A Modern Panarion
========================================
H. P. Blavatsky (1895) — Collection of Blavatsky's fugitive articles — completes the library's set of her major books. Source: https://archive.org/details/modernpanarionco00blav. Public domain.


M

THE  LIBRARY

OF

THE  UNIVERSITY

OF  CALIFORNIA

LOS  ANGELES

THE

H.   P.    B.

MEMORIAL    FUND    SERIES

VOLUME  I.

a

MODERN  PANARION:

Collection  of  Fugitive  Fragments

FROM   THE   PEN   OE

H.  P.  BLAVATSKY.

FIRST   EDITION.

Volume  I.

LONDON:
The  Theosophicat,  Publishing  Society,  7,   Duke  Street,  Adei.phi,  W.C.

NEW   YORK:
The  Path  Office,  144,  Madison  Avenue.

MADRAS:
The  Theosophist  Office,  Advar.

1895.

The  H.P.  B.  Press,
42,  Henry  Street,  Regent's  Park,

LONDON,    N.W.

(Printers  to  the  Theosophical  Society.)

1216

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.

The  Eddy  Manifestations
Dr.  Beard  Criticized
The  Lack  of  Unity  among  Spiritualists
The  Holmes  Controversy
The  Holmes  Controversy  (continued)
Notice  to  Mediums
A  Rebuke  .  .

Occultism  or  Magic
Spiritualistic  Tricksters
The  Search  after  Occultism
The  Science  of  Magic  .
An  Unsolved  Mystery    .
Spiritualism  in  Russia  .
Spiritualism  and  Spiritualists .
What  is  Occultism?
A  Warning  to  Mediums

(New)  York  against  Lankester.     A  new  War  of  the  Roses
Huxley  and  Slade
Can  the  Double  Murder -
Fakirs  and  Tables

A  Protest .....
The  Fate  of  the  Occultist
Buddhism  in  America    .
Russian  Atrocities
Washing  the  Disciples'  Feet    .
Trickery  or  Magic  ?         .
The  Jews  in  Russia
H.  P.  Blavatsky's  Masonic  Patent
Views  of  the  Theosophists
A  Society  without  a  Dogma     .
Elementaries       ....
Kabalistic  Views  of  "Spirits"
The  Knout.    As  Wielded  by  the  Great  Russian  Theosophist.
First  Appearance     ......

Mt.  Coleman's

PAGE

i
5

12

15
28

35
36
33
47
49
55
63
7i
72

7S
82

«4
88

95
103
107
no
112

115
120
121
126
128
132
141
146
152

158

IV

CONTENTS.

Indian  Metaphysics

••II.  M."  and  the  Todas

The  Todas

The  Ahkoond  of  Sv  at.     The  Founder  of

The  Arya  Samaj  ....

Parting  Words    ....

"Not  a  Christian"!

The  Retort  Courteous   .

"Scrutator  Again"

Magic        .....

A  Republican  Citizen     .

The  Theosophists  and  their  Opponents

Echoes  from  India.     What  is  Hindu  Spiritualism

Missionaries  Militant     .

The  History  of  a  "Book"

A  French  View  of  Women's  Rights

Occult  Phenomena

Hindu  Widow-Marriage

"Oppressed  Widowhood"  in  America

"Esoteric  Buddhism"  and  its  Critic

Mr.  A.  Lillie's  Delusions.

What  is  Theosophy?

What  are  the  Theosophists?     .

Antiquity  of  the  Vedas

Persian  Zoroastrianism  and  Russian  Vandalism

Cross  and  Fire    .

War  in  Olympus

A  Land  of  Mystery

Which  First— the  Egg  or  the  Bird?

The  Pralaya  of  Modern  Science

The  Yoga  Philosophy    .

A  Year  of  Theosophy    .

"A  Word  with  Our  Friends"    .

Questions  Answered  about  Yoga  Vidy

The  Missing  Link

Hypnotism

The  Leaven  of  Theosophy

Count  St.  Germain

Lamas  and  Druses

A  Reply  to  Our  Critics.     Our  Final  Answer  to  Seve

"The  Claims  of  Occultism"     .

A  Note  on  Eliphas  Levi

The  Six-Pointed  and  Five-Pointed  Stars

The. Grand  Inquisitor.

The  Brfght  Spot  of  Light

anv  Mvstical  Societies

«  t>

ral  Objections

PAGE
163

173

174

1/9
I84
188

193
I96
I98
199
207
209
214
225
229

237
242

245
247
249
253
26l
270
2;8

283
29O

295

304

333
335
33&
34«
353
357
361
365
367
371
375
3«7
392
398
401
410
432

CONTEXTS.  V

PAGE

"Is  it  Idle  to  Argue  Further?"            ........  434

Fragments  of  Occult  Truth      ........  43S

Notes  on  some  Aryan-Arhat  Esoteric  Tenets            .                         .                         .  475

The  Thoughts  of  the  Dead       .  48]

Dreamland  and  Somnambulism          ......                         .  482

Are  Dreams  but  Idle  Visions?              ........  485

Spiritualism  and  Occult  Truth            ........  490

Reincarnation  in  Tibet.             ........  497

PREFACE.

The  title  A  Modern  Panarion  has  been  taken  from  the  controversial
Panarion  of  the  Church  Father  Epiphanius  in  which  he  attacked
the  various  sects  and  heresies  of  the  first  four  centuries  of  the
Christian  era.  The  Panarion  was  so  called  as  being  a  "basket"  of
scraps  and  fragments.  We  are  told  that  this  Panarion  was  "a  kind
of  medicine  chest,  in  which  he  had  collected  means  of  healing
against  the  poisonous  bite  of  the  heretical  serpent."

A  Modern  Panarion  is  of  a  like  nature  with  the  intent  of  the
Christian  Father;  only  in  the  nineteenth  century,  heresy  has  in
many  instances  become  orthodoxy,  and  orthodoxy  heresy,  and  the
Panarion  of  H.  P.  Blavatsky  is  intended  as  a  means  of  healing
against  the  errors  of  ecclesiasticism,  dogma  and  bigotry,  and  the
blind  negation  of  materialism  and  pseudo-science.

Editors.

THE  H.  P.  B.  MEMORIAL  FUND.

In  1 89 1  the  following  resolutions  were  passed  by  all  the
Sections  of  the  Theosophical  Society  : —

Resolved  :

1.  That  the  most  fitting  and  permanent  memorial  of
H.  P.  B.'s  life  and  work  would  be  the  production  and  publication
of  such  papers,  books  and  translations  as  will  tend  to  promote  that
intimate  union  between  the  life  and  thought  of  the  Orient  and  the
Occident  to  the  bringing  about  of  which  her  life  was  devoted.

2.  That  an  "H.  P.  B.  Memorial  Fund"  be  instituted  for
this  purpose,  to  which  all  those  who  feel  gratitude  or  admiration
towards  H.  P.  B.for  her  work,  both  within  and  without  the  T.  S.,
are  earnestly  invited  to  contribute  as  their  means  may  allow.

3.  That  the  President  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  together
with  the  General  Secretaries  of  all  Sections  of  the  same,  constitute
the  Committee  of  Management  of  this  Fund.

4.  That  the  Presidents  of  Lodges  in  each  Section  be  a
Committee  to  collect  and  forward  to  the  General  Secretary  of
their  respective  Sections  the  necessary  funds  for  this  purpose.

THE  EDDY  MANIFESTATIONS.

[The  following  letter  was  addressed  to  a  contemporary  journal  by  Mine.  Blavatsky,
and  was  handed  to  us  for  publication  in  The  Daily  Graphic,  as  we  have  been  taking
the  lead  in  the  discussion  of  the  curious  subject  of  Spiritualism. — Editor  "Daii/v
Graphic."]

Aware  in  the  past  of  your  love  of  justice  and  fair  play,  I  most
earnestly  solicit  the  use  of  your  columns  to  reply  to  an  article  by
Dr.  G.  M.  Beard  in  relation  to  the  Eddy  family  in  Vermont.  He,  in
denouncing  them  and  their  spiritual  manifestations  in  a  most  sweeping
declaration,  would  aim  a  blow  at  the  entire  spiritual  world  of  to-day.
His  letter  appeared  this  morning  (October  27th).  Dr.  George  M.  Beard
has  for  the  last  few  weeks  assumed  the  part  of  the  "roaring  lion"  seek-
ing for  a  medium  "to  devour."  It  appears  that  to-day  the  learned
gentleman  is  more  hungry  than  ever.  No  wonder,  after  the  failure  he
has  experienced  with  Mr.  Brown,  the  "mind-reader,"  at  New  Haven.

I  do  not  know  Dr.  Beard  personally,  nor  do  I  care  to  know  how  far
he  is  entitled  to  wear  the  laurels  of  his  profession  as  an  M.D.,  but  what
I  do  know  is  that  he  may  never  hope  to  equal,  much  less  to  surpass,
such  men  and  savants  as  Crookes,  Wallace,  or  even  Flammarion,  the
French  astronomer,  all  of  whom  have  devoted  years  to  the  investiga-
tion of  Spiritualism.  All  of  them  came  to  the  conclusion  that,  suppos-
ing even  the  well-known  phenomenon  of  the  materialization  of  spirits
did  not  prove  the  identity  of  the  persons  whom  they  purported  to
represent,  it  was  not,  at  all  events,  the  work  of  mortal  hands ;  still  less
was  it  a.  fraud.

Now  to  the  Eddys.  Dozens  of  visitors  have  remained  there  for
weeks  and  even  for  months;  not  a  single  seance  has  taken  place  with-
out some  of  them  realizing  the  personal  presence  of  a  friend,  a  relative,
a  mother,  father,  or  dear  departed  child.  But  lo!  here  comes  Dr.  Beard,
stops  less  than  two  days,  applies  his  powerful  electrical  battery,  under
which  the  spirit  does  not  even  wink  or  flinch,  closely  examines  the

2  A    MODERN   PANARION.

cabinet  (in  which  he  finds  nothing),  and  then  turns  his  back  and
declares  most  emphatically  "that  he  wishes  it  to  be  perfectly  under-
stood that  if  his  scientific  name  ever  appears  in  connection  with  the
Eddy  family,  it  must  be  only  to  expose  them  as  the  greatest  frauds  who
cannot  do  even  good  trickery."  Consummatum  est!  Spiritualism
is  defunct.  Rcquiescat  in  pace!  Dr.  Beard  has  killed  it  with  one
word.  Scatter  ashes  over  your  venerable  but  silly  heads,  O  Crookes,
Wallace  and  Varley!  Henceforth  you  must  be  considered  as  demented,
psychologized  lunatics,  and  so  must  it  be  with  the  many  thousands  of
Spiritualists  who  have  seen  and  talked  with  their  friends  and  relatives
departed,  recognizing  them  at  Moravia,  at  the  Eddys',  and  elsewhere
throughout  the  length  and  breadth  of  this  continent.  But  is  there  no
escape  from  the  horns  of  this  dilemma?  Yea  verily,  Dr.  Beard  writes
thus:  "When  your  correspondent  returns  to  New  York  I  will  teach
him  on  any  convenient  evening  how  to  do  all  that  the  Eddys  do."
Pray  why  should  a  Daily  Graphic  reporter  be  the  only  one  selected  by
G.  M.  Beard,  M.D.  for  initiation  into  the  knowledge  of  so  clever  a
"trick"?  In  such  a  case  why  not  publicly  denounce  this  universal
trickery,  and  so  benefit  the  whole  world?  But  Dr.  Beard  seems  to  be
as  partial  in  his  selections  as  he  is  clever  in  detecting  the  said  tricks.
Didn't  the  learned  doctor  say  to  Colonel  Olcott  while  at  the  Eddys'
that  three  dollars'  worth  of  second-hand  draper}-  would  be  enough  for
him  to  show  how  to  materialize  all  the  spirits  that  visit  the  Eddy
homestead  ?

To  this  I  reply,  backed  as  I  am  by  the  testimony  of  hundreds  of
reliable  witnesses,  that  all  the  wardrobe  of  Niblo's  Theatre  would  not
suffice  to  attire  the  numbers  of  "spirits"  that  emerge  night  after  night
from  an  empty  little  closet.

L,et  Dr.  Beard  rise  and  explain  the  following  fact  if  he  can:  I
remained  fourteen  days  at  the  Eddys'.  In  that  short  period  of  time
I  saw  and  recognized  fully,  out  of  119  apparitions,  seven  "spirits."
I  admit  that  I  was  the  only  one  to  recognize  them,  the  rest  of  the
audience  not  having  been  with  me  in  my  numerous  travels  throughout
the  East,  but  their  various  dresses  and  costumes  were  plainly  seen  and
closely  examined  by  all.

The  first  was  a  Georgian  boy,  dressed  in  the  historical  Caucasian
attire,  the  picture  of  whom  will  shortly  appear  in  The  Daily  Graphic.  I
recognized  and  questioned  him  in  Georgian  upon  circumstances  known
only  to  myself.     I  was  understood  and  answered.     Requested  by  me  in

THE    EDDY   MANIFESTATIONS.  3

his  mother  tongue  (upon  the  whispered  suggestion  of  Colonel  Olcott)
to  play  the  Lezguinka,  a  Circassian  dance,  he  did  so  immediately  upon
the  guitar.

Second — A  little  old  man  appears.  He  is  dressed  as  Persian  merchants
generally  are.  His  dress  is  perfect  as  a  national  costume.  Everything
is  in  its  right  place,  down  to  the  "babouches"  that  are  off  his  feet,
he  stepping  out  in  his  stockings.  He  speaks  his  name  in  a  loud
whisper.  It  is  "Hassan  Aga,"  an  old  man  whom  I  and  my  family  have
known  for  twenty  years  at  Tiflis.  He  says,  half  in  Georgian  and  half
in  Persian,  that  he  has  got  a  "big  secret  to  tell  me,"  and  comes  at  three
different  times,  vainly  seeking  to  finish  his  sentence.

Third — A  man  of  gigantic  stature  comes  forth,  dressed  in  the
picturesque  attire  of  the  warriors  of  Kurdistan.  He  does  not  speak,
but  bows  in  the  oriental  fashion,  and  lifts  up  his  spear  ornamented  with
bright-coloured  feathers,  shaking  it  in  token  of  welcome.  I  recognize
him  immediately  as  Jaffar  Ali  Bek,  a  young  chief  of  a  tribe  of  Kurds,
who  used  to  accompany  me  in  my  trips  around  Ararat  in  Armenia  on
horseback,  and  who  on  one  occasion  saved  my  life.  More,  he  bends
to  the  ground  as  though  picking  up  a  handful  of  mould,  and  scattering
it  around,  presses  his  hand  to  his  bosom,  a  gesture  familiar  only  to  the
tribes  of  the  Kurdistan.

Fourth — A  Circassian  comes  out.  I  can  imagine  myself  at  Tiflis,  so
perfect  is  his  costume  of  "nouker"  (a  man  who  either  runs  before  or
behind  one  on  horseback).  This  one  speaks  more,  he  corrects  his
name,  which  I  pronounced  wrongly  on  recognizing  him,  and  when  I
repeat  it  he  bows,  smiling,  and  says  in  the  purest  guttural  Tartar,  which
sounds  so  familiar  to  my  ear,  "Tchoch  j^achtchi"  (all  right),  and  goes
away.

Fifth — An  old  woman  appears  with  Russian  headgear.  She  comes
out  and  addresses  me  in  Russian,  calling  me  by  an  endearing  term  that
she  used  in  my  childhood.  I  recognize  an  old  servant  of  my  family,  a
nurse  of  my  sister.

Sixth — A  large  powerful  negro  next  appears  on  the  platform.  His
head  is  ornamented  with  a  wonderful  coiffure  something  like  horns
wound  about  with  white  and  gold.  His  looks  are  familiar  to  me,  but  I
do  not  at  first  recollect  where  I  have  seen  him.  Very  soon  he  begins
to  make  some  vivacious  gestures,  and  his  mimicry  helps  me  to  recognize
him  at  a  glance.  It  is  a  conjurer  from  Central  Africa.  He  grins  and
disappears.

4  A    MODERN    PANARION.

Seventh  and  last — A  large,  grey-haired  gentleman  comes  out  attired
in  the  conventional  suit  of  black.  The  Russian  decoration  of  St.  Ann
hangs  suspended  by  a  large  red  moire  ribbon  with  two  black  stripes —
a  ribbon,  as  every  Russian  will  know,  belonging  to  the  said  decoration.
This  ribbon  is  worn  around  his  neck.  I  feel  faint,  for  I  think  I  recog-
nize my  father.  But  the  latter  was  a  great  deal  taller.  In  my  excite-
ment I  address  him  in  English,  and  ask  him:  "Are  you  my  father?"
He  shakes  his  head  in  the  negative,  and  answers  as  plainly  as  any
mortal  man  can  speak,  and  in  Russian,  "No;  I  am  your  uncle."  The
word  "diadia"  was  heard  and  remembered  by  all  the  audience.  It
means  "uncle."  But  what  of  that?  Dr.  Beard  knows  it  to  be  but  a
pitiful  trick,  and  we  must  submit  in  silence.  People  that  know  me
know  that  I  am  far  from  being  credulous.  Though  an  Occultist  of
many  years'  standing,  I  am  more  sceptical  in  receiving  evidence  from
paid  mediums  than  many  unbelievers.  But  when  I  receive  such
evidences  as  I  received  at  the  Eddys',  I  feel  bound  on  my  honour,  and
under  the  penalty  of  confessing  myself  a  moral  coward,  to  defend  the
mediums,  as  well  as  the  thousands  of  my  brother  and  sister  Spiritualists
against  the  conceit  and  slander  of  one  man  who  has  nothing  and  no
one  to  back  him  in  his  assertions.  I  now  hereby  finally  and  publicly
challenge  Dr.  Beard  to  the  amount  of  $500  to  produce  before  a  public
audience  and  under  the  same  conditions  the  manifestations  herein
attested,  or  failing  this,  to  bear  the  ignominious  consequences  of  his
proposed  expose.

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

124,  East  Sixteenth  Street,  New  York  City,
October  2jth,  iSyj.

DR.  BEARD  CRITICIZED.

As  Dr.  Beard  has  scorned  (in  his  scientific  grandeur)  to  answer  the
challenge  sent  to  him  by  your  humble  servant  in  the  number  of  The
Daily  Graphic  for  the  13th*  of  October  last,  and  has  preferred  instruct-
ing the  public  in  general  rather  than  one  "credulous  fool"  in  par-
ticular, let  her  come  from  Circassia  or  Africa,  I  fully  trust  you  will
permit  me  to  use  your  paper  once  more  in  order  that  by  pointing  out
some  very  spicy  peculiarities  of  this  amazingly  scientific  exposure,  the
public  might  better  judge  at  whose  door  the  aforesaid  elegant  epithet
could  be  most  appropriately  laid.

For  a  week  or  so  an  immense  excitement,  a  thrill  of  sacrilegious  fear,
if  I  may  be  allowed  this  expression,  ran  through  the  psychologized
frames  of  the  Spiritualists  of  New  York.  It  was  rumoured  in  ominous
whispers  that  G.  Beard,  M.D.,  the  Tyndall  of  America,  was  coming  out
with  his  peremptory  exposure  of  the  Eddys'  ghosts  and — the  Spiritual-
ists trembled  for  their  gods !

The  dreaded  day  has  come,  the  number  of  The  Daily  Graphic  for
November  the  9th  is  before  us.  We  have  read  it  carefully,  with  respect-
ful awe,  for  true  science  has  always  been  an  authority  for  us  (weak-
minded  fool  though  we  may  be),  and  so  we  handled  the  dangerous
exposure  with  a  feeling  somewhat  akin  to  that  of  a  fanatic  Christian
opening  a  volume  of  Biichner.  We  perused  it  to  the  last :  we  turned
the  page  over  and  over  again,  vainly  straining  our  eyes  and  brains  to
detect  therein  one  word  of  scientific  proof  or  a  solitary  atom  of  over-
whelming evidence  that  would  thrust  into  our  Spiritualistic  bosom  the
venomous  fangs  of  doubt.  But  no,  not  a  particle  of  reasonable  expla-
nation or  of  scientific  evidence  that  what  we  have  all  seen,  heard  and
felt  at  the  Eddys'  was  but  delusion.  In  our  feminine  modesty,  still
allowing  the  said  article  the  benefit  of  the  doubt,  we  disbelieved  our

*  This  appears  to  be  a  misprint,  unless  the  challenge  had  been  made  on  the  13th,  and  was  only
repeated  in  the  letter  of  Oct.  27th. — Eds.

6  A   MODERN    PANARION.

own  senses,  and  so  devoted  a  whole  day  to  the  picking  up  of  sundry
bits  of  criticism  from  judges  that  we  believe  more  competent  than
ourselves,  and  at  last  came  collectively  to  the  following  conclu-
sion:

The  Daily  Graphic  has  allowed  Dr.  Beard  in  its  magnanimity  nine
columns  of  its  precious  pages  to  prove — what?     Why,  the  following:

First,  that  he.  Dr.  Beard,  according  to  his  own  modest  assertions  (see
columns  second  and  third)  is  more  entitled  to  occupy  the  position  of
an  actor  intrusted  with  characters  of  simpletons  (Moliere's  "Tartuffe"
might  fit  him  perhaps  as  naturally)  than  to  undertake  the  difficult  part
of  a  Prof.  Faraday  vis-a-vis  the  Chittenden  D.  D.  Home.

Secondly,  that  although  the  learned  doctor  was  "overwhelmed  already
with  professional  labours"  (a  nice  and  cheap  reclame,  by  the  way)  and
scientific  researches,  he  gave  the  latter  another  direction,  and  so  went
to  the  Eddys.  That,  arrived  there,  he  played  with  Horatio  Eddy,  for
the  glory  of  science  and  the  benefit  of  humanity,  the  difficult  character
of  a  "dishevelled  simpleton,"  and  was  rewarded  in  his  scientific  re-
search by  finding  on  the  said  suspicious  premises  a  professor  of  bumps
"a  poor  harmless  fool"!  Galileo,  of  famous  memory,  when  he  detected
the  sun  in  its  involuntary  imposture  chuckled  certainly  less  over  his
triumph  than  does  Dr.  Beard  over  the  discovery  of  this  "poor  fool"
No.  i.  Here  we  modestly  suggest  that  perhaps  the  learned  doctor  had
no  need  to  go  as  far  as  Chittenden  for  that.

Further,  the  doctor,  forgetting  entirely  the  wise  motto,  Non  bis  in
idem,  discovers  and  asserts  throughout  the  length  of  his  article  that
all  the  past,  present  and  future  generations  of  pilgrims  to  the  "Eddy
homestead"  are  collectively  fools,  and  that  every  solitary  member  of
this  numerous  body  of  Spiritualistic  pilgrims  is  likewise  "a  weak-
minded,  credulous  fool"!  Query — the  proof  of  it,  if  you  please,  Dr.
Beard?     Answer — Dr.  Beard  has  said  so,  and  Echo  responds,  Fool!

Truly  miraculous  are  thy  doings,  indeed,  O  Mother  Nature!  The  cow
is  black  and  its  milk  is  white!  But  then,  you  see,  those  ill-bred,  igno-
rant Eddy  brothers  have  allowed  their  credulous  guests  to  eat  up  all
the  "trout"  caught  by  Dr.  Beard  and  paid  for  by  him  seventy-five  cents
per  pound  as  a  penalty;  and  that  fact  alone  might  have  turned  him  a
little — how  shall  we  say — sour,  prejudiced?  No,  erroneous  in  his  state-
ment, will  answer  better.

For  erroneous  he  is,  not  to  say  more.     When,  assuming  an  air  of
scientific  authority,  he  affirms  that  the  sc'ance-xoom  is  generally  so  dark

DR.    BEARD    CRITICIZED.  7

that  one  cannot  recognize  at  three  feet  distance  his  own  mother,  he
says  what  is  not  true.  When  he  tells  us  further  that  he  saw  through  a
hole  in  one  of  the  shawls  and  the  space  between  them  all  the  manoeu-
vres of  Horatio's  arm,  he  risks  finding  himself  contradicted  by  thou-
sands who,  weak-minded  though  they  may  be,  are  not  blind  for  all  that,
neither  are  they  confederates  of  the  Eddys,  but  far  more  reliable  wit-
nesses in  their  simple-minded  honesty  than  Dr.  Beard  is  in  his  would-be
scientific  and  unscrupulous  testimony.  The  same  when  he  says  that
no  one  is  allowed  to  approach  the  spirits  nearer  than  twelve  feet  dis-
tance, still  less  to  touch  them,  except  the  "two  simple-minded  ignorant
idiots"  w7ho  generally  sit  on  both  ends  of  the  platform.  To  my  know-
ledge many  other  persons  have  sat  there  besides  those  two.

Dr.  Beard  ought  to  know  this  better  than  anyone  else,  as  he  has  sat
there  himself.  A  sad  story  is  in  circulation,  by  the  way,  at  the  Eddys'.
The  records  of  the  spiritual  seances  at  Chittenden  have  devoted  a
whole  page  to  the  account  of  a  terrible  danger  that  threatened  for  a
moment  to  deprive  America  of  one  of  her  brightest  scientific  stars.  Dr.
Beard,  admitting  a  portion  of  the  story  himself,  perverts  the  rest  of
it,  as  he  does  everything  else  in  his  article.  The  doctor  admits  that
he  had  been  badly  struck  by  the  guitar,  and,  not  being  able  to  bear
the  pain,  "jumped  up,"  and  broke  the  circle.  Now  it  clearly  appears
that  the  learned  gentleman  has  neglected  to  add  to  the  immense  stock
of  his  knowledge  the  first  rudiments  of  "logic."  He  boasts  of  having
completely  blinded  Horatio  and  others  as  to  the  real  object  of  his
visit.  What  should  then  Horatio  pummel  his  head  for?  The  spirits
were  never  known  before  to  be  as  rude  as  that.  But  Dr.  B.  does  not
believe  in  their  existence  and  so  lays  the  whole  thing  at  Horatio's  door.
He  forgets  to  state,  though,  that  a  whole  shower  of  missiles  were  thrown
at  his  head  and  that — "pale  as  a  ghost,"  so  says  the  tale-telling  record
— the  poor  scientist  surpassed  for  a  moment  the  "fleet-footed  Achilles"
himself  in  the  celerity  with  which  he  took  to  his  heels.  How  strange
if  Horatio,  not  suspecting  him  still,  left  him  standing  at  two  feet  dis-
tance from  the  shawl !     How  very  logical !

It  becomes  evident  that  the  said  neglected  logic  was  keeping  com-
pany at  the  time  with  old  mother  Truth  at  the  bottom  of  her  well,
neither  of  them  being  wanted  by  Dr.  Beard.  I  myself  have  sat  upon
the  upper  step  of  the  platform  for  fourteen  nights  by  the  side  of  Mrs.
Cleveland.  I  got  up  every  time  "Honto"  approached  me  to  within  an
inch  of  my  face  in  order  to  see  her  the  better.      I  have  touched  her

8  A    MODERN    PANARION.

hands  repeatedly  as  other  spirits  have  been  touched,  and  even  embraced
her  nearly  every  night.

Therefore,  when  I  read  Dr.  Beard's  preposterous  and  cool  assertion
that  "a  very  low  order  of  genius  is  required  to  obtain  command  of  a  few
words  in  different  languages  and  so  to  mutter  them  to  credulous  Spiri-
tualists," I  feel  every  right  in  the  world  to  say  in  my  turn  that  such  a
scientific  exposure  as  Dr.  Beard  has  come  out  with  in  his  article  does
not  require  any  genius  at  all;  per  contra,  it  requires  a  ridiculous  faith
on  the  part  of  the  writer  in  his  own  infallibility,  as  well  as  a  positive
confidence  in  finding  in  all  his  readers  what  he  elegantly  terms  "weak-
minded  fools."  Every  word  of  his  statement,  when  it  is  not  a  most
evident  untruth,  is  a  wicked  and  malicious  insinuation  built  on  the  very
equivocal  authority  of  one  witness  against  the  evidence  of  thousands.

Says  Dr  Beard,  "I  have  proved  that  the  life  of  the  Eddys  is  one  long
lie,  the  details  need  no  further  discussion."  The  writer  of  the  above
lines  forgets,  by  saying  these  imprudent  words,  that  some  people  might
think  that  "like  attracts  like."  He  went  to  Chittenden  with  deceit  in
his  heart  and  falsehood  on  his  lips,  and  so  judging  his  neighbour  by
the  character  he  assumed  himself,  he  takes  everyone  for  a  knave  when
he  does  not  put  him  down  as  a  fool.  Declaring  so  positively  that  he
has  proved  it,  the  doctor  forgets  one  trifling  circumstance,  namely,  that
he  has  proved  nothing  whatever.

Where  are  his  boasted  proofs?  When  we  contradict  him  by  saying
that  the  seance-xoo\\\  is  far  from  being  as  dark  as  he  pretends  it  to  be,
and  that  the  spirits  themselves  have  repeatedly  called  out  through  Mrs.
Eaton's  voice  for  more  light,  we  only  say  what  we  can  prove  before  any
jury.  When  Dr.  Beard  says  that  all  the  spirits  are  personated  by  W.
Eddy,  he  advances  what  would  prove  to  be  a  greater  conundrum  for
solution  than  the  apparition  of  spirits  themselves.  There  he  falls  right
away  into  the  domain  of  Cagliostro:  for  if  Dr.  B.  has  seen  five  or  six
spirits  in  all,  other  persons,  myself  included,  have  seen  one  hundred
and  nineteen  in  less  than  a  fortnight,  nearly  all  of  whom  were  differ-
ently dressed.  Besides,  the  accusation  of  Dr.  Beard  implies  the  idea
to  the  public  that  the  artist  of  The  Daily  Graphic  who  made  the
sketches  of  so  many  of  those  apparitions,  and  who  is  not  a  "credulous
Spiritualist"  himself,  is  likewise  a  humbug,  propagating  to  the  world
what  he  did  not  see,  and  so  spreading  at  large  the  most  preposterous
and  outrageous  lie.

When  the  learned  doctor  will  have  explained  to  us  how  any  man  in

DR.    BEARD    CRITICIZED.  y

his  shirt-sleeves  and  a  pair  of  tight  pants  for  an  attire  can  possibly  con-
ceal on  his  person  (the  cabinet  having  been  previously  found  empty)
a  whole  bundle  of  clothes,  women's  robes,  hats,  caps,  head-gears,  and
entire  suits  of  evening  dress,  white  waistcoats  and  neckties  included,
then  he  will  be  entitled  to  more  belief  than  he  is  at  present.  That
would  be  a  proof  indeed,  for,  with  all  due  respect  to  his  scientific  mind,
Dr.  Beard  is  not  the  first  CEdipus  that  has  thought  of  catching  the
Sphinx  by  its  tail  and  so  unriddling  the  mystery.  We  have  known  more
than  one  "weak-minded  fool,"  ourselves  included,  that  has  laboured
under  a  similar  delusion  for  more  than  one  night,  but  all  of  us  were
finally  obliged  to  repeat  the  words  of  the  great  Galileo,  "B  pur,  se
muove!"  and  give  it  up.

But  Dr.  Beard  does  not  give  it  up.  Preferring  to  keep  a  scornful
silence  as  to  any  reasonable  explanation,  he  hides  the  secret  of  the
above  mystery  in  the  depths  of  his  profoundly  scientific  mind.  "His
life  is  given  to  scientific  researches,"  you  see;  "his  physiological  know-
ledge and  neuro-physiological  learning  are  immense,"  for  he  says  so,
and  skilled  as  he  is  in  combating  fraud  by  still  greater  fraud  (see
column  the  eighth),  spiritualistic  humbug  has  no  more  mysteries  for
him.  In  five  minutes  the  scientist  had  done  more  towards  science
than  all  the  rest  of  the  scientists  put  together  have  done  in  years  of
labour,  and  "would  feel  ashamed  if  he  had  not."  (See  same  column.)
In  the  overpowering  modesty  of  his  learning  he  takes  no  credit  to
himself  for  having  done  so,  though  he  has  discovered  the  astounding,
novel  fact  of  the  "cold  benumbing  sensation."  How  Wallace,  Crookes
and  Varley,  the  naturalist-anthropologist,  the  chemist  and  electrician,
will  blush  with  envy  in  their  old  country!  America  alone  is  able  to
produce  on  her  fertile  soil  such  quick  and  miraculous  intellects.  "  Veni,
Vidi,  Via/"  was  the  motto  of  a  great  conqueror.  Why  should  not  Dr.
Beard  select  for  his  crest  the  same?  And  then,  not  unlike  the  Alex-
anders and  the  Caesars  of  antiquity  (in  the  primitive  simplicity  of  his
manners),  he  abuses  people  so  elegantly,  calling  them  "fools"  when  he
cannot  find  a  better  argument.

A  far  wiser  mind  than  Dr.  Beard  (will  he  dispute  the  fact?)  has  sug-
gested, centuries  ago,  that  the  tree  was  to  be  judged  according  to  its
fruits.  Spiritualism,  notwithstanding  the  desperate  efforts  of  more
scientific  men  than  himself,  has  stood  its  ground  without  flinching  for
more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century.  Where  are  the  fruits  of  the  tree  of
science  that  blossoms  on  the  soil  of  Dr.  Beard's  mind?     If  we  are  to

IO  A   MODERN   PANARION.

judge  of  them  by  his  article,  then  verily  the  said  tree  needs  more  than
usual  care.  As  for  the  fruits,  it  would  appear  that  they  are  as  yet  in  the
realms  of  "sweet  delusive  hope."  But  then,  perhaps  the  doctor  was
afraid  to  crush  his  readers  under  the  weight  of  his  learning  (true  merit
has  been  in  all  times  modest  and  unassuming),  and  that  accounts  for
the  learned  doctor  withholding  from  us  any  scientific  proof  of  the  fraud
that  he  pretends  to  be  exposing,  except  the  above-mentioned  fact  of
the  "cold  benumbing  sensation."  But  how  Horatio  can  keep  his  hand
and  arm  ice  cold  under  a  warm  shawl  for  half  an  hour  at  a  time,  in
summer  as  well  as  in  any  other  season,  and  that  without  having  some
ice  concealed  about  his  person,  or  how  he  can  prevent  it  from  thawing
— all  the  above  is  a  mystery  that  Dr.  Beard  doesn't  reveal  for  the  pre-
sent. Maybe  he  will  tell  us  something  of  it  in  his  book  that  he  adver-
tises in  the  article.  Well,  we  only  hope  that  the  former  will  be  more
satisfactory  than  the  latter.

I  will  add  but  a  few  words  before  ending  my  debate  with  Dr.  Beard
for  ever.  All  that  he  says  about  the  lamp  concealed  in  a  bandbox,  the
strong  confederates,  etc.,  exists  only  in  his  imagination,  for  the  mere
sake  of  argument,  we  suppose.  "False  in  one,  false  in  all,"  says  Dr.
Beard  in  column  the  sixth.  These  words  are  a  just  verdict  on  his  own
article.

Here  I  will  briefly  state  what  I  reluctantly  withheld  up  to  the  present
moment  from  the  knowledge  of  all  such  as  Dr.  Beard.  The  fact  was
too  sacred  in  my  eyes  to  allow  it  to  be  trifled  with  in  newspaper  gossip-
ing. But  now,  in  order  to  settle  the  question  at  once,  I  deem  it  my
duty  as  a  Spiritualist  to  surrender  it  to  the  opinion  of  the  public.

On  the  last  night  that  I  spent  with  the  Eddys  I  was  presented  by
Georgo  Dix  and  Mayflower  with  a  silver  decoration,  the  upper  part  of
a  medal  with  which  I  was  but  too  familiar.  I  quote  the  precise  words
of  the  spirit:  "We  bring  you  this  decoration,  for  we  think  you  will
value  it  more  highly  than  anything  else.  You  will  recognize  it,  for  it  is
the  badge  of  honour  that  was  presented  to  your  father  by  his  Govern-
ment for  the  campaign  of  1828,  between  Russia  and  Turkey.  We  got
it  through  the  influence  of  your  uncle,  who  appeared  to  you  here  this
evening.  We  brought  it  from  your  father's  grave  at  Stavropol.  You
will  identify  it  by  a  certain  sign  known  to  yourself."

These  words  were  spoken  in  the  presence  of  forty  witnesses.  CoL
Olcott  will  describe  the  fact  and  give  the  design  of  the  decoration.

I  have  the  said  decoration  in  my  possession.     I  know  it  as  having

DR.    BEARD    CRITICIZED.  II

belonged  to  my  father.  More,  I  have  identified  it  by  a  portion  that,
through  carelessness,  I  broke  myself  many  years  ago,  and,  to  settle  all
doubt  in  relation  to  it,  I  posssess  the  photograph  of  my  father  (a  pic-
ture that  has  never  been  at  the  Eddys',  and  could  never  possibly  have
been  seen  by  any  of  them)  on  which  this  medal  is  plainly  visible.

Query  for  Dr.  Beard :  How  could  the  Eddys  know  that  my  father  was
buried  at  Stavropol;  that  he  was  ever  presented  with  such  a  medal,  or
that  he  had  been  present  and  in  actual  service  at  the  time  of  the  war
of  1828?

Willing  as  we  are  to  give  every  one  his  due,  we  feel  compelled  to  say
on  behalf  of  Dr.  Beard  that  he  has  not  boasted  of  more  than  he  can  do,
in  advising  the  Eddys  to  take  a  few  private  lessons  of  him  in  the  trickery
of  mediumship.  The  learned  doctor  must  be  expert  in  such  trickeries.
We  are  likewise  ready  to  admit  that  in  saying  as  he  did  that  "his
article  would  only  confirm  the  more  the  Spiritualists  in  their  belief"
(and  he  ought  to  have  added,  "convince  no  one  else"),  Dr.  Beard  has
proved  himself  to  be  a  greater  "prophetic  medium"  than  any  other  in
this  country !

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

jj,  Irving  Place,  New  York  City,

November  10th,  1874.

THE  LACK  OF  UNITY  AMONG
SPIRITUALISTS.

[From  a  letter  received  from  JIme.  Blavatsky  last  week  we  make  the  following
extracts,  want  of  space  alone  preventing  us  from  publishing  it  entire.  It  was
written  in  her  usual  lively  and  entertaining  style,  and  her  opinions  expressed  are
worthv  of  careful  study,  many  of  them  being  fully  consistent  with  the  true  state  of
affairs.— Editor  "Spiritual  Scientist"  (Dec.  3rd,  1874).]

As  it  is,  I  have  only  done  my  duty;  first,  towards  Spiritualism,  that
I  have  defended  as  well  as  I  could  from  the  attacks  of  imposture  under
its  too  transparent  mask  of  science;  then  towards  two  helpless  slandered
"mediums" — the  last  word  becoming  fast  in  our  days  the  synonym  of
"martyr";  secondly,  I  have  contributed  my  mite  towards  opening  the
eyes  of  an  indifferent  public  to  the  real,  intrinsic  value  of  such  a  man
as  Dr.  Beard.  But  I  am  obliged  to  confess  that  I  really  do  not  believe
that  I  have  done  any  good — at  least,  any  practical  good — to  Spiritualism
itself;  and  I  never  hope  to  perform  such  a  feat  as  that  were  I  to  keep
on  for  an  eternity  bombarding  all  the  newspapers  of  America  with  my
challenges  and  refutations  of  the  lies  told  by  the  so-called  "scientific
exposers."

It  is  with  a  profound  sadness  in  my  heart  that  I  acknowledge  this
fact,  for  I  begin  to  think  there  is  no  help  for  it.  For  over  fifteen  years
have  I  fought  my  battle  for  the  blessed  truth;  I  have  travelled  and
preached  it — though  I  never  was  born  for  a  lecturer — from  the  snow-
covered  tops  of  the  Caucasian  Mountains,  as  well  as  from  the  sandy
valleys  of  the  Nile.  I  have  proved  the  truth  of  it  practically  and  by
persuasion.  For  the  sake  of  Spiritualism  I  have  left  my  home,  an  easy
life  amongst  a  civilized  society,  and  have  become  a  wanderer  upon  the
face  of  this  earth.  I  had  already  seen  my  hopes  realized,  beyond  the
most  sanguine  expectations,  when,  in  my  restless  desire  for  more
knowledge,  my  unlucky  star  brought  me  to  America.

Knowing  this  country  to  be  the  cradle  of  modern   Spiritualism,  I

THE    LACK   OF   UNITY   AMONG   SPIRITUALISTS.  13

came  over  here  from  France  with  feelings  not  unlike  those  of  a
Mohammedan  approaching  the  birthplace  of  his  prophet.  I  had  for-
gotten that  "no  prophet  is  without  honour  save  in  his  own  country."
In  the  less  than  fourteen  months  that  I  am  here,  sad  experience  has
but  too  well  sustained  the  never-dying  evidence  of  this  immortal  truth.

What  little  I  have  done  towards  defending  phenomena  I  am  ever
ready  to  do  over  and  over  again,  as  long  as  I  have  a  breath  of  life  left
in  me.  But  what  good  will  it  ever  do?  We  have  a  popular  and  wise
Russian  saying  that  "one  Cossack  on  the  battle-field  is  no  warrior."
Such  is  my  case,  together  with  that  of  many  other  poor,  struggling
wretches,  everyone  of  whom,  like  a  solitary  scout,  sent  far  ahead  in
advance  of  the  arm}-,  has  to  fight  his  own  battle,  and  defend  the  post
entrusted  to  him,  unaided  by  anyone  but  himself.  There  is  no  union
between  Spiritualists,  no  entente  cordialc,  as  the  French  say.  Judge
Edmonds  said,  some  years  ago,  that  they  numbered  in  their  ranks  over
eleven  millions  in  this  country  alone;  and  I  believe  it  to  be  true;  in
which  case,  it  is  but  to  be  the  more  deplored.  When  one  man — as
Dr.  Beard  did  and  will  do  yet — dares  to  defy  such  a  formidable  body
as  that,  there  must  be  some  cause  for  it.  His  insults,  gross  and  vulgar
as  they  are,  are  too  fearless  to  leave  one  particle  of  doubt  that  if  he
does  it,  it  is  but  because  he  knows  too  well  that  he  can  do  so  with
impunity  and  perfect  ease.  Year  after  year  the  American  Spiritualists
have  allowed  themselves  to  be  ridiculed  and  slighted  by  everyone  who
had  a  mind  to  do  so,  protesting  so  feebly  as  to  give  their  opponents  the
most  erroneous  idea  of  their  weakness.  Am  I  wrong,  then,  in  saying
that  our  Spiritualists  are  more  to  be  blamed  than  Dr.  Beard  himself  in
all  this  ridiculous  polemic?  Moral  cowardice  breeds  more  contempt
than  the  "familiarity"  of  the  old  motto.  How  can  we  expect  such  a
scientific  sleight-of-hand  as  he  is  to  respect  a  body  that  does  not  respect
itself?     .     .     .

My  humble  opinion  is,  that  the  majority  of  our  Spiritualists  are  too
much  afraid  for  their  "respectability"  when  called  upon  to  confess  and
acknowledge  their  "belief."  Will  37ou  agree  with  me,  if  I  say  that  the
dread  of  the  social  Areopagus  is  so  deeply  rooted  in  the  hearts  of  your
American  people,  that  to  endeavour  to  tear  it  out  of  them  would  be
undertaking  to  shake  the  whole  sj'stem  of  society  from  top  to  bottom?
"Respectability"  and  "fashion"  have  brought  more  than  one  utter
materialist  to  select  (for  mere  show)  the  Episcopalian  and  other  wealthy
churches.      But  Spiritualism  is  not  "fashionable,"  as  yet,  and  that's

j  ,  A    MODERN    PANARION.

where  the  trouble  is.  Notwithstanding  its  immense  and  daily  increasing
numbers,  it  has  not  won,  till  now,  the  right  of  citizenship.  Its  chief
leaders  are  not  clothed  in  gold  and  purple  and  fine  raiment;  for,  not
unlike  Christianity  in  the  beginning  of  its  era,  Spiritualism  numbers
in  its  ranks  more  of  the  humble  and  afflicted  ones,  than  of  the  powerful
and  wealthy  of  this  earth.  Spiritualists  belonging  to  the  latter  class
will  seldom  dare  to  step  out  in  the  arena  of  publicity  and  boldly  pro-
claim their  belief  in  the  face  of  the  whole  world;  that  hybrid  monster,
called  "public  opinion,"  is  too  much  for  them;  and  what  does  a
Dr.  Beard  care  for  the  opinion  of  the  poor  and  the  humble  ones?  He
knows  but  too  well  that  his  insulting  terms  of  "fools"  and  "weak-
minded  idiots,"  as  his  accusations  of  credulousness,  will  never  be  applied
to  themselves  by  any  of  the  proud  castes  of  modern  "Pharisees";
Spiritualists  as  they  know  themselves  to  be,  and  have  perhaps  been  for
3?ears,  if  they  deign  to  notice  the  insult  at  all,  it  will  be  but  to  answer
him  as  the  cowardly  apostle  did  before  them,  "Man,  I  tell  thee,  I  know
him  not!"

St.  Peter  was  the  only  one  of  the  remaining  eleven  that  denied  his
Christ  thrice  before  the  Pharisees;  that  is  just  the  reason  why,  of  all
the  apostles,  he  is  the  most  revered  by  the  Catholics,  and  has  been
selected  to  rule  over  the  most  wealthy  as  the  most  proud,  greedy  and
hypocritical  of  all  the  churches  in  Christendom.  And  so,  half  Christians
and  half  believers  in  the  new  dispensation,  the  majority  of  those
eleven  millions  of  Spiritualists  stand  with  one  foot  on  the  threshold  of
Spiritualism,  pressing  firmly  wTith  the  other  one  the  steps  leading  to
the  altars  of  their  "fashionable"  places  of  worship,  ever  ready  to  leap
over  under  the  protection  of  the  latter  in  hours  of  danger.  They
know  that  under  the  cover  of  such  immense  "respectability"  they  are
perfectly  safe.  Who  would  presume  or  dare  to  accuse  of  "credulous
stupidity"  a  member  belonging  to  certain  "fashionable  congregations"  ?
Under  the  powerful  and  holy  shade  of  any  of  those  "pillars  of  truth"
every  heinous  crime  is  liable  to  become  immediately  transformed  into
but  a  slight  and  petty  deviation  from  strict  Christian  virtue.  Jupiter,
for  all  his  numberless  "Don  Juan"  like  frolics,  was  not  the  less  on  that
account  considered  by  his  worshippers  as  the  "Father  of  Gods" !

THE  HOLMES  CONTROVERSY.

A  few  weeks  ago,  in  a  letter,  extracts  from  which  have  appeared  in
The  Spiritual  Scientist  of  December  3rd,  I  alluded  to  the  deplorable
lack  of  accord  between  American  Spiritualists,  and  the  consequences
of  the  same.  At  that  time  I  had  just  fought  out  my  useless  battle  with
a  foe  who,  though  beneath  my  own  personal  notice,  had  insulted  all  the
Spiritualists  of  this  country,  as  a  body,  in  a  caricature  of  a  so-called
scientific  expose'.  In  dealing  with  him  I  dealt  with  but  one  of  the
numerous  "bravos"  enlisted  in  the  arm}-  of  the  bitter  opponents  of
belief;  and  my  task  was,  comparatively  speaking,  an  easy  one,  if  we
take  it  for  granted  that  falsehood  can  hardly  withstand  truth,  as  the
latter  will  ever  speak  for  itself.  Since  that  day  the  scales  have  turned ;
prompted  now,  as  then,  by  the  same  love  of  justice  and  fair  play,  I  feel
compelled  to  throw  down  my  glove  once  more  in  our  defence,  seeing
that  so  few  of  the  adherents  to  the  cause  are  bold  enough  to  accept
that  duty,  and  so  man}*  of  them  show  the  white  feather  of  pusillanimity.

I  indicated  in  my  letter  that  such  a  state  of  things,  such  a  complete
lack  of  harmony,  and  such  cowardice,  I  may  add,  among  their  ranks,
subjected  the  Spiritualists  and  the  cause  to  constant  attacks  from  a
compact,  aggressive  public  opinion,  based  upon  ignorance  and  wicked
prejudice,  intolerant,  remorseless  and  thoroughly  dishonest  in  the
employment  of  its  methods.  As  a  vast  army,  amply  equipped,  may  be
cut  to  pieces  by  an  inferior  force  well  trained  and  handled,  so  Spiri-
tualism, numbering  its  hosts  by  millions,  and  able  to  vanquish  every
reactionary  theology  by  a  little  well-directed  effort,  is  constantly
harassed,  weakened,  impeded,  by  the  convergent  attacks  of  pulpit  and
press,  and  by  the  treachery  and  cowardice  of  its  trusted  leaders.  It  is
one  of  these  professed  leaders  that  I  propose  to  question  to-day,  as
closely  as  my  rights,  not  only  as  a  widely  known  Kabalist  but  also  as  a
resident  of  the  United  States,  will  allow  me.  When  I  see  the  numbers
of  believers  in  this  country,  the  broad   basis  of  their  belief,  the  im-

j 5  A   MODERN   PANARION.

pregnability  of  their  position,  and  the  talent  that  is  embraced  within
their  ranks,  I  am  disgusted  at  the  spectacle  that  they  manifest  at  this
very  moment,  after  the  Katie  King— how  shall  we  say— fraud?  By  no
means,  since  the  last  word  of  this  sensational  comedy  is  far  from  being

spoken.

There  is  not  a  country  on  the  face  of  our  planet,  with  a  jury  attached
to  its  courts  of  justice,  but  gives  the  benefit  of  the  doubt  to  every
criminal  brought  within  the  law,  and  affords  him  a  chance  to  be  heard
and  tell  his  story.

Is  such  the  case  between  the  pretended  "spirit  performer,"  the
alleged  bogus  Katie  King,  and  the  Holmes  mediums?  I  answer  most
decidedly  no,  and  mean  to  prove  it,  if  no  one  else  does.

I  deny  the  right  of  any  man  or  woman  to  wrench  from  our  hands  all
possible  means  of  finding  out  the  truth.  I  deny  the  right  of  any
editor  of  a  daily  newspaper  to  accuse  and  publish  accusations,  refusing
at  the  same  time  to  hear  one  word  of  justification  from  the  defendants,
and  so,  instead  of  helping  people  to  clear  up  the  matter,  leaving  them
more  than  ever  to  grope  their  way  in  the  dark.

The  biography  of  "Katie  King"  has  come  out  at  last;  a  sworn
certificate,  if  you  please,  endorsed  (under  oath?)  by  Dr.  Child,  who
throughout  the  whole  of  this  "burlesque"  epilogue  has  ever  appeared
in  it,  like  some  inevitable  deus-ex-machina.  The  whole  of  this  made-
up  elegy  (by  whom?  evidently  not  by  Mrs.  White)  is  redolent  with  the
perfume  of  erring  innocence,  of  Magdalene-like  tales  of  woe  and
sorrow,  tardy  repentance  and  the  like,  giving  us  the  abnormal  idea  of
a  pickpocket  in  the  act  of  robbing  our  soul  of  its  most  precious,
thrilling  sensations.  The  carefully-prepared  explanations  on  some
points  that  appear  now  and  then  as  so  many  stumbling-blocks  in  the
way  of  a  seemingly  fair  expose  do  not  preclude,  nevertheless,  through
the  whole  of  it,  the  possibility  of  doubt ;  for  many  awkward  semblances
of  truth,  partly  taken  from  the  confessions  of  that  fallen  angel,  Mrs.
White,  and  partly — most  of  them  we  should  say — copied  from  the
private  note-book  of  her  "amanuensis,"  give  you  a  fair  idea  of  the
veracity  of  this  sworn  certificate.  For  instance,  according  to  her  own
statement  and  the  evidence  furnished  by  the  habitues  of  the  Holmeses,
Mrs.  White  having  never  been  present  at  any  of  the  dark  circles  (her
alleged  acting  as  Katie  King  excluding  all  possibility,  on  her  part,  of
such  a  public  exhibition  of  flesh  and  bones),  how  comes  she  to  know
so  well,  in  every  particular,  about  the  tricks  of  the  mediums,  the  pro-

THE    HOLMES    CONTROVERSY.  1 7

gramme  of  their  performances,  etc.?  Then,  again,  Mrs.  White  who
remembers  so  well — by  rote  we  may  say — every  word  exchanged
between  Katie  King  and  Mr.  Owen,  the  spirit  and  Dr.  Child,  has  evi-
dently forgotten  all  that  was  ever  said  hy  her  in  her  bogus  personation
to  Dr.  Felger;  she  does  not  even  remember  a  very  important  secret  com-
municated by  her  to  the  latter  gentleman!  What  an  extraordinary
combination  of  memory  and  absence  of  mind  at  the  same  time.  May
not  a  certain  memorandum-book,  with  its  carefully-noted  contents,
account  for  it,  perhaps?  The  document  is  signed,  under  oath,  with
the  name  of  a  non-existing  spirit,  Katie  King.     .     .     .     Very  clever!

All  protestations  of  innocence  or  explanations  sent  in  by  Mr.  or  Mrs.
Holmes,  written  or  verbal,  are  peremptorily  refused  publication  by  the
press.  No  respectable  paper  dares  takes  upon  itself  the  responsibility
of  such  an  unpopular  cause.

The  public  feel  triumphant;  the  clergy,  forgetting  in  the  excitement
of  their  victory  the  Brooklyn  scandal,  rub  their  hands  and  chuckle;
a  certain  exposer  of  materialized  spirits  and  mind-reading,  like  some
monstrous  anti-spiritual  mitrailleuse  shoots  forth  a  volley  of  missiles,
and  sends  a  condoling  letter  to  Mr.  Owen;  Spiritualists,  crestfallen,
ridiculed  and  defeated,  feel  crushed  for  ever  under  the  pretended  expo-
sure and  that  overwhelming,  pseudonymous  evidence.  .  .  .  The
day  of  Waterloo  has  come  for  us,  and  sweeping  away  the  last  remnants
of  the  defeated  army,  it  remains  for  us  to  ring  our  own  death-knell.
.  .  .  Spirits,  beware!  henceforth,  if  you  lack  prudence,  your  mate-
rialized forms  will  have  to  stop  at  the  cabinet  doors,  and  in  a  perfect
tremble  melt  away  from  sight,  singing  in  chorus  Edgar  Poe's  "Never
7noreT  One  would  really  suppose  that  the  whole  belief  of  the  Spiri-
tualists hung  at  the  girdles  of  the  Holmeses,  and  that  in  case  they
should  be  unmasked  as  tricksters,  we  might  as  well  vote  our  pheno-
mena an  old  woman's  delusion.

Is  the  scraping  off  of  a  barnacle  the  destruction  of  a  ship?  But,
moreover,  we  are  not  sufficiently  furnished  with  any  plausible  proofs
at  all.

Colonel  Olcott  is  here  and  has  begun  investigations.  His  first  tests
with  Mrs.  Holmes  alone,  for  Mr.  Holmes  is  lying  sick  at  Vineland,
have  proved  satisfactory  enough,  in  his  eyes,  to  induce  Mr.  Owen  to
return  to  the  spot  of  his  first  love,  namely,  the  Holmeses'  cabinet.  He
began  by  tying  Mrs.  Holmes  up  in  a  bag,  the  string  drawn  tightly
round  her  neck,  knotted  and  sealed  in  the  presence  of  Mr.  Owen,  Col.

l8  A   MODERN    PANARION.

Olcott  and  a  third  gentleman.  After  that  the  medium  was  placed  in
the  erapt}'  cabinet,  which  was  rolled  away  into  the  middle  of  the  room,
and  it  was  made  a  perfect  impossibility  for  her  to  /esc  her  hands.  The
door  being  closed,  hands  appeared  in  the  aperture,  then  the  outlines  of
a  face  came,  which  gradually  formed  into  the  classical  head  of  John
King,  turban,  beard  and  all.  He  kindly  allowed  the  investigators  to
stroke  his  beard,  touch  his  warm  face,  and  patted  their  hands  with  his.
After  the  seance  was  over,  Mrs.  Holmes,  with  many  tears  of  gratitude
in  the  presence  of  the  three  gentlemen,  assured  Mr.  Owen  most  solemnly
that  she  had  spoken  many  a  time  to  Dr.  Child  about  "Katie"  leaving
her  presents  in  the  house  and  dropping  them  about  the  place,  and  that
she — Mrs.  Holmes — wanted  Mr.  Owen  to  know  it;  but  that  the  doctor
had  given  her  most  peremptory  orders  to  the  contrary,  forbidding  her
to  let  the  former  know  it,  his  precise  words  being,  "Don't  do  it,  it's
useless;  he  must  not  know  it."  I  leave  the  question  of  Mrs.  Holmes'
veracity  as  to  this  fact  for  Dr.  Child  to  settle  with  her.

On  the  other  hand,  we  have  the  woman,  Eliza  White,  exposer  and
accuser  of  the  Holmeses,  who  remains  up  to  the  present  day  a  riddle
and  an  Egyptian  mystery  to  every  man  and  woman  of  this  city,  except
to  the  clever  and  equally  invisible  party — a  sort  of  protecting  deity —
who  took  the  team  in  hand,  and  drove  the  whole  concern  of  "Katie's"
materialization  to  destruction,  in  what  he  considered  such  a  first-rate
way.  She  is  not  to  be  met,  or  seen,  or  interviewed,  or  even  spoken  to
by  anyone,  least  of  all  by  the  ex-admirers  of  "Katie  King"  herself,  so
anxious  to  get  a  peep  at  the  modest,  blushing  beauty  who  deemed  her-
self worthy  of  personating  the  fair  spirit.  Maybe  it's  rather  dangerous
to  allow  them  the  chance  of  comparing  for  themselves  the  features  of
both?  But  the  most  perplexing  fact  of  this  most  perplexing  imbroglio
is  that  Mr.  R.  D.  Owen,  by  his  own  confession  to  me,  has  never,  not  even
on  the  day  of  the  exposure,  seen  Mrs.  White,  or  talked  to  her,  or  had  other-
wise the  least  chance  to  sea//  her  features  close  cno2tgh  for  hi///  to  identify  her.
He  caught  a  glimpse  of  her  general  outline  but  once,  viz.,  at  the  mock
seance  of  Dec.  5th,  referred  to  in  her  biography,  when  she  appeared  to
half  a  dozen  of  witnesses  (invited  to  testify  and  identify  the  fraud)
emerging  de  novo  from  the  cabinet,  with  her  face  closely  covered  with  a
double  veil  (!)  after  which  the  sweet  vision  vanished  and  appeared  no
more.  Mr.  Owen  adds  that  he  is  not  prepared  to  swear  to  the  identity
of  Mrs.  White  and  Katie  King.

May  I  be  allowed  to  enquire  as  to  the  necessity  of  such  a  profound

THE    HOLMES   CONTROVERSY.  19

mystery,  after  the  promise  of  a  public  exposure  of  all  the  fraud?  It
seems  to  me  that  the  said  exposure  would  have  been  far  more  satis-
factory if  conducted  otherwise.  Why  not  give  the  fairest  chance  to
R.  D.  Owen,  the  party  who  has  suffered  the  most  on  account  of  this
disgusting  swindle — if  swindle  there  is — to  compare  Mrs.  White  with
his  Katie?  May  I  suggest  again  that  it  is  perhaps  because  the  spirit's
features  are  but  too  well  impressed  on  his  memory,  poor,  noble,  con-
fiding gentleman.  Gauze  dresses  and  moonshine,  coronets  and  stars
can  possibly  be  counterfeited  in  a  half-darkened  room,  while  features,
answering  line  for  line  to  the  "spirit  Katie's"  face,  are  not  so  easily
made  up ;  the  latter  require  very  clever  preparations.  A  lie  may  be  easy
enough  for  a  smooth   tongue,   but  no  pug  nose  can   lie  itself  into   a

classical  one.

A  very  honourable  gentleman  of  my  acquaintance,  a  fervent  admirer
of  the  "spirit  Katie's"  beauty,  who  has  seen  and  addressed  her  at  two
feet  distance  about  fifty  times,  tells  me  that  on  a  certain  evening,  when
Dr.  Child  begged  the  spirit  to  let  him  see  her  tongue  (did  the  honour-
able doctor  want  to  compare  it  with  Mrs.  White's  tongue — the  lady
having  been  his  patient?),  she  did  so,  and  upon  her  opening  her  mouth,
the  gentleman  in  question  assures  me  that  he  plainly  saw,  what  in  his
admiring  phraseology  he  terms  "the  most  beautiful  set  of  teeth — two
rows  of  pearls."  He  remarked  most  particularly  those  teeth.  Now
there  are  some  wicked,  slandering  gossips,  who  happen  to 'have  culti-
vated most  intimately  Mrs.  White's  acquaintance  in  the  happy  days  of
her  innocence,  before  her  fall  and  subsequent  expose',  and  they  tell  us
very  bluntly  (we  beg  the  penitent  angel's  pardon,  we  repeat  but  a  hear-
say) that  this  lady  can  hardly  number  among  her  other  natural  charms
the  rare  beauty  of  pearly  teeth,  or  a  perfect,  most  beautifully  formed  hand
and  arm.  Why  not  show  her  teeth  at  once  to  the  said  admirer,  and  so
shame  the  slanderers?  Why  shun  "Katie's"  best  friends?  If  we  were
so  anxious  as  she  seems  to  be  to  prove  "who  is  who,"  we  would  surely
submit  with  pleasure  to  the  operation  of  showing  our  teeth,  yea,  even
in  a  court  of  justice.  The  above  fact,  trifling  as  it  may  seem  at  first
sight,  would  be  considered  as  a  very  important  one  by  any  intelligent
juryman  in  a  question  of  personal  identification.

Mr.  Owen's  statement  to  us,  corroborated  by  "Katie  King"  herself  in
her  biography,  a  sworn  document,  remember,  is  in  the  following  words:
"She  consented  to  have  an  interview  with  some  gentlemen  who  had
seen  her  personating  the  spirit,  on  condition  that  she  -would  be  allowed  to

oo  A    MODERN    PAXARION.

keep  a  veil  over her -face  all  the  time  she  was  conversing  with  them"  {Phila-
delphia Inquirer,  Jan.  nth,  4th  col.,  "K.  K.  Biography.")

Now  pray  why  should  these  "too  credulous  weak-minded  gentle-
men," as  the  immortal  Dr.  Beard  would  say,  be  subjected  again  to  such
an  extra  strain  on  their  blind  faith?  We  should  say  that  that  was  just
the  proper  time  to  come  out  and  prove  to  them  what  was  the  nature  of
the  mental  aberration  they  were  labouring  under  for  so  many  months.
Well,  if  they  do  swallow  this  new  veiled  proof  they  are  welcome  to  it.

Vulgus  vult  decipi  decipiaturl  But  I  expect  something  more  sub-
stantial before  submitting  in  guilty  silence  to  be  laughed  at.  As  it  is,
the  case  stands  thus:

According  to  the  same  biography  (same  column)  the  mock  seance
was  prepared  and  carried  out  to  everyone's  heart's  content,  through
the  endeavours  of  an  amateur  detective,  who,  by  the  way,  if  any  one
wants  to  know,  is  a  Mr.  W.  O.  Leslie,  a  contractor  or  agent  for  the
Baltimore,  Philadelphia,  and  New  York  Railroad,  residing  in  this  city.
If  the  press  and  several  of  the  most  celebrated  victims  of  the  fraud  are
under  bond  of  secrecy  with  him,  /  am  no/,  and  mean  to  say  what  I
know.  And  so  the  said  seance  took  place  on  Dec.  5th  last,  which  fact
appearing  in  sworn  evidence,  implies  that  Mr.  Leslie  had  wrested  from
Mrs.  White  the  confession, of  her  guilt  at  least  several  days  previous  to
that  date,  though  the  precise  day  of  the  "amateur's"  triumph  is  very
cleverly  withheld  in  the  sworn  certificate.  Now  comes  a  new  conun-
drum.

On  the  evenings  of  Dec.  2nd  and  3rd,  at  two  seances  held  at  the
Holmeses',  I,  myself,  in  the  presence  of  Robert  Dale  Owen  and  Dr.
Child  (chief  manager  of  those  performances,  from  whom  I  got  on  the
same  morning  an  admission  card),  together  with  twenty  more  witnesses,
saw  the  spirit  of  Katie  step  out  of  the  cabinet  twice,  in  full  form  and
beauty,  and  I  can  swear  in  any  court  of  justice  that  she  did  not  bear
the  least  resemblance  to  Mrs.  White's  portrait.

As  I  am  unwilling  to  base  my  argument  upon  any  other  testimony  than
my  own,  I  will  not  dwell  upon  the  alleged  apparition  of  Katie  King  at
the  Holmeses'  on  Dec.  5th  to  Mr.  Roberts  and  fifteen  others,  among
whom  was  Mr.  W.  H.  Clarke,  a  reporter  for  The  Daily  Graphic,  for  I
happened  to  be  out  of  town,  though,  if  this  fact  is  demonstrated,  it
will  go  far  against  Mrs.  White,  for  on  that  precise  evening,  and  at  the
same  hour,  she  was  exhibiting  herself  as  the  bogus  Katie  at  the  mock
seance.     Something  still  more  worthv  of  consideration  is  found  in  the

THE    HOLMES   CONTROVERSY.  21

most  positive  assertion  of  a  gentleman,  a  Mr.  Wescott,  who  on  that
evening  of  the  5th,  on  his  way  home  from  the  real  seance,  met  in  the
car  Mr.  Owen,  Dr.  Child  and  his  wife,  all  three  returning  from  the
mock  seance.  Now  it  so  happened  that  this  gentleman  mentioned  to
them  about  having  just  seen  the  spirit  Katie  come  out  of  the  cabinet,
adding  "he  thought  she  never  looked  better";  upon  hearing  which
Mr.  Robert  Dale  Owen  stared  at  him  in  amazement,  and  all  the  three
looked  greatly  perplexed.

And  so  I  have  but  insisted  on  the  apparition  of  the  spirit  at  the
mediums'  house  on  the  evenings  Dec.  2nd  and  3rd,  when  I  witnessed
the  phenomenon,  together  with  Robert  Dale  Owen  and  other  parties.

It  would  be  worse  than  useless  to  offeror  accept  the  poor  excuse  that
the  confession  of  the  woman  White,  her  exposure  of  the  fraud,  the
delivery  to  Mr.  Leslie  of  all  her  dresses  and  presents  received  by  her
in  the  name  of  Katie  King,  the  disclosure  of  the  sad  news  by  this
devoted  gentleman  to  Mr.  Owen,  and  the  preparation  of  the  mock
seance  cabinet  and  other  important  matters,  had  all  of  them  taken
place  on  the  4th;  the  more  so,  as  we  are  furnished  with  most  positive
proofs  that  Dr.  Child  at  least,  if  not  Mr.  Owen,  knew  all  about  Mr.
Leslie's  success  with  Mrs.  White  several  days  beforehand.  Knowing
then  of  the  fraud,  how  could  Mr.  Leslie  allow  it  to  be  still  carried  on,
as  the  fact  of  Katie's  apparition  at  the  Holmeses'  on  Dec.  2nd  and  3rd
prove  to  have  been  the  case?  Any  gentleman,  even  with  a  very  mode-
rate degree  of  honour  about  him,  would  never  allow  the  public  to  be
fooled  and  defrauded  any  longer,  unless  he  had  the  firm  resolution  of
catching  the  bogus  spirit  on  the  spot  and  proving  the  imposition.  But
no  such  thing  occurred.  Quite  the  contrary;  for  Dr.  Child,  who  had
constituted  himself  from  the  first  not  only  chief  superintendent  of  the
seances,  cabinet  and  materialization  business,  but  also  cashier  and  ticket-
holder  (paying  the  mediums  at  first  ten  dollars  per  seance,  as  he  did,  and
subsequently  fifteen  dollars,  and  pocketing  the  rest  of  the  proceeds),  on
that  same  evening  of  the  3rd  Took  the  admission  money  from  every  visitor
as  quietly  as  he  ever  did.  I  will  add,  furthermore,  that  I,  in  propria
persona,  handed  him  on  that  very  night  a  five-dollar  bill,  and  that  he
(Dr.  Child)  kept  the  whole  of  it,  remarking  that  the  balance  could  be
made  good  to  us  by  future  sca?ices.

Will  Dr.  Child  presume  to  say  that  getting  ready,  as  he  then  was,
in  company  with  Mr.  Leslie,  to  produce  the  bogus  Katie  King  on  the
5th  of  December,  he  knew  nothing,  as  yet,  of  the  fraud  on  the  3rd?

22  A    MODERN    PANARION.

Further;  in  the  same  biography  (chap,  viii,  column  the  ist),  it  is
stated  that,  immediately  upon  Mrs.  White's  return  from  Blissfield,
Mich.,  she  called  on  Dr.  Child,  and  offered  to  expose  the  whole  humbug
she  had  been  engaged  in,  but  that  he  would  not  listen  to  her.  Upon
that  occasion  she  was  not  veiled,  as  indeed  there  was  no  necessity  for  her
to  be,  since  by  Dr.  Child's  own  admission  she  had  been  a  patient  of  his,
and  under  his  medical  treatment.  In  a  letter  from  Holmes  to  Dr.  Child,
dated  Blissfield,  Aug.  28th,  1874,  the  former  writes:

Mrs.  White  says  vou  and  the  friends  were  ver}'  rude,  wanted  to  look  into  all  our
boxes  and  trunks  and  break  open  locks.  What  were  you  looking  for,  or  expecting
to  find?

All  these  several  circumstances  show  in  the  clearest  possible  manner
that  Dr.  Child  and  Mrs.  White  were  on  terms  much  more  intimate  then
than  that  of  casual  acquaintance,  and  it  is  the  height  of  absurdity  to
assert  that  if  Mrs.  White  and  Katie  King  were  identical,  the  fraud  was
not  perfectly  well  known  to  the  "Father  Confessor"  (see  narrative  of
John  and  Katie  King,  p.  45).  But  a  side  light  is  thrown  upon  this
coined}'  from  the  pretended  biography  of  John  King  and  his  daughter
Katie,  written  at  their  dictation  in  his  ozan  office  by  Dr.  Child  himself.
This  book  was  given  out  to  the  world  as  an  authentic  revelation  from
these  two  spirits.  It  tells  us  that  they  stepped  in  and  stepped  out  of
his  office,  da}-  after  day,  as  any  mortal  being  might,  and  after  holding
brief  conversations,  followed  by  long  narratives,  they  fully  endorsed
the  genuineness  of  their  own  apparition  in  the  Holmeses'  cabinet.
Moreover,  the  spirits  appearing  at  the  public  sc'anccs  corroborated  the
statements  which  they  made  to  their  amanuensis  in  his  office;  the  two
dovetailing  together  and  making  a  consistent  story.  Now,  if  the
Holmeses'  Kings  were  Mrs.  White,  who  were  the  spirits  visiting  the
doctor's  office?  and  if  the  spirits  visiting  him  were  genuine,  who  were
those  that  appeared  at  the  public  seances?  In  which  particular  has  the
"Father  Confessor"  defrauded  the  public?  In  selling  a  book  containing
false  biographies  or  exposing  bogus  spirits  at  the  Holmeses'?  Which
or  both?     Let  the  doctor  choose.

If  his  conscience  is  so  tender  as  to  force  him  into  print  with  his
certificate  and  affidavits  why  does  it  not  sink  deep  enough  to  reach
his  pocket,  and  compel  him  to  refund  to  us  the  money  obtained  by  him
under  false  pretences?  According  to  his  own  confession,  the  Holmeses
received  from  him,  up  to  the  time  they  left  town,  about  $1,200,  for  four
months  of  daily  seances.    That  he  admitted  every  night  as  many  visitors

THE    HOLMES   CONTROVERSY.  2J

as  he  could  possibly  find  room  for — sometimes  as  many  as  thirty-five —
is  a  fact  that  will  be  corroborated  by  every  person  who  has  seen  the
phenomena  more  than  once.  Furthermore,  some  six  or  seven  reliable
witnesses  have  told  us  that  the  modest  fee  of  %i  was  only  for  the
habitues,  too  curious  or  over-anxious  visitors  having  to  pay  sometimes
as  much  as  $5,  and  in  one  instance  $10.  This  last  fact  I  give  under  all
reserve,  not  having  had  to  pay  so  much  as  that  myself.

Now  let  an  impartial  investigator  of  this  Philadelphia  imbroglio  take
a  pencil  and  cast  up  the  profit  left  after  paying  the  mediums,  in  this
nightly  spirit  speculation  lasting  many  months.  The  result  would  be
to  show  that  the  business  of  a  spirit  "Father  Confessor"  is,  on  the
whole,  a  very  lucrative  one.

L,adies  and  gentlemen  of  the  spiritual  belief,  methinks  we  are  all  of
us  between  the  horns  of  a  very  wonderful  dilemma.  If  you  happen  to
find  your  position  comfortable,  /  do  not,  and  so  will  try  to  extricate
myself.

Let  it  be  perfectly  understood,  though,  that  I  do  not  intend  in  the
least  to  undertake  at  present  the  defence  of  the  Holmeses.  They  may
be  the  greatest  frauds  for  what  I  know  or  care.  My  only  purpose  is  to
know  for  a  certainty  to  whom  I  am  indebted  for  my  share  of  ridicule —
small  as  it  may  be,  luckily  for  me.  If  we  Spiritualists  are  to  be  laughed
and  scoffed  at  and  ridiculed  and  sneered  at,  we  ought  to  know  at  least
the  reason  why.  Either  there  was  a  fraud  or  there  was  none.  If  the
fraud  is  a  sad  reality,  and  Dr.  Child  by  some  mysterious  combination
of  his  personal  cruel  fate  has  fallen  the  first  victim  to  it,  after  having
proved  himself  so  anxious  for  the  sake  of  his  honour  and  character  to
stop  at  once  the  further  progress  of  such  a  deceit  on  a  public  that  had
hitherto  looked  on  him  alone  as  the  party  responsible  for  the  perfect
integrity  and  genuineness  of  a  phenomenon  so  fully  endorsed  by  him
in  all  particulars,  why  does  not  the  doctor  come  out  the  first  and  help
us  to  the  clue  of  all  this  mystery?  Well  aware  of  the  fact  that  the
swindled  and  defrauded  parties  can  at  any  day  assert  their  rights  to  the
restitution  of  moneys  laid  out  by  them  solely  on  the  ground  of  their
entire  faith  in  him  they  had  trusted,  why  does  he  not  sue  the  Holmeses
and  so  prove  his  own  innocence?  He  cannot  but  admit  that  in  the
eyes  of  some  initiated  parties,  his  cause  looks  far  more  ugly  as  it  now
stands  than  the  accusation  under  which  the  Holmeses  vainly  struggle.
Or,  if  there  was  no  fraud,  or  if  it  is  not  fully  proved,  as  it  cannot  well
be  on  the  shallow  testimony  of  a  nameless  woman  signing  documents

24

A   MODERN    PAXARION.

with  pseudonyms,  why  then  all  this  comedy  on  the  part  of  the  prin-
cipal partner  in  the  "Katie  materialization"  business?  Was  not  Dr.
Child  the  institutor,  the  promulgator,  and  we  may  say  the  creator  of
what  proves  to  have  been  but  a  bogus  phenomenon,  after  all?  Was  not
he  the  advertising  agent  of  this  incarnated  humbug — the  Barnum  of
this  spiritual  show?  And  now  that  he  has  helped  to  fool  not  only
Spiritualists  but  the  world  at  large,  whether  as  a  confederate  himself  or
one  of  the  weak-minded  fools — no  matter,  so  long  as  it  is  demonstrated
that  it  was  he  that  helped  us  to  this  scrape — he  imagines  that  by  help-
ing to  accuse  the  mediums,  and  expose  the  fraud,  by  fortifying  with  his
endorsement  all  manner  of  bogus  affidavits  and  illegal  certificates  from
non-existing  parties,  he  hopes  to  find  himself  henceforth  perfectly
clear  of  responsibility  to  the  persons  he  has  dragged  after  him  into  this
infamous  swamp!

We  must  demand  a  legal  investigation.  We  have  the  right  to  insist
upon  it,  for  we  Spiritualists  have  bought  this  right  at  a  dear  price:
with  the  life-long  reputation  of  Mr.  Owen  as  an  able  and  reliable  writer
and  trustworthy  witness  of  the  phenomena,  who  may  henceforth  be
regarded  as  a  doubted  and  ever-ridiculed  visionary  by  sceptical  wise-
acres. We  have  bought  this  right  with  the  prospect  that  all  of  us,
whom  Dr.  Child  has  unwittingly  or  otherwise  (time  will  prove  it)  fooled
into  belief  in  his  Katie  King,  will  become  for  a  time  the  butts  for  end-
less raillery,  satires  and  jokes  from  the  press  and  ignorant  masses.  We
regret  to  feel  obliged  to  contradict  on  this  point  such  an  authority  in
all  matters  as  The  Daily  Graphic,  but  if  orthodox  laymen  rather  de-
cline to  see  this  fraud  thoroughly  investigated  in  a  court  of  justice
for  fear  of  the  Holmeses  becoming  entitled  to  the  crown  of  martyrs,  we
have  no  such  fear  as  that,  and  repeat  with  Mr.  Hudson  Tuttle  that
"better  perish  the  cause  with  the  impostors  than  live  such  a  life  of
eternal  ostracism,  with  no  chance  for  justice  or  redress."

Why  in  the  name  of  all  that  is  wonderful  should  Dr.  Child  have  all
the  laurels  of  this  unfought  battle,  in  which  the  attacked  army  seems
for  ever  doomed  to  be  defeated  without  so  much  as  a  struggle?  Why
should  he  have  all  the  material  benefit  of  this  materialized  humbug,
and  R.  D.  Owen,  an  honest  Spiritualist,  whose  name  is  universally
respected,  have  all  the  kicks  and  thumps  of  the  sceptical  press?  Is
this  fair  and  just?  How  long  shall  we  Spiritualists  be  turned  over  like
so  many  scapegoats  to  the  unbelievers  by  cheating  mediums  and  specu-
lating prophets?     Like  some  modern  shepherd  Paris,  Mr.  Owen  fell  a

THE    HOLMES   CONTROVERSY.  25

victim  to  the  snares  of  this  pernicious,  newly  materialized  Helen ;  and
on  him  falls  heaviest  the  present  reaction  that  threatens  to  produce  a
new  Trojan  war.  But  the  Homer  of  the  Philadelphia  Iliad,  the  one
who  has  appeared  in  the  past  as  the  elegiac  poet  and  biographer  of  that
same  Helen,  and  who  appears  in  the  present  kindling  up  the  spark
of  doubt  against  the  Holmeses,  till,  if  not  speedily  quenched,  it  might
become  a  roaring  ocean  of  flames — he  that  plays  at  this  present  hour
the  unparalleled  part  of  a  chief  justice  presiding  at  his  own  trial  and
deciding  in  his  own  case — Dr.  Child,  we  say,  turning  back  on  the  spirit
daughter  of  his  own  creation,  and  backing  the  mortal,  illegitimate  off-
spring furnished  by  somebody,  is  left  unmolested!  Only  fancy,  while
R.  D.  Owen  is  fairly  crushed  under  the  ridicule  of  the  exposure,  Dr.
Child,  who  has  endorsed  false  spirits,  now  turns  state's  evidence  and
endorses  as  fervently  spirit  certificates,  swearing  to  the  same  in  a  court
of  justice!

If  ever  I  may  hope  to  get  a  chance  of  having  my  advice  accepted  by
some  one  anxious  to  clear  up  all  this  sickening  story,  I  would  insist
that  the  whole  matter  be  forced  into  a  real  court  of  justice  and  un-
riddled before  a  jury.  If  Dr.  Child  is,  after  all,  an  honest  man  whose
trusting  nature  was  imposed  upon,  he  must  be  the  first  to  offer  us  all
the  chances  that  lie  in  his  power  of  getting  at  the  bottom  of  all  these
endless  "whys"  and  "hows."  If  he  does  not,  in  such  a  case  we  will
try  for  ourselves  to  solve  the  following  mysteries:

1st,  Judge  Allen,  of  Vineland,  now  in  Philadelphia,  testifies  to  the
fact  that  when  the  cabinet,  made  up  under  the  direct  supervision  and
instructions  of  Dr.  Child,  was  brought  home  to  the  Holmeses,  the
doctor  worked  at  it  himself,  unaided,  one  whole  day,  and  with  his  tools,
Judge  Allen  being  at  the  time  at  the  mediums',  whom  he  was  visiting.
If  there  was  a  trap-door  or  "two  cut  boards"  connected  with  it,  who
did  the  work?  Who  can  doubt  that  such  clever  machinery,  fitted  in
such  a  way  as  to  baffle  frequent  and  close  examinations  on  the  part  of
the  sceptics,  requires  an  experienced  mechanic  of  more  than  ordinary
ability?  Further,  unless  well  paid,  he  could  hardly  be  bound  to
secrecy.  Who  paid  him?  Is  it  Holmes  out  of  his  ten-dollar  nightly
fee?     We  ought  to  ascertain  it.

2nd,  If  it  is  true,  as  two  persons  are  ready  to  swear,  that  the  party,
calling  herself  Eliza  White,  alias  "Frank,"  alias  Katie  King,  and  so
forth,  is  no  widow  at  all,  having  a  well  materialized  husband,  who
is  living,  and  who  keeps  a  drinking  saloon  in  a  Connecticut  town — then

26  A    MODERN    PANARION.

in  such  case  the  fair  widow  has  perjured  herself  and  Dr.  Child  has
endorsed  the  perjury.  We  regret  that  he  should  endorse  the  state-
ments of  the  former  as  rashly  as  he  accepted  the  fact  of  her  mate-
rialization.

3rd,  Affidavits  and  witnesses  (five  in  all)  are  ready  to  prove  that  on  a
certain  night,  when  Mrs.  White  was  visibly  in  her  living  body,  refresh-
ing her  penitent  stomach  in  company  with  impenitent  associates  in  a
lager  beer  saloon,  having  no  claims  to  patrician  "patronage,"  Katie
King,  in  her  spirit  form,  was  as  visibly  seen  at  the  door  of  her
cabinet.

4th,  On  one  occasion,  when  Dr.  Child  (in  consequence  of  some
prophetic  vision,  maybe)  invited  Mrs.  White  to  his  own  house,  where
he  locked  her  up  with  the  inmates,  who  entertained  her  the  whole  of
the  evening,  for  the  sole  purpose  of  convincing  (he  always  seems
anxious  to  convince  somebody  of  something)  some  doubting  sceptics
of  the  reality  of  the  spirit-form,  the  latter  appeared  in  the  sea?ice-xoom.
and  talked  with  R.  D.  Owen  in  the  presence  of  all  the  company.  The
Spiritualists  were  jubilant  that  night,  and  the  doctor  the  most  trium-
phant of  them  all.  Many  are  the  witnesses  ready  to  testify  to  the  fact,
but  Dr.  Child,  when  questioned,  seems  to  have  entirely  forgotten  this
important  occurrence.

5th,  Who  is  the  party  whom  she  claims  to  have  engaged  to  personate
General  Rawlings?  Let  him  come  out  and  swear  to  it,  so  that  we  will
all  see  his  great  resemblance  to  the  defunct  warrior.

6th,  Let  her  name  the  friends  from  whom  she  borrowed  the  costumes
to  personate  "Sauntee"  and  "Richard."  They  must  prove  it  under
oath.  Let  them  produce  the  dresses.  Can  she  tell  us  where  she  got
the  shining  robes  of  the  second  and  third  spheres?

7th,  Only  some  portions  of  Holmes'  letters  to  "Frank"  are  published
in  the  biography:  some  of  them  for  the  purpose  of  proving  their  co-
partnership in  the  fraud  at  Blissfield.  Can  she  name  the  house  and
parties  with  whom  she  lodged  and  boarded  at  Blissfield,  Michigan?

When  all  the  above  questions  are  answered  and  demonstrated  to  our
satisfaction,  then,  and  only  then,  shall  we  believe  that  the  Holmeses  are
the  only  guilty  parties  to  a  fraud,  which,  for  its  consummate  rascality
and  brazenness,  is  unprecedented  in  the  annals  of  Spiritualism.

I  have  read  some  of  Mr.  Holmes'  letters,  whether  original  or  forged,
no  matter,  and  blessed  as  I  am  with  a  good  memory,  I  well  remember
certain  sentences  that  have  been,  very  luckily  for  the  poetic  creature,

THE    HOLMES   CONTROVERSY.  2J

suppressed  by  the  blushing  editor  as  being  too  vile  for  publication.
One  of  the  most  modest  of  the  paragraphs  runs  thus:

Now,  my  advice  to  you,  Frank,  don't  crook  your  ciboiu  too  often;  no  use  doubling
up  and  squaring  your  fists  again.

Oh,  Katie  King!

Remember,  the  above  is  addressed  to  the  woman  who  pretends  to
have  personated  the  spirit  of  whom  R.  D.  Owen  wrote  thus:

I  particularly  noticed  this  evening  the  ease  and  harmony  of  her  motions.  In
Naples,  during  five  years,  I  frequented  a  circle  famed  for  courtly  demeanour;  but
never  in  the  best-bred  lady  of  rank  accosting  her  visitors,  have  I  seen  Katie  out-
rivalled.

And  further:

A  well-known  artist  of  Philadelphia,  after  examining  Katie,  said  to  me  that  he
had  seldom  seen  features  exhibiting  more  classic  beauty.  "Her  movements  and
bearing,"  he  added,  "are  the  very  ideal  of  grace."

Compare  for  one  moment  this  admiring  description  with  the  quota-
tion from  Holmes'  letter.  Fancy  an  ideal  of  classic  beauty  and  grace
crooking  her  elbow  in  a  lager  beer  saloon,  and — judge  for  yourselves  I

H.  P.  Beavatsky.

////,  Girard  Street,  Philadelpliia.

THE  HOLMES  CONTROVERSY.

(Continued.)

In  the  last  Religio-Philosophical  Journal  (for  February  27th)  in  the
Philadelphia  department,  edited  by  Dr.  Child,  under  the  most  poetical
heading  of,  "After  the  Storm  comes  the  Sunshine,"  we  read  the
following:

I  have  been  waiting  patiently  for  the  excitement  in  reference  to  the  Holmes
fraud  to  subside  a  little.  I  will  now  make  some  further  statements  and  answer
some  questions.

Further:

The  stories  of  my  acquaintance  with  Mrs.  White  are  all  fabrications.

Further  still:

I  shall  not  notice  the  various  reports  put  forth  about  my  pecuniary  relations
farther  than  to  say  there  is  a  balance  due  to  me  for  money  loaned  to  the  Holmeses.

I  claim  the  right  to  answer  the  above  three  quotations,  the  more  so
that  the  second  one  consigns  me  most  unceremoniously  to  the  ranks  of
the  liars.  Now  if  there  is,  in  my  humble  judgment,  anything  more
contemptible  than  a  cheat,  it  is  certainly  a  liar.

The  rest  of  this  letter,  editorial,  or  whatever  it  may  be,  is  unanswer-
able, for  reasons  that  will  be  easily  understood  by  whoever  reads  it.
When  petulant  Mr.  Pancks  (in  Little  Dorrit)  spanked  the  benevolent
Christopher  Casby,  this  venerable  patriarch  only  mildly  lifted  up  his
blue  eyes  heavenward,  and  smiled  more  benignly  than  ever.  Dr.  Child,
tossed  about  and  as  badly  spanked  by  public  opinion,  smiles  as  sweetly
as  Mr.  Casby,  talks  of  "sunshine,"  and  quiets  his  urgent  accusers  by
assuring  them  that  "it  is  all  fabrications."

I  don't  know  whence  Dr.  Child  takes  his  "sunshine,"  unless  he
draws  it  from  the  very  bottom  of  his  innocent  heart.

For  my  part,  since  I  came  to  Philadelphia,  I  have  seen  little  but
slush  and  dirt;  slush  in  the  streets,  and  dirt  in  this  exasperating
Katie  King  mystery.

THE    HOLMES   CONTROVERSY.  29

I  would  strongly  advise  Dr.  Child  not  to  accuse  me  of  "fabrication,"
whatever  else  he  may  be  inclined  to  ornament  me  with.  What  I  say
I  can  prove,  and  am  ever  willing  to  do  so  at  any  day.  If  he  is  innocent
of  all  participation  in  this  criminal  fraud,  let  him  "rise  and  explain."

If  he  succeeds  in  clearing  his  record,  I  will  be  the  first  to  rejoice,  and
promise  to  offer  him  publicly  my  most  sincere  apology  for  the  "erro-
neous suspicions"  I  labour  under  respecting  his  part  in  the  affair;  but
he  must  first  prove  that  he  is  thoroughly  innocent.  Hard  words  prove
nothing,  and  he  cannot  hope  to  achieve  such  a  victory  by  simply
accusing  people  of  "fabrications."  If  he  does  not  abstain  from  apply-
ing epithets  unsupported  by  substantial  proofs,  he  risks,  as  in  the  game
of  shuttlecock  and  battledore,  the  chance  of  receiving  the  missile  back,
and  maybe  that  it  will  hurt  him  worse  than  he  expects.

In  the  article  in  question  he  says:

The  stories  of  my  acquaintance  with  Mrs.  White  are  all  fabrications.  I  did  let
her  in  two  or  three  times,  but  the  entry  a_nd  hall  were  so  dark  that  it  was  impossible
to  recognize  her  or  any  one.  I  have  seen  her  several  times,  and  knew  that  she
looked  more  like  Katie  King  than  Mr.  [?]  or  Mrs.  Holmes.

Mirabile  dictu!  This  beats  our  learned  friend,  Dr.  Beard.  The  latter
denies,  point-blank,  not  only  "materialization,"  which  is  not  yet  actually
proved  to  the  world,  but  also  every  spiritual  phenomenon.  But  Dr.
Child  denies  being  acquainted  with  a  woman  whom  he  confesses  him-
self to  have  seen  "several  times,"  received  in  his  office,  where  she  was
seen  repeatedly  by  others,  and  yet  at  the  same  time  admits  that  he
"knew  she  looked  like  Katie  King,"  etc.  By  the  way,  we  have  all
laboured  under  the  impression  that  Dr.  Child  admitted  in  The  Inquirer
that  he  saw  Mrs.  White  for  the  first  time  and  recognized  her  as  Katie
King  only  on  that  morning  when  she  made  her  affidavit  at  the  office
of  the  justice  of  the  peace.  A  "fabrication"  most  likely.  In  the
R. -P.  Journal  for  October  27th,  1874,  Dr.  Child  wrote  thus:

Your  report  does  not  for  a  moment  shake  my  confidence  in  our  Katie  King,  as
she  conies  to  me  every  day  and  talks  to  me.  On  several  occasions  Katie  had  come
to  me  and  requested  Mr.  Owen  and  myself  to  go  there  [meaning  to  the  Holtneses']
and  she  would  come  and  repeat  what  she  had  told  me  above.

Did  Dr.  Child  ascertain  where  Mrs.  White  was  at  the  time  of  the

spirit's  visits  to  him?

As  to  Mrs.  White,  I  know  her  well.  I  have  on  many  occasions  let  her  into  the
house.  I  saw  her  at  the  time  the  manifestations  were  going  on  in  Blissfield.  She
has  since  gone  to  Massachusetts.

•^O  A   MODERN    PANARIOX.

And  still  the  doctor  assures  us  he  was  not  acquainted  with  Mrs.
White.  What  signification  does  he  give  to  the  word  "acquaintance"
in  such  a  case?  Did  he  not  go,  in  the  absence  of  the  Holmeses,  to  their
house,  and  talk  with  her  and  even  quarrel  with  the  woman?  Another
fabricated  story,  no  doubt.  I  defy  Dr.  Child  to  print  again,  if  he  dare,
such  a  word  as  fabrication  in  relation  to  myself,  after  he  has  read  a
•certain  statement  that  I  reserve  for  the  last.

In  all  this  pitiful,  humbugging  romance  of  an  "exposure"  by  a  too
material  she-spirit,  there  has  not  been  given  us  a  single  reasonable
explanation  of  even  so  much  as  one  solitary  fact.  It  began  with  a  bogus
biography,  and  threatens  to  end  in  a  bogus  fight,  since  every  single  duel
requires  at  least  two  participants,  and  Dr.  Child  prefers  extracting
sunshine  from  the  cucumbers  of  his  soul  and  letting  the  storm  sub-
side, to  fighting  like  a  man  for  his  own  fair  name.  He  says  that  "he
shall  not  notice"  what  people  say  about  his  little  speculative  transac-
tions with  the  Holmeses.  He  assures  us  that  they  owe  him  money.
Very  likely,  but  it  does  not  alter  the  alleged  fact  of  his  having  paid
$10  for  every  seance  and  pocketing  the  balance.  Dare  he  say  that  he
did  not  do  it?  The  Holmeses  say  otherwise,  and  the  statements  in
writing  of  various  witnesses  corroborate  them.

The  Holmeses  may  be  scamps  in  the  eyes  of  certain  persons,  and  the
only  ones  in  the  eyes  of  the  more  prejudiced;  but  as  long  as  their
statements  have  not  been  proven  false,  their  word  is  as  good  as  the
word  of  Dr.  Child;  aye,  in  a  court  of  justice  even,  the  "Mediums
Holmes"  would  stand  just  on  the  same  level  as  any  spiritual  prophet
or  clairvoyant  who  might  have  been  visited  by  the  same  identical  spirits
that  visited  the  former.  So  long  as  Dr.  Child  does  not  legally  prove
them  to  be  cheats  and  himself  innocent,  why  should  not  they  be  as  well
entitled  to  belief  as  himself?

From  the  first  hour  of  the  Katie  King  mystery,  if  people  have  ac-
cused them,  no  one  so  far  as  I  know — not  even  Dr.  Child  himself — has
proved,  or  even  undertaken  to  prove,  the  innocence  of  their  ex-cashier
and  recorder.  The  fact  that  every  word  of  the  ex-leader  and  president
of  the  Philadelphian  Spiritualists  would  be  published  by  every  spiritual
paper  (and  here  we  must  confess  to  our  wonder  that  he  does  not  hasten
much  to  avail  himself  of  this  opportunity)  while  any  statement  coming
from  the  Holmeses  would  be  pretty  sure  of  rejection,  would  not  neces-
sarily imply  the  fact  that  they  alotie  are  guilty ;  it  would  only  go  towards
showing  that,  notwithstanding  the  divine  truth  of  our  faith  and  the

THE    HOLMES   CONTROVERSY.  -I

teachings  of    our   invisible    guardians,    some    Spiritualists    have    not
profited  by  them  to  learn  impartiality  and  justice.

These  "mediums"  are  persecuted;  so  far  it  is  but  justice,  since  they
themselves  admitted  their  guilt  about  the  photography  fraud,  and
unless  it  can  be  shown  that  they  were  thereunto  controlled  by  lying  spirits,
their  own  mouths  condemn  them;  but  what  is  less  just,  is  that  they
are  slandered  and  abused  on  all  points  and  made  to  bear  alone  all  the
weight  of  a  crime,  where  confederacy  peeps  out  from  every  page  of  the
story.  No  one  seems  willing  to  befriend  them — these  two  helpless  un-
influential  creatures,  who,  if  they  sinned  at  all,  perhaps  sinned  through
weakness  and  ignorance — to  take  their  case  in  hand,  and  by  doing
justice  to  them,  do  justice  at  the  same  time  to  the  cause  of  truth.  If
their  guilt  should  be  as  evident  as  the  daylight  at  noon,  is  it  not  ridicu-
lous that  their  partner,  Dr.  Child,  should  show  surprise  at  being  so
much  as  suspected!  History  records  but  one  person — the  legitimate
spouse  of  the  great  Caesar — whose  name  has  to  remain  enforced  by  law
as  above  suspicion.  Methinks  that  if  Dr.  Child  possesses  some  natural
claims  to  his  self-assumed  title  of  Katie  King's  "Father  Confessor,"  he
can  have  none  whatever  to  share  the  infallibility  of  Madame  Caesar's
virtue.  Being  pretty  sure  as  to  this  myself,  and  feeling,  moreover,
somewhat  anxious  to  swell  the  list  of  pertinent  questions,  which  are
called  by  our  disingenuous  friend  "fabrications,"  with  at  least  one
fact,  I  will  now  proceed  to  furnish  your  readers  with  the  following:

"Katie's"  picture  has  been,  let  us  say,  proved  a  fraud,  an  imposition
on  the  credulous  world,  and  is  Mrs.  White's  portrait.  This  counterfeit
has  been  proved  by  the  beauty  of  the  "crooking  elbow,"  in  her  bogus
autobiography  (the  proof  sheets  of  which  Dr.  Child  was  seen  correct-
ing), by  the  written  confession  of  the  Holmeses,  and,  lastly,  by  Dr.
Child  himself.

Out  of  the  several  bogus  portraits  of  the  supposed  spirit,  the  most
spurious  one  has  been  declared — mostly  on  the  testimony  endorsed  by
Dr.  Child  and  "over  his  signature" — to  be  the  one  where  the  pernicious
and  false  Katie  King  is  standing  behind  the  medium.

The  operation  of  this  delicate  piece  of  imposture  proved  so  difficult
as  to  oblige  the  Holmeses  to  take  into  the  secret  of  the  conspiracy  the
photographer.

Now  Dr.  Child  denies  having  had  anything  whatever  to  do  with  the
sittings  for  those  pictures.  He  denies  it  most  emphatically,  and  goes
so  far  as  to  say  (we  have  many  witnesses  and  proofs  of  this)  that  he

32  A   MODERN    PANARION.

was  out  of  town,  four  hundred  miles  away,  when  the  said  pictures  were
taken.  And  so  he  was,  bless  his  dear  prophetic  soul !  Meditating  and
chatting  with  the  nymphs  and  goblins  of  Niagara  Falls,  so  that,  when
he  pleads  an  alibi,  it's  no  "fabrication"  but  the  truth  for  once.

Unfortunately  for  the  veracious  Dr.  Child — "whose  character  and
reputation  for  truthfulness  and  moral  integrity  no  one  doubts,"  here
we  quote  the  words  of  "Honesty"  and  "Truth,"  transparent  pseu-
donyms of  an  "amateur"  for  detecting,  exposing  and  writing  under
the  cover  of  secrecy,  who  tried  to  give  a  friendly  push  to  the  doctor  in
two  articles,  but  failed  in  both — unfortunately  for  H.  T.  Child,  we  say,
he  got  inspired  in  some  evil  hour  to  write  a  certain  article,  and  for-
getting the  wise  motto,  Verba  volant,  scripta  manent,  to  publish  it  in
The  Daily  Graphic  on  Nov.  16th,  together  with  the  portraits  of  John
and  Katie  King.

Now  for  this  bouquet  of  the  endorsement  of  a  fact  by  a  truthful
man,  "whose  moral  integrity  no  one  can  doubt."

To  the  Editor  of  "The  Daily  Graphic"

On  the  evening  of  July  20th,  after  a  large  and  successful  seance,  in  which  Katie
had  walked  out  into  the  room  in  the  presence  of  thirty  persons  and  had  disappeared
and  reappeared  in  full  view,  she  remarked  to  Mr.  Leslie  and  myself  that  if  we,  with
four  others  whom  she  named,  would  remain  after  the  seance,  she  would  like  to  try
for  her  photograph.  We  did  so,  and  there  were  present  six  persons  besides  the
photographer.  I  had  procured  two  dozen  magnesian  spirals,  and,  when  all  was
ready,  she  opened  the  door  of  the  cabinet  and  stood  in  it,  while  Mr.  Holmes  on  one
side,  and  I  upon  the  other,  burned  these,  making  a  brilliant  light.  We  tried  two
plates,  but  neither  of  them  was  satisfactory.

Another  effort  was  made  on  July  23rd,  which  was  successful.  We  asked  her  if  she
would  try  to  have  it  taken  by  daylight.  She  said  she  would.  We  sat  with  shutters
open  at  4  p.m.  In  a  few  moments  Katie  appeared  at  the  aperture  and  said  she  was
ready.  She  asked  to  have  one  of  the  windows  closed,  and  that  we  should  hold  a
shawl  to  screen  her.  As  soon  as  the  camera  was  ready  she  came  out  and  walked
behind  the  shawl  to  the  middle  of  the  room,  a  distance  of  six  or  eight  feet,  where
she  stood  in  front  of  the  camera.  She  remained  in  that  position  until  the  first
picture  was  taken,  when  she  retired  to  the  cabinet.

Mr.  Holmes  proposed  that  she  should  permit  him  to  sit  in  front  of  the  camera,
and  should  come  out  and  place  her  hand  upon  his  shoulder.  To  this  she  assented,
and  desired  all  present  to  avoid  looking  into  tier  eyes,  as  this  disturbed  the  conditions
very  much.     .     .     .

The  second  picture  was  then  taken  in  -which  she  stands  behind  Mr.  Holmes.  When
the  camera  was  closed  she  showed  great  signs  of  weakness,  and  it  was  necessary  to
assist  her  back  to  the  cabinet,  and  when  she  got  to  the  door  she  appeared  ready  to  sink
to  the  floor  and  disappeared  [?].     The  cabinet  door  'was  opened,  but  she  raas  not  to  be

THE   HOLMES   CONTROVERSY.  33

seen.     In  a  few  minutes  she  appeared  again  and  remarked  that  she  had  not  been

sufficiently  materialized,  and  said  she  would  like  to  try  again,  if  we  could  wait  a

little  while.     We  waited  about  fifteen  minutes,  when  she  rapped  on  the  cabinet,

signifying  that  she  was  ready  to  come  out.     She  did  so,  and  we  obtained  the  third

negative.

(Signed)  Dr.  H.  T.  Child.

And  so,  Dr.  Child,  we  have  obtained  this,  we  did  that,  and  we  did
many  other  things.  Did  you?  Now,  besides  Dr.  Child's  truthful
assertions  about  his  being  out  of  town,  especially  at  the  time  this  third
negative  was  obtained,  we  have  the  testimony  of  the  photographer,
Dr.  Selger,  and  other  witnesses  to  corroborate  the  fact.  At  the  same
time,  I  suppose  that  Dr.  Child  will  not  risk  a  denial  of  his  own  article.
I  have  it  in  my  possession  and  keep  it,  together  with  many  others  as
curious,  printed  like  it,  and  written  in  black  and  white.  Who  fabricates
stories?     Can  the  doctor  answer?

How  will  he  creep  out  of  this  dilemma?  What  rays  of  his  spiritual
"sunshine"  will  be  able  to  de-materialize  such  a  contradictory  fact  as
this  one?  Here  we  have  an  article  taking  up  two  spacious  columns  of
The  Daily  Graphic,  in  which  he  asserts  as  plainly  as  possible,  that  he
was  present  himself  at  the  sittings  of  Katie  King  for  her  portrait,  that
the  spirit  come  out  boldly,  in  full  daylight,  that  she  disappeared  on  the
threshold  of  the  cabinet,  and  that  he,  Dr.  Child,  helping  her  back  to
it  on  account  of  her  great  weakness,  saw  that  there  was  no  one  in  the
said  cabinet,  for  the  door  remained  opened.  Who  did  he  help?  Whose
fluttering  heart  beat  against  his  paternal  arm  and  waistcoat?  Was  it
the  bonny  Eliza?  Of  course,  backed  by  such  reliable  testimony  of
such  a  truly  trustworthy  witness,  the  pictures  sold  like  wild-fire.  Who
got  the  proceeds?  Who  kept  them?  If  Dr.  Child  was  not  in  town
when  the  pictures  were  taken,  then  this  article  is  an  "  evident  fabrica-
tion." On  the  other  hand,  if  what  he  says  in  it  is  truth,  and  he  was
present  at  all  at  the  attempt  of  this  bogus  picture-taking,  then  he
certainly  must  have  known  "who  was  who,  in  1874,"  as  the  photographer
knew  it,  and  as  surely  it  did  not  require  Argus-eyes  to  recognize  in  full
daylight  with  only  one  shutter  partially  closed,  a  materialized,  ethereal
spirit,  from  a  common,  "elbow-crooking"  mortal  woman,  whom,  though
not  acquainted  with  her,  the  doctor  still  "knew  well."

If  our  self-constituted  leaders,  our  prominent  recorders  of  the  pheno-
mena, will  humbug  and  delude  the  public  with  such  reliable  statements
as  this  one,  how  can  we  Spiritualists  wonder  at  the  masses  of  incredulous
scoffers  that  keep  on  politely  taking  us  for  "lunatics"  when  they  do

34  A    MODERN    PANARION.

not  very  rudely  call  us  "liars  and  charlatans"  to  our  faces?  It  is  not
the  occasionally  cheating  "mediums"  that  have  or  can  impede  the
progress  of  our  cause;  it's  the  exalted  exaggerations  of  some  fanatics
on  one  hand,  and  the  deliberate,  unscrupulous  statements  of  those  who
delight  in  dealing  in  "wholesale  fabrications"  and  "pious  frauds"  that
have  arrested  the  unusually  rapid  spreading  of  Spiritualism  in  1874  and
brought  it  to  a  dead  stop  in  1875.  For  how  many  years  to  come  yet,
who  can  tell?

In  his  "After  the  Storm  comes  the  Sunshine,"  the  Doctor  makes  the
following  melancholy  reflection :

It  has  been  suggested  that  going  into  an  atmosphere  of  fraud,  such  as  surrounds
these  mediums  [the  Holmeses]  and  being  sensitive  [O  poor  Yorick!]  I  was  more
liable  to  be  deceived  than  others.

We  shudder  indeed  at  the  thought  of  the  exposure  of  so  much
sensitiveness  to  so  much  pollution.  Alas!  soiled  dove!  how  very
sensitive  must  a  person  be  who  picks  up  such  evil  influences  that  they
actually  force  him  into  the  grossest  of  fabrications  and  make  him
invent  stories  and  endorse  facts  that  he  has  not  and  could  not  have
seen.  If  Dr.  Child,  victim  to  his  too  sensitive  nature,  is  liable  to  fall
so  easily  as  that  under  the  control  of  wicked  "Diakka,"  our  friendly
advice  to  him  is  to  give  up  Spiritualism  as  soon  as  possible,  and  join  a
Young  Men's  Christian  Association;  for  then,  under  the  protecting
wing  of  the  true  orthodox  Church,  he  can  begin  a  regular  fight,  like  a
second  St.  Anthony,  with  the  orthodox  devil.  Such  Diakka  as  he  fell
in  with  at  the  Holmeses'  must  beat  Old  Nick  by  long  odds,  and  if  he
could  not  withstand  them  by  the  unaided  strength  of  his  own  pure
soul,  he  may  with  "bell,  book  and  candle"  and  the  use  of  holy  water
be  more  fortunate  in  a  tug  with  Satan,  crying  as  other  "Father  Con-
fessors" have  heretofore,  " Exorciso  vos  in  nomine  Lucisf"  and  signify-
ing his  triumph  with  a  robust  Laus  Deo.

H.  P.  Blavatsky.
Philadelphia,  March,  1875.

NOTICE  TO  MEDIUMS.

In  compliance  with  the  request  of  the  Honourable  Alexander  Aksa-
koff,  Counsellor  of  State  in  the  Imperial  Chancellery  at  St.  Petersburg,
the  undersigned  hereby  give  notice  that  they  are  prepared  to  receive
applications  from  physical  mediums  who  may  be  willing  to  go  to
Russia,  for  examination  before  the  committee  of  the  Imperial  Univer-
sity.

To  avoid  disappointment,  it  may  be  well  to  state  that  the  undersigned
will  recommend  no  mediums  whose  personal  good  character  is  not
satisfactorily  shown;  nor  any  who  will  not  submit  themselves  to  a
thorough  scientific  test  of  their  mediumistic  powers,  in  the  city  of  New
York,  prior  to  sailing;  nor  any  who  cannot  exhibit  most  of  their
phenomena  in  a  lighted  room,  to  be  designated  by  the  undersigned,
and  with  such  ordinary  furniture  as  may  be  found  therein.

Approved  applications  will  be  immediately  forwarded  to  St.  Peters-
burg, and  upon  receipt  of  orders  thereon  from  the  scientific  commis-
sion or  its  representative,  M.  Aksakoff,  proper  certificates  and  instruc-
tions will  be  given  to  accepted  applicants,  and  arrangements  made  for
defraying  expenses.

Address  the  undersigned,  in  care  of  E.  Gerry  Brown,  Editor  of  The
Spiritual  Scientist,  18,  Exchange  Street,  Boston,  Mass.,  who  is  hereby
authorized  to  receive  personal  applications  from  mediums  in  the  New
England  States.

Henry  S.  Olcott.
Helkn  P.  Blavatsky.

A  REBUKE.

I  am  truly  sorry  that  a  Spiritualist  paper  like  The  Religio- Philo-
sophical Journal,  which  claims  to  instruct  and  enlighten  its  readers,
should  suffer  such  trash  as  Mr.  Jesse  Sheppard  is  contributing  to  its
columns  to  appear  without  review.  I  will  not  dwell  upon  the  previous
letter  of  this  very  gifted  personage,  although  everything  he  has  said
concerning  Russia  and  life  at  St.  Petersburg  might  be  picked  to  pieces
by  anyone  having  merely  a  superficial  acquaintance  with  the  place  and
the  people;  nor  will  I  stop  to  sniff  at  his  nosegays  of  high-sounding
names — his  Princess  Boulkoffs  and  Princes  This  and  That,  which  are
as  preposterously  fictitious  as  though,  in  speaking  of  Americans,  some
Russian  singing-medium  were  to  mention  his  friends  Prince  Jones  or
Duke  Smith,  or  Earl  Brown — for  if  he  chooses  to  manufacture  noble
patrons  from  the  oversloppings  of  his  poetic  imagination,  and  it
amuses  him  or  his  readers,  no  great  harm  is  done.  But  when  it  comes
to  his  saying  the  things  he  does  in  the  letter  of  July  3rd  in  that  paper,
it  puts  quite  a  different  face  upon  the  matter.  Here  he  pretends  to
give  historical  facts — which  never  existed.  He  tells  of  things  he  saw
clairvoyantly,  and  his  story  is  such  a  tissue  of  ridiculous,  gross  ana-
chronisms that  they  not  only  show  his  utter  ignorance  of  Russian  his-
tory, but  are  calculated  to  injure  the  cause  of  Spiritualism  by  throwing
doubt  upon  all  clairvoyant  descriptions.  Secondarily  in  importance
they  destroy  his  own  reputation  for  veracity,  stamp  him  as  a  trickster
and  a  false  writer,  and  bring  the  gravest  suspicion  upon  his  claim  to
possess  any  mediumship  whatever.

What  faith  can  anyone,  acquainted  with  the  rudiments  of  history,
have  in  a  medium  who  sees  a  mother  (Catherine  II)  giving  orders  to
strangle  her  son  (Paul  I),  when  we  all  know  that  the  Emperor  Paul
ascended  the  throne  upon  the  decease  of  the  very  mother  whom  the
inventive  genius  of  this  musical  prodigy  makes  guilty  of  infanticide?

Permit  me,  O  young  seer  and  Spiritualist,  as  a  Russian  somewhat

A   REBUKE.  37

read  in  the  history  of  her  country,  to  refresh  your  memory.  Spiritual-
ism has  been  laughed  at  quite  enough  recently  in  consequence  of  such
pious  frauds  as  yours,  and  as  Russian  savants  are  about  to  investigate
the  subject,  we  may  as  well  go  to  them  with  clean  hands.  The  journal
which  gives  you  its  hospitality  goes  to  my  country,  and  its  interests
will  certainly  suffer  if  you  are  allowed  to  go  on  with  your  embroidery
and  spangle-work  without  rebuke.  Remember,  young  poetico-historian,
that  the  Emperor  Paul  was  the  paternal  grandfather  of  the  present
Czar,  and  everyone  who  has  been  at  St.  Petersburg  knows  that  the
"old  palace,"  which  to  your  spiritual  eye  wears  such  "an  appearance  of
dilapidation  and  decay,  worthy  of  a  castle  of  the  Middle  Ages,"  and  the
one  where  your  Paul  was  strangled,  is  an  every-day,  modern-looking,
respectable  building,  the  successor  of  one  which  was  pulled  down  early
in  the  reign  of  the  late  Emperor  Nicholas,  and  known  from  the  be-
ginning until  now  as  the  Pavvlowsky  Military  College  for  the  "Cadets."
And  the  two  assassins,  begotten  in  your  clairvoyant  loins — Petreski
and  Kofski!  Really  now,  Mr.  Sheppard,  gentlemanly  assassins  ought
to  be  very  much  obliged  to  you  for  these  pretty  aliases!

It  is  fortunate  for  you,  dear  sir,  that  it  did  not  occur  to  you  to  discuss
these  questions  in  St.  Petersburg,  and  that  you  evolved  your  history
from  the  depths  of  your  own  consciousness,  for  in  our  autocratical
country  one  is  not  permitted  to  discuss  the  little  unpleasantnesses  of
the  imperial  family  history,  and  the  rule  would  not  be  relaxed  for  a
Spanish  grandee,  or  even  that  more  considerable  personage,  an  Ameri-
can singing-medium.  An  attempt  on  your  part  to  do  so  would  assuredly
have  interfered  with  your  grand  concert,  under  imperial  patronage,
and  might  have  led  to  your  journeying  to  the  borders  of  Russia  under
an  armed  escort  befitting  your  exalted  rank.

H.  P.  Blavatskv.

OCCULTISM  OR  MAGIC.

Among  the  numerous  sciences  pursued  by  the  well-disciplined  army
of  earnest  students  of  the  present  century,  none  has  had  less  honours
or  more  scoffing  than  the  oldest  of  them— the  science  of  sciences,  the
venerable  mother-parent  of  all  our  modern  pigmies.  Anxious  in  their
petty  vanity  to  throw  the  veil  of  oblivion  over  their  undoubted  origin,
the  self-styled  positive  scientists,  ever  on  the  alert,  present  to  the  coura-
geous scholar  who  tries  to  deviate  from  the  beaten  highway  traced  out
for  him  by  his  dogmatic  predecessors,  a  formidable  range  of  serious
obstacles.

As  a  rule,  Occultism  is  a  dangerous,  double-edged  weapon  for  one  to
handle  who  is  unprepared  to  devote  his  whole  life  to  it.  The  theory
of  it,  unaided  by  serious  practice,  will  ever  remain  in  the  eyes  of  those
prejudiced  against  such  an  unpopular  cause  an  idle,  crazy  speculation,
fit  only  to  charm  the  ears  of  ignorant  old  women.  When  we  cast  a
look  behind  us  and  see  how  for  the  last  thirty  years  modern  Spiritual-
ism has  been  dealt  with,  notwithstanding  the  occurrence  of  daily,  hourly-
proofs  which  speak  to  all  our  senses,  stare  us  in  the  eyes,  and  utter
their  voices  from  "beyond  the  great  gulf,"  how  can  we  hope,  I  say,  that
Occultism  or  Magic — which  stands  in  relation  to  Spiritualism  as  the
infinite  to  the  finite,  as  the  cause  to  the  effect,  or  as  unity  to  multifari-
ousness— will  easily  gain  ground  where  Spiritualism  is  scoffed  at?  One
who  rejects  a  priori  or  even  doubts  the  immortality  of  man's  soul  can
never  believe  in  its  Creator;  and,  blind  to  what  is  heterogeneous  in  his
eyes,  will  remain  still  more  blind  to  the  proceeding  of  the  latter  from
homogeneity.  In  relation  to  the  Kabalah,  or  the  compound  mystic
text-book  of  the  great  secrets  of  Nature,  we  do  not  know  of  anyone  in
the  present  century  who  could  have  commanded  a  sufficient  dose  of
that  moral  courage  which  fires  the  heart  of  the  true  Adept  with  the
sacred  flame  of  propagandism,  to  force  him  into  defying  public  opinion
by  displaying  familiarity  with  that  sublime  work.     Ridicule  is  the  dead-

OCCULTISM    OR   MAGIC.  39

liest  weapon  of  the  age,  and  while  we  read  in  the  records  of  history  of
thousands  of  martyrs  who  joyfully  braved  flames  and  faggots  in  support
of  their  mystic  doctrines  in  the  past  centuries,  we  would  scarcely  be
likely  to  find  one  individual  in  the  present  times  who  would  be  brave
enough  even  to  defy  ridicule  by  seriously  undertaking  to  prove  the
great  truths  embraced  in  the  traditions  of  the  Past.

As  an  instance  of  the  above,  I  will  mention  the  article  on  Rosieru-
cianism,  signed  "Hiraf."  This  ably-written  essay — notwithstanding
some  fundamental  errors,  which,  though  they  are  such,  would  be  hardly
noticed  except  by  those  who  had  devoted  their  lives  to  the  study  of
Occultism  in  its  various  branches  of  practical  teaching — indicates  with
certainty  to  the  practical  reader  that,  for  theoretical  knowledge,  at
least,  the  author  need  fear  few  rivals,  still  less  superiors.  His  modesty,
which  I  cannot  too  much  appreciate  in  his  case — though  he  is  safe
enough  behind  the  mask  of  his  fancy  pseudonym — need  not  give  him
any  apprehensions.  There  are  few  critics  in  this  country  of  Positivism
who  would  willingly  risk  themselves  in  an  encounter  with  such  a
powerful  disputant,  on  his  own  ground.  The  weapons  he  seems  to
hold  in  reserve,  in  the  arsenal  of  his  wonderful  memory,  his  learning,
and  his  readiness  to  give  any  further  information  that  enquirers  may
wish  for,  will  undoubtedly  scare  off  every  theorist,  unless  he  is  perfectly
sure  of  himself,  which  few  are.  But  book-learning — and  here  I  refer
only  to  the  subject  of  Occultism — vast  as  it  may  be,  will  always  prove
insufficient  even  to  the  analytical  mind — the  most  accustomed  to  extract
the  quintessence  of  truth,  disseminated  throughout  thousands  of  con-
tradictory statements — unless  supported  by  personal  experience  and
practice.  Hence  "Hiraf"  can  only  expect  an  encounter  with  some
one  who  may  hope  to  find  a  chance  to  refute  some  of  his  bold  asser-
tions on  the  plea  of  having  just  such  a  slight  practical  experience.
Still,  it  must  not  be  understood  that  these  present  lines  are  intended
to  criticize  our  too  modest  essayist.  Far  from  poor,  ignorant  me  be
such  a  presumptuous  thought.  My  desire  is  simple:  to  help  him  in
his  scientific,  but,  as  I  said  before,  rather  hypothetical  researches,  by
telling  a  little  of  the  little  I  picked  up  in  my  long  travels  throughout
the  length  ami  breadth  of  the  East — that  cradle  of  Occultism — in  the
hope  of  correcting  certain  erroneous  notions  he  seems  to  be  labouring
under,  and  which  are  calculated  to  confuse  uninitiated  sincere  enquirers,
who  might  desire  to  drink  at  his  own  source  of  knowledge.

In  the  first  place,  "Hiraf"  doubts  whether  there  are  in  existence,  in

40  A   MODERN   PANARION.

England  or  elsewhere,  what  we  term  regular  colleges  for  the  neophytes
of  this  Secret  Science.  I  will  say  from  personal  knowledge  that  such
places  there  are  in  the  East — in  India,  Asia  Minor,  and  other  countries.
As  in  the  primitive  days  of  Socrates  and  other  sages  of  antiquity,  so
now,  those  who  are  willing  to  learn  the  Great  Truth  will  ever  find  the
chance  if  they  only  "try"  to  meet  some  one  to  lead  them  to  the  door  of
one  "who  knows  when  and  how."  If  "Hiraf"  is  right  about  the
seventh  rule  of  the  Brotherhood  of  the  Rosy  Cross,  which  says  that
"the  Rose-crux  becomes  and  is  not  made,"  he  may  err  as  to  the  excep-
tions which  have  ever  existed  among  other  Brotherhoods  devoted  to
the  pursuit  of  the  same  secret  knowledge.  Then  again,  when  he
asserts,  as  he  does,  that  Rosicrucianism  is  almost  forgotten,  we  may
answer  him  that  we  do  not  wonder  at  it,  and  add,  by  way  of  parenthesis,
that,  strictly  speaking,  the  Rosicrucians  do  not  now  even  exist,  the  last
of  that  fraternity  having  departed  in  the  person  of  Cagliostro.

"Hiraf"  ought  to  add  to  the  word  Rosicrucianism  "that  particular
sect"  at  least,  for  it  was  but  a  sect  after  all,  one  of  many  branches  of  the
same  tree.

By  forgetting  to  specify  that  particular  denomination  and  by  includ-
ing under  the  name  of  Rosicrucians  all  those  who,  devoting  their  lives
to  Occultism  congregated  together  in  Brotherhoods,  "Hiraf"  commits
an  error  by  which  he  may  unwittingly  lead  people  to  believe  that  the
Rosicrucians  having  disappeared,  there  are  no  more  Kabalists  prac-
tising Occultism  on  the  face  of  the  earth.  He  also  becomes  thereby
guilty  of  an  anachronism,  attributing  to  the  Rosicrucians  the  building
of  the  pyramids  and  other  majestic  monuments,  which  indelibly  exhibit
in  their  architecture  the  symbols  of  the  grand  religions  of  the  past.
For  it  is  not  so.  If  the  main  object  in  view  was,  and  still  is,  alike,  with
all  the  great  family  of  the  ancient  and  modern  Kabalists,  the  dogmas
and  formulae  of  certain  sects  differ  greatly.  Springing  one  after  the
other  from  the  great  Oriental  mother-root,  they  scattered  broadcast  all
over  the  world,  and  each  of  them  desiring  to  out-rival  the  other  by
plunging  deeper  and  deeper  into  the  secrets  jealously  guarded  by
Nature,  some  of  them  became  guilt}'  of  the  greatest  heresies  against
the  primitive  Oriental  Kabalah.

While  the  first  followers  of  the  secret  sciences,  taught  to  the  Chal-
daeans  by  nations  whose  very  name  was  never  breathed  in  history,
remained  stationary  in  their  studies,  having  arrived  at  the  maximum,
the  Omega  of  the  knowledge  permitted  to  man,  many  of  the  subse-

OCCULTISM    OR   MAGIC.  41

quent  sects  separated  from  them,  and,  in  their  uncontrollable  thirst  for
more  knowledge,  trespassed  beyond  the  boundaries  of  truth  and  fell
into  fictions.  In  consequence  of  Pythagoras — so  says  Jamblichus —
having  by  sheer  force  of  energy  and  daring  penetrated  into  the  mys-
teries of  the  Temple  of  Thebes,  obtained  therein  his  initiation  and
afterwards  studied  the  sacred  sciences  in  Egypt  for  twenty-two  years,
many  foreigners  were  subsequently  admitted  to  share  the  knowledge
of  the  wise  men  of  the  East,  who,  as  a  consequence,  had  many  of  their
secrets  divulged.  Later  still,  unable  to  preserve  them  in  their  purity,
these  mysteries  were  so  mixed  up  with  fictions  and  fables  of  the
Grecian  mythology  that  truth  was  wholly  distorted.

As  the  primitive  Christian  religion  divided,  in  course  of  time,  into
numerous  sects,  so  the  science  of  Occultism  gave  birth  to  a  variety  of
doctrines  and  various  brotherhoods.  So  the  Egyptian  Ophites  became
the  Christian  Gnostics,  shooting  forth  the  Basilideans  of  the  second
century,  and  the  original  Rosicrucians  created  subsequently  the  Para-
celsists,  or  Fire  Philosophers,  the  European  Alchemists,  and  other
physical  branches  of  their  sect.  (See  Hargrave  Jennings'  Rosicrzccia?is.)
To  call  indifferently  every  Kabalist  a  Rosicrucian,  is  to  commit  the
same  error  as  if  we  were  to  call  every  Christian  a  Baptist  on  the  ground
that  the  latter  are  also  Christians.

The  Brotherhood  of  the  Rosy  Cross  was  not  founded  until  the  middle
of  the  thirteenth  century,  and  notwithstanding  the  assertions  of  the
learned  Mosheim,  it  derives  its  name  neither  from  the  Latin  word  Ros
(dew),  nor  from  a  cross,  the  symbol  of  Lux.  The  origin  of  the
Brotherhood  can  be  ascertained  by  any  earnest,  genuine  student  of
Occultism,  who  happens  to  travel  in  Asia  Minor,  if  he  chooses  to  fall
in  with  some  of  the  Brotherhood,  and  if  he  is  willing  to  devote  himself
to  the  head-tiring  work  of  deciphering  a  Rosicrucian  manuscript — the
hardest  thing  in  the  world — for  it  is  carefully  preserved  in  the  archives
of  the  very  Lodge  which  was  founded  by  the  first  Kabalist  of  that
name,  but  which  now  goes  by  another  name.  The  founder  of  it.  a
German  Ritter,  of  the  name  of  Rosencranz,  was  a  man  who,  after
acquiring  a  very  suspicious  reputation  through  the  practice  of  the
Black  Art  in  his  native  place,  reformed  in  consequence  of  a  vision.
Giving  up  his  evil  practices,  he  made  a  solemn  vow,  and  went  on  foot
to  Palestine,  in  order  to  make  his  amende  honorable  at  the  Holy  Sepul-
chre. Once  there,  the  Christian  God,  the  meek,  but  well-informed
Nazarene— trained  as  he  was  in  the  high  school  of  the  Essenians,  those

,2  A   MODERN    PANARION.

virtuous  descendants  of  the  botanical  as  well  as  astrological  and
magical  Chaldaeans — appeared  to  Rosencranz,  a  Christian  would  say,  in
a  vision,  but  I  would  suggest,  in  the  shape  of  a  materialized  spirit.
The  purport  of  this  visitation,  as  well  as  the  subject  of  their  conversa-
tion, remained  for  ever  a  mystery  to  many  of  the  Brethren;  but  imme-
diately after  that,  the  ex-sorcerer  and  Ritter  disappeared,  and  was
heard  of  no  more  till  the  mysterious  sect  of  Rosicrucians  was  added  to
the  family  of  Kabalists,  and  their  powers  aroused  popular  attention,
even  among  the  Eastern  populations,  indolent  and  accustomed  as  they
are  to  live  among  wonders.  The  Rosicrucians  strove  to  combine  to-
gether the  most  various  branches  of  Occultism,  and  they  soon  became
renowned  for  the  extreme  purity  of  their  lives  and  their  extraordinary
powers,  as  well  as  for  their  thorough  knowledge  of  the  secret  of  secrets.

As  alchemists  and  conjurers  they  became  proverbial.  Later  (I  need
not  inform  "Hiraf"  precisely  when,  as  we  drink  at  two  different  sources
of  knowledge),  they  gave  birth  to  the  more  modern  Theosophists,  at
whose  head  was  Paracelsus,  and  to  the  Alchemists,  one  of  the  most
celebrated  of  whom  was  Thomas  Vanghan  (seventeenth  century),  who
wrote  the  most  practical  things  on  Occultism  under  the  name  of
Eugenius  Philalethes.  I  know  and  can  prove  that  Vaughan  was,  most
positively,  "made  before  he  became."

The  Rosicrucian  Kabalah  is  but  an  epitome  of  the  Jewish  and  the
Oriental  ones,  combined,  the  latter  being  the  most  secret  of  all.  The
Oriental  Kabalah,  the  practical,  full,  and  only  existing  copy,  is  care-
fully preserved  at  the  headquarters  of  this  Brotherhood  in  the  East,
and,  I  may  safely  vouch,  will  never  come  out  of  its  possession.  Its
very  existence  has  been  doubted  by  many  of  the  European  Rosi-
crucians. One  who  wants  "to  become"  has  to  hunt  for  his  knowledge
through  thousands  of  scattered  volumes,  and  pick  up  facts  and  lessons,
bit  by  bit.  Unless  he  takes  the  nearest  wa)r  and  consents  "to  be  made,"
he  will  never  become  a  practical  Kabalist,  and  with  all  his  learning
will  remain  at  the  threshold  of  the  "mysterious  gate."  The  Kabalah
ma;.-  be  used  and  its  truths  imparted  on  a  smaller  scale  now  than  it  was
in  antiquity,  and  the  existence  of  the  mysterious  Eodge,  on  account  of
its  secrecy,  doubted,  but  it  does  exist  and  has  lost  none  of  the  primitive
secret  powers  of  the  ancient  Chaldaeans.  The  lodges,  few  in  number,
are  divided  into  sections  and  known  but  to  the  Adepts;  no  one  would
be  likely  to  find  them  out,  unless  the  Sages  themselves  found  the  neo-
phyte worthy  of  initiation.     Unlike  the  European   Rosicrucians — who,.

OCCULTISM    OR   MAGIC.  43

in  order  "to  become  and  not  to  be  made,"  have  constantly  put  into
practice  the  word  of  St.  John,  who  says,  "Heaven  suffereth  violence
and  the  violent  take  it  by  force,"  and  who  have  struggled  alone,
violently  robbing  Nature  of  her  secrets — the  Oriental  Rosicrucians  (for
such  we  will  call  them,  being  denied  the  right  to  pronounce  their  true
name),  in  the  serene  beatitude  of  their  divine  knowledge,  are  ever
ready  to  help  the  earnest  student  struggling  "to  become"  with  practical
knowledge,  which  dissipates,  like  a  heavenly  breeze,  the  blackest
clouds  of  sceptical  doubt.

"Hiraf"  is  right  again  when  he  says  that

Knowing  that  their  mysteries,  if  divulged,  in  the  present  chaotic  state  of  society,
would  produce  mere  confusion  and  death,

they  shut  up  that  knowledge  within  themselves.  Heirs  to  the  early
heavenly  wisdom  of  their  first  forefathers,  they  keep  the  keys  which
unlock  the  most  guarded  of  Nature's  secrets,  and  impart  them  only
gradually  and  with  the  greatest  caution.  But  still  they  do  impart
sometimes.

Once  in  such  a  cerclc  vicieux,  "Hiraf"  sins  likewise  in  a  certain  com-
parison he  makes  between  Christ,  Buddha,  and  Khoung-foo-tsee,  or
Confucius.  A  comparison  can  hardly  be  made  between  the  two  former
wise  and  spiritual  Illuminati,  and  the  Chinese  philosopher.  The
higher  aspirations  and  views  of  the  two  Christs  can  have  nothing  to
do  with  the  cold,  practical  philosophy  of  the  latter,  brilliant  anomaly
as  he  was  among  a  naturally  dull  and  materialistic  people,  peaceful  and
devoted  to  agriculture  from  the  earliest  ages  of  their  history.  Con-
fucius can  never  bear  the  slightest  comparison  with  the  two  great
Reformers.  Whereas  the  principles  and  doctrines  of  Christ  and
Buddha  were  calculated  to  embrace  the  whole  of  humanity,  Confucius
confined  his  attention  solely  to  his  own  country,  trying  to  apply  his
profound  wisdom  and  philosophy  to  the  wants  of  his  countrymen,  and
little  troubling  his  head  about  the  rest  of  mankind.  Intensely  Chinese
in  patriotism  and  views,  his  philosophical  doctrines  are  as  much  devoid
of  the  purely  poetic  element,  which  characterizes  the  teachings  of
Christ  and  Buddha,  the  two  divine  types,  as  the  religious  tendencies  of
his  people  lack  in  that  spiritual  exaltation  which  we  find,  for  instance,
in  India.  Khoung-foo-tsee  has  not  even  the  depth  of  feeling  and  the
slight  spiritual  striving  of  his  contemporary,  Lao-tsee.  Says  the
learned  Ennemoser:

44  A    MODERN    PANARION.

The  spirits  of  Christ  and  Buddha  have  left  indelible,  eternal  traces  all  over  the
face  of  the  world.  The  doctrines  of  Confucius  can  be  mentioned  only  as  the  most
brilliant  proceedings  of  cold  human  reasoning.

Harvey,  in  his  Universal  History,  has  depicted  the  Chinese  nation
perfectly,  in  a  few  words:

Their  heavy,  childish,  cold,  sensual  nature  explains  the  peculiarities  of  their
history.

Hence  any  comparison  between  the  first  two  Reformers  and  Con-
fucius, in  an  essay  on  Rosicrucianism,  in  which  "Hiraf"  treats  of  the
Science  of  Sciences  and  invites  the  thirsty  for  knowledge  to  drink  at
her  inexhaustible  source,  seems  inadmissible.

Further,  when  our  learned  author  asserts  so  dogmatically  that  the
Rosicrucian  learns,  though  he  never  uses,  the  secret  of  immortality  in
earthly  life,  he  asserts  only  what  he  himself,  in  his  practical  inexperi-
ence, thinks  impossible.  The  words  "never"  and  "impossible"  ought
to  be  erased  from  the  dictionary  of  humanity,  until  the  time  at  least
when  the  great  Kabalah  shall  all  be  solved,  and  so  rejected  or  accepted.
The  Count  St.  Germain  is,  until  this  very  time,  a  living  mystery,  aud
the  Rosicrucian  Thomas  Vaughan  another  one.  The  countless  authori-
ties we  have  in  literature,  at  well  as  in  oral  tradition  (which  sometimes
is  the  more  trustworthy),  about  this  wonderful  Count's  having  been
met  and  recognized  in  different  centuries,  is  no  myth.  Anyone  who
admits  one  of  the  practical  truths  of  the  occult  sciences  taught  by  the
Kabalah  tacitly  admits  them  all.  It  must  be  Hamlet's  "to  be  or  not
to  be,"  and  if  the  Kabalah  is  true,  then  St.  Germain  need  be  no  myth.

But  I  am  digressing  from  my  object,  which  is,  firstly,  to  show  the
slight  differences  between  the  two  Kabalahs,  that  of  the  Rosicrucians
and  the  Oriental  one;  and,  secondly,  to  say  that  the  hope  expressed  by
"Hiraf"  to  see  the  subject  better  appreciated  at  some  future  day  than
it  has  been  till  now,  may  perhaps  become  more  than  a  hope.  Time
will  show  many  things;  till  then,  let  us  heartily  thank  "Hiraf"  for  this
first  well-aimed  shot  at  those  stubborn  scientific  runaways,  who,  once
before  the  Truth,  avoid  looking  her  in  the  face,  and  dare  not  even  throw
a  glance  behind  them,  lest  they  should  be  forced  to  see  that  which
would  greatly  lessen  their  self-sufficiency.  As  a  practical  follower  of
Eastern  Spiritualism,  I  can  confidently  wait  for  the  time,  when,  with
the  timely  help  of  those  "who  know,"  American  Spiritualism,  which
■even  in  its  present  shape  has  proved  such  a  sore  in  the  side  of  the
materialists,  will  become  a  science  and  a  thing  of  mathematical  certi-

OCCULTISM    OR   MAGIC.  45

tude,  instead  of  being  regarded  only  as  the  crazy  delusion  of  epileptic
monomaniacs.

The  first  Kabalah  in  which  a  mortal  man  ever  dared  to  explain  the
greatest  mysteries  of  the  universe,  and  show  the  keys  to

Those  masked  doors  in  the  ramparts  of  Nature  through  which  no  mortal  can
ever  pass  without  rousing  dread  sentries  never  seen  upon  this  side  her  wall,

was  compiled  by  a  certain  Simeon  Ben  Iochai,  who  lived  at  the  time
of  the  second  Temple's  destruction.  Only  about  thirty  years  after  the
death  of  this  renowned  Kabalist,  his  MSS.  and  written  explanations,
which  had  till  then  remained  in  his  possession  as  a  most  precious
secret,  were  used  by  his  son  Rabbi  Elizzar  and  other  learned  men.
Making  a  compilation  of  the  whole,  they  so  produced  the  famous  work
called  Sohar  (God's  splendour).  This  book  proved  an  inexhaustible
mine  for  all  the  subsequent  Kabalists,  their  source  of  information  and
knowledge,  and  all  more  recent  and  genuine  Kabalahs  were  more  or
less  carefully  copied  from  the  former.  Before  that,  all  the  mysterious
doctrines  had  come  down  in  an  unbroken  line  of  merely  oral  tradition  as
far  back  as  man  could  trace  himself  on  earth.  They  were  scrupulously
and  jealously  guarded  by  the  wise  men  of  Chaldsea,  India,  Persia  and
Egypt,  and  passed  from  one  Initiate  to  another,  in  the  same  purity  of
form  as  when  handed  down  to  the  first  man  by  the  angels,  students  of
God's  great  Theosophic  Seminary.  For  the  first  time  since  the  world's
creation,  the  secret  doctrines,  passing  through  Moses  who  was  initiated
in  Egypt,  underwent  some  slight  alterations.

In  consequence  of  the  personal  ambition  of  this  great  prophet-
medium,  he  succeeded  in  passing  off  his  familiar  spirit,  the  wrathful
"Jehovah,"  for  the  spirit  of  God  himself,  and  so  won  undeserved  laurels
and  honours.  The  same  influence  prompted  him  to  alter  some  of  the
principles  of  the  great  oral  Kabalah  in  order  to  make  them  the  more
secret.  These  principles  were  laid  out  in  symbols  by  him  in  the  first
four  books  of  the  Pentateuch,  but  for  some  mysterious  reasons  he  with-
held them  from  Deuteronomy.  Having  initiated  his  seventy  Elders  in
his  own  way,  the  latter  could  give  but  what  they  had  received  them-
selves, and  so  was  prepared  the  first  opportunity  for  heresy,  and  the
erroneous  interpretation  of  the  symbols.  While  the  Oriental  Kabalah
remained  in  its  pure  primitive  shape,  the  Mosaic  or  Jewish  one  was  full
of  drawbacks,  and  the  keys  to  many  of  the  secrets — forbidden  by  the
Mosaic  law — purposely  misinterpreted.  The  powers  conferred  by  it  on
the   Initiates  were    formidable   still,    and    of   all    the    most    renowned

46  A   MODERN    PANARION.

Kabalists,  King  Solomon  and  his  bigoted  parent,  David,  notwith-
standing his  penitential  psalms,  were  the  most  powerful.  But  still  the
doctrine  remained  secret  and  purely  oral,  until,  as  I  have  said  before,
the  days  of  the  second  Temple's  destruction.  Philologically  speaking,
the  very  word  Kabalah  is  formed  from  two  Hebrew  words,  meaning
to  receive,  as  in  former  times  the  Initiate  received  it  orally  and  directly
from  his  Master,  and  the  very  book  of  the  Sohar  was  written  out  on
received  information,  which  was  handed  down  as  an  unvarying  stereo-
typed tradition  by  the  Orientals,  and  altered,  through  the  ambition  of
Moses,  by  the  Jews.

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

SPIRITUALISTIC  TRICKSTERS.

A  most  outrageous  swindle  was  perpetrated  upon  the  public  last
Sunday  evening  at  the  Boston  Theatre.  Some  persons  with  no  higher
aspirations  in  the  world  than  a  lust  for  a  few  dollars  to  fill  their  pockets,
depleted  by  unsuccessful  cheap  shows,  advertised  a  "seance,"  and  en-
gaged as  "mediums"  some  of  the  most  impudent  impostors  with  which
the  world  is  cursed.  They  furthermore  abused  public  confidence  by
causing  it  to  be  understood  that  these  people  were  to  appear  before  the
scientific  commission  at  St.  Petersburg.

Is  it  not  about  time  that  some  Society  in  Boston  should  be  suffi-
ciently strong  financially,  and  have  members  who  will  have  the  re-
quisite energy  to  act  in  an  emergency  like  this?  Common  sense  would
dictate  what  might  be  done,  and  a  determined  will  would  overcome  all
obstacles.  Spiritualism  needs  a  Vigilance  Committee.  Public  opinion
will  justify  any  measures  that  will  tend  to  check  this  trifling.  "Up,
and  at  them!"  should  be  the  watchword  until  we  have  rid  society  of
these  pests  and  their  supporters.

The  press  of  Boston  are  disposed  to  be  fair  towards  Spiritualists.
But  if  Spiritualists  do  not  care  enough  for  Spiritualism  to  defend  it
from  tricksters  who  have  not  sufficient  skill  to  merit  them  the  title  of
jugglers,  how  can  they  expect  any  different  treatment  than  that  it  is
receiving?

As  a  proof  of  the  sincerity  of  the  Boston  press  and  also  in  support
and  further  explanation  of  the  above  we  might  mention  that  the  fol-
lowing card,  sent  to  all  the  morning  dailies,  was  accepted  and  printed
in  Tuesday's  edition.

Boston,  July  10th,  1875.

Sir, — The  undersigned  desire  to  say  that  the  persons  who  advertised  a  so-called
spiritualistic  exhibition  at  the  Boston  Theatre  last  evening  were  guilty  of  false  re-
presentations to  the  public.  We  are  alone  empowered  by  the  Academy  of  Sciences
attached  to  the  Imperial  University  of  St.  Petersburg,  Russia,  to  select  the  mediums

48  A    MODERN    PANARION.

who  shall  be  invited  by  that  body  to  display  their  powers  during  the  forthcoming
scientific  investigation  of  Spiritualism,  and  Mr.  E.  Gerry  Brown,  editor  Spiritual
Scientist,  of  this  city,  is  our  onfy  authorized  deputy.

Neither  "F.  Warren,"  "Prof.  J.  T.  Bates,"  "Miss  Luydam,"  "Mrs.  S.  Gould,"  nor
"Miss  Lillie  Darling"  has  been  selected,  or  is  at  all  likely  to  be  selected  for  that
honour.

As  this  swindle  may  be  again  attempted,  we  desire  to  say,  once  for  all,  that  no
medium  accepted  by  us  will  be  obliged  to  exhibit  his  powers  to  earn  money  to  de-
fray his  expenses,  nor  will  any  such  exhibition  be  tolerated.  The  Imperial  Univer-
sity of  St.  Petersburg  makes  its  investigation  in  the  interest  of  science — not  to
assist  charlatans  to  give  juggling  performances  in  theatres,  upon  the  strength  of
our  certificates.  Henry  S.  Olcott.

H.    P.    BlvAVATSKY.

THE  SEARCH  AFTER  OCCULTISM.

[From  The  Spiritual  Scientist.']

Being  daily  in  receipt  of  numerous  letters,  written  with  the  view  of
obtaining  advice  as  to  the  best  method  of  receiving  information  respect-
ing Occultism,  and  the  direct  relation  it  bears  to  modern  Spiritualism,
and  not  having  sufficient  time  at  my  disposal  to  answer  these  requests,
I  now  propose  to  facilitate  the  mutual  labour  of  myself  and  corre-
spondents by  naming  herein  a  few  of  the  principal  works  treating  upon
Magism,  and  the  mysteries  of  such  modern  Hermetists.

To  this  I  feel  bound  to  add,  respecting  what  I  have  stated  before,  to
wit:  that  would-be  aspirants  must  not  lure  themselves  with  the  idea  of
any  possibility  of  their  becoming  practical  Occultists  by  mere  book-
knowledge.  The  works  of  the  Hermetic  philosophers  were  never
intended  for  the  masses,  as  Mr.  Charles  Sotheran,  a  learned  member
of  the  Society  Rosae  Crucis,  in  a  late  essay  observes:

Gabriel  Rossetti  in  his  disquisitions  on  the  anti- papal  spirit  which  produced  the
Reformation  shows  that  the  art  of  speaking  and  writing  in  a  language  which  bears
a  double  interpretation  is  of  very  great  antiquity,  that  it  was  in  practice  among  the
priests  of  Egypt,  brought  thence  by  the  Manichees,  whence  it  passed  to  the  Tem-
plars and  Albigenses,  spread  over  Europe,  and  brought  about  the  Reformation.

The  ablest  book  that  was  ever  written  on  Symbols  and  Mystic  Orders,
is  most  certainly  Hargrave  Jennings'  The  Rosicrucians,  and  yet  it  has
been  repeatedly  called  "obscure  trash"  in  my  presence,  and  that  too,
by  individuals  who  were  most  decidedly  well-versed  in  the  rites  and
mysteries  of  modern  Freemasonry.  Persons  who  lack  even  the  latter
knowledge,  can  easily  infer  from  this  what  would  be  the  amount  of
information  they  might  derive  from  still  more  obscure  and  mystical
works;  for  if  we  compare  Hargrave  Jennings'  book  with  some  of  the
mediaeval  treatises  and  ancient  works  of  the  most  noted  Alchemists
and  Magi,  we  might  find  the  latter  as  much  more  obscure  than  the
former — as  regards  language — as  a  pupil  in  celestial  philosophy  would

5°

A    MODERN    PANAKION.

find  the  Book  of  the  Heavens,  if  he  should  examine  a  far  distant  star
with  the  naked  eye,  rather  than  with  the  help  of  a  powerful  telescope.

Far  from  me,  though,  the  idea  of  disparaging  in  anyone  the  laudable
impulse  to  search  ardently  after  Truth,  however  arid  and  ungrateful  the
task  may  appear  at  first  sight;  for  my  own  principle  has  ever  been  to
make  the  Light  of  Truth  the  beacon  of  my  life.  The  words  uttered  by
Christ  eighteen  centuries  ago:  "Believe  and  you  will  understand,"  can
be  applied  in  the  present  case,  and  repeating  them  with  but  a  slight
modification,  I  may  well  say:   "Study  and  you  will  believe."

But  to  particularize  one  or  another  book  on  Occultism,  to  those  who
are  anxious  to  begin  their  studies  in  the  hidden  mysteries  of  nature,  is
something  the  responsibility  of  which  I  am  not  prepared  to  assume.
What  may  be  clear  to  one  who  is  intuitional,  if  read  in  the  same  book
by  another  person  might  prove  meaningless.  Unless  one  is  prepared  to
devote  to  it  his  whole  life,  the  superficial  knowledge  of  Occult  Sciences
will  lead  him  surely  to  become  the  target  for  millions  of  ignorant  scoff-
ers to  aim  their  blunderbusses  loaded  with  ridicule  and  chaff  against.
Besides  this,  it  is  in  more  than  one  way  dangerous  to  select  this  science
as  a  mere  pastime.  One  must  bear  for  ever  in  mind  the  impressive
fable  of  CEdipus,  and  beware  of  the  same  consequences.  CEdipus  un-
riddled but  one-half  of  the  enigma  offered  him  by  the  Sphinx  and
caused  its  death;  the  other  half  of  the  mystery  avenged  the  death  of
the  symbolic  monster,  and  forced  the  King  of  Thebes  to  prefer  blind-
ness and  exile  in  his  despair  rather  than  face  what  he  did  not  feel  him-
self pure  enough  to  encounter.  He  unriddled  the  man,  the  form,  and
had  forgotten  God,  the  idea.

If  a  man  would  follow  in  the  steps  of  Hermetic  philosophers  he
must  prepare  himself  beforehand  for  martyrdom.  He  must  give  up
personal  pride  and  all  selfish  purposes,  and  be  ready  for  everlasting
encounters  with  friends  and  foes.  He  must  part,  once  for  all,  with
every  remembrance  of  his  earlier  ideas,  on  all  and  on  everything.
Existing  religions,  knowledge,  science,  must  rebecome  a  blank  book
for  him,  as  in  the  days  of  his  babyhood,  for  if  he  wants  to  succeed  he
must  learn  a  new  alphabet  on  the  lap  of  Mother  Nature,  every  letter  of
which  will  afford  a  new  insight  to  him,  every  syllable  and  word  an  un-
expected revelation.  The  two  hitherto  irreconcilable  foes,  science  and
theology — the  Montecchi  and  Capuletti  of  the  nineteenth  century — will
ally  themselves  with  the  ignorant  masses  against  the  modern  Occultist.
If  we  have  outgrown   the  age  of  stakes,  we  are  in   the  heyday,  per

THE    SEARCH   AFTER   OCCULTISM.  5 1

contra,  of  slander,  the  venom  of  the  press,  and  all  these  mephitic  ven-
ticelli  of  calumny  so  vividly  expressed  by  the  immortal  Don  Basilic
To  science  it  will  be  the  duty — arid  and  sterile  as  a  matter  of  course — of
the  Kabalist  to  prove  that  from  the  beginning  of  time  there  was  but
one  positive  science — Occultism  ;'  that  it  was  the  mysterious  lever  of  all
intellectual  forces,  the  Tree  of  Knowledge  of  good  and  evil  of  the  alle-
gorical paradise,  from  whose  gigantic  trunk  sprang  in  every  direction
boughs,  branches  and  twigs,  the  former  shooting  forth  straight  enough
at  first,  the  latter  deviating  with  every  inch  of  growth,  assuming  more
and  more  fantastical  appearances,  till  at  last  one  after  the  other  lost  its
vital  juice,  got  deformed,  and,  drying  up,  finally  broke  off,  scattering
the  ground  afar  with  heaps  of  rubbish.  To  theology  the  Occultist  of
the  future  will  have  to  demonstrate  that  the  Gods  of  the  mythologies,
the  Elohims  of  Israel  as  well  as  the  religious  and  theological  mysteries
of  Christianity,  to  begin  with  the  Trinity,  sprang  from  the  sanctuaries
of  Memphis  and  Thebes;  that  their  mother  Eve  is  but  the  spiritualized
Psyche  of  old,  both  of  them  paying  a  like  penalty  for  their  curiosity,
descending  to  Hades  or  hell,  the  latter  to  bring  back  to  earth  the
famous  Pandora's  box,  the  former  to  search  out  and  crush  the  head
of  the  serpent — symbol  of  time  and  evil,  the  crime  of  both  expiated
by  the  pagan  Prometheus  and  the  Christian  Lucifer ;  the  first  delivered
by  Hercules,  the  second  conquered  by  the  Saviour.

Furthermore,  the  Occultist  will  have  to  prove  to  Christian  theology,
publicly,  what  many  of  its  priesthood  are  well  aware  of  in  secret,
namely,  that  their  God  on  earth  was  a  Kabalist,  the  meek  representa-
tive of  a  tremendous  Power,  which,  if  misapplied,  might  shake  the
world  to  its  foundations;  and  that  of  all  their  evangelical  symbols,
there  is  not  one  but  can  be  traced  up  to  its  parent  fount.  For  instance,
their  incarnated  Verbum  or  Logos  was  worshipped  at  his  birth  by  the
three  Magi  led  on  by  the  star,  and  received  from  them  the  gold,  the
frankincense  and  myrrh — the  whole  of  which  is  simply  an  excerpt  from
the  Kabalah  our  modern  theologians  despise,  and  the  representation
of  another  and  still  more  mysterious  "Ternary"  embodying  allegori-
cally  in  its  emblems  the  highest  secrets  of  the  Kabalah.

A  clergy  whose  main  object  has  ever  been  to  make  of  their  Divine
Cross  the  gallows  of  Truth  and  Freedom,  could  not  do  otherwise  than
try  and  bury  in  oblivion  the  origin  of  that  same  cross,  which,  in  the
most  primitive  symbols  of  the  Egyptians'  magic,  represents  the  key  to
heaven.     Their  anathemas  are  powerless  in  our  days — the  multitude  is

52  A    MODERN    PANARION.

wiser;  but  the  greatest  danger  awaits  us  just  in  that  latter  direction,  if
we  do  not  succeed  in  making  the  masses  remain  at  least  neutral — till
they  come  to  know  better — in  this  forthcoming  conflict  between  Truth,
Superstition  and  Presumption,  or  to  express  it  in  other  terms,  Occult
Spiritualism,  Theology  and  Science.  We  have  to  fear  neither  the
miniature  thunderbolts  of  the  clergy,  nor  the  unwarranted  negations  of
science.  But  Public  Opinion,  this  invisible,  intangible,  omnipresent,
despotic  tyrant — this  thousand-headed  Hydra,  the  more  dangerous  for
being  composed  of  individual  mediocrities — is  not  an  enemy  to  be
scorned  by  any  would-be  Occultist,  courageous  as  he  may  be.  Many
of  the  far  more  innocent  Spiritualists  have  left  their  sheepskins  in  the
clutches  of  this  ever-hungry,  roaring  lion,  for  he  is  the  most  dangerous
of  our  three  classes  of  enemies.  What  will  be  the  fate  in  such  a  case  of
an  unfortunate  Occultist,  if  he  once  succeeds  in  demonstrating  the  close
relationship  existing  between  the  two?  The  masses  of  people,  though
they  do  not  generally  appreciate  the  science  of  truth  or  have  real
knowledge,  on  the  other  hand  are  unerringly  directed  by  mere  instinct;
they  have  intuitionally — if  I  may  be  allowed  to  so  express  myself — an
idea  of  what  is  formidable  in  its  genuine  strength.  People  will  never
conspire  except  against  real  Power.  In  their  blind  ignorance,  the
Mysteries  and  the  Unknown  have  been,  and  ever  will  be,  objects  of
terror  for  them.  Civilization  may  progress;  human  nature  will  remain
the  same  throughout  all  ages.     Occultists,  beware!

L,et  it  be  understood  then  that  I  address  myself  but  to  the  truly
courageous  and  persevering.  Besides  the  danger  expressed  above,  the
difficulties  in  becoming  a  practical  Occultist  in  this  country  are  next
to  insurmountable.  Barrier  upon  barrier,  obstacles  in  every  form  and
shape,  will  present  themselves  to  the  student;  for  the  keys  of  the
Golden  Gate  leading  to  the  Infinite  Truth  lie  buried  deep,  and  the  gate
itself  is  enclosed  in  a  mist  which  clears  up  only  before  the  ardent  rays
of  implicit  faith.  Faith  alone — one  grain  of  which  as  large  as  a  mustard-
seed,  according  to  the  words  of  Christ,  can  lift  a  mountain — is  able  to
find  out  how  simple  becomes  the  Kabalah  to  the  Initiate  once  he  has
succeeded  in  conquering  the  first  abstruse  difficulties.  The  dogma  of  it
is  logical,  easy  and  absolute.  The  necessary  union  of  ideas  and  signs;
the  trinity  of  words,  letters,  numbers,  and  theorems;  the  religion  of
it  can  be  compressed  into  a  few  words.  "It  is  the  Infinite  condensed
in  the  hand  of  an  infant,"  says  Eliphas  L,evi.  Ten  ciphers,  twenty-
two  alphabetical  letters,  one  triangle,  a  square  and  a  circle.     Such  are

THE  SEARCH   AFTER  OCCULTISM.  53

the  elements  of  the  Kabalah  from  whose  mysterious  bosom  sprang  all
the  religions  of  the  past  and  present;  which  endowed  all  the  Free-
masonic  associations  with  their  symbols  and  secrets,  which  alone  can
reconcile  human  reason  with  God  and  Faith,  Power  with  Freedom,
Science  with  Mystery,  and  which  has  alone  the  keys  of  present,  past
and  future.

The  first  difficulty  for  the  aspirant  lies  in  the  utter  impossibility  of
his  comprehending,  as  I  said  before,  the  meaning  of  the  best  books
written  by  Hermetic  philosophers.  These,  who  mainly  lived  in  the
mediaeval  ages,  prompted  on  the  one  hand  by  their  duty  towards  their
brethren,  and  by  their  desire  to  impart  only  to  them  and  their  suc-
cessors the  glorious  truths,  and  on  the  other  very  naturally  desirous
to  avoid  the  clutches  of  the  bloodthirsty  Christian  Inquisition,  en-
veloped themselves  more  than  ever  in  mystery.  They  invented  new
signs  and  hieroglyphs,  renovated  the  ancient  symbolical  language  of
the  high  priests  of  antiquity,  who  had  used  it  as  a  sacred  barrier  be-
tween their  holy  rites  and  the  ignorance  of  the  profane,  and  created  a
veritable  Kabalistic  slang.  This  latter,  which  continually  blinded  the
false  neophyte,  attracted  towards  the  science  only  by  his  greediness  for
wealth  and  power  which  he  would  have  surely  misused  were  he  to  suc-
ceed, is  a  living,  eloquent,  clear  language,  but  it  is  and  can  become
such  only  to  the  true  disciple  of  Hermes.

But  were  it  even  otherwise,  and  could  books  on  Occultism,  written  in
a  plain  and  precise  language  be  obtained  in  order  to  get  initiated  in
the  Kabalah,  it  would  not  be  sufficient  to  understand  and  meditate  on
certain  authors.  Galatinus  and  Pic  de  la  Mirandola,  Paracelsus  and
Robertus  de  Fluctibus  do  not  furnish  one  with  the  key  to  the  practical
mysteries.  They  simply  state  what  can  be  done  and  why  it  is  done;
but  they  do  not  tell  one  hozv  to  do  it.  More  than  one  philosopher  who
has  by  heart  the  whole  of  the  Hermetic  literature,  and  who  has  de-
voted to  the  study  of  it  upwards  of  thirty  or  forty  years  of  his  life,  fails
when  he  believes  he  is  about  reaching  the  final  great  result.  One  must
understand  the  Hebrew  authors,  such  as  Sepher  Yetzirah,  for  instance,
learn  by  heart  the  great  book  of  the  Zohar  in  its  original  tongue,  master
the  Kabalah  Demidata  from  the  Collection  of  1684  (Paris);  follow  up  the
Kabalistic  pneumatics  at  first,  and  then  throw  oneself  headlong  into
the  turbid  waters  of  that  mysterious*  .  .  .  never  tried  to  explain:
the  Prophecy  of  Ezckiel  and   the  Apocalypse,  two  Kabalistic  treatises,

*  The  cutting  is  here  imperfect— some  paragraph  or  so  wanting-.

54  A   MODERN    PANARION.

reserved  without  doubt  for  the  commentaries  of  the  Magi  kings,  books
closed  with  the  seven  seals  to  the  faithful  Christian,  but  perfectly  clear
to  the  Infidel  initiated  in  the  Occult  Sciences.

Thus  the  works  on  Occultism,  were  not,  I  repeat,  written  for  the
masses,  but  for  those  of  the  Brethren  who  make  the  solution  of  the
mysteries  of  the  Kabalah  the  principal  object  of  their  lives,  and  who
are  supposed  to  have  conquered  the  first  abstruse  difficulties  of  the
Alpha  of  Hermetic  philosophy.

To  fervent  and  persevering  candidates  for  the  above  science,  I  have
to  offer  but  one  word  of  advice,  "try  and  become."  One  single  journey
to  the  Orient,  made  in  the  proper  spirit,  and  the  possible  emergencies
arising  from  the  meeting  of  what  may  seem  no  more  than  the  chance
acquaintances  and  adventures  of  any  traveller,  may  quite  as  likely  as
not  throw  wide  open  to  the  zealous  student  the  heretofore  closed  doors
of  the  final  mysteries.  I  will  go  farther  and  say  that  such  a  journey,
performed  with  the  omnipresent  idea  of  the  one  object,  and  with  the
help  of  a  fervent  will,  is  sure  to  produce  more  rapid,  better,  and  far
more  practical  results,  than  the  most  diligent  study  of  Occultism  in
books — even  though  one  were  to  devote  to  it  dozens  of  years.

In  the  name  of  Truth,  yours,

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

THE  SCIENCE  OF  MAGIC.

Happening  to  be  on  a  visit  to  Ithaca,  where  spiritual  papers  in
general,  and  The  Banner  of  Light  in  particular,  are  very  little  read,  but
where,  luckily,  The  Scientist  has  found  hospitality  in  several  houses,  I
learned  through  your  paper  of  the  intensely  interesting  and  very  erudite
attack  in  an  editorial  of  The  Banner,  on  "Magic,"  or  rather  on  those
who  had  the  absurdity  to  believe  in  Magic.  As  hints  concerning  myself
— at  least  in  the  fragment  I  see — are  very  decently  veiled,  and,  as  it
appears,  Col.  Olcott  alone,  just  now,  is  offered  by  way  of  a  pious
holocaust  on  the  altar  erected  to  the  angel-world  by  some  Spiritualists,
who  seem  to  be  terribly  in  earnest,  I  will — leaving  the  said  gentleman
to  take  care  of  himself,  provided  he  thinks  it  worth  his  trouble — pro-
ceed to  say  a  few  words  only,  in  reference  to  the  alleged  non-existence
of  Magic.

Were  I  to  give  anything  on  my  own  authority  and  base  my  defence
of  Magic  only  on  what  I  have  seen  myself,  and  know  to  be  true  in  rela-
tion to  that  science,  as  a  resident  of  many  years'  standing  in  India  and
Africa,  I  might,  perhaps,  risk  to  be  called  by  Mr.  Colby — with  that
unprejudiced,  spiritualized  politeness,  which  so  distinguishes  the  vener-
able editor  of  The  Banner  of  Light — "an  irresponsible  woman";  and
that  would  not  be  for  the  first  time  either.  Therefore,  to  his  astonishing
assertion  that  no  Magic  whatever  either  exists  or  has  existed  in  this
world,  I  will  try  to  find  as  good  authorities  as  himself,  and  maybe  better
ones,  and  thus  politely  proceed  to  contradict  him  on  that  particular  point.

Heterodox  Spiritualists,  like  myself,  must  be  cautious  in  our  days
and  proceed  with  prudence,  if  they  do  not  wish  to  be  persecuted  with
all  the  untiring  vengeance  of  that  mighty  army  of"  Indian  controls"
and  miscellaneous  "guides"  of  our  bright  Summer-Land.

When  the  writer  of  the  editorial  says  that  he —

Does  not  think  it  at  all  improbable  that  there  are  humbugging  spirits  who  try  to
fool  certain  aspirants  to  occult  knowledge  with  the  notion  that  there  is  such  a  thing
as  magic,  (?)

56  A    MODERN    PANARION.

then,  on  the  other  hand,  I  can  answer  him  that  I,  for  one,  not  only
think  it  probable  but  I  am  perfectly  sure  and  can  take  my  oath  to  the
certainty,  that  more  than  once  spirits  who  were  either  very  elementary
or  very  unprogressed  ones,  calling  themselves  Theodore  Parker,  have
been  most  decidedly  fooling  and  disrespectfully  humbugging  our  most
esteemed  editor  of  The  Banner  of  Light  into  the  notion  that  the  Apen-
nines were  in  Spain,  for  instance.

Furthermore,  supported  in  my  assertions  by  thousands  of  intelligent
Spiritualists,  generally  known  for  their  integrity  and  truthfulness  I
could  furnish  numberless  proofs  and  instances  where  the  Elementary
Diakka,  Esrito  malins  etfarfadeto  and  other  such-like  unreliable  and
ignorant  denizens  of  the  spirit-world,  arraying  themselves  in  pompous,
world-known  and  famous  names,  suddenly  gave  the  bewildered  wit-
nesses such  deplorable,  unheard-of,  slipslop  trash,  and  betimes  some-
thing worse,  that  more  than  one  person  who,  previous  to  that,  was  an
earnest  believer  in  the  spiritual  philosophy,  has  either  silently  taken  to
his  heels,  or  if  he  happened  to  have  been  formerly  a  Roman  Catholic,
has  devoutly  tried  to  recall  to  memory  with  which  hand  he  used  to
cross  himself,  and  then  cleared  out  with  the  most  fervent  exclamation
of  "  Vade  retro,  Satanas /"  Such  is  the  opinion  of  ever)'  educated
Spiritualist.

If  that  indomitable  Attila,  the  persecutor  of  modern  Spiritualism  and
mediums,  Dr.  G.  Beard,  had  offered  such  a  remark  against  Magic,  I
would  not  wonder,  as  a  too  profound  devotion  to  blue  pill  and  black
draught  is  generally  considered  the  best  antidote  against  mystic  and
spiritual  speculations;  but  for  a  firm  Spiritualist — a  believer  in  invisible,
mysterious  worlds  swarming  with  beings,  the  true  nature  of  which  is
still  an  unriddled  mystery  to  everyone — to  step  in  and  then  sarcastically
reject  that  which  has  been  proved  to  exist  and  believed  in  for  countless
ages  by  millions  of  persons,  wiser  than  himself,  is  too  audacious!  And
that  sceptic  is  the  editor  of  a  leading  Spiritual  paper! — a  man  whose
first  duty  should  be  to  help  his  readers  to  seek,  untiringly  and  perse-
veringly,  for  the  truth  in  whatever  form  it  might  present  itself;  but
who  takes  the  risk  of  dragging  thousands  of  people  into  error,  by
pinning  them  to  his  personal  rose-water  faith  and  credulity.  Every
serious,  earnest-minded  Spiritualist  must  agree  with  me  in  saying,  that
if  modern  Spiritualism  remains,  for  a  few  years  only,  in  its  present
condition  of  chaotic  anarchy,  or  still  worse,  if  it  is  allowed  to  run  its
mad   course,    shooting   forth   on    all   sides   idle   hypotheses   based   on

THE    SCIENCE    OF   MAGIC.  57

superstitious,  groundless  ideas,  then  will  the  Dr.  Beards,  Dr.  Marvins
and  others,  known  as  scientific  (?)  sceptics,  triumph  indeed.

Really,  it  seems  to  be  a  waste  of  time  to  answer  such  ridiculous,
ignorant  assertions  as  the  one  which  forced  me  to  take  up  my  pen.
Any  well-read  Spiritualist  who  finds  the  statement  "that  there  ever
was  such  a  science  as  magic,  has  never  been  proved,  nor  ever  will  be,"
will  need  no  answer  from  myself,  nor  anyone  else,  to  cause  him  to
shrug  his  shoulders  and  smile,  as  he  probably  has  smiled,  at  the
wonderful  attempt  of  Mr.  Colby's  spirits  to  reorganize  geography  by
placing  the  Apennines  in  Spain.

Why,  man  alive,  did  you  never  open  a  book  in  your  life  besides  your
own  records  of  Tom,  Dick  and  Harry  descending  from  upper  spheres
to  remind  their  Uncle  Sam  that  he  had  torn  his  gaiters  or  broken  his
pipe  in  the  far  West?

Did  you  suppose  that  Magic  is  confined  to  witches  riding  astride
broomsticks  and  then  turning  themselves  into  black  cats?  Even  the
latter  superstitious  trash,  though  it  was  never  called  Magic  but  Sorcery,
does  not  appear  so  great  an  absurdity  for  one  to  accept  who  firmly
believes  in  the  transfiguration  of  Mrs.  Compton  into  Katie  Brinks.
The  laws  of  nature  are  unchangeable.  The  conditions  under  which  a
medium  can  be  transformed,  entirely  absorbed  in  the  process  by  the
spirit,  into  the  semblance  of  another  person,  will  hold  good  whenever
that  spirit,  or  rather  force,  should  have  a  fancy  to  take  the  form  of  a
cat.

The  exercise  of  magical  power  is  the  exercise  of  powers  natural,
but  superior  to  the  ordinary  functions  of  Nature.  A  miracle  is  not  a
violation  of  the  laws  of  Nature,  except  for  ignorant  people.  Magic  is
but  a  science,  a  profound  knowledge  of  the  Occult  forces  in  Nature,  and
of  the  laws  governing  the  visible  or  the  invisible  world.  Spiritualism
in  the  hands  of  an  Adept  becomes  Magic,  for  he  is  learned  in  the  art
of  blending  together  the  laws  of  the  universe,  without  breaking  any  of
them  and  thereby  violating  Nature.  In  the  hands  of  an  experienced
medium,  Spiritualism  becomes  unconscious  sorcery;  for,  by  allowing
himself  to  become  the  helpless  tool  of  a  variety  of  spirits,  of  whom  he
knows  nothing  save  what  the  latter  permit  him  to  know,  he  opens,
unknown  to  himself,  a  door  of  communication  between  the  two  worlds,
through  which  emerge  the  blind  forces  of  Nature  lurking  in  the  astral
light,  as  well  as  good  and  bad  spirits.

A  powerful  mesmerizer,  profoundly  learned  in  his  science,  such  as

n^S  A    MODERN    PANARION.

Baron  Dupotet,  and  Regazzoni  Pietro  d'Amicis  of  Bologna,  are  magicians,
for  they  have  become  the  Adepts,  the  initiated  ones,  into  the  great
mystery  of  our  Mother  Nature.  Such  men  as  the  above-mentioned —
and  such  were  Mesmer  and  Cagliostro — control  the  spirits  instead  of
allowing  their  subjects  or  themselves  to  be  controlled  by  them;  and
Spiritualism  is  safe  in  their  hands.  In  the  absence  of  experienced
Adepts  though,  it  is  always  safer  for  a  naturally  clairvoyant  medium  to
trust  to  good  luck  and  chance,  and  try  to  judge  of  the  tree  by  its  fruits.
Bad  spirits  will  seldom  communicate  through  a  pure,  naturally  good
and  virtuous  person;  and  it  is  still  more  seldom  that  pure  spirits  will
choose  impure  channels.     Like  attracts  like.

But  to  return  to  Magic.  Such  men  as  Albertus  Magnus,  Raymond
I,ulli,  Cornelius  Agrippa,  Paracelsus,  Robert  Fludd,  Eugenius  Phila-
lethes,  Kunrath,  Roger  Bacon  and  others  of  similar  character,  in  our
sceptical  century,  are  generally  taken  for  visionaries;  but  so,  too,  are
modern  Spiritualists  and  mediums — nay  worse,  for  charlatans  and
poltroons;  but  never  were  the  Hermetic  philosophers  taken  by  anyone
for  fools  and  idiots,  as,  unfortunately  for  ourselves  and  the  cause,  every
unbeliever  takes  all  of  us  believers  in  Spiritualism  to  be.  Those
Hermetics  and  philosophers  may  be  disbelieved  and  doubted  now,  as
everything  else  is  doubted,  but  very  few  doubted  their  knowledge  and
power  during  their  lifetime,  for  they  could  always  prove  what  they
claimed,  having  command  over  those  forces  which  nozv  command  help-
less mediums.  They  had  their  science  and  demonstrated  philosophy
to  help  them  to  throw  down  ridiculous  negations,  while  we  sentimental
Spiritualists,  rocking  ourselves  to  sleep  with  our  "Sweet  Bye-and-Bye,"
are  now  unable  to  recognize  a  spurious  phenomenon  from  a  genuine
one,  and  are  daily  deceived  by  vile  charlatans.  Even  though  doubted
then,  as  Spiritualism  is  in  our  day,  still  these  philosophers  were  held
in  awe  and  reverence,  even  by  those  who  did  not  implicitly  believe
in  their  Occult  potency,  for  they  were  giants  of  intellect.  Profound
knowledge,  as  well  as  cultured  intellectual  powers,  will  always  be
respected  and  revered;  but  our  mediums  and  their  adherents  are
laughed  at  and  scorned,  and  we  are  all  made  to  suffer,  because  the
phenomena  are  left  to  the  whims  and  pranks  of  self-willed  and  other
mischievous  spirits,  and  we  are  utterly  powerless  in  controlling  them.

To  doubt  Magic  is  to  reject  History  itself,  as  well  as  the  testimony  of
ocular  witnesses  thereof,  during  a  period  embracing  over  4,000  years.
Beginning  with  Homer,  Moses,  Hermes,  Herodotus,  Cicero,  Plutarch,

THE   SCIENCE   OF   MAGIC.  59

Pythagoras,  Apollonius  of  Tyana,  Simon  the  Magician,  Plato,  Pausa-
nias,  Iamblichus,  and  following  this  endless  string  of  great  men —
historians  and  philosophers,  who  all  of  them  either  believed  in  Magic
or  were  magicians  themselves — and  ending  with  our  modern  authors,
such  as  W.  Howitt,  Ennemoser,  G.  des  Mousseaux,  Marquis  de  Mirville
and  the  late  Eliphas  Levi,  who  was  a  magician  himself — among  all  of
these  great  names  and  authors,  we  find  but  the  solitary  Mr.  Colby,
editor  of  The  Banner  of  Light,  who  ignores  that  there  ever  was  such  a
science  as  Magic.  He  innocently  believes  the  whole  of  the  sacred  army
of  Bible  prophets,  commencing  with  Father  Abraham,  including  Christ,
to  be  merely  mediums;  in  the  eyes  of  Mr.  Colby  they  were  all  of  them
acting  under  control !  Fancy  Christ,  Moses,  or  an  Apollonius  of  Tyana,
controlled  by  an  Indian  guide!  The  venerable  editor  ignores,  perhaps,
that  spiritual  mediums  were  better  known  in  those  days  to  the  ancients,
than  they  are  now  to  us,  and  he  seems  to  be  equally  unaware  of  the  fact
that  the  inspired  sibyls,  pythonesses,  and  other  mediums  were  entirely
guided  by  their  high  priest  and  those  who  were  initiated  into  the
esoteric  theurgy  and  mysteries  of  the  temples.  Theurgy  was  Magic;
as  in  modern  times,  the  sibyls  and  pythonesses  were  mediums;  but
their  high  priests  were  magicians.  All  the  secrets  of  their  theology,
which  included  Magic,  or  the  art  of  invoking  ministering  spirits,  were
in  their  hands.  They  possessed  the  science  of  discerning  spirits;  a
science  which  Mr.  Colby  does  not  possess  at  all — to  his  great  regret,  no
doubt.  By  this  power  they  controlled  the  spirits  at  will,  allowing  but
the  good  ones  to  absorb  their  mediums.  Such  is  the  explanation  of
Magic — the  real,  existing,  White  or  Sacred  Magic,  which  ought  to  be
in  the  hands  of  science  now,  and  would  be,  if  science  had  profited  by
the  lessons  which  Spiritualism  has  inductively  taught  for  these  last
twenty-seven  years.

That  is  the  reason  why  no  trash  was  allowed  to  be  given  by  un pro-
gressed spirits  in  the  days  of  old.  The  oracles  of  the  sibyls  and
inspired  priestesses  could  never  have  affirmed  Athens  to  be  a  town  in
India,  or  jumped  Mount  Ararat  from  its  native  place  down  to  Egypt.

If  the  sceptical  writer  of  the  editorial  had,  moreover,  devoted  less
time  to  little  prattling  Indian  spirits  and  more  to  profitable  lectures,  he
might  have  learned  perhaps  at  the  same  time  that  the  ancients  had
their  illegal  mediums — I  mean  those  who  belonged  to  no  special  temple
— and  thus  the  spirits  controlling  them,  unchecked  by  the  expert  hand
of  the  magician,  were  left  to  themselves,  and  had  all  the  opportunity

60  A   MODERN    PANARION.

possible  to  perform  their  capers  on  their  helpless  tools.  Such  mediums
were  generally  considered  obsessed  and  possessed,  which  they  were  in
fact,  in  other  words,  according  to  the  Bible  phraseology,  "they  had
seven  devils  in  them."  Furthermore,  these  mediums  were  ordered  to
be  put  to  death,  for  the  intolerant  Moses  the  magician,  who  was  learned
in  the  wisdom  of  Egypt,  had  said,  "Thou  shalt  not  suffer  a  witch  to
live."  Alone  the  Egyptians  and  Greeks,  even  more  humane  and  just
than  Moses,  took  such  into  their  temples,  and,  when  found  unfit  for
the  sacred  duties  of  prophecy  cured  them  in  the  same  way  as  Jesus
Christ  cured  Mary  of  Magdala  and  many  others,  by  "casting  out  the
seven  devils."  Either  Mr.  Colby  and  Co.  must  completely  deny  the
miracles  of  Christ,  the  Apostles,  Prophets,  Thaumaturgists  and  Magi-
cians, and  so  deny  point-blank  ever}-  bit  of  the  sacred  and  profane  his-
tories, or  he  must  confess  that  there  is  a  Power  in  this  world  which  can
command  spirits — at  least  the  bad  and  unprogressed  ones,  the  elemen-
tary and  Diakka.  The  pure  ones,  the  disembodied,  will  never  descend
to  our  sphere  unless  attracted  by  a  current  of  powerful  sympathy  and
love,  or  on  some  useful  mission.

Far  from  me  the  thought  of  casting  odium  and  ridicule  on  all
mediums.  I  am  myself  a  Spiritualist,  if,  as  says  Colonel  Olcott,  a  firm
belief  in  our  spirit's  immortality  and  the  knowledge  of  a  constant  possi-
bility for  us  to  communicate  with  the  spirits  of  our  departed  and  loved
ones,  either  through  honest,  pure  mediums,  or  by  means  of  the  Secret
Science,  constitutes  a  Spiritualist.  And  I  am  not  of  those  fanatical
Spiritualists,  to  be  found  in  every  country,  who  blindly  accept  the
claims  of  every  "spirit,"  for  I  have  seen  too  much  of  various  pheno-
mena, undreamed  of  in  America;  I  know  that  Magic  does  exist,  and
10,000  editors  of  spiritual  papers  cannot  change  my  belief  in  what  I
know.  There  is  a  White  and  a  Black  Magic,  and  no  one  who  has  ever
travelled  in  the  East  can  doubt  it,  if  he  has  taken  the  trouble  to  investi-
gate. My  faith  being  firm  I  am  therefore  ever  ready  to  support  and
protect  any  honest  medium — aye,  and  even  occasionally  one  who
appears  dishonest,  for  I  know  but  too  well  what  helpless  tools  and  vic-
tims such  mediums  are  in  the  hands  of  unprogressed,  invisible  beings.
I  am  furthermore  aware  of  the  malice  and  wickedness  of  the  elemen-
taries,  and  how  far  they  can  inspire  not  only  a  sensitive  medium,  but
any  other  person  as  well.  Though  I  may  be  an  "irresponsible,"  despite
the  harm  some  mediums  do  to  earnest  Spiritualists  by  their  unfairness,
one-sidedness,   and   spiritual   sentimentalism,   I   feel  safe   to  say  that

THE    SCIENCE    OF   MAGIC.  6l

generally  I  am  quick  enough  to  detect  whenever  a  medium  is  cheating
under  control,  or  cheating  consciously.

Thus  Magic  exists,  and  has  existed,  ever  since  prehistoric  ages.
Beginning  in  history  with  the  Samothracian  Mysteries,  it  followed  its
course  uninterruptedly,  and  ended  for  a  time  with  the  expiring  theurgic
rites  and  ceremonies  of  Christianized  Greece;  then  reappeared  for  a
time  again  with  the  Neo-Platonic,  Alexandrian  school,  and,  passing  by
initiation  to  sundry  solitary  students  and  philosophers,  safely  crossed
the  mediaeval  ages,  and  notwithstanding  the  furious  persecutions  of  the
Church,  resumed  its  fame  in  the  hands  of  such  Adepts  as  Paracelsus
and  several  others,  and  finally  died  out  in  Europe  with  the  Count  St.
Germain  and  Cagliostro,  to  seek  refuge  from  frozen-hearted  scepticism
in  its  native  country  of  the  East.

In  India,  Magic  has  never  died  out,  and  blossoms  there  as  well  as
ever.  Practised,  as  in  ancient  Egypt,  only  within  the  secret  enclosure
of  the  temples,  it  was,  and  still  is,  called  the  "Sacred  Science."  For
it  is  a  science,  based  on  the  occult  forces  of  Nature;  and  not  merely  a
blind  belief  in  the  poll-parrot  talking  of  crafty  elementaries,  ready
to  forcibly  prevent  real,  disembodied  spirits  from  communicating  with
their  loved  ones  whenever  they  can  do  so.

Some  time  since  a  Mr.  Mendenhall  devoted  several  columns,  in  The
Religio- Philosophical  Journal,  to  questioning,  cross-examining,  and
criticizing  the  mysterious  Brotherhood  of  Euxor.  He  made  a  fruitless
attempt  at  forcing  the  said  Brotherhood  to  answer  him,  and  thus  unveil
the  sphinx.

I  can  satisfy  Mr.  Mendenhall.  The  Brotherhood  of  Euxor  is  one  of
the  sections  of  the  Grand  L,odge  of  which  /  am  a  member.  If  this
gentleman  entertains  any  doubt  as  to  my  statement — which  I  have  no
doubt  he  will — he  can,  if  he  chooses,  write  to  Lahore  for  information.
If,  perchance,  the  seven  of  the  committee  were  so  rude  as  not  to  answer
him,  and  should  refuse  to  give  him  the  desired  information,  I  can  then
offer  him  a  little  business  transaction.  Mr.  Mendenhall,  as  far  as  I
remember,  has  two  wives  in  the  spirit  world.  Both  of  these  ladies
materialize  at  M.  Mott's,  and  often  hold  very  long  conversations  with
their  husband,  as  the  latter  told  us  several  times  and  over  his  own
signature;  adding,  moreover,  that  he  had  no  doubt  whatever  of  the
identity  of  the  said  spirits.  If  so,  let  one  of  the  departed  ladies  tell
Mr.  Mendenhall  the  name  of  that  section  of  the  Grand  Lodge  I  belong
to.     For  real,  genuine,  disembodied  spirits,  if  both  are  what  they  claim

62  A   MODERN    PANARION.

to  be,  the  matter  is  more  than  easy ;  they  have  but  to  enquire  of  other
spirits,  look  into  my  thoughts,  and  so  on;  for  a  disembodied  entity,  an
immortal  spirit,  it  is  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world  to  do.  Then,  if  the
gentleman  I  challenge,  though  I  am  deprived  of  the  pleasure  of  his
acquaintance,  tells  me  the  true  name  of  the  section — which  name  three
gentlemen  in  New  York,  who  are  accepted  neophytes  of  our  Lodge,
know  well — I  pledge  myself  to  give  to  Mr.  Mendenhall  the  true  state-
ment concerning  the  Brotherhood,  which  is  not  composed  of  spirits,  as
he  may  think,  but  of  living  mortals,  and  I  will,  moreover,  if  he  desires
it,  put  him  in  direct  communication  with  the  Lodge  as  I  have  done  for
others.  Methinks,  Mr.  Mendenhall  will  answer  that  no  such  name  can
be  given  correctly  by  the  spirits,  for  no  such  Lodge  or  Section  either,
exists  at  all,  and  thus  close  the  discussion.

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

(From  The  Spiritual  Scientist?)

AN  UNSOLVED  MYSTERY.

The  circumstances  attending  the  sudden  death  of  M.  Delessert,
inspector  of  the  Police  de  Surete,  seem  to  have  made  such  an  impression
upon  the  Parisian  authorities  that  they  were  recorded  in  unusual  detail.
Omitting  all  particulars  except  what  are  necessary  to  explain  matters,
we  produce  here  the  undoubtedly  strange  history.

In  the  fall  of  1S61  there  came  to  Paris  a  man  who  called  himself  Vic
de  Lassa,  and  was  so  inscribed  upon  his  passports.  He  came  from
Vienna,  and  said  he  was  a  Hungarian,  who  owned  estates  on  the
borders  of  the  Banat,  not  far  from  Zenta.  He  was  a  small  man,  aged
thirty-five,  with  pale  and  mysterious  face,  long  blonde  hair,  a  vague,
wandering  blue  eye,  and  a  mouth  of  singular  firmness.  He  dressed
carelessly  and  unaffectedly,  and  spoke  and  talked  without  much
empressement.  His  companion,  presumably  his  wife,  on  the  other  hand,
ten  years  younger  than  himself,  was  a  strikingly  beautiful  woman,  of
that  dark,  rich,  velvety,  luscious,  pure  Hungarian  type  which  is  so  nigh
akin  to  the  gipsy  blood.  At  the  theatres,  on  the  Bois,  at  the  cafes,  on
the  boulevards,  and  everywhere  that  idle  Paris  disports  itself,  Madame
Aimee  de  Lassa  attracted  great  attention  and  made  a  sensation.

They  lodged  in  luxurious  apartments  on  the  Rue  Richelieu,  frequented
the  best  places,  received  good  company,  entertained  handsomely,  and
acted  in  every  way  as  if  possessed  of  considerable  wealth.  Lassa  had
always  a  good  balance  chez  Schneider,  Ruter  et  Cie,  the  Austrian  bankers
in  Rue  Rivoli,  and  wore  diamonds  of  conspicuous  lustre.

How  did  it  happen  then,  that  the  Prefect  of  Police  saw  fit  to  suspect
Monsieur  and  Madame  de  Lassa,  and  detailed  Paul  Delessert,  one  of  the
most  ruse  inspectors  of  the  force,  to  "pipe"  him?  The  fact  is,  the
insignificant  man  with  the  splendid  wife  was  a  very  mysterious  per-
sonage, and  it  is  the  habit  of  the  police  to  imagine  that  mystery  always
hides  either  the  conspirator,  the  adventurer,  or  the  charlatan.  The
conclusion  to  which  the  Prefect  had  come  in  regard  to  M.  de  Lassa  was

64  A   MODERN    PANARION.

that  he  was  an  adventurer  and  charlatan  too.  Certainly  a  successful
one,  then,  for  he  was  singularly  unobtrusive  and  had  in  no  way  trum-
peted the  wonders  which  it  was  his  mission  to  perform,  yet  in  a  few
weeks  after  he  had  established  himself  in  Paris  the  salon  of  M.  de  L,assa
was  the  rage,  and  the  number  of  persons  who  paid  the  fee  of  100  francs
for  a  single  peep  into  his  magic  crystal,  and  a  single  message  by  his
spiritual  telegraph,  was  really  astonishing.  The  secret  of  this  was
that  M.  de  Lassa  was  a  conjurer  and  deceiver,  whose  pretensions  were
omniscient  and  whose  predictions  always  came  true.

Delessert  did  not  find  it  very  difficult  to  get  an  introduction  and  ad-
mission to  De  Lassa's  salon.  The  receptions  occurred  every  other  day —
two  hours  in  the  forenoon,  three  hours  in  the  evening.  It  was  evening
when  Inspector  Delessert  called  in  his  assumed  character  of  M.  Flabry,
virtuoso  in  jewels  and  a  convert  to  Spiritualism.  He  found  the  hand-
some parlours  brilliantly  lighted,  and  a  charming  assemblage  gathered
of  well-pleased  guests,  who  did  not  at  all  seem  to  have  come  to  learn
their  fortunes  or  fates,  while  contributing  to  the  income  of  their  host,
but  rather  to  be  there  out  of  complaisance  to  his  virtues  and  gifts.

Mine,  de  Lassa  performed  upon  the  piano  or  conversed  from  group  to
group  in  a  way  that  seemed  to  be  delightful,  while  M.  de  Lassa  walked
about  or  sat  in  his  insignificant,  unconcerned  way,  saying  a  word  now
and  then,  but  seeming  to  shun  everything  that  was  conspicuous.
Servants  handed  about  refreshments,  ices,  cordials,  wines,  etc.,  and
Delessert  could  have  fancied  himself  to  have  dropped  in  upon  a  quite
modest  evening  entertainment,  altogether  en  regie,  but  for  one  or  two
noticeable  circumstances  which  his  observant  eyes  quickl}7  took  in.

Except  when  their  host  or  hostess  was  within  hearing  the  guests
conversed  together  in  low  tones,  rather  mysteriously,  and  with  not
quite  so  much  laughter  as  is  usual  on  such  occasions.  At  intervals
a  very  tall  and  dignified  footman  would  come  to  a  guest,  and,  with  a
profound  bow,  present  him  a  card  on  a  silver  salver.  The  guest  would
then  go  out,  preceded  by  the  solemn  servant,  but  when  he  or  she
returned  to  the  salon — some  did  not  return  at  all — they  invariably
wore  a  dazed  or  puzzled  look,  were  confused,  astonished,  frightened,  or
amused.  All  this  was  so  unmistakably  genuine,  and  De  Lassa  and  his
wife  seemed  so  unconcerned  amidst  it  all,  not  to  say  distinct  from  it  all,
that  Delessert  could  not  avoid  being  forcibly  struck  and  considerably
puzzled.

Two  or  three  little   incidents,  which   came   under    Delessert's   own

AN    UNSOLVED    MYSTERY.  65

immediate  observation,  will  suffice  to  make  plain  the  character  of  the
impressions  made  upon  those  present.  A  couple  of  gentlemen,  both
young,  both  of  good  social  condition,  and  evidently  very  intimate
friends,  were  conversing  together  and  tutoying  one  another  at  a  great
rate,  when  the  dignified  footman  summoned  Alphonse.  He  laughed
gaily,  "Tarry  a  moment,  chcr  Auguste,"  said  he,  "and  thou  shalt  know
all  the  particulars  of  this  wonderful  fortune!"  "E/i  Hen!"  A  minute
had  scarcely  elapsed  when  Alphonse  returned  to  the  salon.  His  face
was  white  and  bore  an  appearance  of  concentrated  rage  that  was
frightful  to  witness.  He  came  straight  to  Auguste,  his  eyes  flashing,
and  bending  his  face  toward  his  friend,  who  changed  colour  and  recoiled,
he  hissed  out:  "Monsieur  L,efebure,  vons  etes  un  lac/ie!"  "Very  well,
Monsieur  Meunier,"  responded  Auguste,  in  the  same  low  tone,  "to-
morrow morning  at  six  o'clock!"  "It  is  settled,  false  friend,  execrable
traitor!  A  la  mort!"  rejoined  Alphonse,  walking  off.  "  Cela  va  sans
dire!"  muttered  Auguste,  going  towards  the  hat-room.

A  diplomatist  of  distinction,  representative  at  Paris  of  a  neighbouring
state,  an  elderly  gentleman  of  superb  aplomb  and  most  commanding
appearance,  was  summoned  to  the  oracle  by  the  bowing  footman.
After  being  absent  about  five  minutes  he  returned,  and  immediately
made  his  way  through  the  press  to  M.  de  Lassa,  who  was  standing  not
far  from  the  fireplace,  with  his  hands  in  his  pockets  and  a  look  of
utmost  indifference  upon  his  face.  Delessert  standing  near,  watched
the  interview  with  eager  interest.

"I  am  exceedingly  sorry,"  said  General  Von ,  "to  have  to  absent

myself  so  soon  from  your  interesting  salon,  M.  de  L,assa,  but  the  result
of  my  seance  convinces  me  that  my  dispatches  have  been  tampered
with."  "I  am  sorry,"  responded  M.  de  L,assa,  with  an  air  of  languid
but  courteous  interest;  "I  hope  you  may  be  able  to  discover  which  of
your  servants  has  been  unfaithful."  "I  am  going  to  do  that  now,"  said
the  General,  adding,  in  significant  tones,  "I  shall  see  that  both  he  and
his  accomplices  do  not  escape  severe  punishment."  "That  is  the  only
course  to  pursue,  Monsieur  le  Comte."  The  ambassador  stared,  bowed,
and  took  his  leave  with  a  bewilderment  in  his  face  that  was  beyond  the
power  of  his  tact  to  control.

In  the  course  of  the  evening  M.  de  L,assa  went  carelessly  to  the
piano,  and,  after  some  indifferent  vague  preluding,  played  a  remarkably
effective  piece  of  music,  in  which  the  turbulent  life  and  buoyancy  of
bacchanalian  strains  melted  gently,  almost  imperceptibly  away,  into  a

66  A   MODERN   PANARION.

sobbing  wail  of  regret,  and  languor,  and  weariness,  and  despair.  It
was  beautifully  rendered,  and  made  a  great  impression  upon  the
guests,  one  of  whom,  a  lady,  cried,  "How  lovely,  how  sad!  Did  you
compose  that  yourself,  M.  de  Lassa?"  He  looked  towards  her  absently
for  an  instant,  then  replied:  "I?  Oh,  no!  That  is  merely  a  remini-
scence, madame."  "Do  you  know  who  did  compose  it,  M.  de  Lassa?"
enquired  a  virtuoso  present.  "I  believe  it  was  originally  written  by
Ptolemy  Auletes,  the  father  of  Cleopatra,"  said  M.  de  Lassa,  in  his
indifferent  musing  way;  "but  not  in  its  present  form.  It  has  been
twice  re-written  to  my  knowledge;  still,  the  air  is  substantially  the
same."  "From  whom  did  you  get  it,  M.  de  Lassa,  if  I  may  ask?"  per-
sisted the  gentleman.  "Certainly,  certainly!  The  last  time  I  heard  it
played  was  by  Sebastian  Bach;  but  that  was  Palestrina's — the  present
— version.  I  think  I  prefer  that  of  Guido  of  Arezzo — it  is  ruder,  but
has  more  force.  I  got  the  air  from  Guido  himself."  "You — from —
Guido!"  cried  the  astonished  gentleman.  "Yes,  monsieur,"  answered
De  Lassa,  rising  from  the  piano  with  his  usual  indifferent  air.  "  Mon
Diai!"  cried  the  virtuoso,  putting  his  hand  to  his  head  after  the  manner
of  Mr.  Twemlow,  "Mon  Dicu!  that  was  in  Anno  Domini  1022."  "A
little  later  than  that — July,  103 1,  if  I  remember  rightly,"  courteously
corrected  M.  de  Lassa.

At  this  moment  the  tall  footman  bowed  before  M.  Delessert,  and
presented  the  salver  containing  the  card.  Delessert  took  it  and  read:
"  0?i  vous  accorde  trente-cinq  secondes,  M.  Flabry,  tout  aii plus  /"  Delessert
followed;  the  footman  opened  the  door  of  another  room  and  bowed
again,  signifying  that  Delessert  was  to  enter.  "Ask  no  questions,"  he
said  briefly;  "Sidi  is  mute."  Delessert  entered  the  room  and  the
door  closed  behind  him.  It  was  a  small  room,  with  a  strong  smell  of
frankincense  pervading  it;  the  walls  were  covered  completely  with  red
hangings  that  concealed  the  windows,  and  the  floor  was  felted  with  a
thick  carpet.  Opposite  the  door,  at  the  upper  end  of  the  room  near  the
ceiling  was  the  face  of  a  large  clock,  under  it,  each  lighted  by  tall  wax
candles,  were  two  small  tables,  containing,  the  one  an  apparatus  very
like  the  common  registering  telegraph  instrument,  the  other  a  crystal
globe  about  twenty  inches  in  diameter,  set  upon  an  exquisitely  wrought
tripod  of  gold  and  bronze  intermingled.  By  the  side  of  the  door  stood
a  man  jet  black  in  colour,  wearing  a  white  turban  and  burnous,  and
having  a  sort  of  wand  of  silver  in  one  hand.  With  the  other  he  took
Delessert  by  the  right  arm  above  the  elbow,  and  led  him  quickly  up  the

AN   UNSOLVED    MYSTERY.  67

room.  He  pointed  to  the  clock,  and  it  struck  an  alarum;  he  pointed  to
the  crystal.  Delessert  bent  over,  looked  into  it,  and  saw — a  facsimile
of  his  own  sleeping-room,  everything  photographed  exactly.  Sidi  did
not  give  him  time  to  exclaim,  but  still  holding  him  by  the  arm,  took
him  to  the  other  table.  The  telegraph-like  instrument  began  to  click-
click.  Sidi  opened  the  drawer,  drew  out  a  slip  of  paper,  crammed  it
into  Delessert's  hand,  and  pointed  to  the  clock,  which  struck  again.
The  thirty-five  seconds  were  expired.  Sidi,  still  retaining  hold  of
Delessert's  arm,  pointed  to  the  door  and  led  him  towards  it.  The  door
opened,  Sidi  pushed  him  out,  the  door  closed,  the  tall  footman  stood
there  bowing — the  interview  with  the  oracle  is  over.  Delessert  glanced
at  the  piece  of  paper  in  his  hand.  It  was  a  printed  scrap,  capital  letters,
and  read  simply:  "To  M.  Paul  Delessert:  The  policeman  is  always
welcome,  the  spy  is  always  in  danger!"

Delessert  was  dumbfounded  a  moment  to  find  his  disguise  detected,
but  the  words  of  the  tall  footman,  "This  way  if  you  please,  M.  Flabry,"
brought  him  to  his  senses.  Setting  his  lips,  he  returned  to  the  salon,
and  without  delay  sought  M.  de  L,assa.  "Do  you  know  the  contents
of  this?"  asked  he,  showing  the  message.  "I  know  even-thing,  M.
Delessert,"  answered  De  Lassa,  in  his  careless  way.  "Then  perhaps  you
are  aware  that  I  mean  to  expose  a  charlatan,  and  unmask  a  hypocrite,
or  perish  in  the  attempt?"  said  Delessert.  " Cela  mest  egal,  monsieur"
replied  De  Lassa.  "You  accept  my  challenge  then?"  "Oh!  it  is  a
defiance,  then?"  replied  De  Lassa,  letting  his  eye  rest  a  moment  upon
Delessert,  "mats  oui,  je  racccpte!"     And  thereupon  Delessert  departed.

Delessert  now  set  to  work,  aided  by  all  the  forces  the  Prefect  of
Police  could  bring  to  bear,  to  detect  and  expose  this  consummate
sorcerer,  whom  the  ruder  processes  of  our  ancestors  would  easily  have
disposed  of — by  combustion.  Persistent  enquiry  satisfied  Delessert
that  the  man  was  neither  a  Hungarian  nor  was  named  De  L,assa;  that
no  matter  how  far  back  his  power  of  "reminiscence"  might  extend,  in
his  present  and  immediate  form  he  had  been  born  in  this  unregenerate
world  in  the  toy-making  city  of  Nuremburg;  that  he  was  noted  in
boyhood  for  his  great  turn  for  ingenious  manufactures,  but  was  very
wild,  and  a  maztvais  sujet.  In  his  sixteenth  year  he  escaped  to  Geneva
and  apprenticed  himself  to  a  maker  of  watches  and  instruments.  Here
he  had  been  seen  by  the  celebrated  Robert  Houdin,  the  prestidigitateur.
Houdin  recognizing  the  lad's  talents,  and  being  himself  a  maker  of
ingenious  automata,  had  taken  him  off  to  Paris  and  employed  him  in

68  A   MODERN    PANARJON.

his  own  workshops,  as  well  as  for  an  assistant  in  the  public  performances
of  his  amusing  and  curious  diablerie.  After  staying  with  Houdin  some
years,  Pflock  Haslich  (which  was  De  L,assa's  right  name)  had  gone  East
in  the  suite  of  a  Turkish  Pasha,  and  after  many  years'  roving,  in  lands
where  he  could  not  be  traced  under  a  cloud  of  pseudonyms,  had  finally
turned  up  in  Venice,  and  come  thence  to  Paris.

Delessert  next  turned  his  attention  to  Mme.  de  L,assa.  It  was  more
difficult  to  get  a  clue  by  means  of  which  to  know  her  past  life;  but  it
was  necessary  in  order  to  understand  enough  about  Haslich.  At  last,
through  an  accident,  it  became  probable  that  Mme.  Aimee  was  identical
with  a  certain  Mme.  Schlaff,  who  had  been  rather  conspicuous  among
the  demi-monde  of  Buda.  Delessert  posted  off  to  that  ancient  city,  and
thence  went  into  the  wilds  of  Transylvania  to  Mengyco.  On  his  return,
as  soon  as  he  reached  the  telegraph  and  civilization,  he  telegraphed
the  Prefect  from  Kardszag:  "Don't  lose  sight  of  my  man,  nor  let  him
leave  Paris.     I  will  run  him  in  for  you  two  days  after  I  get  back."

It  happened  that  on  the  day  of  Delessert' s  return  to  Paris  the  Prefect
was  absent,  being  with  the  Emperor  at  Cherbourg.  He  came  back
on  the  fourth  day,  just  twenty-four  hours  after  the  announcement  of
Delessert's  death.  That  happened,  as  near  as  could  be  gathered,  in
this  wise:  The  night  after  Delessert's  return  he  was  present  at  De
Lassa's  salon  with  a  ticket  of  admittance  to  a  seance.  He  was  very
completely  disguised  as  a  decrepit  old  man,  and  fancied  that  it  was
impossible  for  any  one  to  detect  him.  Nevertheless,  when  he  was
taken  into  the  room,  and  looked  into  the  crystal,  he  was  utterly  horror-
stricken  to  see  there  a  picture  cf  himself,  lying  face  down  and  senseless
upon  the  side-walk  of  a  street;  and  the  message  he  received  read  thus:
"What  you  have  seen  will  be,  Delessert,  in  three  days.  Prepare!"
The  detective,  unspeakably  shocked,  retired  from  the  house  at  once
and  sought  his  own  lodgings.

In  the  morning  he  came  to  the  office  in  a  state  of  extreme  dejection.
He  was  completely  unnerved.  In  relating  to  a  brother  inspector  what
had  occurred,  he  said:  "That  man  can  do  what  he  promises,  I  am
doomed ! "

He  said  that  he  thought  he  could  make  a  complete  case  out  against
Haslich  alias  De  L,assa,  but  could  not  do  so  without  seeing  the  Prefect
and  getting  instructions.  He  would  tell  nothing  in  regard  to  his  dis-
coveries in  Buda  and  in  Transylvania — said  he  was  not  at  liberty  to  do
so — and  repeatedly  exclaimed:   "Oh!  if  M.  le  Prefet  were  only  here!"

AN   UNSOLVED    MYSTERY.  69

He  was  told  to  go  to  the  Prefect  at  Cherbourg,  but  refused  upon  the
ground  that  his  presence  was  needed  in  Paris.  He  time  and  again
averred  his  conviction  that  he  was  a  doomed  man,  and  showed  himself
both  vacillating  and  irresolute  in  his  conduct,  and  extremely  nervous.
He  was  told  that  he  was  perfectly  safe,  since  De  Lassa  and  all  his
household  were  under  constant  surveillance;  to  which  he  replied,  "You
do  not  know  the  man."  An  inspector  was  detailed  to  accompany
Delessert,  never  to  lose  sight  of  him  night  and  day,  and  guard  him
carefully;  and  proper  precautions  were  taken  in  regard  to  his  food  and
drink,  while  the  guards  watching  De  Lassa  were  doubled.

On  the  morning  of  the  third  day,  Delessert,  who  had  been  staying
chiefly  indoors,  avowed  his  determination  to  go  at  once  and  telegraph
to  M.  le  Prefet  to  return  immediately.  With  this  intention  he  and  his
brother  officer  started  out.  Just  as  they  got  to  the  corner  of  the  Rue
de  Lanery  and  the  Boulevard,  Delessert  stopped  suddenly  and  put  his
hand  to  his  forehead.

"My  God!"  he  cried,  "the  crystal!  the  picture!"  and  fell  prone
upon  his  face,  insensible.  He  was  taken  at  once  to  a  hospital,  but  only
lingered  a  few  hours,  never  regaining  his  consciousness.  Under  ex-
press instruction  from  the  authorities,  a  most  careful,  minute,  and
thorough  autopsy  was  made  of  Delessert's  body  by  several  distin-
guished surgeons,  whose  unanimous  opinion  was,  that  the  cause  of  his
death  was  apoplexy,  due  to  fatigue  and  nervous  excitement.

As  soon  as  Delessert  was  sent  to  the  hospital,  his  brother  inspector
hurried  to  the  Central  Office,  and  De  Lassa,  together  with  his  wife  and
everyone  connected  with  the  establishment,  were  at  once  arrested.  De
Lassa  smiled  contemptuously  as  they  took  him  away.  "I  knew  you
were  coming;  I  prepared  for  it;  you  will  be  glad  to  release  me  again."

It  was  quite  true  that  De  Lassa  had  prepared  for  them.  When  the
house  was  searched  it  was  found  that  every  paper  had  been  burned,  the
crystal  globe  was  destroyed,  and  in  the  room  of  the  seances  was  a  great
heap  of  delicate  machinery  broken  into  indistinguishable  bits.  "That
cost  me  200,000  francs,"  said  De  Lassa,  pointing  to  the  pile,  "but  it  has
been  a  good  investment."  The  walls  and  floors  were  ripped  out  in
several  places,  and  the  damage  to  the  property  was  considerable.  In
prison  neither  De  Lassa  nor  his  associates  made  any  revelations.  The
notion  that  they  had  something  to  do  with  Delessert's  death  was
quickly  dispelled,  in  a  legal  point  of  view,  and  all  the  party  but  De
Lassa  were  released.    He  was  still  detained  in  prison,  upon  one  pretext

70  A   MODERN   PANARION.

or  another,  when  one  morning  he  was  found  hanging  by  a  silk  sash  to
the  cornice  of  the  room  where  he  was  confined — dead.  The  night
before,  it  was  afterwards  discovered,  Madame  de  L,assa  had  eloped  with
a  tall  footman,  taking  the  Nubian  Sidi  with  them.  De  Lassa's  secrets
died  with  him.

"It  is  an  interesting  story,  that  article  of  yours  in  to-day's  Scientist.
But  is  it  a  record  of  facts,  or  a  tissue  of  the  imagination?  If  true,  why
not  state  the  source  of  it,  in  other  words,  specify  your  authority  for  it."

The  above  is  not  signed,  but  we  would  take  the  opportunity  to  say
that  the  story,  "An  Unsolved  Mystery,"  was  published  because  we
considered  the  main  points  of  the  narrative — the  prophecies,  and  the
singular  death  of  the  officer — to  be  psychic  phenomena,  that  have  been,
and  can  be,  again  produced.  Why  quote  "authorities"?  The  Scrip-
tures tell  us  of  the  death  of  Ananias,  under  the  stern  rebuke  from
Peter;  here  we  have  a  phenomenon  of  a  similar  nature.  Ananias  is
supposed  to  have  suffered  instant  death  from  fear.  Few  can  realize
this  power  governed  by  spiritual  laws,  but  those  who  have  trod  the
boundary  line  and  know  some  few  of  the  things  that  can  be  done,  will
see  no  great  mystery  in  this,  nor  in  the  story  published  last  week.  We
are  not  speaking  in  mystical  tones.  Ask  the  powerful  mesmerist  if
there  is  danger  that  the  subject  may  pass  out  of  his  control? — if  he
could  will  the  spirit  out,  never  to  return  ?  It  is  capable  of  demonstra-
tion that  the  mesmerist  can  act  on  a  subject  at  a  distance  of  many
miles;  and  it  is  no  less  certain  that  the  majority  of  mesmerists  know
little  or  nothing  of  the  laws  that  govern  their  powers.

It  may  be  a  pleasant  dream  to  attempt  to  conceive  of  the  beauties  of
the  spirit-world ;  but  the  time  can  be  spent  more  profitably  in  a  study
of  the  spirit  itself,  and  it  is  not  necessary  that  the  subject  for  study
should  be  in  the  spirit-world.

SPIRITUALISM  IN  RUSSIA.

To  the  Editor  of  "  The  Spiritual  Scientist."

Dear  Sir, — In  advices  just  received  from  St.  Petersburg  I  am  re-
quested to  translate  and  forward  to  The  Scientist  for  publication  the
protest  of  the  Hon.  Alexander  Aksakoff,  Imperial  Counsellor  of  State,
against  the  course  of  the  professors  of  the  University  respecting  the
Spiritualistic  investigation.  The  document  appears,  in  Russian,  in  the
Vcdomostji,  the  official  journal  of  St.  Petersburg.

This  generous,  high-minded,  courageous  gentleman  has  done  the
possible,  and  even  the  impossible,  in  order  to  open  the  spiritual  eyes
of  those  incurable  moles  who  fear  the  daylight  of  truth  as  the  burglar
fears  the  policeman's  bull's-eye.

The  heartfelt  thanks  and  gratitude  of  every  Spiritualist  ought  to  be
forwarded  to  this  noble  defender  of  the  cause,  who  regretted  neither
his  time,  trouble  nor  money  to  help  the  propagation  of  the  truth.

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

New  York,  April  10th,  i8?6*

See  Appendix,  "A.  Aksakofifs  Protest."

SPIRITUALISM  AND  SPIRITUALISTS.

[From  The  Spiritual  Scientist,  Jan.  6th,  1876.]

Dear  Sir, — For  the  last  three  months  one  has  hardly  been  able  to
open  a  number  of  The  Banner,  or  the  other  papers  ,  without  finding  one
or  more  proofs  of  the  fecundity  of  the  human  imagination  in  the  condi-
tion of  hallucination.  The  Spiritualist  camp  is  in  an  uproar,  and  the
clans  are  gathering  to  fight  imaginary  foes.  The  tocsin  is  sounded ;
danger  signals  shoot,  like  flaming  rockets,  across  the  hitherto  serene
sky,  and  warning  cries  are  uttered  by  vigilant  sentries  posted  at  the
four  corners  of  the  "angel-girt  world."  The  reverberations  of  this
din  resound  even  in  the  daily  press.  One  would  think  that  the  Day  of
Judgment  had  come  for  American  Spiritualism.

Why  all  this  disturbance?  Simply  because  two  humble  individuals
have  spoken  a  few  wholesome  truths.  If  the  grand  beast  of  the  Apoca-
lypse with  its  seven  heads  and  the  word  "Blasphemy"  written  upon
each,  had  appeared  in  heaven,  there  would  hardly  have  been  seen  so
much  commotion  there,  as  this ;  and  there  seems  to  be  a  concerted  effort
to  cast  out  Col.  Olcott  and  myself  (coupled  like  a  pair  of  Hermetic
Siamese  twins)  as  ominous  to  the  superstitious  as  a  comet  with  a  fiery
tail,  and  the  precursor  of  war,  plagues  and  other  calamities.  They  seem
to  think  that  if  they  do  not  crush  us,  we  will  destroy  Spiritualism.

I  have  no  time  to  waste,  and  what  I  now  write  is  not  intended  for  the
benefit  of  such  persons  as  these — whose  soap-bubbles,  however  pretty,
are  sure  to  burst  of  themselves — but  to  set  myself  right  with  many
most  estimable  Spiritualists  for  whom  I  feel  a  sincere  regard.

If  the  spiritual  press  of  America  were  conducted  upon  a  principle  of
doing  even  justice  to  all,  I  would  send  your  contemporaries  copies  of
this  letter,  but  their  course  in  the  past  has  made  me — whether  rightly
or  not — feel  as  if  no  redress  could  be  had  outside  of  your  columns.  I
shall  be  only  too  glad  if  their  treatment,  in  this  case,  gives  me  cause  to
change  my  opinion  that  they,  and  their  slandering  theorists,  are  inspired

SPIRITUALISM   AND   SPIRITUALISTS.  73

by  the  biblical  devils  who  left  Mary  Magdalene  and  returned  to  the  land
of  the  "Sweet  Bye-and-Bye.'"

To  begin,  I  wish  to  unhook  my  name  from  that  of  Col.  Olcott,  if  you
please,  and  declare  that,  as  he  is  not  responsible  for  my  views  or
actions,  neither  am  I  for  his.  _  He  is  bold  enough  and  strong  enough
to  defend  himself  under  all  circumstances,  and  has  never  allowed  his
adversaries  to  strike  without  knocking  out  two  teeth  to  their  one.  If
our  views  on  Spiritualism  are  in  some  degree  identical,  and  our  work
in  the  Theosophical  Society  pursued  in  common,  we  are,  notwithstand-
ing, two  very  distinct  entities  and  mean  to  remain  such.  I  highly
esteem  Col.  Olcott,  as  everyone  does  who  knows  him.  He  is  a  gentle-
man; but  what  is  more  in  my  eyes,  he  is  an  honest  and  true  man,  and
an  unselfish  Spiritualist,  in  the  proper  sense  of  that  word.  If  he  now
sees  Spiritualism  in  another  light  than  orthodox  Spiritualists  would
prefer,  the}'  themselves  are  only  to  blame.  He  strikes  at  the  rotten
places  of  their  philosophy,  and  they  do  all  they  can  to  cover  up  the
ulcers  instead  of  trying  to  cure  them.  He  is  one  of  the  truest  and
most  unselfish  friends  that  the  cause  has  to-day  in  America,  and  yet  he
is  treated  with  an  intolerance  that  could  hardly  be  expected  of  any-
body above  the  level  of  the  rabid  Moodys  and  Sankeys.  Surely,  facts
speak  for  themselves;  and  a  faith  so  pure,  angelic  and  unadulterated  as
American  Spiritualism  is  claimed  to  be,  can  have  nothing  to  fear  from
heresiarchs.  A  house  built  on  the  rock  stands  unshaken  by  any  storm.
If  the  New  Lutheran  Church  can  prove  all  its  "controls,  guides  and
visitors  from  behind  the  shining  river"  to  be  disembodied  spirits,  why
all  this  row?  That's  just  where  the  trouble  lies;  they  cannot  prove  it.
They  have  tasted  these  fruits  of  Paradise,  and  while  finding  some  of
them  sweet  and  refreshing  because  gathered  and  brought  by  real  angel
friends,  so  many  others  have  proved  sour  and  rotten  at  the  core,  that
to  escape  an  incurable  dyspepsia,  many  of  the  best  and  most  sincere
Spiritualists  have  left  the  communion  without  asking  for  a  letter  of
dismissal.

This  is  not  Spiritualism;  it  is,  as  I  say,  a  New  Lutheran  Church,  and
really,  though  the  late  oracle  of  The  Banner  of  Light  was  evidently  a
pure  and  true  woman — for  the  breath  of  calumny,  this  raging  demon  of
America,  has  never  been  able  to  soil  her  reputation — and  though  cer-
tainly she  was  a  wonderful  medium,  still  I  don't  see  why  a  Spiritualist
should  be  ostracized,  only  because  after  having  given  up  St.  Paul,  he
or  she  does  not  strictly  adhere  to  the  doctrines  of  St.  Conant.

74  A    MODERN    PANARION.

The  last  number  of  The  Banner  contained  a  letter  from  a  Mr.  Saxon,
criticizing  some  expressions  in  a  recent  letter  of  Col.  Olcott  to  the  New
York  Sun,  in  defence  of  the  Eddys.  The  only  part  which  concerned
me  is  this:

Surely  some  magician,  with  his  or  her  Kabalistic  "Presto!  Change!"  has  worked
sudden  and  singular  revolutions  in  the  mind  of  this  disciple  of  Occultism,  this
gentleman  who  "is"  and  "is  not"  a  Spiritualist.

As  I  am  the  only  Kabalist  in  America,  I  cannot  be  mistaken  as  to
the  author's  meaning;  so  I  cheerfully  pick  up  the  glove.     While  I  am
not  responsible  for  the  changes  in  the  barometer  of  Col.  Olcott's  spiri-
tuality (which  I  notice  usually  presage  a  storm),  I  am  for  the  follow-
ing facts:   Since  I  left  Chittenden,   I   have  constantly  and   fearlessly
maintained   against   everyone,   beginning  with    Dr.    Beard,   that   their
apparitions  are  genuine  and  powerful.     Whether  they  are  "spirits  of
hell  or  goblins  damned"  is  a  question  quite  separate  from  that  of  their
mediumship.    Col.  Olcott  will  not  deny  that  when  we  met  at  Chittenden
for  the  first  time,  and  afterwards — and  that  more  than  once — when  he
expressed  suspicions  about  the  genuineness  of  Mayflower  and  George
Dix,  the  spirits  of  Horatio's  dark  seanees,  I  insisted  that,  so  far  as  I
could  judge,  they  were  genuine  phenomena.     He  will  also  no  doubt
admit,  since  he  is  an  eminently  truthful  man,  that  when  the  ungrateful
behaviour  of  the  Eddys — toward  whom  every  visitor  at  the  homestead
will  testify  that  he  was  kinder  than  a  brother — had  made  him  ready  to
express  his  indignation,  I  interfered  on  their  behalf,  and  begged  that
he   would   never   confound   mediums   with   other   people   as   to   their
responsibility.     Mediums  have  tried  to  shake  my  opinions  of  the  Eddy
boys,  offering  in  two  cases  that  I  can  recall  to  go  to  Chittenden  with
me  and  expose  the  fraud.     I  acted  the  same  with  them  that  I  did  with
the  Colonel.     Mediums  have  tried  likewise  to  convince  me  that  Mr.
Crookes'  Katie  King  was  but  Miss  F.  Cooke  walking  about,  while  a
wax  bust,  fabricated  in  her  likeness  and  covered  with  her  clothes,  lay
in  the  cabinet  representing  her  as  entranced.     Other  mediums,  regard-
ing me  as  a  fanatical  Spiritualist,  who  would  even  be  ready  to  connive
at  fraud  rather  than  see  the  cause  hurt  by  an  exposure,  have  let,  or
pretended  to  let,  me  into  the  secrets  of  the  mediumship  of  their  fellow
mediums,  and  sometimes  incautiously  into  their  own.

My  experience  shows  that  the  worst  enemies  of  mediums  are
mediums.  Not  content  with  slandering  each  other,  they  assail  and
traduce  their  warmest  and  most  unselfish  friends.

SPIRITUALISM    AND   SPIRITUALISTS.  75

Whatever  objection  anyone  may  have  to  me  on  account  of  country,
religion,  occult  study,  rudeness  of  speech,  cigarette-smoking,  or  any
other  peculiarity,  my  record  in  connection  with  Spiritualism  for  long
years  does  not  show  me  as  making  money  by  it,  or  gaining  any  other
advantage,  direct  or  indirect.  .On  the  contrary,  those  who  have  met  me
in  all  parts  of  the  world  (which  I  have  circumnavigated  three  times),
will  testify  that  I  have  given  thousands  of  dollars,  imperilled  my  life,
defied  the  Catholic  Church — where  it  required  more  courage  to  do  so
than  the  Spiritualists  seem  to  show  about  encountering  elementaries —
and  in  camp  and  court,  on  the  sea,  in  the  desert,  in  civilized  and
savage  countries,  I  have  been  from  first  to  last  the  friend  and  champion
of  mediums.  I  have  done  more.  I  have  often  taken  the  last  dollar
out  of  my  pocket,  and  even  necessary  clothes  off  my  back,  to  relieve
their  necessities.

And  how  do  you  think  I  have  been  rewarded?  By  honours,  emolu-
ments, and  social  position?  Have  I  charged  a  fee  for  imparting  to
the  public  or  individuals  what  little  knowledge  I  have  gathered  in  my
travels  and  studies?  Let  those  who  have  patronized  our  principal
mediums  answer.

I  have  been  slandered  in  the  most  shameful  way,  and  the  most  un-
blushing lies  circulated  about  my  character  and  antecedents  by  the
very  mediums  whom  I  have  been  defending  at  the  risk  of  being  taken
for  their  confederate,  when  their  tricks  have  been  detected.  What
has  happened  in  American  cities  is  no  worse  nor  different  from  what
has  befallen  me  in  Europe,  Asia  and  Africa.  I  have  been  injured
temporarily  in  the  eyes  of  good  and  pure  men  and  women  by  the  libels
of  mediums  whom  I  never  saw,  and  who  never  were  in  the  same  city
with  me  at  the  same  time;  of  mediums  who  made  me  the  heroine  of
shameful  histories  whose  action  was  alleged  to  have  occurred  when  I
was  in  another  part  of  the  world,  far  away  from  the  face  of  a  white
man.  Ingratitude  and  injustice  have  been  my  portion  since  I  had
first  to  do  with  spiritual  mediums.  I  have  met  here  with  a  few  excep-
tions, but  very,  very  few.

Now,  what  do  you  suppose  has  sustained  me  throughout?  Do  you
imagine  that  I  could  not  see  the  disgusting  frauds  mixed  up  with  the
most  divine  genuine  manifestations?  Could  I,  having  nothing  to  gain
in  money,  power  or  any  other  consideration,  have  been  content  to  pass
through  all  these  dangers,  suffer  all  this  abuse,  and  receive  all  these
injurious  insults,  if  I  saw  nothing  in  Spiritualism  but  what  these  critics

76  A   MODERN    PANARION.

of  Col.  Olcott  and  myself  can  see?  Would  the  prospect  of  an  eternity,
passed  in  the  angel-girt  world,  in  company  with  unwashed  Indian
guides  and  military  controls,  with  Aunt  Sallies  and  Prof.  Websters,
have  been  inducement  enough?  No;  I  would  prefer  annihilation  to
such  a  prospect.  It  was  because  I  knew  that  through  the  same  golden
gates  which  swung  open  to  admit  the  elementary  and  those  unpro-
gressed  human  spirits  who  are  worse,  if  anything,  than  they,  have
often  passed  the  real  and  purified  forms  of  the  departed  and  blessed
ones.  Because,  knowing  the  nature  of  these  spirits  and  the  laws  of
mediumistic  control,  I  have  never  been  willing  to  hold  my  calumniators
responsible  for  the  great  evil  they  did,  when  they  were  often  simply
the  unfortunate  victims  of  obsession  by  unprogressed  spirits.  Who
can  blame  me  for  not  wishing  to  associate  with  or  receive  instruction
from  spirits  who,  if  not  far  worse,  were  no  better  nor  wiser  than  I  ?  Is
a  man  entitled  to  respect  and  veneration  simply  because  his  body  is
rotting  under  ground,  like  that  of  a  dog?  To  me  the  grand  object  of
my  life  was  attained  and  the  immortality  of  our  spirit  demonstrated.
Why  should  I  turn  necromancer  and  evoke  the  dead,  who  could  neither
teach  me  nor  make  me  better  than  I  was?  It  is  a  more  dangerous
thing  to  play  with  the  mysteries  of  life  and  death  than  most  Spiri-
tualists imagine.

L,et  them  thank  God  for  the  great  proof  of  immortality  afforded
them  in  this  century  of  unbelief  and  materialism;  and,  if  divine
Providence  has  put  them  on  the  right  path,  let  them  pursue  it  by  all
means,  but  not  stop  to  pass  their  time  in  dangerous  talk  indiscrimi-
nately with  ever}7  one  from  the  other  side.  The  land  of  spirits,  the
Summer  Land,  as  they  call  it  here,  is  a  terra  incognita;  no  believer  will
deny  it;  it  is  vastly  more  unknown  to  even7  Spiritualist,  as  regards  its
various  inhabitants,  than  a  trackless  virgin  forest  of  Central  Africa.
And  who  can  blame  the  pioneer  settler  if  he  hesitates  to  open  his  door
to  a  knock,  before  assuring  himself  whether  the  visitor  be  man  or
beast?

Thus,  just  because  of  all  that  I  have  said  above  I  proclaim  myself  a
true  Spiritualist,  because  my  belief  is  built  upon  a  firm  ground,  and
that  no  exposure  of  mediums,  no  social  scandal  affecting  them  or
others,  no  materialistic  deductions  of  exact  science,  or  sneers  and
denunciations  of  scientists,  can  shake  it.  The  truth  is  coming  slowly
to  light  and  I  shall  do  my  best  to  hasten  its  advent.  I  will  breast  the
current  of  popular  prejudice  and  ignorance.     I  am  prepared  to  endure

SPIRITUALISM   AND    SPIRITUALISTS.  77

slander,  foul  insinuations  and  insult  in  the  future  as  I  have  in  the  past.
Already  one  spiritual  editor,  to  most  effectually  demonstrate  his  spiri-
tuality, has  called  me  a  witch.  I  have  survived,  and  hope  to  do  so  if
two  or  two-score  more  should  do  the  same ;  but  whether  I  ride  the  air
to  attend  my  Sabbath  or  not,  one  thing  is  certain:  I  will  not  ruin
myself  to  buy  broomsticks  upon  which  to  chase  after  every  lie  set  afloat
by  editors  or  mediums.

H.  P.  Blavatskv.

WHAT  IS  OCCULTISM?

[From  The  Spiritual  Scientist.']

I  BELIEVE  Occultism  to  be  essentially  a  reincarnation  of  ancient
paganism,  a  revivification  of  the  Pythagorean  philosophy;  not  the
senseless  ceremonies  and  spiritless  forms  of  those  ancient  religions,
but  the  Spirit  of  the  Truth  which  animated  those  grand  old  systems
which  held  the  world  spell-bound  in  awe  and  reverence  long  after  the
spirit  had  departed,  and  nothing  was  left  but  the  dead,  decaying  body.

Occultism  asserts  the  eternal  individuality  of  the  soul,  the  imperish-
able force  which  is  the  cause  and  sustaining  power  of  all  organization,
that  death  is  only  the  casting  off  of  a  worn-out  garment  in  order  to
procure  a  new  and  better  one.

So  death,  so-called,  can  but  the  form  deface,
The  immortal  soul  flies  out  in  empty  space,
To  seek  her  fortune  in  another  place.

Occultism,  in  its  efforts  to  penetrate  the  arcana  of  dynamic  forces
and  primordial  power,  sees  in  all  things  a  unity,  an  unbroken  chain
extending  from  the  lowest  organic  form  to  the  highest,  and  concludes
that  this  unity  is  based  upon  a  uniformly  ascending  scale  of  organic
forms  of  being,  the  Jacob's  ladder  of  spiritual  organic  experience,  up
which  every  soul  must  travel  before  it  can  again  sing  praises  before  the
face  of  its  Father.  It  perceives  a  duality  in  all  things,  a  physical  and
spiritual  nature,  closely  interwoven  in  each  other's  embrace,  inter-
dependent upon  each  other,  and  yet  independent  of  each  other.  And
as  there  is  in  spirit-life  a  central  individuality,  the  soul,  so  there  is  in
the  physical,  the  atom,  each  eternal,  unchangeable  and  self-existent.
These  centres,  physical  and  spiritual,  are  surrounded  by  their  own
respective  atmospheres,  the  intersphering  of  which  results  in  aggrega-
tion and  organization.  This  idea  is  not  limited  to  terrestrial  life,  but
is  extended  to  worlds  and  systems  of  worlds.

Physical  existence  is  subservient  to  the  spiritual,  and  all  physical

WHAT   IS   OCCULTISM?  79

improvement  and  progress  are  only  the  auxiliaries  of  spiritual  progress,
without  which  there  could  be  no  physical  progress.  Physical  organic
progress  is  effected  through  hereditary  transmission;  spiritual  organic
progress  by  transmigration.

Occultism  has  divided  spiritual  progress  into  three  divisions — the
elementary,  which  corresponds  with  the  lower  organizations;  the  astral,
which  relates  to  the  human;  and  the  celestial,  which  is  divine.  "Ele-
mentary spirits,"  whether  they  belong  to  "earth,  water,  air  or  fire,"  are
spirits  not  yet  human,  but  attracted  to  the  human  by  certain  congeniali-
ties. As  many  physical  diseases  are  due  to  the  presence  of  parasites,
attracted  or  produced  by  uncleanness  and  other  causes,  so  parasitic
spirits  are  attracted  by  immorality  or  spiritual  uncleanness,  thereby
inducing  spiritual  diseases  and  consequent  physical  ailments.  They
who  live  on  the  animal  plane  must  attract  spirits  of  that  plane,  who
seek  for  borrowed  embodiments  where  the  most  congeniality  exists  in
the  highest  form.

Thus  the  ancient  doctrine  of  obsession  challenges  recognition,  and
the  exorcism  of  devils  is  as  legitimate  as  the  expelling  of  a  tape-worm,
or  the  curing  of  the  itch.  It  was  also  believed  that  these  spiritual
beings  sustained  their  spiritual  existence  by  certain  emanations  from
physical  bodies,  especially  when  newly  slain;  thus  in  sacrificial  offer-
ings the  priests  received  the  physical  part,  and  the  Gods  the  spiritual,
they  being  content  with  a  "sweet-smelling  savour."  It  was  further
thought  that  wars  were  instigated  by  these  demons,  so  that  they  might
feast  on  the  slain.

But  vegetable  food  also  held  a  place  in  spiritual  estimation,  for
incense  and  fumigations  were  powerful  instruments  in  the  hands  of  the
expert  magician.

Above  the  elementary  spheres  were  the  seven  planetary  spheres,  and
as  the  elementary  spheres  were  the  means  of  progress  for  the  lower
animals,  so  were  the  planetary  spheres  the  means  of  progress  for  spirits
advanced  from  the  elementary — for  human  spirits.  The  human  spirit
at  death  went  to  its  associative  star,  till  ready  for  a  new  incarnation,  and
its  birth  partook  of  the  nature  of  the  planet  whence  it  came,  and  whose
rays  illumined  the  ascendant — the  central  idea  of  astrology.  When
the  lessons  of  a  planetary  sphere  were  fully  mastered,  the  spirit  rose  to
the  next  sphere  to  proceed  as  before.  The  character  of  these  spheres
corresponded  to  the  "seven  ages  of  man."  But  not  always  did  the  spirit
return  to  the  astral  spheres.     Suicides;  those  from  whom  life  had  been

80  A    MODERN    PANARION.

suddenly  taken  before  fully  ripe;  those  whose  affections  were  inordi-
nately attached  to  earthly  things,  etc.,  were  held  to  the  earth  till  certain
conditions  were  fulfilled,  and  some  whose  lives  had  fitted  them  for  such
disposal  were  remanded  to  the  elementary  spheres,  to  be  incarnated  as
lower  animals,  corresponding  to  the  nature  of  their  lives.  Such  were
the  perturbed  spirits  who  sometimes  disturbed  the  peace  of  sensitive
mortals  in  the  days  gone  by — perhaps  now.

Transcending  the  planetary  spheres  were  the  three  divine  spheres
where  the  process  of  apotheosis  took  place,  where  the  spirit  progressed
till  it  reached  the  fulness  of  the  Godhead  bodily.  From  these  spheres
were  appointed  the  Guardians  of  the  inferior  spheres,  the  Messengers  of
God,  ministering  spirits,  sent  to  minister  to  them  who  shall  receive  the
inheritance  of  salvation.

Such  is  a  brief  outline  of  spiritual  Occult  philosophy;  it  may  seem  to
be  inconsistent  with  the  ideas  of  modern  Spiritualism,  }ret  even  Spiri-
tualism has  not  altogether  lost  sight  of  the  seven  spheres  and  other
peculiarities  of  the  ancient  astro-spiritual  faith;  and  as  knowledge  is
acquired  and  experience  gained,  a  better  understanding  of  both  ancient
and  modern  mysticism  will  bring  them  nearer  together  and  show  a  con-
sistency and  mutual  agreement  which  has  never  been  disturbed — only
obscured — by  human  ignorance  and  presumption.

But  Occultism  has  a  physical  aspect  which  I  cannot  afford  to  pass  by.
Man  is  a  fourfold  being.

Four  things  of  man  there  are:   spirit,  soul,  ghost,  flesh;
Four  places  these  four  keep  and  do  possess.
The  earth  covers  flesh,  the  ghost  hovers  o'er  the  grave,
Orcus  hath  the  soul,  the  stars  the  spirit  crave.

When  the  spirit  leaves  the  body,  and  is  properly  prepared  for  the
stellar  spheres,  these  are  retained  in  the  mortal  remains;  and  the
shade,  which  is  no  part  of  the  spirit  or  the  true  man  or  woman,  may
still  counterfeit  them,  make  revelations  of  the  past,  in  fact  reveal  more
of  its  sensual  history,  and  prove  sensual  identity  better  than  the  spirit
itself  could  do,  seeing  it  knows  only  spiritual  things.  The  sciomancy
of  the  past  bears  the  same  relation  to  modern  psychometry  that
ancient  Magic  does  to  modern  Spiritualism.  Thus  in  haunted  houses,
in  graveyards  and  places  where  deeds  of  violence  have  occurred,  sensi-
tives see  the  drama  reacted  which  transpired  long  ago,  the  spirit  being
no  accessory  thereto.

The  spirit  cannot  even  communicate  unless  through  the  interblend-

WHAT   IS   OCCULTISM?  8 1

ing  of  physical  and  spiritual  aune,  and  only  by  coming  en  rapport  with
physical  things  can  it  know  anything  of  them ;  and  thus  mediums  are
as  necessary  on  the  other  side  as  on  this;  through  which  mediums,
Guardian  Spirits,  we  may  gain  a  nearer  apprehension  of  spiritual  truths,
if  we  live  for  them.

Buddha  of  California.*

*  We  cannot  say  positively  that  this  is  H.  P.  B.'s,  but  it  is  either  written  by  her,  or  under  her
inspiration.

A  WARNING  TO  MEDIUMS.

[From  The  Banner  of  Light,  May  13th,  1876.]

Dear  Sir, — I  take  the  earliest  opportunity  to  warn  mediums  gener-
ally— but  particularly  American  mediums — that  a  plot  against  the  cause
has  been  hatched  in  St.  Petersburg.  The  particulars  have  just  been
received  by  me  from  one  of  my  foreign  correspondents,  and  may  be
relied  upon  as  authentic.

It  is  now  commonly  known  that  Prof.  Wagner,  the  geologist,  has
boldly  come  out  as  a  champion  for  mediumistic  phenomena.  Since  he
witnessed  the  wonderful  manifestations  of  Bredif,  the  French  medium,
he  has  issued  several  pamphlets,  reviewed  at  great  length  in  Col.
Olcott's  People  from  the  Other  World,  and  excited  and  defied  the  anger
of  all  the  scientific  pyschophobists  of  the  Imperial  University.  Fancy
a  herd  of  mad  bulls  rushing  at  the  red  flag  of  a  picador,  and  you  will
have  some  idea  of  the  effect  of  Wagners  Olcott-pamphlet  upon  his
colleagues.

Chief  among  them  is  the  chairman  of  the  scientific  Commission  which
has  just  exploded  with  a  report  of  what  they  did  not  see  at  seances  never
held!  Goaded  to  fury  by  the  defence  of  Spiritualism,  which  they  had
intended  to  quietly  butcher,  this  individual  suddenly  took  the  deter-
mination to  come  to  America,  and  is  now  probably  on  his  way.  Like
a  Samson  of  science,  he  expects  to  tie  our  foxes  of  mediums  together
by  the  tails,  set  fire  to  them,  and  turn  them  into  the  corn  of  those
Philistines,  Wagner  and  Butlerow.

L,et  me  give  mediums  a  bit  of  friendly  caution.  If  this  Russian  Pro-
fessor should  turn  up  at  a  seance,  keep  a  sharp  eye  upon  him,  and  let
everyone  do  the  same;  give  him  no  private  seances  at  which  there  is  not
present  at  least  one  truthful  and  impartial  Spiritualist.  Some  scientists
are  not  to  be  trusted.     My  correspondent  writes  that  the  Professor —

Goes  to  America  to  create  a  great  scandal,  burst  up  Spiritualism,  and  turn  the
laugh  on  P.  Wagner,  Aksakoff  and  Butlerow.

A    WARNING   TO    MEDIUMS.  #3

The  plot  is  very  ingeniously  contrived:  he  is  coming  here  under  the
pretext  of  the  Centennial,  and  will  attract  as  little  attention  as  possible
among  the  mediums.

But,  Mr.  Editor,  what  if  he  should  meet  the  fate  of  Hare  and  become
a  Spiritualist!  What  wailing  would  there  not  be  in  the  Society  of
Physical  Sciences!  I  shudder  at  the  mortification  which  would  await
my  poor  countrymen.

But  another  distinguished  Russian  scientist  is  also  coming,  for  whom
I  bespeak  a  very  different  reception.  Prof.  Kittara,  the  greatest  tech-
nologist of  Russia  and  a  member  of  the  Emperor's  Privy  Council,  is
really  sent  by  the  government  to  the  Centennial.  He  is  deeply  inter-
ested in  Spiritualism,  very  anxious  to  investigate  it,  and  will  bring  the
proper  credentials  from  Mr.  Aksakoff.  The  latter  gentleman  writes
me  that  every  civility  and  attention  should  be  shown  Prof.  Kittara,  as
his  report,  if  favourable,  will  have  a  tremendous  influence  upon  public
opinion.

The  unfairness  of  the  University  Commission  has,  it  seems,  produced
a  reaction.  I  translate  the  following  from  a  paper  which  Mr.  Aksa-
koff has  sent  me,  the  St.  Petersburg  Berjeveya  I  ledomostji  (Exchange
Reports)  :

We  hear  that  the  Commission  for  the  investigation  of  mediumism,  which  was
formed  by  the  Society  of  Physical  Sciences  attached  to  the  University,  is  preparing
to  issue  a  report  of  its  labours  [?  !].  It  will  appear  as  an  appendix  to  the  monthly
periodical  of  the  Chemical  and  Physical  Societies.  Meanwhile  another  Commis-
sion is  being  formed,  but  this  time  its  members  will  not  be  supplied  from  the
Physical  Science  Society,  but  from  the  Medical  Society.  Nevertheless,  several
members  of  the  former  will  be  invited  to  join,  as  well  as  the  friends  of  medium-
ism, and  others  who  would  be  able  to  offer  important  suggestions  pro  or  con.  We
hear  that  the  formation  of  this  new  Commission  is  warmly  advocated,  its  necessity
having  been  shown  in  the  breach  of  faith  by  the  Physical  Science  Society,  its  failure
to  hold  the  promised  forty  seances,  its  premature  adoption  of  unfair  conclusion-,
and  the  strong  prejudices  of  the  members.

Let  us  hope  that  this  new  organization  may  prove  more  honourable
than  its  predecessor  (peace  to  its  ashes!).

H.  P.  Blavatskv.

(NEW)  YORK  AGAINST  LANKESTER.

A    NEW    WAR    OF    THE    ROSES.

[From  The  Banner  of  Light,  Oct.  24th,  1S76.]

Despite  the  constant  recurrence  of  new  discoveries  by  modern  men
of  science,  an  exaggerated  respect  for  authority  and  an  established
routine  among  the  educated  class  retard  the  progress  of  true  know-
ledge. Facts  which,  if  observed,  tested,  classified  and  appreciated,
would  be  of  inestimable  importance  to  science,  are  summarily  cast
into  the  despised  limbo  of  supernaturalism.  To  these  conservatives
the  experience  of  the  past  serves  neither  as  an  example  nor  a  warning.
The  overturning  of  a  thousand  cherished  theories  finds  our  modern
philosopher  as  unprepared  for  each  new  scientific  revelation  as  though
his  predecessor  had  been  infallible  from  time  immemorial.

The  protoplasmist  should,  at  least,  in  modesty  remember  that  his  past
is  one  vast  cemetery  of  dead  theories;  a  desolate  potter's  field  wherein
exploded  hypotheses  lie,  in  ignoble  oblivion,  like  so  many  executed
malefactors,  whose  names  cannot  be  pronounced  by  the  next  of  kin
without  a  blush.

The  nineteenth  century  is  essentially  the  age  of  demolition.  True,
science  takes  just  pride  in  many  revolutionary  discoveries  and  claims
to  have  immortalized  the  epoch  by  forcing  from  Dame  Nature  some  of
her  most  important  secrets.  But  for  every  inch  she  illumines  of  the
narrow  and  circular  path  within  whose  limits  she  has  hitherto  trodden,
what  unexplored  boundless  stretches  have  been  left  behind  ?  The
worst  is  that  science  has  not  simply  withheld  her  light  from  these
regions  that  seem  dark  (but  are  not),  but  her  votaries  try  their  best  to
quench  the  lights  of  other  people  under  the  pretext  that  they  are  not
authorities,  and  their  friendly  beacons  are  but  "will-o'-the-wisps."
Prejudice  and  preconceived  ideas  have  entered  the  public  brain,  and,
cancer-like,  are  eating  it  to  the  core.  Spiritualism — or,  if  some  for
whom  the  word  has  become  so  unpopular  prefer  it,  the  universe  of

(NEW)    YORK   AGAINST   EANKESTER.  85

spirit — is  left  to  fight  out  its  battle  with  the  world  of  matter,  and  the
crisis  is  at  hand.

Half- thinkers,  and  aping,  would-be  philosophers — in  short,  that
class  which  is  unable  to  penetrate  events  any  deeper  than  their  crust,
and  which  measures  every  day's  occurrences  by  its  present  aspect,
unmindful  of  the  past  and  careless  of  the  future — heartily  rejoice  over
the  latest  rebuff  given  to  phenomenalism  in  the  Lankester-Donkin
offensive  and  defensive  alliance,  and  the  pretended  exposure  of  Slade.
In  this  hour  of  would-be  Lancastrian  triumph,  a  change  should  be
made  in  English  heraldic  crests.  The  Lancasters  were  always  given
to  creating  dissensions  and  provoking  strife  among  peaceable  folk.
From  ancient  York  the  War  of  the  Roses  is  now  transferred  to  Middle-
sex, and  Lankester  (whose  name  is  a  corruption),  instead  of  uniting
himself  with  the  hereditary  foe,  has  joined  his  idols  with  those  of
Donkin  (whose  name  is  evidently  also  a  corruption).  As  the  hero  of
the  hour  is  not  a  knight,  but  a  zoologist  deeply  versed  in  the  science
to  which  he  devotes  his  talents,  why  not  compliment  his  ally  by  quar-
tering the  red  rose  of  Lancaster  with  the  downy  thistle  so  delicately
appreciated  by  a  certain  prophetic  quadruped,  who  seeks  for  it  by  the
wayside?  Really,  Mr.  Editor,  when  Mr.  Lankester  tells  us  that  all
those  who  believe  in  Dr.  Slade's  phenomena  "are  lost  to  reason,"  we
must  accord  to  biblical  animals  a  decided  precedence  over  modern
ones.  The  ass  of  Balaam  had  at  least  the  faculty  of  perceiving  spirits,
while  some  of  those  who  bray  in  our  academies  and  hospitals  show  no
evidence  of  its  possession.     Sad  degeneration  of  species!

Such  persons  as  these  bound  all  spiritual  phenomena  in  Nature  by
the  fortunes  and  mishaps  of  mediums;  each  new  favourite,  they  think,
must  of  necessity  pull  down  in  his  fall  an  unscientific  hypothetical
"Unseen  Universe,"  as  the  tumbling  red  dragon  of  the  Apocalypse
drew  with  his  tail  the  third  part  of  the  stars  of  heaven.  Poor  blind
moles!  They  perceive  not  that  by  inveighing  against  the  "craze"  of
such  phenomenalists  as  Wallace,  Crookes,  Wagner  and  Thury,  they
only  help  the  spread  of  true  Spiritualism.  We  millions  of  lunatics
really  ought  to  address  a  vote  of  thanks  to  the  "dishevelled"  Beards
who  make  supererogatory  efforts  to  appear  as  stupid  clodpoles  to
deceive  the  Eddys,  and  to  Lankesters  simulating  "astonishment  and
intense  interest,"  the  better  to  cheat  Dr.  Slade.  More  than  any  advo-
cates of  phenomenalism,  they  bring  its  marvels  into  public  notice  by
their  pyrotechnic  exposures.

86  A    MODERN    PANARION.

As  one  entrusted  by  the  Russian  Committee  with  the  delicate  task
of  selecting  a  medium  for  the  coming  St.  Petersburg  experiments,  and
as  an  officer  of  the  Theosophieal  Society,  which  put  Dr.  Slade's  powers
to  the  test  in  a  long  series  of  seances,  I  pronounce  him  not  only  a
genuine  medium,  but  one  of  the  best  and  least  fraudulent  mediums
ever  developed.  From  personal  experience  I  can  not  only  testify  to
the  genuineness  of  his  slate-writing,  but  also  to  that  of  the  materializa-
tions which  occur  in  his  presence.  A  shawl  thrown  over  a  chair
(which  I  was  invited  to  place  wherever  I  chose)  is  all  the  cabinet  he
exacts,  and  his  apparitions  immediately  appear,  and  that  in  gas-light.

No  one  will  charge  me  with  a  superfluous  confidence  in  the  person-
ality of  materializing  apparitions,  or  a  superabundance  of  love  for
them;  but  honour  and  truth  compel  me  to  affirm  that  those  who
appeared  to  me  in  Slade's  presence  were  real  phantoms,  and  not  "made
up"  confederates  or  dolls.  They  were  evanescent  and  filmy,  and  the
only  ones  I  have  seen  in  America  which  have  reminded  me  of  those
that  the  Adepts  of  India  evoke.  Like  the  latter,  they  formed  and
dissolved  before  my  eyes,  their  substance  rising  mist-like  from  the
floor,  and  gradually  condensing.  Their  eyes  moved  and  their  lips
smiled;  but  as  they  stood  near  me  their  forms  were  so  transparent  that
through  them  I  could  see  the  objects  in  the  room.  These  I  call  gemiine
spiritual  substances,  whereas  the  opaque  ones  that  I  have  seen  else-
where were  nothing  but  animated  forms  of  matter — whatever  they  be
— with  sweating  hands  and  a  peculiar  odour,  which  I  am  not  called
upon  to  define  at  this  time.

Everyone  knows  that  Dr.  Slade  is  not  acquainted  with  foreign  lan-
guages, and  yet  at  our  first  se'ance,  three  years  ago,  on  the  day  after  my
arrival  in  New  York,  where  no  one  knew  me,  I  received  upon  his  slate
a  long  communication  in  Russian.  I  had  purposely  avoided  giving
either  to  Dr.  Slade  or  his  partner,  Mr.  Simmons,  any  clue  to  my  nation-
ality, and  while,  from  my  accent,  they  would  of  course  have  detected
that  I  was  not  an  American,  they  could  not  possibly  have  known  from
what  country  I  came.  I  fancy  that  if  Dr.  Lankester  had  allowed  Slade
to  write  on  both  knees  and  both  elbows  successively  or  simultaneously,
the  poor  man  would  not  have  been  able  to  turn  out  Russian  messages
by  trick  and  device.

In  reading  the  accounts  in  the  London  papers,  it  has  struck  me  as
very  remarkable  that  this  "vagrant"  medium,  after  baffling  such  a  host
of.  savants,  should  have  fallen  so  easy  a  victim  to  the  zoologico-osteological

(NEW)   YORK   AGAINST   LANKESTER.  87

brace  of  scientific  detectives.  Fraud,  that  neither  the  "psychic"  Ser-
jeant Cox,  nor  the  "unconsciously  cerebrating"  Carpenter,  nor  the  wise
Wallace,  nor  the  experienced  M.A.  (Oxon.),  nor  the  cautious  Lord
Rayleigh — who,  mistrusting  his  own  acuteness,  employed  a  professional
juggler  to  attend  the  seance  with  him — nor  Dr.  Carter  Blake,  nor  a
host  of  other  competent  observers  could  detect,  was  seen  by  the  eagle
eyes  of  the  Lankester-Donkin  Gemini  at  a  single  glance.  There  has
been  nothing  like  it  since  Beard,  of  electro-hay  fever  and  Eddy  fame,
denounced  the  faculty  of  Yale  for  a  set  of  asses,  because  they  would
not  accept  his  divinely-inspired  revelation  of  the  secret  of  mind-reading,
and  pitied  the  imbecility  of  that  "amiable  idiot,"  Col.  Olcott,  for
trusting  his  own  two-months'  observation  of  the  Eddy  phenomena  in
preference  to  the  electric  doctor's  single  sc'ance  of  an  hour.

I    am  an  American   citizen  in    embryo,   Mr.   Editor,   and   I   cannot
hope  that  the  English  magistrates  of  Bow  Street  will  listen  to  a  voice
that  comes  from  a  city  proverbially  held  in  small  esteem  by  British
scientists.     When  Prof.  Tyndall  asks  Prof.  Youmans  if  the  New  York
carpenters    could   make  him    a  screen   ten    feet  long  for  his   Cooper
Institute  lectures,  and  whether  it  would  be  necessary  to  send  to  Boston
for  a  cake  of  ice  that  he  wished  to  use  in  the  experiments;  and  when
Huxley  evinces  grateful  surprise  that  a  "foreigner"  could  express  him-
self in  your  (our)  language  in  such  a  way  as  to  be  so  readily  intelli-
gible, "to  all  appearance,"  by  a  New  York  audience,  and  that  those
clever  chaps — the  New  York  reporters — could  report  him  despite  his
accent,  neither  New  York  "spooks,"  nor  I,  can  hope  for  a  standing  in  a
London  court,  when  the  defendant  is  prosecuted  by  English  scientists.
But,  fortunately  for  Dr.  Slade,  British  tribunals  are  not  inspired  by  the
Jesuits,  and  so  Slade  may  escape  the  fate  of  Eeymarie.     He  certainly
will,  if  he  is  allowed  to  summon  to  the  witness-stand  his  Owasso  and
other  devoted  "controls,"  to  write  their  testimony  inside  a  double  slate,
furnished   and   held   by  the  magistrate  himself.     This  is   Dr.  Slade's
golden  hour;  he  will  never  have  so  good  a  chance  to  demonstrate  the
reality  of  phenomenal  manifestations,  and  make  Spiritualism  triumph
over  scepticism;  and  we,  who  know  the  doctor's  wonderful  powers,  are
confident  that  he  can  do  it,  if  he  is  assisted  by  those  who  in  the  past
have  accomplished  so  much  through  his  instrumentality.

H.  P.  Blavatskv,
Corresponding  Secretary  of  the  Theosophical  Society.

New  York,  Oct.  8th,  1S76.

HUXLEY    AND    SLADE.

[From  The  Banner  of  Light,  Oct.  28th,  1876.]

As  I  see  the  issue  that  has  been  raised  by  Dr.  Hallock  with  Mr.
Huxley,  it  suggests  to  me  the  comparison  of  two  men  looking  at  the
same  distant  object  through  a  telescope.  The  Doctor,  having  taken
the  usual  precautions,  brings  the  object  within  close  range  where  it
can  be  studied  at  one's  leisure;  but  the  naturalist,  having  forgotten  to
remove  the  cap,  sees  only  the  reflection  of  his  own  image.

Though  the  materialists  may  find  it  hard  to  answer  even  the  brief
criticisms  of  the  Doctor,  yet  it  appears  that  Mr.  Huxley's  New  York
lectures — as  they  present  themselves  to  me  in  their  naked  desolation —
suggest  one  paramount  idea  which  Dr.  Hallock  has  not  touched  upon.
I  need  scarcely  say  to  you,  who  must  have  read  the  report  of  these
would-be  iconoclastic  lectures,  that  this  idea  is  one  of  the  "  false  pre-
tences" of  Modern  Science.  After  all  the  flourish  which  attended  his
coming,  all  the  expectations  that  had  been  aroused,  all  the  secret
apprehensions  of  the  church  and  the  anticipated  triumph  of  the  mate-
rialists, what  did  he  teach  us  that  was  really  new  or  so  extremely
suggestive?  Nothing,  positively  nothing.  Exclude  a  sight  of  his  per-
sonality, the  sound  of  his  well-trained  voice,  the  reflection  of  his  scien-
tific glory,  and  the  result  may  be  summed  up  thus:  "Cr.,  Thomas  H.
Huxley,  ^1,000."

Of  him  it  may  be  said,  as  it  has  been  of  other  teachers  before,  that
what  he  said  that  was  new  was  not  true;  and  that  which  was  true  was
not  new.

Without  going  into  details,  for  the  moment,  it  suffices  to  say  that  the
materialistic  theory  of  evolution  is  far  from  being  demonstrated,  while
the  thought  that  Mr.  Huxley  does  not  grasp — i.e.,  the  double  evolution
of  spirit  and  matter — is  imparted  under  the  form  of  various  legends  in
the  oldest  parts  of  the  Rig  Veda  (the  Aitareya  Brahmand).  Only  these
benighted  Hindus,  it  seems,  made  the  trifling  improvement  over  Modern

HUXLEY   AND    SLADE.  89

Science,  of  hooking  a  First  Cause  on  to  the  further  end  of  the  chain  of
evolution.

In  the  Chaturhotri  Mantra  (Book  V  of  the  Aitareya  Brahmana)  the
Goddess  Eath  (Iyam),  who  is  termed  the  Queen  of  the  Serpents  (Sarpa),
for  she  is  the  mother  of  everything  that  moves  (Sarpat),  was  in  the
beginning  of  time  completely  bald.  She  was  nothing  but  one  round
head,  which  was  soft  to  the  touch,  i.e.,  "a  gelatinous  mass."  Being  dis-
tressed at  her  baldness,  she  called  for  help  to  the  great  Yayu,  the  Lord
of  the  airy  regions;  she  prayed  him  to  teach  her  the  Mantra  (invoca-
tion or  sacrificial  prayer — a  certain  part  of  the  Veda),  which  would
confer  on  her  the  magical  power  of  creating  things  (generation).  He
complied,  and  then  as  soon  as  the  Mantra  was  pronounced  by  her  "in
the  proper  metre"  she  found  herself  covered  with  hair  (vegetation).
She  was  now  hard  to  the  touch,  for  the  Lord  of  the  air  had  breathed
upon  her — the  globe  had  cooled.  She  had  become  of  a  variegated  or
motley  appearance,  and  suddenly  acquired  the  power  to  produce  out  of
herself  every  animate  and  inanimate  form,  and  to  change  one  form  to
another.

Therefore  in  like  manner  [says  the  sacred  book]  the  man  who  has  such  a  know-
ledge [of  the  Mantras]  obtains  the  faculty  of  assuming  any  shape  or  form  he  likes.

It  will  scarcely  be  said  that  this  allegory  is  capable  of  more  than  one
interpretation,  viz.,  that  the  ancient  Hindus,  many  centuries  before  the
Christian  era,  taught  the  doctrine  of  evolution.  Martin  Haug,  the
Sanskrit  scholar,  asserts  that  the  Vedas  were  already  in  existence  from
2,000  to  2,200  B.C.

Thus,  while  the  theory  of  evolution  is  nothing  new.  and  may  be  con-
sidered a  proven  fact,  the  new  ideas  forced  upon  the  public  by  Mr.
Huxley  are  only  undemonstrated  hypotheses,  and  as  such  liable  to  be
exploded  the  first  fine  day  upon  the  discovery  of  some  new  fact.  We
£nd  no  admission  of  this,  however,  in  Mr.  Huxley's  communications  to
the  public;  but  the  unproved  theories  are  enunciated  with  as  much
boldness  as  though  they  were  established  scientific  facts,  corroborated
by  unerring  laws  of  Nature.  Notwithstanding  this  the  world  is  asked
to  revere  the  great  evolutionist,  only  because  he  stands  under  the
shadow  of  a  great  name.

What  is  this  but  one  of  the  many  false  pretences  of  the  sciolists1
And  yet  Huxley  and  his  admirers  charge  the  believers  in  the  evolution
of  spirit  with  the  same  crime  of  false  pretences,  because,  forsooth,  our
theories  are  as  yet  undemonstrated.      Those  who  believe  in   Slade's

9°

A    MODERN    PANARION.

spirits  are  "lost  to  reason,"  while  those  who  can  see  embryonic  man  in
Huxley's  "gelatinous  mass"  are  accepted  as  the  progressive  minds  of
the  age.  Slade  is  arraigned  before  the  magistrate  for  taking  $5  from
Lankester,  while  Huxley  triumphantly  walks  away  with  $5,000  of
American  gold  in  his  pockets,  which  was  paid  him  for  imparting  to  us
the  mirific  fact  that  man  evolved  from  the  hind  toe  of  a  pedactyl  horse!

Now,  arguing  from  the  standpoint  of  strict  justice,  in  what  respect
is  a  materialistic  theorist  any  better  than  a  spiritualistic  one?  And
in  what  degree  is  the  evolution  of  man — independent  of  divine  and
spiritual  interference — better  proven  by  the  toe-bone  of  an  extinct
horse,  than  the  evolution  and  survival  of  the  human  spirit  by  the
writing  upon  a  screwed-up  slate  by  some  unseen  power  or  powers?
And  yet  again,  the  soulless  Huxley  sails  away  laden  with  flowers  like
a  fashionable  corpse,  conquering  and  to  conquer  in  fresh  fields  of  glory,
while  the  poor  medium  is  hauled  before  a  police  magistrate  as  a  "  vagrant
and  a  swindler,"  without  proof  enough  to  sustain  the  charge  before  an
unprejudiced  tribunal.

There  is  good  authority  for  the  statement  that  psychological  science
is  a  debatable  land  upon  which  the  modern  physiologist  hardly  dares
to  venture.  I  deeply  sympathize  with  the  embarrassed  student  of  the
physical  side  of  Nature.  We  all  can  readily  understand  how  disagree-
able it  must  be  to  a  learned  theorist,  ever  aspiring  for  the  elevation  of
his  hobby  to  the  dignity  of  an  accepted  scientific  truth,  constantly  to
receive  the  lie  direct  from  his  remorseless  and  untiring  antagonist —
psychology.  To  see  his  cherished  materialistic  theories  become  every
day  more  untenable,  until  they  are  reduced  to  the  condition  of  mummies
swathed  in  shrouds,  self-woven  and  inscribed  with  a  farrago  of  pet
sophistries,  is  indeed  hard.  And  in  their  self-satisfying  logic,  these
sons  of  matter  reject  every  testimony  but  their  own:  the  divine  entity
of  the  Socratic  daimonion,  the  ghost  of  Caesar,  and  Cicero's  Divinum
Quidam,  they  explain  by  epilepsy;  and  the  prophetic  oracles  of  the
Jewish  Bath-Kol  are  set  down  as  hereditary  hysteria!

And  now,  supposing  the  great  protoplasmist  to  have  proved  to  the
general  satisfaction  that  the  present  horse  is  an  effect  of  a  gradual
development  from  the  Orohippus,  or  four-toed  horse  of  the  Eocene  for-
mation, which,  passing  further  through  Miocene  and  Pliocene  periods,
has  become  the  modern  honest  Equus,  does  Huxley  thereby  prove  that
man  has  also  developed  from  a  one-toed  human  being?  For  nothing
short  of  that  could  demonstrate  his  theory.     To  be  consistent  he  must.

HUXLEY   AND   SLADE.  9 1

show  that  while  the  horse  was  losing  at  each  successive  period  a  toe,,
man  has  in  reversed  order  acquired  an  additional  one  at  each  new  for-
mation; and  unless  we  are  shown  the  fossilized  remains  of  man  in  a
series  of  one-,  two-,  three-  and  four-toed  anthropoid  ape-like  beings-
antecedent  to  the  present  perfected  Homo,  what  does  Huxley's  theory
amount  to?  Nobody  doubts  that  everything  has  evolved  out  of  some-
thing prior  to  itself.  But,  as  it  is,  he  leaves  us  hopelessly  in  doubt
whether  it  is  man  who  is  a  hippar ionic  ox  equine  evolution,  or  the  ante-
diluvian Equits  that  evolved  from  the  primitive  genus  Homo!

Thus  to  apply  the  argument  to  Slade's  case  we  may  say  that,  whether
the  messages  on  his  slate  indicate  an  authorship  among  the  returning
spirits  of  antediluvian  monkeys,  or  the  bravos  and  L,ankestrian  ances-
tors of  our  day,  he  is  no  more  guilty  of  false  pretences  than  the  $5,000
evolutionist.  Hypothesis,  whether  of  scientist  or  medium,  is  no  false
pretence;  but  unsupported  assertion  is,  when  people  are  charged  money
for  it.

If,  satisfied  with  the  osseous  fragments  of  a  Hellenized  or  Latinized
skeleton,  we  admit  that  there  is  a  physical  evolution,  by  what  logic  can
we  refuse  to  credit  the  possibility  of  an  evolution  of  spirit?  That  there
are  two  sides  to  the  question,  no  one  but  an  utter  psychophobist  will
deny.  It  may  be  argued  that  even  if  the  Spiritualists  have  demonstrated
their  bare  facts,  their  philosophy  is  not  complete,  since  it  has  missing
links.  But  no  more  have  the  evolutionists.  They  have  fossil  remains
which  prove  that  once  upon  a  time  the  ancestors  of  the  modern  horse
were  blessed  with  three  and  even  four  toes  and  fingers,  the  fourth
"answering  to  the  little  finger  of  the  human  hand,"  and  that  the  Proto-
hippus  rejoiced  in  "a  fore-arm" ;  Spiritualists  in  their  turn  exhibit  entire
hands,  arms,  and  even  bodies  in  support  of  their  theory  that  the  dead
still  live  and  revisit  us.  For  my  part  I  cannot  see  that  the  osteologists
have  the  better  of  them.  Both  follow  the  inductive  or  purely  scientific
method,  proceeding  from  particulars  to  universals;  thus  Cuvier,  upon
finding  a  small  bone,  traced  around  it  imaginary  lines  until  he  had  built
up  from  his  prolific  fancy  a  whole  mammoth.  The  data  of  scientists-
are  no  more  certain  than  those  of  Spiritualists;  and  while  the  former
have  but  their  modern  discoveries  upon  which  to  build  their  theories,
Spiritualists  may  cite  the  evidence  of  a  succession  of  ages,  which  began
long  prior  to  the  advent  of  Modern  Science.

An  inductive  hypothesis,  we  are  told,  is  demonstrated  when  the  facts
are  shown  to  be  in  entire  accordance  with  it.     Thus,  if  Huxley  possesses

92

A   MODERN    PANARION.

conclusive  evidence  of  the  evolution  of  man  in  the  genealogy  of  the
horse,  Spiritualists  can  equally  claim  that  proof  of  the  evolution  of
spirit  out  of  the  body  is  furnished  in  the  materialized,  more  or  less
substantial,  limbs  that  float  in  the  dark  shadows  of  the  cabinet,  and
often  in  full  light — a  phenomenon  which  has  been  recognized  and
attested  by  numberless  generations  of  wise  men  of  every  country.  As
to  the  pretended  superiority  of  modern  over  ancient  science,  wTe  have
only  the  word  of  the  former  for  it.  This  is  also  an  hypothesis;  better
evidence  is  required  to  prove  the  fact.  We  have  but  to  turn  to  Wendell
Phillips's  lecture  on  the  Lost  Arts  to  have  a  certain  right  to  doubt  the
assurance  of  Modern  Science.

Speaking  of  evidence,  it  is  strange  what  different  and  arbitrary
values  may  be  placed  upon  the  testimony  of  different  men  equally
trustworthy  and  well-meaning.     Says  the  parent  of  protoplasm :

It  is  impossible  that  one's  practical  life  should  not  be  more  or  less  influenced  by
the  views  which  he  ma}'  hold  as  to  what  has  been  the  past  history  of  things.  One
of  them  is  human  testimony  in  its  various  shapes — all  testimony  of  eye-witnesses,
traditional  testimony  from  the  lips  of  those  who  have  been  eye-witnesses,  and  the
testimony  of  those  who  have  put  their  impressions  into  writing  or  into  print.

On  just  such  testimony,  amply  furnished  in  the  Bible  (evidence
which  Mr.  Huxley  rejects),  and  in  many  other  less  problematical
authors  than  Moses,  among  whom  may  be  reckoned  generations  of
great  philosophers,  theurgists,  and  laymen.  Spiritualists  have  a  right
to  base  their  fundamental  doctrines.  Speaking  further  of  the  broad
distinction  to  be  drawn  between  the  different  kinds  of  evidence,  some
being  less  valuable  than  others,  because  given  upon  grounds  not  clear,
upon  grounds  illogically  stated  and  upon  such  as  do  not  bear  thorough
and  careful  inspection,  the  same  gelatinist  remarks:

For  example,  if  I  read  in  your  history  of  Tennessee  [Ramsay's]  that  one  hundred
years  ago  this  country  was  peopled  by  wandering  savages,  my  belief  in  this  state-
ment rests  upon  the  conviction  that  Mr.  Ramsay  was  actuated  by  the  same  sort  of
motives  that  men  are  now,  .  .  .  that  he  himself  was,  like  ourselves,  not  inclined
to  make  false  statements.  ...  If  you  read  Caesar's  Commentaries,  wherever  he
gives  an  account  of  his  battles  with  the  Gauls,  you  place  a  certain  amount  of  confi-
dence in  his  statements.  You  take  his  testimony  upon  this,  you  feel  that  Caesar
would  not  have  made  these  statements  unless  he  had  believed  them  to  be  true.

Profound  philosophy!  precious  thoughts!  gems  of  condensed,  gelati-
nous truth!  long  may  it  stick  to  the  American  mind!  Mr.  Huxley
ought  to  devote  the  rest  of  his  days  to  writing  primers  for  the  feeble-
minded adults  of  the  United  States.     But  why  select  Caesar  as  the  type

HUXLEY   AND   SLADE.  93

of  the  trustworthy  witness  of  ancient  times?  And  if  we  must  im-
plicitly credit  his  reports  of  battles,  why  not  his  profession  of  faith  in
augurs,  diviners  and  apparitions? — for  in  common  with  his  wife,  Cal-
purnia,  he  believed  in  them  as  firmly  as  any  modern  Spiritualist  in
his  mediums  and  phenomena.  We  also  feel  that  no  more  than  Caesar
would  such  men  as  Cicero  and  Herodotus  and  L,ivy  and  a  host  of
others  "have  made  these  false  statements,"  or  reported  such  things
"unless  they  believed  them  to  be  true."

It  has  already  been  shown  that  the  doctrine  of  evolution,  as  a  whole,
was  taught  in  the  Rig  Veda,  and  I  may  also  add  that  it  can  be  found  in
the  most  ancient  of  the  books  of  Hermes.  This  is  bad  enough  for  the
claim  to  originality  set  up  by  our  modern  scientists,  but  what  shall  be
said  when  we  recall  the  fact  that  the  very  pedactyl  horse,  the  finding  of
whose  footprints  has  so  overjoyed  Mr.  Huxley,  was  mentioned  by
ancient  writers  (Herodotus  and  Pliny,  if  I  mistake  not),  and  was  once
outrageously  laughed  at  by  the  French  Academicians?  Let  those  who
wish  to  verify  the  fact  read  Salverti's  Philosophy  of  Occult  Science,  trans-
lated by  Todd  Thompson.

Some  day  proofs  as  conclusive  will  be  discovered  of  the  reliability  of
the  ancient  writers  as  to  their  evidence  on  psychological  matters.  What
Niebuhr,  the  German  materialist,  did  with  Livy's  History,  from  which  he
eliminated  every  one  of  the  multitude  of  facts  of  phenomenal  "Super-
naturalism,"  scientists  now  seem  to  have  tacitly  agreed  to  do  with  all
the  ancient,  mediaeval  and  modern  authors.  What  they  narrate,  that
can  be  used  to  bolster  up  the  physical  part  of  science,  scientists  accept
and  sometimes  coolly  appropriate  without  credit;  what  supports  the
Spiritualistic  philosophy  they  incontinently  reject  as  mythical  and
contrary  to  the  order  of  Nature.  In  such  cases  "evidence"  and  the
"testimony  of  eye-witnesses"  count  for  nothing.  They  adopt  the
contrary  course  to  Lord  Verulam,  who,  arguing  on  the  properties  of
amulets  and  charms,  remarks  that:

We  should  not  reject  all  this  kind,  because  it  is  not  known  how  far  those  con-
tributing to  superstition  depend  on  natural  causes.

There  can  be  no  real  enfranchisement  of  human  thought  nor  expan-
sion of  scientific  discovery  until  the  existence  of  spirit  is  recognized,
and  the  double  evolution  accepted  as  a  fact.  Until  then,  false  theories
will  always  find  favour  with  those  who,  having  forsaken  "the  God  of
their  fathers,"  vainly  strive  to  find  substitutes  in  nucleated  masses  of
matter.     And  of  all  the  sad  things  to  be  seen  in  this  era  of  "shams,"

94  A    MODERN    PANARION.

none  is  more  deplorable — though  its  futility  is  often  ludicrous — than  the
conspiracy  of  certain  scientists  to  stamp  out  spirit  by  their  one-sided
theory  of  evolution,  and  destroy  Spiritualism  by  arraigning  its  mediums
upon  the  charge  of  "false  pretences."

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

CAN  THE  DOUBLE  MURDER.'

To  the  Editor  of  "  The  Sun."

Sir, — One  morning  in  1867  Eastern  Europe  was  startled  by  news  of
the  most  horrifying  description.  Michael  Obrenovitch,  reigning  Prince
of  Serbia,  his  aunt,  the  Princess  Catherine,  or  Katinka,  and  her  daugh-
ter had  been  murdered  in  broad  daylight,  near  Belgrade,  in  their  own
garden,  assassin  or  assassins  remaining  unknown.  The  Prince  had
received  several  bullet- shots  and  stabs,  and  his  body  was  actually
butchered;  the  Princess  was  killed  on  the  spot,  her  head  smashed,  and
her  young  daughter,  though  still  alive,  was  not  expected  to  survive.
The  circumstances  are  too  recent  to  have  been  forgotten,  but  in  that
part  of  the  world,  at  the  time,  the  case  created  a  delirium  of  excitement.

In  the  Austrian  dominions  and  in  those  under  the  doubtful  pro-
tectorate of  Turke)r,  from  Bucharest  down  to  Trieste,  no  high  family
felt  secure.  In  those  half-Oriental  countries  every  Montecchi  has  its
Capuletti,  and  it  was  rumoured  that  the  bloody  deed  was  perpetrated
by  the  Prince  Kara-Gueorguevitch,  or  "Tzerno-Gueorgey,"  as  he  is
usually  called  in  those  parts.  Several  persons  innocent  of  the  act  were,
as  is  usual  in  such  cases,  imprisoned,  and  the  real  murderers  escaped
justice.  A  young  relative  of  the  victim,  greatly  beloved  by  his  people,
a  mere  child,  taken  for  the  purpose  from  a  school  in  Paris,  was  brought
over  in  ceremony  to  Belgrade  and  proclaimed  Hospodar  of  Serbia.  In
the  turmoil  of  political  excitement  the  tragedy  of  Belgrade  was  for-
gotten by  all  but  an  old  Serbian  matron  who  had  been  attached  to  the
Obrenovitch  family,  and  who,  like  Rachel,  would  not  be  comforted  for
the  death  of  her  children.  After  the  proclamation  of  the  young  Obreno-
vitch, nephew  of  the  murdered  man,  she  had  sold  out  her  property  and
disappeared;  but  not  before  taking  a  solemn  vow  on  the  tombs  of  the
victims  to  avenge  their  deaths.

The  writer   of  this   truthful   narrative    had    passed    a   few  days    at
Belgrade,  about  three  months  before  the  horrid  deed  was  perpetrated,

96  A   MODERN    PANARION.

and  knew  the  Princess  Katinka.  She  was  a  kind,  gentle,  and  lazy
creature  at  home;  abroad  she  seemed  a  Parisienne  in  manners  and
education.  As  nearly  all  the  personages  who  will  figure  in  this  true
story  are  still  living,  it  is  but  decent  that  I  should  withhold  their
names,  and  give  only  initials.

The  old  Serbian  lady  seldom  left  her  house,  going  but  to  see  the
Princess  occasionally.  Crouched  on  a  pile  of  pillows  and  carpeting,
clad  in  the  picturesque  national  dress,  she  looked  like  the  Cumsean
sibyl  in  her  days  of  calm  repose.  Strange  stories  were  whispered
about  her  Occult  knowledge,  and  thrilling  accounts  circulated  some-
times among  the  guests  assembled  round  the  fireside  of  the  modest
inn.  Our  fat  landlord's  maiden  aunt's  cousin  had  been  troubled  for
some  time  past  by  a  wandering  vampire,  and  had  been  bled  nearly  to
death  by  the  nocturnal  visitor,  and  while  the  efforts  and  exorcisms  of
the  parish  pope  had  been  of  no  avail,  the  victim  was  luckily  delivered

by  Gospoja  P ,  who  had  put  to  flight  the  disturbing  ghost  by  merely

shaking  her  fist  at  him,  and  shaming  him  in  his  own  language.  It
was  in  Belgrade  that  I  learned  for  the  first  time  this  highly-interesting
fact  in  philology,  namely,  that  spooks  have  a  language  of  their  own.

The  old  lady,  whom  I  will  call  Gospoja  P ,  was  generally  attended

by  another  personage  destined  to  be  the  principal  actress  in  our  tale  of
horror.  It  was  a  young  gipsy  girl  from  some  part  of  Roumania,  about
fourteen  years  of  age.  Where  she  was  born,  and  who  she  was,  she  seemed
to  know  as  little  as  anyone  else.  I  was  told  she  had  been  brought  one
day  by  a  party  of  strolling  gipsies,  and  left  in  the  yard  of  the  old  lady,
from  which  moment  she  became  an  inmate  of  the  house.  She  was
nicknamed  "the  sleeping  girl,"  as  she  was  said  to  be  gifted  with  the
faculty  of  apparently  dropping  asleep  wherever  she  stood,  and  speak-
ing her  dreams  aloud.     The  girl's  heathen  name  was  Frosya.

About  eighteen  months  after  the  news  of  the  murder  had  reached
Italy,  where  I  was  at  the  time,  I  travelled  over  the  Banat  in  a  small
waggon  of  my  own,  hiring  a  horse  whenever  I  needed  one.  I  met
on  my  way  an  old  Frenchman,  a  scientist,  travelling  alone  after  my
own  fashion,  but  with  the  difference  that  while  he  was  a  pedestrian,
I  dominated  the  road  from  the  eminence  of  a  throne  of  dry  hay  in  a
jolting  waggon.  I  discovered  him  one  fine  morning  slumbering  in  a
wilderness  of  shrubs  and  flowers,  and  had  nearly  passed  over  him,
absorbed  as  I  was  in  the  contemplation  of  the  surrounding  glorious
scenery.      The   acquaintance   was   soon   made,   no   great  ceremony  of

CAN  THE  DOUBLE  MURDER?  97

mutual  introduction  being  needed.  I  had  heard  his  name  mentioned
in  circles  interested  in  mesmerism,  and  knew  him  to  be  a  powerful
adept  of  the  school  of  Dupotet.

"I  have  found,"  he  remarked,  in  the  course  of  the  conversation  after
I  had  made  him  share  my  seat  of  hay,  "one  of  the  most  wonderful
subjects  in  this  lovely  Thebaide.  I  have  an  appointment  to-night  with
the  family.  They  are  seeking  to  unravel  the  mystery  of  a  murder  by
means  of  the  clairvoyance  of  the  girl     .     .     .     she  is  wonderful ! "

"Who  is  she?"  I  asked.

"A  Roumanian  gipsy.  She  was  brought  up,  it  appears,  in  the  family
of  the  Serbian  reigning  Prince,  who  reigns  no  more,  for  he  was  very

mysteriously  mur Halloo,  take  care!     Diable,  you  will  upset  us

over  the  precipice!"  he  hurriedly  exclaimed,  unceremoniously  snatch-
ing from  me  the  reins,  and  giving  the  horse  a  violent  pull.

"You  do  not  mean  Prince  Obrenovitch?"  I  asked  aghast.

"Yes,  I  do;  and  him  precisely.  To-night  I  have  to  be  there,  hoping
to  close  a  series  of  seances  by  finally  developing  a  most  marvellous
manifestation  of  the  hidden  power  of  the  human  spirit;  and  you  may
come  with  me.  I  will  introduce  you;  and  besides,  you  can  help  me  as
an  interpreter,  for  they  do  not  speak  French."

As  I  was  pretty  sure  that  if  the  somnambule  was  Frosya,  the  rest  of

the  family  must  be  Gospoja  P ,  I  readily  accepted.     At  sunset  we

were  at  the  foot  of  the  mountain,  leading  to  the  old  castle,  as  the
Frenchman  called  the  place.  It  fully  deserved  the  poetical  name  given
it.  There  was  a  rough  bench  in  the  depths  of  one  of  the  shadowy
retreats,  and  as  we  stopped  at  the  entrance  of  this  poetical  place,  and
the  Frenchman  was  gallantly  busying  himself  with  my  horse  on  the
suspicious-looking  bridge  which  led  across  the  water  to  the  entrance
gate,  I  saw  a  tall  figure  slowly  rise  from  the  bench  and  come
towards  us.

It  was  my  old  friend  Gospoja  P ,  looking  more  pale  and  more

mysterious  than  ever.  She  exhibited  no  surprise  at  seeing  me,  but
simply  greeting  me  after  the  Serbian  fashion,  with  a  triple  kiss  on  both
cheeks,  she  took  hold  of  my  hand  and  led  me  straight  to  the  nest  of
ivy.  Half  reclining  on  a  small  carpet  spread  on  the  tall  grass,  with
her  back  leaning  against  the  wall,  I  recognized  our  Frosya.

She  was  dressed  in  the  national  costume  of  the  Wallachian  women,
a  sort  of  gauze  turban  intermingled  with  various  gilt  medals  and  bands
on  her  head,  white  shirt  with  opened  sleeves,  and  petticoats  of  varie-

8

98  A   MODERN   PANARION.

gated  colours.  Her  face  looked  deadly  pale,  her  eyes  were  closed,
and  her  countenance  presented  that  stony,  sphinx-like  look  which
characterizes  in  such  a  peculiar  way  the  entranced  clairvoyant  som-
nambule.  If  it  were  not  for  the  heaving  motion  of  her  chest  and
bosom,  ornamented  by  rows  of  medals  and  bead  necklaces  which
feebly  tinkled  at  every  breath,  one  might  have  thought  her  dead,  so
lifeless  and  corpse-like  was  her  face.  The  Frenchman  informed  me
that  he  had  sent  her  to  sleep  just  as  we  were  approaching  the  house,
and  that  she  now  was  as  he  had  left  her  the  previous  night;  he  then
began  busying  himself  with  the  sujct,  as  he  called  Frosya.  Paying  no
further  attention  to  us,  he  shook  her  by  the  hand,  and  then  making  a
few  rapid  passes  stretched  out  her  arm  and  stiffened  it.  The  arm,  as
rigid  as  iron,  remained  in  that  position.  He  then  closed  all  her  fingers
but  one — the  middle  finger — which  he  caused  to  point  at  the  evening
star,  which  twinkled  in  the  deep  blue  sky.  Then  he  turned  round
and  went  over  from  right  to  left,  throwing  on  some  of  his  fluids  here,
again  discharging  them  at  another  place;  busying  himself  with  his
invisible  but  potent  fluids,  like  a  painter  with  his  brush  when  giving
the  last  touches  to  a  picture.

The  old  lady,  who  had  silently  watched  him,  with  her  chin  in  her
hand  the  while,  put  her  thin,  skeleton-looking  hands  on  his  arm  and
arrested  it,  as  he  was  preparing  himself  to  begin  the  regular  mesmeric
passes.

"Wait,"  she  whispered,  "till  the  star  is  set  and  the  ninth  hour  com-
pleted. The  Vourdalaki  are  hovering  round;  they  may  spoil  the
influence."

"What  does  she  say?"  enquired  the  mesmerizer,  annoyed  at  her
interference.

I  explained  to  him  that  the  old  lady  feared  the  pernicious  influences
of  the  Vourdalaki.

"Vourdalaki!  What's  that — the  Vourdalaki?"  exclaimed  the  French-
man. "Let  us  be  satisfied  with  Christian  spirits,  if  they  honour  us
to-night  with  a  visit,  and  lose  no  time  for  the  Vourdalaki."

I  glanced  at  the  Gospoja.  She  had  become  deathly  pale  and  her
brow  was  sternly  knitted  over  her  flashing  black  eyes.

"Tell  him  not  to  jest  at  this  hour  of  the  night!"  she  cried.  "He  does
not  know  the  country.  Even  this  holy  church  may  fail  to  protect  us
once  the  Vourdalaki  are  roused.  What's  this?"  pushing  with  her  foot
a  bundle  of  herbs  the  botanizing  mesmerizer  had  laid  near  on  the

CAN  THE  DOUBLE  MURDER?  99

grass.  She  bent  over  the  collection  and  anxiously  examined  the
contents  of  the  bundle,  after  which  she  flung  the  whole  into  the
water.

"It  must   not  be  left   here,"  she  firmly  added;    "these  are  the  St.
John's  plants,  and  they  might 'attract  the  wandering  ones."

Meanwhile  the  night  had  come,  and  the  moon  illuminated  the  land-
scape with  a  pale,  ghostly  light.  The  nights  in  the  Banat  are  nearly
as  beautiful  as  in  the  East,  and  the  Frenchman  had  to  go  on  with  his
experiments  in  the  open  air,  as  the  priest  of  the  church  had  prohibited
such  in  the  tower,  which  was  used  as  the  parsonage,  for  fear  of  filling
the  holy  precincts  with  the  heretical  devils  of  the  mesmerizer,  which,
the  priest  remarked,  he  would  be  unable  to  exorcise  on  account  of
their  being  foreigners.

The  old  gentleman  had  thrown  off  his  travelling  blouse,  rolled  up
his  shirt  sleeves,  and  now,  striking  a  theatrical  attitude,  began  a  regular
process  of  mesmerization.

Under  his  quivering  fingers  the  odile  fluid  actually  seemed  to  flash
in  the  twilight.  Frosya  was  placed  with  her  figure  facing  the  moon,
and  every  motion  of  the  entranced  girl  was  discernible  as  in  daylight.
In  a  few  minutes  large  drops  of  perspiration  appeared  on  her  brow,
and  slowly  rolled  down  her  pale  face,  glittering  in  the  moonbeams.
Then  she  moved  uneasily  about  and  began  chanting  a  low  melody,  to
the  words  of  which  the  Gospoja,  anxiously  bent  over  the  unconscious
girl,  was  listening  with  avidity  and  trying  to  catch  every  syllable.
With  her  thin  finger  on  her  lips,  her  eyes  nearly  starting  from  their
sockets,  her  frame  motionless,  the  old  lady  seemed  herself  transfixed
into  a  statue  of  attention.  The  group  was  a  remarkable  one,  and  I
regretted  that  I  was  not  a  painter.  What  followed  was  a  scene  worthy
to  figure  in  Macbeth.  At  one  side  she,  the  slender  girl,  pale  and  corpse-
like, writhing  under  the  invisible  fluid  of  him  who  for  the  hour  was  her
omnipotent  master;  at  the  other  the  old  matron,  who,  burning  with  her
unquenched  fire  of  revenge,  stood  waiting  for  the  long-expected  name
of  the  Prince's  murderer  to  be  at  last  pronounced.  The  Frenchman
himself  seemed  transfigured,  his  grey  hair  standing  on  end ;  his  bulky
clumsy  form  seemed  to  have  grown  in  a  few  minutes.  All  theatrical
pretence  was  now  gone ;  there  remained  but  the  mesmerizer,  aware  of
his  responsibility,  unconscious  himself  of  the  possible  results,  studying
and  anxiously  expecting.  Suddenly  Frosya,  as  if  lifted  by  some  super-
natural force,  rose  from  her  reclining  posture  and  stood  erect  before  us,

IOO  A   MODERN   PANARION.

again  motionless  and  still,  waiting  for  the  magnetic  fluid  to  direct  her.
The  Frenchman,  silently  taking  the  old  lady's  hand,  placed  it  in  that
of  the  somnambulist,  and  ordered  her  to  put  herself  en  rapport  with
the  Gospoja.

"What  seest  thou,  my  daughter?"  softly  murmured  the  Serbian  lady.
"Can  your  spirit  seek  out  the  murderers?"

"Search  and  behold!"  sternly  commanded  the  mesmerizer,  fixing  his
gaze  upon  the  face  of  the  subject.

"I  am  on  my  way — I  go,"  faintly  whispered  Frosya,  her  voice  seem-
ing not  to  come  from  herself,  but  from  the  surrounding  atmosphere.

At  this  moment  something  so  strange  took  place  that  I  doubt  my
ability  to  describe  it.  A  luminous  vapour  appeared,  closely  surround-
ing the  girl's  body.  At  first  about  an  inch  in  thickness,  it  gradually
expanded,  and,  gathering  itself,  suddenly  seemed  to  break  off  from  the
body  altogether  and  condense  itself  into  a  kind  of  semi-solid  vapour,
which  very  soon  assumed  the  likeness  of  the  somnambule  herself.
Flickering  about  the  surface  of  the  earth  the  form  vacillated  for  two  or
three  seconds,  then  glided  noiselessly  toward  the  river.  It  disappeared
like  a  mist,  dissolved  in  the  moonbeams,  which  seemed  to  absorb  it
altogether.

I  had  followed  the  scene  with  an  intense  attention.  The  mysterious
operation,  known  in  the  East  as  the  evocation  of  the  scin-lecca,  was
taking  place  before  my  own  eyes.  To  doubt  was  impossible,  and
Dupotet  was  right  in  saying  that  mesmerism  is  the  conscious  Magic  of
the  ancients,  and  Spiritualism  the  unconscious  effect  of  the  same  Magic
upon  certain  organisms.

As  soon  as  the  vaporous  double  had  smoked  itself  through  the  pores
of  the  girl,  Gospoja  had,  by  a  rapid  motion  of  the  hand  which  was  left
free,  drawn  from  under  her  pelisse  something  which  looked  to  us  sus-
piciously like  a  small  stiletto,  and  placed  it  as  rapidly  in  the  girl's
bosom.  The  action  was  so  quick  that  the  mesmerizer,  absorbed  in  his
work,  had  not  remarked  it,  as  he  afterwards  told  me.  A  few  minutes
elapsed  in  a  dead  silence.  We  seemed  a  group  of  petrified  persons.
Suddenly  a  thrilling  and  transpiercing  cry  burst  from  the  entranced
girl's  lips,  she  bent  forward,  and  snatching  the  stiletto  from  her  bosom,
plunged  it  furiously  round  her,  in  the  air,  as  if  pursuing  imaginary
foes.  Her  mouth  foamed,  and  incoherent,  wild  exclamations  broke
from  her  lips,  among  which  discordant  sounds  I  discerned  several  times
two  familiar  Christian  names  of  men.     The  mesmerizer  was  so  terrified

CAN  THE    DOUBLE    MURDER?  IOI

that  he  lost  all  control  over  himself,  and  instead  of  withdrawing  the
fluid  he  loaded  the  girl  with  it  still  more.

"Take  care,"  exclaimed  I.  "Stop!  You  will  kill  her,  or  she  will
kill  you!"

But  the  Frenchman  had  unwittingly  raised  subtle  potencies  of  Nature
over  which  he  had  no  control.  Furiously  turning  round,  the  girl  struck
at  him  a  blow  which  would  have  killed  him  had  he  not  avoided  it  by
jumping  aside,  receiving  but  a  severe  scratch  on  the  right  arm.  The
poor  man  was  panic-stricken;  climbing  with  an  extraordinary  agility,
for  a  man  of  his  bulky  form,  on  the  wall  over  her,  he  fixed  himself  on
it  astride,  and  gathering  the  remnants  of  his  will  power,  sent  in  her
direction  a  series  of  passes.  At  the  second,  the  girl  dropped  the
weapon  and  remained  motionless.

"What  are  you  about?"  hoarsely  shouted  the  mesmerizer  in  French,
seated  like  some  monstrous  night-goblin  on  the  wall.  "Answer  me,  I
command  you!"

"I  did  .  .  .  but  what  she  .  .  .  whom  you  ordered  me  to  obey
.  .  .  commanded  me  to  do,"  answered  the  girl  in  French,  to  my
amazement.

"What  did  the  old  witch  command  you?"  irreverently  asked  he.

"To  find  them  .  .  .  who  murdered  .  .  .  kill  them.  .  .  I
did  so  .  .  .  and  they  are  no  more  .  .  .  Avenged!  .  .  .  Avenged!
They  are     .     .     ."

An  exclamation  of  triumph,  a  loud  shout  of  infernal  joy,  rang  loud
in  the  air,  and  awakening  the  dogs  of  the  neighbouring  villages  a
responsive  howl  of  barking  began  from  that  moment,  like  a  ceaseless
echo  of  the  Gospoja's  cry:

"I  am  avenged!  I  feel  it;  I  know  it.  My  warning  heart  tells  me
that  the  fiends  are  no  more."  She  fell  panting  on  the  ground,  drag-
ging down,  in  her  fall,  the  girl,  who  allowed  herself  to  be  pulled  down
as  if  she  were  a  bag  of  wool.

"I  hope  my  subject  did  no  further  mischief  to-night.  She  is  a
dangerous  as  well  as  a  very  wonderful  subject,"  said  the  Frenchman.

We  parted.     Three  days  after  that  I  was   at  T ,  and   as   I  was

sitting  in  the  dining-room  of  a  restaurant,  waiting  for  my  lunch,   I
happened  to  pick  up  a  newspaper,  and  the  first  lines  I  read  ran  thus:
Vienna,  186— .    Two  Mysterious  Deaths.

Last  evening,  at  9.45,  as  P was  about  to  retire,  two  of  the  gentle men-in -wait-
ing suddenly  exhibited  great  terror,  as  though  they  had  seen  a  dreadful  apparition.

102  A   MODERN   PANARION.

They  screamed,  staggered,  and  ran  about  the  room,  holding  up  their  hands  as  if  to
ward  off  the  blows  of  an  unseen  weapon.  They  paid  no  attention  to  the  eager
questions  of  the  prince  and  suite,  but  presently  fell  writhing  upon  the  floor,  and
expired  in  great  agony.  Their  bodies  exhibited  no  appearance  of  apoplexy,  nor
an}'  external  marks  of  wounds,  but,  wonderful  to  relate,  there  were  numerous  dark
spots  and  long  marks  upon  the  skin,  as  though  they  were  stabs  and  slashes  made
without  puncturing  the  cuticle.  The  autopsy  revealed  the  fact  that  beneath  each
of  these  mysterious  discolourations  there  was  a  deposit  of  coagulated  blood.  The
greatest  excitement  prevails,  and  the  faculty  are  unable  to  solve  the  mystery.

Hadji  Mora.
(H.  P.  Blavatsky.)

FAKIRS   AND   TABLES.

[From  the  New  York  Sim,  April  ist,  1877.]

However  ignorant  I  may  be  of  the  laws  of  the  solar  system,  I  am
at  all  events  so  firm  a  believer  in  heliocentric  journalism  that  I  sub-
scribe some  remarks  for  The  Sun  upon  my  "iconoclasm."

No  doubt  it  is  a  great  honour  for  an  unpretending  foreigner  to  be
thus  crucified  between  the  two  greatest  celebrities  of  your  chivalrous
country — the  truly  good  Deacon  Richard  Smith,  of  the  blue  gauze
trousers,  and  the  nightingale  of  the  willow  and  the  cypress,  G.  Wash-
ington Childs,  A.M.  But  I  am  not  a  Hindu  Fakir,  and  therefore  can-
not say  that  I  enjoy  crucifixion,  especially  when  unmerited.  I  do  not
even  fancy  being  swung  round  the  "tall  tower"  with  the  steel  hooks  of
your  satire  metaphorically  thrust  through  my  back.  I  have  not  in-
vited the  reporters  to  a  show.  I  have  not  sought  notoriety.  I  have
only  taken  up  a  quiet  corner  in  your  free  country,  and,  as  a  woman
who  has  travelled  much,  shall  try  to  tell  a  Western  public  the  strange
things  I  have  seen  among  Eastern  peoples.  If  I  could  have  enjoyed
this  privilege  at  home  I  should  not  be  here.  Being  here,  I  shall,  as
your  old  English  proverb  expresses  it,  "Tell  the  truth  and  shame  the
devil."

The  World  reporter  who  visited  me  wrote  an  article  which  mingled
his  souvenirs  of  my  stuffed  apes  and  my  canaries,  my  tiger-heads  and
palms,  with  aerial  music  and  the  flitting  doppel gangers  of  Adepts.  It
was  a  very  interesting  article  and  was  certainly  intended  to  be  very
impartial.  If  I  appear  in  it  to  deny  the  immutability  of  natural  law,
and  inferentially  to  affirm  the  possibility  of  miracle,  it  is  either  due  to
my  faulty  English  or  to  the  carelessness  of  the  reader.

There  are  no  such  uncompromising  believers  in  the  immutability  and
universality  of  the  laws  of  Nature  as  students  of  Occultism.  Let  us
then,  with  your  permission,  leave  the  shade  of  the  great  Newton  to  rest
in  peace.     It  is  not  the  principle  of  the  law  of  gravitation,  or  the  neces-

104  A    MODERN   PANARION.

sity  of  a  central  force  acting  toward  the  sun,  that  is  denied,  but  the
assumption  that,  behind  the  law  which  draws  bodies  toward  the  earth's
centre,  and  which  is  our  most  familiar  example  of  gravitation,  there  is
no  other  law,  equally  immutable,  that  under  certain  conditions  appears
to  counteract  the  former.

If  but  once  in  a  hundred  years  a  table  or  a  Fakir  is  seen  to  rise  in  the
air,  without  a  visible  mechanical  cause,  then  that  rising  is  a  manifesta-
tion of  a  natural  law  of  which  our  scientists  are  as  }ret  ignorant.  Chris-
tians believe  in  miracles;  Occultists  credit  them  even  less  than  pious
scientists,  Sir  David  Brewster,  for  instance.  Show  an  Occultist  an  un-
familiar phenomenon,  and  he  will  never  affirm  a  priori  that  it  is  either
a  trick  or  a  miracle.  He  will  search  for  the  cause  in  the  reason  of
causes.

There  was  an  anecdote  about  Babinet,  the  astronomer,  current  in
Paris  in  1854,  when  the  great  war  was  raging  between  the  Academy
and  the  "waltzing  tables."  This  sceptical  man  of  science  had  pro-
claimed in  the  Revue  des  Deux  Maudes  (January,  1S54,  p.  414)  that  the
levitation  of  furniture  without  contact  "was  simpl}r  as  impossible  as
perpetual  motion."  A  few  days  later,  during  an  experimental  seance,
a  table  was  levitated  without  contact  in  his  presence.  The  result  was
that  Babinet  went  straight  to  a  dentist  to  have  a  molar  tooth  extracted,
which  the  iconoclastic  table  in  its  aerial  flight  had  seriously  damaged.
But  it  was  too  late  to  recall  his  article.

I  suppose  nine  men  out  of  ten,  including  editors,  would  maintain
that  the  undulatory  theory  of  light  is  one  of  the  most  firmly  estab-
lished. And  yet  if  you  will  turn  to  page  22  of  The  New  Chemistry,  by
Prof.  Josiah  P.  Cooke,  Jr.,  of  Harvard  University  (New  York,  1876),
you  will  find  him  saying:

I  cannot  agree  with  those  who  regard  the  wave-theory  of  light  as  an  established
principle  of  science.  ...  It  requires  a  combination  of  qualities  in  the  ether  of
space  which  I  find  it  difficult  to  believe  are  actually  realized.

What  is  this  but  iconoclasm  ?

Let  us  bear  in  mind  that  Newton  himself  accepted  the  corpuscular
theory  of  Pythagoras  and  his  predecessors,  from  whom  he  learned  it,
and  that  it  was  only  en  desespoir  de  cause  that  later  scientists  accepted
the  wave  theory  of  Descartes  and  Huyghens.  Kepler  maintained  the
magnetic  nature  of  the  sun.  Leibnitz  ascribed  the  planetary  motions
to  agitations  of  an  ether.  Borelli  anticipated  Newton  in  his  discovery,
although  he  failed  to  demonstrate  it  as  triumphantly.     Huyghens  and

FAKIRS    AND   TABLES.  I05

Boyle,  Horrocks  and  Hooke,  Halley  and  Wren,  all  had  ideas  of  a
central  force  acting  toward  the  snn,  and  of  the  true  principle  of  dimi-
nution of  action  of  the  force  in  the  ratio  of  the  inverse  square  of  the
distance.  The  last  word  has  not  yet  been  spoken  with  respect  to  gravi-
tation; its  limitations  can  never  be  known  until  the  nature  of  the  sun
is  better  understood.

They  are  just  beginning  to  recognize — see  Prof.  Balfour  Stewart's
lecture  at  Manchester,  entitled,  The  Su?i  and  the  Earth,  and  Prof.  A.  M.
Mayer's  lecture,  The  Earth  a  Great  Magnet — the  intimate  connection
between  the  sun's  spots  and  the  position  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  The
interplanetary  magnetic  attractions  are  but  just  being  demonstrated.
Until  gravitation  is  understood  to  be  simply  magnetic  attraction  and
repulsion,  and  the  part  played  by  magnetism  itself  in  the  endless  corre-
lations of  forces  in  the  ether  of  space — that  "hypothetical  medium,"
as  Webster  terms  it — is  better  grasped,  I  maintain  that  it  is  neither
fair  nor  wise  to  deny  the  levitation  of  either  Fakir  or  table.  Bodies
oppositely  electrified  attract  each  other;  similarly  electrified  they
repulse  each  other.  Admit,  therefore,  that  any  body  having  weight,
whether  man  or  inanimate  object,  can  by  any  cause  whatever,  external
or  internal,  be  given  the  same  polarity  as  the  spot  on  which  it  stands,
and  what  is  to  prevent  its  rising?

Before  charging  me  with  falsehood  when  I  affirm  that  I  have  seen
both  men  and  objects  levitated,  you  must  first  dispose  of  the  abundant
testimony  of  persons  far  better  known  than  my  humble  self.  Mr.
Crookes,  Prof.  Thury  of  Geneva,  Louis  Jacolliot,  your  own  Dr.  Gray
and  Dr.  Warner,  and  hundreds  of  others,  have,  first  and  last,  certified
the  fact  of  levitation.

I  am  surprised  to  find  how  little  even  the  editors  of  your  erudite
contemporary,  The  World,  are  acquainted  with  Oriental  metaphysics  in
general,  and  the  trousers  of  the  Hindu  Fakirs  in  particular.  It  was
bad  enough  to  make  those  holy  mendicants  of  the  religion  of  Brahma
graduate  from  the  Buddhist  Lamaseries  of  Tibet;  but  it  is  unpardon-
able to  make  them  wear  baggy  breeches  in  the  exercise  of  their  reli-
gious functions.

This  is  as  bad  as  if  a  Hindu  journalist  had  represented  the  Rev.  Mr.
Beecher  entering  his  pulpit  in  the  scant  costume  of  the  Fakir — the
dhoti,  a  cloth  about  the  loins,  "only  that  and  nothing  more."  To
account,  therefore,  for  the  oft-witnessed,  open-air  levitations  of  the
Swamis  and  Gurus  upon  the  theory  of  an  iron  frame  concealed  beneath

106  A   MODERN   PANARION.

the  clothing,  is  as  reasonable  as  Monsieur  Babinet's  explanation  of  the
table-tipping  and  tapping  as  unconscious  ventriloquism.

You  may  object  to  the  act  of  disembowelling,  which  I  am  com-
pelled to  affirm  I  have  seen  performed.  It  is  as  you  say,  "remark-
able," but  still  not  miraculous.  Your  suggestion  that  Dr.  Hammond
should  go  and  see  it  is  a  good  one.  Science  would  be  the  gainer,  and
your  humble  correspondent  be  justified.  Are  you,  however,  in  a  posi-
tion to  guarantee  that  he  would  furnish  the  world  of  sceptics  with  an
example  of  "veracious  reporting,"  if  his  observation  should  tend  to
overthrow  the  pet  theories  of  what  we  loosely  call  science?

Yours  very  respectfully,

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

New  York,  March  28th,  i8yy.

A  PROTEST.

[From  the  New  York  World,  April  6th,  1S77.]

There  was  a  time  when  the  geocentric  theory  was  universally
accepted  by  Christian  nations,  and  if  you  and  I  had  then  been  carrying
on  our  little  philological  and  psychological  controversy,  I  should  have
bowed  in  humility  to  the  dictum  of  an  authority  so  particularly  at  home
in  "'the  Mysticism  of  the  Orient."  But  despite  all  modifications  of  our
astronomical  system,  I  am  no  heliolater,  though  I  do  subscribe  for  The
Sun  as  well  as  The  World.  I  feel  no  more  bound  to  "cajole"  or  con-
ciliate the  one  than  to  suffer  my  feeble  taper  to  be  extinguished  by  the
draught  made  by  the  other  in  its  diurnal  rush  through  journalistic
space.

As  near  as  I  can  judge  from  your  writing  there  is  this  difference
between  us,  that  I  write  from  personal  experience,  and  you  upon
information  and  belief.  My  authorities  are  my  eyes  and  ears;  yours,
obsolete  works  of  reference  and  the  pernicious  advice  of  a  spontaneously
generated  Lampsakano,  who  learned  his  Mysticism  from  the  detached
head  of  one  Dummkopf.  (See  The  Sun  of  March  25th.)  My  assertions
may  be  corroborated  by  any  traveller,  as  they  have  been  by  the  first
authorities.  Elphinstone's  Kingdom  of  Kabul  was  published  sixty-two
years  ago  (1815),  his  History  of  India  thirty-six  years  ago.  If  the
latter  is  the  "standard  text-book"  for  British  civil  servants,  it  certainly
is  not  so  for  native  Hindus,  who  perhaps  know  as  much  of  their  Philo-
sophy and  Religion  as  he.  In  fact,  a  pretty  wide  reading  of  European
"authorities"  has  given  me  a  very  poor  opinion  of  them,  since  no  two
agree.  Sir  William  Jones  himself,  whose  shoe-strings  few  Orientalists
are  worthy  to  untie,  made  very  grave  mistakes,  which  are  now  being
corrected  by  Max  Miiller  and  others.  He  knew  nothing  of  the  Vedas
(see  Max  Midler's  Chips,  vol.  i.  p.  183),  and  even  expressed  his  belief
that  Buddha  was  the  same  as  the  Teutonic  deity  Woden  or  Odin,  and
Shakya — another  name  of  Buddha — the  same  as   Shishak,  a  king  of

108  A   MODERN    PANARION.

Egypt!  Why,  therefore,  could  not  Elphinstone  make  a  mess  of  such
subtle  religious  distinctions  as  the  innumerable  sects  of  Hindu  Mystics
existing  at  present?

I  am  charged  with  such  ignorance  that  I  imagine  the  Fakirs  to  be
"holy  mendicants  of  the  religion  of  Brahma,"  while  you  say  they  are
not  of  the  religion  of  Brahma  at  all,  but  Mohammedans.

Does  this  precious  piece  of  information  also  come  from  Elphinstone?
Then  I  give  you  a  Roland  for  your  Oliver.  I  refer  you  to  James  Mill's
History  of  British  India,  vol.  i.  p.  2S3  (London:   1S5S).     You  say:

Those  seeking  ready-made  information  can  find  our  statements  corroborated  in
any  encyclopaedia.

Perhaps  you  refer  to  Appleton's?  Very  well.  In  the  article  on
James  Mill  (vol.  ii.  p.  501),  you  will  find  it  saying  that  his  India

Was  the  first  complete  work  on  the  subject.  It  was  without  a  rival  as  a  source  of
information,  and  the  justice  of  its  views  appeared  in  the  subsequent  measures  for
the  government  of  that  country.

Now,  Mill  says  that  the

Fakirs  are  a  sect  of  Brahmanism;  and  that  their  penances  are  prescribed  by  the
Laws  of  Manu.

Will  your  Lamp-sickener,  or  whatever  the  English  of  that  Greek
ma}T  be,  say  that  Manu  was  a  Mohammedan?  And  yet  this  would  be
no  worse  than  your  clothing  the  Fakirs,  who  belong,  as  a  rule,  to  the
Brahman  pagodas,  in  yellow — the  colour  exclusively  worn  by  Buddhist
lamas — and  breeches — which  form  part  of  the  costume  of  the  Moham-
medan dervishes.  Perhaps  it  is  a  natural  mistake  for  your  Lampsakanoi,
who  rely  upon  Elphinstone  for  their  facts  and  have  not  visited  India,
to  confound  the  Persian  dervishes  with  the  Hindu  Fakirs.  But  "while
the  lamp  holds  out  to  burn"  read  Louis  Jacolliot's  Bible  in  India,  just
out,  and  learn  from  a  man  who  has  passed  twenty  years  in  India,  that
your  correspondent  is  neither  a  fool  nor  a  liar.

You  charge  me  with  saying  that  a  Fakir  is  a  "worshipper  of  God."
I  say  I  did  not,  as  the  expression  I  used,  "Fakir  is  a  loose  word,"  well
proves.  It  was  a  natural  mistake  of  the  reporter,  who  did  not  employ
stenograph}-  at  our  interview.  I  said,  "A  Svami  is  one  who  devotes
himself  entirely  to  the  service  of  God."

All  Svamis  of  the  Nir-Narrain  sects  are  Fakirs,  but  all  Fakirs  are
not  necessarily  Svamis.  I  refer  you  to  Coleman's  Mythology  of  the
Hindus  (p.  244),  and  to  The  Asiatic  Journal.  Coleman  says  precisely
what  Louis  Jacolliot  says,  and  both  corroborate  me.     You  very  oblig-

A   PROTEST.  109

ingly  give  me  a  lesson  in  Hindustani  and  Devanagari,  and  teach  me
the  etymology  of  "Guru,"  "Fakir,"  "Gossain,"  etc.  For  answer  I  refer
you  to  John  Shakespear's  large  Hindustani- English  Dictionary.  I  may
know  less  English  than  your  Lampsakanoi,  but  I  do  know  of  Hindu-
stani and  Sanskrit  more  than  can  be  learned  on  Park  Row.

As  I  have  said  in  another  communication,  I  did  not  invite  the  visits
of  reporters,  nor  seek  the  notoriety  which  has  suddenly  been  thrust
upon  me.  If  I  reply  to  your  criticisms — rhetorically  brilliant,  but  wholly
unwarranted  by  the  facts — it  is  because  I  value  your  good  opinion
(without  caring  to  cajole  you),  and  at  the  same  time  cannot  sit  quiet
and  be  made  to  appear  alike  devoid  of  experience,  knowledge  and
truthfulness.

Respectfully,  but  still  rebelliously,  yours,

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

Monday,  April  2nd,  iSyy.

THE  FATE  OF  THE  OCCULTIST.

[From  the  New  York  World,  May  6th,  1S77.]

From  the  first  month  of  my  arrival  in  America  I  began,  for  reasons
mysterious,  but  perhaps  intelligible,  to  provoke  hatred  among  those
who  pretended  to  be  on  good  terms  with  me,  if  not  the  best  of  friends.
Slanderous  reports,  vile  insinuations  and  innuendoes  have  rained  about
me.  For  more  than  two  years  I  have  kept  silent,  although  the  least
of  the  offences  attributed  to  me  were  calculated  to  excite  the  loathing
of  a  person  of  my  disposition.  I  have  rid  myself  of  a  number  of  these
retailers  of  slander,  but  finding  that  I  was  actually  suffering  in  the  esti-
mation of  friends  whose  good  opinion  I  valued,  I  adopted  a  policy  of
seclusion.  For  two  years  my  world  has  been  in  my  apartments,  and  for
an  average  of  at  least  seventeen  hours  a  day  I  have  sat  at  my  desk,
with  my  books  and  manuscripts  as  my  companions.  During  this  time
many  highly-valued  acquaintanceships  have  been  formed  with  ladies
and  gentlemen  who  have  sought  me  out,  without  expecting  me  to
return  their  visits.

I  am  an  old  woman,  and  I  feel  the  need  of  fresh  air  as  much  as  any
one,  but  my  disgust  for  the  lying,  slanderous  world  that  one  finds  out-
side of  "heathen"  uncivilized  countries  has  been  such  that  in  seven
months  I  believe  I  have  been  out  but  three  times.  But  no  retreat  is
secure  against  the  anonymous  slanderer,  who  uses  the  United  States
mail.  Letters  have  been  received  by  my  trusted  friends  containing  the
foulest  aspersions  upon  myself.  At  various  times  I  have  been  charged
with:  (1)  drunkenness;  (2)  forgery;  (3)  being  a  Russian  spy;  (4)  with
being  an  anti-Russian  spy;  (5)  with  being  no  Russian  at  all,  but  a
French  adventuress ;  (6)  with  having  been  in  jail  for  theft ;  (7)  with  being
the  mistress  of  a  Polish  count  in  Union  Square;  (8)  with  murdering
seven  husbands;  (9)  with  bigamy;  (10)  with  being  the  mistress  of  Col.
Olcott,  (11)  also  of  an  acrobat.  Other  things  might  be  mentioned,  but
decency  forbids.

THE   FATE   OF  THE   OCCULTIST.  Ill

Since  the  arrival  of  Wong  Chin  Foo  the  game  has  recommenced  with
•double  activity.  We  have  received  anonymous  letters  and  others,  and
newspaper  slips,  telling  infamous  stories  about  him.  On  his  part,  he
has  received  communications  about  us,  one  of  which  I  beg  you  to
insert.

May  ft/i.
Does  the  disciple  of  Buddha  know  the  character  of  the  people  with  whom  lie  is
at  present  residing?    The  surroundings  of  a  teacher  of  morality  and  religion  should
be  moral.     Are  his  so?     On  the  contrary,  they  are  people  of  very  doubtful  reputa-
tion, as  he  can  ascertain  by  applying  at  the  nearest  police-station.

A  Friend.

Of  Wong  Chin  Foo's  merits  or  shortcomings  I  know  nothing,  except
that  since  his  arrival  his  conversation  and  behaviour  have  impressed
me  very  favourably.  He  appears  to  be  a  very  earnest  and  enthusiastic
student.  However,  he  is  a  man,  and  is  able  to  take  care  of  himself,
although,  like  me,  a  foreigner.  But  I  wish  to  say  for  myself  just  this:
that  I  defy  any  person  in  America  to  come  forward  and  prove  a  single
charge  against  my  honour.  I  invite  everyone  possessed  of  such  proof
as  will  vindicate  them  in  a  court  of  justice  to  publish  it  over  their  own
signatures  in  the  newspapers.  I  will  furnish  to  anyone  a  list  of  my
several  residences,  and  contribute  towards  paying  detectives  to  trace
my  every  step.  But  I  hereby  give  notice  that  if  any  more  unverifiable
slanders  can  be  traced  to  responsible  sources,  I  will  invoke  the  protec-
tion of  the  law,  which,  it  is  the  theory  of  your  national  Constitution,
was  made  for  heathen  as  well  as  Christian  denizens.

Respectfully,

H.  P.  Blavatskv.

New  York,  May  5th,  iS~-.

BUDDHISM   IN   AMERICA.

[From  the  New  York  Sun,  May  13th,  1877.]

As,  in  your  leading  article  of  May  6th,  I  am  at  one  moment  given
credit  for  knowing  something  about  the  religion  of  the  Brahmans  and
Buddhists,  and,  anon,  of  being  a  pretender  of  the  class  of  Jacolliot,
and  even  his  plagiarist,  you  will  not  wonder  at  my  again  knocking  at
your  doors  for  hospitality.  This  time  I  write  over  my  own  signature,
and  am  responsible,  as  I  am  not  under  other  circumstances.

No  wonder  that  the  "learned  friend"  at  your  elbow  was  reminded
"of  the  utterances  of  one  Louis  Jacolliot."

The  paragraphs  in  the  very  able  account  of  your  representative's
interview,  which  relate  to  "Adhima  and  Heva"  and  "Jezeus  Christna,"
were  translated  bodily,  in  his  presence,  from  the  French  edition  of  the
Bible  in  India.  They  were  read,  moreover,  from  the  chapter  entitled,
"Bagaveda" — instead  of  "Bhagavat,"  as  you  put  it,  kindly  correcting
me.  In  so  doing,  in  my  humble  opinion,  he  is  right,  and  the  others
are  wrong,  were  it  but  for  the  reason  that  the  Hindus  themselves  so
pronounce  it — at  least  those  of  southern  India,  who  speak  either  the
Tamil  language  or  other  dialects.  Since  we  seek  in  vain  among  Sans-
krit philologists  for  any  two  who  agree  as  to  the  spelling  or  meaning  of
important  Hindu  words,  and  scarcely  two  as  to  the  orthography  of  this
very  title,  I  respectfully  submit  that  neither  "the  French  fraud"  nor
I  are  chargeable  with  any  grave  offence  in  the  premises.

For  instance,  Prof.  Whitney,  your  greatest  American  Orientalist,
and  one  of  the  most  eminent  living,  spells  it  Bagavata;  while  his
equally  great  opponent,  Max  Miiller,  prefers  Bagavadgita,  and  half
a  dozen  others  spell  it  in  as  many  different  ways.  Naturally  each
scholar,  in  rendering  the  Indian  words  into  his  own  vernacular,  follows
the  national  rule  of  pronunciation;  and  so,  you  will  see,  that  Prof.
Miiller  in  writing  the  syllable  ad  with  an  a  does  precisely  what  Jacolliot
does  in   spelling  it  ed,  the  French  e  having  the  same  sound  as  the

BUDDHISM    IN   AMERICA.

"3

English  a  before  a  consonant.  The  same  holds  good  with  the  name
of  the  Hindu  Saviour,  which  by  different  authorities  is  spelt  Krishna,
Crisna,  Khristna  and  Krisna;  everything,  in  short,  but  the  right  way,
Christna.  Perhaps  you  may  say  that  this  is  mere  hypothesis.  But
since  every  Indianist  follows  his  own  fancy  in  his  phonetic  transcrip-
tions, I  do  not  know  why  I  may  not  exercise  my  best  judgment,
especially  as  I  can  give  good  reasons  to  support  it.

You  affirm  that  there  "never  was  a  Hindu  reformer  named  Jezeus
Christna";  and,  although  I  confined  my  affirmation  of  his  existence  to
the  authority  of  Jacolliot  at  the  interview  in  question,  I  now  assert  on
my  own  responsibility  that  there  was,  and  is,  a  personage  of  that  name
recognized  and  worshipped  in  India,  and  that  he  is  not  Jesus  Christ.
Christna  is  a  Brahmanical  deity,  and,  besides  by  the  Brahmans,  is
recognized  by  several  sects  of  the  Jains.  When  Jacolliot  says  "Jezeus
Christna,"  he  only  shows  a  little  clumsiness  in  phonetic  rendering,  and
is  nearer  right  than  many  of  his  critics.  I  have  been  at  the  festivals  of
Janmotsar,  in  commemoration  of  the  birth  of  Christna  (which  is  their
Christmas)  and  have  heard  thousands  of  voices  shouting:  "Jas-i-
Christna!  Jasas-wi-Christna!"  Translated  they  are:  Jas-i,  renowned,
famous,  and  Jasas-wi,  celebrated,  or  divinely-renowned,  powerful;  and
Christna,  sacred.  To  avoid  being  again  contradicted,  I  refer  the  reader
to  any  Hindustani  dictionary.  All  the  Brahmans  with  whom  I  have
talked  on  the  subject  spoke  of  Christna  either  as  Jas-i-Christna,  or
Jadar  Christna,  or  again  used  the  term,  Yadur-pati,  Lord  of  Yadavas,
descendant  of  Yadu,  one  of  the  many  titles  of  Christna  in  India.  You
see,  therefore,  that  it  is  but  a  question  of  spelling.

That  Christna  is  preferable  to  Krishna  can  be  clearly  shown  under
the  rules  laid  down  by  Burnouf  and  others  upon  the  authority  of  the
pandits.  True,  the  initial  of  the  name  in  the  Sanskrit  is  generally
written  k;  but  the  Sanskrit  k  is  strongly  aspirated;  it  is  a  guttural
expiration,  whose  only  representation  is  the  Greek  cJii.  In  English,
therefore,  the  k  instead  of  having  the  sound  of  k  as  in  king  would  be
even  more  aspirated  than  the  h  in  heaven.  As  in  English  the  Greek
word  is  written  Christos  in  preference  to  H'ristos,  which  would  be
nearer  the  mark,  so  with  the  Hindu  deity;  his  name  under  the  same
rule  should  be  written  Christna,  notwithstanding  the  possible  un-
welcomeness  of  the  resemblance.

M.  Taxtor  de  Ravisi,  a  French  Catholic  Orientalist,  and  for  ten  years

Governor  of  Karikal  (India),  Jacolliot's  bitterest  opponent  in  religious

9

114  A   MODERN   PANARION.

conclusions,  fully  appreciates  the  situation.  He  would  have  the  name
spelt  Krishna,  because  (i)  most  of  the  statues  of  this  God  are  black,
and  Krishna  means  black;  and  (2)  because  the  real  name  of  Christna
"was  Kaneya,  or  Caneya."  Very  well;  but  black  is  Krishna.  And  if
not  only  Jacolliot,  but  the  Brahmans  themselves  are  not  to  be  allowed
to  know  as  much  as  their  European  critics,  we  will  call  in  the  aid  of
Volney  and  other  Orientalists,  who  show  that  the  Hindu  deity's  name
is  formed  from  the  radical  Chris,  meaning  sacred,  as  Jacolliot  shows  it.
Moreover,  for  the  Brahmans  to  call  their  God  the  "black  one"  would
be  unnatural  and  absurd;  while  to  style  him  the  sacred,  ox  pure  essence,
would  be  perfectly  appropriate  to  their  notions.  As  to  the  name  being
Caneya,  M.  Taxtor  de  Ravisi,  in  suggesting  it,  completes  his  own  dis-
comfiture. In  escaping  Scylla  he  falls  into  Charybdis.  I  suppose
no  one  will  deny  that  the  Sanskrit  Kanya  means  Virgin,  for  even  in
modern  Hindustani  the  Zodiacal  sign  of  Virgo  is  called  Kaniya.
Christna  is  styled  Kaneya,  as  having  been  born  of  a  Virgin.  Begging
pardon,  then,  of  the  "learned  friend"  at  your  elbow,  I  reaffirm  that  if
there  "never  was  a  Hindu  reformer  named  Jezeus  Christna,"  there  was
a  Hindu  Saviour,  who  is  worshipped  unto  this  day  as  Jasi  Christna,  or,
if  it  better  accords  with  his  pious  preferences,  Jas-i-Kristna.

When  the  84,000  volumes  of  the  Dharma  Khanda,  or  sacred  books  of
the  Buddhists,  and  the  thousands  upon  thousands  of  ollse  of  Vaidic
and  Brahmanical  literature,  now  known  by  their  titles  only  to  Euro-
pean scholars,  or  even  a  tithe  of  those  actually  in  their  possession  are
translated,  and  comprehended,  and  agreed  upon,  I  will  be  happy  to
measure  swords  again  with  the  solar  pandit  who  has  prompted  your
severe  reflections  upon  your  humble  subscriber

Though,  in  common  with  various  authorities,  you  stigmatize  Jacolliot

as  a  "French  fraud,"  I  must  really  do  him  the  justice  to  say  that  his

Catholic  opponent,  De  Ravisi,  said  of  his  Bible  in  India,  in  a  report

made  at  the  request  of  the  Societe  Academique  de  St.  Quentin,  that  it

is  written

With  good  faith,  of  absorbing  interest,  a  learned  work  on  known  facts  and  with
familiar  arguments.

Ten  years'  residence  and  studies  in  India  were  surely  enough  to  fit
him  to  give  an  opinion.  Unfortunately,  however,  in  America  it  is  but
too  easy  to  gain  the  reputation  of  "a  fraud"  in  much  less  time.

Respectfully,

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

RUSSIAN   ATROCITIES

[From  the  New  York  World,  Aug.  13th,  1877.]
The  Sublime  Porte  has  had  the  sublime  effrontery  to  ask  the
American  people  to  execrate  Russian  barbarity.  It  appeals  for  sym-
pathy on  behalf  of  helpless  Turkish  subjects  at  the  seat  of  war.  With
the  memories  of  Bulgaria  and  Servia  still  fresh,  this  seems  the  climax
of  daring  hypocrisy.  Barely  a  few  months  ago  the  reports  of  Mr.
Schuyler  and  other  impartial  observers  of  the  atrocities  of  Bashi-
Bazouks  sent  a  thrill  of  horror  through  the  world.  Perpetrated  under
official  sanction,  they  aroused  the  indignation  of  all  who  had  hearts  to
feel.  In  to-day's  paper  I  read  another  account  of  pretended  Russian
cruelties,  and  your  able  and  just  editorial  comments  upon  the  same.
Permit  one  who  is,  perhaps,  in  a  better  position  than  any  other  private
person  here  to  know  what  is  taking  place  at  the  front,  to  inform  you  of
certain  facts  derived  from  authentic  sources.  Besides  receiving  daily
papers  from  St.  Petersburg,  Moscow,  Tiflis  and  Odessa,  I  have  an  uncle,
a  cousin  and  a  nephew  on  active  service,  and  every  steamer  brings  me
accounts  of  military  movements  from  eye-witnesses.  My  cousin  and
nephew  have  taken  part  in  all  bloody  engagements  in  Turkish  Armenia
up  to  the  present  time,  and  were  at  the  siege  and  capture  of  Ardahan.
Newspapers  may  suppress,  colour  or  exaggerate  facts;  the  private
letters  of  brave  soldiers  to  their  families  rarely  do.

L,et  me  say,  then,  that  during  this  campaign  the  Turkish  troops  have
been  guilty  of  such  fiendish  acts  as  to  make  me  pray  that  my  relatives
may  be  killed  rather  than  fall  into  their  hands.  In  a  letter  from  the
Danube,  corroborated  by  several  correspondents  of  German  and  Aus-
trian papers,  the  writer  says :

On  June  20th  we  entered  Kozlovetz,  a  Bulgarian  town  of  about  two  hundred
houses,  which  lies  three  or  four  hours  distant  from  Sistova.  The  sight  which  met
our  eyes  made  the  blood  of  every  Russian  soldier  run  cold,  hardened  though  he  is
to  such  scenes.  On  the  principal  street  of  the  deserted  town  were  placed  in  rows
140  beheaded  bodies  of  men,  women,  and  children.     The  heads  of  these  unfortu-

Il6  A    MODERN   PANARION.

nates  were  tastefully  piled  in  a  pyramid  in  the  middle  of  the  street.  Among  the
smoking  ruins  of  every  house  we  found  half-burned  corpses,  fearfully  mutilated.
We  caught  a  Turkish  soldier,  and  to  our  questions  he  reluctantly  confessed  that
their  chiefs  had  given  orders  not  to  leave  a  Christian  place,  however  small,  before
burning  it  and  putting  to  death  every  man,  woman,  and  child.

On  the  first  day  that  the  Danube  was  crossed  some  foreign  corre-
spondents, among  them  that  of  the  Cologne  Gazette,  saw  several  bodies
of  Russian  soldiers  whose  noses,  ears,  hands,  etc.,  had  been  cut  off,
while  the  genital  organs  had  been  stuffed  into  the  mouths  of  the  corpses.
Later,  three  bodies  of  Christian  women  were  found — a  mother  and  two
daughters — whose  condition  makes  one  almost  drop  the  pen  in  horror
at  the  thought.  Entirely  nude,  split  open  from  below  to  the  navel,
their  heads  cutoff;  the  wrists  of  each  corpse  were  tied  together  with
strips  of  skin  and  flesh  flayed  from  the  shoulder  down ;  and  the  corpses
of  the  three  martyrs  were  similarly  bound  to  each  other  by  long  ribbons
of  flesh  dissected  from  their  thighs.

A  correspondent  writes  from  Sistova:

The  Emperor  continues  his  daily  visits  to  the  hospitals  and  passes  whole  hours
with  the  wounded.  A  few  days  ago  His  Majesty,  accompanied  by  Colonel  Wellesley,
the  British  military  attache,  visited  two  unfortunate  Bulgarians  who  died  on  the
night  following.  The  skull  of  one  of  them  was  split  open  both  laterally  and  verti-
cally, by  two  sword-cuts,  an  eye  was  torn  out,  and  he  was  otherwise  mutilated.  He
explained,  as  well  as  he  could,  that  several  Turks  seeing  him,  demanded  his  money.
As  he  had  none,  four  of  the  party  held  him  fast  while  the  fifth,  brandishing  his
sword,  and  repeating  all  the  time,  "There,  you  Christian  dog,  there's  your  cross
for  you!  "  first  split  his  skull  from  the  forehead  to  the  back  of  the  head,  and  then
crosswise  from  ear  to  ear.  While  the  Emperor  was  listening  to  these  details  the
greatest  agony  was  depicted  upon  his  face.  Taking  Colonel  Wellesley  by  the  arm,
and  pointing  to  the  Bulgarian,  he  said  to  him  in  French:  "See  the  work  of  your
proteges!''''     The  British  officer  blushed  and  was  much  confused.

The  special  correspondent  of  the  London  Standard,  describing  his
audience  with  the  Grand  Duke  Nicholas,  Commander-in-Chief,  on  July
7th,  says  that  the  Grand  Duke  communicated  to  him  the  most  horrify-
ing details  about  the  cruelties  committed  at  Dobroudga.  A  Christian
whose  hands  were  tied  with  strips  of  his  own  skin  cut  from  the  length
of  both  his  arms,  and  his  tongue  cut  down  from  the  root,  was  laid  at
the  feet  of  the  Emperor  and  died  there  before  the  eyes  of  the  Czar  and
the  British  agent,  the  same  Colonel  Wellesley,  who  was  in  attendance.
Turning  to  the  latter,  His  Majesty,  with  a  stern  expression,  asked  him
to  inform  his  Government  of  what  he  had  just  seen  for  himself.  Says
the  correspondent:

RUSSIAN   ATROCITIES.

117

From  the  beginning  of  the  war  I  have  heard  of  quite  a  number  of  such  cases,
but  never  witnessed  one  myself.  After  the  personal  assurances  given  to  me  by  the
Grand  Duke,  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  doubt  that  the  Turkish  officers  are  unable
to  control  their  irregular  troops.

The  correspondent  of  The  Northern  Messenger had  gone  the  rounds
of  the  hospitals  to  question  the  wounded  soldiers.  Four  of  them,
belonging  to  the  Second  Battalion  of  Minsk  Rifles,  testified  with  the
most  solemn  asseverations  that  they  had  seen  the  Turks  approach  the
wounded,  rob  them,  mutilate  their  bodies  in  the  most  cruel  way,  finish
them  with  the  bayonet.  They  themselves  had  avoided  this  fate  only
by  feigning  death.  It  is  a  common  thing  for  wounded  Turks  to  allure
Russian  soldiers  and  members  of  the  sanitary  corps  to  their  assistance,
and,  as  they  bend  over  them,  to  kill  with  a  revolver  or  dagger  those
who  would  relieve  them.  A  case  like  this  occurred  under  the  eye  of
one  of  my  correspondents  in  Turkish  Armenia,  and  was  in  all  the
Russian  papers.  A  sergeant's  assistant  (a  sanitar)  was  despatched
under  such  circumstances;  thereupon  a  soldier  standing  by  killed  the
assassin.

My  cousin,  Major  Alexander  U.  White — of  the  Sixteenth  Nije-
gorodsk  Dragoons,  one  of  the  most  gallant  soldiers  in  the  army  of
Loris  Melikof,  and  who  has  just  been  decorated  by  the  Grand  Duke,
under  the  authority  of  the  Emperor,  with  a  golden  sword  inscribed,
"For  Bravery" — says  that  it  is  becoming  positively  dangerous  to
relieve  a  wounded  Turk.  The  people  who  robbed  and  killed  the
wounded  in  the  hospital  at  Ardahan  upon  the  entry  of  the  Russian
troops  were  the  Karapapahs,  Mussulmans  and  the  supposed  allies  of
the  Turks.  During  the  siege  they  prudently  awaited  the  issue  from
a  safe  distance.  As  soon  as  the  Russians  conquered,  the  Karapapahs
flew  like  so  many  tigers  into  the  town,  slaying  the  wounded  Turks,
robbing  the  dead,  pillaging  houses,  bringing  the  horses  and  mules  of
the  fleeing  enemy  into  the  Russian  camp,  and  swearing  allegiance  to
the  Commander-in-Chief,  The  Cossacks  had  all  the  trouble  in  the
world  to  prevent  their  new  allies  from  continuing  the  greatest  excesses.
To  charge,  therefore,  upon  the  Russians  the  atrocities  of  these  cowardly
jackals  (a  nomadic  tribe  of  brigands)  is  an  impudent  lie  of  Mukhtar
Pasha,  whose  falsifications  have  become  so  notorious  that  some  Parisian
papers  have  nicknamed  him  "Blaguer  Pasha."  His  despatches  are
only  matched  in  mendacity  by  those  of  the  Spanish  commanders  in
Cuba.

Il8  A   MODERN    PANARION.

The  stupidity  of  charging  such  excesses  upon  the  Russian  army
becomes  apparent  when  we  remember  that  the  policy  of  the  Govern-
ment from  the  first  has  been  to  pay  liberally  for  supplies,  and  win  the
goodwill  of  the  people  of  the  invaded  provinces  by  kindness.  So
marked  and  successful  has  this  policy  proved  in  General  L,oris  Meli-
kof's  field  of  operations,  that  the  anti- Russian  papers  of  England,
Austria  and  other  countries  have  denounced  it  as  Russian  "craft."
With  the  Danubian  forces  is  the  Emperor  in  person,  liberator  of
millions  of  serfs,  and  the  mildest  and  justest  sovereign  who  has  ever
occupied  the  throne  of  any  country.  As  he  won  the  love  of  his  whole
people  and  the  adoration  of  his  army  by  his  sense  of  justice  and
benevolent  regard,  I  ask  you  if  he  is  likely  to  countenance  any  cruel
excesses?  While  the  cowardly  Abdul-Hamid  hides  in  the  alcoves  of
his  harem,  and  of  the  imperial  princes  none  have  taken  the  field,  the
Czar  follows  his  army,  step  by  step,  submits  to  comparatively  severe
and  unaccustomed  hardships,  and  exposes  his  health  and  life  against
all  the  remonstrances  and  prayers  of  Prince  Gortschakof.  His  four
sons  are  all  in  active  service,  and  the  son  of  the  Grand  Duke  Nicholas
was  decorated  at  the  crossing  of  the  Danube  for  personal  courage,
having  exposed  his  life  for  hours  under  a  shower  of  bullets.

I  only  ask  the  American  people  to  do  justice  to  their  long-tried
and  unfaltering  friends,  the  Russians.  However  politicians  may  have
planned,  the  Russian  people  have  entered  this  war  as  a  holy  crusade  to
rescue  millions  of  helpless  Slavonians — their  brothers — of  the  Danube
from  Turkish  cruelty.  The  people  have  dragged  the  Government  to
the  field.  Russia  is  surrounded  by  false  neutrals,  who  but  watch  the
opportunity  to  fly  at  her  throat,  and,  shameful  fact,  the  blessing  of
the  Pope  rests  upon  the  Moslem  standards,  and  his  curse  against  his
fellow  Christians  has  been  read  in  all  the  Catholic  churches.  For  my
part,  I  care  a  great  deal  less  even  than  my  countrymen  for  his  blessings
or  curses,  for  besides  other  reasons  I  regard  this  war  not  as  one  of
Christian  against  Moslem,  but  as  one  of  humanity  and  civilization
against  barbarism.  This  is  the  view  of  the  Catholic  Czecks  of  Bohemia.
So  great  was  their  indignation  at  what  they  rightly  considered  the
dishonour  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  that  on  July  4th — anniver-
sary of  the  mart37rdom  of  John  Huss — notwithstanding  the  efforts  of
the  police,  they  repaired  in  multitudes  to  the  heights  of  Smichovo,
Beraun  and  other  hills  around  Prague,  and  burnt  at  the  stake  the
portraits  and   wax  effigies  of  the   Pope  and  the  Prince   Archbishop

RUSSIAN   ATROCITIES.  Iig

Schwartzenberg,  and  the  papal  discourse  against  the  Russian  Emperor
and  army,  singing  the  while  Slavonian  national  songs,  and  shouting,
"Down  with  the  Pope!  Death  to  the  Ultramontanes!  Hurrah  for  the
Czar-Liberator!" — all  of  which  shows  that  there  are  good  Catholics
among  the  Slavonians,  at  least,  who  rightly  hold  in  higher  estimation
the  principles  of  national  solidarity  than  foolish  dogmas  of  the  Vatican,
even  though  backed  by  pretended  infallibility.

Respectfully,
August  gth.  H.  P.  Blavatsky.

WASHING  THE  DISCIPLES'   FEET.

[From  the  New  York  Suti,  August  16th,  1877.]

At  the  ceremony  of  "feet-washing"  which  occurred  at  L,imwood
Camp-ground,  August  8th,  and  is  described  in  The  Sun  of  to-day,
Elder  Jones,  of  Mechanicsburg,  Pa.,  professed  to  give  the  history  of
this  ancient  custom.     The  report  says:

He  claimed  that  its  origin  did  not  date  anterior  to  the  coming  of  Christ;  neither
was  the  matter  of  cleanliness  to  be  thought  of  in  this  connection.  Its  observance
was  due  exclusively  to  the  fact  that  it  was  a  scriptural  injunction;  it  originated  in
Christ's  example,  and  it  devolved  upon  his  hearers  to  follow  this  example.  Numer-
ous scriptural  passages  were  quoted  in  support  of  this  argument.

The  reverend  gentleman  is  in  error.  The  ceremony  was  first  per-
formed by  the  Hindu  Christna  (or  Krishna)  who  washed  the  feet  of
his  Brahmans  as  an  example  of  humility,  many  thousand  years  anterior
to  the  Christian  era.  Chapter  and  verse  will  be  given,  if  required,
from  the  Brahmanical  books.  Meanwhile,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the
Rev.  John  P.  L,undy's  Monumental  Christianity,  p.  154.

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

TRICKERY  OR  MAGIC?

[From  The  Religio-  Philosophical  Journal,  Dec.  22nd,  1877.]

A  wise  saying  is  that  which  affirms  that  he  who  seeks  to  prove  too
much,  in  the  end  proves  nothing.  Prof.  W.  B.  Carpenter,  F.R.S.  (and
otherwise  alphabetically  adorned),  furnishes  a  conspicuous  example  in
his  strife  with  men  better  than  himself.  His  assaults  accumulate
bitterness  with  every  new  periodical  he  makes  his  organ,  and  in  pro-
portion with  the  increase  of  his  abuse  his  arguments  lose  force  and
cogency.  And,  forsooth,  he  nevertheless  lectures  his  antagonists  for
their  lack  of  "calm  discussion,"  as  though  he  were  not  the  very  type  of
controversial  nitro-glycerine!  Rushing  at  them  with  his  proofs,  which
are  "incontrovertible"  only  in  his  own  estimation,  he  commits  himself
more  than  once.  By  one  of  such  committals  I  mean  to  profit  to-day,
by  citing  some  curious  experiences  of  my  own.

My  object  in  writing  the  present  is  far  from  that  of  taking  any  part
in  this  onslaught  upon  reputations.  Messrs.  Wallace  and  Crookes  are
well  able  to  take  care  of  themselves.  Each  has  contributed  in  his  own
specialty  towards  real  progress  in  useful  knowledge  more  than  Dr.
Carpenter  in  his.  Both  have  been  honoured  for  valuable  original
researches  and  discoveries,  while  their  accuser  has  been  often  charged
with  being  no  better  than  a  very  clever  compiler  of  other  men's  ideas.
After  reading  the  able  rejoinders  of  the  "defendants"  and  the  scathing
review  of  the  mace-swinging  Prof.  Buchanan,  every  one,  except  his
friends,  the  psychophobists,  can  see  that  Dr.  Carpenter  is  completely
floored.     He  is  as  dead  as  the  traditional  door  nail.

In  the  December  supplement  of  The  Popular  Science  Monthly,  I  find,
(p.  116)  the  interesting  admission  that  a  poor  Hindu  juggler  can  per-
form a  feat  that  quite  takes  the  great  Professor's  breath  away!  In
comparison,  the  mediumistic  phenomena  of  Miss  Xichol  (Mrs.  Guppy)
are  of  no  account.     Says  Dr.  Carpenter:

The  celebrated  "tree-trick,"  which  most  people  who  have  been  long  in  India  have
seen,  as  described   by  several  of  our  most  distinguished  civilians   and  scientific

122  A   MODERN   PANARION.

officers,  is  simply  the  greatest  marvel  I  ever  heard  of.  That  a  mango-tree  should
first  shoot  up  to  a  height  of  six  inches,  from  a  grass-plot  to  which  the  conjurers
had  no  previous  access,  beneath  an  inverted  cylindrical  basket,  whose  emptiness
has  been  previously  demonstrated,  and  that  this  tree  should  appear  to  grow  in  the
course  of  half  an  hour  from  six  inches  to  six  feet,  under  a  succession  of  taller  and
yet  taller  baskets,  beats  Miss  Nichol.

Well,  I  should  think  it  did.  At  any  rate,  it  beats  anything  that  any
F.R.S.  can  show  by  daylight  or  dark,  in  the  Royal  Institution  or  else-
where. Would  not  one  think  that  such  a  phenomenon  so  attested,  and
occurring  under  circumstances  that  preclude  trickery,  would  provoke
scientific  investigation?  If  not,  what  would?  But  observe  the  knot-
hole through  which  an  F.R.S.  can  creep  out.  "Does  Mr.  Wallace,"
ironically  asks  the  Professor,

Attribute  this  to  a  spiritual  agency  ?  or,  like  the  world  in  general  [of  course
meaning  the  world  that  science  created  and  Carpenter  energizes]  and  the  per-
formers of  the  tree-trick  in  particular,  does  he  regard  it  as  a  piece  of  clever
jugglery  ?

Leaving  Mr.  Wallace,  if  he  survives   this  Jovian  thunder-bolt,  to
answer  for  himself,  I  have  to  say  for  the  "performers"  that  they  would
respond  with  an  emphatic  "No"  to  both  interrogatories.     The  Hindu
jugglers  neither  claim  for  their  performance  a  "spiritual  agency,"  nor
admit  it  to  be  a  "trick  of  clever  jugglery."     The  ground  they  take  is
that  the  tricks  are  produced  by  certain  powers  inherent  in  man  him-
self, which  may  be  used  for  a  good  or  bad  purpose.     And  the  ground
that  I,  humbly  following  after  those  whose  opinion  is  based  on  really
exact  psychological  experiments  and  knowledge,  take,  is,  that  neither
Dr.    Carpenter  nor  his   body-guard  of  scientists,  though   their   titles
stream   after  their  names  like  the  tail  after  a  kite,  have  as  yet  the
slightest  conception  of   these  powers.     To  acquire  even  a  superficial
knowledge  of  them,  they  must  change  their  scientific  and  philosophical
methods.     Following  after  Wallace  and  Crookes,  they  must  begin  with
the  A  B  C  of  Spiritualism,  which — meaning  to  be  very  scornful — Dr.
Carpenter  terms  "the  centre  of  enlightenment  and  progress."     They
must  take   their  lessons   not  alone  from  the   true  but  as   well   from
spurious  phenomena,  from  what  his  (Carpenter's)  chief  authority,  the
"arch-priest  of  the  new  religion,"  properly  classifies  as  "Delusions,.
Absurdities  and  Trickeries."     After  wading  through  all  this,  as  every
intelligent  investigator  has  had  to  do,  he  may  get  some  glimpses  of
truth.     It  is  as  useful  to  learn  what  the  phenomena  are  not,  as  to  find
out  what  they  are.

TRICKERY    OR    MAGIC?  1 23

Dr.  Carpenter  has  two  patent  keys  warranted  to  unlock  every  secret
door  of  the  mediumistic  cabinet.  They  are  labelled  "expectancy"  and
"prepossession."  Most  scientists  have  some  pick-lock  like  this.  But
to  the  "tree-trick"  they  scarcely  apply;  for  neither  his  "distinguished
civilians"  nor  "scientific  officers"  could  have  expected  to  see  a  stark-
naked  Hindu  on  a  strange  glass-plot,  in  full  daylight,  make  a  mango-
tree  grow  six  feet  from  the  seed  in  half  an  hour,  their  "prepossessions"
would  be  all  against  it.  It  cannot  be  a  "spiritual  agency";  it  must  be
"jugglery."  Now  Maskelyne  and  Cooke,  two  clever  English  jugglers,
have  been  keeping  the  mouths  and  eyes  of  all  London  wide  open  with
their  exposures  of  Spiritualism.  They  are  admired  by  all  the  scien-
tists, and  at  Slade's  trial  figured  as  expert  witnesses  for  the  prosecu-
tion. They  are  at  Dr.  Carpenter's  elbow.  Why  does  he  not  call  them
to  explain  this  clever  jugglery,  and  make  Messrs.  Wallace  and  Crookes
blush  with  shame  at  their  own  idiocy?  All  the  tricks  of  the  trade  are
familiar  to  them;  where  can  science  find  better  allies?  But  we  must
insist  upon  identical  conditions.  The  "Tree-Trick"  must  not  be  per-
formed by  gas-light  on  the  platform  of  any  Egyptian  Hall,  nor  with
the  performers  in  full  evening  dress.  It  must  be  in  broad  daylight,  on
a  strange  grass-plot  to  which  the  conjurers  had  no  previous  access.
There  must  be  no  machinery,  no  confederates,  white  cravats  and
swallow-tail  coats  must  be  laid  aside,  and  the  English  champions
appear  in  the  primitive  apparel  of  Adam  and  Eve — a  tight-fitting
"coat  of  skin,"  and  with  the  single  addition  of  a  dhoti,  or  a  breech-
cloth  seven  inches  wide.  The  Hindus  do  all  this,  and  we  only  ask  fair
play.  If  they  raise  a  mango-sapling  under  these  circumstances,  Dr.
Carpenter  will  be  at  perfect  liberty  to  beat  therewith  the  last  remnant
of  brains  out  of  the  head  of  any  "crazy  Spiritualist"  he  may  encounter.
But  until  then,  the  less  he  says  about  Hindu  jugglery  the  better  for  his
scientific  reputation.

It  is  not  to  be  denied  that  in  India,  China  and  elsewhere  in  the  East
there  are  veritable  jugglers  who  exhibit  tricks.  Equally  true  is  it  that
some  of  these  performances  surpass  any  with  which  Western  people
are  acquainted.  But  these  are  neither  Fakirs  nor  the  performers  of
the  "mango-tree"  marvel,  as  described  by  Dr.  Carpenter.  Even  this
is  sometimes  imitated  both  by  Indian  and  European  adepts  in  sleight-
of-hand,  but  under  totally  different  conditions.  Modestly  following  in
the  rear  of  the  "distinguished  civilians"  and  "scientific  officers,"  I  will
now  narrate  something  which  I  have  seen  with  my  own  eyes.

124  A   MODERN   PANARION.

While  at  Cawnpur,  en  rozitc  to  Benares,  the  holy  city,  a  lady,  my
travelling  companion,  was  robbed  of  the  entire  contents  of  a  small
trunk.  Jewelry,  dresses,  and  even  her  note-book,  containing  a  diary
which  she  had  been  carefully  compiling  for  over  three  months,  had
mysteriously  disappeared,  without  the  lock  of  the  valise  having  been
disturbed.  Several  hours,  perhaps  a  night  and  a  day  had  passed  since
the  robbery,  as  we  had  started  at  daybreak  to  explore  some  neighbour-
ing ruins,  still  freshly  allied  with  the  Nana  Sahib's  reprisals  on  the
English.  My  companion's  first  thought  was  to  call  upon  the  local
police;  mine  for  the  help  of  some  native  gossain  (a  holy  man  supposed
to  be  informed  of  everything)  or  at  least  a  jadugar,  or  conjurer.  But
the  ideas  of  civilization  prevailed,  and  a  whole  week  was  wasted  in
fruitless  visits  to  the  chabutara  (police-house),  and  interviews  with  the
kotwal,  its  chief.  In  despair,  my  expedient  was  at  last  resorted  to,
and  a  gossain  procured.  We  occupied  a  small  bungalow  at  the  extreme
end  of  one  of  the  suburbs,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Ganges,  and  from
the  verandah  a  full  view  of  the  river  was  had,  which  at  that  place  was
very  narrow.

Our  experiment  was  made  on  that  verandah  in  the  presence  of  the
family  of  the  landlord — a  half-caste  Portuguese  from  the  south — my
friend  and  myself  and  two  freshly-imported  Frenchmen,  who  laughed
outrageously  at  our  superstition.  Time,  three  o'clock  in  the  afternoon.
The  heat  was  suffocating,  but  notwithstanding,  the  holy  man — a  coffee-
coloured,  living  skeleton — demanded  that  the  motion  of  the  pankah
(hanging  fan  worked  by  a  cord)  should  be  stopped.  He  gave  no
reason,  but  it  was  because  the  agitation  of  the  air  interferes  with  all
delicate  magnetic  experiments.  We  had  all  heard  of  the  "rolling-
pot"  as  an  agency  for  the  detection  of  theft  in  India — a  common  iron
pot  being  made,  under  the  influence  of  a  Hindu  conjurer,  to  roll  of  its
own  impulse,  without  any  hands  touching  it,  to  the  very  spot  where
the  stolen  goods  are  concealed.  The  gossain  proceeded  otherwise.
He  first  of  all  demanded  some  article  that  had  been  latest  in  contact
with  the  contents  of  the  valise;  a  pair  of  gloves  was  handed  him.  He
pressed  them  between  his  thin  palms,  and,  rolling  them  over  and  over
again,  then  dropped  them  on  the  floor  and  proceeded  to  turn  himself
slowly  around,  with  arms  outstretched  and  fingers  expanded,  as  though
he  were  seeking  the  direction  in  which  the  property  lay.  Suddenly  he
stopped  with  a  jerk,  sank  gradually  to  the  floor  and  remained  motion-
less, sitting  cross-legged  and  with  his  arms  still  outstretched  in  the

TRICKERY   OR    MAGIC?  125

same  direction,  as  though  plunged  in  a  cataleptic  trance.  This  lasted
for  over  an  hour,  which  in  that  suffocating  atmosphere  was  to  us  one
long  torture.  Suddenly  the  landlord  sprang  from  his  seat  to  the
balustrade,  and  began  intently  looking  towards  the  river,  in  which
direction  our  eyes  also,  turned.  Coming  from  whence,  or  how,  we
could  not  tell,  but  out  there,  over  the  water,  and  near  its  surface,  was
a  dark  object  approaching.  What  it  was  we  could  not  make  out;  but
the  mass  seemed  impelled  by  some  interior  force  to  revolve,  at  first
slowly,  but  then  faster  and  faster  as  it  drew  near.  It  was  as  though
supported  on  an  invisible  pavement,  and  its  course  was  in  a  direct  line
as  the  bee  flies.  It  reached  the  bank,  disappeared  again  among  the
high  vegetation,  and  anon,  rebounding  with  force  as  it  leaped  over  the
low  garden  wall,  flew  rather  than  rolled  on  to  the  verandah  and  dropped
with  a  heavy  thud  under  the  extended  palms  of  the  gossain.  A  violent,
convulsive  tremor  shook  the  frame  of  the  old  man,  as  with  a  deep  sigh
he  opened  his  half-closed  eyes.  All  were  astonished,  but  the  French-
men stared  at  the  bundle  with  an  expression  of  idiotic  terror  in  their
eyes.  Rising  from  the  ground  the  holy  man  opened  the  tarred  canvas
envelope,  and  within  were  found  all  the  stolen  articles  down  to  the
least  thing.  Without  a  word  or  waiting  for  thanks,  he  salaamed  low  to
the  company  and  disappeared  through  the  doorway,  before  we  recovered
from  our  surprise.  We  had  to  run  after  him  a  long  way  before  we
could  press  upon  him  a  dozen  rupees,  which  blessings  he  received  in
his  wooden  bowl.

This  may  appear  a  very  surprising  and  incredible  story  to  Europeans
and  Americans  who  have  never  been  in  India.  But  we  have  Dr.
Carpenter's  authority  for  it,  that  even  his  "distinguished  civilian"
friends  and  "scientific  officers,"  who  are  as  little  likely  to  sniff  out
anything  mystical  there  with  their  aristocratic  noses  as  Dr.  Carpenter
to  see  it  with  his  telescopic,  microscopic,  double-magnifying  scientific
eyes  in  England,  have  witnessed  the  mango  "tree-trick,"  which  is  still
more  wonderful.  If  the  latter  is  "clever  jugglery"  the  other  must
be,  too.  Will  the  white-cravated  and  swallow-tailed  gentlemen  of  the
Egyptian  Hall,  please  show  the  Royal  Society  how  either  is  done?

H.  P.  Blavatskv.

THE  JEWS  IN  RUSSIA.

[From  the  New  York  World,  Sept.  25th,  1877.]

IT  is  to  be  regretted  that  your  incandescent  contemporary,  The  Sun,
should  have  no  better  sources  of  information.  It  stated  on  Saturday
last  that

In  Russia  the  persecution  of  the  Israelites  is  continued,  with  nearly  all  its  ancient
cruelty.  They  are  not  permitted  to  reside  in  many  of  the  greatest  cities.  Kief
and  Novgorod  as  well  as  Moscow  are  forbidden  to  them,  and  even  in  the  rural  dis-
tricts they  are  burdened  with  multiform  exactions.

This  is  the  reverse  of  correct,  as  is  also  the  further  statement  that

They  have  been  robbed  and  oppressed  in  Bulgaria  by  the  Russians.

The  murdering  and  plundering  at  the  seat  of  war,  it  is  now  pretty
well  settled,  has  been  done  by  the  Turks  exclusively,  and,  notwithstand-
ing that  the  English  and  other  Turkophile  organs  have  diligently  cast
the  blame  upon  the  Russians,  the  plot  of  the  Ottoman  Government,
thanks  to  the  honest  old  German  Emperor,  is  now  discovered.  The
Turks  are  convicted  of  systematic  lying,  and  nearly  every  country,
including  England  herself,  has  sent  a  protest  to  the  Sublime  Porte
against  atrocities.  As  to  the  condition  of  Israelites  in  Russia,  it  has
immensely  improved  since  the  ascension  of  Alexander  II  to  the  throne
of  his  father.  For  more  than  ten  years  they  have  been  placed  on  jury
duty,  admitted  to  the  bar,  and  otherwise  accorded  civil  rights  and
privileges.  If  social  disabilities  still  linger,  we  are  scarcely  the  ones
to  chide,  in  view  of  our  Saratoga  and  L,ong  Branch  customs,  and  the
recent  little  unpleasantness  between  Mr.  Hilton  and  the  descendants
of  the  "chosen  people."

If  your  neighbour  would  take  the  trouble  to  ask  any  traveller  or
Russian  Israelite  now  in  America,  it  would  learn  that  Kief,  as  well  as
other  "greatest  cities"  are  full  of  Jews;  that  in  fact  there  are  more  Jews
than  Gentiles  in  the  first-named  of  these  cities.  Pretty  much  all  trade
is  in  their  hands,  and  they  furnish  even  all  the  olive-oil  that  is  perma-

THE  JEWS   IN   RUSSIA.  1 27

nently  burnt  at  the  rakka  (shrines)  of  the  700  orthodox  saints  whose
beatified  mummies  fill  up  the  catacombs  of  Kief,  and  the  wax  for  the
candles  on  all  the  altars.  It  is  again  the  Jews  who  keep  the  dram-
shops, or  Kabak,  where  the  faithful  congregate  after  service  to  give  a
last  fillip  to  their  devotional  ardour.  It  is  barely  four  months  since  the
chief  Rabbi  of  Moscow  published  in  the  official  Viedomosty  an  earnest
address  to  his  co-religionists  throughout  the  empire  to  remind  them
that  they  were  Russians  by  nativity,  and  called  upon  them  to  display
their  patriotism  in  subscriptions  for  the  wounded,  prayers  in  the  syna-
gogues for  the  success  of  the  Russian  arms,  and  in  all  other  practical
ways.  In  1870,  during  the  emeute  in  Odessa,  which  was  caused  by
some  Jewish  children  throwing  dirt  into  the  church  on  Easter  night,
and  which  lasted  more  than  a  week,  the  Russian  soldiers  shot  and
bayoneted  twelve  Christian  Russians  and  not  a  single  Jew;  while — and
I  speak  as  an  eye-witness — over  two  hundred  rioters  were  publicly
whipped  by  order  of  the  Governor-General,  Kotzebue,  of  whom  none
were  Israelites.  That  there  is  a  hatred  between  them  and  the  more
fanatical  Christians  is  true,  but  the  Russian  Government  can  be  no
more  blamed  for  this  than  the  British  and  American  Governments
because  Orangemen  and  Catholics  mutually  hate,  beat,  and  occasionally
kill  each  other.

H.  P.  Blavatsky.
New  York,  Sept.  24th,  iS-jy.

H.  P.  BLAVATSKY'S  MASONIC

PATENT.

[From  The  Franklin  Register,  Feb.  8th,  1878.]

[Editorial. — We  are  gratified  to  be  able  to  present  to  the  readers
of  The  Register  this  week,  the  following  highly-characteristic  letter,
prepared  expressly  for  our  paper  by  Madame  Helen  P.  Blavatsky,  the
authoress  of  his  Unveiled.  In  this  letter  the  lady  defends  the  validity
of  her  diploma  as  a  Mason,  reference  to  which  was  had  in  our  issue  of
January  18th.  The  immediate  cause  of  the  letter  from  Madame  B.  was
the  multiplication  of  attacks  upon  her  claim  to  that  distinguished
honour  both  before  and  since  the  publication  mentioned.

The  field  is  open  for  a  rejoinder;  and  we  trust  that  a  champion
will  appear,  to  defend  that  which  she  so  vigorously  and  bravely  assails.

That  the  subject-matter  in  controversy  may  be  seen  at  a  glance  by
those  who  may  not  be  regular  readers  of  our  paper,  we  again  print
the  text  of  her  diploma.

To  the  Glory  of  the  Sublime  Architect  of  the  Universe.

Ancient   and    Primitive    Rite    of    Masonry,    derived   through    the    Charter   of    the

Sovereign  Sanctuar}-  of  America,  from  the  Grand  Council  of  the

Grand  Lodge  of  France.

Salutation  on  all  points  of  the  Triangle.

Respect  to  the  Order.

Peace,  Tolerance,  Truth.

To  all  Illustrious  and  Enlightened  Masons  throughout  the  world — union,  prosperity,

friendship,  fraternity.  *
We,  the  Thrice-Illustrious  Sovereign  Grand  Master  General,  and  we,  the
Sovereign  Grand  Conservators,  thirty-third  and  last  degree  of  the  Sovereign
Sanctuary  for  England,  Wales,  etc.,  decorated  with  the  Grand  Star  of  Sirius,  etc.,
Grand  Commanders  of  the  Three  Legions  of  the  Knights  of  Masonry,  by  virtue  of
the  high  authority  with  which  we  are  invested,  have  declared  and  proclaimed,  and
by  these  presents  do  declare  and  proclaim  our  illustrious  and  enlightened  Brother,
H.  P.  Blavatsky,  to  be  an  Apprentice,  Companion,  Perfect  Mistress,  Sublime  Elect

II.    P.    BLAVATSKV'S   MASONIC    PATENT.  I2Q

Scotch  Lady,  Grand  Elect,  Chevaliere  de  Rose  Croix,  Adonaite  Mistress,  Perfect
Venerable  Mistress,  an  1  a  crowned  Princess  of  Rite  of  Adoption.

Given  under  our  hands  and  the  seals  of  the  Sovereign  Sanctuary  for  England
and  Wales,  sitting  in  the  Valley  of  London,  this  24th  day  of  November,  1S77,  year
of  true  light  000,000,000.

John  Yarker,  thirty-third  degree,  Sovereign  (hand  Master.

M.  Caspari,  thirty-third  degree,  Grand  Chancellor.

A.  D.  Loewenstark,  thirty- third  degree,  Grand  Secretary.]

To  the  Editor  of  "  The  Frank/in  Register."

I  am  obliged  to  correct  certain  errors  in  your  highly  complimentary
editorial  in  The  Register  of  January  18th.  You  say  that  I  have  taken
"the  regular  degrees  in  Masonic  Lodges"  and  attained  high  dignity  in
the  order,  and  further  add :

Upon  Madame  B.  has  recently  been  conferred  the  diploma  of  the  thirty-third
Masonic  Degree,  from  the  oldest  Masonic  body  in  the  world.

If  you  will  kindly  refer  to  my  his  Unveiled  (vol.  ii.  p.  394),  you  will
find  me  saying:

We  are  neither  under  promise,  obligation,  nor  oath,  and  therefore  violate  no
confidence,

— reference  being  made  to  Western  Masonry,  to  the  criticism  of  which
the  chapter  is  devoted ;  and  full  assurance  is  given  that  I  have  never
taken  "the  regular  degrees"  in  any  Western  Masonic  L,odge.  Of
course,  therefore,  having  taken  no  such  degrees,  I  am  not  a  thirty-third
degree  Mason.  In  a  private  note,  also  in  your  most  recent  editorial,
you  state  that  you  find  yourself  taken  to  task  by  various  Masons,
among  them  one  who  has  taken  thirty-three  degrees — which  include
the  "Ineffable" — for  what  you  said  about  me.  My  Masonic  experience
— if  you  will  so  term  membership  in  several  Eastern  Masonic  Frater-
nities and  Esoteric  Brotherhoods — is  confined  to  the  Orient.  But,
nevertheless,  this  neither  prevents  my  knowing,  in  common  with  all
Eastern  "Masons,"  everything  connected  with  Western  Masonry  (in-
cluding the  numberless  humbugs  that  have  been  imposed  upon  the
Craft  during  the  last  half  century)  nor,  since  the  receipt  of  the  diploma
from  the  "Sovereign  Grand  Master,"  of  which  you  publish  the  text,
my  being  entitled  to  call  myself  a  Mason.  Claiming  nothing,  there-
fore, in  Western  Masonry  but  what  is  expressed  in  the  above  diploma,
you  will  perceive  that  your  Masonic  mentors  must  transfer  their  quarrel
to  John  Yarker,  jun..  P.M.,  P.Mk.,  M.Pz.,  P.G.C.,  and  M.W.S.K.T.
and  R.C.,  K.T.,   P.K.H.,  and    K.A.R.S.,   P.M.W.,   P.S.G.C.  and    P.S.,

I30  A    MODERN    PANARION.

Dai  A.D.,  A.  and  P.  Rite,  to  the  man,  in  short,  who  is  recognized  in
England  and  Wales  and  the  whole  world,  as  a  member  of  the  Masonic
Archaeological  Institute;  as  Honorary  Fellow  of  the  London  Literarv
Union;  of  Lodge  No.  227,  Dublin;  of  the  Bristol  College  of  Rosi-
crucians;  who  is  Past  Grand  Mareschal  of  the  Temple;  member  of  the
Royal  Grand  Council  of  the  Antient  Rites  time  immemorial;  keeper  of
the  Ancient  Royal  Secrets,  Grand  Commander  of  Mizraim,  Ark
Mariners,  Red  Cross  Constantine,  Babylon  and  Palestine,  R.  Grand
Superintendent  for  Lancashire,  Sovereign  Grand  Conservator  of  the
Ancient  and  Primitive  Rite  of  Masonry,  thirty-third  and  last  degree,
etc.,  from  whom  the  Patent  issued.

Your  "Ineffable"  friend  must  have  cultivated  his  spiritual  percep-
tions to  small  purpose  in  the  investigation  and  contemplation  of  the
"Ineffable  Name,"  from  the  fourth  to  the  fourteenth  degrees  of  that
gilded  humbug,  the  A.  and  A.  Rite,  if  he  could  say  that  there  is,

No  authority  for  a  derivation  through  the  charter  of  the  Sovereign  Sanctuarv  of
America,  to  issue  this  patent.

He  lives  in  a  veritable  Crystal  Palace  of  Masonic  glass,  and  must  look
out  for  falling  stones.     Brother  Yarker  says,  in  his  Notes  on  the     .
Modern  Rosicrucianism  and  the  various  Rites  a?id  Degrees  (p.  149),  that  the

Grand  Orient,  derived  from  the  Craft  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  in   1725,  works
and  recognizes  the    following  Rites,  appointing  representatives  with  chapters  in
America  and  elsewhere:   1.  French  Rite;  2.   Rite  of  Heredom;  3.  A.  and  A.   Rite;
4.  Rite  of  Kilwinning;  5.  Philosophical  Rite;  6.  Rite  du  Regime  rectif;  7.  Rite  of
Memphis;  8.  Rite  of  Mizraim.     All  under  a  grand  college  of  Rites.

The  A.  and  P.  Rite  was  originally  chartered  in  America,  November
9th,  1856,  with  David  McChellan  as  G.  M.  [see  Kenneth  Mackenzie's
Royal  Masonic  Cyclopccdia,  p.  43],  and  in  1S62  submitted  entirely  to  the
Grand  Orient  of  France.  In  1S62,  the  Grand  Orient  vised  and  sealed
the  American  Patent  of  Seymour  as  G.  M.,  and  mutual  representatives
were  appointed,  down  to  1S66,  when  the  relations  of  the  G.  O.  with
America  were  ruptured,  and  the  American  Sovereign  Sanctuary  took
up  its  position,  "in  the  bosom"  of  the  Ancient  Cernear  Council,  of
the  "Scottish  Rite"  of  thirty-three  degrees,  as  John  Yarker  says,  in
the  above  quoted  work.  In  1872  a  Sovereign  Sanctuary  of  the  Rite
was  established  in  England,  by  the  American  Grand  Body,  with  John
Yarker  as  Grand  Master.  Down  to  the  present  time  the  legality  of
Seymour's  Sanctuary  has  never  been  disputed  by  the  Grand  Orient  of
France,  and  reference  to  it  is  found  in  Marconis  de  Negre's  books.

H.  p.  blayatsky's  masonic  patent.  131

It  sounds  very  grand,  no  doubt,  to  be  a  thirty-second  degreeist,  and
an  "Ineffable"  one  into  the  bargain;  but  read  what  Robert  B.  Folger,
M.D.,  Past  Master  thirty-third,  says  himself  in  his  Ancient  and  Accepted
Scottish  Rite  in  Thirty-three  Degrees :

With  reference  to  tlie  other  degrees,  .  .  .  (with  the  exception  of  the  thirty-
third,  which  was  manufactured  in  Charleston)  they  were  all  in  the  possession  of  the
G.  O.  before,  but  were  termed    .     .     .     obsolete.

And  further:  he  asks:

Who  were  the  persons  that  formed  this  Supreme  Council  of  the  thirty-third
degree?  And  where  did  they  get  that  degree,  or  the  power  to  confer  it?  .  .  .
Their  patents  have  never  been  produced,  nor  has  any  evidence  ever  yet  been  given
that  they  came  in  possession  of  the  thirty-third  degree  in  a  regular  and  lawful
manner  (pp.  92,  95,  96).

That  an  American  Rite,  thus  spuriously  organized,  declines  to
acknowledge  the  Patent  of  an  English  Sovereign  Sanctuary,  duly
recognized  by  the  Grand  Orient  of  France,  does  not  at  all  invalidate
my  claim  to  Masonic  honours.  As  well  might  Protestants  refuse  to
call  the  Dominicans  Christians,  because  they — the  Protestants — broke
away  from  the  Catholic  Church  and  set  up  for  themselves,  as  for  A.
and  A.  Masons  of  America  to  deny  the  validity  of  a  Patent  from  an
English  A.  and  P.  Rite  body.  Though  I  have  nothing  to  do  with
American  modern  Masonr}T,  and  do  not  expect  to  have,  yet,  feeling
highly  honoured  by  the  distinction  conferred  upon  me  by  Brother
Yarker,  I  mean  to  stand  for  my  chartered  rights,  and  to  recognize  no
other  authority  than  that  of  the  high  Masons  of  England,  who  have
been  pleased  to  send  me  this  unsolicited  and  unexpected  testimonial  of
their  approval  of  my  humble  labours.

Of  a  piece  with  the  above  is  the  ignorant  rudeness  of  certain  critics
who  pronounce  Cagliostro  an  "impostor"  and  his  desire  of  engrafting
Eastern  Philosophy  upon  Western  Masonry  "charlatanism."  Without
such  a  union  Western  Masonry  is  a  corpse  without  a  soul.  As  Yarker
observes,  in  his  Notes  on  the  Mysteries  of  Antiquity :

As  the  Masonic  fraternity  is  now  governed,  the  Craft  is  becoming  a  storehouse
of  paltry  Masonic  emperors  and  other  charlatans,  who  swindle  their  brothers,  ami
feather  their  nests  out  of  the  aristocratic  pretensions  which  they  have  tacked  on
to  our  institutions — ad  captandum  valgus.

Respectfully,

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

VIEWS  OF  THE  THEOSOPHISTS.

[From  the  London  Spiritualist.]
Permit  a  humble  Theosophist  to  appear  for  the  first  time  in  your
columns,  to  say  a  few  words  in  defence  of  our  beliefs.     I  see  in  your
issue    of  December   21st  ultimo,  one  of  your  correspondents,    Mr.  J.
Croucher,  makes  the  following  very  bold  assertions:

Had  the  Theosophists  thoroughly  comprehended  the  nature  of  the  soul  and
spirit,  and  its  relation  to  the  bod}-,  they  would  have  known  that  if  the  soul  once
leaves,  it  leaves  for  ever.

This  is  so  ambiguous  that,  unless  he  uses  the  term  "soul"  to  desig-
nate only  the  vital  principle,  I  can  only  suppose  that  he  falls  into  the
common  error  of  calling  the  astral  body,  spirit,  and  the  immortal
essence,  "soul."  We  Theosophists,  as  Col.  Olcott  has  told  you,  do  vice
versa.

Besides  the  unwarranted  imputation  on  us  of  ignorance,  Mr.  Croucher
has  an  idea  (peculiar  to  himself)  that  the  problem  which  has  here-
tofore taxed  the  powers  of  the  metaphysicians  in  all  ages  has  been
solved  in  our  own.  It  is  hardly  to  be  supposed  that  Theosophists  or
any  others  "thoroughly"  comprehend  the  nature  of  the  soul  and  spirit,
and  their  relation  to  the  body.  Such  an  achievement  is  for  Omni-
science, and  we  Theosophists  treading  the  path  worn  by  the  footsteps
of  the  old  Sages  in  the  moving  sands  of  exoteric  philosophy,  can  only
hope  to  approximate  to  the  absolute  truth.  It  is  really  more  than
doubtful  whether  Mr.  Croucher  can  do  better,  even  though  an  "inspira-
tional medium,"  and  experienced  "through  constant  sittings  with  one
of  the  best  trance  mediums"  in  your  country.  I  may  well  leave  to
time  and  Spiritual  Philosophy  to  entirely  vindicate  us  in  the  far  here-
after. When  any  CEdipus  of  this  or  the  next  century  shall  have  solved
this  eternal  enigma  of  the  Sphinx — man,  ever>r  modern  dogma,  not
excepting  some  pets  of  the  Spiritualists,  will  be  swept  away,  as  the
Theban  monster,  according  to  the  legend,  leaped  from  his  promontory
into  the  sea,  and  was  seen  no  more.

VIEWS   OF  THE   THEOSOPHISTS.  [33

As  early  as  February  iSth,  1876,  your  learned  correspondent,  "M.A.
Oxon.,"  took  occasion,  in  an  article  entitled  "Soul  and  Spirit,"  to
point  out  the  frequent  confusion  of  the  terms  by  other  writers.  As
things  are  no  better  now,  I  will  take  the  opportunity  to  show  how
sorely  Mr.  Croucher,  and  many  other  Spiritualists  of  whom  he  may
be  taken  as  the  spokesman,  misapprehend  Col.  Olcott's  meaning  and
the  views  of  the  New  York  Theosophists.  Col.  Olcott  neither  affirmed
nor  dreamed  of  implying  that  the  immortal  spirit  leaves  the  body  to
produce  the  medial  displays.  And  yet  Mr.  Croucher  evidently  thinks
he  did,  for  the  word  "spirit"  to  him  means  the  inner,  astral  man,  or
double.     Here  is  what  Col.  Olcott  did  say,  double  commas  and  all:

That  mediumistic  physical  phenomena  are  not  produced  by  pure  spirits,  but  by
"souls"  embodied  or  disembodied,  and  usually  with  the  help  of  Elementals.

Any  intelligent  reader  must  perceive  that,  in  placing  the  word
"souls"  in  quotation  marks,  the  writer  indicated  that  he  was  using  it
in  a  sense  not  his  own.  As  a  Theosophist,  he  would  more  properly
and  philosophically  have  said  for  himself  "astral  spirits"  or  "astral
men,"  or  doubles.  Hence,  the  criticism  is  wholly  without  even  a  foun-
dation of  plausibility.  I  wonder  that  a  man  could  be  found  who,  on  so
frail  a  basis,  would  have  attempted  so  sweeping  a  denunciation.  As  it
is,  our  President  only  propounded  the  trine  of  man,  like  the  ancient
and  Oriental  Philosophers  and  their  worth)-  imitator  Paul,  who  held
that  the  physical  corporeity,  the  flesh  and  blood,  was  permeated  and  so
kept  alive  by  the  Psuche,  the  soul  or  astral  body.  This  doctrine,  that
man  is  trine — spirit  or  Nous,  soul  and  body — was  taught  by  the  Apostle
of  the  Gentiles  more  broadly  and  clearly  than  it  has  been  by  any  of  his
Christian  successors  (see  1  Thess.,  v.  23).  But  having  evidently  forgot-
ten or  neglected  to  "thoroughly"  study  the  transcendental  opinions  of
the  ancient  Philosophers  and  the  Christian  Apostle  upon  the  subject,
Mr.  Croucher  views  the  soul  (Psuc/ic)  as  spirit  (Nous)  and  vice  versa.

The  Buddhists,  who  separate  the  three  entities  in  man  (though
viewing  them  as  one  when  on  the  path  to  Nirvana),  yet  divide  the
soul  into  several  parts,  and  have  names  for  each  of  these  and  their
functions.  Thus  confusion  is  unknown  among  them.  The  old  Greeks
did  likewise,  holding  that  Psuche  was  bios,  or  physical  life,  and  it  w;b
thumos,  or  passional  nature,  the  animals  being  accorded  but  the  lower
faculty  of  the  soul  instinct.  The  soul  or  Psuche  is  itself  a  combination,
consensus  or  unity  of  the  bios,  or  physical  vitality,  the  epithumia  or
concupiscible  nature,  and  the pkren,  mens  ox  mind.    Perhaps  the  animus

134  A    MODERN    PANARION.

ought  to  be  included.  It  is  constituted  of  ethereal  substance,  which
pervades  the  whole  universe,  and  is  derived  wholly  from  the  soul  of
the  world — Aninia  Mundi  or  the  Buddhist  Svabhavat — which  is  not
spirit;  though  intangible  and  impalpable,  it  is  yet,  by  comparison  with
spirit  or  pure  abstraction,  objective  matter.  By  its  complex  nature,
the  soul  may  descend  and  ally  itself  so  closely  to  the  corporeal  nature
as  to  exclude  a  higher  life  from  exerting  any  moral  influence  upon  it.
On  the  other  hand,  it  can  so  closely  attach  itself  to  the  Nous  or  spirit,
as  to  share  its  potency,  in  which  case  its  vehicle,  physical  man,  will
appear  as  a  God  even  during  his  terrestrial  life.  Unless  such  union  of
soul  and  spirit  does  occur,  either  during  this  life  or  after  physical  death,
the  individual  man  is  not  immortal  as  an  entity.  The  Psuche  is  sooner
or  later  disintegrated.  Though  the  man  ma}'  have  gained  "the  whole
world,"  he  has  lost  his  "soul."  Paul,  when  teaching  the  anastasis,  or
continuation  of  individual  spiritual  life  after  death,  set  forth  that  there
was  a  physical  body  which  was  raised  in  incorruptible  substance.

The  spiritual  body  is  most  assuredly  not  one  of  the  bodies,  or
visible  or  tangible  larvae,  which  form  in  circle-rooms,  and  are  so
improperly  termed  "materialized  spirits."  When  once  the  metanoia,
the  full  developing  of  spiritual  life,  has  lifted  the  spiritual  body  out
of  the  psychical  (the  disembodied,  corruptible,  astral  man,  what  Col.
Olcott  calls  "soul"),  it  becomes,  in  strict  ratio  with  its  progress,  more
and  more  an  abstraction  for  the  corporeal  senses.  It  can  influence,
inspire,  and  even  communicate  with  men  subjectively;  it  can  make
itself  felt,  and  even,  in  those  rare  instances  when  the  clairvoyant  is
perfectly  pure  and  perfectly  lucid,  be  seen  by  the  inner  eye  (which  is
the  eye  of  the  purified  Psuche — soul).  But  how  can  it  ever  manifest
objectively?

It  will  be  seen,  then,  that  to  apply  the  term  "spirit"  to  the  mate-
rialized cidola  of  your  "form-manifestations"  is  grossly  improper,  and
something  ought  to  be  done  to  change  the  practice,  since  scholars  have
begun  to  discuss  the  subject.  At  best,  when  not  what  the  Greeks
termed  phantasma,  they  are  but  phasma  or  apparitions.

In  scholars,  speculators,  and  especially  in  our  modern  savants,  the
psychical  principle  is  more  or  less  pervaded  by  the  corporeal,  and  "the
things  of  the  spirit  are  foolishness  and  impossible  to  be  known"
(i  Cor.,  ii.  14).  Plato  was  then  right,  in  his  way,  in  despising  land-
measuring,  geometry  and  arithmetic,  for  all  these  overlooked  all  high
ideas.     Plutarch  taught  that  at  death  Proserpine  separated  the  body

VIEWS   OF   THE    THEOSOPIIISTS.  135

and  the  soul  entirely,  after  which  the  latter  became  a  free  and  indepen-
dent demon  (daimon).  Afterward  the  good  underwent  a  second  disso-
lution: Demeter  divided  the  Psuche  from  the  Nous  or  Pneuma.  The
former  was  dissolved  after  a  time  into  ethereal  particles — hence  the
inevitable  dissolution  and  subsequent  annihilation  of  the  man  who  at
death  is  purely  psychical;  the  latter,  the  Nous,  ascended  to  its  higher
divine  power  and  became  gradually  a  pure,  divine  spirit.  Kapila,  in
common  with  all  Eastern  Philosophers,  despised  the  purely  psychical
nature.  It  is  this  agglomeration  of  the  grosser  particles  of  the  soul,
the  mesmeric  exhalations  of  human  nature  imbued  with  all  its  terres-
trial desires  and  propensities,  its  vices,  imperfections  and  weakness,
forming  the  astral  body,  which  can  become  objective  under  certain
circumstances,  which  the  Buddhists  call  the  Skandhas  (the  groups),  and
Col.  Olcott  has  for  convenience  termed  the  "soul."  The  Buddhists
and  Brahmans  teach  that  the  man's  individuality  is  not  seenred  until
he  has  passed  through  and  become  disembarrassed  of  the  last  of  these
groups,  the  final  vestige  of  earthly  taint.  Hence  their  doctrine  of
metempsychosis,  so  ridiculed  and  so  utterly  misunderstood  by  our
greatest  Orientalists.

Even  the  physicists  teach  us  that  the  particles  composing  physical
man  are,  by  evolution,  reworked  by  nature  into  every  variety  of  inferior
physical  form.  Why,  then,  are  the  Buddhists  unphilosophical  or  even
unscientific,  in  affirming  that  the  semi-material  Skandhas  of  the  astral
man  (his  very  ego,  up  to  the  point  of  final  purification)  are  appropri-
ated to  the  evolution  of  minor  astral  forms  |  which,  of  course,  enter
into  the  purely  physical  bodies  of  animals)  as  fast  as  he  throws  them
off  in  his  progress  toward  Nirvana?  Therefore,  we  may  correctlv  say,
that  so  long  as  the  disembodied  man  is  throwing  off  a  single  particle
of  these  Skandhas,  a  portion  of  him  is  being  reincarnated  in  the  bodies
of  plants  and  animals.  And  if  he,  the  disembodied  astral  man,  be  so
material  that  "Demeter"  cannot  find  even  one  spark  of  the  Pneuma  to
carry  up  to  the  "divine  power,"  then  the  individual,  so  to  speak,  is
dissolved,  piece  by  piece,  into  the  crucible  of  evolution,  or,  as  the
Hindus  allegorically  illustrate  it,  he  passes  thousands  of  years  in  the
bodies  of  impure  animals.  Here  we  see  how  completely  the  ancient
Greek  and  Hindu  Philosophers,  the  modern  Oriental  schools,  and  the
Theosophists,  are  ranged  on  one  side,  in  perfect  accord,  and  the  bright
array  of  "inspirational  mediums"  and  "spirit  guides"  stand  in  perfect
discord  on  the  other.      Though  no  two  of  the  latter,  unfortunately,

I36  A    MODERN    PANARION.

agree  as  to  what  is  and  what  is  not  truth,  yet  the3r  do  agree  with  unani-
mity to  antagonize  whatever  of  the  teachings  of  the  Philosophers  we
may  repeat.

L,et  it  not  be  inferred,  though,  from  this,  that  I,  or  any  other  real
Theosophist,  undervalue  true  spiritual  phenomena  or  philosophy,  or
that  we  do  not  believe  in  the  communication  between  mortals  and  pure
Spirits,  any  less  than  we  do  in  communication  between  bad  men  and
bad  Spirits,  or  even  of  good  men  with  bad  Spirits  under  bad  conditions.
Occultism  is  the  essence  of  Spiritualism,  while  modern  or  popular
Spiritualism  I  cannot  better  characterize  than  as  adulterated  uncon-
scious Magic.  We  go  so  far  as  to  say  that  all  the  great  and  noble
characters,  all  the  grand  geniuses,  the  poets,  painters,  sculptors,  musi-
cians, all  who  have  worked  at  any  time  for  the  realization  of  their
highest  ideal,  irrespective  of  selfish  ends — have  been  spiritually  in-
spired; not  mediums,  as  many  Spiritualists  call  them — passive  tools
in  the  hands  of  controlling  guides — but  incarnate,  illuminated  souls,
working  consciously  in  collaboration  with  the  pure  disembodied  human
and  new-embodied  high  Planetary  Spirits,  for  the  elevation  and  spiri-
tualization  of  mankind.  We  believe  that  everything  in  material  life  is
most  intimately  associated  with  spiritual  agencies.  As  regards  physi-
cal phenomena  and  mediumship,  we  believe  that  it  is  only  when  the
passive  medium  has  given  place,  or  rather  grown  into,  the  conscious
mediator,  that  he  discerns  between  Spirits  good  and  bad.  And  we  do
believe,  and  know  also,  that  while  the  incarnate  man  (though  the
highest  Adept)  cannot  vie  in  potency  with  the  pure  disembodied
Spirits,  who,  freed  of  all  their  Skandhas,  have  become  subjective  to  the
physical  senses,  yet  he  can  perfectly  equal,  and  can  far  surpass  in  the
way  of  phenomena,  mental  or  physical,  the  average  "Spirit"  of  modern
mediumship.  Believing  this,  you  will  perceive  that  we  are  better
Spiritualists,  in  the  true  acceptation  of  the  word,  than  so-called
Spiritualists,  who,  instead  of  showing  the  reverence  we  do  to  true
Spirits — Gods — debase  the  name  of  Spirit  by  applying  it  to  the  im-
pure, or  at  best,  imperfect  beings  who  produce  the  majority  of  the
phenomena.

The  two  objections  urged  by  Mr.  Croucher  against  the  claim  of  the
Theosophists,  that  a  child  is  but  a  duality  at  birth,  "and  perhaps  until
the  sixth  or  seventh  year,"  and  that  some  depraved  persons  are  annihi-
lated at  some  time  after  death,  are  (1)  the  mediums  have  described  to
him  his  three  children  "who  passed  away  at  the  respective  ages  of  two,

VIEWS   OF  THE   THEOSOPHISTS.  137

four,  and  six  years"  ;  and  (  2)  that  he  has  known  persons  who  were  "very
depraved"  on  earth  come  back.     He  says:

These  statements  have  been  afterwards  confirmed  by  glorious  beings  who  came
after,  and  who  have  proved  by  their  mastery  of  the  laws  which  are  governing  the
universe,  that  they  are  worthy  of  being  believed.

I  am  really  happy  to  hear  that  Mr.  Croucher  is  competent  to  sit  in
judgment  upon  these  "glorious  beings,"  and  give  them  the  palm  over
Kapila,  Manu,  Plato,  and  even  Paul.  It  is  worth  something,  after  all,
to  be  an  "inspirational  medium."  We  have  no  such  "glorious  beings"
in  the  Theosophical  Society  to  learn  from;  but  it  is  evident  that  while
Mr.  Croucher  sees  and  judges  things  through  his  emotional  nature,  the
Philosophers  whom  we  study  took  nothing  from  any  "glorious  being"
that  did  not  perfectly  accord  with  the  universal  harmony,  justice,  and
equilibrium  of  the  manifested  plan  of  the  Universe.  The  Hermetic
axiom,  "as  below,  so  above,"  is  the  only  rule  of  evidence  accepted  by
the  Theosophists.  Believing  in  a  spiritual  and  invisible  Universe,  we
cannot  conceive  of  it  in  any  other  way  than  as  completely  dovetailing
and  corresponding  with  the  material,  objective  Universe;  for  logic  and
observation  alike  teach  us  that  the  latter  is  the  outcome  and  visible
manifestation  of  the  former,  and  that  the  laws  governing  both  are
immutable.

In  this  letter  of  Dec.  7th  Colonel  Olcott  very  appropriately  illustrates
his  subject  of  potential  immortality  by  citing  the  admitted  physical
law  of  the  survival  of  the  fittest.  The  rule  applies  to  the  greatest  as  to
the  smallest  things,  to  the  planet  equally  with  the  plant.  It  applies  to
man.  And  the  imperfectly  developed  man-child  can  no  more  exist
under  the  conditions  prepared  for  the  perfected  types  of  its  species,
than  can  an  imperfect  plant  or  animal.  In  infantile  life  the  higher
faculties  are  not  developed,  but,  as  everyone  knows,  are  only  in  the
germ,  or  rudimentary.  The  babe  is  an  animal,  however  "angelic"  he
may,  and  naturally  enough  ought  to,  appear  to  his  parents.  Be  it
ever  so  beautifully  modelled,  the  infant  body  is  but  the  jewel-casket
preparing  for  the  jewel.  It  is  bestial,  selfish,  and,  as  a  babe,  nothing
more.  Little  of  even  the  soul,  Psuche,  can  be  perceived  except  so  far
as  vitality  is  concerned;  hunger,  terror,  pain  and  pleasure  appear  to  be
the  principal  of  its  conceptions.  A  kitten  is  its  superior  in  everything
but  possibilities.  The  grey  neurine  of  the  brain  is  equally  unformed.
After  a  time  mental  qualities  begin  to  appear,  but  they  relate  chiefly  to
external  matters.    The  cultivation  of  the  mind  of  the  child  by  teachers

I38  A    MODERN    PANARION.

can  only  affect  this  part  of  the  nature — what  Paul  calls  natural  or
physical,  and  James  and  Jude  sensual  or  psychical.  Hence  the  words
of  Jude,  "psychical,  having  not  the  spirit,"  and  of  Paul:

The  psychical  man  receiveth  not  the  things  of  the  spirit,  for  to  him  thev  are
foolishness;  the  spiritual  man  discerneth.

It  is  only  the  man  of  full  age,  with  his  faculties  disciplined  to  discern
good  and  evil,  whom  we  can  denominate  spiritual,  noetic,  intuitive.
Children  developed  in  such  respects  would  be  precocious,  abnormal
abortions.

Why,  then,  should  a  child  who  has  never  lived  other  than  an  animal
life;  who  never  discerned  right  from  wrong;  who  never  cared  whether
he  lived  or  died — since  he  could  not  understand  either  of  life  or  death
— become  individually  immortal?  Man's  cycle  is  not  complete  until  he
has  passed  through  the  earth-life.  No  one  stage  of  probation  and
experience  can  be  skipped  over.  He  must  be  a  man  before  he  can
become  a  Spirit.  A  dead  child  is  a  failure  of  nature — he  must  live
again;  and  the  same  Psuche  reenters  the  physical  plane  through
another  birth.  Such  cases,  together  with  those  of  congenital  idiots,
are,  as  stated  in  his  Unveiled,  the  only  instances  of  human  reincarna-
tion.* If  every  child-duality  were  to  be  immortal,  why  deny  a  like
individual  immortality  to  the  duality  of  the  animal?  Those  who
believe  in  the  trinity  of  man  know  the  babe  to  be  but  a  duality — body
and  soul — and  the  individuality  which  resides  only  in  the  psychical  is,
as  we  have  seen  proved  by  the  Philosophers,  perishable.  The  com-
pleted trinity  only  survives.  Trinity,  I  say,  for  at  death  the  astral
form  becomes  the  outwrard  body,  and  inside  a  still  finer  one  evolves,
which  takes  the  place  of  the  Psuche  on  earth,  and  the  whole  is  more
or  less  overshadowed  by  the  Nous.  Space  prevented  Col.  Olcott  from
developing  the  doctrine  more  fully,  or  he  would  have  added  that  not
even  all  of  the  Elementaries  (human)  are  annihilated.  There  is  still  a
chance  for  some.  By  a  supreme  struggle  these  may  retain  their  third
and  higher  principle,  and  so,  though  slowly  and  painfully,  yet  ascend
sphere  after  sphere,  casting  off  at  each  transition  the  previous  heavier
garment,  and  clothing  themselves  in  more  radiant  spiritual  envelopes,
until,  rid  of  every  finite  particle,  the  trinity  merges  into  the  final
Nirvana,  and  becomes  a  unity — a  God.

A  volume  would  scarce  suffice  to  enumerate  all  the  varieties  of  Ele-

*  [Note  that  "reincarnation"  is  here  used  as  a  term  applying  only  to  the  Psuche.     This  does  not
reincarnate,  it  has  always  been  taught,  except  in  the  instances  given. — Eds.]

VIEWS   OF   THE   THEOSOPHISTS.  139

mentaries  and  Elementals;  the  former  being  so  called  by  some  Kaba-
lists  (Henry  Knnrath,  for  instance)  to  indicate  their  entanglement  in
the  terrestrial  elements  which  hold  them  captive,  and  the  latter  desig-
nated by  that  name  to  avoid  confusion,  and  equally  applying  to  those
which  go  to  form  the  astral  body  of  the  infant  and  to  the  stationary
Nature  Spirits  proper.  Eliphas  L,evi,  however,  indifferently  calls  them
all  "Elementary"  and  "souls."  I  repeat  again,  it  is  but  the  wholly
psychical  disembodied  astral  man  which  ultimately  disappears  as  an
individual  entity.  As  to  the  component  parts  of  his  Psuche,  they  are
as  indestructible  as  the  atoms  of  any  other  body  composed  of  matter.

The  man  must  indeed  be  a  true  animal  who  has  not,  after  death,  a
spark  of  the  divine  Ruach  or  Nous  left  in  him  to  allow  him  a  chance
of  self-salvation.  Yet  there  are  such  lamentable  exceptions,  not  alone
among  the  depraved,  but  also  among  those  who,  during  life,  by  stifling
even'  idea  of  an  after  existence,  have  killed  in  themselves  the  last
desire  to  achieve  immortality.  It  is  the  will  of  man,  his  all-potent  will,
that  weaves  his  destiny,  and  if  a  man  is  determined  in  the  notion  that
death  means  annihilation,  he  will  find  it  so.  It  is  among  our  commonest
experiences  that  the  determination  of  physical  life  or  death  depends
upon  the  will.  Some  people  snatch  themselves  by  force  of  determina-
tion from  the  very  jaws  of  death,  while  others  succumb  to  insignificant
maladies.  What  man  does  with  his  body  he  can  do  with  his  disem-
bodied Psuche.

Nothing  in  this  militates  against  the  images  of  Mr.  Croucher's
children  being  seen  in  the  Astral  Light  by  the  medium,  either  as
actually  left  by  the  children  themselves,  or  as  imagined  by  the  father
to  look  when  grown.  The  impression  in  the  latter  case  would  be  but  a
phasma,  while  in  the  former  it  is  a  phantasma,  or  the  apparition  of  the
indestructible  impress  of  what  once  really  was.

In  days  of  old  the  "mediators"  of  humanity  were  men  like  Christna,
Gautama  Buddha,  Jesus,  Paul,  Apollonius  of  Tyana,  Plotinus,  Por-
phyry, and  the  like  of  them.  They  were  Adepts,  Philosophers— men
who,  by  struggling  their  whole  lives  in  purity,  study,  and  self-sacrifice,
through  trials,  privations  and  self-discipline,  attained  divine  illumina-
tion and  seemingly  superhuman  powers.  They  could  not  only  produce
all  the  phenomena  seen  in  our  times,  but  regarded  it  as  a  sacred  duty
to  cast  out  "evil  spirits,"  or  demons,  from  the  unfortunates  who  were
obsessed— in  other  words,  to  rid  the  medium  of  their  days  of  the
"Elementaries."

140  A   MODERN   PANARION.

But  in  our  time  of  improved  psychology  every  hysterical  sensitive
looms  into  a  seer,  and  behold!  there  are  mediums  by  the  thousand!
Without  any  previous  study,  self-denial,  or  the  least  limitation  of  their
physical  nature,  they  assume,  in  the  capacity  of  mouthpieces  of  un-
identified and  unidentifiable  intelligences,  to  outrival  Socrates  in  wis-
dom, Paul  in  eloquence,  and  Tertullian  himself  in  fiery  and  authorita-
tive dogmatism.  The  Theosophists  are  the  last  to  assume  infallibility
for  themselves,  or  recognize  it  in  others;  as  they  judge  others,  so  they
are  willing  to  be  judged.

In  the  name,  then,  of  logic  and  common  sense,  before  bandying
epithets,  let  us  submit  our  difference  to  the  arbitrament  of  reason.
Let  us  compare  all  things,  and,  putting  aside-,  emotionalism  and  preju-
dice as  unworthy  of  the  logician  and  the  experimentalist,  hold  fast
only  to  that  which  passes  the  ordeal  of  ultimate  analysis.

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

New  York,  Jan.  14th,  iSjS.

A  SOCIETY  WITHOUT  A  DOGMA.

[From  the  London  Spiritualist,  Feb.  8th.  187S.]
Times  have  greatly  changed  since  the  winter  of  1875-6,  when  the
establishment  of  the  Theosophical  Society  caused  the  grand  army  of
American  Spiritualists  to  wave  banners,  clang  steel,  and  set  up  a  great
shouting.  How  well  we  all  remember  the  putting  forth  of  "Danger
Signals,"  the  oracular  warnings  and  denunciations  of  numberless
mediums!  How  fresh  in  memory  the  threats  of  "angel-friends"  to
Dr.  Gardiner,  of  Boston*  that  they  would  kill  Colonel  Olcott  if  he
dared  call  them  "Elementaries"  in  the  lectures  he  was  about  deliver-
ing! The  wrorst  of  the  storm  has  passed.  The  hail  of  imprecations
no  longer  batters  around  our  devoted  heads;  it  is  raining  now,  and  we
can  almost  see  the  rainbow  of  promised  peace  spanning  the  sky.

Beyond  doubt,  much  of  this  subsidence  of  the  disturbed  elements  is
due  to  our  armed  neutrality.  But  still  I  judge  that  the  gradual  spread
of  a  desire  to  learn  something  more  as  to  the  cause  of  the  phenomena
must  be  taken  into  account.  And  yet  the  time  has  not  quite  come
when  the  lion  (Spiritualism)  and  the  lamb  (Theosophy)  are  ready  to
lie  down  together — unless  the  lamb  is  willing  to  lie  inside  the  lion.
While  wre  held  our  tongues  we  were  asked  to  speak,  and  when  we
spoke — or  rather  our  President  spoke — the  hue  and  cry  was  raised
once  more.  Though  the  pop-gun  fusillade  and  the  dropping  shots  of
musketry  have  mostly  ceased,  the  defiles  of  your  spiritual  Balkans  are
defended  by  your  heaviest  Krupp  guns.  If  the  fire  were  directed  only
against  Colonel  Olcott  there  would  be  no  occasion  for  me  to  bring  up
the  reserves.  But  fragments  from  both  of  the  bombs  which  your  able
gunner,  and  our  mutual  friend,  "M.A.  Oxon."  has  exploded,  in  his  two
letters  of  January  4th  and  nth,  have  given  me  contusions.  Under
the  velvet  paw  of  his  rhetoric  I  have  felt  the  scratch  of  challenge.

At  the  very  beginning  of  what  must  be  a  long  struggle,   it  i^  im-
peratively demanded  that  the  Theosophical  position  shall  be  unequivo-

142  A    MODERN    PANARION.

cally  defined.  In  the  last  of  the  above  two  communications,  it  is  stated
that  Colonel  Olcott  transmits  "the  teaching  of  the  learned  author  of
Isis  Unveiled'" — the  "master  key  to  all  problems."  (?)

Who  has  ever  claimed  that  the  book  was  that,  or  anything  like  it?
Not  the  author,  certainly.  The  title?  A  misnomer  for  which  the
publisher  is  unpremeditatedly  responsible,  and,  if  I  am  not  mistaken,
"M.A.  Oxon."  knows  it.  My  title  was  The  Veil  of  Isis,  and  that  head-
line runs  through  the  entire  first  volume.  Not  until  that  volume  was
stereotyped  did  anyone  recollect  that  a  book  of  the  same  name  was
before  the  public.  Then,  as  a  demiere  ressource,  the  publisher  selected
the  present  title.

"If  he  [Olcott]  be  not  the  rose,  at  any  rate  he  has  lived  near  it,"
says  your  learned  correspondent.  Had  I  seen  this  sentence  apart  from
the  context,  I  would  never  have  imagined  that  the  unattractive  old
party,  superficially  known  as  H.  P.  Blavatsky,  was  designated  under
this  poetical  Persian  simile.  If  he  had  compared  me  to  a  bramble-
bush,  I  might  have  complimented  him  upon  his  artistic  realism.  He
says :

Colonel  Olcott  of  himself  would  command  attention;  he  commands  it  still
more  on  account  of  the  store  of  knowledge  to  which  he  has  had  access.

True,  he  has  had  such  access,  but  by  no  means  is  it  confined  to  my
humble  self.  Though  I  may  have  taught  him  a  few  of  the  things  that
I  had  learned  in  other  countries  (and  corroborated  the  theory  in  every
case  by  practical  illustration),  yet  a  far  abler  teacher  than  I  could  not
in  three  brief  years  have  given  him  more  than  the  alphabet  of  what
there  is  to  learn,  before  a  man  can  become  wise  in  spiritual  and  psycho-
physiological things.  The  very  limitations  of  modern  languages  prevent
any  rapid  communication  of  ideas  about  Eastern  Philosophy.  I  defy
the  great  Max  Miiller  himself  to  translate  Kapila's  Sutras  so  as  to  give
their  real  meaning.  We  have  seen  what  the  best  European  authorities
can  do  with  the  Hindu  metaphysics;  and  what  a  mess  they  have
made  of  it,  to  be  sure!  The  Colonel  corresponds  directly  with  Hindu
scholars,  and  has  from  them  a  good  deal  more  than  he  can  get  from  so
clumsy  a  preceptor  as  myself.

Our  friend,  "M.A.  Oxon.,"  says  that  Colonel  Olcott  "comes  forward
to  enlighten  us" — than  which  scarce  anything  could  be  more  inaccu-
rate. He  neither  comes  forward,  nor  pretends  to  enlighten  anyone.
The  public  wanted  to  know  the  views  of  the  Theosophists,  and  our
President  attempted  to  give,  as  succinctly  as  possible  in  the  limits  of  a

A    SOCIETY    WITHOUT   A   DOGMA.  I43

single  article,  some  little  glimpse  of  so  much  of  the  truth  as  he  had
learned.  That  the  result  would  not  be  wholly  satisfactory  was  inevit-
able. Volumes  would  not  suffice  to  answer  all  the  questions  naturally
presenting  themselves  to  an  enquiring  mind;  a  library  of  quartos
would  barely  obliterate  the  prejudices  of  those  who  ride  at  the  anchor
of  centuries  of  metaphysical  and  theological  misconceptions — perhaps
even  errors.  But,  though  our  President  is  not  guilty  of  the  conceit
of  "pretending  to  enlighten"  Spiritualists,  I  think  he  has  certainly
thrown  out  some  hints  worthy  of  the  thoughtful  consideration  of  the
unprejudiced.

I  am  sorry  that  "M.A.  Oxon."  is  not  content  with  mere  suggestions.
Nothing  but  the  whole  naked  truth  will  satisfy  him.  We  must  "square"
our  theories  with  his  facts,  we  must  lay  our  theory  down  "on  exact
lines  of  demonstration."     We  are  asked:

Where  are  the  seers?     What  are  their  records?     And,  far  more  important,  how
do  they  verify  them  to  us  ?

I  answer:  Seers  are  where  "Schools  of  the  Prophets"  are  still  extant,
and  they  have  their  records  with  them.  Though  Spiritualists  are  not
able  to  go  in  search  of  them,  yet  the  Philosophy  they  teach  commends
itself  to  logic,  and  its  principles  are  mathematically  demonstrable.  If
this  be  not  so,  let  it  be  shown.

But,  in  their  turn,  Theosophists  may  ask,  and  do  ask:  Where  are  the
proofs  that  the  medial  phenomena  are  exclusively  attributable  to  the
agency  of  departed  "Spirits"?  Who  are  the  "Seers"  among  mediums
blessed  with  an  infallible  lucidity?  What  "tests"  are  given  that  admit
of  no  alternative  explanation?  Though  Swedenborg  was  one  of  the
greatest  of  Seers,  and  churches  are  erected  in  his  name,  yet  except  to
his  adherents  what  proof  is  there  that  the  "Spirits"  objective  to  his
vision — including  Paul — promenading  in  hats,  were  anything  but  the
creatures  of  his  imagination?  Are  the  spiritual  potentialities  of  the
living  man  so  well  comprehended  that  mediums  can  tell  when  their
own  agency  ceases,  and  that  of  outside  influence  begins?  No;  but
for  all  answer  to  our  suggestions  that  the  subject  is  open  to  debate,
"M.A.  Oxon."  shudderingly  charges  us  with  attempting  to  upset  what
he  designates  as  "a  cardinal  dogma  of  our  faith,"  i.e.,  the  faith  of  the
Spiritualists.

Dogma?  Faith?  These  are  the  right  and  left  pillars  of  every  soul-
crushing  Theology.  Theosophists  have  no  dogmas,  exact  no  blind
faith.      Theosophists   are   ever   ready  to  abandon   every   idea    that    is

144  A   MODERN    PANARION.

proved  erroneous  upon  strictly  logical  deductions;  let  Spiritualists  do
the  same.  Dogmas  are  the  toys  that  amuse,  and  can  satisfy  but,  un-
reasoning children.  They  are  the  offspring  of  human  speculation  and
prejudiced  fancy.  In  the  eye  of  true  Philosophy  it  seems  an  insult  to
common  sense,  that  we  should  break  loose  from  the  idols  and  dogmas
of  either  Christian  or  heathen  exoteric  faith  to  catch  up  those  of  a
church  of  Spiritualism.  Spiritualism  must  either  be  a  true  Philosophy,
amenable  to  the  test  of  the  recognized  criterion  of  logic,  or  be  set  up
in  its  niche  beside  the  broken  idols  of  hundreds  of  antecedent  Christian
sects.

Realizing,  as  they  do,  the  boundlessness  of  the  absolute  truth,  Theo-
sophists  repudiate  all  claim  to  infallibility.  The  most  cherished  pre-
conceptions, the  most  "pious  hope,"  the  strongest  "master  passion,"
they  sweep  aside  like  dust  from  their  path,  when  their  error  is  pointed
out.  Their  highest  hope  is  to  approximate  to  the  truth;  that  they  have
succeeded  in  going  a  few  steps  beyond  the  Spiritualists,  they  think
proved  in  their  conviction  that  they  know  nothing  in  comparison
with  what  is  to  be  learned ;  in  their  sacrifice  of  every  pet  theory  and
prompting  of  emotionalism  at  the  shrine  of  fact;  and  in  their  absolute
and  unqualified  repudiation  of  everything  that  smacks  of  "dogma."

With  great  rhetorical  elaboration  "M.A.  Oxon."  paints  the  result  of
the  supersedure  of  spiritualistic  by  Theosophic  ideas.  In  brief,  he
shows  Spiritualism  a  lifeless  corpse:

A  bod}'  from  which  the  soul  has  been  wrenched,  and  for  which  most  men  will
care  nothing.

We  submit  that  the  reverse  is  true.  Spiritualists  wrench  the  soul
from  true  Spiritualism  by  their  degradation  of  Spirit.  Of  the  infinite
they  make  the  finite;  of  the  divine  subjective  they  make  the  human
and  limited  objective.  Are  Theosophists  Materialists?  Do  not  their
hearts  warm  with  the  same  "pure  and  holy  love"'  for  their  "loved
ones"  as  those  of  Spiritualists?  Have  not  many  of  us  sought  long
years  "through  the  gate  of  mediumship  to  have  access  to  the  world
of  Spirit" — and  vainly  sought?  The  comfort  and  assurance  modern
Spiritualism  could  not  give  us  we  found  in  Theosophy.  As  a  result
we  believe  far  more  firmly  than  many  Spiritualists — for  our  belief  is
based  on  knowledge — in  the  communion  of  our  beloved  ones  with  us;
but  not  as  materialized  Spirits  with  beating  hearts  and  sweating  brows.

Holding  such  views  as  we  do  as  to  logic  and  fact,  you  perceive  that
when  a  Spiritualist  pronounces  to  us  the  words  dogma  and  fact,  debate

A   SOCIETY   WITHOUT   A   DOGMA.  I45

is  impossible,  for  there  is  no  common  ground  upon  which  we  can  meet.
We  decline  to  break  our  heads  against  shadows.  If  fact  and  logic
were  given  the  consideration  they  should  have,  there  would  be  no
more  temples  in  this  world  for  exoteric  worship,  whether  Christian
or  heathen,  and  the  method  of  the  Theosophists  would  be  welcomed  as
the  only  one  insuring  action  and  progress — a  progress  that  cannot  be
arrested,  since  each  advance  shows  yet  greater  advances  to  be  made.

As  to  our  producing  our  "Seers"  and  "their  records" — one  word.
In  The  Spiritualist  of  Jan.  nth,  I  find  Dr.  Peebles  saying  that  in  due
time  he

Will  publish  such  facts  about  the  Dravida  Brahmans  as  I  am  [he  is]  permitted.
I  say  permitted,  because  some  of  these  occurred  under  the  promise  and  seal  of
secrecy.

If  even  the  casual  wayfarer  is  put  under  an  obligation  of  secrecy
before  he  is  shown  some  of  the  less  important  psycho-physiological
phenomena,  is  it  not  barely  possible  that  the  Brotherhood  to  which
some  Theosophists  belong  has  also  doctrines,  records,  and  phenomena,
that  cannot  be  revealed  to  the  profane  and  the  indifferent,  without  any
imputation  lying  against  their  reality  and  authoritativeness?      This,
at  least,  I  believe,  "M.A.  Oxon."  knows.      As  we  do  not  offensively
obtrude  ourselves  upon  an   unwilling  public,  but  only  answer  under
compulsion,  we  can  hardly  be  denounced  as  contumacious  if  we  pro-
duce to  a  promiscuous  public  neither  our  "Seers"  nor  "their  records."
When   Mohammed  is  ready  to  go  to  the  mountain,  it  will  be  found
standing  in  its  place.

And  that  no  one  that  makes  this  search  may  suppose  that  we  Theo-
sophists send  him  to  a  place  where  there  are  no  pitfalls  for  the  unwary,
I  quote  from  the  famous  commentary  on  the  Bhagavad  Gita  of  our
brother  Hurrychund  Chintamon,  the  unqualified  admission  that,

In  Hindustan,  as  in  England,  there  are  doctrines  for  the  learned,  and  dogmas
for  the  unlearned;  strong  meat  for  men,  and  milk  for  babes;  facts  for  the  few,  and
fictions  for  the  many;  realities  for  the  wise,  and  romances  for  the  simple;  esoteric
truth  for  the  philosopher,  and  exoteric  fable  for  the  fool.

Like  the  Philosophy  taught  by  this  author  in  the  work  in  question,

the  object  of  the  Theosophical  Society  "is  the  cleansing  of  spiritual

truth."

H.  P.  Biayatsky.

New  York,  Jan.  20th,  iSyj.

ELEMENTARIES.

[From  The  Religio-Philosophical Journal,  Nov.  17th,  1877.]

I  perceive  that  of  late  the  ostracized  subject  of  the  Kabalistic
"Elementaries"  is  beginning  to  appear  in  the  orthodox  spiritualistic
papers  pretty  often.  No  wonder;  Spiritualism  and  its  Philosophy  are
progressing,  and  they  will  progress  despite  the  opposition  of  some  very
learned  ignoramuses,  who  imagine  the  Cosmos  rotates  within  the
academic  brain.  But  if  a  new  term  is  once  admitted  for  discussion,
the  least  we  can  do  is  to  first  clearly  ascertain  what  that  term  means.
We  students  of  the  Oriental  Philosophy  count  it  a  clear  gain  that  spiri-
tualistic journals  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  are  beginning  to  discuss
the  subject  of  sub-human  and  earth-bound  beings,  even  though  they
ridicule  the  idea.  But  do  those  who  ridicule  know  what  they  are  talk-
ing about,  having  never  studied  the  Kabalistic  writers?  It  is  evident
to  me  that  they  are  confounding  the  "Elementaries" — disembodied,
vicious,  and  earth-bound,  yet  human  Spirits — with  the  "Elementals,"
or  Nature  Spirits.

With  your  permission,  then,  I  will  answer  an  article  by  Dr.  Wold  rich
which  appeared  in  your  Joiirnal  of  the  27th  inst.,  and   to  which  the
author  gives  the  title  of  "Elementaries."     I  freely  admit  that,  owing
to  my  imperfect  knowledge  of  English  at  the  time  I  first  wrote  upon
the  Elementaries,  I  may  have  myself  contributed  to  the  present  con-
fusion, and  thus  brought  upon  my  doomed  head  the  wrath  of  Spiritu-
alists, mediums,  and  their  "guides"  into  the  bargain.     But  now  I  will
attempt  to  make   my  meaning  clear.     Eliphas  L,evi   applies  the  term
"Elementary"  equally  to  earth-bound  human  Spirits  and  to  the  creatures
of  the  elements.     This  carelessness  on  his  part  is  due  to  the  fact  that
as  the  human  Elementaries  are  considered  by  the  Kabalists  as  having
irretrievably  lost  every  chance  of  immortality,  they  therefore,  after  a
certain  period  of  time,  become  no  better  than  the  "Elementals,"  who
never  had  any  souls  at  all.     To  disentangle  the  subject,  I  have,  in  my

ELEMENTARIES.  1 47

/sis  U?iveiled,  shown  that  the  former  should,  alone,  be  called  "Elemen-
taries"  and  the  latter  "Elementals"  (vol.  i.  p.  xxx.  ''Before  the  Veil").

Dr.  Woldrich,  in  imitation  of  Herbert  Spencer,  attempts  to  explain
the  existence  of  a  popular  belief  in  Nature  Spirits,  demons  and  mytho-
logical deities,  as  the  effect  of  an  imagination  untutored  by  Science,
and  wrought  upon  by  misunderstood  natural  phenomena.  He  attri-
butes the  legendary  Sylphs,  Undines,  Salamanders  and  Gnomes — four
great  families,  which  include  numberless  sub-divisions — to  mere  fancy;
going  however  to  the  extreme  of  affirming  that  by  long  practice  one
can  acquire

That  power  which  disembodied  spirits  have  of  materializing  apparitions  by  the
will.

Granted  that  "disembodied  Spirits"  have  sometimes  that  power;  but
if  disembodied  why  not  embodied  Spirits  also,  i.e.,  a  yet  living  person
who  has  become  an  Adept  in  Occultism  through  study?  According  to
Dr.  Woldrich's  theory,  an  embodied  Spirit  or  Magician  can  create  only
subjectively,  or  to  quote  his  words:

He  is  in  the  habit  of  summoning,  that  is,  bringing  up  to  his  imagination,  his
familiar  spirits,  which,  having  responded  to  his  will,  he  considers  as  real  existences.

I  will  not  stop  to  enquire  for  the  proofs  of  this  assertion,  for  it  would
only  lead  to  an  endless  discussion.  If  many  thousands  of  Spiritualists
in  Europe  and  America  have  seen  materialized  objective  forms  which
assure  them  they  were  the  Spirits  of  once  living  persons,  millions  of
Eastern  people  throughout  the  past  ages  have  seen  the  Hierophants  of
the  Temples,  and  even  now  see  them  in  India,  without  being  in  the
least  mediums,  also  evoking  objective  and  tangible  forms,  which  display
no  pretensions  to  being  the  souls  of  disembodied  men.  But  I  will  only
remark  that,  though  subjective  and  invisible  to  others,  as  Dr.  Woldrich
tells  us,  these  forms  are  palpable,  hence  objective  to  the  clairvoyant;  no
scientist  has  yet  mastered  the  mysteries  of  even  the  physical  sciences
sufficiently  to  enable  him  to  contradict,  with  anything  like  plausible  or
incontrovertible  proofs,  the  assumption  that  because  the  clairvoyant
sees  a  form  remaining  subjective  to  others,  this  form  is  nevertheless
neither  a  "hallucination"  nor  a  fiction  of  the  imagination.  Were  the
persons  present  endowed  with  the  same  clairvoyant  faculty,  they  would
every  one  of  them  see  this  creature  of  "hallucination"  as  well;  hence
there  would  be  sufficient  proof  that  it  had  an  objective  existence.
And  this  is  how  the  experiments  are  conducted  in  certain  psychological
training  schools,  as  I  call  such  establishments  in  the  East.     One  clair-

148  A   MODERN   PANARION.

voyant  is  never  trusted.  The  person  may  be  honest,  truthful,  and  have
the  greatest  desire  to  learn  only  that  which  is  real,  and  yet  mix  the  truth
unconsciously  and  accept  an  Elemental  for  a  disembodied  Spirit,  and
vice  versa.  For  instance,  what  guarantee  can  Dr.  Woldrich  give  us  that
"Hoki"  and  "Thalia,"  the  guides  of  Miss  May  Shaw,  were  not  simply
creatures  produced  by  the  power  of  the  imagination?  This  gentleman
may  have  the  word  of  his  clairvoyant  for  this;  he  may  implicitly  and
very  deservedly  trust  her  honesty  when  in  her  normal  state;  but  the
fact  alone  that  a  medium  is  a  passive  and  docile  instrument  in  the
hands  of  some  invisible  and  mysterious  powers,  ought  to  make  her
irresponsible  in  the  eyes  of  every  serious  investigator.  It  is  the  Spirit,
or  these  invisible  powers,  he  has  to  test,  not  the  clairvoyant;  and  what
proof  has  he  of  their  trustworthiness  that  he  should  think  himself
warranted  in  coming  out  as  the  opponent  of  a  Philosophy  based  on
thousands  of  years  of  practical  experience,  the  iconoclast  of  experi-
ments performed  by  whole  generations  of  learned  Egyptians,  Hiero-
phants,  Gurus,  Brahmans,  Adepts  of  the  Sanctuaries,  and  a  whole  host
of  more  or  less  learned  Kabalists,  who  were  all  trained  Seers?  Such  an
accusation,  moreover,  is  dangerous  ground  for  the  Spiritualists  them-
selves. Admit  once  that  a  Magician  creates  his  forms  only  in  fancy,
and  as  a  result  of  hallucination,  and  what  becomes  of  all  the  guides,
spirit  friends  and  the  tutti  quanti  from  the  sweet  "Summer  Land,"
crowding  around  the  trance  mediums  and  Seers?  Why  these  would-be
disembodied  entities  are  to  be  considered  more  identified  with  humanity
than  the  Elementals,  or  as  Dr.  Woldrich  terms  them,  "Elementaries,"
of  the  Magician,  is  something  which  would  scarcely  bear  investigation.
From  the  standpoint  of  certain  Buddhist  Schools,  your  correspon-
dent may  be  right.  Their  Philosophy  teaches  that  even  our  visible
Universe  assumed  an  objective  form  as  a  result  of  the  fancy  followed
by  the  volition  or  the  will  of  the  Unknown  and  Supreme  Adept,  differ-
ing, however,  from  Christian  theology,  inasmuch  as  they  teach  that
instead  of  calling  out  our  Universe  from  nothingness,  He  had  to  exer-
cise His  will  upon  preexisting  Matter,  eternal  and  indestructible  as  to
invisible  Substance,  though  temporary  and  ever-changing  as  to  forms.
Some  higher  and  still  more  subtle  metaphysical  Schools  of  Nepaul  even
go  so  far  as  to  affirm — on  very  reasonable  grounds,  too — that  this  pre-
existing and  self-existent  Substance  or  Matter  (Svabhavat)  is  itself
without  any  other  creator  or  ruler;  when  in  the  state  of  activity  it  is
Pravritti,  a  universal  creating  principle;  when  latent  and  passive  they

ELEMENTARIES.  149

call  this  force  Nirvritti.  As  for  something  eternal  and  infinite,  for  that
which  had  neither  beginning  nor  end  there  can  be  neither  past  nor
future,  but  everything  that  was  and  will  be,  IS;  therefore  there  never
was  an  action  or  even  thought,  however  simple,  that  is  not  impressed
in  imperishable  records  on  this  Substance,  called  by  the  Buddhists
Svabhavat,  by  the  Kabalists  Astral  Light.  As  in  a  faithful  mirror,  this
Light  reflects  every  image,  and  no  human  imagination  could  see  any-
thing outside  that  which  exists  impressed  somewhere  on  the  eternal
Substance:  To  imagine  that  a  human  brain  can  conceive  of  anything
that  was  never  conceived  of  before  by  the  "universal  brain,"  is  a  fallacy
and  a  conceited  presumption.  At  best,  the  former  can  catch  now  and
then  stray  glimpses  of  the  "Eternal  Thought"  after  this  has  assumed
some  objective  form,  either  in  the  world  of  the  invisible,  or  visible,
Universe.  Hence  the  unanimous  testimony  of  trained  Seers  goes  to
prove  that  there  are  such  creatures  as  the  Elementals;  and  that  though
the  Elementaries  have  been  at  some  time  human  Spirits,  they,  having
lost  every  connection  with  the  purer  immortal  world,  must  be  recog-
nized by  some  special  term  which  would  draw  a  distinct  line  of  demar-
cation between  them  and  the  true  and  genuine  disembodied  souls,  which
have  henceforth  to  remain  immortal.  To  the  Kabalists  and  the  Adepts,
especially  in  India,  the  difference  between  the  two  is  all-important,  and
their  tutored  minds  will  never  allow  them  to  mistake  the  one  for  the
other;  to  the  untutored  medium  they  are  all  one.

Spiritualists  have  never  accepted  the  suggestion  and  sound  advice  of
certain  of  their  seers  and  mediums.  They  have  regarded  Dr.  Peebles'
"Gadarenes"  with  indifference;  they  have  shrugged  their  shoulders  at
the  "Rosicruciau"  fantasies  of  P.  B.  Randolph,  and  his  Ravalette  has
made  none  of  them  the  wiser;  they  have  frowned  and  grumbled  at  A.
Jackson  Davis'  "Diakka";  and  finally,  lifting  high  the  banner,  have
declared  a  murderous  war  of  extermination  against  the  Theosophists
and  Kabalists.     What  are  now  the  results?

A  series  of  exposures  of  fraudulent  mediums  that  have  brought  mor-
tification to  their  endorsers  and  dishonour  upon  the  cause;  identifica-
tion by  genuine  seers  and  mediums  of  pretended  Spirit-forms  that  were
afterwards  found  to  be  mere  personations  by  lying  cheats,  go  to  prove
that  in  such  instances  at  least,  outside  of  clear  cases  of  confederacy,
the  identifications  were  due  to  illusion  on  the  part  of  the  said  seers;
spirit-babes  discovered  to  be  battered  masks  and  bundles  of  rags;
obsessed  mediums  driven  by  their  guides  to  drunkenness  and  immor-

150  A   MODERN   PANARION.

alityof  conduct;  the  practices  of  free-love  endorsed  and  even  prompted
by  alleged  immortal  Spirits ;  sensitive  believers  forced  to  the  commission
of  murder,  suicide,  forgery,  embezzlement  and  other  crimes;  the  over-
credulous  led  to  waste  their  substance  in  foolish  investments  and  the
search  after  hidden  treasures;  mediums  fostering  ruinous  speculations
in  stocks;  free-loveites  parted  from  their  wives  in  search  of  other  female
affinities;  two  continents  flooded  with  the  vilest  slanders,  spoken  and
sometimes  printed  by  mediums  against  other  mediums;  incubi  and  suc-
cubi  entertained  as  returning  angel-husbands  or  wives;  mountebanks
and  jugglers  protected  by  scientists  and  the  clergy,  and  gathering  large
audiences  to  witness  imitations  of  the  phenomena  of  cabinets,  the
reality  of  which  genuine  mediums  themselves  and  Spirits  are  powerless
to  vindicate  by  giving  the  necessary  test  conditions;  seances  still  held
in  Stygian  darkness,  where  even  genuine  phenomena  can  readily  be
mistaken  for  the  false,  and  false  for  the  real;  mediums  left  helpless  by
their  angel  guides,  tried,  convicted,  and  sent  to  prison,  and  no  attempt
made  to  save  them  from  their  fate  by  those  who,  if  they  are  Spirits
having  the  power  of  controlling  mortal  affairs,  ought  to  have  enlisted
the  sympathy  of  the  heavenly  hosts  on  behalf  of  their  mediums  in  the
face  of  such  crying  injustice;  other  faithful  spiritualistic  lecturers  and
mediums  broken  down  in  health  and  left  unsupported  by  those  calling
themselves  their  patrons  and  protectors — such  are  some  of  the  features
of  the  present  situation;  the  black  spots  of  what  ought  to  become  the
grandest  and  noblest  of  all  religious  Philosophies  freely  thrown  by
the  unbelievers  and  Materialists  into  the  teeth  of  every  Spiritualist.
No  intelligent  person  of  the  latter  class  need  go  outside  of  his  own
personal  experience  to  find  examples  like  the  above.  Spiritualism  has
not  progressed  and  is  not  progressing  and  will  not  progress,  until  its
facts  are  viewed  in  the  light  of  the  Oriental  Philosophy.

Thus,  Mr.  Editor,  your  esteemed  correspondent,  Dr.  Woldrich,  may
be  found  guilty  of  an  erroneous  proposition.  In  the  concluding  sen-
tence of  his  article  he  says:

I  know  not  whether  I  have  succeeded  in  proving  the  Elementary  a  myth,  but  at
least  I  hope  that  I  have  thrown  some  more  light  upon  the  subject  to  some  of  the
readers  of  the  journal.

To  this  I  would  answer:  (i)  He  has  not  proved  at  all  the  "Elemen-
tary a  myth,"  since  the  Elementaries  are,  with  a  few  exceptions,  the
earth-bound  guides  and  Spirits  in  which  he  believes,  together  with  every
other  Spiritualist.      (2)  Instead  of  throwing  light  upon    the  subject,

ELEMENTARIES.  151

the  Doctor  has  but  darkened  it  the  more.  (3)  Such  explanations  and
careless  exposures  do  the  greatest  harm  to  the  future  of  Spiritualism,
and  greatly  serve  to  retard  its  progress  by  teaching  its  adherents  that
they  have  nothing  more  to  learn.

Sincerely  hoping  that  I  have  not  trespassed  too  much  on  the  columns
of  your  esteemed  journal,  allow  me  to  sign  myself,  dear  sir,

Yours  respectfully,

H.  P.  Blavatskv,
Corresponding  Secretary  of  the  Thcosophical  Society.
New  York.

KABALISTIC  VIEWS  OF  "SPIRITS."

[From  The  Religio-Phihsophical  Journal,  Jan.  26th,  1S7S.]

I  MUST  beg  you  to  again  allow  me  a  little  space  for  the  further  eluci-
dation of  a  very  important  question — that  of  the  "Elementals"  and  the
"Elementaries."  It  is  a  misfortune  that  our  European  languages  do
not  contain  a  nomenclature  expressive  of  the  various  grades  and  con-
ditions of  spiritual  beings.  But  surely  I  cannot  be  blamed  for  either
the  above  linguistic  deficiency,  or  because  some  people  do  not  choose,
or  are  unable,  to  understand  my  meaning!  I  cannot  too  often  repeat
that  in  this  matter  I  claim  no  originality.  My  teachings  are  but  the
substance  of  what  many  Kabalists  have  said  before  me,  which  to-day  I
mean  to  prove,  with  your  kind  permission.

I  am  accused  (1)  of  "turning  somersaults"  and  jumping  from  one
idea  to  another.  The  defendant  pleads — not  guilty.  (2)  Of  coining
not  only  words  but  Philosophies  out  of  the  depths  of  my  consciousness.
Defendant  enters  the  same  plea.  (3)  Of  having  repeatedly  asserted
that  "intelligent  Spirits  other  than  those  who  have  passed  through  an
earth  experience  in  a  human  body  were  concerned  in  the  manifestations
known  as  the  phenomena  of  Spiritualism."  True,  and  defendant
repeats  the  assertion.  (4;  Of  having  advanced,  in  my  bold  and  un-
warranted theories,  "beyond  the  great  Eliphas  Levi  himself."  Indeed?
Were  I  to  go  even  as  far  as  he  (see  his  Science  des  Esprits),  I  would
deny  that  a  single  so-called  spiritual  manifestation  is  more  than  hallu-
cination, produced  by  soulless  Elementals,  whom  he  calls  "Elemen-
taries" (see  Rituel  de  la  Haute  Magic).

I  am  asked:  "What  proof  is  there  of  the  existence  of  the  Elemen-
tals?" In  my  turn  I  will  enquire:  "What  proof  is  there  of  'diakkas,'
'guides,'  'bands'  and  'controls'?"  And  yet  these  terms  are  all  current
among  Spiritualists.  The  unanimous  testimony  of  innumerable  ob-
servers and  competent  experimenters  furnishes  the  proof.  If  Spiri-
tualists cannot,  or  will  not,  go  to  those  countries  where  they  are  living

KABALISTIC   VIEWS   OF    "SPIRITS."  153

and  these  proofs  are  accessible,  the}',  at  least,  have  no  right  to  give  the
lie  direct  to  those  who  have  seen  both  the  Adepts  and  the  proofs.  My
witnesses  are  living  men  teaching  and  exemplifying  the  Philosophy  of
hoary  ages;  theirs,  these  very  "guides"  and  "controls,"  who  up  to  the
present  time  are  at  best  hypothetical,  and  whose  assertions  have  been
repeatedly  found,  by  Spiritualists  themselves,  contradictory  and  false.
If  my  present  critics  insist  that  since  the  discussion  of  this  matter
began,  a  disembodied  soul  has  never  been  described  as  an  "Elemen-
tary," I  merely  point  to  the  number  of  the  London  Spiritualist  for
Feb.  1 8th,  1876,  published  nearly  two  years  ago,  in  which  a  corre-
spondent, who  has  certainly  studied  the  Occult  Sciences,  says  :

Is  it  not  probable  that  some  of  the  elementary  spirits  of  an  evil  type  are  those
spirit-bodies,  which,  only  recently  disembodied,  are  on  the  eve  of  an  eternal  disso-
lution, and  which  continue  their  temporary  existence  only  by  vampirizing  those
still  in  the  flesh?     They  had  existence;  they  never  attained  to  being.

Note  two  things:  that  human  Elementaries  are  recognized  as  exist-
ing, apart  from  the  Gnomes,  Sylphs,  Undines  and  Salamanders —
beings  purely  elemental;  and  that  annihilation  of  the  soul  is  regarded
as  potential.

Says  Paracelsus,  in  his  Philosophia  Sagax:

The  current  of  Astral  Light  with  its  peculiar  inhabitants,  Gnomes,  Sylphs,  etc.,
is  transformed  into  human  light  at  the  moment  of  the  conception,  and  it  becomes
the  first  envelope  of  the  soul — its  grosser  portion;  combined  with  the  most  subtle
fluids,  it  forms  the  sidereal  [astral,  or  ethereal]  phantom — -the  inner  man.

And  Eliphas  Levi:

The  Astral  Light  is  saturated  with  elementary  souls  which  it  discharges  in  the
incessant  generation  of  beings.  ...  At  the  birth  of  a  child  they  influence  the
four  temperaments  of  the  latter:  the  element  of  the  Gnomes  predominates  in
melancholy  persons;  of  the  Salamanders  in  the  sanguine;  of  the  Undines  in  the
phlegmatic;  of  the  Sylphs  in  the  giddy  and  bilious.  .  .  .  These  are  the  spirits
which  we  designate  under  the  term  of  occult  elements  {Rituel  de  la  Haute  Ma
vol.  ii.  chapter  on  the  "Conjuration  of  the  Four  Classes  of  Elementary"  .

"Yes,  yes,"  he  remarks  (pp.  cit.,  vol.  i.  p.  164  :

These  spirits  of  the  elements  do  exist.  Some  wandering  in  their  spheres,  others
trying  to  incarnate  themselves,  others,  again,  already  incarnated,  and  living  on
earth.     These  are  vicious  and  imperfect  men.

Note  that  we  have  here  described  to  us  more  or  less  "intelligent
Spirits,  other  than  those  who  have  passed  through  an  earth  experience
in  a  human  body."  If  not  intelligent,  they  would  not  know  how  to
make  the  attempt  to  incarnate  themselves.     Vicious   Elementals,   or

154  A   MODERN    PANARION.

Elementaries,  are  attracted  to  vicious  parents;  they  bask  in  their  atmo-
sphere, and  are  thus  afforded  the  chance,  by  the  vices  of  the  parents,
to  perpetuate  in  the  child  the  paternal  wickedness.  The  unintellectual
"Elementals"  are  drawn  in  unconsciously  to  themselves,  and,  in  the
order  of  Nature,  as  component  parts  of  the  grosser  astral  body  or  soul,
determine  the  temperament.  They  can  as  little  resist  as  the  animal-
cules can  avoid  entering  into  our  bodies  in  the  water  we  swallow.  Of
a  third  class,  out  of  hundreds  that  the  Eastern  Philosophers  and
Kabalists  are  acquainted  with,  Eliphas  L,evi,  discussing  spiritistic
phenomena,  says:

They  are  neither  the  souls  of  the  damned  nor  guilty;  the  elementary  spirits  are
like  children,  curious  and  harmless,  and  torment  people  in  proportion  as  attention
is  paid  to  them.

These  he  regards  as  the  sole  agents  in  all  the  meaningless  and  useless
physical  phenomena  at  seances.  Such  phenomena  will  be  produced
unless  they  be  dominated  "by  wills  more  powerful  than  their  own."
Such  a  will  may  be  that  of  a  living  Adept,  or,  as  there  are  none  such
at  Western  spiritual  sc'anccs,  these  read)'  agents  are  at  the  disposal  of
every  strong,  vicious,  earth-bound,  human  Elementary  who  has  been
attracted  to  the  place.  By  such  they  can  be  used  in  combination  with
the  astral  emanations  of  the  circle  and  medium,  as  stuff  out  of  which
to  make  materialized  Spirits.

So  little  does  L,evi  concede  the  possibility  of  Spirit-return  in  objective
form,  that  he  says:

The  good  deceased  come  back  in  our  dreams;  the  state  of  mediumism  is  an
extension  of  dream,  it  is  somnambulism  in  all  its  variety  and  ecstasies.  Fathom
the  phenomenon  of  sleep  and  you  will  understand  the  phenomena  of  the  spirits.

And  again:

According  to  one  of  the  great  dogmas  of  the  Kabalah,  the  soul  despoils  itself  in
order  to  ascend,  and  thus  would  have  to  re-clothe  itself  in  matter  to  descend.
There  is  but  one  way  for  a  spirit  already  liberated  to  manifest  himself  objectively
on  earth ;  he  must  get  back  into  his  body  and  resurrect.  This  is  quite  another
thing  from  hiding  under  a  table  or  a  hat.  Necromancy,  or  the  evocation  of  mate-
rialized spirits,  is  horrible.  It  constitutes  a  crime  against  Nature.  We  have
admitted  in  our  former  works  the  possibility  of  vampirism,  and  even  undertaken  to
explain  it.  The  phenomena  now  actually  occurring  in  America  and  Europe  un-
questionably belong  to  this  fearful  malady.  The  mediums  do  not,  it  is  true,  eat  the
flesh  of  corpses  [like  one  Sergeant  Bertrand];  but  they  breathe  in  throughout  their
whole  nervous  organism  the  phosphoric  emanations  of  putrefied  corpses,  or  spectral
light.  They  are  not  vampires,  but  they  evoke  vampires;  for  this  reason,  they  are
nearly  all  debilitated  and  sick  (Science  des  Esprits,  p.  258).

KABAUSTIC   VIEWS   OF    "SPIRITS."  155

Henry  Kunrath  was  a  most  learned  Kabalist,  and  the  greatest
authority  among  mediaeval  Occultists.  He  gives,  in  one  of  the  clavi-
cles of  his  Amphitheatrum  Sapientitz  sEternce,  illustrative  engravings
of  the  four  great  classes  of  elementary  Spirits,  as  they  presented  them-
selves during  an  evocation  of  ceremonial  Magic,  before  the  eyes  of  the
Magus,  when,  after  passing  the  threshold,  he  lifted  the  "Veil  of  Isis."
In  describing  them,  Kunrath  corroborates  Eliphas  Levi.  He  tells  us
they  are  disembodied,  vicious  men,  who  have  parted  with  their  divine
Spirits  and  become  Elementaries.  They  are  so  termed,  because  attracted
by  the  earthly  atmosphere  and  surrounded  by  the  earth's  elements.
Here  Kunrath  applies  the  term  "Elementary"  to  doomed  human
souls,  while  Levi  uses  it,  as  we  have  seen,  to  designate  another  class
of  the  same  great  family — Gnomes,  Sylphs,  Undines,  etc. — sub-human
entities.

I  have  before  me  a  manuscript,  intended  originally  for  publication,
but  withheld  for  various  reasons.  The  author  signs  himself  "Zeus,"
and  is  a  Kabalist  of  more  than  twenty-five  years'  standing.  This
experienced  Occultist,  a  zealous  devotee  of  Kunrath,  expounding  the
doctrine  of  the  latter,  also  says  that  the  Kabalists  divided  the  Spirits
of  the  elements  into  four  classes,  corresponding  to  the  four  tempera-
ments in  man.

It  is  charged  against  me  as  a  heinous  offence  that  I  aver  that  some
men  lose  their  souls  and  are  annihilated.  But  this  last-named  au-
thority, "Zeus,"  is  equally  culpable,  for  he  says:

They  [the  Kabalists]  taught  that  man's  spirit  descended  from  the  great  ocean  of
spirit,  and  is,  therefore,  per  se,  pure  and  divine,  but  its  soul  or  capsule,  through  the
[allegorical]  fall  of  Adam,  became  contaminated  with  the  world  of  darkness,  or  the
world  of  Satan  [evil],  of  which  it  must  be  purified,  before  it  could  ascend  again  to
celestial  happiness.  Suppose  a  drop  of  water  enclosed  within  a  capsule  remains
whole,  the  drop  of  water  remains  isolated;  break  the  envelope,  and  the  drop
becomes  a  part  of  the  ocean,  its  individual  existence  has  ceased.  So  it  is  with  the
spirit.  So  long  as  its  ray  is  enclosed  in  its  plastic  mediator  or  soul,  it  has  an  indi-
vidual existence.  Destroy  this  capsule,  the  astral  man  then  becomes  an  Elemen-
tary; this  destruction  may  occur  from  the  consequences  of  sin,  in  the  most  depraved
and  vicious,  and  the  spirit  returns  back  to  its  original  abode— the  individualization
of  man  has  ceased.  .  .  .  This  militates  with  the  idea  of  progression  that  Spiritualists
generally  entertain.  If  they  understood  the  Law  of  Harmony,  they  would  see  their
error.  It  is  only  by  this  Law  that  individual  life  can  be  sustained;  and  the  farther
we  deviate  from  harmony  the  more  difficult  it  is  to  regain  it.

To  return  to  Levi,  he  remarks  {La  Haute  Magie,  vol.  i.  p.  319):

156  A   MODERN   PANARION.

When  we  die,  our  interior  light  [the  soul]  ascends  agreeably  to  the  attraction  of
its  star  [the  spirit],  but  it  must  first  of  all  get  rid  of  the  coils  of  the  serpent  [earthly
evil — sin],  that  is  to  say,  of  the  unpurified  Astral  Light  which  surrounds  and  holds
it  captive,  unless,  by  the  force  of  Will,  it  frees  and  elevates  itself.  This  immersion
of  the  living  soul  in  the  dead  light  [the  emanations  of  everything  that  is  evil,
which  pollute  the  earth's  magnetic  atmosphere,  as  the  exhalation  of  a  swamp  does
the  air]  is  a  dreadful  torture;  the  soul  freezes  and  burns  therein  at  the  same  time.

The  Kabalists  represent  Adam  as  the  Tree  of  Life,  of  which  the
trunk  is  Humanity;  the  various  races,  the  branches;  and  individual
men,  the  leaves.  Every  leaf  has  its  individual  life,  and  is  fed  by  the
one  sap;  but  it  can  live  only  through  the  branch,  as  the  branch  itself
draws  its  life  through  the  trunk.     Says  the  Kabalah:

The  wicked  are  the  dead  leaves  and  the  dead  bark  of  the  tree.  They  fall,  die,
are  corrupted  and  changed  into  manure,  which  returns  to  the  tree  through  the
root.

My  friend,  Miss  Emily  Kislingbury,  of  London,  secretary  of  the
British  National  Association  of  Spiritualists,  who  is  honoured,  trusted
and  beloved  by  all  who  know  her,  sends  me  a  spirit-communication
obtained,  in  April,  1S77,  through  a  young  lady,  who  is  one  of  the
purest  and  most  truthful  of  her  sex.  The  following  extracts  are
singularly  a  propos  to  the  subject  under  discussion.

Friend,  you  are  right.  Keep  our  Spiritualism  pure  and  high,  for  there  are  those
who  would  abase  its  uses.  But  it  is  because  they  know  not  the  power  of  Spiritual-
ism. It  is  true,  in  a  sense,  that  the  spirit  can  overcome  the  flesh,  but  there  are
those  to  whom  the  fleshly  life  is  dearer  than  the  life  of  the  spirit;  they  tread  on
dangerous  ground.  For  the  flesh  ma}'  so  outgrow  the  spirit,  as  to  withdraw  from
it  all  spirituality,  and  man  becomes  as  a  beast  of  the  field,  with  no  saving  power
left.  These  are  they  whom  the  church  has  termed  "reprobate,"  eternally  lost,  but
they  suffer  not,  as  the  church  has  taught,  in  conscious  hells.  They  merely  die,  and
are  not;  their  light  goes  out,  and  has  no  conscious  being.  [Question]:  But  is  this
not  annihilation?  [Answer]:  It  amounts  to  annihilation;  they  lose  their  individual
entities,  and  return  to  the  great  reservoir  of  spirit — unconscious  spirit.

Finally,  I  am  asked:  ""Who  are  the  trained  Seers?"  They  are  those,
I  answer,  who  have  been  trained  from  their  childhood,  in  the  Pagodas,
to  use  their  spiritual  sight;  those  whose  accumulated  testimony  has
not  varied  for  thousands  of  years  as  to  the  fundamental  facts  of
Eastern  Philosophy;  the  testimony  of  each  generation  corroborating
that  of  each  preceding  one.  Are  these  to  be  trusted  more,  or  less,
than  the  communications  of  "bands" — each  of  whom  contradicts  the
other  as  completely  as  the  various  religious  sects,  which  are  ready  to
cut  each  other's  throats — and  of  mediums,  even  the  best  of  whom  are

KABAUSTIC   VIEWS   OF    "SPIRITS."  157

ignorant  of  their  own  nature,  and  unsubjected  to  the  wise  direction
and  restraint  of  an  Adept  in  Psychological  Science?

No  comprehensive  idea  of  Nature  can  be  obtained  except  by  apply-
ing the  Law  of  Harmony  and  analogy  in  the  spiritual  as  well  as  in  the
physical  world.  "As  above,  so  below,"  is  the  old  Hermetic  axiom.  If
Spiritualists  would  apply  this  to  the  subject  of  their  own  researches
they  would  see  the  philosophical  necessity  of  there  being  in  the  world
of  Spirit,  as  well  as  the  world  of  Matter,  a  law  of  the  survival  of  the
fittest.

Respectfully,

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

THE  KNOUT.

AS    WIELDED    BY    THE    GREAT    RUSSIAN    THEOSOPHIST.
Mr.  Coleman's  First  Appearance.

[From  The  Religio-Philosophical  Journal,  March  16th,  1878.]

I  have  read  some  of  the  assaults  upon  Colonel  Olcott  and  myself
that  have  appeared  in  the  Journal.  Some  have  amused  me,  others  I
have  passed  by  unread;  but  I  was  quite  unprepared  for  the  good  fortune
that  lay  in  store  for  me  in  embryo  in  the  paper  of  Feb.  16th.  The
"Protest"  of  Mr.  W.  Emmette  Coleman,  entitled  "Sclavonic  Theosophy
v.  American  Spiritualism"  is  the  musky  rose  in  an  odoriferous  bouquet.
Its  pungent  fragrance  would  make  the  nose  of  a  sensitive  bleed,  whose
olfactory  nerves  would  withstand  the  perfume  of  a  garden  full  of  the
Malayan  flower-queen — the  tuberose;  and  yet,  my  tough,  pug,  Mon-
golian nose,  which  has  smelt  carrion  in  all  parts  of  the  world,  proved
itself  equal  even  to  this  emergency.

"From  the  sublime  to  the  ridiculous,"  says  the  French  proverb,
"there  is  but  a  single  step."  From  sparkling  wit  to  dull  absurdity
there  is  no  more.  An  attack,  to  be  effective,  must  have  an  antagonist
to  strike,  for  to  kick  against  something  that  exists  only  in  one's
imagination,  wrenches  man  or  beast.  Don  Quixote  fighting  the  "air-
drawn"  foes  in  his  windmill,  stands  for  ever  the  laughing-stock  of  all
generations,  and  the  type  of  a  certain  class  of  disputants,  whom,  for
the  moment,  Mr.  Coleman  represents.

The  pretext  for  two  columns  of  abuse — suggesting,  I  am  sorry  to
say,  parallel  sewers — is  that  Miss  Emily  Kislingbury,  in  an  address
before  the  B.N. A.  of  Spiritualists,  mentioned  Colonel  Olcott's  name  in
connection  with  a  leadership  of  Spiritualism.  I  have  the  report  of
her  remarks  before  me,  and  find  that  she  neither  proposed  Colonel
Olcott  to  American  Spiritualists  as  a  leader,  nor  said  that  he  had
wanted  "leadership,"  desired  it  now,  or  could  ever  be  persuaded  to
take  it.     Says  Mr.  Coleman:

THE    KNOUT.

159

It  is  seriously  proposed  by  your  transatlantic  sister,  Miss  Kislingbury  .  .  .  that
American  Spiritualists  should  select  as  their  guardian  guide     .     .     .     Col.   H.   S.

oicottn

If  anyone  is  entitled  to  this  wealth  of  exclamation  points  it  is  Miss
Kislingbury,  for  the  charge  against  her  from  beginning  to  end  is
simply  an  unmitigated  falsehood.  Miss  Kislingbury  merely  expressed
the  personal  opinion  that  a  certain  gentleman,  for  whom  she  had  a
deserved  friendship,  would  have  been  capable,  at  one  time,  of  acting
as  a  leader.  This  was  her  private  opinion,  to  which  she  had  as  good
a  right  as  either  of  her  defamers — who  in  a  cowardly  way  try  to  use
Col.  Olcott  and  myself  as  sticks  with  which  to  break  her  head — have  to
their  opinions.  It  may  or  may  not  have  been  warranted  by  the  facts —
that  is  immaterial.  The  main  point  is,  that  Miss  Kislingbury  has  not
said  one  word  that  gives  the  slightest  pretext  for  Mr.  Coleman's  attack-
ing her  on  this  question  of  leadership.  And  yet,  I  am  not  surprised  at
his  course,  for  this  brave,  noble-hearted,  truthful  and  spotless  lady
occupies  too  impregnable  a  position  to  be  assailed,  except  indirectly.
Someone  had  to  pay  for  her  plain  speaking  about  American  Spiritual-
ism. What  better  scapegoat  than  Olcott  and  Blavatsky,  the  twin
"theosophical  Gorgons"!

What  a  hullabaloo  is  raised,  to  be  sure,  about  Spiritualists  declining
to  follow  our  "leadership."  In  my  "Buddhistico-Tartaric"  ignorance
I  have  always  supposed  that  something  must  be  offered  before  it  can
either  be  indignantly  spurned  or  even  respectfully  declined.  Have  we
offered  to  lead  Spiritualists  by  the  nose  or  by  other  portions  of  their
anatomy?  Have  we  ever  proclaimed  ourselves  as  "teachers,"  or  set
ourselves  up  as  infallible  "guides"?  L,et  the  hundreds  of  unanswered
letters  that  we  have  received  from  Spiritualists  be  our  witness.  L,et  us
even  include  two  letters  from  Mr.  W.  Emmette  Coleman,  from  Leaven-
worth, Kansas,  calling  attention  to  his  published  articles  of  Jan.  13th,
20th,  27th,  and  Feb.  3rd  (four  papers),  inviting  controversy.  He  says
in  his  communication  of  Jan.  23rd,  1S77,  to  Col.  Olcott,  "I  am  in
search  of  Truth";  therefore  he  has  not  all  the  truth.  He  asks  Col.
Olcott  to  answer  certain  "interrogatories";  therefore  our  opinions  are
admitted  to  have  some  weight.     He  says:

This  address  [the  one  he  wants  us  to  read  and  express  our  opinion  upon]  was
delivered  some  time  since;  if  of  more  recent  date  I  [he]  might  modify  somewhat.

Now  Col.  Olcott's  People  from  the  Other  World  was  published  Jan.,
1875;  Mr.  Coleman's  letter  to  the  Colonel  was  written  in  Jan.,  1877;  and

l6o  A   MODERN   PANARION.

his  present  "Protest"  to  the  Journal  appeared  Feb.,  1878.  It  puzzles
me  to  know  how  a  man  "in  search  of  Truth"  could  lower  himself  so
far  as  to  hunt  for  it  in  the  coat-pockets  of  an  author  whose  work  is

Clearly  demonstrative  of  the  utterly  unscientific  character  of  his  researches,  full
of  exaggerations,  inaccuracies,  marvellous  statements  recorded  at  second-hand
without  the  slightest  confirmation,  lackadaisical  sentimentalities,  egotistical  rho-
domontades,  and  grammatical  inelegancies  and  solecisms.

To  go  to  a  man  for  "Truth"  who  is  characterized  by
The  most  fervid  imagination  and  brilliant  powers  of  invention,
— according  to  Mr.  Emmette  Coleman — shows  Mr.  Coleman  in  a  sorry
light  indeed!  His  only  excuse  can  be  that  in  January,  1877,  when  he
invited  Col.  Olcott  to  discuss  with  him — despite  the  fact  that  the  Theo-
sophical  Society  had  been  established  in  1S75,  and  all  our  "heresies"
were  already  in  print — his  estimation  of  Col.  Olcott's  intellectual
powers  was  different  from  what  it  is  now,  and  that  Mr.  Coleman's
"address"  has  been  left  two  years  unread  and  unnoticed.  Does  this
look  like  our  offering  ourselves  as  "leaders"?  We  address  the  great
body  of  intelligent  American  Spiritualists.  They  have  as  much  a
right  to  their  opinions  as  we  to  ours;  they  have  no  more  right  than  we
to  falsely  state  the  positions  of  their  antagonists.  But  their  would-be
champion,  Mr.  Coleman,  for  the  sake  of  having  an  excuse  to  abuse  me,
pretends  to  quote  (see  column  2,  paragraph  1)  from  something  I  have
published,  a  whole  sentence  that  I  defy  him  to  prove  I  ever  made  use
of.  This  is  downright  literary  fraud  and  dishonest}'.  A  man  who  is
in  "search  of  Truth"  does  not  usually  employ  a  falsehood  as  a  weapon.
Good  friends,  whose  enquiries  we  have  occasionally,  but  rarely,
answered,  bear  us  witness  that  we  have  always  disclaimed  anything
like  "leadership";  that  we  have  invariably  referred  you  to  the  same
standard  authors  whom  we  have  read,  the  same  old  Philosophers  we
have  studied.  We  call  on  you  to  testify  that  we  have  repudiated
dogmas  and  dogmatists,  whether  living  men  or  disembodied  Spirits.
As  opposed  to  Materialists,  Theosophists  are  Spiritualists,  but  it  would
be  as  absurd  for  us  to  claim  the  leadership  of  Spiritualism  as  for  a
Protestant  priest  to  speak  for  the  Romish  Church,  or  a  Romish  Cardinal
to  lead  the  great  body  of  Protestants,  though  both  claim  to  be  Chris-
tians! Recrimination  seems  to  be  the  life  and  soul  of  American
journalism,  but  I  really  thought  that  a  spiritualistic  organ  had  more
congenial  matter  for  its  columns  than  such  materialistic  abuse  as  the
present  "Fort  L,eavenworth"  criticism!

THE   KNOUT.  l6l

One  chief  aim  of  the  writer  seems  to  be  to  abuse  /sis  Unveiled.  My
publisher  will  doubtless  feel  under  great  obligations  for  giving  it  such
a  notoriety  just  now,  when  the  fourth  edition  is  ready  to  go  to  press.
That  the  fossilized  reviewers  of  The  Tribune  and  Popular  Science
Monthly — both  admitted  advocates  of  materialistic  Science  and  un-
sparingly contemptuous  denouncers  of  Spiritualism — should,  without
either  of  them  having  read  my  book,  brand  it  as  spiritualistic  moon-
shine, was  perfectly  natural.  I  should  have  thought  that  I  had  written
my  first  volume,  holding  up  Modern  Science  to  public  contempt  for  its
unfair  treatment  of  psychological  phenomena,  to  small  purpose,  if  they
had  complimented  me.  Nor  was  I  at  all  surprised  that  the  critic  of
the  New  York  Stin  permitted  himself  the  coarse  language  of  a  partizan
and  betrayed  his  ignorance  of  the  contents  of  my  book  by  terming  me
a  "Spiritualist."  But  I  am  sorry  that  a  critic  like  Mr.  Coleman,  who
professes  to  speak  for  the  Spiritualists  and  against  the  Materialists,
should  range  himself  by  the  side  of  the  flunkeys  of  the  latter,  when  at
least  twenty  of  the  first  critics  of  "Europe  and  America,  not  Spiritualists
but  well-read  scholars,  have  praised  it  even  more  unstintedly  than  he
has  bespattered  it.  If  such  men  as  the  author  of  The  Great  Dionysiak
Myth  and  Poseidon — writing  a  private  letter  to  a  fellow  archaeologist
and  scholar,  which  he  thought  I  would  never  see — says  the  design  of
my  book  is  "simply  colossal,"  and  that  the  book  "is  really  a  marvellous
production"  and  has  his  "entire  concurrence"  in  its  views  about:
(i)  the  wisdom  of  the  ancient  Sages;  (2)  the  folly  of  the  merely
material  Philosopher  (the  Emmette  Colemans,  Huxleys  and  Tyndalls)  ;
(3)  the  doctrine  of  Nirvana;  (4)  archaic  monotheism,  etc.;  and  when
the  London  Public  Opinion  calls  it  "one  of  the  most  extraordinary
works  of  the  nineteenth  century"  in  an  elaborate  criticism;  and  when
Alfred  R.  Wallace  says :

I  am  amazed  at  the  vast  amount  of  erudition  displayed  in  the  chapters,  and  the
great  interest  of  the  topics  on  which  they  treat;  your  book  will  open  up  to  many
Spiritualists  a  whole  world  of  new  ideas,  and  cannot  fail  to  be  of  the  greatest  value
in  the  enquiry  which  is  now  being  so  earnestly  carried  on,

— Mr.  Coleman  really  appears  in  the  sorry  light  of  one  who  abuses  for
the  mere  sake  of  abusing.

What  a  curious  psychological  power  I  must  have !  All  the  Journal
writers,  from  the  talented  editor  down  to  Mr.  Coleman,  pretend  to
account  for  the  blind  devotion  of  Col.  Olcott  to  Theosophy,  the  over-
partial    panegyric    of   Miss   Kislingbury,    the   friendly    recantation   of

162  A   MODERN   PANARIOX.

Dr.  G.  Bloede,  and  the  surprisingly  vigorous  defence  of  myself  by  Mr.
C.  Sotheran,  and  other  recent  events,  on  the  ground  of  my  having
psychologized  them  all  into  the  passive  servitude  of  hoodwinked
dupes !  I  can  only  say  that  such  Psychology  is  next  door  to  miracle.
That  I  could  influence  men  and  women  of  such  acknowledged  inde-
pendence of  character  and  intellectual  capacity,  would  be  at  least  more
than  any  of  your  lecturing  mesmerizers  or  "spirit-controls"  have  been
able  to  accomplish.  Do  you  not  see,  my  noble  enemies,  the  logical
consequences  of  such  a  doctrine?  Admit  that  I  can  do  that,  and  you
admit  the  reality  of  Magic,  and  my  powers  as  an  Adept.  I  never
claimed  that  Magic  was  anything  but  Psychology  practically  applied.
That  one  of  your  mesmerizers  can  make  a  cabbage  appear  a  rose  is
only  a  lower  form  of  the  power  you  all  endow  me  with.  You  give  an
old  woman — whether  forty,  fifty,  sixty  or  ninety  years  old  (some  swear
I  am  the  latter,  some  the  former),  it  matters  not;  an  old  woman  whose
"Kalmuco-Buddhistico-Tartaric"  features,  even  in  youth,  never  made
her  appear  pretty;  a  woman  whose  ungainly  garb,  uncouth  manners
and  masculine  habits  are  enough  to  frighten  any  bustled  and  corseted
fine  lady  of  fashionable  society  out  of  her  wits — you  give  her  such
powers  of  fascination  as  to  draw  fine  ladies  and  gentlemen,  scholars
and  artists,  doctors  and  clergymen,  to  her  house  by  scores,  to  not  only
talk  Philosophy  with  her,  not  merely  to  stare  at  her  as  though  she
were  a  monkey  in  red  flannel  breeches,  as  some  of  them  do,  but  to
honour  her  in  many  cases  with  their  fast  and  sincere  friendship  and
grateful  kindness !  Psychology !  If  that  is  the  name  you  give  it,
then,  although  I  have  never  offered  myself  as  a  teacher,  you  had  better
come,  my  friends,  and  be  taught  at  once  the  "trick"  (gratis — for,
unlike  other  psychologizers,  I  never  yet  took  money  for  teaching  any-
thing to  anybody),  so  that  hereafter  you  may  not  be  deceived  into
recognizing  as — what  Mr.  Coleman  so  graphically  calls — "the  sainted
dead  of  earth,"  those  pimple-nosed  and  garlic-breathing  beings  who
climb  ladders  through  trap-doors,  and  carry  tow  wigs  and  battered
masks  in  the  penetralia  of  their  underclothing.

H.  P.  Blavatsky,
— "the masculine-feminine  Sclavonic  Theosoph  from  Crim-Tartary" — a
title  which  does  more  credit  to  Mr.  Coleman's  vituperative  ingenuity
than  to  his  literary  accomplishments.

INDIAN  METAPHYSICS.

[From  the  London  Spiritualist,  March  22nd,  1S77.]

Two  peas  in  the  same  pod  are  the  traditional  symbol  of  mutual
resemblance,  and  the  time-honoured  simile  forced  itself  upon  me  when
I  read  the  twin  letters  of  our  two  masked  assailants  in  your  paper  of
Feb.  22nd.  In  substance  they  are  so  identical  that  one  would  suppose
the  same  person  had  written  them  simultaneously  with  his  two  hands,
as  Paul  Morphy  will  play  you  two  games  of  chess,  or  Kossuth  dictate
two  letters  at  once.  The  only  difference  between  these  two  letters —
lying  beside  each  other  on  the  same  page,  like  two  babes  in  one  crib
— is,  that  "M.A.  Cantab's"  is  brief  and  courteous,  while  "Scrutator's"
is  prolix  and  uncivil.

By  a  strange  coincidence  both  these  sharp-shooters  fire  from  behind
their  secure  ramparts  a  shot  at  a  certain  "learned  Occultist"  over  the
head  of  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey,  who  quoted  some  of  that  personage's  views,
in  a  letter  published  May  10th,  1876.  Whether  in  irony  or  otherwise,
they  hurl  the  views  of  this  "learned  Occultist"  at  the  heads  of  Col.
Olcott  and  myself,  as  though  the5'  were  missiles  that  would  floor  us
completely.  Now  the  "learned  Occultist"  in  question  is  not  a  whit
more,  or  less,  learned  than  your  humble  servant,  for  the  very  simple
reason  that  we  are  identical.  The  extracts  published  by  Mr.  Massey,
by  permission,  were  contained  in  a  letter  from  myself  to  him.  More-
over it  is  now  before  me,  and,  save  one  misprint  of  no  consequence,  I
do  not  find  in  it  a  word  that  I  would  wish  changed.  What  is  said
there  I  repeat  now  over  my  signature — the  theories  of  1876  do  not
contradict  those  of  1878  in  any  respect,  as  I  shall  endeavour  to  prove,
after  pointing  out  to  the  impartial  reader  the  quaking  ground  upon
which  our  two  critics  stand.  Their  arguments  against  Theosophy —
certainly  "Scrutator's" — are  like  a  verdant  moss,  which  displays  a
velvety  carpet  of  green  without  roots  and  with  a  deep  bog  below.

When  a  person  enters  on  a  controversy  over  a  fictitious  signature,  he

!64  a  modern  panarion.

should  be  doubly  cautious,  if  he  would  avoid  the  accusation  of  abusing
the  opportunity  of  the  mask  to  insult  his  opponents  with  impunity.
Who  or  what  is  "Scrutator"?  A  clergyman,  a  medium,  a  lawyer,  a
philosopher,  a  physician  (certainly  not  a  metaphysician),  or  what?
Qitien  sabe?  He  seems  to  partake  of  the  flavour  of  all,  and  yet  to
grace  none.  Though  his  arguments  are  all  interwoven  with  sentences
quoted  from  our  letters,  yet  in  no  case  does  he  criticize  merely  what
is  written  by  us,  but  what  he  thinks  we  may  have  meant,  or  what
the  sentences  might  imply.  Drawing  his  deductions,  then,  from  what
existed  only  in  the  depths  of  his  own  consciousness,  he  invents  phrases,
and  forces  constructions,  upon  which  he  proceeds  to  pour  out  his  wrath.
Without  meaning  to  be  in  the  least  personal — for,  though  propagating
"absurdities"  with  the  "utmost  effrontery,"  I  should  feel  sorry  and
ashamed  to  be  as  impertinent  with  "Scrutator"  as  he  is  with  us — yet,
hereafter,  when  I  see  a  dog  chasing  the  shadow  of  his  own  tail,  I  will
think  of  his  letter.

In  my  doubts  as  to  what  this  assailant  might  be,  I  invoked  the  help
of  Webster  to  give  me  a  possible  clue  in  the  pseudonym.  "Scrutator,"
says  the  great  lexicographer,  is  "one  who  scrutinizes,"  and  "scrutiny"
he  derives  from  the  I^athi  scrutari,  "to  search  even  to  the  rags";  which
scrutari  itself  he  traces  back  to  a  Greek  root,  meaning  "trash,  trum-
pery." In  this  ultimate  analysis,  therefore,  we  must  regard  the  ?wm  de
plume,  while  very  applicable  to  his  letter  of  February  22nd,  as  very  un-
fortunate for  himself;  for,  at  best,  it  makes  him  a  sort  of  literary  chiffon-
nicr,  probing  in  the  dust-heap  of  the  language  for  bits  of  hard  adjectives
to  fling  at  us.  I  repeat  that,  when  an  anonymous  critic  accuses  two
persons  of  "slanderous  imputations"  (the  mere  reflex  of  his  own  im-
agination), and  of  "unfathomable  absurdities,"  he  ought,  at  least,  to
make  sure  (1)  that  he  has  thoroughly  grasped  what  he  is  pleased  to
call  the  "teachings"  of  his  adversaries;  and  (2)  that  his  own  philoso-
phy is  infallible.  I  may  add,  furthermore,  that  when  that  critic  permits
himself  to  call  the  views  of  other  people — not  yet  half  digested  by
himself— "unfathomable  absurdities,"  he  ought  to  be  mighty  careful
about  introducing  as  arguments  into  the  discussion  sectarian  absurdities
far  more  "unfathomable"  and  which  have  nothing  to  do  with  either
Science  or  Philosophy.

I  suppose  [gravely  argues  "Scrutator"]  a  babe's  brain  is  soft  and  a  quite  unfit
tool  for  intelligence,  otherwise  Jesus  could  not  have  lost  His  intelligence  when  He
took  upon  Himself  the  body  and  the  brain  of  a  babe  [!  !  ?].

I

INDIAN    METAPHYSICS.  [65

The  very  opposite  of  Oliver  Johnson  evidently,  this  Jesus-babe  of
"Scrutator's."

Such  an  argument  might  come  with  a  certain  force  in  a  discussion
between  two  conflicting  dogmatic  sects,  but  if  picked  "even  to  rags"
it  seems  but  "utmost  effrontery" — to  use  "Scrutator's"  own  compli-
mentary expression — to  employ  it  in  a  philosophical  debate,  as  if  it
were  either  a  scientific  or  historically  proved  fact!  If  I  refused,  at  the
very  start,  to  argue  with  our  friend  "M.A.  Oxon.,"  a  man  whom  I
esteem  and  respect  as  I  do  few  in  this  world,  only  because  he  put  for-
ward a  "cardinal  dogma,"  I  shall  certainly  lose  no  time  in  debating
Theosophy  with  a  tattering  Christian,  whose  scrutinizing  faculties
have  not  helped  him  beyond  the  acceptance  of  the  latest  of  the  world's
Avataras,  in  all  its  unphilosophical  dead-letter  meaning,  without  even
suspecting  its  symbolical  significance.  To  parade  in  a  would-be  philo-
sophical debate  the  exploded  dogmas  of  any  Church,  is  most  ineffec-
tual, and  shows,  at  best,  a  great  poverty  of  resource.  Why  does  not
"Scrutator"  address  his  refined  abuse,  ex  cathedra,  to  the  Royal  Society,
whose  Fellows  doom  to  annihilation  even'  human  being,  Theosophist
or  Spiritualist,  pure  or  impure?

With  crushing  irony  he  speaks  of  us  as  "our  teachers."  Now  I  re-
member having  distinctly  stated  in  a  previous  letter  that  we  have  not
offered  ourselves  as  teachers,  but,  on  the  contrary,  decline  any  such  office
— whatever  may  be  the  superlative  panegyric  of  my  esteemed  friend,
Mr.  O.  Sullivan,  who  not  only  sees  in  me  "a  Buddhist  priestess"  (!),
but,  without  a  shadow  of  warrant  of  fact,  credits  me  with  the  founda-
tion of  the  Theosophical  Society  and  its  Branches!  Had  Colonel
Olcott  been  half  as  "psychologized"  by  me  as  a  certain  American
Spiritualist  paper  will  have  it,  he  would  have  followed  my  advice  and
refused  to  make  public  our  "views,"  even  though  so  much  and  so  often
importuned  in  different  quarters.  With  characteristic  stubbornness,
however,  he  had  his  own  way,  and  now  reaps  the  consequence  of  having
thrown  his  bomb  into  a  hornet's  nest.  Instead  of  being  afforded  oppor-
tunity for  a  calm  debate,  we  get  but  abuse,  pure  and  simple — the  only
weapon  of  partisans.  Well,  let  us  make  the  best  of  it,  and  join  our
opponents  in  picking  the  question  "to  rags."  Mr.  C.  C.  Massey  comes
in  for  his  share,  too,  and  though  fit  to  be  a  leader  himself,  is  given  by
"Scrutator"  a  chief!

Neither  of  our  critics  seems  to  understand  our  views  (or  his  own)  so
little  as  "Scrutator."     He  misapprehends  the  meaning  of  Elementary,

1 66  A    MODERN   PANARION.

and  makes  a  sad  mess  of  Spirit  and  Matter.     Hear  him  say  that  Ele-
mentary

Is  a  new-fangled  and  ill-defined  term     .     .     .     not  yet  two  years  old.

This  sentence  alone  proves  that  he  forces  himself  into  the  discussion,
without  any  comprehension  of  the  subject  at  issue.  Evidently,  he  has
neither  read  the  mediaeval  nor  modern  Kabalists.  Henry  Kunrath  is
as  unfamiliar  to  him  as  the  Abbe  Constant.  L,et  him  go  to  the  British
Museum,  and  ask  for  Xhe  Amphit  heat  rum  Sapientice  sEternceoi  Kunrath.
He  will  find  in  it  illustrative  engravings  of  the  four  great  classes  of
elementary  Spirits,  as  seen  during  an  evocation  of  ceremonial  Magic
by  the  Magus  who  lifts  the  Veil  of  Isis.  The  author  explains  that
these  are  disembodied  vicious  men,  who  have  parted  with  their  divine
Spirits,  and  become  as  beasts.  After  reading  this  volume,  "Scrutator"
may  profitably  consult  Eliphas  Eevi,  whom  he  will  find  using  the  words
"Elementary  Spirits"  throughout  his  Dogmeet  Riticel  de  la  Haute  Magie,
in  both  senses  in  which  we  have  employed  it.  This  is  especially  the
case  where  (vol.  i.  p.  262,  seq.)  he  speaks  of  the  evocation  of  Apollonius
of  Tyana  by  himself.  Quoting  from  the  greatest  Kabalistic  authorities,
he  says:

When  a  man  has  lived  well,  the  astral  cadaver  evaporates  like  a  pure  incense,  as
it  mounts  towards  the  higher  regions;   but  if  a  man  has  lived  in  crime,  his  astral
cadaver,  which  holds  him  prisoner,  seeks  again  the  objects  of  his  passions  and
desires  to  resume  its  earthly  life.     It  torments  the  dreams  of  young  girls,  bathes  in
the  vapour  of  spilt  blood,  and  wallows  about  the  places  where  the  pleasures  of  his
life  flitted  by;  it  watches  without  ceasing  over  the  treasures  which  it  possessed  and
buried;  it  wastes  itself  in  painful  efforts  to  make  for  itself  material  organs  [mate-
rialize itself]  and  live  again.      But  the  astral  elements  attract  and  absorb  it;   its
memory  is  gradually  lost,  its  intelligence  weakens,  all  its  being  dissolves.     .     .     .
The  unhappy  wretch  loses  thus  in  succession  all  the  organs  which  served  its  sinful
appetites.     Then  it  [this  astral  body,  this  "soul,"  this  all  that  is  left  of  the  once
living  man]  dies  a  second  time  and  for  ever,  for  it  then  loses  its  personality  and  its
memory.     Souls  which  are  destined  to  live,  but  which  are  not  yet  entirely  purified,
remain  for  a  longer  or  shorter  time  captive  in  the  astral  cadaver,  where  they  are
refined  by  the  odic  light,  which  seeks  to  assimilate  them  to  itself  and  dissolve.     It
is  to  rid  themselves  of  this  cadaver  that  suffering  souls  sometimes  enter  the  bodies
of  living  persons,  and  remain  there  for  a  time  in  a  state  which  the  Kabalists  call
embryonic  \embryonnat\     These  are  the  aerial  phantasmas  evoked  by  necromancy
[and  I  may  add,  the  "'materialized  Spirits"  evoked  by  the  unconscious  necromancy
of  incautious  mediums,  in  cases  where  the  forms  are  not  transformations  of  their
own  doubles];   these  are  larvte,  substances  dead  or  dying  with  which  one  places
himself  en  rapport.

INDIAN   METAPHYSICS.  1 67

Further,  Levi  says  (op.  eil.,  p.  164):

The  astral  light  is  saturated  with  elementary  souls.  .  .  .  Yes,  yes,  these
spirits  of  the  elements  do  exist.  Some  wandering  in  their  spheres,  others  trying  to
incarnate  themselves,  others,  again  already  incarnated  and  living  on  earth;  these
are  vicious  and  imperfect  men.

And  in  the  face  of  this  testimony — which  he  can  find  in  the  British
Museum,  two  steps  from  the  office  of  The  Spiritualist  (!) — that  since
the  Middle  Ages  the  Kabalists  have  been  writing  about  the  Elemen-
taries,  and  their  potential  annihilation,  "Scrutator"  permits  himself
to  arraign  Theosophists  for  their  "effrontery"  in  foisting  upon  Spiri-
tualists a  "new-fangled  and  ill-defined  term"  which  is  "not  yet  two
years  old"!

In  truth,  we  may  say  that  the  idea  is  older  than  Christianity,  for  it  is
found  in  the  ancient  Kabalistic  books  of  the  Jews.  In  the  olden  time
they  defined  three  kinds  of  "souls" — the  daughters  of  Adam,  the
daughters  of  the  angels  and  those  of  sin;  and  in  the  book  of  The
Revolution  of  the  Souls  three  kinds  of  "Spirits"  (as  distinct  from  mate-
rial bodies)  are  shown — the  captive,  the  wandering  and  the  free  Spirits.
If  "Scrutator"  were  acquainted  with  the  literature  of  Kabalism,  he
would  know  that  the  term  Elementary  applies  not  only  to  one  prin-
ciple or  constituent  part,  to  an  elementary  primary  substance,  but  also
embodies  the  idea  which  we  express  by  the  term  elemental — that
wmich  pertains  to  the  four  elements  of  the  material  world,  the  first
principles  or  primary  ingredients.  The  word  "elemental"  as  defined
by  Webster,  was  not  current  at  the  time  of  Kunrath,  but  the  idea  was
perfectly  understood.  The  distinction  has  been  made,  and  the  term
adopted  by  Theosophists  for  the  sake  of  avoiding  confusion.  The
thanks  we  get  are  that  we  are  charged  with  propounding,  in  1878,  a
different  theory  of  the  "Elementaries"  from  that  of  1876!

Does  anything  herein  stated  either  as  from  ourselves,  or  Kunrath,  or
Levi,  contradict  the  statement  of  the  "learned  Occultist"  that:

Each  atom,  no  matter  where  found,  is  imbued  with  that  vital  principle  called
spirit.  .  .  .  Each  grain  of  sand,  equally  with  each  minutest  atom  of  the  human
body,  has  its  inherent  latent  spark  of  the  divine  light?

Italicizing  some  words  of  the  above,  but  omitting  to  emphasize  the
one  important  word  of  the  sentence,  i.e.,  "latent,"  which  contains  the
key  to  the  whole  mystery,  our  critic  mars  the  sense.  In  the  grain  of
sand,  and  each  atom  of  the  human  material  body,  the  Spirit  is  latent.
not  active;  hence  being  but  a  correlation  of  the  highest  light,  some-

1 68  A    MODERN    PANARION.

thing  concrete  as  compared  with  the  purely  abstract,  the  atom  is  vital-
ized and  energized  by  Spirit,  without  being  endowed  with  distinct
consciousness.  A  grain  of  sand,  as  every  minutest  atom,  is  certainly
"imbued  with  that  vital  principle  called  Spirit"  ;  so  every  atom  of  both,
following  the  law  of  evolution,  whether  of  objective  or  semi-concrete
astral  matter,  will  have  to  remain  eternal  throughout  the  endless
cycles,  indestructible  in  their  primary  elementary  constituents.

But  will  "M.A.  Cantab.,"  for  all  that,  call  a  grain  of  sand,  or  a
human  nail-paring,  consciously  immortal?  Does  he  mean  us  to  under-
stand him  as  believing  that  a  fractional  part  of  a  fraction  has  the  same
attributes,  capabilities,  and  limitations  as  the  whole?  Does  he  say  that
because  the  atoms  in  a  nail-paring  are  indestructible  as  atoms,  there-
fore the  bod}*,  of  which  the  nail  formed  a  part,  is  necessarily,  as  a
conscious  whole,  indestructible  and  immortal?

Our  opponents  repeat  the  words  trinity,  body,  soul,  Spirit,  as  they
might  say  the  cat,  the  house,  and  the  Irishman  inhabiting  it — three
perfectly  dissimilar  things.  They  do  not  see  that,  dissimilar  as  the
three  parts  of  the  human  trinity  may  seem,  they  are  in  truth  but
correlations  of  the  one  eternal  Essence — which  is  no  essence;  but  un-
fortunately the  English  language  is  barren  of  adequate  expressions,
and,  though  they  do  not  see  it,  the  house,  the  physical  Irishman,  and
the  cat  are,  in  their  last  analysis,  one.  I  verily  begin  to  suspect  that
they  imagine  that  Spirit  and  Matter  are  two,  instead  of  one!  Truly
says  Vishnu  Barva  Brahmachari,  in  one  of  his  essays  in  Marathi  (1869),
that :

The  opinion  of  the  Europeans  that  matter  is  Padartha  (an  equivalent  for  the
pada,  or  word  Abhava,  i.e.,  Ahey,  composed  of  two  letters,  Ahe,  meaning  is,  and
nahin,  not,  whereas  Abhava  is  no  Padartha)  is  foolishly  erroneous.

Kant,  Schopenhauer  and  Hartmann  seem  to  have  written  to  little
effect,  and  Kapila  will  be  soon  pronounced  an  antiquated  ignoramus.
Without  at  all  ranging  myself  under  Schopenhauer's  banner,  who  main-
tains that  in  reality  there  is  neither  Spirit  nor  Matter,  yet  I  must  say  that
if  even  he  were  studied,  Theosophy  would  be  better  understood.

But  can  one  really  discuss  metaphysical  ideas  in  a  European  lan-
guage? I  doubt  it.  We  say  "Spirit,"  and  behold,  what  confusion  it
leads  to.  Europeans  give  the  name  Spirit  to  that  something  which
they  conceive  as  apart  from  physical  organization,  independent  of
corporeal,  objective  existence;  and  they  call  spirit  also  the  airy,
vaporous   essence,   alcohol.     Therefore,  the    New    York    reporter  who

INDIAN    METAPHYSICS.  169

defined  a  materialized  Spirit  as  "frozen  whiskey,"  was  right  in  his  way.
A  copious  vocabulary,  indeed,  that  has  but  one  term  for  God  and  for
alcohol!  With  all  their  libraries  of  metaphysics,  European  nations
have  not  even  gone  to  the  trouble  of  inventing  appropriate  words  to
elucidate  metaphysical  ideas.  If  they  had,  perhaps  one  book  in  every
thousand  would  have  sufficed  to  really  instruct  the  public,  instead  of
there  being  the  present  confusion  of  words,  obscuring  intelligence,
and  utterly  hampering  the  Orientalist,  who  would  expound  his  Philo-
sophy in  English.  Whereas,  in  the  latter  language,  I  find  but  one
word  to  express,  perhaps,  twenty  different  ideas,  in  the  Eastern  tongues,
especially  Sanskrit,  there  are  twenty  words  or  more  to  render  one  idea
in  its  various  shades  of  meaning.

We  are  accused  of  propagating  ideas  that  would  surprise  the
"average"  Buddhist.  Granted,  and  I  will  liberally  add  that  the
average  Brahmanist  might  be  equally  astonished.  We  never  said  that
we  were  either  Buddhists  or  Brahmanists  in  the  sense  of  their  popular
exoteric  Theologies.  Buddha,  sitting  on  his  Lotus,  or  Brahma,  with
any  number  of  teratological  arms,  appeals  to  us  as  little  as  the  Catholic
Madonna  or  the  Christian  personal  God,  which  stare  at  us  from  cathe-
dral walls  and  ceilings.  But  neither  Buddha  nor  Brahma  represents
to  His  respective  worshippers  the  same  ideas  as  these  Catholic  icons
which  we  regard  as  blasphemous.  In  this  particular  who  dares  say
that  Christendom  with  its  civilization  has  outgrown  the  fetichism  of
Fijians?  When  we  see  Christians  and  Spiritualists  speaking  so  flip-
pantly and  confidently  about  God  and  the  "-materialization  of  Spirit,"
we  wish  they  might  be  made  to  share  a  little  in  the  reverential  ideas  of
the  old  Aryas.

We  do  not  write  for  "average"  Buddhists,  or  average  people  of  any
sort.  But  I  am  quite  willing  to  match  any  tolerably  educated  Buddhist
or  Brahman  against  the  best  metaphysicians  of  Europe,  to  compare
views  on  God  and  on  man's  immortality.

The  ultimate  abstract  definition  of  this — call  it  God,  Force,  Principle,
as  you  will — will  ever  remain  a  mystery  to  Humanity,  though  it  attain
to  its  highest  intellectual  development.  The  anthropomorphic  ideas  of
Spiritualists  concerning  Spirit  are  a  direct  consequence  of  the  anthro-
pomorphic conceptions  of  Christians  as  to  the  Deity.  So  directly  is  the
one  the  outflow  of  the  other,  that  "Scrutator's"  handiest  argument
against  the  duality  of  a  child  and  potential  immortality  is  to  cite
Jesus  who  increased  in  wisdom  as  His  brain  increased.

170  A   MODERN   PANARION.

Christians  call  God  an  Infinite  Being,  and  then  endow  Him  with
every  finite  attribute,  such  as  love,  anger,  benevolence,  mercy!  They
call  Him  all-merciful,  and  preach  damnation  for  three-fourths  of
Humanity  in  every  church,  all-just,  and  the  sins  of  this  brief  span  of
life  may  not  be  expiated  by  even  an  eternity  of  conscious  agony.
Now,  by  some  miracle  of  oversight,  among  thousands  of  mistransla-
tions in  the  "Holy"  Writ,  the  word  "destruction,"  the  synonym  of
annihilation,  was  rendered  correctly  in  King  James's  version,  and  no
dictionary  can  make  it  read  either  damnation  or  eternal  torment.
Though  the  Church  consistently  put  down  the  "destructionists,"  yet
the  impartial  will  scarcely  deny  that  they  come  nearer  than  their
persecutors  to  believing  what  Jesus  taught,  and  what  is  consistent  with
justice,  in  teaching  the  final  annihilation  of  the  wicked.

To  conclude,  then,  we  believe  that  there  is  but  one  undefinable
Principle  in  the  whole  Universe,  which  being  utterly  incomprehensible
by  our  finite  intellects,  we  prefer  rather  to  leave  undebated  than  to
blaspheme  Its  majesty  with  our  anthropomorphic  speculations.  We
believe  that  all  else  which  has  being,  whether  material  or  spiritual,  and
all  that  may  have  existence,  actually,  or  potentially  in  our  idealism,
emanates  from  this  Principle.  That  everything  is  a  correlation  in  one
shape  or  another  of  this  Will  and  Force;  and  hence,  judging  of  the
unseen  by  the  visible,  we  base  our  speculations  upon  the  teachings  of
the  generations  of  Sages  who  preceded  Christianity,  fortified  by  our
own  reason.

I  have  already  illustrated  the  incapacity  of  some  of  our  critics  to
separate  abstract  ideas  from  complex  objects,  by  instancing  the  grain
of  sand  and  the  nail-paring.  They  refuse  to  comprehend  that  a  philo-
sophical doctrine  can  teach  that  an  atom  imbued  with  divine  light,  or
a  portion  of  the  great  Spirit,  in  its  latent  stage  of  correlation,  may,  not-
withstanding its  reciprocal  or  corresponding  similarity  and  relations  to
the  one  indivisible  whole,  be  yet  utterly  deficient  in  self-consciousness.
That  it  is  only  when  this  atom,  magnetically  drawn  to  its  fellow-atoms,
which  had  served  in  a  previous  state  to  form  with  it  some  lower  com-
plex object,  is  transformed  at  last,  after  endless  cycles  of  evolution,
into  man — the  apex  of  perfected  being,  intellectually  and  physically,  on
our  planet — in  conjunction  with  them  it  becomes,  as  a  whole,  a  living
soul,  and  reaches  the  state  of  intellectual  self-consciousness.

A  stone  becomes  a  plant,  a  plant  an  animal,  an  animal  a  man,  and  man  a  Spirit,
say  the  Kabalists.     And  here  again,  is  the  wretched  necessity  of  trans-

INDIAN   METAPHYSICS.  171

lating  by  the  word  "Spirit"  an  expression  which  means  a  celestial,  or
rather  ethereal,  transparent  man.  But  if  man  is  the  crown  of  evolution
on  earth,  what  is  he  in  the  initiatory  stages  of  the  next  existence,  that
man  who,  at  his  best — even  when  he  is  pretended  to  have  served  as
a  habitation  for  the  Christian  God,  Jesus — is  said  by  Paul  to  have  been
"made  a  little  lower  than  the  angels"?  But  now  we  have  every  astral
spook  transformed  into  an  "angel"!  I  cannot  believe  that  the  scholars
who  write  for  your  paper — and  there  are  some  of  great  intelligence
and  erudition  who  think  for  themselves,  and  whom  exact  science  has
taught  that  ex  nihilo  nihil  fit;  who  know  that  every  atom  of  man's
body  has  been  evolving  by  imperceptible  gradations,  from  lower  into
higher  forms,  through  the  cycles — accept  the  unscientific  and  illogical
doctrine  that  the  simple  unshelling  of  an  astral  man  transforms  him
into  a  celestial  Spirit  and  "angel"  guide.

In  Theosophical  opinion  a  Spirit  is  a  Ray,  a  fraction  of  the  Whole;
and  the  Whole  being  Omniscient  and  Infinite,  Its  fraction  must  par-
take, in  degree,  of  the  same  abstract  attributes.  Man's  "Spirit"  must
become  the  drop  of  the  Ocean,  called  "Ishvara-Bhava" — the  "I  am
one  body,  together  with  the  universe  itself"  (I  am  in  my  Father,  and
my  Father  is  in  me),  instead  of  remaining  but  the  "Jiva-Bhava,"  the
body  only.  He  must  feel  himself  not  only  a  part  of  the  Creator,  Pre-
server and  Destroyer,  but  of  the  Soul  of  the  Three,  the  Parabrahman,
Who  is  above  these  and  is  the  vitalizing,  energizing  and  ever-presiding
Spirit.  He  must  fully  realize  the  sense  of  the  word  "Sahajanund,"
that  state  of  perfect  bliss  in  Nirvana,  which  can  only  exist  for  the  It,
which  has  become  coexistent  with  the  "formless  and  actionless  present
time."  This  is  the  state  called  "  Vartamana,"  or  the  "ever  still  present,"
in  which  there  is  neither  past  nor  future,  but  one  infinite  eternity  of
present.  Which  of  the  controlling  "spirits,"  materialized  or  invisible,
have  shown  any  signs  that  they  belong  to  the  kind  of  real  Spirits  known
as  the  "Sons  of  Eternity"?  Has  the  highest  of  them  been  able  to  tell
even  as  much  as  our  own  Divine  Nous  can  whisper  to  us  in  moments
when  there  comes  the  flash  of  sudden  prevision?  Honest  communi-
cating "intelligences"  often  answer  to  many  questions:  "We  do  not
know;  this  has  not  been  revealed  to  us."  This  very  admission  proves
that,  while  in  many  cases  on  their  way  to  knowledge  and  perfection,  yet
they  are  but  embryonic,  undeveloped  "Spirits";  they  are  inferior  even
to  some  living  Yogis  who,  through  abstract  meditation,  have  united

A.

themselves  with  their  personal  individual  Brahman,  their  Atman,  and

172  A   MODERN   PANARION.

hence  have  overcome  the  "Agnyanam,"  or  lack  of  that  knowledge  as
to  the  intrinsic  value  of  one's  "self,"  the  Ego  or  self-being,  so  recom-
mended by  Socrates  and  the  Delphic  commandment.

London  has  been  often  visited  by  highly  intellectual,  educated  Hindus.
I  have  not  heard  of  any  one  professing  a  belief  in  "materialized  Spirits"
— as  Spirits.  When  not  tainted  with  Materialism,  through  demoralizing
association  with  Europeans,  and  when  free  from  superstitious  sectarian-
ism, how  would  one  of  them,  versed  in  the  Vedanta,  regard  these  ap-
paritions of  the  circle?  The  chances  are  that,  after  going  the  rounds
of  the  mediums,  he  would  say:  "Some  of  these  may  be  survivals  of
disembodied  men's  intelligences,  but  they  are  no  more  spiritual  than
the  average  man.  They  lack  the  knowledge  of  'Dryananta,'  and  evi-
dently find  themselves  in  a  chronic  state  of  'Maya,'  i.e.,  possessed  of
the  idea  that  'they  are  that  which  they  are  not.'  The  'Vartamana'  has
no  significance  for  them,  as  they  are  cognizant  but  of  the  'Vishama'
[that  which,  like  the  concrete  numbers  in  mixed  mathematics,  applies
to  that  which  can  be  numbered].  Like  simple,  ignorant  mortals,  they
regard  the  shadow  of  things  as  the  reality,  and  vice  versa,  mixing  up
the  true  light  of  the  'Vyatireka'  with  the  false  light  or  deceitful  appear-
ance— the  'Anvaya.'  ...  In  what  respect,  then,  are  they  higher
than  the  average  mortal?  No;  they  are  not  spirits,  not 'Devas,'  .  .  .
they  are  astral  'Dasyoos.'  "

Of  course  all  this  will  appear  to  "Scrutator"  "unfathomable  absur-
dities," for  unfortunate^,  few  metaphysicians  shower  down  from  Wes-
tern skies.  Therefore,  so  long  as  our  English  opponents  will  remain
in  their  semi-Christian  ideas,  and  not  only  ignore  the  old  Philosophy,
but  the  very  terms  it  employs  to  render  abstract  ideas;  so  long  as  we
are  forced  to  transmit  these  ideas  in  a  general  way — particularly  as  it
is  impracticable  without  the  invention  of  special  words — it  will  be  un-
profitable to  push  discussion  to  any  great  lengths.  We  would  only
make  ourselves  obnoxious  to  the  general  reader,  and  receive  from
other  anonymous  writers  such  unconvincing  compliments  as  "Scruta-
tor" has  favoured  us  with.

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

New  York,  March  yth,  iSyj.

a

H.  M."  AND  THE  TODAS.

[From  the  London  Spiritualist."]

I  have  read  the  communication  of  "H.  M."  in  your  paper  of  the  8th
inst.  I  would  not  have  mentioned  the  "Todas"  at  all  in  my  book,  if
I  had  not  read  a  very  elaborate  octavo  work  in  271  pp.,  by  William  S.
Marshall,  L,ieut.-Col.  of  Her  Majesty's  Bengal  Staff  Corps,  entitled:
A  Phrenologist  amo?ig  the  Todas,  copiously  illustrated  with  photographs
of  the  squalid  and  filthy  beings  to  whom  "H.  M."  refers.  Though
written  by  a  staff  officer,  assisted  "by  the  Rev.  Friedrich  Metz,  of  the
Basle  Missionary  Society,  who  had  spent  upwards  of  twenty  years  of
labour"  among  them,  "the  only  European  able  to  speak  the  obscure
Toda  tongue,"  the  book  is  so  full  of  misrepresentations — though  both
writers  appear  to  be  sincere —  that  I  wrote  what  I  did.

What  I  said  I  knew  to  be  true,  and  I  do  not  retract  a  single  word.  If
neither  "H.  M."  nor  Lieut. -Col.  Marshall,  nor  the  Rev.  Mr.  Metz  have
penetrated  the  secret  that  lies  behind  the  dirty  huts  of  the  aborigines
they  have  seen,  that  is  their  misfortune,  not  my  fault.

H.  P.  Blavatskv.

New  York,  March  iSlh,  1878.

THE  TODAS.

[From  the  London  Spiritualist.']

For  ray  answer  to  the  sneer  of  your  correspondent  "H.  M."  about  my
opinion  of  the  Todas  a  few  lines  sufficed.  I  only  cared  to  say  that  what
I  have  written  in  Isis  Unveiled  was  written  after  reading  Col.  Marshall's
A  Phrenologist  among  the  Todas,  and  in  consequence  of  what,  whether
justly  or  not,  I  believe  to  be  the  erroneous  statements  of  that  author.
Writing  about  Oriental  psychology,  its  phenomena  and  practitioners,
as  I  did,  I  should  have  been  ludicrously  wanting  in  common  sense  if  I
had  not  anticipated  such  denials  and  contradictions  as  those  of  "H.  M."
from  every  side.  How  would  it  profit  the  seeker  after  this  Occult  know-
ledge to  face  danger,  privations,  and  obstacles  of  every  kind  to  gain  it,
if,  after  attaining  his  end,  he  should  not  have  facts  to  relate  of  which
the  profane  were  ignorant?  A  pretty  set  of  critics  are  the  ordinary
travellers  or  observers,  even  though  what  Dr.  Carpenter  euphemistically
calls  a  "scientific  officer,"  or  "distinguished  civilian,"  when,  confessedly,
every  European  unfurnished  with  some  mystical  passport  is  debarred
from  entering  any  orthodox  Brahman's  house  or  the  inner  precincts  of
a  pagoda.  How  we  poor  Theosophists  should  tremble  before  the  scorn
of  those  modern  Daniels  when  the  cleverest  of  them  has  never  been
able  to  explain  the  commonest  "tricks"  of  Hindu  jugglers,  to  say
nothing  of  the  phenomena  of  the  Fakirs!  These  very  savants  answer
the  testimony  of  Spiritualists  with  an  equally  lofty  scorn,  and  resent  as
a  personal  affront  the  invitation  to  even  attend  a  seance.

I  should  therefore  have  let  the  "Todas"  question  pass,  but  for  the
letter  of  "Late  Madras  C.  S."  in  your  paper  of  the  15th.  I  feel  bound
to  answer  it,  for  the  writer  plainly  makes  me  out  to  be  a  liar.  He
threatens  me,  moreover,  with  the  thunderbolts  that  a  certain  other
officer  has  concealed  in  his  library  closet.

It  is  quite  remarkable  how  a  man  who  resorts  to  an  alias  sometimes
forgets  that  he  is  a  gentleman.     Perhaps  such  is  the  custom  in  your

THK   TODAS.  175

civilized  England,  where  manners  and  education  are  said  to  be  carried
to  a  superlative  elegance ;  but  not  so  in  poor,  barbarous  Russia,  which
a  good  portion  of  your  countrymen  are  just  now  trying  to  strangle  (if
they  can).  In  my  country  of  Tartaric  Cossacks  and  Kalmucks,  a  man
who  sets  out  to  insult  another  does  not  usually  hide  himself  behind  a
shield.  I  am  sorry  to  have  to  say  this  much,  but  you  have  allowed
me,  without  the  least  provocation  and  upon  several  occasions,  to  be
unstintedly  reviled  by  correspondents,  and  I  am  sure  that  you  are  too
much  of  a  man  of  honour  to  refuse  me  the  benefit  of  an  answer.  "  Late
Madras,  C.  S."  sides  with  Mrs.  Showers  in  the  insinuation  that  I  never
was  in  India  at  all.  This  reminds  me  of  a  calumny  of  last  year,
originating  with  "spirits"  speaking  through  a  celebrated  medium  at
Boston,  and  finding  credit  in  many  quarters.

It  was,  that  I  was  not  a  Russian,  did  not  even  speak  that  language,
but  was  merely  a  French  adventuress.  So  much  for  the  infallibility  of
some  of  the  sweet  "angels."  Surely,  I  will  neither  go  to  the  trouble  of
exhibiting  to  any  of  my  masked  detractors,  of  this  or  the  other  world,
my  passports  vises  by  the  Russian  embassies  half  a  dozen  times  on  my
way  to  India  and  back.  Nor  will  I  demean  myself  by  showing  the
stamped  envelopes  of  letters  received  by  me  in  different  parts  of  India.

Such  an  accusation  makes  me  simply  laugh,  for  my  word  is,  surely,
as  good  as  that  of  anybody  else.  I  will  only  say  that  more's  the  pity
that  an  English  officer,  who  was  "fifteen  years  in  the  district,"  knows
less  of  the  Todas  than  I,  who,  he  pretends,  never  was  in  India  at  all.
He  calls  Gopuram  a  "tower"  of  the  pagoda.  Why  not  the  roof  or  any-
thing else  as  well?  Gopicram  is  the  sacred  pylon,  the  pyramidal  gate-
way by  which  the  pagoda  is  entered ;  and  yet  I  have  repeatedly  heard
the  people  of  southern  India  call  the  pagoda  itself  a  Gopuram.  It  may
be  a  careless  mode  of  expression  employed  among  the  vulgar;  but
when  we  come  to  consult  the  authority  of  the  best  Indian  lexico-
graphers we  find  it  accepted.  In  John  Shakespear's  Hindustani-
English  Dictionary  (edition  of  1849,  p.  1727)  the  word  Gopuram  is  ren-
dered as  "an  idol  temple  of  the  Hindus."  Has  "Late  Madras  C.  S."  or
any  of  his  friends,  ever  climbed  up  into  the  interior,  so  as  to  know  who
or  what  is  concealed  there?  If  not,  then  perhaps  his  fling  at  me  was  a
trifle  premature.  I  am  sorry  to  have  shocked  the  sensitiveness  of  such
a  philological  purist,  but  really  I  do  not  see  why,  when  speaking  of
the  temples  of  the  Todas— whether  they  exist  or  not— even  a  Brah-
man  Guru  might  not  say  that   they  had  their    Gopurams?     Perhaps

176  A   MODERN   PANARION.

he,  or  some  other  brilliant  authority  in  Sanskrit  and  other  Indian  lan-
guages, will  favour  us  with  the  etymology  of  the  word?  Does  the  first
syllable,  go  or  gu,  relate  to  the  roundness  of  these  "towers"  as  my  critic
calls  them  (for  the  word  go  does  mean  something  round)  or  to  gop,  a
cowherd,  which  gave  its  name  to  a  Hindu  caste  and  was  one  of  the
names  of  Krishna,  Go-pal,  meaning  the  cowherd?  Let  these  critics
carefully  read  Col.  Marshall's  work  and  see  whether  the  pastoral  tribe,
whom  he  saw  so  much,  and  discovered  so  little  about,  whose  worship
(exoteric,  of  course)  is  all  embraced  in  the  care  of  the  sacred  cows  and
buffaloes,  the  distribution  of  the  "divine  fluid" — milk,  and  whose
seeming  adoration,  as  the  missionaries  tell  us,  is  so  great  for  their  buf-
faloes that  they  call  them  the  "gift  of  God,"  could  not  be  said  to  have
their  Gopurams,  though  the  latter  were  but  a  cattle-pen,  a  tirieri,  the
viaiind,  in  short,  into  which  the  phrenological  explorer  crawled  alone
by  night  with  infinite  pains  and — neither  saw  nor  found  anything.  And
because  he  found  nothing  he  concludes  they  have  no  religion,  no  idea
of  God,  no  worship.  About  as  reasonable  an  inference  as  Dr.  W.  B.
Carpenter  might  come  to  if  he  had  crawled  into  Mrs.  Showers'  sc'ance-
room  some  night  when  all  the  "angels"  and  their  guests  had  fled,
and  straightway  reported  that  among  Spiritualists  there  are  neither
mediums  nor  phenomena.

Col.  Marshall  I  find  far  less  dogmatic  than  his  admirers.  Such  cau-
tious phrases  as  "I  believe,"  "I  could  not  ascertain,"  "I  believe  it  to
be  true,"  and  the  like,  show  his  desire  to  find  out  the  truth,  but  scarcely
prove  conclusively  that  he  has  found  it.  At  best  it  only  comes  to  this,
that  Col.  Marshall  believes  one  thing  to  be  true,  and  I  look  upon  it
differently.  He  credits  his  friend  the  missionary,  and  I  believe  my
friend  the  Brahman,  who  told  me  what  I  have  written.  Besides,  I
explicitly  state  in  my  book  (see  /sis,  vol.  ii.  pp.  614,  615):

As  soon  as  their  [the  Todas']  solitude  was  profaned  by  the  avalanche  of  civiliza-
tion .  .  .  the  Todas  began  moving  away  to  other  parts  as  unknown  and  more
inaccessible  than  the  Neilgherri  hills  had  formerly  been.

The  Todas,  therefore,  of  whom  my  Brahman  friend  spoke,  and  whom
Capt.  W.  L,.  D.  O'Grady,  late  manager  of  the  Madras  Branch  Bank  at
Ootacamuud,  tells  me  he  has  seen  specimens  of,  are  not  the  degenerate
remnants  of  the  tribe  whose  phrenological  bumps  were  measured  by
Col.  Marshall.  And  yet,  even  what  the  latter  writes  of  these,  I  from
personal  knowledge  affirm  to  be  in  many  particulars  inaccurate.  I
may  be  regarded  by  my  critics  as  over-credulous,  but  this  is  surely  no

THE   TODAS.  177

reason  why  I  should  be  treated  as  a  liar  whether  by  late  or  living
Madras  authorities  of  the  C.  S.  Neither  Capt.  O'Grady,  who  was  born
at  Madras  and  was  for  a  time  stationed  on  the  Neilgherry  hills,  nor  I,
recognized  the  individuals  photographed  in  Col.  Marshall's  book  as
Todas.  Those  we  saw  wore  their  dark  brown  hair  very  long,  and  were
much  fairer  than  the  Badagas,  or  any  other  Hindus,  in  neither  of  which
particulars  do  they  resemble  Col.  Marshall's  types.     "H.  M."  says:

The  Todas  are  brown,  coffee-coloured,  like  most  other  natives.

But  turning  to  Appleton's  Cyclopccdia  (vol.  xii.  p.  173),  we  read:

These  people  are  of  a  light  complexion,  have  strongly-marked  Jewish  features,
and  have  been  supposed  by  many  to  be  one  of  the  lost  tribes.

"H.  M."  assures  us  that  the  places  inhabited  by  the  Todas  are  not
infested  by  venomous  serpents  or  tigers;  but  the  same  Cyclopedia  re-
marks that :

The  mountains  are  swarming  with  wild  animals  of  all  descriptions,  among  which
elephants  and  tigers  are  numerous.

But  the  "Late"  (defunct? — is  your  correspondent  a  disembodied
angel?)  "Madras  C.  S."  attains  to  the  sublimity  of  the  ridiculous  when,
with  biting  irony  in  winding  up,  he  says:

All  good  spirits,  of  whatever  degree,  astral  or  elementary,  .  .  .  prevent  his
[Capt.  R.  F.  Burton's]  ever  meeting  with  Isis — rough  might  be  the  unveiling!

Surely  unless  that  military  Nemesis  should  tax  the  hospitality  of
some  American  newspaper,  conducted  by  politicians,  he  could  never  be
rougher  than  this  Madras  Grandison.  And  then,  the  idea  of  suggesting
that,  after  having  contradicted  and  made  sport  of  the  greatest  authori-
ties of  Europe  and  America,  to  begin  with  Max  Muller  and  end  with
the  Positivists,  in  both  my  volumes,  I  should  be  appalled  by  Captain
Burton,  or  the  whole  lot  of  captains  in  Her  Majesty's  service — though
each  carried  an  Armstrong  gun  on  his  shoulder  and  a  mitrailleuse  in
his  pocket — is  positively  superb!  Let  them  reserve  their  threats  and
terrors  for  my  Christian  countrymen.

Any  moderately  equipped  sciolist  (and  the  more  empty-headed,  the
easier)  might  tear  Isis  to  shreds,  in  the  estimation  of  the  vulgar,  with
his  sophisms  and  presumably  authoritative  analysis;  but  would  that
prove  him  to  be  right,  and  me  wrong?  Let  all  the  records  of  medial
phenomena,  rejected,  falsified,  slandered  and  ridiculed,  and  of  mediums
terrorized,  for  thirty  years  past,  answer  for  me.  I,  at  least,  am  not  of
the  kind  to  be  bullied  into  silence  by  such  tactics,  as  "Late  Madras"

178  A    MODERN    PANARION.

may  in  time  discover;  nor  will  he  ever  find  me  skulking  behind  a
?iom  de plume  when  I  have  insults  to  offer.  I  always  have  had,  as  I  now
have,  and  trust  ever  to  retain,  the  courage  of  my  opinions,  however
unpopular  or  erroneous  they  may  be  considered;  and  there  are  not
showers  enough  in  Great  Britain  to  quench  the  ardour  with  which  I
stand  by  my  convictions.

There  is  but  one  way  to  account  for  the  tempest  which,  for  four
months,  has  raged  in  The  Spiritualist  against  Col.  Olcott  and  myself,
and  that  is  expressed  in  the  familiar  French  proverb — "Ouand  on  veut
tuer  son  chien,  on  dit  qu'il  est  enrage."

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

New  York,  March  24th,  iSjS.

THE  AHKOOND  OF  SWAT.

THE   FOUNDER  OF   MANY   MYSTICAL  SOCIETIES.

[From  the  New  York  Echo,  187S.]

Of  the  many  remarkable  characters  of  this  century,  Ghafur  was  one
of  the  most  conspicuous.

If  there  be  truth  in  the  Eastern  doctrine  that  souls,  powerful  whether
for  good  or  bad,  who  had  not  time  in  one  existence  to  work  out  their
plans,  are  reincarnated,  the  fierceness  of  their  yearnings  to  continue
on  earth  thrusting  them  back  into  the  current  of  their  attractions,  then
Ghafur  was  a  rebirth  of  that  Felice  Peretti,  who  is  known  in  history  as
Pope  Sixtus  V.,  of  crafty  and  odious  memory.  Both  were  born  in  the
lowest  class  of  society,  being  ignorant  peasant  boys  and  beginning  life
as  herdsmen.  Both  reached  the  apex  of  power  through  craft  and
stealth  and  by  imposing  upon  the  superstitions  of  the  masses.  Sixtus,
author  of  mystical  books  and  himself  a  practitioner  of  the  forbidden
sciences  to  satisfy  his  lust  for  power  and  ensure  impunity,  became
Inquisitor-General.  Made  Pope,  he  hurled  his  anathemas  alike  against
Elizabeth  of  England,  the  King  of  Navarre,  and  other  important  per-
sonages. Abdul  Ghafur,  endowed  with  an  iron  will,  had  educated
himself  without  colleges  or  professors  except  through  association  with
the  "wise  men"  of  Khuttuk.  He  was  as  well  versed  in  the  Arabic  and
Persian  literature  of  alchemy  and  astronomy  as  Sixtus  was  in  Aristotle,
and  like  him  knew  how  to  fabricate  mesmerized  talismans  and  amulets
containing  either  life  or  death  for  those  to  whom  they  were  presented.
Each  held  millions  of  devotees  under  the  subjection  of  their  psycho-
logical influence,  though  both  were  more  dreaded  than  beloved.

Ghafur  had  been  a  warrior  and  an  ambitious  leader  of  fanatics,  but
becoming  a  dervish  and  finally  a  pope,  so  to  say,  his  blessing  or  curse
made  him  as  effectually  the  master  of  the  Ameers  and  other  Mussul-
mans as  Sixtus  was  of  the  Catholic  potentates  of  Europe.

Only  the  salient  features  of  his  career  are  known  to  Christendom.

l8o  A   MODERN   PANARION.

Watched,  as  he  may  have  been,  his  private  life,  ambitions,  aspirations
for  temporal  as  well  as  religious  power,  are  almost  a  sealed  book.  But
the  one  certain  thing  is,  that  he  was  the  founder  and  chief  of  nearly
every  secret  society  worth  speaking  of  among  Mussulmans,  and  the
dominant  spirit  in  all  the  rest.  His  apparent  antagonism  to  the  Waha-
bees  was  but  a  mask,  and  the  murderous  hand  that  struck  Lord  Mayo
was  certainly  guided  by  the  old  Abdul.  The  Biktashee  Dervishes*
and  the  howling,  dancing,  and  other  Moslem  religious  mendicants
recognize  his  supremacy  as  far  above  that  of  the  Sheik-ul-Islam  of  the
faithful.  Hardly  a  political  order  of  any  importance  issued  from  Con-
stantinople or  Teheran — heretics  though  the  Persians  are — without  his
having  a  finger  in  the  pie  directly  or  indirectly.  As  fanatical  as  Sixtus,
but  more  cunning  yet,  if  possible,  instead  of  giving  direct  orders  for
the  extermination  of  the  Huguenots  of  Islam,  the  Wahabees,  he
directed  his  curses  and  pointed  his  finger  only  at  those  among  them
whom  he  found  in  his  way,  keeping  on  the  best,  though  secret,  terms
with  the  rest.

The  title  of  Nasr-ed-Din  (defender  of  the  faith)  he  impartially  applied
to  both  the  Sultan  and  the  Shah,  though  one  is  a  Sunnite  and  the  other
a  Shiah.  He  sweetened  the  stronger  religious  intolerance  of  the
Osman  dynasty  by  adding  to  the  old  title  of  Nasr-ed-Din  those  of
Saif-ed-Din  (scimitar  of  faith)  and  Emir-el-Mumminiah  (prince  of  the
faithful).  Every  Emir-el-Sourey,  or  leader  of  the  sacred  caravan  of
pilgrims  to  Mekka,  brought  or  sent  messages  to,  and  received  advice
and  instructions  from,  Abdul,  the  latter  in  the  shape  of  mysterious
oracles,  for  which  was  left  the  full  equivalent  in  money,  presents  and
other  offerings,  as  the  Catholic  pilgrims  have  recently  done  at  Rome.

In  1847-8  the  Prince  Mirza,  uncle  of  the  young  Shah  and  ex-governor
of  a  great  province  in  Persia,  appeared  in  Tiflis,  seeking  Russian  pro-
tection at  the  hands  of  Prince  Woronzof,  Viceroy  of  the  Caucasus.
Having  helped  himself  to  the  crown  jewels  and  ready  money  in  the
treasury,  he  had  run  away  from  the  jurisdiction  of  his  loving  nephew,
who  was  anxious  to  put  out  his  eyes.  Popular  rumour  asserted  that
his  reason  for  what  he  had  done  was  that  the  great  dervish,  Ahkoond,
had  thrice  appeared  to  him  in  dreams,  prompting  him  to  take  what  he
had  and  share  his  booty  with  the  protectors  of  the  faith  of  his  principal
wife  (he  brought  twelve  with  him  to  Tiflis),  a  native  of  Cabul.     The

*  To  this  day,  no  Biktashee  would  be  recognized  as  such  unless  he  could  claim  possession  of  a
certain  medal  with  the  seal  of  this  "  high-pontiff"  of  all  the  Dervishes,  whether  they  belong  to  one
sect  or  the  other.

THE    AHKOOND   OF   SWAT.  l8l

secret,  though,  perhaps,  indirect  influence  he  exercised  on  the  Begum
of  Bhopal,  during  the  Sepoy  rebellion  of  1857,  was  a  mystery  only  to
the  English,  whom  the  old  schemer  knew  so  well  how  to  hoodwink.
During  his  long  career  of  Macchiavellism,  friendly  with  the  British,
and  yet  striking  them  constantly  in  secret;  venerated  as  a  new  prophet
by  millions  of  orthodox,  as  well  as  heretic  Mussulmans;  managing  to
preserve  his  influence  over  friend  and  foe,  the  old  "Teacher"  had  one
enemy  whom  he  feared,  for  he  knew  that  no  amount  of  craft  would
ever  win  it  over  to  his  side.  This  enemy  was  the  once  mighty  nation
of  the  Sikhs,  ex-sovereign  rulers  of  the  Punjab  and  masters  of  the
Peshawur  Valley.  Reduced  from  their  high  estate,  this  warrior  people
are  now  under  the  rule  of  a  single  Maharajah — Puttiala — who  is  him-
self the  helpless  vassal  of  the  British.  From  the  beginning  the  Ah-
koond  had  continually  encountered  the  Sikhs  in  his  path.  Scarce
would  he  feel  himself  conqueror  over  one  obstacle,  before  his  heredi-
tary enemy  would  appear  between  him  and  the  realization  of  his  hopes.
If  the  Sikhs  remained  faithful  to  the  British  in  1857,  it  was  not
through  hearty  loyalty  or  political  convictions,  so  much  as  through
sheer  opposition  to  the  Mohammedans,  whom  they  knew  to  be  secretly
prompted  by  the  Ahkoond.

Since  the  days  of  the  great  Nanak,  of  the  Kshattriya  caste,  founder
of  the  Sikh  Brotherhood  in  the  second  half  of  the  fifteenth  century,
these  brave  and  warlike  tribes  have  ever  been  the  thorn  in  the  side  of
the  Mogul  dynasty,  the  terror  of  the  Moslems  of  India.     Originating,
as  we  may  say,  in  a  religious  Brotherhood,  whose  object  was  to  make
away  alike  with  Islamism,  Brahmanism,  and  other  isms,  including  later
Christianity,  this  sect  evolved  a  pure  monotheism  in  the  abstract  idea
of  an  ever  unknown  Principle,  and  elaborated  it  into  the  doctrine  of
the  "Brotherhood  of  Man."     In  their  view,  we  have  but  one  Father-
Mother   Principle,    with    "neither   form,   shape,   nor   colour,"   and  we
ought  all  to  be,  if  we  are  not,  brothers  irrespective  of  distinctions  of
race  or  colour.     The  sacerdotal  Brahman,  fanatical  in  his  observance
of  dead-letter  forms,  thus  became  in  the  opinion  of  the  Sikh  as  much
the  enemy  of  truth  as  the  Mussulman  wallowing  in  a  sensual  heaven
with  his  houris,  the  joss-worshipping  Buddhist  grinding  out  prayers  at
his  wheel,  or  yet  the  Roman  Catholic  adoring  his  jewelled  Madonnas,
whose  complexion  the  priests  change  from  white  to  brown  and  black
to  suit  climates  and  prejudices.     Later  on,  Arjuua,  son  of  Ram  das,  the
fourth  in  the  succession  after  Nanak,  gathering  together  the  doctrines

1 82  A   MODERN    PANARION.

of  the  founder  and  his  son  Angad,  brought  out  a  sacred  volume,  called
Adi-garunth,  and  largely  supplemented  it  with  selections  from  forty-
five  Sutras  of  the  Jains.  While  adopting  equally  the  religious  figures
of  the  Vedas  and  Koran,  after  sifting  them  and  explaining  their  sym-
bolism, the  Adi-garunth  yet  presents  a  greater  similarity  of  ideas
respecting  the  most  elaborate  metaphysical  conceptions  with  those  of
the  Jain  school  of  Gurus.  The  notions  of  Astrology,  or  the  influence
of  the  starry  spheres  upon  ourselves,  were  evidently  adopted  from  that
most  prominent  school  of  antiquity.  This  will  be  readily  ascertained
by  comparing  the  commentaries  of  Abhayadeva  Suri  upon  the  original
forty-five  Sutras  in  the  Magadhi  or  Balabasha  language*  with  the  Adi-
garunth.  An  old  Jain  Guru,  who  is  said  to  have  drawn  the  horoscope
of  Runjeet  Singh,  at  the  time  of  his  greatest  power,  had  foretold  the
downfall  of  the  kingdom  of  Lahore.  It  was  the  learned  Arjuna  who
retired  into  Amritsir,  changed  the  sect  into  a  politico-religious  com-
munity, and  instituted  within  the  same  another  and  more  esoteric  body
of  Gurus,  scholars  and  metaphysicians,  of  which  he  became  sole  chief.
He  died  in  prison,  under  torture,  by  the  order  of  Aurungzebe,  into
whose  hands  he  had  fallen,  at  the  beginning  of  the  seventeenth  cen-
tury. His  son  Govinda,  a  Guru  (religious  teacher)  of  great  renown,
vowed  revenge  against  the  race  of  his  father's  murderers,  and  after
various  changes  of  fortune  the  Afghans  were  finally  driven  from  the
Punjab  by  the  Sikhs  in  1764.  This  triumph  only  made  their  hatred
more  bitter  still,  and  from  that  moment  until  the  death  of  Runjeet
Singh,  in  1839,  we  find  them  constantly  aiming  their  blows  at  the
Moslems.  Maha  Singh,  the  father  of  Runjeet,  had  set  off  the  Sikhs  into
twelve  mizals  or  divisions,  each  having  its  own  chief  (Sirdar),  whose
secret  Council  of  State  consisted  of  learned  Gurus.  Among  these  were
Masters  in  spiritual  Science,  and  they  might,  if  they  had  had  a  mind,
have  exhibited  as  astonishing  "miracles"  and  divine  legerdemain  as
the  old  Mussulman  Ahkoond.  He  knew  it  well,  and  for  this  reason
dreaded  them  even  more  than  he  hated  them  for  his  defeat  and  that  of
his  Ameer  by  Runjeet  Singh.

One  highly  dramatic  incident  in  the  life  of  the  "Pope  of  Sydoo"  is
the  following  well-authenticated  case,  which  was  much  commented
upon  in  his  part  of  India  about  twenty  years  ago.     One  day,  in  1858,

*  This  valuable  work  is  now  being  republished  by  Ookerdhabhoy  Shewgee,  and  has  been  received
by  the  Theosophical  Society  from  the  Editor  through  the  President  of  the  Bombay  branch.  When
finished  it  will  be  the  first  edition  of  the  Jain  Bible,  Sittra-Sangraha  or  Vihiva  Punnutt'i  S&tray
in  existence,  as  all  their  sacred  books  are  kept  in  secret  by  the  Jains.

THE   AHKOOND   OF   SWAT.  183

when  the  Ahkoond,  squatting  on  his  carpet,  was  distributing  amulets,
blessings  and  prophecies  among  his  pious  congregation  of  pilgrims,  a
tall  Hindu,  who  had  silently  approached  and  mingled  in  the  crowd
without  having  been  noticed,  suddenly  addressed  him  thus:  "Tell  me,
prophet,  thou  who  prophesiest  so  well  for  others,  whether  thou  knowest
what  will  be  thine  own  fate,  and  that  of  the  'Defender  of  the  Faith,'
thy  Sultan  of  Stamboul,  twenty  years  hence?"

The  old  Ghafur,  overcome  with  violent  surprise,  stared  at  his  inter-
locutor, but  no  answer  came.  In  recognizing  the  Sikh  he  seemed  to
have  lost  all  power  of  speech,  and  the  crowd  was  under  a  spell.

"If  not,"  continued  the  intruder,  "then  I  will  tell  thee.  Twenty
years  more  and  your  'Prince  of  the  Faithful'  will  fall  by  the  hand  of
an  assassin  of  his  own  house.  Two  old  men,  one  the  Dalai  Lama  of
the  Christians,  the  other  the  great  prophet  of  the  Moslems — thyself—
will  be  simultaneously  crushed  under  the  heel  of  death.  Then,  the
first  hour  will  strike  of  the  downfall  of  those  twin  foes  of  truth —
Christianity  and  Islam.  The  first,  as  the  more  powerful,  will  survive
the  second,  but  both  will  soon  crumble  into  fragmentary  sects,  which
will  mutually  exterminate  each  other's  faith.  See,  thy  followers  are
powerless,  and  I  might  kill  thee  now,  but  thou  art  in  the  hands  of  Des-
tiny, and  that  knows  its  own  hour."

Before  a  hand  could  be  lifted  the  speaker  had  disappeared.  This
incident  of  itself  sufficiently  proves  that  the  Sikhs  might  have  assas-
sinated Abdul  Ghafur  at  any  time  had  they  chosen  so  to  do.  And  it
may  be  that  The  May/air  Gazette,  which  in  June,  1877,  prophetically
observed  that  the  rival  pontiffs  of  Rome  and  Swat  might  die  simulta-
neously, had  heard  from  some  "old  Indian"  this  story,  which  the  writer
also  heard  from  an  informant  at  Lahore.

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

THE  ARYA  SAMAJ.

Christendom  sends  its  missionaries  to  Heathendom  at  an  expense
of  millions  drained  from  the  pockets  of  would-be  pious  folks,  who
court  respectability.  Thousands  of  homeless  and  penniless  old  men,
women  and  children  are  allowed  to  starve  for  lack  of  funds,  for  the
sake,  perhaps,  of  one  converted  "heathen."  All  the  spare  money  of
the  charitable  is  absorbed  by  these  dead-head  travelling  agents  of  the
Christian  Church.  What  is  the  result?  Visit  the  prison  cells  of  so-
called  Christian  lands,  crammed  with  delinquents  who  have  been  led
on  to  felony  by  the  weary  path  of  starvation,  and  you  will  have  the
answer.

Read  in  the  daily  papers  the  numerous  accounts  of  executions,  and
you  will  find  that  modern  Christianity  offers,  perhaps  unintentionally
but  none  the  less  surely,  a  premium  for  murder  and  other  heinous
crimes.  Is  anyone  prepared  to  deny  the  assertion?  Remember  that,
while  many  a  respectable  unbeliever  dies  in  his  bed  with  the  comfort-
able assurance  from  his  next  of  kin,  and  good  friends  in  general,  that
he  is  going  to  hell,  the  red-handed  criminal  has  but  to  believe  at  his
eleventh  hour  that  the  blood  of  the  Saviour  can  and  will  save  him,  to
receive  the  guarantee  of  his  spiritual  adviser  that  he  will  find  himself
when  launched  into  eternity  in  the  bosom  of  Christ,  in  heaven,  and
playing  upon  the  traditional  harp.  Why,  then,  should  any  Christian
deny  himself  the  pleasure  and  profit  of  robbing,  or  even  murdering,
his  richer  neighbour?  And  such  a  doctrine  is  being  promulgated
among  the  heathen  at  the  cost  of  an  annual  expenditure  of  millions.

But,  in  her  eternal  wisdom,  Nature  provides  antidotes  against  moral
as  well  as  against  mineral  and  vegetable  poisons.  There  are  people
who  do  not  content  themselves  with  preaching  grandiloquent  dis-
courses; they  act.  If  such  books  as  Higgins'  Anacalypsis,  and  that
extraordinary  work  of  an  anonymous  English  author — a  bishop,  it  is
whispered — entitled  Supernatural  Religion,  cannot  awaken  responsive

THE    ARVA    SAMAJ.  1S5

echoes  among  the  ignorant  masses,  other  means  can  be,  and  are
resorted  to — means  more  effectual  and  which  will  bring  fruit  in  the
future,  if  hitherto  prevented  by  the  crushing  hand  of  ecclesiastical
and  monarchical  despotism.  Those  whom  the  written  proofs  of  the
fictitious  character  of  biblical  authority  cannot  reach,  may  be  saved  by
the  spoken  word.  And  this  work  of  disseminating  the  truth  among
the  more  ignorant  classes  is  being  ardently  prosecuted  by  an  army  of
devoted  scholars  and  teachers,  simultaneously  in  India  and  America.

The  Theosophical  Society  has  been  of  late  so  much  spoken  about;
such  idle  tales  have  been  circulated  about  it — its  members  bein?  sworn
to  secrecy  and  hitherto  unable,  even  if  willing,  to  proclaim  the  truth
about  it — that  the  public  may  be  gratified  to  know,  at  least,  about  one
portion  of  its  work.  It  is  now  in  organized  affiliation  with  the  Arya
Samaj  of  India,  its  Western  representative,  and,  so  to  say,  under  the
order  of  its  chiefs.  A  younger  Society  than  the  Brahmo  Samaj,  it  was
instituted  to  save  the  Hindus  from  exoteric  idolatries,  Brahmanism  and
Christian  missionaries.

The  purely  Theistic  movement  connected  with  the  Brahmo  Samaj
had  its  origin  in  the  same  idea.  It  began  early  in  the  present  century,
but  spasmodically  and  with  interruption,  and  only  took  concrete  shape
under  the  leadership  of  Baboo  Keshub  Chunder  Sen  in  1S58.  Rammo-
hun  Roy,  who  ma}-  be  termed  the  combined  Fenelon  and  Thomas
Paine  of  Hindustan,  was  its  parent,  his  first  church  having  been
organized  shortly  before  his  death  in  1833.  One  of  the  greatest  and
most  acute  of  controversial  waiters  that  our  century  has  produced,  his
works  ought  to  be  translated  and  circulated  in  every  civilized  land.  At
his  death,  the  work  of  the  Brahmo  Samaj  was  interrupted.  As  Miss
Collett  says,  in  her  Brahmo  Year  Book  for  1878,  it  was  only  in  October,
1839,  that  Debendra  Nath  Tagore  founded  the  Tattvabodhini  Sabha
(or  Society  for  the  Knowledge  of  Truth),  which  lasted  for  twenty
years,  and  did  much  to  arouse  the  energies  and  form  the  principles  of
the  young  church  of  the  Brahmo  Samaj.  But  exoteric  or  open  religion
as  it  is  now,  it  must  have  been  conducted  at  first  much  on  the  prin-
ciples of  the  secret  societies,  as  we  are  informed  that  Keshub  Chunder
Sen,  a  resident  of  Calcutta  and  a  pupil  of  the  Presidency  College,  who
had  long  before  quitted  the  orthodox  Brahmanical  Church  and  was
searching  for  a  purely  Theistic  religion,  "had  never  heard  of  the
Brahmo  Samaj  before  1S58"  (see  The  Theistic  Annual^  187S,  p.  45  .

Since  then  the  Brahmo  Samaj,  which  he  then  joined,  has  flourished

186  A    MODERN    PANARION".

and  become  more  popular  every  day.  We  now  find  it  with  Samajes
established  in  many  provinces  and  cities.  At  least,  we  learn  that  in
May,  1877,  fifty  Samajes  have  notified  their  adhesion  to  the  Society
and  eight  of  them  have  appointed  their  representatives.  Native
missionaries  of  the  Theistic  religion  oppose  the  Christian  missionaries
and  the  orthodox  Brahmans,  and  the  work  is  going  on  livelily.  So
much  for  the  Brahmo  movement.

And  now,  with  regard  to  the  Arya  Samaj,  The  Indian  Tribune  uses
the  following  language  in  speaking  of  its  founder:

The  first  quarter  of  the  sixteenth  century  was  no  more  an  age  of  reformation  in
Europe  than  the  one  we  now  live  in  is,  at  this  moment,  in  India.  From  amongst
its  own  "Benedictines,"  Swami  Dyanand  Saraswati  has  arisen,  who,  unlike  other
reformers,  does  not  wish  to  set  up  a  new  religion  of  his  own,  but  asks  his  country-
men to  go  back  to  the  pristine  purity  and  Theism  of  their  Vedic  religion.  After
preaching  his  views  in  Bombay,  Poona,  Calcutta,  and  the  N.-W.  Provinces,  he  came
to  the  Punjab  last  year,  and  here  it  is  that  he  found  the  most  congenial  soil.

It  was  in  the  land  of  the  five  rivers,  on  the  banks  of  the  Indus,  that  the  Vedas
were  first  compiled.  It  was  the  Punjab  that  gave  birth  to  a  Nanak.  And  it  is  the
Punjab  that  is  making  such  efforts  for  a  revival  of  Vedic  learning  and  its  doctrines.
And  wherever  Swami  Dyanand  goes,  his  splendid  physique,  his  manly  bearing,
eloquence  and  his  incisive  logic  bear  down  all  opposition.  People  rise  up  and  say:
We  shall  remain  no  longer  in  this  state  for  ourselves,  we  have  had  enough  of  a
crafty  priesthood  and  a  demoralizing  idolatry,  and  we  shall  tolerate  them  no
longer.  We  shall  wipe  off  the  ugliness  of  ages,  and  try  to  shine  forth  in  the
original  radiance  and  effulgence  of  our  Aryan  ancestors.

The  Svami  is  a  most  highly  honoured  Fellow  of  the  Theosophical
Society,  takes  a  deep  interest  in  its  proceedings,  and  The  Indian  Spec-
tator of  Bombay,  April  14th,  1S78,  spoke  by  the  book  when  it  said
that  the  work  of  Pundit  Dyanand  "bears  intimate  relation  to  the  work
of  the  Theosophical  Society."

While  the  members  of  the  Brahmo  Samaj  mayT  be  designated  as  the
Lutheran  Protestants  of  orthodox  Brahmauism,  the  disciples  of  the
Svami  Dyanand  should  be  compared  to  those  learned  mystics,  the
Gnostics,  who  had  the  key  to  those  earlier  writings  which,  later,  were
worked  over  into  the  Christian  gospels  and  various  patristic  literature.
As  the  above-named  pre-Christian  sects  understood  the  true  esoteric
meaning  of  the  Chrestos  allegory,  which  is  now  materialized  into  the
Jesus  of  flesh,  so  the  disciples  of  the  learned  and  holy  Svami  are  taught
to  discriminate  between  the  written  form  and  the  spirit  of  the  word
preached  in  the  Vedas.  And  this  is  the  principal  point  of  difference  be-
tween the  Arya  Samaj  and  the  Brahmos  who,  as  it  would  seem,  believe

THE    ARYA    SAMAJ.  1S7

in  a  personal  God  and  repudiate  the  Vedas,  while  the  Aryas  see  an
everlasting  Principle,  an  impersonal  Cause  in  the  great  "Soul  of  the
universe"  rather  than  a  personal  being,  and  accept  the  Vedas  as  supreme
authority,  though  not  of  divine  origin.  But  we  may  better  quote  in
elucidation  of  the  subject  what  the  President  of  the  Bombay  Arya
Samaj,  also  a  Fellow  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  Mr.  Hurrychund
Chintamon,  says  in  a  recent  letter  to  our  Society:

Pundit  Dyanand  maintains  that  as  it  is  now  universally  acknowledged  that  the
Vedas  are  the  oldest  books  of  antiquity,  if  they  contain  the  truth  and  nothing  but
the  truth  in  an  unmutilated  state,  and  nothing  new  can  be  found  in  other  works  of
later  date,  why  should  we  not  accept  the  Vedas  as  a  guide  for  Humanity?  .  .  .
A  revealed  book  or  revelation  is  understood  to  mean  one  of  two  things,  viz.:  (1)  a
book  already  written  by  some  invisible  hand  and  thrown  into  the  world;  or  (2)  a
work  written  by  one  or  more  men  while  they  were  in  their  highest  state  of  mental
lucidity,  acquired  by  profound  meditation  upon  the  problems  of  who  man  is,
whence  he  came,  whither  he  must  go,  and  by  what  means  he  may  emancipate
himself  from  worldly  delusions  and  sufferings.  The  latter  hypothesis  may  be
regarded  as  the  more  rational  and  correct.

Our  Brother  Hurrychund  here  describes  those  superior  men  whom
we  know  as  Adepts.     He  adds:

The  ancient  inhabitants  of  a  place  near  Thibet,  and  adjoining  a  lake  called
Mansovara,  were  first  called  Deveneggury  (Devanagari)  or  godlike  people.  Their
written  characters  were  also  called  Deveneggury  or  Balbadha  letters.  A  portion  of
them  migrated  to  the  North  and  settled  there,  and  afterwards  spread  towards  the
South,  while  others  went  to  the  West.  All  these  emigrants  styled  themselves
Aryans,  or  noble,  pure,  and  good  men,  as  they  considered  that  a  pure  gift  had  been
made  to  humanity  from  the  "Pure  Alone."  These  lofty  souls  were  the  authors  of
the  Vedas.

What  more  reasonable  than  the  claim  that  such  Scriptures,  emanat-
ing from  such  authors,  should  contain,  for  those  who  are  able  to  pene-
trate the  meaning  that  lies  half  concealed  under  the  dead  letter,  all  the
wisdom  which  it  is  allowed  to  men  to  acquire  on  earth?  The  Chiefs  of
the  Arya  Samaj  discredit  "miracles,"  discountenance  superstition  and
all  violation  of  natural  law,  and  teach  the  purest  form  of  Vaidic  Philo-
sophy. Such  are  the  allies  of  the  Theosophical  Society.  They  have
said  to  us:  "Let  us  work  together  for  the  good  of  mankind,"  and  we
will.

H.  P.  Blavatskv.

PARTING  WORDS.

[From  The  Religio-Philosophical  Journal,  July  6th,  1878.]

So  far  as  I  can  at  present  foresee,  this  will  be  the  last  time  I  shall
ask  yon  to  print  anything  over  my,  to  many  Spiritualists,  loathed
signature,  as  I  intend  to  start  for  India  very  soon.  But  I  have  once
more  to  correct  inaccurate  statements.  If  I  had  had  my  choice,  I
would  have  preferred  almost  any  other  person  than  my  very  esteemed
friend  Dr.  Bloede,  to  have  last  words  with.  Once  an  antagonist,  a
bitter  and  unjust  one  to  me,  as  he  himself  admits,  he  has  since  made
all  the  amends  I  could  have  asked  of  a  scholar  and  a  gentleman,  and
now,  as  all  who  read  your  valuable  paper  see,  he  does  me  the  honour
to  call  me  friend.  Honest  in  intent  he  always  is,  I  am  sure,  but  still  a
little  prejudiced.  Who  of  us  but  is  so,  more  or  less?  Duty,  therefore,
compels  me  to  correct  the  erroneous  impression  which  his  letter  on
"Secret  Societies"  {Journal  of  June  15th)  is  calculated  to  give  about
the  Theosophical  Society.  How  man}7  "Fellows"  we  have,  how  the
Society  is  flourishing,  what  are  its  operations  or  how  conducted,  no
one  knows  or  can  know,  save  the  presidents  of  its  various  branches  and
their  secretaries.  Therefore,  Dr.  G.  Bloede,  in  saying  that  it  has  "failed
in  America  and  will  fail  in  Europe,"  speaks  of  that  of  which  neither
he  nor  any  other  outsider  has  knowledge.  If  the  Society's  only  object
were  the  study  of  the  phenomena  called  Spiritual,  his  strictures  would
be  perfectly  warranted;  for  it  is  not  secrecy  but  privacy  and  exclusive-
ness  that  are  demanded  in  the  management  of  circles  and  mediums.
It  would  have  been  absurd  to  make  a  secret  society  expressly  for  that
purpose.  At  its  beginning  the  Theosophical  Society  was  started  for
that  sole  study,  and  therefore  was,  as  you  all  know,  open  to  any
respectable  person  who  wished  to  join  it.  We  discussed  "spiritual"
topics  freely,  and  were  willing  to  impart  to  the  public  the  results  of  all
our  experiments,  and  whatever  some  of  us  might  have  learned  of  the
subject  in  the  course  of  long  studies.     How  our  views  and  philosophy

PARTING   WORDS.  1 89

were  received — no  need  to  recall  the  old  story  again.  The  storm  has
already  subsided;  and  the  total  of  "Billingsgate"  poured  upon  our
devoted  heads  is  preserved  in  three  gigantic  scrap-books  whose  con-
tents I  mean  to  immortalize  some  day.  When  through  the  writing
and  noble  efforts  of  the  Journal  and  other  spiritual  papers  the  secret  of
these  varied  and  vexing  phenomena,  indiscriminately  called  spiritual,
will  be  snatched  at  last,  when  the  faithful  of  the  orthodox  church  of
Spiritualism  will  be  forced  to  give  up — partially  at  least — their  many
bigoted  and  preconceived  notions,  then  the  time  will  have  come  again
for  Theosophists  to  claim  a  hearing.  Till  then,  its  members  retire  from
the  arena  of  discussion  and  devote  their  whole  leisure  to  the  fulfilment
of  other  and  more  important  objects  of  the  Society.

You  perceive,  then,  that  it  is  only  when  experience  showed  the
necessity  for  its  work  to  be  enlarged,  and  its  objects  became  various,
that  the  T.  S.  thought  fit  to  protect  itself  by  secrecy.  Since  then,  none
but  perjured  witnesses,  and  we  know  of  none,  can  have  told  about  what
we  were  doing,  except  as  permitted  by  official  sanction  and  announced
from  time  to  time.  One  of  such  objects  of  our  Society  we  are  willing
to  publicly  announce.

It  is  universally  known  that  this  most  important  object  is  to  antago-
nize Christianity*  and  especially  Jesuitism.  One  of  our  most  esteemed
and  valued  members,  once  an  ardent  Spiritualist,  but  who  must  for  the
present  be  nameless,  has  but  recently  fallen  a  victim  to  the  snares  of
this  hateful  body.

The  nefarious  designs  of  Jesuitism  are  plotted  in  secret  and  carried
out  through  secret  agencies.  What  more  reasonable  and  lawful,  there-
fore, than  that  those  who  wish  to  fight  it  should  keep  their  own  secret,
likewise,  as  to  their  agencies  and  plans?  We  have  among  us  persons
in  high  position — political,  military,  financial  and  social — who  regard
Christianity  as  the  greatest  evil  to  humanity,  and  are  willing  to  help
pull  it  down.  But  for  them  to  be  able  to  do  much  and  well,  they  must
do  it  anonymously.  The  Church — "triple-headed  snake"  as  a  well-
known  writer  calls  it — can  no  longer  burn  its  enemies,  but  it  can  blast
their  social  influence;  can  no  longer  roast  their  bodies,  but  can  ruin
their  fortunes.  We  have  no  right  to  give  our  enemy,  the  Church,  the
names  of  our  "Fellows,"  who  are  not  ripe  for  martyrdom,  and  so  we

*  [In  later  days  H.  P.  B.  took  great  pains  to  explain  that  the  "  Christianity  "  which  she  so  vigorously
attacked,  was  an  ecclesiastical  system  of  dogmas  to  which  she  subsequently  gave  the  name  "  Church-
ianity,"  and  not  the  spiritual  and  moral  teachings  of  Jesus. — Eds.]

I  go  A    MODERN   PANARION.

keep  them  secret.  If  we  have  an  agent  to  send  to  India  or  to  Japan,
or  China,  or  any  other  heathen  country,  to  do  something  or  confer
with  somebody  in  connection  with  the  Society's  general  plans  against
missionaries,  it  would  be  foolish,  nay,  criminal,  to  expose  our  agent
to  imprisonment  under  some  malicious  pretext,  if  not  death,  and  even
the  latter  is  possible  in  the  far-away  East,  and  our  scheme  is  liable
to  miscarry  by  announcing  it  to  the  dishonourable  company  of  Jesus.
So,  sir,  to  sum  up  in  a  word.  Dr.  Bloede  has  made  a  great  mistake  in
supposing  the  Theosophical  Society  a  "failure"  in  this  or  any  other
country.  Where  the  Society  counted  three  years  ago  its  members  by
the  dozen,  it  now  counts  them  by  the  hundred  and  thousand.  And
so  far  from  its  threatening  in  any  respect  the  stability  of  society  or
the  advancement  of  spiritual  knowledge,  the  Theosophical  institution

A

which  now  bears  the  name  of  the  "Theosophical  Society  of  the  Arya
Samaj  of  India"  (being  regularly  chartered  by  and  affiliated  with  that

A

great  body  in  the  land  of  the  Aryas)  will  be  found  some  day,  by  the
Spiritualists  and  all  others  who  claim  the  right  of  thinking  for  them-
selves, to  have  been  the  true  friend  of  intellectual  and  spiritual  liberty
— if  not  in  America,  at  least  in  France  and  other  countries,  where  an
infernal  priesthood  thrusts  innocent  Spiritualists  into  prison  by  the
help  of  a  subservient  judiciary  and  the  use  of  perjured  testimony.  Its
name  will  be  respected  as  a  pioneer  of  free  thought  and  an  uncompro-
mising enemy  of  priestly  and  monkish  fraud  and  despotism.

H.  P.  Blavatskv.
New  York,  June  iyth,  i8j8.

H.  P.  B.   IN  INDIA.

"NOT  A  CHRISTIAN"!

[From  the  Indian  Spectator.']

Before  entering  upon  the  main  question  that  compels  me  to  ask  you
kindly  to  accord  me  space  in  your  esteemed  paper,  will  you  inform  me
as  to  the  nature  of  that  newly-born  infant  prodigy  which  calls  itself
The  Bombay  Review?  Is  it  a  bigoted,  sectarian  organ  of  the  Christians,
or  an  impartial  journal,  fair  to  all,  and  unprejudiced  as  every  respect-
able paper  styling  itself  "Review"  ought  to  be,  especially  in  a  place
like  Bombay,  where  such  a  diversity  of  religious  opinions  is  to  be
found?  The  two  paragraphs  in  the  number  of  February  22nd,  which
so  honour  the  Theosophical  Society  by  a  double  notice  of  its  American
members,  would  force  me  to  incline  toward  the  former  opinion.  Both
the  editorial  which  attacks  my  esteemed  friend,  Miss  Bates,  and  the
apocalyptic  vision  of  the  modern  Ezekiel,  alias  "  Anthroposophist,"
who  shoots  his  rather  blunt  arrows  at  Col.  Olcott,  require  an  answer,  if
it  were  but  to  show  the  advisability  of  using  sharper  darts  against
Theosophists.  Leaving  the  seer  to  his  prophetic  dream  of  langoutis
and  cow-dung,  I  will  simply  review  the  editorial  of  this  Review  which
tries  to  be  at  the  same  time  satirical  and  severe  and  succeeds  only  in
being  nonsensical.  Quoting  from  another  paper  a  sentence  relating  to
Miss  Bates,  which  describes  her  as  "not  a  Christian,"  it  remarks  in  that
bitter  and  selfish  spirit  of  arrogance  and  would-be  superiority,  which
so  characterizes  Christian  sectarianism:

The  public  might  have  been  spared  the  sight  of  the  italicized  personal  explana-
tion.

What  "public"  may  I  ask?  The  majority  of  the  intelligent  and
reading  public — especially  of  native  papers — in  Bombay  as  throughout
India  is,  we  believe,  composed  of  non-Christians — of  Parsis,  Hindus,
etc.  And  this  public  instead  of  resenting  such  "wanton  aggressive-
ness," as  the  writer  pleases  to  call  it,  can  but  rejoice  to  find  at  least

one  European  lady,  who,  at  the  same  time  that  she  is  not  a  Christian,

1. 1

194  A    MODERN    PANARIOX.

is  quite  ready,  as  a  Theosophist,  to  call  any  respectable  "heathen"  her
brother,  and  regard  him  with  at  least  as  much  sympathy  as  she  does  a
Christian.  But  this  unfortunate  thrust  at  Theosophy  is  explained  by
what  follows :

In  the  young  lady's  ozun  interest  the  insult  ought  not  to  have  been  flung  into  the
teeth  of  the  Christian  public.

Without  taking  into  consideration  the  old  and  wise  axiom,  that
honesty  is  the  best  policy,  we  can  only  regret  for  our  Christian  oppo-
nents that  they  should  so  soon  "unveil"  their  cunning  policy.  While
in  the  eyes  of  every  honest  "heathen"  Theosophist,  there  can  be  no
higher  recommendation  for  a  person  than  to  have  the  reputation  of
being  truthful  even  at  the  expense  of  his  or  her  "interest,"  our  Chris-
tian Review  unwittingly  exposes  the  concealed  rope  of  the  mission
machinery,  by  admitting  that  it  is  in  the  i?iterest  of  every  person  here,
at  least — to  appear  a  Christian  or  a  possible  convert,  if  he  is  not  one  de
facto.  We  feel  really  very,  very  grateful  to  the  Review  for  such  a  timely
and  generous  confession.  The  writer's  defence  of  the  "public"  for
which  it  speaks  as  one  having  authority  is  no  less  vague  and  unsatis-
factory, as  we  all  know  that  among  the  240,000,000  of  native  population
in  India,  Christians  count  but  as  a  drop  in  an  ocean.  Or  is  it  possible
that  no  other  public  but  the  Christian  is  held  worthy  of  the  name  or
even  of  consideration?  Had  converted  Brahmans  arrived  here  instead
of  Theosophists,  and  one  of  these  announced  his  profession  of  faith  by
italicizing  the  words,  not  a  heathen,  we  doubt  whether  the  fear  of  hurt-
ing the  feelings  of  many  millions  of  Hindus  would  have  ever  entered
the  mind  of  our  caustic  paragraphist!

Nor  do  we  find  the  sentence,  "India  owes  too  much  to  Christianity,"
anything  but  arrogant  and  presumptuous  talk.  India  owes  much  and
everything  to  the  British  Government,  which  protects  its  heathen
subjects  equally  with  those  of  English  birth,  and  would  no  more  allow
the  one  class  to  insult  the  other  than  it  would  revive  the  Inquisition.
India  owes  to  Great  Britain  its  educational  system,  its  slow  but  sure
progress,  and  its  security  from  the  aggression  of  other  nations;  to
Christianity  it  owes  nothing.  And  yet  perhaps  I  am  mistaken,  and
ought  to  have  made  one  exception.  India  owes  to  Christianity  its
mutiny  of  1857,  which  threw  it  back  for  a  century.  This  we  assert  on
the  authority  of  general  opinion  and  of  Sir  John  Kay,  who  declares,  in
his  Sepoy  War,  that  the  mutiny  resulted  from  the  intolerance  of  the
crusading  missions  and  the  silly  talk  of  the  Friend  of  India.

"NOT   A    CHRISTIAN"!  195

I  have  done ;  adding  but  one  more  word  of  advice  to  the  Review.
In  the  last  quarter  of  the  nineteenth  century,  when  the  latest  inter-
national revision  of  the  Bible — that  infallible  and  revealed  Word  of
God! — reveals  64,000  mistranslations  and  other  mistakes,  it  is  not  the
Theosophists — a  large  number  of  whose  members  are  English  patriots
and  men  of  learning — but  rather  the  Christians  who  ought  to  beware
of  "wanton  aggressiveness"  against  people  of  other  creeds.  Their
boomerangs  may  fly  back  from  some  unexpected  parabola  and  hit  the
throwers.

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

Bombay,  Feb.  25th,  1879.

THE  RETORT  COURTEOUS.

[From  the  Indian  Spectator.^

There  is  a  story  current  among  the  Yankees  of  a  small  school  boy,
who,  having  been  thrashed  by  a  bigger  fellow  and  being  unable  to  hit
him  back,  consoled  himself  by  making  faces  at  his  enemy's  sister.
Such  is  the  position  of  my  opponent  of  the  world-famed  Bombay  Review.
Realizing  the  impossibility  of  injuring  the  Theosophical  Society,  he
"makes  faces"  at  its  Corresponding  Secretary,  flinging  at  her  personal
abuse.

Unfortunately  for  my  masked  enemies  and  fortunately  for  myself,
I  have  five  years'  experience  in  fighting  American  newspapers,  an}'  one
of  which,  notwithstanding  the  grandiloquent  style  of  the  "Anthropo-
sophists,"  "B.'s"  and  "Onesimuses"  is  any  day  more  than  a  match  in
humour,  and  especially  in  wit,  for  a  swarm  of  such  pseudonymous
wasps  as  work  on  the  Review.  If  I  go  to  the  trouble  of  noticing  their
last  Saturday's  curry  of  weak  arguments  and  impertinent  personalities
at  all,  it  is  simply  with  the  object  of  proving  once  more  that  it  requires
more  wit  than  seems  to  be  at  their  command  to  compel  my  silence.
Abuse  is  no  argument;  moreover,  if  applied  indiscriminately  it  may
prove  dangerous  sometimes.

Hence,  I  intend  noticing  but  one  particular  point.  As  to  their  con-
ceit, it  is  very  delightful  to  behold!  What  a  benevolent  tone  of
patronage  combined  with  modesty  is  theirs!  How  refreshing  in  hot
weather  to  hear  them  saying  of  oneself:

We  have  been  more  charitable  to  her  than  she  seems  subsequently  to  deserve  [! !].

Could  dictatorial  magnanimity  be  carried  further?  And  this  dithy-
rambic,  which  forces  one's  recognition  of  the  worth  of  the  mighty  ones
"of  broad  and  catholic  views,"  who  control  the  fates  of  The  Bombay
Revietc,  and  have  done  in  various  ways  so  much  "for  the  races  of
India"!  One  might  fancy  he  heard  the  "spirits"  of  Lord  Mayo  and
Sir  William  Jones  themselves  blowing  through  the  pipes  of  this  earth-
shaking  organ.

THE    RETORT    COURTEOIS.  197

Has  it  acquired  its  reverberant  diapason  from  the  patronage  of  all
the  native  princes  whose  favours  it  so  eagerly  sought  a  while  ago?

I  have  neither  leisure  nor  desire  to  banter  penny-a-line  wit  with  such
gold-medal  experts,  especially  when  I  honestly  write  above  my  own
signature  and  they  hide  themselves  behind  secure  pseudonyms.
Therefore,  I  will  leave  their  claptrap  about  "weeds  and  Madame
Sophy  "  to  be  digested  by  themselves,  and  notice  but  the  insinuation
about  "Russian  spies."  I  agree  with  the  Review  editor  when  he  says
that  it  is  the  business  of  Sir  Richard  Temple  and  Sir  Frank  Souter  to
take  care  of  such  "spies."  And  I  will  further  add  that  it  is  these  two
gentlemen  alone  who  have  the  right  or  the  authority  to  denoimce  such
people.

No  other  person,  were  he  even  the  noblest  of  the  lords  instead  of  an
anonymous  writer,  can  or  will  be  allowed  to  throw  out  such  a  malicious
and  mischievous  hint  about  a  woman  and  a  citizen  of  the  United  States.
He  who  does  it  risks  being  brought  to  the  bar  of  that  most  just  of  all
tribunals — a  British  Court.  And  if  either  of  my  ambuscaders  wishes
to  test  the  question,  pray  let  him  put  his  calumny  in  some  tangible
shape.  Such  a  vile  innuendo — even  when  shaped  into  the  sham-denial
of  a  bazaar  rumour,  becomes  something  more  serious  than  whole  folios
of  the  "flapdoodle"  (the  stuff — as  sailors  say — upon  which  fools  are
fed)  which  the  Review? ' s  Christian  Shastris  serve  up  against  Theosophy
and  Theosophists.  In  the  interest  of  that  youthful  and  boisterous
paper  itself,  we  hope  that  henceforth  it  will  get  its  information  from  a
more  reliable  source  than  the  Bombay  market  places.

H.  P.  Blavatsky.
Bombay,  March  i/t/i,  iSyg.

u

SCRUTATOR"  AGAIN.

[Probably  from  the  London  Spiritualist.']

If  my  memory  has  not  altogether  evaporated  under  the  combined
influences  of  this  blazing  Indian  sun  and  the  frequent  misconstructions
of  your  correspondents,  there  occurred,  in  March,  1878,  an  epistolary
skirmish  between  one  who  prudently  conceals  his  face  behind  the  two
masks  of  "Scrutator"  and  "M.A.  Cantab.,"  and  your  humble  servant.
He  again  attacks  me  in  the  character  of  my  London  Nemesis.  Again
he  lets  fly  a  Parthian  shaft  from  behind  the  fence  of  one  of  his  pseudo-
nyms. Again  he  has  found  a  mare's  nest  in  my  garden — a  chrono-
logical, instead  of  a  metaphysical  one  this  time.  He  is  exercised  about
my  age,  as  though  the  value  of  my  statements  would  be  in  the  least
affected  by  either  rejuvenating  me  to  infancy,  or  ageing  me  into  a
double  centenarian.  He  has  read  in  the  Revue  Spirite  for  October  last
a  sentence  in  which,  discussing  this  very  point,  I  say  that  I  have  not
passed  thirty  years  in  India.     And  that :

Oest  justement  nion  age — qicoique  fort  respectable  tel  qiCil  est — qui  s' oppose  violem-
ment  a  cette  chronologic,  etc.

I  reproduce  the  sentence  exactly  as  it  appears,  with  the  sole  exception
of  restoring  the  period  after  "VInde"  in  the  place  of  the  comma,  which
is  simply  a  typographical  mistake.  The  capital  C  which  immediately
follows  would  have  conveyed  to  anyone  except  a  "Scrutator"  my  exact
meaning,  viz.,  that  my  age  itself,  hozvever  respectable,  is  opposed  to  the
idea  that  I  had  passed  thirty  years  in  India.

I  do  hope  that  my  ever-masked  assailant  will  devote  some  leisure  to
the  study  of  French  as  well  as  of  punctuation  before  he  attacks  again.

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

Bombay,  Feb.,  iSjq.

MAGIC.

[From  The  Deccan  Star,  March  30th,  1879.]

In  The  Indian  Tribune  of  March  15th  appears  a  letter  upon  the  rela-
tions of  the  Theosophical  Society  with  the  Arya  Samaj.  The  writer
seems  neither  an  enemy  of  our  cause,  nor  hostile  to  the  Society;  there-
fore I  will  try  in  a  gentle  spirit  to  correct  certain  misapprehensions
under  which  he  labours.

As  he  signs  himself  "A  Member,"  he  must,  therefore,  be  regarded
by  us  as  a  Brother.  And  yet  he  seems  moved  by  an  unwarranted  fear
to  a  hasty  repudiation  of  too  close  a  connection  between  our  Society
and  his  Samaj,  lest  the  fair  name  of  the  latter  be  compromised  before
the  public  by  some  strange  notions  of  ours.     He  says:

I  have  been  surprised  to  hear  that  the  Society  embraces  people  who  believe  in
magic.  Should  this,  however,  be  the  belief  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  I  could
only  assure  your  readers  that  the  Arya  Samaj  is  not  in  common  with  them  in  this
respect.  .  .  .  Only  as  far  as  Vedic  learning  and  Vedic  philosophy  is  concerned,
their  objects  may  be  said  to  be  similar.

It  is  these  voxy  points  I  now  mean  to  answer.

The  gist  of  the  whole  question  is  as  to  the  correct  definition  of  the
word  "Magic,"  and  understanding  of  what  Vaidic  "learning  and  philo-
sophy" are.  If  by  Magic  is  meant  the  popular  superstitious  belief  in
sorcery,  witchcraft  and  ghosts  in  general;  if  it  involves  the  admission
that  s?tpernainral  feats  may  be  performed ;  if  it  requires  faith  in  miracles
— that  is  to  say,  phenomena  outside  natural  law;  then,  on  behalf  of
every  Theosophist,  whether  a  sceptic  yet  unconverted,  a  believer  in
and  student  of  phenomena  pure  and  simple,  or  even  a  modern  Spiri-
tualist so-called — i.e.,  one  who  believes  mediumistic  phenomena  to  be
necessarily  caused  by  returning  human  Spirits — we  emphatically  repu-
diate the  accusation.

We  did  not  see  The  Civil  and  Military  Gazette,  which  seems  so  well
acquainted  with  our  doctrines;    but  if  it   meant  to  accuse  any  Theo-

200  A   MODERN    PANARION.

sophists  of  any  such  belief,  then,  like  many  other  Gazettes  and  Reviews,
it  talked  of  that  which  it  knew  nothing  about.

Our  Society  believes  in  no  miracle,  diabolical  or  human,  nor  in  any-
thing which  eludes  the  grasp  of  either  philosophical  and  logical
induction,  or  the  syllogistic  method  of  deduction.  But  if  the  cor-
rupted and  comparatively  modern  term  of  "Magic"  is  understood  to
mean  the  higher  study  and  knowledge  of  Nature  and  deep  research
into  her  hidden  powers — those  Occult  and  mysterious  laws  which
constitute  the  ultimate  essence  of  every  element — whether  with  the
ancients  we  recognize  but  four  or  five,  or  with  the  moderns  over  sixty;
or,  again,  if  by  Magic  is  meant  that  ancient  study  within  the  sanctu-
aries, known  as  the  "worship  of  the  Light,"  or  divine  and  spiritual
wisdom — as  distinct  from  the  worship  of  darkness  or  ignorance — which
led  the  initiated  High-priests  of  antiquity  among  the  Aryans,  Chal-
daeans,  Medes  and  Egyptians  to  be  called  Maha,  Magi  or  Maginsi,  and
by  the  Zoroastrians  Meghistam  (from  the  root  Meh'ah,  great,  learned,
wise) — then,  we  Theosophists  "plead  guilty."

We  do  study  that  "Science  of  sciences,"  extolled  by  the  Eclectics
and  Platonists  of  the  Alexandrian  Schools,  and  practised  by  the  Theur-
gists  and  the  Mystics  of  every  age.  If  Magic  gradually  fell  into
disrepute,  it  was  not  because  of  its  intrinsic  worthlessness,  but  through
misconception  and  ignorance  of  its  primitive  meaning,  and  especially
the  cunning  policy  of  Christian  theologians,  who  feared  lest  many  of
the  phenomena  produced  by  and  through  natural  (though  Occult)  law
should  give  the  direct  lie  to,  and  thus  cheapen,  "Divine  biblical
miracle,"  and  so  forced  the  people  to  attribute  every  manifestation  that
they  could  not  comprehend  or  explain  to  the  direct  agency  of  a  per-
sonal devil.  As  well  accuse  the  renowned  Magi  of  old  of  having  had
no  better  knowledge  of  divine  truth  and  the  hidden  powers  and  possi-
bilities of  physical  law  than  their  successors,  the  uneducated  Parsi
Mobeds,  or  the  Hindu  Maharajahs  of  that  shameless  sect  known  as
the  Valiabhacharyas,  both  of  whom  yet  derive  their  appellation  from
the  Persian  word  Mog  or  Mag,  and  the  Sanskrit  Maha.  More  than  one
glorious  truth  has  thus  tumbled  down  through  human  ignorance  from
the  sublime  unto  the  ridiculous.

Plato,  and  even  the  sceptical  Lucian,  both  recognized  the  high
wisdom  and  profound  learning  of  the  Magi ;  and  Cicero,  speaking  of
those  who  inhabited  Persia  in  his  times,  calls  them  "sapientium  et
doctorum  genus  majorum."     And  if  so,  we  must  evidently  believe  that

MAGIC.  20I

these  Magi  or  "magicians"  were  not  such  as  London  sees  at  a  shil-
ling a  seat — nor  yet  certain  fraudulent  spiritual  mediums.  The  Science
of  such  Theurgists  and  Philosophers  as  Pythagoras,  Plotinus,  Porphyry,
Proclus,  Bruno,  Paracelsus,  and  a  host  of  other  great  men,  has  now-
fallen  into  disrepute.  But  had  our  Brother  Theosophist,  Thomas  Alva
Edison,  the  inventor  of  the  telephone  and  the  phonograph,  lived  in
the  days  of  Galileo,  he  would  have  surely  expiated  on  the  rack  or  at
the  stake  his  sin  of  having  found  the  means  to  fix  on  a  soft  surface  of
metal,  and  preserve  for  long  years,  the  sounds  of  the  human  voice,
for  his  talent  would  have  been  pronounced  the  gift  of  hell.  And  yet,
such  an  abuse  of  brute  power  to  suppress  truth  would  not  have  changed
a  scientific  discovery  into  a  foolish  and  disreputable  superstition.

But  our  friend  "A  Member,"  consenting  to  descend  to  our  level  in
one  point  at  least,  admits  himself  that  in  "Vedic  learning  and  philo-
sophv"  the  Arya  Samaj  and  the  Theosophical  Society  are  upon  a
common  ground.  Then,  I  have  something  to  appeal  to  as  an  authority
which  will  be  better  still  than  the  so-much-derided  Magic,  Theurgy
and  Alchemy.  It  is  the  Vedas  themselves,  for  "Magic"  is  brought  into
every  tine  of  the  sacred  books  of  the  Aryans.  Magic  is  indispensable  for
the  comprehension  of  either  of  the  six  great  schools  of  Aryan  philo-
sophy. And  it  is  precisely  to  understand  them,  and  thus  enable  our-
selves to  bring  to  light  the  hidden  summum  bonum  of  that  mother  of
all  Eastern  Philosophies  known  as  the  Vedas,  and  the  later  Brahraani-
cal  literature,  that  we  study  it.  Neglect  this  study,  and  we,  in  common
with  all  Europe,  would  have  to  set  Max  Muller's  interpretations  of  the
Vedas  far  above  those  of  Svami  Dyanand  Sarasvati,  as  given  in  his
Veda  Bhdshya.  And  we  would  have  to  let  the  Anglo-German  Sans-
kritist  go  uncontradicted,  when  he  says  that  with  the  exception  of  the
Rik,  none  other  of  the  four  sacred  books  is  deserving  of  the  name  of
Veda,  especially  the  Atharva  Veda,  which  is  absurd,  magical  nonsense,
composed  of  sacrificial  formulas,  charms  and  incantations  (see  his
Lecture  on  the  Vedas).  This  is,  therefore,  why,  disregarding  every
misconception,  we  humbly  beg  to  be  allowed  to  follow  the  analytical
method  of  such  students  and  practitioners  of  "Magic"  as  Kapila—
mentioned  in  the  Shvctdshvatara  Upauis/iad  as

The  Rishi  nourished  with  knowledge  by  the  Cod  himself—
Patanjali,  the  great  authority  of  the  Yoga,  Shankaracharya  of  theurgic
memory,  and  even  Zoroaster,  who  certainly  learned  his  wisdom  from
the  initiated  Brahmaus  of  Arvavarta.      And  we  do  not  see  why,   for

202  A   MODERN   PANARION.

that,  we  should  be  held  up  to  the  world's  scorn,  as  either  superstitious
fools  or  hallucinated  enthusiasts,  b>r  our  own  brother  of  the  Arya
Samaj.  I  will  say  more.  While  the  latter  is,  perhaps,  in  common
with  other  "members"  of  the  same  Samaj,  unable  and  perfectly  help-
less to  defend  Svami  Dyanand  against  the  sophistry  of  such  partial
scoffers  as  a  certain  Pandit  Mahesa  Chandra  Nyayaratna,  of  Calcutta,
who  would  have  us  believe  the  Veda  Bhashya  a  futile  attempt  at  inter-
pretation ;  we,  Theosophists,  do  not  shrink  from  assuming  the  burden.
When  the  Svami  affirms  that  Agni  and  Ishvara  are  identical,  the  Cal-
cutta Pandit  calls  it  "stuff."  To  him  Agni  means  the  coarse,  visible
fire,  with  which  one  melts  his  ghee  and  cooks  his  rice  cakes.  Ap-
parently he  does  not  know,  as  he  might,  if  he  had  studied  "Magic" —
that  is  to  say,  had  familiarized  himself  with  the  views  about  the  divine
Fire  or  L,ight,  "whose  external  body  is  Flame,"  held  by  the  mediaeval
Rosicrucians  (the  Fire-Philosophers)  and  all  their  initiated  predeces-
sors and  successors — that  the  Vedic  Agni  is  in  fact  and  deed  Ishvara
and  nothing  else.     The  Svami  makes  no  mistake  when  he  says:

For  Agni  is  all  the  deities  and  Vishnu  is  all  the  deities.  For  these  two  [divine]
bodies,  Agni  and  Vishnu,  are  the  two  ends  of  the  sacrifice.

At  one  end  of  the  ladder  which  stretches  from  heaven  to  earth  is
Ishvara — Spirit,  Supreme  Being,  subjective,  invisible  and  incomprehen-
sible; at  the  other  his  visible  manifestation,  "sacrificial  fire."

So  well  has  this  been  comprehended  by  every  religious  Philosophy
of  antiquity  that  the  enlightened  Parsi  worships  not  gross  flame,  but
the  divine  Spirit  within,  of  which  it  is  the  visible  type;  and  even  in
the  Jewish  Bible  there  is  the  unapproachable  Jehovah  and  his  down-
rushing  fire  which  consumes  the  wood  upon  the  altar  and  licks  up  the
water  in  the  trench  about  it  (i  Kings,  xviii.  38).  There  is  also  the
visible  manifestation  of  God  in  the  burning  bush  of  Moses,  and  the
Holy  Ghost,  in  the  Gospels  of  the  Christians,  descending  like  tongues
of  flame  upon  the  heads  of  the  assembled  disciples  on  the  day  of
Pentecost.  There  is  not  an  Esoteric  Philosophy  or  rather  Theosophy,
which  did  not  apprehend  this  deep  spiritual  idea,  and  each  and  all
are  traceable  to  the  Vaidic  sacred  books.  Says  the  author  of  The
Rosicmcians  in  his  chapter  on  "The  Nature  of  Fire,"  and  quoting  R.
Fludd,  the  mediaeval  Theosophist  and  Alchemist:

Wonder  no  longer  then,  if,  in  the  religions  of  the  Aryans,  Medes  and  Zoroas-
trians,  rejected  so  long  as  an  idolatry,  the  ancient  Persians  and  their  masters,  the
Magi,  concluding  that  they  saw  "All"  in  this  supernaturally  magnificent  Element

MAGIC.

203

[fire]  fell  down  and  worshipped  it;  making  of  it  the  visible  representation  of  the
truest,  but  yet,  in  man's  speculations,  in  his  philosophies,  nay,  in  his  commonest
reason,  impossible  God;  God  being  everywhere  and  in  us,  and  indeed  us,  in  the
God-lighted  man,  and  impossible  to  be  contemplated  or  known  outside,  being  All.

This  is  the  teaching  of  the  mediaeval  Fire-Philosophers  known  as
the  Brothers  of  the  Rosie-Cross,  such  as  Paracelsus,  Kunrath,  Van
Helmont,  and  that  of  all  the  Illuminati  and  Alchemists  who  suc-
ceeded these,  and  who  claimed  to  have  discovered  the  eternal  Fire,  or
to  have  "found  out  God  in  the  Immortal  Light" — that  light  whose
radiance  shone  through  the  Yogis.    The  same  author  remarks  of  them:

Already,  in  their  determined  climbing  unto  the  heights  of  thought,  had  these
Titans  of  mind  achieved,  past  the  cosmical  through  the  shadowy  borders  of  the
Real  and  Unreal,  into  Magic.     For  is  Magic  wholly  false  ?

— he  goes  on  to  ask.     No;  certainly  not,  when  by  Magic  is  understood
the  higher  study  of  divine,  and  yet  not  supernatural  law,  though  the
latter  be,  as  yet,  undiscovered  by  exact  and  materialistic  phenomena,
such  as  those  which  are  believed  in  by  nearly  twenty  millions  of  well-
educated,   often    highly  enlightened    and   learned  persons    in    Europe
and  America.      These  are  as  real,  and  as  well  authenticated  by  the
testimony  of  thousands  of  unimpeached  witnesses,  and  as  scientifically
and   mathematically  proved   as  the  latest  discoveries  of  our  Brother
T.  A.  Edison.     If  the  term  "fool"  is  applicable  to  such  men  of  Science
and  giants  of  intellect  of  the  two  hemispheres,  as  W.  Crookes,  F.R.S.,
Alfred  Russel  Wallace,  the  greatest  Naturalist  of  Europe  and  a  suc-
cessful rival  of  Darwin,  and  as  Flammarion,  the  French  Astronomer,
Member  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  of  France,  and  Professor  Zollner,
the  celebrated  Leipzig  Astronomer  and  Physicist,  and  Professor  Hare,
the  great   Chemist  of  America,  and    many  another  no   less   eminent
Scientist,    unquestioned   authorities   upon   any   other   qzicstion   but   the
so-called  spiritual  phenomena,  and  all  firm  Spiritualists  themselves,
often  converted  only  after  years  of  careful  investigation — then,  indeed,
we  Theosophists  would  not  find  ourselves  in  bad  company,  and  would
deem  it  an  honour  to  be  called  "fools"  were  we  even  firm  orthodox
Spiritualists    ourselves — i.e.,    believers    in    perambulating    ghosts    and
materialized  bhuts — which  we  are  not.      But  we  are  believers  in  the
phenomena  of  the  Spiritualists  (even  if  we  do  doubt  their  "spirits"),
for  we  happen  to  know  them  to  be  actual  facts.     It  is  one  thing  to
reject  unproved  theory,  and  quite  another  to  battle  against  well-estab-
lished facts.     Everyone  has  a  right  to  doubt,  until  further  and  stronger

204  A    MODERN    PANARION.

evidence,  whether  these  modern  phenomena  which  are  inundating  the
Western  countries,  are  all  produced  by  disembodied  "spirits" — for  it
happens  to  be  hitherto  a  mere  speculative  doctrine  raised  up  by  enthu-
siasts; but  no  one  is  authorized — unless  he  can  bring  to  contradict  the
fact,  something  better  and  weightier  than  the  mere  negations  of  sceptics
— to  deny  that  such  phenomena  do  occur.     If  we  Theosophists  (and  a
very  small  minority  of  us),  disclaim  the  agency  of  "spirits"  in  such
manifestations,  it  is  because  we  can  prove  in  most  instances  to  the
Spiritualists,  that  many  of  their  phenomena,  whether  of  physical  or
psychological  nature,  can  be  reproduced  by  some  of  our  Adepts  at  will,
and  without  any  aid  of  "spirits"  or  resort  to  either  divine  or  diabolical
miracle,   but   simply  hy  developing  the   Occult  powers  of  the  man's
Inner  Self  and  studying  the  mysteries  of  Nature.     That  European  and
American  sceptics  should  deny  such  interference  by  Spirits,  and,  as
a  consequence  discredit  the  phenomena  themselves,  is  no  cause  for
wonder.      Scarcely  liberated  from  the  clutches  of  the  Church,  whose
terrible  policy,  barely  a  century  ago,  was  to  torture  and  put  to  death
every  person  who  either  doubted  biblical  "divine"  miracle,  or  endorsed
one  which  theology  declared  diabolical,  it  is  but  the  natural  force  of
reaction  which  makes  them  revel  in  their  new-found  liberty  of  thought
and  action.    One  who  denies  the  Supreme  and  the  existence  of  his  own
Soul,  is  not  likely  to  believe  in  either  Spirits  or  phenomena,  without
abundant  proof.     But  that  Eastern  people,  Hindus  especially,  of  any
sect,  should  disbelieve,  is  indeed  an  anomaly,  considering  that  they  all
are  taught  the  transmigration  of  Souls,  and  spiritual  as  well  as  physical
evolution.      The  sixteenth  chapter  of  the   Mahabharata,  Harivansha
Parva,  is  full  of  spiritual  phenomena  and  the  raising  of  Spirits.    And  if,
ashamed  of  the  now  termed  "superstitions"  of  their  forefathers,  young
India  turns,  sunflower-like,  but  to  the  great  luminaries  of  the  West,
this  is  what  one  of  the  most  renowned  men  of  Science  of  England,
A.  R.  Wallace — a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  as  well  as  a  member  of  the
Theosophical  Society — says  of  the  phenomena  in  his  Contributions  to
the  Theory  of  Natural  Selection,  and  On  Miracles  and  Modern  Spiritualism,
thus  confirming  the  belief  of  old  India:

Up  to  the  time  when  I  first  became  acquainted  with  the  facts  of  Spiritualism,  I
was  a  confirmed  philosophical  sceptic.  I  was  so  thorough  and  confirmed  a  Mate-
rialist, that  I  could  not  at  that  time  find  a  place  in  my  mind  for  the  conception  of
spiritual  existence,  or  for  any  other  genesis  in  the  universe  than  matter  and  force.
Facts,  however,  "are  stubborn  things."

MAGIC.  205

Having  explained  how  he  came  to  become  a  Spiritualist,  he  considers
the  spiritual  theory  and  shows  its  compatibility  with  natural  selection.
Having,  he  says:

Been  led,  by  a  strict  induction  from  facts,  to  a  belief— firstly,  in  the  existence  of
a  number  of  .preter-human  intelligences  of  various  grades;  and  secondly,  that  some
of  these  intelligences,  although  usually  invisible  and  intangible  to  us,  can  and  do
act  on  matter,  and  do  influence  our  minds — I  am  surely  following  a  strictly  logical
and  scientific  course,  in  seeing  how  far  this  doctrine  will  enable  us  to  account  for
some  of  those  residual  phenomena  which  Natural  Selection  alone  will  not  explain.
In  the  tenth  chapter  of  my  Contributions  to  the  Theory  of  Natural  Selection  I  have
pointed  out  what  I  consider  to  be  some  of  these  residual  phenomena;  and  I  have
suggested  that  they  may  be  due  to  the  action  of  sonic  of  the  various  intelligences
above  referred  to.  I  maintained,  and  still  maintain,  that  this  view  is  one  which  is
logically  tenable,  and  is  in  no  way  inconsistent  with  a  thorough  acceptance  of  tin-
grand  doctrine  of  evolution  through  Natural  Selection.

Would  not  one  think  he  hears  in  the  above  the  voices  of  Manu,
Kapila  and  many  other  Philosophers  of  old  India,  in  their  teachings
about  the  creation,  evolution  and  growth  of  our  planet  and  its  living
world  of  animal  as  well  as  human  species?  Does  the  great  modern
Scientist  speak  less  of  "Spirits"  and  spiritual  beings  than  Manu,  the
antediluvian  scientist  and  prehistoric  legislator?     L,et  young  and  seep-

A

tical  India  read  and  compare  the  old  Aryan  ideas  with  those  of  modern
Mystics,  Theosophists,  Spiritualists,  and  a  few  great  Scientists,  and  then
laugh  at  the  s7ipcrstitious  theories  of  both.

For  four  years  we  have  been  fighting  out  our  great  battle  against
tremendous  odds.  We  have  been  abused  and  called  traitors  by  the
Spiritualists,  for  believing  in  other  beings  in  the  invisible  world  besides
their  departed  Spirits;  we  were  cursed  and  sentenced  to  eternal  damna-
tion, with  free  passports  to  hell,  by  the  Christians  and  their  clergy ;
ridiculed  by  sceptics,  looked  upon  as  audacious  lunatics  by  society,
and  tabooed  by  the  conservative  press.  We  thought  we  had  drunk  to
the  dregs  the  bitter  cup  of  gall.  We  had  hoped  that  at  least  in  India,
the  country  par  excellence  of  psychological  and  metaphysical  Science,
we  would  find  firm  ground  for  our  weary  feet.  But  lo!  here  comes  a
brother  of  ours  who,  without  even  taking  the  trouble  to  ascertain
whether  or  not  the  rumours  about  us  are  true,  in  case  we  do  believe  in

either  Magic  or  Spiritualism Well!    We  impose  ourselves  upon  no

one.  For  more  than  four  years  we  lived  and  waxed  in  power  if  not
in  wisdom — which  latter  our  humble  deputation  of  Theosophists  was
sent  to  search  for  here,  so  that  we  might  impart  "Vaidic  learning  and

-206  A   MODERN   PANARION.

philosophy"  to  the  millions  of  famished  souls  in  the  West,  who  are
familiar  with  phenomena,  but  wrongly  suffer  themselves  to  be  misled
through  their  mistaken  notions  about  ghosts  and  bhuts.     But  if  we  are

A.

to  be  repulsed  at  the  outset  by  any  considerable  party  of  Arya  Samaj-
ists,  who  share  the  views  of  "A  Member,"  then  will  the  Theosophical
Society,  with  its  45,000  or  so  of  Western  Spiritualists,  have  to  become
again  a  distinct  and  independent  body,  and  do  as  well  as  it  can  without
a  single  "member"  to  enlighten  it  on  the  absurdity  of  Spiritualism
.jand  Magic.

H.  P.  Blavatsky.
Bombay,  March,  iSyg.

A  REPUBLICAN  CITIZEN.

[From  The  Banner  of  Light,  May  13th,  1879,  but  addressed  to  the  Editor  of

The  Bombay  Gazette^

On  the  very  day  of  my  return  from  a  month's  travel,  I  am  shown  by
the  American  Consul  two  paragraphs,  viz.,  one  in  your  paper  of  the
10th  inst.,  which  mentions  me  as  the  "Russian  'Baroness,'"  and  one  in
The  Times  of  India  of  the  8th,  whose  author  had  tried  hard  to  be  witty
but  only  succeeded  in  being  impertinent  and  calumnious.  In  this  last
paragraph  I  am  referred  to  as  a  woman  who  called  herself  a  "Russian
Princess."

With  the  original  and  selected  matter  in  your  contemporary  you,  of
course,  have  nothing  to  do.  If  the  editor  can  find  "amusing"  such
slanderous  tomfooleries  as  the  extract  in  question  from  The  Colonial
Gazette  and  Star  of  India,  and  risk  a  suit  for  libel  for  circulating  defa-
mations of  a  respectable  scientific  Society,  and  vilifying  its  honoured
President  by  calling  him  a  "secret  detective" — an  outrageous  lie,  by
the  way — that  is  not  your  affair.  My  present  business  is  to  take  the
Gazette  to  task  for  thrusting  upon  my  unwilling  Republican  head  the
baronial  coronet.  Know,  please,  once  for  all,  that  I  am  neither  "Coun-
tess," "Princess,"  nor  even  a  modest  "Baroness" — whatever  I  may
have  been  before  last  July.  At  that  time  I  became  a  plain  citizen  of
the  United  States  of  America.  I  value  that  title  far  more  than  any
that  could  be  conferred  on  me  by  King  or  Emperor.  Being  this,  I
could  be  nothing  else,  if  I  wished ;  for,  as  everyone  knows,  had  I  been
even  a  princess  of  the  royal  blood  before,  once  that  my  oath  of  allegi-
ance was  pronounced,  I  forfeited  every  claim  to  titles  of  nobility.
Apart  from  this  notorious  fact,  my  experience  of  things  in  general,  and
peacocks'  feathers  in  particular,  has  led  me  to  acquire  a  positive  con-
tempt for  titles;  since  it  appears  that,  outside  the  boundaries  of  their
own  fatherlands,  Russian  princes,  Polish  counts,  Italian  marquises  and
German  barons,  are  far  more  plentiful   inside  than  outside  the  police

208  A   MODERN   PANARION.

precincts.  Permit  me  further  to  state — if  only  for  the  edification  of
The  Times  of  India  and  a  brood  of  snarling  little  papers  searching
around  after  the  garbage  of  journalism — that  I  have  never  styled
myself  aught  but  what  I  can  prove  myself  to  be,  namely,  an  honest
woman,  now  a  citizen  of  America,  my  adopted  country,  and  the  only
land  of  true  freedom  in  the  whole  world.

H.  P.  Blavatsky.
Bombay,  May  12th.

THE  THEOSOPHISTS  AND  THEIR

OPPONENTS.

[From  The  Amrita  Bazar  Patrika,  June  13th,  1S79.]

I  pray  you  to  give  me,  in  your  Calcutta  paper,  space  enough  to  reply
to  the  mendacious  comments  of  one  of  our  religious  neighbours  upon
the  Theosophical  Society.  The  Indian  Christian  Herald,  in  the  number
of  April  4th  (which  unhappily  has  just  now  reached  my  eye),  with  a
generosity  peculiar  to  religious  papers,  filled  two  pages  with  pious
abuse  of  our  Society  as  a  body.  I  gather  from  it,  moreover,  that  The
Friend  of  India  had  previously  gone  out  of  its  way  to  vilify  the  Society,
since  the  former  paper  observes  that :

The  Theosophical  Society  has  merited  the  epithets  employed  ahout  it  by  The
Friend  of  In

To  my  everlasting  confusion  be  it  said,  that  I  am  guilty  of  the  crime

of  not  only  never  reading,  but  also  of  never  having  so  much  as  laid

my  eyes   upon  that  last  named  veteran  organ.     Nor  can  any  of  our

Theosophists  be  charged  with  abusing  the  precious  privilege  of  reading

the  missionary  journals,  a  considerable  time  having  elapsed  since  each

of  us  was  weaned,  and  relinquished  milk-and-water  pap.     Not  that  we

shirk  the  somniferous  task  under  the  spur  of  necessity.     Were  not  the

proof  of  our  present  writing  itself  sufficient,  I  need  only  cite  the  case

of  the  Bombay  missionary  organ,  The  Dnyanodaya,  which,  on  the  17th

ult.,  infamously  libelled  us,  and  on  the  25th  was  forced  by  Colonel

Olcott's  solicitor,  Mr.  Turner,  to  write  an  ample  apology,  in  order  to

avoid  a  criminal  prosecution  for  defamation  of  character.     We  regret

now  to  see  that  while  the  truly  good  and  pious  writer  of  the  Herald

was  able  to  rise  to  the  level  of  Billingsgate,  he  would  not  (or  dared

not?)  climb  to  the  height  of  actionable  slander.     Truly  prudence  is  a

great  virtue!

Confronted,  as  we  all  have  so  often  been,  with  the  intolerant  bigotry

15

2IO  A    MODERN    PANARION.

— religious  "zeal"  they  call  it — and  puerile  anathemas  of  the  clerical
"followers  of  the  meek  and  lowly  Jesus,"  no  Theosophist  is  surprised
to  find  the  peas  from  the  He?'ald-shootQr  rattling  against  his  armour.
It  adds  to  the  clatter,  but  no  one  is  mortally  hurt.  And,  after  all,  how
natural  that  the  poor  fellows  who  try  to  administer  spiritual  food  to  the
benighted  heathen — much  after  the  fashion  of  the  Strasburg  goose-
fatteners,  who  thrust  balls  of  meal  down  the  throats  of  the  captive
birds,  unmasticated,  to  swell  their  livers — should  shake  at  the  intrusion
of  Europeans  who  are  read}'  to  analyze  for  the  heathen  these  scripture-
balls  they  are  asked  to  grease  with  blind  faith  and  swallow  without
chewing!  People  like  us,  who  would  have  the  effrontery  to  claim  for
the  "heathen"  the  same  right  to  analyze  the  Bible  as  the  Christian
clergy  claim  to  analyze  and  even  to  revile  the  sacred  Scriptures  of
other  people,  must  of  course  be  put  down.  And  the  very  Christian
Herald  tries  his  hand.     It  says:

Let  us  without  any  bias  or  prejudice  reflect  .  .  .  about  the  Theosophical
Society  .  .  .  such  a  mortal  degradation  of  persons  [the  Buddhist,  Aryan,  Jain,
Pars!,  Hebrew  and  Mussulman  Theosophists,  included?]  who  can  see  nothing  good
in  the  Bible  .  .  .  [and  who]  ought  to  remember  that  the  Bible  is  not  only  a
blessed  book,  but  our  book  [!].

The  latter  piece  of  presumptuous  conceit  cannot  be  allowed  to  pass
unnoticed.  Before  I  answer  the  preceding  invectives  I  mean  to  demand
a  clear  definition  of  this  last  sentence,  "our  Book."  Whose  Book?
The  Herald's?  "Our"  must  mean  that;  for  the  seven  thick  volumes  of
the  Speaker's  Commentary  on  the  Old  Testament*  show  that  the  posses-
sive pronoun  and  the  singular  noun  in  question  can  no  longer  be  used
by  Christians  when  speaking  of  the  Bible.  So  numerous  and  glaring
have  been  the  mistakes  and  mis-translations  detected  by  the  forty
divines  of  the  Anglican  Church,  during  their  seven  years'  revision
of  the  Old  Testament,  that  the  L,ondon  Quarterly  Review  (No.  294,
April,  1S79),  the  organ  of  the  most  extreme  orthodoxy,  is  driven  in
despair  to  say:

The  time  has  certainly  passed  when  the  whole  Bible  could  be  practically  esteemed
a  single  Book,  miraculously  communicated  in  successive  portions  from  heaven,  put
into  writing  no  doubt  by  human  hands,  but  at  the  dictation  of  the  divine  spirit.

So  we  see  beyond  question  that  if  it  is  anybody's  "Book"  it  must  be

The  Indian  Christian  Herald's;  for,  in  fact,  its  editors  add:

*  The  Bible,  according  to  the  authorized  version  (a.d.  i6ii),  with  an  explanatory  and  critical  com-
mentary and  a  revision  of  the  translation,  by  bishops  and  other  clergy  of  the  Anglican  Church.
Edited  by  F.  C  Cook,  M.A.,  Canon  of  Exeter,  Preacher  at  Lincoln's  Inn,  Chaplain  in  Ordinary  to  the
Queen.    Vols,  i.-vi.    The  Old  Testament.     London,  1871-1876.

THK    THEOSOPHISTS   AND   THEIR    OPPONENTS.  211

We  feel  it  to  be  no  more  a  collection  of  books,  but  the  book.

But  here  is  another  bitter  pill  for  your  contemporary.  It  says  in  a
pious  gush :

The  words  which  had  come  from  the  prophets  of  the  despised  Israel  have  been
the  life-blood  of  the  world's  devotion.

But  the  inexorable  quarterly  reviewer,  after  reluctantly  abandoning
to  the  analytical  scalpels  of  Canon  Cook  and  Bishop  Harold  Browne  the
Mosaic  miracles — whose  supernatural  character  is  no  longer  affirmed,
but  they  are  allowed  to  be  "natural  phenomena" — turns  to  the  pre-
tended Old  Testament  prophecies  of  Christ,  and  sadly  says:

In  the  poetical  [psalms  and  songs]  and  the  prophetical  books  especially  the
number  of  corrections  is  enormous.

And  he  shows  how  the  commentators  upon  Isaiah  and  the  other  so-
called  prophets  have  reluctantly  admitted  that  the  time-worn  verses
which  have  been  made  to  serve  as  predictive  of  Christ  have  in  truth  no
such  meaning.     He  says:

It  requires  an  effort  to  break  the  association,  and  to  realize  how  much  less  they
[the  prophecies]  must  have  meant  at  first  to  the  writers  themselves.  But  it  is  just
this  that  the  critical  expositor  is  bound  to  do  .  .  .  for  this  some  courage  is
required,  for  the  result  is  apt  to  seem  like  a  disenchantment  for  the  worse,  a  descent
to  an  inferior  level,  a  profanation  of  the  paradise  in  which  ardent  souls  have  found
spiritual  sustenance  and  delight.

(Such  "souls"  as  the  Herald  editor's?)  What  wonder,  then,  that
the  explosion  of  these  seven  theological  torpedoes — as  the  seven
volumes  of  the  Speaker's  Commentary  may  truly  be  called — should
force  the  reviewer  into  saying:

To  us,  we  confess,  every  attempt  to  place  the  older  Scriptures  on  the  same
supreme  pinnacle  on  which  the  New  Testament  of  later  Revelation  stands,  is
doomed  to  failure.

The  Herald  is  welcome  to  what  is  left  of  its  "Book."
How  childishly  absurd  it  was  then  of  the  Herald  to  make  a  whole
Society  the  scapegoat  for  the  sins  of  one  individual!  It  is  now  univer-
sally known  that  the  Society  comprises  fellows  of  many  nationalities
and  many  different  religious  faiths,  and  that  its  Council  is  made  up  of
the  representatives  of  these  faiths;  yet  the  Herald  endorses  the  false-
hood that  the  Society's  principles  are  "a  strange  compound  of
Paganism  and  Atheism,"  and  its  creed  "a  creed  as  comprehensive  as
it  is  incomprehensible."  What  other  answer  does  this  calumny  require
than  the  fact  that  our  President  has  publicly  declared  that  it  had  "no

212  A   MODERN   PANARION.

creed  to  offer  for  the  world's  acceptance,"  *  and  that  in  art.  viii  of  the
Society's  Rules,  appended  to  the  printed  Address,  in  an  enumeration
of  the  plans  of  the  Society,  the  first  paragraph  says  that  it  aims:
To  keep  alive  in  man  his  belief  that  he  has  a  soul,  and  the  Universe  a  God.

If  this  is  a  "compound  of  Paganism  and  Atheism,"  then  let  the
Herald  make  the  most  of  it.

But  the  Society  is  not  the  real  offender;  the  clerical  stones  are
thrown  into  my  garden.  The  Herald's  quotation  of  an  expression
used  by  me,  in  commenting  upon  a  passage  of  Sir  John  Kay's  Sepoy
War,  making  The  Friend  of  India  and  Co.  primarily  responsible  for
that  bloody  tragedy,  shows  the  whole  animus.  It  was  I  who  said  (see
Indian  Spectator,  March  2nd)  that:

India  owes  everything  to  the  British  Government  and  not  to  Christianity

— i.e.,  to  missionaries.  I  may  have  lost  my  "senses  outright,"  as  The
Indian  Christian  Herald  politely  remarks,  but  I  think  I  have  enough
left  to  see  through  the  inane  sophistries  which  they  make  do  duty  for
arguments.

We  have  only  to  say  to  the  Herald  the  following:  (1)  It  is  just  be-
cause we  do  live  in  "an  age  of  enlightenment  and  progress,"  in  which
there  is  (or  should  be)  room  for  every  form  of  belief,  that  such  Augus-
tinian  tirades  as  the  Herald's  are  out  of  place.     (2)  We  have  not  a

Mortal  hatred  for  Christianity  and  its  Divine  Founder,

— for  the  tendency  of  the  Society  is  to  emancipate  its  fellows  from  all
hatred  or  preference  for  any  one  exoteric  form  of  religion — i.e.,  with
more  of  the  human  than  divine  element  in  it — over  another  (see  rules);
neither  can  we  hate  a  "Founder"  whom  the  majority  of  us  do  not
believe  to  have  ever  existed.  (3)  To  "retain"  a  "reverence  for  the
Bible"  one  must  at  some  time  have  had  it,  and  if  our  own  investiga-
tions had  not  long  since  convinced  us  that  the  Bible  was  no  more  the
"Word  of  God"  than  half  a  dozen  other  holy  books,  the  present  con-
clusions of  the  Anglican  divines — at  least  as  far  as  the  Old  Testament
is  concerned — would  have  removed  the  last  vestige  of  doubt  upon  that
point.  And  besides  sundry  American  clergymen  and  bishops  we  have
among  our  Fellows  a  vicar  of  the  Church  of  England,  who  is  one  of
its  most  learned  antiquarians.     (4)  The  assertion  that  the

Pure  monotheism  of  the  Vedas  is  a  pure  myth

•   The  Tlieosophical  Society  and  its  Aim.    Address  delivered  by  Colonel  H.  S.  Olcott,  at  the  Framji
Cowasji  Hall,  Bombay,  March  23rd,  1879.

THK    TIIKOSOPHISTS   AND   THEIR    OPPONKNTS.  213

is  a  pure  falsehood,  beside  being  an  insult  to  Max  Mtiller  and  other
Western  Orientalists,  who  have  proved  the  fact;  to  say  nothing  of  that
great  Aryan  scholar,  preacher  and  reformer,  Svami  Dyanand  Saras  vat  i.
"Degraded  humanity"  that  we  are,  there  must  be  indeed  "some-
thing radically  wrong  and  corrupt"  in  our  "moral  nature,"  for,  we
confess  to  joy  at  seeing  our  Society  constantly  growing  from  acces-
sions of  some  of  the  most  influential  laymen  of  different  countries.
And  it  moreover  delights  us  to  think  that  when  we  reach  the  bottom  of
the  ditch,  we  will  have  as  bedfellows  half  the  Christian  clergy,  if  the
Speaker  s  Commentary  makes  as  sad  havoc  with  the  divinity  of  the
Nciv  Testament  as  it  has  with  that  of  the  Old.  Our  Indian  Christian
Pecksniff  in  righteous  indignation  exclaims:

How  they  managed  to  sink  so  low  in  the  scale  of  moral  and  spiritual  being  must
be  a  sadly  interesting  study  for  metaphysicians.

Sad,  indeed;  but  sadder  still  to  reflect  that  unless  the  editors  of  The
Indian  Christian  Herald  are  protected  by  post-mortem  fire-insurance
policies,  they  are  in  danger  themselves  of  eternal  torment.

Whosoever  shall  say  to  his  brother,  Thou  fool,  shall  be  in  danger  of  hell  fire,

says  Lord  Jesus,  "the   Desire  of  nations,"  in  Matthew,  v.  22,  unless
— dreadful  thought! — this  verse  should  be  also  found  a  mistranslation.

H.  P.  Bi.ayatsky,
Corresponding  Secretary  of  the  Theosophical  Society.

[N.B.— We  insert  the  above  letter  with  great  reluctance.  The  subject  matter  of
the  letter  is  not  fit  for  our  columns,  and  we  have  no  sympathy  with  those  who
attack  the  religious  creed  of  other  men.  The  matter  of  fact  is,  a  Calcutta  paper
attacks  a  body  of  men,  and  the  latter  are  thrown  at  a  great  disadvantage  if  they
are  not  allowed  an  opportunity  by  another  paper  of  replying  to  the  attack.  It  is
from  that  feeling  alone  that  we  have  given  place  to  the  above  letter. — Ed.  A.  B.
Patrilca.}

ECHOES  FROM  INDIA.

WHAT    IS    HINDU    SPIRITUALISM?

[From  The  Banner  of  Light,  Oct.  iSth,  1879.]

Phenomena  in  India — beside  the  undoubted  interest  they  offer  in
themselves,  and  apart  from  their  great  variety  and  in  most  instances
utter  dissimilarity  from  those  we  are  accustomed  to  hear  of  in  Europe
and  America — possess  another  feature  which  makes  them  worthy  of
the  most  serious  attention  of  the  investigator  of  Psychology.

Whether  Eastern  phenomena  are  to  be  accounted  for  by  the  imme-
diate interference  and  help  of  the  spirits  of  the  departed,  or  attributed
to  some  other  and  hitherto  unknown  cause,  is  a  question  which,  for  the
present,  we  will  leave  aside.  It  can  be  discussed,  with  some  degree  of
confidence,  only  after  many  instances  have  been  carefully  noted  and
submitted,  in  all  their  truthful  and  unexaggerated  details,  to  an  impar-
tial and  unprejudiced  public.  One  thing  I  beg  to  reaffirm,  and  this  is,
that  instead  of  exacting  the  usual  "conditions"  of  darkness,  harmo-
nious circles,  and  nevertheless  leaving  the  witnesses  uncertain  as  to
the  expected  results,  Indian  phenomena,  if  we  except  the  independent
apparitions  of  bhuts  (ghosts  of  the  dead),  are  never  sporadic  and  spon-
taneous, but  seem  to  depend  entirely  upon  the  will  of  the  operator,
whether  he  be  a  holy  Hindu  Yogi,  a  Mussulman  Sadhu,  Fakir,  or  yet  a
juggling  Jaddugar  (sorcerer).

In  this  connection  I  mean  to  present  numerous  examples  of  what  I  here
say;  for  whether  we  read  of  the  seemingly  supernatural  feats  produced

A.  A.

by  the  Rishis,  the  Aryan  patriarchs  of  archaic  antiquity,  or  by  Acharyas
of  the  Pauranic  days,  or  hear  of  them  from  popular  traditions,  or  again
see  them  repeated  in  our  modern  times,  we  always  find  such  pheno-
mena to  be  of  the  most  varied  character.  Besides  covering  the  whole
range  of  those  known  to  us  through  modern  mediumistic  agency,  as
well  as  repeating  the  mediaeval  pranks  of  the  nuns  of  Eoudon  and
other  historical  posscdees  in  cases  of  bhut  obsession,  we  often  recognize

ECHOES   FROM    INDIA.  215

in  them  the  exact  counterparts — as  once  upon  a  time  they  must  have
been  the  originals — of  biblical  miracles.  With  the  exception  of  two
— those  over  which  the  world  of  piety  goes  most  into  raptures  while
glorifying  the  Lord,  and  the  world  of  scepticism  grins  most  sardoni-
cally— to  wit,  the  anti-heliocentric  crime  performed  by  Joshua,  and
Jonah's  unpleasant  excursion  into  the  slimy  cavern  of  the  whale's
bell\' — we  have  to  record  as  occasionally  taking  place  in  India,  nearly
every  one  of  the  feats  which  are  said  to  have  so  distinguished  Moses
and  other  "friends  of  God."

But  alas  for  those  venerable  jugglers  of  Judaea!  And  alas  for  those
pious  souls  who  have  hitherto  exalted  these  alleged  prophets  of  the
forthcoming  Christ  to  such  a  towering  eminence!  The  idols  have  just
been  all  but  knocked  off  their  pedestals  by  the  parricidal  hands  of  the
forty  divines  of  the  Anglican  Church,  who  now  are  known  to  have
sorely  disparaged  the  Jewish  Scriptures.  The  despairing  cry  raised
by  the  reviewer  of  the  just  issued  Commentary  on  the  "Holy"  Bible,  in
the  most  extreme  organ  of  orthodoxy  (the  London  Quarterly  Revi
for  April,  1S79),  is  only  matched  by  his  meek  submission  to  the  inevit-
able. The  fact  I  am  alluding  to  is  one  already  known  to  you,  for  I
speak  of  the  decision  and  final  conclusive  opinions  upon  the  worth  of
the  Bible  by  the  conclave  of  learned  bishops  who  have  been  engaged
for  the  last  dozen  years  on  a  thorough  revision  of  the  Old  Testament.
The  results  of  this  labour  of  love  may  be  summarized  thus:

1.  The  shrinkage  of  the  Mosaic  and  other  "miracles"  into  mere
natural  phenomena.  (See  decisions  of  Canon  Cook,  the  Queen's  Chap-
lain, and  Bishop  Harold  Browne.)

2.  The  rejection  of  most  of  the  alleged  prophecies  of  Christ  as  such;
the  said  prophecies  now  turning  out  to  have  related  simply  to  contem-
poraneous events  in  Jewish  national  history.

3.  Resolutions  to  place  no  more  the  Old  Testament  on  the  same
eminence  as  the  Gospels,  as  it  would  inevitably  lead  to  the  disparage-
ment of  the  new  one.

4.  The  sad  confession  that  the  Mosaic  Books  do  not  contain  one  word
about  a  future  life,  and  the  just  complaint  that :

Moses  under  divine  direction  [?]  should  have  abstained  from  any  recognition  of
man's  destiny  beyond  the  grave,  while  the  belief  was  prominent  in  all  the  religious
around  Israel.

This  is:

Confessed  to  be  one  of  those  enigmas  which  are  the  trial  of  our  faith.

2l6  A    MODERN    PANARIOX.

And  it  is  the  "trial"  of  our  American  missionaries  here  also.  Edu-
cated natives  all  read  the  English  papers  and  magazines,  and  it  now
becomes  harder  than  ever  to  convince  these  "heathen"  matriculates  of
the  "sublime  truths"  of  Christianity.  But  this  by  way  of  a  small
parenthesis;  for  I  mention  these  newly  evolved  facts  only  as  having  an
important  bearing  upon  Spiritualism  in  general,  and  its  phenomena
especially.  Spiritualists  have  always  taken  such  pains  to  identify  their
manifestations  with  the  Bible  miracles,  that  such  a  decision,  coming
from  witnesses  certainly  more  prejudiced  in  favour  of  than  opposed  to
"miracles"  and  divine  supernal  phenomena,  is  rather  a  new  and  unex-
pected difficulty  in  our  way.  Let  us  hope  that  in  view  of  these  new
religious  developments,  our  esteemed  friend  Dr.  Peebles,  before  com-
mitting himself  too  far  to  the  establishment  of  "independent  Christian
churches,"  will  wait  for  further  ecclesiastical  verdicts,  and  see  how  the
iconoclastic  verdicts,  and  how  the  iconoclastic  English  divines  will
overhaul  the  phenomena  of  the  New  Testament.  Maybe,  if  their  con-
sistency does  not  evaporate,  they  will  have  to  attribute  all  the  miracles
worked  by  Jesus  also  to  "natural  phenomena" !  Very  happily  for  Spiri-
tualists, and  for  Theosophists  likewise,  the  phenomena  of  the  nineteenth
century  cannot  be  as  easily  disposed  of  as  those  of  the  Bible.  We  have
had  to  take  the  latter  for  nearly  two  thousand  years  on  mere  blind  faith,
though  but  too  often  they  transcended  every  possible  law  of  nature;
while  quite  the  reverse  is  our  own  case,  and  we  can  offer  facts.

But  to  return.  If  manifestations  of  an  Occult  nature  of  the  most
various  character  may  be  said  to  abound  in  India,  on  the  other  hand,
the  frequent  statements  of  Dr.  Peebles  to  the  effect  that  this  country  is
full  of  native  Spiritualists,  are — how  shall  I  say  it? — a  little  too  hasty
and  exaggerated.  Disputing  this  point  in  the  London  Spiritualist  of
Jan.  18th,  1878,  with  a  Madras  gentleman,  now  residing  in  New  York,
he  maintained  his  position  in  the  following  words:

I  have  met  not  only  Sinhalese  and  Chinese  Spiritualists,  but  hundreds  of  Hindu
Spiritualists,  gifted  with  the  powers  of  conscious  mediumship.  And  yet  Mr.
W.  L.  D.  O'Grady,  of  New  York,  informs  the  readers  of  The  Spiritualist  (see  issue
Nov.  23rd)  that  there  are  no  Hindu  Spiritualists.  These  are  his  words:  "No  Hindu
is  a  Spiritualist."

And  as  an  offset  to  this  assertion,  Dr.  Peebles  quotes  from  the.  letter
of  an  esteemed  Hindu  gentleman,  Mr.  Peary  Chand  Mittra,  of  Calcutta,
a  few  words  to  the  effect  that  he  blesses  God  that  his  "inner  vision  is
being  more  and  more  developed"  and  that  he  talks  "with  spirits."     We

ECHOES    FROM    INDIA.  217

all  know  that  Mr.  Mittra  is  a  Spiritualist,  but  what  does  it  prove?
Would  Dr.  Peebles  be  justified  in  stating  that  because  H.  P.  Blavatsky
and  half  a  dozen  other  Russians  have  become  Buddhists  and  Yedan-
tists,  Russia  is  full  of  Buddhists  and  Yedantists?  There  may  be  in
India  a  few  Spiritualists  among  the  educated  reading  classes  scattered
far  and  wide  over  the  country,  but  I  seriously  doubt  whether  our
esteemed  opponent  could  easily  find  a  dozen  of  such  among  this  popu-
lation numbering  240,000,000.  There  are  solitary  exceptions,  which
only  go  to  strengthen  a  rule,  as  everyone  knows.

Owing  to  the  rapid  spread  of  spiritualistic  doctrines  the  world  over,
and  to  my  having  left  India  several  years  before,  at  the  time  I  was  in
America  I  abstained  from  contradicting  in  print  the  great  spiritualistic
"pilgrim"  and  philosopher,  surprising  as  such  statements  seemed  to
me,  who  thought  myself  pretty  well  acquainted  with  this  country.
India,  unprogressive  as  it  is,  I  thought  might  have  changed,  and  I  was
not  sure  of  my  facts.  But  now  that  I  have  returned  for  the  fourth
time  to  this  country,  and  have  had  over  five  months'  residence  in  it,
after  a  careful  investigation  into  the  phenomena  and  especially  into
the  opinions  held  by  the  people  on  this  subject,  and  seven  weeks  of
travelling  all  over  the  country,  mainly  for  the  purpose  of  seeing  and
investigating  every  kind  of  manifestations,  I  must  be  allowed  to  know
what  I  am  talking  about,  as  I  speak  by  the  book.  Mr.  O'Grady  was
right.  No  "Hindu  is  a  Spiritualist"  in  the  sense  we  all  understand
the  term.  And  I  am  now  ready  to  prove,  if  need  be,  by  dozens  of  letters
from  the  most  trustworthy  natives  who  are  educated  by  Brahmans,  and
know  the  religious  and  superstitious  views  of  their  countrymen  better
than  any  one  of  us,  that  whatever  else  Hindus  may  be  termed  it  is  not
Spiritualists.  "What  constitutes  a  Spiritualist?"  very  pertinently  en-
quires, in  a  London  spiritual  organ,  a  correspondent  with  "a  passion
for  definition"  (see  Spiritualist,  June  13th,  1879).     He  asks:

Is  Mr.  Crookes  a  Spiritualist,  who,  like  my  humble  self,  does  not  believe  in
spirits  of  the  dead  as  agents  in  the  phenomena?

He  then  brings  forward  several  definition-.

From  the  most  latitudinarian  to  the  most  restricted  definitions.

Let  us  see  to  which  of  these  "definitions"  the  "Spiritualism"  of  the
Hindus— I  will  not  say  of  the  mass,  but  even  of  a  majority— would
answer.  Since  Dr.  Peebles— during  his  two  short  visits  to  India  ami
while  on  his  way  from  Madias,  cro.ssing  the  continent  in  its  diameter
from  Calcutta  to  Bombav— could   meet   "hundreds   of    Spiritualists,"

2l8  A    MODERN    PANARION.

then  these  must  indeed  form,  if  not  the  majority,  at  least  a  consider-
able percentage  of  the  240,000,000  of  India.  I  will  now  quote  the
definitions  from  the  letter  of  the  enquirer  who  signs  himself  "A  Spiri-
tualist" (?),  and  add  my  own  remarks  thereupon:

A. — Everyone  is  a  Spiritualist  who  believes  in  the  immortality  of  the  soul.

I  guess  not;  otherwise  the  whole  of  Christian  Europe  and  America
would  be  Spiritualists;  nor  does  this  definition  A  answer  to  the  reli-
gious views  of  the  Hindus  of  any  sect,  for  while  the  ignorant  masses
believe  in  and  aspire  to  Moksha,  i.e.,  literal  absorption  of  the  spirit  of
man  in  that  of  Brahman,  or  loss  of  individual  immortality,  as  means  of
avoiding  the  punishment  and  horrors  of  transmigration,  the  Philoso-
phers, Adepts,  and  learned  Yogis,  such  as  our  venerated  master,  Svami
Dyanand  Sarasvati,  the  great  Hindu  reformer,  Sanskrit  scholar,  and
supreme  chief  of  the  Vaidic  Section  of  the  Eastern  division  of  the  Theo-
sophical  Society,  explain  the  future  state  of  man's  Spirit,  its  progress
and  evolution,  in  terms  diametrically  opposite  to  the  views  of  the  Spiri-
tualists.    These  views,  if  agreeable,  I  will  give  in  some  future  letter.

B. — Anyone  who  believes  that  the  continued  conscious  existence  of  deceased
persons  has  been  demonstrated  by  communication  is  a  Spiritualist.

A  Hindu,  whether  an  erudite  scholar  and  Philosopher  or  an  ignorant
idolater,  does  not  believe  in  "continued  conscious  existence,"  though
the  former  assigns  for  the  hoi}-,  sinless  soul,  which  has  reached  Svarga
(heaven)  and  Moksha,  a  period  of  many  millions  and  quadrillions  of
years,  extending  from  one  Pralaya*  to  the  next.  The  Hindu  believes
in  cyclic  transmigration  of  the  soul,  during  which  there  must  be
periods  when  the  soul  loses  its  recollections  as  well  as  the  conscious-
ness of  its  individuality;  since,  if  it  were  otherwise,  every  person
would  distinctly  remember  all  his  previous  existences,  which  is  not  the
case.  Hindu  Philosophers  are  likewise  consistent  with  logic.  They
at  least  will  not  allow  an  endless  eternity  of  either  reward  or  punish-
ment for  a  few  dozens  of  years  of  earthly  life,  whether  this  life  be
wholly  blameless  or  yet  wholly  sinful.

C. — Anyone  is  a  Spiritualist  who  believes  in  any  of  the  alleged  objective  pheno-
mena, whatever  theory  he  may  favour  about  them,  or  even  if  he  have  none  at  all.

*  For  the  meaning-  of  the  word  Pralaya  see  vol.  ii.  of  /sis  Unveiled.  I  am  happy  to  say  that  not-
withstanding the  satirical  criticisms  upon  its  Vaidic  and  Buddhistic  portions  by  some  American
"would-be"  Orientalists,  Svami  Dyanand  and  the  Rev.  Sumangala  of  Ceylon,  respectively  the  re-
presentatives of  Vaidic  and  Buddhistic  scholarship  and  literature  in  India— the  first  the  best  Sans-
krit, and  the  other  the  most  eminent  Pali  scholar — both  expressed  their  entire  satisfaction  with  the
correctness  of  my  esoteric  explanations  of  their  respective  religions.  /sis  Unveiled  is  now  being
translated  into  Marathi  and  Hindi  in  India,  and  into  Pali  in  Ceylon.

ECHOES   FROM    INDIA.  219

Such  are  "phenomenalists,"  not  Spiritualists,  and  in  this  sense  the
definition  answers  to  Hindu  beliefs.  All  of  them,  even  those  who,
aping  the  modern  school  of  Atheism,  declare  themselves  Materialists,
are  yet  phenomenalists  in  their  hearts,  if  one  only  sounds  them.

D  and  E. — Does  not  allow  of  Spiritualism  without  spirits,  but  the  spirits  need  not
be  human.

At  this  rate  Theosophists  and  Occultists  generally  may  also  be  called
Spiritualists,  though  the  latter  regard  them  as  enemies;  and  in  this
sense  only  all  Hindus  are  Spiritualists,  though  their  ideas  about
human  Spirits  are  diametrically  opposed  to  those  of  the  "Spiritualists."
They  regard  bhuts — which  are  the  Spirits  of  those  who  died  with
unsatisfied  desires,  and  who  on  account  of  their  sins  and  earthly  at-
tractions, are  earth-bound  and  kept  back  from  Svarga  (the  "Elemen-
taries"  of  the  Theosophists) — as  having  become  wicked  devils,  liable  to
be  annihilated  any  day  under  the  potent  curses  of  much-sought- for  and
appreciated  mediums.*  The  Hindu  regards  as  the  greatest  curse  a
person  can  be  afflicted  with,  possession  and  obsession  by  a  bhnt,  and
the  most  loving  couples  often  part  if  the  wife  is  attacked  by  the  bhut
of  a  relative,  who,  it  seems,  seldom  or  never  attacks  any  but  women.

F. — Considers  that  no  one  has  a  right  to  call  himself  a  Spiritualist  who  has  any
new-fangled  notions  about  "Elementaries,"  spirit  of  the  medium,  and  so  forth;
or  does  not  believe  that  departed  human  spirits,  high  and  low,  account  for  all  the
phenomena  of  every  description.

This  one  is  the  most  proper  and  correct  of  all  the  above  given
"definitions,"  from  the  standpoint  of  orthodox  Spiritualism,  and
settles  our  dispute  with  Dr.  Peebles.  No  Hindu,  were  it  even  possible
to  bring  him  to  regard  bhuts  as  low,  suffering  Spirits  on  their  way  to
progress  and  final  pardon  (?),  could,  even  if  he  would,  account  for  all
the  phenomena  on  this  true  spiritualistic  theory.  His  religious  and
philosophical  traditions  are  all  opposed  to  such  a  limited  idea.  A
Hindu  is,  first  of  all,  a  born  metaphysician  and  logician.  If  he  be-
lieves at  all,  and  in  whatever  he  believes,  he  will  admit  of  no  special
laws  called  into  existence  for  men  of  this  planet  alone,  but  will  apply
these  laws  throughout  the  universe;  for  he  is  a  Pantheist  before  being
anything  else,  and  notwithstanding  his  possible  adherence  to  some
special  sect.  Thus  Mr.  Peebles  has  well  defined  the  situation  himself,
in  the  following  happy  paradox,  in  his  Spiritualist  letter  above  quoted,
and  in  which  he  says:

[Evidently  the  word  "medium"  is  here  used  for  "exorcist."     EDS.

220  A    MODERN    PANARION.

Some  of  the  best  mediums  that  it  has  been  1113-  good  fortune  to  know,  I  met  in
Ceylon  and  India.  And  these  were  not  mediums ;  for,  indeed,  they  held  converse
with  the  Pays  and  Pesatsays,  having  their  habitations  in  the  air,  the  water,  the  fire,
in  rocks  and  trees,  in  the  clouds,  the  rain,  the  dew,  in  mines  and  caverns!

Thus  these  "mediums"  who  were  not  mediums,  were  no  more  Spiri-
tualists than  they  were  mediums,  and — the  house  (Dr.  Peebles'  house)
is  divided  against  itself  and  must  fall.  So  far  we  agree,  and  I  will  now
proceed  further  on  with  my  proofs.

As  I  mentioned  before,  Colonel  Olcott  and  myself,  accompanied  by
a  Hindu  gentleman,  Mr.  Mulji-Taker-Sing,  a  member  of  our  Council,
started  on  our  seven  weeks'  journey  early  in  April.  Our  object  was
twofold:  (1)  to  pay  a  visit  to  and  remain  for  some  time  with  our
ally  and  teacher,  Svami  Dyanand,  with  whom  we  had  corresponded  so
long  from  America,  and  thus  consolidate  the  alliance  of  our  Society
with  the  Arya  Samajes  of  India  (of  which  there  are  now  over  fifty);
and  (2)  to  see  as  much  of  the  phenomena  as  we  possibly  could;  and,
through  the  help  of  our  Svami — a  Yogi  himself  and  an  Initiate  into
the  mysteries  of  the  Vidya  (or  Secret  Science) — to  settle  certain  vexed
questions  as  to  the  agencies  and  powers  at  work,  at  first  hand.  Cer-
tainly no  one  could  find  a  better  opportunity  to  do  so  than  we  had.
There  we  were,  on  friendly  relations  of  master  and  pupils  with  Pandit
Dyanand,  the  most  learned  man  in  India,  a  Brahman  of  high  caste,
and  one  who  had  for  seven  long  years  undergone  the  usual  and  dreary
probations  of  Yogism  in  a  mountainous  and  wild  region,  in  solitude,
in  a  state  of  complete  nudity  and  constant  battle  with  elements  and
wild  beasts — the  battle  of  the  divine  human  Spirit  and  the  imperial
will  of  man  against  gross  blind  matter  in  the  shape  of  tigers,  leopards,
rhinoceroses  and  bears,  without  noting  venomous  snakes  and  scorpions.
The  inhabitants  of  the  village  nearest  to  that  mountain  are  there  to
certify  that  sometimes  for  weeks  no  one  would  venture  to  take  a  little
food — a  handful  of  rice — to  our  Svami;  and  yet,  whenever  they  came,
they  always  found  him  in  the  same  posture  and  on  the  same  spot — an
open,  sandy  hillock,  surrounded  by  thick  jungle  full  of  beasts  of  prey —
and  apparently  as  well  without  food  and  water  for  whole  weeks,  as  if
he  were  made  of  stone  instead  of  human  flesh  and  bones.*  He  has
explained  to  us  this  mysterious  secret  which  enables  man  to  suffer  and

*  Yogis  and  ascetics  are  not  the  only  examples  of  such  protracted  fastings;  for  if  these  can  be
doubted,  and  sometimes  utterly  rejected  by  sceptical  Science  as  void  of  any  conclusive  proof— for
the  phenomenon  takes  place  in  remote  and  inaccessible  places — we  have  many  of  the  Jains,  inhabi-
tants of  populated  towns,  to  bring  forward  as  exemplars  of  the  same.  Many  of  them  fast,  abstain-
ing even  from  one  drop  of  water,  for  forty  days  at  a  time — and  survive  always.

ECHOES    FROM    INDIA.  22I

conquer  at  last  the  most  cruel  privations,  which  permits  him  to  go
without  food  or  drink  for  days  and  weeks;  to  become  utterly  insensible
to  the  extremes  of  either  heat  or  cold ;  and  finally,  to  live  for  days  out-
side instead  of  within  his  body.

During-  this  voyage  we  visited  the  very  cradle  of  Indian  Mysticism,
the   hot-bed   of   ascetics,    where   the   remembrance   of   the   wondrous
phenomena  performed  by  the  Rishis  of  old   is  no\V  as  fresh  as  it  ever
was   during  those   days  when    the   School   of  Patanjali — the   reputed
founder  of  Yogism — was  filled,   and  where  his  Yog-Sankhya  is  still
studied  with  as  much  fervour,  if  not  with  the  same  powers  of  compre-
hension.      To   Upper   India   and   the    North-Western    Provinces  we
went;    to  Allahabad  and  Cawnpore,  with   the  shores  of  their  sacred
Ganga  (Ganges)  all  studded  with  devotees;  whither  the  latter,  when  dis-
gusted with  life,  proceed  to  pass  the  remainder  of  their  days  in  medita-
tion and  seclusion,  and  become  Sannyasis,  Gossains,  Sadhus.     Thence
to  Agra,  with  its  Taj  Mahal,  "the  poem  in  marble,"  as  Bishop  Heber
happily  called   it,  and  the  tomb  of  its  founder,  the   great  Emperor-
Adept,  Akbar,  at  Secundra;  to  Agra,  with  its  temples  crowded  with
Shakti-worshippers,  and  to  that  spot,  famous  in  the  history  of  Indian
Occultism,  where  the  Jumna  mixes  its  blue  waters  with  the  patriarchal
Ganges,  and  which  is  chosen  by  the  Shaktas  (worshippers  of  the  female
power)  for  the  performance  of  their  pujas,  during  which  ceremonies
the  famous  black  crystals  or  mirrors  mentioned  by  P.  B.  Randolph  are
fabricated  by  the  hands  of  young  virgins.     From  there,  again,  to  Saha-
rampore  and  Meerut,  the  birthplace  of  the  mutiny  of  1S57.      During
our  sojourn  at  the  former  town,  it  happened  to  be  the  central  railway
point  to  which,  on  their  return  from  the  Hardwar  pilgrimage,  flocked
nearly  twenty-five  thousand  Sannyasis  and  Gossains,  to   numbers  of
whom  Col.  Olcott  put  close  interrogatories,  and  with  whom  he  con-
versed for  hours.    Then  to  Rajputana,  the  land  inhabited  by  the  bravest
of  all  races  in  India,  as  well  as  the  most  mystically  inclined — the  Solar
Race,  whose  Rajahs  trace  descent  from  the  sun  itself.     We  penetrated
as  far  as  Jeypore,  the  Paris,   and  at  the  same  time  the   Rome  of  the
Rajput  land.     We  searched   through    plains   and    mountains,   and  all
along  the  sacred  groves  covered  with  pagodas  and  devotees,  among
whom  we  found  some  very  holy  men,  endowed  with  genuine  wondrous
powers,  but  the  majority  were  unmitigated  frauds.     And  we  got  into
the  favour  of  more  than  one  Brahman,   guardian  and  keeper  of  his
God's  secrets  and  the  mysteries  of  his  temple;  but  got  no  more  evi-

222  A   MODERN   PANARION.

dence  out  of  these  "hereditary  dead  beats,"  as  Col.  Olcott  graphically
dubbed  them,  than  out  of  the  Sannyasis  and  exorcizers  of  evil  spirits,
as  to  the  similarity  of  their  views  with  those  of  the  Spiritualists.
Neither  have  we  ever  failed,  whenever  coming  across  any  educated
Hindu,  to  pump  him  as  to  the  ideas  and  views  of  his  countrymen  about
phenomena  in  general,  and  Spiritualism  especially.  And  to  all  our
questions,  who  it  was  in  the  case  of  holy  Yogis,  endowed  "with  miracu-
lous powers,"  that  produced  the  manifestations,  the  astonished  answer
was  invariably  the  same:  "He  [the  Yogi]  himself  having  become  one
with  Brahm,  produces  them,"  and  more  than  once  our  interlocutors
got  thoroughly  disgusted  and  extremely  offended  at  Col.  Olcott's
irreverent  question,  whether  the  bhuts  might  not  have  been  at  work
helping  the  Thaumaturgist.  For  nearly  two  months  uninterruptedlv
our  premises  at  Bombay — garden,  verandahs  and  halls — were  crammed
from  early  morning  till  late  at  night  with  native  visitors  of  the  most
various  sects,  races  and  religious  opinions,  averaging  from  twenty  to  a
hundred  and  more  a  day,  coming  to  see  us  with  the  object  of  exchang-
ing views  upon  metaphysical  questions,  and  to  discuss  the  relative
worth  of  Eastern  and  Western  Philosophies — Occult  Sciences  and
Mysticism  included.  During  our  journey  we  had  to  receive  our
brothers  of  the  Arya  Samajes,  which  sent  their  deputations  wherever
we  went  to  welcome  us,  and  wherever  there  was  a  Samaj  established.
Thus  we  became  intimate  with  the  previous  views  of  hundreds  and
thousands  of  the  followers  of  Svami  Dyanand,  every  one  of  whom
had  been  converted  by  him  from  one  idolatrous  sect  or  another.  Many
of  these  were  educated  men,  and  as  thoroughly  versed  in  Vaidic  Philo-
sophy as  in  the  tenets  of  the  sect  from  which  they  had  separated.
Our  chances,  then,  of  getting  acquainted  with  Hindu  views,  Philo-
sophies and  traditions,  were  greater  than  those  of  any  previous  Euro-
pean traveller;  nay,  greater  even  than  those  of  any  officials  who  had
resided  for  years  in  India,  but  who,  neither  belonging  to  the  Hindu
faith  nor  on  such  friendly  terms  with  them  as  ourselves,  were  neither
trusted  by  the  natives,  nor  regarded  as  and  called  by  them  "brothers"
as  we  are.

It  is,  then,  after  constant  researches  and  cross-questioning,  extending
over  a  period  of  several  months,  that  we  have  come  to  the  following
conclusions,  which  are  those  of  Mr.  O' Grady:  No  Hindu  is  a  Spiri-
tualist; and,  with  the  exception  of  extremely  rare  instances,  none  of
them  have  ever  heard  of  Spiritualism  or  its  movements  in  Europe,

ECHOES    FROM    INDIA.  223

least  of  all  in  America — with  which  country  many  of  them  are  as
little  acquainted  as  with  the  North  Pole.  It  is  but  now,  when  Svami
Dyanand,  in  his  learned  researches,  has  found  out  that  America  must

A.

have  been  known  to  the  early  Aryans — as  Arjuna,  one  of  the  five
Pandavas,  the  friend  and  disciple  of  Christna,  is  shown  in  Pauranic
history  to  have  gone  to  Patal(a)  in  search  of  a  wife,  and  married  in
that  country  Ulupi,  the  widow  daughter  of  Naga,  the  king  of  Patal(a),
an  antipodal  country  answering  perfectly  in  its  description  to  America,
and  unknown  in  those  early  days  to  any  but  the  Aryans — that  an
interest  for  this  country  is  being  felt  among  the  members  of  the
Samajes.  But,  as  we  explained  the  origin,  development  and  doctrines
of  the  Spiritual  Philosophy  to  our  friends,  and  especially  the  modus
operandi  of  the  mediums — i.e.,  the  communion  of  the  Spirits  of  the
departed  with  living  men  and  women,  whose  organisms  the  former  use
as  modes  of  communication — the  horror  of  our  listeners  was  unequalled
and  undisguised  in  each  case.  "Communion  with  bhuts!"  they  ex-
claimed. "Communion  with  souls  that  have  become  wicked  demons,
to  whom  we  are  ready  to  offer  sacrifices  in  food  and  drink  to  pacify
them  and  make  them  leave  us  quiet,  but  who  never  come  but  to  disturb
the  peace  of  families;  whose  presence  is  a  pollution!  What  pleasure
or  comfort  can  the  Bellate  [white  foreigners]  find  in  communicating
with  them?"  Thus,  I  repeat  most  emphatically  that  not  only  are
there,  so  to  say,  no  Spiritualists  in  India,  as  we  understand  the  term,
but  I  affirm  and  declare  that  the  very  suggestion  of  our  so-called
"Spirit  intercourse"  is  obnoxious  to  most  of  them — that  is  to  say,  to
the  oldest  people  in  the  world,  people  who  have  known  all  about  the
phenomena  for  thousands  upon  thousands  of  years.  Is  this  fact
nothing  to  us,  who  have  just  begun  to  see  the  wonders  of  medium-
ship?  Ought  we  to  estimate  our  cleverness  at  so  high  a  figure  as  to
make  us  refuse  to  take  instruction  from  these  Orientals,  who  have  seen
their  holy  men — nay,  even  their  Gods  and  demons  and  the  Spirits  of
the  elements — performing  "miracles"  since  the  remotest  antiquity?
Have  we  so  perfected  a  Philosophy  of  our  own  that  we  can  compare  it
with  that  of  India,  which  explains  every  mystery,  and  triumphantly
demonstrates  the  nature  of  every  phenomenon?  It  would  he  worth  our
while,  believe  me,  to  ask  Hindu  help,  if  it  were  but  to  prove,  better
than  we  can  now,  to  the  Materialists  and  sceptical  Science,  that,  what-
ever may  be  the  true  theory  as  to  the  agencies,  the  phenomena,
whether  biblical  or  Vaidic,  Christian  or  heathen,  are   in  the  natural

224  A    MODERN    PANARION.

order  of  this  world,  and  have  a  first  claim  to  scientific  investigation.
Let  us  first  prove  the  existence  of  the  Sphinx  to  the  profane,  and  after-
wards we  may  try  to  unriddle  its  mysteries.  Spiritualists  will  always
have  time  enough  to  refute  "antiquated  doctrines"  of  old.  Truth  is
eternal,  and  however  long  trampled  down  will  always  come  out  the
brighter  in  the  expiring  twilight  of  superstition.  But  in  one  sense  we
are  perfectly  warranted  in  applying  the  name  of  Spiritualists  to  the
Hindus.  Opposed  as  they  are  to  physical  phenomena  as  produced  by
the  bhuts,  or  unsatisfied  souls  of  the  departed,  and  to  the  possession  by
them  of  mediumistic  persons,  they  still  accept  with  joy  those  consoling
evidences  of  the  continued  interest  in  themselves  of  a  departed  father
or  mother.  In  the  subjective  phenomena  of  dreams,  in  visions  of
clairvoyance  or  trance,  brought  on  by  the  powers  of  holy  men,  they
welcome  the  Spirits  of  their  beloved  ones,  and  often  receive  from  them
important  directions  and  advice.

If  agreeable  to  vour  readers  I  will  devote  a  series  of  letters  to  the
phenomena  taking  place  in  India,  explaining  them  as  I  proceed.  I
sincerely  hope  that  the  old  experience  of  American  Spiritualists,  mass-
ing in  threatening  force  against  iconoclastic  Theosophists  and  their
"superannuated"  ideas  will  not  be  repeated;  for  my  offer  is  perfectly
impartial  and  friendly.  It  is  with  no  desire  to  either  teach  new  doc-
trines or  carry  on  an  unwelcome  Hindu  propaganda  that  I  make  it;
but  simply  to  supply  material  for  comparison  and  study  to  the  Spiri-
tualists who  think.

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

Bombay,  July,  iSyg.

MISSIONARIES  MILITANT.

i

[Probably  from  the  Allahabad  Pioneer,  1880.]

We  have  just  read  the  two  dreary  columns  in  The  Pioneer  of  March
15th,  "The  Theosophists  in  Council,"  by  Mr.  T.  G.  Scott.  The  Coun-
cil of  the  Society  having  nothing  more  to  say  to  the  reverend  polemic,
who,  in  rejoinder  to  a  brief  card,  treats  the  world  to  two  columns  of
what  Coleridge  would  call  "a  juggle  of  sophistry,"  I,  myself,  would
ask  you  to  favour  me  with  a  brief  space.

A  few  points  of  Mr.  Scott's  most  glaring  misconceptions  (?)  about
our  Society  may  be  noticed.  We  are  said  to  have  declared,  at  New
York,  that  the  Theosophical  Society  was  hostile  to  the  "Christian
Church";  while  at  Mayo  Hall,  Allahabad,  our  President  affirmed  that
his  Society  was  not  organized  to  fight  "Christianity."  This  is  assumed
to  be  a  contradiction  and  a  "change  of  base."  Now  if  there  were
enough  "Christianity"  in  the  "Christian  Church"  to  be  spoken  of,  the
gentleman's  point  might  be  deemed  well  taken.  But,  in  my  humble
opinion,  this  is  not  at  all  the  case.  Hence — though  not  at  all  hostile
to  "Christianity,"  i.e.,  the  ethics  alleged  to  have  been  preached  by  Jesus
of  Nazareth — I,  in  common  with  many  Theosophists,  am  very  much
so  to  the  so-called  "Church  of  Christ."  Collectively,  this  Church  in-
cludes three  great  rival  religions  and  some  hundreds  of  minor  sects,
for  the  most  part  bitterly  recriminative  and  mutually  far  more  hostile
to  each  other  than  we  are  to  all.  To  accuse,  therefore,  the  Theosophists
— who  may  dislike  the  Methodist,  Presbyterian,  Jesuit,  Baptist,  or  any
other  alleged  "Christian"  sect — of  bitter  hatred  of  "Christianity"  in
the  abstract,  is  like  accusing  one  of  hating  light  because  he  opposes
the  use  of  either  or  all  of  the  many  new-fangled  inventions  of  kerosene
lamps,  which,  under  the  pretext  of  preserving  the  light,  injure  it!  The
Christianity  of  Jesus,  dragged  by  its  numberless  sects  around  the  arena
of  our  century,  appears  like  that  car  in  the  Slavonian  fable  (a  version
of  one  by  iEsop)  to  which  were  harnessed   all  manner  of  creeping,

10

226  A   MODERN    PANARION.

swimming,  and  flying  things.  Each  of  these,  following  its  own
instinct,  attempted  to  draw  the  car  after  its  own  fashion.  Result:
between  the  birds,  animals,  reptiles  and  fishes,  the  unfortunate  vehicle
was  torn  into  fragments.

The  reverend  missionaries  are  hard  to  please  in  this  country.  When
left  unnoticed,  they  complain  of  the  Theosophists  ignoring  the  brave
"six  hundred";  and  when  we  do  notice  them — which,  indeed,  happens
only  under  compulsion — the}'  begin  abusing  us  in  the  most  un-Christian
and  often,  I  am  sorry  to  say,  ungentlemanly  way.

Thus,  for  instance,  we  had  to  call  the  strong  hand  of  the  law  to  our
help  in  the  case  of  The  Dnydnodaya,  a  diminutive  and  sorry  but  quite
a  fighting  little  missionary  weekly  of  Bombay,  which  called  our  Society
names,  and  had  to  apologize  in  print  for  it.  Now  comes  The  Bengal
Magazine  of  January;  its  Editor — by  the  by,  a  Christian  reverend,  but
nevertheless  very  rude  Babu — is  advised  to  look  out  and  consult  the
law,  before  he  charges  Colonel  Olcott  or  anyone  else  with  "hocus-pocus
tricks"  again;  as  the  "gushing  Colonel"  ma)- prove  as  little  gushing
and  as  active  in  his  case  as  he  was  in  that  of  the  abusive  little  Dnyano-
daya. And  now  Mr.  T.  G.  Scott  calls  an  article  on  "Missions  in  India"
(Theosopliist,  January)  a

Bold,  but  exceedingly  ignorant  attempt  at  making  it  appear  that  missions  are  a
failure  in  India.

Ignorant  as  we  newcomers  may  be  about  Indian  missionary  ques-
tions, I  must  remind  Mr.  Scott  that  the  person  whom  he  stigmatizes
with  ignorance  is  a  lady  who  has  passed  many  years  in  India  and  has
had  ample  opportunities  for  observation.  Most  military  or  civil
employes  of  experience  in  India  whom  I  have  met  take  the  same  view
of  the  matter  that  she  does.  I  cannot  imagine  why  Darwin  and
Tyndall  should  have  been  selected  by  Mr.  Scott,  out  of  the  thousands
of  scientific  and  educated  men  now  pulling  Christianity  to  pieces,  as
"noisy  characters";  nor  why  he  should  cite,  in  an  issue  created  by
modern  biblical  research,  Newton,  Kepler,  Herschell  or  anyone  else
who  lived  before  the  recent  advances  of  Science  in  this  direction,  and
in  days  when,  to  deny  not  merely  Christianity,  but  some  minor  dogma
of  the  State  religion  was  equivalent  to  self-condemnation  to  an  auto-
da-fe'.  As  for  the  Christianity  of  Max  Miiller,  Dr.  Carpenter  (a  prince
among  Materialists)  and  the  late  Louis  Agassiz,  the  less  said  the  better.
Might  not  his  long  string  of  high-sounding  names  have  been  profitably
enlarged  by  the  addition  of  those  of  the  late  Viscount  Amberley  and

MISSIONARIES   MILITANT.  227

Lord  Queensborough,  of  the  "Church"  of  Moncure  Conway,  in  which
is  preached  the  great  Religion  of  Humanity  from  every  "religion"  and
church?

Science  is  our  guide,  and  truth  is  the  spirit  that  we  worship,
says  the  noble  Lord  Queensborough  in  his  letter  recently  published  in
The  Statesman !     Mr.  Scott  assures  his  readers  that :

Never  since  the  Apostles  has  it  [Christianity]  been  so  vigorous  as  now;  .  .  .
the  tendency  is  anything  else  than  to  infidelity  and  atheism.

But  Lord  Queensborough,  in  his  letter  to  "E.  C.  H."  challenges  the
latter,  and  with  him  the  whole  world  of  Christians  in  these  remarkable
words:

Call  us  atheists  and  infidels  if  you  will;  .  .  .  and  I  maintain,  and  will  main-
tain, that  the  time  has  arrived  for  us  to  proclaim  ourselves  and  to  claim  to  be
respected,  as  other  religious  bodies  are;  but  as  we  never  shall  be,  unless  we  stand
forward  and  openly  declare  what  our  religion  is  ...  I  am  only  acting  as  the
mouthpiece  of  thousands,  perhaps  millions,  with  whom  I  have  faith  in  common.
.  .  .  Churches  of  our  religion  already  exist.  I  will  name  one  in  London,  always
as  full  as  it  can  hold  on  Sundays— South  Place  Chapel,  Finsbury,  where  Mr.  Mon-
cure Conway  lectures.

Moncure  Conway,  I  will  remind  Mr.  Scott,  instead  of  the  Bible  and
Christianity  preaches  every  Sunday  from  The  Sacred  Anthology,  extracts
from  the  Vedas,  the  Buddhist  Sutras,  the  Koran,  and  so  on.  Many  of
his  parishioners  are  fellows  of  the  Theosophical  Society.  And  now  it
is  my  turn  to  ask,  "How  does  this  tally  with  the  utterances  of"  Mr.
Scott,  the  missionary?  Equally  ill-timed  was  Mr.  Scott's  quotation
from  the  New  Testament  of  the  passage  :

Jesus  said,  Other  sheep  I  have,  not  of  this  fold.

For  in  the  very  mouth  of  Jesus  are  put  also  the  words:

He  that  believeth  and  is  baptized  shall  be  saved;  but  he  that  believeth  not  shall
be  damned  (Mark,  xvi.  16).

To  this  Mr.  Scott  may,  perhaps,  repeat  what  he  says  in  his  two-
column  letter:

The  whole  question  of  the  nature  and  extent  of  future  punishment  is  a  matter  of
interpretation.

Exactly.  So  we,  Theosophists  and  other  heathen  and  "infidels,"
who  live  in  a  century  of  free  thought  and  in  a  country  of  religious
freedom,  avail  ourselves  of  it.

And  now  all  his  points  being  answered,  the  reverend  gentleman  is

228

A   MODERN    PANARION.

at  liberty  to  ventilate  his  ideas  and  pour  his  wrath  upon  the  Theo-
sophists  wherever  he  likes.  Yet,  unless  he  can  get  his  satisfaction
from  following  the  good  example  of  other  missionaries,  and  indulge  in
monologues  of  abuse,  he  can  reckon  but  little  upon  us  to  answer  him.
It  takes  two  for  a  dialogue;  and  whether  as  a  Society  or  as  individuals,
we  decline  any  further  controversy  on  the  subject  with  one  who  gives
so  few  facts  and  so  many  words.

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

THE   HISTORY   OF   A   "BOOK."

[From  the  Allahabad  Pioneer,  March  12th.  1SS0.]

As  the  indications  in  the  press  all  point  towards  a  Russian  reign  of
terror,  either  before  or  at  the  death  of  the  Czar — most  probably  the
former — a  bird's-eye  view  of  the  constitution  of  Russian  society  will
enable  us  to  better  understand  events  as  the}*  transpire.

Three  distinct  elements  compose  what  is  now  known  as  the  Russian
aristocracy.  These  may  be  broadly  said  to  represent  the  primitive
Slavonian,  the  primitive  Tartar,  and  composite  Russianized  immigrants
from  other  countries,  and  subjects  of  conquered  states,  such  as  the
Baltic  provinces.  The  flower  of  the  haute  noblesse,  those  whose  heredi-
tary descent  places  them  beyond  challenge  in  the  very  first  rank,  are
the  Rurikovitch,  or  descendants  of  the  Grand  Duke  Rurik  and  [the
ruling  families  of]  the  aforetime  separate  principalities  of  Novgorod,
Pskof,  etc.,  which  were  welded  together  into  the  Muscovite  empire.
Such  are  the  Princes  Bariatinsky,  Dolgorouki,  Shonysky  (now  extinct,
we  believe),  Tscherbatow,  Ouroussov,  Viazemsky,  etc.  Moscow  has
been  the  centre  of  the  greater  part  of  this  princely  class  since  the  days
of  Catherine  the  Great;  and  though,  in  most  cases,  ruined  in  fortune,
they  are  yet  as  proud  and  exclusive  as  the  blue-blooded  French
families  of  the  Quartier  St.  Germain.  The  names  of  some  of  the
highest  of  these  are  virtually  unknown  outside  of  the  limits  of  the
empire,  for,  dissatisfied  with  the  reforms  of  Peter  and  Catherine,  and
unable  to  make  as  fine  a  figure  at  the  court  as  those  whom  they
delighted  to  call  parvenus,  it  has  been  their  proud  boast  that  they  have
never  served  in  any  subordinate  capacity,  and  have  not  been  brought
in  contact  with  Western  Europe  and  its  politics.  Living  only  upon
their  remembrances,  they  have  made  a  class  apart  and  dwell  on  a  sort
of  high  social  table-land,  whence  they  look  down  upon  commoner
mortals.  Many  of  the  old  families  are  extinct,  and  many  of  those  that
remain  entirely  reduced  to  genteel  poverty.

230  A    MODERN    PANARION.

Rurik,  as  is  well  known,  was  not  a  Slav  by  birth,  but  a  Varyago-
Roos,  though  his  nationality,  as  well  as  that  of  his  people  who  came
with  him"  to  Russia,  is  very  much  questioned  unto  this  day,  having
been  a  matter  of  scientific  dispute  for  several  years  between  the  two
well-known  professors  of  St.  Petersburg,  Kostomarof  and  Pogodine —
the  latter  now  dead.  Implored  by  the  Slavs  to  come  and  reign  over
their  country,  Rurik  is  reported  to  have  been  addressed  by  the  dele-
gates in  these  ominous  words:  "Come  with  us,  great  prince  .
for  vast  is  our  mother  land;  but  there  is  little  order  in  it" — words
which  their  descendants  might  well  report  with  as  much,  if  not  more,
propriety  now  as  then.  Accepting  the  invitation,  Rurik  came  in
a.d.  861  to  Novgorod,  with  his  two  brothers,  and  laid  the  foundation
of  Russian  nationality.  The  "Rurikovitch,"  then,  are  the  descendants
of  this  prince,  his  two  brothers  and  his  sou,  Igor,  the  line  running
through  a  long  succession  of  princes  and  chiefs  of  principalities.  The
reigning  house  of  Rurik  became  extinct  at  the  death  of  Fredor,  the
son  of  Ivan  the  Terrible.  After  a  period  of  anarchy,  the  Romanoffs,
a  family  of  petty  nobles,  came  into  power.  But,  as  this  was  only  in
1613,  it  was  not  without  reason  that  the  Prince  P.  Dolgorouki,  a
modern  historian  of  Catherine  II  (a  book  prohibited  in  Russia),  when
smarting  under  the  sense  of  a  personal  wrong,  taunted  the  present
Emperor  with  the  remark :

Alexander  II  must  not  forget  that  it  is  little  more  than  two  centuries  since  the
Romanoffs  held  the  stirrups  of  the  Princes  Dolgorouki.

And  this,  despite  the  marriage  of  Mary,  Princess  Dolgorouki,  with
Michael  Romanoff  after  he  became  Czar.

The  Tartar  princely  families  descend  from  the  Tartar  Khans  and
Magnates  of  the  "Zolotaya  Orda"  (Golden  Orda)  of  Kazan,  who  so
long  held  Russia  in  subjection,  but  who  were  made  tributary  by  Ivan
III,  father  of  Ivan  the  Terrible,  in  1523- 1530.  Of  the  families  of  this
blood  which  survive,  the  Princes  Dondoukof,  whose  head  was  formerly
Governor-General  of  Kiew,  and  more  recently  served  in  Bulgaria  in  a
similar  capacity,  may  be  mentioned.  These  are,  more  or  less,  looked
down  upon  by  the  "Rurikovitch,"  as  well  as  by  old  Lithuanian  and
Polish  princely  families,  who  hate  the  Russian  descendants  of  Rurik,
as  these  hate  their  Roman  Catholic  rivals.  Then  comes  in  the  third
element,  the  old  Livonian  and  Ksthonian  Barons  and  Counts,  the
Kourland  nobles  and  /rei/terrs,  who  boast  of  descending  from  the  first
Crusaders   and  look    clown    upon    the    Slav   aristocracy;    and    various

:

THE    HISTORY    OF   A    "BOOK.

-     >»

231

foreign  families  invited  into  the  country  by  successive  sovereigns,  a
Western  element  engrafted  upon  the  Russian  stock.  The  names  of
the  latter  immigres  have  been  Russianized  in  some  cases  beyond  recog-
nition; as,  for  instance,  the  English  Hamiltons,  who  have  now  become
the  "Khomoiitoff!"

We  have  not  the  data  which  would  enable  us  to  give  the  numerical
strength  of  either  of  the  above  classes;  but  an  enumeration,  made  in
the  year  1842,  showed  a  total  of  551,970  noblemen  of  hereditary,  and
257,346  of  personal  rank.  This  comprised  all  in  the  empire  of  different
degrees  of  noble  ranks,  including  the  princely  families  and  the  under-
stratum of  nobility.  There  is  an  untitled  nobility,  the  descendants  of
the  old  Boyars  of  Russia,  often  prouder  of  their  family  record  than
those  who  are  known  as  princes.  The  Demidoff  family,  for  instance,
and  the  Narishkine,  though  frequently  offered  the  ranks  of  prince  and
count,  have  always  haughtily  rejected  the  honour,  maintaining  that
the  Czar  could  make  a  prince  any  day,  but  never  a  Demidoff  or  a
Narishkine.

Peter  the  Great,  having  abolished  the  princely  privileges  of  the
Boyars,  and  made  the  offices  of  the  empire  accessible  to  all,  created  the
Tchin,  or  a  caste  of  municipal  employes  and  government  officials,  di-
vided into  fourteen  classes,  the  first  eight  of  which  confer  hereditary
nobility  upon  the  person  holding  one  of  them,  and  the  six  latter  give
but  a  personal  nobility  to  the  incumbent,  and  do  not  transmit  gentility
to  the  children.  Office  does  not  increase  the  nobility  of  incumbents
already  noble,  but  does  lift  the  ignoble  into  a  higher  social  rank  (Tchi-
novnik,  government  employe,  was  for  years  a  term  of  scorn  in  the
mouths  of  the  nobles).  It  is  only  since  Alexander  came  to  the  throne
that  an  old  edict  was  done  away  with,  which  deprived  of  noble  rank
and  reduced  to  the  peasantry  any  family  which,  for  three  successive
generations,  had  not  taken  service  under  the  government.  Those  were
called  Od)iodvort~i,  and  among  them  some  of  the  oldest  families  found
themselves  included  in  1845,  when  the  Emperor  Nicholas  ordered  the
examination  of  the  titles  of  nobles.  The  nice  distinctions  among  the
above  fourteen  classes  are  as  puzzling  to  a  foreigner  as  the  relative
precedence  of  the  various  buttons  of  Chinese  Mandarins,  or  the  tails
of  the  Pachas.

Besides  these  conflicting  elements  of  high  and  low  nobility,  the
direct  descendants  of  the  Boyars  of  old — the  Slavonian  peers  in  the
palmy  days  of  Russia,  divided  into  petty  sovereignties,  who  chose  for

232

A   MODERN    PANAKION.

themselves  the  prince  they  wanted  to  serve  and  left  him  at  will,  who
were  vassals,  not  subjects,  had  their  own  military  retinue,  and  without
whose  approval  no  grand-ducal  "ukase"  could  be  of  any  avail — and
the  ennobled  Tchinovniks,  sons  of  priests  and  petty  traders,  there  are
yet  to  be  considered  79,000,000  of  other  people.  These  may  be  divided
into  the  millions  of  liberated  serfs  (22,000,000),  of  crown  peasants
(16,000,000),  who  inhabit  cities,  preferring  various  trades  and  menial
service  to  agriculture.  The  rest  comprises  (1)  the  Meshtchanis,  or
petty  bourgeois,  one  step  higher  than  the  peasant;  (2)  the  enormous
body  of  merchants  and  traders  divided  into  three  guilds;  (3)  the
hereditary  citizens,  who  have  nothing  to  do  with  nobility;  (4)  the
black  clergy  or  the  monks  and  nuns;  and  the  secular  clergy,  or
married  priests — a  caste  apart  and  hereditary;  and  (5)  the  military
class.

We  will  not  include  in  our  classification  the  3,000,000  of  Mohamme-
dans, the  2,000,000  of  Jews,  the  250,000  Buddhists,  the  pagan  Izors,  the
Savakots,  and  the  Karels,  who  seem  perfectly  well  satisfied  with  the
Russian  rule,  thoroughly  tolerant  to  their  various  worships/'-1  These,
with  the  exception  of  the  higher  educated  Jews  and  some  fanatical
Mohammedans,  care  little  as  to  the  hand  that  rules  them.  But  we  will
remind  the  reader  of  the  fact  that  there  are  over  one  hundred  different
nations  and  tribes,  who  speak  more  than  forty  different  languages,  and
are  scattered  over  an  area  of  8,331,884  English  square  miles  ;f  that  the
population  of  all  Russia,  European  and  Asiatic,  is  not  above  ten  to
the  square  mile;  that  the  railroads  are  very  few  and  easily  controlled,
and  other  means  of  transport  scanty.  How  far  it  would  be  possible  to
effect  a  complete  revolution  throughout  the  Russian  Empire,  may  well
be  a  subject  of  conjecture.  With  so  little  to  bind  the  many  nationali-
ties into  one  movement,  it  would  seem  to  a  foreigner  an  undertaking
so  hopeless  as  to  discourage  even  an  Internationalist  or  a  Nihilist.
Add  to  this  the  unquestionable  devotion  of  the  liberated  serfs  and
peasantry  to  the  Czar,  in  whom  they  see  alike  the  benefactor  of  the
oppressed,  the  vicegerent  of  God,  and  the  head  of  their  Church,  and
the  case  seems  yet  more  problematical.  At  the  same  time,  we  must
not  forget  the  lessons  of  history,  which  has  more  than  once  shown  us

*  By  the  last  statistics,  the  Mohammedans  have  4,189  mosques  and  7,940  muftis  and  mulahs  in
the  Empire  of  Russia;  the  Buddhists  389  places  of  worship  and  4,400  priests;  the  Jews  445  syna-
gogues and  4,935  rabbis,  etc.

+  According  to  the  calculation  made  in  1856  by  G.  Schweitzer,  Director  of  the  Observatory  of
Moscow.

THE    HISTORY    OF    A    "HOOK."  233

how  the  very  vastness  of  an  empire  and  the  lack  of  a  common  unity
aniong  its  subjects  have  proved  at  some  supreme:  crisis  the  most  potent
elements  of  its  downfall.

St.  Petersburg  is,  in  reality,  the  aristocratic  Pare  aux  Cop,  a  place
of  shameless  profligacy  and  riotous  excesses,  with  so  little  that  is
national  in  it  that  its  very  name  is  German.  It  is  the  natural  port  of
entry  for  all  the  continental  vices,  as  well  as  for  the  loose  ideas  about
morality,  religion  and  social  duty,  which  are  becoming  so  widely  preva-
lent. The  corrupting  influence  that  Paris  has  upon  France,  St.  Peters-
burg has  upon  Russia.  An  influential  Russian  magazine,  Rousskcyc
Ryetch,  gave  us  only  the  other  day  the  following  picture  of  St.  Peters-
burg society :

Russian  society  slumbers,  or  rather  it  feels  heavy  and  somnolent.  It  lazily  nods,
only  now  and  then  opening  its  lifeless  eyes,  as  might  one  who,  after  a  heavy
dinner,  forced  to  sit  in  an  unnatural  position,  cannot  resist  a  lethargic  drowsiness,
and  feels  that  he  must  either  unbutton  his  uniform  and  draw  a  full  breath,  or —
suffocate.  Rut  the  dinner  is  an  official  one,  and  his  body  pinched  in  a  state  uniform
too  tight  for  him.  The  man  is  overcome  with  an  irresistible  somnolence;  he  feels
the  blood  rushing  to  his  head,  his  legs  tremble  and  his  hand  mechanically  fumbles
the  button  of  the  uniform  to  get  one  gasp  of  breath  that  would  interrupt  the  un-
endurable torture.     Such  is  the  present  condition  of  our  society.

But  while  it  is  nodding  under  its  threatened  apoplexy,  from  a  surfeit  of  indiges-
tible food,  those  carnivorous  jackals,  who  are  always  ready  to  eat  and  drink,  and
can  digest  whatever  they  pick  up,  do  not  sleep.  The  violation  of  the  seventh
commandment,  intellectually  as  well  as  physically,  having  debased  body,  mind  and
soul,  is  nestling  in  the  very  heart  of  the  public.  Adulterers  of  body,  adulterers  of
thought,  adulterers  of  knowledge  and  science,  adulterers  of  labour — reign  in  our
midst,  are  creeping  out  from  every  side  as  the  representatives  of  society  and  the
public,  boasting  of  their  brazen  hardihood,  successful  wherever  they  go,  having
Hung  away  all  shame,  cast  aside  every  concern  to  at  least  conceal  the  nakedness
of  their  deeds,  even  from  the  eyes  of  those  from  whom  they  squeeze  all  that  can  he
squeezed  only  from  Mich  a  fool  as— man.  Government  and  treasury  pilferers:  em-
bezzlers of  public  and  private  properties;  blacklegs  and  swindlers  subsidized  by
numberless  bubble  companies,  by  stock  companies  and  fraudulent  enterprises;
thimble-riggers  and  violators  of  women  and  children  whom  they  debauch  and  ruin;
contractors,  money-lenders,  bribed  judges  and  venal  counsel,  bucket-shop  keepers
and  sharpers  of  all  nationalities,  every  religion,  every  social  class.  This  i-^  our
modern  social  force.  Like  beasts  of  prey,  hunting  in  packs,  this  force,  gloating
over  its  quarry,  satiating  itself,  noisily  crunching  its  restless,  tireless  jaws,  imposing
itself  upon  everyone,  dares  to  offer  itself  as  the  patron  of  everything  -science,
literature,  arts,  and  even  thought  itself.  There  it  is,  the  kingdom  of  this  world.
flesh  of  the  J/cs/i,  blood  of  the  blood,  made  in  the  image  of  the  animal  from  which
the  first  germ  of  man  evolved.

234  A   MODERN    PANARION.

Such  are  the  social  ethics  of  our  contemporary  Russia,  on  Russian
testimony.  If  so,  then  it  must  have  reached  that  culminating  point
from  which  it  must  either  fall  into  the  mire  of  dissolution,  like  old
Rome,  or  gravitate  towards  regeneration  through  all  the  horrors  and
chaos  of  a  "Reign  of  Terror."  The  press  teems  with  guarded  com-
plaints of  "prostration  of  forces"  among  its  representatives,  the  chronic
signs  of  fast-impending  social  dissolution,  and  the  profound  apathy
into  which  the  whole  Russian  people  seem  to  have  fallen.  The  only
beings  full  of  life  and  activity,  amid  this  lethargy  of  satiety,  seem  to
be  the  omnipresent  and  ever-invisible  Nihilists.  Clearly  there  must  be
a  change.

From  all  this  social  rottenness,  the  black  fungus  of  Nihilism  has
sprung.  Its  hot-bed  has  been  preparing  for  years,  by  the  gradual
sapping  of  moral  tone  and  self-respect  and  the  debauchery  of  the
higher  class,  who  always  give  the  impulse  to  those  below  them  for  good
or  evil.  All  that  lacked  was  the  occasion  and  the  man.  Under  the
passport  system  of  Nicholas,  the  chances  for  becoming  polluted  by
Paris  life  were  confined  to  a  mere  handful  of  rich  nobles,  whom  the
caprice  of  the  Czar  allowed  to  travel.  Even  they,  the  privileged  of
favour  and  fortune,  had  to  apply  for  permission  six  months  in  advance,
and  pay  a  thousand  roubles  for  their  passport,  with  a  heavy  fine  for
each  day  in  excess  of  the  time  granted,  and  the  prospect  of  confiscation
of  their  entire  property  should  their  foreign  stay  exceed  three  years.
But  under  Alexander  everything  was  changed;  the  emancipation  of
the  serfs  was  followed  by  numberless  reforms — the  unmuzzling  of  the
press,  trial  by  jury,  equalizing  the  rights  of  citizenship,  free  passports,
etc.  Though  good  in  themselves,  these  reforms  came  with  such  a  rush
upon  a  people  unaccustomed  to  the  least  of  these  privileges,  as  to  throw
them  into  a  high  fever.  The  patient,  escaping  from  his  strait -jacket,,
ran  wildly  about  the  streets.  Then  came  the  Polish  Revolution  of  1863,.
in  which  a  number  of  Russian  students  participated.  Reaction  followed
and  repressive  measures  were  readopted  one  by  one;  but  it  was  too  late.
The  caged  animal  had  tasted  liberty,  though  ever  so  brief,  and  thence-
forth could  not  be  docile  as  before.  Where  there  had  been  one  Russian
traveller  to  Paris,  Vienna  and  Berlin  under  the  old  reign,  now  there
were  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands;  and  just  so  many  more  agencies
were  at  work  to  import  fashionable  vice  and  scientific  scepticism.  The
names  of  John  Stuart  Mill,  Darwin,  and  Biichner,  were  upon  the  lip  of
every  beardless  boy  and  heedless  girl  at  the  universities  and  colleges.

THE    HISTORY    OF   A    "BOOK.  235

The  former  were  preaching  Nihilism,  the  latter  Women's  Rights  and
Free  Love.  The  one  let  their  hair  grow  like  moujiks,  and  donned  the
red  national  shirt  and  kaftan  of  the  peasantry;  the  other  clipped  their
hair  short  and  affected  blue  spectacles.  Trades  Unions,  infected  with
the  notions. of  the  International,  sprang  up  like  mushrooms;  and
demagogues  ranted  to  social  clubs  upon  the  conflict  between  labour
and  capital.     The  cauldron  began  to  seethe.     At  last  the  man  came.

The  history  of  Nihilism  can  be  summed  up  in  two  words.  For
their  name  they  are  indebted  to  the  great  novelist  Tourguenief,  who
created  Bazarof,  and  stamped  the  type  with  the  name  of  Nihilist.
Little  did  the  famous  author  of  Fathers  and  Sons  imagine  at  that  time
into  what  national  degeneration  his  hero  would  lead  the  Russian
people  twenty-five  years  later.  Only  "Bazarof" — in  whom  the  novelist
painted  with  satirical  fidelity  the  characteristics  of  certain  "Bohemian"
negationists,  then  just  glimmering  on  the  horizon  of  student  life — had
little  in  common,  except  the  name  and  materialistic  tendency,  with  the
masked  Revolutionists  and  Terrorists  of  to-day.  Shallow,  bilious,  and
nervous,  this  studiosus  medicines  is  simply  an  unquiet  spirit  of  sweeping
negation  ;  of  that  sad,  yet  scientific  scepticism  reigning  now  supreme  in
the  ranks  of  the  highest  intellect;  a  spirit  of  Materialism,  sincerely
believed  in,  and  as  honestly  preached;  the  outcome  of  long  reflections
over  the  rotten  remnants  of  man  and  frog  in  the  dissecting  room,
where  the  dead  ma?i  suggested  to  his  mind  no  more  than  the  dead  frog.
Outside  of  animal  life  everything  to  him  is  nihil;  "a  thistle,"  growing
out  of  a  lump  of  mud,  is  all  that  man  can  look  forward  to  after  death.
And  thus  this  type — Bazarof — was  caught  up  as  their  highest  ideal  by
the  university  students.  The  "Sons"  began  destroying  what  the
"Fathers"  had  built.  .  .  .  And  now  Tourguenief  is  forced  to  taste
of  the  bitter  fruits  of  the  tree  of  his  planting.  Like  the  creator  of
Frankenstein,  who  could  not  control  the  mechanical  monster  that  his
ingenuity  had  constructed  out  of  the  putrefactions  of  the  churchyard,
he  now  finds  his  "type" — which  was  from  the  first  hateful  and  terrible
to  him — grown  into  the  ranting  spectre  of  the  Nihilist  delirium,  the
red-handed  Socialist.  The  press,  at  the  initiative  of  the  Moskovskye
Vyedomosty — a  centenarian  paper — takes  up  the  question  and  openly
accuses  the  most  brilliant  literary  talent  of  Russia,  one  whose  sym-
pathies are,  and  always  have  been,  on  the  side  of  the  "Fathers,"  with
having  been  the  first  to  plant  the  poisonous  weed.

Owing  to  the  peculiar  transitional  state  of  Russian  society  between

236  A   MODERN    PANARION.

1S50  and  i860,  the  name  was  hailed  and  adopted,  and  the  Nihilists
began  springing  up  at  ever}'  side.  They  captured  the  national  litera-
ture, and  their  new  doctrines  were  fast  disseminated  throughout  the
whole  empire.  And  now  Nihilism  has  grown  into  a  power— an  im-
perium  in  imperio.  It  is  no  more  with  Nihilism  with  which  Russia
struggles,  but  with  the  terrible  consequences  of  the  ideas  of  1850.
Fathers  and  Sons  must  henceforth  occupy  a  prominent  place,  not  only
in  literature,  as  quite  above  the  ordinary  level  of  authorship,  but  also
as  the  creator  of  a  new  page  in  Russian  political  history,  the  end  of
which  no  man  can  foretell.

A  FRENCH   VIEW  OF   WOMEN'S

RIGHTS.

[Probably  from  the  Allahabad  Pioneer.^

With  a  little  book  entitled  Les  Femmes  qui  Tucnt  el  les  Femmes  qui

Votcnt,  Alexandre  Dumas,  fils,  has  just  entered  the  arena  of  social  and
political  reform.  The  novelist,  who  began  by  picking  up  his  Beatrices
and  Lauras  in  the  social  gutter,  the  author  of  La  Davie  aux  Came'lias
and  La  Dame  aux  Per/es,  is  regarded  in  France  as  the  finest  known
analyst  of  the  female  heart.  He  now  comes  out  in  a  new  light;  as  a
defender  of  Woman's  Rights  in  general,  and  of  those  women  especially
whom  English  people  generally  talk  about  as  little  as  possible.  If  this
gifted  son  of  a  still  more  gifted  father  never  sank  before  to  the  miry
depths  of  that  modern  French  realistic  school  now  in  such  vogue,  the
school  headed  by  the  author  of  L '  Assommoir  and  Nana,  and  so  fitly
nicknamed  L'Fco/e  Ordurialiste,  it  is  because  he  is  a  born  poet,  and
follows  the  paths  traced  out  for  him  by  the  Marquis  de  Sade,  rather
than  those  of  Zola.  He  is  too  refined  to  be  the  rival  of  writers  like
those  who  call  themselves  auteurs-naturalistcs  and  romanciers-experimen-
talistes,  who  use  their  pen  as  the  student  in  surgery  his  scalpel,  plung-
ing it  into  the  depths  of  all  the  social  cancers  they  can  find.

Until  now  he  idealized  and  beautified  vice.  In  the  work  under
review,  he  defends  not  only  its  right  to  exist  under  certain  conditions,
but  claims  for  it  a  recognized  place  in  the  broad  sunlight  of  social  and
political  life.

His  brochure  of  216  pages,  which  has  lately  been  published  in  the
shape  of  a  letter  to  J.  Claretie,  is  now  having  an  immense  success.
By  the  end  of  September,  hardly  a  week  after  its  appearance,  it  had
already  reached  its  sixth  edition.  It  treats  of  two  great  social  difficul-
ties— the  question  of  divorce,  and  the  right  of  women  to  participate  in
elections.      Dumas   begins   by   assuming   the   defence   of    the   several

238  A    MODERN    PAXARION.

women  who  have  recently  played  an  important  part  in  murder  cases,
in  which  their  victims  were  their  husbands  and  lovers.

All  these  women,  he  says,  are  the  embodiment  of  the  idea  which  for
some  time  past  has  been  fermenting  in  the  world.  It  is  that  of  the
entire  disenthralment  of  the  woman  from  her  old  condition  of  slavery,
created  for  her  by  the  Bible,  and  enforced  by  tyrannical  society.  All
these  murders  and  this  public  vice,  as  well  as  the  increasing  mental
labour  of  women,  M.  Dumas  takes  to  be  so  many  signs  of  one  and  the
same  aspiration — that  of  mastering  man,  getting  the  best  of  him,  and
competing  with  him  in  everything.  What  men  will  not  give  them
willingly,  women  of  a  certain  class  endeavour  to  obtain  by  cunning.
As  a  result  of  such  a  policy,  he  says,  we  see  "those  young  ladies"
acquiring  an  enormous  influence  over  men  in  all  social  affairs  and  even
in  politics.  Having  amassed  large  fortunes,  when  older  they  appear  as
lady-patronesses  of  girls'  schools  and  of  charitable  institutions,  and  take
a  part  in  provincial  administration.  Their  past  is  lost  sight  of;  they
succeed  in  establishing,  so  to  say,  an  imperium  in  imperio,  where  they
enforce  their  own  laws,  and  manage  to  have  them  respected.  This
state  of  things  is  attributed  by  Dumas  directly  to  the  restriction  of
Woman's  Rights,  to  the  state  of  legal  slavery  women  have  been  sub-
jected to  for  centuries,  and  especially  to  the  marriage  and  anti-divorce
laws.  Answering  the  favourite  objection  of  those  who  oppose  divorce
on  the  ground  that  its  establishment  would  promote  too  much  freedom
in  love,  the  author  of  Le  Demi-Monde  bravely  pushes  forward  his  last
batteries  and  throws  off  the  mask.

Why  not  promote  such  freedom?  What  appears  a  danger  to  some,  a
dishonour  and  shame  to  others,

Will  become  an  independent  and  recognized  profession  in  life — une  carriere  a  part
— a  fact,  a  world  of  its  own,  with  which  all  the  other  corporations  and  classes  of
society  will  have  to  reckon.  It  will  not  be  long  before  everyone  will  have  ceased
to  protest  against  its  right  to  an  independent  and  legal  existence.  Very  shortly  it
will  form  itself  into  an  integral,  compact  body;  and  the  time  will  come  when,
between  this  world  and  the  others,  relations  will  be  established  as  friendly  as
between  two  equally  powerful  and  recognized  empires.

With  every  year  women  free  themselves  more  and  more  from  empty

formalism,  and  M.  Dumas  hopes  there  will  never  again  be  a  reaction.

If  a  woman  is  unable  to  give  up  the  idea  of  love  altogether,  let  her

prefer  unions  binding  neither  party  to  anything,  and  let  her  be  guided

in  this  only  by  her  own  free  will  and  honesty.     Of  course  it  is  rather  to

A  FRENCH    VIEW    OF    WOMEN'S   RIGHTS.  239

review  an  important  current  of  feeling  in  an  important  community
than  to  discuss  au  fond  the  delicate  questions  with  which  M.  Dumas
deals,  that  we  are  taking  notice  of  his  book.  We  may  thus  leave  the
reader  to  his  own  reflections  on  this  proposed  reform,  as  also  in  refer-
ence to  most  of  the  points  raised.

A  certain  Hubertine  Auclaire,  in  France,  has  lately  refused  to  pay
her  taxes  on  the  plea  that  political  rights  belonging  to  man  are  denied
to  her  as  a  woman;  and  Dumas,  with  this  incident  as  a  text,  devotes
the  last  part  of  this  brochure  to  a  defence  of  Woman's  Rights,  as  elo-
quent, impressive  and  original  as  other  portions  which  will  less  bear
discussion.     He  writes:

In  1847  political  reformers  thought  it  necessary  to  lower  the  electoral  franchise
and  distribute  the  right  of  vote  according  to  capacity.

That  is,  to  limit  it  to  intelligent  men.  The  government  refused,  and
this  led  to  the  Revolution  of  184S.  Scared,  it  gave  the  people  the  right
of  universal  suffrage,  extending  the  right  to  all,  whether  capable  or
incapable,  provided  the  voters  were  only  men.  At  present  this  right
holds  good,  and  nothing  can  abolish  it.  But  women  come,  in  their
turn,  and  ask:   "How  about  us?     We  claim  the  same  privileges."

What  [asks  Dumas]  can  be  more  natural,  reasonable  and  just?  There  is  no
reason  why  woman  should  not  have  equal  rights  with  man.  What  difference  do
you  find  between  the  two  which  warrants  your  refusing  her  such  a  privilege?  None
at  all.  Sex  ?  Her  sex  has  no  more  to  do  with  it  than  the  sex  of  man.  As  to  all
other  dissimilarities  between  us,  they  go  far  more  to  her  credit  than  to  ours.  If
one  argues  that  woman  is  by  nature  a  weaker  creature  than  man,  and  that  it  is  Ins
duty  to  take  care  of  and  defend  her,  we  will  answer  that  hitherto  we  have,  it  seems,
so  badly  defended  her  that  she  had  to  pick  up  a  revolver  and  take  that  defence
into  her  own  hands;  and  to  remain  consequent  with  ourselves  we  have  to  enter
the  verdict  of  "Not  guilty"  whenever  she  is  caught  in  that  act  of  self-defence.

To  the  plea  that  woman  is  intellectually  weaker  than  man,  and  is
shown  to  be  so  by  sacred  writings,  the  author  sets  off  against  the  bibli-
cal Adam  and  Eve,  Jacolliot's  translation  of  the  Hindu  legend  in  his
Bible  dans  V hide,  and  contends  that  it  was  man,  not  woman,  who
became  the  first  sinner  and  was  turned  out  of  Paradise.  If  man  is
endowed  with  stronger  muscles,  woman's  nerves  surpass  his  in  capacity
for  endurance.  The  biggest  brain  ever  found — in  weight  and  size — is
now  proved  to  have  belonged  to  a  woman.  It  weighed  2,200  grammes
— 400  more  than  that  of  Cuvier.  But  brain  has  nothing  to  do  with  the
electoral  question.  To  drop  a  ballot  into  the  urn  no  one  is  required
to  have  invented  powder,  or  to  be  able  to  lift  500  kilogrammes.

24O  A   MODERN   PANARION.

Dumas  has  an  answer  for  every  objection.  Are  illustrious  women
exceptions?  He  cites  a  brilliant  array  of  great  female  names,  and
contends  that  the  sex  in  which  such  exceptions  are  to  be  met  has
acquired  a  legal  right  to  take  part  in  the  nomination  of  the  village
maires  and  municipal  officers.  The  sex  which  claims  a  Blanche  de
Castille,  an  Elizabeth  of  England,  another  of  Hungary,  a  Catherine  II
and  a  Maria  Theresa,  has  won  every  right.

If  so  many  women  were  found  good  enough  to  reign  and  govern
nations,  they  surely  must  have  been  fit  to  vote.  To  the  remark  that
women  can  neither  go  to  war  nor  defend  their  country,  the  reader  is
reminded  of  such  names  as  Joan  of  Arc,  and  the  three  other  Joans,  of
Flanders,  of  Blois,  and  Joan  Hachette.  It  was  in  memory  of  the  bril-
liant defence  and  salvation  of  her  native  town,  Beauvais,  by  the  latter
Joan,  at  the  head  of  all  the  women  of  that  city,  besieged  by  Charles  le
Temeraire,  that  Louis  XI  decreed  that  henceforth  and  for  ever  the  place
of  honour  in  all  the  national  and  public  processions  should  belong  to
women.  Had  woman  no  other  rights  in  France,  the  fact  alone  that
she  was  called  upon  to  sacrifice  1,800,000  of  her  sons  to  Napoleon  the
Great,  ought  to  ensure  to  her  every  right.  The  example  of  Hubertine
Auclaire  will  be  soon  followed  by  every  woman  in  France.  L,aw  was
ever  unjust  to  woman;  and  instead  of  protecting  her,  it  seeks  but  to
strengthen  her  chains.  In  case  of  crimes  committed,  does  law  ever
think  of  bringing  forward  as  an  extenuating  circumstance,  her  weak-
ness? On  the  contrary,  it  always  takes  advantage  of  it.  The  illegiti-
mate child  is  given  by  it  the  right  to  find  out  who  its  mother  was,  but
not  its  father.  The  husband  can  go  anywhere,  do  whatever  he  pleases,
abandon  his  family,  change  his  citizenship,  and  even  emigrate,  without
the  consent  or  even  knowledge  of  his  wife.

She  can  do  nothing  of  the  kind.  In  case  of  a  suspicion  of  her  faith,
he  can  deprive  her  of  her  marriage  portion ;  and  in  case  of  guilt  may
even  kill  her.  It  is  his  right.  Debarred  from  the  benefits  of  a  divorce,
she  has  to  suffer  all,  and  finds  no  redress.  She  is  fined,  judged,  sen-
tenced, imprisoned,  put  to  death,  and  suffers  all  the  penalties  of  law
just  as  much  and  under  the  same  circumstances  as  he  does,  but  no
magistrate  has  ever  thought  of  saying  yet:

"Poor  weak  little  creature!  .  .  .  Det  us  forgive  her,  for  she  is
irresponsible,  and  so  much  lower  than  man!"

The  whole  eloquent,  if  sometimes  rhapsodical  plea  in  favour  of
women's  suffrage  is  concluded  with  the  following  suggestions :

A    FRENCH    VIEW    OF   WOMEN'S   RIGHTS.  241

First,  the  situation  will  appear  absurd;  but  gradually  people  will  become  accus-
tomed to  the  idea,  and  soon  every  protest  will  die  ont.  No  doubt  at  first  the  idea
of  woman  in  this  new  role  will  have  to  become  the  subject  of  bitter  criticism  and
satire.  Ladies  will  be  accused  of  ordering  their  hats  a  l' it  rue,  their  bodices  au
suffrage  universel,  and  their  skirts  au  scrutin  secret.  But  what  then?  After  having
served  for  a  time  as  an  object  of  amazement,  then  become  a  fashion  and  habit,  the
new  system  will  be  finally  looked  upon  as  a  duty.  At  all  events  it  has  now  become
a  claimed  right.  A  few  grandes  dames  in  cities,  some  wealthy  female  landowners  in
provincial  districts,  and  leaseholders  in  villages,  will  set  the  example,  and  it  will
be  soon  followed  by  the  rest  of  the  female  population.

The  book  winds  up  with  this  question  and  answer:

I  ma}',  perhaps,  be  asked  by  some  pious  and  disciplined  lady,  some  fervent  be-
liever in  the  idea  that  humanity  can  only  be  rescued  from  perdition  by  codes  and
gospels,  by  the  Roman  law  and  Roman  Church:  "Pra}r,  tell  me,  sir,  where  are  we
driving  to  with  all  these  ideas?"  "He,  madame!  .  .  .  we  go  where  we  were
going  to  from  the  first,  to  that  which  must  be,  that  is,  the  inevitable.  We  move
slowly  onward,  because  we  can  spare  time,  having  some  millions  of  years  yet  before
us,  and  because  we  have  to  leave  some  work  to  do  for  those  who  are  following  us.
For  the  present  we  are  occupied  in  enfranchising  women ;  when  this  is  done  we
will  try  to  enfranchise  God.  And  as  soon  as  full  harmony  will  have  been  estab-
lished between  these  three  eternal  principles — God,  man  and  woman — our  way  will
appear  to  us  less  dark  before  us,  and  we  will  journey  on  the  quicker."

Certainly  the  advocates  of  Woman's  Rights  in  England  have  never  yet
approached  their  subject  from  this  point  of  view.  Is  the  new  method
of  attack  likely  to  prove  more  effective  than  the  familiar  declamation  of
the  British  platform,  or  the  earnest  prosing  of  our  own  great  woman's
champion,  John  Stuart  Mill?  This  remains  to  be  seen;  but  certainly
for  the  most  part  the  English  ladies  who  fight  this  battle  will  be  puzzled
how  to  accept  an  ally  whose  sympathy  is  due  to  principles  so  fright-
fully indecorous  as  those  of  our  present  author.

H.  P.  Blavatskv.

OCCULT   PHENOMENA.

[From  the  Bombay  Gazette,  Oct.  29th,  1SS0.]

In  the  issue  of  the  19th  instant  of  your  worthy  contemporary,  I  find
over  two  columns  devoted  to  the  doubtful  glorification,  but  mostly  to
the  abuse,  of  my  humble  individuality.  There  is  a  long  confidential
letter  from  Colonel  Olcott  to  an  officer  of  our  Society,  obtained  surrep-
titiously by  somebody,  and  marked  "private" — a  word  showing  in
itself  that  the  document  was  never  meant  for  the  public  eye — and  an
editorial,  principally  filled  with  cheap  abuse,  and  venomous,  though
common-place,  suggestions.  The  latter  was  to  be  expected,  but  I
would  like  information  upon  the  following  points:  (1)  How  did  the
editor  come  into  possession  of  a  document  stolen  from  the  desk  of  the
President  of  the  Bombay  Branch  of  the  Theosophical  Society?  and
(2)  having  got  it,  what  right  had  he  to  publish  it  at  all,  without  first
obtaining  consent  from  the  writer  or  addressee — a  consent  which  he
could  never  have  obtained?  and  (3)  how  is  such  an  action  to  be  charac-
terized? If  the  law  affords  no  redress  for  a  wrong  like  this  I  am
content,  at  least,  to  abide  the  verdict  of  every  well-bred  man  or
woman  who  shall  read  the  letter  and  comments  thereon.  This  private
letter  having  been  written  about,  but  not  by  me,  I  abandon  this  special
question  to  be  settled  between  the  offended  and  the  offender,  and  touch
but  upon  the  one  which  concerns  me  directly.

I  have  lived  long  enough  in  this  world  of  incessant  strife,  in  which
the  "survival  of  the  fittest"  seems  to  mean  the  triumph  of  the  most
unprincipled,  to  have  learned  that  when  I  have  once  allowed  my  name
to  appear  in  the  light  of  a  benevolent  genius,  for  the  production  of
"cups,"  "saucers"  and  "brooches,"  I  must  bear  the  penalty;  especially
when  the  people  are  so  foolish  as  to  take  the  word  "Magic"  either  in
its  popular  superstitious  sense — that  of  the  work  of  the  devil — or  in
that  of  juggler)-.  Therefore  and  precisely  because  I  am  an  "elderly
lady  from  Russia  via  America,"  the  latter  country  of  unlimited  freedom

OCCULT    1'IIKNOMKXA.

243

— especially  in  newspaper  personal  abuse — has  toughened  me  to  the
extent  of  being  indifferent  as  to  the  sneering  and  jeering  of  news-
papers upon  questions  they  do  not  understand  at  all;  provided  they
are  witty  and  remain  within  the  limits  of  propriety  and  do  no  harm
but  to  myself.  Being  neither  a  professional  medium  nor  a  professional
anything,  and  making  my  experiments  in  "Occult  phenomena"  only
in  the  presence  of  a  few  friends — rarely  before  anyone  who  is  not
a  member  of  our  Society — I  have  a  right  to  claim  from  the  public  a
little  more  fairness  and  politeness  than  are  usually  accorded  to  paid
jugglers  and  even  alleged  Thaumaturgists.  And  if  my  friends  will
insist  upon  publishing  about  "Occult  phenomena"  taking  place  in
their  presence,  they  should  at  least  preface  their  narratives  with  the
following  warning:  Pukka  Theosophy  believes  in  no  miracle,  whether
divine  or  devilish;  recognizes  nothing  as  supernatural;  believes  only
in  facts  and  Science;  studies  the  laws  of  Nature,  both  Occult  and
patent;  and  gives  attention  particularly  to  the  former,  just  because
exact  Science  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  them.

Such  laws  are  those  of  Magnetism  in  all  its  branches,  Mesmerism,
Psychology,  etc.  More  than  once  in  the  history  of  its  past  has  Science
been  made  the  victim  of  its  own  delusions  as  to  its  professed  infalli-
bility; and  the  time  must  come  when  the  perfection  of  Asiatic  Psy-
chology and  its  knowledge  of  the  forces  of  the  invisible  world  will
be  recognized,  as  were  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  electricity,  and  so
forth,  after  the  first  sneers  and  lampoons  died  away.  The  "silly
attempts  to  hoodwink  individuals"  will  then  be  viewed  as  honest
attempts  at  proving  to  this  generation  of  Spiritualists  and  believers
in  past  "miracle-mongers,"  that  there  is  naught  miraculous  in  this
world  of  Matter  and  Spirit,  of  visible  results  and  invisible  causes;
naught — but  the  great  wickedness  of  a  world  of  Christians  and  Pagans,
alike  ridiculously  superstitious  in  one  direction,  that  of  their  respective
religions,  and  malicious  whenever  a  purely  disinterested  and  philan-
thropic effort  is  made  to  open  their  eyes  to  the  truth.  I  beg  leave  to
further  remark  that  personally  I  never  bragged  of  anything  I  might
have  done,  nor  do  I  offer  any  explanation  of  the  phenomena,  except
to  utterly  disclaim  the  possession  of  any  miraculous  or  supernatural
powers,  or  the  performing  of  anything  by  jugglery — i.e.,  with  the  usual
help  of  confederates  and  machinery.  That's  all.  And  surely,  if  there
is  anything  like  a  sense  of  justice  left  in  society,  I  am  amenable  to
neither  statutory  nor  social  laws  for  gratifying  the  interest  of  members

244  A   MODERN   PANARION.

of  our  Society,  and  the  wishes  of  my  personal  friends,  by  exhibiting  to
them  in  privacy  various  phenomena,  in  which  I  believe  far  more  firmly
than  any  of  them,  since  I  know  the  laws'  by  which  they  are  produced,
and  am  read}'  to  stand  any  amount  of  personal  newspaper  abuse  when-
ever these  results  are  told  to  the  public.  The  "official  circles  at
Simla"  was  an  incorrect  and  foolish  phrase  to  use.  I  never  produced
anything  in  the  "official  circles";  but  I  certainly  hope  to  have  im-
pressed a  few  persons  belonging  to  such  "official  circles"  with  the
sense  that  I  was  neither  an  impostor  nor  a  "hoodwinker  of  official
personages,"  for  whom,  moreover,  so  long  as  I  live  up  to  the  law  of
the  country,  and  respect  it  (especially  considering  my  natural  demo-
cratic feelings,  strengthened  by  my  American  naturalization),  I  am
not  bound  to  have  any  more  respect  than  each  of  them  personally
deserves  in  his  individual  capacity.  I  must  add,  for  the  personal  grati-
fication of  the  Editor  of  your  contemporary,  and  in  the  hope  that  this
will  soothe  his  irate  feelings,  that  of  the  five  eye-witnesses  to  the
"cup"  production,  three  (two  of  these  of  the  "official  circle")  utterly
disbelieve  the  genuineness  of  the  phenomenon,  though  I  would  be
pleased  to  know  how,  with  all  their  scepticism,  they  would  be  able  to
account  for  it.  I  do  not  imitate  the  indiscretion  of  the  Editor  and
mention  names,  but  leave  the  public  to  draw  such  inferences  as  they
please.

I  am  a  private  individual,  and  no  one  has  a  right  to  call  upon  me  to
rise  and  explain.  Therefore,  by  causing  Colonel  Olcott's  stolen  letter
to  be  followed  by  a  paragraph  entitled  "The  way  they  treat  'occult
phenomena'  in  England,"  giving  an  account  of  the  arrest  of  Miss
Houghton,  a  medium  who  obtained  money  under  false  pretences,  the
Editor,  by  the  implied  innuendo  which  likens  my  case  to  hers,  became
guilty  of  one  more  unprovoked  and  uugentlemanly  insult  towards  me,
who  obtain  neither  money  nor  favours  of  any  sort  for  my  "pheno-
mena," and  lays  himself  open  to  vo.ry  hard  reprisals.  The  only  benefit
I  have  ever  derived  from  my  experiments,  when  made  public,  is  news-
paper abuse  and  more  or  less  unfavourable  comments  upon  my  un-
fortunate self  all  over  the  country.  This,  unless  my  convictions  were
strong  indeed,  would  amount  to  obtaining  Billingsgate  and  martyrdom
under  false  pretences,  and  begging  a  reputation  for  insanity.  The  game
would  hardly  be  worth  the  candle,  I  think.

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

Amritzur,  Oct.  25th,  1880.

HINDU  VIDOW-MARRIAGE.

[The  following  is  a  copy  of  a  letter  received  by  Dewan  Bahadur  Ragunath  Row
from  Madame  Blavatsky.]

My  dear  Sir, — I  have  not  made  a  study  of  Hindu  law,  but  I  do  know
something  of  the  principles  of  Hindu  religions,  or  rather  ethics,  and  of
those  of  its  glorious  Founders.  I  regard  the  former  as  almost  the  em-
bodiment of  justice,  and  the  latter  as  ideals  of  spiritual  perfectibility.
When  then  anyone  points  out  to  me  in  the  existing  canon  any  text,  line
or  word  that  violates  one's  sense  of  perfect  justice,  I  instinctively  know
it  must  be  a  later  perversion  of  the  original  Smriti.  In  my  judgment,
the  Hindus  are  now  patiently  enduring  many  outrageous  wrongs  that
were  cunningly  introduced  into  the  canon,  as  opportunity  offered,  by
selfish  and  unscrupulous  priests  for  their  personal  benefit,  as  occurred
in  the  case  of  Suttee,  the  burning  of  widows.  The  marriage  laws  are
another  example.  To  marry  a  child,  without  her  knowledge  or  con-
sent to  enter  the  married  state,  and  then  to  doom  her  to  the  awful,
because  unnatural,  fate  of  enforced  celibacy  if  the  boy-child  to  whom
she  was  betrothed  should  die  (and  one  half  of  the  human  race  do  die
before  coming  of  age),  is  something  actually  brutal,  devilish.  It  is  the
quintessence  of  injustice  and  cruelty,  and  I  would  sooner  doubt  the
stars  of  heaven  than  believe  that  any  one  of  those  star-bright  human
souls  called  Rishis  had  ever  consented  to  such  a  base  and  idiotic
cruelty.  If  a  female  has  entered  the  marital  relation,  she  should,  in
my  opinion,  remain  a  chaste  widow  if  her  husband  should  die.  But  if
a  betrothed  bo}'-husband  of  a  non-consenting  and  irresponsible  child-
wife  should  die,  or  if,  upon  coming  to  age,  either  of  them  should  be
averse  from  matrimony,  and  prefer  to  take  up  the  religious  life,  to
devote  themselves  to  charitable  occupations,  to  study,  or  for  other
good  reasons  wish  to  remain  celibate,  then  they  ought  to  be  allowed  to
do  so.  We  personally  know  of  several  cases  where  the  males  or
females   are  so  bent   upon  becoming   Chelas  that  they  prefer   death

246  A   MODERN   PAXARION.

rather  than  to  enter  or  continue  in — as  the  cases  severally  may  be —
the  married  state.  My  woman's  instinct  always  told  me  that  for  such
there  was  comfort  and  protection  in  the  Hindu  law  of  the  Rishis,
which  was  based  upon  their  spiritual  perceptions,  hence  upon  the
perfect  law  of  harmony  and  justice  which  pervades  all  nature.  And
now,  upon  reading  your  excellent  pamphlet,  I  perceive  that  my
instincts  had  not  deceived  me.

Wishing   eveiy  possible  success   to   your  noble  and  highly  philan-
thropical  enterprise,  believe  me,  dear  sir,  with  respect,

Yours  fraternally,

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

Mylaporc,  June  jrd,  1882.

"OPPRESSED  WIDOWHOOD"  IN

AMERICA.

[From  The  Philosophic  Enquirer,  July  15th,  1883.]

Having  read  an  article  signed  with  the  above  pseudonym  in  The
Philosophic  Enquirer  of  July  1st,  in  which  the  hapless  condition  of  the
Hindu  widow  is  so  sincerely  bewailed,  the  idea  struck  me  that  it  may
not  be  uninteresting  to  your  readers,  the  opponents  as  well  as  the  sup-
porters of  child-marriage  and  widow-marriage,  to  learn  that  the  sacer-
dotal caste  of  India  is  not  a  solitary  exception  in  the  cruel  treatment
of  those  unfortunates  whom  fate  has  deprived  of  their  husbands.
Those  who  look  upon  the  re-marriage  of  their  bereaved  females  with
horror,  as  well  as  those  who  may  yet  be  secretly  sighing  for  Suttee,
will  find  worthy  sympathizers  among  the  savage  and  fierce  tribe  of  the
Talkotins  of  Oregon  (America).  Says  Ross  Cox  in  his  Advcnlurcs  on
the  Columbia  River:

The  ceremonies  attending  the  dead  are  very  singular  and  quite  peculiar  to  this
tribe.  During  the  nine  days  the  corpse  is  laid  out  the  widow  of  the  deceased  is
obliged  to  sleep  alongside  it  from  sunset  to  sunrise;  and  from  this  custom  there  is
no  relaxation  even  during  the  hottest  days  of  summer!  [While  the  ceremony  of
cremation  is  being  performed,  and  the  doctor  (or  "medicine  man")  is  trying  for  the
last  time  his  skill  upon  the  corpse,  and  using  useless  incantations  to  bring  him
back  to  life,]  the  widow  must  lie  on  the  pile,  and  after  the  fire  is  applied  to  it  she
cannot  stir  until  the  doctor  orders  her  to  be  removed,  which,  however,  is  never
done  until  her  body  is  completely  covered  with  blisters.

After  being  placed  on  her  legs  she  is  obliged  to  pass  her  hands  gently  through
the  flames  and  collect  some  of  the  liquid  fit  which  issues  from  the  corpse,  with
which  she  is  permitted  [?]  to  wet  her  face  and  body!  When  the  friends  of  the
deceased  observe  the  sinews  of  the  legs  and  arms  beginning  to  contract  they
compel  the  unfortunate  widow  to  go  again  on  the  pile,  and  by  dint  of  hard  press-
ing to  straighten  those  members.

If  during  her  husband's  lifetime  she  has  been  known  to  have  omitted  adminis-
tering to  him  savoury  food,  or  neglected  his  clothing,  etc.,  she  is  now  made  to
suffer  severely  for  such  lapses  of  duty  by  his  relations,  who  frequently  fling  her  on

248  A   MODERN    PANARION.

the  funeral  pile,  from  which  she  is  dragged  by  her  friends,  and  thus  between  alter-
nate scorching  and  cooling  she  is  dragged  backwards  and  forwards  until  she  falls
into  a  state  of  insensibility.

After  which  she  is  saved  and  allowed  to  go.

But  if  the  widow  was  faithful,  respectful  and  a  good  wife,  then :

After  the  process  of  burning  the  corpse  has  terminated,  the  widow  collects  the
larger  bones,  which  she  rolls  up  in  an  envelope  of  birch  bark,  and  which  she  is
obliged  for  some  years  afterwards  to  carry  on  her  back.  She  is  now  considered  and
treated  as  a  slave  [as  in  India] ;  all  the  laborious  duties  of  cooking,  collecting  fuel,
etc.,  devolve  on  her.  She  must  obey  the  orders  of  all  the  women  and  even  of  the
village  children,  and  the  slightest  mistake  or  disobedience  subjects  her  to  the
infliction  of  a  heavy  punishment.  The  wretched  widow,  to  avoid  this  complicated
cruelty,  often  commits  suicide.  Should  she,  however,  linger  on  for  three  or  four
vears,  the  friends  of  her  husband  agree  to  relieve  her  from  her  painful  mourning.
This  is  a  ceremony  of  much  consequence.  .  .  .  Invitations  are  sent  to  the
inhabitants  of  the  various  friendly  villages,  and  when  the  feast  commences
presents  are  distributed  to  each  visitor.  The  object  of  their  meeting  is  then
explained,  and  the  woman  is  brought  forward,  still  carrying  on  her  back  the  bones
of  her  late  husband,  which  are  now  removed  and  placed  in  a  carved  box,  which  is
nailed  to  a  post  twelve  feet  high.

Her  conduct  as  a  faithful  widow  is  next  highly  eulogized,  and  the  ceremony  of
her  manumission  is  completed  by  one  man  powdering  on  her  head  the  down  of
birds  and  another  pouring  on  it  the  contents  of  a  bladder  of  oil!  She  is  then  at
liberty  to  marry  again  or  lead  a  life  of  single  blessedness;  but  few  of  them,  I  believe,
wish  to  encounter  the  risk  attending  a  second  widowhood.

H.  P.  B.

u

ESOTERIC  BUDDHISM"  AND  ITS

CRITIC.

[From  Light,  1883.]

Bottom.— Let  me  play  the  lion.  ...  I  will  roar,  that  I  will  do  any  man's
heart  good  to  hear  me.  .  .  .  I  will  make  the  Duke  say,  .  .  .  "Let  him  roar,
let  him  roar  again."  .  .  .  Masters,  you  ought  to  consider  with  yourselves;  to
bring  in— God  shield  us!— a  lion  among  ladies,  is  a  most  dreadful  thing;  for,  there
is  not  a  more  fearful  wild-fowl  than  your  lion  living;  and  we  ought  to  look  to't.
.  .  .  Nay,  you  must  name  his  name,  and  half  his  face  must  be  seen  through  the
lion's  neck;  and  he  himself  must  speak  through,  saying  thus,  or  to  the  same  defect:
"Ladies,"  or  "fair  ladies  [or  Theosophists]  I  would  wish  you,"  or  "I  would  request
you,"  or  "I  would  entreat  you,"  not  to  fear,  not  to  tremble:  ...  If  you  think
I  come  hither  as  a  lion,  .  .  .  no,  I  am  no  such  thing:  I  am  a  man  .  .  .  and
there  indeed  let  him  name  his  name. — Midsummer  Night's  Dream.

In  Light  of  July  21st,  in  the  "Correspondence,"  appears  a  letter
signed  "G.  W.,  M.D."  Most  transparent  initials  these,  which  "name
the  name"  at  once,  and  show  the  writer's  face  "through  the  lion's
neck."  The  communication  consists  of  just  fifty-eight  paragraphs,
containing  an  equal  number  of  sneering,  rancorous,  vulgar,  personal
flings,  the  whole  distributed  over  three  and  a  half  columns.  It  pre-
tends to  criticize,  while  only  misquoting  and  misinterpreting  Eastern
Esotericism.  Its  author  would  create  a  laugh  at  the  expense  of  Mr.
Sinnett's  book,  and  succeeds  in  showing  us  what  a  harmless  creature  is
the  "lion,"  " zvild-fowl"  though  he  may  be;  and  where  he  would  make
a  show  of  wit,  the  letter  is  only — nasty.

I  should  not  address  your  public,  even  in  my  private  capacity,  but
that  the  feelings  of  many  hundreds  of  my  Asiatic  brothers  have  been
outraged  by  this,  to  them,  ribald  attack  upon  what  they  hold  sacred.
For  them,  and  at  their  instance,  I  protest.  It  might  be  regarded  as
beneath  contempt  had  it  come  from  an  outsider  upon  whom  rested  no
obligation  to  uphold  the  dignity  of  the  Theosophical  Society;  in  such
case  it  would  have  passed  for  a  clumsy  attempt  to  injure  an  unpalatable
cause:  that  of  Esoteric  Buddhism.     But  when  it  is  a  wide-open  secret

250  A   MODERN   PANARION.

that  the  letter  came  from  a  member  of  about  five  years'  standing,  and
one  who,  upon  the  protogenesis  of  the  "British  Theosophical  Society"
as  the  "L,ondon  Lodge  of  the  Theosophical  Society,"  retained  member-
ship, the  case  has  quite  another  aspect.  The  cutting  insult  having
been  inflicted  publicly  and  without  antecedent  warning,  it  appears
necessary  to  enquire  as  to  the  occult  motive.

I  shall  not  stop  to  remark  upon  the  wild  resume,  which,  professedly
"a  criticism  from  a  European  and  arithmetical  standpoint,"  passed
muster  with  you.  Nor  shall  I  lose  time  over  the  harmless  flings  at
"incorrigible  Buddhists  and  other  lunatics,"  beyond  remarking  a propos
of  "moon"  and  "dust-bins"  that  the  former  seems  to  have  found  a
good  symbol  of  herself  as  a  "dust-bin"  in  the  heads  of  those  whose
perceptive  faculties  seem  so  dusty  as  to  prevent  the  entrance  of  a  single
ray  of  Occult  light.  Briefly  then,  since  the  year  1879  when  we  came  to
India,  the  author  of  the  letter  in  question  has  made  attempts  to  put
himself  into  communication  with  the  "Brothers."  Besides  trying  to
enter  into  correspondence  with  Colonel  Olcott's  Guru,  he  sent  twice,
through  myself,  letters  addressed  to  the  Mahatmas.  Being,  as  it
appears,  full  of  one-sided  prejudiced  questions,  suggesting  to  Buddhist
Philosophers  the  immense  superiority  of  his  own  "Esoteric"  Chris-
tianity over  the  system  of  the  Lord  Buddha,  which  is  characterized  as
fruitful  of  selfishness,  human  blindness,  misanthropy  and  spiritual  death,
they  were  returned  by  the  addressees  for  our  edification  and  to  show
us  why  they  would  not  notice  them.  Whoever  has  read  a  novelette
contributed  by  this  same  gentleman  to  The  Psychological  Review  and
entitled  "The  Man  from  the  East"  will  readily  infer  what  must  have
been  his  attitude  towards  the  "Himalayan"  and  Tibetan  Mystics.  A
Scotch  doctor,  the  hero,  meets  at  a  place  in  Syria,  in  an  Occult  Brother-
hood, a  Christian  convert  from  this  "Himalayan  heathen  Brotherhood,"
who — a  Hindu — utters  against  his  late  Adept  Masters  the  self-same
libels  as  are  now  repeated  in  the  letter  under  notice.*

The  shot  at  Theosophy  being  badly  aimed,  flew  wide  of  the  mark;
but  still,  like  Richard  III,  "G.  W.,  M.D."  resolved,  as  it  appears,  to
keep  up  the  gunnery —

*  The  mythical  hero  of  the  story  would  seem  to  have  met  at  Paris  with  a  certain  pseudo-Brahman,
a  convert  to  Roman  Catholicism,  who  is  giving  himself  out  as  an  ex-Chela— his  statements  and  all
corroborative  ones  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding;  he  may  have  misled,  if  not  the  mythical  Scotch
doctor,  at  least  the  actual  "M.D."  of  London.  And,  by  the  way,  our  French  Fellows  may  as  well
know,  that  unless  this  pretender  ceases  his  bogus  revelations  as  to  the  phenomenal  powers  of  our
Mahatmas  being  "of  the  devil "  a  certain  native  gentleman  who  has  known  this  convert  of  the
Jesuits  from  childhood,  will  expose  him  most  fully.— H.  P.  B.

"ESOTERIC    BUDDHISM"    AND   ITS   CRITIC.  251

If  not  to  fight  with  foreign  enemies,

Yet  to  beat  down  these  rebels  here  at  home.

The  three  indignant  answers  called  out  by  "G.  \V.,  M.D.,"  having
emanated  from  an  English  lady  and  two  genuine  English  gentlemen,
are,  in  my  humble  opinion,  too  dignified  and  mild  for  the  present  case.
So  brutal  an  attack  demanded  something  stronger  than  well-bred
protests;  and  at  the  risk  of  being  taken  by  "G.  W.,  M.D."  as  the
reverse  of  well-bred,  I  shall  use  plain  words  about  this  whilom  friend,
but  now  traitor — I  hope  to  show  the  term  is  not  too  harsh.  As  an
ardent  Theosophist,  the  grateful  loyal  friend  of  the  author  denounced
— who  deserves  and  has  the  regard  of  Mahatma  Koot-Hoomi — and  as
the  humble  pupil  of  Those  to  whom  I  owe  my  life  and  the  future  of
my  soul,  I  shall  speak.  While  I  have  breath,  I  shall  never  allow  to
pass  unnoticed  such  ugly  manifestations  of  religious  intolerance,  nay,
bigotry,  and  personal  rancour  resulting  from  envy,  in  a  member  of  our
Society.

Before  closing,  I  must  notice  one  specially  glaring  fact.  Touched
evidently  to  the  quick  by  Mr.  Sinnett's  very  proper  refusal  to  let  one
so  inimical  see  the  "Divine  Face"  (yes,  truly  Divine,  though  not  so
much  so  as  the  original)  of  the  Mahatma,  "G.  W.,  M.D."  with  a  sneer
of  equivocal  propriety,  calls  it  a  mistake.     He  says:

For  just  as  some  second-class  saints  have  been  made  by  gazing  on  halfpenny
prints  of  the  Mother  of  God,  so  who  can  say  that  if  my  good  friend  had  permitted
my  sceptical  eyes  to  look  on  the  Divine  face  of  Koot-Hoomi  I  might  not  forthwith
have  been  converted  into  an  Esoteric  Buddhist?

Impossible;  an  Esoteric  Buddhist  never  broke  his  pledged  word;
and  one  who  upon  entering  the  Society  gave  his  solemn  word  of  honour,
in  the  presence  of  witnesses,  that  he  would

Defend  the  interests  of  the  Society  and  the  honour  of  a  brother  Theosophist,
when  unjustly  assailed,  even  at  the  peril  of  my  [his]  own  life,

and  then  could  write  such  a  letter,  would  never  be  accepted  in  that
capacity.  One  who  unjustly  assails  the  honour  of  hundreds  of  his
Asiatic  brothers,  slanders  their  religion  and  wounds  their  most  sacred
feelings,  may  be  a  very  esoteric  Christian,  but  certainly  is  a  disloyal
Theosophist.  My  perceptions  of  what  constitutes  a  man  of  honour
may  be  very  faulty,  but  I  confess  that  I  could  not  imagine  such  a  one
making  public  caricatures  upon  confessedly  "private  instructions."
(See  second  column,  paragraph  14  of  his  letter.)  Private  instructions
of  this  sort,  given  at  confidential   private  meetings  of  the  Society  in

252  A    MODERN    PANARION.

advance  of  their  publication,  are  exactly  what  the  entering  member's
"word  of  honour"  pledges  him  not  to  reveal.

The  broken  faith  hath  made  thee  prey  for  worms;-
What  canst  thou  swear  by  now  ?

Your  correspondent  deprecates

At  the  outset  this  Oriental  practice  of  secrecy;  [he  knows]  that  secrecy  and
cunning  are  ever  twin  sisters,  [and  it  appears  to  him]  childish  and  effeminate  [to
pretend]  by  secret  words  and  signs  to  enshrine  great  truths  behind  a  veil,  which  is
only  useful  as  a  concealment  of  ignorance  and  nakedness.

Indeed:  so  he  is  not  an  "Esoteric  Christian"  after  all,  else  I  have
misread  the  Bible.  For  what  I  find  there  in  various  passages,  of  which
I  cite  but  one,  shows  me  that  he  is  as  disloyal  to  his  own  Master  and
Ideal  Christ,  as  he  is  to  Theosophy:

And  He  said  unto  them  [His  own  disciples],  Unto  you  it  is  given  to  know  the
inystery  of  the  kingdom  of  God;  but  unto  them  that  are  without  [the  "G.W.,
M.D.'s"  of  the  day]  all  these  things  are  done  in  parables:  that  seeing  they  may  see
and  not  perceive;  and  hearing  they  may  hear,  and  not  understand;  lest  at  any
time  they  should  be  converted,  and  their  sins  should  be  forgiven  them.  {Mark,
iv.  11,  12.)

Shall  we  characterize  this  also  as  "childish  and  effeminate,"  say  that
the  twins  sisters  "secrecy  and  cunning"  lurk  behind  this  veil,  and  that
in  this  instance,  as  usual,  it  was  "only  useful  as  a  concealment  of
ignorance  and  nakedness"?  The  grandeur  of  Esoteric  Buddhism  is
that  it  hides  what  it  does  from  the  vulgar,  not  "lest  at  any  time  they
should  be  converted,  and  their  sins  forgiven  them,"  or  as  they  would
say,  "cheat  their  Karma" — but  lest  by  learning  prematurely  that  which
can  safely  be  trusted  only  to  those  who  have  proved  their  unselfishness
and  self-abnegation,  even  the  wicked,  the  si?iners  should  be  hurt.

And  now,  may  the  hope  of  Bottom  be  realized,  and  some  IyOndon
Duke  say  to  this  harmless  lion:  "Eet  him  roar,  let  him  roar  again."

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

Nilgherry  Hills,  Aug.  23rd,  18S3.

MR.  A.  LILLIE'S  DELUSIONS.

[From  Light,  1884.]

I  WRITE  to  rectify  the  many  mistakes — if  they  are,  indeed,  only  "mis-
takes"— in  Mr.  L,illie's  last  letter  that  appeared  in  Light  of  August
2nd,  in  answer  to  the  Observations  on  his  pamphlet  by  the  President  of
the  London  Lodge.

1.  This  letter,  in  which  the  author  of  Buddha  and  Early  Buddhism
proposed  to

Consider  briefly  some  of  the  notable  omissions  made  in  the  "Observations,"
begins  with  two  most  notable  assertions  concerning  myself,  which  arc
entirely  false,  and  which  the  author  had  not  the  slightest  right  to  make.
He  says:

For  fourteen  years  (1S60  to  1S74)  Madame  Blavatsky  was  an  avowed  vSpiritnalist,
controlled  by  a  spirit  called  "John  King"     .     .     .     she  attended  many  seances.

But  this  would  hardly  prove  anyone  to  be  a  Spiritualist,  and,  more-
over, all  these  assertions  are  entirely  false.  I  say  the  word  and  under-
line it,  for  the  facts  in  them  are  distorted,  and  made  to  fit  a  preconceived
and  very  erroneous  notion,  started  first  by  the  Spiritualists,  whose
interest  it  is  to  advocate  "spirits"  pure  and  simple,  and  to  kill,  if  they
can,  which  is  rather  doubtful,  belief  in  the  wisdom,  if  not  in  the  very
existence,  of  our  revered  Masters.

Though  I  do  not  at  all  feel  bound  to  unbosom  my  private  life  to  Mr.
Arthur  Lillie,  nor  do  I  recognize  in  him  the  right  of  demanding  it.  yet
out  of  respect  to  a  few  Spiritualists  whom  I  esteem  and  honour,  I
would  set  them  right  once  for  all  on  the  subject.  As  that  period  of
my  life  (1S73-1879)  in  America,  with  all  its  spiritual  transactions,  will
be  given  very  soon  in  a  new  book  called  Madame  Blavatsky,  published
by  friends,  and  one  which  I  trust  will  settle,  once  and  for  ever,  the
many  wild  and  unfounded  stories  told  of  me,  I  will  briefly  state  only
the  following.

The  unwarranted  assumption  mentioned  above  is  very  loosely  based

254  A  MOD;ERN  panarion.

on  one  single  document,  namely,  Colonel  Olcott's  People  from  the  Other
World.  As  this  book  was  written  partly  before,  and  partly  after,  my
first  acquaintance  with  Colonel  Olcott,  and  as  he  was  a  Spiritualist,
which  he  has  never  denied,  I  am  not  responsible  for  his  views  of  me
and  my  "power"  at  that  time.  He  wrote  what  he  then  thought  the
whole  truth,  honestly  and  sincerely;  and  as  I  had  a  determined  object
in  view,  I  did  not  seek  to  disabuse  him  too  rudely  of  his  dreams.  It
was  only  after  the  formation  of  the  Theosophical  Society  in  1875,  that
he  learned  the  whole  truth.  I  defy  anyone,  after  that  period,  to  find
one  word  from  his  pen  that  would  corroborate  his  early  views  on  the
nature  of  my  supposed  "mediumship."  But  even  then,  when  writing
of  me  in  his  book,  he  states  distinctly  the  following:

Her  mediumship  is  totally  different  from  that  of  any  other  person  I  ever  met,  for
instead  of  being  controlled  by  spirits  to  do  their  will,  it  is  she  who  seems  to  control
them  to  do  her  bidding.

Strange  "mediumship,"  one  that  resembled  in  no  way  any  that  even
Colonel  Olcott — a  Spiritualist  of  thirty  years'  standing — had  ever  met
with!  But  when  Colonel  Olcott  says  in  his  book  (p.  453)  that  instead  of
being  controlled  by,  it  is  I  who  control  the  so-called  spirits,  he  is  yet
made  to  say  by  Mr.  Lillie,  who  refers  the  public  to  Colonel  Olcott's
book,  that  is  I  who  was  controlled!  Is  this  a  misstatement  and  a
misquotation,  I  ask,  or  is  it  not?

Again,  it  is  stated  by  Mr.  Lillie  that  I  conversed  with  this  "spirit"
(John  King)  during  fourteen  years,  "constantly  in  India  and  else-
where." To  begin  with,  I  here  assert  that  I  had  never  heard  the  name
of  "John  King"  before  1873.  True  it  is,  I  had  told  Colonel  Olcott  and
many  others  that  the  form  of  a  man,  with  a  dark  pale  face,  black  beard,
and  white  flowing  garments  and  fettah,  that  some  of  them  had  met
about  the  house  and  my  rooms,  was  that  of  a  "John  King."  I  had
given  him  that  name  for  reasons  that  will  be  fully  explained  very  soon,
and  I  laughed  heartily  at  the  easy  way  the  astral  body  of  a  living  man
could  be  mistaken  for,  and  accepted  as,  a  spirit.  And  I  had  told  them
that  I  had  known  that  "John"  since  i860;  for  it  was  the  form  of  an
Eastern  Adept,  who  has  since  gone  for  his  final  initiation,  passing
through  and  visiting  us  in  his  living  body  on  his  way,  at  Bombay.
Whether  Messrs.  Lillie  and  Co.  believe  the  statement  or  not,  I  care
very  little,  as  Colonel  Olcott  and  other  friends  know  it  now  to  be  the
true  one.  I  have  known  and  conversed  with  many  a  "John  King"  in
my  life — a  generic  name  for  more  than  one  spook — but,  thank  heaven,

MR.   A.    LHJJE  S   DELUSIONS.  255

I  was  never  yet  "controlled"  by  one!  My  mediumship  has  been
crushed  out  of  me  a  quarter  of  a  century  or  more;  and  I  defy  loudly
all  the  "spirits"  of  the  Kama  Loka  to  approach — let  alone  to  control
me — now.  Surely  it  is  Mr.  Arthur  Lillie  who  must  be  "controlled"  by
some  one  to  make  untruthful  statements  which  can  be  so  easily  refuted
as  this  one.

2.  Mr.  Lillie  asks  for

Information  about  the  seven  years'  initiation  of  Madame  Blavatsky.

The  humble  individual  of  this  name  has  never  heard  of  such  an
initiation.  With  that  accuracy  in  the  explanation  of  Esoteric  terms
that  so  preeminently  characterizes  the  author  of  Buddha  and  Early
Buddhism,  the  word  may  be  intended  for  "instruction"?  If  so,  then
I  should  be  quite  justified  in  first  asking  Mr.  Lillie  what  right  he  has
to  cross-examine  me.  But  since  he  chooses  to  take  such  liberties  with
my  name,  I  will  tell  him  plainly  that  he  himself  knows  nothing,  not
merely  of  initiations  and  Tibet,  but  even  of  exoteric — let  alone  Esoteric —
Buddhism.  What  he  pretends  to  know  about  Lama'ism  he  has  picked
up  from  the  hazy  information  of  travellers,  who,  having  forced  them-
selves into  the  borderland  of  Tibet,  pretend  on  that  account  to  know  all
that  is  within  the  country  closed  for  centuries  to  the  average  traveller.
Even  Csomo  de  Koros  knew  very  little  of  the  real gyclukpas  and  Esoteric
Lamaism,  except  what  he  was  permitted  to  know,  for  he  never  went
beyond  Zanskar  and  the  lamasery  of  Phagdal — erroneously  spelt  by
those  who  pretend  to  know  all  about  Tibet,  Pugdal,  which  is  incorrect,
just  because  there  are  no  meaningless  navies  in  Tibet,  as  Mr.  Lillie  has
been  taught  to  say.  And  I  will  tell  him  also  that  I  have  lived  at
different  periods  in  Little  Tibet  as  well  as  in  Great  Tibet,  and  that
these  combined  periods  form  more  than  seven  years.

Yet  I  have  never  stated  either  verbally  or  over  my  signature  that  I
had  passed  seven  consecutive  years  in  a  convent.  What  I  have  said,
and  repeat  now,  is  that  I  have  stopped  in  Lamai'stic  convents;  that  I
have  visited  Tzi-gadze,  the  Teshu  Hlumpo  territory  and  its  neighbour-
hood, and  that  I  have  been  further  into,  and  have  visited  such  places
of  Tibet  as  have  never  been  visited  by  other  Europeans,  and  such  as  he
can  never  hope  to  visit.

Mr.  Lillie  had  no  right  to  expect  more  "ample  details"  in  Mr.  Finch's
pamphlet.  Mr.  Finch  is  an  honourable  man,  who  speak-  of  the  private
life  of  a  person  only  so  far  as  that  person  permits  him.  My  friends
and  those  whom   I  respect  and  for  whose  opinion  I  care,  have  ample

256  A   MODERN   PANARION.

evidence — from  my  family  for  instance — that  I  have  been  in  Tibet,  and
this  is  all  I  care  for.     As  to —

The  names,  perhaps,  of  three  or  four  .  .  .  English  [rather  Anglo-Indian]
officials,  who  would  certify

to  having  seen  me  when  I  passed,  I  am  afraid  their  vigilance  would
not  be  found  at  the  height  of  their  trustworthiness.  Only  two  years
back,  as  I  can  prove  by  numerous  witnesses,  when  journeying  from
Chandernagore  to  Darjeeling,  instead  of  proceeding  to  it  direct,  I  left
the  train  half-way,  was  met  by  friends  with  a  conveyance,  and  passed
with  them  into  the  territory  of  Sikkhim  where  I  found  my  Master  and
Mahatma  Kuthumi.  Thence  I  went  five  miles  across  the  old  border-
land of  Tibet.

Upon  my  return,  five  days  later,  to  Darjeeling,  I  received  a  kind  note
from  the  Deputy  Commissioner.  It  notified  me  in  the  politest  of  terms
that,  having  heard  of  my  intention  of  going  over  to  Tibet,  the  govern-
ment could  not  allow  me  to  proceed  there  before  I  had  received  per-
mission to  that  effect  from  Simla,  nor  could  it  accept  the  responsibility
of  my  safety,

The  Rajah  of  Sikkhim  being  very  averse  to  allow  travellers  on  his  territorv,  etc.

This  I  would  call  shutting  the  stable-door  when  the  steed  is  stolen.
Nor  had  the  very  "trustworthy"  official  even  heard  that  a  month  before
Mr.  Sinnett  had  kindly  procured  for  me  permission,  since  I  went  to
Sikkhim  but  for  a  few  days,  and  no  farther  than  the  old  Tibetan  bor-
derland. The  question  is  not  whether  the  Anglo-Indian  Government
will  or  will  not  grant  such  permission,  but  whether  the  Tibetans  will
let  one  cross  their  territory.  Of  the  latter,  I  am  sure  any  day.  I  invite
Mr.  Lillie  to  try  the  same.  He  may  at  the  same  time  study  with  profit
geography,  and  ascertain  that  there  are  other  routes  than  those  laid
down  into  Tibet,  besides  via  "English  officials."  He  tries  his  best  to
make  me  out,  in  plain  words,  a  liar.  He  will  find  it  even  more  difficult
than  to  disprove  that  he  knows  nothing  of  either  Tibet  or  Buddhism  or
our  "Byang  Tisubs."

I  will  surely  never  lose  my  time  in  showing  that  his  accusations
against  One,  Whom  no  insult  of  his  can  reach,  are  perfectly  worthless.
There  are  numbers  of  men  quite  as  intelligent  as  he  believes  himself
to  be,  whose  opinion  of  our  Mahatmas'  letters  is  the  reverse  of  his.
He  can  "suppose"  that  the  authorities  by  him  cited  knew  more  about
Tibet  than  our  Masters;  others  think  they  do  not;  and  the  thousand

MR.    A.   ULLIE'S   DELUSIONS.  257

and  one  blunders  of  his  Buddha  and  Early  Buddhism  show  ns  what
these  authorities  are  worth  when  trusted  literally.  As  to  his  trying  to
insinuate  that  there  is  no  Mahatma.  Kutlunni  at  all,  the  idea  alone  is
absurd.  He  will  have  to  dispose,  before  he  does  anything  more,  of  a
certain  lady  in  Russia,  whose  truthfulness  and  impartiality  no  one  who
knows  her  would  ever  presume  to  question,  who  received  a  letter  from
that  Master  so  far  back  as  1870.  Perchance  a  forgery  also?  As  to  my
having  been  in  Tibet,  at  Mahatma  Kuthumi's  house,  I  have  better
proof  in  store — when  I  believe  it  needed — than  Mr.  Lillie's  rancorous
ingenuity  will  ever  be  able  to  make  away  with.

If  the  teachings  of  Mr.  Sinnett's  Esoteric  Buddhism  are  considered
atheistic,  then  I  am  an  atheist  too.  And  yet  I  would  not  deny  what  I
wrote  in  /sis,  as  quoted  by  Mr.  Finch.  If  Mr.  Lillie  knows  no  differ-
ence between  an  anthropomorphic  extra-cosmic  God,  and  the  Divine
Kssence  of  the  Advaitis  and  other  Esotericists,  then,  I  must  only  lose
a  little  more  of  my  respect  for  the  R.  A.  S.  in  which  he  claims  mem-
bership; and  it  may  justify  the  more  our  assertions  that  there  is  more
knowledge  in  "Babu  (?)  Subba  Row's"  solitary  head  than  in  dozens  of
the  heads  of  "Orientalists"  about  London  we  know  of.  The  same  with
regard  to  the  Master's  name.  If  Mr.  Lillie  tells  us  that  "Kuthumi"  is
not  a  Tibetan  name,  we  answer  that  we  never  claimed  it  to  be  one.
Everyone  knows  that  the  Master  is  a  Punjabi,  whose  family  was  settled
for  years  in  Cashmere.  But  if  he  tells  us  that  an  expert  at  the  British
Museum  ransacked  the  Tibetan  dictionary  for  the  words  "Kut"  and
"Humi,"  "and  found  no  such  words,"  then  I  say:  Buy  a  better  dic-
tionary or  replace  the  expert  by  a  more  "expert"  one.  Let  Mr.  Lillie
try  the  glossaries  of  the  Moravian  Brothers  and  their  alphabets.  I  am
afraid  he  is  ruining  terribly  his  reputation  as  an  Orientalist.  Indeed,
before  this  controversy  is  settled  he  may  leave  in  it  the  last  shreds  of
his  supposed  Oriental  learning.

Lest  Mr.  Lillie  should  take  my  omitting  to  answer  a  single  one  of
his  very  indiscreet  questions  as  a  new  pretext  for  printing  some  imper-
tinence, I  say:  I  was  at  Mentana  during  the  battle  in  October,  1S67,
and  left  Italy  in  November  of  the  same  year  for  India.  Whether  I  was
sent  there,  or  found  myself  there  by  accident,  are  questions  that  per-
tain to  my  private  life,  with  which,  it  appears  to  me,  Mr.  Lillie  has  no
concern.  But  this  is  on  a  par  with  his  other  ways  of  dealing  with  his
opponents.

Mr.  Lillie's  other  sarcasms  touch  me  very  little,   for   I   know  their

25S  A   MODERN   PANARION.

value.  I  may  let  them  pass  without  any  further  notice.  Some  persons
have  an  extraordinarily  clever  way  of  avoiding  an  embarrassing  posi-
tion by  trying  to  place  their  antagonists  in  the  same  situation.  For
instance,  Mr.  Ljllie  could  not  answer  the  criticisms  made  on  his  Buddha
and  Early  Buddhism  in  The  Theosophist,  nor  has  he  ever  attempted
to  do  so.  But  he  applied  himself  instead  to  collect  every  vile  rumour
and  idle  gossip  about  me,  its  editor.  Why  does  he  not  show,  to  begin
with,  that  his  reviewer  was  wrong?  Why  does  he  not,  by  contradict-
ing our  statements,  firmly  establish  his  own  authority  as  an  Orientalist,
showing  first  of  all  that  he  is  a  genuine  scholar,  who  knows  the  sub-
ject he  is  talking  about,  before  he  allows  himself  to  deny  and  contra-
dict other  people's  statements  in  matters  which  he  knows  still  less
about?  He  does  nothing  of  the  kind,  however — not  a  word,  not  a
mention  of  the  scourging  criticism  that  he  is  tenable  to  refute.  Instead
of  that,  one  finds  the  offended  author  trying  to  throw  ridicule  on  his
reviewers,  probably  so  as  to  lessen  the  value  of  what  they  have  to  say
of  his  own  book.  This  is  clever,  very  clever  strategy — whether  it  is
equally  honourable  remains,  withal,  an  open  question.

It  might  be  difficult,  after  the  conclusions  reached  by  qualified
scholars  in  India  concerning  his  first  book,  to  secure  much  attention
in  The  Theosophist  for  his  second,  but  if  this  volume  in  turn  were  ex-
amined with  the  care  almost  undeservedly  devoted  to  the  first,  and  if
it  were  referred  to  the  authority  of  such  real  Oriental  scholars  and
Sanskritists  as  Mr.  R.  T.  H.  Griffith,  for  instance,  I  think  it  would  be
found  that  the  aggregate  blundering  of  the  two  books  put  together
might  excite  even  as  much  amusement  as  the  singular  complacency
with  which  the  author  betrays  himself  to  the  public.

H.  P.  Blavatsky.

August  3rd,  i$Sj.

ARTICLES
FROM  "THE  THEOSOPHIST."

WHAT  IS  THEOSOPIIY?

[Vol.  I.  No.  i,  October,  1879.]

This  question  has  been  so  often  asked,  and  misconception  so  widely
prevails,  that  the  editors  of  a  journal  devoted  to  an  exposition  of  the
world's  Theosophy  would  be  remiss,  were  its  first  number  issued  with-
out coming  to  a  full  understanding  with  their  readers.  But  our  head-
ing involves  two  further  queries:  what  is  the  Theosophical  Society;
and  what  are  the  Theosophists ?     To  each  an  answer  will  be  given.

According  to  lexicographers,  the  term  Thcosophia  is  composed  of  two
Greek  words — theos,  "God,"  and  sop/i/a,  "wisdom."  So  far,  correct.  But
the  explanations  that  follow  are  far  from  giving  a  clear  idea  of  Theo-
sophy.    Webster  defines  it  most  originally  as

A  supposed  intercourse  with  God  and  superior  spirits,  and  consequent  attainment
of  superhuman  knowledge,  by  physical  processes,  as  by  the  theurgic  operations  of
some  ancient  Platonists,  or  by  the  chemical  processes  of  the  German  fire-philosophers.

This,  to  say  the  least,  is  a  poor  and  flippant  explanation.  To  attri-
bute such  ideas  to  men  like  Ammonius  Saccas,  Plotinus,  Jamblichus,
Porphyry,  Proclus,  shows  either  intentional  misrepresentation,  or  Mr.
Webster's  ignorance  of  the  philosophy  and  motives  of  the  greatest
geniuses  of  the  later  Alexandrian  School.  To  impute  to  those  whom
their  contemporaries  as  well  as  posterity  styled  "Theodidaktoi,"  God-
taught,  a  purpose  to  develop  their  psychological,  spiritual  perceptions
by  "physical  processes,"  is  to  describe  them  as  materialists.  As  to  the
concluding  fling  at  the  fire-philosophers,  it  rebounds  from  them  to  fall
home  among  our  most  eminent  modern  men  of  science,  those  in  whose
mouths  the  Rev.  James  Martineau  places  the  following  boast:  "Matter
is  all  we  want;  give  us  atoms  alone  and  we  will  explain  the  universe."

Vaughan  offers  a  far  better,  more  philosophical  definition.     He  says:

A  Theosophist  is  one  who  gives  you  a  theory  of  God  or  the  works  of  Cod.  which
has  not  revelation,  but  an  inspiration  of  his  own  for  its  basis.

In  this  view  every  great  thinker  and  philosopher,  especially  every
founder  of  a  new  religion,  school  of  philosophy,  or  sect  is  necessarily
a  Theosophist.     Hence  Theosophy  and  Theosophists  have  existed  ever

262  A   MODERN    PANARION.

since  the  first  glimmering  of  nascent  thought  made  man  seek  instinc-
tively for  the  means  of  expressing  his  own  independent  opinions.

There  were  Theosophists  before  the  Christian  era,  notwithstanding
that  the  Christian  writers  ascribe  the  development  of  the  eclectic
Theosophieal  system  to  the  early  part  of  the  third  century  of  their  era.
Diogenes  Laertius  traces  Theosophy  to  an  epoch  antedating  the  dynasty
of  the  Ptolemies;  and  names  as  its  founder  an  Egyptian  Hierophant
called  Pot-Amun,  the  name  being  Coptic  and  signifying  a  priest  conse-
crated to  Amun,  the  God  of  Wisdom.  But  history  shows  it  revived  by
Ammonius  Saccas,  the  founder  of  the  Neo-Platonic  School.  He  and
his  disciples  called  themselves  "Philalethians" — lovers  of  the  truth;
while  others  termed  them  the  "  Analogists,"  on  account  of  their  method
of  interpreting  all  sacred  legends,  symbolical  myths  and  mysteries,  by
a  rule  of  analogy  or  correspondence,  so  that  events  which  had  occurred
in  the  external  world  were  regarded  as  expressing  operations  and  ex-
periences of  the  human  soul.  It  was  the  aim  and  purpose  of  Ammonius
to  reconcile  all  sects,  peoples  and  nations  under  one  common  faith
— a  belief  in  one  Supreme  Eternal,  Unknown  and  Unnamed  Power,
governing  the  universe  by  immutable  and  eternal  laws.  His  object
was  to  prove  a  primitive  system  of  Theosophy,  which  at  the  beginning
was  essentially  alike  in  all  countries;  to  induce  all  men  to  lay  aside
their  strifes  and  quarrels,  and  unite  in  purpose  and  thought  as  the
children  of  one  common  mother;  to  purify  the  ancient  religions,  by
degrees  corrupted  and  obscured,  from  all  dross  of  human  element,
by  uniting  and  expounding  them  upon  pure  philosophical  principles.
Hence,  the  Buddhistic,  Vedantic  and  Magian,  or  Zoroastrian,  systems
were  taught  in  the  Eclectic  Theosophieal  School  along  with  all  the
philosophies  of  Greece.  Hence  also,  that  preeminently  Buddhistic
and  Indian  feature  among  the  ancient  Theosophists  of  Alexandria,  of
due  reverence  for  parents  and  aged  persons;  a  fraternal  affection  for
the  whole  human  race;  and  a  compassionate  feeling  for  even  the  dumb
animals.  While  seeking  to  establish  a  system  of  moral  discipline,
which  enforced  upon  people  the  duty  to  live  according  to  the  laws  of
their  respective  countries,  to  exalt  their  minds  by  the  research  and
contemplation  of  the  one  Absolute  Truth;  his  chief  object,  in  order,
as  he  believed,  to  achieve  all  others,  was  to  extract  from  the  various
religious  teachings,  as  from  a  many-chorded  instrument,  one  full  and
harmonious  melody,  which  would  find  response  in  every  truth-loving
heart.

WHAT   IS  THEOSOPHY?  263

Theosophy  is,  then,  the  archaic  Wisdom-Religion,  the  esoteric  doctrine
once  known  in  every  ancient  country  having  claims  to  civilization.
This  "Wisdom"  all  the  old  writings  show  ns  as  an  emanation  of
the  divine  Principle;  and  the  clear  comprehension  of  it  is  typified  in
such  names  as  the  Indian  Budh,  the  Babylonian  Nebo,  the  Thoth  of
Memphis,  the  Hermes  of  Greece;  in  the  appellations,  also,  of  some
goddesses — Metis,  Neitha,  Athena,  the  Gnostic  Sophia — and  finally  the
Vedas,  from  the  word  "to  know."  Under  this  designation,  all  the
ancient  philosophers  of  the  East  and  West,  the  Hierophants  of  old
Egypt,  the  Rishis  of  Aryavartta,  the  Theodidaktoi  of  Greece,  included
all  knowledge  of  things  occult  and  essentially  divine.  The  Mercavah
of  the  Hebrew  rabbis,  the  secular  and  popular  series,  were  thus  desig-
nated as  only  the  vehicle,  the  outward  shell  which  contained  the  higher
esoteric  knowledge.  The  Magi  of  Zoroaster  received  instruction  and
were  initiated  in  the  caves  and  secret  lodges  of  Bactria;  the  Egyptian
and  Grecian  Hierophants  had  their  aporrhcta,  or  secret  discourses,
during  which  the  Mystes  became  an  Epoptes — a  Seer.

The  central  idea  of  Eclectic  Theosophy  was  that  of  a  single  Supreme
Essence,  Unknown  and  Unknoivable,  for — "How  could  one  know  the
knower?"  as  enquires  the  Brihadaranyaka  Upanishad.  Their  system
was  characterized  by  three  distinct  features:  the  theory  of  the  above-
named  Essence;  the  doctrine  of  the  human  soul — an  emanation  from
the  latter,  hence  of  the  same  nature;  and  its  theurgy.  It  is  this  last
science  which  has  caused  the  Neo-Platonists  to  be  so  misrepresented
in  our  era  of  materialistic  science.  Theurgy  being  essentially  the  art
of  applying  the  divine  powers  of  man  to  the  subordination  of  the
blind  forces  of  nature,  its  votaries  were  first  termed  magicians — a  cor-
ruption of  the  word  "Magh,"  signifying  a  wise,  or  learned  man — and
then  derided.  Sceptics  of  a  century  ago  would  have  been  as  wick-  of  the
mark  if  they  had  laughed  at  the  idea  of  a  phonograph  or  telegraph.
The  ridiculed  and  the  "infidels"  of  one  generation  generally  become
the  wise  men  and  saints  of  the  next.

As  regards  the  Divine  Essence  and  the  nature  of  the  soul  and  spirit,
modern  Theosophy  believes  now  as  ancient  Theosophy  did.  The
popular  Diu  of  the  Aryan  nations  was  identical  with  the  Iao  of  the
Chaldceans,  and  even  with  the  Jupiter  of  the  less  learned  and  philo-
sophical among  the  Romans;  and  it  was  just  as  identical  with  the
Jahve  of  the  Samaritans,  the  Tin  or  "Tiusco"  of  the  Northmen,  the  Duw
of  the  Britons,  and  the  Zeus  of  the  Thracians.      As  to  the  Absolute

264  A   MODERN   PANARION.

Essence,  the  One  and  All — whether  we  accept  the  Greek  Pythagorean,
the  Chaldaean  Kabalistic,  or  the  Aryan  philosophy  in  regard  to  it,  it
will  all  lead  to  one  and  the  same  result.  The  Primeval  Monad  of  the
Pythagorean  system,  which  retires  into  darkness  and  is  itself  Darkness
(for  human  intellect)  was  made  the  basis  of  all  things;  and  we  can  find
the  idea  in  all  its  integrity  in  the  philosophical  systems  of  Leibnitz
and  Spinoza.  Therefore,  whether  a  Theosophist  agrees  with  the
Kabalah  which,  speaking  of  En-Soph  propounds  the  query:  "Who,
then,  can  comprehend  It,  since  It  is  formless  and  Non-existent?";
or,  remembering  that  magnificent  hymn  from  the  Rig  Veda  (book  x,
hymn  129) — enquires:

Who  knows  from  whence  this  great  creation  sprang?

Whether  his  will  created  or  was  mute.

Pie  knows  it — or  perchance  even  He  knows  not;

or,   again,  accepts   the   Vedantic  conception   of  Brahma,   who    in   the
Upanishads  is  represented  as  "without  life,  without  mind,  pure,"  u?i-
conscious,  for — Brahma  is  "Absolute  Consciousness";  or  even,  finally,
whether,  siding  with  the  Svabhavikas  of  Nepaul,  he  maintains  that
nothing  exists  but  "Svabhava"  (substance  or  nature)  which  exists  by
itself  without  any  creator;  any  one  of  the  above  conceptions  can  lead
but  to  pure  and  absolute  Theosophy — that  Theosophy  which  prompted
such  men  as  Hegel,  Fichte  and  Spinoza  to  take  up  the  labours  of  the
old  Grecian  philosophers  and  speculate  upon  the  One  Substance,  the
Deity,  the  Divine  All  proceeding  from  the  Divine  Wisdom,  incompre-
hensible, unknown  and  7innamed,  by  any  ancient  or  modern  religious
philosophy,  with  the  exception  of  Christianity  and  Mohammedanism.
Every  Theosophist,  then,  holding  to  a  theory  of  the  Deity  "which  has
not  revelation,  but  an  inspiration  of  his  own  for  its  basis,"  may  accept
any  of  the  above  definitions,  or  belong  to  any  of  these  religions,  and
yet  remain    strictly  within    the  boundaries  of  Theosophy.      For   the
latter  is  belief  in  the  Deity  as  the  ALL,  the  source  of  all  existence,  the
infinite  that  cannot  be  either  comprehended  or  known,  the  universe
alone  revealing  //,  or,  as  some  prefer  it,  Him,  thus  giving  a  sex  to  that,
to   anthropomorphize  which    is    blasphefjiy.     True  Theosophy  shrinks
from  brutal   materialization;    it  prefers  believing  that,   from   eternity
retired  within  itself,  the  Spirit  of  the  Deity  neither  wills  nor  creates;
but  that,  from  the  infinite  effiulgency  everywhere  going  forth  from  the
Great  Centre,  that  which  produces  all  visible  and  invisible  things  is
but  a  Ray  containing  in  itself  the  generative  and  conceptive  power,

WHAT   IS  THEOSOPHY?  265

which,  in  its  turn,  produces  that  which  the  Greeks  called  Macrocosm,
the  Kabalists  Tikkun  or  Adam  Kadmon — the  archetypal  man — and  the
Aryans  Purusha,  the  manifested  Brahma,  or  the  Divine  Male.  Theo-
sophy  believes  also  in  the  Anastasis  or  continued  existence,  and  in
transmigration  (evolution)  or  a  series  of  changes  in  the  soul*  which
can  be  defended  and  explained  on  strict  philosophical  principles,  and
only  by  making  a  distinction  between  Paramatma.  (transcendental,
supreme  soul)  and  Jivatma  (animal,  or  conscious  soul)  of  the  Vedantins.
To  fully  define  Theosophy  we  must  consider  it  under  all  its  aspects.
The  interior  world  has  not  been  hidden  from  all  by  impenetrable  dark-
ness. By  that  higher  intuition  acquired  by  Theosophia,  or  God-know-
ledge, which  carried  the  mind  from  the  world  of  form  into  that  of
formless  spirit,  man  has  been  sometimes  enabled  in  every  age  and
•every  country  to  perceive  things  in  the  interior  or  invisible  world.
Hence  the  "Samadhi,"  or  Dhya.11  Yog  Samadhi,  of  the  Hindu  ascetics;
the  "Daimonion-photisma,"  or  spiritual  illumination  of  the  Neo-
Platonists;  the  "sidereal  confabulation  of  soul,"  of  the  Rosicrucians  or
fire-philosophers;  and,  even  the  ecstatic  trance  of  mystics  and  of  the
modern  mesmerists  and  spiritualists,  are  identical  in  nature,  though
various  as  to  manifestation.  The  search  after  man's  diviner  "self,"  so
often  and  so  erroneously  interpreted  as  individual  communion  with  a
personal  God,  was  the  object  of  every  mystic,  and  belief  in  its  possi-
bility seems  to  have  been  coeval  with  the  genesis  of  humanity,  each
people  giving  it  another  name.  Thus  Plato  and  Plotinus  call  "Noetic
work  "  that  which  the  Yogin  and  the  Shrotriya  term  Vidya.

By  reflection,  self-knowledge  and  intellectual  discipline,  the  soul  can  be  raised
to  the  vision  of  eternal  truth,  goodness  and  beauty — that  is,  to  the  /  'ision  of  God—
this  is  the  epopteia,

said  the  Greeks,  and  Porphyry  adds:

To  unite  one's  soul  to  the  Universal  Soul  requires  but  a  perfectly  pure  mind.
Through  self-contemplation,  perfect  chastity,  and  purity  of  body,  we  may  approach
nearer  to  It,  and  receive,  in  that  Mate,  true  knowledge  and  wonderful  insight.

And  Svami  Dayanand  Sarasvati,  who  has  read  neither  Porphyry  nor
other  Greek  authors,  but  who  is  a  thorough  Yedic  scholar,  says  in  his
Veda  Bhashya:

•  In  a  series  of  articles  entitled  "The  World  fheosophists,"  we  intend  Viewing-  that  from

Pythagoras,  who  got  his  wisdom  in  India,  down  to  our  best  known  modern  philosophers  and  Theo-
sophi>t>  David  Hume,  Shelley,  and  tin-  Spiritists  of  France  included  main-  believed  and  yi  1  bi  lieve
in  metempsychosis,  or  reincarnation  of  the  soul,  however  unelaborated  the  system  of  the  Spiritists
may  be  considered.

266  A    MODERN   PANARION.

To  obtain  Diksha  (highest  initiations)  and  Yoga,  one  has  to  practise  according  to
the  rules.  .  .  .  The  soul  in  human  body  can  perform  the  greatest  wonders  by
knowing  the  Universal  Spirit  (or  God)  and  acquainting  itself  with  the  properties
and  qualities  (occult)  of  all  the  things  in  the  universe.  A  human  being  (a  Dikshita
or  initiate)  can  thus  acquire  a  power  of  seeing  and  hearing  at  great  distances.

Finally,  Alfred  R.  Wallace,  F.R.S.,  a  spiritualist  and  yet  a  confessedly
great  naturalist,  says,  with  brave  candour:

It  is  "spirit"  that  alone  feels,  and  perceives,  and  thinks — that  acquires  know-
ledge, and  reasons  and  aspires  .  .  .  there  not  unfrequently  occur  individuals  so
constituted  that  the  spirit  can  perceive  independently  of  the  corporeal  organs  of
sense,  or  can,  perhaps,  wholly  or  partially,  quit  the  body  for  a  time  and  return  to
it  again    .    .    .    the  spirit    .    .    .    communicates  with  spirit  easier  than  with  matter.

We  can  now  see  how,  after  thousands  of  years  have  intervened
between  the  age  of  the  Gymnosophists*  and  our  own  highly  civilized
era,  notwithstanding,  or,  perhaps,  just  because  of  such  an  enlighten-
ment which  pours  its  radiant  light  upon  the  psychological  as  well  as
upon  the  physical  realms  of  nature,  over  twenty  millions  of  people
to-day  believe,  under  a  different  form,  in  those  same  spiritual  powers,
that  were  believed  in  by  the  Yogins  and  the  Pythagoreans,  nearly  3,000

A

years  ago.  Thus,  while  the  Aryan  mystic  claimed  for  himself  the
power  of  solving  all  the  problems  of  life  and  death,  when  he  had  once
obtained  the  power  of  acting  independently  of  his  body,  through  the
Atma — "self,"  or  "soul";  and  the  old  Greeks  went  in  search  of  At  me
— the  Hidden  One,  or  the  God-Soul  of  man,  with  the  symbolical  mirror
of  the  Thesmophorian  mysteries;  so  the  Spiritualists  of  to-day  believe
in  the  faculty  of  the  spirits,  or  the  souls  of  the  disembodied  persons,  to
communicate  visibly  and   tangibly  with   those   they  loved   on   earth.

a  B     m

And  all  these,  Aryan  Yogins,  Greek  philosophers,  and  modern  Spiri-
tualists, affirm  that  possibility  on  the  ground  that  the  embodied  soul
and  its  never  embodied  spirit — the  real  se(/—3.re  not  separated  from
either  the  Universal  Soul  or  other  spirits  by  space,  but  merely  by  the
differentiation  of  their  qualities;  as  in  the  boundless  expanse  of  the
universe  there  can  be  no  limitation.     And  that  when  this  difference  is

A

once  removed — according  to  the  Greeks  and  Aryans  by  abstract  con-
templation, producing  the  temporary  liberation  of  the  imprisoned
soul;  and  according  to  Spiritualists,  through  mediumship — such  a
union  between  embodied  and  disembodied  spirits  becomes  possible.
Thus  was    it    that    Patanjali's   Yogins,  and,  following  in    their   steps,

*  The  reality  of  the  Yoga- power  was  affirmed  by  many  Greek  and  Roman  writers,  who  call  the
Yogins  Indian  Gymnosophists;  by  Strabo,  Lucan,  Plutarch,  Cicero,  Pliny,  etc.

WHAT   IS   THEOSOPHY?  267

Plotinus,  Porphyry  and  other  Neo-Platonists,  maintained  that  in  their
hours  of  ecstasy  they  had  been  united  to,  or  rather  become  as  one
with,  God,  several  times  during  the  course  of  their  lives.  This  idea,
erroneous  as  it  may  seem  in  its  application  to  the  Universal  Spirit,  was,
and  is,  claimed  by  too  many  great  philosophers  to  be  put  aside  as
entirely  chimerical.  In  the  case  of  the  Theodidaktoi,  the  only  con-
trovertible point,  the  dark  spot  on  this  philosophy  of  extreme  mysti-
cism, was  its  claim  to  include  that  which  is  simply  ecstatic  illumina-
tion under  the  head  of  sensuous  perception.  In  the  case  of  the  Yogins,
who  maintained  their  ability  to  see  Ishvara  "face  to  face,"  this  claim
was  successfully  overthrown  by  the  stern  logic  of  Kapila.  As  to  the
similar  assumption  made  for  their  Greek  followers,  for  a  long  array  of
Christian  ecstatics,  and,  finally,  for  the  last  two  claimants  to  "God-
seeing"  within  these  last  hundred  years — Jacob  Bohme  and  Swedenborg
— this  pretension  would  and  should  have  been  philosophically  and  logi-
cally questioned,  if  a  few  of  our  great  men  of  science  who  are  Spiri-
tualists had  had  more  interest  in  the  philosophy  than  in  the  mere
phenomenalism  of  Spiritualism.

The  Alexandrian  Theosophists  were  divided  into  neophytes,  ini-
tiates and  masters,  or  Hierophants;  and  their  rules  were  copied  from
the  ancient  Mysteries  of  Orpheus,  who,  according  to  Herodotus,
brought  them  from  India.  Ammonius  obliged  his  disciples  under  oath
not  to  divulge  his  higher  doctrines,  except  to  those  who  were  proved
thoroughly  worthy  and  initiated,  and  who  had  learned  to  regard  the
gods,  the  angels  and  the  demons  of  other  peoples,  according  to  the
esoteric  hypo  no/a,  or  under-meaning.     Epicurus  observes:

The  Gods  exist,  but  they  are  not  what  the  hoi  polloi,  the  uneducated  multitude,
suppose  them  to  be.  He  is  not  an  atheist  who  denies  the  existence  of  the  Gods
whom  the  multitude  worship,  but  he  is  such  who  fastens  on  these  gods  the  opinions
of  the  multitude.

In  his  turn,  Aristotle  declares  that  of  the

Divine  Essence  pervading  the  whole  world  of  nature,  what  are  styled  the  Gods
are  simply  the  first  principles.

Plotinus,  the  pupil  of  the  "God-taught"  Ammonius,  tells  us  that
the  secret  gnosis  or  the  knowledge  of  Theosophy,  has  three  degrees —
opinion,  science  and  illumination.

The  means  or  instalment  of  the  first  is  sense,  or  perception ;  of  the  second,  dia-
lectics;  of  the  third,  intuition.  To  the  last,  reason  is  subordinate;  ii  is  absolute
knowledge,  founded  on  the  identification  of  the  mind  with  the  object  known.

Theosophy  is  the  exact  science  of  psychology,  so  to  say;  it  stands  in

268  A    MODERN    PANARION.

relation  to  natural,  uncultivated  mediumship,  as  the  knowledge  of  a
Tyndall  stands  to  that  of  a  school-boy  in  physics.  It  develops  in  man
a  direct  beholding;  that  which  Schelling  denominates  "a  realization  of
the  identity  of  subject  and  object  in  the  individual" ;  so  that  under  the
influence  and  knowledge  of  hyponoia  man  thinks  divine  thoughts,  views
all  things  as  they  really  are,  and,  finally,  "becomes  recipient  of  the
Soul  of  the  World,"  to  use  one  of  the  finest  expressions  of  Emerson.
"I,  the  imperfect,  adore  my  own  perfect" — he  says  in  his  superb  Essay
on  The  Over-Soul.  Besides  this  psychological,  or  soul-state,  Theosophy
cultivated  every  branch  of  sciences  and  arts.  It  was  thoroughly  fami-
liar with  what  is  now  commonly  known  as  mesmerism.  Practical
theurgy  or  "ceremonial  magic,"  so  often  resorted  to  in  their  exorcisms
by  the  Roman  Catholic  clergy,  was  discarded  by  the  Theosophists.  It
is  but  Jamblichus  alone  who,  transcending  the  other  eclectics,  added
to  Theosophy  the  doctrine  of  Theurgy.  When  ignorant  of  the  true
meaning  of  the  esoteric  divine  symbols  of  nature,  man  is  apt  to  mis-
calculate the  powers  of  his  soul,  and,  instead  of  communing  spiritually
and  mentally  with  the  higher,  celestial  beings,  the  good  spirits  (the
gods  of  the  theurgists  of  the  Platonic  school),  he  will  unconsciously
call  forth  the  evil,  dark  powers  which  lurk  around  humanity — the  un-
dying, grim  creations  of  human  crimes  and  vices — and  thus  fall  from
thcurgia  (white  magic)  into  goetia  (or  black  magic,  sorcery).  Yet,
neither  white  nor  black  magic  are  what  popular  superstition  under-
stands by  the  terms.  The  possibility  of  "raising  a  spirit,"  according
to  the  key  of  Solomon,  is  the  height  of  superstition  and  ignorance.
Purity  of  deed  and  thought  can  alone  raise  us  to  an  intercourse  "with
the  gods,"  and  attain  for  us  the  goal  we  desire.  Alchemy,  believed  by
so  many  to  have  been  a  spiritual  philosophy  as  well  as  a  physical
science,  belonged  to  the  teachings  of  the  Theosophical  school.

It  is  a  noticeable  fact  that  neither  Zoroaster,  Buddha,  Orpheus,
Pythagoras,  Confucius,  Socrates,  nor  Ammonius  Saccas,  committed
anything  to  writing.  The  reason  for  it  is  obvious.  Theosophy  is  a
double-edged  weapon  and  unfit  for  the  ignorant  or  the  selfish.  L,ike
every  ancient  philosophy,  it  has  its  votaries  among  the  moderns;  but,
until  late  in  our  own  days,  its  disciples  were  few  in  number,  and  of  the
most  various  sects  and  opinions.

Entirely  speculative,  and  founding  no  schools,  they  have  still  exercised  a  silent
influence  upon  philosophy;  and  no  doubt,  when  the  time  arrives,  many  ideas  thus
silently  propounded  may  yet  give  new  directions  to  human  thought,

WHAT    IS   TIIKOSOPHY?  269

remarks  Mr.  Kenneth  R.  H.  Mackenzie,  IX°  .  .  .  himself  a  mystic
and  a  Theosophist,  in  his  large  and  valuable  work,  The  Royal  Masonic
Cyclopedia  (articles  "Theosophical  Society  of  New  York"  and  "Theo-
sophy,"  p.  731).*  Since  the  days  of  the  fire-philosophers,  they  had
never  formed  themselves  into  societies,  for,  tracked  like  wild  beasts  by
the  Christian  clergy,  to  be  known  as  a  Theosophist  often  amounted,
hardly  a  century  ago,  to  a  death-warrant.  The  statistics  show  that,
during  a  period  of  150  years,  no  less  than  90,000  men  and  women  were
burned  in  Europe  for  alleged  witchcraft.  In  Great  Britain  only,  from
a.d.  1640  to  1660,  but  twenty  years,  3,000  persons  were  put  to  death  for
compact  with  the  "Devil."  It  was  but  late  in  the  present  century — in
1875 — that  some  progressed  mystics  and  Spiritualists,  unsatisfied  with
the  theories  and  explanations  of  Spiritualism,  started  by  its  votaries,
and  finding  that  they  were  far  from  covering  the  whole  ground  of  the
wide  range  of  phenomena,  formed  at  New  York,  America,  an  associa-
tion which  is  now  widely  known  as  the  Theosophical  Society.  And
now,  having  explained  what  is  Theosophy,  we  will,  in  a  separate  article,
explain  what  is  the  nature  of  our  Society,  which  is  also  called  the
"Universal  Brotherhood  of  Humanit)7."

*  The  Royal  Masonic  Cyclopedia  of  History,  Rites,  Symbolism  and  Biography.  Edited  by  Kenneth
R.  H.  Mackenzie,  IX5  (Cryptonymus),  Hon.  Member  of  the  Canongate  Kilwinning  Lodge,  Xo.  2,
Scotland.     New  York:  J.  W.  Bouton,  706,  Broadway.     1877.

WHAT  ARE  THE  THEOSOPHISTS?

Are  they  what  they  claim  to  be — students  of  natural  law,  of  ancient
and  modern  philosophy,  and  even  of  exact  science?  Are  they  Deists,
Atheists,  Socialists,  Materialists,  or  Idealists;  or  are  they  but  a  schism
of  modern  Spiritualism — mere  visionaries?  Are  they  entitled  to  any
consideration,  as  capable  of  discussing  philosophy  and  promoting  real
science;  or  should  they  be  treated  with  the  compassionate  toleration
which  one  gives  to  "harmless  enthusiasts"?  The  Theosophical  Society
has  been  variously  charged  with  a  belief  in  "miracles"  and  "miracle-
working";  with  a  secret  political  object — like  the  Carbonari;  with
being  spies  of  an  autocratic  Czar;  with  preaching  socialistic  and  nihil-
istic doctrines;  and,  mirabilc  dictu,  with  having  a  covert  understanding
with  the  French  Jesuits,  to  disrupt  modern  Spiritualism  for  a  pecuniary
consideration!  With  equal  violence  they  have  been  denounced  as
dreamers,  by  the  American  Positivists;  as  fetish-worshippers,  by  some
of  the  New  York  press;  as  revivalists  of  "mouldy  superstitions,"  by
the  Spiritualists ;  as  infidel  emissaries  of  Satan,  by  the  Christian
Church;  as  the  very  types  of  "gobe-mouche,"  by  Prof.  W.  B.  Carpenter,
F.R.S.;  and,  finally,  and  most  absurdly,  some  Hindu  opponents,  with
a  view  to  lessening  their  influence,  have  flatly  charged  them  with  the
employment  of  demons  to  perform  certain  phenomena.  Out  of  all  this
pother  of  opinions,  one  fact  stands  conspicuous — the  Society,  its  mem-
bers, and  their  views,  are  deemed  of  enough  importance  to  be  discussed
and  denounced:  Men  slarider  only  those  whom  they  hate — or  fear.

But,  if  the  Society  has  had  its  enemies  and  traducers,  it  has  also  had
its  friends  and  advocates.  For  every  word  of  censure,  there  has  been
a  word  of  praise.  Beginning  with  a  party  of  about  a  dozen  earnest
men  and  women,  a  month  later  its  numbers  had  so  increased  as  to
necessitate  the  hiring  of  a  public  hall  for  its  meetings;  within  two
years  it  had  working  branches  in  European  countries.  Still  later,
it  found  itself  in  alliance  with  the  Indian  Arya  Samaj,  headed  by  the

WHAT   ARE   THE   THEOSOPHISTS?  27 1

learned  Pandit  Dayanand  Sarasvati  Svami,  and  the  Ceylonese  Buddh-
ists, under  the  erudite  H.  Sumangala,  High  Priest  of  Adam's  Peak  and
President  of  the  Vidyodaya  College,  Colombo.

He  who  would  seriously  attempt  to  fathom  the  psychological  sciences,
must  come  to  the  sacred  land  of  ancient  Aryavartta.  None  is  older
than  she  in  esoteric  wisdom  and  civilization,  however  fallen  may  be  her
poor  shadow — modern  India.  Holding  this  country,  as  we  do,  for  the
fruitful  hot-bed  whence  proceeded  all  subsequent  philosophical  systems,
to  this  source  of  all  psychology  and  philosophy  a  portion  of  our  Society
has  come  to  learn  its  ancient  wisdom  and  ask  for  the  impartation  of  its
weird  secrets.  Philology  has  made  too  much  progress  to  require  at
this  late  day  a  demonstration  of  this  fact  of  the  primogenitive  nation-
alky  of  Aryavartta.  The  unproved  and  prejudiced  hypothesis  of
modern  chronology  is  not  worthy  of  a  moment's  thought,  and  it  will
vanish  in  time  like  so  many  other  unproved  hypotheses.  The  line  of
philosophical  heredity,  from  Kapila  through  Epicurus  to  James  Mill;
from  Patanjali  through  Plotinus  to  Jacob  Bohme,  can  be  traced  like  the
course  of  a  river  through  a  landscape.  One  of  the  objects  of  the
Society's  organization  was  to  examine  the  too  transcendent  views  of
the  Spiritualists  in  regard  to  the  powers  of  disembodied  spirits;  and,
having  told  them  what,  in  our  opinion  at  least,  a  portion  of  their
phenomena  are  not,  it  will  become  incumbent  upon  us  now  to  show
what  they  are.  So  apparent  is  it  that  it  is  in  the  East,  and  especially
in  India,  that  the  key  to  the  alleged  "supernatural"  phenomena  of  the
Spiritualists  must  be  sought,  that  it  has  recently  been  conceded  in  the
Allahabad  Pioneer  (Aug.  nth,  1879),  an  Anglo-Indian  daily  journal
which  has  not  the  reputation  of  saying  what  it  does  not  mean.
Blaming  the  men  of  science  who,  "intent  upon  physical  discovery,  for
some  generations  have  been  too  prone  to  neglect  super-physical  inves-
tigation," it  mentions  "the  new  wave  of  doubt"  (Spiritualism)  which
has  "latterly  disturbed  this  conviction."  To  a  large  number  of  persons,
including  many  of  high  culture  and  intelligence,  it  adds,  "the  super-
natural has  again  asserted  itself  as  a  fit  subject  of  enquiry  and  research.
And  there  are  plausible  hypotheses  in  favour  of  the  idea  that  among
the  'sages'  of  the  East  .  .  .  there  maybe  found  in  a  higher  degree
than  among  the  more  modernized  inhabitants  of  the  West  traces  of
those  personal  peculiarities,  whatever  they  may  be,  which  are  required
as  a  condition  precedent  to  the  occurrence  of  supernatural  phenomena."
And  then,  unaware  that  the  cause  he  pleads  is  one  of  the  chief  aims

272  A    MODERN    PANARION.

and  objects  of  our  Society,  the  editorial  writer  remarks  that  it  is  "the
only  direction  in  which,  it  seems  to  us,  the  efforts  of  the  Theosophists
in  India  might  possibly  be  useful.  The  leading  members  of  the  Theo-
sophical  Society  in  India  are  known  to  be  very  advanced  students  of
occult  phenomena  already,  and  we  cannot  but  hope  that  their  pro-
fessions of  interest  in  Oriental  philosophy  .  .  .  may  cover  a  re-
served intention  of  carrying  out  explorations  of  the  kind  we  indicate."
While,  as  observed,  one  of  our  objects,  it  yet  is  but  one  of  many;  the
most  important  of  which  is  to  revive  the  work  of  Ammonius  Saccas,
and  make  various  nations  remember  that  they  are  the  children  "of  one
mother."  As  to  the  transcendental  side  of  the  ancient  Theosophy,  it
is  also  high  time  that  the  Theosophical  Society  should  explain.  With
how  much,  then,  of  this  nature-searching,  God-seeking  science  of  the

A

ancient  Aryan  and  Greek  mystics,  and  of  the  powers  of  modern  spiri-
tual mediumship,  does  the  Society  agree?  Our  answer  is:  With  it  all.
But  if  asked  what  it  believes  in,  the  reply  will  be:  "As  a  body —
nothing."  The  Society,  as  a  body,  has  no  creed,  as  creeds  are  but  the
shells  around  spiritual  knowledge;  and  Theosophy  in  its  fruition  is
spiritual  knowledge  itself — the  very  essence  of  philosophical  and
theistic  enquiry.  Visible  representative  of  Universal  Theosophy,  it
can  be  no  more  sectarian  than  a  Geographical  Society,  which  repre-
sents universal  geographical  exploration  without  caring  whether  the
explorers  be  of  one  creed  or  another.  The  religion  of  the  Society  is  an
algebraical  equation,  in  which  so  long  as  the  sign  of  equality  (  =  )  is  not
omitted,  each  member  is  allowed  to  substitute  quantities  of  his  own,
which  better  accord  with  climatic  and  other  exigencies  of  his  native
land,  with  the  idiosyncrasies  of  his  people,  or  even  with  his  own.
Having  no  accepted  creed,  our  Society  is  very  ready  to  give  and  take,
to  learn  and  teach,  by  practical  experimentation,  as  opposed  to  mere
passive  and  credulous  acceptance  of  enforced  dogma.  It  is  willing  to
accept  every  result  claimed  by  any  of  the  foregoing  schools  or  systems,
that  can  be  logically  and  experimentally  demonstrated.  Conversely,  it
can  take  nothing  on  mere  faith,  no  matter  by  whom  the  demand  may
be  made.

But  when  we  come  to  consider  ourselves  individually,  it  is  quite
another  thing.  The  Society's  members  represent  the  most  varied
nationalities  and  races,  and  were  born  and  educated  in  the  most  dis-
similar creeds  and  social  conditions.  Some  of  them  believe  in  one
thing,  others  in  another.     Some  incline  towards  the  ancient  magic,  or

WHAT    ARK   THE    TIIEOSOPIII.- .

273

secret  wisdom  that  was  taught  in  the  sanctuaries,  which  was  the  very
opposite  of  supernaturalism  or  diabolism ;  others  in  modern  spiritual-
ism, or  intercourse  with  the  spirits  of  the  dead;  still  others  in  mesmer-
ism or  animal  magnetism,  or  only  an  occult  dynamic  force  in  nature.
A  certain  number  have  scarcely  yet  acquired  any  definite  belief,  but
are  in  a  state  of  attentive  expectancy;  and  there  are  even  those  who
call  themselves  materialists,  in  a  certain  sense.    Of  atheists  and  bigoted
sectarians  of  any  religion,  there  are  none  in  the  Society;  for  the  very
fact  of  a  man's  joining  it  proves  that  he  is  in  search  of  the  final  truth
as  to   the  ultimate  essence  of  things.     If  there  be  such  a  thing  as  a
speculative  atheist,  which  philosophers  ma}-  deny,  he  would  have  to
reject  both  cause  and  effect,  whether  in  this  world  of  matter,  or  in  that
of  spirit.     There  may  be  members  who,  like  the  poet  Shelley,  have  let
their  imagination  soar  from  cause  to  prior  cause  ad  infinitum,  as  each
in  its  turn  became  logically  transformed  into  a  result  necessitating  a
prior  cause,  until  they  have  thinned  the  Eternal  into  a  mere  mist.     But
even  they  are  not  atheist  in  the  speculative  sense,  whether  they  identify
the  material  forces  of  the  universe  with  the  functions  with  which  the
theists  endow  their  God,  or  otherwise;  for  once  that  they  cannot  free
themselves  from  the  conception  of  the  abstract  ideal  of  power,  cause,
necessity,  and  effect,  they  can  be  considered  as  atheists  only  in  respect
to  a  personal  God,  and  not  to  the  Universal  Soul  of  the  pantheist.     On
the  other  hand  the  bigoted  sectarian,  fenced  in,  as  he  is,  with  a  creed
upon  every  paling  of  which  is  written  the  warning  "Xo  Thorough-
fare," can  neither  come  out  of  his  enclosure  to  join  the  Theosophical
Society,  nor,  if  he  could,  has  it  room  for  one  whose  very  religion  for-
bids examination.    The  very  root  idea  of  the  Society  is  free  and  fearless
investigation.

As  a  body,  the  Theosophical  Society  holds  that  all  original  thinkers
and  investigators  of  the  hidden  side  of  nature,  whether  materialists —
those  who  find  in  matter  "the  promise  and  potency  of  all  terrestrial
life,"  or  Spiritualists — that  is.  those  who  discover  in  spirit  the  source  of
all  energy  and  of  matter  as  well — were  and  are,  properly,  Theosophi-
For  to  be  one,  one  need  not  necessarily  recognize  the  existence  of
any  special  God  or  Deity.     One  need  but  worship  the  spirit  of  living
nature,  and  try  to  identify  oneself  with  it.     To  revere  that  Presence,  the
invisible  Cause,  which  is   yet  ever  manifesting  itself  in  its  incessant
results:  the  intangible,  omnipotent,  and  omnipresent  Proteus:  indiv
ible  in  its  Essence,  and  eluding  form,  yet  appearing  under  all  and  every

274  A   MODERN   PANARION.

form;  who  is  here  and  there,  and  everywhere  and  nowhere;  is  All,
and  Nothing;  ubiquitous  }ret  one;  the  Essence  filling,  binding,  bound-
ing, containing  everything;  contained  in  all.  It  will,  we  think,  be
seen  now,  that  whether  classed  as  theists,  pantheists  or  atheists,  such
men  are  near  kinsmen  to  the  rest.  Be  he  what  he  may,  once  that  a
student  abandons  the  old  and  trodden  highway  of  routine,  and  enters
upon  the  solitary  path  of  independent  thought — Godward — he  is  a
Theosophist;  an  original  thinker,  a  seeker  after  the  eternal  truth  with
"an  inspiration  of  his  own"  to  solve  the  universal  problems.

With  every  man  that  is  earnestly  searching  in  his  own  way  after  a
knowledge  of  the  Divine  Principle,  of  man's  relations  to  it,  and
nature's  manifestations  of  it,  Theosophy  is  allied.  It  is  likewise  the
ally  of  honest  science,  as  distinguished  from  much  that  passes  for  exact,
physical  science,  so  long  as  the  latter  does  not  poach  on  the  domains
of  psychology  and  metaphysics.

And  it  is  also  the  ally  of  every  honest  religion — to  wit,  a  religion
willing  to  be  judged  by  the  same  tests  as  it  applies  to  the  others.
Those  books,  which  contain  the  most  self-evident  truth,  are  to  it
inspired  (not  revealed).  But  all  books  it  regards,  on  account  of  the
human  element  contained  in  them,  as  inferior  to  the  Book  of  Nature;
to  read  which  and  comprehend  it  correctly,  the  innate  powers  of  the
soul  must  be  highly  developed.  Ideal  laws  can  be  perceived  by  the
intuitive  faculty  alone;  they  are  beyond  the  domain  of  argument  and
dialectics,  and  no  one  can  understand  or  rightly  appreciate  them
through  the  explanations  of  another  mind,  even  though  this  mind  be
claiming  a  direct  revelation.  And  as  this  Society,  which  allows  the
widest  sweep  in  the  realms  of  the  pure  ideal,  is  no  less  firm  in  the
sphere  of  facts,  its  deference  to  modern  science  and  its  just  representa-
tives is  sincere.  Despite  all  their  lack  of  a  higher  spiritual  intuition,
the  world's  debt  to  the  representatives  of  modern  physical  science  is
immense;  hence,  the  Society  endorses  heartily  the  noble  and  indignant
protest  of  that  gifted  and  eloquent  preacher,  the  Rev.  O.  B.  Frothiug-
ham,  against  those  who  try  to  undervalue  the  services  of  our  great
naturalists.  "Talk  of  Science  as  being  irreligious,  atheistic,"  he  ex-
claimed in  a  recent  lecture,  delivered  at  New  York,  "Science  is  creating
a  new  idea  of  God.  It  is  due  to  Science  that  we  have  any  conception
at  all  of  a  living  God.  If  we  do  not  become  atheists  one  of  these  days
under  the  maddening  effect  of  Protestantism,  it  will  be  due  to  Science,
because  it  is  disabusing  us  of  hideous  illusions  that  tease  and  embar-

WHAT    AKK    THE    TIIEOSOPHISTS?  275

rass  us,  and  putting  us  in  the  way  of  knowing  how  to  reason  about  the
things  we  see.     .     .     ."

And  it  is  also  due  to  the  unremitting  labours  of  such  Orientalists  as
Sir  W.  Jones,  Max  Midler,  Burnouf,  Colebrooke,  Haug,  St.  Hilaire,  and
so  many  others,  that  the  Society,  as  a  body,  feels  equal  respect  and
veneration  for  Vedic,  Buddhist,  Zoroastrian,  and  other  old  religions  of
the  world;  and  a  like  brotherly  feeling  toward  its  Hindu,  Sinhalese,
Parsi,  Jain,  Hebrew  and  Christian  members  as  individual  students  of
"self,"  of  nature,  and  of  the  divine  in  nature.

Born  in  the  United  States  of  America,  the  Society  was  constituted
on  the  model  of  its  Mother  Land.  The  latter,  omitting  the  name  of
God  from  its  constitution  lest  it  should  afford  a  pretext  one  day  to
make  a  state  religion,  gives  absolute  equality  to  all  religions  in  its  laws.
All  support  and  each  is  in  turn  protected  by  the  State.  The  Society,
modelled  upon  this  constitution,  may  fairly  be  termed  a  "Republic  of
Conscience."

We  have  now,  we  think,  made  clear  why  our  members,  as  individuals,
are  free  to  stay  outside  or  inside  any  creed  they  please,  provided  the}'
do  not  pretend  that  none  but  themselves  shall  enjoy  the  privilege  of
conscience,  and  try  to  force  their  opinions  upon  the  others.  In  this
respect  the  rules  of  the  Society  are  very  strict.  It  tries  to  act  upon
the  wisdom  of  the  old  Buddhistic  axiom,  "Honour  thine  own  faith,  and
do  not  slander  that  of  others";  echoed  back  in  our  present  century,  in
the  "Declaration  of  Principles"  of  the  Brahma  Samaj,  which  so  nobly
states  that  "no  sect  shall  be  vilified,  ridiculed,  or  hated."  In  Section
VI  of  the  Revised  Rules  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  recently  adopted
in  General  Council,  at  Bombay,  is  this  mandate:

It  is  not  lawful  for  any  officer  of  the  Parent  Society  to  express,  by  word  or  act.
any  hostility  to,  or  preference  for,  any  one  section  (sectarian  division,  or  group
within  the  Society)  more  than  another.  All  must  be  regarded  and  treated  as  equally
the  objects  of  the  Society's  solicitude  and  exertions.  All  have  an  equal  right  to
have  the  essential  features  of  their  religious  belief  laid  before  the  tribunal  of  an
impartial  world.

In  their  individual  capacity,  members  may,  when  attacked,  occasion-
ally break  this  rule,  but,  nevertheless,  as  officers,  they  are  restrained,
and  the  rule  is  strictly  enforced  during  the  meetings.  For  above  all
human  sects  stands  Theosophy  in  its  abstract  sense;  Theosophy,  which
is  too  wide  for  any  of  them  to  contain,  but  which  easily  contains  them.

In  conclusion,  we  may  state  that,  broader  and  far  more  universal  in
its  views  than  any  existing  mere  scientific  Society,  it  has  plus  science

276

A    MODERN    PANARION.

its  belief  in  every  possibility,  and  determined  will  to  penetrate  into
those  unknown  spiritual  regions  which  exact  science  pretends  that  its
votaries  have  no  business  to  explore.  And,  it  has  one  quality  more
than  any  religion,  in  that  it  makes  no  difference  between  Gentile,  Jew,
or  Christian.  It  is  in  this  spirit  that  the  Society  has  been  established
upon  the  footing  of  a  Universal  Brotherhood.

Unconcerned  about  politics,  and  all  political  organizations,  the  Society
cares  but  little  about  the  outward  human  management  of  the  material
world.  The  whole  of  its  aspirations  are  directed  towards  the  occult
truths  of  the  visible  and  invisible  worlds.  Whether  the  physical  man
be  under  the  rule  of  an  empire  or  a  republic,  concerns  only  the  man
of  matter.  His  body  may  be  enslaved;  as  to  his  soul,  he  has  the  right
to  give  to  his  rulers  the  proud  answer  of  Socrates  to  his  judges.  They
have  no  sway  over  the  inner  man.

Such,  then,  is  the  Theosophical  Society,  and  such  its  principles,  its
multifarious  aims,  and  its  objects.  Need  we  wonder  at  the  past  mis-
conceptions of  the  general  public,  and  the  easy  hold  the  enemy  has
been  able  to  find  to  lower  it  in  the  public  estimation.  The  true  student
has  ever  been  a  recluse,  a  man  of  silence  and  meditation.  With  the
busy  world  his  habits  and  tastes  are  so  little  in  common  that,  while  he
is  studying,  his  enemies  and  slanderers  have  undisturbed  opportunities.
But  time  cures  all,  and  lies  are  but  ephemera.     Truth  alone  is  eternal.

About  a  few  of  the  Fellows  of  the  Society  who  have  made  great
scientific  discoveries,  and  some  others  to  whom  the  psychologist  and
the  biologist  are  indebted  for  the  new  light  thrown  upon  the  darker
problems  of  the  inner  man,  we  will  speak  later  on.  Our  object  now
was  but  to  prove  to  the  reader  that  Theosophy  is  neither  "a  new-fangled
doctrine,"  a  political  cabal,  nor  one  of  those  societies  of  enthusiasts
which  are  born  to-day  but  to  die  to-morrow.  That  not  all  of  its
members  can  think  alike,  is  proved  by  the  Society  being  organized
in  two  great  divisions — the  Eastern  and  the  Western — and  the  latter
being  divided  into  numerous  sections,  according  to  races  and  religious
views.  One  man's  thought,  infinitely  various  as  are  its  manifestations,
is  not  all-embracing.  Denied  ubiquity,  it  must  necessarily  speculate
but  in  one  direction;  and  once  transcending  the  boundaries  of  exact
human  knowledge,  it  has  to  err  and  wander,  for  the  ramifications  of  the
one  central  and  absolute  Truth  are  infinite.  Hence,  we  occasionally
find  even  the  greater  philosophers  losing  themselves  in  the  labyrinths
of  speculation,  thereby  provoking  the  criticism  of  posterity.     But  as

WHAT    ARE    THE    TIIEOSOPHISTS?  277

all  work  for  one  and  the  same  object,  namely  the  disenthralment  of
human  thought,  the  elimination  of  superstitions,  and  the  discovery
of  truth,  all  are  equally  welcome.  The  attainment  of  these  objects,
all  agree,  can  best  be  secured  by  convincing  the  reason  and  warming
the  enthusiasm  of  the  generation  of  fresh  young  minds  that  are  just
ripening  into  maturity,  and  making  ready  to  take  the  place  of  their
prejudiced  and  conservative  fathers.  And,  as  each — the  great  ones  as
well  as  small — have  trodden  the  royal  road  to  knowledge,  we  listen  to
all,  and  take  both  small  and  great  into  our  fellowship.  For  no  honest
searcher  comes  back  empty-handed,  and  even  he  who  has  enjoyed  the
least  share  of  popular  favour  can  lay  at  least  his  mite  upon  the  one  altar
of  Truth.

ANTIQUITY    OF  THE   YEDAS.

[Vol.  I.  No.  i,  October,  1879.]

A  journal  interested  like  The  Thcosophist  in  the  explorations  of
archaeology  and  archaic  religions,  as  well  as  the  study  of  the  occult  in
nature,  has  to  be  doubly  prudent  and  discreet.  To  bring  the  two  con-
flicting elements — exact  science  and  metaphysics — into  direct  contact,
might  create  as  great  a  disturbance  as  to  throw  a  piece  of  potassium
into  a  basin  of  water.  The  very  fact  that  we  are  predestined  and
pledged  to  prove  that  some  of  the  wisest  of  Western  scholars  have
been  misled  by  the  dead  letter  of  appearances,  and  that  they  are  unable
to  discover  the  hidden  spirit  in  the  relics  of  old,  places  us  under  the
ban  from  the  first.  With  those  sciolists  who  are  neither  broad  enough
nor  sufficiently  modest  to  allow  their  decisions  to  be  reviewed,  we  are
necessarily  in  antagonism.  Therefore  it  is  essential  that  our  position  in
relation  to  certain  scientific  hypotheses,  perhaps  tentative  and  only  sanc-
tioned for  want  of  better  ones,  should  be  clearly  defined  at  the  outset.

An  infinitude  of  study  has  been  bestowed  by  the  archaeologists  and
the  Orientalists  upon  the  question  of  chronology,  especially  in  regard
to  comparative  theology.  So  far  their  affirmations  as  to  the  relative
antiquity  of  the  great  religions  of  the  pre-Christian  era  are  little  more
than  plausible  hypotheses.  How  far  back  the  national  and  religious
Vedic  period,  so-called,  extends,  "it  is  impossible  to  tell,"  confesses
Prof.  Max  Miiller;  nevertheless  he  traces  it  "to  a  period  anterior  to
1000  B.C.,"  and  brings  us  to  "1100  or  1200  B.C.,  as  the  earliest  time  when
we  may  suppose  the  collection  of  the  Vedic  hymns  to  have  been
finished."  Nor  do  any  other  of  our  leading  scholars  claim  to  have
finally  settled  the  vexed  question,  especially  delicate  as  it  is  in  its  bear-
ing upon  the  chronology  of  the  book  of  Gaicsis.  Christianity,  the
direct  outflow  of  Judaism  and  in  most  cases  the  state  religion  of  their
respective  countries,  has  unfortunately  stood  in  their  way.  Hence
scarcely  two  scholars  agree;   and  each  assigns  a  different  date  to  the

ANTIQUITY   OF  THE    VI- DAS.  279

Vedas  and  the  Mosaic  books,  taking  care  in  every  case  to  give  the
latter  the  benefit  of  the  doubt.      Even   that  leader  of  the  leaders  in
philological  and  chronological  questions,  Prof.  Miiller.  hardly  twenty
years  ago  allowed  himself  a  prudent  margin  by  stating  that  it  will  lie-
difficult   to   settle   "whether   the  Veda   'is   the  oldest  of   books,'   and
whether  some  of  the  portions  of  the  Old  Testament  may  not  be  traced
back  to  the  same  or  even  an  earlier  date  than  the  oldest  hymns  of  the
Veda."      The  Theosophist  is,  therefore,  quite  warranted  in  either  adopt-
ing or  rejecting  as  it  pleases  the  so-called  authoritative  chronology  of
science.      Do   we  err,   then,   in   confessing  that  we    rather   incline   to
accept  the  chronology  of  that  renowned  Vedic  scholar,  Svami  Daya-
nand  Sarasvati,  who  unquestionably  knows  what  he  is  talking  about,
has  the   four  Vedas  by  heart,  is  perfectly  familiar  with  all  Sanskrit
literature,  has  no  such  scruples  as  the  Western  Orientalists  in  regard
to  public  feelings,  nor  desire  to  humour  the  superstitious  notions  of
the  majority,  nor  has  any  object  to  gain  in  suppressing  facts.     We  are
only  too  conscious  of  the  risk  in  withholding  our  adulation  from  scien-
tific authorities.     Yet,  with  the  common  temerity  of  the  heterodox,  we
must  take  our  course,  even  though,  like  the  Tarpe'ia  of  old,  we  be
smothered   under  a  heap   of  shields,  a  shower  of  learned  quotations
from  those  "authorities."     We  are  far  from  feeling  ready  to  adopt  the
absurd  chronology  of  a  Berosus  or  even   Syncellus,  though   in  truth
they  appear  absurd  only  in   the   light   of    our   preconceptions.      But
between  the  extreme  claims  of   the   Brahmans  and   the  ridiculously
short  periods  conceded  by  our  Orientalists  for  the  development  and  full
growth  of  that  gigantic  literature  of  the  ante-Mahabharatan  period,
there  ought  to  be  a  just  mean.      While  Svami    Day  an  and   Sarasvati
asserts  that:   "The  Vedas  have  now  ceased  to  be  objects  of  study  for
nearly  5,000  years,"  and  places  the  first  appearance  of  the  four  Vedas
at  an  immense  antiquity;  Prof.  Miiller,  assigning  for  the  composition
of  even  the  earliest  among  the  Brahmanas,  the  years  from  about  1000
to  800  B.C.,  hardly  dares,  as  we  have  seen,  to  place  the  collection  and
the  original  composition  of  the  Sanhita,  of  Rig  Vedic  hymns,  earlier
than  1200  to  1500  before  our  era!*-     Whom  ought  we  to  believe,  and
which  of  the  two  is  the  better  informed?     Cannot  this  gap  of  several
thousand  years  be  closed,  or  would  it  be  equally  difficult  for  either  of
the  two  cited  authorities  to  give  data  which  would  be  regarded  by
science  as  thoroughly  convincing?

Chips  from  a  German  \\'<<t  <  tureon  Hi,-  Vedas,  p.  11.

2SO  A    MODERN    PANARION.

It  is  as  easy  to  reach  a  false  conclusion  by  the  modern  inductive
method  as  to  assume  false  premises  from  which  to  make  deductions.
Doubtless  Prof.  Max  Miiller  has  good  reasons  for  arriving  at  his  chro-
nological conclusions.  But  so  has  Dayanand  Sarasvati  Pandit.  The
gradual  modifications,  development,  and  growth  of  the  Sanskrit  lan-
guage are  sure  guides  enough  for  an  expert  philologist.  But  that  there
is  a  possibility  of  his  having  been  led  into  error  would  seem  to  suggest
itself  upon  considering  a  certain  argument  brought  forward  by  Svami
Dayanand.  Our  respected  friend  and  teacher  maintains  that  both  Prof.
Miiller  and  Dr.  Wilson  have  been  solely  guided  in  their  researches  and
conclusion  by  the  inaccurate  and  untrustworthy  commentaries  of
Sayana,  Mahidara  and  Uvata;  commentaries  which  differ  diametrically
from  those  of  a  far  earlier  period  as  used  by  himself  in  connection  with
his  great  work,  the  Veda  Bhashya.  A  cry  was  raised  at  the  outset  of
this  publication  that  Svami's  commentary  is  calculated  to  refute  Sayana
and  the  English  interpreters.     Pandit  Dayanand  very  justly  remarks:

For  this  I  cannot  be  blamed;  if  Sayana  has  erred  and  the  Engiish  interpreters
have  chosen  to  take  him  as  their  guide,  the  delusion  cannot  be  long  maintained.
Truth  alone  can  stand,  and  falsehood  must  fall.*

And  if,  as  he  claims,  his  Veda  Bhashya  is  entirely  founded  on  the  old
commentaries  of  the  ante-Mahabharatan  period  to  which  the  Western
scholars  have  had  no  access,  then,  since  his  were  the  surest  guides  of
the  two  classes,  we  cannot  hesitate  to  follow  him  rather  than  the  best
of  our  European  Orientalists.

But,  apart  from  such  prima  facie  evidence,  we  would  respectfully
request  Prof.  Max  Miiller  to  solve  us  a  riddle.  Propounded  by  himself,
it  has  puzzled  us  for  over  twenty  years,  and  pertains  as  much  to  simple
logic  as  to  the  chronology  in  question.  Clear  and  undeviating,  like
the  Rhone  through  the  Geneva  lake,  the  idea  runs  through  the  course
of  his  lectures,  from  the  first  volume  of  Chips  down  to  his  last  dis-
course. We  will  try  to  explain.  All  who  have  followed  his  lectures
as  attentively  as  ourselves  will  remember  that  Prof.  Max  Miiller  attri-
butes the  wealth  of  myths,  symbols  and  religious  allegories  in  the
Vedic  hymns,  as  in  Grecian  mythology,  to  the  early  worship  of  nature
by  man.     To  quote  his  words :

In  the  hymns  of  the  Veda,  we  see  man  left  to  himself  to  solve  the  riddle  of  this
world.  .  .  .  He  is  awakened  from  darkness  and  slumber  by  the  light  of  the
sun,  and  him  whom  his  eyes  cannot  behold,  and  who  seems  to  grant  him  the  daily

*  Answer  to  the  Objections  to  the  Veda  Bhashya.

ANTIQUITY    OF   THE   VEDAS.  2Sl

pittance  of  his  existence  he  calls  "his  life,  his  breath,  his  brilliant  Lord  and  Pro-
tor."     He  gives  names  to  all  the  powers  of  nature,  and  after  he  has  called  the
fire  "Agni,"  the  sunlight  "Indra,"  the  storms  "Maruts,"  and  the  dawn  "Ushas,"
the)  all  seem  to  grow  naturally  into  beings  like  himself,  nay,  greater  than  himself.*

This  definition  of  the  mental  state  of  primitive  man,  in  the  days  of
the  vers7  infancy  of  humanity,  and  when  hardly  ont  of  its  cradle,  is —
perfect.  The  period  to  which  he  attributes  these  effusions  of  an
infantile  mind  is  the  Vedic  period,  and  the  time  which  separates  us
from  it  is,  as  claimed  above,  3,000  years.  So  much  impressed  seems
the  great  philologist  with  this  idea  of  the  mental  feebleness  of  mankind
at  the  time  when  these  hymns  were  composed  by  the  most  venerable
Rishis,  that  in  his  Introduction  to  the  Science  of  Religion  (p.  278)  we  find
the  Professor  saying:

Do  you  still  wonder  at  polytheism  or  at  mythology?  Why,  they  are  inevitable.
They  are,  if  you  like,  a  parley  enfantin  of  religion.  But  the  world  has  its  child-
hood, and  when  it  was  a  child  it  spoke  as  a  child  \nota  bene,  3,000  years  ago],  it
understood  as  a  child,  it  thought  as  a  child.  .  .  .  The  fault  rests  with  us  if  we
insist  on  taking  the  language  of  children  for  the  language  of  men.     .     .     .

.  .  .  The  language  of  antiquity  is  the  language  of  childhood  .  .  .  The
parler  enfantin  in  religion  is  not  extinct  .  .  .  as,  for  instance,  the  religion  of
India.

Having  read  thus  far  we  pause  and  think.  At  the  very  close  of  this
able  explanation  we  meet  with  a  tremendous  difficulty,  the  idea  of
which  must  have  never  occurred  to  the  able  advocate  of  the  ancient
faiths.  To  one  familiar  with  the  writings  and  ideas  of  this  Oriental
scholar,  it  would  seem  the  height  of  absurdity  to  suspect  him  of
accepting  the  biblical  chronology  of  6,000  years  since  the  appearance
•of  the  first  man  upon  earth  as  the  basis  of  his  calculations.  And  yet
the  recognition  of  such  chronology  is  inevitable  if  we  have  to  accept
Prof.  Midler's  reasons  at  all;  for  here  we  run  against  a  purely  arith-
metical and  mathematical  obstacle,  a  gigantic  miscalculation  of  pro-
portion.

No  one  can  deny  that  the  growth  and  development  of  mankind —
mental  as  well  as  physical — must  be  analogically  measured  by  the
growth  and  development  of  man.  An  anthropologist,  if  he  cares  to  go
beyond  the  simple  consideration  of  the  relations  of  man  to  other  mem-
bers of  the  animal  kingdom,  has  to  be  in  a  certain  way  a  physiologist
as  well  as  an  anatomist;  for,  as  much  as  ethnology,  his  is  a  progressive
science,  which  can  be  well  treated  but  by  those  who  are  able  to  follow

Chips  from  a  German  Workshop!  vol.  i.  p.  68.

282  A    MODERN    PANARION.

up  retrospectively  the  regular  unfolding  of  human  faculties  and  powers,
assigning  to  each  a  certain  period  of  life.  Thus  no  one  would  regard
a  skull  in  which  the  wisdom-tooth,  so-called,  should  be  apparent,  as  the
skull  of  an  infant.  Now,  according  to  geology,  recent  researches,
Prof.  W.  Draper  tells  us :

Give  good  reasons  to  believe  that  under  low  and  base  grades  the  existence  of  man
can  be  traced  back  into  the  tertiary  times.  In  the  old  glacial  drift  of  Scotland  the
relics  of  man  are  found  along  with  those  of  the  fossil  elephant.

Now,  the  best  calculations,  so  far,  assign  a  period  of  240,000  years
since  the  beginning  of  the  last  glacial  period.  Making  a  proportion
between  240,000  years — the  least  age  we  can  accord  to  the  human  race
— and  the  twenty-four  years  of  a  man's  life,  we  find  that  3,000  years
ago,  or  the  period  of  the  composition  of  the  Vedic  hymns,  mankind
would  be  just  twenty-one,  the  legal  age  of  majority,  and  certainly  a
period  at  which  man  ceases  using,  if  he  ever  will,  the  "parler
enfantin,"  or  childish  lisping.  But,  according  to  the  views  of  the
lecturer,  it  follows  that  man  was,  3,000  years  ago,  at  twenty-one,  a
foolish  and  undeveloped — though  a  very  promising — infant,  and  at
twenty-four  has  become  the  brilliant,  acute,  learned,  highly  analytical
and  philosophical  man  of  the  nineteenth  century.  Or,  still  keeping
our  equation  in  view,  in  other  words,  the  Professor  might  as  well  say
that  an  individual  who  was  a  nursing  baby  at  12  noon,  on  a  certain  day,
would  at  12.20  p.m.  on  the  same  day  have  become  an  adult,  speaking
high  wisdom  instead  of  his  "parler  enfantin!"

It  really  seems  the  duty  of  the  eminent  Sankritist  and  Lecturer  on
Comparative  Theology  to  get  out  of  this  dilemma.  Either  the  Rig
Veda  hymns  were  composed  but  3,000  years  ago,  and,  therefore,  cannot
be  expressed  in  the  "language  of  childhood" — man  having  lived  in
the  glacial  period — but  the  generation  which  composed  them  must
have  been  composed  of  adults,  presumably  as  philosophical  and  scien-
tific in  the  knowledge  of  their  day  as  we  are  in  our  own;  or  we  have
to  ascribe  to  them  an  immense  antiquity  in  order  to  carry  them  back
to  the  days  of  man's  mental  infancy.  And  in  this  latter  case,  Prof.
Max  Miiller  will  have  to  withdraw  a  previous  remark,  expressing  the
doubt

Whether  some  of  the  portions  of  the  Old  Testament  may  not  be  traced  back  to-
the  same  or  even  an  earlier  date  than  the  oldest  hymns  of  the  Vedas.

PERSIAN  ZOROASTRIANISM  AND
RUSSIAN    VANDALISM.

[Vol.  I.  No.  I,  October,  1879.]

Few  persons  are  capable  of  appreciating  the  truly  beautiful  and
aesthetic;  fewer  still  of  revering  those  monumental  relics  of  bygone
ages,  which  prove  that  even  in  the  remotest  epochs  mankind  wor-
shipped a  Supreme  Power,  and  people  were  moved  to  express  their
abstract  conceptions  in  works  which  should  defy  the  ravages  of  time.
The  Vandals — whether  Slavic  Wends,  or  some  barbarous  nation  of
Germanic  race — came  at  all  events  from  the  North.  A  recent  occur-
rence is  calculated  to  make  us  regret  that  Justinian  did  not  destroy  them
all;  for  it  appears  that  there  are  still  left  in  the  North  worthy  scions
of  those  terrible  destroyers  of  monuments  of  arts  and  sciences,  in  the
persons  of  certain  Russian  merchants  who  have  just  perpetrated  an  act
of  inexcusable  Vandalism.  According  to  the  late  Russian  papers,  the
Moscow  arch-millionaire,  Kokoref,  with  his  Tiflis  partner  the  Armenian
Croesus,  Mirzoef,  is  desecrating  and  about  to  totally  destroy  the  oldest
relic  in  the  world  of  Zoroastrianism — the  "Attesh-Gag"  of  Baku.

Few  foreigners,  and  perhaps  as  few  Russians,  know  anything  of  this
venerable  sanctuary  of  the  fire-worshippers  beside  the  Caspian  Sea.
About  twenty  versts  from  the  small  town  of  Baku  in  the  valley  of
Apsheron  in  Russian  Georgia,  and  among  the  barren,  desolated  steppes
of  the  shores  of  the  Caspian,  there  stands — alas!  rather  stood,  but  a
few  months  ago — a  strange  structure,  something  between  a  mediaeval
cathedral  and  a  fortified  castle.  It  was  built  in  unknown  ages,  and  by
builders  as  unknown.  Over  an  area  of  somewhat  more  than  a  square
mile,  a  tract  known  as  the  Fiery  Field,  upon  which  the  structure
stands,  if  one  but  digs  from  two  to  three  inches  into  the  sandy  earth,
and  applies  a  lighted  match,  a  jet  of  fire  will  stream  up,  as  if  from  a
spout*     The  "Guebre  Temple,"  as  the  building  is  sometimes  termed,

•  A  bluish  flame  is  seen  to  arise  then-,  but  this  fire  does  not  1  onsumi  .  "an  1  if  a  \><  rson  finds  him-
self in  the  middle  of  it,  he  is  not  sensible  of  any  warmth."- -Sec  Kinneir's  In  ria,  p.  ;,s.

284  A   MODERN    PANARION.

is  carved  out  of  one  solid  rock.  It  is  an  enormous  square  enclosed  by-
crenelated  walls,  and  at  the  centre  of  the  square,  a  high  tower,  also
rectangular,  resting  upon  four  gigantic  pillars.  The  latter  were  pierced
vertically  down  to  the  bed-rock  and  the  cavities  were  continued  up  to
the  battlements  where  they  opened  out  into  the  atmosphere;  thus  form-
ing continuous  tubes  through  which  the  inflammable  gas  stored  up  in
the  heart  of  the  mother  rock  was  conducted  to  the  top  of  the  tower.
This  tower  has  been  for  centuries  a  shrine  of  the  fire-worshippers,  and
bears  the  symbolical  representation  of  the  trident — called  tirsut.  All
around  the  interior  face  of  the  external  wall  are  excavated  the  cells,
about  twenty  in  number,  which  served  as  habitations  for  past  genera-
tions of  Zoroastrian  recluses.  Under  the  supervision  of  a  High
Mobed,  here,  in  the  silence  of  their  isolated  cloisters,  they  studied  the
Avesfa,  the  Vendiddd,  the  Yaskna — especially  the  latter,  it  seems,  as
the  rocky  walls  of  the  cells  are  inscribed  with  a  greater  number  of
quotations  from  the  sacred  songs.  Under  the  tower-altar  three  huge
bells  were  hung.  A  legend  says  that  the}*  were  miraculously  produced
by  a  holy  traveller,  in  the  tenth  century,  during  the  Mussulman  perse-
cution, to  warn  the  faithful  of  the  approach  of  the  enemy.  But  a  few
weeks  ago  the  tall  tower-altar  was  yet  ablaze  with  the  same  flame  that
local  tradition  affirms  had  been  kindled  thirty  centuries  ago.  At  the
horizontal  orifices  in  the  four  hollow  pillars  burned  four  perpetual
fires,  fed  uninterruptedly  from  the  inexhaustible  subterranean  reser-
voir. From  every  merlon  on  the  walls,  as  well  as  from  even-  embra-
sure, flashed  forth  a  radiant  light,  like  so  many  tongues  of  fire;  and
even  the  large  porch  overhanging  the  main  entrance  was  encircled  by
a  garland  of  fiery  stars,  the  lambent  lights  shooting  forth  from  smaller
and  narrower  orifices.  It  was  amid  these  impressive  surroundings  that
the  Guebre  recluses  used  to  send  up  their  daily  prayers,  meeting  under
the  open  tower-altar;  every  face  reverentially  turned  toward  the  setting
sun,  as  they  united  their  voices  in  a  parting  evening  hymn.  And  as
the  luminary — the  "Eye  of  Ahura-mazda" — sank  lower  and  lower
down  the  horizon,  their  voices  grew  lower  and  softer,  until  the  chant
sounded  like  a  plaintive  and  subdued  murmur.  ...  A  last  flash —
and  the  sun  is  gone;  and  as  darkness  follows  daylight  almost  suddenly
in  these  regions,  the  departure  of  the  Deity's  symbol  was  the  signal  for
a  general  illumination,  unrivalled  even  by  the  greatest  fireworks  at
regal  festivals.  The  whole  field  seemed  nightly  like  one  blazing
prairie.     .     .     .

PERSIAN    ZOROASTRIAMS.M    AND    RUSSIAN    VANDALISM.  285

Till  about  1S40,  Attesh-Gag  was  the  chief  rendezvous  for  all  the
fire-worshippers  of  Persia.  Thousands  of  pilgrims  came  and  went;
for  no  true  Guebre  could  die  happy  unless  he  had  performed  the
sacred  pilgrimage  at  least  once  during  his  lifetime.  A  traveller —
Koch — who  visited  the  cloister  about  that  time,  found  in  it  but  five
Zoroastrians,  with  their  pupils.  In  1878,  about  fourteen  mouths  ago,
a  lady  of  Tifiis,  who  visited  the  Attesh-Gag,  mentioned  in  a  private
letter  that  she  found  there  but  one  solitary  hermit,  who  emerges  from
his  cell  but  to  meet  the  rising  and  salute  the  departing  sun.  And  now,
hardly  a  year  later,  we  find  in  the  papers  that  Messrs.  Kokoref  and  Co.
are  busy  erecting  on  the  Fiery  Field  enormous  buildings  for  the  refining
of  petroleum!  All  the  cells  but  the  one  occupied  by  the  poor  old
hermit,  half  ruined  and  dirty  beyond  expression,  are  inhabited  by  the
firm's  workmen;  the  altar  over  which  blazed  the  sacred  flame  is  now
piled  high  with  rubbish,  mortar  and  mud,  and  the  flame  itself  turned
off  in  another  direction.  The  bells  are  now,  during  the  periodical
visits  of  a  Russian  priest,  taken  down  and  suspended  in  the  porch  of
the  superintendent's  house;  heathen  relics  being  as  usual  used — though
abused — by  the  religion  which  supplants  the  previous  worship.  And
all  looks  like  the  abomination  of  desolation.  .  .  .  "It  is  a  matter
of  surprise  to  me,"  writes  a  Baku  correspondent  in  the  Sf.  Petersburg
Viedomosti,  who  was  the  first  to  send  the  unwelcome  news,  "that  the
trident,  the  sacred  tirsut  itself,  has  not  as  yet  been  put  to  some  appro-
priate use  in  the  new  firm's  kitchen!  .  .  .  Is  it  then  so  absolutely
necessary  that  the  millionaire  Kokoref  should  desecrate  the  Zoroastrian
cloister,  which  occupies  such  a  trifling  compound  in  comparison  to  the
space  allotted  to  his  manufactories  and  stores?  And  shall  such  a
remarkable  relic  of  antiquity  be  sacrificed  to  commercial  greediness
which  can  after  all  neither  lose  nor  gain  one  single  rouble  by  destroy-
ing it?"

It  must,  apparently,  since  Messrs.  Kokoref  and  Co.  have  rented  the
whole  field  from  the  Government,  which  seems  to  feel  quite  indifferent
to  this  idiotic  and  useless  Vandalism.  It  is  now  more  than  twenty
years  since  I  visited  Attesh-Gag  for  the  last  time.  In  those  days
besides  a  small  group  of  recluses,  it  had  the  visits  of  many  pilgrims.
And  since  it  is  more  than  likely  that  ten  years  hence  people  will  h
no  more  of  it,  I  may  give  a  few  more  details  of  its  history.  Our  IVirsi
friends  will,  I  am  sure,  feel  an  interest  in  a  few  legends  gathered  by
me  on  the  spot.

286  A   MODERN   PANARION.

A  veil  seems  to  be  drawn  over  the  origin  of  Attesh-Gag.  Historical
data  are  scarce  and  contradictory.  With  the  exception  of  some  old
Armenian  chronicles  which  mention  it  incidentally  as  having  existed
before  Christianity  was  brought  into  the  country  by  St.  Nina  during
the  third  century,--1  there  is  no  mention  of  it  anywhere  else,  so  far  as
I  know.

Tradition  informs  us — how  far  correctly  is  not  for  me  to  decide —
that  long  before  Zarathushtra,  the  people,  who  now  are  called  in  con-
tempt by  the  Mussulmans  and  Christians  "Guebres,"  and  who  term
themselves  "Behedin"  (followers  of  the  true  faith)  recognized  Mithra,
the  Mediator,  as  their  sole  and  highest  God — who  included  within  him-
self all  the  good  as  well  as  the  bad  Gods.  Mithra  representing  the  two
natures  of  Ormazd  and  Ahriman  combined,  the  people  feared  him,
whereas  they  would  have  had  no  need  of  fearing,  but  only  of  loving
and  reverencing  him  as  Ahura-Mazda,  were  Mithra  without  the  Ahri-
man element.

*  Though  St.  Nina  appeared  in  Georgia  in  the  third,  it  is  not  before  the  fifth  century  that  the
idolatrous  Grouzines  were  converted  to  Christianity  by  the  thirteen  Syrian  Fathers.  They  came
under  the  leadership  of  both  St.  Antony  and  St.  John  of  Zedadzene — so  called,  because  he  is  alleged
to  have  travelled  to  the  Caucasian  regions  on  purpose  to  fight  and  conquer  the  chief  idol  Zeda  !
And  thus  while — as  incontrovertible  proof  of  the  existence  of  both — the  opulent  tresses  of  the  black
hair  of  St.  Nina  are  preserved  to  this  day  as  relics,  in  Zion  Cathedral  at  Tiflis— the  thaumaturgic
John  has  immortalized  his  name  still  more.  Zeda,  who  was  the  Baal  of  Trans-Caucasus,  had  children
sacrificed  to  him,  as  the  legend  tells  us,  on  the  top  of  the  Zedadzene  mount,  about  eighteen  versts
from  Tiflis.  It  is  there  that  the  saint  defied  the  idol — or  rather  Satan  under  the  guise  of  a  stone
statue — to  single  combat,  and  miraculously  conquered  him,  i.e.,  threw  down  and  trampled  upon  the
idol.  But  he  did  not  stop  there  in  the  exhibition  of  his  powers.  The  mountain  peak  is  of  immense
height,  and  being  only  a  barren  rock  at  its  top,  spring  water  is  nowhere  to  be  found  on  its  summit.
But  in  commemoration  of  his  triumph,  the  saint  had  a  spring  appear  at  the  very  bottom  of  the  deep,
and — as  people  assert — fathomless  well  dug  down  into  the  very  bowels  of  the  mountain,  and  the
gaping  mouth  of  which  was  situated  near  the  altar  of  the  god  Zeda,  just  in  the  centre  of  his  temple.
It  was  into  this  opening  that  the  limbs  of  the  murdered  infants  were  cast  down  after  the  sacrifice.
The  miraculous  spring,  however,  was  soon  dried  up,  and  for  many  centuries  no  water  appeared.  But
when  Christianity  was  firmly  established,  the  water  began  reappearing  on  the  seventh  day  of  every
May,  and  continues  to  do  so  till  the  present  time.  Strange  to  say  this  fact  does  not  pertain  to  the
domain  of  legend,  but  is  one  that  has  provoked  an  intense  curiosity  even  among  men  of  science,
such  as  the  eminent  geologist,  Dr.  Abich,  who  resided  for  years  at  Tiflis.  Thousands  upon  thousands
proceed  yearly  upon  pilgrimage  to  Zedadzene  on  the  seventh  of  May,  and  all  witness  the  "miracle."
From  early  morning  water  is  heard  bubbling  down  at  the  rocky  bottom  of  the  well;  and,  as  noon
approaches,  the  parched-up  walls  of  the  mouth  become  moist,  and  clear,  cold,  sparkling  water  seems
to  come  out  from  every  pore  of  the  rock;  it  rises  higher  and  higher,  bubbles,  increases,  until  at  last
having  reached  the  very  brim  it  suddenly  stops,  and  a  prolonged  shout  of  triumphant  joy  bursts
from  the  fanatical  crowd.  This  cry  seems  to  shake  the  very  depths  of  the  mountain  like  a  sudden
discharge  of  artillery  and  awakens  the  echo  for  miles  around.  Everyone  hurries  to  fill  a  vessel  with
the  miraculous  water.  There  are  necks  wrung  and  heads  broken  on  that  day  at  Zedadzene,  but
everyone  who  survives  carries  home  a  provision  of  the  crystal  fluid.  Toward  evening  the  water
begins  decreasing  as  mysteriously  as  it  had  appeared,  and  at  midnight  the  well  is  again  perfectly
dry.  Not  a  drop  of  water,  nor  a  trace  of  any  spring,  could  be  found  by  the  engineers  and  geologists
bent  upon  discovering  the  "trick."  For  a  whole  year  the  sanctuary  remains  deserted,  and  there  is
not  even  a  janitor  to  watch  the  poor  shrine.  The  geologists  have  declared  that  the  soil  of  the  moun-
tain precludes  the  possibility  of  having  springs  concealed  in  it.     Who  will  explain  the  puzzle?

PERSIAN   ZOROASTRIANISM   AND    RUSSIAN    VANDALISM.  287

One  day  as  the  God,  disguised  as  a  shepherd,  was  wandering  about
the  earth,  he  came  to  Baku,  then  a  dreary,  deserted  sea-shore,  and
found  an  old  devotee  of  his  quarrelling  with  his  wife.  Upon  this  barren
spot  wood  was  scarce,  and  she  would  not  give  up  a  certain  portion  of
her  stock  of  cooking  fuel  to  be  burned  upon  the  altar.  So  the  Ahriraan
element  was  aroused  in  the  God,  and,  striking  the  stingy  old  woman,
he  changed  her  into  a  gigantic  rock.  Then,  the  Ahura-Mazda  element
prevailing,  he,  to  console  the  bereaved  widower,  promised  that  neither
he  nor  his  descendants  should  ever  need  fuel  any  more,  for  he  would
provide  such  a  supply  as  should  last  till  the  end  of  time.  So  he  struck
the  rock  again  and  then  struck  the  ground  for  miles  around,  and  the
earth  and  the  calcareous  soil  of  the  Caspian  shores  were  filled  up  to
the  brim  with  naphtha.  To  commemorate  the  happy  event  the  old
devotee  assembled  all  the  youths  of  the  neighbourhood  and  set  himself
to  excavating  the  rock — which  was  all  that  remained  of  his  ex-wife.
He  cut  the  battlemented  walls,  and  fashioned  the  altar  and  the  four
pillars,  hollowing  them  all  to  allow  the  gases  to  rise  and  escape  through
the  top  of  the  merlons.  The  God  Mithra  upon  seeing  the  work  ended,
sent  a  lightning  flash,  which  set  the  fire  upon  the  altar  ablaze,  and  lit
up  every  merlon  upon  the  walls.  Then,  in  order  that  it  should  burn
the  brighter,  he  called  forth  the  four  winds  and  ordered  them  to  blow
the  flame  in  every  direction.  To  this  day  Baku  is  known  under  its
primitive  name  of  "Baadey-ku-ba,"  which  means  literally  the  gather-
ing of  winds.

The  other  legend,  which  is  but  a  continuation  of  the  above,  runs
thus:  For  countless  ages  the  devotees  of  Mithra  worshipped  at  his
shrines,  until  Zarathushtra,  descending  from  heaven  in  the  shape  of  a
<; Golden  Star,"  transformed  himself  into  a  man,  and  began  teaching  a
new  doctrine.  He  sung  the  praises  of  the  One  but  Triple  God — the
supreme  Eternal,  the  incomprehensible  essence  "Zervana-Akarna,"
which  emanating  from  itself  "Primeval  Light,"  the  latter  in  its  turn
produced  Ahura-Mazda.  But  this  process  required  that  the  "Primeval
One"  should  previously  absorb  in  itself  all  the  light  from  the  fiery
Mithra,  and  thus  left  the  poor  God  despoiled  of  all  his  brightness.
Losing  his  right  of  undivided  supremacy,  Mithra.  in  despair,  and  insti-
gated by  his  Ahrimanian  nature,  annihilated  himself  for  the  time
being,  leaving  Ahriman  alone,  to  fight  out  his  quarrel  with  Ortnazd,
as  best  he  could.  Hence  the  prevailing  duality  in  nature  since  that
time  until  Mithra  returns;  for  he  promised  to  his  faithful  devotees  to

2SS  A   MODERN    PANARION.

come  back  some  day.  Only,  since  then,  a  series  of  calamities  fell  upon
the  fire-worshippers.  The  last  of  these  was  the  invasion  of  their
country  by  the  Moslems  in  the  seventh  century,  when  these  fanatics
began  most  cruel  persecutions  against  the  Behedin.  Driven  away  from
every  quarter,  the  Guebres  found  refuge  but  in  the  province  of  Ker-
man,  and  in  the  city  of  Yezd.  Then  followed  heresies.  Many  of  the
Zoroastrians  abandoning  the  faith  of  their  forefathers  became  Mos-
lems; others,  in  their  unquenchable  hatred  for  the  new  rulers,  joined
the  ferocious  Kurds  and  became  devil-,  as  well  as  fire-worshippers.
These  are  the  Yezids.  The  whole  religion  of  these  strange  sectarians
— with  the  exception  of  a  few  who  have  more  weird  rites,  which  are  a
secret  to  all  but  to  themselves — consists  in  the  following.  As  soon  as
the  morning  sun  appears,  they  place  their  two  thumbs  crosswise  one
upon  the  other,  kiss  the  symbol,  and  touch  their  brows  with  them  in
reverential  silence.  Then  they  salute  the  sun  and  turn  back  into  their
tents.  They  believe  in  the  power  of  the  devil,  dread  it,  and  propitiate
the  "fallen  angel"  by  every  means;  getting  very  angry  whenever  they
hear  him  spoken  of  disrespectfully  by  either  a  Mussulman  or  a  Chris-
tian. Murders  have  been  committed  by  them  on  account  of  such
irreverent  talk,  but  people  have  become  more  prudent  of  late.

With  the  exception  of  the  Bombay  community  of  Parsis,  fire-wor-
shippers are,  then,  to  be  found  but  in  the  two  places  before  mentioned,
and  scattered  around  Baku.  In  Persia  some  years  ago,  according  to
statistics  they  numbered  about  100,000  men,  I  doubt,  though,  whether
their  religion  has  been  preserved  as  pure  as  even  that  of  the  Gujarati
Parsis,  adulterated  as  is  the  latter  by  the  errors  and  carelessness  of
generations  of  uneducated  Alobeds.  And  yet,  as  is  the  case  of  their
Bombay  brethren,  who  are  considered  by  all  the  travellers  as  well  as
Anglo-Indians,  as  the  most  intelligent,  industrious  and  well-behaved
community  of  the  native  races,  the  fire-worshippers  of  Kerman  and
Yezd  bear  a  very  high  character  among  the  Persians,  as  well  as  among
the  Russians  of  Baku.  Uncouth  and  crafty  some  of  them  have  become,
owing  to  long  centuries  of  persecution  and  spoliation;  but  the  unani-
mous testimony  is  in  their  favour,  and  they  are  spoken  of  as  a  virtuous,
highly  moral,  and  industrious  population.  "As  good  as  the  word  of
a  Guebre"  is  a  common  saying  among  the  Kurds,  who  repeat  it  without
being  in  the  least  conscious  of  the  self-condemnation  contained  in  it.

I   cannot   close  without   expressing  my  astonishment   at  the   utter
ignorance  as  to  their  religion,  which  seems  to  prevail  in  Russia  even

PERSIAN    ZOROASTRIANISM    AND    RUSSIAN    VANDALISM.  289

among  the  journalists.  One  of  them  speaks  of  the  Guebres,  in  the
article  of  the  St.  Petersburg  Viedomosti  above  referred  to,  as  of  a  sect
of  Hindu  idolaters,  in  whose  prayers  the  name  of  Brahma  is  constantly
invoked.  To  add  to  the  importance  of  this  historical  item,  Alexandre
Dumas  (senior)  is  quoted,  as  mentioning  in  his  work,  Travels  in  the
Caucasus,  that  during  his  visit  to  Attesh-Gag,  he  found  in  one  of  the
cells  of  the  Zoroastrian  cloister  "two  Hindu  idols" !  Without  forgetting
the  charitable  dictum:  De  mortuis  nil  nisi  bonum,  we  cannot  refrain
from  reminding  the  correspondent  of  our  esteemed  contemporary  of  a
fact  which  no  reader  of  the  novels  of  the  brilliant  French  writer  ought
to  be  ignorant  of,  namely,  that  for  the  variety  and  inexhaustible  stock
of  historical  facts,  evolved  out  of  the  abysmal  depths  of  his  own  con-
sciousness, even  the  immortal  Baron  Munchausen  was  hardly  his  equal.
The  sensational  narrative  of  his  tiger-hunting  in  Mingrelia,  where,
since  the  days  of  Noah,  there  never  was  a  tiger,  is  yet  fresh  in  the
memory  of  his  readers.

CROSS  AND  FIRE.

[Vol.  I.  No.  2,  November,  1879.]

Perhaps  the  most  widespread  and  universal  symbols  in  the  old  astro-
nomical systems  which  have  passed  down  the  stream  of  time  to  our
century,  and  have  left  traces  everywhere  in  the  Christian  religion  as  else-
where, are  the  Cross  and  the  Fire,  the  latter  the  symbol  of  the  sun.
The  ancient  Aryans  used  them  both  as  the  symbols  of  Agni.  Whenever
the  ancient  devotee  desired  to  worship  Agni — says  E.  Burnouf  {Science
des  Religions,  ch.  x.) — he  arranged  two  pieces  of  wood  in  the  form  of  a
cross,  and  by  a  peculiar  whirling  and  friction  obtained  fire  for  his
sacrifice.  As  a  symbol  it  is  called  Svastika,  and  as  an  instrument
manufactured  out  of  a  sacred  tree  and  in  possession  of  every  Brahman,
it  is  known  as  Arani.

The  Scandinavians  had  the  same  sign  and  called  it  Thor's  Hammer,
as  bearing  a  mysterious  magneto-electric  relation  to  Thor,  the  God  of
Thunder,  who,  like  Jupiter  armed  with  his  thunderbolts,  holds  in  his
hand  this  ensign  of  power,  not  only  over  mortals  but  also  the  mis-
chievous spirits  of  the  elements,  over  which  he  presides.  In  Masonry
it  appears  in  the  form  of  the  grand  master's  mallet;  at  Allahabad  it
may  be  seen  on  the  fort  as  the  Jaina  Cross,  or  the  talisman  of  the  Jaina
kings;  and  the  gavel  of  the  modern  judge  is  no  more  than  this  crux
dissimulata,  as  de  Rossi  the  archaeologist  calls  it;  for  the  gavel  is  the
sign  of  power  and  strength,  as  the  hammer  represented  the  might  of
Thor,  who  in  the  Norse  legend  splits  a  rock  with  it.  Dr.  Schliemann
found  it  in  terra-cotta  discs,  on  the  site,  as  he  believes,  of  ancient  Troy,
in  the  lowest  strata  of  his  excavations;  which  indicated,  according  to

A

Dr.  Lundy,  "an  Aryan  civilization  long  anterior  to  the  Greek — say
from  two  to  three  thousand  years  B.C."  Burnouf  calls  it  the  oldest
form  of  the  Cross  known,  and  affirms  that  "it  is  found  personified  in
the  ancient  religion  of  the  Greeks  under  the  figure  of  Prometheus,  the
fire-bearer  crucified  on  Mount  Caucasus,  while  the  celestial  bird — the

CROSS   AND    FIRE.

29 1

Shyena  of  the  Vedic  hymns — daily  devours  his  entrails."  Boldetti
{Osservazioni,  i.  15,  p.  60)  gives  a  copy  from  the  painting  in  the  ceme-
tery of  St.  Sebastian,  representing  a  Christian  convert  and  gravedigger
named  Diogenes,  who  wears  on  both  his  legs  and  right  arm  the  signs
of  the  Svastika.  The  Mexicans  and  the  Peruvians  had  it,  and  it  is
found  as  the  sacred  Tau  in  the  oldest  tombs  of  Egypt.

It  is,  to  say  the  least,  a  strange  coincidence,  remarked  even  by  some
Christian  clergymen,  that  Agnus  Dei,  the  L,amb  of  God,  should  have
symbols  identical  with  the  Indian  God  Agni.  While  Agnus  Dei  ex-
piates and  takes  away  the  sins  of  the  world,  in  one  religion,  the  God
Agni  in  the  other,  likewise  expiates  sins  against  the  Gods,  man,  the
manes,  the  soul  and  repeated  sins,  as  shown  in  the  six  prayers  accom-
panied by  six  oblations  (Colebrooke  Essays,  vol.  i.  p.  190).

If,  then,  we  find  these  two — the  Cross  and  the  Fire — so  closely  asso-
ciated in  the  esoteric  symbolism  of  nearly  every  nation,  it  is  because
on  the  combined  powers  of  the  two  rests  the  whole  plan  of  universal
law.  In  astronomy,  physics,  chemistry,  in  the  whole  range  of  natural
philosophy,  in  short,  they  always  come  out  as  the  invisible  cause  and
the  visible  result;  and  only  metaphysics  and  alchemy — or  shall  we  say
metachemistry,  since  we  prefer  coining  a  new  word  to  shocking  scepti-
cal ears — can  fully  and  conclusively  solve  their  mysterious  meaning.
An  instance  or  two  will  suffice  for  those  who  are  willing  to  think  over
hints.

The  central  point,  or  the  great  central  Sun  of  the  Kosmos,  as  the
Kabalists  call  it,  is  the  Deity.  It  is  the  point  of  intersection  between
the  two  great  conflicting  powers — the  centripetal  and  the  centrifugal
forces — which  drive  the  planets  into  their  elliptical  orbits,  making  them
trace  a  cross  in  their  path  through  the  Zodiac.  These  two  terrible,
though  as  yet  hypothetical  and  imaginary  powers,  preserve  harmony
and  keep  the  universe  in  steady,  unceasing  motion;  and  the  four  bent
points  of  the  Svastika  typify  the  revolution  of  the  earth  upon  its  axis.
Plato  calls  the  universe  a  "blessed  god,"  made  in  a  circle  and  decussated
hi  the  form  of  the  letter  X.     So  much  for  astronomy.

In  Masonry  the  Royal  Arch  degree  retains  the  Cross  as  the  triple
Egyptian  Tau.  It  is  the  mundane  circle  with  the  astronomical  cro-s
upon  it  rapidly  revolving;  the  perfect  square  of  the  Pythagorean
mathematics  in  the  scale  of  numbers,  as  its  occult  meaning  is  inter-
preted by  Cornelius  Agrippa.  Fire  is  heat — the  central  point;  the
perpendicular  ray  represents  the  male  element — spirit,  and  the  hori-

2Q2  A   MODERN    PANARION.

zontal  one  the  female  element — matter.  Spirit  vivifies  and  fructifies
matter,  and  everything  proceeds  from  the  central  point,  the  focus  of
life,  and  light,  and  heat,  represented  by  the  terrestrial  fire.  So  much
again  for  physics  and  chemistry;  for  the  field  of  analogies  is  boundless,
and  universal  laws  are  immutable  and  identical  in  their  outward  and
inward  applications.  Without  intending  to  be  disrespectful  to  anyone,
or  to  wander  far  away  from  truth,  we  think  we  may  say  that  there  are
strong  reasons  to  believe  that  in  their  original  sense  the  Christian  Cross
as  the  cause,  and  eternal  torment  by  hell-fire  as  the  direct  effect  of
negation  of  the  former,  have  more  to  do  with  these  two  ancient  sym-
bols than  our  Western  theologians  are  prepared  to  admit.

If  Fire  is  the  Deity  with  some  heathens,  so  in  the  Bible  God  is  like-
wise the  Life  and  the  Light  of  the  world.

If  the  Holy  Ghost  and  Fire  cleanse  and  purify  the  Christian,  Lucifer
is  also  Light,  and  the  "Son  of  the  morning."

Turn  where  we  will,  we  are  sure  to  find  these  conjoint  relics  of
ancient  worship  among  almost  every  nation  and  people.  From  the
Aryans,  the  Chaldseans,  the  Zoroastrians,  Peruvians,  Mexicans,  Scan-
dinavians, Celts,  and  ancient  Greeks  and  Latins,  they  have  descended
in  their  completeness  to  the  modern  Parsi.  The  Phoenician  Cabiri  and
the  Greek  Dioscuri  are  partially  revived  in  every  temple,  cathedral,
and  village  church ;  while,  as  will  now  be  shown,  the  Christian  Bulgarians
have  even  preserved  the  sun-worship  more  than  a  thousand  years  since
they  were  converted  to  Christianity.  And  yet  they  appear  none  the
less  pagans  than  they  were  before,  for  this  is  how  they  keep  Christmas
and  New  Year's  Day.  To  this  time  they  call  this  festival  Sourjvaki,  as
it  falls  in  with  the  festival  in  honour  of  the  ancient  Slavonian  God
Sourja.     In  the  Slavonian  mythology  this  Deity — Sourja  or  Sourva —

A.

evidently  identical  with  the  An^an  Surya — sun — is  the  God  of  heat,
fertility  and  abundance.  The  celebration  of  this  festival  is  of  immense
antiquity  as,  far  before  the  days  of  Christianity,  the  Bulgarians  wor-
shipped Sourva,  and  consecrated  New  Year's  Day  to  this  God,  praying
him  to  bless  their  fields  with  fertility,  and  send  them  happiness  and
prosperity.  This  custom  has  remained  among  them  in  all  its  primitive
heathenism,  and  though  it  varies  according  to  localities,  yet  the  rites
and  ceremonies  are  essentially  the  same.

On  the  eve  of  New  Year's  Day,  the  Bulgarians  do  no  work,  and  are
obliged  to  fast.  Young  betrothed  maidens  are  busy  preparing  a  large
platiy  (cake)  in  which  they  place  roots  and  young  shoots  of  various

CROSS   AND    FIRE.

'■93

forms,  to  each  of  which  a  name  is  given,  according  to  the  shape  of
the  root.  Thus  one  means  the  house,  another  represents  the  garden;
others  again,  the  mill,  the  vineyard,  the  horse,  a  hen,  a  cat,  ami  so  on,
according  to  the  landed  property  and  worldly  possessions  of  the  family.
Even  articles  of  value  such  as  jewelry  and  bags  of  money  are  represented
in  this  emblem  of  the  horn  of  abundance.  Besides  all  these,  a  large
and  ancient  silver  coin  is  placed  inside  the  cake;  it  is  called  bdbkaand
and  is  tied  two  ways  with  a  red  thread,  which  forms  a  cross.  This  coin
is  regarded  as  the  symbol  of  fortune.  After  sunset  and  other  cere-
monies including  prayers,  addressed  in  the  direction  of  the  departing
luminary,  the  whole  family  assemble  about  a  large  round  table,  called
paralya,  on  which  are  placed  the  above-mentioned  cake,  dry  vegetables,
corn,  a  wax  taper,  and  finally  a  large  censer  containing  incense  of  the
best  quality,  to  perfume  the  God.  The  head  of  the  family,  usually  the
oldest  in  the  family — either  the  grandfather  or  the  father  himself—
taking  up  the  censer  with  the  greatest  veneration  in  one  hand,  and  the
wax  taper  in  the  other,  begins  walking  about  the  premises,  incensing
the  four  corners,  beginning  and  ending  with  the  east,  and  reads  various
invocations,  which  close  with  the  Christian  "Our  Father,  which  art  in
heaven,"  addressed  to  Sourja.  The  taper  is  then  laid  away  to  be  pre-
served throughout  the  whole  year,  till  the  next  festival.  It  is  thought
to  have  acquired  marvellous  healing  properties,  and  is  lighted  only
upon  occasions  of  family  sickness,  in  which  case  it  is  expected  to  cure
the  patient.

After  this  ceremony,  the  old  man  takes  his  knife  and  cuts  the  cake
into  as  many  slices  as  there  are  members  of  the  household  present.
Each  person,  on  receiving  his  or  her  share,  makes  haste  to  open  and
search  the  piece.  The  happiest  for  the  ensuing  year,  is  he  or  she  who
gets  the  part  containing  the  old  coin  crossed  with  the  scarlet  thread;
he  is  considered  the  elect  of  Sourja,  and  everyone  envies  the  fortunate
possessor.  Then  in  order  of  importance  come  the  emblems  of  the
house,  the  vineyard,  and  so  on;  and  according  to  his  finding,  the  finder
reads  his  horoscope  for  the  coming  year.  Most  unlucky  is  he  who  sets
the  cat;  he  turns  pale  and  trembles.  Woe  to  him  and  misery,  for  he  is
surrounded  by  enemies,  and  has  to  prepare  for  great  trials.

At  the  same  time,  a  large  log  which  represents  a  flaming  altar,  is  set
up  in  the  chimney-place,  and  fire  is  applied  to  it.     This  log  burns  in
honour  of  Sourja,  and  is  intended  as  an  oracle  for  the  whole  hou;
If  it  burns  the  whole  night  through  till  morning,  without  the  flame

294  A   MODERN    PANARION.

dying  out,  it  is  a  good  sign;  otherwise  the  family  prepares  to  see  death
that  year,  and  deep  lamentations  end  the  festival.  Neither  the  mo?itzee
(young  bachelor),  nor  the  mommee  (the  maiden),  sleep  that  night.  At
midnight  begins  a  series  of  soothsaying,  magic,  and  various  rites,  in
which  the  burning  log  plays  the  part  of  the  oracle.  A  young  bud
thrown  into  the  fire  and  bursting  with  a  loud  snap,  is  a  sign  of  happy
and  speed}'  marriage.  Long  after  midnight  the  young  couples  leave
their  respective  homes,  and  begin  visiting  their  acquaintances  from
house  to  house,  offering  and  receiving  congratulations,  and  rendering
thanks  to  the  Deity.  These  couples  are  called  Souryakari,  and  each
male  carries  a  large  branch  ornamented  with  red  ribbons,  old  coins,
and  the  image  of  Sourja,  and  as  they  wend  their  way,  they  sing  in
chorus.  Their  chant  is  as  original  as  it  is  peculiar,  and  merits  trans-
lation, though  of  course  it  must  lose  in  being  rendered  into  a  foreign
language.  The  following  stanzas  are  addressed  by  them  to  those  they
visit:

Sourva,  Sourva,  Lord  of  the  season,

Happy  New  Year  mayst  thou  send:

Health  and  fortune  on  this  household,

Success  and  blessings  till  next  year.

With  good  crops  and  full  ears,

With  gold  and  silk,  and  grapes  and  fruit,

With  barrels  full  of  wine,  and  stomachs  full,

You  and  your  house  be  blessed  by  the  God     .     .     .

His  blessing  on  you  all.     Amen!  Amen!  Amen!

The  singing  Souryakari,  recompensed  for  their  good  wishes  with  a
present  at  every  house,  go  home  at  early  dawn.  And  this  is  how  the
symbolical  exoteric  Cross  and  Fire-worship  of  old  Aryavartta  go  hand
in  hand  in  Christian  Bulgaria.

WAR  IN  OLYMPUS.

[Vol.  T.  No.  2,  November,  1879.]

Dark  clouds  are  gathering  over  the  hitherto  cold  and  serene  horizon
of  exact  science,  which  forebode  a  squall.  Already  two  camps  are
forming  among  the  votaries  of  scientific  research.  One  wages  war  on
the  other,  and  hard  words  are  occasionally  exchanged.  The  apple  of
discord  in  this  case  is — Spiritualism.  Fresh  and  illustrious  victims  are
yearly  decoyed  away  from  the  impregnable  strongholds  of  materialistic
negation,  and  ensnared  into  examining  and  testing  the  alleged  spiritual
phenomena.  And  we  all  know  that  when  a  true  scientist  examines
them  without  prejudice  .  .  .  well,  he  generally  ends  like  Professor
Hare,  Mr.  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  the  great  Alfred  Russell  Wallace,
another  F.R.S.,  and  so  many  other  eminent  men  of  science — he  passes
over  to  the  enemy.

We  are  really  curious  to  know  what  will  be  the  new  theory  advanced
in  the  present  crisis  by  the  sceptics,  and  how  they  will  account  for  such
apostasy  of  several  of  their  luminaries,  as  has  just  occurred.  The
venerable  accusations  of  non  compos  mentis  and  "dotage"  will  not  bear
another  refurbishing.  The  eminent  perverts  are  increasing  numeri-
cally so  fast,  that  if  mental  incapacity  is  charged  upon  all  of  them
who  experimentally  satisfy  themselves  that  tables  can  talk  sense,  and
mediums  float  through  the  air,  it  might  augur  ill  for  science:  there
might  soon  be  none  but  weakened  brains  in  the  learned  societies.
They  may,  possibly,  for  a  time  find  some  consolation  in  accounting  for
the  lodgment  of  the  extraordinary  "delusion"  in  very  scholarly  heads,
upon  the  theory  of  atavism — the  mysterious  law  of  latent  transmission,
so  much  favoured  by  the  modern  schools  of  Darwinian  evolutionism —
especially  in  Germany,  as  represented  by  that  thorough-going  apostle
of  the  modern  "struggle  for  culture,"  Ernst  Haeckel,  professor  at  Jena.
They  may  attribute  the  belief  of  their  colleagues  in  the  phenomena  to
certain  molecular  movements  of  the  cell  in  the  ganglia  of  their  once

296  A   MODERN    PANARION.

powerful  brains,  hereditarily  transmitted  to  them  by  their  ignorant
mediaeval  ancestors.  Or,  again,  they  may  split  their  ranks,  and  estab-
lishing an  imperhim  in  imperio  "divide  and  conquer"  still.  All  this  is
possible;  but  time  alone  will  show  which  of  the  parties  will  come  off
best.

We  have  been  led  to  these  reflections  by  a  row  now  going  on  between
German  and  Russian  professors — all  eminent  and  illustrious  savants.
The  Teutons  and  Slavs,  in  the  case  under  observation,  are  not  fighting
according  to  their  nationality,  but  conformably  to  their  respective
beliefs  and  unbeliefs.  Having  concluded,  for  the  occasion,  an  offensive
as  well  as  a  defensive  alliance,  regardless  of  race — they  have  broken
up  in  two  camps,  one  representing  the  Spiritualists,  and  the  other  the
sceptics.  And  now  war  to  the  knife  is  declared.  Leading  one  party,
are  Professors  Zollner,  Ulrizzi  and  Fichte,  Butlerof  and  Wagner,  of
the  Leipzig,  Halle  and  St.  Petersburg  Universities;  the  other  follows
Professors  Wundt,  Mendeleyef,  and  a  host  of  other  German  and  Russian
celebrities.  Hardly  has  Zollner — a  most  renowned  astronomer  and
physicist — printed  his  confession  of  faith  in  Dr.  Slade's  mediumistic
phenomena  and  set  his  learned  colleagues  aghast  when  Professor
Ulrizzi,  of  the  Halle  University,  arouses  the  wrath  of  the  Olympus  of
science  by  publishing  a  pamphlet  entitled,  The  so-called  Spiritualism  a
Scientific  Question,  intended  as  a  complete  refutation  of  the  arguments
of  Professor  Wundt,  of  the  Leipzig  University,  against  the  modern
belief,  and  contained  in  another  pamphlet  called  by  its  author  Spiri-
tualism— the  so-called  Scientific  Question.  And  now  steps  in  another
active  combatant,  Mr.  Butlerof,  Professor  of  Chemistry  and  Natural
Sciences  in  St.  Petersburg,  who  narrates  his  experiments  in  London,
with  the  medium  Williams,  and  thus  rouses  up  a  most  ferocious
polemic.  The  humoristical  illustrated  paper  Kladderadatsch  executes
a  war-dance,  and  shouts  with  joy,  while  the  more  serious  conservative
papers  are  indignant.  Pressed  behind  their  last  entrenchments  by  the
cool  and  uncontrovertible  assertions  of  a  most  distinguished  naturalist,
the  critics,  led  forward  by  the  St.  Petersburg  star,  Mr.  Burenin,  seem
desperate,  and  evidently  short  of  ammunition,  since  they  are  reduced
to  the  expedient  of  trying  to  rout  the  enemy  with  the  most  remarkable
paradoxes.  The  pro  and  con  of  the  dispute  are  too  interesting,  and  our
posterity  might  complain,  were  the  incidents  suffered  to  be  left  beyond
the  reach  of  English  and  American  readers  interested  in  Spiritualism,
by  remaining  confined  to  the  German  and  Russian  newspapers.     So,

WAR    IN    OLYMPUS.  297

Homer-like,  we  will  follow  the  combatants  and  condense  this  modem
Iliad  for  the  benefit  of  our  friends.

After  several  years  of  diligent  research  and  investigation  of  the
phenomena,  Messrs.  Wagner  and  Butlerof,  both  distinguished  savants
and  professors  of  St.  Petersburg  University,  became  thoroughly  con-
vinced of  the  reality  of  the  weird  manifestations.  As  a  result,  both
wrote  numerous  and  strong  articles  in  the  leading  periodicals  in  de-
fence of  the  "mischievous  epidemic" — as  in  his  moments  of  "uncon-
scious cerebration"  and  "prepossession"  in  favour  of  his  own  hobby,
Dr.  Carpenter  calls  Spiritualism.  Both  of  the  above  eminent  gentle-
men are  endowed  with  those  precious  qualities,  which  are  the  more  to
be  respected  as  they  are  so  seldom  met  with  among  our  men  of  science.
These  qualities,   admitted  by  Mr.   Burenin,   their  critic,  himself,  are:

(1)  a  serious  and  profound  conviction  that  what  they  defend  is  true;

(2)  an  unwavering  courage  in  stating  at  every  hazard,  before  a  preju-
diced and  inimical  public  that  such  is  their  conviction;  (3)  clearness
and  consecutiveness  in  their  statements;  (4)  the  serene  calmness  and
impartiality  with  which  they  treat  the  opinions  of  their  opponents;
(5)  a  full  and  profound  acquaintance  with  the  subject  under  discussion.
The  combination  of  the  qualities  enumerated,  adds  their  critic,

Leads  us  to  regard  the  recent  article  by  Professor  Butlerof,  Empiricism  and  1 '
matism  in  the  Domain  of  Mediumship,  as  one  of  those  essays  whose  commanding
significance  cannot  be  denied  and  which  are  sure  to  strongly  impress  the  readers.
Such  articles  are  positively  rare  in  our  periodicals;  rare  because  of  the  originality
of  the  author's  conclusions;  and  because  of  the  clear,  precise,  and  serious  presenta-
tion of  facts.     .     .     .

The  article  so  eulogized  may  be  summed  up  in  a  few  words.  We  will
not  stop  to  enumerate  the  marvels  of  spiritual  phenomena  witnessed
by  Professor  Zollner  with  Dr.  Slade  and  defended  by  Professor  Butlerof,
since  they  are  no  more  marvellous  than  the  latter  gentleman's  personal
experience  in  this  direction  with  Mr.  Williams,  a  medium  of  London,
in  1S76.  The  seances  took  place  in  a  London  hotel  in  the  room  occu-
pied by  the  Hon.  Alexandre  Aksakof,  Russian  Imperial  Councillor,  in
which,  with  the  exception  of  this  gentleman,  there  were  but  two  other
persons — Professor  Butlerof  and  the  medium.  Confederacy  was  thus
utterly  impossible.  And  now,  what  took  place  under  these  conditions,
which  so  impressed  one  of  the  first  scientists  of  Russia5  Simply  this:
Mr.  Williams,  the  medium,  was  made  to  sit  with  his  hands,  feet,  and
even  his  body  tightly  bound  with  cords  to  his  chair,  which  was  placed

298  A   MODERN    PANARION.

in  a  dead-wall  corner  of  the  room,  behind  Mr.  Bntlerof's  plaid  hung-
across  so  as  to  form  a  screen.  Williams  soon  fell  into  a  kind  of  leth-
argic stupor,  known  among  Spiritualists  as  the  trance  condition,  and
"spirits"  began  to  appear  before  the  eyes  of  the  investigators.  Various
voices  were  heard,  and  loud  sentences  pronounced  by  the  "invisibles,"
from  every  part  of  the  room ;  things — toilet  appurtenances  and  so  forth
— began  flying  in  every  direction  through  the  air,  and  finally  "John
King" — a  sort  of  king  of  the  spooks,  who  has  been  famous  for  years —
made  his  appearance  bodily.  But  we  must  allow  Professor  Butlerof  to
tell  his  phenomenal  story  himself.

We  first  saw  several  bright  lights  moving  in  the  air,  and  immediately  after  ap-
peared the  full  figure  of  "John  King."  His  apparition  is  generally  preceded  by  a
greenish  phosphoric  light  which,  gradually  becoming  brighter,  illuminates,  more
and  more,  the  whole  bust  of  "John  King."  Then  it  is  that  those  present  perceive
that  the  light  emanates  from  some  kind  of  luminous  object  held  by  the  "spirit."
The  face  of  a  man  with  a  thick  black  beard  becomes  clearly  distinguishable:  the
head  is  enveloped  in  a  white  turban.  The  figure  appeared  outside  the  cabinet  (that
is  to  say,  the  screened  corner  where  the  medium  sat),  and  finally  approached  us.
We  saw  it  each  time  for  a  few  seconds;  then  rapidly  waning,  the  light  was  extin-
guished and  the  figure  became  invisible  to  reappear  again  in  a  moment  or  two;
then  from  the  surrounding  darkness  "John's"  voice  was  heard  proceeding  from  the
spot  on  which  he  had  appeared  mostly,  though  not  always,  when  he  had  already
disappeared.  "John"  asked  us:  "What  can  I  do  for  you?"  and  Mr.  Aksakof
requested  him  to  rise  up  to  the  ceiling  and  speak  to  us.  In  accordance  with  the
wish  expressed,  the  figure  suddenly  appeared  above  the  table  and  towered  majesti-
cally above  our  heads  t<j  the  ceiling,  which  became  all  illuminated  with  the  lumi-
nous object  held  in  the  spirit's  hand,  when  "John"  was  quite  under  the  ceiling  he
shouted  down  to  us:   "Will  that  do?"

During  another  seance  M.  Butlerof  asked  "John"  to  approach  him
quite  near,  which  the  "spirit"  did,  and  so  gave  him  the  opportunity  of
seeing  clearly  "the  sparkling,  clear  eyes  of  John."  Another  spirit,
"Peter,"  though  he  never  put  in  a  visible  appearance  during  the  seances,
yet  conversed  with  Messrs.  Butlerof  and  Aksakof,  wrote  for  them  on
paper  furnished  by  them,  and  so  forth.

Though  the  learned  Professor  minutely  enumerates  all  the  pre-
cautions he  had  taken  against  possible  fraud,  the  critic  is  not  yet
satisfied,  and  asks,  pertinently  enough:

Why  did  not  the  respectable  savant  catch  "John"  in  his  arms,  when  the  spirit
was  but  a  foot  distant  from  him  ?  Again,  why  did  not  both  Messrs.  Aksakof  and
Butlerof  try  to  get  hold  of  "John's"  legs,  when  he  was  mounting  to  the  ceiling?
Indeed  they  ought  to  have  done  all  this,  if  they  are  really  so  anxious  to  learn  the
truth  for  their  own  sake,   as  for  that  of  science,  when  they  struggle  to  lead  on

WAR   IN   OLYMPUS.  299

toward  the  domains  of  the  "other  world."  And,  had  they  complied  with  such  a
simple  and,  at  the  same  time,  very  little  scientific  test,  there  would  be  no  more
need  for  them,  perhaps,  to    .    .     .    further  explain  the  scientific  importance  of  the

spiritual  manifestations.

That  this  importance  is  not  exaggerated,  and  has  as  much  significance
for  the  world  of  science,  as  for  that  of  religious  thought,  is  proved  by
so  many  philosophical  minds  speculating  upon  the  modern  "delusion."
This  is  what  Fichte,  the  learned  German  savant,  says  of  it.

Modern  Spiritualism  chiefly  proves  the  existence  of  that  which,  in  common  par-
lance, is  very  vaguely  and  inaptly  termed  "apparition  of  spirits."  If  we  concede
the  reality  of  such  apparitions,  then  they  become  an  undeniable,  practical  proof  of
the  continuation  of  our  personal,  conscious  existence  (beyond  the  portals  of  death  I.
And  such  a  tangible,  fully  demonstrated  fact  cannot  be  otherwise  but  beneficent  in
this  epoch,  which,  having  fallen  into  a  dreary  denial  of  immortality,  thinks,  in  the
proud  self-sufficiency  of  its  vast  intellect,  that  it  has  alread)  happily  left  behind  it
every  superstition  of  the  kind.

If  such  a  tangible  evidence  could  be  really  found,  and  demonstrated
to  us,  beyond  any  doubt  or  cavil,  reasons  Fichte  further  on :

If  the  reality  of  the  continuation  of  our  lives  after  death  were  furnished  us  upon
positive  proof,  in  strict  accordance  with  the  logical  elements  of  experimental
natural  sciences,  then  it  would  be,  indeed,  a  result  with  which,  owing  to  its  nature
and  peculiar  significance  for  humanity,  no  other  result  to  be  met  with  in  all  the
history  of  civilization  could  be  compared.  The  old  problem  of  man's  destination
upon  earth  would  thus  be  solved,  and  consciousness  in  humanity  would  be  elevated
one  step.  That  which,  hitherto,  could  be  revealed  to  man  but  in  the  domain  of
blind  faith,  presentiment,  and  passionate  hope,  would  become  to  him— positive
knowledge;  he  would  have  acquired  the  certainty  that  he  was  a  member  of  an
eternal,  a  spiritual  world,  in  which  he  would  continue  living,  and  that  his  tem-
porary existence  upon  this  earth  forms  but  a  fractional  portion  of  a  future  eternal
life,  and  that  it  is  only  there  that  he  would  be  enabled  to  perceive,  and  fully  com-
prehend his  real  destiny.  Having  acquired  this  profound  conviction,  mankind
would  be  thoroughly  impressed  with  a  new  and  animating  comprehension  of  life,
and  its  intellectual  perceptions  opened  to  an  idealism  strong  with  incontrovertible
facts.  This  would  prove  tantamount  to  a  complete  reconstruction  of  man  in  rela-
tion to  his  existence  as  an  entity  and  his  mission  upon  earth;  it  would  be,  so  t<>  say,
a  "new  birth."  Whoever  has  lost  all  inner  convictions  as  to  his  eternal  destiny.
his  faith  in  eternal  life,  whether  the  case  be  that  of  an  isolated  individuality.  ,1
whole  nation,  or  the  representative  of  a  certain  epoch,  he  or  it  may  be  regarded
having  had  uprooted,  and  to  the  very  core,  all  sense  of  that  invigorating  force
which  alone  lends  itself  to  self-devotion  and  to  progress.  Such  a  man  becomes
what  was  inevitable — an  egotistical,  selfish,  sensual  being,  cencerned  wholl}  for  his
self-preservation.  His  culture,  his  enlightenment  and  civilization,  can  serve  him
but  as  a  help  and  ornament  toward  that  life  of  sensualism,  or.  at  best,  to  guard  him
from  all  that  can  harm  it.

500  A    MODERN    PANARION.

Such  is  the  enormous  importance  attributed  by  Professor  Fichte  of
Germany,  and  Professor  Butlerof  of  Russia,  to  the  spiritual  pheno-
mena; and  we  may  say  the  feeling  is  more  than  sincerely  echoed  in
England  by  Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace,  F.R.S.

An  influential  American  scientific  journal  uses  equally  strong  lan-
guage when  speaking  of  the  value  that  a  scientific  demonstration  of
the  survival  of  the  human  soul  would  have  for  the  world.  If  Spiritual-
ism prove  true,  it  says,

It  will  become  the  one  grand  event  of  the  world's  history;  it  will  give  an  im-
perishable lnstre  of  glory  to  the  nineteenth  century.  Its  discoverer  will  have  no
rival  in  renown,  and  his  name  will  be  written  high  above  an}'  other.  If  the  pre-
tensions of  Spiritualism  have  a  rational  foundation,  no  more  important  work  has
been  offered  to  men  of  science  then  their  verification.  (Scientific  American,  1874,
as  quoted  in  Olcott's  People  from  the  Other  World,  Preface,  p.  v.)

And  now  we  will  see  what  the  stubborn  Russian  critic  (who  seems  to
be  but  the  mouth-piece  of  European  materialistic  science),  has  to  say
in  response  to  the  unanswerable  arguments  and  logic  of  Messrs.  Fichte
and  Butlerof.  If  scepticism  has  no  stronger  arguments  to  oppose  to
Spiritualism  but  the  following  original  paradox,  then  we  will  have  to
declare  it  worsted  in  the  dispute.  Instead  of  the  beneficial  results
foretold  by  Fichte  in  the  case  of  the  final  triumph  of  Spiritualism,  the
critic  forecasts  quite  a  different  state  of  things.

As  soon  as  such  scientific  methods  shall  have  demonstrated,  beyond  doubt  or
cavil,  to  the  general  satisfaction,  that  our  world  is  crammed  with  souls  of  men  who
have  preceded  us,  and  whom  we  will  all  join  in  turn;  as  soon  as  it  shall  be  proven
that  these  "souls  of  the  deceased"  can  communicate  with  mortals,  all  the  earthly
physical  science  of  the  eminent  scholars  will  vanish  like  a  soap-bubble,  and  will
have  lost  all  its  interest  for  us  living  men.  Why  should  people  care  for  their  pro-
portionately short  life  upon  earth,  once  that  they  have  the  positive  assurance  and
conviction  of  another  life  to  come  after  bodily  death;  a  death  which  does  not  in  the
least  preclude  conscious  relations  with  the  world  of  the  living,  or  even  their  post
mortem  participation  in  all  its  interests?  Once  that,  with  the  help  of  science,
based  on  mediumistic  experiments  and  the  discoveries  of  Spiritualism,  such  rela-
tions shall  have  been  firmly  established,  they  will  nati;rally  become  every  da}-  more
and  more  intimate;  an  extraordinary  friendship  will  ensue  between  this  and  the
"other"  world;  that  other  world  will  begin  divulging  to  this  one  the  most  occult
mysteries  of  life  and  death,  and  the  hitherto  most  inaccessible  laws  of  the  universe
— those  which  now  exact  the  greatest  efforts  of  man's  mental  powers.  Finally,
nothing  will  remain  for  us  in  this  temporary  world  to  either  do  or  desire,  but  to
pass  away  as  soon  as  possible  into  the  world  of  eternity.  No  inventions,  no  observa-
tions, no  sciences  will  be  any  more  needed!  Why  should  people  exercise  their  brains,
for  instance,  in  perfecting  the  telegraphs,  when  nothing  else  will  be  required  but  to

WAR    IX    OLYMPUS.

3d

be  on  good  terms  with  spirits  in  order  to  avail  of  their  services  for  the  instantaneous
transmission  of  thoughts  and  objects,  not  only  from  Kurope  to  America,  but  even
to  the  moon,  if  so  desired?  The  following  are  a  few  of  the  results  which  a  com-
munion' de  facto  between  this  world  and  the  "other,"  that  certain  men  of  science
are  hoping  to  establish  by  the  help  of  Spiritualism,  will  inevitably  had  us  to:  the
complete  extinction  of  all  science,  and  even  of  the  human  race,  which  will  be  ever
rushing  onward  to  a  better  life.  The  learned  and  scholarly phantasists  who  an
anxious  to  promote  the  science  of  Spiritualism,  of  a  close  communication  betwi
the  two  worlds,  ought  to  bear  the  above  in  mind.

To  which  the  "scholarly  phantasists"  would  be  quite  warranted  in
answering  that  one  would  have  to  bring  his  own  mind  to  the  exact
measure  of  microscopic  capacity  required  to  elaborate  such  a  theory  as
this,  before  he  could  take  it  into  consideration  at  all.  Is  the  above-
meant  to  be  offered  as  an  objection  for  serious  consideration?  Strange
logic!  We  are  asked  to  believe  that,  because  these  men  of  science,
who  now  believe  in  naught  but  matter,  and  thus  try  to  fit  every  pheno-
menon— even  of  a  mental  and  spiritual  character — to  the  Procrustean
bed  of  their  own  preconceived  hobbies,  would  find  themselves,  by  the
mere  strength  of  circumstances,  forced  in  their  turn,  to  fit  these
cherished  hobbies  to  truth,  however  unwelcome,  and  to  facts  wherever
found — that  because  of  that,  science  will  lose  all  its  charm  for  humanity.
Nay — life  itself  will  become  a  burden !  There  are  millions  upon  mil-
lions of  people  wdio,  without  believing  in  Spiritualism  at  all,  yet  have
faith  in  another  and  a  better  world.  And  were  that  blind  faith  to
become  positive  knowledge  indeed,  it  could  but  better  humanity.

Before  closing  his  scathing  criticism  upon  the  "credulous  men  of
science"  our  reviewer  sends  one  more  bomb  in  their  direction,  which
unfortunately,  like  many  other  explosive  shells,  misses  the  culprits  and
wounds  the  whole  group  of  their  learned  colleagues.  We  translate  the
missile  verbatim,  this  time  for  the  benefit  of  all  the  European  and
American  academicians.

Speaking  of  Butlerof  and  his  article,  he  adds:

The  eminent  professor,  among  other  things,  makes  the  most  of  th<
that  Spiritualism  gains  with  every  day  more  and  more  converts  within  the  cm:  p.  .ra-
tion of  our  great  scientists.     He  enumerates  a  long  list  of  English  and  German
names  among  illustrious  men  of  science,  who  have  more  or  less  confessed  them-
selves in  favour  of  the  spiritual  doctrines.     Among  these  names  we  find  sue'
quite  authoritative,  those  of  the  greatest  luminaries  of  science.     Such  a  fact  is  to
say  the  least,  very  striking,  and.  in  any  case,  lends  a  great  weight  to  Spiritualism.
But  we  have  only  to  ponder  coolly  over  it,  to  come  very  easily  to  the  conclui
that  it  is  just  among  such  great  men  of  science  that  Spirittialism

302  A   MODERN   PANARION.

■and find  ready  converts.  With  all  their  powerful  intellects  and  gigantic  knowledge,
our  great  scholars  are  firstly,  men  of  sedentary  habits,  and,  secondly,  they  are,  with
scarcely  an  exception,  men  with  diseased  and  shattered  nerves,  inclined  toward  an
abnormal  development  of  an  overstrained  brain.  Such  sedentary  men  are  the  easiest
to  hoodwink  ;  a  clever  charlatan  will  make  an  easier  prey  of,  and  bamboozle  with  far
more  facility,  a  scholar  than  an  unlearned  but  practical  man.  Hallucination  will  far
sooner  get  hold  of  persons  inclined  to  nervous  receptivity,  especially  if  they  once
concentrate  themselves  upon  some  peculiar  ideas,  or  a  favourite  hobby.  This,  I
believe,  will  explain  the  fact  that  we  see  so  many  men  of  science  enrolling  them-
selves in  the  army  of  Spiritualists.

We  need  not  stop  to  enquire  how  Messrs.  Tyndall,  Huxley,  Darwin,
Herbert  Spencer,  Lewes,  and  other  eminent  scientific  and  philosophical
sceptics,  will  like  such  a  prospect  of  rickety  ganglionic  centres,  col-
lective softening  of  the  brain,  and  the  resulting  "hallucinations."  The
argument  is  not  only  an  impertinent  naivete',  but  a  literary  monstrosity.

We  are  far  from  agreeing  entirely  with  the  views  of  Professor  But-
lerof,  or  even  Mr.  Wallace,  as  to  the  agencies  at  work  behind  the
modern  phenomena;  yet  between  the  extremes  of  spiritual  negation
and  affirmation,  there  ought  to  be  a  middle  ground;  only  pure  philo-
sophy can  establish  truth  upon  firm  principles;  and  no  philosophy  can
be  complete  unless  it  embraces  both  physics  and  metaphysics.  Mr.
Tyndall,  who  declares  in  Science  and  Man  that  "metaphysics  will  be
welcomed  when  it  abandons  its  pretensions  to  scientific  discovery,  and
consents  to  be  ranked  as  a  kind  of  poetry,"  opens  himself  to  the  criti-
cism of  posterity.  Meanwhile,  he  must  not  regard  it  as  an  imper-
tinence if  his  Spiritualistic  opponents  retort  with  the  answer  that
"physics  will  always  be  welcomed,  when  it  abandons  its  pretension  to
psychological  discovery."  The  physicists  will  have  to  consent  to  be
regarded  in  a  near  future  as  no  more  than  supervisors  and  analysts  of
physical  results,  who  have  to  leave  the  spiritual  causes  to  those  who
believe  in  them.  Whatever  the  issue  of  the  present  quarrel,  we  fear,
though,  that  Spiritualism  has  made  its  appearance  a  century  too  late.
Our  age  is  preeminently  one  of  extremes.  The  earnest  philosophical,
yet  reverent,  doubters  are  few,  and  the  name  for  those  who  rush  to  the
opposite  extreme  is — Legion.  We  are  the  children  of  our  century.
Thanks  to  that  same  law  of  atavism,  it  seems  to  have  inherited  from
its  parent — the  eighteenth — the  century  of  both  Voltaire  and  Jonathan
Edwards — all  its  extreme  scepticism,  and,  at  the  same  time,  religious
credulity  and  bigoted  intolerance.  Spiritualism  is  an  abnormal  and
premature  outgrowth,  standing  between  the  two;  and,  though  it  stands

WAR   IN   OLYMPUS.  303

right  on  the  highway  to  truth,  its  ill-defined  beliefs  make  it  wander  on
through  by-paths  which  lead  to  anything  but  philosophy.  Its  future
depends  wholly  upon  the  timely  help  it  can  receive  from  honest  science
— that  science  which  scorns  no  truth.  It  was,  perhaps,  when  thinking
of  the  opponents  of  the  latter,  that  Alfred  de  Musset  wrote  the  follow-
ing magnificent  apostrophe:

Sleep'st  thou  content,  Voltaire?
And  thy  dread  smile  hovers  it  still  above
Thy  fleshless  bones    .     .     .     .  ?
Thine  age  they  call  too  young  to  understand  thee;
This  one  should  suit  thee  better —

Thy  men  are  born !
And  the  huge  edifice  that,  day  and  night,  thy  great  hands  undermined,

Is  fallen  upon  us.     .     .     .

A  LAND  OF  MYSTERY.

[Vol.  I.  Nos.  6,  7,  9  and  n,  March,  April,  June  and  August,  1S80.]
Whether  one  surveys  the  imposing  ruins  of  Memphis  or  Palmyra;
stands  at  the  foot  of  the  great  pyramid  of  Ghizeh;  wanders  along  the
shores  of  the  Nile;  or  ponders  amid  the  desolate  fastnesses  of  the
long-lost  and  mysterious  Petra;  however  clouded  and  misty  the  origin
of  these  pre-historic  relics  may  appear,  one  nevertheless  finds  at  least
certain  fragments  of  firm  ground  upon  which  to  build  conjecture.
Thick  as  may  be  the  curtain  behind  which  the  history  of  these  anti-
quities is  hidden,  still  there  are  rents  here  and  there  through  which
one  may  catch  glimpses  of  light.  We  are  acquainted  with  the  descen-
dants of  the  builders;  and,  however  superficially,  we  also  know  the
story  of  the  nations  whose  vestiges  are  scattered  around  us.  Not  so
with  the  antiquities  of  the  New  World  of  the  two  Americas.  There,
all  along  the  coast  of  Peru,  all  over  the  Isthmus  and  North  America,
in  the  canyons  of  the  Cordilleras,  in  the  impassable  gorges  of  the
Andes,  and,  especially,  beyond  the  valley  of  Mexico,  lie,  ruined  and
desolate,  hundreds  of  once  mighty  cities,  lost  to  the  memory  of  men,
and  having  themselves  lost  even  a  name.  Buried  in  dense  forests,  en-
tombed in  inaccessible  valleys,  sometimes  sixty  feet  underground,  from
the  day  of  their  discover}'  until  now  they  have  ever  remained  a  riddle,
baffling  all  enquiry,  and  they  have  been  muter  than  the  Egyptian  Sphinx
herself.  We  know  nothing  of  America  prior  to  the  Spanish  Conquest
— positively  nothing.  No  chronicles,  not  even  comparatively  modern
ones,  survive;  there  are  no  traditions,  even  among  the  aboriginal  tribes,
as  to  its  past  events.  We  are  as  ignorant  of  the  races  that  built  these
cyclopean  structures  as  of  the  strange  worship  that  inspired  the  ante-
diluvian sculptors  who  carved  upon  hundreds  of  miles  of  walls,  of
monuments,  monoliths  and  altars,  these  weird  hieroglyphics,  these
groups  of  animals  and  men,  pictures  of  an  unknown  life  and  lost  arts
— scenes  so  fantastic  and  wild,  at  times,  that  the}7  involuntarily  suggest

A    T.AND   OF   MYSTERY.  305

the  idea  of  a  feverish  dream,  whose  phantasmagoria  suddenly  crystal-
lized into  granite  at  the  wave  of  sonic  might}  magician's  hand,  to
bewilder  the  coming  generations  for  ever  and  ever.  So  late  as  the
beginning  of  the  present  century  the  very  existence  of  such  a  wealth
of  antiquities  was  unknown.  The  petty,  suspicious  jealousy  of  the
Spaniards  had,  from  the  first,  created  a  Chinese  wall  between  their
American  possessions  and  the  too  curious  traveller;  and  the  ignorance
and  fanaticism  of  the  conquerors,  and  their  carelessness  as  to  all  but
the  satisfaction  of  their  insatiable  greed,  had  precluded  scientific  re-
search. Even  the  enthusiastic  accounts  of  Cortez  and  his  army  of
brigands  and  priests,  and  of  Pizarro  and  his  robbers  and  monks,  as  to
the  splendour  of  the  temples,  palaces  and  cities  of  Mexico  and  Peru,
were  long  discredited.  In  his  History  of  America,  Dr.  Robertson  g<
so  far  as  to  inform  his  reader  that  the  houses  of  the  ancient  Mexicans
were

Mere  huts,  built  with  turf  or  mud,  or  the  branches  of  trees,  like  those  of  the
rudest  Indians.*

And,   upon  the  testimony  of  some  Spaniards,  he  even   risked  the
assertion  that  there  was  not

In  all  the  extent  of  that  vast  empire  a  single  monument  or  vestige  of  any  bnild-
ing  more  ancient  than  the  Conquest.

It  was  reserved  to  the  great  Alexander  Humboldt  to  vindicate  the
truth.  In  1S03  a  flood  of  new  light  was  poured  into  the  world  of
archaeology  by  this  eminent  and  learned  traveller.  In  this  he  luckily
proved  but  the  pioneer  of  future  discoverers.  He  then  described  but
Mitla,  or  the  Vale  of  the  Dead,  Xoxichalco,  and  the  great  pyramidal
Temple  of  Cholula.  But  after  him  came  Stephens,  Catherwood,  and
Squier;  and  in  Peru,  D'Orbigny  and  Dr.  Tschuddi.  Since  then
numerous  travellers  have  visited  and  given  us  accurate  details  of  many
of  the  antiquities.  But  how  many  more  yet  remain  not  only  un-
explored, but  even  unknown,  no  one  can  tell.  As  regards  prehistoric
buildings,  both  Peru  and  Mexico  are  rivals  of  Egypt.  Equalling  the
latter  in  the  immensity  of  her  cyclopean  structures,  Peru  sur]
her  in  their  number;  while  Cholula  exceeds  the  grand  pyramid  of
Cheops  in  breadth,  if  not  in  height.  Works  of  public  utility,  such  as
walls,  fortifications,  terraces,  water-courses,  aqueducts,  bridges,  temp:
burial-grounds,  whole  cities,  and  exquisitely  paved  roads,  hundreds  of

*  See  Stephen >'  Central  Am

306  A   MODERN    PANARION.

miles  in  length,  stretch  in  an  unbroken  line,  almost  covering  the  land
as  with  a  net.  On  the  coast  they  are  built  of  sun-dried  bricks;  in  the
mountains,  of  porphyritic  lime,  granite  and  silicated  sandstones.  Of
the  long  generations  of  peoples  who  built  them,  history  knows  nothing,
and  even  tradition  is  silent.  As  a  matter  of  course,  most  of  these  lithic
remains  are  covered  with  a  dense  vegetation.  Whole  forests  have
grown  out  of  the  cities'  broken  hearts,  and,  with  a  few  exceptions,
everything  is  in  ruin.  But  one  may  judge  of  what  once  was  by  that
which  yet  remains.

With  a  most  flippant  unconcern,  the  Spanish  historians  refer  nearly
every  ruin  to  Incal  times.  No  greater  mistake  can  be  made.  The
hieroglyphics  which  sometimes  cover  whole  walls  and  monoliths  from
top  to  bottom  are,  as  they  were  from  the  first,  a  dead  letter  to  modern
science.  But  they  were  equally  a  dead  letter  to  the  Incas,  though  the
history  of  the  latter  can  be  traced  to  the  eleventh  century.  They  had
no  clue  to  the  meaning  of  these  inscriptions,  but  attributed  all  such
to  their  unknown  predecessors;  thus  barring  the  presumption  of  their
own  descent  from  the  first  civilizers  of  their  country.  Briefly,  the
Incal  history  runs  thus:

Inca  is  the  Ouichua  title  for  chief  or  emperor,  and  the  name  of  the
ruling  and  most  aristocratic  race  or  rather  caste  of  the  land  which  was
governed  by  them  for  an  unknown  period,  prior  to,  and  until,  the
Spanish  Conquest.  Some  place  their  first  appearance  in  Peru  from
regions  unknown  in  1021;  others,  also,  on  conjecture,  at  five  centuries
after  the  biblical  "flood,"  and  according  to  the  modest  notions  of
Christian  theology.  Still  the  latter  theory  is  undoubtedly  nearer  truth
than  the  former.  The  Incas,  judged  by  their  exclusive  privileges,
power  and  "infallibility,"  are  the  antipodal  counterpart  of  the  Brah-
manical  caste  of  India.  Like  the  latter,  the  Incas  claimed  direct
descent  from  the  Deity,  which,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Suryavansha
dynasty  of  India,  was  the  Sun.  According  to  the  sole  but  general
tradition,  there  was  a  time  when  the  whole  of  the  population  of  the
now  New  World  was  broken  up  into  independent,  warring  and  bar-
barian tribes.  At  last  the  "Highest"  Deity — the  Sun — took  pity  upon
them,  and,  in  order  to  rescue  the  people  from  ignorance,  sent  down
upon  earth  to  teach  them  his  two  children,  Manco  Capac,  and  his  sister
and  wife,  Mama  Ocollo  Huaco — the  counterparts,  again,  of  the  Egyptian
Osiris,  and  his  sister  and  wife,  Isis,  as  well  as  of  the  several  Hindu
Gods  and  demi-Gods  and  their  wives.     These  two  made  their  appear-

A   LAND   OF   MYSTERY.  307

ance  on  a  beautiful  island  in  Lake  Titieaea — of  which  we  will  speak
further  on — and  thence  proceeded  northward  to  Cuzco,  later  on  the
capital  of  the  Incas,  where  they  at  once  began  to  disseminate  civiliza-
tion. Collecting  together  the  various  races  from  all  parts  of  Peru,  the
divine  couple  then  divided  their  labour.  Manco  Capac  taught  men
agriculture,  legislation,  architecture  and  arts;  while  Mama  Ocollo
instructed  the  women  in  weaving,  spinning,  embroidery  and  house-
keeping. It  is  from  this  celestial  pair  that  the  Incas  claimed  their
descent;  and  yet  they  were  utterly  ignorant  of  the  people  who  built
the  stupendous  and  now  ruined  cities  which  cover  the  whole  area  of
their  empire,  and  which  then  extended  from  the  equator  over  thirty-
seven  degrees  of  latitude,  and  included  not  only  the  western  slope  of
the  Andes,  but  the  whole  mountain  chain  with  its  eastern  declivities  to
the  Amazon  and  Orinoco.  As  the  direct  descendants  of  the  Sun,  they
were  the  high  priests  of  the  state  religion,  and  at  the  same  time
emperors  and  the  highest  statesmen  in  the  land;  in  virtue  of  which,
they,  again  like  the  Brahmans,  arrogated  to  themselves  a  divine
superiority  over  the  ordinary  mortals,  thus  founding,  like  the  "twice-
born,"  an  exclusive  and  aristocratic  caste — the  Inca  race.  Considered
as  the  son  of  the  Sun,  every  reigning  Inca  was  the  high  priest,  the
oracle,  chief  captain  in  w7ar,  and  absolute  sovereign;  thus  realizing  the
double  office  of  Pope  and  King,  and  so  long  anticipating  the  dream  of
the  Roman  Pontiffs.  To  his  command  the  blindest  obedience  was
exacted;  his  person  was  sacred;  and  he  was  the  object  of  divine
honours.  The  highest  officers  of  the  land  could  not  appear  shod  in  his
Presence;  this  mark  of  respect  pointing  again  to  an  Oriental  origin;
while  the  custom  of  boring  the  ears  of  the  youths  of  royal  blood  and
inserting  in  them  golden  rings,  "which  were  increased  in  size  as  they
advanced  in  rank,  until  the  distension  of  the  cartilage  became  a  posi-
tive deformity,"  suggests  a  strange  resemblance  between  the  sculptured
portraits  of  many  of  them  that  we  find  in  the  more  modern  ruins,  and
the  images  of  Buddha  and  of  some  Hindu  deities,  not  to  mention  our
contemporary  dandies  of  Siam,  Burmah  and  Southern  India.  Once
more  like  India,  in  the  palmy  days  of  the  Brahman  power,  no  one  had
the  right  to  receive  an  education  or  study  religion  except  the  young
men  of  the  privileged  Inca  caste.  And,  when  the  reigning  Inca  died.
or,  as  it  was  termed,  "was  called  home  to  the  mansion  of  his  fathi
a  very  large  number  of  his  attendants  and  his  wives  wnx-  made  to  die
with  him,  during  the  ceremonies  of  his  obsequies,  just  as  we  find  in  the

30S  A    MODERN    PANARION.

old  annals  of  Rajasthan,  and  down  to  the  but  just  abolished  custom  of
Sati.  Taking  all  this  into  consideration,  the  archaeologist  cannot
remain  satisfied  with  the  brief  remark  of  certain  historians  that :

In  this  tradition  we  trace  only  another  version  of  the  story  of  the  civilization
common  to  all  primitive  nations,  and  that  imposture  of  a  celestial  relationship
wherebv  designing  rulers  and  cunning  priests  have  sought  to  secure  their  ascen-
dency  among  men.

No  more  is  it  an  explanation  to  say  that:

Manco  Capac  is  the  almost  exact  counterpart  of  the  Chinese  Foh,  the  Hindu
Buddha,  the  terrestrial  Osiris  of  Egypt,  the  Ouetzacoatl  of  Mexico,  and  Votan  of
Central  America.

For  all  this  is  but  too  evident.  What  we  want  to  learn  is,  how  came
these  nations,  so  antipodal  to  each  other  as  India,  Egypt  and  America,
to  offer  such  extraordinary  points  of  resemblance,  not  only  in  their
general  religious,  political  and  social  views,  but  sometimes  in  the
minutest  details.  The  task  much-needed  is  to  find  out  which  one  of
them  preceded  the  other;  to  explain  how  these  peoples  came  to  plant
at  the  four  corners  of  the  earth  nearly  identical  architecture  and  arts,
unless  there  was  a  time  when,  as  asserted  by  Plato  and  believed  in  by
more  than  one  modern  archaeologist,  no  ships  were  needed  for  such  a
transit,  as  the  two  worlds  formed  but  one  continent.

According  to  the  most  recent  researches,  there  are  five  distinct  styles
of  architecture  in  the  Andes  alone,  of  which  the  Temple  of  the  Sun  at
Cuzco  was  the  latest.  And  this  one,  perhaps,  is  the  only  structure  of
importance  which,  according  to  modern  travellers,  can  be  safely  attri-
buted to  the  Incas,  whose  imperial  glories  are  believed  to  have  been
the  last  gleam  of  a  civilization  dating  back  for  untold  ages.  Dr.  E.  R.
Heath,  of  Kansas,  thinks  that

Long  before  Manco  Capac  the  Andes  had  been  the  dwelling-place  of  races  whose
beginnings  must  have  been  coeval  with  the  savages  of  Western  Europe.  The
gigantic  architecture  points  to  the  Cyclopean  family,  the  founders  of  the  Temple
of  Babel  and  the  Egyptian  pyramids.  The  Grecian  scroll  found  in  many  places  is
borrowed  (?)  from  the  Egyptians;  the  mode  of  burial  and  embalming  their  dead
points  to  Egypt.

Further  on,  this  learned  traveller  finds  that  the  skulls  taken  from
the  burial-grounds,  according  to  craniologists,  represent  three  distinct
races:  the  Chinchas,  who  occupied  the  western  part  of  Peru  from  the
Andes  to  the  Pacific;  the  Aymaras,  dwellers  of  the  elevated  plains  of
Peru  and  Bolivia,  on  the  southern  shore  of  Lake  Titicaca;  and  the
Huaucas,  who  "occupied  the  plateau  between  the  chains  of  the  Andes,

A    LAND    OF    MYSTERY.  309

north  of  Lake  Titicaca  to  the  ninth  degree  of  south  latitude."  To
confound  the  buildings  of  the  epoch  of  the  Incas  in  Peru,  and  of
Montezuma  and  his  Caciques,  in  Mexico,  with  the  aboriginal  monu-
ments, is  fatal  to  archjeology.  While  Cholula,  Uxmal,  Quiche,  Pacha-
camac  and  Chichen  were  all  perfectly  preserved  and  occupied  at  the
time  of  the  invasion  of  the  Spanish  banditti,  there  are  hundreds  of
ruined  cities  and  works  which  were  in  the  same  state  of  ruin  even
then;  whose  origin  was  as  unknown  to  the  conquered  Incas  and
Caciques  as  it  is  to  us;  and  which  are  undoubtedly  the  remains  of
unknown  and  now  extinct  peoples.  The  strange  shapes  of  the  heads
and  profiles  of  the  human  figures  upon  the  monoliths  of  Copan  are  a
warrant  for  the  correctness  of  the  hypothesis.  The  pronounced  dif-
ference between  the  skulls  of  these  races  and  the  Indo-European  skulls
was  at  first  attributed  to  mechanical  means,  used  by  the  mothers  for
giving  a  peculiar  conformation  to  the  head  of  their  children  during
infancy,  as  is  often  done  by  other  tribes  and  peoples.  But,  as  the  same
author  tells  us,  the  finding  in

A  mummy  of  a  fcetus  of  seven  or  eight  months  having  the  same  conformation  of
skull,  has  placed  a  doubt  as  to  the  certainty  of  this  fact.

And  besides  hypothesis,  we  have  scientific  and  unimpeachable  proof
of  a  civilization  that  must  have  existed  in  Peru  ages  ago.  Were  we  to
give  the  number  of  thousands  of  years  that  have  probably  elapsed
since  then,  without  first  showing  good  reasons  for  the  assumption,  the
reader  might  feel  like  holding  his  breath.     So  let  us  try.

The  Peruvian  guano  (Jiuano),  that  precious  fertilizer,  composed  of
the  excrement  of  sea-fowls,  intermixed  with  their  decaying  bodies,
eggs,  remains  of  seal,  and  so  on,  which  has  accumulated  upon  the  isles
of  the  Pacific  and  the  coast  of  South  America,  and  its  formation,  are
now  well  known.  It  was  Humboldt  who  first  discovered  and  drew  the
world's  attention  to  it  in  1804.  And,  while  describing  the  deposits  as
covering  the  granite  rocks  of  the  Chincas  and  other  islands  to  the
depth  of  fifty  or  sixty  feet,  he  states  that  the  accumulation  of  the  pre-
ceding 300  years,  since  the  Conquest,  had  formed  only  a  few  lines  in  thick-
ness. How  many  thousands  of  years,  then,  it  required  to  form  this
deposit  sixty  feet  deep,  is  a  matter  of  simple  calculation.  In  this  con-
nection we  may  now  quote  something  of  a  discovery  spoken  of  in  the
"Peruvian  Antiquities."*

0  A  paper  published  by  Dr.  E-  R.  Heath   in   the  Kansas  City  Review  of  Science  and  Industry,
November,  1878.

310  A   MODERN    PANARION.

Buried  sixty-two  feet  under  the  ground,  on  the  Chinca  islands,  stone-idols  and
water-pots  were  found,  while  thirty-three  and  thirty-five  feet  below  the  surface
"were  wooden  idols.  From  beneath  the  guano  on  the  Guanapi  islands,  just  south  of
Truxillo,  and  Macabi  just  north,  mummies,  birds  and  birds'  eggs,  gold  and  silver
ornaments  were  taken.  On  the  Macabi  the  labourers  found  some  large  valuable
golden  vases,  which  they  broke  up  and  divided  among  themselves,  even  though
offered  weight  for  weight  in  gold  coin,  and  thus  relics  of  the  greatest  interest  to
the  scientist  have  been  lost  for  ever.  He  who  can  determine  the  centuries  neces-
sary to  deposit  thirty  and  sixty  feet  of  guano  on  these  islands,  remembering  that
since  the  Conquest  three  hundred  years  ago,  no  appreciable  increase  in  depth  has
been  noted,  can  give  you  an  idea  of  the  antiquity  of  these  relics.

If  we  confine  ourselves  to  a  strictly  arithmetical  calculation,  then
allowing  twelve  lines  to  an  inch,  and  twelve  inches  to  a  foot,  and
allowing  one  line  to  every  century,  we  are  forced  to  believe  that  the
people  who  made  these  precious  gold  vases  lived  864,000  years  ago!
Leave  an  ample  margin  for  errors,  and  give  twelve  lines  to  a  century —
say  an  inch  to  every  ico  years — and  we  will  yet  have  72,000  years  back
a  civilization  which — if  we  judge  by  its  public  works,  the  durability  of
its  constructions,  and  the  grandeur  of  its  buildings — equalled,  and  in
some  things  certainly  surpassed,  our  own.

Having  well-defined  ideas  as  to  the  periodicity  of  cycles,  for  the

world  as  well  as  for  nations,  empires  and  tribes,  we  are  convinced  that

our  present  modern  civilization  is  but  the  latest  dawn  of  that  which

already  has  been   seen   an    innumerable   number  of  times  upon  this

planet.      It   may   not  be  exact  science,  but  it  is  both  inductive  and

deductive  logic,  based   upon  theories  far  less  hypothetical   and  more

palpable  than  many  another  theory,   held    as  strictly  scientific.      To

express  it  in  the  words  of  Prof.  T.  E.  Nipher,  of  St.  Louis,  "we  are

not  the  friends  of  theory  but  of  truth,"  and  until  truth  is   found,  we

welcome   every  new  theory,  however   unpopular  at   first,   for   fear  of

rejecting  in  our  ignorance  the  stone  which  may  in  time  become  the

very  corner-stone  of  the  truth.

The  errors  of  scientific  men  are  well-nigh  countless,  not  because  they  are  men  of
science,  but  because  they  are  men,

says  the  same  scientist;  and  further  quotes  the  noble  words  of  Faraday:
Occasionally,  and  frequently  the  exercise  of  the  judgment  ought  to  end  in  absolute
reservation.  It  may  be  very  distasteful  and  a  great  fatigue  to  suspend  a  conclusion,
but  as  we  are  not  infallible,  so  we  ought  to  be  cautious.  (Experimental  Researches,
24th  Series.)

It  is  doubtful  whether,  with  the  exception  of  a  few  of  the  most
prominent  ruins,  a  detailed   account  of  the  so-called  American  anti-

A    LAND    OF   MYSTERY.

3"

quities  ever  was  attempted.  Yet,  in  order  to  bring  out  the  more
prominently  a  point  of  comparison,  such  a  work  would  be  absolutely
necessary.  If  the  history  of  religion  and  of  mythology  and — far  more
important — the  origin,  developing  and  final  grouping  of  the  human
species  are  ever  to  be  unravelled,  we  have  to  trust  to  archaeological
research  rather  than  to  the  hypothetical  deductions  of  philology.  We
must  begin  by  massing  together  the  concrete  imagery  of  the  early
thought,  more  eloquent  in  its  stationary  form  than  the  verbal  expression
of  the  same,  the  latter  being  but  too  liable,  in  its  manifold  interpreta-
tions, to  be  distorted  in  a  thousand  ways.  This  would  afford  us  an
easier  and  more  trustworthy  clue.  Archaeological  Societies  ought  to
have  a  whole  cyclopaedia  of  the  world's  remains,  with  a  collation  of  the
most  important  of  the  speculations  as  to  each  locality.  For,  however
fantastic  and  wild  some  of  these  hypotheses  may  seem  at  first  glance,
yet  each  has  a  chance  of  proving  useful  at  some  time.  It  is  often  more
beneficial  to  know  what  a  thing  is  not  than  to  know  what  it  is,  as  Max
Mtiller  truly  tells  us.

It  is  not  within  the  limits  of  an  article  in  our  paper  that  any  such
object  could  be  achieved.  Availing  ourselves,  though,  of  the  reports
of  the  Government  surveyors,  trustworthy  travellers,  men  of  science,
and  even  our  own  limited  experience,  we  will  try  in  future  issues  to
give  to  our  Hindu  readers,  who  possibly  may  never  have  heard  of  these
antiquities,  a  general  idea  of  them.  Our  information  is  drawn  from
every  reliable  source;  the  survey  of  the  Peruvian  antiquities  being
mostly  due  to  Dr.  Heath's  able  paper,  above  mentioned.

II.

Evidently  we  Theosophists  are  not  the  only  iconoclasts  in  this  world
of  mutual  deception  and  hypocrisy.  We  are  not  the  only  ones  who
believe  in  cycles,  and,  opposing  the  biblical  chronology,  lean  towards
those  opinions  which  are  secretly  shared  by  so  many,  but  publicly
avowed  by  so  few.  We  Europeans  are  just  emerging  from  the  very
bottom  of  a  new  cycle,  and  progressing  upwards,  while  the  Asiatics —
Indians  especially — are  the  lingering  remnants  of  the  nations  which
filled  the  world  in  the  previous  and  now  departed  cycles.  Whether  the
Aryans  sprang  from  the  archaic  Americans,  or  the  latter  from  the  pre-
historic Aryans,  is  a  question  which  no  living  man  can  decide.  But
that  there  must  have  been  an  intimate  connection  at  some  time  between
the   old   Aryans,  the   pre-historic   inhabitants   of    America— whatever

312  A   MODERN    PANARION.

might  have  been  their  name — and  the  ancient  Egyptians,  is  a  matter
more  easily  proved  than  contradicted.  And  probably,  if  there  ever
was  such  a  connection,  it  must  have  taken  place  at  a  time  when  the
Atlantic  did  not  yet  divide  the  two  hemispheres  as  it  does  now.

In  his  Peruvian  Antiquities,  Dr.  Heath,  of  Kansas  City — vara  avis
among  scientific  men,  a  fearless  searcher,  who  accepts  truth  wherever
he  finds  it,  and  is  not  afraid  to  speak  it  out  in  the  very  face  of  dogmatic
opposition — sums  up  his  impressions  of  the  Peruvian  relics  in  the
following  words:

Three  times  the  Andes  sank  hundreds  of  feet  beneath  the  ocean  level,  and  again
were  slowly  brought  to  their  present  height.  A  man's  life  would  be  too  short  to
count  even  the  centuries  consumed  in  this  operation.  The  coast  of  Peru  has  risen
eighty  feet  since  it  felt  the  tread  of  Pizarro.  Supposing  the  Andes  to  have  risen
uniformly  and  without  interruption,  70,000  years  must  have  elapsed  before  thev
reached  their  present  altitude.

Who  knows,  then,  but  that  Jules  Verne's  fanciful  idea*  regarding  the  lost  conti-
nent Atlantis  ma}- be  near  the  truth?  Who  can  say  that,  where  now  the  Atlantic
Ocean  is,  a  continent  did  not  formerly  exist,  with  its  dense  population,  advanced  in
the  arts  and  sciences,  who,  as  they  found  their  land  sinking  beneath  the  waters,
retired  part  east  and  part  west,  thus  populating  the  two  hemispheres?  This  would
explain  the  similarity  of  their  archaeological  structures  and  races,  and  their  differ-
ences, modified  by  and  adapted  to  the  character  of  their  respective  climates  and
countries.  Thus  would  the  llama  and  camel  differ,  although  of  the  same  species;
thus  the  algoraba  and  espino  trees;  thus  the  Iroquois  Indians  of  North  America
and  the  most  ancient  Arabs  call  the  constellation  of  the  "Great  Bear"  by  the  same
name;  thus  various  nations,  cut  off  from  all  intercourse  or  knowledge  of  each
other,  divide  the  zodiac  into  twelve  constellations,  apply  to  them  the  same  names,
and  the  Northern  Hindus  apply  the  name  Andes  to  their  Himalayan  mountains,  as
did  the  South  Americans  to  their  principal  chain. t  Must  we  fall  in  the  old  rut,
and  suppose  no  other  means  of  populating  the  Western  Hemisphere  except  "by
way  of  Behring's  Strait"?  Must  we  still  locate  a  geographical  Eden  in  the  East,
and  suppose  a  land,  equally  adapted  to  man  and  as  old  geologically,  must  wait  the
aimless  wanderings  of  the  "lost  tribes  of  Israel"  to  become  populated?

Go  where  we  may,  to  explore  the  antiquities  of  America — whether  of
Northern,  Central,  or  Southern  America — we  are  first  of  all  impressed
with  the  magnitude  of  these  relics  of  ages  and  races  unknown,  and
then  with  the  extraordinary  similarity  they  present  to  the  mounds  and

*  This  "  idea  "  is  plainly  expressed  and  asserted  as  a  fact  by  Plato  in  his  Banquet ;  and  was  taken
up  by  Bacon  in  his  New  Atlantis.

+  '"  The  name  A  merica,"  said  I,  in  /sis  Unveiled  (vol.  ii.  p.  591),  three  years  ago,  "  ma3'  one  day  be
found  closely  related  to  Meru,  the  sacred  mount  in  the  centre  of  the  seven  continents."  When  first
discovered,  America  was  found  to  bear  among  some  native  tribes  the  name  of  Atlanta.  In  the  states
of  Central  America  we  find  the  name  Amerih,  signifying,  like  Meru,  a  great  mountain.  The  origin
of  the  Kamas  Indians  of  America  is  also  unknown.

A   LAND   OF   MYSTERY.  313

ancient  structures  of  old  India,  of  Egypt  and  even  of  some  parts  of
Europe.  Whoever  has  seen  one  of  these  mounds  has  seen  all.  Who-
ever has  stood  before  the  cyclopean  structures  of  one  continent  can
have  a  pretty  accurate  idea  of  those  of  the  other.  Only  be  it  said — we
know  still  less  of  the  age  of  the  antiquities  of  America  than  even  of
those  in  the  Valley  of  the  Nile,  of  which  we  know  next  to  nothing.
But  their  symbolism — apart  from  their  outward  form — is  evidently  the
same  as  in  Egypt,  India  and  elsewhere.  As  before  the  great  pyramid
of  Cheops  in  Cairo,  so  before  the  great  mound,  100  feet  high,  on  the
plain  of  Cahokia — near  St.  Louis  (Missouri) — which  measures  700  feet
long  by  800  feet  broad  at  the  base,  and  covers  upwards  of  eight  acres
of  ground,  having  20,000,000  cubic  feet  of  contents,  and  the  mound  on
the  banks  of  Brush  Creek,  Ohio,  so  accurately  described  by  Squier  and
Davis,  one  knows  not  whether  to  admire  more  the  geometrical  pre-
cision, prescribed  by  the  wonderful  and  mysterious  builders  in  the  form
of  their  monuments,  or  the  hidden  symbolism  they  evidently  sought  to
express.  The  Ohio  mound  represents  a  serpent,  upwards  of  1,000  feet
long.  Gracefully  coiled  in  capricious  curves,  it  terminates  in  a  triple
coil  at  the  tail.

The  embankment  constituting  the  effigy  is  upwards  of  five  feet  in  height,  by
thirty  feet  at  the  centre  of  the  body,  slightly  diminishing  towards  the  tail.*

The  neck  is  stretched  out  and  its  mouth  wide  open,  holding  within
its  jaws  an  oval  figure.

Formed  by  an  embankment  four  feet  in  height,  this  oval  is  perfectly  regular  in
outline,  its  transverse  and  conjugate  diameters  being  160  and  eighty  feet  respectively,

say  the  surveyors.  The  whole  represents  the  universal  cosmological
idea  of  the  serpent  and  the  egg.  This  is  easy  to  surmise.  But  how
came  this  great  symbol  of  the  Hermetic  wisdom  of  old  Egypt  to  find
itself  represented  in  North  America?  How  is  it  that  the  sacred  build-
ings found  in  Ohio  and  elsewhere,  these  squares,  circles,  octagons,  and
other  geometrical  figures,  in  which  one  recognizes  so  easily  the  pre-
vailing idea  of  the  Pythagorean  sacred  numerals,  seem  copied  from
The  Book  of  Numbers?  Apart  from  the  complete  silence  as  to  their
origin,  even  among  the  Indian  tribes,  who  have  otherwise  preserved
their  own  traditions  in  every  case,  the  antiquity  of  these  ruins  is  proved
by  the  existence  of  the  largest  and  most  ancient  forests  growing  on  the
buried  cities.  The  prudent  archaeologists  of  America  have  generously
assigned   them   2,000  years.     But  bv  whom   built,    and   whether  their

*  Smithsonian  Contributions  to  Knowledge,  vol.  i.

314  A    MODERN    PANARION.

authors  migrated,  or  disappeared  beneath  victorious  armies,  or  were
swept  out  of  existence  by  some  direful  epidemic,  or  a  universal  famine,
are  questions,    "probably  beyond  the  power  of   human   investigation
to  answer,"  they  say.     The  earliest  inhabitants  of  Mexico,  of  whom
history  has  any  knowledge — more  hypothetical   than  proven — are  the
Toltecs.     These  are  sicpposed  to  have  come  from  the  North  and  believed
to  have  entered  Anahuac  in  the  seventh  century  a.d.     They  are  also
credited   with   having    constructed   in    Central   America,   where    they
spread  in  the  eleventh  century,  some  of  the  great  cities  whose  ruins
still  exist.     In  this  case  it  is  they  who  must  also  have  carved  the  hiero-
glyphics that  cover  some  of  the  relics.     How  is  it,  then,  that  the  pic-
torial system  of  writing  of  Mexico,  which  was  used  by  the  conquered
people  and  learned  by  the  conquerors  and  their  missionaries,  does  not
yet  furnish  the  keys  to  the  hieroglyphics  of  Palenque  and  Copan,  not
to  mention  those  of  Peru  ?     And  these  civilized  Toltecs  themselves,
who  were  they,  and  whence  did  they  come?     And  who  are  the  Aztecs
that   succeeded   them?     Even    among  the   hieroglyphical    systems   of
Mexico,  there  were  some  which  the  foreign  interpreters  were  precluded
the  possibility  of  studying.    These  were  the  so-called  schemes  of  judicial
astrology  "given  but  not  explained  in  Lord  Kingsborough's  published
collection,"  and  set  down  as  purely  figurative  and  symbolical,  "intended
only  for  the  use  of  the  priests  and  diviners  and  possessed  of  an  esoteric
significance."     Many  of  the  hieroglyphics  on  the  monoliths  of  Palenque
and  Copan  are  of  the  same  character.     The  "priests  and  diviners"  were
all  killed  off  by  the  Catholic  fanatics — the  secret  died  with  them.

Nearly  all  the  mounds  in  North  America  are  terraced  and  ascended
by  large  graded  ways,  sometimes  square,  often  hexagonal,  octagonal  or
truncated,  but  in  all  respects  similar  to  the  teocallis  of  Mexico,  and  to
the  topes  of  India.  As  the  latter  are  attributed  throughout  this  country
to  the  work  of  the  five  Pandus  of  the  Lunar  Race,  so  the  Cyclopean
monuments  and  monoliths  on  the  shores  of  Lake  Titicaca,  in  the
republic  of  Bolivia,  are  ascribed  to  giants,  the  five  exiled  brothers
"from  beyond  the  mounts."  They  worshipped  the  moon  as  their  pro-
genitor and  lived  before  the  time  of  the  "Sons  and  Virgins  of  the  Sim."
Here,  the  similarity  of  the  Aryan  with  the  South  American  tradition  is
again  but  too  obvious,  and  the  Solar  and  Lunar  races — the  Surya
Vansha  and  the  Chandra  Vansha — reappear  in  America.

This  Lake  Titicaca,  which  occupies  the  centre  of  one  of  the  most
remarkable  terrestrial  basins  on  the  whole  globe,  is:

A   LAND   OF   MYSTERY.

H5

One  hundred  and  sixty  miles  long  and  from  fifty  to  eighty  broad,  and  disc-bar.
through  the  valley  of  El  Desaguadero,  to  the  south-east  into  another  lake,  called
Lake  Aullagas,  which  is  probably  kept  at  a  lower  level  by  evaporation  or  filtration,
since  it  has  no  known  outlet.     The  surface  of  the  lake  is  [2,846  feet  above  the-  sea,
and  it  is  the  most  elevated  body  of  waters  of  similar  size  in  the  world.

As  the  level  of  its  waters  has  very  much  decreased  in  the  historical
period,  it  is  believed  on  good  grounds  that  they  once  surrounded  the
elevated  spot  on  which  are  found  the  remarkable  ruins  of  Tiahuanaco.
The  latter  are  without   any  doubt  aboriginal    monuments   pertain-
ing to  an  epoch  which  preceded   the  Incal  period,  much  as  the  Dra-
vidian  and  other  aboriginal  peoples  preceded  the   Aryans   in    India.
Although  the  traditions  of  the  Incas  maintain  that  the  great  law-giver
and   teacher   of    the    Peruvians,    Manco   Capac — the    Manu   of    South
America — diffused  his  knowledge  and  influence  from  this  centre,  yet
the  statement  is  unsupported  by  facts.      If  the  original  seat  of  the
Aymara,  or  "Inca"  race  was  there,  as  claimed  by  some,  how  is  it  that
neither  the  Incas,  nor  the  Aymaras,  who  dwell  on  the  shores  of  the
lake  to  this  day,  nor  yet  the  ancient  Peruvians,  had  the  slightest  know-
ledge concerning  their  history?     Beyond  a  vague  tradition  which  tells
us  of  "giants"  having  built  these  immense  structures  in  one  night,  we
do  not  find  the   faintest  clue.     And  we  have  every  reason  to  doubt
whether  the  Incas  are  of  the  Aymara  race  at  all.    The  Incas  claim  their
descent  from  Manco  Capac,  the  son  of  the  Sun,  and  the  Aymaras  claim
this  legislator  as  their  instructor  and  the  founder  of  the  era  of  their
civilization.     Yet  neither  the  Incas  of  the  Spanish  period  could  prove
the  one,  nor  the  Aymaras  the  other.     The  language  of  the  latter  is
quite  distinct  from  the  Inichua — the  tongue  of  the  Incas;    and   they
were  the  only  race  that  refused  to  give  up  their  language  when  con-
quered by  the  descendants  of  the  Sun,  as  Dr.  Heath  tells  us.

The  ruins  afford  every  evidence  of  the  highest  antiquity.  Some  are
built  on  a  pyramidal  plan,  as  most  of  the  American  mounds  are,  and
cover  several  acres;  while  the  monolithic  doorways,  pillars  and  stone
idols,  so  elaborately  carved,  are  "sculptured  in  a  style  wholly  different
from  any  other  remains  of  art  yet  found  in  America."  D'Orbigny
speaks  of  the  ruins  in  the  most  enthusiastic  manner.     He  sa\  s:

These  monuments  consist  of  a  mound  raised  nearly  100  feet,  surrounded  with
pillars — of  temples  from  600  to  1,200  feet  in  length,  opening  precisely  towards  the
east,  and  adorned  with  colossal  angular  columns — of  porticoes  of  a  single  stone,
covered  with  reliefs  of  skilful  execution,  displaying  symbolical  representations  of
the  Sun,  and  the  condor,  his  messenger — of  basaltic  statues  loaded  with  bas-reli<

316  A    MODERN    PANARIOX.

in  which  the  design  of  the  carved  head  is  half  Egyptian — and  lastly,  of  the  interior
of  a  palace  formed  of  enormous  blocks  of  rock,  completely  hewn,  whose  dimen-
sions are  often  twenty-one  feet  in  length,  twelve  in  breadth,  and  six  in  thickness.
In  the  temples  and  palaces,  the  portals  are  not  inclined,  as  among  those  of  the
Incas,  but  perpendicular;  and  their  vast  dimensions,  and  the  imposing  masses  of
which  they  are  composed,  surpass  in  beauty  and  grandeur  all  that  were  afterwards
built  by  the  sovereigns  of  Cuzco.

L,ike  the  rest  of  his  fellow-explorers,  M.  D'Orbigny  believes  these
ruins  to  have  been  the  work  of  a  race  far  anterior  to  the  Incas.

Two  distinct  styles  of  architecture  are  found  in  these  relics  of  Lake
Titicaca.  Those  of  the  island  of  Coati,  for  instance,  bear  every  feature
in  common  with  the  ruins  of  Tiahuanaco;  so  do  the  vast  blocks  of
stone  elaborately  sculptured,  some  of  which,  according  to  the  report  of
the  surveyors  in  1846,  measure

Three  feet  in  width  by  eighteen  feet  in  length,  and  six  feet  in  thickness;

while  on  some  of  the  islands  of  the  I,ake  Titicaca  there  are  monuments

of  great  extent;

But  of  true  Peruvian  type,  believed  to  be  the  remains  of  temples  destroyed  by  the
Spaniards.

The  famous  sanctuary,  with  the  human  figure  in  it,  belongs  to  the
former.  Its  doorway,  ten  feet  high,  thirteen  feet  broad,  with  an  opening
six  feet  four  inches  by  three  feet  two  inches,  is  cut  from  a  single  stone.

Its  east  front  has  a  cornice,  in  the  centre  of  which  is  a  human  figure  of  strange
form,  crowned  with  rays,  interspersed  with  serpents  with  crested  heads.  On  each
side  of  this  figure  are  three  rows  of  square  compartments,  filled  with  human  and
other  figures,  of  apparently  symbolic  design.     .     .     .

Were  this  temple  in  India,  it  would  undoubtedly  be  attributed  to
Shiva;  but  it  is  at  the  Antipodes,  where  neither  the  foot  of  a  Shaiva
nor  one  of  the  Naga  tribe  has  ever  penetrated  to  the  knowledge  of
man,  though  the  Mexican  Indians  have  their  Nargal,  or  chief  sorcerer
and  serpent  worshipper.  The  ruins  standing  on  an  eminence,  which,
from  the  water-marks  around  it,  seems  to  have  been  formerly  an  island
in  Lake  Titicaca,  and :

The  level  of  the  lake  now  being  135  feet  lower,  and  its  shores  twelve  miles  dis-
tant, this  fact,  in  conjunction  with  others,  warrants  the  belief  that  these  remains
antedate  any  others  known  in  America.*

Hence,  all  these  relics  are  unanimously  ascribed  to  the  same

Unknown  and  mysterious  people  who  preceded  the  Peruvians,  as  the  Tulhuatecas
or  Toltecs  did  the  Aztecs.     It  seems  to  have  been  the  seat  of  the  highest  and  most

•  New  American  Cyclopcedia,  art.  "Teotihuacan."

A   LAND    OF    MYSTERY.  317

ancient  civilization  of  South  America   and  of  a  people  who   have  left   the  most

gigantic  monuments  of  their  power  and  skill.     .     .     .

And  these  monuments  are  all  either  Dracontias — temples  sacred  to
the  Snake — or  temples  dedicated  to  the  Sun.

Of  this  same  character  are  the  ruined  pyramids  of  Teotihtiacan  and
the  monoliths  of  Palenque  and  Copan.  The  former  are  som  •  eight
leagues  from  the  city  of  Mexico  on  the  plain  of  Otumla,  and  are  con-
sidered among  the  most  ancient  in  the  land.  The  two  principal  ones
are  dedicated  to  the  Sun  and  Moon,  respectively.  They  are  built  of
cut  stone,  square,  with  four  stories  and  a  level  area  at  the  top.  The
larger,  that  of  the  Sun,  is  221  feet  high,  680  feet  square  at  the  base,  and
covers  an  area  of  eleven  acres,  nearly  equal  to  that  of  the  great  pyramid
of  Cheops.  And  yet,  the  pyramid  of  Cholula,  higher  than  that  of
Teotihuacan  by  ten  feet  according  to  Humboldt,  and  having  1,400  feet
square  at  the  base,  covers  an  area  of  forty-five  acres!

It  is  interesting  to  hear  what  the  earliest  writers — the  historians  who
saw  them  during  the  first  conquest — say  even  of  some  of  the  most
modern  of  these  buildings,  of  the  great  temple  of  Mexico,  among
others.     It  consisted  of  an  immense  square  area,

Surrounded  by  a  wall  of  stone  and  lime,  eight  feet  thick,  with  battlements,  orna-
mented with  many  stone  figures  in  the  form  of  serpents,

says  one.  Cortez  shows  that  500  houses  might  be  easily  placed  within
its  enclosure.  It  was  paved  with  polished  stones,  so  smooth,  that  "the
horses  of  the  Spaniards  could  not  move  over  them  without  slipping,"
writes  Bernal  Diaz.  In  connection  with  this,  we  must  remember  that
it  was  not  the  Spaniards  who  conquered  the  Mexicans,  but  their  horses.
As  a  horse  was  never  seen  before  by  this  people  in  America,  until  the
Europeans  landed  it  on  the  coast,  the  natives,  though  excessively
brave,

Were  so  awestruck  at  the  sight  of  horses  and  the  roar  of  the  artillery,
that  they  took  the  Spaniards  to  be  of  divine  origin  and  sent  them
human  beings  as  sacrifices.     This  superstitious  panic   is  sufficient  to
account  for  the  fact  that  a  handful  of  men  could  so  easily  conquer
incalculable  thousands  of  warriors.

According  to  Gomara,  the  four  walls  of  the  enclosure  of  the  temple
corresponded  with  the  cardinal  points.     In  the  centre  of  this  gi
area  arose  the  great  temple,  an  immense  pyramidal   structure  of  eight
stages,  faced  with   stone,  300  feet  square  at  the  base  and   120  feet  in
height,  truncated,  with  a  level  summit,  upon  which  were  situated  two

318  A   MODERN    PANARION.

towers,  the  shrines  of  the  divinities  to  whom  it  was  consecrated —
Tezcatlipoca  and  Huitzlipochtli.  It  was  here  that  the  sacrifices  were
performed,  and  the  eternal  fire  maintained.  Clavigero  tells  us  that,
besides  this  great  pyramid,  there  were  forty  other  similar  structures
consecrated  to  various  divinities.     The  one  called  Tczcacalli,

The  House  of  the  Shining  Mirrors,  sacred  to  Tezcatlipoca,  the  God  of  Light,  the
Soul  of  the  World,  the  Vivifier,  the  Spiritual  Sun.

The  dwellings  of  priests,  who,  according  to  Zarate,  amounted  to
8,000,  were  near  by,  as  well  as  the  seminaries  and  the  schools.  Ponds
and  fountains,  groves  and  gardens,  in  which  flowers  and  sweet  smelling
herbs  were  cultivated  for  use  in  certain  sacred  rites  and  the  decoration
of  altars,  were  in  abundance;  and,  so  large  was  the  inner  yard,  that:

Eight  thousand  or  1 0,000  persons  had  sufficient  room  to  dance  in  it  upon  their
solemn  festivities,

says  Solis.  Torquemada  estimates  the  number  of  such  temples  in  the
Mexican  empire  at  40,000,  but  Clavigero,  speaking  of  the  majestic
Teocalli  (literally,  houses  of  God)  of  Mexico,  estimates  the  number
higher.

So  wonderful  are  the  features  of  resemblance  between  the  ancient
shrines  of  the  Old  and  the  New  World  that  Humboldt  remains  unable
to  express  his  surprise.     He  exclaims:

What  striking  analogies  exist  between  the  monuments  of  the  old  continents  and
those  of  the  Toltecs  who  .  .  .  built  these  colossal  structure,  truncated  pyra-
mids, divided  by  layers,  like  the  temple  of  Belus  at  Babylon!  Where  did  they  take
the  model  of  these  edifices?

The  eminent  naturalist  might  have  also  enquired  whence  the  Mexicans
got  all  their  Christian  virtues,  being  but  poor  pagans.  The  code  of  the
Aztecs,  says  Prescott:

Evinces  a  profound  respect  for  the  great  principles  of  morality,  and  as  clear  a
perception  of  these  principles  as  is  to  be  found  in  the  most  cultivated  nations.

Some  of  these  are  very  curious  inasmuch  as  they  show  such  a  simi-
larity to  some  of  the  Gospel  ethics.  "He  who  looks  too  curiously  on
a  woman,  commits  adultery  with  his  eyes,"  says  one  of  them.  "Keep
peace  with  all;  bear  injuries  with  humility;  God,  who  sees,  will  avenge
you,"  declares  another.  Recognizing  but  one  Supreme  Power  in
Nature,  they  addressed  it  as  the  Deity

By  whom  we  live,  omnipresent,  that  knoweth  all  thoughts  and  giveth  all  gifts,
without  whom  man  is  as  nothing;  invisible,  incorporeal,  of  perfection  and  purity,
under  whose  wings  we  find  repose  and  a  sure  defence.

A   LAND    OF    MYSTERY.  3^

And,  in  naming  their  children,  says  Lord  Kingsborough :
They  used  a  ceremony  strongly  resembling  the  Christian  rite  of  baptism,  the  lips
and  bosom  of  the  infant  being  sprinkled  with  water,  and  the  Lord  implored  to
wash  away  the  sin  that  was  given  to  it  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  so  that  the
child  might  be  born  anew.  Their  laws  were  perfect;  justice,  contentment  and  peace
reigned  in  the  kingdom  of  these  benighted  heathens,

when  the  brigands  and  the  Jesuits  of  Cortez  landed  at  Tabasco.  A
century  of  murders,  robbery,  and  forced  conversion,  were  sufficient  to
transform  this  quiet,  inoffensive  and  wise  people  into  what  they  are
now.  They  have  fully  benefited  by  dogmatic  Christianity.  And  he,
who  ever  went  to  Mexico,  knows  what  that  means.  The  country  is
full  of  bloodthirsty  Christian  fanatics,  thieves,  rogues,  drunkards,
debauchees,  murderers,  and  the  greatest  liars  the  world  has  ever  pro-
duced! Peace  and  glory  to  your  ashes,  O  Cortez  and  Torquemada!
In  this  case  at  least,  will  you  never  be  permitted  to  boast  of  the  en-
lightenment your  Christianity  lias  poured  out  on  the  poor,  and  once
virtuous  heathens!

III.

The  ruins  of  Central  America  are  no  less  imposing.  Massively
built,  with  walls  of  a  great  thickness,  they  are  usually  marked  by
broad  stairways  leading  to  the  principal  entrance.  When  composed  of
several  stories,  each  successive  story  is  usually  smaller  than  that  below
it,  giving  the  structure  the  appearance  of  a  pyramid  of  several  stages.
The  front  walls,  either  made  of  stone  or  stuccoed,  are  covered  with
elaborately  carved,  symbolical  figures;  and  the  interior  divided  into
corridors  and  dark  chambers,  with  arched  ceilings,  the  roofs  supported
by  overlapping  courses  of  stones,

Constituting  a  pointed  arch,  corresponding  in  type  with  the  earliest  monuments
of  the  Old  World.

Within  several  chambers  at  Palenque,  tablets,  covered  with  sculp-
tures and  hieroglyphics  of  fine  design  and  artistic  execution,  were  dis-
covered by  Stephens.  In  Honduras,  at  Copan,  a  whole  city — temples,
houses  and  grand  monoliths  intricately  carved — was  unearthed  in  an
old  forest  by  Catherwood  and  Stephens.  The  sculpture  and  general
style  of  Copan  are  unique,  and  no  such  style  or  even  anything  approach-
ing it  has  been  found  anywhere  else,  except  at  Quirigua  and  in  the
islands  of  L,ake  Nicaragua.  No  one  can  decipher  the  weird  hiero-
glyphical  inscriptions  on  the  altars  and  monoliths.  With  the  excep-
tion of  a  few  works  of  uncut  stone,

320  A    MODERN   PANARION.

To  Copan  we  may  safely  assign  an  antiquity  higher  than  to  any  of  the  other
monuments  of  Central  America  with  which  we  are  acquainted,
says  the  New  American   Cyclopaedia.      At  the  period  of  the  Spanish
conquest  Copan  was  already  a  forgotten  ruin,  concerning  which  only
the  vaguest  traditions  existed.

No  less  extraordinary  are  the  remains  of  the  different  epochs  in
Peru.  The  ruins  of  the  temple  of  the  Sun  at  Cuzco  are  yet  imposing,
notwithstanding  that  the  depredatory  hand  of  the  Vandal  Spaniard
passed  heavily  over  it.  If  we  may  believe  the  narratives  of  the  con-
querors themselves,  they  found  it  on  their  arrival,  a  kind  of  fairy-tale
castle.  With  its  enormous  circular  stone  wall  completely  encompass-
ing the  principal  temple,  chapels  and  buildings,  it  is  situated  in  the
very  heart  of  the  city,  and  even  its  remains  justly  provoke  the  admira-
tion of  the  traveller.

Aqueducts  opened  within  the  sacred  enclosure;  and  within  it  were  gardens  and
walks  among  shrubs  and  floiuers  of  gold  and  silver,  made  in  imitation  of  the  produc-
tions of  nature.  It  was  attended  by  4,000  priests.  The  ground  for  200  paces  around
the  temple  was  considered  hoi}',  and  no  one  was  allowed  to  pass  within  this
boundary  but  with  naked  feet.*

Besides  this  great  temple,  there  were  300  other  inferior  temples  at
Cuzco.  Next  to  the  latter  in  beauty  was  the  celebrated  temple  of
Pachacamac.  Still  another  great  temple  of  the  Sun  is  mentioned  by
Humboldt;  and,

At  the  base  of  the  hill  of  Cannar  was  formerly  a  famous  shrine  of  the  Sun,  con-
sisting of  the  universal  symbol  of  that  luminary,  formed  by  nature  upon  the  face
of  a  great  rock.

Roman  tells  us

That  the  temples  of  Peru  were  built  upon  high  ground  or  the  top  of  the  hills,
and  were  surrounded  by  three  and  four  circular  embankments  of  earth,  one  within
the  other.

Other  remains  seen  by  myself— especially  mounds — are  surrounded
by  two,  three  and  four  circles  of  stones.  Near  the  town  of  Cayambe,
on  the  very  spot  on  which  Ulloa  saw  and  described  an  ancient  Peru-
vian temple,  "perfectly  circular  in  form  and  open  at  the  top,"  there  are
several  such  cromlechs.  Quoting  from  an  article  in  the  Madras  Times
of  1876,  Mr.  J.  H.  Rivett-Carnac  gives,  in  his  Archaeological  Notes,  the
following  information  upon  some  curious  mounds  in  the  neighbour-
hood of  Bangalore:f

La  Vega.
+  "On  Ancient  Sculpturing-  on  Rocks  in  Kuniaon,  India,  similar  to  those  found  on  Monoliths  and
Rocks  in  Europe."     By  J.  H.  Rivett-Carnac,  Bengal  Civil  Service,  CLE.,  F.S.A.,  M.R.A.S.,  F.G.S.,  etc.

A   LAND    OF   MYSTERY.  321

Near  the  village  there  are  at  least  one  hundred  cromlechs  plainly  to  be  seen.
These  cromlechs  are  surrounded  by  circles  of  stones,  some  of  them  with  concentric
circles  three  and  four  deep.  One  very  remarkable  in  appearance  has  four  circles
of  large  stones  around  it,  and  is  called  by  the  natives  "Pandavara  Gudi"  or  the
temple  of  the  Pandus.  This  is  supposed  to  be  the  first  instance  where  the  natives
popularly  imagine  a  structure  of  this  kind  to  have  been  the  temple  of  a  bygone,  if
not  of  a  mythical,  race.  Many  of  these  structures  have  a  triple  circle,  some  a
double,  and  a  few  single  circles  of  stone  round  them.

Ill  the  thirty-fifth  degree  of  latitude,  the  Arizona  Indians  in  North
America  have  their  rude  altars  to  this  day,  surrounded  by  precise! v
such  circles,  and  their  sacred  spring,  discovered  by  Major  Alfred  R.
Calhoun,  F.G.S.,  of  the  United  States  Army  Survey  Commission,  is
surrounded  with  the  same  symbolical  wall  of  stones  as  is  found  in
Stonehenge  and  elsewhere.

By  far  the  most  interesting  and  full  account  we  have  read  for  a  long
time  of  the  Peruvian  antiquities  is  that  from  the  pen  of  Dr.  Heath,
of  Kansas,  already  mentioned.  Condensing  the  general  picture  of
the  remains  into  the  limited  space  of  a  few  pages  in  a  periodical,*  he
yet  manages  to  present  a  masterly  and  vivid  picture  of  the  wealth  of
these  remains.  More  than  one  speculator  has  grown  rich  in  a  few
days  through  his  desecrations  of  the  "huacas."  The  remains  of  count-
less generations  of  unknown  races  who  had  slept  there  undisturbed —
who  knows  for  how  many  ages? — are  now  left  by  the  sacrilegious
treasure-hunter  to  crumble  into  dust  under  the  tropical  sun.  Dr.
Heath's  conclusions,  more  startling,  perchance,  than  his  discoveries,
are  worthy  of  being  recorded.  We  will  repeat  in  brief  his  descrip-
tions:

In  the  Jeguatepegue  valley  in  Peru  in  io°  24'  S.  latitude,  four  miles  north  of  the
port  of  Pacasmayo,  is  the  Jeguatepegue  river.  Near  it.  beside  the  southern  shore,
is  an  elevated  platform  "one-fourth  of  a  mile  square  and  forty  feet  high,  all  of
adobes,  or  sun-burnt  bricks.  A  wall  of  fifty  feet  in  width  connects  it  with  another."
150  feet  high,  200  feet  across  the  top,  and  500  at  the  base,  nearly  square.  This
latter  was  built  in  sections  of  rooms,  ten  feet  square  at  the  base,  six  feet  at  the  top
and  about  eight  feet  high.  All  of  this  same  class  of  mounds — temples  to  worship
the  sun,  or  fortresses,  as  they  may  be — have  on  the  northerly  side  an  incline  for  an
entrance.  Treasure-seekers  have  cut  into  this  one  about  half-way,  and  it  is  said
150,000  dollars'  worth  of  gold  and  silver  ornaments  were  found.

Here  many  thousands  of  men  were  buried,  and  beside  the  skeletons
were  found  in  abundance  ornaments  of  gold,  silver,  copper,  coral
beads,  etc.

*  See  Kansas  City  Review  of  Science  and  Industry,  November,

322  A    MODERN    PANARION.

On  the  north  side  of  the  river  are  the  extensive  ruins  of  a  walled  city,  two  miles
wide  by  six  long.  .  .  .  Follow  the  river  to  the  mountains.  All  along  you  pass
ruin  after  ruin  and  huaca  after  huaca  (burial  places).

At  Tolon  there  is  another  ruined  city.      Five  miles  further  up  the

river

There  is  an  isolated  boulder  of  granite,  four  and  six  feet  in  its  diameters,  covered
with  hieroglyphics;  fourteen  miles  further,  a  point  of  mountain  at  the  junction  of
two  ravines  is  covered  to  a  height  of  more  than  fifty  feet  with  the  same  class  of
hieroglyphics — birds,  fishes,  snakes,  cats,  monkeys,  men,  sun,  moon,  and  many  odd
and  now  unintelligible  forms.  The  rock  on  which  these  are  cut  is  a  silicated  sand-
stone, and  many  of  the  lines  are  an  eighth  of  an  inch  deep.  In  one  large  stone
there  are  three  holes,  twenty  to  thirty  inches  deep,  six  inches  in  diameter  at  the
orifice  and  two  at  the  apex.  ...  At  Anchi,  on  the  Rimac  river,  upon  the  face
of  a  perpendicular  wall  200  feet  above  the  river-bed,  there  are  two  hieroglyphics,
representing  an  imperfect  B  and  a  perfect  D.  In  a  crevice  below  them,  near  the
river,  were  found  buried  25,000  dollars'  worth  of  gold  and  silver.  When  the  Incas
learned  of  the  murder  of  their  chief,  what  did  they  do  with  the  gold  they  were
bringing  for  his  ransom  ?  Rumour  says  they  buried  it.  .  .  .  May  not  these
markings  at  Yonan  tell  something,  since  they  are  on  the  road  and  near  to  the  Incal
city  ?

The  above  was  published  in  November,  1878;  when  in  October,  1877,
in  Isis  Unveiled  (vol.  i.  p.  595),  I  gave  a  legend  which,  from  circum-
stances too  long  to  explain,  I  hold  to  be  perfectly  trustworthy,  relating
to  these  same  buried  treasures  for  the  Inca's  ransom,  a  journal  more
satirical  than  polite  classed  it  with  the  tales  of  Baron  Munchausen.
The  secret  was  revealed  to  me  by  a  Peruvian.  At  Arica,  going  from
Lima,  there  stands  an  enormous  rock,  which  tradition  points  to  as  the
tomb  of  the  Incas.  As  the  last  rays  of  the  setting  sun  strike  the  face
of  the  rock  one  can  see  curious  hieroglyphics  inscribed  upon  it.  These
characters  form  one  of  the  land-marks  that  show  how  to  get  at  the
immense  treasures  buried  in  subterranean  corridors.  The  details  are
given  in  his,  and  I  will  not  repeat  them.  Strong  corroborative  evi-
dence is  now  found  in  more  than  one  recent  scientific  work,  and  the
statement  may  be  less  pooh-poohed  now  than  it  was  then.  Some  miles
beyond  Yonan,  on  a  ridge  of  a  mountain  700  feet  above  the  river,  are
the  walls  of  another  city.  Six  and  twelve  miles  further  are  extensive
walls  and  terraces;  seventy-eight  miles  from  the  coast  "you  zig-zag  up
the  mountain  side  7,000  feet,  then  descend  2,000"  to  arrive  at  Coxa-
molca,  the  city  where,  unto  this  day,  stands  the  house  in  which
Atahualpa,  the  unfortunate  Inca,  was  held  prisoner  by  the  treacherous
Pizarro.     It  is  the  house  which  the  Inca  "promised  to  fill  with  gold

A   LAND   OF    MYSTERY.  323

as  high  as  he  could  reach  in  exchange  for  his  liberty"  in  1532;  he  did
fill  it  with  17,500,000  dollars'  worth  of  gold,  and  so  kept  his  promise.
But  Pizarro,  the  swineherd  of  Spain  and  the  worthy  acolyte  of  the
priest  Hernando  de  Lugues,  murdered  him,  notwithstanding  his  pledge
of  honour.     Three  miles  from  this  town

There  is  a  wall  of  unknown  make,  cemented;  the  cement  is  harder  than  stone
itself.  ...  At  Chepen  there  is  a  mountain  with  a  wall  twenty  feet  high,  the
summit  being  almost  entirely  artificial.  Fifty  miles  south  of  Pacaomayo,  between
the  seaport  of  Huanchaco  and  Truxillo,  are  the  ruins  of  Chan-Chan,  the  capital
city  of  the  Chimoa  kingdom.  .  .  .  The  road  from  the  port  to  the  city  crosses
these  ruins,  entering  by  a  causeway  about  four  feet  from  the  ground,  and  leading
from  one  great  mass  of  ruins  to  another;  beneath  this  is  a  tunnel.

Be  they  forts,  castles,  palaces,  or  burial  mounds  called  "huacas,"  all
hear  the  name  "huaca."  Hours  of  wandering  on  horseback  among
these  ruins  give  only  a  confused  idea  of  them,  nor  can  any  explorers
there  point  out  what  were  palaces  and  what  were  not.  .  .  .  The
highest  enclosures  must  have  cost  an  immense  amount  of  labour.

To  give  an  idea  of  the  wealth  found  in  the  country  by  the  Spaniards
we  copy  the  following,  taken  from  the  records  of  the  municipality  in
the  city  of  Truxillo  by  Dr.  Heath.  It  is  a  copy  of  the  accounts  that
are  found  in  the  Book  of  Fifths  of  the  Treasury  in  the  years  1577  and
1578,  of  the  treasures  found  in  the  "Huaca  of  Toledo"  by  one  man
alone.

Firstly. — In  Truxillo,  Peru,  on  July  22nd,  1577,  Don  Gracia  Gutierrez  de  Toledo
presented  himself  at  the  royal  treasury,  to  give  into  the  royal  chest  a  fifth.  He
brought  a  bar  of  gold  19  carats  ley  and  weighing  2,400  Spanish  dollars,  of  which
the  fifth  being  708  dollars,  together  with  \\  per  cent,  to  the  chief  assayer,  were
deposited  in  the  royal  box.

Secondly.— -On  December  12th  he  presented  himself  with  five  bars  of  gold,  15
and  19  carats  ley,  weighing  8,918  dollars.

Thirdly.— On  January  7th,  1578,  he  came  with  his  fifth  of  Large  bars  and  plates  of
gold,  115  in  number,  15  to  20  carats  ley,  weighing  153,280  dollars.

Fourthly.— On  March  Sth  he  brought  sixteen  bars  of  gold.  14  to  21  carats  ley,
weighing  21,118  dollars.

Fifthly.— On  April  5th  he  brought  different  ornaments  of  gold,  being  little  belts
of  gold  and  patterns  of  corn-heads  and  other  things,  of  14  carats  ley,  weighing
6,272  dollars.

Sixthly.— On  April  20th  he  brought  three  small  bars  of  gold,  20  carats  ley,  weigh-
ing 4,170  dollars.

Seventhly.— On  July  12th  he  came  with  forty-seven  bars,  14  to  21  carat-  ley,
weighing  77,312  dollars.

324  A    MODERN    PANARION.

Eighthly. — On  the  same  day  he  came  back  with  another  portion  of  gold  and
ornaments  of  corn-heads  and  pieces  of  effigies  of  animals,  weighing  4,704  dollars.

The  sum  of  these  eight  bringings  amounted  to  278,174  gold  dollars  or  Spanish
ounces.  Multiplied  by  sixteen  gives  4,450,784  silver  dollars.  Deducting  the  royal
fifth— 985,95375  dollars — left  3,464,830-25  dollars  as  Toledo's  portion!  Even  after
this  great  haul,  effigies  of  different  animals  of  gold  were  found  from  time  to  time.
Mantles  also  adorned  with  square  pieces  of  gold,  as  well  as  robes  made  with
feathers  of  divers  colours,  were  dug  up.  There  is  a  tradition  that  in  the  huaca
of  Toledo  there  were  two  treasures,  known  as  the  great  and  little  fish.  The  smaller
only  has  been  found.  Between  Huacho  and  Supe,  the  latter  being  120  miles  north
of  Callao,  near  a  point  called  Atahuangri,  there  are  two  enormous  mounds  resem-
bling the  Campana  and  San  Miguel,  of  the  Huatica  valley,  soon  to  be  described.
About  five  miles  from  Patavilca  (south,  and  near  Supe)  is  a  place  called  "Para-
mouga,"  or  the  fortress.  The  ruins  of  a  fortress  of  great  extent  are  here  visible;
the  walls  are  of  tempered  clay,  about  six  feet  thick.  The  principal  building  stood
on  an  eminence,  but  the  walls  were  continued  to  the  foot  of  it,  like  regular  circum-
vallations;  the  ascent  winding  round  the  hill  like  a  labyrinth,  having  many  angles
which  probably  served  as  outworks  to  defend  the  place.  In  this  neighbourhood
much  treasure  has  been  excavated,  all  of  which  must  have  been  concealed  by  the
pre-historic  Indians,  as  we  have  no  evidence  of  the  Iucas  ever  having  occupied  this
part  of  Peru  after  they  had  subdued  it.

Not  far  from  Ancon,  on  a  circuit  of  six  to  eight  miles,
On  every  side  you  see  skulls,  legs,  arms  and  whole  skeletons  lying  about  in  the
sand.     ...     At  Parmayo,  fourteen  miles  further  down  north,

and  on  the  sea-shore  is  another  great  burving-ground.  Thousands
of  skeletons  lie  about,  thrown  out  by  the  treasure- seekers.  It  has
more  than  half  a  mile  of  cutting  through  it.  .  .  .  It  extends  up
the  face  of  the  hill  from  the  sea-shore  to  the  height  of  about  800  feet.
.  .  .  Whence  come  these  hundreds  and  thousands  of  peoples  who
are  buried  at  Ancon?  Time  and  time  again  the  archaeologist  finds
himself  face  to  face  with  such  questions,  to  which  he  can  only  shrug
his  shoulders  and  say  with  the  natives — "Quien  Sabe?" — who  knows?
Dr.  Hutchinson  writes,  under  date  of  October  30th,  1872,  in  the
South  Pacific  Times:

I  am  come  to  the  conclusion  that  Chancay  is  a  great  city  of  the  dead,  or  has
been  an  immense  ossuary  of  Peru;  for  go  where  you  will,  on  a  mountain  top  or
level  plain,  or  by  the  sea-side,  you  meet  at  every  turn  skulls  and  bones  of  all
descriptions.

In  the  Huatica  valley,  which  is  an  extensive  ruin,  there  are  seven-
teen mounds,  called  "huacas,"  although,  remarks  the  writer,  "they
present  more  the  form  of  fortresses  or  castles  than  burying-grounds."
A  triple  wall  surrounded  the  city.     These  walls  are  often  three  yards

!

A   LAND   OF   MYSTERY.  325

in  thickness  and  from  fifteen  to  twenty  feet  high.  To  the  cast  of  these
is  the  enormous  mound  called  Huaca  of  Pando  .  .  .  and  the  great
ruins  of  fortresses,  which  natives  entitle  Huaca  of  the  Bell.  La  Cam-
pana,  the  Huacas  of  Pando,  consisting  of  a  series  of  large  and  small
mounds,  and  extending  over  a  stretch  of  ground  incalculable  without
being  measured,  form  a  colossal  accumulation.  The  "Bell"  mound  is
no  feet  high.  Towards  Callao  there  is  an  oblong  plateau  (278  yards
long  and  ninety-six  across),  having  on  the  top  eight  gradations  of
declivity,  each  from  one  to  two  yards  lower  than  its  neighbour,  and
making  a  total  in  length  and  breadth  of  about  278  yards,  according
to  the  calculation  of  J.  B.  Steere,  of  Michigan,  Professor  of  Natural
History.

The  square  plateau  first  mentioned,  at  the  base  consists  of  two  divi-
sions .  .  each  measuring  a  perfect  square  forty-seven  to  forty-
eight  yards;  the  two  joining  form  the  square  of  ninety-six  yards.
Besides  this,  is  another  square  of  forty-seven  to  forty-eight  yards.  On
the  top,  returning  again,  we  find  the  same  symmetry  of  measurement
in  the  multiples  of  twelve,  nearly  all  the  ruins  in  this  valley  being  the
same,  which  is  a  fact  for  the  curious.  Was  it  by  accident  or  design?
.  .  .  The  mound  is  a  truncated  pyramidal  form,  and  is  calculated  to
contain  a  mass  of  14,641,820  cubit  feet  of  material.  .  .  .  The  "For-
tress" is  a  huge  structure,  eight}-  feet  high  and  150  yards  in  measure-
ment. Many  large  square  rooms  show  their  outlines  on  the  top,  but
are  filled  with  earth.  Who  brought  this  earth  here,  and  with  what
object  was  the  filling-up  accomplished?  The  work  of  obliterating  all
space  in  these  rooms  with  loose  earth  must  have  been  almost  as  great
as  the  construction  of  the  building  itself.  .  .  .  Two  miles  south
we  find  another  similar  structure,  more  spacious  and  with  a  greater
number  of  apartments.  .  .  .  It  is  nearly  170  yards  in  length,  and
168  in  breadth,  and  ninety-eight  feet  high.  The  whole  of  these  ruins
.  .  .  were  enclosed  by  high  walls  of  adobes — large  mud  bricks —
some  from  one  to  two  yards  in  thickness,  length  and  breadth.  The
"huaca"  of  the  "Bell"  contains  about  20,220,840  cubic  feet  of  material,
while  that  of  "San  Miguel"  has  25,650,800.  These  two  buildings,  with
their  terraces,  parapets  and  bastions,  with  a  large  number  of  rooms  and
squares,  are  now  filled  up  with  earth !

Near  "Mira  Flores"  is  Ocheran — the  largest  mound  in  the  Huatica
valley.  It  has  ninety-five  feet  of  elevation  and  a  width  of  fifty-five
yards  on  the  summit,  and  a  total   length  of  428  yards,  or   [,284  feet,

326  A    MODERN   PANARION.

another  multiple  of  twelve.  It  is  enclosed  by  a  double  wall,  816  yards
in  length  by  700  across,  thus  enclosing  117  acres.  Between  Ocharas
and  the  ocean  are  from  fifteen  to  twenty  masses  of  ruins  like  those
already  described.

The  Inca  temple  of  the  Sun,  like  the  temple  of  Cholula  on  the  plains
of  Mexico,  is  a  sort  of  vast  terraced  pyramid  of  earth.  It  is  from  200
to  300  feet  high,  and  forms  a  semi-lunar  shape  that  is  beyond  half  a
mile  in  extent.  Its  top  measures  about  ten  acres  square.  Many  of
the  walls  are  washed  over  with  red  paint,  and  are  as  fresh  and  bright
as  when  centuries  ago  it  was  first  put  on.  ...  In  the  Canete  valley,
opposite  the  Chincha  Guano  Islands,  are  extensive  ruins,  described  by
Squier.  From  the  hill  called  "Hill  of  Gold,"  copper  and  silver  pins
were  taken  like  those  used  by  ladies  to  pin  their  shawls;  also  tweezers
for  pulling  out  the  hair  of  the  eyebrows,  eyelids  and  whiskers,  as  well
as  silver  cups.

Dr.  Heath  observes:

The  coast  of  Peru  extends  from  Tumbey  to  the  river  Loa,  a  distance  of  1,233
miles.  Scattered  over  this  whole  extent  there  are  thousands  of  ruins  besides  those
just  mentioned,  while  nearly  every  hill  and  spire  of  the  mountains  have  upon
them  or  about  them  some  relic  of  the  past;  and  in  every  ravine,  from  the  coast  to
the  central  plateau,  there  are  ruins  of  walls,  cities,  fortresses,  burial-vaults  and
miles  and  miles  of  terraces  and  water-courses.  Across  the  plateau  and  down  the
eastern  slope  of  the  Andes  to  the  home  of  the  wild  Indian,  and  into  the  unknown
impenetrable  forest,  still  you  find  them.  In  the  mountains,  however,  where  showers
of  rain  and  snow  with  the  terrific  thunder  and  lightning  are  nearly  constant  a
number  of  months  each  year,  the  ruins  are  different.  Of  granite,  porphyritic  lime
and  silicated  sandstone,  these  massive,  colossal,  cyclopean  structures  have  resisted
the  disintegration  of  time,  geological  transformations,  earthquakes,  and  the  sacri-
legious, destructive  hand  of  the  warrior  and  treasure-seeker.  The  masonry  com-
posing these  walls,  temples,  houses,  towers,  fortresses,  or  sepulchres,  is  uncemented,
held  in  place  by  the  incline  of  the  walls  from  the  perpendicular,  and  adaptation  of
each  stone  to  the  place  destined  for  it,  the  stones  having  from  six  to  many  sides,
each  dressed  and  smoothed  to  fit  another  or  others  with  such  exactness  that  the
blade  of  a  small  penknife  cannot  be  inserted  in  any  of  the  seams  thus  formed,
whether  in  the  central  parts  entirely  hidden  or  on  the  internal  or  external  surfaces.
These  stones,  selected  with  no  reference  to  uniformity  in  shape  or  size,  vary  from
one-half  cubic  foot  to  1,500  cubic  feet  solid  contents,  and  if,  in  the  many,  many
millions  of  stones  you  could  find  one  that  would  fit  in  the  place  of  another,  it
would  be  purely  accidental.  In  "Triumph  Street,"  in  the  city  of  Cuzco,  in  apart
of  the  wall  of  the  ancient  house  of  the  Virgins  of  the  Sun,  is  a  very  large  stone,
known  as  "the  stone  of  the  twelve  corners,"  since  it  is  joined  with  those  that
surround  it,  by  twelve  faces,  each  having  a  different  angle.     Besides  these  twelve

A   LAND   OF   MYSTERY.  327

faces  it  has  its  internal  one,  and  no  one  knows  how  many  it  has  on  its  back  that  is
hidden  in  the  masonry.  In  the  wall  in  the  centre  of  the  Cuzco  fortress  there  are
stones  thirteen  feet  high,  fifteen  feet  long,  and  eight  feet  thick,  and  all  have  been
quarried  miles  away.  Near  this  city  there  is  an  oblong  smooth  boulder,  eight*  ■  11
feet  in  its  longer  axis  and  twelve  feet  in  its  lesser.  On  one  side  arc-  large  niches  cut
out,  in  which  a  man  can  stand,  and,  by  swaying  his  body,  cause  tin-  stone  to  rock.
These  niches  apparently  were  made  solely  for  this  purpose.  One  <>f  tin-  most
wonderful  and  extensive  of  these  works  in  stone  is  that  called  ( Hlantay-Tambo,
a  ruin  situated  thirty  miles  north  of  Cuzco,  in  a  narrow  ravine  on  the-  hank  of  the
river  Urubamba.  It  consists  of  a  fortress  constructed  on  the  top  of  a  sloping,
craggy  eminence.  Extending  from  it  to  the  plain  below  is  a  stony  stairway.  At
the  top  of  the  stairway  are  six  large  slabs,  twelve  feet  high,  live  feet  wide  and  three
feet  thick,  side  by  side,  having  between  them  and  on  top  narrow  strips  of  stone
about  six  inches  wide,  frames,  as  it  were,  to  the  slabs,  and  all  being  of  dressed
stone.  At  the  bottom  of  the  hill,  part  of  which  was  made  by  hand,  and  at  the  foot
of  the  stairs,  a  stone  wall  ten  feet  wide  and  twelve  feet  high  extends  some  distance
into  the  plain.     In  it  are  many  niches  all  facing  the  south.

The  ruins  in  the  islands  in  Lake  Titicaca,  wdiere  Incal  history  begins,  have  often
been  described.

At  Tiahuanaco,  a  few  miles  south  of  the  lake,  there  are  stones  in  the  form  of
columns,  partly  dressed,  placed  in  line  at  certain  distances  from  each  other,  and
having  an  elevation  above  the  ground  of  from  eighteen  to  twenty  feet.  In  this
same  line  there  is  a  monolithic  doorway,  now  broken,  ten  feet  high  by  thirteen
wide.  The  space  cut  out  for  the  door  is  seven  feet  four  inches  high  by  three  feet
two  inches  wide.  The  whole  face  of  the  stone  above  the  door  is  engraved.  Another,
similar,  but  smaller,  lies  on  the  ground  beside  it.  These  stones  are  of  hard  por-
phyry, and  differ  geologically  from  the  surrounding  rock;  hence  we  infer  they
must  have  been  brought  from  elsewhere.

At  "Chavin  de  Huanta."  a  town  in  the  province  of  Huari,  there  are  some  ruins
worthy  of  note.  The  entrance  to  them  is  by  an  alley-way,  six  feet  wide  and  nine
feet  high,  roofed  over  with  sandstone  partly  dressed,  of  more  than  twelve  feet  in
length.  On  each  side  there  are  rooms  twelve  feet  wide,  roofed  over  by  large  pieces
of  sandstone,  one  and  a  half  feet  thick  and  from  six  to  nine  feet  wide.  The  walls
of  the  rooms  are  six  feet  thick,  and  have  some  loopholes  in  them,  probably  for
ventilation.  In  the  floor  of  this  passage  there  is  a  very  narrow  entrance  to  a  sub-
terranean passage  that  passes  beneath  the  river  to  the  other  side.  From  this  many
huacas,  stone  drinking  vessels,  instruments  of  copper  and  silver,  and  a  skeleton  of
an  Indian  sitting  were  taken.  The  greater  part  of  these  ruins  were  situated  over
aqueducts.  The  bridge  to  these  castles  is  made  of  three  stones  of  dressed  granite,
twenty-four  feet  long,  two  feet  wide  by  one  and  a  half  thick.  Some  of  the  granite
stones  are  covered  with  hieroglyphics.

At  Corralones,  twenty-four  miles  from  Arequipa,  there  are  hieroglyphics  engraved
on  masses  of  granite,  which  appear  as  if  painted  with  chalk.  There  are  figures  of
men,  llamas,  circles,  parallelograms,  letters  like  an  A'  and  an  0,  and  even  remains
of  a  system  of  astronomv.

328  A    MODERN    PANARION.

At  Huaytar,  in  the  province  of  Castro  Virreina,  there  is  an  edifice  with  the  same
engravings.

At  Nazca,  in  the  province  of  lea,  there  are  some  wonderful  ruins  of  aqueducts,
four  to  five  feet  high  and  three  feet  wide,  very  straight,  double-walled,  of  unfinished
stone,  flagged  on  top.

At  Ouelap,  not  far  from  Chochapayas,  there  have  lately  been  examined  some
extensive  works;  a  wall  of  dressed  stone,  560  feet  wide,  3,660  long,  and  150  feet
high.  The  lower  part  is  solid.  Another  wall  above  this  has  600  feet  length,  500
width,  and  the  same  elevation  of  150  feet.  There  are  niches  over  both  walls  three
feet  long,  one  and  a  half  wide  and  thick,  containing  the  remains  of  the  ancient
inhabitants,  some  naked,  others  enveloped  in  shawls  of  cotton  of  distinct  colours
and  well  embroidered.     .     .     .

Following  the  entrances  of  the  second  and  highest  wall,  there  are  other  sepul-
chres like  small  ovens,  six  feet  high  and  twenty-four  in  circumference;  in  their
base  are  flags,  upon  which  some  cadavers  reposed.  On  the  north  side  there  is  on
the  perpendicular  rocky  side  of  the  mountain  a  brick  wall,  having  small  windows,
600  feet  from  the  bottom.  ATo  reason  for  this,  nor  means  of  approach,  can  now  be
found.  The  skilful  construction  of  utensils  of  gold  and  silver  that  were  found
here,  the  ingenuity  and  solidity  of  this  gigantic  work  of  dressed  stone,  make  it
also  probably  of  pre-Incal  date.     .     .  Estimating  500  ravines  in  the  1,200  miles

of  Peru,  and  ten  miles  of  terraces  of  fifty  tiers  to  each  ravine,  which  would  only  be
five  miles  of  twenty-five  ti^rs  to  each  side,  we  have  250,000  miles  of  stone  wall,
averaging  three  to  four  feet  high — enough  to  encircle  this  globe  ten  times.  Sur-
prising as  these  estimates  may  seem,  I  am  full}-  convinced  that  an  actual  measure-
ment would  more  than  double  them,  for  these  ravines  vary  from  thirty  to  100  miles
in  length.  While  at  San  Mateo,  a  town  in  the  valley  of  the  river  Rimac,  where
the  mountains  rise  to  a  height  of  1,500  or  2,000  feet  above  the  river  bed,  I  counted
200  tiers,  none  of  which  were  less  than  four  and  man}-  more  than  six  miles  long.

Dr.  Heath  then  very  pertinently  enquires:

Who  then  were  these  people,  cutting  through  sixty  miles  of  granite;  transplant-
ing blocks  of  hard  porphyry,  of  Eaalbec  dimensions,  miles  from  the  place  where
quarried,  across  valleys  thousands  of  feet  deep,  over  mountains,  along  plains,
leaving  no  trace  of  how  or  where  they  carried  them ;  people  (said  to  be)  ignorant
of  the  use  of  wood,  with  the  feeble  llama  their  only  beast  of  burden;  who  after
having  brought  these  stones  fitted  them  into  other  stones  with  mosaic  precision ;
terracing  thousands  of  miles  of  mountain  side;  building  hills  of  adobes  and  earth,
and  huge  cities;  leaving  works  in  clay,  stone,  copper,  silver,  gold  and  embroidery,
many  of  which  cannot  be  duplicated  at  the  present  age;  people  apparently  vying
with  Dives  in  riches,  Hercules  in  strength  and  energy,  and  the  ant  and  bee  in
industry?

Callao  was  submerged  in  1746  and  entirely  destroyed.  Lima  was
ruined  in  1678;  in  1746  only  twenty  houses  out  of  3,000  were  left  stand-
ing, while  the  ancient  cities  in  the  Huatica  and  L,urin  valleys  still
remain  in  a  comparatively  good  state  of  preservation.     San  Miguel  de

A   LAND   OF   MYSTERY.  329

Puiro,  founded  by  Pizarro  in  1531,  was  entirely  destroyed  in  1855,
while  the  old  ruins  near  by  suffered  little.  Arequipo  was  thrown  down
in  August,  1868,  but  the  ruins  near  show  no  change.  In  engineering,
at  least,  the  present  may  learn  from  the  past.  We  hope  to  show  that  it
may  in  most  things  else.

IV.

To  refer  all  these  cyclopean  constructions,  then,  to  the  days  of  the
Iucas,  is,  as  we  have  shown  before,  yet  more  inconsistent,  and  seems
even  a  greater  fallacy  than  that  too  common  one  of  attributing  every
rock-temple  of  India  to  Buddhist  excavators.  As  many  authorities
show — Dr.  Heath  among  the  rest — Incal  history  only  dates  back  to  the
eleventh  century  a.d.,  and  the  period,  from  that  time  to  the  Conquest,
is  utterly  insufficient  to  account  for  such  grandiose  and  innumerable
works;  nor  do  the  Spanish  historians  know  much  of  them.  Nor  again,
must  we  forget  that  the  temples  of  heathendom  were  odious  to  the
narrow  bigotry  of  the  Roman  Catholic  fanatics  of  those  days;  and  that,
whenever  the  chance  offered,  they  either  converted  them  into  Christian
churches  or  razed  them  to  the  ground.  Another  strong  objection  to
the  idea  lies  in  the  fact  that  the  Incas  were  destitute  of  a  written
language,  and  that  these  antique  relics  of  bygone  ages  are  covered
with  hieroglyphics.

It  is  granted  that  the  temple  of  the  .Sun,  at  Cuzco,  was  of  Incal  make,  but  that
is  the  latest  of  the  five  styles  of  architecture  visible  in  the  Andes,  each  probably
representing  an  age  of  human  progress.

The  hieroglyphics  of  Peru  and  Central  America  have  been,  are,  and
will  most  probably  remain  for  ever  as  dead  a  letter  to  our  cryptographers
as  they  were  to  the  Incas.  The  latter  like  the  barbarous  ancient  Chinese
and  Mexicans  kept  their  records  by  means  of  a  quipus  (or  knot  in  Peru-
vian)—a  cord,  several  feet  long,  composed  of  different  coloured  threads,
from  which  a  multicoloured  fringe  was  suspended;  each  colour  denoting
a  sensible  object,  and  knots  serving  as  ciphers.     Says  Prescott:

The  mysterious  science  of  the  quipus  supplied  the  Peruvians  with  the  means  "I"
communicating  their  ideas  to  one  another,  and  of  transmitting  them  t<>  future
generations.     .     .     .

Each  locality,  however,  had  its  own  method  of  interpreting  these
elaborate  records,  hence  a  quipus  was  only  intelligible  in  the  place
where  it  was  kept.     Dr.  Heath  writes:

Many  quipus  have  been  taken  from  the  graves,  in  an  excellent  state  of  preservation
in  colour  and  texture,  but  the  lips  that  alone  could  pronounce  the  verbal  key  have

330  A   MODERN    PAXARION.

for  ever  ceased  their  function,  and  the  relic-seeker  has  failed  to  note  the  exact  spot
where  each  was  found,  so  that  the  records,  which  con  id  tell  so  much  we  want  to
know,  will  remain  sealed  till  all  is  revealed  at  the  last  day     .     .     .

— if  anything  at  all  is  revealed  then.  But  what  is  certainly  as  good  as  a
revelation  now,  while  our  brains  are  in  function,  and  our  mind  is  acutely
alive  to  some  preeminently  suggestive  facts,  is  the  incessant  discoveries
of  archaeology,  geology,  ethnology  and  other  sciences.  It  is  the  almost
irrepressible  conviction  that  man  having  existed  upon  earth  millions
of  years — for  all  we  know — the  theory  of  cycles  is  the  only  plausible
theory  to  solve  the  great  problems  of  humanity,  the  rise  and  fall  of
numberless  nations  and  races,  and  the  ethnological  differences  among
the  latter.  This  difference — which,  though  as  marked  as  the  one
between  a  handsome  and  intellectual  European  and  a  Digger  Indian,
yet  makes  the  ignorant  shudder  and  raise  a  great  outcry  at  the  thought
of  destroying  the  imaginary  "great  gulf  between  man  and  brute  crea-
tion"— might  thus  be  well  accounted  for.  The  Digger  Indian,  then,  in
company  with  many  other  savage,  though  to  him  superior,  nations,
which  are  evidently  dying  out  to  afford  room  to  men  and  races  of  a
superior  kind,  would  have  to  be  regarded  in  the  same  light  as  so  many
dying-out  species  of  animals — and  no  more.  Who  can  tell  but  that
the  forefathers  of  this  flat-headed  savage — forefathers  who  may  have
lived  and  prospered  amidst  the  highest  civilization  before  the  glacial
period — were  in  arts  and  sciences  far  beyond  those  of  the  present
civilization,  though,  it  may  be,  in  quite  another  direction?  That  man
has  lived  in  America,  at  least  50,000  years  ago,  is  now  proved  scientifi-
cally and  remains  a  fact  beyond  doubt  or  cavil.  In  a  lecture  delivered
at  Manchester,  in  June  last,  by  Mr.  H.  A.  Allbutt,  Honorary  Fellow  of
the  Royal  Anthropological  Society,  the  lecturer  stated  the  following :

Near  New  Orleans,  in  one  part  of  the  modern  delta,  in  excavating  for  gas  works,
a  series  of  beds,  almost  wholly  made  up  of  vegetable  matter,  were  dug  through.
In  the  excavation,  at  a  depth  of  sixteen  feet  from  the  upper  surface,  and  beneath
four  buried  forests,  one  on  the  top  of  the  other,  the  labourers  discovered  some
charcoal  and  the  skeleton  of  a  man,  the  cranium  of  which  was  reported  to  be  that
of  the  type  of  the  aboriginal  Red  Indian  race.  To  this  skeleton  Dr.  Dowler  ascribed
an  antiquity  of  some  50,000  years.

The  irresistible  cycle  in  the  course  of  time  brought  down  the
descendants  of  the  contemporaries  of  the  late  inhabitant  of  this
skeleton,  and  intellectually  as  well  as  physically  they  have  degenerated,
as  the  present  elephant  has  degenerated  from  his  proud  and  monstrous
forefather,  the  antediluvian  Sivatherium,  whose  fossil  remains  are  still

A  LAND   OF  MYSTERY.  13]

found  in  the  Himalayas,  or,  as  the  lizaxd  has  from  the  plesiosaurus.

Why  should  man  be  the  only  species  upon  earth  which  lias  never
changed  in  form  since  the  first  day  of  his  appearance  upon  this  planet?
The  fancied  superiority  of  every  generation  of  mankind  over  the  pre-
ceding one  is  not  yet  so  well  established  as  to  make  it  impossible  for  us
to  learn  some  day  that,  as  in  everything  else,  the  theory  is  a  two-sided
question — incessant  progress  on  the  one  side,  and  an  as  irresistible
decadence  on  the  other,  of  the  cycle.

Even  as  regards  knowledge  and  power,  the  advance,  which  some  claim  as  a
characteristic  feature  of  humanity,  is  effected  by  exceptional  individuals  who  arise-
in  certain  races  under  favourable  circumstances  only,  and  is  quite  compatible  with
long  intervals  of  immobility,  and  even  of  decline,  '

says  a  modern  man  of  science.  This  point  is  corroborated  by  what  we
see  in  the  modern  degenerate  descendants  of  the  great  and  powerful
races  of  ancient  America — the  Peruvians  and  the  Mexicans.

How  changed!  How  fallen  from  their  greatness  must  have  been  the  Incas,  when
a  little  band  of  160  men  could  penetrate,  uninjured,  to  their  mountain  homes,
murder  their  worshipped  kings  and  thousands  of  their  warriors,  and  carry  away
their  riches,  and  that,  too,  in  a  country  where  a  few  men  with  stones  could  resist
an  army  successfully!  Who  could  recognize  in  the  present  Inichua  and  Aymara
Indians  their  noble  ancestry 3     .     .     .

Thus  writes  Dr.  Heath,  and  his  conviction  that  America  was  once
united  with  Europe,  Asia,  Africa  and  Australia,  seems  as  firm  as  our
own.  There  must  exist  geological  and  physical  cycles  as  well  as
intellectual  and  spiritual;  globes  and  planets,  as  well  as  races  and
nations,  are  born  to  grow,  progress,  decline  and — die.  Great  nations
split,  scatter  into  small  tribes,  lose  all  remembrance  of  their  integrity,
gradually  fall  into  their  primitive  state  and — disappear,  one  after  the
other,  from  the  face  of  the  earth.  So  do  great  continents.  Ceylon
must  have  formed,  once  upon  a  time,  part  of  the  Indian  continent.  So,
to  all  appearance,  was  Spain  once  joined  to  Africa,  the  narrow  channel
between  Gibraltar  and  the  latter  continent  having  been  once  upon  a
time  dry  land.  Gibraltar  is  full  of  large  apes  of  the  same  kind  as  those
which  are  found  in  great  numbers  on  the  opposite  side  of  the  African
coast,  whereas  nowhere  in  Spain  is  either  a  monkey  or  ape  to  be  found
at  any  place  whatever.  And  the  caves  of  Gibraltar  are  also  full  of
gigantic  human  bones,  supporting  the  theory  that  they  belong  to  an
antediluvian   race  of  men.      The  same  Dr.   Heath   mentions  the   town

'Journal  of  Science  for  February,  art.  "The  Alleged  Distinction  between  Man  and  I

332  A    MODERN    PANARION.

of  Eten  in  io°  S.  latitude  of  America,  in  which  the  inhabitants  of  an
unknown  tribe  of  men  speak  a  monosyllabic  language  that  imported
Chinese  labourers  understood  from  the  first  day  of  their  arrival.  They
have  their  own  laws,  customs  and  dress,  neither  holding  nor  permitting
communication  with  the  outside  world.  No  one  can  tell  whence  the}'
came  or  when ;  whether  it  was  before  or  after  the  Spanish  Conquest.
They  are  a  living  mystery  to  all  who  chance  to  visit  them.

With  such  facts  before  us  to  puzzle  exact  science  herself,  and  show
our  entire  ignorance  of  the  past,  verily,  we  recognize  no  right  of  any
man  on  earth — whether  in  geography  or  ethnology,  in  exact  or  abstract
sciences — to  tell  his  neighbour,  "So  far  shalt  thou  go,  and  no  further!"

But  recognizing  our  debt  of  gratitude  to  Dr.  Heath  of  Kansas,  whose
able  and  interesting  paper  has  furnished  us  with  such  a  number  of
facts  and  suggested  such  possibilities,  we  can  do  no  better  than  quote
his  concluding  reflections:

Thirteen  thousand  years  ago,  Vega  or  a  Lyrcz,  was  the  north  polar  star;  since  then
how  many  changes  has  she  seen  in  our  planet!  How  many  nations  and  races
spring  into  life,  rise  to  their  zenith  of  splendour,  and  then  deca}-;  and  when  we
shall  have  been  gone  thirteen  thousand  years,  and  once  more  she  resumes  her  post
at  the  north,  completing  a  "Platonic  or  Great  Year,"  think  you  that  those  who
shall  fill  our  places  on  the  earth  at  that  time  will  be  more  conversant  with  our
history  than  we  are  of  those  that  have  passed?  Verily  might  we  exclaim,  in  terms
almost  psalmistic,  "Great  God,  Creator  and  Director  of  the  Universe,  what  is  man
that  Thou  art  mindful  of  him!"

Amen !  ought  to  be  the  response  of  such  as  yet  believe  in  a  God  who
is  "the  Creator  and  Director  of  the  Universe."

WHICH  FIRST-THE  EGG  OR  THE

BIRD?

I  beg  to  present  my  warmest  thanks  to  Mr.  William  Simpson,
F.R.G.S.,  the  distinguished  artist  and  antiquary,  who  last  year  ex-
tended his  researches  to  Peshawur  valley  and  elsewhere,  and  thereby
so  enriched  the  Lahore  Museum,  for  kindly  presenting  me  with  a  copy
of  his  ver}'  valuable  paper,  "Buddhist  Architecture:  Jellalabad,"  en-
riched with  seven  illustrations.  Our  thanks  are  none  the  less  due  to
Mr.  Simpson,  that  in  one  point,  and  a  very  important  one  too,  it  is
impossible  for  either  our  Society  or  myself,  to  agree  with  his  conclu-
sions. The  feature  of  Mr.  Simpson's  interesting  and  learned  paper  is,
to  quote  the  words  of  Mr.  James  Fergusson,  F.R.G.S.,  Past  Vice-Presi-
dent, that  every  "form  of  art  was  imported  into  India,  and  nothing  ever
came  out  of  it"  (the  italics  are  mine).  Mr.  Simpson  builds  his  hasty
conclusions  upon  the  fact  that  most  of  the  capitals  of  the  pillars  and
pilasters  in  the  ruins  of  the  valley  of  the  Kabul  river,  are  Corinthian,
and  "the  bases  and  mouldings  generally  are  such  as  are  most  unmis-
takably derived  from  the  far  west,"  and  finally  that  a  "number  of
bell-shaped  capitals,  surmounted  by  double  animals  which  look  like  a
reminiscence  of  the  pillars  of  Persepolis,"  are  also  found  in  the  caves
of  Karli,  and  other  caves  of  India,  as  well  as  in  the  valley  of  Peshawur.

I  will  not  limit  my  protest  in  this  case  to  merely  pointing  to  the
words  of  Mr.  Fergusson,  who  cautiously  remarks  that  "the  similarity
is,  however,  so  remote  that  it  is  hardly  sufficient  to  sustain  Mr.  Simp-
son's assertion  that  every  form  of  art  was  imported  into  India,  and
nothing  ever  came  out  of  it."  But  I  will  humbly  suggest  that  in  .1
country  like  India,  whose  past  history  is  a  total  blank,  every  attempt
to  decide  the  age  of  the  monuments,  or  whether  their  style  was  original
or  borrowed,  is  now  pretty  much  as  open  a  question  as  it  was  a  century
ago.     A  new  discovery  may  any  day  annihilate  the  theory  of  the  day

334

A   MODERN    PANARION.

before.  Lack  of  space  forbids  me  to  enter  upon  the  discussion  more
elaborately.  Therefore,  I  will  permit  myself  only  to  say  that  Mr.
Simpson's  present  "assertion"  remains  as  hypothetical  as  before.
Otherwise,  we  would  have  to  decide  a  priori,  whether  India  or  Greece
borrowed  from  the  other  in  other  important  cases  now  pending.
Besides  "Corinthian  pillars"  and  "double  animals,"  once  so  dear  to
the  Persepolitans,  we  have,  here,  the  solar  race  of  the  Hari-Kula  (Sun
family)  whose  deeds  must  have  been  a  copy  of,  or  the  model  for,  the
labours  and  very  name  of  the  Grecian  Sun-God  Hercules.  No  less  is
it  a  matter  for  the  consideration  of  philologists  and  archaeologists
which  of  the  two — the  Egyptian  Sphinx,  called  by  them  Harimukh,
or  Har-M-Kho  (the  Sun  in  his  resting-place)  or  the  lofty  Himalaya
peak,  also  called  Harimukh  (the  mouth  of  the  Sun)  in  the  range  to  the
north  of  Cashmir,  owes  its  name  to  the  other.

THE  PRALAYA  OF  MODERN

SCIENCE.

[Vol.  II.  No.  r,  October,  18S0.]

If  Science  is  right,  then  the  future  of  our  Solar  System — hence  of
what  we  call  the  universe — offers  but  little  of  hope  or  consolation  for
our  descendants.  Two  of  her  votaries,  Messrs.  Thompson  and  Klausius,
have  simultaneously  reached  the  conclusive  opinion  that  the  universe
is  doomed  at  some  future,  and  not  very  remote  period,  to  destruction.
Such  is  also  the  theory  of  several  other  astronomers,  one  and  all
describing  the  gradual  cooling  off  and  the  final  dissolution  of  our
planet  in  terms  nearly  identical  with  those  used  by  the  greatest  Hindu
and  even  some  of  the  Greek  sages.  One  might  almost  think  he  were
reading  over  again  Manu,  Kanada,  Kapila  and  others.  The  following
are  some  of  the  newest  theories  of  our  Western  pandits.

All  the  ponderable  masses  which  must  have  separated  themselves  at  the  evolution
or  first  appearance  upon  the  earth  from  the  primeval  mass  of  matter,  will  reunite
themselves  again  into  one  gigantic  and  boundless  heavenly  body,  every  visible
movement  in  this  mass  will  be  arrested,  and  alone  the  molecular  motion  will  remain,
which  will  equally  spread  throughout  this  ponderous  body  under  the  form  of  heat.

say  our  scientists.     Kanada,  the  atomist,  the  old  Hindu  sage,  said  as
much.     He  remarks:

In  creation  two  atoms  begin  to  be  agitated,  till  at  length  they  become  separated
from  their  former  union  and  then  unite,  by  which  a  new  substance  i>  formed,
which  possesses  the  qualities  of  the  things  from  which  it  arose.

R-ohschmidt,  the  Austrian  professor  of  mathematics  and  astronomy,
and  the  English  astronomer,  Proctor,  treating  of  the  same  subject,  have
both  arrived  at  another  and  different  view  of  the  cause  from  which  will
come  the  future  dissolution  of  the  world.  They  attribute  it  to  the
gradual  and  slow  cooling  of  the  sun,  which  must  result  in  the  final
extinction  of  this  planet  some  day.    All  the  planets  will  then,  following

336  A   MODERN    PANARION.

the  law  of  gravitation,  tumble  in  upon  the  inanimate  cold  luminary,
and  coalesce  with  it  into  one  huge  body.  If  this  thing  should  happen,
says  the  German  savant,  and  such  a  period  begins,  then  it  is  impossible
that  it  should  last  for  ever,  for  such  a  state  would  not  be  one  of  abso-
lute equilibrium.  During  a  wonderful  period  of  time,  the  sun,  gradu-
ally hardening,  will  go  on  absorbing  the  radiant  heat  from  the  universal
space,  and  concentrating  it  around  itself.

But  let  us  listen  to  Professor  Tay  upon  this  question.     According  to
his  opinion,  the  total  cooling  off  of  our  planet  will  bring  with  it  un-
avoidable death.     Animal  and  vegetable  life  which  will  have,  previous
to  that  event,  shifted  its  quarters  from  the  northern  and  already  frozen
regions  to  the  equator,  will  then  finally  and  for  ever  disappear  from  the
surface  of  the  globe,  without  leaving  behind  any  trace  of  its  existence.
The  earth  will  be  wrapped  in  dense  cold  and  darkness;  the  now  cease-
less atmospheric  motion  will  have  changed   into    complete   rest   and
silence;  the  last  clouds  will  have  poured  upon  the  earth  their  last  rain;
the  course  of  the  streams  and  rivers  bereaved  of  their  vivifier  and
motor — the  sun — will  be  arrested,  and   the  seas  frozen  into  a  mass.  •
Our  globe  will  have  no  other  light  than  the  occasional  glimmering  of
the  shooting  stars,  which  will  not  yet  have  ceased  to  penetrate  into  and
become  inflamed  in  our  atmosphere.     Perhaps,  too,  the  sun  under  the
influence  of  the  cataclysm  of  the  solar  mass,  will  yet  exhibit  for  a  time
some  signs  of  vitality,  and  heat  and  light  will  reenter  it  for  a  short
space  of  time;  but  the  reaction  will  not  fail  to  reassert  itself,  for  the
sun,  powerless  and  dying,  will  again  become  extinct,  and  this  time  for
ever.     Such  a  change  was  remarked  and  actually  took  place  in  the  now
extinct  constellations  of  the  Swan,  the  Crown,  and   the  Ophiucus  in
the  first  period  of  their  cooling      And  the  same  fate  will  reach  all  the
other  planets,  which,  meanwhile,  obeying  the  law  of  inertia,  will  go  on
revolving  around    the  extinct  sun.     ,     .     .     Further   on    the   learned
astronomer  depicts  the  last  year  of  the  expiring  globe  in  the  very  words
of  a  Hindu  philosopher  describing  the  Pralaya:

Cold  and  death  blow  from  the  northern  pole,  and  spread  along  the  entire  face  of
the  earth,  nine-tenths  of  which  have  ahead}-  expired.  Life,  hardly  perceptible,  is
all  concentrated  at  her  heart — the  equator — in  the  few  remaining  regions  which
are  yet  inhabited,  and  where  reigns  a  complete  confusion  of  tongues  and  nationali-
ties. The  surviving  representatives  of  the  human  race  are  soon  joined  by  the
largest  specimens  of  animals  which  are  also  driven  there  by  the  intense  cold.
One  object,  one  aspiration,  huddles  together  all  this  varied  mass  of  beings — the
struggle  for  life.     Groups  of  animals  without  distinction  of  kinds  crowd  together

THE    PRALAYA    OF    MODERN    SCIENCE.  337

into  one  herd  in  the  hope  of  finding  some  heat  in  the  rapidly  freezing  bodii
snakes  threaten  no  more  with  their  poisonous  fangs,  nor  lions  and  tigers  with  tin  ir
sharp  claws;  all  that  each  of  them  begs  for  is  life — nothing  but  life,  lift-  to  the  last
minute!  At  last  comes  that  last  day,  and  the  pale  and  expiring  rays  of  the  sun
illuminate  the  following  gloomy  scene:  the  frozen  bodies  of  the  last  of  the  human
family,  dead  from  cold  and  lack  of  air,  on  the  shores  of  a  likewise  rapidly  freezing
motionless  sea.

The  words  may  not  be  precisely  those  of  the  learned  professor,  for
they  are  utilized  from  notes  taken  in  a  foreign  language,  but  the  ideas
are  literally  his.  The  picture  is  indeed  gloomy,  but  the  ideas,  based
upon  scientific  mathematical  deductions,  are  not  new,  and  we  have  read
in  a  Hindu  author  of  the  pre-Christian  era  a  description  of  the  same
catastrophe  as  given  by  Manu  in  a  language  far  superior  to  this  one.
The  general  reader  is  invited  to  compare,  and  the  Hindu  reader  to  see
in  this  one  more  corroboration  of  the  great  wisdom  and  knowledge  of
his  forefathers,  who  anticipated  the  modern  researches  in  almost  every-
thing.

Strange  noises  are  heard  proceeding  from  every  point.  .  .  .  These  are  the
precursors  of  the  Night  of  Brahma.  Dusk  rises  at  the  horizon  and  the  sun  passes
away.  .  .  .  Gradually  light  pales,  heat  diminishes,  uninhabitable  spots  multiply
On  the  earth,  the  air  becomes  more  and  more  rarefied,  the  springs  of  waters  dry  up,
the  great  rivers  see  their  waves  exhausted,  the  ocean  shows  its  sand)-  bottom,  anil
plants  die.  .  .  .  Life  and  motion  lose  their  force;  planets  can  hardly  gravitate
in  space;  they  are  extinguished  one  by  one.  .  .  .  Surya  flickers  and  goes  out;
matter  falls  into  dissolution,  and  Brahma,  (the  creative  force)  merges  back  into
Dyaus,  the  unrevealed,  and  his  task  being  accomplished  he  falls  asleep.  .  .  .
Night  for  the  universe  has  come!     (By  VamadEva.)

23

THE  YOGA  PHILOSOPHY.*

[Vol.  II.  Nos.  2,  4  and  7,  November,  1880,  and  January  and  April,  1SS1.]

[Yoga,  or  human  hibernation,  being  only  prolonged  sleep,  it  is  interesting  to
notice  that  there  are  instances  on  record  of  individuals  sleeping  for  weeks,  months,
nay,  even  for  years.  ]

We  have  ourself  known  a  Russian  lady — Mme.  Kashereninoff — whose
sister,  then  an  unmarried  lady  about  twenty-seven,  slept  regularly  for
six  weeks  at  a  time.  After  that  period  she  would  awake,  weak  but  not
very  exhausted,  and  ask  for  some  milk,  her  habitual  food.  At  the  end
of  a  fortnight,  sometimes  three  weeks,  she  would  begin  to  show  un-
mistakable signs  of  somnolence,  and  at  the  end  of  a  month  fall  into
her  trance  again.  Thus  it  lasted  for  seven  years,  she  being  considered
by  the  populace  a  great  saint.  It  wTas  in  1841.  What  became  of  her
after  that  we  are  unable  to  say.

[Yoga  has  been  differently  defined  by  different  authorities.  Some  have  defined
it  as  mental  abstraction;  some  have  defined  it  as  silent  prayer;  some  have  defined
it  as  the  union  of  the  inspired  to  the  expired  air;  some  have  defined  it  as  the  union
of  mind  to  soul.  But  by  Yoga,  I  understand  the  art  of  suspending  the  respiration
and  circulation.     Yoga  is  chiefly  divided  into  Raja  Yoga  and  Hatha  Yoga.],

Here  the  author  falls  into  an  unmistakable  error  He  confounds  the
Raja  with  the  Hatha  Yogins,  whereas  the  former  have  nothing  to  do
with  the  physical  training  of  the  Hatha  nor  with  any  other  of  the  in-
numerable sects  who  have  now  adopted  the  name  and  emblems  of
Yogins.  Wilson,  in  his  Essays  on  the  Religio?is  of  the  Hindus,  falls  into
the  same  confusion,  and  knows  very  little,  if  anything  at  all  of  the  true
Raja  Yogins,  who  have  no  more  to  do  with  Shiva  than  with  Vishnu,  or
any  other  deity.  Alone,  the  most  learned  among  the  Shaukara's  Dandins
of  Northern  India,  especially  those  who  are  settled  in  Rajputana,  would
be  able — if  they  were  willing — to  give  some  correct  notions  about  the

*  The  paragraphs  in  small  type  within  square  brackets  are  summarized  from  an  article  in  The
Theosophisl  to  which  H.  P.  B.  attached  notes.     We  insert  them  to  render  the  comments  intelligible.

THE    YOGA    PHILOSOPHY.  339

Raja  Yogins;  for  these  men,  who  have  adopted  the  philosophical  tenets
of  Shankara's  Vedanta  are,  moreover,  profoundly  versed  in  the  doctrines
of  the  Tantras— termed  devilish  by  those  who  either  do  not  understand
them  or  reject  their  tenets  with  some  preconceived  object.  If  in  speaking
of  the  Dandins  we  have  used  above  the  phrase  beginning  with  the  con-
junction "if,"  it  is  because  we  happen  to  know  how  carefully  the  secrets
of  the  real  Yogins— nay  even  their  existence  itself— are  denied  within  this
fraternity.  It  is  comparatively  but  lately  that  the  usual  excuse  adopted
by  them,  in  support  of  which  they  bring  their  strongest  authorities,
who  affirm  that  the  Yoga  state  is  unattainable  in  the  present  or  Kali
age,  has  been  set  afloat  by  them.  "From  the  unsteadiness  of  the
senses,  the  prevalence  of  sin  in  the  Kali,  and  the  shortness  of  life,  how
can  exaltation  by  Yoga  be  obtained?"  enquires  Kashikhanda.  But  this
declaration  can  be  refuted  in  two  words  and  with  their  own  weapons.
The  duration  of  the  present  Kali  Yuga  is  432,000  years,  of  which  4,979
have  already  expired.  It  is  at  the  very  beginning  of  Kali  Yuga  that
Krishna  and  Arjuna  were  born.  It  is  since  Vishnu's  eighth  incarna-
tion that  the  country  had  all  its  historical  Yogins,  for  as  to  the  prehis-
toric ones,  or  those  claimed  as  such,  we  do  not  find  ourselves  entitled
to  force  them  upon  public  notice.  Are  we  then  to  understand  that
none  of  these  numerous  saints,  philosophers  and  ascetics  from  Krishna
down  to  the  late  Vishnu  Brahmachari  Bawa  of  Bombay  had  ever
reached  the  "exaltation  by  Yoga"?  To  repeat  this  assertion  is  simply
suicidal  to  their  own  interests.

It  is  not  that  among  the  Hatha  Yogins — men  who  at  times  had
reached  through  a  physical  and  well-organized  system  of  training  the
highest  powers  as  "wonder  workers" — there  has  never  been  a  man
worthy  of  being  considered  as  a  true  Yogin.  What  we  say  is  simply
this:  the  Raja  Yogin  trains  but  his  mental  and  intellectual  powers,
leaving  the  physical  alone  and  making  but  little  of  the  exercise  of
phenomena  simply  of  a  physical  character.  Hence  it  is  the  rarest
thing  in  the  world  to  find  a  real  Yogin  boasting  of  being  one,  or  willing
to  exhibit  such  powers — though  he  does  acquire  them  as  well  as  the  one
practising  Hatha  Yoga,  but  through  another  and  Jar  more  intellectual
system.  Generally  they  deny  these  powers  point-blank,  for  reasons  but
too  well  grounded.  The  former  need  not  even  belong  to  any  apparent
order  of  ascetics,  and  are  oftener  known  as  private  individuals  than
members  of  a  religious  fraternity,  nor  need  they  necessarily  be  Hindus.
Kabir,  who  was  one  of  them,  fulminates  against  most  of  the  later  sects

340  A   MODERN    PANARION.

of  mendicants   who   occasionally  become   warriors   when    not   simply
brigands,  and  sketches  them  with  a  masterly  hand :

I  never  beheld  such  a  Yogin  ,  O  brother!  who,  forgetting  his  doctrine,  roves  about
in  negligence.  He  follows  professedly  the  faith  of  Mahadeva  and  calls  himself  an
eminent  teacher:  the  scene  of  his  abstraction  is  the  fair  or  the  market.  Maya,  is
the  mistress  of  the  false  saint.  When  did  Dattatrava  demolish  a  dwelling?  When
did  Sukhadeva  collect  an  armed  host?  When  did  Narada  mount  a  matchlock?
When  did  Vyasadeva  blow  a  trumpet?  etc.

Therefore,  whenever  the  author — Dr.  Paul — speaks  of  Raja  Yoga,
the  Hatha  simply  is  to  be  understood.  v

[Minute  directions  then  follow  for  the  practising  of  postures,  the  repetition  of
Mantras;  and  Yamyasana  and  Pranayama,  or  the  inspiration  and  suspension  of  the
breath.]

All  the  above  are,  as  we  said  before,  the  practices  of  Hatha  Yoga,
and  conducive  but  to  the  production  of  physical  phenomena  affording
very  rarely  flashes  of  real  clairvoyance,  unless  it  be  a  kind  of  feverish
state  of  artificial  ecstasy.  If  we  publish  them,  it  is  merely  for  the
great  value  we  set  upon  this  information  as  liable  to  afford  a  glimpse
of  truth  to  sceptics,  by  showing  them  that  even  in  the  case  of  the
Hatha  Yogins,  the  cause  for  the  production  of  the  phenomena  as  well
as  the  results  obtained  can  be  all  explained  scientifically;  and  that
therefore  there  is  no  need  to  either  reject  the  phenomena  a  priori  and
without  investigation  or  to  attribute  them  to  any  but  natural,  though
occult  powers,  more  or  less  latent  in  every  man  and  woman.

[Dr.  Paul  next  describes  the  eight  varieties.  Kumbhaka,  which  Yogins  practise
with  a  view  to  study  the  nature  of  the  Soul.  Khechari  Mudra  is  the  lengthening
the  tongue  by  splitting  and  then  "milking"  it  until  it  is  long  enough  to  be  turned
back  into  the  gullet,  and,  with  its  point,  to  press  the  epiglottis  and  so  close  the
rima  glottidis,  which  confines  the  inspired  air  within  the  system,  the  lungs  and
intestines  being  completely  filled.  By  this  practice  he  becomes  insensible  to  every-
thing that  is  external.  "Without  it,"  says  Dr.  Paul,  "he  can  never  be  absorbed  into
God."}

As  the  science  and  study  of  Yoga  Philosophy  pertains  to  Buddhist,
L,amaic  and  other  religions  supposed  to  be  atheistical,  i.e.,  rejecting
belief  in  a  personal  deity,  and  as  a  Vedantin  would  by  no  means  use
such  an  expression,  we  must  understand  the  term  "absorption  into
God"  in  the  sense  of  union  with  the  Universal  Soul,  or  Parama-
Purusha — the  primal  or  One  Spirit.

[Directions  are  then  given  for  the  practice  of  Miilabandha,  a  process  by  which
youth  is  said  to  be  restored  to  an  old  man.]

THE   YOGA    PHILOSOPHY.  341

This  posture  will  hardly  have  the  desired  effect  unless  its  philosophy
is  well  understood  and  it  is  practised  from  youth.  The  appearance  of
old  age,  when  the  skin  has  wrinkled  and  the  tissues  have  relaxed,  can
be  restored  but  temporarily,  and  with  the  help  of  Maya.  The  Mula-
bandha  is  simply  a  process  to  throw  oneself  into  sleep  (thus  gaining
the  regular  hours  of  sleep).

[Ujjayi  Kumbhaka.  Assume  the  posture  called  Sukhasana,  render  the  two  nos-
trils free  by  the  first  Kumbhaka,  inspire  through  both  nostrils,  fill  tin-  stomach  and
throat  with  the  inspired  air,  and  then  expire  slowly  through  the  left  nostril.  He
that  practises  this  Kumbhaka  cures  all  diseases  dependent  upon  deficient  inhala-
tion of  oxygen.]

And  if  anyone  feels  inclined  to  sneer  at  the  novel  remedy  employed
by  the  Yogins  to  cure  "coryza,"  "worms"  and  other  diseases— which  is
only  a  certain  mode  of  inhalation — his  attention  is  invited  to  the  fact
that  these  illiterate  and  superstitious  ascetics  seem  to  have  only  antici-
pated the  discoveries  of  modern  science.  One  of  the  latest  is  reported
in  the  last  number  of  the  New  York  Medical  Record  (Sept.,  1888),  under
the  title  of  "A  New  and  Curious  Plan  for  Deadening  Pain."  The
experiments  were  made  by  Dr  Bonwill,  a  well-known  physician  of
Philadelphia,  in  1872,  and  have  been  since  successfully  applied  as  an
anaesthetic.     We  quote  it  from  the  Dubuque  Daily  Telegraph  :

In  1875  Dr.  A.  Hewson  made  a  favourable  report  of  his  experience  with  it  to  the
International  Medical  Congress,  and  at  a  recent  meeting  of  the  Philadelphia  County
Medical  Society  several  papers  were  read   on   the  subject,   and  much   discussion
followed.     In  using  the  method,  the  operator  merely  requests  the  patient  to  breathe
rapidly,  making  about  one  hundred  respirations  per  minute,  ending  in  rapid  puffing
expirations.     At  the  end  of  from  two  to  five  minutes  an  entire  or  partial  absence  of
pain  results  for  half  a  minute  or  more,  and  during  that  time  teeth  may  be  drawn  or
incisions  made.    The  patient  maybe  in  any  position,  but  that  recommended  is  lying
on  the  side,  and  it  is  generally  best  to  throw  a  handkerchief  over  the  face  to  prevent
distraction  of  the  patient's  attention.     When  the  rapid  breathing  is  first  begun  tin-
patient  may  feel  some  exhilaration,  following  this  comes  a  sensation  of  fulness  in
the  head  or  dizziness.      The  face  is  at  first  flushed  and  afterwards  pale  or  even
bluish,  the  heart  beats  rather  feebly  and  fast,  but  the  sense  of  touch  is  not  affected,
nor  is  consciousness  lost.     The  effect  is  produced  more  readily  in  females  than  in
males,  and  in  middle-aged  more  easily  than   in   the  old;    children   can  hardly  be
made  to  breathe  properly.     It  is  denied  that  there  is  any  possible  danger.     Several
minor  operations,  other  than  dental  ones,   have  been   successfully   made   by  this
method,  and  it  is  claimed  that  in  dentistry,  surgery  and  obstetrics  it  may  supplant
the  common  anaesthetics.     Dr.  Hewson's  explanation  is  that  rapid  breathing  dimin-
ishes the  oxygenation  of  the  blood,  and  that  the  resultant  excess  of  carbonic  acid
temporarily  poisons  the  nerve  centres.     Dr.  Bonwill  gives  several  explanations,  one

342  A    MODERN    PAXARION.

being  the  specific  effect  of  carbonic  acid,  another  the  diversion  of  will-force  pro-
duced by  rapid  voluntary  muscular  action,  and,  third,  the  damming  up  of  the
blood  in  the  brain,  due  to  the  excessive  amount  of  air  passing  into  the  lungs.  The
Record  is  not  satisfied  with  the  theories,  but  considers  it  well  proved  that  pain  may
be  deadened  by  the  method,  which  it  commends  to  the  profession  for  the  experi-
mental determination  of  its  precise  value.

And  if  it  be  well  proved  that  about  one  hundred  respirations  per
minute  ending  in  rapid  puffing  expirations  can  successfully  deaden
pain,  then  why  should  not  a  varied  mode  of  inhaling  oxygen  be  pro-
ductive of  other  and  still  more  extraordinary  results,  yet  unknown  to
Science,  but  awaiting  her  future  discoveries?

[After  speaking  at  some  length  concerning  Samadhi  and  of  the  various  branches
of  Raja  Yoga,  Dr.  Paul's  remarks  call  forth  the  following  note.]

This  system,  evolved  by  long  ages  of  practice  until  it  was  brought  to
bear  the  above-described  results,  was  not  practised  in  India  alone  in
the  days  of  antiquity.  The  greatest  philosophers  of  all  countries
sought  to  acquire  these  powers,  and,  certainly,  behind  the  external
ridiculous  postures  of  the  Yogins  of  to-day,  lies  concealed  the  profound
wisdom  of  the  archaic  ages,  one  that  included  among  other  things  a
perfect  knowledge  of  what  are  now  termed  physiology  and  psychology.
Ammonius  Saccas,  Porphyry^,  Proclus  and  others  practised  it  in  Egypt;
and  Greece  and  Rome  did  not  hesitate  at  all  in  their  time  of  philo-
sophical glory  to  follow  suit.  Pythagoras  speaks  of  the  celestial  music
of  the  spheres  that  one  hears  in  hours  of  ecstasy,  Zeno  finds  a  wise
man  who,  having  conquered  all  passions,  feels  happiness  and  emotion
but  in  the  midst  of  torture.  Plato  advocates  the  man  of  meditation
and  likens  his  powers  to  those  of  the  divinity,  and  we  see  the  Chris-
tian ascetics  themselves  through  a  mere  life  of  contemplation  and
self-torture  acquire  powers  of  levitation  or  aethrobacy,  which,  though
attributed  to  the  miraculous  intervention  of  a  personal  God,  are  never-
theless real  and  the  result  of  physiological  changes  in  the  human
body      Says  Patanjali:

The  Yogin  will  hear  celestial  sounds,  the  songs  and  conversations  of  celestial
choirs.     He  will  have  the  perception  of  their  touch  in  their  passage  through  the  air,

which,  translated  into  more  sober  language,  means  that  the  ascetic  is
enabled  to  see  with  the  spiritual  eye  in  the  Astral  Light,  hear  with  the
spiritual  ear  subjective  sounds  inaudible  to  others,  and  live  and  feel,  so
to  say,  in  the  Unseen  Universe.

The  Yogin  is  able  to  enter  a  dead  or  a  living  body  by  the  path  of  the  senses,  and  in
this  body  to  act  as  though  it  were  his  own.

THE   YOGA    PHILOSOPHY.  343

The  "path  of  the  senses";  our  physical  senses,  supposed  to  originate
in  the  astral  body,  the  ethereal  counterpart  of  man,  or  the  jivatma,
which  dies  with  the  body;  the  senses  are  here  meant  in  their  spiritual
sense — volition  of  the  higher  principle  in  man.  The  true  Raja  Yogin  is
a  stoic;  and  Kapila,  who  deals  but  with  the  latter — utterly  rejecting
the  claim  of  the  Hatha  Yogins  to  converse  during  Samadhi  with  the
Infinite  Ishvara — describes  their  state  in  the  following  words:

To  a  Yogin  in  whose  mind  all  things  are  identified  as  spirit,  what  is  infatuation?
What  is  grief?  He  sees  all  things  as  one;  he  is  destitute  of  affections;  he-  neither
rejoices  in  good  nor  is  offended  with  evil.  ...  A  wise  man  sees  so  many  false
things  in  those  which  are  called  true,  so  much  miser}'  in  wdiat  is  called  happiness,
that  he  turns  away  with  disgust.  .  .  .  He  who  in  the  body  has  obtained  libera-
tion (from  the  tyranny  of  the  senses)  is  of  no  caste,  of  no  sect,  of  no  order,  attends
to  no  duties,  adheres  to  no  shastras,  to  no  formulas,  to  no  works  of  merit;  he  is
beyond  the  reach  of  speech;  he  remains  at  a  distance  from  all  secular  concerns;  he
has  renounced  the  love  and  the  knowledge  of  all  sensible  objects;  he  flatters  none,
he  honours  none,  he  is  not  worshipped,  he  worships  none;  whether  he  practises
and  follows  the  customs  of  his  fellow-men  or  not  this  is  his  character.

And  a  selfish  and  a  disgustingly  misanthropical  one  this  character
would  be  were  it  that  for  which  the  True  Adept  was  striving.  But  it
must  not  be  understood  literally,  and  we  shall  have  something  more
to  say  upon  the  subject  in  the  following  article,  which  will  conclude
Dr.  Paul's  essay  on  Yoga  Philosophy.

[One  of  the  practices  followed  by  the  Hatha  Yogin  is  called  Dhauti.  This  is  the
act  of  swallowing  a  bandage  of  linen  moistened  with  water,  measuring  three  inches
in  breadth  and  fifteen  cubits  in  length.  This  is  rather  a  difficult  process.  But  very
few  fakirs  can  practise  it.]

And  a  happy  thing  it  is  that  the  process  is  so  difficult,  as  we  do
not  know  of  anything  half  so  disgusting.  No  true  Raja  Yogin  will  ever
condescend  to  practise  it.  Besides,  as  every  physician  can  easily  tell,
the  process,  if  repeated,  becomes  a  very  dangerous  one  for  the  experi-
menter. There  are  other  "processes"  still  more  hideous,  and  as  use-
less for  psychological  purposes.

[Nor  does  his  hair  grow  during  the  time  he  remains  buried.]
In  reference  to  the  arrest  of  the  growth  of  the  hair,  some  adepts  in
the  secret  science  claim  to  know  more  than  this.  They  prove  their
ability  to  completely  suspend  the  functions  of  life  each  night  during
the  hours  intended  for  sleep.  Life  then  is,  so  to  say,  held  in  total
abeyance.     The  wear  and  tear  of  the  inner  as  well  as  the  outer  organ-

344  A    MODERN    PANARION.

ism  being  thus  artificially  arrested,  and  there  being  no  possibility  of
waste,  these  men  accumulate  as  much  vital  energy  for  use  in  their
waking  state  as  they  would  have  lost  in  sleep,  during  which  state,  if
natural,  the  process  of  energy  and  expense  of  force  is  still  mechanically
going  on  in  the  human  body.  In  the  induced  state  described,  as  in
that  of  a  deep  swoon,  the  brain  no  more  dreams  than  if  it  were  dead.
One  century,  if  passed,  would  appear  no  longer  than  one  second,  for
all  perception  of  time  is  lost  for  him  who  is  subjected  to  it.  Nor  do
the  hairs  or  nails  grow  under  such  circumstances,  though  they  do  for  a
certain  time  in  a  body  actually  dead,  which  proves,  if  anything  can,
that  the  atoms  and  tissues  of  the  physical  body  are  held  under  con-
ditions quite  different  from  those  of  the  state  we  call  death.  For,  to
use  a  physiological  paradox,  life  in  a  dead  animal  organism  is  even
more  intensely  active  than  it  ever  is  in  a  living  one,  which,  as  we
see,  does  not  hold  good  in  the  case  under  notice.  Though  the
average  sceptic  may  regard  this  statement  as  sheer  nonsense,  those
who  have  experienced  this  in  themselves  know  it  as  an  undoubted
fact.

Two  certain  fakirs  from  Nepaul  once  agreed  to  try  the  experiment.
One  of  them,  previous  to  attempting  the  hibernation,  underwent  all
the  ceremonies  of  preparation  as  described  by  Dr.  Paul,  and  took  all
the  necessary  precautious;  the  other  simply  threw  himself  by  a  process
known  to  himself  and  others  into  that  temporary  state  of  complete
paralysis  which  imposes  no  limits  of  time,  may  last  months  as  well  as
hours,  and  which  is  known  in  certain  Tibetan  lamaseries  as  ...  .
The  result  was  that  while  the  hair,  beard  and  nails  of  the  former  had
grown  at  the  end  of  six  weeks,  though  feebly  yet  perceptibly,  the  cells
of  the  latter  had  remained  as  closed  and  inactive  as  if  he  had  been
transformed  for  that  lapse  of  time  into  a  marble  statue.  Not  having
personally  seen  either  of  these  men,  or  the  experiment,  we  can  vouch
only  in  a  general  way  for  the  possibility  of  the  phenomenon,  not  for
the  details  of  this  peculiar  case,  though  we  would  as  soon  doubt  our
existence  as  the  truthfulness  of  those  from  whom  we  have  the  story.
We  only  hope  that  among  the  sceptical  and  materialistic  who  may
scoff,  we  may  not  find  either  people  who  nevertheless  accept  with  a
firm  and  pious  conviction  the  story  of  the  resurrection  of  the  half-
decayed  L,azarus  and  other  like  miracles,  or  yet  those  who  while  ready
to  crush  a  Theosophist  for  his  beliefs,  would  never  dare  to  scoff  at  those
of  a  Christian.

THE   YOGA   PHILOSOPHY.  345

[A  Yogin  acquires  an  increase  of  specific  gravity  by  swallowing  great  draughts  of
the  air,  and  compressing  the  same  within  the  system.]

This  is  what,  three  years  ago,  in  describing  the  phenomenon  in
/sis  Unveiled.,  we  called  "interpolarization."  ( vSee  vol.  i.  op.  cit.,  pp.
23  and  24.)

[On  the  powers  resulting  from  Prapti,  it  is  said     .     .     .]

As  a  deaf  and  dumb  person  learns  to  understand  the  exact  meaning
of  what  is  said  simply  from  the  motion  of  the  lips  and  face  of  the
speaker,  and  without  understanding  any  language  phonetically,  other
and  extra  senses  can  be  developed  in  the  soul  as  well  as  in  the  physical
mind  of  a  mute,  a  sixth  and  equally  phenomenal  sense  is  developed  as
the  result  of  practice,  which  supplies  for  him  the  lack  of  the  other
two.

Magnetic  and  mesmeric  aura,  or  "fluid,"  can  be  generated  and  inten-
sified in  every  man  to  an  almost  miraculous  extent,  unless  he  be  by
nature  utterly  passive.

We  have  known  of  such  a  faculty  (divining  the  thoughts  of  others)
to  exist  in  individuals  who  were  far  from  being  adepts  or  Yogins,  and
had  never  heard  of  the  latter  It  can  be  easily  developed  by  intense
will,  perseverance  and  practice,  especially  in  persons  who  are  born
with  natural  analytical  powers,  intuitive  perception,  and  a  certain  apt-
ness for  observation  and  penetration.  These  may,  if  they  only  preserve
perfect  purity,  develop  the  faculty  of  divining  people's  thoughts  to  a
degree  which  seems  almost  supernatural.  Some  very  clever  but  quite
uneducated  detectives  in  London  and  Paris,  develop  it  in  themselves  to
an  almost  faultless  perfection.  It  can  also  be  helped  by  mathematical
study  and  practice.  If  then  such  is  found  to  be  the  case  with  simple
individuals,  why  not  in  men  who  have  devoted  to  it  a  whole  life,  helped
on  by  a  study  of  the  accumulated  experience  of  many  a  generation  of
mystics  and  under  the  tuition  of  real  adepts?

The  dual  soul  is  no  fancy  and  may  be  one  day  explained  in  scien-
tific language,  when  the  psycho-physiological  faculties  of  man  shall  be
better  studied,  when  the  possibility  of  many  a  now-doubted  pheno-
menon is  discovered,  and  when  truth  will  no  longer  be  sacrificed  to
conceit,  vanity  and  routine.  Our  physical  senses  have  nothing  to  do
with  the  spiritual  or  psychological  faculties.  The  latter  begin  their
action  where  the  former  stop,  owing  to  that  Chinese  wall  about  the
soul  empire,  called  matter.

[Concerning  the  power  called  Vashitva,  it  is  observed     .     .     .]

346  A    MODERN    PANARION.

Perhaps  the  Hobilgans  and  the  Shaberons  of  Tibet  might  have
something  to  tell  us  if  they  chose.  The  great  secret  which  enwraps
the  mystery  of  the  reincarnations  of  their  great  Dalay-Lamas,  their
supreme  Hobilgans,  and  others  who  as  well  as  the  former  are  supposed,
a  few  days  after  their  enlightened  souls  have  laid  aside  their  mortal
clothing,  to  reincarnate  themselves  in  young,  and,  previously  to  that,
very  weak  bodies  of  children,  has  never  yet  been  told.  These  children,
who  are  invariably  on  the  point  of  death  when  designated  to  have  their
bodies  become  the  tabernacles  of  the  souls  of  deceased  Buddhas,  recover
immediately  after  the  ceremony,  and,  barring  accident,  live  long  years,
exhibiting  trait  for  trait  the  same  peculiarities  of  temper,  characteristics
and  predilections  as  the  dead  man's.  Vashitva  is  also  said  to  be  the
power  of  taming  living  creatures  and  of  making  them  obedient  to  one's
own  wishes  and  orders.

[Pythagoras,  who  visited  India,  is  said  to  have  tamed  by  the  influence  of  his  will
or  word  a  furious  bear,  prevented  an  ox  from  eating  beans,  and  stopped  an  eagle  in
its  flight.]

These  are  mesmeric  feats  and  it  is  only  by  (in)exact  scientists  that

mesmerism  is  denied  in  our  days.     It  is  largely  treated  of  in  /sis,  and

the  power  of  Pythagoras  is  explained  in  vol.  i.  p.  283,  ct  seq.

[Ishatwa,  or  divine  power.  When  the  passions  are  restrained  from  their  desires,
the  mind  becomes  tranquil  and  the  soul  is  awakened.]

In  which  case  it  means  that  the  soul,  being  liberated  from  the  yoke
of  the  body  through  certain  practices,  discipline  and  purity  of  life,
during  the  lifetime  of  the  latter,  acquires  powers  identical  with  its
primitive  element,  the  universal  soul.  It  has  overpowered  its  material
custodian;  the  terrestrial  gross  appetites  and  passions  of  the  latter,
from  being  its  despotic  masters,  have  become  its  slaves,  hence  the  soul
has  become  free  henceforth  to  exercise  its  transcendental  powers,  un-
trammelled by  any  fetters.

[With  regard  to  restoring  the  dead  to  life.]

Life  once  extinct  can  never  be  recalled,  but  another  life  and  another
soul  can  sometimes  reanimate  the  abandoned  frame,  if  we  may  believe
learned  men  who  were  never  known  to  utter  an  untruth.

Wherever  the  word  "soul"  has  occurred  in  the  course  of  the  above
comments,  the  reader  must  bear  in  mind  that  we  do  not  use  it  in  the
sense  of  an  immortal  principle  in  man,  but  in  that  of  the  group  of
personal  qualities  which  are  but  a  congeries  of  material  particles  whose
term  of  survival  beyond  the  physical,  or  material,  personality  is  for  a

THE   YOGA    PHILOSOPHY.  347

longer  or  shorter  period,  proportionately  with  the  grossness  or  refine-
ment of  the  individual.  Various  correspondents  have  asked  whether
the  Siddhis  of  Yoga  can  only  be  acquired  by  the  rude  training  of
Hatha  Yoga;  and  The  Journal  of  Science  (London)  assuming  that  they
cannot,  launched  out  in  the  violent  expressions  which  were  recently
quoted  in  these  pages.  But  the  fact  is  that  there  is  another,  an  un-
objectionable and  rational  process,  the  particulars  of  which  cannot  be
given  to  the  idle  enquirer,  and  which  must  not  even  be  touched  upon
at  the  latter  end  of  a  commentary  like  the  present  one.  The  subject
niav  be  reverted  to  at  a  more  favourable  time.

A  YEAR   OF   THEOSOPHY.

[Vol,  II.  No.  4,  January,  1881.]

The  dial  of  time  marks  off  another  of  the  world's  hours.  .  .  .
And  as  the  old  year  passes  into  eternity,  like  a  rain-drop  falling  into
the  ocean,  its  vacant  place  on  the  calendar  is  occupied  by  a  successor
which,  if  one  may  credit  the  ancient  prophetic  warnings  of  Mother
Shipton  and  other  seers,  is  to  bring  woe  and  disaster  to  some  portions
of  the  world.  Let  it  go  with  its  joys  and  triumphs,  its  badness  and
bitterness,  if  it  but  leave  behind  for  our  instruction  the  memory  of
our  experience  and  the  lesson  of  our  mistakes.  Wise  is  he  who  lets
"the  dead  past  bury  its  dead,"  and  turns  with  courage  to  meet  the
fresher  duties  of  the  New  Year;  only  the  weak  and  foolish  bemoan  the
irrevocable.  It  will  be  well  to  take  a  brief  retrospect  of  those  incidents
of  the  year  1880  (a.d.)  which  possess  an  interest  for  members  of  the
Theosophical  Society.  The  more  so  since,  in  consequence  of  the
absence  from  Bombay  of  the  President  and  Corresponding  Secretary,
the  anniversary  day  of  the  Society  was  not  publicly  celebrated.

It  will  not  be  necessary  to  enter  minutely  into  those  details  of  ad-
ministration which,  however  important  in  themselves  as  links,  weak  or
strong,  in  the  general  chain  of  progress,  and  however  they  may  have
taxed  the  patience,  nerves,  or  other  resources  of  the  chief  officers,  do
not  at  all  interest  the  public.  It  is  not  so  much  explanation  as  restdts
that  are  demanded,  and  these  in  our  case  abound.  Even  our  worst
enemy  would  be  forced  to  admit,  were  he  to  look  closely  into  our
transactions,  that  the  Society  is  immeasurably  stronger  morally,
numerically,  and  as  regards  a  capacity  for  future  usefulness,  than  it
was  a  year  ago.  Its  name  has  become  most  widely  known;  its  fellow-
ship has  been  enriched  by  the  accession  of  some  very  distinguished
men;  it  has  planted  new  branch  societies  in  India,  Ceylon  and  else-
where; applications  are  now  pending  for  the  organization  of  still  other
branches,  in   California,  India,  Australia  and  elsewhere;   its  Magazine

A   YEAR    OF   THEOSOPHY.  349

has  successfully  entered  the  second  volume;  its  local  issues  with  the
government  of  India  have  been  finally  and  creditably  settled;  a  mis-
chievous attempt  by  a  handful  of  malcontents  at  Bombay  to  disrupt  it
has  miserably  failed  *  It  has  made  official  alliances  with  the  Sanskrit
Samaj  of  Benares,  that  is  to  say.  with  the  most  distinguished  body  of
orthodox  Sanskrit  pandits  in  the  world,  with  the  other  Sabha  of  which
Pandit  Rama  Misra  Shastri  is  manager,  and  with  the  Hindu  Sabha,  of
Cochin    State;    while,   at   the   same   time,    strengthening   its   fraternal

A

relations  with  the  Arya  Samajes  of  the  Punjab  and  Xorth-Western  Pro-
vinces. Besides  all  this,  we  can  point  with  joy  and  pride  to  the  results
of  the  late  mission  to  Ceylon,  where,  within  the  space  of  fifty-seven
days,  seven  branch  societies  of  Buddhist  laymen,  one  Ecclesiastical
Council  of  Buddhist  priests,  and  one  scientific  society  were  organized,
and  some  hundreds  of  new  fellows  were  added  to  our  list.

All  this  work  could  not  be  accomplished  without  great  labour,
mental  anxiety  and  physical  discomfort.  If  to  this  be  added  the
burden  of  a  correspondence  with  many  different  countries,  and  the
time  required  for  making  two  journeys  to  Northern  India  and  one  to
Ceylon,  our  friends  at  a  distance  will  see  that  whatever  other  blame
may  properly  attach  to  the  founders,  who  have  never  claimed  infalli-
bility of  any  sort,  that  of  laziness  is  assuredly  not  to  be  cast  in  their
teeth.  Nor,  when  they  learn  that  the  work  done  since  leaving  America,
the  travelling  expenses  and  the  fitting  and  maintenance  of  the  Head-
quarters' establishment  have  cost  some  Rs.  20,000,  while  the  cash
receipts  of  the  treasurer  (exclusive  of  those  from  Ceylon,  Rs.  2.440,
which  sum  is  set  aside  as  a  special  fund  to  be  used  in  the  interests  of
Buddhism)  have  been  only  one  thousand  two  hundred  and  forty  rupees,  all
told,  including  one  donation  of  Rs.  200  from  the  universally  respected
Maharani  Svarnamayi,  and  another  of  Rs.  20  from  a  well-wisher  in
Bengal,  will  those  who  direct  the  Society's  affairs  be  regarded  by  them
as  making  money  out  of  their  offices?  And  these  figures,  which  may
most  readily  be  verified,  are  our  only  answer  to  the  calumnies  which
have  maliciously  been  circulated  by  some  who  did  not  and  others  who
did  know  the  truth.

The  trip  to  Ceylon  occupied  twenty-seven  days  in  all,  the  second  one
to   Northern   India   125   days.      Thus  the  founders   have  been   absent

*  Secret  letters  by  former  members  denouncing-  its  founders,  sent  to  Parisian  and  other  T::  •
sophists,  and  pretending-  that  the  Bombay  Society  was  virtually  extinct  its  best  members  having
resigned  .  were  sent  back  to  us  with  new  protestations  of  friendship  and  loyalty  and  expressions  "I
scorn  for  the  conspirators. — [Ed.  T/ieos.]

350  A   MODERN   PANARION.

from  Bombay  on  duty  twenty-nine  weeks  out  of  the  fifty-two;  their
travels  extending  through  twenty-five  degrees  of  latitude,  from  Lahore
at  the  extreme  north  of  India  to  Matara,  the  southernmost  point  of
ancient  Lanka.  Each  of  the  Indian  Presidencies  has  contributed  a
quota  of  new  members;  and  at  the  former  capital  of  the  late  lion-
hearted  Runjeet  Singh,  a  branch  was  recently  organized  by  Sikhs  and
Punjabis  under  the  title  of  the  "  Punjab  Theosophical  Society."  During
the  twelvemonth,  President  Olcott  delivered  seventy-nine  lectures  and
addresses,  a  majority  of  which  were  interpreted  in  the  Hindi,  Urdu,
Guzerati  and  Singhalese  languages.

Many  misconceptions  prevail   as  to  the  nature  and  objects  of  the
Theosophical  Society.     Some — Sir  Richard  Temple  in  the  number —
fancy  it  is  a  religious  sect;   many  believe  it  is  composed  of  atheists;
a  third  party  are  convinced  that  its  sole  object  is  the  study  of  occult
science  and  the  initiation  of  green  hands  into  the  Sacred  Mysteries.
If  we  have  had  one  we  certainly  have  had  a  hundred  intimations  from
strangers  that  they  were  ready  to  join  at  once  if  they  could  be  sure
that  they  would  shortly  be  endowed  with  Siddhis,  or  the  power  to  work
occult  phenomena.     The  beginning  of  a  new  year  is  a  suitable  time  to
make  one  more  attempt — we  wish  it  could  be  the  last — to  set  these
errors  right.     So,  then,  let  us  again  say:  (i)  The  Theosophical  Society
teaches  no  new  religion,  aims  to  destroy  no  old  one,  promulgates  no
creed  of  its  own,  follows  no  religious  leader,  and  distinctly  andemphati-
cally  is  not  a  sect  nor  ever  was  one.     It  admits  worthy  people  of  any
religion  to  membership  on  condition  of  mutual  tolerance  and  mutual
help  to  discover  truth.    The  founders  have  never  consented  to  be  taken
as  religious  leaders,  they  repudiate  any  such  idea,  and  they  have  not
taken  and  will  not  take  disciples.     (2)  The  Society  is  not  composed  of
atheists,  nor  is  it  any  more  conducted  in  the  interest  of  atheism  than
in  that  of  deism  or  polytheism.     It  has  members  of  almost  every  reli-
gion, and  is  on  equally  friendly  terms  with  each  and  all.     (3)  Not  a
majority,  nor  even  a  respectable  minority  numerically  speaking,  of  its
fellows  are  students  of  occult  science  or  ever  expect  to  become  adepts.
All  who  care  for  the  information  have  been  told  what  sacrifices  are
necessary  in  order  to  gain  the  higher  knowledge,  and  few  are  in  a  posi-
tion to  make  one  tenth  of  them.     He  who  joins  our  Society  gains  no
Siddhis  by  that  act,  nor  is  there  any  certainty  that  he  will  even  see  any
phenomena,  let  alone  meet  with  an  adept.     Some  have  enjoyed  both
these  opportunities,  and  so  the  possibility  of  the  phenomena  and  the

A   YEAR    OF   TIIKOSOI'IIY.  35I

existence  of  Siddhis  do  not  rest  upon  our  unverified  assertions.
Those  who  have  seen  things  have  perhaps  been  allowed  to  do  so  on
account  of  some  personal  merit  detected  by  those  who  showed  them
the  Siddhis,  or  for  other  reasons  known  to  themselves  and  over  which
we  have  no  control.

For  thousands  of  years  these  things  have,  whether  rightly  or  wrongly,
been  guarded  as  sacred  mysteries,  and  Asiatics  at  least  need  not  be
reminded  that  often  even  after  months  or  years  of  the  most  faithful  and
assiduous  personal  service,  the  disciples  of  a  Yogi  have  not  been  shown
"miracles"  or  endowed  with  powers.  What  folly,  therefore,  to  imagine
that  by  entering  any  society  one  might  make  a  short  cut  to  adeptship!
The  weary  traveller  along  a  strange  road  is  grateful  even  to  find  a
guide-post  that  shows  him  his  way  to  his  place  of  destination.  Our
Society,  if  it  does  naught  else,  performs  this  kindly  office  for  the
searcher  after  truth.     And  it  is  much.

Before  closing,  one  word  must  be  said  in  correction  of  an  unfortunate
impression  that  has  got  abroad.  Because  our  pamphlet  of  rules  men-
tions a  relationship  between  our  Society  and  certain  proficients  in
Occult  Science,  or  "Mahatmas,"  many  persons  fancy  that  these  great
men  are  personally  engaged  in  the  practical  direction  of  its  affairs;
and  that  in  such  a  case,  being  primarily  responsible  for  the  several
mistakes  that  have  occurred  in  the  admission  of  unworthy  members
and  in  other  matters,  they  can  neither  be  so  wise,  so  prudent,  nor  so
far-seeing  as  is  claimed  for  them.  It  is  also  imagined  that  the  Presi-
dent and  Corresponding  Secretary  (especially  the  latter)  are,  if  not
actually  Yogis  and  Mahatmas  themselves,  at  least  persons  of  ascetic
habits,  who  assume  superior  moral  excellence.  Neither  of  these  sup-
positions is  correct,  and  both  are  positively  absurd.  The  administra-
tion of  the  Society  is,  unless  in  exceptionally  important  crises,  left  to
the  recognized  officials,  and  they  are  wholly  responsible  for  all  the
errors  that  are  made.  Many  may  doubtless  have  been  made,  and  our
management  may  be  very  faulty,  but  the  wonder  is  that  no  more  have
occurred,  if  the  multiplicity  of  duties  necessarily  imposed  upon  the
two  chief  officers  and  the  world-wide  range  of  activity  be  taken  into
account.  Colonel  Olcott  and  Madame  Blavatsky  do  not  pretend  to
asceticism,  nor  would  it  be  possible  for  them  to  practise  it  while  in  the
thick  of  the  struggle  to  win  a  permanent  foothold  for  the  Society  in  the
face  of  every  possible  obstacle  that  a  selfish,  sensuality-loving  world
puts  in  the  way.     What  either  of  them  has  heretofore  been,  or  either

352  A   MODERN    PANARION.

or  both  may  in  the  future  become,  is  quite  a  different  affair.  At  present
they  only  claim  to  be  trying  honestly  and  earnestly,  so  far  as  their
natural  infirmities  of  character  permit,  to  enforce  by  example  and
precept  the  ideas  which  are  embodied  in  the  purposes  and  rules  of  the
Theosophical  Society.  Once  or  twice  ill-wishers  have  publicly  taunted
us  with  not  having  given  practical  proofs  of  our  alleged  affection  for
India.  Our  final  vindication  must  be  left  to  posterity,  which  always
renders  that  justice  that  the  present  too  often  denies.  But  even  now —
if  we  may  judge  by  the  tone  of  our  correspondence,  as  well  as  by  the
enthusiasm  which  has  everywhere  greeted  us  in  the  course  of  our
journeyings — a  palpably  good  effect  has  been  produced  by  our  appeals
to  the  educated  Indian  public.  The  moral  regeneration  of  India  and
the  revival  of  her  ancient  spiritual  glories  must  be  exclusively  the  work
of  her  own  sons.  All  we  can  do  is  to  apply  the  match  to  the  train,  to
fan  the  smouldering  embers  into  a  genial  warmth,  and  this  we  are
trying  to  do.  One  step  in  the  right  direction,  it  will  doubtless  be
conceded,  is  the  alliance  effected  with  the  Benares  pandits.

a

A  WORD  WITH  OUR  FRIENDS.

n

[Vol.  II.  No.  4  (Supplement),  January,  1SS1.]

That  cause  must  be  weak  and  desperate,  indeed,  that  has  to  resort
to  the  arts  of  the  slanderer  to  prop  it  up  and  injure  its  victims.     And  it
is  truly  lamentable  to  see   people  adopting  these  tactics  against  the
Theosophical  Society  and  its  founders.     Soon  after  we  reached  India
we  were  obliged  to  begin  legal  proceedings  against  a  missionary  organ,
to  compel  its  editor  to  apologize  for  some  base  slanders  he  had  indulged
in;    and   readers   of  The   Theosopliist  are  aware  of  the  conduct  of  the
Christian  party  in   Ceylon,  and  their  utter  discomfiture  at  Panadure.
However  great  our  efforts  to  avoid  any  conflict  with  them,  some  strange
fatality  seems  to  be  for  ever  urging  these  good  people  to  adopt  ques-
tionable measures  to  hasten  their  own  ultimate  ruin.     Our  Society  has
been  their  favourite  mark.     The  most  recent  shot  was  fired  at  Benares
by   a  well-known  convert  to  the  Christian   faith,  who,  unable   to  lay
hold  upon  anything  disreputable  in  our  Indian  career,  did  his  best  to
injure  us  in  a  certain  important  direction  by  sneeringly  suggesting  to  a
very  high  personage  that  Colonel  Olcott  was  a  man  of  no  position  in
his  own  country,  and  had  doubtless  come  to  India  as  an  adventurer,  to
make  money  out  of  the  people.     Happily  his  venom  was  poured  into
unsympathetic  ears.     Yet,  as  he  is  a  man  of  a  certain  influence,  and
others  of  our  friends  have  also  been  similarly  approached  by  him  and
other  enemies  of  ours,  such  calumnies  as  these  cannot  be  well  over-
looked.    We  are  quite  aware  that  a  document  of  such  a  nature  as  the
present,   if   launched   on   the  public  without  a  word  of   explanation,
would  give  rise  to  criticism,  and  perhaps  be  thought  in  bad  taste,  unli
very  serious  and  important  reasons  can  be  shown  for  its  appearance.
Such  reasons  unquestionably  exist,  even  were  no  account  to  be  taken
of  the  malicious  plot  of  our  Benares  opponent.     When,  in  addition  to
this,  we  reflect  that  ever  since  we  landed  in  this  country,  impelled  by
motives,  sincere  and  honest — though,  perhaps,  as  we  now  find  it  our-

354  A   MODERN    PANARION.

selves,  too  enthusiastic,  too  unusual  in  foreigners  to  be  readily  believed
in  by  natives  without  some  more  substantial  proof  than  our  simple
word — we  have  been  surrounded  by  more  enemies  and  opponents  than
by  friends  and  sympathizers;  and  that  we  two  are  strangers  to  rulers
as  well  as  the  ruled,  we  believe  that  no  available  proof  should  be  with-
held that  will  show  that,  at  least,  we  are  honest  and  peaceful  people,  if
not  actually  that  which  we  know  ourselves  to  be — most  sincere  friends
of  India  and  her  sons.  Our  personal  honour,  as  well  as  the  honour  of
the  whole  Society,  is  at  stake  at  the  present  moment.  "Tell  me  what
your  friends  are  and  I  will  tell  you  what  you  are,"  is  a  wise  saying.
A  man  at  Colonel  Olcott's  time  of  life  is  not  likely  to  so  change  in
character  as  to  abandon  his  country,  where  he  has  such  an  honourable
past  and  where  his  income  was  so  large  as  it  was,  to  come  to  India
and  turn  "adventurer."  Therefore,  we  have  concluded,  with  Colonel
Olcott's  permission,  to  give  the  following  details.  They  are  but  a
few  out  of  many  now  lying  before  us,  that  show  his  honourable,
efficient  and  faithful  career,  both  as  a  member  of  the  Bar,  a  private
gentleman,  and  a  public  official,  from  the  year  1853  down  to  the  very
moment  of  his  departure  from  the  United  States  for  India.  As  Colonel
Olcott  is  not  a  man  to  sound  his  own  praises,  the  writer,  his  colleague,
may  state  that  his  name  has  been  widely  known  in  America  for  nearly
thirty  3^ears  as  a  promoter  of  various  public  reforms.  It  was  he  who
founded  (in  1856)  the  first  scientific  agricultural  school  there  upon  the
Swiss  model;  it  was  he  again  who  aided  in  introducing  a  new  crop  now
universally  cultivated;  addressed  three  state  legislatures  upon  the  sub-
ject by  invitation;  wrote  three  works  upon  agriculture,  of  which  one
passed  through  seven  editions,  and  was  introduced  into  the  school
libraries;  was  offered  by  Government  a  botanical  mission  to  Caffraria,
and,  later,  the  Chief  Commissionership  of  Agriculture,  and  was  offered
by  M.  Evangelides,  of  Greece,  the  Professorship  of  Agriculture  in  the
University  of  Athens.  He  was  at  one  time  Agricultural  Editor  of
Horace  Greeley's  great  journal,  The  Tribune,  and  also  American  Corre-
spondent of  The  Mark  Lane  Express.  For  his  public  services  in  con-
nection with  agricultural  reform  he  was  voted  two  medals  of  honour
by  the  National  (U.  S.)  Agricultural  Society,  and  a  silver  goblet  by  the
American  Institute.

The  breaking  out  of  the  fearful  civil  war  in  America  called  every
man  to  serve  his  country.  Colonel  Olcott  after  passing  through  four
battles  and  one  siege  (the  capture  of  Fort  Macon),  and  after  recovering

"A    WORD    WITH    OUE    FRIENDS.  355

from  a  severe  illness  contracted  in  the  field,  was  offered  by  the  late
Secretary  of  War  the  highly  honourable  and  responsible  appointment
of  Special  Commissioner  of  the  War  Department;  and  two  years  la!
was,  at  the  request  of  the  late  Secretary  of  the  Navy,  ordered  on
special  duty  in  connection  with  that  branch  of  the  service,  additional
to  his  regular  duties  in  the  War  Department.  His  services  were  most
conspicuous,  as  his  papers — which  include  a  complimentary  report  to
the  U.S.  Senate,  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Navy — prove.

At  the  close  of  the  war  the  national  army  of  one  million  men  was
quietly  disbanded,  and  was  reabsorbed  back  into  the  nation  as  though
nothing  had  happened.  Colonel  Olcott  resumed  his  profession,  and
was  shortly  invited  to  take  the  secretaryship  and  practical  direction  of
the  National  Insurance  Convention — a  conference  or  league  of  the
officials  of  the  various  state  governments  for  the  purpose  of  codifying
and  simplifying  the  laws  affecting  insurance  companies.  Accepting,
he  was  thus  for  two  }rears  or  more  in  the  closest  contact  with,  and  the
trusted  adviser  of,  some  of  the  leading  state  public  functionaries  of
the  Union;  and  a  statute  drafted  by  him,  in  connection  with  another
well-known  legal  gentleman  (Mr.  Abbott)  was  passed  by  ten  state
legislatures  and  became  law.  What  his  public  services  were  in  this
connection,  and  how  he  was  thanked  and  honoured  for  them,  may
readily  be  seen  by  consulting  the  two  large  volumes  of  the  Conven-
tion's "Transactions,"  which  are  in  the  Library  of  the  Theosophical
Society,  at  Bombay.

This  brings  us  down  to  the  year  1872.  In  [876  he  was  deputed  by
His  Honour  the  Mayor  of  New7  York  City  to  collect  a  public  subscrip-
tion in  aid  of  a  charitable  object.  In  1877  he  was  one  of  an  Inter-
national Committee  chosen  b)r  the  Italian  residents  of  New  York  to
erect  a  monument  to  Mazzirii,  in  Central  Park.  The  same  year  he  was
Honorary  Secretary  of  a  National  Committee — one  member  of  which
was  the  just  elected  President  of  the  United  States,  General  Garfield
— formed  to  secure  a  worthy  representation  of  American  arts  and
industries  at  the  Paris  "Exposition  Universelle,"  of  1S7S.  In  the
following  year  he  left  New  York  for  India,  and  just  before  sailing
received  from  the  President  and  Secretary  of  State  a  diplomatic  pass-
port, such  as  is  only  issued  to  the  most  eminent  American  citizens,
and  circular  autograph  letters  recommending  him  to  the  particular
favour  of  all  U.S.  Ministers  and  Consuls,  a-  a  gentleman  who  had
been  requested  to  promote  in   every  practicable  and  proper  way  the

356  A   MODERN   PANARION.

mutual  commercial  relations  of  the  United  States  and  India.  And
now  if  the  enemies  of  the  Theosophical  Society  can  produce  an  "ad-
venturer" with  such  a  record  and  such  testimonials  of  integrity  and
capacity,  by  all  means  let  them  name  their  man.

(Signed)        H.  P.  Blavatsky.

QUESTIONS  ANSWERED  ABOUT
YOGA  YIDYA.

[Vol.  II.  No.  5,  February,   iSSi.]

A  Hindu  gentleman  of  the  Madras  Presidency  propounds  a  number
of  questions  about  Occult  Science  which  we  answer  in  these  columns,
as  the  information  is  often  demanded  of  us  and  we  can  reach  all  at
once  in  this  way.

O. — Do  you  or  Colonel  Olcott  undertake  to  teach  this  wonderful
Vidya  to  anyone  who  may  be  anxious  to  learn  it?

A. — No;  the  correspondent  is  referred  to  our  January  number  for
remarks  upon  this  point.

O. — Would  you  like  to  give  proofs  of  the  existence  of  occult  powers
in  man  to  anyone  who  may  be  sceptically  inclined,  or  who  may  desire

to  have  his  faith  strengthened,  as  you  have  given  to  Mr.  and  Mrs.

and  the  editor  of  The  Amrita  Bazar  Patrika  ?

A. — We  would  "like"  that  everyone  should  have  such  proofs  who
needs  them,  but,  as  the  world  is  rather  full  of  people — some  twenty-
four  crores  being  in  India  alone — the  thing  is  impracticable.  Still
such  proofs  have  always  been  found  by  those  who  sought  them  in
earnest,  from  the  beginning  of  time  until  now.  We  found  them — in
India.  But  then  we  spared  neither  time  nor  trouble  in  journeying
round  the  world.

Q. — Can  you  give  such  proofs  to  one  like  myself,  who  is  at  a  great
distance;  or  must  I  come  to  Bombay?

A. — Answered  above.  We  would  not  undertake  to  do  this  thing,
even  if  we  could,  for  we  would  be  run  down  with  thousands  of  curiosity-
seekers,  and  our  life  become  a  burden.

Q. — Can  a  married  man  acquire  the  Yidya?

A. — No,  not  while  a  G-rihasta.  You  know  the  invariable  rule  was
that  a  boy  was  placed  at  a  tender  age  under  his  Guru  for  this  training  :

358  A   MODERN    PANARION.

he  stopped  with  him  until  he  was  twenty-five  to  thirty;  then  lived  as  a
married  man  fifteen  to  twenty  years;  finally  retired  to  the  forest  to
resume  his  spiritual  studies.  The  use  of  liquors,  of  beef,  and  certain
other  meats  and  certain  vegetables,  and  the  relations  of  marriage,  pre-
vent spiritual  development.

0. — Does  God  reveal  himself  by  inspiration  to  a  Yogi?

A. — Ever}7  man  has  his  own  ideas  about  "God."  So  far  as  we  have
learned,  the  Yogi  discovers  his  God  in  his  inner  self,  his  Atma.  When
he  reaches  that  point  he  is  inspired — by  the  union  of  himself  with  the
Universal,  Divine  Principle — Parabrahman.  With  a  personal  God — a
God  who  thinks,  plots,  rewards,  punishes  and  repents — we  are  not
acquainted.  Nor  do  we  think  any  Yogi  ever  saw  such  a  one — unless
it  be  true,  as  a  missionary  affirmed  the  other  day,  at  the  close  of  Colonel
Olcott's  lecture  at  Lahore,  that  Moses,  who  had  murdered  a  man  in
Egypt,  and  the  adulterous  murderer  (David),  were  Yogis!

O. — If  any  Adept  has  power  to  do  anything  he  likes,  as  Colonel
Olcott  said  in  his  lecture  at  Simla,*  can  he  make  me,  who  am  hunger-
ing and  thirsting  after  the  Vidya,  a  thorough  Adept  like  himself?

A. — Colonel  Olcott  is  no  Adept  and  never  boasted  of  being  one.
Does  our  friend  suppose  any  Adept  ever  became  such  without  making
himself  one,  without  breaking  through  ever}7  impediment  through
sheer  force  of  will  and  soul-power?  Such  adeptship  would  be  a  mere
farce.  "An  Adept  becomes,  he  is  not  made,"  was  the  motto  of  the
ancient  Rosicrucians.

Q. — How  is  it  that  in  the  presence  of  such  clear  proof  the  most  civi-
lized nations  still  continue  to  be  sceptical?

A. — The  peoples  referred  to  are  Christian,  and  although  Jesus  de-
clared that  all  who  believed  in  him  should  have  the  power  to  do  all
manner  of  wonders  (see  Mark,  xxvi.  17,  18),  like  a  Hindu  Yogi's,
Christendom  has  been  waiting  in  vain  some  eighteen  centuries  to  see
them.  And  now,  having  become  total  disbelievers  in  the  possibility  of
such  Siddhis,  they  must  come  to  India  to  get  their  proofs,  if  they  care
for  them  at  all.

Q. — Why  does  Colonel  Olcott  fix  the  year  1848  as  the  time  from
which  occult  phenomena  have  occurred?

A. — Our  friend  should  read  more  carefully,  and  not  put  us  to  the
trouble  to  answer  questions  that  are  quite  useless.  What  Colonel
Olcott  did  say  was  that  modern  Spiritualism  dates  from  1848.

*  Colonel  Olcott  said  nothing  of  the  kind.

QUESTIONS    ANSWKKK1)    AUDIT    YOGA    VIDV  v.  359

0. — Are  there  any  such  mediums  in  Indians  William  Eddy,  in  whose
presence  materialized  forms  can  be  seen?

A. — We  do  not  know,  but  suspect  there  are.  We  heard  of  a  case  at
Calcutta  where  a  dead  girl  revisited  her  parents'  house  in  broad  day-
light, and  sat  and  conversed  with  her  mother  on  various  occasions.
Mediumship  can  be  easily  developed  anywhere,  but  we  think  it  a  dan-
gerous thing  and  decline  to  give  instructions  for  its  development.
Those  who  think  otherwise  can  find  what  they  want  in  any  current
number  of  the  L,ondon  Spirittialist,  The  Medium  and  Daybreak,  the
Melbourne  Harbinger  of  Light,  the  American  Banner  of  Light,  or  any
other  respectable  Spiritualistic  organ.

0. — How  do  these  mediums  get  their  powers;  by  a  course  of  train-
ing, or  as  the  result  of  an  accident  of  their  constitution?

A. — Mediums  are  mainly  so  from  birth;  theirs  is  a  peculiar  psycho-
physiological constitution.  But  some  of  the  most  noted  mediums  of  our
times  have  been  made  so  by  sitting  in  circles.  There  is  in  many  persons
a  latent  mediumistic  faculty,  which  can  be  developed  by  effort  and  the
right  conditions.  The  same  remark  applies  to  adeptship.  We  all  have
the  latent  germs  of  adeptship  in  us,  but  in  the  case  of  some  individuals
it  is  infinitely  easier  to  bring  them  into  activity  than  in  others.

0. — Colonel  Olcott  repudiates  the  idea  of  spirit  agency  as  necessary
to  account  for  the  production  of  phenomena,  yet  I  have  read  that  a
certain  scientist  sent  spirits  to  visit  the  planets  and  report  what  they
saw  there.

A. — Perhaps  reference  is  made  to  Professor  William  Denton,  the
American  geologist,  author  of  that  interesting  work,  The  Soul  of  Things.
His  explorations  were  made  through  psychometry,  his  wife — a  very
intellectual  lady  though  a  great  sceptic  as  to  spirits — being  the  psycho-
meter.     Our  correspondent  should  read  the  book.

O. — What  becomes  of  the  spirits  of  the  departed?

A. — There  is  but  one  "Spirit" — Parabrahnian,  or  by  whatever  other
name  one  chooses  to  call  the  Eternal  Principle.  The  "souls"  of  the
departed  pass  through  many  other  stages  of  existence  after  leaving
this  earth-body,  just  as  they  were  in  many  others  anterior  to  their  birth
as  men  and  women  here.  The  exact  truth  about  this  mystery  is  known
only  to  the  highest  Adepts;  but  it  maybe  said  even  by  the  lowest  of
the  neophytes  that  each  of  us  controls  his  future  rebirths,  making  each
next  succeeding  one  better  or  worse  according  to  his  present  efforts
and  deserts.

360  A   MODERN   PANARION.

Q. — Is  asceticism  necessary  for  Yoga?

A. — Yoga  exacts  certain  conditions  which  will  be  found  described  at
p.  47  of  our  December  number.  One  of  these  conditions  is  seclusion
in  a  place  where  the  Yogi  is  free  from  all  impurities — whether  physical
or  moral.  In  short,  he  must  get  away  from  the  immoral  atmosphere  of
the  world.  If  anyone  has  by  such  study  gained  powers,  he  cannot
remain  long  in  the  world  without  losing  the  greater  part  of  his  powers —
and  that  the  higher  and  nobler  part.  So  that,  if  any  such  person  is  seen
for  many  consecutive  years  labouring  in  public,  and  neither  for  money
nor  fame,  it  should  be  known  that  he  is  sacrificing  himself  for  the  good
of  his  fellow-men.  Some  day  such  men  seem  to  suddenly  die,  and  their
supposed  remains  are  disposed  of;  but  yet  they  may  not  be  dead.
"Appearances  are  deceitful,"  the  proverb  says.

THE  MISSING  LINK.

[Vol.  II.  No.  5,  February,  18S1.]

A  good  many  of  the  Western  papers  are  terribly  excited  over  a  bit
of  news  just  arrived  in  Europe  from  Saigon.  The  most  radical  and
freethinking  of  them  crow  over  the  fact — as  well  they  may  in  the
interest  of  truth — as  though  the  thickest,  and  hitherto  most  impene-
trable of  the  veils  covering  Mother  Nature's  doings  had  been  removed
for  ever,  and  anthropology  had  no  more  secrets  to  learn.  The  excite-
ment is  due  to  a  little  monster,  a  seven-year-old  boy,  now  on  exhibition
at  Saigon.  The  child  is  a  native  of  Cambodia,  quite  robust  and
healthy,  yet  exhibiting  in  his  anatomy  the  most  precious  and  rare  of
physical  endowments — a  real  tail,  ten  inches  long  and  one  and  a  half
thick  at  its  root!

This  original  little  sample  of  humanity — unique,  we  believe,  of  his
kind — is  now  made  out  by  the  disciples  of  Darwin  and  Haeckel  to  be
the  bona  {bony?)  fide  missing  link.  L,et  us  suppose,  for  argument's
sake,  that  the  evolutionists  (whose  colours  we  certainly  wear)  are  right
in  their  hypothesis,  and  that  the  cherished  theory  of  having  baboons
for  our  ancestors  turns  out  true.  Will  every  difficulty  in  our  way  be
then  removed?  By  no  means:  for  then  more  than  ever  shall  we  have  to
try  to  solve  the  hitherto  insoluble  problem,  which  comes  first,  the  man
or  the  ape?  It  will  be  the  Aristotelean  egg  and  chicken  problem  of
creation  over  again.  We  can  never  know  the  truth  until  some  streak
of  good  chance  shall  enable  science  Lo  witness  at  different  periods  and
under  various  climates  either  women  giving  birth  to  apes,  graced  with
a  caudal  appendage,  or  female  orang-outangs  becoming  mothers  ol  tail-
less, and,  moreover,  semi-human  children,  endowed  with  a  capacity  for
speech  at  least  as  great  as  that  of  a  moderately  clever  parrot  or  mini.

Science  is  but  a  broken  reed  for  us  in  this  respect,  for  science  is  just
as  perplexed,  if  not  more  so,  than  the  rest  of  us  common  mortals.  So
little  is  it  able  to  enlighten  us  upon  the  mystery,  that  the  men  of  m

362  A    MODERN    PANARION.

learning  are  those  who  confuse  us  the  most  in  some  respects.  As  in
regard  to  the  heliocentric  system,  which,  after  it  had  been  left  an  un-
disputed fact  for  more  than  three  centuries,  found  in  the  later  part  of
our  own  a  most  serious  opponent  in  Dr.  Shroepfer,  Professor  of  Astro-
nomy at  the  University  of  Berlin,  so  the  Darwinian  theory  of  the  evo-
lution of  man  from  an  anthropoid,  has  among  its  learned  opponents
one,  who,  though  an  evolutionist  himself,  is  eager  to  oppose  Darwin,
and  seeks  to  establish  a  school  of  his  own.

This  new  "perfectionist"  is  a  professor  in  the  Hungarian  town  of
Fiinfkirchen,  who  is  delivering  just  now  a  series  of  lectures  through-
out Germany.  "Man,"  says  he,  "whose  origin  must  be  placed  in  the
Silurian  mud,  whence  he  began  evoluting  from  a  frog,  must  necessarily
some  day  reevolute  into  the  same  animal."  So  far,  well  and  good.
But  the  explanations  going  to  prove  this  hypothesis,  which  Professor
Charles  Deezy  accepts  as  a  perfectly  established  fact,  are  rather  too
vague  to  enable  us  to  build  anything  like  an  impregnable  theory  upon
them.     He  tells  us:

In  the  primitive  days  of  the  first  period  of  evolution  there  lived  a  huge,  frog-
like, mammalian  animal,  inhabiting  the  seas,  but  which,  being  of  the  amphibious
kind,  lived  likewise  on  land,  breathing  in  the  air  as  easily  as  it  did  in  water,  its
chief  habitat,  though,  was  in  the  salt  sea-water.  This  frogdike  creature  is  now
what  we  call — man  (!)  and  his  marine  origin  is  proved  by  the  fact  that  he  cannot  live
without  salt.

There  are  other  signs  about  man,  almost  as  impressive  as  the  above,
by  which  this  origin  can  be  established,  if  we  may  believe  this  new
prophet  of  science.     For  instance:

A  well-defined  remnant  of  fins,  to  be  seen  between  his  thumbs  and  fingers,  as
also  his  insurmountable  tendency  towards  the  element  of  water;

a  tendency,  we  remark  passim,  more  noticeable  in  the  Hindu  than  the
Highlander!

No  less  does  the  Hungarian  scientist  set  himself  against  Darwin's
theory  of  man  descending  from  the  ape.  According  to  his  new
teaching,

It  is  not  the  anthropoid  which  begot  man,  but  the  latter  who  is  the  progenitor  of
the  monkey.  The  ape  is  merely  a  man  returned  once  more  to  its  primitive,  savage
state.

Our  Professor's  views  as  to  geology  and  the  ultimate  destruction  of
our  globe,  coupled  with  his  notions  regarding  the  future  state  of  man-
kind, are  no  less  original,  and  are  the  very  sweetest  fruit  of  his  Tree  of

THE    MISSING    LINK.  ^63

Scientific  Knowledge.  Provoking  though  they  do  general  hilarity,
they  are  nevertheless  given  out  by  the  "learned"  lecturer  in  quite  a
serious  spirit,  and  his  works  are  placed  among  the  text-books  for
colleges.  If  we  have  to  credit  his  statement,  then  we  must  believe
that  "the  moon  is  slowly  but  surely  approaching  the  earth."  The
result  of  such  an  indiscretion  on  the  part  of  our  fair  Diana  is  to  be
most  certai?ily  the  following:

The  sea  waves  will  some  day  immerse  our  "lobe  and  gradually  submerge  all  the
continents.  Then  man,  unable  to  live  any  longer  on  dry  land,  will  have  but  to
return  to  his  primitive  form,  i.e.,  he  will  rebecome  an  aquatic  animal— a  man-frog.

And  the  life-insurance  companies  will  have  to  shut  up  shop  and
become  bankrupts — he  might  have  added.  Daring  speculators  are
advised  to  take  their  precautious  in  advance.

Having  permitted  ourselves  this  bit  of  irreverence  about  science —
those,  rather,  who  abuse  their  connection  with  it — we  may  as  well  give
here  some  of  the  more  acceptable  theories  respecting  the  missing  link.
These  are  by  no  means  so  scarce  as  bigots  would  like  to  make  us
believe,  Schweinfurth  and  other  great  African  travellers  vouchsafe  for
the  truth  of  these  assertions  and  believe  they  have  found  races  which
may,  after  all,  be  the  missing  links — between  man  and  ape.  Such  are
the  Akkas  of  Africa;  those  whom  Herodotus  calls  the  Pigmies  (ii.  32)
and  the  account  of  whom — notwithstanding  it  came  from  the  very  pen
of  the  father  of  history — was  until  very  recently  believed  to  be  erro-
neous and  they  themselves  myths  of  a  fabled  nation.  But,  since  the
public  has  had  the  most  trustworthy  narratives  of  European  travellers,
we  have  learned  to  know  better,  and  no  one  any  longer  thinks  that
Herodotus  has  confounded  in  his  account  men  and  the  cynocephaloid
apes  of  Africa.

We  have  but  to  read  the  description  of  the  orang-outang  and  of  the
chimpanzee  to  find  that  these  animals — all  but  the  hairy  surface —
answer  in  nearly  every  respect  to  these  Akkas.  They  are  said  to  have
large  cylindrical  heads  on  a  thin  neck,  and  a  body  about  four  feet  high;
very  long  arms,  perfectly  disproportionate,  as  they  reach  far  lower  than
their  knees;  a  chest  narrow  at  the  shoulders  and  widening  tremen-
dously toward  the  stomach,  which  is  always  enormous;  knees  thick.
and  hands  of  an  extraordinary  beauty  of  design  (a  characteristic  of
monkeys'  hands,  which,  with  the  exception  of  their  short  thuml
have  wonderfully  neat  and  slender  fingers  tapering  to  the  ends,  and
always  prettily  shaped  finger  nails).     The  Akkas'  walk  is  vacillating,

364  A   MODERN    PANARION.

which  is  due  to  the  abnormal  size  of  their  stomach,  as  in  the  chim-
panzee and  the  orang-outang.  Their  cranium  is  large,  profoundly
depressed  at  the  root  of  the  nose,  and  surmounted  by  a  contracting
forehead  sloping  directly  backward;  a  projecting  mouth  with  very  thin
lips,  and  a  beardless  chin — or  rather  no  chin  at  all.  The  hair  on  their
heads  does  not  grow,  and  though  less  noisy  than  the  orang-outang  they
are  enormously  so  when  compared  with  other  men.  On  account  of  the
long  grass  which  often  grows  twice  their  own  size  in  the  regions  they
inhabit,  they  are  said  to  jump  like  so  many  grasshoppers,  to  make
enormous  strides,  and  to  have  all  the  outward  motions  of  big  anthro-
poids.

Some  scientists  think — this  time  with  pretty  good  reason — that  the
Akkas,  more  even  than  the  Matimbas,  of  which  d'Escayrac  de  Lauture
gives  such  interesting  accounts,  the  Kimosas  and  the  Bushmen,  of
austral  Africa,  are  all  remnants  of  the  missing  link.

HYPNOTISM.

[Vol.  II.  No.  5,  February,  iSSi.]

The  views  of  medical  men  in  regard  to  hypnotism  or  self-mesmeri-
zation  have  been  greatly  strengthened  of  late.  This  is  evident  from
the  report  by  Dr.  Grishhorn,  of  St.  Petersburg,  at  the  latest  meeting  of
the  Society  of  the  St.  Petersburg  Physicians,  on  November  i8th  (Dec.
ist),  a  report  which  is  full  of  interest.  Until  recently,  the  phenomena
of  hypnotism  have  been  only  accepted  under  a  quasi  protest,  while
mesmerism  and  clairvoyance  were  regarded  and  denounced  by  the  best
authorities  in  science  as  pure  charlatanism.  The  greatest  physicians
remained  sceptical  as  to  the  reality  of  the  phenomena,  until  one  after
the  other  came  to  learn  better;  and  these  were  those,  of  course,  who
had  the  patience  to  devote  some  time  and  labour  to  personal  experi-
ment in  this  direction.  Still  many  have  thus  acquired  the  profound
conviction  that  there  exists  in  man  a  faculty — mysterious  and  yet
unexplained — which  causes  him  under  a  certain  degree  of  self-
concentration  to  become  as  rigid  as  a  statue  and  lose  more  or  less
his  consciousness.  That  once  in  such  a  nervous  state,  at  times  his
spiritual  and  mental  faculties  will  seem  paralyzed,  and  the  mechanical
action  of  the  body  alone  remain ;  while  at  others  it  will  be  quite  the
contrary;  his  physical  senses  becoming  benumbed,  his  mental  and
spiritual  faculties  will  acquire  a  most  wonderful  degree  of  acuteness.

Last  summer  Dr.  Grishhorn  made,  with  Professor  Berger,  a  series
of  hypnotic  experiments  and  observations  in  the  Breslau  Hospital  for
Nervous  Diseases.  One  of  the  first  patients  experimented  upon  was  a
young  girl  of  about  twenty,  who  suffered  acutely  from  rheumatic  pain.
Professor  Berger,  applying  to  the  tip  of  her  nose  a  small  hammer  used
for  auscultations,  directed  her  to  concentrate  all  her  attention  upon  the
spot  touched.  Hardly  a  few  minutes  had  elapsed,  when,  to  his  utmost
astonishment,  the  girl  became  quite  rigid.  A  bronze  statue  could  not
be  more  motionless  and  stiff.     Then  Dr.  Grishhorn  tried  every  kind  of

366  A   MODERN    PANARION.

experiment  in  order  to  ascertain  that  the  girl  did  not  play  a  part.  A
lighted  candle  was  closely  approached  to  her  eyes,  and  it  was  found
that  the  pupil  did  not  contract;  the  eyes  remaining  opened  and  glassy,
as  if  the  person  had  been  dead.  He  then  passed  a  long  needle  through
her  lip  and  moved  it  in  every  direction ;  but  the  two  doctors  remarked
neither  the  slightest  sign  of  pain,  nor,  what  was  most  strange,  was
there  a  single  drop  of  blood.  He  called  her  by  her  name;  there  came
no  answer.  But  when,  taking  her  by  the  hand,  he  began  to  converse
with  her,  the  young  girl  answered  all  his  questions,  though  feebly  at
first  and  as  if  compelled  by  an  irresistible  power.

The  second  experiment  proved  more  wonderful  )Tet.  It  was  made
with  a  young  soldier,  who  had  just  been  brought  into  the  hospital,  and
who  proved  "what  the  Spiritualists  call  a  medium" — says  the  official
report.  This  last  experiment  finally  convinced  Drs.  Grishhorn  and
Berger  of  the  reality  of  the  doubted  phenomena.  The  soldier,  a
German,  ignorant  of  a  single  word  of  Russian,  spoke  in  his  trance
with  the  doctor  in  that  language,  pronouncing  the  most  difficult  words
most  perfectly,  without  the  slightest  foreign  accent.  Suffering  from  a
paralysis  of  both  legs,  during  his  hypnotic  sleep  he  used  them  freely,
walking  with  entire  ease,  and  repeating  every  movement  and  gesture
made  by  Dr.  Grishhorn  with  absolute  precision.  The  Russian  sen-
tences he  pronounced  very  rapidly,  while  his  own  tongue  he  spoke
very  slowly.  He  even  went  so  far  as  to  write,  at  the  doctor's  dictation,
a  few  words  in  that  language,  quite  unknown  to  him,  and  in  the
Russian  characters.

The  debates  upon  this  most  important  report  by  a  well-known
physician  were  announced  to  take  place  at  the  next  meeting  of  the
Society  of  the  St.  Petersburg  Medical  Practitioners.  As  soon  as  the
official  report  of  the  proceedings  is  published,  we  will  give  it  to  our
readers.  It  is  really  interesting  to  witness  how  the  men  of  science  are
gradually  being  led  to  acknowledge  facts  which  they  have  hitherto  so
bitterly  denounced.

Hypnotism,  we  may  add,  is  rlought  but  the  Trataka  of  the  Yogi,  the
act  of  concentrating  his  mind  on  the  tip  of  the  nose,  or  on  the  spot
between  the  eyebrows.  It  was  known  and  practised  by  the  ascetics  in
order  to  produce  the  final  Samadhi,  or  temporary  deliverance  of  the
soul  from  the  body;  a  complete  disenthralment  of  the  spiritual  man
from  the  slavery  of  the  physical  with  its  gross  senses.  It  is  being
practised  unto  the  present  day.

THE  LEAVEN  OF  THEOSOPHY.

[Vol.  II.  No.  6,  -March,  1SS1.]

Those  of  us  whose  duty  it  is  to  watch  the  Theosophical  movement
and  aid  its  progress  can  afford  to  be  amused  at  the  ignorant  conceit
displayed  by  certain  journals  in  their  criticisms  upon  our  Society  and
its  officers.  Some  seem  to  think  that  when  they  have  flung  their
handful  of  dirt  we  must  certainly  be  overwhelmed.  One  or  two  have
even  gone  so  far  as,  with  mock  sympathy,  to  pronounce  us  already
hopelessly  disrupted.  It  is  a  pity  we  cannot  oblige  them,  but  so  it  is,
and  they  must  make  the  best  of  the  situation.  Our  Society  as  a  body
might  certainly  be  wrecked  by  mismanagement  or  the  death  of  its
founders,  but  the  idea  which  it  represents  and  which  has  gained  so
wide  a  currency,  will  run  on  like  a  crested  wave  of  thought  until  it
dashes  upon  the  hard  beach  where  materialism  is  picking  and  sorting
its  pebbles.  Of  the  thirteen  persons  who  composed  our  first  hoard  of
officers,  in  1S75,  nine  were  Spiritualists  of  greater  or  less  experience.
It  goes  without  saying,  then,  that  the  aim  of  the  Society  was  not  to
destroy  but  to  better  and  purify  Spiritualism.  The  phenomena  we
knew  to  be  real,  and  we  believed  them  to  be  the  most  important  of  all
current  subjects  for  investigation.  For,  whether  they  should  finally
prove  to  be  traceable  to  the  agency  of  the  departed,  or  but  manifesta-
tions of  occult  natural  forces  acting  in  concert  with  latent  psycho-
physiological human  powers,  they  opened  up  a  great  field  of  research,
the  outcome  of  which  must  be  enlightenment  upon  the  master  problem
of  life:  Man  and  his  Relations.  We  had  seen  phenomenalism  running
riot  and  twenty  millions  of  believers  clutching  at  one  drifting  theory
after  another  in  the  hope  to  gain  the  truth.  We  had  reason  to  know-
that  the  whole  truth  could  only  be  found  in  one  quarter,  the  Asiatic
schools  of  philosophy,  and  we  felt  convinced  that  the  truth  could
never  be  discovered  until  men  of  all  races  and  creeds  should  join  like-
brothers  in  the  search.  So  taking  our  stand  upon  that  ground,  we
began  to  point  the  way  eastward.

368  A   MODERN   PANARION.

Our  first  step  was  to  lay  down  the  proposition  that,  even  admitting
the  phenomena  to  be  real,  they  need  not  of  necessity  be  ascribed  to
departed  souls.  We  showed  that  there  was  ample  historical  evidence
that  such  phenomena  had  from  remotest  times  been  exhibited  by  men
who  were  not  mediums,  who  repudiated  the  passivity  exacted  of
mediums,  and  who  simply  claimed  to  produce  them  by  cultivating
inherent  powers  in  their  living  selves.  Hence  the  burden  of  proving
that  those  wonders  were  and  could  only  be  done  by  the  dead  with  the
agency  of  passive  medial  agents,  lay  with  the  Spiritualists.

To  deny  our  proposition  involved  either  the  repudiation  of  the
testimony  of  the  most  trustworthy  authorities  in  many  countries  and
in  different  epochs,  or  the  wholesale  ascription  of  mediumship  to  every
wonder-worker  mentioned  in  history.  The  latter  horn  of  the  dilemma
had  been  taken.  Reference  to  the  works  of  the  most  noted  Spiritual-
istic writers,  as  well  as  to  the  newspaper  organs  of  the  movement,  will
show  that  the  thaums,  or  "miracles"  of  every  "magician,"  saint,
religious  leader,  and  ascetic,  from  the  Chaldsean  Magians,  the  ancient
Hindu  saint,  the  Egyptian  Jannes  and  Jambres,  the  Hebrew  Moses
and  Jesus,  and  the  Mussulman  prophet,  down  to  the  Benares  sanuyasi
of  M.  Jacolliot,  and  the  common  fakir  of  to-day,  who  has  made  Anglo-
Indian  mouths  gape  with  wonder,  have  each  and  all  been  spoken  of  as
true  mediumistic  marvels.  This  was  the  best  that  could  be  done  with
a  difficult  subject,  but  it  could  not  prevent  Spiritualists  from  thinking.
The  more  they  have  thought,  read  and  compared  notes,  during  the
past  five  years,  with  those  who  have  travelled  in  Asia  and  studied
psychological  science  as  a  science,  the  more  has  the  first  acrid  feeling
against  our  Society  abated.  We  noticed  this  change  in  the  first  issue
of  this  magazine.  After  only  five  years  of  agitation,  without  abuse
from  us  or  any  aggressive  propagandism  on  our  part,  the  leaven  of  this
great  truth  has  begun  to  work.  It  can  be  seen  on  ever}'  side.  We  are
now  kindly  asked  to  show  Kurope  and  America  experimental  proofs  of
the  correctness  of  our  assertions.  L,ittle  by  little  a  body  of  persons,
including  some  of  the  best  minds  in  the  movement,  has  come  over  to
our  side  and  many  now  cordially  endorse  our  position:  that  there  can
be  no  spiritual  intercourse  either  with  the  souls  of  the  living  or  the
dead,  unless  it  is  preceded  by  self-spiritualization,  the  conquest  of  the
meaner  self,  the  education  of  the  nobler  powers  within  us.  The  serious
dangers,  as  well  as  the  more  evident  gratifications  of  mediumship,
are  becoming  gradually  appreciated.      Phenomenalism,  thanks  to  the

THE   I.EAVEN    OF   THEOSOPHY.  369

splendid  works  of  Professor  Zollner,  Mr.  Crookes,  Mr.  Varley,  and
other  able  experimentalists,  is  tending  towards  its  proper  limits  of  a
problem  of  science.  There  is  a  thoughtful  and  more  and  more  earnest
study  of  spiritual  philosophy.  We  .see  this,  not  alone  among  the  Spiri-
tualists of  Great  Britain,  Australasia  and  the  United  States,  but  also
among  the  intellectual  and  numerous  classes  of  the  continental  spiri-
tists and  the  magnetists.  Should  nothing  occur  to  break  the  present
harmony  and  impede  the  progress  of  ideas,  we  may  well  expect,  within
another  five  years,  to  see  the  entire  body  of  investigators  of  the  pheno-
mena of  mesmerism  and  mediumism  more  or  less  imbued  with  a  con-
viction that  the  greatest  psychological  truth  in  its  most  unadulterated
form,  can  be  found  in  the  Indian  Philosophies.  And  let  it  be  remem-
bered we  ascribe  this  great  result  not  to  anything  we  few  may  person-
ally have  done  or  said,  but  to  the  gradual  growth  of  a  conviction  that
the  experience  of  mankind  and  the  lessons  of  the  past  can  no  longer
be  ignored.

It  would  be  easy  to  fill  many  pages  with  extracts  from  the  journalism
of  to-day  that  sustain  the  above  views,  but  we  forbear.  Wherever
these  lines  are  read — and  that  will  be  by  subscribers  in  almost  every
quarter  of  the  globe — their  truth  will  not  be  denied  by  impartial
observers.  Merely  to  show  the  tendency  of  things,  let  us  take  the
following  excerpts  from  the  Spiritual  Notes  and  the  Revue  Spirite,
organs  respectively  of  the  spiritualist  and  the  spiritist  parties.  The
first  says:

From  certain  delicate  yet  well-defined  signs  of  the  times  we  are  led  to  believe
that  a  great  change  is  gradually  passing  over  the  spirit  of  that  system  which,  for
the  last  thirty  years,  has  been  called  by  the  not  altogether  happy  title  of  Modern
Spiritualism.  This  change  is  observable,  not  perhaps  so  much  in  the  popular
aspect  of  the  subject,  which  will  doubtless  always  remain  more  or  less  one  of  sign
and  wonder.  It  is  probably  necessary  that  such  should  be  the  case.  It  is  very
likely  a  sine  qua  lion  that  there  should  always  be  a  fringe  of  the  purely  marvellous
to  attract  the  criers  of  "  I.o  here!  "  "Lo  there]  "  from  whose  numbers  the  higher  and
inner  circle  of  initiates  may  be  from  time  to  time  recruited.  It  is  here  we  discern
the  great  value,  with  all  their  possible  abuses,  of  physical  manifestations,  material-
izations, and  the  like.  These  form  the  alphabet  of  the  neophyte.  But  the  change
which  strikes  us  at  the  present  moment  is  what  we  may  call  the  rapid  growth  of  the
initiate  class  as  opposed  t<>  the  neophytes;  the  class  of  those  who  have  quite  grown
out  of  the  need  of  these  sensible  wonders  (a  need  through  which,  however,  they
have  duly  passed)  and  who  are  prepared  to  pass  to  the  sublimest  heights  of  the  spiri-
tual philosophy.     We  cannot  but  regard  this  as  an  eminently  happy  sign,  because

it  is  the  evidence  of  normal  growth.     We  have  had   first  the  Made,  then  tin   ear,

25

370  A   MODERN    PANARION.

but  now  we  have  the  full  corn  in  the  ear.  Among  the  main-  evidences  of  this
change  we  note  two  especially,  each  of  which  has  been  mentioned  already  in  these
columns  in  its  single  aspect.  One  is  the  publication  of  Dr.  Wyld's  book  on  Chris-
tian Theosophy,  the  other  the  formation  and  development  of  the  secret  society
called  the  Guild  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  We  are  not  prepared  to  commit  ourselves  to
all  the  doctrines  of  Dr.  Wyld's  book.  The  Guild  would  probably  be  too  ecclesias-
tical in  its  structure  for  many  of  our  readers — it  is  founded,  we  may  mention,  by  a
clergyman  of  the  Church  of  England — but  in  each  case  we  notice  what  is  called  a
"levelling  up."  We  perceive  that  the  paramount  idea  is  not  to  call  spirits  from
the  vasty  deep — not  to  force  the  hand  of  the  spirit  world,  so  to  say,  and  to  compel
its  denizens  to  come  "down"  or  "up"  to  us,  but  so  to  regulate  life  as  to  open  up
the  dormant  sense  on  our  side,  and  enable  us  to  see  those  who  are  not  in  a  land
that  is  very  far  off,  from  which  they  have  come  up  or  down  to  us.  This,  we  happen
to  know,  is  preeminently  the  case  with  the  Guild,  which,  beginning  by  being  regu-
lative of  life  and  worship,  includes  a  margin  for  any  amount  of  thaumaturgical
element.  We  may  not  say  more,  but  we  may  also  point  to  every  page  of  Dr.  Wyld's
book  as  an  indication  of  a  similar  method;  and  we  notice  the  supervention  of  that
method  with  much  satisfaction.  It  will  never  be  the  popular  method,  but  its  pre-
sence, however  secret,  in  our  midst,  will  work  like  leaven,  and  affect  the  whole
mass  of  "Modern  Spiritualism."

i

COUNT  ST.  GERMAIN.

[Vol.  II.  No.  8,  May,  1SS1.]

At  long  intervals  have  appeared  in  Europe  certain  men  whose  rare
intellectual  endowments,  brilliant  conversation,  and  mysterious  modes
of  life  have  astounded  and  dazzled  the  public  mind.  The  article  now
copied  from  All  the  Year  Roinid  relates  to  one  of  these  men — the  Count
St.  Germain.  In  Hargrave  Jennings'  curious  work,  The  Rosicrucians,
is  described  another,  a  certain  Signor  Gualdi,  who  was  once  the  talk  of
Venetian  society.  A  third  was  the  historical  personage  known  as
Alessandro  di  Cagliostro,  whose  name  has  been  made  the  synonym  of
infamy  by  a  forged  Catholic  biography.  It  is  not  now  intended  to
compare  these  three  individuals  with  each  other  or  with  the  common
run  of  men.  We  copy  the  article  of  our  London  contemporary  for
quite  another  object.  We  wish  to  show  how  basely  personal  character
is  traduced  without  the  slightest  provocation — unless  the  fact  of  one's
being  brighter  in  mind,  and  more  versed  in  the  secrets  of  natural  law
can  be  construed  as  a  sufficient  provocation  to  set  the  slanderer's  pen
and  the  gossip's  tongue  in  motion.  Let  the  reader  attentively  note
what  follows.     The  writer  in  All  the  Year  Round  says:

This  famous  adventurer  [the  Count  St.  Germain]  is  supposed  to  have  been  a  Hun-
garian by  birth,  but  the  early  part  of  his  life  was  by  himself  carefully  wrapped  in
mystery.  His  person  and  his  title  alike  stimulated  curiosity.  His  age  was  unknown
and  his  parentage  equally  obscure.  We  catch  the  first  glimpse  of  him  in  Paris,  a
century  and  a  quarter  ago,  filling  the  court  and  the  town  with  his  renown.  Amazed
Paris  saw  a  man — apparently  of  middle  age — a  man  who  lived  in  magnificent  style,
who  went  to  dinner  parties  where  he  ate  nothing,  but  talked  incessantly  and  with
exceeding  brilliancy  on  every  imaginable  topic.  I  lis  tone  was  perhaps  over  trenchant
— the  tone  of  a  man  who  knows  perfectly  what  he  is  talking  about.  Learned,
speaking  every  civilized  language  admirably,  a  great  musician,  an  excellent  chemist,
he  played  the  part  of  a  prodigy,  and  played  it  to  perfection.  Endowed  with  extra-
ordinary confidence  or  consummate  impudence,  he  not  only  laid  down  the  law
magisterially  concerning  the  present,  but  spoke  without  hesitation  of  events  200
years  old.     His  anecdotes  of  remote  occurrences  were  related  with  extraordinary

37:

A   MODERN    PANARION.

minuteness.  He  spoke  of  scenes  at  the  court  of  Francis  I.  as  if  he  had  seen  them,
describing  exactly  the  appearance  of  the  king,  imitating  his  voice,  manner  and
laneuasje,  affectinsr  throughout  the  character  of  an  eve-witness.  In  like  stvle  he
edified  his  audience  with  pleasant  stories  of  Louis  XIV.,  and  regaled  them  with
vivid  descriptions  of  places  and  persons.  Hardly  saying  in  so  many  words  that  he
was  actually  present  when  the  events  happened,  he  yet  contrived,  by  his  great
graphic  power,  to  convey  that  impression  .  .  .  intending  to  astonish,  he  suc-
ceeded completely.  Wild  stories  were  current  concerning  him.  He  was  reported
to  be  300  years  old,  and  to  have  prolonged  his  life  by  the  use  of  a  famous  elixir.
Paris  went  mad  about  him.  He  was  questioned  constantly  about  his  secret  of
longevity,  and  was  marvellously  adroit  in  his  replies,  denying  all  power  to  make  old
folks  young  again,  but  quietly  asserting  his  possession  of  the  secret  of  arresting
decay  in  the  human  frame.  Diet,  he  protested,  was,  with  his  marvellous  elixir,  the
true  secret  of  long  life,  and  he  resolutely  refused  to  eat  any  food  but  such  as  had
been  specially  prepared  for  him — oatmeal,  groats  and  the  white  meat  of  chickens.
On  great  occasions  he  drank  a  little  wine,  sat  up  as  late  as  anyone  would  listen
to  him,  but  took  extraordinary  precautions  against  the  cold.  To  ladies  he  gave
mysterious  cosmetics  to  preserve  their  beauty  unimpaired;  to  men,  he  talked
openly  of  his  method  of  transmuting  metals,  and  of  a  certain  process  for  melting
down  a  dozen  little  diamonds  into  one  large  stone.  These  astounding  assertions
were  backed  by  the  possession  of  apparently  boundless  wealth,  and  a  collection  of
jewels  of  rare  size  and  beauty.

From  time  to  time  this  strange  being  appeared  in  various  European  capitals,
under  various  names,  as  Marquis  de  Montferrat,  Count  Bellamare,  at  Venice;
Chevalier  Schoening,  at  Pisa;  Chevalier  Weldou,  Milan;  Count  Soltikoff,  at  Genoa;
Count  Tzarogy  at  Schwalbach,  and,  finally,  as  Count  St.  Germain  at  Paris;  but,  after
his  disaster  at  the  Hague,  no  longer  seems  so  wealthy  as  before,  and  has  at  times
the  appearance  of  seeking  his  fortune.  At  Tournay,  he  is  "interviewed"  by  the
renowned  Chevalier  de  Seingalt,  who  finds  him  in  an  Armenian  robe  and  pointed
cap,  with  a  long  beard  descending  to  his  waist,  and  ivory  wand  in  hand — the  com-
plete make-up  of  a  necromancer.  St.  Germain  is  surrounded  by  a  legion  of  bottles,
and  is  occupied  in  developing  the  manufacture  of  hats  upon  chemical  principles.
Seingalt  being  indisposed,  the  Count  offers  to  physic  him  gratis  and  offers  to  dose
him  with  an  elixir,  which  appears  to  have  been  sether;  but  the  other  refuses,  with
many  polite  speeches.  It  is  the  scene  of  the  two  augurs.  Not  being  allowed  to  act
as  physician,  St.  Germain  determines  to  show  his  power  as  an  alchemist,  takes  a
twelve-sous  piece  from  the  other  augur,  puts  it  on  red-hot  charcoal,  and  works
with  a  blow-pipe,  the  piece  of  money  is  fused  and  allowed  to  cool.  "Now,"  says
St.  Germain,  "take  your  money  again."  "But  it  is  gold."  "Of  the  purest."
Augur  No.  2  does  not  believe  in  the  transmutation  and  looks  on  the  whole  opera-
tion as  a  trick;  but  he  pockets  the  piece,  nevertheless,  and  finally  presents  it  to  the
celebrated  Marshal  Keith,  then  governor  of  Neuchatel.

Again,  in  pursuit  of  dyeing  and  other  manufacturing  schemes,  St.  Germain  turned
up  at  St.  Petersburg,  Dresden  and  Milan.  Once  he  got  into  trouble,  and  was
arrested   in  a  petty  town  of  Piedmont  on  a  protested  bill  of  exchange;  but  he

COUNT   ST.    GERMAIN.  373

pulled  out  a  hundred  thousand  crowns'  worth  of  jewels,  paid  on  the  spot,  bullied
the  governor  of  the  town  like  a  pickpocket,  and  was  released  with  the  most  re-
sin ctful  excuses.

Very  little  doubt  exists  that  during  one  of  his  residences  in  Russia,  he  played  an
important  part  in  the  revolution  which  placed  Catherine  II.  <>n  the  throne.  In
support  of  this  view,  P.aron  C.kichen  cites  the  extraordinary  attention  bestowed  on
St.  (iermain  at  Leghorn,  1770,  by  Count  Alexis  Orloff,  and  a  remark  made  by  Prince
Gregory  OrlofF  to  the  Margrave  of  Onspach  during  his  stay  at  Nuremberg.

After  all,  w  bo  was  he? — the  son  of  a  Portuguese  king  or  of  a  Portuguese  Jew?  Or
did  he  in  his  old  age  tell  the  truth  to  his  protector  and  enthusiastic  admirer,  Prince
Charles  of  Hesse  Cassel?  According  to  the  story  told  by  his  last  friend,  he  was  the
son  of  a  Prince  Rakoczy  of  Transylvania,  and  his  first  wife  a  Tekely.  He  was
placed,  when  an  infant,  under  the  protection  of  the  last  of  the  Medici.  When  he
grew  up  and  heard  that  his  two  brothers,  sons  of  the  Princess  Hesse  Rheinfels,  of
Rothenburg,  had  received  the  names  of  St.  Charles  and  St.  Elizabeth,  he  deter-
mined to  take  the  name  of  their  holy  brother  St.  Germanus.  What  was  the  truth  ?
One  thing  alone  is  certain,  that  he  was  a  protigeoi  the  last  Medici.  Prince  Charles,
who  appears  to  have  regretted  his  death,  which  happened  in  17S3,  very  sincerely
tells  us  that  he  fell  sick,  while  pursuing  his  experiments  in  colours  at  Ekrenforde,
and  died  shortly  after,  despite  the  innumerable  medicaments  prepared  by  his  own
private  apothecary.  Irrederick  the  (ireat.  who,  despite  his  scepticism,  took  a  queer
interest  in  astrologers,  said  of  him,  "This  is  a  man  who  does  not  die."  Mirabeau
adds  epigratnmatically,  "He  w-as  always  a  careless  fellow,  and  at  last,  like  his  pre-
decessors, forgot  not  to  die."

And  now  we  ask  what  shadow  of  proof  is  herein  afforded  either  that
St.  Germain  was  an  "adventurer,"  that  he  meant  to  "play  the  part  of  a
prodigy,"  or  that  he  sought  to  make  money  out  of  dupes.  Not  one
single  sign  is  there  of  his  being  other  than  what  he  seemed,  viz.,  a
possessor  of  ample  means  to  support  honestly  his  standing  in  society.
He  claimed  to  know  how  to  fuse  small  diamonds  into  large  ones,  and
to  transmute  metals,  and  backed  his  "assertions"  by  the  possession  of
apparently  boundless  wealth  and  a  collection  of  jewels  of  rare  size  and
beauty.  Are  "adventurers"  like  this?  Do  charlatans  enjoy  the  confi-
dence and  admiration  of  the  cleverest  statesmen  and  nobles  of  Europe
for  long  years,  and  not  even  at  their  deaths  show  in  one  111111°:  that  they
were  undeserving?  Some  encyclopaedists  (see  New  American  Cyclo-
pecdia,  xiv.  266)  say:  "He  is  supposed  lo  have  been  employed  during  the
greater  part  of  his  life  as  a  spy  at  the  courts  at  which  he  resided."  But
upon  what  evidence  is  this  supposition  based?  Has  anyone  found  it  in
any  of  the  state  papers  in  the  secret  archives  of  either  of  those  courts ?
Not  one  word,  not  one  shred  of  fact  to  build  this  base  calumny  upon,
has  ever  been   found.      It   is  simply  a  malicious  lie.      The  treatment

374  A   MODERN    PANARION.

this  great  man,  this  pupil  of  Indian  and  Egyptian  hierophants,  this
proficient  in  the  secret  wisdom  of  the  East,  has  had  from  Western
writers,  is  a  stigma  upon  human  nature.  And  so  has  the  stupid  world
behaved  towards  every  other  person  who,  like  St.  Germain,  has  re-
visited it  after  long  seclusion  devoted  to  study,  with  his  stores  of
accumulated  esoteric  wisdom,  in  the  hope  of  bettering  it,  and  making
it  wiser  and  happier.

One  other  point  should  be  noticed.  The  above  account  gives  no
particulars  of  the  last  hours  of  the  mysterious  Count  or  of  his  funeral.
Is  it  not  absurd  to  suppose  that  if  he  really  died  at  the  time  and  place
mentioned,  he  would  have  been  laid  in  the  ground  without  the  pomp
and  ceremony,  the  official  supervision,  the  police  registration  which
attend  the  funerals  of  men  of  his  rank  and  notoriety?  Where  are
these  data?  He  passed  out  of  public  sight  more  than  a  century  ago,
yet  no  memoir  contains  them.  A  man  who  so  lived  in  the  full  blaze  of
publicity  could  not  have  vanished,  if  he  really  died  then  and  there,  and
left  no  trace  behind.  Moreover,  to  this  negative  we  have  the  alleged
positive  proof  that  he  was  living  several  years  after  1784.  He  is  said
to  have  had  a  most  important  private  conference  with  the  Empress  of
Russia  in  17S5  or  1786,  and  to  have  appeared  to  the  Princess  de  Lam-
balle  when  she  stood  before  the  tribunal,  a  few  moments  before  she  was
struck  down  with  a  billet,  and  a  butcher-boy  cut  off  her  head;  and  to
Jeanne  Dubarry,  the  mistress  of  Louis  XV.  as  she  waited  on  her  scaf-
fold at  Paris  the  stroke  of  the  guillotine  in  the  Days  of  Terror  of  1793.

A  respected  member  of  our  Society,  residing  in  Russia,  possesses
some  highly  important  documents  about  Count  St.  Germain,  and  for  the
vindication  of  the  memory  of  one  of  the  grandest  characters  of  modern
times,  it  is  hoped  that  the  long-needed  but  missing  links  in  the  chain
of  his  history  may  speedily  be  given  to  the  world  through  these
columns.

LAMAS  AND  DRUSES.

[Vol.  II.  No.  9.  June  1SS1.]

Mr.  L.  Oliphant' s  new  work,  Land  of  Gi/cad,  attracts  considerable
attention.  Reviews  appeared  some  time  since,  but  we  had  to  lay  the
subject  aside,  until  now,  for  lack  of  space.  We  shall  now  have  something
to  say,  not  of  the  work  itself — though  justice  can  hardly  be  sufficiently
done  to  the  writings  of  that  clever  author — but  of  what  he  tells  us
respecting  the  Druses,  those  mystics  of  Mount  Lebanon  of  whom  so
little  is  known.  We  may  perchance  shed  some  new  light  on  the
subject.     Mr.  Oliphant  thinks  that

The  Druse  has  a  firm  conviction  thai  the  end  of  the  world  is  at  hand.  Recent
events  have  so  far  tallied  with  the  enigmatical  prophecies  of  his  sacred  books,  that
he  looks  forward  to  the  speedy  resurrection  of  El  Hakim,  the  founder  and  divine
personage  of  the  sect.  In  order  to  comprehend  this,  the  connection  between
China  and  Druse  theology  has  to  be  remembered.  The  souls  of  all  pious  Druses
are  supposed  to  be  occupying  in  large  numbers  certain  cities  in  the  west  of  China.
The  end  of  the  world  will  be  signalized  by  the  approach  of  a  mighty  army  from
the  East  against  the  contending  powers  of  Islam  and  Christianity.  This  army  will
be  under  the  command  of  the  Universal  Mind  ami  will  consist  of  millions  of
Chinese  Unitarians.  To  it  Christians  and  Mahomedans  will  surrender  and  march
before  it  to  Mecca.  El  Hakim  will  then  appear;  at  his  command  the  Caaba  will  be
demolished  by  fire  from  Heaven,  and  the  resurrection  of  the  dead  will  take  place.
Now  that  Russia  has  come  into  collision  with  China,  the  Druses  see  the  fulfilment
of  their  sacred  prophecies,  and  are  eagerly  waiting  for  an  Armageddon  in  which
they  believe  themselves  destined  to  play  a  prominent  part.     (Pioneer.)

Mr.  Laurence  Oliphant  is  in  our  opinion  one  of  England's  best
writers.  He  is  also  more  deeply  acquainted  with  the  inner  life  of  the
East  than  most  of  the  travellers  and  writers  who  have  written  on  the
subject — not  even  excepting  Captain  and  Mrs.  R.  Burton.  But  even
this  acute  and  observing  intellect  could  hardlv  fathom  the  secret  of  the
profoundly  mystical  beliefs  of  the  Druses.  To  begin  with.  El  Hakim
is  not  the  founder  of  their  sect.  Their  ritual  and  dogmas  were  n<
made  known  but  to  those  who  had  been  admitted  into  their  brother-

376  A   MODERN    PANARION.

hood.  Their  origin  is  next  to  unknown.  As  to  their  external  religion,
or  rather  what  has  transpired  of  it,  that  can  be  told  in  a  few  words.
The  Druses  are  believed  to  be  a  mixture  of  Kurds,  Mardi-Arabs,  and
other  semi-civilized  tribes.  We  humbly  maintain  that  they  are  the
descendants  of  and  a  mixture  of,  mystics  of  all  iiatioiis,  mystics  who,
in  the  face  of  cruel  and  unrelenting  persecution  by  the  orthodox
Christian  Church  and  orthodox  Islamism,  have,  ever  since  the  first
centuries  of  the  Mohammedan  propaganda,  been  gathered  together,  and
who  gradually  made  a  permanent  settlement  in  the  fastnesses  of  Syria
and  Mount  Lebanon,  where  they  had  from  the  first  found  refuge.
Since  then  they  have  preserved  the  strictest  silence  upon  their  beliefs
and  truly  occult  rites.  Later  on  their  warlike  character,  great  bravery
and  unity  of  purpose,  which  made  their  foes,  whether  Mussulmans  or
Christians,  equally  fear  them,  helped  them  toward  forming  an  inde-
pendent community,  or,  as  we  may  term  it,  an  imperium  in  imperio.
They  are  the  Sikhs  of  Asia  Minor,  and  their  polity  offers  many  points
of  similarity  with  the  late  "commonwealth"  of  the  followers  of  Guru
Nanak,  even  extending  to  their  mysticism  and  indomitable  bravery.
But  the  two  are  even  more  closely  related  to  a  third  and  far  more
mysterious  community  of  religionists,  of  which  nothing  or  next  to
nothing  is  known  by  outsiders:  we  mean  that  fraternity  of  Tibetan
Lamaists,  known  as  the  Brotherhood  of  Khe-lang,  who  mix  but  little
with  the  rest.  Even  Csoma  de  Kbros,  who  passed  several  years  with
the  Lamas,  learned  hardly  more  of  the  religion  of  these  Chakravartins
(wheel-turners)  than  what  they  chose  to  let  him  know  of  their  exoteric
rites,  and  of  the  Khe-langs  he  learned  positively  nothing.

The  mystery  that  hangs  over  the  scriptures  and  religion  of  the
Druses  is  far  more  impenetrable  than  that  connected  with  the  Amritsar
and  Lahore  "Disciples,"  whose  Grantha  is  well  known  and  has  been
translated  into  European  languages  more  than  once.  Of  the  alleged
forty-five  sacred  books*  of  the  Lebanon  mystics  none  were  ever  seen,
let  alone  examined,  by  any  European  scholar.

Many  manuscripts  have  never  left  the  underground  Holoweys  (place

*  The  work  presented  by  Nasr-Allah  to  the  French  king  as  a  portion  cf  the  Druse  scriptures,
and  translated  by  Petis  de  la  Croix  in  1701,  is  pronounced  a  forgery.  Not  one  of  the  copies
now  in  the  possession  of  the  Bodleian,  Vienna,  or  Vatican  Libraries  is  genuine;  and,  besides,  each
of  them  is  a  copy  from  the  other.  Great  was  always  the  curiosity  of  the  travellers,  and  greater  yet
the  efforts  of  the  indomitable  and  ever-prying  missionary,  to  penetrate  behind  the  veil  of  Druse
worship,  but  all  have  resulted  in  failure.  The  strictest  secrecy  as  to  the  nature  of  their  beliefs,  the
peculiar  rites  practised  in  their  subterranean  Holoweys.  and  the  contents  of  their  canonical  books  was
enjoined  upon  their  followers  by  H'amsa  and  Boha-eddin,  the  chief  and  first  disciple  of  the  former.

LAMAS   AND    DRUSES.  377

of  religious  meeting),  invariably  built  under  the  meeting-room  on  the
ground  floor,  and  the  public  Thursday  assemblies  of  the  Druses  are
simply  blinds  intended  for  over-curious  travellers  and  neighbours.

Verily  a  strange  seel  arc  the  disciples  of  H'amsa,  as  they  call  them-
selves. Their  Okhal  or  spiritual  teachers,  besides  having,  like  the
Sikh  Akali,  the  duty  of  defending  the  visible  place  of  worship,  which
is  merely  a  large  unfurnished  room,  are  also  the  guardians  of  the
Mystical  Temple  and  the  "wise  men,"  or  the  Initiates  of  their  mysteries
— as  their  name  of  Okhal  implies,  Akl  being  in  Arabic  "intelligence"  or
"wisdom."  It  is  improper  to  call  them  Druses,  as  thev  regard  it  as  an
insult;  nor  are  they  in  reality  the  followers  of  Daruzi,  a  heretical  pupil
of  H'amsa,  but  the  true  disciples  of  the  latter.  The  origin  of  that
personage,  who  appeared  among  them  in  the  eleventh  century,  coming
from  Central  Asia,  and  whose  secret  or  mystery  name  is  El  Hamma,
is  quite  unknown  to  our  European  scholars.  His  spiritual  titles  are
"Universal  Source  or  Mind,"  "Ocean  of  Light,"  and  "Absolute  or
Divine  Intelligence."  They  are,  in  short,  repetitions  of  those  of  the
Tibetan  Dalai-Lama,  whose  appellation,  "Path  to  the  Ocean,"*  means
Path  or  "Way  to  the  Ocean  of  Light"  (Intelligence)  or  Divine  Wis-
dom— both  titles  being  identically  the  same.  It  is  curious  that  the
Hebrew  word  lamad  should  also  mean  the  "God-taught."

An  English  Orientalist  recently  found  that  the  religion  of  Xanak  had
a  good  deal  of  Buddhism  in  it  (art.  "Diwali,"  in  Calcutta  Review).
This  would  only  be  natural,  since  the  Empire  of  Hindustan  is  the
land  of  Buddhas  and  Bodhisattvas.  But  that  the  religion  of  the
Druses,  between  whose  geographical  and  ethnological  position  and
that  of  the  Hindus  there  is  an  abyss,  should  be  so,  is  far  more  incom-
prehensible and  strange.  Yet  it  is  a  fact.  They  are  more  Lamaists  in
their  beliefs  and  certain  rites,  than  any  other  people  on  the  face  of  the
globe.  The  fact  may  be  contradicted,  but  it  will  only  be  because
Europe  knows  next  to  nothing  of  either.  Their  system  of  government
is  set  down  as  feudal  and  patriarchal,  while  it  is  as  theocratic  as  that  of

"  Lama"  means  path    >r  road  in  the  vulgar  Tibetan  langu  gt  .  but  i:
veys  the  meaning ol  way;  asthe"wayto  wisdom  or  salvation."    strung  igh  it  also  mi

"cross."  It  is  the  Roman  figure  X  "r  ten.  the  emblem  of  perfection  or  perfect  number,  and  -tooi.1  for
ten  with  the  Egyptians,  Chinese,  Phoenicians,  Romans,  etc.  It  is  also  found  in  the  Mexican  secular
calendars.  The  Tartars  call  it  I.  una  from  the  Scyth  .-Turanian  word  lamh,  hand  (from  tile  number
of  fingers  on  1 ».  >t  1 1  hands),  and  it  is  synonymous  with  th     rod  of  the  Ch  ind  thus

the  name  of  a  the   High  I'riest  of  the  Tartars,  and  of  the  I.aniair   Me  —  ng

the  author  of  The  />'<><£  of  God,  in  the  "Commentaries  on  the  Apocalypse."  with  the  Irish,  luam
signifies  the  headof  the  church,  a  spiritual  chief.

378  A   MODERN   PANARION.

the  Lamaists — or  as  that  of  the  Sikhs,  as  it  used  to  be.  The  mys-
terious representation  of  the  Deity  appears  in  H'ainsa,  whose  spirit  is
said  to  guide  them,  and  periodically  reincarnate  itself  in  the  person  of
the  chief  Okhal  of  the  Druses,  as  it  does  in  the  Guru-Kings  of  the
Sikhs,  some  of  whom,  like  Guru  Govind,  claimed  to  be  the  reincarna-
tions of  Nanak,  while  the  Dalai  L,amas  of  Tibet  claim  to  be  those  of
Buddha.  The  latter,  by  the  way,  are  loosely  called  Shaberons  and
Kubilghans  (both  in  various  degrees  reincarnations  not  of  Buddha,  the
man,  but  of  his  Buddh-like  divine  spirit)  by  Abbe  Hue  and  others,
without  any  regard  to  the  difference  in  the  appellation:  El  Hamma  or
H'amsa  came  from  the  "land  of  the  Word  of  God."  Where  was  that  land  ?
Swedenborg,  the  Northern  Seer,  advised  his  followers  to  search  for  the
Lost  Word  among  the  hierophants  of  Tartary,  Tibet  and  China.  To
this  we  may  add  a  few  explanatory  and  corroborative  facts.  LJ'hassa,
the  theocratic  metropolis  of  Tibet,  is  commonly  translated  as  "God-
land,"  that  is  to  say,  this  is  the  only  English  equivalent  that  we  can
find*

Though  separated  by  the  Karakorum  range  and  Ljttle  Tibet,  the
Great  Tibet  is  on  the  same  Asiatic  plateau  in  which  our  biblical
scholars  designate  the  table-land  of  Pamir,f  as  the  cradle  of  the  human
race,  the  birthplace  of  the  mythical  Adam.  Tibet,  or  Ti-Boutta  will
yield,  etymologically,  the  words  Ti — which  is  the  equivalent  for  God
in  Chinese — and  Buddha  or  Wisdom:  the  land  then  of  the  Wisdom
Deity,  or  the  incarnations  of  Wisdom.  It  is  also  called  "Bod-Jid."
Now  "Jid"  and  "Jod"  are  synonymous  apocalyptic  and  phallic  names
for  the  Deity — Yod  being  the  Hebrew  name  for  God.  G.  Higgins
shows  in  his  Celtic  Druids,  the  Welsh  Druids  altering  the  name  Bod-
Jid  into  Bndd-ud,  which  with  them  too  meant  the  "Wisdom  of  Jid" —
what  people  now  call  "God."|

The  religion  of  the  Druses  is  said  to  be  a  compound  of  Judaism,
Mohammedanism   and   Christianity,  strongly  tinged  with   Gnosticism

--  And  a  most  unsatisfactory  terra  it  is,  as  the  Lamaists  have  no  conception  of  the  anthropomorphic
deity  which  the  English  word  "God"  represents.  For  Buddha  (the  latter  name  being  quite  unknown
to  the  common  people)  is  their  equivalent  expression  for  that  All-embracing,  Superior  Good  or  Wis-
dom from  which  all  proceeds  as  does  the  light  from  the  sun,  the  cause  being  nothing  personal,  but
simply  an  abstract  principle.  And  it  is  this  that  in  all  our  Theosophical  writing,  for  the  want  of  a
better  word,  we  have  to  terra  "God-like"  and  "Divine."

+  There  are  several  Pamirs  in  Central  Asia.  There  is  the  Alichur  Pamir  which  lies  more  north  than
either;  the  Great  Pamir  with  Lake  Victoria  in  its  vicinity;  Taghdumbash  Pamir  and  the  Little  Pamir
more  south;  and  eastward  another  chain  of  Pamirs  dividing  Mustagh  Pass  and  Little  Guhjal.  We
would  like  to  know  on  which  of  these  we  have  to  look  for  the  garden  of  Eden.

t  The  name  in  Hebrew  for  sanctuary  is  te-bah,  and  ti-boulta  and  te-bet,  also  a  cradle  of  the  human
race,  thebelh  meaning  "a  box,"  the  "ark"  of  Noah  and  the  floating  cradle  of  Moses.

LAMAS   AND    DRUSES.  -i>,9

and  the  Magian  system  of  Persia.  Were  people  to  call  things  by  their
right  names,  sacrificing  all  self-conceit  to  truth,  they  might  confi
things  otherwise.  They  could  say,  for  instance,  that  .Mohammedanism
being  a  compound  of  Chaldeeism,  Christianity  and  Judaism;  Christian-
ity a  mixture  of  Judaism,  Gnosticism  and  Paganism;  and  Judaism  a
wholesale  Egypto-Chaldsean  Kabalism,  masquerading  under  different
names  and  fables,  made  to  fit  the  bits  and  scraps  of  the  real  history  of
the  Israelite  tribes — the  religious  system  of  the  Druses  would  then  be
found  one  of  the  last  survivals  of  the  archaic  Wisdom-Religion.  It  is
entirely  based  on  that  element  of  practical  mysticism  of  which  branches
have  from  time  to  time  sprung  into  existence.  They  pass  under  the
unpopular  names  of  Kabalism,  Theosophy  and  Occultism.  Except
Christianity — which  owing  to  the  importance  it  gives  to  the  prin-
cipal prop  of  its  doctrine  of  salvation  (we  mean  the  dogma  of  Satan)
had  to  anathematize  the  practice  of  theurgy — every  religion,  including
Judaism  and  Mohammedanism,  credits  these  above-named  branches.
Civilization  having  touched  with  its  materialistic,  all-levelling  and  all-
destroying  hand  even  India  and  Turkey  amid  the  din  and  chaos  of
crumbling  faiths  and  old  sciences,  the  reminiscence  of  archaic  truths
is  now  fast  dying  out.

It  has  become  popular  and  fashionable  to  denounce  "the  old  and
mouldy  superstitions  of  our  forefathers,"  verily  even  amongst  the  most
natural  allies  of  the  students  of  theurgy  or  occultism — the  Spiritualists.
Among  the  many  creeds  and  faiths  striving  to  follow  the  cyclic  tide,
and  helping  it  themselves  to  sweep  away  the  knowledge  of  old.  strangely
blind  to  the  fact  that  the  same  powerful  wave  of  materialism  and
modern  science  also  sweeps  away  their  own  foundations,  the  only
religions  which  have  remained  as  alive  as  ever  to  these  forgotten  truths
of  old,  are  those  which  from  the  first  have  kept  strictly  aloof  from  the
rest.  The  Druses,  while  outwardly  mixing  with  Moslems  and  Chris-
tians,  and  alike  ever  ready  to  read  the  Kuran  as  well  as  the  Go-pels  in
their  Thursday  public  meetings,  have  never  allowed  an  uninitiated
stranger  to  penetrate  the  mysteries  of  their  own  doctrines.  Intelligence
alone,  they  say,  communicates  to  the  soul  (which  to  them  is  mortaL
though  it  survives  the  body)  the  enlivening  ami  divine  spark  of  the
Supreme  Wisdom,  or  Ti-meami,  but  it  must  be  screened  from  all
non-believers  in  H'amsa.  The  work  of  the  soul  i-  to  seek  Wisdom,
and  the  substance  of  earthly  wisdom  is  to  know  Universal  Wisdom,  or
"God,"  as  other  religionists   call   that  principle.     This  is  the  doctrine

380  A    MODERN    PANARION.

of  the  Buddhists  and  Lamaists  who  say  "Buddha"  where  the  Druses
say  "Wisdom" — one  word  being  the  translation  of  the  other.  "In
spite  of  their  external  adoption  of  the  religious  customs  of  the  Moslems,
of  their  readiness  to  educate  their  children  in  Christian  schools,  their
use  of  the  Arabic  language,  and  their  free  intercourse  with  strangers,
the  Druses  remain  even  more  than  the  Jews  a  peculiar  people"  says  a
writer.

The}-  are  very  rarely,  if  ever,  converted;  they  marry  within  their
own  race,  and  adhere  most  tenaciously  to  their  traditions,  baffling  all
efforts  to  discover  their  cherished  secrets.  Yet  neither  are  they  fanatical
nor  do  they  covet  proselytes.

In  his  Travels  in  Tartary,  Thibet  and  China,  Hue  speaks  with  great
surprise  of  the  extreme  tolerance  and  even  outward  respect  shown
by  the  Tibetans  to  other  religions.  A  Grand  Lama  or  a  "living
Buddha,"  as  he  calls  him,  whom  the  two  missionaries  met  at  Choaug
Long,  near  Koum-Boum,  certainly  had  the  best  of  them  in  good  breed-
ing as  well  as  tact  and  deference  to  their  feelings.  The  two  French-
men, however,  neither  understood  nor  appreciated  the  act,  since  they
seemed  quite  proud  of  the  insult  offered  by  them  to  the  Hobilgan.
"We  were  waiting  for  him  .  .  .  seated  on  the  kang,  and  purposely
did  not  rise  to  receive  him,  but  merely  made  him  a  slight  salutation,"
boasts  Hue  (vol.  ii.  pp.  35,  36).  The  Grand  Lama  "did  not  appear  dis-
concerted," though;  upon  seeing  that  they  as  "purposely  withheld
from  him"  an  invitation  to  sit  down  "he  only  looked  at  them  surprised,"
as  well  he  might.  A  breviary  of  theirs  having  attracted  his  attention,
he  demanded  "permission  to  examine  it,"  and  then  carrying  it  solemnly
to  his  brow,  he  said:  "It  is  your  book  of  prayer;  we  must  always
honour  and  reverence  other  people's  prayers."  It  was  a  good  lesson,
yet  they  understood  it  not.  We  would  like  to  see  that  Christian  mis-
sionary who  would  reverently  carry  to  his  brow  the  Yedas,  the  Tripi-
taka,  or  the  Grantha,  and  publicly  honour  other  people's  prayers!
While  the  Tibetan  "savage,"  the  heathen  Hobilgan,  was  all  affability
and  politeness,  the  two  French  "Lamas  of  Jehovah,"  as  Abbe  Hue
called  his  companion  and  himself,  behaved  like  two  uneducated  bullies.
And  to  think  that  they  even  boast  of  it  in  print!

No  more  than  the  Druses  do  the  Lamaists  seek  to  make  proselytes.
Both  people  have  their  "schools  of  magic,"  those  in  Tibet  being
attached  to  some  La-khaug  (lamaseries),  and  those  among  the  Druses  in
the  closely-guarded  crypts  of  initiation,  no  stranger  being  even  allowed

LAMAS    AND    DRUSES.  ,vsI

inside  the  buildings.  As  the  Tibetan  Hobilgans  are  the  incarnations  of
Buddha's  spirit,  so  the  Druse  Okhals — erroneously  called  "Spiritual-
ists" by  some  writers — are  the  incarnations  of  H'amsa.  Both  peoples
have  a  regular  system  of  pass-words  and  signs  of  recognition  among
the  neophytes,  and  we  know  them  to  be  nearly  identical.

In  the  mystical  system  of  the  Druses  there  are  five  "Messengers"  or
interpreters  of  the  "Word  of  the  Supreme  Wisdom,*'  who  occupy  the
same  position  as  the  five  chief  Bodhisattvas,  or  Hobilgans  of  Tibet,  each
of  whom  is  the  bodily  temple  of  the  spirit  of  one  of  the  five  Buddhas.
Let  us  see  what  can  be  made  known  of  both  classes.  The  names  of
the  five  principal  Druse  "Messengers,"  or  rather  their  titles — as  these
names  are  generic,  in  both  the  Druse  and  Tibetan  hierarchies,  and  the
title  passes  at  the  death  of  each  to  his  successor — are:

(i)  H'amsa,*  or  El  Hararaa  (Spiritual  Wisdom),  considered  as  the
Messiah,  through  whom  speaks  Incarnate  Wisdom.

(2)  Ismail- Ti-meami  (the  Universal  Soul).  He  prepares  the  Druses
before  their  initiation  to  receive  "Wisdom."

(3)  Mohammed  (the  Word).  His  duty  is  to  watch  over  the  behaviour
and  necessities  of  the  brethren;  a  kind  of  bishop.

(4)  Se-lama  (the  Preceding),  called  the  "Right  Wine;.'

(5)  Mokshatana,  Boha-eddin  (the  Following',  named  the  "Deft
Wing."

These  last  are  both  messengers  between  H'amsa  and  the  Brother-
hood. Above  these  living  mediators  who  retnai?i  ever  unknown  to  all  but
the  chief  Okhals,  stand  the  ten  incarnates  of  the  "Supreme  Wisdom,"
the  last  of  whom  is  to  return  at  the  end  of  the  cycle,  which  is  fast
approaching,  though  no  one  but  El  Hamma  knows  the  day — that  last
"Messenger,"  in  accordance  with  the  cyclic  recurrences  of  events,
being  also  the  first  who  came  with  H'amsa,  hence  Boha-eddin.  The
names  of  the  Druse  incarnations  are  AH  A-llal,  who  appeared  in  India
(Kabir,  we  believe);  Albar,  in  Persia;  Aha,  in  Yemen;  Moill  and
Kahim,  in  Eastern  Africa;  Moessa  and  Had-di,  in  Central  Asia;  Albou

*  Very  curiously  the  Druses  identify  their  H'amsa  with  Hemsa,  the  Prophet  Mahomet's  uncle,
who,  they  say,  tired  of  the  world  and  it-  d<  ceitful  temptations,  simulated  d<  ath  at  the  battle  of  Dhod,
,\.ii.< 25,  and  retired  to  the  fastnesses  of  a  great  mountain  in  Central  Asia,  where  lie  lire. one  a  saint.    He

1  died  in  spirit.    When  several  centuries  after  that  he  ap]  imoug  them  it  was  in  h

spiritual  body,  ami  when  their  Messiah  had,  after  founding  the  Brotherhood,  disappeared   S<  -lama

and    Boha-eddin   were   the   only   ones   to   know   the    reln.it    ol    their   Master.     They  alone  knew   the

bodies  into  which  he  went  on  successively  reincarnating  himself,  as  he  is  not  permitted  to  die  until
the  return  of  the  Highest  Messenger,  the  last  one  of  the  ten  Avatars.    He  alone  -the  now  invis
but  expected  one— stands  higher  than  H'amsa.    But  it  is  not,  as  erroneously  believed.  "  HI  Hakim,"
itimite  Khalif  of  bad  name.

382  A   MODERN   PANARION.

and  Manssour,  in  China;  and  Budea,  that  is  Boha-eddin,*  in  Tartary,
whence  he  came  and  whither  he  returned.  This  last  one,  some  say,
was  dual-sexed  on  earth.  Having  entered  into  El  Hakim — the  Khalif,
a  monster  of  wickedness — he  caused  him  to  be  assassinated,  and  then
sent  H'amsa  to  preach  and  to  found  the  Brotherhood  of  Lebanon.  El
Hakim,  then,  is  but  a  mask.  It  is  Budea,  i.e.,  Boha-eddiu,  they
expect. f

And  now  for  the  Lamaic  hierarchy.  Of  the  living  or  incarnate
Buddhas  there  are  five  also,  the  chief  of  whom  is  Dalay,  or  rather
Talay,  Lama — from  tale,  "ocean"  or  "sea";  he  being  called  "Ocean  of
Wisdom."  Above  him,  as  above  H'amsa,  there  is  but  the  "Supreme
Wisdom,"  the  abstract  principle  from  which  emanated  the  five  Buddhas
— Maitrei-Buddha  (the  last  Bodhisattva  or  Vishnu  in  the  Kalki  Avatar),
the  tenth  "Messenger"  expected  on  earth,  included.  But  this  will  be
the  One  Wisdom,  and  will  incarnate  itself  in  the  whole  humanity  col-
lectively, not  in  a  single  individual.  But  of  this  mystery  no  more  at
present.     These  five  Hobilgans  are  distributed  in  the  following  order:

(1)  Talay-Lama,  of  L,ha-ssa,  the  incarnation  of  the  "spiritual,  pas-
sive" wisdom,  which  proceeds  from  Gautama  or  Siddhartha  Buddha,  or
Fo.

(2)  Bande-cha-an  Rem-boo-tchi,  at  Djashi-Loombo.  He  is  "the
active  earthly  wisdom."

(3")  Sa-deha-fo,  or  the  "Mouthpiece  of  Buddha,"  otherwise  the
"Word,"  at  Ssamboo.

(4)  Khi-sson-Tamba,  the  "Precursor"  (of  Buddha)  at  the  Grand
Kooren.

(5)  Tchang-Zya-Fo-Lang,  in  the  Altai  Mountains.  He  is  called  the
"Successor"  (of  Buddha).

The  Shaberons  are  one  degree  lower.  They,  like  the  chief  Okhals
of  the  Druses,  are  the  Initiates  of  the  great  wisdom  or  Buddh,  esoteric
religion.  This  double  list  of  the  "five"  shows  great  similarity  at  least
between  the  polity  of  the  two  systems.  The  reader  must  bear  in  mind
that  they  have  sprung  into  their  present  visible  conditions  nearly  at  the
same   time.     It   was   from   the   ninth   to   the   fifteenth   centuries  that

*  One  of  the  names  of  Minerva,  Goddess  of  Wisdom,  was  Budea.

+  In  the  Druse  system  there  is  no  room  for  a  personal  deity,  unless  a  portion  of  the  divine  imper-
sonal and  abstract  wisdom  incarnates  itself  in  a  mortal  man.  The  deific  principle  with  them  is  the
essence  of  Life,  the  All,  and  as  impersonal  as  the  Parabrahm  of  the  Vedautins  or  the  Nirvana  state
of  the  Buddhists,  ever  invisible,  all-pervading  and  incomprehensible,  to  be  known  but  by  occasional
incarnations  of  the  spirit  in  human  form.  These  ten  incarnations  or  human  avatars,  as  above  speci-
fied, are  called  the  "Temples  of  Ti-meam"  (Universal  Spirit).

LAMAS   AND    DRUSES.  383

modern  Lamaism  evolved  its  ritual  and  popular  religion,  which  serves
the  Hobilgans  and  Shaberons  as  a  blind,  even  against  the  average
Chinaman  and  Tibetan.  It  was  in  the  eleventh  century  that  H'ainsa
founded  the  Brotherhood  of  Lebanon,  and  till  now  no  one  has  acquired
it--  secrets!

It  is  supremely  strange  that  both  the  Lamas  and  the  Druses  should
have  the  same  mystical  statistics.  They  reckon  the  bulk  of  the  human
race  at  1,332,000,000.  When  good  and  evil,  they  say,  will  come  to  an
equilibrium  in  the  scales  of  human  actions  (now  evil  is  far  the  heavier),
then  the  breath  of  "Wisdom"  will  annihilate  in  the  wink  of  an  eye
just  666,000,000  of  men.  The  surviving  666,000,000  will  have  "Supreme
Wisdom"  incarnated  in  them.*  This  may  have  and  probably  has  an
allegorical  meaning.  But  what  relation  might  it  possibly  bear  to  the
number  of  the  "beast"  of  St.  John's  Revelation  ?

If  more  were  known  than  really  is  of  the  religions  of  Tibet  and  the
Druses,  then  would  scholars  see  that  there  is  more  affinity  between
Turanian  Lamaists  and  the  Semitic  "El  Hammists,"  or  Druses,  than
was  ever  suspected.  But  all  is  darkness,  conjecture  and  mere  guess-
work whenever  the  writers  speak  of  either  the  one  or  the  other.  The
little  that  has  transpired  of  their  beliefs  is  generally  so  disfigured  by
prejudice  and  ignorance  that  no  learned  Lama  or  Druse  would  ever
recognize  a  glimpse  of  likeness  to  his  faith  in  these  speculative  phan-
tasies. Even  the  profoundly  suggestive  conclusion  to  which  Godfrey
Higgins  came  (Ccltie  Druids,  part  i.  p.  101)  however  true  is  but  half  so.
"It  is  evident,"  he  writes,  "that  there  was  a  secret  science  possessed
somewhere  [by  the  ancients]  which  must  have  been  guarded  by  the
most  solemn  oaths  .  .  .  and  I  cannot  help  suspecting  that  there
is  still  a  secret  doctrine  known  only  in  the  deep  recesses  of  the  crypts
of  Tibet."

To  conclude  with  the  Druses.  As  Se-lama  and  Boha-eddin — two
names  more  than  suggestive  of  the  words  "Lama"  and  "Buddha" — are
the  only  ones  entrusted  with  the  secret  of  H'amsa's  retreat,  and  having
the  means  of  consulting  with  their  Master,  they  from  time  to  time
bring  his  directions  and   commands  to  the   Brotherhood;    so  even  to

•  The  Hindus  have  the  same  belief.  In  the  Deva-Yuga  tiny  will  all  be  Devs  or  Gods.  See  Lama-
nim-tshen-po,  or  "Great  Road  to  Perfection,"  a  work  of  the  fifteenth  century.  The  author  of  this
book  is  the  great  reformer  of  Lamaism,  the  famous  Tzong-ka-pa,  from  whose  hair  sprang  up  the
famous  Koum-boum  letter  tree.  ;i  tree  win  ise  1'  aves  all  bear  sacred  Tibetan  inscriptions,  according  to
tradition.  This  tree  was  sei  a  by  A.bbe  Hue  some  forty  years  ago,  and  was  seen  last  year  by  the  Hun-
garian traveller  Count  Szitcheny,  who,  however,  begging  his  pardon,  could  not,  under  its  physical
surroundings,  have  carried  away  a  branch  of  it  as  he  pre  tends  to  have  done.

384  A   MODERN    PANARION.

this  day  do  the  Okhals  of  that  name  travel  every  seventh  year  through
Bussora  and  Persia  into  Tartary  and  Tibet  to  the  very  west  of  China,
and  return  at  the  expiration  of  the  elsventh  year,  bringing  fresh  orders
from  "El  Hamma."  Owing  to  the  expectation  of  war  between  China
and  Russia,  only  last  year  a  Druse  messenger  passed  through  Bombay
on  his  way  to  Tibet  and  Tartary.  This  would  explain  the  "supersti-
tious" belief  that  "the  souls  of  all  pious  Druses  are  supposed  to  be
occupying  in  large  numbers  certain  cities  in  China."  It  is  around  the
plateau  of  the  Pamirs — they  say,  with  the  biblical  scholars — that  the
cradle  of  the  true  race  must  be  located — but  the  cradle  of  initiated
humanity  only,  of  those  who  have  for  the  first  time  tasted  of  the  fruit
of  knowledge,  and  those  are  in  Tibet,  Mongolia,  Tartary,  China  and
India,  where  also  the  souls  of  their  pious  and  initiated  brethren  trans-
migrate and  become  "sons  of  God."  What  this  language  means  every
Theosophist  ought  to  know.  They  discredit  the  fable  of  Adam  and
Eve,  and  say  that  they  who  first  ate  of  the  forbidden  fruit,  and  thus
became  Elohim,  were  Enoch  or  Hermes  (the  supposed  father  of
Masonry),  and  Seth  Sat-an,  the  father  of  secret  wisdom  and  learning,
whose  abode,  they  say,  is  now  in  the  planet  Mercury,"5  and  whom  the
Christians  were  kind  enough  to  convert  into  a  chief  devil,  the  "fallen
angel."  Their  evil  one  is  an  abstract  principle,  and  called  the  "Rival."
The  "millions  of  Chinese  Unitarians"  may  mean  Tibetan  Eamas,
Hindus  and  others  of  the  East,  as  well  as  Chinamen.  It  is  true  that
the  Druses  believe  in  and  expect  their  resurrection  day  in  Armageddon,
which,  however,  they  pronounce  otherwise.  As  the  phrase  occurs  in
the  Apocalypse  it  may  seem  to  some  that  they  got  the  idea  from  St.
John's  Revelation.  It  is  nothing  of  the  kind.  On  that  day,  which,
according  to  the  Druse  teaching,  will  consummate  the  great  spiritual
plan,  "the  bodies  of  the  wise  and  faithful  will  be  absorbed  into  the
absolute  essence,  and  transformed  from  the  many  into  the  One."  This
is  preeminently  the  Buddhist  idea  of  Nirvana,  and  that  of  the  Vedautin
final  absorption  into  Parabrahm.    Their  "Persian  Magianism  and  Gnos-

*  Buddha  is  son  of  Maya,  and  (according  to  the  Brahmauic  notion)  of  Vishnu;  Maia  is  mother
of  Mercury  by  Jupiter.  Buddha  means  the  "wise,"  and  Mercury  is  God  of  Wisdom  (Hermes);  and
the  planet  sacred  to  Gautama  Buddha  is  Mercury;  Venus  and  Isis  presided  over  navigation,  as  Mary
or  Maria,  the  Madonna,  presides  now.     Is  not  the  latter  hymned  to  this  day  by  the  Church:

"Ave  Maria,  stella     .     .     .
Dei  mater  alma".'
or

"Hail,  Star  of  the  Sea,
Mother  of  God"
— thus  identified  with  Venus?

LAMAS   AND    DRUSES.  385

ticism"  makes  them  regard  St.  John  as  Oannes,  the  Chaldaean  man-
fish,  hence  connects  their  belief  at  once  with  the  Indian  Vishnu  and
the  Lamaic  symbology.  Their  "Armageddon"  is  simply  "  Ramda-
gon,"*  and  this  is  how  it  is  explained.

The  sentence  in  Rcvc/a/ion  is  no  better  interpreted  than  so  many
other  things  by  Christians,  while  even  the  non-Kabalistic  Jews  know
nothing  of  its  real  meaning.  Armageddon  is  mistaken  for  a  geo-
graphical locality — the  elevated  table  of  Esdraelon  or  Ar-mageddon,
the  mountain  of  Megiddo,  where  Gideon  triumphed  over  the  Midian-
ites.f  It  is  an  erroneous  notion,  for  the  name  in  the  Revelation  refers
to  a  mythical  place  mentioned  in  one  of  the  most  archaic  traditions  of
the  heathen  east,  especially  among  the  Turanian  and  Semitic  races.
It  is  simply  a  kind  of  purgatorial  Elysium,  in  which  departed  spirits
are  collected  to  await  the  day  of  final  judgment.  That  it  is  so  is  proved
by  the  verses  in  Revelation:  "And  he  gathered  them  together  into  a
place  called  .  .  .  Armageddon.  And  the  seventh  angel  poured  out
his  vial  into  the  air"  (xvi.  16,  17).  The  Druses  pronounce  the  name  of
that  mystical  locality  "Ramdagon."  It  is,  then,  highly  probable  that
the  word  is  an  anagram,  as  shown  by  the  author  of  the  "Commentary
on  the  Apocalypso."      It  means  "Rama-Dagon,"  \  the  first  signifying

'  Rama,  of  the  solar  race,  is  an  incarnation  of  Vishnu— a  Sun-God.  In  the  "Matsya,"  or  first
Avatar,  in  ortk-r  to  save  humanity  from  final  destruction  (see  Vishnu  Parana)  that  God  appears  to
King  Satyavrata  and  the  seven  saints  who  accompany  him  on  the  vessel  to  escape  universal  deluge,
as  an  enormous  fish  with  one  stupendous  horn.  To  this  horn  the  king  is  commanded  by  Hari  to  tie
the  ship  with  a  serpent  (the  emblem  of  eternity)  instead  of  a  cable.  The  Dalay-Lama,  besides  his
name  of  "Ocean,"  is  also  called  Sarou.  which  in  Tibetan  means  the  "unicorn,"  or  one-horned.  He
wear--  on  his  head-gear  a  prominent  horn,  set  over  a  Yung-dang,  or  mystic  cross,  which  is  the  Jain
and  Hindu  Svastika.  The  "fish"  and  the  sea  or  water  are  the  most  archaic  emblems  of  the  .Messiahs,
or  incarnations  of  divine  wisdom,  among-  all  the  ancient  peoples.  Fishes  play  a  prominent  figure
on  old  Christian  medals;  and  in  the  catacombs  of  Rome  the  "Mystic  Cross"  or  "Anchor"  stands
between    two    fishes  as  supporters.      Uagh-dae,   the    name    of   Zaratushtra's    mother,  means    the

Divine  Fish"  or  Holy  Wisdom.  The  "Mover  on  the  Waters."  whether  we  call  him  Nar.ivana  or
Abatur  (the  Kabalistic  Superior  Father  and  "Ancient  of  the  World")  or  "Holy  Spirit"  is  all  one.

>rding  to  Codex  Nazareeus,  Kabalah  and  Genesis,  the  Holy  Spirit  when  moving-  on  the  wal
mirrored  himself     and   "Adam   Kaduion  was  born."     Mare  in  I.atin  i--  tin-  sea.     Water  is  associated

with         y  creed.    Mary  and  Venus  are  both  patronesses  of  the  sea  and  of  sailors— and  both  mothers
of  Love  whether  divine  or  earthly,     the  mother  of  Jesus  is  called  Mary  or  Mariah— the  word

meaning  in  Hebrew  »iiri<>>,  that  in  which  we  find  but  the  reflection  instead  of  a  reality,  and  600
year-  in  ion  Christianity  there  was  Maya.  Buddha's  mother,  whose  name  means  illusion— identically

the  same.     Another  curious  "coincidence"  is  found  in  the  selections  Of  new  Dalav-I.amas  in  Tibet.

The  new  incarnation  of  Buddha  is  ascertained  by  a  curious  ichthyomancy  with  three  gold  fishes.

Shutting  themselves  up  in  the  liuddha-I.a  (temple),  the  HCobilgans  pla  1 1 1 :  ■  gold  fish  in  an  urn.
and  on  one  of  these  ancient  emblems  of  Supreme  Wisdom  shortly  appears  the  name  of  the  child  into
whom  the  soul  of  the  late-  Dalay-Lama  is  supposed  to  have  transmigrated.

+  It  is  not  the  "Valley  of  Megeddo,"  tor  there  is  no  such  valley  known.  Dr.  Robinson's  typo-
phical  and  biblical  notions  being  no  better  than  hypothesi  -

X  Ram  is  also  womb  anil  valley,  and  in  Tibetan  "goat";  Dag  is  fish,  from  Dagon,  the  man-li-h.
or  perfect  wisdom.

386

A   MODERN    PANARION.

Sun- God  of  that  name,  and  the  second  "Dagon,"  or  the  Chaldaean  Holy
Wisdom  incarnated  in  their  "Messenger,"  Oannes,  the  Man-Fish,  and
descending  on  the  "  Sons  of  God''  or  the  Initiates  of  whatever  country;
those,  in  short,  through  whom  Deific  Wisdom  occasionally  reveals  itself
to  the  world.

A  REPLY  TO  OUR  CRITICS.

OUR   FINAL  ANSWER  TO  SEVERAL  OBJECTIONS.

[Vol.  II.  No.  10,  July,  1881.]

In  the  ordinary  run  of  daily  life  speech  may  be  silver,  while  "silence
is  gold."  With  the  editors  of  periodicals  devoted  to  some  special  object
"silence"  in  certain  cases  amounts  to  cowardice  and  false  pretences.
Such  shall  not  be  our  case.

We  are  perfectly  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  simple  presence  of  the
word  "Spiritualism"  on  the  title-page  of  our  journal  "causes  it  to  lose
in  the  eyes  of  materialist  and  sceptic  fifty  per  cent  of  its  value" — for
we  are  repeatedly  told  so  by  many  of  our  best  friends,  some  of  whom
promise  us  more  popularity,  hence  an  increase  of  subscribers,  would
we  but  take  out  the  "contemptible"  term  and  replace  it  by  some  other,
synonymous  in  meaning,  but  less  obnoxious  phonetically  to  the  general
public.  That  would  be  acting  under  false  pretences.  The  undisturbed
presence  of  the  unpopular  word  will  indicate  our  reply.

That  we  did  not  include  "Spiritualism"  among  the  other  subjects  to
which  our  journal  is  devoted  "in  the  hopes  that  it  should  do  us  good  ser-
vice among  the  Spiritualists"  is  proved  by  the  following  fact:  From  the
first  issue  of  our  Prospectus  to  the  present  day,  subscribers  from  "spiri-
tual" quarters  have  not  amounted  to  four  per  cent  on  our  subscription
list.  Yet,  to  our  merriment,  we  are  repeatedly  spoken  of  as  "Spiritual-
ists" by  the  press  and  our  opponents.  Whether  really  ignorant  of,  or
purposely  ignoring  our  views,  they  tax  us  with  belief  in  spirits.  Not
that  we  would  at  all  object  to  the  appellation — too  many  far  worthier
and  wiser  persons  than  we  firmly  believing  in  "Spirits" — but  that
would  be  acting  under  "false  pretences"  again.  And  so  we  are  called
a  "Spiritualist"  by  persons  who  foolishly  regard  the  term  as  a  "brand,"
while  the  orthodox  Spirituali>t>,  who  are  well  aware  that  we  attribute
their  phenomena  to  quite  another  agency  than  spirits,  resent  our  pecu-
liar opinions  as  an  insult  to  their  belief,  and  in  their  turn  ridicule  and
oppose  us.

383

A    MODERN    PANARIOX.

This  fact  alone  ought  to  prove,  if  anything  ever  will,  that  our  journal
pursues  an  honest  policy.  That,  established  for  the  one  and  sole
object,  namely,  for  the  elucidation  of  truth,  however  unpopular,  it  has
remained  throughout  true  to  its  first  principle — that  of  absolute  im-
partiality. And  that  as  fully  answers  another  charge,  viz.,  that  of
publishing  views  of  our  correspondents  with  which  we  often  do  not
concur  ourselves.  "Your  journal  teems  with  articles  upholding  ridicu-
lous superstitions  and  absurd  ghost-stories,"  is  the  complaint  in  one
letter.  "You  neglect  laying  a  sufficient  stress  in  your  editorials  upon
the  necessity  of  discriminating  between  facts  and  error,  and  in  the
selection  of  the  matter  furnished  by  your  contributors,"  says  another.
A  third  one  accuses  us  of  not  sufficiently  rising  "from  supposed  facts
to  principles,  which  would  prove  to  our  readers  in  every  case  the
former  no  better  than  fictions."  In  other  words,  as  we  understand  it,
we  are  accused  of  neglecting  scientific  induction.  Our  critics  may  be
right,  but  we  also  are  not  altogether  wrong.  In  the  face  of  the  many
crucial  and  strictly  scientific  experiments  made  by  our  most  eminent
savants,  it  would  take  a  wiser  sage  than  King  Solomon  himself  to
decide  now  between  fact  and  fiction.  The  query,  "What  is  truth?"  is
more  difficult  to  answer  in  the  nineteenth  than  in  the  first  century  of
our  era.  The  appearance  of  his  "evil  genius"  to  Brutus  in  the  shape
of  a  monstrous  human  form,  which,  entering  his  tent  in  the  darkness
and  silence  of  the  night,  promised  to  meet  him  in  the  plains  of
Philippi,  was  a.  fact  to  the  Roman  tyrannicide;  it  was  but  a  dream  to
his  slaves,  who  neither  saw  nor  heard  anything  on  that  night.  The
existence  of  an  antipodal  continent  and  the  heliocentric  system  were
facts  to  Columbus  and  Galileo  years  before  they  could  actually  demon-
strate them;  yet  the  existence  of  America,  as  that  of  our  present  solar
system,  was  as  fiercely  denied  several  centuries  back  as  the  phenomena
of  Spiritualism  are  now.  Facts  existed  in  the  "pre-scientific  past,"
and  errors  are  as  thick  as  berries  in  our  scientific  present.  With
whom  then  is  the  criterion  of  truth  to  be  left?  Are  we  to  abandon  it
to  the  mercy  and  judgment  of  a  prejudiced  society,  constantly  caught
trying  to  subvert  that  which  it  does  not  understand ;  ever  seeking  to
transform  sham  and  hypocrisy  into  synonyms  of  "propriety"  and  "re-
spectability"? Or  shall  we  blindly  leave  it  to  modern  exact  science,
so-called?  But  science  has  neither  said  her  last  word  nor  can  her
various  branches  of  knowledge  rejoice  in  their  qualification  of  exact
but  so  long  as  the  hypotheses  of  yesterday  are  not  upset  by  the  dis-

A   REPLY  TO   OUR   CRITICS.  3S9

coveries  of  to-day.  "Science  is  atheistic,  phantasmagorical,  and  always
in  labour  with  conjecture.  It  can  never  become  knowledge  per  sc.
Not  to  know  is  its  climax,"  says  Prof.  A.  Wilder,  our  New  York  Vice-
President,  certainly  more  of  a  man  of  science  himself  than  many  a
scientist  better  known  than  he  is  to  the  world.  Moreover,  the  learned
representatives  of  the  Royal  Society  have  as  many  cherished  hobbies,
and  are  as  little  free  of  prejudice  and  preconception  as  any  other
mortals.  It  is  perhaps  to  religion  and  her  handmaid  theology,  with
her  "seventy-times  seven"  sects,  each  claiming  and  none  proving  its
right  to  the  claim  of  truth,  that  in  our  search  for  it  we  ought  to  humbly
turn?  One  of  our  severe  Christian  Areopagites  actually  expresses  the
fear  that  "even  some  of  the  absurd  stories  of  the  Puranas  have  found
favour  with  The  Theosophist."  But  let  him  tell  us,  Has  the  Bible  any
less  "absurd  ghost-stories"  and  "ridiculous  miracles"  in  it  than  the
Hindu  Puranas  and  Buddhist  Mahd  Jataka,  or  even  one  of  the  most
"shamefully  superstitious  publications"  of  the  Spiritualists?  (We
quote  from  his  letter.)     We  are  afraid  in  one  and  all  it  is  but

Faith,  fanatic  faith,  once  wedded  fast

To  some  dear  falsehood,  hugs  it  to  the  last    .     .     .

and — we  decline  accepting  anything  on  faith.  In  common  with  most
of  the  periodicals  we  remind  our  readers  in  even-  number  of  The  Theo-
sopkist  that  its  "Editors  disclaim  responsibility  for  opinions  expressed
by  contributors,"  with  some  of  which  they  (we)  do  not  agree.  And
that  is  all  we  can  do.  We  never  started  out  in  our  paper  as  teachers,
but  rather  as  humble  and  faithful  recorders  of  the  innumerable  beliefs,
creeds,  scientific  hypotheses,  and — even  "superstitions"  current  in  the
past  ages  and  now  more  than  lingering  yet  in  our  own.  Never  having
been  a  sectarian — i.e.,  an  interested  party — we  maintain  that  in  the
face  of  the  present  situation,  during  that  incessant  warfare,  in  which
old  creeds  and  new  doctrines,  conflicting  schools  and  authorities,  revi-
vals of  blind  faith  and  incessant  scientific  discoveries,  running  a  race
as  though  for  the  survival  of  the  fittest,  swallow  up  and  mutually
destroy  and  annihilate  each  other — daring  indeed  were  that  man  who
would  assume  the  task  of  deciding  between  them!  Who,  we  ask,  in
the  presence  of  those  most  wonderful  and  most  unexpected  achieve-
ments of  our  great  physicists  and  chemists  would  risk  to  draw  the  line
of  demarcation  between  the  possible  and  the  impossible?  Where  is  the
honest  man  who,  conversant  at  all  with  the  latest  conclusions  of
archaeology,  philology,  palaeography  and  especially  Assyriology,  would

390  A    MODERN    PANARIOX.

undertake  to  prove  the  superiority  of  the  religious  "superstitions"  of
the  civilized  Europeans  over  those  of  the  "heathen,"  and  even  of  the
fetish-worshipping  savages?

Having  said  so  much,  we  have  made  clear,  we  hope,  the  reason  why,
believing  no  mortal  man  infallible,  nor  claiming  that  privilege  for
ourselves,  we  open  our  columns  to  the  discussion  of  every  view  and
opinion,  provided  it  is  not  proved  absolutely  supernatural.  Besides,
whenever  we  make  room  for  "unscientific"  contributions  it  is  when
these  treat  upon  subjects  which  lie  entirely  out  of  the  province  of
physical  science — generally  upon  questions  that  the  average  and  dog-
matic scientist  rejects  a  priori  and  without  examination,  but  which  the
real  man  of  science  finds  not  only  possible,  but  after  investigation  very
often  fearlessly  proclaims  the  disputed  question  as  an  undeniable  fact.
In  respect  to  most  transcendental  subjects  the  sceptic  can  no  more
disprove  than  the  believer  prove  his  point.  Fact  is  the  only  tribunal
we  submit  to,  and  recognize  it  without  appeal.  And  before  that  tribu-
nal a  Tyndall  and  an  ignoramus  stand  on  a  perfect  par.  Alive  to  the
truism  that  every  path  may  eventually  lead  to  the  highway  as  every
river  to  the  ocean,  we  never  reject  a  contribution  simply  because  we  do
not  believe  in  the  subject  it  treats  upon,  or  disagree  with  its  conclu-
sions. Contrast  alone  can  enable  us  to  appreciate  things  at  their  right
value;  and  unless  a  judge  compares  notes  and  hears  both  sides  he  can
hardly  come  to  a  correct  decision.  Dum  vitant  still ti  vilia  in  contraria
is  our  motto;  and  we  seek  to  walk  prudently  between  the  many  ditches
without  rushing  into  either.  For  one  man  to  demand  from  another
that  he  shall  believe  like  himself,  whether  in  a  question  of  religion  or
science,  is  supremely  unjust  and  despotic.  Besides,  it  is  absurd.  For
it  amounts  to  exacting  that  the  brains  of  the  convert,  his  organs  of
perception,  his  whole  organization,  in  short,  be  reconstructed  precisely
on  the  model  of  that  of  his  teacher,  and  that  he  shall  have  the  same
temperament  and  mental  faculties  as  the  other  has.  And  why  not  his
nose  and  eyes,  in  such  a  case?  Mental  slavery  is  the  worst  of  all
slaveries.  It  is  a  state  over  which  brutal  force  having  no  real  power,
it  always  denotes  either  an  abject  cowardice  or  a  great  intellectual
weakness.

Among  many  other  charges,  we  are  accused  of  not  sufficiently  exer-
cising our  editorial  right  of  selection.  We  beg  to  differ  and  contradict
the  imputation.  As  every  other  person  blessed  with  brains  instead  of
calves'  feet  jelly  in  his  head  we  certainly  have  our  opinions  upon  things

A  REPLY   TO   OUR   CRITICS.  391

in  general,  and  tilings  occult  especially,  to  some  of  which  we  hold  very
firmly.  But  these  being  our  personal  views,  and  though  we  have  as
good  a  right  to  them  as  any,  we  have  none  whatever  to  force  them  for
recognition  upon  others.  Wc do  not  believe  in  the  activity  of  "departed
Spirits" — others,  and  among  these  many  of  the  Fellows  of  the  Theo-
sophical  Society,  do,  and  we  are  bound  to  respect  their  opinions  so
long  as  they  respect  ours.  To  follow  every  article  from  a  contributor
with  an  Editor's  Note  correcting  "his  erroneous  ideas"  would  amount
to  turning  our  strictly  impartial  journal  into  a  sectarian  organ.  We
decline  such  an  office  of  "Sir  Oracle."

The  Theosophist  is  a  journal  of  our  Society.  Each  of  its  Fellows
being  left  absolutely  untrammelled  in  his  opinions,  and  the  body  repre-
senting collectively  nearly  every  creed,  nationality  and  school  of  philo-
sophy, every  member  has  a  right  to  claim  room  in  the  organ  of  his
Society  for  the  defence  of  his  own  particular  creed  and  views.  Our
Society  being  an  absolute  and  an  uncompromising  Republic  of  Con-
science, preconception  and  narrow-mindedness  in  science  and  philo-
sophy have  no  room  in  it.  They  are  as  hateful  and  as  much  denounced
by  us  as  dogmatism  and  bigotry  in  theology;  and  this  we  have  repeated
usque  ad  nauseam.

Having  explained  our  position,  we  will  close  with  the  following
parting  words  to  our  sectarian  friends  and  critics.  The  materialists
and  sceptics  who  upbraid  us  in  the  name  of  modern  science — the  dame
who  always  shakes  her  head  and  finger  in  scorn  at  everything  she  has
not  yet  fathomed — we  would  remind  of  the  suggestive  but  too  mild
words  of  the  great  Arago:  "He  is  a  rash  man  who  outside  of  pure
mathematics  pronounces  the  word  'impossible.'"  And  to  theology,
which  under  her  many  orthodox  masks  throws  mud  at  us  from  behind
every  secure  corner,  we  retort  by  Victor  Hugo's  celebrated  paradox:
"In  the  name  of  Religion  we  protest  against  all  and  every  religion!"

"THE  CLAIMS  OF  OCCULTISM."

[Vol.  II.  No.  12,  September,  18S1.]

This  is  the  heading  of  an  article  I  find  in  a  London  publication,  a
new  weekly  called  Light,  and  described  as  a  "Journal  Devoted  to  the
Highest  Interests  of  Humanity,  both  Here  and  Hereafter."  It  is  a
good  and  useful  journal;  and,  if  I  may  judge  from  the  only  two  num-
bers I  have  ever  seen,  one  whose  dignified  tone  will  prove  far  more
persuasive  with  the  public  than  the  passionate  and  often  rude  remarks
passed  on  their  opponents  and  sceptics  by  its  "spiritual"  contempora-
ries. The  article  to  which  I  wish  to  call  attention  is  signed  by  a
familiar  name  (jiom  de  plume),  "M.A.  Oxon.,"  that  of  a  profoundly
sympathetic  writer,  of  a  personal  and  esteemed  friend — of  one,  in
short,  who,  I  trust,  whether  he  remains  friendly  or  antagonistic  to  our
views,  would  never  confound  the  doctrine  with  its  adherents,  or,  putting
it  more  plainly,  visit  the  sins  of  the  Occultists  upon  Occultism  and
vice  ve?'sd.

It  is  with  considerable  interest  and  attention,  then,  that  the  present
writer  has  read  "The  Claims  of  Occultism."  As  everything  else
coming  from  "M.A.  Oxon.'s"  pen,  it  bears  a  peculiar  stamp,  not  only
of  originality  but  of  that  intense  individuality,  that  quiet  but  deter-
mined resolution  to  bring  every  new  phasis,  every  discover}'  in  Psycho-
logical sciences  back  to  its  (to  him)  first  principles — Spiritualism.
And  when  writing  the  word,  I  do  not  mean  by  it  the  vulgar  "seance-
room"  Spiritualism,  which  "M.A.  Oxon."  has  from  the  very  first  out-
grown, but  that  primitive  idea  which  underlies  all  the  subsequent
theories,  the  old  parent  root  from  which  have  sprung  the  modern
weeds,  namely,  belief  in  a  guardian  angel  or  a  tutelary  spirit,  who,
whether  his  charge  is  conscious  of  it  or  not — i.e.,  mediumistic  or  non-
medium  istic — is  placed  by  a  still  higher  power  over  every  (baptized?)
mortal  to  watch  over  his  actions  during  life.  And  this,  if  not  the
correct  outline  of  "M.A.  Oxon.'s"  faith,  is  undoubtedly  the  main  idea

"THE   CLAIMS   OF   OCCULTISM."

of  all  the  Christian-born  Spiritualists,  past,  present,  and  future.  The
trine,  Christian  as  it  now  may  be — and  preeminently  Roman  Catholic
it  is — has  not  originated,  as  we  all  know,  with  the  Christian,  but  with
the  Pagan  world.  Besides  being  represented  in  the  tutelary  daimon  of
Socrates — that  ancient  "guide"  of  whom  our  Spiritualists  make  the
most  they  can — it  is  the  doctrine  of  the  Alexandrian  Greek  theurgists,
of  the  Zoroastrians,  and  of  the  later  Babylonian  Jews.  one.  moreover.
sadly  disfigured  by  the  successors  of  all  these — the  Christians.  It
matters  little  though,  for  we  are  now  concerned  but  with  the  personal
views  of  "M.A.  Oxon.,"  which  he  sets  in  opposition  to  those  of  some
Theosophists.

His  doctrine  then  seems  to  us  more  than  ever  to  centre  in,  and  gyrate
around,  that  main  idea  that  the  spirit  of  the  living  man  is  incapable  of
acting  outside  of  the  body  independently  and  per  se ;  but  that  it  must
needs  be  like  a  tottering  baby  guided  by  his  mother  or  nurse — be  led
on  by  some  kind  of  spiritual  strings  by  a  disembodied  spirit,  an  indi-
viduality entirely  distinct  from,  and  at  some  time  even  foreign  to  him-
self, as  such  a  spirit  can  only  be  a  human  soul,  having  at  some  period  or
other  lived  on  this  planet  of  ours.  I  trust  that  I  have  now  correctly
stated  my  friend's  belief,  which  is  that  of  most  of  the  intellectual,  pro-
gressive and  liberal  Spiritualists  of  our  day,  one,  moreover,  shared  by
all  those  Theosophists  who  have  joined  our  movement  by  deserting  the
ranks  of  the  hoi polloi  of  Spiritualism.  Nevertheless,  and  bound  though
we  be  to  respect  the  private  opinions  of  those  of  our  Brother- Fellows
who  have  started  out  in  the  research  of  truth  by  the  same  path  as
"M.A.  Oxon.,"  however  widely  they  may  have  diverged  from  the  one
we  ourselves  follow,  yet  we  will  always  say  that  such  is  not  the  belief
of  all  the  Theosophists — the  writer  included.  For  all  that,  we  shall
not  follow  the  nefarious  example  set  to  us  by  most  of  the  Spiritualists
and  their  papers,  which  are  as  bitter  against  us  as  most  of  the  mis-
sionary sectarian  papers  are  against  each  other  and  the  infidel  Theo-
sophists. We  will  not  quarrel,  but  simply  argue,  for  "Light!  more
light!"  is  the  rallying  cry  of  both  progressive  Spiritualists  and  Theo-
sophists. Having  thus  far  explained  myself,  "M.A.  Oxon."  will  take.
I  am  sure,  en  bon  seigneur  every  remark  that  I  may  make  on  his  article
in  Light,  which  I  here  quote  verbatim.  I  will  not  break  his  flowing
narrative,  but  limit  my  answers  to  modest  footnotes.

It  is  now  some  years  since  Spiritualists  were  startled  by  the  publication  of  two
ponderous  volumes  by  Madame  Blavatsky,  under  the  title  of  Isis  Unveiled.     Th<

394  A    MODERN    PANARION.

who  mastered  the  diversified  contents  of  those  large  and  closely-printed  pages,,
upwards  of  twelve  hundred  in  number,  bore  away  a  vague  impression  that  Spiri-
tualism had  been  freely  handled  not  altogether  to  its  advantage,  and  that  a  porten-
tous claim  had  been  more  or  less  darkly  set  up  for  what  was  called  Occultism.
The  book  was  full  of  material — so  full  that  I  shall  probably  be  right  in  saying  that
no  one  has  mastered  its  contents  so  as  to  fully  grasp  the  author's  plan;  but  the
material  sadly  needed  reducing  to  order,  and  many  of  the  statements  required
elucidation,  and  some,  perhaps,  limitation.*  Moreover,  the  reader  wanted  a  guide
to  pilot  him  through  the  difficulties  that  he  encountered  on  every  hand;  and,
above  all,  he  sorely  needed  some  more  tangible  hold  on  the  history  and  pretensions
of  the  mysterious  Brotherhood  for  whom  the  author  made  such  tremendous
claims.t

It  seemed  vain  for  any  seeker  after  truth  to  attempt  to  enter  into  relations,  how-
ever remote,  with  any  adept  of  the  order  of  which  Madame  Blavatsky  is  the  visible
representative.  All  questions  were  met  with  polite  or  decisive  refusal  to  submit  to
any  examination  of  the  pretensions  made.  The  Brothers  would  receive  an  enquirer
only  after  he  had  demonstrated  his  truth,  honesty  and  courage  by  an  indefinitely
prolonged  probation.  The}-  sought  no  one;  they  promised  to  receive  none.J
Meantime,  they  rejected  no  one  who  was  persevering  enough  to  go  forward  in  the
prescribed  path  of  training  by  which  alone  the  divine  powers  of  the  human  spirit
can,  they  allege,  be  developed.

The  only  palpable  outcome  of  all  this  elaborate  effort  at  human  enlightenment
was  the  foundation  in  America  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  which  has  been  the
accepted,  though  not  the  prescribed,  organization  of  the  Occult  Brotherhood.  §
They  would  utilize  the  Society,  but  they  would  not  advise  as  to  the  methods  by
which  it  should  be  regulated,  nor  guarantee  it  any  special  aid,  except  in  so  far  as  to

*  It  is  not  the  first  time  that  the  just  reproach  is  unjustly  laid  at  my  door.  It  is  but  too  true  that
"the  material  sadly  needed  reducing  to  order,"  but  it  never  was  my  province  to  do  so,  as  I  gave  out
one  detached  chapter  after  the  other,  and  was  quite  ignorant,  as  Mr.  Sinnett  correctly  states  in  The
Occull  World,  whether  I  had  started  upon  a  series  of  articles,  one  book  or  two  books.  Neither  did
I  much  care.  It  was  my  duty  to  give  out  some  hints,  to  point  to  the  dangerous  phases  of  modern
Spiritualism,  and  to  bring  to  bear  upon  that  question  all  the  assertions  and  testimony  of  the  ancient
world  and  its  sages  that  I  could  find,  as  an  evidence  to  corroborate  my  conclusions.  I  did  the  best
I  could  and  knew  how.  If  the  critics  of  Isis  Unveiled  but  consider  that  (i)  its  author  had  never
studied  the  English  language,  and  after  learning  it  in  her  childhood  colloquially  had  not  spoken  it
before  coming  to  America  half-a-dozen  of  times  during  a  period  of  many  years;  (2)  that  most  of  the
doctrines  (or  shall  we  say  hypotheses?)  given  had  to  be  translated  from  an  Asiatic  language;  and
(3)  that  most,  if  not  all  of  the  quotations  from,  and  references  to,  other  works — some  of  these  out  of
print,  and  many  inaccessible  but  to  the  few — and  which  the  author  personally  had  never  read  or  seen,
though  the  passages  quoted  were  proved  in  each  instance  minutely  correct,  then  my  friends  would
perhaps  feel  less  critically  inclined.  However,  Isis  Unveiled  is  but  a  natural  entree  en  matiere  in  the
above  article,  and  I  must  not  lose  time  over  its  merits  or  demerits.

+  Indeed,  the  claims  made  for  a  "Brotherhood"  of  living  men  were  never  half  as  pretentious  as
those  which  are  daily  made  by  the  Spiritualists  on  behalf  of  the  disembodied  souls  of  dead  people.

X  No  more  do  they  now.

\  We  beg  to  draw  to  this  sentence  the  attention  of  all  those  of  our  Fellows  and  friends  in  the  West
as  in  India,  who  felt  inclined  to  either  disbelieve  in,  or  accuse  the  "  Brothers  of  the  First  Section"  on
account  of  the  administrative  mistakes  and  shortcomings  of  the  Theosophical  Society.  From  the
first  the  Fellows  were  notified  that  the  First  Section  might  issue  occasionally  orders  to  those  who
knew  them  personally,  yet  had  never  promised  to  guide,  or  even  protect,  either  the  body  or  its
members.

Till'.    CLAIMS   OF    OCCULTISM.

give  the  very  guarded  promise  that  whatever  aid  might  at  any  time  be  vouchsafed
by  them  to  enquiring  humanity,  would  come,  if  at  all,  through  that  channel.     It

must  be  admitted  that  this  was  a  microscopically  small  crumb  of  com  tort  to  fall
from  so  richly  laden  a  table  as  Madame  Blavatsky  had  depicted,  but  Theosophists
had  to  be  content,  or,  at  least,  silent;  and  so  they  betook  themselves,  some  of  them.
to  reflection.

What  ground  had  they  for  belief  in  the  existence  of  these  Brothers,  adepts  who
had  a  mastery  over  the  secrets  of  nature  which  dwarfed  the  results  of  modern
scientific  research,  who  had  gained  the  profoundest  knowledge — "Know  thyself" —
and  could  demonstrate  by  actual  experiment  the  transcendent  powers  of  the
human  spirit,  spurning  time  and  space,  and  proving  the  existence  of  soul  by  the
methods  of  exact  experimental  science?  What  ground  for  such  claims  existed
outside  of  that  on  which  the  Theosophical  Society  rested?

For  a  long  time  the  answer  was  of  the  vaguest.  But  eventually  evidence  was
gathered,  and  in  this  book*  we  have  Mr.  Sinnett  coming  forward  to  give  us  the
benefit  of  his  own  researches  into  the  matter,  and  especially  to  give  us  his  corre-
spondence with  Koot  Hoonii,  an  adept  and  member  of  the  Brotherhood,  who  had
entered  into  closer  relations,  still  however  of  a  secondary  nature,t  with  him  than
had  been  vouchsafed  to  other  men.  These  letters  are  of  an  extremely  striking
nature,  and  their  own  intrinsic  value  is  high.  This  is  greatly  enhanced  by  the
source  from  which  they  come,  and  the  light  they  throw  upon  the  mental  attitude
of  these  Tibetan  recluses  to  whom  the  world  and  the  things  of  the  world  are
alike  without  interest,  save  in  so  far  as  they  can  ameliorate  man's  state,  and  teach
him  to  develop  and  use  his  powers.

Another  fruitful  subject  of  questioning  among  those  who  leaned  to  theosophical
study  was  as  to  the  nature  of  these  occult  powers.  It  was  impossible  to  construct
from  Isis  Unveiled  any  exact  scheme,  supported  by  adequate  testimony,  or  by  suffi-
cient evidence  from  any  proper  source,  of  what  was  actually  claimed  for  the  adept.
Madame  Blavatsky  herself,  though  making  no  pretension  to  having  attained  the
full  development  of  those  whose  representative  she  was,  possessed  certain  occult
powers  that  seemed  to  the  Spiritualist  strangely  like  those  of  mediumship.i  This,
however,  she  disclaimed  with  much  indignation.  A  medium,  she  explained,  was
but  a  poor  creature,  a  sort  of  conduit  through  which  any  foul  stream  might  be
conveyed,  a  gas-pipe  by  means  of  which  gas  of  a  very  low  power  of  illumination
reached  this  earth.  And  much  pain  was  taken  to  show  that  the  water  :cas  very
foul,  and  that  the  gas  was  derived  from  a  source  that,  if  at  all  spiritual,  was  such
as  we.  who  craved  true  illumination,  should  by  no  means  be  content  with.     It  is

•  The  Occult  World,  by  A.  P.  Sinnett.

+  With  Mr.  Sinnett.  and  only  so  far.  Hi^  relations  with  a  few  other  I'i  Hows  have  been  as  personal
as  they  could  desire.

1  Medium,  in  the  sense  of  the  postman  who  brings  a  letter  from  one  living  person  to  another:  in
the  sense  of  an  assistant  electrician  whose  master  tells  him  how  to  turn  this  screw  and  arrange  that
wire  in  the  Lattery;  never  in  the  sense  of  a  Spiritual  medium.  "Madame  Blavatsky"  neither  needed
nor  did  she  ever  make  use  of  either  dark  seance-rooms,  cabinets,  "trance-state."  "  harmony."  nor  any
of  til-  hundreds  of  conditions  required  by  the  passive  mediums  who  know  not  what  i-  going  to  0  cur.
She  always  knew  beforehand,  and  could  state  what  was  going  to  happen  save  infallibly  answering
each  time  for  con:;.'.!  U  success.

396  A   MODERN    PANARION.

impossible  to  deny  that  the  condition  of  public  Spiritualism  in  America,  at  the
time  when  these  strictures  were  passed  upon  it,  was  such  as  to  warrant  grave  cen-
sure. It  had  become  sullied  in  the  minds  of  observers,  who  viewed  it  from  with-
out, and  who  were  not  acquainted  with  its  redeeming  features,  by  association  with
impurity  and  fraud.  The  mistake  was  to  assume  that  this  was  the  complexion  of
Spiritualism  in  itself,  and  not  of  Spiritualism  as  depraved  by  adventitious  causes.
This,  however,  was  assumed.  If  we  desired  true  light,  then  we  were  told  that  we
must  crush  out  mediumship,  close  the  doors  through  which  the  mere  Spiritual
loafers  come  to  perplex  and  ruin  us,  and  seek  for  the  true  adepts  who  alone  could
safely  pilot  us  in  our  search.  These,  it  was  explained,  had  by  no  means  given  up
the  right  of  entrance  to  their  Spiritual  house  to  any  chance  spirit  that  might  take
a  fancy  to  enter.  They  held  the  key  and  kept  intruders  out,  while,  by  unaided
powers  of  their  own,  they  performed  wonders  before  which  medial  phenomena
paled.  This  was  the  only  method  of  safety;  and  these  powers,  inherent  in  all
men,  though  susceptible  of  development  only  in  the  purest,  and  then  with  diffi-
culty, were  the  only  means  by  which  the  adept  worked.

Some  Theosophists  demonstrated  by  practical  experiment  that  there  is  a  founda-
tion of  truth  in  these  pretensions.  I  am  not  aware  whether  anyone  has  found
himself  able  to  separate  quite  conclusively  between  his  own  unaided  efforts  and
those  in  which  external  spirit  has  had  a  share.  There  is,  however,  one  very  note-
worthy fact  which  gives  a  clue  to  the  difference  between  the  methods  of  the
Spiritualist  and  the  Occultist.  The  medium  is  a  passive  recipient  of  spirit-
influence.  The  adept  is  an  active,  energizing,  conscious  creator  of  results  which
he  knowingly  produces,  and  of  which  evidence  exists  and  can  be  sifted.  Spiritual-
ists have  been  slow  to  accept  this  account  of  what  they  are  familiar  with  in  another
shape.  Theosophists  have  been  equally  slow  to  estimate  the  facts  and  theories  of
Spiritualism  with  candour  and  patience.  Mr.  Sinnett  records  many  remarkable
experiences  of  his  own,  which  are  well  worthy  of  study,  and  which  may  lead  those
who  now  approach  these  phenomena  from  opposite  sides  to  ponder  whether  there
may  not  be  a  common  ground  on  which  they  can  meet.  We  do  not  know  so  much
of  the  working  of  spirit  that  we  can  afford  to  pass  by  contemptuously  any  traces
of  its  operation.  Be  we  Spiritualists  or  Theosophists — odd  names  to  ticket  our-
selves with ! — we  are  all  looking  for  evidence  of  the  whence  and  whither  of
humanity.  We  want  to  know  somewhat  of  the  great  mystery  of  life,  and  to  pry  a
little  into  the  no  less  sublime  mystery  of  death.  We  are  gathering  day  by  day
more  evidence  that  is  becoming  bewildering  in  its  minute  perplexities.  We  want
to  get  light  from  all  sources;  let  us  be  patient,  tolerant  of  divergent  opinion,  quick
to  recognize  the  tiny  hold  that  any  one  soul  can  have  on  truth,  and  the  multiform
variety  in  which  that  which  we  call  truth  is  presented  to  man's  view.  Is  it  strange
that  we  should  see  various  sides  of  it?  Can  we  not  see  that  it  must  needs  be  so?
Can  we  not  wait  for  the  final  moment  of  reconciliation,  when  we  shall  see  with
clearer  eye  and  understand  as  now  we  cannot?

There  is  much  in  Mr.  Sinnett's  little  book  that  may  help  those  who  are  trying  to
assume  this  mental  attitude.  The  philosophy  that  it  contains  is  clearly  stated,  and
affords  rich  material  for  thought.     The  facts  recorded  are  set  forth  with  scientific

"THE   CLAIMS   OF    OCCULTISM.  397

accuracy,  and  must  profoundly  impress  the  careful  and  candid  reader.  The
glimpses  revealed  of  this  silent  Brotherhood,  in  its  lonely  home  on  one  of  the
slopes  of  the  mountains  of  Tibet,  working  to  solve  the  mighty  problem,  and  to
confer  on  humanity  such  benefits  as  it  can  receive,  are  impressive  enough  even  to
the  Philistine  sceptic.  If  they  should  indeed  be  Hashes  of  a  greater  truth,  now
only  dimly  revealed,  the  importance  of  such  revelation  is  not  to  be  measured  in
words.

Be  this,  however,  as  it  may—  and  there  are  many  points  on  which  light  is  neces-
sary  before  a  decisive  opinion  may  be  pronounced — there  is  no  doubt  whatever
that  the  philosophy  contained  in  Mr.  Sinnett's  book  is  similar  to  that  which  the
great  students  of  Theosophy  in  ages  past  have  arrived  at.  It  is  a  mere  piece  of
nineteenth-century  arrogance  to  pooh-pooh  it  as  unworthy  of  attention  by  those
on  whom  has  flashed  the  dazzling  light  of  the  spirit  circle.  The  facts  recorded  are
at  least  as  scientifically  conclusive  as  any  recorded  as  having  happened  in  a  dark
seance,  or  under  the  ordinary  conditions  of  Spiritualistic  investigation.  The  letters
of  Koot  Hoomi  are  fruitful  of  suggestion,  and  will  repay  careful  study  on  their  own
merits.  The  whole  book  contains  only  172  pages,  and  will  not,  therefore,  unduly
tax  the  reader's  patience.  If  any  instructed  Spiritualist  will  read  it,  and  can  say
that  there  is  nothing  in  it  that  adds  to  his  knowledge,  he  will  at  least  have  the
satisfaction  of  having  read  both  sides  of  the  question,  and  that  should  Dresent
itself  to  all  candid  thinkers  as  a  paramount  and  imperative  duty.

A  NOTE  ON  ELIPHAS  LEVI.

[Vol.  III.  No.  i,  October,  1SS1.]

[To  the  Editor  of  "  The  Theosophist."
Madam, — Since   you   have   published   a   posthumous   letter   of  my  master   and
beloved  friend,  the  late  Eliphas  Levi,   I   think  it  would  be  agreeable  to  you  to
publish,  if  judged  suitable,  a  few  extracts  of  the  many  manuscripts  in  my  posses-
sion, written  expressly  for,  and  given  to,  me  by  my  ever- regretted  master.
To  begin  with,  I  send  you  "Stray  Thoughts  on  Death  and  Satan"  from  his  pen.
I  cannot  close  this  letter  without  expressing  the  deep  indignation  aroused  in  me
by  the  base  diatribes  published  in  the  London  Spiritualist  against  your  Society  and
its  members.     Every  honest  heart  is  irritated  at  such  unfair  treatment,  especially
when  proceeding  from  a  man  of  honour  as  Mr.  Harrison  (editor  of  The  Spiritualist)
who  admits  in  his  journal  anonymous  contributions  that  are  tantamount  to  libels.

With  the  utmost  respect,  I  remain,  Madam,
Yours  devotedly,

(BAROX)   J.    SPifDALIKRI.

Marseilles,  July  29th,  18S1.]

It  is  with  feelings  of  sincere  gratitude  that  we  thank  Baron  Spedalieri
for  his  most  valuable  contribution.  The  late  Eliphas  Levi  was  the
most  learned  Kabalist  and  Occultist  of  our  age  in  Europe,  and  every-
thing from  his  pen  is  precious  to  us,  in  so  far  as  it  helps  us  to  compare
notes  with  the  Eastern  Occult  doctrines  and,  by  the  light  thrown  upon
both,  to  prove  to  the  world  of  Spiritualists  and  Mystics,  that  the  two
systems — the  Eastern  Aryan,  and  the  Western  or  the  Chaldaeo-Jewish
Kabalah — are  one  in  their  principal  metaphysical  tenets.  Only,  while
the  Eastern  Occultists  have  never  lost  the  key  to  their  esotericism,  and
are  daily  verifying  and  elaborating  their  doctrines  by  personal  experi-
ments, and  by  the  additional  light  of  modern  science,  the  Western  or
Jewish  Kabalists,  besides  having  been  misled  for  centuries  by  the
introduction  of  foreign  elements  in  it  such  as  Christian  dogmas,  dead-
letter  interpretations  of  the  Bible,  etc.,  have  most  undeniably  lost  the
true  key  to  the  esoteric  meaning  of  Simeon  Ben  Iochai's  Kabalah,  and
are  trying  to  make  up  for  the  loss  by  interpretations  emanating  from

A   NOTK    ON    EUPHAS    LEVI.  399

the  depths  of  their  imagination  and  inner  consciousness.  Such  is
evidently  the  case  with  J.  K.,  the  self-styled  London  "adept,"  whose
anonymous  and  powerless  vilifications  of  the  Theosophical  Society  and
its  members  are  pertinently  regarded  by  Baron  Spedalieri  as  "tanta-
mount to  libels."  But  we  have  to  be  charitable.  That  poor  descendant
of  the  biblical  Levites — as  we  know  him  to  be — in  his  pigmy  efforts  to
upset  the  Theosophists,  has  most  evidently  fractured  his  skull  against
one  of  his  own  "occult"  sentences.  There  is  one  especially  in  The
Spiritualist  (July  22nd),  to  which  the  attention  of  the  mystically
inclined  is  drawn  further  down,  as  this  paragraph  is  most  probably  the
cause  of  the  sad  accident  which  befell  so  handsome  a  head.  Be  it  as
it  may,  but  it  now  disables  the  illustrious  J.  K.  from  communicating
"scientifically  his  knowledge"  and  forces  him  at  the  same  time  to
remain,  as  he  expresses  it,  "in  an  incommunicable  ecstatic  state."  For
it  is  in  no  other  "state"  that  our  great  modern  adept — the  literary  man
of  such  a  "calibre"*  that  to  suspect  him  of  "ignorance"  becomes
equal,  in  audacity,  to  throwing  suspicion  upon  the  virtue  of  Caesar's
wife — could  possibly  have  written  the  following  lines,  intended  by  him,
we  believe,  as  a  lucid  and  clear  exposition  of  his  own  psycho-kabalistic
lore  as  juxtaposed  to  the  "hard  words,"  "outlandish  verbiage,"  "moral
and  philosophical  platitudes,"  and  "jaw-breakers"  of  "the  learned
Theosophists."

These  are  the  "gems  of  occult  wisdom"  of  the  illustrious  Jewish
Kabalist  who,  like  a  bashful  violet,  hides  his  occult  learning  under  two
modest  initials.

In  every  human  creature  there  lies  latent  in  the  involitional  part  of  the  being  a
sufficient  quantity  of  the  omniscient,  the  absolute.  To  induce  the  latent  absolute,
which  is  the  involitional  part  of  our  volitional  conscious  being,  to  become  mani-
fest, it  is  essential  that  the  volitional  part  of  our  being  should  become  latent.
After  the  preparatory  purification  from  acquired  depravities,  a  kind  of  introversion
lias  to  take  place;    the  involitional   lias    to    become    volitional,   by   the    volitional

*  "To  accuse  a  literary  man  of  my  calibre  of  ignorance,  is  as  amusing  a  mistake  as  it  would  hare
been  to  charge  Forson  of  ignorance  of  Greek,"  he  writes  in  The  Spiritualist  of  July  8th.    .    .    .    "The

occult  is  my  special  subject,  and  .  .  .  there  is  but  little  .  .  .  that  I  do  not  know,"  lie  a  Ids.
Now.  the  above  sentence  settles  th<  question  11  once  for  us.  .Not  only  no  ,;  adept,"  but  no  layman
or  profane  of  the  most  widely  recognized  intellect  and  ability  would  ever  have  dared,  under  the
penalty  of  being-  henceforth  and  for  ever  regarded  as  the  most  ridiculously  conceited  of  Sjsop's
heroes,  to  use  such  a  sentence  when  speaking  of  himself!  So  stupidly  arrogant  and  cowardly  im-
pertinent behind  the  shield  of  his  initials  has  he  shown  himself  in  his  transparent  attacks  upon  far
better  and  more  worthy  nun  than  himself  in  the-  above-named  Spiritualist,  that  it  is  the  fir-:
certainly  the  last  time  that  we  do  him  the  honour  oi  noti(  ing  him  in  these  columns.  Our  journal
a  nobler  task,  we  trust,  than  to  be  polemizing  with  those,  whom  in  vulgar  parlance  the  world  gener-
ally terms— bullies.

400  A    MODERN    PANARION.

becoming  involitional.  When  the  conscious  becomes  semi-unconscious,  the,  to  us,
formerly  unconscious  becomes  full}-  conscious.  The  particle  of  the  omniscient  that
is  within  us,  the  vital  and  growing,  sleepless,  involitional,  occult  or  female  prin-
ciple being  allowed  to  express  itself  in  the  volitional,  mental,  manifest,  or  mascu-
line part  of  the  human  being,  while  the  latter  remains  in  a  state  of  perfect  passivity,
the  twro  formerly  dissevered  parts  become  reunited  as  one  holy  (wholly)  perfect
being,  and  then  the  divine  manifestation  is  inevitable.

Very  luckily,  J.  K.  gives  us  himself  the  key  to  this  grandiloquent
gush  by  adding :

Necessarily,  this  is  only  safely  practicable  while  living  in  uncompromisingly  firm
purity,  for  otherwise  there  is  danger  of  unbalancemeut— insanity,  or  a  questionable
form  of  mediumship.

The  italics  are  ours.  Evidently  with  our  immaculate  "adept"  the
"involitional,  occult  or  female  principle"  was  not  allowed  to  "express
itself  in  the  volitional,  mental,  manifest,  or  masculine  part"  of  his
being,  and — behold  the  results!

For  the  edification  of  our  Hindu  readers,  who  are  unprogressive
enough  to  refuse  to  read  the  lucubrations  of  J.  K.,  or  follow  the  mental
"grand  trapeze"  performed  by  this  remarkable  "adept"  on  the  columns
of  The  Spiritualist,  we  may  add  that  in  the  same  article  he  informs
his  English  readers  that  it  is  "Hindu  mystification,  acting  on  Western
credulity"  which  "brought  out  the  Theosophical  Society."  "Hindu
philosophy,"  according  to  that  great  light  of  the  nineteenth  century,
is  no  "philosophy"  but  rather  "mysticism."

Following  the  track  of  the  mystifying  and  mystified  Hindus  they  [the  Theo-
sophists]  consider  the  four  above  faculties  [Siddhis  of  Krishna],  Anima,  Mahima,
Laghima  and  Garima  to  be  the  power  they  [we]  have  to  strive  for.

Indeed,  what  a  ludicrous  confusion  of  effect  with  cause!  The  injury
to  the  brain  must  have  been  serious  indeed.  L,et  us  hope  that  timely
and  repeated  lotions  of  "witch-hazel"  or  the  "universal  magic  balm"
will  have  its  good  effects.  Meanwhile,  we  turn  the  attention  of  our
Hindu  readers  and  students  of  Occultism  to  the  identity  of  the  doc-
trines taught  by  Eliphas  Eevi  (who  is  also  contemptuously  sneered  at,
and  sent  by  the  "adept"  to  keep  company  with  "Brothers,"  "Yogis,"
and  "Fakirs")  in  every  essential  and  vital  point  with  those  of  our
Eastern  initiates.

THE  SIX=POINTED  AND  FI YE-POINTED

STARS.

[Vol.  III.  No.  2,  November,  1881.]

Our  authorities  for  representing  the  pentagram  or  the  five-pointed
star  as  the  microcosm,  and  the  six-pointed  double  triangle  as  the  macro-
cosm, are  all  the  best  known  Western  Kabalists — mediaeval  and  modern.
Eliphas  Levi  (Abbe  Constant)  and,  we  believe,  Kunrath,  one  of  the
greatest  occultists  of  the  past  ages,  give  their  reasons  for  it.  In  Har-
grave  Jennings'  Rosicrucians  the  correct  cut  of  the  microcosm  with
man  in  the  centre  of  the  pentagram  is  given.  There  is  no  objection
whatever  to  publish  their  speculations  save  one — the  lack  of  space  in
our  journal,  as  it  would  necessitate  an  enormous  amount  of  explana-
tions to  make  their  esoteric  meaning  clear.  But  room  will  always  be
found  to  correct  a  few  natural  misconceptions  which  may  arise  in  the
minds  of  some  of  our  readers,  owing  to  the  necessary  brevity  of  our
editorial  notes.  So  long  as  the  question  raised  provokes  no  discussion
to  show  the  interest  taken  in  the  subject,  these  notes  touch  but  super-
ficially upon  every  question.  The  excellence  of  the  above-published
paper  ["The  Six-pointed  and  Five-pointed  Stars,"  by  Krishna  Shankar
Lalshankar],  and  the  many  valuable  remarks  contained  in  it,  afford  us
now  an  opportunity  for  correcting  such  errors  in  the  author's  mind.

As  understood  in  the  West  by  the  real  Kabalists,  Spirit  and  Matter
have  their  chief  symbolical  meaning  in  the  respective  colours  of  the  two
interlaced  triangles,  and  relate  in  no  way  to  any  of  the  lines  which
bind  the  figures  themselves.  To  the  Kabalist  and  Hermetic  philo-
sopher, everything  in  nature  appears  under  a  triune  aspect;  everything
is  a  multiplicity  and  trinity  in  unity,  and  is  so  represented  by  him
symbolically  in  various  geometrical  figures.  "God  geometrizes,"  says
Plato.  The  "Three  Kabalistic  Faces"  are  the  "Three  Lights"  and  the
"Three  Lives"  of  Ain-Suph  (the  Parabrahman  of  the  Westerns  .
which  is  also  called  the  "Central  Invisible  Sun."     •'The  Universe  i>

402  A    MODERN    PANARION.

his  Spirit,  Soul  and  Body,"  his  "Three  Emanations."  This  triune
nature — the  purely  Spiritual,  the  purely  Material,  and  the  Middle
nature  (or  imponderable  matter,  of  which  man's  astral  soul  is  com-
posed)— is  represented  by  the  equilateral  triangle,  whose  three  sides
are  equal  because  these  three  principles  are  diffused  throughout  the
universe  in  equal  proportions,  and — the  one  law  in  nature  being  per-
fect equilibrium — are  eternal  and  coexistent.  The  Western  symbology
then,  with  a  trifling  variation,  is  identically  the  same  as  that  of  the

A

Aryans.  Names  may  van',  and  trifling  details  may  be  added,  but  the
fundamental  ideas  are  the  same.  The  double  triangle,  representing
symbolically  the  macrocosm,  or  great  universe,  contains  in  itself  the
ideas  of  Unity,  of  Duality  (as  shown  in  the  two  colours,  and  two
triangles — the  universe  of  Spirit  and  that  of  Matter),  of  Trinity,  of  the
Pythagoraean  Tetraktys,  the  perfect  Square,  up  to  the  Dodekagon  and
the  Dodekahedron  The  ancient  Chaldsean  Kabalists — the  masters
and  inspirers  of  the  Jewish  Kabalah — were  neither  the  Anthropo-
morphizes of  the  Old  Testament,  nor  those  of  the  present  day.  Their
Ain-Suph — the  Endless  and  the  Boundless — "has  a  form  and  then  has
no  form,"  says  the  Zohar*  and  forthwith  explains  the  riddle  by  adding:
"The  Invisible  assumed  a  Form  when  he  called  the  Universe  into
existence."  That  is  to  say,  the  Deity  can  only  be  seen  and  conceived  of
in  objective  nature — pure  pantheism.     The  three  sides  of  the  triangles

A

represent  to  the  Occultists  as  they  do  to  the  Aryans — Spirit,  Matter,  and
the  Middle  nature  (the  latter  identical  in  its  meaning  with  "Space");
hence  also  the  creative,  preservative  and  destructive  energies,  typified  in
the  "Three  Lights."  The  first  Eight  infuses  intelligent,  conscious  life
throughout  the  universe,  thus  answering  to  the  creative  energy.  The
second  Eight  incessantly  produces  forms  out  of  preexistent  cosmic
matter  within  the  cosmic  circle,  and  hence  is  the  preservative  energy.
The  third  Eight  produces  the  whole  universe  of  gross  physical  matter.
As  the  latter  keeps  gradually  receding  from  the  central  spiritual  Eight,
its  brightness  wanes,  and  it  becomes  Darkness  or  Evil,  leading  to  Death.
Hence  it  becomes  the  destructive  energy,  which  we  find  ever  at  work
on  forms  and  shapes — the  temporary  and  the  changing.  The  "Three
Kabalistic   Faces"   of  the   "Ancient  of  the  Ancient" — who    "has   no

A.

face" — are  the  Aryan  deities  called  respectively  Brahma,  Vishnu  and
Rudra  or  Shiva.     The  double    triangle  of  the   Kabalists   is    enclosed

'  The   Book  of  Splendom ,  written  by  Simeon  Ben  Iochai,  in  the  first  century  B.C. ;  according  to
others  in  the  year  a.d.  So.

THE   SIX-POINTED   AND    FIVE-POINTED    STARS.  403

within  a  circle  represented  by  a  serpent  swallowing  its  own  tail  Cthe
Egyptian  emblem  of  the  eternity),  and  sometimes  by  a  simple  circle
(see  the  theosophical  seal).  The  only  difference  we  can  see  between
the  Aryan  and  the  Western  symbology  of  the  double  triangle — accord-
ing to  the  author's  explanation — lies  in  his  omission  to  notice  the
profound  and  special  meaning  in  that  which,  if  we  understand  him
rightly,  he  terms  "the  zenith  and  the  zero."  With  the  Western  Kaba-
lists,  the  apex  of  the  white  triangle  loses  itself  in  the  zenith,*  the
world  of  pure  immateriality  or  unalloyed  Spirit,  while  the  lower  angle
of  the  black  triangle  pointing  downward  towards  the  nadir  shows — to
use  a  very  prosaic  phrase  of  the  mediaeval  Hermetists — pure,  or  rather
"impure  matter,"  as  the  "gross  purgations  of  the  celestial  fire"  (Spirit)
drawn  into  the  vortex  of  annihilation,  that  lower  world,  where  forms
and  shapes  and  conscious  life  disappear  to  be  dispersed  and  return  to
the  mother  fount  (Cosmic  Matter).  So  with  the  central  point  and  the
central  cavity,  which,  according  to  the  Pauranik  teaching,  "is  con-
sidered to  be  the  seat  of  the  Avyakta  Brahma,  or  Unmanifested
Deity."

The  Occultists,  who  generally  draw  the  figure  thus,  instead  of  a
simple  central  geometrical  point  (which,
having  neither  length,  breadth  nor
thickness,  represents  the  invisible  "  Cen-
tral Sun,"  the  L,ight  of  the  "Unmani-
fested Deity"),  often  place  the  Crux
Ansata  (the  "handled  cross,"  or  the
Egyptian  Tau),  at  the  zenith  of  which,
instead  of  a  mere  upright  line,  they
substitute  a  circle,  the  symbol  of  limit-
less, uncreated  Space.  Thus  modified,
this  cross  has  nearly  the  same  signifi-
cance as  the  "Mundane  Cross"  of  the
ancient  Egyptian  Hermetists,  a  cross  within  a  circle

Therefore,  it  is  erroneous  to  say  that  the  editorial  note  stated  that
the  double  triangle  represented  "Spirit  and  Matter  only"  for  it  repre-
sents so  many  emblems  that  a  volume  would  not  suffice  to  explain
them.     Says  our  critic:

*  The  meaning  is  the  same  in  the  Egyptian  pyramid.  A  French  archaeologist  of  -nun-  renown,  Dr.
Heboid,  shows  the  great  culture  of  the  Egyptians,  5,000  B.C.,  by  stating  upon  various  authorities  that
therewere  at  that  time  no  less  than  "thirty  or  forty  colleges  of  the  initiated  priests  who  studied
occult  sciences  and  practical  magic."

4°4

A   MODERN    PANARION.

If,  as  you  sav,  the  double  triangle  is  made  to  represent  universal  spirit  and  matter
only,  the  objection  that  two  sides — or  any  two  things — cannot  form  a  triangle,  or
that  a  triangle  cannot  be  made  to  represent  one — spirit  alone,  or  matter  alone — as  you
appear  tc  have  done  by  the  distinction  of  white  and  black — remains  unexplained.

Believing  that  we  have  now  sufficiently  explained  some  of  the  diffi-
culties, and  shown  that  the  Western  Kabalists  always  had  regard  to  the
"trinity  in  unity"  and  vice  versa,  we  may  add  that  the  Pythagoraeans
explained  away  the  "objection"  especially  insisted  upon  by  the  writer
of  the  above  words  about  2,500  years  ago.  The  sacred  numbers  of  that
school — whose  cardinal  idea  was  that  there  existed  a  permanent  prin-
ciple of  Unity  beneath  all  the  forces  and  phenomenal  changes  of  the
universe — did  not  include  the  number  two  or  the  Duad  among  the
others.  The  Pythagoreans  refused  to  recognize  that  number,  even  as
an  abstract  idea,  precisely  on  the  ground  that  in  geometry  it  was  im-
possible to  construct  a  figure  with  only  two  straight  lines.  It  is  obvious
that  for  symbolical  purposes  the  number  cannot  be  identified  with  any
circumscribed  figure,  whether  a  plane  or  a  solid,  geometric  figure;  and
thus,  as  it  could  not  be  made  to  represent  a  unity  in  a  multiplicity  as
any  other  polygonal  figure  can,  it  could  not  be  regarded  as  a  sacred
number.  The  number  two,  represented  in  geometry  by  a  double  hori-
zontal line  =r,  and  in  the  Roman  numerals  by  a  double  perpendicular
line  || ,  and,  a  line  having  length,  but  not  breadth  or  thickness,  another
numeral  had  to  be  added  to  it  before  it  could  be  accepted.  It  is  only
in  conjunction  with  number  one,  thus  becoming  the  equilateral  triangle,
that  it  can  be  called  a  figure.  It  thus  becomes  evident  why,  in  sym-
bolizing Spirit  and  Matter  (the  Alpha  and  Omega  in  the  Kosmos),  the
Hermetists  had  to  use  two  triangles  interlaced  (both  a  "trinity  in
unity"),  making  the  one  typifying  Spirit  white  with  chalk,  and  the
other  typifying  Matter  black  with  charcoal.

To  the  question,  what  do  the  two  other  angles  of  the  white  triangle
signify,  if  the  one  "white  point  ascending  heavenward  symbolizes
Spirit" — we  answer  that,  according  to  the  Kabalists,  the  two  lower
points  signify  "Spirit  falling  into  generation,"  i.e.,  the  pure  divine
Spark  already  mixed  with  the  Matter  of  the  phenomenal  world.  The
same  explanation  holds  good  for  the  two  base  angles  of  the  black
triangle;  the  third  points  showing  respectively  the  progressive  puri-
fication of  Spirit,  and  the  progressive  grossness  of  Matter.  Again,  to
say  that  "any  thought  of  upward  or  downward"  in  "the  sublime  idea
of  the  Kosmos"  seems  "not  only  revolting  but  unreal,"  is  to  object  to

THE    SIX-POINTED    AND    FIVE-POINTED   STARS.  405

anything  abstract  being  symbolized  in  a  concrete  image.  Then  win-
not  make  away  with  all  the  signs  altogether,  including  that  of  Vishnu
and  with  all  the  learned  Pauranik  explanations  thereof  given  by  the
writer?  And  why  should  the  Kabalistic  idea  be  more  revolting  than
that  of  "Death,  Devourer,  Time,"  the  latter  word  being  a  synonym  of
Endless  Eternity — represented  by  a  circle  surrounding  the  double
triangle?  Strange  inconsistency,  and  one,  moreover,  which  clashes
entirely  with  the  rest  of  the  article!  If  the  writer  has  not  met  "any-
where with  the  idea  of  one  triangle  being  white  and  the  other  black,"
it  is  simply  because  he  has  never  studied,  nor  probably  even  seen  the
writings  and  illustrations  of  Western  Kabalists.

The  above  explanations  contain  the  key  to  the  Pythagoraean  general
formula  of  unity  in  multiplicity,  the  One  evolving  the  many,  and  per-
vading the  many  and  the  whole.  Their  mystic  Dekad  (1+24-3+4=  IO)>
expresses  the  entire  idea;  it  is  not  only  far  from  being  "revolting"  but
it  is  positively  sublime.  The  One  is  the  Deity;  the  Two  Matter — the
figure  so  despised  by  them  as  Matter  per  sc  can  never  be  a  conscious
unity.*  The  Three  (or  Triangle),  combining  Monad  and  Duad,  par-
taking of  the  nature  of  both,  becomes  the  Triad  or  the  phenomenal
world.  The  Tetrad  or  sacred  Tetraktys,  the  form  of  perfection  with
the  Pythagoraeans,  expresses  at  the  same  time  the  emptiness  of  all —
Maya.  While  the  Dekad,  or  sum  of  all,  involves  the  entire  Kosmos.
"The  universe  is  the  combination  of  a  thousand  elements,  and  yet  the
expression  of  a  single  element — absolute  harmony  or  spirit — a  chaos  to
the  sense,  a  perfect  kosmos  to  reason,"  we  say  in  /sis  Utiveiled.

Pythagoras  learned  his  philosophy  in  India.  Hence,  the  similarity
in  the  fundamental  ideas  of  the  ancient  Brahmanieal  Initiates  and  the
Pythagorists.  And  when  in  defining  the  Shatkon,  the  writer  says  it
"represents  the  great  universe  (Brahmanda) — the  whole  endless  Malia-
kasha — with  all  the  planetary  and  stellar  worlds  contained  in  it,"  he
only  repeats  in  other  words  the  explanation  given  by  Pythagoras  and
the  Hermetic  philosophers  of  the  "hexagonal  star  or  the  "double
triangle,"  as  shown  above.

Nor  do  we  find  it  very  difficult  to  fill  up  the  gap  left  in  our  brief  note
in  the  August  number  as  to  the  "remaining  three  points  of  the  two
triangles,"  and  the  three  sides  of  each  element  of  the  "double  triangle"

»6  '

or  of  the  circle  surrounding  the  figure.     As  the  Hermetists  symbolized

*  Compare  hi  Kapila's  Sankhya— Purusha  and  Prakriti;  only  the  two  combun  I  whi  n  forming  a

unity  can  manifest  themselves  in  this  world  of  the  senses.

406

A   MODERN    PAXARION.

everything  visible  and  invisible  they  could   not  fail  to  symbolize  the
macrocosm  in  its  completeness.

The  Pythagoreans  who  included  in  their  Dekad  the  entire  Kosmos,
A  held  the  number  twelve  in  still  higher

reverence  as  it  represented  the  sacred
Tetraktys  multiplied  by  three,  which
,  C  gave  a  trinity  of  perfect  squares  called
tetrads.  The  Hermetic  philosophers  or
Occultists  following  in  their  steps  re-
presented this  number  twelve  in  the
"double  triangle" — the  great  universe
or  the  macrocosm  as  shown  in  this
figure — and  included  in  it  the  penta-
gram, or  the  microcosm,  called  by  them
the  little  universe.

Dividing  the  twelve  letters  of  the
outer  angles  into  four  groups  of  triads,  or  three  groups  of  tetrads,
they  obtained  the  Dodekagon,  a  regular  geometric  polygon,  bounded
by  twelve  equal  sides  and  containing  twelve  equal  angles,  which  symbol-
ized with  the  ancient  Chaldseans  the  twelve  "great  gods,"*  and  with
the  Hebrew  Kabalists  the  ten  Sephiroth,  or  creative  powers  of  nature,
emanated  from  Sephira  (Divine  Light),  herself  the  chief  Sephiroth
and  emanation  from  Hakoma,  the  Supreme  (or  Unmanifested)  Wisdom,
and  Ain-Suph  the  Endless;  viz.,  three  groups  of  triads  of  the  Sephiroth
and  a  fourth  triad,  composed  of  Sephira,  Ain-Suph  and  Hakoma,  the
Supreme  Wisdom  which  "cannot  be  understood  by  reflection,"  and
which  "lies  concealed  within  and  without  the  cranium  of  Long  Face,"f
the  uppermost  head  of  the  upper  triangle  forming  the  "Three  Kabalistic
Faces,"  making  up  the  twelve.  Moreover,  the  twelve  figures  give  two
squares  or  the  double  Tetraktys,  representing  in  the  Pythagorsean  sym-
bology  the  two  worlds — the  spiritual  and  the  physical.  The  eighteen
inner  and  six  central  angles  yield,  besides  twenty-four,  twice  the  sacred
macrocosmic    number,    also    the    twenty-four    "divine    unmanifested

*  According  to  Haug's  Aitareya  Brdkmana,  the  Hindu  Manas  (Mind)  or  Bhagaviu  creates  no
more  than  the  Pythagoroean  Monas.  He  enters  the  Egg  of  the  World  and  emanates  from  it  as
Brahma,  as  itself  iBhagavan)  has  no  first  cause  (Apurva).  Brahma,  as  Prajipati,  manifests  himself
( as  the  androgyne  Sephira  and  the  ten  Sephiroth)  as  twelve  bodies  or  attributes  which  are  represented
by  the  twelve  Gods  symbolizing  (i)  Fire,  (2)  the  Sun,  (3)  Soma,  (4)  all  living  Beings,  (5)  Vayu,  (6)  Death
— Shiva,  (7)  Earth,  (8)  Heaven,  (9)  Agni,  (10)  Aditya,  (ni  Mind,  (12)  the  great  Infinite  Cycle  which  is  not
to  be  stopped.    This,  with  a  few  variations,  is  purely  the  Kabalistic  idea  of  the  Sephiroth.

+  Idra  Rabba.  vi.  58.

THE   SIX-POINTED   AND    FIVE-POINTED   STARS.  407

powers."  These  it  would  be  impossible  to  enumerate  in  so  short  a
space.  Besides,  it  is  far  more  reasonable  in  our  days  of  scepticism  to
follow  the  hint  of  Iamblichus,  who  says,  that  "the  divine  powers  always
felt  indignant  with  those  who  rendered  manifest  the  composition  of  the
Icosahedron,"  viz.,  those  who  delivered  the  method  of  inscribing  in  a
sphere  the  Dodekahedron,  one  of  the  five  solid  figures  in  geometry,
contained  by  twelve  equal  and  regular  pentagons — the  secret  Kabalistic
meaning  of  which  our  opponents  would  do  well  to  study.

In  addition  to  all  this,  as  shown  in  the  "double  triangle"  above,  the
pentagram  in  the  centre  gives  the  key  to  the  meaning  of  the  Hermetic
philosophers  and  Kabalists.  So  well  known  and  widespread  is  this
double  sign  that  it  may  be  found  over  the  entrance  door  of  the  Lha-
khang  (temples  containing  Buddhist  images  and  statues),  in  every
Gong-pa  (lamasery),  and  often  over  the  relic-cupboard,  called  in  Tibet
Doong-ting.

The  mediaeval  Kabalists  give  us  in  their  writings  the  key  to  its  mean-
ing. "Man  is  a  little  world  inside  the  great  universe" — Paracelsus
teaches.  And  again:  "A  microcosm,  within  the  macrocosm,  like  a
foetus,  he  is  suspended  by  his  three  principal  spirits  in  the  matrix  of
the  universe."  These  three  spirits  are  described  as  double:  (1)  the
spirit  of  the  elements  (terrestrial  body  and  vital  principle);  (2)  the
spirit  of  the  stars  (sidereal  or  astral  body  and  the  will  governing  it);
(3)  the  spirits  of  the  spiritual  world  (the  animal  and  the  spiritual  souls);
the  seventh  principle  being  an  almost  immaterial  spirit  or  the  divine

A

Augoeides,  Atma,  represented  by  the  central  point,  which  corresponds
to  the  human  navel.  This  seventh  principle  is  the  personal  God  of
every  man,  say  the  old  Western  and  Eastern  Occultists.

Therefore  it  is  that  the  explanations  given  by  our  critic  of  the
Shatkon  and  Panchkon  rather  corroborate  than  destroy  our  theory.
Speaking  of  the  five  triangles  composed  of  "five  times  five"  or  twenty-
five  points,  he  remarks  of  the  pentagram  that  it  is  a  "number  otherwise
corresponding  with  the  twenty -five  elements  making  a  living  human
creature."  Now  we  suppose  that  by  "elements"  the  writer  means  just
what  the  Kabalists  say  when  they  teach  that  the  emanations  of  the
twenty-four  divine  " unmanifested  powers" — the  "unexisting"  or  "cen-
tral point"  being  the  twenty-fifth — make  a  perfect  human  being.  But
without  disputing  upon  the  relative  value  of  the  words  "element"  and
"emanation,"  and  strengthened  moreover  as  we  find  the  above  sen-
tence bv  the  author's  additional  remark  that  "the  entire  figure"  of  the

408  a  modern  panarion.

microcosm,  "the  inner  world  of  individual  living  being,"  is  "a  figure
which  is  the  sign  of  Brahma,  the  deified  creative  energy" — in  what
respect,  we  ask,  does  the  above  sentence  so  much  clash  with  our  state-
ment that  some  proficients  in  Hermetic  philosophy  and  Kabalists
regard  the  five  points  of  the  pentagram  as  representing  the  five
cardinal  limbs  of  the  human  body?  We  are  no  ardent  disciple  or
follower  of  the  Western  Kabalists,  yet  we  maintain  that  in  this  they
are  right.  If  the  twenty-five  elements  represented  by  the  five-pointed
star  make  up  a  "living  human  creature"  then  these  elements  are  all
vital,  whether  mental  or  physical,  and  the  figure  symbolizing  "creative
energy"  gives  the  more  force  to  the  Kabalistic  idea.  Every  one  of  the
five  gross  elements — earth,  water,  fire,  air  (or  "wind")  and  ether —
enters  into  the  composition  of  man,  and  whether  we  say  "five  organs
of  action"  or  the  "five  limbs"  or  even  the  "five  senses,"  it  means  all
one  and  the  same  thing,  if  we  would  refrain  from  hair-splitting.

Most  undoubtedly  the  "proficients"  could  explain  their  claim  at  least
as  satisfactorily  as  the  writer  who  controverts  and  denies  it,  in  explain-
ing his  own.  In  the  Codex  Nazarczus,  the  most  Kabalistic  of  books —
the  Supreme  King  of  Light  and  the  chief  /Eon,  Mano,  emanates  the
five  ^Eons — he  himself  with  the  Lord  Ferho  (the  "Unknown  Formless
Life"  of  which  he  is  an  emanation)  making  up  the  seven,  which  typify
again  the  seven  principles  in  man;  the  five  being  purely  material  and
semi-material,  and  the  higher  two  almost  immaterial  and  spiritual.
Five  refulgent  rays  of  light  proceed  from  each  of  the  seven  ^Eons,  five
of  these  shooting  through  the  head,  the  two  extended  hands,  and  the
two  feet  of  man  represented  in  the  five-pointed  star,  one  enveloping
him  as  with  a  mist  and  the  seventh  settling  like  a  bright  star  over  his
head.  The  illustration  may  be  seen  in  several  old  books  upon  the
Codex  Nazarceus  and  the  Kabalah.  What  wonder,  then,  that  since  elec-
tricity or  animal  magnetism  streams  most  powerfully  from  the  five
cardinal  limbs  of  man,  and  since  the  phenomena  of  what  is  now  called
"mesmeric"  force  had  been  studied  in  the  temples  of  ancient  Egypt
and  Greece,  and  mastered  as  it  may  never  hope  to  be  mastered  in  our
age  of  idiotic  and  a  priori  denial,  the  old  Kabalists  and  philosophers
who  symbolized  every  power  in  nature,  should,  for  reasons  perfectly
evident  for  those  who  know  anything  of  the  arcane  sciences  and  the
mysterious  relations  which  exist  between  numbers,  figures  and  ideas,
have  chosen  to  represent  "the  five  cardinal  limbs  of  man" — the  head,
the  two  arms  and  the  two  legs — in  the  five  points  of  the  pentagram?

THE    SIX-POINTED   AND    FIVE-POINTED   STARS.  409

Eliphas  Levi,  the  modern  Kabalist,  goes  as  far,  if  not  farther,  than  his
ancient  and  mediaeval  brethren,  for,  he  says  in  his  Dogme  et  Rituel  di
la  Haute  Magie  (p.  175):

The  Kabalistic  use  of  the  pentagram  can  determine  the  countenance  of  unborn
infants,  and  an  initiated  woman  might  ,yh'e  to  her  son  the  features  of  Nereus  or
Achilles,  or  those  of  Louis  XIV  or  Napoleon.

The  Astral  Light  of  the  Western  Occultists  is  the  Akasha  of  the
Hindus.  Many  of  the  latter  will  not  study  its  mysterious  correlations,
either  under  the  guidance  of  initiated  Kabalists  or  that  of  their  own
initiated  Brahmans,  preferring  to  Prajna  Paramita — their  own  conceit.
And  vet  both  exist  and  are  identical.

THE  GRAND  INQUISITOR.

[Vol.  III.  Nos.  2  and  3,  November  and  December,  1881.]

[Dedicated  by  the  Translator  to  those  sceptics  who  clamour  so  loudly,  both
in  print  and  private  letters — "Show  us  the  wonder-working  'Brothers,'
let  them  come  out  publicly  and — we  will  believe  in  them/"']

[The  following  is  an  extract  from  M.  Dostoevsky's  celebrated  novel,
The  Brothers  Karamazof,  the  last  publication  from  the  pen  of  the  great
Russian  novelist,  who  died  a  few  months  ago,  just  as  the  concluding
chapters  appeared  in  print.  Dostoevsky  is  beginning  to  be  recognized
as  one  of  the  ablest  and  profoundest  among  Russian  writers.  His
characters  are  invariably  typical  portraits  drawn  from  various  classes
of  Russian  society,  strikingly  life-like  and  realistic  to  the  highest
degree.  The  following  extract  is  a  cutting  satire  on  modern  theology
generally  and  the  Roman  Catholic  religion  in  particular.  The  idea  is
that  Christ  revisits  earth,  coming  to  Spain  at  the  period  of  the  Inquisi-
tion, and  is  at  once  arrested  as  a  heretic  by  the  Grand  Inquisitor.  One
of  the  three  brothers  of  the  story,  Ivan,  a  rank  materialist  and  an
atheist  of  the  new  school,  is  supposed  to  throw  this  conception  into
the  form  of  a  poem,  which  he  describes  to  Alyosha — the  youngest  of
the  brothers,  a  young  Christian  mystic  brought  up  by  a  "saint"  in  a
monastery — as  follows:]

"Quite  impossible,  as  you  see,  to  start  without  an  introduction,"
laughed  Ivan.  "Well,  then,  I  mean  to  place  the  event  described  in  the
poem  in  the  sixteenth  century,  an  age — as  you  must  have  been  told  at
school — when  it  was  the  great  fashion  among  poets  to  make  the  deni-
zens and  powers  of  higher  worlds  descend  on  earth  and  mix  freely  with
mortals.  ...  In  France  all  the  notaries'  clerks,  and  the  monks  in
their  cloisters  as  well,  used  to  give  grand  performances,  dramatic  plays
in  which  long  scenes  were  enacted  by  the  Madonna,  the  angels,  the
saints,  Christ,  and  even  by  God  Himself.  In  those  days,  everything  was
very  artless  and  primitive.     An  instance  of  it  may  be  found  in  Victor

THE    GRAND    INQUISITOR.

411

Hugo's  drama,  No t lre Dame de Paris,  where,  at  the  Municipal  Hall,  a  play
called  Lc  Bon  Jugement  de  la  Tres-sainte  et  Gracieuse  Vierge  Marie,  is
enacted  in  honour  of  Louis  XI,  in  which  the  Virgin  appears  personally
to  pronounce  her  'good  judgment.'  In  Moscow,  during  the  pre-
petrean  period,  performances  of  nearly  the  same  character,  chosen
especially  from  the  Old  Testament,  were  also  in  great  favour.  Apart
from  such  plays,  the  world  was  overflooded  with  mystical  writings,
'verses' — the  heroes  of  which  were  always  selected  from  the  ranks  of
angels,  saints  and  other  heavenly  citizens  answering  to  the  devotional
purposes  of  the  age.  The  recluses  of  our  monasteries,  like  the  Roman
Catholic  monks,  passed  their  time  in  translating,  copying,  and  even
producing  original  compositions  upon  such  subjects,  and  that,  remem-
ber, during  the  Tartar  period!  ...  In  this  connection,  I  am  re-
minded of  a  poem  compiled  in  a  convent — a  translation  from  the
Greek,  of  course — called  'The  Travels  of  the  Mother  of  God  among
the  Damned,'  with  fitting  illustrations  and  a  boldness  of  conception
inferior  nowise  to  that  of  Dante.  The  'Mother  of  God'  visits  hell,
in  company  with  the  Archangel  Michael  as  her  cicerone  to  guide  her
through  the  legions  of  the  'damned.'  She  sees  them  all,  and  is  wit-
ness to  their  multifarious  tortures.  Among  the  many  other  exceed-
ingly remarkable  varieties  of  torments — even'  category  of  sinners
having  its  own — there  is  one  especially  worthy  of  notice,  namely,  a
class  of  the  'damned'  sentenced  to  gradually  sink  in  a  burning  lake
of  brimstone  and  fire.  Those  whose  sins  cause  them  to  sink  so  low
that  they  no  longer  can  rise  to  the  surface  are  for  ever  forgotten  by
God,  i.e.,  they  fade  out  from  the  omniscient  memory,  says  the  poem —
an  expression,  by  the  way,  of  an  extraordinary  profundity  of  thought,
when  closely  analyzed.  The  Virgin  is  terribly  shocked,  and  falling
down  upon  her  knees  in  tears  before  the  throne  of  God,  begs  that
all  she  has  seen  in  hell — all,  all  without  exception,  should  have  their
sentences  remitted  to  them.  Her  dialogue  with  God  is  colossally
interesting.  She  supplicates,  she  will  not  leave  Him.  And  when  God,
pointing  to  the  pierced  hands  and  feet  of  her  Son,  cries,  '  How  can  I
forgive  His  executioners?'  she  then  commands  that  all  the  saints.
martyrs,  angels  and  archangels,  should  prostrate  themselves  with  her
before  the  Immutable  and  the  Changeless  One  and  implore  Him  to
change  His  wrath  into  mercy  and — forgive  them  all.  The  poem  clo
upon  her  obtaining  from  God  a  compromise,  a  kind  of  yearly  respite  of
tortures  between  Good  Fridav  and  Trinity,  a  chorus  of  the  ■damned'

412  A    MODERN    PANARION.

singing  loud  praises  to  God  from  their  'bottomless  pit,'  thanking  and

telling  Him:

Thou  art  right,  O  Lord,  very  right,
Thou  hast  condemned  us  justly.

"My  poem  is  of  the  same  character.

"In  it,  it  is  Christ  who  appears  on  the  scene.  True,  He  says  nothing,
but  only  appears  and  passes  out  of  sight.  Fifteen  centuries  have
elapsed  since  He  left  the  world  with  the  distinct  promise  to  return
'with  power  and  great  glory';  fifteen  long  centuries  since  His  prophet
cried,  'Prepare  ye  the  way  of  the  Lord!'  since  He  Himself  had  foretold,
while  yet  on  earth,  'Of  that  day  and  hour  knoweth  no  man,  no,  not
the  angels  of  heaven  but  my  Father  only.'  But  Christendom  expects
Him  still.     .     .     .

"It  waits  for  Kim  with  the  same  old  faith  and  the  same  emotion;
aye,  with  a  far  greater  faith,  for  fifteen  centuries  have  rolled  away  since
the  last  sign  from  heaven  was  sent  to  man,

And  blind  faith  remained  alone

To  lull  the  trusting  heart,

As  heav'n  would  send  a  sign  no  more.

"True,  again,  we  have  all  heard  of  miracles  being  wrought  ever
since  the  'age  of  miracles'  passed  away  to  return  no  more.  We  had,
and  still  have,  our  saints  credited  with  performing  the  most  miraculous
cures;  and,  if  we  can  believe  their  biographers,  there  have  been  those
among  them  who  have  been  personally  visited  by  the  Queen  of  Heaven.
But  Satan  sleepeth  not,  and  the  first  germs  of  doubt,  an  ever-increas-
ing unbelief  in  such  wonders,  already  had  begun  to  sprout  in  Christen-
dom as  early  as  the  sixteenth  century.  It  was  just  at  that  time  that  a
new  and  terrible  heresy  first  made  its  appearance  in  the  north  of  Ger-
many.'" A  great  star  'shining  as  it  were  a  lamp  .  .  .  fell  upon
the  fountains  of  waters'  .  .  .  and  'they  were  made  bitter.'  This
'heresy'  blasphemously  denied  'miracles.'  But  those  who  had  re-
mained faithful  believed  all  the  more  ardently.  The  tears  of  mankind
ascended  to  Him  as  heretofore,  and  the  Christian  world  was  expecting
Him  as  confidently  as  ever;  they  loved  Him  and  hoped  in  Him,  thirsted
and  hungered  to  suffer  and  die  for  Him  just  as  many  of  them  had  done
before.  ...  So  many  centuries  had  weak,  trusting  humanity  im-
plored Him,  crying  with  ardent  faith  and  fervour:  'How  lone:,  O  Lord,
holy  and  true,  dost  Thou  not  come!'     So  many  long  centuries  hath  it

*  Luther's  reform.

THE    GRAND    INQUISITOR.  413

vainly  appealed  to  Him,  that  at  last,  in  His  inexhaustible  compassion,
He  consenteth  to  answer  the  prayer.  .  .  .  He  decideth  that  once-
more,  if  it  were  but  for  one  short  hour,  the  people — His  long-suffering,
tortured,  fatally  sinful,  yet  loving  and  child-like,  trusting  people — shall
behold  Him  again.  The  scene  of  action  is  placed  by  me  in  Spain,  at
Seville,  during  that  terrible  period  of  the  Inquisition,  when.,  for  the
greater  glory  of  God,  stakes  were  flaming  all  over  the  country,

Burning  wicked  heretics,
In  grand  auto-da-fes.

"This  particular  visit  has,  of  course,  nothing  to  do  with  the  promised
Advent,  when,  according  to  the  programme,  'after  the  tribulation  of
those  days,'  He  will  appear  'coming  in  the  clouds  of  heaven.'  For,
that  'coming  of  the  Son  of  Man,'  as  we  are  informed,  will  take  place  as
suddenly  'as  the  lightning  conieth  out  of  the  east  and  shineth  even
unto  the  west.'  No;  this  once,  He  desired  to  come  unknown,  and
appear  among  His  children,  just  when  the  bones  of  the  heretics,  sen-
tenced to  be  burnt  alive,  had  commenced  crackling  at  the  flaming
stakes.  Owing  to  His  limitless  mere}',  He  mixes  once  more  with
mortals  and  in  the  same  form  in  which  He  was  wont  to  appear  fifteen
centuries  ago.  He  descends,  just  at  the  very  moment  when  before
king,  courtiers,  knights,  cardinals,  and  the  fairest  dames  of  court,
before  the  whole  population  of  Seville,  upwards  of  a  hundred  wicked
heretics  are  being  roasted,  in  a  magnificent  auto-da-fe  ad  majorem
Dei  gloriam,  by  the  order  of  the  powerful  Cardinal  Grand  Inquisitor.
.  .  .  He  comes  silently  and  unannounced;  yet  all — how  strange
— yea,  all  recognize  Him,  at  once!  The  population  rushes  towards
Him  as  if  propelled  by  some  irresistible  force;  it  surrounds,  throngs,
and  presses  around,  it  follows  Him.  .  .  .  Silently,  and  with  a  smile
of  boundless  compassion  upon  His  lips,  He  crosses  the  dense  crowd,
and  moves  softly  on.  The  Sun  of  Love  burns  in  His  heart,  and  warm
rays  of  Light,  Wisdom  and  Power  beam  forth  from  His  eyes,  and  pour
down  their  waves  upon  the  swarming  multitudes  of  the  rabble  assembled
around,  making  their  hearts  vibrate  with  returning  love.  He  extends
His  hands  over  their  heads,  blesses  them,  and  from  mere  contact  with
Him,  aye,  even  with  His  garments,  a  healing  power  goes  forth.  An
old  man,  blind  from  his  birth,  cries,  'Lord,  heal  me,  that  I  may  see
Thee!'  and  the  scales  falling  off  the  closed  eyes,  the  blind  man  beholds
Him.  .  .  .  The  crowd  weeps  for  joy,  and  kisses  the  ground  upon
which  He  treads.     Children  strew  flowers  along  His  path  and  sing  to

414  A   MODERN    PAXARIOX.

Him,  'Hosanna!'  It  is  He,  it  is  Himself,  they  say  to  each  other,  it
must  be  He,  it  can  be  none  other  but  He!  He  pauses  at  the  portal
of  the  old  cathedral,  just  as  a  wee  white  coffin  is  carried  in,  with
tears  and  great  lamentations.  The  lid  is  off,  and  in  the  coffin  lies
the  body  of  a  fair  girl-child,  seven  years  old,  the  only  child  of  an
eminent  citizen  of  the  city.  The  little  corpse  lies  buried  in  flowers.
'He  will  raise  thy  child  to  life!'  confidently  shouts  the  crowd  to  the
weeping  mother.  The  officiating  priest  who  had  come  to  meet  the
funeral  procession,  looks  perplexed,  and  frowns.  A  loud  cry  is  suddenly
heard,  and  the  bereaved  mother  prostrates  herself  at  His  feet.  'If  it  be
Thou,  then  bring  back  my  child  to  life ! '  she  cries  beseechingly.  The
procession  halts,  and  the  little  coffin  is  gently  lowered  at  His  feet.
Divine  compassion  beams  forth  from  His  eyes,  and  as  He  looks  at  the
child,  His  lips  are  heard  to  whisper  once  more,  "Talitha  Cumi' — and
'straightway  the  damsel  arose.'  The  child  rises  in  her  coffin.  Her
little  hands  still  hold  the  nosegay  of  white  roses  which  after  death  was
placed  in  them,  and,  looking  round  with  large  astonished  eyes  she
smiles  sweetly.  .  .  .  The  crowd  is  violently  excited.  A  terrible
commotion  rages  among  them,  the  populace  shouts  and  loudly  weeps,
when  suddenly,  before  the  cathedral  door,  appears  the  Cardinal  Grand
Inquisitor  himself.  .  .  .  He  is  a  tall,  gaunt-looking  old  man  of
nearly  fourscore  years  and  ten,  with  a  stern,  withered  face,  and  deeply
sunken  eyes,  from  the  cavity  of  which  glitter  two  fiery  sparks.  He
has  laid  aside  his  gorgeous  cardinal's  robes  in  which  he  had  appeared
before  the  people  at  the  auto-da-fe  of  the  enemies  of  the  Romish
Church,  and  is  now  clad  in  his  old,  rough,  monkish  cassock.  His
sullen  assistants  and  slaves  of  the  'holy  guard'  are  following  at  a
distance.  He  pauses  before  the  crowd  and  observes.  He  has  seen  all.
He  has  witnessed  the  placing  of  the  little  coffin  at  His  feet,  the  calling
back  to  life.  x\nd  now,  his  dark,  grim  face  has  grown  still  darker;  his
bushy  grey  eyebrows  nearly  meet,  and  his  sunken  eye  flashes  with
sinister  light.  Slowly  raising  his  finger,  he  commands  his  minions  to
arrest  Him.     .     .     .

"Such  is  his  power  over  the  well-disciplined,  submissive  and  now
trembling  people,  that  the  thick  crowds  immediately  give  way,  and
scattering  before  the  guard,  amid  dead  silence  and  without  one  breath
of  protest,  allow  them  to  lay  their  sacrilegious  hands  upon  the  stranger
and  lead  Him  away.  .  .  .  That  same  populace,  like  one  man.  now
bows  its  head  to  the  ground  before  the  old  Inquisitor,  who  blesses  it

THE    GRAND    INQUISITOR.  415

and  slowly  moves  onward.  The  guards  conduct  their  prisoner  to  the
ancient  building  of  the  Holy  Tribunal;  pushing  Him  into  a  narrow,
gloomy,  vaulted  prison-cell,  they  lock  Him  in  and  retire.     .     .     .

"The  day  wanes,  and  night — a  dark,  hot,  breathless  Spanish  night —
creeps  on  and  settles  upon  the  city  of  Seville.  The  air  smells  of  laurels
and  orange  blossoms.  In  the  Cimmerian  darkness  of  the-  old  Tribunal
Hall  the  iron  door  of  the  cell  is  suddenly  thrown  open,  and  the  Grand
Inquisitor,  holding  a  dark  lantern,  slowly  stalks  into  the  dungeon.  He
is  alone,  and,  as  the  heavy  door  closes  behind  him,  he  pauses  at  the
threshold,  and,  for  a  minute  or  two,  silently  and  gloomily  scrutinizes
the  Face  before  him.  At  last,  approaching  with  measured  steps,  he
sets  his  lantern  down  upon  the  table  and  addresses  Him  in  these
words :

"Tt  is  Thou!  .  .  .  Thou!'  .  .  .  Receiving  no  reply,  he  rapidly
continues:    'Xay,   answer  not;   be  silent!     .  .     And   what  couldst

Thou  say?  ...  I  know  but  too  well  Thy  answer.  .  .  .  Besides,
Thou  hast  no  right  to  add  one  syllable  to  that  which  was  already
uttered  by  Thee  before.  .  .  .  Why  shouldst  Thou  now  return,  to
impede  us  in  our  work?  For  Thou  hast  come  but  for  that  only,  and
Thou  knowest  it  well.  But  art  Thou  as  well  aware  of  what  awaits
Thee  in  the  morning?  I  do  not  know,  nor  do  I  care  to  know  who
Thou  mayest  be:  be  it  Thou  or  only  Thine  image,  to-morrow  I  will
condemn  and  burn  Thee  on  the  stake,  as  the  most  wicked  of  all  the
heretics;  and  that  same  people,  who  to-day  were  kissing  Thy  feet,  to-
morrow at  one  bend  of  my  finger,  will  rush  to  add  fuel  to  Thv  funeral
pile.     .     .  Wert  Thou  aware  of  this?'  he  adds,  speaking  as  if  in

solemn  thought,  and  never  for  one  instant  taking  his  piercing  glance
off  the  meek  Face  before  him."     .

"I  can  hardly  realize  the  situation  described — what  is  all  this,  Ivan?"
suddenly  interrupted  Alyosha,  who  had  remained  silently  listening  to
his  brother.  "Is  this  an  extravagant  fancy,  or  some  mistake  of  the
old  man,  an  impossible  quid  pro  quo?"

"Let  it  be  the  latter,  if  you  like,"  laughed  Ivan,  "since  modern
realism  has  so  perverted  your  taste  that  you  feel  unable  to  realize  any-
thing from  the  world  of  fancy.  .  .  .  Let  it  be  a  quid  pro  quo.  if  you
so  choose  it.  Again,  the  Inquisitor  is  ninety  years  old,  and  he  might
have  easily  gone  mad  with  his  one  idiefixeoi  power;  or,  it  might  have-
as  well  been  a  delirious  vision,  called  forth  by  dying  fancy,  overheated
by  the  auto-da-fe  of  the  hundred  heretics  in  that  forenoon.    .     .    .    But

416  A    MODERN    PANARIOX.

what  matters  for  the  poem,  whether  it  was  a  quid  pro  quo  or  an  uncon-
trollable fancy?  The  question  is,  that  the  old  man  has  to  open  his
heart;  that  he  must  give  out  his  thought  at  last;  and  that  the  hour  has
come  when  he  does  speak  it  out,  and  says  loudly  that  which  for  ninety
years  he  has  kept  secret  within  his  own  breast."     .     .     .

"And  his  prisoner,  does  He  never  reply?  Does  He  keep  silent,
looking  at  him,  without  saying  a  word?"

"Of  course;  and  it  could  not  well  be  otherwise,"  again  retorted  Ivan.
"The  Grand  Inquisitor  begins  from  his  very  first  words  by  telling  Him
that  He  has  no  right  to  add  one  syllable  to  that  which  He  had  said
before.  To  make  the  situation  clear  at  once,  the  above  preliminary
monologue  is  intended  to  convey  to  the  reader  the  very  fundamental
idea  which  underlies  Roman  Catholicism — as  well  as  I  can  convey  it,
his  words  mean,  in  short:  'Everything  was  given  over  by  Thee  to  the
Pope,  and  everything  now  rests  with  him  alone;  Thou  hast  no  business
to  return  and  thus  hinder  us  in  our  work.'  In  this  sense  the  Jesuits
not  only  talk  but  write  likewise.

"'Hast  thou  the  right  to  divulge  to  us  a  single  one  of  the  mysteries
of  that  world  whence  Thou  comest?'  enquires  of  Him  my  old  Inquisitor,
and  forthwith  answers  for  Him,  'Nay,  Thou  hast  no  such  right.  For,
that  would  be  adding  to  that  which  was  already  said  by  Thee  before;
hence  depriving  people  of  that  freedom  for  which  Thou  hast  so  stoutly
stood  up  while  yet  on  earth.    .  Anything  new  that  Thou  wouldst

now  proclaim  would  have  to  be  regarded  as  an  attempt  to  interfere
with  that  freedom  of  choice,  as  it  would  come  as  a  new  and  a  miraculous
revelation  superseding  the  old  revelation  of  fifteen  hundred  years  ago,
when  Thou  didst  so  repeatedly  tell  the  people:  "The  truth  shall  make
you  free."  Behold  then,  Thy  "free"  people  now!'  adds  the  old  man
with  sombre  irony.  'Yea!  .  .  .  it  has  cost  us  dearly,'  he  continues,
sternly  looking  at  his  victim.  'But  we  have  at  last  accomplished  our
task,  and — in  Thy  ?iamc.  .  .  .  For  fifteen  long  centuries  we  had  to  toil
and  suffer  owing  to  that  "freedom";  but  now  we  have  prevailed  and
our  work  is  done,  and  well  and  strongly  it  is  done.  .  .  .  Believest
not  Thou  it  is  so  very  strong?  .  .  .  And  why  shouldst  Thou  look
at  me  so  meekly  as  if  I  were  not  worthy  even  of  Thy  indignation?
.  .  .  Know  then,  that  now,  and  only  now,  Thy  people  feel  fully  sure
and  satisfied  of  their  freedom;  and  that  only  since  they  have  them-
selves and  of  their  own  free  will  delivered  that  freedom  unto  our  hands
by  placing  it  submissively  at  our  feet.     But  then,  that  is  what  we  have

THE    GRAND   INQUISITOR.  ijy

done.     Is   it  that  which   Thou  hast  striven  for?     Is  this  the  kind  of
<* freedom"  Thou  hast  promised  them?'"     .     .     .

"Now  again,  I  do  not  understand,"  interrupted  Alyosha.     "Does  the
old  man  mock  and  laugh?"

"Not  in  the  least.  He  seriously  regards  it  as  a  great  service  clone
by  himself,  his  brother  monks  and  Jesuits,  to  humanity,  to  have  con-
quered and  subjected  unto  their  authority  that  freedom,  and  boasts  that
it  was  done  but  for  the  good  of  the  world.  'For  only  now,'  he  says
(speaking  of  the  Inquisition)  'has  it  become  possible  to  us,  for  the  first
time,  to  give  a  serious  thought  to  human  happiness.  Man  is  born  a  rebel,
and  can  rebels  be  ever  happy?  .  .  .  Thou  hast  been  fairly  warned
of  it,  but  evidently  to  no  use,  since  Thou  hast  rejected  the  only  means
which  could  make  mankind  happy;  fortunately  at  Thy  departure  Thou
hast  delivered  the  task  to  us.  ,  .  .  Thou  hast  promised,  ratifying
the  pledge  by  Thy  own  words,  in  words  giving  us  the  right  to  bind  and
unbind  .  .  .  and  surely,  Thou  couldst  not  think  of  depriving  us  of
it  now!'"

"But   what   can   he   mean   by   the   words,    'Thou   hast   been    fairly
warned'?"  asked  Alexis.

"These  words  give  the  key  to  what  the  old  man  has  to  say  for  his
justification.     .     .  But  listen —

"'The  terrible  and  wise  spirit,  the  spirit  of  self-annihilation  and  non-
being,'  goes  on  the  Inquisitor,  'the  great  spirit  of  negation  conversed
with  Thee  in  the  wilderness,  and  we  are  told  that  he  "tempted"  Thee.
.  .  .  Was  it  so?  And  if  it  were  so,  then  it  is  impossible  to  utter
anything  more  truthful  that  what  is  contained  in  his  three  offers,  which
Thou  didst  reject,  and  which  are  usually  called  "temptations."  Yea;
if  ever  there  was  on  earth  a  genuine,  striking  wonder  produced,  it  was
on  that  clay  of  Thy  three  temptations,  and  it  is  precisely  in  these  three
short  sentences  that  the  marvellous  miracle  is  contained.  If  it  were
possible  that  they  should  vanish  and  disappear  for  ever,  without  leaving
any  trace,  from  the  record  and  from  the  memory  of  man,  and  that  it
should  become  necessary  again  to  devise,  invent,  and  make  them  re-
appear in  Thy  history  once  more,  thinkest  Thou  that  all  the  world's
sages,  all  the  legislators,  initiates,  philosophers  and  thinkers,  if  called
upon  to  frame  three  questions  which  should,  like  these,  besides  answer-
ing the  magnitude  of  the  event,  express  in  three  short  sentences  the
whole  future  history  of  this  our  world  and  of  mankind— dost  Thou
believe,  I  ask  Thee,  that  all  their  combined  efforts  could  ever  create

28

418  A   MODERN    PANARION.

am'thing  equal  in  power  and  depth  of  thought  to  the  three  propositions
offered  Thee  by  the  powerful  and  all-wise  spirit  in  the  wilderness?
Judging  of  them  by  their  marvellous  aptness  alone,  one  can  at  once
perceive  that  they  emanated  not  from  a  finite,  terrestrial  intellect,  but
indeed,  from  the  Eternal  and  the  Absolute.  In  these  three  offers  we
find,  blended  into  one  and  foretold  to  us,  the  complete  subsequent
history  of  man;  we  are  shown  three  images,  so  to  say,  uniting  in  them
all  the  future  axiomatic,  insoluble  problems  and  contradictions  of
human  nature,  the  world  over.  In  those  days,  the  wondrous  wisdom
contained  in  them  was  not  made  so  apparent  as  it  is  now,  for  futurity
remained  still  veiled;  but  now,  when  fifteen  centuries  have  elapsed,  we
see  that  everything  in  these  three  questions  is  so  marvellously  fore-
seen and  foretold,  that  to  add  to,  or  to  take  away  from,  the  prophecy
one  jot,  would  be  absolutely  impossible!

'"Decide  then  Thyself,'  sternly  proceeded  the  Inquisitor,  'which  of
ye  twain  was  right:  Thou  who  didst  reject,  or  he  who  offered?  Remem-
ber the  subtle  meaning  of  question  the  first,  which  runs  thus:  Wouldst
Thou  go  into  the  world  empty-handed?  Wouldst  Thou  venture  thither
with  Thy  vague  and  undefined  promise  of  freedom,  which  men,  dull
and  unruly  as  they  are  by  nature,  are  unable  so  much  as  to  understand,
which  they  avoid  and  fear? — for  never  was  there  anything  more  unbear-
able to  the  human  race  than  personal  freedom!  Dost  Thou  see  these
stones  in  the  desolate  and  glaring  wilderness?  Command  that  these
stones  be  made  bread — and  mankind  will  run  after  Thee,  obedient  and
grateful  like  a  herd  of  cattle.  But  even  then  it  will  be  ever  diffident
and  trembling,  lest  Thou  shouldst  take  away  Thy  hand,  and  they  lose
thereby  their  bread!  Thou  didst  refuse  to  accept  the  offer  for  fear  of
depriving  men  of  their  free  choice;  for  where  is  there  freedom  of
choice  where  men  are  bribed  with  bread?  Man  shall  not  live  by  bread
alone — was  Thine  answer.  Thou  knewest  not,  it  seems,  that  it  was
precisely  in  the  name  of  that  earthly  bread  that  the  terrestrial  spirit
would  one  day  rise  against,  struggle  with,  and  finally  conquer  Thee,
followed  by  the  hungry  multitudes  shouting:  "Who  is  like  unto  that
Beast,  who  maketh  fire  come  down  from  heaven  upon  the  earth!"
Knowest  Thou  not  that,  but  a  few  centuries  hence,  and  the  whole  of
mankind  will  have  proclaimed  in  its  wisdom  and  through  its  mouth-
piece, Science,  that  there  is  no  more  crime,  hence  no  more  sin  on  earth,
but  only  hungry  people?  "Feed  us  first  and  then  command  us  to  be
virtuous!"    will  be  the  words  written  upon  the  banner  lifted  against

THE    GRAND   INQUISITOR.  ^.ig

Thee — a  banner  which  shall  destroy  Thy  Church  to  its  very  founda-
tions, and  in  the  place  of  Thy  Temple  shall  raise  once  more  the  terrible
Tower  of  Babel;    and  though  its  building  be  left  unfinished,  as  was
that  of  the  first   one,   yet   the  fact  will   remain   recorded    that   Thou
couldst,  but  wouldst  not,  prevent  the  attempt  to  build  that  new  tower
by  accepting  the  offer,  and  thus  saving  mankind  a  millennium  of  use-
less suffering  on  earth.      And  it  is  to  us  that  the  people  will  return
again.      They  will  search  for  us  everywhere;    and   they  will  find  us
under  ground  in  the  catacombs,  as  we  shall  once  more  be  persecuted
and  martyred — and  they  will  begin  crying  unto  us:  "Feed  us,  for  they
who  promised  us  the  fire  from  heaven  have  deceived  us!"     It  is  then
that  we  will  finish  building  their  tower  for  them.     For  they  alone  who
feed  them  shall  finish  it,  and  we  shall  feed  them  in  Thy  name,  and
lying  to  them  that  it  is  in  that  name.     Oh,  never,  never,  will  they  learn
to  feed  themselves  without  our  help!     No  science  will  ever  give  them
bread  so  long  as  they  remain  free,  so  long  as  they  refuse  to  lay  that
freedom  at  our  feet,  and  say.  "Enslave,  but  feed  us!"     That  day  must
come  when  men  will  understand  that  freedom  and  daily  bread  enough
to  satisfy  all  are  unthinkable  and  can  never  be  had  together,  as  men
will  never  be  able  to  fairly  divide  the  two  among  themselves.     And
they  will  also  learn  that  they  can  never  be  free,  for  they  are  weak,
vicious,  miserable  nonentities  born  wicked  and  rebellious.     Thou  hast
promised  to  them  the  bread  of  life,  the  bread  of  heaven,  but  I  ask
Thee  again,  can  that  bread  ever  equal  in  the  sight  of  the  weak  and  the
vicious,  the  ever-ungrateful  human  race,  their  daily  bread  on  earth?
And  even  supposing  that  thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  follow  Thee
in  the  name  of,  and  for  the  sake  of,  Thy  heavenly  bread,  what  will
become  of  the  millions  and  hundreds  of  millions  of  human  beings  too
weak  to  scorn  the  earthly  for  the  sake  of  Thy  heavenly  bread?     Or  is
it  but  those  tens  of  thousands  chosen  among  the  great  and  the  mighty,
that  are  so  dear  to  Thee,  while  the  remaining  millions,  innumerable  as
the  grains  of  sand  in  the  seas,  the  weak  and  the  loving,  have  to  be
used  as  material  for  the  former?     No,  no!     In  our  sight  and  for  our
purpose  the  weak  and  the  lowly  are  the  more  dear  to  us.     True,  they
are  vicious  and  rebellious,  but  we  will  force  them  into  obedience,  and
it  is  they  who  will  admire  us  the  most.     They  will  regard  us  as  gods,
and  feel  grateful  to  those  who  have  consented  to  lead  the  masses  and
bear  their  burden  of  freedom   by  ruling  over  them— so  terrible  will
that  freedom  at  last  appear  to  men!     Then  we  will  tell  them  that  it  is

420  A    MODERN    PANARION.

in  obedience  to  Thy  will  and  in  Thy  name  that  we  rule  over  them.
We  will  deceive  them  once  more  and  lie  to  them  once  again — for  never,
never  more  will  we  allow  Thee  to  come  among  us.  In  this  deception
we  will  find  our  suffering,  for  we  must  needs  lie  eternally,  and  never
cease  to  lie !

"'Such  is  the  secret  meaning  of  "temptation"  the  first,  and  that  is
what  Thou  didst  reject  in  the  wilderness  for  the  sake  of  that  freedom
which  Thou  didst  prize  above  all.  Meanwhile  Thy  tempter's  offer  con-
tained another  great  world-mystery.  By  accepting  the  "bread,"  Thou
wouldst  have  satisfied  and  answered  a  universal  craving,  a  ceaseless
longing  alive  in  the  heart  of  every  individual  human  being,  lurking  in
the  breast  of  collective  mankind,  that  most  perplexing  problem — "whom
or  what  shall  we  worship?"  There  exists  no  greater  or  more  painful
anxiety  for  a  man  who  has  freed  himself  from  all  religious  bias,  than
how  he  shall  soonest  find  a  new  object  or  idea  to  worship.  But  man
seeks  to  bow  before  that  only  which  is  recognized  by  the  greater
majority,  if  not  by  all  his  fellow-men,  as  having  a  right  to  be  wor-
shipped; whose  rights  are  so  unquestionable  that  men  agree  unani-
mously to  bow  down  to  it.  For  the  chief  concern  of  these  miserable
creatures  is  not  to  find  and  worship  the  idol  of  their  own  choice,  but  to
discover  that  which  all  others  will  believe  in,  and  consent  to  bow  down
to  in  a  mass.  It  is  that  instinctive  need  of  having  a  worship  in  common
that  is  the  chief  suffering  of  every  man,  the  chief  concern  of  mankind
from  the  beginning  of  times.  It  is  for  that  universality  of  religious
worship  that  people  destroyed  each  other  by  sword.  Creating  gods
unto  themselves,  they  forthwith  began  appealing  to  each  other:  "Aban-
don yo ur  deities,  come  and  bow  down  to  ours,  or  death  to  ye  and  your
idols!"  And  so  will  they  do  till  the  end  of  this  world;  they  will  do  so
even  then,  when  all  the  gods  themselves  have  disappeared,  for  then
men  will  prostrate  themselves  before  and  worship  some  idea.  Thou
didst  know,  Thou  couldst  not  be  ignorant  of,  that  mysterious  funda-
mental principle  in  human  nature,  and  still  Thou  hast  rejected  the
only  absolute  banner  offered  Thee,  to  which  all  the  nations  would
remain  true,  and  before  which  all  would  have  bowed — the  banner  of
earthly  bread,  rejected  in  the  name  of  freedom  and  of  "bread  in  the
kingdom  of  God"!  Behold,  then,  what  Thou  hast  done  furthermore
for  that  "freedom's"  sake!  I  repeat  to  Thee,  man  has  no  greater
anxiety  in  life  than  to  find  some  one  to  whom  he  can  make  over  that
gift  of  freedom  with  which  the  unfortunate  creature  is  born.     But  he

THE    GRAM)    INQUISITOR.  ,  2  ,

alone  will  prove  capable  of  silencing  and  quieting  their  consciences
that  shall  succeed  in  possessing  himself  of  the  freedom  of  men.  With
"daily  bread"  an  irresistible  power  was  offered  Thee:  show  a  man
"bread"  and  he  will  follow  Thee,  for  what  can  he  resist  less  than  the
attraction  of  bread?  but  if,  at  the  same  time,  another  succeed  in
possessing  himself  of  his  conscience — oh!  then  even  Thy  bread  will
be  forgotten,  and  man  will  follow  him  who  seduced  his  conscience.  So
far  Thou  wert  right.  For  the  mystery  of  human  being  does  not  solely
rest  in  the  desire  to  live,  but  in  the  problem — for  what  should  one  live
at  all?  Without  a  clear  perception  of  his  reasons  for  living,  man  will
never  consent  to  live,  and  will  rather  destroy  himself  than  tarry  on
earth,  though  he  be  surrounded  with  bread.  This  is  the  truth.  But
what  has  happened?  Instead  of  getting  hold  of  man's  freedom,  Thou
hast  enlarged  it  still  more!  Hast  Thou  again  forgotten  that  to  man  rest
and  even  death  are  preferable  to  a  free  choice  between  the  knowledge
of  Good  and  Evil?  Nothing  seems  more  seductive  in  his  eyes  than
freedom  of  conscience,  and  nothing  proves  more  painful.  And  behold  !
instead  of  lajung  a  firm  foundation  whereon  to  rest  once  for  all  man's
conscience,  Thou  hast  chosen  to  stir  up  in  him  all  that  is  abnormal,
mysterious,  and  indefinite,  all  that  is  beyond  human  strength,  and  hast
acted  as  if  Thou  never  hadst  any  love  for  him,  and  yet  Thou  wert  He
who  came  to  "lay  down  His  life  for  His  friends"!  Thou  hast  burdened
man's  soul  with  anxieties  hitherto  unknown  to  him.  Thirsting  for
human  love  freely  given,  seeking  to  enable  man,  seduced  and  charmed
by  Thee,  to  follow  Thy  path  of  his  own  free-will,  instead  of  the  old  and
wise  law  which  held  him  in  subjection,  Thou  hast  given  him  the  right
henceforth  to  choose  and  freely  decide  what  is  good  and  bad  for  him,
guided  but  by  Thine  image  in  his  heart.  But  hast  Thou  never  dreamt
of  the  probability,  nay,  of  the  certainty,  of  that  same  man  one  day
rejecting  finally,  and  controverting  even  Thine  image  and  Thy  truth.
once  he  would  find  himself  laden  with  such  a  terrible  burden  as  freedom
of  choice?  That  a  time  would  surely  come  when  men  would  exclaim
that  Truth  and  Light  cannot  be  in  Thee,  for  no  one  could  have  left
them  in  a  greater  perplexity  and  mental  suffering  than  Thou  hast
done,  lading  them  with  so  main-  cares  and  insoluble  problems  Thus,
it  is  Thyself  who  hast  laid  the  foundation  for  the  destruction  of  Thine
own  kingdom  and  no  one  but  Thou  is  to  be  blamed  lor  it.

'"Meantime,  every  chance  of  success  was  offered  Thee.     There  are
three  Powers,  three  unique  Forces  upon  earth,  capable  of  conquering

422  A   MODERN    PANARION.

for  ever  by  charming  the  conscience  of  these  weak  rebels — men — for
their  own  good;  and  these  Forces  are:  Miracle,  Mystery  and  Authority.
Thou  hast  rejected  all  the  three,  and  thus  wert  the  first  to  set  them  an
example.  When  the  terrible  and  all-wise  spirit  placed  Thee  on  a
pinnacle  of  the  temple  and  said  unto  Thee,  "If  Thou  be  the  son  of
God,  cast  Thyself  down,  for  it  is  written,  He  shall  give  His  angels
charge  concerning  Thee:  and  in  their  hands  they  shall  bear  Thee  up,
lest  at  any  time  Thou  dash  Thy  foot  against  a  stone!" — for  thus  Thy
faith  in  Thy  father  should  have  been  made  evident,  Thou  didst  refuse
to  accept  his  suggestion  and  didst  not  follow  it.  Oh,  undoubtedly,
Thou  didst  act  in  this  with  all  the  magnificent  pride  of  a  god,  but  then
men — that  weak  and  rebel  race — are  they  also  gods,  to  understand  Thy
refusal?  Of  course,  Thou  didst  well  know  that  by  taking  one  single
step  forward,  by  making  the  slightest  motion  to  throw  Thyself  down,
Thou  wouldst  have  tempted  "the  Lord  Thy  God,"  lost  suddenly  all
faith  in  Him,  and  dashed  Thyself  to  atoms  against  that  same  earth
which  Thou  earnest  to  save,  and  thus  wouldst  have  allowed  the  wise
spirit  which  tempted  Thee  to  triumph  and  rejoice.  But,  then,  how
many  such  as  Thee  are  to  be  found  on  this  globe,  I  ask  Thee?  Couldst
Thou  ever  for  a  moment  imagine  that  men  would  have  the  same
strength  to  resist  such  a  temptation?  Is  human  nature  calculated  to
reject  miracle,  and  trust,  during  the  most  terrible  moments  in  life,
when  the  most  momentous,  painful  and  perplexing  problems  struggle
within  man's  soul,  to  the  free  decisions  of  his  heart  for  the  true  solu-
tion? Oh,  Thou  knewest  well  that  that  action  of  Thine  would  remain
recorded  in  books  for  ages  to  come,  reaching  to  the  confines  of  the
globe,  and  Thy  hope  was,  that  following  Thy  example,  man  would
remain  true  to  his  God,  without  needing  any  miracle  to  keep  his  faith
alive!  But  Thou  knewest  not,  it  seems,  that  no  sooner  would  man
reject  miracle  than  he  would  reject  God  likewise,  for  he  seeketh  less
God  than  "a  sign"  from  Him.  And  thus,  as  it  is  beyond  the  power  of
man  to  remain  without  miracles,  so,  rather  than  live  without,  he  will
create  for  himself  new  wonders  of  his  own  making;  and  he  will  bow
to  and  worship  the  soothsayer's  miracles,  the  old  witch's  sorcery,  were
he  a  rebel,  a  heretic,  and  an  atheist  a  hundred  times  over.  Thy  refusal
to  come  down  from  the  cross  when  people,  mocking  and  wagging  their
heads  were  saying  to  Thee — "Save  Thyself  if  Thou  be  the  son  of  God,
and  we  will  believe  in  Thee,"  was  due  to  the  same  determination — not
to  enslave  man  through  miracle,  but  to  obtain  faith  in  Thee  freely  and

THE    GRAND   INQUISITOR.  423

apart  from  any  miraculous  influence.  Thou  thirstest  for  free  and  un-
influenced love,  and  refusest  the  passionate  adoration  of  the  slave
before  a  Potency  which  would  have  subjected  his  will  once  for  ever.
Thou  judgest  of  men  too  highly  here,  again,  for,  though  rebels  they  be,
they  are  born  slaves  and  nothing  more.  Behold,  and  judge  of  them
once  more,  now  that  fifteen  centuries  have  elapsed  since  that  moment.
Look  at  them,  whom  Thou  didst  try  to  elevate  unto  Thee!  I  swear
man  is  weaker  and  lower  than  Thou  hast  ever  imagined  him  to  be!
Can  he  ever  do  that  which  Thou  art  said  to  have  accomplished?  By
valuing  him  so  highly  Thou  hast  acted  as  if  there  were  no  love  for  him
in  Thine  heart,  for  Thou  hast  demanded  of  him  more  than  he  could
ever  give — Thou,  who  lovest  him  more  than  Thyself!  Hadst  Thou
esteemed  him  less,  less  wouldst  Thou  have  demanded  of  him,  and  that
would  have  been  more  like- love,  for  his  burden  would  have  been  made
thereby  lighter.  Man  is  weak  and  cowardly.  What  matters  it,  if  he
now  riots  and  rebels  throughout  the  world  against  our  will  and  power,
and  prides  himself  upon  that  rebellion?  It  is  but  the  petty  pride  and
vanity  of  a  school-boy.  It  is  the  rioting  of  little  children,  getting  up
a  mutiny  in  the  class-room  and  driving  their  schoolmaster  out  of  it.
But  it  will  not  last  long,  and  when  the  day  of  their  triumph  is  over,
.hey  will  have  to  pay  dearly  for  it.  They  will  destroy  the  temples  and
raze  them  to  the  ground,  flooding  the  earth  with  blood.  But  the  foolish
children  will  have  to  learn  some  day  that,  rebels  though  they  be  and
riotous  from  nature,  they  are  too  weak  to  maintain  the  spirit  of  mutiny
for  any  length  of  time.  Suffused  with  idiotic  tears,  they  will  confess
that  He  who  created  them  rebellious  undoubtedly  did  so  but  to  mock
them.  They  will  pronounce  these  words  in  despair,  and  such  blas-
phemous utterances  will  but  add  to  their  misery — for  human  nature
cannot  endure  blasphemy,  and  takes  her  own  revenge  in  the  end.

'"And  thus,  after  all  Thou  hast  suffered  for  mankind  and  its  free-
dom, the  present  fate  of  men  may  be  summed  up  in  three  words:
Unrest,  Confusion,  Misery!  Thy  great  prophet  John  records  in  his
vision,  that  he  saw,  during  the  first  resurrection  of  the  chosen  servants
of  God — "the  number  of  them  which  were  sealed"  in  their  foreheads,
"twelve  thousand"  of  every  tribe.  But  were  they,  indeed,  as  many?
Then  they  must  have  been  gods,  not  men.  They  had  shared  Tin-
Cross  for  long  years,  suffered  scores  of  years'  hunger  and  thirst  in
dreary  wildernesses  and  deserts,  feeding  upon  locusts  and  roots — and
of  these  children  of  free  love  for  Thee,  and  self-sacrifice  in  Thy  name,

424  A    MODERN    PANARION.

Thou  mayest  well  feel  proud.  But  remember  that  these  are  but  a  few
thousands — of  gods,  not  men;  and  how  about  all  others?  And  why
should  the  weakest  be  held  guilty  for  not  being  able  to  endure  what
the  strongest  have  endured?  Why  should  a  soul  incapable  of  contain-
ing such  terrible  gifts  be  punished  for  its  weakness?  Didst  Thou  really
come  to,  and  for,  the  "elect"  alone?  If  so,  then  the  mystery  will
remain  for  ever  mysterious  to  our  finite  minds.  And  if  a  mystery,
then  were  we  right  to  proclaim  it  as  one,  and  preach  it,  teaching  them
that  neither  their  freely  given  love  to  Thee  nor  freedom  of  conscience
were  essential,  but  only  that  incomprehensible  mystery  which  they
must  blindly  obey  even  agai?ist  the  dictates  of  their  conscience.  Thus
did  we.  We  corrected  and  improved  Thy  teaching  and  based  it  upon
"Miracle,  Mystery,  and  Authority."  And  men  rejoiced  at  finding
themselves  led  once  more  like  a  herd  of  cattle,  and  at  finding  their
hearts  at  last  delivered  of  the  terrible  burden  laid  upon  them  by  Thee,
which  caused  them  so  much  suffering.  Tell  me,  were  we  right  in
doing  as  we  did?  Did  not  we  show  our  great  love  for  humanity,  by
realizing  in  such  a  humble  spirit  its  helplessness,  by  so  mercifully
lightening  its  great  burden,  and  by  permitting  and  remitting  for  its
weak  nature  every  sin,  provided  it  be  committed  with  our  authoriza-
tion? For  what,  then,  hast  Thou  come  again  to  trouble  us  in  our
work?  And  whj^  lookest  Thou  at  me  so  penetratingly  with  Thy  meek
eyes,  and  in  such  a  silence?  Rather  shouldst  Thou  feel  wroth,  for  I
need  not  Thy  love,  I  reject  it,  and  love  Thee  not,  myself.  Why  should
I  conceal  the  truth  from  Thee?  I  know  but  too  well  with  whom  I  am
now  talking!  What  I  had  to  say  was  known  to  Thee  before,  I  read  it
in  Thine  eye.  How  should  I  conceal  from  Thee  our  secret?  If  per-
chance Thou  wouldst  hear  it  from  my  own  lips,  then  listen:  We  are
not  with  Thee,  but  with  him,  and  that  is  our  secret!  For  centuries  have
we  abandoned  Thee  to  follow  him,  yes — eight  centuries.  Eight  hun-
dred j^ears  now  since  we  accepted  from  him  the  gift  rejected  by  Thee
with  indignation;  that  last  gift  which  he  offered  Thee  from  the  high
mountain,  when,  showing  all  the  kingdoms  of  the  world  and  the  glory
of  them,  he  saith  unto  Thee:  "All  these  things  will  I  give  Thee,  if
Thou  wilt  fall  down  and  worship  me!"  We  took  Rome  from  him  and
the  glaive  of  Caesar,  and  declared  ourselves  alone  the  kings  of  this
earth,  its  sole  kings,  though  our  work  is  not  yet  fully  accomplished.
But  who  is  to  blame  for  it?  Our  work  is  but  in  its  incipient  stage,  but
it  is  nevertheless  started.    We  may  have  long  to  wait  until  its  culmina-

THE    GRAND    INQUISITOR.  425

tion,  and  mankind  have  to  suffer  much,  but  we  shall  reach  the  goal
some  da>-,  and  become  sole  Caesars,  and  then  will  be  the  time  to  think
of  universal  happiness  for  men.

"'Thou  couldst  accept  the  glaive  of  Caesar  Thyself;  why  didst  Thou
reject  the  offer?     By  accepting  from  the  powerful  spirit  his  third  offer
Thou  wouldst  have  realized  every  aspiration  man  seeketh  for  himself
on  earth;  man  would  have  found  a  constant  object  for  worship;  one  to
deliver  his  conscience  up  to,  and  one  that  should  unite  all  together
into  one  common  and  harmonious  ant-hill;  for  an  innate  necessity  for
universal  union  constitutes  the  third  and  final  affliction  of  mankind.
Humanity  as   a  whole   has   ever   aspired   to   unite  itself  universally.
Many  were  the  great  nations  with  great  histories,  but  the  greater  they
were,  the  more  unhappy  they  felt,  as  they  felt  the  stronger  necessity
of  a  universal  union  among  men.     Great  conquerors,  like  Timoor  and
Tchengis-Khan,  passed  like  a  cyclone  upon  the  face  of  the  earth  in  their
efforts  to  conquer  the  universe,  but  even  they,  albeit  unconsciously,
expressed  the  same  aspiration  towards  universal  and  common  union.
In  accepting  the  kingdom  of  the  world  and  Caesar's  purple,  one  would
found  a  universal  kingdom  and  secure  to  mankind  eternal  peace.     And
who  can  rule  mankind  better  than  those  who  have  possessed  themselves
of  man's  conscience,  and  hold  in  their  hand  man's  daily  bread?    Having
accepted  Caesar's  glaive  and  purple,  we  had,  of  course,  but  to  deny
Thee,  to  henceforth  follow  him   alone.     Oh,   centuries  of  intellectual
riot  and   rebellious  free-thought  are  yet  before  us,  and  their  science
will  end  by  anthropophagy,  for  having  begun  to  build  their  Babylonian
tower  without  our  help  they  will  have  to  end  by  anthropophagy.     But
it  is  precisely  at  that  time  that  the  Beast  will  crawl  up  to  us  in   full
submission,  and  lick  the  soles  of  our  feet,  and  sprinkle  them  with  tears
of  blood.    And  we  shall  sit  upon  the  scarlet-coloured  Beast,  and  lifting
up  high  the  golden  cup  "full  of  abomination  and  filthiness,"  shall  show-
written  upon  it  the  word  "Mystery"!     But  it  is  only  then  that  men
will  see  the  beginning  of  a  kingdom  of  peace  and  happiness.     Thou
art  proud  of  Thine  own  elect,  but  Thou   hast  none  other  but  these
elect,  and  we— we  will  give  rest  to  all.     But  that  is  not  the  end.     Mam-
are  those  anions:  Thine  elect  and  the  labourers  of  Thy  vineyard,  who,
tired  of  waiting  for  Thy  coming,   already  have  carried  and  will   yet
carry,  the  great   fervour  of  their  hearts   and   their  spiritual   strength
into  another  field,  and  will  end  by  lifting  up  against  Thee  Thine  own
banner  of  freedom.     But  it  is  Thyself  Thou  hast  to  thank.     Under  our

426  A    MODERN    PANARION.

rule  and  sway  all  will  be  happy,  and  will  neither  rebel  nor  destroy  each
other  as  they  did  while  under  Thy  free  banner.     Oh,  we  will  take  good
care  to  prove  to  them  that  they  will  become  absolutely  free  only  when
they  have  abjured  their  freedom  in  our  favour  and  submit  to  us  abso-
lutely.    Thinkest  Thou  we  shall  be   right  or  still  lying?     They  will
convince  themselves  of  our  Tightness,  for  they  will  see  what  a  depth  of
degrading  slavery  and  strife  that  liberty  of  Thine  has  led  them  into.
Liberty,  Freedom  of  Thought  and  Conscience,  and  Science  will  lead
them  into  such  impassable  chasms,  place  them  face  to  face  before  such
wonders  and  insoluble  mysteries,  that  some  of  them — more  rebellious
and  ferocious  than  the  rest — will  destroy  themselves;  others — rebellious
but  weak — will  destroy  each  other;  while  the  remainder,  weak,  helpless
and  miserable,  will  crawl  back  to  our  feet  and  cry:   "Yes;  right  were
ye,  oh   Fathers  of  Jesus;  ye  alone  are  in  possession  of  His  1113-stery,
and  we  return  to  you,  praying  that  ye  save  us  from  ourselves!"     Re-
ceiving their  bread  from  us,  they  will  clearly  see  that  we  take  the  bread
from  them,  the  bread  made  by  their  own  hands,  but  to  give  it  back  to
them  in  equal  shares  and  that  without  any  miracle;  and  having  ascer-
tained that,  though  we  have  not  changed  stones  into  bread,  yet  bread
they  have,  while  every  other  bread  turned  verily  in  their  own  hands  into
stones,  they  will  be  only  too  glad  to  have  it  so      Until  that  day,  they
will  never  be  happy.    And  who  is  it  that  helped  the  most  to  blind  them,
tell  me?     Who  separated  the  flock  and  scattered  it  over  ways  unknown
if  it  be  not  Thee?     But  we  will  gather  the  sheep  once  more  and  subject
them  to  our  will  for  ever.     We  will  prove  to  them  their  own  weakness
and  make  them  humble  again,  whilst  with  Thee  they  have  learnt  but
pride,  for  Thou  hast  made  more  of  them  than  they  ever  were  worth.
We  will  give  them  that  quiet,  humble  happiness,  which  alone  benefits
such  weak,  foolish  creatures  as  they  are,  and  having  once  had  proved
to  them  their  weakness,   they  will   become  timid  and    obedient,  and
gather  around  us  as  chickens  around  their  hen.     They  will  wonder  at
and  feel  a  superstitious  admiration  for  us,  and  feel  proud  to  be  led  by
men  so  powerful  and  wise  that  a  handful  of  them  can  subject  a  flock  a
thousand  millions  strong.     Gradually  men  will  begin  to  fear  us.     They
will  nervously  dread  our  slightest  anger,  their  intellects  will  weaken,
their  eyes  become  as  easily  accessible  to  tears  as  those  of  children  and
women;  but  we  will  teach  them  an  easy  transition  from  grief  and  tears
to  laughter,  childish  joy  and  mirthful  song.     Yes;  we  will  make  them
work  like  slaves,  but  during  their  recreation  hours  they  shall  have  an

THK    GRAND    INQUISITOR.  ^2J

innocent  child-like  life,  full  of  play  and  merry  laughter.     We  will  even
permit  than  sin,  for,  weak  and  helpless,  they  will  feel  the  more  love  for
us  for  permitting-  them  to  indulge  in  it.     We  will  tell  them  that  every
kind  of  sin  will  be  remitted  to  them,  so  long  as  it  is  done  with  our  per-
mission; that  we  take  all  these  sins  upon  ourselves,  for  we  so  love  the
world,  that  we  are  even  willing  to  sacrifice  our  souls  for  its  satisfaction.
And,  appearing  before  them  in  the  light  of  their  scapegoats  and  re-
deemers, we  shall  be  adored  the  more  for  it.     They  will  have  no  secrets
from  us.     It  will  rest  with  us  to  permit  them  to  live  with  their  wives
and  concubines,  or  to  forbid  them,  to  have  children  or  remain  childless,
either  way  depending  on  the  degree  of  their  obedience  to  us;  and  they
will  submit  most  joyfully  to  us.     The  most  agonizing  secrets  of  their
souls — all,  all  will  they  lay  down  at  our  feet,  and  we  will  authorize  and
remit  them  all  in  Thy  name,  and  they  will  believe  us  and  accept  our
mediation  with  rapture,   as  it  will  deliver  them    from   their  greatest
anxiety  and  torture — that  of  having  to  decide  freely  for  themselves.
And  all  will  be  happy,  all  except  the  one  or  two  hundred  thousands  of
their  rulers.     For  it  is  but  we,  we  the  keepers  of  the  great  Mystery  who
will   be   miserable.      There  will   be    thousands   of  millions   of   happy
infants,    and   one   hundred   thousand    martyrs   who   have  taken   upon
themselves  the  curse  of  knowledge  of  good  and  evil.     Peaceable  will
be  their  end,  and  peacefully  will  they  die,  in  Thy  name,  to  find  behind
the  portals  of  the  grave — but  death.     But  we  will  keep  the  secret  in-
violate, and  deceive  them  for  their  own  good  with  the  mirage  of  life
eternal  in  Thy  kingdom.     For,   were   there   really  anything   like  life
beyond  the  grave,  surely  it  would  never  fall  to  the  lot  of  such  as  they!
People  tell  us  and  prophesy  of  Thy  coming  and  triumphing  once  more
on   earth;    of  Thy  appearing  with   the  army  of  Thy  elect,   with  Thy
proud  and  mighty  ones;  but  we  will  answer  Thee  that  they  have  saved
but  themselves  while  we  have  saved  all.     We  are  also  threatened  with
the  great  disgrace  which  awaits   the  whore,  "Babylon  the  great,  the
mother  of  harlots" — who  sits  upon  the  Beast,  holding  in  her  hands  the
Mystery,  the  wTord  written  upon  her  forehead;  and  we  are  told  that  the
weak  ones,  the  lambs  shall  rebel  against  her  and  shall  make  her  deso-
late and  naked.     But  then  will  I  arise,  and  point  out  to  Thee  the  thou-
sands of  millions  of  happy  infants  free  from   any  sin.     And   we  who
have  taken  their  sins  upon  us,  for  their  own   good,  shall  stand   before
Thee  and  say:   "Judge  us  if  Thou  canst  and  darest!"      Know  then  that
I  fear  Thee  not.     Know  that  I  too  have  lived  in  the  dreary  wilderness,

428  A   MODERN    PANARION.

where  I  fed  upon  locusts  and  roots,  that  I  too  have  blessed  the  freedom
with  which  Thou  hast  blessed  men,  and  that  I  too  have  once  prepared
to  join  the  ranks  of  Thy  elect,  the  proud  and  the  mighty.  But  I  awoke
from  my  delusion  and  refused  since  then  to  serve  insanity.  I  returned
to  join  the  legion  of  those  w/10  corrected  Thy  mistakes.  I  left  the  proud
and  returned  to  the  really  humble,  and  for  their  own  happiness.  What
I  now  tell  Thee  will  come  to  pass,  and  our  kingdom  shall  be  built,  I
tell  Thee,  not  later  than  to-morrow.  Thou  shalt  see  that  obedient
flock  which  at  one  simple  motion  of  my  hand  will  rush  to  add  burning
coals  to  Thy  stake,  on  which  I  will  burn  Thee  for  having  dared  to  come
and  trouble  us  in  our  work.  For,  if  there  ever  was  one  who  deserved
more  than  any  of  the  others  our  inquisitorial  fires — it  is  Thee!  To-
morrow  I  will  burn  Thee.     Dixi?"

Ivan  paused.     He  had  entered   into   the  situation  and  had    spoken
with  great  animation,  but  now  he  suddenly  burst  out  laughing.

"But   all   that  is   absurd!"    suddenly   exclaimed  Alyosha,   who   had
hitherto   listened   perplexed    and    agitated    but   in    profound    silence.
"Your  poem   is  a  glorification   of  Christ,  not  an   accusation,  as  you,
perhaps,  meant  it  to  be.     And  who  will  believe  you  when  you  speak  of
'freedom'?     Is  it  thus  that  we  Christians   must  understand  it?     It  is
Rome  (not  all  Rome,  for  that  would  be  unjust),  but  the  worst  of  the
Roman  Catholics,  the  Inquisitors  and  the  Jesuits,  that  you  have  been
exposing!     Your  Inquisitor  is  an  impossible  character.    What  are  these
sins  they  are  taking  upon    themselves?     Who    are   those    keepers   of
mystery  who  took  upon  themselves  a  curse  for  the  good  of  mankind?
Who  ever  met  them?     We  all  know  the  Jesuits,  and  no  one  has  a  good
word  to  say  in  their  favour;  but  when  were  they  as  you  depict  them?
Never,  never!     The  Jesuits  are  merely  a  Romish  army  making  ready
for  their  future  temporal  kingdom,  with  a  mitred  emperor — a  Roman
high  priest  at  their  head.     That  is  their  ideal  and  object,  without  any
mystery  or  elevated  suffering.     The  most  prosaic  thirsting  for  power,
for  the  sake  of  the  mean  and  earthly  pleasures  of  life,  a  desire  to  en-
slave their  fellow-men,  something  like  our  late  system  of  serfs,  with
themselves  at  the  head  as  landed  proprietors — that  is  all  that  they  can
be  accused  of.     They  may  not  believe  in  God,  that  is  also  possible,  but
your  suffering  Inquisitor  is  simply — a  fancy!"

"Hold,  hold!"  interrupted  Ivan,  smiling.  "Do  not  be  so  excited.  A
fancy,  you  say;  be  it  so!  Of  course,  it  is  a  fancy.  But  stop.  Do  you
really  imagine  that  all  this  Catholic  movement  during  the  last  centuries

THE    GRAND    INOriSITOR.

429

is  naught  but  a  desire  for  power  for  the  mere  purpose  of  'mean  plea-
sures'?    Is  this  what  your  Father  Pai'ssiy  taught  you?"

"No,  no,  quite  the  reverse,  for  Father  Pafssiy  ouee  told  me  some-
thing very  similar  to  what  you  yourself  say,  though,  of  course,  not
that.     Something  quite  different,"  suddenly  added  Alexis,  blushing,

"A  precious  piece  of  information,  notwithstanding  your  'not  that.'
I  ask  you,  why  should  the  Inquisitors  and  the  Jesuits  of  your  imagina-
tion live  but  for  the  attainment  of  'mean  material  pleasures'?  Why
should  there  not  be  found  among  them  one  single  genuine  martyr,
suffering  under  a  great  and  holy  idea  and  loving  humanity  with  all  his
heart?  Now  let  us  suppose  that  among  all  these  Jesuits  thirsting  and
hungering  but  after  'mean  material  pleasures'  there  may  be  one,  just
one  like  my  old  Inquisitor,  who  had  himself  fed  upon  roots  in  the
wilderness,  suffered  the  tortures  of  damnation  while  trying  to  conquer
flesh,  in  order  to  become  free  and  perfect,  but  who  had  never  ceased  to
love  humanity,  and  who  one  day  prophetically  beheld  the  truth;  who
saw  as  plain  as  he  could  see  that  the  bulk  of  humanity  could  never  be
happy  under  the  old  system,  that  it  was  not  for  them  that  the  great
Idealist  had  come  and  died  and  dreamt  of  His  Universal  Harmony.
Having  realized  that  truth,  he  returned  into  the  world  and  joined —
intelligent  and  practical  people.     Is  this  so  impossible?"

"Joined  whom?  What  intelligent  and  practical  people?"  exclaimed
Alyosha  quite  excited.  "Why  should  they  be  more  intelligent  than
other  men,  and  what  secrets  and  mysteries  can  they  have?  They  have
neither.  Atheism  and  infidelity  is  all  the  secret  they  have.  Your
Inquisitor  does  not  believe  in  God,  and  that  is  all  the  Mystery  there  is
in  it!"

"It  may  be  so.  You  have  guessed  rightly  there.  And  it  is  so,  and
that  is  his  whole  secret;  but  is  this  not  the  acutest  of  sufferings  for
such  a  man  as  he,  who  killed  all  his  young  life  in  asceticism  in  the
desert,  and  yet  could  not  cure  himself  of  his  love  toward  his  fellow-
men?  Toward  the  end  of  his  life  he  becomes  convinced  that  it  is  only
by  following  the  advice  of  the  great  and  terrible  spirit  that  the  fate
of  these  millions  of  weak  rebels,  these  'hall-finished  samples  of
humanity  created  in  mockery'  can  be  made  tolerable.  And  once  con-
vinced of  it,  he  sees  as  clearly  that  to  achieve  that  object,  one  must
follow  blindly  the  guidance  of  the  wise  spirit,  the  fearful  spirit  of
death  and  destruction,  hence  accept  a  system  of  lies  and  deception
and  lead  humanity  consciously  this  time  toward  death  and  destruction,

430  A   MODERN   PANARION.

and  moreover,  be  deceiving  them  all  the  while  in  order  to  prevent
them  from  realizing  where  they  are  being  led,  and  so  force  the  miser-
able blind  men  to  feel  happy,  at  least  while  here  on  earth.  And  note
this:  a  wholesale  deception  in  the  name  of  Him,  in  whose  ideal  the
old  man  had  so  passionately,  so  fervently,  believed  during  nearly  his
whole  life!  Is  this  no  suffering?  And  were  such  a  solitary  exception
found  amidst,  and  at  the  head  of,  that  army  'that  thirsts  for  power  but
for  the  sake  of  the  mean  pleasures  of  life,'  think  you  one  such  man
would  not  suffice  to  bring  on  a  tragedy?  Moreover,  one  single  man
like  my  Inquisitor  as  a  principal  leader,  would  prove  sufficient  to  dis-
cover the  real  guiding  idea  of  the  Romish  system  with  all  its  armies  of
Jesuits,  the  greatest  and  chiefest  agents  of  that  system.  And  I  tell
you  that  it  is  my  firm  conviction  that  the  solitary  type  described  in  my
poem  has  at  no  time  ever  disappeared  from  among  the  chief  leaders  of
that  movement.  Who  knows  but  that  terrible  old  man,  loving  humanity
so  stubbornly  and  in  such  an  original  way,  exists  even  in  our  days  in
the  shape  of  a  whole  host  of  such  solitary  exceptions,  whose  existence
is  not  due  to  mere  chance,  but  to  a  well-defined  association  born  of
mutual  consent,  to  a  secret  league,  organized  several  centuries  back,
in  order  to  guard  the  Mystery  from  the  indiscreet  eyes  of  the  miserable
and  weak  people,  and  only  in  view  of  their  own  happiness?  And  so  it
is;  it  cannot  be  otherwise.  I  suspect  that  even  Masons  have  some  such
Mystery  underlying  the  basis  of  their  organization,  and  that  it  is  just
the  reason  why  the  Roman  Catholic  clergy  hate  them  so,  dreading  to
find  in  them  rivals,  competition,  the  dismemberment  of  the  unity  of
the  idea,  for  the  realization  of  which  one  flock  and  one  Shepherd  are
needed.  However,  in  defending  my  idea,  I  look  like  an  author  whose
production  is  unable  to  stand  criticism.     Enough  of  this."

"You  are,  perhaps,  a  Mason  yourself!"  exclaimed  Alyosha.  "You
do  not  believe  in  God,"  he  added,  with  a  note  of  profound  sadness  in
his  voice.  But  suddenly  remarking  that  his  brother  was  looking  at
him  with  mockery,  "How  do  you  mean  then  to  bring  your  poem  to  a
close?"  he  unexpectedly  enquired,  casting  his  eyes  downward,  "or
does  it  break  off  here?"

"My  intention  is  to  end  it  with  the  following  scene:  Having  disbur-
dened his  heart,  the  Inquisitor  waits  for  some  time  to  hear  his  prisoner
speak  in  His  turn.  His  silence  weighs  upon  him.  He  has  seen  that
his  captive  has  been  attentively  listening  to  him  all  the  time,  with  His
eyes  fixed  penetratingly  and  softly  on  the  face  of  his  jailer,  and  evi-

THE   GRAND   INQUISITOR.  43!

dently  bent  upon  not  replying  to  him.  The  old  man  longs  to  hear  His
voice,  to  hear  Him  reply;  better  words  of  bitterness  and  scorn  than
His  silence.  Suddenly  He  rises;  slowly  and  silently  approaching  the
Inquisitor,  He  bends  towards  him  and  softly  kisses  the  bloodless,
four-score-and-ten-year-old  lips.  That  is  all  the  answer.  The  Grand
Inquisitor  shudders.  There  is  a  convulsive  twitch  at  the  corner  of  his
mouth.  He  goes  to  the  door,  opens  it,  and  addressing  Him,  'Go,'  he
says,  'go,  and  return  no  more  ...  do  not  come  again  .  .  .  never,
never!'  and — lets  Him  out  into  the  dark  night.  The  prisoner
vanishes."

"And  the  old  man?"

"The  kiss  burns  his  heart,  but  the  old  man  remains  firm  in  his  own
ideas  and  unbelief."

"And  you,  together  with  him?  You  too!"  despairingly  exclaimed
Alyosha,  while  Ivan  burst  into  a  still  louder  fit  of  laughter.

THE  BRIGHT  SPOT  OF  LIGHT.

[Vol.  III.  No.  2,  November,  i88r.]

[Madame, — In  the  last  issue  of  your  valuable  journal,  a  member  of  the  New
York  Theosophieal  Society  seeks  to  he  enlightened  as  to  the  cause  of  a  bright  spot
of  light  which  he  has  often  seen.  I  also  am  equally  curious  to  have  an  explanation.
I  attribute  it  to  the  highest  concentration  of  the  soul.  As  soon  as  I  place  myself  in
that  prescribed  attitude,  suddenly  a  bright  spot  appears  before  me  which  fills  my
heart  with  delight,  this  being  regarded  as  a  special  sign  by  the  Indian  devotee  that
he  is  in  the  right  path,  leading  to  ultimate  success  in  the  Yoga  practice,  that  he  is
blessed  by  the  special  grace  of  the  Almighty.

One  evening,  sitting  on  the  ground  cross-legged,  in  that  state  of  concentration
when  the  soul  soars  into  high  regions,  I  was  blessed  with  a  shower  of  flowers — a
most  brilliant  sight,  which  I  long  to  see  again.  I  tried  to  catch  at  flowers  so  rare,
but  they  eluded  my  grasp  and  suddenly  disappeared,  leaving  me  much  disappointed.
Finally  two  flowers  fell  on  me,  one  touching  my  head  and  the  other  my  right
shoulder,  but  this  time  also  the  attempt  to  seize  them  was  unsuccessful.  What
can  it  be,  if  not  a  response  that  God  has  been  pleased  with  his  worshipper,  medita-
tion being,  I  believe,  the  unique  way  of  spiritual  worship.

P.

September  iSth,  i88i.~\

It  depends.  Those  of  our  orthodox  native  contributors  who  worship
some  particular  God — or,  if  they  so  prefer,  the  one  Ishvara  under  some
particular  name — are  too  apt  to  attribute  every  psychological  effect,
induced  by  mental  concentration  during  the  hours  of  religious  medita-
tion, to  their  special  deity,  whereas,  in  ninety-nine  cases  out  of  one
hundred,  such  effects  are  due  simply  to  purely  psycho-physiological
effects.  We  know  a  number  of  mystically-inclined  people  who  see
such  "lights"  as  that  described  above  as  soon  as  they  concentrate
their  thoughts.  Spiritualists  attribute  them  to  the  agency  of  their
departed  friends;  Buddhists  (who  have  no  personal  God)  to  a  pre-
nirvanic  state;  Pantheists  and  Vedantins  to  Maya — or  the  illusion  of
the  senses;  and  Christians — to  a  foresight  of  the  glories  of  Paradise.
The  modern  Occultists  say  that,  when  not  directly  due  to  cerebral
action,  the  normal  functions  of  which  are  certainly  impeded  by  such

THE    BRIGHT   SPOT   OF   LIGHT.  433

an  artificial  mode  of  deep  concentration — these  lights  are  glimpses  of
the  Astral  Light,  or,  to  use  a  more  "scientific"  expression,  of  the
"  Universal  Ether,"  firmly  believed  in  by  more  than  one  man  of  science,
as  proved  by  Stewart  and  Tait's  Unseen  Universe.  Like  the  pure  blue
sky  closely  shrouded  by  thick  vapours  on  a  misty  day,  so  is  the  Astral
Light  concealed  from  our  physical  senses  during  the  hours  of  our
normal  daily  life.  But  when,  concentrating  all  our  spiritual  faculties
we  succeed,  for  the  time  being,  in  paralyzing  their  enemy  (the  physical
senses),  and  the  inner  man  becomes,  so  to  say,  distinct  from  the  man
of  matter — then  the  action  of  the  ever-living  spirit,  like  a  breeze  that
clears  the  sky  from  its  obstructing  clouds,  sweeps  away  the  mist  which
lies  between  our  normal  vision  and  the  Astral  Light,  and  we  obtain
glimpses  into,  and  of,  that  Light.

The  clays  of  "smoking  furnaces"  and  "burning  lamps"  which  form
part  of  the  biblical  visions  are  long  gone  by — to  return  no  more.  But
whoever,  refusing  natural  explanations,  prefers  supernatural  ones,  is,
of  course,  at  liberty  to  imagine  that  an  "Almighty  God"  amuses  us
with  visions  of  flowers,  and  sends  burning  lights  before  making  "cove-
nants" with  his  worshippers.

29

"IS  IT  IDLE  TO  ARGUE  FURTHER?"

[Vol.  III.  No.  4,  January,  1882.]

Says  Light,  in  its  "Notes  by  the  Way,"  edited  by  "M.A.  Oxon.":
The  current  number  of  The  Theosophist  contains  an  important  manifesto,  which
establishes  and  defines  the  ground  finally  taken  up  by  that  body.  Shortly  put,  it  is
one  of  complete  antagonism  to  Spiritualism.  The  Spiritualist  believes  that  it  is
possible  for  spirits  of  the  departed  to  communicate  with  this  earth.  Whatever
divergence  of  opinion  there  may  be  among  us  in  respect  of  other  matters,  we  are
agreed  on  this,  the  cardinal  article  of  our  faith.  Our  daily  experience  affirms  its
truth.  The  consentient  testimony  of  the  most  experienced  among  its  agrees  that,
whether  there  be,  or  whether  there  be  not,  other  agencies  at  work,  the  spirits  we
know  of  are  human  spirits  who  have  once  lived  on  this  earth.  To  this  the  Theo-
sophist returns  the  simple  answer  that  we  are  mistaken.  No  spirits  communicate
with  earth  for  the  sufficient  reason  that  they  cannot.  It  is  idle  to  argue  further.
We  can  but  go  on  our  way  with  the  assured  conviction  that,  whatever  may  be  the
case  in  the  east,  we  find  that  the  departed  spirits  of  mankind  are  both  able  and
willing  to  communicate  with  us  in  the  west.  And  no  metaphysical  theorizing  as
to  what  cannot  be  disposes  in  any  degree  of  what  is.

The  Theosophist  is  forced  to  take  exception  to  the  form  of  statement
of  "facts"  above  used.  As  it  now  stands,  it  is  but  a  short  series  of
speculative  deductions  from  the  very  superficially  defined  doctrines  in
our  "Fragments  of  Occult  Truth,"  which  give  a  by  no  means  complete
idea  of  what  is  really  taught  in  the  doctrine,  scraps  of  which  were
explained  in  the  article  now  most  incorrectly  styled  a  "manifesto."
We  regret  the  necessity  to  contradict  once  more  our  esteemed  opponent,
who  seems  to  be  giving  up  the  Theosophists  in  despair.  But  were  we
also  to  conclude  it  "idle  to  argue  further,"  then  the  position  taken  up
\>y  us  would,  indeed,  give  rise  again  to  endless  misinterpretations.
The  question  of  man's  state  after  death,  the  future  progress  of  his
soul,  spirit  and  other  principles — whatever  anyone  may  call  them — was
hardly  touched  upon  in  the  short  article  under  our  critic's  notice.  In
itself  the  subject  embraces  a  field  of  boundless  extent  and  of  the  most

"IS   IT   IDLE   TO   ARGUE    FURTHER?"

435

metaphysical  intricacy,  one  which  would  demand  volumes  of  commen-
taries and  explanations  to  be  thoroughly  sifted  and  understood.  Yet
superficially  sketched  as  our  ideas  may  have  been  in  the  "Fragments"
— which  was  but  an  answer  to  the  direct  questions,  not  to  say  re-
proaches, of  an  esteemed  brother,  resident  in  Australia — we  neverthe-
less fail  to  detect  in  it  such  passages  or  ideas  as  justify  "M.A.  Oxon."
in  saying  that  our  doctrine  is  "one  of  complete  antagonism  to  Spiri-
tualism." It  is  not  half  so  antagonistic  as  he  believes  it  to  be,  as  we
will  try  to  prove.

"The  Spiritualist  believes  that  it  is  possible  for  spirits  of  the  de-
parted to  communicate  with  this  earth,"  says  the  writer  .  .  .  "and
to  this  the  Theosophist  returns  the  simple  answer  that  we  are  mis-
taken." In  this  sentence  alone,  as  a  kernel  in  a  nut-shell,  lies  hidden
the  reason  of  that  partial  antagonism.  Had  "M.A.  Oxon.,"  slightly
modifying  the  construction  of  the  above-quoted  sentence — written
instead  that  "it  is  possible  for  spirits  yet  embodied  on  this  earth  to
communicate  with  the  spirits  of  the  departed" — then  would  there  have
been  hardly  any  antagonism  at  all  to  deplore.  What  we  hold  and  do
maintain  is  that  all  of  the  so-called  "■physical  phenomena,"  and  "mate-
rializations" especially,  are  produced  by  something,  to  which  we  refuse
the  name  of  "spirit."  In  the  words  of  the  President  of  our  Berham-
pore  Branch  (Babu  Nobin  Krishna  Banerjee,  President  of  the  Adhi
Bhautic  Bhratru  Theosophical  Society):  "We,  Hindus  [and  along  with
them  the  European  disciples  of  Eastern  philosophy]  are  trying  to  spiri-
tualize our  grosser  material  selves,  while  the  American  and  European
Spiritualists  are  endeavouring  in  their  seance-rooms  to  materialize
spirits."  These  words  of  wisdom  well  show  the  opposite  tendencies  of
the  Eastern  and  the  Western  minds — namely,  that  while  the  former  are
trying  to  purify  matter,  the  latter  do  their  best  to  degrade  spirit.
Therefore  what  we  say  is,  that  ninety-nine  times  out  of  one  hun-
dred, "materializations"  so-called,  when  genuine,  and  whether  they
be  partial  or  complete,  are  produced  by  what  we  call  "shells,"  and
occasionally,  perhaps,  by  the  living  medium's  astral  body — but  cer-
tainly never,  in  our  humble  opinion,  by  "disembodied"  spirits  them-
selves.

While  we  sincerely  regret  this  divergence  of  opinions  with  Light,  we
feel  inclined  to  smile  at  the  naivete  of  some  other  Spiritualist  oppo-
nents; as,  for  instance,  at  that  of  the  editor  of  the  London  Spiritualist,
who,   in   his   leading   editorial   of  Nov.    18th,    entitled    "Speculation-

436  A   MODERN   PANARION.

Spinning,"  calls  the  scraps  of  occult  doctrine  given  in  our  "Frag-
ments" "unscientific,"  reproaching  the  writer  (than  whom  there  is  no
abler  metaphysician,  nor  closer  or  more  acute  and  clever  logician
among  Anglo-Indian  writers)  with  a  want  of  "scientific  method"  in
the  presentation  of  his  facts!  At  the  same  time,  the  editorial  informs
us  that  by  "facts"  it  does  not  "necessarily  mean  physical  facts,  for
there  are  demonstrable  truths  outside  the  realms  of  physics."  Pre-
cisely. And  it  is  upon  just  such  "facts,"  the  existence  of  which  is
based  for  us  upon  evidence  which  we  "have  weighed  and  examined"
for  ourselves,  that  we  maintain  the  demonstrability  of  the  deductions
and  final  conclusions  at  which  we  have  arrived.  These  we  preach  but
to  those  who  really  want  to  know  them.  As  none,  they  say,  are  so
blind  as  they  who  will  not  see,  we  abstain  from  offering  our  doctrines
to  such  as  find  them  offensive — among  whom  are  some  Spiritualists.
But  to  the  masses  of  impartial  readers  whose  minds  are  not  yet  wedded
to  this  or  that  theory,  we  present  our  facts  and  tell  them  to  see,  hear
and  judge  for  themselves;  and  there  have  been  some  who  have  not
found  our  theories  merely  "speculation-spinning,"  based  upon  hypo-
theses and  the  crass  sentimentalism  of  a  faith — welcome,  because  of  its
implied  promises  of  a  life  hereafter — but  theories  resting  upon  the
logical  and  stern  deduction  from  facts,  which  constitute  in  themselves
a  knowledge.  Now,  what  are  these  facts,  and  what  do  they  show  and
teach  us?

First  of  all,  and  as  a  rule — the  rare  exceptions  to  which  but  confirm
it  the  more — we  find  that  the  so-called  "disembodied  spirits,"  instead
of  becoming  the  wiser  for  being  rid  of  the  physiological  impediments
and  the  restraints  of  their  gross  material  senses,  would  seem  to  have
become  far  more  stupid,  far  less  perspicacious  and,  in  every  respect,
worse  than  they  were  during  their  earthly  life.  Secondly,  we  have  to
take  note  of  the  frequent  contradictions  and  absurd  blunders;  of  the
false  information  offered,  and  the  remarkable  vulgarity  and  common-
place exhibited  during  their  interviews  with  mortals;  in  materializing
seances  their  oral  utterances  being  invariably  vulgar  common-place,  and
their  inspirational  speeches  or  second-hand  communication  through
trance  and  other  mediums  frequently  so.  Adding  to  this  the  undeni-
able fact  which  shows  their  teachings  reflecting  most  faithfully  the
special  creed,  views,  and  thoughts  of  the  sensitive  or  medium  used  by
them,  or  of  a  sitter  or  sitters,  we  have  already  sufficient  proof  to  show
that  our  theory,  that  they  are  "shells"  and  not  disembodied  spirits  at

i

"IS   IT  IDLE   TO   ARGUE   FURTHER?"  437

all,  is  far  more  logical  and  "scientific"  than  that  of  the  Spiritualists.*
Speaking  here  in  general,  we  need  not  take  into  consideration  excep-
tional cases,  instances  of  undeniable  spiritual  identity  with  which  we
are  sure  to  find  our  arguments  met  by  onr  spiritual  opponents.  No
one  ever  thought  of  calling  "  Imperator"  a  "shell"  ;  but  then  the  latter,
whether  a  living  or  a  disembodied  spirit,  neither  materializes  himself
objectively,  nor  is  it  yet  proved  to  the  satisfaction  of  anyone  except
"M.A.  Oxon."  himself  that  "he"  descends  to  the  medium,  instead  of
the  spirit  of  the  latter  ascending  to  meet  his  instructor.

Thus,  we  maintain  that  "spirits"  are  no  more  what  they  claim  to  be,
than  the  chrysalis  shell  is  the  butterfly  which  left  it.  That  their  per-
sonations of  various  individuals,  whom  the}*  sometimes  represent,  are
mostly  due  to  the  accidental  contact  of  an  "elementary"  or  "eidolon"
(attracted  by  the  medium  and  the  intense  magnetic  desire  of  the  circle
present)  with  the  personal  "aura"  of  this  or  that  individual.  The
thoughts  of  the  latter,  the  various  acts  and  scenes  in  his  past  life,  the
familiar  and  beloved  faces  of  his  departed  ones,  are  then  all  drawn  out
of  the  all-containing  depths  of  the  Astral  Light  and  utilized.  At  times
this  is  done  successfully,  but  frequently  the  thing  proves  a  total  failure.
Only  while  the  former  are,  as  a  rule,  recorded,  the  mention  of  the
latter  is  tacitly  avoided;  no  spiritualistic  journal  having  ever  been
edited  with  that  special  view.  So  much  for  materialization  and  physi-
cal phenomena.  As  for  the  rest,  we  are  at  one  with  the  Spiritualists
with  but  slight  variances,  more  of  form  than  of  substance.

*  We  will  not  go  to  the  trouble  of  showing  how  much,  or  rather  how  little,  of  "  scientific  method"
is  to  be  generally  found  in  The  Spiritualist.  But  while  speaking  of  science  and  its  methods,  we  may
simply  remark  that  though  both  our  theories  (theosophical  and  spiritualistic)  are  sure  to  be  viewed
by  the  men  of  science  as  "speculation-spinning  "  and  metaphysical  windmills,  yet  the  hypotheses  of
Spiritualists — as  broadly  accepted  and  whether  "  scientifically  "  or  unscientifically  stated — are  certain
to  be  pronounced  by  the  majority  of  men  of  real  science,  not  merely  unscientific,  but  very  unphilo-
sophical  and  illogical  as  well.

FRAGMENTS  OF  OCCULT  TRUTH.

[Vol.  III.  Nos.  i,  6  and  12,  October,  1881,  March  and  »September,  1882.]

I.

We  have  received  from  a  brother  Theosophist  an  interesting  and
temperate  note  on  some  supposed  errors  of  occultists  when  dealing
with  the  phenomena  of  .spiritualism.  The  subject  is  one  of  universal
interest,  and  we  shall  therefore  require  no  apology  for  publishing
some  fragments  of  the  lessons  taught  us  on  the  subject  in  the  occult
schools,  which  may  possibly  both  help  to  remove  some  difficulties  and
tend  to  convey  to  spiritualists  generally  a  clearer  conception  of  the
causes  of  many  of  the  phenomena  of  which  they  have  had  experience.

"Those  Theosophists  who  deny  to  departed  spirits  a  legitimate  share
in  the  marvellous  phenomena"  are  few  indeed,  for  the  great  majority  of
Theosophists  concern  themselves  with  spiritualism  very  little,  if  at  all.
Indeed  our  members  may  be  divided  into  five  principal  classes  and
described  as  follows:

(1)  Men  profoundly  concerned  in  the  revival  oftheirrespectivereligious
philosophies  in  all  their  pristine  purity — Buddhist  devotees  outnumber-
ing all  others.     They  neither  know  of,  nor  do  they  care  for  spiritualism.

(2)  Students  of  various  philosophies,  searchers  after  truth  whencesoever
it  may  come.  They  neither  believe  nor  disbelieve  in  spirits.  They  are
open  to  conviction,  but  will  accept  nothing  on  second-hand  testimony.

(3)  Materialists,  freethinkers,  agnostics,  who  care  as  little  for  occultism
as  they  do  for  spiritualism.  Their  only  concern  is  to  free  the  masses
from  the  fetters  of  ignorance  and  superstition  and  educate  them.
Many,  indeed  most  of  them,  are  philanthropists  who  hold  it  more
expedient  to  devote  their  energies  to  the  assistance  of  the  living  than
to  occupy  their  time  in  conversations  with  the  dead.

(4)  Spiritualists  and  spiritists  who  could  not  well  be  accused  of  such
"heresy."     And  finally,

(5)  Occultists  who  do  not  number  a  half  per  cent  in  the  Theosophical
Society.

FRAGMENTS   OF   OCCULT   TRUTH.

439

These  latter  are  the  only  "Theosophists"  who  are  really  open  to  the
above  accusation,  and  even  these,  if  we  look  beyond  the  veil  of  words,
which  more  or  less  conceals  the  ideas  of  both  spiritualists  and  occult-
ists, will  prove  to  differ  less  widely  on  these  points  from  the  views  of
philosophical  spiritualists  than  is  at  first  apparent.  For,  in  this  as  in
so  many  other  cases,  it  is  in  a  great  measure  to  the  different  significa-
tions attached  to  the  same  terms  by  the  two  parties  that  their  apparent
irreconcilable  divergence  is  due.  "Words,"  as  Bacon,  we  think,  says,
"mightily  perplex  the  wisdom  of  the  wisest,  and  like  a  Tartar's  bow,
shoot  backward  into  the  minds  of  those  that  follow  them" ;  and  so  here
the  conflict  of  opinions  between  spiritualists  and  occultists  is  solely  due
to  the  fact  that  the  former,  overrating  the  quality  and  character  of  the
communicating  entities,  dignify  with  the  name  of  "spirits"  certain
reliquiae  of  deceased  human  beings,  while  the  occultists  reserve  the
name  of  Spirit  for  the  highest  principle  of  human  nature,  and  treat
these  reliquiae  as  mere  eidolons,  or  astral  simulacra,  of  the  real  Spirit.

In  order  to  understand  clearly  the  view  of  the  occultists,  it  is  neces-
sary to  glance  at  the  constitution  of  the  living  human  being.  Even
the  spiritualistic  theory  teaches  that  man  is  a  trinity,  composed  of  (i)
a  higher  spirit  or  the  "spiritual  soul"  as  ancient  philosophers  desig-
nated it;  (2)  its  envelope — the  ethereal  form  or  shadow  of  the  body —
called  by  the  Neo-platonists  the  "animal  soul";  and  (3)  the  physical
body.

Although  from  one  point  of  view  this  is  broadly  correct,  yet,  accord-
ing to  occultists,  to  render  our  conceptions  of  this  truth  clearer  and
follow  out  successfully  the  course  of  man  after  death,  it  is  necessary
to  further  subdivide  these  three  entities  and  resolve  them  into  their
constituent  principles.  This  analysis  being  almost  wholly  unknown
to  western  nations,  it  is  difficult  in  some  cases  to  find  any  English
words  by  which  to  represent  the  occult  subdivisions,  but  we  give  them
in  the  least  obscure  phraseology  that  we  can  command.

DIVISIONS    OF    THE  SUBDIVISIONS    OF    THE

SPIRITUALISTS.  OCCULTISTS.

1.  The  Physical  Body  —  composed
wholly  of  matter  in  its  grossest  and
most  tangible  form.

2.  The  Vital  Principle  (or  Jivatman) —
a  form  of  force,  indestructible.  When  it
is  disconnected  with  one  set  of  atoms,  it
immediately  becomes  attracted  by  others.

1.  The  Body.

44©

A   MODERN    PANARION.

2.  The  Animal  Soul  or  Perisprit.

3.  The  Astral  Bod}*  (Linga  Sharira) —
composed  of  highly  etherealized  matter.
In  its  habitual  passive  state  the  perfect
but  very  shadowy  duplicate  of  the  body;
its  activity,  consolidation,  and  form
depend  entirely  on  the  Kama  Rupa.

4.  The  Astral  Shape  (Kama  Rupa)  or
body  of  desire — a  principle  defining  the
configuration  of

5.  The  Animal  or  Physical  Intelligence
or  Consciousness  or  Ego — analogous  to,
though  proportionally  higher  in  degree

\  than  the  reason,  instinct,  memory,  imagin-
ation,  etc.,  existing* in  the  higher  animals.

6.  The  Higher  or  Spiritual  Intelligence
or  Consciousness,  or  Spiritual  Ego — in
which  mainly  resides  the  state  of  con-
sciousness of  the  perfect  man,  though  the
lower  dimmer  animal  consciousness  co-
exists in  No.  5.

7.  The  Spirit — an  emanation  from  the
Absolute;  uncreate,  eternal;  a  state
rather  than  a  being.

Now  the  change  that  we  call  death  only  immediately  affects  the  first
three  constituents;  the  body  decomposes  to  enter  into  new  combina-
tions, and  the  vital  force  is  dissipated  to  help  to  animate  new  organisms,
and  the  astral  human  form  (Linga  Sharira)  dies  with  the  body.

There  remain  four  principles.  As  a  rule  (we  except  the  cases  of  the
higher  adepts),  one  of  two  things  occurs  in  accordance  with  the  universal
law  of  affinity.  If  the  spiritual  Ego  has  been  in  life  material  in  its
tendencies,  placing  its  main  enjoyment  in,  and  centreing  its  desires  on,
material  objects  and  the  gratification  of  earthly  desires,  then,  at  death,  it

3.  The  Spiritual  Soul  or  Spirit.

*  Western  science,  of  course,  as  a  rule,  holds  that  animals  have  no  conscious  ego,  but  this  we  know
to  be  erroneous;  they  possess  no  spiritual,  but  they  do  possess  an  animal  consciousness.  Could  men
communicate  with  them  they  would  discover  not  only  this,  but  also  that  many  of  the  anthropoid
apes  possess  an  intelligence,  consciousness,  etc.,  little  inferior  to  that  of  lunatics,  madmen,  and
some  desperately  wicked  and  depraved  men  who  have,  in  fact,  become  animals,  through  the  loss,
temporary  or  permanent,  of  their  sixth  and  seventh  principles,  even  while  the  combination  of  the
other  five  principles  is  still  intact,  i.e.,  even  during  life.  Was  it  some  hazy  tradition  of  the  truth
handed  down  through  the  Romish  Church,  which  has  ever  possessed  some  secret  knowledge  of  the
teachings  of  the  ancient  mysteries,  or  was  it  the  great  poet's  soul's  own  glimpses  into  the  Astral
Light,  that  made  Dante  represent  the  souls  of  several  of  his  enemies  as  already  in  the  "Inferno"
though  the  men  themselves  still  lived  upon  earth  ?  Of  course  this  fragment  of  truth  was  utterly
distorted  by  the  malign  influence  of  the  then  prevalent  material  hell  superstition,  but  it  was  quite
possible,  as  the  modern  west  has  still  to  realize,  that  the  souls  of  some  of  these  evil  men  might  have
already  passed  away  (though  not  to  the  fabled  Inferno),  whilst  the  men  themselves  still  lived.

FRAGMENTS   OF  OCCULT  TRUTH.  441

continues  to  cling  blindly  to  the  lower  elements  of  its  late-  combination,
and  the  true  spirit  severs  itself  from  these  and  passes  away  elsewhi
To  follow  its  course  is  beside  the  question  at  present,  since  the  remain-
ing principles  in  which  personal  or  animal  consciousness  remains  have-
parted  with  it  for  ever,  and  it  would  require  a  complete  exposition  of
the  entire  philosophy  of  occultism  to  fully  explain  its  course;  suffice
it  to  say  now,  that  it  passes  away — taking  with  it  no  fragment  of  the
individual  consciousness  of  the  man  with  which  it  was  temporarily
associated — to  fulfil  its  mission,  still  guided  and  governed  by  the
irresistible  cyclic  impulse  which  first  projected  it  through  the  veil  of
primitive  cosmic  matter.

But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  tendencies  of  the  Ego  have  been
towards  things  spiritual,  if  its  aspirations  have  been  heavenwards — we
use  a  conventional  term — if  it  has,  when  weighed,  as  it  were,  in  the
balance,  a  greater  affinity  for  the  spiritual  than  for  the  earthly  con-
stituents, with  their  accompanying  desires,  of  the  combination  in  which
it  recently  took  part,  then  will  it  cling  to  the  spirit,  and  with  this  pass
into  the  adjoining  so-called  world  of  effects,  in  reality  a  state,  and  not
a  place,  and  there,  purified  of  much  of  its  still  remaining  material
taints,  evolve  out  of  itself  by  the  spirit's  aid  a  new  Ego,  to  be  reborn,
after  a  brief  period  of  freedom  and  enjoyment,  in  the  next  higher  world
of  causes,  an  objective  world  similar  to  this  present  globe  of  ours,  but
higher  in  the  spiritual  scale,  where  matter  and  material  tendencies  and
desires  play  a  far  less  important  part  than  here.

In  either  case,  it  is  not  a  matter  of  judgment,  of  salvation  and
damnation,  of  heaven  and  hell,  but  solely  the  operation  of  the  universal
law  of  affinity  or  attraction,  which  makes  the  Ego  cling  in  one  case  to
the  more  material,  in  the  other  to  the  spiritual  components  of  the  late
aggregation  now  separated  by  death.  Now  neither  during  gestation
in  the  subjective  world  of  effects,  nor  during  the  temporary  period  of
enjoyment,  in  its  newly  evolved  Ego-hood,  of  the  fruits  of  good  deeds,
its  karma  on  earth,  nor  after  its  entry  into  the  higher  objective  world
of  causes,  can  the  Ego  reenter  this  present  world.  During  the  first
period  it  is,  so  to  speak,  dormant,  and  can  no  more  issue  from  the  state
in  which  it  is  developing  than  a  child  can  come  out  of  its  mother's
womb  to  pay  a  visit  before  the  period  of  pregnancy  concludes.  During
the  second  period,  however  ethereal  and  purified  of  gross  matter  the
regenerated  Ego  may  be,  it  is  still  subject  to  the  physical  and  universal
laws  of  matter.      It   cannot,    even    if  it  would,   span   the   abyss   that

442  A   MODERN   PANARION.

separates  its  state  from  ours.  It  can  be  visited  in  spirit  by  men,  but
it  cannot  descend  into  our  grosser  atmosphere  and  reach  us.  It  attracts,
it  cannot  be  attracted;  its  spiritual  polarity  presenting  an  insuperable
obstacle.  Once  reborn  into  the  higher  world,  and  apart  from  the
physical  impossibility  of  any  communication  between  its  world  and
ours,  to  all  but  the  very  highest  adepts,  the  new  Ego  has  become  a  new
person;  it  has  lost  its  old  consciousness  linked  with  earthly  experiences,
and  has  acquired  a  new  consciousness,  which,  as  time  rolls  on,  will  be
interpenetrated  by  its  experiences  in  that  higher  sphere.  The  time
will  come,  no  doubt,  but  many  steps  higher  on  the  ladder,  when  the
Ego  will  regain  its  consciousness  of  all  its  past  stages  of  existence;
but  in  the  next  higher  world  of  causes,  or  activity,  to  our  own,  the  new
Ego  has  no  more  remembrance  of  its  earthly  career  than  we  here  have
of  the  life  that  preceded  this  present  one.

Therefore  it  is  that  the  occultists  maintain  that  no  "spirits"  of  the
departed  can  appear  or  take  part  in  the  phenomena  of  sc'ance-rooms.
To  what  can  appear  and  take  part  in  these,  the  occultists  refuse  the
name  of  "spirits."

But  it  may  be  asked  what  is  it  that  can  appear?

We  reply — merely  the  animal  souls  or  perisprits  of  the  deceased.  It
might  appear  from  what  we  have  said  that,  while  this,  according  to  our
previous  exposition,  would  be  true  in  the  case  of  the  spiritually-minded,
in  that  of  the  materially-minded  we  should  have  these  and  the  spiritual
Ego  or  consciousness.  But  such  is  not  the  case.  Immediately  on  the
severance  of  the  spirit,  whether  at  death,  or,  as  we  have  already  hinted
is  sometimes  the  case,  before  death,  the  spiritual  Ego  is  dissipated  and
ceases  to  exist.  It  is  the  result  of  the  action  of  spirit  on  matter,  and
it  might,  to  render  the  matter  more  clear,  be  described  as  a  combination
of  spirit  and  matter,  just  as  flame  is  the  result  of  the  combination  of
oxygen  with  the  substance  being  oxygenized,  and  might  loosely  be
described  as  the  combination  of  the  two.  Withdraw  the  oxygen  and
the  flame  ceases;  withdraw  the  spirit,  and  the  spiritual  Ego  disappears.
The  sense  of  individuality  in  spirit  cannot  exist  without  combination
with  matter.  Thus  the  pure  planetary  spirits,  when  first  propelled
into  the  circle  of  necessity,  have  no  individual  consciousness,  only  the
absolute  consciousness  which  they  share  with  all  fragments  of  the
spirit  hitherto  entirely  uncombined  with  matter.  As  they,  entering
into  generation,  descend  the  ladder  and  grow  gradually  more  and  more
hemmed  in   by  matter  and  isolated  from  the  universal  spirit,  so  the

FRAGMENTS   OF   OCCULT  TRUTH.  443

sense  of  individuality,  the  spiritual  Ego-ship,  grows.  How  finally,
on  reascending  the  circle,  step  by  step,  they  regain,  on  reunion  with
the  universal,  the  absolute  consciousness,  and  simultaneously  all  the
individual  consciousnesses  which  they  have  developed  at  each  stage
of  their  descending  and  ascending  progress,  is  one  of  the  highest
mysteries.

But  to  return  to  the  spiritual  Ego-ship  developed  on  this  earth;  if  too
tainted  to  follow  the  spirit  in  its  upward  course,  it  is,  as  it  were,  forth-
with torn  asunder  from  it.  L,eft  in  the  terrestrial  atmosphere  without
the  sustaining  spirit  that  gave  it  existence,  it  has  to  disappear  as  the
flame  does  when  the  oxygen  is  exhausted.  All  the  material  elements
which,  in  combination  with  the  spirit,  gave  it  consistency,  fly  by  the
law  of  affinity  to  join  the  three  other  principles  that  constitute  the
perisprit  or  natural  soul,  and  the  spiritual  Ego  ceases  to  exist.

Thus  alike  in  all  cases  that  remain,  all  that  can  appear  are  the  shells
of  the  deceased,  the  two  principles  which  we  call  the  animal  or  surviv-
ing astral  souls  or  animal  Ego.

But  there  is  this  to  be  noted.  As  the  clay,  as  Saadi  says,  long  retains
traces  of  the  perfume  of  the  roses  which  once  honoured  it  with  their
companionship,  so  the  etherealized  matter  which  has  been  in  combina-
tion with  spirit,  long  retains  a  power  of  resisting  disintegration.  The
more  pure  the  spiritual  Ego,  the  less  of  the  matter,  which  in  combina-
tion with  the  spirit  went  to  form  it,  does  it  leave  behind  clinging  to
the  two  principles;  the  more  impure,  the  greater  the  mass  of  such
spirit-vitalized  matter  which  remains  to  invigorate  the  reliquiae.

Thus  it  follows  that,  in  the  case  of  the  pure  and  good,  the  shells
rapidly  disintegrate;  and  the  animal  soul,  having  ever  been  kept  in
subjection,  is  feeble  and  will-less;  and  it  can  very  rarely,  if  ever,
happen  that  such  should  involuntarily  appear  or  manifest  themselves,
for  their  vitality,  desires  and  aspirations  existed  almost  exclusively  in
what  has  passed  away.  No  doubt  a  power  exists  which  can  compel
even  these  to  appear,  a  power  taught  by  the  evil  science  of  necromancy,
rightly  denounced  by  all  good  men  of  old.  But  why  evil,  it  may  be
asked?  Because  until  these  shells  have  dissipated,  a  certain  sympathy
exists  between  them  and  the  departed  spiritual  Ego  which  is  gestating
in  the  fathomless  womb  of  the  adjoining  world  of  effects;  and  to  dis-
turb the  shells  by  necromantic  sorcery  is  at  the  same  time  to  disturb
the  foetal  spiritual  Ego.

We   have  said   that   these  shells   in  such  cases  rapidly  decay,   the

444  A   MODERN    PANARION.

rapidity  being  exactly  proportional  to  the  purity  of  the  departed  spiri-
tual Ego;  and  we  may  add  that  similarly  the  rapidity  of  gestation  of
the  new  Ego  is  proportional  to  the  purity  of  the  old  Ego  out  of  which
it  is  evolved.  Happily  necromancy  is  unknown  to  modern  spiritualists,
so  that  it  is  next  to  impossible  that  the  reliquiae  of  the  good  and  pure
should  ever  appear  in  the  seance-room.  No  doubt,  the  simulacra  of
some  spiritual  Egos  whose  fate  trembled  in  the  balance,  whose  affinities,
earthwards  and  heavenwards,  to  use  the  popular  phraseology,  were
nearly  equal,  who  have  left  behind  too  much  of  the  matter  that  was
combined  to  form  them,  who  will  lie  long  in  foetal  bonds  before  being
able  to  develop  the  new  Ego-hood;  no  doubt,  we  say,  such  simulacra
may  survive  longer  and  may  occasionally  appear  under  exceptional
conditions  in  se'a?ice-rooms,  with  a  dim,  dazed  consciousness  of  their
past  lives.  But  even  this,  owing  to  the  conditions  of  the  case,  will  be
rare,  and  they  will  never  be  active  or  intelligent,  as  the  stronger  por-
tions of  their  wills,  the  higher  portions  of  their  intelligence,  have
gone  elsewhere.

Nature  draws  no  hard  and  fast  lines,  though  in  the  balance  of  forces
very  slight  differences  in  opposing  energies  may  produce  the  most
divergent  results.  All  entities  shade  off  from  one  end  to  the  other  of
the  chain  by  imperceptible  degrees,  and  it  is  impossible  for  man  to  gauge
the  exact  degree  of  purity  of  the  deceased  at  which  the  voluntary  re-
appearance of  his  reliquiae  through  the  agency  of  mediumship  becomes
impossible;  but  it  is  absolutely  true  that,  broadly  speaking,  as  a  law,
it  is  only  the  reliquiae  of  non-spiritually-minded  men,  whose  spiritual
Egos  have  perished,  that  appear  in  seance-rooms,  and  are  dignified  by
spiritualists  with  the  title  of  "spirits  of  the  departed."

These  shells,  these  animal  souls,  in  whom  still  survive  the  major
portions  of  the  intelligence,  will-power  and  knowledge  that  they  pos-
sessed when  incorporated  in  the  human  combination,  invigorated  too
by  the  reassimilation  of  the  spirit-vitalized  matter  that  once  combined
with  the  spirit  to  compose  their  spiritual  Ego,  are  often  powerful  and
highly  intelligent,  and  continue  to  survive  for  lengthened  periods,
their  intense  desire  for  earthly  life  enabling  them  to  seize  from  the
decaying  simulacra  of  the  good  and  feeble  the  material  for  prolonged
existence.

To  these  eidola  occultists  are  used  to  give  the  name  of  elementaries,
and  these,  by  the  aid  of  the  half-intelligent  forces  of  nature  which  are
attracted  to  them,  perform   most  of  the  wonders  of  the  scafice-rooms.

FRAGMENTS   OF  OCCULT   TRUTH.  445

If  to  these  shells,  these  eidola,  which  have  lost  their  immortality,  and
whence  the  divine  essence  has  for  ever  departed,  the  spiritualists  insist
on  applying  the  title  of  "spirits  of  the  dead,"  well  and  good;  they  are
not  spirits  at  all,  they  are  of  the  earth  earthy,  all  that  remains  of  the
dead  when  their  spirits  have  flown,  but  if  this  be  understood,  and  it  be
nevertheless  considered  desirable  to  call  them  that  to  which  they  are
the  precise  antithesis,  it  is  after  all  merely  a  case  of  misnomer.

But  let  there  be  no  mistake  as  to  what  they  are;  hundreds  and  thou-
sands of  lost  and  ruined  men  and  women  all  over  the  globe  attest  the
degradation  to  which  constant  subjection  to  their  influence  in  medium-
ship  too  generally  leads,  and  we  who  know  the  truth  should  ill  dis-
charge our  duty  if  we  did  not  warn  all  spiritualists,  in  the  strongest
terms  possible,  against  allowing  the  misuse  of  terms  to  mislead  them
as  to  the  real  nature  and  character  of  the  disembodied  entities  with
which  they  so  constantly  and  confidingly  deal.

Now  probably  spiritualists  will  admit  that  our  views  would  explain
the  vast  mass  of  trash,  frivolous  nonsense  and  falsehood  communicated
through  mediums,  as  also  the  manner  in  which  so  many  of  these,  good
and  honest  to  begin  with,  gradually  grow  into  immoral  impostors.  But
many  objections  will  be  raised.  One  man  will  say:  "I  have  repeatedly
conversed  with  my  late  father;  a  better,  kinder-hearted,  more  spiritual-
minded  man  never  lived;  and  on  one  occasion  he  told  me  a  fact,  un-
known to  me,  and,  I  believe  to  everyone  living,  which  I  subsequently
verified."

Nothing  is  simpler;  the  father's  image  was  in  the  son's  mind;  thus
put  en  rapport,  the  disembodied  elementary  which,  if  of  one  of  the  more
intelligent  classes,  has  glimpses  of  things  in  the  astral  light,  and  can
here  and  there  dimly  distinguish  the  pictures  which  record  every  deed,
word  and  thought — pictures  which  we  are  all  unconsciously  incessantly
evolving,  pictures  which  survive  long  after  those  who  originated  them
have  passed  away— the  elementary,  we  say,  scanning  these,  easily  picks
up  sufficient  facts  for  its  purpose,  and  by  its  will  materializes  itself
partly  out  of  matter  drawn  from  the  medium's  body,  partly  out  of  inert
cosmic  matter  drawn  to  it  by  the  help  of  the  elementals  or  half-blind
forces  of  nature  which  it  and  probably  the  medium  also,  has  attracted,
and  stands  forth  the  counterpart  of  the  dead  father  and  talks  of  things
known  only  to  that  dead  father.  Of  course,  if  the  matter  talked  of
were  known  to  any  present,  both  elementary  and  medium,  ll  in  a
trance,  could  equally  know  it,  but  we  have  purposely  supposed  one  of

446  A    MODERN   PANARION.

those  rare  cases  which  are  considered  to  be  the  strongest  proofs  of
"spirit  identity,"  as  it  is  called.  Of  course,  too,  everything  that  has
once  passed  before  that  son's  mind,  intonation  of  voice,  tricks  of
manner,  infirmities  of  temper,  though  apparently  forgotten  at  the
moment,  are  really  indelibly  recorded  in  his  memory,  as  is  proved  by
their  immediate  recognition  when  reproduced  by  the  elementary  who
has  gathered  them  out  of  those  dormant  records.

And  it  must  be  remembered  that  these  apparently  strong  and  perfect
cases  are  very  rare,  and  that  the  elementaries,  if  they  personate  people
of  any  note,  usually  make  gross  blunders,  and  almost  without  excep-
tion betray  their  falsehood  in  one  way  or  another — Shakespeare  and
Milton  dictating  trash,  Newton  grossly  ignorant  of  his  own  Principia,
and  Plato  teaching  a  washed-out  Neo-platonic  or  sentimental  Christian
philosophy,  and  so  on.  At  the  same  time  undoubtedly  in  rare  cases
the  ghostly  relics  of  very  clever,  very  bad  and  very  determined,  men
constitute  disembodied  entities  of  high  intelligence,  which  survive  for
a  lengthened  period,  and  the  more  wicked  and  more  material  they  are
in  all  their  tendencies,  the  longer  do  they  escape  disintegration.

The  Orthodox  Church  is  much  nearer  the  truth  when  it  calls  the
entities  that  are  mostly  dealt  with  in  seance-room?,  "devils"  than  are
the  spiritualists  who  call  them  "spirits."  We  do  not  mean  that  they
are  generally  actively  malevolent,  but  their  magnetic  attractions  are
evil,  and  they  incline  and  lead  those  with  whom  they  have  much  to  .do
to  the  same  evil  material  passions  which  have  been  their  own  ruin.

Naturally  spiritualists  will  object  that  this  cannot  be  true,  since
despite  the  mass  of  folly  and  gibberish  or  worse  often  heard  in  sc'ance-
rooms,  the  purest  sentiments  and  really  lofty  ideas  and  teachings  are
not  rarely  expressed  through  mediums.

Several  points  have,  however,  to  be  borne  in  mind.  In  the  first  place,
though  proved  unfit  for  further  development,  and,  therefore,  doomed
in  most  cases  by  the  eternal  law  of  the  survival  of  the  fittest  to  be  dis-
integrated and,  losing  personal  consciousness,  to  be  worked  up  again
in  the  lower  worlds  into  new  combinations,  all  elementaries  are  by  no
means  actively  wicked  all  round.  When  weighed  in  the  balance,  their
whole  natures  have  proved  to  have  a  greater  affinity  to  matter  than  to
spirit,  and  they  are,  therefore,  incapable  of  further  progress,  but  when
dealing  with  a  pure  circle  and  speaking  through  a  still  pure  medium-
very  few  mediums,  indeed,  continue  thus  after  a  long  course  of  medium-
ship — the  better  and  less  degraded  side  of  their  nature  comes  out,  and

FRAGMENTS  OF  OCCULT  TRUTH.  447

it  is  quite  possible  for  elementaries  to  have  a  perfect  intellectual  know-
ledge and  appreciation  of  virtue  and  purity  and  enlightened  concep-
tions of  truth,  and  yet  be  innately  vicious  in  their  tendencies.  We
meet  plenty  of  men  who  have  a  sentimental  love  for  virtue,  and  yet
whose  lives  are  one  unbroken  course  of  lust  and  self-indulgence;  and
as  the  men  were,  so  are  the  elementaries,  their  reliquiae.  If  we  at
times  speak  bitterly  of  popular  modern  Christianity,  it  is  because  we
know  that,  with  all  its  other  ennobling  and  saving  tendencies,  on  this
all-important  point  it  leads  to  the  destruction  of  myriads  of  souls.  For
it  leads  to  the  belief  that  it  signifies  little  what  a  man  does,  if  he  only
believes  that  his  sins  are  forgiven  him,  and  that  by  relying  on  the
merits  of  Jesus  Christ  he  may  escape  the  vengeance  of  the  Lord.  But
there  is  no  anthropomorphic  Lord,  no  vengeance,  no  forgiveness;
there  is  simply  the  action  of  a  natural  law  impressed  on  the  universe
by  the  Absolute,  simply  a  question  of  balance  of  affinities;  and  the}'-,
whose  deeds  and  general  tendencies  are  earthly,  go  down  in  the  scale,
rarely,  very  rarely,  to  rise  again  in  their  own  identities;  while  those  in
whom  these  tendencies  are  spiritual  pass  upwards.

It  is  not,  however,  possible  to  enter  here  into  the  great  questions
thus  glanced  at,  and  we  return  to  the  subject  of  high,  or  comparatively
high,  teachings  through  mediums.

Now  it  must  not  for  a  moment  be  supposed  that  all  we  hear  from
these  latter  comes  from  elementaries.  In  the  first  place,  a  great  many
well-known  mediums  are  clever  impostors.  There  are  notorious  trance
mediums,  especially  women,  who  steadily  work  up  for  their  so-called
trance  orations,  and  these  being  really  clever,  and  working  at  good
books,  deliver  essays  of  a  respectable,  and  at  times  almost  first-class,
character.  There  is  no  spiritual  influence  at  work  here;  the  only
apparently  abnormal  feature  in  these  cases  is  that  persons  possessing
such  fair  abilities  should  be  willing  thus  to  prostitute  them;  and  that
people  who  can  talk  so  well  and  touchingly  of  truth  and  purity,  should
yet  live  such  lives  of  falsehood  and  immorality.  Video  meliora  probo-
qicc,  dcteriora  sequor,  has  ever  found  a  response  in  too  many  human
hearts,  and  has  in  all  ages  rung  the  annihilation-knell  of  too  many
personalities.

In  the  second  place,  in  the  case  of  pure  and  genuine  mediums,  who,
in  trance,  pass  entirely  under  the  influence  of  their  own  seventh  prin-
ciple, the  Augoeides  of  the  Greeks,  the  whole  teachings  come  from  the
medium's  own  soul,  and  it  is  very  rare  to  obtain  thus  anything  higher

448  A    MODERN    PANARION.

than  what  the  medium's  own  intellect,  when  in  a  state  of  spiritual
excitement,  could  produce.

It  may  be  said  that,  in  many  such  cases,  the  medium  says  himself  or

herself,  that  it  is  Judge  Edmonds,  or  the  late  Bishop  of ,  who  is

teaching  him  or  her,  but  this  is  merely  due  to  the  intervention  of  mis-
chievous elementaries  who  are  always  crowding  about  every  medium,
and  who,  if  he  is  too  pure  to  enable  them  to  get  command  over  him,
yet,  ever  anxious  to  get  a  finger  in  every  pie,  confuse  and  deceive  him.
Only  an  adept  can  clearly  and  consciously  place  the  spiritual  Ego
wholly  under  the  domination  of  the  spirit.  Mediums  who,  in  trance,
unconsciously  succeed  in  doing  this,  are  unaware  of  the  source  whence
they  derive  their  perceptions,  and  can  be  made,  by  any  elementary
exerting  any  influence  over  them,  through  any  weak  point  in  their
character,  to  believe  that  these  are  derived  from  it.  The  same,  though
in  a  minor  degree,  is  the  case  with  those  rare,  high,  because  specially
pure,  mediums,  whose  Ego  and  Spirit  can  soar  together  when  the  rest
of  the  combination  is  in  a  trance,  into  the  astral  light,  and  there  can
read  all  the  highest  thoughts  that  man  has  ever  thought.  True,  the
Ego  of  the  highest  and  best  mediums  can  reproduce  in  this  material
world  only  in  a  fragmentary  and  confused  manner  what  it  reads  in  the
astral  light;  but  still  even  this  reproduction  is  sometimes  of  a  character
far  transcending  the  capacities  alike  of  the  medium  and  all  those
present.  How  it  comes  that  the  thoughts  thus  fished  up  like  pearls  out
of  the  astral  light  come  often  to  be  attributed  by  the  medium  to  spirits,
we  have  already  explained.

But  an  even  more  common  source  of  inspiration  of  mediums  is  the
mind  of  one  or  more  of  those  present.  When  in  a  trance,  the  spiritual
soul — the  sixth  and  seventh  principles — can  read  all  that  is  recorded  in
the  mind  or  memory  of  those  towards  whom  it  is  in  any  way  attracted;
and  the  medium's  utterances  will  in  such  cases  be  quite  up  to  the
highest  standard  of  those  with  whom  it  is  thus  en  rapport;  and  if  these
are  pure,  highly  cultivated  persons,  the  teachings  thus  received  will  be
equally  pure  and  intellectual.  But  here  again  the  unconscious  medium
as  a  whole  does  not  know  whence  these  perceptions  are  being  derived.
In  its  spiritual  soul  it  knows  no  doubt,  but  in  its  combination  with  the
other  principles — a  combination  necessary  for  the  writing  or  speaking
of  those  perceptions — it  is  quite  in  the  dark,  and  can  be  impressed  by
any  elementary  at  hand  of  sufficient  force,  with  any  conception  in
regard  to  the  point  that  it  chooses  to  convey.

FRAGMENTS  OF  OCCULT  TRUTH.

449

111  truth,  mediumship  is  a  dangerous,  too  often  a  fatal,  capacity;  and
if  we  oppose  spiritualism,  as  we  have  ever  consistently  done,  it  is  not
because  we  question  the  reality  of  the  phenomena  which,  we  know,
can  and  do  occur,  despite  the  multitudes  of  fraudulent  imitations,  and
which  our  adepts  can  reproduce  at  will  without  danger  to  themselves,
but  because  of  the  irreparable  spiritual  injury — we  say  nothing  of  the
mere  physical  sufferings — which  the  pursuit  of  spiritualism  inevitably
entails  on  nine-tenths  of  the  mediums  employed.  We  have  seen
scores,  nay,  rather  hundreds,  of  ordinarily  good,  pure,  honest  men  and
women,  who,  but  for  the  cultivation  of  this  evil  capacity  for  the  recep-
tion of  impressions  by  elementaries,  might,  and  would  in  all  proba-
bility, have  lived  lives  leading  to  higher  things;  but  who,  through  the
gradual  pernicious  influence  of  these  low,  earth-bound  natures,  have
sunk  from  bad  to  worse,  ending,  often  prematurely,  lives  that  could
lead  but  to  spiritual  ruin.

These  are  no  speculations — we  speak  that  we  do  know — and  if  one  in
five  mediums,  who  habitually  exercise  their  capacity,  escapes  the  doom
that  overtakes  so  many,  these  exceptions  cannot  justify  the  spiritualists
in  aiding  and  abetting  the  crowd  of  professional  mediums  who  gamble
away  their  immortality  with  the  lower  material  influences.  The  prac-
tice of  mediumship  for  good  purposes,  at  rare  intervals,  by  virtuous
mediums,  intermediately  ever  careful  to  strengthen  their  moral  and
spiritual  natures  by  pure  lives  and  holy  aspirations,  is  one  thing;  and
the  habitual  practice,  in  a  worldly,  careless,  undevout  spirit,  for  gain,
is  another;  and  this  latter  cannot  be  too  strongly  denounced,  alike  in
the  highest  interests  of  the  mediums  and  of  the  sitters  who  employ
them.

"Evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners,"  is  an  eternal  truth,
trite  and  hackneyed  though  it  be,  and  no  evil  communications  are  so
evil  as  those  subtle  influences  that  radiate  from  the  low,  bestial  elemen-
taries who  crowd  the  seance-rooms  of  immoral,  or  more  or  less  demoral-
ized mediums,  too  weak  and  low  to  make  themselves  heard  or  seen,
but  strong  enough  in  their  intensely  material  tendencies,  to  diffuse  a
moral  poison  into  the  mental  atmosphere  of  all  present.

That  men,  bewildered  amidst  the  crumbling  ruins  of  effete  religions,

should   madly  grasp  at  every  clue  by  which  there  seems  some  faint

hope  of  penetrating  the  cloud-covered  labyrinth  of  the  mystery  of  the

universe,  is  neither  wonderful  nor  reprehensible;  but  it  is  not  through

mediums,  the  prey  of  every  idle  spook  and  elementary,  that  the  great

30

450  A   MODERN   PANARION.

truth  is  to  be  reached,  but  by  that  rigorous  course  of  study,  self-
discipline  and  self-purification  which  is  taught  in  the  temple  of  occult-
ism to  which  theosophy  is  in  the  present  day  the  high  road.

II.

What  constitutes  real  knowledge?  The  question  lies  at  the  ver}*-
threshold  of  occult  study.  It  is,  in  actual  practice,  the  first  put  before
a  regular  student  of  occultism  who  is  taken  in  hand  by  the  teachers  of
the  occult  world.  And  the  student  is  taught — or  is  led  to  see — that
there  are  two  kinds  of  knowledge,  the  real  and  the  unreal;  the  real
concerned  with  eternal  verities  and  primal  causes,  the  unreal  with
illusory  effects.  So  far  the  statement  seems  to  deal  with  abstractions
too  vague  to  challenge  denial.  Each  school  of  thinkers  will  admit  as
much,  reserving  to  itself  the  assumption  that  the  illusory  effects  are
those  considerations  which  have  fascinated  its  rivals;  the  eternal  veri-
ties its  own  conclusions.  But  we  no  sooner  come  to  a  clear  under-
standing as  to  what  mental  presentiments  must  be  classed  as  illusory
effects,  than  we  find  the  first  proposition  of  occult  philosophy  at  war
with  the  whole  current  practice  of  the  world  at  large,  as  regards  all
classes  of  scientific  investigation.  All  physical  science  and  a  good
deal  of  what  the  western  world  is  pleased  to  call  metaphysical  specu-
lation, rests  on  the  crude  and  superficial  belief  that  the  only  way  in
which  ideas  can  enter  the  mind,  is  through  the  channels  of  the  senses.
The  physicist  devotes  all  his  efforts  to  the  careful  elimination  from  the
mass  of  materials  on  which  he  builds  up  his  conclusions,  of  everything
except  that  which  he  conceives  to  be  real  fact — and  it  is  exactly  that
which  he  conceives  to  be  real  fact,  anything  clearly  appealing  to  the
senses — which  the  profound  philosophy  of  eastern  occultism  delibe-
rately condemns  at  starting,  as,  in  its  nature,  illusory  effect,  transito^
secondary  consequence  of  the  real  underlying  fact.  And  in  acting
thus,  does  occult  philosophy  make  an  arbitrary  choice  between  rival
methods,  as  a  chemist  might  select  one  or  other  of  two  different
methods  of  analysis?  Not  at  all.  Real  philosophy  cannot  make  any
choice  arbitrarily;  there  is  but  one  eternal  verity,  and,  in  pursuit  of
that,  thought  is  forced  to  travel  along  one  road.  The  knowledge
which  appeals  to  the  senses  cannot  but  deal  with  illusory  effects,  for  all
the  forms  of  this  world  and  its  material  combinations  are  but  pictures
in  the  great  dissolving  view  of  evolution;  there  is  no  eternity  in  any  of
them.     By  mere  inference  from  physical  facts,  science,  proceeding  on

FRAGMENTS  OF  OCCULT  TRUTH.  45 1

its  own  methods,  will  recognize  that  there  was  a  time  before  any  of  the
life  germs  on  this  earth,  whatever  they  may  be,  had  settled  into  the
forms  in  which  they  manifest  themselves  now.  Assuredly  there  will
come  a  time  when  all  these  forms  will  disappear  in  the  progress  of
cosmic  change.  What  preceded  them,  provoking  their  evolution  from
fiery  nebulse,  what  traces  will  they  leave  behind?  From  nothing  they
came,  into  nothing  they  will  return — according  to  the  doubly  irrational
reply  which  is  the  only  logical  inference  from  the  physical  philosophy
which  makes  them  the  real  facts,  the  only  basis  of  real  knowledge.

It  must  be  remembered  of  course  that  the  unreal  knowledge  proceed-
ing from  the  observation  of  illusory,  because  transitory  and  secondary
effects,  hangs  together  satisfactorily  as  regards  the  short  chain  it  is
able  to  construct.     This  it  is  which  leads  so  many,  in  many  respects
powerful,  minds,  to  blind  contentment  with  it.     Some  of  the  laws  of
matter  can   be   detected,   if  not   understood,   by  mere   observation  of
matter.     But  it  is  obvious  that  the  something  out  of  which  matter  pro-
ceeded, the  something  into  which  it  will  return,  cannot  be  observed  by
material   senses.      In   what   other  way  can   observation   be   extended
beyond  the  range  of  material  senses?     Only  if  it  can  be  so  extended,
is  any  knowledge  attainable   by  man  which  has  to  do  wdth   eternal
verities  and  primal   causes;   which  is   real,  as  distinguished  from  the
transitory  and  the  unreal.     Promptly,  in  ignorance  of  the  methods  by
which  observation  can  be  extended  beyond  the  range  of  the  senses,
the  physicist  declares:    Concerning  the   hypothetical  eternal  verities
you  can  only  dream  and  indulge  in  illusory  conjecture — all  mere  brain-
spun  fancy.     Thus  the  world  at  large,  not  content  with  hugging  illu-
sions and  calling  them  realities,  spurns  the  reality  and  denounces  it  as
illusion.

But  can  the  eternal  verity  be  reached?  Even  if  hard  facts  be  ac-
knowledged as  illusion  so  far  as  they  are  transitory,  is  not  that  which
is  exempt  from  change  removed  from  observation?  Must  we  not  follow
up  the  theoretical  admission  of  the  possibility  of  real  knowledge,  by
the  practical  admission  that  no  human  being  can  ever  have  anything
to  do  with  it?  Now  the  consistent  materialist  who  honestly  believes
that  a  man  is  simply  a  structure  of  gas,  phosphates,  and  chemical
elements,  functioning  entirely  within  itself,  would  have  to  be  answered
by  reference  to  facts,  which  it  is  unnecessary  to  rehearse,  in  dealing
with  controversialists  who  recognize  at  all  events  that  the  living  body
includes  a  spiritual  principle,  and  that  the  spiritual  principle  is  capable

452  A   MODERN   PANARION.

of  a  life  apart  from  the  body  when  the  body  itself  is  dead.  There  can
be  no  difficulty  for  a  spiritualist  in  the  way  of  the  conception  that,  if
the  spirit  of  a  man  lives,  observes,  thinks,  and  communicates  its  im-
pressions, after  the  body  is  burned  or  buried,  so,  under  peculiar  condi-
tions, that  same  spirit  may  separate  itself  from  the  body  temporarily
during  life,  and  may  thus  come  into  such  relation  with  the  world  of
spirit  as  to  take  direct  cognizance  of  its  phenomena.  Now  it  is  quite
clear  that,  relatively  to  our  own  at  all  events,  such  a  world  is  a  world
of  eternal  verities.  We  know  that  this  world  is  fleeting  and  transitory.
It  is  readily  conceivable,  and  all  analogies  suggest  the  conclusion,
which  every  sort  of  spiritual  statement  confirms,  that  the  world  of
spirit  is  more  durable.  That  knowledge  is  real  which  lasts,  and  that  is
unreal  which  passes  away — as  in  the  case  of  an  initiated  adept  who
brings  back  upon  earth  with  him  the  clear  and  distinct  recollection,
correct  to  a  detail,  of  facts  gathered,  and  the  information  obtained
in  the  invisible  sphere  of  realities;  the  spirit  of  man,  which  comes
into  direct  and  conscious  relations  with  the  world  of  spirit,  acquires
real  knowledge;  while  the  spirit  of  man  which  lives  imprisoned  in  the
body  and  is  merely  fed  through  the  senses  with  crumbs  of  knowledge,
possesses  the  unreal  only.

But  when  the  imprisoned  spirit  does  not  itself  rise  into  direct  rela-
tions with  the  world  of  spirit,  but  is  visited  by  an  emanation  from  the
world  of  spirit — or  by  a  spirit,  to  work  with  the  spiritualistic  hypothesis
for  a  moment — is  it  entitled  to  assume  that  it  is  coming  into  possession
of  real  knowledge?  Surely  not;  for  though  discussing  spiritual  things
it  is  acquiring  its  knowledge  in  no  way  which  essentially  differs  from
the  method  by  which  mere  knowledge  of  the  purely  physical  sort,
knowledge  of  illusory  effects,  is  acquired.  The  spiritualist,  even  when
himself  a  medium  receiving  communications,  is  taking  in  knowledge
just  as  unreal,  just  as  untrustworthy,  and  liable  to  be  distorted  by  an
erroneous  observation  as  that  which  is  dealt  with  by  the  wholly  un-
spiritual  observer  of  matter.

Who  possesses  the  real  knowledge  as  contradistinguished  from  the
unreal?  the  student  of  occultism  is  asked,  and  he  is  taught  to  reply —
that  which  we  have  shown  to  be  the  only  possible  reply — "The  adepts
alone  possess  the  real  knowledge,  their  minds  alone  being  en  rapport
with  the  universal  mind."  Now,  according  to  the  teaching  of  the
adepts,  spiritualists,  in  ninety-nine  cases  out  of  a  hundred,  are  mistaken
when  they  think  themselves  in  contact  with  the  spirits  of  departed

FRAGMENTS   OF   OCCULT  TRUTH.  453

friends,  or  with  benevolent  beings  of  another  sphere;  and  to  those  who
know  something  of  who  and  what  the  adepts  are,  that  is  conclusive  as
to  the  fact.  But  the  fact  being  so,  every  conception  of  spiritualism
which  conflicts  with  it  must  be  explainable — every  incident  of  spiri-
tualism must  be  susceptible  of  transfer  to  some  group  of  phenomena
which  can  be  shown  to  be  something  different  from  what  spiritualists
imagine  it.  While  the  phenomena  of  spiritualism  are  thrown  off  in  all
directions  so  freely,  it  is  nearly  impossible  to  follow  them  up  in  every
case,  and,  as  regards  the  general  subject,  it  is  best  to  try  and  explain
why  the  phenomena  of  spiritualism  cannot  be  what  spiritualists  think
them,  rather  than  why  each  in  turn  is  actually  something  else.  First
then  as  regards  automatic  writing;  we  need  not  go  further  than  per-
sonal experience  to  show  that  the  production  through  a  medium's
arm,  of  handwriting,  the  facsimile  of  that  produced  in  life  by  an
alleged  spirit,  is  no  proof  of  the  alleged  spirit's  identity  at  all,  or
even  of  its  individuality.  A  certain  Russian  lady  who  was  afflicted
or  gifted,  whichever  way  the  reader  likes  to  put  it,  with  medium-
ship  in  her  youth,  was  "controlled"  for  about  six  years  by  a  "spirit"
who  came  evening  after  evening  and  wrote  reams  through  the  child's
arm  in  the  usual  automatic  way.  The  spirit  professed  to  be  that
of  an  old  lady  who  had  lived  in  a  part  of  Russia  far  away  from
that  in  which  she  was  then  manifesting  herself.  She  gave  many
details  of  her  life  and  family  and  told  how  her  son  had  committed
suicide.  Sometimes  the  son  came  himself,  "in  spirit,"  and  con-
trolled the  little  medium's  arm  and  gave  long  accounts  of  his  re-
morse and  sufferings  consequent  on  the  crime  of  self-murder.  The
old  lady  was  eloquent  on  the  subject  of  heaven  and  its  inhabitants,
including  the  Virgin  Mary.  Needless  to  say  that  she  was  garrulous
concerning  the  circumstances  of  her  own  death  and  the  interesting
ceremony  of  the  last  sacrament.  But  she  also  wrote  of  worldly  matters.
She  gave  a  detailed  account  of  a  petition  she  had  presented  to  the
Emperor  Nicholas,  and  the  text  of  it,  word  for  word.  She  wrote  partly
in  Russian,  partly  in  German,  which  the  child-medium  knew  very
slightly  at  the  time.  Eventually  one  of  the  young  lady's  relatives
went  to  the  place  where  the  spirit  had  lived.  Yes;  she  was  well
remembered;  she  had  been  troubled  by  a  dissolute  son  who  committed
suicide;  she  had  gone  away  to  Norway  where  it  was  believed  she  had
died,  and  so  on.  All  the  automatic  communications  were  verified,  in
short,  and  the  petition  was  turned  up  in  the  archives  of  the  Home

454  A   MODERN    PANARION.

Office  at  St.  Petersburg.  The  handwriting  was  perfectly  reproduced.
Now  what  better  identification  could  a  spirit  have?  Would  not  a
spiritualist  say  of  such  an  experience,  "I  know  that  the  spirits  of  dead
persons  can  communicate  and  prove  their  continued  individuality"?
A  year  after  the   identification  of  the  deceased  person  at  the  place

where  she  had  lived,  and  of  the  petition,  there  came  to ,  where  the

young  medium  and  her  relations  were  living,  an  officer  who  proved  to
be  the  nephew  of  the  "spirit."  He  chanced  to  show  the  child  a  minia-
ture. She  recognized  it  as  that  of  the  spirit.  Explanations  ensued,
and  it  turned  out  that  the  officer's  aunt  was  not  dead  at  all,  nor  was
her  son.  In  all  other  respects  the  mediumistic  communications  were
perfectly  well  substantiated.  The  son  had  attempted  to  commit  suicide,
but  the  bullet  with  which  he  had  shot  himself  had  been  extracted  and
his  life  had  been  saved.

Now,  without  going  further,  this  story  as  a  mere  statement  of  facts
is  enough  to  answer  the  spiritualists'  contention  as  to  automatic  writ-
ing. It  shows  that,  without  the  instrumentality  of  any  deceased  per-
son's "spirit"  at  all,  automatic  writing  attributed  by  spiritualists  to  the
agency  of  such  spirits  may  take  place;  therefore,  that  no  weight  can
be  attached  to  the  experiences  on  which  the  spiritualist  relies.  But
we  may  go  somewhat  further  and  endeavour  to  account  for  the  Russian
story  at  any  rate  by  the  occult  "hypothesis"  as  some  of  our  readers
will  no  doubt  regard  it.  Who  or  what  was  the  intelligence  writing
through  the  hand  of  the  Russian  child-medium?  The  devil?  as  the
priests  of  the  Greek  Church  contended;  some  lying  spirit?  as  the
spiritualists  might  suggest;  the  elementaries?  as  some  readers  of  occult
literature  might  conceive.  No;  it  was  the  fifth  principle  of  the  medium
herself,  her  animal  or  physical  soul,  the  portion  of  the  universal
Proteus,  and  it  acted  as  the  soul  of  the  clairvoyant  acts  during  the
sleep  of  the  body.  The  officer  who  ultimately  showed  the  miniature
had  been  acquainted  with  the  family  several  years  previously.  The
medium  had  seen  the  picture  when  quite  a  young  child,  but  had  for-
gotten it  utterly.  She  had  also  played  with  various  things  that  had
belonged  to  the  "spirit,"  and  had  been  in  her  nephew's  possession.

Preserving  faithfully  the  memory  of  all  it  saw  and  heard  in  the
"astral  light,"  or  in  the  "soul  of  things" — many  readers  will,  no  doubt,
comprehend  the  allusion  here  to  Denton's  book  of  that  name — while
playing  with  the  miniature  and  other  trifles,  the  young  medium's  inner
self  years  afterwards,  owing  to  some  associations  of  memory,  began

FRAGMENTS  OF  OCCULT  TRUTH.  455

unconsciously  reproducing  these  pictures.  Little  by  little  the  inner
self,  or  fifth  principle,  was  drawn  into  the  current  of  those  personal  or
individual  associations  and  emanations,  and  once  the  mediumistic
impulse  given,  nothing  would  arrest  its  progress.  The  facts  accurately
observed  by  the  "flying  soul"  were  inextricably  mixed  up  with  pure
fancy,  derived  from  the  teaching  to  which  the  medium  had  been  sub-
jected, and  hence  the  account  of  heaven  and  the  Virgin  Mary.

Mutatis  mutandis,  a  similar  explanation  would,  in  all  probability,
meet  the  case  not  merely  of  automatic  writing,  but  also  of  the  guiding
or  protecting  spirit  who  mentally  impresses  the  medium,  and  has  been
seen  by  seers  and  seeresses.  That  the  teaching  of  this  intelligence
generally  confirms  the  spiritualistic  doctrine  of  progression  from  place
to  place  and  so  forth,  is  a  strong  indication  that  it  is  really  an  emanation
from  the  medium's  own  mind;  and  the  fact  that  the  supposed  spirit
has  been  seen  by  clairvoyant  mediums  cannot  be  taken  as  proof  of  its
objective  existence.  The  pictures  in  the  astral  light  present  all  the
appearance  of  reality  to  those  who  can  discern  them,  and  the  appearance
of  the  "spirit"  we  have  spoken  of  was  as  real  to  our  child-medium  as
that  of  any  spirit  ever  materialized  in  the  wonderful  scance-room  of  the
Eddy  brothers  in  America,  though  the  good  lady  herself  was  all  the
while  quietly  attending  to  her  knitting,  with  the  breadth  of  Europe
between  her  and  the  family  circle  which  she  had  unconsciously  entered
as  a  spectral  guest.

The  difficulty  of  distinguishing  between  the  creations  of  the  seer's
brain  and  spectral  or  spiritual  phenomena  really  external  to  himself,
appears  to  be  the  cause  of  the  confusion  into  which  untrained,  un-
initiated observers  fall  when  natural  mediumistic  gifts  enable  them  to
cross  the  threshold  of  the  astral  world  and  awake  to  a  perception  of
the  wonders  hanging  like  an  aura  around  the  physical  planet.  From
Socrates  to  Swedenborg,  from  Swedenborg  to  the  latest  clairvoyant,  no
uninitiated  seer  has  ever  seen  quite  correctly.  But  whatever  confusing
influences  have  been  brought  to  bear  on  natural  seers  of  past  times,
none  have  been  beset  with  the  artificial  bewilderments  that  cloud  the
faculties  of  the  modern  spiritualistic  medium.  A  mass  of  prepossessions
occupy  his  mind  at  starting;  every  observation  he  makes  is  twisted  into
the  mould  of  an  elaborate,  predetermined  theory;  and  every  picture
presented  to  his  finer  senses  is  distorted  to  suit  the  expectations  of  his
fancy  and  coloured  to  the  complexion  of  a  previously  formulated  creed.
The  spiritualist  may  honestly  believe  himself  a  seeker  after  truth,  but

456  A   MODERN   PANARION.

the  spiritualist  who  is  himself  in  any  degree  a  medium  is  fascinated
by  the  creations  of  his  faith  and  borne  away  on  an  induced  current
into  a  phantasmagorial  world  peopled  with  his  own  imaginings.  Their
apparent  reality  confirms  the  conjectures  from  which  they  spring,  and
all  suggestions  which  claim  a  reconsideration  of  their  character  seem
almost  a  blasphemy  to  their  eager  devotee.  But  to  the  student  of
occult  philosophy  there  is  a  grander  beauty  in  the  consistent  teaching
of  adeptship  than  in  the  startling  excitement  of  mediumistic  revelation,
while  over  it  all  there  shines  for  him  the  solemn  light  of  absolute
truthfulness.  Mediumship  may  give  sudden  glimpses  of  unsuspected
wonder,  as  bits  of  a  strange  landscape  may  be  momentarily  revealed
by  lightning,  but  the  science  of  adeptship  casts  the  steady  light  of  day
upon  the  whole  scene.  Surely  the  spiritualists,  who  have  at  least  shot
leagues  ahead  in  intelligence  of  the  mere  materialistic  moles  of  their
purblind  generation  in  so  far  as  they  recognize  that  there  is  a  landscape
to  be  seen  if  it  can  only  be  lighted  up,  will  not  deliberately  prefer  to
guess  at  its  features  by  the  help  of  occasional  flashes  from  the  fitful
planes  of  mediumship,  but  will  accept  the  aid  of  that  nobler  illumination
which  the  elevated  genius  and  untiring  exertion  of  occult  sages  of  the
east  have  provided  for  those  whose  spiritual  intuitions  enable  them  to
appreciate  its  sublimity  and  confide  their  aspirations  to  its  guidance.

III.

What  reply  could  we  give  to  one  who  is  in  no  wa)r  satisfied  with
our  explanations  of  spiritualistic  phenomena,  who  still  clings  to  the
theories  of  spiritualists  and  rejects  the  facts  of  the  occultists?

But  one  ma}*,  naturally  enough,  say  that  this  is  begging  the  question,
and  that  he  sees  no  reason  why  the  doctrines  propounded  by  the  latter
should  be  any  more  accepted  as  facts  than  those  espoused  by  the
former.

Let  us  see  how  the  case  stands.  Suppose  a  number  of  people  go  to
see  a  conjurer's  performance;  all  manner  of  wonderful  tricks  are
exhibited;  the  more  intelligent  of  the  spectators  begin  evolving  hypo-
theses to  explain  how  these  are  performed;  night  after  night  the
performances,  though  often  a  good  deal  varied  in  details,  are  repeated.
The  most  intelligent  of  the  spectators  also  return,  night  after  night,
more  and  more  intent  on  discovering  the  rationale  of  the  wonders  they
witness.  They  gradually  work  out  what  appears  to  be  a  fairly  con-
sistent theory  of  all  that  so  astonishes  them,  and,  getting  into  conver-

FRAGMENTS   OF   OCCri.T   TRUTH.  457

sation  with  some  of  the  performers,  find  that  these  to  a  great  extent
confirm  their  conclusions.  Thereupon  they  feel  convinced  that  their
views  are  correct,  and  accept  their  theories  as  facts.  But  for  all  that
they  are  still  before  the  footlights;  they  have  never  been  behind  the
curtain;  they  have  never  actually  seen  how  the  surprising  results  they
witness  are  really  brought  about,  and  these  so-called  facts  of  theirs  are
still  merely  theories.

But  now  some  of  the  spectators  become  acquainted  with  people  who
do  habitually  go  behind  the  scenes,  who  have  examined  the  whole
apparatus,  who  can  make  the  performers  play  whatever  tricks  they
like,  and  who  can,  with  their  apparatus,  perform  precisely  the  same,
and  other  even  more  astonishing  feats,  and  these  men  tell  the  in-
genious spectators  that  their  theories  are  quite  wrong,  and  that  the
facts  of  the  case  are  so  and  so.

Now,  surely  it  will  be  admitted  that  it  is  neither  begging  the  ques-
tion nor  presumption  on  the  part  of  those  who  have  the  entree  behind
the  scenes,  but  the  simple  truth,  when  they  assert  that  their  knowledge
represents  facts  while  the  conclusions  of  the  ordinary  spectators  are
only  theories.

Such  precisely  are  the  relative  positions  of  the  spiritualists  and  the
occultists;  meaning,  of  course,  by  these  latter,  not  the  humble  lay
disciples  who  indite  these  papers,  but  their  pastors,  masters  and  living
spiritual  guides.

"But  how  am  I  to  know,"  a  spiritualist  may  enquire,  "that  these
Masters  of  yours  can  really  go  behind  the  scenes?  You  say  so;  but
what  proof  is  there  of  this?"

Now,  in  the  first  place,  it  is  a  fact,  and  this  everyone  may  prove  for
himself,  that  each  and  all  who  will  lead  the  life  can  satisfy  themselves
that  the  Masters  really  can  do  this,  and  thus  become  entirely  indepen-
dent alike  of  our  and  all  other  persons'  testimony.

The  fact  is  that,  as  we  know,  the  Masters  possess  the  power  of  con-
trolling absolutely  all  the  elementals  and  elementaries  to  whom,  with
some  exceptions,  are  due  the  objective  phenomena,  not  the  work,  un-
conscious or  conscious,  of  the  medium  himself,  of  the  scance-xoovsx.
And  it  is  the  possession  and  exhibition  of  this  power  which  makes  us
consider  their  assertion  that  they  have  been  behind  the  scenes  and  do
know  all  about  it,  proved,  and  that  induces  us  to  accept  their  state-
ments of  what  takes  place  and  is  done  as  fact.

It  will  be  borne  in  mind  that  we  have  never  denied  that  communica-

458  A   MODERN   PANARION.

tion  in  a  certain  sense  can  be  established  between  men  and  real  spirits
of  deceased  persons.  What  we  have  maintained  is  that,  except  in
certain  cases,  of  which  hereafter,  only  shells,  not  true  spirits,  can
appear  or  operate  in  the  seance-room..

We  said  of  the  spirit  in  our  first  "Fragment":  "It  can  be  visited  in
spirit  by  men;  it  cannot  descend  into  our  grosser  atmosphere  and
reach  us.     It  attracts;  it  cannot  be  attracted."

Nor  have  we  ever  disputed  that  there  was  a  state,  out  of  which  the
spiritualist's  conceptions  of  the  Summer  Land  have  no  doubt  arisen,  in
which  the  spirits  of  those  who  have  passed  away  receive  the  reward  of
their  deserts.  To  this  state,  known  to  Tibetan  occultists  as  the  Deva-
chan,  we  especially  alluded  in  that  first  paper  when  we  said,  "nor
during  the  temporary  period  of  its  enjoyment  in  its  newly-evolved  Ego-
hood  of  the  fruits  of  its  good  deeds."

Therefore,  we  are  far  from  desiring  to  contest  a  correspondent's
assertion  that  by  magnetic  action  he  has  succeeded  in  placing  some  of
the  incorporeal  principles  of  certain  sensitives  en  rapport,  if  not,  as  he
says,  with  the  world  of  spirit — a  very  large  world  indeed — at  any  rate
with  certain  spiritual  entities.

It  is  quite  certain  that  in  the  case  of  pure  sensitives  this  can  be
accomplished,  but  what  we  contend  is  that  the  information  thus
obtained  will  never  be  reliable.  For  this  there  are  several  reasons.  In
the  first  place  the  principles  that  cognize  in  such  a  case  are  different
from  those  that  give  outward  expression  to  the  matters  cognized,  and
in  the  case  of  no  untrained  seer  can  the  transfer  of  the  impressions
from  the  spiritual  faculties  which  record,  to  the  more  physical  faculties
which  publish,  be  perfectly  effected.  Even  supposing  both  sensitive
and  magnetizer  to  be  absolutely  free  from  all  preconceived  ideas  about,
or  expectations  in  regard  to,  the  subjects  investigated,  still  in  the  mere
transfer  of  the  observations  from  one  to  the  other  class  of  faculties,
mistakes  and  misconceptions  must  occur.

But  further,  it  is  not  too  much  to  say  that  it  is  quite  impossible  for
the  spiritual  faculties  of  any  untrained  seer  even  to  record  correctly  in
the  first  instance.  Even  our  physical  powers  of  observation  require
careful  training  before  they  will  serve  us  faithfully.  See  how  utterly
unable  young  children  are,  as  a  rule,  to  judge  distances;  and  just  as  the
physical  faculties  are  untrained  in  the  child,  so  are  the  spiritual  facul-
ties untrained  in  the  magnetic  sensitive.  No  doubt  in  the  course  of
years,  if  their  health  and  circumstances  permit  their  constantly  explor-

FRAGMENTS  OF  OCCULT  TRUTH.  459

ing  the  unseen  world,  even  such  untrained  sensitives  may  acquire  for
themselves  a  certain  amount  of  experience  and  training,  and  become
capable  of  comparatively  accurate  observation;  but  such  sensitives
have  been  few,  and  even  the  very  best  have  fallen  far  short  of  accuracy.
So  that  under  the  most  exceptionally  favourable  conditions  you  have
first  an  imperfect  record;  and,  second,  a  more  or  less  erroneous  pre-
sentation of  that  imperfect  record.

But  in  ninety-nine  cases  out  of  a  hundred,  either  or  both  sensitive
and  magnetizer  have  well-defined  preconceptions  of  what  they  think
ought  to  be  the  case,  and  then,  however  honest  and  conscientious  both
may  be,  these  preconceptions  will  more  or  less  colour  the  evidence
given.  Indeed,  so  certainly  is  this  the  case  that,  broadly  speaking,
there  is  twice  the  probability  of  error  in  the  case  of  a  magnetized
sensitive  to  what  there  is  in  the  case  of  a  seer  who,  without  the  inter-
vention of  a  magnetizer,  can  by  "hypnotism"  of  one  kind  or  another,
unaided,  place  himself  en  rapport  with  spiritual  entities.  Thus  a
Swedeuborg  would  be  much  less  likely  to  err  than  the  best  sensitive
requiring  the  intervention  of  a  magnetizer  to  awaken  the  super-
sensuous  faculties.

But  there  is  yet  another  source  of  error.  Even  the  best  and  purest
sensitive  can  only  be  placed  en  rapport  with  a  particular  spiritual  entity,
and  can  only  know,  see  and  feel  what  that  particular  entity  knows,  sees
and  feels.  Now  no  spiritual  entity  in  Devachan,  or  while  hibernating
prior  to  passing  out  of  this  earth's  attraction,  is  in  a  position  to  general-
ize; and  it  is,  broadly  speaking,  only  with  such  that  a  sensitive  can  be
placed  en  rapport.  It  lives  in  a  paradise  or  dream  of  its  own  creating,
and  it  is  utterly  unable  to  give  any  idea  of  how  others  are  faring.
Each  individual  spirit  in  Devachan  dreams  its  own  dream,  lives  in  its
own  Summer  Eand  (but  it  is  a  state,  not  a  land),  surrounded  by  all  the
people  and  things  it  loves  and  longs  for.  But  these  are  ideal,  and  the
very  people  by  whom  it  believes  itself  surrounded  may  be  each  dream-
ing his  own  dream  in  his  own  ideal  paradise;  or  some  of  them  may  be
still  on  earth  or  even  passing  through  the  remorseless  wheels  of  anni-
hilation. And  through  the  veils  that  surround  each  spirit's  dream  of
felicity  there  is  no  peeping  down  to  earth,  a  glimpse  of  which  would
necessarily  mingle  some  bitterness  with  the  cup  of  happiness;  nor  is
there  any  conscious  communication  with  the  flying  souls  that  come,  as
it  were,  to  learn  where  the  spirits  are,  what  they  are  doing,  and  what
they  think,  feel  and  see.

460  A    MODERN    PANARION.

What,  then,  is  being  en  rapport?  It  is  simply  an  identity  of  molecu-
lar vibration  between  the  astral  part  of  the  incarnated  sensitive  and
the  astral  part  of  the  disincarnate  personality.  The  spirit  of  the  sensi-
tive gets  "odylized,"  so  to  speak,  by  the  aura  of  the  spirit,  whether  the
latter  be  hibernating  in  the  earthly  region  or  dreaming  in  the  Deva-
chan;  identity  of  molecular  vibration  is  established,  and  for  a  brief
space  the  sensitive  becomes  the  departed  personality  and  writes  in  its
handwriting,  uses  its  language  and  thinks  its  thoughts.  At  such  times
sensitives  may  believe  that  those  with  whom  they  are  for  the  moment
en  rapport  descend  to  earth  and  communicate  with  them,  whereas,  in
reality,  it  is  merely  their  own  spirits,  which,  being  correctly  attuned  to
those  others,  are  for  the  time  blended  with  them.

Many  of  the  subjective  spiritual  communications  are  genuine,  where
the  sensitive  is  pure-minded;  but  they  only  reflect  in  each  case  the
ideas  of  a  single  spirit,  unable  to  see  beyond  the  limits  of  its  own
mental  chrysalis  or  ideal  paradise;  further,  it  is  impossible  for  the  un-
initiated sensitive  to  observe  and  record  altogether  correctly  what  it
does  see  and  hear  during  its  amalgamation;  it  is  equally  impossible  for
the  sensitive  to  transfer  intact  the  impressions  recorded  by  the  super-
sensuous  faculties  to  the  senses  through  which  alone  they  can  be  com-
municated to  the  world,  and  such  communications  will  be  still  further
vitiated  by  any  preexisting  conceptions  or  beliefs  inhering  in  the  minds
of  either  sensitive  or  magnetizer  or  both.

But  our  critic  says  that,  having  compared  the  descriptions  of  things
spiritual  given  to  him  by  different  sensitives  when  in  trance,  he  found
a  general  harmony,  "each  and  all  describing  worlds  or  spheres  more
beautiful  than  this,  peopled  by  forms  in  human  shape,  exhibiting  a
higher  average  intelligence."  But  what  else  could  he  expect,  he  a
pure-minded,  educated  European  of  the  present  day,  dealing  also  with
pure,  more  or  less  educated  sensitives?  If  he  had  tried  a  native  Aus-
tralian sensitive  and  had  studiously  kept  his  own  mind  passive,  he
would  have  heard  a  very  different  story.  Nay,  though  a  certain  skeleton
of  truth — but  partial  truth — runs  through  all  genuine  communications,
he  will  find  the  widest  discrepancies  in  details  between  the  so-called
facts  elicited  by  himself  and  those  elicited  by  equally  good  observers
with  equally  pure  mediums  in  France,  Germany  and  America.

It  is  unnecessary,  however,  to  press  this  point  further  now;  all  we
desire  for  the  moment  to  make  clear  is  that  while  we  in  no  way  dispute
the  genuineness  of  this  class  of  communications,  for  the  above  reasons

FRAGMENTS  OF  OCCULT  TRUTH.  461

we  know  them  to  be  necessarily  unreliable,  necessarily  more  or  less
incorrect  and  inaccurate.

And  now  as  to  automatic  handwriting  of  a  high  class,  we  would
remark  that  it  may  possibly  be  that  there  is  really  a  distinct  spiritual
entity  impressing  the  writer's  mind.  In  other  words,  there  may,  for  all
we  know,  be  some  spirit  with  whom  his  spiritual  nature  becomes  habitu-
ally, for  the  time,  thoroughly  harmonized,  and  whose  thoughts,  lan-
guage, etc.,  become  his  for  the  time,  the  result  being  that  this  spirit
seems  to  communicate  with  him.  All  we  said  before  was  that  a  similar
explanation  to  that  we  had  offered  of  the  facts  of  a  certain  case  would
in  all  probability  meet  a  certain  correspondent's  case.  But  if  he  feels
confident  that  this  explanation  does  not  fit  his  case,  then  it  is  possible,
though  by  no  means  probable,  that  he  habitually  passes  into  a  state  of
rapport  with  a  genuine  spirit,  and,  for  the  time,  is  assimilated  therewith,
thinking,  to  a  great  extent,  if  not  entirely,  the  thoughts  that  spirit
would  think,  and  writing  in  its  handwriting.

But  even  so,  it  should  not  be  thought  that  such  a  spirit  is  consciously
communicating  with  the  medium,  or  knows  in  any  way,  anything  of  him
or  any  other  person  or  thing  on  earth.  It  is  simply  that,  the  rapport  estab-
lished, he  becomes  for  the  nonce  assimilated  with  that  other  personality,
and  thinks,  speaks  and  writes  as  it  would  have  done  on  earth.

As  for  the  figure  of  the  fine,  intelligent  and  benevolent-looking  man,
seen  repeatedly  by  the  seers  and  seeresses,  this  may  well  be  a  real
astral  picture  of  the  earth-life  form  of  that  very  spirit,  drawn  into  the
aura  of  our  correspondent  by  the  synchronism  of  his  and  that  spirit's
nature.

Many  other  explanations  are  possible;  the  variety  of  the  causes  of
phenomena  is  great,  and  one  need  be  an  adept  and  actually  look  into
and  examine  what  transpires  in  order  to  be  able  to  explain  in  each  case
what  really  underlies  it;  but  this  much  is  certain,  that  no  good  benevo-
lent person  who  passed  away  upwards  of  a  century  ago  can  possibly  be
visiting  here  on  earth  and  advising  and  comforting  a  medium.  The
molecules  of  his  astral  nature  may  from  time  to  time  vibrate  in  perfect
unison  with  those  of  the  spirit  of  some  such  a  person  now  in  Devachan,
and  the  result  may  be  that  he  appears  to  be  in  communication  with
that  spirit  and  to  be  advised  by  him,  and  clairvoyants  may  see  in  the
astral  light  a  picture  of  the  earth-life  form  of  that  spirit,  but,  so  far  as
we  have  as  yet  been  instructed,  this  is  the  nearest  approach  to  the
ordinary  spiritualistic  hypothesis  that  is  possible.

462  A   MODERN    PANARION.

No  doubt  had  a  "guide,"  to  which  a  certain  correspondent  refers,  not
departed  from  this  earth  so  very  long  ago,  another  explanation,  to
which  we  will  refer  later,  more  in  consonance  with  spiritualistic  views,
would  have  been  possible,  though  extremely  improbable.

To  take  up  again  another  point,  even  despite  their  unobjectionable
character,  teachings  may  come  from  mere  reliquiae  of  men  or  person-
alities not  sufficiently  spiritual  for  further  progress.  In  our  first  "Frag-
ment" we  distinctly  said,  "All  elementaries  are  by  no  means  actively
wicked  all  round  .  .  .  when,  speaking  through  a  still  pure  medium
the  better  and  less  degraded  side  of  their  nature  comes  out,  and  it  is
quite  possible  for  elementaries  to  have  a  perfect  intellectual  knowledge
and  appreciation  of  virtue  and  purity,  and  enlightened  conceptions  of
truth,  and  yet  be  innately  vicious  in  their  tendencies."

It  is  perfectly  possible  that  the  admirable  teachings  referred  to  by  a
critic  may  have  come  from  a  high  class,  though  still  lost  personality,
too  intellectual  to  show  in  its  true  colours  before  him  and  his  friend,
and  yet  capable  of  playing  a  very  different  part  in  a  less  pure  circle.

But  it  is  far  more  likely  that  the  medium's  spirit  really  came  en
rapport  with  some  spiritual  entity  in  Devachan,  the  thoughts,  know-
ledge and  sentiments  of  which  formed  the  substance,  while  the  medium's
own  personality  and  preexisting  ideas  more  or  less  governed  the  form
of  the  communication.  We  attach  no  special  importance  to  the  par-
ticular form  of  words  in  which  the  message  was  given.  This  may  be
the  medium's  share  of  the  communication,  when  for  the  moment  he
identifies  his  spiritual  nature  with  that  of  the  spiritual  entity.

But,  as  a  broad  rule,  such  appearances  only  take  place  within  a  few
minutes  after,  or  shortly  before,  the  physical  death.  Of  course  we
mean  the  real  death;  the  last  portion  of  the  frame  that  dies  is  the  brain
— which  is  often  alive  and  thronged  with  images  long  after,  or,  at  any
rate,  for  many  hours  and  days  after  life  has  been  pronounced  to  be
extinct.  It  is  true  that  the  period  intervening  between  death  and  the
entry  into  the  gestation  state,  varies  in  the  case  of  persons  dying  a
natural  death,  from  a  few  hours  to  a  few  years,  but  it  is  quite  abnormal
for  the  spirit  to  appear  during  this  period,  except  within  a  very  short
period  after  death.  Putting  aside  the  case  of  adepts  and  those  trained
by  them  to  that  end,  the  Ego  within  a  few  moments  after  death,  sinks
into  a  state  of  unconsciousness  from  which  it  does  not  recover  until  the
struggle  between  the  higher  and  lower  nature  has  been  fought  out;  and
there  remains  inside  the  sphere  of  the  earth's  attraction — Kama  L,oka,

FRAGMENTS   OF   OCCUI/r   TRUTH.  463

the  Region  of  Desire — only  the  shell,  either  (in  the  rarer  case  of
personalities  doomed  to  annihilation)  a  two  and  a  half  principle  shell,
or  (in  the  case  in  which  the  higher  principles  have  triumphed,  and
have  passed  on,  taking  with  them  the  better  portions  of  the  fifth
principle)  a  one  and  a  half  principle  shell,  soon  to  disintegrate.

Even  when  a  "spirit"  appears  "a  few  days  after  death,"  it  is  really
an  unconscious  appearance.  The  spirit  sunk  in  its  post-mortem  trance
(of  course,  for  all  its  comparative  ethereality  and  non-corporeality,
a  space-occupying  and  material  entity)  is  borne  about  by  magnetic
currents,  swayed  here  and  there  like  dead  leaves  whirling  in  the  bosom
of  a  stream.  Thus  carried,  it  may  pass  within  the  range  of  vision  of
some  seer,  or  its  reflection  in  the  astral  light  may  be  caught  by  the
inner  eye  of  a  clairvoyant.  The  spirit  itself  will  have  no  more  con-
sciousness of  such  an  appearance  than  a  person  passing  through  a
room  in  which,  unknown  to  him,  there  happens  to  be  a  mirror,  is  of
having  cast  a  reflection  therein.  Usually  the  position  and  aspect  of
the  forms  indicate  unmistakably  the  unconsciousness  of  the  spirit,  but
this  is  not  invariable;  the  mental  activity  of  the  spirit  may  revive  in
a  succession  of  dreams,  restoring  a  subjective  consciousness,  while
objective  unconsciousness  still  prevails,  and  in  such  cases  the  form  may
assume  a  conscious  and  animated,  or  even  transfigured  appearance;  all
depends  on  the  character  and  intensity  of  the  dreams,  and  these  again
depend  upon  the  degree  of  the  spirituality  and  purity  of  the  deceased.

It  is  not  at  all  necessary  (nor  indeed,  is  it  possible  under  our  present
hypothesis)  that  any  real  conscious  communication  should  pass  between
the  dormant  spirit  and  the  seer.  It  is  sufficient  for  the  latter  to  come
into  direct  rapport  with  the  spirit  or  its  astral  image,  to  think  precisely
what  the  spirit,  if  still  conscious  and  in  earth-life,  would  have  thought.

In  the  case  of  communication  through  magnetic  sensitives,  the
magnetizer,  tenderly  attached  to  the  deceased,  by  the  exertion  of  his
magnetic  power  unconsciously  places  the  sensitive  en  rapport  with  the
spirit  of  the  deceased  with  which  for  the  time  the  spirit  of  the  sensitive
is  more  or  less  perfectly  identified,  leading  to  an  idea  of  seeing  the
deceased,  as  he  was  wont  to  appear  when  on  earth,  and  receiving  from
him  messages  or  indications,  of  which  the  sensitive  really  became
cognizant  when  the  two  spirits  were  for  the  moment  blended.

Transfigurations,  under  the  same  conditions,  are  less  doubtful  in
character,  and  there  are  three  ways  of  explaining  them:

Firstly:  the  mesmeric  action  of  the  magnetizer  places  the  sensitive's

464  A  MODERN    PANARION.

spirit  en  rapport  with  that  of  his  dearly-loved  deceased  friend.  Then,
when  for  the  time  the  identity  of  the  two  is  established,  the  nature  of
the  deceased  taken  on  by  the  sensitive,  being  much  more  spiritual  and
powerful  than  the  sensitive's  own,  and  his  physical  constitution  being
of  such  a  nature  as  to  admit  such  changes,  the  body  of  the  subject
begins  at  once  to  exhibit  an  analogous  change,  corresponding  to  the
change  undergone  by  his  spiritual  nature  in  consequence  of  the  amal-
gamation.

Secondly:  the  transfiguration  may  be  due  to  the  intensity  and  clear-
ness of  the  deceased  friend's  face  in  the  operator's  thought.  That  face
being  so  strongly  impressed  on  his  memory,  it  is  but  natural  that  his
memory,  owing  to  its  intensified  activity  during  such  seances,  should
be  throwing  off  an  unusual  amount  of  energy,  and  solidifying,  so  to  say,
the  familiar  image  on  the  etheric  waves  of  his  aura.  Thus,  unknown
to  himself,  he  may  rouse  it  up  into  sympathetic  action  which,  trans-
forming the  image  from  a  subjective  into  an  objective  picture,  finally
causes  it  to  move  on,  guided  by  the  current  of  attraction,  until  it  settles
upon,  and  so  is  found  reflected  in  the  medium's  face.  The  images  we
find  in  the  endless  galleries  of  space,  nailed  on  to  the  indestructible

A

walls  of  Akasha,  are  but  lifeless  and  empty  masks  after  all,  the  pictorial
records  of  our  thoughts,  words,  and  deeds.  In  a  case  recently  referred
to  by  a  correspondent,  the  invisible  reality  in  the  magnetizer's  aura
threw  an  objective  adumbration  on  the  plastic  features  of  his  sensitive,
and  the  phenomenon  was  produced.

Thirdly:  thought,  memory  and  will  are  the  energies  of  the  brain,
and,  like  all  other  forces  of  nature — to  use  the  language  of  modern
science — have  two  general  forms,  the  potential  and  the  kinetic  form  of
energy.  Potential  thought  clairvoyantly  discerns  and  chooses  its
subject  in  the  astral  light;  the  will  becomes  the  motor  power  that
causes  it  to  move,  that  directs  and  guides  it  whithersoever  it  likes,  and
it  is  thus  that  the  adept  produces  his  occult  phenomena,  whether  of  a
physical  or  spiritual  character.  But  the  latter  can  also  occur  without
any  intervention  of  an  intelligent  will.  The  passive  condition  of  the
medium  leaves  him  an  easy  prey  to  the  pranks  of  the  elementaries,  as
well  as  to  those  semi-intelligent  elemental  beings  ever  basking  and
masquerading  in  the  sidereal  light,  and  such  a  phenomenon  may  as
easily  occur  of  itself,  simply  owing  to  surrounding  favourable  con-
ditions. The  sidereal  image  of  a  person  we  think  of  will  remain  pale
and  quiescent  in  its  indelible  impression  on  the  ether,  until  its  atoms

FRAGMENTS  OF  OCCULT  TRUTH.  465

are  propelled  into  action  by  the  strong  magnetic  attraction  which
emanates  from  the  molecular  tissues  of  the  medium,  saturated  as  they
are  with  the  mesmerizer's  thought  full  of  the  image.  Hence  the  pheno-
menon of  transfiguration.

These  transfigurations  are  rare,  but  we  have  known  of  a  good  many
instances,  and  some  very  remarkable  ones  will  be  found  recorded  in
Colonel  Olcott's  work,  entitled  People  from  the  Other  World.

The  above  probably  explains  all  the  features  of  the  particular  case-
referred  to;  but  to  enable  us  to  assert  positively  in  any  case  that  the
occurrence  was  brought  about  in  this  or  that  way,  it  is  essential  that
we  should  be  acquainted  with  every  single  detail.  So  long  as  we  only
have  the  barest  outlines  to  deal  with,  all  we  can  pretend  to  offer  are
more  or  less  probable  solutions.

A  critic  tells  us  that  even  if  we  explain  one  or  two  cases,  he  still
finds  an  unbroken  line  of  stubborn  facts  opposing  our  explanations,
behind  which  he  is  unable  to  penetrate.  We  can  only  promise  that  if
he  will  furnish  us  with  accurate  details  of  all  cases  within  his  personal
knowledge  which,  in  his  opinion,  are  not  explicable  by  the  occult  doc-
trines, we  will  show  him  that  they  are  so  explicable  or  abandon  the
field.

But  we  must  lay  down  two  conditions.  First,  we  will  only  accept
cases  of  which  he  has  a  complete  personal  knowledge;  we  will  not
accept  cases  picked  up  out  of  books  and  papers.  Our  critic  is  a  reliable,
philosophical  observer,  from  whom  we  are  sure  to  get  facts  carefully
observed  and  accurately  recorded.  With  these  we  can  have  no  diffi-
culty in  dealing.  But  as  for  cases  recorded  here  there  and  every-
where, many  are,  to  our  knowledge,  pure  inventions,  while  many  more,
although  recorded  in  good  faith,  have  been  so  transformed  in  the  pro-
cess of  observation  and  record  that  it  would  be  hopeless  to  discuss

them.

Secondly,  he  must  not  be  surprised  if,  in  the  course  of  our  explana-
tions, all  kinds  of  new  facts  not  hitherto  touched  on  are  brought  to
notice.  The  subject  is  a  vast  one.  There  are  wheels  within  wheels,
laws  within  laws,  exceptions  to  all  these.  Hitherto  we  have  purposely
only  endeavoured  to  convey  a  general  conception  of  the  more  important
features  of  the  truth.  If  exact  accuracy  of  detail  is  required,  every
one  of  our  general  laws  will  require  certain  provisoes  and  limitations.
To  detail  only  what  we  know  in  regard  to  these  spiritual  phenomena
would  occupy  several  complete  numbers  of  The  Theosophid,  and  if  our

466  A   MODERN    PANARION.

explanation  had  to   include  the  whole  system  of  elementals — future
men  during  a  coming  cycle — and   other  obscure   powers   and   forces
which  cannot  even  be  mentioned,  several   octavo  volumes  would  be
needed  to  contain  it.
The  same  critic  says:

If  the  proof  can  only  be  obtained  by  a  practical  renunciation  of  the  world,  a
severance  of  all  human  ties,  affections  and  responsibilities,  of  what  use  is  it  to
humanity?  Only  one  in  a  million  may  avail  themselves  of  it,  and  how  many  of  the
remaining  nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine  thousand,  nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine,
would  have  faith  in  his  testimony.

We  are  compelled  to  point  out  that  he  is  in  error  in  his  premisses,
and  that  his  conclusions,  even  were  these  premisses  correct,  are  un-
tenable. For  even  admit  that  only  one  in  a  million  would  consent  to
avail  themselves  of  the  opportunity  afforded  for  obtaining  proof,  would
this  be  any  reason  for  the  remaining  nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine
thousand,  nine  hundred  and  ninety-nine  refusing  to  accept  their  evi-
dence? Is  this  so  in  practice?  Certainly  not!  At  the  present  time
not  more  than  one  in  a  million  (if  so  many)  are  willing  to  avail  them-
selves of  the  opportunity  of  obtaining  for  themselves  proof  of  the  facts
of  astronomy.  Yet  the  remainder  accept  these  facts,  perfectly  satisfied
with  the  knowledge  that  anyone  who  chooses  to  go  through  the  neces-
sary training  and  study  can  acquire  that  proof,  and  that  all  who  have
gone  through  that  training  are  agreed  as  to  the  sufficiency  of  the  proof.

Astronomy  is  a  science  with  the  name  and  general  bearing  of  which
all  fairly  educated  men  are  familiar.  Occultism  is  a  science  which  has
hitherto  been  veiled  in  the  most  profound  secrecy,  and  of  which,  so
far,  none  but  occultists  have  possessed  any  knowledge.  But  once  let
mankind  be  familiarized  with  the  idea,  let  it  become  known  that  any-
one who  chooses  to  make  the  necessary  sacrifices  can  obtain  the  proofs,
and  that  those  who  have  obtained  the  proofs  consider  them  conclusive,
and  the  mass  of  mankind  will  be  quite  content  to  accept  the  facts,  even
on  the  testimony  of  the  one  in  a  million  who  does  undertake  the  verifi-
cation of  the  assertions  of  his  predecessors.

But  our  correspondent's  assumptions  are  erroneous;  a  practical
renunciation  of  the  world  in  the  sense  in  which  the  apostle  exhorted
all  Christians  to  be  in  the  world  but  not  of  the  world  is  doubtless
essential,  but  it  is  by  no  means  requisite  to  sever  all  human  ties  and
affections,  nor  can  it  ever  be  permitted,  much  less  required,  to  abjure
human    responsibilities.     These   latter  may  change  in   character,   and

FRAGMENTS   OF  OCCULT  TRUTH.  467

may — indeed  must — with  increased  knowledge  and  power,  assume  a
wider  reach,  and  the  affections  must  broaden  and  become  more  cosmo-
politan, but  it  is  self-abnegation,  not  selfishness,  and  a  devotion  to  the
welfare  of  others,  that  smoothes  the  path  to  adeptship.

Again,  as  regards  the  freedom  from  error  claimed  for  the  teachings
of  occultism,  it  is  needless  to  point  out  the  difference  between  empiri-
cism and  science,  and  the  uninitiated  are  empiricists,  the  occultists,
scientists.  This  will  be  obvious  at  once  when  it  is  borne  in  mind  that,
for  thousands  of  years,  hundreds  of  initiates  have  been  exploring  the
unseen  world ;  that  the  results  of  their  explorations  have  been
recorded  and  collected,  and  discrepancies  eliminated  by  fresh  verifica-
tions ;  that  the  facts  ascertained  have  been  generalized,  and  the  laws
governing  them  deduced  therefrom,  and  the  correctness  of  these  de-
ductions verified  by  experiment.  Occultism  is,  therefore,  in  ever}'
sense  of  the  word  an  exact  science,  while  the  teachings  of  the  very
ablest  untrained  seer  who  has  worked  single-handed  can  only  be  em-
piric.

When  in  our  first  article  we  said  we  know  (an  expression  to  which  a
critic,  perhaps  rightly,  takes  objection)  we  only  said  this  in  the  sense
that,  talking  to  people  ignorant  of  mathematics,  we  should  say  that  we
know  that  the  curve  described  by  the  moon  in  space  is  a  form  of  an
epicycloid  represented  by  such  and  such  an  equation — not  meaning
thereby  that  we  had  ourselves  investigated  this  somewhat  abstruse
problem,  but  that  we  were  aware  of  the  method  by  which  this  was
solved,  and  knew  that  numerous  competent  mathematicians  had  so
solved  it,  and  had  all  arrived  at  the  same  solution.  Surely  those
ignorant  alike  of  mathematics  and  of  the  work  of  mathematicians
could  by  no  means  as  reasonably  say  in  reply,  that  they  knew  that  the
orbit  of  the  moon  was  something  wholly  different.  It  is  not  our  ex-
periences, though  these  collectively  are  considerable,  on  which  we
rely,  as  our  critic  seems  to  fancy.  For  all  we  know,  his  experiences
may  exceed  ours,  and,  be  this  as  it  may,  we  should  certainly  never
have  presumed  to  traverse  authoritatively  his  views  on  the  strength  of
our  own  experiences  or  knowledge.  What  we  rely  on  are  the  general-
ized results  of  the  experiences  during  a  vast  period  of  time  of  a  large
body  of  trained  psychists  who  have  ever  made  the  attainment  of  truth,
in  matters  spiritual,  the  foremost  object  of  their  desire,  and  the  pro-
motion, though  in  secret,  of  the  welfare  of  mankind  their  primary
duty.

468  A   MODERN    PANARION.

And  now,  having  attempted  to  answer  certain  objections  to  onr
previous  "Fragments,"  we  think  it  might  be  well  to  develop  a  little
further  one  doctrine  that  we  broached  in  onr  first  paper,  and  explain
more  in  detail  why  we  are  so  strongly  opposed  to  habitual  mediumism.

Broadly  speaking,  the  objective  phenomena  of  spiritualists  (of  sub-
jective communications  we  have  already  spoken)  are  the  work  of,  or  at
any  rate  result  from,  the  activities  or  intervention  of  elementals,  half
intelligent  nature  forces,  entities  which  in  a  far  distant  cycle,  after
passing  through  all  the  lower  objective  kingdoms  will  ultimately  be
born  as  men;  and  elementaries  or  shells.  These  shells  are  of  two  kinds:
first,  those  belonging  to  men  whose  sixth  and  seventh  principles  hav-
ing attracted  to  themselves  the  quintessence,  as  it  were,  of  the  fifth
also,  have  moved  on  to  fresh  developments.  These  shells  consist  of
the  fourth,  and  only  a  portion  of  the  fifth  principles.  Half  or  more  of
the  personal  memory  is  gone  and  the  more  animal  or  material  instincts
only  survive.  This  relic,  this  dross  left  behind  in  the  crucible  when
the  refined  gold  was  taken,  is  commonly  the  "angel  guide"  of  the
average  medium.  Such  entities,  of  course,  only  survive  for  a  time;
gradually  all  consciousness  departs  and  they  disintegrate.  Only  highly
mediumistic  natures  attract  these,  and  only  certain  of  these.  The
purer  the  personality  the  less  their  vitality,  the  shorter  their  period  of
survival,  and  the  less  the  chance  of  their  contributing  to  mediumistic
displays.  The  more  full  of  blemishes,  the  more  disfigured  by  sins  and
animal  desires,  the  personality,  the  greater  the  vitality  of  its  reliquiae,
the  longer  their  survival,  and  the  greater  the  chance  of  their  finding
their  way  into  the  scancc-room.  The  man,  as  a  whole,  may  have  been
a  good  man,  good  may  have  actively  predominated  in  him,  and  yet  the
worse  portions  of  his  nature,  his  lower  and  more  animal  instincts
standing  now  alone  and  unneutralized  by  all  the  better  portions  of  his
character,  may  be  evil  enough.

It  is  impossible  that  any  real  good  can  come  of  intercourse  even  with
this  class  of  shell;  it  will  not  be  actively  wicked,  it  is  too  imperfect
and  weak  for  that,  but  yet  its  influence  in  the  long  run  cannot  be
elevating.  But,  besides  this,  it  is  wrong  to  encourage  such  shells  into
activity  or  convey  to  them  a  fresh  impulse  such  as  they  often  obtain
through  mediums,  since  a  strong  sympathy  continues  to  subsist  be-
tween the  departed  personality  and  its  reliquiae,  and  any  excitement  of
these  latter,  any  galvanization  of  them  with  a  fictitious  renewed  life,
such  as  results  from  mediums  dealing  with  them,  distinctly  disturbs

FRAGMENTS  OP  OCCULT  TRUTH.  469

the  gestation  of  the  personality,  hinders  the  evolution  of  its  new  Ego-
hood,  and  delays  thereby  its  entry  into  the  state  of  felicity  (Devaehan)
in  which,  in  its  new  Ego-hood,  it  reaps  the  fruits  of  its  good  deeds,
prior  to  reincarnation  and  rebirth  here,  if  it  has  not  completed  its
appointed  tale  of  earth-lives,  or  in  the  next  superior  planet.

But  the  other  kind  of  elementary  is  far  more  dangerous  as  a  rule  to
deal  with.  In  this  case  the  man  has  been  weighed  in  the  balance  and
found  wanting— his  personality  has  to  be  blotted  out— the  fourth  and
fifth  principles  are  intact;  and  more  than  this,  the  fifth  will  have
assimilated  all  that  there  may  be  left  of  personal  recollection  and  per-
ception of  its  personal  individuality  in  the  sixth.  This  second  class
of  shell  is  in  every  way  more  enduring,  more  active,  and  in  the  majority
of  cases,  distinctly  wicked.  No  doubt  it  can  suffer  no  injury  from  its
intercourse  with  men,  but  these  latter  must  inevitably  deteriorate  in
consequence  of  association  with  shells  of  this  class.  Fortunately  these
are  not,  comparatively  speaking,  very  numerous;  of  course,  absolutely,
there  have  been  millions  of  millions  of  such,  but,  to  the  credit  of  human
nature  be  it  said  that  the  personalities  that  have  to  be  absolutely  blotted
out  form  but  a  fractional  percentage  of  the  whole.

Moreover,  shells  of  this  nature  do  not  remain  for  any  great  length  of
time  in  the  atmosphere  of  this  earth,  but  like  straws  floating  near  a
whirlpool,  get  caught  up  by  and  dragged  down  in  that  terrible  mael-
strom which  hurries  off  the  failures  towards  disintegration,  to  the
planet  of  matter  and  death — the  mental  as  well  as  the  physical  satellite
of  our  earth!

As  for  the  elementals,  rudimentary  men  no  doubt,  but  more  embryonic
even  than  the  spirit  that  sleeps  in  the  mineral,  these,  though  capable  of
becoming  powerful  forces  in  association  with  shells,  under  the  spells  of
sorcerers  and  under  the  guidance  of  adepts,  are,  as  a  rule,  irresponsible,
purblind,  neutral  entities,  taking  moral  and  mental  character  and
colour  from  the  active  and  more  developed  spiritual  entity  with  or
under  whose  control  they  work;  but  even  these,  though  themselves
incapable  of  being  injured,  may  become  very  dangerous  to  mediums
with  any  inherent  evil  tendencies.

Here  then  in  elementals  and  elementaries  are  to  be  found  the  majority
probably  of  the  performers  of  the  physical  phenomena  of  spiritualists.
Association  with  no  one  of  these  three  classes  can  possibly  benefit
mankind  as  a  whole.  The  variety  of  natures  is  so  infinite  that  we  do
not  assert  that  in  no  case  has  any  human  being  benefited  by  inter-

470  A    MODERN    PANARION.

course  with  any  individual  specimen  of  either  class.  But  we  do  say
that,  broadly  speaking,  nothing  but  harm  can  be  expected  from  asso-
ciation with  such.  Further,  in  the  case  of  one  of  the  three  classes,
mediumistic  intercourse  inflicts  a  distinct  injury  upon  innocent
beings.

But  though  elementaries  and  elementals  constitute  a  large  proportion
of  the  performers,  there  are  other  classes  of  actors.  We  do  not  pretend
— we  are  not  permitted — to  deal  exhaustively  with  the  question  at
present,  but  we  may  refer  to  one  of  the  most  important  classes  of
entities  who  can  participate  in  objective  phenomena  other  than  elemen-
taries and  elementals.

This  class  comprises  the  spirits  of  conscious  sane  suicides.  They
are  spirits  and  not  shells,  because  there  is  not  in  their  case,  at  any  rate
until  later,  a  total  and  permanent  divorce  between  the  fourth  and  fifth
principles  on  the  one  hand  and  the  sixth  and  seventh  on  the  other.
The  two  are  divided,  they  exist  apart,  but  a  line  of  connection  still
unites  them,  they  ma)*  yet  reunite,  and  the  sorely  threatened  personality
avert  its  doom;  the  fifth  principle  still  holds  in  its  hands  the  clue  by
which,  traversing  the  labyrinth  of  earthly  sins  and  passions,  it  may
regain  the  sacred  penetralia.  But  for  the  time,  though  really  a  spirit,
and  therefore  so  designated,  it  is  practically  not  far  removed  from  a
shell.

This  class  of  spirit  can  undoubtedly  communicate  with  men,  but  as
a  rule  its  members  have  to  pay  dearly  for  exercising  the  privilege,
while  it  is  scarcely  possible  for  them  to  do  otherwise  than  lower  and
debase  the  moral  nature  of  those  with  and  through  whom  they  have
much  communication.  It  is  merely,  broadly  speaking,  a  question  of
degree;  of  much  or  little  injury  resulting  from  such  communication;
the  cases  in  which  real,  permanent  good  can  arise  are  too  absolutely
exceptional  to  require  consideration.

Understand  how  the  case  stands.  The  unhappy  being  revolting
against  the  trials  of  life — trials,  the  results  of  its  own  former  actions,
trials,  heaven's  merciful  medicine  for  the  mentally  and  spiritually
diseased — determines,  instead  of  manfully  taking  arms  against  a  sea  of
troubles,  to  let  the  curtain  drop,  and,  as  it  fancies,  end  them.

It  destroys  the  body,  but  finds  itself  precisely  as  much  alive  mentally
as  before.  It  had  an  appointed  life-term  determined  by  an  intricate
web  of  prior  causes,  which  its  own  wilful  sudden  act  cannot  shorten.
That  term  must  run  out  its  appointed  sands.     You  may  smash  the

FRAGMENTS   OF   OCCULT   TRUTH.

47  r

lower  half  of  the  hour-glass  so  that  the  impalpable  sand  shooting  from
the  upper  bell  is  dissipated  by  the  passing  aerial  currents  as  it  issues,
but  that  stream  will  run  on,  unnoticed  though  it  remain,  until  the
whole  store  in  that  upper  receptacle  is  exhausted.

So  you  may  destroy  the  body,  but  not  the  appointed  period  of
sentient  existence,  foredoomed,  because  simply  the  effect  of  a  plexus  of
causes,  to  intervene  before  the  dissolution  of  the  personality;  this  must
run  on  for  its  appointed  period.

This  is  so  in  other  cases;  for  example,  those  of  the  victims  of  acci-
dent or  violence — they,  too,  have  to  complete  their  life-term,  and  of
these,  too,  we  may  speak  on  another  occasion;  but  here  it  is  sufficient
to  notice  that,  whether  good  or  bad,  their  mental  attitude  at  the  time
of  death  alters  wholly  their  subsequent  position.     They,  too,  have  to
wait  on  within  the  Region  of  Desires  until  their  wave  of  life  runs  on
to  and  reaches  its  appointed   shore;    but  they  wait  on,  wrapped   in
dreams  soothing  and  blissful  or  the  reverse,  according  to  their  mental
and  moral  state  at  and  prior  to  the  fatal  hour,  but  nearly  exempt  from
further  material  temptations,  and,  broadly  speaking,  incapable,  except
just  at  the  moment  of  real  death,  of  communicating  suo  mo  tit  with
mankind,  though  not  wholly  beyond  the  possibility  of  reach  of  the
higher  forms  of  the  "accursed  science,"  necromancy.     The  question  is
a  profoundly  abstruse  one.     It  would  be  impossible  to  explain  within
the  brief  space  still  remaining  to  us  how  the  conditions  immediately
after  death  in  the  case  of  the  man  who  deliberately  lays  down  (not
merely  risks)   his  life  from   altruistic   motives  in   the  hope  of  saving
those  of  others,  and  of  him  who  deliberately  sacrifices  his  life  from
selfish  motives  in  the  hopes  of  escaping  trials  and  troubles  which  loom
before  him,  differ  so  entirely  as  they  do.     Nature  or  Providence,  Y.
or  God  being  merely  a  self-adjusting  machine,  it  would  at  first  sight
seem  as  if  the  results  must  be  identical  in  both  cases.     But  machine
though  it  be,  we  must  remember  that  it  is  a  machine  sui  generis :

Out  of  himself  he  span
Th'  eternal  web  of  right  and  wrong,
And  ever  feels  the  subtlest  thrill,
The  slenderest  thread  along!

— a  machine  compared  with  whose  perfect  sensitiveness  and  adjustment
the  highest  human  intellect  is  but  a  coarse  clumsy  replica.

And  we  must  remember  that  thoughts  and  motives  are  material,  and
at  times  marvellously  potent  material  forces,  and  we  may  then  begin

472  A    MODERN   PANARION.

to  comprehend  why  the  hero  sacrificing  his  life  on  pure  altruistic
grounds,  sinks  as  his  life-blood  ebbs  away  into  a  sweet  dream,  wherein

All  that  he  wishes  and  all  that  he  loves

Come  smiling  around  his  sunny  way,

only  to  wake  into  active  or  objective  consciousness  when  reborn  in
the  Region  of  Happiness,  while  the  poor,  unhappy  and  misguided
mortal  who,  seeking  to  elude  fate,  selfishly  loosens  the  silver  string
and  breaks  the  golden  bowl,  finds  himself  terribly  alive  and  awake,
instinct  with  all  the  evil  cravings  and  desires  that  embittered  his
world-life,  without  a  body  in  which  to  gratify  them,  and  capable  of
only  such  partial  alleviation  as  is  possible  by  more  or  less  vicarious
gratification,  and  this  only  at  the  risk  of  the  complete  rupture  with  his
sixth  and  seventh  principles,  and  consequent  ultimate  annihilation
after  prolonged  periods  of  suffering.

L,et  it  not  be  supposed  that  there  is  no  hope  for  this  class — the  sane,
deliberate  suicide.  If,  bearing  steadfastly  his  cross,  he  suffers  his
punishment  patiently,  striving  against  carnal  appetites — still  alive  in
him  in  all  their  intensity,  though,  of  course,  each  in  proportion  to  the
degree  to  which  it  had  been  indulged  in  earth-life — if,  we  say,  he
bears  this  humbly,  never  allowing  himself  to  be  tempted  here  or  there
into  unlawful  gratifications  of  unholy  desires,  then,  when  his  fated
death-hour  strikes,  his  four  higher  principles  reunite,  and  in  the  final
separation  that  then  ensues  all  may  be  well  with  him,  and  he  may  pass
on  to  the  gestation  period  and  its  subsequent  developments.

Till  the  predestined  death-knell  rings  he  has  his  chance;  he  may
wipe  out  in  suffering  and  repentance  many  a  sad  black  score  from  the
page  of  Karma,  but — and  this  is  the  point  we  desire  to  impress  upon
spiritualists — he  may  add  a  hundred  fouler  ones  to  the  sad  blots  already
damning  the  record.

It  is  not  merely  for  the  sake  of  the  mediums,  not  merely  "for  the
sake  of  those  that  sit  at  meat  with  these,"  but,  above  all,  for  the  sake
of  these  miserable  half-lost  brothers  and  sisters  that  we  appeal.

Suddenly  cut  short  in  careers  always  more  or  less  deeply  befouled  in
all  sane  suicides — and  we  speak  only  of  these,  for  insane  suicides  are
but  victims — by  one  of  the  deadliest  sins,  rage,  hatred,  lust  or  greed,
they  awake  to  find  themselves  haunted  by  their  besetting  sin  in  all  its
intensity.  Around  them  are  mediums,  many  of  them  throwing  them-
selves open  to  what  they  idly  dream  to  be  angel  guides.  They  have
but  to  obsess  these  only  too  willing  partners,  to  share  in  their  evil

FRAGMENTS  OF  OCCULT  TRUTH.  473

gratifications,  or  collecting  out  of  their  aura  and  loosely  coherent
physical  organizations,  and  from  even  fouler  sources,  the  tombs  and
shambles,  materials  to  form  a  fragile  physical  organization  of  their
own,  revel  with  their  mediums  in  all  imaginable  iniquity.  These  are
the  incubi  and  succubae  of  mediaeval  times,  these  are  the  "spirit
wives"  and  "husbands"  of  modern  days,  and  these,  when  merely
obsessing  and  not  assuming  a  separate  objective  form,  are  the  demons
of  drunkenness,  gluttony,  hatred  and  malice,  the  memorials  of  whose
fiendish  excesses  crowd  the  sad  records  alike  of  the  present  and  the
past.

Evil  to  begin  with,  and  separated  (though  not  as  yet  irrevocably)
from  their  sixth  and  seventh  principles,  and  such  restraining  influence
as  these  may  have  insensibly  exercised,  these  spirits  too  often  pass
from  bad  to  worse,  develop  into  true  psychic  vampires,  driving  victim
after  victim  to  destruction,  inciting  to  and  glorying  in,  the  foulest,  the
most  incredible  crimes,  to  be  swept  at  last,  when  the  appointed  death-
hour  strikes,  on  the  flood-tide  of  their  own  enormities,  far  out  of  the
earth's  aura  into  regions  where  annihilation  alone  drops  the  curtain  on
aeons  of  unimaginable  misery.

And  many  of  these,  veritable  fiends  as  they  become,  were  not  so
very,  very  bad  in  this  life — "shady  lots,"  perhaps,  in  modern  phrase-
ology, with  some  rebellious,  bitter,  angry  taint  in  the  character  which
led  them  to  suicide,  but,  after  all,  very  far  removed  from  the  demons
which  they  eventually  become;  and  this  awful  and  incredible  develop-
ment devil-wards  which  they  underwent,  though  indirectly  facilitated
by  the  separation  of  their  highest  principles,  was  primarily  and  almost
exclusively  due  to  the  temptations,  the  facilities  for  the  gratification  of
their  worst  desires,  held  out  to  them  by  mediums,  recognized  as  such  or
not,  of  the  low  physical-manifestation  type.

Alas!  for  the  great  bulk  of  such  mediums.  Alas!  for  too  many  of
their  spiritualistic  admirers  and  associates.  Little  do  they  dream  that
two-thirds  of  all  the  most  monstrous  crimes  in  the  world  have  their
origin  in  this  low  physical  mediumistic  capacity.  Unrecognized  as
such,  hundreds  of  miserable  mediums  perish  on  the  scaffold,  declaring,
and  declaring  truly,  that  they  were  egged  on  to  the  crimes  for  which
they  suffer  by  a  devil,  in  reality  an  obsessing  spirit,  mostly  of  this
class.  In  thousands  and  thousands  of  cases  the  gross  sins,  drunken-
ness, gluttony,  lewdness,  bestiality  in  all  its  forms,  which  spread
desolation  to  innumerable  happy  hearths  and  plunge  in  misery  and

474  A    MODERN    PANARION.

disgrace  countless  happy  households,  are  all  really  traceable  to  this
same  class  of  spirit,  deriving  alike  the  intensity  of  its  evil  desires  and
the  power  to  do  harm,  from  that  fatal  capacity  for  mediumship  of  the
low  class  favourable  to  physical  manifestations.

And  this  mediumship  is  a  plant  that,  like  a  noxious  weed,  under
encouraging  influences,  spreads  as  time  runs  on.  Do  the  spiritualists
who  deal  so  complacently  with,  nay,  who  so  greedily  run  after,  these
physical-manifestation  mediums,  reflect  on,  or  at  all  realize,  what  the}'
are  doing?  It  is  not  merely  that  both  they  themselves  and  the
mediums  are  running  a  fearful  risk  of  moral  shipwreck  through  this
intercourse — this  can  to  a  certain  extent  be  guarded  against,  though
it  too  seldom  is,  by  perfect  purity  of  word  thought  and  deed ;  and
again  the  medium  may,  though  this,  too,  is  rare,  be  naturally  so  well-
disposed  that  the  obsessing  spirit,  if  not  already  rabidly  evil,  may  do
little  harm;  but  what  is  alike  beyond  control  of  medium  and  his  or
her  supporters  is  diffusion,  as  the  mediumship  is  developed,  of  medium-
istic  germs  through  the  akashic  atmosphere,  which,  finding  here  and
there  appropriate  soils  in  the  weakest  and  most  sensual  natures,  will
produce  later  a  crop  of  more  degraded  mediums,  destined  certainly  to
include  many  of  the  vilest  sinners,  if  not  several  of  the  deepest-dyed
criminals  of  the  age.

This  form  of  mediumship  is  a  deadly  weed,  and  so  far  from  being
encouraged  into  reproduction — and  that  is  what  the  spiritualists  as  a
body  do — it  should  be  starved  out  by  disuse  whenever  and  wherever  it
is  recognized.  Unfortunately,  it  will  always  exist,  springing  up  spo-
radically here  and  there;  and,  though  dwarfed  in  habit,  contributing
largely  to  the  loathsome  annals  of  sin  and  crime;  but  it  is  truly  mon-
strous to  aid  the  propagation  of  this  curse  in  an  intensified  form,  by
aiding  and  abetting  the  development  and  function  of  prominent  speci-
mens.

Let  none  who  do  this  dream  that  they  can  escape  the  consequences.
All  who  share  in  transactions  by  which  sin  and  misery  are  multiplied
for  others  must  share  the  recoil.  They  may  act  in  ignorance,  in  good
faith,  and  so  escape  the  moral  taint — the  most  grievous  of  the  conse-
quences of  evil — but  they  can  by  no  means  escape  the  other  conse-
quences, and  they  will  have  to  brave  in  coming  lives  the  angry  buffets
of  a  retributive  justice,  which,  though  sleeping  during  the  present,
never  sleeps  during  a  second  life.

NOTES  ON  SOME  ARYAN-ARHAT
ESOTERIC  TENETS/'

[Vol.  III.  No.  4,  January,  1S82.]

Notes.

The  Tibetan  esoteric  Buddhist  doctrine  teaches  that  Prakriti  is  cosmic
matter,  out  of  which  all  visible  forms  are  produced ;  Akasha  is  also  cosmic
matter,  but  still  more  imponderable,  its  spirit,  as  it  were; -Prakriti  being
the  body  or  substance,  and  Akasha-Shakti  its  soul  or  energy.

Prakriti,  Svabhavat  or  Akasha  is  Space,  as  the  Tibetans  have  it;
Space  filled  with  whatsoever  substance  or  no  substance  at  all,  i.e.,  with
substance  so  imponderable  as  to  be  only  metaphysically  conceivable.
Brahman,  then,  would  be  the  germ  thrown  into  the  soil  of  that  field,
and  Shakti,  that  mysterious  energy  or  force  which  develops  it,  and
which  is  called  by  the  Buddhist  Arahats  of  Tibet,  Fohat.

"That  which  we  call  Form  (Rtipa)  is  not  different  from  that  which  we
call  Space  (Shunyata)  .  .  .  Space  is  not  different  from  Form.  Form  is
the  same  as  Space;  Space  is  the  same  as  Form.  And  so  with  the  other
Skandhas,  whether  Vedana,  or  Sanjria,  or  Sanskara  or  Vijnana,  they
are  each  the  same  as  their  opposite."  {Book  of  Sin- king  or  the  "Heart
Sutra."  Chinese  translation  of  the  Maha-Prajna-Paramita-Hridaya-
Siifra;  chapter  on  the  "Avalokiteshvara,"  or  Ma?iifesfed  Buddha.)

A

So  that,  the  Aryan  and  Tibetan  or  Arhat  doctrines  agree  perfectly  in
substance,  differing  but  in  names  given  and  the  way  of  putting  it,  a
distinction  resulting  from  the  fact  that  the  Vedantin  Brahmans  believe
in  Parabrahman,  a  deific  power,  impersonal  though  it  may  be,  while
the  Buddhists  entirely  reject  it.

Appendices.
I.
The  country  called  Si-dzang  by  the  Chinese,  and  Tibet  by  Western
geographers,  is  mentioned  in  the  oldest  books  preserved  in  the  province

*  The  following  are  a  collection  of  notes  and  appendices  on  an  article,  entitled  "The  Ary.m-Arhat
Esoteric  Tenets  on  the  Sevenfold  Principle  in  Man,"  by  T.  Subba  Row,  B.A.,  BX.— Eds.

47^  A    MODERN    PANARION.

of  Fo-kien  (the  chief  headquarters  of  the  aborigines  of  China)  as  the
great  seat  of  occult  learning  in  the  archaic  ages.  According  to  these
records,  it  was  inhabited  by  the  "Teachers  of  Light,"  the  "Sons  of
Wisdom"  and  the  "Brothers  of  the  Sun."  The  Emperor  Yu,  the
"Great"  (2207  B.C.),  a  pious  mystic,  is  credited  with  having  obtained
his  occult  wisdom  and  the  system  of  theocracy  established  by  him — for
he  was  the  first  one  to  unite  in  China  ecclesiastical  power  with  temporal
authority — from  Si-dzang.  That  system  was  the  same  as  with  the  old
Egyptians  and  the  Chaldees — that  which  we  know  to  have  existed  in
the  Brahmanical  period  in  India,  and  to  exist  now  in  Tibet — namely,  all
the  learning,  power,  the  temporal  as  well  as  the  secret  wisdom  were
concentrated  within  the  hierarchy  of  the  priests  and  limited  to  their
caste.  Who  were  the  aborigines  of  Tibet  is  a  question  which  no  ethno-
grapher is  able  to  answ7er  correctly  at  present.  They  practise  the  Bhon
religion,  their  sect  was  pre-buddhistic  and  anti-buddhistic,  and  they
are  to  be  found  mostly  in  the  province  of  Kam — that  is  all  that  is
known  of  them.  But  even  that  would  justify  the  supposition  that  they
are  the  greatly  degenerated  descendants  of  mighty  and  wise  fore-
fathers. Their  ethnical  type  shows  that  they  are  not  pure  Turanians,
and  their  rites — now  those  of  sorcery,  incantations,  and  nature-worship
— remind  one  far  more  of  the  popular  rites  of  the  Babylonians,  as
found  in  the  records  preserved  on  the  excavated  cylinders,  than,  as
alleged  b}'  some,  of  the  religious  practices  of  the  Chinese  sect  of
Tao-sse — a  religion  based  upon  pure  reason  and  spirituality.  Gener-
ally, little  or  no  difference  is  made  even  by  the  Kyelang  missionaries
who  mix  greatly  with  these  people  on  the  borders  of  British  L,ahoul —
and  ought  to  know  better — between  the  Bhons  and  the  two  rival
Buddhist  sects,  the  Yellow  Caps  and  the  Red  Caps.  The  latter  of
these  have  opposed  the  reform  of  Tzong-ka-pa  from  the  first,  and  have
always  adhered  to  old  Buddhism,  so  greatly  mixed  up  now  with  the
practices  of  the  Bhons.  Were  our  Orientalists  to  know  more  of  them,
and  compare  the  ancient  Babylonian  Bel  or  Baal  worship  with  the  rites
of  the  Bhons,  they  would  find  an  undeniable  connection  between  the
two.  It  is  out  of  the  question  to  begin  an  argument  here  to  prove  the
origin  of  the  aborigines  of  Tibet  as  connected  with  one  of  the  three
great  races  which  superseded  each  other  in  Babylonia,  whether  we  call
them  the  Akkadians  (invented  by  F.  I,enormant),  or  the  primitive
Turanians,  Chaldees  and  Assyrians.  Be  it  as  it  may,  there  is  reason  to
call  the  Trans-Himalayan  esoteric  doctrine  Chaldceo-Tibetan.     And,

NOTES   ON   SOME    ARVAN-ARHAT    ESOTERIC    TENETS.  477

when  we  remember  that  the  Vedas  came — agreeably  to  all  traditions—
from  the  Mansarova  Lake  in  Tibet,  and  the  Brazilians  themselves  from
the  far  north,  we  are  justified  in  looking  on  the  esoteric  doctrines  of
every  people  who  once  had  or  still  have  them,  as  having  proceeded
from  one  and  the  same  source,  and  to  thus  call  it  the  "Aryan-Chakkeo-
Tibetan"  doctrine,  or  Universal  Wisdom  Religion.  "Seek  for  the  Lost
Word  among  the  hierophants  of  Tartary,  China  and  Tibet,"  was  the
advice  of  Swedenborg,  the  seer.

II.

The  Vedas,  Brahmanism,  and  along  with  these  Sanskrit,  were  im-
portations into  what  we  now  regard  as  India.  They  were  never  in-
digenous to  its  soil.  There  was  a  time  when  the  ancient  nations  of
the  West  included  under  the  generic  name  of  India  many  of  the  coun-
tries of  Asia  now  classified  under  other  names.  There  was  an  Upper,
a  L,owrer,  and  a  Western  India,  even  during  the  comparatively  late
period  of  Alexander;  and  Persia,  Iran,  is  called  Western  India  in
some  ancient  classics,  and  the  countries  now  named  Tibet,  Mongolia,
and  Great  Tartary  were  considered  as  forming  part  of  India.  When
we  say,  therefore,  that  India  has  civilized  the  world  and  was  the  Alma
Mater  of  the  civilizations,  arts  and  sciences  of  all  other  nations  (Baby-
lonia, and  perhaps  even  Egypt,  included),  we  mean  archaic,  pre-
historic India,  India  of  the  time  when  the  great  Gobi  was  a  sea,  and
the  lost  Atlantis  formed  part  of  an  unbroken  continent  which  began
at  the  Himalayas  and  ran  down  over  Southern  India,  Ceylon,  Java,  to
far-away  Tasmania.

III.

To  ascertain  such  disputed  questions  [as  to  whether  or  not  the
Tibetan  adepts  are  acquainted  with  the  "esoteric  doctrine  taught  by
the  residents  of  the  sacred  Island"],  we  have  to  look  into  and  study
well  the  Chinese  sacred  and  historical  records — a  people  whose  era
begins  nearly  4,600  years  back  (2697  B.C.).  A  people  so  accurate — by
whom  some  of  the  most  important  "inventions"  of  modern  Europe
and  its  so  much  boasted  modern  science  (such  as  the  compass,  gun-
powder, porcelain,  paper,  printing,  etc.),  were  anticipated,  known,  and
practised  thousands  of  years  before  these  were  rediscovered  by  the
Europeans — ought  to  receive  some  trust  for  their  records.

From  Eao-tze  down  to  Hiouen-Thsang  their  literature  is  filled  with
allusions  and  references  to  that  Island  and  the  wisdom  of  the  Hima-

47S  A    .MODERN   PANARION.

layan  adepts.  In  the  Catena  of  Buddhist  Scrip htres  from  the  Chinese,
by  the  Rev.  Samuel  Beal,  there  is  a  chapter  "On  the  Tian-Ta'i  School
of  Buddhism"  (pp.  244-258),  which  our  opponents  ought  to  read.
Translating  the  rules  of  that  most  celebrated  and  holy  school  and  sect
in  China  founded  by  Chin-che-chay,  called  the  wise  one,  in  the  year
575  of  our  era,  on  coming  to  the  sentence,  "That  which  relates  to  the
one  garment  (seamless)  worn  by  the  Great  Teachers  of  the  Snowy
Mountains,  the  school  of  the  Haimavatas"  (p.  256),  the  European
translator  places  after  it  a  sign  of  interrogation,  as  well  he  may.  The
statistics  of  the  school  of  the  Haimavatas  or  of  our  Himalayan  Brother-
hood, are  not  to  be  found  in  the  General  Census  Records  of  India.
Further,  Mr.  Beal  translates  a  rule  relating  to  "the  great  professors  of
the  higher  order  who  live  in  mountain  depths  remote  from  men,"  the

A.

Aranyakas,  or  hermits.

So,  with  respect  to  the  traditions  concerning  this  Island,  and  apart
from  the  (to  them)  historical  records  of  it  preserved  in  the  Chinese  and
Tibetan  Sacred  Books,  the  legend  is  alive  to  this  day  among  the  people
of  Tibet.  The  fair  Island  is  no  more,  but  the  country  where  it  once
bloomed  remains  there  still,  and  the  spot  is  well  known  to  some  of  the
"great  teachers  of  the  snowy  mountains,"  however  much  convulsed
and  changed  its  topography  may  have  been  by  the  awful  cataclysm.
Every  seventh  year  these  teachers  are  believed  to  assemble  in  Scham-
bha-la,  the  "happy  land."  According  to  the  general  belief  it  is  situ-
ated in  the  north-west  of  Tibet.  Some  place  it  within  the  unexplored
central  regions,  inaccessible  even  to  the  fearless  nomadic  tribes;  others
hem  it  in  between  the  range  of  the  Gangdisri  Mountains  and  the
northern  edge  of  the  Gobi  Desert,  south  and  north,  and  the  more
populated  regions  of  Khoondooz  and  Kashmir,  of  the  Gya-Pheling
(British  India)  and  China,  west  and  east,  which  affords  to  the  curious
mind  a  pretty  large  latitude  to  locate  it  in.  Others  still  place  it  between
Namur  Nur  and  the  Kuen-L,un  Mountains — but  one  and  all  firmly
believe  in  Scham-bha-la,  and  speak  of  it  as  a  fertile,  fairy-like  land,
once  an  island,  now  an  oasis  of  incomparable  beaut}',  the  place  of
meeting  of  the  inheritors  of  the  esoteric  wisdom  of  the  god-like  inhabi-
tants of  the  legendary  Island.

In  connection  with  the  archaic  legend  of  the  Asian  Sea  and  the  Atlan-
tic Continent,  is  it  not  profitable  to  note  a  fact  known  to  all  modern
geologists — that  the  Himalayan  slopes  afford  geological  proof  that  the
substance  of  those  lofty  peaks  was  once  a  part  of  an  ocean  floor?

NOTES   ON   SOME  ARYAN-ARHAT   ESOTERIC   TENETS.  479

IV.

We  have  already  pointed  out  that,  in  our  opinion,  the  whole  differ-
ence between  the  Buddhistic  and  Vedantic  philosophies  was  that  the
former  was  a  kind  of  rationalistic  Ved&ntism,  while  the  latter  might  be
regarded  as  transcendental  Buddhism.  If  the  Aryan  esotericism  applies
the  term  Jivatma  to  the  seventh  principle,  the  pure,  and  per  se  uncon-
scious, spirit — it  is  because  the  Vedanta  postulating  three  kinds  of
existence — (1)  the  Paramarthika,  the  true,  the  only  real  one;  (2)  the
Vyavaharika,  the  practical;  and  (3)  the  Pratibhashika,  the  apparent
or  illusory  life — makes  the  first  L,ife  or  Jiva,  the  only  truly  existent
one.  Brahma  or  the  One  Self  is  its  only  representative  in  the  universe,
as  it  is  the  ziniversal  Life,  while  the  other  two  are  but  its  "phenomenal
appearances,"  imagined  and  created  by  ignorance,  and  complete  illu-
sions suggested  to  us  by  our  blind  senses.  The  Buddhists,  on  the  other
hand,  deny  either  subjective  or  objective  reality  even  to  that  one  Self-
Existence.  Buddha  declares  that  there  is  neither  Creator  nor  an  Abso-
lute Being.  Buddhist  rationalism  was  ever  too  alive  to  the  insuperable
difficulty  of  admitting  one  absolute  consciousness,  as  in  the  words  of
Flint — "wherever  there  is  consciousness  there  is  relation,  and  wherever
there  is  relation  there  is  dualism."  The  One  Life  is  either  absolute
and  unconditioned  (Mukta)  and  can  have  no  relation  to  anything  nor  to
anyone;  or  it  is  bound  and  conditioned  (Baddha),  and  then  it  cannot  be
called  the  Absolute;  the  limitation,  moreover,  necessitating  another
deity  as  powerful  as  the  first  to  account  for  all  the  evil  in  this  world.
Hence,  the  Arahat  secret  doctrine  on  cosmogony  admits  but  of  one
absolute,  indestructible,  eternal  and  uncreated  Unconsciousness  (so  to
translate),  of  an  element  (the  word  being  used  for  want  of  a  better
term)  absolutely  independent  of  everything  else  in  the  universe;  a
something  ever  present  or  ubiquitous,  a  Presence  which  ever  was,  is,
and  will  be,  whether  there  is  a  God,  gods,  or  none;  whether  there  is  a
universe  or  no  universe;  existing  during  the  eternal  cycles  of  Maha
Yugas,  during  Pralayas  and  during  the  periods  of  Manvantara;  and  this
is  Space,  the  field  for  the  operation  of  the  eternal  Forces  and  natural  Law,
the  basis  (as  our  correspondent  rightly  calls  it)  upon  which  take  place
the  eternal  intercorrelations  of  Akasha-Prakriti,  guided  by  the  uncon-
scious regular  pulsations  of  Shakti— the  breath  or  power  of  a  conscious
Deity,  the  theists  would  say— the  eternal  energy  of  an  eternal,  uncon-
scious Law,  say  the  Buddhists.  Space  then,  or  Fan  Bar-nang  (Maha
Shuuyata)  or,  as  it  is  called  by  Lao-tze,  the  "Emptiness,"  is  the  nature

+8o

A    MODERN    PANARION.

of  the  Buddhist  Absolute.  (See  Confucius'  Praise  of  the  Abyss?)  The
word  Jiva,  then,  could  never  be  applied  by  the  Arahats  to  the  seventh
principle,  since  it  is  only  through  its  correlation  or  contact  with  matter
that  Fohat  (the  Buddhist  active  energy)  can  develop  active  consciotis
life;  and  since  to  the  question  "  How  can  itnconscioiisness  generate  con-
sciousness?"— the  answer  would  be:  "Was  the  seed  which  generated  a
Bacon  or  a  Newton  self-conscious?"

THE  THOUGHTS  OF  THE  DEAD.'

[Vol.  III.  No.  4,  January,  1882.]

A  man  dies  of  a  contagious  disease;  months  after  his  death,  aye,
years — a  bit  of  clothing,  an  object  touched  by  him  during  his  sickness,
may  communicate  the  disease  to  a  person  more  physiologically  sensi-
tive than  the  persons  around  him,  while  having  no  effect  upon  the
latter.  And  why  should  not  an  idea,  a  thought  exercise  the  same  influ-
ence? Thought  is  no  less  material  nor  objective  than  the  imponderable
and  mysterious  germs  of  various  infectious  diseases,  the  causes  of  which
are  such  a  puzzle  for  science.  Since  the  mind  of  a  living  person  can
so  influence  another  mind  that  the  former  t:an  force  the  latter  to  think
and  believe  whatever  it  will — in  short,  can  psychologize  that  other  mind,
so  can  the  thought  of  a  person  already  dead.  Once  generated  and
sent  out,  that  thought  will  live  upon  its  own  energy.  It  has  become
independent  of  the  brain  and  mind  which  gave  it  birth.  So  long  as
its  concentrated  energy  remains  undissipated,  it  can  act  as  a  potential
influence  when  brought  into  contact  with  the  living  brain  and  nervous
system  of  a  person  susceptibly  predisposed.  The  unhealthy  action
thus  provoked  may  lead  the  sensitive  into  a  temporary  insanity  of
self-delusion,  that  quite  clouds  the  sense  of  his  own  individuality.  The
morbid  action  thus  once  set  up,  the  whole  floating  group  of  the  dead
man's  thoughts  rushes  into  the  sensitive's  brain,  and  he  can  give  what
seems  test  after  test  of  the  presence  of  the  deceased  and  convince
the  predisposed  investigator  that  the  individuality  of  the  "control,"
"guide,"  or  communicating  intelligence  is  thoroughly  established.

»  The  above  is  a  Note  appended  to  an  article,  entitled  "  Lakshmihai :    the  Authentic   Story  of  a
Bhut,"  by  Piarai  Lall  Chachondia.

3«

DREAMLAND  AND  SOMNAMBULISM.

[Vol.  III.  No.  4,  January,  1882.]
[  To  the  Editor.

(1)  Are  dreams  always  real?  If  so,  what  produces  them?  If  not  real,  may  they
not  nevertheless  have  in  themselves  some  deep  significance?

(2)  Can  you  tell  me  something  about  antenatal  states  of  existence  and  the  trans-
migration of  the  soul?

(3)  Can  you  give  me  anything  that  is  worth  knowing  about  psychology  as  sug-
gested by  this  article  ?  *

Yours  most  fraternally  and  obediently,

JEHANGIR   CURSETJI   TARACHAND.

Bombay,  Nov.  wth,  i88i.~]

To  put  our  correspondent's  request  more  exactly,  he  desires  The
Thcosophist  to  cull  into  the  limits  of  a  column  or  two  the  facts  embraced
within  the  whole  range  of  all  the  sublunar  mysteries  with  "full  expla-
nations."    These  would  embrace:

(1)  The  complete  philosophy  of  dreams,  as  deduced  from  their
physiological,  biological,  psychological  and  occult  aspects.

(2)  The  Buddhist  Jatakas  (rebirths  and  migrations  of  our  Lord
Shakya  Muni),  with  a  philosophical  essay  upon  the  transmigrations  of
the  387,000  Buddhas  who  "turned  the  wheel  of  faith,"  during  the
successive  revelations  to  the  world  of  the  125,000  other  Buddhas,  the
saints  who  can  "overlook  and  unravel  the  thousand-fold  knotted
threads  of  the  moral  chain  of  causation,"  throwing  in  a  treatise  upon
the  Nidanas,  the  chain  of  twelve  causes  with  a  complete  list  of  their
two  millions  of  results,  and  copious  appendices  by  some  Arhats,  "who
have  attained  the  stream  which  flows  into  Nirvana."

(3)  The  compounded  reveries  of  the  world-famous  psychologists;
from  the  Egyptian  Hermes  and  his  Book  of  the  Dead;  Plato's  definition
of  the  Soul,  in  Timceus;  and  so  on,  down  to  Drawing- Room  Nocturnal
Chats  with  a  Disembodied  Sou/,  by  the  Rev.  Adramelech  Romeo  Tiberius
Toughskin  from  Cincinnati.     Such  is  the  modest  task  proposed.

;    A  dream-story  from  Chambers'  Journal.

I

DREAMLAND   AND   SOMNAMBULISM.  483

Our  physical  senses  are  the  agents  by  means  of  which  the  astral
spirit,  or  "conscious  something"  within,  is  brought,  by  contact  with
the  external  world,  to  a  knowledge  of  actual  existence;  while  the
spiritual  senses  of  the  astral  man  are  the  media,  the  telegraphic  wires
by  means  of  which  he  communicates  with  his  higher  principles,  and
obtains  therefrom  the  faculties  of  clear  perception  of,  and  vision  into,
the  realms  of  the  invisible  world.  The  Buddhist  philosopher  holds
that  by  the  practice  of  the  Dhyanas  one  may  reach  "the  enlightened
condition  of  mind,  which  exhibits  itself  by  immediate  recognition  of
sacred  truth,  so  that  on  opening  the  Scriptures  [or  any  books  whatso-
ever?] their  true  meaning  at  once  flashes  into  the  heart."     (Beal's  Catena,

P-  255.)

In  dreaming,  or  in  somnambulism,  the  brain  is  asleep  only  in  parts,
and  is  called  into  action  through  the  agency  of  the  external  senses,
owing  to  some  peculiar  cause;  a  word  pronounced,  a  thought,  or
picture  lingering  dormant  in  one  of  the  cells  of  memory,  and
awakened  by  a  sudden  noise,  the  fall  of  a  stone,  suggesting  instanta-
neously to  this  half-dreamy  fancy  of  the  sleeper  walls  of  masonry,
and  so  on.  When  one  is  suddenly  startled  in  his  sleep  without
becoming  fully  awake,  he  does  not  begin  and  terminate  his  dream
with  the  simple  noise  which  partially  awoke  him,  but  often  experiences
in  his  dream  a  long  train  of  events  concentrated  within  the  brief
space  of  time  the  sound  occupies,  and  to  be  attributed  solely  to  that
sound.  Generally  dreams  are  induced  by  the  waking  associations
which  precede  them.  Some  of  them  produce  such  an  impression  that
the  slightest  idea  in  the  direction  of  any  subject  associated  with  a
particular  dream  may  bring  its  recurrence  years  after.

Tartini,  the  famous  Italian  violinist,  composed  his  "Devil's  Sonata"
under  the  inspiration  of  a  dream.  During  his  sleep  he  thought  the
devil  appeared  to  him  and  challenged  him  to  a  trial  of  skill  upon  Ids
own  private  violin,  brought  straight  from  the  infernal  regions;  which
challenge  Tartini  accepted.  When  he  awoke,  the  melody  of  the
"Devil's  Sonata"  was  so  vividly  impressed  upon  his  mind  that  he
there  and  then  noted  it  down;  but  on  getting  as  far  as  the  finale  all
further  recollection  of  it  was  suddenly  obliterated,  and  he  had  to  lay
aside  the  incomplete  piece  of  music.  Two  years  later  he  dreamt  the
very  same  thing,  and  in  his  dream  tried  to  make  himself  recollect  the
finale  upon  awaking.  The  dream  was  repeated  owing  to  a  blind  street-
musician  fiddling  on  his  instrument  under  the  artist's  window.

484  A   MODERN    PANARION.

Coleridge  in  a  like  manner  composed  his  poem,  "Kublai-Khan,"  in  a
dream.  On  awaking,  he  found  the  now-famous  lines  so  vividly  im-
pressed upon  his  mind  that  he  wrote  them  down.  The  dream  was  due
to  the  poet  falling  asleep  in  his  chair  while  reading  the  following
words  in  Purchas'  Pilgrimage;  "Here  the  Khan  Kublai  commanded  a
palace  to  be  built     .     .     .     enclosed  within  a  wall."

The  popular  belief,  that  among  the  vast  number  of  meaningless
dreams  there  are  some  in  which  presages  are  frequently  given  of
coining  events,  is  shared  by  many  well-informed  persons,  but  not  at  all
by  science.  Yet  there  are  numberless  instances  of  well-attested  dreams
which  were  verified  by  subsequent  events,  and  which,  therefore,  may
be  termed  prophetic.  The  Greek  and  Latin  classics  teem  with  records
of  remarkable  dreams,  some  of  which  have  become  historical.  Faith
in  the  spiritual  nature  of  dreaming  was  as  widely  disseminated  among
the  Pagan  philosophers  as  among  the  Christian  fathers  of  the  church,
nor  is  belief  in  soothsaying  and  interpretations  of  dreams  (oneiro-
mancy)  limited  to  the  heathen  nations  of  Asia,  since  the  Bible  is  full
of  them.  This  is  what  Eliphas  L,evi,  the  great  modern  Kabalist,  says
of  such  divinations,  visions  and  prophetic  dreams,  in  his  Dogme  et
Riiucl  de  la  Haute  Magie  (i.  356,  357):

Somnambulism,  premonitions  and  second  sight  are  but  a  disposition,  whether
accidental  or  habitual,  to  dream,  awake,  or  during  a  voluntar}r,  self-induced,  or  yet
natural  sleep;  i.e.,  to  perceive  [and  guess  by  intuition]  the  analogical  reflections  of
the  astral  light.  .  .  .  The  paraphernalia  and  instruments  of  divinations  are
simply  means  for  [magnetic]  communications  between  the  divinator  and  him  who
consults  him ;  they  serve  to  fix  and  concentrate  two  wills  [bent  in  the  same  direc-
tion] upon  the  same  sign  or  object;  the  queer,  complicated,  moving  figures  helping
to  collect  the  reflections  of  the  astral  fluid.  Thus  one  is  enabled  at  times  to  see  in
the  grounds  of  a  coffee  cup,  or  in  the  clouds,  in  the  white  of  an  egg,  etc.,  fantastic
forms  having  their  existence  only  in  the  translucid  [or  the  seer's  imagination].
Vision-seeing  in  the  water  is  produced  by  the  fatigue  of  the  dazzled  optic  nerve,
which  ends  by  ceding  its  functions  to  the  translucid,  and  calling  forth  a  cerebral
illusion,  which  makes  the  simple  reflections  of  the  astral  light  appear  as  real
images.  Thus  the  fittest  persons  for  this  kind  of  divination  are  those  of  a  nervous
temperament  whose  sight  is  weak  and  imagination  vivid,  children  being  the  best
of  all  adapted  for  it.  But  let  no  one  misinterpret  the  nature  of  the  function  attributed
by  us  to  imagination  in  the  art  of  divination.  We  see  through  our  imagination
doubtless,  and  that  is  the  natural  aspect  of  the  miracle;  but  we  see  actual  and  true
things,  and  it  is  in  this  that  lies  the  marvel  of  the  natural  phenomenon.  We
appeal  for  corroboration  of  what  we  say  to  the  testimony  of  all  the  adepts.

ARE  DREAMS  BUT  IDLE  VISIONS?

[Vol.  III.  No.  4,  January,  1882.]

"Dreams  are  interludes  which  fancy  makes,"  Dryden  tells  us —
perhaps  to  show  that  even  a  poet  will  make  occasionally  his  muse  sub-
servient to  sciolistic  prejudice.

The  instance  of  prevision  in  dream  given  above  [in  a  letter  addressed
to  The  Theosophist\  is  one  of  a  series  of  what  may  be  regarded  as
exceptional  cases  in  dream-life,  the  generality  of  dreams  being,  indeed,
but  "interludes  which  fancy  makes."  It  is  the  policy  of  materialistic,
matter-of-fact  science  to  superbly  ignore  such  exceptions,  on  the
ground,  perchance,  that  the  exception  confirms  the  rule — or,  we  rather
think,  to  avoid  the  embarrassing  task  of  explaining  such  exceptions.
Indeed,  if  one  single  instance  stubbornly  refuses  classification,  with
"strange  coincidences" — so  much  in  favour  with  sceptics — then  pro-
phetic, or  verified,  dreams  would  demand  an  entire  remodelling  of
physiology;  as  in  regard  to  phrenology,  the  recognition  and  acceptance
by  science  of  prophetic  dreams  (hence  the  recognition  of  the  claims  of
theosophy  and  spiritualism)  would,  it  is  contended,  "carry  with  it  a  new
educational,  social,  political,  and  theological  science."  Result :  Science
will  never  recognize  either  dreams,  spiritualism,  or  occultism.

Human  nature  is  an  abyss,  which  physiology  (and  indeed  modern
science  in  general)  has  sounded  less  deeply  than  some  who  have  never
heard  the  word  physiology  pronounced.  Never  are  the  high  censors
of  the  Royal  Society  more  perplexed  than  when  brought  face  to  face
with  that  insolvable  mystery — man's  inner  nature.  The  key  to  it  is —
man's  dual  beinsr.  It  is  that  kev  that  thev  refuse  to  use,  well  aware
that  if  once  the  door  of  the  adytum  be  flung  open  they  will  be  forced
to  drop  one  by  one  their  cherished  theories  and  final  conclusions —
more  than  once  proved  to  have  been  no  better  than  hobbies,  starting
from  false  or  incomplete  premisses.  If  we  must  remain  satisfied  with
the  half  explanations  of  physiology  as  regards  meaningless  dreams,
how  account  in  such  case  for  the  numerous  facts  of  verified  dreams?

486  A    .MODERN    PANARION.

To  say  that  man  is  a  dual  being,  that  in  man  (to  use  the  words  of
Paul)  "there  is  a  natural  bod)',  and  there  is  a  spiritual  body";  and
that,  therefore,  he  must  of  necessity  have  a  double  set  of  senses — is
tantamount  in  the  opinion  of  the  educated  sceptic  to  uttering  an  un-
pardonable and  most  unscientific  fallacy.  Yet  it  has  to  be  uttered,
science  notwithstanding.

Man  is  undeniably  endowed  with  a  double  set  of  senses;  with
natural  or  physical  senses  (these  to  be  safely  left  to  physiology  to  deal
with);  and  with  sub-natural  or  spiritual  senses  (belonging  entirely  to
the  province  of  psychological  science).  The  word  "sub,"  let  it  be  well
understood,  is  used  here  in  a  sense  diametrically  opposite  to  that  given
to  it — in  chemistry,  for  example.  In  our  case  it  is  a  prefix,  as  in  "sub-
tonic"  or  "sub-bass"  in  music.  Indeed,  as  the  aggregate  sound  of
nature  is  shown  to  be  a  single  definite  tone,  a  key-note  vibrating  from
and  through  eternity;  having  an  undeniable  existence  per  se,  yet
possessing  an  appreciable  pitch  only  for  "the  acutely  fine  ear"* — so
the  definite  harmony  or  disharmony  of  man's  external  nature  is  seen
by  the  observant  to  depend  wholly  on  the  character  of  the  key-note
struck  for  the  outer  by  the  inner  man.  It  is  the  spiritual  Ego  or  Self
that  serves  as  the  fundamental  base,  determining  the  tone  of  the  whole
life  of  man — that  most  capricious,  uncertain  and  variable  of  all  instru-
ments, which  more  than  any  other  needs  constant  tuning;  it  is  its
voice  alone,  which  like  the  sub-bass  of  an  organ,  underlies  the  melody
of  his  whole  life,  whether  its  tones  are  sweet  or  harsh,  harmonious  or
wild,  legato  ox  pizzicato.

Therefore,  we  say,  man,  in  addition  to  the  physical,  has  also  a
spiritual  brain.  If  the  former  is  wholly  dependent  for  the  degree  of
its  receptivity  on  its  own  physical  structure  and  development,  it  is,  on
the  other  hand,  entirely  subordinate  to  the  latter,  inasmuch  as  it  is  the
spiritual  Ego  alone  (according  as  it  leans  more  towards  its  two  highest
principles,!  or  towards  its  physical  shell)  that  can  impress  more  or  less
vividly  the  outer  brain  with  the  perception  of  things  purely  spiritual
or  immaterial.  Hence  it  depends  on  the  acuteness  of  the  mental
feelings  of  the  inner  Ego,  on  the  degree  of  spirituality  of  its  faculties,
to  transfer  the  impression  of  the  scenes  its  semi-spiritual  brain  per-
ceives, the  words  it  hears,  and  what  it  feels,  to  the  sleeping  physical

*  This  tone  is  held  by  the  specialists  to  be  the  middle  F  of  the  piano.

+  The  sixth  principle,  or  spiritual  soul,  and  the  seventh— the  purely  spiritual  principle,  the  Spirit
or  Parabrahman,  the  emanation  from  the  unconscious  Absolute.  (See  "Fragments  of  Occult  Truth,"
Theosophht,  October,  1881.)

ARK    DREAMS   BUT   IDLE   VISIONS?  4X7

brain  of  the  outer  man.  The  stronger  the  spirituality  of  the  faculties
of  the  latter,  the  easier  it  will  be  for  the  Ego  to  awake  the  sleeping
hemispheres,  rouse  into  activity  the  sensory  ganglia  and  the  cere-
bellum, and  impress  the  former  (always  in  full  inactivity  and  rest
during  the  deep  sleep  of  man)  with  the  vivid  picture  of  the  subject  so
transferred.  In  a  sensual,  unspiritual  man,  in  one  whose  mode  of  life
and  animal  proclivities  and  passions  have  entirely  disconnected  his
fifth  principle  or  animal,  astral  Ego  from  its  higher  spiritual  soul;  as
also  in  him  whose  hard,  physical  labour  has  so  worn  out  the  material
body  as  to  render  him  temporarily  insensible  to  the  voice  and  touch  of
his  astral  soul — in  both  cases  during  sleep  the  brain  remains  in  a  com-
plete state  of  anaemia  or  full  inactivity.  Such  persons  rarely,  if  ever,
have  any  dreams  at  all,  least  of  all  "visions  that  come  to  pass."  In
the  former,  as  the  waking  time  approaches,  and  his  sleep  becomes
lighter,  the  mental  changes  as  they  begin  to  occur  will  constitute
dreams  in  which  intelligence  will  play  no  part;  his  half-awakened
brain  suggesting  but  pictures  which  are  only  the  hazy  grotesque  repro-
ductions of  his  wild  habits  in  life;  while  in  the  latter  (unless  strongly
preoccupied  with  some  exceptional  thought)  his  ever-present  instinct
of  active  habits  will  not  permit  him  to  remain  in  that  state  of  semi-
sleep  during  which,  as  consciousness  begins  to  return,  dreams  of
various  kinds  are  seen,  but  will  arouse  him  at  once  without  any  inter-
lude to  full  wakefulness.  On  the  other  hand,  the  more  spiritual  a  man,
the  more  active  his  fancy,  the  greater  is  the  probability  of  his  receiving
in  vision  correctly  the  impressions  conveyed  to  him  by  his  all-seeing,
ever-wakeful  Ego.  The  spiritual  senses  of  the  latter,  unimpeded  as
they  are  by  the  interference  of  the  physical  senses,  are  in  direct  inti-
macy with  his  highest  spiritual  principle.  This  principle  (though  per
sc  a  quasi-unconscious  part  of  the  utterly  unconscious,  because  utterly
immaterial,   Absolute*)    having  in    itself  the  inherent   capabilities  of

a  To  this  teaching  every  kind  of  exception  will  be  taken  by  the  theists  and  various  objections
raised  by  the  spiritualists.  It  is  evident  that  we  cannot  be  expected  to  give  within  the  narrow  limits
of  a  short  article,  a  full  explanation  of  this  highly  abstruse  and  esoteric  doctrine.  To  say  that  the
Absolute  Consciousness  is  "unconscious"  of  its  consciousness  (hence  to  the  limited  intellei
man  must  be  "Absolute  Unconsciousness")  seems  like  speaking  of  a  square  triangle.  We  hope  to
develop  the  proposition  more  fully  in  one  of  the  forthcoming  numbers  of  "Fragments  of  Occult
Truth,"  of  which  we  may  publish  a  series.  We  will  then  prove,  perhaps,  to  the  satisfaction  of  the
non-prejudiced  that  the  Absolute,  or  the  Unconditioned,  and  'especially  the  Unrelated,  is  a  mere
fanciful  abstraction,  a  fiction,  unless  we  view  it  from  the  standpoint,  and  in  the  light  of.  the  more
educated  pantheist.     To  do  so,  we  will  have  to  regard  the  Absolute  merely  :-.s  til  ite  of  all

intelligences,  the  totality  of  all  existences,  incapable  of  manifesting  itself  except  through  the  inter-
relationship of  its  parts,  as  it  is  absolutely  incognizable  and  non-existent  outside  its  phenomena,
and  depends  entirely  on  its  ever-correlating  forces,  dependent  in  their  turn  on  the  One  Great  Law.

488  A   MODERN   PANARION.

omniscience,  omnipresence,  and  omnipotence,  as  soon  as  its  pure
essence  comes  in  contact  with  pure  sublimated  and  (to  us)  imponder-
able matter,  imparts  these  attributes  in  a  degree  to  the  as  pure  astral
Ego.  Hence  highly  spiritual  persons  will  see  visions  and  dreams
during  sleep  and  even  in  their  hours  of  wakefulness.  These  are  the
sensitives,  the  natural-born  seers,  now  loosely  termed  "spiritual
mediums,"  there  being  no  distinction  made  between  a  subjective  seer,
a  "neurypnological"  subject,  and  even  an  adept — one  who  has  made
himself  independent  of  his  physiological  idiosyncracies  and  has
entirely  subjected  the  outer  to  the  inner  man.  Those  less  spiritually
endowed  will  see  such  dreams  only  at  rare  intervals;  the  accuracy  of
the  dreams  depending  on  the  intensity  of  the  dreamer's  feeling  in
regard  to  the  perceived  object.

Thus,  in  this  question  of  verified  dreams,  as  in  so  many  others,
modern  science  stands  before  an  unsolved  problem,  the  insolvable
nature  of  which  has  been  created  by  her  own  materialistic  stubborn-
ness, and  her  time-cherished  routine-policy.  For,  either  man  is  a  dual
being,  with  an  inner  Ego* — this  Ego  being  the  "real"  man,  distinct
from,  and  independent  of,  the  outer  man  proportionally  to  the  preva-
lency  or  weakness  of  the  material  body;  an  Ego,  the  scope  of  whose
senses  stretches  far  beyond  the  limit  granted  to  the  physical  senses  of
man;  an  Ego  which  survives  the  decay  of  its  external  covering,  at
least  for  a  time,  even  when  an  evil  course  of  life  has  made  it  fail  to
achieve  a  perfect  union  with  its  spiritual  higher  Self,  i.e.,  to  blend  its
individuality  with  it  (the  personality  gradually  fading  out  in  each  case)
— or  the  testimony  of  millions  of  men  embracing  several  thousands  of
years — the  evidence  furnished  in  our  own  century  by  hundreds  of  the
most  educated  men,  often  by  the  greatest  lights  of  science — all  this
evidence,  we  say,  goes  for  naught.  With  the  exception  of  a  handful  of
scientific  authorities — surrounded  by  an  eager  crowd  of  sceptics  and
sciolists,  who,  having  never  seen  anything,  claim,  therefore,  the  right
of  denying  everything — the  world  stands  condemned  as  a  gigantic
lunatic  asylum!  It  has,  however,  a  special  department  in  it.  It  is
reserved  for  those  who,  having  proved  the  soundness  of  their  minds,
must  of  necessity  be  regarded  as  impostors  and  liars.

Has  then  the  phenomenon  of  dreams  been  so  thoroughly  studied  by

;  Whether  with  one  solitary  Ego,  or  Soul,  as  the  spiritualists  affirm,  or  with  several — i.e.,  composed
of  seven  principles,  as  eastern  esotericism  teaches — is  not  the  question  at  issue  for  the  present.  Let
us  first  prove  by  bringing  our  joint  experience  to  bear,  that  there  is  in  man  something  beyond
Buchner's  force  and  matter.

ARE   DREAMS   BUT  IDLE  VISIONS?  489

materialistic  science,  that  she  has  nothing  more  to  learn,  since  she
speaks  in  such  authoritative  tones  upon  the  subject?  Not  in  the  least.
The  phenomena  of  sensation  and  volition,  of  intellect  and  instinct,  are,
of  course,  all  manifested  through  the  channels  of  the  nervous  centres,
the  most  important  of  which  is  the  brain.  The  peculiar  substance
through  which  these  actions  take  place  has  two  forms,  the  vesicular
and  the  fibrous,  of  which  the  latter  is  held  to  be  simply  the  propagator
of  the  impressions  sent  to  or  from  the  vesicular  matter.  Yet  while  this
physiological  office  is  distinguished,  or  divided  by  science  into  three
kinds — the  motor,  sensitive  and  connecting — the  mysterious  agency  of
intellect  remains  as  mysterious  and  as  perplexing  to  the  great  modern
physiologists  as  it  was  in  the  daj^s  of  Hippocrates.  The  scientific
suggestion  that  there  may  be  a  fourth  series  associated  with  the  opera-
tions of  thought  has  not  helped  towards  solving  the  problem ;  it  has
failed  to  shed  even  the  slightest  ray  of  light  on  the  unfathomable
mystery.  Nor  will  they  ever  fathom  it  unless  our  men  of  science
accept  the  hypothesis  of  Dual  Man.

SPIRITUALISM  AND  OCCULT  TRUTH.

[Vol.  III.  No.  5,  February,  1SS2.]
The  Spiritualist  of  Nov.  iSth  takes  notice  of  the  article  published  in
The  Theosophist  for  October  under  the  heading  "Fragments  of  Occult
Truth,"  but  it  does  not  quite  appreciate  the  objects  with  which  that
article  was  put  forward,  and  still  less  the  importance  of  its  contents.
To  make  further  explanations  intelligible  to  our  own  readers,  however,
we  must  first  represent  The  Spiritualist's  present  remarks,  which,  under
the  heading  of  "Speculation-Spinning,"  are  as  follows:

The  much-respected  author  of  the  best  standard  text-book  on  Chemistry  in  the
English  language,  the  late  Prof.  \V.  Allen  Miller,  in  the  course  of  a  lecture  at  the
Royal  Institution,  set  forth  certain  facts,  but  expressed  an  objection  to  make  known
a  speculative  hypothesis  which  apparently  explained  the  causes  of  the  facts.  He
said  that  tempting  but  inadequately  proved  hypotheses,  when  once  implanted  in
the  mind,  were  most  difficult  to  eradicate;  they  sometimes  stood  in  the  way  of  the
discovery  of  truth,  the)'  often  promoted  experiments  in  a  wrong  direction,  and
were  better  out  of  the  heads  than  in  the  heads  of  young  students  of  science.

The  man  who  prosecutes  original  research  must  have  some  speculation  in  his
head  as  he  tries  each  new  experiment.  Such  experiments  are  questions  put  to
Nature,  and  her  replies  commonly  dash  to  the  ground  one  such  speculation  after
another,  but  gradually  guide  the  investigator  into  the  true  path,  and  reveal  the
previously  unknown  law,  which  can  thenceforth  be  safely  used  in  the  service  of
mankind  for  all  time.

Very  different  is  the  method  of  procedure  among  some  classes  of  psychologists.
With  them  a  tempting  and  plausible  hypothesis  enters  the  mind,  but  instead  of
considering  it  to  be  mischievous  to  propagate  it  as  possessing  authority  before  it  is
verified,  it  is  thought  clever  to  do  so;  the  necessity  for  facts  and  proof  is  ignored,
and  it  may  be  that  a  church  or  school  of  thought  is  set  up,  which  people  are
requested  to  join  in  order  that  they  ma)-  fight  for  the  new  dogma.  Thus  unproved
speculations  are  forced  upon  the  world  with  trumpet  tongues  by  one  class  of  people,
instead  of  being  tested,  and,  in  most  cases,  nipped  in  the  bud,  according  to  the
method  of  the  man  of  science.*

The  religious  periodicals  of  the  day  abound  with  articles  consisting  of  nothing

Wc  do  not  want  to  be  cruel,  but  where  can  one  find  "  unproved  speculations  "  more  unproved,  or
that  would  be  "  nipped  in  the  bud  "  by  "  the  man  of  science"  with  a  more  ready  hand  than  those
that  are  weekly  expressed  in  The  Spiritualist  f

SPIRITUALISM   AND   OCCULT   TRUTH.  ^jL

but  speculations  advanced  by  the  authors  as  truths  and  as  things  to  be  upheld  and
fought  over.  Rarely  is  the  modest  statement  made,  "This  may  explain  some
points  which  are  perplexing  us,  but  until  the  verity  of  the  hypothesis  has  been
firmly  demonstrated  by  facts,  you  must  be  careful  not  to  let  it  rest  in  your  mind  as
truth."  By  "facts"  we  do  not  necessarily  mean  physical  facts,  for  there  are  demon-
strable truths  outside  the  realm  of  physics.

The  foregoing  ideas  have  often  occurred  to  us  while  reading  the  pages  of  The
Theosophist,  and  have  been  revived  by  an  interesting  editorial  article  in  the  last
number  of  that  journal,  in  which  the  nature  of  the  body  and  spirit  of  man  is  defi-
nitely mapped  out  in  seven  clauses.*  There  is  not  one  word  of  attempt  at  proof,
and  the  assertions  can  only  carry  weight  with  those  who  derive  their  opinions  from
the  authoritative  allegations  of  others,  instead  of  upon  evidence  which  they  have
weighed  and  examined  for  themselves;  and  the  remarkable  point  is  that  the  writer
shows  no  signs  of  consciousness  that  any  evidence  is  necessary.  Had  the  scientific
method  been  adopted,  certain  facts  or  truths  would  have  been  made  to  precede  each
of  the  seven  clauses,  coupled  with  the  claim  that  those  truths  demonstrated  the
assertions  in  the  clauses,  and  negatived  all  hypotheses  at  variance  therewith.

Endless  speculation-spinning  is  a  kind  of  mental  dissipation,  which  does  little
good  to  the  world  or  to  the  individuals  who  indulge  therein,  and  has  sometimes
had  in  Europe  a  slight  tendency  to  impart  to  the  latter  signs  of  Pharisaical
self-consciousness  of  their  being  advanced  religionists  and  philosophers,  living
in  a  diviner  air  than  those  who  work  to  base  their  opinions  on  well-verified
truths.  If  the  speculators  recognized  their  responsibility  and  imitated  the  example
set  them  by  the  great  and  good  Prof.  Allen  Miller,  nine-tenths  of  their  time  would
be  set  at  liberty  for  doing  good  work  in  the  world,  the  wasting  of  oceans  of  print-
ing ink  would  be  avoided,  and  mental  energy  which  might  be  devoted  to  high  uses
would  no  longer  run  to  waste.  The  minds  of  habitual  dreamers  and  speculators
ma)'  be  compared  to  windmills  incessantly  at  work  grinding  nothing.t

Just  at  present  there  is  far  too  much  mental  speculation  afloat,  and  far  too  few
people  putting  good  ideas  into  practical  form.  Here  in  London,  within  the  past
year,  grievous  iniquities  which  might  have  been  prevented,  and  grievous  wrongs
which  might  have  been  redressed,  have  abounded,  and  too  few  people  have  been  at
work  ameliorating  the  sorrows  and  the  sins  immediately  around  them.

Now  we  do  not  want  to  discuss  these  questions  with  The  Spiritualist
in  the  way  that  rival  religious  sects  might  debate  their  differeno
There  can  be  no  sectarianism  in  truth-seeking,  and  when  we  regard
the  spiritualists  as  seriously  mistaken  in  many  of  the  most  important
of  the  conclusions  to  which  they  have  come,  they  must  certainly  be
recognized  as  truth-seekers  like  ourselves.  As  a  body,  indeed,  they
are   entitled  to  all  possible  honour  for   having  boldly  pursued    their

*   The  Theosophist,  pp.  18,  19,  October.  ;  -

+  Verily  so.  For  over  thirty  years  have  tin-  dream  rs  aud  speculators  upon  the  rationale  <■>(  "  spiri-
tual "  phenomena  set  their  windmills  to  ivoi :.  ni.^ht  and  day.  and  yet.  hithert  >.  in  .:  I  ;'.  -  and  helping
"  spirits"  have  ground  out  for  the  world  but  -Husks.

492  A    MODERN    I'ANARION.

experiences  to  unpopular  conclusions,  caring  more  for  what  presented
itself  to  them  as  the  truth  than  for  the  good  opinion  of  society  at  large.
The  world  laughed  at  them  for  thinking  their  communications  some-
thing beyond  fraudulent  tricks  of  impostors,  for  regarding  the  appari-
tions of  their  cabinets  as  visitors  from  another  world.  They  knew
quite  well  that  the  communications  in  a  multitude  of  cases  were  no
more  frauds  than  they  were  baked  potatoes,  that  people  who  called
them  such  were  talking  utter  folly,  and  in  the  same  way  that  whatever
the  materialized  "spirits"  were,  they  were  not  in  anything  like  all
cases,  even  if  they  might  be  in  some,  the  pillows  and  nightgowns  of  a
medium's  assistant.  So  they  held  on  gallantly,  and  reaped  a  reward
which  more  than  compensated  them  for  the  silly  success  of  ignorant
outsiders,  in  the  consciousness  of  being  in  contact  with  superhuman
phenomena,  and  in  the  excitement  of  original  exploration.  Nothing
that  has  ever  been  experienced  in  connection  with  such  excitement  by
early  navigators  in  unknown  seas,  can  even  have  been  comparable  to
the  solemn  interest  which  spiritual  enquirers  (of  the  cultivated  kind)
must  have  felt  at  first  as  they  pushed  off,  in  the  frail  canoe  of  medium-
ship,  out  into  flie  ocean  of  the  unknown  world.  And  if  they  had
realized  all  its  perils  one  might  almost  applaud  the  courage  with  which
they  set  sail,  as  warmly  as  their  indifference  to  ridicule.  But  the
heretics  of  one  age  sometimes  become  the  orthodox  of  the  next,  and,
so  apt  is  human  nature  to  repeat  its  mistakes,  that  the  heirs  of  the
martyrs  may  sometimes  develop  into  the  persecutors  of  a  new  genera-
tion. This  is  the  direction  in  which  modern  spiritualism  is  tending,
and  that  tendency,  of  all  its  characteristics,  is  the  one  we  are  chiefly
concerned  to  protest  against.  The  conclusions  of  spiritualism,  in-
accurate and  premature  as  they  are,  are  settling  into  the  shape  of
orthodox  dogma;  while  the  facts  of  the  great  enquiry,  numerous  as
they  are,  are  still  chaotic  and  confused,  their  collectors  insist  on  work-
ing them  up  into  specific  doctrines  about  the  future  state,  and  they  are
often  as  intolerant  of  any  dissent  from  these  doctrines  as  the  old-
fashioned  religionists  were  of  them.

In  fact,  they  have  done  the  very  thing  which  The  Spiritualist,  with
an  inaptitude  born  of  complete  misapprehension  of  what  occult  science
really  is,  now  accuses  us  of  having  done — they  have  given  themselves
wholly  over  to  "speculation-spinning."  It  is  fairly  ludicrous  to  find
this  indictment  laid  at  our  door  on  account  of  our  "Fragments."  The
argument  of  that  paper  was  to  the  effect  that  spiritualists  should  not

SPIRITUALISM    AND   OCCULT  TRUTH.  493

jump  to  conclusions,  should  not  weave  hasty  theories,  on  the  strength
of  se'auee-room  experiments.  Such  and  such  appearances  may  present
themselves;  beware  of  misunderstanding  them.  You  may  see  an
apparition  standing  before  you  which  you  know  to  be  perfectly  genuine,
that  is  to  say,  no  trumpery  imposture  by  a  fraudulent  medium,  and  it
may  wear  the  outward  semblance  of  a  departed  friend,  but  do  not  on
that  account  jump  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  the  spirit  of  your  de-
parted friend,  do  not  spin  speculations  from  the  filmy  threads  of  any
such  delusive  fabric.  Listen  first  to  the  wisdom  of  the  ancient  philo-
sophies in  regard  to  such  appearances,  and  permit  us  to  point  out  the
grounds  on  which  we  deny  what  seems  to  be  the  plain  and  natural
inference  from  the  facts.  And  then  we  proceeded  to  explain  what  we
have  reason  to  know  is  the  accepted  theory  of  profound  students  of
the  ancient  philosophy.  We  were  repeating  doctrines  as  old  as  the
pyramids,  but  The  Spiritualist,  not  having  hitherto  paid  attention  to
them,  seems  really  to  imagine  that  we  have  thrown  them  off  on  the  spur
of  the  moment  as  a  hypothesis,  as  Figuier  does  with  his  conjectures  in
The  Day  after  Death,  or  Jules  Verne  with  his,  in  his  Voyage  Round  the
Moon.  We  cannot,  it  is  true,  quote  any  printed  edition  of  the  ancient
philosophies,  and  refer  the  reader  to  chapter  and  verse,  for  an  article  on
the  seven  principles;  but  assuredly  all  profound  students  of  mystic
literature  will  recognize  the  exposition  on  which  we  ventured,  as  sup-
ported, now  in  one  way,  now  in  another,  by  the  cautiously  obscure
teaching  of  occult  writers.  Of  course,  the  conditions  of  occult  study
are  so  peculiar  that  nothing  is  more  difficult  than  to  give  one's  "authori-
ties" for  any  statement  connected  with  it,  but  none  the  less  is  it  really
just  as  far  from  being  "up  in  a  balloon"  as  any  study  can  be.  It  has
been  explained  repeatedly  that  the  continuity  of  occult  knowledge
amongst  initiated  adepts  is  the  attribute  about  it  which  commends
their  explanations — absolutely  to  the  acceptance  of  those  who  come  to
understand  what  initiation  means,  and  what  kind  of  people  adepts  are.
From  Swedenborg  onwards  there  have  been  many  seers  who  profess  to
gather  their  knowledge  of  other  worlds  from  actual  observation,  but
such  persons  are  isolated,  and  subject  to  the  delusions  of  isolation.
Any  intelligent  man  will  have  an  intuitive  perception  of  this,  express-
ing itself  in  a  reluctance  on  his  part  to  surrender  himself  entirely  to
the  assurances  of  any  such  clairvoyants.  But  in  the  case  of  regularly
initiated  seers  it  must  be  remembered  that  we  are  dealing  with  a  long—
an  extraordinarily  long— series  of  persons  who,  warned   of  the  con-

494  A   MODERN    PANARION.

fusing  circumstances  into  which  they  pass  when  their  spiritual  per-
ceptions are  trained  to  range  beyond  material  limits,  are  so  enabled  to
penetrate  to  the  actual  realities  of  things,  and  who  constitute  a  vast
organized  body  of  seers,  who  check  each  other's  conclusions,  test  each
other's  discoveries  and  formulate  their  visions  into  a  science  of  spirit
as  precise  and  entirely  trustworthy  as,  in  their  humble  way,  are  the
conclusions,  as  far  as  they  go,  of  any  branch  of  physical  science.  Such
initiates  are  in  the  position,  as  regards  spiritual  knowledge,  that  the
regularly  taught  professor  of  a  great  university  is  in,  as  regards  literary
knowledge,  and  anyone  can  appreciate  the  superior  claims  of  instruc-
tion which  might  be  received  from  him,  as  compared  with  the  crude
and  imperfect  instruction  which  might  be  offered  by  the  merely  self-
taught  man.  The  initiate's  speculations,  in  fact,  are  not  spun  at  all;
they  are  laid  out  before  him  by  the  accumulated  wisdom  of  ages,  and
he  has  merely  followed,  verified  and  assimilated  them.

But,  it  may  be  argued,  if  our  statement  about  the  teachings  of  this
absolutely  trustworthy  occult  science  claims  to  be  something  more  than
assertion  and  hypothesis,  it  is  an  assertion,  and,  for  the  world  at  large,
an  hypothesis,  that  any  such  continuously-taught  body  of  initiates  is
anywhere  in  existence.  Now,  in  reference  to  this  objection,  there  are
two  observations  to  be  made.  Firstly,  that  there  is  a  large  mass  of
writings  to  be  consulted  on  the  subject,  and  just  as  spiritualists  say  to
the  outer  world,  "if  you  read  the  literature  of  spiritualism,  you  wall
know  how  preposterous  it  is  to  continue  denying  or  doubting  the  reality
of  spiritual  phenomena,"  so  we  say  to  spiritualists,  "if  you  will  only
read  the  literature  of  occultism  it  will  be  very  strange  if  you  still  doubt
that  the  continuity  of  initiation  has  been  preserved."  Secondly,  we
may  point  out  that  you  may  put  the  question  about  the  existence  of
initiates  altogether  aside,  and  yet  find  in  the  philosophy  of  occultism,
as  expounded  by  those  who  do  labour  under  the  impression  that  they
have  received  their  teaching  from  competent  instructors,  such  inherent
claims  to  intellectual  adoption,  that  it  will  be  strange  if  you  do  not
begin  to  respect  it  as  an  hypothesis.  We  do  not  say  that  the  "Frag-
ments" given  in  our  October  number  constitute  a  sufficiently  complete
scheme  of  things  to  command  conviction,  in  this  way,  on  their  own
intrinsic  merits,  but  we  do  say  that  even  taken  by  themselves  they  do
not  offend  intuitive  criticism  in  the  way  that  the  alternative  spiritual
theory  does.  By  degrees,  as  we  are  enabled  to  bring  out  more  ore  from
the  mine  which  yielded  the  "Fragments,"  it  will  be  found  that  every

SPIRITUALISM    AND    OCCUI/T   TRUTH.  Age

fresh  idea  presented  for  consideration  fits  in  with  what  has  gone  before,
fortifies  it,  and  is  fortified  by  it  in  turn.  Thus,  is  it  not  worth  notice
that  even  some  notes  we  published  in  our  December  number  in  answer
to  enquiries  about  creation,  help  the  mind  to  realize  the  way  in  which,
and  the  materials  with  which,  the  elementaries  in  the  one  case,  in  the
other  the  automatically  acting  Kama  Rupa  of  the  medium,  may  fashion
the  materialized  apparition  which  the  spiritualist  takes  for  the  spirit  of
his  departed  friend?  It  sometimes  happens  that  a  materialized  spirit
will  leave  behind  as  a  memento  of  his  visit  some  little  piece  cut  from
his  spiritual  (?)  drapery.  Does  the  spiritualist  believe  that  the  bit  of
muslin  lias  come  from  the  region  of  pure  spirit  from  which  the  disem-
bodied soul  descends?  Certainly  no  philosophically  minded  spiritualist
would,  but  if  as  regards  the  drapery  such  a  person  would  admit  that
this  is  fashioned  from  the  cosmic  matter  of  the  universe  by  the  will  of
the  spirit  which  makes  this  manifest  (accepting  our  theory  so  far),  does
it  not  rationally  follow  that  all  the  "material"  of  the  materialized
visitor  must  probably  be' also  so  fashioned?  And  in  that  case,  if  the
will  of  a  spirit  without  form  can  produce  the  particular  form  which  the
sitter  recognizes  as  his  dead  friend,  does  he  not  do  this  by  copying  the
features  required  from  some  records  to  which,  as  a  spirit,  he  has  access  ;
and,  in  that  case  again,  is  it  not  clear  that  some  other  spirit  would
equally  have  that  power?  Mere  reflection,  in  fact,  on  the  principles  of
creation  will  lead  one  straight  to  a  comprehension  of  the  utter  worth-
lessness  of  resemblance  in  a  materialized  spirit,  as  a  proof  of  identity.
Again,  the  facts  of  spiritual  experience  itself  fortify  the  explanation
we  have  given.  Is  it  not  the  case  that  most  spiritualists  of  long
experience — omitting  the  few  circumstanced  in  the  very  peculiar  way
that  "M.A.  Oxon."  is,  who  are  not  in  pursuit  of  dead  friends  at  all —
are  always  reduced  sooner  or  later  to  a  state  of  absolute  intellectual
exasperation  by  the  uuprogressive  character  of  their  researches.  How
is  it  that  all  these  twenty  years  that  spiritualists  have  been  conversing
with  their  departed  friends  their  knowledge  of  the  conditions  of  life
in  the  next  world  is  either  as  hazy  still  as  the  rambling  imagination
of  a  pulpit  orator,  or,  if  precise  at  all,  grotesquely  materialistic  in  its
so-called  spirituality?  If  the  spirits  were  what  the  spiritualists  think
them,  is  it  not  obvious  that  they  must  have  made  the  whole  situation
more  intelligible  than  it  is — for  most  people — whereas,  if  they  are,
what  we  affirm  that  they  are  really,  is  it  not  obvious  that  all  they  could
do  is  exactly  what  they  have  done?

496  A   MODERN    PANARION.

But,  to  conclude  for  the  present,  surely  there  need  be  no  hostility,  as
some  spiritual  writers  seem  to  have  imagined,  between  the  spiritualists
and  ourselves,  merely  because  we  bring  for  their  consideration  a  new
stock  of  ideas — new,  indeed,  only  as  far  as  their  application  to  modern
controversies  is  concerned,  old  enough  as  measured  by  the  ages  that
have  passed  over  the  earth  since  they  were  evolved.      A  gardener  is
not  hostile  to  roses  because  he  prunes  his  bushes  and  proclaims  the
impropriety  of  letting  bad   shoots   spring   up    from  below  the  graft.
With  the  spiritualists,  students  of  occultism  must  always  have  bonds  of
sympathy  which  are  unthought  of  in  the  blatant  world  of  earth-bound
materialism  and  superstitious  credulity.     L,et  them  give  us  a  hearing;
let  them   recognize  us  as  brother-worshippers  of  truth,  even  though
found  in  unexpected  places.     They  cannot  prove  so  oblivious  of  their
own  traditions  as  to  refuse  audience  to  any  new  plea,  because  it  may
disturb  them  in  a  faith  they  find  comfortable.     Surely  it  was  not  to  be
comfortable  that  they  first  refused  to  swim  with  the  stream  in  matters
of  religious  thought,  and  deserted  the  easy  communion  of  respectable
orthodoxy.     Will   spiritualism   conquer  incredulity  only  to  find   itself
already  degraded  into  a  new  church,  sinking,  so  to  speak,  into  arm-
chairs in    its  second   childhood,  and   no  longer  entitled    to   belief  or
vigorous  enough  for  further  progress?    It  is  not  a  promising  sign  about
a  religious  philosophy  when  it  looks  too  comfortable,  when  it  promises
too  indulgent   an   asylum   for  our  speckled  souls  with  houris  of  the
Mohammedan  Elysium,  or  the  all  too  homelike  society  of  the  spiritualist's
"Summer-land."     We  bring  our  friends  and  brethren  in  spiritualism
no  mere  feather-headed  fancies,  no  light-spun  speculation,  when  we
offer  them  some  toil-won  fragments  of  the  mighty  mountain  of  occult
knowledge,  at  the  base  of  whose  hardly  accessible   heights   we  have
learned  to  estimate  their  significance  and  appreciate  their  worth.     Is  it
asked  why  we  do  not  spread  out  the  whole  scroll  of  this  much- vaunted
philosophy  for  their  inspection  at  once,  and  so  exhibit  clearly  its  all-
sufficing  coherence?     That  question  at  least  will  hardly  be  asked  by
thoughtful  men  who  realize  what  an  all-sufficient  philosophy  of  the
universe  must  be.      As  well  might  Columbus  have  been  expected  to
bring  back  America  in  his  ships  to  Spain.     "Good  friends,  America
will  not  come,"  he  might  have  said,  "but  it  is  there  across  the  waters,
and  if  you  voyage  as  I  have  done,  and  the  waves  do  not  smother  you,
mayhap  you  will  find  it  too."

REINCARNATION  IN  TIBET.

[Vol.  III.  No.  6,  March,  1SS2.]

So  little  is  known  by  Europeans  of  what  is  going  on  in  Tibet,  and
even  in  the  more  accessible  Bhutan,  that  an  Anglo-Indian  paper — one
of  those  which  pretend  to  know,  and  certainly  discuss  every  imaginable
subject,  whether  they  really  know  anything  of  it  or  not — has  actually
come  out  with  the  following  scrap  of  valuable  information:

It  may  not  be  generally  known  that  the  Deb  Raja  of  Bhutan,  who  died  in  June
last,  but  whose  decease  has  been  kept  dark  till  the  present  moment,  probably  to
prevent  disturbances,  is  our  old  and  successful  opponent  of  1864-5.     •     •     •

The  Bhutan  Government  consists  of  a  spiritual  chief,  called  the  Dhann  Raja,  an
incarnation  of  Buddha  [? ! !]  who  never  dies,  and  a  civil  ruler  called  the  Deb  Raja  in
whom  is  supposed  to  centre  all  authoritj-.

A  more  ignorant  assertion  could  hardly  have  been  made.  It  may  be
argued  that  Christian  writers  believe  even  less  in  Buddha's  reincarna-
tions than  the  Buddhists  of  Ceylon,  and,  therefore,  trouble  themselves
very  little  whether  or  not  they  are  accurate  in  their  statements.  But
in  such  a  case,  why  touch  the  subject  at  all?  Large  sums  are  annually
spent  by  Governments  to  secure  old  Asiatic  manuscripts  and  learn  the
truth  about  old  religions  and  peoples,  and  it  is  not  showing  respect  for
either  science  or  truth  to  mislead  people  interested  in  them  by  a  flippant
and  contemptuous  treatment  of  facts.

On  the  authority  of  direct  information  received  at  our  Headquarters,
we  will  try  to  give  a  more  correct  view  of  the  situation  than  has  hitherto
been  had  from  books.  Our  informants  are  firstly,  some  very  learned
Iyamas;  secondly,  a  European  gentleman  and  traveller,  who  prefers  not
to  give  his  name;  and  thirdly,  a  highly  educated  young  Chinaman,
brought  up  in  America,  who  has  since  preferred  to  the  luxuries  of
worldly  life  and  the  pleasures  of  western  civilization,  the  comparative
privations  of  a  religious  and  contemplative  life  in  Tibet.  Both  of  the
last-named  gentlemen  are  Fellows  of  the  Theosophical   Society.      A

33

49§  A   MODERN   PANARIOX.

message  from  our  "celestial"  brother,  who  never  loses  an  opportunity
of  corresponding  with  us,  has  been  just  received  by  Darjeeling.

In  the  present  article,  beyond  contradicting  the  queer  notion  of  the
Bhutanese  Dharma  Raja  being  "an  incarnation  of  Buddha,"  we  will
only  point  out  a  few  absurdities,  in  which  some  prejudiced  writers  have
indulged.

It  certainly  has  never  been  known — at  any  rate  in  Tibet — that  the
spiritual  chief  of  the  Bhutanese  is  "an  incarnation  of  Buddha,  who
never  dies."  The  Dug-pa,*  or  Red  Caps,  belong  to  the  old  Nyang-
na-pa  sect,  who  resisted  the  religious  reform  introduced  by  Tsong-kha-
pa  between  the  latter  part  of  the  fourteenth  and  the  beginning  of  the
fifteenth  centuries.  It  was  only  after  a  lama  came  to  them  from  Tibet
in  the  tenth  century  and  converted  them  from  the  old  Buddhist  faith
(so  strongly  mixed  up  with  the  Bhon  practices  of  the  aborigines)  into
the  Shammar  sect,  that  the  Bhutanese,  in  opposition  to  the  reformed
Gyelukpas,  set  up  a  regular  system  of  reincarnations.  It  is  not  Buddha,
however,  or  Sang-gyas,  as  he  is  called  by  the  Tibetans,  who  incarnates
himself  in  the  Dharma  Raja,  but  quite  another  personage;  one  of
whom  we  will  speak  about  later  on.

Now  what  do  the  Orientalists  know  of  Tibet,  its  civil  administration,
and  especially  its  religion  and  its  rites?  Only  what  they  have  learned
from  the  contradictory,  and  in  every  case  imperfect,  statements  of  a
few  Roman  Catholic  monks,  and  of  two  or  three  daring  lay  travellers,
who,  ignorant  of  the  language,  could  scarcely  be  expected  to  give  us
even  a  bird's-eye  view  of  the  country.  The  missionaries  who  intro-
duced themselves  stealthily  into  L,hassaf  in  1719,  were  suffered  to
remain  there  but  a  short  time  and  were  finally  forcibly  expelled  from
Tibet.  The  letters  of  the  Jesuits  Desideri,  and  Johann  Grueber,  and
especially  of  Fra  della  Penna,  teem  with  the  greatest  absurdities.^:
Certainly  as  superstitious,  and  apparently  far  more  so  than  the  ignorant
Tibetans  themselves,  on  whom  they  father  every  iniquity,  one  has  but
to  read  these  letters  to  recognize  in  them  that  spirit  of  odium  theologicum

•  The  term  Dug-pa  in  Tibet  is  depreciatory.  They  themselves  pronounce  it  Dog-pa,  from  the  root
to  "bind  "  (religious  binders  to  the  old  faith i :  while  the  paramount  sect  (the  Gyeluk-pa,  Yellow  Caps)
and  the  people  use  the  word  in  the  sense  of  mischief-makers,  "sorcerers."  The  Bhutanese  are  gener-
ally called  Dug-pa  throughout  Tibet  and  even  in  some  parts  of  Northern  India.

+  Out  of  twelve  Capuchin  friars  who,  under  the  leadership  of  Father  della  Penna,  established  a
mission  at  Lhassa,  nine  died  shortly  after,  and  only  three  returned  home  to  tell  the  tale.  (See  Tibet,
by  Clements  R.  Markham.)

i  See  Appendix  to  Narratives  of  the  Mission  of  George  Bogle  to  Tibet.  By  Clements  R.  Markham,
C.B.,  F.R.S.;  Trubner  and  Co.,  London.

REINCARNATION    IN    TIHJvT.  _|C)o.

felt  by  ever}'  Christian,  and  especially  Catholic  missionaries  for  the
"heathen"  and  their  creeds;  a  spirit  which  blinds  one  entirely  to  a
sense  of  justice.  And  when  could  any  better  opportunity  have  been
found  to  ventilate  their  monkish  ill-humour  and  vindictiveness  than
in  the  matter  of  Tibet,  the  very  land  of  mystery,  mysticism  and  seclu-
sion? Beside  these  few  prejudiced  "historians,"  but  five  other  men  of
Europe  have  ever  stepped  into  Tibet.  Of  these  five,  Bogle,  Hamilton,
and  Turner  penetrated  no  farther  than  its  borderlands;  Manning  (the
only  European  who  is  known  to  have  set  his  foot  into  I^ha-ssa*)  died
without  revealing  its  secrets,  for  reasons  suspected,  though  never
admitted,  by  his  only  surviving  nephew,  a  clergyman,  and  Csoma  di
Koros,  never  went  beyond  Zanskar  and  the  lamasery  of  Phag-dal.f

The  regular  system  of  the  Eamai'c  incarnations  of  Sang-gyas,  or
Buddha,  began  with  Tsong-kha-pa.  This  reformer  ir  not  the  incarna-
tion of  one  of  the  five  celestial  Dhyans,  or  heavenly  Buddhas,  as  is
generally  supposed,  who  are  said  to  have  been  created  by  Shakya  Muni
after  he  had  risen  to  Nirvana,  but  that  of  Amita,  one  of  the  Chinese
names  for  Buddha.  The  records  preserved  in  the  Gon-pa  (lamasery)
of  Tda-shi  Hlum-po  (pronounced  in  English  Teshu  Lumbo)  show  that
Sang-gyas  incarnated  himself  in  Tsong-kha-pa,  in  consequence  of  the
great  degradation  his  doctrines  had  fallen  into.  Until  then  there  had
been  no  other  incarnations  than  those  of  the  five  celestial  Buddhas  and
of  their  Bodhisattvas,  each  of  the  former  having  created  (read,  over-
shadowed with  his  spiritual  wisdom)  five  of  the  last-named — there
were,  and  now  are  in  all,  but  thirty  incarnation-;,  five  Dhyans  and
twenty-five  Bodhisattvas.  It  was  because,  among  many  other  reforms,
Tsong-kha-pa  forbade  necromancy  (which  is  practised  to  this  day  with
the  most  disgusting  rites  by  the  Bhons,  the  abo  igines  of  Tibet,  with
whom  the  Red  Caps,  or  Shammars,  have  always  fraternized),  that  the
latter  resisted  his  authority.  This  act  was  followed  by  a  split  between
the  two  sects.  Separating  entirely  from  the  Gyalukpas,  the  Dugpas
(Red  Caps)  from  the  first  in  a  great  minority,  settled  in  various  parts

■'  We  speak  of  the  present  century.     It  is  very  dubious  whether  the  two  missionaries,  Hue  and
Gabet,  ever  entered  Lha-ssa.    The  llamas  deny  it.

+  We  are  well  aware  that  the  name  is  generally  written  Pugdal,  but  it  is  erroneous  to
Pugdal  means  nothing,  and  the  Tibetans  do  not  give  meaningless  names  to  their  sacred  buildh
We  do  not  know  how  Csoma  di  Kon'is  spells  it,  but,  as  in  the  case  of  Pho-ta-la  of  Lha-ssa  loosely
spelt  Potala— the  lamasery  of  Phag-dal  derives  its  name  from  Phag-pa  [phag,  eminent  in  holiness,
buddha-like,  spiritual;  and  pha,  man,  father)  the  title  of  Avalokiteshvara,  the  Bodhisattva  who
incarnates  himself  in  the  Dalai'-Lamas  of  Lha-ssa.  The  valley  of  the  Ganges,  where  Buddha  preached
and  lived,  is  also  called  Ph.ig-yul,  the  holy,  spiritual  land  ;  the  word  Phag  coming  from  the  one  root;
pha  or pho  being  the  corruption  of  Fo  (or  Buddha)  as  the  Tibetan  alphabet  contains  no  letter  !•'.

500  A    MODERN    PANARION.

of  Tibet,  chiefly  on  its  borderlands,  and  principally  in  Nepanl  and
Bhutan.  But,  while  they  retained  a  sort  of  independence  at  the  monas-
tery of  Sakya-Djong,  the  Tibetan  residence  of  their  spiritual  (?)  chief,
Gong-sso  Rimbo-chay,  the  Bhutanese  have  been  from  their  beginning
the  tributaries  and  vassals  of  the  Dalai-Lamas.  In  his  letter  to  Warren
Hastings  in  1774,  the  Tda-shi  Lama,  who  calls  the  Bhutanese  "a  rude
and  ignorant  race,"  whose  "Deb  Rajah  is  dependent  upon  the  Dalai-
Lama,"  omits  to  say  that  they  are  also  the  tributaries  of  his  own  state,
and  have  been  so  for  over  three  centuries  and  a  half.  The  Tda-shi
Lamas  have  always  been  more  powerful  and  more  highly  considered
than  the  Dalai-Lamas.  The  latter  are  the  creation  of  the  Tda-shi
Lama,  Nabang-Lob-Sang,  the  sixth  incarnation  of  Tsong-kha-pa —
himself  an  incarnation  of  Amitabha,  or  Buddha.  This  hierarchy  was
regularly  installed  at  Lha-ssa,  but  it  originated  only  in  the  latter  half
of  the  seventeenth  century.*

In  Mr.  C.  R.  Markham's  highly  interesting  work  above  noticed,  the
author  has  gathered  every  scrap  of  information  that  had  ever  been
brought  to  Europe  about  that  terra  incognita.  It  contains  one  passage,
which,  to  our  mind,  sums  up  in  a  few  words  the  erroneous  views  taken
by  the  Orientalists  of  Lamaism  in  general,  and  of  its  system  of  per-
petual reincarnation  especially.     This  passage  runs  as  follows:

It  was  indeed  at  about  the  period  of  Hiuen-Thsang's  journey  that  Buddhism  first
began  to  find  its  way  into  Tibet,  both  from  the  direction  of  China  and  that  of
India;  but  it  came  in  a  ver}-  different  form  from  that  in  which  it  reached  Ceylon
several  centuries  earlier.  Traditions,  metaphysical  speculations,  and  new  dogmas,
had  overlaid  the  original  Scriptures  with  an  enormous  collection  of  more  recent
revelation.  Thus  Tibet  received  a  vast  body  of  truth,  and  could  only  assimilate  a
portion  for  the  establishment  of  popular  belief.  Since  the  original  Scriptures  had
been  conveyed  into  Ceylon  \>y  the  son  of  Asoka,  it  had  been  revealed  to  the  devout
Buddhists  of  India  that  their  Lord  had  created  the  five  Dhyani  or  celestial  Buddhas,
and  that  each  of  these  had  created  five  Boddhisatwas,  or  beings  in  the  course  of
attaining  Buddhahood.  The  Tibetans  took  firm  hold  of  this  phase  of  the  Buddh-
istic creed,  and  their  distinctive  belief  is  that  the  Boddhisatwas  continue  to  remain
in  existence  for  the  good  of  mankind  by  passing  through  a  succession  of  human
beings  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave.    This  characteristic  of  their  faith  was  gradually

*  Says  Mr.  Markham  in  Tibet  (p.  xvii.  preface):  "Gedun-tubpa,  another  great  reformer,  was  con-
temporary with  Tsong-kha-pa,  having  been  born  in  1339,  and  dying  in  1474  [having  thus  lived  135
years].  He  built  the  monastery  at  Teshu  Lunibo  [Tda-shi  Hlum-po]  in  1445,  and  it  was  in  the
person  of  this  perfect  Lama,  as  he  was  called,  that  the  system  of  perpetual  incarnation  commenced,
lie  was  himself  the  incarnation  of  Boddhisatwa  Padma  Pani,  and  on  his  death  he  relinquished  the
attainment  of  Buddhahood  that  he  might  be  born  again  and  again  for  the  benefit  of  mankind.
.     .     .     When  he  died  his  successor  was  found  as  an  infant  by  the  possession  of  certain  divine  marks.*'

REINCARNATION    IN   TIBET.  501

developed,  and  it  was  long  before  it  received  its  present  form;*  but  the  succession
of  incarnate  Boddhisatwas  was  the  idea  towards  which  the  Tibetan  mind  tended
from  the  first.

At  the  same  time,  as  Max  Miiller  says:

The  most  important  element  of  the  Buddhist  reform  has  always  been  its  social
and  moral  code,  not  its  metaphysical  theories.  That  moral  code,  taken  by  itself,  is
one  of  the  most  perfect  which  the  world  has  ever  known;  and  it  was  this  blessing
that  the  introduction  of  Buddhism  brought  into  Tibet. t

The  "blessing"  has  remained  and  spread  all  over  the  country,  there
being  no  kinder,  purer-minded,  more  simple  or  sin-fearing  nation  than
the  Tibetans,  missionary-slanders  notwithstanding.!  But  yet,  for  all
that,  the  popular  L,amaism,  when  compared  with  the  real  esoteric,  or
Arahat  Buddhism  of  Tibet,  offers  a  contrast  as  great  as  the  snow
trodden  along  a  road  in  the  valley,  to  the  pure  and  undefiled  mass
which  glitters  on  the  top  of  a  high  mountain  peak.§  A  few  of  such
mistaken  notions  about  the  latter,  we  will  now  endeavour  to  correct  as
far  as  it  is  compatible  to  do  so.

Before  it  can  be  clearly  shown  how  the  Bhutanese  were  forcibly
brought  into  subjection,  and  their  Dharma  Raja  made  to  accept  the
"incarnations"  only  after  these  had  been  examined  into,  and  recog-
nized at  Iyha-ssa,  we  have  to  throw  a  retrospective  glance  at  the  state
of  the  Tibetan  religion  during  the  seven  centuries  which  preceded  the

*  Its  "present"  is  its  earliest  form,  as  we  will  try  to  show  further  on.  A  correct  analysis  of  any
religion  viewed  from  its  popular  aspect  only  becomes  impossible — least  of  all  L,amai'sm,  or  esoteric
Buddhism  as  disfigured  by  the  untutored  imaginative  fervour  of  the  populace.  There  is  a  vaster
difference  between  the  LamaTsm  of  the  learned  classes  of  the  clergy  and  the  ignorant  masses  of
their  parishioners  than  there  is  between  the  Christianity  of  a  Bishop  Berkeley  and  that  of  a  modern
Irish  peasant.  Hitherto  Orientalists  have  made  themselves  superficially  acquainted  only  with  the
beliefs  and  rites  of  popular  Buddhism  in  Tibet,  chiefly  through  the  distorting  glasses  of  missionaries,
which  throw  out  of  focus  every  religion  but  their  own.  The  same  course  has  been  followed  in
respect  to  Sinhalese  Buddhism,  the  missionaries  having,  as  Colonel  Olcott  observes  in  the  too  brief
preface  to  his  Buddhist  Catechism,  for  many  years  been  taunting  the  Sinhalese  with  the  "puerility
and  absurdity  of  their  religion"  when,  in  point  of  fact,  what  they  talk  of  is  not  orthodox  Buddh-
ism at  all.     Buddhist  folklore  and  fairy  stories  are  the  accretions  of  twenty-six  centuries.

+  Introduction  to  the  Science  of  Religion,  p.  xiv.

t  The  reader  has  but  to  compare  in  Mr.  Markham's  Tibet  the  warm,  impartial  and  frank  prai- es
bestowed  by  Bogle  and  Turner  on  the  Tibetan  character  and  moral  standing  and  the  enthusiastic
eulogies  of  Thomas  Manning  to  the  address  of  the  Dalai'-Lama  and  his  people,  with  the  three  let  I
of  the  three  Jesuits  in  the  "Appendix,"  to  enable  himself  to  form  a  decisive  opinion.  While  the
former  three  gentlemen,  impartial  narrators,  having  no  object  to  distort  truth,  hardly  find  sufficient
adjectives  to  express  their  satisfaction  with  the  Tibetans,  the  three  "men  of  God"  pick  no  better
terms  for  the  Dalai'-Lamas  and  the  Tibetans  than  "their  devilish  God  the  Father,"  "vindictive
devils,"  "fiends  who  know  how  to  dissemble,"  who  are  "cowardly,  arrogant,  and  proud,"  "dirty  and
immoral."  etc..  all  in  the  same  strain  for  the  sake  of  truth  and  Christian  charity'

\  As  Father  Desideri  has  it  in  one  of  his  very  few  correct  remarks  about  the  Lamas  of  Tibet,
"though  many  may  know  how  to  read  their  mysterious  books,  not  one  can  explain  them"  -an
observation  by  the  by,  which  might  be  applied  with  as  much  justice  to  the  Christian  as  to  the
Tibetan  clergy.     (See  Tibet,  p.  306.)

502  A   MODERN   PANARION.

reform.  As  said  before,  a  Lama  had  come  to  Bhutan  from  Kam — that
province  which  had  always  been  the  stronghold  and  the  hot-bed  of  the
Shammar  or  Bhon  rites* — between  the  ninth  and  tenth  centuries,  and
had  converted  them  into  what  he  called  Buddhism.  But  in  those  days,
the  pure  religion  of  Shakya  Muni  had  already  commenced  degenerat-
ing into  that  L,amai'sm,  or  rather  fetichism,  against  which  four  centuries
later  Tsong-kha-pa  arose  with  all  his  might.  Though  three  centuries
had  only  passed  since  Tibet  had  been  converted  (with  the  exception  of
a  handful  of  Shammars  and  Bhons),  yet  esoteric  Buddhism  had  crept
far  earlier  into  the  country.  It  had  begun  superseding  the  ancient
popular  rites  ever  since  the  time  when  the  Brahmans  of  India,  getting
again  the  upper  hand  over  Asoka's  Buddhism,  were  silently  preparing
to  oppose  it,  an  opposition  which  culminated  in  their  finally  and
entirely  driving  the  new  faith  out  of  the  country.  The  brotherhood  or
community  of  the  ascetics  known  as  the  Byang-tsiub — the  "Accom-
plished" and  the  "Perfect" — existed  before  Buddhism  spread  in  Tibet,
and  was  known,  and  so  mentioned  in  the  pre-buddhistic  books  of
China  as  the  fraternity  of  the  "great  teachers  of  the  snowy  mountains."
Buddhism  was  introduced  into  Bod-yul  in  the  beginning  of  the
seventh  century  by  a  pious  Chinese  princess,  who  had  married  a  Tibetan
king.f  who  was  converted  by  her  from  the  Bhon  religion  into  Buddhism,
and  had  become  since  then  a  pillar  of  the  faith  in  Tibet,  as  Asoka  had
been  nine  centuries  earlier  in  India.  It  was  he  who  sent  his  minister
(according  to  European  Orientalists),  his  own  brother,  the  first  L,ama  in
the  country  (according  to  Tibetan  historical  records)  to  India.  This
brother  minister  returned  "with  the  great  body  of  truth  contained  in  the
Buddhist  canonical  Scriptures;  framed  the  Tibetan  alphabet  from  the
Devanagari  of  India,  and  commenced  the  translation  of  the  canon  from
Sanskrit  (which  had  previously  been  translated  from  Pali,  the  old  language
of  Magadha)  into  the  language  of  the  country."  (See  Markham's  Tibet.*)  \

The  Shammar  sect  is  not,  as  wrongly  supposed,  a  kind  of  corrupted  Buddhism,  but  an  offshoot
of  the  Bhon  religion,  itself  a  degenerated  remnant  of  the  Chaldaean  mysteries  of  old,  now  a  religion
entirely  based  upon  necromancy,  sorcery  and  soothsaying-.  The  introduction  of  Buddha's  name
in  it  means  nothing.

+  A  widely-spread  tradition  tells  us  that  after  ten  years  of  married  life  she  renounced  it,  with  her
husband's  consent,  and  in  the  garb  of  a  nun  (a  Ghelung-ma,  or  Ani)  she  preached  Buddhism  all
over  the  country,  as,  several  centuries  earlier,  the  Princess  Sanghamitta,  Asoka's  daughter,  preached
it  in  India  and  Ceylon.

X  But  what  he  does  not  say  (for  none  of  the  writers  he  derives  his  information  from  knew  it)  is  that
this  princess  is  the  one  who  is  believed  to  have  reincarnated  herself  since  then  in  a  succession  of
female  Lamas  or  Kim  ani — precious  nuns.  Durjiay  Tan-mo  of  whom  Bogle  speaks  (his  Tda-shi
Lama's  half-sister*,  and  the  superior  of  the  nunnery  on  the  Lake  Yam-dog-ccho  or  Piate-Lake,  was
one  of  such  reincarnations.

REINCARNATION    IN    TIBET.

503

Under  the  old  rule  and  before  the  reformation,  the  high  Lamas  were
often  permitted  to  marry,  so  as  to  incarnate  themselves  in  their  own  direct
descendants — a  custom  which  Tsong-kha-pa  abolished,  strictlv  enjoining
celibacy  on  the  Lamas.  The  Lama  Eulightener  of  Bhutan  had  a  son
whom  he  had  brought  with  him.  In  this  son's  first  male  child  born
after  his  death,  the  Lama  had  promised  the  people  to  reincarnate  him-
self. About  a  year  after  the  event — so  goes  the  religious  legend — the
son  was  blessed  hy  his  Bhutanese  wife  with  triplets,  all  the  three  boys!
Under  this  embarrassing  circumstance,  which  would  have  floored  any
other  casuists,  the  Asiatic  metaphysical  acuteness  was  fully  exhibited.
The  spirit  of  the  deceased  Lama,  the  people  were  told,  incarnated  him-
self in  all  the  three  boys.  One  had  his  Om,  the  other  his  Han,  the
third  his  Hoong;  or  in  Sanskrit,  Buddha,  divine  mind;  Dharmn,
matter  or  animal  soul;  and  Saugha,  the  union  of  the  former  two  in
our  phenomenal  world.  It  is  this  pure  Buddhist  tenet  which  was
degraded  by  the  cunning  Bhutanese  clergy  to  serve  the  better  their
ends.  Thus  their  first  Lama  became  a  triple  incarnation,  three  Lamas,
one  of  whom,  they  say,  got  his  "body,"  the  other  his  "heart,"  and  the
third  his  "word"  or  "wisdom."  This  hierarchy  lasted  with  power
undivided  until  the  fifteenth  century,  when  a  Lama  named  Dukpa
Shab-tung,  who  had  been  defeated  by  the  Gyalukpas  of  Gay-don
Toob-pa* — invaded  Bhutan  at  the  head  of  his  arm>r  of  monks.  Con-
quering the  whole  country,  he  proclaimed  himself  their  first  Dharma
Raja,  or  Lama  Rimbochay — thus  starting  a  third  "Gem"  in  opposition
to  the  two  Gyalukpa  "Gems."  But  this  "Gem"  never  rose  to  the
eminence  of  a  Majesty,  least  of  all  was  he  ever  considered  a  "Gem  of
Learning"  or  wisdom.  He  was  defeated  very  soon  after  his  proclama-
tion by  Tibetan  soldiers,  aided  by  Chinese  troops  of  the  Yellow  Sect,
and  forced  to  come  to  terms.  One  of  the  clauses  was  the  permission
to  reign  spiritually  over  the  Red  Caps  in  Bhutan,  provided  he  con-
sented to  reincarnate  himself  in  Lha-ssa  after  his  death,  and  make  the
law  hold  good  for  ever.  No  Dharma  Raja  since  then  was  ever  pro-
claimed or  recognized,  unless  he  was  born  either  at  Lha-ssa  or  on  the
Tda-shi  Hlum-po  territory.  Another  clause  was  to  the  effect  that  the
Dharma  Rajas  should  never  permit  public  exhibitions  of  their  rites  of
sorcery  and  necromancy,  and  the  third  that  a  sum  of  money  should  be

*  The  builder  and  founder  of  Tda-shi  Hlum-po  (Teshu-lumbo),  in  1445;  called  the  "  Perfect  I.rmi.i."
or  Panchhen— the  "Precious  Jewel"— from  the  words,  Pan-chhen  great  teacher,  and  Rim-bochay
priceless  jewel.  While  the  Dala'i-Lama  is  only  Gyalba  Rim-bochay,  or  "Gem  of  Kingly  Majesty,"
the  Tda-shi  Lama  of  Tzi-gadze  is  Panchhen  Rim-bochay  or  U\r  Gem  of  Wisdom  and  learning.

504  A   MODERN   PANARION.

paid  yearly  for  the  maintenance  of  a  lamasery,  with  a  school  attached
where  the  orphans  of  Red  Caps  and  the  converted  Sham  mars  should
be  instructed  in  the  "Good  Doctrine"  of  the  Gyalukpas.  That  the
latter  must  have  had  some  secret  power  over  the  Bhutanese,  who  are
among  the  most  inimical  and  irreconcilable  of  their  Red-capped  ene-
mies, is  proved  by  the  fact  that  Iyama  Duk-pa  Shab-tung  was  reborn  at
Ivha-ssa,  and  that  to  this  day  the  reincarnated  Dharma  Rajas  are  sent
and  installed  at  Bhutan  by  the  Dha-ssa  and  Tzi-gadze  authorities.
The  latter  have  no  concern  in  the  administration  save  their  spiritual
authority,  and  leave  the  temporal  government  entirely  in  the  hands  of
the  Deb-Raja  and  the  four  Pen-lobs,  called  in  Indian  official  papers
Penlows,  who  in  their  turn  are  under  the  immediate  authority  of  the
Ldia-ssa  officials.

From  the  above  it  will  be  easily  understood  that  no  Dharma  Raja
was  ever  considered  as  an  incarnation  of  Buddha.  The  expression
that  the  latter  "never  dies"  applies  but  to  the  two  great  incarnations
of  equal  rank — the  Dalai  and  the  Tda-shi  L,amas.  Both  are  incarna-
tions of  Buddha,  though  the  former  is  generally  designated  as  that  of
Avalokiteshvara,  the  highest  celestial  Dhyan.  For  him  who  under-
stands the  puzzling  mystery  by  having  obtained  a  key  to  it,  the  Gordian
knot  of  these  successive  reincarnations  is  easy  to  untie.  He  knows
that  Avalokiteshvara  and  Buddha  are  one  as  Amita-pho*  (pronounced
Fo)  or  Amita-Buddha  is  identical  with  the  former.  What  the  mystic
doctrine  of  the  initiated  Phag-pa  or  "saintly  men"  (adepts)  teaches
upon  this  subject,  is  not  to  be  revealed  to  the  world  at  large.

*  In  Tibetan  pho  and  pha — pronounced  with  a  soft  labial  breath-like  sound — means  at  the  same
time  "man,  father."  So  Phayul  is  native  land;  Pho-nya,  angel,  messenger  of  good  news;  Pha-me,
ancestors,  etc.,

End  of  Volume  I.

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY

Los  Angeles

This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below.

f

,    %HHD

APR  2  0  ]97]

i  '

SEC'D  LD-URF

JUN  2 1 1988

47584

3  1158  00293  2613  -^°

'2-

PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE
THIS  BOOK  CARD

'CI

a

a

«
a
u

B

S

u

8
B

a

s

M

University  Research  Library

s

6
K

a

a
