The Secret Doctrine, Vol. 1: Cosmogenesis (Helena Petrovna Blavatsky, 1888)
==========================================================
Blavatsky's 1888 masterwork, Vol. 1 (Cosmogenesis); the founding text of modern Theosophy. Public domain. Digitized from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/secretdoctrinesy01blav).

6?  561  .B52  V  1
Blavafsky,  H.'P.  1831-1891
The  secret  doctrine


THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE


Newnham,  Cowell  &  Gripper,  Ltd.,

Printers,

75,  Chiswell  Street,

London,  E.G.  i.


^\^N  OF  PR/iV^.

SEP  22  1.927


THE


Secret  Doctrine  :


THE   SYNTHESIS


OF


SCIENCE,  RELIGION,  AND  PHILOSOPHY.


BY


H.  P.  BLAVATSKY.


AUTHOR  OF    "ISIS  UNVEII,ED.


THIRD    AND    REVISED    EDITION.


SATYAT    NASTI    PARO    DHARMAH.

"There  is  no  Religion  higher  than  Truth."


Volume  I.

COSMOGENESIS.


LONDON :

The  Theosophical  Publishing  House,

1S93.

Reprinted   1902,  1905.  1908,  1911,  1913,  1918,  1921.


^^ Entered  according  to  Act  of  Congress  in  the  year  1888,  by  H.  P.  Blavatsky,
ill  the  Office  of  the  Librariati  of  Congress  at  Washington,  D.C."


ENTERED    AT    STATIONERS'    HAIyly.

ALL  RIGHTS  RESERVED.


This  Work

I  Dedicate  to  all  True  Theosophists,

In  every  Country,

And  of  every  Race,

For  they  called  it  forth,  and  for  them  it  was  recorded.


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.


Introduction       ....
The  Need  of  .such  a  Book
The  Antiquity  of  Documents  and  MSS.
What  the  Book  is  Intended  to  Do


PAGE.
I

3

7

12


Proem       .......

The  Oldest  MSS.  in  the  World  and  its  Symbolism
The  One  Life      ......

The  Secret  Doctrine— Pantheism — Atheism
"Space"  in  all  Religions  and  in  Occultism  .
Seven  Cosmic  Elements — Seven  Races  of  Mankind
The  Three  Propositions  of  the  Secret  Doctrine
Description  of  the  Stanzas  from  the  Book  of  Dzyan


31
31
32
35
37
40
42
48


PART   I.
Cosmic   Evolution.


STANZA   I.


Seven  Stanzas  from  the  Book  of  Dzyan

Commentaries     .

Time  and  Universal  Mind

The  Cau.ses  of  Being     .

The  Seven  Sublime-  Lords

The  Causes  of  Existence

The  One  Form  of  Existence

Alaya,  the  Universal  Soul

Can  the  Finite  conceive  the  Infinite.?


55
67
69

71
73

75
77

79
81


STANZA   II.


The  Builders

The  Absolute  Knows  Itself  Not

The  Germ  of  Life


83
85
87


Vlll


CONTENTS.


Astral  Light  is  not  Anima  Mundi
Divine  Thought


PAGE.
89

91


STANZA   III.

The  Awakening  of  Cosmos

91

The  Universe,  a  Flitting  Shadow

93

Nature's  Symbols

95

The  Churning  of  the  Ocean

97

Darkness  and  Light

99

Androgynous  Deities     .

lOI

The  Serpent  Symbol     .

103

The  Magical  Agent

■       105

I  Am  That  I  Am

.      107

Primeval  Differentiations

109

The  Web  of  Being

»

III

Conscious  Electricity    .

113

STANZA   IV.

The  Septenary  Hierarchies

0                          >                         *                          o                         0                         e                         ol 13

The  Seven  Mystic  Senses

•                         •                         •

-15

The  Vehicle  of  the  Universe  .

^

117

The  Immaculate  Conceptions.

•                         •                         •

119

The  Potency  of  Speech  and  vSouiid   .

121

The  Seven  Senses

»

•       123

The  Boundless  Circle    .

*                         0                         •

125

Fire,  the  Great  Symbol  of  Deity

•                         ■                         •

.       127

The  Stellar  Sons  of  Light

.

.

129

The  Divine  Recorders  .

•                         •

•

131

STANZA  V.

Fohat :  the  Child  of  the  Septenary  Hierarchies

The  Celestial  Buddhas

The  Theogony  of  the  Creators

The  Protean  Spirit-Substance

The  Correlation  of  the  Gods  .

The  Seven  Worlds

The  Antiquity  of  Physical  Sciences

The  One  Flame .

The  Winged  Wheels      .

Monism  and  Materialism

The  Four  Celestial  Beings

The  Lipika

The  Ring  "  Pass  Not"  .


131
133
135
137

139

141

143
145
147
149

151
153
155


CONTENTS.


iX


The  God  of  Man  and  the  God  of  the  Ant
The  Day  of  "Come  To  Us"     .


ces?


and  Man


STANZA  VI

Our  "World,  its  Growth  and  Development    .

The  Mystery  of  the  Female  I/Ogos     .

From  No-Number  to  Number  Seven

Were  the  Ancients  Ignorant  of  the  Physical  Scien

The  Sleep  of  the  Eternal  Mother

The  Cosmic  Plane,  an  Illusion

Primordial  Substance,  a  Reality

Laplace's  Mistake

A  Digression

A  few  Earl}'  Misconceptions  concerning  Planets,  Rounds

Descending  and  Reascending  States

Exchange  of  Life-Principles   .

Opinions  Differ  and  yet  Agree

The  Transmigrations  of  the  Ego

A  Readjustment  of  Facts

Like  Questions,  like  Answers  ,

An  Authoritative  Letter

The  Number  777

The  Monadic  Evolutions

Additional  Facts  and  Explanations  concerning  the  Globes  and

Transfer  of  Life-Elements

The  Monadic  Host

The  Elemental  Kingdoms

Monads  and  Atoms

The  Lunar  Ancestors    .

The  Fourth  Globe

Man  or  Ape ;  which  was  First  ?

An  Erroneous  Opinion  .

A  Master's  Letter

The  Preliminary  Creation  of  Man

The  First  Cause  of  Sin

The  Codex  Nazarc^us  repeats  the  Allegory

Ilda-Baoth -Jehovah

The  Seven  Planes

The  War  in  Heaven

The  Birth  of  the  Worlds

The  Seven  Grades  of  Initiation

The  Lost  Canon  of  Proportion

The  Origin  of  Devotion

The  Creative  Powers     .


the  Monads


PAGE.


160
161
163
165
167
169
171

176
177
179
181
183
185
187
189
191

193
193
195
197
199
201
203
205
207
209
211
213

215
217
219
221
223
225
227
229
231
233


CONTENTS.


STANZA  VII.

The  Parents  of  Man  on  Earth

One  Parent  Flame,  Countless  Flames

Teachings  Contrasted   .

The  Hierarchies  of  Spirits

Nature-Spirits,  or  Elementals

The  Mystery  of  Being  .

The  Ancestry  of  Man    .

The  "Seven  Souls"  in  Egyptology

The  Moon  God   .

Jehovah  a  Female  Sephira

The  Origin  of  Man

Dii  Sunt  Demones  Inversi

The  Immortal  Root

Chaldsean  Metaphysics

The  True  and  the  False  Kabbalah

Occult  and  Kabbalistic  Doctrines

Occultists  and  Kabbalists  Differ

Spirit  Alone  is  Helpless  on  Earth

The  "Devourers"

The  Four  Dimensions  of  Space

Oceans  of  Carbonic  Acid

The  Great  Magic  Agent

Akasha  is  not  Ether

Atoms  are  Invisible  Lives

Occult  Chemistry

The  Fiery  Lives

Man,  the  Shadow  of  his  Prototype

Earth  Peopled  from  Heaven    .

The  "Second  Advent"  .

Summing  Up
The  Upanishads
A  Recapitulation

The  Guiding  Intelligence  of  the  Universe

The  Unity  of  All  in  Nature      .

The  Three  Universes     .

Matter  is  the  Shadow  of  Spirit

The  Yliaster  of  Paracelsus

Hermes  Christianized    .

The  Eternal  alone  is  Real

A  Few  Occult  Aphorisms

Extracts  from  an  Eastern  Private  Commentary  hitherto

Yoga  Powers       .  .  *

Akasha     .  .  .  •

Nothing  New  under  the  Sun  .


Secret


PAGE.

233

235
237
239

241

243

245
247
249
251
253
255
257
259

261

263
265

267
269

271

273
275
277
279
281

283
285

287
289

290
291

293
295
297

299

301

303
305
307
309
309
313
315
317


CONTENTS.


XI


PART  II.

The  Evolution  of  Symbolism.
SECTION  I.


Symbolism  and  Ideographs
The  Egyptian  Cat-Symbol
Magic  Potency  of  Sound
The  Mystery  Language


SECTION  V.

On  the  Hidden  Deity,  its  Symbols  and  Glyphs
The  Gnosis  of  Marcus  .  .  ,  .  .

The  Great  Mind


?AGE.
321

325

327


SECTION  II.

The  Mystery  Language  and  its  Keys             ......      329

Eg}-pt's  many  Religions           .....

•      331

The  Great  Pyramid  Measures  .....

•      333

The  Quadrature  of  the  Circle  .....

•      335

Truth  must  Prevail  at  Last       .....

•      337

Moses  and  the  Ark  of  Bulrushes  copied  from  Sargon

•      339

Occult  Numbers              ......

.      341

Identity  of  the  Ancient  Symbols         ....

.      343

The  "Satanic"  Races    ......

.      345

SECTION  III.

Primordial  Substance  and  Divine  Thought              .....      347

Divine  Thought              ......

349

The  Universal  Illusion               .....

351

Pater  Omnipotens  ^ther         ......

353

The  Cosmogenesis  of  Manu    ......

355

The  Seven  Prakritis       .            .            .            .            .

357

The  Gods  of  "Genesis"            ......

359

The  Mystic  Fire              .......

361

^ther       .......

363

SECTION  IV.

Chaos:  Theos:  Kosmos .             ........      365

The  Soul  of  the  World 367

The  Birth  of  Mind 369

The  Mystic  Elements    .......

•

•

371

373
375
377


Xll


CONTENTS.


Symbols  of  the  Creative  Powers
International  Correlation  of  Gods
Ancient  Symbology


SECTION  VII.


The  Days  and  Nights  of  Brahma

Three  Kinds  of  Pralaya

The  Reabsorption  of  All

A  Kabalistic  Key

The  Coming  of  Night  .

The  Return  of  Moru     .


PAGE.

379
381
383


SECTION  VI.

The  Mundane  Egg

•                  ■                  •

•     384

Egg  and  Ark

•                  •                  •

.     385

Lunar  and  Solar  Deities

•                  •                  •

.     387

Fiery  Serpents    .

•                  *.                  •

.     389

The  Winged  Globe

•                  •                  •

•      39i

Tvro  Aspects  of  "God"

.

•      393

395
397
399
401

403
405


SECTION  VIII.


The  Lotus,  as  a  Universal  Symbol
The  Ideal  becoming  Material  .
Hebrew  Anthropomorphism    .
Brahman  and  Semite     .
The  Letter  M      .


406
407
409
411
413


SECTION  IX

The  Moon;  Deus  Lunus,  Phcebe

The  Christian  Lunar  God

The  Physiological  Key  to  the  Moon  Symbol

The  "  Double  Womb"

An  Allegory  from  the  Zohar    .

Hecate-Luna  the  Counterpart  of  Jehovah

The  Moon  Bi-Sexual     .

The  Dignity  of  Sais

Ante-historical  Catholicism

Identity  of  Typology    .


415
417
419
421
423
425
427
429
431
433


Tree,  Serpent,  and  Crocodile  Worship
The  Serpent,  the  vSymbol  of  Initiation
The  Ashvattha  Tree
"Sevening"
The  Dual  Logos


CONTENTvS.

xni

SECTION  X.

PAGE.

rship

•       434

ation

.       435

.

•       437

.

439

441

SECTION  XI.


Demon  est  Deus  Inversus
No  I/ife  without  Death
Theological  Etymologies
The  Angels  Slandered  .
The  War  of  the  Gods    .
Wilson's  Criticism  Criticized
The  Deception  of  the  Gods


443
445
447
449
451
453
455


SECTION  XII.


The  Theogony  of  the  Creative  Gods

Jehovah  not  the  Supreme  Deity

The  Primeval  Theogony  of  the  Vedantiiis

Synonyms  of  the  Logos

"Female"  Logoi

The  Pythagorean  Idea

Antiquity  of  the  Pyramids

Cosmic  Gods

Incredible,  but  True

The  Same  Idea  in  Confucianism

The  Myster}'  of  Blackness

God  is  our  Higher  Self


457
459

461

463
465
467
469

471
473
475
477
479


SECTION  XIII.


The  Seven  Creations     .

The  Seven  Creations  of  the  Puranas

The  Ogdoad        ....

The  Primary  and  Secondary  Creations

Many  Versions  of  the  One  Truth

The  Seven  Creations     .

Who  the  Kumaras  are  .

The  "Virgin  Ascetics"

Importance  of  the  Number  Seven


480
481
483
485
487
489

493
495
497


XIV


CONTENTS.


SECTION  XIV

The  Four  Elements

On  the  Elements

The  Cosmic  Gods

St.  Paul  Believed  in  Cosmic  Gods

Jehovah,  a  God  of  the  Elements

Astarte  and  the  Virgin  Mary.

Physical  Forces,  the  Vehicles  of  the  Elements


PAGE.

497
499
501
503
505
507
509


SECTION  XV.

On  Kwan-Shi-Yin  and  Kwan-Yiu

Diseased  Imagination   .....

Crinolines,  or  the  Dragon-Garb?


510
511
513


On  Occult  and  Modern  Science


Reasons  for  these  Addenda
Forces  are  Devas  and  Genii     .
Light  is  both  Spirit  and  Matter


PART  III.

Addenda.

SECTION  I.


517


517
519
521


SECTION   II.

Modern  Physicists  are  playing  at  Blind  Man's  Buff
"  Is  Light  a  Body  or  Not  ? "     .
A  Selection  of  Contradictory  Hypotheses    .
Actio  in  Distans  .....

Cauchy's  Views  ......


523
525
527
529
531


SECTION   III.


Is  Gravitation  a  Law  ?  .

Gravity  or  what  ?

Jehovah,  one  of  the  Elohim    .

Newton  then  and  Newton  now

Perpetual  Motion

Kepler's  Ideas    .

The  Cause  of  Rotation


532
533
535
537
539
541
543


CONTENTS.

SECTION   IV


The  Theories  of  Rotation  in  Science
Contradictory  Hypotheses
Scientific  Aberrations    .
The  Paradoxes  of  Science
Forces  are  Realities


SECTION   V.


The  Masks  of  Science

Academical  Misnomers

The  Fixing  of  Light     .

What  is  Force  ?

They  Agree  to  Disagree

The  Mystic  Rays

The  Causes  and  the  Effects

What  is  an  Atom  ?

Chemical  Gods   .

The  Vishishthadvaita  System


SECTION   VI.


An  Attack  on  the  Scientific  Theory  of  Force  by  a  Man  of  Science
Dr.  Richardson's  Heresy  ....••

The  Spirit  and  Soul  of  Kosmos  .  .  .  •  •


SECTION  VII.


Life,  Force,  or  Gravity
Sun-force  and  Earth-force
Pantheism  or  Monotheism
The  Seven  Physical  Senses
The  Tree  of  Life
What  is  Nervous  Ether  ?
The  Life  Principle


SECTION  VIII.


The  Solar  Theory
The  Heart  of  the  Solar  System
The  Quintessence  of  Kosmos
The  Original  Base
Elements  and  Non-Elements
What  is  the  Directive  Force  ?


XV


PAGE.

544
545
547
549

551


552
553
555
557
559
561
563
565
567
569


571
573
575


577
579
581
583
585
587
589


590

591
593
595
597
599


XVI


CONTENTS.


A  Scientific  Caduceus   .
Occultism  in  Chemistry


PAGE.

6oi
603


SECTION   IX.


The  Coming  Force
An  Unconscious  Occultist
Occult  Mysteries  and  Society
Limits  to  Discoveries    .
Keely's  Ether     .  T

A  Premature  Discovery
What  is  the  New  Force  ?


SECTION  XL


Ancient  Thought  in  Modern  Dress
Chemistry  and  Occult  Science
The  Trinity  in  Unity     .
Genesis  of  the  Elements
Puranas  versus  Royal  Society  .


605
607
609
611
613

615
6(7


SECTION  X.

On  the  Elements  and  Atoms  .

619

The  Whirling  of  the  Soul

621

The  Eternal  Pilgrim      .

623

Buddhas  of  the  Three  Worlds

625

The  Crest-jewel  of  Wisdom     .

627

Uranus  and  Neptune     .

a                               0                               a                               •                               «                               ,                               ,

629

Cyclic  Fall  of  the  Gods

(•                                   a                                    9                                   a                                   ft                                   •                                    ■

631

633

635

637
639

641


SECTION  XII.

Scientific  and  Esoteric  Evidence  for,  and  Objections  to,  the  Modern  Nebular

Theory
Modern  Science  and  Occultism
Forces  are  Emanations
Unanswerable  Queries  .
What  are  the  Nebulae.^
Cometary  Matter
Wnat  is  Primitive  Matter  ?
The  Future  Synthesis  .


643
645
647
649
651
653
655
657


CONTENTS.


XVll


SECTION  XIII

Forces— Modes  of  Motion  or  latelligences  ?

Kant  and  Occultism

Mind  in  Nature  .

Occult  and  Physical  Sciences

Plurality  of  Worlds

The  Geology  of  Enoch


Gods,  Monads,  and  Atoms
Who  are  the  Blind  ?
The  Mathematical  Point
Space,  Force,  and  Matter
Phantoms  of  the  Mind
Atomic  Souls

The  Chemistry  of  the  Future
Aryan  and  Western  Science
Hermes  or  Huxley  ?
Leibnitz  and  Occultism
Spinoza  and  Leibnitz     .
The  Nature  of  the  Monad
Spirit  and  Matter  One


SECTION  XIV.


SECTION   XV.


Cyclic  Evolution  and  Karma  .
Is  Man  a  God  or  a  Beast  ?
The  Swing  of  Karma    .
The  Network  of  Destiny
Cvclic  Wheels  within  Wheels
Karma-Nemesis

Ancient  and  Modern  Prophecies
Astrology  a  Science


PAGE.

658

659
661

663
665

667


669

671

673
675
677
679
681

683
685
687
689

691

693


695
697
699

701

703
705
707
709


SECTION  XVI.


The  Zodiac  and  its  Antiquity
The  Zodiac  in  the  Bible
Antiquity  of  Zodiac
The  Zodiac  and  the  Patriarchs
The  vSign  of  Jonas
Chaldseo-Judean  Gods   .
The  Dragon  aud  the  Bull


710
711

713
715
717
719
721


XVlll


CONTENTS.


Bailly's  Conclusions
The  Beginning  of  Kali  Yuga  .
Hindu  Astronomical  Methods
The  Aryan  Hindus  Vindicated


PAGE.

727
729


SECTION  XVII.


Summary  of  the  Position

The  Exact  Science  of — Negation

Forces  are  Gods

The  Aliases  of  Fohat    .

Legend  and  History


731
733
735
737
739


PREFACE  TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION.


The  author — the  writer,  rather — feels  it  necessary  to  apologize
for  the  long  delay  which  has  occurred  in  the  appearance  of  this  work.
It  has  been  occasioned  by  ill-health  and  the  magnitude  of  the  under-
taking. Even  the  two  volumes  now  issued  do  not  complete  the
scheme,  nor  do  these  treat  exhaustively  of  the  subjects  dealt  with  in
them.  A  large  quantity  of  material  has  already  been  prepared,  deal-
ing with  the  history  of  Occultism  as  contained  in  the  lives  of  the
great  Adepts  of  the  Aryan  Race,  and  showing  the  bearing  of  Occult
Philosophy  upon  the  conduct  of  life,  as  it  is  and  as  it  ought  to  be.
Should  the  present  volumes  meet  with  a  favourable  reception,  no
effort  will  be  spared  to  carr>'  out  the  scheme  of  the  work  in  its
entiretv.

This  scheme,  it  must  be  added,  was  not  in  contemplation  when
the  preparation  of  the  work  was  first  announced.  As  originally
announced,  it  was  intended  that  The  Secret  Doctrine  should  be
an  amended  and  enlarged  version  of  his  Unveiled.  It  was,  how-
ever, soon  found  that  the  explanations  which  could  be  added  to
those  already  put  before  the  world,  in  the  last-named  and  other
works  dealing  with  Esoteric  Science,  were  such  as  to  require
a  different  method  of  treatment;  and  consequently  the  present
volumes  do  not  contain,  in  all,  twenty  pages  extracted  from  his
Unveiled.

The  author  does  not  feel  it  necessary  to  ask  the  indulgence  of  her
readers  and  critics  for  the  many  defects  of  literary  style,  and  the


XX  PREFACE.

imperfect  English  which  may  be  found  in  these  pages.  She  is  a
foreigner,  and  her  knowledge  of  the  language  was  acquired  late  in
life.  The  English  tongue  is  employed  because  it  offers  the  most
widely-diffused  medium  for  conveying  the  truths  which  it  had
become  her  duty  to  place  before  the  world.

These  truths  are  in  no  sense  put  forward  as  a  revelation;  nor  does
the  author  claim  the  position  of  a  revealer  of  mystic  lore,  now  made
public  for  the  first  time  in  the  world's  history.  For  what  is  contained
in  this  work  is  to  be  found  scattered  throughout  thousands  of
volumes  embodying  the  Scriptures  of  the  great  x^siatic  and  early
European  religions,  hidden  under  gl3^ph  and  symbol,  and  hitherto
left  unnoticed  because  of  this  veil.  What  is  now  attempted  is  to
gather  the  oldest  tenets  together  and  to  make  of  them  one  harmo-
nious and  unbroken  whole.  The  sole  advantage  which  the  writer
has  over  her  predecessors,  is  that  she  need  not  resort  to  personal
speculations  and  theories.  For  this  work  is  a  partial  statement  of
what  she  herself  has  been  taught  by  more  advanced  students,  sup-
plemented, in  a  few  details  only,  by  the  results  of  her  own  study  and
observation.  The  publication  of  many  of  the  facts  herein  stated  has
been  rendered  necessary  by  the  wild  and  fanciful  speculations  in
which  many  Theosophists  and  students  of  Mysticism  have  indulged,
during  the  last  few  years,  in  their  endeavour,  as  they  imagined,  to
work  out  a  complete  system  of  thought  from  the  few  facts  previously
communicated  to  them.

It  is  needless  to  explain  that  this  book  is  not  the  Secret  Doctrine
in  its  entirety,  but  a  select  number  of  fragments  of  its  fundamental
tenets,  special  attention  being  paid  to  some  facts  which  have  been
seized  upon  by  various  writers,  and  distorted  out  of  all  resemblance
to  the  truth.

But  it  is  perhaps  desirable  to  state  unequivocally  that  the  teach-


PREFACE.  xxi

ings,  however  fragmentary  and  incomplete,  contained  in  these
volumes,  do  not  belong  to  the  Hindu,  the  Zoroastrian,  the  Chaldaean,
or  the  Eg}'ptian  religion,  nor  to  Buddhism,  Islam,  Judaism  or  Chris-
tianity exclusively.  The  Secret  Doctrine  is  the  essence  of  all  these.
Sprung  from  it  in  their  origins,  the  various  religious  schemes  are
now  made  to  merge  back  into  their  original  element,  out  of  which
every  mystery  and  dogma  has  grown,  developed,  and  become
materialized.

It  is  more  than  probable  that  the  book  will  be  regarded  by  a  large
section  of  the  public  as  a  romance  of  the  wildest  kind ;  for  who  has
ever  even  heard  of  the  Book  of  Dzyan?

The  writer,  therefore,  is  fully  prepared  to  take  all  the  responsi-
bility for  what  is  contained  in  this  work,  and  even  to  face  the  charge
of  having  invented  the  whole  of  it.  That  it  has  many  shortcomings
she  is  fully  aware;  all  that  she  claims  for  it  is  that,  romantic  as  it
may  seem  to  many,  its  logical  coherence  and  consistency  entitle  this
new  Genesis  to  rank,  at  any  rate,  on  a  level  with  the  ''working
hypotheses"  so  freely  accepted  by  Modern  Science.  Further,  it
claims  -consideration,  not  by  reason  of  any  appeal  to  dogmatic
authority,  but  because  it  closely  adheres  to  Nature,  and  follows  the
laws  of  uniformity  and  analogy.

The  aim  of  this  work  may  be  thus  stated :  to  show  that  Nature
is  not  "a  fortuitous  concurrence  of  atoms,"  and  to  assign  to  man
his  rightful  place  in  the  scheme  of  the  Universe;  to  rescue  from
degradation  the  archaic  truths  which  are  the  basis  of  all  reli-
gions; to  uncover,  to  some  extent,  the  fundamental  unity  from
which  they  all  spring;  finally,  to  show  that  the  Occult  side  of
Nature  has  never  been  approached  by  the  Science  of  modern
civilization.

If  this  is  in  any  degree  accomplished,  the  writer  is  content.     It  is


xxii  PREFACE.

written  in  the  service  of  humanit)-,  and  by  humanity  and  the  future
generations  it  must  be  judged.  Its  author  recognizes  no  inferior
court  of  appeal.  Abuse  she  is  accustomed  to;  calumny  she  is  daily
acquainted  with ;  at  slander  she  smiles  in  silent  contempt.

De  mmimt's  non  curat  lex.

H.  P.  B.
lyONDON,  October^  1888.


PREFACE  TO  THE  THIRD  AND  REVISED  EDITION.


In  preparing  tliis  edition  for  the  press,  we  have  striven  to  correct
minor  points  of  detail  in  literaiy  form,  without  touching  at  all  more
important  matters.  Had  H.  P.  Blavatsky  lived  to  issue  the  new
edition,  she  would  doubtless  have  corrected  and  enlarged  it  to  a  very
considerable  extent.  That  this  is  not  done  is  one  of  the  many
minor  losses  caused  by  the  one  great  loss.

Awkward  phrases,  due  to  imperfect  knowledge  of  English,  have
"been  corrected ;  most  of  the  quotations  have  been  verified,  and  exact
references  given — a  work  involving  great  labour,  as  the  references
in  the  previous  editions  were  often  very  loose;  a  uniform  system  of
transliteration  for  Sanskrit  words  has  been  adopted.  Rejecting  the
form  most  favoured  by  Western  Orientalists  as  being  misleading  to
the  general  reader — we  have  given  to  the  consonants  not  present  in
our  English  alphabet  combinations  that  approximately  express  their
sound-values,  and  we  have  carefully  inserted  quantities,  wherever
they  occur,  on  the  vowels.  In  a  few  instances  we  have  incorporated
notes  in  the  text,  but  this  has  been  very  sparingly  done,  and  only
when  they  obviously  formed  part  of  it.

We  have  added  a  copious  Index  for  the  assistance  of  students,
and  have  bound  it  separately,  so  that  reference  to  it  may  be  facili-
tated. For  the  great  labour  in  this  we,  and  all  students,  are  the
debtors  of  Mr.  A.  J.  Faulding.

Annie  Besant.
G.  R.  S.  Mead.

London,  1893.


INTRODUCTORY.


Gently  to  hear,  kindly  to  judge.

Shakespeare.


Since  the  appearance  of  Theosophical  literature  in  England,  it  has
become  customary  to  call  its  teachings  "Esoteric  Buddhism."  And,
having  become  a  habit— as  an  old  proverb  based  on  daily  experience
has  it — "Error  runs  down  an  inclined  plane,  while  Truth  has  to
laboriously  climb  its  way  up  hill."

Old  truisms  are  often  the  wisest.     The  human  mind  can  hardly  remain
entirely  free  from  bias,  and  decisive  opinions  are  often  formed  before  a
thorough  examination  of  a  subject  from  all  its  aspects  has  been  made.
This  is  said  with  reference  to  the  prevailing  double  mistake  (a)  of  limit-
ing Theosophy  to  Buddhism  ;  and  (d)  of  confounding  the  tenets  of  the
religious    philosophy   preached   by    Gautama,   the   Buddha,    with    the
doctrines  broadly   outlined   in   Esoteric  Buddhism.      Any   thing   more
erroneous  than  this   could  hardly  be  imagined.     It  has  enabled   our
enemies  to  find  an  effective  weapon  against  Theosophy,  because,  as  an
eminent   Pali   scholar  very  pointedly  expressed  it,  there   was   in   the
volume  named   "  neither  Esotericism   nor   Buddhism."      The   esoteric
truths,  presented  in  Mr.  Sinnett's  work,  ceased  to  be  esoteric  from  the
moment  they  were  made  public  ;  nor  did  the  book  contain  the  religion
of  Buddha,  but  simply  a  few  tenets  from  a  hitherto  hidden  teaching,
which  are   now   explained   and   supplemented   by  many  more  in   the
present  volumes.     And  even  the  latter,  though  giving  out  many  funda-
mental tenets  from  the  Secret  Doctrine  of  the  East,  raise  but  a  small
corner  of  the  dark  veil.    For  no  one,  not  even  the  greatest  living  Adept,
would  be  permitted  to,  or  could— even  if  he  would— give  out  promis-
cuously   to   a  mocking,    unbelieving  world   that  which  has  been   so
effectually  concealed  from  it  for  long  aeons  and  ages.

Esoteric  Buddhism  was  an  excellent  work  with  a  ver>'  unfortunate
title,  though  it  meant  no  more  than  does  the  title  of  this  work,  Thb


2  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Secret  Doctrine.  It  proved  unfortunate,  because  people  are  always
in  the  habit  of  judging  things  by  their  appearance  rather  than  by  their
meaning,  and  because  the  error  has  now  become  so  universal,  that  even
most  of  the  Fellows  of  the  Theosophical  Society  have  fallen  victims  to
the  same  misconception.  From  the  first,  however,  protests  were  raised
by  Brahmans  and  others  against  the  title ;  and,  in  justice  to  myself,  I
must  add  that  Esoteric  Buddhism  was  presented  to  me  as  a  completed
volume,  and  that  I  was  entirely  unaware  of  the  manner  in  which  the
author  intended  to  spell  the  word  "  Budh-ism."

This  has  to  be  laid  directly  at  the  door  of  those  who,  having  been  the
first  to  bring  the  subject  under  public  notice,  neglected  to  point  out  the
difference  between  "Buddhism" — the  religious  system  of  ethics  preached
by  the  lyord  Gautama,  and  so  named  from  his  title  of  Buddha,  the
"Knlightened" — and  "Budhism,"  irom.  Budha,  Wisdom,  or  Knowledge
(Vidya),  the  faculty  of  cognizing,  from  the  Sanskrit  root  Budh,  to  know.
We  Theosophists  of  India  are  ourselves  the  real  culprits,  although,  at
the  time,  we  did  our  best  to  correct  the  mistake.*  To  avoid  this
deplorable  misnomer  was  easy ;  the  spelling  of  the  word  had  only  to  be
altered,  and  by  common  consent  both  pronounced  and  written
"  Budhism,"  instead  of  "  Buddhism."  Nor  is  the  latter  term  correctly
Spelt  and  pronounced,  as  it  ought  to  be  called,  in  English,  Buddhafsm,
and  its  votaries  "  Buddhaists."

This  explanation  is  absolutely  necessary  at  the  beginning  of  a  work
like  the  present.  The  Wisdom- Religion  is  the  inheritance  of  all  the
nations,  the  world  over,  in  spite  of  the  statement  made  in  Esoteric
Buddhism  \  that  "  two  years  ago  {i.e.,  in  1883),  neither  I,  nor  any  other
European  living,  knew  the  alphabet  of  the  Science,  here  for  the  first
time  put  into  a  scientific  shape,"  etc.  This  error  must  have  crept  in
through  inadvertence.  The  present  writer  knew  all  that  is  "  divulged  "
in  Esoteric  Buddhism,  and  much  more,  ma7iy  years  before  it  became  her
duty  (in  1880)  to  impart  a  small  portion  of  the  Secret  Doctrine  to  two
European  gentlemen,  one  of  whom  was  the  author  of  Esoteric  Buddhism ;
and  surely  the  present  writer  has  the  undoubted,  though  to  her,  rather
equivocal,  privilege  of  being  a  European  by  birth  and  education.
Moreover,  a  considerable  part  of  the  philosophy  expounded  by  Mr,
Sinnett  was  taught  in  America,  even  before  Isis  Unveiled  was  published,
to  two  Europeans  and  to  my  colleague.  Colonel  H.  S.  Olcott.  Of  the
three  teachers  the  latter  gentleman  has  had,  the  first  was  a  Hungarian

•  See  Thessophist,  June,  1883.  t  Preface  to  the  original  edition.


INTRODUCTORY.  3

Initiate,  the  second  an  Egyptian,  the  third  a  Hindu.  As  permitted,
Colonel  Olcott  has  given  out  some  of  this  teaching  in  various  ways ;  if
the  other  two  have  not,  it  has  been  simply  because  they  were  not
allowed,  their  time  for  public  work  having  not  yet  come.  But  for
others  it  has,  and  the  appearance  of  Mr.  Sinnett's  several  interesting
books  is  a  visible  proof  of  the  fact.  Moreover,  it  is  above  everything
important  to  keep  in  mind  that  no  Theosophical  book  acquires  the  least
additional  value  from  pretended  authority.

Adi,  or  Adhi  Budha,  the  One,  or  the  First,  and  Supreme  Wisdom,  is
a  term  used  by  Ar3^asanga  in  his  secret  treatises,  and  now  by  all  the
mystic  Northern  Buddhists.  It  is  a  Sanskrit  term,  and  an  appellation
given  by  the  earliest  Aryans  to  the  Unknown  Deity;  the  word
"Brahma"  not  being  found  in  the  Vedas  and  the  early  works.  It
means  the  Absolute  Wisdom,  and  Adibhuta  is  translated  by  Fitzedward
Hall,  "  the  primeval  uncreated  cause  of  all."  ^ons  of  untold  duration
must  have  elapsed,  before  the  epithet  of  Buddha  was  so  humanized,  so
to  speak,  as  to  allow  of  the  term  being  applied  to  mortals,  and  finally
appropriated  to  one  whose  unparalleled  virtues  and  knowledge  caused
him  to  receive  the  title  of  the  "  Buddha  of  Wisdom  Unmoved."  Bodha
means  the  innate  possession  of  divine  intellect  or  understanding;
Buddha,  the  acquirement  of  it  by  personal  efforts  and  merit;  while
Buddhi  is  the  faculty  of  cognizing,  the  channel  through  which  divine
knowledge  reaches  the  Ego,  the  discernment  of  good  and  evil,  also
divine  conscience,  and  the  Spiritual  Soul,  which  is  the  vehicle  of
Atma.  "When  Buddhi  absorbs  our  Ego-tism  (destroys  it)  with  all  its
Vikaras,  Avalokiteshvara  becomes  manifested  to  us,  and  Nirvana,  or
Mukti,  is  reached,"  Mukti  being  the  same  as  Nirvana,  i.e.,  freedom  from
the  trammels  of  Maya  or  Illusion.  Bodhi  is  likewise  the  name  of  a
particular  state  of  trance-condition,  called  Samadhi,  during  which  the
subject  reaches  the  culmination  of  spiritual  knowledge.

Unwise  are  those  who,  in  their  blind  and,  in  our  age,  untimely  hatred
of  Buddhism,  and,  by  reaction,  of  Budhism,  deny  its  esoteric  teachings,
which  are  those  also  of  the  Brahmans,  simply  because  the  name  sug-
gests what  to  them,  as  Monotheists,  are  noxious  doctrines.  Unwise
is  the  correct  term  to  use  in  their  case.  For  in  this  age  of  crass  and
illogical  materialism,  the  Esoteric  Philosophy  alone  is  calculated  to
withstand  the  repeated  attacks  on  all  and  everything  man  holds  most
dear  and  sacred  in  his  inner  spiritual  life.  The  true  philosopher,
the  student  of  Esoteric  Wisdom,  entirely  loses  sight  of  personalities.


4  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

dogmatic  beliefs  and  special  religions.  Moreover,  Esoteric  Philosophy-
reconciles  all  religions,  strips  every  one  of  its  outward  human  garments,
and  shows  the  root  of  each  to  be  identical  with  that  of  every  other  great
religion.  It  proves  the  necessity  of  a  Divine  Absolute  Principle  in
Nature.  It  denies  Deity  no  more  than  it  does  the  sun.  Esoteric
Philosophy  has  never  rejected  God  in  Nature,  nor  Deit}'  as  the  absolute
and  abstract  Ens.  It  onl}^  refuses  to  accept  any  of  the  gods  of  the
so-called  monotheistic  religions,  gods  created  by  man  in  his  own  image
and  likeness,  a  blasphemous  and  sorry  caricature  of  the  Ever-Unknow-
able.  Furthermore,  the  records  we  mean  to  place  before  the  reader
embrace  the  esoteric  tenets  of  the  whole  world  since  the  beginning  of
our  humanity,  and  Buddhistic  Occultism  occupies  therein  only  its
legitimate  place,  and  no  more.  Indeed,  the  secret  portions  of  the  Da}i
or  J  anna  (Dhyana)*  oi  Gautama's  metaphysics — grand  as  they  appear  to
one  unacquainted  with  the  tenets  of  the  Wisdom-Religion  of  antiquity
— are  but  a  very  small  portion  of  the  whole.  The  Hindu  reformer
limited  his  public  teachings  to  the  purely  moral  and  physiological
aspect  of  the  Wisdom-Religion,  to  ethics  and  man  alone.  Things
"unseen  and  incorporeal,"  the  mysteries  of  Being  outside  our  terrestrial
sphere,  the  great  Teacher  left  entirely  untouched  in  his  public  lectures,
reserving  the  Hidden  Truths  for  a  select  circle  of  his  Arhats.  The
latter  received  their  Initiation  at  the  famous  Saptaparna  Cave  (the
Sattapanni  of  Mahavansa)  near  Mount  Baibhar  (the  Webhara  of  the
Pali  MSS.).  This  cave  was  in  Rajagriha,  the  ancient  capital  of
Magadha,  and  was  the  Cheta  Cave  of  Fa-hian,  as  is  rightly  suspected  by
some  archaeologists.!

Time  and  human  imagination  made  short  work  of  the  purity  and
philosophy  of  these  teachings,  once  that  they  were  transplanted  from
the  secret  and  sacred  circle  of  the  Arhats,  during  the  course  of  their
work  of  proselytism,  into  a  soil  less  prepared  for  metaphysical  con-
ceptions than  India;  i.e.,  once  they  were  transferred  into  China,  Japan,
Siam,  and  Burmah.  How  the  pristine  purity  of  these  grand  revelations
was  dealt  with  may  be  seen  in  studying  some  of  the  so-called  "esoteric"
Buddhist  schools  of  antiquity  in  their  modern  garb,  not  only  in  China

*  Dan,  in  modem  Chinese  and  Tibetan  phonetics  Ckhan,  is  the  general  term  for  the  esoteric  schools
and  their  literature.  In  the  old  books,  the  word  Janna  is  defined  as  "  reforming-  one's  self  by
meditation  and  knowledge,"  a  second  inner  birth.  Hence  Dzan,  Djan  phonetically;  the  Book  of
Dzyan.    See  Edkins,    Chinese  Buddhism,  p.  129,  note.

t  Mr.  Beglor,  the  chief  engitieer  at  Buddhagaya,  and  a  distinguished  archsologist,  was  the  first,  we
believe,  to  discover  it.


INTRODUCTORY,  5

and  other  Buddhist  countries  in  general,  but  even  in  not  a  few  schools
of  Tibet,  which  have  been  left  to  the  care  of  uninitiated  llamas  and
Mongolian  innovators.

Thus  the  reader  is  asked  to  bear  in  mind  the  ver>^  important  differ-
ence between  orthodox  Buddhism — i.e.,  the  public  teachings  of  Gautama,
the  Buddha — and  his  esoteric  Budhism.  His  Secret  Doctrine,  however,
differed  in  no  wise  from  that  of  the  initiated  Brahmans  of  his  da5^  The
Buddha  was  a  child  of  Ar}'an  soil,  a  born  Hindu,  a  Kshatriya  and  a
disciple  of  the  Twice-born  (the  initiated  Brahmans)  or  Dvijas.  His
teachings,  therefore,  could  not  be  different  from  their  doctrines,  for  the
whole  Buddhist  reform  consisted  merely  in  giving  out  a  portion  of  that
which  had  been  kept  secret  from  every  man  outside  of  the  "enchanted"
circle  of  ascetics  and  Temple-Initiates.  Unable,  owing  to  his  pledges,
to  teach  all  that  had  been  imparted  to  him,  though  the  Buddha  taught
a  philosophy  built  upon  the  ground-work  of  the  true  esoteric  know-
ledge, he  gave  to  the  world  only  its  outward  material  body  and  kept  its
soul  for  his  Elect.  Many  Chinese  scholars  among  Orientalists  have
heard  of  the  "Soul-Doctrine."  None  seem  to  have  understood  its  real
meaning  and  importance.

That  doctrine  was  preserved  secretly — too  secretly,  perhaps — within
the  sanctuary.  The  mystery  that  shrouded  its  chief  dogma  and  aspira-
tion— Nirvana — has  so  tried  and  irritated  the  curiosity  of  those  scholars
who  have  studied  it,  that,  unable  to  solve  it  logically  and  satisfactoril}'
by  untying  its  Gordian  knot,  they  have  cut  it  through  by  declaring
that  Nirvana  means  absolute  annihilation.

Toward  the  end  of  the  first  quarter  of  this  century  a  distinct  class  of
literature  appeared  in  the  world,  which  with  every  year  became  more
defined  in  its  tendency.  Being  based,  soi-disant,  on  the  scholarly
researches  of  Sanskritists  and  Orientalists  in  general,  it  was  considered
scientific.  Hindii,  Egyptian,  and  other  ancient  religions,  myths,  and
emblems  were  made  to  yield  anj^thing  the  symbologist  wanted  them  to
yield,  and  thus  often  the  rude  outward  form  was  given  out  in  place  of
the  inner  meaning.  Works,  most  remarkable  for  their  ingenious  deduc-
tions and  speculations,  circulo  vicioso — foregone  conclusions  generally
taking  the  place  of  premisses  in  the  syllogisms  of  more  than  one  San-
skrit and  Pali  scholar — appeared  rapidly  in  succession,  over-flooding  the
libraries  with  dissertations  on  phallic  and  sexual  worship  rather  than
on  real  symbolog>%  and  each  contradicting  the  other.

This  is  the  true  reason,  perhaps,  why  the  outline  of  a  few  funda-


6  THE  s:ecRET  doctrine;.

mental  truths  from  the  Secret  Doctrine  of  the  Archaic  Ages  is  now
permitted  to  see  the  light,  after  long  millenniums  of  the  most  profound
silence  and  secrecy.  I  say  advisedly  "a  few  truths,"  because  that
which  must  remain  unsaid  could  not  be  contained  in  a  hundred  such
volumes,  nor  could  it  be  imparted  to  the  present  generation  of  Saddu-
cees.  But  even  the  little  that  is  now  given  is  better  than  complete
silence  upon  these  vital  truths.  The  world  of  to-day,  in  its  mad  career
towards  the  unknown,  which  the  Physicist  is  too  ready  to  confound
with  the  unknowable,  whenever  the  problem  eludes  his  grasp,  is  rapidly
progressing  on  the  reverse  plane  to  that  of  spirituality.  It  has  now
become  a  vast  arena,  a  true  valley  of  discord  and  of  eternal  strife,
a  necropolis,  wherein  lie  buried  the  highest  and  the  most  holy  aspira-
tions of  our  Spirit-Soul.  That  soul  becomes  with  every  new  generation
more  paralyzed  and  atrophied.  The  "  amiable  infidels  and  accom-
plished profligates"  of  Society,  spoken  of  by  Greeley,  care  little  for  the
revival  of  the  dead  sciences  of  the  past ;  but  there  is  a  fair  minority  of
earnest  students  who  are  entitled  to  learn  the  few  truths  that  may  be
given  to  them  now ;  and  7iow  much  more  than  ten  years  ago,  when  his
Unveiled  appeared,  or  even  when  the  later  attempts  to  explain  the
mysteries  of  esoteric  science  were  published.

One  of  the  greatest  and  perhaps  the  most  serious  objection  to  the
correctness  and  reliability  of  the  whole  work  will  be  the  preliminary
Stanzas.  How  can  the  statements  contained  in  them  be  verified  ?
True,  though  a  great  portion  of  the  Sanskrit,  Chinese,  and  Mongolian
works  quoted  in  the  present  volumes  is  known  to  some  Orientalists,
yet  the  chief  work — that  one  from  which  the  Stanzas  are  given — is  not
in  the  possession  of  European  I^ibraries.  The  Book  of  Dzyan  (or
Dzan)  is  utterly  unknown  to  our  Philologists,  or  at  any  rate  was  never
heard  of  by  them  under  its  present  name.  This  is,  of  course,  a  great
drawback  to  those  who  follow  the  methods  of  research  prescribed  by
official  Science;  but  to  students  of  Occultism,  and  to  every  genuine
Occultist,  this  will  be  of  little  moment.  The  main  body  of  the  doc-
trines given,  however,  is  found  scattered  throughout  hundreds  and
thousands  of  Sanskrit  MSS.,  some  already  translated — disfigured  in  their
interpretations,  as  usual — others  still  waiting  their  turn.  Every
scholar,  therefore,  has  an  opportunity  of  verifying  the  statements
herein  made,  and  of  checking  most  of  the  quotations.  A  few  new
facts,  new  to  the  profane  Orientalist  only,  and  passages  quoted  from
the  Commentaries  will  be   found   difficult  to   trace.      Several   of  the


INTRODUCTORY.  y

teachings  also  have  hitherto  been  transmitted  orally,  yet  even  these
in  every  instance  are  hinted  at  in  the  almost  countless  volumes  of
Brahmanical,  Chinese  and  Tibetan  temple-literature.

However  it  may  be,  and  whatsoever  is  in  store  for  the  writer
through  malevolent  criticism,  one  fact  is  quite  certain.  The  members
of  several  esoteric  schools — the  seat  of  which  is  beyond  the  Himalayas,
and  whose  ramifications  may  be  found  in  China,  Japan,  India,  Tibet,
and  even  in  Syria,  and  also  South  America — claim  to  have  in  their
possession  the  sum  total  of  sacred  and  philosophical  works  in  MSS.
and  print,  all  the  works,  in  fact,  that  have  ever  been  written,  in  what-
ever language  or  character,  since  the  art  of  writing  began,  from  the
ideographic  hieroglyphs  down  to  the  alphabet  of  Cadmus  and  the
Devanagari.

It  has  been  constantly  claimed  that,  ever  since  the  destruction  of  the
Alexandrian  Library,*  every  work  of  a  character  that  might  lead  the
profane  to  the  ultimate  discover}^  and  comprehension  of  some  of  the
mysteries  of  the  Secret  Science,  owing  to  the  combined  efforts  of  the
members  of  these  Brotherhoods,  has  been  diligently  searched  for.  It
is  added,  moreover,  by  those  who  know,  that  once  found  all  such
works  were  destroyed,  save  three  copies  of  each  which  were  preserved
and  safely  stored  away.  In  India,  the  last  of  these  precious  manu-
scripts were  secured  and  hidden  during  the  reign  of  the  Emperor
Akbar.

Prof  Max  MiiUer  shows  that  no  bribes  or  threats  of  Akbar  could
extort  the  original  text  of  the  Vedas  from  the  Brahmans,  and  yet
boasts  that  European  Orientalists  have  it.f  That  Europe  has  the
complete  text  is  exceedingly  doubtful,  and  the  future  may  have  very
disagreeable  surprises  in  store  for  the  Orientalists.

It  is  maintained,  furthermore,  that  every  sacred  book  of  this  kind,
the  text  of  which  was  not  sufficiently  veiled  in  symbolism,  or  which
had  any  direct  references  to  the  ancient  mysteries,  was  first  carefully
copied  in  cryptographic  characters,  such  as  to  defy  the  art  of  the  best
and  cleverest  palaeographer,  and  then  destroyed  to  the  last  copy.
During  Akbar's  reign,  some  fanatical  courtiers,  displeased  at  the
Emperor's  sinful  prying  into  the  religions  of  the  infidels,  themselves
helped    the   Brahmans    to    conceal    their   MSS.      Such   was    Badaoni,


•  See  Isis  Unveiled,  Vol.  II,  p.  27.

t  Introduction  to  Uie  Science  of  Religion,  p.  23.


8  .  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

who  had  an  tmdisguised  horror  of  Akbar's  mania  for  idolatrous  religions.

Badaoni,  in  his  Muntakhab  at  Tawarikh,  writes :

As  they  [the  Shramana  and  Brahmans]  surpass  other  learned  men  in  their  treatises
on  morals  and  on  physical  and  religious  sciences,  and  reach  a  high  degree  in  their
knowledge  of  the  future,  in  spiritual  power,  and  human  perfection,  they  brought
proofs  based  on  reason  and  testimony,  .  .  .  and  inculcated  their  doctrines  so  firmly
....  that  no  man  ....  could  now  raise  a  doubt  in  his  Majesty  even  if  moun-
tains were  to  crumble  to  dust,  or  the  heavens  were  to  tear  asunder His

Majesty  relished  inquiries  into  the  sects  of  these  infidels,  who  cannot  be  counted,  so
numerous  they  are,  and  who  have  no  end  of  revealed  books*

This  work  "was  kept  secret  and,  was  not  published  till  the  reign  of
Jahangir."

Moreover  in  all  the  large  and  wealthy  Lamasaries,  there  are  subter-
ranean crypts  and  cave-libraries,  cut  in  the  rock,  whenever  the  Gonpa
and  lyhakhang  are  situated  in  the  mountains.  Beyond  the  Western
Tsaydam,  in  the  solitary  passes  of  Kuen-lun  there  are  several  such
hiding-places.  Along  the  ridge  of  Altyn-tag,  whose  soil  no  European
foot  has  ever  trodden  so  far,  there  exists  a  certain  hamlet,  lost  in  a
deep  gorge.  It  is  a  small  cluster  of  houses,  a  hamlet  rather  than  a
monastery,  with  a  poor-looking  temple  in  it,  and  one  old  lyama,  a
hermit,  living  near  by  to  watch  it.  Pilgrims  say  that  the  subterranean
galleries  and  halls  under  it  contain  a  collection  of  books,  the  number
of  which,  according  to  the  accounts  given,  is  too  large  to  find  room
even  in  the  British  Museum.

According  to  the  same  tradition  the  now  desolate  regions  of  the
waterless  land  of  Tarim — a  veritable  wilderness  in  the  heart  of
Turkestan — were  in  days  of  old  covered  with  flourishing  and  wealthy
cities.  At  present,  a  few  verdant  oases  only  relieve  its  dread  solitude.
One  such,  carpeting  the  sepulchre  of  a  vast  city  buried  under  the
sandy  soil  of  the  desert,  belongs  to  no  one,  but  is  often  visited  by
Mongolians  and  Buddhists.  The  tradition  also  speaks  of  immense
subterranean  abodes,  of  large  corridors  filled  with  tiles  and  C3dinders.
It  may  be  an  idle  rumour,  and  it  may  be  an  actual  fact.

All  this  will  very  likely  provoke  a  smile  of  doubt.  But  before  the
reader  rejects  the  truthfulness  of  the  reports,  let  him  pause  and  reflect
over  the  following  well-known  facts.  The  collective  researches  of
Orientalists,  and  especially  of  late  years  the  labours  of  students  of
Comparative  Philology  and  the  Science  of  Religion,  have  enabled  them


'  Ain  i  Akbari,  translated  by  Dr.  Blochmann,  quoted  by  Max  Miiller,  op.  cit.


INTRODUCTORY.  9

to  ascertain  that  an  incalculable  number  of  MSS.,  and  even  of  printed
works  known  to  have  existed,  arc  now  to  be  710  more  found.  They  have
disappeared  without  leaving  the  slightest  trace  behind  them.  Were
they  works  of  no  importance  they  might,  in  the  natural  course  of
time,  have  been  left  to  perish,  and  their  very  names  would  have  been
obliterated  from  human  memory.  But  this  is  not  so,  for,  as  now
ascertained,  most  of  them  contained  the  true  keys  to  works  still
extant,  and  now  entirely  incomprehe?isible,  for  the  greater  portion  of
their  readers,  without  these  additional  volumes  of  commentaries  and
explanations.

Such,  for  instance,  are  the  works  of  Lao-tse,  the  predecessor  of
Confucius.  He  is  said  to  have  written  nine  hundred  and  thirty
books  on  ethics  and  religions,  and  seventy  on  magic,  one  thousand
in  all.  His  great  work,  however,  the  Tao-te-King,  the  heart  of  his
doctrine  and  the  sacred  scripture  of  the  Tao-sse,  has  in  it,  as  Stanislas
Julien  shows,  only  "about  5,000  words,"*  hardly  a  dozen  of  pages;  yet
Professor  Max  Miiller  finds  that  "  the  text  is  unintelligible  without
commentaries,  so  that  M.  Julien  had  to  consult  more  than  sixty
commentators  for  the  purpose  of  his  translation,  the  earliest  going
back  as  far  as  the  year  163  B.C.",  and  not  earlier,  as  we  see.  During
the  four  centuries  and  a  half  that  preceded  this  "earliest"  of  the
commentators  there  was  ample  time  to  veil  the  true  L,ao-tse  doctrine
from  all  but  his  initiated  priests.  The  Japanese,  among  whom  are
now  to  be  found  the  most  learned  of  the  priests  and  followers  of
Lao-tse,  simply  laugh  at  the  blunders  and  hypotheses  of  European
Chinese  scholars ;  and  tradition  affirms  that  the  commentaries  to  which
our  Western  Sinologues  have  access  are  not  the  real  occult  records,  but
intentional  veils,  and  that  the  true  commentaries,  as  well  as  almost  all
the  texts,  have  long  disappeared  from  the  eyes  of  the  profane.

Of  the  works  of  Confucius  we  read :

If  we  turn  to  China,  we  find  that  the  religion  of  Confucius  is  founded  on  the
Five  King  and  the  Four  Shu  books — in  themselves  of  considerable  extent  and
surrounded  by  voluminous  Commentaries,  without  which  even  the  most  learned
scholars  would  not  venture  to  fathom  the  depth  of  their  sacred  canon. t

But  they  have  not  fathomed  it;  and  this  is  the  complaint  of  the
Confucianists,  as  a  very  learned  member  of  that  body,  in  Paris,  com-
plained in  1 88 1.


•  Tao-te-King,  p.  xxvii.  t  Max  MuUer,  op.  cit.,  p.  114.


lO  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

If  our  scholars  turn  to  the  ancient  literature  of  the  Semitic  reli-
gions, to  the  Scriptures  of  Chaldea,  the  elder  sister  and  instructress,  if
not  the  fountain-head  of  the  Mosaic  Bible,  the  basis  and  starting-
point  of  Christianity,  what  do  they  find  ?  To  perpetuate  the
memory  of  the  ancient  religions  of  Babylon,  to  record  the  vast  cycle
of  astronomical  observations  of  the  Chaldean  Magi,  to  justify
the  tradition  of  their  splendid  and  preeminently  occult  literature,,
what  now  remains?  Only  a  few  fragments,  which  are  said  to  be  by
Berosus.

These,  however,  are  almost  valueless,  even  as  a  clue  to  the  character
of  what  has  disappeared,  for  they  passed  through  the  hands  of  his
Reverence,  the  Bishop  of  Caesarea — that  self-constituted  censor  and
editor  of  the  sacred  records  of  other  men's  religions — and  they  doubt-
less to  this  day  bear  the  mark  of  his  eminently  veracious  and  trust-
worthy hand.  For  what  is  the  history  of  this  treatise  on  the  once
grand  religion  of  Babylon  ?

It  was  written  in  Greek  for  Alexander  the  Great,  by  Berosus,  a  priest
of  the  temple  of  Belus,  from  the  astronomical  and  chronological  records
preserved  by  the  priests  of  that  temple — records  covering  a  period  of
200,000  years — and  is  now  lost.  In  the  first  century  B.C.  Alexander  Poly-
histor  made  a  series  of  extracts  from  it,  which  are  also  lost.  Kusebius
(270-340  A.D.)  used  these  extracts  in  writing  his  Chronicon.  The
points  of  resemblance — almost  of  identity — between  the  Jewish  and
the  Chaldean  scriptures,*  made  the  latter  most  dangerous  to  Eusebius,
in  his  role  of  defender  and  champion  of  the  new  faith  which  had
adopted  the  former  scriptures  and  together  with  them  an  absurd
chronology.

Now  it  is  pretty  certain  that  Eusebius  did  not  spare  the  Egyptian
synchronistic  tables  of  Manetho — so  much  so  that  Bunsenf  charges
him  with  mutilating  history  most  unscrupulously,  and  Socrates,  a
historian  of  the  fifth  century,  and  Syncellus,  vice-patriarch  of  Con-
stantinople in  the  beginning  of  the  eighth,  denounce  him  as  the  most
daring  and  desperate  forger.  Is  it  likely,  then,  that  he  dealt  more
tenderly  with  the  Chaldean  records,  which  were  already  menacing  the
new  religion,  so  rashly  accepted?

*  Found  out  and  proven  only  now,  through  the  discoveries  made  by  George  Smith  (see  his
Chaldean  Account  of  Genesis),  and  which,  thanks  to  this  Armenian  forger,  have  misled  all  the
"civilized  nations"  for  over  1,500  years  into  accepting  Jewish  derivations  for  direct  Divine  Revela-
tion.

+  Egypt's  Place  in  History,  i.  200.


INTRODUCTORY.  I I

So  that,  with  the  exception  of  these  more  than  doubtful  fragments,
the  entire  Chaldean  sacred  literature  has  disappeared  from  the  eyes  of
the  profane  as  completely  as  the  lost  Atlantis.  A  few  facts  that  were
contained  in  the  Berosian  History  are  given  later  on,  and  may  throw
great  light  on  the  true  origin  of  the  Fallen  Angels,  personified  by  Bel
and  the  Dragon.

Turning  now  to  the  oldest  specimen  of  Aryan  literature,  the  Rig
Veda,  the  student  if  he  strictly  follows  in  this  the  data  furnished  by
the  Orientalists  themselves,  will  find  that  although  the  Rig  Veda
contains  only  about  10,580  verses,  or  1,028  hymns,  yet  in  spite  of  the
Brdhma7ias  and  the  mass  of  glosses  and  commentaries,  it  is  not  under-
stood correctly  to  this  day.  Why  is  this  so?  Evidently  because  the
Brahmanas,  "the  scholastic  and  oldest  treatises  on  the  primitive
hymns,"  themselves  require  a  key,  which  the  Orientalists  have  failed
to  secure.

What,  again,  do  the  scholars  say  of  Buddhist  literature?  Do  they
possess  it  in  its  completeness?  Assuredly  not.  Notwithstanding  the
325  volumes  of  the  Kanjur  and  Tanjur  of  the  Northern  Buddhists,
each  volume,  we  are  told,  "weighing  from  four  to  five  pounds,"
nothing,  in  truth,  is  known  of  real  Lamaism.  Yet  the  sacred  canon
is  said  in  the  Saddharmdlankdra*  to  contain  29,368,000  letters,  or,
exclusive  of  treatises  and  commentaries,  five  or  six  times  the  amount
of  the  matter  contained  in  the  Bible,  which,  as  Professor  Max  Miiller
states,  rejoices  in  only  3,567,180  letters.  Notwithstanding,  then,  these
325  volumes  (in  reality  there  are  2>33,  the  Kanjur  comprising  108,  and
Tanjur  225  volumes),  "the  translators,  instead  of  supplying  us  with
correct  versions,  have  interwoven  them  with  their  own  commentaries,
for  the  purpose  of  justifying  the  dogmas  of  their  several  schools."  f
Moreover,  "according  to  a  tradition  preserved  by  the  Buddhist  schools,
both  of  the  South  and  of  the  North,  the  sacred  Buddhist  Canon  com-
prised originally  80,000  or  84,000  tracts,  but  most  of  them  were  lost,  so
that  there  remained  but  6,000" — as  the  Professor  tells  his  audience.
Lost,  as  usual — for  Europeans.  But  who  can  be  quite  sure  that  they
are  likewise  lost  for  Buddhists  and  Brahmans?

Considering  the  reverence  of  the   Buddhists   for  every  line  written
upon  Buddha  and  the  Good  L,aw,  the  loss  of  nearly  76,000  tracts  does


•  Spence  Hardy,  The  Legends  and  Theories  of  the  Buddhists,  p.  66.
tE.  Schlagintweit,  Buddhism  in  Tibet,  p.  77.


12-  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

seem  miraculous.  Had  it  been  vice  versa,  every  one  acquainted  with  the
natural  course  of  events  would  subscribe  to  the  statement  that,  of  these
76,000,  5,000  or  6,000  treatises  might  have  been  destroyed  during  the
persecutions  in,  and  emigrations  from,  India.  But  as  it  is  well  ascer-
tained that  the  Buddhist  Arhats  began  their  religious  exodus,  for  the
purpose  of  propagating  the  new  faith  beyond  Kashmir  and  the  Hima-
laj'^as,  as  early  as  the  year  300  before  our  era,*  and  reached  China  in
the  year  61  A.D.,f  when  Kashyapa,  at  the  invitation  of  the  Kmperor
Ming-ti,  went  there  to  acquaint  the  "Son  of  Heaven"  with  the  tenets
of  Buddhism,  it  does  seem  strange  to  hear  the  Orientalists  speaking
of  such  a  loss  as  though  it  were  really  possible.  They  do  not  seem  to
allow  for  one  moment  the  possibility  that  the  texts  may  be  lost  only  for
the  West  and  for  themselves,  or  that  the  Asiatic  people  should  have  the
unparalleled  boldness  to  keep  their  most  sacred  records  out  of  the  reach
of  foreigners,  thus  refusing  to  deliver  them  to  the  profanation  and  mis-
use even  of  races  so  "vastly  superior"  to  themselves.

Judging  by  the  expressed  regrets  and  numerous  confessions  of  almost
every  one  of  the  Orientalists,:]:  the  public  may  feel  sufficiently  sure,
{a)  that  the  students  of  ancient  religions  have  indeed  very  few  data
upon  which  to  build  such  final  conclusions  as  they  generally  do  about
the  old  faiths,  and  {U)  that  such  lack  of  data  does  not  in  the  least
prevent  them  from  dogmatizing.  One  would  imagine  that,  thanks  to
the  numerous  records  of  the  Eg>''ptian  theogony  and  mysteries,  pre-
served in  the  classics  and  in  a  number  of  ancient  writers,  the  rites  and
dogmas  of  Pharaonic  Egypt,  at  least,  ought  to  be  well  understood;
better,  at  any  rate,  than  the  too  abstruse  philosophies  and  Pantheism
of  India,  of  whose  religion  and  language  Europe  had  hardly  any  idea
before  the  beginning  of  the  present  century.  Along  the  Nile  and  on
the  face  of  the  whole  country,  there  stand  to  this  hour,  yearly  and
daily  exhumed,  ever  fresh  relics  which  eloquently  tell  their  own  history.
Still  it  is  not  so.  The  learned  Oxford  Philologist  himself  confesses
the  truth  by  saying:

We  see  still  standing  the  pyramids,  and  the  ruins  of  temples  and  labyrinths,
their  walls  covered  with  hieroglyphic  inscriptions,  and  with  the  strange  pictures  of
gods  and  goddesses.     On  rolls  of  papyrus,  which  seem  to  defy  the  ravages  of  time.


*  Lassen    [Ind.   Althersumkunde,   II,   1,072)   shows    a   Buddhist  monastery  erected   in  the   Kailas
Range  in  137  B.C. ;  and  General  Cunning-ham,  one  eariier  than  that
t  Rev.  J.  Edkins,  Chinese  Buddhism,  p.  87.
X  See,  for  example,  Max  Miiller's  lectures.


INTRODUCTORY.


13


we  have  even  fragments  of  what  may  be  called  the  sacred  books  of  the  Eg>'ptians.
Yet,  though  much  has  been  deciphered  in  the  ancient  records  of  the  mysterious
race,  the  mainspring  of  the  religion  of  Egypt  and  the  original  intention  of  its
ceremonial  worship  are  far  from  being  fully  disclosed  to  us.*

Here  again  the  mysterious  hieroglyphic  documents  remain,  but  the
keys  by  which  alone  they  become  intelligible  have  disappeared.

In  fact  so  little  acquainted  are  our  greatest  Egyptologists  with  the
funerary-  rites  of  the  Eg}-ptians  and  the  outward  marks  of  the  difference
of  sex  on  the  mummies,  that  it  has  led  to  the  most  ludicrous  mistakes.
Only  a  year  or  two  ago,  one  of  this  kind  was  discovered  at  Boulaq,
Cairo.  The  mummy  of  what  was  considered  the  wife  of  an  unimportant
Pharaoh,  has,  thanks  to  an  inscription  found  on  an  amulet  hung  round
its  neck,  turned  out  to  be  that  of  Sesostris — the  greatest  King  of
Egypt!

Nevertheless,  having  found  that  "there  is  a  natural  connection
between  language  and  religion";  and  that  "there  was  a  commofi  Aryan
religion  before  the  separation  of  the  Aryan  race ;  a  common  Semitic
religion  before  the  separation  of  the  Semitic  race;  and  a  common
Turanic  religion  before  the  separation  of  the  Chinese  and  the  other
tribes  belonging  to  the  Turanian  class "  ;  having,  in  fact,  discovered
only  "three  ancient  centres  of  religion"  and  "three  centres  of
language";  and  though  as  entirely  ignorant  of  those  primitive  religions
and  languages  as  of  their  origin — the  Professor  does  not  hesitate  to
declare  "that  a  truly  historical  basis  for  a  scientific  treatment  of  the
principal  religions  of  the  world"  has  been  gained!

A  "scientific  treatment"  of  a  subject  is  no  guarantee  for  its  "his-
torical basis";  and  with  such  scarcity  of  data  on  hand,  no  Philologist,
even  among  the  most  eminent,  is  justified  in  giving  out  his  own
conclusions  for  historical  facts.  No  doubt,  the  eminent  Orientalist  has
thoroughly  proved  to  the  world's  satisfaction  that,  according  to  the
phonetic  rules  of  Grimm's  law,  Odin  and  Buddha  are  two  different
personages,  quite  distinct  from  each  other,  and  has  proved  it
scientifically.  When,  however,  he  takes  the  opportunity  of  saying  in
the  same  breath  that  Odin  "was  Vv^orshipped  as  the  supreme  deity
during  a  period  long  anterior  to  the  age  of  the  Veda  and  of  Homer,"t
he  has  not  the  slightest  "historical  basis"  for  it,  but  makes  history  and
fact  subservient  to  his  own  conclusions,  which  may  be  verv'  "scientific"
in  the  sight  of  Oriental  scholars,  but  yet  very  wide  of  the  mark  of  actual

*  op.  cit.,  p.  118.  +  Op.  cit.,  p.  318.


14  1*HE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

truth.  The  conflicting  views  of  the  various  eminent  Philologists  and
Orientalists,  from  Martin  Haug  down  to  Prof  Max  Miiller  himself,  on
the  subject  of  chronolog}^  in  the  case  of  the  Vedas,  are  an  evident  proof
that  the  statement  has  no  "historical"  basis  to  stand  upon,  "internal
evidence"  being  very  often  a  Jack-o'-lantern,  instead  of  a  safe  beacon
to  follow.  Nor  has  the  Science  of  modern  Comparative  Mythology  any
better  argument  to  bring  forward  to  crush  the  contention  of  those  learned
writers  who  have  insisted  for  the  last  century  or  so  that  there  must
have  been  "fragments  of  a  primeval  revelation,  granted  to  the  ancestors
of  the  whole  race  of  mankind  .  .  .  preserved  in  the  temples  of  Greece
and  Italy."  For  this  is  what  all  the  Eastern  Initiates  and  Pandits
have  been  proclaiming  to  the  world  from  time  to  time.  And  while  a
prominent  Singhalese  priest  assured  the  writer  that  it  was  well  known
that  the  most  important  tracts,  belonging  to  the  Buddhist  sacred  canon,
were  stored  away  in  countries  and  places  inaccessible  to  the  European  Pan-
dits^ the  late  Svami  Dayanand  Sarasvati,  the  greatest  Sanskritist  of  his
day  in  India,  assured  some  members  of  the  Theosophical  Society  of  the
same  fact  with  regard  to  ancient  Brahmanical  works.  When  told  that
Professor  Max  Miiller  had  declared  to  the  audiences  of  his  Lectures  that
the  theory  "  that  there  was  a  primeval  preternatural  revelation  granted  to
the  fathers  of  the  human  race,  finds  but  few  supporters  at  present" —
the  holy  and  learned  man  laughed.  His  answer  was  suggestive.  "  If
Mr.  'Moksh  Mooller'  [as  he  pronounced  the  name],  were  a  Brahman,
and  came  with  me,  I  might  take  him  to  a  gupa  cave  [a  secret  crypt]
near  Okhee  Math,  in  the  Himalayas,  where  he  would  soon  find  out  that
what  crossed  the  Kalapani  [the  black  waters  of  the  ocean]  from  India  to
Europe  were  only  the  bits  of  rejected  copies  of  some  passages  from  our  sacred
books.  There  was  a  '  primeval  revelation,'  and  it  still  exists ;  nor  will  it
ever  be  lost  to  the  world,  but  will  reappear ;  though  the  Mlechchhas
will  of  course  have  to  wait."

Questioned  further  on  the  point,  he  would  say  no  more.  This  was  at
Meerut,  in  1880.

No  doubt  the  m^^stification  played  by  the  Brahmans  upon  Colonel
Wilford  and  Sir  William  Jones,  in  the  last  century,  at  Calcutta,  was
cruel,  but  it  had  been  well  deserved,  and  no  one  was  more  to  blame  in
that  affair  than  the  missionaries  and  Colonel  Wilford  himself  The
former,  on  the  testimony  of  Sir  William  Jones  himself,*  were  silly
enough  to  maintain  that  "the  Hindus  were  even  now  almost  Christians,

*  Asiatic  Researches,  I,  272.


INTRODUCTORY.  1 5

because  their  Brahmt,  Vishnu  and  Mahesha  were  no  other  than  the
Christian   trinity."*      It  was    a   good   lesson.      It    made   the   Oriental
scholars  doubly  cautious  ;  but  perchance  it  has  also  made  some  of  them
too  shy  and,   in  its  reaction,   has   caused   the   pendulum   of  foregone
conclusions  to  swing  too  much  the  other  way.     For  "that  first  supply
from  the  Brahmanical  market,"  in  answer  to  the  demand  of  Colonel
Wilford,    has    now   created   an   evident    necessity   and    desire    in   the
Orientalists   to   declare   nearly   every  archaic   Sanskrit   manuscript  so
modern  as  to  give  the  missionaries  full  justification  for  availing  them-
selves of  their  opportunity.     That  they  do  so  and  to  the  full  extent  of
their  mental  powers,  is  shown  by  the  absurd  attempts  of  late  to  prove
that  the  whole   Puranic  story   about  Krishna  was  plagiarized  by  the
Brahmans  from  the  Bible  !     But  the  facts  cited  by  the  Oxford  Professor
in   his  Lectures  concerning    the   now   famous   interpolations,    for    the
benefit,  and  later  on  to  the  sorrow,  of  Colonel  Wilford,  do  not  at  all
interfere  with   the   conclusions  to  which  one  who   studies  the   Secret
Doctrine    must    unavoidably    come.      For,   if  the    results    show   that
neither  the  New  nor  even  the  Old  Testament  borrowed  anything  from
the  more  ancient  religion  of  the  Brahmans  and  Buddhists,  it  does  not
follow  that  the  Jews  have  not  borrowed  all  they  knew  from  the  Chaldean
records,  the  latter  being  mutilated  later  on  by  Kusebius.     As  to  the
Chaldeans,    they    assuredly    got    their    primitive    learning    from    the
Brahmans,  for  Rawlinson  shows  an  undeniably  Vedic  influence  in  the
early  mythology  of  Babylon ;  and  Colonel  Vans  Kennedy  has  long  ago
justly  declared  that  Babylonia  was,  from  her  origin,  the  seat  of  Sanskrit
and  Brahman  learning.     But  all  such  proofs  must  lose  their  value,  in
the  presence  of  the  latest  theory  worked  out  by  Prof.   Max  Miiller.
What  it  is  everyone  knows.     The  code  of  phonetic  laws  has  now  become
a  universal  solvent  for  every  identification  and  "  connection  "  between
the   gods   of  many  nations.      Thus,    though   the   Mother  of  Mercury
(Budha,  Thot-Hermes,  etc.)  was  Maia,  the  mother  of  Gautama  Buddha,
also  Maya,  and  the  mother  of  Jesus,  likewise  Maya  (Illusion,  for  Mary  is
Mare,  the  Sea,  the  great  Illusion  symbolically) — yet  these  three  charac-
ters have  no  connection,  nor  can  they  have  any,  since  Bopp  has  "laid
down  his  code  of  phonetic  laws."

In  their  efforts  to  collect  together  the   many  skeins   of   unwritten


*  See  Pdax  Miiller,  op.  cit.,  pp.  288  et  seq.  This  relates  to  the  clever  forgery,  on  leaves  inserted  in  old
Puranic  MSS.,  and  written  in  correct  and  archaic  Sanskrit,  of  all  that  the  Pandits  had  heard  from.
Colonel  Wilford  about  Adam  and  Abraham,  Noah  and  his  three  sons,  etc.,  etc.


l6  THE   SKCRET  DOCTRINE.

hisfoJT,  it  is  a  bold  step  for  our  Orientalists  to  take,  to  deny  a  priori
everything  that  does  not  dove-tail  with  their  special  conclusions.
Thus,  while  new  discoveries  are  daily  made  of  great  arts  and  sciences
having  existed  far  back  in  the  night  of  time,  yet  even  the  knowledge  of
writing  is  refused  to  some  of  the  most  ancient  nations,  and  they  are
credited  with  barbarism  instead  of  culture.  Nevertheless  traces  of  an
immense  civilization,  even  in  Central  Asia,  are  still  to  be  found.  This
civilization  is  undeniably  prehistoric.  And  how  can  there  be  civiliza-
tion without  a  literature  in  some  form,  without  annals  or  chronicles?
Common  sense  alone  ought  to  supplement  the  broken  links  in  the
history  of  departed  nations.  The  gigantic  and  unbroken  wall  of  the
mountains  that  hem  in  the  whole  table-land  of  Tibet,  from  the  upper
course  of  the  river  Khuan-Khe  down  to  the  Karakorum  hills,  witnessed
a  civilization  during  millenniums  of  years,  and  should  have  strange
secrets  to  tell  mankind.  The  eastern  and  central  portions  of  these
regions — the  Nan-chan  and  the  Altyn-tag — were  once  upon  a  time
covered  with  cities  that  could  well  vie  with  Babylon.  A  whole
geological  period  has  swept  over  the  land,  since  those  cities  breathed
their  last,  as  the  mounds  of  shifting  sand  and  the  sterile  and  now
dead  soil  of  the  immense  central  plains  of  the  basin  of  Tarim  testify.
The  borderlands  alone  are  superficially  known  to  the  traveller.  Within
those  table-lands  of  sand  there  is  water,  and  fresh  oases  are  found
blooming  there,  wherein  no  European  foot  has  ever  yet  ventured,  or
trodden  the  now  treacherous  soil.  Among  these  verdant  oases  there
are  some  which  are  entirely  inaccessible  even  to  the  profane  native
traveller.  Hurricanes  may  "tear  up  the  sands  and  sweep  whole  plains
away,"  they  are  powerless  to  destroy  that  which  is  be5'ond  their  reach.
Built  deep  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth,  the  subterranean  stores  are
secure ;  and  as  their  entrances  are  concealed,  there  is  little  fear  that
anyone  would  discover  them,  even  should  several  armies  invade  the
sandy  wastes  where —

Not  a  pool,  not  a  bush,  not  a  house  is  seen,
And  the  mountain-range  forms  a  rugged  screen
Round  the  parch'd  flats  of  the  dry,  dry  desert

But  there  is  no  need  to  send  the  reader  across  the  desert,  when  the
same  proofs  of  ancient  civilization  are  found  even  in  comparatively
populated  regions  of  the  same  country.  The  oasis  of  Tchertchen,  for
instance,  situated  about  4,000  feet  above  the  level  of  the  riv^r
Tchertchen- Darya,  is  now  surrounded  in  every  direction  by  the  ruins


INTRODUCTORY.  I7

of  archaic  towns  and  cities.  There,  some  3,000  human  beings  repre-
sent the  relics  of  about  a  hundred  extinct  nations  and  races,  the  ver)-
names  of  which  are  now  unknown  to  our  ethnologists.  An  anthro-
pologist would  feel  more  than  embarrassed  to  class,  divide  and
subdivide  them ;  the  more  so,  as  the  respective  descendants  of  all
these  antediluvian  races  and  tribes  themselves  know  as  little  of  their
own  forefathers  as  if  they  had  fallen  from  the  moon.  When  ques-
tioned about  their  origin,  they  reply  that  they  know  not  whence  their
fathers  had  come,  but  had  heard  that  their  first,  or  earliest,  men  were
ruled  by  the  great  Genii  of  these  deserts.  This  may  be  put  down  to
ignorance  and  superstition,  yet  in  view  of  the  teachings  of  the  Secret
Doctrine,  the  answer  may  be  based  upon  primeval  tradition.  Alone
the  tribe  of  Khoorassan  claims  to  have  come  from  what  is  now
known  as  Afghanistan,  long  before  the  days  of  Alexander,  and  brings
legendary  lore  to  that  effect  in  corroboration.  The  Russian  traveller
Colonel  (now  General)  Prjevalsky  found  quite  close  to  the  oasis  of
Tchertchen  the  ruins  of  two  enormous  cities,  the  oldest  of  which,
according  to  local  tradition,  was  destroyed  3,000  years  ago  by  a  hero
and  giant,  and  the  other  by  Mongolians  in  the  tenth  century  of  our  era.

The  emplacement  of  the  two  cities  is  now  covered,  owing  to  shifting  sands  and
the  desert  wind,  with  strange  and  heterogeneous  relics;  with  broken  china  and
kitchen  utensils  and  human  bones.  The  natives  often  find  copper  and  gold  coins,
melted  silver  ingots,  diamonds,  and  turquoises,  and  what  is  the  most  remarkable —

broken  glass Coffins  of  some  undeca3-ing  wood,  or  material,  also,  within

which  beautifully  preserved  embalmed  bodies  are  found.    .   .    .    The  male  mummies

are  all  extremely  tall  powerfully  built  men  with  long  wavy  hair A  vault  was

found  with  twelve  dead  men  sitting  in  it.  Another  time,  in  a  separate  coffin,  a
young  girl  was  discovered  by  us.  Her  eyes  were  closed  with  golden  discs,  and  the
jaws  held  firm  by  a  golden  circlet  running  from  under  the  chin  across  the  top  of
the  head.  Clad  in  a  narrow  woollen  garment,  her  bosom  was  covered  with  golden
stars,  the  feet  being  left  naked.*

To  this,  the  famous  traveller  adds  that  all  along  their  way  on  the
river  Tchertchen  they  heard  legends  about  twenty-three  towns  buried
ages  ago  by  the  shifting  sands  of  the  deserts.  The  same  tradition
exists  on  the  L,ob-nor  and  in  the  oasis  of  Kerj-a.

The  traces  of  such  civilization,  and  these  and  like  traditions,  give  us
the  right  to  credit  other  legendary  lore,  warranted  by  well  educated  and
learned  natives  of  India  and  Mongolia  who  speak  of  immense  libraries


•  From  a  lecture  by  N.  M.  Prjevalsky.


l8  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

reclaimed  from  the  sand,  together  with  various  relics  of  ancient  Magic
Lore,  which  have  all  been  safely  stowed  away.

To  recapitulate.  The  Secret  Doctrine  was  the  universally  diffused
religion  of  the  ancient  and  prehistoric  world.  Proofs  of  its  diffusion,
authentic  records  of  its  history,  a  complete  chain  of  documents,  show-
ing its  character  and  presence  in  ever}^  land,  together  with  the  teaching
of  all  its  great  Adepts,  exist  to  this  day  in  the  secret  crypts  of  libraries
belonging  to  the  Occult  Fraternity.

This  statement  is  rendered  more  credible  by  a  consideration  of  the
following  facts:  the  tradition  of  the  thousands  of  ancient  parchments
saved  when  the  Alexandrian  library  was  destroyed ;  the  thousands  of
Sanskrit  works  which  disappeared  in  India  in  the  reign  of  Akbar;  the
universal  tradition  in  China  and  Japan  that  the  true  ancient  texts  with
the  commentaries,  which  alone  make  them  comprehensible,  amounting
to  many  thousands  of  volumes,  have  long  passed  out  of  the  reach  of
profane  hands ;  the  disappearance  of  the  vast  sacred  and  occult  litera-
ture of  Babylon;  the  loss  of  those  keys  which  alone  could  solve  the
thousand  riddles  of  the  Eg>'ptian  hieroglyphic  records ;  the  tradition  in
India  that  the  real  secret  commentaries  which  alone  make  the  Vedas
intelligible,  though  no  longer  visible  to  profane  eyes,  still  remain  for
the  Initiate,  hidden  in  secret  caves  and  crypts ;  and  an  identical  belief
among  the  Buddhists,  with  regard  to  their  secret  books.

The  Occultists  assert  that  all  these  exist,  safe  from  Western  spoliating
hands,  to  reappear  in  some  more  enlightened  age,  for  which,  in  the
words  of  the  late  Svami  Dayanand  Sarasvati,  "the  Mlechchhas  [out-
casts,  savages,  those  beyond  the  pale  of  Aryan  civilization]  will  have  to
wait."

For  it  is  not  the  fault  of  the  Initiates  that  these  documents  are  now
"lost"  to  the  profane;  nor  was  their  policy  dictated  by  selfishness,  or
any  desire  to  monopolise  the  life-giving  sacred  lore.  There  were  por-
tions of  the  Secret  Science  that  for  incalculable  ages  had  to  remain
concealed  from  the  profane  gaze.  But  this  was  because  the  imparting
to  the  unprepared  multitude  secrets  of  such  tremendous  importance
was  equivalent  to  giving  a  child  a  lighted  candle  in  a  powder  magazine.

The  answer  to  a  question  which  has  frequently  arisen  in  the  minds  of
students,  when  meeting  with  statements  such  as  this,  may  well  be  out-
lined here.

We  can  understand,  they  say,  the  necessity  for  concealing  from
the  herd  such  secrets  as  the  Vril,  or  the  rock-destroying  force,  dis-


INTRODUCTORY.  ig

covered  by  J.  W.  Keely,  of  Philadelphia,  but  we  cannot  understand
how  any  danger  could  arise  from  the  revelation  of  such  a  purely  philo-
sophical doctrine,  for  instance,  as  the  evolution  of  the  Planetary-
Chains.

The  danger  was  that  such  doctrines  as  the  Planetar>^  Chain,  or  the
seven  Races,  at  once  give  a  clue  to  the  seven-fold  nature  of  man,  for
each  principle  is  correlated  to  a  plane,  a  planet,  and  a  race,  and  the
human  principles  are,  on  every  plane,  correlated  to  seven -fold  occult
forces,  those  of  the  higher  planes  being  of  tremendous  power.  So  that
any  septenary  division  at  once  gives  a  clue  to  tremendous  occult
powers,  the  abuse  of  which  would  cause  incalculable  evil  to  humanity;
a  clue  which  is,  perhaps,  no  clue  to  the  present  generation — especially
to  Westerns,  protected  as  they  are  by  their  very  blindness  and  ignorant
materialistic  disbelief  in  the  occult — but  a  clue  which  would,  neverthe-
less, have  been  very  real  in  the  early  centuries  of  the  Christian  era  to
people  fully  convinced  of  the  reality  of  Occultism,  and  entering  a
cycle  of  degradation  which  made  them  rife  for  abuse  of  occult  powers
and  sorcery  of  the  worst  description.

The  documents  were  concealed,  it  is  true,  but  the  knowledge  itself
and  its  actual  existence  was  never  made  a  secret  of  by  the  Hierophants
of  the  Temples,  wherein  the  Mysteries  have  ever  been  made  a  disci-
pline and  stimulus  to  virtue.  This  is  very  old  news,  and  was  repeatedly
made  known  by  the  great  Adepts,  from  Pythagoras  and  Plato  down  to
the  Neo-Platonists.  It  was  the  new  religion  of  the  Nazarenes  that
wrought  a  change  for  the  worse  in  the  policy  of  centuries.

Moreover,  there  is  a  well-known  fact — a  very  curious  one,  corro-
borated to  the  writer  by  a  reverend  gentleman  attached  for  years  to  a
Russian  Embassy — that  there  are  several  documents  in  the  St.  Petersburg
Imperial  Libraries  to  show  that,  even  so  late  as  the  days  when  Free-
masonry and  Secret  Societies  of  Mystics  flourished  without  hindrance
in  Russia,  namely  at  the  end  of  the  last  and  the  beginning  of  the
present  centur>^  more  than  one  Russian  Mystic  travelled  to  Tibet  via
the  Ural  Mountains  in  search  of  knowledge  and  initiation  in  the  un-
known crypts  of  Central  Asia.  And  more  than  one  returned  years
later,  with  a  rich  store  of  information  such  as  could  never  have  been
given  him  anywhere  in  Europe.  Several  cases  could  be  cited  and  well-
known  names  brought  forward,  but  for  the  fact  that  such  publicity
might  annoy  the  surviving  relatives  of  the  late  Initiates  referred  to.
Let  any  one  look  over  the  annals  and  history  of  Freemasonry  in  the


20  THE   SECRKT   DOCTRINE.

archives  of  the  Russian  metropolis,  and  he  will  assure  himself  of  the
fact  above  stated.

This  is  a  corroboration  of  what  has  been  stated  many  times  before,
unfortunately,  too  indiscreetly.  Instead  of  benefiting  humanity',  the
virulent  charges  of  deliberate  invention  and  imposture  with  a  purpose,
hurled  at  those  who  asserted  a  veritable,  even  if  a  little  known  fact,  have
only  generated  bad  Karma  for  the  slanderers.  But  now  the  mischief  is
done,  and  truth  should  no  longer  be  denied,  whatever  the  consequences.

Is  Theosophy  a  new  religion,  we  are  asked?  By  no  means;  it  is  not
a  "religion,"  nor  is  its  philosophy  "new";  for,  as  already  stated,  it  is
as  old  as  thinking  man.  Its  tenets  are  not  now  published  for  the  first
time,  but  have  been  cautiously  given  out  to,  and  taught  by,  more  than
one  European  Initiate — especially  by  the  late  Ragon.

More  than  one  great  scholar  has  stated  that  there  never  was  a  religious
founder,  whether  Arj^an,  Semitic  or  Turanian,  who  had  hivented  a  new
religion,  or  revealed  a  new  truth.  These  founders  were  all  tr-ansmitters,
not  original  teachers.  They  were  the  authors  of  new  forms  and  inter-
pretations, while  the  truths  upon  which  their  teachings  were  based  were
as'old  as  mankind.  Thus  out  of  the  many  truths  revealed  orally  to  man
in  the  beginning,  preserved  and  perpetuated  in  the  Ad3^ta  of  the
temples  through  initiation,  during  the  Mysteries  and  by  personal
transmission,  they  selected  one  or  more  of  such  grand  verities — actual-
ities visible  only  to  the  eye  of  the  real  Sage  and  Seer,  and  revealed
them  to  the  masses.  Thus  every  nation  received  in  its  turn  some  of
the  said  truths,  under  the  veil  of  its  own  local  and  special  symbolism.,
which,  as  time  went  on,  developed  into  a  more  or  less  philosophical
cultus,  a  Pantheon  in  mythical  disguise.  Therefore  is  Confucius,  a
very  ancient  legislator  in  historical  chronology,  though  a  very  modern
sage  in  the  world's  history,  shown  by  Dr.  Legge*  to  be  emphatically  a
transmitter,  not  a  maker.  As  he  himself  says,  "I  only  hand  on:  I
cannot  create  new  things.  I  believe  in  the  ancients  and  therefore  I
love  them."t

The  writer  loves  them  too,  and  therefore  believes  in  these  ancients,
and  the  modern  heirs  to  their  Wisdom.  And  believing  in  both,  she  now
transmits  that  which  she  has  received  and  learnt  herself,  to  all  those  who
will  accept  it.  As  to  those  who  may  reject  her  testimony — the  great
majority — she  will  bear  them  no  malice,  for  they  will  be  as  right  in

*  lyiin-Yii  {?  I  a) ;  Schott,  Chinesische  Literahir,  p.  7 ;  quoted  by  Max  Muller.
t  Life  and  Teachings  0/  Confucius,  p.  96.


INTRODUCTORY.  21

their  way  in  denying,  as  she  is  right  in  hers  in  affirming,  since  they
look  at  Truth  from  two  entirely  different  stand-points.     Agreeably  with
the  rules  of  critical  scholarship,  the  Orientalist  has  to  reject  a  priori
whatever  evidence  he  cannot  fully  verify  for  himself.     And  how  can  a
Western  scholar  accept  on  hearsay  that  which  he  knows  nothing  about  ?
Indeed,  that  which  is  given  in  these  volumes  is  selected  from  oral,  as
much  as  from  written  teachings.     This  first  instalment  of  the  esoteric
doctrines  is  based  upon  Stanzas,  which  are  the   records  of  a  people
unknown  to  ethnolog}'.     They  are  written,  it  is  claimed,  in  a  tongue
absent  from  the  nomenclature  of  languages  and  dialects  with  which
philology  is  acquainted;  are  said  to  emanate  from  a  source  repudiated
by  Science — to-wit,  Occultism ;  and  finally  they  are  offered  through  an
agency,  incessantly  discredited  before  the  world  by  all  those  who  hate
unwelcome  truths,  or  have  some  special  hobby  of  their  own  to  defend.
Therefore,  the  rejection  of  these  teachings  may  be  expected,  and  must
be  expected  beforehand.     No  one  styling  himself  a  "scholar,"  in  what-
ever department  of  exact  Science,  will  permit  himself  to  regard  these
teachings  seriously.     They  will  be  derided  and  xeyecieA.  a  priori  in  this
centur}^  but   only  in  this  one.     For  in  the  twentieth  century  of  our
era  scholars  will  begin  to  recognize  that  the  Secret  Doctrine  has  neither
been  invented  nor  exaggerated,  but,  on  the  contrary,  simply  outlined;
and  finally  that  its  teachings  antedate  the  Vedas.     This  is  no  pretension
to  prophecy,  but  simply  a  statement  based  on  the  knowledge  of  facts.
Every   century  an   attempt   is    being   made   to   show   the  world    that
Occultism   is   no   vain   superstition.     Once  the   door    is   permitted   to
remain  a  little  ajar,  it  will  be  opened  wider  with  every  new  century.
The  times  are  ripe  for  a  more  serious  knowledge  than  hitherto  per-
mitted, though  still,  even  now,  very  limited.

For  have  not  even  the  Vedas  been  derided,  rejected  and  called  "a
modern  forgery"  even  so  recently  as  fifty  years  ago?  Was  not
Sanskrit  proclaimed  at  one  time  the  progeny  of,  and  a  dialect  derived
from,  the  Greek,  according  to  Lempriere  and  other  scholars?  About
1820,  as  Prof.  Max  Miiller  tells  us,  the  sacred  books  of  the  Brahmans,
of  the  Magians,  and  of  the  Buddhists,  "were  all  but  unknown,  their
very  existence  was  doubted,  and  there  was  not  a  single  scholar  who
could  have  translated  a  line  of  the  Veda  ...  of  the  Zend  Avesfa,  or
...  of  the  Buddhist  Tripitaka,  and  now  the  Vedas  are  proved  to  be
the  work  of  the  highest  antiquity,  whose  '  preserv'ation  amounts  almost
to  a  marvel'."


22  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

The  same  will  be  said  of  the  Secret  Archaic  Doctrine,  when  undeniable
proofs  are  given  of  its  existence  and  records.  But  it  will  be  centuries
before  much  more  is  given  from  it.  Speaking  of  the  keys  to  the  Zodiacal
Mysteries  as  being  almost  lost  to  the  world,  it  was  remarked  by  the
writer  some  ten  years  ago  in  Isis  Unveiled  that :  "The  said  key  must  be
turned  seven  times  before  the  whole  system  is  divulged.  We  will  give  it
but  one  turn,  and  thereby  allow  the  profane  one  glimpse  into  the  mystery.
Happy  he,  who  understands  the  whole ! "

The  same  may  be  said  of  the  whole  Esoteric  System.  One  turn  of  the
key,  and  no  more,  was  given  in  Isis  Unveiled.  Much  more  is  explained
in  these  volumes.  In  those  days  the  writer  hardly  knew  the  language
in  which  the  work  was  written,  and  the  disclosure  of  many  things,  freely
spoken  about  now,  was  forbidden.  In  Century  the  Twentieth,  some
disciple  more  informed,  and  far  better  fitted,  may  be  sent  by  the
Masters  of  Wisdom  to  give  final  and  irrefutable  proofs  that  there  exists
a  Science  called  Gupta  Vidya ;  and  that,  like  the  once  mysterious
sources  of  the  Nile,  the  source  of  all  religions  and  philosophies  now
made  known  to  the  world  has  been  for  many  ages  forgotten  and  lost  to
men,  but  it  is  at  last  found.

Such  a  work  as  this  has  to  be  introduced  with  no  simple  preface,  but
with  a  volume  rather — one  that  would  give  facts,  not  mere  disquisitions,
since  The  Secret  Doctrine  is  not  a  treatise,  or  a  series  of  vague
theories,  but  contains  all  that  can  be  given  out  to  the  world  in  this
century.

It  would  be  worse  than  useless  to  publish  in  these  pages  even  those
portions  of  the  esoteric  teachings  that  have  now  escaped  from  confine-
ment, unless  the  genuineness  and  authenticity,  or  at  any  rate  the
probability,  of  the  existence  of  such  teachings  were  first  established.
Such  statements  as  will  now  be  made,  have  to  be  shown  as  warranted
by  various  authorities,  such  as  ancient  philosophers,  classical  writers
and  even  certain  learned  Church  Fathers,  some  of  whom  knew  these
doctrines  because  they  had  studied  them,  had  seen  and  read  works
written  upon  them ;  and  some  of  whom  had  even  been  personally
initiated  into  the  ancient  Mysteries,  during  the  performance  of  which
the  arcane  doctrines  were  allegorically  enacted.  The  writer  will  have
to  give  historical  and  trustworthy  names,  and  to  cite  well-known
authors,  ancient  and  modern,  of  recognized  ability,  good  judgment,  and
truthfulness,  as  also  to  name  some  of  the  famous  proficients  in  the
secret  arts  and  science,  together  with  the  mysteries  of  the  latter,  as  they


INTRODUCTORY.  23

are  divulged,  or  rather  partially  presented  before  the  public  in  their
strange  archaic  form.

How  is  this  to  be  done ;  what  is  the  best  way  for  achieving  such  an
object,  has  been  the  ever-recurring  question.  To  make  our  plan  clearer,
an  illustration  may  be  attempted.  When  a  tourist,  coming  from  a  well-
explored  country,  suddenly  reaches  the  borderland  of  a  terra  incog?iita,
hedged  in,  and  shut  out  from  view  by  a  formidable  barrier  of  impassable
rocks,  he  may  still  refuse  to  acknowledge  himself  baffled  in  his  explora-
tory plans.  Ingress  beyond  is  forbidden.  But  if  he  cannot  visit  the
mysterious  region  personally,  he  may  still  find  a  means  of  examining
it  from  as  short  a  distance  as  can  be  arrived  at.  Helped  by  his  know-
ledge of  the  landscapes  left  behind,  he  can  get  a  general  and  pretty
correct  idea  of  the  transmural  view,  if  he  will  only  climb  to  the  loftiest
summit  of  the  altitudes  in  front  of  him.  Once  there,  he  can  gaze  at  it
at  his  leisure,  comparing  that  which  he  dimly  perceives  with  that  which
he  has  just  left  below,  now  that  he  is,  thanks  to  his  own  efforts,  beyond
the  line  of  the  mists  and  the  cloud-capped  cliffs.

Such  a  point  of  preliminar>^  observation,  cannot  in  these  two  volumes
be  offered  to  those  who  would  like  to  get  a  more  correct  understanding
of  the  mysteries  of  the  pre-archaic  periods  given  in  the  texts.  But  if  the
reader  has  patience,  and  will  glance  at  the  present  state  of  beliefs  and
creeds  in  Europe,  compare  and  check  it  with  what  is  known  to  history
of  the  ages  directly  preceding  and  following  the  Christian  era,  then  he
will  find  all  this  in  a  future  volume  of  the  present  work.

In  the  latter  volume  a  brief  recapitulation  will  be  made  of  all  the
principal  Adepts  known  to  history,  and  the  downfall  of  the  Mysteries
will  be  described,  after  which  began  the  disappearance  and  the  system-
atic and  final  elimination  from  the  memory  of  men  of  the  real  nature  of
Initiation  and  the  Sacred  Science.  From  that  time  its  teachings  became
occult,  and  Magic  sailed  but  too  often  under  the  venerable  but  fre-
quently misleading  name  of  Hermetic  Philosophy.  As  real  Occultism
had  been  prevalent  among  the  Mj^stics  during  the  centuries  that
preceded  our  era,  so  Magic,  or  rather  Sorcery,  with  its  Occult  Arts,
followed  the  beginning  of  Christianit3^

However  great  and  zealous  the  fanatical  efforts,  during  these  early
centuries,  to  obliterate  every  trace  of  the  mental  and  intellectual  labour
of  the  Pagans,  thej^  were  a  failure ;  but  the  same  spirit  of  the  dark
demon  of  bigotry  and  intolerance  has  ever  since  systematically  per-
verted every  bright  page  written  in  the  pre-Christian  periods.      Kven


24  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

history,  in  her  uncertain  records,  has  preserved  enough  of  that  which  has
survived  to  throw  an  impartial  light  upon  the  whole.  Let,  then,  the
reader  tarry  a  little  while  with  the  writer  on  the  spot  of  observation
selected.  He  is  asked  to  give  all  his  attention  to  that  millennium  of
the  pre-Christian  and  the  post-Christian  periods,  divided  by  the  year
One  of  the  Nativity.  This  event — whether  historically  correct  or  not —
has  nevertheless  been  made  to  serve  as  a  first  signal  for  the  erection  of
manifold  bulwarks  against  any  possible  return  of,  or  even  a  glimpse
into,  the  hated  religions  of  the  Past ;  hated  and  dreaded,  because
throwing  such  a  vivid  light  on  the  novel  and  intentionally  veiled
interpretation  of  what  is  now  known  as  the  "  New  Dispensation."

However  superhuman  the  efforts  of  the  early  Christian  Fathers  to
obliterate  the  Secret  Doctrine  from  the  very  memory  of  man,  they  all
failed.  Truth  can  never  be  killed ;  hence  the  failure  to  sweep  away
entirely  from  the  face  of  the  earth  every  vestige  of  that  ancient  Wisdom,
and  to  shackle  and  gag  every  witness  who  testified  to  it.  I^et  one  only
think  of  the  thousands,  perhaps  millions,  of  MSS.  burnt;  of  monuments,
with  their  too  indiscreet  inscriptions  and  pictorial  symbols,  pulverized
to  dust;  of  the  bands  of  early  hermits  and  ascetics  roaming  about  among
the  ruined  cities  of  Upper  and  Lower  Egypt,  in  desert  and  mountain,
valley  and  highland,  seeking  for  and  eager  to  destroy  every  obelisk  and
pillar,  scroll  or  parchment  they  could  lay  their  hands  on,  if  only  it  bore
the  symbol  of  the  Tau,  or  any  other  sign  borrowed  and  appropriated  by
the  new  faith — and  he  will  then  see  plainly  how  it  is  that  so  little  has
remained  of  the  records  of  the  past.  Verily,  the  fiendish  spirit  of
fanaticism  of  early  and  mediaeval  Christianity  and  of  Islam  has  loved
from  the  first  to  dwell  in  darkness  and  ignorance ;  and  both  have  made

.     .     .     .     the  sun  like  blood,  the  earth  a  tomb,
The  tomb  a  hell,  and  hell  itself  a  murkier  gloom  !

Both  creeds  have  won  their  proselytes  at  the  point  of  the  sword;
both  have  built  their  churches  on  heaven-kissing  hecatombs  of  human
victims.  Over  the  gateway  of  Century  I  of  our  era,  the  ominous  words
"The  Karma  of  Israel,"  fatally  glowed.  Over  the  portals  of  our  own,
the  future  seer  may  discern  other  words,  that  will  point  to  the  Karma
for  cunningly  made-up  history,  for  events  purposely  perverted,  and  for
great  characters  slandered  by  posterity,  mangled  out  of  recognition,
between  the  two  cars  of  Jagannatha — Bigotry  and  Materialism;  one
accepting  too  much,  the  other  denying  all.  Wise  is  he  who  holds  to
the  golden  mid-point,  who  believes  in  the  eternal  justice  of  things.


INTRODUCTORY.  25

Says  Faizi  Diwan,  the  "witness  to  the  wonderful  speeches  of  a
freethinker  who  belongs  to  a  thousand  sects"  :

In  the  assembly  of  the  day  of  resurrection,  when  past  things  shall  be  forgiven,
the  sins  of  the  Ka'bah  will  be  forgiven  for  the  sake  of  the  dust  of  Christian  churches.

To  this.  Professor  Max  Miiller  replies :

The  sins  of  Islam  are  as  worthless  as  the  dust  of  Christianity ;  on  the  day  of
resurrection  both  Muhammadans  and  Christians  will  see  the  vanity  of  their  religions
doctrines.  Men  fight  aboi:t  religion  on  earth ;  in  heaven  they  shall  find  out  that
there  is  only  one  true  religion — the  worship  of  God's  Spirit.*

In  other  words,  "The;re  is  no  Religion  [or  Law]  higher  than
Truth" — (^Satydt  Nasti  Paro  DhainnaJi) — the  motto  of  the  Maharajah  of
Benares,  adopted  by  the  Theosophical  Societ}'.

As  already  said  in  the  Preface,  The  Secret  Doctrine  is  not  a  version
oi  his  Unveiled,  as  originally  intended.  It  is  rather  a  volume  explanator>^
of  the  latter,  and,  though  entirely  independent  of  the  earlier  work,  an
indispensable  corollary  to  it.  Much  of  what  was  in  the  former  work
could  hardly  be  understood  by  Theosophists  in  those  days.  The
Secret  Doctrine  will  now  throw  light  on  many  a  problem  left  un-
solved in  the  first  work,  especially  on  the  opening  pages,  which  have
never  been  understood.

As  it  was  concerned  simply  with  the  philosophies  within  historical
times  and  the  respective  symbolism  of  the  fallen  nations,  only  a  hurried
glance  could  be  thrown  at  the  panorama  of  Occultism  in  the  two
volumes  of  his.  In  the  present  work,  detailed  cosmogony  and  the
evolution  of  the  four  Races  that  preceded  our  fifth-race  Humanity
are  given,  and  now  two  large  volumes  explain  that  which  was  stated
only  on  the  first  page  of  his  Unveiled  alone,  and  in  a  few  allusions
scattered  hither  and  thither  throughout  that  work.  Nor  can  the  vast
catalogue  of  the  Archaic  Sciences  be  attempted  in  the  present  volumes,
before  we  have  disposed  of  such  tremendous  problems  as  cosmic  and
planetary  Evolution,  and  the  gradual  development  of  the  mysterious
humanities  and  races  that  preceded  our  Adamic  Humanity.  There-
fore, the  present  attempt  to  elucidate  some  mysteries  of  the  Esoteric
Philosophy  has,  in  truth,  nothing  to  do  with  the  earlier  work.  The
writer  must  be  allowed  to  illustrate  what  is  said  by  an  instance.

Volume  I  of  his  begins  with  a  reference  to  an  "old  book" :

So  very  old  that  our  modern  antiquarians  might  ponder  over  its  pages  an  in-
definite time,  and  still  not  quite  agree  as  to  the  nature  of  the  fabric  upon  which  it
is  written.     It  is  the  only  original  copy  now  in  existence.     The  most  ancient  Hebrew

•  Op.  cit.,  p.  257.


26  THB  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

document  on  occult  learning — the  Siprah  Dzeniouta — was  compiled  from  it,  and  that
at  a  time  when  the  former  was  already  considered  in  the  light  of  a  literary  relic.
One  of  its  illustrations  represents  the  Divine  Essence  emanating  from  Adam*  like
a  luminous  arc  proceeding  to  form  a  circle;  and  then,  having  attained  the  highest
point  of  its  circumference,  the  ineffable  Glory  bends  back  again,  and  returns  to
earth,  bringing  a  higher  type  of  humanity  in  its  vortex.  As  it  approaches  nearer
and  nearer  to  our  planet,  the  Emanation  becomes  more  and  more  shadowy,  until
upon  touching  the  ground  it  is  as  black  as  night.

This  very  old  book  is  the  original  work  from  which  the  many  volumes
oiKiu-ti  were  compiled.  Not  only  the  latter  and  the  Siphrah  Dzeniouta,
but  even  the  Sepher  Jetzirah  f — the  work  attributed  by  the  Hebrew
Kabalists  to  their  Patriarch  Abraham  (!),  the  SJm-kiiig,  China's  primi-
tive Bible,  the  sacred  volumes  of  the  Egyptian  Thoth- Hermes,  the
Picrdnas  in  India,  the  Chaldean  Book  of  Numbers  and  the  Pe7itateuch
itself,  are  all  derived  from  that  one  small  parent  volume.  Tradition
says,  that  it  was  taken  down  in  Senzar,  the  secret  sacerdotal  tongue,
from  the  words  of  Divine  Beings,  who  dictated  it  to  the  Sons  of  Light,
in  Central  Asia,  at  the  very  beginning  of  our  Fifth  Race ;  for  there  was
a  time  when  its  language  (the  Senzar)  was  known  to  the  Initiates  of
every  nation,  when  the  forefathers  of  the  Toltec  understood  it  as
easily  as  the  inhabitants  of  the  lost  Atlantis,  who  inherited  it,  in  their
turn,  from  the  sages  of  the  Third  Race,  the  Manushis,  who  learnt  it
direct  from  the  Devas  of  the  Second  and  First  Races.  The  illustra-
tion spoken  of  in  his  relates  to  the  evolution  of  these  Races  and  of
our  fourth-  and  fifth-race  Humanity  in  the  Vaivasvata  Manvantara,  or
Round;  each  Round  being  composed  of  the  Yugas  of  the  seven  periods
of  Humanity;  four  of  which  are  now  passed  in  02ir  I^ife-Cycle,  the
middle  point  of  the  fifth  being  nearly  reached.  This  illustration  is
symbolical,  as  every  one  can  well  understand,  and  covers  the  ground
from  the  beginning.  The  old  book,  having  described  cosmic  evolution
and  explained  the  origin  of  everything  on  earth,  including  physical
man,  after  giving  the  true  history  of  the  Races,  from  the  First  down  to
our  own  Fifth  Race,  goes  no  further.  It  stops  short  at  the  beginning
of  the  Kali  Yuga,  just  4,989  years  ago,  at  the  death  of  Krishna,  the
bright  Sun-god,  the  once  living  hero  and  reformer.


»  The  name  is  used  in  the  sense  of  the  Greek  word  avdpoiTTO?.

t  Rabbi  Jehoshua  Ben  Chananea,  who  died  about  A.D.  72,  openly  declared  that  he  had  performed
"  miracles  "  by  means  of  the  book  Sepher  Jetzirah,  and  challenged  every  sceptic.  Franck,  quoting
from  the  Babylonian  Talmud,  names  two  other  thaumaturgists,  Rabbis  Chanina  and  Oshoi.  (See
Jerusalem  Talmud,  Sanhedrin,  c.  7,  etc. ;  and  Franck,  Die  Kabbalah,  pp.  55,  56).  Many  of  the  mediaeval
Occultists,  Alchemists,  and  Kabalists  have  made  the  same  claim ;  and  even  the  late  modern  Magus,
Eliphas  Levi,  publicly  asserts  it  in  his  books  on  Magic.


INTRODUCTORY.  11

But  there  exists  another  book.  None  of  its  possessors  regard  it  as
very  ancient,  as  it  was  born  with,  and  is  only  as  old  as  the  Black  Age,
namely,  about  5,000  years.  In  about  nine  years  hence,  the  first  cycle
of  the  first  five  millenniums,  that  began  with  the  great  cycle  of  the
Kali  Yuga,  will  end.  And  then  the  last  prophecy  contained  in  that
book — the  first  volume  of  the  prophetic  record  for  the  Black  Age — will
be  accomplished.  We  have  not  long  to  wait,  and  many  of  us  will
witness  the  dawn  of  the  New  Cycle,  at  the  end  of  which  not  a  few
accounts  will  be  settled  and  squared  between  the  races.  Volume  II
of  the  prophecies  is  nearly  ready,  having  been  in  preparation  since
the  time  of  Buddha's  grand  successor,  Shankaracharya.

One  more  important  point  must  be  noticed,  one  that  stands  foremost
in  the  series  of  proofs  given  of  the  existence  of  one  primeval,  universal
Wisdom — at  any  rate  for  Christian  Kabalists  and  students.  The
teachings  were,  at  least,  partially  known  to  several  of  the  Fathers  of
the  Church.  It  is  maintained,  on  purely  historical  grounds,  that
Origen,  Synesius,  and  even  Clemens  Alexandrinus,  had  themselves
been  initiated  into  the  Mysteries  before  adding  to  the  Neo-Platonism  of
the  Alexandrian  school  that  of  the  Gnostics,  under  the  Christian  veil.
More  than  this,  some  of  the  doctrines  of  the  secret  schools,  though  by
no  means  all,  were  preserved  in  the  Vatican,  and  have  since  become
part  and  parcel  of  the  Mysteries,  in  the  shape  of  disfigured  additions
made  to  the  original  Christian  programme  by  the  Latin  Church.  Such
is  the  now  materialised  dogma  of  the  Immaculate  Conception.  This
accounts  for  the  great  persecutions  set  on  foot  by  the  Roman  Catholic
Church  against  Occultism,  Masonry,  and  heterodox  Mysticism  generally.

The  days  of  Constantine  were  the  last  turning-point  in  history,  the
period  of  the  supreme  struggle,  that  ended  in  the  Western  world
throttling  the  old  religions  in  favour  of  the  new  one,  built  on  their
bodies.  From  thence  the  vista  into  the  far  distant  past,  beyond  the
Deluge  and  the  Garden  of  Eden,  began  to  be  forcibly  and  relentlessly
shut  out  by  every  fair  and  unfair  means  from  the  indiscreet  gaze  of
posterity.  Every  issue  was  blocked  up,  every  record  upon  which  hands
could  be  laid,  destroyed.  Yet  there  remains  enough,  even  among  such
mutilated  records,  to  warrant  us  in  saying  that  there  is  in  them  ever}^
requisite  evidence  of  the  actual  existence  of  a  Parent  Doctrine.  Frag-
ments have  survived  geological  and  political  cataclysms,  to  tell  the
story ;  and  every  survival  shows  evidence  that  the  now  secret  Wisdom
was  once  the  one  fountain  head,   the  ever-flowing  perennial  source,


28  THE  SECRET   DOCTRINE.

from  which  were  fed  all  the  streamlets — the  later  religions  of  all
nations — from  the  first  down  to  the  last.  This  period,  beginning  with
Buddha  and  Pythagoras  at  the  one  end  and  finishing  with  the  Neo-
Platonists  and  Gnostics  at  the  other,  is  the  only  focus  left  in  History
wherein  converge  for  the  last  time  the  bright  rays  of  light  streaming
from  the  asons  of  times  gone  by,  unobscured  by  the  hand  of  bigotry  and
fanaticism.

This  accounts  for  the  necessity  under  which  the  writer  has  laboured
of  ever  explaining  the  facts  given  from  the  hoariest  past  by  evidence
gathered  from  the  historical  period,  even  at  the  risk  of  being  once  more
charged  with  a  lack  of  method  and  system.  No  other  means  w^as  at
hand.  The  public  must  be  made  acquainted  with  the  efforts  of  manj^
world-adepts,  of  initiated  poets  and  writers  in  the  classics  of  every  age,
to  preserve  in  the  records  of  humanitj^  the  knowledge  at  least  of  the
existence  of  such  a  philosophy,  if  not  actually  of  its  tenets.  The
Initiates  of  1888  would  indeed  remain  incomprehensible  and  even  a
seemingly  impossible  myth,  were  not  like  Initiates  shown  to  have  lived
in  every  other  age  of  histor5^  This  could  be  done  only  by  naming
chapter  and  verse  where  mention  may  be  found  of  these  great
characters,  who  were  preceded  and  followed  by  a  long  and  interminable
line  of  other  famous  antediluvian  and  postdiluvian  Masters  in  the  arts.
Thus  only  could  it  be  shown,  on  semi-traditional  and  semi-historical
authority,  that  occult  knowledge  and  the  powers  it  confers  on  man,  are
not  altogether  fictions,  but  that  the}^  are  as  old  as  the  world  itself.

To  my  judges,  past  and  future,  therefore — whether  they  are  serious
literary  critics,  or  those  howling  der\nshes  in  literature  w^ho  judge  a
book  according  to  the  popularity  or  unpopularity  of  the  author's  name,
who,  hardly  glancing  at  its  contents,  fasten  like  lethal  bacilli  on  the
weakests  points  of  the  body — I  have  nothing  to  say.  Nor  shall  I  con-
descend to  notice  those  crack-brained  slanderers — fortunately  very  few
in  number — who,  hoping  to  attract  public  attention  by  throwing
discredit  on  every  writer  whose  name  is  better  known  than  their  own,
foam  and  bark  at  their  very  shadows.  These,  having  first  maintained
for  years  that  the  doctrines  taught  in  the  Theosophist,  and  which
culminated  in  Esoteric  Buddhism,  had  been  all  inveiited  by  the  present
writer,  have  finally  turned  round,  and  denounced  Isis  Unveiled  and  the
rest  as  a  plagiarism  from  Eliphas  lycvi  (!),  Paracelsus  (!  !),  and,  7nirabile
dictu,  Buddhism  and  Brahminism  (!!!).  As  well  charge  Renau  with
having  stolen  his    Vie  de  Jesus  from  the  Gospels,  and  Max  Miiller  his


INTRODUCTORY.  -  20

Sacred  Books  of  the  East  or  his  Chips  from  the  philosophies  of  the
Brahmans  and  of  Gautama,  the  Buddha.  But  to  the  public  in  general
and  the  readers  of  The  Secret  Doctrine  I  may  repeat  what  I  have
stated  all  along,  and  which  I  now  clothe  in  the  words  of  Montaigne  :

Gaitlemen,  "/  have  here  made  orily  a  nosegay  of  culled  floivers,  arid  have
brought  nothing  of  my  own  but  the  string  that  ties  thetur

Pull  the  "string"  to  pieces  and  cut  it  up  in  shreds,  if  you  will.  As
for  the  nosegay  of  facts — you  will  never  be  able  to  make  away  with
these.     You  can  only  ignore  them,  and  no  more.

We  maj'  close  with  a  parting  word  concerning  this  first  volume.  In
an  introduction  prefacing  chapters  dealing  chiefly  with  cosmogony,
certain  subjects  brought  forward  may  be  deemed  out  of  place,  but  one
more  consideration  added  to  those  already  given  has  led  me  to  touch
upon  them.  Every  reader  will  inevitably  judge  the  statements  made
from  the  stand-point  of  his  own  knowledge,  experience,  and  conscious-
ness, basing  his  judgment  on  what  he  has  already  learnt.  This  fact
the  writer  is  constantly  obliged  to  bear  in  mind;  hence,  also  the
frequent  references  in  this  first  volume  to  matters  which,  properly
speaking,  belong  to  a  later  part  of  the  work,  but  which  could  not  be
passed  bj'  in  silence,  lest  the  reader  should  look  upon  it  as  a  fairj^  tale
indeed — a  fiction  of  some  modern  brain.

Thus,  the  Past  shall  help  to  realize  the  Present,  and  the  latter  to
better  appreciate  the  Past.  The  errors  of  the  day  must  be  explained
and  swept  away,  yet  it  is  more  than  probable — nay  in  the  present  case
it  amounts  to  certitude — that  once  more  the  testimou)^  of  long  ages  and
of  history  will  fail  to  impress  any  but  the  very  intuitional — which  is
equal  to  sajang  the  very  few.  But  in  this  as  in  all  like  cases,  the  true
and  the  faithful  may  console  themselves  by  presenting  the  sceptical
modern  Sadducee  with  the  mathematical  proof  and  memorial  of  his
obdurate  obstinacy  and  bigotr>'.  There  still  exists  somewhere  in  the
archives  of  the  French  Academ)%  the  famous  law  of  probabilities
worked  out  by  certain  mathematicians  for  the  benefit  of  sceptics  by  an
algebraical  process.  It  runs  thus :  If  two  persons  give  their  evidence  to
a  fact,  and  thus  impart  to  it  each  of  them  f  of  certitude;  that  fact
will  have  then  |ij  of  certitude;  i.e.,  its  probability  will  bear  to  its  im-
probability the  ratio  of  35  to  i.  If  three  such  evidences  are  joined
together  the  certitude  will  become  f ff .  The  agreement  of  ten  persons
giving  each  |  of  certitude  will  produce  \%^^,  etc.,  etc.  The  Occultist
may  remain  satisfied  with  such  certitude,  and  care  for  no  more.


PROEM.


PAGES  FROM  A  PRE-HISTORIC   RECORD.

An  archaic  Manuscript — a  collection  of  palm  leaves  made  imperme-
able to  water,  fire,  and  air,  by  some  specific  and  unknown  process — is
before  the  writer's  eye.     On  the  first  page  is  an  immaculate  white  disk
within  a  dull  black  ground.     On  the  following  page,  the  same  disk,  but
with  a  central  point.     The  first,  the  student  knows,  represents  Kosmos
in  Eternity,  before  the  reawakening  of  still  slumbering  Energy,  the
Emanation  of  the  World  in  later  sj^stems.     The  point  in  the  hitherto
immaculate  disk,  Space  and  Eternity  in  Pralaya,  denotes  the  dawn  oi
differentiation.     It  is  the  Point  in  the  Mundane  Egg,  the  Germ  within
it  which  will  become  the  Universe,  the  All,  the  boundless,  periodical
Kosmos — a  Germ  which  is  latent  and  active,  periodicallj'  and  by  turns.
The  one  circle  is  divine  Unity,  from  which  all  proceeds,  whither  all
returns:    its  circumference — a  forcibly  limited  symbol,  in  view  of  the
limitation  of  the  human  mind — indicates  the  abstract,  ever  incognizable
Presence,  and  its  plane,  the  Universal  Soul,  although  the  two  are  one.
Only,  the  face  of  the  disk  being  white,  and  the  surrounding  ground
black,  clearly  shows  that  its  plane  is  the  sole  knowledge,  dim  and  hazy
though  it  still  is,  that  is  attainable  by  man.     It  is  on  this  plane  that
the  manvantaric   manifestations  begin;    for  it  is  in  this  Soui.   that
slumbers,   during  the    Pralaya,    the    Divine    Thought,*  wherein    lies
concealed  the  plan  of  every  future  cosmogony  and  theogony.

*  It  is  hardly  necessary  to  remind  the  reader  that  the  term  Divine  Thought,  like  that  of  Universal
Mind,  must  not  be  regarded  as  even  vaguely  shadowing  forth  an  intellectual  process  akin  to  that
exhibited  by  man.  The  "Unconscious,"  according  to  von  Hartraann,  arrived  at  the  vast  creative,
or  rather  evolutionary  plan,  "by  a  clairvoyant  wisdom  superior  to  all  consciousness,"  which  in
Vedintic  language  would  mean  absolute  Wisdom.  Only  those  who  realize  how  far  intuition  soars
above  the  tardy  processes  of  ratiocinative  thought  can  form  the  faintest  conception  of  that  absolute
Wisdom  which  transcends  the  ideas  of  Time  and  Space.  Mind,  as  we  know  it,  is  resolvable  into  states
of  consciousness,  of  varying  duration,  intensity,  complexity,  etc.,  all,  in  the  ultimate,  resting  on  sensa-
tion, which  is  again  Maya.  Sensation,  again,  necessarily  postulates  limitation.  The  Personal  God  of
orthodox  Theism  perceives,  thinks,  and  is  affected  by  emotion;  he  repents  and  feels  "fierce  anger."
But  the  notion  of  such  mental  states  clearly  involves  the  unthinkable  postulate  of  the  externality  of
the  exciting  stimuli,  to  say  nothing  of  the  impossibilitj'  of  ascribing  changelessness  to  a  being  whose
emotions  fluctuate  with  events  in  the  worlds  he  presides  over.  The  conceptions  of  a  Personal  God  as
changeless  and  infinite  are  thus  unpsychological  and,  what  is  worse,  unphilosophical.


32  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

It  is  the  One  Life,  eternal,  invisible,  yet  omnipresent,  without
beginning  or  end,  yet  periodical  in  its  regular  manifestations — between
which  periods  reigns  the  dark  mystery  of  Non-Being;  unconscious,  yet
absolute  Consciousness,  unrealizable,  yet  the  one  self-existing  Reality:
trul}^  "a  Chaos  to  the  sense,  a  Kosmos  to  the  reason."  Its  one  abso-
lute attribute,  which  is  Itself,  eternal,  ceaseless  Motion,  is  called  in
esoteric  parlance  the  Great  Breath,*  which  is  the  perpetual  motion  of
the  Universe,  in  the  sense  of  limitless,  ever-present  Space.  That  which
is  motionless  cannot  be  Divine.  But  then  there  is  nothing  in  fact
and  reality  absolutely  motionless  within  the  Universal  Soul.

Almost  five  centuries  B.C.  Leucippus,  the  instructor  of  Democritus,
maintained  that  Space  was  eternally  filled  with  atoms  actuated  by  a
ceaseless  motion,  which,  in  due  course  of  time,  as  they  aggregated,
generated  rotatory  motion,  through  mutual  collisions  producing  lateral
movements.  Epicurus  and  Lucretius  taught  the  same  doctrine,  adding
however  to  the  lateral  motion  of  the  atoms  the  idea  of  afiinity — an
Occult  teaching.

From  the  beginning  of  man's  inheritance,  from  the  first  appearance
of  the  architects  of  the  globe  he  lives  on,  the  unrevealed  Deity  was
recognized  and  considered  under  its  only  philosophical  aspect — Uni-
versal Motion,  the  thrill  of  the  creative  Breath  in  Nature.  Occultism
sums  up  the  One  Existence  thus:  "■Deity  is  an  arcane,  living  \or  moving]
Fire,  and  the  eternal  witnesses  to  this  7i7iseen  Preseyice,  are  Light,  Heat,
Moisture," — this  trinity  including,  and  being  the  cause  of,  every  pheno-
menon in  Nature.f  Intra-cosmic  motion  is  eternal  and  ceaseless ;
cosmic  motion — the  visible,  or  that  which  is  subject  to  perception — is
finite  and  periodical.     As  an  eternal  abstraction  it  is  the  Ever- Present;

*  Plato  proves  himself  an  Initiate,  when  sa^^ng■  in  Cratylus  that  C'eos  is  derived  from  C'eetv,  ta
move,  to  run,  for  the  first  astronomers  who  observed  the  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies  called  the
planets  ^eot,  gods.    Later  the  word  produced  another  term,  aXriue.La — the  breath  of  God.

■t Nominalists,  arguing  with  Berkeley  that  "it  is  impossible  ...  to  form  the  abstract  idea  of
motion  distinct  from  the  body  moving"  {Principles  of  Human  Knowledge,  Introd.,  par.  lo),  may  put
the  question,  What  is  that  body,  the  producer  of  that  motion?  Is  it  a  substance?  Then  you  are
believers  in  a  Personal  God?  etc.,  etc.  This  will  be  answered  farther  on,  in  a  further  part  of  this
work;  meanwhile,  we  claim  our  rights  of  Conceptionalists  as  against  Roscelini's  materialistic  views
of  Realism  and  Nominalism.  "Has  science,"  says  one  of  its  ablest  advocates,  Edward  Clodd,
"revealed  anything  that  weakens  or  opposes  itself  to  the  ancient  words  in  which  the  essence  of  all
relig^ion,  past,  present,  and  to  come,  is  given;  to  do  justly,  to  love  mercy,  to  walk  humbly  before  thy
God?"  And  we  agree,  provided  we  connote  by  the  word  God,  not  the  crude  anthropomorphism
which  is  still  the  backbone  of  our  current  theology,  but  the  symbolic  conception  of  that  which  is  the
Life  and  Motion  of  the  Universe,  to  know  which  in  the  physical  order  is  to  know  time  past,  present,
and  to  come,  in  the  existence  of  successions  of  phenomena;  to  know  which,  in  the  moral,  is  to  know
what  has  been,  is,  and  will  be,  within  human  consciousness.  (See  Science  and  the  Emotions,  a  Dis-
course delivered  at  South  Place  Chapel,  Finsbury,  Loudon,  December  27th,  1885.)


PROEM.  25

■as  2.  manifestation,  it  is  finite  both  in  the  coming  direction  and  the
opposite,  the  two  being  the  Alpha  and  Omega  of  successive  recon-
structions. Kosmos — the  Noumenon — has  nought  to  do  with  the
causal  relations  of  the  phenomenal  World.  It  is  only  with  reference
to  the  intra-cosraic  Soul,  the  ideal  Kosmos  in  the  immutable  Divine
Thought,  that  we  may  say:  "It  never  had  a  beginning  nor  will  it  have
an  end."  With  regard  to  its  body  or  cosmic  organization,  though  it
cannot  be  said  that  it  had  a  first,  or  will  ever  have  a  last  construction,
yet  at  each  new  Manvantara,  its  organization  maj^  be  regarded  as  the
first  and  the  last  of  its  kind,  as  it  evolves  every  time  on  a  higher
plane.

A  few  years  ago  onl)'-,  it  was  stated  that :

The  esoteric  doctrine,  like  Buddhism  and  Brahmanism,  and  even  Kabalism,
teaches  that  the  one  infinite  and  unknown  Essence  exists  from  all  eternity,  and  in
regular  and  harmonious  successions  is  either  passive  or  active.  In  the  poetical
phraseology  of  Manu  these  conditions  are  called  the  Days  and  the  Nights  of
Brahma.  The  latter  is  either  "awake"  or  "asleep."  The  Svabhavikas,  or  philoso-
phers of  the  oldest  school  of  Buddhism,  which  still  exists  in  Nepaul,  speculate  only
upon  the  active  condition  of  this  "Essence,"  which  they  call  Svabhavat,  and  deem
it  foolish  to  theorize  upon  the  abstract  and  "unknowable"  power  in  its  passive  con-
dition. Hence  they  are  called  Atheists  by  both  Christian  theologians  and  modern
scientists,  for  neither  of  the  two  are  able  to  understand  the  profound  logic  of  their
philosophy.  The  former  will  allow  of  no  other  God  than  the  personified  secondary-
powers  which  have  worked  out  the  visible  universe,  and  which  becomes  with  them
the  anthropomorphic  God  of  the  Christians — the  male  Jehovah,  roaring  amid
thunder  and  lightning.  In  its  turn,  rationalistic  science  greets  the  Buddhists  and
the  Svabha\nkas  as  the  "Positivists"  of  the  archaic  ages.  If  we  take  a  one-sided
view  of  the  philosophy  of  the  latter,  our  materialists  may  be  right  in  their  own
way.  The  Buddhists  maintain  that  there  is  no  Creator,  but  an  infinitude  of
creative  powers,  which  collectively  form  the  one  eternal  substance,  the  essence  of
which  is  inscratable— hence  not  a  subject  for  speculation  for  any  true  philosopher.
Socrates  invariably  refused  to  argue  upon  the  mystery  of  universal  being,  j^et  no
one  would  ever  have  thought  of  charging  him  with  atheism,  except  those  who  were
bent  upon  his  destmction.  Upon  inaugurating  an  active  period,  says  the  Secret
Doctrine,  an  expansion  of  this  Divine  Essence  from  without  inwardly  and  from
within  outwardly,  occurs  in  obedience  to  eternal  and  immutable  law,  and  the
phenomenal  or  visible  universe  is  the  ultimate  result  of  the  long  chain  of  cosmical
forces  thus  progressively  set  in  motion.  In  like  manner,  when  the  passive  condi-
tion is  resumed,  a  contraction  of  the  Divine  Essence  takes  place,  and  the  previous
work  of  creation  is  gradually  and  progressively  undone.  The  visible  universe
becomes  disintegrated,  its  material  dispersed;  and  "darkness"  solitary  and  alone,
broods  once  more  over  the  face  of  the  "deep."  To  use  a  metaphor  from  the  secret
books,  which   \\-ill   convey  the   idea  still   more   clearly,   an   out-breathing  of  the


34  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

"unknown  essence"  produces  the  world;  and  an  inhalation  causes  it  to  disappe?-
This  process  has  been  going  on  from  all  eternity,  and  our  present  universe  is  but
one  of  an  infinite  series,  which  had  no  beginning  and  will  have  no  end.*

This  passage  will  be  explained,  as  far  as  it  is  possible,  in  the  present
work.  Though  it  contains  nothing  new  to  the  Orientalist,  as  it  now
stands,  its  esoteric  interpretation  may  contain  a  good  deal  which  has
hitherto  remained  entirely  unknown  to  the  Western  student.

The  first  illustration  is  a  plain  disk,  (^.  The  second  in  the  archaic
symbol  shows  a  disk  with  a  point  in  it,  Q — the  first  diflferentiation
in  the  periodical  manifestations  of  the  ever-eternal  Nature,  sexless  and
infinite,  "Aditi  in  THAT,"t  or  potential  Space  within  abstract  Space.
In  its  third  stage  the  point  is  transformed  into  a  diameter,  Q.  It
now  symbolizes  a  divine  immaculate  Mother-Nature  within  the  all-
embracing  absolute  Infinitude.  When  the  horizontal  diameter  is
crossed  by  a  vertical  one,  ^,  it  becomes  the  Mundane  Cross.  Hu-
manity has  reached  its  Third  Root-Race;  it  is  the  sign  for  the  origin
of  human  Life.  When  the  circumference  disappears  and  leaves  only
the  -f-,  it  is  a  sign  that  the  fall  of  man  into  matter  is  accomplished,
and  the  Fourth  Race  begins.  The  cross  within  a  circle  symbolizes
pure  Pantheism ;  when  the  cross  is  left  uninscribed,  it  becomes  phallic.
It  had  the  same  and  yet  other  meanings  as  a  Tau  inscribed  within  a
circle,  ^;  or  as  a  Thor's  Hammer — the  so-called  Jaina  cross,  or  Svas-
tika,  within  a  circle,  (^.

By  the  third  symbol — the  circle  divided  in  two  by  a  horizontal
diameter — was  meant  the  first  manifestation  of  creative  Nature — still
passive,  because  feminine.  The  first  shadowy  perception  of  man
connected  with  procreation  is  feminine,  because  man  knows  his  mother
more  than  his  father.  Hence  female  deities  were  more  sacred  than
male.  Nature  is  therefore  feminine,  and,  to  a  degree,  objective  and
tangible,  and  the  Spirit  Principle  which  fructifies  it,  is  concealed.:]:
By  adding  to  the  horizontal  line  in  the  circle,   a  perpendicular,  the


*  /sis  Unveiled,  II,  264  -5.

■mig  Veda.

J  We  are  told  by  the  Western  mathematicians  and  some  American  Kabalists,  that  in  the  Kabalah
also  "the  value  of  the  Jehovah  name  is  that  of  the  diameter  of  a  circle."  Add  to  this  the  fact  that
Jehovah  is  the  third  of  the  Sephiroth,  Binah,  a  feminine  word,  and  you  have  the  key  to  the  mystery.
By  certain  Kabalistic  transformations  this  name,  which  is  androgynous  in  the  first  chapters  of
Genesis,  becomes  in  its  transformations  entirely  masculine,  Cainite  and  phallic.  The  choosing
of  a  deity  among  the  pagan  gods  and  making  of  it  a  special  national  God,  to  call  upon  it  as  the
"One  Iviving  God,"  the  "God  of  Gods,"  and  then  proclaiming  this  worship  monotheistic,  does  not
change  it  into  the  One  Principle  whose  "  Unity  admits  not  of  multiplication,  change,  or  form,"
especially  in  the  case  of  a  priapic  deity,  as  Jehovah  is  now  demonstrated  to  be.


PROEM.  25

Tau  was  formed,  "J",  the  oldest  form  of  the  letter.  It  was  the  glyph
of  the  Third  Root- Race  to  the  day  of  its  symbolical  Fall — i.e.,  when
the  separation  of  sexes  by  natural  evolution  took  place — when  the
figure  became  (J),  or  sexless  life  modified  or  separated— a  double
glyph  or  symbol.  With  the  sub-races  of  our  Fifth  Race  it  became  in
symbology  the  Sacf,  and  in  Hebrew  N'cabvah,  of  the  first-formed
Races;*  then  it  changed  into  the  Egyptian  emblem  of  life,  9.  and
still  later  into  the  sign  of  Venus,  ^.  Then  comes  the  Svastika
(Thor's  Hammer,  now  the  Hermetic  Cross),  entirely  separated  from  its
circle,  thus  becoming  purely  phallic.  The  esoteric  symbol  of  Kali
Yuga  is  the  five-pointed  star  reversed,  with  its  two  points  (horns)
turned  heavenward,  thus  ^,  the  sign  of  human  sorcery,  a  position
every  Occultist  will  recognize  as  one  of  the  "left-hand,"  and  used  in
ceremonial  magic.

It  is  hoped  that  during  the  perusal  of  this  work  the  erroneous  ideas
of  the  public  in  general  with  regard  to  Pantheism  will  be  modified.  It
is  wrong  and  unjust  to  regard  the  Buddhists  and  Advaitin  Occultists  as
Atheists.  If  not  all  of  them  philosophers,  they  are,  at  any  rate,  all
logicians,  their  objections  and  arguments  being  based  on  strict  reason-
ing. Indeed,  if  the  Parabrahman  of  the  Hindus  may  be  taken  as  a
representative  of  the  hidden  and  nameless  deities  of  other  nations,  this
absolute  Principle  will  be  found  to  be  the  prototype  from  which  all  the
others  were  copied.  Parabrahman  is  not  "God,"  because  It  is  not  a
God.  "It  is  that  which  is  supreme,  and  not  supreme  {paravard):'\  It
is  supreme  as  cause,  not  supreme  as  effect.  Parabrahman  is  simply,  as
a  Secondless  Reality,  the  all-inclusive  Kosmos — or  rather  the  infinite
Cosmic  Space — in  the  highest  spiritual  sense,  of  course.  Brahman
(neuter)  being  the  unchanging,  pure,  free,  undecaying  supreme  Root,
the  "One  true  Existence,  Paramarthika,"  and  the  absolute  Chit  and
Chaitanya  (Intelligence,  Consciousness),  cannot  be  a  cognizer,  "for
That  can  have  no  subject  of  cognition."  Can  the  Flame  be  called  the
Essence  of  Fire?  This  Essence  is  "the  Life  and  Light  of  the  Universe,
the  visible  fire  and  flame  are  destruction,  death,  and  evil."  "Fire  and
Flame  destroy  the  body  of  an  Arhat,  their  essence  makes  him  im-
mortal." J     "The  knowledge  of  the  absolute  Spirit,  like  the  effulgence

•See  that  suggestive  work,  The  Source  of  Measures,  where  the  author  explains  the  real  meaning
of  the  word  Sacr\  from  which  "sacred,"  "sacrament,"  are  derived,  words  which  have  now  become
synonyms  of  holiness,  though  purely  phallic!

■\  Mandukya  Upanishad,  I.  28.

XBodhimuy.  Book  II.


36  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

of  the  sun,  or  like  heat  in  fire,  is  naught  else  than  the  absolute  Essence
itself,"  says  Shankaracharya.  It — is  "the  Spirit  of  the  Fire,"  not  Fire
itself;  therefore,  "the  attributes  of  the  latter.  Heat  or  Flame,  are  not
the  attributes  of  the  Spirit,  but  of  that  of  which  that  Spirit  is  the
unconscious  cause."  Is  not  the  above  sentence  the  true  key-note  of
later  Rosicrucian  philosophy?  Parabrahman  is,  in  short,  the  collective
aggregate  of  Kosmos  in  its  infinity  and  eternity,  the  "That"  and
"This"  to  which  distributive  aggregates  can  not  be  applied.*  "In  the
beginning  This  was  the  Self,  one  only;"t  and  the  great  Shankar-
tcharya  explains  that  "This"  refers  to  the  Universe  (Jagat);  the  words,
"  in  the  beginning,"  meaning  before  the  reproduction  of  the  pheno-
menal Universe.

Therefore,  when  the  Pantheists  echo  the  Upanishads,  which  state,  as
in  the  Secret  Doctrine,  that  "This"  cannot  create,  they  do  not  deny  a
Creator,  or  rather  a  collective  aggregate  of  creators ;  they  simply  refuse,
very  logically,  to  attribute  "creation"  and  especially  formation — some-
thing finite — to  an  Infinite  Principle.  With  them,  Parabrahman  is  a
passive  because  an  absolute  Cause,  the  unconditioned  Mukta.  It  is
only  limited  omniscience  and  omnipotence  that  are  refused  to  the
latter,  because  these  are  still  attributes,  reflected  in  man's  perceptions;
and  because  Parabrahman,  being  the  Supreme  Ael,  the  ever  invisible
Spirit  and  Soul  of  Nature,  changeless  and  eternal,  can  have  no  attri-
butes, the  term  Absoluteness  very  naturally  precluding  any  idea  of  the
finite  or  conditioned  from  being  connected  with  it.  And  if  the  Vedan-
tins  postulate  attributes  as  belonging  simply  to  its  emanation,  calling  it
ishvara  phis  Maya,  and  Avidya  (Agnosticism  and  Nescience  rather
than  Ignorance),  it  is  difficult  to  find  any  Atheism  in  this  conception.:}:
Since  there  can  be  neither  two  Infinites  nor  two  Absolutes  in  a  Uni-
verse supposed  to  be  boundless,  this  Self- Existence  can  hardly  be  con-
ceived of  as  creating  personally.  To  the  senses  and  in  the  perceptions
of  finite  beings.  That  is  '^on-Being,  in  the  sense  that  it  is  the  One  Be-
ness ;  for,  in  this  Ali,  lies  concealed  its  coeternal  and  coeval  emanation


*  See  the  Vedanta  Sara,  by  Major  G.  A.  Jacob  ;  and  also  T/ie  Aphorisms  of  Shandilya,  translated  by
Cowell,  p.  42.
■r  Aitareya  Upanishad.

%  Nevertheless,  prejudiced  and  rather  fanatical  Christian  Orientalists  would  like  to  prove  this  to  be
pure  Atheism.  For  proof  of  this,  compare  Major  Jacob's  Vedanta  Sara.  Yet,  the  whole  of
antiquity  echoes  the  thought :

Omnis  enim  per  se  divom  natura  necesse  est
Iramortali  Eevo  surama  cum  pace  fruatur—
as  Lucretius  has  it— a  purely  Vedantic  conception.


PROEM.  37

or  inherent  radiation,  which,  becoming  periodically  Brahma  (the  male-
female  Potency),  expands  itself  into  the  manifested  Universe.  "Nara-
yana  moving  on  the  [abstract]  Waters  of  Space,"  is  transformed  into
the  Waters  of  concrete  substance  moved  by  him,  who  now  becomes  the
manifested  Word  or  Logos.

The  orthodox  Brahmans,  those  who  rise  the  most  against  the  Pan-
theists and  Advaitins,  calling  them  Atheists,  are  forced,  if  Manu  is  any
authority  in  this  matter,  to  accept  the  death  of  Brahma,  the  Creator,  at
the  expiration  of  every  Age  of  this  deity — loo  Divine  Years,  a  period
which  in  our  years  requires  fifteen  figures  to  express.  Yet  no  philo-
sopher among  them  will  view  this  "death"  in  an}'  other  sense  than  as  a
temporary  disappearance  from  the  manifested  plane  of  existence,  or  as  a
periodical  rest.

The  Occultists  are,  therefore,  at  one  with  the  Advaita  Vedantin
philosophers  as  to  the  above  tenet.  They  show,  on  philosophical
grounds,  the  impossibility  of  accepting  the  idea  of  the  absolute  All
creating  or  even  evolving  the  Golden  Egg,  into  which  it  is  said  to  enter
in  order  to  transform  itself  into  Brahma,  the  Creator,  who  later  expands
himself  into  the  Gods  and  all  the  visible  Universe.  They  say  that
absolute  Unity  cannot  pass  to  Infinity,  for  Infinity  presupposes  the
limitless  extension  of  something,  and  the  duration  of  that  something;
and  the  One  All — like  Space,  which  is  its  only  mental  and  physical
representation  on  this  earth,  or  our  plane  of  existence — is  neither  an
object  of,  nor  a  subject  to,  perception.  If  one  could  suppose  the
eternal  infinite  All,  the  omnipresent  Unity,  instead  of  being  in
Eternit}',  becoming  through  periodical  manifestation  a  manifold  Uni-
verse or  a  multiple  Personality,  that  Unity  would  cease  to  be  one.
Locke's  idea,  that  "pure  space  is  capable  of  neither  resistance  nor
motion,"  is  incorrect.  Space  is  neither  a  "limitless  void,"  nor  a  "con-
ditioned fulness,"  but  both.  Being — on  the  plane  of  absolute  abstraction
— the  ever-incognizable  Deity,  which  is  void  only  to  finite  minds,*  and
on  that  of  mayavic  perception,  the  Plenum,  the  absolute  Container  of
all  that  is,  whether  manifested  or  unmanifested,  it  is,  therefore,  that
Absolute  All.  There  is  no  difference  between  the  Christian  Apostle's
"in  Him  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being,"  and  the  Hindu  Rishi's

•  The  very  names  of  the  two  chief  deities,  Brahma  and  Vishnu,  ought  to  have  long:  ago  suggested
their  esoteric  meanings.  Brahman,  or  Brahm,  is  derived  by  some  from  the  root  brih,  to  grow  or  to
expand  (see  Calcutta  Review,  vol.  Ixvi.,  p.  14);  Vishnu,  from  the  root  vish,  to  pervade,  to  enter
into  the  nature  of  the  essence;  Brahma- Vishnu  thus  being  infinite  Space,  of  which  the  Gods,  the
Rishis,  the  Mauus,  and  all  in  this  Universe  are  simply  the  Potencies  (Vibhutayah).


38  THE  SECRET   DOCTRINE.

"the  Universe  lives  in,  proceeds  from,  and  will  return  to,  Brahma":  for
Brahman  (neuter),  the  unmanifested,  is  that  Universe  z«  absco?idito,  and
Brahma,  the  manifested,  is  the  lyOgos,  made  male-female*  in  the  sym-
bolical orthodox  dogmas,  the  God  of  the  Apostle-Initiate  and  of  the
Rishi  being  both  the  Unseen  and  the  Visible  Space.  Space  is  called,
in  esoteric  symbolism,  the  "Seven-Skinned  Eternal  Mother-Father."
From  its  undifferentiated  to  its  differentiated  surface  it  is  composed  of
seven  layers.

"  What  is  that  which  was,  is,  and  will  be,  whether  there  is  a  Universe  or
not;  whether  the?'e  be  gods  or  noneV  asks  the  esoteric  Senzar  Catechism.
And  the  answer  made  is — "Space''

It  is  not  the  One  unknown  ever-present  God  in  Nature,  or  Nature  in
abscondito,  that  is  rejected,  but  the  "God"  of  human  dogma,  and  his
humanized  "Word."  Man,  in  his  infinite  conceit  and  inherent  pride
and  vanity,  shaped  it  himself  with  his  sacrilegious  hand  out  of  the
material  he  found  in  his  own  small  brain-fabric,  and  forced  it  upon  his
fellows  as  a  direct  revelation  from  the  one  unrevealed  SPACE.f  The
Occultist  accepts  revelation  as  coming  from  divine  yet  still  finite
Beings,  the  manifested  Lives,  never  from  the  unmanifestable  One
lyiFE;  from  those  Entities,  called  Primordial  Man,  Dhyani-Buddhas,  or
Dhyan   Chohans,   the   Rishi- Prajapati  of  the  Hindus,  the   Elohim  or

•  See  Mauu's  account  of  Brahma  separating  his  body  into  male  and  female,  the  latter  the  female
Vach,  in  whom  he  creates  Viraj,  and  compare  this  with  the  esotericism  of  Chapters  II,  III,  and  IV
of  Genesis.

t  Occultism  is  indeed  "in  the  air"  at  the  close  of  this  our  century.  Among  many  other  works
recentlypublished,  we  would  recommend  especially  to  students  of  theoretical  Occultism  who  would
not  venture  beyond  the  realm  of  our  special  human  plane,  New  Aspects  of  Life  and  Religion,  by  Henry
Pratt,  M.D.  It  is  full  of  esoteric  dogmas  and  philosophy,  the  latter,  however,  in  the  concluding
chapters,  rather  limited  by  what  seems  to  be  a  spirit  of  conditioned  positivism.  Nevertheless,  what
is  said  of  Space  as  "the  Unknown  First  Cause,"  merits  quotation.

"This  unknown  something,  thus  recognized  as,  and  identified  with,  the  primary  embodiment  of
Simple  Unity,  is  invisible  and  impalpable  [as  abstract  space,  granted] :  and  because  invisible  and  im-
palpable, therefore  incognizable.  And  this  incognizability  has  led  to  the  error  of  supposing  it  to  be  a
simple  void,  a  mere  receptive  capacity.  But,  even  viewed  as  an  absolute  void,  space  must  be  admitted
to  be  either  self-existent,  infinite,  and  eternal,  or  to  have  had  a  first  cause  outside,  behind,  and  beyond
itself.

"And  yet  could  such  a  cause  be  found  and  defined,  this  would  only  lead  to  the  transferring  thereto
of  the  attributes  otherwise  accruing  to  space,  and  thus  merely  throw  the  difliculty  of  origination  a
step  farther  back,  without  gaining  additional  light  as  to  primary  causation."     (Op.  cit.,  p.  5.)

This  is  precisely  what  has  been  done  by  the  believers  in  an  anthropomorphic  creator,  an  extra-
cosmic,  instead  of  an  intra-cosmic  God.  Many  of  Dr.  Pratt's  subjects — most  of  them  we  may  say —
are  old  Kabalistic  ideas  and  theories  which  he  presents  in  quite  a  new  garb — "New  Aspects"  of  the
Occult  in  Nature,  indeed.  Space,  however,  viewed  as  a  Substantial  Unity— the  living  Source  of  Life —
is,  as  the  Unknown  Causeless  Cause,  the  oldest  dogma  in  Occultism,  millenniums  earlier  than  the
Pater-iEther  of  the  Greeks  and  Latins.  So  are  "  Force  and  Matter,  as  Potencies  of  Space,  insepar-
able, and  the  unknown  revealers  of  the  Unknown."  They  are  all  found  in  Aryan  philosophy  personi-
fied as  Vishvakarman,  Indra,  Vishnu,  etc.,  etc.  Still  they  are  expressed  very  philosophically,  and
under  many  unusual  aspects,  in  the  work  referred  to.


PROEM.  39

-Sons  of  God  of  the  Jews,  the  Planetary  Spirits  of  all  nations,  who  have
become  Gods  for  men.  The  Occultist  also  regards  the  Adi-Shakti — the
direct  emanation  of  Mulaprakriti,  the  eternal  Root  of  That,  and  the
female  aspect  of  the  Creative  Cause,  Brahma,  in  her  akashic  form  of  the
Universal  Soul — as  philosophically  a  Maya,  and  cause  of  human  Maya.
But  this  view  does  not  prevent  him  from  believing  in  its  existence  so
long  as  it  lasts,  to  wit,  for  one  Mahamanvantara;  nor  from  applying
Akasha,  the  radiation  of  Mulaprakriti,*  to  practical  purposes,  con-
nected as  this  World-Soul  is  with  all  natural  phenomena  known  or  un-
known to  Science.

The  oldest  religions  of  the  world — exoterically,  for  the  esoteric  root
or  foundation  is  one — are  the  Indian,  the  Mazdean,  and  the  Egyptian.
Next  comes  the  Chaldean,  the  outcome  of  these,  now  entirely  lost  to
the  world,  except  in  its  disfigured  Sabeanism  as  at  present  rendered  by
the  archaeologists.  Then,  passing  over  a  number  of  religions  that  will
be  mentioned  later,  comes  the  Jewish,  esoterically  following  in  the  line
of  Babylonian  Magism,  as  in  the  Kabalah;  exoterically,  a  collection  of
allegorical  legends,  as  in  Gejiesis  and  the  Pentateuch.  Read  by  the  light
of  the  Zohar,  the  four  initial  chapters  of  Geiiesis  are  the  fragment  of  a
highly  philosophical  page  in  the  world's  cosmogony.  Left  in  their
symbolical  disguise,  they  are  a  nursery  tale,  an  ugly  thorn  in  the  side
of  science  and  logic,  an  evident  effect  of  Karma.  To  let  them  serve  as
a  prologue  to  Christianity  was  a  cruel  revenge  on  the  part  of  the
Rabbis,  who  knew  better  what  their  Pe^itateuch  meant.  It  was  a  silent
protest  against  their  spoliation,  and  the  Jews  have  now  certainly  the
better  of  their  traditional  persecutors.  The  above-named  exoteric
creeds  will  be  explained  in  the  light  of  the  universal  doctrine  as  we
proceed.
The  Occult  Catechism  contains  the  following  questions  and  answers :
What  is  it  that  ever  is  ? — Space,  the  eternal  Amipadaka  [^Pare?itless^.
What  is  it  that  ever  was  ? — The  Germ  iii  the  Root.  What  is  it  that  is  ever
comijig  and  going? — The  Great  Breath.     Then,  there  are  three  Eternals  ? —

•  In  contradistinction  to  the  manifested  Universe  of  matter,  the  term  Mfllaprakriti  (from  rnUla,  root,
axid.  prakriti,  nature),  or  the  unmanifested  primordial  Matter — called  by  Western  Alchemists  Adam's
Earth — is  applied  by  the  Vedantins  to  Parabrahman.  Matter  is  dual  in  religious  metaphysics,  and
in  esoteric  teachings  septenary,  like  everything  else  in  the  Universe.  As  Mulaprakriti,  it  is  undiffer-
entiated and  eternal:  as  Vyakta,  it  becomes  differentiated  and  conditioned,  according  to  S/if^/f/jA-
vatara,  Upaniskad,  I,  8,  and  Devt  Bhagavata  Purdna.  The  author  of  the  Four  Lectures  on  the
Bhagavad  Gitd,  in  speaking  of  Mulaprakriti,  says:  "From  its  [the  Logos']  objective  standpoint,
Parabrahman  appears  to  it  as  Mulaprakriti.  ...  Of  course  this  Mulaprakriti  is  material  to  it,  as
any  material  object  is  material  to  us.  .  .  Parabrahman  is  an  unconditioned  and  absolute  reality,
and  Mfilaprakriti  is  a  sort  of  veil  thrown  over  it."    [Theosophist ,  VIII,  304.)


40  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

No,  the  three  are  one.     That  which  ever  is  is  one,  that  which  ever  was  is  one,
that  which  is  ever  being  and  becoming  is  also  07ie :  and  this  is  Space.

Explain,  O  Lanoo  \disciple\ — The  One  is  an  unbroke7i  Circle  \_Ring']
with  no  circumference,  for  it  is  nowhere  and  everywhere ;  the  O^ie  is  the
bou7idless  Plane  of  the  Circle,  manifesting  a  Diameter  only  during  the
manvantafdc  periods ;  the  One  is  the  indivisible  Point  found  nowhere,
perceived  everywhere  during  those  periods ;  it  is  the  Vertical  aiid  the  Hori-
zontal, the  Father  and  the  Mother,  the  szmimit  and  base  of  the  Father,  the
two  extremities  of  the  Mother,  reaching  in  reality  nowhere,  for  the  One  is
the  Ring  as  also  the  Rings  that  are  within  that  Ring.  Light  hi  Darkness
and  Darkness  in  Light:  the  ''Breath  which  is  eternal!'  It  proceeds  fvm
without  inwardly,  when  it  is  everywhere,  and  from  within  outwardly,  when
it  is  nowhere — (i.e.,  Mdyd,^  one  of  the  Centres). \  It  expands  and  co?itracts
\exhalatio7i  and  hihalatio7i\.  When  it  expa7ids,  the  Mother  diffuses  a7id
scatters ;  when  it  C07itracts,  the  Mother  draws  back  and  i7igathers.  This
produces  the  periods  of  Evolution  a7id  Dissolutio7i,  Ma7iva7itara  a7id  Pralaya.
The  Germ,  is  invisible  a7id fiery ;  the  Root  \the  Plane  of  the  Circle']  is  cool ;
but  duri7ig  Evolution  a7id  Ma7ivanta7'a  her  garme7tt  is  cold  a7id  7'adiant.
Hot  Breath  is  the  Father  who  devours  the  proge7iy  of  the  ma7iy-faced  Ele77ie7it
[^heterogeneous'],  a7id  leaves  the  single-faced  ones  \l107noge71eous].  Cool
Breath  is  the  Mother,  who  co7iceives,  for77is,  bri7igs  fo7'th,  a7id  receives  the7n
back  into  her  bosom,  to  ref 07^771  them  at  the  Dawn  [of  the  Day  of  B7'aht7id,  or
Ma7iva7itara].

For  clearer  understanding  on  the  part  of  the  general  reader,  it  must
be  stated  that  Occult  Science  recognizes  seve7i  Cosmic  Elements — four
entirely  physical,  and  the  fifth  (Ether)  semi-material,  which  will  become
visible  in  the  Air  towards  the  end  of  our  Fourth  Round,  to  reign
supreme  over  the  others  during  the  whole  of  the  Fifth.  The  remaining
two  are  as  yet  absolutely  beyond  the  range  of  human  perception.     They

*  Esoteric  Philosophy,  regarding  every  finite  thing  as  Maya  (or  the  illusion  of  ignorance),  must
necessarily  view  in  the  same  light  every  intra-cosmic  planet  and  body,  seeing  that  it  is  something
organized,  hence  finite.  The  sentence,  therefore,  "it  proceeds  from  without  inwardly,  etc.",  in  its
first  clause,  refers  to  the  dawn  of  the  Mahamanvantara,  or  the  great  reevolution  after  one  of  the
complete  periodical  dissolutions  of  every  compound  form  in  Nature,  from  planet  to  molecule,  into  its
ultimate  essence  or  element ;  and  in  its  second  clause,  to  the  partial  or  local  Manvantara,  which  may
be  a  solar  or  even  a  planetary  one.

i-  By  Centre,  a  centre  of  energy  or  a  cosmic  focus  is  meant ;  when  the  so-called  "  creation,"  or
formation,  of  a  planet,  is  accomplished  by  that  force  which  is  designated  by  Occultists  Life  and  by
Science  Energy,  then  the  process  takes  place  from  within  outwardly,  every  atom  being  said  to  contain
in  itself  the  creative  energy  of  the  divine  Breath.  And,  whereas  after  an  Absolute  Pralaya,  when  the
preexisting  material  consists  but  of  One  Element,  and  Breath  "is  ever3rwhere,"  the  latter  acts  from
without  inwardly :  after  a  Minor  Pralaya,  when  everj'thing  having  remained  in  statu  quo — in  a  re-
frigerated state,  so  to  say,  like  the  moon — then  at  the  first  flutter  of  Manvantara,  the  planet  or
planets  begin  their  resurrection  to  life  from  within  outwardly.


PROEM.  41

will,  however,  appear  as  presentments  during  the  Sixth  and  Seventh
Races  of  this  Round,  and  will  be  fully  known  in  the  Sixth  and  Seventh
Rounds  respectively.*  These  seven  Elements  with  their  numberless
sub-elements,  which  are  far  more  numerous  than  those  known  to
Science,  are  simply  conditional  modifications  and  aspects  of  the  One
and  only  Element.  This  latter  is  not  Ether,f  not  even  Akasha,  but  the
source  of  these.  The  Fifth  Element,  now  quite  freely  advocated  by
Science,  is  not  the  Ether  hypothesized  by  Sir  Isaac  Newton — although
he  calls  it  by  that  name,  having  probably  associated  it  in  his  mind  with
^ther,  the  "Father-Mother"  of  antiquity.  As  Newton  intuitionally
says,  "  Nature  is  a  perpetual  circulatory  worker,  generating  fluids  out
of  solids,  fixed  things  out  of  volatile,  and  volatile  out  of  fixed,  subtile

out  of  gross,  and  gross  out  of  subtile Thus,  perhaps,   may

all  things  be  originated  from  Ether." :J:

The  reader  has  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  Stanzas  treat  only  of  the
cosmogon}^  of  our  own  planetary  .system  and  of  what  is  visible  around
it,  after  a  Solar  Pralaya.  The  secret  teachings  with  regard  to  the
evolution  of  the  Universal  Kosmos  cannot  be  given,  since  they  could
not  be  understood  by  even  the  highest  minds  in  this  age,  and  there
seem  to  be  very  few  Initiates,  even  among  the  greatest,  who  are  allowed
to  speculate  upon  this  subject.  Moreover  the  Teachers  say  openly  that
not  even  the  highest  Dhyani-Chohans  have  ever  penetrated  the
mysteries  beyond  those  boundaries  that  separate  the  milliards  of  solar
systems  from  the  Central  Sun,  as  it  is  called.  Therefore,  that  which  is
given   relates  only  to  our  visible  Cosmos,  after  a  Night  of  Brahma.


*  In  the  evolutionary  cycles  of  ideas,  it  is  curious  to  notice  how  ancient  thought  seems  to  be
reflected  in  modem  speculation.  Had  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  read  and  studied  ancient  Hindu
philosophers  when  he  wrote  a  certain  passage  in  his  First  Principles  (p.  482)  ?  Or  is  it  an  independent
flash  of  inner  perception  that  made  him  say  half  correctly,  half  incorrectly,  "  motion  as  well  as  matter,
being  fixed  in  quantity  [?],  it  would  seem  that  the  change  in  the  distribution  of  matter  which  motion
effects,  coming  to  a  limit  in  whicliever  direction  it  is  carried  [?],  the  indestructible  motion  thereupon
necessitates  a  reverse  distribution.  Apparently,  the  universally  coexistent  forces  of  attraction  and
repulsion  which,  as  we  have  seen,  necessitate  rhythm  in  all  minor  changes  throughout  the  Universe,
also  necessitate  rhj-thm  in  the  totality  of  its  changes— produce  now  an  immeasurable  period  during
which  the  attracting  forces  predominating,  cause  universal  concentration,  and  then  an  immeasurable
period,  during  which  the  repulsive  forces  predominating,  cause  universal  difiusion — alternate  eras
of  evolution  and  dissolution."

+  Whatever  the  views  of  Physical  Science  upon  the  subject,  Occult  Science  has  been  teaching  for
ages  that  Akasha  (of  which  Ether  is  the  grossest  form),  the  Fifth  universal  cosmic  Principle — to  which
corresponds  and  from  which  proceeds  human  Manas — is,  cosmically,  a  radiant,  cool,  diathermanous
plastic  matter,  creative  in  its  physical  nature,  correlative  in  its  grossest  aspects  and  portions,
immutable  in  its  higher  principles.  In  the  creative  condition  it  is  called  the  Sub-Root;  and  in
conjunction  with  radiant  heat,  it  recalls  "  dead  worlds  to  life."  In  its  higher  aspect  it  is  the  Soul  of
the  World  ;  in  its  lower— the  Destroyer.

%  Hypoih.,  1675.


42  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Before  the  reader  proceeds  to  the  consideration  of  the  Stanzas  from  the
Book  of  Dzyan  which  form  the  basis  of  the  present  work,  it  is  absokitely
necessary  that  he  should  be  made  acquainted  with  the  few  fundamental
conceptions  which  underlie  and  pervade  the  entire  system  of  thought
to  which  his  attention  is  invited.  These  basic  ideas  are  few  in  number,
but  on  their  clear  apprehension  depends  the  understanding  of  all  that
follows ;  therefore  no  apology  is  required  for  asking  the  reader  to  make
himself  familiar  with  these  first,  before  entering  on  the  perusal  of  the
work  itself.

The  Secret  Doctrine  then,  establishes  three  fundamental  propositions:

I.  An  Omnipresent,  Eternal,  Boundless  and  Immutable  Principle,
on  which  all  speculation  is  impossible,  since  it  transcends  the  power
of  human  conception  and  can  only  be  dwarfed  by  any  human  expres-
sion or  similitude.  It  is  beyond  the  range  and  reach  of  thought — in
the  words  of  the  Mandukya,  "unthinkable  and  unspeakable."

To  render  these  ideas  clearer  to  the  general  reader,  let  him  set  out
with  the  postulate  that  there  is  One  Absolute  Reality  which  antecedes
all  manifested,  conditioned  Being.  This  Infinite  and  Eternal  Cause —
dimly  formulated  in  the  "Unconscious"  and  "Unknowable"  of  current
European  philosophy — is  the  Rootless  Root  of  "all  that  was,  is,  or  ever
shall  be."  It  is  of  course  devoid  of  all  attributes  and  is  essentially
without  any  relation  to  manifested,  finite  Being.  It  is  "Be-ness"
rather  than  Being,  Sat  in  Sanskrit,  and  is  beyond  all  thought  or
speculation.

This  Be-ness  is  symbolized  in  the  Secret  Doctrine  under  two  aspects.
On  the  one  hand,  absolute  Abstract  Space,  representing  bare  sub-
jectivity, the  one  thing  which  no  human  mind  can  either  exclude  from
any  conception,  or  conceive  of  by  itself.  On  the  other,  absolute
Abstract  Motion  representing  Unconditioned  Consciousness.  Even
our  Western  thinkers  have  shown  that  consciousness  is  inconceivable
to  us  apart  from  change,  and  motion  best  symbolizes  change,  its
essential  characteristic.  This  latter  aspect  of  the  One  Reality,  is
also  symbolized  by  the  term  the  Great  Breath,  a  symbol  sufficiently
graphic  to  need  no  further  elucidation.  Thus,  then,  the  first  funda-
mental axiom  of  the  Secret  Doctrine  is  this  metaphysical  One  Abso-
lute Be-ness — symbolized  by  finite  intelligence  as  the  theological
Trinity.

It  may,  however,  assist  the  student  if  a  few  further  explanations  are
here  given.


PROEM.  43

Herbert  Spencer  has  of  late  so  far  modified  his  Agnosticism,  as  to
assert  that  the  nature  of  the  "  First  Cause,"*  which  the  Occultist  more
logically  derives  from  the  Causeless  Cause,  the  "Eternal,"  and  the
"  Unknowable,"  may  be  essentially  the  same  as  that  of  the  conscious-
ness which  wells  up  within  us :  in  short,  that  the  impersonal  Reality
per\'^ading  the  Kosmos  is  the  pure  noumenon  of  thought.  This  advance
on  his  part  brings  him  very  near  to  the  Esoteric  and  Vedantin  tenet. f

Parabrahman,  the  One  Reality,  the  Absolute,  is  the  field  of  Absolute
Consciousness,  i.e.,  that  Essence  which  is  out  of  all  relation  to  con-
ditioned existence,  and  of  which  conscious  existence  is  a  conditioned
symbol.  But  once  that  we  pass  in  thought  from  this  (to  us)  Absolute
Negation,  duality  superv^enes  in  the  contrast  of  Spirit  (or  Conscious-
ness) and  Matter,  Subject  and  Object.

Spirit  (or  Consciousness)  and  Matter  are,  however,  to  be  regarded,
not  as  independent  realities,  but  as  the  two  symbols  or  aspects  of  the
Absolute,  Parabrahman,  which  constitute  the  basis  of  conditioned
Being  whether  subjective  or  objective.

Considering  this  metaphj^sical  triad  as  the  Root  from  which  pro-
ceeds all  manifestation,  the  Great  Breath  assumes  the  character  of
Pre-cosmic  Ideation.  It  is  the  fo7is  et  origo  of  Force  and  of  all  indi-
vidual Consciousness,  and  supplies  the  guiding  intelligence  in  the  vast
scheme  of  cosmic  Evolution.  On  the  other  hand,  Pre-cosmic  Root-
Substance  (Mulaprakriti)  is  that  aspect  of  the  Absolute  which  under-
lies all  the  objective  planes  of  Nature.

Just  as  Pre-cosmic  Ideation  is  the  root  of  all  individual  Consciousness,
so  Pre-cosmic  Substance  is  the  substratum  of  Matter  in  the  various
grades  of  its  differentiation.

Hence  it  will  be  apparent  that  the  contrast  of  these  two  aspects  of
the  Absolute  is  essential  to  the  existence  of  the  Manifested  Universe.
Apart  from  Cosmic  Substance,  Cosmic  Ideation  could  not  manifest  as
individual  Consciousness,  since  it  is  only  through  a  vehicle  (upddhi)  of
matter  that  consciousness  wells  up  as  "I  am  I,"  a  physical  basis  being
necessary  to  focus  a  Ray  of  the  Universal  Mind  at  a  certain  stage  of
complexity.      Again,   apart  from   Cosmic  Ideation,   Cosmic  Substance

•The  "First"  presupposes  necessarily  something  which  is  the  "first  brought  forth,"  "the  first  in
time,  space,  and  rank" — and  therefore  finite  and  conditioned.  The  " first"  cannot  be  Absolute
for  it  is  a  manifestation.  Therefore,  Eastern  Occultism  calls  the  Abstract  All  the  One  Causeless
Cause,  the  Rootless  Root,  and  limits  the  "  First  Cause"  to  the  Logos,  in  the  sense  that  Plato  gives  to
this  term.

tSee  T.  Subba  Row's  four  able  lectures  on  the  Bhagavad  Gtta,  in  The  Theosophisl,  Feb.  1887.


44  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

would  remain  an  empty  abstraction,  and  no  emergence  of  Conscious-
ness could  ensue.

The  Manifested  Universe,  therefore,  is  pervaded  by  duality,  which
is,  as  it  were,  the  very  essence  of  its  ^;i:-istence  as  Manifestation.  But
just  as  the  opposite  poles  of  Subject  and  Object,  Spirit  and  Matter,
are  but  aspects  of  the  One  Unity  in  which  they  are  synthesized,  so,  in
the  Manifested  Universe,  there  is  "that"  which  links  Spirit  to  Matter,
Subject  to  Object.

This  something,  at  present  unknown  to  Western  speculation,  is  called
by  Occultists  Fohat.  It  is  the  "bridge"  by  which  the  Ideas  existing  in
the  Divine  Thought  are  impressed  on  Cosmic  Substance  as  the  Laws  of
Nature.  Fohat  is  thus  the  dynamic  energy  of  Cosmic  Ideation  ;  or,
regarded  from  the  other  side,  it  is  the  intelligent  medium,  the  guiding
power  of  all  manifestation,  the  Thought  Divine  transmitted  and  made
manifest  through  the  Dhyan  Chohans,*  the  Architects  of  the  visible
World.  Thus  from  Spirit,  or  Cosmic  Ideation,  comes  our  Conscious-
ness, from  Cosmic  Substance  the  several  Vehicles  in  which  that
Consciousness  is  individualized  and  attains  to  self — or  reflective —
consciousness;  while  Fohat,  in  its  various  manifestations,  is  the
mysterious  link  between  Mind  and  Matter,  the  animating  principle
electrifying  every  atom  into  life.

The  following  summary  will  afford  a  clearer  idea  to  the  reader.

(i.)  Absoluteness:  the  Parabrahman  of  the  Vedantins  or  the  One
Reality,  Sat,  which  is,  as  Hegel  says,  both  Absolute  Being  and  Non-
Being.

(2.)  The  Firs i  Logos:  the  impersonal,  and,  in  philosophy,  Unmani-
fested  Logos,  the  precursor  of  the  Manifested.  This  is  the  "  First
Cause,"  the  "Unconscious"  of  European  Pantheists.

(3.)  The  Second  Logos:  Spirit-Matter,  Life;  the  "Spirit  of  the
Universe,"  Purusha  and  Prakriti.

(4.)  The  Third  Logos:  Cosmic  Ideation,  Mahat  or  Intelligence,  the
Universal  World-Soul ;  the  Cosmic  Noumenon  of  Matter,  the  basis  of
the  intelligent  operations  in  and  of  Nature,  also  called  Maha-Buddhi.

The  One  Reality  ;  its  dual  aspects  in  the  conditioned  Universe.

Further,  the  Secret  Doctrine  affirms:

II.  The  Eternity  of  the  Universe  in  toto  as  a  boundless  plane;
periodically  "the  playground  of  numberless  Universes  incessantly
manifesting  and  disappearing,"   called  the  "Manifesting  Stars,"    and

•  Called  by  Christian  theolog-y,  Archangels,  Seraphs,  etc.,  etc.


PROEM.  45

the  "Sparks  of  Eternity."  "  The  Eternity  of  the  Pilgrim*  is  like  a  wink
of  the  Eye  of  Self- Existence"  as  the  Book  of  Dyzan  puts  it.  ''The  ap-
pearance and  disappearance  of  Worlds  is  like  a  regular  tidal  ebb  of  flux  and
reflux."

This  second  assertion  of  the  Secret  Doctrine  is  the  absolute  univer-
sality of  that  law  of  periodicity,  of  flux  and  reflux,  ebb  and  flow,
which  physical  science  has  observed  and  recorded  in  all  departments
of  nature.  An  alternation  such  as  that  of  Day  and  Night,  Ivife  and
Death,  Sleeping  and  Waking,  is  a  fact  so  common,  so  perfectly
universal  and  without  exception,  that  it  is  easy  to  comprehend  that
in  it  we  see  one  of  the  absolutely  fundamental  Laws  of  the  Universe.

Moreover,  the  Secret  Docrine  teaches  :

III.  The  fundamental  identity  of  all  Souls  with  the  Universal  Over-
Soul,  the  latter  being  itself  an  aspect  of  the  Unknown  Root;  and  the
obligatory  pilgrimage  for  every  Soul — a  spark  of  the  former — through
the  Cycle  of  Incarnation,  or  Necessity,  in  accordance  with  Cyclic  and
Karmic  Law,  during  the  whole  term.  In  other  words,  no  purely
spiritual  Buddhi  (Divine  Soul)  can  have  an  independent  conscious
existence  before  the  spark  which  issued  from  the  pure  Essence  of  the
Universal  Sixth  Principle — or  the  OvER-SouL — has  {a)  passed  through
ever>^  elemental  form  of  the  phenomenal  world  of  that  Manvantara,
and  ib)  acquired  individuality,  first  by  natural  impulse,  and  then  by
self-induced  and  self-devised  efforts,  checked  by  its  Karma,  thus
ascending  through  all  the  degrees  of  intelligence,  from  the  lowest  to
the  highest  Manas,  from  mineral  and  plant,  up  to  the  holiest  Arch-
angel (Dhyani-Buddha).  The  pivotal  doctrine  of  the  Esoteric  Philo-
sophy admits  no  privileges  or  special  gifts  in  man,  save  those  won  by
his  own  Ego  through  personal  effort  and  merit  throughout  a  long  series
of  metempsychoses  and  reincarnations.  This  is  why  the  Hindiis  say
that  the  Universe  is  Brahman  and  Brahma,  for  Brahman  is  in  every
atom  of  the  universe,  the  six  Principles  in  Nature  being  all  the  outcome
— the  variously  differentiated  aspects — of  the  Seventh  and  One,  the  only
Reality  in  the  Universe  whether  cosmic  or  micro-cosmic ;  and  also  why
the  permutations,  psychic,  spiritual  and  physical,  on  the  plane  of  mani-

•  "  Pilgrim  "  is  the  appellation  given  to  our  Monad  (the  Two  in  one)  during  its  cycle  of  incarna-
tions. It  is  the  only  immortal  and  eternal  Principle  in  us,  being  an  indivisible  part  of  the  integral
whole — the  Universal  Spirit,  from  which  it  emanates,  and  into  which  it  is  absorbed  at  the  end  of  the
cycle.  When  it  is  said  to  emanate  from  the  One  Spirit,  an  awkward  and  incorrect  expression  has  to
be  used  for  lack  of  appropriate  words  in  English.  The  Vedantins  call  it  Sutnitma  (Thread-Soul),  but
their  explanation  differs  somewhat  from  that  of  the  Occultists;  to  explain  which  difference,  however,
is  left  to  the  Vedantins  themselves.


46  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

festation  and  form,  of  the  Sixth  (Brahma  the  vehicle  of  Brahman)  are
viewed  by  metaphysical  antiphrasis  as  illusive  and  mayavic.  For
although  the  root  of  every  atom  individually  and  of  every  form  col-
lectively, is  that  Seventh  Principle  or  the  One  Reality,  still,  in  its
manifested  phenomenal  and  temporary  appearance,  it  is  no  better
than  an  evanescent  illusion  of  our  senses.

In  its  absoluteness,  the  One  Principle  under  its  two  aspects.  Para-
brahman  and  Mulaprakriti,  is  sexless,  unconditioned  and  eternal.  Its
periodical  manvantaric  emanation,  or  primal  radiation,  is  also  One,
androgynous  and  phenomenally  finite.  When  the  radiation  radiates
in  its  turn,  all  its  radiations  are  also  androgynous,  to  become  male
and  female  principles  in  their  lower  aspects.  After  Pralaya,  whether
the  Great  or  Minor  Pralaya — the  latter  leaving  the  worlds  in  statu  quo  *
— the  first  that  reawakes  to  active  life  is  the  plastic  Akasha,  Father-
Mother,  the  Spirit  and  Soul  of  Ether,  or  the  Plane  of  the  Circle.
Space  is  called  the  Mother  before  its  cosmic  activity,  and  Father-
Mother  at  the  first  stage  of  reawakening.  In  the  Kabalah  it  is  also
Father-Mother-Son.  But  whereas  in  the  Eastern  Doctrine,  these  are
the  Seventh  Principle  of  the  Manifested  Universe,  or  its  Atma-Buddhi-
Manas  (Spirit-Soul-Intelligence),  the  Triad  branching  off  and  divid-
ing into  seven  cosmical  and  seven  human  Principles,  in  the  Western
Kabalah  of  the  Christian  Mystics  it  is  the  Triad  or  Trinity,  and  with
their  Occultists,  the  male-female  Jehovah,  Jah-Havah.  In  this  lies  the
whole  difference  between  the  Esoteric  and  the  Christian  Trinities.  The
Mystics  and  the  Philosophers,  the  Eastern  and  Western  Pantheists,
synthesize  their  pregenetic  Triad  in  the  pure  divine  abstraction.  The
orthodox,  anthropomorphize  it.  Hiranyagarbha,  Hari,  and  Shankara
— the  three  Hypostases  of  the  manifesting  "Spirit  of  the  Supreme
Spirit,"  by  which  title  Prithivi,  the  Earth,  greets  Vishnu  in  his  first
Avatara — are  the  purely  metaphysical  abstract  qualities  of  Formation,
Preservation,  and  Destruction,  and  are  the  three  divine  Avasthas
(Hypostases)  of  that  which  "does  not  perish  with  created  things,"
Achyuta,  a  name  of  Vishnu ;  whereas  the  orthodox  Christian  separates
his  Personal  Creative  Deity  into  the  three  Personages  of  the  Trinity,
and  admits  of  no  higher  Deity.  The  latter,  in  Occultism,  is  the
abstract  Triangle ;  with  the  orthodox,  the  perfect  Cube.     The  creative

*  It  is  not  the  physical  organisms  that  remain  in  statu  quo,  least  of  all  their  psychic  principles,
during  the  great  Cosmic  or  even  Solar  Pralayas,  but  only  their  akashic  or  astral  "  photographs."  But
during  the  Minor  Pralayas,  once  overtaken  by  the  "Night,"  the  planets  remain  intact,  though  dead,
just  as  a  huge  animal,  caught  and  embedded  in  the  polar  ice,  remains  the  same  for  ages.


PROEM.  47

god  or  the  aggregate  gods  are  regarded  by  the  Eastern  philosopher  as
Bhrantidarshanatah,  "false  appearances,"  something  "  conceived  of,  by-
reason  of  erroneous  appearances,  as  a  material  form,"  and  explained  as
arising  from  the  illusive  conception  of  the  egotistic  personal  and  human
Soul  (lower  Fifth  Principle).  It  is  beautifully  expressed  in  a  revised
translation  in  Fitzedward  Hall's  notes  to  Wilson's  translation  of  the
Vishnu  Purana.  "That  Brahma  in  its  totality,  has  essentially  the
aspect  of  Prakriti,  both  evolved  and  unevolved  [Miilaprakriti],  and
also  the  aspect  of  Spirit  and  the  aspect  of  Time.  Spirit,  O  twice  born,
is  the  leading  aspect  of  the  Supreme  Brahma.*  The  next  is  a  two-
fold aspect, — Prakriti,  both  evolved  and  unevolved,  and  Time  is  the
last."  Cronus  is  shown  in  the  Orphic  Theogony  also  as  being  a
generated  god  or  agent.

At  this  stage  of  the  reawakening  of  the  Universe,  the  sacred  sym-
bolism represents  it  as  a  perfect  Circle  with  the  Point  (Root)  in  the
•centre.  This  sign  was  universal,  therefore  we  find  it  in  the  Kabalah
also.  The  Western  Kabalah,  however,  now  in  the  hands  of  Christian
Mystics,  ignores  it  altogether,  though  it  is  plainly  shown  in  the  Zohar.
These  sectarians  begin  at  the  end,  and  give,  as  the  symbol  of  pregen-
etic  Kosmos,  ^,  calling  it  the  "Union  of  the  Rose  and  Cross,"  the
great  mystery  of  occult  generation,  from  whence  the  name — Rosicrucian
(Rose  Cross)!  This  may  be  seen  from  one  of  the  most  important  and
best  known  of  their  symbols,  one  which  has  never  been  hitherto  under-
stood even  by  modern  Mystics.  It  is  that  of  the  Pelican  tearing  open
its  breast  to  feed  its  seven  little  ones — the  real  creed  of  the  Brothers
of  the  Rosie-Cross  and  a  direct  outcome  from  the  Kastern  Secret
Doctrine.

Brahman  (neuter)  is  called  KSlahamsa,  meaning,  as  explained  by
Western  Orientalists,  the  Eternal  Swan  (or  goose),  and  so  is  Brahma,
the  Creator.  A  great  mistake  is  thus  brought  under  notice;  it  is
Brahman  (neuter)  which  ought  to  be  referred  to  as  Hamsa-vahana
(that  which  uses  the  Swan  as  its  Vehicle),  and  not  Brahma,  the  Creator,
who  is  the  real  Kalahamsa;  while  Brahman  (neuter)  is  Hamsa,  and
A-hamsa,  as  will  be  explained  in  the  Commentaries.     Let  it  be  under-


*  Thus  Spencer,  who,  nevertheless,  like  Schopenhauer  and  von  Hartmann.  only  reflects  an  aspect  oi
the  old  esoteric  philosophers,  and  hence  lands  his  readers  on  the  bleak  shore  of  Agnostic  despair —
reverently  formulates  the  prand  mystery;  "that  which  persists  unchang^ing  in  quantity,  but  ever
changing  in  form,  under  these  sensible  appearances  which  the  Universe  presents  to  us,  is  an  un-
known and  unknowable  power,  which  we  are  obliged  to  recognize  as  without  limit  in  Space  ana
without  beginning  or  end  in  Time."  It  is  only  daring  Theology — never  Science  or  Philoaophy—
which  seeks  to  gauge  the  Infinite  and  unveil  the  Fathomless  and  Unknowable.


48  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

stood  that  the  terms  Brahma  and  Parabrahman  are  not  used  here
because  they  belong  to  our  Esoteric  nomenclature,  but  simply  because
they  are  more  familiar  to  the  students  in  the  West.  Both  are  the
perfect  equivalents  of  our  one,  three,  and  seven  vowelled  terms,  which
stand  for  the  One  All,  and  the  One  "  All  in  All."

Such  are  the  basic  conceptions  on  which  the  Secret  Doctrine  rests.

It  would  not  be  in  place  here  to  enter  upon  any  defence  or  proof  of
their  inherent  reasonableness;  nor  can  I  pause  to  show  how  they  are,
in  fact,  contained — though  too  often  under  a  misleading  guise — in  every
system  of  thought  or  philosophy  worthy  of  the  name.

Once  that  the  reader  has  gained  a  clear  comprehension  of  them  and
realized  the  light  which  they  throw  on  every  problem  of  life,  they  will
need  no  further  justification  in  his  eyes,  because  their  truth  will  be  to
him  as  evident  as  the  sun  in  heaven.  I  pass  on,  therefore,  to  the
subject  matter  of  the  Stanzas  as  given  in  this  volume,  adding  a
skeleton  outline  of  them,  in  the  hope  of  thereby  rendering  the  task  of
the  student  more  easy,  by  placing  before  him  in  a  few  words  the  general
conception  therein  explained.

The  history  of  Cosmic  Evolution,  as  traced  in  the  Stanzas,  is,  so
to  say,  the  abstract  algebraical  formula  oi  that  evolution.  Hence  the
student  must  not  expect  to  find  there  an  account  of  all  the  stages  and
transformations  which  intervene  between  the  first  beginnings  of  Uni-
versal Evolution  and  our  present  state.  To  give  such  an  account
would  be  as  impossible  as  it  would  be  incomprehensible  to  men  who
cannot  grasp  the  nature  of  even  the  plane  cf  existence  next  to  that  to
which,  for  the  moment,  their  consciousness  is  limited.

The  Stanzas,  therefore,  give  an  abstract  formula  which  can  be
applied,  mutatis  mutandis,  to  all  evolution  :  to  that  of  our  tiny  Earth,  to
that  of  the  Chain  of  Planets  of  which  that  Earth  forms  one,  to  the  Solar
Universe  to  which  that  Chain  belongs  and  so  on,  in  an  ascending  scale,
till  the  mind  reels  and  is  exhausted  in  the  effort.

The  seven  Stanzas  given  in  this  volume  represent  the  seven  terms  of
this  abstract  formula.  They  refer  to,  and  describe,  the  seven  great
stages  of  the  evolutionary  process,  which  are  spoken  of  in  the  Purdiias
as  the  "Seven  Creations,"  and  in  the  Bible  as  the  "Days"  of  Creation.

Stanza  I  describes  the  state  of  the  One  All  during  Pralaya,  before
the  first  flutter  of  reawakening  Manifestation.

A  moment's  thought  shows  that  such  a  state  can  only  be  symbolized;
to  describe  it  is  impossible.     Nor  can  it  be  symbolized  except  in  nega-


PROEM.  49

tives ;  for,  since  it  is  the  state  of  Absoluteness  per  se,  it  can  possess  none
of  those  specific  attributes  which  serve  us  to  describe  objects  in  positive
terms.  Hence  that  state  can  only  be  suggested  by  the  negatives  of  all
those  most  abstract  attributes  which  men  feel  rather  than  conceive,  as
the  remotest  limits  attainable  by  their  power  of  conception.

Stanza  II  describes  a  stage  which,  to  a  Western  mind,  is  so  nearly
identical  with  that  mentioned  in  Stanza  I,  that  to  express  the  idea  of
its  difference  would  require  a  treatise  in  itself.  Hence  it  must  be  left
to  the  intuition  and  the  higher  faculties  of  the  reader  to  grasp,  as  far  as
he  can,  the  meaning  of  the  allegorical  phrases  used.  Indeed  it  must  be
remembered  that  all  these  Stanzas  appeal  to  the  inner  faculties  rather
than  to  the  ordinary  comprehension  of  the  physical  brain.

Staiiza  III  describes  the  Reawakening  of  the  Universe  to  life  after
Pralaya.  It  depicts  the  emergence  of  the  Monads  from  their  state  of
absorption  within  the  One,  the  earliest  and  highest  stage  in  the  forma-
tion of  Worlds — the  term  Monad  being  one  which  may  apply  equally  to
the  vastest  Solar  System  or  the  tiniest  atom.

Stanza  /F  shows  the  differentiation  of  the  "Germ"  of  the  Universe
into  the  Septenary  Hierarchy  of  conscious  Divine  Powers,  which  are
the  active  manifestations  of  the  One  Supreme  Energy.  They  are  the
framers,  shapers,  and  ultimately  the  creators  of  all  the  manifested
Universe,  in  the  only  sense  in  which  the  name  "creator"  is  intelligible;
they  inform  and  guide  it;  they  are  the  intelligent  Beings  who  adjust
and  control  evolution,  embodying  in  themselves  those  manifestations  of
the  One  Law,  which  we  know  as  the  "Laws  of  Nature."

Generically,  they  are  known  as  the  Dhyan  Chohans,  though  each  of
the  various  groups  has  its  own  designation  in  the  Secret  Doctrine.

This  stage  of  evolution  is  spoken  of  in  Hindu  mythology  as  the
"Creation  of  the  Gods."

Stanza  V  describes  the  process  of  world-formation.  First,  diffused
Cosmic  Matter,  then  the  "Fiery  Whirlwind,"  the  first  stage  in  the  for-
mation of  a  nebula.  This  nebula  condenses,  and  after  passing  through
various  transformations,  forms  a  Solar  Universe,  a  Planetary  Chain,  or
a  single  Planet,  as  the  case  may  be.

Stanza  VI  indicates  the  subsequent  stages  in  the  formation  of  a
"World"  and  brings  the  evolution  of  such  a  World  down  to  its  fourth
great  period,  corresponding  to  the  period  in  which  we  are  now  living.

Sta7iza  F// continues  the  history,  tracing  the  descent  of  life  down  to  the
appearance  of  Man ;  and  thus  closes  the  First  Book  of  the  Secret  Doctrine.


ijO  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

The  development  of  "Mau"  from  his  first  appearance  on  this  earth
in  this  Round  to  the  state  in  which  we  now  find  him  will  form  the
subject  of  Book  II.

The  Stanzas  which  form  the  thesis  of  every  section  are  given
throughout  in  their  modern  translated  version,  as  it  would  be  worse
than  useless  to  make  the  subject  still  more  difficult  by  introducing  the
archaic  phraseology  of  the  original,  with  its  puzzling  style  and  words.
Extracts  are  given  from  the  Chinese,  Tibetan  and  Sanskrit  translations
of  the  original  Senzar  Commentaries  and  Glosses  on  the  Book  of  Dzyan
— now  rendered  for  the  first  time  into  a  European  language.  It  is
almost  unnecessary  to  state  that  only  portions  of  the  seven  Stanzas  are
here  given.  Were  they  published  complete  they  would  remain  incom-
prehensible to  all  save  a  few  high  Occultists.  Nor  is  there  any  need
to  assure  the  reader  that  no  more  than  most  of  the  profane,  does  the
writer,  or  rather  the  humble  recorder,  understand  those  forbidden
passages.  To  facilitate  the  reading,  and  to  avoid  the  too  frequent
reference  to  foot-notes,  it  was  thought  best  to  blend  together  texts  and
glosses,  using  the  Sanskrit  and  Tibetan  proper  names  whenever  these
could  not  be  avoided,  in  preference  to  giving  the  originals :  the  more  so
as  the  said  terms  are  all  accepted  synonyms,  the  latter  only  being
used  between  a  Master  and  his  Chelas  (or  Disciples),

Thus,  were  one  to  translate  into  English,  using  only  the  substantives
and  technical  terms  as  employed  in  one  of  the  Tibetan  and  Senzar  ver-
sions, shloka  I  would  read  as  follows:

Tho-ag  171  Zhi-gyu  slept  seven  Khorlo.  Zodmanas  zhiba.  All  Nyug
bosom.  Konch-hog  not;  Thyan-Kam  not;  Lha-Chohan  not;  Tenbrel
Chugnyi  not;  Dharviakaya  ceased;  Tgenchang  not  become ;  Barnang  and
Ssa  in  Ngovonyidj ;  alone  Tho-og  Yinsin  iJi  night  of  Sun- chan  and  Yong-
Grub  \^Paranishpan7ia\  etc.,  etc.

This  would  sound  like  pure  Abracadabra.

As  this  work  is  written  for  the  instruction  of  students  of  Occultism,
and  not  for  the  benefit  of  Philologists,  we  may  well  avoid  such  foreign
terms  wherever  it  is  possible  to  do  so.  The  untranslateable  terms
alone,  incomprehensible  unless  their  meanings  are  explained,  are  left,
but  all  such  terms  are  rendered  in  their  Sanskrit  form.  Needless  to
remind  the  reader  that  these  are,  in  almost  every  case,  the  late  develop-
ments of  the  latter  language,  and  pertain  to  the  Fifth  Root-Race.  San-
skrit, as  now  known,  was  not  spoken  hy  the  Atlanteans,  and  most  of
the  philosophical  terms  used  in  the  systems  of  the  India  of  the  Post-


PROEM.  51

Mahabharatan  period  are  not  found  in  the  Vedas,  nor  are  they  to  be
met  with  in  the  original  Stanzas,  but  only  their  equivalents.  The
reader  who  is  not  a  Theosophist,  is  once  more  invited  to  regard  all  that
follows  as  a  fairy  tale,  if  he  likes;  at  best  as  one  of  the  yet  unproven
speculations  of  dreamers;  and,  at  the  worst,  as  an  additional  hy-
pothesis to  the  many  scientific  hypotheses  past,  present  and  future,
some  exploded,  others  still  lingering.  It  is  not  in  any  sense  less
scientific  than  are  many  of  the  so-called  scientific  theories;  and  it  is
in  every  case  more  philosophical  and  probable.

In  view  of  the  abundant  comments  and  explanations  required,  the
references  to  the  footnotes  are  marked  in  the  usual  way,  while  the  sen-
tences to  be  com.mented  upon  are  marked  with  letters.  Additional
matter  will  be  found  in  the  Chapters  on  Symbolism,  which  are  often
more  full  of  information  than  the  Commentaries.


PART  I.


COSMIC   EVOLUTION.


SEVEN    STANZAS    FROM    THE    "BOOK    OF    DZYAN,"

WITH    COMMENTARIES.


Nor  Aught  nor  Nought  existed;  yon  bright  sky

TVas  not,  nor  heaven's  broad  roof  outstretched  above.

What  covered  all?     What  sheltered?     What  concealed?

Was  it  the  water's  fathomless  abyss?

There  was  no  death — yet  there  was  nought  immortal,

There  was  no  confine  betwixt  day  and  night;

The  only  One  breathed  breathless  by  Itself,

Other  than  It  there  nothing  since  has  been.

Darkness  there  was,  and  all  at  first  was  veiled

In  gloom  profound  — an  ocean  without  light.

The  germ  that  still  lay  covered  in  the  husk

Burst  forth,  one  nature,  from  the  fervent  heat.

Who  knows  the  secret?     Who  proclaimed  it  here?
Whence,  whence  this  manifold  creation  sprang?
The  Gods  themselves  came  later  into  being  —
Who  knows  from  whence  this  great  creation  sprang?
That,  whence  all  this  great  creation  came,
WTiether  Its  will  created  or  was  mute,
The  Most  High  Seer  that  is  in  highest  heaven.
He  knows  it — or  perchance  even  he  knows  not.

Gazing  into  eternity
Ere  the  foundations  of  the  earth  were  laid.


Thou  wert.     And  when  the  subterranean  flame
Shall  burst  its  prison  and  devour  the  frame.
Thou  shalt  be  still  as  thou  wert  before
And  know  no  change,  when  time  shall  be  no  more.
O,  endless  thought,  divine  Eternity.

Rig  Veda  (Colebrooke).


Cosmic  Evolution.


FROM


THE   STANZAS   OF   DZYAN.


Stanza  I.  .

1.  The  Eternal  Parent,  wrapped  in  her  Ever-Invisible  Robes,
had  slumbered  once  again  for  Seven  Eternities.

2.  Time  was  not,  for  it  lay  asleep  in  the  hifinite  Bosom  of
Duration.

3.  Universal  Mind  was  not,  for  there  were  no  Ah-hi  to
contain  it.

4.  The  Seven  Wa3's  to  Bliss  were  not.  The  Great  Causes
of  Misery  were  not,  for  there  was  no  one  to  produce  and  get
ensnared  by  them.

?.  Darkness  alone  filled  the  Boundless  All,  for  Father,
Mother  and  Son  were  once  more  one,  and  the  Son  had  not  yet
awakened  for  the  new  Wheel  and  his  Pilgrimage  thereon.


56  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

6.  The  Seven  Sublime  Lords  and  the  Seven  Truths  had
ceased  to  be,  and  the  Universe,  the  Son  of  Necessity,  was
immersed  in  Paranishpanna,  to  be  outbreathed  by  that  which
is,  and  yet  is  not.    Naught  was.

7.  The  Causes  of  Existence  had  been  done  away  with ;  the
Visible  that  was,  and  the  Invisible  that  is,  rested  in  Eternal
Non-Being — the  One  Being.

8.  Alone,  the  One  Form  of  Existence  stretched  boundless,
infinite,  causeless,  in  Dreamless  Sleep;  and  Life  pulsated  un-
conscious in  Universal  Space,  throughout  that  All-Presence,
which  is  sensed  by  the  Opened  Eye  of  Dangma.

9.  But  where  was  Dangma  when  the  Alaya  of  the  Universe
was  in  Paramartha,  and  the  Great  Wheel  was  AnupadaRa  i-


Stanza  IL

1.  .  .  .  Where  were  the  Builders,  the  Luminous  Sons  of
Manvantaric  Dawn  ?  ...  In  the  Unknown  Darkness  in  their
Ah-hi  Paranishpanna.  The  Producers  of  Form  from  No-
Form — the  Root  of  the  World — the  Devamatri  and  Svabhavat,
rested  in  the  Bliss  of  Non-Being.

2.  .  .  .  Where  was  Silence  ?  Where  the  ears  to  sense  it  ?
No,  there  was  neither  Silence  nor  Sound ;  naught  save  Cease-
less Eternal  Breath,  which  knows  itself  not.


THE   STANZAS  OF  DZYAN.  57

3.  The  Hour  had  not  yet  struck;  the  Ray  had  not  vet
flashed  into  the  Germ ;  the  Matripadma  had  not  yet  swollen.

4.  Her  Heart  had  not  yet  opened  for  the  One  Ray  to  enter,
thence  to  fall,  as  Three  into  Four,  into  the  Lap  of  Maya.

5.  The  Seven  were  not  yet  born  from  the  Web  of  Light.
Darkness  alone  was  Father-Mother,  Svabhavat ;  and  Svabhavat
was  in  Darkness.

6.  These  Two  are  the  Germ,  and  the  Germ  is  One.  The
Universe  was  still  concealed  in  the  Divine  Thougnt  iiiid  the
Divine  Bosom.


Stanza  III.

1.  .  .  .  The  last  Vibration  of  the  Seventh  Eternity  thrills
through  Infinitude.  The  Mother  swells,  expanding  from  within
without,  like  the  Bud  of  the  Lotus.

2.  The  Vibration  sweeps  along,  touching  with  its  swift
Wing  the  whole  Universe  and  the  Germ  that  dwelleth  in  Dark-
ness, the  Darkness  that  breathes  over  the  slumbering  Waters
of  Life.

^.  Darkness  radiates  Light,  and  Light  drops  one  solitary
Ray  into  the  Waters,  into  the  Mother-Deep.    The  Ray  shoots


58  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

through  the  Virgin  Egg,  the  Ray  causes  the  Eternal  Egg  to
thrill,  and  drop  the  non-eternal  Germ,  which  condenses  into  the
World-Egg.

4.  The  Three  fall  into  the  Four.  The  Radiant  Essence
becomes  Seven  inside,  Seven  outside.  The  Luminous  Egg,
which  in  itself  is  Three,  curdles  and  spreads  in  milk-white
Curds  throughout  the  Depths  of  Mother,  the  Root  that  grows
in  the  Depths  of  the  Ocean  of  Life.

5.  The  Root  remains,  the  Light  remains,  the  Curds  remain,
and  still  Oeaohoo  is  One.

6.  The  Root  of  Life  was  in  every  Drop  of  the  Ocean  of
Immortality,  and  the  Ocean  was  Radiant  Light,  which  was  Fire,
and  Heat,  and  Motion.  Darkness  vanished  and  was  no  more ;
it  disappeared  in  its  own  Essence,  the  Body  of  Fire  and  Water,
of  Father  and  Mother.

7.  Behold,  O  Lanoo,  the  Radiant  Child  of  the  Two,  the
unparalleled  refulgent  Glory — Bright  Space,  Son  of  Dark  Space,
who  emerges  from  the  Depths  of  the  great  Dark  Waters.  It  is
Oeaohoo,  the  Younger,  the  *  *  *.  He  shines  forth  as  the  Sun,
he  is  the  Blazing  Divine  Dragon  of  Wisdom;  the  Eka  is  Chatur,
and  Chatur  takes  to  itself  Tri,  and  the  Union  produces  the
Sapta,  in  whom  are  the  Seven,  which  become  the  Tridasha,  the
Hosts  and  the  Multitudes.     Behold  him  lifting  the  Veil,  and


THE   STANZAS   OF   DZYAN.  59

unfurling  it  from  East  to  West.  He  shuts  out  the  Above,  and
leaves  the  Below  to  be  seen  as  the  Great  Illusion.  He  marks
the  places  for  the  Shining  Ones,  and  turns  the  Upper  into  a
shoreless  Sea  of  Fire,  and  the  One  Manifested  into  the  Great
Waters.

8.  Where  v/as  the  Germ,  and  where  was  now  Darkness?
Where  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Flame  that  burns  in  thy  Lamp,  O
Lanoo?  The  Germ  is  That,  and  That  is  Light,  the  White
Brilliant  Son  of  the  Dark  Hidden  Father.

9.  Light  is  Cold  Flame,  and  Flame  is  Fire,  and  Fire  produces
Heat,  which  yields  Water — the  Water  of  Life  in  the  Great
Mother.

10.  Father-Mother  spin  a  Web,  whose  upper  end  is  fastened
to  Spirit,  the  Light  of  the  One  Darkness,  and  the  lower  one  to
its  shadowy  end,  Matter ;  and  this  Web  is  the  Universe,  spun
out  of  the  Two  Substances  made  in  One,  which  is  Svabhavat.

11.  It  expands  when  the  Breath  of  Fire  is  upon  it;  it  con-
tracts when  The  Breath  of  the  Mother  touches  it.  Then  the
Sons  dissociate  and  scatter,  to  return  into  their  Mother's  Bosom,
at  the  end  of  the  Great  Day,  and  re-become  one  with  her.
When  it  is  cooling,  it  becomes  radiant.  Its  Sons  expand  and
contract  through  their  ov/n  Selves  and  Hearts;  they  embrace
Infinitude.


6o  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

12.  Then  Svabhavat  sends  Fohat  to  harden  the  Atoms.
Each  is  a  part  of  the  Web.  Reflecting  the  "Self-Existent
Lord,"  like  a  Mirror,  each  becomes  in  turn  a  World.


Stanza  IV.

1.  .  .  .  Listen,  ye  Sons  of  the  Earth,  to  your  Instructors —
the  Sons  of  the  Fire.  Learn,  there  is  neither  first  nor  last ;  for
all  is  One  Number,  issued  from  No-Number.

2.  Learn  what  we,  who  descend  from  the  Primordial  Seven,
we,  who  are  born  from  the  Primordial  Flame,  have  learnt  from
our  Fathers.  ...

3.  From  the  Effulgency  of  Light — the  Ray  of  the  Ever-
Darkness — sprang  in  Space  the  reawakened  Energies ;  the  One
from  the  Egg,  the  Six,  and  the  Five.  Then  the  Three,  the  One,
the  Four,  the  One,  the  Five — the  Twice  Seven,  the  Sum  Total.
And  these  are  the  Essences,  the  Flames,  the  Elements,  the
Builders,  the  Numbers,  the  Arupa,  the  Rupa,  and  the  Force  or
Divine  Man,  the  Sum  Total.  And  from  the  Divine  Man  eman-
ated the  Forms,  the  Sparks,  the  Sacred  Animals,  and  the
Messengers  of  the  Sacred  Fathers  within  the  Holy  Four.

4.  This  was  the  Army  of  the  Voice,  the  Divine  Mother  of
the  Seven.  The  Sparks  of  the  Seven  are  subject  to,  and  the
servants  of,  the  First,  the  Second,  the  Third,  the  Fourth,  the


THE  STANZAS  OF  DZYAN.  6l

Fifth,  the  Sixth,  and  the  Seventh  of  the  Seven.  These  are
called  Spheres,  Triangles,  Cubes,  Lines  and  Modellers ;  for  thus
stands  the  Eternal  Nidana— the  Oi-Ha-Hou.

5.  The  Oi-Ha-Hou,  which  is  Darkness,  the  Boundless,  or
the  No-Number,  Adi-Nidana  Svabhavat,  the  O '-

1.  The  Adi-Sanat,  the  Number,  for  he  is  One.

II.  The  Voice  of  the  Word,  Svabhavat,  the  Numbers,  for

he  is  One  and  Nine.

III.  The  "  Formless  Square."

And  these  Three,  enclosed  within  the  0»  ^ire  the  Sacred
Four ;  and  the  Ten  are  the  Ariapa  Universe.  Then  come  the
Sons,  the  Seven  Fighters,  the  One,  the  Eighth  left  out,  and  his
Breath  which  is  the  Light-Maker.

6.  .  .  .  Then  the  Second  Seven,  who  are  the  Lipika,  pro-
duced by  the  Three.  The  Rejected  Son  is  One.  The  "  Son-
Suns  "  are  countless.


Stakza  V.

1.  The  Primordial  Seven,  the  First  Seven  Breaths  of  the
Dragon  of  Wisdom,  produce  in  their  turn  from  their  Holy  Cir-
cumgyrating  Breaths  the  Fiery  Whirlwind.

2.  They  make  of  him  the  Messenger  of  their  Will.  The
Dzyu  becomes  Fohat :  the  swift  Son  of  the  Divine  Sons,  whose


62  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Sons  are  the  Lipika,  runs  circular  errands.  Fohat  is  the  Steed,
and  the  Thought  is  the  Rider.  He  passes  like  h'ghtning  through
the  fiery  clouds;  takes  Three,  and  Five,  and  Seven  Strides
through  the  Seven  Regions  above,  and  the  Seven  belov/.  He
lifts  his  Voice,  and  calls  the  innumerable  Sparks,  and  joins
them  together.

h  He  is  their  guiding  spirit  and  leader.  When  he  com-
mences work,  he  separates  the  Sparks  of  the  Lower  Kingdom,
that  float  and  thrill  with  joy  in  their  radiant  dwellings,  and
forms  therewith  the  Germs  of  Wheels.  He  places  them  in  the
Six  Directions  of  Space,  and  One  in  the  middle — the  Central
Wheel.

4.  Fohat  traces  spiral  lines  to  unite  the  Sixth  to  the
Seventh — the  Crown.  An  Army  of  the  Sons  of  Light  stands
at  each  angle;  the  Lipika,  in  the  Middle  Wheel.  They  say:
"This  is  good."  The  first  Divine  World  is  ready;  the  First,
the  Second.  Then  the  "  Divine  Arupa "  reflects  itself  in
Chhaya  Loka,  the  First  Garment  of  Anupadaka.

$.  Fohat  takes  five  strides,  and  builds  a  winged  wheel  at
each  corner  of  the  square  for  the  Four  Holy  Ones  .  .  .  and
their  Armies.

6.  The  Lipika  circumscribe  the  Triangle,  the  First  One,  the
Cube,  the  Second  One,  and  the  Pentacle  within  the  Egg.    It


THE   STANZAS   OF   DZYAN.  63

is  the  Ring  called  "Pass  Not"  for  those  who  descend  and
ascend;  who  during  il'.e  Kalpa  are  progressing  towards  the
Great  Day  "Be  With  Us."  .  .  .  Thus  were  formed  the
Arupa  and  the  Riipa:  from  One  Light,  Seven  Lights;  from
each  of  the  Seven,  seven  times  Seven  Lights.  The  Wheels
watch  the  Ring.  .  .  .


Stanza  VL

1.  By  the  power  of  the  Mother  of  Mercy  and  Knowledge,
Kwan-Yin— the  Triple  of  Kwan-Shai-Yin,  residing  in  Kwan-
Yin-Tien — Fohat,  the  Breath  of  their  Progeny,  the  Son  of  the
Sons,  having  called  forth,  from  the  lower  Abyss,  the  Illusive
Form  of  Sien-Tchan  and  the  Seven  Elements.

2.  The  Swift  and  the  Radiant  One  produces  the  seven
Laya  Centres,  against  which  none  will  prevail  to  the  Great
Day  "Be  With  Us";  and  seats  the  Universe  on  these  Eternal
Foundations,  surrounding  Sien-Tchan  with  the  Elementary
Germs.

^.  Of  the  Seven— first  One  manifested.  Six  concealed ;  Two
manifested,  Five  concealed ;  Three  manifested.  Four  concealed ;
Four  produced,  Three  hidden:  Four  and  One  Tsan  revealed,
Two  and  One-Half  concealed ;  Six  to  be  manifested.  One  laid


64  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

«

aside.    Lastl}^  Seven  Small  Wheels  revoivMig     ae  giving  birth
to  the  other.

4.  He  builds  then)  in  the  likeness  of  older  Wheels,  placing
them  on  the  Imperisliable  Centres.

How  does  Fohu?w*  build  them  ?  He  collects  the  Fiery-Dust.
He  makes  Balls  of  Fire,  runs  through  them,  and  round  them,
infusing  life  therciiito,  then  sets  them  into  motion ;  some  one
way,  some  the  other  way.  They  are  cold,  he  makes  them  hot.
They  are  dry,  he  makes  them  moist.  They  shine,  he  fans  and
cools  them.  Thus  acts  Fohat  from  one  Twilight  to  the  other,
during  Seven  Eternities.

^.  At  the  Fourth,  the  Sons  are  told  to  create  their  Images.
One-Third  refuses.    Two  obey.

The  Curse  is  pronounced.  They  will  be  born  in  the  Fourth,
suifer  and  cause  suffering.    This  is  the  First  War.

6.  The  Older  Wheels  rotated  downward  and  upward.  .  .  .
The  Mother's  Spawn  filled  the  whole.  There  were  Battles
fought  between  the  Creators  and  the  Destroyers,  and  Battles
fought  for  Space;  the  Seed  appearing  and  reappearing  con-
tinuously.

7.  Make  thy  calculations,  O  Lanoo,  if  thou  wouldst  learn
the  correct  age  of  thy  Small  Wheel.  Its  Fourth  Spoke  is  our
Mother.    Reach  the  Fourth  Fruit  of  the  Fourth  Path  of  Know-


THE   STANZAS   OF   DZYAN.  65

ledge  that  leads  to  Nirvana,  and  thou  shalt  comprehend,  for
thou  shalt  see.  .  ,  .


Stanza  VIL

1.  Behold  the  beginning  of  sentient  formless  Life.

First,  the  Divine,  the  One  from  the  Mother-Spirit;  then,  the
Spiritual;  the  Three  from  the  One,  the  Four  from  the  One,
and  the  Five,  from  which  the  Three,  the  Five  and  the  Seven.
These  are  the  Three-fold  and  the  Four-fold  downward;  the
Mind-born  Sons  of  the  First  Lord,  the  Shining  Seven.  It  is
they  who  are  thou,  1,  he,  O  Lanoo ;  they  who  watch  over  thee
and  thy  mother,  Bhumi.

2.  The  One  Ray  multiplies  the  smaller  Rays.  Life  precedes
Form,  and  Life  survives  the  last  atom.  Through  the  countless
Kays  the  Life-Ray,  the  One,  like  a  Thread  through  many  Beads.

3.  When  the  One  becomes  Two,  the  Threefold  appears,  and
the  Three  are  One ;  and  it  is  our  Thread,  O  Lanoo,  the  Heart  of
the  Man-Plant  called  Saptaparna.

4.  It  is  the  Root  that  never  dies ;  the  Three-tongued  Flame
of  the  Four  Wicks.  The  Wicks  are  the  Sparks,  that  draw  from
the  Three-tongued  Flame  shot  out  by  the  Seven — their  Flame —
tne  Beams  and  Sparks  of  one  Moon  reflected  in  the  running
Waves  of  all  the  Rivers  of  Earth.  &


66  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

5".  The  Spark  hangs  from  the  Flame  by  the  finest  thread  of
Fohat.  It  journeys  through  the  Seven  Worlds  of  Maya,  it
stops  in  the  First,  and  is  a  Metal  and  a  Stone ;  it  passes  into  the
Second,  and  behold — a  Plant ;  the  Plant  whirls  through  seven
changes  and  becomes  a  Sacred  Animal.  From  the  combined
attributes  of  these,  Manu,  the  Thinker,  is  formed.  Who  forms
him?  The  Seven  Lives  and  the  One  Life.  Who  completes
him?  The  Fivefold  Lha.  And  who  perfects  the  last  Body?
Fish,  Sin,  and  Soma.  .  .  .

6.  From  the  First-born  the  Thread  between  the  Silent
Watcher  and  his  Shadow  becomes  more  strong  and  radiant
with  every  Change.  The  morning  Sunlight  has  changed  into
noon-day  glory.   .   .   .

7.  "  This  is  thy  present  Wheel,"  said  the  Flame  to  the  Spark.
"  Thou  art  myself,  my  image  and  my  shadow.  I  have  clothed
myself  in  thee,  and  thou  art  my  Vahan  to  the  Day  *  Be  With
Us,'  when  thou  shalt  re-become  myself  and  others,  thyself  and
me."  Then  the  Builders,  having  donned  their  first  Clothing,
descend  on  radiant  Earth  and  reign  over  Men — who  are  them-
selves. .  .  .


[  Thus  ends  this  portion  of  the  arcJjaic  narrative,  dark,  con-
fufed,  alnioji  incomprebenfible.  An  attempt  witl  now  be  made  to
throw  light  into  this  darJiness,  to  make  fenfe  out  of  this  apparent
non-fenfe.1


COMMENTARIES


ON    THE    SEVEN    STANZAS    AND    THEIR    TERMS,    ACCORDING    TO    THEIR
NUMERATION,    IN    STANZAS    AND    SHLOKAS.


STANZA  I.
I.  The  Eternal  Parent,*  wrapped  in  her  Ever-Invisible  Robes,

HAD  SLUMBERED  ONCE  AGAIN  FOR  SEVEN  ETERNITIES.

The  "  Parent,"  Space,  is  the  eternal,  ever-present  Cause  of  all — the
incomprehensible  Deity,  whose  "Invisible  Robes"  are  the  mystic  Root
of  all  Matter,  and  of  the  Universe.  Space  is  the  one  eternal  thing  that
we  can  most  easily  imagine,  immovable  in  its  abstraction  and  unin-
fluenced by  either  the  presence  or  absence  in  it  of  an  objective
Universe.  It  is  without  dimension,  in  every  sense,  and  self-existent.
Spirit  is  the  first  differentiation  from  "  That,"  the  Causeless  Cause  of
both  Spirit  and  Matter.  As  taught  in  the  Esoteric  Catechism,  it  is
neither  "limitless  void,"  nor  "conditioned  fulness,"  but  both.  It  was
and  ever  will  be.

Thus,  the  "Robes"  stand  for  the  noumenon  of  undifferentiated
Cosmic  Matter.  It  is  not  matter  as  we  know  it,  but  the  spiritual
essence  of  matter,  and  is  coeternal  and  even  one  with  Space  in  its
abstract  sense.  Root-Nature  is  also  the  source  of  the  subtile  invisible
properties  in  visible  matter.  It  is  the  Soul,  so  to  say,  of  the  One
Infinite  Spirit.  The  Hindus  call  it  Miilaprakriti,  and  say  that  it  is  the
primordial  Substance,  which  is  the  basis  of  the  Upadhi  or  Vehicle  of
every  phenomenon,  whether  physical,  psychic  or  mental.  It  is  the
source  from  which  Akasha  radiates.

By  the  "  Seven  Eternities,"  seons  or  periods  are  meant.  The  word
Eternity,  as  understood  in  Christian  theolog>^  has  no  meaning  to  the

•  Space.


68  THE  SECRET   DOCTRINE.

Asiatic  ear,  except  in  its  application  to  the  One  Existence ;  nor  is  the
term  "  sempiternity,"  the  eternal  only  in  futurity,  anything  better  than
a  misnomer.*  Such  words  do  not  and  cannot  exist  in  philosophical
metaphysics,  and  were  unknown  till  the  advent  of  ecclesiastical  Chris-
tianity. The  Seven  Eternities  mean  the  seven  periods,  or  a  period
answering  in  its  duration  to  the  seven  periods,  of  a  Manvantara,  extend-
ing throughout  a  Mahakalpa  or  "Great  Age"  (loo  Years  of  Brahma),
making  a  total  of  311,040,000,000,000  of  years;  each  Year  of  Brahma
being  composed  of  360  Days,  and  of  the  same  number  of  Nights  of
Brahma  (reckoning  by  the  Chandrayana  or  lunar  year) ;  and  a  Day  of
Brahma  consisting  of  4,320,000,000  of  mortal  years.  These  Eternities
belone  to  the  most  secret  calculations,  in  which,  in  order  to  arrive  at
the  true  total,  every  figure  must  be  7-^',  x  varying  according  to  the
nature  of  the  cycle  in  the  subjective  or  real  world;  and  every  figure
relating  to,  or  representing,  the  different  cycles — from  the  greatest  to
the  smallest — in  the  objective  or  unreal  world,  must  necessarily  be
multiples  of  seven.  The  key  to  this  cannot  be  given,  for  herein  lies  the
mystery  of  esoteric  calculations,  and  for  the  purposes  of  ordinary
calculation  it  has  no  sense.  "  The  number  seven,"  says  the  Kabalah,
"  is  the  great  number  of  the  Divine  Mysteries  "  ;  number  ten  is  that  of
all  human  knowledge  (the  Pythagorean  Decad) ;  1,000  is  the  number
ten  to  the  third  power,  and  therefore  the  number  7,000  is  also  symbolical.
In  the  Secret  Doctrine  the  figure  4  is  the  male  symbol  only  on  the
highest  plane  of  abstraction ;  on  the  plane  of  matter  the  3  is  the
masculine  and  the  4  the  feminine — the  upright  and  the  horizontal  in
the  fourth  stage  of  symbolism,  when  the  symbols  become  the  glyphs  of
the  generative  powers  on  the  physical  plane.


STANZA   \.—Conti7tued.

2  Time  was  not,  for  it  i.ay  asi^eep  in  the  Infinite  Bosom  of
Duration.

"Time"  is  only  an  illusion  produced  by  the  succession  of  our  states
of  consciousness  as  we  travel  through  Eternal  Duration,  and  it  does  not
exist  where  no  consciousness  exists  in  which  the  illusion  can  be  pro-


•  It  is  stated  in  Book  II,  ch.  viii,  of  Vishnu  Purana :  "  By  immortality  is  meant  existence  to  the  end
of  the  Kalpa";  and  Wilson,  the  translator,  remarks  in  a  foot-note:  "This,  according-  to  the  Vedas,  is
all  that  is  to  be  understood  of  the  immortality  [or  eternity]  of  the  gods ;  they  perish  at  the  end  of
universal  dissolution  [or  Pralaya]."  And  IJsoteric  Philosophy  says :  "  They  '  perish '  not,  but  are
reabsorbed."


TIME  AND   UNIVERSAL  MIND.  69

duced,  but  "lies  asleep."  The  Present  is  only  a  mathematical  line
which  divides  that  part  of  Eternal  Duration  which  we  call  the  Future,
from  that  part  which  we  call  the  Past.  Nothing  on  earth  has  real
duration,  for  nothing  remains  without  change — or  the  same — for  the
billionth  part  of  a  second ;  and  the  sensation  we  have  of  the  actuality
of  the  division  of  Time  known  as  the  Present,  comes  from  the  blurring
of  the  momentary  glimpse,  or  succession  of  glimpses,  of  things  that  our
senses  give  us,  as  those  things  pass  from  the  region  of  ideals,  which  we
call  the  Future,  to  the  region  of  memories  that  we  name  the  Past.  In
the  same  way  we  experience  a  sensation  of  duration  in  the  case  of  the
instantaneous  electric  spark,  by  reason  of  the  blurred  and  continuing
impression  on  the  retina.  The  real  person  or  thing  does  not  consist
solely  of  what  is  seen  at  any  particular  moment,  but  is  composed  of  the
sum  of  all  its  various  and  changing  conditions  from  its  appearance  in
material  form  to  its  disappearance  from  earth.  It  is  these  "sum-
totals"  that  exist  from  eternity  in  the  Future,  and  pass  by  degrees
through  matter,  to  exist  for  eternity  in  the  Past.  No  one  would  say
that  a  bar  of  metal  dropped  into  the  sea  came  into  existence  as  it  left
the  air,  and  ceased  to  exist  as  it  entered  the  water,  and  that  the  bar
itself  consisted  only  of  that  cross-section  thereof  which  at  any  given
moment  coincided  with  the  mathematical  plane  that  separates,  and,  at
the  same  time,  joins,  the  atmosphere  and  the  ocean.  Even  so  of
persons  and  things,  which,  dropping  out  of  the  "to  be"  into  the  "has
been,"  out  of  the  Future  into  the  Past — present  momentarily  to  our
senses  a  cross-section,  as  it  were,  of  their  total  selves,  as  they  pass
through  Time  and  Space  (as  Matter)  on  their  way  from  one  eternity  to
another :  and  these  two  eternities  constitute  that  Duration  in  which
alone  anything  has  true  existence,  were  our  senses  but  able  to  cognize  it.


STANZA  l.—Co7iti?iued.
3.  Universal  Mind  was  not,   for  there  were  no  Ah-hi*  to

CONTAIN    IT.f

"Mind"  is  a  name  given  to  the  sum  of  the  States  of  Consciousness,
grouped  under  Thought,  Will  and  Feeling.  During  deep  sleep  idea-
tion ceases  on  the  physical  plane,  and  memory  is  in  abeyance;  thus  for
the  time-being  "Mind  is  not,"  because  the  organ,  through  which  the
Ego  manifests  ideation  and  memory  on  the  material  plane,  has  tempor-

•  Celestial  Beings.  +  And  hence  to  manifest  it.


yo  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

arily  ceased  to  function.  A  noumenon  can  become  a  phenomenon  on
any  plane  of  existence  only  by  manifesting  on  that  plane  through  an
appropriate  basis  or  vehicle;  and  during  the  long  Night  of  rest  called
Pralaya,  when  all  the  Existences  are  dissolved,  the  "Universal  Mind"
remains  as  a  permanent  possibility  of  mental  action,  or  as  that  abstract
absolute  Thought,  of  which  Mind  is  the  concrete  relative  manifestation.
The  Ah-hi  (Dhyan  Chohans)  are  the  collective  hosts  of  spiritual  Beings
' — the  Angelic  Hosts  of  Christianity,  the  Elohim  and  "Messengers"  of
the  Jews — who  are  the  Vehicle  for  the  manifestation  of  the  Divine  or
Universal  Thought  and  Will.  They  are  the  Intelligent  Forces  that
give  to,  and  enact  in.  Nature  her  "L,aws,"  while  they  themselves  act  ac-
cording to  Laws  imposed  upon  them  in  a  similar  manner  by  still  higher
Powers;  but  they  are  not  the  "personifications"  of  the  Powers  of
Nature,  as  erroneously  thought.  This  Hierarchy  of  spiritual  Beings,
through  which  the  Universal  Mind  comes  into  action,  is  like  an  army —
a  host,  truly — by  means  of  which  the  fighting  power  of  a  nation  mani-
fests itself,  and  which  is  composed  of  army-corps,  divisions,  brigades,
regiments,  and  so  forth,  each  with  its  separate  individuality  or  life,  and
its  limited  freedom  of  action  and  limited  responsibilities;  each  con-
tained in  a  larger  individuality,  to  which  its  own  interests  are  subser-
vient, and  each  containing  lesser  individualities  in  itself.


STANZA  l.—Cojttimied.

4.  The  Seven  Ways  to  Bliss*  were  not  («).  The  Great  Causes
OF  Misery  t  were  not,  for  there  was  no  one  to  produce  and

GET  ensnared   by   THEM  {b).

{a)  There  are  "Seven  Paths"  or  "Ways"  to  the  "Bliss"  of  Non-
Existence,  which  is  absolute  Being,  Existence  and  Consciousness.  They
were  not,  because  the  Universe,  so  far,  was  empty,  and  existed  only  in
the  Divine  Thought.

{b)  For  it  is  .  .  .  the  Twelve  Nidanas,  or  Causes  of  Being.  Each  is  the
eflfect  of  its  antecedent  cause,  and  a  cause,  in  its  turn,  to  its  successor;
the  sum  total  of  the  Nidanas  being  based  on  the  Four  Truths,  a  doctrine
especially  characteristic  of  the  Hinayana  System.]:     They  belong  to  the


*  Nirvana.     Nippang  in  Chinese;  Neibban  in  Burmese;  Moksha  in  India.

t  Nidana  and  Maya.    The   "Twelve"  Nidanas  (in  Tibetan  Ten-brel  Chug-nyi)  are  the  chief  causes
of  existence,  effects  generated  by  a  concatenation  of  causes  produced.
t  See  Wassilief,  Der  Buddhismus,  pp.  97  -128.


THE   CAUSES    OF   BEING.  7 1

theory  of  the  stream  of  catenated  law  which  produces  merit  and  de-
merit, and  finally  brings  Karma  into  full  sway.  It  is  a  system  based
upon  the  great  truth  that  reincarnation  is  to  be  dreaded,  as  existence
in  this  world  entails  upon  man  only  suifering,  misery  and  pain;  death
itself  being  unable  to  deliver  man  from  it,  since  death  is  merely  the
door  through  which  he  passes  to  another  life  on  earth  after  a  little
rest  on  its  threshold — Devachan.  The  Hinayana  System,  or  School  of
the  Little  Vehicle,  is  of  very  ancient  growth ;  while  the  Mahayana,  or
School  of  the  Great  Vehicle,  is  of  a  later  period,  having  originated
after  the  death  of  Buddha.  Yet  the  tenets  of  the  latter  are  as  old  as
the  hills  that  have  contained  such  schools  from  time  immemorial,  and
the  Hinayana  and  Mahayana  Schools  both  teach  the  same  doctrine  in
reality.  Yana,  or  Vehicle,  is  a  mystic  expression,  both  "Vehicles"  in-
culcating that  man  may  escape  the  sufferings  of  rebirth  and  even  the
false  bliss  of  Devachan,  by  obtaining  Wisdom  and  Knowledge,  which
alone  can  dispel  the  Fruits  of  Illusion  and  Ignorance.

Maya,  or  Illusion,  is  an  element  which  enters  into  all  finite  things,  for
everything  that  exists  has  only  a  relative,  not  an  absolute,  realitj^  since
the  appearance  which  the  hidden  noumenon  assumes  for  any  observer
depends  upon  his  power  of  cognition.  To  the  untrained  e^-e  of  the
savage,  a  painting  is  at  first  an  unmeaning  confusion  of  streaks  and
daubs  of  colour,  while  an  educated  eye  sees  instantly  a  face  or  a  land-
scape. Nothing  is  permanent  except  the  one  hidden  absolute  Existence
which  contains  in  itself  the  noumena  of  all  realities.  The  Existences
belonging  to  every  plane  of  being,  up  to  the  highest  Dhyan  Chohans,
are,  comparativelj^  like  the  shadows  cast  by  a  magic  lantern  on  a
colourless  screen.  Nevertheless  all  things  are  relatively  real,  for  the
cognizer  is  also  a  reflection,  and  the  things  cognized  are  therefore  as
real  to  him  as  himself.  Whatever  realit}^  things  possess,  must  be  looked
for  in  them  before  or  after  they  have  passed  like  a  flash  through  the
material  world;  for  we  cannot  cognize  any  such  existence  directly,  so
long  as  we  have  sense-instruments  which  bring  only  material  existence
into  the  field  of  our  consciousness.  Whatever  plane  our  consciousness
may  be  acting  in,  both  we  and  the  things  belonging  to  that  plane  are,
for  the  time  being,  our  only  realities.  But  as  we  rise  in  the  scale  of
development,  we  perceive  that  in  the  stages  through  which  we  have
passed,  we  mistook  shadows  for  realities,  and  that  the  upward  progress  of
the  Ego  is  a  series  of  progressive  awakenings,  each  advance  bringing
with  it  the  idea  that  now,  at  last,  we  have  reached  "reality";  but  only


72  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

when  we  shall  have  reached  absolute  Consciousness,  and  blended  our
own  with  it,  shall  we  be  free  from  the  delusions  produced  by  Maya.


STANZA  l.—Contimced.

5.  Darkness  alone  filled  the  Boundless  All  (a),  for  Father,
Mother  and  Son  were  once  more  one,  and  the  Son  had  not  yet
awakened  for  the  new  Wheel*  and  his  Pilgrimage  thereon  {b),

(a)  "Darkness  is  Father- Mother:  Light  their  Son,''  says  an  old  Eastern
proverb.  Light  is  inconceivable  except  as  coming  from  some  source
which  is  the  cause  of  it:  and  as,  in  the  case  of  Primordial  Light,  that
source  is  unknown,  though  so  strongly  demanded  by  reason  and  logic,
therefore  it  is  called  "Darkness"  by  us,  from  an  intellectual  point  of
view.  As  to  borrowed  or  secondar}^  light,  whatever  its  source,  it  can  be
only  of  a  temporary  mayavic  character.  Darkness,  then,  is  the  Eternal
Matrix  in  which  the  Sources  of  Light  appear  and  disappear.  Nothing
is  added  to  darkness  to  make  of  it  light,  or  to  light  to  make  it  darkness,
on  this  our  plane.  They  are  interchangeable;  and,  scientifically,  light  is
but  a  mode  of  darkness  and  vice  versa.  Yet  both  are  phenomena  of  the
same  noumenon — which  is  absolute  darkness  to  the  scientific  mind,
and  but  a  gray  twilight  to  the  perception  of  the  average  Mystic,  though
to  that  of  the  spiritual  eye  of  the  Initiate  it  is  absolute  light.  How  far
we  discern  the  light  that  shines  in  darkness  depends  upon  our  powers
of  vision.  What  is  light  to  us  is  darkness  to  certain  insects,  and  the
eye  of  the  clairvo^^ant  sees  illumination  where  the  normal  eye  perceives
only  blackness.  When  the  whole  Universe  was  plunged  in  sleep — had
returned  to  its  one  primordial  element — there  was  neither  centre  of
luminosity,  nor  eye  to  perceive  light,  and  darkness  necessarily  filled
the  "  Boundless  All."

(J))  The  "Father"  and  "Mother"  are  the  male  and  female  principles
in  Root-Nature,  the  opposite  poles  that  manifest  in  all  things  on  every
plane  of  Kosmos — or  Spirit  and  Substance,  in  a  less  allegorical  aspect,
the  resultant  of  which  is  the  Universe,  or  the  "Son."  They  are  "once
more  one,"  when  in  the  Night  of  Brahma,  during  Pralaya,  all  in  the
objective  Universe  has  returned  to  its  one  primal  and  eternal  cause,  to

*  The  term  "Wheel"  is  the  symbolical  expressipn  for  a  world  or  globe,  which  shows  that  the
ancients  were  aware  that  our  Earth  was  a  revolving:  globe,  not  a  motionless  square  as  some  Christian
Fathers  taught.  The  "Great  Wheel "  is  the  whole  duration  of  our  Cycle  of  Being,  or  Mahakalpa,  i.e.,
the  whole  revolution  of  our  special  Chain  of  seven  Globes  or  Spheres  from  beginning  to  end;  the
"Small  Wheels"  meaning  the  Rounds,  of  which  there  are  also  seven.


THE   SEVEN   SUBLIME    LORDS.  73

reappear  at  the  following  Dawn — as  it  does  periodically.  Karana —
Eternal  Cause — was  alone.  To  put  it  more  plainly :  Karana  is  alone
during  the  Nights  of  Brahma.  The  previous  objective  Universe  has
dissolved  into  its  one  primal  and  eternal  Cause,  and  is,  so  to  say,  held
in  solution  in  Space,  to  differentiate  again  and  crystallize  out  anew  at
the  following  Manvataric  Dawn,  which  is  the  commencement  of  a  new
Day  or  new  activity  of  Brahma — the  symbol  of  a  Universe.  In  esoteric
parlance,  Brahma  is  Father-Mother-Son,  or  Spirit,  Soul  and  Body  at
once ;  each  personage  being  symbolical  of  an  attribute,  and  each  attri-
bute or  quality  being  a  graduated  efflux  of  Divine  Breath  in  its  cyclic
differentiation,  involutionary  and  evolutionary.  In  the  cosmico-
physical  sense,  it  is  the  Universe,  the  Planetary  Chain  and  the  Earth ;
in  the  purely  spiritual,  the  Unknown  Deity,  Planetary  Spirit,  and
Man — the  son  of  the  two,  the  creature  of  Spirit  and  Matter,  and  a
manifestation  of  them  in  his  periodical  appearances  on  Earth  during
the  "Wheels,"  or  the  Manvantaras.


STANZA    \.— Continued.

6.  The  Seven  Sublime  IvOrds  and  the  Seven  Truths  had  ceased
to  be  {d),  and  the  universe,  the  son  of  necessity,  was  immersed

IN   PARANISHPANNA*  {U),  TO  BE  OUTBREATHED   BY  THAT  WHICH   IS,   AND

YET  IS  NOT.    Naught  was  (c).

{a)  The  "Seven  Sublime  Lords"  are  the  Seven  Creative  Spirits,  the
Dhyan  Chohans,  who  correspond  to  the  Hebrew  Elohim.  It  is  the
same  Hierarchy  of  Archangels  to  which  St.  Michael,  St.  Gabriel,  and
others  belong,  in  Christian  Theogony.  Only  while  St.  Michael,  for
instance,  is  allowed  in  dogmatic  Latin  Theology  to  watch  over  all  the
promontories  and  gulfs,  in  the  Esoteric  System  the  Dhyanis  watch
successively  over  one  of  the  Rounds  and  the  great  Root-Races  of  our
Planetary  Chain.  They  are,  moreover,  said  to  send  their  Bodhisattvas,
the  human  correspondents  of  the  Dhyani-Buddhas  during  every  Round
and  Race.  Out  of  the  "Seven  Truths"  and  Revelations,  or  rather
revealed  secrets,  four  only  have  been  handed  to  us,  as  we  are  still  in
the  Fourth  Round,  and  the  world  also  has  had  only  four  Buddhas,  so
far.  This  is  a  very  complicated  question,  and  will  receive  more  ample
treatment  later  on.

So   far   "there   are   only   Four  Truths,    and    Four    Vedas'' — say  the

•  Absolute  Perfection,  Paranirvana,  which  is  Yong-Grub.  •


74  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Buddhists  and  Hindus.  For  a  similar  reason  Irenaeus  insisted  on  the
necessity  of  Four  Gospels.  But  as  every  new  Root-Race  at  the  head
of  a  Round  must  have  its  revelation  and  revealers,  the  next  Round  will
bring  the  Fifth,  the  following  the  Sixth,  and  so  on.

(^)  "Paranishpanna"  is  the  Absolute  Perfection  to  which  all  Exis-
tences attain  at  the  close  of  a  great  period  of  activity,  or  Mahamanvan-
tara,  and  in  which  they  rest  during  the  succeeding  period  of  repose.
In  Tibetan  it  is  called  "Yong-Grub."  Up  to  the  day  of  the  Yog-
acharya  School  the  true  nature  of  Paranirvana  was  taught  publicly,  but
since  then  it  has  become  entirely  esoteric ;  hence  so  many  contradictory
interpretations  of  it.  It  is  only  a  true  Idealist  who  can  understand  it.
Kverything  has  to  be  viewed  as  ideal,  with  the  exception  of  Paranir-
vana, by  him  who  would  comprehend  that  state,  and  acquire  a  know-
ledge of  how  Non-Ego,  Voidness,  and  Darkness  are  Three  in  One,  and
alone  self-existent  and  perfect.  It  is  absolute,  however,  only  in  a
relative  sense,  for  it  must  give  room  to  still  further  absolute  perfection,
according  to  a  higher  standard  of  excellence  in  the  following  period
of  activity — just  as  a  perfect  flower  must  cease  to  be  a  perfect  flower
and  die,  in  order  to  grow  into  a  perfect  fruit,  if  such  a  mode  of
expression  may  be  permitted.

The  Secret  Doctrine  teaches  the  progressive  development  of  every-
thing, worlds  as  well  as  atoms;  and  this  stupendous  development  has
neither  conceivable  beginning  nor  imaginable  end.  Our  "Universe"  is
only  one  of  an  infinite  number  of  Universes,  all  of  them  "Sons  of
Necessity,"  because  links  in  the  great  cosmic  chain  of  Universes,  each
one  standing  in  the  relation  of  an  eflect  as  regards  its  predecessor,  and
of  a  cause  as  regards  its  successor.

The  appearance  and  disappearance  of  the  Universe  are  pictured  as
an  outbreathing  and  inbreathing  of  the  "Great  Breath,"  which  is
eternal,  and  which,  being  Motion,  is  one  of  the  three  symbols  of  the
Absolute — Abstract  Space  and  Duration  being  the  other  two.  When
the  Great  Breath  is  projected,  it  is  called  the  Divine  Breath,  and  is
regarded  as  the  breathing  of  the  Unknowable  Deity — the  One  Exis-
tence— which  breathes  out  a  thought,  as  it  were,  which  becomes  the
Kosmos.  So  also  is  it  that  when  the  Divine  Breath  is  inspired,  the
Universe  disappears  into  the  bosom  of  the  Great  Mother,  who  then
sleeps  "wrapped  in  her  Ever- Invisible  Robes."

(c)  By  "that  which  is,  and  yet  is  not"  is  meant  the  Great  Breath  itself,
which  we  can  only  speak  of  as  Absolute  Existence,  but  cannot  picture


THE   CAUSES  OF  EXISTENCE.  75

to  our  imagination  as  any  form  of  Existence  that  we  can  distinguish
from  Non-Existence.  The  three  periods — the  Present,  the  Past  and
the  Future — are  in  Esoteric  Philosophy  a  compound  time;  for  the  three
are  a  composite  number  only  in  relation  to  the  phenomenal  plane,  but
in  the  realm  of  noumena  have  no  abstract  validity.  As  said  in  the
Scriptures:  "The  Past  Time  is  the  Present  Time,  as  also  the  Future,
which,  though  it  has  not  come  into  existence,  still  is,"  according  to  a
precept  in  the  Prasanga  Madhyamika  teaching,  whose  dogmas  have
been  known  ever  since  it  broke  away  from  the  purely  esoteric  schools.*
Our  ideas,  in  short,  on  duration  and  time  are  all  derived  from  our
sensations  according  to  the  laws  of  association.  Inextricably  bound  up
with  the  relativity  of  human  knowledge,  they  nevertheless  can  have  no
existence  except  in  the  experience  of  the  individual  Ego,  and  perish
when  its  evolutionary  march  dispels  the  Maya  of  phenomenal  existence.
What  is  time,  for  instance,  but  the  panoramic  succession  of  our  states
of  consciousness?  In  the  words  of  a  Master,  "I  feel  irritated  at  having
to  use  these  three  clumsy  words — Past,  Present,  and  Future — miserable
concepts  of  the  objective  phases  of  the  subjective  whole,  they  are  about
as  ill-adapted  for  the  purpose  as  an  axe  for  fine  carving."  One  has  to
acquire  Paramartha  lest  one  should  become  too  easy  a  prey  to  Samvriti
— is  a  philosophical  axiom. f


STANZA  1.— Continued.
7.  The  Causes  of  Existence  had  been  done  away  with  (a);  the

VlSIBI^E  THAT  WAS,  AND  THE  INVISIBLE  THAT  IS,  RESTED  IN  ETERNAL

Non-Being — the  One  Being  {b).

{a)  "The  Causes  of  Existence"  mean  not  only  the  physical  causes
known  to  Science,  but  the  metaphysical  causes,  the  chief  of  which  is  the
desire  to  exist,  an  outcome  of  Nidana  and  Maya.  This  desire  for  a  sen-
tient life  shows  itself  in  ever^'thing,  from  an  atom  to  a  sun,  and  is  a
reflection  of  the  Divine  Thought  propelled  into  objective  existence,
into  a  law  that  the  Universe  should  exist.  According  to  Esoteric
teaching,  the  real  cause  of  that  supposed  desire,  and  of  all  existence,

•See  Dzungarian  Marti  Kumbum,  the  "Book  of  the  10,000  Precepts."  Also  consult  Wassiliefs  Der
Buddhismus,  pp.  327  and  357,  etc.

tin  clearer  words:  One  has  to  acquire  true  Self-Consciousness  in  order  to  understand  Samvriti,  or
the  "origrin  of  delusion."  Paramartha  is  the  synonym  of  the  term  Svasaravedana,  or  the  "reflection
which  analyses  itself"  There  is  a  diflference  in  the  interpretation  of  the  meaning  of  Paramartha
■between  the  Vogacharyas  and  the  Madhyamikas,  neither  of  whom,  however,  explain  the  real  and
true  esoteric  sense  of  the  expression.


76  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

remains  for  ever  hidden,  and  its  first  emanations  are  the  most  com-
plete abstractions  mind  can  conceive.  These  abstractions  must  of
necessity  be  postulated  as  the  cause  of  the  material  Universe  which
presents  itself  to  the  senses  and  intellect,  and  must  underlie  the
secondary  and  subordinate  powers  of  Nature,  which  have  been  an-
thropomorphized and  worshipped  as  "God"  and  "gods"  by  the
common  herd  of  every  age.  It  is  impossible  to  conceive  anything
without  a  cause ;  the  attempt  to  do  so  makes  the  mind  a  blank.  This
is  virtually  the  condition  to  which  the  mind  must  come  at  last  when
we  try  to  trace  back  the  chain  of  causes  and  effects,  but  both  Science
and  Religion  jump  to  this  condition  of  blankness  much  more  quickly
than  is  necessary,  for  they  ignore  the  metaphysical  abstractions  which
are  the  only  conceivable  causes  of  physical  concretions.  These  ab-
stractions become  more  and  more  concrete  as  they  approach  our
plane  of  existence,  until  finally  they  phenomenalize  in  the  form  of
the  material  Universe,  by  a  process  of  conversion  of  metaphysics  into
physics,  analogous  to  that  by  which  steam  can  be  condensed  into
water,  and  water  frozen  into  ice.

{b)  The  idea  of  "Eternal  Non-Being,"  which  is  the  "One  Being,"
will  appear  a  paradox  to  anyone  who  does  not  remember  that  we  limit
our  ideas  of  Being  to  our  present  consciousness  of  Existence;  making  it
a  specific,  instead  of  a  generic  term.  An  unborn  infant,  could  it  think
in  our  acceptation  of  that  terra,  would  necessarily  in  a  similar  manner
limit  its  conception  of  Being  to  the  intra-uterine  life  which  alone  it
knows;  and  were  it  to  endeavour  to  express  to  its  consciousness  the
idea  of  life  after  birth  (death  to  it),  it  would,  in  the  absence  of  data  to
go  upon,  and  of  faculties  to  comprehend  such  data,  probably  express
that  life  as  "  Non-Being  which  is  Real  Being."  In  our  case  the  One
Being  is  the  noumenon  of  all  the  noumena  which  we  know  must
underlie  phenomena,  and  give  them  whatever  shadow  of  reality  they
possess,  but  which  we  have  not  the  senses  or  the  intellect  to  cognize  at
present.  The  impalpable  atoms  of  gold  scattered  through  the  substance
of  a  ton  of  auriferous  quartz  may  be  imperceptible  to  the  naked  eye  of
the  miner,  yet  he  knows  that  they  are  not  only  present  there,  but  that
they  alone  give  his  quartz  any  appreciable  value;  and  this  relation  of
the  gold  to  the  quartz  may  faintly  shadow  forth  that  of  the  noumenon
to  the  phenomenon.  Only  the  miner  knows  what  the  gold  will  look  like
when  extracted  from  the  quartz,  whereas  the  common  mortal  can  form
no  conception  of  the  reality  of  things  separated  from  the  M^ya  which


THE  ONE  FORM   OF   EXISTENCE.  77

veils  them,  and  in  which  they  are  hidden.  Alone  the  Initiate,  rich
with  the  lore  acquired  bj'  numberless  generations  of  his  predecessors,
directs  the  "Eye  of  Dangma"  toward  the  essence  of  things  on  which  no
Maya  can  have  any  influence.  It  is  here  that  the  teachings  of  Esoteric
Philosophy  in  relation  to  the  Nidanas  and  the  Four  Truths  become  of
the  greatest  importance;  but  they  are  secret.


STANZA  l.—Ccntimied.

8.  Alone,  the  One  Form  of  Existence  (a)  stretched  bound-
less, INFINITE,  causeless,  IN  DREAMLESS  SlEEP  {b)\  AND  lylFE
PULSATED    UNCONSCIOUS    IN    UNIVERSAL     SpACE,     THROUGHOUT    THAT

All-Presence,  which  is  sensed  by  the  Opened  Eye  of  Dangma.*

{a)  The  tendency  of  modem  thought  is  to  recur  to  the  archaic  idea  of
a  homogeneous  basis  for  apparently  widely  different  things — hetero-
geneity developed  from  homogeneity.      Biologists  are  now  searching
for  their  homogeneous  protoplasm  and  Chemists  for  their  protyle,  while
Science  is  looking  for  the  force  of  which  electricity,  magnetism,  heat,
and  so  forth,  are  the  differentiations.     The  Secret  Doctrine  carries  this
idea  into  the  region  of  metaphysics,  and  postulates  a  "  One  Form  of
Existence"  as  the  basis  and  source  of  all  things.      But  perhaps  the
phrase,  the  "One  Form  of  Existence,"  is  not  altogether  correct.     The
Sanskrit  word  is  Prabhavapya3-a,  "the  place  [or  rather  plane]  whence
is  the  origination,  and  into  which  is  the  resolution  of  all  things,"  as  a
commentator  says.     It  is  not  the  "Mother  of  the  World,"  as  translated
by  Wilson;!  for  Jagad  Yoni,  as  shown  by  Fitzedward  Hall,  is  scarcely
so  much  the  "Mother  of  the  World,"  or  the  "Womb  of  the  World,"
as  the  "Material  Cause  of  the  World."      The  Puranic  commentators
explain  it  by  Karana,  "Cause,"  but  Esoteric  Philosophy,  by  the  ideal
spirit  of  that  cause.     In  its  secondary-  stage,  it  is  the  Svabhavat  of  the
Buddhist  philosopher,  the  Eternal  Cause  and  Effect,  omnipresent  yet
abstract,  the  self-existent  plastic  Essence  and  the  Root  of  all  things,
viewed  in  the  same  dual  light  as  the  Vedantin  views  his  Parabrahman

*  In  India  it  is  called  the  "Eye  of  Shiva,"  but  beyond  the  Great  Range  it  is  known  in  Esoteric
phraseology  as  "Dangnia's  Opened  Eye."  Dangma  means  a  purified  soul,  one  who  has  become  a
Jivanmukta,  the  highest  Adept,  or  rather  a  Mahatma  so-called.  His  "Opened  Eye"  is  the  inner
spiritual  eye  of  the  seer;  and  the  faculty  which  manifests  through  it,  is  not  clair\'oyance  as  ordinarily
understood,  i.e.,  the  power  of  seeing  at  a  distance,  but  rather  the  faculty  of  spiritual  intuition,
through  which  direct  and  certain  knowledge  is  obtainable.  This  faculty  is  intimately  connected
with  the  "third  eye,"  which  mythological  tradition  ascribes  to  certain  races  of  men.

+  Vishnu  Purdna  ,  I.  21.


78  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

and  Mulaprakriti,  the  one  under  two  aspects.  It  seems  indeed  extra-
ordinary to  find  great  scholars  speculating  on  the  possibility  of  the
Vedanta,  and  the  Uttara  Miniansa  especially,  having  been  "evoked  by
the  teachings  of  the  Buddhists " ;  whereas,  on  the  contrary,  it  is
Buddhism,  the  teaching  of  Gautama  Buddha,  that  was  "evoked"  and
entirely  upreared  on  the  tenets  of  the  Secret  Doctrine,  of  which  a
partial  sketch  is  here  attempted,  and  on  which,  also,  the  Upa?iishads
are  made  to  rest.*  According  to  the  teachings  of  Shri  Shankaracharya
our  contention  is  undeniable.f

{b)  "  Dreamless  Sleep  "  is  one  of  the  seven  states  of  consciousness
known  in  Oriental  Esotericism.  In  each  of  these  states  a  different
portion  of  the  mind  comes  into  action  ;  or  as  a  Vedantin  would  express
it,  the  individual  is  conscious  in  a  different  plane  of  his  being.  The  term
"  Dreamless  Sleep,"  in  this  case,  is  applied  allegorically  to  the  Universe
to  express  a  condition  somewhat  analogous  to  that  state  of  conscious-
ness in  man,  which,  not  being  remembered  in  a  waking  state,  seems  a
blank,  just  as  the  sleep  of  the  mesmerized  subject  seems  to  him  an
unconscious  blank  when  he  returns  to  his  normal  condition,  although
he  has  been  talking  and  acting  as  a  conscious  individual  would.


STANZA   \.— Continued.
9.  But  where  was  Dangma  when  the  Alaya  of  the  Universe  %

WAS  IN  PARAMARTHA  («;),§  AND  THE  GrEAT  WhEEI,  WAS  AnUPADAKA((^)?

(cL)  Here  we  have  before  us  the  subject  of  centuries  of  scholastic
disputations.  The  two  terms  "Alaya,"  and  "  Paramartha,"  have  been
the   causes   of   dividing   schools    and   splitting  the   truth    into    more

•  And  yet,  one,  claiming  authority,  namely,  Sir  Monier  Williams,  Boden  Professor  of  Sanskrit  at
Oxford,  has  just  denied  the  fact.  This  is  what  he  taught  his  audience,  on  June  the  4th,  1888,  in
his  annual  address  before  the  Victoria  Institute  of  Great  Britain:  "Originally,  Buddhism  set  its
face  against  all  solitary  asceticism  ...  to  attain  sublime  heights  of  knowledge.  It  had  no
occult,  no  esoteric  system  of  doctrine  .  .  .  withheld  from  ordinary  men"  (!  !).  And,  again:
"...  When  Gautama  Buddha  began  his  career,  the  later  and  lower  form  of  Yoga  seems  to  have
been  little  known."  And  then,  contradicting  himself,  the  learned  lecturer  forthwith  informs  his
audience  that  "we  learn  from  Z-a/z/a- Fw/(7> a  that  various  forms  of  bodily  torture,  self-maceration,
and  austerity  were  common  in  Gautama's  time."  (!  !)  But  the  lecturer  seems  quite  unaware  that  this
kind  of  torture  and  self-maceration  is  precisely  the  lower  form  of  Yoga,  Hatha  Yoga,  which  was
"little  known"  and  3'et  so  "common"  in  Gautama's  time.

t  It  is  even  argued  that  all  the  Six  Darshanas,  or  Schools  of  Philosophy,  show  traces  of  Buddha's
influence,  being  either  taken  from  Buddhism  or  due  to  Greek  teaching!  (See  Weber,  Max  MiiUer,
etc.)  We  labour  under  the  impression  that  Colebrooke,  "the  highest  authority"  in  such  matters,
had  long  ago  settled  the  question  by  showing  that  "the  Hindus  were  in  this  instance  the  teachers,
not  the  learners."

X  Soul,  as  the  basis  of  all,  Anima  Mundi.

{  Absolute  Being  and  Consciousness,  which  are  Absolute  Non-Being  and  Unconsciousness.


ALAYA,    THE   UNIVERSAI,  SOUL.  79

different  aspects  than  any  other  mystic  words.     Alaya  is  the  Soul  of
the  World  or  Anima  Mundi — the  Over-Soul  of  Emerson — which  accord-
ing to  esoteric  teaching  changes  its  nature  periodically.     Alaya,  though
eternal  and  changeless  in  its  inner  essence  on  the  planes  which  are
unreachable  by  either  men  or  cosmic  gods  (Dhyani-Buddhas),  changes
during  the  active   life-period  with  respect  to  the   lower  planes,  ours
included.      During  that  time  not  only  the   Dhyani-Buddhas   are   one
with  Alaya  in  Soul  and  Essence,  but   even  the  man  strong  in  Yoga
(Mystic  Meditation)  "  is  able  to  merge  his  soul  with  it,"  as  Aryasanga,
of  the  Yogacharya  school,  says.     This  is  not  Nirvana,  but  a  condition
next  to  it.     Hence  the  disagreement.     Thus,  while  the  Yogacharyas  of
the  Mahayana  School  say  that  Alaya  (N3'ingpo  and  Tsang  in  Tibetan)  is
the  personification  of  the  Voidness,   and  yet  Alaya  is  the  basis  of
every  visible  and  invisible  thing,  and  that,   though  it  is  eternal   and
immutable    in   its    essence,    it    reflects   itself   in   every   object   of  the
Universe    "like    the   moon   in   clear  tranquil   water";    other    schools
dispute  the  statement.     The  same  for  Paramartha.     The  Yogacharyas
interpret  the  term  as  that  which  is  also  dependent  upon  other  things
CParataniraJ ;   and  the    Madhyamikas  say  that  Paramartha  is  limited
to   Paranishpanna   or  Absolute   Perfection ;    i.e.,   in   the  exposition  of
these  "Two  Truths"   of  the  Four,  the  former  believe  and  maintain
that,  on  this  plane,  at  any  rate,  there  exists   only  Samvritisatya  or
relative  truth  ;  and  the  latter  teach  the  existence  of  Paramarthasatya,
Absolute  Truth.*    "No  Arhat,  O  mendicants,  can  reach  absolute  know-
ledge before  he  becomes  one  with  Paranirvana.     Parikalpita  and  Para-
tantra  are  his  two  great  enemies."!     Parikalpita  (in  Tibetan  Kun-tag)
is  error,  made  by  those  unable  to  realize  the  emptiness  and  illusionary
nature  of  all ;  who  believe  something  to  exist  which  does  not — e.g.,  the
Non-Ego.     And  Paratantra  is  that,  whatever  it  is,  which  exists  only
through  a  dependent  or  causal  connection,  and  which  has  to  disappear
as  soon  as  the  cause  from  which  it  proceeds  is  removed — e.g.,  the  flame
of  a  wick.     Destroy  or  extinguish  it,  and  light  disappears.

Esoteric  Philosophy  teaches  that  everything  lives  and  is  conscious,
but  not  that  all  life  and  consciousness  are  similar  to  those  of  human
or  even   animal  beings.      Eife  we  look  upon   as    the  One  Form   of

•  "  Pararnarthasatya "  is  self-consciousness;  Svasamvedana,  or  self- analyzing  reflection  —  from
parama,  above  everything,  and  artha,  comprehension;  salya  meaning  absolute  true  being,  or
esse.  In  Tibetan  Paramarthasatya  is  Dondampaidenpa.  The  opposite  of  this  absolute  reality,  or
actuality,  is  Samvritisatya — the  relative  truth  only — Samvriti  meaning  "  false  conception  "  and  being
the  origin  of  Illusion,  Maya;  in  Tibetan  Kundzabchidenpa,  "illusion-creating  appearance."

+  Aphorisms  of  the  Bodhisatlvas.


8o  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Existence,  manifesting  in  what  is  called  Matter;  or  what,  incorrectly
separating  them,  we  name  Spirit,  Soul  and  Matter  in  man.  Matter  is
the  Vehicle  for  the  manifestation  of  Soul  on  this  plane  of  existence,  and
Soul  is  the  Vehicle  on  a  higher  plane  for  the  manifestation  of  Spirit,
and  these  three  are  a  Trinity  synthesized  by  Life,  which  pervades  them
all.  The  idea  of  Universal  Life  is  one  of  those  ancient  conceptions
which  are  returning  to  the  human  mind  in  this  century,  as  a  conse-
quence of  its  liberation  from  anthropomorphic  Theology.  Science,  it
is  true,  contents  itself  with  tracing  or  postulating  the  signs  of  Universal
Life,  but  has  not  yet  been  bold  enough  to  even  whisper  "Anima
Mundi "  !  The  idea  of  "crystalline  life,"  now  familiar  to  Science,
would  have  been  scouted  half  a  century  ago.  Botanists  are  now  search-
ing for  the  nerves  of  plants ;  not  that  they  suppose  that  plants  can  feel
or  think  as  animals  do,  but  because  they  believe  that  some  structure,
bearing  the  same  relation  functionally  to  plant  life  that  nerves  bear  to
animal  life,  is  necessarj^  to  explain  vegetable  growth  and  nutrition.  It
seems  hardly  possible  that  Science,  by  the  mere  use  of  terms  such  as
"force"  and  "energy,"  can  disguise  from  itself  much  longer  the  fact
that  things  that  have  life  are  living  things,  whether  they  be  atoms  or
planets.

But  what  is  the  belief  of  the  inner  Esoteric  Schools,  the  reader  may
ask.  What  are  the  doctrines  taught  on  this  subject  by  the  Esoteric
"  Buddhists  "  ?  With  them,  we  answer,  Alaya  has  a  double  and  even  a
threefold  meaning.  In  the  Yogacharya  system  of  the  contemplative
Mahayana  School,  Alaya  is  both  the  Universal  Soul,  Anima  Mundi,
and  the  Self  of  a  progressed  Adept,  "  He  who  is  strong  in  the  Yoga
can  introduce  at  will  his  Alaya  by  means  of  meditation  into  the  true
nature  of  Existence."  "The  Alaya  has  an  absolute  eternal  existence,"
says  Aryasanga,  the  rival  of  Nagarjuna.*  In  one  sense  it  is  Pradhana,
which  is  explained  in  Vishiu  Pnrana  as,  "  that  which  is  the  unevolved
cause,  is  emphatically  called,  by  the  most  eminent  sages,  Pradhana,
original  base,  which  is  subtile  Prakriti,  viz.,  that  which  is  eternal,  and
which  at  once  is  [or  comprehends  what  is]  and  [what]  is  not,  or  is
mere  process."!  "The  indiscrete  cause  which  is  uniform,  and  both
cause   and    effect,    and   which    those  who   are    acquainted    with    first


»  Aryasang-a  was  a  pre-Christian  Adept  and  founder  of  a  Buddhist  esoteric  school,  though  Csoma
de  Koros  places  him,  for  some  reasons  of  his  own,  in  the  seventh  century  a.d.  There  was  another
Aryasanga,  who  lived  during  the  first  centuries  of  our  era,  and  the  Hungarian  scholar  most  probably
confuses  the  two.

+  Vdyu  Piirdna.


CAN   THE    FINITE   CONCEIVE   THE   INFINITE  ?  Si

principles,  call  Pradhana  and  Prakriti,  is  the  incognizable  Brahma  who
was  before  all,"*  i.e.,  Brahma  does  not  put  forth  evolution  itself  or
create,  but  only  exhibits  various  aspects  of  itself,  one  of  which  is
Prakriti,  an  aspect  of  Pradhana.  "  Prakriti,"  however,  is  an  incorrect
word,  and  Alaya  would  explain  it  better;  for  Prakriti  is  not  the  *'un-
cognizable  Brahma."  It  is  a  mistake  of  those  who  know  nothing
of  the  universality  of  the  Occult  doctrines  from  the  very  cradle  of
the  human  races,  and  especially  so  of  those  scholars  who  reject  the
ver>'  idea  of  a  "primordial  revelation,"  to  teach  that  the  Anima  Mundi,
the  One  Life  or  Universal  Soul,  was  made  known  only  by  Anaxagoras,
or  during  his  age.  This  philosopher  brought  the  teaching  forward
simply  to  oppose  the  too  materialistic  conceptions  of  Democritus  on
cosmogony,  based  on  the  exoteric  theory  of  blindly  driven  atoms.
Anaxagoras  of  Clazomense,  however,  was  not  its  inventor,  but  only  its
propagator,  as  was  also  Plato.  That  which  he  called  Mundane  Intelli-
gence, Nous  (NoDs),  the  principle  that  according  to  his  views  is  abso-
lutely separated  and  free  from  matter  and  acts  with  design,  was  called
Motion,    the   One    Life,  or   Jivatma.    in    India,    ages  before   the    year

A.

500  B.C.  Only  the  Arj'an  philosopners  never  endowed  this  principle,
which  with  them  is  infinite,  with  the  finite  "attribute  of  thinking."!

This  leads  naturally  to  the  "Supreme  Spirit"  of  Hegel  and  the
German  Transcendentalists — a  contrast  that  it  maj^  be  useful  to  point
out.  The  schools  of  Schelling  and  Fichte  have  diverged  widely  from
the  primitive  archaic  conception  of  an  Absolute  Principle,  and  have
mirrored  an  aspect  only  of  the  basic  idea  of  the  Vedanta.  Even  the
"Absoluter  Geist"  shadowed  forth  by  von  Hartmann  in  his  pessimistic
philosophy  of  the  "  Unconscious,"  while  it  is,  perhaps,  the  closest
approximation  made  by  European  speculation  to  the  Hindii  Advaitin
doctrines,  yet  similarly  falls  far  short  of  the  reality.

According  to  Hegel,  the  "Unconscious"  would  never  have  under-
taken the  vast  and  laborious  task  of  evolving  the  Universe,  except  in
the  hope  of  attaining  clear  Self-Consciousness.  In  this  connection  It  is
to  be  borne  in  mind  that  in  designating  Spirit,  a  term  which  the  Europ-
ean Pantheists  use  as  equivalent  to  Parabrahman,  as  Unconscious,  they  do
not  attach  to  the  expression  the  connotation  it  usually  bears.  It  is  em-
ployed in  the  absence  of  a  better  term  to  symbolize  a  profound  myster>'.

•  Vishnu  Parana,  Wilson,  I.  20.

+  Finite  self-consciousness,  I  mean.     For  how  can  the  Absolute  attain  this  otherwise  than  simply  as
an  aspect,  the  highest  of  which  aspects  known  to  us  is  human  consciousness?


82  THK  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

The  "Absolute  Consciousness  behind  phenomena,"  they  tell  us,
which  is  only  termed  unconsciousness  in  the  absence  of  any  element
of  personality,  transcends  human  conception.  Man,  unable  to  form  a
single  concept  except  in  terms  of  empirical  phenomena,  is  powerless
from  the  very  constitution  of  his  being  to  raise  the  veil  that  shrouds
the  majesty  of  the  Absolute.  Only  the  liberated  Spirit  is  able  to  faintly
realize  the  nature  of  the  source  whence  it  sprung  and  whither  it  must
eventually  return.  As  the  highest  Dhyan  Chohan,  however,  can  but
bow  in  ignorance  before  the  awful  mystery  of  Absolute  Being ;  and
since,  even  in  that  culmination  of  conscious  existence — "the  merging
of  the  individual  in  the  universal  consciousness,"  to  use  a  phrase  of
Fichte's — the  Finite  cannot  conceive  the  Infinite,  nor  can  it  apply  to
it  its  own  standard  of  mental  experiences,  how  can  it  be  said  that  the
Unconscious  and  the  Absolute  can  have  even  an  instinctive  impulse
or  hope  of  attaining  clear  Self-Consciousness?*  A  Vedantin,  more-
over, would  never  admit  this  Hegelian  idea ;  and  the  Occultist  would
say  that  it  applies  perfectl}^  to  the  awakened  Mahat,  the  Universal  Mind
already  projected  into  the  phenomenal  world  as  the  first  aspect  of  the
changeless  Absolute,  but  never  to  the  latter.  "Spirit  and  Matter,  or
Purusha  and  Prakriti,  are  but  the  two  primeval  aspects  of  the  One  and
Secondless,"  we  are  taught.

The  matter-moving  Nous,  the  animating  Soul,  immanent  in  ever^-^
atom,  manifested  in  man,  latent  in  the  stone,  has  different  degrees  of
power ;  and  this  Pantheistic  idea  of  a  general  Spirit-Soul  pervading  all
Nature  is  the  oldest  of  all  the  philosophical  notions.  Nor  was  the
Archaeus  a  discover^'  either  of  Paracelsus  or  of  his  pupil  Van  Helmont ;
for  this  same  Archaeus  is  "  Father-^ther,"  the  manifested  basis  and
source  of  the  innumerable  phenomena  of  life — localized.  The  whole
series  of  the  numberless  speculations  of  this  kind  are  but  variations  on
the  same  theme,  the  key-note  of  which  was  struck  in  this  "primeval
revelation."

(Ji)  The  term  "Anupadaka,"  parentless,  or  without  progenitors,  is  a
mystical  designation  having  several  meanings  in  our  philosophy.  By
this  name  Celestial  Beings,  the  Dhyan  Chohans  or  Dhyani-Buddhas,
are  generally  meant.  These  correspond  mystically  to  the  human
Buddhas  and  Bodhisattvas,  known  as  the  Manushi  (Human)  Buddhas,
which  latter  are  also  designated  Anupadaka,  once  that  their  whole
personality  is  merged  in  their  compound  Sixth  and  Seventh  Principles,

»  See  Schwegler's  Handbook  of  the  History  of  Philosophy,  in  Sterling's  translation,  p.  28.


THE    BUILDERS.  83

or  Atma-Buddhi,  and  they  have  become  the  "Diamond-Souled"(Vajra-
sattvas*).  or  full  Mahatmas.  The  "Concealed  Lord"  (Sangbai  Dag-po),
"the  one  merged  with  the  Absolute,"  can  have  no  parents  since  he
is  Self-Existent,  and  one  with  the  Universal  Spirit  (Svayambhu),t
the  Svabhavat  in  its  highest  aspect.  The  mystery  of  the  Hierarchy
of  the  Anupadaka  is  great,  its  apex  being  the  universal  Spirit-Soul,
and  the  lower  rung  the  Manushi-Buddha :  and  even  every  soul-
endowed  man  also  is  an  Anupadaka  in  a  latent  state.  Hence — when
speaking  of  the  Universe  in  its  formless,  eternal,  or  absolute  condition,
before  it  was  fashioned  by  the  Builders — the  expression,  "the  great
Wheel  [Universe]  was  Anupadaka."


STANZA   II.

I.  .  .  .  Where  were  the  Builders,  the  IvUminous  Sons  of
Manvantaric  Dawn  (a)?  ...  In  the  Unknown  Darkness  in
their  Ah-hi  I  Paranishpanna.  The  Producers  of  Form  §  from
No-Form  || — the  Root  of  the  World — the  Devamatri  ^  and
Svabhavat,  rested  in  the  Bliss  of  Non-Being  (d).

(a)  The  "Builders,"  the  "Sons  of  Manvantaric  Dawn,"  are  the  real
creators  of  the  Universe ;  and  in  this  doctrine,  which  deals  only  with
our  Planetary  System,  they,  as  the  architects  of  the  latter,  are  also
called  the  "Watchers"  of  the  Seven  Spheres,  which  exoterically  are
the  seven  planets,  and  esoterically  the  seven  earths  or  spheres  (Globes)
of  our  Chain  also.  The  opening  sentence  of  Stanza  I,  when  mention-
ing "Seven  Eternities,"  applies  both  to  the  Mahakalpa  or  "the  (Great)

•  Vajrapani  or  Vajradhara  means  the  diamond-holder;  in  Tibetan  Dorjesempa,  sempa  meaning  the
soul  ;  its  adamantine  quality  referring  to  its  indestructibility  in  the  hereafter.  The  explanation  with
regard  to  the  Anupadaka  given  in  the  Kdla  Chakra,  the  first  in  the  Gyut  division  of  the  Kanjiir,
is  half  esoteric.  It  has  misled  the  Orientalists  into  erroneous  speculations  with  respect  to  the
Uhyani-Buddhas  and  their  earthly  correspondencies,  the  Manushi-Buddhas.  The  real  tenet  is
hinted  at  in  a  subsequent  volume,  and  will  be  more  fully  explained  in  its  proper  place.

"  To  quote  Hegel  again,  who  with  Schelling  practically  accepted  the  Pantheistic  conception  of
periodical  Avataras  (special  incarnations  of  the  World-Spirit  in  Man,  as  seen  in  the  case  of  all  the
great  religious  reformers) :  "The  essence  of  man  is  spirit  ....  only  by  stripping  hitnself  of  his  finite-
ness  and  surrendering  himself  to  pure  self-consciousness  does  he  attain  the  truth.  Christ-man,  as
man  in  whom  the  Unity  of  God-man  [identity  of  the  individual  with  the  universal  Consciousness  as
taught  by  the  Vedantins  and  some  Advaitees]  appeared,  has,  in  his  death  and  history  generally,
himself  presented  the  eternal  history  of  Spirit — a  history  which  every  man  has  to  accomplish  in
himself,  in  order  to  exist  as  Spirit." — Philosophy  of  History,  Sibree's  English  Translation,  p.  340.

X  Chohanic,  Dhyani-Buddhic.

}  Rupa.

II  Arfipa.

IT  "  Mother  of  the  Gods,"  Aditi,  or  Cosmic  Space.    In  the  Zohar,  she  is  called  Sephira,  the  Mother
of  the  Sephiroth,  and  Shekinah  in  her  primordial  form,  in  abscondiio.


34  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Age  of  Brahma,"  as  well  as  to  the  Solar  Pralaya  and  subsequent  resur-
rection of  our  Planetary  System  on  a  higher  plane.  There  are  many
kinds  of  Pralaya  (dissolution  of  a  thing  visible),  as  will  be  shown
elsewhere.

(^)  "  Paranishpanna,"  remember,  is  the  summum  bonum,  the  Absolute,
hence  the  same  as  Paranirvana.  Besides  being  the  final  state,  it  is
that  conditio-n  of  subjectivity  which  has  no  relation  to  anything  but
the  One  Absolute  Truth  (Paramarthasatya)  on  its  own  plane.  It  is
that  state  which  leads  one  to  appreciate  correctly  the  full  meaning  of
Non-Being,  which,  as  explained,  is  Absolute  Being.  Sooner  or  later,
all  that  now  seemingly  exists,  will  be  in  reality  and  actually  in  the
state  of  Paranishpanna,  But  there  is  a  great  difference  between
conscious  and  unconscious  Being.  The  condition  of  Paranishpanna,
without  Paramartha,  the  Self-analysing  Consciousness  (Svasamve-
dana),  is  no  bliss,  but  simply  extinction  for  Seven  Eternities.  Thus,
an  iron  ball  placed  under  the  scorching  rays  of  the  sun  will  get
heated  through,  but  will  not  feel  or  appreciate  the  warmth,  while
a  man  will.  It  is  only  "  with  a  nmid  clear  and  undarkened  by  Per-
S07iality,  arid  an  assimilation  of  the  merit  of  manifold  Existences  devoted
to  Being  in  its  collectivity  \_the  whole  living  and  sentiejit  Universe^''  that
one  gets  rid  of  personal  existence,  merging  into,  becoming  one  with,
the  Absolute,*  and  continuing  in  full  possession  of  Paramartha.


STANZA   ll.—Contimied.
2.    .    .    .    Where  was  Silence?    Where  the  ears  to  sense  it?

No,    THERE    was    NEITHER    SlEENCE     NOR    SoUND    (a);     NAUGHT  SAVE

Ceaseless  Eternal  Breath,!  which  knows  itself  not  (^b).

{d)  The  idea  that  things  can  cease  to  exist  and  still  be,  is  a  funda-
mental one  in  Eastern  p.sychology.  Under  this  apparent  contradiction
in  terms,  there  rests  a  fact  of  Nature,  to  realize  which  in  the  mind,
rather  than  to  argue  about  words,  is  the  important  thing.  A  familiar
instance  of  a  similar  paradox  is  afforded  by  chemical  combination.
The  question  whether  hydrogen  and  oxygen  cease  to  exist,  when  they

*  Hence  Non-Being  is  "Absolute  Being-,"  in  Esoteric  Philosophy.  In  the  tenets  of  the  latter  even
Adi-Buddha  (the  First  or  Primeval  Wisdom)  is,  while  manifested,  in  one  sense  an  Illusion,  Maya,  since
all  the  gods,  including  Brahma,  have  to  die  at  the  end  of  the  Age  of  Brahma  ;  the  abstraction  called
Parabrahman— whether  we  call  it  Ain  Suph,  or  with  Herbert  Spencer  the  Unknowable— alone  being
the  One  Absolute  Reality.  The  One  Secondless  Existence  is  Advaita,  "  Without  a  Second,"  and  all
the  rest  is  Maya,  so  teaches  the  Advaita  Philosophy.

+  Motion.


THE   ABSOLUTE    KNOWS   ITSELF   NOT.  85

combine  to  form  water,  is  still  a  moot  one ;  some  arguing  that  since
they  are  found  again  when  the  water  is  decomposed,  they  must  be  there
all  the  while ;  others  contending  that  as  they  actually  turn  into  some-
thing totally  different,  they  must  cease  to  exist  as  themselves  for  the
time  being ;  but  neither  side  is  able  to  form  the  faintest  conception  of
the  real  condition  of  a  thing,  which  has  become  something  else  and  yet
has  not  ceased  to  be  itself.  Existence  as  water  for  oxj^gen  and
hydrogen  may  be  said  to  be  a  state  of  Non-Being,  which  is  more  real
Being  than  their  existence  as  gases ;  and  it  may  faintly  symbolize  the
condition  of  the  Universe  when  it  goes  to  sleep,  or  ceases  to  be,  during
the  Nights  of  Brahma — to  awaken  or  reappear  again,  when  the  dawn  of
the  new  Manvantara  recalls  it  to  what  we  call  existence.

{b)  The  "Breath"  of  the  One  Existence  is  only  used  in  application
to  the  spiritual  aspect  of  Cosmogony  by  Archaic  Esotericism  ;  in  other
cases,  it  is  replaced  by  its  equivalent  on  the  material  plane — Motion.
The  One  Eternal  Element,  or  element-containing  Vehicle,  is  Space,
dimensionless  in  every  sense ;  coexistent  with  which  are  Endless  Dura-
tion, Primordial  (hence  Indestructible)  Matter,  and  Motion — Absolute
"Perpetual  Motion,"  which  is  the  "Breath"  of  the  One  Element.
This  Breath,  as  seen,  can  never  cease,  not  even  during  the  Pralayic
Eternities.

But  the  Breath  of  the  One  Existence  does  not,  all  the  same,  apply  to
the  One  Causeless  Cause  or  the  All-Be-ness,  in  contradistinction  to
All-Being,  which  is  Brahma,  or  the  Universe.  Brahma,  the  four-faced
god,  who,  after  lifting  the  Earth  out  of  the  waters,  "  accomplished  the
creation,"  is  held  to  be  only  the  Instrumental,  and  not,  as  clearly
implied,  the  Ideal  Cause.  No  Orientalist,  so  far,  seems  to  have
thoroughly  comprehended  the  real  sense  of  the  verses  in  the  Purdnas,
that  treat  of  "  creation."

Therein  Brahma  is  the  cause  of  the  potencies  that  are  to  be  generated
subsequently  for  the  work  of  "creation."  For  instance,  in  the  Vishmc
Purdna,^'  the  translation,  "and  from  him  proceed  the  potencies  to  be
created,  after  they  have  become  the  real  cause,"  would  perhaps  be
more  correctly  rendered,  "and  from  IT  proceed  the  potencies  that  will
create  as  they  become  the  real  cause  [on  the  material  plane]."  Save  that
One  Causeless  Ideal  Cause  there  is  no  other  to  which  the  Universe  can
be  referred.  "Worthiest  of  ascetics,  through  its  potency — i.e.,  through
the  potency  of  that  cause — every  created  thing  comes  by  its  inherent  or

•  Wilson,  I.  iv.


86  THE  SEICRET  DOCTRINE.

proper  nature."  If,  "in  the  Vedanta  and  Nya5^a,  nimitta  is  the  efficient
cause,  as  contrasted  with  iipdddna,  the  material  cause,  [and]  in  the
Sankhya,  pradhdna  implies  the  functions  of  both";  in  the  Esoteric
Philosophy,  which  reconciles  all  these  systems,  and  the  nearest
exponent  of  which  is  the  Vedanta  as  expounded  by  the  Advaita
Vedantists,  none  but  the  updddna  can  be  speculated  upon.  That  which
is,  in  the  minds  of  the  Vaishnavas  (the  Visishthadvaitas),  as  the  ideal  in
contradistinction  to  the  real — or  Parabrahman  and  Ishvara — can  find
no  room  in  published  speculations,  since  that  ideal  even  is  a  misnomer,
when  applied  to  that  of  which  no  human  reason,  even  that  of  an  Adept,
can  conceive.

To  know  itself  or  oneself,  necessitates  consciousness  and  perception
to  be  cognized — both  limited  faculties  in  relation  to  any  subject  except
Parabrahman.  Hence  the  "Bternal  Breath  which  knows  itself  not."
Infinity  cannot  comprehend  Finiteness.  The  Boundless  can  have  no
relation  to  the  Bounded  and  the  Conditioned.  In  the  Occult  teachings,
the  Unknown  and  the  Unknowable  Mover,  or  the  Self-Existing,  is  the
Absolute  Divine  Essence.  And  thus  being  Absolute  Consciousness,
and  Absolute  Motion — to  the  limited  senses  of  those  who  describe  this
indescribable — it  is  unconsciousness  and  immovableness.  Concrete
consciousness  cannot  be  predicated  of  abstract  consciousness,  an}'
more  than  the  quality  wet  can  be  predicated  of  water — wetness  being  its
own  attribute  and  the  cause  of  the  wet  quality  in  other  things.  Con-
sciousness implies  limitations  and  qualifications ;  something  to  be
conscious  of,  and  someone  to  be  conscious  of  it.  But  Absolute  Con-
sciousness contains  the  cognizer,  the  thing  cognized  and  the  cognition,
all  three  in  itself  and  all  three  07ie.  No  man  is  conscious  of  more  than
that  portion  of  his  knowledge  which  happens  to  be  recalled  to  his  mind
at  any  particular  time,  yet  such  is  the  poverty  of  language  that  we
have  no  term  to  distinguish  the  knowledge  not  actively  thought  of,
from  knowledge  we  are  unable  to  recall  to  memory.  To  forget  is
synonymous  with  not  to  remember.  How  much  greater  must  be  the
difficulty  of  finding  terms  to  describe,  and  to  distinguish  between,
abstract  metaphysical  facts  or  differences!  It  must  not  be  forgotten,
also,  that  we  give  names  to  things  according  to  the  appearances  they
assume  for  ourselves.  We  call  Absolute  Consciousness  "  unconscious-
ness," because  it  seems  to  us  that  it  must  necessarily  be  so,  just  as  we
call  the  Absolute,  "  Darkness,"  because  to  our  finite  understanding  it
appears  quite  impenetrable ;  yet  we  recognize  fully  that  our  perception


THE   GERM   OF   LIFE.  87

of  such  things  does  not  do  them  justice.  We  involuntarily  distinguish
in  our  minds,  for  instance,  between  unconscious  Absolute  Conscious-
ness, and  unconsciousness,  by  secretly  endowing  the  former  with  some
indefinite  quality  that  corresponds,  on  a  higher  plane  than  our  thoughts
can  reach,  with  what  we  know  as  consciousness  in  ourselves.  But  this
is  not  any  kind  of  consciousness  that  we  can  manage  to  distinguish
from  what  appears  to  us  as  unconsciousness.


STANZA   l\.— Continued.
3.  The  Hour   had   not   yet   struck;    the    Ray  had   not  yet

FLASHED    INTO    THE     GERM    {o)  ;    THE     MaTRIPADMA  *     HAD     NOT    YET
SWOLLEN  {b).\

(a)  The  "Ra}'^"  of  the  "Ever  Darkness"  becomes,  as  it  is  emitted,  a
Ray  of  effulgent  Light  or  Life,  and  flashes  into  the  "  Germ  " — the  Point
in  the  Mundane  Egg,  represented  by  Matter  in  its  abstract  sense.  But
the  term  "  Point"  must  not  be  understood  as  applying  to  any  particular
point  in  Space,  for  a  germ  exists  in  the  centre  of  every  atom,  and  these
collectively  form  the  "  Germ ; "  or  rather,  as  no  atom  can  be  made
visible  to  our  physical  eye,  the  collectivity  of  these  (if  the  term  can  be
applied  to  something  which  is  boundless  and  infinite)  forms  the
noumenon  of  eternal  and  indestructible  Matter.

{b)  One  of  the  symbolical  figures  for  the  Dual  Creative  Power  in
Nature  (matter  and  force  on  the  material  plane)  is  "  Padma,"  the
water-lily  of  India.  The  Lotus  is  the  product  of  heat  (fire)  and  water
(vapour  or  ether) ;  fire  standing  in  every  philosophical  and  religious
system,  even  in  Christianity,  as  a  representation  of  the  Spirit  of  Deity,
the  active,  male,  generative  principle ;  and  ether,  or  the  soul  of  matter,
the  light  of  the  fire,  for  the  passive  female  principle,  from  which  every-
thing in  this  Universe  emanated.  Hence,  ether  or  water  is  the
Mother,  and  fire  is  the  Father.  Sir  William  Jones — and  before  him
archaic  botany — showed  that  the  seeds  of  the  Lotus  contain — even
before  they  germinate — perfectly  formed  leaves,  with  the  miniature
shape  of  what  one  day,  as  perfect  plants,  they  will  become  :  nature  thus
giving  us  a  specimen  of  the  preformation  of  its  production  .  .  .  the
seeds  of  all  phanerogamous  plants  bearing  proper  flowers  containing
an  embryo  plantlet  ready  formed. J     This  explains  the  sentence,  "The

•  Mother-t,otus.

+  An  unpoetical  term,  yet  still  very  graphic.

t  Gross,  The  Heafjien  Religion,  p.  195.


88  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

MStri-Padma  had  not  yet  swollen  " — the  form  being  usually  sacrificed
to  the  inner  or  root  idea  in  archaic  sj^mbology.

The  lyotus,  or  Padma,  is,  moreover,  a  very  ancient  and  favourite
symbol  for  the  Cosmos  itself,  and  also  for  man.  The  popular  reasons
given  are,  firstl}^  the  fact  just  mentioned,  that  the  I^otus-seed  contains
within  itself  a  perfect  miniature  of  the  future  plant,  which  typifies  the
fact  that  the  spiritual  prototypes  of  all  things  exist  in  the  immaterial
world,  before  these  things  become  materialized  on  earth.  Secondly,
the  fact  that  the  lyOtus-plant  grows  up  through  the  water,  having  its
root  in  the  Ilus,  or  mud,  and  spreading  its  flower  in  the  air  above.
The  I^otus  thus  typifies  the  life  of  man  and  also  that  of  the  Cosmos;
for  the  Secret  Doctrine  teaches  that  the  elements  of  both  are  the  same,
and  that  both  are  developing  in  the  same  direction.  The  root  of  the
i,otus  sunk  in  the  mud  represents  material  life,  the  stalk  passing  up
through  the  water  typifies  existence  in  the  astral  world,  and  the  flower
floating  on  the  water  and  opening  to  the  sky  is  emblematical  of
spiritual  being.


STANZA   \1.— Continued.
4.  Her  Heart  had  not  yet  opened  for  the  One  Ray  to  enter,

THENCE   TO   FAI^L,   AS   ThREE   INTO    FoUR,    INTO   THE   LAP   OF   MaYA.

The  Primordial  Substance  had  not  yet  passed  out  of  its  precosmic
latency  into  differentiated  objectivity,  or  even  become  the  (to  man,  so
far)  invisible  Protyle  of  Science.  But,  as  the  "Hour  strikes"  and  it
becomes  receptive  of  the  Fohatic  impress  of  the  Divine  Thought — the
Logos,  or  the  male  aspect  of  the  Anima  Mundi,  Alaya — its  "Heart"
opens.  It  differentiates,  and  the  Three  (Father,  Mother,  Son)  are
transformed  into  Four.  Herein  lies  the  origin  of  the  double  mystery
of  the  Trinity  and  the  Immaculate  Conception.  The  first  and  funda-
mental  dogma  of  Occultism  is  Universal  Unity  (or  Homogeneity)  under
three  aspects.  This  leads  to  a  possible  conception  of  Deity,  which  as
an   absolute  Unity   must    remain    forever    incomprehensible    to   finite

intellects.

If  thou  wouldest  believe  in  the  Power  which  acts  within  the  root  of  a  plant,  or
imagine  the  root  concealed  under  the  soul,  thou  hast  to  think  of  its  stalk  or  trunk,
and  of  its  leaves  and  flowers.  Thou  canst  not  imagine  that  Power  independently  of
these  objects.     Life  can  be  known  only  by  the  Tree  of  Life.     .     .     .  *

*  Precepts  for^Yoga.


ASTRAL   LIGHT   IS   NOT  ANIMA   MUNDI.  89

The  idea  of  Absolute  Unity  would  be  broken  entirely  in  our  concep-
tion, had  we  not  something  concrete  before  our  eyes  to  contain  that
Unity.  And  the  Deity  being  absolute,  must  be  omnipresent;  hence
not  an  atom  but  contains  It  within  itself  The  roots,  the  tnnik,  and
its  many  branches,  are  three  distinct  objects,  5^et  they  are  one  tree.
Say  the  Kabalists :  "The  Deity  is  one,  because  It  is  infinite.  It  is
triple,  because  It  is  ever  manifesting."  This  manifestation  is  triple  in
its  aspects,  for  it  requires,  as  Aristotle  has  it,  three  principles  for  every
natural  body  to  become  objective :  privation,  form,  and  matter.*  Pri-
vation meant  in  the  mind  of  the  great  philosopher  that  which  the
Occultists  call  the  prototypes  impressed  in  the  Astral  Light — the
lowest  plane  and  world  of  Anima  Mundi.  The  union  of  these  three
principles  depends  upon  a  fourth — the  I^ife  which  radiates  from  the
summits  of  the  Unreachable,  to  become  a  universally  diffused  Essence
on  the  manifested  planes  of  Existence.  And  this  Quaternary  (Father,
Mother,  Son,  as  a  Unity,  and  a  Quaternary — as  a  living  manifestation)
has  been  the  means  of  leading  to  the  ver\^  archaic  idea  of  Immaculate
Conception,  now  finally  cr3^stallized  into  a  dogma  of  the  Christian
Church,  which  has  carnalized  this  metaphysical  idea  beyond  any
common  sense.  For  one  has  but  to  read  the  Kabalah  and  study  its
numerical  methods  of  interpretation  to  find  the  origin  of  the  dogma.
It  is  purely  astronomical,  mathematical,  and  preeminently  meta-
physical :  the  Male  Element  in  Nature  (personified  by  the  male
deities  and  I^ogoi — Viraj,  or  Brahma,  Horus,  or  Osiris,  etc.,  etc.)  is
born  through,  not  from,  an  immaculate  source,  personified  by  the
"Mother,"  for — the  Abstract  Deit}'  being  sexless,  and  not  even  a
Being  but  Be-ness,  or  Eife  itself — that  Male  having  a  "Mother"
cannot  have  a  "Father."  Eet  us  render  this  in  the  mathematical
language  of  the  author  of  The  Source  of  Measures.  Speaking  of  the
"Measure  of  a  Man"  and  his  numerical  (Kabalistic)  value,  he  writes
that  in  Genesis,  iv.  i —

It  is  called  the  "Man  even  Jehovah"  Measure,  and  this  is  obtained  in  this  way,
viz.:  113x5  =  565,  and  the  value  565  can  be  placed  under  the  form  of  expression
565x10=565.     Here  the   Man-number   113   becomes   a  factor  of  56-5x10,  and  the

•  A  Veddntin  of  the  Visishthadvaita  Philosophy  would  say  that,  though  the  only  independent
Reality,  Parabrahman  is  inseparable  from  His  Trinity.  That  He  is  three,  "  Parabrahmau,  Chit,  and
Achit,"  the  last  two  being  dependent  Realities  unable  to  exist  separately;  or,  to  make  it  clearer,
Parabrahman  is  the  Substance-changeless,  eternal,  and  incognizable— and  Chit  (Atm.a)  and  Achit
(Anatma)  and  its  qualities,  as  form  and  colour  are  the  qualities  of  any  object.  The  two  are  the
garment,  or  body,  or  rather  aspect  (sharira)  of  Parabrahman.  But  an  Occultist  would  find  much  to
say  against  this  claim,  and  so  would  the  Advaiti  Vedantin.


90  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

(Kabalistic)  reading  of  this  last  numbered  expression  is  Jod,  He,  Vau,  He,  or
Jehovah.  .  .  .  The  expansion  of  565  into  56-5  x  10  is  purposed  to  show  the
emanation  of  the  male  (Jod)  from  the  female  (Eva)  principle;  or,  so  to  speak,  the
birth  of  a  male  element  from  an  immaculate  source,  in  other  words,  an  immaculate
conception.

Thus  is  repeated  on  earth  the  mystery  enacted,  according  to  the
Seers,  on  the  divine  plane.  The  Son  of  the  Immaculate  Celestial
Virgin  (or  the  Undifferentiated  Cosmic  Prot5de,  Matter  in  its  infini-
tude) is  born  again  on  earth  as  the  Son  of  the  terrestrial  Eve,  our
mother  Karth,  and  becomes  Humanity  as  a  total — past,  present,  and
future — for  Jehovah,  or  Jod-He-Vau-He,  is  androgyne,  or  both  male  and
female.  Above,  the  Son  is  the  whole  Kosmos ;  below,  he  is  Mankind.
The  Triad  or  Triangle  becomes  Tetraktys,  the  sacred  Pythagorean
number,  the  perfect  Square,  and  a  six-faced  Cube  on  earth.  The
Macroprosopus  (the  Great  Face)  is  now  Microprosopus  (the  lycsser
Face) ;  or,  as  the  Kabbalists  have  it,  the  Ancient  of  Days,  descending
on  Adam  Kadmon  whom  he  uses  as  his  vehicle  to  manifest  through,
gets  transformed  into  Tetragrammaton.  It  is  now  in  the  "L,ap  of
Maya,"  the  Great  Illusion,  and  between  itself  and  the  Reality  has  the
Astral  Light,  the  Great  Deceiver  of  man's  limited  senses,  unless  Know-
ledge through  Paramarthasatya  comes  to  the  rescue.


STANZA   W.— Continued.

5.  The  Seven*  were  not  yet  born  from  the  Web  of  I^ighTo
Darkness  alone  was  Father- Mother,  Svabhavat;  and  Svab-
havat  was  in  darkness.

The  Secret  Doctrine,  in  the  Stanzas  here  given,  occupies  itself
chiefly,  if  not  entirely,  with  our  Solar  System,  and  especially  with  our
Planetary  Chain.  The  "Seven  Sons,"  therefore,  are  the  creators  of
the  latter.     This  teaching  will  be  explained  more  fully  hereafter.

Svabhavat,  the  "  Plastic  Essence  "  that  fills  the  Universe,  is  the  root
of  all  things.  Svabhavat  is,  so  to  s^y,  the  Buddhistic  concrete  aspect
of  the  abstraction  called  in  Hindu  philosophy  Mulaprakriti.  It  is  the
body  of  the  Soul,  and  that  which  Ether  would  be  to  Akasha,  the  latter
being  the  informing  principle  of  the  former.  Chinese  mystics  have
made  of  it  the  synonj^m  of  "  Being."  In  the  Chinese  translation  of  the
Ekashloka-Shastra  of  Nagarjuna  (the  Lung-shu  of  China),  called  the
Yih-shu-lu-kia-hm,  it  is  said  that  the  term  "Being,"  or  "Subhava,"

*Sc.,  Sons.


DIVINE   THOUGHT.  9I

(Yeu  in  Chinese)  means  "the  Substance  giving  substance  to  itself";
it  is  also  explained  by  him  as  meaning  "without  action  and  with
action,"  "the  nature  which  has  no  nature  of  its  own."  Subhava,  from
which  Svabhavat,  is  composed  of  two  words :  su  fair,  handsome,  good  ;
sva,  self,  and  bhdva,  being  or  states  of  being.


STANZA   ll.—Conthmed.

6.  Thkse  Two  are  the  Germ,  and  the  Germ  is  One.  The  Uni-
verse   WAS    still    concealed    IN    THE    DiVINE    THOUGHT    AND    THE

Divine  Bosom.

The  " Divine  Thought"  does  not  imply  the  idea  of  a  Divine  Thinker.
The  Universe,  not  only  past,  present  and  future — a  human  and  finite
idea  expressed  by  finite  thought  —  but  in  its  totality,  the  Sat  (an
untranslateable  term),  Absolute  Being,  with  the  Past  and  Future
crystallized  in  an  eternal  Present,  is  that  Thought  itself  reflected  in  a
secondary  or  manifested  cause.  Brahman  (neuter),  as  the  Mysterium
Magnum  of  Paracelsus,  is  an  absolute  mystery  to  the  human  mind.
Brahma,  the  male-female,  the  aspect  and  anthropomorphic  reflection  of
Brahman,  is  conceivable  to  the  perceptions  of  blind  faith,  though
rejected  by  human  intellect  when  it  attains  its  majority.

Hence  the  statement  that  during  the  prologue,  so  to  sa}^  of  the
drama  of  creation,  or  the  beginning  of  cosmic  evolution,  the  Universe,
or  the  Son,  lies  still  concealed  "in  the  Divine  Thought,"  which  had
not  yet  penetrated  into  the  "Divine  Bosom."  This  idea,  note  well,  is
at  the  root,  and  forms  the  origin,  of  all  the  allegories  about  the  "  Sons
of  God"  born  of  immaculate  virgins.


STANZA   III.
I.    .    .    .    The    last    Vibration    of    the    Seventh    Eternity

THRILLS  through   INFINITUDE   (o).      ThE    MOTHER    SWELLS,    EXPAND-
ING FROM  WITHIN  WITHOUT,   LIKE  THE   BUD   OF  THE   LOTUS  {b).

(a)  The  seemingly  paradoxical  use  of  the  term,  "Seventh  Eternity,"
thus  dividing  the  indivisible,  is  sanctified  in  Esoteric  Philosophy.
The  latter  divides  boundless  Duration  into  unconditionally  eternal
and  universal  Time  (Kala) ;  and  conditioned  Time  (Khandakala).
One  is  the  abstraction  or  noumenon  of  infinite  Time  the  other
its  phenomenon  appearing  periodically,   as   the  effect  of   Mahat — the


92  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Universal  Intelligence,  limited  by  manvantaric  duration.  With  some
schools,  Mahat  is  the  first-born  of  Pradhana  (undifferentiated  Substance,
or  the  periodical  aspect  of  Mulaprakriti,  the  Root  of  Nature),  which
(Pradhana)  is  called  Maya,  Illusion.  In  this  respect,  I  believe.  Esoteric
teaching  differs  from  the  Vedantin  doctrines  of  both  the  Advaita  and
the  Visishthadvaita  schools.  For  it  says  that,  while  Mulaprakriti,  the
noumenon,  is  self-existing  and  without  any  origin — is,  in  short,  parent-
less,  Anupadaka,  as  one  with  Brahman — Prakriti,  its  phenomenon,  is
periodical  and  no  better  than  a  phantasm  of  the  former ;  so  Mahat,  the
first-born  of  Jnana  (or  Gnosis),  Knowledge,  Wisdom  or  the  Logos — is  a
phantasm  reflected  from  the  Absolute  Nirguna  (Parabrahman),  the  One
Reality,  "devoid  of  attributes  and  qualities";  while  with  some  Vedan-
tins  Mahat  is  a  manifestation  of  Prakriti,  or  Matter.

(Ji)  Therefore,  the  "  last  Vibration  of  the  Seventh  Eternity "  w^as
"  fore-ordained  " — by  no  God  in  particular,  but  occurred  in  virtue  of
the  eternal  and  changeless  Law  which  causes  the  great  periods  of
Activit}^  and  Rest,  called  so  graphically,  and  at  the  same  time  so
poeticall}^  the  Days  and  Nights  of  Brahma.  The  expansion  "  from
within  without"  of  the  Mother,  called  elsewhere  the  "Waters  of
Space,"  "  Universal  Matrix,"  etc.,  does  not  allude  to  an  expansion
from  a  small  centre  or  focus,  but  means  the  development  of  limitless
subjectivity  into  as  limitless  objectivity,  without  reference  to  size  or
limitation  or  area.  "  The  ever  \_to  tis']  invisible  and  immaterial  Sicbsta7ice
present  in  eternity,  threrv  its  periodical  Shadow  from  its  own  plane  into  the
Lap  of  Maya'''  It  implies  that  this  expansion,  not  being  an  increase  in
size — for  infinite  extension  admits  of  no  enlargement — was  a  change  of
condition.  It  expanded  "like  the  Bud  of  the  Eotus";  for  the  Eotus
plant  exists  not  onlj^  as  a  miniature  embryo  in  its  seed  (a  physical
characteristic),  but  its  prototype  is  present  in  an  ideal  form  in  the
Astral  Eight  from  "  Dawn"  to  "Night"  during  the  manvantaric  period,
like  everything  else,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  in  this  objective  Universe;
from  man  to  mite,  from  giant  trees  to  the  tiniest  blades  of  grass.

All  this,  teaches  the  Hidden  Science,  is  but  the  temporary-  reflection,
the  shadow  of  the  eternal  ideal  prototype  in  Divine  Thought ;  the  word
"Eternity,"  note  well  again,  standing  here  only  in  the  sense  of
"^on,"  as  lasting  throughout  the  seemingly  interminable,  but  still
limited  cycle  of  activity,  called  by  us  Manvantara.  For  what  is  the  real
esoteric  meaning  of  Manvantara,  or  rather  a  Manu-antara  ?  It  means,
literally,  "between  tAvo  Manus,"  of  whom  there  are  fourteen  in  every


THE   UNIVERSE,    A   FLITTING  SHADOW.  93

Day  of  Brahma,  such  a  Day  consisting  of  i,ooo  aggregates  of  four  Ages,

1,000  "  Great   Ages"   or   Mahay ugas.     Let  us  now  analyse  the   word

or  name    Manu.     Orientalists    in   their   dictionaries    tell   us   that    the

term  "Manu"  is  from  the  root  man,  "to  think";  hence  "the  thinking

man."     But,  esoterically,  every  Manu,  as  an  anthropomorphized  patron

of  his   special   cycle   (or   Round),   is   but   the  personified  idea  of  the

"Thought  Divine"  (as  the  Hermetic  Pymander) ;  each  of  the  Manus,

therefore,  being  the  special  god,  the  creator  and  fashioner  of  all  that

appears  during  his  own  respective  cycle  of  being  or  Manvantara.    Fohat

runs  the   Manus'   (or  Dhyan  Chohans')  errands,  and  causes  the  ideal

prototypes  to  expand  from  within  without — that  is,  to  cross  gradually,

on  a  descending  scale,  all  the  planes,  from  the  noumeual  to  the  lowest

phenomenal,  to  bloom  finallj'  on  the  last  into  full  objectivity^ — the  acme

of  Illusion,  or  the  grossest  matter.


STANZA   \\\.— Continued.

2.  The  Vibration  sweeps  along,  touching*'  with  its  swift
Wing  the  whole  Universe  and  the  Germ  that  dwelleth  in
Darkness,  the  Darkness  that  breathes!  over  the  slumbering
Waters  of  Life.

The  Pythagorean  Monas  is  also  said  to  dwell  in  solitude  and  "Dark-
ness" like  the  "Germ."  The  idea  of  the  Breath  of  Darkness  moving
over  "the  slumbering  Waters  of  Life,"  which  is  Primordial  Matter  with
the  latent  Spirit  in  it,  recalls  the  first  chaper  of  Genesis.  Its  original  is
the  Brahmanical  Narayana  (the  Mover  on  the  Waters),  who  is  the  per-
sonification of  the  Eternal  Breath  of  the  unconscious  All  (or  Para-
brahaman)  of  the  Eastern  Occultists.  The  Waters  of  Life,  or  Chaos —
the  female  principle  in  symbolism — are  the  vacuum  (to  our  mental
sight),  in  which  lie  the  latent  Spirit  and  Matter.  This  it  was  that  made
Democritus  assert,  after  his  instructor  Leucippus,  that  the  primordial
principles  of  all  were  atoms  and  a  vacuum,  in  the  sense  of  space,  but
not  of  empty  space,  for  "Nature  abhors  a  vacuum,"  according  to  the
Peripatetics  and  ever>^  ancient  philosopher.

In  all  Cosmogonies  "Water"  plays  the  same  important  part.  It  is
the  base  and  source  of  material  existence.  Scientists,  mistaking  the
word  for  the  thing,  understand  by  it  the  definite  chemical  combination
of  oxygen  and  hydrogen,  thus  giving  a  specific  meaning  to  a  term  used

•  Simultaneously.  t  Moves.


94  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

by  Occultists  in  a  generic  sense,  and  which  is  employed  in  Cosmogony
with  a  metaphysical  and  mystical  meaning.  Ice  is  not  water,  neither  is
steam,  although  all  three  have  precisely  the  same  chemical  composition.


STANZA   \ll.—Co7itinued.

3.  Darkness  radiates  I^ight,  and  L,ight  drops  one  solitary  Ray
INTO  THE  Waters,  into  the  Mother- Deep.  The  Ray  shoots
through  the  Virgin  Egg,  the  Ray  causes  -the  Eternal  Egg  to
thrill,  and  drop  the  non-eternal  Germ,*  which  condenses  into
THE  World-Egg.

The  "solitary  Ray"  dropping  into  the  "Mother-Deep"  may  be  taken
to  mean  Divine  Thought,  or  Intelligence,  impregnating  Chaos.  This,
however,  occurs  on  the  plane  of  metaphysical  abstraction,  or  rather  the
plane  whereon  that  which  we  call  a  metaphysical  abstraction,  is  a
reality.  The"Virgin-Egg,"  being  in  one  sense  the  abstract  of  all  ova,  or
the  power  of  becoming  developed  through  fecundation,  is  eternal  and
for  ever  the  same.  And  just  as  the  fecundation  of  an  eg^  takes  place
before  it  is  dropped ;  so  the  non-eternal  periodical  Germ,  which  later
becomes  in  symbolism  the  Mundane  Egg,  contains  in  itself,  when  it
emerges  from  the  said  symbol,  "the  promise  and  potency"  of  all  the
Universe.  Though  the  idea  per  se  is,  of  course,  an  abstraction,  a  sym-
bolical mode  of  expression,  it  is  a  true  symbol,  for  it  suggests  the  idea
of  infinity  as  an  endless  circle.  It  brings  before  the  mind's  eye  the
picture  of  Kosmos  emerging  from  and  in  boundless  Space,  a  Universe
as  shoreless  in  magnitude,  if  not  as  endless  in  its  objective  manifesta-
tion. The  symbol  of  an  Qgg  also  expresses  the  fact  taught  in  Occultism
that  the  primordial  form  of  everything  manifested,  from  atom  to  globe,
from  man  to  angel,  is  spheroidal,  the  sphere  being  with  all  nations  the
emblem  of  eternity  and  infinity — a  serpent  swallowing  its  tail.  To
realize  the  meaning,  however,  the  sphere  must  be  thought  of  as  seen
from  its  centre.  The  field  of  vision,  or  of  thought,  is  like  a  sphere
whose  radii  proceed  from  one's  self  in  every  direction,  and  extend  out
into  space,  opening  up  boundless  vistas  all  around.  It  is  the  symbolical
circle  of  Pascal  and  the  Kabalists,  "whose  centre  is  everywhere  and
circumference  nowhere" — a  conception  which  enters  into  the  com-
pound idea  of  this  emblem.

The  "World-Egg"  is,  perhaps,  one  of  the  most  universally  adopted

*  Periodical.


NATURE  S    SYMBOI.S.  ge,

symbols,  highly  suggestive  as  it  is,  equally  in  the  spiritual,  physiologi-
cal, and  cosmological  sense.  Therefore,  it  is  found  in  every  world-
theogony,  where  it  is  largely  associated  with  the  serpent  symbol,  the
latter  being  everywhere,  in  philosophy  as  in  religious  S)^mbolism,  an
emblem  of  etemitj-,  infinitude,  regeneration,  and  rejuvenation,  as  well
as  of  wisdom.  The  mystery  of  apparent  self-generation  and  evolution
through  its  own  creative  power,  repeating  in  miniature,  in  the  egg,  the
process  of  cosmic  evolution — both  due  to  heat  and  moisture  under  the
efflux  of  the  unseen  creative  spirit — fully  justified  the  selection  of  this
graphic  symbol.  The  "Virgin-Egg"  is  the  microcosmic  symbol  of  the
macrocosmic  prototype,  the  "  Virgin  Mother" — Chaos  or  the  Primeval
Deep.  The  male  creator  (under  whatever  name)  springs  forth  from
the  virgin  female,  the  Immaculate  Root  fructified  by  the  Ray.  Who,  if
versed  in  astronomy  and  natural  sciences,  can  fail  to  see  its  suggestive-
ness?  Kosmos,  as  receptive  Nature,  is  an  egg  fructified — yet  left
immaculate ;  for  once  regarded  as  boundless,  it  could  have  no  other
representation  than  a  spheroid.  The  Golden  Egg  was  surrounded  by
seven  natural  Elements,  "  four  readj^  [ether,  fire,  air,  water],  three
secret."  This  may  be  found  stated  in  Vishnu  Pu?-dna,  where  elements
are  translated  "envelopes,"  and  a  secret  one  is  added — Ahamkara.*  The
original  text  has  no  Ahamkara;  it  mentions  seven  Elements  without
specifying  the  last  three.


STANZA  l\l.—Co7itinued.

4.  The  Three  \  fall  into  the  Four  X  The  Radiant  Essence
BECOMES  Seven  inside,  Seven  outside  (a).     The  Luminous  Egg,  §

WHICH  IN   itself    IS    ThREE,||  CURDLES   AND    SPREADS    IN  MILK-WHITE

Curds  throughout  the  Depths  of  Mother,  the  Root  that  grows
IN  THE  Depths  of  the  Ocean  of  Life  (b).

The  use  of  geometrical  figures  and  the  frequent  allusions  to  figures  in
all  ancient  scriptures,  as  in  the  Purayias,  the  Egyptian  Book  of  the  Dead
and  even  the  Bible — must  be  explained.  In  the  Book  of  Dzyan,  as  in  the
Kabalah,  there  are  two  kinds  of  numerals  to  be  studied — the  Figures,
often  simple  blinds,  and  the  Sacred  Numbers,  the  values  of  which  are

•  Wilson,  Vishnu  Piirdna,  I.  40.

t  Triangle.

X  Quatemarj-.

}  Hirauyagarbha.

II  The  three  hypostases  of  Brahma,  or  Vishnu,  the  three  Arasthas.


96  the;  secret  doctrine.

all  known  to  the  Occultists  through  Initiation.  The  former  are  but
conventional  glyphs;  the  latter,  the  basic  symbols  of  all.  That  is  to
say,  the  one  are  purely  physical,  the  other  purely  metaphysical,  the
two  standing  in  relation  to  each  other  as  Matter  stands  to  Spirit — the
extreme  poles  of  the  One  Substance.

As  Balzac,  the  unconscious  Occultist  of  French  literature,  says  some-
where, the  Number  is  to  Mind  the  same  as  it  is  to  Matter,  "an  incompre-
hensible agent."  Perhaps  so  to  the  profane,  never  to  the  initiated  mind.
Number  is,  as  the  great  writer  thought,  an  Entity,  and,  at  the  same  time,
a  Breath  emanating  from  what  he  called  God  and  what  we  call  the  All,
the  Breath  which  alone  could  organize  the  physical  Cosmos,  "where
naught  obtains  its  form  but  through  the  Deity,  which  is  an  effect  of
Number."     It  is  instructive  to  quote  Balzac's  words  upon  this  subject:

The  smallest  as  the  most  immense  creations,  are  they  not  to  be  distinguished
from  each  other  by  their  quantities,  their  qualities,  their  dimensions,  their  forces
and  attributes,  all  begotten  by  Number?  The  infinitude  of  Numbers  is  a  fact
proven  to  our  mind,  but  of  which  no  proof  can  be  physically  given.  The  mathe-
matician will  tell  us  that  the  infinitude  of  Numbers  exists  but  is  not  to  be  demon-
strated.   God  is  a  Number  endowed  with  motion,  which  is  felt  but  not  demonstrated.

As  Unity,  it  begins  the  Numbers,  with  which  it  has  nothing  in  coimnon

The  existence  of  Numbers  depends  on  Unity,  which  without  a  single  Number,

begets  them  all What !  unable  either  to  measure  the  first  abstraction

yielded  to  you  by  the  Deity,  or  to  get  hold  of  it,  you  still  hope  to  subject  to  3'our
measurements  the  mystery  of  the  Secret  Sciences  which  emanate  from  that  Deity?

And  what  would  you  feel,  were  I  to  plunge  you  into  the  abysses  of

Motion,  the  Force  which  organizes  the  Numbers?  What  would  you  think,  were  I
to  add  that  Motion  and  Number*  are  begotten  by  the  Word,  the  Supreme  Reason
of  the  Seers  and  Prophets,  who,  in  days  of  old,  sensed  the  mighty  Breath  of  God,
a  witness  to  which  is  the  Apocalypse  ?

iU)  "The  Radiant  Essence  curdles  and  spreads  throughout  the
Depths"  of  Space.  From  an  astronomical  point  of  view  this  is  easy
of  explanation:  it  is  the  Milky  Way,  the  World-Stuff,  or  Primordial
Matter  in  its  first  form.  It  is  more  difficult,  however,  to  explain  it  in
a  few  words,  or  even  lines,  from  the  standpoint  of  Occult  Science  and
Symbolism,  as  it  is  the  most  complicated  of  glyphs.  Herein  are  en-
shrined more  than  a  dozen  symbols.  To  begin  with,  it  contains  the
whole  pantheon  of  mysterious  objects,!  every  one  of  them  having  some


*  Number,  truly;  but  never  Motion.    It  is  Motion  which  begets  the  Logos,  the  Word,  in  Occultism.

+  The  "fourteen  precious  things."  The  narrative  or  allegory  is  found  in  the  Shatapatha  Bramanah
and  others.  The  Japanese  Secret  Science  of  the  Buddhist  Mystics,  the  Yamabooshi,  has  "sevca
precious  things."    We  will  speak  of  them,  hereafter.


THE   CHURNING   OF   THE    OCEAN.  97

definite  Occult  meaning,  extracted  from  the  Hindii  allegorical  "Churn-
ing of  the  Ocean"  by  the  Gods.  Besides  Amrita,  the  water  of  life  or
immortalit}',  Surabhi,  the  "cow  of  plenty,"  called  "the  fountain  of  milk
and  curds,"  was  extracted  from  this  "sea  of  milk."  Hence  the  uni-
versal adoration  of  the  cow  and  bull,  one  the  productive,  the  other  the
generative  power  in  Nature :  symbols  connected  with  both  the  solar
and  the  cosmic  deities.  The  specific  properties,  for  Occult  purposes,  of
the  "fourteen  precious  things,"  being  explained  only  at  the  Fourth
Initiation,  cannot  be  given  here;  but  the  following  may  be  remarked.
In  the  Shatapatha  Brdhviana  it  is  stated  that  the  Churning  of*  the
Ocean  of  Milk  took  place  in  the  Satya  Yuga,  the  first  Age  which
immediately  followed  the  "Deluge."  As,  however,  neither  the  Rig
Veda  nor  Manu — both  preceding  Vaivasvata's  "  Deluge,"  that  of  the
bulk  of  the  Fourth  Race — mention  this  Deluge,  it  is  evident  that  it  is
neither  the  Great  Deluge,  nor  that  which  carried  away  Atlantis,  nor
even  the  Deluge  of  Noah,  which  is  here  meant.  This  "Churning"
relates  to  a  period  before  the  earth's  formation,  and  is  in  direct  connec-
tion with  another  universal  legend,  the  various  and  contradictory
versions  of  which  culminated  in  the  Christian  dogma  of  the  "  War  in
Heaven,"  and  the  "Fall  of  the  Angels."  Tho.  Brdhmaiias,  reproached
by  the- Orientalists  with  their  versions  on  the  same  subjects  often  clash-
ing with  each  other,  are  preeminently  occult  works,  hence  used  purposely
as  blinds.  They  are  allowed  to  survive  for  public*  use  and  property
only  because  they  were  and  are  absolutely  unintelligible  to  the  masses.
Otherwise  they  would  have  disappeared  from  circulation  as  long  ago  as
the  days  of  Akbar.


STANZA  \\\.— Continued.
5.  The  Root  remains,  the  Light  remains,  the  Curds  remain,

AND  STIEL   OEAOHOO   IS  OnE.

"Oeaohoo"  is  rendered  "Father-Mother  of  the  Gods"  in  the  Com-
mentaries, or  the  "Six  in  One,"  or  the  Septenary  Root  from  which  all
proceeds.  All  depends  upon  the  accent  given  to  these  seven  vowels,
which  may  be  pronounced  as  one,  three,  or  even  seven  syllables,  by
adding  an  e  after  the  final  0.  This  mystic  name  is  given  out,  because
without  a  thorough  master}^  of  the  triple  pronunciation  it  remains  for

ever  mefiectual.

s


98  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

"Is  One"  refers  to  the  Non-Separateness  of  all  that  lives  and  has  its
being,  whether  in  an  active  or  passive  state.  In  one  sense,  Oeaoiioo  i«
the  Rootless  Root  of  All;  hence,  one  with  Parabrahman :  in  another
sense  it  is  a  name  for  the  manifested  One  I^ife,  the  eternal  living  Unity.
The  "  Root"  means,  as  already  explained,  Pure  Knowledge  (Sattva),*
eternal  {nitya)  unconditioned  Reality,  or  Sat  (Satya),  whether  we  call  it
Parabrahman  or  Mulaprakriti,  for  these  are  but  the  two  symbols  of  the
One.  The  "L/ight"  is  the  same  Omnipresent  Spiritual  Ray,  which  has
entered  and  now  fecundated  the  Divine  Egg,  and  calls  cosmic  matter
to  begin  its  long  series  of  differentiations.  The  "Curds"  are  the  first
differentiation,  and  probably  also  refer  to  that  cosmic  matter  which  is
supposed  to  be  the  origin  of  the  Milky  Way — the  matter  we  know.
This  "matter,"  which,  according  to  the  revelation  received  from  the
primeval  Dhyani-Buddhas,  is,  during  the  periodical  Sleep  of  the
Universe,  of  the  ultimate  tenuity  conceivable  to  the  eye  of  the  perfect
Bodhisattva — this  matter,  radiant  and  cool,  becomes,  at  the  first  re-
awakening of  cosmic  motion,  scattered  through  Space ;  appearing,  when
seen  from  the  Earth,  in  clusters  and  lumps,  like  curds  in  thin  milk.
These  are  the  seeds  of  the  future  worlds,  the  "  star-stuff."


STANZA  1\\.— Continued.

6.  The  Root  of  IvIFE  was  in  every  Drop  of  the  Ocean  of  Im-
mortality,! AND  THE  Ocean  was  Radiant  IvIGht,  which  was  Fire,
AND  Heat,  and  Motion.     Darkness  vanished  and  was  no  more;

IT  disappeared  in  ITS  OWN  ESSENCE,  THE  BODY  OF  FiRE  AND  WATER,

OF  Father  and  Mother.

The  Essence  of  Darkness  being  Absolute  Light,  Darkness  is  taken  as
the  appropriate  allegorical  representation  of  the  condition  of  the
Universe  during  Pralaya,  or  the  term  of  Absolute  Rest,  or  Non-Being,
as  it  appears  to  our  finite  minds.  The  "  Fire,  and  Heat,  and  Motion,"
here  spoken  of,  are,  of  course,  not  the  fire,  heat,  and  motion  of  Physical
Science,  but  the  underlying  abstractions,  the  noumena,  or  the  soul,  of

*  "The  original  for  Understanding  is  Sattva,  which  Shankara  renders  Antaskarana.  'Refined,'  he
says,  'by  sacrifices  and  other  sanctifying  operations.'  In  the  Kalha,  at  p.  148,  Sattva  is  rendered  by
Shankara  to  mean  Buddhi — a  common  use  of  the  word."  [Bhagavadgitd ,  etc.,  translated  by  Kashiuath
Trimbak  Telang,  M.A. ;  edited  by  Max  Miiller,  p.  193.)  Whatever  meaning  various  schools  may  give
the  term,  Sattva  is  the  name  .given  among  Occult  students  of  the  Aryasanga  School  to  the  dual  Monad,
or  Atma-Buddhi,  and  Atma-Buddhi  on  this  plane  corresponds  to  Parabrahman  and  Mulaprakriti  ou
the  higher  plane.

+  Amrita.


DARKNESS  AND   UGHT.  99

the  essence  of  these  material  manifestations — the  "things  in  them-
selves," which,  as  Modern  Science  confesses,  entirely  elude  the  instru-
ments of  the  laboratory,  and  which  even  the  mind  cannot  grasp,
although  it  can  equally  as  little  avoid  the  conclusion  that  these  under-
Ijang  essences  of  things  must  exist.  "  Fire  and  Water,  or  Father  and
Mother,"  may  be  taken  here  to  mean  the  divine  Ray  and  Chaos.
"Chaos,  from  this  union  with  Spirit  obtaining  sense,  shone  with
pleasure,  and  thus  was  produced  the  Protogonos  [the  first-born
Light],"  says  a  fragment  of  Hernias.  Damascius  calls  it  Dis,  the
"disposer  of  all  things."*

According  to  the  Rosicrucian  tenets,  as  handled  and  explained  by
the  profane  for  once  correctly,  if  only  partially,  "Light  and  Darkness
are  identical  in  themselves,  being  only  divisible  in  the  human  mind";
and  according  to  Robert  Fludd,  "Darkness  adopted  illumination  in
order  to  make  itself  visible."!  According  to  the  tenets  of  Eastern
Occultism,  Darkness  is  the  one  true  actuality,  the  basis  and  the  root  of
Light,  without  which  the  latter  could  never  manifest  itself,  nor  even
exist.  Light  is  Matter,  and  Darkness  pure  Spirit.  Darkness,  in  its
radical,  metaphysical  basis,  is  subjective  and  absolute  Light;  while
the  latter  in  all  its  seeming  effulgence  and  glory,  is  merely  a  mass
of  shadows,  as  it  can  never  be  eternal,  and  is  simply  an  Illusion,
or  Maya.

Kven  in  the  niind-bafflihg  and  science-harassing  Genesis, X  light  is
created  out  of  darkness — "and  darkness  was  upon  the  face  of  the
deep" — and  not  vice  versa.  "In  him  [in  darkness]  was  life;  and  the
life  was  the  light  of  men."§  A  day  may  come  when  the  e5^es  of  men
will  be  opened;  and  then  they  may  comprehend  better  than  they  do
now  the  verse  in  the  Gospel  of  John  that  says,  "And  the  light  shineth
in  darkness;  and  the  darkness  comprehendeth  it  not."  They  will  see
then  that  the  word  "darkness"  does  not  apply  to  man's  spiritual  eye-
sight, but  indeed  to  Darkness,  the  Absolute,  that  comprehendeth  not
(cannot  cognize)  transient  Light,  however  transcendent  to  hiiman
eyes.  Demon  est  Deus  inversus.  The  Devil  is  now  called  "darkness"
by  the  Church,  whereas  in  the  Bible,  in  the  Book  of  Job,  he  is  called  the
"Son  of  God,"  the  bright  star  of  the  early  morning,  Lucifer.  There  is
a  whole  philosophy  of  dogmatic  craft  in  the  reason  why  the  first  Arch-
angel, who  sprang  from  the  depths  of  Chaos,  was  called  Lux  (Lucifer),
the  luminous  "Son  of  the  Morning,"  or  Manvantaric  Dawn.     He  has


*  Cory's  Ancient  Fraginents, -p.  l\i,.  +  On  Rosenkranz.  t  i.  2.  \John,\.^.


lOO  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.


been  transformed  by  the  Church  into  lyiicifer  or  Satan,  because  he  is
higher  and  older  than  Jehovah,  and  had  to  be  sacrificed  to  the  new
dogma.


STANZA  lll.—Co7iHmied.

7.  Behold,  O  Lanoo,*  the  Radiant  Child  of  the  Two,  the  un-
paralleled REFULGENT  GLORY — BRIGHT  SpACE,  Son  OF  DARK  SpACE,
WHO     EMERGES    FROM     THE    DEPTHS    OF  THE    GREAT    DARK    WATERS.

It  is  Oeaohoo,  the  1''ounger,  the  *  *  *  f  (a).  He  shines  forth
AS  the  Sun,  he  is  the  Blazing  Divine  Dragon  of  Wisdom;  the
Eka|  is  Chatur,  and  Chatur  takes  to  itself  Tri,  and  the  Union

PRODUCES  THE  SAPTA,  IN  WHOM  ARE  THE  SEVEN,   WHICH  BECOME   THE

Tridasha,§  the   Hosts  and  the  Multitudes  {b).      Behold   him

LIFTING    THE    VEIL,    AND    UNFURLING    IT    FROM    EaST   TO    WEST.      HE

shuts  out  the  Above,  and  leaves  the  Below  to  be  seen  as  the
Great  Illusion.    He  marks  the  places  for  the  Shining  Ones,||

AND   TURNS    THE   IJPPER  ^   INTO    A   SHORELESS    SEA    OF    FiRE  (c),    AND

THE  One  Manifested**  into  the  Great  Waters.

{a)  "Bright  Space,  Son  of  Dark  Space,"  corresponds  to  the  Ray
dropped  at  the  first  thrill  of  the  new  Dawn  into  the  great  Cosmic
Depths,  from  which  it  reemerges  differentiated  as  "Oeaohoo,  the
Younger"  (the  "New  Life"),  to  be  to  the  end  of  the  Life-Cycle  the
Germ  of  all  things.  He  is  "the  Incorporeal  Man  who  contains  in  him-
self the  Divine  Idea,"  the  generator  of  Light  and  Life,  to  use  an
expression  of  Philo  Judseus.  He  is  called  the  "Blazing  Dragon  of
Wisdom,"  because,  firstly,  he  is  that  which  the  Greek  philosophers
called  the  Logos,  the  Verbum  of  the  Thought  Divine;  and  secondly,
because  in  Esoteric  Philosophy  this  first  manifestation,  being  the  syn-
thesis or  the  aggregate  of  Universal  Wisdom,  Oeaohoo,  the  "Son  of
the  Sun,"  contains  in  himself  the  Seven  Creative  Hosts  (Sephiroth),

*Lanoo  is  a  student,  a  Chela  who  studies  practical  Esotericism.

t  "Whom  thou  knowest  now  as  Kwan-Shai-Yin." — Comment.

t  Eka  is  One;  Chatur,  Four;  Tri,  Three;  and  Sapta,  Seven.

\  "Tridasha,"  or  Thirty,  three  times  ten,  alludes  to  the  Vedic  deities  in  round  numbers,  or  more
accurately  33— a  sacred  number.  They  are  the  12  Adityas,  the  8  Vasus,  the  ii  Rudras,  and  the  2
Ashvins— the  twin  sons  of  the  Sun  and  Sky.  This  is  the  root-number  of  the  Hindu  Pantheon,  which
enumerates  2,2  crores,  or  three  hundred  and  thirty  millions  of  gods  and  goddesses.

II  Stars.

IT  The  Upper  Space.

**  Element.


ANDROGYNOUS    DEITIES.  lOI

and  is  thus  the  essence  of  manifested  Wisdom.  ''He  who  bathes  in  the
Light  of  Oeaohoo  will  never  be  deceived  by  the  Veil  of  MayaT

"Kwan-Shai-Yin"  is  identical  with,  and  an  equivalent  of  the  Sanskrit
Avalokiteshvara,  and  as  such  is  an  androgynous  deity,  like  the  Tetra-
gramraaton  and  all  the  Logoi  of  antiquity.  It  is  only  by  some  sects
in  China  that  he  is  anthropomorphized,  and  represented  with  female
attributes;  under  his  female  aspect  becoming  Kwan-Yin,  the  Goddess
of  Mercy,  called  the  "Divine  Voice."*  The  latter  is  the  patron  deity
of  Tibet  and  of  the  island  of  Puto  in  China,  where  both  deities  have  a
number  of  monasteries.!

The  higher  gods  of  antiquity  are  all  "Sons  of  the  Mother"  before
they  become  "Sons  of  the  Father."  The  Logoi,  like  Jupiter  or  Zeus,
son  of  Cronus-Saturn,  "Infinite  Time"  (Kala),  in  their  origin  were
represented  as  male-female.  Zeus  is  said  to  be  the  "beautiful  virgin,"
and  Venus  is  made  bearded.  Apollo  was  originally  bisexual,  so  is
Brahma- Vach  in  Mayiu  and  the  Piiranas.  Osiris  is  interchangeable
with  Isis,  and  Horus  is  of  both  sexes.  Finally  in  St.  John's  vision
in  Revelation,  the  I^ogos,  who  is  now  connected  with  Jesus,  is  her-
maphrodite, for  he  is  described  as  having  female  breasts.  So  also  is
Tetragrammaton,  or  Jehovah.  But  there  are  two  Avalokiteshvaras  in
Esotericism ;  the  First  and  the  Second  Logos.

No  religious  symbol  can  escape  profanation  and  even  derision  in  our
days  of  politics  and  science.  In  Southern  India  the  writer  has  seen  a
converted  native  making  puja  with  offerings  before  a  statue  of  Jesus
clad  in  woman's  clothes  and  with  a  ring  in  its  nose.  On  asking  the
meaning  of  this  masquerade,  we  were  answered  that  it  was  Jesu-Maria
blended  in  one,  and  that  it  was  done  by  the  permission  of  the  Padre,  as
the  zealous  convert  had  no  money  to  purchase  two  statues,  or  "idols"  as
they,  very  properly,  were  called  by  a  witness,  another  but  a  non-con-
verted Hindu.  Blasphemous  this  will  appear  to  a  dogmatic  Christian,
but  the  Theosophist  and  the  Occultist  must  award  the  palm  of  logic  to
the  converted  Hindii.  The  esoteric  Christos  in  the  Gnosis  is,  of  course,
sexless,  but  in  exoteric  Theology  he  is  male  and  female.


•The  Gnostic  Sophia,  "Wisdom,"  who  is  the  "Mother"  of  the  Ogdoad  (Aditi,  in  a  certain  sense,
with  her  eight  sons),  is  the  Holy  Ghost  and  the  Creator  of  all,  as  in  the  ancient  systems.  The
"  Father  "  is  a  far  later  invention.  The  earliest  manifested  Logos  was  female  everywhere— the  mother
of  the  seven  planetan,'  powers.

■f  See  Chinese  Buddhism,  by  the  Rev.  Joseph  Rdkins,  who  always  gives  correct  facts,  although  his
conclusions  are  very  frequently  erroneous.


I02  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

(3)  The  "Dragon  of  Wisdom"  is  the  One,  the  "Eka"  or  Saka.  It  is
curious  that  Jehovah's  name  in  Hebrew  should  also  be  One,  Achad.
"His  name  is  Achad,"  say  the  Rabbins.  The  Philologists  ought  to
decide  which  of  the  two  is  derived  from  the  other,  linguistically  and
symbolically;  surely,  not  the  Sanskrit.  The  "One"  and  the  "Dragon"
are  expressions  used  by  the  ancients  in  connection  with  their  respective
IrOgoi.  Jehovah — esoterically  Elohim — is  also  the  Serpent  or  Dragon
that  tempted  Eve;  and  the  Dragon  is  an  old  gb'ph  for  the  Astral  Light
(Primordial  Principle),  "which  is  the  Wisdom  of  Chaos."  Archaic
philosophy,  recognizing  neither  Good  nor  Evil  as  a  fundamental  or  in-
dependent power,  but  starting  from  the  Absolute  Ai.l  (Universal  Per-
fection eternally),  traces  both  through  the  course  of  natural  evolution
to  pure  Eight  condensing  gradually  into  form,  and  hence  becoming
Matter  or  Evil.  It  was  left  with  the  early  and  ignorant  Christian
Fathers  to  degrade  the  philosophical  and  highly  scientific  idea  of  this
emblem  into  the  absurd  superstition  called  the  "Devil."  They  took
this  from  the  later  Zoroastrians,  who  saw  Devils  or  Evil  in  the  Hindii
Devas,  and  the  word  Evil  has  become  by  a  double  transmutation  D'Evil
(Diabolos,  Diable,  Diavolo,  Teufel),  But  the  Pagans  have  always  shown
a  philosophical  discrimination  in  their  symbols.  The  primitive  sym-
bol of  the  serpent  symbolized  divine  Wisdom  and  Perfection,  and  has
always  stood  for  psychical  Regeneration  and  Immortality.  Hence,
Hermes  calling  the  serpent  the  most  spiritual  of  all  beings;  Moses,
initiated  into  the  Wisdom  of  Hermes,  following  suit  in  Genesis ;  the
Gnostic  Serpent  with  the  seven  vowels  over  its  head,  being  the
emblem  of  the  Seven  Hierarchies  of  the  Septenary  or  Planetary
Creators.  Hence,  also,  the  Hindii  serpent  Shesha  or  Ananta,  the
Infinite,  a  name  of  Vishnu,  and  his  first  Vahana,  or  Vehicle,  on  the
Primordial  Waters.  Eike  the  Eogoi  and  the  Hierarchies  of  Powers,
however,  these  serpents  have  to  be  distinguished  one  from  the  other.
Shesha  or  Ananta,  the  "Couch  of  Vishnu,"  is  an  allegorical  abstrac-
tion, symbolizing  infinite  Time  in  Space,  which  contains  the  Germ
and  throws  off  periodically  the  efflorescence  of  this  Germ,  the  Mani-
fested Universe;  whereas,  the  Gnostic  Ophis  contains  the  same  triple
symbolism  in  its  seven  vowels  as  the  one,  three  and  seven-syllabled
Oeaohoo  of  the  archaic  doctrine;  i.e.,  the  First  Unmanifested  Eogos,
the  Second  Manifested,  the  Triangle  concreting  into  the  Quaterna-
ry or  Tetragrammaton,  and  the  Rays  of  the  latter  on  the  material
plane.


THE   SERPENT  SYMBOL.  103

Yet  they  all  made  a  difference  between  the  good  and  the  bad  Serpent
(the  Astral  Light  of  the  Kabalists) — between  the  former,  the  embodi-
ment of  divine  Wisdom  in  the  region  of  the  Spiritual,  and  the  latter.
Evil,  on  the  plane  of  Matter.  For  the  Astral  Ught,  or  the  Ether,  of
the  ancient  Pagans — the  name  Astral  Light  is  quite  modern — is  Spirit-
Matter.  Beginning  with  the  pure  spiritual  plane,  it  becomes  grosser
as  it  descends,  until  it  becomes  Maya,  or  the  tempting  and  deceitful
Serpent  on  our  plane.

Jesus  accepted  the  serpent  as  a  synonym  of  Wisdom,  and  this  formed
part  of  his  teaching:  "Be  ye  wise  as  serpents,"  he  says.  "/?i  the  begin-
ning, before  Mother  became  Father- Mother,  the  Fiery  Dragon  moved  in  the
Infinitudes  alo7ie."*  The  Aitareya  Brahmana  calls  the  Earth  Sarparajni,
the  "Serpent  Queen,"  and  the  "Mother  of  all  that  moves."  Before  our
globe  became  egg-shaped  (and  the  Universe  also),  "a  long  trail  of
cosmic  dust  [or  fire-mist]  moved  and  writhed  like  a  serpent  in  Space."
The  "Spirit  of  God  moving  on  Chaos"  was  symbolized  by  every  nation
in  the  shape  of  a  fiery  serpent  breathing  fire  and  light  upon  the  prim-
ordial waters,  until  it  had  incubated  cosmic  matter  and  made  it  assume
the  annular  shape  of  a  serpent  with  its  tail  in  its  mouth — which  sym-
bolizes not  only  eternity  and  infinitude,  but  also  the  globular  shape  of
all  the  bodies  formed  within  the  Universe  from  that  fiery  mist.  The
Universe,  as  also  the  Earth  and  Man,  serpent-like,  periodically  cas_t  off
their  old  skins,  to  assume  new  ones  after  a  time  of  rest.  The  serpent
is  surely  not  a  less  graceful  or  a  more  unpoetical  image  than  the
caterpillar  and  chrysalis  from  which  springs  the  butterfly,  the  Greek
emblem  of  Ps5^che,  the  human  soul !  The  Dragon  was  also  thfe  symbol
of  the  Logos  with  the  Egyptians,  as  with  the  Gnostics.  In  the  Book  of
Hermes,  Pymander,  the  oldest  and  the  most  spiritual  of  the  Logoi  of
the  Western  Continent,  appears  to  Hermes  in  the  shape  of  a  Fiery
Dragon  of  "Light,  Fire,  and  Flame."  Pymander,  the  "Thought
Divine"  personified,  says:

The  Light  is  I,  I  am  the  Nous  [the  Mind  or  IManu],  I  am  thy  God,  and  I  am  far
older  than  the  human  principle  which  escapes  from  the  shadow  [Darkness,  or  the
concealed  Deity].  I  am  the  germ  of  thought,  the  resplendent  Word,  the  Son  of
God.  All  that  thus  sees  and  hears  in  thee  is  the  Verbum  of  the  Master;  it  is  the
Thought  [Mahat]  which  is  God,  the  Father. t    The  celestial  Ocean,  the  ^ther,

•  Book  of  Sarpar&jni.

t  By  "God,  the  Father,"  the  seventh  principle  in  Man  and  Kosmos  are  here  unmistakably  meant,
this  principle  being  inseparable  in  its  Esse  and  Nature  from  the  seventh  cosmic  principle.  In  one
sense  it  is  the  Logos  of  the  Greeks  and  the  Avalokiteshvara  of  the  Esoteric  "  Buddhists."


I04  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

....     is  the  Breath  of  the  Father,  the  life-giving  principle,  the  Mother,  the
,  Holy  Spirit,     ....     for  these  are  not  separated,  and  their  union  is  Life.

Here  we  find  the  unmistakable  echo  of  the  archaic  Secret  Doctrine,
as  now  expounded.  Only  the  latter  does  not  place  at  the  head  of  the
Evolution  of  Life  the  "Father,"  who  comes  third  and  is  the  "Son  of
the  Mother,"  but  the  "Eternal  and  Ceaseless  Breath  of  the  Ael."
Mahat  (Understanding,  Universal  Mind,  Thought,  etc.),  before  it  mani-
fests itself  as  Brahma  or  Shiva,  appears  as  Vishnu,  says  the  Sd?ikhya
Sdra."^  Hence  it  has  several  aspects,  just  as  the  Logos  has.  Mahat  is
called  the  Lord,  in  the  Primary  Creation,  and  is,  in  this  sense.  Uni-
versal Cognition  or  Thought  Divine;  but,  "that  Mahat  which  was
first  produced  is  (afterwards)  called  Ego-ism,  when  it  is  born  as  (the
feeling  itself)  'I,'  that  is  said  to  be  the  Secondary  Creation."!  And  the
translator  (an  able  and  learned  Brahman,  not  a  European  Orientalist)
explains  in  a  foot-note,  ''i.e.,  when  Mahat  develops  into  the  feeling  of
Self-Consciousness — I — then  it  assumes  the  name  of  Egoism,"  which,
translated  into  our  Esoteric  phraseology,  means — when  Mahat  is  trans-
formed into  the  human  Manas  (or  even  that  of  the  finite  gods),  and
becomes  Aham-s\n^.  Why  it  is  called  the  Mahat  of  the  Secondary
Creation  (or  the  Ninth,  the  Kaumara  in  Vishnu  Purdna),  will  be  ex-
plained hereafter.

(c)  The  "Sea  of  Fire"  is,  then,  the  Super-Astral  (^i.e.,  Noumenal)
Light,  the  first  radiation  from  the  Root  Mulaprakriti,  Undifferentiated
Cosmic  Substance,  which  becomes  Astral  Matter.  It  is  also  called  the
"Fiery  Serpent,"  as  above  described.  If  the  student  bears  in  mind  that
there  is  but  One  Universal  Element,  which  is  infinite,  unborn,  and  un-
dying and  that  all  the  rest — as  in  the  world  of  phenomena — are  but  so
many  various  differentiated  aspects  and  transformations  (correlations,
they  are  now  called)  of  that  One,  from  macrocosmical  down  to  micro-
cosmical  effects,  from  super-human  down  to  human  and  sub-human
beings,  the  totality,  in  short,  of  objective  existence — then  the  first
and  chief  difficulty  will  disappear  and  Occult  Cosmology  may  be
mastered.  Thus  in  the  Egyptian  also  as  in  the  Indian  Theogony
there  was  a  Concealed  Deity,  the  One,  and  a  creative,  androgynous
god ;  Shoo  being  the  god  of  creation,  and  Osiris  in  his  original
primary  form,  the  god  "whose  name  is  unknown."  %

All  the  Kabalists  and  Occultists,  Eastern  and  Western,  recognize  {a)

*  Fitzedward  Hall's  edition,  in  the  Bibliotheca  Indica,  p.  i6.
t  Anugitd,  ch.  xxvi,  K.  T.  Telang's  Translation,  p.  333.
I  See  Mariette's  Abydos,  II.  63,  and  III.  413,  414,  No.  1,122.


THE    MAGICAL   AGENT.  I05

the  identity'  of  "Father- Mother"  with  Primordial  ^ther,  or  Akasha
(Astral  Light);  and  {b)  its  homogeneity  before  the  evolution  of  the
"Son,"  cosmically  Fohat,  for  it  is  Cosmic  Electricity.  "Fohat  hardens
and  scatters  the  Seven  Brothers'' ;'^  which  means  that  the  Primordial
Electric  Entity — for  the  Eastern  Occultists  insist  that  Electricity  is  an
Entity — electrifies  into  life,  and  separates  primordial  stuff  or  pregenetic
matter  into  atoms,  themselves  the  source  of  all  life  and  consciousness.
"There  exists  a  universal  agent  unique  oi  all  forms  and  of  life,  that  is
called  Od,  Ob,  and  Aour,t  active  and  passive,  positive  and  negative,
like  day  and  night:  it  is  the  first  light  in  Creation"  (Eliphas  Eevi) —
the  "first  light"  of  the  primordial  Elohim,  the  Adam,  "male  and
female,"  or  (scientifically)  Electricity  and  Eife.

The  ancients  represented  it  by  a  serpent,  for  ''Fohat  hisses  as  he
glides  hither  and  thither''  in  zigzags.  The  Kabalah  figures  it  with  the
Hebrew  letter  Teth,  Jd,  whose  symbol  is  the  serpent  which  played  such
a  prominent  part  in  the  Mysteries.  Its  universal  value  is  nine,  for  it  is
the  ninth  letter  of  the  alphabet,  and  the  ninth  door  of  the  fifty  portals,
or  gatewaj^s,  that  lead  to  the  concealed  mysteries  of  being.  It  is  the
magical  agent  par  excellence,  and  designates  in  Hermetic  philosophy
"  Life  infused  into  Primordial  Matter,"  the  essence  that  composes  all
things,  and  the  spirit  that  determines  their  form.  But  there  are  two
secret  Hermetical  operations,  one  spiritual,  the  other  material,  correla-
tive and  for  ever  united.     As  Hermes  says :

Thou  Shalt  separate  the  earth  from  the  fire,  the  subtile  from  the  solid  ....
that  which  ascends  from  earth  to  heaven  and  descends  again  from  heaven  to  earth.
It  [the  subtile  light]  is  the  strong  force  of  every  force,  for  it  conquers  every  subtile
thing  and  penetrates  into  every  solid.     Thus  was  the  world  formed.

It  was  not  Zeno,  the  founder  of  the  Stoics,  alone,  who  taught  that  the
Universe  evolves,  and  its  primary  substance  is  transformed  from  the
state  of  fire  into  that  of  air,  then  into  that  of  water,  etc.  Heraclitus  of
Ephesus  maintained  that  the  one  principle  that  underlies  all  phenomena
in  Nature  is  fire.  The  intelligence  that  moves  the  Universe  is  fire,  and
fire  is  intelligence.  And  while  Anaximenes  said  the  same  of  air,  and
Thales  of  Miletus  (600  years  B.C.)   of  water,   the   Esoteric   Doctrine

•  Book  of  Dzyan,  III.

+  Od  is  the  pure  life-givingf  Light,  or  magnetic  fluid  ;  Ob  the  messenger  of  death  used  by  sorcerers,
the  nefarious  evil  fluid;  Aour  is  the  synthesis  of  the  two.  Astral  Light  proper.  Can  the  Philologists
tell  why  Od— a  terra  used  by  Reichenbach  to  denominate  the  vital  fluid— is  also  a  Tibetan  word
meaning  light,  brightness,  radiancy?  It  also  means  "sky"  in  an  Occult  sense.  Whence  the  root  of
the  word?     But  Akasha  is  not  quite  Ether,  but  far  higher  than  that,  as  will  be  shown.


Io6  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

reconciles   all   these  philosophers,  by  showing  that   though  each  was
right,  the  sj^stem  of  none  was  complete.


STANZA   lll.—Conti7med.

8.  Where  was  the  Germ,  and  where  was  now  Darkness?
Where  is  the  Spirit  of  the  Flame  that  burns  in  thy  IvAmp,  O
IvAnoo?  The  Germ  is  That,  and  That  is  Light,  the  White
Brilliant  Son  of  the  Dark  Hidden  Father.

The  answer  to  the  first  question,  suggested  by  the  second,  which  is
the  reply  of  the  teacher  to  the  pupil,  contains  in  a  single  phrase  one
of  the  most  essential  truths  of  Occult  Philosophy.  It  indicates  the
existence  of  things  imperceptible  to  our  physical  senses  which  are  of
far  greater  importance,  more  real  and  more  permanent,  than  those  that
appeal  to  these  senses  themselves.  Before  the  Lanoo  can  hope  to
understand  the  transcendentally  metaphysical  problem  contained  in
the  first  question,  he  must  be  able  to  answer  the  second ;  while  the
very  answer  he  gives  to  the  second  will  furnish  him  with  the  clue  to
the  correct  reply  to  the  first.

In  the  Sanskrit  Commentary  on  this  Stanza,  the  terms  used  for  the
concealed  and  the  unrevealed  Principle  are  many.  In  the  earliest  MSS.
of  In4ian  literature  this  Unrevealed  Abstract  Deity  has  no  name.  It  is
generally  called  "That"  (Tad,  in  Sanskrit),  and  means  all  that  is,  was,
and  will  be,  or  that  can  be  so  received  by  the  human  mind.

Among  such  appellations  given — of  course,  only  in  Esoteric  Philo-
sophy— as  the  "Unfathomable  Darkness,"  the  "Whirlwind,"  etc.,  it  is
also  called  the  "It  of  the  Kalahansa,"  the  "Kala-ham-sa,"  and  even  the
"  Kali  Hamsa  "  (Black  Swan).  Here  the  w  and  the  n  are  convertible,
and  both  sound  like  the  nasal  French  an  or  am.  As  in  the  Hebrew
so  also  in  the  Sanskrit  many  a  mysterious  sacred  name  conveys  to  the
profane  ear  no  more  than  some  ordinary,  and  often  vulgar  word,  be-
cause it  is  concealed  anagrammatically  or  otherwise.  This  word  Hansa,
or  Hamsa,  is  just  such  a  case.  Hamsa  is  equal  to  "A-ham-sa"— three
words  meaning  "I  am  He";  while  divided  in  still  another  way  it  will
read  "So-ham,"  "He  [is]  I."  In  this  single  word  is  contained,  for
him  who  understands  the  language  of  wisdom,  the  universal  mystery,
the  doctrine  of  the  identity  of  man's  essence  with  god-essence.  Hence
the  glyph  of,  and  the  allegory  about,  Kalahansa  (or  Hamsa),  and  the
name  given  to  Brahman  (neuter),  later  on  to  the  male  Brahma,  of


I   AM    THAT   I    AM.  I07

Hamsa-vahana,  "  he  who  uses  the  Hamsa  as  his  vehicle."  The  same
word  may  be  read  "  Kalaham-sa,"  or  "  I  am  I,  in  the  eternity  of  time,"
answering  to  the  Biblical,  or  rather  Zoroastrian,  "I  am  that  I  am."  The
same  doctrine  is  found  in  the  Kabalah,  as  witness  the  following  extract
from  an  unpublished  MS.  by  Mr.  S.  Liddell  McGregor  Mathers,  the
learned  Kabalist  :

The  three  pronouns,  NIH,  HriN,  "^DN,  Hua,  Ateh,  Ani— He,  Thou,  I— are  used  to
symbolize  the  ideas  of  Macroposopus  and  Microprosopus  in  the  Hebrew  Qabalah.
Hua,  "  He,"  is  applied  to  the  hidden  and  concealed  Macroprosopus  ;  Ateh,  "  Thou,"
to  Microprosopus;  and  Ani,  "I,"  to  the  latter  when  He  is  represented  as  speaking.
(See  Lesser  Holy  Assembly,  204  et  scq.)  It  is  to  be  noted  that  each  of  these  names
consists  of  three  letters,  of  which  the  letter  Aleph  N,  A,  forms  the  conclusion  of  the
first  word  Hua,  and  the  commencement  of  Atah  and  Ani,  as  if  it  were  the  connect-
ing link  between  them.  But  N  is  the  symbol  of  the  Unity  and  consequently  of  the
unvarying  Idea  of  the  Divine  operating  through  all  these.  But  behind  the  N
in  the  name  Hua  are  the  letters  "I  and  H,  the  symbols  of  the  numbers  Six  and
Five,  the  I\Iale  and  the  Female,  the  Hexagram  and  the  Pentagram.  And  the  num-
bers of  these  three  words,  Hua,  Ateh,  Ani,  are  12,  406,  and  61,  which  are  resumed  in
the  key  numbers  of  3,  10,  and  7,  by  the  Qabalah  of  the  Nine  Chambers  which  is  a
form  of  the  exegetical  rule  of  Temura.

It  is  useless  to  attempt  to  explain  the  mj'stery  in  full.  Materialists
and  the  men  of  Modern  Science  will  never  understand  it,  since,  in
order  to  obtain  clear  perception  of  it,  one  has  first  of  all  to  admit  the
postulate  of  a  universally  diffused,  omnipresent,  eternal  Deity  in
Nature;  secondly,  to  have  fathomed  the  mystery  of  electricity  in  its
true  essence ;  and  thirdly,  to  credit  man  with  being  the  septenary
symbol,  on  the  terrestrial  plane,  of  the  One  Great  Unit,  the  Logos,
which  is  Itself  the  seven-vowelled  sign,  the  Breath  crystallized  into  the
Word.*  He  who  believes  in  all  this,  has  also  to  believe  in  the  multiple
combination  of  the  seven  planets  of  Occultism  and  of  the  Kabalah,  with
the  twelve  zodiacal  signs ;  and  attribute,  as  we  do,  to  each  planet  and  to
each  constellation  an  influence  which,  in  the  words  of  Mr.  Ely  Star  (a
French  astrologer),  "is  proper  to  it,  beneficent  or  maleficent,  and  this,
after  the  planetary  spirit  which  rules  it,  who,  in  his  turn,  is  capable  of
influencing  men  and  things  which  are  found  in  harmony  with  him  and
with  which  he  has  any  affinity."  For  these  reasons,  and  since  few
believe  in  the  foregoing,  all  that  can  now  be  given  is  that  in  both  cases


•  This  is  again  similar  to  the  doctrine  of  Fichte  and  German  Pantheists.  The  former  reveres  Jesus
as  the  great  teacher  who  inculcated  the  unity  of  the  spirit  of  man  with  the  God-Spirit  or  Universal
Principle  (the  Advaita  doctrine).  It  is  difficult  to  find  a  single  speculation  in  Western  metaphysics
which  has  not  been  anticipated  by  archaic  Eastern  philosophy.  From  Kant  to  Herbert  Spencer,  it  is
all  a  more  or  less  distorted  echo  of  the  Dvaita,  Advaita,  and  Vedantic  doctrines  generally.


I08  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

the  symbol  of  Hansa  (whether  I,  He,  Goose  or  Swafi)  is  an  important
symbol,  representing,  among  other  things.  Divine  Wisdom,  Wisdom  in
Darkness  beyond  the  reach  of  men.  For  all  exoteric  purposes,  Hansa,
as  every  Hindu  knows,  is  a  fabulous  bird  which,  when  (in  the  allegory)
given  milk  mixed  with  water  for  its  food,  separated  the  two,  drinking
the  milk  and  leaving  the  water;  thus  showing  inherent  wisdom — milk
standing  symbolically  for  spirit,  and  water  for  matter.

That  this  allegory  is  very  ancient  and  dates  from  the  very  earliest
archaic  period,  is  shown  by  the  mention,  in  the  Bhagavata  Purana,  of  a
certain  caste  named  Hamsa  or  Hansa,  which  was  the  "  one  caste"  par
excellence;  when  far  back  in  the  mists  of  a  forgotten  past  there  was
among  the  Hindus  only  "One  Veda,  One  Deity,  One  Caste."  There  is
also  a  range  in  the  Himalayas,  described  in  the  old  books  as  being
situated  north  of  Mount  Mem,  called  Hamsa,  and  connected  with
episodes  pertaining  to  the  history  of  religious  mysteries  and  initiations.
As  to  Kalahansa  being  the  supposed  Vehicle  of  Brahma-Prajapati,  in
the  exoteric  texts  and  translations  of  the  Orientalists,  it  is  quite  a
mistake.  Brahman,  the  neuter,  is  called  by  them  Kala-hansa,  and
Brahma,  the  male,  Hansa- vahana,  because,  forsooth,  "his  vehicle  is  a
swan  or  goose."*  This  is  a  purely  exoteric  gloss.  Esoterically  and
logically,  if  Brahman,  the  infinite,  is  all  that  is  described  by  the  Orien-
talists, and,  agreeably  with  the  Vedantic  texts,  is  an  abstract  deity,  in  no
way  characterized  by  the  ascription  of  any  human  attributes,  and  at
the  same  time  it  is  maintained  that  he  or  it  is  called  Kalahansa — then
how  can  it  ever  become  the  Vahan  of  Brahma,  the  manifested  finite
god?  It  is  quite  the  reverse.  The  "Swan  or  Goose"  (Hansa)  is  the
symbol  of  the  male  or  temporary  deity,  Brahma,  the  emanation  of  the
primordial  Ray,  which  is  made  to  serve  as  a  Vahan  or  Vehicle  for  the
Divine  Ray,  which  otherwise  could  not  manifest  itself  in  the  Universe,
being,  antiphrastically,  itself  an  emanation  of  Darkness — for  our  human
intellect,  at  any  rate.  It  is  Brahma,  then,  who  is  Kalahansa,  and  the
Ray,  Hansa-vahana.

As  to  the  strange  symbol  thus  chosen,  it  is  equally  suggestive;  the
true  mystic  significance  being  the  idea  of  a  Universal  Matrix,  figured
by  the  Primordial  Waters  of  the  Deep,  or  the  opening  for  the  reception,
and  subsequently  for  the  issuing,  of  that  One  Ray  (the  Logos)  which
contains  in  itself  the  other  Seven  Procreative  Rays  or  Powers  (the
IvOgoi  or  Builders).     Hence  the  choice  by  the  Rosecroix  of  the  aquatic

*  Compare  Dowson's  Dictionary  of  Hindil  Mythology,  p.  57.


PRIMEVAL   DIFFERENTIATIONS.  lOQ

fowl — whether  swan  or  pelican  * — with  seven  young  ones,  for  a  symbol,
modified  and  adapted  to  the  religion  of  everj^  country.  Ain  Suph  is
called  the  "Fiery  Soul  of  the  Pelican"  in  the  Book  of  Ntimbers.\  Appear-
ing with  everj^  Manvantara  as  Narayana,  or  Svayambhuva,  the  Self-
Existent,  and  penetrating  into  the  Mundane  Kgg,  it  emerges  from  it  at
the  end  of  the  divine  incubation  as  Brahma,  or  Prajapati,  the  progenitor
of  the  future  Universe,  into  which  he  expands.  He  is  Purusha  (Spirit),
but  he  is  also  Prakriti  (Matter).  Therefore  it  is  only  after  separating
itself  into  two  halves — Brahma- Vach  (the  female)  and  Brahma-Viraj
(the  male) — that  the  Prajapati  becomes  the  male  Brahma.


STANZA    III. — Continued.

9.  Light  is  Cold  Flame,  and  Flame  is  Fire,  and  Fire  produces
Heat,  which  yields  Water — the  Water  of  Life  in  the  Great
Mother.]:

It  must  be  remembered  that  the  words  "Light,"  "Flame"  and
"Fire,"  have  been  adopted  by  the  translators  from  the  vocabulary  of
the  old  "Fire  Philosophers," §  in  order  to  render  more  clearly  the
meaning  of  the  archaic  terms  and  symbols  employed  in  the  original.
Otherwise  they  would  have  remained  entirely  unintelligible  to  a
European  reader.  To  a  student  of  the  Occult,  however,  the  above
terms  will  be  sufficiently  clear.

All  these— "Light,"  "Flame,"  "Cold,"  "Fire,"  "Heat,"  "Water,"
and  "Water  of  Life" — are,  on  our  plane,  the  progeny,  or,  as  a  modern
Physicist  would  say,  the  correlations  of  Electricity.  Mighty  word,
and  a  still  mightier  symbol!  Sacred  generator  of  a  no  less  sacred
progeny;   of  Fire — the  creator,   the  preserver  and  the  destroyer;   of

*  Whether  the  genus  of  the  bird  be  cygnus,  anser,  or  pelecanus,  it  is  no  matter,  as  it  is  an  aquatic
bird  floating  or  moving  on  the  waters  like  the  Spirit,  and  then  issuing  from  those  waters  to  give  birth
to  other  beings.  The  true  significance  of  the  symbol  of  the  Eighteenth  Degree  of  the  Rosecroix  is
precisely  this,  though  it  was  later  on  poetised  into  the  motherly  feeling  of  the  pelican  rending  its
bosom  to  feed  its  seven  little  ones  with  its  blood.

t  The  reason  why  Moses  forbids  eating  the  pelican  and  swan  (Deuteronomy,  xiv.  16,  17),  classing
the  two  among  the  unclean  fowls,  and  permits  eating  "the  bald  locusts,  beetles,  and  the  grasshopper
after  his  kind"  (Leviticus  xi.  22.),  is  a  purely  physiological  one,  and  has  to  do  with  mystic  symbology
only  in  so  far  as  the  word  "unclean,"  like  every  other  word,  ought  not  to  be  understood  literally  ;  for
it  is  esoteric  like  all  the  rest,  and  may  as  well  mean  "  holy  "  as  not.  It  is  a  very  suggestive  blind  in
connection  with  certain  superstitions— ^-.^r-,  that  of  the  Russian  people,  who  will  not  use  the  pigeon  for
food;  not  because  it  is  "unclean"  but  because  the  " Holy  Ghost "  is  credited  with  ha\-ing  appeared
under  the  form  of  a  dove.

X  Chaos.

}  Not  the  Mediaeval  Alchemists,  but  the  Magi  and  Fire-Worshippers,  from  whom  the  Rosicrucians,
or  the  Philosophers  per  i/^nem,  the  successors  of  the  Theurgists,  borrowed  all  their  ideas  concerning
Fire,  as  a  m.ystic  and  divine  element.


no  the;  secret  doctrine.

lyight — the  essence  of  our  divine  ancestors ;  of  Flame — the  soul  of
things.  Electricity,  the  One  lyife  at  the  upper  rung  of  Being,  and
Astral  Fluid,  the  Athanor  of  the  Alchemists,  at  the  lower;  God  and
Devil,  Good  and  Evil.

Now,  why  is  Eight  called  "Cold  Flame"?     In  the  order  of  Cosmic
Evolution  (as  taught  by  the  Occultist),  the  energy  that  actuates  matter,
after  its  first  formation  into  atoms,  is  generated  on  our  plane  by  Cosmic
Heat ;  and  before  that  period  Cosmos,  in  the  sense  of  dissociated  matter,
was  not.     The  first  Primordial  Matter,  eternal  and  coeval  with  Space,
''which  has  neither  a  beginning  nor  an  end,  \_is']  tieither  hot  7ior  cold,  bzit  is
of  its  own  special  7iature,'"  says  the  Commentary'.      Heat  and  cold  are
relative  qualities  and  pertain  to  the  realms  of  the  manifested  worlds,
which  all  proceed  from  the  manifested  Hyle,  which,  in  its  absolutely
latent  aspect,  is  referred  to  as  the  "Cold  Virgin,"  and  when  awakened
to  life,  as  the  "Mother."     The  ancient  Western  cosmogonic  myths  state
that  at  first  there  was  only  cold  mist  (the  Father)  and  the  prolific  slime
(the  Mother,  Ilus  or  Hyle),  from  which  crept  forth  the  Mundane  Snake
(Matter).*     Primordial  Matter,  then,  before  it  emerges  from  the  plane
of  the  never-manifesting,  and  awakens  to  the  thrill  of  action  under  the
impulse  of  Fohat,  is  but  "  a  cool  radiance,  colourless,  formless,  tasteless,
and  devoid  of  every  quality  and  aspect."     Even  such  are  her  First-born,
the  "Four  Sons,"  who  "are  One,  and  become  Seven," — the  Entities,  by
whose  qualifications  and  names  the  ancient  Eastern  Occultists  called
the  four  of  the  seven  primal  "Centres  of  Force,"  or  Atoms,  that  develop
later  into  the  great  Cosmic  "Elements,"  now  divided  into  the  seventy
or  so  sub-elements,  known  to  Science.     The  four  "Primal  Natures"  of
the  first  Dhyan  Chohans  are  the  so-called  (for  want  of  better  terms)
Akashic,  Ethereal,  Watery  and  Fiery.     They  answer,  in  the  terminology
of  practical  Occultism,  to  the  scientific  definitions  of  gases,  which — to
convey  a  clear  idea  to  both  Occultists  and  laymen — may  be  defined  as
parahydrogenic,t  paraoxygenic,  oxyhydrogenic,  and  ozonic,  or  perhaps
nitrozonic;  the  latter  forces,  or  gases  (in  Occultism,  supersensuous,  yet
atomic  substances),  being  the  most  effective  and  active  when  energizing
on  the  plane  of  more  grossly  differentiated  matter.  These  elements  are
both  electro-positive  and  electro-negative.      These  and  many  more  are
probably  the  missing  links  of  Chemistry.      They  are  known  by  other
names  in  Alchemy  and  to  Occultists  who  practise  phenomenal  powers.
It  is  by  combining  and  recombining,  or  dissociating,  the  "Elements"

•  Isis  Unveiled,  I.  146.  t  "Para"  gives  the  force  of  beyond,  outside.


THE  WEB   OF   BEING.  Ill

in  a  certain  way,  by  means  of  Astral  Fire,  that  the  greatest  phenomena
are  produced.

STANZA  III.— Continued.

ID.  Father-Mother  spin  a  Web,  whose  upper  end  is  fastened
TO  Spirit,*  the  Light  op  the  One  Darkness,  and  the  lower  one

TO  ITS  shadowy  end,  MATTER;!  AND  THIS  WEB  IS  THE  UNIVERSE  SPUN
OUT   OF  THE   Two   SUBSTANCES  MADE  IN  OnE,  WHICH   IS   SvABHAVAT.

In  the  Mandukya  UpanishadX  it  is  written,  "As  a  spider  throws  out
and  retracts  its  web,  as  herbs  spring  up  in  the  ground  .  .  .  so  is
the  Universe  derived  from  the  undecaying  one,"  Brahma,  for  the  "Germ
of  unknown  Darkness,"  is  the  material  from  which  all  evolves  and
develops,  "as  the  web  from  the  spider,  as  foam  from  the  water,"  etc.
This  is  only  graphic  and  true,  if  the  term  Brahma,  the  "Creator,"  is
derived  from  the  root  brih,  to  increase  or  expand.  Brahma  "expands,'*
and  becomes  the  Universe  woven  out  of  his  own  substance.

The  same  idea  has  been  beautifully  expressed  by  Goethe,  who  says:
Thus  at  the  roaring  loom  of  Time  I  ply,
And  weave  for  God  the  garment  thou  see'st  Him  by.


STANZA  III.— Continued.

II.  It  §  EXPANDS  WHEN  THE  BrEATH  OF  FiRE  ||  IS  UPON  IT;  IT
CONTRACTS  WHEN  THE  BrEATH  OF  THE  MOTHER  ^  TOUCHES  IT.      ThEN

THE  Sons**  dissociate  and  scatter,  to  return  into  their  Mother's
Bosom,  at  the  end  of  the  Great  Day,  and  re-become  one  with
her.    When  iTff  is  cooling,  it  becomes  radiant.     Its  Sons  expand

AND    contract    THROUGH    THEIR    OWN    SELVES    AND    HEARTS;     THEY

EMBRACE  Infinitude.

The  expanding  of  the  Universe,  under  the  "Breath  of  Fire,"  is  very
suggestive  in  the  light  of  the  fire-mist  period,  of  which  Modern  Science
speaks  so  much,  and  knows  in  reality  so  little.

Great   heat   breaks    up    the    compound    elements    and    resolves  the

*  Purusha.
t  Prakriti.

I  I,  I.  7-

}  The  Web.

II  The  Father.

U  The  Root  of  Matter.

••  The  Elements,  with  their  respective  Powers,  or  Intelligences.

+t  The  Web.


112  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

heavenly  bodies  into  their  Primeval  One  Element,  explains  the  Com-
mentary.

'■'■Once  disintegrated  into  its  p7'inial  constituejit,  by  getthig  zvithin  the
attraction  and  reach  of  a  focus,  or  centre  of  heat  \_ene7gy\  of  which  many
are  carried  about  to  and  fro  in  space,  a  body,  whether  alive  or  dead,  will  be
vapourized,  and  held  in  the  'Bosof?i  of  the  Mother,'  zintil  Fohat,  gathering
a  few  of  the  clusters  of  Cosmic  Matter  \_nebulce],  will,  by  giving  it  a?i
impulse,  set  it  in  motion  anew,  develop  the  required  heat,  and  then  leave  it
to  follow  its  0W71  new  growl  hJ"'

The  expanding  and  contracting  of  the  "Web" — i.e.,  the  world-stuff,
or  atoms — express  here  the  pulsatory  movement ;  for  it  is  the  regular
contraction  and  expansion  of  the  infinite  and  shoreless  Ocean,  of  that
which  we  may  call  the  noumenon  of  Matter,  emanated  by  Svabhavat,
which  causes  the  universal  vibration  of  atoms.  But  it  is  also  sugges-
tive of  something  else.  It  shows  that  the  ancients  were  acquainted
with  that  which  is  now  the  puzzle  of  many  Scientists  and  especially  of
Astronomers — the  cause  of  the  first  ignition  of  matter,  or  world-stuff",
the  paradox  of  the  heat  produced  by  refrigerative  contraction,  and  other
such  cosmic  riddles — for  it  points  unmistakably  to  a  knowledge  by  the
ancients  of  such  phenomena.  ''There  is  heat  internal  and  heat  external
in  every  atom,''  say  the  MSS.  Commentaries,  to  which  the  writer  has  had
access,  ''the  Breath  of  the  Father  \^Spirit\  and  the  Breath  \or  Heat^  of
the  Mother  \_Matter']' ;  and  they  give  explanations  which  show  that  the
modern  theorj^  of  the  extinction  of  the  solar  fires,  by  loss  of  heat
through  radiation,  is  erroneous.  The  assumption  is  false  even  on  the
Scientists'  own  admission.  For,  as  Professor  Newcomb*  points  out,  "by
losing  heat  a  gaseous  body  contracts,  and  the  heat  generated  by  the
contraction  exceeds  that  which  it  had  to  lose  in  order  to  produce  the
contraction."  This  paradox,  that  a  body  gets  hotter,  as  the  shrinking
produced  by  its  getting  colder  is  greater,  has  led  to  long  disputes.  The
surplus  of  heat,  it  is  argued,  is  lost  by  radiation,  and  to  assume  that
the  temperature  is  not  lowered  pari  passu  with  a  decrease  of  volume
under  a  constant  pressure,  is  to  set  at  naught  the  law  of  Charles.
Contraction  develops  heat,  it  is  true;  but  contraction  (from  cooling)  is
incapable  of  developing  the  whole  amount  of  heat  at  any  time  existing
in  the  mass,  or  even  of  maintaining  a  body  at  a  constant  temperature,
etc.  Professor  Winchell  tries  to  reconcile  the  paradox — only  a  seeming
one  in  fact,    as  J.  Homer   Lanef  proved — by  vSuggesting  "something

*  Popular  Astronomy,  pp.  507,  508.  +  American  Journal  of  Science,  July,  1870.


CONSCIOUS  ELECTRICITY.  II3

besides  heat."  "May  it  not  be,"  he  asks,  "simply  a  repulsion  among
the  molecules,  which  varies  according  to  some  law  of  the  distance''?*
But  even  this  will  be  found  irreconcilable,  unless  this  "something
besides  heat"  is  ticketed  "Causeless  Heat,"  the  "Breath  of  Fire,"  the
all-creative  Force  plus  Absolute  Intelligence,  which  Physical  Science  is
not  likely  to  accept.

However  it  may  be,  the  reading  of  this  Stanza,  notwithstanding  its
archaic  phraseology,  shows  it  to  be  more  scientific  than  even  Modern
Science.


STANZA  \\l.—Co7itinued.
12.  Then  Svabhavat  sends  Fohat  to  harden  the  Atoms.    EAcnf

IS  A  PART   OF  THE  WEB.J      REFLECTING   THE  "  SELF-ExISTENT  LorD,"§

LIKE  A  Mirror,  each  becomes  in  turn  a  World.  ||

Fohat  hardens  the  Atoms;  i.e.,  by  infusing  energy  into  them,  he
scatters  the  "Atoms,"  or  Primordial  Matter.  ''  He  scatters  himself  while
scattering  Matter  into  Atoms."

It  is  through  Fohat  that  the  ideas  of  the  Universal  Mind  are  im-
pressed upon  Matter.  Some  faint  idea  of  the  nature  of  Fohat  may  be
gathered  from  the  appellation  "Cosmic  Electricity,"  sometimes  applied
to  it;  but,  in  this  case,  to  the  commonlj'  known  properties  of  electricity,
must  be  added  others,  including  intelligence.  It  is  of  interest  to  note
that  Modern  Science  has  come  to  the  conclusion,  that  all  cerebration
and  brain-activity  are  attended  by  electrical  phenomena.


STANZA   IV.
I.  .    .    .    Listen,  ye  Sons  of  the  Earth,  to  your  Instructors —
THE  Sons  of  the  FIre  (a).     Eearn  there  is  neither  first  nor
last;  for  all  is  One  Number,  issued  from  No-Number  {b).

(a)  The  terms,  the  "Sons  of  the  Fire,"  the  "Sons  of  the  Fire-
Mist,"  and  the  like,  require  explanation.  They  are  connected  with  a
great  primordial  and  universal  myster3^  and  it  is  not  easy  to  make  it
clear.  There  is  a  passage  in  the  Bhagavadgitd,  wherein  Krishna,
speaking  symbolically  and  esoterically,  says :

•  Winchell,  World-Life,  pp.  83-5.
+  Of  the  Atoms.
X  The  Universe.
}  Primeval  Light.

II  This  is  said  in  view  of  the  fact  that  the  flame  from  a  fire  is  inexhaustible,  and  that  the  lights
of  the  whole  Universe  could  be  lit  from  one  simple  rush-liiyht  without  diminishing-  the  flame.


114  '"'HE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

I  will  state  the  times  [conditions]  ...  at  which  devotees  departing  [from  this
life]  do  so  never  to  return  [be  reborn],  or  to  return  [to  incarnate  again].  The  fire,
the  flame,  the  day,  the  bright  [lucky]  fortnight,  the  six  months  of  the  northern

solstice,    departing  [djdng] in   these,    those  who   know  the   Brahman

[Yogis]  go  to  the  Brahman.  Smoke,  night,  the  dark  [unlucky]  fortnight,  the  six
months  of  the  southern  solstice,  (dying)  in  these,  the  devotee  goes  to  the  lunar  light
[or  mansion,  the  Astral  Light  also]  and  returns  [is  reborn].  These  two  paths,  bright
and  dark,  are  said  to  be  eternal  in  this  world  [or  Great  Kalpa  (Age)].  By  the  one  (a
man)  goes  never  to  return,  by  the  other  he  comes  back.*

Now  these  terms  "fire,"  "flame,"  "day,"  the  "bright  fortnight,"  etc.,
"smoke,"  "night,"  and  so  on,  leading  only  to  the  end  of  the  Lunar
Path,  are  incomprehensible  without  a  knowledge  of  Ksotericism.
These  are  all  na^nes  of  various  deities  which  preside  over  the  cosmo-
psychic  Powers.  We  often  speak  of  the  Hierarchy  of  "Flames,"  of
the  "Sons  of  Fire,"  etc.  Shankaracharya,  the  greatest  of  the  Esoteric
Masters  of  India,  says  that  Fire  means  a  deity  which  presides  over
Time  (Kala).  The  able  translator  of  the  Bhagavadgttd,  Kashinath
Trimbak  Telang,  M.A.,  of  Bombay,  confesses  he  has  "no  clear  notion
of  the  meaning  of  these  verses."  It  seems  quite  clear,  on  the  contrar}^
to  him  who  knows  the  Occult  doctrine.  With  these  verses  the  mj'Stic
sense  of  the  solar  and  lunar  symbols  are  connected.  The  Pitris  are
Lunar  Deities  and  our  Ancestors,  because  they  created  the  physical  man.
The  Agnishvatta,  the  Kumaras  (the  Seven  Mj'stic  Sages),  are  Solar
Deities,  though  they  are  Pitris  also;  and  these  are  the  "Fashioners  of
the  In7ier  Man."  They  are  "The  Sons  of  Fire,"  because  they  are  the
first  Beings,  called   "Minds,"   in  the  Secret   Doctrine,  evolved  from

Primordial  Fire.      "The  Lord is  a  consuming  fire."t     "The

Lord  shall  be  revealed with  his  mighty  angels  in  flaming

fire.":[  The  Holy  Ghost  descended  on  the  Apostles  as  "cloven  tongues
like  as  of  fire";§  Vishnu  will  return  on  Kalki,  the  White  Horse,  as  the
last  Avatara,  amid  fire  and  flames ;  and  Sosiosh  will  also  descend  on  a
White  Horse  in  a  "tornado  of  fire."  "And  I  saw  heaven  opened,  and
behold  a  white  horse ;  and  he  that  sat  upon  him  ....  and  his  name
is  called  the  Word  of  God,"||  amid  flaming  Fire.  Fire  is  ^ther  in  its
purest  form,  and  hence  is  not  regarded  as  matter,  but  is  the  unity  of
^ther — the  second,  manifested  deity — in  its  universality.     But  there

*  Chap,  viii.,  p.  80,  Telang's  Translation,
t  Deuteronomy,  iv   24.
+   JTtess.,  i.  7,  8.
i  Acts,  ii.  3.
H  Jfev.,  xix.  13.


THE   SEVEN   MYSTIC   SENSES.  II5

are  two  "Fires,"  and  a  distinction  is  made  between  them  in  the  Occult
teachings.  The  first,  or  the  ^uraXy /o7'mless  and  invisible  Fire,  concealed
in  the  Central  Spiritual  Su7i,  is  spoken  of  as  Triple  (metaphysi-
cally) ;  while  the  Fire  of  the  Manifested  Cosmos  is  Septenary,  through-
out both  the  Universe  and  our  Solar  System.  '' The  fire  of  knoiv ledge
burns  up  all  actioti  07i  the  plane  of  ilhisio7t''  says  the  Commentary.
"  Therefore,  those  who  have  acqtiired  it  a7id  are  ema7icipated,  are  called
'Firesy  Speaking  of  the  seven  senses,  symbolized  as  Hotris,  or
Priests,  Narada  says  in  A7mgitd:  "Thus  these  seven  [senses,  smell
and  taste,  and  colour,  and  sound,  etc.,]  are  the  causes  of  emancipa-
tion" ;  and  the  translator  adds:  "It  is  from  these  seven  from  which  the
Self  is  to  be  emancipated.  'I' [in  the  sentence,  'I  am  .  .  .  devoid
of  qualities']  must  mean  the  Self,  not  the  Brahmana  who  speaks."*

{b)  The  expression,  "all  is  One  Number,  issued  from  No-Number,"
relates  again  to  that  universal  and  philosophical  tenet  just  explained  in
the  commentary  on  Shloka  4  of  Stanza  III.  That  which  is  absolute,  is
of  course  No-Number ;  but  in  its  later  significance  it  has  an  application
both  in  Space  and  in  Time.  It  means  that  not  only  every  increment  of
time  is  part  of  a  larger  increment,  up  to  the  most  indefinitely  prolonged
duration  conceivable  by  the  human  intellect,  but  also  that  no  mani-
fested thing  can  be  thought  of  except  as  part  of  a  whole :  the  total
aggregate  being  the  One  Manifested  Universe  that  issues  from  the
Unmanifested  or  Absolute — called  Non-Being,  or  "No-Number,"  to
distinguish  it  from  Being,  or  the  "One  Number."


STANZA  lV.—Co7itinued.

2.  Learn  what  we,  who  descend  from  the  Primordiai,  Seven,
WE,  who  are  born  from  the  Primordiai,  Flame,  have  i^earnt
from  our  Fathers.    .    .    .

This  is  explained  in  Book  II,  and  the  term,  "Primordial  Flame,"
corroborates  what  is  said  in  the  first  paragraph  of  the  preceding  com-
mentary on  Stanza  IV.

The  distinction  between  the  "  Primordial"  and  the  subsequent  Seven
Builders  is  that  the  former  are  the  Ray  and  direct  emanation  of  the  first
"  Sacred  Four,"  the  Tetraktys,  that  is,  the  eternally  Self- Existent  One


•  Telang's  Translation,  Sacred  Books  of  the  East,  viii.  278.


Il6  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

— eternal  in  essence  note  well,  not  in  manifestation,  and  distinct  from  the
Universal  One.  Latent,  during  Pralaya,  and  active,  during  Manvan-
tara,  the  "Primordial"  proceed  from  "Father-Mother"  (Spirit-Hyle,  or
Ilus) ;  whereas  the  other  Manifested  Quaternary  and  the  Seven  proceed
from  the  Mother  alone.  It  is  the  latter  who  is  the  immaculate  Virgin -
Mother,  who  is  overshadowed,  not  impregnated,  by  the  Universal
Mystery — when  she  emerges  from  her  state  of  Laya,  or  undifferentiated
condition.  In  reality,  they  are,  of  course,  all  one ;  but  their  aspects  on
the  various  planes  of  Being  are  different.

The  first  Primordial  are  the  highest  Beings  on  the  Scale  of  Existence.
They  are  the  Archangels  of  Christianity,  those  who  refuse  to  create
or  rather  to  multiply — as  did  Michael  in  the  latter  system,  and  as  did
the  eldest  "Mind-born  Sons"  of  Brahma  (Vedhas).


STANZA  W .—Continued.
3.  From  the  Effulgency  of  Light — the   Ray  of   the   Ever-

DARKNESS — SPRANG     IN     SpACE    THE    REAWAKENED     ENERGIES;*    THE

One  from  the  Egg,  the  Six,  and  the  Five  {a).  Then  the  Three,
THE  One,  the  Four,  the  One,  the  Five — the  Twice  Seven,  the
Sum  Total  (U).  And  these  are  the  Essences,  the  Flames,  the
Elements,  the  Builders,  the  Numbers  (<:),  the  Arupa,  f  the
RuPA,:]:  and  the  Force,  or  Divine  Man — the  Sum  Total.  And
from  the  Divine  Man  emanated  the  Forms,  the  Sparks,  the
Sacred  Animals  {jT),  and  the  Messengers  of  the  Sacred  Fathers  §
within  the  Holy  Four.||

(a)  This  relates  to  the  Sacred  Science  of  the  Numerals ;  so  sacred,
indeed,  and  so  important  in  the  study«of  Occultism  that  the  subject  can
hardly  be  skimmed,  even  in  such  a  large  work  as  the  present.  It  is  on
the  Hierarchies  and  the  correct  numbers  of  these  Beings — invisible  (to
us)  except  upon  very  rare  occasions — that  the  mystery  of  the  whole
Universe  is  built.  The  Kumaras,  for  instance,  are  called  the  "  Four" —
though  in  reality  seven  in  number — because  Sanaka,  Sananda,  Sanatana
and   Sanatkumara   are   the  chief  Vaidhatra  (their  patronymic  name),

*  Dhyin  Chohans.

+  Formless.

X  With  Bodies.

}  Pitris.

II  The  Four,  represented  in  the  Occult  numerals  by  the  Tetraktys,  the  Sacred  or  Perfect  Square,  is
a  Sacred  Number  with  the  Mystics  of  every  nation  and  race.  It  has  one  and  the  same  significance  in
Brihmanisra,  Buddhism,  in  Kabalism  and  in  the  Egyptian,  Chaldean  and  other  numerical  systems.


THE  vehicle;  of  the  universe.  117

"who  sprang  from  the  ''  four-fold  mystery."  To  make  the  whole  clearer,
we  have  to  turn  for  our  illustrations  to  tenets  more  familiar  to  some  of
our  readers,  namely  the  Brahmanical.

According  to  Manu,  Hiranyagarbha  is  Brahma,  the  first  male,  formed
by  the  undiscernible  Causeless  Cause,  in  a  "Golden  Egg  resplendent  as
the  Sun,"  as  states  the  Hhidii  Classical  Dictio7iary ;  Hiranyagarbha
meaning  the  Golden,  or  rather  the  Effulgent,  Womb  or  Egg.  The
meaning  tallies  awkwardly  with  the  epithet  "male."  Surely  the
esoteric  meaning  of  the  sentence  is  clear  enough !  In  the  Rig  Veda  it
is  said  :— "That,  the  one  Lord  of  all  beings  ....  the  one  animat-
ing principle  of  gods  and  men,"  arose,  in  the  beginning,  in  the  Golden
Womb,  Hiranyagarbha — which  is  the  Mundane  Egg,  or  Sphere  of  our
Universe.  That  Being  is  surely  androgynous,  and  the  allegory  of
Brahma  separating  into  two,  and  creating  in  one  of  his  halves  (the
female  Vach)  himself  as  Viraj,  is  a  proof  of  it.

"The  One  from  the  Egg,  the  Six  and  the  Five,"  give  the  number
1065,  the  value  of  the  First-born  (later  on  the  male  and  female  Bralima-
Prajapati),  who  answers  to  the  numbers  7,  and  14,  and  21  respectively.
The  Prajapati,  like  the  Sephiroth  are  only  seven,  including  the
synthetic  Sephira  of  the  Triad  from  which  they  spring.  Thus  from
Hiranyagarbha,  or  Prajapati,  the  Triune  (the  primeval  Vedic  Trimiirti,
Agni,  Vayu,  and  Siirya),  emanate  the  other  seven,  or  again  ten,  if  we
separate  the  first  three  which  exist  in  one,  and  one  in  three ;  all,  more-
over, being  comprehended  within  that  one  "  Supreme,"  Parama,  called
Guhya  or  "Secret,"  and  Sarvatman,  the  "Super-Soul."  "■  The  seven
Lords  of  Being  lie  concealed  in  Sarvatman  like  thoughts  in  one  brain.''
So  with  the  Sephiroth.  They  are  either  seven  when  counting  from  the
upper  Triad,  headed  by  Kether,  or  ten — exoterically.  In  the  Mahd-
bhdrata,  the  Prajapati  are  21  in  number,  or  ten,  six,  and  five  (1065),
thrice  seven.*

(b)  "The  Three,  the  One,  the  Four,  the  One,  the  Five,"  in  their  total
— Twice  Seven,  represent  31415 — the  numerical  Hierarchy  of  the  Dhyan


*  In  the  k'abalak,  the  same  numbers,  viz.,  1065  area  value  of  Jehovah,  since  the  numerical  values  of
the  three  letters  which  compose  his  name — ^Jod,  Vau  and  twice  He — are  respective!}'  10  C^),  6  C\)  and
5(77);  or  again  thrice  seven,  21.  "Ten  is  the  Mother  of  the  Soul,  for  Life  and  Light  are  therein
united,"  says  Hermes.  "  For  number  one  is  born  of  the  Spirit  and  the  number  ten  from  Matter  [Chaos,
feminine] ;  the  unity  has  made  the  ten,  the  ten  the  unity."  {Book  of  the  Keys.)  By  means  of  Teniura,
the  anagramraatical  method  of  the  Kabalah,  and  the  knowledge  of  1065  (21),  a  universal  science  may
be  obtained  regarding  Cosmos  and  its  mysteries  (Rabbi  Yogel).  The  Rabbis  regard  the  numbers
10,  6,  and  5  as  the  most  sacred  of  all.


Il8  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Chohans  of  various  orders,  and  of  the  inner  or  circumscribed  world  *
Placed  on  the  boundary  of  the  great  Circle,  "  Pass  Not" — called  also  the
Dhyanipasha,  the  "Rope  of  the  Angels,"  the  "Rope"  that  hedges  off  the
phenomenal  from  the  noumenal  Cosmos,  which  does  not  fall  within  the
range  of  our  present  objective  consciousness — this  number,  when  not
enlarged  by  permutation  and  expansion,  is  ever  31415,  anagrammati-
cally  and  Kabalistically,  being  both  the  number  of  the  Circle  and  the
mj'stic  Svastika,  the  "Twice  Seven"  once  more;  for  whatever  way  the
two  sets  of  figures  are  counted,  when  added  separately,  one  figure  after
another,  whether  crossways  from  right,  or  from  left,  they  will  always
yield  fourteen.  Mathematically  they  represent  the  well-known  mathe-
matical formula,  that  the  ratio  of  the  diameter  of  a  circle  to  the  circum-
ference is  as  I  to  3*i4i5,  or  the  value  of  -n-  (pi),  as  it  is  called.  This  set
of  figures  must  have  the  same  meaning,  since  the  i:  314,159  and
again  i :  3-1415927  are  worked  out  in  the  secret  calculations  to  express
the  various  cycles  and  ages  of  the  "First-born,"  or  311,040,000,000,000
with  fractions,  and  yield  the  same  ^3415  by  a  process  we  are  not  con-
cerned with  at  present.  And  it  may  be  shown  that  Mr.  Ralston
Skinner,  the  author  of  T/ie  Source  of  Measures,  reads  the  Hebrew  word
Alhim  in  the  same  number  values — by  omitting,  as  said,  the  ciphers,
and  by  permutation — 135 14:  since  n  («)  is  i  ;  S  (/)  is  3  (30);  n  ih)
is  5  ;  "I  (z)  is  I  (10) ;  and  D  (jn)  is  4  (40) ;  and  anagrammatically—
3 141 5,  as  explained  by  him.

Thus,  while  in  the  metaphysical  world,  the  Circle  with  the  one
central  Point  in  it  has  no  number,  and  is  called  Anupadaka — parentless
and  numberless,  for  it  can  fall  under  no  calculation ;  in  the  manifested
world,  the  Mundane  Egg  or  Circle  is  circumscribed  within  the  groups
called  the  I^ine,  the  Triangle,  the  Pentagram,  the  second  Line  and  the
Square  (or  13514);  and  when  the  Point  has  generated  a  lyine,  and  thus
becomes  a  diameter  which  stands  for  the  androgynous  lyOgos,  then  the
figures  become  31415,  or  a  triangle,  a  line,  a  square,  a  second  line,  and
a  pentagram.  "  When  the  Son  separates  from  the  Mother  he  becomes
the  Father,'''  the  diameter  standing  for  Nature,  or  the  feminine  prin-
ciple. Therefore  it  is  said:  ''In  the  World  of  Being,  the  One  Point
fructifies  the  Line,  the  Virgin  Matrix  of  Kosjnos  \fhe  egg-shaped  zero'],  and
the  immaculate  Mother  gives  birth  to  the  Form  that  combines  all  forms T
Prajapati   is    called   the  first    procreating    male,    and    "his    mother's

*  The  reader  may  be  told  that  an  American  Kabalist  has  now  discovered  the  same  number  for  the
Elohim.  It  came  to  the  Jews  from  Chaldsea.  See  "Hebrew  Metrology,"  in  The  Masonic  Review,  July,
1885,  McMillan  lyOdge,  No.  141.


THE  IMMACULATE   CONCEPTIONS.  II9

husband."*  This  gives  the  key-note  to  all  the  later  "  Divine  Sons"
from  "Immaculate  Mothers."  It  is  strongly  corroborated  by  the  signifi-
cant fact  that  Anna,  the  name  of  the  Mother  of  the  Virgin  Mary,  now
represented  by  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  as  having  given  birth  to
her  daughter  in  an  immaculate  way  ("  Mary  conceived  without  sin"),  is
derived  from  the  Chaldean  Ana,  Heaven,  or  Astral  Light,  Anima
Mundi;  whence  Anaitia,  Devi-Durga,  the  wife  of  Shiva,  is  also  called
Annapuma,  and  Kanya,  the  Virgin;  Uma-Kanya  being  her  esoteric
name,  and  meaning  the  "Virgin  of  Light,"  Astral  Light  in  one  of  its
multitudinous  aspects.

(c)  The  Devas,  Pitris,  Rishis ;  the  Suras  and  the  Asuras ;  the  Dait5^as
and  Adityas;  the  Danavas  and  Gandharvas,  etc.,  etc.,  have  all  their
synonyms  in  our  Secret  Doctrine,  as  well  as  in  the  Kabalah  and
Hebrew  Angelolog>^;  but  it  is  useless  to  give  their  ancient  names,  as  it
would  only  create  confusion.  Many  of  these  may  be  now  also  found
even  in  the  Christian  Hierarchy  of  divine  and  celestial  Powers.  All
those  Thrones  and  Dominions,  Virtues  and  Principalities,  Cherubs,
Seraphs  and  Demons,  the  various  denizens  of  the  Sidereal  World,  are
the  modern  copies  of  archaic  prototypes.  The  very  symbolism  in  their
names,  when  transliterated  and  arranged,  in  Greek  and  Latin,  are
sufficient  to  show  it,  as  will  be  proved  in  several  cases  further  on.

(jT)  The  "Sacred  Animals"  are  found  in  the  Bible  2iS^€i\  as  in  the
Kabalah,  and  they  have  their  meaning — a  very  profound  one,  too — on
the  page  of  the  origins  of  Life.  In  the  Sepher  Jetzirah  it  is  stated  that:
"God  engraved  in  the  Holy  Four  the  Throne  of  his  Glory,  the
Auphanim  [the  Wheels  or  World-Spheres],  the  Seraphim,  and  the
Sacred  Animals,  as  Ministering  Angels,  and  from  tiiese  [Air,  Water,
and  Fire  or  Etherj  he  formed  his  habitation."

The  following  is  the  literal  translation  from  the  IXth  and  Xth
Sections:

Ten  numbers  without  what  ?  One:  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God  ....  who
liveth  in  eternities!  Voice  and  Spirit  and  Word,  and  this  is  the  Holy  Spirit.
Two:  Air  out  of  Spirit.  He  designed  and  hewed  therewith  twenty-two  letters  of
foundation,  three  mothers,  and  seven  double  and  twelve  single,  and  one  Spirit  out
of  them.  Three:  Water  out  of  Spirit;  he  designed  and  hewed  with  them  the  barren
and  the  void,  mud  and  earth.     He  designed  them  as  a  flower-bed,  hewed  them  as  a

*  We  find  the  .same  expression  in  Egypt.  Mout  signifies,  for  one  thing-,  "Mother,"  and  shows  the
character  assigned  to  her  in  the  triad  of  that  country.  She  was  no  less  the  mother  than  the  wife  of
Ammon,  one  of  the  principal  titles  of  the  god  being  "the  husband  of  his  mother."  The  goddess
Mout,  or  Mut,  is  addressed  as  "Our  Lady,"  the  "Queen  of  Heaven"  and  "of  the  Earth,"  thus
"sharing  these  titles  ^rith  the  other  mother  goddesses,  Isis,  Hathor,  etc."    (Maspero).


I20  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

wall,  covered  them  as  a  paving.  Four:  Fire  out  of  Water.  He  designed  and  hewed
therewith  the  throne  of  glory  and  the  wheels,  and  the  seraphim  and  the  holy-
animals  as  ministering  angels,  and  of  the  three  He  founded  his  dwelling,  as  it  is
said.  He  makes  his  angels  spirits,  and  his  servants  fiery  flames!

The  words  "founded  his  dwelling"  show  clearly  that  in  the  Kabalah,
as  in  India,  the  Deity  was  considered  as  the  Universe,  and  was  not,  in
his  origin,  the  extra-cosmic  God  he  now  is.

Thus  was  the  world  made  "through  Three  Seraphim — Sepher,
Saphar,  and  Sipur,"  or  "through  Number,  Numbers,  and  Numbered."
With  the  astronomical  key,  these  "Sacred  Animals"  become  the  signs
of  the  Zodiac.


STANZA   \\\— Continued.

4.  This  was  the  Army  of  the  Voice,  the  Divine  Mother  of
THE  Seven,  The  Sparks  of  the  Seven  are  subject  to,  and  the
servants  of,  the  First,  the  Second,  the  Third,  the  Fourth,
THE  Fifth,  the  Sixth,  and  the  Seventh  of  the  Seven  {d).
These  *  are  cali^ed  Spheres,  Triangles,  Cubes,  I^ines  and
Modellers;  for  thus  stands  the  Eternal  Nidana — the  Oi-
Ha-Hou  {b').\

(a)  This  Shloka  gives  again  a  brief  analysis  of  the  Hierarchies  of  the
Dhyan  Chohans,  called  Devas  (Gods)  in  India,  or  the  Conscious  Intelli-
gent Powers  in  Nature.  To  this  Hierarchy  correspond  the  actual  types
into  which  Humanity  may  be  divided ;  for  Humanity,  as  a  whole,  is  in
reality  a  materialized,  though  as  yet  imperfect,  expression  thereof.
The  "Army  of  the  Voice"  is  a  term  closely  connected  with  the  mystery
of  Sound  and  Speech,  as  an  effect  and  corollary  of  the  Cause — Divine
Thought.  As  beautifully  expressed  by  P.  Christian,  the  learned  author
of  Histoire  de  la  Magie  and  V Homme  Rotige  des  Tuileries,  the  words
spoken  by,  as  well  as  the  name  of,  every  individual  largely  determine
his  future  fate.     Why  ?     Because :

When  our  soul  [mind]  creates  or  evokes  a  thought,  the  representative  sign  of  that
thought  is  self-engraved  upon  the  astral  fluid,  which  is  the  receptacle  and,  so  to
say,  the  mirror  of  all  the  manifestations  of  being.

*  The  Sparks.

t  The  permutation  of  Oeaohoo.  The  literal  signification  of  the  word  is,  among  the  Eastern  Oc-
cultists of  the  North,  a  circular  wind,  whirlwind;  but  in  this  instance,  it  is  a  term  to  denote  the  cease-
less and  eternal  Cosmic  Motion,  or  rather  the  Force  that  moves  it,  which  Force  is  tacitly  accepted  as
the  Deity,  but  never  named.    It  is  the  eternal  Karana,  the  ever-acting  Cause.


THE   POTENCY   OF  SPEECH   AND   SOUND.  121

The  sign  expresses  the  thing:  the  thing  is  the  [hidden  or  occult]  virtue  of  the  sign.

To  pronounce  a  word  is  to  evoke  a  thought,  and  make  it  present:  the  magnetic
potency  of  human  speech  is  the  commencement  of  everj'  manifestation  in  the
Occult  World.  To  utter  a  Name  is  not  only  to  define  a  Being  [an  Entity],  but  to
place  it  under,  and  condemn  it  through  the  emissicm  of  the  Word  [Verbum]  to  the
influence  of,  one  or  more  Occult  potencies.  Things  are,  for  every  one  of  us,  that
which  it  [the  Word]  makes  them  while  naming  them.  The  Word  [Verbum]  or  the
speech  of  every  man  is,  quite  unconsciously  to  himself,  a  blessing  or  a  curse;  this  is
why  our  present  ignorance  about  the  properties  and  attributes  of  the  idea,  as  well
as  about  the  attributes  and  properties  of  mailer,  is  often  fatal  to  us.

Yes,  names  [and  words]  are  either  beneficenl  or  maleficenl;  they  are,  in  a  certain
sense,  either  venomous  or  health-giving,  according  to  the  hidden  influences
attached  by  Supreme  Wisdom  to  their  elements,  that  is  to  say,  to  the  lellers  which
compose  them,  and  the  numbers  correlative  to  these  letters.

This  is  strictly  true  as  an  esoteric  teaching  accepted  by  all  the
Eastern  Schools  of  Occultism.  In  the  Sanskrit,  as  also  in  the  Hebrew
and  all  other  alphabets,  every  letter  has  its  occult  meaning  and  its
rationale:  it  is  a  cause  and  an  effect  of  a  preceding  cause,  and  a  com-
bination of  these  xoxy  often  produces  the  most  magical  effect.  The
vowels,  especially,  contain  the  most  occult  and  formidable  potencies.
The  Mantras  (magical  rather  than  religious  invocations,  esoterically)
are  chanted  by  the  Brahmans,  and  so  are  the  rest  of  the  Vedas  and
other  Scriptures.

The  "Army  of  the  Voice"  is  the  prototype  of  the  "Host  of  the
Logos,"  or  the  "Word,"  of  the  Sepher  Jetzirah,  called  in  the  Secret
Doctrine  the  "One  Number  issued  from  No-Number" — the  One
Eternal  Principle.  The  Esoteric  Theogony  begins  with  the  One  Mani-
fested (therefore  not  eternal  in  its  presence  and  being,  if  eternal  in  its
essence),  the  Number  of  the  Numbers  and  Numbered — the  latter  pro-
ceeding from  the  Voice,  the  feminine  Vach,  "of  the  hundred  forms,"
Shatariipa,  or  Nature.  It  is  from  this  Number,  lo,  or  Creative  Nature,
the  Mother  (the  Occult  cypher,  or  "o,"  ever  procreating  and  multiply-
ing in  union  with  the  unit  "i,"  or  the  Spirit  of  Life),  that  the  whole
Universe  proceeds.

In  the  Amigita,^  a  conversation  is  given  between  a  Brahmana  and
his  wife  on  the  origin  of  Speech  and  its  Occult  properties.  The  wife
asks  how  Speech  came  into  existence,  and  which  was  prior  to  the  other.
Speech  or  Mind.     The  Brahmana  tells  her  that  the  Apana  (inspirational

•  vi.  15.  The  AnugXta.  forms  part  of  the  Ashvamedha  Parvan  of  the  Mahdbkdrala.  The  translator
of  the  Bhagavadfcitd,  edited  by  Max  Miiller,  regards  it  as  a  continuation  of  the  Bhagavadgitd.  Its
original  is  one  of  the  oldest  Upanishads.


122  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

breath)  becoming  lord,  changes  that  intelligence,  which  does  not
understand  Speech  or  Words,  into  the  state  of  Apana,  and  thus  opens
the  Mind.  Thereupon  he  tells  her  a  story,  a  dialogue  between  Speech
and  Mind.  Both  went  to  the  Self  of  Being  {i.e.,  to  the  individual
Higher  Self,  as  Nilakantha  thinks;  to  Prajapati,  according  to  the  com-
mentator Arjuna  Mishra),  and  asked  him  to  destroy  their  doubts,  and
decide  which  of  them  preceded  and  was  superior  to  the  other.  To  this
the  lyord  said:  "Mind  (is  superior)."  But  Speech  answered  the  Self  of
Being,  by  saying:  "I  verily  yield  (you)  your  desires,"  meaning  that  by
Speech  he  acquired  what  he  desired.  Thereupon  again,  the  Self  told
her  that  there  are  two  Minds,  the  "movable"  and  the  "immovable."
"The  immovable  is  with  me,"  he  said,  "the  movable  is  in  your
dominion"  (i.e.  of  Speech),  on  the  plane  of  matter.  "To  that  you  are
superior."

But  inasmuch,  O  beautiful  one,  as  you  came  personally  to  speak  to  me  (in  the
way  you  did,  i.e.  proudly),  therefore,  O  Sarasvati!  you  shall  never  speak  after
(hard)  exhalation.  The  goddess  Speech  [Sarasvati,  a  later  form  or  aspect  of  Vach,
the  goddess  also  of  secret  learning,  or  Esoteric  Wisdom],  verily,  dwelt  always
between  the  Prana  and  the  Apana.  But,  O  noble  one !  going  with  the  Apana  wind
[vital  air],  though  impelled,  .  .  .  without  the  Prana  [expirational  breath],  she
ran  up  to  Prajapati  [Brahma],  saying,  "Be  pleased,  O  venerable  sir!"  Then  the
Prana  appeared  again  nourishing  Speech.  And,  therefore.  Speech  never  speaks
after  (hard)  exhalation.     It  is  always  noisy  or  noiseless.     Of  these  two,  the  noiseless

is  the  superior  to  the  noisy  (Speech) The  (Speech)  which  is  produced  in

the  body  by  means  of  the  Prana,  and  which  then  goes  [is  transformed]  into  Apana
and  then  becoming  assimilated  with  the  Udana  [physical  organs  of  Speech]  .  .  .
then  finally  dwells  in  the  Samana  ["at  the  navel  in  the  form  of  sound,  as  the
material  cause  of  all  words,"  says  Arjuna  Mishra].  So  Speech  formerly  spoke.
Hence  the  Mind  is  distinguished  by  reason  of  its  being  immovable,  and  the
Goddess  (Speech)  by  reason  of  her  being  movable.

The  above  allegory  is  at  the  root  of  the  Occult  law,  which  prescribes
silence  upon  the  knowledge  of  certain  secret  and  invisible  things,
perceptible  only  to  the  spiritual  mind  (the  sixth  sense),  and  which
cannot  be  expressed  by  "noisy"  or  uttered  speech.  This  chapter  of
Anugifd  explains,  says  Arjuna  Mishra,  Pranayama,  or  regulation  of  the
breath  in  Yoga  practices.  This  mode,  however,  without  the  previous
acquisition  of,  or  at  least  full  understanding  of,  the  two  higher  senses
(of  which  there  are  seven,  as  will  be  shown),  pertains  rather  to  the
lower  Yoga.  The  Hatha  so  called  was  and  still  is  discountenanced  by
the  Arhats.     It  is  injurious  to  the  health,  and  alone  can  never  develop


THE   SEVEN  SENSES.  1 23

into  Raja  Yoga.  This  storj-  is  quoted  to  show  how  inseparably  con-
nected in  the  metaphj-sics  of  old,  are  intelligent  beings,  or  rather
"intelligences,"  with  every  sense  or  function,  whether  physical  or
mental.  The  Occult  claim  that  there  are  seven  senses  in  man,  and  in
nature,  as  there  are  seven  states  of  consciousness,  is  corroborated  in
the  same  work.  Chapter  vii,  on  Pratyahara  (the  restraint  and  regulation
of  the  senses,  Pranayama  being  that  of  the  "vital  winds"  or  breath).
The  Brahmana,  speaking  of  the  institution  of  the  seven  sacrificial
Priests  (Hotris),  says:  "The  nose  and  the  eye,  and  the  tongue,  and
the  skin  and  the  ear  as  the  fifth  [or  smell,  sight,  taste,  touch,  and
hearing],  mind  and  understanding  are  the  seven  sacrificial  priests
separately  stationed,"  which  "dwelling  in  a  minute  space  (still)  do  not
perceive  each  other,"  on  this  sensuous  plane,  none  of  them  except
mind.  For  mind  says:  "The  nose  smells  not  without  me,  the  eye  does
not  take  in  colour,  etc..  etc.  I  am  the  eternal  chief  among  all  elements
[i.e.,  senses].  Without  me,  the  senses  never  shine,  like  an  empty
dwelling,  or  like  fires  the  flames  of  which  are  extinct.  Without  me,  all
beings,  like  fuel  half  dried  and  half  moist,  fail  to  apprehend  qualities  or
objects  even  with  the  senses  exerting  themselves."*'

This,  of  course,  only  with  regard  to  mind  on  the  sensuous  pla^ie.
Spiritual  Mind,  the  upper  portion  or  aspect  of  the  impersonal  Manas,
takes  no  cognizance  of  the  senses  in  physical  man.  How  well  the
ancients  were  acquainted  with  the  correlation  of  forces,  and  all  the
recently  discovered  phenomena  of  mental  and  physical  faculties  and
functions,  and  with  many  more  mysteries  also — may  be  found  in  reading
Chapters  vii  and  viii  of  this  priceless  work  in  philosophy  and  mystic
learning.  See  the  quarrel  of  the  senses  about  their  respective  superi-
ority and  their  taking  the  Brahman,  the  Lord  of  all  creatures,  for  their
arbiter.  "You  are  all  greatest  and  not  greatest  [or  superior  to  objects,
as  Arjuna  Mishra  says,  none  being  independent  of  the  other].  You
are  all  possessed  of  one  another's  qualities.  All  are  greatest  in  their
own  spheres  and  all  support  one  another.  There  is  one  unmoving
.  [life-wind  or  breath,  the  yoga-inhalation,  so  called,  which  is  the  breath
of  the  One  or  Higher  Self].  That  one  is  my  own  Self,  accumulated
in  numerous  (forms)."

This  Breath,  Voice,  Self  or  Wind  (Pneuma?),  is  the  Synthesis  of  the

■ ' y

•  This  shows  the  modern  metaphysicians,  added  ti?  .ill  past  and  present  Hegels.  Berkelcys,
Schopenhauers,  Hartmanns,  Herbert  Spencers,  and  even  the  modem  Hylo-Idealists  to  boot,  no  better
than  the  pale  copyists  of  hoary  antiquity.


124  '''KE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Seven  Senses,  noumenally  ail  minor  deities,  and  esoterically — the  Sep-
tenary and  the  "Army  of  the  Voice."

(^)  Next  we  see  Cosmic  Matter  scattering  and  forming  itself  into
Elements;  grouped  into  the  mystic  Four  within  the  fifth  Element —
Ether,  the  "lining"  of  Akasha,  the  Anima  Mundi,  or  Mother  of  Cos-
mos. "Dots,  lyines.  Triangles,  Cubes,  Circles"  and  finally  "Spheres"
— why  or  how?  Because,  says  the  Commentary,  such  is  the  first  law
of  Nature,  and  because  Nature  geometrizes  universally  in  all  her  mani-
festations. There  is  an  inherent  law — not  only  in  the  primordial,  but
also  in  the  manifested  matter  of  our  phenomenal  plane — by  which
Nature  correlates  her  geometrical  forms,  and  later,  also,  her  compound
elements,  and  in  which  also  there  is  no  place  for  accident  or  chance.  It
is  a  fundamental  law  in  Occultism,  that  there  is  no  rest  or  cessation  of
motion  in  Nature.*  That  which  seems  rest  is  only  the  change  of  one
form  into  another,  the  change  of  substance  going  hand  in  hand  with
that  of  form — so  at  least  we  are  taught  in  Occult  physics,  which
thus  seem  to  have  anticipated  the  discovery  of  the  "conservation  of
matter"  by  a  considerable  time.  Says  the  ancient  Commentary  f  to
Stanza  IV:

The  Mother  is  the  fiery  Fish  of  Life.  She  scatters  her  Spaw7i  and  the
Breath  \^Motion]  heats  ayid  quickens  it.  The  Grains  \_of  Spaw7i]  are  soon
attracted  to  each  other  a7id  form  the  Curds  in  the  Ocean  {of  Space\  The
larger  lumps  coalesce  and  receive  new  Spawn — in  fiery  Dots,  Triangles  and
Cubes,  which  ripen,  and  at  the  appointed  time  sofne  of  the  himps  detach
themselves  aiid  assume  spheroidal  form,  a  process  which  they  effect  only  when
not  interfered  with  by  the  others.  Afte}'  which.  Law  No.  *  *  *  cotties
into  operation.  Motion  \_the  Breath^  becomes  the  Whirlwind  and  sets  them
into  rotation.\

*  It  is  the  knowledge  of  this  law  that  permits  and  helps  the  Arhat  to  perform  his  Siddhis,  or
various  phenomena,  such  as  the  disintegration  of  matter,  the  transport  of  objects  from  one  place  to
another,  etc.

t  These  are  ancient  Commentaries  attached  with  modern  Glossaries  to  the  Stanzas,  for  the  Commen-
taries in  their  symbolical  language  are  usually  as  difficult  to  understand  as  the  Stanzas  themselves.

X  In  a  polemical  scientific  work,  TJie  Modern  Genesis  (p.  48),  the  Rev.  W.  B.  Slaughter,  criticizing
the  position  assumed  by  the  astronomers,  says:  "It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  advocates  of  this
[nebular]  theory  have  not  entered  more  largely  into  the  discussion  of  it  [the  beginning  of  rotation].
No  one  condescends  to  give  us  the  rationale  of  it.  How  does  the  process  of  cooling  and  contracting
the  mass  impart  to  it  a  rotatory  motion?"  (Quoted  by  Winchell,  World- Life,  p.  94.)  It  is  not
materialistic  Science  that  can  ever  solve  it.  "Motion  is  eternal  in  the  unmanifested,  and  periodical
in  the  manifest,"  says  an  Occult  teachirg.  It  is  "■■when  heat  caused  by  the  descent  of  Flame  into
primordial  matter  causes  its  particles  to  move,  vjhick  motion  becomes  the  Whirlwind."  A  drop  of  liquid
assumes  a  spheroidal  form  owing  to  its  atoms  moving  around  themselves  in  their  ultimate,  unresolv-
able,  and  noumenal  essence;  unresolvable  for  Physical  Science,  at  any  rate.  The  question  is  amply
treated  later  on.


THE   BOUNDLESS  CIRCLE.  1 25

STANZA   \N.—Co7itimi€d.
5.  The  Oi-Ha-Hou,  which  is  Darkness,  the  Boundless,  or  the
No-Number,  Adi-Nidana  Svabhavat,   the  (")•*

I.  The  Adi-Sanat,  the  Number,  for  he  is  One  {a).
II.  The  Voice  of  the  Word,  Svabhavat,  the  Numbers,
for  he  is  One  and  Nine.j
III.  The  "Formless  Square." t
And  these  Three,  enclosed  within  the  Q,§  are  the  Sacred
Four;  and  the  Ten  are  the  Arupa  i|  Universe  {b).    Then  come
the  Sons,  the  Seven  Fighters,  the  One,  the  Eighth  left  out,
and  his  Breath  which  is  the  Light-Maker  {c)-\

(a)  "Adi-Sanat,"  translated  literally,  is  the  First  or  "Primeval  An-
cient," a  name  which  identifies  the  Kabalistic  "Ancient  of  Days"  and
the  "Holy  Aged"  (Sephira  and  Adam  Kadmon)  with  Brahma,  the
Creator,  called  also  Sanat  among  his  other  names  and  titles.

"Svabhavat"  is  the  mystic  Essence,  the  plastic  Root  of  physical
Nature — "Numbers"  when  manifested;  the  "Number,"  in  its  Unity  of
Substance,  on  the  highest  plane.  The  name  is  of  Buddhist  use  and  a
synonym  for  the  four-fold  Anima  Mundi,  the  Kabalistic  Archetypal
World,  from  whence  proceed  the  Creative,  Formative,  and  Material
Worlds;  and  the  Scintillae  or  Sparks — the  various  other  worlds  con-
tained in  the  last  three.  The  Worlds  are  all  subject  to  Riders  or
Regents — Rishis  and  Pitris  with  the  Hindiis,  Angels  with  the  Jews
and  Christians,  Gods  with  the  Ancients  in  general.

(^)  "O-"  '^^^^  means  that  the  "Boundless  Circle,"  the  zero,  becomes
a  number,  only  when  one  of  the  other  nine  figures  precedes  it,  and  thus
manifests  its  value  and  potency;  the  "Word"  or  Logos,  in  union  with
"Voice"  and   Spirit**  (the  expression  and  source  of  Consciousness),

•  The  -r,  the  unknown  quantity.

t  Which  makes  Ten,  or  the  perfect  number,  applied  to  the  "Creator,"  the  name  given  to  the  totahty
of  the  Creators  blended  by  the  Monotheists  into  One,  as  the  "  Elohim,"  Adam  Kadmon  or  Sephira,
the  Crown— are  the  androgyne  synthesis  of  the  ten  Sephiroth,  who  stand  for  the  symbol  of  the  mani-
fested Universe  in  the  popularized  Kabalah.  The  Esoteric  Kabalists,  however,  following  the  Eastern
Occultists,  divide  the  upper  Sephirothal  triangle  (or  Sephira,  Chokmah  and  Binah)  from  the  rest,
which  leaves  seven  Sephiroth.  As  for  Svabhavat,  the  Orientalists  explain  the  term  as  meaning  the
universal  plastic  matter  diffused  through  space,  with,  perhaps,  half  an  eye  to  the  Ether  of  Science.
But  the  Occultists  identify  it  with  "Father-Mother"  on  the  mystic  plane.

X  Arupa.     \  Boundless  Circle.

II  Subjective,  Formless.    II  Bhaskara.

•*  This  refers  to  the  Abstract  Thought  and  concrete  Voice,  or  the  manifestation  thereof,  the  effect  of
the  Cause.  Adam  Kadmon,  or  Tetragrammaton,  is  the  Logos  in  the  Kabalah.  Therefore  this  Triad
answers  in  the  latter  to  the  highest  Triangle  of  Kether,  Chokmah  and  Binah,  the  last  a  female
potency,  and  at  the  same  time  the  male  Jehovah,  as  partaking  of  the  nature  of  Chokmah,  or  the  male
Wisdom.


126  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Standing  for  the  nine  figures,  and  thus  forming,  with  the  cypher,  the
Decad  which  contains  in  itself  all  the  Universe.  The  Triad  forms
the  Tetraktys,  or  "Sacred  Four,"  within  the  Circle,  the  Square  within
the  Circle  being  the  most  potent  of  all  the  magical  figures.

(r)  The  "One  Rejected"  is  the  Sun  of  our  system.  The  exoteric
version  may  be  found  in  the  oldest  Sanskrit  Scriptures.  In  the  Rig
Veda,  Aditi,  the  "Boundless"  or  Infinite  Space — translated  by  Prof.
Max  Miiller,  "the  visible  infinite,  visible  by  the  naked  eye  (!!);  the
endless  expanse  beyond  the  earth,  beyond  the  clouds,  beyond  the  sky  "
— is  the  equivalent  of  "Mother-Space,"  coeval  with  "Darkness."  She
is  very  properly  called  the  "  Mother  of  the  Gods,"  Deva-Matri,  as  it  is
from  her  cosmic  matrix  that  all  the  heavenly  bodies  of  our  system  were
born — sun  and  planets.  Thus  she  is  described,  allegorically,  in  this
wise:  ^' Eight  sons  were  born  from  the  body  of  Aditi;  she  approached  the
gods  with  seven,  but  cast  away  the  eighth,  Marttdnda,'''  our  sun.  The
seven  sons  called  the  Adityas  are,  cosmically  or  astronomically,  the
seven  planets;  and  the  sun  being  excluded  from  their  number  shows
plainly  that  the  Hindus  may  have  known,  and  in  fact  knew,  of  a  seventh
planet,  without  calling  it  Uranus.*     But  esoterically  and  theologically,

A,

SO  to  say,  the  Adityas,  in  their  primitive  most  ancient  meanings,  are
the  eight,  and  twelve  great  gods  of  the  Hindu  Pantheon.  "The  Seven
allow  the  mortals  to  see  their  dwellings,  but  show  themselves  only  to
the  Arhats,"  says  an  old  proverb;  "their dwellings"  standing  here  for
the  planets.  The  ancient  Commentary^  gives  the  following  allegor}^  and
explains  it:

Eight  houses  were  biiilt  by  Mother:  eight  houses  for  her  eight  Divine
Sons;  four  large  and  four  S7nall  ones.  Eight  brilliant  Suns,  according  to
their  age  and  merits.  Bal-i-lu  \_Mdrttdnda^  was  not  satisfied,  though  his
house  was  the  largest.  He  began  \_to  tvork~\  as  the  huge  elephants  do.  He
breathed  \drezv  in^  into  his  stomach  the  vital  airs  of  his  brothers.  He
sought  to  devour  them.     The  larger  four  were  far  away  ;  far,  on  the  margiyi

*  The  Secret  Doctrine  teaches  that  the  Sun  is  a  central  star  and  not  a  planet.  Yet  the  ancients
knew  of  and  worshipped  seven  great  gods,  excluding  the  Suu  and  Earth.  Which  was  that  '"Mystery
God"  they  set  apart.'  Of  course  not  Uranus,  only  discovered  by  Herschel  in  1781.  But  could  it  not
be  known  by  another  name?  Says  Ragon :  "  Occult  Sciences  having  discovered  through  astronomical
calculations  that  the  number  of  the  planets  must  be  seven,  the  ancients  were  led  to  introduce  the  Sun
into  the  scale  of  the  celestial  harmonies,  and  make  film  occupy  the  vacant  place.  Thus,  every  time
they  perceived  an  influence  that  pertained  to  none  of  the  six  planets  known,  they  attributed  it  to  the
Sun.  .  .  .  The  error  seems  important,  but  was  not  so  in  practical  results,  if  the  astrologers  re-
placed Uranus  by  the  Sun,  which  ...  is  a  central  Star  relatively  motionless,  turning  onlj'  on  its
axis  and  regulating  time  and  measure:  and  which  cannot  be  turned  aside  from  its  true  functions."
(Mafonnerie  Occulte,  p.  447.)  The  nomenclature  of  the  days  of  the  week  is  also  faulty.  "The  Sun-day
ought  to  be  Uranus-day  (Urani  dies,  Urandi),"  adds  the  learned  writer.


FIRE,    THE    GREAT   SYMBOL   OF   DEITY.  1 27

of  their  kingdom*  They  were  not  robbed  \affected\  and  laughed.  Do
your  worst.  Sir,  you  canyiot  reach  us,  they  said.  But  the  smaller  wept.
They  complained  to  the  Mother.  She  exiled  Bal-i-lu  to  the  centre  of  her
kingdom,  from  whence  he  could  not  move.  \_Since  then'\  he  \only'\  watches
and  threatens.  He  pursues  them,  turning  slowly  round  hi^nself ;  they
turning  swiftly  from  him,  and  he  following  from  afar  the  direction  in
which  his  brothers  move  on  the  path  that  encircles  their  houses. \  Frotn  that
day  he  feeds  on  the  sweat  of  the  Mother's  body.  He  fills  himself  with  her
breath  and  refuse.     Therefore,  she  rejected  him.

Thus  the  "Rejected  Son"  being  our  Sun,  evidently,  as  shown  above,
the  "Son-Suns"  refer  not  only  to  our  planets  but  to  the  heavenly  bodies
in  general.  Surya,  himself  only  a  reflection  of  the  Central  Spiritual
Sun,  is  the  prototype  of  all  those  bodies  that  evolved  after  him.  In
the  Vedas  he  is  called  Ivoka-Chakshuh,  the  "Eye  of  the  World"  (our
planetary  world),  and  he  is  one  of  the  three  chief  deities.  He  is  called
indifferently  the  Son  of  Dyaus  or  of  Aditi,  because  no  distinction  is
made  with  reference  to,  or  scope  allowed  for,  the  esoteric  meaning.
Thus  he  is  depicted  as  drawn  by  seven  horses,  and  by  one  horse  with
seven  heads;  the  former  referring  to  his  seven  planets,  the  latter  to
their  one  common  origin  from  the  One  Cosmic  Element.  This  "One
Element"  is  called  figuratively  "Fire."  The  Vedas  teach  that  "fire
verily  is  all  the  deities.":J:

The  meaning  of  the  allegory  is  plain,  for  we  have  both  the  Dzyan
Commentary  and  Modern  Science  to  explain  it,  though  the  two  differ  in
more  than  one  particular.  The  Occult  Doctrine  rejects  the  hypothesis
born  of  the  Nebular  Theor>',  that  the  (seven)  great  planets  have
evolved  from  the  Sun's  central  mass,  of  this  our  visible  Sun,  at  any
rate.  The  first  condensation  of  cosmic  matter  of  course  took  place
about  a  central  nucleus,  its  parent  Sun;  but  our  Sun,  it  is  taught,
merel}-  detached  itself  earlier  than  all  the  others,  as  the  rotating  mass
contracted,  and  is  their  elder,  bigger  "brother"  therefore,  not  their
"father."  The  eight  Adityas,  the  "gods,"  are  all  formed  from  the
eternal   substance   (cometary  matter  § — the    Mother),    or   the    "world-

•  Planetary  System.

t"The  Sun  rotates  on  its  axis  always  in  the  same  direction  in  which  the  planets  revolve  in  their
respective  orbits,"  astronomy  teaches  us.

tSee  Antigiid,  Telang,  x.  9;  and  Aiiareya  BrAhmana,  Haug,  p.  r.

rrhis  essence  of  cometarj'  matter,  Occult  Science  teaches,  is  totally  different  from  any  of  the
chemical  or  physical  characteristics  with  which  Modern  Science  is  acquainted.  It  is  homogeneous  in
its  primitive  form  beyond  the  Solar  Systems,  and  diflferentiates  entirely  once  it  crosses  the  boundaries
of  our  Earth's  reprion  ;  vitiated  by  the  atmospheres  of  the  planets  and  the  already  compound  matter
of  the  interplanetary  stuff,  it  is  heterogeneous  only  in  our  manifested  world.


128  the;  secret  doctrine.

stuff,"  which  is  both  the  fifth  and  the  sixth  Cosmic  Principle,  the
Upadhi,  or  Basis,  of  the  Universal  Soul,  just  as  in  man,  the  Micro-
cosm, Manas*  is  the  Upadhi  of  Buddhi.f

There  is  a  whole  poem  on  the  pregenetic  battles  fought  by  the
growing  planets  before  the  final  formation  of  Cosmos,  thus  accounting
for  the  seemingly  disturbed  position  of  the  systems  of  several  planets ;
the  plane  of  the  satellites  of  some  (of  Neptune  and  Uranus,  for  in-
stance, of  which  the  ancients  knew  nothing,  it  is  said)  being  tilted
over,  thus  giving  them  an  appearance  of  retrograde  motion.  These
planets  are  called  the  Warriors,  the  Architects,  and  are  accepted  by  the
Roman  Church  as  the  leaders  of  the  heavenly  Hosts,  thus  showing  the
same  traditions.  Having  evolved  from  Cosmic  Space,  the  Sun,  we  are
taught — before  the  final  formation  of  the  primaries  and  the  annulation
of  the  planetary  nebulae — drew  into  the  depths  of  his  mass  all  the
cosmic  vitality  he  could,  threatening  to  engulf  his  weaker  "Brothers,"
before  the  law  of  attraction  and  repulsion  was  finally  adjusted;  after
which,  he  began  feeding  on  "the  Mother's  refuse  and  sweat";  in  other
words,  on  those  portions  of  ^ther  (the  "Breath  of  the  Universal  Soul"),
of  the  existence  and  constitution  of  which  Science  is  as  yet  absolutely
ignorant.  As  a  theory  of  this  kind  has  been  propounded  by  Sir
William  Grove,^  who  theorizes  that  the  systems  "are  gradually  chang-
ing by  atmospheric  additions  or  subtractions,  or  by  accretions  and
diminutions  arising  from  nebular  substance,"  and  again  that  "the  sun
may  condense  gaseous  matter  as  it  travels  in  space,  and  so  heat  may  be
produced" — the  archaic  teaching  seems  scientific  enough,  even  in  this
age.§  Mr.  W.  Mattieu  Williams  suggested  that  the  diffused  matter  or
Kther,  which  is  the  recipient  of  the  heat  radiations  of  the  Universe,  is
thereby  drawn  into  the  depths  of  the  solar  mass;  expelling  thence
the  previously  condensed  and  thermally  exhausted  Ether,  it  becomes
compressed  and  gives  up  its  heat,  to  be  in  turn  itself  driven  out  in  a
rarefied  and  cooled  state,  to  absorb  a  fresh  supply  of  heat,  which  he
supposes  to  be  in  this  way  taken  up  by  the  Ether,  and  again  concen-
trated and  redistributed  by  the  Suns  of  the  Universe.

This  is  about  as  close  an  approximation  to  the  Occult  teachings  as

»  Manas— the  Mind-Principle,  or  the  Human  Soul.

■t  Buddhi — the  Di\'ine  Soul.

t  See  Correlation  of  Physical  Forces,  1843,  p.  81 ;  and  Address  to  the  British  Association,  1866.

\  Very  similar  ideas  were  those  of  W.  Mattieu  Williams,  in  nie  Fuel  of  the  Sun;  of  Dr.  C.  William
Siemens,  On  the  Conservation  of  Solar  Energy  (Nature,  XXV,  440-444,  March  9,  1882) ;  and  also  of  Dr.
P.  Martin  Duncan  in  an  Address,  as  the  President  of  the  Geological  Society,  London,  May,  1877.  See
World-Life,  by  Alexander  Wiuchell,  LL.D.,  p.  53,  et  seq.


THE   STELLAR  SONS   OF    LIGHT.  1 29

Science  ever  imagined;  for  Occultism  explains  it  by  the  "dead  breath,"
given  back  by  Marttanda,  and  his  feeding  on  the  "sweat  and  refuse"  of
"Mother  Space."  What  could  affect  Neptune,*  Saturn  and  Jupiter,
but  little,  would  have  killed  such  comparatively  small  "Houses"  as
Mercury,  Venus  and  Mars.  As  Uranus  was  not  known  before  the  end
of  the  eighteenth  centur}',  the  name  of  the  fourth  planet  mentioned  in
the  allegory  must  remain  to  us,  so  far,  a  mystery.

The  "  Breath"  of  all  the  "Seven"  is  said  to  be  Bhaskara,  the  Ught-
Maker,  because  they  (the  planets)  were  all  comets  and  suns  in  their
origin.  They  evolve  into  manvantaric  life  from  Primeval  Chaos  (now
the  noumenon  of  irresolvable  nebulae),  by  aggregation  and  accumula-
tion of  the  primary  differentiations  of  eternal  Matter,  according  to
the  beautiful  expression  in  the  Commentary',  "  Thus  the  So?is  of  Light
clothed  themselves  in  the  fabric  of  Darkness''  They  are  called  alle-
gorically  the  "  Heavenly  Snails,"  on  account  of  their  (to  us)  formless
Intelligences  inhabiting  unseen  their  starry  and  planetar>'  homes,  and
so  to  speak,  carrying  them,  as  the  snails  do,  along  with  themselves  in
their  revolution.  The  doctrine  of  a  common  origin  for  all  the  heavenly
bodies  and  planets  was,  as  we  see,  inculcated  by  the  archaic  astrono-
mers, before  Kepler,  Newton,  L,eibnitz,  Kant,  Herschel  and  Laplace.
Heat  (the  "Breath"),  Attraction  and  Repulsion — the  three  great  factors
of  Motion — are  the  conditions  under  which  all  the  members  of  this
primitive  family  are  born,  develop,  and  die;  to  be  reborn  after  a  Night
of  Brahma,  during  which  eternal  Matter  relapses  periodically  into  its
primary  undifferentiated  state.  The  most  attenuated  gases  can  give  no
idea  of  its  nature  to  the  modern  Physicist,  Centres  of  Forces  at  first,
the  invisible  Sparks,  or  primordial  Atoms,  differentiate  into  Molecules,
and  become  Suns — passing  gradually  into  objectivity — gaseous,  radiant,
cosmic,  the  one  "  Whirlwind  "  (or  Motion)  finally  giving  the  impulse  to
the  form,  and  the  initial  motion,  regulated  and  sustained  by  the  never-
resting  "  Breaths"— the  Dhyan  Chohans.


STANZA    IM .—Continued.
6 Then  the  Second  Seven,  who  are  the  Lipika,  pro-
duced BY  THE  Three.!    The  Rejected  Son  is  One.    The  "Son-
Suns"   ARE  countless.

•  When  we  speak  of  Neptune,  it  is  not  as  an  Occultist  but  as  a  European.  The  true  Eastern  Occul-
tist will  maintain  that,  whereas  there  are  many  yet  undiscovered  planets  in  our  system,  Neptune  does
not  really  belong  to  it,  in  spite  of  its  apparent  connection  ^vith  our  Sun  and  the  influence  of  the  latter
upon  it.     This  connection  is  mayavic,  imaginary,  they  say-

■!■  Word,  Voice  and  Spirit.  10


130  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

The  "  Lipika,"  from  the  word  lipi,  "writing,"  means  literally  the
"Scribes."*  Mystically,  these  Divine  Beings  are  connected  with
Karma,  the  Law  of  Retribution,  for  they  are  the  Recorders,  or
Annalists,  who  impress  on  the  (to  us)  invisible  tablets  of  the  Astral
Light,  "the  great  picture-gallery  of  eternity" — a  faithful  record  of
every  act,  and  even  thought,  of  man ;  of  all  that  was,  is,  or  ever
will  be,  in  the  phenomenal  Universe.  As  said  in  his  Unveiled,  this
divine  and  unseen  canvas  is  the  Book  of  Life.  As  it  is  the  Lipika  who
project  into  objectivity  from  the  passive  Universal  Mind  the  ideal  plan
of  the  Universe,  upon  which  the  "Builders"  reconstruct  the  Kosmos
after  every  Pralaya,  it  is  they  who  stand  parallel  to  the  Seven  Angels
of  the  Presence,  whom  the  Christians  recognize  in  the  Seven  "  Plane-
tary Spirits,"  or  the  "Spirits  of  the  Stars" ;  and  thus  it  is  they  who  are
the  direct  amanuenses  of  the  Eternal  Ideation — or,  as  Plato  calls  it,
the  "  Divine  Thought."  The  Eternal  Record  is  no  fantastic  dream,  for
we  meet  with  the  same  records  in  the  world  of  gross  matter.  As  Dr.
Draper  says :

A  shadow  never  falls  upon  a  wall  without  lea\ang  thereupon  a  permanent  trace
which  might  be  made  visible  by  resorting  to  proper  processes The  por-
traits of  our  friends  or  landscape-views  may  be  hidden  on  the  sensitive  surface  from
the  eye,  but  they  are  ready  to  make  their  appearance  as  soon  as  proper  developers
are  resorted  to.  A  spectre  is  concealed  on  a  silver  or  a  glassy  surface,  until,  by  our
necromancy,  we  make  it  come  forth  into  the  visible  world.  Upon  the  walls  of  our
most  private  apartments,  where  v.'e  think  the  eye  of  intrusion  is  altogether  shut
out,  and  our  retirement  can  never  be  profaned,  there  exist  the  vestiges  of  our  acts,
silhouettes  of  whatever  we  have  done.t

Drs.  Jevons  and  Babbage  believe  that  every  thought  displaces  the
particles  of  the  brain  and,  setting  them  in  motion,  scatters  them
throughout  the  universe:  they  also  think  that  "each  particle  of  the
existing  matter  must  be  a  register  of  all  that  has  happened."^  Thus
the  ancient  doctrine  has  begun  to  acquire  rights  of  citizenship  in  the
speculations  of  the  scientific  world.

The  forty  "  Assessors,"  who  stand  in  the  region  of  Amenti  as  the
accusers  of  the  Soul  before  Osiris,  belong  to  the  same  class  of  deities
as  the  Lipika,  and  might  stand  as  parallels,  were  not  the  Egyptian  gods
so  little  understood  in  their  esoteric  meaning.  The  Hindu  Chitragupta
who  reads  out  the  account  of  every  Soul's  life  from  his  register,  called

*  These  are  the  four  "  Immortals,"  which  are  mentioned  in  the  Atharva  Veda  as  the  "  Watchers  "
or  Guardians  of  the  four  quarters  of  the  sky.     (See  Ch.  Ixxvi.,  1-4,  et  seq.)
+  Conflict  between  Religion  and  Science,  pp.  132  and  133.
}  Principles  of  Science,  II.  455.


THE    DIVINE    RECORDERS.


131


Agra-Sandliaui ;  the  Assessors  who  read  theirs  from  the  Heart  of  the
Defunct,  which  becomes  an  open  book  before  either  Yama,  Minos,
Osiris,  or  Karma — are  all  so  many  copies  of,  and  variants  from,  the
Lipika  and  their  Astral  Records.  Nevertheless,  the  Lipika  are  not
deities  connected  with  Death,  but  with  Life  Eternal.

Connected  as  the  L,ipika  are  with  the  destiny  of  even,'  man,  and  the
birth  of  every  child,  whose  life  is  already  traced  in  the  Astral  Light —
not  fatalistically,  but  only  because  the  Future,  like  the  Past,  is  ever
alive  in  the  Present — they  may  also  be  said  to  exercise  an  influence  on
the  Science  of  Horoscopy.  We  must  admit  the  truth  of  the  latter
whether  we  will  or  not.  For,  as  observed  by  one  of  the  modern  pro-
fessors of  Astrology:

Now  that  photography  has  revealed  to  us  the  chemical  influeuce  of  the  sidereal
system,  by  fixing  on  the  sensitized  plate  of  the  apparatus  milliards  of  stars  and
planets  that  had  hitherto  baffled  the  efforts  of  the  most  powerful  telescopes  to
discover,  it  becomes  easier  to  understand  how  our  solar  system  can,  at  the  birth  of
a  child,  influence  his  brain— virgin  of  any  impression— in  a  definite  manner  and
according  to  the  presence  on  the  zenith  of  such  or  another  zodiacal  constellation.*


STANZA  V.

I.  The  Primordiai,  Seven,  the  First  Seven  Breaths  of  the
Dragon  of  Wisdom,  produce  in  their  turn  from  their  Holy  Cir-
cumgyrating  Breaths  the  Fiery  Whirlwind.

This  is,  perhaps,  the  most  difficult  of  all  the  Stanzas  to  explain.  Its
language  is  comprehensible  only  to  him  who  is  thoroughly  versed  in
Eastern  allegory,  and  its  purposely  obscure  phraseology.  The  ques-
tion will  surely  be  asked:  Do  the  Occultists  believe  in  all  these
"Builders,"  "Lipika,"  and  "Sons  of  Light,"  as  Entities,  or  are  they
merely  imagery  ?  To  this  the  answer  is  given  as  plainly :  After  due
allowance  for  the  imager}-  of  personified  Powers,  we  must  admit  the
existence  of  these  Entities,  if  we  would  not  reject  the  existence  of
Spiritual  Humanity  within  physical  mankind.  For  the  hosts  of  these
Sons  of  Light,  the  Mind-born  Sons  of  the  first  manifested  Ray  of  the
Unknown  All,  are  the  very  root  of  Spiritual  Man.  Unless  we  want  to
believe  the  unphilosophical  dogma  of  a  specially  created  soul  for  every
human  birth — a  fresh  supply  of  these  pouring  in  daily,  since  "Adam"
— we  have  to  admit  the  Occult  teachings.  This  will  be  explained  in  its
place.     Let  us  see,  now,  what  may  be  the  meaning  of  this  Occult  Stanza.

•  Les  Mysteres  de  l' Horoscope,  Ely  Star,  p.  xi.


132  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

The  Doctrine  teaches  that,  in  order  to  become  a  divine,  fully  con-
scious God — aye,  even  the  highest — the  Spiritual  Primeval  Intelli-
gences must  pass  through  the  human  stage.  And  when  we  say  human,
this  does  not  apply  merely  to  our  terrestrial  humanity,  but  to  the
mortals  that  inhabit  any  world,  i.e.,  to  those  Intelligences  that  have
reached  the  appropriate  equilibrium  between  matter  and  spirit,  as  we
have  now,  ever  since  the  middle  point  of  the  Fourth  Root  Race  of  the
Fourth  Round  was  passed.  Each  Entity  must  have  won  for  itself  the
right  of  becoming  divine,  through  self-experience.  Hegel,  the  great
German  thinker,  must  have  known  or  sensed  intuitionally  this  truth,
when  he  said,  that  the  Unconscious  evolved  the  Universe  only  "in
the  hope  of  attaining  clear  self-consciousness,"  in  other  words,  of
becoming  Man;  for  this  is  also  the  secret  meaning  of  the  oft  recur-
ring Puranic  phrase,  of  Brahma  being  constantly  "moved  by  the  desire
to  create."  This  explains  also  the  hidden  Kabalistic  meaning  of  the
saying:  "The  Breath  becomes  a  stone;  the  stone,  a  plant;  the  plant,
an  animal;  the  animal,  a  man;  the  man,  a  spirit;  and  the  spirit,  a
god."  The  Mind-born  Sons,  the  Rishis,  the  Builders,  etc.,  were  all
Men — of  whatever  forms  and  shapes — in  other  worlds  and  in  pre-
ceding Manvantaras.

This  subject  being  so  very  mystical,  it  is  most  difficult  to  explain  it
in  all  its  details  and  bearings;  for  the  whole  mystery  of  evolutionary-
creation  is  contained  therein.  A  sentence  or  two  in  the  Shloka  vividly
recalls  to  mind  similar  sentences  in  the  Kabalah  and  the  phraseology^
of  the  King  Psalmist.*  Both,  when  speaking  of  God,  show  him  making
the  wind  his  messenger  and  his  "  ministers  a  flaming  fire."  But  in  the
Esoteric  Doctrine  it  is  used  figuratively.  The  "Fiery  Whirl-wind"  is
the  incandescent  cosmic  dust  which  only  follows  magnetically,  as  the
iron  filings  follow  the  magnet,  the  directing  thought  of  the  "Creative
Forces."  Yet,  this  cosmic  dust  is  something  more;  for  every  atom  in
the  Universe  has  the  potentiality  of  self-consciousness  in  it,  and  is,  like
the  Monads  of  Leibnitz,  a  Universe  in  itself,  and  for  itself  //  is  an
atom  and  an  angel.

In  this  connection  it  should  be  noted  that  one  of  the  luminaries  of
the  modern  Evolutionist  School,  Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace,  when  discussing
the  inadequacy  of  "natural  selection"  as  the  sole  factor  in  the  develop-
ment of  physical  man,  practically  concedes  the  whole  point  here
discussed.     He   holds   that   the   evolution   of   man   was   directed   and


•  Psalms,  civ.  4.


THE    CELESTIAI,    BUDDHAS.  133

furthered  by  superior  Intelligences,  whose  agencj^  is  a  necessary  factor
in  the  scheme  of  Nature.  But  once  the  operation  of  these  Intelligences
is  admitted  in  one  place,  it  is  only  a  logical  deduction  to  extend  it  still
further.     No  hard  and  fast  line  can  be  drawn.


STANZA   \ .—Continued.

2.  They  make  of  him  the  Messenger  of  their  Wii^i.  (a).  The
dzyu  becomes  fohat:  the  swift  son  of  the  divine  sons,  whose
Sons  are  the  Lipika,*  runs  circular  errands.  Fohat  is  the
Steed,  and  the  Thought  is  the  RiDER.f  He  passes  like  light-
ning   THROUGH    THE    FIERY    CLOUDS  |    {b)\    TAKES    ThREE,    AND    FiVE,

AND  Seven  Strides  through  the  Seven  Regions  above,  and
THE  Seven  below.§  He  lifts  his  Voice,  and  calls  the  innu-
merable Sparks,  II  and  joins  them  together  (c).

(a)  This  show^s  the  "Primordial  Seven"  using  for  their  Vehicle,
(Vahana,  or  the  manifested  subject  which  becomes  the  symbol  of  the
Power  directing  it)  Fohat,  called  in  consequence,  the  "Messenger  of
their  Will"— the  "Fiery  Whirlwind."

(d)  "Dzyu  becomes  Fohat" — the  expression  itself  shows  it.  Dzyu  is
the  one  Real  (Magical)  Knowledge,  or  Occult  Wisdom;  which,  dealing
with  eternal  truths  and  primal  causes,  becomes  almost  omnipotence
when  applied  in  the  right  direction.  Its  antithesis  is  Dzyu-mi,  that
which  deals  with  illusions  and  false  appearances  only,  as  in  our  exo-
teric modern  sciences.  In  this  case,  Dzyu  is  the  expression  of  the  col-
lective Wisdom  of  the  Dhyani-Buddhas.

As  the  reader  is  supposed  not  to  be  acquainted  with  the  Dhyani-
Buddhas,  it  is  as  well  to  say  at  once  that,  according  to  the  Orientalists,
there  are  five  Dhj^anis  who  are  the  Celestial  Buddhas,  of  whom  the
Human  Buddhas  are  the  manifestations  in  the  world  of  form  and
matter.  Esoterically,  however,  the  Dhyani-Buddhas  are  seven,  of
whom  five  only  have  hitherto  manifested,^  and  two  are  to  come  in  the
Sixth  and  Seventh  Root-Races.  They  are,  so  to  speak,  the  eternal
prototypes  of  the  Buddhas  who  appear  on  this  earth,  each  of  whom  has

•  The  difference  between  the  Builders,  the  Planetary  Spirits,  and  the  Lipika  must  not  be  lost  sight
of.     (See  Shlokas  5  and  6  of  this  Commentary.)
t  That  is,  he  is  under  the  influence  of  their  guiding  thought.
t  Cosmic  mists.
\  The  World  to  be.
H  Atoms.
IT  See  A.  P.  Sinnett's  Esoteric  Buddhism,  5th  annotated  edition,  pp.  171-173.


134  I'HE   SECRKT   DOCTRINE.

his  particular  divine  prototype.  So,  for  instance,  Amitabha  is  the
Dhyani-Buddha  of  Gautama  Shakyamuni,  manifesting  through  him
whenever  this  great  Soul  incarnates  on  earth  as  He  did  in  Tzon-
kha-pa.*  As  the  synthesis  of  the  seven  Dhyani-Buddhas,  Avaloki-
teshvara  was  the  first  Buddha  (the  lyOgos),  and  Amitabha  is  the  inner
"God"  of  Gautama,  who,  in  China,  is  called  Amida  (Buddha).  They
are,  as  Prof.  Rhys  Davids  correctly  states,  "the  glorious  counterparts
in  the  mystic  world,  free  from  the  debasing  conditions  of  this  material
life,"  of  every  earthly  mortal  Buddha — the  liberated  Manushi-Buddhas
appointed  to  govern  the  Earth  in  this  Round.  They  are  the  "Buddhas
of  Contemplation,"  and  are  all  Anupadaka  (parentless),  i.e.,  self-born
of  the  divine  essence.  The  exoteric  teaching — which  says  that  every
Dhyani-Buddha  has  the  faculty  of  creating  from  himself  an  equally
celestial  son,  a  Dhyani-Bodhisattva,  who,  after  the  decease  of  the
Manushi- Buddha,  has  to  carry  out  the  work  of  the  latter — rests  on
the  fact  that,  owing  to  the  highest  Initiation  performed  by  one  over-
shadowed by  the  "  Spirit  of  Buddha" — who  is  credited  by  the  Orien-
talists with  having  created  the  five  Dhyani-Buddhas! — a  candidate
becomes  virtually  a  Bodhisattva,  created  such  by  the  High  Initiator.

(r)  Fohat,  being  one  of  the  most,  if  not  the  most  important  character
in  Esoteric  cosmogony,  should  be  minutely  described.  As  in  the  oldest
Grecian  cosmogony,  which  differed  widely  from  the  later  mythology,
Eros  is  the  third  person  in  the  primeval  trinity.  Chaos,  Gaea,  Eros —
answering  to  the  Kabalistic  Trinity,  Ain  Suph,  the  Boundless  All  (for
Chaos  is  Space,  from  xaiVw,  to  open  wide,  to  be  void),  Shekinah  and  the
Ancient  of  Days,  or  the  Holy  Ghost — so  Fohat  is  one  thing  in  the  yet
Unmanifested  Universe,  and  another  in  the  phenomenal  and  Cosmic
World.  In  the  latter,  he  is  that  occult,  electric,  vital  power,  which,
under  the  Will  of  the  Creative  Logos,  unites  and  brings  together  all
forms,  giving  them  the  first  impulse,  which  in  time  becomes  law.  But
in  the  Unmanifested  Universe,  Fohat  is  no  more  this,  than  Eros  is
the  later  brilliant  winged  Cupid,  or  Eove.  Fohat  has  naught  to  do
with  Cosmos  yet,  since  Cosmos  is  not  born,  and  the  Gods  still  sleep  in
the  bosom  of  "Father-Mother."  He  is  an  abstract  philosophical  idea.
He  produces  nothing  yet  by  himself;  he  is  simply  that  potential  crea-
tive Power,  in  virtue  of  whose  action  the  Noumenon  of  all  future  phe-

*  The  first  and  greatest  Tibetan  Reformer  who  founded  the  "Yellow-Caps,"  Gelukpas.  He  was
bom  in  the  year  1355  a.d.,  in  the  district  of  Amdo,  and  was  the  Avatara  of  Amitabha,  the  celestial,
name  of  Gautama  Buddha.


THE   THEOGONY   OF  THE    CREATORS.


135


.lomena  divides,  so  to  speak,  but  to  reunite  in  a  mystic  supersensuous
act,  and  emit  the  creative  Ra3\  When  the  "Divine  Son"  breaks  forth,
then  Fohat  becomes  the  propelling  force,  the  active  Power  which
causes  the  One  to  become  Two  and  Three — on  the  cosmic  plane  of
manifestation.  The  triple  One  differentiates  into  the  Many,  and  then
Fohat  is  transformed  into  that  force  which  brings  together  the  ele-
mental atoms,  and  makes  them  aggregate  and  combine.  We  find  an
echo  of  this  primeval  teaching  in  early  Greek  mythology.  Erebus  and
Nux  are  born  out  of  Chaos,  and,  under  the  action  of  Eros,  give  birth  in
their  turn  to  ^ther  and  Hemera,  the  light  of  the  superior  and  the  light
of  the  inferior,  or  terrestrial,  regions.  Darkness  generates  light.  Com-
pare in  the  Purdnas  Brahma's  Will  or  "Desire"  to  create;  and  in  the
Phcenician  cosmogony  of  Sanchuniathon  the  doctrine  that  Desire,
TTo^os,  is  the  principle  of  creation.

Fohat  is  closely  related  to  the  "One  I,ife."  From  the  Unknown
One,  the  Infinite  Totality,  the  Manifested  One,  or  the  periodical,
Manvantaric  Deity,  emanates;  and  this  is  the  Universal  Mind,  which,
separated  from  its  Fountain-Source,  is  the  Demiurge  or  the  Creative
Logos  of  the  Western  Kabalists,  and  the  Four-faced  Brahma  of  the
Hindii  religion.  In  its  totality,  viewed,  in  the  Esoteric  doctrine,  from
the  standpoint  of  manifested  Divine  Thought,  it  represents  the  Hosts
of  the  higher  Creative  Dhyan  Chohans,  Simultaneously  with  the  evo-
lution of  the  Universal  Mind,  the  Concealed  Wisdom  of  Adi-Buddha —
the  One  Supreme  and  Eternal — manifests  itself  as  Avalokiteshvara  (or
Manifested  Ishvara),  which  is  the  Osiris  of  the  Eg^'ptians,  the  Ahura-
Mazda  of  the  Zoroastrians^  the  Heavenly  Man  of  the  Hermetic  philo-
sophers, the  Logos  of  the  Platonists,  and  the  Atman  of  the  Vedantins.--
By  the  action  of  the  Manifested  Wisdom,  or  Mahat — represented  by
these  innumerable  centres  of  spiritual  energy  in  the  Kosmos — the
Reflection  of  the  Universal  Mind,  which  is  Cosmic  Ideation  and  the
Intellectual  Force  accompanying  such  Ideation,  becomes  objectively
the  Fohat  of  the  Buddhist  esoteric  philosopher.  Fohat,  running  along
the  seven  principles  of  Akasha,  acts  upon  manifested  Substance,  or  the
One  Element,  as  declared  above,  and,  by  differentiating  it  into  various
centres  of  energ}%  sets  in  motion  the  law  of  Cosmic  Evolution,  which,
in  obedience  to  the  Ideation  of  the  Universal  Mind,  brings  into  exis-
tence all  the  various  states  of  being  in  the  manifested  Solar  Sj^stem.


•  T.  Subba  Row  seems  to  identify  him  with,  and  to  call  him,  the  Logos.    (See  his  Lectures  on  the
BhagavadgUa,  in  the  Theosophisl,  vol.  ix.)


136  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

The  Solar  System,  brought  into  existence  by  these  agencies,  consists
of  Seven  Principles,  like  everything  else  within  these  centres.  Such  is
the  teaching  of  the  Trans-Himalayan  Ksotericism.  Every  philosophy,
however,  has  its  own  way  of  dividing  these  principles.

Fohat,  then,  is  the  personified  electric  vital  power,  the  transcen-
dental binding  unity  of  all  cosmic  energies,  on  the  unseen  as  on  the
manifested  planes,  the  action  of  which  resembles — on  an  immense
scale — that  of  a  living  Force  created  by  Will,  in  those  phenomena
where  the  seemingly  subjective  acts  on  the  seemingly  objective,  and
propels  it  to  action.  Fohat  is  not  only  the  living  Symbol  and  Con-
tainer of  that  Force,  but  is  looked  upon  by  the  Occultists  as  an  Entity;
the  forces  it  acts  upon  being  cosmic,  human  and  terrestrial,  and
exercising  their  influence  on  all  these  planes  respectively.  On  the
earthly  plane,  its  influence  is  felt  in  the  magnetic  and  active  force
generated  by  the  strong  desire  of  the  magnetizer.  On  the  cosmic,  it  is
present  in  the  constructive  power  that,  in  the  formation  of  things —
from  the  planetary  system  down  to  the  glow-worm  and  simple  dais}' —
carries  out  the  plan  in  the  mind  of  Nature,  or  in  the  Divine  Thought,
with  regard  to  the  development  and  growth  of  a  particular  thing.  It
is,  metaphysically,  the  objectivized  Thought  of  the  Gods,  the  "Word
made  flesh,"  on  a  lower  scale,  and  the  messenger  of  cosmic  and  human
Ideation ;  the  active  force  in  Universal  L,ife.  In  its  secondary  aspect,
Fohat  is  the  Solar  Energy,  the  electric  vital  fluid,  and  the  preserving
Fourth  Principle,  the  Animal  Soul  of  Nature,  so  to  say,  or — Electricity.

In  1882,  the  President  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  Col.  Olcott,  was
taken  to  task  for  asserting  in  one  of  his  lectures  that  Electricity  is
matter.  Such,  nevertheless,  is  the  teaching  of  the  Occult  Doctrine.
"Force,"  "Energy,"  may  be  better  names  for  it,  so  long  as  European
Science  knows  so  little  about  its  true  nature;  yet  matter  it  is,  as  much
as  Ether  is  matter,  since  it  is  as  atomic,  though  indeed  several  removes
from  Ether.  It  seems  ridiculous  to  argue  that  because  a  thing  is
imponderable  to  Science,  therefore  it  cannot  be  called  matter.  Elec-
tricity is  "immaterial,"  in  the  sense  that  its  molecules  are  not  subject
to  perception  and  experiment;  yet  it  may  be — and  Occultism  saj^s  it
is — atomic;  therefore  it  is  matter.  But  even  supposing  it  were  un-
scientific to  speak  of  it  in  such  terms,  once  Electricitj^  is  called  in
Science  a  source  of  Energy,  Energ}^  simply,  and  a  Force — where  is
that  Force  or  that  Energy  which  can  be  thought  of  without  thinking
of  matter?     Maxwell,  a  mathematician  and  one  of  the  greatest  authori-


THE    PROTEAN    SPIRIT-SUBSTANCE.  137

ties  Upon  Electricity  and  its  phenomena,  said,  years  ago,  that  Elec-
tricitj'  was  matter,  not  motion  merely.  "If  we  accept  the  hypothesis
that  the  elementar>^  substances  are  composed  of  atoms,  we  cannot  avoid
concluding  that  electricity  also,  positive  as  well  as  negative,  is  divided
into  definite  elementarj^  portions,  which  behave  like  atoms  of  elec-
tricity."* We  will  go  further  than  this,  and  assert  that  Electricity  is
not  only  Substance,  but  that  it  is  an  emanation  from  an  Entity,  which
is  neither  God  nor  Devil,  but  one  of  the  numberless  Entities  that  rule
and  guide  our  world,  according  to  the  eternal  I^aw  of  Karma.

To  return  to  Fohat,  it  is  connected  with  Vishnu  and  Surya  in  the
early  character  of  the  former  God ;  for  Vishnu  is  not  a  high  God  in  the
Rig  Veda.  The  name  Vishnu  is  from  the  root  vish,  "to  pervade,"  and
Fohat  is  called  the  "Per\^ader"  and  the  Manufacturer,  because  he
shapes  the  atoms  from  crude  material.!  In  the  sacred  texts  of  the
Rig  Veda,  Vishnu  is  also  "a  manifestation  of  the  Solar  Energy,  and  is
described  as  striding  through  the  seven  regions  of  the  Universe  in
three  steps,"  the  Vedic  God  having  little  in  common  with  the  Vishnu
of  later  times.  Therefore  the  two  are  identical  in  this  particular
feature,  and  one  is  the  copy  of  the  other.

The  Three  and  Seven  "Strides"  refer  to  the  seven  spheres  inhabited
by  man,  in  the  Esoteric  Doctrine,  as  well  as  to  the  seven  regions  of  the
Earth.  Notwithstanding  the  frequent  objections  made  by  would-be
Orientalists,  the  Seven  Worlds,  or  Spheres,  of  our  Planetary  Chain
are  distinctly  referred  to  in  the  exoteric  Hindu  scriptures.  But  how
strangely  all  these  numbers  are  connected  with  like  numbers  in  other
cosmogonies  and  with  their  symbols,  can  be  seen  from  the  comparisons
and  parallelisms  made  by  students  of  old  religions.  The  "three  strides
of  Vishnu,"  through  the  "seven  regions  of  the  Universe,"  of  the  Rig
Veda,  have  been  variously  explained  by  commentators  as  meaning  fire,
lightning  and  the  sun,  cosmically,  and  as  having  been  taken  in  the
earth,  the  atmosphere,  and  the  sky;  more  philosophically — and  in  the
astronomical  sense,  very  correctly — they  are  explained  by  Aurnavabha
as  being  the  various  positions  of  the  sun,  rising,  noon,  and  setting.
Esoteric  Philosophy  alone  explains  it  clearly,  though  the  Zohar  has
laid  it  down  verj^  philosophically  and  comprehensively.  It  is  plainly
demonstrated  therein  that  in  the  beginning  the  Elohim  (Alhim)  were
called  Achad,  "One,"  or  the  "Deity,  One  in  Many,"  a  very  simple  idea

•Helmholtz,  Faraday  lecture,  1881.

t  It  is  well  known  that  sand,  when  placed  on  a  metal  plate  in  vibration,  assumes  a  series  of  regular
fig'ures  of  various  descriptions.    Can  Science  give  a  complete  explanation  of  this  fact  ?


138  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE-

in  a  pantheistic  conception — pantheistic  in  its  philosophical  sense,  of
course.  Then  came  the  change,  "Jehovah  is  Klohim,"  thus  unifying
the  multiplicity  and  taking  the  first  step  towards  Monotheism.  Now
to  the  query,  "How  is  Jehovah  Elohim?"  the  answer  is,  "By  Three
Steps"  from  below.  The  meaning  is  plain.  The  Steps  are  symbols,
and  emblematic,  mutually  and  correlativel}^  of  Spirit,  Soul  and  Body
(Man);  of  the  Circle,  transformed  into  Spirit,  the  Soul  of  the  World
and  its  Body  (or  Karth).  Stepping  out  of  the  Circle  of  Infinity,  that
no  man  comprehendeth,  Ain  Suph — the  Kabalistic  synonym  foi;  Para-
brahman,  for  the  Zeroana  Akerne,  of  the  Mazdeans,  or  for  any  other
"Unknowable" — becomes  "One"  (the  Achad,  the  Eka,  the  Ahu);  then
he  (or  it)  is  transformed  by  evolution  into  the  "One  in  Many,"  the
Dhyani-Buddhas  or  the  Elohim,  or  again  the  Amshaspends,  his  third
Step  being  taken  into  the  generation  of  the  flesh,  or  Man.  And  from
Man,  or  Jah-Hovah,  "male-female,"  the  inner  divine  entity  becomes,
on  the  metaphysical  plane,  once  more  the  Elohim.

The  numbers  3,  5,  and  7  are  prominent  in  speculative  Masonry,  as
shown  in  his  Unveiled.     A  Mason  writes:

There  are  the  3,  5,  and  7  steps  to  show  a  circular  walk.     The  three  faces  of  3,  3  ;
5,  3;  and  7,  3;  etc.,  etc.     Sometimes  it  comes  in  this  form:  -f-  =  376"5,  and  ^^^-^  =
3817-5,   and  the  ratio  of  WVr^  feet  for  cubit  measure  gives  the  Great  Pyramid
measures.

Three,  five  and  seven  are  mystical  numbers,  and  the  last  and  the  first
are  as  greatly  honoured  by  Masons  as  by  Parsis — the  Triangle  being
a  symbol  of  Deity  ever5n;vhere.*  As  a  matter  of  course.  Doctors  of
Divinity — Cassel,  for  instance — show  the  Zohar  explaining  and  support-
ing the  Christian  Trinity  (!).  It  is  the  latter,  however,  that  had  its
origin  from  the  /\,  in  the  archaic  Occultism  and  Symbology  of  the
Heathen.  The  Three  Strides  relate  metaphysically  to  the  descent  of
Spirit  into  Matter,  of  the  Eogos  falling  as  a  ray  into  the  spirit,  then
into  the  soul,  and  finally  into  the  human  physical  form  of  man,  in
which  it  becomes  Life.

The  Kabalistic  idea  is  identical  with  the  Esotericism  of  the  archaic
period.  This  Esotericism  is  the  common  property  of  all,  and  belongs
neither  to  the  Aryan  Fifth  Race,  nor  to  any  of  its  numerous  sub-races.
It  cannot  be  claimed  by  the  Turanians,  so-called,  the  Egyptians,
Chinese,  Chaldeans,  or  by  any  of  the  seven  divisions  of  the  Fifth
Root  Race,  but  really  belongs  to  the  Third  and  Fourth  Root  Races,

•  See  The  Masonic  Cyclopcedia,  Mackenzie;  and  The  Pythagorean  Triangle,  Oliver.


THE  CORRELATION   OP  THE  GODS.  139

whose  descendants  we  find  in  the  Seed  of  the  Fifth,  the  earliest
Aryans.  The  Circle  was  with  every  nation  the  symbol  of  the  Unknown
— "  Boundless  Space,"  the  abstract  garb  of  an  ever  present  abstraction
— the  Incognizable  Deity.  It  represents  limitless  Time  in  Eternity.
The  Zeroana  Akerne  is  also  the  "Boundless  Circle  of  Unknown  Time,"
from  which  Circle  issues  the  radiant  Light — the  Universal  Sun,  or
Ormazd* — and  the  latter  is  identical  with  Cronus,  in  his  ^olian  form,
that  of  a  Circle.  For  the  Circle  is  Sar  and  Saros,  or  Cycle.  It  was
the  Babylonian  God  whose  circular  horizon  was  the  visible  symbol
of  the  invisible,  while  the  Sun  was  the  One  Circle  from  which  pro-
ceeded the  cosmic  orbs,  of  which  he  was  considered  the  leader.  Zero-
ana,  is  the  Chakra,  or  Circle,  of  Vishnu,  the  mysterious  emblem  which
is,  according  to  the  definition  of  a  Mystic,  "a  curve  of  such  a  nature
that  as  to  any,  the  least  possible,  part  thereof,  if  the  curve  be  pro-
tracted either  way,  it  will  proceed  and  finally  reenter  upon  itself,  and
form  one  and  the  same  curve — or  that  which  we  call  the  circle."  No
better  definition  could  thus  be  given  of  the  natural  symbol  and  the
evident  nature  of  Deity,  which  having  its  circumference  everywhere
(the  boundless)  has,  therefore,  its  central  point  also  everj'where;  in
other  words,  is  in  every  point  of  the  Universe.  The  invisible  Deity  is
thus  also  the  Dhyan  Chohans,  or  the  Rishis,  the  primitive  seven,  and
the  nine,  without,  and  ten,  including,  their  synthetical  unit,  from  which
It  steps  into  Man.

Returning  to  Commentary  4  of  Stanza  IV,  the  reader  now  will  under-
stand why,  while  the  Trans-Himala^'^an  Chakra  has  inscribed  within  it
ZXlIlJl"^ — triangle,  first  line,  square,  second  line,  and  a  pentacle  with
a  point  in  the  centre,  either  thus  "^,  or  some  other  variation — the
Kabalistic  Circle  of  the  Elohim  reveals,  when  the  letters  of  the  word
QTiSn  (Alhim  or  Elohim)  are  read  numerically,  the  famous  numerals
13514,  or  anagrammatically  31415 — the  astronomical  tt  (pi),  or  the
hidden  meaning  of  the  Dhyani-Buddhas,  of  the  Gebers,  the  Giburim,
the  Kabeiri,  and  the  Elohim,  all  signifjang  "Great  Men,"  "Titans,"
"  Heavenly  Men,"  and,  on  earth,  "Giants."

The  Seven  was  a  Sacred  Number  with  every  nation ;  but  none
applied  it  to  more  physiologically  materialistic  uses  than  the  Hebrews.
With  them  7  was  preeminently  the  generative  number,  and  9  the  male
causative  one,  forming  as  shown  by  the  Kabalists  the  otz,  si;  (90,  70),
or  "the  Tree  of  the  Garden  of  Eden,"  the  "double  hermaphrodite  rod"

•  Ormazd  is  the  I«ogos,  the  "First  Bom,"  and  the  Sun.


140  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

of  the  Fourth  Race.  This  was  the  symbol  of  the  "Holy  of  Holies,"  the
3  and  the  4  of  sexual  separation.  Nearly  every  one  of  the  22  Hebrew
letters  are  merely  phallic  symbols.  Of  the  two  letters — as  shown  above
— one,  the  ayin,  is  a  negative  female  letter,  symbolically  an  eye;  the
the  other  a  male  letter,  tza,  a  y?5>^-hook  or  dart.  Whereas  with  the
Hindus  and  Aryans  generally,  the  significance  was  manifold,  and
related  almost  entirely  to  purely  metaphysical  and  astronomical  truths.
Their  Rishis  and  Gods  their  Demons  and  Heroes,  have  historical  and
ethical  meanings.
Yet  we  are  told  by  a  Kabalist,  who,  in  a  work  not  yet  published,

A.

contrasts  the  Kabalah  and  Z<?/z^r  with  Aryan  Ksotericism,  that:

The  Hebrew  clear,  short,  terse  and  exact,  modes  far  and  beyond  measure  surpass
the  toddling  word-talk  of  the  Hindus — ^just  as  by  parallelisms  the  Psalmist  says,
"  My  mouth  speaks  with  my  tongue,  I  know  not  thy  numbers"  (Ixxi.,  15).  .  .  .
The  Hindu  glyph  shows  by  its  insufficiency  in  the  large  admixture  of  adventitious
sides  the  same  borrowed  plumage  that  the  Greeks  (the  lying  Greeks)  had,  and  that
Masonry  has:  which,  in  the  rough  monosyllabic  (and  apparent)  poverty  of  the
Hebrew,  shows  the  latter  to  have  come  down  from  a  far  more  remote  antiquity
than  any  of  these,  and  to  have  been  the  source  [!  ?],  or  nearer  the  old  original
source  than  any  of  them.

This  is  entirely  erroneous.  Our  learned  brother  and  correspondent
judges  the  Hindu  religious  systems  apparently  by  their  Shdstras  and
Puranas,  probably  the  latter,  and  in  their  modern  translations  more-
over, which  disfigure  them  out  of  all  recognition.  It  is  to  their
philosophical  systems  that  we  have  to  turn,  to  their  esoteric  teaching,
if  we  would  make  a  point  of  comparison.  No  doubt  the  symbolog}^  of
the  Peyitateuch,  and  even  of  the  New  Testament,  comes  from  the  same
source.  But  surely  the  Pyramid  of  Cheops,  whose  measurements  are
all  found,  by  Professor  Piazzi  Smyth,  repeated  in  Solomon's  alleged
and  mythical  Temple,  is  not  of  a  later  date  than  the  Mosaic  books  ?
Hence,  if  there  is  any  such  great  identity  as  is  claimed,  it  must  be  due
to  servile  copying  on  the  part  of  the  Jews,  not  on  that  of  the  Egyptians.
The  glyphs  of  the  Jews — and  even  their  language,  the  Hebrew — are  not
original.  They  are  borrowed  from  the  Egyptians,  from  whom  Moses
got  his  Wisdom ;  from  the  Coptic,  the  probable  kinsman,  if  not  parent,
of  the  old  Phcenician  and  from  the  Hyksos,  their  (alleged)  ancestors,  as
Josephus  shows.*  Aye;  but  who  are  the  Hyksos  shepherds?  And
who  the  Egyptians?  History  knows  nothing  of  the  question,  and
speculates  and  theorizes  out  of  the  depths  of  the  respective  conscious-

•  Against  Apion,  I,  25.


THE  SEVEN  WORLDS.  14I

nesses  of  her  historians.*  "Khamism,  or  old  Coptic,  is  from  Western
Asia,  and  contains  some  germ  of  the  Semitic,  thus  bearing  witness

A

to  the  primitive  cognate  unity  of  the  Ar>an  and  Semitic  races,"  says
Bunsen,  who  places  the  great  events  in  Eg5'pt  9,000  years  B.C.  The
fact  is  that  in  archaic  Esotericism  and  Aryan  thought  we  find  a  grand
philosophy,  whereas  in  the  Hebrew  records  we  find  only  the  most
surprising  ingenuity  in  inventing  apotheoses  for  phallic  worship  and
sexual  theogony.

A

That  the  Aryans  never  made  their  religion  rest  solely  on  physio-
logical S3'mbols,  as  the  old  Hebrews  have  done,  may  be  seen  in  the
exoteric  Hindu  Scriptures.  That  these  accounts,  also,  are  blinds  is
shown  by  their  contradicting  each  other,  a  different  explanation  being
found  in  almost  every  Purana  and  epic  poem.  Read  esoterically,
however,  they  will  all  yield  the  same  meaning.  Thus  one  account
enumerates  seven  w^orlds,  exclusive  of  the  nether  worlds,  also  seven  in
number;  these  fourteen  upper  and  nether  worlds  have  nothing  to  do
with  the  classification  of  the  Septenary  Chain  and  belong  to  the  purely
ethereal,  invisible  worlds.  These  will  be  noticed  elsewhere.  Suffice
it  for  the  present  to  show  that  the)^  are  purposely  referred  to  as
though  they  belonged  to  the  Chain.  "Another  enumeration  calls
the  seven  worlds  earth,  sky,  heaven,  middle  region,  place  of  birth,
mansion  of  the  blest,  and  abode  of  truth;  placing  the  Sons  of
Brahma  in  the  sixth  division,  and  stating  the  fifth,  or  Jana-loka,
to  be  that  where  animals  destroyed  in  the  general  conflagration
are  born  again. "f  Some  real  Esoteric  teaching  is  given  in  the  sub-
sequent chapters  on  Symbolism.  He  who  is  prepared  for  it  will  under-
stand the  hidden  meaning.


STANZA  N .—Continued.
3.  He  is  their  guiding  spirit  and  leader.    When  he  commences

WORK,  he  separates  THE  SpARKS  OF  THE  LOWER  KINGDOM, |  THAT
FLOAT  AND  THRILL  WITH  JOY  IN  THEIR  RADIANT  DWELLINGS, §  AND
FORMS    THEREWITH    THE   GERMS    OF  WHEELS.       HE    PLACES    THEM    IN

THE  Six  Directions  of  Space,  and  One  in  the  middle — the
Central  Wheel.

"Wlieels,"   as   already  explained,   are  the   centres  of  force,   around
which  primordial  cosmic  matter  expands,  and,  passing  through  all  the

•  See  Isis  Unveiled,  II.,  430-438.  t  See  Dowson's  Hindu,  Classical  Dictionary.

t  The  mineral  atoms.  \  Gaseous  clouds.


142  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

six  stages  of  consolidation, becomes  spheroidal  and  ends  by  being  trans-
formed into  globes  or  spheres.  It  is  one  of  the  fundamental  dogmas  of
Ksoteric  cosmogony,  that  during  the  Kalpas  (or  ^ons)  of  Life,  Motion,
which,  during  the  periods  of  Rest,  ''pulsates  and  thrills  through  every
slu7nbering  atom'' — assumes  an  evergrowing  tendency,  from  the  first
awakening  of  Kosmos  to  a  new  "Day,"  to  circular  movement.  "The
Deity  becomes  a  Whirlwind."  It  may  be  asked,  as  the  writer  has  not
failed  to  ask:  Who  is  there  to  ascertain  the  difference  in  that  Motion,
since  all  Nature  is  reduced  to  its  primal  essence,  and  there  can  be  no
one — not  even  one  of  the  Dhyani-Chohans,  who  are  all  in  Nirvana — to
see  it?  The  answer  to  this  is:  Everything  in  Nature  has  to  be  judged
by  analogy.  Though  the  highest  Deities  (Archangels  or  Dhyani-
,Buddhas)  are  unable  to  penetrate  the  mysteries  which  lie  too  far
beyond  our  Planetary  System  and  the  visible  Cosmos,  yet  there  were
great  seers  and  prophets  in  olden  times  who  were  enabled  to  perceive
the  mystery  of  Breath  and  Motion  retrospectively,  when  the  systems  of
Worlds  were  at  rest  and  plunged  in  their  periodic  sleep.

The  Wheels  are  also  called  Rotae — the  moving  wheels  of  the  (Iielestial
orbs  participating  in  the  world's  creation — when  the  meaning  refers  to
the  animating  principle  of  the  stars  and  planets ;  for,  in  the  Kabalah,
they  are  represented  by  the  Auphanim,  the  Angels  of  the  Spheres  and
Stars,  of  which  they  are  the  informing  Souls.*

This  law  of  vortical  movement  in  primordial  matter  is  one  of  the
oldest  conceptions  of  Greek  philosophy,  whose  first  historical  sages
were  nearly  all  Initiates  of  the  Mysteries.  The  Greeks  had  it  from  the
Eg>Ttians,  and  the  latter  from  the  Chaldeans,  who  had  been  the  pupils
of  Brahmans  of  the  Esoteric  school.  Leucippus,  and  Democritus  of
Abdera— the  pupil  of  the  Magi— taught  that  this  gyratory  movement
of  the  atoms  and  spheres  existed  from  eternity.f  Hicetas,  Heraclides,
Ecphantus,  Pythagoras,  and  all  his  pupils,  taught  the  rotation  of  the
earth ;  and  Aryabhata  of  India,  Aristarchus,  Seleucus,  and  Archimedes


*  See  Kabbalah  Denudaia,  "De  Anima,"  p.  113.

+  "The  doctrine  of  the  rotation  of  the  earth  about  an  axis  was  taught  by  the  Pythagorean  Hicetas.
probably  as  early  as  500  B.C.  It  was  also  taught  by  his  pupil  Ecphantus,  and  by  Heraclides,  a  pupil
of  Plato.  The  immobility  of  the  sun  and  the  orbital  rotation  of  the  earth  were  shown  by  Aristarchus
of  Samos  as  early  as  281  B.C.  to  be  suppositions  accordant  with  facts  of  observation.  The  heliocentric
theory  was  also  taught  about  150  B.C.,  by  Seleucus  of  Seleucia  on  the  Tigris.  [It  was  taught  500  B.C.
by  Pythagoras.— H.P.B.]  It  is  said  also  that  Archimedes,  in  a  work  entitled  Psammites,  inculcated
the  heliocentric  theory.  The  sphericity  of  the  earth  was  distinctly  taught  by  Aristotle,  who  appealed
for  proof  to  the  figure  of  the  earth's  shadow  on  the  moon  in  eclipses.  (Aristotle,  De  CcbIo,  lib.  11.,  cap,
XIV.)  The  same  idea  was  defended  by  PHny.  (Nat.  Hist.,  n.,  65.)  These  views  seem  to  have  been  lost
from  knowledge  for  more  than  a  thousand  years.    .    .    ."    [VJincheW,  IVorld-Life,  $51-2.)


THE  ANTIQUITY  OF  PHYSICAI,  SCIENCES.  I43

calculated  its  revolution  as  scientifically  as  the  Astronomers  do  now;
while  the  theor>^  of  Elemental  Vortices  was  known  to  Anaxagoras,
and  maintained  by  him  500  years  B.C.,  or  nearly  2,000  before  it  was
taken  up  by  Galileo,  Descartes,  Swedenborg,  and  finally,  with  slight
modifications,  by  Sir  W.  Thomson.*  All  such  knowledge,  if  justice  be
only  done,  is  an  echo  of  the  archaic  doctrine,  an  attempt  to  explain
which  is  now  being  made.  How  men  of  the  last  few  centuries  have
come  to  the  same  ideas  and  conclusions  that  were  taught  as  axiomatic
truths  in  the  secrecy  of  the  Adyta,  dozens  of  millenniums  ago.is  a  ques-
tion that  is  treated  separately.  Some  were  led  to  it  by  the  natural
progress  in  Physical  Science  and  by  independent  observation ;  others —
such  as  Copernicus,  Swedenborg,  and  a  few  more — their  great  learning
notwithstanding,  owed  their  knowledge  far  more  to  intuitive  than  to
acquired  ideas,  developed  in  the  usual  wa}-  by  a  course  of  study.  That
Swedenborg,  who  could  not  possibly  have  known  anything  of  the
esoteric  ideas  of  Buddhism,  independently  came  near  the  Occult  teach-
ing in  his  general  conceptions,  is  shown  by  his  essay  on  the  Vortical
Theory.  In  Clissold's  translation  of  it,  quoted  by  Prof.  Winchell,t  we
find  the  following  resume:

The  first  cause  is  the  infinite  or  unlimited.  This  gives  existence  to  the  first  finite
or  limited.  [The  Logos  in  its  manifestation  and  the  Universe.]  That  which  pro-
duces a  limit  is  analogous  to  motion.  [See  Stanza  I  supra.']  The  limit  produced  is
a  point,  the  essence  of  which  is  motion ;  but  being  without  parts,  this  essence  is  not
actual  motion,  but  only  a  conatus  to  it.  [In  our  doctrine  it  is  not  a  "conatus,"  but
a  change  from  Eternal  Vibration,  in  the  unmanifested,  to  Vortical  Motion,  in  the
phenomenal  or  manifested  World.]  From  this  first  proceed  extension,  space,  figure,
and  succession,  or  time.  As  in  geometry  a  point  generates  a  line,  a  line  a  surface,
and  a  surface  a  solid,  so  here  the  conatus  of  the  point  tends  towards  lines,  surfaces
and  solids.  In  other  words,  the  Universe  is  contained  in  ovo  in  the  first  natural
point.

The  Motion  toward  which  the  conatus  tends  is  circular,  since  the  circle  is  the
most  perfect  of  all  figures  .  .  .  "The  most  perfect  figure  of  the  motion  above
described  must  be  the  perpetually  circular;  that  is  to  say,  it  must  proceed  from  the
centre  to  the  periphery  and  from  the  peripheiy  to  the  centre."  %

This  is  Occultism  pure  and  simple.

By  the  "Six  Directions  of  Space"  is  here  meant  the  "Double
Triangle,"  the  junction  and  blending  together  of  pure  Spirit  and
Matter,  of  the  Ariipa  and  the  Rupa,  of  which  the  Triangles  are  a
Symbol.  This  Double  Triangle  is  a  sign  of  Vishnu;  it  is  Solomon's
Seal,  and  the  Shri-Antara  of  the  Brahmans.

»  On  Vortex  Atoms.  t  Op.  cit.,  567.  %  Abridged  from  Ptincipia  Rerum  Naturalium.


144  I'he;  secret  doctrine.

STANZA  N .—Continued.
4.   FOHAT     TRACES     SPIRAI,     LINES    TO     UNITE    THE     SiXTH    TO    THE)

Seventh — the  Crown  (a).  An  Army  of  the  Sons  of  I,ight  stands
AT  each  angle;  the  Lipika,  in  the  Middle  Wheel  {p).  They"^
say:  "This  is  good."  The  first  Divine  World  is  ready;  the
First,    the    Second.!      Then    the    "Divine    Arupa''^    reflects

itself   in    ChHAYA   IyOKA,§   THE    FiRST   GARMENT   OF   AnUPADAKA  (<:).

{a)  This  tracing  of  "spiral  lines"  refers  to  the  evolution  of  Man's  as
well  as  of  Nature's  Principles;  an  evolution  which  takes  place  gradu-
ally, as  does  everything  else  in  Nature.  The  Sixth  Principle  in  Man
(Buddhi,  the  Divine  Soul),  though  a  mere  breath,  in  our  conceptions,  is
still  something  material  when  compared  with  Divine  Spirit  (Atma),  of
which  it  is  the  carrier  or  vehicle.  Fohat,  in  his  capacity  of  Divine
lyOve  (Fros),  the  electric  power  of  affinity  and  sympathy,  is  shown,
allegorically,  trying  to  bring  the  pure  Spirit,  the  Ray  inseparable  from
the  One  Absolute,  into  union  with  the  Soul,  the  two  constituting  in
Man  the  Monad,  and  in  Nature  the  first  link  between  the  ever-un-
conditioned and  the  manifested.  "The  First  is  now  the  Second
[World]" — of  the  lyipikas — has  reference  to  the  same.

(b)  The  "Army"  at  each  angle  is  the  Host  of  Angelic  Beings  (Dhyan
Chohans),  appointed  to  guide  and  watch  over  each  respective  region,
from  the  beginning  to  the  end  of  a  Manvantara.  They  are  the  "Mystic
Watchers"  of  the  Christian  Kabalists  and  Alchemists,  and  relate,  sym-
bolically as  well  as  cosmogonically,  to  the  numerical  system  of  the
Universe.  The  numbers  with  which  these  Celestial  Beings  are  con-
nected, are  extremely  difficult  to  explain,  as  each  number  refers  to
several  groups  of  distinct  ideas,  according  to  the  particular  group  of
"Angels"  which  it  is  intended  to  represent.  Herein  lies  the  nodus  in
the  study  of  symbology,  with  which  so  many  scholars,  unable  to  untie
it,  have  preferred  dealing  as  Alexander  dealt  with  the  Gordian  knot ;
hence  erroneous  conceptions  and  teachings,  as  a  direct  result.

(r)  The  "First  is  the  Second,"  because  the  "First"  cannot  really  be
numbered  or  regarded  as  such,  for  the  First  is  the  realm  of  noumena  in
its  primary  manifestation,  the  threshold  to  the  World  of  Truth,  or  Sat,
through  which  the  direct  energy  that  radiates  from  the  One  Reality —

*  The  Lipika.

t  That  is :  the  First  is  uow  the  Second  World.

\  The  Formless  Universe  of  Thought.

}  The  Shadowy  World  of  Primal  Form,  or  the  Intellectual.


THE   ONE   FLAME.  145

the  Nameless  Deity — reaches  us.  Here  again,  the  untranslateable  term
Sat  (Be-ness)  is  likely  to  lead  to  an  erroneous  conception,  since  that
which  is  manifested  cannot  be  Sat,  but  is  something  phenomenal,  not
everlasting,  nor,  in  truth,  even  sempiternal.  It  is  coeval  and  coexis-
tent with  the  One  Life,  "Secondless,"  but  as  a  manifestation  it  is  still  a
Maya— like  the  rest.  This  "World  of  Truth,"  in  the  words  of  the  Com-
mentar>',  can  be  dCvScribed  only  as  "«  bright  star  dropped  froni  the  Heart
of  Eternity;  the  beacon  of  hope  on  whose  Seven  Rays  hang  the  Seven
Worlds  of  Being."     Truly  so ;  since  these  are  the  Seven  Lights  whose

A

reflections  are  the  human  immortal  Monads — the  Atma,  or  the  irradia-
ting Spirit  of  every  creature  of  the  human  family.  First,  this  Septenary
Light;  then  the  "Divine  World" — the  countless  lights  lit  at  the
primeval  Light — the  Buddhis,  or  formless  Divine  Souls,  of  the  last
Ariipa  (Formless)  World-  the  "Sum  Total,"  in  the  mysterious  language
of  the  old  Stanza.

In  the  Catechism,  the  Master  is  made  to  ask  the  pupil :

'^ -Lift  thy  head,  O  Lanoo ;  dost  thoit  see  one,  or  coiuitless  lights  above  thee,
burning  in  the  dark  midnight  sky  V

"/  sense  one  Flame,  O  Gurudeva,  I  see  countless  tuidetached  sparks
shining  i7i  it."

"  Thozi  sayest  well.  And  now  look  around  and  into  thyself.  That  light
which  burtis  inside  thee,  dost  thou  feel  it  differeiit  in  ariywise  from  the  light
that  shines  in  thy  brother-men  ?"

'■'■It  is  in  no  way  different,  though  the  prisoner  is  held  in  bo7idage  by
Kanna,  and  though  its  outer  garments  delude  the  ignorant  into  saying,
'  Thy  Soul  and  My  SouV ."

The  radical  unity  of  the  ultimate  essence  of  each  constituent  part  of
compounds  in  Nature — from  star  to  mineral  atom,  from  the  highest
Dhyan  Chohan  to  the  smallest  infusorium,  in  the  fullest  acceptation  of
the  term,  and  whether  applied  to  the  spiritual,  intellectual,  or  physical
worlds — this  unity  is  the  one  fundamental  law  in  Occult  Science.
"The  Deity  is  boundless  and  infinite  expansion,"  says  an  Occult
axiom:  hence,  the  name  of  Brahma,  as  previously  remarked.*

There  is  a  deep  philosophy  underlying  the  earliest  worship  in  the
world,  the  worship  of  the  Sun  and  of  Fire.  Of  all  the  Elements  known
to  Physical  Science,  Fire  is  that  which  has  ever  eluded  definite  analysis.

*  In  the  Rig  Veda,  we  find  the  names  Brahmanaspati  and  Brihaspati  alternating-  with,  and  equiv-
alent to,  each  other.  Also  see  BtihadiXranyaka  Upanishad ;  Brihaspati  is  a  deity  called  the  •'  Fathei-
of  the  Gods."


146  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

It  is  confidently  asserted  that  air  is  a  mixture  containing  the  gases
oxygen  and  nitrogen.  We  view  the  Universe  and  the  Earth  as  matter
composed  of  definite  chemical  molecules.  We  speak  of  the  primitive
ten  earths,  endowing  each  with  a  Greek  or  Ivatin  name.  We  say  that
water  is,  chemically,  a  compound  of  oxygen  and  hydrogen.  But
what  is  Fire?  It  is  the  effect  of  combustion,  we  are  gravely  answered.
It  is  heat  and  light  and  motion,  and  a  correlation  of  physical  and
chemical  forces  in  general.  And  this  scientific  definition  is  philosophi-
cally supplemented  by  a  theological  one  in  Webster's  Dictionary,  which
explains  fire  as  "the  instrument  of  punishment,  or  the  punishment  of
the  impenitent  in  another  state" — the  "state,"  by  the  b5^e,  being  sup-
posed to  be  spiritual;  but,  alas!  the  presence  of  fire  would  seem  to
be  a  convincing  proof  of  its  material  nature.  Yet,  speaking  of  the  illu-
sion of  regarding  phenomena  as  simple,  because  they  are  familiar.
Professor  Bain  says:

Very  familiar  facts  seem  to  stand  in  no  need  of  explanation  themselves  and  to  be
the  means  of  explaining  whatever  can  be  assimilated  to  them.  Thus,  the  boiling
and  evaporation  of  a  liquid  is  supposed  to  be  a  very  simple  phenomenon  requiring
no  explanation,  and  a  satisfactory  explanation  of  rarer  phenomena.  That  water
should  dry  up  is,  to  the  uninstructed  mind,  a  thing  wholly  intelligible :  whereas  to
the  man  acquainted  with  physical  science  the  liquid  state  is  anomalous  and  inex-
plicable. The  lighting  of  a  fire  by  a  flame  is  a  great  scientific  difficulty,  yet  few
people  think  so.*

What  says  the  Ksoteric  teaching  with  regard  to  Fire?  ''Fire  is  the
most  perfect  and  unadulterated  reflection,  in  Heaven  as  on  Earth,  of  the
One  Flainc.  It  is  Life  and  Death,  the  origin  and  the  end  of  every  material
fhifig.  It  is  divine  Stibstancey  Thus,  not  only  the  Fire- Worshipper,
the  Parsi,  but  even  the  wandering  savage  tribes  of  America,  which
proclaim  themselves  "born  of  fire,"  show  more  science  in  their  creeds
and  truth  in  their  superstitions,  than  all  the  speculations  of  modern
physics  and  learning.  The  Christian  who  says,  "God  is  a  living  Fire,"
and  speaks  of  the  Pentecostal  "Tongues  of  Fire"  and  of  the  "Burning
Bush"  of  Moses,  is  as  much  a  fire-worshipper  as  any  other  "Heathen."
Among  the  Mystics  and  Kabalists,  the  Rosicrucians  were  those  who
defined  Fire  in  the  most  correct  way.  Procure  a  sixpenny  lamp,  keep
it  only  supplied  with  oil,  and  you  will  be  able  to  light  at  its  flame  the
lamps,  candles,  and  fires  of  the  whole  globe  without  diminishing  that
flame.  If  the  Deity,  the  radical  One,  is  an  eternal  and  infinite  Sub-
stance never  consumed  ("the  I^ord  thy  God  is  a   consuming  fire"),

*  Logic,  II.  125.


THE  WINGED  WHEELS.  I47

then  it  does  not  seem  reasonable  that  the  Occult  teaching  should  be
held  as  unphilosophical  when  it  says:  "Thus  were  formed  the  Arupa
and  Rupa  [Worlds]:  from  One  Light  Seven  Lights;  from  each  of  the
Seven,  seven  times  Seven"  etc.,  etc.


STANZA  M .—Continued.

5.  FOHAT  TAKES  FIVE  STRIDES*  (a),  AND  BUILDS  A  WINGED  V*'-HEEL
AT  EACH  CORNER  OF  THE  SQUARE  FOR  THE  FoUR  HOLY  OnES  .  .  .
AND  THEIR  ArMIES  f   (b).

(a)  The  "  Strides,"  as  already  explained  in  the  last  Commentary',
refer  to  both  the  cosmic  and  the  human  Principles — the  latter  of  which
consist,  in  the  exoteric  division,  of  three  (Spirit,  Soul  and  Body),  and,
in  the  esoteric  calculation,  of  seven  Principles — three  Ra^'s  of  the
Essence  and  four  Aspects. |  Those  who  have  studied  Mr.  Sinnett's
Esoteric  Buddhism  will  easih'  grasp  the  nomenclature.  There  are  two
Esoteric  schools  beyond  the  HimMayas,  or  rather  one  school,  divided
into  two  sections — one  for  the  inner  Lanoos,  the  other  for  the  outer
or  semi-lay  Chelas;  the  first  teaching  a  septenary,  the  other  a  six-
fold division  of  the  human  Principles.

From  a  cosmic  point  of  view,  Fohat  taking  "Five  Strides"  refers
here  to  the  five  upper  planes  of  Consciousness  and  Being,  the  sixth
and  the  seventh  (counting  downwards)  being  the  astral  and  the  terres-
trial, or  the  two  lower  planes.

(J))  Four  "Winged  Wheels  at  each  corner  ...  for  the  Four
Holy  Ones  and  their  Armies  (Hosts)."  These  are  the  "Four  Maha-
rajahs,"  or  great  Kings,  of  the  Dhyan  Chohans,  the  Devas,  who  preside
each  over  one  of  the  four  cardinal  points.  They  are  the  Regents,  or
Angels,  who  rule  over  the  Cosmical  Forces  of  North,  South,  East  and
West,  Forces  having  each  a  distinct  Occult  property.  These  Beings  are
also  connected  with  Karma,  as  the  latter  needs  physical  and  material
agents  to  carry  out  its  decrees,  such  as  the  four  kinds  of  winds,  for
instance,  professedly  admitted  by  Science  to  have  their  respective  evil
and  beneficent  influences  upon  the  health  of  mankind  and  every  living
thing.  There  is  Occult  philosophy  in  the  Roman  Catholic  doctrine
which  traces  the  various  public  calamities,  such  as  epidemics  of  disease,


•  Having  already  taken  the  first  three,
t  Hosts.

X  The  four  Aspects  are  the  body,  its  life  or  vitality,  and  the  "double"  of  the  body— the  triad  which
disappears  with  the  death  of  the  person— and  the  Kama  Rupa  which  disinteg-rates  in  Kama  t,oka.


148  THE  secre;t  doctrine.

and  wars,  and  so  on,  to  the  invisible  "Messengers"  from  North  and
West.  "The  glory  of  God  comes  from  the  way  of  the  East,"  says
Ezekiel ;  while  Jeremiah,  Isaiah,  and  the  Psalmist  assure  their  readers
that  all  the  evil  under  the  Sun  comes  from  the  North  and  the  West —
which,  when  applied  to  the  Jewish  nation,  sounds  like  an  undeniable
prophecy.  And  this  accounts  also  for  St.  Ambrose*  declaring  that  it
is  precisely  for  this  reason  that  "we  curse  the  North  Wind,  and  that
during  the  ceremony  of  baptism  we  begin  by  turning  towards  the
West  [Sidereal],  to  renounce  the  better  him  who  inhabits  it;  after
which  we  turn  to  the  East."

Belief  in  the  Four  Maharajahs — the  Regents  of  the  four  cardinal
points — was  universal  and  is  now  that  of  Christians,  who  call  them,
after  St.  Augustine,  "Angelic  Virtues"  and  "Spirits,"  when  enume-
rated by  themselves,  and  "Devils,"  when  named  by  Pagans.  But
where  is  the  difference  between  the  Pagans  and  the  Christians  in  this
case?     Says  the  scholarly  Vossius:

Though  St.  Augustine  has  said  that  every  \'isible  thing  in  this  world  had  an
angelic  virtue  as  an  overseer  near  it,  it  is  not  individuals  but  entire  species  of  things
that  must  be  understood,  each  such  species  having  indeed  its  particular  angel
to  watch  it.  He  is  at  one  in  this  with  all  the  philosophers  .  .  .  For  us  these
angels  are  spirits  separated  from  the  objects  .  .  .  whereas  for  the  [Pagan]
philosophers  they  were  gods.t

Considering  the  Ritual  for  the  "  Spirits  of  the  Stars,"  established  by
the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  these  look  suspiciously  like  "gods,"  but
they  were  no  more  honoured  or  worshipped  by  the  ancient,  nor  are
they  by  the  modern,  Pagan  rabble  than  they  are  now  at  Rome  by  the
highly  cultured  Catholic  Christians.

Following  Plato,  Aristotle  explained  that  the  term  o-roixeia  was  under-
stood only  as  meaning  the  incorporeal  principles  placed  at  each  of  the
four  great  divisions  of  our  cosmical  world,  to  supervise  them.  Thus,
no  more  than  Christians  do  Pagans  adore  and  worship  the  Elements
and  the  (imaginary)  cardinal  points,  but  the  "  gods  "  that  respectively
rule  over  them.  For  the  Church,  there  are  two  kinds  of  Sidereal
Beings,  Angels  and  Devils.  For  the  Kabalist  and  Occultist,  there  is
but  one  class,  and  neither  Occultist  nor  Kabalist  makes  any  difference
between  the  "  Rectors  of  Eight "  and  the  "  Rectores  Tenebrarura,"  or
Cosmocratores,  whom  the  Roman  Church  imagines  and  discovers  in
the  "  Rectors  of  Eight,"  as  soon  as  any  one  of  them  is  called  bj'^  another
name  than  the  one  she  addresses  him  by.     It  is   not  the  Rector,  or


*  On  Amos,  iv.  ^  Theol.  Cii .,  I.  vii.


MONISM    AND   MATERIALISM.  I49

Maharajah,  who  punishes  or  rewards,  with  or  without  "God's"  per-
mission or  order,  but  man  himself — his  deeds,  or  Karma,  attracting
individually  and  collectively  (as  in  the  case  of  whole  nations,  some-
times) every  kind  of  evil  and  calamity.  We  produce  Causes,  and
these  awaken  the  corresponding  powers  in  the  Sidereal  World,  which
are  magnetically  and  irresistibly  attracted  to — and  react  upon — those
who  produce  such  causes ;  whether  such  persons  are  practically  the
evil-doers,  or  simply  "thinkers"  who  brood  mischief.  For  thought
is  matter,  we  are  taught  by  Modern  Science;  and  "every  particle  of
the  existing  matter  must  be  a  register  of  all  that  has  happened,"  as
Messrs.  Jevons  and  Babbage  in  their  Prmcipies  of  Science  tell  the
profane.  Modern  Science  is  ever>^  daj'  drawn  more  into  the  mael-
strom of  Occultism ;  unconsciously,  no  doubt,  still  ver>'  sensibly.

"Thought  is  matter":  not  of  course,  however,  in  the  sense  of  the
German  Materialist  Moleschott,  who  assures  us  that  "  thought  is  the
movement  of  matter" — a  statement  of  almost  unparalleled  absurdity.
Mental  states  and  bodily  states  are  utterly  contrasted  as  such.  But
that  does  not  affect  the  position  that  every  thought,  in  addition  to
its  physical  accompaniment  (brain-change),  exhibits  an  objective —
though  to  us  supersensuously  objective — aspect  on  the  astral  plane.*

The  two  main  theories  of  Science  as  to  the  relations  between  Mind
and  Matter  are  Monism  and  Materialism.  These  two  cover  the  whole
ground  of  negative  psychology  with  the  exception  of  the  quasi-occult
views  of  the  German  Pantheistic  schools.

The  views  of  our  present-day  scientific  thinkers  as  to  the  relations
between  mind  and  matter  may  be  reduced  to  the  following  two  hypo-
theses. These  show  that  both  views  equally  exclude  the  possibility  of
an  independent  soul,  distinct  from  the  physical  brain  through  which  it
functions.     They  are :

(i.)  Materialisr?i,  the  theory  which  regards  mental  phenomena  as  the
product  of  molecular  change  in  the  brain;  i.e.,  as  the  outcome  of  a
transformation  of  motion  into  feeling  (!).  The  cruder  school  once
went  so  far  as  to  identify  mind  with  a  "peculiar  mode  of  motion"  (!  !),
but  this  view  is  now  happily  regarded  as  absurd  by  most  of  the  men  of
Science  themselves.

(2.)  Monism,  or  the  Single  Substance  doctrine,  is  the  more  subtle
form  of  negative  psycholog}^  which  one  of  its  advocates.  Professor  Bain,
ably  terms  "guarded  materialism."     This  doctrine,  which  commands  a

•  See  The  Occult  IVorld,  pp.  89,  90.


I50  'THK  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

verj^  wide  assent,  counting  among  its  upholders  such  men  as  lycwes,
Spencer,  Ferrier,  and  others,  while  positing  thought  and  mental  phe-
nomena generally  as  radically  contrasted  with  matter,  regards  them  as
the  two  sides,  or  aspects,  of  one  and  the  same  substance  in  some  of  its
conditions.     Thought  as  thought,  they  say,  is  utterly  contrasted  with
material  phenomena,  but  it  must  be  also  regarded  as  only  "the  subjective
side  of  ner^^ous  motion" — whatever  our  learned  men  may  mean  by  this.
To  return  to  the  commentary  on  the  Four  Maharajahs,  however,  in
the  Egyptian  temples,  according  to  Clemens  Alexandrinus,  an  immense
curtain  separated  the  tabernacle  from  the  place  for  the  congregation.
The  Jews  had  the  same.     In  both,  the  curtain  was  drawn  over  five
pillars  (the  Pentacle),  symbolizing  our  five  senses  and  five  Root  Races
esoterically,  while  the  four  colours  of  the  curtain  represented  the  four
cardinal  points  and  the  four  terrestrial  elements.     The  whole  was  an
allegorical  symbol.     It  is  through  the  four  high  Rulers  over  the  four
points  and  elements  that  our  five  senses  may  become  cognizant  of  the
hidden  truths  of  Nature ;  and  not  at  all,  as  Clemens  would  have  it,  that
it  is  the  elements  pe7'  se  that  furnished  the  Pagans  with  Divine  Know-
ledge or  the  Knowledge  of  God.*     While  the  Egyptian  emblem  was
spiritual,    that    of   the   Jews   was    purely    materialistic,    and,    indeed,
honoured  only  the  blind  elements  and  the  imaginary  "points."     For
what  was  the  meaning  of  the  square  Tabernacle  raised  by  Moses  in
the  wilderness,  if  it  had  not  the  same  cosmical  significance?     "Thou
shalt  make  an  hanging     ...     of  blue,  purple,  and  scarlet     .     .     .
five  pillars   of  shittim   wood    for  the   hanging     .     .     .     four  brazen
rings  in  the  four  corners  thereof    .    .    .    boards  of  fine  wood  for  the
four  sides.  North,   South,  West,  and   East    ...   of  the  Tabernacle
.    .    .   with  Cherubims  of  cunning  work."!     The  Tabernacle  and  the
square  courtyard.  Cherubim  and  all,  were  precisely  the  same  as  those
in  the  Eg>'ptian  temples.     The  square  form  of  the  Tabernacle  meant
just  the  same  thing  as  it  still  means,  to  this  day,  in  the  exoteric  worship
of  the  Chinese  and  Tibetans — the  four  cardinal  points  signifying  that
which  the  four  sides  of  the  pyramids,  obelisks,  and  other  such  square
erections  mean.     Josephus  takes  care  to  explain  the  whole  thing.     He
declares  that  the  Tabernacle  pillars  were  the  same  as  those  raised  at
Tyre  to  the  four  elements,  which  were  placed  on  pedestals  whose  four

*Thus  the  sentence,  "Natura  Elementorum  obtinet  revelationem  Dei"  {C\&m<ins,Slromata,  IV.  6),
is  applicable  to  both  or  neither.  Consult  the  Zends,  II.  228,  and  Plutarch  De  Iside,  as  compared  by
I^ayard,  Academie  des  Inscriptions,  1854,  Vol.  XV.

+  Exodus  xxvi,  xxvii.


THE  FOUR   CELESTIAL  BEINGS.  151

angles  faced  the  four  cardinal  points;  adding  that  "the  angles  of  the
pedestals  had  the  four  figures  of  the  Zodiac"  on  them,  which  repre-
sented the  same  orientation.*

The  idea  may  be  traced  in  the  Zoroastrian  caves,  in  the  rock-cut
temples  of  India,  and  in  all  the  sacred  square  buildings  of  antiquity  that
have  survived  to  this  day.  This  is  shown  definitely  by  Layard,  who
finds  the  four  cardinal  points,  and  the  four  primitive  elements,  in  the
religion  of  every  country,  under  the  shape  of  square  obelisks,  the  four
sides  of  the  pyramids,  etc.,  etc.  Of  these  elements  and  their  points  the
Four  Maharajahs  were  the  regents  and  directors.

If  the  student  would  know  more  of  them,  he  has  but  to  compare  the
Vision  of  Ezekiel  (ch.  i.)  with  what  is  known  of  Chinese  Buddhism,
even  in  its  exoteric  teachings,  and  examine  the  outward  shape  of
these  "Great  Kings  of  the  Devas."  In  the  opinion  of  the  Rev.  Joseph
Edkins,  "they  preside  each  over  one  of  the  four  continents  into  which

the  Hindiis  divide  the  world Each  leads  an  army  of  spiritual

beings  to  protect  mankind  and  Buddhism."!  With  the  exception  of
favouritism  towards  Buddhism,  the  four  Celestial  Beings  are  precisely
this.  The  Hindiis,  however,  happen  to  divide  the  world  into  seven
continents,  exoterically  as  well  as  esoterically ;  and  their  four  Cosmic
Devas  are  eight,  presiding  over  the  eight  points  of  the  compass  and  not
over  the  continents.

The  "Four"  are  the  protectors  of  mankind  and  also  the  agents  of
Karma  on  Earth,  whereas  the  lyipika  are  concerned  with  Humanity's
hereafter.  At  the  same  time  they  are  the  four  living  creatures,  "who
have  the  likeness  of  a  man,"  of  Ezekiel's  vision,  called  by  the  transla-
tors of  the  Bible,  "Cherubim,"  "Seraphim,"  etc.;  by  the  Occultists,
"Winged  Globes,"  "Fiery  Wheels";  and  in  the  Hindii  Pantheon,
by  a  number  of  different  names.  All  these  Gandharvas,  the  "Sweet
Songsters,"  the  Asuras,  Kinnaras,  and  Nagas,  are  the  allegorical
descriptions  of  the  Four  Maharajahs.  The  Seraphim  are  the  fier}^
Serpents  of  Heaven  which  we  find  in  a  passage,  describing  Mount
Meru  as  "the  exalted  mass  of  glor>',  the  venerable  haunt  of  gods  and
heavenly  choristers  ....  not  to  be  reached  by  sinful  men  ....
because  guarded  by  Serpents."  They  are  called  the  Avengers,  and
the  "Winged  Wheels."

Their  mission  and  character  being  explained,  let  us  see  what  the
Christian  bible-interpreters  say  of  the  Cherubim.     "The  word  signi-

•  Antiquities,  I.  VIII,  ch.  xxii.  +  Chinese  Buddhism,  p.  216.


152  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

fies  in  Hebrew,  fulness  of  knowledge;  these  angels  are  so  called  from
their  exquisite  Knowledge,  and  were  therefore  used  for  the  punishment
of  men  who  affected  divine  Knowledge."  (Interpreted  by  Cruden  in
his  Concordance,  from  Genesis  iii.  24.)  Very  well;  and  vague  as  the
information  is,  it  shows  that  the  Cherub  placed  at  the  gate  of  the
Garden  of  Eden,  after  the  "Fall,"  suggested  to  the  venerable  interpre-
ters the  idea  of  punishment  connected  with  forbidden  Science  or  divine
Knowledge — one  that  generally  leads  to  another  "Fall,"  that  of  the
gods  or  "God,"  in  man's  estimation.  But  as  the  good  old  Cruden
knew  nought  of  Karma,  he  may  be  forgiven.  Yet  the  allegory  is
suggestive.  From  Meru,  the  abode  of  gods,  to  Eden,  the  distance  is
verj^  small,  and  from  the  Hindii  Serpents  to  the  Ophite  Cherubim,  the
third  out  of  the  seven  of  which  was  the  Dragon,  the  separation  is  still
smaller,  for  both  watched  the  entrance  to  the  realm  of  Secret  Know-
ledge.    Ezekiel,  moreover,  plainlj^  describes  the  four  Cosmic  Angels:

I  looked,  and,  behold,  a  whirlwind,  .  .  .  a  .  .  .  cloud  and  a  fire  infolding  it  .  .  .
also  out  of  the  midst  thereof  came  the  likeness  of  four  living  creatures  ,  .  .  they
had  the  likeness  of  a  man.  And  every  one  had  four  faces  and  .  .  .  four  wings  .  .  .
the  face  of  a  man,*  and  the  face  of  a  lion  .  .  .  the  face  of  an  ox,  and  .  .  .  the  face
of  an  eagle  .  .  .  Now  as  I  beheld  the  living  creatures,  behold  one  wheel  upon  the
Earth  .  .  .  with  his  four  faces  ...  as  it  were  a  wheel  in  the  middle  of  a  wheel  .  .  .
for  the  spirit  of  the  living  creature  was  in  the  wheel.t

There  are  three  chief  Groups  of  Builders,  and  as  many  of  the  Plane-
tary Spirits  and  the  Eipika,  each  Group  being  again  divided  into  seven
sub-groups.  It  is  impossible,  even  in  such  a  large  work  as  this,  to
enter  into  a  minute  examination  of  even  the  three  principal  Groups,
as  it  would  demand  an  extra  volume.  The  Builders  are  the  represen-
tatives of  the  first  "Mind-Born"  Entities,  therefore  of  the  primeval
Rishi-Prajapati;  also  of  the  Seven  great  Gods  of  Egypt,  of  which
Osiris  is  the  chief;  of  the  Seven  Amshaspends  of  the  Zoroastrians,  with
Ormazd  at  their  head;  of  the  "Seven  Spirits  of  the  Face";  of  the
Seven  Sephiroth  separated  from  the  first  Triad,  etc.,  etc.ij:     They  build,

*  "Man"  was  here  substituted  for  "Dragon."  Compare  the  Ophite  Spirits.  The  Angels  recog-
nized by  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,  who  correspond  to  these  "Faces,"  were  with  the  Ophites:
Dragon^Raphael ;  I,ion — Michael;  Bull,  or  Ox — Uriel;  and  Elagle — Gabriel.  The  four  keep  company
with  the  four  Evangelists,  and  preface  the  Gospels.

t  Ezekiel,  i.

t  The  Jews,  save  the  Kabalists,  having  no  names  for  East,  West,  South,  and  North,  expressed  the
idea  by  words  signifying  before,  behind,  right  and  left,  and  very  often  confounded  the  terms  exoteric-
ally,  thus  making  the  blinds  in  the  Bible  more  confused  and  difficult  to  interpret.  Add  to  this  the
fact  that  out  of  the  forty-seven  translators  of  King  James'  Bible  "only  three  understood  Hebrew,  and
of  these  two  died  before  the  Psalms  were  translated"  {Royal  Masonic  Cydopcedia),  and  one  may  easily
understand  what  reliance  can  be  placed  on  the  English  version  of  the  Bible.  In  this  work  the  Douay
Roman  Catholic  version  is  generally  followed.


THE   LIPIKA,  152

or  rather  rebuild,  every  "System"  after  the  "Night."  The  Second
Group  of  the  Builders  is  the  Architect  of  our  Planetary  Chain  exclu-
sively; and  the  Third,  the  Progenitor  of  our  Humanity — the  macro-
cosmic  prototype  of  the  microcosm.

The  Planetary  Spirits  are  the  informing  spirits  of  the  Stars  in
general,  and  of  the  Planets  especially.  They  rule  the  destinies  of  men
who  are  all  born  under  one  or  other  of  their  constellations ;  the  Second
and  Third  Groups  pertaining  to  other  systems  have  the  same  functions,
and  all  rule  various  departments  in  Nature.  In  the  Hindu  exoteric
Pantheon  they  are  the  guardian  deities  who  preside  over  the  eight
points  of  the  compass — the  four  cardinal  and  the  four  intermediate
points — and  are  called  Lokapalas,  "Supporters  or  Guardians  of  the
World"  (in  our  visible  Cosmos),  of  which  Indra  (East),  Yama  (South),
Varuna  (West),  and  Kuvera  (North)  are  the  chief;  their  elephants  and
spouses  pertaining  of  course  to  fancy  and  afterthought,  though  all  of
them  have  an  Occult  significance.

The  lyipika,  a  description  of  w^hom  is  given  in  Commentary  6  of
Stanza  IV,  are  the  Spirits  of  the  Universe,  whereas  the  Builders  are
only  our  own  planetar}'  deities.  The  former  belong  to  the  most  Occult
portion  of  cosmogenesis,  which  cannot  be  given  here.  Whether  the
Adepts — even  the  highest — know  this  angelic  order  in  the  completeness
of  its  triple  degrees,  or  only  the  lowxr  one  connected  with  the  records
of  our  world,  is  something  which  the  writer  is  unprepared  to  sa]',  and
she  would  rather  incline  to  the  latter  supposition.  Of  its  highest  grade
one  thing  only  is  taught:  the  Lipika  are  connected  with  Karma —
being  its  direct  Recorders.  The  Symbol  for  Sacred  and  Secret  Know-
ledge in  antiquity  was  universally  a  Tree,  b)^  which  a  Scripture  or  a
Record  was  also  meant.  Hence  the  word  Lipika,  the  Writers  or
Scribes;  the  Dragons,  symbols  of  Wisdom,  who  guard  the  Trees  of
Knowledge;  the  "golden"  Apple-Tree  of  the  Hesperides;  the  "Lux-
uriant Trees"  and  vegetation  of  Mount  Meru,  guarded  b}'  Serpents.
Juno's  giving  Jupiter,  on  her  marriage,  a  Tree  with  golden  fruit,  is
another  form  of  Eve  offering  Adam  the  apple  from  the  Tree  of
Knowledge.


STANZA  V .—Continued.

6.  The  Lipika  circumscribe  the  Triangle,  the  First  One,*  the
Cube,  the  Second  One,  and  the  Pentacle  within  the  EoGf  {a).

*  The  vertical  line  or  the  figure  I.  +  Circle.


154  the  secret  doctrine.

It  is  the  Ring  called  "Pass  Not"  for  those  who  descend  and
ascend;*  who  during  the  Kalpa  are  progressing  towards  the

Great  Day  "  Be  With  Us"  (<^) Thus  were  formed  the

Arupa  and  the  RuPA:t  from  One  I^ight,  Seven  I,ights;  from
EACH  of  the  Seven,  seven  times  Seven  Lights.  The  Wheels
watch  the  Ring

The  Stanza  proceeds  with  a  minute  classification  of  the  Orders  of
the  Angelic  Hierarchy.  From  the  Group  of  Four  and  Seven  emanates
the  Mind-Born  Groups  of  Ten,  of  Twelve,  of  Twenty-one,  etc.,  all
these  divided  again  into  sub-groups  of  Heptads,  Enneads,  Dodecads,
and  so  on,  until  the  mind  is  lost  in  this  endless  enumeration  of
celestial  Hosts  and  Beings,  each  having  its  distinct  task  in  the
ruling  of  the  visible  Cosmos  during  its  existence.

(a)  The  Esoteric  meaning  of  the  first  sentence  of  the  Shloka  is,  that
those  who  have  been  called  Lipikas,  the  Recorders  of  the  Karmic
Ledger,  make  an  impassible  barrier  between  the  personal  Ego  and  the
impersonal  Self,  the  Noumenon  and  Parent-Source  of  the  former.  Hence
the  allegory.  They  circumscribe  the  manifested  world  of  matter  within
the  Ring  "Pass  Not."  This  world  is  the  objective  symbol  of  the  One
divided  into  the  Many,  on  the  planes  of  Illusion,  of  Adi  (the  "First")
or  of  Eka  (the  "One");  and  this  One  is  the  collective  aggregate,  or
totality,  of  the  principal  Creators  or  Architects  of  this  visible  Universe.
In  Hebrew  Occultism  their  name  is  both  Achath,  feminine,  "One,"  and
Achad,  "One"  again,  but  masculine.  The  Monotheists  have  taken,
and  are  still  taking,  advantage  of  the  profound  esotericism  of  the
Kabalah,  to  apply  the  name  by  which  the  One  Supreme  Essence  is
known,  to  its  manifestation,  the  Sephiroth-Elohim,  and  call  it  Jehovah.
But  this  is  quite  arbitrarj^  and  against  all  reason  and  logic,  as  the  term
Elohim  is  a  plural  noun,  identical  with  the  plural  word  Chiim,  often
compounded  with  it.  The  sentence  in  the  Sepher  Yetzirah  and  else-
where, "  Achath- Ruach-Elohim-Chiim,"  denotes  the  Elohim  as  andro-
gynous at  best,  the  feminine  element  almost  predominating,  as  it  would
read:  "One  is  She  the  Spirit  of  the  Elohim  of  Life."  As  said,  Achath
(or  Echath)  is  feminine,  and  Achad  (or  Echad)  masculine,  both  mean-
ing One.

Moreover,  in  Occult  metaphysics,  there  are,  properly  speaking,  two
"Ones" — the  One  on  the  unreachable  plane  of  Absoluteness  and  In-

*  Also  for  those  who,  etc.  +  The  Formless  World  and  the  World  of  Forms.


THE    RING    "  PASS   NOT."  I55

finity,  on  which  no  speculation  is  possible;  and  the  second  One  on
the  plane  of  Kmanations.  The  former  can  neither  emanate  nor  be
divided,  as  it  is  eternal,  absolute,  and  immutable;  but  the  second,
being,  so  to  speak,  the  reflection  of  the  first  One  (for  it  is  the  lyOgos,  or
ishvara,  in  the  Universe  of  Illusion),  can  do  so.  It  emanates  from
itself — as  the  upper  Sephirothal  Triad  emanates  the  lower  seven
Sephiroth — the  seven  Rays  or  Dhyan  Chohans;  in  other  words,  the
Homogeneous  becomes  the  Heterogeneous,  the  Protyle  differentiates
into  the  Elements.  But  these,  unless  they  return  into  their  primal
Element,  can  never  cross  beyond  the  Eaya,  or  zero-point.  This  meta-
physical tenet  can  hardly  be  better  described  than  in  T.  Subba  Row's
Bhagavadgitd  Lectures:

Mulaprakriti  [the  veil  of  Parabrahman]  acts  as  the  one  energy  through  the  Logos
[or  Ishvara].  Now  Parabrahman  ...  is  the  one  essence  from  which  starts
into  existence  a  centre  of  energy,  which  I  shall  for  the  present  call  the  Logos.  .  .
It  is  called  the  Verbum  ...  by  the  Christians,  and  it  is  the  divine  Christos
who  is  eternal  in  the  bosom  of  his  Father.  It  is  called  Avalokiteshvara  by  the
Buddhists.  ...  In  almost  every  doctrine,  they  have  formulated  the  existence  of
a  centre  of  spiritual  energy  which  is  unborn  and  eternal,  and  which  exists  in  the
bosom  of  Parabrahman  at  the  time  of  Pralaya,  and  starts  as  a  centre  of  conscious
energy  at  the  time  of  cosmic  activity.     ...  *

For,  as  the  lecturer  premised  by  saying,  Parabrahman  is  not  this  or
that,  it  is  not  even  consciousness,  as  it  cannot  be  related  to  matter  or
anything  conditioned.  It  is  not  Ego  nor  is  it  Non-Ego,  nor  even  Atma,
but  verily  the  one  source  of  all  manifestations  and  modes  of  existence.

Thus  in  the  allegorj^  the  Eipika  separate  the  world  (or  plane)  of
pure  Spirit  from  that  of  Matter.  Those  who  "descend  and  ascend" —
the  incarnating  Monads,  and  men  striving  towards  purification  and
"ascending,"  but  still  not  having  quite  reached  the  goal — may  cross
the  Circle  of  "Pass  Not,"  only  on  the  Day  "Be  With  Us";  that  day
when  man,  freeing  himself  from  the  trammels  of  ignorance,  and  recog-
nizing fully  the  non-separateness  of  the  Ego  within  his  Personality —
erroneously  regarded  as  his  own — from  the  Universal  Ego  (Anima
Supra-Mundi),  merges  thereby  into  the  One  Essence,  to  become  not
only  one  with  "Us,"  the  manifested  universal  Lives  which  are  one  Life,
but  that  very  Life  itself.

Astronomically,  the  Ring  "Pass  Not"  that  the  Lipika  trace  round  "the
Triangle,  the  First  One,  the  Cube,  the  Second  One,  and  the  Pentacle,"  to

•  Theosophisl,  Feb.,  1877,  p.  303.


156  the;  secret  doctrine.

circumscribe  these  figures,  is  thus  again  shown  to  contain  the  symbols
of  31415,  or  the  coefficient  constantly  used  in  mathematical  taoles,  the
value  TT  (pi),  the  geometrical  figures  standing  here  for  numerical  figures.
According  to  the  general  philosophical  teachings,  this  Ring  is  beyond
the  region  of  what  are  called  nebulae  in  astronomy.  But  this  is  as
erroneous  a  conception  as  that  of  the  topography  and  descriptions,
given  in  Puranic  and  other  exoteric  Scriptures,  about  the  1008  worlds
of  the  Deva-loka  worlds  and  firmaments.  There  are  worlds,  of  course,
in  the  esoteric  as  well  as  in  the  profane  scientific  teachings,  at  such
incalculable  distances  that  the  light  of  the  nearest  of  them,  though
it  has  only  just  reached  our  modern  "  Chaldees,"  may  have  left  its
luminary  long  before  the  day  on  which  the  words,  "lyCt  there  be
lyight,"  were  pronounced ;  but  these  are  not  worlds  on  the  Devalokic
plane,  but  in  our  Cosmos.

The  Chemist  goes  to  the  laya  or  zero-point  of  the  plane  of  matter
with  which  he  deals,  and  then  stops  short.  The  Physicist  or  the
Astronomer  counts  billions  of  miles  beyond  the  nebulae,  and  then  he
also  stops  short.  The  semi-initiated  Occultist  also  will  represent  this
laya-point  to  himself  as  existing  on  some  plane  which,  if  not  physical,
is  still  conceivable  to  the  human  intellect.  But  the  full  Initiate  knows
that  the  Ring  "Pass  Not"  is  neither  a  locality,  nor  can  it  be  measured
by  distance,  but  that  it  exists  in  the  absoluteness  of  Infinity.  In  this
"Infinity"  of  the  full  Initiate,  there  is  neither  height,  breadth  nor
thickness,  but  all  is  fathomless  profundity,  reaching  down  from  the
physical  to  the  "para-metaphysical."  In  using  the  word  "down,"
essential  depth — "nowhere  and  everj^where" — is  meant,  not  depth  of
physical  matter.

If  one  carefully  searches  through  the  exoteric  and  grossly  anthropo-
morphic allegories  of  popular  religions,  even  in  these  the  doctrine
embodied  in  the  Circle  of  "Pass  Not,"  guarded  by  the  Lipika,  may  be
diml}^  perceived.  Thus  one  finds  it  even  in  the  teachings  of  the
Vedantin  sect  of  the  Visishthadvaita,  the  most  tenaciously  anthropo-
morphic in  all  India.  For  we  read  of  the  released  soul  that,  after
reaching  Moksha — a  state  of  bliss  meaning  "release  from  Bandha,"  or
bondage — bliss  is  enjoyed  by  it  in  a  place  called  Paramapada,  which
place  is  not  material,  but  made  of  Suddasattva,  the  essence,  of  which
the  body  of  Ishvara — the  "lyord" — is  formed.  There,  Muktas  or  Jivat-
mas  (Monads)  who  have  attained  Moksha,  are  never  again  subject  to
the  qualities  of  either  matter  or  Karma.     "But  if  they  choose, y^^r  the


THE  GOD  OF  MAN  AND  THE  GOD  OF  THE  ANT.         157

sake  of  doing  good  to  the  world,  they  may  incarnate  on  earth."*'  The
way  to  Paramapada,  or  the  immaterial  worlds,  from  this  world,  is
called  Devayana.     When  a  person  has  attained  Moksha  and  the  body

dies:

The  Jiva  (Soul)  goes  with  Sukshraa  Sharirat  from  the  heart  of  the  body  to  the
Brahmarandra  in  the  crown  of  the  head,  traversing  Sushunina,  a  nerve  connecting
the  heart  with  the  Brahmarandra.  The  Jiva  breaks  through  the  Brahmarandra
and  goes  to  the  region  of  the  Sun  (Suryamandala)  through  the  solar  rays.  Then  it
goes,  through  a  dark  spot  in  the  Sun,  to  Paramapada.  .  .  .  The  Jiva  is  directed
on  its  way  ....  by  the  Supreme  Wisdom  acquired  by  Yoga.J  The  Jiva  thus
proceeds  to  Paramapada  by  the  aid  of  Athivahikas  (bearers  in  transit),  known  by
the  names  of  Archi  Ahas  ....  Aditya,  .  .  .  Prajapati,  etc.  The  Archis,
etc.,  here  mentioned,  are  certain  pure  Souls,  etc.,  etc.§

No  Spirits  except  the  "Recorders"  (Lipika)  have  ever  crossed  the
forbidden  line  of  this  Ring,  nor  will  any  do  so  until  the  day  of  the  next
Pralaya,  for  it  is  the  boundar>"  that  separates  the  Finite — however  in-
finite in  man's  sight — from  the  truly  Infinite.  The  Spirits  referred  to,
therefore,  as  those  who  "ascend  and  descend,"  are  the  "Hosts"  of
what  are  loosely  called  "Celestial  Beings."  But  thej'  are,  in  fact,
nothing  of  the  kind.  Thej^  are  Entities  of  higher  worlds  in  the
Hierarchy  of  Being,  so  immeasurably  high  that,  to  us,  they  must  appear
as  Gods,  and  collectively — God.  But  so  must  we,  mortal  men,  appear
to  the  ant,  which  reasons  on  the  scale  of  its  special  capacities.  The
ant  may  also,  for  all  we  know,  see  the  avenging  finger  of  a  Persona!
God  in  the  hand  of  the  urchin  who,  under  the  impulse  of  mischief,
destroys,  in  one  moment,  its  ant-hill,  the  labour  of  many  weeks — long
years  in  the  chronology  of  insects.  The  ant,  feeling  it  acuteh%  may
also,  like  man,  attribute  the  undeserved  calamity  to  a  combination
of  providence  and  sin,  and  see  in  it  the  result  of  the  sin  of  its  first
parent.  Who  knows,  and  who  can  affirm  or  deny?  The  refusal  to
admit,  in  the  whole  Solar  System,  of  any  other  reasonable  and  intellec-
tual beings  than  ourselves  on  the  human  plane,  is  the  greatest  conceit

*  These  voluntary  reincarnations  are  referred  to  in  our  Doctrine  as  Nirmanakayas — the  surviving
spiritual  principles  of  men.

t  Sukshma  Sharira,  "dream-like"  illusive  body,  with  which  are  clothed  the  inferior  Dhyanis  of  the
celestial  Hierarchy.

X  Compare  this  Esoteric  tenet  with  the  Gnostic  doctrine  found  in  Pistis-Sophia  (Knowledge-
Wisdom),  in  which  treatise  Sophia  (Achamoth)  is  shown  lost  in  the  waters  of  Chaos  (Matter),  on  her
way  to  the  Supreme  Light,  and  Christos  delivering  and  helping  her  on  the  right  Path.  Note  well,
that  "Christos"  with  the  Gnostics  meant  the  Impersonal  Principle,  the  Atman  of  the  Universe,  and
the  Atma  within  every  man's  soul— and  not  Jesus;  though  in  the  old  Coptic  MS.,  in  the  British
Museum,  "Christos"  is  replaced  by  "Jesus"  and  other  terms.

\  A  Catechism  of  the  Visishthadvaita  Pliilosophy,  by  N.  Bhashyacharya,  F.T.S.,  late  Pandit  of  the
Adyar  Library.


158  the;  secret  doctrine.

of  our  age.  All  that  Science  has  a  right  to  afl5rm,  is  that  there  are  no
invisible  Intelligences  living  under  the  same  conditions  as  we  do.  It
cannot  deny  point-blank  the  possibility  of  there  being  worlds  within
worlds,  under  conditions  totally  different  to  those  that  constitute  the
nature  of  our  world;  nor  can  it  deny  that  there  may  be  a  certain
limited  communication  between  some  of  these  worlds  and  our  own.
The  greatest  philosopher  of  European  birth,  Emmanuel  Kant,  assures
us  that  such  a  communication  is  in  no  way  improbable.

I  confess  I  am  much  disposed  to  assert  the  existence  of  immaterial  natures  in  the
world,  and  to  place  my  own  soul  in  the  class  of  these  beings.  It  will  hereafter,  I
know  not  where,  or  when,  yet  be  proved  that  the  human  soul  stands  even  in  this
life  in  indissoluble  connection  with  all  immaterial  natures  in  the  spirit-world,  that
it  reciprocally  acts  upon  these  and  receives  impressions  from  them.*

To  the  highest  of  these  worlds,  we  are  taught,  belong  the  seven
Orders  of  the  purely  divine  Spirits ;  to  the  six  lower  ones  belong  Hier-
archies that  can  occasionally  be  seen  and  heard  by  men,  and  that  do
communicate  with  their  progeny  of  the  Earth;  a  progeny  which  is
indissolubly  linked  with  them,  each  Principle  in  man  having  its  direct
source  in  the  nature  of  these  great  Beings,  who  furnish  us  respectively
with  the  invisible  elements  in  us.  Physical  Science  is  welcome  to
speculate  upon  the  physiological  mechanism  of  living  beings,  and  to
continue  her  fruitless  efforts  in  trying  to  resolve  our  feelings,  our  sen-
sations, mental  and  spiritual,  into  functions  of  their  organic  vehicles.
Nevertheless,  all  that  will  ever  be  accomplished  in  this  direction  has
already  been  done,  and  Science  can  go  no  farther.  She  is  before  a
dead  wall,  on  the  face  of  which  she  traces,  as  she  imagines,  great
physiological  and  psychic  discoveries,  every  one  of  which  will  be
shown  later  on  to  be  no  better  than  cobwebs,  spun  by  her  scientific
fancies  and  illusions.  The  tissues  of  our  objective  framework  alone  are
subservient  to  the  analysis  and  researches  of  Physiological  Science.
The  six  higher  Principles  in  them  will  evade  for  ever  the  hand  that
is  guided  by  an  animus,  which'  purposely  ignores  and  rejects  the  Occult
Sciences.  All  that  modern  physiological  research  in  connection  with
psychological  problems  has,  and  owing  to  the  nature  of  things  could
have,  shown,  is  that  every  thought,  sensation,  and  emotion  is  attended
with  a  re-marshalling  of  the  molecules  of  certain  nerves.  The  infer-
ence drawn  by  scientists  of  the  type  of  Biichner,  Vogt,  and  others,  that

*  Trdume  eines  Geistersehers,  quoted  by  C.  C.  Massey,  in  his  preface  to  Von  Hartmann's  Spirit-
ismus.


THE  DAY  OF   "COME  TO   US."  1 59

thought  is  molecular  motion,  necessitates  the  fact  of  our  subjective
consciousness  being  made  a  complete  abstraction.

The  Great  Day  "Be  With  Us,"  then,  is  an  expression,  the  only  merit
of  which  lies  in  its  literal  translation.  Its  significance  is  not  so  easily
revealed  to  a  public,  unacquainted  with  the  mystic  tenets  of  Occultism,
or  rather  of  Ksoteric  Wisdom  or  "Budhism."  It  is  an  expression
peculiar  to  the  latter,  and  as  hazy  for  the  profane  as  that  of  the
Egyptians,  who  called  the  same  the  Day  "Come  To  Us,"  which  is
identical  with  the  former — though  the  word  "be,"  in  this  sense,  might
be  still  better  replaced  with  either  of  the  two  terms  "remain"  or
"rest  with  us,"  as  it  refers  to  that  long  period  of  Rest  which  is  called
Paranin^ana.  "  Le  Jour  de  'Viens  a  nous'!  C'est  le  jour  ou  Osiris  a
dit  au  Soleil :  Viens!  Je  le  vois  rencontrant  le  Soleil  dans  I'Amenti."*
The  Sun  here  stands  for  the  Logos  (or  Christos,  or  Horus),  as  the
central  Essence  syntheticalh%  and  as  a  diffused  essence  of  radiated
Entities,  different  in  substance,  but  not  in  essence.  As  expressed  by
the  BhagavadgHa  lecturer,  "it  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  Logos  is
but  a  single  centre  of  energy  which  is  manifested  by  Parabrahman.
There  are  innumerable  others.  Their  number  is  almost  infinite,  in  the
bosom  of  Parabrahman."  Hence  the  expressions,  "The  Day  of  Come
to  Us"  and  "The  Day  of  Be  With  Us,"  etc.  Just  as  the  Square  is  the
Symbol  of  the  Four  sacred  Forces  or  Powers — Tetraktys — so  the  Circle
shows  the  boundarj'  within  the  Infinity  that  no  man,  even  in  spirit,  or
Deva  or  Dhyan  Chohan  can  cross.  The  Spirits  of  those  who  "descend
and  ascend,"  during  the  course  of  cyclic  evolution,  shall  cross  the
"iron-bound  world,"  only  on  the  day  of  their  approach  to  the  threshold
of  Paranirvana.  If  they  reach  it,  they  will  rest  in  the  bosom  of  Para-
brahman, or  the  "Unknown  Darkness,"  which  shall  then  become  for
all  of  them  Light,  during  the  whole  period  of  Mahapralaya,  the  "Great
Night,"  namely,  311,040,000,000,000  \'ears  of  absorption  in  Brahman.
The  Day  of  "Be  With  Us"  is  this  period  of  Rest,  or  Paranirvana.  It
corresponds  to  the  Day  of  the  Last  Judgment  of  the  Christians,  which
has  been  sorely  materialized  in  their  religion. f

As  in  the  exoteric  interpretation  of  the  Eg>'ptian  rites,  the  soul  of
ever>'  defunct  person — from  the  Hierophant  down  to  the  sacred  bull
Apis — became  an  Osiris,  was  Osirified  (the  Secret  Doctrine,  however,


*  Le  Livre  des  Marts,  Paul  Pierret,  Chap,  xvii,  p.  01.

+  See  also  for  other  data  on  this  peculiar  expression,  the  Day  of  '•Come  To  Us,"   The  Funerary
Ritual  of  the  Egyptians,  by  Viscount  de  Roug-c.


l6o  THE    SECRET   DOCTRINE.

teaching  that  the  real  Osirification  was  the  lot  of  every  Monad  only
after  3,000  cycles  of  Existences) ;  so  in  the  present  case.  The
Monad,  born  of  the  nature  and  the  very  Essence  of  the  "Seven"
(its  highest  Principle  becoming  immediately  enshrined  in  the  Seventh
Cosmic  Element),  has  to  perform  its  septenary  gyration  throughout
the  Cycle  of  Being  and  Forms,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest ;  and
then  again  from  man  to  God.  At  the  threshold  of  Paranirvana,  it
reassumes  its  primeval  Essence  and  becomes  the  Absolute  once  more.


STANZA  VI.

I.  By  the  power  of  the  Mother  of  Mercy  and  Knowledge  («),
KwAN-YiN — THE  Triple  of  Kwan-Shai-Yin,  residing  in  Kwan-
YiN-TiEN  {b) — Fohat,  the  Breath  of  their  Progeny,  the  Son
OF  THE  Sons,  having  called  forth,  from  the  lower  Abyss,*-
the  Illusive  Form  of  Sien-TchanI  and  the  Seven  Elements.

This  Stanza  is  translated  from  the  Chinese  text,  and  the  names  given
as  the  equivalents  of  the  original  terms  are  preserved.  The  real
Esoteric  nomenclature  cannot  be  given,  as  it  would  onlj'  confuse  the
reader.  The  Brahmanical  doctrine  has  no  equivalents  for  these.  Vach
seems,  in  many  an  aspect,  to  approach  the  Chinese  Kwan-Yin,  but
there  is  no  regular  worship  of  Vach  under  this  name  in  India,  as  there  is
of  Kwan-Yin  in  China.  No  exoteric  religious  system  has  ever  adopted
a  female  Creator,  and  thus,  from  the  first  dawn  of  popular  religions,
woman  has  been  regarded  and  treated  as  inferior  to  man.  It  is  only
in  China  and  Egypt  that  Kwan-Yin  and  Isis  are  placed  on  a  par  with
the  male  gods.  Esotericism  ignores  both  sexes.  Its  highest  Deity  is
as  sexless  as  it  is  formless,  neither  Father  nor  Mother;  and  its  first
manifested  beings,  celestial  and  terrestrial  alike,  become  only  gradually
androgynous  to  finally  separate  into  distinct  sexes.

(a)  "The  Mother  of  Mercy  and  Knowledge"  is  called  the  "Triple"
of  Kwan-Shai-Yin,  because  in  her  correlations,  metaphysical  and
cosmical,  she  is  the  "Mother,  the  Wife  and  the  Daughter"  of  the
Eogos,  just  as  in  the  later  theological  translations  she  became  the
"Father,  Son  and  (female)  Holy  Ghost" — the  Shakti  or  Energy — the
Essence  of  the  Three.  Thus  in  the  Esotericism  of  the  Vedantins,
Daiviprakriti,  the  Eight  manifested  through  Ishvara,  the  Eogos,J  is  at
one  and  the  same  time  the  Mother  and  also  the  Daughter  of  the  Eogos,
or  Verbum  of  Parabrahman  ;   while  in  that  of  the  Trans-Himalayan

»  Chaos.  t  Our  Universe.  t  The  Theosophist,  Feb.,  1887,  p.  305.


THE    MYSTERY   OF   THE    FEMALE    LOGOS.  l6r

teachings,  it  is — in  the  Hierarchy  of  their  allegorical  and  metaphysical
theogony — the  "Mother,"  or  abstract  ideal  Matter,  Mulaprakriti,  the
Root  of  Nature;  from  the  metaphysical  standpoint,  a  correlation  of
Adi-Budha,  manifested  in  the  Logos,  Avalokiteshvara;  and  from  the
purely  Occult  and  cosmical,  Fohat,  the  "Son  of  the  Son,"  the  androg>'-
nous  energy  resulting  from  this  "Light  of  the  Logos,"  which  manifests
in  the  plane  of  the  objective  Universe  as  the  hidden,  as  much  as  the
revealed.  Electricity — which  is  Life.     Says  T.  Subba  Row:

Evolution  is  commenced  by  the  intellectual  energy  of  the  Logos,  .  .  .  not
merely  on  account  of  the  potentialities  locked  up  in  Mulaprakriti.  This  Light
of  the  Logos  is  the  link  .  .  .  between  objective  matter  and  the  subjective
Thought  of  Ishvara  [or  Logos].  It  is  called  in  several  Buddhist  books  Fohat.  It
is  the  one  instrument  with  which  the  Logos  works.*

(d)  "  Kwan-Yin-Tien "  means  the  "Melodious  Heaven  of  Sound,"
the  Abode  of  Kwan- Yin,  or  the  "  Divine  Voice."  This  "Voice"  is  a
synonym  of  the  Verbum  or  Word,  "  Speech,"  as  the  expression  of
Thought.  Thus  may  be  traced  the  connection  with,  and  even  the  origin
of,  the  Hebrew  Bath-Kol,  the  "  Daughter  of  the  Divine  Voice,"  or
Verbum,  or  the  male  and  female  Logos,  the  "Heavenly  Man,"  or  Adam
Kadmon,  who  is  at  the  same  time  Sephira.  The  latter  was  surely
anticipated  by  the  Hindu  Vach,  the  goddess  of  Speech,  or  of  the
Word.  For  Vach — the  daughter  and  the  female  portion,  as  is  stated,
of  Brahma,  one  "generated  by  the  gods" — is,  in  company  with  Kwan-
Yin,  with  Isis  (also  the  daughter,  wife  and  sister  of  Osiris)  and  other
goddesses,  the  female  Logos,  so  to  speak,  the  goddess  of  the  active
forces  in  Nature,  the  Word,  Voice  or  Sound,  and  Speech.  If  Kwan-
Yin  is  the  "Melodious  Voice,"  so  is  Vach  "the  melodious  cow  who
milked  forth  sustenance  and  water  [the  female  principle]  ....
who  yields  us  nourishment  and  sustenance,"  as  Mother-Nature.  She
is  as.sociated  in  the  work  of  creation  with  Prajapati.  She  is  male  and
female  ad  libihim,  as  Eve  is  with  Adam.     And  she  is  a  form  of  Aditi

A

— the  principle  higher  than  ^ther — of  Akasha,  the  synthesis  of  all
the  forces  in  Nature.  Thus  Vach  and  Kwan-Yin  are  both  the  magic
potency  of  Occult  Sound  in  Nature  and  ^ther — which  "Voice"  calls
forth  Sien-Tchan,  the  illusive  form  of  the  Universe  out  of  Chaos  and
the  Seven  Elements.

Thus,  in  Manu.  Brahma  (the  Logos  also)  is  shown  dividing  his  body
into  two  parts,  male  and  female,  and  creating  in   the  latter,  who   is


•  op.  cit.,  p.  306.


1^2  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Vach,  Viraj,  who  is  himself,  or  Brahma  again.  A  learned  Vedantin
Occultist  speaks  of  this  "goddess"  as  follows,  explaining  the  reason
why  ishvara  (or  Brahma)  is  called  Verbum  or  Logos ;  why  in  fact  it  is
called  Sabda  Brahman :

The  explanation  I  am  going  to  give  you  will  appear  thoroughly  mystical;  but  if
mystical,  it  has  a  tremendous  significance  when  properly  understood.  Our  old
writers  said  that  Vach  is  of  four  kinds.  [See  Rig  Veda  and  the  Upanishads.']  Vaik-
hari  Vach  is  what  we  utter.  Every  kind  of  Vaikhari  Vach  exists  in  its  Madhyama,
further  in  its  Pashyanti,  and  ultimately  in  its  Para  form.*  The  reason  why  this
Pranava  is  called  Vach  is  this,  that  the  four  principles  of  the  great  cosmos  corres-
pond to  these  four  forms  of  Vach.  Now  the  whole  manifested  solar  system  exists
in  its  Sukshma  form  in  the  light  or  energy  of  the  Logos,  because  its  energy  is
caught  up  and  transferred  to  cosmic  matter,  .  .  .  the  whole  cosmos  in  its  objec-
tive form  is  Vaikhari  Vach,  the  light  of  the  Logos  is  the  Madhyama  form,  and  the
Logos  itself  the  Pashyanti  form,  and  Parabrahman  the  Para  aspect  of  that  Vach.
It  is  by  the  light  of  this  explanation  that  we  must  try  to  understand  certain  state-
ments made  by  various  philosophers  to  the  eflfect  that  the  manifested  cosmos  is
the  Verbum  manifested  as  cosmos.t


STANZA  N\.— Continued.
2.  The  Swift  and  the  Radiant  One  produces  the  seven  Laya  \
Centres  (a),  against  which  none  will  prevail  to  the  Great
Day  "Be  With  Us";  and  seats  the  Universe  on  these  Eternal
Foundations,  surrounding  Sien-Tchan  with  the  Elementary
Germs  {b).

(a)  The  seven  Laya  Centres  are  the  seven  zero-points,  using  the
term  zero  in  the  same  sense  that  Chemists  do.  It  indicates,  in  Eso-
tericism,  a  point  at  which  the  reckoning  of  differentiation  begins.
From  these  Centres — beyond  which  Esoteric  Philosophy  allows  us
to  perceive  the  dim  metaphysical  outlines  of  the  "Seven  Sons"  of
Life  and  Light,  the  Seven  Logoi  of  the  Hermetic  and  all  other
philosophers — begins  the  differentiation  of  the  Elements  which  enter
into  the  constitution  of  our  Solar  System.  It  has  often  been  asked
what  is  the  exact  definition  of  Fohat  and  his  powers  and  functions,
for  he  seems  to  exercise  those  of  a  Personal  God  as  understood  in
the  popular  religions.  The  answer  has  just  been  given  in  the  Com-
mentary on  Stanza  V.  As  well  said  in  the  Bhagavadgita  Lectures,
"  The  whole  cosmos  must  necessarily  exist  in  the  one  source  of  energ^^

*  Madhya  is  said  of  something-  whose  commencement  and  end  are  unknown,  and  Para  means
infinite.    These  expressions  all  relate  to  infinitude  and  to  division  of  time.
+    Op.  cit.,  p.  307.
t  From  the  Sanskrit  Laya,  the  point  of  matter  where  every  differentiation  has  ceased.


FROM   NO-NUMBER  TO   NUMBER  SEVEN,  163

from  which  this  light  [Fohat]  emanates."  Whether  we  count  the
principles  in  cosmos  and  man  as  seven  or  only  as  four,  the  forces  of,
and  in,  physical  Nature  are  Seven ;  and  it  is  stated  by  the  same
authority  that,  "Prajna,  or  the  capacity  of  perception,  exists  in  seven
different  aspects  corresponding  to  the  seven  conditions  of  matter."
For,  "just  as  a  human  being  is  composed  of  seven  principles,  differen-
tiated matter  in  the  solar  system  exists  in  seven  different  conditions."*
So  does  Fohat.  Fohat  has  several  meanings,  as  already  shown.  He
is  called  the  "Builder  of  the  Builders,"  the  Force  that  he  personifies
having  formed  our  Septenary'  Chain.  He  is  One  and  Seven,  and  on  the
cosmic  plane  is  behind  all  such  manifestations  as  light,  heat,  sound,
adhesion,  etc.,  etc.,  and  is  the  "spirit"  of  electricity,  which  is  the  Life
of  the  Universe.  As  an  abstraction,  we  will  call  it  the  One  Life ;  as  an
objective  and  evident  Realit}^  we  speak  of  a  septenary  scale  of  mani-
festation, which  begins  at  the  upper  rung  with  the  One  Unknowable
Causality,  and  ends  as  Omnipresent  Mind  and  lyife,  immanent  in  every
atom  of  Matter.  Thus,  while  Science  speaks  of  its  evolution  through
brute  matter,  blind  force,  and  senseless  motion,  the  Occultists  point  to
Intelligent  Law  and  Sentieyit  Life,  and  add  that  Fohat  is  the  guiding
Spirit  of  all  this.  Yet  he  is  no  personal  god  at  all,  but  the  emanation
of  those  other  Powers  behind  him,  whom  the  Christians  call  the  "Mes-
sengers" of  their  God  (in  reality,  of  the  Elohim,  or  rather  one  of  the
Seven  Creators  called  Flohim),  and  we  the  Messenger  of  the  primordial
Sons  of  Life  and  Light.

{b)  The  "  E:ienientar>-  Germs,"  with  which  he  fills  Sien-Tchan  (the
Universe)  from  Tien-Sin  (the  "  Heaven  of  Mind,"  or  that  which  is
absolute),  are  the  Atoms  of  Science  and  the  Monads  of  Leibnitz.


STANZA  W.—Contimied.
3.  Of    the    Seven! — first    One    manifested,    Six    concealed;

Two  MANIFESTED,    FiVE   CONCEALED ;    ThREE  MANIFESTED,  FoUR  CON-
CEALED ;   Four  produced,  Three  hidden  ;   Four  and  One  Tsan  \

REVEALED,  TwO   AND   OnE   HALF  CONCEALED ;    SiX  TO  BE  MANIFESTED,

One  LAID  ASIDE  {a).    Lastly,  Seven  Small  Wheels  revolving;

ONE  giving   birth   TO   THE   OTHER  {b).

{a)  Although   these   Stanzas   refer   to   the   whole    Universe   after   a


•  Five  Years  of  Theosophy,  Art.,  "  Personal  and  Impersonal  God,"  p.  200.
+  Elements.
X  Fraction.


164  THE  SECRJ3T  DOCTRINE.

Mahapralaya  (Universal  Dissolution),  yet  this  sentence,  as  any  student
of  Occultism  may  see,  refers  also  by  analogy  to  the  evolution  and  final
formation  of  the  primitive  (though  compound)  seven  Elements  on  our
Earth.  Of  these,  four  Elements  are  now  fully  manifested,  while  the
fifth — Ether — is  only  partially  so,  as  we  are  hardly  in  the  second  half
of  the  Fourth  Round,  and  consequently  the  fifth  Element  will  manifest
fully  only  in  the  Fifth  Round.  The  Worlds,  including  our  own,  as
germs,  were  of  course  primarily  evolved  from  the  One  Element  in  its
second  stage — "Father-Mother,"  the  Differentiated  World's  Soul,  not
what  is  termed  the  "Over-Soul"  by  Emerson — whether  we  call  it,  with
Modern  Science,  cosmic  dust  and  fire-mist,  or  with  Occultism,  Akasha,
Jivatma,  Divine  Astral  Light,  or  the  "Soul  of  the  World."  But  this
first  stage  of  Evolution  was  in  due  course  of  time  followed  by  the  next.
No  World,  and  no  heavenly  body,  could  be  constructed  on  the  objective
plane,  had  not  the  Elements  been  already  sufficiently  differentiated
from  their  primeval  Ilus,  resting  in  Eaya.  The  latter  term  is  a
synonym  of  Nir^^ana.  It  is,  in  fact,  the  Nirvanic  dissociation  of  all
substances,  merged  after  a  Eife-Cycle  into  the  latency  of  their  primary
conditions.  It  is  the  luminous  but  bodiless  shadow  of  the  Matter  that
was,  the  realm  of  negativeness — wherein  lie  latent  during  their  period
of  rest  the  active  Forces  of  the  Universe.

Now,  speaking  of  Elements,  it  is  made  the  standing  reproach  of  the
Ancients,  that  they  "supposed  their  elements  simple  and  undecom-
posable."  The  shades  of  our  pre-historic  ancestors  might  return
the  compliment  to  modern  Physicists,  now  that  new  discoveries  in
Chemistry  have  led  Mr.  W.  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  to  admit,  that  Science  is
yet  a  thousand  leagues  from  a  knowledge  of  the  compound  nature  of
the  simplest  molecule.  From  him  we  learn  that  such  a  thing  as  a
really  simple  molecule  entirely  homogeneous  is  terra  incognita  in
Chemistry.  "Where  are  we  to  draw  the  line?"  he  asks;  "is  there  no
way  out  of  this  perplexity?  Must  we  either  make  the  elementary'
examinations  so  stiff  that  only  60  or  70  candidates  can  pass,  or  must  we
open  the  examination  doors  so  wide  that  the  number  of  admissions  is
limited  only  by  the  number  of  applicants?"  And  then  the  learned
chemist  gives  striking  instances.     He  says :

Take  the  case  of  yttrium.  It  has  its  definite  atomic  weight,  it  behaved  in  every
respect  as  a  simple  body,  an  element,  to  which  we  might  indeed  add,  but  from
which  we  covild  not  take  away.  Yet  this  yttrium,  this  supposed  homogeneous
whole,  on  being  submitted  to  a  certain  method  of  fractionation,  is  resolved  into


WERE  THE  ANCIENTS   IGNORANT  OP  THE   PHYSICAL  SCIENCES  "r    165

portions  not  absolutely  identical  among  themselves,  and  exhibiting  a  gradation  of
properties.  Or  take  the  case  of  didymium.  Here  was  a  body  betraying  all  the
recognized  characters  of  an  element.  It  had  been  separated  with  much  difficulty
from  other  bodies  which  approximated  closely  to  it  in  their  properties,  and  during
this  crucial  process  it  had  undergone  very  severe  treatment  and  very  close  scrutiny.
But  then  came  another  chemist,  who,  treating  this  assumed  homogeneous  body  by
a  peculiar  process  of  fractionation,  resolved  it  into  the  two  bodies  pi-aseodymium
and  neodymium,  between  which  certain  distinctions  are  perceptible.  Further,  we
even  now  have  no  certainty  that  neodymium  and  praseodymium  are  simple  bodies.
On  the  contrary,  they  likewise  exhibit  symptoms  of  splitting  up.  Now,  if  one
supposed  element  on  proper  treatment  is  thus  found  to  comprise  dissimilar  mole-
cules, we  are  surely  warranted  in  asking  whether  similar  results  might  not  be
obtained  in  other  elements,  perhaps  in  all  elements,  if  treated  in  the  right  way.
We  may  even  ask  where  the  process  of  sorting-out  is  to  stop — a  process  which  of
course  presupposes  variations  between  the  individual  molecules  of  each  species.
And  in  these  successive  separations  we  naturally  find  bodies  approaching  more  and
more  closely  to  each  other.*

Once  more  thi^  reproach  against  the  Ancients  is  an  unwarrantable
statement.  Their  initiated  philosophers  at  any  rate,  can  hardly  come
under  such  an  imputation,  since  it  is  they  who  have  invented  allegories
and  religious  myths  from  the  beginning.  Had  they  been  ignorant  of
the  Heterogeneity  of  their  Elements  they  would  have  had  no  personifi-
cations of  Fire,  Air,  Water,  Earth,  and  ^ther;  their  cosmic  gods  and
goddesses  would  never  have  been  blessed  with  such  posterity,  with  so
many  sons  and  daughters,  elements  born  from  and  withhi  each  respec-
tive Element.  Alchemy  and  Occult  phenomena  would  have  been  a
delusion  and  a  snare,  even  in  theory,  had  the  Ancients  been  ignorant
of  the  potentialities  and  correlative  functions  and  attributes,  of  every
element  that  enters  into  the  composition  of  Air,  Water,  Earth,  and
even  Fire — the  latter  a  terra  incognita  to  this  day  to  Modern  Science,
which  is  obliged  to  call  it  motion,  evolution  of  light  and  heat,  state  of
ignition — defining  it  by  its  outward  aspects  in  short,  in  ignorance  of
its  nature.

But  what  Modern  Science  seems  to  fail  to  perceive,  is  that,  differen-
tiated as  may  have  been  those  simple  chemical  atoms — which  archaic
philosophy  called  "the  creators  of  their  respective  parents,"  fathers,
brothers,  husbands  of  their  mothers,  and  these  mothers  the  daughters
of  their  own  sons,  like  Aditi  and  Daksha,  for  example — differentiated
as  these  elements  were  in  the  beginning,  still,  they  were  not  the  com-
pound bodies  known  to  Science,  as  they  are  now.     Neither  Water,  Air,

•  Presidential  Address  before  the  Royal  Society  of  Chemists,  March,  i888.


1 66  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

nor  Karth  (a  synonym  for  solids  generally)  existed  in  their  present
form,  representing  the  only  three  states  of  matter  recognized  by
Science;  for  all  these  and  even  Fire  are  productions  already  recom-
bined  by  the  atmospheres  of  completely  formed  globes,  so  that  in  the
first  periods  of  the  earth's  formation  they  were  something  quite  sui
generis.  Now  that  the  conditions  and  laws  ruling  our  Solar  System  are
fully  developed,  and  that  the  atmosphere  of  our  earth,  as  of  every
other  globe,  has  become,  so  to  say,  a  crucible  of  its  own,  Occult  Science
teaches  that  there  is  a  perpetual  exchange  taking  place,  in  space,  of
molecules,  or  rather  of  atoms,  correlating,  and  thus  changing  their  com-
bining equivalents  on  every  planet.  Some  men  of  Science,  and  these
among  the  greatest  Physicists  and  Chemists,  begin  to  suspect  this  fact,
which  has  been  known  for  ages  to  the  Occultists.  The  spectroscope
shows  only  the  probable  similarity  (on  external  evidence)  of  terrestrial
and  sidereal  substance;  it  is  unable  to  go  any  farther,  or  to  show
whether  or  not  atoms  gravitate  towards  one  another  in  the  same  way,
and  under  the  same  conditions,  as  they  are  supposed  to  do  on  our
planet,  physically  and  chemically.  The  scale  of  temperature,  from  the
highest  degree  to  the  lowest  that  can  be  conceived  of,  may  be  imagined
to  be  one  and  the  same  in  and  for  the  whole  Universe;  nevertheless,  its
properties,  other  than  those  of  dissociation  and  reassociation,  differ  on
every  planet;  and  thus  atoms  enter  into  new  forms  of  existence,  un-
dreamed of,  and  incognizable  to,  Physical  Science.  As  already  ex-
pressed in  Five  Years  of  Theosophy*  the  essence  of  cometary  matter,  for
instance,  "is  totally  different  from  any  of  the  chemical  or  physical
characteristics  with  which  the  greatest  Chemists  and  Physicists  of  the
earth  are  acquainted."  And  even  that  matter,  during  rapid  passage
through  our  atmosphere,  undergoes  a  certain  change  in  its  nature.

Thus  not  only  the  elements  of  our  planet,  but  even  those  of  all  its
sisters  in  the  Solar  System,  differ  in  their  combinations  as  widely  from
each  other,  as  from  the  cosmic  elements  beyond  our  solar  limits.  This
is  again  corroborated  by  the  same  man  of  Science  in  the  lecture
referred  to  above,  who  quotes  Clerk  Maxwell,  saying  "that  the  ele-
ments are  not  absolutely  homogeneous."     He  writes :

It  is  difficult  to  conceive  of  selection  and  elimination  of  intermediate  varieties,
for  where  can  these  eliminated  molecules  have  gone  to,  if,  as  we  have  reason  to
believe,  the  hydrogen,  etc.,  of  the  fixed  stars  is  composed  of  molecules  identical  in


*  P.  242.


THE  SLEEP  OF  THE  ETERNAL  MOTHER.  167

all  respects  with  our  own In  the  first  place  we  may  call  in  question

this  absolute  molecular  identity,  since  we  have  hitherto  had  no  means  for  coming
to  a  conclusion  save  the  means  furnished  by  the  spectroscope,  while  it  is  admitted
that,  for  accurately  comparing  and  discriminating  the  spectra  of  two  bodies,  they
should  be  examined  under  identical  states  of  temperature,  pressure,  and  all  other
physical  conditions.  We  have  certainly  seen,  in  the  spectrum  of  the  sun,  rays
which  we  have  not  been  able  to  identify.

Therefore,  the  elements  of  our  planet  cannot  be  taken  as  a  standard
for  comparison  with  the  elements  in  other  worlds.  In  fact  each  world
has  its  Fohat,  which  is  omnipresent  in  its  own  sphere  of  action.  But
there  are  as  many  Fohats  as  there  are  worlds,  each  varying  in  power
and  degree  of  manifestation.  The  individual  Fohats  make  one  uni-
versal, collective  Fohat — the  aspect-entity  of  the  one  absolute  Non-
Entity,  which  is  absolute  Be-ness,  Sat.  "Millions  and  billions  of
worlds  are  produced  at  every  Manvantara" — it  is  said.  Therefore
there  must  be  many  Fohats,  whom  we  consider  as  conscious  and
intelligent  Forces.  This,  no  doubt,  to  the  disgust  of  scientific  minds.
Nevertheless  the  Occultists,  who  have  good  reasons  for  it,  consider  all
the  forces  of  Nature  as  veritable,  though  supersensuous,  states  of
Matter;  and  as  possible  objects  of  perception  to  beings  endowed  with
the  requisite  senses.

Enshrined  in  its  pristine,  virgin  state  within  the  Bosom  of  the
Eternal  Mother,  every  atom  born  beyond  the  threshold  of  her  realm
is  doomed  to  incessant  differentiation.  ''The  Mother  sleeps, yet  is  ever
breathing^  And  every  breath  sends  out  into  the  plane  of  manifesta-
tion her  protean  products,  which,  carried  on  by  the  wave  of  efflux,  are
scattered  by  Fohat,  and  driven  toward  or  beyond  this  or  another  plane-
tary atmosphere.  Once  caught  by  the  latter,  the  atom  is  lost;  its
pristine  puritj'-  is  gone  for  ever,  unless  fate  dissociates  it  by  leading  it
to  a  "current  of  efflux"  (an  Occult  term  meaning  quite  a  different
process  from  that  which  the  ordinary  word  implies),  when  it  may  be
carried  once  more  to  the  borderland  where  it  had  previously  perished,
and  taking  its  flight,  not  into  Space  above  but  into  Space  within,
be  brought  under  a  state  of  differential  equilibrium  and  happily  re-
absorbed. Were  a  truly  learned  Occultist- Alchemist  to  write  the  "I,ife
and  Adventures  of  an  Atom,"  he  would  secure  thereby  the  supreme
scorn  of  the  modern  Chemist,  though  perchance  also  his  subsequent
gratitude.  Indeed,  if  such  an  imaginary  Chemist  happened  to  be  in-
tuitional, and  would  for  a  moment  step  out  of  the  habitual  groove  of
strictly  "Exact  Science,"  as  the  Alchemists  of  old  did,  he  might  be  re-


1 68  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

paid  for  his  audacity.  However  it  may  be,  "  The  Breath  of  the  Father-
Mother  iss2ies  cold  a7id  radiant,  and  gets  hot  and  corrupt,  to  cool  once  more
and  be  purified  iri  the  eternal  bosom  of  inkier  Space"  says  the  Commen-
tary. Man  absorbs  cold  pure  air  on  the  mountain-top,  and  throws  it
out  impure,  hot  and  transformed.  Thus,  the  higher  atmosphere  of
every  globe,  being  its  mouth,  and  the  lower  its  lungs,  the  man  of  our
planet  breathes  only  the  "refuse  of  Mother;"  therefore,  "he  is  doomed
to  die  thereon."  He  who  would  allotropize  sluggish  oxygen  into
ozone  to  a  measure  of  alchemical  activity,  reducing  it  to  its  pure
essence  (for  which  there  are  means),  would  discover  thereby  a  sub-
stitute for  an  "Elixir  of  I,ife"  and  prepare  it  for  practical  use.

{U)  The  process  referred  to  as  the  "Small  Wheels,  one  giving  birth
to  the  other,"  takes  place  in  the  sixth  region  from  above,  and  on  the
plane  of  the  most  material  world  of  all  in  the  manifested  Kosmos — our
terrestrial  plane.  These  "Seven  Wheels"  are  our  Planetary  Chain.
By  "Wheels"  the  various  spheres  and  centres  of  forces  are  generally
meant;  but  in  this  case  they  refer  to  our  septenary  Ring.


STANZA   ^\.— Continued.

4.  He  buiIvDS  them  in  the  likeness  of  older  Wheels,-''  placing
them  on  the  imperishable  centres  {a).

How  DOES    FOHAT    BUILD  THEM?    HE    COLLECTS    THE    FlERY-DuST.

He  MAXES  Balls  of  Fire,  runs  through  them,  and  round

THEM,  INFUSING  LIFE  THEREINTO,  THEN  SETS  THEM  INTO  MOTION;
SOME  ONE  WAY,  SOME  THE  OTHER  WAY.  ThEY  ARE  COLD,  HE  MAKES
THEM  HOT.  They  are  dry,  he  MAKES  THEM  MOIST.  ThEY  SHINE,
HE  FANS  AND  COOLS  THEM  (U).  ThUS  ACTS  FOHAT  FROM  ONE  Twi-
LIGHT  TO  THE   OTHER,    DURING  SEVEN   ETERNITIES.f

(a)  The  Worlds  are  built  "in  the  likeness  of  older, Wheels" — i.e.,
of  those  that  had  existed  in  preceding  Manvantaras  and  went  into
Pralaya ;  for  the  L/aw  for  the  birth,  growth,  and  decay  of  everything  in
Kosmos,  from  the  Sun  to  the  glow-worm  in  the  grass,  is  One.  There
is  an  everlasting  work  of  perfection  with  every  new  appearance,  but
the  Substance-Matter  and  Forces  are  all  one  and  the  same.  And  this
L,aw  acts  on  every  planet  through  minor  and  varying  laws.

The  "Imperishable  [I^aya]  Centres"  have  a  great  importance,  and

*  Worlds.  +  A  period  of  311,040,000,000,000  years,  according-  to  Brahmanical  calculations.


THE  COSMIC   PI.ANE,    AN   ILLUSION.  169

their  meaning  must  be  fully  understood,  if  we  would  have  a  clear  con-
ception of  the  Archaic  Cosmogony,  whose  theories  have  now  passed
into  Occultism.  At  present,  one  thing  may  be  stated.  The  Worlds  are
built  neither  tipo7i,  nor  over,  nor  in  the  I^aya  Centres,  the  zero-point
being  a  condition,  not  a  mathematical  point.

{b)  Bear   in   mind   that   Fohat,    the   constructive    Force   of   Cosmic
Electricity,  is  said,  metaphorically,  to  have  sprung,  like  Rudra  from
the  head  of  Brahma,  '\fr07j1  the  Brain  of  the  Father  and  the  Bosofn  of  the
Mother,''  and  then  to  have  metamorphosed  himself  into  a  male  and  a
female,  i.e.,  polarized  himself  into  positive  and  negative  electricity.    He
has  Seven  Sons  who  are  his  Brothers.     Fohat  is  forced  to  be  born,  time
after  time,  whenever  any  two  of  his  "Son-Brothers"  indulge  in  too  close
contact — whether  an  embrace  or  a  fight.     To  avoid  this,  he  unites  and
binds  together  those  of  unlike  nature,  and  separates  those  of  similar
temperaments.     This,  as  any  one  can  see,  relates,  of  course,  to  elec-
tricity generated  by  friction,  and  to  the  law  of  attraction  between  two
objects  of  unlike,  and  repulsion  between  those  of  like  polarity.     The
Seven    Son-Brothers,    however,    represent    and    personify   the    seven
forms  of  cosmic  magnetism,  called  in  Practical  Occultism  the  "Seven
Radicals,"  whose   cooperative   and   active   progeny  are,  among  other
energies.  Electricity,   Magnetism,  Sound,  Eight,  Heat,  Cohesion,  etc.
Occult   Science   defines   all   these   as   super-sensuous   effects   in   their
hidden  behaviour,  and  as  objective  phenomena  in  the  world  of  sense;
the   former  requiring  abnormal  faculties  to  perceive  them,  the  latter
cognizable  by  our  ordinary  physical  senses.     They  all  pertain  to,  and
are  the  emanations  of,  still  more  supersensuous  spiritual  qualities,  not
personated  by,  but  belonging  to,  real  and  conscious  Causes.    To  attempt
a  description  of  such  Entities  would  be  worse  than  useless.    The  reader
must  bear  in  mind  that,  according  to  our  teaching  which  regards  this
phenomenal  Universe  as  a  Great  Illusion,  the  nearer  a  body  is  to  the
Unknown    Substance,  the   more   it  approaches  Reality,  as   being   the
farther  removed   from   this   world   of  Maya.     Therefore,    though   the
molecular  constitution    of  these   bodies   is   not   deducible   from   their
manifestations,  on  this  plane  of  consciousness,  they  nevertheless,  from
the  standpoint  of  the  Adept  Occultist,  possess  a  distinctive  objective  if
not  material  structure,  in  the  relatively  noumenal — as  opposed  to  the
phenomenal — Universe.     Men  of  science  may  term  them  force  or  forces
generated  by  matter,  or  "modes  of  its  motion,"  if  they  will;  Occultism
sees  in  these  effects  Elementals  (Forces),  and,  in   the  direct  causes


lyo  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

producing  them,  intelligent  Divine  Workmen.     The  intimate  connec-
tion of  these  Elementals,  guided  by  the  unerring  hand  of  the  Rulers,
with  the  elements  of  pure  Matter — their  correlation  we  might  call  it —
results  in  our  terrestrial  phenomena,  such  as  light,  heat,  magnetism,
etc.,  etc.     Of  course  we  shall  never  agree  with  the  American  Substan-
tialists*  who  call  every  force  and  energy — whether  light,  heat,  elec-
tricity or  cohesion — an  "entity" ;  for  this  would  be  equivalent  to  calling
the  noise  produced  by  the  rolling  of  the  wheels  of  a  vehicle  an  entity
— thus   confusing   and   identifying    that    "noise"   with    the    "driver"
outside,  and   the   guiding   "Master   Intelligence"    within  the  vehicle.
But  we  do  certainly  give  that  name  to  the   "drivers"    and   to  these
guiding    "Intelligences,"   the    ruling    Dhyan    Chohans,    as    has  been
shown.     The  Elementals,  the  Nature-Forces,  are  the  acting,  though
invisible,  or  rather  imperceptible,  secondary  causes,  and  in  themselves
the  effects  of  primary  causes  behind  the  veil  of  all  terrestrial  pheno-
mena.     Electricity,   light,   heat,    etc.,    have    been    aptly   termed    the
"Ghosts  or  Shadows  of  Matter  in  Motion,"  i.e.,  supersensuous  states  of
Matter  whose  effects  only  we  are  able  to  cognize.     To  expand,  then,
the  simile  given  above.     The  sensation  of  light  is  like  the  sound  of  the
rolling  wheels — a  purely  phenomenal  effect,  having  no  existence  outside
the  observer.     The  proximate  exciting  cause  of  the  sensation  is  com-
parable to  the  driver — a  supersensuous  state  of  matter  in  motion,   a
Nature-Force  or  Elemental.     But,  behind  this — just  as  the  owner  of  the
carriage  directs  the  driver  from  within — stands  the  higher  and  noumenal
cause,   the  Intelligence  from   whose   essence   radiate   these    States    of
"Mother,"  generating  the  countless  milliards  of  Elementals,  or  Psychic
Nature-Spirits,  just   as   every   drop    of  water   generates   its   physical
infinitesimal  Infusoria.     It  is  Fohat  who  guides  the  transfer   of  the
principles  from  one  planet  to  the  other,  from  one  star  to  another  child-
star.     When  a  planet  dies,  its  informing  principles  are  transferred  to  a
laya  or  sleeping  centre,  with  potential  but  latent  energy  in  it,  which  is
thus  awakened  into  life  and  begins  to  form  itself  into  a  new  sidereal
body.

It  is  most  remarkable  that,  while  honestly  confessing  their  entire
ignorance  of  the  true  nature  of  even  terrestrial  matter — primordial
substance  being  regarded  more  as  a  dream  than  as  a  sober  reality —

*  See  the  Scientific  Arena,  a  monthly  journal  devoted  to  current  philosophical  teaching  and  its
bearing  upon  the  religious  thought  of  the  age.  New  York:  A.  Wilford  Hall,  Ph.D.,  LL.D.,Editor,
July,  August,  and  September,  1886.


PRIMORDIAL   SUBSTANCE,    A   REALITY.  17I

the  Physicists  should,  nevertheless,  set  themselves  up  as  judges  of  that
matter,  and  claim  to  know  what  it  is  able  and  is  not  able  to  do,  in
various  combinations.  Scientists  know  this  matter  hardly  skin-deep,
and  yet  they  will  dogmatize.  It  is  "a  mode  of  motion"  and  nothing
else!  But  the  "force"  that  is  inherent  in  a  living  person's  breath,
when  blowing  a  speck  of  dust  from  the  table,  is  also,  undeniably,  "a
mode  of  motion."  It  is  as  undeniably  not  a  quality  of  the  matter,  or
the  particles  of  the  speck,  and  it  emanates  from  the  living  and  think-
ing Entity  that  breathed,  whether  the  impulse  originated  consciously
or  unconsciously.  Indeed,  to  endow  matter — something  of  which
nothing  is  so  far  known — with  an  inherent  quality  called  force,  of  the
nature  of  which  still  less  is  known,  is  to  create  a  far  more  serious
difficulty  than  that  which  lies  in  the  acceptation  of  the  intervention  of
our  "Nature-Spirits"  in  every  natural  phenomenon.

The  Occultists — who,  if  they  would  express  themselves  correctly,  do
not  say  that  matter,  but  only  the  substance  or  essence  of  matter,  {i.e.,
Mulaprakriti,  the  Root  of  all)  is  indestructible  and  eternal — assert  that
all  the  so-called  Forces  of  Nature,  electricity,  magnetism,  light,  heat,
etc.,  etc.,  far  from  being  modes  of  motion  of  material  particles,  are  in
esse,  i.e.,  in  their  ultimate  constitution,  the  differentiated  aspects  of  that
Universal  Motion  which  is  discussed  and  explained  in  the  first  pages
of  this  volume.  When  Fohat  is  said  to  produce  Seven  Laya  Centres,  it
means  that,  for  formative  or  creative  purposes,  the  Great  Law — Theists
may  call  it  God — stays,  or  rather  modifies,  its  perpetual  motion  on
seven  invisible  points  within  the  area  of  the  Manifested  Universe.
"  The  Great  Breath  digs  through  Space  seven  holes  into  Laya,  to  cause  them
to  circumgyrate  during  Manvantara''  says  the  Occult  Catechism.  We
have  said  that  Laya  is  what  Science  may  call  the  zero-point  or  line;  the
realm  of  absolute  negativeness,  or  the  one  real  absolute  Force,  the
noumeno7i  of  the  Seventh  State  of  that  which  we  ignorantly  call  and
recognize  as  "Force";  or  again  the  noumenon  of  Undifferentiated
Cosmic  Substance,  which  is  itself  an  unreachable  and  unknowable
object  for  finite  perception ;  the  root  and  basis  of  all  states  of  objec-
tivity and  also  subjectivity;  the  neutral  axis,  not  one  of  the  many
aspects,  but  its  centre.  It  may  serve  to  elucidate  the  meaning,  if  we
try  to  imagine  a  "neutral  centre" — the  dream  of  those  who  would
discover  perpetual  motion.  A  "neutral  centre"  is,  in  one  aspect,  the
limiting  point  of  any  given  set  of  senses.  Thus,  imagine  two  con-
secutive planes  of  matter;  each  of  these  corresponding  to  an  appro-


172  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

priate  set  of  perceptive  organs.  We  are  forced  to  admit  that  between
these  two  planes  of  matter  an  incessant  circulation  takes  place;  and  if
we  follow  the  atoms  and  molecules  of,  say,  the  lower  in  their  transfor-
mation upwards,  they  will  come  to  a  point  where  they  pass  altogether
beyond  the  range  of  the  faculties  we  are  using  on  the  lower  plane.
In  fact,  for  us  the  matter  of  the  lower  plane  there  vanishes  from  our
perception — or  rather,  it  passes  on  to  the  higher  plane,  and  the  state  of
matter  corresponding  to  such  a  point  of  transition  must  certainly
possess  special,  and  not  readily  discoverable,  properties.  Seven  such
"Neutral  Centres,"*  then,  are  produced  by  Fohat,  who,  when,  as
Milton  has  it :

Fair  foundations  (are)  laid  whereon  to  build     .     .     .

quickens  matter  into  activity  and  evolution.

The  Primordial  Atom  (Ann)  cannot  be  multiplied  either  in  its
pregenetic  state,  or  its  primogeneity;  therefore  it  is  called  the  "Sum
Total,"  of  course,  figuratively,  as  that  "Sum  Total"  is  boundless.
That  which  is  the  abyss  of  nothingness  to  the  Physicist,  who  knows
only  the  world  of  visible  causes  and  effects,  is  the  boundless  Space  of
the  Divine  Plenum  to  the  Occultist.  Among  many  other  objections  to
the  doctrine  of  an  endless  evolution  and  involution,  or  reabsorption  of
the  Kosmos,  a  process  which,  according  to  the  Brahmanical  and
Esoteric  Doctrine,  is  without  beginning  or  end,  the  Occultist  is  told
that  it  cannot  be,  since  "by  all  the  admissions  of  modern  scientific
philosophy  it  is  a  necessity  of  nature  to  run  down."  If  the  tendency  of
nature  "to  run  down"  is  to  be  considered  so  forcible  an  objection  to
Occult  Cosmogony,  how,  we  may  ask,  do  5^our  Positivists  and  Free-
thinkers and  Scientists  account  for  the  phalanx  of  active  stellar
systems  around  us?  The}'  had  eternity  to  "run  down"  in;  why,
then,  is  not  the  Kosmos  a  huge  inert  mass?  Even  the  moon  is  only
hypothetically  believed  to  be  a  dead  planet,  "run  down,"  and
Astronomy  does  not  seem  to  be  acquainted  with  many  such  dead
planets. t  The  query  is  unanswerable.  But  apart  from  this,  it  must  be
noted  that  the  idea  of  the  amount  of  "  transformable  energy"  in  our


•  Such,  we  believe,  is  the  name  applied  to  what  he  also  calls  "Etheric  Centres,"  by  J.  W.  Keely,
of  Philadelphia,  the  inventor  of  the  famous  "  Motor  "—destined,  as  his  admirers  have  hoped,  to
revolutionize  the  motor  power  of  the  world.

+  The  moon  is  dead  only  so  far  as  regards  her  inner  principles— z.^.,  psychically  and  spiritually,
however  absurd  the  statement  may  seem.  Ph.ysically,  she  is  only  as  a  semi -paralysed  body  may  be.
She  is  aptly  referred  to  in  Occultism  as  the  "  Insane  Mother,"  the  great  sidereal  lunatic.


I^APLACE'S    MISTAKE.  173

little  sj'^stem   coming  to  an   end,   is  based  purely  on  the  fallacious
conception  of  a  "white-hot,  incandescent  sun,"  perpetually  radiating
away  its  heat  without  compensation  into  space.     To  this  we  reply  that
nature  runs   down  and  disappears  from  the   objective   plane,  only  to
reemerge  after  a  time  of  rest  out  of  the  subjective,  and  to  reascend
once  more.     Our  Kosmos  and  Nature  will  run  down  only  to  reappear
on   a   more   perfect   plane   after   every   Pralaya.      The   Matter   of  the
Eastern  philosophers  is  not  the  "  matter"  and  Nature  of  the  Western
metaphysicians.     For  what   is  Matter?     And   above   all,   what   is   our
scientific   philosophy   but   that   which   was   so  justly   and   so  politely
defined  by  Kant  as  the  "science  of  the  limits  to  our  knowledge"?     To
what  have  the  many  attempts  made  by  Science  to  bind,  connect,  and
define  all  the  phenomena  of  organic  life,  by  mere  physical  and  chemical
manifestations,  brought  it?      To   speculation    generally  —  mere   soap-
bubbles,  that  have  burst  one  after  the  other  before  the  men  of  Science
Avere   permitted   to   discover   real   facts.      All   this    would   have   been
avoided,   and  the  progress  of  knowledge  would  have  proceeded  with
gigantic  strides,  had  only  Science  and  its  philosophy  abstained  from
accepting    hj^potheses   merely   on    the   one-sided   knowledge   of   their
"matter."     The  behaviour  of  Uranus   and  Neptune — whose  satellites,
four  and  one  in  number  respectively,  revolved,  it  was  thought,  in  their
orbits  from  East  to  West,  whereas  all  the  other  satellites  rotate  from
West  to  East — is  a  very  good  instance,  as  showing  how  unreliable  are
all  a  priori  speculations,  even  when  based  on  the  strictest  mathematical
analysis.     The  famous  hypothesis  of  the  formation  of  our  Solar  System
out  of  nebulous  rings,  put  forward  by  Kant  and  I^aplace,  was  chiefly
based  on  the  assumed  fact  that  all  the  planets  revolved  in  the  same
direction.     Laplace,  relying  on  this  mathematically  demonstrated  fact
in  his  own  time,  and  calculating  on  the  theory  of  probabilities,  oflfered
to  bet  three  milliards  to  one  that  the  next  planet  discovered  would
have   in   its   system   the   same  peculiarity  of  motion   eastward.     The
immutable  laws   of  scientific   mathematics   got   "worsted   by   further
experiments  and  observations."     This  idea  of  Laplace's  mistake  pre-
vails generally  to  this  day;   but  some  Astronomers  have  finally  suc-
ceeded  in   demonstrating  (?)   that   the   error  has    been   in   accepting
Laplace's    assertion    for   a   mistake;    and   steps   to   correct   the   bevue,
without   attracting  general   attention,   are   now  being    taken.      Man)^
such  unpleasant  surprises  are  in  store  for  hypotheses  of  even  a  purely
physical  character.     What  further  disillusions,  then,  ma)^  there  not  be


174  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

in  questions  concerning  a  transcendental,  Occult  Nature?  At  any
rate,  Occultism  teaches  that  the  so-called  "reverse  rotation"  is  a  fact.
If  no  physical  intellect  is  capable  of  counting  the  grains  of  sand
covering  a  few  miles  of  sea-shore,  or  of  fathoming  the  ultimate  nature
and  essence  of  these  grains,  when  palpable  and  visible  on  the  palm  of
the  Naturalist,  how  can  any  Materialist  limit  the  laws  which  govern
the  changes  in  the  conditions  and  being  of  the  atoms  in  Primordial
Chaos,  or  know  anything  certain  about  the  capabilities  and  potency  of
the  atoms  and  molecules,  before  and  after  their  formation  into  worlds?
These  changeless  and  eternal  molecules — far  more  numberless  in  space
than  the  grains  on  the  ocean  shore — may  differ  in  their  constitution
along  the  lines  of  their  planes  of  existence,  as  the  soul-substance
differs  from  its  vehicle,  the  body.  Each  atom  has  seven  planes  of
being  or  existence,  we  are  taught;  and  each  plane  is  governed  by  its
specific  laws  of  evolution  and  absorption.  Ignorant  of  any,  even  ap-
proximate, chronological  data  from  which  to  start,  in  attempting  to
decide  the  age  of  our  planet  or  the  origin  of  the  solar  system.  Astrono-
mers, Geologists,  and  Physicists,  with  each  new  hypothesis,  are  drifting
farther  and  farther  away  from  the  shores  of  fact  into  the  fathomless
depths  of  speculative  ontology.*  The  lyaw  of  Analogy,  in  the  plan  of
structure  between  the  trans-solar  S3'stems  and  the  solar  planets,  does
not  necessarily  bear  upon  the  finite  conditions,  to  which  every  visible
body  is  subject,  in  this  our  plane  of  being.  In  Occult  Science,  this
Law  of  Analogy  is  the  first  and  most  important  key  to  cosmic  physics;
but  it  has  to  be  studied  in  its  minutest  details,  and  "turned  seven
times,"  before  one  comes  to  understand  it.  Occult  Philosophy  is  the
only  science  that  can  teach  it.  How,  then,  can  anyone  hang  the
truth  or  the  untruth  of  the  Occultist's  proposition,  "the  Kosmos  is
eternal  in  its  unconditioned  collectivity,  and  finite  only  in  its  con-
ditioned manifestations,"  on  this  one-sided  physical  enunciation  that
"it  is  a  necessity  of  Nature  to  run  down"?t


A   DIGRESSION.
With  this  Shloka  ends  that  portion  of  the  Stanzas  relating  to  the


*  Occultists,  however,  having  the  most  perfect  faith  in  their  own  exact  records,  astronomical  and
mathematical,  calculate  the  age  of  humanity,  and  assert  that  men  (as  separate  sexes)  have  existed  in
this  Round  just  18,618,727  years,  as  the  Brahmanical  teachings  and  even  some  Hindu  calendars
declare.

t  The  commentaries  on  the  Stanzas  are  resumed  on  p.  213.


A   DIGRESSION.  175

cosmogony  of  the  Universe  after  the  last  Mahapralaya,  or  Universal
Dissolution,  which,  when  it  comes,  sweeps  out  of  Space  every  differen-
tiated thing,  gods  as  well  as  atoms,  like  so  many  dry  leaves.  From
this  verse  onwards,  the  Stanzas  are  only  concerned  with  our  Solar
System  in  general,  with  the  Planetary  Chains  therein  inferentially,
and  with  the  history  of  our  Globe  (the  Fourth  and  its  Chain)  especially.
All  the  verses  which  follow  in  this  Volume  refer  only  to  the  evolution
of,  and  on,  our  Earth.  With  regard  to  the  latter,  a  strange  tenet —
strange  from  the  modern  scientific  standpoint  only,  of  course — is  held,
which  ought  to  be  made  known.

But  before  entirely  new  and  somewhat  startling  theories  are  pre-
sented to  the  reader,  they  must  be  prefaced  by  a  few  words  of  ex-
planation. This  is  absolutely  necessary,  as  these  theories  clash  not
only  with  Modern  Science,  but,  on  certain  points,  contradict  earlier
statements*  made  by  other  Theosophists,  who  claim  to  base  their  ex-
planations and  renderings  of  these  teachings  on  the  same  authority
as  w'e  do.

This  may  give  rise  to  the  idea  that  there  is  a  decided  contradiction
between  the  expounders  of  the  same  doctrine ;  whereas  the  difference,
in  reality,  arises  from  the  incompleteness  of  the  information  given  to
earlier  writers,  who  thus  drew  some  erroneous  conclusions  and  indulged
in  premature  speculations,  in  their  endeavour  to  present  a  complete
system  to  the  public.  Thus  the  reader,  who  is  already  a  student  of
Theosophy,  must  not  be  surprised  to  find  in  these  pages  the  rectifica-
tion of  certain  statements  made  in  various  Theosophical  works,  and
also  the  explanation  of  certain  points  which  have  remained  obscure,
because  they  were  necessarily  left  incomplete.  Many  are  the  questions
upon  which  even  the  author  of  Esoteric  Buddhism,  the  best  and  most
accurate  of  all  such  works,  has  not  touched.  On  the  other  hand,  even
he  has  introduced  several  mistaken  notions,  which  must  now  be  pre-
sented in  their  true  mystic  light,  as  far  as  the  present  w-riter  is  capable
of  so  doing.

Let  us  then  make  a  short  break  between  the  Shlokas  just  explained
and  those  which  follow,  for  the  cosmic  periods  which  separate  them
are  of  immense  duration.  This  will  afford  us  ample  time  to  take  a
bird's-eye  view  of  some  points  pertaining  to  the  Secret  Doctrine,  which


•  In  Esoteric  Buddhism  and  Man:  Fragments  0/  Forgotten  History.


176  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

have  been  presented  to  the  public  under  a  more  or  less  uncertain  and
sometimes  mistaken  light.


A  FEW  EARLY   MISCONCEPTIONS    CONCERNING    PLANETS,

ROUNDS,  AND  MAN.
Among  the  eleven  Stanzas  omitted,  there  is  one  which  gives  a  full
description  of  the  formation  of  the  Planetary  Chains  one  after  another,
after  the  first  cosmic  and  atomic  differentiation  had  commenced  in  the
primitive  Acosmism.  It  is  idle  to  speak  of  "laws  arising  when  Deity-
prepares  to  create,"  for  "laws,"  or  rather  Law,  are  eternal  and  un-
created; and  again  Deity  is  I^aw,  and  vice  versa.  Moreover,  the  one
eternal  I^aw  unfolds  everything  in  the  (to  be)  manifested  Nature  on
a  sevenfold  principle;  among  the  rest,  the  countless  circular  Chains
of  Worlds,  composed  of  seven  Globes,  graduated  on  the  four  lower
planes  of  the  World  of  Formation,  the  three  others  belonging  to  the
Archetypal  Universe.  Out  of  these  seven  only  one,  the  lowest  a7id  the
viost  material  of  these  Globes,  is  within  our  plane  or  means  of  percep-
tion, the  six  others  lying  outside  it  and  being  therefore  invisible  to  the
terrestrial  eye.  Every  such  Chain  of  Worlds  is  the  progeny  and  crea-
tion of  another,  lozuer,  and  dead  Chain — its  i^eincarnatiofi,  so  to  say.  To
make  it  clearer:  we  are  told  that  each  of  the  planets — of  which  seven,
only  were  called  sacred,  as  being  ruled  by  the  highest  Regents  or  Gods,
and  not  at  all  because  the  Ancients  knew  nothing  of  the  others* —
whether  known  or  unknown,  is  a  septenary,  as  also  is  the  Chain  to
which  the  Earth  belongs.  For  instance,  all  such  planets  as  Mercur>',
Venus,  Mars,  Jupiter,  Saturn,  etc.,  etc.,  or  our  Earth,  are  as  visible  to
us  as  our  Globe,  probably,  is  to  the  inhabitants,  if  any,  of  the  other
planets,  because  they  are  all  on  the  same  plane;  while  the  superior
fellow-globes  of  these  planets  are  on  other  planes  quite  outside  that  of
our  terrestrial  senses.  As  their  relative  positions  are  given  further  on,
and  also  in  the  diagram  appended  to  the  comments  on  Shloka  6  of
Stanza  VI,  a  few  words  of  explanation  is  all  that  is  needed  at  present.
These  invisible  companions  correspond  curiously  to  that  which  we  call
the  "principles"  in  man.  The  seven  are  on  three  material  planes  and
one  spiritual  plane,  answering  to  the  three  Upadhis  (Material  Bases),  and
one  spiritual  Vehicle  (Vahana),  of  our  seven  Principles  in  the  human
division.     If,  for  the  sake  of  a  clearer  mental  conception,  we  imagine


*  Many  more  planets  are  enumerated  in  the  Secret  Books  than  in  modem  astronomical  works.


DESCENDING  AND   REASCENDING   STATES.


177


the  human  Principles  to  be  arranged  as  in  the  following  schema,  we
shall  obtain  the  annexed  diagram  of  correspondences :

Diagram  I.


HUMAN   PRINCIPLES.


(2)  SouL
Upadhi  of  spirit.  V


(4)  Animal  Soul.
UpAdhi  of  Mind.


(6)  Astral  Body.
Upadlii  of  Life.


(7)  Physical  Body.

Upadhi  of  ail  the  Six

Principles.


(i)  Spirit.


(3)  Mind.


(5)  Life.


PLANETARY  DIVISION.


u


u

<u

+J

C8

O
■•-J

a

bo

<u
u
ai

<u

Q


Our  Earth,
or  any  (visi-
ble) Planet.


o


A


i


Oh
CO

o


o

<


As  we  are  proceeding  here  from  Universals  to  Particulars,  instead  of
using  the  inductive  or  Aristotelean  method,  the  numbers  are  reversed.
Spirit  is  enumerated  the  first  instead  of  seventh,  as  is  usually  done,  but
in  truth,  ought  7iot  to  be  done.

The  Principles,  as  usually  named  after  the  manner  of  Esoteric  Biiddh-

A

ism  and  other  works,  are:  i,  Atma;  2,  Buddhi  (Spiritual  Soul);  3,
Manas  (Human  Soul);  4,  Kama  Riipa  (Vehicle  of  Desires  and  Pas-
sions); 5,  Prana;  6,  I,inga  Sharira;  7,  Sthula  Sharira.

The  dark  horizontal  lines  of  the  lower  planes  are  the  Upadhis  in  the
case  of  the  human  Principles,  and  the  planes  in  the  case  of  the  Planet-
ary- Chain.  Of  course,  as  regards  the  Human  Principles,  the  diagram
does  not  place  them  quite  in  order,  yet  it  shows  the  correspondence
and  analogy  to  which  attention  is  now  drawn.  As  the  reader  will  see,
it  IS  a  case  of  descent  into  matter,  the  adjustment — in  both  the  mystic


13


1 78  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

and  the  physical  sense — of  the  two,  and  their  interblending  for  the
great  coming  "struggle  for  life"  that  awaits  both  Entities.  "Entity"
may  be  thought  a  strange  term  to  use  in  the  case  of  a  Globe,  but  the
ancient  philosophers,  who  saw  in  the  Earth  a  huge  "animal,"  were
wiser  in  their  generation  than  our  modern  geologists  are  in  theirs;
and  Pliny,  who  called  the  Earth  our  kind  nurse  and  mother,  the  only
Element  which  is  not  inimical  to  man,  spoke  more  truly  than  Watts,
who  fancied  that  he  saw  in  her  the  footstool  of  God.  For  Earth  is  only
the  footstool  of  man  in  his  ascension  to  higher  regions ;  the  vestibule —

to  glorious  mansions,

Through  which  a  moving  crowd  for  ever  press.

But  this  only  shows  how  admirably  Occult  Philosophy  fits  every
thing  in  Nature,  and  how  much  more  logical  are  its  tenets  than  the
lifeless  hypothetical  speculations  of  Physical  Science.

Having  learned  thus  much,  the  Mystic  will  be  better  prepared  to
understand  the  Occult  teaching,  though  every  formal  student  of
Modern  Science  may,  and  probably  will,  regard  it  as  preposterous
nonsense.  The  student  of  Occultism,  however,  holds  that  the  theory
at  present  under  discussion  is  far  more  philosophical  and  probable
than  any  other.  It  is  more  logical,  at  any  rate,  than  the  theor\"
recently  advanced  which  made  of  the  Moon  the  projection  of  a  por-
tion of  our  Earth,  extruded  when  the  latter  was  a  globe  in  fusion,  a
molten  plastic  mass.

Says  Mr.  Samuel  Eaing,  the  author  of  Modern  Science  and  Modern
Thought :

The  astronomical  conclusions  are  theories  based  on  data  so  uncertain,  that  while
in  some  cases  they  give  results  incredibly  short,  like  that  of  15  millions  of  years  for
the  whole  past  process  of  formation  of  the  solar  system,  in  others  they  give  results
almost  incredibly  long,  as  in  that  which  supposes  the  moon  to  have  been  thrown  off
when  the  earth  was  rotating  in  three  hours,  while  the  utmost  actual  retardation
obtained  from  observation  would  require  600  millions  of  years  to  make  it  rotate
in  twenty-three  hours  instead  of  twenty-four.*

And  if  Physicists  persist  in  such  speculations,  why  should  the  chro-
nology of  the  Hindus  be  laughed  at  as  exaggerated?

It  is  said,  moreover,  that  the  Planetary  Chains  having  their  Daj^s
and  their  Nights — i.e.,  periods  of  activity  or  life,  and  of  inertia  or  death
— behave  in  heaven  as  do  men  on  earth:  they  generate  their  likes,
grow  old,  and  become  personally  extinct,  their  spiritual  principles  only
living  in  their  progeny  as  a  survival  of  themselves.

•  p.  48.


EXCHANGE   OF   I,IFE-PRINCIPI,ES.  1 79

Without  attempting  the  very  difficult  task  of  giving  out  the  whole
process  in  all  its  cosmic  details,  enough  may  be  said  to  give  an  ap-
proximate idea  of  it.  When  a  Planetary  Chain  is  in  its  last  Round,  its
Globe  A,  before  finally  dying  otit,  sends  all  its  energy  and  principles
into  a  neutral  centre  of  latent  force,  a  laj^a  centre,  and  thereby  informs
a  new  nucleus  of  undifferentiated  substance  or  matter,  i.e.,  calls  it  into
activity  or  gives  it  life.  Suppose  such  a  process  to  have  taken  place
in  the  Lunar  Planetary  Chain;  suppose  again,  for  argument's  sake —
though  Mr.  Darwin's  theory  quoted  below  has  lately  been  upset,  even
if  the  fact  has  not  ytt  been  ascertained  by  mathematical  calculation —
that  the  Moon  is  far  older  than  the  Karth.  Imagine  the  six  fellow-
globes  of  the  Moon — aeons  before  the  first  Globe  of  our  seven  was
evolved — just  in  the  same  position  in  relation  to  each  other  as  the
fellow-globes  of  our  Chain  now  occupy  in  regard  to  our  Earth.*  And
now  it  will  be  easy  to  imagine  further  Globe  A  of  the  Lunar  Chain
informing  Globe  A  of  the  Terrestrial  Chain,  and — dying;  next  Globe  B
of  the  former  sending  its  energy  into  Globe  B  of  the  new  Chain ;  then
Globe  C  of  the  Lunar  creating  its  progeny  Sphere  C  of  the  Terrene
Chain;  then  the  Moon  (our  satellite)  pouring  forth  into  the  lowest
Globe  of  our  Planetary  Chain — Globe  D,  our  Earth — all  its  life,  energy
and  powers;  and,  having  transferred  them  to  a  new  centre,  becoming
virtually  a  dead  plajiet,  in  which  since  the  birth  of  our  Globe  rotation
has  almost  ceased.  The  Moon  is  the  satellite  of  our  Earth,  undeniably,
but  this  does  not  invalidate  the  theory  that  she  has  given  to  the  Earth
all  but  her  corpse.  For  Darwin's  theory  to  hold  good,  besides  the
hypothesis  just  upset,  other  still  more  incongruous  speculations  had  to
be  invented.  The  Moon,  it  is  said,  has  cooled  nearly  six  times  as
rapidly  as  the  Earth. f  "The  Moon,  if  the  earth  is  14,000,000  years
old  since  its  incrustation,  is  only  eleven  and  two -thirds  millions  of
years  old  since  that  stage  .  .  ."  etc.  And  if  our  Moon  is  but  a
splash  from  our  Earth,  why  can  no  similar  inference  be  established
for  the  Moons  of  other  planets?  The  Astronomers  "do  not  know."
Why  should  Venus  and  Mercury  have  no  satellites,  and  by  what,
when  they  exist,  were  they  formed?  The  Astronomers  do  not  know,
because,  we  say.  Science  has  only  one  key — the  key  of  matter — to
open  the  mj^steries  of  Nature,  while  Occult  Philosophy  has  seven
ke3^s   and   explains   that  which   Science    fails    to   see.      Mercury   and

•  See,  in  Esoteric  Buddhism,  "The  Constitution  of  Man,"  and  the  "  Planetary  Chain."
+  Winchell's  World-Life.


l8o  TH:e  SECREJT  DOCTRINE.

Venus  have  no  satellites,  but  they  had  "parents"  just  as  the  Earth
had.  Both  are  far  older  than  the  Earth,  and,  before  the  latter  reaches
her  Seventh  Round,  her  mother  Moon  will  have  dissolved  into  thin
air,  as  the  Moons  of  the  other  planets  have,  or  have  not,  as  the  case
may  be,  since  there  are  planets  which  have  several  Moons — a  mystery
again  which  no  CEdipus  of  Astronomy  has  solved.

The  Moon  is  now  the  cold  residual  quantity,  the  shadow  dragged
after  the  new  body,  into  which  her  living  powers  and  principles  are
transfused.  She  now  is  doomed  for  long  ages  to  be  ever  pursuing  the
Earth,  to  be  attracted  by  and  to  attract  her  progeny.  Constantly
vampirized  hy  her  child,  she  revenges  herself  on  it,  by  soaking  it
through  and  through  with  the  nefarious,  invisible  and  poisoned  in-
fluence which  emanates  from  the  occult  side  of  her  nature.  For  she
is  a  dead,  yet  a  living  body.  The  particles  of  her  deca3dng  corpse  are
full  of  active  and  destructive  life,  although  the  body  which  the)^  had
formed,  is  soulless  and  lifeless.  Therefore  its  emanations  are  at  the
same  time  beneficent  and  maleficent — a  circumstance  finding  its
parallel  on  earth,  in  the  fact  that  the  grass  and  plants  are  nowhere
more  juicy  and  thriving  than  on  graves;  while  at  the  same  time  it  is
the  graveyard,  or  corpse-emanations,  which  kill.  And  like  all  ghouls
or  vampires,  the  Moon  is  the  friend  of  the  sorcerers  and  the  foe  of  the
unwary.  From  the  archaic  aeons  and  the  later  times  of  the  witches  of
Thessaly,  down  to  some  of  the  present  Tantrikas  of  Bengal,  her  nature
and  properties  have  been  known  to  every  Occultist,  but  have  remained
a  closed  book  for  Physicists.

Such  is  the  Moon  from  the  astronomical,  geological,  and  physical
standpoints.  As  to  her  metaphysical  and  psychic  nature,  it  must
remain  an  occult  secret  in  this  work,  as  it  was  in  the  volume  entitled
Esoteric  Buddhism,  notwithstanding  the  rather  sanguine  statement
made  therein,  that  "there  is  not  much  mystery  left  now  in  the  riddle
of  the  eighth  sphere."*  These  are  topics,  indeed,  "on  which  the
Adepts  are  very  reserved  in  their  communications  to  uninitiated
pupils,"  and  since  they  have,  moreover,  never  sanctioned  or  permitted
any  published  speculations  upon  them,  the  less  said  the  better.

Yet,  without  treading  upon  the  forbidden  ground  of  the  "eighth
sphere,"  it  may  be  useful  to  state  some  additional  facts  with  regard  to
the  ex-monads  of  the  Eunar  Chain — the  "  Lunar  Ancestors" — as  they
play  a  leading  part  in  the  coming  Anthropogenesis.    This  brings  us

*  p.  113  {5th  edition).


OPINIONS   DIFFER   AND   YET  AGREE.


I8l


directly  to  the  Septenary  Constitution  of  man ;  and  as  some  discussion
has  arisen  of  late  about  the  best  classification  to  be  adopted  for  the  divi-
sion of  the  microcosmic  entity,  two  systems  are  now  appended  with  a
view  to  facilitate  comparison.  The  subjoined  short  article  is  from  the
pen  of  Mr.  T.  Subba  Row,  a  learned  Vedantin  scholar.  He  prefers  the
Brahmanical  division  of  the  Raja  Yoga,  and  from  a  metaphj^sical  point
of  view  he  is  quite  right.  But,  as  it  is  a  question  of  simple  choice  and
expediency,  we  hold  in  this  work  to  the  time-honoured  classification
of  the  Trans-Himalayan  "Arhat  Esoteric  School."  The  following
table  and  its  explanatory  text  are  reprinted  from  the  Theosophist,  and
are  also  contained  in  Five  Years  of  jTheosophy.^

THE  SEPTENARY  DIVISION  IN  DIFFERENT  INDIAN  SYSTEMS.

We  give  below  in  a  tabular  form  the  classifications  adopted  by  the  Buddhist  and
Vedantic  teachers  of  the  principles  of  man :


"Esoteric  Buddhism."

Vedanta.

Taraka  Raja  Yoga.

I.

Sthula  Sharira.

Annamayakosha.  t

\

2.

Prana.J

1  Pranamayakosha.

\  Sthulopadhi.il

3-

The  Vehicle  of  Prana.§.

.'

4-

Kama  Rupa.

■-  Manomayakosha.

\

5-

\      (a)    Volitions   and
Mind   ^               feelings,  etc.

..„..

(      {b)    Vijiianam.

Vijnanamayakosha.

)

6.

Spiritual  Soul.H

Anandamayakosha.

Karanopadhi.

7-

Atma.

Atma.

Atma.

From  the  foregoing  table  it  will  be  seen  that  the  third  principle  in  the  Buddhist
classification  is  not  separatel}'  mentioned  in  the  Vedantic  division,  as  it  is  merely
the  vehicle  of  Prana.  It  will  also  be  seen  that  the  fourth  principle  is  included  in
the  third  Kosha  (Sheath),  as  the  same  principle  is  but  the  vehicle  of  will-power,
which  is  but  an  energ}'  of  the  mind.  It  must  also  be  noticed  that  the  Vijiianamaya-
kosha  is  considered  to  be  distinct  from  the  Manomayakosha,  as  a  division  is  made


•  pp.  185-6.

t  Kosha  is  "sheath"  literally,  the  sheath  of  everj'  principle.

t  Life.

\  The  Astral  Body,  or  Linga  Sharira.

II  Sthula-upadhi,  or  basis  of  the  principle.

H  Buddhi.


l82  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

after  death  between  the  lower  part  of  the  mind,  as  it  were,  which  has  a  closer
affinity  with  the  fourth  principle  than  with  the  sixth  and  its  higher  part,  which
attaches  itself  to  the  latter,  and  which  is,  in  fact,  the  basis  for  the  higher  spiritual
individuality  of  man.

We  may  also  here  point  out  to  our  readers  that  the  classification  mentioned  in
the  last  column  is,  for  all  practical  purposes,  connected  with  Raja  Yoga,  the  best
and  simplest.  Though  there  are  seven  principles  in  man,  there  are  but  three  dis-
tinct Upadhis  (Bases),  in  each  of  which  his  Atma  may  work  independently  of  the
rest.  These  three  Upadhis  can  be  separated  by  an  Adept  without  killing  himself.
He  cannot  separate  the  seven  principles  from  each  other  without  destroying  his
constitution.

The  student  will  now  be  better  prepared  to  see  that  between  the
three  Upadhis  of  the  Raja  Yoga  and  its  Atma,  and  our  three  Upadhis,
Atma,  and  the  additional  three  divisions,  there  is  in  reality  but  very
little  difference.  Moreover,  as  every  Adept  in  Cis-Himalayan  or  Trans-
Himalayan  India,  of  the  Patanjali,  the  Aryasanga  or  the  Mahay  ana
schools,  has  to  become  a  Raja  Yogi,  he  must,  therefore,  accept  the
Taraka  Raja  classification  in  principle  and  theorj^  whatever  classifica-
tion he  resorts  to  for  practical  and  Occult  purposes.  Thus,  it  matters
very  little  whether  one  speaks  of  the  f/iree  Upadhis,  with  their  //iree

A

Aspects,  and  Atma,  the  eternal  and  immortal  synthesis,  or  calls  them
the  "Seven  Principles."

For  the  benefit  of  those  who  may  not  have  read,  or,  if  they  have,
may  not  have  clearly  understood,  in  Theosophical  writings,  the  doc-
trine of  the  septenary  Chains  of  Worlds  in  the  Solar  Cosmos,  the
teaching  is  briefly  as  follows.

1.  Everj'thing  in  the  metaphysical  as  in  the  phj^sical  Universe  is
septenary.  Hence  every  sidereal  body,  every  planet,  whether  visible
or  invisible,  is  credited  with  six  companion  Globes.  The  evolution  of
life  proceeds  on  these  seven  Globes  or  bodies,  from  the  First  to  the
Seventh,  in  Seven  Rounds  or  Seven  Cycles.

2.  These  Globes  are  formed  by  a  process  which  the  Occultists  call
the  "rebirth  of  Planetary  Chains  (or  Rings)."  When  the  Seventh  and
last  Round  of  one  of  such  Rings  has  been  entered  upon,  the  highest  or
first  Globe,  A,  followed  by  all  the  others  down  to  the  last,  instead  of
entering  upon  a  certain  time  of  rest — or  "Obscuration,"  as  in  the
previotis  Rounds — begins  to  die  out.  The  Planetary  Dissolution  (Pra-
laya)  is  at  hand,  and  its  hour  has  struck ;  each  Globe  has  to  transfer  its
life  and  energj'  to  another  planet.*

•  See  Diagram  II,  p.  195.


THE  TRANSMIGRATIONS  OF  THE   EGO.  183

3.  Our  Earth,  as  the  visible  representative  of  its  invisible  superior
fellow-globes,  its  "Lords"  or  "Principles,"  has  to  live,  as  have  the
others,  through  seven  Rounds.  During  the  first  three,  it  forms  and
consolidates;  during  the  fourth,  it  settles  and  hardens;  during  the  last
three,  it  gradually  returns  to  its  first  ethereal  form :  it  is  spiritualized,
so  to  say.

4.  Its   Humanity   develops   fully   only   in    the  Fourth— our  present

Round.     Up  to  this  Fourth  I.ife-Cycle,  it  is  referred  to  as  "Humanity"

only   for   lack   of   a   more   appropriate   term.      I^ike   the   grub   which

becomes  chrysalis  and  butterfly,  Man,  or  rather  that  which  becomes

Man,  passes   through   all   the   forms  and   kingdoms  during  the  First

Round,  and  through  all  the  human  shapes  during  the  two  following

Rounds.     Arrived  on  our  Earth  at  the  commencement  of  the  Fourth,  in

the  present  series  of  Life-Cycles  and  Races,  Man  is  the  first  form  that

appears  thereon,  being  preceded  only  by  the  mineral  and  vegetable

kingdoms— even  the  latter  having  to  develop  and  eo7iH?iue  its  further

evolution  through  man.     This  will  be  explained  in  Volume  II.     During

the  three  Rounds  to  come,  Humanity,  like  the  Globe  on  which  it  lives,

will  be  ever  tending  to  reassume  its  primeval  form,  that  of  a  Dhyan

Chohanic  Host.     Man  tends   to  become  a  God   and  th.Qn— God,  like

every  other  Atom  in  the  Universe,

Begiyining  so  early  as  with  the  Second  Round,  Evolution  proceeds  already
on  quite  a  different  plan.  It  is  only  during  the  first  Round  that  fHeavefilyJ
Man  becomes  a  human  being  on  Globe  A,  frebecomesj  a  mineral,  a  pla^it,
an  animal,  on  Globe  B  and  C,  etc.  7  he  process  changes  entirely  from  the
Second  Round;  but  you  have  learned  prudence  .  .  .  and  I  advise  you
to  say  nothing  before  the  time  for  saying  it  has  come.     .     .*

5.  Every  Life-Cycle  on  Globe  D  (our  Earth)t  is  composed  of  seven
Root-Races.  They  commence  with  the  ethereal  and  end  with  the
spiritual,  on  the  double  line  of  physical  and  moral  evolution— from  the
beginning  of  the  Terrestrial  Round  to  its  close.  One  is  a  "Planetary
Round"  from  Globe  A  to  Globe  G,  the  seventh;  the  other,  the  "Globe
Round,"  or  the  Terrestrial.

This  is  very  well  described  in  Esoteric  Buddhism,  and  needs  no  further
elucidation  for  the  time  being.

6.  The  First  Root-Race,  i.e.,  the  first  "Men"  on  earth  (irrespective  of
form),  were  the  progeny  of  the  "Celestial  Men,"  rightly  called  in  Indian

•  Extract  from  the  Teacher's  letters  on  various  topics.

+  We  are  not  concerned  with  the  other  Globes  in  this  work  except  incidentally.


-?v:j.  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

philosophy  the  "lyiinar  Ancestors"  or  the  Pitris,  of  which  there  are
seven  Classes  or  Hierarchies.  As  all  this  will  be  sufl&ciently  explained
in  the  following  sections  and  in  Volume  II,  no  more  need  be  said  of  it
here.

But  the  two  works  already  mentioned,  both  of  which  treat  of  sub-
jects from  the  Occult  doctrine,  need  particular  notice.  Esoteric  Buddh-
ism is  too  well  known  in  Theosophical  circles,  and  even  to  the  outside
world,  for  it  to  be  necessary  to  enter  at  length  upon  its  merits  here.  It
is  an  excellent  book,  and  has  done  still  more  excellent  work.  But  this
does  not  alter  the  fact  that  it  contains  some  mistaken  notions,  and  that
it  has  led  many  Theosophists  and  lay-readers  to  form  an  erroneous
conception  of  the  Eastern  Secret  Doctrine.  Moreover  it  seems,  per-
haps, a  little  too  materialistic.

Ma7i,  which  came  later,  was  an  attempt  to  present  the  archaic  doc-
trine from  a  more  ideal  standpoint,  to  translate  some  visions  in  and
from  the  Astral  I^ight,  to  render  some  teachings  partly  gathered  from
a  Master's  thoughts,  but  unfortunately  misunderstood.  This  work  also
speaks  of  the  evolution  of  the  early  Races  of  men  on  Earth,  and  con-
tains some  excellent  pages  of  a  philosophical  character.  But  so  far  it
is  only  an  interesting  little  mystical  romance.  It  has  failed  in  its
mission,  because  the  conditions  required  for  a  correct  translation  of
these  visions  were  not  present.  Hence  the  reader  must  not  wonder
if  our  volumes  contradict  these  earlier  descriptions  in  several
particulars.

Esoteric  cosmogony  in  general,  and  the  evolution  of  the  human
Monad  especially,  differ  so  essentially  in  these  two  books,  and  in  other
Theosophical  works  written  independently  by  beginners,  that  it  becomes
impossible  to  proceed  with  the  present  work  without  special  mention
of  these  two  earlier  volumes,  for  both  have  a  number  of  admirers —
Esoteric  Buddhism  especially.  The  time  has  arrived  for  the  explana-
tion of  some  matters  in  this  direction.  Mistakes  have  now  to  be
checked  by  the  original  teachings,  and  corrected.  If  one  of  the  said
works  has  too  pronounced  a  bias  toward  materialistic  Science,  the
other  is  decidedly  too  idealistic,  and  at  times  is  fantastic.

From  the  doctrine — rather  incomprehensible  to  Western  minds —
which  deals  with  the  periodical  Obscurations  and  successive  Rounds  of
the  Globes,  along  their  circular  Chains,  were  born  the  first  perplexities
and  misconceptions.  One  of  such  has  reference  to  the  "Fifth-"  and
even  "Sixth-Rounders."     Those  who  knew  that  a  Round  was  preceded


A   READJUSTMENT   OF   FACTS.  I85

and  followed  by  a  long  Pralaya,  a  pause  of  rest,  which  created  an  im-
passable gulf  between  two  Rounds  until  the  time  came  for  a  renewed
cycle   of  life,   could  not   understand   the   "fallacy"   of   talking  about
"■Fifth  and  KSzA'/i^-Rounders"  in  owr  Fourth  Round.     Gautama  Buddha,
it  was  held,  was  a  "Sixth-Rounder,"  Plato  and  some  other  great  philo-
sophers and  minds,  "Fifth-Rounders."     How  could  it  be?     One  Master
taught  and  affirmed  that  there  were  such  "Fifth- Rounders"  even  now
on  Earth ;  and  though  understood  to  say  that  mankind  was  5^et  in  the
Fourth  Round,  in  another  place  he  seemed  to  say  that  we  were  in  the
Fifth.      To   this   an    "apocalyptic  answer"    was    returned   by  another
Teacher:  "A  few  drops  of  rain  do  not  make  a  monsoon,  though  they
presage  it."     .     .     .     "No,  we  are  not  in  the  Fifth  Round,  but  Fifth
Round  men  have  been  coming  in  for  the  last  few  thousand  5'ears."
This  was  worse  than  the  riddle  of  the  Sphinx!     Students  of  Occultism
subjected  their  brains  to  the  wildest  work  of  speculation.     For  a  con-
siderable time  they  tried  to  outvie  CEdipus  and  reconcile  the  two  state-
ments.    And  as  the  Masters  kept  as  silent  as  the  stony  Sphinx  herself,
they  were  accused  of  "inconsistency,"  "contradiction,"  and  "discrep-
ancies."    But  the)^  were  simply  allowing  the  speculations  to  go  on,  in
order  to  teach  a  lesson  which  the  Western  mind  sorely  needs.     In  their
conceit  and  arrogance,  and  in  their  habit  of  materializing  every  meta-
physical conception  and  term,  without  allowing  any  margin  for  Eastern
metaphor  and   allegory',  the   Orientalists  had  made   a  jumble  of  the
Hindu  exoteric  philosophy,  and  the  Theosophists  were  now  doing  the
same  with  regard  to  Esoteric  teachings.     To  this  daj^  it  is  evident  that
the  latter  have  utterly  failed  to  understand  the  meaning  of  the  term
"  Fifth  and   Sixth-Rounders."      But    it  is   simply   this:    every   Round
brings  about  a  new  development,  and  even  an  entire  change,  in  the
mental,  psychic,  spiritual  and  physical  constitution  of  man ;  all  these
principles  evolving  on  an  ever  ascending  scale.     Hence  it  follows  that
those  persons  who,  like  Confucius  and   Plato,   belonged   psychically,
mentally  and  spiritually  to  the  higher  planes  of  evolution,  were  in  our
Fourth  Round  as  the  average  man  will  be  in  the  Fifth  Round,  whose
mankind  is  destined  to  find  itself,  on  this  scale  of  evolution,  immenseh'
higher  than  is  our  present  humanity.     Similarl}-,  Gautama  Buddha —
Wisdom  incarnate — was  still  higher  and  greater  than  all  the  men  we
have  mentioned  who  are  called  "Fifth-Rounders,"  and  so  Buddha  and
Shankaracharj^a   are  termed  "Sixth  Rounders,"  allegorically.     Hence
again  the  concealed  wisdom  of  the  remark,  pronounced  at  the  time


l86  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

"evasive" — "a  few  drops  of  rain  do  not  make  a  monsoon,  though  they
presage  it."

And  now  the  truth  of  the  following  remark,  in  Esoteric  Buddhism,
will  be  fully  apparent :

It  is  impossible,  whert  the  complicated  facts  of  an  entirely  unfamiliar  science  are
being  presented  to  untrained  minds  for  the  first  time,  to  put  them  forward  with  all
their  appropriate  qualifications  .  .  .  and  abnormal  developments.  .  .  .  We
must  be  content  to  take  the  broad  rules  first  and  deal  with  the  exceptions  after-
wards, and  especially  is  this  the  case  with  a  study,  in  connection  with  which  the
traditional  methods  of  teaching,  generally  followed,  aim  at  impressing  every  fresh
idea  on  the  memory  by  provoking  the  perplexity  it  at  last  relieves.

As  the  author  of  the  remark  was  himself,  as  he  says,  "an  untrained
mind"  in  Occultism,  his  own  inferences,  and  his  better  knowledge  of
modem  astronomical  speculations  than  of  archaic  doctrines,  led  him,
quite  naturally,  and  unconsciously  to  himself,  to  commit  a  few  mis-
takes of  detail  rather  than  of  any  "broad  rule."  One  such  will  now
be  noticed.  It  is  a  trifling  one,  still  it  is  calculated  to  lead  many  a
beginner  into  erroneous  conceptions.  But  as  the  mistaken  notions  of
the  earlier  editions  were  corrected  in  the  annotations  of  the  fifth
edition,  so  the  sixth  may  be  revised  and  perfected.  There  were  several
reasons  for  such  mistakes.  They  were  due  to  the  necessity,  under
which  the  Teachers  laboured,  of  giving  what  were  considered  as  "eva-
sive answers";  the  questions  being  too  persistently  pressed  to  be  left
unnoticed,  while,  on  the  other  hand,  they  could  07ily  be  partially
answered.  This  position  notwithstanding,  the  confession  that  "half
a  loaf  is  better  than  no  bread"  was  but  too  often  misunderstood,  and
hardly  appreciated  as  it  ought  to  have  been.  As  a  result  thereof
gratuitous  speculations  were  sometimes  indulged  in  by  the  European
lay-chelas.  Among  such  were  the  "Mystery  of  the  Eighth  Sphere"
in  its  relation  to  the  Moon,  and  the  erroneous  statement  that  two
of  the  superior  Globes  of  the  Terrestrial  Chain  were  two  of  our  well-
known  planets;  "besides  the  earth  .  .  .  there  are  07ily  two  other
worlds  of  our  chain  which  are  visible.    .    .    .    Mars  and  Mercury.    .    .    ."*

This  was  a  great  mistake.  But  the  blame  for  it  is  to  be  attached  as
much  to  the  vagueness  and  incompleteness  of  the  Master's  answer  as  to
the  question  of  the  learner  itself,  which  was  equally  vague  and  in-
definite.

It  was  asked:   "What  planets,  of  those  known  to  ordinary  Science,


*  Esoteric  Buddhism,  p.  136.


LIKE    QUESTIONS,    LIKE   ANSWERS.  1 87

besides  Mercury,  belong  to  our  system  of  worlds?"  Now  if  by  "system
of  worlds"  our  Terrestrial  Chain,  or  "String,"  was  intended,  in  the  mind
of  the  querist,  instead  of  the  "Solar  System  of  Worlds,"  as  it  should
have  been,  then  of  course  the  answer  was  likely  to  have  been  mis-
understood. For  the  reply  was:  ''Mars,  etc.,  and  four  other  planets  of
which  Astronomy  knows  nothiyig.  Neither  A,  B,  nor  Y,  Z,  are  k?iown,
7ior  can  they  be  seen  through  physical  means,  however  perfected."  This
is  plain :  (a)  Astronomy  as  yet  knows  nothing  in  reality  of  the
planets,  neither  the  ancient  ones,  nor  those  discovered  in  modern
times,  (^b)  No  companion  planets  from  A  to  Z,  i.e.,  no  upper  Globes  of
any  Chain  in  the  Solar  S^^stem,  can  be  seen;  with  the  exception  of
course  of  all  the  planets  which  come  foicrtk  in  number,  as  our  Earth,
the  Moon,  etc.,  etc.  As  to  Mars,  Mercury,  and  "the  four  other
planets,"  they  bear  a  relation  to  Earth  of  which  no  Master  or  high
Occultist  will  ever  speak,  much  less  explain  the  nature.

In  this  same  letter  the  impossibility  is  distinctly  stated  by  one  of  the
Teachers  to  the  author  of  Esoteric  Buddhism:  "  Try  to  understand  that
yori  are pjit ting  me  questions  pertaining  to  the  highest  Initiation ;  that  I  can
give  you  {only)  a  general  view,  bid  that  I  dare  not,  nor  will  I,  enter  into
details.  .  .  ."  Copies  of  all  the  letters  ever  received,  or  sent,  with
the  exception  of  a  few  private  ones — "ifi  which  there  was  no  teaching''
the  Master  saj^s — are  with  the  writer.  As  it  was  her  duty,  in  the
beginning,  to  answer  and  explain  certain  points  not  touched  upon,  it  is
more  than  likely  that,  notwithstanding  the  many  annotations  on  these
copies,  the  writer,  in  her  ignorance  of  English  and  her  fear  of  saying
too  much,  may  have  bungled  the  information  given.  She  takes  the
whole  blame  for  it  upon  herself  in  any  and  every  case.  But  it  is  impos-
sible for  her  to  allow  students  to  remain  any  longer  under  erron-
eous impressions,  or  to  believe  that  the  fault  lies  with  the  Esoteric
system.

t,et  it  then  be  now  distinctly  stated  that  the  theory  broached  is
impossible,  with  or  without  the  additional  evidence  furnished  by
modern  Astronomy.  Physical  Science  can  supply  corroborative,
though  still  very  uncertain,  evidence,  but  only  as  regards  heavenly
bodies  on  the  same  plane  of  materiality  as  our  objective  Universe.
Mars  and  Mercury,  Venus  and  Jupiter,  like  every  hitherto  discovered
planet,  or  those  still  to  be  discovered,  are  all,  per  se,  the  representa-
tives on  our  plane  of  such  Chains.  As  distinctl}-  stated  in  one  of  the
numerous  letters  of  Mr.  Sinnett's  Teacher:  '' there  are  other  and  innu-


l88  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

merable  manvantaric  Chains  of  Globes  which  bear  intelligent  Beings,  both
in  and  outside  our  Solar  System^  But  neither  Mars  nor  Mercury
belong  to  our  Chain.  They  are,  along  with  other  planets,  septenary
Units  in  the  great  host  of  Chains  of  our  System,  and  all  are  as  visible
as  their  upper  Globes  are  invisible.

If  it  is  still  argued  that  certain  expressions  in  the  Teacher's  letters
were  liable  to  mislead,  the  answer  comes :  Amen ;  so  they  v/ere.  The
author  of  Esoteric  Buddhism  understood  it  well  when  he  wrote  that
such  are  "the  traditional  modes  of  teaching  ...  by  provoking
the  perplexity,"  they  do  or  do  not  relieve — as  the  case  may  be.  At  all
events,  if  it  is  urged  that  this  might  have  been  explained  earlier,  and
the  true  nature  of  the  planets  given  out  as  they  now  are,  the  answer
comes  that:  It  was  not  found  expedient  to  do  so  at  the  time,  as  it
would  have  opened  the  way  to  a  series  of  additional  questions  which
could  yiever  be  answered  on  accozint  of  their  Esoteric  nature,  and  thus  would
only  become  embarrassing.  It  had  been  declared  from  the  first,  and
has  been  repeatedly  asserted  since:  (i)  That  no  Theosophist,  not  even  as
an  accepted  Chela,  let  alone  lay  students,  could  expect  to  have  the  secret
teachings  explained  to  him  thoroughly  and  completely,  before  he  had
irretrievably  pledged  himself  to  the  Brotherhood  and  passed  through  at  least
one  Initiatioji,  because  no  figures  and  numbers  could  be  given  to  the
public,  for  figures  and  numbers  are  the  key  to  the  Esoteric  system.
(2)  That  what  was  revealed  was  merely  the  Esoteric  lining  of  that
which  is  contained  in  almost  all  the  exoteric  scriptures  of  the  world-
religions — preeminently  in  the  Brahmanas  and  the  Upanishads  of  the
Vedas,  and  even  in  the  Ptiranas.  It  was  a  small  portion  of  what  is
divulged  far  more  fully  now  in  the  present  volumes ;  and  even  this  is
very  incomplete  and  fragmentary.

When  the  present  work  was  commenced,  the  writer,  feeling  sure  that
the  speculation  about  Mars  and  Mercury  was  a  mistake,  applied  to  the
Teachers  by  letter  iox  an  explanation  and  an  authoritative  version.  Both
came  in  due  time,  and  verbatim  extracts  from  these  are  now  given.

" It  is  quite  correct  that  Mars  is  in  a  state  of  obscuration  at

prescjit,  a7id  Merctiry  just  beginning  to  get  07ct  of  it.  Yozi  might  add  that
Venus  is  in  her  last  Round.  .  .  .  If  7ieither  Mercury  nor  Venus  have
satellites,  it  is  because  of  the  reasons  ....  and  also  because  Mars  has
two  satellites  to  which  he  has  no  right.  .  .  .  Phobos,  the  supposed
Hnner''  satellite,  is  no  satellite  at  all.  Thus,  this  remark  of  lo?ig  ago  by
Laplace  and  now  by  Faye  do  not  agree,  you  see.     (Read  "  Comptes  Rendus,''


AN   AUTHORITATIVE   LETTER.  189

Tome  XC,  p.  s^Q-J  Phobos  keeps  a  too  short  periodic  time,  and  therefore  there
*mtist  exist  S077ie  defect  in  the  ?nother  idea  of  the  theory,'  as  Fay e  justly
observes.  .  .  .  Again,  both  [Mars  and  Mercury']  are  septe?iary  Chains,
as  independent  of  the  Earth's  sidereal  lords  and  superiors  as  you  are  inde-
pendent of  the  '  principles'  of  Ddumling  {Tom  Thutnb'] — which  were  per-
haps his  six  brothers,  with  or  without  night-caps.  .  .  .  '  Gratification
of  curiosity  is  the  end  of  knozvledge  for  some  vieti,'  was  said  by  Bacon,  who
was  as  right  in  postulatirig  this  truism,  as  those  who  were  familiar  with  it
before  hi7)i,  were  right  in  hedgiyig  ofi^WiSDOufvm  K?iowledge,  and  traci^ig
limits  to  that  which  is  to  be  given  out  at  07ie  time.     .     .     .     Re^ne^nber :

linowledge  dwells

In  heads  replete  7vith  thoughts  of  other  men.
Wisdom  in  minds  attentive  to  their  own.     .    .     .

"You  can  never  impress  it  too  profoiuidly  07i  the  77ii7ids  of  those  to  whotn
you  impart  so7ne  of  the  Esoteric  teachi7igs."

Here  are  more  extracts  from  another  letter  written  by  the  same
authority.  This  time  it  is  in  answer  to  some  objections  laid  before  the
Teachers.  They  are  based  upon  extreniel}'  scientific,  and  as  futile,
reasonings  about  the  advisability  of  trj'ing  to  reconcile  the  Esoteric
theories  with  the  speculations  of  Modern  Science,  were  written  by
a  young  Theosophist  as  a  warning  against  the  "Secret  Doctrine,"
and  in  reference  to  the  same  subject.  He  had  declared  that  if  there
were  such  companion  Earths,  "they  must  be  onl)^  a  wee  bit  less
material  than  our  globe."  How  then  was  it  that  they  could  not  be
seen  ?    The  answer  was :

".  .  .  .  Were  psychic  aiid  spi7'itual  teachi7igs  77iore  fully  tinderstood,
it  would  becoi7ie  next  to  impossible  to  even  imagi)ie  such  a7i  i7ico7igruity .
U7iless  less  tro7ible  is  taken  to  reco7icile  the  irreco7ici table — that  is  to  say,  the
■metaphysical  and  spiritual  sciences  with  physical  or  7iatnral  philosophy,
'  natural'  bei7ig  a  synonym  to  them  [men  of  Scie7ice'\  of  that  matter  zvhich
falls  tnider  the  perceptio7i  of  their  corpo7-eal  senses — 7io  progress  can  be  really
achieved.  Our  Globe,  as  taught  from  the  first,  is  at  the  botto7n  of  the  arc  of
descent,  where  the  ?7iatter  of  ottr  perceptio7is  exhibits  itself  in  its  grossest

for7n Hence  it  07ily  sta7ids  to  reaso7i  that  the  Globes  which

overshadow  our  Earth,  77mst  be  on  differe7it  a7id  superior  planes,  hi  short,
as  Globes,  they  are  i7i  coadunition  but  7iot  i7i  CONSUBSTANTiality  zoith
our  Earth,  a7id  thtis  pertai7i  to  quite  a7iother  state  of  co7isciousness.  Our
pla7iet  {like  all  those  we  see)  is  adapted  to  the  peculiar  state  of  its  huma7i
stock,  that  state  which  e7iables  zcs  to  see  zvith  our  7iaked  eye  the  sidereal  bodies


I  go  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

which  are  coessential  7vith  our  terrene  plane  and  substance,  just  as  theu
respective  inhabitayits,  the  Jovians,  Martians  and  others,  can  perceive  our
little  world;  because  our  playies  of  consciousness,  differing  as  they  do  in
degree,  but  being  the  same  in  kind,  are  on  the  same  layer  of  differentiated
matter.  ....  What  I  wrote  was :  '  The  minor  Pralaya  concerns  only
our  little  Stri^igs  of  Globes.  (  We  called  Chains  "  Strings"  in  those  days  of
lip-confusion. J  .  .  .  To  such  a  Siring  our  Earth  belongs.'  This  ought
to  have  shown  plainly  that  the  other  planets  were  also  'Strings,''  or  Chains.
.  .  .  If  he  Sjneaning  the  objector^  would  perceive  even  the  dim  silhouette
of  one  of  such  'playlets'  on  the  higher  planes,  he  has  to  first  throw  off  eveti
the  thin  cloitds  of  the  astral  matter  that  stand  bctiveen  him  and  the  next
plane''

It  thus  becomes  patent  why  we  could  not  perceive,  even  with  the
help  of  the  best  telescopes,  that  which  is  outside  our  world  of  matter.
Those  alone,  whom  we  call  Adepts,  who  know  how  to  direct  their
mental  vision  and  to  transfer  their  consciousness — both  physical  and
psychic — to  other  planes  of  being,  are  able  to  speak  with  authority  on
such  subjects.     And  they  tell  us  plainly:

''Lead  the  life  necessary  for  the  acquisitio7i  of  such  kiiowledge  and
powers,^  and  Wisdom  will  come  to  you  natu?^ally.  Whenever  you  are  able  to
attune  your  consciousness  to  any  of  the  seven  chords  of 'Universal  Conscious-
ness' those  chords  that  riin  along  the  sounding-board  of  Kosmos,  vibrating
from  one  Eternity  to  another;  when  you  have  studied  thoroughly  the  'Music
of  the  spheres^  then  only  will  you  become  quite  free  to  share  your  know-
ledge with  those  with  7vhom  it  is  safe  to  do  so.  Meanwhile,  be  prudent.
Do  not  give  out  the  great  Truths  that  are  the  inheritance  of  the  future
Races,  to  our  present  generation.  Do  7iot  attempt  to  unveil  the  secret  of
Being  and  Non-Being  to  those  unable  to  see  the  hidden  meaning  of  Apollo' s
Heptachord,  the  lyre  of  the  radiant  god,  in  each  of  the  seve?i  strings  of
which  dwelleth  the  Spirit,  Soul  and  Astral  Body  of  the  Kos^nos,  whose
shell  only  has  now  fallen  into  the  hands  of  modern  Science.  .  .  .  Be
prudent,  we  say,  pi'udent  and  wise,  and  above  all  take  care  what  those  who
learn  from  you  believe  in ;  lest  by  deceiving  themselves  they  deceive  others,
.  .  .  for  such  is  the  fate  of  every  truth  ivith  which  men  ar'C,  as  yet,
unfamiliar.  .  .  .  Let  rather  the  Planetary  Chains  and  other  super-
and  sub-cosmic  mysteries  remain  a  dreamland  for  those  who  can  neither  see,
nor  yet  believe  that  others  can''

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  few  of  us  have  followed  the  wise  advice,
and  that  many  a  priceless  pearl,  many  a  jewel  of  wisdom,  has  been


THE   NUMBER   777.  I9I

cast  to  an  enem)'-,  unable  to  understand  its  value,  who  has  turned  round
and  rent  us.

''Let  7is  imagine'' — wrote  the  same  Master  to  his  two  "  lay  chelSs,"
as  he  called  the  author  of  Esoteric  Buddhism  and  another  gentleman,
his  co-student  for  some  time — ''let  us  imagiiie  that  our  earth  is  one  of

a  group  of  seven  planets  or  man-bearing  worlds \_The  '  seven

planets'  are  the  sacred  planets  of  a?itiquity,  and  are  all  septenary.^  Now
the  life-imptilse  reaches  A,  or  rather  that  which  is  desti?ied  to  become  A,  and
which  so  far  is  but  cosmic  dust  \_a  laya-centre^     .     .     ."  etc.

In  these  early  letters,  in  which  terms  had  to  be  invented  and  words
coined,  the  "  Rings"  very  often  became  "  Rounds,"  and  the  "  Rounds,"
"  Life-Cj'^cles,"  and  vice  versa.  To  a  correspondent  who  called  a  "Round"
a  "  World-Ring,"  the  Teacher  wrote :  "  I  believe  this  will  lead  to  a  further
confusio7i.  A  Round  we  are  agreed  to  call  the  passage  of  a.  Mo7iad from
Globe  A  to  Globe  G  or  Z.  .  .  The  '  World- Ri7ig'  is  correct.  .  .  Ad-
vise Mr.  .  .  .  strongly,  to  agree  upon  a  iiomenclature  before  goi?ig  any
further.'''

Notwithstanding  this  agreement,  man}^  mistakes,  owing  to  this  con-
fusion, crept  into  the  earliest  teachings.  The  "Races"  even  were
occasionally  mixed  up  with  the  "Rounds"  and  "Rings,"  and  led  to
similar  mistakes  in  Man:  Fragments  of  Forgotten  Tricth.  From  the
first  the  Master  had  written :

"Not  being  permitted  to  give  yoti  the  whole  trtith,  or  divulge  the  number
of  isolated  fractions,     .     .     .    I  am  unable  to  satisfy  you."

This  in  answer  to  the  questions:   "If  we  are  right,  then  the  total
existence  prior  to  the  man-period  is  637,"  etc.,  etc.     To  all  the  queries
relating  to  figures,  the  reply  was:  "  Try  to  solve  the  problein  of  "jyj  incar-
natioyis.    .     .    .     Though  I  arn  obliged  to  withhold  ififo?'mation,  .    .    .  yet  if
yo2i  should  work  out  the  proble?n  by  yourself  it  will  be  my  duty  to  tell  you  so."

But  it  never  was  so  worked  out,  and  the  results  were — never-ceasing
perplexity  and  mistakes.

Even  the  teaching  about  the  septenary'  constitution  of  the  sidereal
bodies  and  of  the  macrocosm — from  which  the  septenary  division  of
the  microcosm,  or  man — has  until  now  been  among  the  most  esoteric.
In  olden  times  it  used  to  be  divulged  only  at  Initiation  together  with  the
most  sacred  figures  of  the  cycles.  Now,  as  stated  in  one  of  the  Theo-
sophical  journals,*  the  i-evelation  of  the  whole  system  of  cosmogony
had  not  been  contemplated,  nor  even  thought  for  one  moment  possible,

•  Lucifer,  May,  1888.


ig2  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

at  a  time  when  a  few  scraps  of  information  were  sparingly  given  out,  in
answer  to  letters,  written  by  the  author  of  Esoteric  Buddhism,  in  which
he  put  forward  a  multiplicity  of  questions.  Among  these  were  ques-
tions on  such  problems  as  no  Master,  however  high  and  indepe?ide7it
he  might  be,  would  have  the  right  to  answer,  and  thus  divulge  to  the  world
the  most  time-honoured  and  archaic  of  the  jnysteries  of  the  ancient  college-
temples.  Hence  only  a  few  of  the  doctrines  were  revealed  in  their
broad  outlines,  while  details  were  constantly  withheld,  and  all  the
efforts  made  to  elicit  more  information  about  them  were  sj^stemati-
cally  eluded  from  the  beginning.  This  was  perfectly  natural.  Of
the  four  Vid3^as,  out  of  the  seven  branches  of  Knowledge  mentioned
in  the  Puranas — namely,  Yajna  Vidya,  the  performance  of  religious
rites  in  order  to  produce  certain  results;  Maha  Vidya,  the  great
(magic)  knowledge,  now  -degenerated  into  Tantrika  worship ;  Guhya
Vid)'a,  the  science  of  Mantras  and  their  true  rhythm  or  chanting,
of  mystical  incantations,  etc. ;  Atma  Vid3^a,  or  the  true  spiritual  and
divine  Wisdom, — it  is  only  the  last  which  can  throw  final  and  abso-
lute light  upon  the  teachings  of  the  three  first  named.  Without
the  help  of  Atma  Vidya,  the  other  three  remain  no  better  than  szir-
face  sciences,  geometrical  magnitudes  having  length  and  breadth,  but
no  thickness.  They  are  like  the  soul,  limbs  and  mind  of  a  sleeping
man,  capable  of  mechanical  motions,  of  chaotic  dreams  and  even  sleep-
walking, of  producing  visible  effects,  but  stimulated  only  by  instinc-
tual not  intellectual  causes,  least  of  all  by  fully  conscious  spiritual
impulses.  A  good  deal  can  be  given  out  and  explained  from  the  three
first-named  sciences.  But  unless  the  key  to  their  teachings  is  furnished
by  Atma  Vidya,  they  will  remain  for  ever  like  the  fragments  of  a
mangled  text-book,  like  the  adumbrations  of  great  truths,  dimly  per-
ceived by  the  most  spiritual,  but  distorted  out  of  all  proportion  by
those  who  would  nail  every  shadow  to  the  wall.

Then,  again,  another  great  perplexity  was  created  in  the  minds  of
students  by  the  incomplete  exposition  of  the  doctrine  of  the  evolution
of  the  Monads.  To  be  fully  realized,  both  this  process  and  that  of  the
birth  of  the  Globes  must  be  examined  far  more  from  their  metaphysical
aspect,  than  from  what  one  might  call  a  statistical  standpoint,  involving
figures  and  numbers  which  are  rarely  permitted  to  be  widely  used.
Unfortunately,  there  are  few  who  are  inclined  to  handle  these  doctrines
only  metaphysically.  Even  the  best  of  the  Western  writers  upon  our
doctrine  declares  in  his  work,  when  speaking  of  the  evolution  of  the


THE   MONADIC    EVOL,UTlONS.  iqj

Monads,  that  "on  pure  metaphysics  of  that  sort  we  are  not  now  en-
gaged." *  And  in  such  case,  as  the  Teacher  remarks  in  a  letter  to  him:
"  Why  this  preaching  of  our  doctrines,  all  this  iiphill  work  and  swimniiyig
*  in  adversum  flunieii' ?  Why  should  the  West  .  .  .  learn  .  .  .  front
the  East  .  .  .  that  which  can  never  meet  the  requirements  of  the  special
tastes  of  the  esthetics  r"'  And  he  draws  his  correspondent's  attention
"/(7  the  formidable  difficulties  encountered  by  us  \_the  Adepts^  in  every
attempt  we  make  to  explai^i  our  metaphysics  to  the  Western  mind."

And  well  he  may;  for  outside  of  metaphysics,  no  Occult  philosophy,
no  Esotericism  is  possible.  It  is  like  trying  to  explain  the  aspirations
and  affections,  love  and  hatred,  the  most  private  and  sacred  workings
in  the  soul  and  mind  of  a  living  man,  by  an  anatomical  description  of
the  thorax  and  brain  of  his  dead  body.

lyCt  us  now  examine  two  tenets  mentioned  above,  but  hardly  alluded
to  in  Esoteric  Buddhism,  and  supplement  them  as  far  as  lies  in  our
power.


ADDITIONAL  FACTS  AND  EXPLANATlONvS  CONCERNING  THE
GLOBEvS  AND  THE   MONADS.

Two  Statements  made  in  the  above  work  must  be  noticed  and  the
author's  opinions  quoted.     The  first  is  as  follows:

The  spiritual  Monads  ...  do  not  fully  complete  their  mineral  existence  on
Globe  A,  then  complete  it  on  Globe  B,  and  so  on.  They  pass  several  times  round
the  whole  circle  as  minerals,  and  then  again  several  times  round  as  vegetables,  and
several  times  as  animals.  We  purposely  refrain  for  the  present  from  going  into
figures,  etc.,  etct

That  was  a  wise  course  to  adopt  in  view  of  the  great  secrecy  main-
tained with  regard  to  figures  and  numbers.  This  reticence  is  now
partially  relinquished ;  but  it  would  perhaps  have  been  better  had  the
real  numbers  concerning  Rounds  and  evolutional  gyrations  been  either
entirely  divulged  at  the  time,  or  entirely  withheld.  Mr.  Sinnett  under-
stood this  difficulty  well  when  saying:

For  reasons  which  are  not  easy  for  the  outsider  to  divine,  the  possessors  of  Occult
knowledge  are  especially  reluctant  to  give  out  numerical  facts  relating  to  cos-
mogony, though  it  is  hard  for  the  uninitiated  to  understand  why  they  should
be  withheld.  J


•  Esoteric  Buddhism  (5th  ed.),  p.  46.  t  Op.  cit.,  p.  49.  X  Op.  cit.,  p.  140.

1 1


794  '"^HE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

That  there  were  such  reasons  is  evident.  Nevertheless,  it  is  to  this
reticence  that  most  of  the  confused  ideas  of  some  Eastern  as  well  as
Western  pupils  are  due.  The  difficulties  in  the  way  of  the  acceptance
of  the  particular  tenets  under  consideration  seemed  great,  just  because
of  the  absence  of  an)^  data  to  go  upon.  But  there  it  was.  For,  as  the
Masters  have  many  times  declared,  the  figures  belonging  to  the  Occult
calculations  cannot  be  given — outside  the  circle  of  pledged  Chelas,
and  not  even  these  can  break  the  rules.

To  make  things  plainer,  without  touching  upon  the  mathematical
aspects  of  the  doctrine,  the  teaching  given  ma}'  be  expanded  and  some
obscure  points  solved.  As  the  evolution  of  the  Globes  and  that  of  the
Monads  are  so  closely  interblended,  we  will  make  of  the  two  teachings
one.  In  reference  to  the  Monads,  the  reader  is  asked  to  bear  in  mind
that  Eastern  philosophy  rejects  the  Western  theological  dogma  of  a
newly-created  soul  for  every  baby  born,  a  dogma  as  unphilosophical  as
it  is  impossible  in  the  economy  of  Nature.  There  must  be  a  limited
number  of  Monads,  evolving  and  growing  more  and  more  perfect,
through  their  assimilation  of  manj^  successive  Personalities,  in  every
new  Manvantara.  This  is  absolutely  necessary  in  view  of  the  doctrines
of  Rebirth  and  Karma,  and  of  the  gradual  return  of  the  human  Monad
to  its  source — Absolute  Deity.  Thus,  although  the  hosts  of  more  or
less  progressed  Monads  are  almost  incalculable,  they  are  still  finite,  as
is  everything  in  this  Universe  of  differentiation  and  finiteness.

As  shown  in  the  double  diagram  of  the  human  Principles  and  the
ascending  Globes  of  the  World-Chains,*  there  is  an  eternal  concatena-
tion of  causes  and  effects,  and  a  perfect  analogy  which  runs  through,
and  links  together,  all  the  lines  of  evolution.  One  begets  the  other —
Globes  as  Personalities.     But,  let  us  begin  at  the  beginning.

The  general  outline  of  the  process  by  which  the  successive  Planetary
Chains  are  formed  has  just  been  given.  To  prevent  future  misconcep-
tions, some  further  details  maj^  be  offered  which  will  also  throw  light
on  the  history  of  Humanity  on  our  own  Chain,  the  progeny  of  that  of
the  Moon.

In  the  accompanying  diagram.  Fig.  i  represents  the  Lunar  Chain  of
seven  Globes  at  the  outset  of  its  seventh  or  last  Round;  while  Fig.  2
represents  the  Earth  Chain  which  will  be,  but  is  not  yet  in  existence.
The  seven  Globes  of  each  Chain  are  distinguished  in  their  cyclic  order

*  p.  177  supra.


TRANSFER   OF   UFE-ELEMENTS.


195


by  the  letters  A  to  G,  the  Globes  of  the  Earth  Chain  being  further
marked  by  a  cross  (  +  ),  the  symbol  of  the  Earth.

Diagram  II.


Fig.  I.


LUNAR  CHAIN.


EARTH  CHAIN.


Fig.  2.


o


V'


D


A+r


c+^


•>r^


••G-H


-  -  -  -  _s


^>;^F+


Now,  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  Monads  cycling  round  any
septenary  Chain  are  divided  into  seven  Classes  or  Hierarchies,  accord-
ing to  their  respective  stages  of  evolution,  consciousness  and  merit.
Let  us  follow,  then,  the  order  of  their  appearance  on  Globe  A,  in  the
First  Round.  The  time-spaces  between  the  appearances  of  these  Hier-
archies on  any  one  Globe  are  so  adjusted,  that  when  Class  7,  the  last,
appears  on  Globe  A,  Class  i,  the  first,  has  just  passed  on  to  Globe  B;
and  so  on,  step  by  step,  all  round  the  Chain.

Again,  in  the  Seventh  Round  of  the  Lunar  Chain,  when  Class  7,  the
last,  quits  Globe  A,  that  Globe,  instead  of  falling  asleep,  as  it  had  done
in  previous  Rounds,  begins  to  die  (to  go  into  its  Planetary  Pralaya);*
and  in  djdng  it  transfers  successively,  as  just  said,  its  principles,  or
life-elements  and  energy,  etc.,  one  after  the  other,  to  a  new  laya-centre,
which  commences  the  formation  of  Globe  A  of  the  Earth  Chain.  A
similar  process  takes  place  for  each  of  the  Globes  of  the  Lunar  Chain,
one  after  the  other,  each  forming  a  fresh  Globe  of  the  Earth  Chain.

•  Occultism  divides  the  periods  of  Rest  (Pralaj'a)  into  several  kinds :  there  is  the  Individual  Pralaya
of  each  Globe,  as  humanity  and  life  pass  on  to  the  next — seven  minor  Pralayas  in  each  Roiind ;  the
Planetary 'PraXa.ya. -when  seven  Rounds  are  completed;  the  ^b/ar  Pralaya,  when  the  whole  sj'Stem  is
at  an  end;  and  finally  the  Universal  Pralaya,  Maha  or  Brahma  Pralaya,  at  the  close  of  the  Age  of
Krahma.  These  are  the  chief  Pralayas  or  "  destruction  periods."  There  are  many  other  minor  ones,
but  with  these  we  are  not  concerned  at  present.


196  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Our  Moon  was  the  fourth  Globe  of  the  series,  and  was  on  the  same
plane  of  perception  as  our  Earth.  But  Globe  A  of  the  Lunar  Chain  is
not  fully  "dead,"  till  the  first  Monads  of  the  first  Class  have  passed
from  Globe  G  or  Z,  the  last  of  the  Lunar  Chain,  into  the  Nirvana
which  awaits  them  between  the  two  Chains;  and  similarly  for  all  the
other  Globes  as  stated,  each  giving  birth  to  the  corresponding  Globe
of  the  Earth  Chain.

Further,  when  Globe  A  of  the  new  Chain  is  ready,  the  first  Class  or
Hierarchy  of  Monads  from  the  Lunar  Chain  incarnate  upon  it  in  the
lowest  kingdom,  and  so  on  successively.  The  result  of  this  is,  that  it
is  only  the  first  Class  of  Monads  which  attains  the  human  state  of
development  during  the  first  Round,  since  the  second  Class,  on  each
Globe,  arriving  later,  has  not  time  to  reach  that  stage.  Thus  the
Monads  of  Class  2  reach  the  incipient  human  stage  only  in  the  Second
Round,  and  so  on  up  to  the  middle  of  the  Fourth  Round.  But  at  this
point — and  on  this  Fourth  Round  in  which  the  human  stage  will  be
fully  developed — the  "door"  into  the  human  kingdom  closes;  and
henceforward  the  number  of  "human"  Monads,  i.e..  Monads  in  the
human  stage  of  development,  is  complete.  For  the  Monads  which  had
not  reached  the  human  stage  by  this  point,  will,  owing  to  the  evolution
of  Humanity  itself,  find  themselves  so  far  behind,  that  they  will  reach
the  human  stage  only  at  the  close  of  the  Seventh  and  last  Round.
They  will,  therefore,  not  be  men  on  this  Chain,  but  will  form  the
Humanity  of  a  future  Manvantara,  and  be  rewarded  by  becoming
"men"  on  a  higher  Chain  altogether,  thus  receiving  their  Karmic  com-
pensation. To  this  there  is  but  one  solitary  exceptio?i,  and  for  very  good
reasons,  of  which  we  shall  speak  farther  on.  But  this  accounts  for  the
difference  in  the  Races.

It  thus  becomes  apparent  how  perfect  is  the  analogy  between  the
processes  of  Nature  in  the  cosmos  and  in  the  individual  man.  The
latter  lives  through  his  life-cycle,  and  dies.  His  higher  principles,
corresponding  in  the  development  of  a  Planetary  Chain  to  the  cycling
Monads,  pass  into  Devachan,  which  corresponds  to  the  Nirvana  and
states  of  rest  intervening  between  two  Chains.  The  man's  lower
principles  are  disintegrated  in  time,  and  are  used  by  Nature  again  for
the  formation  of  new  human  principles ;  the  same  process  also  taking
place  in  the  disintegration  and  formation  of  Worlds.  Analogy  is  thus
the  surest  guide  to  the  comprehension  of  the  Occult  teachings.

This  is  one  of  the  "seven  mysteries  of  the  moon,"  and  it  is  now


THE  MONADIC   HOST.  1 97

revealed.  The  seven  "mysteries"  are  called  by  the  Japanese  Yama-
booshis,  the  mystics  of  the  Lao-Tze  sect  and  the  ascetic  monks  of  Kioto,
the  Dzenodoo — the  "Seven  Jewels"  ;  only,  the  Japanese  and  the  Chinese
Buddhist  ascetics  and  Initiates  are,  if  possible,  even  more  reticent  in
giving  out  their  "Knowledge"  than  are  the  Hindiis.

But  the  reader  must  not  be  allowed  to  lose  sight  of  the  Monads,  and
must  be  enlightened  as  to  their  nature,  as  far  as  permitted,  without
trespassing  upon  the  highest  mysteries,  of  which  the  writer  does  not  in
an}^  way  pretend  to  know  the  last  or  final  word.

The  Monadic  Host  may  be  roughly  divided  into  three  great  Classes:

1.  The  most  developed  Monads — the  Lunar  Gods  or  "  Spirits,"  called,
in  India,  the  Pitris — whose  function  it  is  to  pass  in  the  First  Round
through  the  whole  triple  cycle  of  the  mineral,  vegetable  and  animal
kingdoms,  in  their  most  ethereal,  filmy,  and  rudimentary  forms,  in
order  to  clothe  themselves  in,  and  assimilate,  the  nature  of  the  newly
formed  Chain.  They  are  those  who  first  reach  the  human  form — if
there  can  be  any  form  in  the  realm  of  the  almost  subjective — on  Globe
A,  in  the  First  Round.  It  is  they,  therefore,  who  lead  and  represent
the  human  element  during  the  Second  and  Third  Rounds,  and  finally
evolve  their  shadows  at  the  beginning  of  the  Fourth  Round  for  the
second  Class,  or  those  who  come  behind  them.

2.  Those  Monads  that  are  the  first  to  reach  the  human  stage  during
the  three  and  a  half  Rounds,  and  to  become  "men."

3.  The  laggards,  the  Monads  which  are  retarded,  and  which  will  not
reach,  by  reason  of  Karmic  impediments,  the  human  stage  at  all  during
this  Cycle  or  Round,  save  one  exception  which  will  be  spoken  of
elsewhere,  as  already  promised.

We  are  forced  to  use  above  the  misleading  word  "  men,"  and  this  is  a
clear  proof  of  how  little  any  European  language  is  adapted  to  express
these  subtle   distinctions.

It  stands  to  reason  that  these  "men"  did  not  resemble  the  men  of
to-day,  either  in  form  or  nature.  Why  then,  it  may  be  asked,  call  them
"men"  at  all?  Because  there  is  no  other  term,  in  any  Western
language,  which  approximately  conveys  the  idea  intended.  The  word
"men"  at  least  indicates  that  these  beings  were  '' manus'''  thinking
entities,  however  they  differed  in  form  and  intellection  from  ourselves.
But  in  reality  they  were,  in  respect  of  spirituality  and  intellection,
rather  "gods"  than  "men."

The   same   difiiculty   of  language    is   met   with    in    describing  the


igS  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

"stages"  through  which  the  Monad  passes.  Metaphysically  speaking,
it  is  of  course  an  absurdity  to  talk  of  the  "development"  of  a  Monad,
or  to  say  that  it  becomes  "man."  But  any  attempt  to  preserve  meta-
phj^sical  accuracy  of  language,  in  the  use  of  such  a  tongue  as  the
English,  would  necessitate  at  least  three  extra  volumes  of  this  work,
and  would  entail  an  amount  of  verbal  repetition  which  would  be
wearisome  in  the  extreme.  It  stands  to  reason  that  a  Monad  cannot
either  progress  or  develop,  or  even  be  affected  by  the  changes  of  state
it  passes  through.  //  is  not  of  this  world  or  plane,  and  may  only  be  com-
pared to  an  indestructible  star  of  divine  light  and  fire,  thrown  down  on
to  our  Earth,  as  a  plank  of  salvation  for  the  Personalities  in  which  it
indwells.  It  is  for  the  latter  to  cling  to  it ;  and  thus  partaking  of  its
divine  nature,  obtain  immortality.  Left  to  itself  the  Monad  will  cling
to  no  one;  but,  like  the  plank,  be  drifted  away  to  another  incarnation,
by  the  unresting  current  of  evolution.

Now  the  evolution  of  the  exterjial  form,  or  body,  round  the  astral,  is
produced  by  the  terrestrial  forces,  just  as  in  the  case  of  the  lower
kingdoms;  but  the  evolution  of  the  internal,  or  real,  Man  is  purely
spiritual.  It  is  now  no  more  a  passage  of  the  impersonal  Monad
through  many  and  various  forms  of  matter — endowed  at  best  with
instinct  and  consciousness  on  quite  a  different  plane — as  in  the  case  of
external  evolution,  but  a  journey  of  the  "Pilgrim-Soul"  through
various  states  of  not  only  matter,  but  of  self-consciousness  and  self-per-
ception, or  of  perception  from  apperception.

The  Monad  emerges  from  its  state  of  spiritual  and  intellectual
unconsciousness ;  and,  skipping  the  first  two  planes — too  near  the
Absolute  to  permit  of  any  correlation  with  anything  on  a  lower  plane
— it  gets  directly  into  the  plane  of  Mentality.  But  there  is  no  plane  in
the  whole  universe  with  a  broader  margin,  or  a  wider  field  of  action,  in
its  almost  endless  gradations  of  perceptive  and  apperceptive  qualities,
than  this  plane,  which  has  in  its  turn  an  appropriate  smaller  plane  for
every  "form,"  from  the  Mineral  Monad  up  to  the  time  when  that
Monad  blossoms  forth  by  evolution  into  the  Divine  Monad.  But  all
the  time  it  is  still  one  and  the  same  Monad,  differing  only  in  its  incar-
nations, throughout  its  ever  succeeding  cycles  of  partial  or  total
obscuration  of  spirit,  or  partial  or  total  obscuration  of  matter — two
polar  antitheses — as  it  ascends  into  the  realms  of  mental  spirituality,  or
descends  into  the  depths  of  materiality.

To  return   to  Esoteric  Buddhism.      The   second   statement   is  with


THE  ELEMENTAL  KINGDOMS.  199

regard  to  the  enormous  period  intervening  between  the  mineral  epoch,
on  Globe  A,  and  the  man  epoch,  the  term  "man  epoch"  being  used
because  of  the  necessity  of  giving  a  name  to  that  fourth  kingdom
which  follows  the  animal,  though  in  truth  the  "man"  on  Globe  A,
during  the  First  Round,  is  no  man,  but  only  his  prototype,  or  dimen-
sionless  image,  from  the  astral  regions.     The  statement  runs  as  follows :

The  full  development  of  the  mineral  epoch  on  Globe  A,  prepares  the  way  for  the
vegetable  development,  and,  as  soon  as  this  begins,  the  mineral  life-impulse  over-
:flows  into  Globe  B.  Then,  when  the  vegetable  development  on  Globe  A  is  com-
plete and  the  animal  development  begins,  the  vegetable  life-impulse  overflows  to
Globe  B,  and  the  mineral  impulse  passes  on  to  Globe  C.  Then  finally  comes  the
human  life  impulse  on  Globe  A.*

And  so  it  goes  on  for  three  Rounds,  when  it  slackens,  and  finally
stops  at  the  threshold  of  our  Globe,  in  the  Fourth  Round ;  because  the
human  period  (of  the  true  physical  men  to  be),  the  seventh,  is  now
reached.     This  is  evident,  for  as  said  :

.  .  .  There  are  processes  of  evolution  which  precede  the  mineral  kingdom,
^nd  thus  a  wave  of  evolution,  indeed  several  waves  of  evolution,  precede  the
mineral  wave  in  its  progress  round  the  spheres. t

And  now  we  have  to  quote  from  another  article,  "The  Mineral
Monad,"  in  Five  Yea7-s  of  Thcosophy :

There  are  seven  kingdoms.  The  first  group  comprises  three  degrees  of  elemen-
tals,  or  nascent  centres  of  forces — from  the  first  stage  of  differentiation  of  [from]
Mulaprakriti  [or  rather  Pradhana,  Primordial  Homogeneous  Matter]  to  its  third
■degree — i.e.,  from  full  unconsciousness  to  semi-perception;  the  second  or  higher
group  embraces  the  kingdoms  from  vegetable  to  man;  the  mineral  kingdom  thus
forming  the  central  or  turning  point  in  the  degrees  of  the  "Monadic  Essence,"  con-
sidered as  an  evolving  energy.  Three  stages  [sub-physical]  on  the  elemental  side;
the  mineral  kingdom ;  three  stages  on  the  objective  physical:^  side — these  are  the
[first  or  preliminary]  seven  links  of  the  evolutionary  chain. §

"Preliminar>'"  because  thej^  are  preparator5%  and  though  belonging
in  fact  to  the  natural,  they  would  be  more  correctly  described  as  the
sub-natural  evolittion.  This  process  makes  a  halt  in  its  stages  at  the
third,  at  the  threshold  of  the  fourth  stage,  when  it  becomes,  on  the
plane  of  natural  evolution,  the  first  really  manward  stage,  thus  forming

•  pp.  48, 49.

t  Ibid.

X  "Physical"  here  means  differentiated  for  cosmical  purposes  and  work;  that  "physical  side,"
nevertheless,  if  objective  to  the  apperception  of  beings  from  other  planes,  is  yet  quite  subjective  to  us
on  our  plane.

\  pp.  276  el  seq.


200  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

with  the  three  elemental  kingdoms,  the  ten,  the  Sephirothal  number.

It  is  at  this  point  that  begins:

A  descent  of  spirit  into  matter  equivalent  to  an  ascent  in  physical  evolution;  a
reascent  from  the  deepest  depths  of  materiality  (the  mineral)  towards  its  status  quo
ante,  with  a  corresponding  dissipation  of  concrete  organism — up  to  Nirvana,  the
vanishing  point  of  differentiated  matter.*

Therefore  it  becomes  evident,  why  that  which  is  pertinently  called
in  Esoteric  Buddhism  "wave  of  evolution,"  and  "mineral,  vegetable,
animal  and  man-impulse,"  stops  at  the  door  of  our  Globe,  at  its
Fourth  Cycle  or  Round.  It  is  at  this  point  that  the  Cosmic  Monad
(Buddhi)   will   be  wedded   to,  and   become  the  vehicle  of,  the  Atmic

A

Ray;  i.e.,  Buddhi  will  awaken  to  an  apperception  of  it  (Atman),  and
thus  enter  on  the  first  step  of  a  new  septenary  ladder  of  evolution,
which  will  lead  it  eventuallj^  to  the  tenth,  counting  from  the  lowest
upwards,  of  the  Sephirothal  Tree,  the  Crown.

Everything  in  the  Universe  follows  analogy.  "As  above,  so  below";
Man  is  the  microcosm  of  the  Universe.  That  which  takes  place  on  the
spiritual  plane,  repeats  itself  on  the  cosmic  plane.  Concretion  follows
the  lints  of  abstraction;  corresponding  to  the  highest  must  be  the
lowest;  the  material  to  the  spiritual.  Thus,  corresponding  to  the
Sephirothal  Crown,  or  Upper  Triad,  there  are  the  three  elemental
kingdoms,  which  precede  the  mineral, f  and  which,  using  the  language
of  the  Kabalists,  answer  in  the  cosmic  differentiation  to  the  Worlds  of
Form  and  Matter,  from  the  Super-Spiritual  to  the  Archetypal.

Now  what  is  a  Monad?  And  what  relation  does  it  bear  to  an  Atom?
The  following  reply  is  based  upon  the  explanations  given  in  answer
to  these  questions  in  the  above-cited  article,  "The  Mineral  Monad,"
written  by  the  author.     To  the  second  question  it  is  answered:

None  whatever  to  the  atom  or  molecule  as  at  present  existing  in  the  scientific  con-
ception. It  can  neither  be  compared  with  the  microscopic  organisms,  once  classed
among  polygastric  infusoria,  and  now  regarded  as  vegetable,  and  classed  among
algae;  nor  is  it  quite  the  monas  of  the  Peripatetics.  Physically  or  constitutionally
the  Mineral  Monad  differs,  of  course,  from  the  Human  Monad,  which  is  not
physical,  nor  can  its  constitution  be  rendered  by  chemical  symbols  and  elements. |

In  short,  as  the  Spiritual  Monad  is  One,  Universal,  Boundless  and
Impartite,  whose  Rays,  nevertheless,  form  what  we,  in  our  ignorance,
call  the  "Individual  Monads"  of  men,  so  the  Mineral  Monad — being  at
the  opposite  curve  of  the  circle — is  also  One,  and  from  it  proceed  the

*  Ibid.  t  See  diagram,  op.  cU.,  p.  277.  t  Op.  cit.,  pp.  273-4.


MONADS   AND   ATOMS.  20I

countless  physical   atoms,   which   Science   is   beginning  to   regard   as

individualized.

Otherwise  how  could  one  account  for,  and  explain  mathematically,  the  evolu-
tionary and  spiral  progress  of  the  four  kingdoms?  The  Monad  is  the  combination
of  the  last  two  principles  in  man,  the  sixth  and  the  seventh,  and,  properly  speaking,
the  term  "Human  Monad"  applies  only  to  the  Dual  Soul  (Atma-Buddhi),  not  to  its
highest  spiritual  vivifying  principle,  Atma,  alone.  But  since  the  Spiritual  Soul,  if
divorced  from  the  latter  (Atma),  could  have  no  existence,  no  being,  it  has  thus  been
called.  .  .  .  Now  the  Monadic,  or  rather  Cosmic,  Essence,  if  such  a  term  be
permitted,  in  the  mineral,  vegetable  and  animal,  though  the  same  throughout  the
series  of  cycles,  from  the  lowest  elemental  up  to  the  Deva  kingdom,  yet  differs  in  the
scale  of  progression.  It  would  be  very  misleading  to  imagine  a  Monad  as  a  separate
Entity,  trailing  its  slow  way  in  a  distinct  path^through  the  lower  kingdoms,  and
after  an  incalculable  series  of  transformations  flowering  into  a  human  being;  in
short,  that  the  Monad  of  a  Humboldt  dates  back  to  the  Monad  of  an  atom  of  horn-
blende. Instead  of  saj-ing  a  "Mineral  Monad,"  the  more  correct  phraseology  in
Phj'sical  Science,  which  differentiates  every  atom,  would  of  course  have  been  to
call  it  "the  Monad  manifesting  in  that  form  of  Prakriti  called *the  Mineral  King-
dom." The  atom,  as  represented  in  the  ordinary  scientific  hypothesis,  is  not  a
particle  of  something,  animated  by  a  psychic  something,  destined  after  seons  to
blossom  into  a  man.  But  it  is  a  concrete  manifestation  of  the  Universal  Energy,
which  itself  has  not  yet  become  individualized ;  a  sequential  manifestation  of  the
one  Universal  Monas.  The  Ocean  of  Matter  does  not  divide  into  its  potential  and
constituent  drops,  until  the  sweep  of  the  life-impulse  reaches  the  evolutionarj'  stage
of  man-birth.  The  tendency  towards  segregation  into  individual  Monads  is  gradual,
and  in  the  higher  animals  comes  almost  to  the  point.  The  Peripatetics  applied  the
word  Monas  to  the  whole  Kosmos,  in  the  pantheistic  sense;  and  the  Occultists,
while  accepting  this  thought  for  convenience  sake,  distinguish  the  progressive
stages  of  the  evolution  of  the  concrete  from  the  abstract,  by  terms  of  which  the
"Mineral,  Vegetable,  Animal  Monad,"  etc.,  are  examples.  The  term  merely  means
that  the  tidal  wave  of  spiritual  evolution  is  passing  through  that  arc  of  its  circuit.
The  "Monadic  Essence"  begins  to  imperceptibly  differentiate  towards  individual
consciousness  in  the  vegetable  kingdom.  As  the  Monads  are  uncompounded
things,  as  correctly  defined  by  Leibnitz,  it  is  the  Spiritual  Essence  which  vivifies
them  in  their  degrees  of  differentiation,  which  properly  constitutes  the  Monad — not
the  atomic  aggregation,  which  is  only  the  vehicle  and  the  substance  through  which
thrill  the  lower  and  the  higher  degrees  of  intelligence.*

Leibnitz  conceived  of  the  Monads  as  elementary  and  indestructible
units,  endowed  with  the  power  of  giving  and  receiving  with  respect  to
other  units,  and  thus  of  determining  all  spiritual  and  physical  pheno-
mena. It  is  he  who  invented  the  term  apperception,  which  together
with    nerve-    (not    perception,    but    rather)    sensation,    expresses    the

•  op.  cU.,  p.  274-5.


202  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

State  of    the  Monadic  consciousness  through  all  the  kingdoms  up  to
Man.

A

Thus  it  may  be  wrong,  on  strictly  metaphysical  lines,  to  call  Atma-
Buddhi  a  Monad,  since  in  the  materialistic  view  it  is  dual  and  therefore
compound.  But  as  Matter  is  Spirit,  and  vice  versa ;  and  since  the  Uni-
verse and  the  Deity  which  informs  it  are  unthinkable  apart  from  each
other;  so  in  the  case  of  Atma-Buddhi.  The  latter  being  the  vehicle  of
the  former,  Buddhi  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  Atma,  as  Adam-
Kadmon,  the  Kabalistic  I^ogos,  does  to  Ain  Suph,  or  Mulaprakriti  ta
Parabrahman.

And  now  a  few  words  more  on  the  Moon.

What,  it  may  be  asked,  are  the  "lyunar  Monads,"  just  spoken  of?
The  description  of  the  seven  Classes  of  Pitris  will  come  later,  but  now
some  general  explanations  may  be  given.  It  must  be  plain  to  everyone
that  they  are  Monads,  who,  having  ended  their  lyife-Cycle  on  the  Lunar
Chain,  which  is  inferior  to  the  Terrestrial  Chain,  have  incarnated  on  the
latter.  But  there  are  some  further  details  which  may  be  added,  though
they  border  too  closely  on  forbidden  ground  to  be  treated  of  fully.
The  last  word  of  the  mystery  is  divulged  only  to  Adepts,  but  it  may  be
stated  that  our  satellite  is  only  the  gross  body  of  its  invisible  principles.
Seeing  then  that  there  are  seven  Earths,  so  there  are  seven  Moons,  the
last  alone  being  visible;  the  same  for  the  Sun,  whose  visible  body  is
called  a  Maya,  a  reflection,  just  as  man's  body  is.  "  The  real  Sun  and
the  real  Moon  are  as  invisible  as  the  real  viafi,''  says  an  Occult  maxim.

And  it  may  be  remarked,  en  passant,  that  those  Ancients  were  not  so
foolish  after  all  who  first  started  the  idea  of  "Seven  Moons."  For
though  this  conception  is  now  taken  solely  as  an  astronomical  measure
of  time,  in  a  very  materialized  form,  yet  underlying  the  husk  there  can
still  be  recognized  the  traces  of  a  profoundly  philosophical  idea.

In  reality  the  Moon  is  the  satellite  of  the  Earth  in  one  respect  only,
viz.,  that  physically  the  Moon  revolves  round  the  Earth.  But  in  every
other  respect,  it  is  the  Earth  which  is  the  satellite  of  the  Moon,  and  not
vice  versa.  Startling  as  the  statement  may  seem,  it  is  not  without  con-
firmation from  scientific  knowledge.  It  is  evidenced  by  the  tides,  by
the  cyclic  changes  in  many  forms  of  disease,  which  coincide  with  the
lunar  phases;  it  can  be  traced  in  the  growth  of  plants,  and  is  very
marked  in  the  phenomena  of  human  conception  and  gestation.  The
importance  of  the  Moon  and  its  influence  on  the  Earth  were  recognized
in  every  ancient  religion,  notably  the  Jewish,  and  have  been  remarked


THE    LUNAR   ANCESTORS.  203

by  many  observers  of  psychical  and  physical  phenomena.  But,  so  far
as  Science  knows,  the  Earth's  action  on  the  Moon  is  confined  to  the
physical  attraction,  which  causes  her  to  circle  in  her  orbit.  And  should
an  objector  insist,  that  this  fact  alone  is  sufficient  evidence  that  the
Moon  is  truly  the  Earth's  satellite  on  other  planes  of  action,  one  may
reply  by  asking  whether  a  mother,  who  walks  round  and  round  her
child's  cradle,  keeping  watch  over  the  infant,  is  the  subordinate  of  her
child  or  dependent  upon  it?  Though  in  one  sense  she  is  its  satellite,
yet  she  is  certainly  older  and  more  fully  developed  than  the  child
she  watches.

It  is,  then,  the  Moon  that  plays  the  largest  and  most  important  part,
as  well  in  the  formation  of  the  Earth  itself,  as  in  the  peopling  thereof
with  human  beings.  The  Eunar  Monads,  or  Pitris,  the  ancestors  of
man,  become  in  reality  man  himself.  They  are  the  Monads,  who  enter
on  the  cycle  of  evolution  on  Globe  A,  and  who,  passing  round  the
Chain  of  Globes,  evolve  the  human  form,  as  has  just  been  shown.  At
the  beginning  of  the  human  stage  of  the  Fourth  Round  on  this  Globe,
they  "ooze  out"  their  astral  doubles,  from  the  ''ape-like"  forms  which
they  had  evolved  in  the  Third  Round.  And  it  is  this  subtle,  finer  form,
which  serves  as  the  model  round  which  Nature  builds  physical  man.
These  Monads,  or  Divine  Sparks,  are  thus  the  Lunar  Ancestors,  the
Pitris  themselves;  for  these  Eunar  Spirits  have  to  become  "men,"  in
order  that  their  Monads  may  reach  a  higher  plane  of  activity  and  self-
consciousness,  i.e.,  the  plane  of  the  Manasa-Putras,  those  who  endow
the  "senseless"  shells,  created  and  informed  by  the  Pitris,  with  "mind,"
in  the  latter  part  of  the  Third  Root-Race.

In  the  same  way,  the  Monads,  or  Egos,  of  the  men  of  the  Seventh
Round  of  our  Earth,  after  our  own  Globes  A,  B,  C,  D,  etc.,  parting
with  their  life-energ}%  will  have  informed,  and  thereby  called  to  life,
other  laya-centres,  destined  to  live  and  act  on  a  still  higher  plane  of
being — in  the  same  way  will  the  Terrene  Ancestors  create  those  who
will  become  their  superiors.

It  now  becomes  plain,  that  there  exists  in  Nature  a  triple  evolu-
tionary scheme  for  the  formation  of  the  three  periodical  Upadhis;  or
rather  three  separate  schemes  of  evolution,  which  in  our  system  are
inextricably  interwoven  and  interblended  at  every  point.  These  are
the  Monadic  (or  Spiritual),  the  Intellectual,  and  the  Physical  Evolu-
tions. These  three  are  the  finite  aspects,  or  the  reflections  on  the
field  of  Cosmic  Illusion,  of  Atma,  the  seventh,  the  One  Reality.


204  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

1.  The  Monadic,  as  the  name  implies,  is  concerned  with  the  growth
and  development  into  still  higher  phases  of  activity  of  the  Monads,  in
conjunction  with:

2.  The  Intellectual,  represented  by  the  Manasa-Dhyanis  (the  Solar
Devas,  or  the  Agnishvatta  Pitris),  the  "givers  of  intelligence  and  con-
sciousness" to  man,  and:

3.  The  Physical,  represented  by  the  Chhayas  of  the  Lunar  Pitris,
round  which  Nature  has  concreted  the  present  physical  body.  This
body  serves  as  the  vehicle  for  the  "growth,"  to  use  a  misleading  word,
and  the  transformations — through  Manas,  and  owing  to  the  accumula-
tion of  experiences — of  the  Finite  into  the  Infinite,  of  the  Transient
into  the  Eternal  and  Absolute.

Each  of  these  three  systems  has  its  own  laws,  and  is  ruled  and
guided  by  different  sets  of  the  highest  Dhyanis  or  Logoi.  Each  is
represented  in  the  constitution  of  Man,  the  Microcosm  of  the  great
Macrocosm ;  and  it  is  the  union  of  these  three  streams  in  him,  which
makes  him  the  complex  being  he  now  is.

Nature,  the  physical  evolutionary  Power,  could  never  evolve  Intelli-
gence unaided  ;  she  can  only  create  "senseless  forms,"  as  will  be  seen
in  our  Anthropogenesis.  The  Eunar  Monads  cannot  progress,  for  they
have  not  yet  had  sufl&cient  touch  with  the  forms  created  by  "  Nature,"
to  allow  of  their  accumulating  experiences  through  its  means.  It  is
the  Manasa-Dhyanis  who  fill  up  the  gap,  and  they  represent  the  evolu-
tionary power  of  Intelligence  and  Mind,  the  link  between  Spirit  and
Matter — in  this  Round.

Also  it  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  Monads  which  enter  upon  the
evolutionary  cycle  upon  Globe  A,  in  the  first  Round,  are  in  very  dif-
ferent stages  of  development.  Hence  the  matter  becomes  somewhat
complicated.     Eet  us  recapitulate.

The  most  developed,  the  Eunar  Monads,  reach  the  human  germ-
stage  in  the  First  Round;  become  terrestrial,  though  very  ethereal,
human  beings  towards  the  end  of  the  Third  Round,  remaining  on  the
Globe  through  the  "obscuration"  period,  as  the  seed  for  future  man-
kind in  the  Fourth  Round,  and  thus  become  the  pioneers  of  Humanity
at  the  beginning  of  this,  the  present  Fourth  Round.  Others  reach  the
human  stage  only  during  later  Rounds,  i.e.,  in  the  second,  third  or  first
half  of  the  Fourth  Round.  And  finally  the  most  retarded  of  all — i.e.,
those  still  occupying  animal  forms  after  the  middle  turning-point  of
the  Fourth  Round — wnll  not  become  men  at  all  during  this  Manvantara.


THE  FOURTH   GLOBE.  .  205

They  vvill  reach  to  the  verge  of  Humanity  only  at  the  close  of  the
Seventh  Round,  to  be,  in  their  turn,  ushered  into  a  new  Chain,  after
Pralaya,  by  older  pioneers,  the  progenitors  of  Humanity,  or  the
Seed-Humanity  (Shishta),  viz.,  the  men  who  will  be  at  the  head  of
all  at  the  end  of  these  Rounds.

The  student  scarcely  needs  any  further  explanation  on  the  part  played
by  the  Fourth  Globe  and  the  Fourth  Round  in  the  scheme  of  evolution.

From  the  preceding  diagrams,  which  are  applicable,  mutatis  mutandis,
to  Rounds,  Globes  or  Races,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  fourth  member  of
a  ::eries  occupies  a  unique  position.  Unlike  the  others,  the  Fourth  has
no  "sister"  Globe  on  the  same  plane  as  itself,  and  it  thus  forms  the
fulcrum  of  the  "balance"  represented  by  the  whole  Chain.  It  is  the
sphere  of  final  evolutionary  adjustments,  the  world  of  the  Karmic
scales,  the  Hall  of  Justice,  where  the  balance  is  struck  which  deter-
mines the  future  course  of  the  Monad  during  the  remainder  of  its  in-
carnations in  the  Cycle.  And  therefore  is  it  that,  after  this  central
turning-point  has  been  passed  in  the  Great  Cycle — i.e.,  after  the  middle
point  of  the  Fourth  Race  in  the  Fourth  Round  on  our  Globe — no  more
Monads  can  enter  the  human  kingdom.  The  door  is  closed  for  this
Cycle,  and  the  balance  struck.  For  were  it  otherwise — had  there  been
a  new  soul  created  for  each  of  the  countless  milliards  of  human  beings
that  have  passed  away,  and  had  there  been  no  reincarnation — it  would
become  difficult  indeed  to  provide  room  for  the  disembodied  "spirits";
nor  could  the  origin  and  cause  of  suffering  ever  be  accounted  for.  It  is
the  ignorance  of  the  Occult  tenets,  and  the  enforcement  of  false  con-
ceptions under  the  guise  of  religious  education,  which  have  created
Materialism  and  Atheism  as  a  protest  against  the  asserted  divine  order
of  things.

The  only  exceptions  to  the  rule  just  .stated  are  the  "dumb  races,"
whose  Monads  are  already  within  the  human  stage,  in  virtue  of  the
fact  that  these  "animals"  are  later  than,  and  even  half  descended  from,
man ;  their  last  descendants  being  the  anthropoid  and  other  apes.
These  "human  presentments"  are  in  truth  only  the  distorted  copies  of
the  early  humanity.  But  this  will  receive  full  attention  in  the  next
volume.

As  the  Commentary,  broadh^  rendered,  says:

/.  Every  Form.  07i  earth,  and  every  Speck  \atom'\  ifi  Space  strives  in  its
efforts  towards  self-formation  to  follow  the  model  placed  for  it  in  the
''^Heavenly  Man.''     .     .     .     Its  (the  atom's)  involution  and  evolution,  its


206  tHE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

external  and  hiternal  growth  and  development,  have  atc  one  and  the  same
object — Ma7i ;  Man,  as  the  highest  physical  a7id  ultimate  form  on  this
Earth;  the  " Monad, ^''  in  its  absolute  totality  ayid  awakened  condition — as
the  cubnination  of  the  divine  incarnations  on  Earth.

2.  The  Dhyanis  \_Pitris']  are  those  who  have  evolved  their  Bhiita  \_Doubles^
from  themselves,  which  Ritpa  \^Forni\  has  become  the  vehicle  of  Moyiads
\_Seventh  and  Sixth  principles^  that  had  completed  their  cycle  of  trans-
migration in  the  three  preceding  Kalpas  \^Rounds~\.  Then,  they  \the  Astral
Doubles']  became  the  men  of  the  first  Human  Race  of  the  Round.  But  they
were  not  complete,  and  were  senseless.

This  will  be  explained  in  the  sequel.  Meanwhile  man — or  rather
his  Monad — has  existed  on  Earth  from  the  very  beginning  of  this
Round.  But,  up  to  our  own  Fifth  Race,  the  external  shapes  which
covered  those  divine  Astral  Doubles,  have  changed  and  consolidated
with  every  sub-race;  the  form  and  physical  structure  of  the  fauna
changing  at  the  same  time,  as  they  had  to  be  adapted  to  the  ever-
changing  conditions  of  life  on  this  Globe,  during  the  geological  periods
of  its  formative  cycle.  And  thus  will  they  go  on  changing  with  every
Root- Race,  and  every  chief  sub-race,  down  to  the  last  one  of  the  Seventh
in  this  Round.

J.  The  inner,  now  concealed,  vian,  was  then  [_in  the  beginnings]  the
external  man.  The  progeny  of  the  Dhyanis  \_Pitris\  he  was  ''the  son  like
ti?ito  his  father.'"  Like  the  lotus,  whose  external  shape  assurnes  gradually
the  form  of  the  model  withi7i  itself,  so  did  the  form  of  man  in  the  beginning
evolve  from  within  zvithout.  After  the  cycle  i?i  which  man  began  to  pro-
create his  species  after  the  fashio?i  of  the  present  aniifial  kingdom,  it  be-
came the  reverse.  The  hu7nan  foetus  follows  7iow  in  its  transfor77iations  all
the  fo7'ms  that  the  physical  fra77ie  of  ma7i  asstwied,  thro7ighout  the  three
Kalpas  \_Rou7ids~\,  duri7ig  the  tentative  efforts  at  plastic  fo7-7nation  around
the  Mo7iad,  by  senseless,  because  impeyfect,  matter,  zVz  her  bli7id  wanderings.
In  the  present  age,- the  physical  e7nb7yo  is  a  plant,  a  reptile,  an  a7iimal,
before  it  fi7ially  beco77ies  man,  evolviyig  withiyi  himself  his  own  ethereal
counte7part,  i7i  his  turn,  hi  the  beginning  it  was  that  counterpart  \jxstral
ma7i]  which,  being  senseless,  got  entayigled  in  the  meshes  of  7natter.

But  this  "  man"  belongs  to  the  Fourth  Round.  As  shown,  the  Monad
had  passed  through,  journeyed  and  been  imprisoned  in,  every  transi-
tional form,  throughout  every  kingdom  of  nature,  during  the  three  pre-
ceding Rounds.  But  the  Monad  which  becomes  human,  is  not  the  Ma7i.
In  this  Round — with  the  exception  of  the  highest  mammals  after  man,


MAN   OR  APE;    WHICH   WAS    FIRST?  207

the  anthropoids  destined  to  die  out  in  this  our  race,  when  their  Monads
will  be  liberated  and  pass  into  the  astral  human  forms,  or  the  highest
eleraentals,  of  the  Sixth  and  the  Seventh  Races,  and  then  into  the
lowest  human  forms  in  the  Fifth  Round — no  units  of  any  of  the
kingdoms  are  $inimated  any  longer  by  Monads  destined  to  become
human  in  their  next  stage,  but  only  by  the  lower  elementals  of  their
respective  realms.  These  "elementals"  will  become  human  Monads,
in  their  turn,  only  at  the  next  great  planetary  Manvantara.

And  in  fact  the  last  human  Monad  incarnated  before  the  beginning
of  the  Fifth  Root-Race.  Nature  never  repeats  herself;  therefore  the
anthropoids  of  our  day  have  not  existed  at  any  time  since  the  middle
of  the  Miocene  period,  when,  like  all  cross  breeds,  they  began  to
show  a  tendency,  more  and  more  marked  as  time  went  on,  to  return
to  the  type  of  their  first  parent,  the  gigantic  black  and  yellow  Lemuro-
Atlantean.  To  search  for  the  "missing  link"  is  useless.  To  the
Scientists  of  the  closing  Sixth  Root-Race,  millions  and  millions  of
years  hence,  our  modern  races,  or  rather  their  fossils,  will  appear  as
those  of  small  insignificant  apes — an  extinct  species  of  the  genus  homo.

Such  anthropoids  form  an  exception  because  they  were  not  intended
by  Nature,  but  are  the  direct  product  and  creation  of  "senseless"
man.  The  Hindiis  attribute  a  divine  origin  to  the  apes  and  monkeys,
because  the  men  of  the  Third  Race  were  gods  from  another  plane,  who
had  become  "senseless"  mortals.  This  subject  had  already  been
touched  upon  in  his  Unveiled,  twelve  years  ago,  as  plainly  as  was  then
possible.  The  reader  is  there  referred  to  the  Brahmans,  if  he  would
know  the  reason  of  the  regard  they  have  for  the  monkeys.

He  [the  reader]  would  perhaps  learn — were  the  Brahman  to  judge  him  worthy  of
an  explanation — that  the  Hindu  sees  in  the  ape  but  what  Manu  desired  he  should :
the  transformation  of  species  most  directly  connected  with  that  of  the  human
family — a  bastard  branch  engrafted  on  their  own  stock  before  the  final  perfection
of  the  latter.  He  might  learn,  further,  that  in  the  eyes  of  the  educated  "heathen"
the  spiritual  or  inner  man  is  one  thing,  and  his  terrestrial  physical  casket  another.
That  physical  nature,  that  great  combination  of  correlations  of  physical  forces,  ever
creeping  on  towards  perfection,  has  to  avail  herself  of  the  material  at  hand;  she
models  and  remodels  as  she  proceeds,  and,  finishing  her  crowning  work  in  man,
presents  him  alone  as  a  fit  tabernacle  for  the  overshadowing  of  the  Divine  Spirit.*

Moreover,  a  German  scientific  work  is  mentioned  in  a  footnote  on
the  same  page.     It  says  that:
A   Hanoverian   Scientist  has    recently    published    a    work    entitled,     Ueber  die

•  II.  278-9.


208  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Auflosung  der  Arten  durch  Natilrliche  Zucht-wahl,  in  which  he  shows,  with
great  ingenuity,  that  Darwin  was  wholly  mistaken  in  tracing  man  back  to  the
ape.  On  the  contrary,  he  maintains  that  it  is  the  ape  which  is  evolved  from  man.
He  shows  that,  in  the  beginning,  mankind  were,  morally  and  physically,  the  types
and  prototypes  of  our  present  race  and  of  our  human  dignity,  by  their  beauty  of
form,  regularity  of  feature,  cranial  development,  nobility  of  sentiments,  heroic
impulses,  and  grandeur  of  ideal  conceptions.  This  is  a  purely  Brahmanic,  Buddhis-
tic and  Kabalistic  doctrine.  His  book  is  copiously  illustrated  with  diagrams,
tables,  etc.  It  asserts  that  the  gradual  debasement  and  degradation  of  man,
morally  and  physically,  can  be  readily  traced  throughout  ethnological  transforma-
tions down  to  our  time.  And,  as  one  portion  has  already  degenerated  into  apes,
so  the  civilized  man  of  the  present  day  will  at  last,  under  the  action  of  the  inevit-
able law  of  necessity,  be  also  succeeded  by  like  descendants.  If  we  may  judge  of
the  future  by  the  actual  present,  it  certainly  does  seem  possible  that  so  unspiritual
and  materialistic  a  race  should  end  as  Simla  rather  than  as  Seraphs.

But  though  the  apes  descend  from  man,  it  is  certainly  not  the  fact
that  the  human  Monad,  which  has  once  reached  the  level  of  humanity,
ever  incarnates  again  in  the  form  of  an  animal.

The  cycle  of  "metempsychosis"  for  the  human  Monad  is  closed,
for  we  are  in  the  Fourth  Round  and  the  Fifth  Root- Race.  The  reader
will  have  to  bear  in  mind — at  any  rate  one  who  has  made  himself
acquainted  with  Esoteric  Btiddhism — that  the  Stanzas  which  follow
in  this  volume  and  the  next  speak  of  the  evolution  in  our  Fourth
Round  only.  The  latter  is  the  cycle  of  the  turning-point,  after
which,  matter,  having  reached  its  lowest  depths,  begins  to  strive
onward  and  to  become  spiritualized,  with  every  new  race  and  with
every  fresh  cycle.  Therefore  the  student  must  take  care  not  to  see
contradiction  where  there  is  none,  for  in  Esoteric  Buddhism  Rounds
are  spoken  of  in  general,  while  here  only  the  Fourth,  or  our  present
Round,  is  meant.  Then  it  was  the  work  of  formation ;  now  it  is  that
of  reformation  and  evolutionary  perfection.

Finally,  to  close  this  digression  anent  various,  but  unavoidable,  mis-
conceptions, we  must  refer  to  a  statement  in  Esoteric  Buddhist?i,  which
has  produced  a  very  fatal  impression  upon  the  minds  of  many  Theoso-
phists.  One  unfortunate  sentence,  from  the  work  just  referred  to,  is
constantly  brought  forward  to  prove  the  materialism  of  the  doctrine.
The  author,  referring  to  the  progress  of  organisms  on  the  Globes,
says  that :

The  mineral  kingdom  will  no  more  develop  the  vegetable  ....  than  the
Earth  was  able  to  develop  man  from  the  ape,  till  it  received  an  impulse.*

*  p.  48.


AN  ERRONEOUS  OPINION.  209

Whether  this  sentence  renders  the  thought  of  the  author  literally,  or
is  simply,  as  we  believe  it  is,  a  lapsus  calami,  may  remain  an  open
question.

It  is  really  with  surprise  that  we  have  ascertained  the  fact,  that
Esoteric  Buddhism  was  so  little  understood  by  some  Theosophists,  as
to  have  led  them  into  the  belief  that  it  thoroughly  supported  Darwinian
evolution,  and  especially  the  theory  of  the  descent  of  man  from  a  pithe-
coid ancestor.  As  one  member  writes:  "I  suppose  j^ou  realize  that
three-fourths  of  Theosophists  and  even  outsiders  imagine  that,  as  far
as  the  evolution  of  man  is  concerned,  Darwinism  and  Theosophy  kiss
one  another."  Nothing  of  the  kind  was  ever  realized,  nor  is  there  any
great  warrant  for  it,  so  far  as  we  know,  in  Esoteric  Buddhism.  It  has
been  repeatedly  stated,  that  evolution  as  taught  by  Manu  and  Kapila
was  the  groundwork  of  the  modern  teachings,  but  neither  Occultism
nor  Theosophy  has  ever  supported  the  wild  theories  of  the  present
Darwinists — least  of  all  the  descent  of  man  from  an  ape.  Of  this,
more  hereafter.  But  one  has  only  to  turn  to  p.  47  of  the  work  named,
to  find  the  statement  that :

Man  belongs  to  a  kingdom  distinctly  separate  from  that  of  the  animals.

With  such  a  plain  and  unequivocal  statement  before  him,  it  is  very
strange  that  any  careful  student  should  have  been  so  misled,  unless  he
is  prepared  to  charge  the  author  with  a  gross  contradiction.

Kvery  Round  repeats  the  evolutionary^  work  of  the  preceding  Round,
on  a  higher  scale.  With  the  exception  of  some  higher  anthropoids,  as
just  mentioned,  the  Monadic  inflow,  or  inner  evolution,  is  at  an  end  till
the  next  Manvantara.  It  can  never  be  too  often  repeated  that  the  full-
blown human  Monads  have  to  be  first  disposed  of,  before  the  new  crop
of  candidates  appears  on  this  Globe  at  the  beginning  of  the  next  Cycle.
Thus  there  is  a  lull ;  and  this  is  why,  during  the  Fourth  Round,  man
appears  on  Earth  earlier  than  any  animal  creation,  as  will  be  described.

But  it  is  still  urged  that  the  author  of  Esoteric  Buddhism  has
"preached  Darwinism"  all  along.  Certain  passages  would  undoubtedly
seem  to  lend  countenance  to  this  inference.  Besides  which,  the  Occul-
tists themselves  are  ready  to  concede  partial  correctness  to  the  Dar-
winian hypothesis,  in  later  details,  bye-laws  of  evolution,  and  after  the
midway  point  of  the  Fourth  Race.  Of  that  which  has  taken  place.
Physical  Science  can  really  know  nothing,  for  such  matters  lie  entirely
outside  of  its  sphere  of  investigation.  But  what  the  Occultists  have
never  admitted,  .nor  will  they  ever  admit,  is  that  man  was  an  ape  iti

15


2IO  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

this  or  any  other  Round;  or  that  he  ever  could  be  one,  however  much
he  may  have  been  "ape-like."  This  is  vouched  for  by  the  very  author-
ity from  whom  the  author  oi  Esoteric  Buddhism  got  his  information.

Thus  to  those  who  confront  the  Occultists  with  these  lines  from  the
above-named  volume:

It  is  enough  to  show  that  we  may  as  reasonably — and  that  we  must,  if  we  would
talk   about  these  matters  at  all — conceive   a  life-impulse  giving  birth   to  mineral
forms,  as  of  the  same  sort  of  impulse  concerned  to  raise  a  race  of  apes  into  a  race  of
rudimentary  men.

To  those  who  bring  this  passage  forward  as  showing  "decided  Dar-
winism," the  Occultists  answer  by  pointing  to  the  explanation  of  the
Master,  Mr.  Sinnett's  Teacher,  which  would  contradict  these  lines,  were
they  written  in  the  spirit  attributed  to  them.  A  copy  of  this  letter  was
sent  to  the  writer,  together  with  others,  two  years  ago  (1886),  with
additional  marginal  remarks,  to  quote  from,  in  the  Secret  Doctrine.

It  begins  by  considering  the  difficulty  experienced  by  the  Western
student,  in  reconciling  some  facts,  previously  given,  with  the  evolution
of  man  from  the  animal,  i.e.,  from  the  mineral,  vegetable  and  animal
kingdoms,  and  advises  the  student  to  hold  to  the  doctrine  of  analogy
and  correspondences.  Then  it  touches  upon  the  mystery  of  the  Devas,
and  even  Gods,  having  to  pass  through  states,  which  it  was  agreed  to
refer  to  as  "Immetallization,  Inherbation,  Inzoonization  and  finally  In-
carnation," and  explains  this  b)^  hinting  at  the  necessity  of  failures  even
in  the  ethereal  races  of  Dhyan  Chohans.     Concerning  this  it  says:

''These  'failtires'  are  too  far  progressed  and  spiritualized  to  be  thrown
back  forcibly  from  Dhyan  Chohanship  i^ito  the  vortex  of  a  new  primordial
evolution  throjigh  the  lower  kingdoms.     ..."

After  which,  a  hint  only  is  given  about  the  mystery  contained  in  the
allegory  of  the  fallen  Asuras,  which  will  be  expanded  and  explained
in  Volume  II.  When  Karma  has  reached  them  at  the  stage  of  human
evolution :

"  They  will  have  to  drink  it  to  the  last  drop  in  the  bitter  cup  of  retribution.
Then  they  become  an  active  force  and  commi7tgle  with  the  ele^nentals,  the
progressed  entities  of  the  pure  animal  kingdom,  to  develop  little  by  little  the
full  type  of  humanity r

These  Dhyan  Chohans,  as  we  see,  do  not  pass  through  the  three
kingdoms  as  do  the  lower  Pitris;  nor  do  they  incarnate  in  man  until
the  Third  Root  Race.     Thus,  as  the  teaching  stands:

''Round  I.     Man  in  the  First  Round  ayid  First  Race  on  Globe  D,  our


A   master's   letter.  "  211

Earth,  was  an  ethereal  being  fa  Lunar  Dhyani,  as  man  J,  non-intellizenf.
but  super-spiritual ;  a7id  correspondingly,  on  the  law  of  analogy,  iii  the
First  Race  of  the  Fourth  Rou7id.  In  each  of  the  subsequent  races  and  sub-
races,  .  .  .  he  grows  more  and  more  into  a7i  encased  or  iyicamate  being,
but  still  preponderatirigly  ethereal.  .  .  .  He  is  sexless,  and,  like  the
anitnal  and  vegetable,  he  develops  monstrous  bodies  corresponde?itial  with
his  coarser  siirroundings.

"Rou7id  II.  He  \_ma7i\  is  still  gigayitic  a7id  ethereal,  but  growing  firmer
a7id  77iore  condensed  i7i  body ;  a  more  physical  Tnan  yet  still  less  intelligait
than  spiritual  ( i ),for  mind  is  a  slower  a7id  more  difficult  evolution  than  is
the  physical  fra7ne.     .     .     .

^^  Round  III.  He  has  now  a  perfectly  concrete  or  compacted  body,  at  first
theforTn  of  a  giant-ape,  and  7iozv  more  intelligent,  or  rather  cu7ini7ig,  than
spiritiial.  For,  07i  the  dow7iward  arc,  he  has  now  reached  a  point  where
his  primordial  spirituality  is  eclipsed  a7id  overshadowed  by  nascent
mentality  (2).  In  the  last  half  of  the  Third  Rouyid,  his  gigantic  stature
decreases,  and  his  body  i77iproves  in  texture,  and  he  becomes  a  7nore  ratio7ial
bei7ig,  though  still  jnore  a7i  ape  than  a  Deva.  .  .  .  \_All  this  is  almost
exactly  repeated  in  the  Third  Root- Race  of  the  Fourth  Round.']

"Rou7id  IV.  hitcllect  has  an  e7iormous  development  in  this  Roiaid.
The  \hitherto]  dumb  races  acquire  our  ^present]  himian  speech  on  this  Globe,
on  which,  fro7n  the  Fourth  Race,  language  is  perfected  a7id  kyiow ledge  i7i-
creases.  At  this  half-way  point  of  the  Fourth  Round  [_as  of  the  Fourth,
or  Atlantean,  Root-Race],  hzimanity  passes  the  axial  point  of  the  7ninor
manvantaric  cycle  .  .  .  the  world  teeming  with  the  results  of  i7itellectual
activity  and  spiritual  decrease.     .     .     ."

This  is  from  the  authentic  letter;  what  follows  are  the  later  remarks  and
additional  explanations  traced  by  the  same  hand  in  the  form  of  footnotes.

''(i)     .     .     .      The  origi7ial  letter  C07itai7ied  general  teaching — a'bif'd's-

eye  view' — and  particularized  nothing.    .    .    .     To  speak  of 'physical  man,'

while  limiting  the  statement  to  the  early  Rou7ids,  would  be  driftiiig  back  to

the  7niraculous  and  insta?itaneo2is 'coats  of  skin.'  .  .  .    The  first 'Nature,' the

first  'body,'  the  first  'mind'  07i  the  first  plane  of  perception,  on  the  first  Globe

in  the  first  Round,  is  what  was  77ieant.     For  Kar7na  ayid  evolutio7i  have:

'    .    .     .    centred  in  our  make  such  strange  extremes,

Frotn  different  Natures*  marvellously  mixed    .    .     .'

"(2)  Restore:   he  has  now   reached  the  poi7it  \by  afialogy,  a7id  as  the

•  The  Natures  of  the  seven  Hierarchies  or  Classes  of  Pitris  and  Dhyan  Chohans  which  compose
our  nature  and  bodies  are  here  meant.


212  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Third  Root  Race  in  the  Fourth  Round\  zvhere  his  \the  angel-man' s^
primordial  spirituality  is  eclipsed  and  overshadowed  by  nascent  human
mentality,  and  you  have  the  true  versio?i  on  your  thzcmb-nail.     .     .     ."

These  are  the  words  of  the  Teacher;  text,  words  and  sentences  in
brackets,  and  explanatory  footnotes.  It  stands  to  reason  that  there
must  be  an  enormous  difference  in  such  terms  as  "objectivity"  and
"subjectivity,"  "materiality"  and  "spirituality,"  when  the  same  terms
are  applied  to  different  planes  of  being  and  perception.  All  this  must
be  taken  in  its  relative  sense.  And  therefore  there  is  little  to  be
wondered  at,  if,  left  to  his  own  speculations,  an  author  who,  however
eager  to  learn,  was  yet  quite  inexperienced  in  these  abstruse  teachings,
has  fallen  into  an  error.  Nor  was  the  difference  between  the  Rounds
and  the  Races  sufficiently  defined  in  the  letters  received,  since  nothing
of  the  kind  had  been  required  before,  as  the  ordinary  Eastern  disciple
would  have  found  out  the  difference  in  a  moment.  Moreover,  to  quote
from  a  letter  of  the  Master :

"  The  teachings  were  imparted  under  protest.  .  .  .  They  were,  so  to
say ,  smuggled  goods  .  .  .  and  when  I  remained  face  to  face  with  only  one
correspondent,  the  other,  Mr.  .  .  .  had  so  far  tossed  all  the  cards  into
confusion,  that  little  remained  to  be  said  without  trespassing  upon  law.''

Theosophists  "whom  it  may  concern"  will  understand  what  is  meant.

The  outcome  of  all  this  is,  that  nothing  had  ever  been  said  in  the
letters  to  warrant  the  assurance,  that  the  Occult  doctrine  has  ever
taught,  or  any  Adept  believed  in,  unless  metaphorically,  the  prepos-
terous modern  theory  of  the  descent  of  man  from  a  common  ancestor
with  the  ape — an  anthropoid  of  the  actual  animal  kind.  To  this  day
the  world  is  more  full  of  ape-like  men  than  the  woods  are  of  men-
like  apes.  The  ape  [is  sacred  in  India  because  its  origin  is  well  known
to  the  Initiates,  though  concealed  under  a  thick  veil  of  allegory.
Hanumana  is  the  son  of  Pavana  (Vayu,  "God  of  the  wind")  by  Anjana,
wife  of  a  monster  called  Kesari,  though  his  genealogy  varies.  The
reader  who  bears  this  in  mind,  will  find  in  Volume  II,  passim,  the  whole
explanation  of  this  ingenious  allegory.  The  "men"  of  the  Third  Race
(who  separated)  were  "Gods,"  by  their  spirituality  and  purity,  though
senseless,  and  as  yet  destitute  of  mind,  as  men.

These  "men"  of  the  Third  Race,  the  ancestors  of  the  Atlanteans,
were  just  such  ape-like,  intellectually  senseless,  giants  as  were  those
beings,  who,  during  the  Third  Round,  represented  Humanity.     Morally
irresponsible,  it  was  these  Third  Race  "men"  who,  through  promi^-


THE    PRELIMINARY   CREATION   OF   MAN.  273

cuous  connection  with  animal  species  lower  than  themselves,  created
that  missing  link  which  became  ages  later  (in  the  Tertiary  period  only),
the  remote  ancestor  of  the  real  ape,  as  we  find  it  now  in  the  pithecoid
family.

And  if  this  is  found  clashing  with  the  statement  which  shows  the
animal  later  than  man,  then  the  reader  is  asked  to  bear  in  mind  that
Xhe  place?ital  mammal  only  is  meant.  In  those  days,  there  were  animals
of  which  Zoology  does  not  even  dream  in  our  own ;  and  the  modes  of
reprodziction  were  not  ide7itical  with  the  notions  which  modern  Physio-
logy has  upon  the  subject.  It  is  not  altogether  convenient  to  touch
upon  such  questions  in  public,  but  there  is  no  contradiction  or  impossi-
bility in  this  whatever.

Thus  the  earlier  teachings,  however  unsatisfactory,  vague  and  frag-
mentary, did  not  teach  the  evolution  of  "man"  from  the  "ape."  Nor
does  the  author  of  Esoteric  Buddhism  assert  it  an>^vhere  in  his  work  in
so  many  words ;  but,  owing  to  his  inclination  towards  Modern  Science,
he  uses  language  which  might  perhaps  justify  such  an  inference.  The
man  who  preceded  the  Fourth,  the  Atlantean,  Race,  however  much  he
may  have  looked  physically  like  a  "gigantic  ape" — "the  counterfeit  of
man  who  hath  not  the  life  of  a  man  " — was  still  a  thinking  and  already
a  speaking  man.  The  Lemuro- Atlantean  was  a  highly  civilized  Race,
and  if  one  accepts  tradition,  which  is  better  history  than  the  specula-
tive fiction  which  now  passes  under  that  name,  he  was  higher  than  we
are  with  all  our  sciences  and  the  degraded  civilization  of  the  day:  at
any  rate,  the  I^emuro- Atlantean  of  the  closing  Third  Race  was  so.

And  now  we  may  return  to  the  Stanzas.


STANZA  VI.— Continued.

5.  At  the  Fourth*  {a),  the  Sons  are  told  to  create  their
Images.     One  Third  refuses.     Twof  obey.

The  Curse  is  pronounced  (^b):  they  will  be  born  in  the
Fourth,!  suffer  and  cause  suffering.    This  is  the  First  War  (c).

The  full  meaning  of  this  Shloka  can  only  be  fully  comprehended
after  reading  the  additional  detailed  explanations,  in  the  Anthropo-
genesis  and  its  Commentaries,  in  Volume  II.  Between  this  Shloka  ana
Shloka  4,  extend   long  ages;    and    there  now  gleams  the   dawn   and

■   liound,  or  revolution  of  Life  and  Being  round  the  seven  smaller  Wheels,     t  Thirds.     X  RaCC


nti^  THE   SECSET  DOCTRINE.

sunrise  of  another  aeon.  The  drama  enacted  on  our  planet  is  at  the
beginning  of  its  fourth  act;  but  for  a  clearer  comprehension  of  the
whole  play  the  reader  will  have  to  turn  back  before  he  can  proceed
onward.  For  this  verse  belongs  to  the  general  Cosmogony  given  in
the  archaic  volumes,  whereas  Volume  II  will  give  a  detailed  account  of
the  "creation,"  or  rather  formation,  of  the  first  human  beings,  followed
by  the  second  humanity,  and  then  by  the  third ;  or,  as  they  are  called,
the  First,  Second,  and  the  Third  Root-Races.  As  the  solid  Earth
began  by  being  a  ball  of  liquid  fire,  of  fiery  dust  and  its  protoplasmic
phantom,  so  did  man.

(«)  That  which  is  meant  by  the  qualification  the  "Fourth,"  is  ex-
plained as  the  Fourth  Round,  only  on  the  authority  of  the  Commen-
taries. It  can  equally  mean  Fourth  Eternity  as  Fourth  Round,  or  even
our  Fourth  Globe.  For,  as  will  repeatedly  be  shown,  the  latter  is  the
fourth  sphere,  on  the  fourth  or  lowest  plane  of  material  life.  And  it
so  happens  that  we  are  in  the  Fourth  Round,  at  the  middle  point  of
which  the  perfect  equilibrium  between  Spirit  and  Matter  had  to  take

place.

It  was,  as  we  shall  see,  at  this  period — during  the  highest  point  of
civilization  and  knowledge,  and  also  of  human  intellectuality,  of  the
Fourth,  Atlantean  Race— that,  owing  to  the  final  crisis  of  the  physio-
logico-spiritual  adjustment  of  the  races,  humanity  branched  off  into
two  diametrically  opposite  paths :  the  Right-  and  the  Left-hand  Paths
of  Knowledge  or  Vidya.     In  the  words  of  the  Commentary:

Thus  were  the  germs  of  the  White  atid  the  Black  Magic  sown  in  those
days.  The  seeds  lay  laterit  for  some  time,  to  sprout  only  during  the  early
period  of  the  Fifth  \oiir  Race'].

Says  the  Commentarj^  explaining  the  Shloka :

The  Holy  Youths  {the  Gods]  refised  to  multiply  and  create  species  after
their  likeness,  after  their  kind.  "  They  are  not  fit  Forms  {Riipas]  for  us.
They  have  to  grow.''  They  refise  to  enter  the  Chhdyas  \_Shadows  or
Images]  of  their  inferiors.  Thus  had  selfish  feeling  prevailed  from  the
beginning,  even  among  the  Gods,  and  they  fell  under  the  eye  of  the  Karmic
Lipikas.

They  had  to  suffer  for  it  in  later  births.  How  the  punishment
reached  the  Gods  will  be  seen  in  Volume  II.

\t  is  a  universal  tradition  that,  before  the  physiological  "Fall,"
propagation  of  one's  kind,  whether  human  or  animal,  took  place
thro-jgh  the  Will  of  the  Creators,  or  of  their  progeny.    This  was  the


THE   FIRST   CAUSE    OF   SIN.  215

Fall  of  Spirit  into  generation,  not  the  Fall  of  mortal  Man.  It  has
alread)'-  been  stated  that,  to  become  self-conscious,  Spirit  must  pass
through  every  cycle  of  being,  culminating  in  its  highest  point  on  earth
in  Man.  Spirit  per  se\s>  an  unconscious  negative  abstraction.  Its  purity
is  inherent,  not  acquired  by  merit;  hence,  as  already  shown,  to  become
the  highest  Dhyan  Chohan,  it  is  necessary  for  each  Ego  to  attain  to  full
self-consciousness  as  a  human,  i.e.,  conscious,  being,  which  is  syn-
thesized for  us  in  Man.  The  Jewish  Kabalists,  arguing  that  no
Spirit  can  belong  to  the  divine  Hierarchy  unless  Ruach  (Spirit)  is
united  to  Nephesh  (lyiving  Soul),  only  repeat  the  Eastern  Esoteric
teaching:

A  Dhyani  has  to  be  an  Atmd-Buddhi ;  once  the  Bziddhi- Manas  breaks

/N  ...  ^

loose  from  the  immortal  A  imd,  of  which  it  (Buddhi)  is  the  vehicle,  Atman

passes  into  Non-Being,  which  is  Absolute  Being.

This  means  that  the  purely  Nirvanic  state  is  a  passage  of  Spirit  back
to  the  ideal  abstraction  of  Be-ness,  which  has  no  relation  to  the  plane
on  which  our  Universe  is  accomplishing  its  cycle.

(^)  "The  Curse  is  pronounced"  does  not  mean,  in  this  instance,  that
any  Personal  Being,  God,  or  Superior  Spirit,  pronounced  it,  but  simply
that  the  cause,  which  could  but  create  bad  results,  had  been  generated ;
and  that  the  effects  of  this  Karmic  cause  could  lead  the  Beings  that
counteracted  the  laws  of  Nature,  and  thus  impeded  her  legitimate  pro-
gress, only  to  bad  incarnations,  hence  to  suffering.

(c)  "There  were  many  Wars,"  all  referring  to  struggles  of  adjust-
ment, spiritual,  cosmical  and  astronomical,  but  chiefly  to  the  mystery
of  the  evolution  of  man,  as  he  is  now.  The  Powers  or  pure  Essences
that  were  "told  to  create,"  relate  to  a  mystery  explained,  as  already
said,  elsewhere.  It  is  not  only  one  of  the  most  hidden  secrets  of
Nature — that  of  generation,  over  whose  solution  the  Embrj^ologists
have  vainly  put  their  heads  together — but  likewise  a  divine  function
which  involves  that  great  religious,  or  rather  dogmatic,  mystery,  the
so-called  "Fall"  of  the  Angels.  Satan  and  his  rebellious  host,  when
the  meaning  of  the  allegory  is  explained,  will  thus  prove  to  have
refused  to  create  phy.sical  man,  only  to  become  the  direct  Saviours  and
Creators  of  divine  Man.  The  .symbolical  teaching  is  more  than  mys-
tical and  religious,  it  is  purely  scientific,  as  will  be  seen  later  on.  For,
instead  of  remaining  a  mere  blind  functioning  medium,  impelled  and
guided  by  fathomless  Law,  the  "rebellious"  Angel  claimed  and  enforced
his  right  of  independent  judgment  and  will,  his  right  of  free-agency


2l6  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

and  responsibility,  since  Man  and  Angel  are  alike  under  Karmic  I^aw.
Kxplaining  Kabalistic  views,  the  author  of  New  Aspects  of  Life  says
of  the  Fallen  Angels  that:

According  to  the  symbolical  teaching,  Spirit,  from  being  simply  a  functionary
agent  of  God,  became  volitional  in  its  developed  and  developing  action;  and,  sub-
stituting its  own  will  for  the  divine  desire  in  its  regard,  so  fell.  Hence  the  king-
dom and  reign  of  spirits  and  spiritual  action,  which  flow  from  and  are  the  product
of  spirit-volition,  are  outside,  and  contrasted  with,  and  in  contradiction  to,  the
kingdom  of  souls  and  divine  action.*

So  far,  so  good ;  but  what  does  the  author  mean  by  saying :

When  man  was  created,  he  was  human  in  constitution,  with  human  affections,
human  hopes  and  aspirations.     From  this  state  he  fell — into  the  brute  and  savage.

This  is  diametrically  opposite  to  our  Eastern  teaching,  and  even  to
the  Kabalistic  notion,  so  far  as  we  understand  it,  and  to  the  Bible  it-
self. This  looks  like  Corporealism  and  Substantialism  colouring  Posi-
tive Philosophy,  though  it  is  rather  diflScult  to  feel  quite  sure  of  the
author's  meaning.  K  fall,  however,  "from  the  natural  into  the  super-
natural and  the  animal" — supernatural  meaning  the  purely  spiritual  in
this  case — implies  what  we  suggest.

The  New  Testame?tt  speaks  of  one  of  these  "  Wars,"  as  follows:

And  there  was  war  in  heaven:  Michael  and  his  angels  fought  against  the  Dragon;
and  the  Dragon  fought  and  his  angels,  and  prevailed  not;  neither  was  their  place
found  any  more  in  Heaven.  And  the  great  Dragon  was  cast  out,  that  old  serpent,
called  the  Devil  and  Satan,  which  deceiveth  the  whole  world.t

The  Kabalistic  version  of  the  same  story  is  given  in  the  Codex
Nazar(Biis,  the  scripture  of  the  Nazarenes,  the  real  mystic  Christians
of  John  the  Baptist,  and  the  Initiates  of  Christos.  Bahak  Zivo,  the
"Father  of  the  Genii,"  is  ordered  to  construct  creatures — to  "create."
But,  as  he  is  "ignorant  of  Orcus,"  he  fails  to  do  so,  and  calls  in  Fetahil,
a  still  purer  spirit,  to  his  aid,  who  fails  still  worse.  This  is  a  repetition
of  the  failure  of  the  "Fathers,"  the  I^ords  of  Ught,  who  fail  one  after
the  other.:]:

We  will  now  quote  from  our  earlier  volumes  :§

Then  steps  on  the  stage  of  creation  the  Spirit  ||  (of  the  Earth  so-called,  or  the


*  P-  235-
t  Rev.,  xii.  7-9.
X  See  Vol.  II,  Shloka  17.

\  Isis  Unveiled,  I.  299,  300.     Compare  also  Dunlap,  Sod:  the  Son  of  the  Man,  pp.  51  ei  seq.
II  On  the  authority  of  Irenseus,  of  Justin  Martyr  and  of  the  Codex  itself,  Dunlap  shows  that  the
Nazarenes  regarded  "Spirit"  as  a  female  and  evil  Power,  in  its  connection  with  our  :Earth.


THE   CODEX   NAZAR/EUS  REPEATS  THE   ALLEGORY.  217

Soul,  Psyche,  which  St.  James  calls  "devilish"),  the  lower  portion  of  the  Anima
Mundi  or  Astral  Light.  [See  the  close  of  this  Shloka.]  With  the  Nazarenes  and  the
Gnostics  this  Spirit  -wa.?,  feminine.  Thus  the  vSpirit  of  the  Earth,  perceiving  that  for
Fetahil,*  the  newest  man  (the  latest),  the  splendour  was  "changed,"  and  that  for
splendour  existed  "decrease  and  damage,"  she  awakes  Karabtanos,t  "who  was
frantic  and  without  sense  and  judgment,''  and  says  to  him:  "Arise,  see,  the  Splen-
dour (Light)  of  the  Newest  Man  (Fetahil)  has  failed  (to  produce  or  create  men),  the
decrease  of  this  Splendour  is  visible.  Rise  up,  come  with  thy  Mother  (the  Spiritus)
and  free  thee  from  limits  by  which  thou  art  held,  and  those  more  ample  than  the
whole  world."  After  which,  follows  the  union  of  the  frantic  and  blind  matter,
guided  by  the  insinuations  of  the  Spirit  (not  the  Divitie  Breath  but  the  Astral
Spirit,  which  by  its  double  essence  is  already  tainted  with  matter) ;  and  the  offer  of
the  Mother  being  accepted,  the  Spiritus  conceives  "Seven  Figures,"  and  the  Seven
Stellars  (Planets),  which  represent  also  the  seven  capital  sins,  the  progeny  of  an
Astral  Soul,  separated  from  its  divine  source  (spirit),  and  matter,  the  blind  demon  of
concupiscence.  Seeing  this,  Fetahil  extends  his  hand  towards  the  abyss  of  matter,
and  says :  "Let  the  earth  exist,  just  as  the  abode  of  the  Powers  has  existed."  Dip-
ping his  hand  in  the  chaos,  which  he  condenses,  he  creates  our  planet.

Then  the  Codex  proceeds  to  tell  how  Bahak  Zivo  was  separated  from  the  Spiritus,
and  the  Genii  or  Angels  from  the  Rebels.  J  Then  (the  greatest)  Mano,§  who  dwells
with  the  greatest  Ferho,  calls  Kebar  Zivo  (known  also  by  the  name  of  Nebat  lavar
bar  lufin  Ifalin),  the  Helm  and  Vine  of  the  Food  of  Life  ||— he  being  the  third  Life,
and  commiserating  the  rebellious  and  foolish  Genii,  on  account  of  the  magnitude  of
their  ambition,  says:  "Lord  of  the  GeniilT  (^ons),  see  what  the  Genii  (the  Rebel-
lious Angels)  do,  and  about  what  they  are  consulting.**  They  say:  'Let  us  call  forth
the  world,  and  let  us  call  the  "Powers"  into  existence.  The  Genii  are  the  Princes
(Principes),  the  Sons  of  Light,  but  Thou  art  the  Messenger  of  Life'."

And  in  order  to  counteract  the  influence  of  the  seven  "badly  disposed"  principles
the  progeny  of  Spiritus,  Kebar  Zivo  (or  Cabar  Zio),  the  mighty  Lord  of  Splendour,
produces  seven  other  lives  (the  cardinal  virtues),  who  shine  in  their  own  form  and
light  "from  on  high,"tt  and  thus  reestablish  the  balance  between  good  and  evil,
light  and  darkness.

Here  one  finds  a  repetition  of  the  early  allegorical  dual  systems,  such


•  Fetahil  is  identical  with  the  host  of  the  Pitris,  who  "  created  man  "  as  a  "shell"  oiily.  He  was,  with
the  Nazarenes,  the  King^  of  Light,  and  the  Creator;  but  in  this  instance  he  is  the  unlucky  Prometheus,
who  fails  to  get  hold  of  the  Living  Fire  necessary  for  the  formation  of  the  Divine  Soul,  as  he  is
ignor.-int  of  the  secret  name,  the  ineffable  or  incommunicable  name  of  the  Kabalists.

t  The  spirit  of  Matter  and  Concupiscence;  Kama  Rupa  minus  Manas,  Mind.

t  Codex  Nazarceus,  ii.  233.

}  This  Mano  of  the  Nazarenes  strangely  resembles  the  Hindu  Manu,  the  Heavenly  Man  of  the  Rig
Veda.

H  "I  am  the  true  Vine,  and  my  father  is  the  husbandman."     [John,  xv.  i.)

^  With  the  Gnostics,  Christ,  as  well  as  Michael  who  is  identical  with  him  in  .some  respects,  was  the
"Chief  of  the  .^ns."

••  Codex  Nazarepiis,  i.  135.

++  See  the  Cosmogony  of  Pherecydes.


2l8  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

as  the  Zoroastrian,  and  detects  a  germ  of  the  dogmatic  and  dualistic
religions  of  the  future,  a  germ  which  has  grown  into  such  a  luxuriant
tree  in  ecclesiastical  Christianity.  It  is  already  the  outline  of  the
two  "Supremes" — God  and  Satan.  But  in  the  Stanzas  no  such  idea
exists.

Most  of  the  Western  Christian  Kabalists — preeminently  Eliphas
I^evi — in  their  desire  to  reconcile  the  Occult  Sciences  with  Church
Dogmas,  did  their  best  to  make  of  the  "Astral  Light"  only  and  pre-
eminently the  Pleroma  of  the  early  Church  Fathers,  the  abode  of  the
Hosts  of  the  Fallen  Angels,  of  the  Archons  and  Powers.  But  the
Astral  Light,  though  only  the  lower  aspect  of  the  Absolute,  is  still
dual.  It  is  the  Anima  Mundi,  and  ought  never  to  be  viewed  otherwise,
except  for  Kabalistic  purposes.  The  difference  which  exists  between
its  "Light"  and  its  "Living  Fire,"  ought  ever  to  be  present  in  the  mind
of  the  Seer  and  the  Psychic.  The  higher  aspect  of  this  "Light,"  with-
out which  only  creatures  of  matter  can  be  produced,  is  this  Living
Fire,  and  its  Seventh  Principle.  It  is  stated  in  /sis  Unveiled,  in  a
complete  description  of  it :

The  Astral  Liglit  or  Anima  Mundi  is  dual  and  bi-sexual.  The  (ideal)  male  part  of
it  IS  purely  divine  and  spiritual,  it  is  Wisdom,  it  is  Spirit  or  Purusha;  while  the
female  portion  (the  Spiritus  of  the  Nazarenes)  is  tainted,  in  one  sense,  with  matter,
is  indeed  matter,  and  therefore  is  evil  already.  It  is  the  life-principle  of  every
living  creature,  and  furnishes  the  astral  soul,  the  fluidic  perisprit,  to  men,  animals,
fowls  of  the  air,  and  everything  living.  Animals  have  only  the  latent  germ  of  the
highest  immortal  soul  in  them.  This  latter  will  develop  only  after  a  series  of
countless  evolutions;  the  doctrine  of  which  evolutions  is  contained  in  the  Kabalis-
tic axiom:  "A  stone  becomes  a  plant;  a  plant,  a  beast;  a  beast,  a  man;  a  man,  a
spirit;  and  the  spirit,  a  god.*

The  seven  principles  of  the  Eastern  Initiates  had  not  been  explained
when  his  Unveiled  was  written,  but  only  the  three  Kabalistic  Faces  of
the  semi-exoteric  Kabalah.\  But  these  contain  the  description  of  the
mystic  natures  of  the  first  Group  of  Dhyan  Chohans  in  the  regimen
ignis,  the  region  and  "rule  (or  government)  of  fire,"  divided  into  three
classes,  synthesized  by  the  first,  which  makes  four  or  the  "Tetraktys."
If  one  studies  the  commentaries  attentively,  he  will  find  the  same  pro-
gression in  the  angelic  natures,  viz.,  from  the  passive  down  to  the
active;  the  last  of  these  Beings  are  as  near  to  the  Ahamkara  Element
— the  region  or  plane  wherein  Egoship,  or  the  feeling  of  I-am-ness,  is
beginning  to  be  defined— as  the  first  are  near  to  the  undifferentiated

•  I.  301,  note.  +  They  are  found,  however,  in  the  Chaldean  Book  0/  Numbers.


ILDA-BAOTH-JEHOVAH.  219

Essence.  The  former  are  Arupa,  incorporeal;  the  latter,  Rupa,  cor-
Doreal.

In  Volume  II  of  the  same  work,*  the  philosophical  systems  of  the
Gnostics  and  the  primitive  Jewish  Christians,  the  Nazarenes  and  the
Ebionites,  are  fully  considered.  They  show  the  views  held  in  those
days,  outside  the  circle  of  Mosaic  Jews,  about  Jehovah.  He  was
identified  by  all  the  Gnostics  with  the  evil,  rather  than  with  the  good
principle.  For  them,  he  was  Ilda-Baoth,  the  "Son  of  Darkness,"
whose  mother,  Sophia  Achamoth,  was  the  daughter  of  Sophia,  the
Divine  Wisdom — the  female  Holy  Ghost  of  the  early  Christians —
Akasha;    Sophia  Achamoth  personifying   the  L^ower  Astral  Light  or

A.

Ether.  The  Astral  Light  stands  in  the  same  relation  to  Akasha  and
Anima  Mundi,  as  Satan  stands  to  the  Deity.  They  are  one  and  the
same  thing  seen  from  two  aspects,  the  spiritual  and  the  psychic — the
super-ethereal,  or  connecting  link  between  matter  and  pure  spirit — and
the  physical.!  Ilda-Baoth — a  compound  name,  made  up  of  Ilda  (iS"*),
child,  and  Baoth;  the  latter  from  2"ini  an  ^"g^,  and  Dim,  chaos,  empti-
ness, void,  or  desolation;  or  the  Child  born  in  the  Egg  of  Chaos,  like
Brahma — or  Jehovah,  is  simply  one  of  the  Elohim,  the  Seven  Creative
Spirits,  and  one  of  the  lower  Sephiroth.  Ilda-Baoth  produces  from
himself  seven  other  Gods,  "Stellar  Spirits,"  or  the  Lunar  Ancestors, J
for  they  are  all  the  same.§  They  are  all  in  his  own  image,  the  "Spirits
of  the  Face,"  and  the  reflections  one  of  the  other,  who  become
darker  and  more  material,  as  they  successively  recede  from  their
originator.  They  also  inhabit  seven  regions  disposed  like  a  stair,  for
its  steps  mount  and  descend  the  scale  of  spirit  and  matter.  ||  With
Pagans  and  Christians,  with  Hindvis  and  Chaldeans,  with  Greek  as
with  Roman  Catholics — the  texts  varying  slightly  in  their  interpreta-
tions— they  all  were  the  Genii  of  the  seven  planets,  and  of  the  seven
planetary  spheres  of  our  septenary  Chain,  of  which  Earth  is  the  lowest.
This  connects  the  "Stellar"  and  "Lunar"  Spirits  with  the  higher
planetary  Angels,  and  the  Saptarshis,  the  Seven  Rishis  of  the  Stars,

•  op.  cit.,  II.  183  et  seq.

t  For  the  difference  between  nous,  the  higher  divine  Wisdom,  and  psyche,  the  lower  and  terrestrial,
see  St.  James,  iii.  15-17.

X  Jehovah's  connection  with  the  Moon  in  the  Kabalah  is  well  known  to  students.

\  For  the  Nazarenes,  see  Isis  Unveiled,  II.  131  and  132.  The  true  followers  of  the  true  Christos  were
all  Nazarenes  and  Christians,  and  were  the  opponents  of  the  later  Christians.

II  See  the  diagram  of  the  Lunar  Chain  of  seven  worlds,  p.  195,  where,  as  in  our  own  or  any  other
Chain,  the  upper  worlds  are  spiritual,  while  the  lowest,  whether  Moon,  Earth,  or  any  other  planet,  is
dark  with  matter.


220  THE    SECRET    DOCTRINE.

of  the  Hindus — as  subordinate  Angels,  or  Messengers,  to  these  Rishis,
their  emanations,  on  the  descending  scale.  Such,  in  the  opinion  of  the
philosophical  Gnostics,  were  the  God  and  the  Archangels  now  wor-
shipped by  the  Christians!  The  "Fallen  Angels"  and  the  legend  of
the  "War  in  Heaven"  are  thus  purely  pagan  in  their  origin,  and  come
from  India,  via  Persia  and  Chaldea.  The  only  reference  to  them  in  the
Christian  canon  is  found  in  Revelation  xii,  as  quoted  a  few  pages  back.
Thus  "  Satan,"  once  he  ceases  to  be  viewed  in  the  superstitious,  dog-
matic, unphilosophical  spirit  of  the  Churches,  grows  into  the  grandiose
image  of  one  who  makes  of  a  terrestrial,  a  divine  Man ;  who  gives  him,
throughout  the  long  cycle  of  Mahakalpa,  the  law  of  the  Spirit  of  I,ife,
and  makes  him  free  from  the  Sin  of  Ignorance,  hence  of  Death.


STANZA  W.— Continued.
6.  The  OivDER  Wheels  rotated  downward  and  upward  (a).     .    .
The  Mother's  Spawn  filled  the  whole.*    There  were  Battles
fought  between  the  creators  and  the  destroyers,  and  battles

FOUGHT  FOR  SpACE  ;    THE   SEED   APPEARING    AND    REAPPEAELING   CON-
TINUOUSLY (J)).\

(a)  Here,  having  finished  for  the  time  being  with  our  side-issues —
which,  however  they  may  break  the  flow  of  the  narrative,  are  necessary
for  the  elucidation  of  the  whole  scheme — we  must  return  once  more  to
Cosmogony.  The  phrase  "  Older  Wheels"  refers  to  the  Worlds,  or
Globes,  of  our  Chain  as  they  were  during  the  previous  Rounds.  The
present  Stanza,  when  explained  esoterically,  is  found  embodied  entirely
in  Kabalistic  works.  Therein  will  be  found  the  ver>'  histor)^  of  the
evolution  of  those  countless  Globes,  which  evolve  after  a  periodical
Pralaya,  rebuilt  from  old  material  into  new  forms.  The  previous
Globes  disintegrate  and  reappear,  transformed  and  perfected  for  a  new
phase  of  life.  In  the  Kabalah,  worlds  are  compared  to  sparks  which
fly  from  under  the  hammer  of  the  great  Architect — Law,  the  lyaw
which  rules  all  the  smaller  Creators.

The  following  comparative  diagram  shows  the  identity  between  the
two  systems,  the  Kabalistic  and  the  Eastern.  The  three  upper  are  the
three  higher  planes  of  consciousness,  revealed  and  explained  in  both

*  The  whole  Kosmos.    The  reader  is  reminded  that  in  the  Stanzas  Kosmos  often  means  only  our
own  Solar  System,  not  the  Infinite  Universe.
t  This  is  purely  astronomical.


THE   SEVEN   PI^ANES.


221


schools  only  to  the  Initiates ;  the  lower  represent  the  four  lower  planes
— the  lowest  being  our  plane,  or  the  visible  Universe.

Diagram   III.


PljlNE  L


D

I  Til*  Earth.,


The  Substantial
or  Formative  World.

P1.ANK  IV.


The  Ph3rsical
or  Material  World. 1


These  seven  planes  correspond  to  the  seven  states  of  consciousness  in
man.  It  remains  with  him  to  attune  the  three  higher  states  in  himself
to  the  three  higher  planes  in  Kosmos.  But  before  he  can  attempt  to
attune,  he  must  awaken  the  three  "seats"  to  life  and  activity.  And
how  many  are  capable  of  bringing  themselves  to  even  a  superficial
comprehension  of  Atma  Vidya  (Spirit-Knowledge),  or  what  is  called  by
the  Sufis,  Rohanee!§

•  The  Arupa,  or  "  Formless" ;  there  where  fomi  ceases  to  exist,  on  the  objective  plane.

1-  The  word  "Archetypal"  must  not  be  taken  here  in  the  sense  that  the  Platonists  gave  to  it,  i.e.,
the  World  as  it  existed  in  the  Mind  of  the  Deity;  but  in  that  of  a  World  made  as  a  first  model,  to  be
followed  and  improved  upon  by  the  Worlds  which  succeed  it  physically — though  deteriorating  iu
purity.

X  These  are  the  four  lower  planes  of  Cosmic  Consciousness,  the  three  higher  planes  being  inacces-
sible to  human  intellect  as  develojied  at  present.  The  seven  states  of  human  consciousness  pertain
to  quite  another  question.

{  For  a  clearer  explanation  of  the  above,  see  "  Saptaparna"  in  the  Index.


222  the;  secret  doctrine.

(b)  "The  Seed  appearing  and  reappearing  continuously."  Here
"Seed"  stands  for  the  "World-Germ,"  viewed  by  Science  as  material
particles  in  a  highly  attenuated  condition,  but  in  Occult  Physics  as
"spiritual  particles,"  i.e.,  supersensuous  matter  existing  in  a  state  of
primeval  differentiation.  To  see  and  appreciate  the  difference — the
immense  gulf  that  separates  terrestrial  matter  from  the  finer  grades  of
supersensuous  matter — every  Astronomer,  every  Chemist  and  Physicist
ought  to  be  a  Psychometer,  to  say  the  least ;  he  ought  to  be  able  to  sense
for  himself  that  difference  in  which  he  now  refuses  to  believe.  Mrs.
Elizabeth  Denton,  one  of  the  most  learned,  and  also  one  of  the  most
materialistic  and  sceptical  women  of  her  age — the  wife  of  Professor
Denton,  the  well-known  American  Geologist,  and  the  author  of  The
Soul  of  Things — was,  in  spite  of  her  scepticism,  one  of  the  most  wonder-
ful psychometers.  This  is  what  she  describes  in  one  of  her  ex-
periments. A  particle  of  a  meteorite  was  placed  on  her  forehead,  in  an
envelope,  and  the  lady,  not  being  aware  of  what  it  contained,  said :

What  a  difference  between  that  which  we  recognize  as  matter  here  and  that  which
seems  like  matter  there !  In  the  one,  the  elements  are  so  coarse  and  so  angular,
I  wonder  that  we  can  endure  it  at  all,  much  more  that  we  can  desire  to  continue
our  present  relations  to  it;  in  the  other,  all  the  elements  are  so  refined,  they  are  so
free  from  those  great,  rough  angularities,  which  characterize  the  elements  here,
that  I  can  but  regard  that  as  by  so  much  the  more  than  this  the  real  existence.  *

In  Theogony,  ever>'  Seed  is  an  ethereal  organism,  from  which  evolves
later  on  a  celestial  Being,  a  God.

In  the  "Beginning,"  that  which  is  called  in  mystic  phraseology
"Cosmic  Desire"  evolves  into  Absolute  Light.  Now  light  without  any
shadow  would  be  absolute  light ;  in  other  words,  absolute  darkness,  as
Physical  Science  tries  to  prove.  This  "shadow"  appears  under  the
form  of  primordial  matter,  allegorized — if  you  will — in  the  shape  of
the  Spirit  of  Creative  Fire  or  Heat.  If,  rejecting  the  poetical  form  and
allegory.  Science  chooses  to  see  in  this  the  primordial  "fire-mist,"  it  is
welcome  to  do  so.  Whether  one  way  or  the  other,  whether  Fohat  or
the  famous  Force  of  Science,  nameless  and  as  difficult  of  definition  as
our  Fohat  himself,  that  Something  "caused  the  Universe  to  move  with
circular  motion,"  as  Plato  has  it;  or,  as  the  Occult  teaching  ex-
presses it :

The  Central  Sun  causes  Fohat  to  collect  primordial  dust  in  the  form
of  hails,  to  imt>el  them  to  move  in  converging  lines  and  finally  to  apt>roach


op.  cii.,  III.  346.


THE   WAR    IN   HEAVEN.  22.3

tack  other  and  aggregate.  .  .  .  Being  scattered  in  Space,  without  order
or  system,  the  World-Germs  come  into  frequent  collision  tintil  their  final
aggregation,  after  which  they  becotne  Wanderers  \^Comets'}.  Then  the
battles  and  struggles  begin.  The  older  \bodies'\  attract  the  yozmger,  while
others  repel  them.  Many  perish,  devoured  by  their  stronger  companions.
Those  that  escape  become  worlds?^

When  carefully  analyzed  and  reflected  upon,  this  will  be  found  as
scientific  as  Science  can  make  it,  even  at  our  late  period.

We  have  been  assured,  that  there  exist  several  modern  works  of
speculative  fancy  upon  such  struggles  for  life  in  sidereal  heaven,
especially  in  the  German  language.  We  rejoice  to  hear  it,  for  ours  is
an  Occult  teaching  lost  in  the  darkness  of  archaic  ages.  We  have
treated  of  it  fully  in  Isis  Unveiled,^  and  the  idea  of  Darv/inian-like
evolution,  of  struggle  for  life  and  supremacy,  and  of  the  ''survival  of
the  fittest,"  among  the  Hosts  above  as  of  the  Hosts  below,  runs  through-
out both  the  volumes  of  our  earlier  work,  written  in  1876.  But  the
idea  is  not  ours,  it  is  that  of  antiquity.  Even  the  Puranic  writers
have  ingeniously  interwoven  allegory  with  cosmic  facts  and  human
events.  Any  symbologist  may  discern  their  astro-cosmical  allusions,
even  though  he  be  unable  to  grasp  the  whole  meaning.  The  great
"wars  in  heaven,"  in  the  Puranas;  the  wars  of  the  Titans,  in  Hesiod
and  other  classical  writers;  the  "struggles"  also  between  Osiris  and
Typhon,  in  the  Eg>'ptian  mj'th;  and  even  those  in  the  Scandinavian
legends;  all  refer  to  the  same  subject.  Northern  Mythology  refers  to  it
as  the  battle  of  the  Flames,  the  sons  of  Muspel  who  fought  on  the  field
of  Wigred.  All  these  relate  to  Heaven  and  Earth,  and  have  a  double,
and  often  even  a  triple,  meaning  and  esoteric  application  to  things
above  as  to  things  below.  They  severally  relate  to  astronomical,  theo-
gonical  and  human  struggles;  to  the  adjustment  of  orbs,  aud  the
supremacy  among  nations  and  tribes.  The  "struggle  for  existence"
and  the  "survival  of  the  fittest"  reigned  supreme  from  the  moment
that  Kosmos  manifested  into  being,  and  could  hardly  escape  the  obser-
vant eye  of  the  ancient  Sages.  Hence  the  incessant  fights  of  Indra,
the  God  of  the  Firmament,  with  the  Asuras — degraded  from  high  Gods
into  cosmic  Demons — and  with  Vritra  or  Ahi;  the  battles  fought
between  stars  and  constellations,  between  moons  and  planets — later  on
incarnated  as  kings  and  mortals.  Hence  also  the  War  in  Heaven  of
Michael  and  his  Host  against  the  Dragon — ^Jupiter  and  Lucifer  Venus —

.  *  Book  of  Dzyan.     +  Stclndex,  at  the  words  "Evolution,"  "Darwin,"  "Kapila,"  "Battle  of  Life,"  etc.


224  '^^^  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

when  a  third  of  the  stars  of  the  rebellious  Host  was  hurled  down  into
Space,  and  "its  place  was  found  no  more  in  Heaven."  As  we  wrote
long  ago :

This  is  the  basic  and  fundamental  stone  of  the  secret  cycles.  It  shows  that  the
Brahmans  and  Tanaim  .  .  .  speculated  on  the  creation  and  development  of  the
world  quite  in  a  Darwinian  way,  both  anticipating  him  and  his  school  in  the
natural  selection,  gradual  development  and  transformation  of  species.*

There  were  old  worlds  that  perished,  conquered  by  the  new,  etc.,  etc.
The  assertion  that  all  the  worlds  (stars,  planets,  etc.) — as  soon  as  a
nucleus  of  primordial  substance,  in  the  laya  (undifferentiated)  state,  is
informed  by  the  freed  principles  of  a  just  deceased  sidereal  body — be-
come first  comets,  and  then  suns,  to  cool  down  to  inhabitable  worlds,  is
a  teaching  as  old  as  the  Rishis.

Thus  the  Secret  Books,  as  we  see,  distinctly  teach  an  astrononi}-  that
would  not  be  rejected  even  by  modern  speculation,  could  the  latter
thoroughly  understand  its  teachings.

For  archaic  astronomy  and  the  ancient  physical  and  mathematical
sciences  expressed  views  identical  with  those  of  Modern  Science,  and
many  of  far  more  momentous  import.  A  "struggle  for  life"  and  a
"survival  of  the  fittest,"  in  the  worlds  above  and  on  our  planet  here
below,  are  distinctly  taught.  This  teaching,  however,  although  it
would  not  be  entirely  rejected  by  Science,  is  sure  to  be  repudiated  as
an  integral  whole.  For  it  avers  that  there  are  only  seven  self-born
primordial  "Gods,"  emanated  from  the  trinitarian  One.  In  other
words,  it  means  that  all  the  worlds,  or  sidereal  bodies — always  on  strict
analogy — are  formed  one  from  the  other,  after  the  primordial  manifes-
tation at  the  beginning  of  the  Great  Age  is  accomplished.

The  birth  of  the  celestial  bodies  in  space  is  compared  to  a  multitude
of  pilgrims  at  the  Festival  of  the  Fires.  Seven  ascetics  appear  on  the
threshold  of  the  temple  with  seven  lighted  sticks  of  incense.  At  the
light  of  these  the  first  row  of  pilgrims  light  their  incense  sticks.
After  which,  every  ascetic  begins  whirling  his  stick  around  his  head  in
space,  and  furnishes  the  rest  with  fire.  Thus  with  the  heavenly  bodies.
A  laya-centre  is  lighted  and  awakened  into  life  by  the  fires  of  another
"pilgrim,"  after  which,  the  new  "centre"  rushes  into  space  and  be-
comes a  comet.  It  is  only  after  losing  its  velocity,  and  hence  its  fiery
tail,  that  the  Fiery  Dragon  settles  down  into  quiet  and  steady  life,  as  a
regular  respectable  citizen  of  the  sidereal  family.     Therefore  it  is  said'

*  liis  Unveiled,  II.  260.


THE   BIRTH    OF   THE   WORLDS.  225

Born  in  the  unfathotnable  depths  of  Space,  out  of  the  homogeneous
Element  called  the  World- Soul,  every  nucleus  of  cosmic  matter,  suddenly
lau7iched  into  being,  begins  life  U7ider  the  most  hostile  circumstances.
Through  a  series  of  countless  ages,  it  has  to  conquer  for  itself  a  place  iji
the  i7ifinitudes.  It  circles  round  and  round,  betweeyi  denser  and  already
fixed  bodies,  moviiig  by  jerks,  and  pulling  towards  some  given  point  or
centre  that  attracts  it,  and,  like  as  a  ship  drawn  into  a  channel  dotted
with  reefs  a7id  sunken  rocks,  trying  to  avoid  other  bodies  that  draw  and
repel  it  in  turn.  Ma?iy  perish,  their  mass  disintegratijig  through  stronger
masses,  and,  when  born  within  a  system,  chiefly  within  the  insatiable
stomachs  of  various  Suns.  Those  which  move  slower,  and  are  propelled
into  an  elliptic  cozirse,  are  doomed  to  annihilation  sooner  or  later.  Others,
viovifig  in  parabolic  ciirves,  generally  escape  destruction,  owi?ig  to  their
velocity.

Some  very  critical  readers  will  perhaps  imagine  that  this  teaching,
as  to  the  cometar>-  stage  passed  through  by  all  heavenly  bodies,  is  in
contradiction  with  the  statements  just  made  as  to  the  Moon  being  the
mother  of  the  Earth.  They  will  perhaps  fancy  that  intuition  is  needed
to  harmonize  the  two.  But  no  intuition  is  in  truth  required.  What
does  Science  know  of  comets,  their  genesis,  growth,  and  ultimate
behaviour?  Nothing— absolutely  nothing!  And  what  is  there  so
impossible  in  that  a  laya-centre— a  lump  of  cosmic  protoplasm,  homo-
geneous and  latent— when  suddenly  animated  or  fired  up,  should  rush
from  its  bed  in  space,  and  whirl  throughout  the  abysmal  depths,  in
order  to  strengthen  its  homogeneous  organism  by  an  accumulation  and
addition  of  differentiated  elements?  And  why  should  not  such  a  comet
settle  in  life,  live,  and  become  an  inhabited  globe?

"  The  abodes  of  Fohat  are  many''— it  is  said.  '' He  places  his  Four  Fiery
[electro-positive]  Sons  in  the  Four  Circles";  these  Circles  are  the  equator,
the  ecliptic,  and  the  two  parallels  of  declination,  or  the  tropics,  to
preside  over  the  climates  of  which  are  placed  the  Four  Mystical
Entities.  Then  again:  ''Other  Seven  [So?is']  are  commissiotied  to  preside
over  the  seven  hot,  and  seven  cold  Lokas  [the  Hells  of  the  orthodox
Brdhmans]  at  the  two  ends  of  the  Egg  of  Matter  [our  Earth  ayid  its
polesy  The  seven  Lokas  are  elsewhere  also  called  the  "Rings"  and
the  "Circles."  The  Ancients  made  the  polar  circles  seven  instead  of
two,  as  do  the  Europeans ;  for  Mount  Mem,  which  is  the  North  Pole,
is  said  to  have  seven  gold  and  seven  silver  steps  leading  to  it.

The  strange  statements,  in  one  of  the  Stanzas,  that  "  The  Songs  of


•726  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Foh'^f  and  his  Sons  were  radiant  as  the  noofi-tide  Sun  and  the  M0071
combined,''  and  that  the  Four  Sons,  on  the  middle  Four-fold  Circle,
"SAW  their  Father's  Songs  and  heard  his  solar-selenic  Radiayice,"  are
explained,  in  the  Commentary,  in  these  words:  ''The  agitation  of  the
Fohatic  Forces  at  the  two  cold  ends  \_North  and  South  Poles'\  of  the  Earth,
which  results  in  a  mtdticolotired  radiance  at  night,  has  in  it  several  of
the  properties  of  Akasha  [Fther'],  Colour  a?id  Sound  as  well."

"Sound  is  the  characteristic  of  Akasha  [Ether]:  it  generates  Air,
the  property  of  which  is  Touch;  which  [by  friction]  becomes  produc-
tive of  Colour  and  Light."*

Perhaps  the  above  will  be  regarded  as  archaic  nonsense,  but  it  will
be  better  comprehended,  if  the  reader  remembers  the  Aurora  Borealis
and  Australis,  both  of  which  take  place  at  the  very  centres  of  terres-
trial electric  and  magnetic  forces.  The  two  Poles  are  said  to  be  the
store-houses,  the  receptacles  and  liberators,  at  the  same  time,  of  cosmic
and  terrestrial  Vitality  (Electricity),  from  the  surplus  of  which  the
Earth,  had  it  not  been  for  these  two  natural  safety-valves,  would  have
been  rent  to  pieces  long  ago.  At  the  same  time  it  is  a  theory  that
has  lately  become  an  axiom,  that  the  phenomenon  of  the  polar  lights
is  accompanied  by,  and  productive  of,  strong  sounds,  like  whistling,
hissing  and  cracking.  See  Professor  Humboldt's  works  on  the  Aurora
Borealis,  and  his  correspondence  regarding  this  moot  question.


STANZA   ^\.— Continued.
7.  Make  thy  calculations,  O  Lanoo,  if  thou  wouldst  learn

THE  CORRECT  AGE   OF  THY   SmALL   WHEEL.f       ITS    FOURTH    SpOKE   IS

OUR  Mother  t  («)•  Reach  the  Fourth  Fruit  of  the  Fourth
Path  of  Knowledge  that  leads  to  Nirvana,  and  thou  shalt
comprehend,  for  thou  shalt  see  {p).     .     .     .

(fl)  The  "Small  Wheel"  is  our  Chain  of  Spheres,  and  the  "Fourth
Spoke"  is  our  Earth,  the  fourth  in  the  Chain.  It  is  one  of  those  on
which  the  "hot  [positive]  breath  of  the  Sun"  has  a  direct  eflfect.

The  seven  fundamental  transformations  of  the  Globes  or  heavenly
Spheres,  or  rather  of  their  constituent  particles  of  matter,  are  described
as  follows:  (i)  homogeneoics ;  (2)  aeriform  and  radia?it — gaseous;  (3)
curd-like  (nebulous);  (4)  atomic,  ethereal — beginning  of  motion,  hence  of
differentiation  ;  (5)  germinal,  fiery — differentiated,  but  composed  of  the

•   Vishnu  Pur&na.  t  Chain.  X  Harth.


THE   SEVEN   GRADES   OF   INITIATION.


227


germs  only  of  the  Elements,  in  their  earliest  states,  they  having  seven
states,  when  completely  developed  on  our  earth ;  (6)  four-fold,  vapoury —
the  future  Earth;  (7)  cold — and  depending  on  the  Sun  for  life  and  light.

To  calculate  its  age,  however,  as  the  pupil  is  asked  to  do  in  the
Stanza,  is  rather  difi&cult,  since  we  are  not  given  the  figures  of  the
Great  Kalpa,  and  are  not  allowed  to  publish  those  of  our  small  Yugas,
except  as  to  the  approximate  duration  of  these.  "  The  older  Wheels
rotated  for  one  Eternity  and  one-half  of  a7i  Eternity"  it  says.  We  know
that  by  "Eternity"  the  seventh  part  of  311,040,000,000,000  years,  or  an
Age  of  Brahma  is  meant.  But  what  of  that?  We  also  know  that,  to
begin  with,  if  we  take  for  our  basis  the  above  figures,  we  have  first  of
all  to  eliminate  from  the  100  Years  of  Brahma,  or  311,040,000,000,000
3'ears,  two  Years  taken  up  by  the  Sandhyas  (Twilights),  which  leaves
98,  as  we  have  to  bring  it  to  the  mystical  combination  14  x  7.  But  we
have  no  knowledge  at  what  time  precisely  the  evolution  and  formation
of  our  little  Earth  began.  Therefore,  it  is  impossible  to  calculate  its
age,  unless  the  time  of  its  birth  is  given — which  the  Teachers  refuse  to
do,  so  far.  At  the  close  of  this  Volume  and  in  Volume  II,  however,
some  chronological  hints  will  be  given.  We  must  remember,  more-
over, that  the  law  of  analogy  holds  good  for  the  worlds,  as  it  does  for
man;  and  that  as  ''The  One  [Deity^  becomes  Two  \_Deva  or  Atigel^  and
Two  becomes  Three  [or  Man'],"  etc.,  so  we  are  taught  that  the  Curds
(World-Stuff)  become  Wanderers  (Comets);  these  become  stars;  and
the  stars  (the  centres  of  vortices),  our  sun  and  planets — to  put  it  briefly.
This  cannot  be  so  very  2i?iscie?itifc,  since  Descartes  also  thought  that
"the  planets  rotate  on  their  axes,  because  they  were  once  lucid  stars,
the  centres  of  vortices."

(d)  There  are  four  grades  of  Initiation  mentioned  in  exoteric  works,
which  are  known  respectively  in  Sanskrit  as  Srotapanna,  Sakridagamin,
Anagamin,  and  Arhan;  the  Four  Paths  to  Nirvana,  in  this  our  Fourth
Round,  bearing  the  same  appellations.  The  Arhan,  though  he  can  see
the  Past,  the  Present  and  the  Future,  is  not  yet  the  highest  Initiate;
for  the  Adept  himself,  the  ijiitiated  candidate,  becomes  Chela  (Pupil)
to  a  higher  Initiate.  Three  higher  grades  have  still  to  be  conquered
by  the  Arhan  who  would  reach  the  apex  of  the  ladder  of  Arliat-
ship.  There  are  those  who  have  reached  it  even  in  this  Fifth  Race  of
ours,  but  the  faculties  necessary  for  the  attainment  of  these  higher
grades  will  be  fully  developed,  in  the  average  ascetic,  only  at  the  end  of
this  Root- Race,  and  in  the  Sixth  and  Seventh.     Thus,  there  will  always


228  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

be  Initiates  and  the  Profane  until  the  end  of  this  minor  Manvantara,
the  present  Life-Cycle.  The  Arhats  of  the  "Fire- Mist,"  of  the  Seventh
Rung,  are  but  one  remove  from  the  Root-Base  of  their  Hierarchy,  the
highest  on  Earth  and  our  Teiirestrial  Chain.  This  "Root-Base"  has  a
name  which  can  only  be  translated  into  English  by  several  compound
words — the  "Ever-Living-Human-Banj^an."  This  "Wondrous  Being"
descended  from  a  "high  region,"  they  say,  in  the  early  part  of  the
Third  Age,  before  the  separation  of  sexes  in  the  Third  Race.

This  Third  Race  is  sometimes  called  collectively  the  "  Sons  of  Pas-
sive Yoga,"  i.e.,  it  was  produced  unconsciously  by  the  Second  Race,
which,  as  it  was  intellectually  inactive,  is  supposed  to  have  been  con-
stantly plunged  in  a  kind  of  blank  or  abstract  contemplation,  as  re-
quired by  the  conditions  of  the  Yoga  state.  In  the  first  or  earlier
portion  of  the  existence  of  this  Third  Race,  while  it  was  yet  in  its  state
of  purity,  the  "Sons  of  Wisdom,"  who,  as  will  be  seen,  incarnated  in
this  Root-Race,  produced  by  Kriyashakti  a  progeny,  called  the  "Sons
of  Ad,"  or  of  the  "Fire-Mist,"  the  " Sons  of  Will  and  Yoga,"  etc.  They
were  a  conscious  production,  as  a  portion  of  the  Race  was  already
animated  with  the  divine  spark  of  spiritual,  superior  intelligence.
This  progeny  was  not  a  race.  It  was  at  first  a  Wondrous  Being,  called
the  "Initiator,"  and  after  him  a  group  of  semi-divine  and  semi-human
Beings.  "Set  apart"  in  archaic  genesis  for  certain  purposes,  they  are
those  in  whom  are  said  to  have  incarnated  the  highest  Dhyanis —
"Munis  and  Rishis  from  previous  Manvantaras" — to  form  the  rmrsery
for  future  human  Adepts,  on  this  Earth  and  during  the  present  Cycle.
These  "Sons  of  Will  and  Yoga,"  born,  so  to  speak,  in  an  immaculate
way,  remained,  it  is  explained,  entirely  apart  from  the  rest  of  mankind.

The  "Being"  just  referred  to,  who  has  to  remain  nameless,  is  the
Tree  from  which,  in  subsequent  ages,  all  the  great  historically  known
Sages  and  Hierophants,  such  as  the  Rishi  Kapila,  Hermes,  Enoch,
Orpheus,  etc.,  have  branched  off.  As  objective  ma7i,  he  is  the  vays-
terious  (to  the  profane — the  ever  invisible,  yet  ever  present)  Personage,
about  whom  legends  are  rife  in  the  East,  especially  among  the  Occul-
tists and  the  students  of  the  Sacred  Science.  It  is  he  who  changes
form,  yet  remains  ever  the  same.  And  it  is  he,  again,  who  holds
spiritual  sway  over  the  initiated  Adepts  throughout  the  whole  world.
He  is,  as  said,  the  "Nameless  One"  who  has  so  many  names,  and  yet
whose  names  and  whose  very  nature  are  unknown.  He  is  the  "Initia-
tor," called  the  "Great  Sacrifice."      For,  sitting  at  the  Threshold


THE   LOST   CANON   OF   PROPORTION.  229

of  Light,  he  looks  into  it  from  within  the  Circle  of  Darkness,  which
he  will  not  cross;  nor  will  he  quit  his  post  till  the  last  Day  of  this
Life-Cycle.  Why  does  the  Solitary  Watcher  remain  at  his  self-
chosen  post?  Why  does  he  sit  by  the  Fountain  of  Primeval  Wisdom,
of  which  he  drinks  no  longer,  for  he  has  naught  to  learn  which  he  does
not  know— aye,  neither  on  this  Earth,  nor  in  its  Heaven?  Because  the
lonely,  sore-footed  Pilgrims,  on  their  journey  back  to  their  Home,  are
never  sure,  to  the  last  moment,  of  not  losing  their  way,  in  this  limitless
desert  of  Illusion  and  Matter  called  Earth-Life.  Because  he  would  fain
show  the  way  to  that  region  of  freedom  and  light,  from  which  he  is  a
voluntary  exile  himself,  to  every  prisoner  who  has  succeeded  in  liberat-
ing himself  from  the  bonds  of  flesh  and  illusion.  Because,  in  short,  he
has  sacrificed  himself  for  the  sake  of  Mankind,  though  but  a  few  elect
may  profit  by  the  Great  Sacrifice.

It  is  under  the  direct,  silent  guidance  of  this  Maha-Guru  that  all  the
other  less  divine  Teachers  and  Instructors  of  Mankind  became,  from
the  first  awakening  of  human  consciousness,  the  guides  of  early  Hu-
manity. It  is  through  these  "Sons  of  God"  that  infant  Humanity
learned  its  first  notions  of  all  the  arts  and  sciences,  as  well  as  of
spiritual  knowledge;  and  it  is  They  who  laid  the  first  foundation-stone
of  those  ancient  civilizations  that  so  sorely  puzzle  our  modern  genera-
tion of  students  and  scholars.

Let  those  who  doubt  this  statement,  explain,  on  any  other  equallj^
reasonable  grounds,  the  mystery  of  the  extraordinary  knowledge  pos-
sessed b}^  the  Ancients — who,  some  pretend,  developed  from  lower  and
animal-like  savages,  the  "cave-men"  of  the  palaeolithic  age!  Let  them
turn,  for  instance,  to  such  works  as  those  of  Vitruvius  Pollio  of  the
Augustan  age,  on  architecture,  in  which  all  the  rules  of  proportion  are
those  anciently  taught  at  Initiaiio7is,  if  they  would  acquaint  themselves
with  this  truly  divine  art,  and  understand  the  deep  esoteric  significance
hidden  in  every  rule  and  law  of  proportion.  No  man  descended  from  a
palaeolithic  cave-dweller  could  ever  evolve  such  a  science  unaided,  even
in  millenniums  of  thought  and  intellectual  evolution.  It  is  the  pupils
of  those  incarnated  Rishis  and  Devas  of  the  Third  Root  Race  who
handed  on  their  knowledge,  from  one  generation  to  another,  to  Eg>pt
and  to  Greece  with  her  now  lost  canon  of  proportio7i ;  just  as  the  dis-
ciples of  the  Initiates  of  the  Fourth,  the  Atlanteans,  handed  it  over  to
their  Cyclopes,  the  "Sons  of  Cycles"  or  of  the  "Infinite,"  from  whom
the  name  passed  to  the  still  later  generations  of  Gnostic  priests.


230  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

It  is  owing  to  the  divine  perfection  of  these  architectural  proportions  that  the
Ancients  could  build  these  wonders  of  all  the  subsequent  ages,  their  Fanes,  Pyra-
mids, Cave-Temples,  Cromlechs,  Cairns,  Altars,  proving  they  had  the  powers  of
machinery  and  a  knowledge  of  mechanics  to  which  modern  skill  is  like  a  child's
play,  and  which  that  skill  refers  to  itself  as  the  "works  of  hundred-handed  giants."*

Modern  architects  may  not  have  altogether  neglected  these  rules,
but  they  have  superadded  enough  empirical  innovations  to  destroy
the  just  proportions.  It  is  Vitruvius  who  gave  to  posterity  the  rules
of  construction  of  the  Grecian  temples  erected  to  the  immortal  Gods;
and  the  ten  books  of  Marcus  Vitruvius  Pollio  on  Architecture,  of  one,
in  short,  who  was  an  Initiate,  can  only  be  studied  esoterically.  The
Druidical  Circles,  the  Dolmens,  the  Temples  of  India,  Egypt  and  Greece,
the  Towers,  and  the  127  towns  in  Europe  which  were  found  "Cyclopean
in  origin"  by  the  French  Institute,  are  all  the  work  of  initiated  Priest-
Architects,  the  descendants  of  those  first  taught  by  the  "Sons  of  God,"
and  justly  called  the  "Builders."  This  is  v\^hat  appreciative  posterity
says  of  these  descendants :

They  used  neither  mortar  nor  cement,  nor  steel,  nor  iron  to  cut  the  stones  with;
and  yet  they  were  so  artificially  wrought  that  in  many  places  the  joints  are  hardly
seen,  though  many  of  the  stones,  as  in  Peru,  are  38  feet  long,  18  feet  broad,  and  6  feet
thick,  and  in  the  walls  of  the  fortress  of  Cuzco  there  are  stones  of  a  still  greater  size.t

Again  :

The  well  of  Syene,  made  5,400  years  ago,  when  that  spot  was  exactly  under
the  tropic,  which  it  has  now  ceased  to  be,  was  ...  so  constructed,  that  at
noon,  at  the  precise  moment  of  the  solar  solstice,  the  entire  disk  of  the  sun  was
seen  reflected  on  its  surface — a  work  which  the  united  skill  of  all  the  astronomers
in  Europe  would  not  now  be  able  to  effect.  J

Although  these  matters  were  barely  hinted  at  in  his  Ujiveiled,  it  will
be  well  to  remind  the  reader  of  what  was  said  there  §  concerning  a
certain  Sacred  Island  in  Central  Asia,  and  to  refer  him  for  further
details  to  the  Section,  entitled  "The  Sons  of  God  and  the  Sacred
Island,"  attached  to  Stanza  IX  of  Volume  II.  A  few  more  explana-
tions, however,  though  thrown  out  in  a  fragmentary  form,  may  help
the  student  to  obtain  a  glimpse  into  the  present  mystery.

To  state  at  least  one  detail  concerning  these  mysterious  "Sons  of
God"  in  plain  words:  it  is  from  them,  these  Brahmaputras,  that  the
high  Dvijas,  the  initiated  Brahmans  of  old,  claimed  descent,  while  the
modem  Brahman  would  have  the  lower  castes  believe  literally  that
they  (the  Brahmans)  issued  direct  from  the  mouth  of  Brahma.     Such  is


•  Kenealy,  Book  of  God,  p.  ii8.  +  Acosta,  vi.  14.  X  Kenealy,  ibid.  \  I.  587-93.


THE   ORIGIN   OF   DEVOTION.  23 1

the  Esoteric  teaching;  and  it  adds  moreover  that,  although  those  de-
scended (spiritually,  of  course)  from  the  "Sons  of  Will  and  Yoga"
became  in  time  divided  into  opposite  sexes,  as  their  "  KriySshakti"
progenitors  did  themselves  later  on;  yet  even  their  degenerate  de-
scendants have,  down  to  the  present  day,  retained  a  veneration  and
respect  for  the  creative  function,  and  still  regard  it  in  the  light  of  a
religious  ceremony,  whereas  the  more  civilized  nations  consider  it  as
a  mere  animal  function.  Compare  the  Western  views  and  practice  in
these  matters  with  the  Institutions  of  Manu,  in  regard  to  the  laws  of
Grihastha,  or  married  life.  The  true  Brahman  is,  thus,  indeed  "he
whose  seven  forefathers  have  drunk  the  juice  of  the  Moon-plant
(Soma),"  and  who  is  a  "Trisuparna,"  for  he  has  understood  the  secret
of  the  Vedas.

And,  to  this  day,  such  Brahmans  know  that,  during  the  early  be-
ginnings of  this  Race,  psychic  and  physical  intellect  being  dormant
and  consciousness  still  undeveloped,  its  spiritual  conceptions  were
quite  unconnected  with  its  physical  surroundings;  that  divi?ie  man
dwelt  in  his  animal — though  externally  human — form ;  that,  if  there
was  instinct  in  him,  no  self-consciousness  came  to  enlighten  the  dark-
ness of  the  latent  Fifth  Principle.  When  the  Lords  of  Wisdom,  moved
by  the  law  of  evolution,  infused  into  him  the  spark  of  consciousness,
the  first  feeling  it  awoke  to  life  and  activity  was  a  sense  of  solidarity,
of  one-ness  with  his  spiritual  creators.  As  the  child's  first  feeling  is
for  its  mother  and  nurse,  so  the  first  aspirations  of  the  awakening  con-
sciousness in  primitive  man  were  for  those  whose  element  he  felt
within  himself,  and  who  were  yet  outside,  and  independent  of  hiui.
Devotion  arose  out  of  that  feeling,  and  became  the  first  and  foremost
motor  in  his  nature;  for  it  is  the  only  one  which  is  natural  in  his
heart,  which  is  innate  in  him,  and  which  we  find  alike  in  the  human
babe  and  the  young  of  the  animal.  This  feeling  of  irrepressible,  in-
stinctive aspiration  in  primitive  man  is  beautifully,  and  one  may  say
intuitionaily,  described  by  Carlyle,  who  exclaims :

The  great  antique  heart— how  like  a  child's  in  its  simplicity,  like  a  man's  in  its
earnest  solemnity  and  depth !  Heaven  lies  over  him  wheresoever  he  goes  or  stands
on  the  earth ;  making  all  the  earth  a  mystic  temple  to  him,  the  earth's  business  all
a  kind  of  worship.     Glimpses  of  bright  creatures  flash  in  the  common  sunlight;

angels  yet  hover,  doing  God's  messages  among  men Wonder,  miracle,

encompass  the  man ;  he  lives  in  an  element  of  miracle.*     ....     A  great  law  of

•  That  which  was  natural  in  the  sight  of  primitive  man,  has  only  now  become  miracle  to  us;  and
that  which  was  to  him  a  miracle,  could  never  be  expressed  in  our  language.  ,


232  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

duty,  high  as  these  two  infinitudes  (heaven  and  hell),  dwarfing  all  else,  annihilating
all  else — it  was  a  reality,  and  it  is  one:  the  garment  only  of  it  is  dead;  the  essence
of  it  lives  through  all  times  and  all  eternity !

It  lives  undeniably,  and  has  settled  in  all  its  ineradicable  strength

A

and  power  in  the  Asiatic  Aryan  heart,  from  the  Third  Race  direct,
through  its  first  Mind-born  Sons,  the  fruits  of  Kriyashakti.  As  time
rolled  on,  the  holy  caste  of  Initiates  produced,  but  rarely,  from  age
to  age,  such  perfect  creatures;  beings  apart,  inwardly,  though  the
same  as  those  who  produced  them,  outwardly.

In  the  infancy  of  the  Third  primitive  Race:
A  creature  of  a  more  exalted  kind
Was  wanting  yet,  and  therefore  was  designed;
Conscious  of  thought,  of  more  capacious  breast,
For  empire  formed  and  fit  to  rule  the  rest.

It  was  called  into  being,  a  ready  and  perfect  vehicle  for  the  incar-
nating denizens  of  higher  spheres,  who  took  forthwith  their  abodes  in
these  forms,  born  of  Spiritual  Will  and  the  natural  divine  power  in
man.  It  was  a  child  of  pure  spirit,  mentally  unalloyed  with  any
tincture  of  earthly  element.  Its  physical  frame  alone  was  of  time  and
of  life,  for  it  drew  its  intelligence  direct  from  above.  It  was  the  I^iving
Tree  of  Divine  Wisdom ;  and  may  therefore  be  likened  to  the  Mundane
Tree  of  the  Norse  I^egeuds,  which  cannot  wither  and  die  until  the  last
battle  of  life  shall  be  fought,  while  its  roots  are  all  the  time  gnawed  by
the  dragon  Nidhogg.  For  even  so,  the  first  and  holy  Son  of  Kriyashakti
had  his  body  gnawed  by  the  tooth  of  time,  but  the  roots  of  his  inner
being  remained  for  ever  undecaying  and  strong,  because  they  grew  and
expanded  in  heaven,  and  not  on  earth.  He  was  the  first  of  the  First,
and  he  was  the  Seed  of  all  the  others.  There  were  other  Sons  of
Kriyashakti  produced  by  a  second  spiritual  efibrt,  but  the  first  one  has
remained  to  this  day  the  Seed  of  Divine  Knowledge,  the  One  and  the
Supreme  among  the  terrestrial  "Sons  of  Wisdom."  Of  this  subject  we
can  say  no  more,  except  to  add  that  in  every  age — aye,  even  in  our  own
— there  have  been  great  intellects  who  have  understood  the  problem
correctly.

But  how  comes  our  physical  body  to  the  state  of  perfection  it  is  now
found  in?  Through  millions  of  years  of  evolution,  of  course,  yet
never  through,  or  from,  animals,  as  taught  by  Materialism.  For,  as
Carlyle  says :

.  .  .  The  essence  of  our  being,  the  mj^stery  in  us  that  calls  itself  "I," — ah,
what  words  have  we  for  such  things.? — is  a  breath  of  Heaven;  the  Highest  Being


THE   CREATIVE   POWERS.  233

reveals  himself  in  man.     This  body,  these  faculties,  this  life  of  ours,  is  it  not  all  as
a  vesture  for  that  Unnamed  ?

The  "breath  of  Heaven,"  or  rather  the  breath  of  L,ife,  called  in  the
Bible  Nephesh,  is  in  ever>'  animal,  in  every  animate  speck  and  in  every
mineral  atom.  But  none  of  these  has,  like  man,  the  consciousness  of
the  nature  of  that  "Highest  Being,"*  as  none  has  that  divine  harmony
in  its  form,  which  man  possesses.  It  is,  as  Novalis  said,  and  no  one
since  has  said  it  better,  as  repeated  by  Carlyle:

There  is  but  one  temple  in  the  Universe,  and  that  is  the  Body  of  Man.  Nothing
is  holier  than  that  high  form.  .  .  .  We  touch  Heaven  when  we  lay  cur  hand  on
a  human  body!  This  sounds  like  a  mere  flourish  of  rhetoric;  but  it  is  not  so.  If
well  meditated,  it  will  turn  out  to  be  a  scientific  fact;  the  expression  ...  of
the  actual  truth  of  the  thing.  We  are  the  miracle  of  miracles — the  great  inscrutable
Mystery.     .     .     .t


STANZA  VII.

I.  Behold  the  beginning  of  sentient  formless  Life  (a).

First,  the  Divine  %  {b),  the  One  from  the  Mother-Spirit  ;§
then,  the  Spiritual  II  (^);  ^the  Three  from  the  One  {d),  the
Four  from  the  One  {e),  and  the  Five  (/),  from  which  the  Three,
THE  Five  and  the  Seven  {g).  These  are  the  Three-fold  and
the  Four-fold  downward;  the  Mind-born  Sons  of  the  First
Lord,**  the  Shining  Seven. ff  It  is  they  who  are  thou,  I,  he,
O  Lanoo;  they  who  watch  over  thee  and  thy  mother,  Bhumi.|:[:

(a)  The  Hierarchy  of  Creative  Powers  is  divided  esoterically  into
Seven  (four  and  three),  within  the  Twelve  great  Orders,  recorded  in  the
twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac;  the  Seven  of  the  manifesting  scale  being
connected,  moreover,  with  the  Seven  Planets.  All  these  are  subdivided
into  numberless  Groups  of  divine  spiritual,  semi-spiritual,  and  ethereal
Beings.

•  There  is  no  nation  in  the  world  in  which  the  feeling  of  devotion,  or  of  religious  mysticism,  is  more
developed  and  prominent  than  in  the  Hindu  people.  See  what  Max  Miiller  says  of  this  idiosyncrasy
and  national  feature  in  his  works.  This  is  a  direct  inheritance  from  the  primitive  conscious  men  of
the  Third  Race.

t  Lectures  on  Heroes.

t  Vehicle.

\  Atman.

II  Atma-Buddhi,  Spirit-Soul.    This  relates  to  the  cosmic  principles.

^  Ag:ain.

••  Avalokiteshvara.

++  Bflilders.    The  seven  creative  Rishis,  now  connected  with  the  constellation  of  the  Great  Bear.

tt  Earth.


234  I'HE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

The  chief  Hierarchies  among  these  are  hinted  at  in  the  great  Quater-
nary, or  the  "four  bodies  and  the  three  faculties,"  exoterically,  of
Brahma  and  the  Panchasya,  the  five  Brahmas,  or  the  five  Dhyani-
Buddhas  in  the  Buddhist  system.

The  highest  Group  is  composed  of  the  Divine  Flames,  so  called,  also
spoken  of  as  the  "Fiery  Lions"  and  the  "  I^ions  of  lyife,"  whose  esoteri-
cism  is  securely  hidden  in  the  zodiacal  sign  of  lyco.  It  is  the  nucleole
of  the  superior  Divine  World.  They  are  the  Formless  Fiery  Breaths,
identical  in  one  aspect  with  the  upper  Sephirothal  Triad,  which  is
placed  by  the  Kabalists  in  the  Archetypal  World.

The  same  Hierarchy,  with  the  same  numbers,  is  found  in  the  Japanese
system,  in  the  "Beginnings,"  as  taught  by  both  the  Shinto  and  the
Buddhist  sects.  In  this  system,  Anthropogenesis  precedes  Cosmo-
genesis,  as  the  divine  merges  into  the  human,  and  creates — midway  in
its  descent  into  matter — the  visible  Universe;  the  legendary  person-
ages, remarks  reverentially  Omoie,  "having  to  be  understood  as  the
stereotyped  embodiment  of  the  higher  [secret]  doctrine,  and  its
sublime  truths."  To  state  this  old  system  at  full  length  would  occupy
too  much  of  our  space;  a  few  words  on  it,  however,  cannot  be  out
of  place.  The  following  is  a  short  synopsis  of  this  Anthropo-Cosmo-
genesis,  and  shows  how  closely  the  most  separated  nations  echoed
one  and  the  same  archaic  teaching.

When  all  was  as  yet  Chaos  (Kon-ton),  three  spiritual  Beings  appeared
on  the  stage  of  future  creation:  (i)  Ame  no  ani  naka  nushi  no  Kami,
"Divine  Monarch  of  the  Central  Heaven";  (2)  Taka  mi  onosubi  no
Kami,  "Exalted,  Imperial  Divine  Offspring  of  Heaven  and  Earth";
and  (3)  Kamu  mi  musubi  no  Kami,  "Offspring  of  the  Gods,"  simply.

These  were  without  form  or  substance — our  Arupa  Triad — as  neither
the  celestial  nor  the  terrestrial  substance  had  yet  differentiated,  "  nor
had  the  essence  of  things  been  formed."

((5)  In  the  Zohar — which,  as  now  arranged  and  reedited  by  Moses  de
Eeon,  with  the  help  of  Syrian  and  Chaldean  Christian  Gnostics,  in  the
Xlllth  century,  and  corrected  and  revised  still  later  by  man}^  Christian
hands,  is  only  a  little  less  exoteric  than  the  Bible  itself— this  "Divine
[Vehicle]"  no  longer  appears  as  it  does  in  the  Chaldean  Book  of
Numbers.  True  enough,  Ain  Suph,  the  Absolute  Endless  No-thing,
uses  also  the  form  of  the  One,  the  manifested  "Heavenly  Man"  (the
First  Cause),  as  its  Chariot  (Mercabah,  in  Hebrew;  Vahana,  in  Sanskrit)
or  Vehicle,  to  descend  into,  and   manifest  itself  in,  the  phenomenal


ONE   PARENT  FLAME,   COUNTLESS   FLAMES.  235

world.  But  the  Kabalists  neither  make  it  plain  how  the  Absolute
can  use  anything,  or  exercise  any  attribute  whatever,  since,  as  the
Absolute,  it  is  devoid  of  attributes;  nor  do  they  explain  that  in  reality
it  is  the  First  Cause  (Plato's  L^ogos),  the  original  and  eternal  Idea,  that
manifests  through  Adam  Kadmon,  the  Second  l^ogos,  so  to  speak.  In
the  Book  of  Numbers,  it  is  explained  that  Ain  (En,  or  Aior)  is  the  only
self-existent,  whereas  its  "Depth,"  the  Bythos  of  the  Gnostics,  called
Propator,  is  only  periodical.  The  latter  is  Brahma,  as  diflFerentiated
from  Brahman  or  Parabrahman.  It  is  the  Depth,  the  Source  of  Light,
or  Propator,  which  is  the  Unmanifested  Logos,  or  the  abstract  Idea,  and
not  Ain  Suph,  whose  Ray  uses  Adam  Kadmon — "male  and  female" —
or  the  Manifested  Logos,  the  objective  Universe,  as  a  Chariot,  through
which  to  manifest.  But  in  the  Zohar  we  read  the  following  incon-
gruity: "■Senior  occultatus  est,  et  abscondiius ;  Microprosopus  manifestus
est,  et  non  manifestus ^"^  This  is  a  fallacy,  since  Microprosopus,  or  the
Microcosm,  can  only  exist  during  its  manifestations,  and  is  destroyed
during  the  Mahapralayas.  Rosenroth's  Kabbala  is  no  guide,  but  very
often  a  puzzle.

The  First  Order  are  the  Divine.  As  in  the  Japanese  system,  in
the  Egyptian,  and  every  old  cosmogony — at  this  divine  Flame,  the
"One,"  are  lit  the  Three  descending  Groups.  Having  their  potential
being  in  the  higher  Group,  they  now  become  distinct  and  separate
Entities.  These  are  called  the  Virgins  of  Life,  the  Great  Illusion,  etc.,
etc.,  and  collectively  the  six-pointed  star.  The  latter,  in  almost  every
religion,  is  the  symbol  of  the  Logos  as  the  first  emanation.  It  is  the
sign  of  Vishnu  in  India,  the  Chakra,  or  Wheel ;  and  the  glyph  of  the
Tetragrammaton,  "He  of  the  Four  Letters,"  in  the  Kabalah,  or  meta-
phorically the  "Limbs  of  Microprosopus,"  which  are  ten  and  six
respectivel5\

The  later  Kabalists,  however,  especially  the  Christian  Mystics,  have
played  sad  havoc  with  this  magnificent  symbol.  Indeed,  the  Micro-
prosopus— who  is,  philosophically  speaking,  quite  distinct  from  the
unmanifested  eternal  Logos,  "one  with  the  Father"— has  finally  been
brought,  by  centuries  of  incessant  efforts  of  sophistry  and  of  paradoxes,
to  be  considered  as  one  with  Jehovah,  or  the  one  living  God  (!),  whereas
Jehovah  is  no  better  than  Binah,  a  female  Sephira.  This  fact  cannot
be  too  frequently  impressed  upon  the  reader.  For  the  "Ten  Limbs"  of
the  Heavenly  Man  are  the  ten  Sephiroth;  but  the  first  Heavenly  Man

•  Rosenroth,  Liber  Afystetii,  W.  i.


236  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

is  the  unmanifested  Spirit  of  the  Universe,  and  ought  never  to  be
degraded  into  Microprosopus,  the  Lesser  Face  or  Countenance,  the
prototype  of  man  on  the  terrestrial  plane.  The  Microprosopus  is,  as
just  said,  the  lyOgos  manifested,  and  of  such  there  are  many.  Of  this,
however,  later  on.  The  six-pointed  star  refers  to  the  six  Forces  or
Powers  of  Nature,  the  six  planes,  principles,  etc.,  etc.,  all  synthesized
by  the  seventh,  or  the  central  point  in  the  star.  All  these,  the  upper
and  lower  Hierarchies  included,  emanate  from  the  Heavenly  or  Celes-
tial Virgin,  the  Great  Mother  in  all  religions,  the  Androgyne,  the
Sephira  Adam  Kadmon.  Sephira  is  the  Crown,  Kether,  in  the  abstract
principle  only,  as  a  mathematical  x,  the  unknown  quantity.  On  the
plane  of  differentiated  nature,  she  is  the  female  counterpart  of  Adam
Kadmon,  the  first  Androgyne.  The  Kabalah  teaches  that  the  words
^' Fiat  Lux''*  referred  to  the  formation  and  evolution  of  the  Sephiroth,
and  not  to  light  as  opposed  to  darkness.     Rabbi  Simeon  says:

O  companions,  companions,  man  as  an  emanation  was  both  man  and  woman,
Adam  Kadmon  verily,  and  this  is  the  sense  of  the  words,  "Let  there  be  Light,  and
there  was  Light."    And  this  is  the  two-fold  man.t

■  In  its  Unity,  Primordial  Light  is  the  seventh,  or  highest,  principle,
Daiviprakriti,  the  Light  of  the  Unmanifested  Logos.  But  in  its  differ-
entiation, it  becomes  Fohat,  or  the  "Seven  Sons."  The  former  is  sym-
bolized by  the  central  point  in  the  Double  Triangle;  the  latter  by  the
Hexagon  itself,  or  the  "Six  Limbs"  of  Microprosopus,  the  Seventh
being  Malkuth,  the  "Bride"  of  the  Christian  Kabalists,  or  our  Earth.
Hence  the  expressions :

The  first  after  the  One  is  Divine  Fire;  the  secojid.  Fire  and  Ether;  the

third  is  composed  of  Fire,  Ether  and   Water;    the  fourth  of  Fire,  Ether,

Water,  and  Air.      The  One  is  not  concerned  with  Man-bearing  Globes,  but

with  the  inner,  invisible  Spheres.     The  First-Born  are  the  Life,  the  Heart

and  Pulse  of  the  Universe;  the  Second  are  its  Mind  or  Consciousness.

These  Elements  of  Fire,  Air,  etc.,  are  not  our  compound  elements;
and  this  "Consciousness"  has  no  relation  to  our  consciousness.  The
Consciousness  of  the  "  One  Manifested,"  if  not  absolute,  is  still  uncon-
ditioned. Mahat,  the  Universal  Mind,  is  the  first  production  of  the
Brahma-Creator,  but  also  of  Pradhana,  Undifferentiated  Matter.

(f)  The  Second  Order  of  Celestial  Beings,  those  of  Fire  and  Ether,
corresponding  to  Spirit  and  Soul,  or  Atma-Buddhi,  whose  names  are
legion,  are  still  formless,  but  more  definitely  "substantial."     They  are

*  Genesis  i.  t  Ausziige  aus  dent  Zohar,  pp.  13-15.


.ill


TEACHINGS  CONTRASTED.  237

the  first  difterentiation  in  the  Secondary  Evolution  or  "Creation" — a
misleading  word.    As  the  name  shows,  they  are  the  Prototypes  of  the  in-
carnating Jivas  or  Monads,  and  are  composed  of  the  Fiery  Spirit  of  Life,
It  is  through  these  that  passes,  like  a  pure  solar  beam,  the  Ray  which
is  furnished  by  them  with  its  future  Vehicle,  the  Divine  Soul,  Buddhi.
These  are   directly   concerned   with   the   Hosts   of  the  higher  World
of  0717'  System.     From  these  Two-fold  Units  emanate  the  "Three-fold."
In  the  cosmogony  of  Japan,  when,  out  of  the  chaotic  mass,  an  egg-
like nucleus   appears,  having  within  itself  the  germ  and  potency  of
all  universal   as  well   as  of  all   terrestrial    life,  it  is   the  Three-fold
just  named,    which  differentiate.      The    male  ethereal   principle   (Yo)
ascends,   and  the  female  grosser   or   more   material  principle  (In)   is
precipitated  into  the  universe  of  substance,  when  a  separation  occurs
between  the  celestial  and  the  terrestrial.     From  this,  the  female,  the
Mother,  the  first  rudimentary  objective  being  is  born.     It  is  ethereal,
without  form  or  sex,  and  yet  it  is  from  it  and  the  Mother  that  the
Seven    Divine  Spirits  are  born,   from  whom  will  emanate  the  seven
"creations";  just  as  in  the  Codex  Nazamus  from  Karabtanos  and  the
Mother  Spiritus  the  seven  "evilly  disposed"  (material)  spirits  are  born.
It  would  be  too  long  to  give  here  the  Japanese  names,  but  in  trans-
lation they  stand  in  this  order:

(i.)  The  "Invisible  Celibate,"  which  is  the  Creative  Logos  of  the
non-creating  "Father,"  or  the  creative  potentiality  of  the  latter  made
manifest.

(2.)  The  "Spirit  [or  God]  of  the  rayless  Depths  [Chaos],"  which
becomes  differentiated  matter,  or  the  world-stuff";  also  the  mineral
realm.

(3.)  The  "Spirit  of  the  Vegetable  Kingdom,"  of  the  "Abundant
Vegetation."

(4.)  The  "Spirit  of  the  Earth"  and  "the  Spirit  of  the  Sands";  a
Being  of  dual  nature,  the  former  containing  the  potentiality  of  the
male  element,  the  latter  that  of  the  female  element.  These  two  were
one,  as  yet  unconscious  of  being  two.

In  this  duality  were  contained  (a)  Isu  no  gai  no  Kami,  the  male,
dark  and  muscular  Being;  and  (J))  Eku  gai  no  Kami,  the  female,  fair
and  weaker  or  more  delicate  Being.     Then :

(5  and  6.)  The  Spirits  who  were  androgynous  or  dual-sexed.
(7.)  The   Seventh    Spirit,    the    last    emanated    from   the    "Mother,"
appears  as  the  first  divine  human   form  distinctly  male  and  female.


238  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

It  was  the  seventli  "creation,"  as  in  the  Purdnas,  wherein  man  is  the
seventh  creation  of  Brahma.

These,  Tsanagi-Tsanami,  descended  into  the  Universe  by  the  Celes-
tial Bridge,  the  Milky  Way,  and  "Tsanagi,  perceiving  far  below  a
chaotic  mass  of  cloud  and  water,  thrust  his  jewelled  spear  into  the
depths,  and  dry  land  appeared.  Then  the  two  separated  to  explore
Onokoro,  the  newly-created  island-world."     (Omoie.)

Such  are  the  Japanese  exoteric  fables,  the  rind  that  conceals  the
kernel  of  the  same  one  truth  of  the  Secret  Doctrine.

A,

{d)  The  Third  Order  correspond  to  Atma-Buddhi-Manas,  Spirit,  Soul
and  Intellect;  and  are  called  the  "Triads."

((?)  The  Fourth  Order  are  substantial  Entities.     This  is  the  highest
Group  among  the  Riipas  (Atomic  Forms).     It  is  the  nursery  of  the
human,  conscious,  spiritual  Souls.     They  are  called  the  "Imperishable
Jivas,"  and  constitute,  through  the  Order  below  their  own,  the  first
Group  of  the  first  Septenary  Host — the  great  mystery  of  human,  con-
scious and  intellectual  Being.     For  the  latter  is  the  field  wherein  lies
concealed,  m  its  privation,  the  Germ  that  will  fall  into  gejieratioti.     That
Germ  will  become  the  spiritual  potency  in  the  physical  cell,  that  guides
the  development  of  the  embryo,  and  that  is  the  cause  of  the  heredi-
tary^ transmission  of  faculties,  and  all  the  inherent  qualities  in  man.
The  Darwinian  theory,  however,  of  the  transmission  of  acquired  facul-
ties is  neither  taught  nor  accepted  in  Occultism.      Evolution,  in  the
latter,  proceeds  on  quite  other  lines ;  the  physical,  according  to  Esoteric
teaching,  evolving  gradually  from  the  spiritual,  mental,  and  psychic.
This  inner  soul  of  the  physical  cell — the  "spiritual  plasm"  that  domin-
ates the  germinal  plasm — is  the  key  that  must  open  one  day  the  gates
of  the  terra  incognita  of  the  Biologist,  now  called  the  dark  mystery  of
Embryology.     It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  Modern  Chemistry,  while  re-
jecting, as  a  superstition  of  Occultism  and  Religion  as  well,  the  theory
of  substantial  and  invisible  Beings,  called  Angels,  Elementals,  etc. —
without,  of  course,  having  ever  looked  into  the  philosophy  of  these
incorporeal  Entities,  or  thought  over  them — should,  owing  to  observ^a-
tion  and  discovery,  have  been  unconsciously  forced  to  recognize  and
adopt  the  same   ratio  of  progression  and   order,   in  the  evolution  of
chemical  atoms,  as  Occultism  does  for  both  its  Dhyanis  and  Atoms —
analogy  being  its  first  law.     As  seen  above,  the   very  first  Group  of
the  Riipa  Angels  is  quaternary,  an  element  being  added  to  each  in
descending   order.      So  also   are   the    atoms,    in    the  phraseology'  of


THE   HIERARCHIES   OF  SPIRITS.  2^9

Chemistry,  monatomic,  diatomic,  triatomic,  tetratomic,  etc.,  progressing
downwards.

Let  it  be  remembered  that  the  Fire,  Water,  and  Air  of  Occultism,  or
the  "Elements  of  Primar>''  Creation"  so-called,  are  not  the  compound
elements  they  are  on  earth,  but  noumenal  homogeneous  Elements — the
Spirits  of  the  former.  Then  follow  the  Septenary  Groups  or  Hosts.
Placed  on  parallel  lines  with  the  atoms  in  a  diagram,  the  natures  of
these  Beings  would  be  seen  to  correspond,  in  their  downward  scale
of  progression,  to  composite  elements  in  a  mathematically  identical
manner  as  to  analogy.  This  refers,  of  course,  only  to  diagrams  made
by  Occultists;  for  were  the  scale  of  Angelic  Beings  to  be  placed  on
parallel  lines  with  the  scale  of  the  chemical  atoms  of  Science — from
the  hypothetical  Helium  down  to  Uranium — they  would  of  course  be
found  to  differ.  For  the  latter  have,  as  correspondents  on  the  Astral
Plane,  only  the  four  lowest  orders — the  three  higher  principles  in  the
atom,  or  rather  molecule,  or  chemical  element,  being  perceptible  to  the
initiated  Dangma's  eye  alone.  But  then,  if  Chemistry  desired  to  find
itself  on  the  right  path,  it  would  have  to  correct  its  tabular  arrangement
by  that  of  the  Occultists — which  it  might  refuse  to  do.  In  Esoteric
Philosophy,  every  physical  particle  corresponds  to,  and  depends  on,  its
higher  noumenon — the  Being  to  whose  essence  it  belongs;  and,  above
as  below,  the  Spiritual  evolves  from  the  Divine,  the  Psycho-mental
from  the  Spiritual — tainted  from  its  lower  plane  by  the  Astral — the
whole  animate  and  (seemingly)  inanimate  Nature  evolving  on  parallel
lines,  and  drawing  its  attributes  from  above  as  well  as  below.

The  number  seven,  as  applied  to  the  term  Septenary  Host,  above
mentioned,  does  not  imply  only  seven  Entities,  but  seven  Groups  or
Hosts,  as  explained  before.  The  highest  Group,  the  Asuras  born  in
Brahma's  first  body,  which  turned  into  "Night,"  are  septenary,  i.e.,
divided  like  the  Pitris  into  seven  Classes,  three  of  which  are  bodiless
(arupa)  and  four  with  bodies.*  They  are  in  fact  more  truly  our  Pitris
(Ancestors)  than  the  Pitris  who  projected  the  first  physical  man.

{f)  The  Fifth  Order  is  a  ver\'  mysterious  one,  as  it  is  connected  with
the  microcosmic  pentagon,  the  five-pointed  star,  representing  man.  In
India  and  Egypt,  these  Dhyanis  were  connected  with  the  Crocodile,
and  their  abode  is  in  Capricornu"s.  But  these  are  convertible  terms
in  Indian  Astrology,  for  the  tenth  sign  of  the  Zodiac,  which  is  called
Makara,  is  loosely  translated  "Crocodile."     The  word  itself  is  occultly

•  See  Vishnu  Purana,  Book  I.


240  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

interpreted  in  various  ways,  as  will  be  shown  further  on.  In  Egypt,  the
Defunct — whose  symbol  is  the  pentagram,  or  the  five-pointed  star,  the
points  of  which  represent  the  limbs  of  a  man — was  shown  emblemati-
cally transformed  into  a  crocodile.  Sebekh,  or  Sevekh  (or  "Seventh"),
as  Mr.  Gerald  Massey  says,  showing  it  to  be  the  type  of  intelligence,  is
a  dragon  in  reality,  not  a  crocodile.  He  is  the  "Dragon  of  Wisdom,"
or  Manas,  the  Human  Soul,  Mind,  the  Intelligent  Principle,  called  in
our  Esoteric  Philosophy  the  Fifth  Principle.

jSays  the  defunct  "Osirified,"  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  or  Ritual,  under
the  glyph  of  a  mummiform  God  with  a  crocodile's  head:

I  am  the  crocodile  presiding  at  the  fear,  I  am  the  God-crocodile,  at  the  arrival  of
his  Soul  among  men.     I  am  the  God-crocodile  brought  for  destruction.

An  allusion  to  the  destruction  of  divine  spiritual  purity  when  man
acquires  the  knowledge  of  good  and  evil;  also  to  the  "fallen"  Gods,  or
Angels  of  every  theogony.

I  am  the  fish  of  the  great  Horus.  [As  Makara  is  the  "Crocodile,"  the  Vehicle  of
Varuna.]     I  am  merged  in  Sekhem.*

This  last  sentence  gives  the  corroboration,  and  repeats  the  doctrine
of  esoteric  "Buddhism,"  for  it  alludes  directly  to  the  Fifth  Principle
(Manas),  or  the  most  spiritual  part  of  its  essence  rather,  which  merges
into,  is  absorbed  by,  and  made  one  with  Atma-Buddhi,  after  the  death
of  man.      For  Sekhem  is  the  residence,  or  Eoka,  of  the  God   Khem

A.

(Horus-Osiris,  or  Father  and  Son);  hence  the  Devachan  of  Atma-
Buddhi.  In  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  the  Defunct  is  shown  entering  into
Sekhem,  with  Horus-Thot,  and  "emerging  from  it  as  pure  spirit."
Thus  the  Defunct  says :

I  see  the  forms  of  [myself,  as  various]  men  transforming  eternally  ...  I  know
this  [chapter].     He  who  knows  it   .   .   .    takes  all  kinds  of  living  forms.t

And  addressing  in  magic  formula  that  which  is  called,  in  Egyptian
Esotericism,  the  "ancestral  heart,"  or  the  reincarnating  principle,  the
permanent  Ego,  the  Defunct  says:

O  my  heart,  my  ancestral  heart,  necessary  for  my  transformations,  ....  do
not  separate  thyself  from  me  before  the  guardian  of  the  scales.  Thou  art  my  per-
sonality within  my  breast,  divine  companion  zvatching  over  my  fleshes  [bodies].  J

It  is  in  Sekhem  that  lies  concealed  the  "Mysterious  Face,"  or  the
real  Man  concealed  under  the  false  personality,  the  triple-crocodile  of
Egypt,  the  symbol  of  the  higher  Trinity,  or  human  Triad,  Atma,
Buddhi  and  Manas.

One  of  the  explanations  of  the  real  though  hidden  meaning  of  this

»  Ch.  Ixxxviii.  +  Ch.  Ixiv.  29,  30.  X  Ibid.,  34,  35.


NATURE-SPIRITS,    OR  ELEMENTALS.  24I

Egj'ptian  religious  glyph  is  easy.  The  crocodile  is  the  first  to  await
and  meet  the  devouring  fires  of  the  morning  sun,  and  very  soon  came
to  personify  the  solar  heat.  When  the  sun  arose,  it  was  like  the  arrival
on  earth,  and  among  men,  of  the  "divine  soul  which  informs  the  Gods."
Hence  the  strange  symbolism.  The  mummy  donned  the  head  of  a
crocodile  to  show  that  it  was  a  Soul  arriving  from  the  earth.

In  all  the  ancient  papyri,  the  crocodile  is  called  Sebekh  (Seventh);
water  also  symbolizes  the  fifth  principle  esoterically ;  and,  as  already
stated,  Mr.  Gerald  Massey  shows  that  the  crocodile  was  the  "seventh
Soul,  the  supreme  one  of  seven— the  Seer  unseen."  Even  exoterically
Sekhem  is  the  residence  of  the  God  Khem,  and  Khera  is  Horus  aveng-
ing the  death  of  his  father  Osiris,  hence  punishing  the  sins  of  man,
when  he  becomes  a  disembodied  Soul.  Thus  the  defunct  Osirified
became  the  God  Khem,  who  "gleans  the  field  of  Aanroo";  that  is,  he
gleans  either  his  reward  or  punishment,  for  that  field  is  the  celestial
locality  (Devachan),  where  the  Defunct  is  given  wheat,  the  food  of  divine
justice.  The  Fifth  Group  of  Celestial  Beings  is  supposed  to  contain  in
itself  the  dual  attributes  of  both  the  spiritual  and  physical  aspects  of
the  Universe ;  the  two  poles,  so  to  say,  of  Mahat,  the  Universal  Intelli-
gence, and  the  dual  nature  of  man,  the  spiritual  and  the  physical.
Hence  its  number  Five,  doubled  and  made  into  Ten,  connecting  it
with  Makara,  the  tenth  sign  of  the  Zodiac.

(^;  The  Sixth  and  Seve^ith  Orders  partake  of  the  lower  qualities  of
the  Quaternary.  They  are  conscious  ethereal  Entities,  as  invisible
as  Ether,  which  are  shot  out,  like  the  boughs  of  a  tree,  from  the  first
central  Group  of  the  Four,  and  shoot  out  in  their  turn  numberless  side
Groups,  the  lower  of  which  are  the  Nature-Spirits,  or  Elementals,  of
countless  kinds  and  varieties;  from  the  formless  and  unsubstantial —
the  ideal  Thoughts  of  their  creators — down  to  atomic,  though,  to
human  perception,  invisible  organisms.  The  latter  are  considered  as
the  "spirits  of  atoms,"  for  they  are  the  first  remove  (backwards)  from
the  phj^sical  atom — sentient,  if  not  intelligent  creatures.  They  are  all
subject  to  Karma,  and  have  to  work  it  out  through  every  cycle.  For,
as  the  Doctrine  teaches,  there  are  no  such  privileged  Beings  in  the
Universe,  whether  in  our  own  or  in  other  S}'stems,  in  the  outer  or  the
inner  Worlds,*  as  the  Angels  of  the  Western  Religion  and  the  Judean.


•  A  World,  when  called  a  "higher  World,"  is  not  higher  by  reason  of  its  location,  but  because
it  is  superior  in  quality  or  essence.  Yet  such  a  World  is  generally  understood  by  the  profane  as
■'Heaven,"  and  located  above  our  heads.  j.


242  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

A  Dhyan  Chohan  has  to  become  one;  iie  cannot  be  born  or  appear
suddenly  on  the  plane  of  life  as  a  full-blown  Angel.  The  Celestial
Hierarchy  of  the  present  Manvantara  will  find  itself  transferred,  in  the
next  Circle  of  Life,  into  higher  superior  Worlds,  and  will  make  room  for
a  new  Hierarchy,  composed  of  the  elect  ones  of  our  mankind.  Being
is  an  endless  cycle  within  the  One  Absolute  Eternity,  wherein  move
numberless  inner  cycles  finite  and  conditioned.  Gods,  created  as  such,
would  evince  no  personal  merit  in  being  Gods.  Such  a  class  of  Beings
— perfect  onl}^  by  virtue  of  the  special  immaculate  nature  inherent  in
them — in  the  face  of  suffering  and  struggling  humanity,  and  even  of
the  lower  creation,  would  be  the  symbol  of  an  eternal  injustice  quite
Satanic  in  character,  an  ever  present  crime.  It  is  an  anomaly  and  an
impossibility  in  Nature.  Therefore  the  "Four"  and  the  "Three"  have
to  incarnate  as  all  other  beings  have.  This  Sixth  Group,  moreover,
remains  almost  inseparable  from  man,  who  draws  from  it  all  but  his
highest  and  lowest  principles,  or  his  spirit  and  body;  the  five  middle
human  principles  being  the  very  essence  of  those  Dhyanis.  Para-
celsus calls  them  the  Flagse ;  the  Christians,  the  Guardian  Angels ;  the
Occultists,  the  Ancestors,  the  Pitris.  They  are  the  Six-fold  Dhyan
Chohans,  having  the  six  spiritual  Elements  in  the  composition  of
their  bodies — in  fact,  men,  minus  the  physical  body.

Alone,  the  Divine  Ray,  the  Atman,  proceeds  directly  from  the  One.
When  asked  how  this  can  be?  How  is  it  possible  to  conceive  that
these  "Gods,"  or  Angels,  can  be  at  the  same  time  their  own  emanations
and  their  personal  selves  ?  Is  it  in  the  same  sense  as  in  the  material
world,  where  the  son  is,  in  one  way,  his  father,  being  his  blood,  the
bone  of  his  bone  and  the  flesh  of  his  flesh?  To  this  the  Teachers
answer:  Verily  it  is  so.  But  one  has  to  go  deep  into  the  mystery  of
Being,  before  one  can  fully  comprehend  this  truth.


STANZA  \U.— Continued.
2.  The  One  Ray  mui^tiplies  the  smai^ler  Rays.    Eife  precedes
Form,  and  Life  survives  the  last  Atom.*    Through  the  count-
less Rays  the  Life- Ray,  the  One,  Eike  a  Thread  through  many
Beads.!

This  shloka  expresses  the  conception — a  purely  Vedantic   one,   as
already   explained    elsewhere — of   a   Eife-Thread,    Sutratma,    running

»  of  Form,  the  Sthula  Sharira,  External  Body.
+  Pearls.


THE   MYSTERY  OF   BEING.  243

through  successive  generations.  How,  then,  can  this  be  explained?
By  resorting  to  a  simile,  to  a  familiar  illustration,  though  necessarily
imperfect,  as  all  our  available  analogies  must  be.  Before  resorting  to
it,  however,  I  would  ask,  whether  it  seems  unnatural,  least  of  all
"supernatural,"  to  any  one  of  us,  when  we  consider  the  process  of  the
growth  and  development  of  a  foetus  into  a  healthy  baby  weighing
several  pounds?  Evolving  from  what?  From  the  segmentation  of  an
infinitesimally  small  ovum  and  a  spermatozoon!  And  afterwards  we
see  the  baby  develop  into  a  six-foot  man !  This  refers  to  the  atomic
and  physical  expansion,  from  the  microscopically  small  into  something
exceedingly  large ;  from  the  unseen,  to  the  naked  eye,  into  the  visible
and  objective.  Science  has  provided  for  all  this;  and,  I  dare  sa}^
her  theories,  enibr>'ological,  biological  and  physiological,  are  correct
enough,  so  far  as  exact  observation  of  the  material  goes.  Nevertheless,
the  two  chief  difficulties  of  the  science  of  Embryology — namely,  what
are  the  forces  at  work  in  the  formation  of  the  fcetus,  and  the  cause  of
"hereditary  transmission"  of  likeness,  physical,  moral  or  mental — have
never  been  properly  answered ;  nor  will  they  ever  be  solved,  till  the
day  when  Scientists  condescend  to  accept  the  Occult  theories.  But  if
this  physical  phenomenon  astonishes  no  one,  except  in  so  far  as  it
puzzles  the  Embryologists,  why  should  our  intellectual  and  inner
growth,  the  evolution  of  the  Human-Spiritual  to  the  Divine-Spiritual,
be  regarded  as,  or  seem,  more  impossible  than  the  other?

The  Materialists  and  the  Evolutionists  of  the  Darwinian  school
would  be  ill-advised  to  accept  the  newly  worked-out  theories  of  Pro-
fessor Weissmann,  the  author  of  Beitrdge  zur  Desce^idenzlehre,  with
regard  to  one  of  the  two  mj^steries  of  Embr>"olog\^  as  above  speci-
fied, which  he  seems  to  think  he  has  solved;  for,  when  it  is  fully
solved,  Science  will  have  stepped  into  the  domain  of  the  truly
Occult,  and  passed  for  ever  out  of  the  realm  of  transformation,  as
taught  by  Darwin.  The  two  theories  are  irreconcilable,  from  the
standpoint  of  Materialism.  Regarded  from  that  of  the  Occultists,
however,  the  new  tlieor>"  solves  all  these  mysteries.  Those  who  are
not  acquainted  with  the  discovery  of  Professor  Weissmann — at  one
time  a  fervent  Darwinist — ought  to  hasten  to  repair  the  deficiency.
The  German  embr>^ologist-philosopher — stepping  over  the  heads  of  the
Greek  Hippocrates  and  Aristotle,  right  back  into  the  teachings  of  the
old  Ar^-ans — shows  one  infinitesimal  cell,  out  of  millions  of  others  at
work  in  the  formation  of  an  organism,  alone  and  unaided  determining.


244  '^^^   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

by  means  of  constant  segmentation  and  multiplication,  the  correct
image  of  the  future  man,  or  animal,  in  its  physical,  mental  and
psychic  characteristics.  It  is  this  cell  which  impresses  on  the  face  and
form  of  the  new  individual  the  features  of  the  parents,  or  of  some  dis-
tant ancestor;  it  is  this  cell,  again,  which  transmits  to  him  the  intel-
lectual and  mental  idiosyncracies  of  his  sires,  and  so  on.  This  Plasm
is  the  immortal  portion  of  our  bodies,  developing  by  means  of  a  pro-
cess of  successive  assimilations.  Darwin's  theory,  viewing  the  em-
brj^ological  cell  as  the  essence  or  extract  from  all  other  cells,  is  set
aside;  it  is  incapable  of  accounting  for  hereditary  transmission.  There
are  but  two  ways  of  explaining  the  mystery  of  heredity:  either  the  sub-
stance of  the  germinal  cell  is  endowed  with  the  faculty  of  crossing  the
whole  cycle  of  transformations  that  lead  to  the  construction  of  a  separate
organism,  and  then  to  the  reproduction  of  identical  germinal  cells ;
or,  these  germinal  cells  do  not  have  their  genesis  at  all  in  the  body  of  the
individual,  but  proceed  directly  from,  the  ancestral  ger^ninal  cell  passed  frorn
father  to  son  through  long  generations.  It  is  the  latter  hypothesis  that
Weissmann  has  adopted  and  worked  upon,  and  it  is  to  this  cell  that
he  traces  the  immortal  portion  of  man.  So  far,  so  good;  and  when
this  almost  correct  theory  is  accepted,  how  will  Biologists  explain  the
first  appearance  of  this  everlasting  cell?  Unless  man  "grew"  like  the
immortal  "Topsy,"  and  was  not  born  at  all,  but  fell  from  the  clouds,
how  was  that  embr>'ological  cell  generated  in  him?

Complete  the  Physical  Plasm,  mentioned  above,  the  "Germinal  Cell"
of  man  with  all  its  material  potentialities,  with  the  "Spiritual  Plasm,"
so  to  say,  or  the  fluid  that  contains  the  five  lower  principles  of  the  Six-
principled  Dhyani — and  you  have  the  secret,  if  you  are  spiritual  enough
to  understand  it.

Now  to  the  promised  simile.

When  the  seed  of  the  animal  man  is  cast  into  the  soil  of  the  animal
woma7i,    that  seed  can^iot  germinate  U7iless  it  has  been  fructified  by   the
five  virtues  fhefiuid  of,  or  the  emanation  from,  the  principles^  of  the  Six-
fold Heavenly  Man.      Wherefore  the  Microcosm  is  represented  as  a  Pentagon,
within  the  Hexagon  Star,  the  Macrocosm.*

The  fiinctions  of  fiva  on  this  Earth  are  of  a  five-fold  character,      hi
the  mineral  atom,  it  is  connected  with  the  lowest  principles  of  the  Spirits  of
the  Earth  (the  Six-fold  Dhydnis) ;  in  the  vegetable  particle,  with  their

"AvdpWTTOS)  a  work  on  Occult  Embryology,  Book  I.


THE   ANCESTRY   OF   MAN.


245


second — the  Prdna  (Life)  ;  in  the  animal,  with  all  these  plus  the  third  and
the  fourth ;  in  man,  the  germ  mtcst  receive  the  fruitage  of  all  the  five.  Other-
wise he  will  be  bor7i  no  higher  than  an  animal.^

Thus  in  man  alone  the  Jiva  is  complete.  As  to  his  seventh  prin-
ciple, it  is  but  one  of  the  Beams  of  the  Universal  Sun,  for  each  rational
creature  receives  the  temporary  loan  only  of  that  which  has  to  return
to  its  source.  As  to  his  physical  body,  it  is  shaped  by  the  lowest  terres-
trial I^ives,  through  ph5'sical,  chemical  and  phj'siological  evolution;
"the  Blessed  Ones  have  nought  to  do  with  the  purgations  of  matter,"
says  the  Kabalali  in  the  Chaldean  Book  of  Nzcjnbers.

It  comes  to  this:  Mankind,  in  its  first  prototypal,  shadowy  form,  is  the
offspring  of  the  Elohim  of  Life,  or  Pitris;  in  its  qualitative  and  phy-
sical aspect,  it  is  the  direct  progeny  of  the  "Ancestors,"  the  lowest
Dhyanis,  or  Spirits  of  the  Earth;  for  its  moral,  psychic  and  spiritual
nature,  it  is  indebted  to  a  Group  of  divine  Beings,  the  name  and
characteristics  of  which  will  be  given  in  Volume  II.  CoHectivel}^  men
are  the  handiwork  of  Hosts  of  various  Spirits ;  distributively,  the  taber-
nacles of  those  Hosts;  and  occasionally  and  individually,  the  vehicles
of  some  of  them.  In  our  present  all-material  Fifth  Race,  the  earthly
Spirit  of  the  Fourth  is  still  strong  in  us;  but  we  are  approaching  the
time  when  the  pendulum  of  evolution  will  direct  its  swing  decidedly
upwards,  bringing  Humanity  back  on  a  parallel  line  with  the  primitive
Third  Root-Race  in  spirituality.  During  its  childhood,  mankind  was
wholly  composed  of  that  Angelic  Host,  who  were  the  indwelling  Spirits
that  animated  the  monstrous  and  gigantic  tabernacles  of  clay  of  the
Fourth  Race,  built  by  and  composed  of  countless  myriads  of  Lives,  as
our  bodies  are  also  now.  This  sentence  will  be  explained  later  on  in  the
present  Commentary.  Science,  dimly  perceiving  the  truth,  may  find
bacteria  and  other  infinitesimals  in  the  human  body,  and  see  in  them
only  occasional  and  abnormal  visitors,  to  which  diseases  are  attributed.
Occultism — which  discerns  a  Life  in  every  atom  and  molecule,  whether
in  a  mineral  or  human  body,  in  air,  fire  or  water — affirms  that  our
whole  body  is  built  of  such  Lives;  the  smallest  bacterium  under  the
microscope  being  to  them  in  comparative  size  like  an  elephant  to  the
tiniest  infusoria.

The  "tabernacles"  mentioned  above  have  improved  in  texture  and
symmetry  of  form,  growing  and  developing  with  the  Globe  that  bears
them ;  but  the  physical  improvement  has  taken  place  at  the  expense  of

•  Namely,  a  congenital  idiot.


246  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

the  Spiritual  Inner  Man  and  of  Nature.  The  three  middle  principles,
in  earth  and  man,  became  with  every  Race  more  material ;  the  Soul
stepping  back  to  make  room  for  the  Physical  Intellect;  the  essence  of
the  Elements  becoming  the  material  and  composite  elements  now
known.

Man  is  not,  nor  could  he  ever  be,  the  complete  product  of  the  "Lord
God";  but  he  is  the  child  of  the  Elohim,  so  arbitrarily  changed  into
the  singular  number  and  masculine  gender.  The  first  Dhyanis,  com-
missioned to  "create"  man  in  their  image,  could  only  throw  off  their
Shadows,  as  a  delicate  model  for  the  Nature  Spirits  of  matter  to  work
upon.  Man  is,  beyond  any  doubt,  formed  physically  out  of  the  dust  of
the  Earth,  but  his  creators  and  fashioners  were  many.  Nor  can  it  be
said  that  the  "Eord  God  breathed  into  his  nostrils  the  Breath  of  Eife,"
unless  that  God  is  identified  with  the  "One  Life,"  omnipresent  though
invisible,  and  unless  the  same  operation  is  attributed  to  "God"  on
behalf  of  every  "Living  Soul,"  which  is  the  Vital  Soul  (Nephesh),  and
not  the  Divine  Spirit  (Ruach)  which  ensures  to  man  alone  a  divine
degree  of  immortality,  that  no  animal,  as  such,  could  ever  attain  in  this
cycle  of  incarnation.  It  is  owing  to  the  inadequate  distinctions  made
by  the  Jews,  and  now  by  our  Western  metaphysicians,  who  are  unable
to  understand,  and  hence  to  accept,  more  than  a  triune  man — Spirit,
Soul,  Body — that  the  "Breath  of  Life"  has  been  confused  with  the
immortal  "Spirit."  This  applies  also  directly  to  the  Protestant  theolo-
gians, who  in  translating  a  certain  verse  in  the  Fourth  Gospel  *  have
entirely  perverted  its  meaning.  This  mistranslation  runs,  "the  wind
bloweth  where  it  listeth,"  instead  of  "the  spirit  goeth  where  it  willeth,"
as  in  the  original,  and  also  in  the  translation  of  the  Greek  Eastern
Church.

The  learned  and  very  philosophical  author  of  Nnv  Aspects  of  Life
would  impress  upon  his  reader  that  the  Nephesh  Chiah  (Living  Soul),
according  to  the  Hebrews  :

Proceeded  from,  or  was  produced  by,  the  infusion  of  the  Spirit  or  Breath  of  Life
into  the  quickening  body  of  man,  and  was  to  supersede  and  take  the  place  of  that
Spirit  in  the  thus  constituted  Self,  so  that  the  Spirit  passed  into,  was  lost  sight  of,
and  disappeared  in  the  Living  Soul.

The  human  body,  he  thinks,  ought  to  be  viewed  as  a  matrix  in
which,  and  from  which,  the  Soul,  which  he  seems  to  place  higher  than
the  Spirit,  is  developed.     Considered  functionally  and  from  the  stand-

*  John  iii  S.


THE    "SEVEN   SOULS"    IN  EGYPTOLOGY.  247

point  of  activity,  the  Soul  stands  undeniably  higher,  in  this  finite  and
conditioned  world  of  Maya.  The  Soul,  he  says,  "is  ultimately  produced
from  the  animated  body  of  man."  Thus  the  author  identifies  "Spirit"
(Atma)  with  the  "Breath  of  Life"  simply.  The  Eastern  Occultists  will
demur  to  this  statement,  for  it  is  based  on  the  erroneous  conception  that

A

Prana  and  Atma,  or  Jivatma,  are  one  and  the  same  thing.  The  author
supports  the  argument,  by  showing  that  with  the  ancient  Hebrews,
Greeks,  and  even  Latins,  Ruach,  Pneuma  and  Spiritus  meant  Wind —
with  the  Jews  undeniably,  and  with  the  Greeks  and  Romans  very
probably ;  the  Greek  word  Anemos  (Wind)  and  the  Latin  Animus
(Soul)  having  a  suspicious  relation.

This  is  very  far  fetched.  But  a  legitimate  battle-field  for  deciding  this
question  is  hardly  to  be  found,  since  Dr.  Pratt  seems  to  be  a  practical,
matter-of-fact  metaphysician,  a  kind  of  Kabalist-Positivist,  whereas  the
Eastern  metaphysicians,  especially  the  Vedantins,  are  all  Idealists.
The  Occultists  also  are  of  the  extreme  Esoteric  Vedantin  school,  and
though  they  call  the  One  Life  (Parabrahman)  the  Great  Breath  and
the  Whirlwind,  they  disconnect  the  seventh  principle  entirely  from
matter,  and  deny  that  it  has  any  relation  to,  or  connection  with  it.

Thus  the  philosophj'  of  man's  psychic,  spiritual  and  mental  relations
with  his  physical  functions  is  in  almost  inextricable  confusion.     Neither

A.

the  old  Aryan  nor  the  Egyptian  psychology  is  now  properly  under-
stood; nor  can  they  be  assimilated,  without  accepting  the  Esoteric
septenarj',  or,  at  any  rate,  the  Vedantic  quinquepartite  division  of
the  human  inner  principles.  Failing  which,  it  will  be  for  ever  im-
possible to  understand  the  metaphysical  and  purely  psychic,  and  even
physiological,  relations  between  the  Dhyan  Chohans,  or  Angels,  on  the

A

one  plane,  and  Humanity  on  the  other.  No  Eastern  (Arj^an)  Esoteric
works  are  so  far  published,  but  we  possess  the  Egyptian  papyri,  which
speak  clearly  of  the  seven  principles,  or  the  "Seven  Souls  of  Man."
The  Book  of  the  Dead  gives  a  complete  list  of  the  "transformations"
that  every  Defunct  undergoes,  while  divesting  himself,  one  by  one,  of
all  these  principles — materialized  for  the  sake  of  clearness  into  ethereal
entities  or  bodies.  We  must,  moreover,  remind  those  who  try  to  show
that  the  Ancient  Eg^'ptians  did  not  teach  Reincarnation,  that  the
"Soul"  (the  Ego  or  Self)  of  the  Defunct  is  said  to  be  living  in  Eter-
nity: it  is  immortal,  "coeval  with,  and  disappearing  with,  the  Solar
Boat,"  that  is,  for  the  Cycle  of  Necessity.  This  "Soul"  emerges  from
the  Tiaou,  the  Realm  of  the  Cause  of  Life,  and  joins  the  livnng  on  Earth


248  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

by  day,  to  return  to  Tiaou  every  7i2ght.    This  expresses  the  periodical
existences  of  the  Ego.*

The  Shadow,  the  Astral  Form,  is  annihilated,  "devoured  by  the
Urasus,"t  the  JManes  will  be  annihilated;  the  two  Twins  (the  Fourth
and  Fifth  Principles)  will  be  scattered;  but  the  Soul-Bird,  "the  Divine

A

Swallow,  and  the  Uraeus  of  Flame"  (Manas  and  Atma-Buddhi)  will
live  in  the  eternity,  for  the}^  are  their  mother's  husbands.

A

Another  suggestive  analogy  between  the  Aryan,  or  Brahmanical,  and
the  Egyptian  Esotericism.  The  former  call  the  Pitris  the  "  Lunar
Ancestors"  of  men,  and  the  Egyptians  make  of  the  Moon-God,  Taht-
Esmun,  the  first  human  ancestor.

This  Moon-God  "expressed  the  Seven  nature-powers  that  were  prior  to  himself,
and  were  summed  up  in  him  as  his  seven  souls,  of  which  he  was  the  manifestor  as
the  Eighth  One.  [Hence  the  eighth  sphere.]  .  .  .  The  seven  rays  of  the  Chaldean
.  .  .  Heptakis  or  lao,  on  the  Gnostic  stones,  indicate  the  same  septenary  of  souls.
.  .  .  The  first  form  of  the  mystical  Seven  was  seen  to  be  figured  in  heaven,  by  the
seven  large  stars  of  the  Great  Bear,  the  constellation  assigned  by  the  Egyptians  to
the  Mother  of  Time,  and  of  the  seven  Elemental  Powers."J

As  well  known  to  ever}^  Hindu,  this  same  constellation  represents
in  India  the  Seven  Rishis,  and  is  called  Riksha,  and  Chitrashikan-
dinas.

Like  alone  produces  like.  The  Earth  gives  Man  his  bod}^  the  Gods
(Dhyanis)  give  him  his  five  inner  principles,  the  psychic  Shadow,  of
which  these  Gods  are  often  the  animating  principle.  Spirit  (Atman)
is  one,  and  indiscrete.     It  is  not  in  the  Tiaou.

For  what  is  the  Tiaou  ?  The  frequent  allusion  to  it  in  the  Book  of
the  Dead  contains  a  mystery.  Tiaou  is  the  path  of  the  Night-Sun,  the
inferior  hemisphere,  or  the  infernal  region  of  the  Egyptians,  placed  by
them  on  the  concealed  side  of  the  Moon.  The  human  being,  in  their
Esotericism,  came  out  from  the  Moon — a  triple  mystery,  astronomical,
physiological  and  psychical,  at  once;  he  crossed  the  whole  cycle  of
existence,  and  then  returned  to  his  birth-place,  before  issuing  from  it
again.  Thus  the  Defunct  is  shown  arriving  in  the  West,  receiving  his
judgment  before  Osiris,  resurrecting  as  the  God  Horus,  and  circling
round  the  sidereal  heavens,  which  is  an  allegorical  assimilation  to  Ra,
'  the  Sun ;  then  having  crossed  the  Noot,  the  Celestial  Abyss,  returning
once  more  to  Tiaou;  an  assimilation  to  Osiris,  who,  as  the  God  of  life

•  Ch.  cxlviii.        t  Ibid.,  cxlix.  51.     X  The  Seven  Souls  of  Man,  p.  2;  a  Lecture  by  Gerald  Massey.


THE  MOON  GOD.  249

and  reproduction,  inhabits  the  Moon.  Plutarch*  shows  the  Egyptians
celebrating  a  festival  called  "The  Ingress  of  Osiris  into  the  Moon."
In  the  Riiual,\  life  is  promised  after  death ;  and  the  renovation  of  life
is  placed  under  the  patronage  of  Osiris-L,unus,  because  the  Moon  was
the  symbol  of  life-renewals  or  reincarnations,  owing  to  its  growth,
waning,  dying,  and  reappearance  every  month.  In  the  Dankmoe,X  it  is
said:  "O  Osiris-Lunus,  that  renews  to  thee  thy  renewal."  And  Sabekh
says  to  Seti  I:§  "Thou  renewest  th3^self  as  the  God  L,unus,  when  a
babe."  It  is  still  better  explained  in  a  I^ouvre  papyrus  :  ||  "Couplings
and  conceptions  abound  when  he  [Osiris-IyUnus]  is  seen  in  heaven
on  that  da^^"     Says  Osiris:    "O  sole  radiant  beam  of  the  Moon!     I

issue    from  the  circulating  multitudes  [of  stars] Open

me  the  Tiaou,  for  Osiris  N.      I  will  issue  by  day  to  do  what  I  have
to  do  amongst  the  living  "^ — i.e.,  to  produce  conceptions.

Osiris  was  "God  manifest  in  generation,"  because  the  ancients  knew,
far  better  than  the  moderns,  the  real  occult  influences  of  the  lunar
bod}^  upon  the  mysteries  of  conception.  In  the  oldest  systems  we  find
the  Moon  always  male.  Thus  Soma,  with  the  Hindus,  is  a  kind  of
sidereal  Don  Juan,  a  "King,"  and  the  father,  albeit  illegitimate,  of
Budha — Wisdom.  This  relates  to  Occult  Knowledge,  a  wisdom
gathered  through  a  thorough  acquaintance  with  lunar  mj^steries,  in-
cluding those  of  sexual  generation.  And  later,  when  the  Moon  became
connected  with  the  female  Goddesses,  with  Diana,  Isis,  Artemis,  Juno,
etc.,  this  connection  was  also  due  to  a  thorough  knovdedge  of  physio-
log}'  and  female  nature,  phj^sical  as  much  as  psj'chic.

If,  instead  of  being  taught  in  Sunday  Schools  useless  lessons  from
the  Bible,  the  armies  of  the  ragged  and  poor  were  taught  Astrolog}' — so
far,  at  any  rate,  as  the  occult  properties  of  the  Moon  and  its  hidden
influences  on  generation  are  concerned — then,  there  would  be  little
need  to  fear  increase  of  the  population,  or  to  resort  to  the  questionable
literature  of  the  Malthusians  for  its  arrest.  For  it  is  the  Moon  and  her
conjunctions  that  regulate  conceptions,  and  every  Astrologer  in  India
knows  it.  During  the  previous  Races,  and  at  least  at  the  beginning  of
the  present  one,  those  who  indulged  in  marital  relations  during  certain
lunar  phases  that  made  those  relations  sterile,  were  regarded  as  sor-

•  De  /side  et  Osiride,  xliii.

1-  Ch.   xli.

X  iv.  5.

}  Mariette's  Abydos,  plate  51.

II  P;  Pienret,  Etudes  Egyptologiqttes.

^  Ritual,  ch.   ii.


250  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

cerers  and  sinners.  But  now  even  these  sins  of  old,  which  arose
from  the  abuse  of  Occult  knowledge,  would  appear  preferable  to  the
crimes  of  to-day,  which  are  perpetrated  because  of  the  complete
ignorance  of  such  Occult  influences.

But,  primaril}^  the  Sun  and  Moon  were  the  only  visible  and,  by
their  effects,  so  to  say,  taiigible,  psychic  and  physiological  deities — the
Father  and  the  Son — while  Space  or  Air  in  general,  or  that  expanse  of
heaven  called  Noot  by  the  Egyptians,  was  the  concealed  Spirit  or
Breath  of  the  two.  The  Father  and  Son  were  interchangeable  in  their
functions,  and  worked  together  harmoniously  in  their  efiects  upon
terrestrial  nature  and  humanity;  hence  they  were  regarded  as  one,
though  two  as  personified  Entities.  They  were  both  males,  and  both
had  their  distinct  though  collaborative  work  in  the  causative  genera-
tion of  humanity.  So  much  from  the  astronomical  and  cosmic  stand-
points, viewed  and  expressed  in  symbolical  language,  which  became  in
our  last  races  theological  and  dogmatic.  But  behind  this  veil  of  cosmic
and  astrological  symbols,  there  were  the  occult  mysteries  of  anthropo-
graph}^  and  the  primeval  genesis  of  man.  And  in  this,  no  knowledge
of  symbols,  or  even  the  key  to  the  post-diluvian  symbolical  language
of  the  Jews,  will  or  can  help,  save  only  with  reference  to  that  which
has  been  laid  down  in  national  scriptures  for  exoteric  uses;  the  sum  of
which,  however  cleverly  veiled,  was  but  the  smallest  portion  of  the  real
primitive  history  of  each  people,  and  often,  moreover,  as  in  the  Hebrew
Scriptures,  related  merely  to  the  terrestrial  human,  and  not  to  the
divine  life  of  that  nation.  That  psychic  and  spiritual  element  belonged
to  the  Mysteries  and  Initiation.  There  were  things  never  recorded
in  scrolls,  but  which,  as  in  Central  Asia,  were  engraved  on  rocks  and  in
subterranean  cr5^pts.

Nevertheless,  there  was  a  time  when  the  whole  world  was  "of  one
lip  and  of  one  knowledge,"  and  man  knew  more  of  his  origin  than  he
does  now;  and  thus  knew  that  the  Sun  and  Moon,  however  large  a  part
they  may  play  in  the  constitution,  growth  and  development  of  the
human  body,  were  not  the  direct  causative  agents  of  his  appearance
on  Earth;  for  these  agents,  in  truth,  are  the  living  and  intelligent
Powers  which  the  Occultists  call  Dhyan  Chohans.

As  to  this,  a  very  learned  admirer  of  the  Jewish  Esotericism  tells  us

that:

The  Kabalah  says  expressly  that  Elohim  is  a  "general  abstraction";  what  we  call
in  mathematics  "a  constant  coefficient,"  or  a  "general  function,"  entering  into  all


JEHOVAH   A   FEMALE   SEPHIRA.  251

construction,   not  particular;  that  is,  by  the  general  ratio  i  to  31415,  the  [Astro-
Dhyanic  and]  Elohistic  figures.

To  this  the  Eastern  Occultist  replies :  Quite  so ;  they  are  an  abstrac-
tion to  our  physical  senses.  To  our  spiritual  perceptions,  however,
and  to  our  inner  spiritual  eye,  the  Elohim,  or  Dhyanis,  are  no  more  an
abstraction  than  our  soul  and  spirit  are  to  us.  Reject  the  one  and  you
reject  the  other,  since  that  which  is  the  surviving  Entity  ifi  us,  is  partly
the  direct  emanation  from,  and  partly  those  celestial  Entities  themselves.
One  thing  is  certain ;  the  Jews  were  perfectly  acquainted  with  sorcery
and  various  maleficent  forces :  but,  with  the  exception  of  some  of  their
great  prophets  and  seers  like  Daniel  and  Ezekiel — Enoch  belonging  to
a  far  distant  race,  as  a  generic  character,  and  not  to  any  nation  but  to
all — they  knew  little  of,  nor  would  they  deal  with,  the  real  divine  Oc-
cultism ;  their  national  character  being  averse  to  anything  which  had
no  direct  bearing  upon  their  own  ethnical,  tribal  and  individual  bene-
fits— witness  their  own  prophets,  and  the  curses  thundered  by  them
against  the  "stiff-necked  race."  But  even  the  Kabalah  plainly  shows
the  direct  relation  between  the  Sephiroth,  or  Elohim,  and  men.

Therefore,  when  it  is  proved  to  us  that  the  Kabalistic  identification
of  Jehovah  with  Binah,  a  female  Sephira,  has  still  another,  a  sub-occult,
meaning  in  it,  then  and  then  only  will  Occultists  be  ready  to  pass  the
palm  of  perfection  to  the  Kabalist.  Until  then,  it  is  asserted  that,  as
Jehovah,  in  the  abstract  sense  of  a  "one  living  God,"  is  a  single
number,  a  metaphysical  figment,  and  a  reality  only  when  put  in  his
proper  place  as  an  emanation  and  a  Sephira — we  have  a  right  to  main-
tain that  the  Zohar,  as  witnessed  by  the  Book  of  Numbers,  at  any  rate,
gave  out  originally,  before  the  Christian  Kabalists  had  disfigured  it,  and
still  gives  out,  the  same  doctrine  that  we  do ;  that  is,  it  makes  Man
emanate,  not  from  one  Celestial  Man,  but  from  a  Septenary  Group  of
Celestial  Men,  or  Angels,  just  as  in  Pymander,  the  Thought  Divine.


STANZA   W\.— Continued.

(3)  When  the  One  becomes  Two,  the  Three-fold  appears  {d).
The  Three  are*  One  ;  and  it  is  our  Thread,  O  Lanoo,  the
Heart  of  the  Man-Plant,  called  Saptaparna  {p).

(a)  "When  the  One  becomes  Two,  the  Three-fold  appears":  to  wit,
when  the  One  Eternal  drops  its  reflection  into  the  region  of  Manifesta-

•  Linked  into.


252  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

tion,  that  reflection,  the  Ray,  differentiates  the  Water  of  Space;  or,  in
the  words  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead:  "Chaos  ceases,  through  the  efful-
gence of  the  Ray  of  Primordial  Light  dissipating  total  darkness,  by
the  help  of  the  great  magic  power  of  the  Word  of  the  [Central]  Sun."
Chaos  becomes  male-female,  and  Water,  incubated  by  Light,  and  the
Three-fold  Being  issues  as  its  "First-born."  "  Ra  [or  Osiris-Ptah]
creates  his  own  lyinibs  [like  Brahma],  by  creating  the  Gods  destined  to
personify  his  phases,"  during  the  Cycle.*  The  Egyptian  Ra,  issuing
from  the  Deep,  is  the  Divine  Universal  Soul  in  its  manifested  aspect,
and  so  is  Narayana,  the  Purusha,  "concealed  in  Akasha,  and  present  in
Kther."

This  is  the  metaphysical  explanation,  and  refers  to  the  ver}'-  begin-
ning of  Evolution,  or,  as  we  would  rather  say,  of  Theogony.  The
meaning  of  the  Stanza,  when  explained  from  another  standpoint  in  its
reference  to  the  mystery  of  man  and  his  origin,  is  still  more  difficult  to
comprehend.  In  order  to  form  a  clear  conception  of  what  is  meant  by
the  One  becoming  Two,  and  then  being  transformed  into  the  Three-
fold, the  student  has  to  make  himself  thoroughly  acquainted  with
what  we  call  Rounds.  If  he  refers  to  Esoteric  Buddhism — the  first
attempt  to  sketch  out  an  approximate  outline  of  archaic  cosmogony —
he  will  find  that  by  a  Round  is  meant  the  serial  evolution  of  nascent
material  Nature,  of  the  seven  Globes  of  our  Chain,!  with  their  mineral,
vegetable  and  animal  kingdoms;  man  being  included  in  the  latter
and  standing  at  the  head  of  it,  during  the  whole  period  of  a  Eife-
Cj'cle,  which  latter  would  be  called  by  the  Brahmans  a  "Day  of
Brahma."  It  is,  in  short,  one  revolution  of  the  "Wheel"  (our  Plane-
tary Chain),  which  is  composed  of  seven  Globes,  or  seven  separate
"Wheels,"    in   another    sense   this   time.       When    evolution    has   run


*  op.  cit.,  xvii.  4.

t  Several  inimical  critics  are  anxious  to  prove  that  no  Seven  Principles  of  Man,  or  Septenary  Con-
stitution of  our  Chain,  were  taught  in  our  earlier  volumes,  Isis  Unveiled.  Though  in  that  work  the
doctrine  could  only  be  hinted  at,  there  are  many  passages,  nevertheless,  in  which  the  Septenary  Con-
stitution  of  both  Man  and  the  Chain  is  openly  mentioned.  Speaking  of  the  Elohim  (II.  420),  it  is
said:  "They  remain  over  the  seventh  heaven  (or  spiritual  world),  for  it  is  they  who,  according  to  the
Kabalists,  formed  in  succession  the  six  material  worlds,  or  rather,  attempts  at  worlds,  that  preceded
our  own,  which,  they  say,  is  tiie  seventh."  Our  Globe,  in  the  diagram  representing  the  Chain,  is,  of
course,  the  seventh  and  lowest;  though,  as  the  evolution  on  these  Globes  is  cyclic,  it  is  the  fourth,  on
the  descending  arc  of  matter.  And  again  (II.  367)  it  is  written :  "  In  the  Egyptian  notions,  as  in  those
of  all  other  faiths  founded  on  philosophy,  msin  was  not  merely  .  .  .  a  union  of  soul  and  body;  he  was
a  trinity,  when  spirit  was  added  to  it.  Besides,  that  doctrine  made  him  consist  of  .  .  .  body,  .  .  .
astral  form,  or  shadow,  .  .  .  animal  soul,  ...  the  higher  soul,  and  .  .  .  terrestrial  intelUgence
[and]  a  sixth  principle,  etc.,  etc."— the  seventh— Spirit.  So  clearly  are  these  principles  men-
tioned, that  even  in  the  Index  (II.  683),  one  finds  "Six  Principles  of  Man,"  the  seventh  being,  in
strict  truth,  the  synthesis  of  the  six,  and  not  a  principle  but  a  ray  of  the  Absolute  All.


THE    ORIGIN   OF   MAN.  253

downward  into  matter  from  Globe  A  to  Globe  G,  it  is  one  Round.
In  the  middle  of  the  fourth  revolution,  which  is  our  present  Round,
"Evolution  has  reached  its  acme  of  physical  development,  crowned  its
work  with  the  perfect  physical  man,  and,  from  this  point,  begins  its
work  spirit-ward."  All  this  needs  little  repetition,  as  it  is  well  ex-
plained in  Esoteric  Buddhism.  That  which  was  hardly  touched  upon,
however,  and  of  which  the  little  that  was  said  has  misled  many,  is  the
origin  of  man,  and  it  is  upon  this  that  a  little  more  light  may  now  be
thrown,  just  enough  to  make  the  Stanza  more  comprehensible,  as
the  process  will  be  fully  explained  only  in  its  legitimate  place,  in
Volume  II.

Now  ever)'  Round,  on  the  descending  scale,  is  but  a  repetition  in  a
more  concrete  form  of  the  Round  which  preceded  it,  just  as  every
Globe,  down  to  our  Fourth  Sphere  the  actual  Earth,  is  a  grosser  and
more  material  copy  of  the  more  shadowy  Sphere  which  precedes  it,
each  in  order,  on  the  three  higher  planes.*  On  its  wa}^  upwards,
on  the  ascending  arc.  Evolution  spiritualizes  and  etherealizes,  so  to
speak,  the  general  nature  of  all,  bringing  it  on  to  a  level  with  the  plane
on  which  the  twin  Globe  on  the  opposite  arc  is  placed;  the  result
being,  that  when  the  seventh  Globe  is  reached,  in  whatever  Round,
the  nature  of  everything  that  is  evolving  returns  to  the  condition  it
was  in  at  its  starting  point — phis,  every  time,  a  new  and  superior
degree  in  the  states  of  consciousness.  Thus  it  becomes  clear  that  the
"origin  of  man,"  so-called,  in  this  our  present  Round,  or  I^ife-Cj-cle,
on  this  Planet,  must  occupy  the  same  place  in  the  same  order — save
details  based  on  local  conditions  and  time — as  in  the  preceding  Round.
Again,  it  must  be  explained  and  remembered  that,  as  the  work  of  each
Round  is  said  to  be  apportioned  to  a  different  Group  of  so-called  Crea-
tors, or  Architects,  so  is  that  of  ever>-  Globe;  that  is,  it  is  under  the
super\asion  and  guidance  of  special  Builders  and  Watchers— the
various  Dhyan  Chohans.

"Creators"  is  an  incorrect  word  to  use,  as  no  other  religion,  not  even
the  sect  of  the  Visishthadvaitis  in  India,  one  which  anthropomorphizes
even  Parabrahman,  believes  in  creation  ex  nikilo,  as  Christians  and
Jews  do,  but  only  in  evolution  out  of  preexisting  materials.

The  Group  of  the  Hierarchy  which  is  commissioned  to  "create"  men
is  a  special  Group,  then;  yet  it  evolved  shadowy  man  in  this  Cycle,  just
as  a  higher  and  still  more  spiritual  Group  evolved  him  in  the  Third

•  See  Diagram  III.  p.  221.


254  'I'HE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Round.  But  as  it  is  the  Sixth,  on  the  downward  scale  of  Spirituality
— the  last  and  Seventh  being  the  Terrestrial  Spirits  (Elementals),  which
gradually  form,  build  and  condense  his  physical  body — this  Sixth
Group  evolves  no  more  than  the  future  man's  shadowy  form,  a  filmy,
hardly  visible,  transparent  copy  of  themselves.  It  becomes  the  task  of
the  Fifth  Hierarchy — the  mysterious  Beings  that  preside  over  the  con-
stellation Capricornus,  Makara,  or  "Crocodile,"  in  India  and  in  Egypt
— to  inform  the  empty  and  ethereal  animal  form,  and  make  of  it  the
Rational  Man.  This  is  one  of  those  subjects  upon  which  very  little
may  be  said  to  the  general  public.  It  is  a  Mystery  truly,  but  only  to
him  who  is  prepared  to  reject  the  existence  of  intellectual  and  con-
scious Spiritual  Beings  in  the  Universe,  and  to  limit  full  Consciousness
to  man  alone,  and  that  only  as  a  "function  of  the  brain."  Many  are
those  among  the  Spiritual  Entities,  who  have  incarnated  bodily  in
man,  since  his  first  appearance,  and  who,  for  all  that,  still  exist  as  in-
dependently as  they  did  before,  in  the  infinitudes  of  Space.

To  put  it  more  clearly,  such  an  invisible  Entity  may  be  bodily  present
on  earth  without,  however,  abandoning  its  status  and  functions  in  the
supersensuous  regions.  If  this  needs  explanation,  we  can  do  no  better
than  remind  the  reader  of  like  cases  in  so-called  "Spiritualism";
though  such  cases  are  very  rare,  at  least  as  regards  the  nature  of  the
Entity  incarnating,  or  taking  temporary  possession  of  a  medium.  For
the  so-called  "spirits"  that  may  occasionally  possess  themselves  of  the
bodies  of  mediums  are  not  the  Monads,  or  Higher  Principles,  of  dis-
embodied Personalities.  Such  "spirits"  can  only  be  either  Ele-
mentaries,  or — Nirmanakayas.  Just  as  certain  persons,  whether  by
virtue  of  a  peculiar  organization,  or  through  the  power  of  acquired
mystic  knowledge,  can  be  seen  in  their  "double"  in  one  place,  while
their  body  is  many  miles  away ;  so  the  same  thing  can  occur  in  the
case  of  superior  Beings.

Man,  philosophically  considered,  is,  in  his  outward  form,  simply  an
animal,  hardly  more  perfect  than  his  pithecoid-like  ancestor  of  the
Third  Round.  He  is  a  living  Body,  not  a  living  Being,  since  the
realization  of  existence,  the  ''Ego  Sum,'''  necessitates  self-conscious-
ness, and  an  animal  can  only  have  direct  consciousness,  or  instinct.
This  was  so  well  understood  by  the  ancients,  that  even  the  Kabalists
made  of  soul  and  body  two  Lives,  independent  of  each  other.  In  the
New  Aspects  of  Life,  the  author  states  the  Kabalistic  teaching:

They  held  that,  functionally,  Spirit  and  Matter,  of  corresponding  opacity  and


DII   SUNT  DEMONES    INVERSI.  255

density,  tended  to  coalesce;  and  that  the  resultant  created  Spirits,  in  the  dis-
embodied state,  were  constituted  on  a  scale  in  which  the  differing  opacities  and
transparencies  of  elemental  or  vmcreated  Spirit  were  reproduced.  And  that  these
Spirits,  in  the  disembodied  state,  attracted,  appropriated,  digested  and  assimilated
elemental  Spirit  and  elemental  Matter  whose  condition  was  conformed  to  their
own.  .  .  .  They  therefore  taught  that  there  was  a  wide  difference  in  the  condi-
tions of  created  Spirits;  and  that,  in  the  intimate  association  between  the  Spirit-
world  and  the  world  of  Matter,  the  more  opaque  Spirits,  in  the  disembodied  state,
were  drawn  towards  the  more  dense  parts  of  the  material  world,  and  therefore  tended
towards  the  centre  of  the  Earth,  where  they  found  the  conditions  most  suited  to
their  state;  while  the  more  transparent  Spirits  passed  into  the  surrounding  aura  of
the  planet,  the  most  rarefied  finding  their  home  in  its  satellite.*

This  relates  exclusively  to  our  Elemental  Spirits,  and  has  naught  to
do  with  either  the  Planetar}^  Sidereal,  Cosmic  or  Inter- Etheric  Intelli-
gent Forces,  or  "Angels"  as  they  are  termed  by  the  Roman  Church.
The  Jewish  Kabalists,  especially  the  practical  Occultists  who  dealt  with
Ceremonial  Magic,  busied  themselves  solely  with  the  Spirits  of  the
Planets  and  the  "Elementals"  so-called.  Therefore  the  above  covers
only  a  portion  of  the  Esoteric  teaching.

The  Soul,  whose  body-vehicle  is  the  astral,  ethereo-substantial
envelope,  could  die  and  man  be  still  living  on  earth.  That  is  to  say,
the  Soul  could  free  itself  from  and  quit  the  tabernacle  for  various
reasons,  such  as  insanity,  spiritual  and  physical  depravit3%  etc.  The
possibility  of  the  "Soul" — that  is,  the  eternal  Spiritual  Ego — dwelling
in  the  unseen  worlds,  while  its  body  goes  on  living  on  Earth,  is  a  pre-
eminently Occult  doctrine,  especially  in  Chinese  and  Buddhist  philo-
sophy. Many  are  the  sotillcss  men  among  us,  for  the  occurrence  is
found  to  take  place  in  wicked  materialists  as  well  as  in  persons  "who
advance  in  holiness  and  never  turn  back."

Therefore,  that  which  living  men  (Initiates)  can  do,  the  Dhyanis,
who  have  no  physical  body  to  hamper  them,  can  do  still  better.  This
was  the  belief  of  the  antediluvians,  and  it  is  fast  becoming  that  of
modern  intellectual  society  in  "Spiritualism,"  as  well  as  in  the  Greek
and  Roman  Churches,  which  teach  the  ubiquity  of  their  Angels.  The
Zoroastrians  regarded  their  Amshaspends  as  dual  entities  (Ferouers),
applying  this  duality— in  Esoteric  philosophy,  at  any  rate— to  all  the
spiritual  and  invisible  denizens  of  the  numberless  worlds  in  space,
which  are  visible  to  our  eye.  In  a  note  of  Damascius  (sixth  century)
on  the  Chaldean  Oracles,  we  have  ample  evidence  of  the  universality  of


•  pp.  340-351,  "Genesis  of  theSoul.^


'256  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINT.^

this  doctrine,  for  he  says:  "In  these  Oracles,  the  seven  Cosmocratores
of  the  World  ['the  World-Pillars'],  mentioned  likewise  by  St.  Paul,
are  double;  one  set  being  commissioned  to  rule  the  superior  worlds,
the  spiritual  and  the  sidereal,  and  the  other  to  guide  and  watch  over
the  worlds  of  matter."  Such  is  also  the  opinion  of  Jamblichus,  v/ho
makes  an  evident  distinction  between  the  Archangels  and  the  Arch-
ontes.*

The  above  may  be  applied,  of  course,  to  the  distinction  made  be-
tween the  degrees  or  orders  of  Spiritual  Beings,  and  it  is  in  this  sense
that  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  tries  to  interpret  and  teach  the  differ-
ence; for  while  the  Archangels  are  in  her  teaching  divine  and  holy,
she  denounces  their  "Doubles"  as  Devils.  But  the  word  Ferouer  is  not
to  be  understood  in  this  sense,  for  it  means  simply  the  reverse  or  the
opposite  side  of  some  attribute  or  quality.  Thus  when  the  Occultist
says  that  the  "Demon  is  the  inverse  of  God" — evil,  the  reverse  of  the
medal — he  does  not  mean  two  separate  actualities,  but  two  aspects
or  facets  of  the  same  Unity.  But  the  best  man  living,  side  by  side
with  an  Archangel — as  described  in  Theology — would  appear  a  fiend.
Hence  a  certain  reason  in  depreciating  a  lower  "Double,"  immersed  far
deeper  in  matter  than  its  original.  But  still  there  is  as  little  cause  to
regard  them  as  Devils,  and  this  is  precisel}^  what  the  Roman  Catholics
maintain  against  all  reason  and  logic.

This  identity  between  the  Spirit  and  its  material  "Double" — in  man
it  is  the  reverse — explains  still  bettei  the  confusion,  already  alluded
to  in  this  work,  in  the  names  and  individualities,  as  well  as  in  the
numbers,  of  the  Rishis  and  Prajapatis;  especially  of  those  of  the
Satya  Yuga  and  the  Mahabharatan  Period.  It  also  throws  additional
light  on  what  the  Secret  Doctrine  teaches  with  regard  to  the  Root-
and  the  Seed-Manus.  Not  only  these  Progenitors  of  our  mankind,
but  every  human  being,  we  are  taught,  has  his  prototype  in  the
Spiritual  Spheres,  which  prototype  is  the  highest  essence  of  his
Seventh  Principle.  Thus  the  seven  Manus  become  fourteen,  the  Root-
Manu  being  the  Prime  Cause,  and  the  Seed-Manu  its  Effect;  and  from
the  Satya  Yuga  (the  first  stage)  to  the  Heroic  Period,  these  Manus  or
Rishis  become  twenty-one  in  number.

(J))  The  concluding  sentence  of  this  shloka  shows  how  archaic  is  the
belief  and  the  doctrine  that  man  is  seven-fold  in  his  constitution.  The
"Thread"  of  Being,  which  animates  man,  and  passes  through  all  his

*  De  Mysieriis,  ii.  3.


THE   IMMORTAI,  ROOT.  257

Personalities,  or  Rebirths  on  this  Earth — an  allusion  to  Siitratma — the
Thread  on  which  moreover  all  his  "Spirits"  are  strung,  is  spun  from
the  essence  of  the  Three-fold,  the  Four-fold  and  the  Five-fold  which
contain  all  the  preceding.  Panchashikha,  agreeably  to  Padma  Purana,^
is  one  of  the  seven  Kumdras  who  go  to  Shveta  Dvipa  to  worship
Vishnu.  We  shall  see,  further  on,  what  connection  there  is  between
the  "celibate"  and  chaste  Sons  of  Brahma,  who  refuse  "to  multiply,"
and  terrestrial  mortals.  Meanwhile,  it  is  evident  that  the  "Man-Plant,
Saptaparna,"  thus  refers  to  the  seven  principles,  and  that  man  is  com-
pared to  this  seven-leaved  plant,  which  is  so  sacred  among  Buddhists.
The  Eg^^tian  allegory,  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  that  relates  to  the  "re-
ward of  the  Soul,"  is  as  suggestive  of  our  septenary  doctrine  as  it  is
poetical.  The  Deceased  is  allotted  a  piece  of  land  in  the  field  of  Aanroo,
wherein  the  Manes,  the  deified  shades  of  the  dead,  glean,  as  the  harvest
they  have  sown  by  their  actions  in  life,  the  corn  seven  cubits  high,
which  grows  in  a  territory  divided  into  seven  and  fourteen  portions.
This  corn  is  the  food  on  which  they  will  live  and  prosper,  or  that  will
kill  them,  in  Amenti,  the  realm  of  which  the  Aanroo-field  is  a  domain.
For,  as  said  in  the  hymn.f  the  Deceased  is  either  destroyed  therein,  or
becomes  pure  spirit  for  the  Eternity,  in  consequence  of  the  "seven
times  seventy-seven  lives"  passed,  or  to  be  passed,  on  Earth.  The  idea
of  the  corn  reaped  as  the  "fruit  of  our  actions"  is  very  graphic.

STANZA  ^W.—Contmued.

4.  It  is  the  Root  that  never  dies,  the  Three-tongued  Flame
OP   THE   Four   Wicks  (a)     .     .     .    The   Wicks   are  the    Sparks,

THAT   DRAW  FROM  THE   ThrEE-TONGUED    FLAME,t   SHOT   OUT   BY   THE

Seven,   their  Flame;    the  Beams   and   Sparks    of    One    Moon,

REFLECTED    IN    THE    RUNNING    Wa\^S    OF   ALL    THE    RiVERS    OF   THE
Earth§  (Jj).

(a)  The  "Three-tongued  Flame  that  never  dies"  is  the  immortal
spiritual  Triad,  the  Atma,  Buddhi  and  Manas,  or  rather  the  fruitage  of
the  last,  assimilated  by  the  first  two  after  every  terrestrial  life.  The
"Four  Wicks,"  that  go  out  and  are  extinguished,  are  the  Quaternary,
the  four  lower  principles,  including  the  body.

"I  am  the  Three-wicked  Flame  and  my  Wicks  are  immortal,"  says
the  Defunct.     "I  enter  into  the  domain  of  Sekhem  [the  God  whose

•  Asiatic  Researches,  xi.  99,  100.        +  Ch.  xxxii.  9.        t  Their  Upper  Triad.       §  Bhumi  or  Prithivi.

18


258  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

hand  sows  the  seed  of  action  produced  by  the  disembodied  soul],  and  I
enter  the  region  of  the  Flames  who  have  destroyed  their  adversaries
\_z.e.,  got  rid  of  the  sin-creating  Four  Wicks]."*

"The  Three-tongued  Flame  of  the  Four  Wicks"  corresponds  to  the
four  Unities  and  the  three  Binaries  of  the  Sephirothal  tree.

(d)  Just  as  milliards  of  bright  sparks  dance  on  the  waters  of  an  ocean,
above  which  one  and  the  same  moon  is  shining,  so  our  evanescent
Personalities — the  illusive  envelopes  of  the  immortal  Monad-Ego—
twinkle  and  dance  on  the  waves  of  Maya.  They  appear  and,  as  the
thousands  of  sparks  produced  by  the  moon-beams,  last  only  so  long  as
the  Queen  of  the  Night  radiates  her  lustre  on  the  "Running  Waves"
of  lyife,  the  period  of  a  Manvantara;  and  then  they  disappear,  the
"Beams" — symbols  of  our  eternal  Spiritual  Egos — alone  surviving,  re-
merged  in,  and  being,  as  they  were  before,  one  with  the  Mother-
Source.


STANZA  Yll.— Continued.

5.  The  Spark  hangs  from  the  Flame  by  the  finest  Thread
OF  FoHAT.  It  journeys  through  the  Seven  Worlds  of  Maya  (a).
It  stops  in  the  first,!  and  is  a  Metal  and  a  Stone;  it  passes
INTO  the  Second,:]:  and  behold — a  Plant;  the  Plant  whirls
THROUGH  Seven  Forms  and  becomes  a  Sacred  Animal  §  (d).

From  the  combined  attributes  of  these,  Manu,||  the  Thinker,
IS  formed.

Who  forms  him?  The  Seven  Lives,  and  the  One  I^ife  (c).
Who  completes  him?  The  Five-fold  IvHA.  And  who  perfects
the  last  Body?    Fish,  Sin  and  Soma^  (d).

(a)  The  phrase,  "through  the  Seven  Worlds  of  Maya,"  refers  here  to
the  seven  Globes  of  the  Planetary  Chain  and  the  seven  Rounds,  or  the
fort3^-nine  stations  of  active  existence  that  are  before  the  "Spark,"  or
Monad,  at  the  beginning  of  every  Great  Life-Cycle,  or  Manvantara.
The  "Thread  of  Fohat"  is  the  Thread  of  Life  before  referred  to.

This  relates  to  the  greatest  problem  of  philosophy — the  physical  and
substantial  nature  of  Life,  the  independent  nature  of  which  is  denied

*  Book  of  the  Dead,  i.  7.    Compare  also  Mysteries  of  Rostan.

+  Kingdom.

X  Kingdom.

\  The  first  Shadow  of  the  Physical  Man.

II  Man.

V,  The  Moon.


CHALDEAN   METAPHYSICS.  259

by  Modem  Science,  because  that  Science  is  unable  to  comprehend  it.
The  reincarnationists  and  believers  in  Karma  alone  dimly  perceive,
that  the  whole  secret  of  Life  is  in  the  unbroken  series  of  its  manifes-
tations, whether  in,  or  apart  from,  the  physical  body.     Because  even  if:

Life,  like  a  dome  of  many-coloured  glass,
Stains  the  white  radiance  of  Eternity —

yet  it  is  itself  part  and  parcel  of  that  Eternity;  for  Life  alone  can
understand  Life.

What  is  that  "Spark"  which  "hangs  from  the  Flame"?  It  is  Jiva,
the  Monad  in  conjunction  with  Manas,  or  rather  its  aroma — that  which
remains  from  each  Personality,  when  worthy,  and  hangs  from  Atma-
Buddhi,  the  Flame,  by  the  Thread  of  Life.  In  whatever  way  it  is  inter-
preted, and  into  whatever  number  of  principles  the  human  being  is
divided,  it  maj'^  be  easily  shown  that  this  doctrine  is  supported  by  all
the  ancient  religions,  from  the  Vedic  to  the  Eg>'ptian,  from  the  Zoroas-
trian  to  the  Jewish.  In  the  case  of  the  last-mentioned,  the  Kabalistic
works  offer  abundant  proof  of  this  statement.  The  entire  system  of
the  Kabalistic  numerals  is  based  on  the  divine  Septenary  hanging  from
the  Triad,  thus  forming  the  Decad,  and  its  permutations  7,  5,  4,  and  3,
which,  finally,  all  merge  into  the  O71C  itself;  an  endless  and  boundless
Circle.

As  says  the  Zohar:

The  Deity  [the  ever  invisible  Presence]  manifests  itself  through  the  ten  Sephiroth,
which  are  its  radiating  witnesses.  The  Deity  is  like  the  sea  from  vrhich  outflov/s  a
stream  called  Wisdom,  the  v/aters  of  which  fall  into  a  lake  named  Intelligence.

From  the  basin,  lilce  seven  channels,  issue  the  Seven  Sephiroth For  ten

equal  seven:  the  Decad  contains yb/zr  Unities  and  three  Binaries.

The  Ten  Sephiroth  correspond  to  the  Limbs  of  Man.

When  I  [the  Elohim]  framed  Adam  Kadmon,  the  Spirit  of  the  Eternal  shot  out  of
his  Body,  like  a  sheet  of  lightning  that  radiated  at  once  on  the  billows  of  the  seven
millions  of  skies,  and  my  ten  Splendours  were  his  Limbs.

But  neither  the  Head  nor  the  Shoulders  of  Adam  Kadmon  can  be
seen;  therefore  we  read  in  the  Siphra  Dtseiiioutha,  the  "Book  of  the
Concealed  Myster>'" :

In  the  beginning  of  Time,  after  the  Elohim  [the  "Sons  of  Light  and  Life,"  or  the
Builders]  had  shaped  out  of  the  eternal  Essence  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth,  they
formed  the  worlds  six  by  six.

The  seventh  being  Malkuth,  which  is  our  Earth*  on  its  plane,  and

•  See  Mantuan  Codex.


26o  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

the  lowest  on  all  the  other  planes  of  conscious  existence.     The  Chal-
dean Book  of  Numbei's  contains  a  detailed  explanation  of  all  this.

The  first  triad  of  the  Body  of  Adam  Kadmon  [the  three  upper  planes  of  the
seven  *]  cannot  be  seen  before  the  Soul  stands  in  the  presence  of  the  Ancient  of
Days.

The  Sephiroth  of  this  upper  Triad  are:  "i.  Kether  (the  Crown),  re-
presented by  the  brow  of  Macroprosopus ;  2.  Chokniah  (Wisdom,  a
male  Principle),  by  his  right  shoulder;  and  3..Binah  (Intelligence,  a
female  Principle),  by  the  left  shoulder."  Then  come  the  seven  Limbs,
or  Sephiroth,  on  the  planes  of  manifestation ;  the  totality  of  these  four
planes  being  represented  by  Microprosopus,  the  lycsser  Face,  or  Tetra-
grammaton,  the  "four-lettered"  Mystery.  "The  seve7i  manifested  and
the  three  concealed  I^imbs  are  the  Body  of  the  Deity."

Thus  our  Karth,  Malkuth,  is  both  the  seventh  and  the  fourth  World;
the  former  when  counting  from  the  first  Globe  above,  the  latter  if
reckoned  by  the  planes.  It  is  generated  by  the  sixth  Globe  or  Sephira,
called  Yezud,  "Foundation,"  or,  as  said  in  the  Book  of  Numbers,  "by
Yezud,  He  [Adam  Kadmon]  fecundates  the  primitive  Heva  [Eve  or
our  Earth]."  Rendered  in  mystic  language,  this  is  the  explanation
why  Malkuth,  called  the  Inferior  Mother,  Matrona,  Queen,  and  the
Kingdom  of  the  Foundation,  is  shown  as  the  Bride  of  Tetragrammaton,
or  Microprosopus  (the  Second  I<ogos),  the  Heavenly  Man.  When  free
from  all  impurity,  she  will  become  united  with  the  Spiritual  lyOgos,  i.e.,
in  the  Seventh  Race  of  the  Seventh  Round — after  the  regeneration,  on
the  day  of  "Sabbath."  For  the  ''Seventh  Day"  again  has  an  occult
significance  undreamed  of  by  our  theologians.

When  Matronitha,  the  Mother,  is  separated  and  brought  face  to  face  with  the
King,  in  the  excellence  of  the  Sabbath,  all  things  become  one  bod5'.t

"Become  one  body"  means,  that  all  is  reabsorbed  once  more  into  the
One  Element,  the  spirits  of  men  becoming  Nirvanis,  and  the  elements
of  everything  else  becoming  again  what  they  were  before — Protyle  or
Undifferentiated  Substance.  "Sabbath"  means  Rest,  or  Nirvana.  It  is
not  the  '■'■seventh  day"  after  six  days,  but  a  period  the  duration  of  which
equals  that  of  the  seven  "days,"  or  any  period  made  up  of  seven  parts.
Thus  a  Pralaya  is  equal  in  duration  to  a  Manvantara,  or  a  Night  of
Brahma  is  equal  to  his  Yi'scj.  If  the  Christians  will  follow  Jewish  cus-
toms, they  ought  to  adopt  the  spirit  and  not  the  dead  letter  thereof.

*  The  formation  of  the  "Li\-ing  Soul,"  or  Man,  would  render  the  idea  more  clearly.    A  "I,iving
Soul"  is  a  synonym  of  Man  in  the  Bible.    These  are  our  seven  "  Principles."
+  Ha  Idra  Zuta  Kadisha,  xxii.  746.


THE  TRUE   AND  THE   FAI^E   KABALAH.  26l

They  should  work  one  week  of  seven  days  and  rest  seven  days.  That
the  word  "Sabbath"  had  a  mystic  significance,  is  disclosed  in  the  con-
tempt shown  by  Jesus  for  the  Sabbath  day,  and  by  what  is  said  in  Luke*
Sabbath  is  there  taken  for  the  whole  week.  See  the  Greek  text  where
the  week  is  called  "Sabbath."  Literally,  "I  fast  twice  in  the  Sabbath."
Paul,  an  Initiate,  knew  it  well  when  referring  to  the  eternal  rest  and
felicity  in  Heaven,  as  Sabbath  if  "and  their  happiness  will  be  eternal,
for  they  will  ever  be  [one]  with  the  Lord,  and  will  enjoy  an  eternal
SabbathrX

The  difference  between  the  Kabalah  and  the  archaic  Esoteric  Vidya —
taking  the  Kabalah  as  contained  in  the  Chaldean  Book  of  Numbers,  not
as  misrepresented  by  its  now  disfigured  copy,  the  Kabalah  of  the  Chris-
tian Mystics — is  very  small  indeed,  being  confined  to  unimportant
divergences  of  form  and  expression.  Thus  Eastern  Occultism  refers
to  our  Earth  as  the  Fourth  World,  the  lowest  of  the  Chain,  above
which  run  upward  on  both  curves  the  six  Globes,  three  on  each  side.
The  Zohar,  on  the  other  hand,  calls  the  Earth  the  lower,  or  the  seventh,
adding  that  upon  the  six  depend  all  things  which  are  in  it  (Micro-
prosopus).  The  "Smaller  Face  [smaller  because  manifested  and  finite]
is  formed  of  six  Sephiroth,"  says  the  same  work.  "Seven  Kings  come
and  die  in  the  thrice- destroyed  World  [Malkuth,  our  Earth,  destroyed  after
each  of  the  Three  Rounds  which  it  has  gone  through].  And  their  reign
[that  of  the  Seven  Kings]  will  be  broken  up."§  This  relates  to  the  Seven
Races,  y?z'd'  of  which  have  already  appeared,  and  two  more  have  still  to
appear  in  this  Round.

The  Shinto  allegorical  accounts  of  cosmogony  and  the  origin  of  man,
in  Japan,  hint  at  the  same  belief.

Captain  C.  Pfoundes,  who  studied  the  religion  underl)dng  the  various
sects  of  the  land,  for  nearly  nine  years  in  the  monasteries  of  Japan,  says :

The  Shinto  idea  of  creation  is  as  follows:  Out  of  Chaos  (Konton)  the  Earth  (In)
was  the  sediment  precipitated,  and  the  Heavens  (Yo)  the  ethereal  essences  which
ascended:  Man  (Jin)  appeared  between  the  two.  The  first  man  was  called  Kuni-to
ko  tatchino-mikoto,  and  five  other  names  were  given  to  him,  and  then  the  human
race  appeared,  male  and  female.  Isanagi  and  Isanami  begat  Tenshoko  doijin,  the
first  of  the  five  Gods  of  the  Earth.

These  "Gods"  are  simply  our  Five  Races,  Isanagi  and  Isanami  being
the  two  kinds  of  "Ancestors,"  the  two  preceding  Races  which  give
birth  to  animal  and  to  rational  man.


t  Hebrews,  iv.  %  Cruden,  sub  voce.  \  Book  of  Numbers,  1.  viii.  3.


262


THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.


It  will  be  shown  in  Volume  II,  that  the  number  seven,  as  well  as  the
doctrine  of  the  septenary  constitution  of  man,  was  preeminent  in  all  the
secret  systems.  It  plays  as  important  a  part  in  Western  Kabalah  as  in
Eastern  Occultism.  Kliphas  lyevi  calls  the  number  seven  "the  key  to
the  Mosaic  creation  and  the  symbols  of  every  religion."  He  shows  the
Kabalah  faithfully  following  even  the  septenary  division  of  man,  for
the  diagram  he  gives  in  his  Clef  des  Grands  Mysttres*  is  septenary.
This  may  be  seen  at  a  glance,  however  cleverly  the  correct  thought  is
veiled.  One  needs  also  only  to  look  at  the  diagram,  the  "  Formation  of
the  Soul,"  in  Mathers'  Kabbalah  Unveiled,]  from  the  above  mentioned
work  of  L,evi,  to  find  the  same,  though  with  a  different  interpretation.

Thus  it  stands  with  both  the  Kabalistic  and  Occult  names  attached:

Diagram  IV.


The
Upper  Triad:
The  Immortal,  t


The

Lower

Quaternary  -.

The  Transitory

and  the  Mortal.


Levi   calls   Nephesh    that  which   we  name    Manas,    and   vice  versa,
Nephesh  is  the  Breath  of  (animal)  Life  in  man — the  Breath  of  Life,

*  p.  389-

t  Plate  VII.  p.  37.

t  This  Triad  is  disconnected  with  the  lower  Quaternary,  as  it  disconnects  itself  always  after  death.


OCCULT  AND   KABALISTIC  DOCTRINES.


263


instinctual  \x\.  the  animal;  and  Manas  is  the  Third  Soul — the  human  in
its  light  side,  and  animal,  in  its  connection  with  Samael  or  Kama.
Nephesh  is  really  the  "Breath  of  (animal)  Life"  breathed  into  Adam,
the  Man  of  Dust;  it  is  consequently  the  Vital  Spark,  the  informing
Element.  Without  Manas,  the  "  Reasoning  Soul,"  or  Mind,  which  in
Levi's  diagram  is  miscalled  Nephesh,  Atma-Buddhi  is  irrational  on
this  plane  and  cannot  act.  It  is  Buddhi  which  is  the  Plastic  Mediator;
not  Manas,  the  intelligent  medium  between  the  upper  Triad  and  the
lower  Quaternary.  But  there  are  many  such  strange  and  curious
transformations  to  be  found  in  the  Kabalistic  works — a  convincing
proof  that  this  literature  has  become  a  sad  jumble.  We  do  not  accept
the  classification,  except  in  this  one  particular,  in  order  to  show  the
points  of  agreement.

We  wdll  now  give  in  tabular  form  what  the  very  cautious  EHphas
Levi  says  in  explanation  of  his  diagram,  and  what  the  Esoteric  Doctrine
teaches — and  compare  the  two.  Levi,  too,  makes  a  distinction  between
Kabalistic  and  Occult  Pneumatics.


Says  Eliphas  Levi,  the  Kabalist:
Kabalistic  Pneumatics.

1.  The  Soul  (or  Ego)  is  a  clothed

light ;  and  this  light  is  triple.

2.  Neshamah — pure  Spirit.

3.  Ruach — the  Soul  or  Spirit.

4.  Nephesh — Plastic  Mediator.!


Say  the  Theosophists :
Esoteric  Pneumatics.

1.  The    same;     for    it    is    Atma-

Buddhi-Manas.

2.  The  same.*

3.  Spiritual  Soul.

4.  Mediator    between    Spirit    and

Man,  the  Seat  of  Reason,  the
Mind,  in  man.


5.  The  garment  of  the  Soul  is  the    5.  Correct,
rind  [body]  of  the  Im.age  [As-
tral Soul].


•  EHphas  Levi,  whether  purposely  or  otherwise,  has  confused  the  numbers:  with  us  his  No.  2  is
No.  I  (Spirit! ;  and  by  making  of  Nephesh  both  the  Plastic  Mediator  and  Life,  he  thus  makes  in
reality  only  six  principles,  because  he  repeats  the  first  two.

+  Esotericism  teaches  the  same.  But  Manas  is  not  Nephesh ;  nor  is  the  latter  the  Astral,  but  the
Fourth  Principle,  and  also  the  Second,  PrAna,  for  Nephesh  is  the  "Breath  of  Life"  in  man,  as  in  beast
or  insect ;  of  physical,  material  life,  which  has  no  spirituality  in  it.


264


THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.


6.  The  Image  is  double,  because  it
reflects  the  good  and  the  bad.


7.  [Image — Body.]

Occult  Pneumatics.
(As  given  by  Kliphas  I,evi.)

1.  Nephesh  is  immortal,  because  it

renews  its  life  by  the  destruc-
tion of  forms.

[But  Nephesh,  the  "Breath  of
Life,"  is  a  misnomer,  and  a
useless  puzzle  to  the  student.]

2.  Ruach  progresses  by  the  evolu-

tion of  ideas  (!  ?).


3.  Neshamah  is  progressive,  with-
out oblivion  and  destruction.


4.  The  Soul  has  three  dwellings.


5.  These  dwellings  are:  the  Plane
of  Mortals ;  the  Superior  Eden ;
and  the  Inferior  Eden.


6.  Too  uselessly  apocalyptic.    Why

not  say  that  the  Astral  reflects
the  good  as  well  as  the  bad
man ;  man,  who  is  ever  tending
to  the  upper  Triad,  or  elst  dis-
appears  with  the  Quaternary.

7.  The  Earthly  Image.

Occult  Pneumatics.
(As  given  by  the  Occultists.)

1.  Manas  is  immortal,  because  after

every  new  incarnation  it  adds

A

to  Atma-Buddhi  something  of
itself;  and  thus,  assimilating
itself  to  the  Monad,  shares  its
immortality.

2.  Buddhi    becomes   conscious   by

the  accretions  it  gets  from
Manas,  on  the  death  of  man
after   every    new   incarnation.

3.  Atma    neither    progresses,    for-

gets, nor  remembers.  It  does
not  belong  to  this  plane:  it
is  but  the  Ray  of  Light  eter-
nal which  shines  upon,  and
through,  the  darkness  of  mat-
ter— when  the  latter  is  willing.

4.  The   Soul — collectively,    as   the

Upper  Triad — /tves  on  three
planes,  besides  its  fourth,  the
terrestrial  sphere ;  and  it  z^  eter-
nally on  the  highest  of  the  three.

5.  These  dwellings  are:  Earth  for

the  physical  man,  or  Animal
Soul ;  Kama  Loka  (Hades,  the
Limbo)  for  the  disembodied
man,  or  his  Shell;  Devachan
for  the  Higher  Triad.


OCCULTISTS  AND   KA.BAUSTS  DIFFER.


261;


6.  The  Image  [man]  is  a  sphinx    6.  Correct,
that  offers  the  riddle  of  birth.


The  fatal  Image  [the  Astral]
endows  Nephesh  with  its  ap-
titudes; but  Ruach  is  able  to
substitute  for  it  the  Image
conquered  in  accordance  with
the  inspirations  of  Neshamah.


7.  The  Astral,  through  Kama  (De-
sire), is  ever  drawing  Manas
down  into  the  sphere  of  mate-
rial passions  and  desires.  But
if  the  better  Man,  or  Manas,
tries  to  escape  the  fatal  attrac-
tion, and  turns  its  aspirations
to  Atma  (Neshamah),  then
Buddlii  (Ruach)  conquers,  and
carries  Manas  with  it  to  the
realm  of  eternal  Spirit,

It  is  very  evident  that  the  French  Kabalist  either  did  not  sufficiently
know  the  real  tenet,  or  distorted  it  to  suit  himself  and  his  objects.
Thus  he  says  again,  treating  upon  the  same  subject,  as  follows;  and  we
Occultists  answer  the  late  Kabalist  and  his  admirers  also  as  follov/s:


The  Body  is  the  mould  of  Ne-
phesh ;  Nephesh  the  mould  of
Ruach;  Ruach  the  mould  of
the  garment  of  Neshamah.


2.


Light  [the  Soul]  personifies  it-
self in  clothing  itself  [with  a
Body];  and  personality  en-
dures only  when  the  garment
is  perfect.


1.  The   Body   follows   the  whims,

good  or  bad,  of  Manas ;  Manas
tries  to  follow  the  Light  of
Buddhi,  but  often  fails.  Bud-
dhi  is  the  mould  of  the  "gar-
ments" of  Atma;  for  Atma  is
no  body,  or  shape,  or  any-
thing, and  because  Buddhi  is
onl}'  figuratively  its  Vehicle.

2.  The  Monad  becomes  a  personal

Ego  when  it  incarnates;  and
something  remains  of  that
Personality  through  Manas,
when  the  latter  is  perfect
enough  to  assimilate  Buddhi.


3.  The  Angels   aspire    to  become    3.  Correct,
men;    a  Perfect  Man,  a  Man-
God,  is  above  all  the  Angels.


266  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

4.  Every  14,000  years  the  soul  re-     4.  Within  a  period,  a  Great  Age,  or
juvenates,  and  rests  in  the  jubi-  a  Day  of   Brahma,    14  Manus

lean  sleep  of  oblivion.  reign;  after  which  conies  Pra-

laya,  when  all  the  Souls  (Egos)
rest  in  Nirvana.

Such  are  the  distorted  copies  of  the  Esoteric  Doctrine  in  the  Kabalah.

But  to  return  to  Shloka  5  of  Stanza  VII.

(J))  The  well-known  Kabalistic  aphorism  runs:  "A  stone  becomes  a
plant;  a  plant,  a  beast;  the  beast,  a  man;  a  man,  a  spirit;  and  the
spirit,  a  god."  The  "Spark"  animates  all  the  kingdoms,  in  turn,  before
it  enters  into  and  informs  Divine  Man,  between  whom  and  his  pre-
decessor animal  man,  there  is  all  the  difference  in  the  world.  Ge?iesis
begins  its  anthropology  at  the  wrong  end — evidently  for  a  blind — and
lands  nowhere.  The  introductory  chapters  of  Genesis  were  never
meant  to  represent  even  a  remote  allegory  of  the  creation  of  ouj"  Earth.
Thej^  embrace  a  metaphysical  conception  of  some  indefinite  period,  in
eternity,  when  successive  attempts  were  being  made  by  the  law  of
evolution  at  the  formation  of  universes.  The  idea  is  plainly  stated  in
the  Zohar:

There  were  old  Worlds,  which  perished  as  soon  as  they  came  into  existence,  were
formless,  and  were  called  Sparks.  Thus,  the  smith,  when  hammering  the  iron,  lets
the  sparks  fly  in  all  directions.  The  Sparks  are  the  primordial  Worlds,  which  could
not  continue  because  the  Sacred  Aged  (Sephira)  had  not  as  yet  assumed  its  form
(of  androg3'ne,  or  opposite  sexes)  of  King  and  Queen  (Sephira  and  Kadmon),  and  the
Master  was  not  j'et  at  his  work.*

Had  Genesis  begun  as  it  ought,  one  would  have  found  in  it,  first,  the
Celestial  Eogos,  the  "Heavenly  Man,"  which  evolves  as  a  Compound
Unit  of  Eogoi,  out  of  which,  after  their  pralayic  sleep — a  sleep  that
gathers  the  Numbers  scattered  on  the  mayavic  plane  into  One,  as  the
separate  globules  of  quicksilver  on  a  plate  blend  into  one  mass — the
Eogoi  appear  in  their  totality  as  the  first  "  Male  and  Female,"  or  Adam
Kadmon,  the  "Fiat  Eux"  of  the  Bible,  as  we  have  alread)^  seen.  But
this  transformation  did  not  take  place  on  our  Earth,  nor  on  any
material  plane,  but  in  the  Spacial  Depths  of  the  first  differentiation  of
the  eternal  Root-Matter.  On  our  nascent  Globe,  things  proceed
differently.  The  Monad  or  Jiva,  as  said  in  Isis  Unveiled,]  is,  first
of  all,  shot  down  by  the  Law  of  Evolution  into  the  lowest  form  of
matter — the  mineral.     After  a  sevenfold  gyration  encased  in  the  stone,

*  Zohar,  "Idra  Suta,"  Book  iii.,  p.  292,  b.  t  1.  302.


SPIRIT  ALONE   IS  HELPLESS  ON   EARTH.  267

or  that  which  will  become  mineral  and  stone  in  the  Fourth  Round,  it
creeps  out  of  it,  say,  as  a  lichen.  Passing  thence,  through  all  the
forms  of  vegetable  matter,  into  what  is  termed  animal  matter,  it  has
now  reached  the  point  at  which  it  has  become  the  germ,  so  to  speak,
of  the  animal,  that  will  become  the  physical  man.  All  this,  up  to  the
Third  Round,  is  formless,  as  matter,  and  senseless,  as  consciousness.
For  the  Monad,  or  Jiva,  per  se,  cannot  be  called  even  Spirit:  it  is  a  Ray,
a  Breath  of  the  Absolute,  or  the  Absoluteness  rather;  and  the  Abso-
lute Homogeneity,  having  no  relations  with  the  conditioned  and
relative  finiteness,  is  unconscious  on  our  plane.  Therefore,  besides
the  material  which  will  be  needed  for  its  future  human  form,  the
Monad  requires  {a)  a  spiritual  model,  or  prototype,  for  that  material
to  shape  itself  into;  and  {b)  an  intelligent  consciousness,  to  guide  its
evolution  and  progress,  neither  of  which  is  possessed  by  the  homo-
geneous Monad,  or  by  senseless  though  living  matter.  The  Adam  of
dust  requires  the  Soul  of  Life  to  be  breathed  into  him:  the  two  middle
Principles,  which  are  the  sentient  Life  of  the  irrational  animal  and  the
Human  Soul,  for  the  former  is  irrational  without  the  latter.  It  is  on!}'
when,  from  a  potential  androg>'ue,  man  has  become  separated  into
male  and  female,  that  he  will  be  endowed  with  this  conscious,  rational,
individual  Soul  (Manas),  "the  principle,  or  the  intelligence,  of  the
Elohim,"  to  receive  which,  he  has  to  eat  of  the  fruit  of  Knowledge
from  the  Tree  of  Good  and  Evil.  How  is  he  to  obtain  all  this?  The
Occult  Doctrine  teaches  that  while  the  Monad  is  cycling  on  downward
into  matter,  these  very  Elohim,  or  Pitris — the  lower  Dhyan  Chohans —
are  evolving,  pari  passu  with  it,  on  a  higher  and  more  spiritual  plane,
descending  also  relatively  into  matter,  on  their  own  plane  of  con-
sciousness, when,  after  having  reached  a  certain  point,  they  will  meet
the  incarnating  senseless  Monad,  encased  in  the  lowest  matter,  and
blending  the  two  potencies.  Spirit  and  Matter,  the  union  will  produce
that  terrestrial  symbol  of  the  "Heavenly  Man"  in  space — Perfect
Man.  In  the  Sankhya  Philosophy,  Purusha  (Spirit)  is  spoken  of  as
something  impotent  unless  it  mounts  on  the  shoulders  of  Prakriti
(Matter),  which,  left  alone,  is — senseless.  But  in  the  Secret  Philosophy
they  are  viewed  as  graduated.  Spirit  and  Matter,  though  one  and  the
same  thing  in  their  origin,  when  once  they  are  on  the  plane  of
differentiation,  begin  each  of  them  their  evolutionary  progress  in
contrarj^  directions — Spirit  falling  gradually  into  Matter,  and  the  latter
ascending  to  its  original  condition,  that  of  a  pure  spiritual  Substance.


268  THE    SECRET    DOCTRINE.

Both  are  inseparable,  yet  ever  separated.  On  the  physical  plane,  two
like  poles  will  always  repel  each  other,  while  the  negative  and  the
positive  are  mutually  attracted ;  so  do  Spirit  and  Matter  stand  to  each
other — the  two  poles  of  the  same  homogeneous  Substance,  the  Root-
Principle  of  the  Universe.

Therefore,  when  the  hour  strikes  for  Purusha  to  mount  on  Prakriti's
shoulders  for  the  formation  of  the  Perfect  Man — rudimentary  man  of
the  first  Two  and  a  Half  Races  being  only  the  first,  gradually  evolving
into  the  vtost  perfect,  of  matmftals — the  Celestial  Ancestors  (Entities  from
preceding  Worlds,  called  in  India  the  Shishta)  step  in  on  this  our
plane,  and  incarnate  in  the  physical  or  animal  man,  as  the  Pitris  had
stepped  in  before  them  for  the  formation  of  the  latter.  Thus  the  two
processes  for  the  two  "creations" — the  animal  and  the  divine  man —
differ  greatly.  The  Pitris  shoot  out  from  their  ethereal  bodies  still  more
ethereal  and  shadowy  similitudes  of  themselves,  or  what  we  should  now
call  "doubles,"  or  "astral  forms,"  in  their  own  likeness.*"  This  furnishes
the  Monad  with  its  first  dwelling,  and  blind  matter  with  a  model
around  and  upon  which  to  build  henceforth.  But  Ma7i  is  still  incom-
plete. From  Svaj^ambhuva  Manu,t  from  whom  descended  the  seven
primitive  Manus,  or  Prajapatis,  each  of  whom  gave  birth  to  a  primitive
Race  of  men,  down  to  the  Codex  Nazarcsus,  in  which  Karabtanos,  or
Fetahil,  blind  concupiscent  Matter,  begets  on  his  Mother,  Spiritus,
seven  Figures,  each  of  which  stands  as  the  progenitor  of  one  of  the
primeval  seven  Races — this  doctrine  has  left  its  impress  on  every
archaic  scripture.

"Who  forms  Manu  [the  Man]  and  who  forms  his  body?  The  I,ife
and  the  I^ives.  Sinj  and  the  Moon."  Here  Manu  stands  for  the
spiritual,  heavenly  Man,  the  real  and  non-dying  Ego  in  us,  which  is
the  direct  emanation  of  the  "One  Eife,"  or  the  Absolute  Deity.  As  to
our  outward  physical  bodies,  the  house  of  the  tabernacle  of  the  Soul,  the
Doctrine  teaches  a  strange  lesson;  so  strange  that  unless  thoroughly
explained,  and  as  thoroughly  comprehended,  it  is  only  the  exact  science
of  the  future  that  is  destined  to  fully  vindicate  the  theory.

It  has  been  stated  before  now  that  Occultism  does  not  accept  any-
thing inorganic  in  the  Kosmos.     The  expression  employed  by  Science,

*  Read,  in  Isis  Unveiled  (ii.  297 — 303),  the  doctrine  of  the  Codex  NazarcEus.  Every  tenet  of  our
teaching  is  found  there  under  a  different  form  and  allegory.

t  Manu,  Bk.  I.

X  The  word  "vSin"  is  curious,  but  has  a  particular  Occult  relation  to  the  Moou,  besides  being  its
Chaldean  equivalent.


THE    "DEVOURERS."  269

"inorganic  substance,"  means  simply  that  the  latent  life,  slumbering  in
the  molecules  of  so-called  "inert  matter,"  is  incognizable.  All  IS
Life,  and  every  atom  of  even  mineral  dust  is  a  IvIPE,  though  beyond
our  comprehension  and  perception,  because  it  is  outside  the  range  of
the  laws  known  to  those  who  reject  Occultism.  "The  very  atoms,"
says  Tyndall,  "seem  instinct  with  a  desire  for  life."  Whence,  then,  we
would  ask,  comes  the  tendency  "to  run  into  organic  form"?  Is  it  in
any  way  explicable  except  according  to  the  teachings  of  Occult
Science?

The  Worlds,  to  the  profane,  are  built  up  of  the  hiown  Elements.  To  the
conception  of  an  Arhat,  these  Elements  are  themselves,  collectively,  a  Divine
Life;  distributively,  on  the  plane  of  manifestatio7is,  the  numberless  and
coun  tless  crores  of  L ives.  Fire  alone  is  One,  on  the  pla?ie  of  the  One  Reality  :
on  that  of  manifested,  hetice  illusive.  Being,  its  particles  are  fiery  Lives
■which  live  and  have  their  being  at  the  expense  of  every  other  Life  that  they
consume.  Therefore  they  are  ?iamed  the  "Devourers."  .  .  .  Every
visible  thing  in  this  Universe  was  built  by  suck  l^rj^s,  from  conscious  a^id
divine  primordial  man  down  to  the  unconscious  agents  that  construct  matter.
.  .  .  From  the  One  Life,  formless  and  uncreate,  proceeds  the  Universe
of  Lives.  First  was  manifested  from  the  Deep  {^Chaos']  cold  luminous  Fire
{^gaseous  light  ?\  which  formed  the  Curds  in  Space  [irresolvable  7iebulce,

perhaps?'] These  fought,  and  a  great  heat  was  developed

by  the  e7icountering  attd  collision,  which  produced  rotation.  Then  catne  the
first  manifested  Material  Fire,  the  hot  Flames,  the  Wafiderers  in  Heaven
ICotnets'].  Heat  geyierates  moist  vapour ;  that  forms  solid  water  {^?];  then
dry  mist,  then  liquid  mist,  watery,  that  puts  out  the  luminous  brightness
of  the  Pilgrims  [Comets?],  and  forms  solid  watery  Wheels  [Matter
Globes].  Bhitmi  [the  Earth]  appears  with  six  sisters.  These  produce  by
their  cofitinuous  motion  the  inferior  fire,  heat,  and  an  aqueous  mist,  which
yields  the  third  World-Elemeni—WATi^^;  and  from  the  breath  of  all
[atmospheric]  Air  is  born.  These  four  are  the  four  Lives  of  the  first  four
Periods  [Rounds]  of  Manvantara.     The  three  last  willfollotv.

The  Commentary  first  speaks  of  the  "numberless  and  countless
crores  of  Lives."  Is  Pasteur,  then,  unconsciously  taking  the  first  step
toward  Occult  Science,  in  declaring  that,  if  he  dared  express  his  ideas
fully  upon  this  subject,  he  would  say,  that  the  organic  cells  are  endowed
with  a  vital  potency  that  does  not  cease  its  activity  with  the  cessation
of  a  current  of  oxygen  towards  them,  and  does  not,  on  that  account,
break  off  its  relations  with  life  itself,  which  is  supported  by  the  in-


270  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

fluence  of  that  gas?  "I  would  add,"  continues  Pasteur,  "that  the
evolution  of  the  germ  is  accomplished  by  means  of  complicated  pheno-
mena, among  which  we  must  class  processes  of  fermentation";  and
life,  according  to  Claude  Bernard  and  Pasteur,  is  nothing  else  than  a
process  of  fermentation.  That  there  exist  in  Nature  Beings,  or  I^ives,
that  can  live  and  thrive  without  air,  even  on  our  Globe,  has  been  de-
monstrated by  the  same  Scientists.  Pasteur  found  that  many  of  the
lower  lives,  such  as  vibriones,  and  other  microbes  and  bacteria,  could
exist  without  air,  which,  on  the  contrar5^  killed  them.  They  derived  the
oxygen  necessary  for  their  multiplication  from  the  various  substances
that  surrounded  them.  He  calls  them  cerobes,  living  on  the  tissues  of
our  matter,  when  the  latter  has  ceased  to  form  a  part  of  an  integral
and  living  whole  (then  called  very  unscientifically  by  Science  "dead
matter"),  and  ancerobes.  The  one  kind  binds  oxygen,  and  contributes
greatly  to  the  destruction  of  animal  life  and  vegetable  tissues,  furnish-
ing to  the  atmosphere  materials  which  enter,  later  on,  into  the  constitu-
tion of  other  organisms ;  the  other  finally  destroys,  or  rather  annihilates,
the  so-called  organic  substance ;  ultimate  decay  being  impossible  with-
out their  participation.  Certain  germ-cells,  such  as  those  of  yeast,
develop  and  multiply  in  air,  but  when  deprived  of  it,  they  will  adapt
themselves  to  life  without  air  and  become  ferments,  absorbing  oxygen
from  substances  coming  in  contact  with  them,  and  thereby  ruining  the
latter.  The  cells  in  fruit,  when  lacking  free  oxygen,  act  as  ferments
and  stimulate  fermentation.  "Therefore  the  vegetable  cell,  in  this
case,  manifests  its  life  as  an  anaerobic  being.  Why,  then,  should  an  or-
ganic cell  form,  in  this  case,  an  exception?"  asks  Professor  Bogolubof.
Pasteur  shows  that  in  the  substance  of  our  tissues  and  organs,  the  cell,
not  finding  sufficient  oxygen  for  itself,  stimulates  fermentation  in  the
same  way  as  the  fruit-cell,  and  Claude  Bernard  thought  that  Pasteur's
idea  of  the  formation  of  ferments  found  its  application  and  corrobora-
tion in  the  fact  that  urea  increases  in  the  blood  during  strangulation.
L,iFE  therefore  is  everywhere  in  the  Universe,  and.  Occultism  teaches
us.  it  is  also  in  the  atom.

"Bhumi  appears  with  six  sisters,"  says  the  Commentary.  It  is  a
Vedic  teaching  that  "there  are  three  Earths,  corresponding  to  three
Heavens,  and  our  Earth  [the  fourth]  is  called  Bhiimi."  This  is  the
explanation  given  by  our  exoteric  Western  Orientalists.  But  the
esoteric  meaning,  and  allusion  to  it  in  the  Vedas,  is  that  it  refers  to  our
Planetary  Chain ;   "three  Earths,"  on  the  descending  arc,  and  "three


THE  FOUR  DIMENSIONS  OF  SPACE.  271

Heavens,"  which  are  three  Earths  or  Globes  also,  only  far  more  ethereal,
on  the  ascending  or  spiritual  arc.  By  the  first  three  we  descend  into
Matter,  by  the  other  three  we  ascend  into  Spirit ;  the  lowest  one,  Bhumi,
our  Earth,  forming  the  turning  point,  so  to  say,  and  containing,  poten-
tially, as  much  of  Spirit  as  it  does  of  Matter.  But  we  shall  treat  of  this
hereafter.

The  general  teaching  of  the  Commentar>%  then,  is  that  everj^  new
Round  develops  one  of  the  Compound  Elements,  as  now  known  to
Science,  which  rejects  the  primitive  nomenclature,  preferring  to  sub-
divide them  into  constituents.  If  Nature  is  the  "Ever-Becoming"  on
the  manifested  plane,  then  these  Elements  are  to  be  regarded  in  the
same  light:  they  have  to  evolve,  progress,  and  increase  to  the  man-
vantaric  end.

Thus  the  First  Round,  we  are  taught,  developed  but  one  Element,
and  a  nature  and  humanity  in  what  may  be  spoken  of  as  one  aspect  of
Nature — called  by  some,  very  unscientifically,  though  it  may  be  so
de facto,  "one-dimensional  space."

The  Second  Round  brought  forth  and  developed  two  Elements,
Fire  and  Earth ;  and  its  humanity,  adapted  to  this  condition  of  Nature,
if  we  can  give  the  name  humanity  to  beings  living  under  conditions
now  unknown  to  men,  was — to  use  again  a  familiar  phrase  in  a  strictly
figurative  sense,  the  only  way  in  which  it  can  be  used  correctly — a
"two-dimensional"  species.

The  processes  of  natural  development  which  we  are  now  considering
will  at  once  elucidate  and  discredit  the  fashion  of  speculating  on  the
attributes  of  two,  three,  and/our  or  more  dirneyisional  space;  but,  in  pass-
ing, it  is  worth  while  to  point  out  the  real  significance  of  the  sound,
but  incomplete,  intuition  that  has  prompted — among  Spiritualists  and
TheosophLsts,  and  several  great  men  of  Science,  for  the  matter  of  that*
— the  use  of  the  modern  expression,  the  "fourth  dimension  of  space."
To  begin  with,  the  superficial  absurdity  of  assuming  that  Space  itself
is  measurable  in  any  direction  is  of  little  consequence.  The  familiar
phrase  can  only  be  an  abbreviation  of  the  fuller  form — the  "-fourth  di-
mension of  matter,  in  Spaced \  But  even  thus  expanded,  it  is  an  un-
happy phrase,  because  while  it  is  perfectly  true  that  the  progress  of

•  Professor  ZSllner's  theory  has  been  more  than  welcomed  by  several  Scientists,  who  are  also
Spiritualists;  Professors  Butlerof  and  Wagner,  of  St.  Petersburg:,  for  instance.

i-  "  The  pfiving  reality  to  abstractions  is  the  error  of  Realism.  Space  and  Time  are  frequently  viewed
a.s  separated  from  all  the  concrete  experiences  of  the  mind,  instead  of  being  generalizations  of  these
in  certain  aspects."    (Bain,  Log^'r,  Part  II.  p.  389.)


272  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

evolution  may  be  destined  to  introduce  us  to  new  characteristics  of
matter,  those  with  which  we  are  already  familiar  are  really  more  nu-
merous than  the  three  dimensions.  The  qualities,  or  what  is  perhaps
the  best  available  term,  the  characteristics  of  matter,  must  clearly  bear
a  direct  relation  always  to  the  senses  of  man.  Matter  has  extension,
colour,  motion  (molecular  motion),  taste  and  smell,  corresponding  to
the  existing  senses  of  man,  and  the  next  characteristic  it  develops — let
us  call  it  for  the  moment  "Permeability" — will  correspond  to  the  next
sense  of  man,  which  we  may  call  "Normal  Clairvoyance."  Thus,  when
some  bold  thinkers  have  been  thirsting  for  a  fourth  dimension,  to  ex-
plain the  passage  of  matter  through  matter,  and  the  production  of
knots  upon  an  endless  cord,  they  have  been  in  want  of  a  sixth  charac-
teristic of  matter.  The  three  dimensions  belong  really  to  oxAy  one
attribute,  or  characteristic,  of  matter — extension ;  and  popular  common
sense  justly  rebels  against  the  idea  that,  under  any  condition  of  things,
there  can  be  more  than  three  of  such  dimensions  as  length,  breadth  and
thickness.  These  terms,  and  the  term  "dimension"  itself,  all  belong
to  one  plane  of  thought,  to  one  stage  of  evolution,  to  one  characteristic
of  matter.  So  long  as  there  are  foot-rules  within  the  resources  of
cosmos,  to  apply  to  matter,  so  long  will  they  be  able  to  measure  it
three  ways  and  no  more;  just  as,  from  the  time  the  idea  of  measure-
ment first  occupied  a  place  in  the  human  understanding,  it  has  been
possible  to  apply  measurement  in  three  directions  and  no  more.  But
these  considerations  do  not  in  any  way  militate  against  the  certainty
that,  in  the  progress  of  time,  as  the  faculties  of  humanity  are  multi-
plied, so  will  the  characteristics  of  matter  be  multiplied  also.  Mean-
while, the  expression  is  far  more  incorrect  than  even  the  familiar
phrase  of  the  sun's  "rising"  or  "setting."

We  now  return  to  the  consideration  of  material  evolution  through
the  Rounds.  Matter  in  the  Second  Round,  it  has  been  stated,  may  be
figuratively  referred  to  as  two-dimensional.  But  here  another  caveat
must  be  entered.  This  loose  and  figurative  expression  may  be  re-
garded— on  one  plane  of  thought,  as  we  have  just  seen — as  equivalent
to  the  second  characteristic  of  matter,  corresponding  to  the  second  per-
ceptive faculty  or  sense  of  man.  But  these  two  linked  scales  of  evolu-
tion are  concerned  with  the  processes  going  on  within  the  limits  of  a
single  Round.  The  succession  of  primary  aspects  of  Nature,  with
which  the  succession  of  Rounds  is  concerned,  has  to  do,  as  already
indicated,  with  the  development  of  the  Elements — in  the  Occult  sense


OCEANS   OF   CARBONIC   ACID.  273

— Fire,  Air,  Water,  Earth.  We  are  only  in  the  Fourth  Round,  and  our
catalogue  so  far  stops  short.  The  order  in  which  these  Elements  are
mentioned,  in  the  last  sentence  but  one,  is  the  correct  one  for  Esoteric
purposes  and  in  the  Secret  Teachings.  Milton  was  right  when  he
spoke  of  the  "Powers  of  Fire,  Air,  Water,  Earth";  the  Earth,  such  as
we  know  it  now,  had  no  existence  before  the  Fourth  Round,  hundreds
of  millions  of  years  ago,  the  commencement  of  our  geological  Earth.
The  Globe,  says  the  Conimen,tar>^  was  '■'fiery,  cool  atid  radiant,  as  its
ethereal  me7i  and  animals,  during  the  First  Rou7id" — a  contradiction  or
paradox  in  the  opinion  of  our  present  Science — ''luminous  aiid  more
demise  and  heavy,  during  the  Second  Rozind;  watery  djiring  the  Third."
Thus  are  the  Elements  reversed.

The  centres  of  consciousness  of  the  Third  Round,  destined  to
develop  into  humanity  as  we  know  it,  arrived  at  a  perception  of  the
third  Element,  Water.  If  we  had  to  frame  our  conclusions  according
to  the  data  furnished  us  by  Geologists,  then  we  would  say  that  there
was  no  real  water,  even  during  the  Carboniferous  Period.  We  are  told
that  gigantic  masses  of  carbon,  which  existed  formerly  spread  in  the
atmosphere,  as  carbonic  acid,  were  absorbed  by  plants,  while  a  large
proportion  of  that  gas  was  mixed  in  the  water.  Now,  if  this  be  so,  and
we  have  to  believe  that  all  the  carbonic  acid  which  went  to  compose
those  plants  that  formed  bituminous  coal,  lignite,  etc.,  and  went  towards
the  formation  of  lime-stone,  and  so  on,  that  all  this  was  at  that  period
in  the  atmosphere  in  gaseous  form,  then,  there  must  have  been  seas
and  oceans  of  liquid  carbonic  acid !  But  how  then  could  the  Car-
boniferous Period  be  preceded  by  the  Devonian  and  Silurian  Ages —
those  of  fishes  and  molluscs — on  that  assumption?  Barometric  pres-
sure, moreover,  must  have  exceeded  several  hundred  times  the  pressure
of  our  present  atmosphere.  How  could  organisms,  even  so  simple  as
those  of  certain  fishes  and  molluscs,  stand  that?  There  is  a  curious
work  by  Blanchard,  on  the  Origin  of  Eife,  wherein  he  shows  some
strange  contradictions  and  confusions  in  the  theories  of  his  colleagues,
and  which  we  recommend  to  the  reader's  attention.

Those  of  the  Fourth  Round  have  added  Earth  as  a  state  of  matter  to
their  stock,  as  well  as  the  three  other  Elements  in  their  present  trans-
formation.

In  short,  none  of  the  so-called  Elements  were,  in  the  three  preceding
Rounds,  as  they  are  now.  For  all  we  know.  Fire  mav  have  been  ptire
Akasha,  the  First  Matter  of  the  "Magnum  Opus"  of  the  Creators  and


274  'I'HE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Builders,  that  Astral  lyight  which  the  paradoxical  Eliphas  Levi  calls  in
one  breath  the  "Body  of  the  Holy  Ghost,"  and  in  the  next  "Baphomet,"
the  ''Androgyne  Goat  of  Mendes";  Air,  simply  Nitrogen,  the  "Breath
of  the  Supporters  of  the  Heavenly  Dome,"  as  the  Mahometan  Mystics
call  it;  Water,  that  primordial  fluid  which  was  required,  according  to
Moses,  to  make  a  "Living  Soul."  And  this  may  account  for  the  flagrant
discrepancies  and  unscientific  statements  found  in  Genesis.  Sejiarate
the  first  from  the  second  chapter;  read  the  former  as  a  scripture  of  the
Elohists,  and  the  latter  as  that  of  the  far  later  Jehovists ;  still  one  finds,
if  one  reads  between  the  lines,  the  same  order  in  which  created  things
appear;  namely.  Fire  (Light),  Air,  Water,  and  Man  (or  Earth).  For
the  sentence  of  the  first  chapter  (the  Elohistic),  "In  the  beginning
God  created  the  heaven  and  the  earth,"  is  a  mistranslation;  it  is  not
"the  heaven  and  the  earth,"  but  the  duplex,  or  dual,  Heaven,  the  upper
and  the  lower  Heavens,  or  the  separation  of  Primordial  Substance  that
was  light  in  its  upper,  and  dark  in  its  lower  portions  (the  manifested
Universe),  in  its  duality  of  the  invisible  (to  the  senses),  and  the  visible
to  our  perceptions.  "God  divided  the  light  from  the  darkness";  and
then  made  the  firmament  (Air).  "Let  there  be  a  firmament  in  the  midst
of  the  waters,  and  let  it  divide  the  waters  from  the  waters,"  i.e.,  "the
waters  which  were  under  the  firmament  [our  manifested  visible  Uni-
verse] from  the  waters  which  were  above  the  firmament  [the  (to  us)  in-
visible planes  of  being]."  In  the  second  chapter  (the  Jehovistic),
plants  and  herbs  are  created  before  water,  just  as  in  the  first,  light  is
produced  before  the  sun.  "God  made  the  earth  and  the  heavens,  and
every  plant  of  the  field  before  it  was  in  the  earth,  and  every  herb  of  the
field  before  it  grew;  for  the  Lord  God  [Elohim]  had  not  caused  it  to
rain  upon  the  earth,  etc." — an  absurdity  unless  the  esoteric  explanation
is  accepted.  The  plants  were  created  before  they  were  in  the  earth —
for  there  was  no  earth  then  such  as  it  is  now;  and  the  herb  of  the  field
was  in  existence  before  it  grew  as  it  does  now,  in  the  Fourth  Round.

Discussing  and  explaining  the  nature  of  the  invisible  Elements  and
the  "Primordial  Fire"  mentioned  above,  Eliphas  Levi  invariablj^  calls
it  the  "Astral  Light":  with  him  it  is  the  "Grand  Agent  Magique."
Undeniably  it  is  so,  but — only  so  far  as  Black  Magic  is  concerned,  and
on  the  lowest  planes  of  what  we  call  Ether,  the  noumenon  of  which  is
Akasha ;  and  even  this  would  be  held  incorrect  by  orthodox  Occultists.
The  "Astral  Light"  is  simply  the  older  "Sidereal  Light"  of  Paracelsus;
and  to  say  that  "everything  which  exists  has  been  evolved  from  it,  and


THE   GREAT  MAGIC   AGENT.  275

it  preserves  and  reproduces  all  forms,"  as  he  does,  is  to  enunciate  truth
only  in  the  second  proposition.  The  first  is  erroneous;  for  if  all  that
exists  was  evolved  through  (or  via)  it,  this  is  not  the  Astral  Ught,  since
the  latter  is  not  the  container  of  all  things  but,  at  best,  only  the
reflector  of  this  all.  Eliphas  Levi  ver>'  truly  shows  it  "a  force  in
Nature,"  by  means  of  which  "a  single  man  who  can  master  it  .  .  .
might  throw  the  world  into  confusion  and  transform  its  face";  for  it
is  the  "Great  Arcanum  of  transcendent  Magic."  Quoting  the  words
of  the  great  Western  Kabalist  in  their  translated  form,^-'  we  may,  per-
haps, the  better  explain  them  by  the  occasional  addition  of  a  word  or
two,  to  show  the  difference  between  Western  and  Eastern  explanations
of  the  same  subject.     The  author  saj^s  of  the  great  Magic  Agent:

This  ambient  and  all-penetrating  fluid,  this  ray  detached  from  the  [Central  or
Spiritual]  Sun's  splendour  .  .  .  fixed  by  the  weight  of  the  atmosphere  [?  !]  and
the  power  of  central  attraction  .  .  .  the  Astral  Light,  this  electro-magnetic
ether,  this  vital  and  luminous  caloric,  is  represented  on  ancient  monuments  by  the
girdle  of  Isis,  which  twines  round  two  poles  .  .  .  and  in  ancient  theogonies  by
the  serpent  devouring  its  own  tail,  emblem  of  prudence  and  of  Saturn  [emblem  of
infinity,  immortality,  and  Cronus — Time — not  the  God  Saturn  or  the  planet].  It  is
the  winged  dragon  of  Medea,  the  double  serpent  of  the  caduceus,  and  the  tempter  of
Genesis ;  but  it  is  also  the  brazen  snake  of  Moses  encircling  the  Tau  .  .  .  lastly,
it  is  the  devil  of  exoteric  dogmatism,  and  is  really  the  blind  force  [it  is  not  blind,
and  L^vi  knew  it],  which  souls  must  conquer,  in  order  to  detach  themselves  from
the  chains  of  Earth;  for  if  they  should  not,  the}-  will  be  absorbed  by  the  same
power  which  first  produced  them,  and  will  return  to  the  central  and  eternal  fire.

This  great  Archseus  is  now  publicly  discovered  by,  and  for,  only  one
man — ^J.  W.  Keely,  of  Philadelphia.  For  others,  however,  it  is  dis-
covered, yet  must  remain  almost  useless.     "So  far  shalt  thou  go.    .    .  ."

All  the  above  is  as  practical  as  it  is  correct,  save  one  error,  which  we
have  explained.  Eliphas  Eevi  commits  a  great  blunder  in  alwaj^s
identifying  the  Astral  Eight  with  what  v^^e  call  Akasha.  What  it  really
is  will  be  expounded  in  Volume  II.

Eliphas  Levi  further  writes :

The  great  Magic  Agent  is  the  fourth  emanation  of  the  life  principle  [we  saj' — it  is
the  first  in  the  inner,  and  the  second  in  the  outer  (our)  Universe],  of  which  the  Sun
is  the  third  form  ...  for  the  day-star  [the  Sun]  is  only  the  reflection  and
material  shadow  of  the  Central  Sun  of  truth,  which  illuminates  the  intellectual
[invisible]  world  of  Spirit,  and  which  itself  is  but  a  gleam  borrowed  from  the
Absolute.

So  far  he   is  right  enough.     But   when  the  great  authority  of  the

*  The  Mysteries  of  Magic,  by  A..  E.  Waite.


276  the;  se;cre;t  doctrine.

Western  Kabalists  adds  that,  nevertheless,  "it  is  not  the  immortal
Spirit,  as  the  Indian  Hierophants  have  imagined  " — we  answer,  that  he
slanders  the  said  Hierophants,  as  they  have  said  nothing  of  the  kind ;
for  even  the  Puranic  exoteric  writings  flatly  contradict  the  assertion.
No  Hindii  has  ever  mistaken  Prakriti — the  Astral  Light  being  only
above  the  lowest  plane  of  Prakriti,  the  Material  Kosmos — for  the
"immortal  Spirit."  Prakriti  is  ever  called  Maya,  Illusion,  and  is
doomed  to  disappear  with  the  rest,  the  Gods  included,  at  the  hour  of

A

the  Pralaya.  As  it  is  shown  that  Akasha  is  not  even  the  Ether,  least
of  all  then,  we  imagine,  can  it  be  the  Astral  I^ight.  Those  unable  to
penetrate  beyond  the  dead  letter  of  the  Purdnas,  have  occasionally
confused  Akasha  with  Prakriti,  with  Ether,  and  even  with  the  visible
Sky !  It  is  true  also  that  those  who  have  invariably  translated  the  term
Akasha  by  "Ether" — "Wilson,  for  instance — finding  it  called  "the
material  cause  of  sound"  possessing,  moreover,  this  one  si7igle  property,
have  ignorantly  imagined  it  to  be  "material,"  in  the  phj^sical  sense.
True,  again,  that  if  the  characteristics  are  accepted  literally,  then,  since
nothing  material  or  physical,  and  therefore  conditioned  and  temporary,
can  be  immortal — according  to  metaphysics  and  philosophy — it  would
follow  that  Akasha  is  neither  infinite  nor  immortal.  But  all  this  is
erroneous,  since  both  the  words  Pradhana,  Primeval  Matter,  and
Sound,  as  a  property,  have  been  misunderstood;  the  former  term
(Pradhana)  being  certainly  synonymous  with  Mulaprakriti  and  Akasha,
and  the  latter  (Sound)  with  the  Verbum,  the  Word  or  the  Logos.  This
is  easy  to  demonstrate;  for  it  is  shown  in  the  following  sentence  from
Vishnu  Purana.^  "There  was  neither  day  nor  night,  nor  sky,  nor
earth,  nor  darkness,  nor  light,  nor  any  other  thing,  save  only  One,
unapprehensible  by  intellect,  or  that  which  is  Brahman,  and  Pums,
[Spirit]  and  Pradhana  [Primordial  Matter]."

Now,  what  is  Pradhana,  if  it  is  not  Mulaprakriti,  the  Root  of  All,  in
another  aspect?  For  though  Pradhana  is  said,  further  on,  to  merge  into
the  Deity,  as  everything  else  does,  in  order  to  leave  the  One  absolute
during  the  Pralaya,  yet  is  it  held  as  infinite  and  immortal.  The  literal
translation  is  given  as:  "One  Pradhanika  Brahma  Spirit:  That  was";
and  the  Commentator  interprets  the  compound  term  as  a  substantive,
not  as  a  derivative  word  used  attributively,  i.e.,  like  something  "con-
joined with  Pradhana."  The  student  has  to  note,  moreover,  that  the
Puranic  is   a    dualistic   system,  not   evolutionary,    and    that,   in    this

*  Wilson,  I.  23,  24.


AKASHA   IS  NOT  ETHER.  277

respect,  far  more  will  be  found,  from  an  Elsoteric  standpoint,  in  the
Sankhya,  and  even  in  the  Mdnava-Dharma-Shdstra,  however  much
the  latter  differs  from  the  former.  Hence  Pradhana,  even  in  the
Pjcrdnas,  is  an  aspect  of  Parabrahman,  not  an  evolution,  and  must  be
the  same  as  the  Vedantic  Mulaprakriti.  "Prakriti,  in  Wa  primary  state,
is  Akasha,"  says  a  Vedantin  scholar."^'     It  is  almost  abstract  Nature.

Akasha,  then,  is  Pradhana  in  another  form,  and  as  such  cannot  be
Ether,  the  ever-invisible  agent,  courted  even  by  Physical  Science.  Nor
is  it  Astral  lyight.  It  is,  as  said,  the  noimiejion  of  the  seven-fold  differen-
tiated Prakriti  t — the  ever  im.maculate  "Mother"  of  the  fatherless
"Son,"   who  becomes  "Father"  on  the  lower  manifested  plane.     For

A.

Mahat  is  the  first  product  of  Pradhana,  or  Akasha;  and  Mahat — Uni-
versal Intelligence,  "whose  characteristic  property  is  Buddhi" — is  no
other  than  the  Logos,  for  he  is  called  Ishvara,  Brahma,  Bhava,  0X0..%
He  is,  in  short,  the  "Creator,"  or  the  Divine  Mind  in  creative  operation,
"the  Cause  of  all  things."  He  is  the  "  First-Born,"  of  whom  the  Purdnas
tell  us  that  "Earth  and  Mahat  are  the  inner  and  outer  boundaries  of
the  Universe,"  or,  in  our  language,  the  negative  and  the  positive  poles
of  dual  Nature  (abstract  and  concrete),  for  the  Purdna  adds :

In  this  manner — as  were  the  seven  forms  [principles]  of  Prakriti  reckoned  from
Mahat  to  Earth — so  at  the  (time  of  elemental)  dissolution  {pratydhara),  these  seven
successively  reenter  into  each  other.  The  Egg  of  Brahma  {Sarva-inaiidala)  is
dissolved,  with  its  seven  zones  (dvipa),  seven  oceans,  seven  regions,  etc.§

These  are  the  reasons  why  the  Occultists  refuse  to  give  the  name  of

A

Astral  Light  to  Akasha,  or  to  call  it  Ether.  "In  my  Father's  house
are  many  mansions,"  maybe  contrasted  with  the  Occult  saying,  "In
our  Mother's  house  are  seven  mansions,"  or  planes,  the  lowest  of  which
is  above  and  around  us — the  Astral  Light.

The   Elements,  whether  simple   or   compound,  could   not  have  re-

*  Five  Years  of  Tkeosophy,  p.  169.

t  lu  the  Sankhya  philosophy,  the  seven  Prakritis,  or  "productive  productions,"  are  Mahat,
Ahamkara,  and  the  Jive  Taiiniatras.    See  Sankhya  KCirikd,  III.,  and  the  Conitnentarj'  thereon.

t  See  Linga  Purchta,  Prior  Section,  Ixx.  12  et  seq.;  and  yAyii  Purdna,  ch.  iv.,  but  especially  the
former  Pitruna — Prior  SeAion,  \'iii.  67-74.

?  Vishnu  Purdna,  Book  vi.,  ch.  iv.  No  use  to  say  so  to  the  Hindus,  who  know  their  Puranas  by
heart,  but  very  useful  to  remind  our  Orientalists  and  those  Westerns  who  regard  Wilson's  transla-
tions as  authoritative,  that,  in  his  English  translation  of  the  Vishmi  Purdna,  he  is  guilty  of  the  most
ludicrous  contradictions  and  errors.  So  on  this  identical  subject  of  the  seven  Prakritis,  or  the  seven
zones  of  Brahma's  Egg,  the  two  accounts  differ  totally.  In  Vol.  i.  p.  40,  the  Egg  is  said  to  be
externally  invested  by  seven  envelopes.  Wilson  comments:  "by  Water,  Air,  Fire,  Ether,  and
Ahamkara  "—which  last  word  does  not  exist  in  the  Sanskrit  texts.  And  in  Vol.  v.  p.  198,  of  the  same
Purdna,  it  is  written:  "in  this  manner  were  the  .seven  forms  of  nature  (Prakriti)  reckoned  from  Mahat
to  Earth"  (?).  Between  Mahat,  or  Maha-Buddhi,  and  "Water,  etc.",  the  difference  is  very  con-
siderable.


27S  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

mained  the  same  since  the  commencement  of  the  evolution  of  our
Chain.  Everything  in  the  Universe  progresses  steadily  in  the  Great
Cj'cle,  while  incessantly  going  up  and  down  in  the  smaller  Cycles.
Nature  is  never  stationary  during  Manvantara,  as  it  is  ever  becoming,^
not  simply  behig;  and  mineral,  vegetable,  and  human  life  are  always
adapting  their  organisms  to  the  then  reigning  Elements ;  and  therefore
those  Elements  were  then  fitted  for  them,  as  they  are  now  for  the  life  of
present  humanity.  It  will  only  be  in  the  next,  or  Fifth,  Round  that
the  fifth  Element,  Ether — the  gross  body  of  Akasha,  if  it  can  be  called
even  that — will,  by  becoming  a  familiar  fact  of  Nature  to  all  men,  as
Air  is  familiar  to  us  now,  cease  to  be,  as  at  present,  hypothetical  and  an
"agent"  for  so  many  things.     And  only  during  that  Round  will  those

A

higher  senses,  the  growth  and  development  of  which  Akasha  subserves,
be  susceptible  of  a  complete  expansion.  As  already  indicated,  o.  partial
familiarity  with  the  characteristic  of  matter — Permeability — which
should  be  developed  concurrently  with  the  sixth  sense,  may  be  ex-
pected to  develop  at  the  proper  period  in  this  Round.  But  with  the
next  Element  added  to  our  resources,  in  the  next  Round,  Permea-
bility will  become  so  manifest  a  characteristic  of  matter,  that  the
densest  forms  of  this  Round  will  seem  to  man's  perceptions  as  ob-
structive to  him  as  a  thick  fog,  and  no  more.

Eet  us  now  return  to  the  Eife-Cycle.  Without  entering  at  length
upon  the  description  given  of  the  Higher  EiVES,  we  must  direct  our
attention,  at  present,  simply  to  the  earthly  Beings  and  the  Earth  itself.
The  latter,  we  are  told,  is  built  up  for  the  First  Round  by  the  "De-
vourers,"  which  disintegrate  and  differentiate  the  germs  of  other  Eives
in  the  Elements ;  pretty  much,  it  must  be  supposed,  as  in  the  present
stage  of  the  world,  the  aerobes  do,  when,  undermining  and  loosening  the
chemical  structure  in  an  organism,  they  transform  animal  matter,  and
generate  substances  that  vary  in  their  constitutions.  Thus  Occultism
disposes  of  the  so-called  Azoic  Age  of  Science,  for  it  shows  that  there
never  was  a  time  when  the  Earth  was  without  life  upon  it.  Wherever
there  is  an  atom  of  matter,  a  particle,  or  a  molecufe,  even  in  its  most
gaseous  condition,  there  is  life  in  it,  however  latent  and  unconscious.

Whatsoever  qidts  the  Lay  a  State,  becomes  active  Life ;  it  is  drawn  into  the
vortex  of  Motion  \Jhe  Alchemical  Solvent  of  Life'] ;  Spirit  and  Matter  are

*  According  to  the  great  metaphysician  Hegel  ^Iso.  For  him  Nature  was  a  perpetual  becoming.  A
purely  SIsoteric  conception.  Creation  or  Origin,  in  the  Christian  sense  of  the  term,  is  absolutely
unthinkable.  As  the  above-quoted  thinker  said:  "God  (the  Universal  Spirit)  objecUvizes  himself  as
Nature,  and  again  ri.ses  out  of  it."


ATOMS  ARE  INVISIBLE   LIVES.  279

the  two  States  of  the  One,  which  is  neither  Spirit  7ior  Matter,  both  being
the  Absolute  Life,  latent.  .  .  .  Spirit  is  the  first  differentiation  of  {and
in'\  Space;  and  Matter  the  first  differentiation  of  Spirit.  That,  which  is
neither  Spirit  nor  Matter,  That  is  IT— the  Causeless  Cause  of  Spirit  and
Matter,  which  are  the  Cause  of  Kosmos.  And  THAT  we  call  the  One
lyiFE,  or  the  Intra-Cosjnic  Breath.'^

Once  more  we  say — like  must  produce  like.  Absolute  I,ife  cannot
produce  an  inorganic  atom,  whether  single  or  complex,  and  there  is
life  even  in  Laj'a,  just  as  a  man  in  a  profound  cataleptic  state — to  all
appearance  a  corpse — is  still  a  living  being.

When  the  "Devourers" — in  whom  the  men  of  Science  are  invited  to
see,  with  some  show  of  reason,  atoms  of  the  Fire -Mist,  if  the}^  will,  as
the  Occultist  will  offer  no  objection  to  this — when  the  "Devourers,"
we  say,  have  differentiated  the  "Fire  Atoms,"  by  a  peculiar  process  of
segmentation,  the  latter  become  I,ife-Germs,  which  aggregate  accord-
ing to  the  laws  of  cohesion  and  affinity.  Then  the  Life-Germs  produce
Ivives  of  another  kind,  which  work  on  the  structure  of  our  Globes.

Thus,  in  the  First  Round,  the  Globe,  having  been  built  by  the  primi-
tive Fire-Iyives — i.e.,  formed  into  a  sphere — had  no  solidity,  no  qualifi-
cations, save  a  cold  brightness,  no  form,  no  colour;  it  is  only  towards
the  end  of  the  First  Round  that  it  developed  one  Element,  which,  from
its  inorganic,  so  to  saj",  or  simple  Essence,  has  become  now,  in  our
Round,  the  fire  we  know  throughout  the  System.  The  Earth  was  in  her
first  Riipa,  the  essence  of  which  is  the  Akashic  Principle  named  *  *  *,
that  which  is  now  known  as,  and  very  erroneously  termed,  Astral
Light,  which  Eliphas  Levi  calls  the  "Imagination  of  Nature,"  probably
to  avoid  giving  it  its  correct  name,  as  others  do.

Speaking  of  it,  in  his  Preface  to  the  Histoire  de  la  Magie,  Eliphas  Levi

says :

It  is  through  this  Force  that  all  the  ner\^ous  centres  secretly  communicate  with
each  other;  from  it— that  sympathy  and  antipathy  are  born;  from  it— that  we
have  our  dreams;  and  that  the  phenomena  of  second  sight  and  extra-natural
visions  take  place Astral  Light  [acting  under  the  impulsion  of  power-
ful wills]     .     .     .     destroys,    coagulates,  separates,  breaks,  gathers  in   all   things.

.  .  .  God  created  it  on  that  day  when  he  said:  ''Fiat  Lux!'"''  .  .  .  It  is
directed  by  the  Egregores,  i.e.,  the  chiefs  of  the  souls,  who  are  the  spirits  of
energy  and  action.t

Eliphas  Levi  ought  to  have  added  that  the  Astral  Light,  or  Primordial
Substance,  if  matter  at  all,  is  that  which,  called  Light,  Lux  esoterically

•  Book  of  Dzyan,  Comm.  Ill,  par.  18.  t  p.  ig.


28o  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

explained,  7's  the  body  of  those  Sph'its  themselves,  and  their  very  essence.
Our  physical  light  is  the  vianifestation  011  otir  plane,  and  the  reflected
radiance,  of  the  Divine  Light,  emanating  from  the  collective  Body  of
those  who  are  called  the  "Lights"  and  the  "Flames."  But  no  other
Kabalist  has  ever  had  the  talent  of  heaping  up  one  contradiction  on  the
other,  of  making  one  paradox  chase  another  in  the  same  sentence,  and
in  such  flowing  language,  as  Eliphas  Levi.  He  leads  his  reader  through
the  most  lovely  valleys,  to  strand  him  after  all  on  a  desert  and  barren
rock.

Says  the  Commentary:

//  is  thr'ough  and  from  the  radiations  of  the  seven  Bodies  of  the  seven
Orders  of  Dhyanis,  that  the  seven  Discrete  Quantities  \_Eleme7its\  whose
Motion  and  harmonious  Union  p^vduce  the  manifested  Universe  of  Matter,
are  bom.

The  Second  Round  brings  into  manifestation  the  second  Element —
Air  ;  an  element,  the  purity  of  which  would  ensure  continuous  life  to
him  who  would  use  it.  In  Europe  there  have  been  two  Occultists  only
who  have  discovered  and  even  partially  applied  it  in  practice,  though
its  composition  has  alwa3'-s  been  known  among  the  highest  Eastern
Initiates.  The  ozone  of  the  modern  Chemists  is  poison  compared  with
the  real  Universal  Solvent,  which  could  never  be  thought  of  unless  it
existed  in  Nature.

From  the  Second  Round,  Earth — hitherto  a  foetus  in  the  matrix  of  Space
— began  its  real  existejice:  it  had  developed  individtial  seiitient  Life,  its
second  Principle.  The  second  corresponds  to  the  sixth  \_Pri?iciple'];  the
second  is  Life  conti?iuous,  the  other,  temporary.

The  77/ /r^  Round  developed  the  third  Principle— Water  ;  while  the
Fourth  transformed  the  gaseous  fluids  and  plastic  form  of  our  Globe
into  the  hard,  crusted,  grossly  material  sphere  we  are  living  on.
Bhtimi  has  reached  her  fourth  Principle.  To  this  it  may  be  objected
that  the  law  of  analog}^  so  much  insisted  upon,  is  broken.  Not  at  all.
Earth  will  reach  her  true  ultimate  form — her  body  shell — inversely  in
this  to  man,  only  toward  the  end  of  the  Manvantara,  after  the  Seventh
Round.  Eugenius  Philalethes  was  right  when  he  assured  his  readers,
"on  his  word  of  honour,"  that  no  one  had  yet  seen  the  "Earth,"  i.e..
Matter  in  its  essential  form.  Our  Globe  is,  so  far,  in  its  Kamarupic
state — the  Astral  Body  of  Desires  of  Ahamkara,  dark  Egotism,  the
progeny  of  Mahat,  on  the  lower  plane.

It  is  not  molecularly  constituted  matter,  least  of  all  the  human  Body,


OCCULT  CHEMISTRY.  281

Sthula  Sharira,  that  is  the  grossest  of  all  our  "Principles,"  but  verily
the  middle  Principle,  the  real  Animal  Centre,  whereas  our  Body  is
but  its  shell,  the  irresponsible  factor  and  medium  through  which  the
beast  in  us  acts  all  its  life.  Every  intellectual  Theosophist  will  under-
stand my  real  meaning.  Thus  the  idea  that  the  human  tabernacle  is
built  by  countless  Lives,  just  in  the  same  way  as  was  the  rocky  crust  of
our  Earth,  has  nothing  repulsive  in  it  for  the  true  Mystic.  Nor  can
Science  oppose  the  Occult  teaching,  for  it  is  not  because  the  microscope
will  ever  fail  to  detect  the  ultimate  living  atom  or  life,  that  it  can  reject
the  doctrine.

{c)  Science  teaches  us  that  the  living  as  well  as  the  dead  organisms  of
both  man  and  animal  are  swarming  with  bacteria  of  a  hundred  various
kinds;  that  from  without  we  are  threatened  with  the  invasion  of
microbes  with  every  breath  we  draw,  and  from  within  by  leucomaines,
cerobes,  anaerobes,  and  what  not.  But  Science  has  never  yet  gone  so
far  as  to  assert  with  the  Occult  doctrine,  that  our  bodies,  as  well  as
those  of  animals,  plants,  and  stones,  are  themselves  altogether  built  up
of  such  beings;  which,  with  the  exception  of  the  larger  species,  no
microscope  can  detect.  So  far  as  regards  the  purely  animal  and  ma-
terial portion  of  man,  Science  is  on  its  way  to  discoveries  that  will  go
far  towards  corroborating  this  theory.  Chemistry  and  Phj'siology^  are
the  two  great  magicians  of  the  future,  which  are  destined  to  open  the
eyes  of  mankind  to  great  physical  truths.  With  every  day,  the  identity
between  the  animal  and  physical  man,  between  the  plant  and  man,  and
even  between  the  reptile  and  its  nest,  the  rock,  and  man— is  more  and
more  clearly  shown.  The  physical  and  chemical  constituents  of  all
being  found  to  be  identical.  Chemical  Science  may  well  say  that  there
is  no  difference  between  the  matter  which  composes  the  ox,  and  that
which  forms  man.  But  the  Occult  doctrine  is  far  more  explicit.  It
says:  Not  only  the  chemical  compounds  are  the  same,  but  the  same  in-
finitesimal invisible  Lives  compose  the  atoms  of  the  bodies  of  the  moun-
tain and  the  daisy,  of  man  and  the  ant,  of  the  elephant  and  of  the
tree  which  shelters  it  from  the  sun.  Each  particle — whether  you  call  it
organic  or  inorganic—?^  a  Life.  Every  atom  and  molecule  in  the  Uni-
verse is  both  life-giving  and  death-giving  to  such  forms,  inasmuch  as  it
builds  by  aggregation  universes,  and  the  ephemeral  vehicles  ready  to
receive  the  transmigrating  soul,  and  as  eternally  destroys  and  changes
the  forms,  and  expels  the  souls  from  their  temporary  abodes.  It
creates  and  kills;  it  is  self-generating  and  self-destroying;    it  brings


282  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

into  being,  and  annihilates,  that  mystery  of  mysteries,  the  livhig  body
of  man,  animal,  or  plant,  every  second  in  time  and  space ;  and  it  gene-
rates equally  life  and  death,  beauty  and  ugliness,  good  and  bad,  and
even  the  agreeable  and  disagreeable,  the  beneficent  and  maleficent  sen-
sations. It  is  that  mysterious  lyiFE,  represented  collectively  by  count-
less myriads  of  I^ives,  that  follows  in  its  own  sporadic  way  the  hitherto
incomprehensible  law  of  Atavism ;  that  copies  family  resemblances,  as
well  as  those  it  finds  impressed  in  the  Aura  of  the  generators  of  every
future  human  being;  a  mystery,  in  short,  that  will  receive  fuller  atten-
tion elsewhere.  For  the  present,  one  instance  may  be  cited  in  illustra-
tion. Modern  Science  is  beginning  to  find  out  that  ptomaine,  the
alkaloid  poison  generated  by  decaying  corpses  and  matter — a  Life  also,
extracted  with  the  help  of  volatile  ether,  yields  a  smell  as  strong  as
that  of  the  freshest  orange-blossoms;  but  that  free  from  oxygen,  such
alkaloids  yield  either  a  most  sickening,  disgusting  smell,  or  a  most
agreeable  aroma,  which  recalls  that  of  the  most  delicately  scented
flowers;  and  it  is  suspected  that  such  blossoms  owe  their  agreeable
smell  to  the  poisonous  ptomaine.  The  venomous  essence  of  certain
fungi,  also,  is  nearly  identical  with  the  venom  of  the  cobra  of  India,  the
most  deadly  of  serpents.  The  French  savants  Arnaud,  Gautier,  and
Villiers,  have  found  in  the  saliva  of  living  men  the  same  venomous  al-
kaloid as  in  that  of  the  toad,  the  salamander,  the  cobra,  and  the  trigo-
nocephalus  of  Portugal.  It  is  proven  that  venom  of  the  deadliest  kind,
whether  called  ptomaine,  or  leucomaine,  or  alkaloid,  is  generated  by  liv-
ing men,  animals  and  plants.  Gautier  also  discovered  an  alkaloid  in  the
fresh  carcase  and  brains  of  an  ox,  and  a  venom  which  he  calls  xantho-
creatinine,  similar  to  the  substance  extracted  from  the  poisonous  saliva
of  reptiles.  It  is  the  muscular  tissues,  the  most  active  organs  in  the
animal  economy,  that  are  suspected  of  being  the  generators  or  factors
of  venoms,  which  have  the  same  importance  as  carbonic  acid  and  urea
in  the  functions  of  life,  and  are  the  ultimate  products  of  inner  combus-
tion. And  though  it  is  not  5'et  fully  determined  whether  poisons  can
be  generated  by  the  animal  systems  of  living  beings,  without  the  parti-
cipation and  interference  of  microbes,  it  is  ascertained  that  the  animal
does  produce  venomous  substances  in  its  physiological  or  living  state.

Thus,  having  discovered  the  effects,  Science  has  to  find  'Cti^xx  primary
causes ;  and  this  it  can  never  do  without  the  help  of  the  old  sciences,
of  Alchemy,  Occult  Botany  and  Physics.  We  are  taught  that  every
physiological  change,  in  addition  to  pathological  phenomena,  diseases


THE   FIERY  EIVES.  285

— nay,  life  itself,  or  rather  the  objective  phenomena  of  life,  produced  by
certain  conditions  and  changes  in  the  tissues  of  the  body,  which  allow
and  force  life  to  act  in  that  body — that  all  this  is  due  to  those  unseen
"Creators"  and  "Destroyers,"  which  are  called,  in  such  a  loose  and
general  way,  microbes.  It  might  be  supposed  that  these  Fiery  lyives
and  the  microbes  of  Science  are  identical.  This  is  not  true.  The
Fiery  I^ives  are  the  seventh  and  highest  sub-division  of  the  plane  of
matter,  and  correspond  in  the  individual  with  the  One  lyife  of  the
Universe,  though  only  on  that  plane  of  matter.  The  microbes  of
Science  are  the  first  and  lowest  sub-division  on  the  second  plane — that
of  material  Prana,  or  Life.  The  physical  body  of  man  undergoes  a
complete  change  of  structure  ever}^  seven  years,  and  its  destruction  and
preservation  are  due  to  the  alternate  functions  of  the  Fiery  Lives,  as
Destroyers  and  Builders.  Thej'-  are  Builders  by  sacrificing  themselves,
in  the  form  of  vitality,  to  restrain  the  destructive  influence  of  the  mi-
crobes, and,  by  supplying  the  microbes  with  what  is  necessary,  they
compel  them  under  that  restraint  to  build  up  the  material  bodj^  and  its
cells.  They  are  Destroyers  also,  when  that  restraint  is  removed,  and
the  microbes,  unsupplied  with  vital  constructive  energy,  are  left  to  run
riot  as  destructive  agents.  Thus,  during  the  first  half  of  a  man's  life,
the  first  yfz'^  periods  of  seven  years  each,  the  Fiery  Lives  are  indirectly-
engaged  in  the  process  of  building  up  man's  material  body;  Life  is  on
the  ascending  scale,  and  the  force  is  used  in  construction  and  increase.
After  this  period  is  passed,  the  age  of  retrogression  commences,  and,
the  work  of  the  Fiery  Lives  exhausting  their  strength,  the  work  of
destruction  and  decrease  also  commences.

An  analogy  between  cosmic  events  in  the  descent  of  Spirit  into
Matter,  for  the  first  half  of  a  Manvantara  (planetary  as  well  as  human),
and  its  ascent,  at  the  expense  of  Matter,  in  the  second  half,  may  here
be  traced.  These  considerations  have  to  do  solely  with  the  plane  of
matter,  but  the  restraining  influence  of  the  Fiery  Lives  on  the  lowest
sub-division  of  the  second  plane,  the  microbes,  is  confirmed  b}-  the
fact  mentioned  in  the  tlieor}^  of  Pasteur  above  referred  to,  that  the  cells
of  the  organs,  when  they  do  not  find  sufficient  oxj^gen  for  themselves,
adapt  themselves  to  that  condition  and  form /erme?i^s,  which,  by  absorb-
ing oxygen  from  substances  which  come  in  contact  with  them,  produce
their  destruction.  Thus  the  process  is  commenced  by  one  cell  robbing
its  neighbour  of  the  source  of  its  vitality,  when  the  supply  is  insufficient;
and  the  destruction  so  commenced  steadily  progresses.


284  I'HK  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Such  experimenters  as  Pasteur  are  the  best  friends  and  helpers  of  the
Destroyers,  and  the  worst  enemies  of  the  Creators — if  the  latter  were
not  at  the  same  time  Destroyers  also.  However  it  may  be,  one  thing  is
certain  in  this:  the  knowledge  of  these  primary  causes,  and  of  the  ulti-
mate essence  of  every  Element,  of  its  lyives,  their  functions,  properties,
and  conditions  of  change — constitutes  the  basis  of  Magic.  Paracelsus
was,  perhaps,  the  only  Occultist  in  Europe,  during  the  latter  centuries  of
the  Christian  era,  who  was  versed  in  this  mystery.  Had  not  a  criminal
hand  put  an  end  to  his  life  years  before  the  time  allotted  him  by  Nature,
phj^siological  Magic  would  have  fewer  secrets  for  the  civilized  v/orld
than  it  now  has.

(d)  But  what  has  the  Moon  to  do  in  all  this,  we  may  be  asked.  What
have  "Fish,  Sin  and  Soma  [Moon],"  in  the  apocalyptic  sentence  of  the
Stanza,  to  do  in  company  with  the  Eife-microbes  ?  With  the  latter
nothing,  except  that  they  avail  themselves  of  the  tabernacle  of  clay
prepared  by  them;  with  divine  perfect  Man  everything,  since  "Fish,
Sin  and  Moon"  conjointly  compose  the  three  symbols  of  the  immortal
Being.

This  is  all  that  can  be  given.  Nor  does  the  writer  pretend  to  know
more  of  these  strange  symbols  than  may  be  inferred  about  them  from
exoteric  religions — from  the  mysteiy,  perhaps,  which  underlies  the
Matsya  (Fish)  Avatara  of  Vishnu,  the  Chaldean  Cannes,  the  Man-Fish,
recorded  in  the  imperishable  sign  of  the  Zodiac,  Pisces,  and  nmning
throughout  the  two  Testaments  in  the  personages  of  Joshua  "Son  of
Nun  (the  Fish)"  and  Jesus;  from  the  allegorical  "Sin,"  or  Fall  of
Spirit  into  Matter;  and  from  the  Moon — in  so  far  as  it  relates  to  the
Eunar  Ancestors,  the  Pitris.

For  the  present,  it  maj-  be  as  well  to  remind  the  reader,  that  while
the  Moon-Goddesses  were  connected  in  every  mythology,  especially
the  Grecian,  with  child-birth,  because  of  the  influence  of  the  Moon  on
women  and  conception,  the  Occult  and  actual  connection  of  our  satellite
with  fecundation  is  to  this  day  unknown  to  Physiology,  which  regards
every  popular  practice  in  this  connection  as  gross  superstition.  As  it
is  useless  to  discuss  these  in  detail,  we  can  only  stop  for  the  present  to
notice  the  lunar  symbology  casuall}^,  to  show  that  the  said  superstition
belongs  to  the  most  ancient  beliefs,  and  even  to  Judaism — the  basis  of
Christianity.  With  the  Israelites,  the  chief  function  of  Jehovah  was
child-giving,  and  the  Esotericism  of  the  Bible,  interpreted  kabalistically,
shows  undeniably  that  the  Holy  of  Holies  in  the  Temple  was  simply


MAN,   THE   SHADOW  OF  HIS  PROTOTYPE.  285

the  symbol  of  the  womb.  This  is  now  proven  beyond  doubt  and  cavil,
by  the  numerical  reading  of  the  Bible  in  general,  and  of  Gcjiesis  espe-
cially. This  idea  must  certainly  have  been  borrowed  by  the  Jews  from
the  Egyptians  and  Indians,  whose  Holy  of  Holies  is  symbolized  by  the
King's  Chamber  in  the  Great  Pyramid  and  the  Yoni 'symbols  of  exoteric
Hinduism.  To  make  the  matter  clearer,  and  to  show  at  the  same  time
the  enormous  difference  in  the  spirit  of  interpretation  and  the  original
meaning  of  the  same  symbols  between  the  ancient  Eastern  Occultists
and  the  Jewish  Kabalists,  we  refer  the  reader  to  the  Section  on  "The
Holy  of  Holies,"  in  the  second  Volume.

Phallic  worship  has  developed  only  with  the  loss  of  the  keys  to  the
true  meaning  of  the  symbols.  It  was  the  last  and  most  fatal  turning
from  the  highway  of  truth  and  divine  knowledge  into  the  side  path  of
fiction,  raised  into  dogma  through  human  falsification  and  hierarchic
ambition.


STANZA  Nil.— Continued.

6.  From  the  First-Born,*  the  Thread  between  the  Silent
Watcher  and  his  Shadow  becomes  more  strong  and  radiant
with  every  Change. t    The  morning  sun-light  has  changed  into

NOON-DAY   GLORY

This  sentence,  "the  Thread  between  the  Silent  Watcher  and  his
Shadow  [Man]  becomes  more  strong  with  every  Change,"  is  another
psychological  myster>',  that  will  find  its  explanation  in  Volume  II.
For  the  present,  it  will  suffice  to  say  that  the  "Watcher"  and  his
"Shadows" — the  latter  numbering  as  many  as  there  are  reincarnations
for  the  Monad — are  one.  The  Watcher,  or  the  Divine  Prototype,  is  at
the  upper  rung  of  the  lyadder  of  Being;  the  Shadow,  at  the  lower.
Withal,  the  Monad  of  every  living  being,  unless  his  moral  turpitude
breaks  the  connection,  and  he  runs  loose  and  astray  into  the  "  Lunar
Path" —  to  use  the  Occult  expression — is  an  individual  Dhydn  Chohan,
distinct  from  others,  with  a  kind  of  spiritual  hidividziality  of  its  own,  dur-
ing  one  special  Manvantara.  Its  Primary,  the  Spirit  (Atman),  is  one,
of  course,  with  the  One  Universal  Spirit  (Paramatma),  but  the  Vehicle
(Vahan)  it  is  enshrined  in,  the  Buddlii,  is  part  and  parcel  of  that
Dhyan-Chohanic  Essence ;  and  it  is  in  this  that  lies  the  mystery  of  that

•  Primitive,  or  First  Man.  t  Reincarnation.


286  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

ubiquity,  which  was  discussed  a  few  pages  back.  "My  Father,  that  is
in  Heaven,  and  I — are  one,"  says  the  Christian  Scripture;  and  in  this,
at  any  rate,  it  is  the  faithful  echo  of  the  Ksoteric  tenet.


•    STANZA   V\\.— Continued.

7.  "This  is  thy  present  Wheel" — said  the  Fi^ame  to  the  Spark.
"Thou  art  myself,  my  Image  and  my  Shadow.     I  piave  clothed

MYSELF  IN  THEE,  AND  THOU  ART  MY  VaHAN,*  TO  THE  DAY  '  BE  WiTH
Us,'    WHEN   THOU    SHALT    RE-BECOME    MYSELF    AND    OTHERS,    THYSELF

AND  I"  (a).  Then  the  Builders,  having  donned  their  fiRvST  Cloth-
ing, DESCEND  on  radiant  EARTH,  AND  REIGN  OVER  MEN — WHO  ARE
THEMSELVES  {U).

(a)  The  Day  when  the  Spark  will  re-become  the  Flame,  when  Man
will  merge  into  his  Dhyan  Chohan,  "m3^self  and  others,  thyself  and
I,"  as  the  Stanza  has  it,  means  that  in  Paranirv^ana — when  Pralaya
will  have  reduced  not  only  material  and  psychical  bodies,  but  even  the
spiritual  Egos,  to  their  original  principle — the  Past,  Present,  and  even
Future  Humanities,  like  all  things,  will  be  one  and  the  same.  Every-
thing will  have  reentered  the  Great  Breath.  In  other  v/ords,  everj^-
thing  will  be  "merged  in  Brahman,"  or  the  Divine  Unity.

Is  this  annihilation,  as  some  think?  Or  atheism,  as  other  critics —
the  worshippers  of  z.  personal  deity,  and  believers  in  an  unphilosophical
paradise — are  inclined  to  suppose?  Neither.  It  is  worse  than  useless
to  return  to  the  question  of  implied  atheism,  in  that  which  is  spirittiality
of  a  most  refined  character.  To  see  in  Nirvana  annihilation,  amounts
to  saying  of  a  man  plunged  in  a  sound  dreamless  sleep — one  that  leaves
710  impression  on  the  physical  memory  and  brain,  because  the  sleeper's
Higher  Self  is  then  in  its  original  state  of  AbsohUe  Consciousness — that
he,  too,  is  annihilated.  The  latter  simile  answers  to  one  side  of  the
question  only — the  most  material;  since  rea.bsorption  is  by  no  means
such  a  "dreamless  sleep,"  but,  on  the  contrary-.  Absolute  ^^xsloxio^e.,  an
unconditioned  unity,  or  a  state,  to  describe  which  human  language  is
absolutely  and  hopelessly  inadequate.  The  only  approach  to  anything
like  a  comprehensive  conception  of  it  can  be  attempted  solely  in  the
panoramic  visions  of  the  Soul,  through  spiritual  ideations  of  the  divine
Monad.  Nor  is  the  Individualitj- — nor  even  the  essence  of  the  Personality,
if  any  be  left  behind — lost,  because  reabsorbed.     For,  however  limitless

*  Vehicle.


EARTH   PEOPLED   FROM   HEAVEN.  287

from  a  human  standpoint,  the  paranirv^anic  state,  yet  it  has  a  limit
in  Eternity.  Once  reached,  the  same  Monad  will  reevicrge  therefrom,
as  a  still  higher  being,  on  a  far  higher  plane,  to  recommence  its  cycle
of  perfected  activity.  The  human  mind,  in  its  present  stage  of  develop-
ment, cannot  transcend,  scarcely  can  it  reach  this  plane  of  thought.
It  totters  here,  on  the  brink  of  incomprehensible  Absoluteness  and
Eternity.

{b)  The  "Watchers"  reign  over  men  during  the  whole  period  of
Satya  Yuga  and  the  smaller  subsequent  Yugas,  down  to  the  beginning
of  the  Third  Root  Race ;  after  which  it  is  the  Patriarchs,  Heroes,  and
the  Manes,  as  in  the  Egyptian  Dynasties  enumerated  by  the  priests  to
Solon,  the  incarnated  Dh^-anis  of  a  lower  order,  up  to  King  Menes  and
the  human  Kings  of  other  nations.  All  were  carefully  recorded.  In
the  views  of  sj^mbologists  this  Mythopoeic  Age  is  of  course  regarded
as  only  a  fairy  tale.  But  since  traditions  and  even  chronicles  of  such
Dynasties  of  Divine  Kings,  of  Gods  reigning  over  men,  followed  by
Dynasties  of  Heroes  or  Giants,  exist  in  the  annals  of  every  nation,  it  is.
difficult  to  understand  how  all  the  peoples  under  the  sun,  some  of
whom  are  separated  hy  vast  oceans  and  belong  to  different  hemi-
spheres, such  as  the  ancient  Peruvians  and  Mexicans,  as  well  as  the
Chaldeans,  could  have  worked  out  the  same  "fairy  tales"  in  the  same
order  of  events.''^-  However,  as  the  Secret  Doctrine  teaches  history —
which,  although  esoteric  and  traditional,  is,  none  the  less,  more  reliable
than  profane  history — we  are  entitled  to  our  beliefs  as  much  as  any-
one else,  whether  religionist  or  sceptic.  And  that  Doctrine  says  that
the  Dhyani-Buddhas  of  the  two  higher  Groups,  namely,  the  Watchers
or  the  Architects,  furnished  the  many  and  various  races  with  divine
kings  and  leaders.  It  is  the  latter  who  taught  humanity  their  arts  and
sciences,  and  the  former  who  revealed  to  the  incarnated  Monads  that
had  just  shaken  off  their  Vehicles  of  the  lower  Kingdoms,  and  who
had,  therefore,  lost  every  recollection  of  their  divine  origin,  the  great
spiritual  truths  of  the  transcendental  Worlds.

Thus,  as  expressed  in  the  Stanza,  the  W^atchers  "descend  on  radiant
Earth  and  reign  over  men,  ^vho  are  themselves^  The  reigning  Kings
had  finished  their  cycle  on  Earth  and  other  Worlds,  in  the  preceding
Rounds.     In  the  future  Manvantaras  they  will  have  risen  to  higher


•  See,  for  example,  Sacred  Mysteries  among  the  Mayas  and  the  Quiche's,  by  Augustus  le  Plongeon,
who  shows  the  identity  between  the  Egyptian  rites  and  beliefs  and  those  of  the  people  he  describes.
The  ancient  hieratic  alphabets  of  the  Mayas  and  the  Egyptians  are  almost  identical.


288  the:  secret  doctrine.

Systems  than  our  planetary  World ;  and  it  is  the  Elect  of  our  Hu-
manity, the  Pioneers  on  the  hard  and  difficult  path  of  Progress,  who
will  take  the  places  of  their  predecessors.  The  next  great  Manvantara
will  witness  the  men  of  our  own  lyife-Cycle  becoming  the  instructors
and  guides  of  a  Mankind  whose  Monads  may  now  be  still  imprisoned —
semi-conscious — in  the  most  intellectual  of  the  animal  kingdom,  while
their  lower  principles  may  be  animating,  perhaps,  the  highest  specimens
of  the  vegetable  world.

Thus  proceed  the  cycles  of  the  septenary  evolution,  in  Seven-fold
Nature;  the  spiritual  or  divine ;  the  psychic  or  semi-divine;  the  intel-
lectual; the  passional,  the  instinctual,  or  cognitiojial ;  the  semi-corpo-
real; and  the  purely  material  or  physical  natures.  All  these  evolve  and
progress  cyclically,  passing  from  one  into  another,  in  a  double,  centri-
fugal and  centripetal,  way,  07ie  in  their  ultimate  essence,  seve7i  in  their
aspects.  The  lowest,  of  course,  is  that  depending  upon  and  sub-
servient to  our  five  physical  senses,  which  are  in  truth  seven,  as  shown
later,  on  the  authority  of  the  oldest  Upanishads.  Thus  far,  for  indi-
vidual, human,  sentient,  animal  and  vegetable  life,  each  the  microcosm
of  its  higher  macrocosm.  The  same  for  the  Universe,  which  manifests
periodically,  for  purposes  of  the  collective  progress  of  the  countless
Lives,  the  outbreathings  of  the  One  Life;  in  order  that,  through  the
Kver-Becoming,  every  cosmic  atom  in  this  infinite  Universe,  passing
from  the  formless  and  the  intangible,  through  the  mixed  natures  of  the
semi-terrestrial,  down  to  matter  in  full  generation,  and  then  back
again,  reascending  at  each  new  period  higher  and  nearer  the  final
goal ;  that  each  atom,  we  say,  may  reach,  through  individual  merits  and
efforts,  that  plane  where  it  re-becom^es  the  One  Unconditioned  Ali..  But
between  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega  there  is  the  weary  "Road,"  hedged
in  by  thorns,  that  goes  down  first,  then —

Winds  np  hill  all  the  way;
Yes,  to  the  very  end.   .    .   .

Starting  upon  the  long  journey  immaculate,  descending  more  and
more  into  sinful  matter,  and  having  connected  himself  with  every
atom  in  manifested  Space— the  Pilgrim,  having  struggled  through,
and  suffered  in,  every  form  of  Life  and  Being,  is  only  at  the  bottom  of
the  valley  of  matter,  and  half  through  his  cycle,  when  he  has  identified
himself  with  collective  Humanity.  This,  he  has  made  in  his  own  image.
In  order  to  progress  upwards  and  homewards,  the  "God"  has  now  to
ascend  the  weary  uphill  path  of  the  Golgotha  of  Life.     It  is  the  martyr-


THE    "SECOND  ADVENT."  289

dom  of  self-conscious  existence.  Like  Vishvakarman,  he  has  to  sacrifice
nimself  to  himself,  in  order  to  redeem  all  creatures,  to  resui^^ect  from  the
Many  into  the  One  L,ife.  Then  he  ascends  into  Heaven  indeed ;  where,
plunged  into  the  incomprehensible  Absolute  Being  and  Bliss  of  Para-
nirvana,  he  reigns  unconditionally,  and  whence  he  will  re-descend
again,  at  the  next  "Coming,"  which  one  portion  of  humanity  expects
in  its  dead-letter  sense  as  the  "Second  Advent,"  and  the  other  as  the
last  "Kalki  Avatara."


20


SUMMING  UP.


The  History  of  Creation  and  of  this  World,  from  its  beginning  up  to  the  present  time,  is  composed
of  seven  chapters.    The  seventh  chapter  is  not  yet  written.

T.  SUBBA  Row.*

Thb  first  of  these  "seven  chapters"  has  been  attempted  and  is  now
finished.  However  incomplete  and  feeble  as  an  exposition,  it  is,  at
any  rate,  an  approximation — using  the  word  in  a  mathematical  sense —
to  that  which  is  the  oldest  basis  for  all  subsequent  cosmogonies.  The
attempt  to  render  in  a  European  tongue  the  grand  panorama  of  the
ever  periodically  recurring  Law,  impressed  upon  the  plastic  minds  of
the  first  Races  endowed  with  Consciousness,  by  those  who  reflected  the
same  from  the  Universal  Mind,  is  daring;  for  no  human  language,
save  the  Sanskrit — which  is  that  of  the  Gods — can  do  so  with  any
degree  of  adequacy.  But  the  failures  in  this  work  must  be  forgiven  for
the  sake  of  the  motive.

As  a  whole,  neither  the  foregoing  nor  what  follows  can  be  found  in
full  anywhere.  It  is  not  taught  in  any  of  the  six  Indian  schools  of
philosophy,  for  it  pertains  to  their  synthesis,  the  seventh,  which  is  the
Occult  Doctrine.  It  is  not  traced  on  any  crumbling  papyrus  of  Eg}^pt,
nor  is  it  any  longer  graven  on  Assyrian  tile  or  granite  wall.  The
Books  of  the  Vedanta — the  "last  word  of  human  knowledge" — give  out
but  the  metaphysical  aspect  of  this  world-cosmogonj^;  and  their  price-
less thesaurus,  the  Upatiishads — Upa-7ii-shadhe\.ng  o.  compound  word,
expressing  the  conquest  of  ignorance  by  the  revelation  of  secret,  spiri-
tual knowledge — now  requires  the  additional  possession  of  a  master-
key,  to  enable  the  student  to  get  at  their  full  meaning.  The  reason  for
this  I  venture  to  state  here  as  I  learned  it  from  a  Master.

The  name  Upanishad,  is  usually  translated  "esoteric  doctrine."
These  treatises  form  part  of  Shruti,  or  "revealed"  Knowledge,  Revela-
tion in  short,  and  are  generally  attached  to  the  Brahmana  portion  of
the  Vedas,  as  their  third  division.

*  In  The  Theosophist,  1881.


THE   UPANISHADS.  29I

[Now]  the  Vcdas  have  a  distinct  dual  meaning— one  expressed  by  the  literal  sense
of  the  words,  the  other  indicated  by  the  metre  and  the  svara  (intonation),  which  are
as  the  life  of  the  Vedas.  .  .  .  Learned  pandits  and  philologists  of  course  deny
that  svara  has  anything  to  do  with  philosophy  or  ancient  esoteric  doctrines;  but
the  mysterious  connection  between  svara  and  light  is  one  of  its  most  profound
secrets.*

There  are  over  150  Upanishads  enumerated  by  Orientalists,  who
credit  the  oldest  with  being  written  probably  about  600  3^ears  B.C.;
but  of  genuine  texts  there  does  not  exist  a  fifth  of  the  number.  The
Upa7iishads  are  to  the  Vedas  what  the  Kabalah  is  to  the  Jewish  Bible.
They  treat  of  and  expound  the  secret  and  mystic  meaning  of  the  Vedic
texts.  The}-  speak  of  the  origin  of  the  Universe,  the  nature  of  Deity,
and  of  Spirit  and  Soul,  as  also  of  the  metaphysical  connection  of  Mind
and  Matter.  In  a  few  words:  They  contain  the  beginni^ig  and  the  end
of  all  human  knowledge,  bid  they  have  ceased  to  reveal  it,  since  the  days
of  Buddha.  If  it  were  otherwise,  the  Upanishads  could  not  be  called
esoteric,  since  they  are  now  openly  attached  to  the  Sacred  Brahmanical
Books,  which  have,  in  our  present  age,  become  accessible  even  to  the
Mlechchhas  (out-castes)  and  the  European  Orientalists.  One  thing  in
them — and  this,  in  all  the  Upanishads — invariably  and  constantly  points
to  their  ancient  origin,  and  proves  (a)  that  they  were  written,  in  some
of  their  portions,  before  the  caste  system  became  the  tyrannical  institu-
tion which  it  still  is;  and  {b)  that  half  of  their  contents  have  been
eliminated,  while  some  of  them  have  been  rewritten  and  abridged.
"The  great  Teachers  of  the  higher  Knowledge  and  the  Brahmans  are
continually  represented  as  going  to  Kshatri^^a  [military-caste]  kings  to
become  their  pupils."  As  Professor  Cowell  pertinently  remarks,  the
Upanishads  "breathe  an  entirely  different  spirit  [from  other  Brah-
manical writings],  a  freedom  of  thought  unknown  in  any  earlier  work,
except  in  the  Rig  Veda  hymns  themselves,"  The  second  fact  is
explained  by  a  tradition  recorded  in  one  of  the  MSS.  on  Buddha's
life.  It  says  that  the  Upanishads  were  originally  attached  to  their
Brdhmanas  after  the  beginning  of  a  reform,  which  led  to  the  exclusive-
ness  of  the  present  crste  system  among  the  Brahmans,  a  few  centuries
after  the  invasion  of  India  by  the  "Twice-born."  They  were  com-
plete in  those  days,  and  were  used  for  the  instruction  of  the  Chelas
who  were  preparing  for  Initiation.

This  lasted  so  long  as  the  Vedas  and  the  Brahvianas  remained  in  the

*  T.  Subba  Rov/,  Five  Years  of  Theosophy,  p.  154.


292  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

sole  and  exclusive  keeping  of  the  temple-Brahmans — while  no  one  else
had  the  right  to  study  or  even  read  them  outside  of  the  sacred  caste.
Then  came  Gautama,  the  Prince  of  Kapilavastu.  After  learning  the
whole  of  the  Brahmanical  wisdom  in  the  Rahasya,  or  the  Upa^iishads,
and  finding  that  the  teachings  differed  little,  if  at  all,  from  those  of  the
"Teachers  of  Life"  inhabiting  the  snow)^  ranges  of  the  Himalaj^as,*
the  disciple  of  the  Brahmans,  feeling  indignant  because  the  Sacred  Wis-
dom was  thus  withheld  from  all  but  Brahmans,  determined,  by  popu-
larizing it,  to  save  the  whole  world.  Then  it  was  that  the  Brahmans,
seeing  that  their  Sacred  Knowledge  and  Occult  Wisdom  was  falling
into  the  hands  of  the  Mlechchhas,  abridged  the  texts  of  the  Upanish-
ads,  which  originally  contained  thrice  the  matter  of  the  Vedas  and
the  Brdhmarias  together,  without  altering,  however,  one  word  of  the
texts.  They  simpl}^  detached  from  the  MSS.  the  most  important  por-
tions, containing  the  last  word  of  the  Mystery  of  Being.  The  key  to
the  Brahmanical  secret  code  remained  henceforth  with  the  Initiates
alone,  and  the  Brahmans  were  thus  in  a  position  to  publicly  deny  the.
correctness  of  Buddha's  teaching  by  appealing  to  their  Upanishads,
silenced  for  ever  on  the  chief  questions.  Such  is  the  esoteric  tradition
beyond  the  Himalayas.

Shri  Shankaracharya,  the  greatest  Initiate  living  in  the  historical
ages,  wrote  many  a  Bhashya  (Commentary)  on  the  Upanishads.  But
his  original  treatises,  as  there  are  reasons  to  suppose,  have  not  yet
fallen  into  the  hands  of  the  Philistines,  for  they  are  too  jealously  pre-
served in  his  monasteries  (mathams).  And  there  are  still  weightier
reasons  to  believe  that  the  priceless  Bhashyas  on  the  Esoteric  Doctrine
of  the  Brahmans,  by  their  greatest  expounder,  will  remain  for  ages
still  a  dead  letter  to  most  of  the  Hindus,  except  the  Smartava  Brah-
mans. This  sect,  founded  by  Shankaracharya,  which  is  still  very
powerful  in  Southern  India,  is  now  almost  the  only  one  to  produce
students  who  have  preserved  sufficient  knowledge  to  comprehend  the
dead  letter  of  the  Bhashyas.  The  reason  for  this,  I  am  informed,  is
that  they  alone  have  occasionally  real  Initiates  at  their  head  in  their
mathams,  as  for  instance,  in  the  Shringa-giri,  in  the  Western  Ghats  of
Mysore.     On  the  other  hand,  there  is  no  sect,  in  that  desperately  exclu-

*  Also  called  the  "Sons  of  Wisdom"  and  of  the  "Fire-Mist,"  and  the  "Brothers  of  the  Sun,"  in  the
Chinese  records.  Si-dzang  (Tibet)  is  mentioned,  in  the  MSS.  of  the  sacred  library  of  the  province  of
Fo-Kien,  as  the  great  seat  of  Occult  learning  from  time  immemorial,  ages  before  Buddha.  The
Emperor  Yu,  the  "Great  "  (2,207  B.C.),  a  pious  Mj'stic  and  great  Adept,  is  said  to  have  obtained  his
Knowledge  from  the  "Great  Teachers  of  the  Snowy  Range"  in  Si-dzang.


A   RECAPITULATION.  293

sive  caste  of  the  Brahmans,  more  exclusive  than  is  the  Smartava ;  and
the  reticence  of  its  followers,  to  say  what  they  may  know  of  the  Occult
sciences  and  the  Esoteric  Doctrine,  is  onl}^  equalled  by  their  pride  and
learning.

Therefore  the  writer  of  the  present  statement  must  be  prepared
beforehand  to  meet  with  great  opposition,  and  even  the  denial  of  such
statements  as  are  brought  forward  in  this  work.  Not  that  any  claim  to
infallibility,  or  to  perfect  correctness  in  every  detail  of  all  which  is
herein  written,  has  ever  been  put  forward.  Facts  are  there,  and  they
can  hardly  be  denied.  But,  owing  to  the  intrinsic  difficulties  of  the
subjects  treated  of,  and  the  almost  insurmountable  limitations  of  the
English  tongue,  as  of  all  other  European  languages,  to  express  certain
ideas,  it  is  more  than  probable  that  the  writer  has  failed  to  present  the
explanations  in  the  best  and  the  clearest  form;  yet  all  that  could  be
done,  under  every  adverse  circumstance,  has  been  done,  and  this  is  the
utmost  that  can  be  expected  of  any  writer.

Let  us  recapitulate  and,  by  the  vastness  of  the  subjects  expounded,
show  how  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  it  is  to  do  them  full  justice.

(i)  The  Secret  Doctrine  is  the  accumulated  Wisdom  of  the  Ages,
and  its  cosmogony  alone  is  the  most  stupendous  and  elaborate  of  all
systems,  even  as  veiled  in  the  exotericism  of  the  Puranas.  But  such  is
the  mysterious  power  of  Occult  symbolism,  that  the  facts  which  have
actually  occupied  countless  generations  of  initiated  seers  and  prophets
to  marshal,  set  down  and  explain,  in  the  bewildering  series  of  evolu-
tionary' progress,  are  all  recorded  on  a  few  pages  of  geometrical  signs
and  glyphs.  The  flashing  gaze  of  those  seers  has  penetrated  into  the
ver>^  kernel  of  matter,  and  recorded  the  soul  of  things  there,  where  an
ordinarj-  profane  observer,  however  learned,  would  have  perceived  but
the  external  work  of  form.  But  Modern  Science  believes  not  in  the
"soul  of  things,"  and  hence  will  reject  the  whole  system  of  ancient
cosmogony.  It  is  useless  to  sa}^  that  the  S3'stem  in  question  is  no  fancy
of  one  or  several  isolated  individuals;  that  it  is  an  uninterrupted
record,  covering  thousands  of  generations  of  seers,  w^iose  respective
experiences  were  made  to  test  and  verify  the  traditions,  passed  on
orally  by  one  early  race  to  another,  of  the  teachings  of  higher  and
exalted  Beings,  who  watched  over  the  childhood  of  Humanity;  that  for
long  ages,  the  "Wise  Men"  of  the  Fifth  Race,  of  the  stock  saved  and
rescued  from  the  last  cataclysm  and  the  shifting  of  continents,  passed
their  lives  in  leanmig,  7iot  teaching.     How  did  they  do  so?     It  is  an-


294  '^^^  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

swered:  by  checking,  testing,  and  verifying,  in  every  department  of
Nature,  the  traditions  of  old,  by  the  independent  visions  of  great
Adepts;  that  is  to  say,  men  who  have  developed  and  perfected  their
physical,  mental,  psjxhic,  and  spiritual  organizations,  to  the  utmost
possible  degree.  No  vision  of  one  Adept  was  accepted  till  it  was
checked  and  confirmed  by  the  visions — so  obtained  as  to  stand  as  in-
dependent evidence — of  other  Adepts,  and  by  centuries  of  experience.

(2)  The  fundamental  law  in  that  system,  the  central  point  from
which  all  emerges,  around  and  towards  which  all  gravitates,  and  upon
which  is  hung  all  its  philosophy,  is  the  One  Homogeneous  Divine
Substance- Principle,  the  One  Radical  Cause.

.     .     .     .     Some  few,  whose  lamps  shone  brighter,  have  been  led

From  cause  to  cause  to  nature's  secret  head.

And  found  that  one  first  Principle  must  be.     .    .    .

It  is  called  "Substance-Principle,"  for  it  becomes  "Substance"  on
the  plane  of  the  manifested  Universe,  an  Illusion,  while  it  remains  a
"Principle"  in  the  beginningless  and  endless  abstract,  visible  and
invisible.  Space.  It  is  the  omnipresent  Reality;  impersonal,  because
it  contains  all  and  everything.  Its  Impersonality  is  the  fundamental
conception  of  the  System.  It  is  latent  in  every  atom  in  the  Universe,
and  is  the  Universe  itself.

(3)  The  Universe  is  the  periodical  manifestation  of  this  unknown
Absolute  Essence.  To  call  it  "  Essence,"  however,  is  to  sin  against  the
very  spirit  of  the  philosophy.  For  though  the  noun  may  be  derived
in  this  case  from  the  verb  esse,  "to  be,"  yet  It  cannot  be  identified  with
a  "being"  of  any  kind,  that  can  be  conceived  by  human  intellect.  It
is  best  described  as  neither  Spirit  nor  Matter,  but  both.  Parabrahman
and  Mulaprakriti  are  One,  in  reality,  yet  Two  in  the  universal  concep-
tion of  the  Manifested,  even  in  the  conception  of  the  One  Logos,  the
first  "Manifestation,"  to  which,  as  the  able  lecturer  shows,  in  the
"Notes  on  the  Bhagavadgita,''  IT  appears  from  the  objective  stand-
point as  Mulaprakriti,  and  not  as  Parabrahman;  as  its  Veil,  and  not
the  One  Reality  hidden  behind,  which  is  unconditioned  and  absolute.

(4)  The  Universe,  with  everything  in  it,  is  called  Maya,  because  all  is
temporary  therein,  from  the  ephemeral  life  of  a  fire-fly  to  that  of  the
sun.  Compared  to  the  eternal  immutability  of  the  One,  and  the
changelessness  of  that  Principle,  the  Universe,  with  its  evanescent  ever-
changing  forms,  must  b€  necessarily,  in  the  mind  of  a  philosopher,  no


THE  GUIDING   INTEI.LIGENCE   OF  THE  UNIVERSE.  295

better  than  a  will-o'-the-wisp.     Yet,  the  Universe  is  real  enough  to  the
conscious  beings  in  it,  which  are  as  unreal  as  it  is  itself.

(5)  Everything  in  the  Universe,  throughout  all  its  kingdoms,  is
conscious:  i.e.,  endowed  with  a  consciousness  of  its  own  kind  and  on  its
own  plane  of  perception.  We  men  must  remember  that,  simply  because
we  do  not  perceive  any  signs  of  consciousness  which  we  can  recognize,
say,  in  stones,  we  have  no  right  to  say  that  no  consciousness  exists
there.  There  is  no  such  thing  as  either  "dead"  or  "blind"  matter,  as
there  is  no  "blind"  or  "unconscious"  L,aw\  These  find  no  place
among  the  conceptions  of  Occult  Philosophy.  The  latter  never  stops
at  surface  appearances,  and  for  it  the  noumenal  Essences  have  more
reality  than  their  objective  counterparts;  wherein  it  resembles  the
system  of  the  mediaeval  Nominalists,  for  whom  it  was  the  universals
that  were  the  realities,  and  the  particulars  which  existed  only  in  name
and  human  fancy.

(6)  The  Universe  is  worked  and  guided,  from  wit/mi  outwards.  As
above  so  it  is  below,  as  in  heaven  so  on  earth;  and  man,  the  micro-
cosm and  miniature  copy  of  the  macrocosm,  is  the  living  witness  to
this  Universal  I^aw,  and  to  the  mode  of  its  action.  We  see  that  every
external  motion,  act,  gesture,  whether  voluntary  or  mechanical,  organic
or  mental,  is  produced  and  preceded  by  internal  feeling  or  emotion,
will  or  volition,  and  thought  or  mind.  As  no  outward  motion
or  change,  when  normal,  in  man's  external  body,  can  take  place
unless  provoked  by  an  inward  impulse,  given  through  one  of  the  three
functions  named,  so  with  the  external  or  manifested  Universe.  The
whole  Kosmos  is  guided,  controlled,  and  animated  by  almost  endless
series  of  Hierarchies  of  sentient  Beings,  each  having  a  mission  to
perform,  and  who — whether  we  give'  them  one  name  or  another,
whether  we  call  them  Dhyan  Chohans  or  Angels — are  "Messengers,"
in  the  sense  only  that  they  are  the  agents  of  Karmic  and  Cosmic  Laws.
They  vary  infinitely  in  their  respective  degrees  of  consciousness  and
intelligence;  and  to  call  them  all  pure  Spirits,  without  any  of  the
earthly  alloy  "which  time  is  wont  to  prey  upon,"  is  only  to  indulge  in
poetical  fancy.  For  each  of  these  Beings  either  was,  or  prepares  to
become,  a  man,  if  not  in  the  present,  then  in  a  past  or  a  coming  Man-
vantara.  They  are  perfected,  when  not  iyicipicnt,  men;  and  in  their
higher,  less  material,  spheres  differ  morally  from  terrestrial  human
beings  only  in  that  they  are  devoid  of  the  feeling  of  personality,  and  of
the  luanaji  emotional  nature — two  purely  earthly  characteristics.     The


2g6  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

former,  or  the  "perfected,"  have  become  free  from  these  feelings,
because  (a)  they  have  no  longer  fleshly  bodies— an  ever-numbing
weight  on  the  Soul;  and  {b),  the  pure  spiritual  element  being  left
untrammelled  and  more  free,  they  are  less  influenced  by  Maya  than
man  can  ever  be,  unless  he  is  an  Adept  who  keeps  his  two  personalities
— the  spiritual  and  the  physical — entirely  separated.  The  incipient
Monads,  having  never  yet  had  terrestrial  bodies,  can  have  no  sense
of  personality  or  ^^^-ism.  That  which  is  meant  by  "personality"
being  a  limitation  and  a  relation,  or,  as  defined  by  Coleridge,  "indivi-
duality existing  in  itself  but  with  a  nature  as  a  ground,"  the  term
cannot  of  course  be  applied  to  non-human  Entities;  but,  as  a  fact
insisted  upon  by  generations  of  Seers,  none  of  these  Beings,  high  or
low,  have  either  individuality  or  personality  as  separate  Entities,  i.e.,
they  have  no  individuality  in  the  sense  in  which  a  man  says,  "/  am
myself  and  no  one  else" ;  in  other  words,  they  are  conscious  of  no  such
distinct  separateness  as  men  and  things  have  on  earth.  Individuality
is  the  characteristic  of  their  respective  Hierarchies,  not  of  their  units;
and  these  characteristics  vary  only  with  the  degree  of  the  plane  to
which  these  Hierarchies  belong:  the  nearer  to  the  region  of  Homo-
geneity and  the  One  Divine,  the  purer  and  the  less  accentuated  is  that
individuality  in  the  Hierarchy.  They  are  finite  in  all  respects,  with
the  exception  of  their  higher  principles — the  immortal  Sparks  re-
flecting the  Universal  Divine  Flame,  individualized  and  separated
only  on  the  spheres  of  Illusion,  by  a  differentiation  as  illusive  as  the
rest.  They  are  "lyiving  Ones,"  because  they  are  the  streams  projected
on  the  cosmic  screen  of  Illusion  from  the  Absolute  Life;  Beings  in
whom  life  cannot  become  extinct,  before  the  fire  of  ignorance  is  extinct
in  those  who  sense  these  "lyives."  Having  sprung  into  being  under
the  quickening  influence  of  the  uncreated  Beam,  the  reflection  of  the
great  Central  Sun  that  radiates  on  the  shores  of  the  River  of  I^ife,  it  is
the  Inner  Principle  in  them  which  belongs  to  the  Waters  of  Immor-
tality, while  its  differentiated  clothing  is  as  perishable  as  man's  body.
Therefore  Young  was  right  in  saying  that

Angels  are  men  of  a  superior  kind  ...
and  no  more.  They  are  neither  "ministering"  nor  "protecting"
Angels,  nor  are  they  "Harbingers  of  the  Most  High";  still  less  the
"Messengers  of  Wrath"  of  any  God  such  as  man's  fancy  has  created.
To  appeal  to  their  protection  is  as  foolish  as  to  believe  that  their
sympathy  may  be  secured  by  any  kind  of  propitiation ;  for  they  are,  as


THE   UNITY  OF  ALL  IN  NATURE.  297

much  as  man  himself  is,  the  slaves  and  creatures  of  immutable  Karmic
and  Cosmic  Law.  The  reason  for  this  is  evident.  Having  no  elements
of  personality  in  their  essence,  they  can  have  no  personal  qualities,
such  as  are  attributed  by  men,  in  exoteric  religions,  to  their  anthro-
pomorphic God — a  jealous  and  exclusive  God,  who  rejoices  and  feels
wrathful,  is  pleased  with  sacrifice,  and  is  more  despotic  in  his  vanity
than  any  finite  foolish  man.  Man,  being  a  compound  of  the  essences
of  all  these  celestial  Hierarchies,  may  succeed  in  making  himself,  as
such,  superior,  in  one  sense,  to  any  Hierarchy  or  Class,  or  even  com-
bination of  them.  "Man  can  neither  propitiate  nor  command  the
Devas,"  it  is  said.  But,  by  paralyzing  his  lower  personalit)^  and
arriving  thereby  at  the  full  knowledge  of  the  non-separateness  of  his
Higher  Self  from  the  One  Absolute  SELF,  man  can,  even  during  his
terrestrial  life,  become  as  "one  of  us."  Thus  it  is,  by  eating  of  the
fruit  of  knowledge,  which  dispels  ignorance,  that  man  becomes  like
one  of  the  Elohim,  or  the  Dhyanis;  and  once  on  their  plane,  the
Spirit  of  Solidarity  and  perfect  Harmony,  which  reigns  in  every  Hier-
archy, must  extend  aver  him,  and  protect  him  in  every  particular.

The  chief  difficulty  which  prevents  men  of  Science  from  believing
in  divine  as  well  as  in  nature  spirits  is  their  Materialism,  The  main
impediment  before  the  Spiritualist  which  hinders  him  from  believing
in  the  same,  while  preserxdng  a  blind  belief  in  the  "Spirits"  of  the
Departed,  is  the  general  ignorance  of  all — except  some  Occultists  and
Kabalists — about  the  true  essence  and  nature  of  Matter,  It  is  on  the
acceptance  or  rejection  of  the  theory  of  the  Unity  of  all  in  Nature,  in
its  2cltimate  Esse^ice,  that  mainly  rests  the  belief  or  unbelief  in  the
existence  around  us  of  other  conscious  Beings,  besides  the  Spirits  of
the  Dead.  It  is  on  the  right  comprehension  of  the  primeval  Evolution
of  Spirit-Matter,  and  its  real  Essence,  that  the  student  has  to  depend  for
the  further  elucidation  in  his  mind  of  the  Occult  Cosmogony,  and  for
the  only  sure  clue  which  can  guide  his  subsequent  studies.

In  sober  truth,  as  just  shown,  every  so-called  "Spirit"  is  either  a
disembodied  or  a  future  man.  As  from  the  highest  Archangel  (Dhyan
Chohan)  down  to  the  last  conscious  Builder  (the  inferior  Class  of
Spiritual  Entities),  all  such  are  men,  having  lived  aeons  ago,  in  other
Manvantaras,  on  this  or  other  Spheres;  so  the  inferior,  semi-intelligent
and  non-intelligent  Elementals  are  all  future  men.  The  fact  alone,
that  a  Spirit  is  endowed  with  intelligence,  is  a  proof  to  the  Occultist
that  such  a  Being  must  have  been  a  man,  and  acquired  his  knowledge


298  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

and  intelligence  throughout  the  human  cycle.  There  is  but  one  in-
divisible and  absolute  Omniscience  and  Intelligence  in  the  Universe,
and  this  thrills  throughout  every  atom  and  infinitesimal  point  of  the
whole  Kosmos,  which  has  no  bounds,  and  which  people  call  Space,
considered  independently  of  an^'thing  contained  in  it.  But  the  first
differentiation  of  its  reflcctio7i  in  the  Manifested  World  is  purely  spiri-
tual, and  the  Beings  generated  in  it  are  not  endowed  with  a  conscious-
ness that  has  any  relation  to  the  one  we  conceive  of.  They  can  have
no  human  consciousness  or  intelligence  before  they  have  acquired
such,  personally  and  individually.  This  may  be  a  mystery,  yet  it  is
a  fact  in  Esoteric  Philosophy,  and  a  very  apparent  one  too.

The  whole  order  of  Nature  evinces  a  progressive  march  towards  a
higher  life.  There  is  design  in  the  action  of  the  seemingly  blindest
forces.  The  whole  process  of  evolution,  with  its  endless  adaptations,  is
a  proof  of  this.  The  immutable  laws  that  weed  out  the  weak  and
feeble  species,  to  make  room  for  the  strong,  and  which  ensure  the
"survival  of  the  fittest,"  though  so  cruel  in  their  immediate  action,
all  are  working  toward  the  grand  end.  The  v^xy  fact  that  adaptations
do  occur,  that  the  fittest  do  survive  in  the  struggle  for  existence,  shows
that  what  is  called  "unconscious  Nature"  is  in  reality  an  aggregate  of
forces,  manipulated  by  semi-intelligent  beings  (Elementals),  guided  by
High  Planetary  Spirits  (Dhyan  Chohans),  whose  collective  aggregate
forms  the  Manifested  Verbum  of  the  Unmanifested  Logos,  and  consti-
stutes  at  one  and  the  same  time  the  Mind  of  the  Universe  and  its  im-
mutable Law.

For  Nature,  taken  in  its  abstract  sense,  cannot  be  "unconscious,"  as  it
is  the  emanation  from,  and  thus  an  aspect  on  the  manifested  plane  of,
the  Absolute  Consciousness.  Where  is  that  daring  man  who  would
presume  to  deny  to  vegetation  and  even  to  minerals  a  cotisciousjiess  of
their  own?  All  he  can  say  is,  that  this  consciousness  is  beyond  his
comprehension.

Three  distinct  representations  of  the  Universe,  in  its  three  distinct
aspects,  are  impressed  upon  our  thoughts  by  the  Esoteric  Philosophy :
the  Pre-existing,  evolved  from  the  Ever-existing,  and  the  Phenome7ial —
the  world  of  illusion,  the  reflection,  and  shadow  thereof.  During  the
great  mysterj^  and  drama  of  life,  known  as  the  Manvantara,  real  Kos-
mos is  like  the  objects  placed  behind  the  white  screen  upon  which
shadows  are  thrown.  The  actual  figures  and  things  remain  invisible,
while  the  wires  of  evolution  are  pulled  by  unseen  hands.     Men  and


THE   THREE  UNIVERSES.  299

things  are  thus  but  the  reflections,  on  the  white  field,  of  the  realities
behind  the  snares  of  Mahamaya,  or  the  Great  Illusion.  This  was  taught
in  every  philosophy,  in  every  religion,  ante-  as  well  as  post-diluvian,  in
India  and  Chaldea,  by  the  Chinese  as  by  the  Grecian  Sages.  In  the
former  countries  these  three  Universes  were  allegorized,  in  exoteric
teachings,  by  the  three  Trinities,  emanating  from  the  central  eternal
Germ,  and  forming  with  it  a  Supreme  Unity:  the  initial,  the  mani-
fested, and  the  creative  Triad,  or  the  Three  in  One.  The  last  is  but  the
symbol,  in  its  concrete  expression,  of  the  first  ideal  two.  Hence  Eso-
teric Philosophy  passes  over  the  necessarianism  of  this  purely  meta-
physical conception,  and  calls  the  first  one,  only,  the  Ever-Existing.
This  is  the  view  of  every  one  of  the  six  great  schools  of  Indian  philo-
soph}' — the  six  principles  of  that  unit  body  of  Wisdom  of  which  the
Gnosis,  the  hidden  Knowledge,  is  the  seventh.

The  writer  hopes  that,  however  superficially  the  comments  on  the
Seven  Stanzas  may  have  been  handled,  enough  has  been  given,  in  this
cosmogonic  portion  of  the  work,  to  show  the  archaic  teachings  to  be  on
their  very  face  more  scieiitific  (in  the  modern  sense  of  the  word)  than
any  other  ancient  Scriptures  left  to  be  judged  on  their  exoteric  aspect.
Since,  however,  as  before  confessed,  this  work  withholds  far  more  than
it  gives  out,  the  student  is  invited  to  use  his  own  intuitions.  Our  chief
care  is  to  elucidate  that  which  has  already  been  given  out,  and,  to  our
regret,  very  incorrectly  at  times;  to  supplement  the  knowledge  hinted
at — whenever  and  wherever  possible — by  additional  matter;  and  to
bulwark  our  doctrines  against  the  too  strong  attacks  of  modern  Sec-
tarianism, and  more  especially  against  those  of  our  latter-day  Ma-
terialism, very  often  miscalled  Science,  whereas,  in  reality,  the  words
"Scientists"  and  "Sciolists"  ought  alone  to  bear  the  responsibility  for
the  many  illogical  theories  offered  to  the  world.  In  its  great  ignorance,
the  public,  while  blindly  accepting  everything  that  emanates  from  "au-
thorities," and  feeling  it  to  be  its  duty  to  regard  every  dictum  coming
from  a  man  of  Science  as  a  proven  fact — the  public,  we  say,  is  taught
to  scoff  at  anything  brought  forward  from  "heathen"  sources.  There-
fore, as  materialistic  Scientists  can  be  fought  solely  with  their  own
weapons — those  of  controversy  and  argument — an  Addendum  is  added
to  each  Volume  contrasting  the  respective  views,  and  showing  how  even
great  authorities  may  often  err.  We  believe  that  this  can  be  done
effectually,  by  showing  the  weak  points  of  our  opponents,  and  by  prov-
ing their  too  frequent  sophisms,  which  are  made  to  pass  for  scientific


30O  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

dicta,  to  be  incorrect.  We  hold  to  Hermes  and  his  "Wisdom,"  in  its  uni-
versal character;  they — to  Aristotle,  as  against  intuition  and  the  expe-
rience of  the  Ages,  fancying  that  Truth  is  the  exclusive  property  of  the
Western  world.  Hence  the  disagreement.  As  Hermes  says:  "Know-
ledge differs  much  from  sense ;  for  sense  is  of  things  that  surmount  it,
but  Knowledge  is  the  end  of  sense" — i.e.,  of  the  illusion  of  our  physical
brain  and  its  intellect;  thus  emphasizing  the  contrast  between  the
laboriously  acquired  knowledge  of  the  senses  and  Mind  (Manas),  and
the  intuitive  omniscience  of  the  Spiritual  Divine  Soul  (Buddhi).

Whatever  may  be  the  destiny  of  these  actual  writings  in  a  remote
future,  we  hope  to  have  so  far  proven  the  following  facts:

(i)  The  Secret  Doctrine  teaches  no  Atheism,  except  in  the  sense
underlying  the  Sanskrit  word  Nastika,  a  rejection  of  idols,  including
every  anthropomorphic  God.  In  this  sense  every  Occultist  is  a
Nastika.

(2)  It  admits  a  Logos,  or  a  Collective  "Creator"  of  the  Universe;  a
Demiurge,  in  the  sense  implied  when  one  speaks  of  an  "Architect"
as  the  "Creator"  of  an  edifice,  whereas  that  Architect  has  never
touched  one  stone  of  it,  but,  furnishing  the  plan,  has  left  all  the
manual  labour  to  the  masons ;  in  our  case  the  plan  was  furnished  by
the  Ideation  of  the  Universe,  and  the  constructive  labour  was  left  to
the  Hosts  of  intelligent  Powers  and  Forces.  But  that  Demiurge  is  no
personal  deity — i.e.,  an  imperfect  extra-cosmic  God,  but  only  the  aggre-
gate of  the  Dhyan  Chohans  and  the  other  Forces.

(3)  The  Dhyan  Chohans  are  dual  in  their  character;  being  com-
posed of  id)  the  irrational  brute  Energy,  inherent  in  Matter,  and  {U)  the
intelligent  Soul,  or  cosmic  Consciousness,  which  directs  and  guides  that
Energy,  and  which  is  the  Dhyaji  Chohanic  Thought,  reflecting  the  Ideatioji
of  the  Ihiiversal  Mind.  This  results  in  a  perpetual  series  of  physical
manifestations  and  moral  effects  on  Earth,  during  manvantaric  periods,
the  whole  being  subservient  to  Karma.  As  that  process  is  not  always
perfect;  and  since,  however  many  proofs  it  may  exhibit  of  a  guiding
Intelligence  behind  the  veil,  it  still  shows  gaps  and  flaws,  and  even
very  often  results  in  evident  failures — therefore,  neither  the  collective
Host  (Demiurge),  nor  any  of  the  working  Powers  individually,  are
proper  subjects  for  divine  honours  or  worship.  All  are  entitled  to  the
grateful  reverence  of  humanity,  however,  and  man  ought  to  be  ever
striving  to  help  the  divine  evolution  of  Ideas,  by  becoming,  to  the  best
of  his  ability,  a  co-ivorker  with  Nature,  in  the  cyclic  task.     The  ever


MATTER  IS  THE  SHADOW   OF  SPIRIT.  3OI

unknowable  and  incognizable  Karana  alone,  the  Causeless  Cause  of  all
causes,  should  have  its  shrine  and  altar  on  the  holy  and  ever  untrodden
o-round  of  our  heart — invisible,  intangible,  unnientioned,  save  through
the  "still  small  voice"  of  our  spiritual  consciousness.  Those  who
worship  before  it,  ought  to  do  so  in  the  silence  and  the  sanctified
solitude  of  their  Souls ;  making  their  Spirit  the  sole  mediator  between
them  and  the  Universal  Spirit,  their  good  actions  the  only  priests,  and
their  sinful  intentions  the  only  visible  and  objective  sacrificial  victims
to  the  Presence.

"\Vlien  thou  pray  est,  thou  shalt  not  be  as  the  hypocrites  are  .  .  .
but  enter  into  thine  inner  chamber,  and  having  shut  thy  door,  pray  to
thy  Father  which  is  in  secret."*  Our  Father  is  within  us  "in  secret,"
our  Seventh  Principle  in  the  "inner  chamber"  of  our  soul-perception.
"The  Kingdom  of  God"  and  of  Heaven  is  within  us,  says  Jesus,  not
outside.  Whj''  are  Christians  so  absolutely  blind  to  the  self-evident
meaning  of  the  words  of  wisdom  they  delight  in  mechanically  re-
peating?

(4)  Matter  is  Eternal.  It  is  the  Upadhi,  or  Physical  Basis,  for  the
One  Infinite  Universal  Mind  to  build  thereon  its  ideations.  Therefore,
the  Esotericists  maintain  that  there  is  no  inorganic  or  "dead"  matter  in
Nature,  the  distinction  between  the  two  made  by  Science  being  as
unfounded  as  it  is  arbitrary  and  devoid  of  reason.  Whatever  Science
may  think,  however — and  exact  Science  is  a  fickle  dame,  as  we  all  know
by  experience — Occultism  knows  and  teaches  differently,  as  it  has  done
from  time  immemorial,  from  Manu  and  Hermes  down  to  Paracelsus
and  his  successors.

Thus,  Hermes,  the  Thrice  Great,  says:

Oh,  my  son,  matter  becomes;  formerly  it  was;  for  matter  is  the  vehicle  of  be-
coming. Becoming  is  the  mode  of  activity  of  the  uncreate  and  foreseeing  God.
Having  been  endowed  with  the  germ  of  becoming,  [objective]  matter  is  brought
into  birth,  for  the  creative  force  fashions  it  accordwg  to  the  ideal  forms.  Matter  not
yet  engendered  had  no  form;  it  becomes,  when  it  is  put  into  operation. t

To  this  the  late  Dr.  Anna  Kingsford,  the  able  translator  and  com-
piler of  the  Hermetic  Fragments,  remarks  in  a  footnote:

Dr.  Mdnard  observes  that  in  Greek  the  same  word  signifies  to  be  born  and  to
become.  The  idea  here  is,  that  the  material  of  the  world  is  in  its  essence  eternal,
but  that  before  creation  or  "becoming"  it  is  in  a  passive  and  motionless  condition.
Thus  it  "was"  before  being  put  into  operation;  now  it  "becomes,"  that  is,  it  is
mobile  and  progressive.

•  Matt.  vi.  5,  6.  t  The  Virgin  of  the  IVorld,  pp.  134-5.


302  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE-

And  she  adds  the  purely  Vedantic  doctrine  of  the  Hermetic  philo-
sophy that:

Creation  is  thus  the  period  of  activity  [Manvantara]  of  God,  who,  according  to
Hermetic  thought  [or  which,  according  to  the  Vedantin],  has  two  modes — Activity
or  Existence,  God  evolved  (Deus  explicitus);  and  Passivity  of  Being  [Pralaya],  God
involved  (Deus  implicitus).  Both  modes  are  perfect  and  complete,  as  are  the
waking  and  sleeping  states  of  man.  Fichte,  the  German  philosopher,  distinguished
Being  (Seyn)  as  One,  which  we  know  only  through  existence  (Daseyn)  as  the
Manifold.  This  view  is  thoroughly  Hermetic.  The  "Ideal  Forms"  .  .  .  are
the  archetypal  or  formative  ideas  of  the  Neo-Platonists;  the  eternal  and  subjective
concepts  of  things  subsisting  in  the  Divine  Mind,  prior  to  "creation"  or  becoming.

Or,  as  in  the  philosophy  of  Paracelsus :

Everything  is  the  product  of  one  universal  creative  effort.  .  .  .  There  is
nothing  dead  in  Nature.  Everything  is  organic  and  living,  and  therefore  the  whole
world  appears  to  be  a  living  organism.*

(5)  The  Universe  was  evolved  out  of  its  ideal  plan,  upheld  through
Eternity  in  the  Unconsciousness  of  that  which  the  Vedantins  call
Parabrahman.  This  is  practically  identical  with  the  conclusions  of
the  highest  Western  philosophy,  "the  innate,  eternal,  and  self-existing
Ideas"  of  Plato,  now  reflected  by  Von  Hartmann.  The  "Unknow-
able" of  Herbert  Spencer  bears  but  a  faint  resemblance  to  that  trans-
cendental Reality  believed  in  by  Occultists,  often  appearing  merely
a  personification  of  a  "force  behind  phenomena" — an  infinite  and
eternal  Knergy,  from  which  all  things  proceed,  whereas  the  author  of
the  Philosophy  of  the  Unconsciozis  has  come  (in  this  respect  only)  as
near  to  a  solution  of  the  great  Mystery  as  mortal  man  can.  Few
have  been  those,  whether  in  ancient  or  mediaeval  philosophy,  who  have
dared  to  approach  the  subject  or  even  hint  at  it.  Paracelsus  mentions
it  inferentially,  and  his  ideas  are  admirably  synthesized  by  Dr.  F.
Hartmann,  F.T.S.,  in  his  Paracelstis,  from  which  we  have  just  quoted.

All  the  Christian  Kabalists  understood  well  the  Eastern  root  idea.
The  active  Power,  the  "  Perpetual  Motion  of  the  great  Breath,"  only
awakens  Cosmos  at  the  dawn  of  every  new  Period,  setting  it  into
motion  by  means  of  the  two  contrary  Forces,  the  centripetal  and  the
centrifugal  Forces,  which  are  male  and  female,  positive  and  negative,
physical  and  spiritual,  the  two  being  the  one  Primordial  Force,  and
thus  causing  it  to  become  objective  on  the  plane  of  Illusion.  In  other
words,  that  dual  motion  transfers  Cosmos  from  the  plane  of  the  Eternal

*  Paracelsus,  Franz  Hartmann,  M.D.,  p.  44.


THE  YLIASTER  OF  PARACELSUS.  303

Ideal  into  that  of  finite  manifestation,  or  from  the  7ioumcnal  to  the
phenomenal  plane.     Ever>'thing  that  is,  was,  and  wi//  be,  eternallj^  is,
even  the  countless  Forms,  which  are  finite  and  perishable  only  in  their
objective,  but  not  in  their  ideal  form.     They  existed  as  Ideas,  in  the
Eternity,  and,  when  they  pass   away,  will   exist  as   reflections.      Oc-
cultism teaches   that   no  form   can   be   given   to   anything,    either  by
Nature   or  by  man,  whose   ideal   type   does  not  already  exist  on  the
subjective  plane:  more  than  this;  that  no  form  or  shape  can  possibly
enter  man's  consciousness,  or   evolve  in  his  imagination,  which  does
not   exist   in   prototype,    at   least   as  an   approximation.     Neither   the
form  of  man,  nor  that  of  any  animal,  plant  or  stone,  has  ever  been
"created";    and  it  is   only  on  this  plane   of  ours  that   it   commenced
"becoming,"  that  is  to  say,  objectivizing  into  its  present  materiality,
or   expanding  from   within  otitwards,  from   the   most   sublimated  and
supersensuous   essence   into   its   grossest  appearance.      Therefore   oia-
human  forms  have  existed  in  the  Eternity  as  astral  or  ethereal  proto-
types;   according  to   which   models,    the   Spiritual   Beings,    or   Gods,
whose  duty  it  was  to  bring  them  into  objective  being  and  terrestrial
life,  evolved  the  protoplasmic  forms  of  the  future  Egos  from  their  own
essence.     After  which,  when  this  human  Upadhi,  or  basic  mould,  was
ready,  the  natural  terrestrial  Forces  began   to  work  on   these  super-
sensuous  moulds,  which  contained,  besides  their  own,  the  ele77ients  of  all  the
past  vegetable  and  future  animal  forms  of  this  Globe.     Therefore,  man's
outward  shell  passed  through  every  vegetable  and  animal  body,  before
it  assumed  the  human  shape.     But  as  this  will  be  fully  described  in
Volume  II,  in  the  Commentaries,  there  is  no  need  to  say  more  of  it
here.

According  to  the  Hermetico-Kabalistic  philosophy  of  Paracelsus,  it
is  Yliaster— the  ancestor  of  the  just-born  Protyle,  introduced  by  Mr.
Crookes  into  Chemistiy— or  primordial  Protomateria,  that  evolved  out
of  itself  the  Cosmos.

When  creation  [evolution]  took  place,  the  Yliaster  divided  itself;  it,  so  to  say,
melted  and  dissolved,  developed  out  of  [from  within]  itself  the  Ideos  or  Chaos
(Mysterium  Magnum,  Iliados,  Limbus  Major,  or  Primordial  Matter).  This  Primor-
dial Essence  is  of  a  monistic  nature,  and  manifests  itself  not  only  as  vital  activity,
a  spiritual  force,  an  invisible,  incomprehensible,  and  indescribable  power,  but  also
as  vital  matter  of  which  the  substance  of  living  beings  consists.     In  this  Limbus  or

Ideos  of  primordial  matter, the  only  matrix  of  all  created  things,  the

substance  of  all  things  is  contained.     It  is  described  by  the  ancients  as  the  Chaos
...    out  of  which  the  Macrocosmos,  and  afterwards,  by  division  and  evolution  in


304  THE    SECRET   DOCTRINE.

Hysteria  Specialia,*  each  separate  being  came  into  existence.     All  things  and  all
elementary  substances  were  contained  in  it  itt  potentid  but  not  in  actu.i

This  makes  the  translator,  Dr.  F.  Hartmann,  justly  observe  that  "it
seems  that  Paracelsus  anticipated  the  modern  discovery  of  the  'potenc}^
of  matter'  three  hundred  years  ago."

The  Magnus  lyimbus,  then,  or  Yliaster,  of  Paracelsus  is  simply  our
old  friend  "Father- Mother,"  within,  before  it  appeared  in  Space.  It  is
the  Universal  Matrix  of  Kosmos,  personified  in  the  dual  character  of
Macrocosm  and  Microcosm,  or  the  Universe  and  our  Globe, |  by  Aditi-
Prakriti,  spiritual  and  physical  Nature.  For  we  find  it  explained  in
Paracelsus  that:

The  Magnus  Limbus  is  the  nursery  out  of  which  all  creatures  have  grown,  in  the
same  sense  as  a  tree  may  grow  out  of  a  small  seed;  with  the  difference,  however,
that  the  great  Limbus  takes  its  origin  from  the  Word  of  God,  while  the  Limbus
minor  (the  terrestrial  seed  or  sperm)  takes  it  from  the  earth.  The  great  Limbus  is
the  seed  out  of  which  all  beings  have  come,  and  the  little  Limbus  is  each  ultimate
being  that  reproduces  its  form,  and  that  has  itself  been  produced  by  the  great.
The  little  Limbus  possesses  all  the  qualifications  of  the  great  one,  in  the  same
sense  as  a  son  has  an  organization  similar  to  that  of  his  father.  .  .  .  As  .  .  .
Yliaster  dissolved.  Ares,  the  dividing,  differentiating,  and  individualizing  power
[Fohat,  another  old  friend]  .  .  .  began  to  act.  All  production  took  place  in
consequence  of  separation.  There  were  produced  out  of  the  Ideos  the  elements  of
Fire,  Water,  Air  and  Earth,  whose  birth,  however,  did  not  take  place  in  a  material
mode,  or  by  simple  separation,  but  spiritually  and  dynamically  [not  even  by  com-
plex combinations — e.g.,  mechanical  mixture  as  opposed  to  chemical  combina-
tion], just  as  fire  may  come  out  of  a  pebble,  or  a  tree  out  of  a  seed,  although  there
is  originally  no  fire  in  the  pebble,  nor  a  tree  in  the  seed.  "Spirit  is  living,  and
Life  is  Spirit,  and  Life  and  Spirit  [Prakriti,  Purusha  (?)]  produce  all  things,  but  they
are  essentially  one  and  not  two."  .  .  .  The  elements,  too,  have  each  one  its
own  Yliaster,  because  all  the  activity  of  matter  in  every  form  is  only  an  effluvium
of  the  same  fountain.  But  as  from  the  seed  grow  the  roots  with  their  fibres,  after-
wards the  stalk  with  its  branches  and  leaves,  and  lastly  the  flowers  and  seeds;
likewise  all  beings  were  born  from  the  elements,  and  consist  of  elementary  sub-
stances out  of  which  other  forms  may  come  into  existence,  bearing  the  characteris-
tics of  their  parents.  §     The  elements  as  the  mothers  of  all  creatures  are  of  an

•  This  word  is  explained  by  Dr.  Hartmann,  from  the  original  texts  of  Paracelsus  before  him,  as
follows.  According  to  this  great  Rosicrucian;  "Mysterium  is  everything  out  of  which  something
may  be  developed,  which  is  only  germinally  contained  in  it.  A  seed  is  the  '  Mysterium '  of  a  plant,
an  egg  that  of  a  living  bird,  etc."

t  Op.  cit.,  pp.  41,  42.

%  It  is  only  the  mediaeval  Kabalists  who,  following  the  Jewish  and  one  or  two  Neo-Platonists,
applied  the  term  Microcosm  to  man.  Ancient  philosophy  called  the  Earth  the  Microcosm  of  the
Macrocosm,  and  man  the  outcome  of  the  two.

\  "This  doctrine,  preached  300  years  ago,"  remarks  the  translator,  "is  identical  with  the  one  that
has  revolutionized  modern  thought,  after  having  been  put  into  new  shape  and  elaborated  by  Darwin.
It  is  still  more  elaborated  by  Kapila  in  the  Sankhya  philosophy."


HERMES  CHRISTIANIZED.  305

invisible,  spiritual  nature,  and  have  souls.*    They  all  spring  from  the  Mysterium
Magnum.

Compare  this  with  Vishmi  Purdna.

From  Pradhana  [Primordial  Substance]  presided  over  by  Kshetrajna  ["embodied
spirit"  (?)]  proceeds  the  unequal  development  [Evolution]  of  those  qualities.  .  .  .
From  the  gi-eat  principle  (Mahat)  [Universal]  Intellect  [or  Mind]  ...  is  pro-
duced the  origin  of  the  subtle  elements  and  of  the  organs  of  sense. t    .     .     .

Thus  it  may  be  shown  that  all  the  fundamental  truths  of  Nature
were  universal  in  antiquity,  and  that  the  basic  ideas  upon  Spirit,
Matter  and  the  Universe,  or  upon  God,  Substance  and  Man,  were
identical.  Taking  the  two  most  ancient  religious  philosophies  on  the
globe,  Hindiiism  and  Hermeticism,  from  the  Scriptures  of  India  and
Egypt,  the  identity  of  the  two  is  easily  recognizable.

This  becomes  apparent  to  one  who  reads  the  latest  translation  and
rendering  of  the  "Hermetic  Fragments"  just  mentioned,  by  our  late
lamented  friend.  Dr.  Anna  Kingsford.  Disfigured  and  tortured  as
these  have  been  in  their  passage  through  sectarian  Greek  and  Christian
hands,  the  translator  has  most  ably  and  intuitionally  seized  the  weak
points  and  tried  to  remedy  them  by  means  of  explanations  and  foot-
notes.    She  says:

The  creation  of  the  visible  world  by  the  "working  gods"  or  Titans,  as  agents  of
the  Supreme  God,  J  is  a  thoroughly  Hermetic  idea,  recognizable  in  all  religious
systems,  and  in  accordance  with  modern  scientific  research  [.?],  which  shows  us
everywhere  the  Divine  Power  operating  through  natural  Forces.

To  quote  from  the  translation  :

That  Universal  Being,  that  contains  all,  and  which  is  all,  puts  into  motion  the  soul
and  the  world,  all  that  nature  comprises.  In  the  manifold  unity  of  universal  life,
the  innumerable  individualities  distinguished  by  their  variations  are,  nevertheless,
united  in  such  a  manner  that  the  whole  is  one,  and  that  everything  proceeds  from
Unity.  §

And  again  from  another  translation:

God  is  not  a  mind,  but  the  cause  that  the  Mind  is;  not  a  spirit,  but  the  cause
that  the  Spirit  is;  not  light,  but  the  cause  that  the  Light  is.||

The   above   shows   plainly   that   the    "Divine   Pymander,"    however

•  The  Eastern  Occultist  says  that  they  are  guided  aud  infonned  by  Spiritual  Beings,  the  Work-
men in  the  invisible  Worlds,  and  behind  the  veil  of  Occult  Nature,  or  Nature  in  abscotidito.

+  Wilson,  I.  ii.,  (Vol.  I.  35).

t  A  frequent  expression  in  the  said  "  Fragments,"  to  which  we  take  exception.  The  Universal
Mind  is  not  a  Being  or  "God."

}  The  Virgin  of  Che  IVorld,  p.  47.     "Asclepios,"  Pt.  I.

II  Divine  Pymander,  ix.  64.  ^


306  THEJ  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

much  distorted  in  some  passages  by  Christian  "smoothing,"  was  never-
theless written  by  a  philosopher,  while  most  of  the  so-called  "Hermetic
Fragments"  are  the  production  of  sectarian  pagans  with  a  tendency
towards  an  anthropomorphic  Supreme  Being.  Yet  both  are  the  echo
of  the  Esoteric  Philosophy  and  the  Hindu  Puranas.

Compare  two  invocations,  one  to  the  Hermetic  "Supreme  All,"  the
other  to  the  "Supreme  All"  of  the  later  Aryans.  Says  a  Hermetic
Vragment  cited  by  Suidas  :

1  adjure  thee,  Heaven,  holy  work  of  the  great  God;  I  adjure  thee.  Voice  of  the
Father,  uttered  in  the  beginning  when  the  universal  world  was  framed;  I  adjure
thee  by  the  Word,  only  Son  of  the  Father  Who  upholds  all  things;  be  favourable,
be  favourable.*

This  is  preceded  by  the  following:

Thus  the  Ideal  Light  was  before  the  Ideal  Light,  and  the  luminous  Intelligence
of  Intelligence  was  always,  and  Us  unity  was  nothing  else  than  the  Spirit  envelop-
ing the  Universe.  Out  of  Whom  [  Which']  is  neither  God  nor  Angels,  nor  any  other
essentials,  for  He  [It]  is  the  Lord  of  all  things  and  the  Power  and  the  Light;  and  all
depends  on  Him  [It]  and  is  in  Him  [It].

A  passage  contradicted  by  the  very  same  Trismegistus,  who  is  made
to  say:

To  speak  of  God  is  impossible.  For  the  corporeal  cannot  express  the  incorpo-
real  That  which  has  not  any  body  nor  appearance,  nor  form,  nor  matter,

cannot  be  apprehended  by  sense.  I  understand,  Tatios,  I  understand,  that  which
it  is  impossible  to  define — that  is  God.t

The  contradiction  between  the  two  passages  is  evident;  and  this
shows  (a)  that  Hermes  was  a  generic  nam  de  plume  used  by  a  series  of
generations  of  Mystics  of  every  shade,  and  {b)  that  great  discernment
has  to  be  used  before  accepting  a  Fragment  as  esoteric  teaching  only
because  it  is  undeniably  ancient.  Let  us  now  compare  the  above  with
a  like  invocation  in  the  Hindu  Scriptures — undoubtedly  as  old,  if  not
far  older.  Here  it  is.  Parashara,  the  Aryan  "Hermes,"  instructs
Maitreya,  the  Indian  Asclepios,  and  calls  upon  Vishnu  in  his  triple
hypostasis :

Glory  to  the  unchangeable,  holy,  eternal,  supreme  Vishnu,  of  one  universal
nature,  the  mighty  over  all;  to  him  who  is  Hiranyagarbha,  Hari,  and  Shankara
[Brahma,  Vishnu,  and  Shiva],  the  creator,  the  pi-eserver,  and  destroyer  of  the  world;
to  VSsudeva,  the  liberator  (of  his  worshippers);  to  him  whose  essence  is  both  single
and  manifold ;  who  is  both  subtile  and  corporeal,  indiscrete  and  discrete ;  to  Vishnu,

•  The  Virgin  of  the  World,  p.  153.

t  Op.  cit.,  pp.  139,  140.    Fragments  from  the  "Physical  Eclogues"  and  "Florilegium"  of  Stobasus.


THE  ETERNAI,  AI^ONE   IS  REAL.       '  307

the  cause  of  final  emancipation.  Glory  to  the  supreme  Vishnu,  the  cause  of  the
creation,  existence,  the  end  of  this  world;  who  is  the  root  of  the  world,  and  who
consists  of  the  world.*

This  is  a  grand  invocation,  with  a  deep  philosophical  meaning  under-
lying it;  but,  for  the  profane  masses,  as  suggestive  as  is  the  Hermetic
prayer  of  an  anthropomorphic  Being.  We  must  respect  the  feeling
that  dictated  both;  but  we  cannot  help  finding  it  in  full  disharmony
with  its  inner  meaning,  even  with  that  which  is  found  in  the  same
Hermetic  treatise  where  it  is  said:

Trisniegistus :  Reality  is  not  upon  the  earth,  my  son,  and  it  cannot  be  thereon.
.  .  .  Nothing  on  earth  is  real,  there  are  only  appearances.  .  .  He  [man]  is  not
real,  my  son,  as  man.  The  real  consists  solely  in  itself  and  remains  what  it  is.
.  .  Man  is  transient,  therefore  he  is  not  real,  he  is  but  appearance,  and  appear-
ance is  the  supreme  illusion.

Tatios :  Then  the  celestial  bodies  themselves  are  not  real,  my  father,  since  they
also  vary.'

Trismegisius :  That  which  is  subject  to  birth  and  to  change  is  not  real

there  is  in  them  a  certain  falsity,  seeing  that  they  too  are  variable

Tatios :  And  what  then  is  the  primordial  Reality,  O  my  Father?

Trismegisius:  He  Who  [That  Which]  is  one  and  alone,  O  Tatios;  He  Who  [That
Which]  is  not  made  of  matter,  nor  in  any  body.  Who  [Wliich]  has  neither  colour
nor  form,  Who  [Which]  changes  not  nor  is  transmitted,  but  Who  [Wliich]  always
Is.t

This  is  quite  consistent  with  the  Vedantic  teaching.  The  leading
thought  is  Occult ;  and  many  are  the  passages  in  the  Hermetic  Frag-
ments that  belong  bodily  to  the  Secret  Doctrine.

This  Doctrine  teaches  that  the  whole  Universe  is  ruled  by  intelligent
and  semi-intelligent  Forces  and  Powers,  as  stated  from  the  very  be-
ginning. Christian  Theology  admits  and  even  enforces  belief  in  such,
but  makes  an  arbitrary  division  and  refers  to  them  as  "Angels"  and
"Devils."  Science  denies  the  existence  of  both,  and  ridicules  the  very
idea.  Spiritualists  believe  in  the  "Spirits  of  the  Dead,"  and  outside
these  deny  entirely  any  other  kind  or  class  of  invisible  beings.  The
Occultists  and  Kabalists  are  thus  the  only  rational  expounders  of  the
ancient  traditions,  which  have  now  culminated  in  dogmatic  faith  on
the  one  hand,  and  dogmatic  denial  on  the  other.  For  both  belief  and
unbelief  each  embrace  but  one  small  corner  of  the  infinite  horizons  of
spiritual  and  physical  manifestations :  and  thus  both  are  right  from
their  respective  standpoints,  yet  both  are  wrong  in  believing  that
they  can  circumscribe  the  whole  within  their  own  special  and  narrow

•  Vishnu  Pur&na,  I.  ii,  Wilson,  I.  13-15.  +  Op.  cit.,  pp.  135-138.


2o8  "  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

barriers,  for— they  can  never  do  so.  In  this  respect,  Science,  Theology,
and  even  Spiritualism  show  little  more  wisdom  than  the  ostrich,  when
it  hides  its  head  in  the  sand  at  its  feet,  feeling  sure  that  there  can  be
thus  nothing  beyond  its  own  point  of  observation  and  the  limited  area
occupied  by  its  foolish  head.

As  the  only  works  now  extant  upon  the  subject  under  consideration,
within  reach  of  the  profane  of  the  Western  "civilized"  races,  are  the
above-mentioned  Hermetic  Books,  or  rather  Hermetic  Fragments,  we
may  contrast  them  in  the  present  case  with  the  teachings  of  Esoteric
Philosophy.     To  quote  for  this  purpose  from  any  other  would  be  use-
less, since  the  public  knows   nothing  of  the  Chaldean  works,  which
are  translated  into  Arabic  and  preserved  by  some  Sufi  Initiates.     There-
fore the  "  Definitions  of  Asclepios,"  as  lately  compiled  and  glossed  by
Dr.  Anna  Kingsford,  F.T.S.,  some  of  which  sayings  are  in  remarkable
agreement  with  the  Eastern  Esoteric  Doctrine,  have  to  be  resorted  to
for  comparison.    Though  not  a  few  passages  bear  a  strong  impression
of  some  later  Christian  hand,  yet  on  the  whole  the  characteristics  of
the  Genii  and  Gods  are  those  of  Eastern  teachings,  although  concern-
ing other  things  there  are  passages  which  differ  widely  in  our  doctrines.
As  to  the  Genii,  the  Hermetic  philosophers  called  Theoi  (Gods),  Genii
and  Daimones,  those  Entities  whom  we  call  Devas  (Gods),  Dhyan  Cho-
hans,  Chitkala  (the  Kwan-Yin,  of  the  Buddhists),  and  various  other
names.     The  Daimones   are— in  the   Socratic  sense,  and  even   in   the
Oriental   and    Eatin   theological    sense— the    guardian    spirits    of   the
human  race;  "those  who  dwell  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  immor-
tals, and  thence  watch  over  human  affairs,"   as   Hermes   has  it.     In
Esoteric  parlance,  they  are  called  Chitkala,  some  of  which  are  those
who   have   furnished   man   wdth  his  fourth  and   fifth  Principles  from
their  own   essence,  and  others  the  so-called  Pitris.     This  will  be  ex-
plained when  we  come  to  the  production  of  the  complete  ma^i.     The
root  of  the  name  is  Chit,  "that  by  which  the  consequences  of  acts  and
species  of  knowledge  are  selected  for  the  use  of  the  soul,"   or  con-
science, the  inner  voice  in  man.     With  the  Yogins,  Chit  is  a  synonym
of  Mah'at,  the  first  and  divine  Intellect;  but  in  Esoteric  Philosophy'
Mahat  is 'the  root  of  Chit,  its  germ;  and  Chit  is  a  quality  of  Manas
in  conjunction  with  Buddhi,  a  quality  that  attracts  to  itself  by  spiritual
afl&nity  a  Chitkala,  when  it  develops  sufi&ciently  in  man.     This  is  why
it  is  said  that  Chit  is  a  voice  acquiring    mystic  life  and  becoming
Kwan-Yin.


A   FEW  OCCULT  APHORISMS.  309

EXTRACTS  FROM  AN   EASTERN   PRIVATE   COMMENTARY,    HITHERTO

SECRET.*

xvii.  The  Initial  Existence,  in  the  first  Twilight  of  the  Mahdfnanvan-
tara  [after  the  Mahdpralaya  that  follows  every  Age  of  Brahma\,  is  a  CON-
SCIOUS Spiritual  Quality.  In  the  Manifested  Worlds  [Solar  Systems'],
it  is,  in  its  Objective  Subjectivity,  like  the  film  front  a  Divine  Breath  to  the
gaze  of  the  entranced  seer.  It  spreads  as  it  issues  from  Laya\  throtcghout
Infinity  as  a  colourless  spiritual  fluid.  It  is  on  the  Seve7ith  Pla7ie,  and  in
its  Seventh  State,  in  our  Planetary  World.%

xviii.  It  is  Substance  to  OUR  spiritual  sight.  It  cannot  be  called  so  by
men  in  their  Waking  State;  therefore  they  have  named  it  in  their  ignorance
"  God-Spirit."

xix.  //  exists  everywhere  and  forms  the  first  Upddhi  [Foundation']^  on
which  our  World  [Solar  System^  is  built.  Outside  the  latter,  it  is  to  be
found  in  its  pristine  purity  only  between  [the  Solar  Systems  or']  the  Stars
of  the  Universe,  the  Worlds  already  formed  or  formi7ig;  those  in  Laya
resting  meanwhile  in  its  bosom,.  As  its  substa^ice  is  of  a  differ-ent  kind
from  that  known  on  Earth,  the  inhabitants  of  the  latter,  seeiyig  Through
IT,  believe  in  their  illusion  and  ignorance  that  it  is  empty  space.  There  is
7iot  07ie  finger's  breadth  [a7igula]  of  void  Space  in  the  whole  Boundless
[Universe].     .     .

XX.  Matter  or  Substa7ice  is  septe7iary  within  our  World,  as  it  is  so
beyo7id  it.  Moreova\  each  of  its  states  or  principles  is  g7'aduatcd  i7ito  seven
degrees  of  density.  Surya  [the  Sun],  m  its  visible  reflection,  exhibits  the
first  or  lowest  state  of  the  seventh,  the  highest  state  of  the  U7iiv€rsal
Presence,  the  pure  of  the  pure,  the  first  manifested  Breath  of  the  Ever-
Unma7iifested  Sat  [Be-ness].  All  the  central  physical  or  objective  Siins
are  i7i  their  substa7ice  the  lowest  state  of  the  first  pri7iciple  of  the  B7'eath.
Nor  are  any  of  these  a7iy  more  tha7i  the  Reflectio7is  of  their  Pri77iaries,  which
are  concealed  from  the  gaze  of  all  but  the  Dhyd7i  Chohans,  whose  corporeal
substance  belongs  to  the  fifth  divisio7i  of  the  seve7ith  p7'inciple  of  the  Mother-
Substance,  a7td  is,  therefore,  four  degrees  higher  than  the  solar  reflected  sub-
sta7ice.  As  there  are  seven  Dhdtu  [principal  siibstances  iji  the  human
body],  so  there  are  seven  Forces  i7i  Man  a7id  i7i  all  Nature.

xxi.     The  real  substance  of  the  Concealed  [Sun]  is  a  nucleus  of  Mother-

•  This  teaching  does  not  refer  to  Prakriti-Purusha  beyond  the  boundaries  of  our  small  universe,
t  The  ultimate  quiescent  state;  the  Nir\'anic  condition  of  the  Seventh  Principle.
X  The  teaching  is  all  given  from  our  plane  of  consciousness.


3IO  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

Substajice*  It  is  the  Heart  and  Matrix  of  all  the  liviyig  and  existing
Forces  in  otir  Solar  U?iiverse.  It  is  the  Kernel  from  which  proceed  to
spread  on  their  cyclic  journeys  all  the  Powers  that  set  in  actiofi  the  Atoms,
iJi  their  functioiial  duties,  and  the  Focus  within  which  they  again  meet  in
their  Seventh  Esse7ice  every  eleventh  year.  He  who  tells  thee  he  has  seen
the  Sun,  laugh  at  him,\  as  if  he  had  said  that  the  Sun  moves  really  onward
in  his  diurnal  path.     .     .     .

xxiii.  //  is  on  account  of  his  septenary  nattire,  that  the  Sun  is  spoken
of  by  the  ancients  as  one  who  is  driven  by  seven  horses  equal  to  the  m,etres
of  the  Vedas;  or,  again,  that,  though  he  is  identified  with  the  seven  Gana
[^Classes  of  Being'\  in  his  orb,  he  is  distinct  from  them,\  as  he  is,  indeed;  as
also  that  he  has  Seven  Rays,  as  indeed  he  has.     .     .     .

XXV.     The  Seven  Beings  in  the  Sun  are  the  Seveyi  Holy  Ones,  self-born

from  the  inherent  poiver  i7i  the  Matrix  of  Mother-Substance.     It  is  they  who

send  the  seven  principal  Forces,  called  Rays,   which  at  the  beginning  of

Pralaya  will  centre  into  seven  new  Suns  for  the  next  Manvantara.     The

■  energy,  from  which  they  spring  into  conscious  existe^ice  in  every  Sun,  is  what

some  people  call  Vishnu,  which  is  the  Breath  of  the  AbsoIvUTEness.

We  call  it  the  One  Maiiifested  Life — itself  a  reflection  of  the  Absolute.    .    .

xxvii.  The  latter  must  never  be  mentioned  in  words  or  speech,  LEST
IT  SHOULD  TAKE  AWAY  SOME  OF  OUR  SPIRITUAL  ENERGIES  that  aspire
towards  ITS  state,  gravitatiyig  ever  omvard  unto  IT  spiritually,  as  the
whole  physical  tiniverse  gravitates  towards  ITS  -manifested  centre — cosmically.

xxviii.  Theforfner — the  Initial  Existence — which  may  be  called,  while  in
this  state  of  being,  the  One  I^ife,  is,  as  explained,  a  Film  for  creative  or
formative  pttrposes.  It  manifests  in  seven  states,  which,  with  their  septenary
sub-divisio7is,  are  the  Forty-nine  Fires  mentio7icd  i7i  sacred  books.     .     .     .

xxix.  The  first  is  the  ....  "J/oM^r"  [/"r/V^a  Materia].  Sepa-
rating itself  i7ito  its  pri7nary  seven  states,  it  proceeds  down  cyclically;  whe7i
having  co7isolidated  itself  in  its  LAST  principle,  as  GROSS  MATTER, §  it
revolves  aroimd  itself  and  informs,  zvith  the  seve7ith  emanatio7i  of  the  last,
the  first  and  the  lowest  ele77ient  \_the  serpe7it  biti7ig  its  own  tail\  In  a
Hierarchy,  or  Order  of  Being,  the  seventh  emanation  of  her  last  principle  is:

*  Or  the  "dream  of  Science,"  the  primeval  really  homogeneous  matter,  which  no  mortal  can  make
objective  in  this  Race,  or  Round  either.

t  "  Vishnu,  in  the  form  of  his  active  energy,  neither  ever  rises  nor  sets,  and  is  at  once,  the  seven-
fold sun  and  distinct  from  it,"  says  Vishnu  Piirdna,  II.  xi.,  (Wilson,  II.  296).

t  "  In  the  same  manner  as  a  man  approaching  a  mirror  placed  upon  a  stand,  beholds  in  it  his  own

image,  so  the  energy  (or  reflection)  of  Vishnu  [the  Sun]  is  never  disjoined  but  remains

in  the  Sun  (as  in  a  mirror),  that  is  there  stationed."  (Ibid.,  loc.  cit.)

?  Compare  the  Hermetic  "Nature"  "going  down  cyclically  into  matter  when  she  meets  the
'  Heavenly  Man '."


OCCULT   APHORISMS.  3II

fa)  In  the  Miricral,  the  Spark  that  lies  latent  in  it,  and  is  called  to
its   eva7iescent   being  by   the    Positive  azvakefiiyig  the  Negative    \_a?id    so
forth']

(b)  In  the  Plant,  it  is  that  vital  ajid  intelligent  Force  which  informs  the
seed  and  develops  it  i?ito  the  blade  of  grass,  or  the  root  and  sapling.  It  is
the  germ  which  becomes  the  Upadhi  of  the  seven  principles  of  the  thing  it
resides  in,  shooting  them  out  as  the  latter  grows  arid  develops.

(c)  In  every  Animal,  it  does  the  same.  It  is  its  Life- Principle  a7id  vital
pozver;  its  instinct  and  gzialities;  its  characteristics  and  special  idiosyn-
crasies.    .     .     .

fdj  To  Ma7i,  it  gives  all  that  it  bestows  on  all  the  rest  of  the  manifested
U7iits  i7i  Nature;  but  develops,  further7nore,  the  reflection  of  all  its  ''Forty-
nine  Fires"  in  him.  Each  of  his  seve7i  principles  is  an  heir  in  full  to,  and
a  partaker  of,  the  seven  principles  of  the  ''Great  Mother."  The  breath  of
her  first  principle  is  his  Spirit  S^At77ia\.  Her  second  principle  is  Buddhi
\_Sour\.  We  call  it,  erroneously,  the  seventh.  The  third  fur7iishes  hi77i
with  the  Brai7i  Stuff  07i  the  physical  plane,  and  with  the  Mind  that  moves
it  [which  is  the  Hianan  Soul. — H.  P.  B.] — according  to  his  orga7iic  capaci-
ties.

fej  It  is  the  guidi7ig  Force  i7i  the  cos77iic  and  terrestrial  Ele7nents.  It
resides  in  the  Fire  provoked  out  of  its  latent  into  active  being ;  for  the  whole
of  the  seven  sub-divisions  of  the  .  .  .  pri7iciple  reside  i7i  the  terrestrial
Fire.  It  whirls  in  the  breeze,  blows  with  the  htirrica7ie,  a7id  sets  the  air  in
motion,  which  element  participates  in  one  of  its  principles  also.  Proceedi7i<r
cyclically,  it  regulates  the  motio7i  of  the  water,  attracts  and  repels  the  waves,^
according  to  fixed  laws,  of  which  its  seventh  pri7iciple  is  the  i7iforming  soul.

(f)  Its  four  higher  principles  C07itai7i  the  Germ  that  develops  into  the
Cosmic  Gods;  its  three  lower  07ies  breed  the  Lives  of  the  Eleme7its  \_Ele-
me7itals\

(g)  In   our  Solar    World,    the   One  Existence  is  Heave7i   a7id  Earth,
the  Root  a7id  the  Flozvcr,  the  Action  a7id  the  Thought.     It  is  i7i  the  Su7i,
a7id  is  as  present  i7i  the  glow-worm.     Not  a7i  ato7n  ca7i  escape  it.     There-
fore,   the   ancient  Sages    have    wisely  called   it    the    ma7iifestcd    God   i7i
Nature.     .     .     .

It  may  be  interesting,  in  this  connection,  to  remind  the  reader  of  what
T.  Subba  Row  said  of  the  Forces — mysticall}^  defined.


•  The  writers  of  the  above  knew  perfectly  well  the  physical  cause  of  the  tides,  of  the  waves,  etc.
It  is  the  informing  Spirit  of  the  whole  cosmic  solar  body  that  is  meant  here,  and  which  is  referred  to
whenever  such  expressions  ai-e  used  from  the  mj-stic  point  of  view.


o


12  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.


Kanya  [the  sixth  sign  of  the  Zodiac,  or  Virgo]  means  a  virgin,  and  represents
Shakti  or  Mahamaya.  The  sign  in  question  is  the  sixth  Rashi  or  division,  and  in-
dicates that  there  are  six  primary  forces  in  Nature  [synthesized  by  the  Seventh].  .  .

These  Shaktis  stand  as  follows:

(i)  Parashakti. — Literally  the  great  or  supreme  force  or  power.  It  means  and
includes  the  powers  of  light  and  heat.

(2)  Jndnashakti. — Literally  the  power  of  intellect,  of  real  wisdom  or  knowledge.
It  has  two  aspects:

I.  The  following  are  some  of  its  manifestations  when  placed  under  the  influence
or  control  of  ^naterial  conditions,  (a)  The  power  of  the  mind  in  interpreting  our
sensations.  (i^)  Its  power  in  recalling  past  ideas  (memory)  and  raising  future
expectation,  (c)  Its  power  as  exhibited  in  what  are  called  by  modern  psychologists
"the  laws  of  association,"  which  enables  it  to  form  persisting  connections  between
various  groups  of  sensations  and  possibilities  of  sensations,  and  thus  generate  the
notion  or  idea  of  an  external  object,  (d)  Its  power  in  connecting  our  ideas  together
by  the  mysterious  link  of  memory,  and  thus  generating  the  notion  of  self  or  in-
dividuality.

II.  The  following  are  some  of  its  manifestations  when  liberated  from  the  bonds
of  matter:

(a)  Clairvoyance,     (b)  Psychometn,\

(3)  Ichchhdshakti. — Literally  the  poiver  of  the  ivill.  Its  most  ordinary  manifestation
is  the  generation  of  certain  nerve  currents,  which  set  in  motion  such  muscles  as
are  required  for  the  accomplishment  of  the  desired  object.

(4)  Kriydshakti. — The  mysterious  power  of  thought  which  enables  it  to  produce
external,  perceptible,  phenomenal  results  by  its  own  inherent  energy.  The
ancients  held  that  any  idea  will  manifest  itself  externally  if  one's  attention  is  deeply
concentrated  upon  it.  Similarly  an  intense  volition  will  be  followed  by  the  desired
result.

A  Yogi  generally  performs  his  wonders  by  means  of  Ichchhashakti  and  Kriya-
shakti.

(5)  Kundalini  Shakti. — The  power  or  force  which  moves  in  a  serpentine  or  curved
path.  It  is  the  universal  life-principle  which  everywhere  manifests  in  Nature.
This  force  includes  the  two  great  forces  of  attraction  and  repulsion.  Electricity
and  magnetism  are  but  manifestations  of  it.  This  is  the  power  which  brings  about
that  "continuous  adjustment  of  internal  relations  to  external  relations,''''  which  is
the  essence  of  life  according  to  Herbert  Spencer,  and  that  "continuous  adjustment
of  external  relations  to  internal  relatiotis,'"  which  is  the  basis  of  transmigration  of
souls,  Punarjanman  (Re-birth),  in  the  doctrines  of  the  ancient  Hindu  philosophers.

A  Yogi  must  thoroughly  subjugate  this  power  or  force,  before  he  can  attain
Moksha.     .     .     .

(6)  Mantrikdshakti. — Literally  the  force  or  power  of  letters,  speech  or  music.
The  whole  of  the  ancient  Mantra  Shdstra  has  this  force  or  power  in  all  its  mani-
festations for  its  subject  matter The  influence  of  its  music  is  one  of  its

ordinary  manifestations.     The  power  of  the  mirific  inefiFable  name  is  the  crown  of
this  Shakti.


YOGA   POWERS.  313

Modern  Science  has  but  partly  investigated  the  first,  second  and  fifth  of  the
forces  or  powers  above  named,  but  is  altogether  in  the  dark  as  regards  the  remain-
ing powers The  six  forces  are  in  their  unity  represented  by  the  Astral

Light  [Daiviprakriti,  the  seventh,  the  Light  of  the  Logos].*

The  above  is  quoted  to  show  the  real  Hindu  ideas  on  the  subject.
It  is  all  esoteric,  though  not  covering  the  tenth  part  of  what  might  be
said.  For  one  thing,  the  six  names  of  the  six  Forces  mentioned  are
those  of  the  six  Hierarchies  of  Dhyan  Chohans,  synthesized  by  their
Primary,  the  seventh — who  personify  the  Fifth  Principle  of  Cosmic
Nature,  or  of  the  "Mother"  in  its  mystical  sense.  The  enumeration
alone  of  the  Yoga  Powers  would  require  ten  volumes.  Each  of  these
Forces  has  a  living  Conscious  Entity  at  its  head,  of  which  Entity  it  is
an  emanation.

But  let  us  compare  with  the  Commentary  above  cited  the  words  of
Hermes,  the  Thrice  Great:

The  creation  of  life  by  the  sun  is  as  continuous  as  his  light;  nothing  arrests  or
limits  it.  Around  him,  like  an  army  of  satellites,  are  innumerable  choirs  of  Genii.
These  dwell  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  Immortals,  and  thence  watch  over  human
things.  They  fulfil  the  will  of  the  Gods  [Karma]  by  means  of  storms,  tempests,
transitions  of  fire  and  earthquakes ;  likewise  by  famines  and  wars,  for  the  punish-
ment of  impiety,  t    .     .     •

It  is  the  sun  who  preserves  and  nourishes  all  creatures;  and,  even  as  the  Ideal
World,  which  environs  the  sensible  world,  fills  this  last  with  the  plenitude  and
universal  variety  of  forms,  so  also  the  sun,  enfolding  all  in  his  light,  accomplishes
everywhere  the  birth  and  development  of  creatures.  ..."  Under  his  orders  is
the  choir  of  the  Genii,  or  rather  the  choirs,  for  there  are  many  and  diverse,  and
their  number  corresponds  to  that  of  the  stars.  Every  star  has  its  Genii,  good  and
evil  by  nature,  or  rather  by  their  operation,  for  operation  is  the  essence  of  the  Genii.
.  .  .  All  these  G^nii  preside  over  mundane  affairs,X  they  shake  and  overthrow  the
constitution  of  states  and  of  individuals;  they  imprint  their  likeness  on  our  souls,
they  are  present  in  our  nerves,  our  marrowy  our  veins,  our  arteries,  and  our  vety
brain-substance.  ...  At  the  moment  when  each  of  us  receives  life  and  being,  he
is  taken  in  charge  by  the  Genii  [Elementals]  who  preside  over  births,  j  and  who  are


*  Five  Years  of  Theosophy,  pp.  no,  in,  art.,  "The  Twelve  Signs  of  the  Zodiac."

+  See  Stanzas  III  and  IV,  and  the  Commentaries  thereupon,  and  especially  compare  the  comments
on  Stanza  IV,  concerning  the  Lipika  and  the  four  Maharajahs,  the  agents  of  Karma.

X  And  "Gods"  or  Dhyanis,  too,  not  only  the  Genii  or  "guided  Forces."

\  The  meaning  of  this  is  that  as  man  is  composed  of  all  the  Great  Elements— Fire,  Air,  Water,
Earth  and  Ether— the  Elementals  which  respectively  belong  to  these  Elements  feel  attracted  to  man
by  reason  of  their  coessence.  That  Element  which  predominates  in  a  certain  constitution  will  be
the  ruling  Element  throughout  life.  For  instance,  if  man  has  a  preponderance  of  the  earthly,
gnomic  Element,  the  Gnomes  will  lead  him  towards  assimilating  metals— money  and  wealth,  and  so
on.  "  Animal  man  is  the  son  of  the  animal  elements  out  of  which  his  Soul  [Hfe]  was  bom,  and
animals  are  the  mirrors  of  man,"  says  Paracelsus.  {De  Fundamento  SapienlieE.)  Paracelsus  was
cautious,  and  wanted  the  Bible  to  agree  with  what  he  said,  and  therefore  did  not  say  all.


314  'THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

classed  beneath  the  astral  powers  [superhuman  astral  Spirits].  Perpetually  they
change,  not  always  identically,  but  revolving  in  circles.*  They  permeate  by  the
body  two  parts  of  the  soul,  that  it  may  receive  from  each  the  impress  of  his  own
energy.  But  the  reasonable  part  of  the  soul  is  not  subject  to  the  Genii;  it  is
designed  for  the  reception  of  [the]  God,t  who  enlightens  it  with  a  sunny  ray.
Those  who  are  thus  illumined  are  few  in  number,  and  from  them  the  Genii  abstain :
for  neither  Genii  nor  Gods  have  any  power  in  the  presence  of  a  single  ray  of  God.  J
But  all  other  men,  both  soul  and  body,  are  directed  by  Genii,  to  whom  they  cleave,

and  whose  operations  they  aflfect The  Genii  have  then  the  control

of  mundane  things  and  our  bodies  serve  them  as  instruments.  §

The  above,  save  a  few  sectarian  points,  represents  that  which  was  a
universal  belief,  common  to  all  nations,  till  about  a  century  or  so  back.
It  is  still  as  orthodox  in  its  broad  outlines  and  features  among  Pagans
and  Christians  alike,  if  one  excepts  a  handful  of  Materialists  and  men
of  Science.

For  whether  one  calls  the  Genii  of  Hermes  and  his  "Gods,"  "Powers
of  Darkness"  and  "Angels,"  as  in  the  Greek  and  I,atin  Churches;  or
"Spirits  of  the  Dead,"  as  in  Spiritualism;  or,  again,  Bhuts  and  Devas,
Shaitan  or  Djin,  as  they  are  still  called  in  India  and  Mussulman  coun-
tries— they  are  all  one  and  the  same  thing— Ihi^vsiQ-N.  I^et  not  this,
however,  be  misunderstood  in  the  sense  into  which  the  great  philo-
sophical doctrine  of  the  Vedantists  has  been  lately  perverted  by
Western  schools.

All  that  which  is,  emanates  from  the  Absolute,  which,  by  reason  of
this  qualification  alone,  stands  as  the  One  and  Only  Reality — hence,
everything  extraneous  to  this  Absolute,  the  generative  and  causative
Element,  mtcst  be  an  Illusion,  most  undeniably.  But  this  is  only  so
from  the  purely  metaphysical  view.  A  man  who  regards  himself  as
mentally  sane,  and  is  so  regarded  by  his  neighbours,  calls  the  visions
of  an  insane  brother — hallucinations  which  make  the  victim  either
happy  or  siipremely  wretched,  as  the  case  may  be — likewise  illusions  and
fancies.  But,  where  is  that  madman  for  whom  the  hideous  shadows
in  his  deranged  mind,  his  illusio7is,  are  not,  for  the  time  being,  as
actual  and  as  real  as  the  things  which  his  physician  or  keeper  may  see?


*  Cyclic  progress  in  development.

t  The  God  in  man  and  often  the  incarnation  of  a  God,  a  highly  Spiritual  Dhyan  Chohan  in  him,
besides  the  presence  of  his  own  Seventh  Principle.

J  Now,  what  "God"  is  meant  here?  Not  God  the  "Father,"  the  anthropomorphic  fiction;  for  that
God  is  the  Elohim  collectively,  and  has  no  being  apart  from  the  Host.  Besides,  such  a  God  is  finite
and  imperfect.  It  is  the  high  Initiates  and  Adepts  who  are  meant  here  by  the  "few  in  number."
And  it  is  precisely  such  men  who  believe  in  "Gods",  and  know  no  "God"  but  one  Universal
unrelated  and  unconditioned  Deity.

}  The  Virgin  of  the  IVorid,  pp.  104-5,  "The  Definitions  of  Asclepios."


AKASHA.  315

Ever>'thing  is  relative  in  this  Universe,  ever5'thing  is  an  Illusion.  But
the  experience  of  any  plane  is  an  actuality  for  the  percipient  being,
whose  consciousness  is  on  that  plane,  though  the  said  experience,
regarded  from  the  purely  metaphysical  standpoint,  may  be  conceived
to  have  no  objective  reality.  But  it  is  not  against  Metaphysicians,  but
against  Physicists  and  Materialists  that  Esoteric  teaching  has  to  fight ;
and  for  these  latter  Vital  Force,  Light,  Sound,  Electricity,  even  to  the
objectively  drawing  force  of  Magnetism,  have  no  objective  being,  and
are  said  to  exist  merely  as  "modes  of  motion,"  "sensations  and  affec-
tions of  matter."

Neither  the  Occultists  generally,  nor  the  Theosophists,  reject,  as
erroneously  believed  by  some,  the  views  and  theories  of  the  Modern
Scientists  only  because  these  views  are  opposed  to  Theosophy.  The
first  rule  of  our  Society  is  to  render  unto  Caesar  what  is  Caesar's.
Theosophists,  therefore,  are  the  first  to  recognize  the  intrinsic  value
of  Science.  But  when  its  high  priests  resolve  consciousness  into  a
secretion  from  the  grey  matter  of  the  brain,  and  everything  else  in
Nature  into  a  mode  of  motion,  we  protest  against  the  doctrine  as  being
unphilosophical,  self-contradictory,  and  simply  absurd,  from  a  scientific
point  of  view,  as  much  and  even  more  than  from  the  Occult  aspect  of
the  Esoteric  Knowledge.

For  truly  the  Astral  Eight  of  the  derided  Kabalists  has  strange  and
weird  secrets  for  him  who  can  see  in  it;  and  the  mysteries  concealed
wnthin  its  incessantly  disturbed  waves  are  there,  the  whole  body  of
Materialists  and  scofiers  notwithstanding.

The  Astral  Light  of  the  Kabalists  is  by  some  very  incorrectly  trans-
lated "Ether,"  the  latter  is  confused  with  the  hypothetical  Ether  of
Science,  and  both  are  referred  to  by  some  Theosophists  as  synonymous
with  Akasha.     This  is  a  great  mistake.

The  author  of  A  Rational  Refutation  writes,  thus  unconsciously
helping  Occultism :

A  characterization  of  Akasha  will  serve  to  show  how  inadequately  it  is  repre-
sented by  "ether."  In  dimension  it  is  .  .  .  infinite;  it  is  not  made  up  of  parts;
and  colour,  taste,  smell,  and  tangibility  do  not  appertain  to  it.  So  far  forth  it
corresponds  exactly  to  time,  space,  Ishvara  [the  "Lord,"  but  rather  creative  potency
and  soul— Anima  Muudi]  and  soul.  Its  speciality,  as  compared  therewith,  consists
in  its  being  the  material  cause  of  sound.  Except  for  its  being  so,  one  might  take  it
to  be  one  with  vacuity.*

It  is   vacuity,  no   doubt,   especially   for   Rationalists.      At   any  rate

•  p.  120.


2i6  THE    SECRET   DOCTRINE.

Akasha  is  sure  to  produce  vacuity  in  the  brain  of  a  Materialist.
Nevertheless,  though  Akasha  is  certainly  not  the  Ether  of  Science—
not  even  the  Ether  of  the  Occultist  who  defines  the  latter  as  one
of  the  principles  of  Akasha  only— it  is  as  certainly,  together  with
its  primary,  the  cause  of  sound,  a  psychical  and  spiritual,  not  a
material  cause  by  any  means.  The  relations  of  Ether  to  Akasha  may
be  defined  by  applying  to  both  Akasha  and  Ether  the  words  used  of
the  God  in  the  Vedas,  "So  himself  was  indeed  (his  own)  son,"  one
being  the  progeny  of  the  other  and  yet  itself.  This  may  be  a  difficult
riddle  to  the  profane,  but  very  easy  to  understand  for  any  Hindu-
even  though  not  a  Mystic.

These  secrets  of  the  Astral  Eight,  along  with  many  other  mysteries,
will  remain  non-existent  to  the  Materialists  of  our  age,  in  the  same
way  as  America  was  a  non-existent  myth  for  Europeans  during  the
early  part  of  the  mediaeval  ages,  whereas  Scandinavians  and  Norwe-
gians had  actually  reached  and  settled  in  that  very  old  "New  World"
several  centuries  before.     But,  as  a  Columbus  was  born  to  re-discover,
and  to  force  the  Old  World  to  believe  in  antipodal  countries,  so  will
there  be  born  Scientists  who  will  discover  the  marvels  now  claimed  by
Occultists  to  exist  in  the  regions  of  Ether,  with  their  varied  and  multi-
form denizens  and  conscious  Entities.     Then,  noletis  volens.  Science  will
have  to  accept  the  old  "superstition,"  as  it  has  several  others.     And
having  been  once  forced  to  accept  it,  its  learned  professors  in  all  proba-
bility—judging from  past  experience,  as  in  the  case  of  Mesmerism  and
Magnetism,   now  re-baptized  Hypnotism— will   father  the  thing  and
reject  the  name.     The  choice  of  the  new  appellation  will,  in  its  turn,
depend  on  the  "modes  of  motion"— the  new  name  for  the  older  "auto-
matic physical  processes  among  the  nerve   fibrils  of  the   [scientific]
brain"  of  Moleschott— and  also,  most  likely,  upon  the  last  meal  of  the
namer,  since,   according  to   the   founder  of  the   new  Hylo-Idealistic
Scheme,  "cerebration  is  generically  the  same  as  chylification."*    Thus,
were  one  to  believe  this  preposterous  proposition,  the  new  name  of  the
archaic  truth  would  have  to  take  its  chance  on  the  inspiration  of  the
namer's   liver,   and   then  only  would   these  truths   have  a   chance   of
becoming  scientific!

But,  Truth,  however  distasteful  to  the  generally  blind  majority,  has
always  had  her  champions  ready  to  die  for  her,  and  it  is  not  the
Occultists  who  will  protest  against  its  adoption  by  Science  under  what-

*  National  Reformer,  January  9th.  1887.    Article  "  Phreno-Kosmo-Biology,"  by  Dr.  I^ewins.


NOTHING  NEW  UNDER  THE  SUN.  317

ever  new  name.  But  until  absolutely  forced  on  the  notice  and  accep-
tance of  Scientists,  many  an  Occult  truth  will  be  tabooed,  as  the
phenomena  of  the  Spiritualists  and  other  psychic  manifestations  were,
to  be  finally  appropriated  by  its  ex-traducers  without  the  least  acknow-
ledgment or  thanks.  Nitrogen  has  added  considerably  to  chemical
knowledge,  but  its  discoverer,  Paracelsus,  is  to  this  day  called  a
"quack."  How  profoundly  true  are  the  words  of  H.  T.  Buckle,  in  his
admirable  History  of  Civilization,  when  he  says :

Owing  to  circumstances  still  unknown  [Karmic  provision]  there  appear  from  time
to  time  great  thinkers,  who,  devoting  their  lives  to  a  single  purpose,  are  able  to
anticipate  the  progress  of  mankind,  and  to  produce  a  religion  or  a  philosophy  by
which  important  effects  are  eventually  brought  about.  But  if  we  look  into  history
we  shall  clearly  see  that,  although  the  origin  of  a  new  opinion  may  be  thus  due  to
a  single  man,  the  result  which  the  new  opinion  produces  will  depend  on  the  condi-
tion of  the  people  among  whom  it  is  propagated.  If  either  a  religion  or  a  philo-
sophy is  too  much  in  advance  of  a  nation,  it  can  do  no  present  service,  but  must
bide  its  time*  until  the  minds  of  men  are  ripe  for  its  reception.  .  .  .  Every
science,  every  creed  has  had  its  martyrs.  According  to  the  ordinary  course  of  affairs,
a  few  generations  pass  azcay,  and  then  there  comes  a  period  when  these  very  truths  are
looked  upon  as  commonplace  facts,  and  a  little  later  there  comes  another  period  in
which  they  are  dectared  to  be  necessary,  and  even  the  dullest  intellect  wonders  how  they
could  ever  have  been  denied.^

It  is  barely  possible  that  the  minds  of  the  present  generations  are  not
quite  ripe  for  the  reception  of  Occult  truths.  Such  perchance  will  be
the  retrospect  furnished  to  the  advanced  thinkers  of  the  Sixth  Root-
Race  of  the  history  of  the  acceptance  of  Esoteric  Philosophy — fully
and  unconditionally.  Meanwhile  the  generations  of  our  Fifth  Race
will  continue  to  be  led  away  by  prejudice  and  preconceptions.  Occult
Sciences  will  have  the  finger  of  scorn  pointed  at  them  from  every
street-corner,  and  everyone  will  seek  to  ridicule  and  crush  them  in
the  name,  and  for  the  greater  glor3%  of  Materialism  and  its  so-called
Science.  The  present  Volumes,  however,  show,  in  an  anticipator}^
answer  to  several  of  the  forthcoming  Scientific  objections,  the  true  and
mutual  positions  of  the  defendant  and  plaintiff.  The  Theosophists  and
Occultists  stand  arraigned  by  public  opinion,  which  still  holds  high  the
banner  of  the  inductive  Sciences.  The  latter  have,  then,  to  be  exam-
ined ;  and  it  must  be  shown  how  far  their  achievements  and  discoveries
in  the  realm  of  natural  law  are  opposed,  not  so  much  to  our  claims,  as


*  This  is  Cyclic  law;  but  this  law  itself  is  often  defied  by  human  stubbornness.
+  VoU  I.  p.  256.


3l8  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

to  facts  in  nature.  The  hour  has  now  struck  to  ascertain  whether  the
walls  of  the  modern  Jericho  are  so  impregnable,  that  no  blast  of  the
Occult  trumpet  is  ever  likely  to  make  them  crumble.

The  so-called  "Forces,"  with  I^ight  and  Electricity  heading  them,
and  the  constitution  of  the  Solar  orb  must  be  carefully  examined ;  as
also  Gravitation  and  the  Nebular  theories.  The  natures  of  Ether
and  of  other  Elements  must  be  discussed ;  thus  contrasting  Scientific
with  Occult  teachings,  while  revealing  some  of  the  hitherto  secret
tenets  of  the  latter.

Some  fifteen  years  ago,  the  writer  was  the  first  to  repeat,  after  the
Kabalists,  the  wise  Commandments  in  the  Esoteric  Catechism.

Close  thy  mouth,  lest  thou  shouldst  speak  of  this  [the  myster}^],  and  thy  heart,
lest  thou  shouldst  think  aloud;  and  if  thy  heart  has  escaped  thee,  bring  it  back
to  its  place,  for  such  is  the  object  of  our  alliance.*

And  again,  from  the  Rules  of  Initiation.

This  is  a  seaxt  zvhich  gives  death:  close  thy  mouth  lest  thou  shouldst
reveal  it  to  the  vulgar;  compress  thy  brain  lest  somethiyig  shotild  escape
from  it  and  fall  outside.

A  few  years  later,  a  jcorner  of  the  Veil  of  Isis  had  to  be  lifted ;  and
now  another  and  a  larger  rent  is  made.

But  old  and  time-honoured  errors — such  as  become  with  every  day
more  glaring  and  self-evident — stand  arrayed  in  battle-order  now,  as
they  did  then.  Marshalled  by  blind  conservatism,  conceit  and  preju-
dice, they  are  constantly  on  the  watch,  ready  to  strangle  ever}^  truth,
which,  awakening  from  its  age-long  sleep,  happens  to  knock  for  admis-
sion. Such  has  been  the  case  ever  since  man  became  an  animal.  That
this  proves  in  every  case  moral  death  to  the  revealers  who  bring  to
light  any  of  these  old,  old  truths,  is  as  certain  as  that  it  gives  life  and
regeneration  to  those  who  are  fit  to  profit  even  by  the  little  that  is  now
revealed  to  them.

*  Sepher  Jetzitah.


PART    II.


THE


EVOLUTION  OF  SYMBOLISM.


THE  EVOLUTION  OF  SYMBOLISM.


SECTION  I.

Symbolism  and  Ideographs.


Is  not  a  symbol  ever,  to  him  who  has  eyes  for  it,  some  dimmer  or  clearer  revelation  of  the  God-
like? .  .  .  Through  all  .  .  .  there  glimmers  something  of  a  Divine  Idea.  Nay,  the  highest
ensign  that  men  ever  met  and  embraced  under,  the  cross  itself,  had  no  meaning,  save  an  accidental
extrinsic  one.

Carlyle.

The  study  of  the  hidden  meaning  in  every  religious  and  profane
legend,  of  whatsoever  nation,  large  or  small,  and  preeminently  in  the
traditions  of  the  Kast,  has  occupied  the  greater  portion  of  the  present
writer's  life.  She  is  one  of  those  who  feel  convinced  that  no  mytholo-
gical stor5',  no  traditional  event  in  the  folk-lore  of  a  people,  has  ever,
at  any  time,  been  pure  fiction,  but  that  every  one  of  such  narratives
has  an  actual  historical  lining  to  it.  In  this  the  writer  disagrees  with
those  symbologists,  however  great  their  reputation,  who  find  in  every-
myth  nothing  more  than  additional  proof  of  the  superstitious  bent  of
mind  of  the  Ancients,  and  who  believe  that  all  mythologies  sprang
from,  and  are  built  upon,  solar  myths.  Such  superficial  thinkers  have
been  admirably  disposed  of  by  Mr.  Gerald  Massey,  the  poet  and
Eg>^ptologist,  in  a  lecture  on  "Luniolatry,  Ancient  and  Modern."  His
pointed  criticism  is  worthy  of  reproduction  in  this  part  of  our  work,  as
it  echoes  so  well  our  own  feelings,  expressed  openly  so  far  back  as
1875,  when  Jsis  Unveiled  ^zs.  written.

For  thirty  years  past  Professor  Max  Miiller  has  been  teaching  in  his  books  and
lectures,  in  the  Times,  Saturday  Review,  and  varioiis  magazines,  from  the  platform


322  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

of  the  Royal  Institution,  the  pulpit  of  Westminster  Abbey,  and  his  chair  at  Oxford,
that  mythology  is  a  disease  of  language,  and  that  the  ancient  symbolism  was  a
result  of  something  like  a  primitive  mental  aberration.

"We  know,"  says  Renouf,  echoing  Max  Miiller,  in  his  Hibbert  lectures,  "We
know  that  mythology  is  the  disease  which  springs  up  at  a  peculiar  stage  of  human
culture."  Such  is  the  shallow  explanation  of  the  non-evolutionists,  and  such  ex-
planations are  still  accepted  by  the  British  public,  that  gets  its  thinking  done  for  it
by  proxy.  Professor  Max  Miiller,  Cox,  Gubematis,  and  other  propounders  of  the
Solar  Mythos,  have  portrayed  the  primitive  myth-maker  for  us  as  a  sort  of  German-
ised-Hindu  metaphysician,  projecting  his  own  shadow  on  a  mental  mist,  and
talking  ingeniously  concerning  smoke,  or,  at  least,  cloud;  the  sky  overhead  becom-
ing like  the  dome  of  dreamland,  scribbled  over  with  the  imagery  of  aboriginal
nightmares!  They  conceive  the  early  man  in  their  own  likeness,  and  look  upon
him  as  perversely  prone  to  self-mystification,  or,  as  Fontenelle  has  it,  "subject  to
beholding  things  that  are  not  there"!  They  have  misrepresented  primitive  or
archaic  man  as  having  been  idiotically  misled  from  the  first  by  an  active  but  un-
tutored imagination  into  believing  all  sorts  of  fallacies,  which  were  directly  and
constantly  contradicted  by  his  own  daily  experience;  a  fool  of  fancy  in  the  midst  of
those  grim  realities  that  were  grinding  his  experiences  into  him,  like  the  griding
icebergs  making  their  imprints  upon  the  rocks  submerged  beneath  the  sea.  It
remains  to  be  said,  and  will  one  day  be  acknowledged,  that  these  accepted  teachers
have  been  no  nearer  to  the  beginnings  of  mythology  and  language  than  Burns's
poet  Willie  had  been  near  to  Pegasus.  My  reply  is,  'Tis  but  a  dream  of  the  meta-
physical theorist  that  mythology'  was  a  disease  of  language,  or  of  anything  else
except  his  own  brain.  The  origin  and  meaning  of  mythology  have  been  missetl
altogether  by  these  solarites  and  weather-mongers!  Mythology  was  a  primitive
mode  of  thinging  the  early  thought.  It  was  founded  on  natural  facts,  and  is  still
verifiable  in  phenomena.  There  is  nothing  insane,  nothing  irrational  in  it,  when
considered  in  the  light  of  evolution,  and  when  its  mode  of  expression  by  sign-
language  is  thoroughly  understood.  The  insanity  lies  in  mistaking  it  for  human
history  or  Divine  Revelation.*  Mythology  is  the  repository  of  man's  most  ancient
science,  and  what  concerns  us  chiefly  is  this— when  truly  interpreted  once  more,  it
is  destined  to  be  the  death  of  those  false  theologies  to  which  it  has  unwittingly

given  birth !  t

In  modern  phraseology  a  statement  is  sometimes  said  to  be  mythical  in  propor-
tion to  its  being  untrue;  but  the  ancient  mythology  was  not  a  system  or  mode  of
falsifying  in  that  sense.  Its  fables  were  the  means  of  conveying  facts;  they  were
neither  forgeries  nor  fictions.  ...  For  example,  when  the  Egyptians  portrayed
the  moon  as  a  cat,  they  were  not  ignorant  enough  to  suppose  that  the  moon  was  a
cat;  nor  did  their  wandering  fancies  see  any  likeness  in  the  moon  to  a  cat;  nor  was
a  cat-myth  any  mere  expansion  of  verbal  metaphor;  nor  had  they  any  intention  of

*  As  far  as  "Divine  Revelation"  is  concerned,  we  agree.  Not  so  with  regard  to  "human  history."
For  there  is  "history"  in  most  of  the  allegories  and  "myths"  of  India;  and  events,  real  actual
events,  are  concealed  under  them.

t  When  the  "false  theologies"  disappear,  then  true  prehistoric  realities  will  be  found,  contained
especially  in  the  mythology  of  the  Aryans  and  ancient  Hindus,  and  even  the  pre-Homeric  Hellenes.


THE  EGYPTIAN   CAT-SYMBOI..  323

making  puzzles  or  riddles.  .  .  .  They  had  observed  the  simple  fact  that  the  cat
saw  in  the  dark,  and  that  her  eyes  became  full-orbed,  and  grew  most  luminous  by
night.  The  moon  was  the  seer  by  night  in  heaven,  and  the  cat  was  its  equivalent
on  the  earth;  and  so  the  familiar  cat  was  adopted  as  a  representative,  a  natural
sign,  a  living  pictograph  of  the  lunar  orb.  .  .  .  And  so  it  followed  that  the  sun
which  saw  down  in  the  under-world  at  night  could  also  be  called  the  cat,  as  it  was,
because  it  also  saw  in  the  dark.  The  name  of  the  cat  in  Egyptian  is  mau,  which
denotes  the  seer,  from  luau,  to  see.  One  writer  on  mythology  asserts  that  the
E'O'ptiaus  "imagined  a  great  cat  behind  the  sun,  which  is  the  pupil  of  the  cat's
eve."  But  this  imagining  is  all  modern.  It  is  the  Miillerite  stock  in  trade.  The
moon,  as  cat,  was  the  eye  of  the  sun,  because  it  reflected  the  solar  light,  and  because
the  eye  gives  back  the  image  in  its  mirror.  In  the  form  of  the  goddess  Pasht,  the
cat  keeps  watch  for  the  sun,  vidth  her  paw  holding  down  and  bruising  the  head  of
the  serpent  of  darkness,  called  his  eternal  enemy!

This  is  a  very  correct  exposition  of  the  lunar  mythos  from  its
astronomical  aspect.  Selenography,  however,  is  the  least  esoteric  of
the  divisions  of  lunar  Symbology.  To  master  thoroughly— if  one  is
permitted  to  coin  a  new  word — Selenognosis,  one  must  become  pro-
ficient in  more  than  its  astronomical  meaning.  The  Moon  is  in-
timately related  to  the  Earth,  as  shown  in  the  Stanzas,  and  is  more
directly  concerned  with  all  the  mysteries  of  our  Globe  than  is  even
Venus-Ivucifer,  the  occult  sister  and  alter  ego  of  the  Earth.*

The  untiring  researches  of  Western,  especially  German,  symbologists,
during  the  last  and  the  present  centuries,  have  induced  the  most  un-
prejudiced students,  and  of  course  every  Occultist,  to  see  that  without
the  help  of  symbology — with  its  .seven  departments,  of  which  the
moderns  know  nothing — no  ancient  Scripture  can  ever  be  correctly
understood.  Symbology  must  be  studied  from  every  one  of  its  aspects,
for  each  nation  had  its  own  peculiar  methods  of  expres.sion.  In  short,
no  Eg}'ptian  papyrus,  no  Indian  oUa,  no  Assyrian  tile,  no  Hebrew
scroll,  should  be  read  and  interpreted  literally.

This  ever>^  scholar  now  knows.  The  able  lectures  of  Mr.  Gerald
Massey  alone  are  sufl&cient  to  convince  any  fair-minded  Christian  that
to  accept  the  dead-letter  of  the  Bible  is  equivalent  to  falling  into  a
grosser  error  and  superstition  than  any  hitherto  evolved  by  the  brain
of  the  savage  South  Sea  Islander.  But  the  fact  to  which  even  the
most  truth-loving  and  truth-searching  Orientalists— whether  Arj^anists
or  Egyptologists — seem  to  remain  blind,  is  that  every  symbol  on
papyrus  or  olla  is  a  many-faced  diamond,  each  of  whose  facets  not  only
includes   several  interpretations,  but  also  relates   to  several  sciences.

•  See  Section  VII,  "  Deus  Lunus."


324


THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.


This  is  instanced  in  the  just  quoted  interpretation  of  the  cat  symboliz-
ing the  moon — an  example  of  sidereo-terrestrial  imagery';  for  the  moon
has  with  other  nations  many  other  meanings  besides.

As  a  learned  Mason  and  Theosophist,  the  late  Kenneth  Mackenzie,
has  shown  in  his  Royal  Masonic  Cydopcsdia,  there  is  a  great  difference
between  emblem  and  symbol.  The  former  "comprises  a  larger  series  of
thoughts  than  a  symbol,  which  may  be  said  rather  to  illustrate  some
single  special  idea."  Hence,  the  symbols — lunar,  or  solar,  for  example
— of  several  countries,  each  illustrating  such  a  special  idea,  or  series  of
ideas,  form  collectively  an  esoteric  emblem.  The  latter  is  "a  concrete
visible  picture  or  sign  representing  principles,  or  a  series  of  principles,
recognizable  by  those  who  have  received  certain  instructions  [Initiates]."
To  put  it  still  plainer,  an  emblem  is  usually  a  series  of  graphic  pictures
viewed  and  explained  allegorically,  and  unfolding  an  idea  in  panoramic
views,  one  after  the  other.  Thus  the  Purdnas  are  written  emblems.
So  are  the  Mosaic  and  Christian  Testa^nerits,  or  the  Bible,  and  all  other
exoteric  Scriptures.     As  the  same  authority  shows:

All  esoteric  societies  have  made  use  of  emblems  and  symbols,  such  as  the
Pythagorean  Society,  the  Eleusinia,  the  Hermetic  Brethren  of  Egypt,  the  Rosi-
crucians,  and  the  Freemasons.  Many  of  these  emblems  it  is  not  proper  to  divulge
to  the  general  eye,  and  a  very  minute  difference  may  make  the  emblem  or  symbol
differ  widely  in  its  meaning.  The  magical  sigilla,  being  founded  on  certain  principles
of  number,  partake  of  this  character,  and  although  monstrous  or  ridiculous  in  the
eyes  of  the  uninstructed,  convey  a  whole  body  of  doctrine  to  those  who  have  been
trained  to  recognize  them.

The  above  enumerated  societies  are  all  comparatively  modern,  none
dating  back  earlier  than  the  Middle  Ages.  How  much  more  proper,
then,  that  the  students  of  the  oldest  archaic  school  should  be  careful
not  to  divulge  secrets  of  far  more  importance  to  humanity  (as  being
dangerous  in  ignorant  hands)  than  any  of  the  so-called  "Masonic
Secrets,"  which  have  now  become  those  of  Polichinelle,  as  the  French
say!  But  this  restriction  can  apply  only  to  the  psychological  or  rather
psycho-physiological  and  cosmical  significance  of  symbol  and  emblem,
and  even  to  that  only  partially.  For  though  an  Adept  is  compelled  to
refuse  to  impart  the  conditions  and  means  that  lead  to  any  correlation
of  Elements — whether  psychic  or  physical— which  may  produce  harm-
ful as  well  as  beneficent  results;  yet  he  is  ever  ready  to  impart  to  the
earnest  student  the  secret  of  the  ancient  thought,  in  anything  that  has
respect  to  history  concealed  under  mythological  symbolism,  and  thus
to  furnish  a  few  more  land-marks  for  a  retrospective  view  of  the  past.


MAGIC   POTENCY  OF  SOUND.  325

in  so  far  as  it  furnishes  useful  information  with  regard  to  the  origin  of
man,  the  evolution  of  the  Races  and  geognosy.  And  yet  it  is  the
cr}'ing  complaint  to-day,  not  only  among  Theosophists,  but  also  among
the  few  profane  interested  in  the  subject:  Why  do  not  the  Adepts  reveal
that  which  they  know?  To  this,  one  might  answer:  Why  should  they,
since  one  knows  beforehand  that  no  man  of  Science  will  accept  it,  even
as  a  hypothesis,  much  less  as  a  theory  or  axiom.  Have  you  so  much
as  accepted  or  believed  in  the  A  B  C  of  the  Occult  Philosophy  con-
tained in  the  Theosophist,  Esoteric  Buddhism,  and  other  works  and
periodicals?  Has  not  even  the  little  which  has  been  given,  been
ridiculed  and  derided,  and  made  to  face  the  "animal-"  and  "ape-
theory"  of  Huxley  and  Haeckel,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  rib  of  Adam
and  the  apple  on  the  other?  Notwithstanding  such  an  unenviable
prospect,  however,  a  mass  of  facts  is  given  in  the  present  work,  and
the  origin  of  man,  the  evolution  of  the  Globe  and  the  Races,  human
and  animal,  are  as  fully  treated  as  the  writer  is  able  to  treat  them.

The  proofs  brought  forward  in  corroboration  of  the  old  teachings  are
scattered  widely  throughout  the  old  scriptures  of  ancient  civilizations.
The  Ptiranas,  the  Zend Avesta,  and  the  old  classics,  are  full  of  such  facts;
but  no  one  has  ever  taken  the  trouble  of  collecting  and  collating  them
together.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  all  such  events  were  recorded
sj^mbolically ;  and  that  the  best  scholars,  the  most  acute  minds,  among
our  Aryanists  and  Egyptologists,  have  been  too  often  darkened  by  one
or  another  preconception,  and  still  oftener,  by  one-sided  views  of  the
secret  meaning.  Yet  even  a  parable  is  a  spoken  symbol :  a  fiction  or  a
fable,  as  some  think;  an  allegorical  representation,  we  say,  of  life-
realities,  events,  and  facts.  And  just  as  a  moral  was  ever  drawn  from
a  parable,  such  moral  being  an  actual  truth  and  fact  in  human  life,  so
a  historical,  real  event  was  deduced,  by  those  versed  in  the  hieratic
sciences,  from  emblems  and  symbols  recorded  in  the  ancient  archives
of  the  temples.  The  religious  and  esoteric  histor>^  of  every  nation  was
embedded  in  symbols;  it  was  never  expressed  literally  in  so  many
words.  All  the  thoughts  and  emotions,  all  the  learning  and  know-
ledge, revealed  and  acquired,  of  the  early  Races,  found  their  pictorial
expression  in  allegory  and  parable.  Why?  Because  the  spoken  word
has  a  potency  not  only  tinknown  to,  but  even  unsuspected  and  naturally  dis-
believed ifi,  by  the  modern  "  sages."  Because  sound  and  rhythm  are
closely  related  to  the  four  Elements  of  the  Ancients;  and  because  such
or  another  vibration  in  the  air  is  sure  to  awaken  the  corresponding


326  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Powers,  union  with  which  produces  good  or  bad  results,  as  the  case
may  be.  No  student  was  ever  allowed  to  recite  historical,  religious,  or
real  events  of  any  kind,  in  so  many  unmistakable  words,  lest  the
Powers  connected  with  the  event  should  be  once  more  attracted.  Such
events  were  narrated  only  during  Initiation,  and  every  student  had  to
record  them  in  corresponding  symbols,  drawn  out  of  his  own  mind  and
examined  later  by  his  Master,  before  they  were  finally  accepted.  Thus
by  degrees  was  the  Chinese  Alphabet  created,  as  just  before  it  the
hieratic  symbols  were  fixed  upon  in  old  Egypt.  In  the  Chinese  lan-
guage, the  characters  of  which  may  be  read  in  any  language,  and
which,  as  just  said,  is  only  a  little  less  ancient  than  the  Egyptian
alphabet  of  Thoth,  every  word  has  its  corresponding  symbol  in  a  pic-
torial form.  This  language  possesses  many  thousands  of  such  symbol-
letters,  or  logograms,  each  conveying  the  meaning  of  a  whole  vv^ord ;  for
letters  proper,  or  an  alphabet  as  we  understand  it,  do  not  exist  in  the
Chinese  language,  any  more  than  they  did  in  the  Eg3"ptian,  till  a  far
later  period.

Thus  a  Japanese  who  does  not  understand  one  word  of  Chinese,
meeting  with  a  Chinaman  who  has  never  heard  the  language  of  the
former,  will  communicate  in  writing  with  him,  and  they  will  under-
stand each  other  perfectly — because  their  writing  is  symbolical.

The  explanation  of  the  chief  symbols  and  emblems  is  now  attempted,
as  Book  II,  which  treats  of  Anthropogenesis,  would  be  most  difficult  to
understand  without  a  preparatory^  acquaintance  with  at  least  the  meta-
physical symbols.

Nor  would  it  be  just  to  enter  upon  an  esoteric  reading  of  sjanbolism,
without  giving  due  honour  to  one  who  has  rendered  it  the  greatest
service  in  this  century,  by  discovering  the  chief  key  to  ancient  Hebrew
symbology,  strongly  interwoven  with  metrology,  one  of  the  keys  to
the  once  universal  Mystery  lyanguage.  Mr.  Ralston  Skinner,  of  Cin-
cinnati, the  author  of  The  Key  to  the  Hebrew-Egyptian  Mystery  in  the
Source  of  Measures,  has  our  thanks.  A  Mystic  and  a  Kabalist  by  nature,
he  has  laboured  for  many  years  in  this  direction,  and  his  efforts  have
certainly  been  crowned  with  great  success.     In  his  own  words :

The  writer  is  quite  certain  that  there  was  an  ancient  language  which  modemly
and  up  to  this  time  appears  to  have  been  lost,  the  vestiges  of  which,  however,
abundantly  exist.  .  .  .  The  author  discovered  that  this  geometrical  ratio  [the
integral  ratio  of  the  diameter  to  the  circumference  of  a  circle]  was  the  very  ancient,
and  probably  the  divine  origin  of  ...  .  linear  measures.  ...  It  appears
sJmost  proven  that  the  same  system  of  geometry,  numbers,  ratio,    and   measures


THE   MYSTERY   L,ANGUAGE.  327

was  known  and  made  use  of  on  the  continent  of  North  America,  even  prior  to
the  knowledge  of  the  same  by  the  descending  Semites

The  peculiarity  of  this  language  was  that  it  could  be  contained  in  another,
concealed  and  not  to  be  perceived,  save  through  the  help  of  special  instruc-
tion; letters  and  syllabic  signs  possessing  at  the  same  time  the  powers  or  mean-
ings of  numbers,  of  geometrical  shapes,  pictures,  or  ideographs  and  symbols,
the  designed  scope  of  which  would  be  determinatively  helped  out  by  parables  in
the  shape  of  narratives  or  parts  of  narratives;  while  also  it  could  be  set  forth
separately,  independently,  and  variously,  by  pictures,  in  stone  work,  or  in  earth
constructions.

To  clear  up  an  ambiguity  as  to  the  term  language:  Primarily  the  word  means
the  expression  of  ideas  by  human  speech ;  but,  secondarily,  it  may  mean  the
expression  of  ideas  by  any  other  instrumentality.  This  old  language  is  so  com-
posed in  the  Hebrew  text,  that  by  the  use  of  the  written  characters,  which  uttered
shall  be  the  language  first  defined,  a  distinctly  separated  series  of  ideas  may  be  in-
tentionally communicated,  other  than  those  ideas  expressed  by  the  reading  of  the
sound-signs.  This  secondary  language  sets  forth,  under  a  veil,  series  of  ideas,
copies  in  imagination  of  things  sensible,  which  may  be  pictured,  and  of  things
which  may  be  classed  as  real  without  being  sensible:  as,  for  instance,  the  number
9  may  be  taken  as  a  reality,  though  it  has  no  sensible  existence,  so  also  a  revolution
of  the  moon,  as  separated  from  the  moon  itself  by  which  that  revolution  has  been
made,  may  be  taken  as  giving  rise  to,  or  causing  a  real  idea,  though  such  a  revolu-
tion has.no  substance.  This  idea-language  may  consist  of  symbols  restricted  to
arbitrary  terms  and  signs,  having  a  very  limited  range  of  conceptions,  and  quite
valueless,  or  it  may  be  a  reading  of  nature  in  some  of  her  manifestations  of  a  value
almost  immeasurable,  as  regards  human  civilization.  A  picture  of  something
natural  may  give  rise  to  ideas  of  coordinating  subjects,  radiating  out  in  various
and  even  opposing  directions,  like  the  spokes  of  a  wheel,  and  producing  natural
realities  in  departments  very  foreign  to  the  apparent  tendency  of  the  reading  of  the
first  or  starting  picture.  Notion  may  give  rise  to  connected  notion,  but  if  it  does,
then,  however  apparently  incongruous,  all  resulting  ideas  must  spring  from  the
original  picture  and  be  harmonically  connected,  or  related  the  one  with  the  other.
Thus  with  a  pictured  idea  radical  enough,  the  imagination  of  the  cosmos  itself,
even  in  its  details  of  construction,  might  result.  Such  a  use  of  ordinary  language  is
now  obsolete,  but  it  has  become  a  question  with  the  writer  whether  at  one  time,
far  back  in  the  past,  it,  or  such,  was  not  the  language  of  the  world  and  of  universal
use,  possessed,  however,  as  it  became  more  and  more  moulded  into  its  arcane  forms,
by  a  select  class  or  caste.  By  this  I  mean  that  the  popular  tongue  or  vernacular
commenced  even  in  its  origin  to  be  made  use  of  as  the  vehicle  of  this  peculiar
mode  of  conveying  ideas.  Of  this  the  evidences  are  very  strong;  and,  indeed,  it
would  seem  that  in  the  history  of  the  human  race  there  happened,  from  causes
which  at  present,  at  any  rate,  we  cannot  trace,  a  lapse  or  loss  from  an  original
perfect  language  and  a  perfect  system  of  science — shall  we  say  perfect  because  they
were  of  divine  origin  and  importation  ?  *

•  From  an  MS.


228  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

"Divine  origin"  does  not  here  mean  a  revelation  from  an  anthropo-
morphic God  on  a  mount  amidst  thunder  and  lightning;  but,  as  we
understand  it,  a  language  and  a  system  of  science  imparted  to  early
mankind  by  a  more  advanced  mankind,  so  much  higher  as  to  be  divine
in  the  sight  of  that  infant  humanity:  by  a  "mankind,"  in  short,  from
other  spheres ;  an  idea  which  contains  nothing  supernatural  in  it,  but
the  acceptance  or  rejection  of  which  depends  upon  the  degree  of
conceit  and  arrogance  in  the  mind  of  him  to  whom  it  is  stated.  For,
if  the  professors  of  modern  knowledge  would  only  confess  that,  though
they  know  nothing  of  the  future  of  the  disembodied  man — or  rather
will  accept  nothing — yet  this  future  may  be  pregnant  with  surprises
and  unexpected  revelations  to  them,  once  their  Egos  are  rid  of  their
gross  bodies — then  materialistic  unbelief  would  have  fewer  chances
than  it  has.  Who  of  them  knows,  or  can  tell,  what  may  happen  when
once  the  Ivife-Cycle  of  this  Globe  is  run  down,  and  our  mother  Earth
herself  falls  into  her  last  sleep?  Who  is  bold  enough  to  say  that  the
divine  Egos  of  our  mankind — at  least  the  elect  out  of  the  multitudes
passing  on  to  other  spheres — will  not  become  in  their  turn  the  "divine"
instructors  of  a  new  mankind  generated  by  them  on  a  new  Globe,  called
to  life  and  activity  by  the  disembodied  "principles"  of  our  Earth?  All
this  may  have  been  the  experience  of  the  Past,  and  these  strange
records  lie  embedded  in  the  "Mystery  Language"  of  the  pre-historic
ages,  the  language  now  called  Symbolism.


SECTION  II.

The  Mystery  Language  and  Its  Keys.


Recent  discoveries  made  by  great  mathematicians  and  Kabalists
thus  prove,  beyond  a  shadow  of  doubt,  that  every  theolog>-,  from  the
earliest  down  to  the  latest,  has  sprung,  not  only  from  a  common  source
of  abstract  beliefs,  but  from  one  universal  Esoteric,  or  Mystery,
lyanguage.  These  scholars  hold  the  key  to  the  universal  language  of
old,  and  have  turned  it  successfully,  though  only  once,  in  the  herme-
tically closed  door  leading  to  the  Hall  of  Mysteries.  The  great  archaic
system  known  from  prehistoric  ages  as  the  sacred  Wisdom-Science,
one  that  is  contained  and  can  be  traced  in  every  old  as  well  as  in  every
new  religion,  had,  and  still  has,  its  universal  language — suspected  by
the  Mason  Ragon — the  language  of  the  Hierophants,  which  has  seven
"dialects,"  so  to  speak,  each  referring,  and  being  specially  appropriate,
to  one  of  the  seven  mysteries  of  Nature.  Each  had  its  own  symbolism.
Nature  could  thus  be  either  read  in  its  fulness,  or  viewed  from  one  of
its  special  aspects.

The  proof  of  this  lies,  to  this  day,  in  the  extreme  difficulty  which  the
Orientalists  in  general,  and  the  Indianists  and  Egyptologists  in  parti-

A

cular,  experience  in  interpreting  the  allegorical  writings  of  the  Aryans
and  the  hieratic  records  of  old  Egypt.  This  is  because  they  will  never
remember  that  all  the  ancient  records  were  written  in  a  language  which
was  universal  and  known  to  all  nations  alike  in  days  of  old,  but  which
is  now  intelligible  only  to  the  few.  I,ike  the  Arabic  figures  which  are
understandable  to  men  of  every  nation,  or  like  the  English  word  and,
which  becomes  et  for  the  Frenchman,  und  for  the  German,  and  so  on,
yet  which  may  be  expressed  for  all  civilized  nations  in  the  simple  sign
& — so  all  the  words  of  that  Mystery  Language  signified  the  same  thing


330  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

to  each  man,  of  whatever  nationality.  There  have  been  several  men  of
note  who  have  tried  to  reestablish  such  a  universal  and  philosophical
tongue,  Delgarme,  Wilkins,  I^eibnitz;  but  Demaimieux,  in  his  Pasi-
graphie,  is  the  only  one  who  has  proven  its  possibility.  The  scheme  of
Valentinius,  called  the  "Greek  Kabalah,"  based  on  the  combination  of
Greek  letters,  might  serve  as  a  model.

The  many-sided  facets  of  the  Mystery  I^anguage  have  led  to  the
adoption  of  widely  varied  dogmas  and  rites  in  the  exotericism  of  the
Church  rituals.  It  is  these,  again,  which  are  at  the  origin  of  most  of
the  dogmas  of  the  Christian  Church;  for  instance,  the  seven  Sacra-
ments, the  Trinity,  the  Resurrection,  the  seven  Capital  Sins  and  the
seven  Virtues.  The  Seven  Keys  to  the  Mystery  Tongue,  however,
having  always  been  in  the  keeping  of  the  highest  among  the  initiated
Hierophants  of  antiquity;  it  is  only  the  partial  use  of  a  few  out  of  the
seven  which  passed,  through  the  treason  of  some  early  Church  Fathers
— ex-Initiates  of  the  Temples — into  the  hands  of  the  new  sect  of  the
Nazarenes.  Some  of  the  early  Popes  were  Initiates,  but  the  last  frag-
ments of  their  knowledge  have  now  fallen  into  the  power  of  the  Jesuits,
who  have  turned  them  into  a  system  of  sorcery.

It  is  maintained  that  India — not  confined  to  its  present  limits,  but
including  its  ancient  boundaries — is  the  only  country  in  the  world
which  still  has  among  her  sons  Adepts,  who  have  the  knowledge  of  all
the  seven  sub-systems  and  the  key  to  the  entire  system.  From  the  fall
of  Memphis,  Egypt  began  to  lose  these  keys  one  by  one,  and  Chaldaea
had  preserved  only  three  in  the  days  of  Berosus.  As  for  the  Hebrews,
in  all  their  writings  they  show  no  more  than  a  thorough  knowledge  of
the  astronomical,  geometrical  and  numerical  s^^stems  of  symbolizing
the  human,  and  especially  the  physiological  functions.  They  never
had  the  higher  keys.

M.  Gaston  Maspero,  the  great  French  Egyptologist  and  the  successor
of  Mariette  Bey,  writes :

Every  time  I  hear  people  talking  of  the  religion  of  Egypt,  I  am  tempted  to  ask
which  of  the  Eg^'ptian  religions  they  are  talking  about?  Is  it  of  the  Egj-ptian
religion  of  the  fourth  dynasty,  or  of  the  Egyptian  rehgion  of  the  Ptolemaic  period?
Is  it  of  the  religion  of  the  rabble,  or  of  that  of  the  learned  ?  Of  the  religion  such
as  was  taught  in  the  schools  of  Heliopolis,  or  of  that  which  was  in  the  minds  and
conceptions  of  the  Theban  sacerdotal  class?  For,  between  the  first  Memphite
tomb,  which  bears  the  cartouche  of  a  king  of  the  third  dynasty,  and  the  last  stones
engraved  at  Esneh  under  Caesar  Philippus,  the  Arabian,  there  is  an  interval  of  at
least   five  thousand   years.      Leaving  aside   the    invasion   of  the   Shepherds,    the


EGYPT'S   MANY   REUGIONS.  33 1

Ethiopian  and  Assyrian  dominions,  the  Persian  conquest,  Greek  colonization,  and
the  thousand  revolutions  of  its  political  life,  Eg>'pt  had  passed  during  those  five
thousand  years  through  many  vicissitudes  of  life,  moral  and  intellectual.  Chapter
XVII  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  which  seems  to  contain  the  exposition  of  the
system  of  the  world,  as  it  was  understood  at  Heliopolis  during  the  time  of  the  first
dynasties,  is  known  to  us  by  a  few  copies  of  the  eleventh  and  twelfth  dynasties.
Every  oue  of  the  verses  composing  it  was  already  interpreted  in  three  or  four
different  ways;  so  different,  indeed,  that  according  to  this  or  another  school,  the
Demiurge  became  either  the  solar  fire — Ra-shoo,  or  the  primordial  water.  Fifteen
centuries  later,  the  number  of  readings  had  increased  considerably.  Time,  in
its  course,  had  modified  their  ideas  about  the  universe  and  the  forces  that  ruled  it.
In  the  short  eighteen  centuries  that  Christianity  has  existed,  it  has  worked  up,
developed  and  transformed  most  of  its  dogmas;  how  many  times,  then,  might  not
the  Egyptian  priesthood  have  altered  their  dogmas  during  those  fifty  centuries  that
separate  Theodosius  from  the  King  Builders  of  the  P>'ramids.*

Here  we  believe  the  eminent  Eg}'ptologist  is  going  too  far.  The
exoteric  dogmas  may  often  have  been  altered,  the  esoteric  never.  He
does  not  take  into  account  the  sacred  immutability  of  the  primitive
truths,  revealed  only  during  the  mysteries  of  Initiation.  The  Egj'ptian
priests  had  forgotten  much,  they  altered  nothing.  The  loss  of  a  great
part  of  the  primitive  teaching  was  due  to  the  sudden  deaths  of  the
great  Hierophants,  who  passed  away  before  they  had  time  to  reveal  all
to  their  successors,  mostly  in  the  absence  of  worthy  heirs  to  the  know-
ledge. Yet  they  have  preserved  in  their  rituals  and  dogmas  the  prin-
cipal teachings  of  the  Secret  Doctrine.

Thus,  in  the  Chapter  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  mentioned  by  Maspero,
we  find  (i)  Osiris  saying  he  is  Toom — the  creative  force  in  Nature,
giving  form  to  all  beings,  spirits  and  men,  self-generated  and  self-
existent — issued  from  Noon,  the  celestial  river,  called  Father- Mother
of  the  Gods,  the  primordial  deity,  which  is  Chaos  or  the  Deep,  impreg-
nated by  the  unseen  Spirit.  (2)  He  has  found  Shoo,  the  solar  force,  on
the  Stairway  in  the  City  of  the  Eight  (the  two  squares  of  Good  and
Evil),  and  he  has  annihilated  the  Children  of  Rebellion,  the  evil  prin-
ciples in  Noon  (Chaos).  (3)  He  is  the  Fire  and  Water,  Noon  the
Primordial  Parent,  and  he  created  the  Gods  out  of  his  Limbs — fourteen
Gods  (twice  seven),  seven  dark  and  seven  light  Gods — the  seven  Spirits
of  the  Presence  of  the  Christians,  and  the  seven  dark  Evil  Spirits.
(4)  He  is  the  L,aw  of  Existence  and  Being,  the  Bennoo,  or  Phoenix,  the
Bird  of  Resurrection  in  Eternity,  in  whom  Night  follows  Day,  and  Day
Night — an  allusion  to  the  periodical  cycles  of  cosmic  resurrection  and

•  Guide  au  Muse'e  de  Boulag,  pp.  148,  149.


332  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

human  reincarnation.  For  what  else  can  this  mean?  "The  Wayfarer
who  crosses  millions  of  years  is  the  name  of  one,  and  the  Great  Green
[Primordial  Water  or  Chaos]  the  name  of  the  other,"  one  begetting
millions  of  years  in  succession,  the  other  engulfing  them,  to  restore
them  back.  (5)  He  speaks  of  the  Seven  Luminous  Ones  who  follow
their  Lord,  Osiris,  who  confers  justice,  in  Amenti.

All  this  is  now  shown  to  have  been  the  source  and  origin  of  Chris-
tian dogmas.  That  which  the  Jews  had  from  Egypt,  through  Moses
and  other  Initiates,  was  confused  and  distorted  enough  in  later  days;
but  that  which  the  Church  got  from  both,  is  still  more  misinterpreted.

Yet  the  system  of  the  former,  in  this  special  department  of  sym-
bology — the  key,  namely,  to  the  mysteries  of  astronomy  as  connected
with  those  of  generation  and  conception — is  now  proven  identical  with
those  ideas  in  ancient  religions  which  have  developed  the  phallic
element  of  theolog>\  The  Jewish  system  of  sacred  measures,  applied
to  religious  symbols,  is  the  same,  so  far  as  geometrical  and  numerical
combinations  go,  as  those  of  Greece,  Chaldsea  and  Egypt,  for  it  was
adopted  by  the  Israelites  during  the  centuries  of  their  slavery  and
captivity  among  the  two  latter  nations.*  What  was  this  system?  It  is
the  intimate  conviction  of  the  author  of  The  Source  of  Measures  that :
"the  Mosaic  Books  were  intended,  by  a  mode  of  art-speech,  to  set
forth  a  geometrical  and  numerical  system  of  exact  science,  which
should  serve  as  an  origin  of  measures."  Piazzi  Smj^th  believes  simi-
larly. This  system  and  these  measures  are  found  by  some  scholars  to
be  identical  with  those  used  in  the  construction  of  the  Great  Pyramid :
but  this  is  only  partially  so.  "The  foundation  of  these  measures  was
the  Parker  ratio,"  says  Ralston  Skinner,  in  The  Source  of  Measures.

The  author  of  this  very  extraordinary  work  has  discovered  it,  he
says,  in  the  use  of  the  integral  ratio  of  the  diameter  to  the  circum-
ference of  a  circle,  discovered  by  John  A.  Parker,  of  New  York.  This
ratio  is  6561  for  diameter,  and  20612  for  circumference.  Furthermore,
that  this  geometrical  ratio  was  the  very  ancient  and  probably  the
divine  origin  of  what   have  now  become,  through  exoteric  handling


•  As  we  said  in  Isis  Unveiled  (II.  438-9) :  "To  the  present  moment,  in  spite  of  all  controversies  and
researches,  History  and  Science  remain  as  much  as  ever  in  the  dark  as  to  the  origrin  of  the  Jews.
They  may  as  well  be  the  exiled  Chandalas  of  old  India,  the  'bricklayers'  mentioned  by  Veda-
Vyasa  and  Manu,  as  the  Phoenicians  of  Herodotus,  or  the  Hyksos  of  Josephus,  or  the  descendants
of  Pah  shepherds,  or  a  mixture  of  all  these.  The  Bible  names  the  Tyrians  as  a  kindred  people
and  claims  dominion  over  them.  .  .  Yet  whatever  they  may  have  been,  they  became  a  hybrid
people,  not  long  after  the  time  of  Moses,  for  the  Bible  shows  them  freely  intermarrying  not  alone
with  the  Canaanites,  but  with  every  other  nation  or  race  they  came  in  contact  with."


THE   GREAT   PYRAMID   MEASURES.  333

and  practical  application,  the  British  linear  measures,  "the  underlying
unit  of  which,  viz.,  the  inch,  was  likewise  the  base  of  one  of  the  royal
Egyptian  cubits,  and  of  the  Roman /t?^/."

He  also  discovered  that  there  was  a  modified  form  of  the  ratio,  v-iz.,  113  to  355;
and  that  while  this  last  ratio  pointed  through  its  origin  to  the  exact  integral  pi,  or
to  6561  to  20612,  it  also  served  as  a  base  for  astronomical  calculations.  The  author
discovered  that  a  system  of  exact  science,  geometrical,  numerical,  and  astronomical,
founded  on  these  ratios,  and  to  be  seen  in  use  in  the  construction  of  the  Great
Egyptian  Pj'ramid,  was  in  part  the  burden  of  this  language,  as  contained  in,  and
concealed  under,  the  verbiage  of  the  Hebrew  text  of  the  Bible.  The  inch  and  the
two-foot  rule  of  24  inches,  interpreted  for  use  through  the  elements  of  the  circle
and  the  ratios  mentioned,  were  found  to  be  at  the  basis  or  foundation  of  this
natural,  and  Egj'ptian,  and  Hebrew  system  of  science;  while,  moreover,  it  seems
evident  enough  that  the  s)'stem  itself  was  looked  upon  as  of  divine  origin,  and  of
divine  revelation.

But  let  US  see  what  is  said  by  the  opponents  of  Prof.  Piazzi  Smyth's
measurements  of  the  Pyramid.

Mr.  Petrie  seems  to  deny  them,  and  to  have  made  short  work
altogether  of  Piazzi  Smj^h's  calculations  in  their  Biblical  connection.
So  does  Mr.  Proctor,  the  champion  "Coincidentalist"  for  many  years
past  in  every  question  of  ancient  arts  and  sciences.  Speaking  of  "the
multitude  of  relations  independent  of  the  Pyramid,  which  have  turned
up  while  the  Pyramidalists  have  been  endeavouring  to  connect  the
Pyramid  with  the  solar  system,"  he  says:

These  coincidences  [which  "would  still  remain  if  the  Pyramid  had  no  exis-
tence,"] are  altogether  more  curious  than  any  coincidence  between  the  Pyramid
and  astronomical  numbers :  the  former  are  as  close  and  remarkable  as  they  are  real ;
the  latter,  which  are  only  imaginary  (?),  have  only  been  established  by  the  process
which  schoolboys  call  "  fudging,"  and  now  new  measures  have  left  the  work  to  be
done  all  over  again.*

On  this  Mr.  C.  Staniland  Wake  justly  observes:

They  must,  however,  have  been  more  than  fnere  coincidences,  if  the  builders  of  the
Pyramid  had  the  astronomical  knowledge  displayed  in  its  perfect  orientation  and  in
its  other  admitted  astronomical  features,  t

They  had  it  assuredly';  and  it  is  on  this  "knowledge"  that  the  pro-
gramme of  the  Mysteries  and  of  the  series  of  Initiations  was  based  :
hence,  the  construction  of  the  Pyramid,  the  everlasting  record  and  the
indestructible  symbol  of  these  M}-steries  and  Initiations  on  Earth,  as
the  courses  of  the  stars  are  in  Heaven.     The  cycle  of  Initiation  was  a


*  Knowledge,  Vol.  II;  see  also  Petrie's  letter  to  The  Academy,  Dec.  17,  i88i.
t  The  Origin  and  Significance  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  p.  9.


334  I'HE  SKCRET  doctrine;.

reproduction  in  miniature  of  that  great  series  of  cosmic  changes  to
which  astronomers  have  given  the  name  of  the  Tropical  or  Sidereal
Year.  Just  as,  at  the  close  of  the  cycle  of  the  Sidereal  Year  (25,868
years),  the  heavenly  bodies  return  to  the  same  relative  positions  as
they  occupied  at  its  outset,  so  at  the  close  of  the  cycle  of  Initiation  the
Inner  Man  has  regained  the  pristine  state  of  divine  purity  and  know-
ledge from  which  he  set  out  on  his  cycle  of  terrestrial  incarnation.

Moses,  an  Initiate  into  the  Egyptian  Mystagogy,  based  the  religious
mysteries  of  the  new  nation  which  he  created,  upon  the  same  abstract
formulae  derived  from  this  Sidereal  Cycle,  symbolized  by  the  form  and
measurements  of  the  Tabernacle,  which  he  is  supposed  to  have  con-
structed in  the  Wilderness.  On  these  data,  the  later  Jewish  High
Priests  constructed  the  allegory  of  Solomon's  Temple — a  building
which  never  had  a  real  existence,  any  more  than  had  King  Solomon
himself,  who  is  as  much  a  solar  myth  as  is  the  still  later  Hiram  Abif  of
the  Masons,  as  Ragon  has  well  demonstrated.  Thus,  if  the  measure-
ments of  this  allegorical  Temple,  the  symbol  of  the  cycle  of  Initiation,
coincide  with  those  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  it  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the
former  were  derived  from  the  latter  through  the  Tabernacle  of  Moses.

That  our  author  has  undeniably  discovered  one  and  even  two  of  the
keys,  is  fully  demonstrated  in  the  work  just  quoted.  One  has  only  to
read  it,  to  feel  a  growing  conviction  that  the  hidden  meaning  of  the
allegories  and  parables  of  both  Testaments  is  now  unveiled.  But  that
he  owes  this  discovery  far  more  to  his  own  genius  than  to  Parker  and
Piazzi  Smyth,  is  also  as  certain,  if  not  more  so.  For,  as  just  shown,  it
is  not  so  certain  whether  the  measures  of  the  Great  Pyramid  adopted
by  the  Biblical  Pyramidalists  are  beyond  suspicion.  A  proof  of  this  is
to  be  found  in  the  work  called  The  Pyramids  and  Temples  of  Gizeh,  by
Mr.  F.  Petrie,  and  also  in  other  works  written  quite  recently  to  oppose
the  said  calculations,  which  their  authors  call  "biassed."  We  gather
that  nearly  every  one  of  Piazzi  Smyth's  measurements  differs  from  the
later  and  more  carefully  made  measurements  of  Mr.  Petrie,  who  con-
cludes the  Introduction  to  his  work  with  this  sentence :

As  to  the  results  of  the  whole  investigation,  perhaps  many  theorists  will  agree
with  an  American  who  was  a  warm  believer  in  Pyramid  theories  when  he  came  to
Gizeh.  I  had  the  pleasure  of  his  company  there  for  a  couple  of  days,  and  at  our
last  meal  together  he  said  to  me  in  a  saddened  way:  "Well,  sir!  I  feel  as  if  I  had
been  to  a  funeral.  By  all  means  let  the  old  theories  have  a  decent  burial,  though
we  should  take  care  that  in  our  haste  none  of  the  wounded  ones  are  buried  alive."

As  regards  the  late  J.  A.  Parker's  calculation  in  general,  and  his


THE   QUADRATURE  OF  THE  CIRCLE.  335

third  proposition  especially,  we  have  consulted  some  eminent  mathe-
maticians, and  this  is  the  substance  of  what  they  say:

Parker's  reasoning  rests  on  sentimental,  rather  than  on  mathe-
matical, considerations,  and  is  logically  inconclusive.

Proposition  III,  namely,  that:

The  circle  is  the  natural  basis  or  beginning  of  all  area,  and  the  square  being  made
so  in  mathematical  science,  is  artificial  and  arbitrary.

— is  an  illustration  of  an  arbitrary  proposition,  and  cannot  safely  be
relied  upon  in  mathematical  reasoning.  The  same  observation  applies,
even  more  strongly,  to  Proposition  VII,  which  states  that:

Because  the  circle  is  the  primary  shape  in  nature,  and  hence  the  basis  of  area;
and  because  the  circle  is  measured  by.  and  is  equal  to  the  square  only  in  ratio  of
half  its  circumference  by  the  radius,  therefore,  circumference  and  radius,  and  not
the  square  of  diameter,  are  the  only  natural  and  legitimate  elements  of  area,  by
which  all  regular  shapes  are  made  equal  to  the  square,  and  equal  to  the  circle.

Proposition  IX  is  a  remarkable  example  of  faulty  reasoning,  though
it  is  the  one  on  which  Mr.  Parker's  Quadrature  mainly  rests.  It  states
that:

The  circle  and  the  equilateral  triangle  are  opposite  to  one  another  in  all  the
elements  of  their  construction,  and  hence  the  fractional  diameter  of  one  circle,
which  is  equal  to  the  diameter  of  one  square,  is  in  the  opposite  duplicate  ratio  to
the  diameter  of  an  equilateral  triangle  whose  area  is  one,  etc.,  etc.

Granting,  for  the  sake  of  argument,  that  a  triangle  can  be  said  to
have  a  radius,  in  the  sense  in  which  we  speak  of  the  radius  of  a  circle
— for  what  Parker  calls  the  radius  of  the  triangle,  is  the  radius  of  a
circle  inscribed  in  a  triangle,  and  therefore  not  the  radius  of  the
triangle  at  all — and  granting  for  the  moment  the  other  fanciful  and
mathematical  propositions  united  in  his  premisses,  why  must  we  con-
clude that,  if  the  equilateral  triangle  and  circle  are  opposite  in  all  the
elements  of  their  construction,  the  diameter  of  any  defined  circle  is  in
the  opposite  duplicate  ratio  of  the  diameter  of  any  given  equivalent
triangle?  What  necessar>-  connection  is  there  between  the  premisses
and  the  conclusion?  The  reasoning  is  of  a  kind  not  known  in  geo-
metr>',  and  would  not  be  accepted  by  strict  mathematicians.

Whether  the  archaic  Esoteric  system  originated  the  British  inch  or
not,  is  of  little  consequence,  however,  to  the  strict  and  true  meta-
physician. Nor  does  Mr.  Ralston  Skinner's  esoteric  reading  of  the
Bible  become  incorrect,  merely  because  the  mea.surements  of  the  Pyra-
mid may  not  be  found  to  agree  with  those  of  Solomon's  Temple,  the


336  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Ark  of  Noah,  etc.,  or  because  Mr.  Parker's  Quadrature  of  the  Circle
is  rejected  by  mathematicians.  For  Mr.  Skinner's  reading  depends
primarily  on  the  Kabalistic  methods  and  the  Rabbinical  value  of  the
Hebrew  letters.  But  it  is  extremely  important  to  ascertain  whether
the  measures  used  in  the  evolution  of  the  symbolic  religion  of  the
Aryans,  in  the  construction  of  their  temples,  in  the  figures  given  in  the
Purdnas,  and  especially  in  their  chronology,  their  astronomical  sym-
bols, the  duration  of  the  cycles,  and  other  computations,  were,  or  were
not,  the  same  as  those  used  in  the  Biblical  measurements  and  glj^phs.
For  this  will  prove  that  the  Jews,  unless  they  took  their  sacred  cubit
and  measurements  from  the  Egyptians — Moses  being  an  Initiate  of
their  Priests — must  have  got  those  notions  from  India.  At  any  rate
they  passed  them  on  to  the  early  Christians.  Hence,  it  is  the  Occult-
ists and  Kabalists  who  are  the  true  heirs  to  the  Knowledge,  or  the
Secret  Wisdom,  which  is  still  found  in  the  Bible;  for  they  alone  now
understand  its  real  meaning,  whereas  profane  Jews  and  Christians
cling  to  the  husks  and  dead  letter  thereof.  That  it  was  this  system  of
measures  which  led  to  the  invention  of  the  God-names  Elohim  and
Jehovah,  and  to  their  adaptation  to  Phallicism,  and  that  Jehovah  is  a
not  very  flattering  copy  of  Osiris,  is  now  demonstrated  by  the  author  of
the  Source  of  Meastires.  But  the  latter  and  Mr.  Piazzi  Smyth  both  seem
to  labour  under  the  impression  that  {a)  the  priority  of  the  system
belongs  to  the  Israelites,  the  Hebrew  language  being  the  divine  lan-
guage, and  that  (J))  this  universal  language  belongs  to  direct  revela-
tion!

The  latter  hypothesis  is  correct  only  in  the  sense  shown  in  the  last
paragraph  of  the  preceding  Section ;  but  we  have  yet  to  agree  as  to  the
nature  and  character  of  the  divine  "  Revealer."  The  former  hypothesis
as  to  priority  will  for  the  profane,  of  course  depend  on  {a)  the  internal
and  external  evidence  of  the  revelation,  and  {p)  on  each  scholar's  indivi-
dual preconceptions.  This,  however,  cannot  prevent  either  the  Theistic
Kabalist,  or  the  Pantheistic  Occultist,  from  believing  each  in  his  way ;
neither  of  the  two  convincing  the  other.  The  data  furnished  by  his-
tor>'  are  too  meagre  and  unsatisfactory  for  either  of  them  to  prove  to
the  sceptic  which  of  them  is  right.

On  the  other  hand,  the  proofs  afforded  by  tradition  are  too  constantly
rejected  for  us  to  hope  to  settle  the  question  in  our  present  age.  Mean-
while, Materialistic  Science  will  be  laughing  at  both  Kabalists  and
Occultists  indifferently.     But  the  vexed  question  of  priority  once  laid


TRUTH  MUST   PREVAIL  AT  LAST.  337

aside,  Science,  in  its  departments  of  Philology  and  Comparative  Reli-
gion, will  find  itself  finally  taken  to  task,  and  be  compelled  to  admit
the  common  claim.

One  by  one  the  claims  become  admitted,  as  one  Scientist  after
another  is  compelled  to  recognize  the  facts  given  out  from  the  Secret
Doctrine;  though  he  rarely,  if  ever,  recognizes  that  he  has  been  antici-
pated in  his  statements.  Thus,  in  the  palmy  days  of  Mr.  Piazzi
Smyth's  authority  on  the  Pj^ramid  of  Gizeh,  his  theory  was,  that  the
porphyry  sarcophagus  of  the  King's  Chamber  was  '^the  unit  of  measure
for  the  two  most  enlightened  nations  of  the  earth,  England  and
America,"  and  was  no  better  than  a  "corn-bin."  This  was  vehemently
denied  by  us  in  his  Unveiled,  which  had  just  been  published  at  that
time.  Then  the  New  York  press  arose  in  arms  (the  Sun  and  the
World  newspapers  chiefly)  against  our  presuming  to  correct  or  find
fault  with  such  a  star  of  learning.  In  that  work,  we  had  said,  that
Herodotus,  when  treating  of  that  Pyramid :

.  .  .  might  have  added  that,  externally  it  symbolized  the  creative  principle  of
Nature,  and  illustrated  also  the  principles  of  geometry,  jnathematics,  astrology,  and
astronomy.  Internally,  it  was  a  majestic  fane,  in  whose  sombre  recesses  were  per-
formed the  Mysteries,  and  whose  walls  had  often  witnessed  the  initiation-scenes  of
members  of  the  royal  family.  The  porphyry  sarcophagus,  which  Professor  Piazzi
Smyth,  Astronomer  Royal  of  Scotland,  degrades  into  a  corn-bin,  was  the  baptismal
font,  upon  emerging  from  which  the  neophyte  was  "born  again"  and  became  an
adept.*

Our  statement  was  laughed  at  in  those  days.  We  were  accused  of
having  got  our  ideas  from  the  "craze"  of  Shaw,  an  English  writer  who
had  maintained  that  the  sarcophagus  had  been  used  for  the  celebration
of  the  Mysteries  of  Osiris,  although  we  had  never  heard  of  that  writer.
And  now,  six  or  seven  years  later  (1882),  this  is  what  Mr.  Staniland
Wake  writes :

The  so-called  King's  Chamber,  of  which  an  enthusiastic  pyramidist  says,  "The
polished  walls,  fine  materials,  grand  proportions,  and  exalted  place,  eloquently  tell
of  glories  yet  to  come,"  if  not  "the  chamber  of  perfections"  of  Cheops'  tomb,  was
probably  the  place  to  which  the  initiant  was  admitted  after  he  had  passed  through  the
narrow  npivard  passage  and  the  grand  gallery,  with  its  lowly  termination,  which
gradually  prepared  him  for  the  final  stage  of  the  Sacred  Mysteries.i

Had  Mr.  Staniland  Wake  been  a  Theosophist,  he  might  have  added
that  the  narrow  upward  passage  leading  to  the  King's  Chamber  had  a
"narrow  gate"  indeed;  the  same   "strait  gate"  which  "leadeth  unto


op.  cit.,  I.  519.  +  The  Origin  and  Significance  of  the  Great  Pyramid,  p.  93.


338  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

life,"  or  the  new  spiritual  re-birth  alluded  to  by  Jesus  in  Matthew;*
and  that  it  was  of  this  gate  in  the  Initiation  Temple,  that  the  writer,
who  recorded  the  words  alleged  to  have  been  spoken  by  an  Initiate,
was  thinking.

Thus  the  greatest  scholars  of  Science,  instead  of  pooh-poohing  that
supposed  "farrago  of  absurd  fiction  and  superstitions,"  as  the  Brah-
manical  literature  is  generally  termed,  will  endeavour  to  learn  the
symbolical  universal  language,  with  its  numerical  and  geometrical
keys.  But  here,  again,  they  will  hardly  be  successful,  if  they  share
the  belief  that  the  Jewish  Kabalistic  system  contains  the  key  to  the
whole  mystery ;  for  it  does  not.  Nor  does  any  other  Scripture  at  present
possess  it  in  its  entirety,  since  even  the  Vedas  are  not  complete.  Kver>^
old  religion  is  but  a  chapter  or  two  of  the  entire  volume  of  archaic
primeval  mysteries;  Eastern  Occultism  alone  being  able  to  boast  that
it  is  in  possession  of  the  full  secret,  with  its  seve^i  keys.  Comparisons
will  be  instituted,  and  as  much  as  possible  will  be  explained  in  this
work;  the  rest  is  left  to  the  student's  personal  intuition.  In  saying
that  Eastern  Occultism  has  the  secret,  it  is  not  as,  if  a  "complete"
or  even  an  approximate  knowledge  was  claimed  by  the  writer,  which
would  be  absurd.  What  I  know,  I  give  out;  that  which  I  cannot  ex-
plain, the  student  must  find  out  for  himself.

But  though  we  may  suppose  that  the  entire  cycle  of  the  universal
Mystery  Language  will  not  be  mastered  for  centuries  to  come,  yet
even  the  little  which  has  hitherto  been  discovered  in  the  Bible  by
some  scholars,  is  quite  sufficient  to  demonstrate  the  claim — mathe-
matically. As  Judaism  availed  itself  of  two  keys  out  of  the  seven,  and
as  these  two  keys  have  now  been  re-discovered,  it  becomes  no  longer  a
matter  of  individual  speculation  and  hypothesis,  least  of  all  of  "coin-
cidence," but  one  of  a  correct  reading  of  the  Biblical  texts,  just  as
anyone  acquainted  with  arithmetic  reads  and  verifies  an  addition  sum.
In  fact,  all  we  have  said  in  his  Unveiled  is  now  found  corroborated  in
the  Egyptian  Mystery,  or  The  Source  of  Measures,  by  such  readings  of
the  Bible  with  the  numerical  and  geometrical  keys.

A  few  years  longer,  and  this  system  will  kill  the  dead-letter  reading
of  the  Bible,  as  it  will  that  of  all  the  other  exoteric  faiths,  by  showing
the  dogmas  in  their  real,  naked  meaning.  And  then  this  undeniable
meaning,  however  incomplete,  will  unveil  the  mystery  of  Being,  and
will,  moreover,  entirely  change  the  modern  scientific  systems  of  An-

*  vii.  13  et  seq.


MOSES  AND  THE  ARK  OF  BULRUSHES  COPIED  FROM  SARGON.       339

thropolog}',  Ethnology  and  especially  that  of  Chronology.  The  ele-
ment of  Phallicism,  found  in  every  God-name  and  narrative  in  the
Old,  and  to  some  degree  in  the  New,  Testament,  may  also  in  time  con-
siderably change  modern  materialistic  views  on  Biology  and  Physiology.

Divested  of  their  modern  repulsive  crudeness,  such  views  of  Nature
and  man  will,  on  the  authority  of  the  celestial  bodies  and  their  mys-
teries, unveil  the  evolutions  of  the  human  mind  and  show  how  natural
was  such  a  course  of  thought.  The  so-called  phallic  symbols  have
become  offensive  only  because  of  the  element  of  materiality  and  ani-
mality  in  them.  In  the  beginning,  such  symbols  were  but  natural,  as
they  originated  with  the  archaic  races,  which,  issuing  to  their  personal
knowledge  from  an  androgyne  ancestrj^  were  the  first  phenomenal
manifestations  in  their  own  sight  of  the  separation  of  the  sexes  and
the  ensuing  mystery  of  creating  in  their  turn.  If  later  races,  espe-
cially the  "chosen  people,"  have  degraded  them,  this  does  not  affect
the  origin  of  the  symbols.  This  little  Semitic  tribe — one  of  the
smallest  branchlets  from  the  commingling  of  the  fourth  and  fifth
sub-races,  the  Mongolo-Turanian  and  the  so-called  Indo-European,
after  the  sinking  of  the  great  Continent — could  only  accept  its  sym-
bology  in  the  spirit  which  was  given  to  it  by  the  nations  from  which
it  was  derived.  And,  perchance,  in  the  Mosaic  beginnings,  the  sym-
bolog>'  was  not  so  crude  as  it  became  later  under  the  handling  of  Ezra,
who  remodelled  the  whole  Pentateuch.  To  take  an  instance,  the  gb^ph
of  Pharaoh's  daughter  (the  woman),  the  Nile  (the  Great  Deep  and
Water),  and  the  baby-boy  found  floating  therein  in  the  ark  of  rushes,
was  not  primarily  composed  for,  or  by,  Moses.  It  was  anticipated  in
the  fragments  found  on  the  Babylonian  tiles,  in  the  story  of  King
Sargon,  who  lived  far  earlier  than  Moses.

In  his  Assyrian  Antiquities,^-  Mr.  George  Smith  says:  "In  the  palace
of  Sennacherib  at  Kouyunjik,  I  found  another  fragment  of  the  curious
history-  of  Sargon  .  .  .  published  in  my  translation  in  the  Trans-
actions of  the  Society  of  Biblical  ArchcEologyT  \  The  capital  of  Sargon
the  Babylonian  Moses,  "was  the  great  city  of  Agadi,  called  by  the
Semites  Akkad — mentioned  in  GenesisX  as  the  capital  of  Nimrod.  .  .  .
Akkad  lay  near  the  City  of  Sippara  on  the  Euphrates  and  North  of
Babylon. "§  Another  strange  "coincidence"  is  found  in  the  fact  that
the  name  of  the  neighbouring  City  of  Sippara  is  the  same  as  the
name  of  the  wife  of  Moses — Zipporah.||      Of  course  the  story  is  a

•  p.  224.        +  Vol.  I.  Part  I.  40.        t  X.  10.         \  See  Isis  Unveiled,  11.  442-3.         II  Exodus,  11.  21.


340  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

clever  addition  by  Ezra,  zvho  could  not  have  been  ignorant  of  the  original.
This  curious  story  is  found  on  fragments  of  tablets  from  Kouyunjik,
and  reads  as  follows:

1.  Sargina,  the  powerful  king,  the  king  of  Akkad  am  I.

2.  My  mother  was  a  princess,  my  father  I  did  not  know;  a  brother  of  my  father
ruled  over  the  country.

3.  In  the  city  of  Azupiranu,  which  by  the  side  of  the  river  Euphrates  is  situated,

4.  My  mother,  the  princess,  conceived  me;  in  difficulty  she  brought  me  forth;

5.  She  placed  me  in  an  ark  of  rushes,  with  bitumen  my  exit  she  sealed  up;

6.  She  launched  me  in  the  river,  which  did  not  drown  me.

7.  The  river  carried  me,  to  Akki,  the  water-carrier,  it  brought  me.

8.  Akki,  the  water-carrier,  in  tenderness  of  bowels,  lifted  me.*

And  now  let  us  compare  the  Bible  narrative  in  Exodus:

And  when  she  [Moses'  mother]  could  not  longer  hide  him,  she  took  for  him

an  ark  of  bulrushes,  and  daubed  it  with  slime  and  with  pitch,  and  put  the  child

therein,  and  she  laid  it  in  the  flags  by  the  river's  brink,  t

Mr.  G.  Smith  then  continues:

The  story  is  supposed  to  have  happened  about  1600  B.C.,  rather  earlier  than  the
supposed  age  of  Moses;  and,  as  we  know  that  the  fame  of  Sargon  reached  Eg>-pt,  it
is  quite  likely  that  this  account  had  a  connection  with  the  events  related  in  Exodus
II,  for  every  action,  when  once  performed,  has  a  tendency  to  be  repeated.

But  now  that  Professor  Sayce  has  had  the  courage  to  push  back  the
dates  of  the  Chaldean  and  Assyrian  Kings  by  two  thousand  years  more,
Sargon  must  have  preceded  Moses  by  2,000  years  at  the  least.  The
confession  is  suggestive,  but  the  figures  lack  a  cypher  or  two.

Now,  what  is  the  logical  inference?  Most  assuredly,  that  which
gives  us  the  right  to  say  that  the  story  told  of  Moses  by  Ezra  had  been
learned  by  him  while  at  Babylon,  and  that  he  applied  the  allegory  told
of  Sargon  to  the  Jewish  lawgiver.  In  short,  that  Exodus  was  never
written  by  Moses,  but  was  re-fabricated  from  old  materials  by  Ezra.

And  if  so,  then  why  should  not  other  symbols  and  glyphs  far  more
crude  in  their  phallic  element  have  been  added  by  this  adept  in  the
later  Chaldean  and  Sabaean  phallic  worship?  We  are  taught  that  the
primeval  faith  of  the  Israelites  was  quite  different  from  that  which  was
developed  centuries  later  by  the  Talmudists,  and  before  them  by  David
and  Hezekiah.

All  this,  notwithstanding  the  exoteric  element,  as  now  found  in  the
two   Testaments,  is  quite  sufficient  to  class  the  Bible  among  esoteric


*  George  Smith,  Chaldean  Account  of  Genesis,  pp.  299,  300.  +  u.  3-


OCCULT  NUMBERS.  341

works,  and  to  connect  its  secret  system  with  Indian,  Chaldean,  and
Egyptian  symbolism.  The  whole  cycle  of  Biblical  glyphs  and  numbers,
as  suggested  by  astronomical  observ^ations — Astronomy  and  Theology
being  closely  connected — is  found  in  Indian  exoteric,  as  well  as  esoteric,
systems.  These  figures  and  their  symbols,  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac,
the  planets,  their  aspects  and  nodes — the  last  term  having  now  passed
even  into  our  modern  Botany — are  known  in  Astronomy  as  Sextiles,
Quartiles  and  so  on,  and  have  been  used  for  ages  and  aeons  by  the
archaic  nations,  and  in  one  sense  have  the  same  meaning  as  the
Hebrew  numerals.  The  earliest  forms  of  elementarj'  geometry  must
have  certainly  been  suggested  by  the  observation  of  the  heavenly
bodies  and  their  groupings.  Hence,  the  most  archaic  symbols  in-
Eastern  Esotericism  are  a  circle,  a  point,  a  triangle,  a  square,  a  pen-
tagon, and  a  hexagon,  and  other  plane  figures  with  various  sides  and
angles.  This  shows  the  knowledge  and  use  of  geometrical  symbology
to  be  as  old  as  the  world.

Starting  from  this,  it  becomes  easy  to  understand  how  Nature  herself,
even  without  the  help  of  their  divine  instructors,  could  have  taught
primeval  mankind  the  first  principles  of  a  numerical  and  geometrical
symbol-language.*  Hence  we  find  numbers  and  figures  used  as  an
expression  and  a  record  of  thought  in  every  archaic  symbolical  Scrip-
ture. They  are  ever  the  same,  with  certain  variations  only,  arising
from  the  first  figures.  Thus  the  evolution  and  correlation  of  the
mysteries  of  Kosmos,  of  its  growth  and  development — spiritual  and
physical,  abstract  and  concrete — were  first  recorded  in  geometrical
changes  of  shape.  Ever}^  Cosmogony  began  with  a  circle,  a  point,  a
triangle  and  a  square,  up  to  number  9,  when  it  was  synthesized  b}'  the
first  line  and  a  circle — the  Pythagorean  mystic  Decad,  the  sum  of  all,
involving  and  expressing  the  mysteries  of  the  entire  Kosmos;  mys-
teries recorded  a  hundred  times  more  fully  in  the  Hindu  system  than
elsewhere,  for  him  who  can  understand  its  mystic  language.  The
numbers  3  and  4,  in  their  combination  7,  and  also  5,  6,  9,  and  10,  are
the  very  corner-stones  of  Occult  Cosmogonies.  This  Decad  and  its
thousand  combinations  are  found  in  every  portion  of  the  globe.  One
recognizes  it  in   the   caves   and  rock-cut  temples   of   Hindustan  and


•  As  a  reminder  how  the  esoteric  religion  of  Moses  was  crushed  several  times,  and  the  worship  of
Jehovah,  as  reestablished  by  David,  pnt  in  its  place,  by  Hezekiah  for  instance,  compare  his  Unveiled
(II.  436-42).  Surely  there  must  have  l>een  some  very  good  reasons  why  the  Saddueees,  who  furnished
almost  all  the  High  Priests  of  Judaea,  held  to  the  Laws  of  Moses  and  spurned  the  alleged  "Books  of
Moses,"  the  Pentateuch  of  the  Synagogue  and  the  Talmud?


342  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Central  Asia;  in  the  Pyramids  and  Litlioi  of  Egypt  and  America;  in
the  Catacombs  of  Ozimandyas;  in  the  mounds  of  the  snow-capped
Caucasian  fastnesses;  in  the  ruins  of  Palenque;  in  Easter  Island;
everywhere  whither  the  foot  of  ancient  man  has  ever  journeyed.  The
3  and  the  4,  the  triangle  and  the  square,  or  the  universal  male  and
female  glyphs,  showing  the  first  aspect  of  the  evolving  deity,  are
stamped  for  ever  in  the  Southern  Cross  in  the  Heavens,  as  in  the
Egj'ptian  Crux  Ansata.  As  well  expressed  by  the  author  of  The
Source  of  Measures  :

The  Cube  unfolded  is  in  display  a  cross  of  the  Tau,  or  Egyptian  form,  or  of  the
Christian  cross-form.  ...  A  circle  attached  to  the  first,  gives  the  Ansated
Cross  .  .  .  numbers  3  and  4,  counted  on  the  cross,  showing  a  form  of  the  [Hebrew]
golden  candlestick  [in  the  Holy  of  Holies],  and  of  the  3+4=7,  and  6  +  1  =  7,  days  in
the  circle  of  the  week,  as  7  lights  of  the  sun.  So  also  as  the  week  of  7  lights  gave
origin  to  the  month  and  year,  so  it  is  the  time-marker  of  birth.  .  .  .  The  cross-
form  being  shown,  then,  by  the  connected  use  of  the  form  113:355,  the  symbol  is
completed  by  the  attachment  of  a  man  to  the  cross*  This  kind  of  measure  was
made  to  coordinate  with  the  idea  of  the  origin  of  human  life,  and  hence  the  phallic
form.

The  Stanzas  show  the  cross  and  these  numbers  playing  a  prominent
part  in  archaic  Cosmogony.  Meanwhile  we  may  profit  by  the  evidence
collected  by  the  same  author,  in  the  section  which  he  rightlj'  calls  the
"Primordial  Vestiges  of  these  Symbols,"  to  show  the  identity  of
symbols  and  their  esoteric  meaning  all  over  the  globe.

Under  the  general  view  taken  of  the  nature  of  the  number-forms  ....  it  be-
comes a  matter  of  research  of  the  utmost  interest  as  to  when  and  where  their
existence  and  their  use  first  became  known.  Has  it  been  a  matter  of  revelation  in
what  we  know  as  the  historic  age — a  cycle  exceedingly  modern  when  the  age  of  the
human  race  is  contemplated?  It  seems,  in  fact,  as  to  the  date  of  its  possession  by
man,  to  have  been  farther  removed,  in  the  past,  from  the  old  Egyptians  than  are
♦he  old  Egyptians  from  us.

The  Easter  Isles  in  "mid  Pacific"  present  the  feature  of  the  remaining  peaks  of
the  mountains  of  a  submerged  continent,  for  the  reason  that  these  peaks  are  thickly
studded  with  cyclopean  statues,  remnants  of  the  civilization  of  a  dense  and  culti-
vated people,  who  must  have,  of  necessity,  occupied  a  widely  extended  area.  On
the  backs  of  these  images  is  to  be  found  the  " ansated  cross''  and  the  same  modified
to  the  outlines  of  the  human  form.  A  full  description,  with  plate  showing  the
land  with  the  thickly  planted  statues,  also  with  copies  of  the  images,  is  to  be  found
in  the  January  number,  1870,  of  the  London  Builder.     .     .     .

In  the  Naturalist,  published  at  Salem,  Massachusetts,  in  one  of  the  early  num-
bers (about  36),  is  to  be  found  a  description  of  some  very  ancient  and  curious  carving

*  Once  more,  i-emember  the  Hindu  Wittoba  crucified  in  space;  the  significance  of  the  "sacred
sign,"  the  Svastika;  Plato's  Decussated  Man  in  Space,  etc.


IDENTITY   OF  THE   ANCIENT  SYMBOLS.  343

on  the  crest  walls  of  the  mountains  of  South  America,  older  by  far,  it  is  averred,
than  the  races  now  living.  The  strangeness  of  these  tracings  is  in  that  they  exhibit
the  outlines  of  a  man  stretched  out  on  a  cross,*  by  a  series  of  drawings,  by  which
from  the  form  of  a  man  that  of  a  cross  springs,  but  so  done  that  the  cross  may  be
taken  as  the  man,  or  the  man  as  the  cross

It  is  known  that  tradition  among  the  Aztecs  has  handed  down  a  verj'  perfect
account  of  the  dchige.  .  .  .  Baron  Humboldt  says  that  we  are  to  look  for  the
country  of  Aztalan,  the  original  country  of  the  Aztecs,  as  high  up,  at  least,  as  the
42nd  parallel  north;  whence  journeying,  they  at  last  arrived  in  the  vale  of  Mexico.
In  that  vale  the  earthen  mounds  of  the  far  north  become  the  elegant  stone  P3'ra-
midal,  and  other  structures,  whose  remains  are  now  found.  The  correspondences
between  the  Aztec  remains  and  those  of  the  Egyptians  are  well  known.  .  .  .
Atwater,  from  examination  of  hundreds  of  them,  is  convinced  that  they  had  a
knowledge  of  astronomy.  As  to  one  of  the  most  perfect  of  the  pyramidal  struc-
tures among  the  Aztecs,  Humboldt  gives  a  description  to  the  following  eflfect:

"The  form  of  this  pj^ramid  [of  Papantla]  which  has  seven  stories,  is  more  tapering
than  any  other  monument  of  this  kind  yet  discovered,  but  its  height  is  not  remark-
able, being  but  57  feet,  its  base  but  25  feet  on  each  side.  However,  it  is  remarkable
on  one  account:  it  is  built  entirely  of  hewn  stones,  of  an  extraordinary  size,  and
verj'  beautifully  shaped.  Three  staircases  lead  to  the  top,  the. steps  of  which  were
decorated  with  hieroglyphical  sculptures  and  small  niches,  arranged  with  great
symmetry'.  The  number  of  these  niches  seem  to  allude  to  the  318  simple  and  com-
pound signs  of  the  days  of  their  civil  calendar.''''

318  is  the  Gnostic  value  of  Christ,  and  the  famous  number  of  the  trained  or  cir-
cumcized  servants  of  Abram.  When  it  is  considered  that  318  is  an  abstract  value,
and  universal,  as  expressive  of  a  diameter  value  to  a  circumference  of  unity,  its  use
in  the  composition  of  a  civil  calendar  becomes  manifest.

Identical  glyphs,  numbers  and  esoteric  symbols  are  found  in  Egypt,
Peru,  Mexico,  Easter  Lsland,  India,  Chaldaea,  and  Central  Asia — Cruci-
fied Men,  and  symbols  of  the  evolution  of  races  from  Gods — and  yet
behold  Science  repudiating  the  idea  of  a  human  race  other  than  one
made  in  our  image ;  Theolog}-  clinging  to  its  6,000  years  of  Creation  ;
Anthropology  teaching  our  descent  from  the  ape;  and  the  Clergy
tracing  it  from  Adam  4,004  years  b.c!  !

Shall  one,  for  fear  of  incurring  the  penalty  of  being  called  a  super-
stitious fool,  and  even  a  liar,  abstain  from  furnishing  proofs — as  good
as  any  existent — only  because  that  day,  when  all  the  Seven  Keys  shall
be  delivered  unto  Science,  or  rather  the  men  of  learning  and  research
in  the  department  of  symbology,  has  not  yet  dawned?  In  the  face  of
the  crushing  discoveries  of  Geolog}-  and  Anthropology  with  regard  to
the  antiquity  of  man,  shall  we — in  order  to  avoid  the  usual  penalty  that

*  See  farther  on  the  description  given  of  the  early  An-an  Initiation:  of  Vishvakanuan  crucifying
the  Sun,  Vikarttaua,  shorn  of  his  beams — on  a  cruciform  lathe.


344  'J'he;  secret  doctrine.

awaits  every  one  who  strays  outside  the  beaten  paths  of  either  Theo-
logy or  Materialism — hold  to  the  6,000  years  and  "special  creation,"  or
accept  in  submissive  admiration  our  genealog}^  and  descent  from  the
ape?  Not  so,  as  long  as  it  is  known  that  the  Secret  Records  hold  the
said  Seven  Keys  to  the  mystery  of  the  genesis  of  man.  Faulty,  materia-
listic, and  biassed  as  the  scientific  theories  may  be,  they  are  a  thousand
times  nearer  the  truth  than  the  vagaries  of  Theology.  The  latter  are
in  their  death  agony  for  every  one  but  the  most  uncompromising  bigot
and  fanatic.  Or  rather,  some  of  its  defenders  must  have  lost  their
reason.  For  what  can  one  think  when,  in  the  face  of  the  dead-letter
absurdities  of  the  Bible,  these  are  still  publicly  supported,  and  as
fiercely  as  ever,  and  one  finds  the  Theologians  maintaining  that  though
"the  Scriptures  carefully  refrain  [?]  from  making  any  direct  contribu-
tion to  scientific  knowledge,  they  have  never  stumbled  upon  any  state-
ment which  will  not  abide  the  light  of  Advancing  Science" ! !  !*

Hence  we  have  no  choice  but  either  to  blindly  accept  the  deductions
of  Science,  or  to  cut  ourselves  adrift  from  it,  and  withstand  it  fearlessly
to  its  face,  stating  what  the  Secret  Doctrine  teaches  us,  and  being  fully
prepared  to  bear  the  consequences.

But  let  us  see  whether  Science,  in  its  materialistic  speculations,  and
even  Theology-,  in  its  death-rattle  and  supreme  struggle  to  reconcile
the  6,000  years  since  Adam  with  Sir  Charles  Ivj^ell's  Geological  Evidences
of  the  Antiquity  of  Man,  do  not  themselves  unconsciously  give  us  a
helping  hand.  Ethnology,  on  the  confession  of  some  of  its  most
learned  votaries,  finds  it  already  impossible  to  account  for  the  varieties
in  the  human  race,  unless  the  hj^pothesis  of  the  creation  of  several
Adams  be  accepted.  They  speak  of  "a  white  Adam  and  a  black
Adam,  a  red  Adam  and  a  yellow  Adam."t  Were  they  Hindus  enume-
rating the  rebirths  of  Vamadeva,  from  the  Linga  Purana,  they  could
sa}'  little  more.  For,  enumerating  the  repeated  births  of  Shiva,  they
show  him  in  one  Kalpa  of  a  white  complexion,  in  another  of  a  black
colour,  in  still  another  of  a  red  colour,  after  which  the  Kumara  becomes
" four  youths  of  a  jt'//£?a;' colour."  This  strange  "coincidence,"  as  Mr.
Proctor  would  say,  speaks  only  in  favour  of  scientific  intuition,  as
Shiva-Kumara  simply  represents,  allegorically,  the  human  Races  during
the  genesis  of  man.     But  it  has  led  to  another  intuitional  phenomenon

*  Primeval  Man  Unveiled;  or  the  Anthropology  of  the  Bible,  by  the  author  (unknown)  of  The  Stars
and  the  Angels,  1870,  p.  14.
t  Op.  cit.,  p.  195.


THE   "SATANIC"    RACES.  345

— in  the  theological  ranks  this  time.  The  unknown  author  of  Priyneval
Man,  in  a  desperate  effort  to  screen  the  Divine  Revelation  from  the
merciless  and  eloquent  discoveries  of  Geology  and  Anthropoiog>%
remarking  that  "it  would  be  unfortunate  if  the  defenders  of  the  Bible
should  be  driven  into  the  position  of  either  surrendering  the  inspira-
tion of  Scripture,  or  denying  the  conclusions  of  Geologists" — finds  a
compromise.  Nay,  he  devotes  a  thick  volume  to  proving  this  fact:
"Adam  was  not  the  first  man*  cfeated  upon  this  earth."  The  ex-
humed relics  of  pre-Adamic  man,  "instead  of  shaking  our  confidence
in  Scripture,  supply  additional  proof  of  its  veracit}'."!  How  so?  In
the  simplest  way  imaginable;  for  the  author  argues  that,  henceforth
"we  [the  clerg>'-]  are  enabled  to  leave  scientific  men  to  pursue  their
studies  without  attempting  to  coerce  them  by  the  fear  of  heresy."
This  must  be  a  relief  indeed  to  Messrs.  Huxley,  Tyndall,  and  Sir
Charles  I,yell !

The  Bible  narrative  does  not  commence  with  creation,  as  is  commonly  supposed,
but  with  the  formation  of  Adam  and  Eve,  millions  of  years  after  our  t)lanet  had
been  created.  Its  previous  historj',  so  far  as  Scripture  is  concerned,  is  yet  un-
written. .  .  .  There  may  have  been  not  one,  but  twenty  different  races  upon
the  earth  before  the  time  of  Adam,  just  as  there  may  be  twenty  different  races  of
men  on  other  worlds.  J

Who,  then,  or  what  were  those  races,  since  the  author  still  main-
tains that  Adam  is  the  first  man  of  our  race?  It  was  the  Satanic
Race  and  Races!  "Satan  [was]  never  in  heaven.  Angels  and  men
[being]  one  species."  It  was  the  pre-Adamic  race  of  "Angels  that
sinned."  Satan  was  the  "first  prince  of  this  world,"  we  read.  Having
died  in  consequence  of  his  rebellion,  he  remained  on  earth  as  a  disem-
bodied Spirit,  and  tempted  Adam  and  Kve.

The  earlier  ages  of  the  Satanic  race,  and  more  especially  during  the  life-time  of
Satan  [!  ! !],  may  have  been  a  period  of  patriarchal  civilization  and  comparative
repose — a  time  of  Tubal-Cains  and  Jubals,  when  both  sciences  and  arts  attempted
to  strike  their  roots  into  the  accursed  ground.  .  .  .  What  a  subject  for  an  epic!
.  .  .  .  There  are  inevitable  incidents  which  must  have  occurred.  We  see  before
us  .  .  .  the  gay  primeval  lover  wooing  his  blushing  bride  at  dewy  eve  under
the  Danish  oaks,  that  then  grew  where  now  no  oaks  will  grow  .  .  .  the  grey
primeval  patriarch  .  .  .  the  primeval  oflfspring  innocently  gambolling  by  his
side.     .     .     .     A  thousand  such  pictures  rise  before  us!  §


•  Especially  in  the  face  of  the  evidence  furnished  by  the  authorized  Bible  itself  in  Genesis  (iv.  16,
17),  which  shows  Cain  going  to  the  land  of  Nod  and  there  marrying  a  wife.
+  Ibid.,  p.  194.
t  Ibid.,  p.  55.
}  Ibid.,  pp.  206-7.


346  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

The  retrospective  glance  at  this  Satanic  "blushing  bride,"  in  the
days  of  Satan's  innocence,  does  not  lose  in  poetry  as  it  gains  in
originality.  Quite  the  reverse.  The  modern  Christian  bride — who
does  not  often  blush  now-a-days  before  her  gay  modern  lovers — might
even  derive  a  moral  lesson  from  this  daughter  of  Satan,  created  in  the
exuberant  fancy  of  her  first  human  biographer.  These  pictures — and
to  appreciate  them  at  their  true  value  they  must  be  examined  in  the
volume  that  describes  them — are  all  suggested  with  a  view  to  reconcile
the  infallibility  of  revealed  Scripture  with  Sir  Charles  lyyell's  Antiquity
of  Ma?i,  and  other  damaging  scientific  works.  But  this  does  not
prevent  truth  and  fact  appearing  at  the  foundation  of  these  vagaries,
which  the  author  has  not  dared  to  sign  with  his  own,  or  even  a
borrowed,  name.  For,  his  pre-Adamic  Races — not  Satanic  but  simply
Atlantean,  and  the  Hermaphrodites  before  the  latter — are  mentioned  in
the  Bible,  if  read  esoterically,  as  they  are  in  the  Secret  Doctrine.  The
Seven  Keys  open  the  mysteries,  past  and  future,  of  the  seven  great
Root-Races,  and  of  the  seven  Kalpas.  Though  the  genesis  of  man,  and
even  the  geolog3%  of  Esotericism  will  surely  be  rejected  by  Science,  just
as  much  as  the  Satanic  and  pre-Adamic  Races,  yet  if  the  Scientists,
having  no  other  way  out  of  their  difficulties,  are  compelled  to  choose
between  the  two,  we  feel  certain  that — Scripture  notwithstanding —
once  the  Mystery  Language  is  approximately  mastered,  it  is  the  archaic
teaching  that  will  be  accepted.


SECTION  III.

Primordial  Substance  and  Divine  Thought.


As  it  wcnild  seem  irrational  to  affirm  that  we  already  know  all  existing  causes,  permission  must  be
given  to  assume,  if  need  be,  an  entirely  new  agent.

Assuming-,  what  is  not  strictly  accurate  as  yet,  that  the  undulatory  hypothesis  accounts  for  all  the

facts,  we  are  called  on  to  decide  whether  the  existence  of  an  undulating  ether  is  thereby  proved.

We  cannot  positively  affirm  that  no  other  ^ipposition  will  explain  the  facts.      Newton's   corpuscular

hsnpothesis  is  admitted  to  have  broken  down  on  interference;   and  there  is,  at  the  present  day,  no

rival.    Still,  it  is  extremely  desirable  in  all  such  hj-potheses  to  find   some  collateral  confirmation,

some  evidence  aliunde,  of  the  supposed  Ether Some  hypotheses  consist  of  assumptions  as

to  the  minute  structure  and  operations  of  bodies.     From  the  nature  of  the  case,  these  assumptions

can  never  be  proved  by  direct  means.     Their  only  merit  is  their  suitability  to  express  the  phenomena-

They  are  representative  fictions.

Logic,  by  Alexander  Bain,  LIy.D.,  Part  II,  p.  133.

Ether — this  hypothetical  Proteus,  one  of  the  "representative  fic-
tions" of  Modern  Science,  which,  nevertheless,  was  so  long  accepted — is
one  of  the  lower  "principles"  of  what  we  call  Primordial  Substance
(Akasha,  in  Sanskrit),  one  of  the  dreams  of  old,  which  has  now  again
become  the  dream  of  Modern  Science.  It  is  the  greatest,  as  it  is  the
boldest,  of  the  surviving  speculations  of  ancient  philosophers.  For  the
Occultists,  however,  both  Ether  and  the  Primordial  Substance  are
realities.  To  put  it  plainly.  Ether  is  the  Astral  Ught,  and  the  Prim-
ordial  Substance  is  Akasha,  the  Upadhi  of  Divine  Thought.

In  modern  language,  the  latter  would  be  better  named  Cosmic  Idea-
tion, Spirit;  the  former.  Cosmic  Substance,  Matter.  These,  the  Alpha
and  the  Omega  of  Being,  are  but  the  two  facets  of  the  one  Absolute
Existence.  The  latter  was  never  addressed,  or  even  mentioned,  by
any  name  in  antiquity,  except  in  allegor}\  In  the  oldest  Aryan  race,
the  Hindvi,  the  worship  of  the  intellectual  classes  at  no  time  ever
consisted  in  an  adoration  of  marvellous  form  and  art,  however  fer\^ent,
as  with  the  Greeks;  an  adoration,  which  led  later  on  to  anthropo-
morphism.     But  while  the  Greek  philosopher  adored  form,  and  the


348  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Hindu  sage  alone  "perceived  the  true  relation  of  earthly  beauty  and
eternal  truth" — the  uneducated  of  every  nation  understood  neither,  at
any  time.

They  do  not  understand  it  even  now.  The  evolution  of  the  God-idea
proceeds  apace  with  man's  own  intellectual  evolution.  So  true  is  it
that  the  noblest  ideal  to  which  the  religious  spirit  of  one  age  can  soar,
will  appear  but  a  gross  caricature  to  the  philosophic  mind  in  a  succeed-
ing epoch !  The  philosophers  themselves  had  to  be  initiated  into  per-
ceptive mysteries,  before  they  could  grasp  the  correct  idea  of  the  Ancients
in  relation  to  this  most  metaphysical  subject.  Otherwise — outside  such
Initiation — for  every  thinker  there  will  be  a  "thus  far  shalt  thou  go
and  no  farther"  mapped  out  by  his  intellectual  capacity,  as  clearly  and
as  unmistakably  as  there  is  one  for  the  progress  of  any  nation  or  race
in  its  cycle  by  the  law  of  Karma.  Outside  of  Initiation,  the  ideals  of
contemporary  religious  thought  must  always  have  their  wings  clipped,
and  remain  unable  to  soar  higher;  for  idealistic,  as  well  as  realistic,
thinkers,  and  even  free-thinkers,  are  but  the  outcome  and  the  natural
product  of  their  respective  environments  and  periods.  The  ideals  of
each  are  but  the  necessary  results  of  their  temperaments,  and  the  out-
come of  that  phase  of  intellectual  progress  to  which  a  nation,  in  its
collectivity,  has  attained.  Hence,  as  already  remarked,  the  highest
flights  of  modern  Western  metaphysics  have  fallen  far  short  of  the
truth.  Much  of  current  Agnostic  speculation  on  the  existence  of  the
"First  Cause"  is  little  better  than  veiled  Materialism — the  termino-
logy alone  being  different.  Even  so  great  a  thinker  as  Mr.  Herbert
Spencer  speaks  of  the  "Unknowable"  occasionally  in  terms  that
demonstrate  the  lethal  influence  of  materialistic  thought,  which,  like
the  deadly  Sirocco,  has  withered  and  blighted  all  current  ontological
speculation.

For  instance,  when  he  terms  the  "First  Cause"  the  "Unknowable,"
a  "power  manifesting  through  phenomena,"  and  "an  infinite  eternal
energy'''  it  is  clear  that  he  has  grasped  solely  'ds.^  physical  aspect  of  the
Mystery  of  Being — the  Energies  of  Cosmic  Substance  only.  The  co-
eternal  aspect  of  the  One  Reality,  Cosmic  Ideation,  is  absolutely  omitted
from  consideration,  and  as  to  its  Noumenon,  it  seems  non-existent  in
the  mind  of  the  great  thinker.  Without  doubt,  this  one-sided  mode  of
dealing  with  the  problem  is  due  largely  to  the  pernicious  Western
practice  of  subordinating  Consciousness  to  Matter,  or  regarding  it  as
a  "bj^e-product"  of  molecular  motion.


DIVINE  THOUGHT.  349

From  the  early  ages  of  the  Fourth  Race,  when  Spirit  alone  was  wor-
shipped and  the  Myster}'  w^as  made  manifest,  down  to  the  last  palmy
days  of  Grecian  art,  at  the  dawn  of  Christianity,  the  Hellenes  alone
had  dared  publicly  to  raise  an  altar  to  the  "  Unknown  God."  What-
ever St.  Paul  may  have  had  in  his  profound  mind,  when  declaring  to
the  Athenians  that  this  "Unknown,"  which  they  ignorantly  wor-
shipped, was  the  true  God  announced  by  himself— that  Deity  was  not
"Jehovah,"  nor  was  he  "the  maker  of  the  world  and  all  things."  For
it  is  not  the  "God  of  Israel"  but  the  "Unknown"  of  the  ancient  and
modern  Pantheist  that  "dwelleth  not  in  temples  made  with  hands:"^-

Divine  Thought  cannot  be  defined,  nor  can  its  meaning  be  explained,
except  by  the  numberless  manifestations  of  Cosmic  Substance,  in  which
the  former  is  se7ised  spiritually  by  those  who  can  do  so.     To  say  this,
after  having  defined  it  as  the  Unknown  Deity,  abstract,  impersonal,
sexless,  which  must  be  placed  at  the  root  of  ever>'  Cosmogony  and  its
subsequent  evolution,  is  equivalent  to  sa5dng  nothing  at  all.     It  is  like
attempting  a  transcendental  equation  of  conditio»ns,  having  in  hand
for  deducing  the  true  value  of  its  terms  only  a   number  of  unknown
quantities.     Its  place  is  found  in  the  old  primitive  symbolic  charts,  in
which,  as  already  shown,  it  is  represented  by  a  boundless  darkness,  on
the  ground  of  which  appears  the  first  central  point  in  white— thus  sym-
bolizing coeval  and  coeternal  Spirit-Matter  making  its  appearance  in
the  phenomenal  world,  before  its  first  differentiation.     When  "  the  One
becomes  Two,"  it  may  then  be  referred  to  as  Spirit  and  Matter.     To
"Spirit"  is  referable  ever>^  manifestation  of  Consciousness,  reflective
or   direct,  and   of  "unconscious  purposiveness"— to   adopt  a  modern
expression  used  in  Western  philosophy,  so-called— as  evidenced  in  the
Vital  Principle,  and  Nature's  submission  to  the  majestic  sequence  of
immutable  Law.      "Matter"    must  be  regarded   as   objectivity  in   its
purest  abstraction,  the  self-existing  basis,  whose  septenary  manvan-
taric  differentiations  constitute   the   objective   reality  underlying  the
phenomena  of  each  phase  of  conscious  existence.     During  the  period
of  Universal  Pralaya,  Cosmic  Ideation  is  non-existent ;  and  the  vari-
ously differentiated  states  of  Cosmic  Substance  are  resolved  back  again
into  the  primary  state  of  abstract  potential  objectivity.

Manvantaric  impulse  commences  with  the  reawakening  of  Cosmic
Ideation,  the  Universal  Mind,  concurrently  with,  and  parallel  to,  the
primary  emergence  of  Cosmic  Substance— the  latter  being  the  manvau-

*  Acts,  xvii.  23,  24.


350  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE-

taric  vehicle  of  the  former — from  its  undifferentiated  pralayic  state.
Then,  Absolute  Wisdom  mirrors  itself  in  its  Ideation;  which,  by  a
transcendental  process,  superior  to  and  incomprehensible  by  human
Consciousness,  results  in  Cosmic  'Energy,  Fohat.  Thrilling  through
the  bosom  of  inert  Substance,  Fohat  impels  it  to  activity,  and  guides
its  primary  differentiations  on  all  the  seven  planes  of  Cosmic  Con-
sciousness. There  are  thus  Seven  Protyles — as  they  are  now  called,
whereas  Aryan  antiquity  named  them  the  Seven  Prakritis,  or  Natures
— serving,  severall}^  as  the  relatively  homogeneous  bases,  which  in  the
course  of  the  increasing  heterogeneity,  in  the  evolution  of  the  Universe,
differentiate  into  the  marvellous  complexity  presented  by  phenomena
on  the  planes  of  perception.  The  term  "relatively"  is  used  designedly,
because  the  very  existence  of  such  a  process,  resulting  in  the  primary
segregations  of  undifferentiated  Cosmic  Substance  into  its  septenary
bases  of  evolution,  compels  us  to  regard  the  Protyle  of  each  plane  as
only  a  mediate  phase  assumed  by  Substance  in  its  passage  from  abstract,
into  full  objectivity.  The  term  Protyle  is  due  to  Mr.  Crookes,  the
eminent  Chemist,  who  has  given  that  name  to  pre-mattcr,  if  one  may  so
call  primordial  and  purely  homogeneous  substance,  suspected,  if  not
actually  yet  found,  by  Science  in  the  ultimate  composition  of  the  atom.
But  the  incipient  segregation  of  primordial  matter  into  atoms  and
molecules  takes  its  rise  subsequent  to  the  evolution  of  our  Seven  Pro-
tyles. It  is  the  last  of  these  that  Mr.  Crookes  is  in  search  of,  having
recently  detected  the  possibility  of  its  existence  on  our  plane.

Cosmic  Ideation  is  said  to  be  non-existent  during  pralayic  periods,
for  the  simple  reason  that  there  is  no  one,  and  nothing,  to  perceive  its
effects.  There  can  be  no  manifestation  of  consciousness,  semi-con-
sciousness, or  even  "unconscious  purposiveness,"  except  through  a
vehicle  of  Matter;  that  is  to  say,  on  this  our  plane,  wherein  human
consciousness,  in  its  normal  state,  cannot  soar  beyond  what  is  known  as
transcendental  metaphysics,  it  is  only  through  some  molecular  aggre-
gation, or  fabric,  that  Spirit  wells  up  in  a  stream  of  individual  or  sub-
conscious subjectivity.  And  as  Matter  existing  apart  from  perception
is  a  mere  abstraction,  both  of  these  aspects  of  the  Absolute — Cosmic
Substance  and  Cosmic  Ideation — are  mutually  interdependent.  In
strict  accuracy,  to  avoid  confusion  and  misconception,  the  term
"Matter"  ought  to  be  applied  to  the  aggregate  of  objects  of  possible
perception,  and  the  term  "Substance"  to  Noumena;  for  inasmuch  as
the  phenomena  of  our  plane  are  the  creations  of  the  perceiving  Ego —


THE   UNIVERSAL  ILLUSION.  351

the  modifications  of  its  own  subjectivity — all  the  "states  of  matter
representing  the  aggregate  of  perceived  objects"  can  have  but  a  rela-
rive  and  purely  phenomenal  existence  for  the  children  of  our  plane.
As  the  modern  Idealists  would  say,  the  cooperation  of  Subject  and
Object  results  in  the  sense-object,  or  phenomenon.

But  this  does  not  necessarily  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  it  is  the
same  on  all  other  planes ;  that  the  cooperation  of  the  two,  on  the  planes
of  their  septenary-  differentiation,  results  in  a  septenary  aggregate  of
phenomena  which  are  likewise  non-existent  per  se,  though  concrete
realities  for  the  Entities  of  whose  experience  the}'^  form  a  part,  in  the
same  manner  as  the  rocks  and  rivers  around  us  are  real  from  the  stand-
point of  a  Physicist,  though  unreal  illusions  of  sense  from  that  of  the
Metaphysician.  It  would  be  an  error  to  say,  or  even  conceive,  such  a
thing.  From  the  stand-point  of  the  highest  metaphysics,  the  whole
Universe,  Gods  included,  is  an  Illusion  (Maya).  But  the  illusion  of
him  who  is  in  himself  an  illusion  differs  on  eveiy  plane  of  conscious-
ness ;  and  we  have  no  more  right  to  dogmatize  about  the  possible
nature  of  the  perceptive  faculties  of  an  Ego  on,  say,  the  sixth  plane,
than  we  have  to  identify  our  perceptions  with,  or  make  them  a  standard
for,  those  of  an  ant,  in  its  mode  of  consciousness.  Cosmic  Ideation
focussed  in  a  Principle,  or  Upadhi  (Basis),  results  as  the  consciousness
of  the  individual  Ego.  Its  manifestation  varies  with  the  degree  of  the
Upadhi.  For  instance,  through  that  known  as  Manas,  it  wells  up  as
Mind-Con.sciousness ;  through  the  more  finely  differentiated  fabric
(sixth  state  of  matter)  of  Buddhi — resting  on  the  experience  of  Manas
as  its  Basis — as  a  stream  of  Spiritual  Intuition.

The  pure  Object  apart  from  consciousness  is  unknown  to  us,  while
living  on  the  plane  of  our  three-dimensional  world,  for  we  know  only
the  mental  states  it  excites  in  the  perceiving  Ego.  And,  so  long  as  the
contrast  of  Subject  and  Object  endures— to  wit,  so  long  as  we  enjoy
our  five  senses  and  no  more,  and  do  not  know  how  to  divorce  our  all-
perceiving  Ego  from  the  thraldom  of  these  senses — so  long  will  it  be
impossible  for  the  personal  Ego  to  break  through  the  barrier  which
separates  it  from  a  knowledge  of  "things  in  themselves,"  or  Substance.
That  Ego,  progressing  in  an  arc  of  ascending  subjectivity,  must
exhaust  the  experience  of  every  plane.  But  not  till  the  Unit  is  merged
in  the  All,  whether  on  this  or  any  other  plane,  and  Subject  and  Object
alike  vanish  in  the  absolute  negation  of  the  Nirvanic  State— negation,
again,  on\y  from  our pla?ie— not  until  then,  is  scaled  that  peak  of  Omni-


352  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

science,  the  Knowledge  of  Things-in-themselves,  and  the  solution  of
the  yet  more  awful  riddle  approached,  before  which  even  the  highest
Dhyan  Chohan  must  bow  in  silence  and  ignorance — the  Unspeakable
Mystery  of  that  which  is  called  by  the  Vedantins,  Parabrahman.

Therefore,  such  being  the  case,  all  those  who  have  sought  to  give  a
name  to  the  Incognizable  Principle  have  simply  degraded  it.  Even  to
speak  of  Cosmic  Ideation — save  in  its  phe7iomenal  aspect — is  like  trying
to  bottle  up  primordial  Chaos,  or  to  put  a  printed  label  on  Eternity.

What,  then,  is  the  "Primordial  Substance,"  that  mysterious  object  of
which  Alchemy  was  ever  talking,  and  which  was  the  subject  of  philo-
sophical speculation  in  every  age?  What  can  it  be  finally,  even  in
its  phenomenal  pre-differentiation  ?  Even  that  is  the  All  of  manifested
Nature  and — nothing  to  our  senses.  It  is  mentioned  under  various
names  in  every  cosmogony,  referred  to  in  every  philosophy,  and  shown
to  be,  to  this  day,  the  ever  grasp-eluding  Proteus  in  Nature.  We
touch  and  do  not  feel  it;  we  look  at  it  without  seeing  it;  we  breathe  it
and  do  not  perceive  it;  we  hear  and  smell  it  without  the  smallest
cognition  that  it  is  there ;  for  it  is  in  every  molecule  of  that  which,  in
our  illusion  and  ignorance,  we  regard  as  Matter  in  any  of  its  states,  or
conceive  as  a  feeling,  a  thought,  an  emotion.  In  short,  it  is  the
Upadhi,  or  Vehicle,  of  every  possible  phenomenon,  whether  physical,
mental,  or  psychic.  In  the  opening  sentences  of  Genesis,  and  in  the
Chaldean  Cosmogony ;  in  the  Purdnas  of  India,  and  in  the  Book  of  the
Dead  of  Egypt ;  everywhere  it  opens  the  cycle  of  manifestation  It  is
termed  Chaos,  and  the  Face  of  the  Waters,  incubated  by  the  Spirit,
proceeding  from  the  Unknown,  whatever  that  Spirit's  name  may  be.

The  authors  of  the  Sacred  Scriptures  in  India  go  deeper  into  the
origin  of  the  evolution  of  things  than  does  Thales  or  Job,  for  they  say:

From  Intelligence  [called  Mahat,  in  the  Purdnas],  associated  with  Ignorance
[ishvara,  as  a  personal  deity],  attended  by  its  projective  power,  in  which  the  quality
of  dulness  [tantas,  insensibility]  predominates,  proceeds' £'/A^^— from  ether,  air;
from  air,  heat;  from  heat,  water;  and  from  water,  earth  with  everything  on  it.

"From  This,  from  this  same  Self,  was  the  Ether  produced,"  says  the
Veda.''

It  thus  becomes  evident  that  it  is  not  this  Ether — sprung  at  the
fourth  remove  from  an  cmanaiiori  of  "Intelligence,  associated  with
Ignorance" — which  is  the  high  Principle,  the  deijic  Entity  worshipped
by  the   Greeks  and   Latins   under  the  name  of  "Pater,   Omnipotens

•  Taiitiriyaka  Upamskad,  Second  Valli,  First  Anuvaka.


PATER   OMNIPOTENS  ^THER.  353

^ther,"  and  "Magnus  ^ther,"  in  its  collective  aggregate.     The  sep-
tenar>'  gradation,  and  the  innumerable  sub-divisions  and  differences,
made  by  the  Ancients  between  the  powers  of  Ether  collectively— from
its  outward  fringe  of  effects,  with  which  our  Science  is  so  familiar,  up
to   the  "Imponderable   Substance,"  once  admitted   as   the  "Ether  of
Space,"  but  now  about  to  be  rejected — have  been  ever  a  vexing  riddle
for  eveiy  branch  of  knowledge.     The  Mythologists  and  Symbologists
of  our  day,  confused  by  this  incomprehensible  glorification  on  the  one
hand,  and  degradation  on  the  other,  of  the  same  deified  Entity  and  in
the  same  religious  systems,   are  often  driven  to   the  most   ludicrous
mistakes.     The  Church,  firm  as  a  rock  in  each  and  all  of  her  early
errors  of  interpretation,  has  made  of  Ether  the  abode  of  her  Satanic
legions.     The  w^hole  Hierarchy  of  the  "Fallen"  Angels  is  there;   Cos-
mocratores,  the  "World  Bearers,"  according  to  Bossuet;  Mundi  Ten-
entes,  the  "World  Holders,"  as  Tertullian  calls  them;   Mundi  Domini,
"World  Dominations,"  or  rather  Dominators;  the  Curbati,  or  "Curved,"
etc.;   thus  making  of  the  stars  and  celestial  orbs  in  their  courses —

Devils!

For  it  is  thus  that  the  Church  has  interpreted  the  verse:  "For  we
wrestle  not  against  flesh  and  blood,  but  against  principalities,  against
powers,  against  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world."*'  Further,^
St.  Paul  mentions  the  spiritual  malices  ("wickedness,"  in  English
texts),  in  the  Air — spiritualia  nequitice  coelestibus — the  Latin  texts  giving
various  names  to  these  "malices,"  the  innocent  "Elementals."  But
the  Church  is  right  this  time,  though  wrong  in  calling  them  all  Devils.
The  Astral  Eight,  or  lower  Ether,  is  full  of  conscious,  semi-conscious
and  unconscious  entities;  only  the  church  has  less  power  over  them
than  over  invisible  microbes  or  mosquitoes.

The  difference  made  between  the  seven  states  of  Ether — itself  one  of
the  Seven  Cosmic  Principles,  whereas  the  ^ther  of  the  ancients  is
Universal  Fire — may  be  seen  in  the  injunctions  by  Zoroaster  and
Psellus,  respectively.  The  former  said:  "Consult  it  only  when  it  is
without  form  or  figure" — absque  forma  et  figurd — which  means,  without
flames  or  burning  coals.  "When  it  has  a  form,  heed  it  7tof';  teaches
Psellus,  "but  when  it  is  formless,  obey  it,  for  it  is  then  sacred  fire,
and  all  it  will  reveal  thee  shall  be  true."t  This  proves  that  Ether,
itself  an  aspect  of  Akasha,  has  in  its  turn  several  aspects  or  "principles."
All  the  ancient  nations  deified  ^ther  in  its  imponderable  aspect  and


•  Ephesians,  \i.  12.  +  Oracles  of  Zoroaster,  "  Effatum,"  xvi.


24


254  'i^HE  secre;t  doctrine.

potency.  Virgil  calls  Jupiter,  Pater  Omnipotens  ^tker,  and  the  "Great
^ther."*  The  Hindiis  have  also  placed  it  among  their  deities,  under
the  name  of  Akasha,  the  synthesis  of  Ether.  And  the  author  of  the
Homoeomerian  System  of  philosophy,  Anaxagoras  of  Clazomense,
firmly  believed  that  the  spiritual  prototypes  of  all  things,  as  well  as
their  elements,  were  to  be  found  in  the  boundless  ^ther,  where  they
were  generated,  whence  they  evolved,  and  whither  they  returned — an
Occult  teaching.

It  thus  becomes  clear  that  it  is  from  ^Ether,  in  its  highest  synthetic
aspect,  once  anthropomorphized,  that  sprang  the  first  idea  of  a  per-
sonal Creative  Deity.  With  the  philosophical  Hindus  the  Elements  are
tamasa,  i.e.,  "unenlightened  by  intellect,  which  they  obscure."

We  have  now  to  exhaust  the  question  of  the  mystical  meaning  of
Primordial  Chaos  and  of  the  Root-Principle,^and  show  how  they  were
connected  in  the  ancient  philosophies  with  Akasha,  incorrectly  trans-
lated Ether,  and  also  with  Maya,  Illusion,  of  which  Ishvara  is  the  male
aspect.  We  shall  speak  further  on  of  the  Intelligent  Principle,  or
rather  of  the  invisible  immaterial  properties,  in  the  visible  and  material
elements,  that  "sprang  from  the  Primordial  Chaos."

For  "what  is  the  primordial  Chaos  but  ^ther?"— it  is  asked,  in  his
JJyiveiled.  Not  the  modern  Ether;  not  such  as  is  recognized  now,  but
such  as  was  known  to  the  ancient  philosophers  long  before  the  time  of
Moses — ^ther,  with  all  its  mysterious  and  occult  properties,  containing
in  itself  the  germs  of  universal  creation.  The  Upper  ^ther,  or  Akasha,
is  the  Celestial  Virgin  and  Mother  of  every  existing  form  and  being,
from  whose  bosom,  as  soon  as  "incubated"  by  the  Divine  Spirit,  are
called  into  existence  Matter  and  Life,  Force  and  Action,  ^ther  is  the
Aditi  of  the  Hindus,  and  it  is  Akasha.  Electricity,  magnetism,  heat,
light,  and  chemical  action  are  so  little  understood  even  now,  that  fresh
facts  are  constantly  widening  the  range  of  our  knowledge.  Who  knows
where  ends  the  power  of  this  protean  giant — ^ther;  or  whence  its
mysterious  origin?  Who,  we  mean,  that  denies  the  Spirit  that  works
in  it,  and  evolves  out  of  it  all  visible  forms?

It  will  be  an  easy  task  to  show  that  the  cosmogonical  legends  all
over  the  world  are  based  on  a  knowledge  among  the  Ancients  of  those
sciences,  which  have,  in  our  days,  allied  themselves  in  support  of  the
doctrine  of  evolution ;  and  that  further  research  may  demonstrate  that
these  Ancients  were  far  better  acquainted  with  the  fact  of  evolution

•  Georgica,  Book  II.  325.


THE  COSMOGENESIS  OF  MANU.  355

itself,  embracing  both  its  physical  and  spiritual  aspects,  than  we  are
now.

With  the  old  philosophers,  evolution  was  a  universal  theorem,  a  doctrine
embracing  the  ivhole,  and  an  established  principle;  whereas  our  modern  evolu-
tionists are  enabled  to  present  us  merely  with  speculative  theoretics;  with  parti-
cular, if  not  wholly  negative  theorems.  It  is  idle  for  the  representatives  of  our
modem  wisdom  to  close  the  debate  and  pretend  that  the  question  is  settled,  merely

because  the  obscure  phraseology  of  the  Mosaic account  clashes  with

the  definite  exegesis  of  "Exact  Science."*

If  we  turn  to  the  Ordinances  of  Mami,  we  find  the  prototype  of  all
these  ideas.  Mostly  lost,  to  the  Western  world,  in  their  original  form,
disfigured  by  later  interpolations  and  additions,  they  have,  neverthe-
less, preserved  quite  enough  of  their  ancient  spirit  to  show  its
character.

"Removing  the  darkness,  the  Self-existent  L,ord  [Vishnu,  Nara-
yana,  etc.]  became  manifest;  and,  wishing  to  produce  beings  from  his
Essence,  created,  in  the  beginning,  water  alone.  In  that  he  cast  seed.
That  became  a  Golden  Egg."

Whence  this  Self-existent  Lord?  It  is  called  This,  and  is  spoken  of
as  "Darkness,  imperceptible,  without  definite  qualities,  undiscoverable,
unknowable,  as  if  wholly  in  sleep."  Having  dwelt  in  that  Egg  for  a
whole  Divine  Year,  he  "who  is  called  in  the  world  Brahma,"  splits  that
Egg  in  two,  and  from  the  upper  portion  he  forms  the  heaven,  from  the
lower  the  earth,  and  from  the  middle  the  sky  and  "the  perpetual  place
of  waters."  f

Directly  following  these  verses,  however,  there  is  something  more
important  for  us,  as  it  entirely  corroborates  our  Esoteric  teachings.
From  verse  14  to  36,  evolution  is  given  in  the  order  described  in  the
Esoteric  Philosophy.  This  cannot  be  easily  gainsaid.  Even  Medhatithi,
the  son  of  Virasvamin,  and  the  author  of  the  Commentary,  the  Ma7iu-
bhdsya,  whose  date,  according  to  the  western  Orientalists,  is  1,000  A.D.,
helps  us  with  his  remarks  to  the  elucidation  of  the  tntth.  He  shows
himself  either  unwilling  to  give  out  more,  because  he  knew  what  had
to  be  kept  from  the  profane,  or  else  he  was  really  puzzled.  Still,  what
he  does  give  out  makes  the  septenary  principle  in  man  and  Nature
plain  enough.

Let  us  begin  with  Chapter  I  of  the  Ordinances,  or  "Laws,"  after  the
Self-existent  Lord,  the  Unmanifesting  Logos  of  the  Unknown  "Dark-


*  Isis  Unveiled.  t  Op.  cit.,  I.  5-13,  Burnell's  translation.


356  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

ness,"  becomes  manifested  in  the  Golden  Egg.     It  is  from  this  Kgg,
from

II.  "That  which  is  the  undiscrete  [undifferentiated]  Cause,  eternal,
which  is  and  is  7iot,  from  It  issued  that  Male  who  is  called  in  the  world
Brahma."

Here,  as  in  all  genuine  philosophical  systems,  we  find  even  the
"Egg,"  or  the  Circle,  or  Zero,  Boundless  Infinity,  referred  to  as  "It,"*
and  Brahma,  the  first  Unit  only,  referred  to  as  the  "  Male"  God,  i.e.,  the
fructifying  Principle.  It  is  (J),  or  lo  (ten),  the  Decad.  On  the  plane
of  the  Septenary,  or  our  World,  only,  it  is  called  Brahma.  On  that
of  the  Unified  Decad,  in  the  realm  of  Reality,  this  male  Brahma  is  an
Illusion.

14.  "From  Self  {Atmanah)  he  created  Mind,  which  is  and  is  not;
and  from  Mind,  Ego-ism  [Self-Consciousness]  {a),  the  ruler  {b),  the
Lord."

(«)  The  Mind  is  Manas.  Medhatithi,  the  commentator,  justly  ob-
serves here  that  it  is  the  reverse  of  this,  and  shows  already  interpolation
and  rearranging;  for  it  is  Manas  that  springs  from  Ahamkara  or  (Uni-
versal) Self-Consciousness,  as  Manas  in  the  microcosm  springs  from
Mahat,  or  Maha-Buddhi  (Buddhi,  in  man).  For  Manas  is  dual.  As
shown  and  translated  by  Colebrooke,  "  Mind,  serving  both  for  sense  and
action,  is  an  organ  by  affinity,  being  cognate  with  the  rest";t  "the
rest"  here  meaning  that  Manas,  our  Fifth  Principle  (the  fifth,  because
the  body  was  named  the  first,  which  is  the  reverse  of  the  true  philo-
sophical  order),  is  in  affinity  both  with  Atma-Buddhi  and  with  the
lower  Four  Principles.  Hence,  our  teaching:  namely,  that  Manas
follows  Atma-Buddhi  to  Devachan,  and  that  the  Lower  Manas,  that  is
to  say,  the  dregs  or  residue  of  Manas,  remains  with  Kama  Rupa,  in
Limbus,  or  Kama  Loka,  the  abode  of  the  "  Shells."

(J?)  Medhatithi  translates  this  as  "the  one  conscious  of  the  I,"  or
Ego,  not  "the  ruler,"  as  do  the  Orientalists.  Thus  also  they  translate
the  following  shloka:

16.  "He  also,  having  made  the  subtile  parts  of  those  six  [the  great
Self  and  the  five;  organs  of  sense],  of  unmeasured  brightness,  to  enter
into  the  elements  of  self  (dtmamdt?'dsu),  created  all  beings."

When,  according  to  Medhatithi,  it  ought  to  read  mdtrdbhih  instead  of
dtmamdtrdsu,  and  thus  would  read :

•  The  ideal  apex  of  the  Pythagorean  Triangle.

t  See  A.  Coke  Bumell's  translation,  edited  by  Ed.  W.  Hopkins,  Ph.  D.


THE  SEVEN   PRAKRITIS.  357

"He  having  pervaded  the  subtile  parts  of  those  six,  of  unmeasured
brightness,  by  elements  of  self,  created  all  beings."

The  latter  reading  must  be  the  correct  one,  since  He,  the  Self,  is
what  we  call  Atma,  and  thus  constitutes  the  seventh  principle,  the
synthesis  of  the  "six."  Such  is  also  the  opinion  of  the  editor  of  the
Mayiava  Dharma  Skdstra,  who  seems  to  have  intuitionally  entered  far
deeper  into  the  spirit  of  the  philosophy  than  has  the  translator,  the  late
Dr.  Burnell ;  for  he  hesitates  little  between  the  text  of  KuUuka  Bhatta
and  the  commentary  of  Medhatithi.  Rejecting  the  ta?inidtra,  or
subtile  elements,  and  the  dtmamdtra  of  Kulluka  Bhatta,  he  says,
applying  the  principles  to  the  Cosmic  Self:

"The  six  appear  rather  to  be  the  manas  plus  the  five  principles  of
ether,  air,  fire,  water,  earth ;  *  having  united  five  portions  of  those  six
with  the  spiritual  element  [the  seventh'\  he  (thus)  created  all  existing
things;'  .  .  .  dtmamdtra  is  therefore  the  spiritual  atom  as  opposed
to  the  elementary,  not  reflexive  'elements  of  himself."

Thus  he  corrects  the  translation  of  verse  17:

"As  the  subtile  elements  of  bodily  forms  of  this  One  depend  on
these  six,  so  the  wise  call  his  form  Sharira."

And  he  adds  that  "elements"  mean  here  portions,  or  parts  (or  princi-
ples), which  reading  is  borne  out  by  verse  19,  which  says :

"This  non-eternal  (Universe)  arises  then  from  the  Eternal,  by  means
of  the  subtile  elements  of  forms  of  those  seven  very  glorious  Principles
(^Ptiricsha)."

Commenting  upon  which  emendation  of  Medhatithi,  the  editor
remarks:  "the  five  elements //«5  mind  \_Ma7ias'\  and  self-consciousness
\_Aha7nkdraY'  are  probably  meant;  'subtile  elements,'  as  before  [mean-
ing] 'fine  portions  of  form'  [or  principles]."  Verse  20  shows  this,
when  saying  of  these  five  elements,  or  "fine  portions  of  form"  (Rupa
plus  Manas  and  Self-Consciousness)  that  they  constitute  the  "Seven
Purusha,"  or  Principles,  called  in  the  Pzirdnas  the  "Seven  Prakritis."

Moreover,  these  "five  elements,"  or  "five  portions,"  are  spoken  of  in
verse  27  as  "those  which  are  called  the  atomic  destructible  portions,"
and  which  are,  therefore,  "distinct  from  the  atoms  of  the  Nyaya."

This  creative  Brahma,  issuing  from  the  Mundane  or  Golden  Egg,
unites  in  himself  both  the  male  and  female  principles.     He  is,  in  short,

•  Ahamk&ra,  as  universal  Self- Consciousness,  has  a  triple  aspect,  as  has  also  Manas.  For  this
"conception  of  I,"  or  the  Ego,  is  either  sattva,  "pure  quietude,"  or  appears  as  rajas,  "active,"  or
remains  tamas,  "stagnant,"  in  darkness.  It  belongs  to  Heaven  and  Earth,  and  assumes  the  proper-
ties of  Ether.


358  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

the  same  as  all  the  creative  Protologoi.  Of  Brahma,  however,  it  could
not  be  said,  as  of  DionySOS,  "Trpwrdyovov  Sicjivrj  Tpiyovov  BaKxeiov  "AvttKTa
"kypiov  apprfTov  Kpxxjtiov  SiKspwra  8tyu,o/)(/)ov" — a  lunar  Jchovah,  Bacchus  truly,
with  David  dancing  nude  before  his  symbol  in  the  ark — because  no  licen-
tious Dionysia  were  ever  established  in  his  name  and  honour.  All  such
public  worship  was  exoteric,  and  the  great  universal  symbols  were  dis-
torted universally,  as  those  of  Krishna  are  now  by  the  Vallabacharyas
of  Bombay,  the  followers  of  the  "infant"  God.  But  are  these  popular
Gods  the  true  Deity?  Are  they  the  apex  and  synthesis  of  the  sevenfold
creation,  man  included?  Impossible!  Each  and  all  are  one  of  the
rungs  of  that  septenary  ladder  of  Divine  Consciousness,  Pagan  as
Christian.  Ain  Suph  is  said  to  manifest  through  the  Seven  Letters  of
the  Name  of  Jehovah  who,  having  usurped  the  place  of  the  Unknown
lyimitless,  was  given  b}^  his  devotees  his  Seven  Angels  of  the  Presence
- — his  Seven  Principles.  But,  indeed,  they  are  mentioned  in  almost
every  school.  In  the  pure  Sankhya  philosophy  Mahat,  Ahamkara  and
the  five  Tanmatras  are  called  the  Seven  Prakritis,  or  Natures,  and  are
counted  from  Maha-Buddhi,  or  Mahat,  down  to  Earth.*

Nevertheless,  however  disfigured  by  Ezra  for  Rabbinical  purposes  is
the  original  Elohistic  version,  however  repulsive  at  times  is  even  the
esoteric  meaning  in  the  Hebrew  scrolls,  far  more  so  indeed  than  its  out-
ward veil  or  cloaking  may  be — once  the  Jehovistic  portions  are  elimi-
nated, the  Mosaic  Books  are  found  full  of  purely  Occult  and  priceless
knowledge,  especially  in  the  first  six  chapters.

Read  by  the  aid  of  the  Kabalah,  one  finds  a  matchless  temple  of
Occult  truths,  a  well  of  deeply  concealed  beauty,  hidden  under  a
structure,  the  visible  architecture  of  which,  notwithstanding  its  ap-
parent symmetry,  is  unable  to  stand  the  criticism  of  cold  reason,  or
to  reveal  the  age  of  its  hidden  truth,  for  it  belongs  to  all  the  ages.
There  is  more  Wisdom  concealed  under  the  exoteric  fables  of  the
Purayias  and  Bible  than  in  all  the  exoteric  facts  and  science  in  the
literature  of  the  world,  and  more  Occult  true  Science,  than  there  is
of  exact  knowledge  in  all  the  academies.  Or,  in  plainer  and  stronger
language,  there  is  as  much  esoteric  wisdom  in  some  portions  of  the
exoteric  Ptira^ias  and  Pentateuch,  as  there  is  of  nonsense  and  of  de-
signedly childish  fancy,  when  read  only  in  the  dead-letter  and  mur-
derous interpretations  of  the  great  dogmatic  religions,  and  especially  of
their  sects.

»  See  Sdnkhya  KdrikA  III,  and  Commentaries.


THE  GODS  OF   "GENESIS."  359

Let  anyone  read  the  first  verses  of  Genesis  and  reflect  upon  them.
There,  "God"  commands  another  "God,"  who  does  his  bidding — even  in
the  cautious  English  Protestant  authorized  translation  of  King  James  I.

In  the  "beginning" — the  Hebrew  language  having  no  word  to  ex-
press the  idea  of  eternity* — "God"  fashions  the  Heaven  and  the  Earth;
and  the  latter  is  "without  form  and  void,"  while  the  former  is  in
fact  not  Heaven,  but  the  "  Deep,"  Chaos,  with  darkness  upon  its  face.f

"And  the  Spirit  of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of  the  Waters,"  or  the
Great  Deep  of  the  Infinite  Space.  And  this  Spirit  is  Narayana,  or
Vishnu.

"And  God  said,  Eet  there  be  a  firmament.  .  ."  And  "God,"  the
second,  obeyed  and  "made  the  firmament."  "And  God  said  let  there
be  light."  And  "there  was  light."  Now  the  latter  does  not  mean
light  at  all,  but,  as  in  the  Kabalah,  the  androgyne  Adam  Kadmon,  or
Sephira  (Spiritual  Light),  for  they  are  one ;  or,  according  to  the  Chal-
dean Book  of  Numbers,  the  secondary  Angels,  the  first  being  the  Elohim,
who  are  the  aggregate  of  that  "fashioning"  God.  For  to  whom  are
those  words  of  command  addressed?  And  who  is  it  who  commands?
That  which  commands  is  the  Eternal  Law,  and  he  who  obeys,  the
Elohim,  the  known  quantity  acting  in  and  with  x,  or  the  coefficient  of
the  unknown  quantity,  the  Forces  of  the  One  Force.  All  this  is  Oc-
cultism, and  is  found  in  the  archaic  Stanzas.  It  is  perfectly  immaterial
whether  we  call  these  "Forces"  the  Dhyan  Chohans,  or  the  Auphanim
as  Ezekiel  does.

"The  one  Universal  Light,  which  to  man  is  Darkness,  is  ever
existent,"  says  the  Chaldean  Book  of  Numbers.  From  it  proceeds
periodically  the  Energy,  which  is  reflected  in  the  Deep,  or  Chaos,
the  store-house  of  future  Worlds,  and,  once  awakened,  stirs  up  and
fructifies  the  latent  Forces,  which  are  the  ever  present  eternal  poten-

•  The  word  "eternity,"  by  which  Christian  theolog:ians  interpret  the  terra  "for  ever  and  ever,"  does
not  exist  in  the  Hebrew  tongue.  "Oulam,"  says  I,e  Clerc,  only  imports  a  time  when  beginning  or
end  is  not  known.  It  does  not  mean  "infinite  duration,"  and  the  term  "forever,"  in  the  Old  Testa-
ment, only  signifies  a  "long  time."  Nor  is  the  word  "eternity"  used  in  the  Christian  sense  in  the
Purdnas.  For  in  Vishmt  Purdna,  it  is  clearly  stated  that  by  "eternity"  and  "immortality"  only
"existence  to  the  end  of  the  Kalpa"  is  meant.    (Book  II.  chap,  viii.)

t  Orphic  Theogony  is  purely  Oriental  and  Indian  in  its  spirit.  The  successive  transformations  it  has
undergone,  have  now  separated  it  widely  from  the  spirit  of  ancient  Cosmogony,  as  may  be  seen  by
comparing  it  even  with  Hesiod's  Theogony.  Yet  the  truly  Aryan  Hindu  spirit  breaks  forth  ever>'-
where  in  both  the  Ilesiodic  and  Orphic  systems.  (See  the  remarkable  work  of  James  Darmesteter,
"Cosmogonies  Aryennes,"  in  his  Essais  Orientaux.)  Thus  the  original  Greek  conception  of  Chaos
is  that  of  the  Secret  Wisdom  Religion.  In  Hesiod,  therefore.  Chaos  is  infinite,  boundless,  endless  and
beginningless  in  duration,  an  abstraction  and  a  visible  presence  at  the  same  time,  Space  filled  with
darkness,  whicli  is  primordial  matter  in  its  pre-cosmic  state.  For  in  its  etymological  sense,  Chaos  is
Space,  according  to  Aristotle,  and  Space  is  the  ever  Unseen  and  Unknowable  Deity,  in  our  philosophy.


360  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

tialities  in  it.     Then  awake  anew  the  Brahmas  and  Buddhas — the  co-
eternal  Forces — and  a  new  Universe  springs  into  being.

In  the  Sepher  Vetzirah,  the  Kabalistic  Book  of  Creation,  the  author
has  evidently  repeated  the  words  of  Manu.  In  it,  the  Divine  Sub-
stance is  represented  as  having  alone  existed  from  the  eternity,  bound-
less and  absolute;  and  as  having  emitted  from  itself  the  Spirit.*  "One
is  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God,  blessed  be  Its  name,  which  liveth  for
ever!  Voice,  Spirit,  and  Word,  this  is  the  Holy  Spirit."t  And  this  is
the  Kabalistic  abstract  Trinity,  so  unceremoniously  anthropomorphized
by  the  Christian  Fathers.  From  this  triple  One  emanated  the  whole
Kosmos.  First  from  One  emanated  number  Two,  or  Air  (the  Father),
the  creative  Element;  and  then  number  Three,  Water  (the  Mother),
proceeded  from  Air;  Ether  or  Fire  completes  the  Mystic  Four,  the
Arbo-al.:j:  "When  the  Concealed  of  the  Concealed  w^anted  to  reveal
Himself,  he  first  made  a  Point  [the  Primordial  Point,  or  the  first
Sephira,  Air,  or  Holy  Ghost,]  shaped  into  a  sacred  Form,  [the  Ten
Sephiroth,  or  the  Heavenly  Man,]  and  covered  it  with  a  rich  and
splendid  Garment,  that  is  the  \Vorldr%

"He  maketh  the  Wind  His  messengers,  flaming  Fire  His  servants ";||
says  the  Yetzirah,  showing  the  cosmical  character  of  the  later  euheme-
rized  Elements,  and  that  Spirit  permeates  everj^  atom  in  Kosmos.

Paul  calls  the  invisible  Cosmic  Beings  the  "Elements."  But  now
the  Elements  are  degraded  into,  and  limited  to,  atoms  of  which  nothing
is  known  so  far,  and  which  are  only  "children  of  necessity,"  as  is  Ether
also.     As  we  said  in  his  Unveiled:

The  poor  primordial  Elements  have  long  been  exiled,  and  our  ambitious  Physi-
cists run  races,  to  determine  who  shall  add  one  more  to  the  fledgling  brood  of  the
sixty  and  odd  elementary  substances.

Meanwhile  there  rages  a  war  in  modern  Chemistry  about  terms.  We
are  denied  the  right  to  call  these  substances  "chemical  element's,"  for
these  are  not  "primordial  principles  of  self-existing  essences,  out  of
which  the  universe  was  fashioned,"  according  to  Plato.  Such  ideas
associated  with  the  word  "element"  were  good  enough  for  the  old
Greek   Philosophy,    but   Modern    Science   rejects   them;    for,    as    Mr.

»  The  manifested  Spirit:  Absolute,  Divine  Spirit  is  one  with  absolute  Divine  Substance;  Para-
brahman  and  Mulaprakriti  are  one  in  essence.  Therefore,  Cosmic  Ideation  and  Cosmic  Substance,  in
their  primal  character,  are  one  also.

+  Sepher  Yetzirah,  Chap.  I.  Mishna  ix.

t  Ihid.    It  is  from  "  Arba"  that  Abram  is  derived.

}  Zohar,  1.  2  a.

II  Sepher  Vetzirah,  Mishna  ix.  10.


THE   MYSTIC   FIRE.  36 1

William  Crookes  says:  "they  are  unfortunate  terms,"  and  experimental
Science  will  have  "nothing  to  do  with  any  kind  of  essences  except
those  which  it  can  see,  smell,  or  taste.  It  leaves  others  to  the  meta-
physicians.   .    ."     We  must  feel  grateful  even  for  so  much !

This  "Primordial  Substance"  is  called  by  some  Chaos.  Plato  and
the  Pythagoreans  named  it  the  Soul  of  the  World,  after  it  had  been
impregnated  by  the  Spirit  of  that  which  broods  over  the  Primeval
Waters,  or  Chaos.  It  is  by  being  reflected  in  it,  say  the  Kabalists,  that
the  brooding  Principle  "created"  the  phantasmagoria  of  a  visible,
manifested  Universe.  Chaos  before,  Ether  after  this  "reflection,"  it  is
still  the  Deity  that  pervades  Space  and  all  things.  It  is  the  invisible,
imponderable  Spirit  of  things,  and  the  invisible,  but  only  too  tangible,
fluid  that  radiates  from  the  fingers  of  the  healthy  magnetizer,  for  it  is
Vital  Electricity — Life  itself.  Called  in  derision,  by  the  Marquis  de
Mirville,  the  "Nebulous  Almighty,"  it  is  to  this  day  termed  by  the
Theurgists  and  Occultists  the  "Living  Fire" ;  and  there  is  not  a  Hindu
who  practises  at  dawn  a  certain  kind  of  meditation  but  knows  its  efiects.
It  is  the  "Spirit  of  Eight"  and  Magnes.  As  truly  expressed  by  an
opponent.  Magus  and  Magnes  are  two  branches  growing  from  the  same
trunk  and  shooting  forth  the  same  resultants.  And  in  this  appellation
of  "Living  Fire"  we  may  also  discover  the  meaning  of  the  puzzling
sentence  in  the  Zend  Avesta:  there  is  "a  Fire  that  gives  knowledge  of
the  future,  science  and  amiable  speech";  that  is  to  sa)%  which  develops
an  extraordinary  eloquence  in  the  sibyl,  the  sensitive,  and  even  some
orators.     Writing  upon  this  subject,  in  his  Unveiled,  we  said:

The  Chaos  of  the  ancients,  the  Zoroastrian  Sacred  Fire,  or  the  Atash-Behram  of
the  Parsis ;  the  Hermes-fire,  the  Elmes-fire  of  the  ancient  Germans;  the  Lightning
of  Cybele ;  the  Burning  Torch  of  Apollo ;  the  Flame  on  the  altar  of  Pan ;  the  Inex-
tinguishable Fire  in  the  temple  on  the  Acropolis,  and  in  that  of  Vesta;  the  Fire-
flame  of  Pluto's  helm ;  the  brilliant  Sparks  on  the  caps  of  the  Dioscuri,  on  the
Gorgon's  head,  the  helm  of  Pallas,  and  the  staff  of  Mercury;  the  Egyptian  Ptah-
Ra;  the  Grecian  Zeus  Cataibates  (the  Descending)  of  Pausanias;  the  Pentecostal
Fire-tongues;  the  Burning  Bush  of  Moses;  the  Pillar  of  Fire  of  Exodus,  and  the
Burning  Lamp  of  Abram ;  the  Eternal  Fire  of  the  "bottomless  pit";  the  Delphic
oracular  vapours;  the  Sidereal  Light  of  the  Rosicrucians;  the  Akasha  of  the  Hindu
Adepts;  the  Astral  Light  of  Eliphas  Levi;  the  Nerve- Aura  and  the  Fluid  of  the
Magnetists;  the  Od  of  Reichenbach;  the  Psychod  and  Ectenic  Force  of  Thury;  the
"Psj'chic  Force"  of  Sergeant  Cox,  and  the  atmospheric  magnetism  of  some  Natura-
lists; galvanism ;  and  finally,  electricity — all  these  are  but  various  names  for  many
different  manifestations  or  eflFects  of  the  same  mysterious,  all-pers-ading  Cause,  the
Greek  Archaeus.


362  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

We  now  add — it  is  all  this  and  much  more.

This  "Fire"  is  spoken  of  in  all  the  Hindu  Sacred  Books,  as  also  in
the  Kabalistic  works.  The  Zohar  explains  it  as  the  "White  Hidden
Fire,  in  the  Risha  Havurah,"  the  White  Head,  whose  Will  causes  the
fiery  fluid  to  flow  in  370  currents  in  every  direction  of  the  Universe.  It
is  identical  with  the  "Serpent  that  runs  with  370  leaps"  of  the  Siphrak
Dtzeniouiha,  the  Serpent,  which,  when  the  "Perfect  Man,"  the  Meta-
tron,  is  raised,  that  is  to  say,  when  the  Divine  Man  indwells  in  the
animal  man,  becomes  three  Spirits,  or  Atma-Buddhi-Manas,  in  our
Theosophical  phraseology.

Spirit,  then,  or  Cosmic  Ideation,  and  Cosmic  Substance — one  of
whose  "principles"  is  Ether— are  one,  and  include  the  Elements,  in  the
sense  St.  Paul  attaches  to  them.  These  Elements  are  the  veiled  Syn-
thesis standing  for  Dhyan  Chohans,  Devas,  Sephiroth,  Amshaspends,
Archangels,  etc.  The  Ether  of  Science— the  Ilus  of  Berosus,  or  the
Protyle  of  Chemistry — constitutes,  so  to  speak,  the  rtcde  material,
relatively,  out  of  which  the  above-named  Builders,  following  the  plan
traced  out  for  them  eternally  in  the  Divine  Thought,  fashion  the
Systems  in  the  Kosmos.  They  are  "myths,"  we  are  told.  No  more  sa
than  Ether  and  the  Atoms,  we  answer.  The  two  latter  are  absolute
necessities  of  Physical  Science,  and  the  Builders  are  as  absolute  a
necessity  of  Metaphysics.  We  are  twitted  with  the  objection:  You
never  saw  them.  And  we  ask  the  Materialists:  Have  you  ever  seen
Ether,  or  your  Atoms,  or,  again,  your  Force?  Moreover,  one  of  the
greatest  Western  Evolutionists  of  our  modern  day,  co-" discoverer"
with  Darwin,  Mr.  A.  R.  Wallace,  when  discussing  the  inadequacy  of
Natural  Selection  alone  accounting  for  the  physical  form  of  Man,
admits  the  guiding  action  of  "higher  intelligences"  as  a  ''necessary
part  of  the  great  laws  which  govern  the  material  Universe."*

These  "higher  intelligences"  are  the  Dhyan  Chohans  of  the   Oc-
cultists.

Indeed,  there  are  few  myths  in  any  religious  system  worthy  of  the
name,  but  have  a  historical  as  well  as  a  scientific  foundation.  "  Myths,"
justly  observes  Pococke,  "are  now  proved  to  be /a^/^5,  just  in  propor-
tion as  we  misunderstand  them;  triiths,  in  proportion  as  they  were
once  understood."

The  most  distinct  and  the  one  prevailing  idea,  found  in  all  ancient
teaching,  with  reference  to  Cosmic  Evolution  and  the  first  "creation"

*  Contributions  to  the  Theory  of  Natural  Selection.


of  our  Globe  with  all  its  products,  organic  and  inorg-anic— strange  word
for  an  Occultist  to  use ! — is  that  the  whole  Kosmos  has  sprung  from  the
Divine  Thought.  This  Thought  impregnates  Matter,  which  is  co-
eternal  with  the  One  Reality ;  and  all  that  lives  and  breathes  evolves
from  the  Emanations  of  the  One  Immutable,  Parabrahman-Mulapra-
kriti,  the  Eternal  One-Root.  The  former  of  these,  in  its  aspect  of  the
Central  Point  turned  inward,  so  to  say,  into  regions  quite  inaccessible
to  human  intellect,  is  Absolute  Abstraction ;  whereas,  in  its  aspect  as
Mulaprakriti,  the  Eternal  Root  of  all,  it  gives  one  at  least  some  hazy
comprehension  of  the  Mystery  of  Being.

Therefore,  it  was  taught  in  the  inner  temples  that  this  visible  Universe  of  Spirit
and  Matter  is  but  the  concrete  Image  of  the  ideal  Abstraction;  it  was  built  on  the
Model  of  the  first  Divine  Idea.  Thus  our  Universe  existed  from  eternity  in  a  latent
state.  The  Soul  animating  this  purely  spiritual  Universe  is  the  Central  Sun,  the
highest  Deity  Itself.  It  was  not  the  One  who  built  the  concrete  form  of  the  idea,
but  the  First-Begotten ;  and,  as  it  was  constructed  on  the  geometrical  figure  of  the
dodecahedron,*  the  First-Begotten  "was  pleased  to  employ  12,000  years  in  its  crea-
tion." The  latter  number  is  expressed  in  the  Tyrrhenian  Cosmogony, t  which
shows  man  created  in  the  sixth  millennium.  This  agrees  with  the  Egyptian  theory
of  6,000  "years,"  J  and  with  the  Hebrew  computation.  But  it  is  the  exoteric  form
of  it.  The  secret  computation  explains  that  the  "12,000  and  the  6,000  years"  are
Years  of  Brahmd,  one  Day  of  Brahma  being  equal  to  4,320,000,000  years.  Sanchu-
niathon,  in  his  Cosmogony,^  declares  that  when  the  Wind  (Spirit)  became  enamoured
of  its  own  principles  (Chaos),  an  intimate  union  took  place,  which  connection  was
called  Pothos  (tto^os),  and  from  this  sprang  the  seed  of  all.  And  the  Chaos  knew
not  its  own  production,  for  it  was  senseless;  but  from  its  embrace  with  the  Wind
was  generated  Mot,  or  the  Ilus  (Mud).||  From  this  proceeded  the  spores  of  creation
and  the  generation  of  the  Universe.H

Zeus-Zen  (^ther),  and  Chthonia  (Chaotic  Earth)  and  Metis  (Water),  his  wives;
Osiris— also  representing  .^ther,  the  first  emanation  of  the  Supreme  Deity,  Amun,
the  primeval  source  of  Light— and  Isis-Latona,  the  Goddess  Earth  and  Water
again;  Mithras,**  the  rock-born  God,  the  symbol  of  the  male  Mundane  Fire,  or  the
personified  Primordial  Light,  and  Mithra,  the  Fire-Goddess,  at  once  his  mother  and
his  wife— the  pure  element  of  Fire,  the  active  or  male  principle,  regarded  as  light
and  heat,  in  conjunction  with  Earth  and  Water,  or  matter,  the  female,  or  passive,
element  of  cosmical  generation— Mithras  who  is  the  son  of  Bordj,  the  Persian


•  Plato,  Timaus.

+  Suidas,  sub  voc.  "Tyrrhenia."     See  Cory's  Ancient  Fragments,  p.  309,  2nd  ed.

X  The  reader  will  viiiderstand  that  by  "years"  is  meant  "ages,"  not  mere  periods  of  13  lunar
months  each.
\  See  the  Greek  translation  by  Philon  Byblius.
II  Cory,  Op.  cit.,  p.  3.
ir  Isis  Unveiled,  I.  342.
••  Mithras  was  regarded  among  the  Persians  as  the  theos  ek  petyas— the  God  from  the  rock.


364  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

mundane  mountain,*  from  which  he  flashed  out  as  a  radiant  ray  of  light;  Brahma,
the  Fire-God,  and  his  prolific  consort;  and  the  Hindu  Agni,  the  refulgent  Deity
from  whose  body  issue  a  thousand  streams  of  glory  and  seven  tongues  of  flame,  and
in  whose  honour  certain  Brahmans  to  this  day  maintain  a  perpetual  fire;  Shiva,
personated  by  Meru,  the  mundane  mountain  of  the  Hindus,  the  terrific  Fire-God,
who  is  said  in  the  legend  to  have  descended  from  heaven,  like  the  Jewish  Jehovah,
"in  a  pillar  of  fire";  and  a  dozen  other  archaic  double-sexed  Deities — all  loudly
proclaim  their  hidden  meaning.  And  what  could  be  the  dual  meaning  of  these
myths  but  the  psycho-chemical  principle  of  primordial  creation ;  the  First  Evolu-
tion, in  its  triple  manifestation  of  Spirit,  Force  and  Matter;  the  divine  correlation,
at  its  starting  point,  allegorized  as  the  marriage  of  Fire  and  Water,  the  products  of
electrifying  Spirit — the  union  of  the  male  active  principle  with  the  female  passive
element — which  become  the  parents  of  their  tellurian  child.  Cosmic  Matter,  the
Prima  Materia,  whose  Soul  is  ^ther,  and  whose  Shadow  is  the  Astral  Light  !t

But  the  fragments  of  the  cosmogonical  systems  that  have  reached  us
are  now  rejected  as  absurd  fables.  Nevertheless,  Occult  Science — which
has  survived  even  the  Great  Flood  that  submerged  the  Antediluvian
Giants  and  with  them  their  very  memory,  save  the  record  preserved  in
the  Secret  Doctrine,  the  Bible  and  other  Scriptures— still  holds  the
Key  to  all  the  world  problems.

Let  us,  then,  apply  this  Key  to  the  rare  fragments  of  long-forgotten
Cosmogonies,  and  by  means  of  their  scattered  portions  endeavour  to  re-
establish the  once  Universal  Cosmogony  of  the  Secret  Doctrine.  The
Key  fits  them  all.  No  one  can  seriously  study  ancient  philosophies
without  perceiving  that  the  striking  similitude  of  conception  in  all  of
them,  in  their  exoteric  form  very  frequently,  and  in  their  hidden  spirit
invariably,  is  the  result  of  no  mere  coincidence,  but  of  a  concurrent
design ;  and  that,  during  the  youth  of  mankind,  there  was  but  one  lan-
guage, one  knowledge,  one  universal  religion,  when  there  were  no
churches,  no  creeds  or  sects,  but  when  every  man  was  a  priest  unto
himself.  And,  if  it  is  shown  that  already  in  those  early  ages  which  are
shut  out  from  our  sight  by  the  exuberant  growth  of  tradition,  human
religious  thought  developed  in  uniform  sympath}^  in  every  portion  of
the  globe;  then,  it  becomes  evident  that  that  thought,  born  under
whatever  latitude,  in  the  cold  North  or  the  burning  South,  in  the  East
or  West,  was  inspired  by  the  same  revelations,  and  that  man  was  nur-
tured under  the  protecting  shadow  of  the  same  Tree  of  Knowledge.

•  Bordj  is  called  a  fire-mountain,  a  volcano:  therefore  it  contains  fire,  rock,  earth  and  water;  the
male,  or  active,  and  the  female,  or  passive,  elements.    The  myth  is  suggestive.
T  Op.  cil.,  I.  156.


SECTION  lY.

Chaos  :  Theos:  Kosmos.


These  three  are  the  containment  of  Space ;  or,  as  a  learned  Kabalist
has  defined  it:  "Space,  the  all-containing  uncontained,  is  the  primary
embodiment  of  simple  Unity  ....  boundless  extension."*  But,  he
asks  again:  "boundless  extension  of  what?" — and  makes  the  correct
reply:  "The  Unknown  Container  of  All,  the  Uriknown  First  Causey
This  is  a  most  correct  definition  and  answer;  most  esoteric  and  true,
from  every  aspect  of  Occult  Teaching.

Space,  which,  in  their  ignorance  and  with  their  iconoclastic  tendency
to  destroy  every  philosophic  idea  of  old,  the  modern  wiseacres  have
proclaimed  "an  abstract  idea"  and  a  "void,"  is,  in  reality,  the  Con-
tainer and  the  Body  of  the  Universe  in  its  Seven  Principles.  It  is  a
Body  of  limitless  extent,  whose  Principles,  in  Occult  phraseology —
each  being  in  its  turn  a  septenary — manifest  in  our  phenomenal  World
only  the  grossest  fabric  of  their  sub-divisions.  "No  one  has  ever  seen
the  Elements  in  their  fulness,"  the  Doctrine  teaches.  We  have  to
search  for  our  Wisdom  in  the  original  expressions  and  synonyms  of
the  primeval  peoples.  Even  the  Jews,  the  latest  of  these,  show  the
same  idea,  in  their  Kabalistic  teachings,  when  they  speak  of  the  seven-
headed  Serpent  of  Space,  called  the  "Great  Sea."

In  the  beginning,  the  Alhim  created  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth;  the  Six
[Sephiroth].  .  .  .  They  created  Six,  and  on  these  all  things  are  based.  And
these  [Six]  depend  upon  the  seven  forms  of  the  Cranium  up  to  the  Dignity  of  all
Dignities,  t

Now  Wind,  Air  and  Spirit  have  ever  been  synonymous  in  every
nation.     Pneuma  (Spirit)  and  Anemos  (Wind),  with  the  Greeks,  Spi-

•  Henry  Pratt,  M.D.,  New  Aspects  of  Life.  t  Siphrak  Dtzenioutha,  i.  i6.


366  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

ritus  and  Ventus,  with  the  lyatins,  were  convertible  terras,  even  if
dissociated  from  the  original  idea  of  the  Breath  of  lyife.  In  the
"Forces"  of  Science  we  s^e  but  the  material  effect  of  the  spiritual
effect  of  one  or  other  of  the  four  primordial  Elements,  transmitted
to  us  by  the  Fourth  Race  just  as  we  shall  transmit  ^ther,  or  rather
its  gross  sub-division,  in  its  fulness  to  the  Sixth  Root-Race.

Chaos  was  called  senseless  by  the  Ancients,  because — Chaos  and  Space
being  synonymous — it  represented  and  contained  in  itself  all  the  Ele-
ments in  their  rudimentarj^  undifferentiated  State.  They  made  ^ther,
the  fifth  Element,  the  synthesis  of  the  other  four;  for  the  ^ther  of
the  Greek  philosophers  was  not  its  Dregs,  although  indeed  they  knew
more  than  Science  does  now  of  these  Dregs  (Ether),  which  are  rightly
enough  supposed  to  act  as  an  agent  for  many  Forces  that  manifest
on  Earth.  Their  ^ther  was  the  Akasha  of  the  Hindiis;  the  Ether
accepted  in  Physics  is  but  one  of  its  sub-divisions,  on  our  plane,  the
Astral  lyight  of  the  Kabalists  with  all  its  evil  as  well  as  its  good  effects.

Seeing  that  the  Essence  of  ^ther,  or  the  Unseen  Space,  was  con-
sidered divine,  as  being  the  supposed  Veil  of  Deity,  it  was  regarded  as
the  Medium  between  this  life  and  the  next.  The  Ancients  considered
that  when  the  directing  active  Intelligences — the  Gods — retired  from
any  portion  of  ^ther  in  our  Space,  or  the  four  realms  which  they
superintend,  then  that  particular  region  was  left  in  the  possession  of
evil,  so  called  by  reason  of  the  absence  from  it  of  good.

The  existence  of  Spirit  in  the  common  Mediator,  the  Ether,  is  denied  by  Materi-
alism ;  while  Theology  makes  of  it  a  Personal  God.  But  the  Kabalist  holds  that
both  are  wrong,  saying  that  in  Ether,  the  elements  represent  only  Matter,  the  blind
Cosmic  Forces  of  Nature;  while  Spirit  represents  the  Intelligence  which  directs
them.  The  Aryan,  Hermetic,  Orphic,  and  Pythagorean  cosmogonical  doctrines,  as
well  as  those  of  Sanchuniathon  and  Berosus,  are  all  based  upon  one  irrefutable
formula,  viz.,  that  ^ther  and  Chaos,  or,  in  the  Platonic  language,  Mind  and  Matter,
were  the  two  primeval  and  eternal  principles  of  the  Universe,  utterly  independent  of
anything  else.  The  former  was  the  all- vivifying  intellectual  principle,  while  Chaos
was  a  shapeless  liquid  principle,  without  "form  or  sense";  from  the  union  of  which
two  sprang  into  existence  the  Universe,  or  rather  the  Universal  World,  the  first
Androgynous  Deity— Chaotic  Matter  becoming  its  Body,  and  Ether  its  Soul.  Ac-
cording to  the  phraseology  of  a  Fragment  of  Hermeias:  "Chaos,  from  this  union
with  Spirit,  obtaining  sense,  shone  with  pleasure,  and  thus  was  produced  Proto-
gonos  the  (First- Born)  Light."*  This  is  the  universal  Trinity,  based  on  the  meta-
physical conceptions  of  the  Ancients,  who,  reasoning  by  analogy,  made  of  man,  who

*  Datnascius,  in  his  Theogony,  calls  it  Dis,  "the  disposer  of  all  things."  Cory,  Ancient  Fragments,
p.  314.


THE   SOUL   OF  THE  WORI,D.  367

is  a  compound  of  Intellect  and  ^Matter,  the  Microcosm  of  the  Macrocosm,  or  Great
Universe.*

"Nature  abhors  Vacuum"  said  the  Peripatetics,  who  though  Mate-
rialists in  their  way,  comprehended  perhaps  why  Democritus,  with  his
instructor  Leucippus,  taught  that  the  first  principles  of  all  things  con-
tained in  the  Universe  were  Atoms  and  a  Vacuum.  The  latter  means
simply  latent  Force  or  Deity,  which,  before  its  first  manifestation —
when  it  became  Will,  communicating  the  first  impulse  to  these  Atoms
— was  the  great  Nothingness,  Ain  Suph,  or  No-Thing;  and,  therefore,
to  every  sense,  a  Void,  or  Chaos.

This  Chaos,  however,  became  the  "Soul  of  the  World,"  according  to
Plato  and  the  Pythagoreans.  According  to  Hindu  teaching.  Deity,  in
the  shape  of  ^ther  or  Akasha,  pervades  all  things.  It  was  called,
therefore,  by  the  Theurgists  the  "Living  Fire,"  the  "Spirit  of  Light,"
and  sometimes  "  Magnes."  According  to  Plato,  the  highest  Deity
itself  built  the  Universe  in  the  geometrical  form  of  the  dodecahedron,
and  its  "First-Begotten"  was  bom  of  Chaos  and  Primordial  Light —
the  Central  Sun.  This  First-Born,  however,  was  only  the  aggregate
of  the  Host  of  the  Builders,  the  first  Constructive  Forces,  who  are
called  in  ancient  Cosmogonies,  the  Ancients,  born  of  the  Deep  or
Chaos,  and  the  First  Point.  He  is  the  Tetragrammaton,  so-called,
at  the  head  of  the  Seven  lower  Sephiroth.  This  was  also  the  belief
of  the  Chaldeans.  Philo,  the  Jew,  speaking  very  flippantly  of  the
first  instructors  of  his  ancestors,  writes  as  follows:

These  Chaldeans  were  of  opinion  that  the  Kosnios,  among  tlie  things  that  exist  [.?],
is  a  single  Point,  either  being  itself  God  [Theos]  or  that  in  it  is  God,  comprehending
the  Soul  of  all  things.t

Chaos,  Theos,  Kosmos  are  but  the  three  symbols  of  their  synthesis —
Space.  One  can  never  hope  to  solve  the  mystery  of  this  Tetraktys,  by
holding  to  the  dead-letter  even  of  the  old  philosophies  as  now  extant.
But  even  in  these,  Chaos,  Theos,  Kosmos  and  Space  are  identified  in
all  Eternity,  as  the  One  Unknown  Space,  the  last  word  on  which  will
never,  perhaps,  be  known,  before  our  Seventh  Round.  Nevertheless,
the  allegories  and  metaphysical  symbols  about  the  primeval  and  perfect
Cube,  are  remarkable,  even  in  the  exoteric  Ptira^ias.

There,  also,  Brahmt  is  Theos,  evolving  out  of  Chaos,  or  the  Great
Deep,  the  Waters,  over  which  Spirit  or  Space — the  Spirit  moving  over
the  face  of  the  future  boundless  Kosmos — is  silently  hovering,  in  the


•  Jsis  Unveiled,  I.  341.  +  "Migration  of  Abraham,"  32.


368  THE  SECRKT  DOCTRINE.

first  hour  of  reawakening.  It  is  also  Vishnu,  sleeping  on  Ananta-
Shesha,  the  great  Serpent  of  Eternity,  of  which  Western  Theology,
ignorant  of  the  Kabalah,  the  only  key  that  opens  the  secrets  of  the
Bible,  has  made — the  Devil.  It  is  the  first  Triangle  or  the  Pythagorean
Triad,  the  "God  of  the  //^r^<?  Aspects,"  before  it  is  transformed,  through
the  perfect  quadrature  of  the  Infinite  Circle,  into  the  "four- faced"
Brahma.  "Of  him  who  is  and  yet  is  not,  from  Non-Being,  the  Kternal
Cause,  is  born  the  Being,  Purusha,"  says  Manu,  the  legislator.

In  the  Egyptian  mythology,  Kneph,  the  Eternal  Unrevealed  God,  is  represented
by  a  snake-emblem  of  Eternity  encircling  a  water  urn,  with  its  head  hovering  over
the  waters,  which  it  incubates  with  its  breath.  In  this  case,  the  Serpent  is  the
Agathodaimon,  the  Good  Spirit;  in  its  opposite  aspect,  it  is  the  Kakodaimon,  the
Evil  Spirit.  In  the  Scandinavian  Eddas,  the  honey-dew,  the  fruit  of  the  Gods,  and
of  the  creative  busy  Yggdrasil  bees,  falls  during  the  hours  of  night,  when  the
atmosphere  is  impregnated  vidth  humidity;  and  in  the  Northern  mythologies,  as
the  passive  principle  of  creation,  it  typifies  the  creation  of  the  Universe  out  of
Water.  This  dew  is  the  Astral  Light  in  one  of  its  combinations,  and  possesses
creative  as  well  as  destructive  properties.  In  the  Chaldean  legend  of  Berosus,
Cannes  or  Dagon,  the  man-fish,  instructing  the  people,  shows  the  infant  World
created  out  of  Water,  and  all  beings  originating  from  this  Prima  Materia.  Moses
teaches  that  only  Earth  and  Water  can  bring  into  existence  a  Living  Soul :  and  we
read  in  the  Scriptures  that  herbs  could  not  grow  until  the  Eternal  caused  it  to  i'ain
upon  Earth.  In  the  Mexican  Popol  Vuh,  man  is  created  out  of  mud  or  clay  {terre
glaise),  taken  from  under  the  Water.  Brahma  creates  the  great  Muni,  or  first  man,
seated  on  his  Lotus,  only  after  having  called  spirits  into  being,  who  thus  enjoyed
•over  mortals  a  priority  of  existence;  and  he  creates  him  out  of  Water,  Air  and
Earth.  Alchemists  claim  that  the  primordial  or  pre-adamic  Earth,  when  reduced
to  its  first  substance,  is  in  its  second  stage  of  transformation  like  clear  Water,  the
first  being  the  Alkahest  proper.  This  primordial  substance  is  said  to  contain  within
itself  the  essence  of  all  that  goes  to  make  up  man;  it  contains  not  only  all  the  ele-
ments of  his  physical  being,  but  even  the  "breath  of  life"  in  a  latent  state,  ready
to  be  awakened.  This  it  derives  from  the  "incubation"  of  the  "Spirit  of  God"
upon  the  face  of  the  Waters — Chaos.  In  fact,  this  substance  is  Chaos  itself.  From
this  it  was  that  Paracelsus  claimed  to  be  able  to  make  his  Homunculi ;  and  this  is
why  Thales,  the  great  natural  philosopher,  maintained  that  Water  was  the  principle
of  all  things  in  nature.*.  .  .  Job  says  that  dead  things  are  formed  from  under
the  Waters,  and  the  inhabitants  thereof.t  In  the  original  text,  instead  of  "dead
things,'^  it  is  written  dead  Rephaim,  Giants  or  mighty  Primitive  Men,  from  whom
Evolution  may  one  day  trace  our  present  race.  J

•  with  the  Greeks,  the  River-Gods,  all  of  them  the  Sons  of  the  Primeval  Ocean^Chaos,  in  its  mascu-
line aspect — were  the  respective  ancestors  of  the  Hellenic  races.  For  them  the  Ocean  was  the  Father
of  the  Gods;  and  thus  in  this  connection  they  had  anticipated  the  theories  of  Thales,  as  rightly
observed  by  Aristotle.     (Metaph.  I.  3-5.)

t  xxvi.  5.

t  /sis  Unveiled,  I.  133-4.


THE    BIRTH    OF   MIND.  369

"  In  the  primordial  state  of  the  creation,"  says  Polier's  Mythologie  des
Indous,  "the  rudimental  Universe,  submerged  in  Water,  reposed  in  the
bosom  of  Vishnu.  Sprung  from  this  Chaos  and  Darkness,  Brahma,
the  Architect  of  the  World,  poised  on  a  lotus-leaf,  floated  [moved]
upon  the  waters,  unable  to  discern  anything  but  water  and  darkness."
Perceiving  such  a  dismal  state  of  things,  Brahma  soliloquizes  in  con-
sternation: "Who  am  I?  Whence  camel?"  Then  he  hears  a  voice:*
"Direct  your  thoughts  to  Bhagavat."  Brahma,  rising  from  his  natatory
position,  seats  himself  upon  the  lotus,  in  an  attitude  of  contemplation,
and  reflects  upon  the  Eternal,  who,  pleased  with  this  evidence  of  piety,
disperses  the  primeval  darkness  and  opens  his  understanding.  "  After
this  Brahma  issues  from  the  Universal  Egg  [Infinite  Chaos]  as  Eight,
for  his  understanding  is  now  opened,  and  he  sets  himself  to  work.  He
moves  on  the  eternal  Waters,  with  the  Spirit  of  God  within  himself;
and  in  his  capacity  of  Mover  of  the  Waters  he  is  Vishnu,  or  Nara5-ana."

This  is,  of  course,  exoteric;  yet,  in  its  main  idea,  it  is  as  identical  as
possible  with  the  Egyptian  Cosmogony,  which,  in  its  opening  sen-
tences, shows  Athtor,t  or  Mother  Night,  representing  Illimitable  Dark-
ness, as  the  Primeval  Element  which  covered  the  Infinite  Abyss,
animated  by  Water  and  the  Universal  Spirit  of  the  Eternal,  dwelling
alone  in  Chaos.  Similarly  in  the  Jewish  Scriptures,  the  history  of  the
creation  opens  with  the  Spirit  of  God  and  his  creative  Emanation—
another  Deity. :J:

The  Zohar  teaches  that  it  is  the  Primordial  Elements — the  trinity  of
Fire,  Air  and  Water— the  Four  Cardinal  Points,  and  all  the  Forces  of
Nature,  which  form  collectively  the  Voice  of  the  Will,  Memrab,  or  the
Word,  the  Logos  of  the  Absolute  Silent  All.  "The  indivisible  Point,
limitless  and  unknowable,"  spreads  itself  over  space,  and  thus  forms
a  Veil,  the  MCilaprakriti  of  Parabrahman,  which  conceals  this  Absolute
Point.

In  the  Cosmogonies  of  all  the  nations  it  is  the  Architects,  synthe-
sized by  the  Demiurge,  in  the  Bible  the  Elohim,  or  Alhim,  who  fashion
Kosmos  out  of  Chaos,  and  who  are  the  collective  Theos,  male-female.
Spirit  and  Matter.  "By  a  series  (^yoni)  of  foundations  {hasoth),  the
Alhim  caused  earth  and  heaven  to  be."§     In  Ge?iesis,  it  is  first  Alhim,

•  The  Spirit,  or  hidden  voice  of  the  Mantras ;  the  active  manifestation  of  the  latent  force,  or  Occult
potency.

t  Orthography  of  the  Archaic  Dictionary.

t  We  do  not  mean  the  current  or  accepted  Bible,  but  the  real  Jewish  Scripture,  nov/  kabaMstically
explained.

}  See  Genesis,  ii.  4.  ag


370  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

then  Jahva-Alhim,  and  finally  Jehovah— after  the  separation  of  the
sexes  in  the  fourth  chapter.  It  is  noticeable  that  nowhere,  except  in
the  later,  or  rather  the  last.  Cosmogonies  of  our  Fifth  Race  does  the
ineffable  and  unutterable  Name*— the  symbol  of  the  Unknown  Deity,
which  was  used  only  in  the  Mysteries — occur  in  connection  with  the
"Creation"  of  the  Universe.  It  is  the  Movers,  the  Runners,  theTheoi
(from  QUiv  to  run),  who  do  the  work  of  formation,  the  Messengers  of
the  Manvantaric  Law,  who  have  now  become  in  Christianity  simply
the  "Messengers"  (Malachim).  This  seems  to  be  also  the  case  in
Hindiiism  or  early  Brahmanism.  For  in  the  Rig  Veda,  it  is  not  Brahma
who  creates,  but  the  Prajapatis,  the  "Lords  of  Being,"  who  are  also  the
Rishis;  the  term  Rishi,  according  to  Professor  Mahadeo  Kunte,  being
connected  with  the  word  to  move,  to  lead  on,  applied  to  them  in  their
terrestrial  character,  when,  as  Patriarchs,  they  lead  their  Hosts  on  the
Seven  Rivers.

Moreover,  the  very  word  "God,"  in  the  singular,  embracing  all  the
Gods,  or  Theoi,  came  to  the  "superior"  civilized  nations  from  a  strange
source,  one  as  entirely  and  preeminently  phallic  as  the  sincere  out-
spokenness of  the  Indian  Lingham.  The  attempt  to  derive  God  from
the  Anglo-Saxon  synonym  Good  is  an  abandoned  idea,  for  in  no  other
language,  from  the  Persian  Khoda  down  to  the  Latin  Deus,  has  an
instance  been  found  of  the  name  for  God  being  derived  from  the  attri-

A

bute  of  Goodness.  To  the  Latin  races  it  comes  from  the  Aryan  Dyaiis
(the  Day);  to  the  Slavonian,  from  the  Greek  Bacchus  {Bagh-bog)\  and
to  the  Saxon  races  directly  from  the  Hebrew  Yod,  or  Jod.  The  latter  is
"•,  the  number-letter  lo,  male  and  female,  and  Yod  is  the  phallic  hook.
Hence  the  Saxon  Godh,  the  Germanic  Gott,  and  the  English  God.
This  symbolic  term  may  be  said  to  represent  the  Creator  of  Phj^sical
Humanity,  on  the  terrestrial  plane ;  but  surely  it  had  nothing  to  do
with  the  Formation,  or  "Creation,"  of  either  Spirit,  Gods,  or  Kosmos?
Chaos-Theos-Kosmos,  the  Triple  Deity,  is  all  in  all.  Therefore,  it
is  said  to  be  male  and  female,  good  and  evil,  positive  and  negative ;  the
whole  series  of  contrasted  qualities.  When  latent,  in  Pralaya,  it  is
incognizable  and  becomes  the  Unknowable  Deity.  It  can  be  known
only  in  its  active  functions ;  hence  as  Matter-Force  and  livi7ig  Spirit,
the  correlations  and  outcome,  or  the  expression,  on  the  visible  plane,
of  the  ultimate  and  ever-to-be  unknown  Unity.

*  It  is  "unutterable"  for  the  simple  reason  that  it  is  non-existent.  It  wewi?;' was  either  a  «ay«tf,
or  any  word  at  all,  but  an  idea  that  could  not  be  expressed.  A  substitute  was  created  for  it  in  the
century  preceding  our  era.


THE   MYSTIC   ELEMENTS.  37I

In  its  turn  this  Triple  Unit  is  the  producer  of  the  Four  Primary  Ele-
ments,* which  are  known,  in  our  visible  terrestrial  Nature,  as  the  seven
(so  far  the  five)  Elements,  each  divisible  into  forty-nine — seven  times
seven — sub-elements,  with  about  sevent>^  of  which  Chemistry  is  ac-
quainted. Every  Cosmical  Element,  such  as  Fire,  Air,  Water,  Earth,
partaking  of  the  qualities  and  defects  of  its  Primaries,  is  in  its  nature
Good  and  Evil,  Force  or  Spirit,  and  Matter,  etc. ;  and  each,  therefore,
is  at  one  and  the  same  time  Eife  and  Death,  Health  and  Disease,  Action
and  Reaction.  They  are  ever  forming  Matter,  under  the  never-ceasing
impulse  of  the  One  Element,  the  Incognizable,  represented  in  the  world
of  phenomena  by  ^ther.  They  are  "the  immortal  Gods  who  give  birth
and  life  to  all."

In  The  Philosophical  Writings  of  Solomon  Ben  Yehudah  Ibn  Gebirol,
in  treating  of  the  structure  of  the  Universe,  it  is  said :

R.  Yehudah  began,  it  is  written:  "Elohim  said:  Let  there  be  a  firmament  in  the
midst  of  the  waters."  Come,  see!  At  the  time  that  the  Holy  .  .  .  created  the
World,  He  created  7  heavens  Above.  He  created  7  earths  Below,  7  seas,  7  days,  7
rivers,  7  weeks,  7  years,  7  times,  and  7,000  years  that  the  World  has  been.  The
Holy  is  in  the  seventh  of  all.t

This,  besides  showing  a  strange  identity  with  the  Cosmogony  of  the
Puranas,\  corroborates  all  our  teachings  with  regard  to  number  seven,
as  briefly  given  in  Esoteric  BiiddJiism.

The  Hindus  have  an  endless  series  of  allegories  to  express  this  idea.
In  the  Primordial  Chaos,  before  it  became  developed  into  the  Sapta
Samudra,  or  Seven  Oceans — emblematical  of  the  Seven  Gunas,  or  con-
ditioned Qualities,  composed  of  Trigunas  (Sattva,  Rajas  and  Tamas) —
lie  latent  both  Amrita,  or  Immortalit3%  and  Visha,  or  Poison,  Death,
Evil.  This  is  to  be  found  in  the  allegorical  Churning  of  the  Ocean  by
the  Gods.  Amrita  is  beyond  any  Guna,  for  it  is  u?ico?iditio?ied,  per  se\
but  when  once  fallen  into  phenomenal  creation,  it  became  mixed  with
Evil,  Chaos,  with  latent  Theos  in  it,  before  Kosmos  was  evolved.
Hence  we  find  Vishnu,  the  personification  of  Eternal  Eaw,  periodically
calling  forth  Kosmos  into  activity,  or,  in  allegorical  phraseology,  churn-
ing out  of  the  Primitive  Ocean,  or  Boundless  Chaos,  the  Amrita  of
Eternity,  reserved  only  for  the  Gods  and  Devas;  and  in  the  task  he  has

•  The  Cosmic  Tabernacle  of  Moses,  erected  by  him  in  the  Desert,  was  square,  representing  the  four
Cardinal  Toints  and  the  four  Elements,  as  Josephus  tells  his  readers.  {Antiq.  i.  viii.  ch.  xxii.)  The
idea  was  taken  from  the  pyramids  iu  Eg>'pt,  and  also  in  Tyre,  where  the  pyramids  became  pillars.
The  Genii,  or  Angels,  have  their  abodes  iu  these  four  points  respectively.

t  Isaac  Myer's  Qabbalah,  published  1888,  p.  415.

X  As,  for  instance,  in  Vishnu  Purdna,  Bk.  I.


372  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

to  employ  Nagas  and  Asuras,  or  Demons  in  exoteric  Hinduism.  The
whole  allegory  is  highly  philosophical,  and  indeed  we  find  it  repeated
in  every  ancient  system  of  philosoph}^  Thus  we  find  it  in  Plato,  who
having  fully  embraced  the  ideas  which  Pythagoras  had  brought  from
India,  compiled  and  published  them  in  a  form  more  intelligible  than
the  original  mysterious  numerals  of  the  Samian  Sage.  Thus  the
Kosmos  is  the  "Son"  with  Plato,  having  for  his  Father  and  Mother
Divine  Thought  and  Matter.*

"The  Egyptians,"  says  Dunlap,  "distinguish  between  an  older  and
younger  Horus;  the  former  the  brother  of  Osiris,  the  latter  the  son  of
Osiris  and  Isis."t  The  first  is  the  Idea  of  the  World  remaining  in  the
Demiurgic  Mind,  "born  in  Darkness  before  the  Creation  of  the  World."
The  second  Horus  is  this  Idea  going  forth  from  the  Logos,  becoming
clothed  with  Matter,  and  assuming  an  actual  existence. :|:

The  Chaldean  Orac/es  speak  of  the  "Mundane  God,  eternal,  boundless,
3'oung  and  old,  of  winding  form."§  This  "winding  form"  is  a  figure
to  express  the  vibratory  motion  of  the  Astral  Light,  with  which  the
ancient  priests  were  perfectlj^  well  acquainted,  though  the  name
"Astral  Light"  was  invented  by  the  Martinists.

Cosmolatry  has  the  finger  of  scorn  pointed  at  its  superstitions  by
Modern  Science.  Science,  however,  before  laughing  at  it,  ought,  as
advised  by  a  French  savant,  "to  entirely  remodel  its  own  system  of
cosmo-pneumatological  education."  Satis  eloquejitia,  sapienti(S paruni !
Cosmolatry,  like  Pantheism,  in  its  ultimate  expression,  may  be  made  to
express  itself  in  the  same  words  in  which  the  Purdna  describes  Vishnu :

He  is  only  the  ideal  cause  of  the  potencies  to  be  created  in  the  work  of  creation ;
and  from  him  proceed  the  potencies  to  be  created,  after  they  have  become  the  real
cause.     Save  that  one  ideal  cause,  there  is  no  other  to  which  the  world  can  be

referred Throiigh  the  potency  of  that  cause,  ^'s&ry  cxQ3X.^^\.\i.\n^cova.&s\iy

its  proper  nature,  [j

*  Plutarch,  De  Iside  et  Osiride,  Ivi.

t  Spirit  History  of  Man,  p.  88.

t  Movers,  Phoinizer,  268.

\  Cory,  A  Jicient  Fragments,  240.

II  Vishnu  Puraiia,  Bk.  I.  Ch.  iv.,  Fitzedward  Hall's  rendering.


SECTION  V.
On  the  Hidden  Deity,  Its  Symbols  and  Glyphs.


The  Logos,  or  Creative  Deity,  the  "Word  made  Flesh,"  of  every
religion,  has  to  be  traced  to  its  ultimate  source  and  essence.  In  India,
it  is  a  Proteus  of  i,oo8  divine  names  and  aspects  in  each  of  its  personal
transformations,  from  Brahma- Purusha,  through  the  Seven  Divine
Rishis  and  Ten  Semi-divine  Prajapatis  (also  Rishis),  down  to  the
Divine-human  Avataras.  The  same  puzzling  problem  of  the  "One  in
Many,"  and  the  Multitude  in  One,  is  found  in  other  Pantheons ;  in  the
Egyptian,  the  Greek  and  the  Chaldeo-Judaic,  the  latter  having  made
confusion  still  more  confused  by  presenting  its  Gods  as  euhemeriza-
tions,  in  the  shapes  of  Patriarchs.  And  these  Patriarchs  are  now
accepted  by  those  who  reject  Romulus  as  a  myth,  and  are  represented
as  living  and  historical  Entities.      Verbum  satis  sapienti!

In  the  Zohar,  Ain  Suph  is  also  the  One,  the  Infinite  Unit}'.  This
was  known  to  the  very  few  learned  Fathers  of  the  Church,  who  were
aware  that  Jehovah  was  no  "highest"  God,  but  a  third-rate  Potency.
But  while  complaining  bitterly  of  the  Gnostics,  and  saying:  "our
Heretics  hold.  .  .  that  Propator  is  known  but  to  the  Only-begotten
Son*  [who  is  Brahma],  that  is  to  the  Mind  [Nous],"  Irenaeus  failed  to
mention  that  the  Jews  did  the  same  in  their  real  secret  books.  Valen-
tinus,  "the  profoundest  doctor  of  the  Gno.sis,"  held  that  "there  was  a
perfect  Aion  who  existed  before  Bythos  [the  first  Father  of  unfathom-
able nature,  which  is  the  Second  Logos],  called  Propator."  It  is  this
Aion  who  springs  as  a  Ray  from  Ain  Suph,  which  does  not  create,  and
Aion  who  creates,  or  through  whom,  rather,  everything  is  created,  or
evolves.     For,  as  the  Basilidians  taught,  "  there  was  a  Supreme  God,

*  Just  as  Mfilaprakriti  is  kuowu  only  to  Ishvara,  the  Logos,  as  he  is  called  by  T.  Subba  Row.


374  '^H®  sscREiT  doctrine;.

Abrasax,  by  whom  was  created  Mind  [Mahat,  in  Sanskrit;  Nous,  in
Greek].  From  Mind  proceeded  the  Word,  lyOgos;  from  the  Word,
Providence  [Divine  lyight,  rather];  then  from  it  Virtue  and  Wisdom  in
Principalities,  Powers,  Angels,  etc."  By  these  Angels  the  365  ^ons
were  created.  "Amongst  the  lowest,  indeed,  and  those  who  made  this
world,  he  [Basilides]  sets  last  of  all  the  God  of  the  Jews,  whom  he
denies  to  be  God  [and  very  rightly],  affirming  he  is  one  of  the  Angels."

Here,  then,  we  find  the  same  system  as  in  the  Purdnas,  wherein  the
Incomprehensible  drops  a  Seed,  which  becomes  the  Golden  ^"g^,  from
which  Brahma  is  produced.  Brahma  produces  Mahat,  etc.  True
Esoteric  Philosophy,  however,  speaks  neither  of  "creation,"  nor  of
"evolution,"  in  the  sense  in  which  the  exoteric  religions  do.  All  these
personified  Powers  are  not  evolutions  from  one  another,  but  so  many
aspects  of  the  one  and  sole  manifestation  of  the  Absolute  All.

The  same  system  as  that  of  the  Gnostic  Emanations  prevails  in  the
Sephirothic  aspects  of  Ain  Suph,  and,  as  these  aspects  are  in  Space  and
Time,  a  certain  order  is  maintained  in  their  successive  appearances.
Therefore,  it  becomes  impossible  not  to  take  notice  of  the  great  changes
that  the  Zohar  has  undergone  under  the  handling  of  generations  of
Christian  Mystics.  For,  even  in  the  metaphysics  of  the  Talmud,  the
Lower  Face  or  Lesser  Countenance,  or  Microprosopus,  could  never  be
placed  on  the  same  plane  of  abstract  ideals  as  the  Higher,  or  Greater
Countenance,  Macroprosopus.  The  latter  is,  in  the  Chaldean  Kabalah,  a
pure  abstraction,  the  Word  or  Logos,  or  Dabar  in  Hebrew;  which  Word,
though  it  becomes  in  fact  a  plural  number,  or  Words,  D(a)B(a)R(i)M,
when  it  reflects  itself,  or  falls  into  the  aspect  of  a  Host  of  Angels,  or
Sephiroth — the  "Number" — is  still  collectively  One,  and  on  the  ideal
plane  a  nought,  O.  "Nothing."  //  is  without  form  or  being,  "with  no
likeness  with  anything  else."*  And  even  Philo  calls  the  Creator,  the
Logos  who  stands  next  God,  the  "Second  God,"  when  he  speaks  of
"the  Second  God,  who  is  his  [the  Highest  God's]  Wisdom."!  Deity  is
not  God.  It  is  No-thing,  and  Darkness.  It  is  nameless,  and  therefore
called  Ain  Suph,  the  word  "  Ayin  meaning  nothing." J  The  "Highest
God,"  the  Unmanifested  Logos,  is  Its  Son.

Nor  are  most  of  the  Gnostic  systems  which  have  come  down  to  us,
mutilated  as  they  are  by  the  Church  Fathers,  anything  better  than  the
distorted  shells  of  the  original  speculations.  Nor  were  they,  moreover,
ever  open  to  the  public  or  general  reader;  for  had  their  hidden  meaning

*  Franck,  Die  Kabbala,  126.  t  Philo,  Qucest.  et  Solut.  %  Franck,  Op.  cil.,  153.


THE   GNOSIS   OF   MARCUS.  375

or  esotericism  been  revealed,  it  would  have  been  no  more  an  esoteric
teaching,  and  this  could  never  have  been.  Marcus,  the  chief  of  the
Marcosians,  who  flourished  in  the  middle  of  the  second  centur)%  and
taught  that  Deity  had  to  be  viewed  under  the  symbol  oi  four  syllables,
gave  out  more  of  the  esoteric  truths  than  any  other  Gnostic.  But  even
he  was  never  well  understood.  For  it  is  only  on  the  surface  or  dead-
letter  of  his  Revelation  that  it  appears  that  God  is  a  Ouaternar}',  to  wit,
"the  Ineffable,  the  Silence,  the  Father,  and  Truth,"  since  in  reality  it
is  quite  erroneous,  and  divulges  only  one  more  esoteric  riddle.  This
teaching  of  Marcus  was  that  of  the  early  Kabalists  and  is  ours.  For  he
makes  of  Deity  the  Number  30,  in  four  syllables,  which,  translated
esoterically,  means  a  Triad  or  Triangle,  and  a  Quaternary  or  a  Square,
in  all  seven,  which,  on  the  lower  plane,  made  the  seven  divine  or
Secret  Letters  of  which  the  God-name  is  composed.  This  requires
demonstration.  In  his  Revelation,  speaking  of  divine  m3^steries  ex-
pressed by  means  of  letters  and  numbers,  Marcus  narrates  how  the
Supreme  "Tetrad  came  down"  unto  him  "from  the  region  which  can-
not be  seen  nor  named,  in  a  female  form,  because  the  world  would  have
been  nnable  to  bear  her  appearing  in  a  male  figure,''  and  revealed  to  him
"the  generation  of  the  universe,  untold  before  to  either  Gods  or  men."

The  first  sentence  already  contains  a  double  meaning.  Why  should
the  apparition  of  a  female  figure  be  more  easily  borne,  or  listened  to,
by  the  world  than  a  male  figure?  On  the  face  of  it,  this  appears  non-
sensical. But  to  one  who  is  acquainted  with  the  M5^stery  Language,  it
is  quite  clear  and  .simple.  Esoteric  Philosophy,  or  the  Secret  Wisdom,
was  symbolized  b)'  a  female  form,  while  a  male  figure  stood  for  the
Unveiled  Mystery.  Hence,  the  world,  not  being  ready  to  receive  it,
could  not  bear  it,  and  the  Revelation  of  Marcus  had  to  be  given  alle-
gorically.     Thus  he  writes :

When  first  its  Father  \sc.  of  the  Tetrad]  .  .  .  the  Inconceivable,  the  Being-
less,  Sexless  [the  Kabalistic  Ain  Suph],  desired  that  Its  Ineffable  [the  First  Logos,
or  .<^on]  should  be  born,  and  Its  Invisible  should  be  clothed  with  form,  Its
mouth  opened  and  uttered  the  Word  like  i:nto  Itself  This  Word  [Logos]  standing
near  showed  It  what  It  was,  manifesting  itself  in  the  form  of  the  Invisible  One.
Now  the  uttering  of  the  [Ineffable]  Name  [through  the  Word]  came  to  pass  in  this
manner.  It  [the  Supreme  Logos]  uttered  the  first  Word  of  its  Name,  .  .  .  which,
was  a  combination  [syllable]  of /o«r  elements  [letters].  Then  the  second  combina-
tion was  added,  also  oi  four  elements.  Then  the  third,  composed  of  ten  elements;
and  after  this  the  fourth  was  uttered,  which  contained  tzuelve  elements.  The
utterance  of  the  whole  Name  consisted  thus  of  thirty  elements  and  oi  four  com-


2n^  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

binations.  Each  element  has  its  own  letters  and  peculiar  character,  and  pronun-
ciation, and  groupings  and  similitudes;  but  none  of  them  perceives  the  form  of
that  of  which  it  is  the  element,  nor  understands  the  utterance  of  its  neighbour,
but,  what  each  sounds  forth  itself,  as  sounding  forth  all  [it  can],  that  it  thinks  good

to  call  the  whole And  these  sounds  are  they  which  manifest  in  form

the  Beingless  and  Ingenerable  ^on,  and  these  are  the  forms  which  are  called
Angels,  perpetually  beholding  the  Face  of  the  Father,*  [the  Logos,  the  "Second
God,"  who  stands  next  God  the  "Inconceivable,"  according  to  PhiloJ.f

This  is  as  plain  as  ancient  esoteric  secres)^  could  make  it.  It  is  as
Kabalistic  though  less  veiled  than  the  Zohai%  in  which  the  mystic
names,  or  attributes,  are  also  four  syllabled,  twelve,  forty-two,  and
even  seventy- two  syllabled  words !  The  Tetrad  shows  to  Marcus  the
Truth  in  the  shape  of  a  naked  woman,  and  letters  every  limb  of  that
figure,  calling  her  head  A  fl,  her  neck  B  >!',  shoulders  and  hands  V  X,
etc.  In  this,  Sephira  is  easily  recognized ;  the  head,  or  Crown,  Kether,
being  numbered  i;  the  brain,  or  Chokmah,  2;  the  Heart,  or  Intel-
ligence, Binah,  3;  and  the  other  seven  Sephiroth  representing  the
limbs  of  the  body.  The  Sephirothic  Tree  is  the  Universe,  and  Adam
Kadmon  personifies  it  in  the  West,  as  Brahma  represents  it  in  India.

Throughout,  the  Ten  Sephiroth  are  represented  as  divided  into  the
Three  higher,  or  the  spiritual  Triad,  and  the  lower  Septenary.  The
true  esoteric  meaning  of  the  sacred  number  Seven  though  cleverly
veiled,  in  the  Zohar,  is  betrayed  by  the  double  way  of  writing  the
term,  "in  the  Beginning,"  or  Be-rasheeth,  and  Be-raishath,  the  latter
the  "Higher,  or  Upper  Wisdom."  As  shown  by  S.  ly.  MacGregor
Mathers!  and  Isaac  Myer,§  both  of  these  Kabalists  being  supported  by
the  best  ancient  authorities,  these  words  have  a  dual  and  secret  mean-
ing. Braisheeth  barah  Elohim  means,  that  the  six,  over  which  stands  the
seventh  Sephira,  belong  to  the  lower  material  class,  or,  as  the  author
says:  "Seven  ....  are  applied  to  the  Lower  Creation,  and  Three  to
the  Spiritual  Man,  the  Heavenly  Prototypic  or  First  Adam."

When  the  Theosophists  and  Occultists  say  that  God  is  no  Being,  for
It  is  Nothing,  No-Thing,  they  are  more  reverential  and  religiously
respectful  to  the  Deity  than  those  who  call  God  He,  and  thus  make  of
Him  a  gigantic  Male.

He  who  studies  the  Kabalah  will  soon  find  the  same  idea  in  the
ultimate  thought  of  its  authors,  the  earlier  and  great  Hebrew  Initiates,

*  The  "Seven  Angels  of  the  Face,"  with  the  Christians.

+  Philosophunie7ia ,  vi.  42.

%  The  Kabbalah  Unveiled,  47.

\   Qabbalah,  233.


THE   GREAT   MIND.  377

who  got  this  Secret  Wisdom  in  Babylonia  from  the  Chaldean  Hiero-
phants,  just  as  Moses  got  his  in  Eg3^pt.  The  Zoharic  system  cannot
ver}-  well  be  judged  by  its  translations  into  Latin  and  other  tongues,
when  all  its  ideas  were  softened  and  made  to  fit  in  with  the  views  and
policy  of  its  Christian  arrangers;  for  its  original  ideas  are  identical
with  those  of  all  other  religious  systems.  The  various  Cosmogonies
show  that  the  Universal  Soul  was  considered  by  every  archaic  nation
as  the  Mind  of  the  Demiurgic  Creator;  and  that  it  was  called  the
Mother,  Sophia,  or  the  female  Wisdom,  with  the  Gnostics;  the  Sephira,
with  the  Jews ;  Sarasvati  or  Vach,  with  the  Hindijis  ;  the  Holy  Ghost
also  being  a  female  Principle.

Hence,  the  Kurios,  or  Logos,  born  from  it,  was,  with  the  Greeks,  the
God,  Mind  (Nous).  "Now  Koros  [Kurios]  .  .  .  signifies  the
pure  and  unmixed  nature  of  Intellect — Wisdom,"  says  Plato,  in
Craiylus;*  and  Kurios  is  Mercury  (Mercurius,  Mar-kurios),  the  Divine
Wisdom,  and  "Mercurj'  is  Sol  [the  Sun],"t  from  whom  Thot-Hermes
received  this  Divine  Wisdom.  While,  then,  the  Logoi  of  all  countries
and  religions  are  correlative,  in  their  sexual  aspects,  with  the  female
Soul  of  the  World  or  the  Great  Deep,  the  Deity,  from  which  these  Two
in  One  have  their  being,  is  ever  concealed  and  called  the  Hidden  One,
and  is  connected  only  indirectly  with  "  Creation, ":|:  as  it  can  act  only
through  the  Dual  Force  emanating  from  the  Eternal  Essence.  Even
^sculapius,  called  the  "Saviour  of  all,"  is  identical,  according  to
ancient  classical  writers,  with  the  Eg>'ptian  Ptah,  the  Creative  Intellect,
or  Divine  Wisdom,  and  with  Apollo,  Baal,  Adonis  and  Hercules  :§  and
Ptah,  in  one  of  its  aspects,  is  the  Anima  Mundi ;  the  Universal  Soul  of
Plato;  the  Divine  Spirit  of  the  Egj'ptians;  the  Holy  Ghost  of  the  early
Christians  and  Gnostics ;  and  the  Akasha  of  the  Hindus,  and  even,  in
its  lower  aspect,  the  Astral  Eight.  For  Ptah  was  originally  the  God  of
the  Dead,  he  into  whose  bosom  they  were  received,  hence  the  Eimbus
of  the  Greek  Christians,  or  the  Astral  Eight.  It  was  far  later  that  Ptah
was  classed  with  the  Sun-Gods,  his  name  signifying  "he  who  opens,"
as  he  is  shown  to  be  the  first  to  unveil  the  face  of  the  dead  mummj-,  to
call  the  Soul  to  life  in  his  bosofn.  Kneph,  the  Eternal  Unrevealed,  is
represented  by  the  snake-emblem  of  eternity  encircling  a  water-urn.


•  p.  79-

+  Aniobius,  VI.  xii.

t  We  employ  the  tenii  as  one  accepted  and  sanctioned  by  use,  and  therefore  more  comprehensible
to  the  reader.
\  See  Dunlap,  Sod:  the  Mysteries  of  Adoni,  23.


378  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

with  its  head  hovering  over  the  "Waters,"  which  it  incubates  with  its
breath — another  form  of  the  one  original  idea  of  "Darkness,"  with  its
Ray  moving  on  the  Waters,  etc.  As  the  Logos-Soul,  this  permutation
is  called  Ptah;  as  the  lyOgos-Creator,  he  becomes  Imhotep,  his  Son,
the  "God  of  the  handsome  face."  In  their  primitive  characters,  these
two  were  the  first  Cosmic  Duad,  Noot,  Space  or  "Sky,"  and  Noon,  the
"Primordial  Waters,"  the  Androgyne  Unity,  above  whom  was  the
Concealed  Breath  of  Kneph.  And  all  of  them  had  the  aquatic  animals
and  plants  sacred  to  them,  the  ibis,  the  swan,  the  goose,  the  crocodile,
and  the  lotus.

Returning  to  the  Kabalistic  Deity,  this  Concealed  Unity  is  then  Ain
Suph  (PjiDpN,  TO  TTciv,  TO  ttTreipov),  Endless,  Boundless,  Non-Existent  (pN),
so  long  as  the  Absolute  is  within  Oulom,*  the  Boundless  and  Termless
Time;  as  such,  Ain  Suph  cannot  be  the  Creator  or  even  the  Modeller
of  the  Universe,  nor  can  It  be  Aur  (Light).  Therefore  Ain  Suph  is
also  Darkness.  The  immutably  Infinite,  and  the  absolutely  Boundless,
can  neither  will,  think,  nor  act.  To  do  this,  it  has  to  become  Finite,
and  it  does  so  by  its  Ray  penetrating  into  the  Mundane  Egg,  or  Infinite
Space,  and  emanating  from  it  as  a  Finite  God.  All  this  is  left  to  the
Ray  latent  in  the  One.  When  the  period  arrives,  the  Absolute  Will
expands  naturally  the  Force  within  it,  according  to  the  Law  of  which
it  is  the  inner  and  ultimate  Essence.  The  Hebrews  did  not  adopt  the
Egg  as  a  symbol,  but  they  substituted  for  it  the  "Duplex  Heavens,"
for,  translated  correctly,  the  sentence  "God  made  the  heavens  and  the
earth"  would  read:  "In  and  out  of  his  own  Essence,  as  a  Womb  [the
Mundane  Egg],  God  created  the  Two  Heavens."  The  Christians,  how-
ever, have  chosen  the  Dove,  the  bird  and  not  the  ^%%,  as  the  symbol  of
their  Holy  Ghost.

"Whoever  acquaints  himself  with  Hud,  the  Mercabah  and  the
Lahgash  [secret  speech  or  incantation],  will  learn  the  secret  of
secrets."  Lahgash  is  nearly  identical  in  meaning  with  Vach,  the  hidden
power  of  the  Mantras.

When  the  active  period  has  arrived,  from  within  the  Eternal  Essence
of  Ain  Suph,  comes  forth  Sephira,  the  Active  Power,  called  the  Primor-
dial Point  and  the  Crown,  Kether.  It  is  only  through  her  that  the
"Un-bounded  Wisdom"  could  give  a  Concrete  Form  to  the  Abstract

*  With  the  ancient  Jews,  as  shown  by  Le  Clerc,  the  word  Oulom  meant  simply  a  time  whose
beginning  or  end  was  not  known.  The  term  "Eternity,"  properly  speaking,  did  not  exist  in  the
Hebrew  tongue  with  the  meaning  applied  by  Vedantins  to  Parabrahman,  for  instance.


SYMBOLS  OF  THE   CREATIVE  POWERS.  379

Thought.  Two  sides  of  the  Upper  Triangle,  by  which  the  Ineffable
Essence  and  its  Manifested  Body,  the  Universe,  are  symbolized,  the
right  side  and  the  base,  are  composed  of  unbroken  lines ;  the  third,  the
left  side,  is  dotted.  It  is  through  the  latter  that  emerges  Sephira.
Spreading  in  every  direction,  she  finally  encompasses  the  whole
Triangle.  In  this  emanation  the  triple  Triad  is  formed.  From  the
invisible  Dew  falling  from  the  higher  Uni-triad,  the  "Head," — thus
leaving  7  Sephiroth  only — Sephira  creates  Primeval  Waters,  or  in
other  words,  Chaos  takes  shape.  It  is  the  first  stage  towards  the
solidification  of  Spirit  which,  through  various  modifications,  will  pro-
duce Earth.  "It  requires  Earth  and  Water  to  make  a  lyiving  Soul,"
says  Moses.  It  requires  the  image  of  an  aquatic  bird  to  connect  it  with
Water,  the  female  element  of  procreation,  with  the  0.%%  and  the  bird
that  fecundates  it.

When  Sephira  emerges  as  an  Active  Power  from  within  the  Latent
Deity,  she  is  female;  when  she  assumes  the  office  of  a  Creator,  she
becomes  a  male;  hence,  she  is  androg>^ne.  She  is  the  "Father  and
Mother,  Aditi,"  of  the  Hindu  Cosmogony  and  of  the  Secret  Doctrine.
If  the  oldest  Hebrew  scrolls  had  been  preserved,  the  modern  Jehovah-
worshipper  would  have  found  that  many  and  uncomely  were  the
symbols  of  the  "Creative  God."  The  frog  in  the  moon,  typical  of  his
generative  character,  was  the  most  frequent.  All  the  birds  and  animals
now  called  "unclean"  in  the  Bible  have  been  the  symbols  of  this  Deity,
in  days  of  old.  A  mask  of  uncleanness  was  placed  over  them,  in  order
to  preserve  them  from  destruction,  because  they  were  so  sacred.  The
brazen  serpent  is  not  a  bit  more  poetical  than  the  goose  or  swan,  if
symbols  are  to  be  accepted  a  la  lettre.

In  the  words  of  the  Zohar:

The  Indivisible  Point,  which  has  no  limit  and  cannot  be  comprehended  because
of  Its  purity  and  brightness,  expanded  from  without,  forming  a  brightness  that
served  the  Indivisible  Point  as  a  Veil ;  [yet  the  latter  also]  could  not  be  viewed  in
consequence  of  its  immeasurable  Light.  It  too  expanded  front  without,  and  this
expansion  was  its  Garment.  Thus  through  a  constant  upheaving  [motion]  finally
the  world  originated.*

The  Spiritual  Substance  sent  forth  by  the  Infinite  lyight  is  the  First
Sephira  or  Shekinah.  Sephira,  exoterically ,  contains  all  the  other  nine
Sephiroth  in  her:  esoterically,  she  contains  but  two,  Chokmah  or  Wis-
dom, "a  masculine,  active  potency  whose  divine  name  is  Jah  (rr"'),"  and

•  Zohar,  Part  I.  fol.  20a.


38o  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Binah,  or  Intelligence,  a  feminine  passive  potency,  represented  by  the
divine  name  Jehovah  (rr"irT"') ;  which  two  potencies  form,  with  Sephira
the  third,  the  Jewish  Trinity  or  the  Crown,  Kether.  These  two  Sephi-
roth,  called  Abba,  Father,  and  Amona,  Mother,  are  the  Duad,  or  the
double-sexed  Logos,  from  which  issued  the  other  seven  Sephiroth.
Thus,  the  first  Jewish  Triad,  Sephira,  Chokmah  and  Binah,  is  the
Hindu  Trimurti.*  However  veiled  even  in  the  Zohar,  and  still  more  in
the  exoteric  Pantheon  of  India,  every  particular  connected  with  one  is
reproduced  in  the  other.  The  Prajapatis  are  the  Sephirotli.  Ten  with
Brahma,  they  dwindle  to  seven  when  the  Trimurti,  or  the  Kabalistic
Triad,  are  separated  from  the  rest.  The  seven  Builders,  or  "Creators,"
become  the  seven  Prajapati,  or  the  seven  Rishis,  in  the  same  order  as
the  Sephiroth  become  the  Creators,  then  the  Patriarchs,  etc.  In  both
Secret  Systems,  the  One  Universal  Essence  is  incomprehensible  and
inactive,  in  its  Absoluteness,  and  can  be  -connected  with  the  Building
of  the  Universe  only  in  an  indirect  way.  In  both,  the  primeval  Male-
female,  or  Androgynous,  Principle  and  its  ten  and  seven  Emanations —
Brahma- Viraj  and  Aditi-Vach,  on  the  one  hand;  and  the  Elohim-
Jehovah,  or  Adam-Adami  (x\dam  Kadmon)  and  Sephira-Eve,  on  the
other;  with  their  Prajapatis  and  Sephiroth — in  their  totality,  represent
primarily  the  Archetypal  Man,  the  Protologos ;  and  it  is  only  in  their
secondary  aspect  that  they  become  cosmic  powers,  and  astronomical  or
sidereal  bodies.  If  Aditi  is  the  Mother  of  the  Gods,  Deva-Matri,  Eve
is  the  Mother  of  All  Living;  both  are  the  Shakti,  or  Generative  Power,
in  their  female  aspect,  of  the  Heavenly  Man,  and  they  are  both  com-
pound Creators.     Says  a  Gupta  Vidya  Sutra:

In  the  beginning,  a  Ray,  issimig  from  Paramarthika  \_the  one  and  only
True  Existence^  became  manifested  in  Vyavahdrika  {^Conventional  Exist-
ence]^, which  was  used  as  a  Vdhana  to  descend  with  itito  the  Utiivcrsal
Mother,  and  to  cause  her  to  expand  \jwell,  brih].

And  in  the  Zohar  it  is  stated :

The  Infinite  Unity,  formless  and  without  similitude,  after  the  Form  of  the
Heavenly  Man  was  created,  used  it.  The  Unknown  L,ightt  [Darkness]  used  the
Heavenly   Form   (Twh'^'S  mN— Adam    Oilah)   as   a  Chariot    (mDID— Mercabah),


*  In  the  Indian  Pantheon  the  doiible-sexed  I,ogos  is  Brahma,  the  Creator,  whose  seven  "Mind-
born"  Sons  are  the  primeval  Rishis— the  Builders.

t  Says  Rabbi  Simeon:  "Oh,  companions,  companions,  man  as  an  emanation  was  both  man  and
woman,  as  well  on  the  side  of  the  'Father'  as  on  the  side  of  the  'Mother.'  And  this  is  the  sense  of
the  words:  'And  Elohim  spake,  Let  there  be  Light,  and  it  was  Light';  .  .  .  and  this  is  the  i'zfO-yb/(f
man."  (Ausziige  aiis  dem  So/tar,  13,  15.)  Light,  then,  in  Genesis,  stood  for  the  Androgyne  Ray,  or
"Heavenly  Man."


INTERNATIONAL    CORRELATION   OF   GODS.  381

through  which  to  descend,  and  wished  to  be  called  by  this  Form,  which  is  the
sacred  name  Jehovah.

As  the  Zohar  again  says :

In  the  beginning  was  the  Will  of  the  King,  prior  to  any  other  existence

It  [the  Will]  sketched  the  forms  of  all  things  that  had  been  concealed  but  nov/
came  into  view.  And  there  went  forth  as  a  sealed  secret,  from  the  head  of  Ain
vSuph,  a  nebulous  spark  of  matter,  without  shape  or  form.  .  .  Life  is  drawn  from
below,  and  from  above  the  source  renews  itself,  the  sea  is  always  full  and  spreads
its  waters  everywhere.

Thus  the  Deity  is  compared  to  a  shoreless  sea,  to  Water  which  is
"the  fountain  of  life."*  "The  seventh  palace,  the  fountain  of  life,  is
the  first  in  the  order  from  above."!  Hence  the  Kabalistic  tenet  on  the
lips  of  the  very  Kabalistic  Solomon,  who  says  in  Proverbs:  "Wisdom
hath  builded  her  house;  it  hath  hewn  out  its  seve^i  pillars."!

Whence,  then,  all  this  identity  of  ideas,  if  there  were  no  primeval
Universal  Revelation?  The  few  points  so  far  brought  out  are  like  a
few  straws  in  a  stack,  in  comparison  to  that  which  will  be  disclosed  as
the  work  proceeds.  If  we  turn  to  the  Chinese  Cosmogony-,  the  most
hazy  of  all,  even  there  the  same  idea  is  found.  Tsi-tsai,  the  Self-
Existent,  is  the  Unknown  Darkness,  the  Root  of  the  Wu-liang-sheu,
Boundless  Age;  Amitabha,  and  Tien,  Heaven,  come  later  on.  The
"Great  Extreme"  of  Confucius  gives  the  same  idea,  his  "straws"  not-
withstanding. The  latter  are  a  source  of  great  amusement  to  the
missionaries,  who  laugh  at  every  "heathen"  religion,  despise  and  hate
that  of  their  brother  Christians  of  other  denominations,  and  yet  one
and  all  accept  their  own  Ge7iesis,  literally.

If  we  turn  to  the  Chaldean  we  find  in  it  Anu,  the  Concealed  Deity,
the  One,  whose  name,  moreover,  shows  it  to  be  of  Sanskrit  origin ;  for
Anu  in  Sanskrit  means  Atom,  Aniyamsam-aniyasam,  smallest  of  the
small,  being  a  name  of  Parabrahman,  in  the  Vedantic  philosophy,  in
which  Parabrahman  is  described  as  smaller  than  the  smallest  atom,  and
greater  than  the  greatest  sphere  or  tmiverse,  Anagraniyas  and  Maha-
toruvat.  In  the  first  verses  of  the  Akkadian  Ge?iesis,  as  fotmd  in  the
cuneiform  texts  on  the  Babylonian  tiles  or  Lateres  Coctiles,  and  as
translated  by  George  Smith,  we  find  Anu,  the  Pas.sive  Deity,  or  Ain
Suph ;  Bel,  the  Creator,  the  Spirit  of  God,  or  Sephira,  moving  on  the
Face  of  the  Waters,  hence  Water  itself;  and  Hea,  the  Universal  Soul,
or  Wisdom  of  the  Three  combined.

•  Zohar,  iii.  290.  t  Op.  cit.,  ii.  261.  %  vs..  i.


382  THE  SECRE'T  DOCTRINE.

The  first  eight  verses  read  as  follows :

1.  When  above,  were  not  raised  the  heavens:

2.  and  below  on  the  earth  a  plant  had  not  grown  up;

3.  the  abyss  had  not  broken  open  their  boundaries.

4.  The  Chaos  (or  Water)  Tiamat  (the  Sea)  was  the  producing-mother  of  the  whole
of  them.     [This  is  the  Cosmical  Aditi  and  Sephira.]

5.  Those  waters  at  the  beginning  were  ordained;  but

6.  a  tree  had  not  grown,  a  flower  had  not  unfolded.

7.  When  the  Gods  had  not  sprung  up,  any  one  of  them;

8.  a  plant  had  not  grown,  and  order  did  not  exist.*

This  was  the  Chaotic  or  Ante-genetic  Period ;  the  double  Swan,  and
the  Dark  Swan  which  becomes  white,  when  lyight  is  created.f

The  symbol  chosen  for  the  majestic  ideal  of  the  Universal  Principle
may  perhaps  seem  little  calculated  to  answer  its  sacred  character.  A
goose,  or  even  a  swan,  will,  no  doubt,  be  thought  an  unfit  symbol  to
represent  the  grandeur  of  the  Spirit.  Nevertheless,  it  must  have  had
some  deep  Occult  meaning,  since  it  figures  not  only  in  every  Cosmo-
gony and  World-religion,  but  was  also  chosen  by  the  Crusaders,  among
the  mediaeval  Christians,  as  the  Vehicle  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  which  was
supposed  to  be  leading  the  army  to  Palestine,  to  wrench  the  tomb  of  the
Saviour  from  the  hands  of  the  Saracen.  If  we  are  to  credit  Professor
Draper's  statement,  in  his  hitelledual  Developme^it  of  Etirope,  the  Cru-
saders, under  Peter  the  Hermit,  were  preceded,  at  the  head  of  the  army,
by  the  Holy  Ghost,  under  the  shape  of  a  white  gander  in  the  company
of  a  goat.  Seb,  the  Egyptian  God  of  Time,  carries  a  goose  on  his  head ;
Jupiter  assumes  the  form  of  a  swan,  and  so  also  does  Brahma;  and  the
root  of  all  this  is  that  mystery  of  mysteries — the  Mundane  Egg.  One
should  learn  the  reason  of  a  symbol  before  depreciating  it.  The  dual
element  of  Air  and  Water  is  that  of  the  ibis,  swan,  goose  and  pelican,  of
crocodiles  and  frogs,  lotus  flowers  and  water  lilies,  etc. ;  and  the  result
is  the  choice  of  the  most  unseemly  symbols  by  the  modern  as  much  as
by  the  ancient  Mystics.  Pan,  the  great  God  of  Nature,  was  generally
figured  in  company  with  aquatic  birds,  geese  especially,  and  so  were
other  Gods.  If  later  on,  with  the  gradual  degeneration  of  religion,  the
Gods  to  whom  geese  were  sacred,  became  priapic  deities,  it  does  not,
therefore,  follow  that  water-fowls  were  made  sacred  to  Pan  and  other


*  Chaldean  Account  of  Genesis,  62,  63.

+  The  Seven  Swans  that  are  believed  to  descend  from  Heaven  on  Lake  Mansarovara,  are  in  the
popular  fancy  the  Seven  Rishis  of  the  Great  Bear,  vyho  assume  that  form  to  visit  the  locality  where
the  Vedas  were  written.


ANCIENT   SYMBOLOGY.  3S3

phallic  deities,  as  some  scoffers  even  of  antiquity  would  have  it,*"  but
that  the  abstract  and  divine  power  of  Procreative  Nature  had  become
grossly  anthropomorphized.  Nor  does  the  swan  of  Leda  show  "priapic
doings  and  her  enjoyment  thereof,"  as  Mr.  Hargrave  Jennings  chastely
expresses  it;  for  the  myth  is  but  another  version  of  the  same  philo-
sophical idea  of  Cosmogony.  Swans  are  frequently  found  associated
with  Apollo,  as  they  are  the  emblems  of  Water  and  Fire,  and  also  of
the  Sun-light,  before  the  separation  of  the  Elements.

Our  modern  symbologists  might  profit  by  some  remarks  made  by  a
well-known  writer,  Mrs.  Lydia  Maria  Child,  who  says:

From  time  immemorial  an  emblem  has  been  worshipped  in  Hindustan  as  the  type
of  creation,  or  the  origin  of  life.  .  .  .  Shiva,  or  the  Mahadeva,  being  not  only
the  reproducer  of  human  forms,  but  also  the  fructifying  principle,  the  generative
power  that  per\'ades  the  Universe.  The  maternal  emblem  is  likewise  a  religious
type.  This  reverence  for  the  production  of  life  introduced  into  the  worship  of
Osiris  the  sexual  emblems.  Is  it  strange  that  they  regarded  with  reverence  the
great  mystery  of  human  birth?  Were  they  impure  thus  to  regard  it.'  Or  are  we
impure  that  we  do  not  so  regard  it }  But  no  clean  and  thoughtful  mi?id  could  so
regard  them.  .  .  .  We  have  travelled  far,  and  unclean  have  been  the  paths,
since  those  old  anchorites  first  spoke  of  God  and  the  soul  in  the  solemn  depths  of
their  first  sanctuaries.  Let  us  not  smile  at  their  mode  of  tracing  the  infinite  and
the  incomprehensible  Cause  throughout  all  the  mysteries  of  nature,  lest  by  so  doing
we  cast  the  shadow  of  our  own  grossness  on  their  patriarchal  simplicity,  t

•  See  Petronius,  Saiyricon.  cxxxvi.  t  Progress  0/ Religious  Ideas,  I.  17  et  seg.


SECTION  VI.
The  Mundane  Egg.


Whence  this  universal  symbol?  The  Egg  was  incorporated  as  a
sacred  sign  in  the  Cosmogony  of  every  people  on  the  earth,  and  was
revered  both  on  account  of  its  form  and  of  its  inner  mystery.  From
the  earliest  mental  conceptions  of  man,  it  has  been  known  as  that
which  represented  most  successfully  the  origin  and  secret  of  Being.
The  gradual  development  of  the  imperceptible  germ  within  the  closed
shell ;  the  inward  working,  without  any  apparent  outward  interference
of  force,  which  from  a  latent  nothing  produced  an  active  something,
needing  naught  save  heat ;  and  which,  having  gradually  evolved  into
a  concrete,  living  creature,  broke  its  shell,  appearing  to  the  outward
senses  of  all  as  a  self-generated  and  self-created  being;  all  this  must
have  been  a  standing  miracle  from  the  beginning.

The  Secret  Teaching  explains  the  reason  for  this  reverence  by  the
symbolism  of  the  prehistoric  races.  In  the  beginnings,  the  "First
Cause"  had  no  name.  Later  it  was  pictured  in  the  fancy  of  the
thinkers  as  an  ever  invisible,  mysterious  Bird  that  dropped  an  Egg  into
Chaos,  which  Egg  became  the  Universe.  Hence  Brahma  was  called
Kalahansa,  the  "Swan  in  [Space  and]  Time."  Becoming  the  Swan  of
Eternity,  Brahma,  at  the  beginning  of  each  Mahamanvantara,  laj^s  a
Golden  Egg,  which  typifies  the  great  Circle,  or  O)  itself  a  symbol  for
the  Universe  and  its  spherical  bodies.

A  second  reason  for  the  Egg  having  been  chosen  as  the  s5^mbolical
representation  of  the  Universe,  and  of  our  Earth,  was  its  form.  It  was
a  Circle  and  a  Sphere;  and  the  ovi-form  shape  of  our  Globe  must  have
been  known  from  the  beginning  of  symbolog)'',  since  it  was  so  uni-
versall}'  adopted.  The  first  manifestation  of  the  Kosmos  in  the  form
of  an  Egg  was  the  most  widely  diffused  belief  of  Antiquity.     As  Br3^ant


EGG   AND   ARK.  385

shows,*  it  was  a  symbol  adopted  among  the  Greeks,  the  Sj^ians,  Per-
sians, and  'Egyptians.  In  the  Egyptian  Rittial,  Seb,  the  God  of  Time
and  of  the  Earth,  is  spoken  of  as  having  laid  an  Egg,  or  the  Universe,
an  "Egg  conceived  at  the  hour  of  the  Great  One  of  the  Dual  Force."!

Ra  is  shown  like  Brahma  gestating  in  the  Egg  of  the  Universe.  The
Deceased  is  "resplendent  in  the  Egg  of  the  Eand  of  Mysteries."  :|:  For,
this  is  "the  Egg  to  which  is  given  Life  among  the  Gods."§  "It  is  the
Egg  of  the  great  clucking  Hen,  the  Egg  of  Seb,  who  issues  from  it  like
a  hawk."  ||

Among  the  Greeks  the  Orphic  Egg  is  described  by  Aristophanes,  and
was  part  of  the  Dionysiac  and  other  Mysteries,  during  which  the  Mun-
dane Egg  was  consecrated  and  its  significance  explained ;  Porphyr}^  also
shows  it  to  be  a  representation  of  the  world:  " 'Ep/x7;j/cu€t  Sc  to  wov  rov
Koa-fjLov."  Faber  and  Bryant  have  tried  to  show  that  the  Egg  t5'pified
the  Ark  of  Noah — a  wild  belief,  unless  the  latter  is  accepted  as  purely
allegorical  and  symbolical.  It  can  only  have  t3-pified  the  Ark  as  a
synonym  of  the  Moon,  the  Argha  which  carries  the  universal  seed  of
life;  but  had  surely  nothing  to  do  with  the  Ark  of  the  Bid/e.  Anyhow,
the  belief  that  the  Universe  existed  in  the  beginning  in  the  shape  of  an
Egg  was  general.     And  as  Wilson  says:

A  similar  account  of  the  first  aggregation  of  the  elements  in  the  form  of  an  Egg
is  given  in  all  the  Purdnas,  with  the  usual  epithet  Haima  or  Hiranj'a,  "golden,"  as
it  occurs  in  Manu,  I.  9.II

Hiranya,  however,  means  "resplendent,"  "shining,"  rather  than
"golden,"  as  is  proven  by  the  great  Indian  scholar,  the  late  Svami
Dayanand  Sarasvati,  in  his  unpublished  polemics  with  Professor  Max
Miiller.     As  said  in  the  Vishnu  Purdna :

Intellect  [Mahat]  .  .  .  the  [unmanifested]  gross  elements  inclusive,  formed
an  Egg  .  .  .  and  the  Lord  of  the  Universe  himself  abided  in  it,  in  the  character
of  Brahma.  In  that  Egg,  O  Brahmana,  were  the  continents,  and  seas  and  moun-
tains, the  planets  and  divisions  of  the  planets,  the  gods,  the  demons  and  mankind.**

Both  in  Greece  and  in  India  the  first  visible  male  Being,  who  united
in  himself  the  nature  of  either  sex,  abode  in  the  Egg  and  issued  from
it.     This  "Fir.st-born  of  the  World"  was  Dionysus,  with  some  Greeks;


*  iii.  165.

t  Ch.  liv.  3.

X  Ch.  xxii.  I.

\  Ch.  xlii.  13.

II  Ch.  liv.  I,  2;  ch.  Ixxvii.  1.

IT   Vishnu  Piir&na,  I.  39.

••  Op.  cit.,  ibid.  a6


386  THB  SECRET   DOCTRINE.

the  God  who  sprang  from  the  Mundane  Egg,  and  from  whom  the
Mortals  and  Immortals  were  derived.  The  God  Ra  is  shown,  in  the
Book  of  the  Dead,  beaming  in  his  Kgg  [the  Sun],  and  the  stars  oflF  as
soon  as  the  God  Shoo  [the  Solar  Energy]  awakens  and  gives  him  the
impulse.*  "He  is  in  the  Solar  Egg,  the  Egg  to  which  is  given  Eife
among  the  Gods."t  The  Solar  God  exclaims :  "I  am  the  Creative  Soul
of  the  Celestial  Abyss.  None  sees  my  Nest,  none  can  break  my  Egg,
lam  the  Eord!"t

In  view  of  this  circular  form,  the  "|"  issuing  from  the  "0»"  or  the
Egg,  or  the  male  from  the  female  in  the  androgyne,  it  is  strange  to  find
a  scholar  saying,  on  the  ground  that  the  most  ancient  Indian  MSS.
show  no  trace  of  it,  that  the  ancient  Aryans  were  ignorant  of  the
decimal  notation.  The  lo,  being  the  sacred  number  of  the  Universe,
was  secret  and  esoteric,  both  as  regards  the  unit  and  cipher,  or  zero,
the  circle.  Moreover,  Professor  Max  Miiller  tells  that  "the  two  words
cipher  and  zero,  which  are  but  one,  are  sufficient  to  prove  that  our
figures  are  borrowed  from  the  Arabs." §  Cipher  is  the  Arabic  cifron,
and  means  "empty,"  a  translation  of  the  Sanskrit  S7inyan,  or  "nought,"
says  the  Professor.!  The  Arabs  had  their  figures  from  Hindustan,  and
never  claimed  the  discovery  for  themselves.  As  to  the  Pythagoreans,
we  need  but  turn  to  the  ancient  manuscripts  of  Boethius'  treatise,  De
Arithynetica,  composed  in  the  sixth  century,  to  find  among  the  Pytha-
gorean numerals  the  "i"  and  the  "o,"  as  the  first  and  final  figures.^
And  Porphyry,  who  quotes  from  the  Pythagorean  Moderatus,**  says
that  the  numerals  of  Pythagoras  were  "hieroglyphical  sj^mbols,  by
means  whereof  he  explained  ideas  concerning  the  nature  of  things,"
or  the  origin  of  the  Universe.

Now,  if,  on  the  one  hand,  the  most  ancient  Indian  MSS.  show  as  yet
no  trace  of  decimal  notation  in  them,  and  Max  Miiller  states  very
clearly  that  until  now  he  has  found  but  nine  letters,  the  initials  of
the  Sanskrit  numerals;  on  the  other  hand,  we  have  records  as  ancient,
to  supply  the  wanted  proof.     We  speak  of  the  sculptures  and  the  sacred

*  Ch.  xvii.  50,  51.

t  Ch.  xlii.  13.

%  Ch.  Ixxx.  9.

\  See  Max  Miiller's  "Our  Figures."

II  A  Kabalist  would  be  rather  inclined  to  believe  that  as  the  Arabic  cifron  was  taken  from  the
Indian  sunyan,  nought,  so  the  Jewish  Kabalistic  Sephiroth  [Sephnni)  were  taken  from  the  word
cipher,  not  in  the  sense  of  emptiness,  but  in  that  of  creation  by  number  and  degrees  of  evolution.
And  the  Sephiroth  are  10  or  (T)

IT  See  King's  Gnostics  and  their  Remains,  370  (2nd  ed.).

**  De  Vita  Pilhag.


LUNAR   AND   SOLAR    DEITIKS.  387

imagery  in  the  most  ancient  temples  of  the  far  East.  Pythagoras  de-
rived his  knowledge  from  India;  and  we  find  Professor  Max  Miiller
corroborating  this  statement,  at  least  so  far  as  to  allow  that  the  Neo-
Pythagoreans  were  the  first  teachers  of  "ciphering,"  among  the  Greeks
and  Romans;  that  they  "at  Alexandria,  or  in  Syria,  became  acquainted
with  the  Indian  figures,  and  adapted  them  to  the  Pythagorean  Abacus."
This  cautious  admission  implies  that  Pythagoras  himself  was  acquainted
with  only  nine  figures.  Thus  we  might  reasonably  answer  that,  although
we  possess  no  certain  proof,  exoterically,  that  the  decimal  notation  was
known  to  Pythagoras,  who  lived  at  the  ver>'  close  of  the  archaic  ages,*
yet  we  have  sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the  full  numbers,  as  given
by  Boethius,  were  known  to  the  Pythagoreans,  even  before  Alexandria
was  built.f  This  evidence  we  find  in  Aristotle,  who  says  that  "some
philosophers  hold  that  ideas  and  numbers  are  of  the  same  nature,  and
amount  to  ten  in  all."  J  This,  we  believe,  will  be  sufficient  to  show
that  the  decimal  notation  was  known  among  them  at  least  as  early  as
four  centuries  B.C.,  for  Aristotle  does  not  seem  to  treat  the  question
as  an  innovation  of  the  Neo-Pythagoreans.

But  we  know  more  than  this;  we  know  that  the  decimal  system  must
have  been  used  by  the  mankind  of  the  earliest  archaic  ages,  since  the
whole  astronomical  and  geometrical  portion  of  the  secret  sacerdotal
language  was  built  upon  the  number  10,  or  the  combination  of  the  male
and  female  principles,  and  since  the  "Pyramid  of  Cheops,"  so-called,  is
built  upon  measures  of  this  decimal  notation,  or  rather  upon  the  digits
and  their  combinations  with  the  nought.  Of  this,  however,  sufficient
has  been  said  in  his  Unveiled,  and  it  is  useless  to  repeat  it.

The  symbolism  of  the  I^unar  and  Solar  Deities  is  so  inextricably
mixed  up,  that  it  is  next  to  impossible  to  separate  from  each  other  such
glyphs  as  the  Egg,  the  Lotus,  and  the  "Sacred"  Animals.  The  Ibis,
for  instance,  was  held  in  the  greatest  veneration  in  Egypt.  It  was
sacred  to  Isis,  who  is  often  represented  with  the  head  of  that  bird,  and
also  sacred  to  Mercury  or  Thoth,  who  is  said  to  have  assumed  its  form
while  escaping  from  Tj'phon.  There  were  tw^o  kinds  of  Ibises  in
Eg>-pt,  Herodotus  §  tells  us;  one  quite  black,  the  other  black  and  white.
The  former  is  credited  with  fighting  and  exterminating  the  winged
serpents  which  came  every  spring  from  Arabia,  and  infested  the  coun-

•  The  year  of  his  birth  is  given  as  608  B.C.
+  That  is  to  say  332  B.C.
X  Metaphysics,  vii.,  F.
\  Euterpe,  75,  76.


388  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

try.  The  other  was  sacred  to  the  Moon,  because  the  latter  planet  is
white  and  brilliant  on  her  external  side,  dark  and  black  on  that  side
which  she  never  turns  to  the  Ii)arth.  Moreover,  the  Ibis  kills  land
serpents,  and  makes  the  most  terrible  havoc  amongst  the  eggs  of  the
crocodile,  and  thus  saves  Egypt  from  having  the  Nile  over-infested  by
those  horrible  saurians.  The  bird  is  credited  with  doing  this  in  the
moonlight,  and  thus  being  helped  by  Isis,  whose  sidereal  symbol  is  the
Moon.  But  the  more  correct  esoteric  truth  underlying  these  popular
myths  is,  that  Hermes,  as  shown  by  Abenephius,*  watched  over  the
Egyptians  under  the  form  of  that  bird,  and  taught  them  the  Occult
arts  and  sciences.  This  simply  means  that  the  ibis  religiosa  had,  and
has,  "magical"  properties  in  common  with  many  other  birds,  the  alba-
tross preeminently,  and  the  mythical  white  swan,  the  Swan  of  Eternity
or  Time,  the  Kalahansa.

Were  it  otherwise,  indeed,  why  should  all  the  ancient  peoples,  who
were  no  more  fools  than  we  are,  have  had  such  a  superstitious  dread  of
killing  certain  birds?  In  Egj^pt,  he  who  killed  an  Ibis,  or  the  Golden
Hawk,  the  symbol  of  the  Sun  and  Osiris,  risked  death,  and  could  hardly
escape  it.  The  veneration  of  some  nations  for  birds  was  such  that
Zoroaster,  in  his  precepts,  forbids  their  slaughter  as  a  heinous  crime.
In  our  age,  we  laugh  at  every  kind  of  divination.  Yet  why  should  so
many  generations  have  believed  in  divination  by  birds,  and  even  in
Oomancy,  which  is  said  b}^  Suidas  to  have  been  imparted  by  Orpheus,
who  taught  how,  under  certain  conditions,  to  perceive  in  the  yolk  and
white  of  an  ^%%,  that  which  the  bird  born  from  it  would  have  seen
around  it  during  its  short  life.  This  Occult  art,  which,  3,000  years  ago,
demanded  the  greatest  learning  and  the  most  abstruse  mathematical
calculations,  has  now  fallen  into  the  depths  of  degradation ;  and  to-day
it  is  the  old  cooks  and  fortune-tellers  who  read  the  future  for  servant-
girls  in  search  of  husbands,  from  the  white  of  an  Q.%<g  in  a  glass.

Nevertheless,  even  Christians  have  to  this  day  their  sacred  birds;  for
instance,  the  Dove,  the  symbol  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Nor  have  they
neglected  the.  sacred  animals;  and  the  evangelical  zoolatry,  with  its
Bull,  Eagle,  Eion,  and  Angel — in  reality  the  Cherub,  or  Seraph,  the
fiery-winged  Serpent — is  as  much  Pagan  as  that  of  the  Egyptians  or
the  Chaldeans.  These  four  animals  are,  in  reality,  the  symbols  of  the
four  Elements,  and  of  the  four  lower  Principles  in  man.  Nevertheless,
they  correspond  physically  and   materially  to  the  four  constellations

•  De  Cultu  Egypt.


FIERY   SERPENTS.  389

that  form,  so  to  speak,  the  suite  or  cortege  of  the  Solar  God,  and  which,
during  the  winter  solstice,  occupy  the  four  cardinal  points  of  the  zo-
diacal circle.  These  four  "animals"  may  be  seen  in  many  of  the
Roman  Catholic  New  Testaments  in  which  the  "portraits"  of  the  Evan-
gelists are  given.  They  are  the  animals  of  Ezekiel's  Mercabah.
As  truly  stated  by  Ragon :

The  ancient  Hierophants  have  combined  so  cleverly  the  dogmas  and  symbols  of
their  religious  philosophies,  that  these  symbols  can  be  fully  explained  only  by  the
combination  and  knowledge  of  all  the  keys.

They  can  be  only  approximately  interpreted,  even  if  one  discovers
three  out  of  these  seven  systems,  viz.,  the  anthropological,  the  psychic
and  the  astronomical.  The  two  chief  interpretations,  the  highest  and
the  lowest,  the  spiritual  and  the  physiological,  were  preserved  in  the
greatest  secrecy,  until  the  latter  fell  into  the  dominion  of  the  profane.
Thus  far,  with  regard  only  to  the  pre-historic  Hierophants,  with  whom
that  which  has  now  become  purely — or  impurely — phallic,  was  a  science
as  profound  and  as  mysterious  as  Biolog>'  and  Physiology  are  now.
This  was  their  exclusive  property,  the  fruit  of  their  studies  and  dis-
coveries. The  other  two  were  those  which  dealt  with  the  Creative
Gods,  or  Theogony,  and  with  creative  man ;  that  is  to  say,  with  the
ideal  and  the  practical  Mysteries.  These  interpretations  were  so
cleverly  veiled  and  combined,  that  many  were  those  who,  while  ar-
riving at  the  discovery  of  one  meaning,  were  baffled  in  understanding
the  significance  of  the  others,  and  could  never  unriddle  them  suffi-
ciently to  commit  dangerous  indiscretions.  The  highest,  the  first  and
the  fourth— Theogony  in  relation  to  Anthropogony — were  almost  im-
possible to  fathom.  We  find  the  proofs  of  this  in  the  Jewish  "Holy
Writ."

It  is  owing  to  the  serpent  being  oviparous,  that  it  became  a  symbol  of
Wisdom  and  an  emblem  of  the  Logoi,  or  the  Self-Born.  In  the  temple
of  Phil«,  in  Upper  Egypt,  an  ^<g<g  was  artificially  prepared  of  clay  mixed
with  various  incenses.  This  was  hatched  by  a  peculiar  process,  and  a
cerastes  or  horned  viper  was  produced.  The  same  was  done  in  the
Indian  temples,  in  antiquity,  in  the  case  of  the  cobra.  The  Creative
God  emerges  from  the  Egg  that  issues  from  the  mouth  of  Kneph,  as  a
winged  Serpent,  for  the  Serpent  is  the  symbol  of  the  All-Wisdom.
With  the  Hebrews  the  same  Deity  is  glyphed  by  the  Flying  or  "Fiery
Serpents"  of  Moses  in  the  Wilderness;  and  with  the  Alexandrian
Mystic  she  becomes  the  Orphio-Christos,  the  Logos  of  the  Gnostics.


390  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

The  Protestants  try  to  show  that  the  allegory  of  the  Brazen  Serpent
and  of  the  Fiery  Serpents  has  a  direct  reference  to  the  mystery  of
the  Christ  and  the  Crucifixion,  whereas,  in  truth,  it  has  a  far  nearer
relation  to  the  mystery  of  generation,  when  dissociated  from  the
^ZZ  with  the  Central  Germ,  or  the  Circle  with  its  Central  Point.
Protestant  Theologians  would  have  us  believe  their  interpretation
ofily  because  the  Brazen  Serpent  was  lifted  on  a  pole!  Whereas  it
had  rather  a  reference  to  the  Egyptian  Egg  standing  upright  sup-
ported by  the  sacred  Tau;  since  the  Egg  and  the  Serpent  are  in-
separable in  the  old  worship  and  symbology  of  Eg>^pt,  and  since  both
the  Brazen  and  Fiery  Serpents  were  Seraphs,  the  burning  "Fiery"
Messengers,  or  the  Serpent  Gods,  the  Nagas  of  India.  Without  the
Egg  it  was  a  purely  phallic  symbol,  but  when  associated  therewith,
it  related  to  cosmic  creation.  The  Brazen  Serpent  had  no  such
holy  meaning  as  the  Protestants  would  ascribe  to  it;  nor  was  it,  in
fact,  glorified  above  the  Fiery  Serpents,  for  the  bite  of  which  it  was  only
a  natural  remedy ;  the  symbological  meaning  of  the  word  "Brazen"
being  the  feminine  principle,  and  that  of  "Fiery,"  or  "Gold,"  the
masculine  principle.

Brass  was  a  metal  symbolizing  the  nether  world  ....  that  of  the  womb
where  life  should  be  given.  .  .  .  The  word  for  serpent  in  Hebrew  was  Nachash,
but  this  is  also  the  term  for  brass.

It  is  said  in  Numbers  that  the  Jews  complained  of  the  Wilderness
where  there  was  no  water,^  after  which  "the  Lord  sent  fiery  serpents"  to
bite  them,  and  then,  to  oblige  Moses,  he  gave  him  as  a  remedy  the
Brazen  Serpent  on  a  pole  for  them  to  look  at;  after  which  "any  man
when  he  beheld  the  serpent  of  brass  .  .  .  lived"  (?).  After  that  the
"Eord,"  gathering  the  people  together  at  the  well  of  Beer,  gave  them
water,  and  grateful  Israel  sang  this  song,  "Spring  up,  O  well."  When,
after  studying  symbology,  the  Christian  reader  comes  to  understand
the  innermost  meaning  of  these  three  symbols.  Water,  Brazen,  and
Serpent,  and  a  few  more,  in  the  sense  given  to  them  in  the  Holy  Bible,  he
will  hardly  like  to  connect  the  sacred  name  of  his  Saviour  with  the
Brazen  Serpent  incident.  The  Seraphim  (D'^DHtU)  or  Fiery  Winged
Serpents,  are  no  doubt  connected  with,  and  inseparable  from,  the  idea
of  the  "Serpent  of  Eternity — God,"  as  explained  in  Kenealy's  Apoca-
lypse; but  the  word  Cherub  also  meant  Serpent,  in  one  sense,  though
its   direct   meaning  is   different,    for  the   Cherubim   and   the   Persian

*  xxi.  5  et  seq.


THE  WINGED   GI^OBE.  39^

Winged  Griffins  (TpvTres),  the  guardians  of  the  Golden  Mountain,  are
the  same,  and  the  compound  name  of  the  former  shows  their  charac-
ter, as  it  is  formed  of  kr  (iD),  a  circle,  and  atid  or  od  (1M^),  a  serpent,
and  therefore  means  a  "serpent  in  a  circle."  And  this  settles  the
phallic  character  of  the  Brazen  Serpent,  and  justifies  Hezekiah  for
breaking  it.*      Vcrdum  satis  sapicyiti!

In  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  as  just  shown,!  reference  is  often  made  to  the
Egg.     Ra,  the  Mighty  One,  remains  in  his  ^z%,  during  the  struggle
between  the  "Children  of  the  Rebellion"  and  Shoo,  the  Solar  Energy
and  the  Dragon  of  Darkness.     The  Deceased  is  resplendent  in  his  Egg
when  he  crosses  to  the  Land  of  Myster>\     He  is  the  Egg  of  Seb.     The
Egg  was  the  symbol  of  Life  in  Immortality  and  Eternity;  and  also  the
glyph  of  the  generative  matrix;  whereas  the  Tau,  which  was  associated
with  it,  was  only  the  symbol  of  life  and  birth  in  generation.     The  Mun-
dane Egg  was  placed  in  Khoom,  the  Water  of  Space,  or  the  feminine
abstract  Principle;  Khoom  becoming,  with  the  "fall"  of  mankind  into
generation  and  phallicism.  Amnion  the  Creative  God.     When  Ptah,  the
"Fiery  God,"  carries  the  Mundane  Egg  in  his  hand,  then  the  symbolism
becomes  quite  terrestrial  and  concrete  in  its  significance.     In  conjunc-
tion with  the  Hawk,  the  symbol  of  Osiris-Sun,  the  symbol  is  dual,  and
relates  to  both  Eives — the  mortal  and  the  immortal.     The  engraving  of
a  papyrus  in  Kircher's    CEdipus  Egyptiacus,X  shows   an  &^g  floating
above  the  mummy.     This  is  the  symbol  of  hope  and  the  promise  of  a
Second  Birth  for  the  Osirified  Dead ;  his  Soul,  after  due  purification  in
the  Amenti,  will  gestate  in  this  Egg  of  Immortality,  to  be  reborn  there-
from into  a  new  life  on  earth.     For  this  Egg,  in  the  Esoteric  Doctrine,
is  Devachan,  the  Abode  of  Bliss;   the  Winged  Scarabseus  also  being
another  symbol  of  it.     The  Winged  Globe  is  but  another  form  of  the
Egg,  and  has  the  same  significance  as  the  Scarabseus,  the  Khopiroo —
from  the  Root  khoproo,  to  become,  to  be  reborn — which  relates  to  the
rebirth  of  man,  as  well  as  to  his  spiritual  regeneration.

In  the  Theogony  of  Mochus,  we  find  ^Ether  first,  and  then  Air,  the
two  principles  from  which  Ulom,  the  Intelligible  (Not/to?)  Deity,  the
visible  Universe  of  Matter,  is  born,  out  of  the  Mundane  Egg.§

In  the  Orphic  Hynms,  Eros-Phanes  evolves  from  the  Divine  Egg,
which  the  .Ethereal  Winds  impregnate,  Wind  being  the  "Spirit  of
God,"  or  rather  the  "Spirit  of  the  Unknown  Darkness" — the  Divine
Idea  of  Plato — which  is  said  to  move  in  ^ther.||      In  the  Hindu  Katho-

*  II  A'ln^j,  xviii.  4.    t  Sw/ra,  pp.  386,  387.    till.  124.    }  Movers, /yw2«j>er,  282.    \\Ses /sis  Unveiled,  1. 56.


392  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

panishad,  Purusha,  the  Divine  Spirit,  already  stands  before  the  Original
Matter,  "from  whose  union  springs  the  Great  Soul  of  the  World,"
Maha-Atma,  Brahma,  the  Spirit  of  Life,*'  etc. ;  the  latter  appellations
being  all  identical  with  Anima  Mundi,  or  the  "Universal  Soul,"  the
Astral  lyight  of  the  Kabalist  and  the  Occultist,  or  the  "^gg  of  Dark-
ness." Besides  this  there  are  many  charming  allegories  on  this  subject,
scattered  through  the  Sacred  Books  of  the  Brahmans.  In  one  place,  it
is  the  female  creator  who  is  first  a  germ,  then  a  drop  of  heavenly  dew,
a  pearl,  and  then  an  Egg.  In  such  cases,  of  which  there  are  too  many
to  enumerate  separately,  the  Egg  gives  birth  to  the  four  Elements
within  the  fifth,  ^ther,  and  is  covered  with  seven  coverings,  which
become  later  on  the  seven  upper  and  the  seven  lower  worlds.  Break-
ing in  two,  the  shell  becomes  the  Heaven,  and  the  contents  the  Earth,
the  white  forming  the  Terrestrial  Waters.  Then,  again,  it  is  Vishnu
who  emerges  from  within  the  Egg,  with  a  Lotus  in  his  hand.  Vinata,
a  daughter  of  Daksha  and  wife  of  Kashyapa,  "the  Self-born,  sprung
from  Time,"  one  of  the  seven  "Creators"  of  our  World,  brought  forth
an  Egg  from  which  was  born  Garuda,  the  Vehicle  of  Vishnu;  the
latter  allegory  having  a  relation  to  our  Earth,  as  Garuda  is  the  Great
Cycle.

The  Egg  was  sacred  to  Isis ;  and  therefore  the  priests  of  Eg>"pt  never
ate  eggs.

Isis  is  almost  always  represented  holding  a  Lotus  in  one  hand,  and  in
the  other  a  Circle  and  a  Cross  {ci^ux  afisata).

Diodorus  Siculus  states  that  Osiris  was  born  from  an  Egg,  like
Brahma.  From  Leda's  Egg,  Apollo  and  Latona  were  born,  and  also
Castor  and  Pollux,  the  bright  Gemini,  And  though  the  Buddhists  do
not  attribute  the  same  origin  to  their  Founder,  yet,  no  more  than  the
ancient  Egyptians  or  the  modern  Brahmans,  do  they  eat  eggs,  lest  they
should  destroy  the  germ  of  life  latent  in  them,  and  thereby  commit  sin.
The  Chinese  believe  that  their  First  Man  was  born  from  an  Egg,  which
Tien  dropped  down  from  Heaven  to  Earth  into  the  Waters.f  This
sgg-symbol  is  still  regarded  by  some  as  representing  the  idea  of  the
origin  of  life,  which  is  a  scientific  truth,  though  the  human  ovu7n  is
invisible  to  the  naked  eye.  Therefore  we  see  respect  shown  to  it
from  the  remotest  antiquity,  by  the  Greeks,  Phoenicians,  Romans,  the

*  Weber,  A  had-  Varies,  213,  et  seg.

+  The  Chinese  seem  to  have  thus  anticipated  Sir  William  Thomson's  theory  that  the  first  living-
germ  had  dropped  to  the  earth  from  some  passing  comet.  Query:  Why  should  this  be  called
scientific  and  the  Chinese  idea  a  superstitious,  foolish  theory?


TWO    ASPECTS   OF    "GOD."  393

Japanese,  and  the  Siamese,  the  North  and  South  American  tribes,  and
even  the  savages  of  the  remotest  islands.

With  the  Egyptians,  the  Concealed  God  was  Ammon  or  Mon,  the
"Hidden",  the  Supreme  Spirit.  All  their  Gods  were  dual — the
scientific  Reality  for  the  sanctuary;  its  double,  the  fabulous  and
mythical  Entity,  for  the  masses.  For  instance,  as  observed  in  the
Section  "Chaos,  Theos,  Kosmos,"  the  Elder  Horus  was  the  Idea  of  the
World  remaining  in  the  Demiurgic  Mind,  "born  in  Darkness  before  the
Creation  of  the  World";  the  Second  Horus  was  the  same  Idea  going
forth  from  the  Logos,  becoming  clothed  with  matter  and  assuming  an
actual  existence.*  Horus,  the  "Elder,"  or  Haroiri,  is  an  ancient  aspect
of  the  Solar  God,  contemporary  with  Ra  and  Shoo;  Haroiri  is  often
mistaken  for  Hor  (Horsusi),  Son  of  Osiris  and  Isis.  The  Egyptians
very  often  represented  the  rising  Sun  under  the  form  of  Hor,  the  Elder,
rising  from  a  full-blown  Lotus,  the  Universe,  when  the  solar  disk  is
always  found  on  the  hawk-head  of  that  God.  Haroiri  is  Khnoom.
The  same  with  Khnoom  and  Ammon,  both  are  represented  as  ram-
headed,  and  both  are  often  confused,  though  their  functions  are
different.  Khnoom  is  the  "modeller  of  men,"  fashioning  men  and
things  out  of  the  Mundane  Egg,  on  a  potter's  wheel;  Ammon-Ra,  the
Generator,  is  the  secondary  aspect  of  the  Concealed  Deity.  Khnoom
was  adored  at  Elephanta  and  Philae,t  Ammon  at  Thebes.  But  it  is
Emepht,  the  One,  Supreme  Planetary  Principle,  who  blows  the  Egg
out  of  his  mouth,  and  who  is,  therefore,  Brahma.  The  Shadow  of  the
Deity,  Kosraic  and  Universal,  of  that  which  broods  over  and  permeates
the  Egg  with  its  vivifying  Spirit,  until  the  Germ  contained  in  it  is  ripe,
was  the  Mystery  God  whose  name  was  unpronounceable.  It  is  Ptah,
however,  ''he  who  opens,"  the  opener  of  Life  and  Death,^  who  proceeds
from  the  Egg  of  the  World  to  begin  his  dual  work.§

According  to  the  Greeks,  the  phantom  form  of  the  Chemis  (Chemi,
ancient  Egypt)  which  floats  on  the  Ethereal  Waves  of  the  Empyrean
Sphere,  was  called  into  being  by  Horus-Apollo,  the  Sun-God,  who
caused  it  to  evolve  out  of  the  Mundane  Egg.

The  Brahf)id7ida  Pura^ia  contains  fully  the  mystery  about  Brahma's
Golden  Egg;  and  this  is  why,  perhaps,  it  is  inaccessible  to  the  Orienta-

•  Compare  Movers,  Phoinizer,  268.

t  His  triadic  Goddesses  are  Sati  and  Anouki.

X  Ptah  was  originally  the  god  of  Death,  of  Destruction,  like  Shiva.  He  is  a  Solar  God  only  by
virtue  of  the  Sun's  fire  killing  as  well  as  vivifying.  He  was  the  national  God  of  Memphis,  the
radiant  and  "fair- faced"  God.

}  Book  of  Numbers.


394  'J'HK   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

lists,  who  say  that  this  Purdna,  like  the  Skanda,  is  "no  longer  procur-
able in  a  collective  body,"  but  "is  represented  by  a  variety  of  Khandas
and  Mahatmyas  professing  to  be  derived  from  it."  The  Brah7nd7ida
Purdna  is  described  as  "that  which  has  declared  in  12,200  verses,  the
magnificence  of  the  %ZZ  of  Brahma,  and  in  which  an  account  of  the
future  Kalpas  is  contained,  as  revealed  by  Brahma."*  Quite  so,  and
much  more,  perchance.

In  the  Scandinavian  Cosmogony,  placed  by  Professor  Max  Miiller,  in
point  of  time,  as  "far  anterior  to  the  Vedas,"  in  the  poem  of  Woluspa,
the  Song  of  the  Prophetess,  the  Mundane  Egg  is  again  discovered  in
the  Phantom-Germ  of  the  Universe,  which  is  represented  as  lying  in
the  Ginnungagap,  the  Cup  of  Illusion,  Maya,  the  Boundless  and  Void
Abyss.  In  this  World's  Matrix,  formerly  a  region  of  night  and  desola-
tion, Nefelheim,  the  Mist-Place,  the  nebular,  as  it  is  called  now,  in  the
Astral  L,ight,  dropped  a  Ray  of  Cold  Light  which  overflowed  this  cup
and  froze  in  it.  Then  the  Invisible  blew  a  scorching  Wind  which  dis-
solved the  frozen  Waters  and  cleared  the  Mist.  These  Waters  (Chaos),
called  the  Streams  of  Eliwagar,  distilling  in  vivifying  drops,  fell  down
and  created  the  Earth  and  the  Giant  Ymir,  who  had  only  the  "sem-
blance of  man"  (the  Heavenly  Man),  and  the  Cow,  Audumla  (the
"Mother,"  Astral  Light  or  Cosmic  Soul),  from  whose  udder  flowed yj7z<r
streams  of  milk — the  four  cardinal  points ;  the  four  heads  of  the  four
rivers  of  Eden,  etc. — which  "four"  are  symbolized  by  the  Cube  in  all
its  various  and  mystical  meanings.

The  Christians — especially  the  Greek  and  Latin  Churches — have
fully  adopted  the  symbol,  and  see  in  it  a  commemoration  of  life  eternal,
of  salvation  and  of  resurrection.  This  is  found  in,  and  corroborated
by,  the  time-honoured  custom  of  exchanging  "Easter  Eggs."  From
the  Anguinum,  the  "Egg"  of  the  Pagan  Druid,  whose  name  alone
made  Rome  tremble  with  fear,  to  the  red  Easter  Egg  of  the  Slavonian
peasant,  a  cycle  has  passed.  And  j^et,  whether  in  civilized  Europe,  or
among  the  abject  savages  of  Central  America,  we  find  the  same
archaic,  primitive  thought,  if  we  will  only  search  for  it,  and  do  not — in
the  haughtiness  of  our  fancied  mental  and  physical  superiority — dis-
figure the  original  idea  of  the  symbol.

*  Wilson,  Vishnu  Purdna,  I.  Pref.  Ixxxiv-v.


SECTION  VII.

The  Days  and  Nights  of  Brahma.


This  is  the  name  given  to  the  Periods  called  Manvantara  (Manu-
antara,  or  between  the  Manus)  and  Pralaya,  or  Dissolution ;  one  refer-
ring to  the  Active  Periods  of  the  Universe;  the  other  to  its  times  of
relative  and  complete  Rest,  whether  they  occur  at  the  end  of  a  Day  or
an  Age,  or  I^ife,  of  Brahma.  These  Periods,  which  follow  each  other
in  regular  succession,  are  also  called  Small  and  Great  Kalpas,  the
Minor  and  the  Maha  Kalpas;  though,  properly  speaking,  the  Maha
Kalpa  is  never  a  Day,  but  a  whole  Life  or  Age  of  Brahma,  for  it  is
said  in  the  Brahma  Vaivarta:  "  Chronologers  compute  a  Kalpa  by  the
Life  of  Brahma.  Minor  Kalpas,  as  Samvarta  and  the  rest,  are  nu-
merous." In  sober  truth  they  are  infinite;  for  they  have  never  had
a  commencement;  or,  in  other  words,  there  never  was  sl  first  Kalpa,
nor  will  there  ever  be  a  last,  in  Eternity.

One  Parardha,  or  half  of  the  existence  of  Brahma,  in  the  ordinary
acceptation  of  this  measure  of  time,  has  already  expired  in  the  present
Maha  Kalpa;  the  last  Kalpa  was  the  Padma,  or  that  of  the  Golden
Lotus;  the  present  one  is  the  Varaha,*  the  "Boar"  Incarnation,  or
Avatar  a.


*  There  is  a  curious  piece  of  information  in  the  Buddhist  esoteric  traditions.  The  exoteric  or  alle-
gorical biography  of  Gautama  Buddha  shows  this  great  Sage  dying  of  an  indigestion  of  "pork  and
rice";  a  very  prosaic  end,  indeed,  with  little  of  the  solemn  element  in  it!  This  is  explained  as  an
allegorical  reference  to  his  having  been  born  in  the  "Boar"  or  Varaha  Kalpa,  when  Vishnu
assumed  the  form  of  that  animal  to  raise  the  Earth  out  of  the  "Waters  of  Space."  Now  as  the
Brahmans  descend  direct  from  Brahma  and  arc,  so  to  speak,  identified  with  him;  and  as  they  are  at
the  same  time  the  mortal  enemies  of  Buddha  and  Buddhism,  we  have  this  curious  allegorical  hint
and  combination.  The  Brahmanism  of  the  Boar  or  Varaha  Kalpa  has  slaughtered  the  religion  of
Buddha  in  India,  swept  it  from  its  face.  Therefore  Buddha,  who  is  identified  with  his  philosophy,  is
said  to  have  died  from  the  effects  of  eating  of  the  flesh  of  a  wild  hog.  The  very  idea  of  one  who
established  the  most  rigorous  vegetarianism  and  respect  for  animal  life— even  to  refusing  to  eat  eggs
as  being  vehicles  of  latent  life— dying  of  an  indigestion  of  meat,  is  absurdly  contradictory  and  has
puzzled  more  than  one  Orientalist.  But  the  present  explanation,  however,  unveils  the  allegory,  and
makes  clear  all  the  rest.  The  Varaha,  however,  is  no  simple  Boar,  but  seems  to  have  meant  at  first
some  antediluvian  lacustrine  animal  "  delighting  to  sport  in  water."    ( V&yu  Pur&na.)


396  THE  SECRETT  DOCTRINE.

One  thing  is  to  be  especially  noted  by  the  scholar  who  studies  the
Hindu   religion   from   the  Purands.      He  must   never  take  the  state-
ments  found   therein   literally,    and    in    one    sense    only;    and    those
especially,   which   concern   the   Manvantaras,  or  Kalpas,   have  to  be
understood   in   their  several   references.     Thus  these  Ages  relate,   in
the  same  language,  to  both  the  great  and  the  small  periods,  to  Maht
Kalpas  and  to  Minor  Cycles.     The  Matsya,  or  Fish  Avatara,  happened
before  the  Varaha  or  Boar  Avatara;   the  allegories,  therefore,  must
relate  to  both  the  Padma  and  the   present  Manvantara,  and  also  to
the  Minor  Cycles  which  have  occurred  since  the  reappearance  of  our
Chain   of  Worlds   and   the   Earth.      And   as   the    Matsya  Avatara   of
Vishnu    and  Vaivasvata's    Deluge    are    correctly  connected  with    an
event  that  happened  on  our  Earth  during  this  Round,  it  is  evident
that,   while   it  may  relate  to    pre-cosmic  events,   pre-cosmic  in    the
sense  of  our  Cosmos,  or  Solar  System,  it  has  reference,  in  our  case,
to   a  distant   geological   period.     Not  even   Esoteric   Philosophy  can
claim  to  know,  except  by  analogical  inference,  that  which  took  place
before  the  reappearance  of  our  Solar  System,  and  previous  to  the  last
Maha  Pralaya.     But  it  teaches  distinctly,  that  after  the  first  geological
disturbance  of  the  Earth's  axis,  which  ended  in  the  sweeping  down  to
the  bottom  of  the  seas  of  the  whole  Second  Continent,  with  its  prime-
val races — of  which  successive  Continents,  or  "  Earths,"  Atlantis  was
the  fourth — there  came  another  disturbance  owing  to  the  axis  again
resuming  its    previous    degree    of  inclination    as   rapidly  as    it    had
changed  it:  when  the  Earth  was  indeed  once  more  raised  out  of  the
waters — as  above,  so  below,  and  vice  versa.     There  were  "Gods"  on
Earth    in  those  days ;  Gods,   and   not  men,  as  we  know  them   now,
says  the  tradition.     As  will  be  shown  in  Volume  II,  the  computation
of  periods,  in  exoteric  Hinduism,  refers  to  both  the  great  cosmic  and
the  small  terrestrial  events  and  cataclysms,  and  the  same  may  be  de-
monstrated in  respect  to  names.     For  instance,  the  name  Yudishthira
— the  first  king  of  the  Sacae  or  Shakas,  who  opens  the  Kali  Yuga  Era,
which  has  to  last  432,000  years,  "an  actual  king  who  lived  3,102  years
B.C." — applies  also  to  the  Great  Deluge,  at  the  time  of  the  first  sinking
of  Atlantis.      He  is  the  "Yudishthira,*  born  on  the  mountain  of  the
hundred  peaks,  at  the  extremity  of  the  world,  beyond  which  nobody  caii

*  According  to  Colonel  Wilford,  the  conclusion  of  the  "Great  War"  took  place  in  1370  B.C.,
(Asiatic  Researches,  xi.  116.);  according  to  Bentley,  575  B.C.  !  !  We  may  yet  hope,  before  the  end
of  this  century,  to  see  the  Mahabharatan  epic  proclaimed  identical  with  the  wars  of  the  great
Napoleon.


THREE   KINDS   OF   PRALAYA.  397

p-o:'  and  "iramediatelv  after  the  flood."*  We  know  of  no  "Flood"
3,102  3'ears  B.C.,  not  even  that  of  Noah,  for,  agreeably  with  Judaeo-
Christian  chronology',  it  took  place  2,349  years  B.C.

This  relates  to  an  esoteric  division  of  time  and  a  mystery  explained
elsewhere,  and  may  therefore  be  left  aside  for  the  present.  Suffice  it  to
remark,  at  this  juncture,  that  all  the  efforts  of  imagination  of  the
Wilfords,  Bentleys,  and  other  would-be  CEdipuses  of  esoteric  Hindu
Chronolog>%  have  sadly  failed.  No  computation  of  either  the  Four
Ages,  or  the  Manvantaras,  has  ever  yet  been  unriddled  by  our  very
learned  Orientalists,  who  have  therefore  cut  the  Gordian  Knot  by  pro-
claiming the  whole  "a  figment  of  the  Brahmanical  brain."  So  be  it,
and  may  the  great  scholars  rest  in  peace!  This  "figment"  is  given  at
the  end  of  the  Commentaries  on  Stanza  II  of  the  Anthropogenesis,  in
Volume  II,  with  Esoteric  additions.

Let  us  see,  however,  what  were  the  three  kinds  of  Pralayas,  and  what
is  the  popular  belief  about  them.     For  once  it  agrees  with  Esotericism.

Of  the  Pralaya,  before  which  fourteen  Manvantaras  elapse,  having
over  them  as  many  presiding  Manus,  and  at  whose  close  occurs  the
Incidental,  or  Brahma's  Dissolution,  it  is  said  in  Vishnu  Purd?ia,  in
condensed  paraphrase:

At  the  end  of  a  thousand  Periods  of  Four  Ages,  which  complete  a  day  of  Brahma,
the  earth  is  almost  exhausted.  The  Eternal  (Avyaya)  Vishnu  then  assumes  the
character  of  Rudra,  the  Destroyer  (Shiva),  and  reunites  all  his  creatures  to  himself.
He  enters  the  Seven  Rays  of  the  Sun  and  drinks  up  all  the  Waters  of  the  Globe;
he  causes  the  moisture  to  evaporate,  thus  drying  up  the  v^'liole  Earth.  Oceans
and  rivers,  torrents  and  small  streams,  are  all  exhaled.  Thus  fed  with  abundant
moisture  the  Seven  Solar  Rays  become  Seven  Suns,  by  dilation,  and  they  finally  set
the  World  on  fire.  Hari,  the  destroyer  of  all  things,  who  is  the  Flame  of  Time,
Kalagni,  finally  consumes  the  Earth.  Then  Rudra,  becoming  Janardana,  breathes
clouds  and  rain.t

There  are  many  kinds  of  Pralaya,  but  three  chief  periods  are
specially  mentioned  in  old  Hindu  books.  The  first  of  these,  as  Wilson
shows,  is  called  Naimittika,^  "Occasional"  or  "Incidental,"  caused  by
the  intervals  of  Brahma  s  Days;  it  is  the  destruction  of  creatures,  of  all
that  lives  and  has  a  form,  but  not  of  the  substance,  which  remains  in


*  See  Royal  Asiat.  Soc.  ix.  364.
t  Bk.  vi.  ch.  iii.

J  In  the  Vedanta  and  Nyaya,  Nimitta,  from  which  Naimittika,  is  rendered  as  the  Efficient  Cause,
when  antithesized  with  Upadana,  the  Physical  or  Material  Cause.  In  the  Sankhya,  Pradhana  is  a
cause  inferior  to  Brahma,  or  rather  Brahma  being  himself  a  cause,  is  superior  to  Pradh.lna.  Hence
"  Incidental"  is  a  wrong  translation,  and  ought  to  be  rendered,  as  shown  by  some  scholars,  "Ideal"
Cause:  even  Real  Cause  would  have  been  better.


398  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

statu  qiio  till  the  new  Dawn  after  that  Night.  The  second  is  called
Prakritika,  and  occurs  at  the  end  of  the  Age  or  L,ife  of  Brahma,  when
everything  that  exists  is  resolved  into  the  Primal  Element,  to  be  re-
modelled at  the'  end  of  that  longer  Night.  The  third,  Atyantika,
does  not  concern  the  Worlds,  or  the  Universe,  but  only  the  Individu-
alities of  some  people.  It  is  thus  the  Individual  Pralaya,  or  Nirvana,
after  having  reached  which,  there  is  no  more  future  existence  possible,
no  rebirth  till  after  the  Maha  Pralaya.  The  latter  Night — lasting  as
it  does  311,040,000,000,000  years,  with  the  possibility  also  of  being
almost  doubled  in  the  case  of  the  lucky  Jivanmukta  who  reaches  Nir-
vana at  an  early  period  of  a  Manvantara — is  long  enough  to  be  re-
garded as  eternal,  if  not  endless.  The  Bhagavata  Purana"^'  speaks  of  a
fourth  kind  of  Pralaya,  the  Nitya,  or  Constant  Dissolution,  and  ex-
plains it  as  the  change  which  takes  place  imperceptibly  in  everything
in  this  Universe  from  the  globe  down  to  the  atom,  without  cessation.
It  is  growth  and  decay — life  and  death.

When  the  Maha  Pralaya  arrives,  the  inhabitants  of  Svar-loka,  the
Upper  Sphere,  disturbed  by  the  conflagration,  seek  refuge  "with  the
Pitris,  their  Progenitors,  the  Manus,  the  Seven  Rishis,  the  various
orders  of  Celestial  Spirits  and  the  Gods,  in  Mahar-loka."  When  the
latter  is  reached  also,  the  whole  of  the  above  enumerated  beings
migrate  in  their  turn  from  Mahar-loka,  and  repair  to  Jana-loka,  "m
their  subtile  forms,  destined  to  become  reembodied,  i7i  similar  capacities  as
their  former,  when  the  world  is  renewed  at  the  begi7ining  of  the  succeeding
Kalpar\

Clouds,  mighty  in  size,  and  loud  in  thunder,  fill  up  all  Space  [Nabhas-tala].
Showering  down  torrents  of  water,  these  clouds  quench  the  dreadful  fires,  .  .  .
and  then  they  rain  uninterruptedly  for  a  hundred  [divine]  Years,  and  deluge  the
whole  World  [Solar  System].  Pouring  down,  in  drops  as  large  as  dice,  these  rains
overspread  the  Earth,  and  fill  the  Middle  Region  (Bhuvo-loka)  and  inundate
Heaven.  The  World  is  now  enveloped  in  darkness;  and  all  things,  animate  or
inanimate,  having  perished,  the  clouds  continue  to  pour  down  their  Waters,  .  .  .
and  the  Night  of  Brahma  reigns  supreme  over  the  scene  of  desolation.  J

This  is  what  we  call  in  the  Esoteric  Doctrine  a  Solar  Pralaya.  When
the  Waters  have  reached  the  region  of  the  Seven  Rishis,  and  the
World,  our  Solar  System,  is  one  Ocean,  they  stop.  The  Breath  of
Vishnu  becomes  a  strong  Wind,  which  blows  for  another  hundred
Divine  Years  until  all  clouds  are  dispersed.  The  wind  is  then  reab-
sorbed :  and  That —

*  XU.  iv.  35.  t  V&yu  Parana.  t  Wilson,  Vishnu  Purina,  VI.  iii.


THE  REABSORPTION   OF  AI,L.  399

Of  which  all  things  are  made,  the  Ivord  by  whom  all  things  exist,  He  who  is  in-
conceivable, without  beginning,  the  beginning  of  the  Universe,  reposes,  sleeping
upon  Shesha  [the  Serpent  of  Infinity]  in  the  midst  of  the  Deep.  The  Creator
[(?)  Adikrit]  Hari,  sleeps  upon  the  Ocean  [of  Space]  in  the  form  of  Brahma —
glorified  by  Sanaka*  and  the  Saints  (Siddhas)  of  Jana-loka,  and  contemplated  by
the  holy  denizens  of  Brahma-loka,  anxious  for  final  liberation — involved  in  mystic
slumber,  the  celestial  personification  of  his  own  illusions.  .  .  .  This  is  the  Dis-
solution {_{?)  Pratisanchara]  termed  Incidental  because  Hari  is  its  Incidental  [Ideal]
Cause. t  When  the  Universal  Spirit  wakes,  the  World  revives;  when  he  closes  his
eyes,  all  things  fall  upon  the  bed  of  mystic  slumber.  In  like  manner,  as  a  thousand
Great  Ages  constitute  a  Day  of  Brahma  [in  the  original  it  is  Padmayoni,  the  same
as  Abjayoni,  "Lotus-born,"  not  Brahma],  so  his  Night  consists  of  the  same  period.
.  .  .  Awaking  at  the  end  of  his  Night,  the  Unborn  .  .  .  creates  the  Universe
anew.:J:

This  is  "Incidental"  Pralaya;   what  is  the  Elemental  (Prakritika)
Dissolution?     Parashara  describes  it  to  Maitreya  as  follows:

When,  by  dearth  and  fire  all  the  Worlds  and  Patalas  [Hells]  are  withered  up  §  .  .  .
the  progress  of  Elemental  Dissolution  is  begun.  Then,  first,  the  Waters  swallow
up  the  property  of  Earth  (which  is  the  rudiment  of  Smell),  and  Earth  deprived  of
this  property  proceeds  to  destruction  .  .  .  and  becomes  one  with  Water.  .  .  .
When  the  Universe  is,  thus,  pervaded  by  the  waves  of  the  watery  Element,  its
rudimentary  flavour  is  licked  up  by  the  Element  of  Fire  .  .  .  and  the  Waters
themselves  are  destroyed  .  .  .  and  become  one  with  Fire ;  and  the  Universe  is,
therefore,  entirely  filled  with  [ethereal]  Flame,  which  .  .  .  gradually  over-
spreads the  whole  World.  While  Space  is  [one]  Flame,  .  .  .  the  Element  of
Wind  seizes  upon  the  rudimental  property,  or  form,  which  is  the  Cause  of  Light,
and  that  being  withdrawn  (pralina),  all  becomes  of  the  nature  of  Air.  The  rudi-
ment of  form  being  destroj'ed,  and  Fire  [(?)  Vibhavasu]  deprived  of  its  rudiment,
Air  extinguishes  Fire  and  spreads  .  .  .  over  Space,  which  is  deprived  of  Light,
when  Fire  merges  into  Air.  Air,  then,  accompanied  by  Sound,  which  is  the  source
of  Ether,  extends  everywhere  throughout  the  ten  regions  .  .  .  until  Ether
seizes  upon  Contact  [(?)  Sparsha,  Cohesion — Touch?],  its  rudimental  propertj^  by
the  loss  of  which,  Air  is  destroyed,  and  Ether  [{?)  Kha]  remains  unmodified;  devoid
of  Form,  Flavour,  Touch  (Sparsha),  and  Smell,  it  exists  [un]  embodied  [murttimat]
and  vast,  and  pervades  the  whole  of  Space.  Ether  [Akasha],  whose  characteristic
property  and  rudiment  is  Sound  [the  "Word"]  exists  alone,  occupying  all  the
vacuity  of  Space  [or  rather,  occupying  the  whole  containment  of  Space].  Then  the
Origin  [Noumenon .'']  of  the   Elements  (Bhutadi)   devours  Sound  [the  collective

*  The  chief  Kuraara,  or  Virgin-God,  a  Dhyan  Chohan  who  refuses  to  create.  A  prototype  of  St.
Michael,  who  also  refuses  to  do  so.

■t  See  concluding  lines  in  Section,  "Chaos:  Theos:  Kosmos."

J  /btd.,  iv.

}  This  prospect  would  hardly  suit  Christian  theology,  which  prefers  an  eternal,  everlasting  Hell
for  its  followers.


400  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Demiurgos];  [and  the  hosts  of  Dhyan  Chohans]  and  all  the  [existing]  Elements*
are,  at  once,  merged  into  their  original.  This  Primary  Element  is  Consciousness,
combined  with  the  Property  of  Darkness  [Tamasa— Spiritual  Darkness  rather],  and
is,  itself,  swallowed  up  [disintegrated]  by  Mahat  [the  Universal  Intellect],  whose
characteristic  property  is  Intelligence  [Buddhi],  and  Earth  and  Mahat  are  the
inner  and  outer  boundaries  of  the  Universe.  In  this  manner,  as  [in  the  Beginning]
were  the  seven  forms  of  Nature  [Prakriti]  reckoned  from  Mahat  to  Earth,  so  .  .  ,
these  seven  successively  reenter  into  each  other. t

The  Egg  of  Brahma  (Sarva-mandala)  is  dissolved  in  the  Waters  that  surround  it,
with  its  seven  zones  (dvipas),  seven  oceans,  seven  regions,  and  their  mountains.
The  investure  of  Water  is  drunk  by  Fire;  the  (stratum  of)  Fire  is  absorbed  by  (that
of)  Air;  Air  blends  itself  with  Ether  [Akasha];  the  Primary  Element  [Bhutadi,  the
origin,  or  rather  the  cause,  of  the  Primary  Element]  devours  the  Ether,  and  is
(itself)  destroyed  by  Intellect  [Mahat,  the  Great,  the  Universal  Mind],  which,  along
with  all  these,  is  seized  upon  by  Nature  [Prakriti]  and  disappears.  This  Prakriti  is,
essentially,  the  same,  whether  discrete  or  indiscrete ;  only  that  which  is  discrete  is,
finally,  lost  or  absorbed  in  the  indiscrete.  Spirit  [Pums]  also,  which  is  one,  pure,
imperishable,  eternal,  all-pervading,  is  a  portion  of  that  Supreme  Spirit  which  is
all  things.  That  Spirit  [Sarvesha]  which  is  other  than  (embodied)  Spirit,  and  in
which  there  are  no  attributes  of  name,  species  [naman  and  jati,  or  riapa,  hence
body  rather  than  species],  or  the  like  ....  [remains]  as  the  (sole)  Existence
[Satta].  Nature  [Prakriti]  and  Spirit  [Purusha]  both  resolve  [finally]  into  Supreme
Spirit,  t

This  is  the  final  Pralaya§ — the  Death  of  Kosmos;  after  which  its
Spirit  rests  in  Nirvana,  or  in  That  for  which  there  is  neither  Day  nor
Night.  All  the  other  Pralayas  are  periodical,  and  follow  the  Man-
vantaras  in  regular  succession,  as  the  night  follows  the  day  of  every
human  creature,  animal,  and  plant.  The  Cycle  of  Creation  of  the
Lives  of  Kosmos  is  run  down;  the  energy  of  the  Manifested  "Word"
having  its  growth,  culmination,  and  decrease,  as  have  all  things  tem-
porary, however  long  their  duration.  The  Creative  Force  is  Eternal
as  noumenal;  as  a  phenomenal  manifestation,  in  its  aspects,  it  has  a

*  The  term  "Elements"  must  be  here  understood  to  mean  not  only  the  visible  and  physical
elements,  but  also  that  which  St.  Paul  calls  Elements — the  Spiritual,  Intelligent  Potencies — Angels
and  Demons  in  their  manvantaric  forms.

t  When  this  description  is  correctly  understood  by  Orientalists,  in  its  esoteric  significance,  then  it
will  be  found  that  this  cosmic  correlation  of  World -Elements  may  explain  the  correlation  of  physical
forces  better  than  those  now  known.  At  any  rate,  Theosophists  will  perceive  that  Prakriti  has  seven
forms,  or  principles,  "reckoned  from  Mahat  to  Earth."  The  "Waters"  mean  here  the  m.ystic
"Mother";  the  Womb  of  Abstract  Nature,  in  which  the  Manifested  Universe  is  conceived.  The
seven  "zones"  have  reference  to  the  Seven  Divisions  of  that  Universe,  or  the  Noumena  of  the  Forces
that  bring  it  into  being.     It  is  all  allegorical.

X  Vishnu  Purdtia,  Bk.  VI.  Ch.  iv.,  Wilson's  mistakes  being  corrected  and  the  origrinal  terms  put  in
brackets.

\  As  it  is  the  Maha,  the  Great,  or  so-called  Final,  Pralaya  which  is  here  described,  every  thing  is
reabsorbed  into  its  origfinal  One  Element;  the  "Gods  themselves,  Brahma  and  the  rest"  being  said  to
die  and  disappear  during  that  long  "Night."


A   KABAUSTIC    KEY,  40I

beginning  and  must,  therefore,  have  an  end.  During  that  interv^al,  it
has  its  Periods  of  Activity  and  its  Periods  of  Rest.  And  these  are  the
Days  and  Nights  of  Brahma.  But  Brahman,  the  Noumenon,  never
rests,  as  //  never  changes,  but  ever  is,  though  It  cannot  be  said  to  be
an}'"where.

The  Jewish  Kabalists  felt  the  necessity  of  this  immutability  in  an
eternal,  infinite  Deity,  and  therefore  applied  the  same  thought  to  the
anthropomorphic  God.  The  idea  is  poetical,  and  very  appropriate  in
its  application.     In  the  Zohar  we  read  as  follows:

As  Moses  was  keeping  a  vigil  on  Mount  Sinai,  in  company  with  the  Deity,  who
was  concealed  from  his  sight  by  a  cloud,  he  felt  a  great  fear  overcome  him,  and
suddenly  asked:  " Lord,  where  art  thou  ....  sleepest  thou,  O  Lord. ^^  .  .  ."
And  the  Spirit  answered  him;  "I  never  sleep:  were  I  to  fall  asleep  for  a  moment
before  my  time,  all  the  creation  would  crumble  into  dissolution  in  one  instant."

"Before  my  time"  is  very  suggestive.  It  shows  the  God  of  Moses  to
be  onl}^  a  temporary  substitute,  like  Brahma,  the  male,  a  substitute  and
an  aspect  of  That  which  is  immutable,  and  which,  therefore,  can  take
no  part  in  the  Days,  or  Nights,  nor  have  any  concern  whatever  with
reaction  or  dissolution.

While  the  Eastern  Occultists  have  seven  modes  of  interpretation,  the
Jews  have  only  four;  namely,  the  real-mystical,  the  allegorical,  the
moral,  and  the  literal  or  Pashut.  The  latter  is  the  key  of  the  exoteric
Churches  and  not  worth  discussion.  Here  are  several  sentences,
which,  read  in  the  first,  or  mystical  key,  show  the  identity  of  the
foundations  of  con':truction  in  ever}^  Scripture.  They  are  given  in
Isaac  Myer's  excellent  book  on  the  Kabalistic  works,  which  he  seems
to  have  well  studied.     I  quote  vcrbatitn.

"B'raisheeth  barah  elohitn  ath  hashania'  yeni  v'ath  haa'retz,  i.e.,  'In  the  beginning
the  God(s)  created  the  heavens  and  the  earth';  (the  meaning  of  which  is;)  the  six
(Sephiroth  of  Construction),*  over  which  B'raisheeth  .stands,  all  belong  Below.  It
created  six,  (and)  on  these  stand  (exist)  all  Things.  And  those  depend  upon  the
seven  forvis  of  the  Cranium  up  to  the  Dignity  of  all  Dignities.  And  the  second
'Earth'  does  not  come  into  calculation,  therefore  it  has  been  said:  'And  from  it
(that  Earth)  which  underwent  the  curse;  came  it  forth.'  .  .  .  'It  (the  Earth)
was  withovit  form  and  void;  and  darkness  was  over  the  face  of  the  Abyss,  and  the
Spirit  of  Elohim  ....  was  breathing  (w^'rrtc/!a'/>A^/A,  i.^.,  hovering,  brooding
over,  moving,  .  .  .)  over  the  waters.'  Thirteen  depend  on  thirteen  (forms)  of  the
most  worthy  Dignity.  Six  thousand  years  hang  (are  referred  to)  in  the  first  six
words.     The  seventh  (thousand,  the  millennium)  above  it  (the  cursed  Earth)  is  that


•  The  "Builders"  of  the  Stanzas.


97


402  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

■which  is  strong  by  Itself.  And  it  was  rendered  entirely  desolate  during  twelve-
hours  (one  .  .  .  day  ....).  In  the  thirteenth,  It  (the  Deity)  shall  restore
them  ....  and  everything  shall  be  renewed  as  before;  and  all  those  six
shall  continue."*

The  "Sephiroth  of  Construction"  are  the  six  Dhyan  Chohans,  or
Manus,  or  Prajapatis,  synthesized  by  the  seventh  "  B'raisheeth,"  the
First  Emanation,  or  Logos,  and  who  are  called,  therefore,  the  Builders
of  the  Lower  or  Physical  Universe,  all  belonging  Below.  These  Six
I'^l,  whose  essence  is  of  the  Seventh,  are  the  Upadhi,  the  Base  or
Fundamental  Stone,  on  which  the  Objective  Universe  is  built,  the
Noumenoi  of  all  things.  Hence  they  are,  at  the  same  time,  the  Forces
of  Nature ;  the  Seven  Angels  of  the  Presence ;  the  Sixth  and  Seventh
Principles  in  Man;  the  spirito-psycho-physical  Spheres  of  the  Sep
tenary  Chain,  the  Root  Races,  etc.  They  all  "depend  upon  the  Seven
Forms  of  the  Cranium"  up  to  the  Highest.  The  ''Second  'Earth'  does
not  come  into  calculation,"  because  it  is  no  Earth,  but  the  Chaos,  or
Abyss  of  Space,  in  which  rested  the  Paradigmatic,  or  Model  Universe,
in  the  Ideation  of  the  Over-Soul,  brooding  over  it.  The  term  "Curse"
is  here  very  misleading,  for  it  means  simply  Doom  or  Destiny,  or  that
fatality  which  sent  it  forth  into  the  objective  state.  This  is  shown  by
that  "Earth,"  under  the  "Curse,"  being  described  as  "without  form
and  void,"  in  whose  abysmal  depths  the  "Breath"  of  the  Elohim,  or
collective  Logoi,  produced,  or  so  to  say  photographed,  the  first  Divine
Ideation  of  the  things  to  be.  This  process  is  repeated  after  every
Pralaya  before  the  beginnings  of  a  new  Manvantara,  or  Period  of
sentient  individual  Being.  "Thirteen  depend  on  thirteen  Forms,"
refers  to  the  thirteen  Periods,  personified  by  the  thirteen  Manus,  with
Svayambhuva,  the  fourteenth — 13,  instead  of  14,  being  an  additional
veil — those  fourteen  Manus  who  reign  within  the  term  of  a  Maha  Yuga,
a  Day  of  Brahma.  These  thirteen-fourteen  of  the  objective  Universe
depend  on  the  thirteen-fourteen  paradigmatic,  ideal  Forms.  The
meaning  of  the  "six  thousand  Years"  which  "hang  in  the  first  six
Words,"  has  again  to  be  sought  in  the  Indian  Wisdom.  They  refer  to
the  primordial  six  (seven)  "Kings  of  Edom,"  who  typify  the  Worlds,
or  Spheres,  of  our  Chain,  during  the  First  Round,  as  well  as  the
primordial  men  of  this  Round.  They  are  the  septenary  pre-Adamic
First  Root-Race,  or  they  who  existed  before  the  Third,  Separated  Race.
As  they  were  Shadows,  and  senseless,  for  they  had  not  yet  eaten  of  the

•  Prom  the  Siphra  Dizenioutha,  c.  i.  \  i6  ei  seq.;  as  quoted  in  Myer's  Qabbalah,  232-3.


THE   COMING   OF   NIGHT.  403

fruit  of  the  Tree  of  Knowledge,  they  could  not  see  the  Parzuphim,  or
"Face  could  not  see  Face";  that  is  to  say,  primeval  men  were  "uncon-
scious." "Therefore,  the  primordial  (seven)  Kings  died,"  i.e.,  were
destroyed.*  Now,  who  are  these  Kings?  They  are  the  Kings  who  are
the  "Seven  Rishis,  certain  (secondary)  divinities,  Indra  [Shakra],
Manu,  and  the  Kings  his  Sons  [who]  are  created  and  perish  at  one
period,"  as  Vishnu  Puraiia  tells  us.f  For  the  seventh  "thousand,"
which  is  not  the  millennium  of  exoteric  Christianity,  but  that  of
Anthropogenesis,  represents  both  the  "Seventh  Period  of  Creation,"
that  of  physical  man,  according  to  Vishnu  Purana,  and  the  Seventh
Principle,  both  macrocosmic  and  microcosmic,  and  also  the  Pralaya
after  the  Seventh  Period,  the  Night,  which  has  the  same  duration  as
the  Day,  of  Brahma.  "It  was  rendered  entirely  desolate  during  twelve
hours."  It  is  in  the  Thirteenth  (twice  six  and  the  synthesis)  that
ever^'thing  shall  be  restored,  and  the  ''six  shall  continue."
Thus,  the  author  of  the  Qabbalah  remarks  quite  truly  that :

Long  before  his  [Ibu  Gebirol's]  time  .  .  .  many  centuries  before  the  Christian
era,  there  was  in  Central  Asia  a  "Wisdom  Religion",  fragments  of  which  subse-
quently existed  among  the  learned  men  of  the  archaic  Egyptians,  the  ancient
Chinese,  Hindus,  etc.  .  .  .  [And  that]  the  Qabbalah  most  likely  originally  came
from  Aryan  sources,  through  Central  Asia,  Persia,  India  and  Mesopotamia,  for  from
Ur  and  Haran  came  Abraham  and  manj'  others,  into  Palestine.  %

Such  was  also  the  firm  conviction  of  C.  W.  King,  the  aitthor  of  The
Gnostics  and  Their  Retnains.

Vamadeva  Modelyar  describes  the  coming  Night  most  poetically.
Though  it  is  given  in  Isis  Unveiled,  it  is  worthy  of  repetition.

Strange  noises  are  heard,  proceeding  from  everj^  point.  .  .  .  These  are  the  pre-
cursors of  the  Night  of  Brahma;  dusk  rises  at  the  horizon,  and  the  Sun  passes  away
behind  the  thirteenth  degree  of  Makara  [the  tenth  sign  of  the  Zodiac],  and  will
reach  no  more  the  sign  of  the  Mina  [the  Zodiacal  sign  Pisces,  or  the  Fish].  The
Gurus  of  the  Pagodas,  appointed  to  watch  the  Rashichakram  [Zodiac],  may  now
break  their  circle  and  instruments,  for  they  are  henceforth  useless.

Gradually  light  pales,  heat  diminishes,  uninhabited  spots  multiply  on  the  earth,
the  air  becomes  more  and  more  rarefied;  the  springs  of  waters  dry  up,  the  great
rivers  see  their  waves  exhausted,  the  ocean  shows  its  sandy  bottom  and  plants  die.
Men  and  animals  decrease  in  size  daily.  Life  and  motion  lose  their  force,  planets
can  hardly  gravitate  in  space;  they  are  extinguished  one  by  one,  like  a  lamp  which
the  hand  of  the  Cliokra  [servant]  neglects  to  replenish.  Siirj'a  [the  Sun]  flickers
and  goes  out,  matter  falls  into  Dissolution  [Pralaya],  and  Brahma  merges  back  into

•  Compare  the  Siphra  Dtzenioulha.  t  Bk.  I.  Ch.  iii.  t  pp.  219,  221.


404  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Dyaus,   the  Unrevealed   God,   and,  his  task  being  accomplished,   he  falls  asleep.
Another  Day  is  passed,  Night  sets  in,  and  continues  until  the  future  Dawn.

And  now  again  reenter  into  the  Golden  Egg  of  his  Thought  the  germs  of  all  that
exist,  as  the  divine  Mauu  tells  us.  During  His  peaceful  rest,  the  animated  beings,
endowed  with  the  principles  of  action,  cease  their  functions,  and  all  feeling  [Manas]
becomes  dormant.  When  they  are  all  absorbed  in  the  Supreme  Soul,  this  Soul  of
all  the  beings  sleeps  in  complete  repose,  till  the  Day  when  it  resumes  its  form,  and
awakes  again  from  its  primitive  darkness.*

As  the  Satya  Yuga  is  always  the  first  in  the  series  of  the  Four  Ages
or  Yugas,  so  the  Kali  ever  conies  the  last.  The  Kali  Yuga  now  reigns
supreme  in  India,  and  it  seems  to  coincide  with  that  of  the  Western
Age.  Anyhow,  it  is  curious  to  see  how  prophetic  in  almost  all  things
was  the  writer  of  Vishmi  Purdna,  when  foretelling  to  Maitre3^a  some  of
the  dark  influences  and  sins  of  this  Kali  Yuga.  For  after  saying  that
the  "barbarians"  will  be  masters  of  the  banks  of  the  Indus,  of  Chan-
drabhagt  and  Kashmira,  he  adds:

There  will  be  contemporary  monarchs,  reigning  over  the  earth,  kings  of  churlish
spirit,  violent  temper,  and  ever  addicted  to  falsehood  and  wickedness.  They  will
inflict  death  on  women,  children,  and  cows;  they  will  seize  upon  the  property  of
their  subjects  [or,  according  to  another  reading,  be  intent  upon  the  wives  of  others];
they  will  be  of  limited  power  .  .  .  their  lives  will  be  short,  their  desires  insatiable.
.  .  .  People  of  various  countries  intermingling  with  them  will  follow  their
example;  and,  the  barbarians  being  powerful  [in  India]  in  the  patronage  of  the
princes,  whilst  pure  tribes  are  neglected,  the  people  Avail  perish  [or,  as  the  Com-
mentator has  it:  "the  Mlechchhas  will  be  in  the  centre,  and  the  Aryas  in  the  end"].t
Wealth  and  piety  will  decrease  day  by  day,  until  the  world  will  be  wholly  depraved.
.  .  .  Propert}' alone  will  confer  rank;  wealth  will  be  the  only  source  of  devotion;
passion  will  be  the  sole  bond  of  union  between  the  sexes;  falsehood  will  be  the
only  means  of  success  in  litigation;  and  women  will  be  objects  merely  of  sensual

gratification External  types  zvill  be  the  only  distinction  of  the  several

orders  of  life;  dishonesty  [anyaya]  will  be  the  (universal)  means  of  subsistence;
weakness  the  cause  of  dependence;  menace  and  presumption  will  be  substituted
for  learning;  liberality  will  be  devotion;  a  man  if  rich  will  be  reputed  pure;  mutual
assent  will  be  marriage;  fine  clothes  will  be  dignity.  .  .  He  who  is  the  strongest
will  reign  .  .  .  the  people,  unable  to  bear  the  heavy  burthens  [khara-bhara,
load  of  taxes],  will  take  refuge  among  the  valleys.  .  .  .  Thus,  in  the  Kali  Age,
will  decay  constantly  proceed,  until  the  human  race  approaches  its  annihilation
[pralaya].  When  .  .  .  the  close  of  the  Kali  age  shall  be  nigh,  a  portion  of  that
divine  Being  which  exists,  of  its  own  spiritual  nature  [Kalki  Avatara]  .  .  .  shall
descend  upon  Earth,  .  .  .  endowed  with  the  eight  superhuman  faculties.  .  .  .
He  will  reestablish  righteousness  upon  earth;  and  the  minds  of  those  who  live  at
the  end  of  Kali  Yuga  shall  be  awakened,  and  shall  be  as  pellucid  as  crystal.     The


•See  Jacolliot's  Les  Fits  de  Dieu,  and  VInde  dcs  Brahmes,  p.  230.    tif  this  is  not  prophetic,  what  is?


THE   RETURN  OP  MORU.  405

men  who  are,  thus,  changed  .  .  .  shall  be  as  the  seeds  of  human  bcin<^s.  and  shall
give  birth  to  a  race  who  shall  follow  the  laws  of  the  Krita  Age  (or  Age  of  Purity).
As  it  is  said :  "When  the  Sun  and  Moon  and  (the  Lunar  Asterism)  Tishya,  and  the
planet  Jupiter  are  in  one  mansion,  the  Krita  [or  Satya]  Age  shall  return *

Two  persons,  Devapi,  of  the  race  of  Kuru,  and  Maru  [Moru],  of  the
family  of  Ikshvaku,  ....  continue  alive  throughout  the  Four
Ages,  residing  at  .  .  .  Kalapa.f  They  will  return  hither,  in  the
beginning  of  the  Krita  Age|  ..  .  .  Maru  [Moru]§  the  son  of  Shighra,
through  the  power  of  devotion  (Yoga)  is  still  living  ....  and
will  be  the  restorer  of  the  Kshattriya  race  of  the  Solar  Dynasty.  ]|

Whether  right  or  wrong  with  regard  to  the  latter  prophecy,  the
"blessings"  of  Kali  Yuga  are  well  described,  and  fit  in  admirably  even
with  that  which  one  sees  and  hears  in  Europe  and  other  civilized  and
Christian  lands  in  the  full  XlXth,  and  at  the  dawn  of  the  XXth  century
of  our  great  "Era  of  Enlightenment."


*  Wilson,  Vtsknu  Purana,  Bk.  IV.  Ch.  xxiv.

+  The  Matsya  Purana  gives  Katapa.

X   I'ishtiu  Purana,  [bid.

\  Max  Miiller  translates  the  name  as  Morya,  of  the  Morya  dynasty,  to  which  Chandragupta  be-
longed. (See  History  of  A  ncient  Sanskrit  Literature),  In  Matsya  Purana,  chapter  cclxxii,  the  dynasty
of  ten  Moryas,  or  Maureyas,  is  spoken  of.  In  the  same  chapter,  it  is  stated  that  the  Moryas  will  one
day  reign  over  India,  after  restoring  the  Kshattriya  race  many  thousand  years  hence.  Only  that
reign  will  be  purely  spiritual  and  "  not  of  this  world."  It  will  be  the  kingdom  of  the  next  Avatara.
Colonel  Tod  believes  the  name  Morya,  or  Maurya,  a  corruption  of  Mori,  a  Rajput  tribe,  and  the  com-
mentary on  the  Mahavanso  thinks  that  some  princes  have  taken  their  name  Maurya  from  their  town
called  Mori,  or  as  Professor  Max  Miiller  gives  it,  Morya-Nagara,  which  is  more  correct,  after  the
original  Mahavanso.  The  Sanskrit  Encyclopedia,  V&chaspattya,  we  are  informed  by  our  Brother,
Devan  Badhadur  R.  Ragoonath  Rao,  of  Madras,  places  Katapa  (Kalapa)  on  the  northern  side  of  the
Himalayas,  hence  in  Tibet.    The  same  is  stated  in  the  Bhagavata  Purana,  Skanda  xii.

II  Ibid.,  ch.  iv.  The  Vayu  Purana  declares  that  Moru  vrill  reestablish  the  Kshattriyas  in  the  Nine-
teenth coming  Vuga.    (See  Five  Years 0/  Theosophy,  483,  art.  "The  Morj'as  and  Koothoomi.")


SECTION  VIII.

The  Lotus,  as  a  Universal  Symbol.


Therk  are  no  ancient  symbols  without  a  deep  and  philosophical
meaning  attached  to  them,  their  importance  and  significance  increasing
with  their  antiquity.  Such  is  the  Lotus.  It  is  the  flower  sacred  to
Nature  and  her  Gods,  and  represents  the  Abstract  and  the  Concrete
Universes,  standing  as  the  emblem  of  the  productive  powers  of  both
Spiritual  and  Physical  Nature.  It  was  held  as  sacred  from  the  remotest
antiquity  by  the  Aryan  Hindus,  the  Egyptians,  and  by  the  Buddhists
after  them.  It  was  revered  in  China  and  Japan,  and  adopted  as  a
Christian  emblem  b}^  the  Greek  and  Latin  Churches,  who  made  of  it  a
messenger,  as  do  now  the  Christians,  who  have  replaced  it  with  the
water-lily.

In  the  Christian  religion,  in  every  picture  of  the  Annunciation,
Gabriel,  the  Archangel,  appears  to  the  Virgin  Mary,  holding  in  his
hand  a  spray  of  water-lilies.  This  spray,  typifying  Fire  and  Water,  or
the  idea  of  creation  and  generation,  symbolizes  precisely  the  same  idea  as
the  Lotus,  in  the  hand  of  the  Bodhisattva  who  announces  to  Maha-
Maya,  Gautama's  mother,  the  birth  of  Buddha,  the  world's  Saviour.
Thus  also,  were  Osiris  and  Horus  constantly  represented  by  the
Egyptians  in  association  with  the  Lotus-flower,  both  being  Sun-Gods
or  Gods  of  Fire;  just  as  the  Holy  Ghost  is  still  typified  by  "tongues
of  fire,"  in  the  Acts.

It  had,  and  still  has,  its  mystic  meaning,  which  is  identical  in  every
nation  on  earth.  We  refer  the  reader  to  Sir  William  Jones.*  With  the
Hindus,  the  I^otus  is  the  emblem  of  the  productive  power  of  Nature,
through  the  agency  of  Fire  and  Water,  or  Spirit  and  Matter.     "O  Thou


See  Dissertations  Relating  to  Asia.


THE   IDEAL  BECOMING   MATERIAL.  407

Eternal!  I  see  Brahni,  the  Creator,  enthroned  in  thee  above  the  I^otus!"
says  a  verse  in  the  Bhagavad  Gitd.  And  Sir  W.  Jones  shows,  as  already
noted  in  the  Stanzas,  that  the  seeds  of  the  Lotus,  even  before  they
germinate,  contain  perfectly-formed  leaves,  the  miniature  shapes  of
what  they  will  become  one  da}^  as  perfected  plants.  The  Lotus,  in
India,  is  the  symbol  of  prolific  Earth  and,  what  is  more,  of  Mount
Mem.  The  four  Angels  or  Genii  of  the  four  quarters  of  Heaven,  the
Maharajahs  of  the  Stanzas,  stand  each  on  a  Lotus.  The  Lotus  is  the
two-fold  type  of  the  Divine  and  Human  Hermaphrodite,  being  so  to
say,  of  dual  sex.

With  the  Hindus,  the  Spirit  of  Fire  or  Heat — which  stirs  up,  fructifies,
and  develops  into  concrete  form,  from  its  ideal  prototype,  ever>'thing
which  is  born  of  Water,  or  Primordial  Earth — evolved  Brahma.  The
Lotus-flower,  represented  as  growing  out  of  Vishnu's  navel,  the  God
who  rests  in  the  Waters  of  Space  on  the  Serpent  of  Infinit}^  is  the
most  graphic  symbol  ever  yet  made.  It  is  the  Universe  evolving  from
the  Central  Sun,  the  Point,  the  ever-concealed  Germ.  Lakshmi,  who
is  the  female  aspect  of  Vishnu,  and  who  is  also  called  Padma,  the  Lotus,
in  the  Rd?ndyana,  is  likewise  shown  floating  on  a  Lotus-flower,  at  the
"Creation,"  and  during  the  "Churning  of  the  Ocean"  of  Space,  as  also
springing  from  the  "Sea  of  Milk,"  like  Venus- Aphrodite  from  the
Foam  of  the  Ocean.

•    .     .    Then,  seated  on  a  lotus,

Beauty's  bright  Goddess,  peerless  Shri,  arose

Out  of  the  waves    .     .     .

sings  an  English  Orientalist  and  poet.  Sir  Monier  Williams.

The  underl3'ing  idea,  in  this  symbol,  is  very  beautiful,  and,  further-
more, shows  an  identical  parentage  in  all  the  religious  systems.
Whether  as  the  Lotus  or  water-lily,  it  signifies  one  and  the  same
philosophical  idea;  namel}^  the  Emanation  of  the  Objective  from  the
Subjective,  Divine  Ideation  passing  from  the  abstract  into  the  concrete,
or  visible  form.  For,  as  soon  as  Darkness,  or  rather  that  which  is
"Darkness"  for  ignorance,  has  disappeared  in  its  own  realm  of  Eternal
Light,  leaving  behind  itself  only  its  Divine  Manifested  Ideation,  the
Creative  Logoi  have  their  understanding  opened,  and  they  see  in  the
Ideal  World,  hitherto  concealed  in  the  Divine  Thought,  the  archetypal
forms  of  all,  and  proceed  to  copy  and  build,  or  fashion,  upon  these
models,  forms  evanescent  and  transcendent.

At  this  stage  of  Action,   the   Demiurge  is  not  yet  the  Architect.


408  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Born  in  the  Twilight  of  Action,  he  has  yet  to  first  perceive  the  Plan,  to
realize  the  Ideal  Forms,  which  lie  buried  in  the  Bosom  of  Eternal  Idea-
tion, just  as  the  future  lotus-leaves,  the  immaculate  petals,  are  con-
cealed within  the  seed  of  that  plant.

In  Esoteric  Philosophy  the  Demiurge,  or  Logos,  regarded  as  the
Creator,  is  simply  an  abstract  term,  an  idea,  like  the  word  "army."  As
the  latter  is  the  all-embracing  term  for  a  body  of  active  forces,  or
working  units — soldiers,  so  is  the  Demiurge  the  qualitative  compound
of  a  multitude  of  Creators  or  Builders.  Burnouf,  the  great  Orienta-
list, seized  the  idea  perfectl}^  w^lien  he  said  that  Brahma  does  7iot  create
the  Earth,  any  more  than  the  rest  of  the  Universe.

Having  evolved  himself  from  the  Soul  of  the  World,  once  separated  from  the
First  Cause,  he  evaporates  with,  and  emanates,  all  Nature  out  of  himself  He  does
not  stand  above  it,  but  is  mixed  up  with  it;  Brahma  and  the  Universe  form  one
Being,  each  particle  of  which  is  in  its  essence  Brahma  himself,  who  proceeded  out
of  himself.

In  a  chapter  of  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  called  "Transformation  into
the  Lotus,"  the  God,  figured  as  a  head  emerging  from  this  flower,
exclaims :

I  am  the  pure  Lotus,  emerging  from  the  Luminous  Ones.  ...  I  carry  the
messages  of  Horus.     I  am  the  pure  Lotus  which  comes  from  the  Solar  Fields.*

The  lotus-idea  may  be  traced  even  in  the  Elohistic  first  chapter  of
Genesis,  as  stated  in  Isis  Unveiled.  It  is  to  this  idea  that  we  must  look
for  the  origin  and  explanation  of  the  verse  in  the  Jewish  Cosmogony
which  reads:  "And  God  said,  Let  the  earth  bring  forth  .  .  .  the
fruit-tree  yielding  fruit  after  his  kind,  whose  seed  is  in  itself."  f  In  all
the  primitive  religions,  the  Creative  God  is  the  "Son  of  the  Father,"
that  is  to  say,  his  Thought  made  visible;  and  before  the  Christian  era,
from  the  Trimurti  of  the  Hindus  down  to  the  three  Kabalistic  Heads  of
the  scriptures,  as  explained  by  the  Jews,  the  Triune  Godhead  of  each
nation  was  fully  defined  and  substantiated,  in  its  allegories.

Such  is  the  cosmic  and  ideal  significance  of  this  great  symbol  with
the  Eastern  peoples.  But  when  applied  to  practical  and  exoteric  wor-
ship, which  had  also  its  esoteric  symbology,  the  Lotus,  in  time,  became
the  carrier  and  container  of  a  more  terrestrial  idea.  No  dogmatic
religion  has  ever  escaped  having  the  sexual  element  in  it;  and  to  this
day   it   soils   the  moral  beauty  of  the  root  idea  of  symbology.     The

*  Ch.  Ixxxi.  t  i.  II.


HEBREW   ANTHROPOMORPHISM.  409

following  is   quoted   from    the   same   Kabalistic   MS.  which  we  have
already  cited  on  several  occasions :

Poinliug  to  like  signification  was  the  Lotus  growing  in  the  waters  of  the  Nile.
Its  mode  of  growth  peculiarly  fitted  it  as  a  symbol  of  the  generative  activities.
The  flower  of  the  Lotus,  which  is  the  bearer  of  the  seed  for  reproduction,  as  the
result  of  its  maturing,  is  connected  by  its  placenta-like  attachment  to  mother-
earth,  or  the  womb  of  Isis,  through  the  water  of  the  womb,  that  is,  the  river  Nile,
by  the  long  cord-like  stalk,  the  umbilicus.  Nothing  can  be  plainer  than  the
symbol,  and  to  make  it  perfect  in  its  intended  signification,  a  child  is  sometimes
represented  as  seated  in  or  issuing  from  the  flower.*  Thus  Osiris  and  Isis,  the
children  of  Cronus,  or  time  without  end,  in  the  development  of  their  nature- forces,
in  this  picture  become  the  parents  of  man  under  the  name  Horus.

We  cannot  lay  too  great  stress  upon  the  use  of  this  generative  function  as  a  basis
for  a  symbolical  language,  and  a  scientific  art-speech.  Thought  upon  the  idea
leads  at  once  to  reflection  upon  the  subject  of  creative  cause.  In  its  workings
Nattire  is  observed  to  have  fashioned  a  wonderful  piece  of  living  mechanism,
governed  by  an  added  living  soul;  the  life  development  and  history  of  which  soul,
as  to  its  whence,  its  present,  and  its  whither,  surpass  all  efforts  of  the  human
intellect. t  The  new-born  is  an  ever- recurring  miracle,  an  evidence  that  within  the
workshop  of  the  womb  an  intelligent  creative  power  has  intervened  to  fasten  a
living  soul  to  a  physical  machine.  The  amazing  wonderfulness  of  the  fact  attaches
a  holy  sacredness  to  all  connected  with  the  organs  of  reproduction,  as  the  dwelling
and  place  of  evident  constructive  intervention  of  deity.

This  is  a  correct  rendering  of  the  underlying  ideas  of  old,  of  the
purely  pantheistic  conceptions,  impersonal  and  reverential,  of  the
archaic  philosophers  of  the  prehistoric  ages.  It  is  not  so,  however,
when  applied  to  sinful  humanity,  to  the  gross  ideas  attached  to
personality.  Therefore,  no  pantheistic  philosopher  would  fail  to  find
the  remarks  that  follow  the  above,  and  which  represent  the  anthropo-
morphism of  Judean  .symbology,  other  than  dangerous  for  the  sacred-
ness of  true  religion,  and  fitting  onl}'  for  our  materialistic  age,  which
is  the  direct  outcome  and  result  of  that  anthropomorphic  character.
For  this  is  the  key-note  to  the  entire  spirit  and  essence  of  the  Old

*  In  the  Indian  Purdnas,  it  is  Vishnu,  the  First,  and  Brahma,  the  Second  Logos,  or  the  Ideal  and
Practical  Creators,  who  are  respectively  represented,  one  as  manifesting  the  Lotus,  the  other  as
issuiupf  from  it.

t  Not  the  efforts,  however,  of  the  trained  psychic  faculties  of  an  Initiate  into  Eastern  Metaphysics,
and  the  Mysteries  of  Creative  Nature.  It  is  the  Profane  of  the  past  ages,  who  have  degraded  the
pure  ideal  of  cosmic  creation  into  an  emblem  of  mere  human  reproduction  and  sexual  functions :  it
is  the  Esoteric  Teachings,  and  the  Initiates  of  the  Future,  whose  mission  it  is,  and  will  be,  to  redeem
and  ennoble  once  more  the  primitive  conception,  so  sadly  profaned  by  its  crude  and  gross  applica-
tion to  exoteric  dogmas  and  personations,  by  theological  and  ecclesiastical  religionists.  The  silent
worship  of  abstract  or  noumenal  Nature,  the  only  divine  manifestation,  is  the  one  ennobling  religion
of  Humauitj'.


4IO  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Testament,  as  the  MS.  states,  treating  of  the  symbolism  of  the  art-
speech  of  the  Bible:

Therefore  the  locality  of  the  womb  is  to  be  taken  as  the  Most  Holy  Place,  the
Sanctum  Sanctorum,  and  the  veritable  Temple  of  the  Living  God.*  With  man,  the
possession  of  the  woman  has  always  been  considered  as  an  essential  part  of  himself,
to  make  one  out  of  two,  and  jealously  guarded  as  sacred.  Even  the  part  of  the
ordinary  house  or  home  consecrated  to  the  dwelling  of  the  wife  was  called  the
penetralia,  the  secret  or  sacred,  and  hence  the  metaphor  of  the  Holy  of  Holies,  of
sacred  constructions  taken  from  the  idea  of  the  sacredness  of  the  organs  of
generation.  Carried  to  the  extreme  of  description  t  by  metaphor,  this  part  of  the
house  is  described  in  the  Sacred  Books  as  the  "between  the  thighs  of  the  house,"
and  sometimes  the  idea  is  carried  out  constructively  in  the  great  door-opening  of
Churches  placed  inward  between  flanking  buttresses.

No  such  thought,  "carried  to  the  extreme,"  ever  existed  among  the
old  primitive  Aryans.  This  is  proven  by  the  fact  that,  in  the  Vedic
period,  their  women  were  not  placed  apart  from  men  in  penetralia,  or
Zenanas.  This  seclusion  began  when  the  Mahommedans — the  next
heirs  to  Hebrew  symbolism,  after  Christian  ecclesiasticism — had  con-
quered the  land  and  gradually  enforced  their  ways  and  customs  upon
the  Hindus.  The  pre-  and  post- Vedic  woman  was  as  free  as  man ;  and
no  impure  terrestrial  thought  was  ever  mixed  with  the  religious
symbology  of  the  earl}'  Aryans.  The  idea  and  application  are  purely
Semitic.  This  is  corroborated  by  the  writer  of  the  said  intensely
learned  and  Kabalistic  revelation,  when  he  closes  the  above-quoted
passages  by  adding:

If  to  these  organs  as  symbols  of  creative  cosmic  agencies  the  idea  of  the  origin  of
measures  as  well  as  of  time-periods  can  be  attached,  then  indeed,  in  the  con-
structions of  the  Temples  as  Dwellings  of  Deity,  or  of  Jehovah,  that  part  designated
as  the  Holy  of  Holies,  or  the  Most  Holy  Place,  should  borrow  its  title  from  the
recognized  sacredness  of  the  generative  organs,  considered  as  symbols  of  measures
as  well  as  of  creative  cause.  With  the  ancient  wise,  there  was  no  ?ianie,  and  no  idea,
and  no  symbol  of  a  First  Cause.

Most  decidedly  not.  Rather  never  give  a  thought  to  it  and  leave  it
for  ever  nameless,  as  the  early  Pantheists  did,  than  degrade  the  sacred-
ness of  that  Ideal  of  Ideals,  by  dragging  down  its  symbols  into  such

*  Surely  the  words  of  the  old  Initiate  into  \.\i& primitive  Mysteries  of  Christianity,  "Know  ye  not  ye
are  the  Temple  of  God"  (i  Corinth,  iii.  i6),  could  not  be  applied  in  this  sense  to  men;  though  the
meaning  was,  undeniably,  so  stated,  in  the  minds  of  the  Hebrew  compilers  of  the  Old  Testament.
And  here  is  the  abyss  that  lies  between  the  symbolism  of  the  New  Testament  and  the  Jewish  canon.
This  gulf  would  have  remained,  and  have  ever  widened,  had  not  Christianity,  especially  and  most
glaringly  the  I^atin  Church,  thrown  a  bridge  over  it.  Modern  Popery  has  now  spanned  it  entirely,
by  its  dogma  of  the  two  immaculate  conceptions,  and  the  anthropomorphic  and,  at  the  same  time
idolatrous,  character  it  has  conferred  upon  the  Mother  of  its  God.

t  It  was  so  carried  only  in  the  Hebrew  Bible,  and  its  servile  copjdst,  Christian  theology.


BRAHMAN   AND   SEMITE.  4II

anthropomorphic  forms!  Here  again  one  perceives  the  immense
chasm  between  Aryan  and  Semitic  religious  thought,  the  two  opposite
poles,  Sincerity  and  Concealment.  With  the  Brahmans,  who  have
never  invested  the  natural  procreative  functions  of  mankind  with  an
"  original  sin  "  element,  it  is  a  religious  duty  to  have  a  son.  A  Brah-
man, in  days  of  old,  having  accomplished  his  mission  of  human  creator,
retired  to  the  jungle,  and  passed  the  rest  of  his  days  in  religious  medi-
tation. He  had  accomplished  his  duty  to  nature,  as  mortal  man  and
its  co-worker,  and  henceforth  gave  all  his  thoughts  to  the  spiritual  and
immortal  portion  of  himself,  regarding  the  terrestrial  as  a  mere  illusion,
an  evanescent  dream — which,  indeed  it  is.  With  the  Semite,  it  was
different.  He  invented  a  temptation  of  flesh  in  a  garden  of  Eden,  and
showed  his  God — esoterically,  the  Tempter  and  the  Ruler  of  Nature —
cursing  for  ever  an  act,  which  was  in  the  logical  programme  of  that
Nature.*  All  this  exoterically,  as  in  the  cloak  and  dead-letter  of  Genesis
and  the  rest.  At  the  same  time,  esoterically,  he  regarded  the  supposed
sin  2indfall  as  an  act  so  sacred,  as  to  choose  the  organ,  the  perpetrator
of  the  original  sin,  as  the  fittest  and  most  sacred  symbol  to  represent
that  God,  who  is  shown  as  branding  its  entering  into  function  as  dis-
obedience and  everlasting  sin!

Who  can  ever  fathom  the  paradoxical  depths  of  the  Semitic  mind!
And  this  paradoxical  element,  minus  its  innermost  significance,  has
now  passed  entirely  into  Christian  theology  and  dogma!

Whether  the  early  Fathers  of  the  Church  knew  the  esoteric  meaning
of  the  Hebrew  Testament,  or  whether  only  a  few  of  them  were  aware  of
it,  while  the  others  remained  ignorant  of  the  secret,  is  for  posterity  to
decide.  One  thing,  at  any  rate,  is  certain.  As  the  Esotericism  of  the
New  Testamejit  agrees  perfectly  with  that  of  the  Hebrew  Mosaic  Books;
and  since,  at  the  same  time,  a  number  of  purely  Egyptian  symbols  and
Pagan  dogmas  in  general — the  Trinity,  for  example — have  been  copied
by,  and  incorporated  into,  the  Synoptics  and  St.  John,  it  becomes
evident  that  the  identity  of  those  symbols  was  known  to  the  writers  of
the  New  Testament,  whoever  they  may  have  been,  They  must  have  been
also  aware  of  the  priority  of  the  Egyptian  Esotericism,  since  they  have
adopted  several  symbols  which  typify  purely  Egyptian  conceptions  and
beliefs,  in  their  outward  and  inward  meaning,  and  which  are  not  to  be

•  The  same  idea  is  carried  out  exoterically  in  the  incidents  of  the  exodus  from  Egypt.  The  Lord
God  tempts  Pharaoh  sorely,  and  "plagues  him  with  great  plagues,"  lest  the  king  should  escape
punishment,  and  thus  afford  no  pretext  for  one  more  triumph  to  his  "chosen  people."


412  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

found  in  the  Jewish  Canon.  One  of  these  is  the  water-lily  in  the  hands
of  the  Archangel,  in  the  early  representations  of  his  appearance  to  the
Virgin  Mary;  and  these  symbolical  images  are  preserved  to  this  day  in
the  iconography  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  Churches.  Thus  Water,
Fire  and  the  Cross,  as  well  as  the  Dove,  the  lyamb  and  other  Sacred
Animals,  with  all  their  combinations,  esoterically  yield  an  identical
meaning,  and  must  have  been  accepted  as  an  improvement  upon
Judaism  pure  and  simple.

For  the  lyOtus  and  Water  are  among  the  oldest  symbols,  and  in  their

A

origin  are  purely  Aryan,  though  they  became  common  property  during
the  branching  off  of  the  Fifth  Race.  To  give  an  example;  letters,  as
well  as  numbers,  were  all  mj^stic,  whether  in  combination,  or  taken
separately.  The  most  sacred  of  all  is  the  letter  M.  It  is  both  feminine
and  masculine,  or  androgyne,  and  is  made  to  symbolize  Water  in  its
origin,  the  Great  Deep.  It  is  a  mystic  letter  in  all  languages,  Eastern
and  Western,  and  stands  as  a  glyph  for  the  waves,  thus  AAA-  In  the
Aryan  Esotericism,  as  in  the  Semitic,  this  letter  has  always  stood  for
the  Waters.  In  Sanskrit,  for  instance,  Makara,  the  tenth  sign  of  the
Zodiac,  means  a  Crocodile,  or  rather  an  aquatic  monster  associated
always  with  Water.  The  letter  Ma  is  equivalent  to,  and  corresponds
with,  the  number  5,  which  is  composed  of  a  Binarj^  the  symbol  of  the
two  sexes  separated,  and  of  the  Ternary,  the  symbol  of  the  Third  Life,
the  progeny  of  the  Binary.  This,  again,  is  often  symbolized  by  a
Pentagon,  the  latter  being  a  sacred  sign,  a  divine  Monogram.  Maitreya
is  the  secret  name  of  the  Fifth  Buddha,  and  the  Kalki  Avatara  of  the
Brahmans,  the  last  Messiah  who  will  come  at  the  culmination  of  the
Great  Cycle.  It  is  also  the  initial  letter  of  the  Greek  Metis,  or  Divine
Wisdom;  of  Mimra,  the  Word,  or  Logos;  and  of  Mithras,  the  Mihr,  the
Monad  Mystery.  All  these  are  born  in,  and  from,  the  Great  Deep,  and
are  the  Sons  of  Maj^a,  the  "Mother";  in  Eg3Tt»  Moot;  in  Greece,
Minerva,  Divine  Wisdom;  of  Mary,  or  Miriam,  Myrrha,  etc.,  the  Mother
of  the  Christian  Logos ;  and  of  Maya,  the  Mother  of  Buddha.  Mad-
hava  and  Madhavi  are  the  titles  of  the  most  important  Gods  and
Goddesses  of  the  Hindu  Pantheon.  Finally,  Mandala  is,  in  Sanskrit,
a  "Circle,"  or  an  Orb,  also  the  ten  divisions  of  the  Rig  Veda.  The
most  sacred  names  in  India  generally  begin  with  this  letter,  from
Mahat,  the  first  manifested  Intellect,  and  Mandara,  the  great  mountain
used  by  the  Gods  to  churn  the  Ocean,  down  to  Mandakini,  the  heavenly
Ganga,  or  Ganges,  Manu,  etc.,  etc.


THE   LETTER   M.  413

Will  this  be  called  a  coincidence?  A  strange  one  is  it  then,  indeed,
when  we  see  even  Moses,  found  in  the  Water  of  the  Nile,  with  the
symbolical  consonant  in  his  name.  And  Pharaoh's  daughter  "called
his  name  Moses;  and  she  said,  Because  I  drew  him  out  of  the  Water."*
Besides  which,  the  Hebrew  sacred  name  of  God,  applied  to  this  letter
M,  is  Meborach,  the  "Holy"  or  the  "Blessed,"  and  the  name  for  the
Water  of  the  Flood  is  Mbul.  A  reminder  of  the  "Three  Maries"  at
the  Crucifixion,  and  their  connection  with  Mare,  the  Sea,  or  Water,
may  close  these  examples.  This  is  why,  in  Judaism  and  Christianity,
the  Messiah  is  always  connected  with  Water,  Baptism;  and  also  with
the  Fishes,  the  sign  of  the  Zodiac  called  Minam  in  Sanskrit,  and  even
with  the  Matsya  (Fish)  Avatara,  and  the  IvOtus,  the  symbol  of  the
womb,  or  with  the  water-lily,  which  has  the  same  signification.

In  the  relics  of  ancient  Egypt,  the  greater  the  antiquit}^  of  the  votive
symbols  and  emblems  of  the  objects  exhumed,  the  oftener  are  L^otus-
flowers  and  Water  found  in  connection  with  the  Solar  Gods.  The  God
Khnoom,  the  Moist  Power,  or  Water,  as  Tliales  taught,  being  the  prin-
ciple of  all  things,  sits  on  a  throne  enshrined  in  a  Lotus.  The  God
Bes  stands  on  a  I^otus,  ready  to  devour  his  progeny.  Thot,  the  God  of
Mystery  and  Wisdom,  the  sacred  Scribe  of  Araenti,  wearing  the  solar
disk  as  head  gear,  sits  with  a  bull's  head — the  sacred  bull  of  Mendes
being  a  form  of  Thot — and  a  human  body,  on  a  full  blown  I,otus.
Finally,  it  is  the  Goddess  Hiqit,  under  her  shape  of  a  frog,  who  rests
on  the  lyOtus,  thus  showing  her  connection  with  water.  And  it  is  from
the  unpoetical  shape  of  this  frog-symbol,  undeniably  the  glyph  of  the
most  ancient  of  the  Egyptian  Deities,  that  the  Egyptologists  have  been
vainly  trying  to  unravel  the  mystery  and  functions  of  the  Goddess.  Its
adoption  in  the  Church,  by  the  early  Christians,  shows  that  they  knew
it  better  than  our  modern  Orientalists.  The  "frog  or  toad  Goddess"
was  one  of  the  chief  Cosmic  Deities  connected  with  Creation,  on
account  of  this  animal's  amphibious  nature,  and  chiefly  because  of  its
apparent  resurrection,  after  long  ages  of  solitary  life,  enshrined  in  old
walls,  in  rocks,  etc.  She  not  only  participated  in  the  organization  of
the  World,  together  with  Khnoom,  but  was  also  connected  with  the
dogma  of  resurrection. \    There  must  have  been  some  very  profound  and

*  Exodus,  ii.  10.  Eveu  to  the  seven  daughters  of  the  Midianitc  priest,  who  came  to  draw  water,  and
whom  Moses  helped  to  water  their  flock;  for  which  service  the  Midian  g'ives  Moses  his  daughter
Zipporah,  or  Sippara,  tlie  shining  Wave,  as  wife.  [Exod.  ii.  16-21.)  All  this  has  the  same  secret
meaning.

t  With  the  Egyptians  it  was  the  resurrection  in  rebirth,  after  3,000  years  of  purification,  either  in
Devachan  or  the  "  Fields  of  Bliss."


414  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

sacred  meaning  attached  to  this  symbol,  since,  notwithstanding  the  risk
of  being  charged  with  a  disgusting  form  of  zoolatry,  the  early  Egyptian
Christians  adopted  it  in  their  Churches.  A  frog  or  toad,  enshrined  in
a  IvOtus-flower,  or  simply  without  the  latter  emblem,  was  the  form
chosen  for  the  Church-lamps,  on  which  were  engraved  the  words,
""Eyw  diu.  dvao-Tcto-is" — I  am  the  resurrection.*  These  frog-Goddesses
are  also  found  on  all  the  mummies.

*  Such  "frog-Goddesses"  may  be  seen  at  Boulak,  in  the  Cairo  Museum.  For  the  statement  about
the  Church-lamps  and  inscriptions,  the  learned  ex-director  of  the  Boulak  Museum,  M.  Gaston
Maspero,  must  be  held  responsible.     (See  his  Guide  au  Muse'e  de  Boulaq,  p.  146.)


SECTION  IX.

The  Moon;  Deus  Lunus,  Phcebe.


This  archaic  symbol  is  the  most  poetical  of  all  symbols,  as  also  the
most  philosophical.  The  ancient  Greeks  brought  it  into  prominence,
and  the  modern  poets  have  worn  it  threadbare.  The  Queen  of  Night,
riding  in  the  majesty  of  her  peerless  light  in  Heaven,  throwing  all,
even  Hesperus,  into  darkness,  and  spreading  her  silver  mantle  over
the  whole  Sidereal  World,  has  ever  been  a  favourite  theme  with  all  the
poets  of  Christendom,  from  Milton  and  Shakespeare  down  to  the  latest
versifier.  But  the  refulgent  lamp  of  night,  with  her  suite  of  stars
unnumbered,  spoke  only  to  the  imagination  of  the  profane.  Until
lately.  Religion  and  Science  had  nought  to  do  with  the  beautiful
mythos.     Yet,  the  cold  chaste  Moon,  she,  who,  in  the  words  of  Shelley:

.     .     .     .     makes  all  beautiful  on  which  she  smiles,

That  wandering  shrine  of  soft,  yet  icy  flame

Which  ever  is  transformed,  yet  still  the  same.

And  warms  not,  but  illumes

stands  in  closer  relations  to  Earth  than  any  other  sidereal  orb.  The
Sun  is  the  Giver  of  Life  to  the  whole  Planetary  System ;  the  Moon  is
the  Giver  of  Life  to  our  Globe;  and  the  early  races  understood  and
knew  it,  even  in  their  infancy.  She  is  the  Queen,  and  she  is  the  King.
She  was  King  Soma  before  she  became  transformed  into  Phoebe  and
the  chaste  Diana.  She  is  preeminently  the  Deity  of  the  Christians,
through  the  Mosaic  and  Kabalistic  Jews,  though  the  civilized  w^orld
may  have  remained  ignorant  of  the  fact  for  long  ages;  in  fact,  ever
since  the  last  initiated  Father  of  the  Church  died,  carrying  with  him
into  his  grave  the  secrets  of  the  Pagan  Temples.  For  such  Fathers
as  Origen  or  Clemens  Alexandrinus,  the  Moon  was  Jehovah's  living
symbol;  the  Giver  of  Life  and  the  Giver  of  Death,  the  Disposer  of
Being— in  our  World.  For,  if  Artemis  was  Luna  in  Heaven,  and,  with
the  Greeks,  Diana  on  Earth,  who  presided  over  child-birth  and  life;


4l6  THK  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

with  the  Egyptians,  she  was  Hekat  (Hecate)  in  Hell,  the  Goddess  of
Death,  who  ruled  over  magic  and  enchantments.  More  than  this;  as
the  personified  Moon,  whose  phenomena  are  triadic,  Diana-Hecate-
lyUna  is  the  three  hi  one.  For  she  is  Diva  trifonms,  tergemina,  triceps,
three  heads  on  one  neck,*  like  Brahma- Vishnu-Shiva.  Hence  she  is
the  prototype  of  our  Trinity,  which  has  not  always  been  entirely  male.
The  number  seven,  so  prominent  in  the  Bible,  so  sacred  in  the  seventh
da}^  or  Sabbath,  came  to  the  Jews  from  antiquity,  deriving  its  origin
from  the  four-fold  number  7  contained  in  the  28  days  of  the  lunar
month,  each  septenary  portion  thereof  being  typified  by  one  quarter  of
the  Moon.

It  is  worth  the  trouble  of  presenting,  in  this  work,  a  bird's-eye  view
of  the  origin  and  development  of  the  lunar  myth  and  worship,  in
historical  antiquity,  on  our  side  of  the  globe.  Its  earlier  origin  is
untraceable  by  exact  Science,  which  rejects  all  tradition;  while  for
Theology,  which,  under  the  guidance  of  the  crafty  Popes,  has  put  a
brand  on  every  fragment  of  literature  that  does  not  bear  the  imprimatur
of  the  Church  of  Rome,  its  archaic  history  is  a  sealed  book.  Whether
the  Egyptian  or  the  Aryan  Hindu  religious  philosophy  is  the  more
ancient — the  Secret  Doctrine  says  it  is  the  latter — does  not  much  mat-
ter, in  this  instance,  as  the  Lunar  and  Solar  "worship"  are  the  most
ancient  in  the  world.  Both  have  survived,  and  prevail  to  this  day
throughout  the  whole  world;  with  some  openly,  with  others — as,  for
instance,  in  Christian  symbology — secretly.  The  cat,  a  lunar  symbol,
was  sacred  to  Isis,  who  was  the  Moon  in  one  sense,  just  as  Osiris  was
the  Sun,  and  is  often  seen  on  the  top  of  the  Sistrum  in  the  hand  of  the
Goddess.  This  animal  was  held  in  great  veneration  in  the  city  of
Bubastis,  which  went  into  deep  mourning  on  the  death  of  the  sacred
cats,  because  Isis,  as  the  Moon,  was  particularly  worshipped  in  that
city  of  mysteries.  The  astronomical  symbolism  connected  with  it  has
already  been  given  in  Section  I,  and  no  one  has  better  described  it
than  Mr.  Gerald  Massey,  in  his  Lectures  and  in  The  Natural  GeJiesis.
The  eye  of  the  cat,  it  is  said,  seems  to  follow  the  lunar  phases  in  their
growth  and  decline,  and  its  orbs  shine  like  two  stars  in  the  darkness  of
night.  Hence  the  mythological  allegory  which  shows  Diana  hiding  in
the  Moon,  under  the  shape  of  a  cat,  when  she  was  seeking,  in  company
with  other  Deities,  to  escaj^e  the  pursuit  of  Typhon,  as  related  in  the

*  The  Goddess  TpLU,opcf>os  in  the  statuary  of  Alcamenes.


THE  CHRISTIAN   I^UNAR   GOD,  417

Metamorphoses  of  Ovid.  The  Moon,  in  Egypt,  was  both  the  "Eye  of
Horas"  and  the  "Eye  of  Osiris,"  the  Sun.

The  same  with  the  Cynocephalus.  The  dog-headed  ape  was  a  glyph
to  symbolize  the  Sun  and  Moon,  in  turn,  though  the  Cynocephalus  is
really  more  a  Hermetic  than  a  religious  symbol.  For  it  is  the  hieroglyph
of  Mercury,  the  planet,  and  of  the  Mercury  of  the  Alchemical  philo-
sophers, who  say  that:

Mercury  has  to  be  ever  7iear  Isis,  as  her  minister,  for  without  Mercury  neither
Isis  nor  Osiris  can  accomplish  anything  in  the  Great  Work.

The  Cynocephalus,  whenever  represented  with  the  caduceus,  the
crescent,  or  the  lotus,  is  a  glyph  of  the  "philosophical"  Mercury;  but
when  seen  with  a  reed,  or  a  roll  of  parchment,  he  stands  for  Hermes,
the  secretary  and  adviser  of  Isis,  as  Hanumana  filled  the  same  office
with  Rama.

Though  the  regular  Sun-Worshippers,  the  Parsis,  are  few,  yet  not
only  is  the  bulk  of  the  Hindu  mythology  and  history  based  upon,  and
interblended  with,  these  two  worships,  but  so  is  even  the  Christian
religion  itself.  From  their  origin  down  to  our  modern  day,  it  has
coloured  the  theologies  of  both  the  Roman  Catholic  and  Protestant
Churches.  Indeed,  the  difference  between  the  Aryan  Hindu  and  the
Aryan  European  faiths  is  very  small,  if  only  the  fundamental  ideas  of
both  are  taken  into  consideration.  Hindus  are  proud  of  calling  them-
selves Siiryavanshas  and  Chandravanshas,  of  the  Solar  and  Lunar
Dynasties.  The  Christians  pretend  to  regard  this  as  idolatry,  and  yet
they  adhere  to  a  religion  entirely  based  upon  Solar  and  Lunar  worship.
It  is  vain  and  useless  for  the  Protestants  to  exclaim  against  the  Roman
Catholics  for  their  "Mariolatry,"  based  on  the  ancient  cult  of  lunar
Goddesses,  when  they  themselves  worship  Jehovah,  preeminently  a
lunar  God ;  and  when  both  Churches  have  accepted  in  their  theologies
the  ►S^^^z-Christ  and  the  Lunar  Trinity.

What  is  known  of  Chaldean  Moon- Worship,  of  the  Babylonian  God,

Sin,  called  by  the  Greeks  Deus  Lunus,  is  very  little;  and  that  little  is

apt  to  mislead  the  profane  student,  who  fails  to   grasp   the   esoteric

significance   of  the    symbols.       As   popularly   known   to   the    ancient

profane  philosophers  and  writers — for  those  who  were  initiated  were

pledged  to  silence — the  Chaldeans  were  the  worshippers  of  the  Moon

under  her,  and  his,  various  names,  just  as  were  the  Jews,  who  came

after  them.

In   the   unpublished    MS.   on    the   Art-Speech,    already    mentioned,

28


41 8  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

giving  a  key  to  the  formation  of  the  ancient  symbolical  laneruage.  a
logical  raiso?i  d^etre  is  brought  forward  for  this  double  worship.  It  is
written  by  a  wonderfully  well-informed  and  acute  scholar  and  Mystic,
who  gives  it  in  the  comprehensive  form  of  a  hypothesis.  The  latter,
however,  forcibly  becomes  a  proven  fact  in  the  history  of  religious
evolution  in  human  thought,  to  anyone  who  has  ever  had  a  glimpse
into  the  secret  of  ancient  symbology.     Thus,  he  says :

Oue  of  the  first  occupations  among  men,  connected  with  those  of  actual  necessity,
would  be  the  perception  of  time  periods,*  marked  on  the  vaulted  arch  of  the
heavens,  sprung  and  rising  over  the  level  floor  of  the  horizon,  or  the  plain  of  still
water.  These  would  come  to  be  marked  as  those  of  day  and  night,  of  the  phases
of  the  moon,  of  its  stellar  or  synodic  revolutions,  and  of  the  period  of  the  solar  year
with  recurrence  of  the  seasons,  and  with  the  application  to  such  periods  of  the
natural  measure  of  day  or  night,  or  of  the  day  divided  into  the  light  and  the  dark.
It  would  also  be  discovered  that  there  was  a  longest  and  shortest  solar  day,  and  two
solar  days  of  equal  day  and  night,  within  the  period  of  the  solar  year;  and  the
points  in  the  year  of  these  could  be  marked  with  the  greatest  precision  in  the  starry
groups  of  the  heavens  or  the  constellations,  subject  to  that  retrograde  movement
thereof,  which  in  time  would  require  a  correction  by  intercalation,  as  was  the  case
in  the  description  of  the  Flood,  where  correction  of  150  days  was  made  for  a  period
of  600  years,  during  which  confusion  of  landmarks  had  increased.  .  .  .  This
would  naturally  come  to  pass  with  all  races  in  all  time ;  and  such  knowledge  must
be  taken  to  have  been  inherent  in  the  human  race,  prior  to  what  we  call  the  historic
period  as  during  the  same.

On  this  basis,  the  author  seeks  for  some  natural  physical  function,
possessed  in  common  by  the  human  race,  and  connected  with  the
periodical  manifestations,  such  that  "the  connection  between  the  two
kinds  of  phenomena  .  .  .  became  fixed  in  common  or  popular
usage."     He  finds  it  in :

{a)  The  feminine  physiological  phenomena  every  lunar  month  of  28  days,  or  4
weeks  of  7  days  each,  so  that  13  occurrences  of  the  period  should  happen  in  364
days,  which  is  the  solar  week-year  of  52  weeks  of  7  days  each,  {b)  The  quickening
of  the  foetus  is  marked  by  a  period  of  126  days,  or  18  weeks  of  7  days  each,  {c)  That
period  which  is  called  "the  period  of  viability"  is  one  of  210  days,  or  30  weeks  of
7  days  each,  {d)  The  period  of  parturition  is  accomplished  in  280  days,  or  a  period
of  40  weeks  of  7  days  each,  or  10  lunar  months  of  28  days  each,  or  of  9  calendar
months  of  31  days  each,  counting  on  the  royal  arch  of  heavens  for  the  measure  of
the  period  of  traverse  from  the  darkness  of  the  womb  to  the  light  and  glory  of
conscious  existence,  that  continuing  inscrutable  mystery  and  miracle.    .     .     .     Thus

*  Ancient  Mythology  includes  ancient  Astronomy  as  well  as  Astrology.  The  planets  were  the
hands  pointing-  out,  on  the  dial  of  our  Solar  System,  the  hours  of  certain  periodical  events.  Thus,
Mercury  was  the  messenger,  appointed  to  keep  time  during  the  daily  solar  and  lunar  phenomena,
and  was  otherwise  connected  with  the  God  and  Goddess  of  lyight.


THE   PHYSIOLOGICAL  KEY  TO  THE   MOON  SYMBOL.  419

the  observed  periods  of  time  marking  the  workings  of  the  birth  function  would
naturally  become  a  basis  of  astronomical  calculation.  .  .  .  We  may  almost
affirm  .  .  .  that  this  was  the  mode  of  reckoning  among  all  nations,  either  inde-
pendently, or  intermediately  and  indirectly  by  tuition.  It  was  the  mode  with  the
Hebrews,  for  even  to-day  they  calculate  the  calendar  by  means  of  the  354  and  355  of
the  lunar  year,  and  we  possess  a  special  evidence  that  it  was  the  mode  with  the
ancient  Egyptians,  as  to  which  this  is  the  proof:

The  basic  idea  underlying  the  religious  philosophy  of  the  Hebrews  was  that
God  contained  all  things  within  himself,*  and  that  man  was  his  image,  man  in-
cluding woman The  place  of  the  man  and  woman  with  the  Hebrews

was  among  the  Egyptians  occupied  by  the  bull  and  the  cow,  sacred  to  Osiris  and
Isis,t  who  were  represented,  respectively,  by  a  man  having  a  bull's  head,  and  a
woman  having  the  head  of  a  cow;  which  symbols  were  worshipped.  Notoriously
Osiris  was  the  Sun  and  the  river  Nile,  the  tropical  year  of  365  days,  which  number
is  the  value  of  the  word  Neilos,  and  the  bull,  as  he  was  also  the  principle  of  fire
and  of  life-giving  force;  while  Isis  was  the  moon,  the  bed  of  the  river  Nile,  or  the
Mother  Earth,  for  the  parturient  energies  of  which  water  was  a  necessity,  the  lunar
year  of  354-364  days,  the  time-maker  of  the  periods  of  gestation,  and  the  cow
marked  by,  or  with,  the  crescent  new  moon

But  the  use  of  the  cow  of  the  Egyptians  for  the  woman  of  the  Hebrews  was  not
intended  as  of  any  radical  difference  of  signification,  but  a  concurrence  in  the
teaching,  intended,  and  merely  as  the  substitution  of  a  symbol  of  common  import,
which  was  this,  viz.,  the  period  of  parturition  with  the  cow  and  the  woman  was
held  to  be  the  same,  or  280  days,  or  ten  lunar  months  of  4  weeks  each.  And  in  this
period  consisted  the  essential  value  of  this  animal  symbol,  whose  mark  was  that  of
the  crescent  moon.:}:  .  .  .  These  parturient  and  natural  periods  are  found  to
have  been  subjects  of  symbolism  all  over  the  world.  They  were  thus  used  by  the
Hindus,  and  are  found  to  be  most  plainly  set  forth  by  the  ancient  Americans,  in  the
Richardson  and  Gest  tablets,  in  the  Palenque  Cross  and  elsewhere,  and  manifestly
lay  at  the  base  of  the  formation  of  the  calendar  forms  of  the  Mayas  of  Yucatan,  the
Hindus,  the  Assyrians,  and  the  ancient  Babylonians,  as  well  as  the  Egyptians  and
old  Hebrews.  The  natural  symbols  .  .  would  be  either  the  phallus  or  the
phallus  and  yoni,  .  .  .  male  and  female.  Indeed,  the  words  translated  by  the
generalizing  terms  male  and  female,  in  the  27th  verse  of  the  ist  chapter  of  Genesis
are  .  .  .  ja^rr  and  «'ca6z/aA  or,  literally,  phallus  and  yoni.  §  While  the  represen-
tation of  the  phallic  emblems  would  barely  indicate  the  genital  members  of  the
human  body,  when  their  functions  and  the  development  of  the  seed-vesicles
emanating  from  them  were  considered,  there  would  come  into  indication  a  mode
of  measures  of  lunar  time,  and  through  lunar,  of  solar  time.

This  is  the  physiological  or  anthropological  key  to  the  Moon  symbol.

•  A  caricatured  and  dwarfed  Vedantin  notion  of  Parabrahraan  containing  within  itself  the  whole
Universe,  as  being  that  boundless  Universe  itself,  and  nothing  existing  outside  0/  itself.

+  Just  as  they  are  to  this  day  in  India  ;  the  bull  of  Shiva,  and  the  cov?  representing  several  Sbaktis
or  Goddesses.

t  Hence  the  worship  of  the  Moon  by  the  Hebrews.

}  "Male  and  female,  created  he  them."


420  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

The  key  that  opens  the  mystery  of  Theogony,  or  the  evolution  of  the
manvantaric  Gods,  is  more  complicated,  and  has  nothing  phallic  in  it.
There,  all  is  mystical  and  divine.  But  the  Jews,  beyond  connecting
Jehovah  directly  with  the  Moon  as  a  generative  God,  preferred  to
ignore  the  higher  Hierarchies,  and  have  made  their  Patriarchs  of  some
of  these  zodiacal  constellations  and  planetary  Gods,  thus  euhemerizing
the  purely  theosophical  idea  and  dragging  it  down  to  the  level  of
sinful  humanity.  The  MS.,  from  which  the  above  is  extracted,  ex-
plains very  clearly  to  what  Hierarchy  of  Gods  Jehovah  belonged,  and
who  this  Jewish  God  was ;  for  it  shows,  in  clear  language,  that  which
the  writer  has  always  insisted  upon ,  namely,  that  the  God  with  which
the  Christians  have  burdened  themselves,  was  no  better  than  the  lunar
symbol  of  the  reproductive  or  generative  faculty  in  Nature.  They
have  ever  ignored  even  the  Hebrew  secret  God  of  the  Kabalists,  Ain
Suph,  a  conception  as  grand  as  Parabrahman  in  the  earliest  Kabalistic
and  mystical  ideas.  But  it  is  not  the  Kabalah  of  Rosenroth  that  can
ever  give  the  true  original  teachings  of  Shimeon  Ben  Yochai,  which
were  as  metaphysical  and  philosophical  as  any  could  be.  And  ho-w'
many  are  there  among  the  students  of  the  Kabalah  who  know  anything
of  them  except  in  their  distorted  lyatin  translations?  Let  us  glance  at
the  idea  which  led  the  ancient  Jews  to  adopt  a  substitute  for  the  Ever-
Unknowable,  and  which  has  misled  the  Christians  into  mistaking  the
substitute  for  the  reality.

If  to  these  organs  [phallus  and  yoni]  as  symbols  of  creative  cosmic  agencies  the
idea  of  .  .  .  time  periods  can  be  attached,  then,  indeed,  in  the  construction  of
Temples  as  Dwellings  of  Deity,  or  of  Jehovah,  that  part  designated  as  the  Holy  of
Holies,  or  The  Most  Holy  Place,  should  borrow  its  title  from  the  recognized  sacred-
ness  of  the  generative  organs,  considered  as  symbols  of  measures  as  well  as  of
creative  cause.

"With  the  ancient  Wise,  there  was  no  name,  and  no  idea,  and  no  symbol,  of  a
First  Cause.*  With  the  Hebrews,  the  indirect  conception  of  such  was  couched  in  a
term  of  negation  of  comprehension,  viz.,  Ain  Suph,  or  the  Without  Bounds.  But
the  symbol  of  its  first  comprehensible  manifestation  was  the  conception  of  a  circle
with  its  diameter  line,  to  at  once  carry  a  geometric,  phallic,  and  astronomic  idea;
...  for  the  one  takes  its  birth  from  the  o,  or  the  circle,  without  which  it  could
not  be,  and  from  the  i,  or  primal  one,  spring  the  9  digits,  and,  geometrically,  all
plane  shapes.  So  in  Kabalah  this  circle,  with  its  diameter  line,  is  the  picture  of  the
10  Sephiroth,  or  Emanations,  composing  the  Adam  Kadmon,  or  the  Archetypal  Man,

*  Because  it  was  too  sacred.  It  is  referred  to  as  That  in  the  Vedas.  It  is  the  "Eternal  Cause,"
and  cannot,  therefore,  be  spoken  of  as  a  "First  Cause,"  a  term  implying  the  absence  of  Cause,  at
one  time.


THE    "DOUBLE  WOMB."  42I

the  creative  origin  of  all  things.  .  .  .  This  idea  of  connecting  the  picture  of
the  circle  and  its  diameter  line,  that  is,  the  number  10,  with  the  signification  of  the
reproductive  organs,  and  the  Most  Holy  Place  .  .  .  was  carried  out  construc-
tively in  the  King's  Chamber,  or  Holy  of  Holies,  of  the  great  Pyramid,  in  the
Tabernacle  of  Moses,  and  in  the  Holy  of  Holies  of  the  Temple  of  Solomon.  .  .  .
It  is  the  picture  of  a  double  womb,  for  in  Hebrew  the  letter  HS  (J^)  is  at  the  same
time  the  number  5,  and  the  symbol  of  the  womb,  and  twice  5  is  10,  or  the  phallic
number.

This  "double  womb"  also  shows  the  duality  of  the  idea  carried  from
the  highest  or  spiritual  down  to  the  lowest  or  terrestrial  plane;  and
limited  by  the  Jews  to  the  latter.  With  them,  therefore,  the  number
seven  has  acquired  the  most  prominent  place  in  their  exoteric  religion,
a  cult  of  external  forms  and  empty  rituals;  take,  for  instance,  their
Sabbath,  the  seventh  day  sacred  to  their  Deity,  the  Moon,  symbolical
of  the  generative  Jehovah.  But,  with  other  nations,  the  number  seven
was  typical  of  theogonic  evolution,  of  Cycles,  Cosmic  Planes,  and  the
Seven  Forces  and  Occult  Powers  in  Kosmos,  as  a  Boundless  Whole,
whose  first  upper  Triangle  was  unreachable  to  the  finite  intellect  of
man.  While  other  nations,  therefore,  busied  themselves,  in  their
forcible  limitation  of  Kosmos  in  Space  and  Time,  only  with  its  sep-
tenary^ manifested  plane,  the  Jews  centred  this  number  solely  in  the
Moon,  and  based  all  their  sacred  calculations  thereupon.  Hence  we
find  the  thoughtful  author  of  the  MS.  just  quoted,  remarking,  in  refer-
ence to  the  metrology  of  the  Jews,  that:

If  20,612  be  multiplied  by  \,  the  product  will  afford  a  base  for  the  ascertainment  of
the  mean  revohition  of  the  moon :  and  if  this  product  be  again  multiplied  by  f,  this
continued  product  will  aflFord  a  base  for  finding  the  exact  period  of  the  mean  solar
year,  .  .  .  this  form  .  .  .  becoming,  for  the  finding  of  astronomical  periods
of  time,  of  very  great  service.

This  double  number — male  and  female — is  symbolized  also  in  some
well-known  idols ;  for  instance :

Ardhanari-Ishvara,  the  Isis  of  the  Hindus,  Eridanus,  or  Ardan,  or  the  Hebrew
Jordan,  or  source  of  descent.     She  is  standing  on  a  lotus-leaf  floating  on  the  water.
But  the  signification  is,  that  it  is  androgyne  or  hermaphrodite,  that  is  phallus  and
yoni   combined,    the   number   10,    the   Hebrew  letter    Yod  (->),   the  containment  of
fehovah.     She,  or  rather  she-he,  gives  the  minutes  of  the  same  circle  of  360  degrees.

"Jehovah,"  in  its  best  aspect  is  Binah,  the  "Upper  mediating  Mother,
the  Great  Sea  or  Holy  Spirit,"  and  therefore  rather  a  synonym  of
Mary,  the  Mother  of  Jesus,  than  of  his  Father;  that  "Mother,  being
the  I^atin  Mare,"  the  Sea,  is  here,  also,  Venus,  the  Stella  del  Mare,  or
"Star  of  the  Sea."


422  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

The  ancestors  of  the  mysterious  Akkadians — the  Chandravanshas  or
Indovanshas,  the  Lunar  Kings,  whom  tradition  shows  reigning  at
Prayaga  (Allahabad),  ages  before  our  era — had  come  from  India,  and
brought  with  them  the  worship  of  their  forefathers,  of  Soma,  and  his
son  Budha,  which  afterwards  became  that  of  the  Chaldeans.  Yet  such
adoration,  apart  from  popular  Astrolatry  and  Heliolatr}^  was  in  no
sense  idolatry.  No  more,  at  any  rate,  than  the  modern  Roman  Catholic
symbolism  which  connects  the  Virgin  Mary,  the  Magna  Mater  of  the
Syrians  and  Greeks,  with  the  Moon.

Of  this  worship,  the  most  pious  Roman  Catholics  feel  quite  proud,
and  loudly  confess  to  it.  In  a  Memoire  to  the  French  Academy,  the
Marquis  De  Mirville  says:

It  is  only  natural  that,  as  an  unconscious  prophecy,  Ammou-Ra  should  be  his
mother's  husband,  since  the  Magna  Mater  of  the  Christians  is  precisely  the  spouse  of
that  son  she  conceives.  .  .  .  We  [Christians]  can  understand  now  why  Ne'ith
throws  radiance  on  the  Sun,  while  remaining  the  Moon,  since  the  Virgin,  who  is  the
Oueen  of  Heaven,  c^  was  Ne'ith,  clothes  the  Christ-Sun,  as  does  Neith,  and  is
clothed  by  him;  "  Tu  vestis  sokm  et  te  sol  vestiV  [as  is  sung  by  the  Roman  Catho-
lics during  their  service].

We  [Christians]  understand  also  how  it  is  that  the  famous  inscription  at  Sais
should  have  stated  that  "none  has  ever  lifted  my  veil  [pepliim],"  considering  that
this  sentence,  literally  translated,  is  the  summary  of  ivhat  is  sung  in  the  Church  on
the  Day  of  the  Immaculate  Cojiception.*'

Surely  nothing  could  be  more  sincere  than  this!  It  justifies  entirely
what  Mr.  Gerald  Massey  has  said  in  his  Lecture  on  "Luniolatry,
Ancient  and  Modern":

The  man  in  the  moon  [Osiris-Sut,  Jehovah-Satan,  Christ-Judas,  and  other  Lunar
Twins]  is  often  charged  with  bad  conduct.  ...  In  the  lunar  phenomena  the
moon  was  one,  as  the  moon,  which  was  two-fold  in  sex,  and  three-fold  in  character,
as  mother,  child,  and  adult  male.  Thus  the  child  of  the  moon  became  the  consort
of  his  own  mother!  It  could  not  be  helped  if  there  was  to  be  any  reproduction.
He  was  compelled  to  be  his  own  father!  These  relationships  were  repudiated  by
later  sociology,  and  the  primitive  man  in  the  moon  got  tabooed.  Yet  in  its  latest,
most  inexplicable  phase,  this  has  become  the  central  doctrine  of  the  grossest  super-
stition the  world  has  seen,*  for  these  lunar  phenomena  and  their  humanly  repre-
sented relationships,  the  incestuous  included,  are  the  very  foundations  of  the
Christian  Trinity  in  Unity.  Through  ignorance  of  the  symbolism,  the  simple
representation  of  early  time  has  become  the  most  profound  religious  mystery  in
modern  Luniolatry.  The  Roman  Church,  without  being  in  any  wise  ashamed  of
the  proof,  portrays  the  Virgin  Mary  arrayed  with  the  sun,  and  the  homed  moon  at


*  Pneumatologie :  Des  Esprits,  torn.  III.  p.  117;  "  Archeologie  de  la  Vierge  Mere.'


AN   ALLEGORY   FROM   THE    ZOIIAR.  423

her  feet,  holding  the  lunar  infant  in  her  arms— as  child  and  consort  of  the  mother
moon !     The  mother,  child,  and  adult  male,  are  fundamental

In  this  way  it  can  be  proved  that  our  Christology  is  mummified  mythology,  and
legendary  lore,  which  have  been  palmed  oflF  upon  us  in  the  Old  Testament  and  the
New,  as  divine  revelation  uttered  by  the  very  voice  of  God.*

A  charming  allegory  is  found  in  the  Zohar,  one  which  unveils  better
than  anything  else  ever  did  the  true  character  of  Jehovah,  or  YHVH,
in  the  primitive  conception  of  the  Hebrew  Kabalists.  It  is  now  found
in  the  philosophy  of  Ibn  Gebirol's  Kabalah,  translated  by  Isaac  Myer.

In  the  introduction  vmtten  by  R.  'Hiz'qee-yah,  which  is  very  old,  and  forms  part
of  our  Brody  edition  of  the  Zohar  (i.  5^.  sq.)  is  an  account  of  a  journey  taken  by
R.  El'azar,  son  of  R.  Shim-on  b.  Yo'hai,  and  R.  Abbah.  .  .  .  They  met  a  man
bearing  a  heavy  burden.  .  .  .  They  conversed  together  .  .  .  and  the  explana-
tions of  the  Thorah,  by  the  man  with  the  burden,  were  so  wonderful,  that  they
asked  him  for  his  name;  he  replied:  "Do  not  ask  me  who  I  am;  but  we  will  all
proceed  with  the  explanation  of  the  Thorah  [Law]."  They  asked:  "Who  caused
thee  thus  to  walk  and  carry  such  a  heavy  load?"  He  answered:  "The  letter  "^
(Yod,  w^hich  - 10,  and  is  the  symbolical  letter  of  Kether  and  the  essence  and  germ
of  the  Holy  Name  mn"',  YHVH)  made  war,  etc."  ....  They  said  to  him  :
"If  thou  wilt  tell  us  the  name  of  thy  father,  we  will  kiss  the  dust  of  thy  feet."
He  replied:  " .  .  .  As  to  my  father,  Jie  had  his  dwelling  in  the  Great  Sea,  and  was
a  fish  therein  [like  Vishnu  and  Dagon  or  Cannes];  which  [first]  destroyed  the  Great

Sea and  he  w^as  great  and  mighty  and  'Ancient  of  Days,'  until  he

swallowed  all  the  other  fishes  in  the  (Great)  Sea."  .  .  .  R.  El'azar  listened  to
his  words  and  said  to  him:  "Thou  art  the  Son  of  the  Holy  Flame,  thou  art  the  Son
of  Rab  Ham-'«a«-ah  Sabah  (the  old)  [the  fish  in  Aramaic  or  Chaldee  is  nun  {noon)],
thou  art  the  Son  of  the  Light  of  the  Thorah  [Dharma],  etc."t

Then  the  author  explains  that  the  feminine  Sephira,  Binali,  is
termed  by  the  Kabalists  the  Great  Sea:  therefore  Binah,  whose  divine
names  are  Jehovah,  Yah,  and  Elohim,  is  simply  the  Chaldean  Tiamat,
the  Female  Power,  the  Thalatth  of  Berosus,  who  presides  over  the
Chaos,  and  was  made  out  later  by  Christian  Theology  to  be  the  Serpent
and  the  Devil.  She-He  (Yah-hovah)  is  the  supernal  He,  and  Eve.
This  Yah-hovah  then,  or  Jehovah,  is  identical  with  our  Chaos — Father,
Mother,  Son — on  the  material  plane,  and  in  the  purely  physical  World ;
Deus  and  Demon,  at  one  and  the  .same  time;  the  Sun  and  Moon,  Good
and  Evil,  God  and  Demon.

Lunar  magnetism  generates  life,  preserves  and  destroys  it,  psychic-
ally as  well  as  physically.  And  if,  astronomically,  the  Moon  is  one  of
the  seven  planets  of  the  Ancient  World,  in  Theogony  she  is  one  of  the
Regents  thereof^with  Christians  now  as  much  as  with  Pagans,  the


•  P-  23-  t  Myer's  Qabbalah,  335-6.


424  I'HE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

former  referring  to  her  under  the  name  of  one  of  their  Archangels,  and
the  latter  under  that  of  one  of  their  Gods.

Therefore  the  meaning  of  the  "fairy  tale,"  translated  by  Chwolsohn
from  the  Arabic  translation  of  an  old  Chaldean  MS.,  of  Qu-tamy  being
instructed  by  the  idol  of  the  Moon,  is  easily  understood.  Seldenus
tells  us  the  secret,  as  well  as  Maimonides  in  his  Guide  to  the  Perplexed.^'
The  worshippers  of  the  Teraphim,  or  the  Jewish  Oracles,  "carved
images,  and  claimed  that  the  light  of  the  principal  stars  [planets]  per-
meating these  through  and  through,  the  Angelic  Virtues  [or  the
Regents  of  the  stars  and  planets]  conversed  with  them,  teaching  them
many  most  useful  things  and  arts."  And  Seldenus  explains  that  the
Teraphim  were  built  and  composed  after  the  position  of  certain  planets,
those  which  the  Greeks  called  (rToix"a,  and  according  to  figures  that
were  located  in  the  sky,  and  called  dXt^r^ptot,  or  the  Tutelary  Gods.
Those  who  traced  out  the  <jTov)(Cia.  were  called  o-Totxeiw/^aTtKot,  or  diviners
by  the  uTov)(Cia.\

It  is  such  sentences,  however,  in  the  Nabathean  Agriadture,  which
have  frightened  the  men  of  Science,  and  made  them  proclaim  the  work
"either  an  apocryphon,  or  a  fairy  tale,  unworthy  of  the  notice  of  an
Academician."  At  the  same  time,  as  shown,  zealous  Roman  Catholics
and  Protestants  metaphorically  tore  it  to  pieces;  the  former  because
"it  described  the  worship  of  demons,"  the  latter  because  it  was  "un-
godly." Once  more,  all  are  wrong.  It  is  not  a  fairy  tale;  and,  as  far
as  the  pious  Churchmen  are  concerned,  the  same  worship  may  be
shown  in  their  Scriptures,  however  disfigured  by  translation.  Solar
and  Lunar  worship  and  also  the  worship  of  the  Stars  and  Elements
can  be  traced,  and  figure  in  Christian  Theologj-.  These  are  defended
by  Papists,  and  can  be  stoutly  denied  by  the  Protestants  only  at  their
own  risk  and  peril.     Two  instances  may  be  given.

Ammianus  Marcellinus  teaches  that  ancient  divinations  were  always
accomplished  with  the  help  of  the  Spirits  of  the  Elements  {Spiritus
Elementoruni,  and  in  Greek  7rvet';aaTaTa)vcrTotxetW).|

But  it  is  found  now  that  the  Planets,  the  Elements,  and  the  Zodiac,
were  figured  not  only  at  Heliopolis  by  the  twelve  stones  called  "Mys-
teries of  the  Elements"  fElementormji  Arcana  J,  but  also  in  Solomon's
Temple,  and,  as  pointed  out  by  various  writers,  in  several  old  Italian
churches  and  even  at  Notre  Dame  de  Paris,  where  they  can  be  seen  to
this  day.

•  Moreh  Nebhuchim,  UI.  xxs.         t  See  i?e  Diis  Syriis,  Teraph.,  II.  Synt.  p.  31.         *  I.  i.  21.


HECATE-I.UNA  THE  COUNTERPART  OF  JEHOVAH.  425

No  symbol,  even  including  the  Sun,  was  more  complex  in  its  mani-
fold meanings  than  the  lunar  symbol.  The  sex  was,  of  course,  dual.
With  some  it  was  male;  as,  for  instance,  the  Hindu  "King  Soma,"  and
the  Chaldean  Sin ;  with  other  nations  it  was  female,  the  beauteous  God-
desses Diana-Luna,  Ilithyia,  lyucina.  With  the  Tauri,  human  victims
were  sacrificed  to  Artemis,  a  form  of  the  lunar  Goddess ;  the  Cretans
called  her  Dictynna,  and  the  Medes  and  Persians  Anaitis,  as  shown  by
an  inscription  of  Coloe:  'Apre/xtSt  'Avactn.  But,  we  are  now  concerned
chiefly  with  the  most  chaste  and  pure  of  the  virgin  Goddesses,  Luna-
Artemis,  to  whom  Pamphos  was  the  first  to  give  the  surname  of  KaX-
\i(TTrj,  and  of  whom  Hippolytus  wrote:  KaAXto-ra  -n-okv  -n-apOivwv.*  This
Artemis-Lochia,  the  Goddess  that  presided  at  conception  and  child-
birth, is,  in  her  functions  and  as  the  triple  Hecate,  the  Orphic  Deity,
the  predecessor  of  the  God  of  the  Rabbins  and  pre-Christian  Kabalists,
and  his  lunar  type.  The  Goddess  Tpt/Aop<^os  was  the  personified  symbol
of  the  various  and  successive  aspects  represented  by  the  Moon  in  each
of  her  three  phases;  and  this  interpretation  was  already  that  of  the
Stoics,t  W'hile  the  Orpheans  explained  the  epithet  Tpt/Aop^os  by  the
three  kingdoms  of  Nature  over  which  she  reigned.  Jealous,  blood-
thirsty, revengeful  and  exacting,  Hecate-Luna  is  a  worthy  counterpart
of  the  "jealous  God"  of  the  Hebrew  prophets.

The  whole  riddle  of  the  Solar  and  Lunar  worship,  as  now  traced  in
the  churches,  hangs  indeed  on  this  world-old  mystery  of  lunar
phenomena.  The  correlative  forces  in  the  "Queen  of  Night,"  that  lie
latent  for  Modern  Science,  but  are  fully  active  to  the  knowledge  of
Eastern  Adepts,  explain  well  the  thousand  and  one  images  under
which  the  Moon  was  represented  by  the  Ancients.  It  also  shows  how
much  more  profoundly  learned  in  the  Selenic  Mysteries  were  the
Ancients  than  are  now  our  modern  Astronomers.  The  whole  Pantheon
of  the  lunar  Gods  and  Goddesses,  Nephtys  or  Neith,  Proserpina,
Melitta,  Cybele,  Isis,  Astarte,  Venus,  and  Hecate,  on  the  one  hand,
and  Apollo,  Dionysus,  Adonis,  Bacchus,  Osiris,  Atys,  Thammuz,  etc.,
on  the  other,  all  show  on  the  face  of  their  names  and  titles — those  of
"Sons"  and  "Husbands"  of  their  "Mothers" — their  identity  with  the
Christian  Trinity.  In  every  religious  system,  the  Gods  were  made  to
merge  their  functions,  as  Father,  Son,  and  Husband,  into  one,  and  the
Goddesses  were  identified  as  Wife,  Mother,  and  Sister  of  the  male
God;  the  former  synthesizing  the  human  attributes  as  the  "Sun,  the

•  See  Patisanias,  viii.  35-8.  •  Comutus,  De  Natura  Deorum,  xxxiv.  i,


425  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Giver  of  lyife,"  the  latter  merging  all  the  other  titles  in  the  grand
synthesis  known  as  Maia,  Maya,  Maria,  etc.,  a  generic  name.  Maia,
in  its  forced  derivation,  has  come  to  mean  with  the  Greeks,  "mother,"
from  the  root  ma  (nurse),  and  even  gave  its  name  to  the  month  of  May,
which  was  sacred  to  all  these  Goddesses  before  it  became  consecrated
to  Mary.*  Its  primitive  meaning,  however,  was  Maya,  Durga,  trans-
lated by  the  Orientalists  as  "inaccessible,"  but  meaning  in  truth  the
"unreachable,"  in  the  sense  of  illusion  and  unreality,  as  being  the
source  and  cause  of  spells,  the  personification  of  illusion.

In  religious  rites,  the  Moon  served  a  dual  purpose.  Personified  as  a
female  Goddess  for  exoteric  purposes,  or  as  a  male  God  in  allegory  and
symbol,  in  Occult  Philosophy  our  satellite  was  regarded  as  a  sexless
Potency  to  be  well  studied,  because  it  was  to  be  dreaded.  With  the
initiated  Aryans,  Chaldeans,  Greeks  and  Romans,  Soma,  Sin,  Artemis
Soteira  (the  hermaphrodite  Apollo,  whose  attribute  is  the  lyre,  and  the
bearded  Diana  of  the  bow  and  arrow),  Deus  I^unus,  and  especially
Osiris-Iyunus  and  Thot-Lunus,f  were  the  Occult  potencies  of  the  Moon.
But  whether  male  or  female,  whether  Thot  or  Minerva,  Soma  or
Astoreth,  the  Moon  is  the  Occult  Mystery  of  Mysteries,  and  more  a
symbol  of  evil  than  of  good.  Her  seven  phases,  in  the  original  Esoteric
division,  are  divided  into  three  astronomical  phenomena  and  four
purely  psychic  phases.  That  the  Moon  was  not  always  reverenced  is
shown  in  the  Mysteries,  in  which  the  death  of  the  Moon-God — the  three
phases  of  gradual  waning  and  final  disappearance — was  allegorized  by
the  Moon  standing  for  the  Genius  of  Evil  that,  for  the  time,  triumphs
over  the  Light  and  Eife-giving  God,  the  Sun;  and  all  the  skill  and
learning  of  the  ancient  Hierophants  in  Magic  were  required  to  turn
this  triumph  into  a  defeat.

It  was  the  most  ancient  worship  of  all,  that  of  the  Third  Race  of  our
Round,  the  Hermaphrodites,  in  which  the  viale  Moon  became  sacred,
when,  after  the  so-called  Fall,  the  sexes  had  become  separated.  Deus
Lunus  then  became  an  androgyne,  male  and  female  in  turn ;  to  finally
serve,  for  purposes  of  sorcery,  as  a  dual  power  for  the  Fourth  Root  Race,
the  Atlanteans.  With  the  Fifth,  our  own  Race,  the  Eunar-solar  worship
divided  the  nations  into  two  distinct,  antagonistic  camps.  It  led  to
events  described  aeons  later  in  the  Mahabharatan  War,  which  to  the

*  The  Roman  Catholics  are  indebted  for  the  idea  of  consecrating-  the  month  of  May  to  the  Virgin
to  the  pagan  Plutarch,  who  shows  that  "May  is  sacred  to  Maia  (Maia)  or  Vesta"  (Aulus  Gellius,
sub  voc.  Maia),  our  mother-earth,  our  nurse  and  nourisher,  personified.

+  Thot-Lunus  is  the  Budha-Soma  of  India,  or  Mercury  and  the  Moon.


THE   MOON   BI-SEXUAI,.  427

Europeans  is  the  fabulous,  to  the  Hindus  and  Occultists  the  historical,
strife  between  the  Siiryavanshas  and  the  Indovanshas.     Originating  in
the  dual  aspect  of  the  Moon,  the  worship  of  the  female  and  the  male
principles  respectively,  it   ended   in   distinct   Solar  and    L,unar   cults.
Among  the  Semitic  races,  the  Sun  was  for  a  very  long  time  feminine
and  the  Moon  masculine;    the  latter  notion  being  adopted  by   them
from  the  Atlantean  traditions.     The  Moon  was  called  the  "Lord  of  the
Sun,"  Bel-Shemesh,  before  the  Shemesh  worship.     The  ignorance  of
the  incipient  reasons  for  such  a  distinction,  and  of  Occult  principles,
led    the    nations    into    anthropomorphic   idol-worship.      During    that
period  which  is  absent  from  the  Mosaic  books,  viz.,  from  the  exile  from
Eden  to  the  allegorical  Flood,  the  Jews,  with  the  rest  of  the  Semites,
worshipped   Dayanisi,  "'Qj-'ND''~r,  the  "Ruler  of  Men,"  the  "Judge,"  or
the  Sun.     Though  the  Jewish  canon  and  Christianism  have  made  the
Sun  to  become  the  "Lord  God"  and  "Jehovah"  in  the  Bible,  yet  the
same  Bible  is  full  of  indiscreet  traces  of  the  androgyne  Deity,  which
was  Jehovah,  the  Sun,  and  Astoreth,  the  Moon  in  its  female  aspect,  and
quite  free  from  the  present  metaphorical  element  given  to  it.     God  is  a
"consuming  fire,"  appears  in,  and  "is  encompassed  by  fire."     It  was
not  only  in  vision  that  Ezekiel  saw  the  Jews  "worshipping  the  Sun."*
The   Baal  of  the   Israelites — the  Shemesh  of  the   Moabites  and  the
Moloch  of  the  Ammonites — was  tne  identical  "Sun-Jehovah,"  and  he
is  till  now  the  "King  of  the  Host  of  Heaven,"  the  Sun,  as  much  as
Astoreth  was  the  "Queen  of  Heaven,"  or  the  Moon.     The  "Sun  of
Righteousness"  has  only  now  become  a  metaphorical  expression.     But
the  religion  of  every  ancient  nation  had  been  primarily  based  upon  the
Occult  manifestations  of  a  purely  abstract  Force  or  Principle  now  called
"God."     The  very  establishment  of  such  worship  shows,  in  its  details
and  rites,  that  the  philosophers  who  evolved  such  systems  of  Nature,
.subjective   and    objective,    possessed   profound   knowledge,    and    were
acquainted  with  many  facts  of  a  scientific  nature.     For  besides  beins'
purely  Occult,  the  rites  of  Lunar  worship  were  based,  as  just  shown,
upon  a  knowledge  of  Physiology- — quite  a  modern  science  with  us —
Psycholog>',  sacred  Mathematics,  Geometry  and    Metrology,    in   their
right  applications  to  symbols  and  figures,  which  are  but  glyphs  record-
ing observed  natural  and  scientific  yar/5;  in  short  upon  a  most  minute
and   profound   knowledge   of   Nature.     As  we  have  just   said,   lunar
magnetism  generates  life,  preserves  and  destroys  it ;  and  Soma  embodies

*  Ezekiel,  viii.  16.


428  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

the  triple  power  of  the  Trimurti,  though  it  remains  unrecognized  by
the  profane  to  this  day.  The  allegory  that  makes  Soma,  the  Moon,
produced  by  the  Churning  of  the  Ocean  of  Life  (Space)  by  the  Gods  in
another  Manvantara,  that  is,  in  the  pre-genetic  day  of  our  Planetary
System,  and  the  myth,  which  represents  "the  Rishis  milking  the
Earth,  whose  calf  was  Soma,  the  Moon,"  have  a  deep  cosmographical
meaning;  for  it  is  neither  our  Earth  which  is  milked,  nor  was  the
Moon  which  we  know  the  calf.*  Had  our  wise  men  of  Science  known
as  much  of  the  mysteries  of  Nature  as  the  ancient  Aryans  did,  they
would  surely  never  have  imagined  that  the  Moon  was  projected  from
the  Earth.  Once  more,  the  oldest  of  permutations  in  Theogony,  the
Son  becoming  his  own  Father  and  the  Mother  generated  by  the  Son,
has  to  be  remembered  and  taken  into  consideration  if  the  symbolical
language  of  the  Ancients  is  to  be  understood  by  us.  Otherwise  mytho-
logy will  be  ever  haunting  the  Orientalists  as  simply  "the  disease
which  springs  up  at  a  peculiar  stage  of  human  culture!" — as  Renouf
gravely  observes.

The  Ancients  taught  the  auto-generation,  so  to  speak,  of  the  Gods:
the  One  Divine  Essence,  unmanifesied,  perpetually  begetting  a  Second-
Self,  manifested,  which  Second-Self,  androgynous  in  its  nature,  gives
birth,  in  an  immaculate  way,  to  everything  macrocosmical  and  micro-
cosmical  in  this  Universe.  This  was  shown  in  the  Circle  and  the
Diameter,  or  the  Sacred  Ten  (lo),  a  few  pages  back.

But  our  Orientalists,  notwithstanding  their  extreme  desire  to  discover
one  homogeneous  Element  in  Nature,  will  not  see  it.  Cramped  in  their
researches  by  such  ignorance,  the  Aryanists  and  Egyptologists  are
constantly  led  astray  from  truth  in  their  speculations.  Thus,  de  Rouge
is  unable  to  understand,  in  the  text  which  he  translates,  the  meaning
of  Ammon-Ra  saying  to  King  Amenophes,  who  is  supposed  to  be
Memnon:  "Thou  art  my  Son,  I  have  begotten  thee."  And,  finding  the
same  idea  in  many  a  text  and  under  various  forms,  this  very  Christian
Orientalist  is  finally  compelled  to  exclaim  :

For  this  idea  to  have  entered  the  mind  of  a  hierogramniatist,  there  must  have
been  in  their  religion  a  more  or  less  defined  doctrine,  indicating  as  a  possible  fact
that  might  come  to  pass,  a  divine  and  immaculate  incarnation  under  a  human  form,.

*  The  Earth  flees  for  her  life,  in  the  allegory,  before  Prithu,  who  pursues  her.  She  assumes  the
shape  of  a  cow,  and,  trembling  with  terror,  runs  away  and  hides  even  in  the  regions  of  Brahma.
Therefore,  it  is  not  our  Earth.  Again,  in  every  Puruna,  the  calf  changes  name.  In  one  it  is  Manu
Svayambhuva,  in  another  Indra,  in  a  third  the  Himavat  (Himalayas)  itself,  while  Meru  was  the
milker.    This  is  a  deeper  allegory  than  one  may  be  inclined  to  think.


THE  DIGNITY  OF  SAIS.  42^

Precisely.  But  why  throw  the  explanation  on  to  an  impossible
prophecy,  when  the  whole  secret  is  explained  by  the  later  religion
copying  the  earlier?

This  doctrine  was  universal,  nor  was  it  the  mind  of  any  one  hiero-
grammatist  that  evolved  it;  for  the  Indian  Avataras  are  a  proof  to  the
contrary.  After  which,  having  come  "to  realize  more  clearl}'"*  what
the  "Divine  Father  and  Sou"  were  with  the  Egyptians,  de  Rouge  still
fails  to  account  for,  and  to  perceive  what  were  the  functions  attributed
to,  \.h.Q  femhmie  Principle  in  that  primordial  generation.  He  does  not
find  it  in  the  Goddess  Neith,  of  Sais.  Yet  he  quotes  the  sentence  of
the  Commander  to  Cambyses,  when  introducing  that  king  into  the
Saitic  temple:  "I  made  known  to  his  Majesty  the  dignity  of  Sais,
which  is  the  abode  of  Nei'th,  the  great  [female]  producer,  genitrix  of  the
Sun,  who  is  the  first-born,  and  who  is  not  begotten,  but  only  brotight
forth" — and  hence  is  the  fruit  of  an  Immaculate  Mother.

How  much  more  grandiose,  philosophical  and  poetical — for  whoever
is  able  to  understand  and  appreciate  it — is  the  real  distinction  made
between  the  Immaculate  Virgin  of  the  ancient  Pagans  and  the  modern
Papal  conception.  With  the  former,  the  ever-youthful  Mother  Nature,
the  antitype  of  her  prototypes,  the  Sun  and  Moon,  generates  and  brings
forth  her  "mind-born"  Son,  the  Universe.  The  Sun  and  Moon,  as
male-female  deities,  fructify  the  Earth,  the  microcosmical  Mother,  and
the  latter  conceives  and  brings  forth,  in  her  turn.  With  the  Chris-
tians, the  "First-bom"  (^primogenitus)  is  indeed  generated,  i.e.,  be-
gotten {genitus,  non  f actus'),  and  positively  conceived  and  brought  forth:
"  Virgo  pariet,"  explains  the  I^atin  Church.  Thus  does  that  Church
drag  down  the  noble  spiritual  ideal  of  the  Virgin  Mary  to  the  earth,
and,  making  her  "of  the  earth  earthy,"  degrades  the  ideal  she  por-
trays to  the  lowest  of  the  anthropomorphic  Goddesses  of  the  rabble.

Truly,  Neith,  Isis,  Diana,  etc.,  by  whatever  name  she  was  called,  was
"a  demiurgical  Goddess,  at  once  visible  and  invisible,  having  her  place
in  Heaven,  and  helping  on  the  generation  of  species'' — the  Moon,  in  short.
Her  occult  aspects  and  powers  are  numberless,  and,  in  one  of  them,  the
Moon  becomes  with  the  Egyptians  Hathor,  another  aspect  of  Isis,t  and
both  of  these  Goddesses  are  shown  suckling  Horus.  Behold  in  the
Egyptian  Hall  of  the  British  Museum,  Hathor  worshipped  by  Pharaoh

•  Hisc/(r<jf  realization  is,  that  the  Eg'Tptians  firophesied  Jehovah  (!)  and  his  incarnated  Redeemer
ithe  g-ood  serpent),  etc.;  even  to  identifying  Typhon  with  the  wicked  dragon  of  the  garden  of  Eden.
And  this  passes  as  serious  and  sober  science!

+  Hathor  is  the  infernal  Isis,  the  Goddess  preeminently  of  the  West  or  the  Nether  World.


430  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Thotmes,  who  stands  between  her  and  the  I^ord  of  Heavens.  The
monolith  was  taken  from  Karnac.  The  same  Goddess  has  the  follow-
ing legend  inscribed  on  her  throne:  "■The  Divine  Mother  and  Lady,  or
Queen  of  Heaven'' ;  also  the  ''Morning  Star"  and  the  ''Light  of  the
Sea"— Stella  Matutina  and  Lux  Maris.  All  the  I^unar  Goddesses  had
a  dual  aspect;  one  divine,  the  other  infernal.  All  were  the  Virgin
Mothers  of  an  immactdately  born  Son — the  Sun.  Raoul  Rochette
shows  the  Moon-Goddess  of  the  Athenians,  Pallas,  or  Cybele,  Minerva,
or  again  Diana,  holding  her  child-son  on  her  lap,  invoked  in  her  festi-
vals as  Movoycv^s  ©eoS,  the  "One  Mother  of  God,"  sitting  on  a  lion,  and
surrounded  by  twelve  personages;  in  whom  the  Occultist  recognizes
the  twelve  great  Gods,  and  the  pious  Christian  Orientalist  the  Apostles,
or  rather  the  Grecian  Pagan  prophecy  thereof.

They  are  both  right,  for  the  Immaculate  Goddess  of  the  Latin  Church
is  a  faithful  copy  of  the  older  Pagan  Goddesses;  the  number  of  the
Apostles  is  that  of  the  twelve  Tribes,  and  the  latter  are  a  personifica-
tion of  the  twelve  great  Gods,  and  of  the  twelve  Signs  of  the  Zodiac.
Almost  every  detail  in  the  Christian  dogma  is  borrowed  from  the
Heathens.  Semele,  the  Wife  of  Jupiter  and  Mother  of  Bacchus,  the
Sun,  is,  according  to  Nonnus,  also  "carried,"  or  made  to  ascend  to
Heaven  after  her  death,  where  she  presides  between  Mars  and  Venus,
under  the  name  of  the  "Queen  of  the  World,"  or  the  Universe,  Travfiaxri-
Xcta;  "at  the  name  of  which,"  as  at  the  names  of  Hathor,  Hecate,  and
other  infernal  Goddesses,  "all  the  demons  tremble."*

"%€iJL€XrjvTpifjiov(TL  8ai'/xov€s."  This  Greek  inscription  on  a  small  temple,
reproduced  on  a  stone  that  was  found  by  Beger,  and  copied  by  Mont-
faucon,  as  De  Mirville  tells  us,  informs  us  of  the  stupendous  fact,  that
the  Magna  Mater  of  the  old  world  was  an  impudent  "plagiarism"  of
the  Immaculate  Virgin  Mother  of  his  Church,  perpetrated  by  the
Demon.  Whether  so,  or  viee  versa,  is  of  no  importance.  That  which
is  interesting  to  note  is  the  perfect  identity  between  the  archaic  copy
and  the  modern  original.

Did  space  permit  we  might  show  the  inconceivable  coolness  and  un-
concern exhibited  by  certain  followers  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church,
when  they  are  made  to  face  the  revelations  of  the  Past.  To  Maury's
remark  that  "the  Virgin  took  possession  of  all  the  Sanctuaries  of  Ceres
and  Venus,    and   that  the  Pagan  rites,  proclaimed   and  practised   in

»  This  is  from  De  Mirville,  who  proudly  confesses  the  similarity,  and  he  ought  to  know.  See
"  Archeologie  de  la  Vierge  Mere,"  in  his  Des  Esprits,  pp.  111-113.


ANTE-HISTORICAL  CATHOUCISM.  43 1

bonour  of  those  Goddesses,  were  in  a  great  measure  transferred  to  the
Mother  of  Christ,"*  the  advocate  of  Rome  answers,  that  such  is  the
fact,  and  that  it  is  just  as  it  should  be,  and  quite  natural.

As  the  dogma,  the  liturgj',  and  the  rites  professed  by  the  Roman  Apostolical
Church  in  1862  are  found  engraved  on  monuments,  inscribed  on  papyri,  and
cylinders  hardly  posterior  to  the  Deluge,  it  does  seem  impossible  to  deny  the  exist-
ence oi  &  first  ante- historical  [Roman]  Catholicism  of  which  our  own  is  but  the  faith-
ful continuation.  .  .  .  [But  while  the  former  was  the  culmination,  the  "5«ww«;«
of  the  impudence  of  demons  and  goetic  necromacy"  .  .  .  the  latter  is  divine.]
If  in  our  [Christian]  Revelation  \_V Apocalypse],  Mary,  clothed  with  the  Sun  and
having  the  Moon  under  her  feet,  has  no  longer  anything  in  common  with  the
humble  servant  [servante]  of  Nazareth  \sic\  it  is  because  she  has  now  become  the
greatest  of  theological  and  cosmological  powers  in  our  universe,  t

Verily  so,  since  Pindar  thus  sings  of  her  "assumption":  "She  sitf
at  the  right  hand  of  her  Father  [Jupiter],  .  .  .  and  is  more  powerful
than  all  the  other  (Angels  or)  Gods"]: — a  hymn  likewise  applied  to  the
Virgin.  St.  Bernard  also,  quoted  by  Cornelius  a  Lapide,  is  made  to
address  the  Virgin  Mary  in  this  wise:  "The  Sun-Christ  lives  in  thee
and  thou  livest  in  him."§

Again  the  Virgin  is  admitted  to  be  the  Moon  by  the  same  unsophisti-
cated holy  man.  Being  the  Lucina  of  the  Church,  in  childbirth  the
verse  of  Virgil,  "  Casta  fove  Lucina,  tuus  jam  regnat  Apollo^'  is  applied
to  her.  "lyike  the  Moon,  the  Virgin  is  the  Queen  of  Heaven,"  adds  the
innocent  saint.  ||

This  settles  the  question.  According  to  such  writers  as  De  Mirville,
the  more  similarity  there  exists  between  the  Pagan  conceptions  and
the  Christian  dogmas,  the  more  divine  appears  the  Christian  religion,
and  the  more  is  it  seen  to  be  the  only  truly  inspired  one,  especially  in
its  Roman  Catholic  form.  The  unbelieving  Scientists  and  Academi-
cians who  think  they  see  in  the  I^atin  Church  quite  the  opposite  of
divine  inspiration,  and  who  will  not  believe  in  the  Satanic  tricks  of
plagiarism  by  anticipation,  are  severely  taken  to  task.  But  then  "they
believe  in  nothing  and  reject  even  the  Nabathean  Agriculttire  as  a
romance  and  a  pack  of  superstitious  nonsense,"  complains  the  memo-
rialist. "In  their  perverted  opinion  Qii-tamy's  'idol  of  the  Moon'  and
the  statue  of  the  Madonna  are  one!"     A  noble  Marquis,  twenty-five

•  Magie,  p.  153.

t  De  Mirville,  Ibid.,  pp.  116  and  119.

X  Hymns  lo  Minei~va,  p.  19.

}  Sermon  sur  la  SainU  Vierge.

II  Apoc,  ch.  jdi.


432  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

years  ago,  wrote  six  huge  volumes,  or,  as  he  calls  them  "Memoires  to
the  French  Academj^"  with  the  sole  object  of  proving  Roman  Catholi-
cism to  be  an  inspired  and  revealed  faith.  As  a  proof  thereof,  he  fur-
nishes numberless  facts,  all  tending  to  show  that  the  entire  Ancient
World,  ever  since  the  Deluge,  had,  with  the  help  of  the  Devil,  been
systematically  plagiarizing  the  rites,  ceremonies,  and  dogmas  of  the
future  Holy  Church,  which  was  to  be  born  ages  later.  What  would
that  faithful  son  of  Rome  have  said  had  he  heard  his  co-religionist,
M.  Renouf,  the  distinguished  Egyptologist  of  the  British  Museum,
declaring  in  one  of  his  learned  lectures,  that  neither  "Hebrews  nor
Greeks  borrowed  any  of  their  ideas  from  Egypt"  ?

But  perhaps  M.  Renouf  intended  to  say  that  it  was  the  Eg>'ptians,
the  Greeks,  and  the  Aryans,  who  borrowed  their  ideas  from  the  I^atin
Church?  And  if  so,  why,  in  the  name  of  logic,  do  the  Papists  reject
the  additional  information  which  the  Occultists  may  give  them  on
Moon-worship,  since  it  all  tends  to  show  that  the  worship  of  the
Roman  Catholic  Church  is  as  old  as  the  world — of  SabcEaiiism  and
Astrolatry?

The  reason  of  early  Christian  and  later  Roman  Catholic  Astrolatry,
or  the  symbolical  worship  of  Sun  and  Moon,  a  worship  identical  with
that  of  the  Gnostics,  though  less  philosophical  and  pure  than  the
"Sun-worship"  of  the  Zoroastrians,  is  a  natural  consequence  of  its
birth  and  origin.  The  adoption  by  the  I^atin  Church  of  such  symbols
as  Water,  Fire,  Sun,  Moon  and  Stars,  and  many  others,  is  simply  a
continuation  by  the  early  Christians  of  the  old  worship  of  Pagan
nations.  Thus,  Odin  got  his  wisdom,  power,  and  knowledge,  by
sitting  at  the  feet  of  Mimir,  the  thrice-wise  Jotun,  who  passed  his  life
by  the  fountain  of  primeval  Wisdom,  the  crystalline  Waters  of  which
increased  his  knowledge  daily.  "Mimir  drew  the  highest  knowledge
from  the  fountain,  because  the  World  was  born  of  Water;  hence
primeval  Wisdom  was  to  be  found  in  that  mysterious  element."  The
eye  which  Odin  had  to  pledge  to  acquire  that  knowledge  may  be  "the
Sun,  which  enlightens  and  penetrates  all  things ;  his  other  eye  being
the  Moon,  whose  reflection  gazes  out  of  the  deep,  and  which  at  last,
when  setting,  sinks  into  the  Ocean."*  But  it  is  something  more  than
this.  Loki,  the  Fire-God,  is  said  to  have  hidden  in  the  Water,  as  well
as  in  the  Moon,  the  light-giver,  whose  reflection  he  found  therein.
This  belief  that  the  Fire  finds  refuge  in  the  Water  was  not  limited  to

•  Wagner  and  McDowall,  Asgard  and  the  Gods,  p.  86.


IDENTITY   OF   TYPOIvOGY.  433;

the  old  Scandinavians.  It  was  shared  by  all  nations  and  was  finally-
adopted  by  the  early  Christians,  who  symbolized  the  Holy  Ghost  under
the  shape  of  Fire,  "cloven  tongues  like  as  of  fire" — the  breath  of  the
Father-Sun.  This  Fire  descends  also  into  the  Water,  or  the  Sea —
Mare,  Mary.  The  Dove  was  the  symbol  of  the  Soul  with  several
nations;  it  was  sacred  to  Venus,  the  Goddess  born  from  the  sea-
foam,  and  it  became  later  the  symbol  of  the  Christian  Anima  Mundi^
or  Holy  Spirit.

One  of  the  most  occult  chapters  in  the  Book  of  the  Dead  is  that
entitled,  "The  transformation  into  the  God  giving  Light  to  the
Path  of  Darkness,"  wherein  "Woman-Light  of  the  Shadow"  serves
Thot  in  his  retreat  in  the  Moon.  Thot-Hermes  is  said  to  hide  therein,
because  he  is  the  representative  of  the  Secret  Wisdom.  He  is  the
manifested  Logos  of  its  light  side;  the  concealed  Deity  or  "Dark
Wisdom"  when  he  is  supposed  to  retire  to  the  opposite  hemisphere.
Speaking  of  her  power,  the  Moon  calls  herself  repeatedly:  "The  Light
which  shineth  in  Darkness,"  the  "Woman-Light."  Hence  it  became
the  accepted  symbol  of  all  the  Virgin-Mother  Goddesses.  As  the
wicked  "evil"  Spirits  warred  against  the  Moon  in  days  of  yore,  so
they  are  supposed  to  war  now,  without,  however,  being  able  to  prevail
against  the  actual  Queen  of  Heaven,  Mar}^  the  Moon.  Hence,  also,  the
Moon  was  intimately  connected  in  all  the  Pagan  Theogonies  with  the
Dragon,  her  eternal  enem3^  The  Virgin,  or  Madonna,  stands  on  the
mythical  Satan  thus  symbolized,  who  lies  crushed  and  powerless,  under
her  feet.  This,  because  the  head  and  tail  of  the  Dragon,  which,  to  this
day  in  Eastern  Astronomy,  represent  the  ascending  and  descending
nodes  of  the  Moon,  were  also  symbolized  in  ancient  Greece  by  the  two
serpents.  Hercules  kills  them  on  the  daj^  of  his  birth,  and  so  does
the  Babe  in  his  Virgin-Mother's  arms.  As  Mr.  Gerald  Massey  aptly
observes  in  this  connection :

All  such  symbols  figured  their  own  facts  from  the  first,  and  did  not  pre-figure
others  of  a  totally  diflFerent  order.  The  iconography  [and  dogmas,  too]  had  sur-
vived in  Rome  from  a  period  remotely  pre-Christian.  There  was  neither  forgery
nor  interpolation  of  types;  twthing  but  a  continuity  of  imagery  with  a  -Perversion
of  its  meaning.


r.>'\


SECTION  X.

Tree,  Serpent,  and  Crocodile  "Worship.


Object  of  horror  or  of  adoration,  men  have  for  the  serpent  an  implacable  hatred,  or  prostrate

themselves  before  its  genius.     Lie  calls  it,  Prudence  claims  it.  Envy  carries  it  in  its  heart,  and

Eloquence  on  its  caduceus.    In  Hell  it  arms  the  whip  of  the  Furies ;  in  Heaven  Eternity  makes  of  it

its  sj-rabol.

De  Chateaubriand.

The  Ophites  asserted  that  there  were  several  kinds  of  Genii,  from
God  to  man ;  that  the  relative  superiority  of  these  was  decided  by  the
degree  of  Light  that  was  accorded  to  each;  and  they  maintained  that
the  Serpent  had  to  be  constantly  called  upon  and  to  be  thanked  for  the
signal  service  it  had  rendered  humanity.  For  it  taught  Adam  that  if
he  ate  of  the  fruit  of  the  Tree  of  Knowledge  of  good  and  evil,  he  would
raise  his  Being  immensely  by  the  learning  and  wisdom  he  would  thus
acquire.     Such  was  the  exoteric  reason  given.

It  is  easy  to  see  whence  is  the  primal  idea  of  the  dual,  Janus-like
character  of  the  Serpent — the  good  and  the  bad.  This  symbol  is  one
of  the  most  ancient,  because  the  reptile  preceded  the  bird,  and  the  bird
the  mammal.  Hence  the  belief,  or  rather  the  superstition,  of  the
savage  tribes  who  think  that  the  souls  of  their  ancestors  live  under
this  form,  and  the  general  association  of  the  Serpent  with  the  Tree.
The  legends  about  the  various  meanings  it  represents  are  numberless ;
but,  as  most  of  them  are  allegorical,  they  have  now  passed  into  the
class  of  fables  based  on  ignorance  and  dark  superstition.  For  instance,
when  Philostratus  narrates  that  the  natives  of  India  and  Arabia  fed  on
the  heart  and  liver  of  Serpents  in  order  to  learn  the  language  of  all  the
animals,  the  Serpent  being  credited  with  that  faculty,  he  certainly
never  meant  his  words  to  be  accepted  literally.*  As  will  be  found
more  than  once  as  we  proceed,  Serpent  and  Dragon  were  names  given

»  See  De  VU9.  Apollonii,  I.  xiv.


THE  SERPENT,   THE   SYMBOL  OF   INITIATION.  435

to  the  Wise  Ones,  the  Initiated  Adepts  of  olden  times.  It  was  their
■wisdom  and  their  learning  that  were  devoured  or  assimilated  by  their
followers,  whence  the  allegor3^  When  the  Scandinavian  Sigurd  is
fabled  to  have  roasted  the  heart  of  Fafnir,  the  Dragon,  whom  he  had
slain,  and  thence  to  have  become  the  wisest  of  men,  the  meaning  is  the
same.  Sigurd  had  become  learned  in  the  runes  and  magical  charms;
he  had  received  the  "Word"  from  an  Initiate  of  the  name  of  Fafnir,  or
from  a  sorcerer,  after  which  the  latter  died,  as  do  many,  after  "passing
the  word."  Epiphanius  lets  out  a  secret  of  the  Gnostics  in  tr>4ng  to
expose  their  "heresies."  The  Gnostic  Ophites,  he  says,  had  a  reason
for  honouring  the  Serpent:  it  was  because  he  taught  the  primeval  men
the  Mysteries.*  Verily  so ;  but  they  did  not  have  Adam  and  Eve  in  the
Garden  in  their  minds  when  teaching  this  dogma,  but  simply  that
which  is  stated  above.  The  Nagas  of  the  Hindu  and  Tibetan  Adepts
were  human  Nagas  (Serpents),  not  reptiles.  Moreover,  the  Serpent
has  ever  been  the  type  of  consecutive  or  serial  rejuvenation,  of  Immor-
tality and  Time.

The  numerous  and  extremely  interesting  readings,  the  interpreta-
tions and  facts  about  Serpent  worship,  given  in  Mr.  Gerald  Massey's
Naticral  Genesis,  are  very  ingenious  and  scientifically  correct.  But
they  are  far  from  covering  the  zvkole  of  the  meanings  implied.  They
divulge  only  the  astronomical  and  ph^-siological  mysteries,  with  the
addition  of  some  cosmic  phenomena.  On  the  lowest  plane  of  materi-
ality, the  Serpent  was,  no  doubt,  the  "great  emblem  of  Mysten/  in  the
Mysteries,"  and  was,  ver>-  likely,  "adopted  as  a  type  of  feminine
pubescence,  on  account  of  its  sloughing  and  self- renewal."  It  was  so,
however,  only  with  regard  to  mysteries  concerning  terrestrial  animal
life,  for  as  the  symbol  of  ''re-clothing  and  re-birth  in  the  [universal]
mysteries,"  its  "final  phase,"!  or  shall  we  rather  say  its  incipient  and
culminating  phases,  was  not  of  this  plane.  These  phases  were  generated
in  the  pure  realm  of  Ideal  Light,  and  having  accomplished  the  round  of
the  whole  cycle  of  adaptations  and  symbolism,  the  Mysteries  returned
from  whence  they  had  come,  into  the  essence  of  immaterial  causality.
They  belonged  to  the  highest  Gnosis.  And  surely  this  could  have
never  obtained  its  name  and  fame  solely  on  account  of  its  penetration
into  physiological  and  especially  feminine  functions !

As  a  symbol,  the  Serpent  had  as  many  aspects  and  occult  mean-
ings as  the  Tree  itself;  the  "Tree  of  Life,"  with  which  it  was  emble-

*  Adv.  Hceres.  xxxvii.  +  Gerald  Massey,  The  Natural  Genesis,  I.  340.


436  the;  secret  doctrine.

matically  and  almost  indissolubly  connected.  Whether  viewed  as  a
metaphysical  or  a  physical  symbol,  the  Tree  and  Serpent,  jointly,  or
separately,  have  never  been  so  degraded  by  antiquity  as  they  are  now,
in  this  our  age  of  the  breaking  of  idols,  not  for  truth's  sake,  but  to
glorify  the  most  gross  matter.  The  revelations  and  interpretations
in  General  Forlong's  Rivers  of  Life  would  have  astounded  the  wor-
shippers of  the  Tree  and  Serpent  in  the  days  of  archaic  Chaldean  and
Egyptian  wisdom;  and  even  the  early  Shaivas  would  have  recoiled
in  horror  at  the  theories  and  suggestions  of  the  author  of  the  said
work.  "The  notion  of  Payne  Knight  and  Inman  that  the  Cross  or
Tau  is  simply  a  copy  of  the  male  organs  in  a  triadic  form  is  radically
false,"  writes  Mr.  G.  Massey,  who  proves  what  he  says.  But  this  is  a
statement  that  could  be  as  justly  applied  to  almost  all  the  modern
interpretations  of  ancient  symbols.  The  Natural  Genesis,  a  monu-
mental work  of  research  and  thought,  the  most  complete  on  that
subject  that  has  ever  been  published,  covering  as  it  does  a  wider
field,  and  explaining  much  more  than  all  the  Symbologists  who  have
hitherto  written,  does  not  yet  go  beyond  the  "psycho-theistic"  stage
of  ancient  thought.  Nor  were  Payne  Knight  and  Inman  altogether
wrong;  except  in  entirely  failing  to  see  that  their  interpretations  of
the  Tree  of  Life,  as  the  Cross  and  Phallus,  fitted  the  symbol  only  in
the  lowest  and  latest  stage  of  the  evolutionary  development  of  the  idea
of  the  Giver  of  lyife.  It  was  the  last  and  the  grossest  physical  trans-
formation of  Nature,  in  animal,  insect,  bird  and  even  plant;  for  bi-une,
creative  magnetism,  in  the  form  of  the  attraction  of  contraries,  or
sexual  polarization,  acts  in  the  constitution  of  reptile  and  bird  as  it
does  in  that  of  man.  Moreover,  the  modern  Symbologists  and  Orien-
talists, from  first  to  last,  being  ignorant  of  the  real  Mysteries  revealed
by  Occultism,  can  necessarily  see  but  this  last  stage.  If  told  that
this  mode  of  procreation,  which  the  whole  world  of  being  has  now  in
common  on  this  Earth,  is  but  a  passing  phase,  a  physical  means  of
furnishing  the  conditions  to  and  producing  the  phenomena  of  life,
and  that  it  will  alter  with  this  and  disappear  with  the  next  Root- Race,
they  would  laugh  at  such  a  superstitious  and  unscientific  idea.  But
the  most  learned  Occultists  assert  this  because  they  know  it.  The  uni-
verse of  living  beings,  of  all  those  which  procreate  their  species,  is  the
living  witness  to  the  various  modes  of  procreation  in  the  evolution  of
animal  and  human  species  and  races;  and  the  Naturalist  ought  to
sense  this  truth  intuitionally,  even  though  he  is  yet  unable  to  demon-


THE   ASHVATTHA  TREE.  437

strate  it.  How  could  he,  indeed,  with  the  present  modes  of  thought!
The  landmarks  of  the  apchaic  history  of  the  Past  are  few  and  scarce,
and  those  that  men  of  Science  come  across  are  mistaken  for  finger-
posts of  our  little  era.  Even  so-called  "universal  (?)  history"  embraces
but  a  tiny  field  in  the  almost  boundless  space  of  the  unexplored  regions
of  our  latest,  Fifth  Root-Race.  Hence,  every  fresh  sign-post,  every
new  glyph  of  the  hoar>'  Past  that  is  discovered,  is  added  to  the  old
stock  of  information,  to  be  interpreted  on  the  same  lines  of  preexisting
conceptions,  and  without  any  reference  to  the  special  cycle  of  thought
which  that  particular  glyph  may  belong  to.  How  can  Truth  ever  come
to  light  if  this  method  is  never  changed !

Thus,  in  the  beginning  of  their  joint  existence  as  a  glyph  of  Im-
mortal Being,  the  Tree  and  Serpent  were  divine  imager3%  truly.  The
Tree  was  reversed,  and  its  roots  were  generated  in  Heaven  and  grew  out
of  the  Rootless  Root  of  All-Being.  Its  trunk  grew  and  developed;
crossing  the  planes  of  the  Pleroma,  it  shot  out  crossways  its  luxuriant
branches,  first  on  the  plane  of  hardly  difierentiated  matter,  and  then
downward  till  they  touched  the  terrestrial  plane.  Thus,  the  Ashvattha
Tree  of  Life  and  Being,  whose  destruction  alone  leads  to  immortality,  is
said  in  the  Bhagavadgita  to  grow  with  its  roots  above  and  its  branches
below.*  The  roots  represent  the  Supreme  Being,  or  First  Cause,  the
Logos;  but  one  has  to  go  beyond  those  roots  to  unite  oneself  with
Krishna,  who,  says  Arjuna,  is  "greater  than  Brahman,  and  First  Cause
.  ,  .  the  indestructible,  that  which  is,  that  which  is  not,  and  what  is
beyond  them."t  Its  boughs  are  Hiranyagarbha  (Brahma  or  Brahman
in  its  highest  manifestations,  say  Shridhara  Svamin  and  Madhusu-
dana),  the  highest  Dhyan  Chohans  or  Devas.  The  Vedas  are  its
leaves.  He  only  who  goes  beyond  the  roots  shall  never  return;  that
is  to  say,  shall  reincarnate  no  more  during  this  Age  of  Brahma.

It  is  only  when  its  pure  boughs  had  touched  the  terrestrial  mud  of
the  Garden  of  Eden,  of  our  Adamic  Race,  that  this  Tree  became  soiled
by  the  contact  and  lost  its  pristine  purity;  and  that  the  Serpent  of
Eternity,  the  Heaven-Born  Logos,  was  finally  degraded.  In  days  of
old,  of  the  Divine  Dynasties  on  Earth,  the  now  dreaded  reptile  was
regarded  as  the  first  beam  of  light  that  radiated  from  the  abyss  of
Divine  Mystery.  Various  were  the  forms  which  it  was  made  to  assume,
and  numerous  the  natural  symbols  adapted  to  it,  as  it  crossed  the  aeons
of  Time ;  as  from  Infinite  Time  (Kala)  itself  it  fell  into  the  space  and

•  Ch.  XV.  t  Ch.  xi.


438  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

time  evolved  out  of  human  speculation.  These  forms  were  cosmic  and
astronomical,  theistic  and  pantheistic,  abstract  and  concrete.  They
became  in  turn  the  Polar  Dragon  and  the  Southern  Cross,  the  Alpha
Draconis  of  the  Pyramid,  and  the  Hindu-Buddhist  Dragon,  which  ever
threatens,  yet  never  swallows  the  Sun  during  its  eclipses.  Till  then,
the  Tree  remained  ever  green,  for  it  was  sprinkled  by  the  Waters  of
L^ife;  the  Great  Dragon  remained  ever  divine,  so  long  as  it  was  kept
within  the  precincts  of  the  sidereal  fields.  But  the  Tree  grew  and  its
lower  boughs  at  last  touched  the  Infernal  Regions — our  Earth.  Then
the  Great  Serpent  Nidhogg — he  who  devours  the  corpses  of  the  evil-
doers in  the  "Hall  of  Misery"  (human  life),  so  soon  as  they  are  plunged
into  Hwergelmir,  the  roaring  cauldron  (of  human  passions) — gnawed
the  reversed  World-Tree.  The  worms  of  materiality  covered  the  once
healthy  and  mighty  roots,  and  are  now  ascending  higher  and  higher
along  the  trunk ;  while  the  Midgard  Snake  coiled  at  the  bottom  of  the
Seas,  encircles  the  Earth,  and,  through  its  venomous  breath,  makes  her
powerless  to  defend  herself.

The  Dragons  and  Serpents  of  Antiquity  are  all  seven-headed — one
head  for  each  Race,  and  "every  head  with  seven  hairs  on  it,"  as  the
allegory  has  it.  Aye,  from  Ananta,  the  Serpent  of  Eternity,  which
carries  Vishnu  through  the  Manvantara;  from  the  original  primordial
Shesha,  whose  seven  heads  become  "one  thousand  heads"  in  the
Puranic  fancy,  down  to  the  seven-headed  Akkadian  Serpent.  This
typifies  the  Seven  Principles  throughout  Nature  and  in  man ;  the
highest  or  middle  head  being  the  seventh.  It  is  not  of  the  Mosaic,
Jewish  Sabbath  that  Philo  speaks,  in  his  Creation  of  the  World,  when
saying  that  the  world  was  completed  "according  to  the  perfect  nature
of  number  6."     For:

When  that  Reason  \_Nous\  wtiich  is  lioly  in  accordance  with  the  number  7,  has  C7itered
the  soul  [the  living  body  rather],  the  number  6  is  thus  arrested  and  all  the  mortal
things  which  that  number  makes.

And  again:

Number  7  is  the  festival  day  of  all  the  earth,  the  birthday  of  the  world.  I  know
not  whether  any  one  would  be  able  to  celebrate  the  number  7  in  adequate  terms.*

The  author  of  The  Natural  Genesis  thinks  that :

The  septenary  of  stars  seen  in  the  Great  Bear  [the  Saptarshis]  and  seven-headed
Dragon  furnished  a  visible  origin  for  the  symbolic  seven  of  time  above.  The  god-
dess of  the  seven  stars  was  the  mother  of  time,  as  Kep ;  whence  Kepti  and  Sebti


*  De  Mundi  Opt/-,  Par.,  pp.  30  and  419.


)>


"SEVENING."  439

for  the  two  times  and  number  7.  So  this  is  the  star  of  the  Seven  by  name.  Sevekh
(Kronus),  the  son  of  the  goddess,  has  the  name  of  the  seven  or  seventh.  So  has
Sefekh  Abu  who  builds  the  house  on  high,  as  Wisdom  (Sophia)  built  hers  with
seven  pillars.  .  .  The  primary  kronotypes  were  seven,  and  thus  the  beginning  of
time  in  heaven  is  based  on  the  number  and  the  name  of  seven,  on  account  of  the
starry  demonstrators.  The  seven  stars  as  they  turned  round  annually  kept  pointing,
as  it  were,  with  the  forefinger  of  the  right  hand,  and  describing  a  circle  in  the  upper
and  lower  heaven.*  The  number  7  naturally  suggested  a  measure  by  seven,  that
led  to  what  may  be  termed  Sevening,  and  to  the  marking  and  mapping  out  of  the
circle  in  seven  corresponding  divisions  which  were  assigned  to  the  seven  great
constellations;  and  thus  was  formed  the  celestial  heptanomis  of  Egypt  in  the
heavens.

When  the  stellar  heptanomis  was  broken  up  and  divided  into  four  quarters,  it  was
multiplied  by  four,  and  the  twenty-eight  signs  took  the  place  of  the  primary  seven
constellations;  the  lunar  zodiac  of  twenty-eight  signs  being  the  registered  result  of
reckoning  twenty-eight  days  to  the  moon,  or  a  lunar  month. t  In  the  Chinese
arrangement,  the  four  sevens  are  given  to  four  Genii  that  preside  over  the  four
cardinal  points; J  or  rather  the  seven  northern  constellations  make  up  the  Black
Warrior;  the  seven  eastern  (Chinese  autumn)  constitute  the  White  Tiger;  the  seven
southern  are  the  Vermilion  Bird;  and  the  seven  western  (called  vernal)  are  the
Azure  Dragon.  Each  of  these  four  spirits  presides  over  its  heptanomis  during  one
lunar  week.  The  genitrix  of  the  first  heptanomis  (Typhon  of  the  seven  stars)  now
took  a  lunar  character.  ...  In  this  phase  we  find  the  goddess  Sefekh,  whose
name  signifies  number  7,  is  the  feminine  word,  or  logos  in  place  of  the  mother  of
time,  who  was  the  earlier  Word,  as  goddess  of  the  Seven  Stars.  §

The  author  shows  that  it  was  the  Goddess  of  the  Great  Bear  and
Mother  of  Time  who  was  in  Egypt  from  the  earliest  times  the  "lyiving
Word,"  and  that  Sevekh-Kronus,  whose  type  was  the  Crocodile-Dragon,
the  pre-planetary  form  of  Saturn,  was  called  her  son  and  consort;  he
was  her  Word-L,ogos.i|

The  above  is  quite  plain,  but  it  was  not  the  knowledge  of  astronomy
only  that  led  the  Ancients  to  the  process  of  Sevening.  The  primal
cause  goes  far  deeper  and  will  be  explained  in  its  place.

The  above  quotations  are  no  digressions.  They  are  brought  for^vard
as  showing  (jx)  the  reason  why  a  full  Initiate  was  called  a  Dragon,  a
Snake,  a  Na'ga;  and  ib)  that  our  septenary  division  was  used  by  the
priests  of  the  earliest  dynasties  in  Egypt,  for  the  same  reason,  and  on

•  For  the  same  reason  the  division  of  the  principles  in  man  into  seven  is  thus  reckoned,  as  they
describe  the  same  circle  in  the  higher  and  lower  human  nature.

+  Thus  the  septenary  division  is  the  oldest  and  preceded  the  four-fold  division.  It  is  the  root  of
archaic  classification.

X  In  Chinese  Buddhism  and  Esotericism,  the  Genii  are  represented  by  four  Dragons— the  Mahira-

jahs  of  the  Stanzas.
}  Op.  cit.,  II.  3"-i3-
li  Ibid.,  I.  321.


440  I'HE  SECREJT  DOCTRINE.

the  same  basis,  as  by  us.  This  needs  further  elucidation,  however.
As  already  stated,  what  Mr.  Gerald  Massey  calls  the  Four  Genii  of  the
four  cardinal  points;  and  the  Chinese,  the  Black  Warrior,  White  Tiger,
Vermilion  Bird,  and  Azure  Dragon,  are  called  in  the  Secret  Books,  the
"Four  Hidden  Dragons  of  Wisdom"  and  the  "Celestial  Nagas."  Now,
the  seven-headed  or  septenary  Dragon-Logos  is  shown  to  have,  in
course  of  time,  been  split  up,  so  to  speak,  into  four  heptanomic  parts
or  twenty-eight  portions.  Each  week  has  a  distinct  Occult  character
in  the  lunar  month;  each  day  of  the  twenty-eight  has  its  special  char-
acteristics; for  each  of  the  twelve  constellations,  whether  separately
or  in  combination  with  other  signs,  has  an  Occult  influence  either  for
good  or  for  evil.  This  represents  the  sum  of  knowledge  that  men  can
acquire  on  this  earth ;  yet  few  are  those  who  acquire  it,  and  still  fewer
are  the  wise  men  who  get  to  the  root  of  knowledge  symbolized  by  the
great  Root-Dragon,  the  Spiritual  lyOgos  of  these  visible  signs.  But
those  who  do,  receive  the  name  of  Dragons,  and  they  are  the  "Arhats
of  the  Four  Truths  of  the  Twenty-eight  Faculties,"  or  attributes,  and
have  always  been  so  called.

The  Alexandrian  Neo-Platonists  asserted  that  to  become  real  Chal-
dees  or  Magi,  one  had  to  master  the  science  or  knowledge  of  the
periods  of  the  Seven  Rectors  of  the  World,  in  whom  is  all  wisdom.
And  Jamblichus  is  credited  with  another  version,  which  does  not,
however,  alter  the  meaning,  for  he  says:

The  Assyrians  have  not  only  preserved  the  records  of  seven  and  twenty  myriads
of  years,  as  Hipparchus  says  they  have,  but  likewise  of  the  whole  apocatastases  and
periods  of  the  Seven  Rulers  of  the  World.*

The  legends  of  every  nation  and  tribe,  whether  civilized  or  savage,
point  to  the  once  universal  belief  in  the  great  wisdom  and  cunning  of
the  Serpents.     They  are  "charmers."     They  hypnotize  the  bird  with
their  eye,  and  man  himself  very  often  does  not  overcome   their  fas-
cinating influence;  therefore  the  symbol  is  a  most  fitting  one.

The  Crocodile  is  the  Egyptian  Dragon.  It  was  the  dual  symbol  of
Heaven  and  Earth,  of  Sun  and  Moon,  and  was  made  sacred,  in  conse-
quence of  its  amphibious  nature,  to  Osiris  and  Isis.  According  to
Eusebius,  the  Egyptians  represented  the  Sun  in  a  Ship  as  its  pilot,
this  ship  being  carried  along  by  a  Crocodile,  "to  show  the  motion  of  the
Sun  in  the  Moist  (Space)."!  The  Crocodile  was,  moreover,  the  symbol
of  Lower  Egypt  herself,  the  Lower  being  the  more  swampy  of  the  two

•  Produs,  Tim.,  I.  t  Prep.  Evang.,  I.  iii.  3.


THE  DUAL  LOGOS.  44I

countries.  The  Alchemists  claim  another  interpretation.  They  say-
that  the  symbol  of  the  Sun  in  the  Ship  on  the  Ether  of  Space  meant
that  the  Hermetic  Matter  is  the  principle,  or  basis,  of  Gold,  or  again
the  philosophical  Sun;  the  Water,  within  which  the  Crocodile  is  swim-
ming, is  that  Water,  or  Matter,  made  liquid;  the  Ship  herself,  finally,
representing  the  Vessel  of  Nature,  in  which  the  Sun,  or  the  sulphuric,
igneous  principle,  acts  as  a  pilot,  because  it  is  the  Sun  which  conducts
the  work  by  his  action  upon  the  Moist  or  Mercury.  The  above  is  only
for  the  Alchemists.

The  Serpent  became  the  type  and  symbol  of  evil,  and  of  the  Devil,
only  du.ring  the  Middle  Ages.  The  early  Christians  as  well  as  the
Ophite  Gnostics,  had  their  dual  Logos :  the  Good  and  the  Bad  Serpent,
the  Agathodsemon  and  the  Kakodsemon.  This  is  demonstrated  by
the  writings  of  Marcus,  Valentinus,  and  many  others,  and  especially  in
Pistis-Sophia — certainly  a  document  of  the  earliest  centuries  of  Chris-
tianity. On  the  marble  sarcophagus  of  a  tomb,  discovered  in  1852
near  the  Porta  Pia,  one  sees  the  scene  of  the  adoration  of  the  Magi,
"or  else,"  remarks  the  late  C.  W.  King,  in  The  Gnostics  and  their  Re-
^nains,  *'the  prototype  of  that  scene,  the  'Birth  of  the  New  Sun'."
The  mosaic  floor  exhibited  a  curious  design  which  might  have  repre-
sented either  Isis  suckling  the  babe  Harpocrates,  or  the  Madonna
nursing  the  infant  Jesus.  In  the  smaller  sarcophagi  that  surrounded
the  larger  one,  many  leaden  plates  rolled  like  scrolls  were  found,
eleven  of  which  can  still  be  deciphered.  The  contents  of  these  ought
to  be  regarded  as  final  proof  of  a  much-vexed  question,  for  they  show
that  either  the  early  Christians,  up  to  the  Vlth  Centur>',  were  bona  fide
Pagans,  or  that  dogmatic  Christianity  was  borrowed  wholesale,  and
passed  in  full  into  the  Christian  Church — Sun,  Tree,  Serpent,  Croco-
dile and  all.

On  the  first  is  seen  Anubis  .  .  .  holding  out  a  scroll;  at  his  feet  are  two
female  busts :  below  all  are  two  serpents  entwined  about  ...  a  corpse  swathed
up  like  a  mummy.  In  the  second  scroll  ...  is  Anubis,  holding  out  a  cross,
the  "Sign  of  Life."     Under  his  feet  lies  the  corpse  encircled  in  the  numerous

folds  of  a  huge  serpent,   the  Agathodaemon,  guardian  of  the  deceased

In  the  third  scroll  .  .  .  the  same  Anubis  bears  on  his  arm  an  oblong  object,
....  held  so  as  to  convert  the  outline  of  the  figure  into  a  complete  Latin  cross.
.  .  .  At  the  god's  foot  is  a  rhomboid,  the  Eg>T)tian  "Egg  of  the  World,"  to-
wards which  crawls  a  serpent  coiled  into  a  circle.  .  .  .  Under  the  .  .  .  busts
...  is  the  letter  a>,  repeated  seven  times  in  a  line,  reminding  one  of  the  "Names."
.    .    .    Very  remarkable  also  is  the  line  of  characters,  apparently  Palmyrene,  upon


442  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

the  legs  of  the  first  Anubis.  As  for  the  figure  of  the  serpent,  supposing  these  talis-
mans to  emanate  not  from  the  Isiac  but  the  newer  Ophite  creed,  it  may  well  stand
for  that  "True  and  perfect  Serpent,"  who  "leads  forth  the  souls  of  all  that  put  their
trust  in  him  out  of  the  Egypt  of  the  body,  and  through  the  Red  Sea  of  Death  into
the  I,and  of  Promise,  sa-ving  them  on  their  way  from  the  Serpents  of  the  Wilder-
ness, that  is,  from  the  Rulers  of  the  Stars."*

And  this  "true  and  perfect  Serpent"  is  the  seven-lettered  God  who
is  now  credited  with  being  Jehovah,  and  Jesus  one  with  him.  To  this
seven-vowelled  God  the  candidate  for  Initiation  is  sent  by  the  "First
Myster>%"  in  the  Pistis- Sophia,  a  work  earlier  than  St.  John's  Revelation,
and  evidently  of  the  same  school.  "The  (Serpent  of  the)  Seven
Thunders  uttered  these  seven  vowels,"  but  "seal  up  those  things  which
the  Seven  Thunders  uttered,  and  write  them  not,"  says  Revelation.
"Do  ye  seek  after  these  mysteries?" — inquires  Jesus  in  Pistis- Sophia.
"No  mystery  is  more  excellent  than  they  [the  seven  vowels];  for  they
shall  bring  your  souls  unto  the  Light  of  Lights" — i.e.,  true  Wisdom.
"Nothing,  therefore,  is  more  excellent  than  the  mysteries  which  ye
seek  after,  saving  only  the  mystery  of  the  Seven  Vowels  and  their
forty  and  nine  Powers,  and  the  numbers  thereof."

In  India,  it  was  the  mystery  of  the  Seven  Fires  and  their  Forty-nine
Fires  or  aspects,  or  "the  numbers  thereof."

These  Seven  Vowels  are  represented  by  the  Svastika  signs  on  the
crowns  of  the  seven  heads  of  the  Serpent  of  Eternity,  in  India,  among
Ksoteric  "Buddhists,"  in  Egypt,  in  Chaldaea,  etc.,  and  among  the
Initiates  of  every  other  country.  They  are  the  Seven  Zones  of  post
■mortem  ascent,  in  the  Hermetic  writings,  in  each  of  which  the
"Mortal"  leaves  one  of  his  Souls,  or  Principles;  until  arrived  on  the
plane  above  all  Zones,  he  remains  as  the  great  Formless  Serpent  of
Absolute  Wisdom,  or  the  Deity  Itself.  The  seven-headed  Serpent  has
more  than  one  signification  in  the  arcane  teachings.  It  is  the  seven-
headed  Draco,  each  of  whose  heads  is  a  star  of  the  Lesser  Bear;  but  it
was  also,  and  preeminently,  the  Serpent  of  Darkness,  inconceivable
and  incomprehensible,  whose  seven  heads  were  the  seven  Logoi,  the
reflections  of  the  one  and  first-manifested  Light — the  Universal  Logos.

*  op.  cit.,  pp.  366-8.


SECTION  XI.
Demon  est  Deus  Inversus.


This  symbolical  sentence,  in  its  many-sided  forms,  is  certainly  most
dangerous  and  iconoclastic  in  the  face  of  all  the  dualistic  later  religions,
or  rather  theologies,  and  especially  so  in  the  light  of  Christianit3\  Yet
it  is  neither  just  nor  correct  to  say  that  it  is  Christianity  which  has
conceived  and  brought  forth  Satan.  As  an  "Adversary,"  the  opposing
Power  required  by  the  equilibrium  and  harmony  of  things  in  Nature,
as  Shadow  is  required  to  make  still  brighter  the  lyight,  as  Night  to
bring  into  greater  relief  the  Day,  and  as  Cold  to  make  one  appreciate
the  more  the  comfort  of  Heat,  .so  has  Satan  ever  existed.  Homogeneity
is  one  and  indivisible.  But  if  the  homogeneous  One  and  Absolute  is
no  mere  figure  of  speech,  and  if  Heterogeneity,  in  its  dualistic  aspect,
is  its  oflfspring,  its  bifurcous  shadow  or  reflection,  then  even  that  divine
Homogeneity  must  contain  in  itself  the  essence  of  both  good  and  evil.
If  "God"  is  Absolute,  Infinite,  and  the  Universal  Root  of  all  and
ever>'thing  in  Nature  and  its  Universe,  whence  comes  Evil  or  D'Evil
if  not  from  the  same  Golden  Womb  of  the  Absolute?  Thus  we  are
forced  either  to  accept  the  emanation  of  good  and  evil,  of  Agatho-
daemon  and  Kakodsemon,  as  offshoots  from  the  same  trunk  of  the  Tree
of  Being,  or  to  resign  ourselves  to  the  absurdity  of  believing  in  two
eternal  Absolutes!

Having  to  trace  the  origin  of  the  idea  to  the  ver>^  beginnings  of  the
human  mind,  it  is  but  just,  meanwhile,  to  give  his  due  even  to  the
proverbial  Devil.  Antiquity  knew  of  no  isolated,  thoroughly  and
absolutely  bad  "God  of  evil."  Pagan  thought  represented  good  and
evil  as  twin  brothers,  born  from  the  same  mother — Nature;  so  soon  as
that  thought  ceased  to  be  archaic,  Wisdom  passed  into  Philosophy.
In  the  beginning  the  symbols  of  good  and  evil  were  mere  abstractions,
Light  and  Darkness;  later  their  types  were  chosen  among  the  most
natural  and  ever-recurrent  periodical  cosmic  phenomena — the  Day  and


444  'J'^^  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Night,  or  the  Sun  and  Moon.  Then  the  Hosts  of  the  Solar  and  I^unar
Deities  were  made  to  represent  them,  and  the  Dragon  of  Darkness  was
contrasted  with  the  Dragon  of  I^ight.  The  Host  of  Satan  is  a  Son  of
God,  no  less  than  the  Host  of  the  B'ne  Alhim,  the  Children  of  God  who
came  to  "present  themselves  before  the  I^ord,"  their  Father.*  "The
Sons  of  God"  become  the  "Fallen  Angels"  only  after  perceiving  that
the  daughters  of  men  were  fair. \  In  the  Indian  philosophy,  the  Suras
are  among  the  earliest  and  the  brightest  Gods,  and  become  Asuras  only
when  dethroned  by  Brahmanical  fancy,  Satan  never  assumed  an
anthropomorphic,  individualized  shape,  until  the  creation  by  man,  of
a  "one  /z7;z«o- personal  God,"  had  been  accomplished;  and  then  merely
as  a  matter  of  prime  necessity.  A  screen  was  needed;  a  scape-goat  to
explain  the  cruelty,  blunders,  and  but  too-evident  injustice,  perpetrated
by  him  for  whom  absolute  perfection,  mercy  and  goodness  were
claimed.  This  was  the  first  Karmic  effect  of  abandoning  a  philoso-
phical and  logical  Pantheism,  to  build,  as  a  prop  for  lazy  man,  "a
merciful  Father  in  Heaven,"  whose  daily  and  hourly  actions,  as  Natura
Naturans,  the  "comely  Mother  but  stone  cold,"  belie  the  assumption.
This  led  to  the  primal  twins,  Osiris-Typhon,  Ormazd-Ahriman,  and
finally  Cain-Abel  and  the  tutti  quaiiti  of  contraries.

Having  commenced  by  being  synonymous  with  Nature,  "God,"  the
Creator,  ended  by  being  made  its  author.  Pascal  settles  the  difficulty
very  cunningly  by  saying:

Nature  has  perfections,  in  order  to  show  that  she  is  the  image  of  God;  and
defects,  in  order  to  show  that  she  is  only  his  image.

The  further  back  one  recedes  into  the  darkness  of  the  prehistoric
ages,  the  more  philosophical  does  the  prototypic  figure  of  the  later
Satan  appear.  The  first  "Adversary,"  in  individual  human  form,  that
one  meets  with  in  old  Puranic  literature,  is  one  of  her  greatest  Rishis
and  Yogis — Narada,  surnamed  the  "Strife-maker."

And  he  is  a  Brahmaputra,  a  son  of  Brahma,  the  male.  But  of  him
later  on.  Who  the  great  "Deceiver"  really  is,  one  can  ascertain  by
searching  for  him,  with  open  eyes  and  an  unprejudiced  mind,  in  every
old  Cosmogony  and  Scripture.

It  is  the  anthropomorphized  Demiurge,  the  Creator  of  Heaven  and
Earth,  when  separated  from  the  collective  Hosts  of  his  Fellow-Creators,
whom,  so  to  speak,  he  represents  and  synthesizes.  It  is  now  the  God
of  Theologies.     "The  wish  is  father  to  the  thought."     Once  upon  a

•  Job,  ii.  +  Genesis,  vi.


NO   LIFE   WITHOUT  DEATH.  445

time,  a  philosophical  symbol  left  to  perverse  human  fancy;  afterwards,
fashioned  into  a  fiendish,  deceiving,  cunning,  and  jealous  God.

As  the  Dragons  and  other  Fallen  Angels  are  described  in  other  parts
of  this  work,  a  few  words  upon  the  much-slandered  Satan  will  be
sufficient.  The  student  will  do  well  to  remember  that,  with  every
people,  except  the  Christian  nations,  the  Devil  is  to  this  day  no  worse
an  entity  than  the  opposite  aspect,  in  the  dual  nature  of  the  so-called
Creator.  This  is  only  natural.  One  cannot  claim  God  as  the  synthesis
of  the  whole  Universe,  as  Omnipresent  and  Omniscient  and  Infinite,
and  then  divorce  him  from  Evil.  As  there  is  far  more  Evil  than  Good
in  the  world,  it  follows  on  logical  grounds  that  either  God  must  include
Evil,  or  stand  as  the  direct  cause  of  it,  or  else  surrender  his  claims
to  Absoluteness.  The  Ancients  understood  this  so  well  that  their
philosophers,  now  followed  by  the  Kabalists,  defined  Evil  as  the
"lining"  of  God  or  Good;  Demon  est  Deus  inversus,  being  a  very  old
adage.  Indeed,  Evil  is  but  an  antagonizing  blind  force  in  Nature;
it  is  reaction,  opposition,  and  contrast — evil  for  some,  good  for  others.
There  is  no  mahim  m  se;  only  the  Shadow  of  Light,  without  which
lyight  could  have  no  existence,  even  in  our  perceptions.  If  Evil  dis-
appeared. Good  would  disappear  along  with  it  from  Earth.  The  "Old
Dragon"  was  pure  Spirit  before  he  became  Matter,  passive  before  he
became  active.  In  the  Syro-Chaldean  Magic  both  Ophis  and  Ophio-
morphos  are  joined  in  the  Zodiac  in  the  sign  of  the  Androgyne  Virgo-
Scorpio.  Before  its  fall  on  earth  the  Serpent  was  Ophis-Christos,  and
after  its  fall  it  became  Ophiomorphos-Chrestos.  Everywhere  the  spec-
ulations of  the  Kabalists  treat  of  Evil  as  a  Force,  which  is  antagonistic,
but  at  the  same  time  essential,  to  Good,  as  giving  it  vitality  and  exist-
ence, which  it  could  never  have  othenvise.  There  would  be  no  Life
possible  (in  the  mayavic  sense)  without  Death;  no  regeneration  and
reconstruction  without  destruction.  Plants  would  perish  in  eternal
sunlight,  and  so  would  man,  who  would  become  an  automaton  without
the  exercise  of  his  free  will,  and  his  aspiring  towards  that  sunlight,
which  would  lose  its  being  and  value  for  him  had  he  nothing  but  light.
Good  is  infinite  and  eternal  only  in  the  eternally  concealed  from  us,
and  this  is  why  we  imagine  it  eternal.  On  the  manifested  planes,  one
equilibrates  the  other.  Few  are  those  Theists,  believers  in  a  Personal
God,  who  do  not  make  of  Satan  the  shadow  of  God;  or  who,  con-
founding both,  do  not  believe  they  have  a  right  to  pray  to  their  idol,
asking  its  help  and  protection  for  the  exercise  of  and  immunity  for


446  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

their  evil  and  cruel  deeds.  "Lead  us  not  into  temptation"  is  addressed
daily  to  "our  Father,  in  Heaven,"  and  not  to  the  Devil,  by  millions  of
Christian  hearts.  This  they  do,  repeating  the  very  words  put  into  the
mouth  of  their  Saviour,  and  yet  do  not  give  one  thought  to  the  fact
that  their  meaning  is  contradicted  point  blank  by  James,  "the  brother
of  the  Lord":

Let  no  man  say  when  he  is  tempted,  I  am  tempted  of  God :  for  God  cannot  be
tempted  with  evil,  neither  tempteth  he  any  man.*

Why,  then,  say  that  it  is  the  Devil  who  tempts  us,  when  the  Church
teaches  us,  07i  the  aiitho7'ity  of  Christ,  that  it  is  God  who  does  so?  Open
any  pious  volume  in  which  the  word  "temptation"  is  defined  in  its
theological  sense,  and  forthwith  you  find  two  definitions :

(I)  Those  afflictions  and  troubles  whereby  God  tries  his  people;  (2)  Those  means
and  enticements  which  the  Devil  makes  use  of  to  ensnare  and  allure  mankind,  t

Accepted  literally,  the  teachings  of  Christ  and  James  contradict  each
other,  and  what  dogma  can  reconcile  the  two  if  the  Occult  meaning  is
rejected?

Between  the  alternative  allurements,  wise  will  be  that  philosopher
who  will  be  able  to  decide  where  God  disappears  to  make  room  for  the
Devil!  Therefore,  when  we  read  that  "the  Devil  is  a  liar  and  the
father  of  it,"  that  is  an  incarnate  lie,  and  are  also  told  in  the  same
breath  that  Satan,  the  Devil,  was  a  Son  of  God  and  the  most  beautiful
of  his  Archangels,  rather  than  believe  that  Father  and  Son  are  a
gigantic,  personified  and  eternal  Lie,  we  prefer  to  turn  to  Pantheism
and  to  Pagan  philosophy  for  information.

Once  that  the  key  to  Genesis  is  in  our  hands,  the  scientific  and  sym-
bolical Kabalah  unveils  the  secret.  The  Great  Serpent  of  the  Garden
of  Eden  and  the  "Lord  God"  are  identical,  and  so  are  Jehovah  and
Cain — that  Cain  who  is  referred  to  in  Theology  as  the  "murderer"  and
the  Liar  to  God!  Jehovah  tempts  the  King  of  Israel  to  number  the
people,  and  Satan  tempts  him  to  do  the  same  in  another  place.  Jeho-
vah turns  into  the  Fiery  Serpents  to  bite  those  he  is  displeased  with ;
and  Jehovah  informs  the  Brazen  Serpent  that  heals  them.

These  short,  and  seemingly  contradictory,  statements  in  the  Old
Testa^nent — contradictory  because  the  two  Powers  are  separated  instead
of  being  regarded  as  the  two  faces  of  one  and  the  same  thing — are  the
echoes,  distorted  out  of  recognition  by  exotericism  and  theology,  of
the  universal  and  philosophical  dogmas  in  Nature,  so  well  understood

*  James,  i.  13.  t  James,  i.  2,  12;  Matth.,  vi.  13.    See  Cruden,  sub  voc.


THEOLOGICAL  ETYMOLOGIES.  447

by  the  primitive  Sages.     We  find  the  same  groundwork  in  several  per-
sonifications in  the  Puranas,  only  far  more  ample  and  philosophically

suggestive.

Thus  Pulastya,  a  "Son  of  God,"  one  of  the  first  progeny,  is  made  the
progenitor  of  Demons,  the  Rakshasas,  the  tempters  and  the  devourers
of  men.  Pishacha,  a  female  Demon,  is  a  daughter  of  Daksha,  a  "Son
of  God"  too,  and  a  God,  and  the  mother  of  all  the  Pishachas.-'^  The
Demons,  so-called  in  the  Purdnas,  are  very  extraordinary  Devils  when
judged  from  the  standpoint  of  European  and  orthodox  views,  since
all  of  them,  Danavas,  Daityas,  Pishachas,  and  Rakshasas,  are  repre-
sented as  extremely  pious,  following  the  precepts  of  the  Vcdas,  some  of
them  even  being  great  Yogins.  But  they  oppose  the  clergy  and  ritu-
alism, sacrifices  and  forms,  just  as  the  head  Yogins  do  to  this  day  in
India,  and  are  no  less  respected  for  it,  though  they  are  permitted  to
follow  neither  caste  nor  ritual;  hence  all  those  Puranic  Giants  and
Titans  are  called  Devils.  The  missionaries,  ever  on  the  watch  to  show,
if  they  can,  that  the  Hindu  traditions  are  nothing  better  than  a  reflec-
tion of  the  Jewish  Bible,  have  evolved  a  whole  romance  on  the  alleged
identity  of  Pulastya  with  Cain,  and  of  the  Rakshasas  with  the  Cainites,
the  "Accursed,"  the  cause  of  the  "Noachian"  Deluge.  (See  the  work
of  Abbe  Gorresio,  who  "etymologizes"  Pulastya's  name  as  meaning
the  "  rejected,"  hence  Cain,  if  you  please).  Pulastya  dwells  in  Kedara,
he  says,  which  means  a  "dug-up  place,"  a  "mine,"  and  Cain  is  shown,
in  tradition  and  the  Bible,  as  the  first  worker  in  metals  and  a  miner
thereof!

While  it  is  very  probable  that  the  Gibborim,  or  Giants,  of  the  Bible
are  the  Rakshasas  of  the  Hindus,  it  is  still  more  certain  that  both  are
Atlanteans,  and  belong  to  the  submerged  races.  However  it  may  be,
no  Satan  could  be  more  persistent  in  slandering  his  enemy,  or  more
spiteful  in  his  hatred,  than  the  Christian  Theologians  are  in  cursing
him  as  the  father  of  every  evil.  Compare  their  vituperation  and  their
opinions  about  the  Devil  with  the  philosophical  views  of  the  Puranic
Sages  and  their  Christ-like  mansuetude.  When  Parashara,  whose
father  was  devoured  by  a  Rakshasa,  was  preparing  himself  to  destroy,
by  magic  arts,  the  whole  race,  his  grandsire,  Vasishtha,  after  showing
the  irate  Sage,  on  his  own  confession,  that  there  is  Evil  and  Karma,
but  no  "evil  Spirits,"  speaks  the  following  suggestive  words:

Let  thy  wrath  be  appeased :  the  Rakshasas  are  not  culpable ;  thy  father's  death

•  Padma  Pur&na.


.448  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

was  the  work  of  Destiny  [Karma].  Anger  is  the  passion  of  fools;  it  becometh  not
a  wise  man.  By  whom,  it  may  be  asked,  is  any  one  killed?  Every  man  reaps  the
consequences  of  his  own  acts.  Anger,  my  son,  is  the  destruction  of  ail  that  man
obtains  .  .  .  and  prevents  the  attainment  ...  of  emancipation.  The  .  .  .
sages  shun  wrath:  be  not  thou,  my  child,  subject  to  its  influence.  Let  no  more
of  those  unoffending  spirits  of  darkness  be  consumed;  let  this  th}'  sacrifice  cease.
Mercy  is  the  might  of  the  righteous.*

Thus,  every  such  "sacrifice"  or  prayer  to  God  for  help  is  no  better
than  an  act  of  Black  Magic.  That  which  Parashara  prayed  for,  was  the
destruction  of  the  Spirits  of  Darkness,  for  his  personal  revenge.  He
is  called  a  Pagan,  and  the  Christians  have  doomed  him,  as  such,  to
Eternal  Hell.  Yet,  in  what  respect  is  the  praj^er  of  sovereigns  and
generals,  who  pray  before  every  battle  for  the  destruction  of  their
enemy,  any  better?  Such  a  prayer  is  in  every  case  Black  Magic  of
the  worst  kind,  concealed  like  a  demon  "Mr.  Hyde"  under  a  sancti-
monious "Dr.  Jekyll."

In  human  nature,  evil  denotes  only  the  polarity  of  Matter  and  Spirit,
a  "struggle  for  life"  between  the  two  manifested  Principles  in  Space
and  Time,  which  Principles  are  one  per  se,  inasmuch  as  they  are  rooted
in  the  Absolute.  In  Cosmos,  the  equilibrium  must  be  preserved.  The
operations  of  the  two  contraries  produce  harmony,  like  the  centri-
petal and  centrifugal  forces,  which,  being  mutually  inter-dependent,
are  necessary  to  each  other,  "in  order  that  both  should  live,"  If  one-
should  be  arrested,  the  action  of  the  other  would  become  immediately
self-destructive.

Since  the  personification  called  Satan  has  been  amply  analyzed  from
its  triple  aspect,  in  the  O/d  Testament,  Christian  Theology  and  the
ancient  Gentile  attitude  of  thought,  those  who  would  learn  more  of
the  subject  are  referred  to  Iszs  Unveiled\  and  the  Second  Part  01
Volume  II  of  the  present  work.  The  subject  is  here  touched  upon,
and  fresh  explanations  are  attempted,  for  a  very  good  reason.  Before
we  can  approach  the  evolution  of  Physical  and  Divine  Man,  we  have
first  to  master  the  idea  of  Cyclic  Evolution,  to  acquaint  ourselves  with
the  philosophies  and  beliefs  of  the  four  Races  which  preceded  our
present  Race,  and  to  learn  what  were  the  ideas  of  those  Titans  and
Giants — Giants,  verily,  mentally,  as  well  as  physically.  The  whole  oi
antiquity  was  imbued  with  that  philosophy  which  teaches  the  involu-
tion of  Spirit  into  Matter,  the  progressive,  downward  cyclic  descent,  or
active,  self-conscious  evolution.     The  Alexandrian  Gnostics  have  sufiB-

•  VUhnu  Purina,  I.  i.  +  Vol.  II.  ch.  x.


THE  ANGELS  SLANDERED.  449

ciently  divulged  the  secrets  of  Initiations,  and  their  records  are  full  of
the  "falling  down  of  the-^ons,"  in  their  double  qualification  of  Angelic
Beings  and  Periods;  the  one  the  natural  evolution  of  the  other.  On
the  other  hand,  Oriental  traditions  on  both  sides  of  the  "Black  Water,"
the  Oceans  that  separate  the  two  "Easts,"  are  equally  full  of  allegories
about  the  downfall  of  the  Pleroma,  or  that  of  the  Gods  and  Devas.
One  and  all,  they  allegorized  and  explained  the  Fall  as  the  desire  to
learn  and  acquire  knowledge — the  desire  to  know.  This  is  the  natural
sequence  of  mental  evolution,  the  Spiritual  becoming  transmuted  into
the  Material  or  Physical.  The  same  law  of  descent  into  Materiality
and  of  reascent  into  Spirituality  asserted  itself  during  the  Christian
era,  the  reaction  having  only  stopped  just  now,  in  our  own  special
Sub-race.

That  which  was  allegorized  in  Pymander,  perhaps  ten  millenniums
ago,  for  a  triune  mode  of  interpretation,  and  intended  for  a  record  of
an  astronomical,  anthropological,  and  even  alchemical  fact,  namely,
the  allegory  of  the  Seven  Rectors  breaking  through  the  Seven  Circles
of  Fire,  was  dwarfed  into  one  material  and  anthropomorphic  inter-
pretation— the  Rebellion  and  Fall  of  the  Angels.  The  multivocal,  pro-
foundly philosophical  narrative,  under  its  poetical  form  of  the  "Mar-
riage of  Heaven  with  Earth,"  the  love  of  Nature  for  Divine  Form,  and
the  Heavenly  Man  enraptured  with  his  own  beautj^  mirrored  in  Nature,
that  is  to  say.  Spirit  attracted  into  Matter,  has  now  become,  under
theological  handling,  the  Seven  Rectors  disobeying  Jehovah,  self-
admiration  generating  Satanic  pride,  followed  by  their  Fall,  Jehovah
permitting  no  worship  to  be  lost  save  upon  himself.  In  short,  the
beautiful  Planet-Angels,  the  glorious  Cyclic  -^ons  of  the  Ancients,
have  become  synthesized  in  their  most  orthodox  shape  in  Samael,  the
Chief  of  the  Demons  in  the  Talmud,  "that  Great  Serpent  with  Twelve
Wings  that  draws  down  after  himself,  in  his  Fall,  the  Solar  System,  or
the  Titans."  But  Schemal — the  alter  ego  and  the  Sabean  type  of
Samael — in  his  philosophical  and  esoteric  aspect,  meant  the  "Year,"  in
its  astrological  evil  aspect,  with  its  twelve  months  or  "Wings"  of  un-
avoidable evils,  in  Nature.  In  Esoteric  Theogony  both  Schemal  and
Samael  represented  a  particular  divinity.*  With  the  Kabalists  they  are
the  "Spirit  of  the  Earth,"  the  Personal  God  that  governs  it,  and  there-
fore de  facto  identical  with  Jehovah.  For  the  Talmudists  themselves
admit  that  Samael  is  a  god-name  of  one  of  the  seven  Elohira.     The

•  See  Chwolsohn,  Nabathean  Agriculture,  II.  217.  „


450  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Kabalists,  moreover,  show  the  two,  Schemal  and  Samael,  as  a  sym-
bolical form  of  Saturn,  Cronus;  the  "Twelve  Wings"  standing  for  the
twelve  months,  and  the  symbol  in  its  collectivity  representing  a  racial
cycle.    Jehovah  and  Saturn  are  also  glyphically  identical.

This  leads,  in  its  turn,  to  a  very  curious  deduction  from  a  Roman
Catholic  dogma.  Many  renowned  writers  belonging  to  the  Latin
Church  admit  that  a  difference  exists,  and  should  be  made,  between
the  Uranian  Titans,  the  antediluvian  Giants,  who  were  also  Titans,  and
those  post-diluvian  Giants,  in  whom  the  Roman  Catholics  persist  in
seeing  the  descendants  of  the  mythical  Ham.  In  clearer  words,  there
is  a  difference  to  be  made  between  the  cosmic,  primordial  opposing
Forces,  guided  by  Cyclic  Law,  the  Atlantean  human  Giants,  and  the
post-diluvian  great  Adepts,  whether  of  the  Right  or  the  Left-hand.  At
the  same  time  they  show  that  Michael,  "the  generalissimo  of  the  fight-
ing Celestial  Host,  the  bodyguard  of  Jehovah^^  as  it  would  seem,  accord-
ing to  de  Mirville,  is  also  a  Titan,  only  with  the  adjective  of  "divine"
before  the  cognomen.  Thus  those  "Uranides"  who  are  called  every-
where "Divine  Titans" — and  who,  having  rebelled  against  Cronus,  or
Saturn,  are  therefore  also  shown  to  be  the  enemies  of  Samael,  also
one  of  the  Elohim,  and  synonymous  with  Jehovah  in  his  collectivity
— are  identical  with  Michael  and  his  Host.  In  short,  the  roles  are
reversed,  all  the  combatants  are  confused,  and  no  student  is  able  to
distinguish  clearly  which  is  which.  Esoteric  explanation  may,  how-
ever, bring  some  order  into  this  confusion,  in  which  Jehovah  becomes
Saturn,  and  Michael  and  his  Army,  Satan  and  the  Rebellious  Angels,
owing  to  the  indiscreet  endeavours  of  the  too  faithful  zealots  to  see  a
Devil  in  ever}"  Pagan  God.  The  true  meaning  is  far  more  philo-
sophical, and  the  legend  of  the  first  "Fall"  of  the  Angels  assumes  a
scientific  colouring  when  correctly  understood.

Cronus  stands  for  endless,  and  hence  immovable  Duration,  without
beginning,  without  end,  beyond  divided  Time  and  beyond  Space.
Those  Angels,  Genii,  or  Devas,  who  were  born  to  act  in  space  and  time,
that  is,  to  break  through  the  Seven  Circles  of  the  super-spiritual  planes
into  the  phenomenal,  or  circumscribed,  super-terrestrial  regions,  are
said  allegorically  to  have  rebelled  against  Cronus,  and  fought  the  Lion
who  was  then  the  one  living  and  highest  God.  When  Cronus,  in  his
turn,  is  represented  as  mutilating  Uranus,  his  father,  the  meaning  of
the  allegory  is  very  simple.  Absolute  Time  is  made  to  become  the
finite   and   conditioned;    a   portion   is    robbed   from   the  whole,   thus


THE  WAR    OF  THE   GODS.  45I

showing  that  Saturn,  the  Father  of  the  Gods,  has  been  transformed
from  Kternal  Duration  into  a  limited  period.  Cronus  with  his  scythe
cuts  down  even  the  longest  and,  to  us,  seemingly  endless  cycles,  which,
for  all  that,  are  limited  in  Eternity,  and  with  the  same  scythe  destroys
the  mightiest  rebels.  Aye,  not  one  will  escape  the  scythe  of  Time!
Praise  the  God  or  Gods,  or  flout  one  or  both,  that  scythe  will  not
tremble  one  millionth  of  a  second  in  its  ascending  or  descending
course.

The  Titans  of  Hesiod's  Thcogony  were  copied  in  Greece  from  the
Suras  and  Asuras  of  India.  These  Hesiodic  Titans,  the  Uranides,
which  were  once  upon  a  time  numbered  as  only  six,  have  been  recently
discovered,  in  an  old  fragment  relating  to  the  Greek  myth,  to  be  seven,
the  seventh  being  called  Phoreg.  Thus  their  identity  with  the  Seven
Rectors  is  fully  demonstrated.  The  origin  of  the  War  in  Heaven  and
the  Fall  has,  in  our  mind,  to  be  traced  unavoidably  to  India,  and
perhaps  far  earlier  than  the  Puranic  accounts  thereof.  For  the  Taraka-
maya  was  in  a  later  age,  and  there  are  accounts  of  three  distinct  Wars
to  be  traced  in  almost  every  Cosmogony.

The  first  War  happened  in  the  night  of  time,  between  the  Gods  and
(A)-suras,  and  lasted  for  the  period  of  one  Divine  Year.*  On  this  occa-
sion the  Deities  were  defeated  by  the  Daityas,  under  the  leadership  of
Hrada.  But  afterwards,  owing  to  a  device  of  Vishnu,  to  whom  the
conquered  Gods  applied  for  help,  the  latter  defeated  the  Asuras.  In
the  Vishnu  Purana  no  interval  is  found  between  the  two  Wars.  In  the
Esoteric  Doctrine,  however,  one  War  takes  place  before  the  building  of
the  Solar  System;  another,  on  Earth,  at  the  "creation"  of  man;  and  a

'  One  Day  of  Brahma  lasts  4,320,000,000  years — multiply  this  by  360 !  The  A-suras  (No-gods,  or
Demons)  are  here  still  Suras,  Gods  higher  in  hierarchj'  than  such  secondary  Gods  as  are  not  even
mentioned  in  the  Vedas.  The  duration  of  the  War  shows  its  significance,  and  also  shows  that  the
combatants  are  only  the  personified  Cosmic  Powers.  It  is  e\'ideutly  for  sectarian  purposes  and  out
of  odium  iheologicum  that  the  illusive  form  Mayamoha,  assumed  by  Vishnu,  was  attributed  in  later
reairangements  of  old  texts  to  Buddha  and  the  Daityas,  as  in  the  Vishnu  Puicina,  unless  it  was  a
fancy  of  Wilson  himself.  He  also  fancied  he  found  an  allusion  to  Buddhism  in  the  Bkas:avadgitd,
whereas,  as  proved  by  K.  T.  Tclang,  he  had  only  confused  the  Buddhists  and  the  older  Charvaka
materialists.  The  version  exists  nowhere  in  other  Piodnas  if  the  inference  does,  as  Trofessor  Wilson
claims,  in  the  Visknu  Purana;  the  translation  of  which,  especially  of  Book  III.  cli.  xviii,  where  the
reverend  Orientalist  arbitrarily  introduces  Buddha,  and  shows  him  teaching  Buddhism  to  Daityas,
led  to  another  "grreat  war"  between  himself  and  Col.  Vans  Kennedy.  The  latter  charged  him
publicly  with  wilfully  distorting  Turanic  texts.  "I  affirm."  wrote  the  Colonel  at  Bombaj',  in  1840,
"that  the  Ptirdnas  do  not  contain  what  Professor  Wilson  has  stated  is  contained  in  them;  ....
until  such  passages  are  produced  I  may  be  allowed  to  repeat  my  former  conclusions  that  Professor
Wilson's  opinion,  that  the  I^rdnas  as  now  extant  are  compilations  made  between  the  eighth  and
seventeenth  centuries  [A.D. !],  rests  solely  on  gratuitous  assumptions  and  unfounded  assertions,  and
that  his  reasoning  in  support  of  it  is  either  futile,  fallacious,  contradictory,  or  improbable."  (See
Visknu  Purana,  trans,  by  Wilson,  edit,  by  Fitzedward  Hall,  Vol.  V,  Appendix.)


452  fHE  SKCRET  DOCTRINE.

third  War  is  mentioned  as  taking  place  at  the  close  of  the  Fourth  Race,
between  its  Adepts  and  those  of  the  Fifth  Race;  that  is,  between  the
Initiates  of  the  "Sacred  Island"  and  the  Sorcerers  of  Atlantis.  We
shall  notice  the  first  contest,  as  recounted  by  Parashara,  and  endeavour
to  separate  the  two  accounts,  which  are  purposely  blended  together.

It  is  there  stated  that  as  the  Daityas  and  Asuras  were  engaged  in  the
duties  of  their  respective  Orders  (Varnas)  and  followed  the  paths  pre-
scribed by  ;.holy  writ,  practising  also  religious  penance— a  queer  em-
ployment for  Demons  if  they  are  identical  with  our  Devils,  as  it  is
claimed — it  was  impossible  for  the  Gods  to  destroy  them.  The  prayers
addressed  by  the  Gods  to  Vishnu  are  curious,  as  showing  the  ideas  in-
volved in  an  anthropomorphic  Deity.  Having,  after  their  defeat,  "  fled
to  the  northern  shore  of  the  Milky  Ocean  [Atlantic  Ocean],"*  the  dis-
comfited Gods  address  many  supplications  "to  the  first  of  Beings,  the
divine  Vishnu,"  and  among  others  the  following:

Glory  to  thee,  who  art  one  with  the  Saints,  whose  perfect  nature  is  ever  blessed,
and  traverses,  unobstructed,  all  permeable  elements.  Glory  to  thee,  who  art  one
with  the  Serpent-Race,  double-tongued,  impetuous,  cruel,  insatiate  of  enjoyment  and
abounding  with  wealth.  .  .  .  Glory  to  thee,  .  .  .  O  Lord,  who  hast  neither
■  colour  nor  extension,  nor  bulk  {ghana),  nor  any  predicable  qualities,  and  whose
essence  {rupa),  purest  of  the  pure,  is  appreciable  only  by  holy  Paramarshis  [the
greatest  of  Sages  or  Rishis].  We  bow  to  thee,  in  the  nature  of  Brahma,  uncreated,
undecaying  (avyaya);  who  art  in  our  bodies,  and  in  all  other  bodies,  and  in  all  living
creatures;  and  beside  whom  nothing  exists.  We  glorify  that  Vasudeva,  the  lord  (of
all),  who  is  without  soil,  the  seed  of  all  things,  exempt  from  dissolution,  unborn,
eternal;  being,  in  essence,  Paramapadatmavat  [beyond  the  condition  of  Spirit],
and,  in  substance  {rupa),  the  whole  of  this  {Universe).t

The  above  is  quoted  as  an  illustration  of  the  vast  field  offered  by  the
Ptcranas  to  adverse  and  erroneous  criticism,  by  every  European  bigot
who  forms  an  estimate  of  an  alien  religion  on  mere  external  evidence.
Any  man  accustomed  to  subject  what  he  reads  to  thoughtful  analysis,
will  see  at  a  glance  the  incongruity  of  addressing  the  accepted  "Un-
knowable," the  formless,  and  attributeless  Absolute,  such  as  the
Vedantins  define  Brahman,  as  being  "one  with  the  Serpent-Race,
double-tongued,  cruel  and  insatiable,"  thus  associating  the  abstract
with  the  concrete,  and  bestowing  adjectives  on  that  which  is  free  from
any  limitations,  and  conditionless.  Even  Professor  Wilson,  who,  after
living   surrounded   by   Brahmans   and    Pandits   in  India  for  so  man}'

*  This  statement  belongs  to  the  third  War,  since  the  terrestrial  continents,  seas  and  rivers  are
mentioned  in  connection  with  it.

••   Vishnu  Purajia,  III.  xvii  (Wilson,  Vol.  HI.  204-5).


WILSON'S   CRITICISM   CRITICIZED.  453

years,  ought  to  have  known  better — even  that  scholar  lost  no  oppor-
tunity of  criticizing  the  Hindu  Scriptures  on  this  account.  Thus,  he
exclaims:

The  Purdnas  constantly  teach  incompatible  doctrines !  According  to  this
passage,*  the  Supreme  Being  is  not  the  inert  cause  of  creation  only,  but  exercises
the  functions  of  an  active  providence.  The  Commentator  quotes  a  text  of  the  Veda
in  support  of  this  view:  "Universal  Soul  entering  into  men,  governs  their  con-
duct."    Incongruities,  however,  are  as  frequent  in  the  Vedas  as  in  the  Purdnas.

Less  frequent,  in  sober  truth,  than  in  the  Mosaic  Bible.  But  preju-
dice is  great  in  the  hearts  of  our  Orientalists,  especially  in  those  of
"reverend"  scholars.  Universal  Soul  is  not  the  inert  Cause  of  Crea-
tion or  (Para)  Brahman,  but  simply  that  which  we  call  the  Sixth  Prin-
ciple of  hitelledual  Kosmos,  on  the  manifested  plane  of  being.  It  is
Mahat,  or  Mahabuddhi,  the  Great  Sou4,  the  Vehicle  of  Spirit,  the  first
primeval  reflection  of  the  formless  Cause,  and  that  which  is  even
bcyo7id  Spirit.  So  much  for  Professor  Wilson's  uncalled-for  fling  at  the
Purarias.  As  for  the  apparently  incongruous  appeal  to  Vishnu  by  the
defeated  Gods,  the  explanation  is  there,  in  the  text  of  Vishnu  Ptirana,
if  Orientalists  would  only  notice  it.  There  is  Vishnu  as  Brahma,  and
Vishnu  in  his  two  aspects,  philosophy  teaches.  There  is  but  one
Brahman,  "essentially  Prakriti  and  Spirit."

This  ignorance  is  truly  and  beautifully  expressed  in  the  praise  of
the  Yogins  to  Brahma,  "the  upholder  of  the  earth,"  when  they  say:

Those  who  have  not  practised  devotion  conceive  erroneously  of  the  nature  of  the
world.  The  ignorant,  who  do  not  perceive  that  this  Universe  is  of  the  nature  of
Wisdom,  and  judge  of  it  as  an  object  of  perception  only,  are  lost  in  the  ocean  of
spiritual  ignorance.  But  they  who  know  true  Wisdom,  and  whose  minds  are  pure,
behold  this  whole  world  as  one  with  Divine  Knowledge,  as  one  with  thee,  O  God!
Be  favourable,  O  universal  Spirit !  t

Therefore,  it  is  not  Vishnu,  "the  inert  cause  of  creation,"  which
exercised  the  functions  of  an  Active  Providence,  but  the  Universal
Soul,  that  which,  in  its  material  aspect,  Eliphas  Levi  calls  Astral  Light.
And  this  Soul  is,  in  its  dual  aspect  of  Spirit  and  Matter,  the  true  an-
thropomorphic God  of  the  Theists;  for  this  God  is  a  personification  of
that  Universal  Creative  Agent,  both  pure  and  impure,  owing  to  its
manifested  condition  and  differentiation  in  this  Mayavic  World — God
and  Devil,  truly.     But  Professor  Wilson  failed  to  see  how  Vishnu,  in


•  Book  I.  chap,  xvii  (Wilson.  Vol.  II.  36),  in  the  story  of  Prahlada— the  Son  of  Hiranyakaihipu,
the  Puranic  Satan,  the  great  enemy  of  Vishnu,  and  the  King  of  the  Three  Worlds— into  whose  heart
Vishnu  entered.

T  Ibid.,  I.  iv  (Wilson,  Vol.  I.  64).


454


THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.


this  character,  closely  resembles  the  I^ord  God  of  Israel,  "especially  in
his  policy  of  deception,  temptation,  and  cunning."

In  the  Vishnu  Purana  this  is  made  as  plain  as  can  be.  For  it  is  said
there,  that:

At  the  conclusion  of  their  prayers  {stoira)  the  Gods  beheld  the  Sovereign  Deity
Hari  (Vishnu)  armed  -wdth  the  shell,  the  discus,  and  the  mace,  ridiiig  on  Garuda.

Now  Garuda  is  the  Manvantaric  Cycle,  as  will  be  shown  in  its  place.
Vishnu,  therefore,  is  the  Deity  in  Space  and  Time,  the  peculiar  God  of
the  Vaishnavas.  Such  Gods  are  called  in  Ksoteric  Philosophy  tribal  or
racial;  that  is  to  say,  one  of  the  many  Dhyanis  or  Gods,  or  Elohim,
one  of  whom  was  generally  chosen  for  some  special  reason  by  a  nation
or  a  tribe,  and  thus  became  gradually  a  "God  above  all  Gods,"*  the
"highest  God,"  as  Jehovah,  Osiris,  Bel,  or  any  other  of  the  Seven
Regents.

"The  tree  is  known  by  its  fruit" ;  the  nature  of  a  God  by  his  actions.
We  must  either  judge  these  actions  by  the  dead-letter  narratives,  or
must  accept  them  allegorically.  If  we  compare  the  two — Vishnu,  as
the  defender  and  champion  of  the  defeated  Gods;  and  Jehovah,  the
defender  and  champion  of  the  "chosen"  people,  so  called  by  anti-
phrasis,  no  doubt,  as  it  is  the  Jews  who  had  chosen  that  "jealous"
God— we  shall  find  that  both  use  deceit  and  cunning.  They  do  so
on  the  principle  of  "the  end  justifying  the  means,"  in  order  to  have
the  best  of  their  respective  opponents  and  foes — the  Demons.  Thus
while,  according  to  the  Kabalists,  Jehovah  assumes  the  shape  of  the
tempting  Serpent  in  the  Garden  of  Eden,  sends  Satan  with  a  special
mission  to  tempt  Job,  harasses  and  wearies  Pharaoh  with  Sarai,  Abra-
ham's wife,  and  "hardens"  another  Pharaoh's  heart  against  Moses,
lest  there  should  be  no  opportunity  for  plaguing  his  victims  "with
great  plagues,"  Vishnu  is  made  in  his  Purana  to  resort  to  a  trick  no
less  unworthy  of  any  respectable  God.

The  defeated  Gods  addressed  Vishnu  as  follows :

Have  compassion  upon  us,  O  Lord,  and  protect  us,  who  have  come  to  thee  for
succour  from  the  Daityas  (Demons) !  They  have  seized  upon  the  three  worlds,  and
appropriated  the  offerings  which  are  our  portion,  taking  care  not  to  transgress  the
precepts  of  the  Veda.  Although  we,  as  well  as  they,  are  parts  of  thee  \  .  .  .  .
engaged  [as  they  are]  ...  in  the  paths  prescribed  by  the  holy  writ  ....
it  is  impossible  for  us  to  destroy  them.     Do  thou,  whose  wisdom  is  immeasurable

*  II  Chronicles,  ii.  5.

+  "There  was  a  day  wheu  the  Sons  of  God  came  before  the  Lord,  and  Satan  came  with  his  brotlurs,
also  before  the  l,ord."    {Job  ii.,  Abyss.,  Ethiopic  text.)


TPIE   DECEPTION  OF  THE  GODS.  455

<Ameyatman)  instruct  us  in  some  device  by  which  we  may  be  able  to  exterminate
the  enemies  of  the  Gods !

When  the  mighty  Vishnu  heard  their  request,  he  emitted  from  his  body  an
illusory  form  (Mayamoha,  the  "deluder  by  illusion")  which  he  gave  to  the  Gods  and
thus  spake:  "This  Mayamoha  shall  wholly  beguile  the  Daityas,  so  that,  being  led
astray  from  the  path  of  the  Vedas,  they  may  be  put  to  death.  ...  Go  then  and
fear  not.  Let  this  delusive  vision  precede  you.  It  shall  this  day  be  of  great  service
unto  you,  O  Gods!"

After  this,  the  great  Delusion  (Mayamoha)  having  proceeded  (to  earth),  beheld
the  Daityas,  engaged  in  ascetic  penances,  and  approaching  them,  in  the  semblance
of  a  Digambara  (naked  mendicant)  with  his  head  shaven  ...  he  thus  addressed
them,  in  gentle  accents:  "Ho,  lords  of  the  Daitya  race,  wherefore  is  it  that  you
practise  these  acts  of  penances.'"  etc.*

Finally  the  Daityas  were  seduced  by  the  wily  talk  of  Mayamoha,  as
Eve  was  seduced  by  the  advice  of  the  Serpent.  They  became  apostates
to  the  Vedas.     As  Dr.  Muir  translates  the  passage:

The  great  Deceiver,  practising  illusion,  next  beguiled  other  Daityas,  by  meaus  of
many  other  sorts  of  heresy.  In  a  very  short  time,  these  Asuras  (Daityas),  deluded
by  the  Deceiver  [who  was  Vishnu']  abandoned  the  entire  system  founded  on  the
ordinances  of  the  triple  Veda.  Some  reviled  the  Vedas ;  others,  the  ceremonial  of
sacrifice;  and  others,  the  Brahmans.  This  (they  exclaimed),  is  a  doctrine  which
will  not  bear  discussion :  the  slaughter  (of  animals,  in  sacrifice),  is  not  conducive  to
religious  merit.  (To  say,  that)  oblations  of  butter  consumed  in  the  fire  produce  any
future  reward,  is  the  assertion  of  a  child.  .  .  .  If  it  be  a  fact  that  a  beast  slain
in  sacrifice  is  exalted  to  heaven,  why  does  not  the  worshipper  slaughter  his  own
father?  ....  Infallible  utterances  do  not,  great  Asuras,  fall  from  the  skies;
it  is  only  assertions  founded  on  reasoning  that  are  accepted  by  me  and  by  other
[intelligent]  persons  like  yourselves!  Thus  by  numerous  methods  the  Daityas  were
unsettled  by  the  great  Deceiver  [Reason].  .  .  .  When  the  Daityas  had  entered
on  the  path  of  error,  the  Deities  mustered  all  their  energies  and  approached  to
battle.  Then  followed  a  combat  between  the  Gods  and  the  Asuras;  and  the  latter,
who  had  abandoned  the  right  road,  were  smitten  by  the  former.  In  previous  times
they  had  been  defended  by  the  armour  of  righteousness  which  they  bore;  but,  when
that  had  been  destroyed,  they,  also,  perished. t

Whatever  may  be  thought  of  the  Hindiis,  no  enemy  of  theirs  can
regard  them  as  fools.  A  people,  whose  holy  men  and  sages  have  left
to  the  world  the  greatest  and  most  sublime  philosophies  that  ever
emanated  from  the  minds  of  men,  must  have  known  the  difference
between  right  and  wrong.  Even  a  savage  can  discern  white  from
black,  good  from  bad,  and  deceit  from  sincerity  and  truthfulness.
Those  who  had  narrated  this  event  in  the  biography  of  their  God,  must


•  /bid.,  Vol.  HI.  205-7.  t  Jojirnal  0/  the  Royal  Asiat.  Society,  xix.  302.


456  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

have  seen  that  in  this  case  it  was  that  God  who  was  the  Arch-Deceiver,
and  the  Daityas,  who  "never  transgressed  the  precepts  of  the  Vedas,''
who  had  the  sunny  side  in  the  transaction,  and  who  were  the  true
"Gods."  Thence  there  must  have  been,  and  there  is  a  secret  meaning
hidden  under  this  allegory.  In  no  class  of  society,  in  no  nation,  are
deceit  and  craft  considered  as  divhie  virtues — except  perhaps  in  the
clerical  classes  of  Theologians  and  modern  Jesuitism.

The  Vishnu  Purd?ia,*  like  all  other  works  of  this  kind,  passed  at  a
later  period  into  the  hands  of  the  Temple-Brahmans,  and  the  old  MSS.
have,  no  doubt,  been  further  tampered  with  by  sectarians.  But  there
was  a  time  when  the  Picrhias  were  esoteric  works,  and  so  they  are
still  for  the  Initiates  who  can  read  them  with  the  key  that  is  in  their
possession.

Whether  the  Brahman  Initiates  will  ever  give  out  the  full  meaning
of  these  allegories,  is  a  question  with  which  the  writer  is  not  concerned.
The  present  object  is  to  show  that,  while  honouring  the  Creative  Powers
in  their  multiple  forms,  no  philosopher  could  have,  or  ever  has,  ac-
cepted the  allegory  for  its  true  spirit,  except,  perhaps,  some  philo-
sophers belonging  to  the  present  "superior  and  civilized"  Christian
races.  For,  as  shown,  Jehovah  is  not  one  whit  the  superior  of  Vishnu
on  the  plane  of  ethics.  This  is  why  the  Occultists,  and  even  some
Kabalists,  whether  or  not  they  regard  those  creative  Forces  as  living
and  conscious  Entities— diwd  one  does  not  see  why  they  should  not  be  so
accepted — will  never  confuse  the  Cause  with  the  Effect,  and  accept  the
Spirit  of  the  Earth  for  Parabrahman,  or  Ain  Suph.  At  all  events  they
know  well  the  true  nature  of  what  was  called  by  the  Greeks  Father-
^ther,  Jupiter-Titan,  etc.  They  know  that  the  Soul  of  the  Astral
Ivight  is  divine,  and  its  Body— the  Light-waves  on  the  lower  planes-
infernal.  This  Light  is  symbolized  by  the  "Magic  Head "  in  the Zohar,
the  Double  Face  on  the  Double  Pyramid;  the  black  Pyramid  rising
against  a  pure  white  ground,  with  a  white  Head  a^id  Face  within  its
black  Triangle;  the  White  Pyramid,  inverted— the  reflection  of  the  first
in  the  dark  Waters — showing  the  black  reflection  of  the  white  Face.

This  is  the  Astral  Light,  or  Demon  est  Deus  Inversus.


*  Wilson's  opinion  that  the  Vishnu  Pur&na  is  a  production  of  our  era,  and  that  in  its  present  forto
it  is  not  earlier  than  between  the  Vlllth  and  the  XVIIth  (!  !)  century,  is  absurd  beyond  noticing.


SECTION  XII.

The  Theogony  of  the  Creative  Gods.


To  thoroughly  comprehend  the  idea  underlying  every  ancient
Cosmology  necessitates  the  study  and  comparative  analysis  of  all  the
great  religions  of  antiquity;  for  it  is  only  by  this  method  that  the  root-
idea  can  be  made  plain.  Exact  Science,  could  it  soar  so  high,  in
tracing  the  operations  of  Nature  to  their  ultimate  and  original  sources,
would  call  this  idea  the  Hierarchy  of  Forces.  The  original,  trans-
cendental and  philosophical  conception  was  one.  But  as  systems
began  to  reflect  more  and  more  with  every  age  the  idiosyncrasies  of
nations,  and  as  the  latter,  after  separating,  settled  into  distinct  groups,
each  evolving  along  its  own  national  or  tribal  groove,  the  main  idea
gradually  became  veiled  by  the  overgrowth  of  human  fancy.  While  in
some  countries  the  Forces,  or  rather  the  intelligent  Powers  of  Nature,
received  divine  honours  to  which  they  were  hardly  entitled,  in  others —
as  now  in  Europe  and  the  other  civilized  lands — the  very  thought  of
such  Forces  being  endowed  with  intelligence  seems  absurd,  and  is
proclaimed  unscientific.  Therefore  one  finds  relief  in  such  statements
as  are  found  in  the  Introduction  to  Asgard  ayid  the  Gods;  "Tales  and
Traditions  of  our  Northern  Ancestors,"  edited  by  W.  S.  W.  Anson,  who
says :

Although  in  Central  Asia,  or  on  the  banks  of  the  Indus,  in  the  Land  of  the
Pyramids,  and  in  the  Greek  and  Italian  peninsulas,  and  even  in  the  North,  whither
Kelts,  Teutons  and  Slavs  wandered,  the  religious  conceptions  of  the  people  have
taken  different  forms,  yet  their  common  origin  is  still  perceptible.  We  point  out
this  connection  between  the  stories  of  the  Gods,  and  the  deep  thought  contained  in
them,  and  their  importance,  in  order  that  the  reader  may  see  that  it  is  not  a  magic
world  of  erratic  fancy  which  opens  out  before  him,  but  that  .  .  .  Life  and  Nature
formed  the  basis  of  the  existence  and  action  of  these  divinities.*

•p-3-


458  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

And  though  it  is  impossible  for  any  Occultist  or  student  of  Eastern
Esotericism  to  concur  in  the  strange  idea  t  lat,  "the  religious  concep-
tions of  the  most  famous  nations  of  antiquity  are  connected  with  the
beginnings  of  civilization  amongst  the  Germanic  races,"*  he  is  yet  glad
to  find  such  truths  expressed  as  that:  "These  fairy  tales  are  not  sense-
less stories  written  for  the  amusement  of  the  idle;  they  embody  the
profound  religion  of  our  forefathers."!

Precisely  so.  Not  only  their  Religion,  but  likewise  their  History.
For  a  myth,  in  Greek  fj-vOos,  means  oral  tradition,  passed  from  mouth  to
mouth  from  one  generation  to  the  other;  and  even  in  the  mpdern
etymology  the  term  stands  for  a  fabulous  statement  conveying  some
important  truth;  a  tale  of  some  extraordinary  personage  whose  bio-
graphy has  become  overgrown,  owing  to  the  veneration  of  successive
generations,  with  rich  popular  fancy,  but  which  is  no  wholesale  fable.
Like  our  ancestors,  the  primitive  Aryans,  we  believe  firmly  in  the
personality  and  intelligence  of  more  than  one  phenomenon-producing
Force  in  Nature.

As  time  rolled  on,  the  archaic  teaching  grew  dimmer;  and  the
nations  more  or  less  lost  sight  of  the  Highest  and  One  Principle  of  all
things,  and  began  to  transfer  the  abstract  attributes  of  the  Causeless
Cause  to  the  caused  effects,  which  became  in  their  turn  causative,  the
Creative  Powers  of  the  Universe;  the  great  nations  thus  acted  from
fear  of  profaning  the  Idea ;  the  smaller,  because  they  either  failed  to
grasp  it,  or  lacked  the  power  of  philosophic  conception  needed  to
preserve  it  in  all  its  immaculate  purity.  But  one  and  all,  with  the
exception  of  the  latest  Aryans,  now  become  Europeans  and  Christians,
show  this  veneration  in  their  Cosmogonies.  As  Thomas  Taylor,  J  the
most  intuitional  of  all  the  translators  of  the  Greek  Fragments,  shows,
no  nation  has  ever  conceived  the  One  Principle  as  the  immediate
creator  of  the  visible  Universe,  for  no  sane  man  would  credit  a  planner
and  architect  with  having  built  with  his  own  hands  the  edifice  he
admires.  On  the  testimony  of  Damascius  in  his  work.  On  First
Principles  (Hcpi  npwrwi'  'Apx^v),  they  referred  to  it  as  the  "  Unknovv^n
Darkness."  The  Babylonians  passed  over  this  principle  in  silence.
"To  that  God,"  says  Porphyry,  in  his  O71  Abstinence  (He/at  a.Tro^<i  twv
€>i/'i;xt»)v),  "who  is  above  all  things,  neither  external  speech  ought  to
be   addressed,    nor    yet   that  which    is    inward."      Hesiod  begins   his


»  Ibid.,  p.  2.  +  Ibid.,  p.  21.  X  See  The  Monthly  Magazine,  for  April,  1797.


JEHOVAH  NOT  THE   SUPREME   DEITY.  459

Theogo7iy  with  the  words,  "Chaos  of  all  things  was  the  first  produced,"*
thus  allowing  the  inference  that  its  Cause  or  Producer  must  be  passed
over  in  reverential  silence.  Homer  in  his  poems  ascends  no  higher
than  Night,  which  he  represents  Zeus  as  reverencing.  According  to
all  the  ancient  theologists,  and  the  doctrines  of  Pythagoras  and  Plato,
Zeus,  or  the  immediate  Artificer  of  the  Universe,  is  not  the  highest  God;
any  more  than  Sir  Christopher  Wren  in  his  physical,  human  aspect  is
the  Mind  in  him  which  produced  his  great  works  of  art.  Homer,
therefore,  is  not  only  silent  with  respect  to  the  First  Principle,  but
likewise  with  respect  to  those  two  Principles  immediately  posterior
to  the  First,  the  ^ther  and  Chaos  of  Orpheus  and  Hesiod,  and  the
Bound  and  Infinity  of  Pj'thagoras  and  Plato. f  Proclus  says  of
this  Highest  Principle  that  it  is  "  the  Unity  of  Unities,  and  beyond  the
first  Adyta  ....  more  ineffable  than  all  Silence,  and  more  occult
than  all  Essence     ....     concealed  amidst  the  intelligible  Gods."  J

To  what  was  written  by  Thomas  Ta3'lor  in  1797 — namtly,  that  the
"Jews  appear  to  have  ascended  no  higher  ....  than  the  immediate
Artificer  of  the  Universe,"  as  "Moses  introduces  a  darkness  on  the
face  of  the  deep,  without  even  insinuating  that  there  was  any  cause  of
its  existence,"^  one  might  add  something  more.  Never  have  the  Jews
in  their  Bible — a  purely  esoteric,  symbolical  work — so  profoundly
degraded  their  metaphorical  deity  as  have  the  Christians,  by  accepting
Jehovah  as  their  one  living  yet  personal  God.

This  First,  or  rather  One,  Principle  was  called  the  "Circle  of
Heaven,"  symbolized  by  the  hierogram  of  a  Point  within  a  Circle  or
Equilateral  Triangle,  the  Point  being  the  Logos.  Thus,  in  the  Rig
Veda,  wherein  Brahma  is  not  even  named.  Cosmogony  is  preluded
with  the  Hiranyagarbha,  the  "Golden  Egg,"  and  Prajapati  (later  on
Brahma),  from  whom  emanate  all  the  Hierarchies  of  "Creators."  The
Monad,  or  Point,  is  the  original  and  is  the  Unit  from  which  follows  the
entire  numeral  system.  This  Point  is  the  First  Cause,  but  That  from
which  it  emanates,  or  of  which,  rather,  it  is  the  expression,  the  Logos,
is  passed  over  in  silence.     In  its  turn,  the  universal  sj'mbol,  the  Point

*  Htoi  /A€V  TrpoiTKTTa  Xaos  y£V€T  (1.  166);  yeveTO  being  considered  in  antiquity  as  meaning-
"•WAH  generated"  and  not  simply  "  ivas."     (See  Taylor's  "Introd.  to  the  Parmenides  of  Plato,"  p.  260.)

+  It  is  the  confusion  between  the  "Bound,"  and  the  "Infinite,"  that  Kapila  overwhelms  with
sarcasms  in  his  disputations  with  the  Brahman  Yogis,  who  claim  in  their  mj-stical  visions  to  see  the
"Highest  One."

X  Ibid.

\  See  T.  Taylor's  article  in  his  Monthly  Magazine,  quoted  iu  the  Platonist  of  Feb.,  1887,  edited  by  T.
M.  Johnson,  F.T.S.,  Osceola,  Missouri.


460  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

within  the  Circle,  was  not  yet  the  Architect,  but  the  Cause  of  that
Architect;  and  the  latter  stood  to  it  in  precisely  the  same  relation  as
the  Point  itself  stood  to  the  Circumference  of  the  Circle,  which  cannot
be  defined,  according  to  Hermes  Trismegistus.  Porphyry  shows  that
the  Monad  and  the  Duad  of  Pythagoras  are  identical  with  Plato's
Infinite  and  Finite,  in  Philebus,  or  what  Plato  calls  the  a-n-upov  and
Trepas.  It  is  the  latter  only,  the  Mother,  which  is  substantial,  the  former
being  the  "Cause  of  all  Unity  and  measure  of  all  things";*  the  Duad,
Mialaprakriti,  the  Veil  of  Parabrahman,  being  thus  shown  to  be  the
Mother  of  the  Logos  and,  at  the  same  time,  his  Daughter — that  is  to
say,  the  object  of  his  perception — the  produced  producer  and  the
secondary  cause  of  it.  With  Pythagoras,  the  Monad  returns  into
Silence  and  Darkness,  as  soon  as  it  has  evolved  the  Triad,  from  which
emanate  the  remaining  7  numbers  of  the  10  numbers  which  are  at  the
base  of  the  Manifested  Universe.

In  the  Norse  Cosmogony  it  is  again  the  same.

In  the  beginning  was  a  great  Abyss  (Chaos),  neither  Day  nor  Night  existed;  the
Abyss  was  Ginnungagap,  the  yawning  gulf,  without  beginning,  without  end.  All-
Father,  the  Uncreated,  the  Unseen,  dwelt  in  the  Depth  of  the  Abyss  (Space)  and
willed,  and  what  was  willed  came  into  being,  t

As  in  the  Hindu  Cosmogony,  the  evolution  of  the  Universe  is
divided  into  two  acts,  which  are  called  in  India  the  Prakrita  and
Padma  Creations.  Before  the  warm  rays  pouring  from  the  Home  of
Brightness  awaken  life  in  the  Great  Waters  of  Space,  the  Elements  of
the  First  Creation  come  into  view,  and  from  them  is  formed  the  Giant
Ymir,  or  Orgelmir  (literally.  Seething  Clay),  Primordial  Matter  differ-
entiated from  Chaos.  Then  comes  the  Cow  Audumla,  the  Nourisher,:]:
from  whom  is  born  Buri,  the  Producer,  whose  son  Bor  (Born),  by
Bestla,  the  daughter  of  the  Frost-Giants,  the  sons  of  Ymir,  had  three
sons,  Odin,  Willi  and  We,  or  Spirit,  Will,  and  Holiness.  This  was
when  Darkness  still  reigned  throughout  Space,  when  the  Ases,  the
Creative  Powers,  or  Dhyan  Chohans,  were  not  yet  evolved,  and  the
Yggdrasil,  the  Tree  of  the  Universe  of  Time  and  of  lyife,  had  not  yet
grown,  and  there  was,  as  yet,  no  Walhalla,  or  Hall  of  Heroes.  The
Scandinavian  legends  of  Creation,  of  our  Earth  and  World,  begin  with
Time  and  human   lyife.     All  that  precedes  it  is  for  them   Darkness,

»  Vit.  Pythag.,  p.  47-
+  Asgard  and  the  Gods,  22.

t  Vach — the  "melodious  cow,  who  milks  sustenance  and  Water,"  and  yields  us  "nourishment  and
sustenance,"  as  described  in  the  Rig  Veda.


THE   PRIMEVAL  THEOGONY  OF  THE  VEDANTINS.  461

wherein  All-Father,  the  Cause  of  all,  dwells.  As  observed  by  the
editor  of  Asgard  and  the  Gods,  though  these  legends  have  in  them  the
idea  of  that  All-Father,  the  original  cause  of  all,  "he  is  scarcely  more
than  mentioned  in  the  poems,"  not,  as  he  thinks,  because  before  the
preaching  of  the  Gospel,  the  idea  "could  not  rise  to  distinct  conceptions
of  the  Eternal,"  but  on  account  of  its  deep  esoteric  character.  There-
fore, all  the  Creative  Gods,  or  Personal  Deities,  begin  at  the  secondary
stage  of  Cosmic  Evolution.  Zeus  is  born  in,  and  out  of  Cronus — Time.
So  is  Brahma  the  production  and  emanation  of  Kala,  "Eternity  and
Time,"  Kala  being  one  of  the  names  of  Vishnu.  Hence  we  find  Odin,
the  Father  of  the  Gods  and  of  the  Ases,  as  Brahma  is  the  Father  of  the
Gods  and  of  the  Asiiras;  and  hence  also  the  androgyne  character  of  all
the  chief  Creative  Gods,  from  the  second  Monad  of  the  Greeks  down
to  the  Sephira  Adam  Kadmon,  the  Brahma  or  Prajapati-Vach  of  the
Vcdas,  and  the  androgyne  of  Plato,  which  is  but  another  version  of  the
Indian  symbol.

The  best  metaphysical  definition  of  primeval  Theogony,  in  the  spirit
of  the  Vedantins,  may  be  found  in  the  "Notes  on  the  Bhagavad  Gita,"
by  T.  Subba  Row.  Parabrahman,  the  Unknown  and  the  Incognizable,
as  the  lecturer  tells  his  audience :

Is  not  Ego,  it  is  not  Non-Ego,  nor  is  it  consciousness it  is  not  even

Alma  ....  but  though  not  itself  an  object  of  knowledge,  it  is  yet  capable  of
supporting  and  giving  rise  to  every  kind  of  object  and  every  kind  of  existence
which  becomes  an  object  of  knowledge.  .  .  [It  is]  the  one  essence  from  which
starts  into  existence  a  centre  of  energy [which  he  calls  the  Logos].*

This  Logos  is  the  Shabda  Brahman  of  the  Hindus,  which  he  will
not  even  call  Ishvara  (the  "Lord"  God),  lest  the  term  should  create
confusion  in  the  people's  minds.  It  is  the  Avalokiteshvara  of  the
Buddhists,  the  Verbum  of  the  Christians  in  its  real  esoteric  meaning,
not  in  its  theological  disfigurement.

It  is,  the  first  Jiiata,  or  the  Ego  in  the  Kosraos,  and  every  other  Ego

is  but  its  reflection  and  manifestation It  exists  in  a  latent  con-
dition in  the  bosom  of  Parabrahman,  at  the  time  of  Pralaya.  .  .  .  [During
Manvantara]  it  has  a  consciousness  and  an  individuality  of  its  own.  .  .  .  [It
is  a  centre  of  energy,  but]  such  centres  of  energy  are  almost  innumerable  in  the
bosom  of  Parabrahman.  It  must  not  be  supposed,  that  [even]  this  Logos  is  [the
Creator,  or  that  it  is]  but  a  single  centre  of  energy.  .  .  .  Their  number  is  almost
infinite.  .  .  .  [This]  is  the  first  Ego  that  appears  in  Kosmos,  and  is  the  end  of
all  evolution.     [It  is  the  abstract  Ego].     .     .     This  is  the  first  manifestation  [or

•  The  Theosophist,  Feb.,  1887,  pp.  302-3.


4-62  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

aspect]  of  Parabrahman.  .  .  When  once  it  starts  into  existence  as  a  conscious
being,  ....  from  its  objective  standpoint,  Parabrahman  appears  to  it  as
Mulaprakriti.  Please  bear  this  in  mind  ...  for  here  is  the  root  of  the  whole
difficulty  about  Purusha  and  Prakriti  felt  by  the  various  writers  on  Vedantic  philo-
sophy. .  .  .  This  Mulaprakriti  is  material  to  it  [the  Logos],  as  any  material
object  is  material  to  us.  This  Mulaprakriti  is  no  more  Parabrahman  than  the
bundle  of  attributes  of  a  pillar  is  the  pillar  itself;  Parabrahman  is  an  unconditioned
and  absolute  reality,  and  Mulaprakriti  is  a  sort  of  veil  thrown  over  it.  Parabrah-
man by  itself  cannot  be  seen  as  it  is.  It  is  seen  by  the  Logos  with  a  veil  thrown
over  it,  and  that  veil  is  the  mighty  expanse  of  Cosmic  Matter.  .  ,  .  Parabrah-
man, after  having  appeared  on  the  one  hand  as  the  Ego,  and  on  the  other  as  Mula-
prakriti, acts  as  the  one  energy  through  the  Logos.*

And  the  lecturer  explains  what  he  means  by  this  acting  of  Some-
thing which  is  Nothing,  though  it  is  the  All,  by  a  fine  simile.  He
compares  the  Logos  to  the  Sun  through  which  light  and  heat  radiate,
but  whose  energy,  light  and  heat,  exist  in  some  unknown  condition  in
Space  and  are  diffused  in  Space  only  as  visible  light  and  heat,  the  Sun
being  only  the  agent  thereof.  This  is  the  first  triadic  hypostasis.  The
quaternary  is  made  up  by  the  energizing  light  shed  by  the  Logos.

The  Hebrew  Kabalists  stated  it  in  a  manner  which  is  esoterically
identical  with  the  Vedantic.  Ain  Suph,  they  taught,  could  not  be  com-
prehended, could  not  be  located,  nor  named,  though  the  Causeless
Cause  of  all.  Hence  its  name,  Ain  Suph,  is  a  term  of  negation,  "the
Inscrutable,  the  Incognizable,  and  the  Unnameable."  They  made  of
it,  therefore,  a  Boundless  Circle,  a  Sphere,  of  which  human  intellect,
with  the  utmost  stretch,  could  only  perceive  the  vault.  In  the  words
of  one  who  has  unriddled  much  in  the  Kabalistical  system  most
thoroughly,  in  one  of  its  meanings,  in  its  numerical  and  geometrical
esotericism :

Close  your  eyes,  and  from  your  own  consciousness  of  perception  try  and  think
outward  to  the  extremest  limits  in  every  direction.  You  will  find  that  equal  lines
or  rays  of  perception  extend  out  evenly  in  all  directions,  so  that  the  utmost  effort  of
perception  will  terminate  in  the  vault  of  a  sphere.  The  limitation  of  this  sphere
will,  of  necessity,  be  a  great  Circle,  and  the  direct  rays  of  thought  in  any  and  every
direction  must  be  right  line  radii  of  the  circle.  This,  then,  must  be,  humanly
speaking,  the  extremest  all-embracing  conception  of  the  Ain  Suph  manifest,  which
formulates  itself  as  a  geometrical  figure,  viz.,  of  a  circle,  with  its  elements  of  curved
circumference  and  right  line  diameter  divided  into  radii.  Hence,  a  geometrical
shape  is  the  first  recognizable  means  of  connection  between  the  Ain  Suph  and  the
intelligence  of  man.t

*  Ibid.,  p.  304.  t   The  Masonic  Review,  June,  1886.


SYNONYMS   OF   THE   l,OGOS.  463

This  Great  Circle,  which  Eastern  Esotericism  reduces  to  the  Point
within  the  Boundless  Circle,  is  the  Avalokiteshvara,  the  Logos,  or
Verbum,  of  which  T.  Subba  Row  speaks.  But  this  Circle  or  manifested
God  is  as  unknown  to  us,  except  through  its  ?}ia7iifested  Universe,  as  is
the  One,  though  easier,  or  rather  more  possible  to  our  highest  con-
ceptions. This  L^gos  which  sleeps  in  the  bosom  of  Parabrahmau,
during  Pralaya,  as  our  "Ego  is  latent  [in  us]  at  the  time  of  Sushupti,"
or  sleep,  which  cannot  cognize  Parabrahman  otherwise  than  as  Miila-
prakriti — the  latter  being  a  Cosmic  Veil  which  is  "the  mighty  expanse
of  Cosmic  Matter" — is  thus  only  an  organ  in  Cosmic  Creation,  through
which  radiate  the  Energy  and  Wisdom  of  Parabrahman,  zinknown  to  the
Logos,  as  it  is  to  ourselves.  Moreover,  as  the  Logos  is  as  unknown  to  us
as  Parabrahman  is  unknown  in  reality  to  the  Logos,  both  Eastern
Esotericism  and  the  Kabalah,  in  order  to  bring  the  Logos  within  the
range  of  our  conceptions,  have  resolved  the  abstract  synthesis  into
concrete  images ;  viz.,  into  the  reflections  or  multiplied  aspects  of  that
Logos,  or  Avalokiteshvara,  Brahma  Ormazd,  Osiris,  Adam  Kadmon,
call  it  by  any  of  such  names  you  will ;  which  aspects,  or  manvantaric
emanations,  are  the  Dhyan  Chohans,  the  Elohim,  the  Devas,  the  Am-
shaspends,  etc.  Metaphysicians  explain  the  root  and  germ  of  the
latter,  according  to  T.  Subba  Row,  as  the  first  manifestation  of  Para-
brahman, "the  highest  trinity  that  we  are  capable  of  understanding,"
which  is  Mulaprakriti,  the  Veil,  the  Logos,  and  the  Conscious  Energy
of  the  latter,  or  its  Power  and  Light,  called  in  the  Bhagavad  Giid,
Daiviprakriti';  or  "Matter,  Force  and  the  Ego,  or  the  one  root  of  Self,
of  which  every  other  kind  of  self  is  but  a  manifestation  or  a  reflection."
It  is  then  only  in  this  Light  of  consciousness,  of  mental  and  physical
perception,  that  practical  Occultism  can  throw  the  Logos  into  visibility
by  geometrical  figures,  which,  when  closely  studied,  will  yield  not  only
a  scientific  explanation  of  the  real,  objective,  existence*  of  the  "Seven
Sons  of  the  Divine  Sophia,"  which  is  this  Light  of  the  Logos,  but  will
show,  by  means  of  other  yet  undiscovered  keys,  that,  with  regard  to
Humanity,  these  "Seven  Sons"  and  their  numberless  emanations,
centres  of  energy  personified,  are  an  absolute  necessity.  Make  away
with  them,  and  the  Myster\'  of  Being  and  Mankind  will  never  be  un-
riddled, nor  even  closely  approached.

It  is  through  this  Light  that  everything  is  created.      This  Root  of
mental  Self  is  also  the  root  of  physical  Self,  for  this  Light  is  the  permu-

*  Objective— in  the  world  of  Miyii,  of  course ;  still  as  real  as  we  are.


464  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

tation,  in  our  manifested  world,  of  Mulaprakriti,  called  Aditi  in  the
Vedas.  In  its  third  aspect  it  becomes  Vach,*  the  Daughter  and  the
Mother  of  the  Logos,  as  Isis  is  the  Daughter  and  the  Mother  of  Osiris,
who  is  Horus,  and  Moot,  the  Daughter,  Wife,  and  Mother,  of  Ammon,
in  the  Egyptian  Moon-glyph.  In  the  Kabalah,  Sephira  is  the  same  as
Shekinah,  and  is,  in  another  synthesis,  the  Wife,  Daughter,  and  Mother
of  the  Heavenly  Man,  Adam  Kadmon,  and  is  even  identical  with  him,
just  as  Vach  is  identical  with  Brahma,  and  is  called  the  female  I/)gos.
In  the  Rig  Veda,  Vach  is  "■  Mystic  Speech,"  by  whom  Occult  Know-
ledge and  Wisdom  are  communicated  to  man,  and  thus  Vach  is  said  to
have  "entered  the  Rishis."  She  is  "generated  by  the  Gods";  she  is
the  Divine  Vach,  the  "Queen  of  Gods";  and  she  is  associated,  like
Sephira  with  the  Sephiroth,  with  the  Prajapatis  in  their  work  of  crea-
tion. Moreover,  she  is  called  the  "Mother  of  the  Vedas,"  "since  it  is
through  her  powers,  [as  Mystic  Speech\  that  Brahma  revealed  them,
and  also  owing  to  her  power  that  he  produced  the  Universe" ;  that  is  to
say,  through  Speech,  and  words,  synthesized  by  the  "Word"  and
numbers. t

But  when  Vach  is  also  spoken  of  as  the  daughter  of  Daksha,  "the  God
who  lives  in  all  the  Kalpas,"  her  mayavic  character  is  shown ;  during
the  Pralaya  she  disappears,  absorbed  in  the  One,  all-devouring  Ray.

But  there  are  two  distinct  aspects  in  universal  Esotericism,  Eastern
and  Western,  in  all  these  personations  of  the  female  Power  in  Nature,
or  Nature  the  notime^ial  and  the  phenomenal.  One  is  its  purely  meta-
physical aspect,  as  described  by  the  learned  lecturer  in  his  "  Notes  on
the  Bhagavad  Gita" ;  the  other  terrestrial  and  physical,  and  at  the
same  time  diviiie  from  the  stand-point  of  practical  human  conception
and  Occultism.  They  are  all  the  symbols  and  personifications  of
Chaos,  the  Great  Deep,  or  the  Primordial  Waters  of  Space,  the  im-
penetrable Veil  between  the  Incognizable  and  the  lyOgos  of  Creation.
"Connecting  himself  through  his  mind  with  Vach,  Brahma  [the
Logos]  created  the  Primordial  Waters."  In  the  Katha  Upanishad  it  is
stated  still  more  clearly:

Prajapati  was  this  Universe.  Vach  was  a  second  to  him.  He  associated  with  her
.     .     .     she  produced  these  creatures  and  again  reentered  Prajapati.

*  "In  the  course  of  cosmic  manifestation,  this  Daiviprakriti,  instead  of  being-  the  Mother  of  the
Logos,  should,  strictly  speaking,  be  called  his  Daughter."    ("Notes  on  the  Bhagavad  GltA,"  op.  cit.,

P-  305-)

t  The  wise  men  who,  like  Stanley  Jevons  amongst  the  modems,  invented  a  method  to  make  the
incomprehensible  assume  a  tangible  form,  could  only  do  so  by  resorting  to  numbers  and  geometrical
figures.


"FEMAI^E"    I,OGOI.  465

This  connects  Vach  and  Sephira  with  the  Goddess  Kwan-Yin,  the
"Merciful  Mother,"  the  Divine  Voice  of  the  Soul,  even  in  exoteric
Buddhism,  and  with  the  female  aspect  of  Kwan-Shai-Yin,  the  Logos,
the  Verbum  of  Creation,  and  at  the  same  time  with  the  Voice  that
speaks  audibly  to  the  Initiate,  according  to  Esoteric  Budhism,  Bath
Kol,  the  Filia  Vocis,  the  Daughter  of  the  Divine  Voice  of  the  Hebrews,
responding  from  the  Mercy  Seat  within  the  Veil  of  the  Temple  is — a
result.

And  here  we  may  incidentally  point  out  one  of  the  many  unjust  slurs
thrown  by  the  "good  and  pious"  missionaries  in  India  on  the  religion
of  the  land.  The  allegoiy,  in  the  Shatapatha  Brdhmana,  that  Brahma,
as  the  Father  of  men,  performed  the  work  of  procreation  by  incestuous
intercourse  with  his  own  daughter  Vach,  also  called  Sandhya,  Twilight,
and  Shatarupa,  of  a  hundred  forms,  is  incessantly  thrown  in  the  teeth
of  the  Brahmans,  as  condemning  their  "detestable,  false  religion."
Besides  the  fact,  conveniently  forgotten  by  the  Europeans,  that  the
Patriarch  Lot  is  shown  guilty  of  the  same  crime  under  the  humafi  form,
whereas  it  was  under  the  form  of  a  buck  that  Brahma,  or  rather  Prajt-
pati,  accomplished  the  incest  with  his  daughter,  who  had  that  of
a  hind  (rohit),  the  esoteric  reading  of  the  third  chapter  of  Genesis
shows  the  same.  Moreover,  there  is  certainly  a  cosmic,  and  not  a
physiological,  meaning  attached  to  the  Indian  allegory,  since  Vach  is
a  permutation  of  Aditi  and  Mulaprakriti,  or  Chaos,  and  Brahma  a
permutation  of  Narayana,  the  Spirit  of  God  entering  into,  and  fructify-
ing Nature;  and,  therefore,  there  is  nothing  phallic  in  the  con-
ception at  all.

As  already  stated,  Aditi-Vach  is  the  female  Logos,  or  Verbum,  the
Word;  and  Sephira  in  the  Kabalah  is  the  same.  These  feminine
Logoi  are  all  correlations,  in  their  noumenal  aspect,  of  Light,  and
Sound,  and  ^ther,  showing  how  well-informed  were  the  Ancients  both
in  Physical  Science,  as  now  known  to  the  moderns,  and  also  as  to  the
birth  of  that  Science  in  the  Spiritual  and  Astral  spheres.

Our  old  writers  said  that  Vach  is  of  four  kinds.  These  are  called  Para,  Pashyanti,
Madhyama,  Vaikhari.  This  statement  you  will  find  in  the  Rig  Veda  itself  and  in
several  of  the  Upanishads.     Vaikhari  Vach  is  what  we  utter.

It  is  Sound,  Speech,  that  again  which  becomes  comprehensive  and
objective  to  one  of  our  physical  senses  and  may  be  brought  under  the
laws  of  perception.     Hence:

4very  kind  of  Vaikhari  Vach  exists  in  its  Madhyama    ....     Pashyanti  and

31


4.66  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Ultimately  in  its  Para  form The  reason  wliy  this  Pranava*  is  called

Vach  is  this,  that  these  four  principles  of  the  great  Kosmos  correspond  to  these

four  forms  of  Vach The  whole  Kosmos  in  its  objective  form  is  Vaikhari

Vach;  the  Light  of  the  Logos  is  the  Madhyama  form;  and  the  Logos  itself  the
Pasyanti  form;  while  Parabrahman  is  the  Para  [beyond  the  Noumenon  of  all
Noumena]  aspect  of  that  V&ch.t

Thus  Vach,  Shekinah,  or  the  "Music  of  the  Spheres"  of  Pythagoras,
are  one,  if  we  take  for  our  example  instances  in  the  three  most  (appa-
rently) dissimilar  religious  philosophies  in  the  world,  the  Hindu,  the
Greek  and  the  Chaldean  Hebrew.  These  personations  and  allegories
may  be  viewed  under  foicr  chief  and  three  lesser  aspects,  or  seven  in  all,
as  in  Ksotericism.  The  Para  form  is  the  ever  subjective  and  latent
lyight  and  Sound,  which  exist  eternally  in  the  bosom  of  the  Incog-
nizable ;  when  transferred  into  the  ideation  of  the  lyOgos,  or  its  latent
lyight,  it  is  called  Pasyanti,  and  when  it  becomes  that  Light  expressed,  it
is  Madhyama.

Now  the  Kabalah  gives  the  definition  thus:

There  are  three  kinds  of  Light,  and  that  [the  fourth]  which  interpenetrates  the
others;  (i)  the  clear  and  the  penetrating,  the  objective  Jjigiit,  (2)  the  reflected  l^iglit,
and  (3)  the  abstract  Light.

The  ten  Sephiroth,  the  Three  and  the  Seven,  are  called  in  the
Kabalah  the  Ten  Words,  dbrim  (Dabarim),  the  Numbers  and  the
Emanations  of  the  Heavenly  I/ight,  which  is  both  Adam  Kadmon  and
Sephira,  Prajapati-Vach,  or  Brahma.  Light,  Sound,  Number,  are  the
three  factors  of  creation  in  the  Kabalah.  Parabrahman  cannot  be
known  except  through  the  luminous  Point,  the  Logos,  which  knows
not  Parabrahman  but  only  Mulaprakriti.  Similarly  Adam  Kadmon
knew  only  Shekinah,  though  he  was  the  Vehicle  of  Ain  Suph.  And,
as  Adam  Kadmon,  he  is,  in  the  Esoteric  interpretation,  the  total  of  the
Number  Ten,  the  Sephiroth,  himself  being  a  Trinity,  or  the  three
attributes  of  the  Incognizable  Deity  in  One.J     "When  the  Heavenly

*  The  Pranava,  Om,  is  a  mystic  term  pronounced  by  the  Yogis  during  meditation ;  of  the  terms
called,  according  to  exoteric  commentators,  Vyakritis,  or  Aum,  Bhuh,  Bhuvah,  Svah,  (Om,  Earth,
Sky,  Heaven),  Pranava  is,  perhaps,  the  most  sacred.  They  are  pronounced  with  breath  suppressed.
See  Manu  II.  76-81,  and  Mitakshara  commenting  on  the  Yajnavakhya-Smriti,  I.  23.  But  the  esoteric
explanation  goes  a  great  deal  further.

+  "Lectures  on  the  Bhagaiiad  Gl/d,"  ibid.,  p.  307.

X  It  is  this  Trinity  that  is  allegorized  by  the  "Three  Steps  of  Vishnu,"  which  mean— Vishnu
being  considered  as  the  Infinite  in  exotericism — that  from  Parabrahman  issued  Mulaprakriti,
■Puruslia  (the  Logos)  and  Prakriti;  the  four  forms— with  itself,  the  synthesis — of  Vach.  And  in  the
Kabalah,  Ain  Suph,  Shekinah,  Adam  Kadmon  and  Sephira,  the  four,  or  the  three,  emanations  being:
distinct— yit  One.


THE   PYTHAGOREAN  IDEA.  467

Man  (or  Logos)  first  assumed  the  form  of  the  Crown*  [Kether]  and
identified  himself  with  Sephira,  he  caused  Seven  splendid  Lights  to
emanate  from  it  [the  Crown],"  which  made  in  their  totality  Ten;  so
Brahma-Prajapati,  once  he  became  separated  from,  yet  identical  with
Vach,  caused  the  seven  Rishis,  the  seven  Manus  or  Prajapatis,  to  issue
from  that  Crown.  In  exotericism  one  will  always  find  10  and  7,  of  either
Sephira  or  Prajapati;  in  esoteric  rendering  always  3  and  7,  which  yield
also  10.  Only  when  divided,  in  the  manifested  sphere,  into  3  and  7,
they  form  (J),  the  androgyne,  and  (^,  or  the  figure  X  manifested  and
differentiated.

This  will  help  the  student  to  understand  why  Pythagoras  esteemed
the  Deity,  the  Logos,  to  be  the  Centre  of  Unity  and  Source  of  Har-
mony. We  say  this  Deity  was  the  Logos,  not  the  Monad  that  dwelleth
in  Solitude  and  Silence,  because  Pjthagoras  taught  that  Unity  being
indivisible  is  no  mwiber.  And  this  is  also  why  it  was  required  of  the
candidate,  who  applied  for  admittance  into  his  school,  that  he  should
have  already  studied  as  a  preliminary  step,  the  sciences  of  Arithmetic,
Astronomy,  Geometry  and  Music,  which  wxre  held  to  be  the  four  divi-
sions of  Mathematics.!  Again,  this  explains  why  the  Pythagoreans
asserted  that  the  doctrine  of  Numbers,  the  chief  of  all  in  Esotericism,
had  been  revealed  to  man  by  the  Celestial  Deities;  that  the  World  had
been  called  forth  out  of  Chaos  by  Sound,  or  Harmony,  and  constructed
according  to  the  principles  of  musical  proportion;  that  the  seven
planets  which  rule  the  destiny  of  mortals  have  a  harmonious  motion
and,  as  Censorinus  says :

Intervals  corresponding  to  musical  diastemes,  rendering  various  sounds,  so  per-
fectly consonant,  that  they  produce  the  sweetest  melody,  which  is  inaudible  to  us,
only  by  reason  of  the  greatness  of  the  sound,  which  our  ears  are  incapable  of
receiving.

In  the  Pythagorean  Theogony,  the  Hierarchies  of  the  Heavenly  Host
and  Gods  were  numbered,  and  also  expressed  numerically.  Pythagoras
had  studied  Esoteric  Science  in  India;  therefore  we  find  his  pupils
saying :

The  Monad  [the  manifested  One]  is  the  principle  of  all  things.  From  the  Monad
and  the  indeterminate  Duad  (Chaos),  Numbers;  from  Numbers,  Points;  from  Points,
Lines;  from  Lines,  Superficies;  from  Superficies,  Solids;  from  these,  Solid  Bodies,

•  Chaldean  Book  of  Numbers.  In  the  current  Kabalah  the  name  Jehovah  replaces  that  of  Adam
Kadmon.

t  Justin  Martyr  tells  us  that,  owing  to  his  ignorance  of  these  four  sciences,  he  was  rejected  by  the
Tjihagoreans  as  a  candidate  for  admission  into  their  school.


468  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

whose  elements  are  four,  Fire,  Water,  Air,  Earth ;  of  all  which  transmuted  [con-e-
lated], and  totally  changed,  the  World  consists.*

And  this,  if  it  does  not  unriddle  the  mystery  altogether,  may  at
any  rate  lift  a  corner  of  the  veil  off  those  wondrous  allegories  that  have
been  thrown  over  Vach,  the  most  mysterious  of  all  the  Brahmanical
Goddesses;  she  who  is  termed  "the  melodious  Cow  who  milked  forth
sustenance  and  Water" — the  Earth  with  all  her  mystic  powers;  and
again  she  "who  yields  us  nourishment  and  sustenance" — the  physical
Earth.  Isis  is  also  mystic  Nature  and  also  Earth;  and  her  cow's  horns
identify  her  with  Vach,  who,  after  being  recognized  in  her  highest
form  as  Para,  becomes,  at  the  lower  or  material  end  of  creation,  Vaik-
hari.  Hence  she  is  mystic,  though  physical,  Nature,  with  all  her  magic
ways  and  properties.

Again,  as  Goddess  of  Speech  and  of  Sound,  and  a  permutation  of
Aditi,  she  is  Chaos,  in  one  sense.  At  any  rate,  she  is  the  "Mother  of
the  Gods,"  and  it  is  from  Brahma,  Ishvara  or  the  Logos,  and  Vach,  as
from  Adam  Kadmon  and  Sephira,  that  the  real  manifested  Theogony
has  to  start.  Beyond,  all  is  Darkness  and  abstract  speculation.  With
the  Dhyan  Chohans  or  the  Gods,  the  Seers,  the  Prophets  and  the
Adepts  in  general  are  on  firm  ground.  Whether  as  Aditi,  or  the
Divine  Sophia  of  the  Greek  Gnostics,  she  is  the  mother  of  the  Seven
Sons,  the  Angels  of  the  Face,  of  the  Deep,  or  the  Great  Green  One  of
the  Book  of  the  Dead.  Says  the  Book  of  Dzyan,  or  Real  Knowledge,
obtained  through  meditation:

The  Great  Mother  lay  zvith  the  /\,  and  the  |,  and  the  \_\ ,  the  second  I
a7id  the  "^,1  in  her  Bosom,  ready  to  bri?ig  them  forth,  the  valiant  Sons  of
the  []]]  l\^  1 1  {or  4,320,000,  the  Cycle'],  whose  two  Elders  are  the  (J)  [Circle]
and  the  •  [Point].

At  the  beginning  of  every  Cycle  of  4,320,000,  the  Seven,  or  as  some
nations  had  it  Eight,  Great  Gods,  descend  to  establish  the  new  order
of  things  and  to  give  the  impetus  to  the  new  cycle.  That  eighth  God
was  the  unifying  Circle,  or  Eogos,  separated  and  made  distinct  from  its
Host,  in  exoteric  dogma,  just  as  the  three  divine  hypostases  of  the
ancient  Greeks  are  now  considered  in  the  Churches  as  three  distinct
persona.     As  a  Commentary  says:

The  Mighty  Ones  perform,   their  great  works,  and  leave  behind  them

*  Diogenes  Laertius,  in  Vil.  Pythag.

t3i4i5,  or  7r,  the  synthesis,  or  the  Host  unified  in  the  Logos^and  the  Point,  called  in  Roman
Catholicism  the  "Angel  of  the  Face,"  and  in  Hebrew,  Michael,  ^ND'^D,  "who  [is  like  unto,  or  the
same]  as  God,"  the  manifested  representation.


ANTIQUITY   OF   THE    PYRAMIDS.  469

everlasting  monuments  to  commetJiorate  their  visit,  every  time  they  pene-
trate withiji  02ir  mdydvic  veil  \atmosphere\*

Thus  we  are  taught  that  the  great  Pyramids  were  built  under  their
direct  supervision,  "when  Dhruva  [the  then  Pole-star],  was  at  his
lowest  culmination,  and  the  Krittikas  [Pleiades]  looked  over  his  head
[were  on  the  same  meridian  but  above]  to  watch  the  work  of  the
Giants."  Thus,  as  the  first  Pyramids  were  built  at  the  beginning
of  a  Sidereal  Year,  under  Dhruva  (Alpha  Polaris),  it  must  have  been
over  31,000  years  (31,105)  ago.  Bunsen  was  right  in  admitting  for
Eg>'pt  an  antiquity  of  over  21,000  years,  but  this  concession  hardly
exhausts  truth  and  fact  in  this  question.  As  Mr.  Gerald  Massey
says :

The  stories  told  by  Egyptian  priests  and  others  of  time-keeping  in  Egypt  are
now  beginning  to  look  less  like  lies  in  the  sight  of  all  who  have  escaped  from
biblical  bondage.  Inscriptions  have  lately  been  found  at  Sakkarah,  making  men-
tion of  two  Sothiac  cycles  .  .  .  registered  at  that  time,  now  some  6,000  years
ago.  Thus  when  Herodotus  was  in  Egypt,  the  Egyptians  had — as  now  known^
observed  at  least  five  different  Sothiac  cycles  of  1,461  years.     .     .     .

The  priests  informed  the  Greek  enquirer  that  time  had  been  reckoned  by  them
for  so  long  that  the  sun  had  twice  risen  where  it  then  set,  and  twice  set  where  it
then  arose.  This  .  .  .  can  only  be  realized  as  a  fact  in  nature  by  means  of  two
cycles  of  Precession,  or  a  period  of  51,736  years,  t

Mor  Isaac  J  shows  the  ancient  Syrians  defining  their  World  of  the
"Rulers"  and  "Active  Gods"  in  the  same  way  as  the  Chaldeans.  The
lowest  World  was  the  Sublunary — our  own — watched  by  the  Angels  of
the  first  or  lower  order ;  the  one  that  came  next  in  rank,  was  Mercury,
ruled  by  the  Archangels :  then  came  Venus,  whose  Gods  were  the  Prin-
cipalities; the  fourth  was  that  of  the  Sun,  the  domain  and  region  of
the  highest  and  mightiest  Gods  of  our  system,  the  solar  Gods  of  all
nations;  the  fifth  was  Mars,  ruled  by  the  Virtues;  the  sixth,  that  of
Bel  or  Jupiter,  was  governed  by  the  Dominions;  the  seventh,  the
World  of  Saturn,  by  the  Thrones.  These  are  the  Worlds  of  Form.
Above  come  the  Four  higher  ones,  making  Seven  again,  since  the
Three  highest  are  "unmentionable  and  unpronounceable."  The  eighth,
composed  of  1,122  stars,  is  the  domain  of  the  Chcrzibs;  the  ninth,
belonging  to  the  walking  and  numberless  stars  on  account  of  their

•  Appearing  at  the  beginning  of  Cycles,  as  also  of  every  Sidereal  Year,  of  25,868  years.  Therefore,
the  Kaljeira  or  Kabarim  received  their  name  iu  Chaldaea,  for  it  means  the  Measures  of  Heaven,  from
Kob,  "measure  of,"  and  Urim,  "Heavens."

■t-   The  Natural  Genesis,  II.  316.

t  See  Kircher's  CEdipus  ylLgypl.,  II.  423.


^.yo  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

distance,  has  the  Seraphs;  as  to  the  tenth,  Kircher,  quoting  Mor  Isaac,
says  that  it  is  composed  "of  invisible  stars  that  could  be  taken,  they
said,  for  clouds,  so  massed  are  they  in  the  zone  that  we  call  Via
Straminis,  the  Milky  Way";  and  he  hastens  to  explain  that  "these  are
the  stars  of  L,ucifer,  engulfed  with  him  in  his  terrible  shipwreck."
That  which  comes  after  and  beyond  the  ten  Worlds  (our  Quaternary),  or
the  Arupa  World,  the  Syrians  could  not  tell.  "All  they  knew  was
that  it  is  there  that  begins  the  vast  and  incomprehensible  Ocean  of
the  Infinite,  the  abode  of  the  True  Divinity,  without  boundary
or  end."

Champollion  shows  the  same  belief  among  the  Egyptians.  Hermes
having  spoken  of  the  Father-Mother  and  Son,  whose  Spirit — collec-
tivel}'  the  Divine  Fiat — shapes  the  Universe,  says:  "Seven  Agents
[Media]  were  also  formed,  to  contain  the  Material  [or  manifested]
Worlds  within  their  respective  Circles,  and  the  action  of  these  Agents
was  named  Destiny."  He  further  enumerates  seven  and  ten  and  twelve
orders,  but  it  would  take  too  long  to  detail  them  here.

As  the  Rig  Vidhdtia  together  with  the  Brahmaiida  Purdna  and  all
such  works,  whether  describing  the  magic  efficacy  of  the  Rig  Vedic
Mantras,  or  the  future  Kalpas,  are  declared  by  Dr.  Weber  and  others
to  be  modern  compilations  "belonging  probably  only  to  the  time  of  the
Purdnas^'  it  is  useless  to  refer  the  reader  to  their  mystic  explanations;
and  one  may  as  well  simply  quote  from  the  archaic  books  utterly  un-
known to  the  Orientalists.  These  works  explain  that  which  so  puzzles
the  scholars,  namely  that  the  Saptarshis,  the  "Mind-born  Sons"  of
Brahma,  are  referred  to  in  the  Shatapatha  BrdJmiana  under  one  set  of
names;  in  the  Mahdbhdrata  under  another  set;  and  that  the  Vdyu
Purdna  makes  even  nine  instead  of  seve^i  Rishis,  by  adding  the  names
of  Bhrigu  and  Daksha  to  the  list.  But  the  same  occurs  in  everj^
exoteric  Scripture.  The  Secret  Doctrine  gives  a  long  genealogy  of
Rishis,  but  separates  them  into  many  classes.  Ivike  the  Gods  of  the
Egyptians,  who  were  divided  into  seven,  and  even  twelve,  Classes,  so
are  the  Indian  Rishis  in  their  Hierarchies.  The  first  three  Groups  are
the  Divine,  the  Cosmical  and  the  Sublunary.  Then  come  the  Solar
Gods  of  our  System,  the  Planetary,  the  Submundane,  and  the  purely
Human — the  Heroes  and  the  Manushi.

At  present,  however,  we  are  only  concerned  with  the  Pre-cosmic,
Divine  Gods,  the  Prajapatis,  or  the  Seven  Builders.  This  Group  is
found   unmistakably  in    every  Cosmogony.      Owing   to    the   loss    of


COSMIC    GODS.  471

Egyptian  archaic  documents,  since,  according  to  M.  Maspero,  "the
materials  and  historical  data  on  hand  to  study  the  history  of  the  reli-
gious evolution  in  Eg>'pt  are  neither  complete  nor  very  often  intelli-
gible," the  ancient  Hymns  and  inscriptions  on  the  tombs  must  be
appealed  to,  in  order  to  have  the  statements  brought  forward  from
the  Secret  Doctrine  partially  and  indirectly  corroborated.  One  such
shows  that  Osiris,  like  Brahma- Prajapati,  Adam  Kadmon,  Ormazd,  and
so  many  other  Logoi,  was  the  chief  and  synthesis  of  the  Group  of
"Creators"  or  Builders.  Before  Osiris  became  the  "One"  and  the
Highest  God  of  Egj'pt,  he  was  worshipped  at  Abydos  as  the  Head,  or  .
lycader,  of  the  Heavenly  Host  of  the  Builders  belonging  to  the  higher
of  the  three  Orders.  The  Hymn  engraved  on  the  votive  stele  of  a
tomb  from  Abydos  (3rd  register)  addresses  Osiris  thus :

Salutations  to  thee,  O  Osiris,  elder  son  of  Seb;  thou  the  greatest  over  the  six
Gods  issued  from  the  Goddess  Noo  [Primordial  Water],  thou  the  great  favourite  of
thy  father  Ra;  Father  of  Fathers,  King  of  Duration,  Master  in  the  Eternity  .  .  .
who,  as  soon  as  these  issued  from  thy  Mother's  Bosom,  gathered  all  the  Crowns
and  attached  the  Urceus  [serpent  or  naja]*  on  thy  head;  multiform  God,  whose
name  is  unknown  and  who  has  many  names  in  towns  and  provinces.

Coming  out  from  the  Primordial  Water  crowned  wath  the  Urseus,
which  is  the  serpent-emblem  of  Cosm.ic  Fire,  and  himself  the  seventh
over  the  six  Primary  Gods,  issued  from  Father- Mother,  Noo  and  Noot,
the  Sky,  who  can  Osiris  be,  but  the  chief  Prajapati,  the  chief  Sephira,
the  chief  Amshaspend,  Onnazd !  That  this  latter  Solar  and  Cosmic
God  stood,  in  the  beginning  of  religious  evolution,  in  the  same  posi-
tion as  the  Archangel,  "whose  name  was  secret,"  is  certain.  This
Archangel  was  Michael,  the  representative  on  earth  of  the  Hidden
Jewish  God;  in  short,  it  is  his  "Face"  that  is  said  to  have  gone  before
the  Jews  like  a  "  Pillar  of  Fire."  Burnouf  says:  "The  seven  Amshas-
pends,  who  are  most  assuredly  our  Archangels,  designate  also  the  per-
sonifications of  the  Divine  Virtues."!  And  these  Archangels,  therefore,
are  as  certainly  the  Saptarshis  of  the  Hindus,  though  it  is  next  to  im-
possible to  class  each  witli  its  Pagan  prototype  and  parallel,  since,  as
in  the  case  of  Osiris,  they  have  all  so  "many  names  in  towns  and
provinces."  Some  of  the  most  important,  however,  will  be  shown  in
their  order.


•  This  EjOptian  word  Naja  reminds  one  a  good  deal  of  the  Indian  Naga,  the  Serpent-God.  Brahma
and  Shiva  and  Vishnu  are  all  crowned  and  connected  with  Nagas— a  sign  of  their  cyclic  and  cosmic
character.

t  Comment,  on  the  Yashna,  174.


472  the;  secret  doctrine.

One  thing  is  thus  undeniably  proven.  The  more  we  study  their
Hierarchies  and  find  out  their  identity,  the  more  proofs  we  acquire
that  there  is  not  one  of  the  past  or  present  personal  Gods,  known  to
us  from  the  earliest  days  of  history,  that  does  not  belong  to  the  third
stage  of  cosmic  manifestation.  In  every  religion  we  find  the  Concealed
Deity  forming  the  ground  work;  then  the  Ray  therefrom,  that  falls  into
primordial  Cosmic  Matter,  the  first  manifestation ;  then  the  Androgyne
result,  the  dual  Male  and  Female  abstract  Force  personified,  the  second
stage ;  this  finally  separates  itself,  in  the  third,  into  Seven  Forces,  called
the  Creative  Powers  by  all  the  ancient  religions,  and  the  Virtues  of
God  by  the  Christians.  The  later  explanations  and  abstract  meta-
physical qualifications  have  not  prevented  the  Roman  and  Greek
Churches  from  worshipping  these  "Virtues"  under  the  personifications
and  distinct  names  of  the  Seven  Archangels.  In  the  Book  of  Drusc/mjt*
in  the  Talmud,  a  distinction  between  these  groups  is  given  which  is  the
correct  Kabalistical  explanation.     It  says:

There  are  three  Groups  (or  Orders)  of  Sephiroth.  ist.  The  Sephiroth  called  the
"Divine  Attributes"  [abstract].  2nd.  The  Physical  or  Sidereal  Sephiroth  [personal]
— one  group  of  seven,  the  other  of  ten.  3rd.  The  metaphysical  Sephiroth,  or  peri-
phrasis of  Jehovah,  who  are  the  first  three  Sephiroth  [Kether,  Chokmah  and  Binah],
the  rest  of  the  seven  being  the  (personal)  seven  Spirits  of  the  Presence  [also  of  the
planets].

The  same  division  has  to  be  applied  to  the  primary,  secondary  and
tertiary  evolution  of  Gods  in  every  Theogony,  if  one  wishes  to  translate
the  meaning  esoterically.  We  must  not  confuse  the  purely  meta-
physical personifications  of  the  abstract  attributes  of  Deity,  with  their
reflection — the  Sidereal  Gods.  This  reflection,  however,  is  in  reality
the  objective  expression  of  the  abstraction;  living  Entities  and  the
models  formed  on  that  divine  Prototype.  Moreover,  the  three  meta-
physical Sephiroth,  or  the  "periphrasis  of  Jehovah,"  are  w^/ Jehovah.
It  is  the  latter  himself,  with  the  additional  titles  of  Adonai,  Klohim,
Sabbaoth,  and  the  numerous  names  lavished  on  him,  who  is  the  peri-
phrasis of  the  Shaddai  Old)),  the  Omnipotent.  The  name  is  a  circum-
locution, indeed,  a  too  abundant  figure  of  Jewish  rhetoric,  and  has
always  been  denounced  by  the  Occultists.  To  the  Jewish  Kabalists,
and  even  the  Christian  Alchemists  and  Rosicrucians,  Jehovah  was  a
convenient  screai,  unified  by  the  folding  of  its  many  panels,  and  adopted


*  First  Treatise,  p.  59.


INCREDIBLE,    BUT  TRUE.  473

as  a  substitute;  one  name  of  an  individual  Sephira  being  as  good  as
another  name,  for  those  who  had  the  secret.  The  Tetragrammaton,
the  Ineffable,  the  Sidereal  "Sum  Total,"  was  invented  for  no  other
purpose  than  to  mislead  the  profane  and  to  symbolize  life  and  genera-
tion.* The  real  secret  and  unpronoujiceable  Name,  the  "Word  that  is
no  word,"  has  to  be  sought  in  the  seven  names  of  the  first  Seven
Emanations,  or  the  "Sons  of  the  Fire,"  in  the  secret  Scriptures  of  all
the  great  nations,  and  even  in  the  Zohar,  the  Kabalistic  lore  of  the
smallest  of  all  of  them,  viz.,  the  Jewish.  This  word,  composed  of  seven
letters  in  every  tongue,  is  found  embodied  in  the  architectural  remains
of  every  great  sacred  building  in  the  world;  from  the  Cyclopean
remains  on  Easter  Island — part  of  a  Continent  buried  under  the  seas
nearer  4,000,000  years  agof  than  20,000 — down  to  the  earliest  Egyptian
pyramids.

We  shall  have  to  enter  more  fully  into  this  subject  later  on,
and  to  bring  practical  illustrations  to  prove  the  statements  made  in
the  text.

For  the  present  it  is  sufficient  to  show,  by  a  few  instances,  the  truth
of  what  has  been  asserted  at  the  beginning  of  this  work,  namel}',  that
no  Cosmogony,  the  world  over,  with  the  sole  exception  of  the  Christian,
has  ever  attributed  to  the  One  Highest  Cause,  the  Universal  Dei  fie
Principle,  the  immediate  creation  of  our  earth,  or  man,  or  anything
connected  with  these.  This  statement  holds  as  well  for  the  Hebrew  or
Chaldean  Kabalah  as  it  does  for  Genesis,  had  the  latter  been  ever
thoroughly  understood   and,  what  is  still  more  important,  correctly


*  Says  the  translator  of  Avicebron's  Qabbalah  of  this  "Sum  Total":  "The  letter  of  Kether  is
■^  (Yod),  of  Binah  H  (Heh),  together  YaH,  the  feminine  Name;  the  third  letter,  that  of  'Hokhmah,  is
1  (Vav),  making  together  in"'  YHV  of  (1177"'  YHVH,  the  Tetragrammaton,  and  really  the  complete
symbols  of  its  efficaciousness.  The  last  H  (Heh)  of  this  Ineffable  Name  being  always  applied  to  the
Six  Lower  and  the  last,  together  the  Seven  remaining  Sephiroth."  (Myer's  Qabbalah,  p.  263).  Thus
the  Tetragrammaton  is  holy  only  in  its  abstract  synthesis.  As  a  Quaternary  containing  the  lower
Seven  Sephiroth,  //  is  phallic.

t  The  statement  will,  of  course,  be  found  preposterous  and  absurd,  and  simply  laughed  at.  But  if
one  believes  in  the  final  submersion  of  Atlantis,  850,000  years  ago,  as  taught  in  Esoteric  Buddhism—
the  gradual  first  sinking  having  begun  during  the  Eocene  Age— one  has  also  to  accept  the  statement
for  the  so-called  I<emuria,  the  continent  of  the  Third  Root-Race,  which  was  first  nearly  destroyed  by
combustion,  and  then  submerged.  As  the  Commentary  teaches:  "  The  First  Earth  having  been  puri-
fied by  the  Forty-nine  Fires,  her  people,  born  0/ Fire  arid  Water,  could  ttot  die  .  .  .;  the  Second  Earth
[with  its  A'ace']  disappeared  as  vapour  vanishes  in  the  air  .  .  .;  the  Third  Earth  had  everything
consumed  on  it  after  the  Separation,  arid  went  down  into  the  lower  Deep  {the  Ocean}.  This
was  twice  eighty-two  Cyclic  V'ears  ago."  Now  a  Cyclic  Year  is  what  we  call  a  Sidereal  Year,  and
is  founded  on  the  Precession  of  the  Equinoxes.  The  length  of  this  Sidereal  Year  is  25,868  years,
and  the  period  mentioned  in  the  Commentary  is,  therefore,  in  all  equal  to  4,242,352  years.  More
details  will  be  found  in  Volume  II.  Meanwhile,  this  doctrine  is  embodied  in  the  "Kings  of
Edom."


474  THB  vSECRET  DOCTRINE.

translated.*  Everywhere  there  is  either  a  I^ogos — a  "Light  shining
in  Darkness,"  truly — or  the  Architect  of  the  Worlds  is  esoterically  in
the  plural  number.  The  Latin  Church,  paradoxical  as  ever,  while
applying  the  epithet  of  Creator  to  Jehovah  alone,  adopts  a  whole  Kyriel
of  names  for  the  zvorking  Forces  of  the  latter,  names  which  betray  the
secret.  For  if  the  said  Forces  had  nought  to  do  with  "  Creation  "  so-
called,  why  call  them  Elohim  (Alhim),  a  plural  word;  Divine  Work-
men and  Energies  ('Eve'pyciai),  incandescent  celestial  stones  {lapides
igniti  coslomni) ;  and  especially  Supporters  of  the  World  (Koo-/xoKpaTopes),
Governors  or  Rulers  of  the  World  (Rectores  Mundi),  Wheels  of  the
World  (Rotse),  Auphanim,  Flames  and  Powers,  Sons  of  God  (B'ne
Alhim),  Vigilant  Counsellors,  etc.?

It  is  often  asserted,  and  unjustly,  as  usual,  that  China,  nearly  as  old
a  country  as  India,  had  no  Cosmogony.  It  was  unknown  to  Confucius,
and  the  Buddhists  extended  their  Cosmogon}-  without  introducing  a
Personal  God,t  it  is  complained.  The  Yi-King,  "the  very  essence  of
ancient  thought  and  the  combined  work  of  the  most  venerated  sages,"
fails  to  show  a  distinct  Cosmogony.  Nevertheless,  one  existed,  and  a
very  distinct  one.  Only  as  Confucius  did  not  admit  of  a  future  life]:
and  the  Chinese  Buddhists  reject  the  idea  of  07ie  Creator,  accepting
one  Cause  and  its  numberless  effects,  they  are  misunderstood  by  the
believers  in  a  Personal  God.  The  "Great  Extreme,"  as  the  commence-
ment of  "changes"  (transmigrations),  is  the  shortest  and,  perhaps,  the
most  suggestive  of  all  Cosmogonies  for  those  who,  like  the  Confucian-
ists,  love  virtue  for  its  own  sake  and  try  to  do  good  unselfishly  without

*  The  same  resen'C  is  found  in  the  Talmud  and  in  every  national  system  of  religion  whether  mono-
theistic or  exoterically  polytheistic.  From  the  superb  religious  poem  by  the  Kabalist  Rabbi  Solomon
ben  Yehudah  Ibn  Gabirol,  the  "Kether  Malchuth,"  we  select  a  few  definitions  given  in  the  prayers
of  Kippur:  "Thou  art  One,  the  beginning  of  all  numbers,  and  the  foundation  of  all  edifices;  Thou  art
One,  and  in  the  secret  of  Thy  unity  the  wisest  of  men  are  lost,  because  they  know  it  not.  Thou  art
One,  and  Thy  Unity  is  never  diminished,  never  extended,  and  cannot  be  changed.  Thou  art  One,  but
not  as  an  element  of  numeration ;  for  Thy  Unity  admits  not  of  multiplication,  change  or  form.  Thou
art  Existent ;  but  the  understanding  and  vision  of  mortals  cannot  attain  to  thy  existence,  nor  deter-
mine for  thee  the  Where,  the  How,  and  the  Why.  Thou  art  Existent,  but  in  thyself  alone,  there
being  none  other  that  can  exist  with  thee.  Thou  art  Existent,  before  all  time  and  without  place.
Thou  art  Existent,  and  thy  existence  is  so  profound  and  secret  that  none  can  penetrate  and  discover
thy  secrecy.  Thou  art  lyiving,  but  within  no  time  that  can  be  fixed  or  known ;  Thou  art  I^iving,  but
not  by  a  spirit  or  a  soul,  for  Tfrou  art  Thyself,  the  Soul  of  all  Souls."  There  is  a  distance  between
this  Kabalistical  Deity  and  the  Biblical  Jehovah,  the  spiteful  and  revengeful  God  of  Abram,  Isaac,
and  Jacob,  who  tempted  the  first  and  wrestled  with  the  last.  No  Vedantin  but  would  repudiate  such
a  Parabrahman!

+  Edkins,  Chinese  Buddhism,  ch.  xx.     And  very  wisely  have  they  acted.

t  If  he  rejected  it,  it  was  on  the  ground  of  what  he  calls  the  "changes,"  in  other  words,  rebirths  of
man,  and  constant  transfonuations.  He  denied  immortality  to  the  Personality  of  man,  as  we  do,  not
to  Man.


THE   SAME  IDEA  IN  CONFUCIANISM.  475

perpetually  looking  to  reward  and  profit.  The  "Great  Extreme"  of
Confucius  produces  "Two  Figures."  These  Two  produce  in  their  turn
the  "Four  Images";  these  again  the  "Eight  Symbols."  It  is  com-
plained that  though  the  Confucianists  see  in  them  "heaven,  earth  and
man  in  miniature,"  we  can  see  in  them  anything  we  like.  No  doubt,
and  so  it  is  with  regard  to  many  symbols,  especially  those  of  the  latest
religions.  But  they  who  know  something  of  Occult  numerals,  see  in
these  "Figures"  the  symbol,  however  rude,  of  a  harmonious  progres-
sive Evolution  of  Kosmos  and  its  Beings,  both  Heavenly  and  Terres-
trial. And  any  one  who  has  studied  the  numerical  evolution  in  the
primeval  Cosmogony  of  Pythagoras — a  contemporary  of  Confucius —
can  never  fail  to  find  in  his  Triad,  Tetractys  and  Decad,  emerging
from  the  One  and  solitary  Monad,  the  same  idea.  Confucius  is  laughed
at  by  his  Christian  biographer  for  "  talking  of  divination,"  before  and
after  this  passage,  and  is  represented  as  saying:

The  eight  symbols  determine  good  and  ill  fortune,  and  these  lead  to  great  deeds.
There  are  no  imitable  images  greater  than  heaven  and  earth.  There  are  no  changes
greater  than  the  four  seasons  [meaning  North,  South,  East  and  West,  etc.].  There
are  no  suspended  images  brighter  than  the  sun  and  moon.  In  preparing  things  for
use,  there  is  none  greater  than  the  sage.  In  determining  good  and  ill-luck  there  is
nothing  greater  than  the  divining  straws  and  the  tortoise.*

Therefore,  the  "divining  straws"  and  the  "tortoise,"  the  "symbolic
sets  of  lines,"  and  the  great  sage  who  looks  at  them  as  they  become  one
and  two,  and  two  become  four,  and  four  become  eight,  and  the  other
sets  "three  and  six,"  are  laughed  to  scorn,  only  because  his  wise  sym-
bols are  misunderstood.

So  the  author  of  the  volume  cited  and  his  colleagues  will  no  doubt
scoff  at  the  Stanzas  given  in  our  text,  for  they  represent  precisely  the
same  idea.  The  old  archaic  map  of  Cosmogony  is  full  of  lines  in  the
Confucian  style,  of  concentric  circles  and  dots.  Yet  all  these  represent
the  most  abstract  and  philosophical  conceptions  of  the  Cosmogony  of
our  Universe.  At  all  events  it  may,  perhaps,  answer  better  to  the
requirements  and  the  scientific  purposes  of  our  age,  than  the  cosmogo-
nical  essays  of  St.  Augustine  and  the  Venerable  Bede,  though  these
were  published  over  a  millennium  later  than  the  Confucian.

Confucius,  one  of  the  greatest  sages  of  the  ancient  world,  believed

•  He  may  be  laughed  at  by  the  Protestants;  but  the  Roman  Catholics  have  no  right  to  mock  him,
without  becoming  guilty  of  blasphemy  and  sacrilege.  For  it  is  over  200  years  since  Confucius  was
canonized  as  a  Saint  in  China  by  the  Roman  Catholics,  who  have  thereby  obtained  many  converts
among  the  ignorant  Confucianists.


476  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

in  ancient  magic,  and  practised  it  himself,  "if  we  take  for  granted  the
statements  of  Kia-yiV  and  "he  praised  it  to  the  skies  in  the  Yi-king,"
we  are  told  by  his  reverend  critic.  Nevertheless,  even  in  his  age,
600  B.C.,  Confucius  and  his  school  taught  the  sphericity  of  the  earth
and  even  the  heliocentric  system ;  while,  at  about  thrice  600  years  after
the  Chinese  philosopher,  the  Popes  of  Rome  threatened  and  even  burnt
"heretics"  for  asserting  the  same.  He  is  laughed  at  for  speaking  of
the  "Sacred  Tortoise."  No  unprejudiced  person  can  see  any  great
difference  between  a  Tortoise  and  a  Lamb  as  candidates  for  sacredness,
as  both  are  symbols  and  no  more.  The  Ox,  the  Kagle,*  and  the  lyion,
and  occasionally  the  Dove  are  the  "sacred  animals"  of  the  Western
Bible;  the  first  three  are  found  grouped  round  the  Evangelists;  the
fourth,  associated  with  these,  a  human  face,  is  a  Seraph,  i.e.,  a  "fiery
serpent,"  the  Gnostic  Agathodaemon  probably.

The  choice  is  curious,  and  shows  how  paradoxical  were  the  first
Christians  in  their  selections.  For  why  .should  they  have  chosen
these  symbols  of  Egyptian  Paganism,  when  the  Eagle  is  never  men-
tioned in  the  New  Testame?it  save  once,  when  Jesus  refers  to  it  as
a  carrion  eater,t  and  in  the  Old  Testaitietii  it  is  called  miclean ;  when
the  Lion  is  made  a  point  of  comparison  with  Satan,  both  roaring  for
men  to  devour ;  and  the  Oxen  are  driven  out  of  the  Temple  ?  On  the
other  hand  the  Serpent,  brought  in  as  an  exemplar  of  wisdom,  is  now
regarded  as  the  symbol  of  the  Devil.  The  esoteric  pearl  of  Christ's
religion,  degraded  into  Christian  theology,  may  indeed  be  said  to  have
chosen  a  strange  and  unfitting  shell  to  be  born  in  and  evolved  from.

As  explained,  the  Sacred  Animals  and  the  Flames  or  Sparks,  within
the  Holy  Four,  refer  to  the  Prototypes  of  all  that  is  found  in  the
Universe  in  the  Divine  Thought,  in  the  Root,  which  is  the  Perfect
Cube,  or  the  Foundation  of  the  Kosmos,  collectively  and  individually.

*  The  animals  regarded  as  sacred  in  the  Bible  are  by  no  means  few  in  number;  as,  for  instance,  the
Goat,  the  Azaz-el,  or  God  of  Victory.  As  Aben  Ezra  says:  "If  thou  art  capable  of  comprehending
the  mystery  of  Azazel,  thou  wilt  learn  the  mystery  of  His  [God's]  name,  for  it  Jias  similar  associates
in  Scriptures.  I  will  tell  thee  by  allusion  one  portion  of  the  mystery;  when  thou  shalt  have  thirty
three  years  of  age  thou  wilt  comprehend  me."  So  with  the  mystery  of  the  Tortoise.  Rejoicing  over
the  poetry  of  biblical  metaphors,  associating  "incandescent  stones,"  ".sacred  animals,"  etc.,  with  the
name  of  Jehovah,  and  quoting  from  the  Bible  de  Vence  (XIX.  318)  a  pious  French  wrriter  says:  "Indeed
all  of  them  are  Elohim,  like  their  God" ;  for,  these  Augels,  "'assume,'  through  a  holy  usurpation,  'the
very  divine  name  of  Jehovah  each  time  they  represent  him'."  (De  Mirville,  Des  Esprits.)  No  one
ever  doubted  that  the  Name  must  have  been  assumed,  when  under  the  guise  of  the  Infinite,  One  In-
cognizable, the  Malachim,  or  Mes.sengers,  descended  to  eat  and  drink  with  men.  But  if  the  Elohim
and  even  lower  Beings,  assuming  the  God-name,  were  and  are  still  worshipped,  why  should  the  saiue
Elohim  be  called  Devils,  when  appearing  under  the  names  of  other  Gods?

+  Matth.,  xxiv.  28.


THE   MYSTERY   OF    BLACKNESS.  477

They  have  all  an  occult  reference  to  primordial  Cosmic  Forms,  and  the
first  concretions,  work,  and  evolution  of  Kosmos.

In   the   earliest    Hindu  exoteric   Cosmogonies,   it    is   not   even   the
Demiurge  who  creates.     For  it  is  said  in  one  of  the  Puranas:

The  great  Architect  of  the  World  gives  the  first  impulse  to  the  rotatory  motion
of  our  planetary  system  by  stepping  in  turn  over  each  planet  and  body.

It  is  this  action  "that  causes  each  sphere  to  turn  around  itself,  and
all  around  the  Sun."  After  which  action,  "it  is  the  Brahraandika,"
the  Solar  and  Lunar  Pitris,  the  Dhyan  Chohans,  "who  take  charge  of
their  respective  spheres  [earths  and  planets],  to  the  end  of  the  Kalpa."
The  Creators  are  the  Rishis,  most  of  whom  are  credited  with  the
authorship  of  the  Mantras,  or  Hymns,  of  the  Rig  Veda.  They  are  some-
times sroen,  sometimes  ten,  when  they  become  Prajapati,  the  Lord  of
Beings;  then  they  rebecome  the  seve7i  and  the  fourteen  Manus,  as  the
representatives  of  the  seven  and  fourteen  Cycles  of  Existence,  or  Days
of  Brahma,  thus  answering  to  the  seven  ^ons,  when,  at  the  end  of  the
first  stage  of  Evolution,  they  are  transformed  into  the  seven  stellar
Rishis,  the  Saptarshis;  while  their  hu7nan  Doubles  appear  as  Heroes,
Kings  and  Sages  on  this  earth.

The  Esoteric  Doctrine  of  the  East  having  thus  furnished  and  struck
the  key-note,  which,  under  its  allegorical  garb,  is,  as  may  be  seen,  as
scientific  as  it  is  philosophical  and  poetical,  every  nation  has  followed
its  lead.  It  is  from  the  exoteric  religions  that  we  have  to  dig  out  the
root-idea  before  we  turn  to  esoteric  truths,  lest  the  latter  should  be
rejected.  Furthermore,  every  symbol,  in  every  national  religion,  may
be  read  esoterically ;  and  the  proof  of  its  being  correctly  read  when
transliterated  into  its  corresponding  numerals  and  geometrical  forms,
may  be  obtained  from  the  extraordinary  agreement  of  all  glyphs  and
symbols,  however  much  they  may  externally  vary  among  themselves.
For  in  the  origin  those  symbols  were  all  identical.  Take,  for  instance,
the  opening  sentences  in  various  Cosmogonies;  in  every  case  it  is  a
Circle,  an  Egg,  or  a  Head.  Darkness  is  always  associated  with  this
first  symbol  and  surrounds  it,  as  is  shown  in  the  Hindu,  the  Egj^ptian,
the  Chaldeo-Hebrew  and  even  the  Scandinavian  systems.  Hence
black  ravens,  black  doves,  black  waters  and  even  black  flames;  the
seventh  tongue  of  Agni,  the  Fire-God  being  called  Kali,  the  "Black,"
since  it  was  a  black  flickering  flame.  Two  "black"  doves  flew  from
Egypt  and,  settling  on  the  oaks  of  Dodona,  gave  their  names  to  the
Grecian  Gods.    Noah  sends  out  a  "black"  raven  after  the  Deluge,  which


478  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

is  a  symbol  for  the  Cosmic  Pralaya,  after  which  began  the  real  creation
or  evolution  of  our  Karth  and  Humanity.  Odin's  "black"  ravens
fluttered  round  the  Goddess  Saga  and  "whispered  to  her  of  the  past
and  of  the  future."  Now  what  is  the  inner  meaning  of  all  those  black
birds?  It  is  that  they  are  all  connected  with  the  primeval  Wisdom,
which  flows  out  of  the  pre- cosmic  Source  of  All,  symbolized  by  the
Head,  the  Circle  or  the  ^gg ;  and  they  all  have  an  identical  meaning
and  relate  to  the  primordial  Archetypal  Man,  Adam  Kadmon,  the
Creative  Origin  of  all  things,  which  is  composed  of  the  Ho.st  of  Cosmic
Powers — the  Creative  Dhyan  Chohans,  beyond  which  all  is  Darkness.

Let  us  enquire  of  the  wisdom  of  the  Kabalah,  even  veiled  and  dis-
torted as  it  now  is,  to  explain  in  its  numerical  language  an  approximate
meaning,  at  least  of  the  word  "raven."  This  is  its  number  value  as
given  in  the  Source  of  Measures :

The  term  Raven  is  used  but  once,  and  taken  as  Eth-h'  orebv  n2;rT"nN=678,
or  113x6;  while  the  Dove  is  mentioned  five  times.  Its  value  is  71,  and  71  x  5=355.
Six  diameters,  or  the  Raven,  crossing,  would  divide  the  circumference  of  a  circle  of
355  into  12  parts  or  compartments;  and  355  subdivided  for  each  unit  by  6,  would
equal  213-0,  or  the  Head  ["beginning"]  in  the  first  verse  of  Getiesis.  This  divided,
or  subdivided,  after  the  same  fashion,  by  2,  or  the  355  by  12,  would  give  213-2,  or
the  word  B'rash,  BJ^^^"!1,  or  the  first  word  of  Genesis,  with  its  prepositional  prefix,
signifying  the  same  concreted  general  form,  astronomically,  with  the  one  here
intended.

Now  the  secret  reading  of  the  first  verse  in  Genesis  being:  "In  Rash
(B'rash)  or  Head,  developed  Gods,  the  Heavens  and  the  Earth" — it  is
easy  to  comprehend  the  esoteric  meaning  of  the  Raven,  once  that  the
like  meaning  of  the  Flood,  or  Noah's  Deluge,  is  ascertained.  What-
ever the  many  other  meanings  of  this  emblematical  allegory  may  be,
its  chief  meaning  is  that  of  a  new  Cycle  and  a  new  Round — our  Fourth
Round.^'f  The  Raven,  or  the  Eth-h'  orebv,  yields  the  same  numerical
value  as  the  Head,  and  returned  not  to  the  Ark,  while  the  Dove  re-
turned, carrying  the  olive-branch;  when  .Noah,  the  new  man  of  the
new  Race — whose  prototype  is  Vaivasvata  Manu,  prepared  to  leave  the
Ark,  the  Womb,  or  Argha,  of  terrestrial  Nature,  he  is  the  symbol  of  the
purely  spiritual,  sexless  and  androgyne  man  of  the  first  three  Races,

*  Bryant  is  right  in  saying  "  Druid  bardism  says  of  Noah  that  when  he  came  out  of  the  ark  (the
birth  of  a  new  cycle),  after  a  stay  therein  of  a  year  and  a  day,  that  is  364  +  i  =365  days,  he  was  con-
gratulated by  Neptune  upon  his  birth  from  the  waters  of  the  Flood,  who  wished  him  a  Happy  New
Year.'"  The  "Year,"  or  cycle,  esoterically,  was  the  new  race  of  men,  born  from  woman,  after  the
Separation  of  the  Sexes,  which  is  the  secondary  meaning  of  the  allegory;  its  primary  meaning  being
the  beginning  of  the  Fourth  Round,  or  the  new  Creation.


GOD   IS   OUR    HIGHER   SEI.F.  479

who  vanished  from  Earth  for  ever.  Numerically,  in  the  Kabalah,
Jehovah,  Adam,  Noah,  are  one.  At  best,  then,  it  is  Deity  descending
on  Ararat  and  later,  on  Sinai,  to  incarnate  henceforth  in  man,  his
image,  through  the  natural  process,  the  mother's  womb,  whose  symbols
are  the  Ark,  the  Mount  (Sinai),  etc.,  in  Genesis.  The  Jewish  allegory
is  astronomical  and  physiological,  rather  than  anthropomorphic.

And  here  lies  the  abyss  between  the  Aryan  and  Semitic  systems,
though  both  are  built  on  the  same  foundation.  As  shown  by  an  ex-
pounder of  the  Kabalah :

The  basic  idea  underlyiug  the  philosophy  of  the  Hebrews  was  that  God  contained
all  things  within  himself  and  that  man  was  his  inias;e;  man,  including  woman  [as
androg3'nes;  and  that]  geometry  (and  numbers  and  measures  applicable  to  astro-
nomy) are  contained  in  the  terms  man  and  woman ;  and  the  apparent  incongruity
of  such  a  mode  was  eliminated  by  showing  the  connection  of  man  and  woman  with
a  particular  system  of  numbers  and  measures  and  geonietr\%  by  the  parturient
time-periods,  which  furnished  the  connecting  link  between  the  terms  used  and  the
facts  shown,  and  perfected  the  mode  used.*

It  is  argued  that,  the  primal  cause  being  absolutely  incognizable,
"the  symbol  of  its  first  cofnprehe?isible  manifestation  was  the  conception
of  a  circle  with  its  diameter  line,  so  as  at  once  to  carr}^  the  idea  of
geometry,  phallicism,  and  astronomy";  and  this  was  finally  applied  to
the  "signification  of  simply  human  generative  organs."  Hence  the
whole  cycle  of  events  from  Adam  and  the  Patriarchs  down  to  Noah  is
made  to  apply  to  phallic  and  astronomical  uses,  the  one  regulating  the
other,  as  the  lunar  periods,  for  instance.  Hence,  too,  the  Genesis  of  the
Hebrews  begins  after  their  coming  out  of  the  Ark,  and  the  end  of  the
Flood,  i.e.,  at  the  Fourth  Race.     With  the  Aryan  people  it  is  different.

Eastern  Esotericism  has  never  degraded  the  One  Infinite  Deity,  the
Container  of  all  things,  to  such  uses;  and  this  is  shown  by  the  absence
of  Brahma  from  the  Rig  Veda  and  the  modest  positions  occupied
therein  by  Rudra  and  Vishnu,  who  became  the  powerful  and  great
Gods,  the  "Infinites"  of  the  exoteric  creeds,  ages  later.  But  even
they,  "Creators"  as  they  all  three  maybe,  are  not  the  direct  "Creators"
and  "forefathers  of  men."  The  latter  are  shown  occupying  a  still
lower  scale,  and  are  called  the  Prajapatis,  the  Pitris,  our  Lunar  An-
cestors, etc.,  but  never  the  One  Infinite  God.  Esoteric  Philosophy
shows  only />//>'.?/Va/ man  as  created  in  the  image  of  the  Deity;  which
Deity,  however,  is  only  the  ''minor  Gods.''  It  is  the  Higher-Self,  the
real  Ego,  who  alone  is  divine  and  God.


•  From  an  unpublished  MS.


SECTION  XIII.

The  Seven  Creations.


There  was  neither  day  nor  night,  nor  sky  ucr  earth,  nor  darkness  nor  light,  nor  any  other  thing
save  only  One,  unapprehensible  by  intellect,  or  That  which  is  Brahma  and  Pums  (Spirit)  and  Prad-
hana  ([crude]  Matter!.*

ViSHNtJ  PURANA  (I.  ii.)

In  Vishnu  Purana,  Parashara  says  to  Maitreya,  his  pupil :

I  have  thus  explained  to  you,  excellent  Muni,  six  creations  .  .  .  the  creation
of  the  Arvaksrotas  beings  was  the  seventh,  and  was  that  of  man.t

Then  he  proceeds  to  speak  of  two  additional  and  very  mysterious
creations,  variously  interpreted  by  the  commentators.

Origen,  commenting  upon  the  books  written  by  Celsus,  his  Gnostic
opponent — books  which  were  all  destroyed  by  the  prudent  Church
Fathers — evidently  answers  the  objections  of  his  contradictor  and  re-
veals his  system  at  the  same  time.  This  was  clearly  septenary.  But
the  theogony  of  Celsus,  the  genesis  of  the  stars  or  planets,  and  of
sound  and  colour,  found  as  an  answer  satire,  and  no  more.  Celsus,  you
see,  "desiring  to  exhibit  his  learning,"  speaks  of  a  ladder  of  creation
with  seven  gates,  and  on  the  top  of  it  the  eighth,  ever  closed.  The
mysteries  of  the  Persian  Mithras  are  explained  and  "musical  reasons,
moreover,  are  added."  And  to  these  again  he  strives  "to  add  a  second
explanation  connected  also  with  musical  considerations,"!  that  is  to
say  with  the  seven  notes  of  the  scale,  the  seven  Spirits  of  the  Stars,  etc.

Valentinus  expatiates  upon  the  power  of  the  great  Seven,  who  were
summoned  to  bring  forth  this  universe  after  Ar(r)hetos,  or  the  In-
effable, whose  name  is  composed  of  seven  letters,  had  represented  the
first  Hebdomad.     The  name  Ar(r)hetos  indicates  the  sevenfold  nature

*  Or  literally  :  "One  Pradhanika  Brahma  Spirit :  TK.4.T  was."    The  "  Pradhauika  Brahma  Spirit"  is
Mulaprakriti  and  Parabrahman.
t  Wilson,  Vishnu  Purana,  I.  73-5.
t  Origen,  Contra  Celsum,  VI.  xxii.


THE  SEVEN  CREATIONS  OF  THE  PURANAS.  481

of  the  One,  the  Logos.  "The  Goddess  Rhea,"  says  Proclus,  "is  a
Monad,  Duad,  and  Heptad,"  comprehending  in  herself  all  the  Titanidae,
"who  are  seven."*

The  Seven  Creations  are  found  in  almost  every  Purdna.  They  are
all  preceded  by  what  Wilson  translates  as  the  "  Indiscrete  Principle,"
Absolute  Spirit,  independent  of  any  relation  with  objects  of  sense.

They  are:  (i)  Mahattattva,  the  Universal  Soul,  Infinite  Intellect,  or
Divine  Mind ;  (2)  Tanmatras,  Bhuta  or  Bhutasarga,  Elemental  Creation
the  first  differentiation  of  Universal  Indiscrete  Substance;  (3)  Indriya
or  Aindriyaka,  Organic  Evolution.  "These  three  were  the  Prakrita
Creations,  the  developments  of  indiscrete  7iature,  preceded  by  the  Indis-
crete Principle";  (4)  Mukhya,  "the  Fundamental  Creation  (of  percep-
tible things)  was  that  of  inanimate  bodies";!  (5)  Tairyagyonya  or
Tir>'aksrotas,  was  that  of  animals;  (6)  Urdhvasrotas,  or  that  of  divini-
ties (J)\X  (7)  Arvaksrotas,  was  that  of  man. §

This  is  the  order  given  in  the  exoteric  texts.  According  to  esoteric
teaching  there  are  seven  Primary,  and  seven  Secondary  "Creations";
the  former  being  the  Forces  self-evolving  from  the  one  causeless  Force  ;
the  latter  showing  the  manifested  Universe  emanating  from  the  already
differentiated  divine  Elements.

Esoterically,  as  well  as  exoterically,  all  the  above  enumerated  Crea-
tions stand  for  the  seven  periods  of  Evolution,  whether  after  an  Age
or  a  Day  of  Brahma.  This  is  the  teaching  par  excellence  of  Occult
Philosophy,  which,  however,  never  uses  the  term  "creation,"  nor  even
that  of  evolution,  with  regard  to  Primary  "Creation";  but  calls  all  such
Forces  the  ''aspects  of  the  Causeless  Force."  In  the  Bible,  the  seven
periods  are  dwarfed  into  the  six  Days  of  Creation  and  the  seventh  Day
of  Rest,  and  the  Westerns  adhere  to  the  letter.  In  the  Hindii  Philo-
sophy, when  the  active  Creator  has  produced  the  World  of  Gods,  the
Germs  of  all  the  undifferentiated  Elements,  and  the  Rudiments  of
future  Senses— the  World  of  Noumena,  in  short— the  Universe  remains
unaltered  for  a  Day  of  Brahma,  a  period  of  4,320,000,000  years.  This  is
the  seventh  passive  Period,  or  the  "Sabbath"  of  Eastern  Philosophy,

*  TimcEus.

+  "And  the  fourth  creation  is  here  the  primary,  for  things  immovable  are  emphatically  known  as
primary"— according  to  a  commentary  translated  by  Fitzedward  Hall  in   his  editing  of  Wilson's

translation.

X  How  can  "  divinities  "  have  been  created  a/^^>- the  animals?  The  esoteric  meaning  of  the  expres-
sion "animals"  is  the  germs  of  all  animal  life,  including  man.  Man  is  called  a  sacrificial  animal,
that  is,  the  only  one  among  the  animal  creation  who  sacrifices  to  the  Gods.  Moreover,  by  "sacred
animals"  the  twelve  Signs  of  the  Zodiac  are  often  meant  in  the  sacred  texts,  as  already  stated.

\   Vishnu  Purdna,  ibid.  32


482  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

following  six  periods  of  active  evolution.  In  the  Shatapatha  Brdhmana,
Brahma  (neuter),  the  Absolute  Cause  of  all  Causes,  radiates  the  Gods.
Having  radiated  the  Gods,  through  its  inherent  nature,  the  work  is
interrupted.     In  the  First  Book  of  Ma7iti  it  is  said :

At  the  expiration  of  each  Night  (Pralaya),  Brahma,  having  been  asleep,  av/akes,
and,  through  the  sole  energy  of  the  motion,  causes  to  emanate  from  itself  the  Spirit
[or  mind],  which  in  its  essence  is,  and  yet  is  not.

In  the  Sepher  Yetzirah,  the  Kabalistic  "Book  of  Creation,"  the  author
has  evidently  reechoed  the  words  of  Manu.  In  it  the  Divine  Substance
is  represented  as  having  alone  existed  from  the  eternity,  boundless  and
absolute ;  and  as  having  emitted  from  itself  the  Spirit.

One  is  the  Spirit  of  the  living  God,  blessed  be  his  Name,  who  liveth  for  ever!
Voice,  Spirit,  and  Word,  this  is  the  Holy  Spirit.*

And  this  is  the  Kabalistic  abstract  Trinity,  so  unceremoniously
anthropomorphized  by  the  Fathers.  From  this  triple  One  emanated
the  whole  Kosmos.  First  from  One  emanated  number  Two,  or  Air,
the  creative  element;  and  then  number  Three,  Water,  proceeded  from
the  Air;  Ether  or  Fire  completes  the  mystic  Four,  the  Arba-il.  In  the
Eastern  doctrine.  Fire  is  the  first  Element— Ether,  synthesizing  the
whole,  since  it  contains  all  of  them.

In  the  Vishnu  Piird7ia,  the  whole  seven  periods  are  given;  and  the
progressive  Evolution  of  the  "Spirit-Soul,"  and  of  the  seven  Forms  of
Matter,  or  Principles,  is  shown.  It  is  impossible  to  enumerate  them  in
this  work.     The  reader  is  asked  to  peruse  one  of  the  Purdnas.

R.  Yehudah  began,  it  is  written:  "Elohim  said:  I^et  there  be  a  firmament,  in  the
midst  of  waters."  Come,  see!  At  the  time  that  the  Holy  .  .  .  created  the
world,  He  [they]  created  7  heavens  Above.  He  created  7  earths  Below,  7  seas,  7
days,  7  rivers,  7  weeks,  7  years,  7  times,  and  7,000  years  that  the  world  has  been,

.     .     .     .     the  seventh  of  all  (the  millennium) So  here  are  7  earths

Below,  they  are  all  inhabited  except  those  which  are  above,  and  those  which  are
below.      And    ....    between  each  earth,  a  heaven  (firmament)  is  spread  out

between  each  other And  there  are  in  them  [these  earths]  creatures

who  look  different  one  from  the  other;  ....  but  if  you  object  and  say  that
all  the  children  of  the  world  came  out  from  Adam,  it  is  not  so.  .  .  .  And  the
lower  earths,  where  do  they  come  from  }  They  are  from  the  chain  of  the  earth,  and
from  the  Heaven  above,  t

Irenaeus   also   is  our  witness — and  a  very  unwilling  one — that  the

Gnostics   taught   the   same   system,    veiling   very    carefully   the    true

esoteric  meaning.     This  "veiling,"  however,  is  identical  with  that  of  the

Vishnu  Purdna  and  others.     Thus  Irenaeus  writes  of  the  Marcosians :


op.  cii.,  I.  ix.  t  Myer's  Qabbalak,  415-16.


THE   OGDOAD.  483

They  maintain  that  first  of  all  the  four  elements,  fire,  water,  earth  and  air,  were
produced  after  the  image  of  the  primary  Tetrad  above,  and  that  then  if  we  add
their  operations,  namely,  heat,  cold,  moisture  and  dryness,  an  exact  likeness  of  the
Ogdoad  is  presented.*

Only  this  "likeness"  and  the  Ogdoad  itself  is  a  blind,  just  as  in  the
seven  creations  of  the  Vishnu  Purdna,  to  which  two  more  are  added,  of
which  the  eighth,  termed  Anugraha,  "possesses  both  the  qualities  of
goodness  and  darkness,"  a  Sankhyan  more  than  a  Puranic  idea.  For
Irenseus  says  again,  that:

They  [the  Gnostics]  had  a  like  eighth  creation  which  was  good  and  bad,  divine
and  human.  They  afiirm  that  man  was  formed  on  the  eighth  day.  Sometimes  they
affirm  that  he  was  made  on  the  sixth  day,  and  at  others  on  the  eighth;  unless,
perchance,  they  mean  that  his  earthly  part  was  formed  on  the  sixth  day  and  his
fleshly  part  [?]  on  the  eighth  day;  these  two  being  distinguished  by  them.t

They  were  so  "distinguished,"  but  not  as  Irenseus  gives  it.  The
Gnostics  had  a  superior,  and  an  inferior  Hebdomad  in  Heaven ;  and  a
third  terrestrial  Hebdomad,  on  the  plane  of  matter.  lao,  the  Mystery
God  and  the  Regent  of  the  Moon,  as  given  in  Origen's  Chart,  was  the
chief  of  these  superior  "Seven  Heavens," J  hence  identical  with  the
chief  of  the  Lunar  Pitris,  that  name  being  given  by  them  to  the  Lunar
Dhyan  Chohans.  "They  affirm  that  these  seven  heavens  are  intelli-
gent, and  speak  of  them  as  being  angels''  writes  the  same  Irenaeus;  and
adds  that  on  this  account  they  termed  lao  Hebdomas,  while  his  mother
was  called  Ogdoas,  because,  as  he  explains,  "she  preserved  the  number
oi  the  first  begotten  and  primary  Ogdoad  of  the  Plerdma"%

This  "first  begotten  Ogdoad"  was  in  Theogony  the  Second  Logos,
the  Manifested,  because  it  was  bom  of  the  Seven-fold  First  Logos,
hence  it  is  the  eighth  on  this  manifested  plane;  and  in  Astrolatry,  it
was  the  Sun,  Marttanda,  the  eighth  Son  of  Aditi,  whom  she  rejects
while  preserving  her  Seven  Sons,  the  planets.  For  the  Ancients  have
never  regarded  the  Sun  as  a  planet,  but  as  a  central  ayid  fixed  Star.
This,  then,  is  the  second  Hebdomad  born  of  the  Seven-rayed  One,
Agni,  the  Sun  and  what  not,  only  not  the  seven  planets,  which  are
Sijrya's  Brothers,  not  his  Sons.  With  the  Gnostics,  these  Astral  Gods
were  the  Sons  of  laldabaoth  ||  (from  ilda,  child,  and  baoth  ^ZZ)^  ^^^  Son
of  Sophia  Achamoth,  the  daughter  of  Sophia  or  Wisdom,  whose  region

♦  Contra  Htrr.,  I.  xvii.  i.

f  Ibid.,  I.  XXX.

X  Superior  to  the  Spirits,  or  "  Heavens,"  of  the  Earth  only.

i  Ibtd.,  I.  V.  2.

(1  See  Isis  Unveiled,  II.  183.


484  I'HE  SECRET   DOCTRINE.

is  the  Pleroma.  laldabaoth  produces  from  himself  these  six  stellar
Spirits:  lao  (Jehovah),  Sabaoth,  Adoneus,  Eloaeus,  Oreus,  Astaphaeus,*
and  it  is  they  who  are  the  second,  or  inferior  Hebdomad.  As  to  the
third,  it  is  composed  of  the  seven  primeval  men,  the  shadows  of  the
Lunar  Gods,  projected  by  the  first  Hebdomad.  In  this  the  Gnostics
did  not,  as  seen,  differ  much  from  the  Esoteric  Doctrine,  except  that
they  veiled  it.  As  to  the  charge  made  by  Irenaeus,  who  was  evidently
ignorant  of  the  true  tenets  of  the  "Heretics,"  with  regard  to  man  being
created  on  the  sixth  day,  and  man  being  created  on  the  eighth,  this
relates  to  the  mysteries  of  the  inner  man.  It  will  become  compre-
hensible to  the  reader  only  after  he  has  read  Volume  II,  and  understood
well  the  Anthropogenesis  of  the  Esoteric  Doctrine,
laldabaoth  is  a  copy  of  Manu,  who  boasts :

O  best  of  twice-born  men !     Know  that  I  (Manu)  am  he,  the  creator  of  all  this
world,  whom  that  male  Viraj     .     .     .     spontaneously  produced,  t

He  first  creates  the  ten  Lords  of  Being,  the  PrajSpatis,  who,  as
verse  36  tells  us,  "produce  seven  other  Manus."  laldabaoth  boasts
likewise:  "I  am  Father  and  God,  and  there  is  no  one  above  me,"  he
exclaims.  For  which  his  Mother  coolly  puts  him  down  by  saying:
"Do  not  lie,  laldabaoth,  for  the  Father  of  all,  the  First  Man  (Anthro-
pos)  is  above  thee,  and  so  is  Anthropos,  the  Son  of  Anthr6pos."|  This
is  a  good  proof  that  there  were  three  lyOgoi — besides  the  Seven  born  of
the  First — one  of  these  being  the  Solar  Logos.  And,  again,  who  was
that  Anthropos  himself,  so  much  higher  than  laldabaoth?  The  Gnostic
records  alone  can  solve  this  riddle.  In  Pistis- Sophia  the  four- vo welled
name  leou  is  generally  accompanied  by  the  epithet  of  "  the  Primal,  or
First  Man."  This  shows  again  that  the  Gnosis  was  but  an  echo  of  our
•Archaic  Doctrine.  The  names  answering  to  Parabrahman,  to  Brahma,
and  Manu,  the  first  thinking  Man,  are  composed  of  one-vowelled,  three-
vowelled  and  seven-vowelled  sounds.  Marcus,  whose  philosophy  was
certainly  more  Pythagorean  than  anything  else,  speaks  of  a  revelation
to  him  of  the  seven  Heavens  sounding  each  one  vowel,  as  they  pro-
nounced the  seven  names  of  the  seven  Angelic  Hierarchies.

When  Spirit  has  permeated  every  minutest  atom  of  the  Seven  Prin-
ciples of  Kosmos,  then  the  Secondary  Creation,  after  the  above-men-
tioned period  of  rest,  begins.

•  See  also  King's  Gnostics  and  their  Remains,  p.  97.    Other  sects  regarded  Jehovah  as  laldabaoth
himself.     King  identifies  him  with  Saturn.
t  Ordinances  of  Manu,  I.  33.
t  Irenceus,  op.  cil.,  I.  xxx.  6.


THE    PRIMARY   AND   SECONDARY   CREATIONS.  485

"The  Creators  [Elohim]  outline  in  the  second  'Hour'  the  shape  of
man,"  says  Rabbi  Simeon  in  The  Nuchthcmeron  of  the  Hebrews.  "There
are  twelve  hours  in  the  day,"  says  the  Mishiia,  "and  it  is  during  these
that  creation  is  accomplished."  The  "twelve  hours  of  the  day"  are
again  the  dwarfed  copy,  the  faint,  yet  faithful,  echo  of  primitive
Wisdom.  They  are  like  the  12,000  Divine  Years  of  the  Gods,  a  cyclic
blind.  Everj^  Day  of  Brahma  has  14  Manus,  which  the  Hebrew
Kabalists,  following,  however,  in  this  the  Chaldeans,  have  disguised
into  12  "Hours."*  The  Nuchthemeron  of  Apollonius  of  Tyana  is  the
same  thing.  "The  Dodecahedron  lies  concealed  in  the  perfect  Cube,"
say  the  Kabalists.  The  mystic  meaning  of  this  is,  that  the  twelve  great
transformations  of  Spirit  into  Matter — the  12,000  Divine  Years — take
place  during  the  four  great  Ages,  or  the  first  Mahayuga.  Beginning
with  the  metaphysical  and  the  supra-human,  it  ends  in  the  physical
and  purely  human  natures  of  Kosmos  and  Man.  Eastern  Philosophy
can  give  the  number  of  mortal  j-^ears  that  run  along  the  line  of  spiritual
and  physical  evolutions  of  the  seen  and  the  unseen,  if  Western  Science
fails  to  do  so.

Primary  Creation  is  called  the  Creation  of  Light  (Spirit);  and 'the
Secondary,  that  of  Darkness  (Matter),!  Both  are  found  in  Genesis.X
The  first  is  the  emanation  of  self-born  Gods  (Elohim) ;  the  second  of
physical  Nature.  •

This  is  why  it  is  said  in  the  Zohar:

Oh,  companions,  companions,  man  as  emanation  was  both  man  and  woman;  as
well  on  the  side  of  the  Father  as  on  the  side  of  the  Mother.  And  this  is  the  sense
of  the  words:  And  Elohim  spake:  "Let  there  be  Light  and  it  was  Light!"  .  .  .
And  this  is  the  "two-fold  Man"!

Light,  however,  on  our  plane,  is  Darkness  in  the  higher  spheres.

"Man  and  woman  ...  on  the  side  of  the  Father"  (Spirit)
refers  to  Primary  Creation ;  and  on  the  side  of  the  Mother  (Matter),  to
the  Secondar5\  The  two-fold  Man  is  Adam  Kadmon,  the  male  and
female  abstract  prototype  and  the  differentiated  Elohim.  Man  pro-
ceeds from  the  Dhyan  Chohan,  and  is  a  "Fallen  Angel,"  a  God  in
exile,  as  will  be  shown.

In  India  these  creations  were  described  as  follows  :§


•  Elsewhere,  however,  the  identity  is  revealed.  See  supra  the  quotation  from  Ibu  Gabirol  and  his
7  heavens,  7  earths,  etc.

t  This  must  not  be  confused  ynt\\  precosmic  "Darkness,"  the  Divine  All.

t  I.  2;  and  also  at  the  beginning  of  II.

{  The  quotations  that  follow  in  treating  of  the  seven  Creations,  except  when  otherwise  stated,  are
all  from  Vishnu  PurAna,  Bk.  I.  Ch.  i-v.


486  -tHE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

(I)  The  First  Creation:  Mahattattva  Creation,  so-called  because  it
was  the  primordial  self-evolution  of  that  which  had  to  become  Mahat,
the  "Divine  Mind,  conscious  and  intelligent";  esoterically,  the  "Spirit
of  the  Universal  Soul."

Worthiest  of  ascetics,  through  its  potency  (the  potency  of  that  cause),  every  pro-
duced cause  comes  by  its  proper  nature.

And  again :

Seeing  that  the  potencies  of  all  beings  are  understood  only  through  the  know-
ledge of  That  (Brahma),  which  is  beyond  reasoning,  creation,  and  the  like,  such
potencies  are  referable  to  Brahma.

That,  then  precedes  the  manifestation.  "The  first  was  Mahat,"
says  Linga  Purdna;  for  the  One  (the  That)  is  neither  y^r^/  nor  last,
but  all.  Exoterically,  however,  this  manifestation  is  the  work  of  the
"Supreme  One" — a  natural  effect,  rather,  of  an  Eternal  Cause;  or,  as
the  Commentator  says,  it  might  have  been  understood  to  mean  that
Brahma  was  then  created  (?),  being  identified  with  Mahat,  active  intelli-
gence, or  the  operating  will  of  the  Supreme.  Esoteric  Philosophy
renders  it  the  "operating  Law."

It  is  on  the  right  comprehension  of  this  tenet  in  the  Brdhmanas  and
Purdnas  that  hangs,  we  believe,  the  apple  of  discord  between  the  three
Vedantin  Sects:  the  Advaita,  Dvaita,  and  the  Vishishthadvaita.  The
first  argues  rightly  that  Parabrahman,  having  no  relation,  as  the
absolute  Ali.,  to  the  manifested  World,  the  Infinite  having  no  con-
nection with  the  Finite,  can  neither  will  nor  create;  that,  therefore,
Brahma,  Mahat,  Ishvara,  or  whatever  name  the  Creative  Power  may
be  known  by,  Creative  Gods  and  all,  are  simply  an  illusive  aspect  of
Parabrahman  in  the  conception  of  the  conceivers ;  while  the  other  sects
identify  the  Impersonal  Cause  with  the  Creator,  or  Ishvara.

Mahat,  or  Maha-Buddhi,  is,  with  the  Vaishnavas,  however,  Divine
Mind,  in  active  operation,  or,  as  Anaxagoras  has  it,  "an  ordering  and
disposing  Mind,  which  was  the  cause  of  all  things  " — NoCs  6  liaKoa^iMv  re

Kttl  TraVTCOV  CtCTlOS.

Wilson  saw  at  a  glance  the  suggestive  connection  between  Mahat
and  the  Phoenician  Mot,  or  Mut,  who  was  female  with  the  Egyptians,
the  Goddess  Moot,  the  Mother,  "which,  like  Mahat,"  he  says,  "was  the
first  product  of  the  mixture  (?)  of  Spirit  and  Matter,  and  the  first  rudi-
ment of  Creation."  "Ex  connexione  autem  ejus  Spiritus  prodidit  Mot
....     Hinc     .     .     .     seminium  omnis  creaturse  et  omnium  rerum


MANY   VERSIONS    OF   THE  ONE    TRUTH.  487

creatio,"  says  Brucker,*  giving  it  a  still  more  materialistic  and  anthro-
pomorphic colouring.

Nevertheless,  the  esoteric  sense  of  the  doctrine  is  seen,  through
every  exoteric  sentence,  on  the  very  face  of  the  old  Sanskrit  texts
that  treat  of  primordial  Creation.

The  Supreme  Soul,  the  All-pernieant  (Sarvaga)  Substance  of  the  World,  having
entered  [been  drawn]  into  Matter  [Prakriti]  and  Spirit  [Purusha],  agitated  the
mutable  and  the  immtitable  principles,  the  season  of  Creation  [Manvantara]  being
arrived.

The  Nous  of  the  Greeks,  which  is  (spiritual  or  divine)  Mind,  or

Mens,  Mahat,  operates  upon  Matter  in  the  same  way;  it  "enters  into"

and  ''agitates'''  it:

Spiritus  intus  alit,  totamque  infusa  per  artus,
Mens  agitat  molem,  et  magno  se  corpore  miscet.

In  the  Phoenician  Cosmogony  also,  "Spirit  mixing  with  its  own
principles  gives  rise  to  creation";!  the  Orphic  Triad  shows  an  iden-
tical doctrine;  for  there  Phanes,  or  Eros,  Chaos,  containing  crude
undifferentiated  Cosmic  Matter,  and  Chronos,  Time,  are  the  three  co-
operating principles,  emanating  from  the  Concealed  and  Unknowable
Point,  which  produce  the  work  of  "Creation."  And  they  are  the
Hindu  Purusha  (Phanes),  Pradhana  (Chaos)  and  Kala  (Chronos).  The
good  Professor  Wilson  does  not  like  the  idea,  as  no  Christian  clergy-
man, however  liberal,  would.  He  remarks  that:  "the  viixture  [of  the
Supreme  Spirit  or  Soul  with  its  own  principles]  is  not  mechanical;  it  is
an  influence  or  effect  exerted  upon  intermediate  agents  which  produce
effects."  The  sentence  in  Vishnu  Purajia,  "as  fragrance  affects  the
mind  from  its  proximity  merely,  and  not  from  aiiy  immediate  operation
upon  mind  itself,  so  the  Supreme  influenced  the  elements  of  creation,"
the  reverend  and  erudite  Sanskritist  correctly  explains  by:  "as  per-
fumes do  not  delight  the  mind  by  actual  contact,  but  by  the  impression
they  make  upon  the  sense  of  smelling,  which  communicates  it  to  the
mind";  adding,  "the  entrance  of  the  Supreme  .  .  .  into  Spirit,  as
well  as  Matter,  is  less  intelligible  than  the  view  elsewhere  taken  of  it,  as
the  infusion  of  Spirit,  identified  with  the  Supreme,  into  Prakriti  or
Matter  alone."  He  prefers  the  verse  in  Padma  Purana :  "  He  who  is
called  the  male  (spirit)  of  Prakriti  .  .  .  that  same  divine  Vishnu
entered  into  Prakriti."  This  view  is  certainly  more  akin  to  the  plastic
character  of  certain  verses  in  the  Bible  concerning  the  Patriarchs,  such


I.  240.  ■•■  Brucker.  ibid.


488  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

as  lyOt  and  even  Adam,*  and  others  of  a  still  more  anthropomorphic
nature.  But  it  is  just  that  which  led  Humanity  to  Phallicisni ;  the
Christian  religion  being  honeycombed  with  it,  from  the  first  chapter
of  Genesis  down  to  the  Revelation.

The  Esoteric  Doctrine  teaches  that  the  Dhyan  Chohans  are  the  col-
lective aggregate  of  Divine  Intelligence  or  Primordial  Mind,  and  that
the  first  Manus,  the  seven  "mind-born"  Spiritual  Intelligences,  are
identical  with  the  former.  Hence  the  Kwan-Shi-Yin,  the  ''Golden
D7ago?t  in  whom  are  the  Seven,''  of  Stanza  III,  is  the  Primordial  Logos,
or  Brahma,  the  first  manifested  Creative  Power;  and  the  Dhyanic
Energies  are  the  Manus,  or  Manu  Svayambhuva  collectively.  The
direct  connection,  moreover,  between  the  Manus  and  Mahat  is  easy
to  see.  Manu  is  from  the  root  man,  to  think ;  and  thinking  proceeds
from  the  mind.     It  is,  in  Cosmogony,  the  Pre-nebular  Period.

(II)  The  Second  Creation,  Bhiita,  was  of  the  Rudimental  Principles
or  Tanmatras;  thence  termed  the  Elemental  Creation  or  Bhutasarga.
It  is  the  period  of  the  first  breath  of  the  differentiation  of  the  Pre-
cosmic  Elements,  or  Matter.  Bhutadi  means  the  "origin  of  the  Ele-
ments," and  precedes  Bhutasarga,  the  "creation,"  or  differentiation,  of
those  Elements  in  Primordial  Akasha,  Chaos  or  Vacuity.f  In  the
Vishnu  Purana  it  is  said  to  proceed  along,  and  belong  to,  the  triple
aspect  of  Ahankara,  translated  Egotism,  but  meaning  rather  that  un-
translatable term  "I-am-ness,"  that  which  first  issues  from  Mahat,  or
Divine  Mind;  the  first  shadowy  outline  of  Self-hood,  for  "pure"
Ahankara  becomes  "passionate"  and  finally  "rudimental"  or  initial-,
it  is  "the  origin  of  conscious  as  of  all  unconscious  h€\n%,'''  though  the
Esoteric  school  rejects  the  idea  of  anything  being  "unconscious,"
save  on  our  plane  of  illusion  and  ignorance.  At  this  stage  of  the
Second  Creation,  the  Second  Hierarchy  of  the  Manus  appear,  the
Dhyan  Chohans  or  Devas,  who  are  the  origin  of  Form  (Rupa),  the
Chitrashikhandinas,  "Bright-crested,"  or  Rikshas;  those  Rishis  w^ho
have  become  the  informing  Souls  of  the  Seven  Stars  (of  the  Great
Bear).]:     In   astronomical   and   cosmogonical   language,   this   Creation

*  Compare  Genesis  xix.  34-8  and  iv.  i.

t  Vishnu  is  both  Bhutesha,  "Lord  of  the  Elements,"  and  of  all  things,  and  Vishvarupa,  "Universal
Substance  "  or  Soul.

X  Compare,  for  their  "post-types,"  the  Treatise  written  by  Trithemius,  Agrippa's  master,  in  the
sixteenth  century,  "Concerning  the  Seven  Secondaries,  or  Spiritual  Intelligences,  who,  after  God,
actuate  the  Universe,"  which,  in  addition  to  secret  cycles  and  several  prophecies,  discloses  certain
facts  and  beliefs  about  the  Genii,  or  the  Elohim,  which  preside  over  and  guide  the  septenary  stages
of  the  World's  Course.


THE   SEVEN    CREATIONS.  489

relates  to  the  Fire-Mist  Period,  the  first  stage  of  Cosmic    Life,  after
its  Chaotic  state,*  when  Atoms  issue  from  Laya.

(Ill)  The  Third  Creation:  the  Third  or  Indriya  Creation  was  the
modified  form  of  Ahankara,  the  conception  of  "I"  (from  Aham,  "I"),
termed  the  Organic  Creation,  or  Creation  of  the  Senses,  Aindriyaka.
"These  three  were  the  Prakrita  Creation,  the  [discrete]  developments
of  indiscrete  nature  preceded  by  the  indiscrete  principle."  "Preceded
by,"  ought  to  be  replaced  here  with  "beginning  with  Bliddhi";  for  the
latter  is  neither  a  discrete  nor  an  indiscrete  quantity,  but  partakes  of
the  nature  of  both,  in  man  as  in  Kosmos.  A  unit  or  human  Monad  on
the  plane  of  illusion,  when  once  freed  from  the  three  forms  of  Ahan-
kara and  liberated  from  its  terrestrial  Manas,  Buddhi  indeed  becomes
a  continued  quantity,  both  in  duration  and  extension,  for  it  is  eternal
and  immortal.  Earlier  it  is  stated,  that  the  Third  Creation  "abound-
ing  with  the  quality  of  goodness,"  is  termed  Urdhvasrotas ;  and  a  page
or  two  further  the  Urdhvasrotas  Creation  is  referred  to  as  "the  sixth
creation  ...  or  that  of  the  divinities."  This  shows  plainly  that
earlier  as  well  as  later  Manvantaras  have  been  purposely  confused,  to
prevent  the  profane  from  perceiving  the  truth.  This  is  called  "incon-
gruity" and  "contradictions"  by  the  Orientalists.  "The  three  crea-
tions beginning  with  Intelligence  are  elemental,  but  the  six  creations
which  proceed  from  the  series  of  which  Intellect  is  the  first,  are  the
work  of  Brahma."!  Here  "creations"  mean  everywhere  stages  of  evolu-
tion. Mahat,  "Intellect"  or  Mind,  which  corresponds  with  Manas,  the
former  being  on  the  cosmic,  and  the  latter  on  the  human  plane,  stands
here,  too,  lower  than  Buddhi  or  supra-divine  Intelligence.  Therefore,
when  we  read  in  Linga  Purdna  that  "the  first  Creation  was  that  of
Mahat,  Intellect  being  the  first  in  manifestation,"  we  must  refer  that
(.specified)  creation  to  the  first  evolution  of  our  System  or  even  our
Earth,  none  of  the  preceding  ones  being  discussed  in  the  Purdnas,  but
only  occasionally  hinted  at.

*  From  the  first,  the  Orientalists  have  found  themselves  beset  with  great  difficulties  in  regard  to
any  possible  order  in  the  Puranic  "Creations."  Brahman  is  very  often  confused  by  Wilson  wdth
Brahma,  for  which  he  is  criticized  by  his  successors.  The  Original  Sanscrit  Texts  are  preferred  by
Mr.  Fitzedward  Hall  for  the  translation  of  the  Vishnu  Purdna,  to  the  text  used  by  Wilson.  "  Had
Professor  Wilson  enjoyed  the  advantages  which  are  now  at  the  command  of  the  student  of  Indian
philosophy,  unquestionably  he  would  have  expressed  himself  differently,"  says  the  editor  of  his  work.
This  reminds  one  of  the  answer  given  by  one  of  Thomas  Taylor's  admirers  to  those  scholars  who
criticized  his  tran.slations  of  Plato:  "Taylor  might  have  known  less  Greek  than  his  critics,  but  he
knew  more  Plato."  Our  present  Orientalists  disfigure  the  mystic  sense  of  the  Sanskrit  texts  far  more
than  Wilson  ever  did,  though  the  latter  is  undeniably  guilty  of  very  gross  errors.

t  V&yu  Pur&na.


490  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

This  Creation  of  the  first  Immortals,  or  Devasarga,  is  the  last  of  the.
series,  and  has  a  universal  meaning ;  it  refers,  namely,  to  Evolution  in
general,  and  not  specifically  to  our  Manvantara,  which  begins  with  the
same  over  and  over  again,  thus  showing  that  it  refers  to  several  dis-
tinct Kalpas.  For  it  is  said  "at  the  close  of  the  past  [Padma]  Kalpa
the  divine  Brahma  awoke  from  his  night  of  sleep  and  beheld  the
Universe  void."  Then  Brahma  is  shown  going  once  more  over  the
"Seven  Creations,"  in  the  secondary  stage  of  evolution,  repeating  the
first  three  on  the  objective  plane.

(IV)  The  Fourth  Creation :  the  Mukhya  or  Primary,  as  it  begins  the
series  of  four.  Neither  the  term  "inanimate"  bodies  nor  "immovable
things,"  as  translated  by  Wilson,  gives  a  correct  idea  of  the  Sanskrit
words  used.  Esoteric  Philosophy  is  not  alone  in  rejecting  the  idea  of
any  atom  being  "inorganic,"  for  it  is  found  also  in  orthodox  Hinduism.
Moreover,  Wilson  himself  says:  "All  the  Hindii  systems  consider
vegetable  bodies  as  endowed  with  life."*  Charachara,  or  the  synony-
mous sthavara  and  jangama,  is,  therefore,  inaccurately  rendered  by
"animate  and  inanimate,"  "sentient  beings"  and  "unconscious,"  or
"conscious  and  unconscious  beings,"  etc.  "Locomotive  and  fixed"
would  be  better,  "since  trees  are  considered  to  possess  souls."  The
Mukhya  is  the  "creation,"  or  rather  organic  evolution,  of  the  vegetable
kingdom.  In  this  Secondary  Period,  the  three  degrees  of  the  elemen-
tal or  rudimental  kingdoms  are  evolved  in  this  World,  corresponding,
inversely  in  order,  to  the  three  Prakritic  Creations,  during  the  Primar}^
Period  of  Brahma's  activity.  As  in  that  Period,  in  the  words  of  Vishnu
/*Mri«a,  "the  first  creation  was  that  of  Mahat  or  Intellect.  .  .  .  The
second  was  that  of  the  Rudimental  Principles  (Tanmatras).  .  .  .
The  third  was  .  .  .  the  creation  of  the  senses  (Aindriyaka)";  so  in
this  one,  the  order  of  the  Elemental  Forces  stands  thus:  (i)  the  nascent
Centres  of  Force,  intellectual  and  physical ;  (2)  the  Rudimentary  Prin-
ciples, nerve  force,  so  to  say ;  and  (3)  nascent  Apperception,  which  is
the  Mahat  of  the  lower  kingdoms,  and  is  especially  developed  in
the  third  order  of  Elementals;  these  are  succeeded  by  the  objective
kingdom  of  minerals,  in  which  this  "apperception"  is  entirely  latent,
to  re-develop  only  in  the  plants.  The  Mukhya  Creation,  then,  is
the  middle  point  between  the  three  lower  and  the  three  higher  king-
doms, which  represent  the  seven  esoteric  kingdoms  of  Kosmos,  and
of  Earth.


•  Collected  Works,  HI.  381.


THE  SEVEN  CREATIONS  CONTINUED.  49I

(V)  The  Fifth  Creation :  the  Tiryaksrotas  or  Tairyagyonya  Creation,*
that  of  the  "(sacred)  animals,"  corresponding  on  Earth  only  to  the
dumb  animal  creation.  That  which  is  meant  by  "animals,"  in  the
Primary  Creation,  is  the  germ  of  awakening  consciousness,  or  of  "ap-
perception," that  which  is  faintly  traceable  in  some  sensitive  plants  on
Earth  and  more  distinctly  in  the  protistic  Monera.f  On  our  Globe,
during  the  First  Round,  animal  "creation"  precedes  that  of  man,  while
the  mammalian  animals  evolve  from  man  in  our  Fourth  Round,  on  the
physical  plane.  In  the  First  Round,  the  animal  atoms  are  drawn  into
a  cohesion  of  human  physical  form;  while  in  the  Fourth,  the  reverse
occurs  according  to  magnetic  conditions  developed  during  life.  And
this  is  "metempsychosis." J  This  fifth  Stage  of  Evolution,  called
exoterically  "Creation,"  may  be  viewed  in  both  the  Primary  and
Secondar)^  Periods,  one  as  the  spiritual  and  cosmic,  the  other  as  the
material  and  terrestrial.  It  is  archebiosis,  or  life-origination;  "origi-
hation,"  so  far,  of  course,  as  the  manifestatioyi  of  life  on  all  the  seven
planes  is  concerned.  It  is  at  this  period  of  evolution  that  the  abso-
lutely eternal  universal  motion,  or  vibration,  that  which  is  called  in
Esoteric  language  the  "Great  Breath,"  diflferentiates  into  the  primor-
dial, first  manifested  Atom.  More  and  more,  as  chemical  and  physical
sciences  progress,  does  this  Occult  axiom  find  its  corroboration  in  the
world  of  knowledge;  the  scientific  hypothesis,  that  even  the  simplest
elements  of  matter  are  identical  in  their  nature,  and  difier  from  each
other  only  in  consequence  of  the  various  distributions  of  atoms  in  the
molecule  or  speck  of  substance,  or  of  the  modes  of  its  atomic  vibration,
gains  more  ground  every  day.

Thus,  as  the  differentiation  of  the  primordial  germ  of  life  has  to  precede
the  evolution  of  the  Dhyan  Chohan  of  the  Third  Group  or  Hierarchy
of  Being  in  Primary  Creation,  before  those  Gods  can  become  embodied
in  their  first  ethereal  form  (rupa),  so  animal  creation  has  for  the  same
reason  \.o  precede  "divine  man"  on  Earth.  And  this  is  why  we  find  in
the Purdnas,  "the  fifth,  the Tain^agyonya Creation,  was  that  of  animals."

(VI)  The   Sixth    Creation:   the  Urdhvasrotas   Creation,   or  that  of

•  Professor  Wilson  translates  as  though  animals  were  higher  in  the  scale  of  "creation"  than
divinities,  or  angels,  although  the  truth  about  the  Devas  is  very  plainly  stated  further  on.  This
"Creation,"  says  the  text,  is  both  Primary  (Prikrita)  and  Secondary  (Vaikrita).  It  is  the  Secondary,
as  regards  the  origin  of  the  Gods  from  Brahma,  the  personal  anthropomorphic  creator  of  our  material
universe;  it  is  the  Primary  as  affecting  Rudra,  who  is  the  immediate  production  of  the  First  Prin-
ciple. The  term  Rudra  is  not  only  a  title  of  Shiva,  but  embraces  agents  of  creation,  angels  and  men,
as  will  be  shown  further  on.

+  Neither  plant  nor  animal,  but  an  existence  between  the  two.

t  Five  Years  of  Theosophy,  p.  276,  art.,  "Mineral  Monad."


4^2  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

Divinities.  But  these  Divinities  are  simply  the  Prototypes  of  the  First
Race,  the  Fathers  of  their  "mind-bom"  progeny  with  the  "soft  bones."
It  is  these  who  became  the  Evolvers  of  the  "Sweat-born" — an  expres-
sion explained  in  Volume  II.

"Created  beings,"  explains  the  Vishnu  Pur  ana,  "although  they  are
destroyed  [in. their  individual  forms]  at  the  periods  of  dissolution,  yet
being  affected  by  the  good  or  evil  acts  oi  former  existences,  are  never
exempted  from  their  consequences.  And  when  Brahma  produces  the
world  anew,  they  are  the  progeny  of  his  will."

''Collecting  his  mind  into  itself  [yoga-willing],  Brahma  creates  the
four  Orders  of  Beings,  termed  Gods,  Demons,  Progenitors,  and  Men" ;
Progenitors  here  meaning  the  Prototypes  and  Evolvers  of  the  first
Root-Race  of  men.  The  Progenitors  are  the  Pitris,  and  are  of  Seven
Classes.  They  are  said,  in  exoteric  mythology,  to  be  born  of  "Brahma's
side,"  like  Eve  from  the  rib  of  Adam.

Finally,  the  Sixth  Creation  is  followed,  and  "Creation"  in  general
closed  by:

(VII)  The  Seventh  Creation :  the  evolution  of  the  Arvaksrotas  Beings,
"which  was     .     .     .     that  of  man."

The  "Eighth  Creation"  mentioned  is  no  Creation  at  all:  it  is  a
"blind,"  for  it  refers  to  a  purely  mental  process,  the  cognition  of  the
"Ninth  Creation,"  which,  in  its  turn,  is  an  effect,  manifesting  in  the
Secondary,  of  that  which  was  a  "Creation"  in  the  Primary  (Prakrita)
Creation.*  The  Eighth,  then,  called  Anugraha,  the  Pratyayasarga  or
Intellectual  Creation  of  the  Sankhyas,t  is  "the  creation  of  which  we
have  a  jiotion  [in  its  esoteric  aspect],  or  to  which  we  give  intellectual
assent  (Anugraha),  in  contradistinction  to  organic  creation^  It  is  the
correct  perception  of  our  relations  to  the  whole  range  of  "  Gods,"  and
especially  of  those  we  bear  to  the  Kumaras,  the  so-called  "Ninth
Creation,"  which  is  in  reality  an  aspect,  or  reflection,  of  the  Sixth  in
oar  Manvantara  (the  Vaivasvata).  "There  is  a  ninth,  the  Kaumara
Creation,  which  is  both  primary  and  secondary,"  says  the  Vishnu
Purana,  the  oldest  of  such  texts.|     As  an  Esoteric  text  explains:

•  "These  notions,"  remarks  Professor  Wilson,  "the  birth  of  Rudra  and  the  saints,  seem  to  have
been  borrowed  from  the  Shaivas,  and  to  have  been  awkwardly  engrafted  upon  the  Vaishnava  system."
The  esoteric  meaning  ought  to  have  been  consulted  before  venturing  such  a  hypothesis.

+  See  Sankhya  KartkA,  v.  46.  p.  146.

X  Parashara,  the  Vedic  Rishi,  who  received  the  Vishnu  Purana  from  Pulastya  and  taught  it  to
Maitreya,  is  placed  by  the  Orientalists  at  various  epochs.  As  correctly  observed,  in  the  Hindu
Classical  Dictionary:  "Speculations  as  to  his  era  differ  widely,  from  575  B.C.  to  1391  B.C.,  and  cannot
be  trusted."  Quite  so;  but  they  are  no  more  untrustworthy  than  any  other  date,  as  assigned  by  the
Sanskritists,  so  famous  in  the  department  of  arbitrary  fancy.


WHO   THE   KUMARAS   ARE.  493

The  Kianaras,  arc  the  Dhyanis,  derived  immediately  from  the  Supreme
Principle,  7vho  reappear  in  the  Vaivasvata  Manu  period,  for  the  progress

of  mankind.'^

The  translator  of  the  Vishmi  Purana  corroborates  it,  by  remarking
that  "these  sages  .  .  .  live  as  long  as  Brahma;  and  they  are  only
created  by  him  in  the  First  Kalpa,  although  their  generation  is  very
commonly,  but  inconsistently,  introduced  in  the  \^Secondary'\  Varaha,
or  Padma  Kalpa."  Thus,  the  Kumaras  are,  exoterically,  "the  creation
of  Rudra  or  Nilalohita,  a  form  of  Shiva,  by  Brahma  .  .  .  and  of
certain  other  mind-born  sons  of  Brahma."  But,  in  the  Esoteric  teach-
ing, they  are  the  Progenitors  of  the  true  spiritual  Self  in  the  physical
man,  the  higher  Prajapatis,  while  the  Pitris,  or  lower  Prajapatis,  are  no
more  than  the  Fathers  of  the  model,  or  type  of  his  physical  form,  made
"in  their  image."  Four  (and  occasion  ally  yzz-^-)  are  mentioned  freely  in
the  exoteric  texts,  three  of  the  Kumaras  being  secret.

"The  four  Kumaras  [are]  the  mind-born  Sons  of  Brahma.  Some
specify  sevenr\  All  these  seven  Vaidhatra,  the  patronymic  of  the
Kumaras,  the  "Maker's  Sons,"  are  mentioned  and  described  in
ishvara  Krishna's  Sdnkhya  Kdrikd  with  the  Commentary  of  Gauda-
padacharya  (Shankaracharya's  Paraguru)  attached  to  it.  It  discusses
the  nature  of  the  Kumaras,  though  it  refrains  from  mentioning  by
name  all  the  seven  Kumaras,  but  calls  them  instead  the  "seven  sons
of  Brahma,"  which  they  are,  as  they  are  created  by  Brahma  in  Rudra.
The  list  of  names  it  gives  us  is:  Sanaka,  Sanandana,  Sanatana,  Kapila,
Ribhu,  and  Panchashikha.     But  these  again  are  all  aliases.

The  exoteric  four  are  Sanatkumara,  Sananda,  Sanaka,  and  Sanatana;
and  the  esoteric  three  Sana,  Kapila,  and  Sanatsujata.  Special  attention
is  once  more  drawn  to  this  class  of  Dhyan  Chohans,  for  herein  lies  the
mystery  of  generation  and  heredity  hinted  at  in  the  Commentary  on
Stanza  VII,  in  treating  of  the  Four  Orders  of  Angelic  Beings.  Volume
II  explains  their  position  in  the  Divine  Hierarch}'.  Meanwhile,  let  us
see  what  the  exoteric  texts  say  about  them.

They  say  little;  and  to  him  who  fails  to  read  between  the  lines —
nothing.  "We  must  have  recourse,  here,  to  other  Pu7-anas  for  the
elucidation  of  this  term,"  remarks  Wilson,  who  does  not  suspect  for  one

*  They  may  indeed  mark  a  "special"  or  extra  "creation,"  since  it  is  they  who,  by  incarnating
themselves  within  the  senseless  human  shells  of  the  two  first  Root-Races,  and  a  great  portion  of
the  Third  Root-Race,  create,  so  to  speak,  a  new  race;  that  of  thinking,  self-conscious  and  divine
men.

t  Hindu.  Classical  Dictionary.


494  I'HE   SKCRET   DOCTRINK.

moment  that  he  is  in  the  presence  of  the  "  Angels  of  Darkness,"  the
mythical  "great  enemy"  of  his  Church.  Therefore,  he  contrives  to
"elucidate"  no  more  than  that  "these  [Divinities]  declining  to  create
progeny,  [and  thus  rebelling  against  Brahma],  remained,  as  the  name
of  the  first  [Sanatkumara]  implies,  ever  boys,  Kumaras;  that  is,  ever
pure  and  innocent,  whence  their  creation  is  called  the  Kaumara."
The  Puranas,  however,  may  afford  a  little  more  light.  "Being  ever  as
he  was  born,  he  is  here  called  a  youth;  and  hence  his  name  is  well
known  as  Sanatkumara."*  In  the  Shaiva  Purayias,  the  Kumaras  are
always  described  as  Yogins.  The  Kur?na  Purdna,  after  enumerating
them,  says:  "These  five,  O  Brahmans,  were  Yogins,  who  acquired
entire  exemption  from  passion."  They  are  five,  because  two  of  the
Kumaras  y<?//.

So  untrustworthy  are  some  translations  of  the  Orientalists  that  in
the  French  translation  of  the  Hari  Vamsha,  it  is  said:  "The  seven
Prajapati,  Rudra,  Skanda  (his  son)  and  Sanatkumara  proceeded  to
create  beings."  Whereas,  as  Wilson  shows,  the  original  is:  "These
seven  .  .  .  created  progeny;  and  so  did  Rudra,  but  Skanda  and
Sanatkumara,  restraining  their  power,  abstained  (from  creation)."  The
"four  orders  of  beings"  are  referred  to  sometimes  as  Ambhamsi,  which
Wilson  renders  as  "literally  Waters'  and  believes  it  "a  mystic  term."
It  is  one,  no  doubt;  but  he  evidently  failed  to  catch  the  real  Esoteric
meaning.  "Waters"  and  "Water"  stand  as  the  symbol  for  Akasha,
the  "Primordial  Ocean  of  Space,"  on  which  Narayana,  the  self-born
Spirit,  moves,  reclining  on  \h2it  which  is  its  progeny.]  "Water  is  the
body  of  Nara;  thus  we  have  heard  the  name  of  Water  explained.
Since  Brahma  rests  on  the  Water,  therefore  he  is  termed  Narayana."]:
"Pure,  Purusha  created  the  Waters  pure."  At  the  same  time  Water  is
the  Third  Principle  in  material  Kosmos,  and  the  third  in  the  realm  of
the  Spiritual :  Spirit  of  Fire,  Flame,  Akasha,  Kther,  Water,  Air,  Earth,
are  the  cosmic,  sidereal,  psychic,  spiritual  and  mystic  principles,  pre-
eniinently  occult,  on  every  pla^ie  of  being.  "Gods,  Demons,  Pitris  and
Men,"  are  the  four  orders  of  beings  to  whom  the  term  Ambhamsi  is
applied,  because  they  are  all  the  product  of  Waters  (mystically),  of
the  Akashic  Ocean,  and  of  the  Third  principle  in  Nature.  In  the
Vedas   it  is  a  synonym  of  Gods.     Pitris  and   Men  on  Earth  are  the

•  Linga  Purana,  Prior  Section,  Ixx.  174.

+  See  Manu,  I.  10.

X  See  Linga,  V&yu  and  MArkandeya  Pur&nas.


THE   "VIRGIN  ASCETICS.  495

transformations  or  rebirths  of  Gods  and  Demons  (Spirits)  on  a  higher
plane.  Water  is,  in  another  sense,  the  feminine  principle.  Venus
Aphrodite  is  the  personified  Sea,  and  the  Mother  of  the  God  of  Love,
the  Generatrix  of  all  the  Gods,  as  much  as  the  Christian  Virgin  Mary  is
Mare,  the  Sea,  the  Mother  of  the  Western  God  of  Love,  Mercy  and
Charity.  If  the  student  of  Esoteric  Philosophy  thinks  deeply  over
the  subject,  he  is  sure  to  find  out  all  the  suggestiveness  of  the  term
Ambhamsi,  in  its  manifold  relations  to  the  Virgin  in  Heaven,  to  the
Celestial  Virgin  of  the  Alchemists,  and  even  to  the  "Waters  of  Grace"
of  the  modern  Baptist.

Of  all  the  seven  great  divisions  of  Dhyan  Chohans,  or  Devas,  there
is  none  with  which  humanity  is  more  concerned  than  with  the  Kumaras.
Imprudent  are  the  Christian  Theologians  who  have  degraded  them  into
Fallal  Angels,  and  now  call  them  Satan  and  Demons;  as  among  these
heavenly  denizens  who  "refuse  to  create,"  the  Archangel  Michael,  the
greatest  patron  Saint  of  the  Western  and  Eastern  Churches,  under  his
double  name  of  St.  Michael  and  his  supposed  copy  on  earth,  St.  George
conquering  the  Dragon,  has  to  be  given  one  of  the  most  prominent
places.

The  Kumaras,  the  Mind-born  Sons  of  Brahma-Rudra,  or  Shiva,
mystically  the  howling  and  terrific  destroyer  of  human  passions  a7id
physical  senses,  which  are  ever  in  the  way  of  the  development  of  the
higher  spiritual  perceptions  and  the  growth  of  the  itmer  eternal  man,
are  the  progeny  of  Shiva,  the  Mahayogi,  the  great  patron  of  all  the
Yogis  and  Mystics  of  India.

Shiva- Rudra  is  the  Destroyer,  as  Vishnu  is  the  Preserver;  and  both
are  the  Regenerators  of  spiritual  as  well  as  of  physical  Nature.  To  live
as  a  plant,  the  seed  must  die.  To  live  as  a  conscious  entity  in  the
Eternity,  the  passions  and  senses  of  man  must  die  before  his  body  does.
"That  to  live  is  to  die  and  to  die  is  to  live,"  has  been  too  little  under-
stood in  the  West.  Shiva,  the  Destroyer,  is  the  Creator  and  the
Saviour  of  Spiritual  Man,  as  he  is  the  good  gardener  of  Nature.  He
weeds  out  the  plants,  human  and  cosmic,  and  kills  the  passions  of  the
physical,  to  call  to  life  the  perceptions  of  the  spiritual,  man.

The  Kumaras,  themselves  then,  being  the  "virgin  ascetics,"  refuse  to
create  the  material  being  Man.  Well  may  they  be  suspected  of  a  direct
connection  with  the  Christian  Archangel  Michael,  the  "virgin  combat-
ant" of  the  Dragon  Apophis,  whose  victim  is  every  Soul  united  too
loosely  to  its  immortal  Spirit,  the  Angel  who,  as  shown  by  the  Gnos-


4g6  THE  se;cret  doctrine.

tics,  refused  to  create  just  as  the  Kumaras  did.     Does  not  that  patron
Angel  of  the  Jews  preside  over  Saturn  (Shiva  or  Rudra),  and  the  Sab-
bath, the  day  of  Saturn?     Is  he  not  shown  of  the  same  essence  with
his  Father  (Saturn),  and  called  the  Son  of  Time,  Cronus,  or  Kala,  a
form  of  Brahma   (Vishnu  and  Shiva)?     And  is  not  Old  Time  of  the
Greeks,  with  its  scythe  and  sand-glass,  identical  with  the  Ancient  of
Days  of  the  Kabalists;  the  latter  "Ancient"  being  one  with  the  Hindu
Ancient  of  Days,  Brahma,  in  his  triune  form,  whose  name  is  also  Sanat,
the   Ancient?     Every  Kumara  bears   the  prefix   of  Sanat  and   Sana.
And  Shanaishchara  is   Saturn,    the   planet   Shani,    the   King   Saturn,
whose  Secretary  in  Egypt  was  Thot-Hermes  the  first.     They  are  thus
identified  both  with  the  planet  and  the  God  (Shiva),  who  are,  in  their
turn,  shown  to  be  the  prototypes  of  Saturn,  who  is  the  same  as  Bel,
Baal,  Shiva,  and  Jehovah  Sabbaoth,  the  Angel  of  the  Face  of  whom  is
Mikael— SnD^d,   "who  [is]  as  God."     He  is  the  patron,  and  guardian
Angel  of  the  Jews,  as  Daniel  tells  us;  and,  before  the  Kumaras  were
degraded,  by  those  who  were  ignorant  of  their  very  name,  into  Demons
and  Fallen  Angels,  the  GrecK    Ophites,  the  occultly  inclined   prede-
cessors and  precursors  of  the  Roman  Catholic  Church  after  its  seces-
sion and  separation  from  the  primitive  Greek  Church,  had  identified
Michael  with  their  Ophiomorphos,  the  rebellious  and  opposing  spirit.
This  means  nothing  more  than   the  reverse  aspect,   symbolically,   of
Ophis,  the   Divine  Wisdom  or   Christos.      In  the    Talmud,  Mikael  is
"Prince  of  Water"  and  the  chief  of  the  Seven  Spirits,  for  the  same
reason  that  one  of  his  many  prototypes,  Sanatsujata,  the  chief  of  the
Kumaras,  is  called  Ambhamsi,  "Waters,"  according  to  the  commentary
on    Vishnu  Piird?ia.     Why?     Because  the  Waters  is  another  name  of
the  Great  Deep,  the  Primordial  Waters  of  Space,  or  Chaos,  and  also
means    Mother,    Amba,    meaning    Aditi    and    Akasha,    the    Celestial
Virgin-Mother   of  the   visible   Universe.     Furthermore,   the   "Waters
of  the  Flood"   are  also  called  the  "Great  Dragon,"  or  Ophis,  Ophio-
morphos.

The  Rudras  will  be  noticed  in  their  septenar>'  character  of  "Fire-
Spirits"  in  the  "Symbolism"  attached  to  the  Stanzas  in  Volume  II.
There  we  shall  also  consider  the  Cross  (3  +  4)  under  its  primeval  and
later  forms,  and  shall  use  for  purposes  of  comparison  the  Pythagorean
numbers  side  by  side  with  Hebrew  metrology.  The  immense  import-
ance of  the  number  seve?i  will  thus  become  evident,  as  the  root  number
of  Nature,     We  shall  examine  it  from  the  standpoint  of  the  Vedas  and


IMPORTANCE   OF   THE   NUMBER  SEVEN.  497

the  Chaldean  Scriptures;  as  it  existed  in  Eg>^pt  thousands  of  years  B.C.,
and  as  treated  in  the  Gnostic  records ;  we  shall  show  how  its  import-
ance as  a  basic  number  has  gained  recognition  in  Physical  Science;
and  we  shall  endeavour  to  prove  that  the  importance  attached  to  the
number  seven  throughout  all  antiquity  was  due  to  no  fanciful  imaginings
of  uneducated  priests,  but  to  a  profound  knowledge  of  Natural  Law.


SECTION  XIV.

The  Four  Elements.


MktaphysicalIvY  and  esoterically,  there  is  but  One  Element  in
Nature,  and  at  the  root  of  it  is  the  Deity;  and  the  so-called  seven
Elements,  of  which  five  have  already  manifested  and  asserted  their
existence,  are  the  garment,  the  veil,  of  that  Deity,  direct  from  the
essence  whereof  comes  Man,  whether  considered  physically,  psychi-
cally, mentally  or  spiritually.  Four  Elements  only  are  generally  spoken
of  in  later  antiquity,  while  five  only  are  admitted  in  philosophy.  For
the  body  of  Ether  is  not  fully  manifested  yet,  and  its  noumenon  is  still
the  "Omnipotent  Father  ^ther,"  the  synthesis  of  the  rest.  But  what
are  these  Elements,  whose  compound  bodies  have  now  been  discovered
by  Chemistry  and  Physics  to  contain  numberless  sub-elements,  even
the  sixty  or  seventy  of  which  no  longer  embrace  the  whole  number
suspected?  Let  us  follow  their  evolution  from  the  historical  beginnings,
at  an3^  rate.

The  Four  Elements  were  fully  characterized  by  Plato  when  he  said
that  they  were  that  "which  composes  and  decomposes  the  co77ipound  bodies ^
Hence  Cosmolatry  was  never,  even  in  its  worst  aspect,  the  fetichism
which  adores  or  worships  the  passive  external  form  and  matter  of  any
object,  but  looked  ever  to  the  Noumenon  therein.  Fire,  Air,  Water,
Earth,  were  but  the  visible  garb,  the  symbols  of  the  informing,  invisible
Souls  or  Spirits,  the  Cosmic  Gods,  to  whom  worship  was  offered  by  the
ignorant,  and  simple,  but  respectful,  recognition  by  the  wiser.  In  their
turn,  the  phenomenal  subdivisions  of  the  noumenal  Elements  were  in-
formed by  the  Elementals,  so-called,  the  "Nature  Spirits"  of  lower
grades.

In  the  Theogony  of  Mochus,  we  find  Ether  first,  and  then  the  Air;


ON  THE   ELEMENTS.  499

the  two  principles  from  which  Ulom,  the  Intelligible  (vorjrcx;)  God,  the
visible  Universe  of  Matter,  is  born.*

In  the  Orphic  hymns,  the  Eros-Phanes  evolves  from  the  Spiritual
Egg,  which  the  Ethereal  Winds  impregnate,  Wind  being  the  "Spirit
of  God,"  which  is  said  to  move  in  ^ther,  "brooding  over  the  Chaos,"
the  Divine  Idea,  In  the  Hindu  Kathopariishad,  Purusha,  the  Divine
Spirit,  already  stands  before  the  Original  Matter,  and  from  their  union
springs  the  great  Soul  of  the  World,  "Maha-Atma,  Brahman,  the  Spirit
of  Life";t  these  latter  appellations  being  again  identical  with  the  Uni-
versal Soul,  or  Anima  Mundi ;  the  Astral  Eight  of  the  Theurgists  and
Kabalists  being  its  last  and  lowest  division.

The  Elements  (o-rotxcta)  of  Plato  and  Aristotle  w^ere  thus  the  incor-
i)oreal  principles  attached  to  the  four  great  divisions  of  our  Cosmic
World,  and  it  is  with  justice  that  Creuzer  defines  these  primitive  beliefs
as  "a  species  of  magism,  2^  psychic  paganism,  and  a  deification  of  potencies;
a  spiritualization  which  placed  the  believers  in  a  close  community  with
these  potencies.":]:  So  close,  indeed,  that  the  Hierarchies  of  these
Potencies,  or  Forces,  have  been  classified  on  a  graduated  scale  of  seven
from  the  ponderable  to  the  imponderable.  They  are  septenary,  not  as
an  artificial  aid  to  facilitate  their  comprehension,  but  in  their  real
cosmic  gradation,  from  their  chemical,  or  physical,  to  their  purely
spiritual  composition.  Gods  with  the  ignorant  masses;  Gods  indepen-
dent and  supreme ;  Demons  with  the  fanatics,  who,  intellectual  as  they
often  may  be,  are  unable  to  understand  the  spirit  of  the  philosophical
sentence,  in  pluribus  tmum.  With  the  Hermetic  philosopher  they  are
Forces  relatively  "blind"  or  "intelligent,"  according  to  which  of  the
principles  in  them  he  deals  with.  It  required  long  millenniums  before
they  found  themselves  finally,  in  our  cultured  age,  degraded  into
simple  chemical  elements.

At  any  rate,  good  Christians,  and  especially  the  Biblical  Protestants,
ought  to  show  more  reverence  for  the  Four  Elements,  if  they  would
maintain  any  for  Moses.  For  the  Bible  manifests  the  consideration  and
mystic  significance  in  which  they  were  held  by  the  Hebrew  Lawgiver,
on  every  page  of  the  Pentateuch.  The  tent  which  contained  the  Holy
of  Holies  was  a  Cosmic  Symbol,  sacred,  in  one  of  its  meanings,  to  the
Elements,  the  four  cardinal  points,  and  Ether.  Josephus  shows  it  built
in  white,  the  colour  of  Ether.  And  this  explains  also  why,  in  the
Egyptian   and   the   Hebrew  temples,   according  to   Clemens  Alexan-

•  Movers,  Phoinizer,  282.  t  Weber,  Akad.  Varies,  213,  214,  etc.  X  IX.  850.


500  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

drinus,*  a  gigantic  curtain,  .supported  by  five  pillars,  separated  the
sa7ictum  soMctoricm — now  represented  by  the  altar  in  Christian  churches
— wherein  the  priests  alone  were  permitted  to  enter,  from  the  part
accessible  to  the  profane.  By  its  fo7ir  colours  this  curtain  symbolized
the  four  principal  Elements,  and  with  the  five  pillars  signified  the
knowledge  of  the  divine  that  the  Jive  senses  can  enable  man  to  acquire
with  the  help  of  \hQ.four  Elements.

In  Cory's  Ancient  Fragments,  one  of  the  "Chaldean  Oracles"  ex-
presses ideas  about  the  elements  and  Ether  in  language  singularly  like
that  of  The  Unseen  Universe,  written  by  two  eminent  Scientists  of  our  day.

It  states  that  from  Ether  have  come  all  things,  and  to  it  all  Avill
return;  that  the  images  of  all  things  are  indelibly  impressed  upon  it;
and  that  it  is  the  store-house  of  the  germs,  or  of  the  remains  of  all
visible  forms,  and  even  ideas.  It  appears  as  if  this  case  strangely  cor-
roborates our  assertion  that  whatever  discoveries  may  be  made  in  our
days  will  be  found  to  have  been  anticipated  by  many  thousand  years  by
our  "simple-minded  ancestors."

Whence  came  the  Four  Elements  and  the  Malachim  of  the  Hebrews?
They  have  been  made  to  merge,  by  a  theological  sleight  of  hand  on
the  part  of  the  Rabbins  and  the  later  Fathers  of  the  Church,  into
Jehovah,  but  their  origin  is  identical  with  that  of  the  Cosmic  Gods  of
all  other  nations.  Their  symbols,  whether  born  on  the  shores  of  the
Oxus,  on  the  burning  sands  of  Upper  Egypt,  or  in  the  wild  forests,
weird  and  glacial,  which  cover  the  slopes  and  peaks  of  the  sacred
snowy  mountains  of  Thessaly,  or  again,  in  the  pampas  of  America —
their  symbols,  we  repeat,  when  traced  to  their  source,  are  ever  one  and
the  same.  Whether  Egyptian  or  Pelasgian,  Aryan  or  Semitic,  the
Genius  Loci,  the  L,ocal  God,  embraced  in  its  unity  all  Nature;  but  not
especially  the  four  elements  any  more  than  one  of  their  creations,  such
as  trees,  rivers,  mounts  or  stars.  The  Genius  L,oci,  a  very  late  after-
thought of  the  last  sub-races  of  the  Fifth  Root-Race,  when  the  primi-
tive and  grandiose  meaning  had  become  nearly  lost,  was  ever  the
representative,  in  his  accumulated  titles,  of  all  his  colleagues.  It  was
the  God  of  Fire,  symbolized  by  thunder,  as  Jove  or  Agni ;  the  God  of
Water,  symbolized  by  the  fluvial  bull,  or  some  sacred  river  or  fountain,
as  Varuna,  Neptune,  etc. ;  the  God  of  Air,  manifesting  in  the  hurricane
and  tempest,  as  Vayu  and  Indra;  and  the  God  or  Spirit  of  the  Earth,
who  appeared  in  earthquakes,  like  Pluto,  Yama,  and  so  many  others.

•  Stromala,  I.  v.  6.


THE  COSMIC   GODS.  501

These  were  the  Cosmic  Gods,  ever  synthesizing  all  in  one,  as  found
in  every  cosmogony  or  mythology.  Thus,  the  Greeks  had  their  Dodo-
nean  Jupiter,  who  included  in  himself  the  four  Elements  and  the  four
cardinal  points,  and  who  was  recognized,  therefore,  in  old  Rome  under
the  pantheistic  title  of  Jupiter  Mundus;  and  who  now,  in  modern
Rome,  has  become  the  Deus  Mundus,  the  one  Mundane  God,  who  is
made  to  swallow  all  others,  in  the  latest  theology,  by  the  arbitrary
decision  of  his  special  ministers.

As  Gods  of  Fire,  Air,  and  Water,  they  were  Celestial  Gods ;  as  Gods
of  the  Lower  Region,  they  were  Infernal  Deities;  the  latter  adjective
applying  simply  to  the  Earth.  They  were  "Spirits  of  the  Earth"  under
their  respective  names  of  Yama,  Pluto,  Osiris,  the  "Lord  of  the  Lower
Kingdom,"  etc.,  and  their  tellurial  character  sulficiently  proves  it.  The
Ancients  knew  of  no  worse  abode  after  death  than  the  Kama  Loka,  the
Limbus  on  this  Earth.*'  If  it  is  argued  that  the  Dodonean  Jupiter  was
identified  with  Dis,  or  the  Roman  Pluto  with  the  Dionysus  Chthonius,
the  Subterranean,  and  with  Aidoneus,  the  King  of  the  Subterranean
World,  wherein,  according  to  Creuzer,f  oracles  were  rendered,  then  it
will  become  the  pleasure  of  the  Occultists  to  prove  that  both  Aidoneus
and  Dionysus  are  the  bases  of  Adonai,  or  lurbo-Adonai,  as  Jehovah  is
called  in  the  Codex  Nazarceus.  "Thou  shalt  not  worship  the  Sun,  who
is  named  Adonai,  whose  name  is  also  Kadush  and  El-El,"  +  and  also
'Lord  Bacchus."  Baal-Adonis  of  the  Sods,  or  Mysteries,  of  the  pre-
Babylonian  Jews  became  the  Adonai  by  the  Massorah,  the  later
vowelled  Jehovah.  Hence  the  Roman  Catholics  are  right.  All  these
Jupiters  are  of  the  same  family;  but  Jehovah  has  to  be  included  therein
to  make  it  complete.  The  Jupiter  Aerius  or  Pan,  the  Jupiter- Amnion,
and  the  Jupiter- Bel- Moloch,  are  all  correlations  and  one  with  lurbo-
Adonai,  because  they  are  all  one  Cosmic  Nature.  It  is  that  Nature
and  Power  which  creates  the  specific  terrestrial  symbol,  and  the
physical  and  material  fabric  of  the  latter,  which  proves  the  Energy
manifesting  through  it  as  extrinsic.

For  primitive  religion  was  something  better  than  simple  preoccupa-
tion about  physical  phenomena,  as  remarked  by  Schelling;  and  prin-

*  The  Gehenna  of  the  Bible  was  a  valley  near  Jerusalem,  where  the  monotheistic  Jews  immolated
their  children  to  Moloch,  if  the  word  of  the  prophet  Jeremiah  is  to  be  beHeved.  The  Scandinavian
Abode  of  Hel  or  Hela  was  a  frigid  region— Kama  Loka  again— and  the  Egyptian  Amenti  a  place  of
purification.     (See /s«i  Unveiled,  II.  11.)

+  I.  vi.  i.

%  Cod.  Naz.,  I.  47  ;  see  also  Psalms,  Ixxxix.  i8.


502  the;  secret  doctrine.

ciples,  more  elevated  than  we  modern  Sadducees  know  of,  "were  hidden
under  the  transparent  veil  of  such  merely  natural  divinities  as  thunder,
the  winds,  and  rain."  The  Ancients  knew  and  could  distinguish  the
corporeal  from  the  spiritual  I^lements  in  the  Forces  of  Nature.

The  four-fold  Jupiter,  as  the  four-faced  Brahma,  the  aerial,  the
fulgurant,  the  terrestrial,  and  the  marine  God,  the  lord  and  master  of
the  four  Elements,  may  stand  as  a  representative  for  the  great  Cosmic
Gods  of  every  nation.  Although  deputing  power  over  the  fire  to
Hephaestus- Vulcan,  over  the  sea  to  Poseidon-Neptune,  and  over  the
Earth  to  Pluto-Aidoneus,  the  Aerial  Jove  was  still  all  these ;  for  ^ther,
from  the  first,  had  preeminence  over,  and  was  the  synthesis  of,  all  the
Elements.

Tradition  tells  of  a  grotto,  a  vast  cave  in  the  deserts  of  Central  Asia,
whereinto  light  pours,  through  four  seemingly  natural  apertures,  or
clefts  placed  crossways  at  the  four  cardinal  points.  From  noon  till  an
hour  before  sunset  the  light  streams  in,  of  four  different  colours,  as
averred,  red,  blue,  orange-gold,  and  white,  owing  to  some  either
natural  or  artificially  prepared  conditions  of  vegetation  and  soil.  The
light  converges  in  the  centre  round  a  pillar  of  white  marble  with  a
globe  upon  it,  which  represents  our  earth.  It  is  named  the  "  Grotto  of
Zaratushta."

Included  under  the  arts  and  sciences  of  the  Fourth  Race,  the  Atlan-
teans,  the  phenomenal  manifestation  of  the  Four  Elements,  which  were
justly  attributed  by  these  believers  to  the  intelligent  interference  of  the
Cosmic  Gods,  assumed  a  scientific  character.  The  Magic  of  the  ancient
priests  consisted,  in  those  days,  in  addressing  their  Gods  in  their  own
language.

The  speech  of  the  men  of  the  Earth  cannot  reach  the  Lords.  Each
viust  be  addressed  in  the  language  of  his  respective  Element.

So  says  The  Book  of  Rides,  in  a  sentence  which  will  be  shown  preg-
nant with  meaning,  adding  as  an  explanation  of  the  nature  of  that
^/^w^«/-language :

//  is  composed  of  Sounds,  7iot  words;  of  sounds,  mimbers  and  figures.
He  who  kfiows  hozv  to  blend  the  three,  will  call  forth  the  response  of  the
superi7itending  Power  \Jhe  Regent- God  of  the  specific  Elcmeiit  needed'].

Thus  this  "language"  is  that  of  incantations  or  of  mantras,  as  they
are  called  in  India;  sound  being  the  most  potent  aiid  effectual  magic
agent,  and  the  first  of  the  keys  which  opens  the  door  of  co?nmwiication
between  Mortals  and  Immortals.     He  who  believes  in  the  words  and


ST.    PAUL  BELIEVED  IN  COSMIC    GODS.  503

teachings  of  St.  Paul,  has  no  right  to  pick  out  from  the  latter  those
sentences  only  which  he  chooses  to  accept,  to  the  rejection  of  others;
and  St.  Paul  teaches  most  undeniably  the  existence  of  Cosmic  Gods
and  their  presence  among  us.  Paganism  preached  a  dual  and  simul-
taneous evolution,  a  "creation"  spiritualem  ac  munda^iwn,  as  the
Roman  Church  has  it,  ages  before  the  advent  of  that  Roman  Church.
Exoteric  phraseology  has  changed  little  with  respect  to  Divine  Hier-
archies since  the  most  palmy  days  of  Paganism,  or  "Idolatry'."  Names
alone  have  changed,  together  with  claims  which  have  now  become  false
pretences.  For  when,  for  instance,  Plato  put  in  the  mouth  of  the
Highest  Principle  (Father  ^ther  or  Jupiter)  the  words,  "the  Gods  of
the  Gods  of  whom  I  am  the  maker,  as  I  am  the  father  of  all  their
works,"  he  knew  the  spirit  of  this  sentence  as  fully,  we  suspect,  as  St.
Paul  did,  when  saying:  "For  though  there  be  that  are  called  Gods,
whether  in  Heaven  or  in  Earth,  as  there  be  Gods  many  and  I^rds

many "*     Both  knew  the  sense  and  the  meaning  of  what

they  put  forward  in  such  guarded  terms.

We  cannot  be  taken  to  task  by  the  Protestants  for  interpreting  the
verse  from  the  Corinthians  as  we  do;  for,  if  the  translation  in  the
English  Bible  is  made  ambiguous,  it  is  not  so  in  the  original  texts,  and
the  Roman  Catholic  Church  accepts  the  words  of  the  Apostle  in  their
true  sense.  For  a  proof  see  St.  Dionysius,  the  Areopagite,  who  was
"directly  inspired  by  the  Apostle,"  and  "who  wrote  under  his  dicta-
tion," as  we  are  assured  by  the  Marquis  de  Mir\'ille,  whose  works
are  approved  by  Rome,  and  who  says,  commenting  on  that  special
verse:  "And,  though  there  are  (in  fact)  they  who  are  called  Gods,
for  it  seems  there  are  really  several  Gods,  withal  and  for  all  that,
the  God-Principle  and  the  Superior  God  ceases  not  to  remain  essen-
tially 07ie  and  indivisible."!  Thus  spoke  the  old  Initiates  also,  know-
ing that  the  worship  of  minor  Gods  could  never  affect  the  "God
Principled  %

Says  Sir  W.  Grove,  F.R.S.,  speaking  of  the  correlation  of  forces:

The  ancients  when  they  witnessed  a  natural  phenomenon,  removed  from  ordinary
analogies,  and  unexplained  by  any  mechanical  action  known  to  them,  referred  it  to
a  soul,  a  spiritual  or  preternatural  power.  ...  Air  and  gases  were  also  at  first
deemed  spiritual,  but  subsequently  they  became  invested  with  a  more  material
character;  and  the  same  words  Trvevfxa,  spirit,  etc.,  were  used  to  signify  the  soul  or


•  I  Cor.,  viii.  5.

i-  Concerning  Divine  Names,  traduction  Darboy,  364.

i  See  de  Mir\'ille,  Des  Esprits,  ii.  322.


504  I'HE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

a  gas ;  the  very  word  gas,  from  geist,  a  ghost  or  spirit,  affords  us  an  instance  of  the
gradual  transmutation  of  a  spiritual  into  a  physical  conception.*

This,  the  great  man  of  Science,  in  his  preface  to  the  sixth  edition  of
his  work,  considers  to  be  the  07ily  concern  of  exact  Science,  which  has
no  business  to  meddle  with  the  causes.

Cause  and  effect  are,  therefore,  in  their  abstract  relation  to  these  forces,  words
solely  of  convenience.  We  are  totally  unacquainted  with  the  ultimate  generating
power  of  each  and  all  of  them,  and  probably  shall  ever  remain  so;  we  can  only
ascertain  the  normal  of  their  actions;  we  must  humbly  refer  their  causation  to  one
omnipresent  influence,  and  content  ourselves  with  studying  their  effects  and  de-
veloping, by  experiment,  their  mutual  relations,  t

This  policy  once  accepted,  and  the  system  virtually  admitted  in  the
above-quoted  words,  namely,  the  spirituality  of  the  "ultimate  genera-
ting power,"  it  would  be  more  than  illogical  to  refuse  to  recognize  this
quality  which  is  inherent  in  the  material  elements,  or  rather,  in  their
compounds,  as  present  in  the  fire,  air,  water  or  earth.  The  Ancients
knew  these  powers  so  well,  that,  while  concealing  their  true  nature
under  various  allegories,  for  the  benefit,  or  to  the  detriment,  of  the
uneducated  rabble,  they  never  departed  from  the  multiple  object  in
view,  while  inverting  them.  They  contrived  to  throw  a  thick  veil  over
the  tiucleus  of  truth  concealed  by  the  symbol,  but  they  ever  tried  to
preserve  the  latter  as  a  record  for  future  generations,  sufficiently  trans-
parent to  allow  their  wise  men  to  discern  the  truth  behind  the  fabulous
form  of  the  glyph  or  allegor>\  These  ancient  sages  are  accused  of
superstitioti  and  credulity;  and  this  too  by  the  very  nations,  which,
though  learned  in  all  the  modern  arts  and  sciences,  and  cultured  and
wise  in  their  generation,  accept  to  this  day  as  their  one  living  and
infinite  God,  the  anthropomorphic  "Jehovah"  of  the  Jews!

What  were  some  of  these  alleged  "superstitions"?  Hesiod  believed,
for  instance,  that  "the  winds  were  the  sons  of  the  Giant  Typhoeus,"
who  were  chained  and  unchained  at  will  by  ^olus,  and  the  polyi;heistic
Greeks  accepted  it  along  with  Hesiod.  Why  should  they  not,  since  the
monotheistic  Jews  had  the  same  beliefs,  with  other  names  for  their
dramatis  persona:,  and  since  Christians  believe  in  the  same  to  this  day?
The  Hesiodic  ^olus,  Boreas,  etc.,  were  named  Kedem,  Tzephuni,
Derum,  and  Ruach  Hayum  by  the  "chosen  people"  of  Israel.  What
is,  then,  the  fundamental  difference?  While  the  Hellenes  were  taught
that  .^olus  tied  and  untied  the  winds,  the  Jews  believed  as  fervently


The  Correlation  of  Physical  Forces,  p.  89.  t  Ibid.,  xiv.


JEHOVAH,   A   GOD   OF  THE  EI.EMENTS.  505

that  their  Ivord  God,  with  ''smoke"  coming  ''otit  of  his  nostrils  and
pre  out  of  his  mouth,  .  .  .  rode  upon  a  cherub  and  did  fly;  and  he
was  see7i  tipon  the  wings  of  the  windT'^  The  expressions  of  the  two
nations  are  either  both  figures  of  speech,  or  both  superstitions.  We
think  they  are  neither;  but  only  arise  from  a  keen  sense  of  oneness
with  Nature,  and  a  perception  of  the  mysterious  and  the  intelligent
behind  every  natural  phenomenon,  which  the  moderns  no  longer
possess.  Nor  was  it  "superstitious"  in  the  Greek  Pagans  to  listen
to  the  oracle  of  Delphi,  when,  at  the  approach  of  the  fleet  of  Xerxes,
that  oracle  advised  them  to  "sacrifice  to  the  winds,"  if  the  same  has
to  be  regarded  as  divine  worship  in  the  Israelites,  who  sacrificed  as
often  to  the  wind  and  also  especially  to  the  fire.  Do  they  not  say  that
their  "God  is  a  consuming  fire,"t  who  appeared  generally  «5  fire  and
"encompassed  by  fire"?  and  did  not  Elijah  seek  for  the  "Lord"  in
the  "great  strong  wind,  and  in  the  earthquake"?  Do  not  the  Chris-
tians repeat  the  same  after  them?  Do  not  they,  moreover,  sacrifice  to
this  day,  to  the  same  "God  of  Wind  and  Water"?  They  do;  because
special  prayers  for  rain,  dry  weather,  trade-winds  and  the  calming  of
storms  on  the  seas,  exist  to  this  hour  in  the  prayer-books  of  the  three
Christian  Churches;  and  the  several  hundred  sects  of  the  Protestant
religion  offer  them  to  their  God  upon  every  threat  of  calamity.  The
fact  that  they  are  no  more  answered  by  Jehovah,  than  they  were,
probably,  by  Jupiter  Pluvius,  does  not  alter  the  fact  of  these  prayers
being  addressed  to  the  Power,  or  Powers,  supposed  to  rule  over  the
Elements,  or  of  these  Powers  being  identical  in  Paganism  and  Chris-
tianity ;  or  have  we  to  believe  that  such  prayers  are  crass  idolatry  and
absurd  "superstition"  ^w/y  when  addressed  by  a  Pagan  to  his  "idol,"
and  that  the  same  superstition  is  suddenly  transformed  into  "praise-
worthy piety"  and  "religion"  whenever  the  name  of  the  celestial
addressee  is  changed?  But  the  tree  is  known  by  its  fruit.  And  the
fruit  of  the  Christian  tree  being  no  better  than  that  of  the  tree  of
Paganism,  why  should  the  former  command  more  reverence  than  the
latter?

Thus,  when  we  are  told  by  the  Chevalier  Drach,  a  converted  Jew,
and  by  the  Marquis  de  Mirville,  a  Roman  Catholic  fanatic  of  the
French  aristocracy,  that  in  Hebrevv'  "lightning"  is  a  synonym  of
"fur}',"  and  is  always  handled  by  the  "evil"  Spirit;  that  Jupiter
Fulgur  or   Fulgurans  is  also  called  by  the  Christians   Elicius,   and

•  II  Sam.,  xxii.  9,  n.  t  Deul.,  iv.  24.


5o6  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

denounced  as  the  "soul  of  lightning,"  its  Daemon;*  we  have  either
to  apply  the  same  explanation  and  definitions  to  the  "lyord  God
of  Israel,"  under  the  same  circumstances,  or  renounce  our  right  of
abusing  the  Gods  and  creeds  of  other  nations.

The  foregoing  statements,  emanating  as  they  do  from  two  ardent  and
learned  Roman  Catholics,  are,  to  say  the  least,  dangero7is,  in  the  pre-
sence of  the  Bible  and  its  prophets.  Indeed,  if  Jupiter,  the  "chief
Daemon  of  the  Pagan  Greeks,"  hurled  his  deadly  thunder-bolts  and
lightnings  at  those  who  excited  his  wrath,  so  did  the  lyord  God  of
Abraham  and  Jacob.     For  we  read  that:

The  Lord  thundered  from  heaven,  and  the  most  High  uttered  his  voice.  And  he
sent  out  arrows  [thunder-bolts]  and  scattered  them  [Saul's  armies];  lightning,  and
discomfited  them.t

The  Athenians  are  accused  of  having  sacrificed  to  Boreas;  and  this
"Daemon"  is  charged  with  having  submerged  and  wrecked  400  ships  of
the  Persian  fleet  on  the  rocks  of  Mount  Pelion,  and  of  having  become
so  furious  that  all  the  Magi  of  Xerxes  could  hardl)^  counteract  him  by
offering  contra-sacrifices  to  Thetis.:):  Very  fortunately,  no  authenti-
cated instance  is  on  the  records  of  Christian  wars,  showing  a  like
catastrophe  on  the  same  scale  happening  to  one  Christian  fleet,  owing
to  the  "prayers"  of  its  enemy — another  Christian  nation.  But  this  is
from  no  fault  of  theirs,  for  each  prays  as  ardently  to  Jehovah  for  the
destruction  of  the  other,  as  the  Athenians  prayed  to  Boreas.  Both
resorted  to  a  neat  little  piece  of  black  magic  con  amove.  Such  absti-
nence from  divine  interference  being  hardly  due  to  lack  of  prayers,
sent  to  a  com7no7i  Almighty  God  for  mutual  destruction,  where,  then,
shall  we  draw  the  line  between  Pagan  and  Christian  ?  And  who  can
doubt  that  all  Protestant  England  would  rejoice  and  offer  thanks  to
the  Lord,  if  during  some  future  war,  400  ships  of  the  hostile  fleet  were
to  be  wrecked  owing  to  such  holy  prayers?  What  is,  then,  the  differ-
ence, we  ask  again,  between  a  Jupiter,  a  Boreas,  and  a  Jehovah?  No
more  than  this:  The  crime  of  one's  own  next-of-kin,  say  of  one's
father,  is  always  excused  and  often  exalted,  whereas  the  crime  of  our
neighbour's  parent  is  ever  gladly  punished  by  hanging.  Yet  the  crime
is  the  same.

So  far  the  "blessings  of  Christianity"  do  not  seem  to  have  made  any
appreciable  advance  on  the  morals  of  the  converted  Pagans.

The  above  is  not  a  defence  of  Pagan  Gods,  nor  is  it  an  attack  on  the

*  op.  ctl.,  III.  415.  +  II  Sam.,  xxii.  14,  15.  t  Herodotus,  Polymnia,  190,  191.


ASTARTE   AND   THE   VIRGIN  MARY.  507

Christian  Deity,  nor  does  it  mean  belief  in  either.  The  writer  is  quite
impartial,  and  rejects  the  testimony  in  favour  of  both,  neither  praying
to,  believing  in,  nor  dreading  any  such  "personal"  and  anthropomor-
phic God.  The  parallels  are  brought  forward  simply  as  one  more
curious  exhibition  of  the  illogical  and  blind  fanaticism  of  the  civilized
theologian.  For,  so  far,  there  is  not  a  very  great  difference  between
the  two  beliefs,  and  there  is  none  in  their  respective  effects  upon
7norality,  or  spiritual  nature.  The  "light  of  Christ"  shines  upon  as
hideous  features  of  the  animal  man  now,  as  the  "light  of  Lucifer"  did
in  days  of  old.  Says  the  missionary  Lavoisier,  in  the  Journal  des
Colonies:

These  unfortunate  heathens  in  their  superstition  regard  even  the  Elements  as
something  that  has  comprehension!  .  .  .  They  still  have  faith  in  their  idol
Vayu— the  God  or,  rather,  Demon  of  the  Wind  and  Air  .  .  .  they  firmly  believe
in  the  efl&cacy  of  their  prayers,  and  in  the  powers  of  their  Brahmans  over  the
winds  and  storms.

In  reply  to  this,  we  may  quote  from  Luke:  "And  he  [Jesus]  arose
and  rehiked  the  wind  and  the  raging  of  the  water,  and  they  ceased  and
there  was  a  calm''*  And  here  is  another  quotation  from  a  Prayer  Book:
"O  Virgin  of  the  Sea,  blessed  Mother  and  Lady  of  the  Waters,  stay  thy
waves."  This  prayer  of  the  Neapolitan  and  Proven9al  sailors,  is
copied  textually  from  that  of  the  Phoenician  mariners  to  their  Virgin-
Goddess  Astarte.  The  logical  and  irrepressible  conclusion  arising
from  the  parallels  brought  forward,  and  the  denunciation  of  the  mis-
sionary, is  that  the  commands-  of  the  Brahmans  to  their  Element-Gods
not  remaining  "ineffectual,"  the  power  of  the  Brahmans  is  thus  placed
on  a  par  with  that  of  Jesus.  Moreover,  Astarte  is  shown  not  a  whit
weaker  in  potency  than  the  "Virgin  of  the  Sea"  of  Christian  sailors.
It  is  not  enough  to  give  a  dog  a  bad  name,  and  then  hang  him;  the
dog  has  to  be  proven  guilty.  Boreas  and  Astarte  may  be  "Devils"  in
theological  fancy,  but,  as  just  remarked,  the  tree  has  to  be  judged  by
its  fruit.  And  once  the  Christians  are  shown  to  be  as  immoral  and  as
wicked  as  the  Pagans  ever  were,  what  benefit  has  Humanity  derived
from  its  change  of  Gods  and  Idols?

That  which  God  and  the  Christian  Saints  are  justified  in  doing,
becomes  in  simple  mortals  a  crime,  if  successful.  Sorcery  and  incan-
tations are  now  regarded  as  fables;  yet  from  the  Institutes  of  Justinian
down  to  the  laws  of  England  and  America  against  witchcraft — obsolete


508  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

but  not  repealed  to  this  day — such  incantations,  even  when  only  sus-
pected, were  punished  as  criminal.  Why  punish  a  chimera  ?  And  still
we  read  of  Constantine,  the  Emperor,  sentencing  to  death  the  philo-
sopher Sopatrus  for  "unchaining  the  winds,"  and  thus  preventing  ships
laden  with  grain  from  arriving  in  time  to  put  an  end  to  famine.
Pausanias  is  derided  when  he  affirms  that  he  saw  with  his  own  eyes
"men  who  by  simple  prayers  and  incantations"  stopped  a  strong  hail-
storm. This  does  not  prevent  modern  Christian  writers  from  advising
prayer  during  storm  and  danger,  and  believing  in  its  efficacy.  Hoppo
and  Stadlein,  two  magicians  and  sorcerers,  were  sentenced  to  death  for
"throwing  charms  on  fruit"  and  transferring  a  harvest  by  magic  arts
from  one  field  to  another,  hardly  a  century  ago,  if  we  can  believe
Sprenger,  the  famous  writer,  who  vouches  for  it:  '■'■  Qui  fruges  excantass-
ent  segeteni  pellicentes  incanta7ido."

I/Ct  us  close  by  reminding  the  reader  that,  without  the  smallest
shadow  of  superstition,  one  may  believe  in  the  dual  nature  of  every
object  on  Earth,  in  spiritual  and  material,  in  visible  and  invisible
Nature,  and  that  Science  virtually  proves  this,  while  denying  its  own
demonstration.  For  if,  as  Sir  William  Grove  says,  the  electricity  we
handle  is  but  the  result  of  ordinary  matter  affected  by  something  in-
visible, the  '' tdtimate  generating  power"  of  ever>^  Force,  the  "one
omnipresent  influence,"  then  it  only  becomes  natural  that  one  should
believe  as  the  Ancients  did ;  namely,  that  every  Element  is  dual  in  its
nature.  "Ethereal  Fire  is  the  emanation  of  the  Kabir  proper;  the
Aerial  is  but  the  union  [correlation]  of  the  former  with  Terrestrial
Fire,  and  its  guidance  and  application  on  our  earthly  plane  belongs  to
a  Kabir  of  a  lesser  dignity" — an  Elemental,  perhaps,  as  an  Occultist
would  call  it;  and  the  same  may  be  said  of  every  Cosmic  Element.

No  one  will  deny  that  the  human  being  is  possessed  of  various
forces,  magnetic,  sympathetic,  antipathetic,  ner\'ous,  dynamical,  occult,
mechanical,  mental,  in  fact  of  every  kind  of  force;  and  that  the  physical
forces  are  all  biological  in  their  essence,  seeing  that  they  intermingle
with,  and  often  merge  into,  those  forces  that  we  have  named  intellec-
tual and  moral,  the  first  being  the  vehicles,  so  to  say,  the  upadhis,  of
the  second.  No  one,  who  does  not  deny  soul  in  man,  would  hesitate
in  saying  that  their  presence  and  .commingling  are  the  very  essence  of
our  being;  that  they  constitute  the  Ego  in  man,  in  fact.  These  poten-
cies have  their  physiological,  physical,  mechanical,  as  well  as  their
nervous,  ecstatic,  clairaudient,  and  clair\'03-ant  phenomena,  which  are


PHYSICAL   FORCES  THE  VEHICLES  OF  THE  ELEMENTS.  509

now  regarded  and  recognized  as  perfectly  natural,  even  by  Science.
Why  should  man  be  the  only  exception  in  Nature,  and  why  cannot
even  the  Elements  have  their  Vehicles,  their  Vahanas,  in  what  we  call
the  Physical  Forces?  And  why,  above  all,  should  such  beliefs  be  called
"superstition"  along  with  the  religions  of  old?


SECTION  XV.

On  Kwan-Shi-Yin  and  Kwan-Yin.


Like  Avalokiteshvara,  Kwan-Shi-Yin  has  passed  through  several
transformations,  but  it  is  an  error  to  say  of  him  that  he  is  a  modern
invention  of  the  Northern  Buddhists,  for  under  another  appellation  he
has  been  known  from  the  earliest  times.  The  Secret  Doctrine  teaches
that:  "^ He  who  is  the  first  to  appear  at  Renovation  zvill  be  the  last  to  come
before  Redbsorption  [Pralaya']."  Thus  the  I/)goi  of  all  nations,  from
the  Vedic  Vishvakarman  of  the  Mysteries  down  to  the  Saviour  of  the
present  civilized  nations,  are  the  "Word"  who  was  in  the  "Beginning,"
or  the  reawakening  of  the  energizing  Powers  of  Nature,  with  the  One
Absolute.  Born  of  Fire  and  Water,  before  these  became  distinct
Elements,  It  was  the  "Maker,"  the  fashioner  or  modeller,  of  all  things.
"Without  him  was  not  anything  made  that  was  made.  In  him  was
life;  and  the  life  was  the  light  of  men,"  who  finally  may  be  called  as
he  ever  has  been,  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega  of  Manifested  Nature.
"The  great  Dragon  of  Wisdom  is  born  of  Fire  and  Water,  and  into
Fire  and  Water  will  all  be  reabsorbed  with  him."*'  As  this  Bodhi-
sattva  is  said  "to  assume  any  form  he  pleases,"  from  the  beginning  of
a  Manvantara  to  its  end,  though  his  special  birthday,  or  memorial  day,
is  celebrated  according  to  the  Kin-kwa7ig-ming-Ki7ig,  or  "Luminous
Sutra  of  Golden  Light,"  in  the  second  month  on  the  nineteenth  day,
and  that  of  Maitreya  Buddha,  in  the  first  month  on  the  first  day,  yet
the  two  are  one.  He  will  appear  as  Maitreya  Buddha,  the  last  of  the
Avataras  and  Buddhas,  in  the  Seventh  Race.  This  belief  and  expecta-
tion are  universal  throughout  the  East.  Only  it  is  not  in  the  Kali
Yuga,  our  present  terrifically  materialistic  age  of  Darkness,  the  "Black
Age,"  that  a  new  Saviour  of  Humanity  can  ever  appear.  The  Kali
Yuga  is  "I'Age  d'Or"  (!)  only  in  the  mystic  writings  of  some  French
pseudo-Occultists.f

•  Fa-kwa-King.  t  St&  La  Mission  des  Jui/s.


DISEASED   IMAGINATION.  5 II

Hence  the  ritual  in  the  exoteric  worship  of  this  Deity  was  founded
on  magic.  The  Mantras  are  all  taken  from  special  books  kept  secret
by  the  priests,  and  each  is  said  to  work  a  magical  effect ;  as  the  reciter .
or  reader,  by  simply  chanting  them,  produces  a  secret  causation  which
results  in  immediate  effects.  Kwan-Shi-Yin  is  Avalokiteshvara,  and
both  are  forms  of  the  Seventh  Universal  Principle ;  while  in  its  highest
metaphysical  character  this  Deity  is  the  synthetic  aggregation  of  all
the  Planetary  Spirits,  Dhj^an  Chohans.  He  is  the  "Self-Manifested";
in  short,  the  "Son  of  the  Father."  Crowned  with  seven  dragons,
above  his  statue  there  appears  the  inscription  Pu-tsi-k'iun-ling,  "the
universal  Saviour  of  all  living  beings."

Of  course  the  name  given  in  the  archaic  volume  of  the  Stanzas  is
quite  different,  but  Kwan-Yin  is  a  perfect  equivalent.  In  a  temple  of
P'u-to,  the  sacred  island  of  the  Buddhists  in  China,  Kwan-Shi-Yin  is
represented  floating  on  a  black  aquatic  bird  (Kalahamsa),  and  pouring
on  the  heads  of  mortals  the  elixir  of  life,  which,  as  it  flows,  is  trans-
formed into  one  of  the  chief  Dhyani-Buddhas,  the  Regent  of  a  star
called  the  "Star  of  Salvation."  In  his  third  transformation  Kwan-Yin
is  the  informing  Spirit  or  Genius  of  Water.  In  China  the  Dalai-Lama
is  believed  to  be  an  incarnation  of  Kwan-Shi-Yin,  who  in  his  third
terrestrial  appearance  was  a  Bodhisattva,  while  the  Teshu  Lama  is  an
incarnation  of  AmitSbha  Buddha,  or  Gautama.

It  maj'  be  remarked  en  passant  that  a  writer  must  indeed  have  a
diseased  imagination  to  discover  phallic  worship  everj^where,  as  do
McClatchey  and  Hargrave  Jennings.  The  first  discovers  "the  old
phallic  gods,  represented  under  two  evident  symbols,  the  Kheen  or
Yang,  which  is  the  membrnm  virile,  and  the  Khw-an  or  Yin,  the  p2ide^i-
du7n  mulicbre."*  Such  a  rendering  seems  the  more  strange  as  Kwan-
Shi-Yin  (Avalokiteshvara)  and  Kwan-Yin,  besides  being  now  the
patron  Deities  of  the  Buddhist  ascetics,  the  Yogis  of  Tibet,  are  the
Gods  of  chastity,  and  are,  in  their  esoteric  meaning,  not  even  that
which  is  implied  in  the  rendering  of  Mr.  Rhys  Davids'  Bicddhism:
"The  name  Avalokiteshvara  .  .  .  means  'the  Lord  who  looks
down  from  on  high'."t  Nor  is  Kwan-Shi-Yin  the  "Spirit  of  the
Buddhas  present  in  the  Church,"  but,  literally  interpreted,  it  means
"the  Lord  that  is  seen."  and  in  one  sense,  "the  Divine  Self  perceived
b3''  Self" — the  human  Self — that  is,  the  Atman  or  Seventh  Principle,
merged  in  the  Universal,  perceived  by,  or  the  object  of  perception  to,

•  China  Revealed,  as  quoted  in  Hargrave  Jennings'  Phallicism,^.  273.  +  p.  202.


512  THK  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Buddhi,  the  Sixth  Principle,  or  Divine  Soul  in  man.     In  a  still  higher
sense,  Avalokiteshvara-Kwan-Shi-Yin,  referred  to  as  the  seventh  Uni-
versal Principle,  is  the  Logos  perceived  by  the  Universal  Buddhi,  or
Soul,  as  the  synthetic  aggregate  of  the  Dhyani-Buddhas ;  and  is  not
the  "Spirit  of  Buddha  present  in  the  Church,"  but  the  Omnipresent
Universal  Spirit  manifested  in  the  temple  of  Kosmos  or  Nature.     This
Orientalistic  etymology  of  Kwan  and   Yin  is  on  a  par  with   that  of
Yogini,  which,  we  are  told  by  Mr.  Hargrave  Jennings,  is  a  Sanskrit
word,  "in  the  dialects  pronounced  Jogi  or  Zogee  (!),  and  is     .     .     .
equivalent  with  Sena,  and  exactly  the  same  as  Duti  or  Dutica,"  i.e.,  a
sacred  prostitute  of  the  temple,  worshipped  as  Yoni  or  Shakti.*     "The
books  of  morality  [in  India]  direct  a  faithful  wife  to  shun  the  society  of
Yogini  or  females  who  have  been  adored  as  Sacti."t     Nothing  should
surprise  us  after  this.     And  it  is,  therefore,  with  hardly  a  smile  that  we
find  another  preposterous  absurdity  quoted  about  "Budh,"  as  being  a
name  "which  signifies  not  only  the  sun  as  the  source  of  generation
but  also  the  male  organ. "|     Max  Miiller,  in  treating  of  "False  Analo-
gies," says  that  "the  most  celebrated  Chinese  scholar  of  his  time,  Abel
Remusat     .     .     .     maintains  that  the  three  syllables  I  Hi  Wei  [in  the
fourteenth  chapter  of  the  Tao-te-King]  were  meant  for  Je-ho-vah";§
and  again.  Father  Amyot  "felt  certain  that  the  three  persons  of  the
Trinity  could  be  recognized"  in  the  same  work.    And  if  Abel  Remusat,
why  not  Hargrave  Jennings?     Every  scholar  will   recognize   the   ab-
surdity of  ever  seeing  in  Budh,  the  "enlightened"  and  the  "awakened,"
a  "phallic  sj'mbol."

Kwan-Shi-Yin,  then,  is  "the  Son  identical  with  his  Father,"  mysti-
cally, or  the  Logos,  the  Word.  He  is  called  the  "Dragon  of  Wisdom,"
in  Stanza  III,  for  all  the  Logoi  of  all  the  ancient  religious  systems  are
connected  with,  and  symbolized  by,  serpents.  In  old  Egypt,  the  God
Nahbkoon,  "he  who  unites  the  doubles,"  was  represented  as  a  serpent
on  human  legs,  either  with  or  without  arms.  This  was  the  Astral
Light  reiiniting  by  its  dual  physiological  and  spiritual  potency  the
Divine-Human  to  its  purely  Divine  Monad,  the  Prototype  in  "Heaven"
or  Nature.  It  was  the  emblem  of  the  resurrection  of  Nature ;  of  Christ
with  the  Ophites ;  and  of  Jehovah  as  the  brazen  serpent  healing  those
who  looked  at  him.     The  serpent  was  also  an  emblem  of  Christ  with

*  op.  cit.,  p.  60.

t-  Ibid.

t  O'Brien,  Round  Towers  of  Ireland,  p.  61,  quoted  by  Hargrave  Jennings  in  his  Phallicism,  p.  246.

\  Introduction  to  the  Science  of  Religion,  p.  332.


CRINOLINES,    OR  THE    DRAGON-GARB?  513

the  Templars,  as  is  shpwn  by  the  Templar  degree  in  Masonry.  The
symbol  of  Knooph  (Khoom  also),  or  the  Soul  of  the  World,  says
Champolliou,  "is  represented  among  other  forms  under  that  of  a  huge
serpent  on  human  legs;  this  reptile,  being  the  emblem  of  the  Good
Genius  and  the  veritable  Agathodaemon,  is  sometimes  bearded."*
This  sacred  animal  is  thus  identical  with  the  serpent  of  the  Ophites,
and  is  figured  on  a  great  number  of  engraved  stones,  called  Gnostic  or
Basilidean  gems.  It  appears  with  various  heads,  human  and  animal,
but  its  gems  are  alwaj^s  found  inscribed  with  the  name  XN0YBI2
(ChNOUBIS).  This  symbol  is  identical  with  one  which,  according  to
Jamblichus  and  Champollion,  was  called  the  "First  of  the  Celestial
Gods,"  the  God  Hermes,  or  Mercury,  with  the  Greeks,  to  which  God
Hermes  Trismegistus  attributes  the  invention  of,  and  the  first  initiation
of  men  into.  Magic;  and  Mercury  is  Budh,  Wisdom,  Enlightenment,  or
"Reawakening"  into  the  divine  Science.

To  close,  Kwan-Shi-Yin  and  Kwan-Yin  are  the  two  aspects,  male
and  female,  of  the  same  principle  in  Kosmos,  Nature  and  Man,  of
Divine  Wisdom  and  Intelligence.  They  are  the  Christos-Sophia  of  the
mystic  Gnostics,  the  Logos  and  its  Shakti.  In  their  longing  for  the
expression  of  some  mysteries  never  to  be  wholly  comprehended  by  the
profane,  the  Ancients,  knowing  that  nothing  could  be  preser\'^ed  in
human  memory  without  some  outward  symbol,  have  chosen  the,  to  us,
often  ridiculous  images  of  the  Kwan-Yins  to  remind  man  of  his  origin
and  inner  nature.  To  the  impartial,  however,  the  Madonnas  in
crinolines  and  the  Christs  in  white  kid  gloves  must  appear  far  more
absurd  than  the  Kwan-Shi-Yin  and  Kwan-Yin  in  their  dragon-garb.
The  subjective  can  hardly  be  expressed  by  the  objective.  Therefore,
since  the  symbolic  formula  attempts  to  characterize  that  which  is  above
scientific  reasoning,  and  is  as  often  far  beyond  our  intellects,  it  must
needs  go  beyond  that  intellect  in  some  shape  or  other,  or  else  it  will
fade  out  from  human  remembrance.


•  Pantheon,  text  3.


34


PART  III.


ADDENDA.


ON  OCCULT   AND  MODERN  SCIENCE.


The  knowledge  of  this  nether  world —
Say,  friend,  what  is  it,  false  or  true?

The  false,  what  mortal  cares  to  know?
The  true,  what  mortal  ever  knev/?


ADDENDA
ON  OCCULT  AND  MODERN  SCIENCE.


SECTION  I.

Reasons  for  These  Addenda.


Many  of  the  doctrines  contained  in  the  foregoing  seven  Stanzas  and
Commentaries  having  been  studied  and  critically  examined  by  some
Western  Theosophists,  certain  of  the  Occult  Teachings  have  been
found  wanting  from  the  ordinary  stand-point  of  modern  scientific
knowledge.  They  seemed  to  encounter  insuperable  difficulties  in  the
way  of  their  acceptance,  and  to  require  reconsideration  in  view  of
scientific  criticism.  Some  friends  have  already  been  tempted  to  regret
the  necessity  of  so  often  calling  in  question  the  assertions  of  Modern
Science.  It  appeared  to  them — and  I  here  repeat  only  their  arguments
— that  "to  run  counter  to  the  teachings  of  its  most  eminent  exponents,
was  to  court  a  premature  discomfiture  in  the  eyes  of  the  Western
World."

It  is,  therefore,  desirable  to  define,  once  and  for  all,  the  position
which  the  writer,  who  does  not  in  this  agree  with  her  friends,  intends
to  maintain.  So  far  as  Science  remains  what  in  the  words  of  Prof.
Huxley  it  is,  viz.,  "organized  common  sense";  so  far  as  its  inferences
are  drawn  from  accurate  premisses,  its  generalizations  resting  on  a
purely  inductive  basis,  every  Theosophist  and  Occultist  welcomes
respectfully  and  with  due  admiration  its  contributions  to  the  domain
of  cosmological  law.  There  can  be  no  possible  conflict  between  the
teachings  of  Occult  and  so-called  exact  Science,  wherever  the  conclu-
sions of  the  latter  are  grounded  on  a  substratum  of  unassailable  fact.
It  is  only  when  its  more  ardent  exponents,  over-stepping  the  limits  of


5l8  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

observed  phenomena  in  order  to  penetrate  into  the  arcana  of  Being,
attempt  to  wrench  the  formation  of  Kosmos  and  its  living  Forces  from
Spirit,  and  to  attribute  all  to  blind  Matter,  that  the  Occultists  claim  the
right  of  disputing  and  calling  in  question  their  theories.  Science
cannot,  owing  to  the  very  nature  of  things,  unveil  the  mystery  of  the
Universe  around  us.  Science  can,  it  is  true,  collect,  classify,  and
generalize  upon  phenomena;  but  the  Occultist,  arguing  from  admitted
metaphysical  data,  declares  that  the  daring  explorer,  who  would  probe
the  inmost  secrets  of  Nature,  must  transcend  the  narrow  limitations  of
sense,  and  transfer  his  consciousness  into  the  region  of  Noumena  and
the  sphere  of  Primal  Causes.  To  eflfect  this,  he  must  develop  faculties
which,  save  in  a  few  rare  and  exceptional  cases,  are  absolutely  dormant,
in  the  constitution  of  the  off-shoots  of  our  present  Fifth  Root-Race  in
Europe  and  America.  He  can  in  no  other  conceivable  manner  collect
the  facts  on  which  to  base  his  speculations.  Is  this  not  apparent  on
the  principles  of  Inductive  Logic  and  Metaphysics  alike?

On  the  other  hand,  whatever  the  writer  may  do,  she  will  never  be
able  to  satisfy  both  Truth  and  Science.  To  offer  the  reader  a  syste-
matic and  uninterrupted  version  of  the  Archaic  Stanzas  is  impossible.
A  gap  of  43  verses  or  shlokas  has  to  be  left  between  the  yth,  already
given,  and  the  51st,  which  is  the  subject  of  Book  II,  though  the  latter
are  made  to  run  as  from  i  onwards,  for  easier  reading  and  reference.
The  mere  appearance  of  man  on  Earth  occupies  an  equal  number  of
Stanzas,  which  minutely  describe  his  primal  evolution  from  the  human
Dhyan  Chohans,  the  state  of  the  Globe  at  that  time,  etc.,  etc.  A  great
number  of  names  referring  to  chemical  substances  and  other  com-
pounds, which  have  now  ceased  to  combine  together,  and  are  therefore
unknown  to  the  later  offshoots  of  our  Fifth  Race,  occupy  a  consider-
able space.  As  they  are  simply  untranslatable,  and  would  remain  in
every  case  inexplicable,  they  are  omitted,  along  with  those  which
cannot  be  made  public.  Nevertheless,  even  the  little  that  is  given  will
irritate  every  follower  and  defender  of  dogmatic  materialistic  Science
who  happens  to  read  it.

In  view  of  the  criticism  offered,  it  is  proposed,  before  proceeding  to
the  remaining  Stanzas,  to  defend  those  already  given.  That  they  are
not  in  perfect  accord  or  harmony  with  Modern  Science,  we  all  know.
But  had  they  been  as  much  in  agreement  with  the  views  of  modern
knowledge  as  is  a  lecture  by  Sir  William  Thomson,  they  would  have
been  rejected  all  the  same.     For  they  teach  belief  in  conscious  Powers


FORCES  ARE  DEVAS  AND  GENII.  5 19

and  Spiritual  Entities;  in  terrestrial,  semi-intelligent,  and  highly  intel-
lectual Forces  on  other  planes  ;*  and  in  Beings  that  dwell  around  us  in
spheres  imperceptible,  whether  through  telescope  or  microscope.
Hence  the  necessity  of  examining  the  beliefs  of  materialistic  Science,
of  comparing  its  views  about  the  "Elements"  with  the  opinions  of  the
Ancients,  and  of  analysing  the  physical  Forces  as  they  exist  in  modern
conceptions,  before  the  Occultists  admit  themselves  to  be  in  the  wrong.
We  shall  touch  upon  the  constitution  of  the  Sun  and  planets,  and  the
Occult  characteristics  of  what  are  called  Devas  and  Genii,  and  are  now
termed  by  Science,  Forces,  or  "modes  of  motion,"  and  see  whether
Esoteric  belief  is  defensible  or  not.  Notwithstanding  the  efforts  made
to  the  contrary-,  an  unprejudiced  mind  will  discover  that  under  New-
ton's "agent,  material  or  immaterial,"!  the  agent  which  causes  gravity,
and  in  his  personal  working  God,  there  is  just  as  much  of  the  meta-
physical Devas  and  Genii,  as  there  is  in  Kepler's  Angelus  Rector  con-
ducting each  planet,  and  in  the  species  immateriata  by  which  the  celes-
tial bodies  were  carried  along  in  their  courses,  according  to  that
Astronomer.

In  Volume  II,  we  shall  have  to  openly  approach  dangerous  subjects.
We  must  bravely  face  Science  and  declare,  in  the  teeth  of  materialistic
learning,  of  Idealism,  Hylo-Idealism,  Positivism  and  all-denying
modern  Psycholog>',  that  the  true  Occultist  believes  in  "Lords  of
Light";  that  he  believes  in  a  Sun,  which— far  from  being  simply  a
"lamp  of  day"  moving  in  accordance  with  physical  law,  and  far  from
being  merely  one  of  those  Suns,  which,  according  to  Richter,  "are
sun-flowers  of  a  higher  light"— is,  like  milliards  of  other  Suns,  the
dwelling  or  the  vehicle  of  a  God,  and  of  a  host  of  Gods.

In  this  dispute,  of  course,  it  is  the  Occultists  who  will  be  worsted.
They  will  be  considered,  on  the  prima  facie  aspect  of  the  question,  to
be  ignoramuses,  and  will  be  labelled  with  more  than  one  of  the  usual
epithets  given  to  those  whom  the  superficially  judging  public,  itself
ignorant  of  the  great  underlying  truths  in  Nature,  accuses  of  believing
in  mediaeval  superstitions.  Let  it  be  so.  Submitting  beforehand  to
every  criticism  in  order  to  go  on  with  their  task,  they  only  claim  the
privilege  of  showing  that  the  Physicists  are  as  much  at  loggerheads
among  themselves  in  their  speculations,  as  these  speculations  are  with
the  teachings  of  Occultism.

*  Their  intellection,  of  course,  being  of  quite  a  different  nature  to  any  we  can  conceive  of  on  Earth.
+  See  his  Third  Letter  to  Bentley.


520  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

The  Sun  is  Matter,  and  the  Sun  is  Spirit.  Our  ancestors,  the
"Heathen,"  like  their  modern  successors,  the  Parsis,  were,  and  are,
wise  enough  in  their  generation  to  see  in  it  the  symbol  of  Divinity,  and
at  the  same  time  to  sense  within,  concealed  by  the  physical  symbol,  the
bright  God  of  Spiritual  and  Terrestrial  Light.  Such  belief  can  be
regarded  as  a  superstition  only  by  rank  Materialism,  which  denies
Deity,  Spirit,  Soul,  and  admits  no  intelligence  outside  the  mind  of
man.  But  if  too  much  wrong  superstition  bred  by  "Churchianity,"  as
Laurence  Oliphant  calls  it,  "renders  a  man  a  fool,"  too  much  scepticism
makes  him  mad.  We  prefer  the  charge  of  folly  in  believing  too  much,
to  that  of  a  madness  which  denies  everything,  as  do  Materialism  and
Hylo-Idealism.  Hence,  the  Occultists  are  fully  prepared  to  receive
their  dues  from  Materialism,  and  to  meet  the  adverse  criticism  which
will  be  poured  on  the  author  of  this  work,  not  for  writing  it,  but  for
believing  in  that  which  it  contains.

Therefore  the  discoveries,  hypotheses,  and  unavoidable  objections
which  will  be  brought  forward  by  the  scientific  critics  must  be
anticipated  and  disposed  of.  It  has  also  to  be  shown  how  far  the
Occult  Teachings  depart  from  Modern  Science,  and  whether  the
ancient  or  the  modern  theories  are  the  more  logically  and  philosophi-
cally correct.  The  unity  and  mutual  relations  of  all  parts  of  Kosmos
were  known  to  the  Ancients,  before  they  became  evident  to  modern
Astronomers  and  Philosophers.  And  even  if  the  external  and  visible
portions  of  the  Universe,  and  their  mutual  relations,  cannot  be  ex-
plained in  Physical  Science,  in  any  other  terms  than  those  used  by  the
adherents  of  the  mechanical  theory  of  the  Universe,  it  does  not  follow
that  the  Materialist,  who  denies  that  the  Soul  of  Kosmos  (which  apper-
tains to  Metaphysical  Philosophy)  exists,  has  the  right  to  trespass  upon
that  metaphysical  domain.  That  Physical  Science  is  trying  to,  and
actually  does,  encroach  upon  it,  is  only  one  more  proof  that  "might  is
right" ;  it  does  not  justify  the  intrusion.

Another  good  reason  for  these  Addenda  is  this.  Since  only  a  certain
portion  of  the  Secret  Teachings  can  be  given  out  in  the  present  age,
the  doctrines  would  never  be  understood  even  by  Theosophists,  if  they
were  published  without  any  explanations  or  commentary.  Therefore
they  must  be  contrasted  with  the  speculations  of  Modern  Science.
Archaic  Axioms  must  be  placed  side  by  side  with  Modern  Hypotheses,
and  the  comparison  of  their  value  must  be  left  to  the  sagacious  reader.

On  the  question  of  the  "Seven  Governors" — as  Hermes  calls  the


LIGHT  IS  BOTH   SPIRIT  AND   MATTER.  521

"'Seven  Builders,"  the  Spirits  which  guide  the  operations  of  Nature,  the
animated  atoms  of  which  are  the  shadows,  in  their  own  world,  of  their
Primaries  in  the  Astral  Realms — this  work  will,  of  course,  have  every
Materialist  against  it,  as  well  as  the  men  of  Science.     But  this  opposi-
tion can,  at  most,  be  only  temporary.     People  have  laughed  at  every-
thing unusual,  and  have  scouted  every  unpopular  idea  at  first,  and  have
then  ended  by  accepting  it.     Materialism  and  Scepticism  are  evils  that
must  remain  in  the  world  so  long  as  man  has  not  quitted  his  present
gross  form  to  don  the  one  he  had  during  the  First  and  Second  Races  of
this  Round.     Unless  Scepticism  and  our  present  natural  ignorance  are
equilibrated  by  Intuition  and  a  natural  Spirituality,  every  being  afflicted
with  such  feelings  will  see  in  himself  nothing  better  than  a  bundle  of
flesh,  bones,  and  muscles,  with  an  empty  garret  inside,  which  serves
the  purpose  of  storing  his  sensations  and  feelings.     Sir  Humphrey
Davy  was  a  great  Scientist,  as  deeply  versed  in  Physics  as  any  theorist
of  our  day,  yet  he  loathed  Materialism.     He  says:

I  heard  with  disgust,  in  the  dissecting-rooms,  the  plan  of  the  Physiologist,  of  the
gradual  secretion  of  matter,  and  its  becoming  endued  with  irritability,  ripening
into  sensibility,  and  acquiring  such  organs  as  were  necessary,  by  its  own  inherent
forces,  and  at  last  rising  into  intellectual  existence.

Nevertheless,  Physiologists  are  not  those  who  should  be  most  blamed
for  speaking  of  that  only  which  they  can  see  by,  and  estimate  on  the
evidence  of,  their  physical  senses.  Astronomers  and  Physicists  are,  we
consider,  far  more  illogical  in  their  materialistic  views  than  are  even
Physiologists,  and  this  has  to  be  proved.     Milton's

Light

Ethereal,  first  of  things,  quintessence  pure,

has  become  with  the  Materialists  only

Prime  cheerer,  light.

Of  all  material  beings,  first  and  best.

For  the  Occultists  it  is  both  Spirit  and  Matter,  Behind  the  "mode
of  motion,"  now  regarded  as  the  "property  of  matter"  and  nothing
more,  they  perceive  the  radiant  Noumenon.  It  is  the  "Spirit  of
Light,"  the  first-born  of  the  Eternal  pure  Element,  whose  energy,  or
emanation,  is  stored  in  the  Sun,  the  great  Life-Giver  of  the  Physical
World,  as  the  hidden  concealed  Spiritual  Sun  is  the  Light-  and  Life-
Giver  of  the  Spiritual  and  Psychic  Realms.  Bacon  was  one  of  the
first  to  strike  the  key-note  of  Materialism,  not  only  by  his  inductive
method— renovated    from    ill-digested   Aristotle— but   by  the   general


^22  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

tenor  of  his  writings.      He  inverts   the  order  of  mental  Evolution
when  saying:

The  first  creation  of  God  was  the  light  of  the  sense;  the  last  was  the  light  of  the
reason;  and  his  Sabbath  work  ever  since  is  the  illumination  of  the  Spirit.

It  is  just  the  reverse.  The  light  of  Spirit  is  the  eternal  Sabbath  of
the  Mystic  or  Occultist,  and  he  pays  little  attention  to  that  of  mere
sense.  That  which  is  meant  by  the  allegorical  sentence,  ''Fiat  Lux,"
is,  when  esoterically  rendered,  "Let  there  be  the  'Sons  of  Ivight',"  or
the  Noumena  of  all  phenomena.  Thus  the  Roman  Catholics  rightly
interpret  the  passage  as  referring  to  Angels,  but  wrongly  as  meaning
Powers  created  by  an  anthropomorphic  God,  whom  they  personify  in
the  ever  thundering  and  punishing  Jehovah.

These  beings  are  the  "Sons  of  lyight,"  because  they  emanate  from,
and  are  self-generated  in,  that  infinite  Ocean  of  Light,  whose  one  pole
is  pure  Spirit  lost  in  the  absoluteness  of  Non-Being,  and  the  other
pole,  the  Matter  in  which  it  condenses,  "crystallizing"  into  a  more  and
more  gross  type  as  it  descends  into  manifestation.  Therefore  Matter,
though  it  is,  in  one  sense,  but  the  illusive  dregs  of  that  Light  whose
Rays  are  the  Creative  Forces,  yet  has  in  it  the  full  presence  of  the
Soul  thereof,  of  that  Principle,  which  none — not  even  the  "Sons  of
Light,"  evolved  from  its  Absolute  Darkness — will  ever  know.  The
idea  is  as  beautifully,  as  it  is  truthfully,  expressed  by  Milton,  who  hails
the  holy  Light,  which  is  the

Oflfspring  of  Heaven,  first-born,

Or  of  th'  Eternal  coeternal  beam;

Since  God  is  Light,

And  never  but  in  unapproached  Light

Dwelt  from  Eternity,  dwelt  then  in  thee.

Bright  effluence  of  bright  essence  increate.


SECTION  11.

Modern  Physicists  are  Playing  at
Blind  Man's  Buff.


And  now  Occultism  puts  to  Science  the  question :  Is  light  a  body,
or  is  it  not?  Whatever  the  answer  of  the  latter,  the  former  is  pre-
pared to  show  that,  to  this  day,  the  most  eminent  Physicists  have  no
real  knowledge  on  the  subject.  To  know  what  light  is,  and  whether  it
is  an  actual  substance  or  a  mere  undulation  of  the  "  ethereal  medium,"
Science  has  first  to  learn  what  Matter,  Atom,  Ether,  Force,  are  in
reality.  Now,  the  truth  is,  that  it  knows  nothing  of  any  of  these,  and
admits  its  ignorance.  It  has  not  even  agreed  what  to  believe  in,  as
dozens  of  hypotheses  on  the  same  subject,  emanating  from  various
and  very  eminent  Scientists,  are  antagonistic  to  each  other  and
often  self-contradictory.  Thus  their  learned  speculations  may,  with  a
stretch  of  good-will,  be  accepted  as  "working  hypotheses"  in  a  second-
ary sense,  as  Stallo  puts  it.  But  being  radically  inconsistent  with  each
otlier,  they  must  finally  end  by  mutually  destroying  themselves.  As
declared  by  the  author  of  Concepts  of  Modern  Physics:

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  several  departments  of  science  are  simply
arbitrary  divisions  of  science  at  large.  In  these  several  departments  the  same
physical  object  may  be  considered  under  different  aspects.  The  physicist  may  study
its  molecular  relations,  while  the  chemist  determines  its  atomic  constitution.  But
when  they  both  deal  with  the  same  element  or  agent,  it  cannot  have  one  set  of
properties  in  physics,  and  another  set  contradictor}'  of  them,  in  chemistry.  If  the
physicist  and  chemist  alike  assume  the  existence  of  ultimate  atoms  absolutely
invariable  in  bulk  and  weight,  the  atom  cannot  be  a  cube  or  oblate  spheroid  for
physical,  and  a  sphere  for  chemical  purposes.  A  group  of  constant  atoms  cannot
oe  an  aggregate  of  extended  and  absolutely  inert  and  impenetrable  masses  in  a
Jrucible  or  retort,  and  a  system  of  mere  centres  of  force  as  part  of  a  magnet  or  of  a
-daniond    battery.     The  universal  aether  cannot  be  soft  and  mobile  to  please  the


524


THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.


chemist,  and  rigid-elastic  to  satisfy  the  physicist;  it  cannot  be  continuous  at  the
command  of  Sir  William  Thomson  and  discontinuous  on  the  suggestion  of  Cauchy


or  Fresnel.*


The  eminent  Physicist,  G.  A.  Hirn,  may  likewise  be  quoted  as  saying
the  same  thing  in  the  43rd  Volume  of  the  Memoires  de  VAcademie  Roy  ale
de Belgique,  which  we  translate  from  the  French,  as  cited:

When  one  sees  the  assurance  with  which  to-day  are  affirmed  doctrines  which
attribute  the  collectivity,  the  universality  of  the  phenomena  to  the  motions  alone
of  the  atom,  one  has  a  right  to  expect  to  find  likewise  unanimity  in  the  qualities
assigned  to  this  unique  being,  the  foundation  of  all  that  exists.     Now,  from  the
first  examination  of  the  particular  systems  proposed,  one  finds  the  strangest  decep-
tion; one  perceives  that  the  atom  of  the  chemist,  the  atom  of  the  physicist,  that  of
the  metaphysician,   and  that  of   the  mathematician    ....    have    absolutely
nothing  in  common  but  the  name!    The  inevitable  result  is  the  existing  subdivision
of  our  sciences,  each  of  which,  in  its  own  little  pigeon-hole,  constructs  an  atom
which  satisfies  the  requirements  of  the  phenomena  it  studies,  without  troubling
itself  in  the  least  about  the  requirements  proper  to  the  phenomena  of  the  neigh-
bouring pigeon-hole.    The  metaphysician  banishes  the  principles  of  attraction  and
repulsion  as  dreams;  the  mathematician,  who  analyses  the  laws  of  elasticity  and
those  of  the  propagation  of  light,  admits  them  implicitly,  without  even  naming
them.     .     .     .     The  chemist  cannot  explain  the  grouping  of  the  atoms,  in  his  often
complicated  molecules,  without  attributing  to  his  atoms  specific   distinguishing
qualities;  for  the  physicist  and  the  metaphysician,  partisans  of  the  modem  doctrines,
the  atom  is,  07t  the  contrary,  always  and  everywhere  the  same.    What  am  I  saying.?
There  is  no  agreement  even  in  one  and  the  same  science  as  to  the  properties  of  the
atom.     Each  constructs  an  atom  to  suit  his  own  fancy,  in  order  to  explain  some
special  phenomenon  with  which  he  is  particularly  concemed.t

The  above  is  the  photographically  correct  image  of  Modern  Science
and  Physics.  The  "pre-requisite  of  that  incessant  play  of  the  'scientific
imagination',"  which  is  so  often  found  in  Professor  Tyndall's  eloquent
discourses,  is  vivid  indeed,  as  is  shown  by  Stallo,  and  for  contradictory
variety  it  leaves  far  behind  it  any  "phantasies"  of  Occultism.  How-
ever that  may  be,  if  physical  theories  are  confessedly  "mere  formal,
explanatory,  didactic  devices,"  and  if,  to  use  the  words  of  a  critic  of
Stallo,  "atomism  is  only  a  symbolical  graphic  system," J  then  the
Occultist  can  hardly  be  regarded  as  assuming  too  much,  when  he
places  alongside  of  these  "devices"  and  "symbolical  systems"  of
Modern  Science,  the  symbols  and  devices  of  Archaic  Teachings.

•  Concepts  of  Modern  Physics,  pp.  xi,  xii,  Introd.  to  2nd  Ed.

t  "  Recherches  experimentales  sur  la  relation  qui  existe  entre  la  resistance  de  I'air  et  sa  tempera-
ture," p.  68,  translated  from  Stallo's  quotation.

t  From  the  criticism  of  Concepts  of  Modern  Physics,  in  Nature.  See  Stallo's  work,  p.  xvi  of
Introduction.


"IS   LIGHT   A   BODY,    OR   NOT?"  525

"AN    LUMEN    SIT    CORPUS,    NEC    NON?"

Most  decidedly  light  is  not  a  body,  we  are  told.  Physical  Sciences
say  light  is  a  force,  a  vibration,  the  undulation  of  Ether.  It  is  the
property  or  quality  of  Matter,  or  even  an  aJBfection  thereof — never  a

body  !

Just  so.  For  this  discovery',  the  knowledge,  whatever  it  may  be
worth,  that  light  or  caloric  is  not  a  motion  of  material  particles,  Science
is  chiefly,  if  not  solely  indebted,  to  Sir  William  Grove.  It  was  he  who
in  a  lecture  at  the  London  Institution,  in  1842,  was  the  first  to  show
that  "heat,  light,*  may  be  considered  as  afifections  of  matter  itself,
and  not  of  a  distinct  ethereal,  'imponderable,'  fluid  [a  state  of  matter
now\  permeating  it."t  Yet,  perhaps,  for  some  Physicists — as  for
QJrsted,  a  very  eminent  Scientist — Force  and  Forces  were  tacitly
"Spirit  [and  hence  Spirits]  in  Nature."  What  several  rather  mystical
Scientists  taught  was  that  light,  heat,  magnetism,  electricity  and
gravity,  etc.,  were  not  the  final  Causes  of  the  visible  phenomena,
including  planetary  motion,  but  were  themselves  the  secondary  effects
of  other  Causes,  for  which  Science  in  our  day  cares  very  little,  but  in
which  Occultism  believes;  for  the  Occultists  have  exhibited  proofs  of
the  validity  of  their  claims  in  every  age.  And  in  what  age  were  there
no  Occultists  and  no  Adepts?

Sir  Isaac  Newton  held  to  the  Pythagorean  corpuscular  theory,  and
was  also  inclined  to  admit  its  consequences;  which  made  the  Comte  de
Maistre  hope,  at  one  time,  that  Newton  would  ultimately  lead  Science
back  to  the  recognition  of  the  fact  that  Forces  and  the  Celestial  Bodies
were  propelled  and  guided  by  Intelligetices.X  But  de  Maistre  counted
without  his  host.     The  innermost  thoughts  and  ideas  of  Newton  were


*  Mr.  Robert  Ward,  discussing  the  questions  of  Heat  and  Light  in  the  'Nox&:n)xT  Journal  of  Science,
1881,  shows  us  how  utterly  ignorant  is  Science  about  one  of  the  commonest  facts  of  Nature — the  heat
of  the  Sun.  He  says:  "The  question  of  the  temperature  of  the  sun  has  been  the  subject  of  investiga-
tion with  many  scientists:  Newton,  one  of  the  first  investigators  of  this  problem,  tried  to  determine
it,  and  after  him  all  the  scientists  who  have  been  occupied  with  calorimetry  have  followed  his
example.  All  have  believed  themselves  successful,  and  have  formulated  their  results  with  great
confidence.  The  following,  iu  the  chronological  order  of  the  publication  of  the  results,  are  the
temperatures  (in  centigrade  degrees)  found  by  each  of  them:  Newton,  1,699,300°;  Pouillet,  1,461°;
Tollner,  102,200°;  Secchi,  5,344,840°;  Ericsson,  2,726,700°;  Fizeau,  7,500°;  Waterston,  9,000,000°;  Spoeren,
27,000°;  Deville,  9,500°;  Soret,  5,801,846°;  Vicaire,  1,500°;  Rosetti,  20,000°.  The  difference  is  as  1,400°
against  9,000,000°,  or  no  less  than  8,998,600°!!  There  probably  does  not  exist  in  science  a  more
astonishing  contradiction  than  that  revealed  in  these  figures."  And  yet  without  doubt  if  an  Occultist
were  to  give  out  an  estimate,  each  of  these  gentlemen  would  vehemently  protest  in  the  name  of
"exact"  Science  at  the  rejection  of  his  special  result.

■t  See  Correlation  of  the  Physical  Forces,  Preface.

X  Soirees,  vol.  ii.


526  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

perverted,  and  of  his  great  mathematical  learning  only  the  mere
physical  husk  was  turned  to  account.

According  to  one  atheistic  Idealist,  Dr.  Lewins :

When  Sir  Isaac,  in  1687  ....  showed  mass  and  atom  acted  upon  ....
by  innate  activity  ....  he  effectually  disposed  of  Spirit,  Anima,  or  Divinity,
as  supererogatory.

Had  poor  Sir  Isaac  foreseen  to  what  use  his  successors  and  followers
would  apply  his  "gravity,"  that  pious  and  religious  man  would  surely
have  quietly  eaten  his  apple,  and  never  have  breathed  a  word  about
any  mechanical  ideas  connected  with  its  fall.

Great  contempt  is  shown  by  Scientists  for  Metaphysics  generally  and
for  Ontological  Metaphysics  especially.  But  whenever  the  Occultists
are  bold  enough  to  raise  their  diminished  heads,  we  see  that  Mate-
rialistic, Physical  Science  is  honey-combed  with  Metaphysics  ;*  that  its
most  fundamental  principles,  while  inseparably  wedded  to  transcen-
dentalism, are  nevertheless,  in  order  to  show  Modern  Science  divorced
from  such  "dreams,"  tortured  and  often  ignored  in  the  maze  of  contra-
dictory theories  and  hypotheses.  A  very  good  corroboration  of  this
charge  lies  in. the  fact  that  Science  finds  itself  absolutely  compelled  to
accept  the  "hypothetical"  Ether,  and  to  try  to  explain  it  on  the
materialistic  grounds  of  atomo-mechanical  laws.  This  attempt  has  led
directly   to   the   most   fatal   discrepancies   and   radical   inconsistencies

•  Stallo's  above-cited  work,  Concepts  of  Modern  Physics,  a  volume  which  has  called  forth  the
liveliest  protests  and  criticisms,  is  recommended  to  anyone  inclined  to  doubt  this  statement.  "The
professed  antagonism  of  science  to  metaphysical  speculation,"  he  writes,  "has  led  the  majority  of
scientific  specialists  to  assume  that  the  methods  and  results  of  empirical  research  are  wholly
independent  of  the  control  of  the  laws  of  thought.  They  either  silently  ignore,  or  openly  repudiate,
the  simplest  canons  of  logic,  including  the  laws  of  non-contradiction,  and  .  .  .  resent  with  the
utmost  vehemence  every  application  of  the  rule  of  consistency  to  their  hypotheses  and  theories
....  and  they  regard  an  examination  (of  them)  ....  in  the  light  of  these  laws  as  an
impertinent  intrusion  of  '  a  priori  principles  and  methods '  into  the  domains  of  empirical  science.
Persons  of  this  cast  of  mind  find  no  difSculty  in  holding  that  atoms  are  absolutely  inert,  and  at  the
same  time  asserting  that  these  atoms  are  perfectly  elastic;  or  in  maintaining  that  the  physical
univei-se,  in  its  last  analysis,  resolves  itself  into  'dead'  matter  and  motion,  and  yet  denying  that  all
physical  energy  is  in  reality  kinetic;  or  in  proclaiming  that  all  phenomenal  dififerences  in  the
objective  world  are  ultimately  due  to  the  various  motions  of  absolutely  simple  material  units,  and,
nevertheless,  repudiating  the  proposition  that  these  units  are  equal."  (p.  xix.)  The  blindness  of
eminent  Physicists  to  some  of  the  most  obvious  consequences  of  their  own  theories  is  marvellous.
"When  Prof.  Tait,  in  conjunction  with  Prof  Stewart,  announces  that  'matter  is  simply  passive'
(The  Unseen  Universe,  sec.  104),  and  then,  in  connection  with  Sir  William  Thomson,  declares  that
'matter  has  an  innate  power  of  resisting  external  influences'  ( Treat,  on  Nat.  Phil.,  Vol.  I.  sec.  216),  it
is  hardly  impertinent  to  inquire  how  these  statements  are  to  be  reconciled.  When  Prof  Du  Bois
Reymond  ....  insists  upon  the  necessity  of  reducing  all  the  processes  of  nature  to  motions  of
a  substantial,  indifferent  substratum,  wholly  destitute  0/ quality  (Ueber  die  Grenzen  des  Naturer-
kennens,  p.  5),  having  declared  shortly  before  in  the  same  lecture  that  'resolution  of  all  changes  in
the  material  world  into  motions  of  atoms  caused  by  their  constant  central  forces  would  be  the  com-
pletion of  natural  science,'  we  are  in  a  perplexity  from  which  we  have  the  right  to  be  relieved."
(Pref  xliii.)


A  SELECTION   OF  CONTRADICTORY   HYPOTHESES.  527

between  the  assumed  nature  of  Ether  and  its  physical  behaviour.  A
second  proof  is  found  in  the  many  contradictory  statements  made
about  the  Atom — the  most  metaphysical  object  in  creation.

Now,  what  does  the  modern  science  of  Physics  know  of  Ether,  the
first  concept  of  which  belongs  undeniably  to  ancient  Philosophers,  the
Greeks  having  borrowed  it  from  the  Aryans,  and  the  origin  of  modern

A

Ether  being  found  in,  and  disfigured  from,  Akasha?  This  disfigure-
ment is  claimed  as  a  modification  and  refinement  of  the  idea  of  Lucre-
tius. L,et  us  then  examine  the  modern  concept,  from  several  scientific
volumes  containing  the  admissions  of  the  Physicists  themselves.

As  Stallo  shows,  the  existence  of  Ether  is  accepted  in  Physical
Astronomy,  in  ordinary  Physics,  and  in  Chemistry.

By  the  astronomers,  this  aether  was  originally  regarded  as  a  fluid  of  extreme
tenuity  and  mobility,  offering  no  sensible  resistance  to  the  motions  of  celestial
bodies,  and  the  question  of  its  continuity  or  discontinuity  was  not  seriously  mooted.
Its  main  function  in  modem  astronomy  has  been  to  serve  as  a  basis  for  hydro-
dynamical  theories  of  gravitation.  In  physics  this  fluid  appeared  for  some  time  in
several  roles  in  connection  with  the  "imponderables"  [so  cruelly  put  to  death  by
Sir  William  Grove],  some  physicists  going  so  far  as  to  identify  it  with  one  or  more
of  them.*

Stallo  then  points  out  the  change  caused  by  the  kinetic  theories ;  that
from  the  date  of  the  dynamical  theory  of  heat.  Ether  was  chosen  in
Optics  as  a  substratum  for  luminous  undulations.  Next,  in  order  to
explain  the  dispersion  and  polarization  of  light.  Physicists  had  to
resort  once  more  to  their  "scientific  imagination,"  and  forthwith  en-
dowed the  Ether  with  (a)  atomic  or  molecular  structure,  and  (^)  with
an  enormous  elasticity,  "so  that  its  resistance  to  deformation  far  ex-
ceeded that  of  the  most  rigid  elastic  bodies."  This  necessitated  the
theory  of  the  essential  discontinuity  of  Matter,  hence  of  Ether.  After
having  accepted  this  discontinuity,  in  order  to  account  for  dispersion
and  polarization,  theoretical  impossibilities  were  discovered  with  regard
to  such  dispersion.  Cauchy's  "scientific  imagination"  saw  in  Atoms
"material  points  without  extension,"  and  he  proposed,  in  order  to
obviate  the  most  formidable  obstacles  to  the  undulatory  theory  (namely,
some  well-known  mechanical  theorems  which  stood  in  the  way),  to
assume  that  the  ethereal  medium  of  propagation,  instead  of  being  con-
tinuous, should  consist  of  particles  separated  by  sensible  distances.
Fresnel  rendered  the  same  service  to  the  phenomena  of  polarization.
E.  B.  Hunt  upset  the  theories  of  both.f    There  are  now  men  of  Science

•  stallo,  loc.  cit.,  p.  X.  t  Silliman's  Journal,  vol.  viii.  pp.  364  et  seq.


528  the;  secret  doctrine.

who  proclaim  them  "materially  fallacious,"  while  others — the  "atomo-
mechanicalists" — cling  to  them  with  desperate  tenacity.  The  supposi-
tion of  an  atomic  or  molecular  constitution  of  Ether  is  upset,  moreover,  by
thermo-dynamics,  for  Clerk  Maxwell  showed  that  such  a  medium
would  be  simply  gas.*  The  hypothesis  of  "finite  intervals"  is  thus
proven  of  no  avail  as  a  supplement  to  the  undulatory  theory.  Besides,
eclipses  fail  to  reveal  any  such  variation  of  colour  as  is  supposed  by
Cauchy,  on  the  assumption  that  the  chromatic  rays  are  propagated
with  different  velocities.  Astronomy  has  pointed  out  more  than  one
phenomenon  absolutely  at  variance  with  this  doctrine.

Thus,  while  in  one  department  of  Physics  the  atomo-molecular  con-
stitution of  the  Ether  is  accepted  in  order  to  account  for  one  special  set
of  phenomena,  in  another  department  such  a  constitution  is  found  to
be  quite  subversive  of  a  number  of  well-ascertained  facts;  and  Hirn's
charges  are  thus  justified.     Chemistry  deemed  it

Impossible  to  concede  the  enormous  elasticity  of  the  sether  without'  depriving  it
of  those  properties,  upon  which  its  serviceableness  in  the  construction  of  chemical
theories  mainly  depended.

This  ended  in  a  final  transformation  of  Ether.

The  exigencies  of  the  atomo-mechanical  theory  have  led  distinguished  mathe-
maticians and  physicists  to  attempt  a  substitution  for  the  traditional  atoms  of
matter,  of  peculiar  forms  of  vortical  motion  in  a  universal,  homogeneous,  incom-
pressible, and  coniinuoiis  material  medium  [Ether],  t

The  present  writer — claiming  no  great  scientific  education,  but  only
a  tolerable  acquaintance  with  modern  theories,  and  a  better  one  with
Occult  Sciences — picks  up  weapons  against  the  detractors  of  the
Esoteric  Teaching  in  the  very  arsenal  of  Modern  Science.  The  glaring
contradictions,  the  mutually-destructive  hypotheses  of  world-renowned
Scientists,  their  disputes,  their  accusations  and  denunciations  of  each
other,  show  plainly  that,  whether  accepted  or  not,  the  Occult  Theories
have  as  much  right  to  a  hearing  as  any  of  the  so-called  learned  and
academical  hypotheses.  Thus,  whether  the  followers  of  the  Royal
Society  choose  to  accept  Ether  as  a  continuous  or  as  a  discontinuous  fluid
matters  little,  and  is  indifferent  for  the  present  purpose.  It  simply
points  to  one  certainty:  Official  Science  knows  7iothing  to  this  day  of  the
constitution   of  Ether.      I^et   Science   call   it   Matter,   if  it   likes;    only

•  See  Clerk  Maxwell's  Treatise  on  Electricity,  and  compare  with  Cauchy's  Memoive  sur  la  Dispersion
de  la  Lumiere.
+  Stallo,  loc.  cii.,  p.  X.


ACTIO   IN   DISTANS.  529

neither  as  Akasha,  nor  as  the  one  sacred  ^ther  of  the  Greeks,  is  it  to
be  found  in  any  of  the  states  of  Matter  known  to  modem  Physics.  It
is  Matter  on  quite  another  plane  of  perception  and  being,  and  it  can
neither  be  analyzed  by  scientific  apparatus,  nor  appreciated  or  even
conceived  by  the  "scientific  imagination,"  unless  the  possessors  thereof
study  the  Occult  Sciences.     That  which  follows  proves  this  statement.

It  is  clearly  demonstrated  by  Stallo  as  regards  the  crucial  problems
of  modern  Physics,  as  was  done  by  De  Quatrefages  and  several  others
in  those  of  Anthropology,  Biology,  etc.,  that,  in  their  efforts  to  support
their  individual  hypotheses  and  systems,  most  of  the  eminent  and
learned  Materialists  very  often  utter  the  greatest  fallacies.  Let  us  take
the  following  case.  Most  of  them  reject  actio  in  distans — one  of  the
fundamental  principles  in  the  question  of  -^ther  or  Akasha  in  Occult-
ism— while,  as  Stallo  justly  observes,  there  is  no  physical  action
"which,  on  close  examination,  does  not  resolve  itself  into  actio  in
distans'' ;  and  he  proves  it.

Now,  metaphysical  arguments,  according  to  Professor  Lodge,*  are
"unconscious  appeals  to  experience."  And  he  adds  that  if  such  an
experience  is  not  co7iceivable,  then  it  does  not  exist.     In  his  own  words:

If  a  highly-developed  mind  or  set  of  minds,  find  a  doctrine  about  some  compara-
tively simple  and  fundamental  matter  absolutely  unthinkable,  it  is  an  evidence
.     .     .     that  the  unthinkable  state  of  things  has  no  existence.

And  thereupon,  toward  the  end  of  his  lecture,  the  Professor  indicates
that  the  explanation  of  cohesion,  as  well  as  of  gravity,  "is  to  be  looked
for  in  the  vortex-atom  theory  of  Sir  William  Thomson."

It  is  needless  to  stop  to  inquire  whether  it  is  to  this  vortex-atom
theory,  also,  that  we  have  to  look  for  the  dropping  down  on  earth  of  the
first  life-germ  by  a  passing  meteor  or  comet — Sir  William  Thomson's
hypothesis.  But  Prof.  Lodge  might  be  reminded  of  the  wise  criticism
on  his  lecture  in  Stallo's  Cojicepts  of  Modem  Physics.  Noticing  the
above-quoted  declaration  by  the  Professor,  the  author  asks

Whether  .  .  ,  the  elements  of  the  vortex-atom  theory  are  familiar,  or  even  pos-
sible, facts  of  experience  ?  For,  if  they  are  not,  clearly  that  theory  is  obnoxious  to
the  same  criticism  which  is  said  to  invalidate  the  assumption  of  actio  in  distans.  f

And  then  the  able  critic  shows  clearly  what  the  Ether  is  not,  nor  can
ever  be,  notwithstanding  all  scientific  claims  to  the  contrary.  And
thus  he  opens  widely,  if  unconsciously,  the  entrance  door  to  our  Occult
Teachings.     For,  as  he  says:


•  Nature,  vol.  xxvii.  p.  304.  t  Op.  ctt.,  p.  xxiv.


35


530  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

The  raediuni  in  which  the  vortex-movements  arise  is,  according  to  Professor
Lodge's  own  express  statement  {Nature,  vol.  xxvii.  p.  305),  "a  perfectly  homo-
geneous, incompressible,  continuous  body,  incapable  of  being  resolved  into  simple
elements  or  atoms;  it  is,  in  fact,  continuous,  not  molecular."  And  after  making
this  statement  Professor  Lodge  adds :  "  There  is  no  other  body  of  which  we  can  say
this,  and  hence  the  properties  of  the  cether  tnust  be  somezvhat  different  from  those  of
ordinary  matter."  It  appears,  then,  that  the  whole  vortex-atom  theory,  which  is
offered  to  us  as  a  substitute  for  the  "metaphysical  theory"  of  actio  in  distans,  rests
upon  the  hypothesis  of  the  existence  of  a  material  medium  which  is  utterly  un-
known to  experience,  and  which  has  properties  somewhat  different*  from  those  of
ordinary  matter.  Hence  this  theory,  instead  of  being,  as  is  claimed,  a  reduction  of
an  unfamiliar  fact  of  experience  to  a  familiar  fact,  is,  on  the  contrary,  a  reduction
of  a  fact  which  is  perfectly  familiar,  to  a  fact  which  is  not  only  unfamiliar,  but
wholly  unknown,  unobserved  and  unobservable.  Furthermore,  the  alleged  vortical
motion  of,  or  rather  in,  the  assumed  ethereal  medium  is  .  .  .  impossible,  because
"motion  in  a  perfectly  homogeneous,  incompressible,  and  therefore  continuous
fluid,  is  not  sensible  motion."  ....  It  is  manifest,  therefore  ....  that,
wherever  the  vortex-atom  theory  may  land  us,  it  certainly  does  not  land  us  any-
where in  the  region  of  physics,  or  in  the  domain  of  ver(z  causceA  And  I  may  add
that,  inasmuch  as  the  hypothetical  undifferentiated  J  and  undifferentiable  medium
is  clearly  an  involuntary  reification  of  the  old  ontological  concept  pure  being,  the
theory  under  discussion  has  all  the  attributes  of  an  inapprehensible  metaphysical
phantom.  §

A  "phantom,"  indeed,  which  can  be  made  apprehensible  only  by
Occultism.  From  such  scientific  Metaphysics  to  Occultism  there  is
hardly  one  step.  Those  Physicists  who  hold  the  view  that  the  atomic
constitution  of  Matter  is  consistent  with  its  penetrability,  need  not  go
far  out  of  their  way  to  be  able  to  account  for  the  greatest  phenomena  of
Occultism,  now  so  derided  by  Physical  Scientists  and  Materialists.
Cauchy's  "material  points  without  extension"  are  lycibnitz's  Monads,
and  at  the  same  time  are  the  materials  out  of  which  the  "Gods"  and
other  invisible  Powers  clothe  themselves  in  bodies.  The  disintegration
and  reintegration  of  "material"  particles  without  extension,  as  a  chief
factor  in  phenomenal  manifestations,  ought  to  suggest  themselves  very
easily  as  a  clear  possibility,  at  any  rate  to  those  few  scientific  minds

*  "  Somewhat  ^\S€X^rx\.\"  exclaims  Stallo.  "The  real  import  of  this 'somewhat' is,  that  the  medium
in  question  is  not,  in  any  intelligible  sense,  material  at  ail,  having  none  of  the  properties  of  matter."
All  the  properties  of  matter  depend  upon  differences  and  changes,  and  the  "hypothetical"  Ether
here  defined  is  not  only  destitute  of  differences,  but  incapable  of  difference  and  change— in  the  phy-
sical sense  let  us  add.  This  proves  that  if  Ether  is  "matter,"  it  is  so  only  as  something  visible,
tangible  and  existing,  for  spiritual  senses  alone;  that  it  is  a  Being  indeed— but  not  of  our  plane —
Pater  ^ther,  or  Akasha.

f  Vera  causes  for  Physical  Science  are  mayavic  or  illusionary  causes  for  the  Occultist,  and  vice  versa,

i  Very  much  "differentiated,"  on  the  contrary,  since  the  day  it  left  its  laya  condition.

5  Op.  cit.,  pp.  xxiv-xxvi.


cauchy's  views.  531

which  accept  M.  Cauchy's  views.  For,  disposing  of  that  property'  of
Matter  which  they  call  impenetrability,  by  simply  regarding  the  Atoms
as  "material  points  exerting  on  each  other  attractions  and  repulsions
which  vary  with  the  distances  that  separate  them,"  the  French  theorist
explains  that:

From  this  it  follows  that,  if  it  pleased  the  author  of  nature  simply  to  modify  the
laws  according  to  which  the  atoms  attract  or  repel  each  other,  we  might  instantly
see  the  hardest  bodies  penetrating  each  other,  the  smallest  particles  of  matter
occupying  immense  spaces,  or  the  largest  masses  reducing  themselves  to  the
smallest  volumes,  the  entire  universe  concentrating  itself,  as  it  were,  in  a  single
point.*

And  that  "point,"  mvisible  on  our  plane  of  perception  and  matter,  is
quite  visible  to  the  eye  of  the  Adept  who  can  follow  and  see  it  present
on  other  planes.  For  the  Occultists,  who  say  that  the  author  of  Nature
is  Nature  itself,  something  indistinct  and  inseparable  from  the  Deity,
it  follows  that  those  who  are  conversant  with  the  Occult  laws  of  Nature,
and  know  how  to  change  and  provoke  new  conditions  in  Ether,  may —
not  modify  the  laws,  but  work  and  do  the  same  in  accordance  with  these
immutable  laws.

*  Sepl  Lefons  de  Pfiysique  Gin^rale,  p.  38,  ei  seq.,  Ed.  Moignc,


SECTION  III
Is  Gravitation  a  Law?


The  corpuscular  theor>'  has  been  unceremoniously  put  aside;  but
gravitation — the  principle  that  all  bodies  attract  each  other  with  a  force
proportional  directly  to  their  masses,  and  inversely  to  the  squares  of
the  distances  betv/een  them — survives  to  this  day  and  reigns,  supreme
as  ever,  in  the  alleged  ethereal  waves  of  Space.  As  a  hypothesis,  it
had  been  threatened  with  death  for  its  inadequacy  to  embrace  all  the
facts  presented  to  it ;  as  a  physical  law,  it  is  the  King  of  the  late  and
once  all-potent  "Imponderables."  "It  is  little  short  of  blasphemy
.  .  .  .  an  insult  to  Newton's  grand  memory  to  doubt  it!" — is  the
exclamation  of  an  American  reviewer  of  Isis  U^iveiled.  Well;  what  is
finally  that  invisible  and  intangible  God  in  whom  we  should  believe  on
blind  faith  ?  Astronomers  who  see  in  gravitation  an  easy-going  solu-
tion for  many  things,  and  a  universal  force  which  allows  them  to  calcu-
late planetary  motions,  care  little  about  the  Cause  of  Attraction.  They
call  Gravity  a  law,  a  cause  in  itself.  We  call  the  forces  acting  under
that  name  effects,  and  very  secondary  effects,  too.  One  day  it  will  be
found  that  the  scientific  hypothesis  does  not  answer  after  all ;  and  then
it  will  follow  the  corpuscular  theory  of  light,  and  be  consigned  to  rest
for  many  scientific  seons  in  the  archives  of  all  exploded  speculations.
Has  not  Newton  himself  expressed  grave  doubts  about  the  nature  of
Force  and  the  corporeality  of  the  "Agents,"  as  they  were  then  called?
So  has  Cuvier,  another  scientific  light  shining  in  the^ight  of  research.
He  warns  his  readers,  in  the  Revolution  du  Globe,  about  the  doubtful
nature  of  the  so-called  Forces,  saying  that  "it  is  not  so  sure  whether
those  agents  were  not  after  all  Spiritual  Powers  {des  ageyits  spiriHiels\y
At  the  outset  of  his  Principia,  Sir  Isaac  Newton  took  the  greatest  care
to  impress  upon  his  school  that  he  did  not  use  the  word  "attraction,"
with  regard  to  the  mutual  action  of  bodies  in  a  physical  sense.  To
him  it  was,  he  said,  a  purely  mathematical  conception,  involving  no


GRAVITY   OR  WHAT?  533

consideration  of  real  and  primary  physical  causes.  In  a  passage  of  his
Principia*  he  tells  us  plainly  that,  physically  considered,  attractions
are  rather  impulses.  In  Section  xi  (Introduction),  he  expresses  the
opinion  that  "there  is  some  subtle  spirit  by  the  force  and  action  of
which  all  movements  of  matter  are  determined";!  and  in  his  Third
Letter  to  Bentley  he  says:

It  is  inconceivable  that  inanimate  brute  matter  should,  without  the  mediation  of
something  else  ivhich  is  not  material,  operate  upon  and  affect  other  matter,  without
mutual  contact,  as  it  must  do  if  gravitation,  in  the  sense  of  Epicurus,  be  essential
and  inherent  in  it.  .  .  .  That  gravity  should  be  innate,  inherent  and  essential
to  matter,  so  that  one  body  may  act  upon  another  at  a  distance,  through  a  vacyium,
without  the  mediation  of  anything  else  by  and  through  which  their  action  may  be
conveyed  from  one  to  another,  is  to  me  so  great  an  absitrdity  that  I  believe  no  man,
who  has  in  philosophical  matters  a  competent  faculty  of  thinking,  can  ever  fall
into  it.  Gravity  must  be  caused  by  an  agent  acting  constantly  according  to  certain
laws;  hvit  whether  this  agent  be  material  or  immaterial  I  have  left  to  the  considera-
tion of  my  readers.

At  this,  even  Newton's  contemporaries  got  frightened — at  the  ap-
parent return  of  Occult  Causes  into  the  domain  of  Physics.  Leibnitz
called  his  principle  of  attraction  "an  incorporeal  and  inexplicable
power."  The  supposition  of  an  attractive  faculty  and  a  perfect  void
was  characterized  by  Bernouilli  as  "revolting,"  the  principle  of  actio  in
dista7is  finding  then  no  more  favour  than  it  does  now.  Euler,  on  the
other  hand,  thought  the  action  of  gravity  was  due  to  either  a  Spirit  or
some  subtle  medium.  And  yet  Newton  knew  of,  if  he  did  not  accept,
the  Ether  of  the  Ancients.  He  regarded  the  intermediate  space  be-
tween the  sidereal  bodies  as  vacuum.  Therefore  he  believed  in  "subtle
Spirit"  and  Spirits  as  we  do,  guiding  the  so-called  attraction.  The
above-quoted  words  of  the  great  man  have  produced  poor  results.
The  "absurdity"  has  now  become  a  dogma  in  the  case  of  pure
Materialism,  which  repeats:  "No  Matter  without  Force,  no  Force
without  Matter;  Matter  and  Force  are  inseparable,  eternal  and  in-
destructible \_tr7ie~\;  there  can  be  no  independent  Force,  since  all
Force  is  an  inherent  and  necessary  property  of  Matter  \^  false'] ;  conse-
quently, there  is  no  immaterial  Creative  Power."      Oh,  poor  Sir  Isaac!

If,  leaving  aside  all  the  other  eminent  men  of  Science  who  agreed  in
opinion  with  Euler  and  L,eibnitz,  the  Occultists  claim  as  their  authori-
ties and  supporters  Sir  Isaac  Newton  and  Cuvier  only,  as  above  cited,
they  need  fear  little  from  Modern  Science,  and  may  loudly  and  protidly

•  Defin.  8,  B.  I.  Prop.  69,  "Scholium."       +  See  Modern  Materialism,  by  the  Rev.  W.  F.  Wilkinson.


534  ''^he;  secret  doctrine.

proclaim  their  beliefs.  But  the  hesitation  and  doubts  of  the  above  cited
authorities,  and  of  many  others,  too,  whom  we  could  name,  did  not  in
the  least  prevent  scientific  speculation  from  wool-gathering  in  the  fields
of  brute  matter  just  as  before.  First  it  was  matter  and  an  imponderable
fluid  distinct  from  it;  then  came  the  imponderable  fluid  so  much  criti-
cized by  Grove;  then  Ether,  which  was  at  first  discontinuous  and  then
became  continuous;  after  which  came  the  "mechanical"  Forces.  These
have  now  settled  in  life  as  "modes  of  motion,"  and  the  Ether  has  be-
come more  mysterious  and  problematical  than  ever.  More  than  one
man  of  Science  objects  to  such  crude  materialistic  views.  But  then,
from  the  days  of  Plato,  who  repeatedly  asks  his  readers  not  to  confuse
incorporeal  Elements  with  their  Principles — the  transcendental  or  spiri-
tual Elements;  from  those  of  the  great  Alchemists,  who,  like  Para-
celsus, made  a  great  difference  between  a  phenomenon  and  its  cause,
or  the  Noumenon;  to  Grove,  who,  though  he  sees  "no  reason  to  divest
universally  diffused  matter  of  the  functions  common  to  all  matter,"  yet
uses  the  term  Forces  where  his  critics,  "who  do  not  attach  to  the  word
any  idea  of  a  specific  action,"  say  Force;  from  those  days  to  this,  nothing
has  proved  competent  to  stem  the  tide  of  brutal  Materialism.  Gravita-
tion is  the  sole  cause,  the  acting  God,  and  Matter  is  its  prophet,  said
the  men  of  Science  only  a  few  years  ago.

They  have  changed  their  views  several  times  since  then.  But  do  the
men  of  Science  understand  the  innermost  thought  of  Newton,  one  of
the  most  spiritual-minded  and  religious  men  of  his  day,  any  better  now
than  they  did  then  ?  It  is  certainly  to  be  doubted.  Newton  is  credited
with  having  given  the  death-blow  to  the  Elemental  Vortices  of  Des-
cartes— the  idea  of  Anaxagoras,  resurrected,  by  the  bye — though  the
last  modern  "vortical  atoms"  of  Sir  William  Thomson  do  not,  in  truth,
differ  much  from  the  former.  Nevertheless,  when  his  disciple  Forbes
wrote  in  the  Preface  to  the  chief  work  of  his  master  a  sentence  declar-
ing that  "attraction  was  the  cause  of  the  system,"  Newton  was  the
first  to  solemnly  protest.  That  which  in  the  mind  of  the  great  mathe-
matician assumed  the  shadow>%  but  firmly  rooted  image  of  God,  as  the
Noumenon  of  all,*  was   called  more  philosophically  by  ancient  and


*  "Attraction,"  Le  Couturier,  a  Materialist,  writes,  "has  now  become  for  the  public  that  which  it
was  for  Newton  himself— a  simple  word,  an  Idea"  (Panorama  des  Mondes),  since  its  cause  is  unknown.
Herschell  virtually  says  the  same,  when  remarking,  that  whenever  studying  the  motion  of  the
heavenly  bodies,  and  the  phenomena  of  attraction,  he  feels  penetrated  at  every  moment  with  the  idea
of  "the  existence  of  causes  that  act  for  us  under  a  veil,  disguising  their  direct  action."  (Must'e  des
Sciences,  August,  1856.)


JEHOVAH,    ONE   OF  THE   ELOHIM.  535

modern  Philosophers  and  Occultists — "Gods,"  or  the  creative  fashion-
ing Powers.  The  modes  of  expression  may  have  been  different,  and
the  ideas  more  or  less  philosophically  enunciated  by  all  sacred  and
profane  Antiquity;  but  the  fundamental  thought  was  the  same.*  For
Pythagoras  the  Forces  were  Spiritual  Entities,  Gods,  independent  of
planets  and  Matter  as  we  see  and  know  them  on  Earth,  who  are  the
rulers  of  the  Sidereal  Heaven.  Plato  represented  the  planets  as  moved
by  an  intrinsic  Rector,  one  with  his  dwelling,  like  "a  boatman  in  his
boat."  As  for  Aristotle,  he  called  those  rulers  "  immaterial  substances" ;  f
though  as  one  who  had  never  been  initiated,  he  rejected  the  Gods  as
Entities.^  But  this  did  not  prevent  him  from  recognizing  the  fact  that
the  stars  and  planets  "were  not  inanimate  masses  but  acting  and  living
bodies  indeed."  As  if  sidereal  spirits  were  the  "diviner  portions  of
their  phenomena  (ra  ^ctortpa  twv  ^avcpwv)."  §

If  we  look  for  corroboration  in  more  modern  and  scientific  times,  we
find  Tycho  Brahe  recognizing  in  the  stars  a  triple  force,  divine,  spiritual
and  vital.  Kepler,  putting  together  the  Pythagorean  sentence,  "the
Sun,  guardian  of  Jupiter,"  and  the  verses  of  David,  "He  placed  his
throne  in  the  Sun,"  and  "the  I,ord  is  the  Sun,"  etc.,  said  that  he
understood  perfectly  how  the  Pythagoreans  could  believe  that  all  the
Globes  disseminated  through  Space  were  rational  Intelligences  {facili-
tates ratiociriativa),  circulating  round  the  Sun,  "in  which  resides  a
pure  spirit  of  fire;  the  source  of  the  general  harmony."  ||

When  an  Occultist  speaks  of  Fohat,  the  energizing  and  guiding
Intelligence  in  the  Universal  Electric  or  Vital  Fluid,  he  is  laughed  at.

*  If  we  are  taken  to  task  for  believing  in  operating-  Gods  and  Spirits  while  rejecting  a  personal
God,  we  answer  to  the  Theists  and  Monotheists:  Admit  that  your  Jehovah  is  one  of  Ike  Elohim,  and
we  are  ready  to  recognize  him.  Make  of  him,  as  you  do,  the  Infinite,  the  One  and  the  Eternal  God,
and  we  will  ne%'er  accept  him  in  this  character.  Of  tribal  Gods  there  were  many;  the  One  Universal
Deity  is  a  principle,  an  abstract  Root-Idea,  which  has  nought  to  do  with  the  unclean  work  of  finite
Form.  We  do  not  worship  the  Gods,  we  only  honour  Them,  as  beings  superior  to  ourselves.  In  this
we  obey  the  Mosaic  injunction,  while  Christians  disobey  their  i?z6/(r— missionaries  foremost  of  all.
"Thou  Shalt  not  revile  the  Gods,"  says  one  of  them— Jehovah— in  Exodus,  x.xii.  28;  but  at  the  same
time  in  verse  20  it  is  commanded:  "He  that  sacrificeth  to  any  God,  save  unto  the  Lord  only,  he  shall
be  utterly  destroyed."  Now  in  the  original  texts  it  is  not  "God"  but  Elohim— and  we  challenge
contradiction— and  Jehovah  is  one  of  the  Elohim,  as  proved  by  his  own  words  in  Genesis,  iii.  22,  when
"the  Lord  God  said  :  Behold  the  Man  is  become  as  one  of  us."  Hence  both  those  who  worship  and
sacrifice  to  the  Elohim,  the  Angels,  and  to  Jehovah,  and  those  who  revile  the  Gods  of  their  fellow-
men,  are  far  greater  transgressors  than  the  Occultists  or  than  any  Theosophist.  Meanwhile  many  of
the  latter  prefer  believing  in  some  one  "Lord"  or  other,  and  are  quite  welcome  to  do  as  they  like.

t  To  likeu  the  "immateriate  species  to  wooden  iron,"  and  to  laugh  at  Spiller  for  referring  to  them
as  "incorporeal  matter"  does  not  solve  the  mystery.  (See  Concepts  of  Modern  Physics,  p.  165  c(
infra.)

t  See  Vossius,  Vol.  II.  p.  528.

}  De  Carlo,  I.  9.

II  De  Motibus  Planeiarum  Hartnonicis,  p.  248.


536  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Withal,  as  now  shown,  the  nature  neither  of  electricity,  nor  of  life,  nor
even  of  light,  is  to  this  day  understood.  The  Occultist  sees  in  the
manifestation  of  ev  ery  force  in  Nature,  the  action  of  the  quality,  or  the
special  characteristic  of  its  Noumenon ;  which  Noumenon  is  a  distinct
and  intelligent  Individuality  c»;z  the  other  side  of  the  manifested  mechayiical
Universe.  Now  the  Occultist  does  not  deny — on  the  contrary  he  will
support  the  view — that  light,  heat,  electricity  and  so  on  are  affections,
not  properties  or  qualities,  of  Matter.  To  put  it  more  clearly :  Matter  is
the  condition,  the  necessary  basis  or  vehicle,  a  sine  qua  non,  for  the
manifestation  of  these  Forces,  or  Agents,  on  this  plane.

But  in  order  to  gain  the  point,  the  Occultists  have  to  examine  the
credentials  of  the  law  of  gravity,  first  of  all,  of  "Gravitation,  the  King
and  Ruler  of  Matter,"  under  every  form.  To  do  so  effectually,  the
hypothesis,  in  its  earliest  appearance,  has  to  be  recalled  to  mind.  To
begin  with,  is  it  Newton  who  was  the  first  to  discover  it?  The  Athenceum
of  Jan.  26,  1867,  has  some  curious  information  upon  this  subject.  It
says:

Positive  evidence  can  be  adduced  that  Newton  derived  all  his  knov/ledge  of
Gravitation  and  its  laws  from  Boehme,  with  whom  Gravitation  or  Attraction  is  the
first  property  of  Nature.  .  .  .  For  with  him,  his  [Bcehme's]  system  shows  us  the
inside  of  things,  while  modern  physical  science  is  content  with  looking  at  the
outside.

Then  again:

The  science  of  electricity,  which  was  not  yet  in  existence  when  he  [Boehme]
wrote,  is  there  anticipated  [in  his  writings];  and  not  only  does  Boehme  describe  all
the  now  known  phenomena  of  that  force,  but  he  even  gives  us  the  origin,  genera-
tion, and  birth  of  electricity,  itself.

Thus  Newton,  whose  profound  mind  easily  read  between  the  lines,
and  fathomed  the  spiritual  thought  of  the  great  Seer,  in  its  mystic
rendering,  owes  his  great  discovery  to  Jacob  Boehme,  the  nursling  of
the  Genii,  Nirmanakayas  who  watched  over  and  guided  him,  of  whom
the  author  of  the  article  in  question  so  truly  remarks :

Every  new  scientific  discovery  goes  to  prove  his  profound  and  intuitive  insight
into  the  most  secret  workings  of  Nature.

And  having  discovered  gravity,  Newton,  in  order  to  render  possible
the  action  of  attraction  in  space,  had,  so  to  speak,  to  annihilate  every
physical  obstacle  capable  of  impeding  its  free  action;  Ether  among
others,  though  he  had  more  than  a  presentiment  of  its  existence.  Ad-
vocating the  corpuscular  theory,  he  made  an  absolute  vacuum  between
the  heavenly  bodies.     Whatever  may  have  been  his  suspicions  and


NEWTON  THEN  AND  NEWTON  NOW.  537

inner  convictions  about  Ether;  however  many  friends  he  may  have  un-
bosomed himself  to— as  in  the  case  of  his  correspondence  with  Bentley

his  teachings  never  showed  that  he  had  any  such  belief.     If  he  was

"persuaded  that  the  power  of  attraction  could  not  be  exerted  by  matter
across  a  vacuum,"*  how  is  it  that  so  late  as  i860,  French  astronomers,
Le  Couturier,  for  instance,  combated  "the  disastrous  results  of  the
theory  of  vacuum  established  by  the  great  man"  ?     Le  Couturier  says:

II  n'est  plus  possible  aujourd'hui,  de  soutenir  comme  Newton,  que  les  corps
celestes  se  mouvent  au  milieu  du  vide  immense  des  espaces.  .  .  .  Parmi  les
consequences  de  la  theorie  du  vide  etablie  par  Newton,  il  ne  reste  plus  debout  que
le  mot  "attraction."  .  .  .  Nous  voyons  venir  le  jour  ou  le  mot  attraction  dis-
paraitra  du  vocabulaire  scientifique.t

Professor  Winchell  writes :

These  passages  [Letter  to  Bentley]  show  what  were  his  views  respecting  the
nature  of  the  interplanetary  medium  of  communication.  Though  declaring  that
the  heavens  "are  void  of  sensible  matter,"  he  elsewhere  excepted  "perhaps  some
very  thin  vapours,  steams,  and  effluvia,, arising  from  the  atmospheres  of  the  earth,
planets,  and  comets,  and  from  such  an  exceedingly  rare  ethereal  medium  as  we
have  elsewhere  described."!

This  only  shows  that  even  such  great  men  as  Newton  have  not
always  the  courage  of  their  opinions.     Dr.  T.  S.  Hunt

Called  attention  to  some  long-neglected  passages  in  Newton's  works,  from  which
it  appears  that  a  belief  in  such  universal,  intercosmical  medium  gradually  took  root
in  his  mind.§

But  such  attention  was  never  called  to  the  said  passages  before
Nov.  28,  1881,  when  Dr.  Hunt  read  his  "Celestial  Chemistry,  from  the
time  of  Newton."     As  L,e  Couturier  says:

Till  then  the  idea  was  universal,  even  among  the  men  of  Science,  that  Newton
had,  while  advocating  the  corpuscular  theory,  preached  a  void.

The  passages  had  been  "long  neglected,"  no  doubt  because  they
contradicted  and  clashed  with  the  preconceived  pet  theories  of  the  day,
till  finally  the  undulator>^  theory  imperiously  required  the  presence  of
an  "ethereal  medium"  to  explain  it.     This  is  the  whole  secret.

Anyhow,  it  is  from  this  theory  of  Newton  of  a  universal  void,  taught,
if  not  believed  in  by  himself,  that  dates  the  immense  scorn  now  shown
by  modem  Physics  for  ancient.  The  old  sages  had  maintained  that
"Nature  abhorred  a  vacuum,"  and  the  greatest  mathematicians  of  the


•   World-Life,  Prof.  Winchell,  LL.D.,  pp.  49  and  50.

t  Panorama  des  Mondes,  pp.  47  and  53.

t  Newton,  Optics,  III.  Query  28,  1704;  quoted  in  World-Life,  p.  50.

}  Ibid.


538  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

world— read  of  the  Western  races— had  discovered  the  antiquated
"fallacy"  and  exposed  it.  And  now  Modern  Science,  however  ungrace-
fully, vindicates  Archaic  Knowledge,  and  has,  moreover,  to  vindicate
Newton's  character  and  powers  of  observation  at  this  late  hour,  after
having  neglected,  for  one  century  and  a  half,  to  pay  any  attention  to
such  very  important  passages — perchance,  because  it  was  wiser  not  to
attract  any  notice  to  them.     Better  late  than  never!

And  now  Father  ^ther  is  re-welcomed  with  open  arms  and  wedded
to  gravitation,  linked  to  it  for  weal  or  woe,  until  the  day  when  it,  or
both,  shall  be  replaced  by  something  else.  Three  hundred  years  ago
it  was  plenum  everywhere,  then  it  became  one  dismal  vacuity;  later
still  the  sidereal  ocean-beds,  dried  up  by  Science,  rolled  onward  once
more  their  ethereal  waves.  Recede  ut  procedas  must  become  the  motto  of
exact  Science— "exact,"  chiefly,  in  finding  itself  inexact  every  leap-year.

But  we  will  not  quarrel  with  the  great  men.  They  had  to  go  back  to
the  earliest  "Gods  of  Pythagoras  and  old  Kanada"  for  the  very  back-
bone and  marrow  of  their  correlations  and  "newest"  discoveries,  and
this  may  well  afford  good  hope  to  the  Occultists  for  their  minor  Gods.
For  we  believe  in  Le  Couturier's  prophecy  about  gravitation.  We
know  the  day  is  approaching  when  an  absolute  reform  will  be  de-
manded in  the  present  modes  of  Science  by  the  Scientists  themselves,
as  was  done  by  Sir  William  Grove,  F.R.S.  Till  that  day  there  is
nothing  to  be  done.  For  if  gravitation  were  dethroned  to-morrow,
the  Scientists  would  discover  some  other  new  mode  of  mechanical
motion  the  day  after.*'  Rough  and  up-hill  is  the  path  of  true  Science,
and  its  days  are  full  of  vexation  of  spirit.  But  in  the  face  of  its
"thousand"  contradictory  hypotheses  offered  as  explanations  of  phy-
sical phenomena,  there  has  been  no  better  hypothesis  than  "motion"
—however  paradoxically  interpreted  by  Materialism.  As  may  be  found
in  the  first  pages  of  this  Volume,  Occultists  have  nothing  to  say  against
Motion,!  the  Great  Breath  of  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer's  "Unknowable."


*  When  read  in  a  fair  and  unprejudiced  spirit,  Sir  Isaac  Newton's  works  are  an  ever  ready  witness
to  show  how  he  must  have  hesitated  between  gravitation  and  attraction,  impulse,  and  some  other
unknown  cause,  to  explain  the  regular  course  of  the  planetary  motion.  But  see  his  Treatise  on  Colour
(Vol.  III.  Question  31).  We  are  told  by  Herschell  that  Newton  left  vvdth  his  successors  the  duty  of
drawing  all  the  scientific  conclusions  from  his  discovery.  How  Modem  Science  has  abused  the  privi-
lege of  building  its  newest  theories  upon  the  law  of  gravitation,  may  be  reahzed  when  one  remembers
how  profoundly  religious  was  that  great  man.

t  The  materialistic  notion  that  because,  in  Physics,  real  or  sen.sible  motion  is  impossible  in  pure
space  or  vacuum,  therefore,  the  eternal  Motion  of  and  in  Cosmos— regarded  as  infinite  Space— is  a
fiction,  only  shows  once  more  that  such  expressions  of  E;astern  metaphysics  as  "pure  Space,"  "pure
Being,"  the  "Absolute,"  etc.,  have  never  been  understood  in  the  West.


PERPETUAI,  MOTION.  539

But,  believing  that  everything  on  Earth  is  the  shadow  of  something  in
Space,  they  believe  in  smaller  "Breaths,"  which,  living,  intelligent  and
independent  of  all  but  Law,  blo.w  in  every  direction  diiring  manvan-
taric  periods.  These  Science  will  reject.  But  whatever  may  be  made
to  replace  attraction,  alias  gravitation,  the  result  will  be  the  same.
Science  will  be  as  far  then  from  the  solution  of  its  difficulties  as  it
is  now,  unless  it  comes  to  some  compromise  with  Occultism,  and
even  with  Alchemy — a  supposition  which  will  be  regarded  as  an  im-
pertinence, but  remains,  nevertheless,  a  fact.     As  Faye  says:

II  manque  quelque  chose  aux  geologues  pour  faire  la  geologie  de  la  Lune;  c'est
d'etre  astronomes.  A  la  verity,  il  manque  aussi  quelque  chose  aux  astronomes  pour
aborder  avec  fruit  cette  dtude,  c'est  d'etre  gdologues.*

But  he  might  have  added,  with  still  more  pointedness :

Ce  qui  manque  a  tous  les  deux,  c'est  Tintuition  du  mystique.

Let  us  remember  Sir  William  Grove's  wise  "concluding  remarks,"
on  the  ultimate  structure  of  Matter,  or  the  minutiae  of  molecular
actions,  which,  he  thought,  man  will  never  know.

Much  harm  has  already  been  done  by  attempting  hj'pothetically  to  dissect  matter
and  to  discuss  the  shapes,  sizes,  and  numbers  of  atoms,  and  their  atmospheres  of
heat,  ether,  or  electricity.  Whether  the  regarding  electricity,  light,  magnetism,
etc.,  as  simply  motions  of  ordinary  matter,  be  or  be  not  admissible,  certain  it  is  that
all  past  theories  have  resolved,  and  all  existing  theories  do  resolve,  the  action  of
these  forces  into  motion.  Whether  it  be  that,  on  account  of  our  familiarity  with
motion,  we  refer  other  affections  to  it,  as  to  a  language  which  is  most  easily  con-
strued, and  most  capable  of  explaining  them,  or  whether  it  be  that  it  is  in  reality
the  only  mode  in  which  our  minds,  as  contra-distinguished  from  our  senses,  are  able
to  conceive  material  agencies,  certain  it  is  that  since  the  period  at  which  the  mystic
notions  of  spiritual  or  preternatural  powers  were  applied  to  account  for  physical
phenomena,  all  hj'potheses  framed  to  explain  them  have  resolved  them  into  motion.

And  then  the  learned  gentleman  states  a  purely  Occult  tenet:

The  term  perpetual  motion,  which  I  have  not  infrequently  used  in  these  pages,
is  itself  equivocal.  If  the  doctrines  here  advanced  be  well  founded,  all  motion  is,  in
one  sense,  perpetual.  In  masses,  whose  motion  is  stopped  by  mutual  concussion,
heat  or  motion  of  the  particles  is  generated ;  and  thus  the  motion  continues,  so  that
if  we  could  venture  to  extend  such  thoughts  to  the  universe,  we  should  assume  the
same  amount  of  motion  affecting  the  same  amount  of  matter  for  event

This  is  precisely  what  Occultism  maintains,  and  on  the  same  principle,
that :

Where  force  is  made  to  oppose  force,  and  produce  static  equilibrium,  the  balance
of  preexisting  equilibrium  is  affected,  and  fresh  motion  is  started  equivalent  to  that
which  is  withdrawn  into  a  state  of  abeyance.

•  From  WincheU's  World-Life,  p.  379.  +  Correl.  Pliys.  Forces,  p.  173.


540  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

This  process  finds  intervals  in  the  Pralaya,  but  is  eternal  and  ceaseless
as  the  "Breath,"  even  when  the  manifested  Kosmos  rests.

Thus,  supposing  attraction  or  gravitation  should  >e  given  up  in
favour  of  the  Sun  being  a  huge  magnet— a  theory  already  accepted  by
some  Physicists— a  magnet  that  acts  on  the  planets  as  attraction  is  now
supposed  to  do,  whereto,  or  how  much  farther,  would  it  lead  the
Astronomers  from  where  they  are  now?  Not  an  inch  farther.  Kepler
came  to  this  "curious  hypothesis"  nearly  300  years  ago.  He  had  not
discovered  the  theory  of  attraction  and  repulsion  in  Kosmos,  for  it  was
known  from  the  days  of  Empedocles,  by  whom  the  two  opposite  forces
were  called  "love"  and  "hate" — words  implying  the  same  idea.  But
Kepler  gave  a  pretty  fair  description  of  cosmic  magnetism.  That  such
magnetism  exists  in  Nature,  is  as  certain  as  that  gravitation  does  not;
not  at  any  rate,  in  the  way  in  which  it  is  taught  by  Science,  which  has
never  taken  into  consideration  the  different  modes  in  which  the  dual
Force,  that  Occultism  calls  attraction  and  repulsion,  may  act  within
our  Solar  System,  the  Earth's  atmosphere  and  beyond  in  the  Kosmos.

As  the  great  Humboldt  writes:

Trans-solar  space  has  not  hitherto  shown  any  phenomenon  analogous  to  our  solar
system.  It  is  a  peculiarity  of  our  system,  that  matter  should  have  condensed  within
it  in  nebulous  rings,  the  nuclei  of  which  condense  into  earths  and  moons.  I  say
again,  heretofore,  nothing  of  the  kind  has  ever  been  observed  beyond  our  planetary
system.*

True,  that  since  i860  the  Nebular  Theory  has  sprung  up,  and  being
better  known,  a  few  identical  phenomena  were  supposed  to  be  observed
beyond  the  Solar  System.  Yet  the  great  man  is  quite  right;  and  no
earths  or  moons  can  be  found,  except  in  appearance,  beyond,  or  of  the
same  order  of  Matter  as  found  in,  our  System.  Such  is  the  Occult
Teaching.

This  was  proven  by  Newton  himself;  for  there  are  many  phenomena
in  our  Solar  System,  which  he  confessed  his  inability  to  explain  by  the
law  of  gravitation;  "such  were  the  uniformity  in  the  directions  of
planetary  movements,  the  nearly  circular  forms  of  the  orbits,  and  their
remarkable  conformity  to  one  plane. "f  And  if  there  is  one  single
exception,  then  the  law  of  gravitation  has  no  right  to  be  referred  to  as
a  universal  law.  "These  adjustments,"  we  are  told,  "Newton,  in  his
general  Scholium,  pronounces  to  be  'the  work  of  an  intelligent  and

*SeeJ?evue  Germanique  of  the  s^  si  Dec.  i860,  art.,  "Lettreset  Conversations  d' Alexandre  Humboldt."
t  Prof.  Winchell.


KEPLER'S   IDEAS.  54^

all-powerful  Being'."  Intelligent  that  "Being"  may  be;  as  to  "all-
powerful,"  there  would  be  every  reason  to  doubt  the  claim.  A  poor
"God"  he,  who  would  work  upon  minor  details  and  leave  the  most
important  to  secondary  forces!  The  poverty  of  this  argument  and
logic  is  surpassed  only  by  that  of  Laplace,  who,  seeking  very  correctly
to  substitute  Motion  for  Newton's  "all-powerful  Being,"  and  ignorant
of  the  true  nature  of  that  Eternal  Motion,  saw  in  it  a  blind  physical
law.  "Might  not  those  arrangements  be  an  effect  of  the  laws  of
motion?"  he  asks,  forgetting,  as  do  all  our  modern  Scientists,  that  this
law  and  this  motion  are  a  vicious  circle,  so  long  as  the  nature  of  both
remains  unexplained.  His  famous  answer  to  Napoleon:  "■  Dieu  est
devenu  ime  hypothhe  inutile,'"  could  be  correctly  made  only  by  one  who
adhered  to  the  philosophy  of  the  Vedantins.  It  becomes  a  pure  fallacy,
if  we  exclude  the  interference  of  operating,  intelligent,  powerful  (never
"all-powerful")  Beings,  who  are  called  "  Gods."

But  we  would  ask  the  critics  of  the  mediaeval  Astronomers,  wh\'
should  Kepler  be  denounced  as  most  unscientific,  for  offering  just  the
same  solution  as  did  Newton,  only  showing  himself  more  sincere,  more
consistent  and  even  more  logical?  Where  may  be  the  difference  be-
tween Newton's  "all-powerful  Being"  and  Kepler's  Rectores,  his
Sidereal  and  Cosmic  Forces,  or  Angels?  Kepler  again  is  criticized  for
his  "curious  hypothesis  which  made  use  of  a  vortical  movement  within
the  solar  system,"  for  his  theories  in  general,  and  for  favouring  Kmpe-
docles'  idea  of  attraction  and  repulsion,  and  "solar  magnetism"  in
particular.  Yet  several  modem  men  of  Science^  as  will  be  shown —
Hunt,  if  Metcalfe  is  to  be  excluded,  Dr.  Richardson,  etc. — very  strongly
favour  the  same  idea.  He  is  half  excused,  however,  on  the  plea
that:

To  the  time  of  Kepler  no  interaction  between  masses  of  matter  had  been  dis-
tinctly recognized  which  was  generically  different  from  magnetism.*

Is  it  distinctly  recognized  now?  Does  Professor  Winchell  claim  for
Science  any  serious  knowledge  whatever  of  the  nature  of  either  elec-
tricity or  magnetism — except  that  both  seem  to  be  the  effects  of  some
result  arising  from  an  undetermined  cause.

The  ideas  of  Kepler,  when  their  theological  tendencies  are  weeded
out,  are  purely  Occult.     He  saw  that:

(I)  The  Sun  is  a  great  Magnet.f  This  is  what  some  eminent  modem
Scientists  and  also  the  Occultists  believe  in.


•   World-Life,  p.  553.  t  But  see  Asironomie  du  Moyen  Age,  by  Delambre.


542  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

(II)  The  Solar  substance  is  immaterial.*  In  the  sense,  of  course,  of
Matter  existing  in  states  unknown  to  Science.

(III)  For  the  constant  motion  and  restoration  of  the  Sun's  energy
and  planetary  motion,  he  provided  the  perpetual  care  of  a  Spirit,  or
Spirits.  The  whole  of  Antiquity  believed  in  this  idea.  The  Occultists
do  not  use  the  word  Spirit,  but  say  Creative  Forces,  which  they  endow
with  intelligence.  But  we  may  call  them  Spirits  also.  We  shall  be
taken  to  task  for  contradiction.  It  will  be  said  that  while  we  deny
God,  we  admit  Souls  and  operative  Spirits,  and  quote  from  bigoted
Roman  Catholic  writers  in  support  of  our  argument.  To  this  we
reply:  We  deny  the  anthropomorphic  God  of  the  Monotheists,  but  never
the  Divine  Principle  in  Nature.  We  combat  Protestants  and  Roman
Catholics  on  a  number  of  dogmatic  theological  beliefs  of  human  and
sectarian  origin.  We  agree  with  them  in  their  belief  in  Spirits  and
intelligent  operative  Powers,  though  we  do  not  worship  "Angels"  as
the  Roman  Latinists  do.

This  theory  is  tabooed  a  great  deal  more  on  account  of  the  "Spirit"
that  is  given  room  in  it,  than  of  anything  else.  Herschell,  the  elder,
believed  in  it  likewise,  and  so  do  several  modern  Scientists.  Never-
theless Professor  Winchell  declares  that  "a  hypothesis  more  fanciful,
and  less  in  accord  with  the  requirements  of  physical  principles,  has  not
been  offered  in  ancient  or  modern  times."!

The  same  was  said,  once  upon  a  time,  of  the  universal  Ether,  and
now  it  is  not  only  accepted  perforce,  but  is  advocated  as  the  only
possible  theory  to  explain  certain  mysteries.

Grove's  ideas,  when  he  first  enunciated  them  in  London  about  1840,
were  denounced  as  unscientific;  nevertheless,  his  views  on  the  Correla-
tion of  Forces  are  now  universally  accepted.  It  would,  very  likely,
require  one  more  conversant  with  Science  than  is  the  writer,  to  combat
with  any  success  some  of  the  now  prevailing  ideas  about  gravitation
and  other  similar  "solutions"  of  cosmic  mysteries.  But,  let  us  recall
a  few  objections  that  came  from  recognized  men  of  Science;  from
Astronomers  and  Physicists  of  eminence,  who  rejected  the  theory  of
rotation,  as  well  as  that  of  gravitation.  Thus  one  reads  in  the  French
Encyclopedia  that  "Science  agrees,  in  the  face  of  all  its  representatives,
that  it  is  impossible  to  explain  the  physical  origin  of  the  rotator>'  motion
of  the  solar  system."

If  the  question  is  asked:  "What  causes  rotation?"    We  are  answered:

*  See /5?.s  Unveiled,  I.  270,  271.  +  World- Life,  554.


THE   CAUSE    OF   ROTATION.  543

"It  is  the  centrifugal  force."  "And  this  force,  what  is  it  that  pro-
duces it?"  "The  force  of  rotation,"  is  the  grave  answer.*  It  will  be
well,  perhaps,  to  examine  both  these  theories  as  being  directly  or
indirectly  connected.

*  Godefroy,  Cosmogonie  de  la  Rivilation.


SECTION  IV.

The  Theories  of  Rotation  in  Science.


Considering  that  "final  cause  is  pronounced  a  chimera,  and  the
First  Great  Cause  is  remanded  to  the  sphere  of  the  Unknown,"  as  a
reverend  gentleman  justly  complains,  the  number  of  hypotheses  put  for-
ward, a  nebula  of  them,  is  most  remarkable.  The  profane  student  is  per-
plexed, and  does  not  know  in  which  of  the  theories  o^  exact  Science  he  has
to  believe.  We  give  below  hypotheses  enough  for  every  taste  and  power
of  brain.     They  are  all  extracted  from  a  number  of  scientific  volumes.

Current  Hypotheses  explaining  the  Origin  of  Rotation.

Rotation  has  originated:

(a)  By  the  collision  of  nebular  masses  wandering  aimlessly  in  Space;
or  by  attraction,  "in  cases  where  no  actual  impact  takes  place."

(b}  By  the  tangential  action  of  currents  of  nebulous  matter  (in  the
case  of  an  amorphous  nebula)  descending  from  higher  to  lower  levels,*
or  simply  by  the  action  of  the  central  gravity  of  the  mass.f

"It  is  a  fundamental  principle  in  physics  that  no  rotation  could  be
generated  in  such  a  mass  by  the  action  of  its  own  parts.  As  well  attempt
to  change  the  course  of  a  steamer  by  pulling  at  the  deck  railing,"  re-
marks on  this  Prof.  Winchell  in  World-Life.X

Hypotheses  of  the  Origin  op  Planets  and  Comets.

(a)  We  owe  the  birth  of  the  planets  (i)  to  an  explosion  of  the  Sun —
a  parturition  of  its  central  niass;§  or  (2)  to  some  kind  of  disruption  of
the  nebular  rings.

*  The  terms  "high"  and  "low"  being  only  relative  to  the  position  of  the  observer  in  Space,  any
use  of  those  terras  tending  to  convey  the  impression  that  they  stand  for  abstract  realities,  is  neces-
sarily fallacious.

t  Jacob  Ennis,  The  Origin  of  the  Stars.

X  P.  99,  note.

\  If  such  is  the  case,  how  does  Science  explain  the  comparatively  small  size  of  the  planets  nearest
the  Sun?  The  theory  of  meteoric  aggregation  is  only  a  step  farther  from  truth  than  the  nebular  con-
ception, and  has  not  even  the  quality  of  the  latter — its  metaphysical  element.


CONTRADICTORY   HYPOTHESES.  545

(i>)  "The  comets  are  strangers  to  the  planetary  system,"*  "The
comets  are  undeniably  generated  in  our  solar  system."!

(c)  The  "■fixed  stars  are  motionless,"  says  one  authority.  "All  the
stars  are  actually  in  motion,"  answers  another  authority.    "Undoubtedly

every  star  is  in  motion."  t

id)  "For  over  350,000,000  years,  the  slow  and  majestic  movement  of
the  sun  around  its  axis  has  never  for  a  moment  ceased."  §

(e)  "Maedler  believes  that  ....  our  sun  has  Alcyone  in  the
Pleiades  for  the  centre  of  its  orbit,  and  consumes  180,000,000  of  years  in
completing  a  single  revolution."  |i

(/)  "The  sun  has  existed  no  more  than  15,000,000  of  years,  and  will
emit  heat  for  no  longer  than  10,000,000  years  more."^

A  few  years  ago  this  eminent  Scientist  was  telling  the  world  that
the  time  required  for  the  Earth  to  cool  from  incipient  incrustation  to
its  present  state,  could  not  exceed  80,000,000  years.*"*  If  the  encrusted
age  of  the  world  is  only  40,000,000,  or  half  the  duration  once  allowed,
and  the  Sun's  age  is  only  15,000,000,  have  we  to  understand  that  the
Karth  was  at  one  time  independent  of  the  Sun  ?

Since  the  ages  of  the  Sun,  of  the  planets,  and  of  the  Earth,  as  they
are  stated  in  the  various  scientific  hypotheses  of  the  Astronomers  and
Physicists,  are  given  elsewhere  below,  we  have  said  enough  to  show
the  disagreement  between  the  ministers  of  Modern  Science.  Whether
we  accept  the  fifiec7i  million  years  of  Sir  William  Thomson  or  the
thousatid  millions  of  Mr.  Huxley,  for  the  rotational  evolution  of  our
Solar  System,  it  will  always  come  to  this;  that  by  accepting  self-
generated  rotation  for  the  heavenly  bodies  composed  of  inert  Matter
and  yet  moved  by  their  own  internal  motion,  for  millions  of  years,  this
teaching  of  Science  amounts  to:

(a)  An  evident  denial  of  that  fundamental  physical  law,  which  states
that  "a  body  in  motion  tends  constantly  to  inertia,  i.e.,  to  continue  in
the  same  state  of  motion  or  rest,  unless  it  is  stimulated  into  further
action  by  a  superior  active  force."

*  Laplace,  Syste.nie  du  Monde,  p.  414,  ed.  1824.

t  Paye,  Comptcs  Rendus,  t.  xc.  pp.  640-2.

t  Wolf.

\  Panorama  des  Mondes,  I/:  Couturier.

1|   World-Life,  Wiiichell,  p.  140.

H  Sir  William  Thomson's  lecture  on  "The  latent  dynamical  theory  regarding  the  probable  origin,
total  amount  of  heat,  and  duration  of  the  Sun,"  1887.

•»  Thomson  and  Tait,  Natural  Philosophy.  And  even  on  these  figures  Bischof  disagrees  with
Thomson,  and  calculates  that  350,000,000  years  would  be  required  for  the  Earth  to  cool  from  a  tem-
perature of  20,000°  to  200°  centigrade.    This  is,  also,  the  opinion  of  Helmholtz.  ^6


546  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

{b)  An  original  impulse,  which  culminates  in  an  unalterable  motion,
within  a  resisting  Ether  that  Newton  had  declared  incompatible  with
that  motion.

(c)  Universal  gravity,  which,  we  are  taught,  always  tends  to  a  centre
in  rectilinear  descent — alone  the  cause  of  the  revolution  of  the  whole
Solar  System,  which  is  performing  an  eternal  double  gyration,  each
body  around  its  axis  and  orbit.     Another  occasional  version  is :

{d)  A  magnet  in  the  Sun;  or,  that  the  said  revolution  is  due  to  a
magnetic  force,  which  acts,  just  as  gravitation  does,  in  a  straight  line,
and  varies  inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance.*

(e)  The  whole  acting  under  invariable  and  changeless  laws,  which
are,  nevertheless,  often  shown  variable,  as  during  some  well-known
freaks  of  planets  and  other  bodies,  as  also  when  the  comets  approach
or  recede  from  the  Sun.

(/)  A  Motor  Force  always  proportionate  to  the  mass  it  is  acting
upon ;  but  independent  of  the  specific  nature  of  that  mass,  to  which  it
is  proportionate ;  which  amounts  to  sa5dng,  as  I^e  Couturier  does,  that :

Without  that  force  independent  from,  and  of  quite  another  nature  than,  the  said
mass,  the  latter,  were  it  as  huge  as  Saturn,  or  as  tiny  as  Ceres,  would  always  fall
with  the  same  rapidity,  t

A  mass,  furthermore,  which  derives  its  weight  from  the  body  on
which  it  weighs.

Thus  neither  I^aplace's  perceptions  of  a  solar  atmospheric  fluid,
which  would  extend  beyond  the  orbits  of  the  planets,  nor  I^e  Couturier's
electricity,  nor  Foucault's  heat,:|:  nor  this,  nor  the  other,  can  ever  help
any  of  the  numerous  hypotheses  about  the  origin  and  permanency  of
rotation  to  escape  from  this  squirrel's  wheel,  any  more  than  can  the
theory  of  gravity  itself.  This  mystery  is  the  Procrustean  bed  of
Physical  Science.  If  Matter  is  passive,  as  we  are  now  taught,  the
simplest  movement  cannot  be  said  to  be  an  essential  property  of  Matter
— the  latter  being  considered  simply  as  an  inert  mass.  How,,  then,  can
such  a  complicated  movement,  compound  and  multiple,  harmonious
and  equilibrated,  lasting  in  the  eternities  for  millions  and  millions  of
years,  be  attributed  simply  to  its  own  inherent  force,  unless  the  latter
is  an  Intelligence?  A  physical  will  is  something  new — a  conception
that  the  Ancients  would  never  have  entertained,  indeed!  For  over  a
century  all  distinction  between  body  and  force  has  been  made  away
with.     "  Force   is  but   the  property   of  a  body   in   motion,"    say  the

*  Coulomb's  I,aw.        t  Musee  des  Sciences,  15  August,  1857.        t  Panorama  des  Mondes,  p.  55.


SCIENTIFIC    ABERRATIONS.  54^

Physicists;  "life — the  property  of  our  animal  organs — is  but  the  result
of  their  molecular  arrangement,"  answer  the  Physiologists.     As  Littre

teaches :

In  the  bosom  of  that  aggregate  which  is  named  planet,  are  developed  all  the
forces  immanent  in  matter  .  .  .  i.e.,  that  matter  possesses  in  itself  amX  through
itsel/the  forces  that  are  proper  to  it  .  .  .  and  which  are  primary,  not  secondary.
Such  forces  are  the  property  of  weight,  the  property  of  electricity,  of  terrestrial
magnetism,  the  property  of  life.  .  .  .  Every  planet  can  develop  life  .  .  .  as  earth,
for  instance,  which  had  not  always  mankind  on  it,  and  now  bears  {produii)  men.*

An  Astronomer  says :

We  talk  of  the  weight  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  but  since  it  is  recognized  that
weight  decreases  in  proportion  to  the  distance  from  the  centre,  it  becomes  evident
that,  at  a  certain  distance,  that  weight  must  be  forcibly  reduced  to  zero.  Were
there  any  attraction  there  would  be  equilibrium  ....  And  since  the  modern
school  recognizes  neither  a  beneath  nor  an  above  in  universal  .space,  it  is  not  clear
what  should  cause  the  earth  to  fall,  were  there  even  no  gravitation,  nor  attraction. t

Methinks  the  Count  de  Maistre  was  right  in  solving  the  question  in
his  own  theological  way.     He  cuts  the  Gordian  knot  by  saying:— "The

planets  rotate  because  they  are  made  ^o  rotate and  the

modern  physical  system  of  the  universe  is  a  physical  impossibility."t
For  did  not  Herschell  say  the  same  thing  when  he  remarked  that  there
is  a  Will  needed  to  impart  a  circular  motion,  and  another  Will  to
restrain  it?§  This  shows  and  explains  how  a  retarded  planet  is  cun-
ning enough  to  calculate  its  time  so  well  as  to  hit  off  its  arrival  at  the
fixed  minute.  For,  if  Science  sometimes  succeeds,  with  great  inge-
nuity, in  explaining  some  of  such  stoppages,  retrograde  motions,
angles  outside  the  orbits,  etc.,  by  appearances  resulting  from  the  in-
equality of  their  progress  and  ours  in  the  course  of  our  mutual  and
respective  orbits,  we  still  know  that  there  are  others,  and  "very  real
and  considerable  deviations,"  according  to  Herschell,  "which  cannot
be  explained  except  by  the  mutual  and  irregular  action  of  those  planets
and  by  the  perturbing  influence  of  the  sun."

We  understand,  however,  that  there  are,  besides  those  little  and
accidental  perturbations,  continuous  perturbations  called  "secular" —
because  of  the  extreme  slowness  with  which  the  irregularity  increases
and  affects  the  relations  of  the  elliptic  movement — and  that  these
perturbations  can  be  corrected.  From  Newton,  who  found  that  this
world  needed  repairing  very  often,  down  to  Reynaud,  all  say  the  same.
In  his  Ciel  et  Terre,  the  latter  says :

•  Reirue  des  Deux  Mondes,  jXiXy  15,  i860.         t  Cosmographic.         %  Soiries.         \  LHscours ,  z6^.


<^8  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

The  orbits  described  by  the  planets  are  far  from  immutable,  and  are,  on  the
contrary,  subject  to  a  perpetual  mutation  in  their  position  and  form.*

Proving  gravitation  and  the  peripatetic  laws  to  be  as  negligent  as
they  are  quick  to  repair  their  mistakes.  The  charge  as  it  stands  seems
to  be  that:

These  orbits  are  alternately  widening  and  narrowing,  their  great  axis  lengthens
and  diminishes,  or  oscillates  at  the  same  time  from  right  to  left  around  the  sun,  the
plane  itself,  in  which  they  are  situated,  raising  and  lowering  itself  periodically
while  pivoting  around  itself  with  a  kind  of  tremor.

To  this,  De  Mirville,  who  believes  in  intelligent  "workmen"  invisibly
ruling  the  Solar  System — as  tve  do — observes  very  wittily :

Voila,  certes,  a  voyage  which  has  little  in  it  of  mechanical  precision;  at  the  utmost,
one  could  compare  it  to  a  steamer,  pulled  to  and  fro  and  tossed  on  the  waves,
retarded  or  accelerated,  all  and  each  of  which  impediments  might  put  off  its  arrival
indefinitely,  were  there  not  the  intelligence  of  a  pilot  and  engineers  to  catch  up
the  time  lost,  and  to  repair  the  damages. t

The  law  of  gravity,  however,  seems  to  be  becoming  an  obsolete  law
in  starry  heaven.  At  any  rate  those  long-haired  sidereal  Radicals,
called  comets,  appear  to  be  very  poor  respecters  of  the  majesty  of  that
law,  and  to  beard  it  quite  impudently.  Nevertheless,  and  though  pre-
senting in  nearly  every  respect  "phenomena  not  yet  fully  understood,"
comets  and  meteors  are  credited  by  the  believers  in  Modern  Science
with  obeying  the  same  laws  and  consisting  of  the  same  Matter,  "as  the
suns,  stars  and  nebulae,"  and  even  "the  earth  and  its  inhabitants."!

This  is  what  one  might  call  taking  things  on  trust,  aye,  even  to  blind
faith.  But  exact  Science  is  not  to  be  questioned,  and  he  who  rejects
the  hypotheses  imagined  by  her  students — gravitation,  for  instance —
would  be  regarded  as  an  ignorant  fool  for  his  pains;  yet  we  are  told  by
the  just  cited  author  a  queer  legend  from  the  scientific  annals.

The  comet  of  1811  had  a  tail  120  millions  of  miles  in  length  and  25  millions  of
miles  in  diameter  at  the  widest  part,  while  the  diameter  of  the  nucleus  was  about
127,000  miles,  more  than  ten  times  that  of  the  earth.

He  tells  us  that :

In  order  that  bodies  of  this  magnitude,  passing  near  the  earth,  should  not  affect
its  motion  or  change  the  length  of  the  year  by  even  a  single  second,  their  actual
substance  must  be  inconceivably  rare.

It  must  be  so  indeed,  yet:
•  p.  28.

t  Des  Esprits,  III.  155,  Deuxieme  Memoire.

X  lyaing's  Modern  Science  and  Modern  Thought.


THE   PARADOXES  OF  SCIENCE.  549

The  extreme  tenuity  of  a  comet's  mass  is  also  proved  by  the  phenomenon  of  the
tail,  which,  as  the  comet  approaches  the  sun,  is  thrown  out  sometimes  to  a  length
of  90  millions  of  miles  in  a  few  hours.  And  what  is  remarkable,  this  tail  is  thrown
out  against  the  force  of  gravity  by  some  repulsive  force,  probably  electrical,  so
that  it  always  points  away  from  the  sun  [!  !!]....  And  yet,  thin  as  the  matter  ot
comets  must  be,  it  obeys  the  common  Law  of  Gravity  [!  ?],  and  whether  the  comet
revolves  in  an  orbit  within  that  of  the  outer  planets,  or  shoots  off  into  the  abysses
of  space,  and  returns  only  after  hundreds  of  years,  its  path  is,  at  each  instant,  regu-
lated by  the  same  force  as  that  which  causes  an  apple  to  fall  to  the  ground.*

Science  is  like  Caesar's  wife,  and  must  not  be  suspected — this  is
evident.  But  it  can  be  respectfully  criticized,  nevertheless,  and  at  all
events,  it  may  be  reminded  that  the  "apple"  is  a  dangerous  fruit.  For
the  second  time  in  the  history  of  mankind,  it  may  become  the  cause  of
the  Fall — this  time,  of  "exact"  Science.  A  comet  whose  tail  defies  the
law  of  gravity  right  in  the  Sun's  face  can  hardly  be  credited  with
obeying  that  law.

In  a  series  of  scientific  works  on  Astronomy  and  the  Nebular  Theory,
written  between  1865  and  1866,  the  present  writer,  a  poor  tyro  in  Science,
has  counted  in  a  few  hours,  no  less  than  thirty-nine  contradictory-
hypotheses  offered  as  explanations  for  the  self-generated,  primitive
rotatory  motion  of  the  heavenly  bodies.  The  writer  is  no  Astronomer,
no  Mathematician,  no  Scientist ;  but  she  was  obliged  to  examine  these
errors  in  defence  of  Occultism,  in  general,  and  what  is  still  more
important,  in  order  to  support  the  Occult  Teachings  concerning  As-
tronomy and  Cosmology.  Occultists  were  threatened  with  terrible
penalties  for  questioning  scientific  truths.  But  now  they  feel  braver;
Science  is  less  secure  in  its  "impregnable"  position  than  they  were
led  to  expect,  and  many  of  its  strongholds  are  built  on  very  shifting
sands.

Thus,  even  this  poor  and  unscientific  examination  of  it  has  been
useful,  and  it  has  certainly  been  very  instructive.  We  have  learned  a
good  many  things,  in  fact,  having  especially  studied  with  particular
care  those  astronomical  data,  that  would  be  the  most  likely  to  clash
with  our  heterodox  and  "superstitioiis"  beliefs.

Thus,  for  instance,  we  have  found  there,  concerning  gravitation,  the
axial  and  orbital  motions,  that  synchronous  movement  having  been
once  overcome,  in  the  early  stage,  this  was  enough  to  originate  a
rotator}^  motion  till  the  end  of  Manvantara.  We  have  also  come  to
know,  in  all  the  aforesaid  combinations  of  possibilities  with  regard  to

•  Ibid.,  p.  17.


550  THE  SBCRET  DOCTRINE.

incipient  rotation,  most  complicated  in  every  case,  some  of  the  causes
to  which  it  may  have  been  due,  as  well  as  some  others  to  which  it
ought  and  should  have  been  due,  but,  in  some  way  or  other,  was  not.
Among  other  things,  we  are  informed  that  incipient  rotation  may  be
provoked  with  equal  ease  in  a  mass  in  igneous  fusion,  and  in  one  that
is  characterized  by  glacial  opacity  *    That  gravitation  is  a  law  which
nothing  can  overcome,  but  which  is,  nevertheless,  overcome,  in  and
out  of  season,  by  the  most  ordinary  celestial  or  terrestrial  bodies — the
tails  of  impudent  comets,  for  instance.     That  we  owe  the  universe  to
the  holy  Creative  Trinity,   called  Inert   Matter,  Senseless  Force  and
Blind  Chance.     Of  the  real  essence  and  nature  of  any  of  these  three,
Science  knows  nothing,  but  this  is  a  trifling  detail.     Ergo,  we  are  told
that,   when   a   mass   of   cosmic    or   nebular   Matter — ^whose   nature  is
entirely  unknown,  and  which  may  be  in  a  state  of  fusion  (Ivaplace),  or
dark  and  cold  (Thomson),  for  "this  intervention  of  heat  is  itself  a  pure
hypothesis"   (Faye) — decides  to  exhibit  its  mechanical  energj^  under
the  form  of  rotation,  it  acts  in  this  wise.     It  (the  mass)  either  bursts
into  spontaneous   conflagration,  or  it   remains   inert,   tenebrous,    and
frigid,  both  states  being  equally  capable  of  sending  it,  without   any
adequate   cause,  spinning   through   Space   for  millions  of  years.     Its
movements  may  be  retrograde,  or  they  may  be  direct,  about  a  hundred
various   reasons  being  offered   for  both   motions,   in   about   as   many
hypotheses;  anyhow,  it  joins  the  maze  of  stars,  whose  origin  belongs
to  the  same  miraculous  and  spontaneous  order — for:

The  nebular  theory  does  not  profess  to  discover  the  origin  of  things,  but  only  a
stadium  in  material  history.f

Those  millions  of  suns,  planets,  and  satellites,  composed  of  inert
matter,  will  whirl  on  in  most  impressive  and  majestic  symmetry  round
the  firmament,  moved  and  guided  only,  notwithstanding  their  inertia,
"by  their  own  internal  motion."

Shall  we  wonder,  after  this,  if  learned  Mystics,  pious  Roman  Catho-
lics, and  even  such  learned  Astronomers  as  were  Chaubard  and  Gode-
froy,J  have  preferred  the  Kabalah  and  the  ancient  systems  to  the
modern  dreary  and  contradictor}^  exposition  of  the  Universe?  The
Zohar  makes  a  distinction,  at  any  rate,  between  "the  Hajaschar  [the

*  Heaven  and  Earth.
+  Winchell,  World-Life,  p.  196.

X  L'Umvers  explique  par  la  Revelation,  and  Cosmogonie  de  la  Revelation.  But  see  De  Mirville's
Beuxieme  Memoire.    The  author,  a  terrible  enemy  of  Occultism,  was  yet  one  who  wrote  great  truths.


FORCES  ARE  REALITIES.  551


'Light  Forces'],  the   Hachoser  ['Reflected  Lights'],  aud  the  simple
phenoyneyial  exteriority  of  their  spiritual  types."*

The  question  of  "gravity"  may  now  be  dismissed,  and  other
hypotheses  examined.  That  Physical  Science  knows  nothing  of
"Forces"  is  clear.  We  may  close  the  argument,  however,  by  calling
to  our  help  one  more  man  of  Science — Professor  Jaumes,  Member  of
the  Academy  of  Medicine  at  Montpellier.  Says  this  learned  man,
speaking  of  Forces:

A  cause  is  that  which  is  essentially  acting  in  the  genealogy  of  phenomena,  in
every  production  as  in  every  modification.  I  said  that  activity  (or  force)  was
invisible.  ...  To  suppose  it  corporeal  and  residing  in  the  properties  of  matter
would  be  a  gratuitous  hypothesis.  ...  To  reduce  all  the  causes  to  God,  .  .  .
would  amount  to  embarrassing  oneself  with  a  hypothesis  hostile  to  many  verities.
But  to  speak  of  a  plurality  of  forces  proceeding  from  the  Deity  and  possessing  in-
herent powers  of  their  own,  is  not  unreasonable,  .  .  .  and  I  am  disposed  to
admit  phenomena  produced  by  intermediate  agents  called  Forces  or  vSecondary
Agents.  The  distinction  of  Forces  is  the  principle  of  the  division  of  Sciences ;  so
many  real  and  separate  Forces,  so  many  mother-Sciences.  .  .  .  No;  Forces  are
not  suppositions  and  abstractions,  but  realities,  and  the  only  acting  realities  whose
attributes  can  be  determined  with  the  help  of  direct  observation  and  induction.t


*  See  Kabbala  Denudata,  II.  67.

+  "Sur  la  Distinction  des  Forces,"  published  in  the  Memoires  de  P Academie  des  Sciences  de  Mont-
pellier, Vol.  II.  fasc.  i,  1854.


SECTION  V.

The  Masks  of  Science.


PHYSICS  OR  METAPHYSICS?


If  there  is  anything  like  progress  on  earth,  Science  will  some  day-
have  to  give  up,  7iolens  vole^is,  such  monstrous  ideas  as  her  physical,
self-guiding  laws,  void  of  Soul  and  Spirit,  and  will  then  have  to  turn
to  the  Occult  Teachings.  It  has  already  done  so,  however  altered  may
be  the  title-pages  and  revised  editions  of  the  Scientific  Catechism.  It
is  now  over  half  a  century  since,  in  comparing  modern  with  ancient
thought,  it  was  found  that,  however  different  our  Philosophy  may
appear  from  that  of  our  ancestors,  it  is,  nevertheless,  composed  only  of
additions  and  subtractions  taken  from  the  old  Philosophy  and  trans-
mitted drop  by  drop  through  the  filter  of  antecedents.

This  fact  was  well  known  to  Faraday,  and  to  other  eminent  men  of
Science.  Atoms,  Ether,  Evolution  itself— all  come  to  Modern  Science
from  ancient  notions,  all  are  based  on  the  conceptions  of  the  archaic
nations.  "Conceptions"  for  the  profane,  under  the  shape  of  allegories;
plain  truths  taught  during  the  Initiations  to  the  Elect,  which  truths
have  been  partially  divulged  through  Greek  writers  and  have  descended
to  us.  This  does  not  mean  that  Occultism  has  ever  had  the  same
views  on  Matter,  Atoms  and  Ether  as  may  be  found  in  the  exotericism
of  the  classical  Greek  writers.  Yet,  if  we  may  believe  Mr.  Tyndall,
even  Faraday  was  an  Aristotelean,  and  was  more  an  Agnostic  than  a
Materialist.  In  his  Faraday,  as  a  Discoverer*  the  author  shows  the
great  Physicist  using  "old  reflections  of  Aristotle"  which  are  "con-
cisely found  in  some  of  his  works."  Faraday,  Boscovitch,  and  all
others,  however,  who  see,  in  the  Atoms  and  molecules,  "centres  of
force,"  and  in  the  corresponding  element,  Force,  an  Entity  by  itself,  are
far  nearer  the  truth,  perchance,  than  those,  who,  denouncing  them,
denounce  at  the  same  time  the  "old  corpuscular  Pythagorean  theory"

*  p.  123.


ACADEMICAL,   MISNOMERS.  553

— one,  by  the  way,  which  never  passed  to  posterity  as  the  great  Philo-
sopher really  taught  it — on  the  ground  of  its  "delusion  that  the  con-
ceptual elements  of  matter  can  be  grasped  as  separate  and  real
entities."

The  chief  and  most  fatal  mistake  and  fallacy  made  by  Science,  in  the
view  of  the  Occultists,  lies  in  the  idea  of  the  possibility  of  such  a  thing
existing  in  Nature  as  inorganic,  or  dead  Matter.  Is  anything  dead  or
inorganic  which  is  capable  of  transformation  or  change? — Occultism
asks.  And  is  there  anything  under  the  sun  which  remains  immutable
or  changeless?

For  a  thing  to  be  dead  implies  that  it  had  been  at  some  time  liviiig.
When,  at  what  period  of  cosmogony?  Occultism  says  that  in  all  cases
Matter  is  the  most  active,  when  it  appears  inert.  A  wooden  or  a  stone
block  is  motionless  and  impenetrable  to  all  intents  and  purposes.
Nevertheless,  and  de  facto,  its  particles  are  in  ceas2less  eternal  vibra-
tion which  is  so  rapid  that  to  the  physical  eye  the  body  seems  abso-
lutel}^  devoid  of  motion;  and  the  spacial  distance  between  those
particles  in  their  vibratory  motion  is — considered  from  another  plane  of
being  and  perception — as  great  as  that  which  separates  snow  flakes  or
drops  of  rain.     But  to  Ph5^sical  Science  this  will  be  an  absurdity.

This  fallacy  is  nowhere  better  illustiated  than  in  the  scientific  work
of  a  German  savant,  Professor  Philip  Spiller.  In  this  cosmological
treatise,  the  author  attempts  to  prove  that :

No  material  constituent  of  a  body,  no  atom,  is  in  itself  originally  endowed  with
force,  but  that  every  such  atom  is  absolutely  dead,  and  without  any  inherent  power
to  act  at  a  distance.*

This  Statement,  however,  does  not  prevent  Spiller  from  enunciating
an  Occult  doctrine  and  principle.  He  asserts  the  independent  substan-
tiality of  Force,  and  shows  it  as  an  "incorporeal  stuff"  (jinkorperlicher
Stoff)  or  Substance.  Now  Substance  is  not  Matter  in  Metaphysics,  and
for  argument's  sake  it  may  be  granted  that  it  is  a  wrong  expression  to
use.  But  this  is  due  to  the  poverty  of  European  languages,  and  especi-
ally to  the  paucity  of  scientific  terms.  Then  this  "stuff"  is  identified
and  connected  by  Spiller  with  the  .^ther.  Expressed  in  Occult  lan-
guage it  might  be  said  with  more  correctness  that  this  "Force-Sub-
stance" is  the  ever-active  phenomenal  positive  Ether — Prakriti;  while
the  omnipresent  all-pervading  ^ther  is  the  Noumenon  of  the  former,
the  substratum  of  all,  or  Akasha.     Nevertheless,  Stallo  falls  foul  of

•  Der  Weltccther  als  Ko.''n'-'"-he  Kraft,  p.  4.


^54  'THS  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Spiller,  as  he  does  of  the  Materialists.  He  is  accused  of  "utter  dis-
regard of  the  fundamental  correlation  of  Force  and  Matter,"  of  neither
of  which  Science  knows  anything  certain.  For  this  "  hypostasized  half-
concept"  is,  in  the  view  of  all  other  Phj'sicists,  not  only  iviponderable,
but  destitute  of  cohesive,  chemical,  thermal,  electric,  and  magnetic
forces,  of  all  of  which  forces — according  to  Occultism — ^ther  is  the
Source  and  Cause.

Therefore  Spiller,  with  all  his  mistakes,  exhibits  more  intuition  than
does  any  other  modern  Scientist,  with  the  exception,  perhaps,  of  Dr.
Richardson,  the  theorist  on  "Nerve-Force,"  or  Nervous  Ether,  also  on
"Sun-Force  and  Earth-Force."*  For  ^ther,  in  Esotericism,  is  the
very  quintessence  of  all  possible  energy,  and  it  is  certainly  to  this
"Universal  Agent  (composed  of  many  agents)  that  are  due  all  the
manifestations  of  energy  in  the  material,  psychic  and  spiritual  worlds.
What,  in  lact,  are  electricity  and  light?  How  can  Science  know
that  one  is  a  fluid  and  the  other  a  "mode  of  motion"?  Why  is  no
reason  given  why  a  difference  should  be  made  between  them,  since
both  are  considered  as  force-correlations?  Electricity  is  a  fluid,  we  are
told,  immaterial  and  non-molecular — though  Helmholtz  thinks  other-
wise— and  the  proof  of  it  is  that  we  can  bottle  it  up,  accumulate  it  and
store  it  away.  Then,  it  must  be  simply  Matter,  and  no  peculiar  "fluid."
Nor  is  it  only  "a  mode  of  motion,"  for  motion  could  hardly  be  stored  in
a  Leyden  jar.  As  for  light,  it  is  a  still  more  extraordinary  "mode  of
motion";  since,  "marvellous  as  it  may  appear,  light  [also]  can  actually
be  stored  up  for  use,"  as  was  demonstrated  by  Grove  nearly  half  a  century
ago.

Take  an  engraving  which  has  been  kept  for  some  days  in  the  dark,  expose  it  to
full  sunshine— that  is,  insulate  it  for  15  minutes;  lay  it  on  sensitive  paper  in  a  dark
place,  and  at  the  end  of  24  hours  it  will  have  left  an  impression  of  itself  on  the
sensitive  paper,  the  whites  coming  out  as  blacks.  .  .  .  There  seems  to  be  no  limit
for  the  reproduction  of  engravings.t

What  is  it  that  remains  fixed,  nailed,  so  to  say,  on  the  paper?  It  is  a
Force  certainly  that  fixed  the  thing,  but  what  is  that  thing,  the  residue
of  which  remains  on  the  paper?

Our  learned  men  will  get  out  of  this  by  some  scientific  technicality;
but  what  is  it  that  is  intercepted,  so  as  to  imprison  a  certain  quantity
of  it  on  glass,  paper,  or  wood?  Is  it  "Motion"  or  is  it  "Force"?  Or
shall  we  be  told  that  what  remains  behind  is  only  the  effect  of  the

**  See  Popular  Science  Review,  Vol.  V.  pp.  329-34-  +  See  Correlation  of  Physical  Forces,  p.  110.


THE   FIXING   OF  LIGHT.  555

Force  or  Motion?  Then  what  is  this  Force?  Force  or  Energy  is  a
quality;  but  every  quality  must  belong  to  a  something,  or  a  somebody.
In  Physics,  Force  is  defined  as  "that  which  changes  or  tends  to  change
any  ph^^sical  relation  between  bodies,  whether  mechanical,  thermal,
chemical,  electrical,  magnetic,  etc."  But  it  is  not  that  Force  or  that
Motion  which  remains  behind  on  the  paper,  when  the  Force  or  Motion
has  ceased  to  act;  and  yet  something,  which  our  physical  senses  can-
not perceive,  has  been  left  there,  to  become  a  cause  in  its  turn  and  to
produce  effects.  What  is  it?  It  is  not  Matter,  as  defined  by  Science —
i.e..  Matter  in  any  of  its  known  states.  An  Alchemist  would  say  it  was
a  spiritual  secretion — and  he  would  be  laughed  at.  But  y€i,  when  the
Physicist  said  that  electricity,  stored  up,  is  a  fluid,  or  that  light  fixed
on  paper  is  still  sunlight — that  was  Scie?ice.  The  newest  authorities
have,  indeed,  rejected  these  explanations  as  "exploded  theories,"  and
have  now  deified  "Motion"  as  their  sole  idol.  But,  surely,  they  and
their  idol  will  one  day  share  the  fate  of  their  predecessors!  An  ex-
perienced Occultist,  one  who  has  verified  the  whole  series  of  Nidanas,
of  causes  and  effects,  that  finally  project  their  last  effect  on  to  this  our
plane  of  manifestations,  one  who  has  traced  Matter  back  to  its  Nou-
menon,  holds  the  opinion  that  the  explanation  of  the  Physicist  is  like
calling  anger,  or  its  effects — the  exclamation  provoked  by  it — a  secre-
tion or  a  fluid,  and  man,  the  cause  of  it,  its  material  conductor.  But,
as  Grove  prophetically  remarked,  the  day  is  fast  approaching  when  it
will  be  confessed  that  the  Forces  we  know  are  but  the  phenomenal
manifestations  of  Realities  we  know  nothing  about — but  which  were
known  to  the  Ancients,  and  by  them  worshipped.

He  made  one  still  more  suggestive  remark  which  ought  to  have
become  the  motto  of  Science,  but  has  not.  Sir  William  Grove  said  that :
"Science  should  have  neither  desires  nor  prejudices.  Truth  should  be  her
sole  aim."

Meanwhile,  in  our  days.  Scientists  are  more  self-opinionated  and
bigoted  than  even  the  Clergy.  For  they  minister  to,  if  they  do  not
actually  worship,  "Force- Matter,"  which  is  their  Uiiknown  God.  And
how  unknown  it  is,  may  be  inferred  from  the  many  confessions  of  the
most  eminent  Physicists  and  Biologists,  with  Faraday  at  their  head.
Not  only,  he  said,  could  he  never  presume  to  pronounce  whether  Force
was  a  property  or  function  of  Matter,  but  he  actually  did  not  know  what
was  meant  by  the  word  Matter,

There  was  a  time,  he  added,  when  he  believed  he  knew  something  of


556  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Matter.     But  the  more  lie  lived,  and  the  more  carefully  he  studied  it,  the
more  he  became  convinced  of  his  utter  ignorance  of  the  nature  of  Matter.*

This  ominous  confession  was  made,  we  believe,  at  a  Scientific  Con-
gress at  Swansea.  Faraday  held  a  similar  opinion,  however,  as  stated
by  Tyndall :

What  do  we  know  of  the  atom  apart  from  its  force  ?  You  imagine  a  nucleus
which  may  be  called  a  and  surround  it  by  forces  which  may  be  called  in;  to  my
mind  the  a  or  nucleus  vanishes  and  the  substance  consists  of  the  powers  m.  And,
indeed,  what  notion  can  we  form  of  the  nucleus  independent  of  its  powers  }  What
thought  remains  on  which  to  hang  the  imagination  of  an  a  independent  of  the
acknowledged  forces?

The  Occultists  are  often  misunderstood  because,  for  lack  of  better
terms,  they  apply  to  the  Essence  of  Force,  under  certahi  aspects,  the
descriptive  epithet  of  Substance.  Now  the  names  for  the  varieties  of
Substance  on  dififerent  planes  of  perception  and  being  are  legion.
Kastern  Occultism  has  a  special  appellation  for  each  kind ;  but  Science
— like  England,  in  the  recollection  of  a  witty  Frenchman,  blessed  with
thirty-six  religions  and  only  one  fish-sauce — has  but  one  name  for  all,
namely  "Substance."  Moreover,  neither  the  orthodox  Physicists  nor
their  critics  seem  to  be  ver)'  certain  of  their  premisses,  and  are  as  apt
to  confuse  the  effects  as  they  are  the  causes.  It  is  incorrect,  for  in-
stance, to  say,  as  Stallo  does,  that  "Matter  can  no  more  be  realized  or
conceived  as  mere  positive  spatial  presence  than  as  a  concretion  of
forces,"  or  that  "Force  is  nothing  without  mass,  and  mass  is  nothing
without  force" — for  one  is  the  Noumenon  and  the  other  the  pheno-
menon.    Again;  Schelling,  when  saying  that

It  is  a  mere  delusion  of  the  phantasy  that  something,  we  know  not  what,  remains
after  we  have  denuded  an  object  of  all  the  predicates  belonging  to  it,t
could  never  have  applied  the  remark  to  the  realm  of  transcendental
Metaphysics.     It  is  true  that  pure  Force  is  nothing  in  the  world  of
Physics ;  it  is  All  in  the  domain  of  Spirit.     Says  Stallo :

If  we  reduce  the  mass  upon  which  a  given  force,  however  small,  acts  to  its  limit
zero — or,  mathematically  expressed,  until  it  becomes  infinitely  small — the  con-
sequence is  that  the  velocity  of  the  resulting  motion  is  infinitely  great,  and  that
the  "thing"  .  .  .  is  at  any  given  moment  neither  here  nor  there,  but  every-
where— that  there  is  no  real  presence;  it  is  impossible,  therefore,  to  construct
matter  by  a  synthesis  of  forces.  J

This  may  be  true  in  the  phenomenal  world,  inasmuch  as  the  illusive
reflection  of  the  One  Reality  of  the  supersensual  world  may  appear  true
to  the  dwarfed  conceptions  of  a  Materialist.     It  is  absolutely  incorrect

•  See  Buckwell's  Electric  Science.  t  Schelling,  Ideen,  etc.,  p.  18.  %  Op.  cit.,  p.  161.


WHAT   IS   FORCE?  557

when  the  argument  is  applied  to  things  in  what  the  Kabalists  call
the  supermundane  spheres.  Inertia,  so-called,  is  Force,  according  to
Newton,*  and  for  the  student  of  Esoteric  Sciences  the  greatest  of  the
Occult  Forces.  A  body  can  only  conceptually,  only  on  this  plane  of
illusion,  be  considered  divorced  from  its  relations  with  other  bodies—
which,  according  to  the  physical  and  mechanical  sciences,  give  rise  to
its  attributes.  In  fact,  it  can  never  be  so  detached ;  death  itself  being
unable  to  detach  it  from  its  relation  with  the  Universal  Forces,  of
which  the  One  Force,  or  Life,  is  the  synthesis:  the  inter-relation
simply  continues  on  another  plane.  But  what,  if  Stallo  is  right,  can
Dr.  James  Croll  mean  when,  in  speaking  "On  the  Transformation  of
Gravity,"  he  brings  forward  the  views  advocated  by  Faraday,  Water-
ston,  and  others?    For  he  says  very  plainly  that  gravity

Is  a  force  pervading  Space  external  to  bodies,  and  that,  on  the  mutual  approach
of  the  bodies,  the  force  is  not  increased,  as  is  generally  supposed,  but  the  bodies
merely  pass  into  a  place  where  the  force  exists  with  greater  intensity.!

No  one  will  deny  that  a  Force,  whether  gravity,  electricity,  or  any
other  Force,  which  exists  oiUside  bodies  and  in  open  Space — be  it  Ether
or  a  vacuum — must  be  something,  and  not  a  pure  nothing,  when  con-
ceived apart  from  a  mass.  Otherwise  it  could  hardly  exist  in  one  place
with  a  greater  and  in  another  with  reduced  "intensity."  G.  A.  Hini
declares  the  same  in  his  Thcorie  Mecanique  de  V  Univers.  He  tries  to
demonstrate:

That  the  atom  of  the  chemists  is  not  an  entity  of  pure  convention,  or  simply  an
explicative  device,  but  that  it  exists  really,  that  its  volume  is  unalterable,  and  that
consequently  it  is  not  elastic  [!  !].  Force,  therefore,  is  not  in  the  atom;  it  is  in  the
space  which  separates  the  atoms  from  each  other.

The  above-cited  views,  expressed  by  two  men  of  Science  of  great
eminence  in  their  respective  countries,  show  that  it  is  not  in  the  least
unscientific  to  speak  of  the  substantiality  of  the  so-called  Forces.  Sub-
ject to  some  future  specific  name,  this  Force  is  Substance  of  some  kind,
and  can  be  nothing  else;  and  perhaps  one  day  Science  will  be  the  first
to  readopt  the  derided  name  of  phlogiston.  Whatever  may  be  the
future  name  given  to  it,  to  maintain  that  Force  does  not  reside  in  the
Atoms,  but  only  in  the  "space  between  them,"  may  be  scientific  enough ;
nevertheless  it  is  not  true.  To  the  mind  of  an  Occultist  it  is  like  saying
that  water  does  not  reside  in  the  drops  of  which  the  ocean  is  composed,
but  only  in  the  space  between  those  drops !

*  Princ,  Def.  iii.  t  Philosophical  Magazine,  Vol.  II.  p.  252.


558  fHE  SECRKT  DOCTRINE.

The  objection  that  there  are  two  distinct  schools  of  Physicists,  by  one

of  which

This  force  is  assumed  to  be  an  independent  substantial  entity,  which  is  not  a
property  of  matter  nor  essentially  related  to  matter,*

is  hardly  likely  to  help  the  profane  to  any  clearer  understanding.  It
is,  on  the  contrary,  more  calculated  to  throw  the  question  into  still
greater  confusion  than  ever.  For  Force  is,  then,  neither  this  nor  the
other.  By  viewing  it  as  "an  independent  substantial  entity,"  the
theory  extends  the  right  hand  of  fellowship  to  Occultism,  while  the
strange  contradictory  idea  that  it  is  not  "related  to  Matter  otherwise
than  by  its  power  to  act  upon  it,"t  leads  Physical  Science  to  the  most
absurd  contradictory  hypotheses.  Whether  "Force"  or  "Motion"
(Occultism,  seeing  no  difference  between  the  two,  never  attempts  to
separate  them),  it  cannot  act  for  the  adherents  of  the  atomo-mechanical
theory  in  one  way,  and  for  those  of  the  rival  school  in  another.  Nor
can  the  Atoms  be,  in  one  case,  absolutely  uniform  in  size  and  weight,
and  in  another,  vary  in  their  weight  (Avogadro's  law).  For,  in  the
words  of  the  same  able  critic:

While  the  absolute  equality  of  the  primordial  units  of  mass  is  thus  an  essential
part  of  the  very  foundations  of  the  mechanical  theory,  the  whole  modern  science
of  chemistry  is  based  upon  a  principle  directly  subversive  of  it— a  principle  of
which  it  has  recently  been  said  that  "it  holds  the  same  place  in  chemistry  that  the
law  of  gravitation  does  in  astronomy.''^  This  principle  is  known  as  the  law  of
Avogadro  or  Ampere.  §

This  shows  that  either  modern  Chemistry,  or  modern  Physics,  is
entirely  wrong  in  the  respective  fundamental  principles.  For  if  the
assumption  of  Atoms  of  different  specific  gravities  is  deemed  absurd,  on
the  basis  of  the  atomic  theory  in  Physics;  and  if  Chemistry,  neverthe-
less, on  this  very  assumption,  meets  with  "unfailing  experimental  veri-
fication," in  the  formation  and  transformation  of  chemical  compounds;
then  it  becomes  apparent  that  it  is  the  atomo-mechanical  theory  which

•  Concepts  of  Modern  Physics,  xxxi.,  Introductory  to  the  2nd  Edition.

+  Loc.  cit.

X  J.  P.  Cooke,  The  New  Chemistry,  p.  13.

{  "It  imports  that  equal  volumes  of  all  substances,  when  in  the  gaseous  state,  and  under  like  condi-
tions of  pressure  and  temperature,  contain  the  same  number  of  molecules— whence  it  follows  that  the
weights  of  the  molecules  are  proportional  to  the  specific  gravities  of  the  gases ;  that  therefore,  these
being  different,  the  weights  of  the  molecule  are  different  also;  and  inasmuch  as  the  molecules  of
certain  elementary  substances  are  monatomic  (consist  of  but  one  atom  each)  while  the  molecules  of
various  other  substances  contain  the  same  number  of  atoms,  that  the  ultimate  atoms  of  such  sub-
stances are  of  different  weights."  [Concepts  of  Modern  Physics,  p.  34.)  As  shown  further  on  in  the
same  volume,  this  cardinal  principle  of  modem  theoretical  chemistry  is  in  utter  and  irreconcilable
conflict  with  the  first  proposition  of  the  atomo-mechanical  theory— namely,  the  absolute  equality  of
the  primordial  units  of  mass.


THEY  AGREE  TO   DISAGREE.  559

is  untenable.  The  explanation  of  the  latter,  that  "the  differences  of
weight  are  only  differences  of  density,  and  differences  of  density  are
differences  of  distance  between  the  particles  contained  in  a  given
space,"  is  not  really  valid,  because,  before  a  Physicist  can  argue  in  his
defence  that  "as  in  the  atom  there  is  no  multiplicity  of  particles  and
no  void  space,  hence  differences  of  densitj'  or  weight  are  impossible
in  the  case  of  atoms,"  he  must  first  know  what  an  Atom  is,  in  reality,
and  that  is  just  what  he  cannot  know.  He  must  bring  it  under  the
observation  of  at  least  one  of  his  physical  senses — and  that  he  cannot
do:  for  the  simple  reason  that  no  one  has  ever  seen,  smelt,  heard,
touched  or  tasted  an  Atom.  The  Atom  belongs  wholly  to  the  domain  of
Metaphysics.  It  is  an  entified  abstraction — at  any  rate  for  Physical
Science — and  has  nought  to  do  with  Physics,  strictly  speaking,  as  it
can  never  be  brought  to  the  test  of  retort  or  balance.  The  mechanical
conception,  therefore,  becomes  a  jumble  of  the  most  conflicting  theories
and  dilemmas,  in  the  minds  of  the  many  Scientists  who  disagree  on
this,  as  on  other  subjects;  and  its  evolution  is  beheld  with  the  greatest
bewilderment  by  the  Eastern  Occultist,  who  follows  this  scientific  strife.

To  conclude,  on  the  question  of  gravity.  How  can  Science  presume
to  know  anything  certain  of  it?  How  can  it  maintain  its  position  and
its  hypotheses  against  those  of  the  Occultists,  who  see  in  gravity  only
sympathy  and  antipathy,  or  attraction  and  repulsion,  caused  by  phy-
sical polarity  on  our  terrestrial  plane,  and  by  spiritual  causes  outside
its  influence?  How  can  they  disagree  with  the  Occultists  before  they
agree  among  themselves?  Indeed  one  hears  of  the  Conservation  of
Energ}',  and  in  the  same  breath  of  the  perfect  hardness  and  inelasti-
city of  the  Atoms;  of  the  kinetic  theory  of  gases  being  identical  with
"potential  energy,"  so  called,  and,  at  the  same  time,  of  the  elementary
luiits  of  mass  being  absolutely  hard  and  inelastic !  An  Occultist  opens
a  scientific  work  and  reads  as  follows :

Physical  atomism  derives  all  the  qualitative  properties  of  matter  from  the  forms
of  atomic  motion.   The  atoms  themselves  remain  as  elements  utterly  devoid  of  quality  *

And  further:

Chemistry  in  its  ultimate  form  nmst  be  atomic  mechanics.t

And  a  moment  after  he  is  told  that :
.   Gases  consist  of  atoms  which  behave  like  solid,  perfectly  elastic  spheres.+

Finally,  to  crown  all,  Sir  W.  Thomson  is  found  declaring  that:

•  Wnndt,  Die  Theorie  der  Materie,  p.  381.

■r  Nazesmanii,  Thermochemie,  p.  150.

X  Kroenig,  Clausius,  Maxwell,  etc.,  Philosophical  Magazine,  Vol.  XIX.  p.  18.


560  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

We  are  forbidden  by  the  modern  theory  of  the  conservation  of  energy  to  assume
inelasticity,  or  anything  short  of  perfect  elasticity  of  the  ultimate  molecules
whether  of  ultra-mundane  or  mundane  matter.*

But  what  do  the  men  of  true  Science  say  to  all  this?  By  the  "men
of  true  Science"  we  mean  those  who  care  too  much  for  truth  and  too
little  for  personal  vanity  to  dogmatize  on  anything,  as  do  the  majority.
There  are  several  among  them — perhaps  more  than  dare  openly  publish
their  secret  conclusions,  for  fear  of  the  cry  "Stone  him  to  death!" —
men,  whose  intuitions  have  made  them  span  the  abyss  that  lies  between
the  terrestrial  aspect  of  Matter,  and  the,  to  us,  on  our  plane  of  illusion,
subjective,  i.e.,  transcendentally  objective  Substance,  and  have  led
them  to  proclaim  the  existence  of  the  latter.  Matter,  to  the  Occultist,
it  must  be  remembered,  is  that  totality  of  existences  in  the  Kosmos,
which  falls  within  any  of  the  planes  of  possible  perception.  We  are
but  too  well  aware  that  the  orthodox  theories  of  sound,  heat  and  light,
are  against  the  Occult  Doctrines.  But,  it  is  not  enough  for  the  men  of
Science,  or  their  defenders,  to  say  that  they  do  not  deny  dynamic
power  to  light  and  heat,  and  to  urge,  as  a  proof,  the  fact  that  Mr.
Crookes'  radiometer  has  unsettled  no  views.  If  they  would  fathom  the
ultimate  nature  of  these  Forces,  they  have  first  to  admit  their  substan-
tial nature,  however  supersensuous  that  nature  may  be.  Neither  do  the
Occultists  deny  the  correctness  of  the  vibratory  theory.f  Only  they
limit  its  functions  to  our  Earth — declaring  its  inadequacy  on  other
planes  than  ours,  since  Masters  in  the  Occult  Sciences  perceive  the
Causes  that  produce  ethereal  vibrations.  Were  all  these  only  the
fictions  of  the  Alchemists,  or  dreams  of  the  Mystics,  such  men  as  Para-
celsus, Philalethes,  Van  Helmont,  and  so  many  others,  would  have  to
be  regarded  as  worse  than  visionaries;  they  would  become  impostors
and  deliberate  mystificators.

The  Occultists  are  taken  to  task  for  calling  the  Cause  of  light,  heat,
sound,  cohesion,  magnetism,  etc.,  etc.,  a  Substance^  Mr.  Clerk  Max-
well has  stated  that  the  pressure  of  strong  sunlight  on  a  square  mile  is
about  3 J  lbs.     It  is,  they  are  told,   "the  energy  of  the  myriad  ether

*  Philosophical  Magazine,  Vol.  XIV.  p.  321-

t  Referring  to  the  "Aura,"  one  of  the  Masters  says  in  the  OccuU  World:  "How  could  you  make
yourself  understood  by,  command  in  fact,  those  semi-intelligent  Forces,  whose  means  of  communi-
cation with  us  are  not  through  spoken  words,  but  through  sounds  and  colours  in  correlation  between
the  vibrations  of  the  two."  It  is  this  "correlation"  that  is  unknown  to  Modem  Science,  although  it
has  been  many  times  explained  by  the  Alchemists.

X  The  Substance  of  the  Occultist,  however,  is  to  the  most  refined  Substance  of  the  Physicist,  what
Radiant  Matter  is  to  the  leather  of  the  Chemist's  boots.


THE  MYSTIC  RAYS.  561

waves";  and  when  they  call  it  a  Substance  impinging  on  that  area,
their  explanation  is  proclaimed  unscientific.

There  is  no  justification  for  such  an  accusation.  In  no  way — as
already  more  than  once  stated — do  the  Occultists  dispute  the  explana-
tions of  Science,  as  affording  a  solution  of  the  immediate  objective
agencies  at  work.  Science  only  errs  in  believing  that,  because  it  has
detected  in  vibratory  waves  the  proximate  cause  of  these  phenomena,  it
has,  therefore,  revealed  all  that  lies  beyond  the  threshold  of  Sense.
It  merely  traces  the  sequence  of  phenomena  on  a  plane  of  effects,  illu-
sory projections  from  the  region  that  Occultism  has  long  since  pene-
trated. And  the  latter  maintains  that  those  etheric  tremors  are  not  set
up,  as  asserted  by  Science,  by  the  vibrations  of  the  molecules  of  known
bodies,  the  Matter  of  our  terrestrial  objective  consciousness,  but  that  we
must  seek  for  the  ultimate  Causes  of  light,  heat,  etc.,  in  Matter  existing
in  supersensuous  states — states,  however,  as  fully  objective  to  the
spiritual  eye  of  man,  as  a  horse  or  a  tree  is  to  the  ordinary  mortal.
I^ight  and  heat  are  the  ghost  or  shadow  of  Matter  in  motion.  Such
states  can  be  perceived  by  the  Seer  or  the  Adept  during  the  hours  of
trance,  under  the  Sushumna  Ray — the  first  of  the  Seven  Mystic  Rays
of  the  Sun.*

Thus,   we  put  forward  the    Occult  teaching  which  maintains  the

A

reality  of  a  supersubstantial  and  supersensible  essence  of  that  Akasha
— not  Ether,  which  is  only  an  aspect  of  the  latter — the  nature  of  which
cannot  be  inferred  from  its  remoter  manifestations,  its  merely  pheno-
menal phalanx  of  effects,  on  this  terrene  plane.  Science,  on  the
contrarj^  informs  us  that  heat  can  never  be  regarded  as  Matter  in  any
conceivable  state.  To  cite  a  most  impartial  critic,  one  whose  authority
ho  one  can  call  in  question,  as  a  reminder  to  Western  dogmatists,  that
the  question  cannot  be  in  any  way  considered  as  settled.

There  is  no  fundamental  difference  between  light  and  heat  .  .  .  each  is  merely
a  metamorphosis  of  the  other.  .  .  .  Heat  is  light  in  complete  repose.  Light  is
heat  in  rapid  motion.  Directly  light  is  combined  with  a  body,  it  becomes  heat;  but
when  it  is  thrown  off  from  that  body  it  again  becomes  light,  t

•  The  names  of  the  Seven  Rays — which  are,  Sushumna,  Harikesha,  Vishvakarman,  VishvatryarchSs,

Sannaddha,  Sarvavasu  and  Svaraj— are  all  mystical,  and  each  has  its  distinct  application  in  a  distinct

state  of  consciousness,  for  Occult  purposes.    The  Sushumna,  which,  as  said  in  the  Nirukta  (n,  6),  is

only  to  light  up  the  Moon,  is  the  Ray  nevertheless  cherished  by  the  initiated  Yogis.    The  totality  of

the  Seven  Rays  spread  through  the  Solar  System  constitutes,  so  to  say,  the  physical  Upadhi  (Basis)

of  the  Ether  of  Science;  in  which  Upadhi,  light,  heat,  electricitj-,  etc.,  the  Forces  of  orthodox  Science,

correlate  to  produce  their  terrestrial  effects.    As  psvchic  and  spiritual  effects,  they  emanate  from,

and  have  their  origin  in,  the  supra-solar  Upadhi,  in  the  .i^ther  of  the  Occultist— or  Akasha.

t  I^eslie's  Fluid  Theory  of  Li<'ht  and  Heat.

37


c52  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Whether  this  is  true  or  false  we  cannot  tell,  and  many  years,  perhaps
many  generations,  will  have  to  elapse  before  we  shall  be  able  to  tell/'^
We  are  also  told  that  the  two  great  obstacles  to  the  fluid  (?)  theory  oi
heat  undoubtedly  are :

(i)  The    production    of  heat    by   friction— excitation    of    molecular

motion.

(2)  The  conversion  of  heat  into  mechanical  motion.
The  answer  given  is:  There  are  fluids  of  various  kinds.     Electricity
is   called  a  fluid,   and  so  was  heat  quite  recently,  but  it  was  on  the
supposition  that  heat  was   some  imponderable  substance.      This  was
during  the  supreme  and  autocratic  reign  of  Matter.     When  Matter  was
dethroned,  and  Motion  was  proclaimed  the  sole  sovereign  ruler  of  the
Universe,  heat  became  a  "mode  of  motion."     We  need  not  despair;  it
may  become  something  else  to-morrow.      Like  the  Universe  itself.
Science  is  ever  becoming,  and  can  never  say,  "I  am  that  I  am."     On
the  other  hand,  Occult  Science  has  its  changeless  traditions  from  pre-
historic times.     It  may  err  in  particulars;  it  can  never  become  guilty
of  a    mistake  in    questions  of  Universal   I,aw,   simply   because   that
Science,  justly  referred  to  by  Philosophy  as  the  Divine,  was  born  on
higher  planes,  and  was  brought  to  Earth  by  Beings  who  were  wiser
than  man  Vv^ill  be,  even  in  the  Seventh  Race  of  his  Seventh  Round.
And  that  Science  maintains  that  Forces  are  not  what  modern  learning
would  have  them;  e.g.,  magnetism  is  not  a  "mode  of  motion";  and,  in
this  particular  case,  at  least,  exact  Modern  Science  is  sure  to  come  tc
grief  some  day.     Nothing,  at  the  first  blush,  can  appear  more  ridiculous,
more  outrageously  absurd  than  to  say,  for  instance:  The  Hindu  initi-
ated Yogi   knows  really  ten  times  more   than  the  greatest  Europear
Physicist  of  the  ultimate  nature  and  constitution  of  light,  both  solar
and  lunar.     Yet  why  is  the  Sushumna  Ray  believed  to  be  that  Ray
which  furnishes  the  Moon  with  its  borrowed  light?     Why  is  it  "the
Ray  cherished  by  the  initiated  Yogi"?    Why  is  the  Moon  considered
as  the  Deity  of  the  Mind,  by  those  Yogis?    We  say,  because  light,  or
rather  all  its  Occult  properties,  every  combination  and  correlation  of  it
with  other  forces,  mental,  psychic,  and  spiritual,  was  perfectly  known
to  the  old  Adepts.

Therefore,  although  Occult  Science  may  be  less  well-informed  than
modern  Chemistry  as  to  the  behaviour  of  compound  elements  in
various  cases  of  physical   correlation,  yet  it  is  immeasurably  higher

*  Buckle 's  History  of  Civilization,  Vol.  in.  p.  384.


THE  CAUSES  AND  THE  EFFECTS.  563

in  its  knowledge  of  the  ultimate  Occult  states  of  Matter,  and  of  the
true  nature  of  Matter,  than  all  the  Physicists  and  Chemists  of  our
•nodern  day  put  together.

Now,  if  we  state  the  truth  openly  and  in  full  sincerity,  namely,  that
the  ancient  Initiates  had  a  far  wider  knowledge  of  Physics,  as  a  Science
of  Nature,  than  is  possessed  by  our  Academies  of  Science,  all  taken
together,  the  statement  will  be  characterized  as  an  impertinence  and  an
absurdity;  for  Physical  Sciences  are  considered  to  have  been  carried  in
our  age  to  the  apex  of  perfection.  Hence,  the  twitting  query :  Can
the  Occultists  meet  successfully  the  two  points,  namely  (a)  the  produc-
tion of  heat  by  friction — excitation  of  molecular  motion;  and  {b)  the
conversion  of  heat  into  mechanical  force,  if  they  hold  to  the  old
exploded  theory  of  heat  being  a  substance  or  a  fluid?

To  answer  the  question,  it  must  first  be  observed  that  the  Occult
Sciences  do  not  regard  either  electricity,  or  any  of  the  Forces  supposed
to  be  generated  by  it,  as  Matter  in  any  of  the  states  known  to  Physical
Science;  to  put  it  more  clearly,  none  of  these  Forces,  so-called,  is  a
solid,  gas,  or  fluid.  If  it  did  not  look  pedantic,  an  Occultist  would
even  object  to  electricity  being  called  a  fluid — as  it  is  an  eflect  and  not
a  cause.  But  its  Noumenon,  he  would  say,  is  a  Conscious  Cause.  The
same  in  the  cases  of  "Force"  and  the  "Atom."  I^et  us  see  what  an
eminent  Academician,  Butlerof,  the  Chemist,  had  to  say  about  these
two  abstractions.     This  great  man  of  Science  argues:

What  is  Force  ?  What  is  it  from  a  strictly  scientific  stand-point,  and  as  warranted
by  the  law  of  conservation  of  energy?  Conceptions  of  Force  are  resumed  by  our
conceptions  of  this,  that,  or  another  mode  of  motion.  Force  is  thus  simply  the
passage  of  one  state  of  motion  into  another  state  of  the  same;  of  electricity  into
heat  and  light,  of  heat  into  sound  or  some  mechanical  function,  and  so  on.*  The
first  time  electric  fluid  was  produced  by  man  on  earth  it  must  have  been  by  fric-
tion; hence,  as  well  known,  it  is  heat  that  produces  it  by  disturbing  its  zero  state,  t
and  electricity  exists  no  more  on  earth  per  se  than  heat  or  light,  or  any  other  force.
They  are  all  correlations,  as  Science  says.  When  a  given  quantity  of  heat,  assisted
by  a  steam  engine,  is  transformed  into  mechanical  work,  we  speak  of  steam  power
(or  force).  When  a  falling  body  strikes  an  obstacle  in  its  way,  thereby  generating
heat  and  sound — we  call  it  the  power  of  collision.  Wlien  electricity  decomposes
water  or  heats  a  platinum  wire,  we  speak  of  the  force  of  the  electric  fluid.  When
the  rays  of  the  sun  are  intercepted  by  the  thermometer  bulb  and  its  quicksilver
expands,  we  speak  of  the  calorific  energy  of  the  sun.     In  short,  when  one  state  of

•  On  the  plane  of  manifestation  and  illusionary  matter  it  may  be  so ;  not  that  it  is  nothing  more,
for  it  is  vastly  more,
t  Neutral,  or  I^aya.


564  ^HE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

a  determined  quantity  of  motion  ceases,  another  state  of  motion  equivalent  to  the
preceding  takes  its  place,  and  the  result  of  such  a  transformation  or  correlation  is—
Force.  In  all  cases  where  such  a  transformation,  or  the  passage  of  one  state  of
motion  into  another,  is  entirely  absent,  there  no  force  is  possible.  Let  us  admit  for
a  moment  an  absolutely  homogeneous  state  of  the  Universe,  and  our  conception  of
Force  falls  down  to  nought.

Therefore  it  becomes  evident  that  the  Force,  which  Materialism  considers  as  the
cause  of  the  diversity  that  surrounds  us,  is  in  sober  reality  only  an  effect,  a  result  of
that  diversity.  From  such  point  of  view  Force  is  not  the  cause  of  motion,  but  a
result,  while  the  cause  of  that  Force,  or  forces,  is  not  the  Substance  or  Matter,  but
Motion  itself  Matter  thus  must  be  laid  aside,  and  with  it  the  basic  principle  of
Materialism,  which  has  become  unnecessary,  as  Force  brought  down  to  a  state  of
motion  can  give  no  idea  of  the  Substance.  If  Force  is  the  result  of  motion,  then  it
becomes  incomprehensible  why  that  motion  should  become  witness  to  Matter  and
not  to  Spirit  or  a  Spiritual  essence.  True,  our  reason  cannot  conceive  of  a  motion
minus  something  moving  (and  onr  reason  is  right) ;  but  the  nature  or  esse  of  that
something  moving  remains  to  Science  entirely  unknown ;  and  the  Spiritualist,  in
such  case,  has  as  much  right  to  attribute  it  to  a  "Spirit,"  as  a  Materialist  to  creative
and  all-potential  Matter.  A  Materialist  has  no  special  privileges  in  this  instance,
nor  can  he  claim  any.  The  law  of  the  conservation  of  energy,  as  thus  seen,  is
shown  to  be  illegitimate  in  its  pretensions  and  claims  in  this  case.  The  "great
dogma."— no  force  without  matter  and  no  matter  withoiit  force— fsiils  to  the  ground,
and  loses  entirely  the  solemn  significance  with  which  Materialism  has  tried  to
invest  it.  The  conception  of  Force  still  gives  no  idea  of  Matter,  and  compels  us  in
no  way  to  see  in  it  "the  origin  of  all  origins."*

We  are  assured  that  Modern  Science  is  not  Materialistic;  and  our
own  conviction  tells  us  that  it  cannot  be  so,  when  its  learning  is  real.
There  is  good  reason  for  this,  well  defined  by  some  Ph5^sicists  and
Chemists  themselves.  Natural  Sciences  cannot  go  hand  in  hand  with
Materialism.  To  be  at  the  height  of  their  calling,  men  of  Science  have
to  reject  the  very  possibility  of  Materialistic  doctrines  having  aught  to
do  with  the  Atomic  Theory;  and  we  find  that  Lange,  Butlerof,  Du  Bois
Reymond— the  last  probably  unconsciously— and  several  others,  have
proved  it.  And  this  is,  furthermore,  demonstrated  by  the  fact,  that
Kanada  in  India,  and  Leucippus  and  Democritus  in  Greece,  and  after
them  Epicurus— the  earliest  Atomists  in  Europe— while  propagating
their  doctrine  of  definite  proportions,  believed  in  Gods  or  supersen-
suous  Entities,  at  the  same  time.  Their  ideas  upon  Matter  thus
differed  from  those  now  prevalent.  We  must  be  allowed  to  make
our  statement  clearer  by  a  short  synopsis  of  the  ancient  and  modern


•  Scientific  Letters,  Professor  Butlerof.


WHAT  IS  AN  ATOM?  565

views  of  Philosophy  upon  Atoms,  and   thus  prove  that  the  Atomic
Theory  kills  Materialism.

From  the  standpoint  of  Materialism,  which  reduces  the  beginnings  of
all  to  Matter,  the  Universe  consists,  in  its  fulness,  of  Atoms  and  vacuit3^
Even  leaving  aside  the  axiom  taught  by  the  Ancients,  and  now  abso-
lutely demonstrated  by  telescope  and  microscope,  that  Nature  abhors
a  vacuum,  what  is  an  Atom?     Professor  Butlerof  writes:

It  is,  we  are  answered  by  Science,  the  limited  division  of  Substance,  the  indivisible
particle  of  Matter.  To  admit  the  divisibility  of  the  atom,  amounts  to  an  admission
of  an  infinite  divisibility  of  Substance,  which  is  equivalent  to  reducing  Substance
to  nihil,  or  nothingness.  Owing  to  a  feeling  of  self-preservation  alone,  Materialism
cannot  admit  infinite  divisibility;  otherviase,  it  would  have  to  bid  farewell  for  ever
to  its  basic  principle  and  thus  sign  its  own  death-warrant.*

Biichner,  for  instance,  like  a  true  dogmatist  in  Materialism  declares
that:

To  accept  infinite  divisibility  is  absurd,  and  amounts  to  doubting  the  very  exist-
ence of  Matter.

The  Atom  is  indivisible  then,  saith  Materialism?  Very  well.  Butlerof
answers :

See  now  what  a  curious  contradiction  this  fundamental  principle  of  the  Materialists
is  leading  them  into.  The  atom  is  indivisible,  and  at  the  same  time  we  know  it  to
be  elastic.  An  attempt  to  deprive  it  of  elasticity  is  unthinkable;  it  would  amount
to  an  absurdity.  Absolutely  non-elastic  atoms  could  never  exhibit  a  single  one  of
those  numerous  phenomena  that  are  attributed  to  their  correlations.  Without  any
elasticity,  the  atoms  could  not  manifest  their  energy,  and  the  Substance  of  the
Materialists  would  remain  weeded  of  everj'  force.  Therefore,  if  the  Universe  is
composed  of  atoms,  then  those  atoms  must  be  elastic.  It  is  here  that  we  meet  wdth
an  insuperable  obstacle.  For,  what  are  the  conditions  requisite  for  the  manifesta-
tion of  elasticity }  An  elastic  ball,  Avhen  striking  against  an  obstacle,  is  flattened
and  contracts,  which  it  would  be  impossible  for  it  to  do,  were  not  that  ball  to  con-
sist of  particles,  the  relative  position  of  which  experiences  at  the  time  of  the  blow
a  temporary'  change.  This  may  be  said  of  elasticity  in  general ;  no  elasticity  is
possible  without  change  with  respect  to  the  position  of  the  compound  particles  of
an  elastic  body.  This  means  that  the  elastic  body  is  changeful  and  consists  of
particles,  or,  in  other  words,  that  elasticity  can  pertain  only  to  those  bodies  that  are
divisible.    And  the  atom  is  elastic.t

This  is  sufficient  to  show  how  absurd  are  the  simultaneous  admis-
sions of  the  non-divisibility  and  of  the  elasticity  of  the  Atom.  The
Atom  is  elastic,  ergo,  the  Atom  is  divisible,  and  must  consist  of  parti-
cles, or  of  sub-atoms.     And  these  sub-atoms?    They  are  either  non-

•  Ibid.  t  Ibid.


566  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

elastic,  and  in  such  case  they  represent  no  dynamic  importance,  or,
they  are  elastic  also;  and  in  that  case,  they,  too,  are  subject  to  divisi-
bility. And  thus  ad  infinitum.  But  infinite  divisibility  of  Atoms
resolves  Matter  into  simple  centres  of  Force,  i.e.,  precludes  the  possi-
biiit}'-  of  conceiving  Matter  as  an  objective  substance.

This  vicious  circle  is  fatal  to  Materialism.  It  finds  itself  caught  in
its  own  nets,  and  no  issue  out  of  the  dilemma  is  possible  for  it.  If  it
says  that  the  Atom  is  indivisible,  then  it  will  have  Mechanics  asking  it
the  awkward  question :

How  does  the  Universe  move  in  this  case,  and  how  do  its  forces  correlate?  A
world  built  on  absolutely  non-elastic  atoms,  is  like  an  engine  without  steam,  it  is
doomed  to  eternal  inertia.*

Accept  the  explanations  and  teachings  of  Occultism,  and — the  blind
inertia  of  Phy<5ical  Science  being  replaced  by  the  intelligent  active
Powers  behind  the  veil  of  Matter — motion  and  inertia  become  subser-
vient to  those  Powers.  It  is  on  the  doctrine  of  the  illusive  nature
of  Matter,  and  the  infinite  divisibility  of  the  Atom,  that  the  whole
Science  of  Occultism  is  built.  It  opens  limitless  horizons  to  Sub-
stance, informed  by  the  divine  breath  of  its  Soul  in  every  possible
state  of  tenuity,  states  still  undreamed  of  by  the  most  spiritually  dis-
posed Chemists  and  Physicists.

The  above  views  were  enunciated  by  an  Academician,  the  greatest
Chemist  in  Russia,  and  a  recognized  authority  even  in  Europe,  the  late
Professor  Butlerof.  True,  he  was  defending  the  phenomena  of  the
Spiritualists,  the  materializations,  so-called,  in  which  he  believed,  as
Professors  Zollner  and  Hare  did,  as  Mr.  A.  Russel  Wallace,  Mr.  W.
Crookes,  and  many  another  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society,  do  still,
whether  openly  or  secretly.  But  his  argument  with  regard  to  the
nature  of  the  Essence  that  acts  behind  the  physical  phenomena  of
light,  heat,  electricity,  etc.,  is  no  less  scientific  and  authoritative  for  all
that,  and  applies  admirably  to  the  case  in  hand.  Science  has  no  right
to  deny  to  the  Occultists  their  claim  to  a  more  profound  knowledge  of
the  so-called  Forces,  which,  they  say,  are  only  the  effects  of  causes
generated  hy  Powers,  substantial,  yet  supersensuous,  and  beyond  any
kind  of  Matter  with  which  Scientists  have  hitherto  become  acquainted.
The  most  Science  can  do  is  to  assume  and  to  maintain  the  attitude  of
Agnosticism.  Then  it  can  say:  Your  case  is  no  more  proven  than
is  ours;  but  we  confess  to  knowing  nothing  in  reality  either  about

•  Ibid.


CHEMICAL  GODS.  567

Force  or  Matter,  or  about  that  which  lies  at  the  bottom  of  the  so-called
correlation  of  Forces.  Therefore,  time  alone  can  prove  who  is  right
and  who  is  wrong.  L,et  us  wait  patiently,  and  meanwhile  show  mutual
courtesy,  instead  of  scoffing  at  each  other.

But  to  do  this  requires  a  boundless  love  of  truth  and  the  surrender  of
that  prestige — however  false — of  infallibility,  which  the  men  of  Science
have  acquired  among  the  ignorant  and  flippant,  though  cultured,
masses  of  the  profane.  The  blending  of  the  two  Sciences,  the  Archaic
and  the  Modern,  requires  first  of  all  the  abandonment  of  the  actual
Materialistic  lines.  It  necessitates  a  kind  of  religious  Mysticism  and
even  the  study  of  old  Magic,  which  our  Academicians  will  never  take
up.  The  necessity  is  easily  explained.  Just  as  in  old  Alchemical
works  the  real  meaning  of  the  Substances  and  Elements  mentioned  is
concealed  under  the  most  ridiculous  metaphors,  so  are  the  physical,
psychic,  and  spiritual  natures  of  the  Elements  (say  of  Fire)  concealed
in  the  Vedas,  and  especially  in  the  Purdnas,  under  allegories  compre-
hensible only  to  the  Initiates.  Had  they  no  meaning,  then  indeed  all
these  long  legends  and  allegories  about  the  sacredness  of  the  three
types  of  Fire,  and  the  Forty-Nine  original  Fires — personified  by  the
Sons  of  Daksha's  Daughters  and  the  Rishis,  their  Husbands,  "who
with  the  first  Son  of  Brahma  and  his  three  descendants  constitute  the
Forty-nine  Fires" — would  be  idiotic  verbiage  and  no  more.  But  it  is
not  so.  Every  Fire  has  a  distinct  function  and  meaning  in  the  worlds
of  the  physical  and  the  spiritual.  It  has,  moreover,  in  its  essential
nature  a  corresponding  relation  to  one  of  the  human  psychic  faculties,
besides  its  well  determined  chemical  and  physical  potencies  when
coming  in  contact  with  terrestrially  differentiated  Matter.  Science  has
no  speculations  to  offer  upon  Fire  per  se;  Occultism  and  ancient  reli-
gious Science  have.  This  is  shown  even  in  the  meagre  and  purposely
veiled  phraseology  of  the  Purdnas,  where,  as  in  the  Vdyu  Purdna,
many  of  the  qualities  of  the  personified  Fires  are  explained.  Thus,
Pavaka  is  Electric  Fire,  or  Vaidyuta;  Pavamana,  the  Fire  produced  by
Friction,  or  Nirmathya:  and  Shuchi  is  Solar  Fire,  or  Saura* — all  these
three  being  the  sons  of  Abhimanin,  the  Agni  (Fire),  eldest  son  of
Brahma  and  of  Svaha.  Pavaka,  moreover,  is  made  parent  to  Kavya-
vahana,  the  Fire  of  the  Pitris :  Shuchi  to  Havyavahana,  the  Fire  of  the
Gods;  and  Pavamana  to  Saharaksha,  the  Fire  of  the  Asuras.  Now  all
this  shows  that  the  writers  of  the  Purdnas  were  perfectly  conversant

*  Called  the  "drinker  of  waters,"  solar  heat  causing'  water  to  evaporate.


568  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

with  the  Forces  of  Science  and  their  correlations,  as  well  as  with  the
various  qualities  of  the  latter  in  their  bearing  upon  those  psychic  and
physical  phenomena  which  receive  no  credit  and  are  now  unknown  to
Physical  Science.  Ver>'  naturally,  when  an  Orientalist,  especially  one
with  materialistic  tendencies,  reads  that  these  are  only  appellations  of
Fire  employed  in  the  invocations  and  rituals,  he  calls  this  "Tantrika
superstition  and  mystification";  and  he  becomes  more  careful  to  avoid
errors  in  spelling  than  to  give  attention  to  the  secret  meaning  attached
to  the  personifications,  or  to  seek  their  explanation  in  the  physical  cor-
relations of  Forces,  so  far  as  these  are  known.  So  little  credit,  indeed,
is  given  to  the  ancient  Aryans  for  knowledge,  that  even  such  glaring
passages  as  that  in  Vishnu  Purana,  are  left  without  any  notice.  Never-
theless, what  can  this  sentence  mean?

Then  ether,  air,  light,  water,  and  earth,  severally  united  with  the  properties  of
sound  and  the  rest,  existed  as  distinguishable  according  to  their  qualities,  .  .  .
but,  possessing  many  and  various  energies  and  being  unconnected,  they  could  not,
without  combination,  create  living  beings,  not  having  blended  with  each  other.
Having  combined  therefore  with  one  another,  they  assumed  through  their  mutual
association,  the  character  of  one  mass  of  entire  unity;  and,  from  the  direction  of
Spirit,  etc.*

This  means,  of  course,  that  the  writers  were  perfectly  acquainted
with  correlation,  and  were  well  posted  about  the  origin  of  Kosmos  from
the  "Indiscrete  Principle,"  Avyaktanugrahena,  as  applied  to  Para-
brahman  and  Mulaprakriti  conjointly,  and  not  to  "Avyakta,  either
First  Cause,  or  Matter,"  as  Wilson  gives  it.  The  old  Initiates  knew  of
no  "miraculous  creation,"  but  taught  the  evolution  of  Atoms,  on  our
physical  plane,  and  their  first  differentiation  from  I^aya  into  Protyle,  as
Mr.  Crookes  has  suggestively  named  Matter,  or  primordial  substance,
beyojid  the  zero-line — there  where  we  place  Mulaprakriti,  the  Root-
Principle  of  the  World-Stuff  and  of  all  in  the  World.

This  can  be  easily  demonstrated.  Take,  for  instance,  the  newly-
published  catechism  of  the  Vishishthadvaita  Vedantins,  an  orthodox
and  exoteric  system,  yet  fully  enunciated  and  taught  in  the  Xlth
century t  at  a  time  when  European  "Science"  still  believed  in  the
squareness  and  flatness  of  the  Earth  of  Cosmas  Indicopleustes  of  the
Vlth  century.  It  teaches  that  before  Evolution  began,  Prakriti,  Nature,
was  in  a  condition  of  I^aj^a,  or  of  absolute  homogeneity,  as  "Matter
exists  in  two  conditions,  the  Sukshma,  or  latent  and  undifferentiated,
and  the  Sthula,  or  differentiated,  condition."      Then  it  became  Anu,

*  I.  ii.  (Wilson,  I.  38.)  t  Its  founder,  RamanujachSrya,  was  born  a.d.  1017.


THE   VISHISHTHADVAITA   SYSTEM.  569

atomic.  It  teaches  of  Suddasattva — "a  substance  not  subject  to  the
qualities  of  Matter,  from  which  it  is  quite  dififerent,"  and  adds  that  out
of  that  Substance  the  bodies  of  the  Gods,  the  inhabitants  of  Vaikun-
thaloka,  the  Heaven  of  Vishnu,  are  formed.  That  every  particle  or
atom  of  Prakriti  contains  Jiva  (divine  life),  and  is  the  Sharira  (body)
of  that  Jiva  which  it  contains,  while  every  Jiva  is  in  its  turn  the  Sharira
of  the  Supreme  Spirit,  as  "Parabrahman  pervades  every  Jiva,  as  well
as  every  particle  of  Matter."  Dualistic  and  anthropomorphic  as  may
be  the  philosophy  of  the  Vishishthadvaita,  when  compared  with  that  of
the  Advaita — the  non-dualists — it  is  yet  supremely  higher  in  logic  and
philosophy  than  the  Cosmogony  accepted  either  by  Christianity  or  by
its  great  opponent.  Modern  Science.  The  followers  of  one  of  the
greatest  minds  that  ever  appeared  on  Earth,  the  Advaita  Vedantins
are  called  Atheists,  because  they  regard  all  save  Parabrahman,  the
Secondless,  or  the  Absolute  Reality  as  an  illusion.  Yet  the  wisest
Initiates  came  from  their  ranks,  as  also  the  greatest  Yogis.  The
Upanishads  show  that  they  most  assuredly  knew  not  only  what  is  the
causal  substance  in  the  effects  of  friction,  and  that  their  forefathers
were  acquainted  with  the  conversion  of  heat  into  mechanical  force,  but
that  they  were  also  acquainted  with  the  Noumenon  of  every  spiritual
as  well  as  of  every  cosmic  phenomenon.

Truly  the  young  Brahman  who  graduates  in  the  Universities  and
Colleges  of  India  with  the  highest  honours;  who  starts  in  life  as  an
M.A.  and  an  L/I^.B.,  with  a  tail  initialed  from  Alpha  to  Omega  after
his  name,  and  a  contempt  for  his  national  Gods  proportioned  to  the
honours  received  in  his  education  in  Physical  Science;  truly  he  has
but  to  read  in  the  light  of  the  latter,  and  with  an  eye  to  the  correlation
of  physical  Forces,  certain  passages  in  his  Purdnas,  if  he  would  learn
how  much  more  his  ancestors  knew  than  he  will  ever  know — unless  he
becomes  an  Occultist.  I^et  him  turn  to  the  allegory  of  Puriiravas  and
the  celestial  Gandharva,*  who  furnished  the  former  with  a  vessel  full

*  The  Gandharva  of  the  Veda  is  the  deity  who  kt^ows  and  reveals  the  secrets  of  heaven  and  divine
truths  to  mortals.  Cosinically,  the  Oandharvas  are  the  aggregate  Powers  of  the  Solar  Fire,  and  con-
stitute its  Forces;  psychically,  the  Intelligence  residing  in  the  Sushumna,  the  Solar  Ray,  the  highest
of  the  Seven  Rays;  mystically,  the  Occult  Force  in  the  Soma,  the  Moon,  or  lunar  plant,  and  the
drink  made  of  it;  physically,  the  phenomenal,  and  spiritually,  the  noumenal,  causes  of  Sound  and
the  "Voice  of  Nature."  Hence,  they  are  called  the  6,333  heavenly  singers,  and  musicians  of  Indra's
Loka,  who  personify,  even  in  number,  the  various  and  manifold  sounds  in  Nature,  both  above  and
below.  In  the  later  allegories  they  are  said  to  have  mystic  power  over  women,  and  to  be  fond  of
them.  The  Esoteric  meaning  is  plain.  They  are  one  of  the  forms,  if  not  the  prototypes,  of  Knoch's
Angels,  the  Sons  of  God,  who  saw  that  the  daughters  of  men  were  fair  {Gen.,  vi.),  who  married  them,
and  taught  the  daughters  of  Earth  the  secrets  of  Heaven.


570  THE  SECRET  DOCTRIISrE.

of  heavenly  fire.  The  primeval  mode  of  obtaining  fire  by  friction  has
its  scientific  explanation  in  the  Vedas,  and  is  pregnant  with  meaning
for  him  who  reads  between  the  lines.  The  Tretagni  (sacred  triad  of
fires)  obtained  by  the  attrition  of  sticks  made  of  the  wood  of  the
Ashvattha  tree,  the  Bo-tree  of  Wisdom  and  Knowledge,  sticks  "as
many  finger-breadths  long  as  there  are  syllables  in  the  Gayatri,"  must
have  a  secret  meaning,  or  else  the  writers  of  the  Vedas  and  Purdnas
were  no  sacred  writers  but  mystificators.  That  it  has  such  a  meaning,
the  Hindii  Occultists  are  a  proof,  and  they  alone  are  able  to  enlighten
Science,  as  to  why  and  how  the  Fire,  that  was  primevally  One,  was
made  three-fold  (treta)  in  our  present  Manvantara,  by  the  Son  of  Ila
(Vach),  the  Primeval  Woman  after  the  Deluge,  the  wife  and  daughter
of  Vaivasvata  Manu.  The  allegory  is  suggestive,  in  whatever  Purdna
it  may  be  read  and  studied.


SECTION  VI.

An  Attack  on   the  Scientific  Theory  of
Force  by  a  Man  of  Science.


The  wise  words  of  several  English  men  of  Science  have  now  to  be
quoted  in  our  favour.  Ostracized  for  "principle's  sake"  by  the  few,
they  are  tacitly  approved  of  by  the  many.  That  one  of  them  preaches
almost  Occult  doctrines — in  some  things  identical  with,  and  often
amounting  to  a  public  recognition  of,  our  "Fohat  and  his  seven  Sons,"
the  Occult  Gandharva  of  the  Vedas — will  be  recognized  by  every  Oc-
cultist, and  even  by  some  profane  readers.

If  such  readers  will  open  Volume  V  of  the  Poptdar  Science  Review^
they  will  find  in  it  an  article  on  "Sun-Force  and  Earth-Force,"  by  Dr.
B.  W.  Richardson,  F.R.S.,  which  reads  as  follows:

At  this  moment,  when  the  theory  of  mere  motion  as  the  origin  of  all  varieties  of
force  is  again  becoming  the  prevailing  thought,  it  were  almost  heresy  to  reopen  a
debate,  which  for  a  period  appears,  by  general  consent,  to  be  \'irtually  closed;  but  I
accept  the  risk,  and  shall  state,  therefore,  what  were  the  precise  views  of  the  im-
mortal heretic,  whose  name  I  have  whispered  to  the  readers,  (Samuel  Metcalfe,)
respecting  Sun-Force.  Starting  with  the  argument  on  which  nearly  all  physicists
are  agreed,  that  there  exist  in  nature  two  agencies — matter  which  is  ponderable,
visible,  and  tangible,  and  a  something  which  is  imponderable,  invisible,  and  appre-
ciable only  by  its  influence  on  matter — Metcalfe  maintains  that  the  imponderable
and  active  agency  which  he  calls  "caloric"  is  not  a  mere  form  of  motion,  not  a
vibration  amongst  the  particles  of  ponderable  matter,  but  itself  a  matenal  substance
floioing  from  the  sun  through  space,t  filling  the  voids  between  the  particles  of
solid  bodies,  and  conveying  by  sensation  the  property  called  heat.  The  nature  of
caloric,  or  Sun-Force,  is  contended  for  by  him  on  the  following  grounds:

(i)  That  it  may  be  added  to,  and  abstracted  from  other  bodies  and  measured  with
mathematical  precision.

•  Pp.  329-334.

t  Not  only  "througli  space,"  but  filling  every  point  of  our  Solar  System,  for  it  is  the  physical
residue,  so  to  say,  of  Ether,  its  "lining-"  (envelope)  on  our  plane;  Etiier  having-  to  serve  other  cosmic
and  terrestrial  purposes  besides  being  the  "agent"  for  transmitting  light.  It  is  the  Astral  Kluid  or
l,ight  of  the  Kabalists,  and  the  Seven  Ra3's  of  Sun-Vishnu,


572  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE-

(ii)  That  it  augments  the  volume  of  bodies,  which  are  again  reduced  in  size  by  its
abstraction.

(iii)  That  it  modifies  the  forms,  properties,  and  conditions  of  all  other  bodies.

(iv)  That  it  passes  by  radiation  through  the  most  perfect  vacuum*  that  can  be
formed,  in  which  it  produces  the  same  effects  on  the  thermometer  as  in  the  atmo-
sphere.

(v)  That  it  exerts  mechanical  and  chemical  forces  which  nothing  can  restrain,  as
in  volcanoes,  the  explosion  of  gunpowder,  and  other  fulminating  compounds.

(vi)  That  it  operates  in  a  sensible  manner  on  the  nervous  system,  producing
intense  pain ;  and  when  in  excess,  disorganization  of  the  tissues.

As  against  the  vibratory  theory,  Metcalfe  further  argues  that  if  caloric  were  a
■mere property  or  quality,  it  could  not  augment  the  volume  of  other  bodies;  for  this
purpose  it  must  itself  have  volume,  it  must  occupy  space,  and  it  must,  therefore,  be
a  material  agent.  If  caloric  were  only  the  effect  of  vibratory  tnotion  amongst  the
particles  of  ponderable  matter,  it  could  not  radiate  from  hot  bodies  without  the
simultaneous  transition  of  the  vibrating  particles;  but  the  fact  stands  out  that  heat
can  radiate  from  material  ponderable  substance  without  loss  of  weight  of  such  sub-
stance. .  .  .  With  this  view  as  to  the  material  nature  of  caloric  or  sun-force;
with  the  impression  firmly  fixed  on  his  mind  that  "everything  in  Nature  is  com-
posed of  two  descriptions  of  matter,  the  one  essentially  active  and  ethereal,  the
other  passive  and  motionless,"  t  Metcalfe  based  the  hypothesis  that  the  sun-
force,  or  caloric,  is  a  self-active  principle.  For  its  own  particles,  he  holds,  it  has
repulsion;  for  the  particles  of  all  ponderable  matter  it  has  affinity;  it  attracts  the
particles  of  ponderable  matter  with  forces  which  vary  inversely  as  the  squares  of
the  distance.  It  thus  acts  through  ponderable  matter.  If  universal  space  were
filled  with  caloric,  sun-force,  alone  (without  ponderable  matter),  caloric  would  also
be  inactive  and  would  constitute  a  boundless  ocean  of  powerless  or  quiescent
ether,  becatise  it  would  then  have  nothing  on  which  to  act,  while  ponderable
matter,  however  inactive  of  itself,  has  "certain  properties  by  which  it  modifies  and
controls  the  actions  of  caloric,  both  of  which  are  governed  by  immutable  laws  that
have  their  origin  in  the  mutual  relations  and  specific  properties  of  each."

And  he  lays  down  a  law  which  he  believes  is  absolute,  and  which  is  thus  ex-
pressed :

"By  the  attraction  of  caloric  for  ponderable  matter,  it  unites  and  holds  together
all  things;  by  its  self-repulsive  energy  it  separates  and  expands  all  things."

This,  of  course,  is  almost  the  Occult  explanation  of  cohesion.     Dr.
Richardson  continues:
As  I  have  alreadj'  said,  the  tendency  of  modern  teaching  is  to  rest  upon  the  hypothesis

*  What  need,  then,  of  etheric  waves  for  the  transmission  of  light,  heat,  etc.,  M  this  substance  can
pass  through  vacuum.

t  And  hov?  can  it  be  otherwise?  Gross  ponderable  matter  is  the  body,  the  shell,  of  Matter  or  Sub-
stance, the  female  passive  principle;  and  this  Fohatic  Force  is  the  second  principle,  Prana — the  male
and  the  active.  On  our  globe  this  Substance  is  the  second  principle  of  the  septenary  Element —
Earth ;  in  the  atmosphere,  it  is  that  of  Air,  which  is  the  cosmic  gross  bod}- ;  in  the  Sun  it  becomes
the  Solar  Body  and  that  of  the  Seven  Rays:  in  Sidereal  Space  it  corresponds  vrith  another  principle,
and  so  on.    The  whole  is  a  homogeneous  Unity  alone,  the  parts  are  all  differentiations.


DR.    RICHARDSON'S   HERESY.  573

^  .  .  .  that  heat  is  motion,  or,  as  it  would,  perhaps,  be  better  stated,  a  specific
force  or  form  of  motion.*

But  this  hypothesis,  popular  as  it  is,  is  not  one  that  ought  to  be  accepted  to  the
exclusion  of  the  simpler  views  of  the  material  nature  of  sun-force,  and  of  its
influence  in  modifj'iug  the  conditions  of  matter.  We  do  not  yet  knoiv  sujfficietit  to  be
dogmatic. \

The  hypothesis  of  Metcalfe  respecting  sun-force  and  earth-force  is  not  only  verj-
simple,  but  most  fascinating.  .  .  .  Here  are  two  elements  in  the  universe,  the
one  is  ponderable  matter  .  .  .  The  second  element  is  the  all-pervading  ether,
solar  fire.  It  is  without  weight,  substance,  form,  or  colour;  it  is  matter  infinitely
divisible,  and  its  particles  repel  each  other;  its  rarity  is  such  that  we  have  no  word,
except  ether,  J  by  which  to  express  it.  It  pervades  and  fills  space,  but  alone  it  too
is  quiescent — dead.§  We  bring  together  the  two  elements,  the  inert  matter,  the
self- repulsive  ether  [.'J  and  thereupon  dead  [.?]  ponderable  matter  is  vivified;  [Pon-
derable matter  may  be  inert  but  never  dead — this  is  Occult  Law."]  ....  through
the  particles  of  the  ponderable  substance  the  ether  [Ether's  second  principle']  pene-
trates, and,  so  penetrating,  it  combines  with  the  ponderable  particles  and  holds
them  in  mass,  holds  them  together  in  bond  of  union;  they  are  dissolved  in  the
ether.

This  distribution  of  solid  ponderable  matter  through  ether  extends,  according  to
the  theorj'  before  us,  to  everything  that  exists  at  this  moment.  The  ether  is  all-
pervading.  The  human  body  itself  is  charged  with  the  ether  [Astral  Light  rather];
its  minute  particles  are  held  together  by  it;  the  plant  is  in  the  same  condition;  the
most  solid  earth,  rock,  adamant,  crystal,  metal,  all  are  the  same.  But  there  are  differ-
ences in  the  capacities  of  different  kinds  of  ponderable  matter  to  receive  sun-force,
and  upon  this  depends  the  various  changing  conditions  of  matter ;  the  solid,  the
liquid,  the  gaseous  condition.  Solid  bodies  have  attracted  caloric  in  excess  over
fluid  bodies,  and  hence  their  firm  cohesion;  when  a  portion  of  molten  zinc  is  poured
upon  a  plate  of  solid  zinc,  the  molten  zinc  becomes  as  solid  because  there  is  a  rush
of  caloric  from  the  liquid  to  the  solid,  and  in  the  equalization  the  particles,  pre-
viously loose  or  liquid,  are  more  closely  brought  together.  .  .  .  Metcalfe  himself,
dwelling  on  the  above-named  phenomena,  and  accounting  for  them  by  the  unity  of
principle  of  action,  which  has  already  been  explained,  sums  up  his  argument  in
very  clear  terms,  in  a  comment  on  the  densities  of  various  bodies.  "Hardness  and
softness,"  he  says,  "solidity  and  liquidity,  are  not  essential  conditions  of  bodies,

*  Or  the  reverberation,  and  for  Sound  repercussion,  on  our  plane  of  that  which  is  a  perpetual
motion  of  that  Substance  on  higher  planes.     Our  world  and  senses  are  ceaselessly  victims  of  Maya.

t  An  honest  admission,  this.

J  Yet  it  is  not  Ether,  but  only  one  of  the  principles  of  F,ther,  the  latter  being  itself  one  of  the
principles  of  Akasha.

}  And  so  does  Prana  (Jiva)  pervade  the  whole  living  body  of  man;  but  alone,  without  having  an
atom  to  act  upon,  it  would  be  quiescent— dead;  /.^.,  would  be  in  Laya,  or,  as  Mr.  Crookes  has  it,
"locked  in  Protyle."  It  is  the  action  of  Fohat  upon  a  compound  or  even  upon  a  simple,  body  that
produces  life.  When  a  body  dies,  it  passes  into  the  same  polarity  as  its  male  energy,  and  repels
therefore  the  active  agent,  which,  losing  hold  of  the  whole,  fastens  on  the  parts  or  molecules,  this
action  being  called  chemical.  Vishnu,  the  Preserver,  transforms  himself  into  Rudra-Shiva,  the  De-
stroyer— a  correlation  seemingly  unknown  to  Science.


574  'J'HE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

but  depend  on  the  relative  proportions  of  ethereal  and  ponderable  matter  of  which
they  are  composed.  The  most  elastic  gas  may  be  reduced  to  the  liquid  form  by  the
abstraction  of  caloric,  and  again  converted  into  a  firm  solid,  the  particles  of  which
would  cling  together  with  a  force  proportional  to  their  augmented  affinity  for  caloric.
On  the  sOther  hand,  by  adding  a  sufficient  quantity  of  the  same  principle  to  the
densest  metals,  their  attraction  for  it  is  diminished  when  they  are  expanded  into
the  gaseous  state,  and  their  cohesion  is  destroyed."

Having  thus  quoted  at  length  the  heterodox  views  of  the  great
"heretic" — views  that  to  be  correct,  need  only  a  little  alteration  of
terms  here  and  there — Dr.  Richardson,  undeniably  an  original  and
liberal  thinker,  proceeds  to  sum  up  these  views,  and  continues :

I  shall  not  dwell  at  great  length  on  this  unity  of  sun-force  and  earth-force,  which
this  theory  implies.  But  I  may  add  that  out  of  it,  or  out  of  the  hypothesis  of  mere
motion  as  force,  and  of  virtue  without  substance,  we  may  gather,  as  the  nearest
possible  approach  to  the  truth  on  this,  the  most  complex  and  profound  of  all  sub-
jects, the  following  inferences:

(a)  Space,  inter-stellary,  inter-planetary,  inter-material,  inter-organic,  is  not  a
vacuum,  but  is  filled  with  a  subtle  fluid  or  gas,  which  for  want  of  a  better  term*  we
may  still  call,  as  the  ancients  did,  Aiih-ur— Solar  Fire— ^ther.  This  fluid,  un-
changeable in  composition,  indestructible,  invisible.t  pervades  everj^thing  and  all
[ponderable']  matter, t  the  pebble  in  the  nmning  brook,  the  tree  overhanging,  the
man  looking  on,  is  charged  with  the  ether  in  various  degrees;  the  pebble  less  than
the  tree,  the  tree  less  than  man.  All  in  the  planet  is  in  like  manner  so  charged!  A
world  is  built  up  in  ethereal  fluid,  and  moving  through  a  sea  of  it.

(b)  The  ether,  whatever  its  nature  is,  is  from  the  sun  and  from  the  suns:§  the
suns  are  the  generators  of  it,  the  store-houses  of  it,  the  diffusers  of  it.||

(c)  Without  the  ether  there  could  be  no  motion;  without  it  particles  of  ponder-
able matter  could  not  glide  over  each  other;  without  it  there  could  be  no  impulse
to  excite  those  particles  into  action.  ,

(d)  Ether  determines  the  constitution  of  bodies.  Were  there  no  ether  there
could  be  no  change  of  constitution  in  substance;   water,  for  instance,  could  only


*  Verily,  unless  the  Occult  terms  of  the  Kabalists  are  adopted!

+  "  Unchangeable"  only  during  manvantaric  periods,  after  which  it  merges  once  more  into  Mula-
prakriti;  "invisible"  for  ever,  in  its  own  essence,  but  seen  in  its  reflected  coruscations,  called  the
Astral  Light  by  the  modem  Kabalists.  Yet,  conscious  and  grand  Beings,  clothed  in  that  same
Essence,  move  in  it.

i  One  has  to  add  ponderable,  to  distinguish  it  from  that  Ether  which  is  Matter  still,  though  a
substratum.

?  The  Occult  Sciences  reverse  the  statement,  and  say  that  it  is  the  Sun,  and  all  the  Suns  that  are
from  it,  which  emanate  at  the  manvantaric  dawn  from  the  Central  Sun.

II  Here,  we  decidedly  beg  to  differ  from  the  learned  gentleman.  I,et  us  remember  that  this  Ether—
whether  Akasha,  or  its  lower  principle,  Ether,  is  meant  by  the  term— is  septenary.  Akasha  is  Aditi
in  the  allegory,  and  the  mother  of  Marttanda,  the  Sun,  the  Devamatri,  Mother  of  the  Gods.  In  the
Solar  System,  the  Sun  is  her  Buddhi  and  Vahana,  the  Vehicle,  hence  the  sixth  principle;  in  Kosmos
all  the  Suns  are  the  Kama  Rupa  of  Akasha  and  so  is  ours.  It  is  only  when  regarded  as  an  indi\'idual
Entity  in  his  own  Kingdom,  that  Surya,  the  Sun,  is  the  seventh  principle  of  the  great  body  of
Matter.


THE   SPIRIT  AND   SOUL  OF  KOSMOS.  575

exist  as  a  substance,  compact  and  insoluble  beyond  any  conception  we  could  fonn
of  it.     It  could  never  even  be  ice,  never  fluid,  never  vapour,  except  for  ether.

((?)  Ether  connects  sun  with  planet,  planet  with  planet,  man  with  planet,  man
with  man.  Without  ether  there  could  be  no  communication  in  the  Universe ;  no
light,  no  heat,  no  phenomenon  of  motion.

Thus  we  find  that  Ether  and  elastic  Atoms  are,  in  the  alleged
mechanical  conception  of  the  Universe,  the  Spirit  and  Soul  of  Kosmos,
and  that  the  theory — put  it  in  any  way  and  under  any  disguise — always
leaves  a  more  widel)'-  opened  issue  for  men  of  Science  to  speculate
upon  beyond  the  line  of  modern  Materialism*  than  the  majority
avails  itself  of.  Atoms,  Ether,  or  both,  modern  speculation  cannot  get
out  of  the  circle  of  ancient  thought;  and  the  latter  was  soaked  through
with  archaic  Occultism.  Undulatory  or  corpuscular  theory — it  is  all
one.  It  is  speculation  from  the  aspects  of  phenomena,  not  from  the
knowledge  of  the  essential  nature  of  the  cause  and  causes.  When
Modern  Science  has  explained  to  its  audience  the  late  achievements  of
Bunsen  and  Kirchoff;  when  it  has  shown  the  seven  colours,  the  primary
of  a  ray  which  is  decomposed  in  a  fixed  order  on  a  screen ;  and  has
described  the  respective  lengths  of  luminous  waves,  what  has  it  proved?
It  has  justified  its  reputation  for  exactness  in  mathematical  achieve-
ment by  measuring  even  the  length  of  a  luminous  wave — "var^'ing
from  about  seven  hundred  and  sixty  millionths  of  a  millimetre  at  the
red  end  of  the  spectrum  to  about  three  hundred  and  ninety-three
millionths  of  a  millimetre  at  the  violet  end."  But  when  the  exactness
of  the  calculation  with  regard  to  the  eifect  on  the  light-wave  is  thus
vindicated.  Science  is  forced  to  admit  that  the  Force,  which  is  the  sup-
posed cause,  is  believed  to  produce  "inconceivably  minute  undulations"
in  some  medium — "generally  regarded  as  identical  with  the  ethereal
medium"! — and  that  medium  itself  is  still  only — a  "hypothetical
agent"!

Auguste  Comte's  pessimism  with  respect  to  the  possibility  of
knowing  some  day  the  chemical  composition  of  the  Sun,  has  not,  as
has   been   averred,  been  belied   thirty  years   later  by  Kirchoff.     The

*  To  be  more  correct,  let  us  rather  call  it  Agnosticism.  Brutal  but  frank  Materialism  is  more
honest  than  Janus-faced  Agnosticism  in  our  days.  Western  Monism,  so-called,  is  the  Pecksniff  of
modern  Philosophy,  turning:  a  Pharisaical  face  to  Psychologrj'  and  Idealism,  and  its  natural  face  of  a
Roman  Augur,  swelling  his  check  with  his  tongue,  to  Materialism.  Such  Monists  are  worse  than
Materialists;  because,  while  looking  at  the  Universe  and  at  psycho-spiritual  man  from  the  same
negative  stand-point,  the  latter  put  their  case  far  less  plausibly  than  do  sceptics  of  Mr.  Tyndairs  or
even  of  Mr.  Huxley's  stamp.  Hcrl>ert  Spencer,  Baiu  and  L,ewes  arc  more  dangerous  to  universal
truths  than  is  liuchncr.

t  Geology,  by  Professor  A.  Winchell.


576  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Spectroscope  has  helped  us  to  see  that  the  elements,  with  which  the
modern  Chemist  is  familiar,  must  in  all  probability  be  present  in  the
Sun's  outward  "robes" — not  in  the  Sun  itself;  and,  taking  these  "robes,"
the  solar  cosmic  veil,  for  the  Sun  itself,  the  Physicists  have  declared
its  luminosity  to  be  due  to  combustion  and  flame,  and  mistaking  the
vital  principle  of  that  luminary  for  a  purely  material  thing,  have  called
it  "chromosphere."*  We  have  only  hypotheses  and  theories  so  far,
not  law — by  any  means.

*  See  Five  Years  of  Tkeosophy,  pp.  245-262— Arts.  "Do  the  Adepts  deny  the  Nebular  Theorj'?"  and
"Is  the  Sun  merely  a  Cooling  Mass?" — for  the  true  Occult  teaching.


SECTION  VIL
Life,  Force,  or  Gravity.


The  imponderable  fluids  have  had  their  day;  mechanical  Forces  are
iess  talked  about;  Science  has  put  on  a  new  face  for  this  last  quarter  of
a  century;  but  gravitation  has  remained,  owing  its  life  to  new  com-
binations after  the  old  ones  had  nearly  killed  it.  It  may  answer  scien-
tific hypotheses  very  well,  but  the  question  is  whether  it  answers  as
well  to  truth,  and  represents  a  fact  in  nature.  Attraction  by  itself  is
not  sufficient  to  explain  even  planetary  motion ;  how  can  it  then  pre-
sume to  explain  the  rotatory  motion  in  the  infinitudes  of  Space?  At-
traction alone  will  never  fill  all  the  gaps,  unless  a  special  impulse  is
admitted  for  every  sidereal  body,  and  the  rotation  of  every  planet  with
its  satellites  is  shown  to  be  due  to  some  one  cause  combined  with  at-
traction. And  even  then,  says  an  Astronomer,*  Science  would  have  to
name  that  cause.

Occultism  has  named  it  for  ages,  and  so  have  all  the  ancient  Philo-
sophers ;  but  then  all  such  beliefs  are  now  proclaimed  exploded  super-
stitions. The  extra-cosmic  God  has  killed  every  possibility  of  belief
in  intra-cosmic  intelligent  Forces;  yet  who,  or  what,  is  the  original
"pusher"  in  that  motion?     Says  Francoeur:t

When  we  have  learned  the  cause,  unique  et  speciale,  that  pushes,  we  will  be  ready
to  combine  it  with  the  one  which  attracts.

And  again:

Attraction  between  the  celestial  bodies  is  only  repulsion :  it  is  the  sun  that  drives
them  incessantly  onward ;  for  otherwise,  their  motion  would  stop.

If  ever  this  theory  of  the  Sun-Force  being  the  primal  cause  of  all  life
on  earth,  and  of  all  motion  in  heaven,  is  accepted,  and  if  that  other  far
bolder  theory  of  Herschell,  about  certain  organisms  in  the  Sun,  is
accepted  even  as  a  provisional  hypothesis,  then  will  our  teachings  be
vindicated,  and  Esoteric  allegory  will  be  shown  to  have  anticipated

•  Philosophie  Naturelle,  art.  142.  t  Astronomie,  p.  342.

3«


578  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE-

Modern  Science  by  millions  of  years,  probably,  for  such  are  the
Archaic  Teachings.  Marttanda,  the  Sun,  watches  and  threatens  his
seven  brothers,  the  planets,  without  abandoning  the  central  position  to
which  his  Mother,  Aditi,  relegated  him.     The  Commentary*  says:

He  pursues  thein,  hirning  sloivly  around  himself,  .  .  .  followmg
from  afar  the  direction  in  which  his  brothers  move,  on  the  path  that  en-
circles their  houses — or  the  orbit.

It  is  the  sun-fluids  or  emanations  that  impart  all  motion,  and
awaken  all  into  life,  in  the  Solar  System.  It  is  attraction  and  repul-
sion, but  not  as  understood  by  modern  Physics  or  according  to  the  law
of  gravity,  but  in  harmony  with  the  laws  of  manvantaric  m,otion  de-
signed from  the  early  Sandhya,  the  Dawn  of  the  rebuilding  and  higher
reformation  of  the  System.  These  laws  are  immutable ;  but  the  motion
of  all  the  bodies — which  motion  is  diverse  and  alters  with  every  minor
Kalpa — is  regulated  by  the  Movers,  the  Intelligences  within  the  Cosmic
Soul.  Are  we  so  very  wrong  in  believing  all  this?  Well,  here  is  a
great  and  modern  man  of  Science  who,  speaking  of  vital  electricity,
uses  language  far  more  akin  to  Occultism  than  to  modern  Materialistic
thought.  We  refer  the  sceptical  reader  to  an  article  on  "The  Source  of
Heat  in  the  Sun,"  by  Robert  Hunt,  F.R.S.,t  who,  speaking  of  the
luminous  envelope  of  the  Sun  and  its  "peculiar  curdy  appearance,"
says:

Arago  proposed  that  this  envelope  should  be  called  the  Photosphere,  a  name  now
generally  adopted.     By  the  elder  Herschell,  the  surface  of  this  photosphere  was

compared  to  mother-of-pearl It  resembles  the  ocean  on  a   tranquil

summer-day,  when  its  surface  is  slightly  crisped  by  a  gentle  breeze Mr.

Nasmyth  has  discovered  a  more  remarkable  condition  than  any  that  had  previously
been  suspected,  .  .  .  objects  which  are  peculiarly  lens-shaped  ....  like
"willow  leaves,"  .  .  .  different  in  size  .  .  .  not  arranged  in  any  order,
.  .  .  .  crossing  each  other  in  all  directions  .  .  .  with  an  irregular  motion
among  themselves.  .  .  .  They  are  seen  approaching  to  and  receding  from  each
other,  and  sometimes  assuming  new  angular  positions,  so  that  the  appearance
.  .  .  .  has  been  compared  to  a  dense  shoal  of  fish,  which,  indeed,  they  resemble
in  shape.  .  .  .  The  size  of  these  objects  gives  a  grand  idea  of  the  gigantic  scale
upon  which  physical  (?)  operations  are  carried  out  in  the  sun.  They  cannot  be  less
than  i,ooo  miles  in  length,  and  from  two  to  three  hundred  miles  in  breadth.  The
most  probable  conjecture  which  has  been  offered  respecting  those  leaf  or  lens-like
objects,  is  that  the  photosphere  J  is  an  immense  ocean  of  gaseous  matter  [what  kind

*  Commentary  on  Stanza  IV,  ante,  pp.  126-7.

t  Popular  Science  Review,  Vol.  IV.  p.  148.

X  And  the  central  mass,  too,  as  will  be  found,  or  rather  the  centre  of  the  reflection.


SUN-FORCE   AND    EARTH-FORCE.  579

of'matter"  ?]    .     .     .    in  a  state  of  intense  [apparent]  incandescence,  and  that  they
are  perspective  projections  of  the  sheets  of  flame.

Solar  "flames"  seen  through  telescopes  are  reflections,  says  Occult-
ism.    But  the  reader  has  already  seen  what  Occultists  have  to  say  to

this.

Whatever  the}'  [those  sheets  of  fliame]  may  be,  it  is  evident  they  are  the  immediate
sources  of  solar  heat  and  light.  Here  we  have  a  surrounding  envelope  of  photogenic
matter,*  which  pendulates  with  mighty  energies,  and  by  communicating  its  motion
to  the  ethereal  medium  in  stellar  space,  produces  heat  and  light  in  far  distant
worlds.  We  have  said  that  those  forms  have  been  compared  to  certain  organisms,
and  Herschell  says,  "Though  it  would  be  too  daring  to  speak  of  such  organizations
as  partaking  of  life  [why  uot?],t  yet  we  do  not  know  that  vital  action  is  competent
to  develop  heat,  light,  and  electricity."  .  .  .  Can  it  be  that  there  is  truth  in  this
fine  thought?  May  the  pulsing  of  vital  matter  in  the  central  sun  of  our  system  be
the  source  of  all  that  life  which  crowds  the  earth,  and  without  doubt  overspreads
the  other  planets,  to  which  the  sun  is  the  mighty  minister?

Occultism  answers  these  queries  in  the  affirmative;  and  Science  will
find  this  to  be  the  case,  one  day.
Again,  Mr.  Hunt  writes:

But  regarding  Life— Vital  Force— as  a  power  far  more  exalted  than  either  light,
heat,  or  electricity,  and  indeed  capable  of  exerting  a  controlling  power  over  them
all  [this  is  absolutely  Occult]  .  .  .  we  are  certainly  disposed  to  view  with  satis-
faction that  speculation  which  supposes  the  photosphere  to  be  the  primary  seat  of
vital  power,  and  to  regard  with  a  poetic  pleasure  that  hypothesis  which  refers  the
solar  energies  to  Life.+

Thus,  we  have  an  important  scientific  corroboration  for  one  of  our
fundamental  dogmas — namely,  that  (a)  the  Sun  is  the  store-house  of
Vital  Force,  which  is  the  Noumenon  of  Electricity;  and  {b)  that  it  is
from  its  mysterious,  never-to-be-fathomed  depths,  that  issue  those  life-
currents  which  thrill  through  Space,  as  through  the  organisms  of  every
living  thing  on  Earth.  For  see  what  another  eminent  Physician  says,
who  calls  this,  our  life-fluid,  "Nervous  Ether."  Change  a  few  sen-
tences in  the  article,  extracts  from  which  now  follow,  and  you  have
another  quasi-Occult  treatise  on  Life-Force.  It  is  again  Dr.  B.  W.
Richardson,  F.R.S.,  who  gives  his  views  as  follows  on  "Nervous
Ether,"  as  he  has  on  "Sun-Force"  and  "Earth-Force":

The  idea  attempted  to  be  conveyed  by  the  theory-  is,  that  between  the  molecules
of  the  matter,  solid  or  fluid,  of  which  the  nervous  organisms,  and,  indeed,  of  which


•  This  "matter"  is  just  like  the  reflection  in  a  mirror  of  the  flame  from  a  "photogenic"  lamp-
wick.
+  See  Five  Years  of  Theosophy,  p.  258,  for  an  answer  to  this  speculation  of  Herschell.

%  Ibid.,  p.  156.


58o  THE  SECRET   DOCTRINE.

all  the  organic  parts  of  a  body  are  composed,  there  exists  a  refined  subtle  medium,
vaporous  or  gaseous,  which  holds  the  molecules  in  a  condition  for  motion  upon
each  other,  and  for  arrangement  and  rearrangement  of  form;  a  medium  by  and
through  which  all  motion  is  conveyed;  by  and  through  which  the  one  organ  or
part  of  the  body  is  held  in  communion  with  the  other  parts,  by  which  and  through
which  the  outer  living  world  communicates  with  the  living  man ;  a  medium,  which,
being  present,  enables  the  phenomena  of  life  to  be  demonstrated,  and  which,  being
universally  absent,  leaves  the  body  actually  dead.

And  the  whole  Solar  System  falls  into  Pralaya — the  author  might
have  added.     But  let  us  read  further:

I  use  the  word  ether  in  its  general  sense  as  meaning  a  very  light,  vaporous  or
gaseous  matter;  I  use  it,  in  short,  as  the  astronomer  uses  it  when  he  speaks  of  the
ether  of  Space,  by  which  he  means  a  subtle  but  material  medium.  .  .  .  When
I  speak  of  a  nervous  ether,  I  do  not  convey  that  the  ether  is  existent  in  nervous
structure  only:  I  believe  truly  that  it  is  a  special  part  of  the  nervous  organization;
but,  as  nerves  pass  into  all  structures  that  have  capacities  for  movement  and  sensi-
bilities, so  the  nervous  ether  passes  into  all  such  parts;  and  as  the  nervous  ether  is,
according  to  my  view,  a  direct  product  from  blood,  so  we  may  look  upon  it  as  a

part  of  the  atmosphere  of  the  blood The  evidence  in  favour  of  the

existence  of  an  elastic  medium  pervading  the  nervous  matter  and  capable  of  being
influenced  by  simple  pressure  is  all-convincing.  ...  In  nervous  structure  there
is,  unquestionably,  a  true  nervous  fluid,  as  our  predecessors  taught.*  The  precise
chemical  (?)t  composition  of  this  fluid  is  not  yet  well  known;  the  physical  charac-
ters of  it  have  been  little  studied.  Whether  it  moves  in  currents,  we  do  not  know;
whether  it  circulates,  we  do  not  know;  whether  it  is  formed  in  the  centres  and
passes  from  them  to  the  nerves,  or  whether  it  is  formed  everywhere  where  blood
enters  nerve,  we  do  not  know.  The  exact  uses  of  the  fluid  we  do  not  consequently
know.  It  occurs  to  my  mind,  however,  that  the  veritable  fluid  of  nervous  matter  is
not  of  itself  sufficient  to  act  as  the  subtle  medium  that  connects  the  outer  with  the
inner  universe  of  man  and  animal.  I  think — and  this  is  the  modification  I  suggest
to  the  older  theory — there  must  be  another  form  of  matter  present  during  life;  a
matter  which  exists  in  the  condition  of  vapour  or  gas,  which  pervades  the  whole
nervous  organism,  surrounds  as  an  enveloping  atmosphere  %  each  molecule  of
nervous  structure,  and  is  the  medium  of  all  motion,  communicated  to  and  from
the  nervous  centres.  .  .  .  When  it  is  once  fairly  presented  to  the  mind  that
during  life  there  is  in  the  animal  body  a  finely  diffused  form  of  matter,  a  vapour
filling  every  part — and  even  stored  in  some  parts;  a  matter  constantly  renewed
by  the  vital  chemistry;  a  matter  as  easily  disposed  of  as  the  breath,  after  it  has
served  its  purpose — a  new  flood  of  light  breaks  on  the  intelligence.  §

A  new  flood  of  light  is  certainly  thrown  on  the  wisdom  of  ancient

•  Paracelsus  for  one,  who  called  it  Liquor  Vitse,  and  Archseus.
t  Alchemical  "composition,"  rather.

i  "This  vital  force    .    .    .    radiates  around  man  like  a  luminous  sphere,"  says  Paracelsus  in
Paragranum.
\  Popular  Science  Review,  Vol.  X.  pp.  380-3.


PANTHEISM    OR   MONOTHEISM.  581

and  mediaeval  Occultism  and  its  votaries.  For  Paracelsus  wrote  the
same  thing  more  than  three  hundred  years  ago,  in  the  sixteenth  cen-
tury, as  follows:

The  whole  of  the  Microcosm  is  potentially  contained  in  the  Liquor  Vitae,  a  nerve
fluid  ...  in  which  is  contained  the  nature,  quality,  character,  and  essence  of
beings.*

The  Archaeus  is  an  essence  that  is  equally  distributed  in  all  parts  of  the  human
body.  .  .  .  The  Spiritus  Vitae  takes  its  origin  from  the  Spiritus  Mundi.  Being
an  emanation  of  the  latter,  it  contains  the  elements  of  all  cosmic  influences,  and
is  therefore  the  cause  by  which  the  action  of  the  stars  [cosmic  forces]  upon  the
invisible  body  of  man  [his  vital  Linga  Sharira]  may  be  explained,  t

Had  Dr.  Richardson  studied  all  the  secret  works  of  Paracelsus,  he
would  not  have  been  obliged  to  confess  so  often,  "we  do  not  know,"
"it  is  not  known  to  us,"  etc.  Nor  would  he  ever  have  written  the
following  sentence,  recanting  the  best  portions  of  his  independent
rediscovery.

It  may  be  urged  that  in  this  line  of  thought  is  included  no  more  than  the  theory

of  the  existence  of  the  ether    ....     supposed  to  pervade  space It

may  be  said  that  this  universal  ether  pervades  all  the  organism  of  the  animal  body
as  from  without,  and  as  part  of  every  organization.  This  view  would  be  Pantheism
physically  discovered,  if  it  were  tnie  [!  !].  It  fails  to  be  true  because  it  would
destroy  the  individuality  of  every  individual  sense.  |

We  fail  to  see  this,  and  we  know  it  is  not  so.  Pantheism  viay  be
"physically  rediscovered."  It  was  known,  seen,  and  felt  by  the  whole
of  antiquity.  Pantheism  manifests  itself  in  the  vast  expanse  of  the
starry  heavens,  in  the  breathing  of  the  seas  and  oceans,  and  in  the
quiver  of  life  of  the  smallest  blade  of  grass.  Philosophy  rejects  one
finite  and  imperfect  God  in  the  universe,  the  anthropomorphic  deity  of
the  Monotheist  as  represented  by  his  followers.  It  repudiates,  in  its
name  of  Philo-theo-sophia,  the  grotesque  idea  that  Infinite,  Absolute
Deity  should,  or  rather  could,  have  any  direct  or  indirect  relation  to
finite  illusive  evolutions  of  Matter,  and  therefore  it  cannot  imagine  a
universe  otitside  that  Deity,  or  the  absence  of  that  Deity  from  the
smallest  speck  of  animate  or  inanimate  Substance.  This  does  not
mean  that  every  bush,  tree  or  stone  is  God  or  a  God ;  but  only  that
every  speck  of  the  manifested  material  of  Kosmos  belongs  to,  and  is
the  Substance  of,  God,  however  low  it  may  have  fallen  in  its  cyclic

•  De  Generatione  Hominis.

t  D<  Viribus  Membrorum.    Sec  Life  of  Puracelius,  by  Franz  Hartmaun,  M.D.,  F.T.S.

%  P.  384-


582  ■  THB  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

gyration  through  the  Eternities  of  the  Ever-Becoming;  and  also  that
every  such  speck  individually,  and  Kosmos  collectively,  is  an  aspect
and  a  reminder  of  that  universal  One  Soul — which  Philosophy  refuses
to  call  God,  thus  limiting  the  eternal  and  ever-present  Root  and
Essence.

Why  either  the  Ether  of  Space  or  "Nervous  Ether"  should  "destroy
the  individuality  of  every  sense,"  seems  incomprehensible  to  one  ac-
quainted with  the  real  nature  of  that  "Nervous  Ether"  under  its
Sanskrit,  or  rather  Esoteric  and  Kabalistic  name.  Dr.  Richardson
agrees  that:

If  we  did  not  individually  produce  the  medium  of  communication  between  our-
selves and  the  outer  world,  if  it  were  produced  from  without  and  adapted  to  one
kind  of  vibration  alone,  there  were  fewer  senses  required  than  we  possess:  for,
taking  two  illustrations  only— ether  of  light  is  not  adapted  for  sound,  and  yet  we
hear  as  well  and  see;  while  air,  the  medium  of  motion  of  sound,  is  not  the  medium
of  light,  and  yet  we  see  and  hear.

This  is  not  so.  The  opinion  that  Pantheism  "fails  to  be  true  because
it  would  destroy  the  individuality  of  every  individual  sense"  shows
that  all  the  conclusions  of  the  learned  doctor  are  based  on  the  modern
physical  theories,  though  he  would  fain  reform  them.  But  he  will  find
it  impossible  to  do  this  unless  he  allows  the  existence  of  spiritual
senses  to  replace  the  gradual  atrophy  of  the  physical.  "We  see  and
hear,"  in  accordance  (of  course,  in  Dr.  Richardson's  mind)  with  the
explanations  of  the  phenomena  of  sight  and  hearing,  afforded  by  that
same  Materialistic  Science  which  postulates  that  we  cannot  see  and
hear  otherwise.     The  Occultists  and  Mystics  know  better.     The  Vedic

A

Aryans  were  as  familiar  with  the  mysteries  of  sound  and  colour  on  the
physical  plane  as  are  our  Physiologists,  but  they  had  also  mastered  the
secrets  of  both  on  planes  inaccessible  to  the  Materialist.  They  knew
of  a  double  set  of  senses;  spiritual  and  material.  In  a  man  who  is
deprived  of  one  or  more  senses,  the  remaining  senses  become  the
more  developed;  for  instance,  the  blind  man  will  recover  his  sight
through  the  senses  of  touch,  of  hearing,  etc.,  and  he  who  is  deaf  will
be  able  to  hear  through  sight,  by  seeing  audibly  the  words  uttered  by
the  lips  and  mouth  of  the  speaker.  But  these  are  cases  that  belong  to
the  world  of  Matter  still.  The  spiritual  senses,  those  that  act  on  a
higher  plane  of  consciousness,  are  rejected  a  priori  by  Physiology,
because  the  latter  is  ignorant  of  the  Sacred  Science.  It  limits  the
action  of  Ether  to  vibrations,  and,  dividing  it  from  air — though  air  is


THE   SEVEN   PHYSICAL  SENSES.  583

simply  differentiated  and  compound  Ether— makes  it  assume  functions
to  fit  in  with  the  special  theories  of  the  Physiologist.  But  there  is
more  real  Science  in  the  teachings  of  the  Upanishads,  when  these  are
correctly  understood,  than  the  Orientalists,  who  do  not  understand
them  at  all,  are  ready  to  admit.  Mental  as  well  as  physical  correla-
tions of  the  seven  senses — seven  on  the  physical  and  seven  on  the
mental  planes — are  clearly  explained  and  defined  in  the  Vedas,  and
especially  in  the  Upa7iishad  q.2X\&A  Anugita:

The  indestructible  and  the  destructible,  such  is  the  double  manifestation  of  the
Self.  Of  these  the  indestructible  is  the  existent  [the  true  essence  or  nature  of  Self,
the  underlying  principles],  the  manifestation  as  an  individual  (entity)  is  called  the
destructible.*

Thus  speaks  the  Ascetic  in  the  Amigita,  and  also:

Every  one   who   is   twice-born   [initiated]   knows  such   is  the   teaching  of  the

ancients Space  is  the  first  entity Now  Space  [Akfisha,  or

the  Noumenon  of  Ether]  has  one  quality  .  .  .  and  that  is  stated  to  be  sound
only  .  .  .  [and  the]  qualities  of  sound  [are]  Shadja,  Rishabha,  together  with
Gandhara,  Madhyama,  Panchama,  and  beyond  these  [should  be  understood  to  be]
Nishada  and  Dhaivata  [the  Hindu  gamut].t

These  seven  notes  of  the  scale  are  the  principles  of  sound.  The
qualities  of  every  Element,  as  of  every  sense,  are  septenary,  and  to
judge  and  dogmatize  on  them  from  their  manifestation  on  the  material
or  objective  plane — likewise  sevenfold  in  itself^s  quite  arbitrary.  For
it  is  only  by  the  Self  emancipating  itself  from  these  seven  causes  of
illusion,  that  we  can  acquire  the  knowledge  (Secret  Wisdom)  of  the
qualities  of  objects  of  sense  on  their  dual  plane  of  manifestation,  the
visible  and  the  invisible.     Thus  it  is  said :

Hear  me  .  .  .  state  this  wonderful  mystery.  .  .  .  Hear  also  the  assignment  of
causes  exliaustively.  The  nose,  and  the  tongue,  and  the  eye,  and  the  skin,  and  the
ear  as  the  fifth  [organ  of  sense]  mind  and  understanding,  +  these  seven  [senses]
should  be  understood  to  be  the  causes  of  (the  knowledge  of)  qualities.  Smell,  and
taste,  and  colour,  sound,  and  touch  as  the  fifth,  the  object  of  the  mental  operation,

•  Ch.  xiii;  Telang's  translation,  p.  292.

+  Ibid.,  ch.  xxxvi;  p.  385.

X  The  division  of  the  physical  senses  into  five,  comes  to  us  from  a  great  antiquity.  But  while
adopting  the  number,  no  modem  Philosopher  has  asked  himself  how  these  senses  could  exist,  i.e.,
be  perceived  and  used  in  a  self-conscious  way,  unless  there  were  the  sixth  sense,  mental  perception,
to  register  and  record  them ;  and— this  for  the  Metaphysicians  and  Occultists— the  seventh  to  preserve
the  spiritual  fruitage  and  remembrance  thereof,  as  in  a  Book  of  I.ife  which  belongs  to  Karma.  The
Ancients  divided  the  senses  into  five,  simply  because  their  teacliers,  the  Initiates,  stopped  at  hearing,
as  being  that  sense  which  developed  on  the  physical  plane,  01  rather,  got  dwarfed  and  limited  to  this
plane,  only  at  the  beginning  of  the  Fifth  Race.  The  Fourth  Race  already  had  begun  to  lose  the
spiritual  condition,  so  preeminently  developed  in  the  Third  Race.


584  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

and  the  object  of  the  understanding  [the  highest  spiritual  sense  or  perception],
these  seven  are  causes  of  action.  He  who  smells,  he  who  eats,  he  who  sees,  he  who
speaks,  and  he  who  hears  as  the  fifth,  he  who  thinks,  and  he  who  understands,
these  seven  should  be  understood  to  be  the  causes  of  the  agents.  These  [the
agents]  being  possessed  of  qualities  (sattva,  rajas,  tamas),  enjoy  their  own  qualities,
agreeable  and  disagreeable.*

The  modern  commentators,  failing  to  comprehend  the  subtle  mean-
ing of  the  ancient  Scholiasts,  take  the  sentence,  "causes  of  the
agents,"  to  mean  "that  the  powers  of  smelling,  etc.,  when  attributed
to  the  Self,  make  him  appear  as  an  agent,  as  an  active  principle"  (!),
which  is  entirely  fanciful.  These  "seven"  are  understood  to  be  the
causes  of  the  agents,  because  "the  objects  are  causes,  as  their  enjoy-
ment causes  an  impression."  It  means  esoterically  that  they,  these
seven  senses,  are  caused  by  the  agents,  which  are  the  "deities,"  for
otherwise  what  does,  or  can,  the  following  sentence  mean?  "Thus,"
it  is  said,  "these  seven  [senses]  are  the  causes  of  emancipation" —
i.e.,  when  these  causes  are  made  ineffectual.  And,  again,  the  sen-
tence, "among  the  learned  [the  wise  Initiates]  who  understand  every-
thing, the  qualities  which  are  in  the  position  [in  the  nature,  rather]  of
the  deities,  each  in  its  place,"  etc.,  means  simply  that  the  "learned"
understand  the  nature  of  the  Noumena  of  the  various  phenomena;
and  that  "qualities,"  in  this  instance,  mean  the  qualities  of  the  high
Planetary  or  Elementary  Gods  or  Intelligences,  which  rule  the  ele-
ments and  their  products,  and  not  at  all  the  "senses,"  as  the  modern
commentator  thinks.  For  the  learned  do  not  suppose  their  senses  to
have  aught  to  do  with  them,  any  more  than  with  their  Self.

Then  we  read  in  the  Bhagavadgita  of  Krishna,  the  Deity,  saying:

Only  some  know  me  truly.  Earth,  water,  fire,  air,  space  [or  Akasha,  ^ther],
mind,  understanding  and  egoism  [or  the  perception  of  all  the  former  on  the  illu-
sive plane],  .  .  this  is  a  lower  form  of  my  nature.  Know  (that  there  is)  another
(form  of  my)  nature,  and  higher  than  this,  which  is  animate,  O  you  of  mighty
arms!  and  by  which  this  universe  is  upheld.  ...  All  this  is  woven  upon  me,
like  numbers  of  pearls  upon  a  thread,  t  I  am  the  taste  in  the  water,  O  son  of
Kunti!  I  am  the  light  of  the  sun  and  moon.  I  am  .  .  .  sound  ("/.^.,  the  occult
essence  which  underlies  all  these  and  the  other  qualities  of  the  various  things
mentioned"— Transl.),  in  space  ...  the  fragrant  smell  in  the  earth,  refulgence
in  the  fire    .    .    .    etc.lf

Truly,  then,  one  should  study  Occult  Philosophy  before  one  begins

•  Ibid.,  ch.  x:  pp.  277,  278.

t  Mundakopaniihad,  p.  298.

X  BfiagavadgiUi,  ch.  vii;  ibid.,  pp.  73,  74.


THE  TREE  OF   LIFE.  585

to  seek  for  and  verify  the  mysteries  of  Nature  on  its  surface  alone,  as
he  alone  "who  knows  the  truth  about  the  qualities  of  Nature,  who
understands  the  creation  of  all  entities  ...  is  emancipated"  from
error.     Says  the  Preceptor:

Accurately  understanding  the  great  (tree)  of  which  the  unperceived  [Occult
Nature,  the  root  of  all]  is  the  sprout  from  the  seed  [Parabrahman],  which  consists
of  the  understanding  [Mahat,  or  the  Universal  Intelligent  Soul]  as  its  trunk,  the
branches  of  which  are  the  great  egoism,*  in  the  holes  of  which  are  the  sprouts,
namely,  the  senses,  of  which  the  great  [occult,  or  invisible]  elements  are  the  flower-
bunches.t  the  gross  elements  [the  gross  objective  matter],  the  smaller  boughs,
which  are  always  possessed  of  leaves,  always  possessed  of  flowers  .  .  .  which  is
eternal  and  the  seed  of  which  is  the  Brahman  [the  Deity];  and  cutting  it  with  that
excellent  sword — knowledge  [Secret  Wisdom] — one  attains  immortality  and  casts  off
birth  and  death. :{:

This  is  the  Tree  of  Life,  the  Ashvattha  tree,  after  the  cutting  of
which  only,  Man,  the  slave  of  life  and  death,  can  be  emancipated.

But  the  men  of  Science  know  nought,  nor  will  they  hear  of  the
"Sword  of  Knowledge"  used  by  the  Adepts  and  Ascetics.  Hence  the
one-sided  remarks  of  even  the  most  liberal  among  them,  based  on  and
flowing  from  undue  importance  given  to  the  arbitrary  divisions  and
classification  of  Physical  Science.  Occultism  heeds  them  very  little,
and  Nature  heeds  them  still  less.  The  whole  range  of  physical  phe-
nomena  proceeds  from  the  Primary  of  ^ther — Akasha,  as  dual-
natured  Akasha  proceeds  from  undifferentiated  Chaos,  so-called,  the
latter  being  the  primary  aspect  of  Miilaprakriti,  the  Root-Matter  and
the  first  abstract  Idea  one  can  form  of  Parabrahman.  Modern  Science
may  divide  its  hypotheticall}^  conceived  Ether  in  as  many  ways  as  it
likes;  the  real  .^ther  of  Space  will  remain  as  it  is  throughout.  It  has
its  seven  "principles,"  as  all  the  rest  of  Nature  has,  and  where  there
was  no  .^ther  there  would  be  no  "sound,"  as  it  is  the  vibrating  sound-
ing-board in  Nature  in  all  its  seven  differentiations.  This  is  the  first
mystery  the  Initiates  of  old  have  learned.  Our  present  normal  physical
senses  were,  from  our  present  point  of  view,  abnormal  in  those  days  of
slow  and  progressive  downward  evolution  and  fall  into  Matter.  And
there  was  a  day  when  all  that  in  our  modern  times  is  regarded  as
exceptional,  so  puzzling  to  the  Physiologists  now  compelled  to  believe
in   them — such    as   thought-transference,    clairvoyance,    clairaudience,

•  Ahamkara,  I  suppose,  that  "Egoship,"  or  "  Ahatnship,"  which  leads  to  every  error.
+  The  Elements  are  the  five  Tanm&tras  of  earth,  water,  fire,  air  and  ether,  the  producers  of  the
grosser  elements.

%  Anugltd,  ch.  xx;  ibid.,  p.  313.


586  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

etc.;  in  short,  all  that  is  now  called  "wonderful  and  abnormal" — when
all  that  and  much  more  belonged  to  the  senses  and  faculties  common
to  all  humanity.  "We  are,  however,  cycling  back  and  cycling  forward;
that  is  to  say,  that  having  lost  in  spirituality  what  we  acquired  in
physical  development  until  almost  the  end  of  the  Fourth  Race,  we  are
now  as  gradually  and  imperceptibly  losing  in  the  physical  all  that  we
regain  once  more  in  the  spiritual  reevolution.  This  process  must  go  on,
until  the  period  which  will  bring  the  Sixth  Root-Race  on  a  line  parallel
with  the  spirituality  of  the  Second  Race,  a  long  extinct  mankind.

But  this  will  hardly  be  understood  at  present.  We  must  return  to
Dr.  Richardson's  hopeful,  though  somewhat  incorrect  hypothesis  about
"Nervous  Ether."  Under  the  misleading  translation  of  the  word  as
"Space,"  Akasha  has  just  been  shown  in  the  ancient  Hindu  system  as
the  "first  born"  of  the  One,  having  but  one  quality,  "Sound,"  which
is  septenary.  In  Esoteric  language  this  One  is  the  Father-Deity,  and
Sound  is  synonymous  with  the  Eogos,  Verbum,  or  Son.  Whether  con-
sciously or  otherwise,  it  must  be  the  latter;  and  Dr.  Richardson,  while
preaching  an  Occult  doctrine,  chooses  the  lowest  form  of  the  septenary
nature  of  that  Sound,  and  speculates  upon  it,  adding:

The  theory,  I  offer,  is  that  the  nervous  ether  is  an  animal  product.  In  different
classes  of  animals  it  may  differ  in  physical  quality  so  as  to  be  adapted  to  the  special
wants  of  the  animal,  but  essentially  it  plays  one  part  in  all  animals,  and  is  pro-
duced, in  all,  in  the  same  way.

Herein  lies  the  nucleus  of  error  leading  to  all  the  resultant  mis-
taken views.  This  "Nervous  Ether"  is  the  lowest  principle  of  the
Primordial  Essence  which  is  Life.  It  is  Animal  Vitality  diflfused  in  all
Nature,  and  acting  according  to  the  conditions  it  finds  for  its  activity.
It  is  not  an  "animal  product,"  but  the  living  animal,  the  living  flower
and  plant,  are  its  products.  The  animal  tissues  only  absorb  it  accord-
ing to  their  more  or  less  morbid  or  healthy  state — as  do  physical
materials  and  structures  (in  their  primogenial  state,  nota  bene) — and,
from  the  moment  of  the  birth  of  the  Entity,  are  regulated,  strengthened,
and  fed  by  it.  It  descends  in  a  larger  supply  to  vegetation  in  the
Sushumna  Sun-Ray  which  lights  and  feeds  the  Moon,  and  it  is  through
her  beams  that  it  pours  its  light  upon,  and  penetrates  man  and  animal,
more  during  their  sleep  and  rest,  than  when  they  are  in  full  activity.
Therefore  Dr.  Richardson  errs  again  in  stating  that:

The  nervous  ether  is  not,  according  to  my  idea  of  it,  in  itself  active,  nor  an  excitant
of  animal  motion  in  the  sense  of  a  force;  but  it  is  essential  as  supplying  the  conditions


WHAT  IS  NERVOUS  ETHER?  587

by  v/hich  the  motion  is  rendered  possible.  [It  is  just  the  reverse.}  ....  It  is
the  conductor  of  all  vibrations  of  heat,  of  light,  of  sound,  of  electrical  action,  of
mechanical  friction.*  It  holds  the  nervous  system  throughout  in  perfect  tension,
during  states  of  life  [true].  By  exercise  it  is  disposed  of  [raM^r^<f«(?ra/(ffi^]  .  .  .
and  when  demand  for  it  is  greater  than  the  supply,  its  deficiency  is  indicated  by
nervous  collapse  or  exhaustion. t  It  accumulates  in  the  nervous  centres  during
sleep,  bringing  them,  if  I  may  so  .speak,  to  their  due  tone,  and  therewith  raising  the
muscles  to  awakening  and  renewed  life.

Just  SO ;  this  is  quite  correct  and  comprehensible.     Therefore :

The  body  fully  renewed  by  it,  presents  capacity  for  motion,  fulness  of  form,  life.
The  body  bereft  of  it  presents  inertia,  the  configuration  of  shrunken  death,  the
evidence  of  having  lost  something  physical  that  was  in  it  when  it  lived.

Modern  Science  denies  the  existence  of  a  "vital  principle."  This
extract  is  a  clear  proof  of  its  grand  mistake.  But  this  "physical  some-
thing," that  we  call  life-fluid — the  Liquor  Vitae  of  Paracelsus — has  not
deserted  the  body,  as  Dr.  Richardson  thinks.  It  has  only  changed  its
state  from  activity  to  passivity,  and  has  become  latent,  owing  to  the
too  morbid  state  of  the  tissues,  on  which  it  has  hold  no  longer.  Once
the  7igor  viortis  is  absolute,  the  Liquor  Vitae  will  reawaken  into  action,
and  will  begin  its  work  on  the  atoms  chemically.  Brahma- Vishnu,  the
Creator  and  the  Preserver  of  Life,  will  have  transformed  himself  into
Shiva  the  Destroyer.

Lastly  Dr.  Richardson  writes :

The  nervous  ether  may  be  poisoned;  it  may,  I  mean,  have  diflfused  through  it,  by
simple  gaseous  diffusion,  other  gases  or  vapours  derived  from  without;  it  may
derive  from  within  products  of  substances  swallowed  and  ingested,  or  gases  of
decomposition  produced  during  disease  in  the  body  itself.  J

And  the  learned  gentleman  might  have  added  on  the  same  Occult
principle:  That  the  "Nervous  Ether"  of  one  person  can  be  poisoned
by  the  "Nervous  Ether"  of  another  person  or  by  his  "auric  emana-
tions."    But  see  what  Paracelsus  said  of  this  "Nervous  Ether" :

The  Archaeus  is  of  a  magnetic  nature,  and  attracts  or  repulses  other  sympathetic
or  antipathetic  forces  belonging  to  the  same  plane.  The  less  power  of  resistance
for  astral  influences  a  person  possesses,  the  more  will  he  be  subject  to  such  in-
fluences.   The  vital  force  is  not  enclosed  in  man,  but  radiates  [within  and]  around

•  The  conductor  in  the  sense  of  UpS.dhi — a  material  or  physical  basis ;  but,  as  the  second  principle
of  the  universal  Soul  and  Vital  Force  in  Nature,  it  is  intelligently  guided  by  the  fifth  principle  thereof.

t  And  too  great  an  exuberance  of  it  in  the  nervous  system  leads  as  often  to  disease  and  death.  If
it  were  the  animal  system  which  generated  it,  such  would  not  be  the  case,  surely.  Hence,  the  latter
emergency  shows  its  independence  of  the  system,  and  its  connection  with  the  Sun-Force,  as  Metcalfe
and  Hunt  explain.

X  P.  387.


588  THE   SECRET  DOCTRTNit.

him  like  a  luminous  sphere  [aura]  and  it  may  be  made  to  act  at  a  distance.  .  .  .
It  may  poison  the  essence  of  life  [blood]  and  cause  diseases,  or  it  may  purify  it  after
it  has  been  made  impure,  and  restore  the  health.*

That  the  two,  "Archseus"  and  "Nervous  Ether,"  are  identical,  is
shown  by  the  English  Scientist,  who  says  that  geiierally  the  tension  of
it  may  be  too  high  or  too  low;  that  it  may  be  so:

Owing  to  local  changes  in  the  nervous  matter  it  invests.  .  .  .  Under  sharp
excitation  it  may  vibrate  as  if  in  a  storm  and  plunge  every  muscle  under  cerebral
or  spinal  control  into  uncontrolled  motion — unconscious  convulsions.

This  is  called  nervous  excitation,  but  no  one,  except  the  Occultist,
knows  the  reason  of  such  nervous  perturbation,  or  explains  the
primary  causes  of  it.  The  principle  of  Life  may  kill  when  too
exuberant,  as  much  as  when  there  is  too  little  of  it.  But  this  "prin-
ciple" on  the  manifested  plane,  that  is  to  say,  our  plane,  is  but  the
effect  and  the  result  of  the  intelligent  action  of  the  "Host,"  or  collective
Principle,  the  manifesting  Life  and  Light.  It  is  itself  subordinate  to,
and  emanates  from,  the  ever-invisible,  eternal  and  Absolute  One  Life,
in  a  descending  and  reascending  scale  of  hierarchic  degrees,  a  true
septenary  ladder,  with  Sound,  the  Logos,  at  the  upper  end,  and  the
Vidyadharas,t  the  inferior  Pitris,  at  the  lower.

Of  course,  the  Occultists  are  fully  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  vitalist
"fallacy,"  so  derided  by  Vogt  and  Huxley,  is,  nevertheless,  still  coun-

•  Paragranum ;  Life  of  Paracelsus,  by  Dr.  F.  Hartmann.

+  In  a  recent  work  on  Symbolism  in  Buddhism  and  Christianity— in  Buddhism  and  Roman  Catho-
licism, rather,  many  later  rituals  and  dogmas  in  Northern  Buddhism,  in  its  popular  exoteric  form,
being  identical  with  those  of  the  Latin  Church— some  curious  facts  are  to  be  found.  The  author  of
this  volume,  with  more  pretensions  than  erudition,  has  indiscriminately  crammed  into  his  work
ancient  and  modem  Buddhist  teachings,  and  has  sorely  confused  Lamai'sm  with  Buddhism.  On
page  404  of  this  volume,  called  Buddhism  in  Christendom,  or  Jesus  the  Essene,  our  pseudo-Ori&rA&XvsX
devotes  himself  to  criticizing  the  "Seven  Principles"  of  the  "Esoteric  Buddhists,"  and  attempts  to
ridicule  them.  On  page  405,  the  closing  page,  he  speaks  enthusiastically  of  the  Vidy4dharas,  "the
seven  great  legions  of  dead  men  made  wise."  Now,  these  Vidyadharas,  whom  some  Orientalists  call
"demi-gods,"  are  in  fact,  exoterically,  a  kind  of  Siddhas,  "affluent  in  devotion,"  and,  esoterically,
they  are  identical  with  the  seven  classes  of  Pitris,  one  class  of  which  endow  man  in  the  Third  Race
with  Self-consciousness,  by  incarnating  in  the  human  shells.  The  "Hymn  to  the  Sun,"  at  the  end
of  his  queer  volume  of  mosaic,  which  endows  Buddhism  with  a  Personal  God  (!  !),  is  an  unfortunate
thrust  at  the  very  proofs  so  elaborately  collected  by  the  unlucky  author.

Theosophists  are  fully  aware  that  Mr.  Rhys  Davids  has  likewise  expressed  his  opinion  on  their
beliefs.  He  said  that  the  theories  propounded  by  the  author  of  Esoteric  Buddhism  "were  not
Buddhism,  and  were  not  esoteric."  The  remark  is  the  result  of  (a)  the  unfortunate  mistake  of
writing  "Buddhism"  instead  of  "Budhaism,"  or  "Budhism,"  i.e.,  of  connecting  the  system  with
Gautama's  religion  instead  of  with  the  Secret  Wisdom  taught  by  Krishna,  Shankarach4rya,  and
many  others,  as  much  as  by  Buddha;  and  {b)  of  the  impossibility  of  Mr.  Rhys  Davids  knowing
anything  of  the  true  1  oteric  Teachings.  Nevertheless  as  he  is  the  greatest  PSli  and  Buddhist  scholar
of  the  day,  whatever  he  may  say  is  entitled  to  respectful  hearing.  But  when  one  who  knows  no  more
of  exoteric  Buddhism  on  Scientific  and  Materialistic  lines,  than  he  knows  of  Esoteric  Philosophy,
defames  those  .vhom  he  honours  with  his  spite,  and  assumes  with  the  Theosophists  the  airs  of  a
profound  scholar,  one  can  only  smile  or — heartily  laugh  at  him.


THE   LIFE   PRINCIPLE.  589

tenanced  in  very  high  scientific  quarters,  and,  therefore,  they  are  happy
to  feel  that  they  do  not  stand  alone.  Thus,  Professor  de  Quatrefages
writes :

It  is  very  true  that  we  do  not  know  what  life  is;  but  no  more  do  we  know  what

the  force  is  that  set  the  stars  in  motion Living  beings  are  heay>',  and

therefore  subject  to  gravitation;  they  are  the  seat  of  numerous  and  various  physico-
chemical  phenomena  which  are  indispensable  to  their  existence,  and  which  must
be  referred  to  the  action  of  etherodynamy  [electricity,  heat,  etc.].  But  these  phe-
nomena are  here  manifested  under  the  influence  of  another  force Life

is  not  antagonistic  to  the  inanimate  forces,  but  it  governs  and  rules  their  action  by
its  laws.*

•    The  Human  Species,  pp.  10,  11.


SECTION  YIII.

The   Solar   Theory


A  SHORT  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  COMPOUND  AND  SINGLE  ELEMENTS
OF  SCIENCE  AS  AGAINST  THE  OCCULT  TEACHINGS.  HOW  FAR
THIS    THEORY,    AS    GENERALLY    ACCEPTED,    IS    SCIENTIFIC.

In  his  reply  to  Dr.  Gull's  attack  on  the  theory  of  Vitality,  which  is
inseparably  connected  with  the  Elements  of  the  Ancients  in  the  Occult
Philosophy,  Professor  Beale,  the  great  Physiologist,  has  a  few  words  as
suggestive  as  they  are  beautiful :

There  is  a  mystery  in  life — a  mystery  which  has  never  been  fathomed,  and  which
appears  greater,  the  more  deeply  the  phenomena  of  life  are  studied  and  contem-
plated. In  living  centres — far  more  central  than  the  centres  seen  by  the  highest
magnifying  powers,  in  centres  of  living  matter,  where  the  eye  cannot  penetrate,
but  towards  which  the  understanding  may  tend— proceed  changes  of  the  nature  of
which  the  most  advanced  physicists  and  chemists  fail  to  afford  us  the  conception :
nor  is  there  the  slightest  reason  to  think  that  the  nature  of  these  changes  will  ever
be  ascertained  by  physical  investigation,  inasmuch  as  they  are  certainly  of  an  order
or  nature  totally  distinct  from  that  to  which  any  other  phenomenon  known  to  us
can  be  relegated.

This  "mystery,"  or  the  origin  of  the  Life  Essence,  Occultism  locates
in  the  same  Centre  as  the  nucleus  of  prima  materia  of  our  Solar
System,  for  they  are  one.

As  says  the  Commentary:

The  Sun  is  the  heart  of  the  Solar  World  '^System']  and  its  brain  is
hidden  behind  the  [visible']  Sun.  Thence,  sensation  is  radiated  i?ito  every
nerve-centre  of  the  great  body,  and  the  waves  of  the  life-esseiice  flow  into
each  artery  arid  vein.     .     .     .     The  planets  are  its  limbs  and  pulses.

It  has  been  stated  elsewhere*  that  Occult  philosophy  denies  that  the
Sun  is  9  globe  in  combustion,  but  defines  it  simply  as  a  world,  a  glow-


•  The  Theosophist.


THE   HEART  OF  THE   SOLAR  SYSTEM.  591

ing  sphere,  the  real  Sun  being  hidden  behind,  and  the  visible  Sun
being  only  its  reflection,  its  shell.  The  Nasmyth  willow  leaves,  mis-
taken by  Sir  John  Herschell  for  "solar  inhabitants,"  are  the  reser\'oirs
of  solar  vital  energy;  "the  vital  electricity  that  feeds  the  whole  system;
the  sun  in  abscondito  ;being  thus  the  storehouse  of  our  little  Cosmos,
self-generating  its  vital  fluid,  and  ever  receiving  as  much  as  it  gives
out,"  and  the  visible  Sun  only  a  window  cut  into  the  real  solar  palace
and  presence,  which,  however,  shews  without  distortion  the  interior

work.

Thus,  during  the  manvantaric  solar  period,  or  life,  there  is  a  regular
circulation  of  the  vital  fluid  throughout  our  System,  of  which  the  Sun
is  the  heart— like  the  circulation  of  the  blood  in  the  human  body;  the
Sun  contracting  as  rhythmically  as  the  human  heart  does  at  ever>^
return  of  it.  Only,  instead  of  performing  the  round  in  a  second  or  so,
it  takes  the  solar  blood  ten  of  its  years  to  circulate,  and  a  whole
year  to  pass  through  its  auricle  and  ventricle  before  it  washes  the
lungs,  and  passes  thence  back  to  the  great  arteries  and  veins  of  the
System.

This,  Science  will  not  deny,  since  Astronomy  knows  of  the  fixed
cycle  of  eleven  years  when  the  number  of  solar  spots  increases,*  the  in-
crease being  due  to  the  contraction  of  the  Solar  Heart.  The  Universe,
our  World  in  this  case,  breathes,  just  as  man  and  every  living  creature,
plant,  and  even  mineral  does  upon  the  Earth ;  and  as  our  Globe  itself
breathes  every  twenty-four  hours.  The  dark  region  is  not  due  to  the
"absorption  exerted  by  the  vapours  issuing  from  the  bosom  of  the  sun,
and  interposed  between  the  observer  and  the  photosphere,"  as  Father
Secchi  would  have  it,t  nor  are  the  spots  formed  "by  the  matter  [heated
gaseous  matter]  itself  which  the  irruption  projects  upon  the  solar
disk."  The  phenomenon  is  similar  to  the  regular  and  healthy  pulsa-
tion of  the  heart,  as  the  life  fluid  passes  through  its  hollow  muscles.
Could  the  human  heart  be  made  luminous,  and  the  living  and  throb-
bing organ  made  visible,  so  as  to  have  it  reflected  upon  a  screen,  such
as  is  used  by  lecturers  on  Astronomy  to  show  the  moon,  for  instance,
then  every  one  would   see   the  sun-spot  phenomena   repeated  every

*  Not  only  does  it  not  deny  the  occurrence,  though  attributing  it  to  a  wrong  cause,  as  always,
each  theory  contradicting  every  other  (see  the  theories  of  Secchi,  of  Faye,  and  of  Young),  the  spots
depending  on  the  superficial  accumulation  of  vapours  cooler  than  the  photosphere  (?),  etc.,  etc.,  but
we  have  men  of  Science  who  astrologise  upon  the  spots.  Professor  Jevous  attributes  all  the  great
periodical  commercial  crises  to  the  influence  of  tlie  sun-spots  every  eleventh  cyclic  year.  (See  his
Investigations  into  Cutrency  and  Finance.)    This  is  worthy  of  praise  and  encouragement  surely.

t  Le  Soleil,  II.  184.


592  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

second,  and  that  they  were  due  to  contraction  and  the  rushing  of  the

blood.
We  read  in  a  work  on  Geology  that  it  is  the  dream  of  Science  that :

All  the  recognized  chemical  elements  will  one  day  be  found  but  modifications  of
a  single  material  element.*

Occult  Philosophy  has  taught  this  since  the  existence  of  human
speech  and  language,  adding,  however,  on  the  principle  of  the  immut-
able k.w  of  analogy,  "as  it  is  above,  so  it  is  below,"  another  of  its
axioms,  that  there  is  neither  Spirit  nor  Matter,  in  reality,  but  only
numberless  aspects  of  the  One  ever-hidden  Is,  or  Sat.  The  homoge-
neous primordial  Element  is  simple  and  single,  only  on  the  terrestrial
plane  of  consciousness  and  sensation,  since  Matter,  after  all,  is  nothing
more  than  the  sequence  of  our  own  states  of  consciousness,  and  Spirit
an  idea  of  psychic  intuition.  Even  on  the  next  higher  plane,  that
single  element  which  is  defined  on  our  Earth  by  current  Science,  as
the  ultimate  undecomposable  constituent  of  some  kind  of  Matter,
would  be  pronounced  in  the  world  of  a  higher  spiritual  perception
to  be  something  very  complex  indeed.  Our  purest  water  would  be
found  to  yield,  instead  of  its  two  declared  simple  elements  of  oxygen
and  hydrogen,  many  other  constituents,  undreamed  of  by  our  modern
terrestrial  Chemistry.  As  in  the  realm  of  Matter,  so  in  the  realm  of
Spirit,  the  shadow  of  that  which  is  cognized  on  the  plane  of  objectivity
exists  on  that  of  pure  subjectivity.  The  speck  of  the  perfectly  homo-
geneous Substance,  the  sarcode  of  the  Haeckelian  Moneron,  is  now
viewed  as  the  archebiosis  of  terrestrial  existence  (Mr.  Huxley's  proto-
plasm)! ;  and  Bathybius  Hseckelii  has  to  be  traced  to  its  pre-terrestrial
archebiosis.  This  is  first  perceived  by  the  Astronomers  at  its  third
stage  of  evolution,  and  in  the  "secondary  creation,"  so-called.  But
the  students  of  Esoteric  Philosophy  understand  well  the  secret  meaning
of  the  Stanza:

Brahma  .  .  .  has  essentially  the  aspect  of  Prakriti,  both  evolved  and  un-
evolved  ....  Spirit,  O  Twice-born  [Initiate],  is  the  leading  aspect  of  Brahma.
The  next  is  a  two-fold  aspect  [of  Prakriti  and  Purusha]  ....  both  evolved
and  unevolved;  and  Time  is  the  last!  J

Anu  is   one  of  the  names   of  Brahma,    as  distinct   from   Brahman,


•   World-Life,  p.  48-

+  Unfortunately,  as  these  pages  are  being  written,  the  "archebiosis  of  terrestrial  existence"  hai
turned,  under  a  somewhat  stricter  chemical  analysis,  into  a  simple  precipitate  of  sulphate  of  lim,:—
hence,  from  the  scientific  standpoint,  not  even  an  organic  substance!    Sic  transit  gloria  mundi!

X  Viihnu  Purdna,  Wilson,  I.  16,  Fitzedward  Hall's  rendering.


THE  QUINTESSENCE   OF  KOSMOS.  593

and  it  means  "atom";  aniyamsam  aniyasam,  "the  most  atomic  of
the  atomic,"  the  "immutable  and  imperishable  (achyuta)  Purushot-
tama."

Surely,  then,  the  elements  now  known  to  us — be  their  number  what-
ever it  may — as  they  are  understood  and  defined  at  present,  are  not,
nor  can  they  be,  the  primordial  Elements.  Those  were  formed  from
"the  airds  of  the  cold  radiant  Mother'''  and  ''the  fire-seed  of  the  hot
Father"  who  "are  one,"  or,  to  express  it  in  the  plainer  language  of
Modern  Science,  those  Elements  had  their  genesis  in  the  depths  of  the
primordial  Fire-mist,  the  masses  of  incandescent  vapour  of  the  irre-
solvable nebulae ;  for,  as  Professor  Newcomb  shows,*  resolvable  nebulse
do  not  constitute  a  class  of  proper  nebulae.  More  than  half  of  those,
he  thinks,  which  were  at  first  mistaken  for  nebulse,  are  what  he  calls
"starry  clusters."

The  elements  now  known  have  arrived  at  their  state  of  permanency
in  this  Fourth  Round  and  Fifth  Race.  They  have  a  short  period  of
rest  before  they  are  propelled  once  more  on  their  upward  spiritual
evolution,  when  the  "living  fire  of  Orcus"  will  dissociate  the  most
irresolvable,  and  scatter  them  again  into  the  primordial  One.

Meanwhile  the  Occultist  goes  further,  as  has  been  shown  in  the
Commentaries  on  the  Seven  Stanzas.  Hence  he  can  hardly  hope  for
any  help  or  recognition  from  Science,  which  will  reject  both  his
"  aniyamsam  aniyasam,"  the  absolutely  spiritual  Atom,  and  his  Manasa-
putras  or  Mind-born  Men.  In  resolving  the  "single  material  element"
into  one  absolute  irresolvable  Element,  Spirit,  or  Root-Matter,  thus
placing  it  at  once  outside  the  reach  and  province  of  Phj^sical  Philo-
sophy— he  has,  of  course  but  little  in  common  with  the  orthodox
men  of  Science.  He  maintains  that  Spirit  and  Matter  are  two  Facets
of  the  unknowable  Unity,  their  apparently  contrasted  aspects  depend-
ing, (a)  on  the  various  degrees  of  differentiation  of  Matter,  and  {b)
on  the  grades  of  consciousness  attained  by  man  himself  This  is,
however.  Metaphysics,  and  has  little  to  do  with  Physics— however
great  in  its  own  terrestrial  limitation  that  physical  Philosophy  may
now  be.

Nevertheless,  once  that  Science  admits,  if  not  the  actual  existence,
at  any  rate,  the  possibility  of  the  existence,  of  a  Universe  with  its
numberless  forms,  conditions,  and  aspects  built  out  of  a  "single  Sub-


•  Popular  Astronomy,  p.  444.


594  I'HE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Stance,"*  it  has  to  go  further.  Unless  it  also  admits  the  possibility  of
One  Element,  or  the  One  I^ife  of  the  Occultists,  it  will  have  to  hang  up
that  "single  Substance,"  especially  if  limited  to  only  the  solar  nebulas,
in  mid  air,  like  the  coffin  of  Mahomet,  though  minus  the  attractive
magnet  that  sustained  that  coffin.  Fortunately  for  the  speculative
Physicists,  if  we  are  unable  to  state  with  any  degree  of  precision  what
the  nebular  theory  does  imply,  we  have,  thanks  to  Professor  Winchell,
and  several  dissident  Astronomers,  been  able  to  learn  what  it  does
not  imply.

Unfortunately,  this  is  far  from  clearing  even  the  most  simple  of  the
problems  that  have  vexed,  and  do  still  vex,  the  men  of  learning  in
their  search  after  truth.  We  have  to  proceed  with  our  enquiries,
starting  with  the  earliest  hypotheses  of  Modern  Science,  if  we  would
discover  where  and  why  it  sins.  Perchance  it  may  be  found  that  Stallo
is  right,  after  all,  and  that  the  blunders,  contradictions  and  fallacies
made  by  the  most  eminent  men  of  learning  are  simply  due  to  their
abnormal  attitude.  They  are,  and  want  to  remain  Materialistic  quand
meme,  and  yet  "the  general  principles  of  the  atomo-mechanical  theory-
— the  basis  of  modern  Physics — are  substantially  identical  with  the
cardinal  doctrines  of  ontological  Metaphysics."  Thus,  "the  funda-
mental errors  of  ontology  become  apparent  in  proportion  to  the  advance
of  physical  science."!  Science  is  honeycombed  with  metaphysical
conceptions,  but  the  Scientists  will  not  admit  the  charge,  and  fight
desperately  to  put  atomo-mechanical  masks  on  purely  incorporeal
and  spiritual  laws  in  Nature,  on  our  plane — refusing  to  admit  their


•  In  his  World- Life  (page  48),  in  the  appended  footnotes,  Professor  Winchell  saj's,  "It  is  generally
admitted  that  at  excessively  high  temperatures  matter  exists  in  a  state  of  dissociation— that  is,  no
chemical  combination  can  exist ";  and,  to  prove  the  imity  of  Matter,  would  appeal  to  the  spectrum,
which  in  every  case  of  homogeneity  vrill  show  a  bright  line,  whereas  in  the  case  of  several  molecular
arrangements  existing— in  the  nebulae  say,  or  a  star— "the  spectrum  should  consist  of  two  or  threv
bright  lines"!  This  would  be  no  proof  either  way  to  the  Physicist-Occultist,  who  maintains  that
beyond  a  certain  limit  of  visible  Matter,  no  spectrum,  no  telescope  and  no  microscope  are  of  any
use.  The  unity  of  Matter,  of  that  which  is  real  cosmic  Matter  to  the  Alchemist,  or  "Adam's  Earth"
as  the  Kabalists  call  it,  can  hardly  be  proved  or  disproved,  by  either  the  French  savant  Dumas,  whc
suggests  "  the  composite  nature"  of  the  "elements"  on  "certain  relations  of  atomic  weights,"  or  even
by  Mr.  Crookes'  "radiant  matter,"  though  his  experiments  may  seem  "to  be  best  understood  on  the
hypothesis  of  the  homogeneity  of  the  elements  of  matter,  and  the  continuity  of  the  states  of  matter."
For  all  this  does  not  go  beyond  material  Matter,  so  to  say,  even  in  what  is  shovsm  by  the  spectrum,
that  modem  "eye  of  Shiva"  of  physical  experiments.  It  is  only  of  this  Matter,  that  H.  St.  Claire
Deville  could  say  that  "when  bodies,  deemed  to  be  simple,  combine  vidth  one  another,  they  vanish,
they  are  individually  annihilated"  ;  simply  because  he  could  not  follow  those  bodies  in  their  fiulhei
transformation  in  the  world  of  spiritual  cosmic  Matter.  Verily  Modem  Science  will  never  be  able
to  dig  deep  enough  into  the  cosmological  formations  to  find  the  Roots  of  the  World-Stuflf  or  Matter,
unless  she  works  on  the  same  lines  of  thought  as  the  medieval  Alchemist  did.

t  Concepts  of  Modern  Physics,  p.  vi.


THE    ORIGINAL.   BASE.  595

substantiality  even  on  other  planes,  the  bare  existence  of  which  they
reject  a  priori.

It  is  easy  to  show,  however,  how  Scientists,  wedded  to  their  material-
istic views,  have,  ever  since  the  days  of  Newton,  endeavoured  to  put
false  masks  on  fact  and  truth.  But  their  task  is  becoming  every  year
more  difficult;  and  every  year  also,  Chemistry,  beyond  all  the  other
sciences,  approaches  nearer  and  nearer  the  realm  of  the  Occult  in
Nature.  It  is  assimilating  the  very  truths  taught  by  the  Occult
Sciences  for  ages,  but  hitherto  bitterly  derided.  "Matter  is  eternal,"
says  the  Esoteric  Doctrine.  But  the  Matter  the  Occultists  conceive  of
in  its  laya,  or  zero  state,  is  not  the  matter  of  Modern  Science,  not  even
in  its  most  rarefied  gaseous  state.  Mr.  Crookes'  "radiant  matter"
would  appear  Matter  of  the  grossest  kind  in  the  realm-  of  the  begin-
nings, as  it  becomes  pure  Spirit  before  it  returns  back  even  to  its  first
point  of  differentiation.  Therefore,  when  the  Adept  or  Alchemist  adds
that,  though  Matter  is  eternal,  for  it  is  Pradhana,  yet  Atoms  are  born
at  ever>-  new  Manvantara,  or  reconstruction  of  the  universe,  it  is  no
such  contradiction  as  a  Materialist,  who  believes  in  nothing  beyond
the  Atom,  might  think.  There  is  a  difference  between  manifested  and
unmayiifested  Matter,  between  Pradhana,  the  beginningless  and  endless
cause,  and  Prakriti,  or  the  manifested  effect.     Says  the  Shloka :

That  which  is  the  unevolved  cause  is  emphatically  called  by  the  most  eminent
sages,  Pradhana,  original  base,  which  is  subtile  Prakriti,  viz.,  that  which  is  eternal
and  which  at  once  is,  and  is  not,  a  mere  process.*

That  which  in  modern  phraseology  is  referred  to  as  Spirit  and
Matter,  is  one  in  eternity  as  the  Perpetual  Cause,  and  it  is  neither
Spirit  nor  Matter,  but  it — rendered  in  Sanskrit  by  Tad,  "that" — all
that  is,  was,  or  will  be,  all  that  the  imagination  of  man  is  capable  of
conceiving.  Even  the  exoteric  Pantheism  of  Hinduism  renders  it  as
no  monotheistic  Philosophy  ever  did,  for  in  superb  phraseology  its
Cosmogony  begins  with  the  well-known  words:

There  was  neither  day  nor  night,  neither  heaven  nor  earth,  neither  darkness  nor
light.  And  there  was  not  aught  else  apprehensible  by  the  senses  or  by  the  mental
faculties.  There  was  then,  however,  one  Brahma,  essentially  Prakriti  [Nature]  and
Spirit.  For  the  two  aspects  of  Vishnu  which  are  other  than  his  supreme  essential
aspect  are  Prakriti  and  Spirit,  O  Brahman.  When  these  two  other  aspects  of  his  nc
longer  subsist,  but  are  dissolved,  then  that  aspect  whence  form  and  the  rest,  i.e.^
creation,  proceed  anew,  is  denominated  time,  O  twice-born.


•  Book  I.  ch.  II.  p.  25.     Vishnu  Pur&.na,  Fitzedward  Hall's  Translation.


596  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

It  is  that  which  is  dissolved,  or  the  illusion ary  dual  aspect  of  That,
the  essence  of  which  is  eternally  One,  that  we  call  Eternal  Matter,  or
Substance,  formless,  sexless,  inconceivable,  even  to  our  sixth  sense  or
mind,*  in  which,  therefore,  we  refuse  to  see  that  which  Monotheists
call  a  personal,  anthropomorphic  God.

How  are  these  two  propositions— that  "Matter  is  eternal,"  and  that
"the  Atom  is  periodical,  and  not  eternal"— viewed  by  exact  Modern
Science?  The  materialistic  Physicist  will  criticize  and  laugh  them  to
scorn.  The  liberal  and  progressive  man  of  Science,  however,  the  true
and  earnest  scientific  searcher  after  truth,  such  as  the  eminent  Chemist,
Mr.  Crookes,  will  corroborate  the  probability  of  the  two  statements.
For  hardly  had  the  echo  of  his  lecture  on  the  "Genesis  of  the  Ele-
ments" died  'away — the  lecture  which,  delivered  by  him  before  the
Chemical  Section  of  the  British  Association,  at  the  Birmingham  meet-
ing in  1887,  so  startled  every  evolutionist  who  heard  or  read  it — than
there  came  another  in  March,  1888.  Once  more  the  President  of  the
Chemical  Society  brought  before  the  world  of  Science  and  the  public
the  fruits  of  some  new  discoveries  in  the  realm  of  Atoms,  and  these
discoveries  justified  the  Occult  Teachings  in  every  way.  They  are
more  startling  even  than  the  statements  made  by  him  in  the  first
lecture,  and  well  deserve  the  attention  of  every  Occultist,  Theosophist,
and  Metaphysician.  This  is  what  he  says  in  his  "Elements  and
ilf^/^-Elements,"  thus  justifying  Stallo's  charges  and  prevision,  with
the  fearlessness  of  a  scientific  mind  which  loves  Science  for  truth's
sake,  regardless  of  any  consequences  to  his  own  glory  and  reputa-
tion.    We  quote  his  own  words:

Permit  me,  gentlemen,  now  to  draw  your  attention  for  a  short  time  to  a  subject
which  concerns  the  fundamental  principles  of  chemistry,  a  subject  which  may  lead
us  to  admit  the  possible  existence  of  bodies  which,  though  neither  compounds  nor
mixtures,  are  not  elements  in  the  strictest  sense  of  the  word— bodies  which  I  ven-
ture to  call  "meta-elements."  To  explain  my  meaning  it  is  necessary  for  me  to
revert  to  our  conception  of  an  element.  What  is  the  criterion  of  an  element?
Where  are  we  to  draw  the  line  between  distinct  existence  and  identity  ?  No  one
doubts  that  oxygen,  sodium,  chlorine,  sulphur  are  separate  elements;  and  when  we
come  to  such  groups  as  chlorine,  bromine,  iodine,  etc.,  we  still  feel  no  doubt,
although  were  degrees  of  "elementicity"  admissible— and  to  that  we  may  ulti-
mately have  to  come— it  might  be  allowed  that  chlorine  approximates  much  more
closely  to  bromine  than  to  oxygen,  sodium,  or  sulphur.  Again,  nickel  and  cobalt
are  near  to  each  other,  very  near,  though  no  one  questions  their  claim  to  rank  as
distinct  elements.  Still  I  cannot  help  asking  what  would  have  been  the  prevalent
•  Vide  in  preceding  Section  VII.,  '%ife,  Force,  or  Gravity,"  quotation  from  AnugUa.


ELEMENTS  AND   NON-ELEMENTS.  597

opinion  among  chemists  had  the  respective  solutions  of  these  bodies  and  their
compounds  presented  identical  colours,  instead  of  colours  which,  approximately-
speaking,  are  mutually  complementary.     Would  their  distinct  nature  have  even
now  been  recognized?    When  we  pass  further  and  come  to  the  so-called  rare  earths
the  ground  is  less  secure  under  our  feet.     Perhaps  we  may  admit  scandium,  ytter-
bium, and  others  of  the  Uke  sort  to  elemental  rank;  but  what  are  we  to  say  in  the
case  of  praseo-  and  neo-dymium,  between  which  there  may  be  said  to  exist  no  well-
marked  chemical  diflference,  their  chief  claim  to  separate  individuality  being  slight
diflFerences  in  basicity  and  crystallizing  powers,  though  their  physical  distinctions,
as  shown  by  spectrum  obsen^ations,  are  very  strongly  marked  ?     Even  here  we  may-
imagine  the  disposition  of  the  majority  of  chemists  would  incline  toward  the  side
of  leniency,  so  that  they  would  admit  these  two  bodies  within  the  charmed  circle.
Whether  in  so  doing  they  woiild  be  able  to  appeal  to  any  broad  principle  is  an  open
question.     If  we  admit  these  candidates  how  in  justice  are  we  to  exclude  the  series
of  elemental  bodies  or  meta-elements  made  known  to  us  by  Kriiss  and  Nilson?
Here  the  spectral  differences  are  well  marked,  while  my  own  researches  on  didy-
mium  show  also   a  slight  difference  in  basicity  between  some  at  least  of  these
doubtful  bodies.     In  the  same  category  must  be  included  the  numerous  separate
bodies   into   which   it   is    probable   that    yttrium,    erbium,    samarium,    and    other
"elements"— commonly  so-called— have  been  and  are  being  split  up.     Where  then
are  we  to  draw  the  line .?     The  different  groupings  shade  off  so  imperceptibly  the
one  into  the  other  that  it  is  impossible  to  erect  a  definite  boundary  between  any
two  adjacent  bodies  and  to  say  that  the  body  on  this  side  of  the  line  is  an  element,
while  the  one  on  the  other  side  is  non-elementary,  or  merely  something  which
simulates  or  approximates  to  an  element.     Wherever  an  apparently  reasonable  line
might  be  drawn  it  would  no  doubt  be  easy  at  once  to  assign  most  bodies  to  their
proper  side,  as  in  all  cases  of  classification  the  real  difiiculty  comes  in  when  the
border-line  is  approached.     Slight  chemical  differences,  of  course,  are  admitted,
and,  up  to  a  certain  point,  so  are  well-marked  physical  differences.     What  are  we
to  say,  however,  when  the  only  chemical  difference  is  an  almost  imperceptible
tendency  for  the  one  body— of  a  couple  or  of  a  group— to  precipitate  before  the
other?    Again,  there  are  cases  where  the  chemical  differences  reach  the  vanishing
point,  although  well-marked  physical  differences  still  remain.     Here  we  stumble
on  a  new  difiiculty:  in  such  obscurities  what  is  chemical  and  what  is  physical?
Are  we  not  entitled  to  call  a  slight  tendency  of  a  nascent  amorphous  precipitate
to  fall  down  in  advance  of  another  a  "physical  difference"?     And  may  we  not  call
coloured  reactions  depending  on  the  amount  of  some  particular  acid  present  and
varying,  according  to  the  concentration  of  the  solution  and  to  the  solvent  employed,
"chemical  differences"  ?     I  do  not  see  how  we  can  deny  elementary  character  to  a
body  which   differs  from  another  by  well-marked  colour,  or  spectrum-reactions,
while  we  accord  it  to  another  body  whose  only  claim  is  a  very  minute  difference
in  basic  powers.     Having  once  opened  the  door  wide  enough  to  admit  some  spec-
trum differences,  we  have  to  inquire  how  minute  a  difference  qualifies  the  candidate
to  pass  ?    I  will  give  instances  from  my  own  experience  of  some  of  these  doubtful
candidates.


598  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Here  the  great  Cliemist  gives  several  cases  of  the  very  extraordinarj'-
behaviour  of  molecules  and  earths,  apparently  the  same,  but  which  yet,
when  examined  very  closely,  were  found  to  exhibit  differences  which,
however  minute,  still  show  that  none  of  them  are  simple  bodies,  and
that  the  60  or  70  elements  accepted  in  chemistry  can  no  longer  cover
the  ground.  Their  name,  apparently,  is  legion,  but  as  the  so-called
"periodic  theory"  stands  in  the  way  of  an  unlimited  multiplication  of
elements,  Mr.  Crookes  is  obliged  to  find  some  means  of  reconciling  the
new  discovery  with  the  old  theory.     "That  theory,"  he  says:

Has  received  such  abundant  verification  that  we  cannot  Hghtly  accept  any  inter-
pretation of  phenomena  which  fails  to  be  in  accordance  with  it.  But  if  we  suppose
the  elements  reinforced  by  a  vast  number  of  bodies  slightly  differing  from  each
other  in  their  properties,  and  forming,  if  I  may  use  the  expression,  aggregations  of
nebulae  where  we  formerly  saw,  or  believed  we  saw,  separate  stars,  the  periodic
arrangement  can  no  longer  be  definitely  grasped.  No  longer,  that  is,  if  we  retain
our  usual  conception  of  an  element.  Let  us,  then,  modify  this  conception.  For
"element"  read  "elementary  group" — such  elementary  groups  taking  the  place  of
the  old  elements  in  the  periodic  scheme — and  the  difficulty  falls  away.  In  defining
an  element,  let  us  take  not  an  external  boundary,  but  an  internal  type.  Let  us  say,
e.g.,  the  smallest  ponderable  quantity  of  yttrium  is  an  assemblage  of  ultimate  atoms
almost  infinitely  more  like  each  other  than  they  are  to  the  atoms  of  any  other
approximating  element.  It  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  the  atoms  shall  all  be
absolutely  alike  among  themselves.  The  atomic  weight  which  we  ascribed  to
yttrium,  therefore,  merely  represents  a  mean  value  around  which  the  actual  weights
of  the  individual  atoms  of  the  "element"  range  within  certain  limits.  But  if  my
conjecture  is  tenable,  could  we  separate  atom  from  atom,  we  should  find  them
varying  within  narrow  limits  on  each  side  of  the  mean.  The  very  process  of
fractionation  implies  the  existence  of  such  differences  in  certain  bodies.

Thus  fact  and  truth  have  once  more  forced  the  hand  of  "exact"
Science,  and  compelled  it  to  enlarge  its  views  and  change  its  terms,
which,  masking  the  multitude,  reduced  them  to  one  body — like  the
Septenary  Elohim  and  their  hosts  transformed  by  the  materialistic
religionists  into  one  Jehovah.  Replace  the  chemical  terms  "mole-
cule," "atom,"  "particle,"  etc.,  by  the  words  "Hosts,"  "Monads,"
"Devas,"  etc.,  and  one  might  think  the  genesis  of  Gods,  the  primeval
evolution  of  manvantaric  intellige?it  Forces,  was  being  described.  But
the  learned  lecturer  adds  to  his  descriptive  remarks  something  still
more  suggestive;  whether  consciously  or  unconsciously,  who  knoweth?
For  he  says :

Until  lately  such  bodies  passed  muster  as  elements.  They  had  definite  proper-
ties, chemical  and  physical ;  they  had  recognized  atomic  weights.     If  we  take  a


WHAT   IS   THE   DIRECTIVE   FORCE?  599

pure  dilute  solution  of  such  a  body,  yttrium  for  instance,  and  if  we  add  to  it  an
excess  of  strong  ammonia,  we  obtain  a  precipitate  which  appears  perfectly  homo-
geneous. But  if  instead  we  add  very  dilute  ammonia  in  quantity  sufHcient  only  to
precipitate  one-half  of  the  base  present,  we  obtain  no  immediate  precipitate.  If
we  stir  up  the  whole  thoroughly  so  as  to  insure  a  uniform  mixture  of  the  solution
and  the  ammonia,  and  set  the  vessel  aside  for  an  hour,  carefully  excluding  dust,  we
may  still  find  the  liquid  clear  and  bright,  without  any  vestige  of  turbidity.  After
thi-ee  or  four  hours,  however,  an  opalescence  will  declare  itself,  and  the  next
morning  a  precipitate  will  have  appeared.  Now  let  us  ask  ourselves,  WTiat  can  be
the  meaning  of  this  phenomenon?  The  quantity  of  precipitant  added  was  in-
sufficient to  throw  down  more  than  half  the  yttria  present,  therefore  a  process  akin
to  selection  has  been  going  on  for  several  hours.  The  precipitation  has  evideyitly
%ot  been  effected  at  random,  those  molecules  of  the  base  being  decomposed  which
happened  to  come  in  contact  with  a  corresponding  molecule  of  ammonia,  for  we
have  taken  care  that  the  liquids  should  be  uniformly  mixed,  so  that  one  molecule
of  the  original  salt  would  not  be  more  exposed  to  decomposition  than  any  other.
If,  further,  we  consider  the  time  which  elapses  before  the  appearance  of  a  precipi-
tate, v/e  cannot  avoid  corning  to  the  conclusion  that  the  action  which  has  been  going
on  for  the  first  few  hours  is  of  a  selective  character.  The  problem  is  not  why  a  pre-
cipitate is  produced,  but  what  determines  or  directs  some  atoms  to  fall  down  and
others  to  remain  in  solution.  Out  of  the  multitude  of  atoms  present,  zu hat  power  is
it  that  directs  each  atom  to  choose  the  proper  path  f  We  may  picture  to  ourselves  some
directive  force  passing  the  atoms  one  by  one  in  review,  selecting  one  for  precipitation
and  another  for  solution  till  all  have  been  adjusted.

The  italics  in  the  above  passage  are  ours.  Well  may  a  man  of
Science  ask  himself:  What  power  is  it  that  directs  each  Atom?  and
what  is  the  meaning  of  its  character  being  selective?  Theists  would
solve  the  question  by  answering  "God";  and  would  thereby  solve
nothing  philosophically.  Occultism  answers  on  its  own  Pantheistic
grounds,  and  teaches  the  student  about  Gods,  Monads,  and  Atoms.
The  learned  lecturer  sees  in  it  that  which  is  his  chief  concern:  the
finger-posts  and  the  traces  of  a  path  which  may  lead  to  the  discoverv%
and  the  full  and  complete  demonstration,  of  an  homogeneous  element
in  Nature.     He  remarks :

In  order  that  such  a  selection  can  be  effected  there  evidently  must  be  some  slight
differences  between  which  it  is  possible  to  select,  and  this  difference  almost  cer-
tainly must  be  one  of  basicity,  so  slight  as  to  be  imperceptible  by  any  test  at  present
known,  but  susceptible  of  being  nursed  and  encouraged  to  a  point  when  the  differ-
ence can  be  appreciated  by  ordinary  tests.

Occultism,  which  knows  of  the  existence  and  presence  in  Nature  of
the  One  Eternal  Element,  at  the  first  difi"erentiation  of  which  the  roots
of  the  Tree  of  Life  are  periodically  struck,  needs  no  scientific  proofs.    It


6oo


THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.


says:  Ancient  Wisdom  has  solved  the  problem  ages  ago.  Aye;  earnest,
as  well  as  mocking  reader,  Science  is  slowly  but  surely  approaching
our  domains  of  the  Occult.  It  is  forced  by  its  own  discoveries  to  adopt
nolens  volens  our  phraseology  and  symbols.  Chemical  Science  is  now
compelled,  by  the  very  force  of  things,  to  accept  even  our  illustration
of  the  evolution  of  the  Gods  and  Atoms,  so  suggestively  and  undeniably
figured  in  the  Caduceus  of  Mercury,  the  God  of  Wisdom,  and  in  the
allegorical  language  of  the  Archaic  Sages.  Says  a  Commentary  in  the
Esoteric  Doctrine:

The  trunk  of  the  Asvattha  (the  tree  of  Life  and  Being,  the  rod  of
the  Caduceus)  grows  from  arid  descends  at  every  Beginning  (every  new
Manvantara)yr{7;«  the  two  dark  witigs  of  the  Swan  (Hansa)  of  Life.  The
two  Serpents,  the  ever-livi?ig  and  its  illusiott  (Spirit  and  matter)  whose
two  heads  grow  from  the  one  head  between  the  wings,  descend  along  the
trunks  interlaced  in  close  embrace.  The  two  tails  join  on  earth  (the  mani-
fested Universe)  into  one,  and  this  is  the  great  illusio?i,  O  Lanoo!

Every  one  knows  what  the  Caduceus  is,
modified  considerably  by  the  Greeks.  The
original  symbol — with  the  triple  head  of
the  serpent — became  altered  into  a  rod
with  a  knob,  and  the  two  lower  heads  were
separated,  thus  disfiguring  somewhat  the
original  meaning.  Yet  it  is  as  good  an
illustration  as  can  be  for  our  purpose,  this
laya  rod,  entwined  by  two  serpents.  Verily
the  wonderful  powers  of  the  magic  Cadu-
ceus were  sung  by  all  the  ancient  poets,
with  a  very  good  reason  for  those  who
understood  the  secret  meaning.

Now  what  says  the  learned  President  of
the  Chemical  Society  of  Great  Britain,  in
that  same  lecture,  which  has  any  reference
to,  or  bearing  upon,  our  above-mentioned
doctrine?  Very  little;  only  this — and  no-
thing more:

In  the  Birmingham  address  already  referred  to  I  asked  my  audience  to  picture
the  action  of  two  forces  on  the  original  protyle— one  being  time,  accompanied  by  a
lowering  of  temperature;  the  other,  swinging  to  and  fro  like  a  mighty  pendulum,
having  periodic  cycles  of  ebb  and  swell,  rest  and  activity,  being  intimately  connected


A  SCIENTIFIC   CADUCEUS.  6or

with  the  imponderable  matter,  essence,  or  source  of  energy-  we  call  electricity.
Now,  a  simile  like  this  effects  its  object  if  it  fixes  in  the  mind  the  particular  fact  it
is  intended  to  emphasize,  but  it  must  not  be  expected  necessarily  to  run  parallel
with  all  the  facts.  Besides  the  lowering  of  temperature  with  the  periodic  ebb  and
flow  of  electricity,  positive  or  negative,  requisite  to  confer  on  the  newly-born
elements  their  particular  atomicity,  it  is  evident  that  a  third  factor  must  be  taken
into  account.  Nature  does  not  act  on  a  flat  plane;  she  demands  space  for  her
cosmogenic  operations,  and  if  we  introduce  space  as  the  third  factor,  all  appears
clear.  Instead  of  a  pendulum,  which,  though  to  a  certain  extent  a  good  illustration,
is  impossible  as  a  fact,  let  us  seek  some  more  satisfactory  way  of  representing  what
I  conceive  may  have  taken  place.  Let  us  suppose  the  zigzag  diagram  not  drawn
upon  a  plane,  but  projected  in  space  of  three  dimensions.  What  figure  can  we  best
select  to  meet  all  the  conditions  involved.'  Many  of  the  facts  can  be  well  explained
by  supposing  the  projection  in  space  of  Professor  Emerson  Reynolds'  zigzag  curve
to  be  a  spiral.  This  figure  is,  however,  inadmissible,  inasmuch  as  the  curve  has  to
pass  through  a  point  neutral  as  to  electricity  and  chemical  energy  twice  in  each
cycle.  We  must,  therefore,  adopt  some  other  figure.  A  figure  of  eight  (8),  or
lemniscate,  -will  foreshorten  into  a  zigzag  just  as  well  as  a  spiral,  and  it  fulfils  every
condition  of  the  problem.

A  lemniscate  for  the  evolution  downward,  from  Spirit  into  Matter;
another  form  of  a  spiral,  perhaps,  in  its  reinvolutionary  path  onward,
from  Matter  into  Spirit ;  and  the  necessary  gradual  and  final  reabsorp-
tion  into  the  lay  a  state,  that  which  Science  calls,  in  her  own  way,  "the
point  neutral  as  to  electricity,"  or  the  zero  point.  Such  are  the  Occult
facts  and  statement.  They  may  be  left  with  the  greatest  security  and
confidence  to  Science,  to  be  justified  some  day.  Let  us  hear  some
more,  however,  about  this  primordial  genetic  type  of  the  symbolical
Caduceus.

Such  a  figure  will  result  from  three  very  simple  simultaneous  motions.  First,  a
simple  oscillation  backwards  and  forwards  (suppose  east  and  west);  secondly,  a
simple  oscillation  at  right  angles  to  the  former  (suppose  north  and  south)  of  half
the  periodic  time — i.e.,  twice  as  fast;  and  thirdly,  a  motion  at  right  angles  to  these
two  (suppose  downwards),  which,  in  its  simplest  form,  would  be  with  unvarjdng
velocity.  If  we  project  this  figure  in  space  we  find  on  examination  that  the  points  of
the  curves,  where  chlorine,  bromine,  and  iodine  are  formed,  come  close  under  each
other;  so  also  will  sulphur,  selenium,  and  tellurium;  again,  phosphorus,  arsenic,
and  antimony;  and  in  like  manner  other  series  of  analogous  bodies.  It  may  be
asked  whether  this  scheme  explains  how  and  why  the  elements  appear  in  this
order?  Let  us  imagine  a  cyclical  translation  in  space,  each  evolution  witnessing
the  genesis  of  the  group  of  elements  which  I  previously  represented  as  produced
during  one  complete  vibration  of  the  pendulum.  Let  us  suppose  that  one  cycle
has  thus  been  completed,  the  centre  of  the  unknown  creative  force  in  its  mighty
journey  through  space  having  scattered  along  its  track  the  primitive  atoms — the


602  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

seeds,  if  I  may  use  the  expression — which  presently  are  to  coalesce  and  develop  into
the  groupings  now  known  as  lithium,  beryllium,  boron,  carbon,  nitrogen,  oxygen,
fluorine,  sodium,  magnesium,  aluminium,  silicon,  phosphorus,  sulphur,  and
chlorine.  What  is  most  probably  the  form  of  track  now  pursued?  Were  it  strictly
confined  to  the  same  plane  of  temperature  and  time,  the  next  elementary  groupings
to  appear  would  again  have  been  those  of  lithium,  and  the  original  cycle  would
have  been  eternally  repeated,  producing  again  and  again  the  same  14  elements.
The  conditions,  however,  are  not  quite  the  same.  Space  and  electricity  are  as  at
first,  but  temperature  has  altered,  and  thus,  instead  of  the  atoms  of  lithium  being
supplemented  with  atoms  in  all  respects  analogous  with  themselves,  the  atomic
groupings  which  come  into  being  when  the  second  cycle  commences  form,  not
lithium,  but  its  lineal  descendant,  potassium.  Suppose,  therefore,  the  vis  generatrix
travelling  to  and  fro  in  cycles  along  a  lemniscate  path,  as  above  suggested,  while
simultaneously  temperature  is  declining  and  time  is  flowing  on— variations  which
I  have  endeavoured  to  represent  by  the  downward  sink— each  coil  of  the  lemniscate
track  crosses  the  same  vertical  line  at  lower  and  lower  points.  Projected  in  space,
the  curve  shows  a  central  line  neutral  as  far  as  electricit}^  is  concerned,  and  neutral
in  chemical  properties — positive  electricity  on  the  north,  negative  on  the  south.
Dominant  atomicities  are  governed  by  the  distance  east  and  west  from  the  neutral
centre  line,  monatomic  elements  being  one  remove  from  it,  diatomic  two  removes,
and  so  on.     In  every  successive  coil  the  same  law  holds  good.

And,  as  if  to  prove  the  postulate  of  Occult  Science  and  Hindii  philo-
sophy, that,  at  the  hour  of  the  Pralaya,  the  two  aspects  of  the  Unknow-
able Deity,  "the  Swan  in  darkness,"  Prakriti  and  Purusha,  Nature  or
Matter  in  all  its  forms  and  Spirit,  no  longer  subsist  but  are  absolutely
dissolved,  we  learn  the  conclusive  scientific  opinion  of  the  great  English
Chemist,  who  caps  his  proofs  by  saying:

We  have  now  traced  the  formation  of  the  chemical  elements  from  knots  and
voids  in  a  primitive,  formless  fluid.  We  have  shown  the  possibility,  nay,  the  pro-
bability that  the  atoms  are  not  eternal  in  existence,  but  share  with  all  other  created
beings  the  attributes  of  decay  and  death.

Occultism  says  a7nen  to  this,  as  the  scientific  "possibility"  and
"probability"  are  for  it  facts,  demonstrated  beyond  the  necessity  for
further  proof,  or  for  any  extraneous  physical  evidence.  Nevertheless,
it  repeats  with  as  much  assurance  as  ever:  "MATTER  is  KTERNAI,,  be-
coming atomic  (its  aspect)  only  periodically."  This  is  as  sure  as  that
the  other  proposition,  which  is  almost  unanimously  accepted  by
Astronomers  and  Physicists — namely,  that  the  wear  and  tear  of  the
body  of  the  Universe  is  steadily  going  on,  and  that  it  will  finally  lead'
to  the  extinction  of  the  Solar  Fires  and  the  destruction  of  the  Universe
— is  quite  erroneous  on  the  lines  traced  by  men  of  Science.  There  will
be,  as  there  ever  were  in  time  and  eternity,  periodical  dissolutions  of


OCCULTISM   IN   CHEMISTRY,  6o


o


the  manifested  Universe,  such  as  a  partial  Pralaya  after  every  Day  of
Brahma;  and  a  Universal  Pralaya — the  Maha- Pralaya — only  after  the
lapse  of  every  Age  of  Brahma.  But  the  scientific  causes  for  such
dissolution,  as  brought  forward  by  exact  Science,  have  nothing  to  do
with  the  true  causes.  However  that  may  be,  Occultism  is  once  more
justified  by  Science,  for  Mr.  Crookes  said:

We  have  shown,  from  arguments  drawn  from  the  chemical  laboratory,  that  in
matter  which  has  responded  to  every  test  of  an  element,  there  are  minute  shades  of
difference  which  may  admit  of  selection.  We  have  seen  that  the  time-honoured
distinction  between  elements  and  compounds  no  longer  keeps  pace  with  the  de-
velopments of  chemical  science,  but  must  be  modified  to  include  a  vast  array  of
intermediate  bodies — "meta-elements."  We  have  shown  how  the  objections  of
Clerk-IMaxwell,  weighty  as  they  are,  may  be  met;  and  finally,  we  have  adduced
reasons  for  believing  that  primitive  matter  was  formed  by  the  act  of  a  generative
force,  throwing  off  at  intervals  of  time  atoms  endowed  with  varying  quantities  of
primitive  forms  of  energy.  If  we  may  hazard  any  conjectures  as  to  the  source  of
energy  embodied  in  a  chemical  atom,  we  may,  I  think,  premise  that  the  heat  radia-
tions propagated  outwards  through  the  ether  from  the  ponderable  matter  of  the
universe,  by  some  process  of  nature  not  yet  known  to  us,  are  transformed  at  the
confines  of  the  universe  into  the  primary — the  essential — motions  of  chemical
atoms,  which,  the  instant  they  are  formed,  gravitate  inwards,  and  thus  restore  to
the  universe  the  energy  which  otherwise  would  be  lost  to  it  through  radiant  heat.
If  this  conjecture  be  well  founded,  Sir  William  Thomson's  startling  prediction  of
the  final  decrepitude  of  the  universe  through  the  dissipation  of  its  energy  falls  to
the  ground.  In  this  fashion,  gentlemen,  it  seems  to  me  that  the  question  of  the
elements  may  be  provisionally  treated.  Our  slender  knowledge  of  these  first  mys-
teries is  extending  steadily,  surely,  though  slowly.

By  a  strange  and  curious  coincidence  even  our  Septenary  doctrine
seems  to  force  the  hand  of  Science.  If  we  understand  rightly,  Chemistry
speaks  of  fourteen  groupings  of  primitive  atoms — lithium,  beryllium,
boron,  carbon,  nitrogen,  oxygen,  fluorine,  sodium,  magnesium,  alu-
minium, silicon,  phosphorus,  sulphur  and  chlorine;  and  Mr.  Crookes,
speaking  of  the  "dominant  atomicities,"  enumerates  seven  groups  of
these,  for  he  says :

As  the  mighty  focus  of  creative  energy  goes  round,  we  see  it  in  successive  cyclec
sowing  in  one  tract  of  space  seeds  of  lithium,  potassium,  rubidium,  and  caesium ;  in
another  tract,  chlorine,  bromine,  and  iodine;  in  a  third,  sodium,  copper,  silver,  and
gold;  in  a  fourth,  sulphur,  selenium,  and  tellurium;  in  a  fifth,  beryllium,  calcium,
strontium,  and  barium;  in  a  sixth,  magnesium,  zinc,  cadmium,  and  mercury;  in  a
seventh,  phosphorus,  arsenic,  antimony,  and  bismuth  [which  makes  seven  group-
ings on  the  one  hand.  And  after  showing]  ....  in  other  tracts  the  other
elements— namely,  aluminium,  gallium,  indium,  and  thallium;  silicon,  germanium,
and  tin;  carbon,  titanium,  and  zirconium.    .   .   .    [he  adds]  while  a  natural  position


604  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

near  the  neutral  axis  is  found  for  the  three  groups  of  elements  relegated  by  Pro-
fessor MendeleefF  to  a  sort  of  Hospital  for  Incurables— his  eighth  family.

It  might  be  interesting  to  compare  these  seven,  and  the  eighth  family
of  "incurables,"  with  the  allegories  concerning  the  seven  primitive
sons  of  "Mother,  Infinite  Space,"  or  Aditi,  and  the  eighth  son  rejected
by  her.  Many  a  strange  coincidence  may  thus  be  found  between
"those  intermediate  links  .  .  .  named  meta-elements"  or  elemen-
toids,  and  those  whom  Occult  Science  names  their  Noumenoi,  the
intelligent  Minds  and  Rulers  of  those  groupings  of  Monads  and  Atoms.
But  this  would  lead  us  too  far.  Let  us  be  content  with  finding  the
confession  of  the  fact  that:

This  deviation  from  absolute  homogeneity  should  mark  the  constitution  of  these
molecules  or  aggregations  of  matter  which  we  designate  elements  and  will  perhaps
be  clearer  if  we  return  in  imagination  to  the  earliest  dawn  of  our  material  universe,
and,  face  to  face  with  the  Great  Secret,  try  to  consider  the  processes  of  elemental
evolution.

Thus  finally  Science,  in  the  person  of  its  highest  representatives,  in
order  to  make  itself  clearer  to  the  profane,  adopts  the  phraseology  of
such  old  Adepts  as  Roger  Bacon,  and  returns  to  the  "prot5de."  All
this  is  hopeful  and  suggestive  of  the  "signs  of  the  times."

Indeed  these  "signs"  are  many  and  multiply  daily;  but  none  are
more  important  than  those  just  quoted.  For  now  the  chasm  between
the  Occult  "superstitious  and  unscientific"  teachings  and  those  of
"exact"  Science  is  completely  bridged,  and  one,  at  least,  of  the  few
eminent  Chemists  of  the  day  is  in  the  realm  of  the  infinite  possibilities
of  Occultism.  Every  new  step  he  will  take  will  bring  him  nearer  and
nearer  to  that  mysterious  Centre,  from  which  radiate  the  innumerable
paths  that  lead  down  Spirit  into  Matter,  and  which  transform  the  Gods
and  the  living  Monads  into  man  and  sentient  Nature.

But  we  have  something  more  to  say  on  this  subject  in  the  following
Section.


SECTION  IX.
The  Coming  Force


ITS    POSSIBILITIES    AND    IMPOSSIBILITIES.

Shall  we  say  that  Force  is  "moving  Matter,"  or  "Matter  in  motion,"
and  a  manifestation  of  Energy;  or  that  Matter  and  Force  are  the  phe-
nomenal differentiated  aspects  of  the  one  primary,  undifferentiated
Cosmic  Substance?

This  query  is  made  with  regard  to  that  Stanza  which  treats  of  Fohat
and  his  "Seven  brothers  or  Sons,"  in  other  words,  of  the  caicse  and  the
effects  of  Cosmic  Electricity,  the  Brothers  or  Sons  of  Occult  parlance
being  the  seven  primary  forces  of  Electricity,  whose  purely  pheno-
menal, and  hence  grossest,  effects  are  alone  cognizable  by  Physicists
on  the  cosmic  and  especially  on  the  terrestrial  plane.  These  include,
among  other  things,  Sound,  Light,  Colour,  etc.  Now  what  does
Physical  Science  tell  us  of  these  "Forces"?  Sound,  it  says,  is  a
sensation  produced  by  the  impact  of  atmospheric  molecules  on  the
tympanum,  which,  by  setting  up  delicate  tremors  in  the  auditory
apparatus,  thus  communicate  their  vibrations  to  the  brain.  Light  is
the  sensation  caused  by  the  impact  of  inconceivably  minute  vibrations
of  ether  on  the  retina  of  the  eye.

So,  too,  say  we.  But  these  are  simply  the  effects  produced  in  our
atmosphere  and  its  immediate  surroundings,  all,  in  fact,  which  falls
within  the  range  of  our  terrestrial  consciousness.  Jupiter  Pluvius  sent
his  symbol  in  drops  of  rain,  of  water  composed,  as  is  believed,  of  two
"elements,"  which  Chemistry  dissociates  and  recombines.  The  com-
pound molecules  are  in  its  power,  but  their  atoms  still  elude  its  grasp.
Occultism  sees  in  all  these  Forces  and  manifestations  a  ladder,  the
lower  rungs  of  which  belong  to  exoteric  Physics,  and  the  higher  are
traced  to  a  living,  intelligent,  invisible  Power,  which  is,  as  a  rule,  the
unconcerned,  but,  exceptionally,  the  conscious,  Cause  of  the  sense-
born  phenomena  designated  as  this  or  that  natural  law.


6o6  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

We  say  and  maintain  that  Sound,  for  one  thing,  is  a  tremendous
Occult  power;  that  it  is  a  stupendous  force,  of  which  the  electricity-
generated  by  a  million  of  Niagaras  could  never  counteract  the  smallest
potentiality  when  directed  with  Occult  Knowledge.  Sound  may  be
produced  of  such  a  nature  that  the  pyramid  of  Cheops  would  be  raised
in  the  air,  or  that  a  dying  man,  nay,  one  at  his  last  breath,  would  be
revived  and  filled  with  new  energy  and  vigour.

For  Sound  generates,  or  rather  attracts  together,  the  elements  that
produce  an  ozone  the  fabrication  of  which  is  beyond  Chemistry,  but  is
within  the  limits  of  Alchemy.  It  may  even  resurrect  a  man  or  an
animal  whose  astral  "vital  body"  has  not  been  irreparably  separated
from  the  physical  body  by  the  severance  of  the  magnetic  or  odic  chord.
As  one  saved  thrice  from  death  by  that  power,  the  writer  ought  to  be
credited  with  personally  knowing  something  about  it.

And  if  all  this  appears  too  unscientific  to  be  even  noticed,  let  Science
explain  to  what  mechanical  and  physical  laws,  known  to  it,  are  due
the  recently  produced  phenomena  of  the  so-called  Keely  motor.  What
is  it  that  acts  as  the  formidable  generator  of  invisible  but  tremendous
force,  of  that  power  which  is  not  only  capable  of  driving  an  engine
of  25  horse-power,  but  has  even  been  employed  to  bodily  lift  the
machinery?  Yet  this  is  done  simply  by  drawing  a  fiddle-bow  across
a  tuning  fork,  as  has  been  repeatedly  proven.  For  the  Etheric  Force,
discovered  by  John  Worrell  Keely,  of  Philadelphia,  well-known  in
America  and  Europe,  is  no  hallucination.  Notwithstanding  his  failure
to  utilize  it — a  failure  prognosticated  and  maintained  by  some  Occult-
ists from  the  first — the  phenomena  exhibited  by  the  discoverer  during
the  last  few  j^ears  have  been  wonderful,  almost  miraculous,  not  in  the
sense  of  the  S2iperna,tu?-al*  but  of  the  superhuman.  Had  Keely  been
permitted  to  succeed,  he  might  have  reduced  a  whole  army  to  atoms
in  the  space  of  a  few  seconds,  as  easily  as  he  reduced  a  dead  ox  to  that
condition.

The  reader  is  now  asked  to  give  serious  attention  to  that  newly -

•  The  word  "supernatural"  implies  above  or  outside  nature.  Nature  and  Space  are  one.  Now
Space  for  the  metaphysician  exists  outside  any  act  of  sensation,  and  is  a  purely  subjective  represen-
tation, notwithstanding  the  contention  of  Materialism,  which  would  connect  it  forcibly  with  one  or
another  datum  of  sensation.  For  our  senses,  it  is  fairly  subjective  when  independent  of  anything
within  it.  How  then  can  any  phenomenon,  or  anything  else,  step  outside,  or  be  performed  beyond,
that  which  has  no  limits?  But  when  spatial  extension  becomes  simply  conceptual,  and  is  thought
of  in  an  idea  connected  with  certain  actions,  as  by  the  Materialists  and  the  Physicists,  then  again
they  have  hardly  a  right  to  define  and  claim  that  which  can,  or  cannot,  be  produced  by  Forces
generated  within  even  limited  spaces,  as  they  have  not  even  an  approximate  idea  of  what  those
Forces  are.


AN  UNCONSCIOUS   OCCUI.TIST.  607

discovered   potency,  which   the   discoverer  has  named   Inter-Etheric
Force,  and  Forces.

In  the  humble  opinion  of  the  Occultists,  as  of  his  immediate  friends,
Mr.  Keely  was,  and  still  is,  at  the  threshold  of  some  of  the  greatest
secrets  of  the  Universe;  of  that  chiefly  on  which  is  built  the  whole
mystery  of  physical  Forces,  and  the  Esoteric  significance  of  the  "Mun-
dane Egg"  symbolism.  Occult  Philosophy,  viewing  the  manifested
and  the  unmanifested  Kosmog  as  a  unity,  symbolizes  the  ideal  concep-
tion of  the  former  by  that  "Golden  Egg"  with  two  poles  in  it.  It  is
the  positive  pole  that  acts  in  the  manifested  World  of  Matter,  while
the  negative  loses  itself  in  the  unknowable  Absoluteness  of  SAT —
Be-ncss*  Whether  this  agrees  with  the  philosophy  of  Mr.  Keely,  we
cannot  tell,  nor  does  it  really  much  matter.  Nevertheless,  his  ideas
about  the  ethero-material  construction  of  the  Universe  look  strangely
like  our  own,  being  in  this  respect  nearly  identical.  This  is  what  we
find  him  saying  in  an  able  pamphlet  compiled  by  Mrs.  Bloomfield-
Moore,  an  American  lady  of  wealth  and  position,  whose  incessant
efforts  in  the  pursuit  of  truth  can  never  be  too  highl}?^  appreciated :

Mr.  Keely,  in  explanation  of  the  working  of  his  engine,  says:  "In  the  conception
of  any  machine  heretofore  constructed,  the  medium  for  inducing  a  neutral  centre
has  never  been  found.  If  it  had,  the  difficulties  of  perpetual-motion  seekers  would
have  ended,  and  this  problem  would  have  become  an  established  and  operating
fact.  It  would  only  require  an  introductory  impulse  of  a  few  pounds,  on  such  a
device,  to  cause  it  to  run  for  centuries.  In  the  conception  of  my  vibratory  engine,
I  did  not  seek  to  attain  perpetual  motion;  but  a  circuit  is  formed  that  actually  has
a  neutral  centre,  which  is  in  a  condition  to  be  vivified  by  my  vibratory  ether,  and,
while  under  operation  by  said  substance,  is  really  a  machine  that  is  virtually  inde-
pendent of  the  mass  (or  globe),  t  and  it  is  the  wonderful  velocity  of  the  vibrator)'
circuit  v/hicli  makes  it  so.  Still,  with  all  its  perfection,  it  requires  to  be  fed  with
the  vibratory  ether  to  make  it  an  independent  motor.  .  .  .  All  structures  require
a  foundation  in  strength  according  to  the  weight  of  the  mass  they  have  to  carry,
but  the  foundations  of  the  universe  rest  on  a  vacuous  point  far  more  minute  than
a  molecule;  in  fact,  to  express  this  truth  properly,  on  an  inter-eiheric  point,  which
requires  an  infinite  mind  to  understand  it.  To  look  down  into  the  depths  of  an
etheric  centre  is  precisely  the  same  as  it  would  be  to  search  into  the  broad  space  of
heaven's  ether  to  find  the  end,  with  this  difference :  that  one  is  the  positive  field,
while  the  other  is  the  negative  field."

•  It  is  not  correct,  when  speaking  of  Idealism,  to  show  it  based  upon  "the  old  ontological  assump-
tions that  things  or  entities  exist  independently  of  each  other,  and  otherwise  than  as  terms  of
relations"  (Stallo).  At  any  rate,  it  is  incorrect  to  say  so  of  Idealism  in  Eastern  Philosophy  and  its
cognition,  for  it  is  just  the  reverse.

t  Independent,  in  a  certain  sense,  but  not  disconnecUd  ■vi'\\.)\  it.


6o8  the;  secret  doctrine.

This  is,  as  may  easily  be  seen,  precisely  the  Eastern  Doctrine.  Mr.
Keely's  inter-etheric  point  is  the  laya-point  of  the  Occultists;  this,
however,  does  not  require  "  an  infinite  mind  to  understand  it,"  but  only
a  specific  intuition  and  ability  to  trace  its  hiding-place  in  this  World  of
Matter.  Of  course,  the  laya  centre  cannot  be  produced,  but  an  inter-
etheric  vacuum  can  be — as  is  proved  by  the  production  of  bell-sounds  in
space.  Mr.  Keely  speaks  as  an  unconscious  Occultist,  nevertheless,
when  he  remarks,  in  his  theory  of  planetary  suspension :

As  regards  planetary  volume,  we  would  ask  in  a  scientific  point  of  view,  How  can
the  immense  difference  of  volume  in  the  planets  exist  withoiit  disorganizing  the
harmonious  action  that  has  always  characterized  them  ?  I  can  only  answer  this
question  properly  by  entering  into  a  progressive  analysis,  starting  on  the  rotating
etheric  centres  that  were  fixed  by  the  Creator*  with  their  attractive  or  accumulative
power.  If  you  ask  what  power  it  is  that  gives  to  each  etheric  atom  its  inconceivable
velocity  of  rotation  (or  introductory  impulse),  I  must  answer  that  no  finite  mind  will
ever  be  able  to  conceive  what  it  is.  The  philosophy  of  accumulation  is  the  only  proof
that  such  a  power  has  been  given.  The  area,  if  we  can  so  speak,  of  such  an  atom
presents  to  the  attractive  or  magnetic,  the  elective  or  propulsive,  all  the  receptive
force  and  all  the  antagonistic  force  that  characterize  a  planet  of  the  largest  magni-
tude; consequently,  as  the  accumulation  goes  on,  the  perfect  equation  remains  the
same.  When  this  minute  centre  has  once  been  fixed,  the  power  to  rend  it  from  its
position  would  necessarily  have  to  be  so  great  as  to  displace  the  most  immense
planet  that  exists.  When  this  atomic  neutral  centre  is  displaced,  the  planet  must
go  with  it.  The  neutral  centre  carries  the  full  load  of  any  accumulation  from  the
start,  and  remains  the  same,  for  ever  balanced  in  the  eternal  space.

Mr.  Keely  illustrates  his  idea  of  "a  neutral  centre"  in  this  way:
We  will  imagine  that,  after  an  accumulation  of  a  planet  of  any  diameter,  say,
20,000  miles,  more  or  less,  for  the  size  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  problem,  there
should  be  a  displacement  of  all  the  material,  with  the  exception  of  a  crust  5,000
miles  thick,  leaving  an  intervening  void  between  this  crust  and  a  centre  of  the  size
of  an  ordinary  billiard  ball,  it  would  then  require  a  force  as  great  to  move  this  small
central  mass  as  it  would  to  move  the  shell  of  5,000  miles  thickness.  Moreover,  this
small  central  mass  would  carry  the  load  of  this  crust  for  ever,  keeping  it  equidistant ;
and  there  could  be  no  opposing  power,  however  great,  that  could  bring  them
together.  The  imagination  staggers  in  contemplating  the  immense  load  which
bears  upon  this  point  of  centre,  where  weight  ceases.  .  .  .  This  is  what  we
understand  by  a  neutral  centre.

And  this  is  what  Occultists  understand  by  a  laya  centre.

The  above  is  pronounced  to  be  "unscientific"  by  many.  But  so  is
everything  that  is  not  sanctioned  and  kept  on  the  strictly  orthodox
lines  of  Physical  Science.     Unless  the  explanation  given  by  the  in-


*  "  By  Fohat,  more  likely,"  would  be  an  Occultist's  reply.


OCCULT   MYSTERIES  AND  SOCIETY.  609

ventor  himself  is  accepted — and  his  explanations,  being  quite  orthodox
from  the  Spiritual  and  the   Occult  standpoints,   if  not  from   that   of
materialistic   speculative   Science,  called   exact,  are   therefore   ours  in
this  particular— what  can  Science  answer  to  facts  already  seen,  which
it   is   no   longer   possible    for   anyone   to   deny?       Occult   Philosophy
divulges  few  of  its  most  important  vital  mysteries.     It  drops  them  like
precious   pearls,  one  by  one,  far  and  wide  apart,  and  even  this  only
when  forced  to  do  so  by  the  evolutionary  tidal  wave  that  carries  on
Humanity  slowly,  silently,  but  steadily,  toward  the  dawn  of  the  Sixth
Race  mankind.     For  once  out  of  the  safe  custody  of  their  legitimate
heirs  and  keepers,  those  mysteries  cease  to  be  Occult :  they  fall  into  the
public  domain,  and  have  to  run  the  risk  of  becoming  curses  more  often
than  blessings  in  the  hands  of  the  selfish— of  the  Cains  of  the  human
race.     Nevertheless,  whenever  such  individuals  as  the  discoverer  of
Etheric  Force  are  born,  men  with  peculiar  psychic  and  mental  capaci-
ties,* they  are  generally  and  more  frequently  helped,  than  allowed  to
go  unassisted,  groping  on  their  way;  if  left  to  their  own  resources,  they
ver>'  soon  fall  victims  to  martyrdom  or  become  the  prey  of  unscrupu-
lous speculators.     But  they  are  helped  only  on  the  condition  that  they
should  not  become,  whether  consciously  or  unconsciously,  an  additional
peril  to  their  age:  a  danger  to  the  poor,  now  offered  in  daily  holocaust
by  the  less  wealthy  to  the  very  wealthy.f     This  necessitates  a  short
digression  and  an  explanation.

Some  twelve  years  back,  during  the  Philadelphia  Centennial  Exhi-
bition, the  writer,  in  answering  the  earnest  queries  of  a  Theosophist,
one  of  the  earliest  admirers  of  Mr.  Keel}-,  repeated  to  him  what  she
had  heard  in  quarters,  information  from  which  she  could  never  doubt.

It  had  been  stated  that  the  inventor  of  the  "Self-Motor"  was  what
is  called,  in  the  jargon  of  the  Kabalists,  a  "  natural-born  magician."
That  he  was  and  would  remain  unconscious  of  the  full  range  of  his
powers,  and  would  w'ork  out  merely  those  which  he  had  found  out  and
ascertained  in  his  own  tx^XvlX^— firstly,  because,  attributing  them  to  a

•  The  reason  for  such  psychic  capacities  is  given  farther  on.

f  The  above  was  written  in  i886,  at  a  time  when  hopes  of  success  for  the  "  Keely  Motor"  were  at
their  highest.  Every  word  then  said  by  the  \vriter  proved  true,  and  now  only  a  few  remarks  are
added  with  regard  to  the  failure  of  Mr.  Keely's  expectations,  so  far,  a  failure  now  admitted  by  the
discoverer  himself.  Though,  however,  the  word  failure  is  here  used,  the  reader  should  understand
it  in  a  relative  sense,  for.  as  Mrs.  Bloom  field -Moore  explains:  "  Wliat  Mr.  Keely  does  admit  is  that,
■baffled  in  applying  \'ibratory  force  to  mechanics,  upon  his  first  and  second  lines  of  experimental
research,  he  was  obliged  cither  to  confess  a  commerriai  failure,  or  to  try  a  third  departure  from  his
base  or  principle,  seeking  success  through  another  channel."  And  this  "channel"  is  on  the
physical  plane.


6ro  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

wrong  source,  he  could  never  give  them  full  sway;  and  secondly ^
because  it  was  beyond  his  power  to  pass  to  others  that  which  was
a  capacity  inherent  in  his  own  special  nature.  Hence,  the  whole  secret
could  not  be  made  over  permanently  to  anj-one,  for  practical  purposes
or  use.*

Individuals  born  with  such  a  capacity  are  not  very  rare.  That  they
are  not  heard  of  more  frequently  is  due  to  the  fact  that  they  live  and
die.  in  almost  every  case,  in  utter  ignorance  that  they  are  possessed  of
abnormal  powers.  Mr.  Keely  possesses  powers  which  are  called  abnor-
mal, just  because  they  happen  to  be  as  little  known,  in  our  day,  as  was
the  circulation  of  the  blood  before  Harvey's  time.  Blood  existed,  and
it  behaved  as  it  does  at  present  in  the  first  man  born  from  woman ;  and
so  exists  and  has  existed  in  man  that  principle  which  can  control  and
guide  etheric  vibratory  Force.  At  any  rate,  it  exists  in  all  those  mortals
whose  Inner  Selves  are  primordially  co7inected,  by  reason  of  their  direct
descent,  with  that  group  of  Dhydn-Choha?is  who  are  called  "the  first-born
of  j^ther."  Mankind,  psychically  considered,  is  divided  into  various
groups,  each  group  being  connected  with  one  of  the  Dhyanic  Groups
that  first  formed  psychic  man  (see  paragraphs  i,  2,  3,  4,  5  in  the  Com-
mentary to  Stanza  VII.).  Mr.  Keely — being  greatly  favoured  in  this
respect,  and  besides  his  psychic  temperament,  being,  moreover,  intel-
lectually a  genius  in  mechanics — may  achieve  most  wonderful  results.
He  has  achieved  some  already — more  than  any  mortal  man,  not  initiated
into  the  final  Mysteries,  has  achieved  in  this  age  up  to  the  present  day.
What  he  has  done  is — a's  his  friends  justly  say  of  him — certainly  quite
suificient  "to  demolish  with  the  hammer  of  Science  the  idols  of  Science"
— the  idols  of  matter  with  the  feet  of  clay.  Nor  would  the  writer  for  a
moment  think  of  contradicting  Mrs.  Bloomfield-Moore,  when,  in  her
paper  on  "Psychic  Force  and  Etheric  Force,"  she  states  that  Mr.  Keely,
as  a  Philosopher:

Is  great  enough  in  soul,  wise  enough  in  mind,  and  sublime  enough  in  courage  to
overcome  all  difficulties,  and  to  stand  at  last  before  the  world  as  the  greatest  dis-
coverer and  inventor  in  the  world.

And  again  she  writes :

Should  Keely  do  no  more  than  lead  scientists  from  the  dreary  realms  where  they
are  groping  into  the  open  field  of  elemental  force,  where  gravity  and  cohesion  are
disturbed  in  their  haunts  and  diverted  to  use;  where,  from  unity  of  origin,  emanates

•  We  learn  that  these  remarks  are  not  applicable  to  Mr.  Keely's  latest  discovery ;  time  alone  caa
show  the  exact  limit  of  his  achievements.


LIMITS  TO   DISCOVERIES.  6ll

infinite  energy  in  diversified  forms,  he  will  achieve  immortal  fame.  Should  he
demonstrate,  to  the  destruction  of  materialism,  that  the  universe  is  animated  by  a
mysterious  principle  to  which  matter,  however  perfectly  organized,  is  absolutely
subservient,  he  will  be  a  greater  spiritual  benefactor  to  our  race  than  the  modem
world  has  yet  found  in  any  man.  Should  he  be  able  to  substitute,  in  the  treatment
of  disease,  the  finer  forces  of  nature  for  the  grossly  material  agencies  which  have
sent  more  human  beings  to  their  graves  than  war,  pestilence  and  famine  combined,
he  will  merit  and  receive  the  gratitude  of  mankind.  All  this  and  more  will  he  do,
if  he  and  those  who  have  watched  his  progress,  day  by  day  for  years,  are  not  too
sanguine  in  their  expectations.

The  same  lady,  in  her  pamphlet,  Keelfs  Secrets,^  brings  forward  the
following  passage  from  an  article,  written  in  the  Theosophist  a  few
years  ago,  by  the  writer  of  the  present  volume:

The  author  of  No.  5  of  the  pamphlets  issued  by  the  Theosophical  Publication
Society,  What  is  Mailer  and  What  is  Force,  says  therein :  "The  men  of  science  have
just  found  out  'a  fourth  state  of  matter,'  whereas  the  Occultists  have  penetrated
years  ago  be3'ond  the  sixth,  and  therefore  do  not  infer,  but  know  of,  the  existence
of  the  seventh,  the  last."  This  knowledge  comprises  one  of  the  secrets  of  Keely's
so-called  "compound  secret."  It  is  already  known  to  many  that  his  secret  includes
"the  augmentation  of  energy,"  the  insulation  of  the  ether,  and  the  adaptation  of
•dynaspheric  force  to  machinery.

It  is  just  because  Keely's  discovery  would  lead  to  a  knowledge  of
one  of  the  most  Occult  secrets,  a  secret  which  can  never  be  allowed  to
fall  into  the  hands  of  the  masses,  that  his  failure  to  push  his  discoveries
to  their  logical  end  seems  certain  to  Occultists.  But  of  this  more  pre-
sently. Even  in  its  limitations  this  discovery  may  prove  of  the  greatest
benefit.     For:

Step  by  step,  with  a  patient  perseverance  which  some  day  the  world  will  honour,
this  man  of  genius  has  made  his  researches,  overcoming  the  colossal  difficulties
which  again  and  again  raised  up  in  his  path  what  seemed  to  be  (to  all  but  himself)
insurmountable  barriers  to  further  progress:  but  never  has  the  world's  index  finger
so  pointed  to  an  hour  when  all  is  making  ready  for  the  advent  of  the  new  form  of
force  that  mankind  is  waiting  for.  Nature,  always  reluctant  to  yield  her  secrets,  is
listening  to  the  demands  made  upon  her  by  her  master,  necessity.  The  coal  mines
of  the  world  cannot  long  afford  the  increasing  drain  made  upon  them.  Steam  has
reached  its  utmost  limits  of  power,  and  does  not  fulfil  the  requirements  of  the  age.
It  knows  that  its  days  are  numbered.  Electricity  holds  back,  with  bated  breath,
dependent  upon  the  approach  of  her  sister  colleague.  Air  ships  are  riding  at
anchor,  as  it  were,  waiting  for  the  force  which  is  to  make  aerial  navigation  some-
thing i7iore  than  a  dream.  As  easily  as  men  communicate  with  their  offices  from
their  homes  by  means  of  the  telephone,  so  will  the  inhabitants  of  separate  conti-
nents talk  across  the  ocean.     Imagination  is  palsied  when  seeking  to  foresee  the

•   Theosophical  Si/lings,  No.  9.


6l2  THE  SECRET   DOCTRINE.

grand  results  of  this  marvellous  discover}^  when  once  it  is  applied  to  art  and
mechanics.  In  taking  the  throne  which  it  will  force  steam  to  abdicate,  dyna-
spheric  force  will  rule  the  world  with  a  power  so  mighty  in  the  interests  of  civiliza-
tion, that  no  finite  mind  can  conjecture  the  results.  Laurence  Oliphant,  in  his
preface  to  Scientific  Religion,  says:  "A  new  moral  future  is  dawning  upon  the
human  race — one,  certainly,  of  which  it  stands  much  in  need."  In  no  way  could
this  new  moral  future  be  so  widely,  so  universally,  commenced  as  by  the  utilizing
of  dynaspheric  force  to  beneficial  purposes  in  life.

The  Occultists  are  ready  to  admit  all  this  with  the  eloquent  writer.
Molecular  vibration  is,  undeniably,  "Keely's  legitimate  field  of  re-
search," and  the  discoveries  made  by  him  will  prove  wonderful — yet
only  in  his  hands  and  through  himself.  The  world  so  far  will  get  but
that  with  which  it  can  be  safely  entrusted.  The  truth  of  this  assertion
has,  perhaps,  not  yet  quite  dawned  upon  the  discoverer  himself,  since
he  writes  that  he  is  absolutely  certain  that  he  will  accomplish  all  that
he  has  promised,  and  that  he  will  then  give  it  out  to  the  world ;  but  it
must  dawn  upon  him,  and  at  no  very  far  distant  date.  And  what  he
says  in  reference  to  his  work  is  a  good  proof  of  it :

In  considering  the  operation  of  my  engine,  the  visitor,  in  order  to  have  even  an
approximate  conception  of  its  viodus  operandi,  must  discard  all  thought  of  engines
that  are  operated  upon  tlie  principle  of  pressure  and  exhaustion,  by  the  expansion  of
steam  or  other  analogous  gas  which  impinges  upon  an  abutment,  such  as  the  piston  of
a  steam-engitie.  My  engine  has  neither  piston  nor  eccentrics,  nor  is  there  one  grain
of  pressure  exerted  in  the  engine,  whatever  may  be  the  size  or  capacity  of  it.  My
system,  in  every  part  and  detail,  both  in  the  developing  of  my  power  and  in  every
branch  of  its  utilization,  is  based  attd  founded  on  sympathetic  vibration.  In  no  other
way  would  it  be  possible  to  awaken  or  develop  my  force,  and  equally  impossible

would  it  be  to  operate  my  engine  upon  any  other  principle This,

however,  is  the  true  system ;  and  henceforth  all  my  operations  will  be  conducted  in
this  manner — that  is  to  say,  my  power  will  be  generated,  my  engines  run,  my
cannon  operated,  through  a  zvire.  It  has  been  only  after  years  of  incessant  labour,
and  the  making  of  almost  innumerable  experiments,  involving  not  only  the  con-
struction of  a  great  many  most  peculiar  mechanical  structures,  and  the  closest
investigation  and  study  of  the  phenomenal  properties  of  the  substance  "ether,"
per  se,  produced,  that  I  have  been  able  to  dispense  with  complicated  mechanism,
and  to  obtain,  as  I  claim,  mastery  over  the  subtle  and  strange  force  ivith  which  I  am
dealing.

The  passages  underlined  by  us,  are  those  which  bear  directly  on  the
Occult  side  of  the  application  of  the  vibratory  Force,  that  which  Mr.
Keely  calls  "sympathetic  vibration."  The  "wire"  is  already  a  step
below,  or  downward  from  the  pure  Etheric  plane  into  the  Terrestrial.
The  discoverer  has  produced  marvels — the  word  "miracle"  is  not  too


KEELY'S   ether.  613

Strong — when  acting  through  the  inter-etheric  Force  alone,  the  fifth

-A,

and  sixth  principles  of  Akasha.  From  a  generator  six  feet  long,  he  has
come  down  to  one  "no  larger  than  an  old-fashioned  silver  watch";
and  this  by  itself  is  a  miracle  oi  mechanical,  but  not  of  spiritual,  genius.
As  was  well  said  by  his  great  patroness  and  defender,  Mrs.  Bloomfield-
Moore :

The  two  forms  of  force  which  he  has  been  experimenting  with,  and  the  pheno-
mena attending  them,  are  the  very  antithesis  of  each  other.

One  was  generated  and  acted  upon  by  and  through  himself.  No  one,
who  should  have  repeated  the  thing  done  by  himself,  could  have  pro-
duced the  same  results.  It  was  truly  Keely's  Ether  that  acted,  while
Smith's  or  Brown's  Ether  would  have  remained  for  ever  barren  of
results.  For  Keely's  difficulty  has  hitherto  been  to  produce  a  machine
which  would  develop  and  regulate  the  Force  without  the  interv^ention
of  any  "will  power"  or  personal  influence  of  the  operator,  whether
conscious  or  unconscious.  In  this  he  has  failed,  so  far  as  others  were
concerned,  for  no  one  but  himself  could  operate  on  his  "machines."
Occultly  this  was  a  far  more  advanced  achievement  than  the  "success"
which  he  anticipates  from  his  wire,  but  the  results  obtained  from  the
fifth  and  sixth  planes  of  the  Etheric,  or  Astral,  Force,  will  never  be
permitted  to  serve  for  purposes  of  commerce  atid  traffic.  That  Keely's
organism  is  directly  connected  with  the  production  of  his  marvellous
results  is  proven  by  the  following  statement,  emanating  from  one  who
knows  the  great  discoverer  intimately.

At  one  time  the  shareholders  of  the  "Keely  Motor  Co."  put  a  man  in  his  work-
shop for  the  express  purpose  of  discovering  his  secret.  After  six  months  of  close
watching,  he  said  to  J.  W.  Keely  one  day:  "I  know  how  it  is  done,  now."  They
had  been  setting  up  a  machine  together,  and  Keely  was  manipulating  the  stop-cock
which  turned  the  force  on  and  off.  "Try  it,  then,"  was  the  answer.  The  man
turned  the  cock,  and  nothing  came.  "Let  me  see  you  do  it  again,"  the  man  said  to
Keely.  The  latter  complied,  and  the  machinery  operated  at  once.  Again  the
other  tried,  but  without  success.  Then  Keely  put  his  hand  on  liis  shoulder  and  told
him  to  try  once  more.  He  did  so,  with  the  result  of  an  instantaneous  production
of  the  current.

This  fact,  if  true,  settles  the  question.

We  are  told  that  Mr.  Keely  defines  electricity  "as  a  certain  form
of  atomic  vibration."  In  this  he  is  quite  right;  but  this  is  Electricity
on  the  terrestrial  plane,  and  through  terrestrial  correlations.  He
estimates —


6l4  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Molecular  vibrations  at       100,000,000  per  second.
Inter-molecular  "         "        300,000,000     "        "
Atomic  "         "        900,000,000     "        "

Inter-atomic        "         "      2,700,000,000     "        "
^theric  "        "      8,100,000,000    "        "

Inter-^Etheric      "        "    24,300,000,000     "        "

This  proves  our  point.  There  are  no  vibrations  that  could  be
counted  or  even  estimated  at  an  approximate  rate  beyond  "the  realm
of  the  fourth  Son  of  Fohat,"  to  use  an  Occult  phrase,  or  that  motion
which  corresponds  to  the  formation  of  Mr.  Crookes'  radiant  matter,
lightly  called  some  years  ago  the  "fourth  state  of  matter" — on  this  otir
plane.

If  the  question  is  asked  why  Mr.  Keely  was  not  allowed  to  pass  a
certain  limit,  the  answer  is  easy;  it  was  because  that,  which  he  has
unconsciously  discovered,  is  the  terrible  sidereal  Force,  known  to,  and
named  by  the  Atlanteans  Mash-mak,  and  by  the  Aryan  Rishis  m  their
Astra  Vidya  by  a  name  that  we  do  not  like  to  give.  It  is  the  Vril  of
Bulwer  Lytton's  Coming  Race,  and  of  the  coming  Races  of  our  man-
kind. The  name  Vril  may  be  a  fiction;  the  Force  itself  is  a  fact,  as
little  doubted  in  India  as  is  the  existence  of  the  Rishis,  since  it  is
mentioned  in  all  the  secret  books.

It  is  this  vibratory  Force,  which,  when  aimed  at  an  army  from  an
Agni-ratha,  fixed  on  a  flying  vessel,  a  balloon,  according  to  the  instruc-
tions found  in  Astra  Vidya,  would  reduce  to  ashes  100,000  men  and
elephants,  as  easily  as  it  would  a  dead  rat.  It  is  allegorized  in  the
Vishnu  Purdjia,  in  the  Ramayayia  and  other  works,  in  the  fable  about
the  sage  Kapila  whose  "glance  made  a  mountain  of  ashes  of  King
Sagara's  60,000  sons,"  and  which  is  explained  in  the  Esoteric  Works,
and  referred  to  as  the  Kapilaksha — Kapila's  Eye.

And  is  it  this  Satanic  Force  that  our  generations  are  to  be  allowed
to  add  to  their  stock  of  Anarchist's  baby-toys,  known  as  melenite,
dynamite  clock-work,  explosive  oranges,  "flower  baskets,"  and  such
other  innocent  names?  Is  it  this  destructive  agency,  which,  once  in
the  hands  of  some  modern  Attila,  a  bloodthirsty  Anarchist,  for
instance,  would  in  a  fev/  days  reduce  Europe  to  its  primitive  chaotic
state,  with  no  man  left  alive  to  tell  the  tale — is  it  this  Force  which  is
to  become  the  common  property  of  all  men  alike?

What  Mr.  Keely  has  already  done  is  grand  and  wonderful  in  the
extreme;  there  is  enough  work  before  him  in  the  demonstration  of  his
new  system  to  "humble  the  pride  of  those  scientists  who  are  material-


A  PREMATURE  DISCOVERY.  615

istic,  by  revealing  those  mysteries  which  lie  behind  the  world  of
matter,"  without,  nolens  volens,  revealing  it  to  all.  For  surely  Psychics
and  Spiritualists,  of  whom  there  are  a  good  number  in  European
armies,  would  be  the  first  to  personally  experience  the  fruits  of  the
revelation  of  such  mysteries.  Thousands  of  them  would  speedily  find
themselves  in  blue  Ether,  perhaps  with  the  populations  of  whole
countries  to  keep  them  company,  were  such  a  Force  to  be  even  entirely
discovered,  let  alone  made  publicly  known.  The  discovery  in  its  com-
pleteness is  by  several  thousand — or  shall  we  say  hundred  thousand —
years  too  premature.  It  will  be  in  its  appointed  place  and  time  only
when  the  great  roaring  flood  of  starv^ation,  misery,  and  underpaid
labour  ebbs  back  again — asitwill  when  the  just  demands  of  the  many  are
at  last  happily  attended  to ;  when  the  proletariat  exists  but  in  name,  and
the  pitiful  cry  for  bread,  that  rings  unheeded  throughout  the  world,
has  died  away.  This  may  be  hastened  by  the  spread  of  learning,  and
by  new  openings  for  work  and  emigration,  with  better  prospects  than
now  exist,  a7id  on  some  new  continent  that  may  appear.  Then  only  will
Keely's  Motor  and  Force,  as  originally  contemplated  by  himself  and
his  friends,  be  in  demand,  because  it  will  then  be  more  needed  by  the
poor  than  by  the  wealthy.

Meanwhile  the  Force  he  has  discovered  will  work  through  wires,
and,  if  he  succeeds,  this  will  be  quite  sufficient  to  make  of  him  the
greatest  discoverer  of  the  age  in  the  present  generation.

What  Mr.  Keely  says  of  Sound  and  Colour  is  also  correct  from  the
Occult  standpoint.  Hear  him  talk  as  though  he  were  the  nursling  of
the  "Gods-Revealers,"  and  as  if  he  had  gazed  all  his  life  into  the  depths
of  Father-Mother  ^ther.

In  comparing  the  tenuity  of  the  atmosphere  with  that  of  the  etheric

flows,  obtained  by  his  invention  for  breaking  up  the  molecules  of  air  by

vibration,  Keely  says:

It  is  as  platinum  to  hydrogen  gas.  Molecular  separation  of  air  brings  us  to  the
first  sub-division  onlj';  inter-niolecular,  to  the  second;  atomic,  to  the  third;  inter-
atomic, to  the  fourth;  etheric,  to  the  fifth;  and  inter-etheric,  to  the  sixth  sub-
division, or  positive  association  with  luminiferous  ether.*  In  my  introductory
argument  I  have  contended  that  this  is  the  vibratory  envelope  of  all  atoms.  In  my
definition  of  atom  I  do  not  confine  myself  to  the  sixth  sub-division  where  this
luminiferous  ether  is  developed  in  its  crude  form,  as  far  as  my  researches  prove.t

•  This  is  also  the  division  made  by  the  Occultists,  under  other  names.

t  Quite  so,  since  there  is  the  seventh  beyond,  which  begins  the  same  enumeration  from  the  first  to
the  last,  on  another  and  higher  plane.


6l6  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

I  think  this  idea  will  be  pronounced  by  the  physicists  of  the  present  day,  a  wild
freak  of  the  imagination.  Possibly,  in  time,  a  light  may  fall  upon  this  theory  that
will  bring  its  simplicity  forward  for  scientific  research.  At  present  I  can  only  com-
pare it  to  some  planet  in  a  dark  space,  where  the  light  of  the  sun  of  science  has  not

yet  reached  it I  assume  that  sound,  like  odour,  is  a  real  substance  of

unknown  and  wonderful  tenuity,  emanating  from  a  body  where  it  has  been  induced
by  percussion  and  throwing  out  absolute  corpuscles  of  matter,  inter-atomic  par-
ticles, with  velocity  of  1,120  feet  per  second;  in  vacuo  20,000.  The  substance  which
is  thus  disseminated  is  a  part  and  parcel  of  the  mass  agitated,  and,  if  kept  under
this  agitation  continuously,  would,  in  the  course  of  a  certain  cycle  of  time,  become
thoroughly  absorbed  by  the  atmosphere;  or,  more  trul)',  would  pass  through  the
atmosphere  to  an  elevated  point  of  tenuity  corresponding  to  the  condition  of  sub-
division that  governs  its  liberation  from  its  parent  body.  .  .  .  The  sounds  from
vibratory  forks,  set  so  as  to  produce  etheric  chords,  while  disseminating  their  tones
(compound),  permeate  most  thoroughly  all  substances  that  come  under  the  range
of  their  atomic  bombardment.  The  clapping  of  a  bell  in  vacuo  liberates  these
atoms  with  the  same  velocity  and  volume  as  one  in  the  open  air;  and  were  the
agitation  of  the  bell  kept  up  continuously  for  a  few  millions  of  centuries  it  would
thoroughly  return  to  its  primitive  element;  and,  if  the  chamber  were  hermetically
sealed,  and  strong  enough,  the  vacuous  volume  surrounding  the  bell  would  be
brought  to  a  pressure  of  many  thousands  of  pounds  to  the  square  inch,  by  the
tenuous  substance  evolved.  In  my  estimation,  sound  truly  defined  is  the  disturb-
ance of  atomic  equilibrium,  rupturing  actual  atomic  corpuscles ;  and  the  substance
thus  liberated  must  certainly  be  a  certain  order  of  etheric  flow.  Under  these  con-
ditions, is  it  unreasonable  to  suppose  that,  if  this  flow  were  kept  up,  and  the  body
thus  robbed  of  its  element,  it  would  in  time  disappear  entirely.?  All  bodies  are
formed  primitively  from  this  highly  tenuous  ether,  animal,  vegetable,  and  mineral,
and  they  are  only  returned  to  their  high  gaseous  condition  when  brought  under  a
state  of  differential  equilibrium.  ...  As  regards  odour,  we  can  only  get  some
definite  idea  of  its  extreme  and  wondrous  tenuity  by  taking  into  consideration  that
a  large  area  of  atmosphere  can  be  impregnated  for  a  long  series  of  years  from  a
single  grain  of  musk;  which,  if  weighed  after  that  long  interval,  will  be  found  to
be  not  appreciably  diminished.  The  great  paradox  attending  the  flow  of  odorous
particles  is  that  they  can  be  held  under  confinement  in  a  glass  vessel!  Here  is  a
substance  of  much  higher  tenuity  than  the  glass  that  holds  it,  and  yet  it  cannot
escape.  It  is  as  a  sieve  with  its  meshes  large  enough  to  pass  marbles,  and  yet
holding  fine  sand  which  cannot  pass  throvigh;  in  fact,  a  molecular  vessel  holding
an  atomic  substance.  This  is  a  problem  that  would  confound  those  who  stop  to
recognize  it.  But  infinitely  tenuous  as  odour  is,  it  holds  a  very  crude  relation  to
the  substance  of  sub-division  that  governs  a  magnetic  flow  (a  flow  of  sympathy,  if
you  please  to  call  it  so).  This  sub-division  comes  next  to  sound,  but  is  above
sound.  The  action  of  the  flow  of  a  magnet  coincides  somewhat  to  the  receiving
and  distributing  portion  of  the  human  brain,  giving  off  at  all  times  a  depreciating
ratio  of  the  amount  received.  It  is  a  grand  illustration  of  the  control  of  mind  over
matter,  which  gradually  depreciates  the  physical  till  dissolution  takes  place.     The


WHAT   IS  THE   NEW   FORCE?  617

magnet  on  the  same  ratio  gradually  loses  its  power  and  becomes  inert.  If  the
relations  that  exist  between  mind  and  matter  could  be  equated  and  so  held,  we
would  live  on  in  our  physical  state  eternally,  as  there  would  be  no  physical  depre-
ciation. But  this  physical  depreciation  leads,  at  its  terminus,  to  the  source  of  a
much  higher  development— viz.,  the  liberation  of  the  pure  ether  from  the  crude
molecular;  which,  in  my  estimation,  is  to  be  much  desired.*

It  may  be  remarked  that,  save  for  a  few  small  divergencies,  no  Adept
nor  Alchemist  could  have  better  explained  these  theories,  in  the  light
of  Modern  Science,  however  much  the  latter  may  protest  against  these
novel  views.  In  all  its  fundamental  principles,  if  not  in  its  details,
this  is  Occultism  pure  and  simple;  and  moreover,  it  is  modern  Natural
Philosophy  as  well.

This  new  Force,  or  whatever  Science  may  call  it,  the  effects  of  which
are  undeniable — as  is  admitted  by  more  than  one  Naturalist  and  Physi-
ci.st  who  has  visited  Mr.  Keely's  laboratory  and  personally  witnessed  its
tremendous  effects — what  is  it?  Is  it  a  "mode  of  motion,"  also,  in
vacuo,  since  there  is  no  Matter  to  generate  it  except  Sound — another
"mode  of  motion,"  no  doubt,  a  sensation  caused,  like  Colour,  by  vibra-
tions? Fully  as  we  believe  in  these  vibrations  as  the  proximate,  the
immediate,  cause  of  such  sensations,  we  as  absolutely  reject  the  one-
sided scientific  theory  that  there  is  710  factor  to  be  considered  as  external
to  us,  other  than  etheric  or  atmospheric  vibrations.

In  this  case  the  American  Substantialists  are  not  wrong,  though  they
are  too  anthropomorphic  and  material  in  their  views  for  these  to  be
accepted  by  Occultists,  when  they  argue  through  Mrs.  M.  S.  Organ,
M.D.,  that:

There  must  be  positive  entitative  properties  in  objects  which  have  a  constitu-
tional relation  to  the  nerves  of  animal  sensation.s,  or  there  can  be  no  perception.
No  impression  of  any  kind  can  be  made  upon  brain,  nerve,  or  mind — no  stiOiulus  to
action — unless  there  is  an  actual  and  direct  communication  of  a  substantial  force.
["Substantial"  as  far  as  it  appears,  in  the  usual  sense  of  the  word,  in  this  universe
of  Illusion  and  MayS,  of  course;  not  in  reality.]  That  force  may  be  the  most
refined  and  sublimated  immaterial  Entity  [.?].  Yet  it  must  exist;  for  no  sense,  ele-
ment, or  faculty  of  the  human  being  can  have  a  perception,  or  be  stimulated  into
action,  without  some  substantial  force  coming  in  contact  with  it.  This  is  the
fundamental  law  per\'ading  the  whole  organic  and  mental  world.  In  the  true
philosophical  sense  there  is  no  such  thing  as  independent  action :  for  every  force  or
substance  is  correlated  to  some  other  force  or  substance.  We  can  with  just  as  much
truth  and  reason  assert  that  no  substance  possesses  any  inherent  gustatory  property
or  any  olfactory  property— that  taste  and  odour  are  simply  sensations  caused  by
vibrations;  and  hence  mere  illu.sions  of  animal  perceptions.

•  From  Mrs.  Bloomfield-Moore's  paper,  The  New  Philosophy.


6i8  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

There  is  a  transcendental  set  of  causes  put  in  motion,  so  to  speak,  in
the  occurrence  of  these  phenomena,  which,  7io^  being-  ifi  relation  to  our
narrow  range  of  cognition,  can  only  be  understood  and  traced  to  their
source  and  their  nature,  by  the  spiritual  faculties  of  the  Adept.  They
are,  as  Asclepios  puts  it  to  the  King,  "incorporeal  corporealities,"  such
as  "appear  in  the  mirror,"  and  "abstract  forms"  that  we  see,  hear,  and
?imell,  in  our  dreams  and  visions.  What  have  the  "modes  of  motion,"
light,  and  ether  to  do  with  these?  Yet  we  see,  hear,  smell  and  touch
1  hem,  ergo  they  are  as  much  realities  to  us  in  our  dreams,  as  any  other
thing  on  this  plane  of  Maya.


SECTION  X.
On  the  Elements  and  Atoms.


When  the  Occultist  speaks  of  Elements,  and  of  human  Beings  who
lived  during  those  geological  ages,  the  duration  of  which  it  is  found  as
impossible  to  determine— according  to  the  opinion  of  one  of  the  best
English  Geologists*— as  the  nature  of  Matter,  it  is  because  he  knows
what  he  is  talking  about.     When  he  says  Man  and  Elements,  he  means
neither  man   in  his  present  physiological   and  anthropological  form,
nor  the  elemental  Atoms,  those  hypothetical  conceptions,  existing  at
present  in  scientific  minds,  the  entitative  abstractions  of  Matter  in  its
highly   attenuated    state;    nor,    again,   does   he    mean    the   compound
Elements  of  Antiquity.      In   Occultism   the  word  Element  in  every
case  means  Rudiment.     When  we  say  "Elementar}^  Man,"  we  mean
either  the  proemial,   incipient  sketch  of  man,  in  its  unfinished  and
undeveloped  condition,  hence  in  that  form  which  now  lies  latent  in
physical  man  during  his  life-time,  and  takes  shape  only  occasionally
and  under  certain  conditions;  or,  that  form  which  for  a  time  sur\dves
the   material   body,   and  which   is  better  known  as  an   Elementar>'.t
With  regard   to  Element,  when  the  term  is  used  metaphysically,   it
means,  in  distinction  to  the  mortal,  the  incipient  Divine  Man;  and,  in
its  physical  usage,  it  means  inchoate  Matter  in  its  first  undifferentiated
condition,  or  in  the  Laya  state,  the  eternal  and  normal  condition  of
Substance,  which  differentiates  only  periodically ;  during  that  differen-
tiation. Substance  is  really  in  an  abnormal  state — in  other  wwds,  it  is
but  a  transitory  illusion  of  the  senses.

As  to  the  Elemental  Atoms,  so-called,  the  Occultists  refer  to  them
by  that  name  with   a   meaning  analogous  to  that  which  is  given  by

•  In  cnswer  to  a  friend,  that  eminent  Geologist  writes:  "I  can  only  say,  in  reply  to  your  letter,
that  it  is  at  present,  and  perhaps  always  will  be,  impossible  to  reduce,  even  approximately,  geologriccil
time  into  years,  or  even  into  millenniums."     (Signed,  William  Pengelly,  F.R.S.)

t  Plato,  in  speaking  of  the  irradonal,  turbulent  Elements,  "composed  of  fire,  air,  water,  and  earth,"
means  Elementary  Daemons.    (See  Tinueus.)


620  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

the  Hindu  to  Brahma,  when  he  calls  him  Ann,  the  Atom.  Every
Elemental  Atom,  in  search  of  which  more  than  one  Chemist  has
followed  the  path  indicated  by  the  Alchemists,  is,  in  their  firm  belief,
when  not  k7iowledge,  a  Soul ;  not  necessarily  a  disembodied  Soul,  but  a
Jiva,  as  the  Hindus  call  it,  a  centre  of  Potential  Vitality,  with  latent
intelligence  in  it,  and,  in  the  case  of  compound  Souls,  an  intelligent
active  Existence,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest  order,  a  form  composed
of  more  or  less  differentiations.  It  requires  a  Metaphysician — and  an
Eastern  Metaphysician — to  understand  our  meaning.  All  those  Atom-
Souls  are  differentiations  from  the  One,  and  are  in  the  same  relation
to  it  as  is  the  Divine  Soul,  Buddhi,  to  its  informing  and  inseparable

A

Spirit,  Atma.

Modern  Physics,  in  borrowing  from  the  Ancients  their  Atomic
Theory,  forgot  one  point,  the  most  important  point  of  the  doctrine;
hence  they  have  got  only  the  husks  and  will  never  be  able  to  get  the
kernel.  In  adopting  physical  Atoms,  they  omitted  the  suggestive  fact
that,  from  Anaxagoras  to  Epicurus,  to  the  Roman  Eucretius,  and  finally
even  to  Galileo,  all  these  Philosophers  believed  more  or  less  in  ani-
viated  Atoms,  not  in  invisible  specks  of  so-called  "brute"  matter.
According  to  them,  rotatory  motion  was  generated  by  larger  (read,
more  divine  and  pure)  Atoms  forcing  other  Atoms  downwards;  the
lighter  ones  being  simultaneously  thrust  upward.  The  Esoteric
meaning  of  this  is  the  ever  cyclic  curve  of  differentiated  Elements
downward  and  upward  through  intercyclic  phases  of  existence,  until
each  again  reaches  its  starting-point  or  birthplace.  The  idea  was
metaphysical  as  well  as  physical ;  the  hidden  interpretation  embracing
Gods  or  Souls,  in  the  shape  of  Atoms,  as  the  causes  of  all  the  effects
produced  on  Earth  by  the  secretioris  from  the  divine  bodies.*  No
Ancient  Philosopher,  not  even  the  Jewish  Kabalists,  ever  dissociated
Spirit  from  Matter,  or  Matter  from  Spirit.  Everything  originated  in
the  One,  and,  proceeding  from  the  One,  must  finally  return  to  the  One.

Light  becomes  heat,  and  consolidates  into  fiery  particles;  which,  from  being
■ignited,  become  cold,  hard  particles,  round  and  smooth.  And  this  is  called  Soul,
imprisoned  in  its  robe  of  matter.t

Atoms  and  Souls  were  synonymous  in  the  language  of  the  Initiates,
The  doctrine  of  "whirling  Souls,"  Gilgoolem,  in  which  so  many
learned  Jews  have  believed,  ^  had  no  other  meaning  esoterically.     The


»  Plato  in  the  Timceus  uses  the  word  "secretions"  of  turbulent  Elements.
t  Valentinus'  Esoteric  Treatise  on  the  Doctrine  of  Gilgul.
X  See  Mackenzie's  Royal  Masonic  Cyclopedia.


THE  WHIRLING   OF  THE  SOUI..  621

learned  Jewish  Initiates  never  meant  Palestine  alone  by  the  Promised
Land,  but  they  meant  the  same  Nirvana  as  do  the  learned  Buddhist
and  Brahman — the  bosom  of  the  Eternal  One,  symbolized  by  that  of
Abraham,  and  by  Palestine  as  its  substitute  on  Earth.

Surely  no  educated  Jew  ever  believed  this  allegory  in  its  literal  sense,
that  the  bodies  of  Jews  contain  within  them  a  principle  of  Soul  which
cannot  rest,  if  the  bodies  are  deposited  in  a  foreign  land,  until,  by  a
process  called  the  "whirling  of  the  Soul"  the  immortal  particle  reaches
once  more  the  sacred  soil  of  the  "Promised  Eand."*  The  meaning  of
this  is  evident  to  an  Occultist.  The  process  was  supposed  to  be  accom-
plished by  a  kind  of  metempsychosis,  the  psychic  spark  being  conveyed
through  bird,  beast,  fish,  and  the  most  minute  insect.f  The  allegory
relates  to  the  Aioms  of  the  body,  each  of  which  has  to  pass  through
every  form,  before  all  reach  the  final  state,  which  is  the  first  starting-
point  of  the  departure  of  every  Atom — its  primitive  Laya  state.  But
the  primitive  meaning  of  Gilgoolem,  or  the  "Revolution  of  Souls,"  was
the  idea  of  the  reincarnating  Souls  or  Egos.  "  All  the  Souls  go  into
the  Gilgoolah,"  into  a  cyclic  or  revolving  process;  i.e.,  they  all  proceed
on  the  cyclic  path  of  re-births.  Some  Kabalists  interpret  this  doctrine
to  mean  only  a  kind  of  purgatory  for  the  souls  of  the  wicked.  But
this  is  not  so.

The  passage  of  the  Soul-Atom  "through  the  seven  Planetary
Chambers"  had  the  same  metaphysical  and  physical  meaning.  It  had
the  latter  when  it  was  said  to  dissolve  into  Ether.  Even  Epicurus,  the
model  Atheist  and  Materialist,  knew  so  much  and  believed  so  much  in
the  ancient  Wisdom,  that  he  taught  that  the  Soul — entirely  distinct
from  immortal  Spirit,  when  the  former  is  enshrined  latent  in  it,  as  it  is
in  every  atomic  speck — was  composed  of  a  fine,  tender  essence,  formed
from  the  smoothest,  roundest,  and  finest  atoms.\

And  this  shows  that  the  ancient  Initiates,  who  were  followed  more
or  less  closely  by  all  profane  Antiquity,  meant  by  the  term  Atom,  a
Soul,  a  Genius  or  Angel,  the  first-born  of  the  ever-concealed  Cause  of
all  causes;  and  in  this  sense  their  teachings  become  comprehensible.
They  asserted,  as  do  their  successors,  the  existence  of  Gods  and  Genii,
Angels  or  Demons,  not  outside,  nor  independent  of,  the  Universal
Plenum,  but  within  it.  Only  this  Plenum,  during  the  life-cycles,  is
infinite.  They  admitted  and  taught  a  good  deal  of  that  which  modern
Science  now  teaches — namely,  the  existence  of  a  primordial  World

'  Cse/n'j  Unveiled,  II.  152.  +  See  Mackenzie,  ibid.,  sub  voc.  X  fsis  Unveiled,  I.  317


622  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Stuff  or  Cosmic  Substance,  eternally  homogeneous,  except  during  its
periodic  existence;  then,  universally  diifused  throughout  infinite  Space,
it  differentiates,  and  gradually  forms  sidereal  bodies  from  itself  They
taught  the  revolution  of  the  Heavens,  the  Earth's  rotation,  the  Helio-
centric System,  and  the  Atomic  Vortices — Atoms  being  in  reality
Souls  and  Intelligences.  These  "Atomists"  were  spiritual,  most  trans-
cendental, and  philosophical  Pantheists.  It  is  not  they  who  would
have  ever  conceived  or  dreamed  that  monstrous  contrasted  progeny,  the
nightmare  of  our  modern  civilized  race :  inanimate  material  and  self-
guiding  Atoms,  on  the  one  hand,  and  an  extra-cosmic  God  on  the  other.
It  may  be  useful  to  show  what  the  Monad  was,  and  what  its  origin,
in  the  teachings  of  the  old  Initiates.

Modern  exact  Science,  as  soon  as  it  began  to  grow  out  of  its  teens,
perceived  the  great,  and  to  it  hitherto  esoteric,  axiom,  that  nothing,
whether  in  the  spiritual,  psychic,  or  physical  realm  of  Being,  could
come  into  existence  out  of  nothing.  There  is  no  cause  in  the  mani-
fested Universe  without  its  adequate  effects,  whether  in  Space  or  Time;
nor  can  there  be  an  effect  without  its  primal  cause,  which  itself  owes
its  existence  to  a  still  higher  one — the  final  and  absolute  Cause  having^
to  remain  to  man  for  ever  an  incomprehensible  Causeless  Cause.  But
even  this  is  no  solution,  and  must  be  viewed,  if  at  all,  from  the  highest
philosophical  and  metaphysical  standpoints,  otherwise  the  problem  had
better  be  left  unapproached.  It  is  an  abstraction,  on  the  verge  of  which
human  reason — however  trained  in  metaphysical  subtleties — trembles,
threatening  to  collapse.  This  may  be  demonstrated  to  any  European,
who  would  undertake  to  solve  the  problem  of  existence,  by  the  articles
of  faith  of  the  true  Vedantin  for  instance.  Let  him  read  and  study  the
sublime  teachings  of  Shankaracharya,  on  the  subject  of  Soul  and
Spirit,  and  the  reader  will  realize  what  is  now  said.*

While  the  Christian  is  taught  that  the  human  Soul  is  a  breath  of
God,  being  created  by  him  for  sempiternal  existence,  having  a  begin-
ning, but  no  end— and  therefore  never  to  be  called  eternal— the  Occult
Teaching  says:  Nothing  is  created,  it  is  only  transformed.  Nothing
can  manifest  itself  in  this  Universe— from  a  globe  down  to  a  vague,
rapid  thought— that  was  not  in  the  Universe  already;  everything  on
the  subjective  plane  is  an  eternal  is;  as  everything  on  the  objective
plane  is  an  ever-decoming—heceiuse  all  is  transitor5^


*  Vtveka  ChUd&mani,  translated  by  Mohini  M.  Chatterji,  as  "The  Crest  Jewel  of  \/isdoJii."    See
Theosophist,  July  and  August,  1886.


THE   ETERNAL   PILGRIM.  623

The  Monad — a  truly  "indivisible  thing,"  as  defined  by  Good,  who
did  not  give  it  the  sense  we  now  do — is  here  rendered  as  the  Atma,  in
conjunction  with  Buddhi  and  the  higher  Manas.  This  trinity  is  one
and  eternal,  the  latter  being  absorbed  in  the  former  at  the  termination
of  all  conditioned  and  illusive  life.  The  Monad,  then,  can  be  traced
through  the  course  of  its  pilgrimage  and  in  its  changes  of  transitory
vehicles,  only  from  the  incipient  stage  of  the  manifested  Universe.  In
Pralaya,  the  intermediate  period  between  two  Manvantaras,  it  loses  its
name,  as  it  loses  it  when  the  real  One  Self  of  man  merges  into  Brahman,
in  cases  of  high  Samadhi  (the  Turiya  state),  or  final  Nirvana ;  in  the
words  of  Shankara:

When  the  disciple  having  attained  that  primeval  consciousness,  absolute  bliss,  of
which  the  nature  is  truth,  which  is  without  form  and  action,  abandons  this  illusive
body  that  has  been  assumed  by  the  Alma  just  as  an  actor  (abandons)  the  dress
(put  on).

For  Buddhi,  the  Anandamaya  Sheath,  is  but  a  mirror  which  reflects
absolute  bliss ;  and,  moreover,  that  reflection  itself  is  yet  not  free  from
ignorance,  and  is  «<?/  the  Supreme  Spirit,  since  it  is  subject  to  con-
ditions, is  a  spiritual  modification  of  Prakriti,  and  is  an  effect;  Atma
alone  is  the  one  real  and  eternal  substratum  of  all,  the  Essence  and
Absolute  Knowledge,  the  Kshetrajna.  Now  that  the  Revised  Version
of  the  Gospels  has  been  published  and  the  most  glaring  mistranslations
of  the  old  versions  are  corrected,  one  can  understand  better  the  words
in  I  /okn  V.  6:  "It  is  the  Spirit  that  beareth  witness  because  the  Spirit
is  truth."  The  words  that  follow  in  the  mistranslated  version  about
the  "three  witnesses,"  hitherto  supposed  to  stand  for  "the  Father,  the
Word,  and  the  Holy  Ghost,"  show  the  real  meaning  of  the  writer  very
clearly,  thus  still  more  forcibly  identifying  his  teaching  in  this  respect
with  that  of  Shankaracharya.     For  what  can  the  sentence  mean,  "there

are  three  that  bear  witness the  Spirit  and  the  Water  and

the  Blood" — if  it  bears  no  relation  to,  nor  connection  with,  the  more
philosophical  statement  of  the  great  Vedantin  teacher,  who,  speaking  of
the  Sheaths — the  principles  in  man — Jiva,  Vijiianamaya,  etc.,  which
are,  in  their  physical  manifestation,  "Water  and  Blood"  or  Life,  adds

A

that  Atma,  Spirit,  alone  is  what  remains  after  the  subtraction  of  the
Sheaths  and  that  it  is  the  Only  Witness,  or  synthesized  unity.  The
less  spiritual  and  philosophical  .school,  solely  with  an  eye  to  a  Trinitv.
made  three  witnesses  out  of  "one,"  thus  connecting  it  more  with  Harth
than  with   Heaven.      It  is   called   in    Esoteric   Philosophy   the    "One


624  '^'^'^  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Witness,"  and,  while  it  rests  in  Devachan,  is  referred  to  as  the  "Three
Witnesses  to  Karma."

Atma,  our  seventh  principle,  being  identical  with  the  Universal
Spirit,  and  man  being  one  with  it  in  his  essence,  what  is  then  the
Monad  proper?  It  is  that  homogeneous  spark  which  radiates  in
millions  of  rays  from  the  primeval  Seven; — of  which  Seven  some-
thing will  be  said  further  on.  It  is  the  emanating  Spark  from  the
UNCREATED  Ray — a  mystery.  In  the  esoteric,  and  even  exoteric
Buddhism  of  the  North,  Adi-Buddha  (Chogi  Dangpoi  Sangye),  the
One  Unknown,  without  beginning  or  end,  identical  with  Parabrah-
man  and  Ain  Suph,  emits  a  bright  Ray  from  its  Darkness,

This  is  the  Logos,  the  First,  or  Vajradhara,  the  Supreme  Buddha,
also  called  Dorjechang.  As  the  Lord  of  all  Mysteries  he  cannot
manifest,  but  sends  into  the  world  of  manifestation  his  Heart — the
"Diamond  Heart,"  Vajrasattva  or  Dorjesempa.  This  is  the  Second
Logos  of  Creation,  from  whom  emanate  the  seven — in  the  exoteric
blind  the  five — Dhj^ani-Buddhas,  called  the  Anupadaka,  the  "Parent-
less."  These  Buddhas  are  the  primeval  Monads  from  the  World  of
Incorporeal  Being,  the  Ariipa  World,  wherein  the  Intelligences  (on
that  plane  only)  have  neither  shape  nor  name,  in  the  exoteric  system,
but  have  their  distinct  seven  names  in  the  Esoteric  Philosophy.  These
Dhj'ani-Buddhas  emanate,  or  create  from  themselves,  by  virtue  of
Dhyana,  celestial  Selves — the  super-human  Bodhisattvas.  These,  in-
carnating at  the  beginning  of  ever}^  human  cycle  on  Earth  as  mortal
men,  become  occasionally,  owing  to  their  personal  merit,  Bodhisattvas
among  the  Sons  of  Humanity,  after  which  they  may  reappear  as
Manushi,  or  Human,  Buddhas.  The  Anupadaka,  or  Dhyani-Buddhas,
are  thus  identical  with  the  Brahmanical  Manasaputra,  Mind- born  Sons
— whether  of  Brahma,  or  of  either  of  the  other  two  Trimurtian  Hypo-
stases; they  are  identical  also  with  the  Rishis  and  Prajapatis.  Thus,
a  passage  is  found  in  Anugitd,  which,  read  esoterically,  shows  plainl)^
though  under  another  imagery,  the  same  idea  and  system.     It  says:

Whatever  entities  there  are  in  this  world,  moveable  or  immoveable,  they  are  the
very  first  to  be  dissolved  [at  Pralaya];  and  next  the  developments  produced  from
the  elements  [from  which  the  visible  viniverse  is  fashioned];  and  (after)  these
developments  [evolved  entities],  all  the  elements.  Such  is  the  upward  gradation
among  entities.  Gods,  Men,  Gandharvas,  Pishachas,  Asuras,  Rakshasas,  all  have
been  created  by  Nature  [Svabhava,  or  Prakriti,  plastic  Nature],  not  by  actions,
nor  by  a  cause  [not  by  any  physical  cause].  These  Br&hmanas  [the  Rishi  Pra-
jaoati?],  the  creators  of  the  world,  are  born   here  (on  earth)  again  and  again.


BUDDHAS  OF  THE  THREE  WORLDS.  62


o


And  whatever  is  produced  from  them  is  dissolved  in  due  lime  in  those  very
five  great  elements  [the  five,  or  rather  seven,  Dhj'ani-Buddhas,  also  called  "Ele-
ments" of  Mankind],  like  billows  in  the  ocean.  These  great  elements  are  in  every
way  (beyond)  the  elements  that  make  up  the  world  [the  gross  elements].  And  he
who  is  released,  even  from  these  five  elements  [the  TanmStras],*  goes  to  the  highest
goal.  The  Lord  PrajSpati  [Brahma]  created  all  this  by  the  mind  only  [b)'  Dhyaua,
or  abstract  meditation  and  mystic  powers,  like  the  Dhyani-Buddhas].t

Evidently  then,  these  Brahmanas  are  identical  with  the  terrestrial
Bodhisattvas  of  the  heavenly  Dhyani-Buddhas.  Both,  as  primordial,
intelligent  "Elements,"  become  the  Creators  or  the  Emanators  of  the
Monads  destined  to  become  human  in  that  cj'cle;  after  which  they
evolve  themselves,  or,  so  to  say,  expand  into  their  own  Selves  as
Bodhisattvas  or  Brahmanas,  in  heaven  and  earth,  to  become  at  last
simple  men.  "The  creators  of  the  world  are  born  here,  on  earth
again  and  again" — truly.  In  the  Northern  Buddhist  S3^stem,  or  the
popular  exoteric  religion,  it  is  taught  that  every  Buddha,  while  preach-
ing the  Good  Law  on  Earth,  manifests  himself  simultaneously  in  three
Worlds:  in  the  Formless  World  as  a  Dhyani-Buddha,  in  the  World  of
Forms  as  a  Bodhisattva,  and  in  the  World  of  Desire,  the  lowest  or  our
World,  as  a  man.      Esoterically  the   teaching  differs.      The  divine,

A.

purely  Adi-Buddhic  Monad  manifests  as  the  universal  Buddhi,  the
Maha-Buddhi  or  Mahat,  in  Hindu  philosophies,  the  spiritual,  omnis-
cient and  omnipotent  Root  of  divine  Intelligence,  the  highest  Anima
Mundi  or  the  Logos.  This  descends  "like  a  flame  spreading  from  the
eternal  Fire,  immoveable,  without  increase  or  decrease,  ever  the  same
to  the  end"  of  the  cycle  of  existence,  and  becomes  Universal  Life  on
the  Mundane  Plane.  From  this  Plane  of  conscious  Life  shoot  out,
like  seven  fiery  tongues,  the  Sons  of  Light,  the  Logoi  of  Life;  then
the  Dhyani-Buddhas  of  contemplation,  the  concrete  forms  of  their
formless  Fathers,  the  Seven  Sons  of  Light,  still  themselves,  to  whom
maybe  applied  the  Brahmanical  mystic  phrase:  "Thou  art  That" —
Brahman.  It  is  from  these  Dhyani-Buddhas  that  emanate  their
Chhayas  or  Shadows,  the  Bodhisattvas  of  the  celestial  realms,  the
prototypes  of  the  super-terrestrial  Bodhisattvas,  and  of  the  terrestrial
Buddhas,  and  finally  of  men.  The  Seven  Sons  of  Light  are  also
called  Stars.


•  The  Tanmatras  are  literally  the  type  or  rudiment  of  an  element  devoid  of  qualities;  but  esoteri-
cally, they  are  the  primeval  Noumena  of  that  which  becomes  in  the  progress  of  evolution,  a  Cosmic
Klement,  in  the  sense  given  to  the  term  in  Antiquity,  not  in  that  of  Physics.  They  are  the  Logoi,
the  seven  emanations  or  rays  of  the  Logos.

•■  Ch.  xxxvi;  Telang's  translation,  pp.  387-8.

41


^26  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

The  Star  under  which  a  human  Entity  is  born,  says  the  Occult
Teaching,  will  remain  for  ever  its  star,  throughout  the  whole  cycle  of
its  incarnations  in  one  Manvantara.  But  this  is  not  his  astrological  star.
The  latter  is  concerned  and  connected  with  the  Personality;  the  former
with  the  hidividuality.  The  Angel  of  that  Star,  or  the  Dhyani-Buddha
connected  with  it,  will  be  either  the  guiding,  or  simply  the  presiding,
Angel,  so  to  say,  in  every  new  rebirth  of  the  Monad,  which  is  part  of
his  own  essejice,  though  his  vehicle,  man,  may  remain  for  ever  ignorant
of  this  fact.  The  Adepts  have  each  their  Dhyani-Buddha,  their  elder
"Twin-Soul,"  and  they  know  it,  calling  it  "Father-Soul,"  and  "Father-
Fire."  It  is  only  at  the  last  and  supreme  Initiation,  however,  when
placed  face  to  face  with  the  bright  "Image"  that  they  learn  to  recog-
nize it.  How  much  did  Bulwer  Lytton  know  of  this  mystic  fact,  when
describing,  in  one  of  his  highest  inspirational  moods,  Zanoni  face  to
face  with  his  Augoeides?

The  Logos,  or  both  the  unmanifested  and  the  manifested  Word,  is
called  by  the  Hindus,  Ishvara,  the  Lord,  though  the  Occultists  give  it
another  name.  Ishvara,  say  the  Vedantins,  is  the  highest  conscious-
ness in  Nature.  "This  highest  consciousness,"  answer  the  Occultists,
"is  only  a  synthetic  unit  in  the  World  of  the  manifested  Logos — or  on
the  plane  of  illusion;  for  it  is  the  sum  total  of  Dhyan  Chohanic  con-
sciousness." "O  wise  man,  remove  the  conception  that  Not-Spirit  is
Spirit''— S2iys  Shankaracharya.  AtmS  is  Not-Spirit  in  its  final  Para-
brahmic  state;  Ishvara,  or  Logos,  is  Spirit;  or,  as  Occultism  explains,
it  is  a  compound  unity  of  manifested  living  Spirits,  the  parent-source
and  nursery  of  all  the  mundane  and  terrestrial  Monads,  plus  their
divine  Reflection,  which  emanate  from,  and  return  into,  the  Logos,
each  in  the  culmination  of  its  time.  There  are  seven  chief  Groups  of
such  Dhyan  Chohans,  which  groups  will  be  found  and  recognized  in
every  religion,  for  they  are  the  primeval  Seven  Rays.  Humanity,
Occultism  teaches  us,  is  divided  into  seven  distinct  Groups,  with  their
sub-divisions,  mental,  spiritual,  and  physical.  Hence  there  are  seven
chief  planets,  the  spheres  of  the  indwelling  seven  Spirits,  under  each
of  which  is  born  one  of  the  human  Groups  which  is  guided  and
influenced  thereby.  There  are  only  seven  planets  specially  connected
with  Earth,  and  twelve  houses,  but  the  passible  combinations  of  their
aspects  are  countless.  As  each  planet  can  stand  to  each  of  the  others
in  twelve  different  aspects,  their  combinations  must  be  almost  infinite;
as   infinite,  in    fact,   as   the   spiritual,   psychic,    mental,    and   physical


THE  CREST-JEWEI,   OF  WISDOM.  627

capacities  in  the  numberless  varieties  of  the  geiius  homo,  each  of  which
varieties  is  born  under  one  of  the  seven  planets  and  one  of  the  said
countless  planetary'  combinations.*

The  Monad,  then,  viewed  as  One,  is  above  the  seventh  principle  in
Kosmos  and  man ;  and  as  a  Triad,  it  is  the  direct  radiant  progeny  of
the  said  compound  Unit,  not  the  Breath  of  "God,"  as  that  Unit  is
called,  nor  creating  out  of  nihil;  for  such  an  idea  is  quite  unphilo-
.sophical,  and  degrades  Deit}-,  dragging  It  down  to  a  finite,  attributive
condition.  As  well  expressed  by  the  translator  of  the  Crest- Jewel  of
Wisdo7n — though  Ishvara  is  "God"

Unchanged  in  the  profoundest  depths  of  Pralayas  and  in  the  intensest  activity  of
Manvantaras,  [still]  beyond  [him]  is  Atm.\,  round  whose  pavilion  is  the  darkness  of
eternal  MAvA.t

The  "Triads"  born  under  the  same  Parent-Planet,  or  rather  the
Radiations  of  one  and  the  same  Planetar>'  Spirit  or  Dhyani-Buddha
are,  in  all  their  after  lives  and  rebirths,  sister,  or  "twin"  souls,  on  this
Earth.  The  idea  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  Christian  Trinity,  the
"Three  in  One,"  only  it  is  still  more  metaphysical:  the  Universal
"Over-Spirit,"  manifesting  on  the  two  higher  planes,  those  of  Buddhi
and  Mahat.  These  are  the  three  Hypo.stases,  metaphysical,  but  never
personal.

This  was  known  to  every  high  Initiate  in  every  age  and  in  every
countr>':  "I  and  my  Father  are  one,"  said  Jesus. J  When  he  is  made
to  say,  elsewhere:  "I  ascend  to  my  Father  and  you?-  Father,"§  it  meant
that  which  has  just  been  stated.  The  identity,  and  at  the  same  time
the  illusive  differentiation  of  the  Ang-el-Monad  and  the  Humati-'M.omA
is  shown  in  the  sentences:  "My  Father  \s  greater  WiSin  I";]|  "Glorify
your  Father  rvhick  is  in  Heaven" ;%  "Then  shall  the  righteous  shine
forth  as  the  sun  in  the  kingdom  of  their  Father"  (not  otir  Father).**    So

•  See  Theosophist,  August,  i886.

f  The  now  universal  error  of  attributingr  to  the  Aneieiits  tlie  knowledge  of  only  seven  planets,
simplj'  because  they  mentioned  no  others,  is  based  on  the  same  general  ignorance  of  their  Occult
doctrines.  The  question  is  not  whether  they  were,  or  were  not,  aware  of  the  existence  of  the  later
discovered  planets ;  but  whether  the  reverence  paid  by  them  to  the  four  exoteric  and  three  secret
Great  Gods — the  Star-Angels,  had  not  some  special  reason.  The  writer  ventures  to  say  there  was
such  a  reason,  and  it  is  this.  Had  they  known  of  as  many  planets  as  we  do  now — and  this  question
can  hardly  be  decided  at  present,  either  way— they  would  still  have  only  connected  the  seven  with
their  religious  worship,  because  the.se  seven  are  directly  and  specially  connected  with  our  Earth,  or.
using  esoteric  phraseology,  with  our  septenary  Ring  of  Spheres,

X  John,  X.  30.

?  Ibid.,  XX,  17.

t1  Ibid.,  liv.  28,

^  Matt.,  V.  16.

'-  •  Ibid.,  xiii,  43.


628  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

again  Paul  asks:  "Know  ye  not  ye  are  the  temple  of  God,  and  that  the
Spirit  of  God dwelleth  in  you?"*  All  this  was  simply  meant  to  show
that  the  group  of  disciples  and  followers  attracted  to  him  belonged  to
the  same  Dhyani-Buddha,  Star,  or  Father,  and  that  this  again  belonged
to  the  same  planetary  realm  and  division  as  he  did.  It  is  the  knowledge
of  this  Occult  Doctrine  that  found  expression  in  the  review  of  The  Idyll
of  the  White  Lotus,  when  T.  Subba  Row  wrote :

Every   Buddha  meets   at   his  last  Initiation  all  the  great  Adepts  who  reached
Buddhahood  during  the  preceding  ages    .    .     .    every  class  of  Adepts  has  its  own

bond  of  spiritual  communion  which  knits  them  together The  only

possible  and  effectual  way  of  entering  into  such  brotherhood  ....  is  by
bringing  oneself  within  the  influence  of  the  Spiritual  light  which  radiates  from
one's  own  Logos.  I  may  further  point  out  here  ....  that  such  communion
is  only  possible  between  persons  whose  souls  derive  their  life  and  sustenance  from
the  same  divine  Ray,  and  that,  as  seven  distinct  Rays  radiate  from  the  "Central
Spiritual  Sun,"  all  Adepts  and  Dhyan  Chohans  are  divisible  into  seven  classes,  each
of  which  is  guided,  controlled,  and  overshadowed  by  one  of  the  seven  forms  or
manifestations  of  the  divine  Wisdom.t

It  is  then  the  Seven  Sons  of  Light, — called  after  their  planets  and
often  identified  with  them  by  the  rabble,  namely,  Saturn,  Jupiter,
Mercury,  Mars,  Venus,  and  presumably  the  Sun  and  Moon,  for  the
modern  critic,  who  goes  no  deeper  than  the  surface  of  old  religions^ —
which  are,  according  to  the  Occult  Teachings,  our  heavenly  Parents,  or
synthetically  our  "  Father."  Hence,  as  already  remarked,  Polytheism
is  really  more  philosophical  and  correct,  as  to  fact  and  Nature,  than  is
anthropomorphic  Monotheism.  Saturn,  Jupiter,  Mercury,  and  Venus,
the  four  exoteric  planets,  and  the  three  others,  which  must  remain
unnamed,  were  the  heavenly  bodies  in  direct  astral  and  psychic  com-
munication, morally  and  physically,  with  the  Earth,  its  Guides,  and
Watchers ;  the  visible  orbs  furnishing  our  Humanity  with  its  outward
and   inward   characteristics,  and   their   Regents   or   Rectors  with  our

•  I  Cor.,  iii.  i6.

t  Theosophist,  Aug.,  1886.

t  These  are  planets  accepted  for  purposes  of  Judicial  Astrology  only.  The  astro-theogonical
division  differed  from  the  above.  The  Sun,  being  a  central  star  and  not  a  planet,  stands,  with  its
seven  planets,  in  more  occult  and  mysterious  relations  to  our  Globe  than  is  generally  known.  The
Sun  was,  therefore,  considered  the  great  Father  of  all  the  Seven  "  Fathers,"  and  this  accounts  for  the
variations  found  between  the  Seven  and  Eight  Great  Gods  of  Chaldean  and  other  countries.  Neither
the  Earth,  nor  the  Moon,  its  satellite,  nor  yet  the  stars,  for  another  reason,  were  anything  more  than
iiibstituics  used  for  Esoteric  purposes.  Yet,  even  with  the  exclusion  of  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  from  the
calculation,  the  Ancients  seem  to  have  known  oi seven  planets.  How  many  more  are  known  to  us,  so
far,  if  we  throw  out  the  Earth  and  Moon  ?  Seven,  and  no  more  :  Seven  primary  or  principal  planet::,
the  ve.st  planetoids  rather  than  planets.


URANUS   AND   NEPTUNE.  629

Monads  and  spiritual  faculties.  In  order  to  avoid  creating  new  mis-
conceptions, let  it  be  stated  that  among  the  three  Secret  Orbs,  or  Star-
Angels,  neither  Uranus  nor  Neptune  were  included;  not  only  because
they  were  unknown  under  these  names  to  the  ancient  Sages,  but
because  they,  like  all  other  planets,  however  many  there  may  be,  are
the  Gods  and  Guardians  of  other  septenary  Chains  of  Globes  within
our  System.

Nor  do  the  two  great  planets  last  discovered  depend  entirely  on  the
Sun,  as  do  the  rest  of  the  planets.  Otherwise,  how  can  we  explain  the
fact  that  Uranus  receives  s^th  part  of  the  light  received  by  our  Earth,
while  Neptune  receives  only  ^-^th  part;  and  that  their  satellites  show
a  peculiarity  of  inverse  rotation  found  in  no  other  planets  of  the  Solar
System  ?  At  any  rate,  what  we  say  applies  to  Uranus,  though  the  fact
has  again  |?een  disputed  recently.

This  subject  will,  of  course,  be  considered  as  a  mere  vagary,  by  all
those  who  confuse  the  universal  order  of  Being  with  their  own  systems
of  classification.  Here,  however,  simple  facts  from  Occult  Teachings
are  stated,  to  be  either  accepted  or  rejected,  as  the  case  may  be.  There
are  details  which,  on  account  of  their  great  metaphysical  abstraction,
ca7inoihe  entered  upon.  Hence,  we  merely  state  that  only  seven  of
our  planets  are  as  intimately  related  to  our  Globe,  as  the  Sun  is  to  all
the  bodies  subject  to  him  in  his  System.  Of  these  bodies  the  poor  little
number  of  primary  and  secondary  planets  known  to  Astronomy,  k)oks
wretched  enough,  in  truth.*  Therefore,  it  stands  to  reason  that  there
are  a  great  number  of  planets,  small  and  large,  that  have  not  been
discovered  yet,  but  of  the  existence  of  which  ancient  Astronomers — all
of  them  initiated  Adepts — must  certainly  have  been  aware.  But,  as
the  relation  of  these  to  the  Gods  was  sacred,  it  had  to  remain  arcane,  as
did  also  the  names  of  various  other  planets  and  stars.

Besides  this,  even  the  Roman  Catholic  Theolog\^  speaks  of  ''seventy
planets  that  preside  over  the  destinies  of  the  nations  of  this  globe;"
and,  save  the  erroneous  application,  there  is  more  truth  in  this  tradition
than  in  exact  modern  Astronomy.     The  seventy  planets  are  connected

=^  When  one  remembers  that  under  the  powerful  telescope  of  Sir  William  Herschell,  that  eminent
Astronomer— gauging  merely  that  portion  of  heaven  in  the  equatorial  plane,  the  approximate  centre
of  which  is  occupied  by  our  Earth—  saw  in  one  quarter  of  an  hour,  16,000  stars  pass  ;  and  applying
this  calculation  to  the  totality  of  the  "Milky  Way"  he  found  in  it  no  less  than  eighteen  millions  of
Suns,  one  wonders  no  longer  that  Laplace,  in  conversation  with  Napoleon  I,  shouldihave  called  God  a
hypothesis— -p^riecWy  useless  to  speculate  upon  for  exact  Physical  Science,  at  any  rate.  Occult  Meta-
physics and  transcendental  Philosophy  will  alone  be  able  to  lift  the  smallest  corner  of  the  impene-
trable veil  in  this  direction.


630  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

with  the  seventy  elders  of  the  people  of  Israel  *  and  the  Regents  of
these  planets  are  meant,  not  the  orbs  themselves;  the  word  seventy  is
a  play  and  a  blind  upon  the  7  x  7  of  the  subdivisions.  Each  people
and  nation,  as  we  have  already  said,  has  its  direct  Watcher,  Guardian  and
Father  in  Heaven — a  Planetary  Spirit.  We  are  willing  to  leave  their  own
national  God,  Jehovah,  to  the  descendants  of  Israel,  the  worshippers  of
Sabaoth  or  Saturn;  for,  indeed,  the  Monads  of  the  people  chosen  by
him  are  his  own,  and  the  Bible  has  never  made  any  secret  of  it.  Only
the  text  of  the  Protestant  English  Bible  is,  as  usual,  in  disagreement
with  those  of  the  Septuagint  and  the  Vulgate.  Thus,  while  in  the
former  we  read :

Wlien  the  Most  High  [not  Jehovah]  divided  to  the  nations  their  inheritance
.  ,  .  he  set  the  bounds  of  the  people  according  to  the  number  of  the  children  of
Israel,  t

In  the  Septuagint  the  text  reads  "according  to  the  number  of  the
Angels,"  Planet-Angels,  a  version  more  concordant  with  truth  and  fact.
Moreover,  all  the  texts  agree  that  "the  Lord's  [Jehovah's]  portion  is
his  people;  Jacob  is  the  lot  of  his  inheritance" ;t  and  this  settles  the
question.  The  "Ivord"  Jehovah  took  Israel  for  his  portion;  what  have
other  nations  to  do  with  that  particular  national  Deity?  Let  then,  the
"Angel  Gabriel"  watch  over  Iran  and  "Mikael -Jehovah"  over  the
Hebrews.  These  are  not  the  Gods  of  other  nations,  and  it  is  difficult
to  see  why  Christians  should  have  selected  a  God  against  whose
commandments  Jesus  was  the  first  to  rise  in  rebellion.

The  planetary  origin  of  the  Monad,  or  Soul,  and  of  its  faculties  was
taught  by  the  Gnostics.  On  its  way  to  the  Earth,  as  on  its  way  back
from  the  Earth,  each  soul  born  in,  and  from,  the  "Boundless  Light,"^
had  to  pass  through  the  seven  planetary  regions  either  way.  The  pure
Dhyani  and  Devas  of  the  oldest  religions  had  become,  in  course  of
time,  with  the  Zoroastrians,  the  Seven  Devs,  the  ministers  of  Ahriman,
"each  chained  to  his  planet ";||  with  the  Brahmans,  the  Asuras  and
,;ome  of  the  Rishis — good,  bad  and  indifferent;  among  the  Egyptian
Gnostics  it  was  Thoth,  or  Hermes,  who  was  the  chief  of  the  Seven.


*  Numb.,  xi.  i6.

•.•  Deut.,  xxxii.  8,  9.

t  Ibid.,  9.

\  C.  W.  King  iu  The  Gnostics  and  their  Remains  (p.  344),  identifies  it  with  "that  summnm  bonum
of  Oriental  aspiration,  the  Buddhist  Nirvana,  'perfect  repose,  the  Epicurean  Indolentia' ;'•  a  view
-liat  looks  flippant  enough  in  its  expression,  though  not  quite  untrue.

\  See  Origen's  Copy  of  the  Cli^irt,  or  Diagranniia  of  the  Ophites.


CYCLIC    FALL   OF   THE   GODS.  63 1

whose  names  are  given  by  Origen  as  Adonai,  genius  of  the  Sun ;  Tao,
of  the  Moon;  Eloi,  of  Jupiter;  Sabaoth,  of  Mars;  Orai,  of  Venus;
Astaphai,  of  Mercury;  and  Ildabaoth  (Jehovah),  of  Saturn.  Finally,
the  Pistis-Sophia,  which  the  greatest  modern  authority  on  exoteric
Gnostic  beliefs,  the  late  Mr.  C.  W.  King,  refers  to  as  "that  precious
monument  of  Gnosticism" — this  old  document  echoes  the  archaic  belief
of  the  ages,  while  distorting  it  to  suit  sectarian  purposes.  The  Astral
Rulers  of  the  Spheres,  the  planets,  create  the  Monads,  or  Souls,  from
their  own  substance  out  of  "the  tears  of  their  eyes,  and  the  sweat  of
their  torments,"  endowing  the  Monads  with  a  spark  of  their  substance
which  is  the  Divine  Light.  It  will  be  shown  in  Volume  II  why  these
"Lords  of  the  Zodiac  and  Spheres"  have  been  transformed  by  sectarian
Theolog>-  into  the  Rebellious  Angels  of  the  Christians,  who  took  them
from  the  Seven  Devs  of  the  Magi,  without  understanding  the  significance
of  the  allegory.*

As  usual,  that  which  is,  and  was  from  its  beginning,  divine,  pure,  and
spiritual  in  its  earliest  unity,  became — by  reason  of  its  differentiation
through  the  distorted  prism  of  man's  conceptions — human  and  impure,
as  reflecting  man's  own  sinful  nature.  Thus,  in  time,  the  planet  Saturn
became  reviled  by  the  worshippers  of  other  Gods.  The  nations  born
under  Saturn — the  Jewish,  for  instance,  with  whom  he  became  Jehovah,
after  being  considered  as  a  son  of  Saturn,  or  Ilda-Baoth,  by  the  Ophites,
and  in  the  Book  of  Jasher — were  eternally  fighting  with  those  born
under  Jupiter,  Mercury,  or  any  other  planet,  except  Saturn-Jehovah;
genealogies  and  prophecies  notwithstanding,  Jesus  the  hiitiate  (or
Jehoshua)— the  type  from  whom  the  "historical"  Jesus  was  copied—
was  not  of  pure  Jewish  blood,  and  thus  recognized  no  Jehovah ;  nor  did
he  worship  any  planetary  God  beside  his  own  "Father,"  whom  he
knew,  and  with  whom  he  communed,  as  every  high  Initiate  does,
"Spirit  to  Spirit  and  Soul  to  Soul."  This  can  hardly  be  taken  excep-
tion to,  unless  the  critic  explains  to  every  one's  satisfaction  the  strange
sentences  put  into  the  mouth  of  Jesus  during  his  disputes  with  the
Pharisees  by  the  author  of  the  Fourth  Gospel :

I  know  that  ye  are  Abraham's  seedt  ...  I  speak  that  which  I  have  seen  with
my  Father;  and  ye  do  that  which  ye  have  seen  with  your  Father.  .  .  .  Ye  do  the
deeds  of  your  Father.  ...  Ye  are  of  your  Father,  the  Devil.  ...  He  was  a
murderer  from  the  beginning,  and  abode  not  in  the  trutli,  because  there  is  no  truth

•  See  also  Section  XIV.

■*  Abraham  and  Saturn  are  identical  in  astro-synibologj-,  and  he  is  the  forefather  of  the  Jehovistic
Jews.


632  THE  SECRET   DOCTRINE.

in  him.     When  he  speaketh  a  lie  he  speaketh  of  his  own :  for  he  is  a  liar  and  the
father  of  it.  *

This  "Father"  of  the  Pharisees  was  Jehovah,  for  he  was  identical
with  Cain,  Saturn,  Vulcan,  etc. — the  planet  under  which  they  were
born,  and  the  God  whom  they  worshipped.  Evidently  there  must  be
an  Occult  meaning  sought  in  these  words  and  admonitions,  however
mistranslated,  since  they  are  pronounced  by  one  who  threatened  with
hell-fire  anyone  who  says  to  his  brother  simply  Raca,  fool.f  And  evi-
dently, again,  the  planets  are  not  merely  spheres,  twinkling  in  Space,,
and  made  to  shine  for  no  purpose,  but  they  are  the  domains  of  various
Beings  with  whom  the  uninitiated  are  so  far  unacquainted,  but  who
have,  nevertheless,  a  mysterious,  unbroken,  and  powerful  connection
with  men  and  globes.  Every  heavenly  body  is  the  temple  of  a  God,
and  these  Gods  themselves  are  the  temples  of  God,  the  Unknown  '■'Not
Spirit."  There  is  nothing  profane  in  the  Universe.  All  Nature  is  a
consecrated  place,  as  Young  says :

Each  of  these  Stars  is  a  religious  house.

Thus  can  all  exoteric  religions  be  shown  to  be  the  falsified  copies  of
the  Esoteric  Teaching.  It  is  the  priesthood  which  has  to  be  held
responsible  for  the  reaction  of  our  day  in  favour  of  Materialism.  It  is
by  worshipping  and  enforcing  on  the  masses  the  worship  of  the  shells
of  pagan  ideals — personified  for  purposes  of  allegory — that  the  latest
exoteric  religion  has  made  of  Western  lands  a  Pandemonium,  in  which
the  higher  classes  worship  the  golden  calf,  and  the  lower  and  ignorant
masses  are  made  to  worship  an  idol  with  feet  of  clay.

•  John,  viii.  37,  38,  41,  44.  t  Matthew,  v.  22.


SECTION  XL

Ancient  Thought  in  Modern  Dress


Modern  Science  is  Ancient  Thought  distortea,  and  no  more.  We  have
seen,  however,  what  intuitional  Scientists  think,  and  are  busy  about;
and  now  the  reader  shall  be  given  a  few  more  proofs  of  the  fact  that
more  than  one  F.R.S.  is  unconsciously  approaching  the  derided  Secret
Sciences.

With  regard  to  Cosmogony  and  primeval  matter,  modern  speculations
are  undeniably  ancient  thought,  "improved"  by  contradictory-  theories
of  recent  origin.  The  whole  foundation  belongs  to  Grecian  and  Indian
Archaic  Astronomy  and  Physics,  in  those  days  called  always  Philo-
sophy.  In  all  the  Aryan  and  Greek  speculations,  we  meet  with  the
conception  of  an  all-pervading,  unorganized,  and  homogeneous  Matter,
or  Chaos,  re-named  by  modern  Scientists  "nebular  condition  of  the
world-stuff."  What  Anaxagoras  called  Chaos  in  his  Homoiomeria  is
now  called  "primitive  fluid"  by  Sir  William  Thomson.  The  Hindii
and  Greek  Atomists — Kanada,  lycucippus,  Democritus,  Epicurus,
Lucretius,  etc. — are  now  reflected,  as  in  a  clear  mirror,  in  the  sup-
porters of  the  Atomic  Theory  of  our  modern  days,  beginning  with
Leibnitz's  Monads,  and  ending  with  the  Vortical  Atoms  of  Sir  William
Thomson.*  True,  the  corpuscular  theor>'  of  old  is  rejected,  and  the
undulatory  theory  has  taken  its  place.  But  the  question  is,  whether
the  latter  is  so  firmly  established  as  not  to  be  liable  to  be  dethroned  like
its  predecessor?  Light,  from  its  metaphysical  aspect,  has  been  fully
treated  in  his  Unveiled:

Light  is  the  first  begotten,  and  the  first  emanation  of  the  Supreme,  and  Light  i::
Life,  says  the  Evangelist  [and  the  Kabalist].  Both  are  electricity — the  life  prin-
ciple, the  Anima  Mundi — pervading  the  Universe,  the  electric  vivifier  of  all  things.


•  The  Elemental  Vortices  inaugurated  by  the  "Mind"  have  not  been  improved  by  their  modem
transformation.


634  '^^^   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Light  is  the  great  Protean  magician,  and  under  the  divine  Will  of  the  Architect*
[or  rather  the  Architects,  the  "Builders,"  called  07te  collectively],  its  multifariouG;,
omnipotent  waves  gave  birth  to  every  form  as  well  as  to  every  living  being.  From
its  swelling  electric  bosom,  spring  Matter  and  Spirit.  Within  its  beams  lie  the
beginnings  of  all  physical  and  chemical  action,  and  of  all  cosmic  and  spiritual
phenomena;  it  vitalizes  and  disorganizes;  it  gives  life  and  produces  death,  and  from
its  Primordial  Point  gradually  emerged  into  existence  the  myriads  of  worlds,  visible
and  invisible  celestial  bodies.  It  was  at  the  ray  of  this  First  Mother,  one  in  three,
that  "God,"  according  to  Plato,  "lighted  a  Fire  which  we  now  call  the  Sun,"t  and
which  is  not  the  cause  of  either  light  or  heat,  but  merely  the  focus,  or,  as  we  might
say,  the  lens,  by  which  the  Rays  of  the  Primordial  Light  become  materialized,  are
concentrated  upon  our  Solar  System,  and  produce  all  the  correlations  of  forces.  J

This  is  the  Ether,  as  just  explained  in  the  views  of  Metcalfe,  repeated
by  Dr.  Richardson,  save  for  the  submission  of  the  former  to  some
details  of  the  modern  undulatory  theory.  We  do  not  say  that  we  deny
the  theory;  we  assert  only  that  it  needs  completion  and  rearrangement.
But  the  Occultists  are  by  no  means  the  only  heretics  in  this  respect;
for  Mr.  Robert  Hunt,  F.R.S.  finds  that:

The  undulatory  theory  does  not  account  for  the  results  of  his  experiments.  §  Sir
David  Brewster,  in  his  Treatise  on  Optics,  showing  "that  the  colours  of  vegetable
life  arise  ....  from  a  specific  attraction  which  the  particles  of  these  bodies
exercise  over  the  diiferently-coloured  rays  of  light,"  and  that  "it  is  by  the  light  of
the  sun  that  the  coloured  juices  of  plants  are  elaborated,  that  the  colours  of  bodies
are  changed,  etc.,"  remarks  that  it  is  not  easy  to  allow  "that  such  effects  can  be
produced  by  the  mere  vibration  of  an  ethereal  medium."  And  he  \s  forced,  he  says,
"by  this  class  of  facts,  to  reason  as  if  light  was  material'  [.?].  Professor  Josiah  P.
Cooke,  of  Harvard  University,  says  that  he  "cannot  agree  ....  with  those
who  regard  the  wave-theory  of  light  as  an  established  principle  of  science."  {[
Herschell's  doctrine,  that  the  intensity  of  light,  in  effect  of  each  undulation,  "is
inversely  as  the  square  of  the  distance  from  the  luminous  body,"  if  correct,
damages  a  good  deal,  if  it  does  not  kill,  the  undulatory  theory.  That  he  is  right,
was  proved  repeatedly  by  experiments  with  photometers;  and  though  it  begins  to^
be  much  doubted,  the  undulatory  theory  is  still  alive.H

To  this  remark  of  Sir  David  Brewster — "forced  to  reason  as  if  light
was  material" — there  is  a  good  deal  to  repl)\     Ivight,  in  one  sense,  is

•  I  have  often  been  taken  to  task  for  using  expressions  in  Isis  denoting  belief  in  a  personal  and
anthropomorphic  God.  This  is  not  n\y  idea.  Kabalistically  speaking-,  the  "Architect"  is  the  generic
name  for  the  Sephiroth,  the  Builders  of  the  Universe,  as  the  "Universal  Mind"  represents  the  collec-
tivity of  the  Dhyan  Chohanic  Minds.

+  TimcEus.

X  I.  258.

?  Researches  on  Light  in  its  Chemical  Relations

II  Modern  Chemistry.

'I  Isis  Unveiled,  I.  157.


CHEMISTRY   AND    OCCULT   SCIENCE.  635

certainh'  as  material  as  is  electricity  itself.  And  if  electricity  is  not
material,  if  it  is  only  a  "mode  of  motion,"  how  is  it  that  it  can  be  stored
up  m  Faure's  accumulators?  Helmholtz  says  that  electricity  must  be
as  atomic  as  matter;  and  Mr.  W.  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  supported  the  view
in  his  address  at  Birmingham,  in  1886,  to  the  Chemical  Section  of  the
British  Association,  of  which  he  was  President.  This  is  what  Helm-
.  holtz  says:

If  we  accept  the  hypothesis  that  the  elementary  substances  are  composed  of
atoms,  we  cannot  avoid  concluding  that  electricity  also,  positive  as  well  as  negative,
is  divided  into  definite  elementary  portions,  which  behave  like  atoms  of  electricity.*

Here  we  have  to  repeat  that  which  was  already  said  in  Section  VIII,
that  there  is  but  one  science  that  can  henceforth  direct  modern  research
into  the  one  path  which  will  lead  to  the  discovery  of  the  whole,  hitherto
Occult,  truth,  and  it  is  the  youngest  of  all — Chemistr>%  as  it  now  stands
reformed.  There  is  no  other,  not  excluding  Astronomy,  that  can  so
unerringly  guide  scientific  intuition,  as  can  Chemistry.  Two  proofs  of
this  are  to  be  found  in  the  world  of  Science — two  great  Chemists,  each
among  the  greatest  in  his  own  country,  namely,  Mr.  Crookes  and  the
late  Professor  Butlerof:  the  one  is  a  thorough  believer  in  abnormal
phenomena;  the  other  was  as  fervid  a  Spiritualist,  as  he  was  great  in
the  natural  sciences.  It  becomes  evident  that,  while  pondering  over
the  ultimate  divisibility  of  Matter,  and  in  the  hitherto  fruitless  chase
after  the  element  of  negative  atomic  weight,  the  scientifically  trained
mind  of  the  Chemist  must  feel  irresistibly  drawn  towards  those  ever-
shrouded  worlds,  to  that  mysterious  Beyond,  whose  measureless  depths
seem  to  close  against  the  approach  of  the  too  materialistic  hand  that
would  fain  draw  aside  its  veil.  "It  is  the  unknown  and  the  ever-
unknowable,"  warns  the  Morist- Agnostic.  "Not  so,"  ansv/ers  the
persevering  Chemist.  "We  are  on  the  track  and  we  are  not  daunted,
and  fain  would  we  enter  the  mysterious  region  which  ignorance  tickets
unknown."

In  his  Presidential  Address  at  Birmingham  Mr.  Crookes  said:

There  is  but  one  unknown — the  ultimate  substratum  of  Spirit  [Space].  That
which  is  not  the  Absolute  and  the  One  is,  in  virtue  of  that  very  differentiation,
however  far  removed  from  the  physical  senses,  always  accessible  to  the  spiritual
human  mind,  which  is  a  coruscation  of  the  undifferentiable  Integral.

Two  or  three  sentences,  at  the  very  close  of  his  lecture  on  the  Genesis
of  the  Elements,  showed  the  eminent  Scientist  to  be  on  the  royal  road

•  Faraday  Lectures,  1881.


636  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

to  the  greatest  discoveries.  He  has  been  for  some  time  overshadowing"
"the  original  protyle,"  and  he  has  come  to  the  conclusion  that  "he
who  grasps  the  Key  will  be  permitted  to  unlock  some  of  the  deepest
mysteries  of  creation."     Protyle,  as  the  great  Chemist  explains:

.  .  .  is  a  word  analogous  to  protoplasm,  to  express  the  idea  of  the  original
primal  matter  existing  before  the  evolution  of  the  chemical  elements.  The  word  I
have  ventured  to  use  for  this  purpose  is  compounded  of  tt/jo  (earlier  than)  and  vXrj
(the  stuff  of  which  things  are  made).  The  word  is  scarcely  a  new  coinage,  for  600
years  ago  Roger  Bacon  wrote  in  his  Arte  Chyniiae,  "The  elements  are  made  out  of
vXi]  and  every  element  is  converted  into  the  nature  of  another  element."

The  knowledge  of  Roger  Bacon  did  not  come  to  this  wonderful  old
magician*  by  inspiration,  but  because  he  studied  ancient  works  on
Magic  and  Alchemy,  and  had  a  key  to  the  real  meaning  of  their
language.  But  see  what  Mr.  Crookes  says  of  Protyle,  next  neighbour
to  the  unconscious  Mulaprakriti  of  the  Occultists:

Let  us  start  at  the  moment  when  the  first  element  came  into  existence.  Before
this  time,  matter,  as  we  know  it,  was  not.  It  is  equally  impossible  to  conceive  of
matter  without  energy,  as  of  energy  without  matter;  from  one  point  of  view  both
are  convertible  terms.  Before  the  birth  of  atoms,  all  those  forms  of  energy,  which
become  evident  when  matter  acts  upon  matter,  could  not  have  existedt — they  were
locked  up  in  the  protyle  as  latent  potentialities  only.  Coincident  with  the  creation
of  atoms,  all  those  attributes  and  properties,  which  form  the  means  of  discriminating
one  chemical  element  from  another,  start  into  existence  fully  endowed  with
energy. +

With  every  respect  due  to  the  great  knowledge  of  the  lecturer,  the
Occultist  would  put  it  otherwise.  He  would  say  that  no  Atom  is  ever
"created,"  for  the  Atoms  are  eternal  within  the  bosom  of  the  One
Atom — "the  Atom  of  Atoms" — viewed  during  Manvantara  as  the  Jagad-
Yoni,  the  material  causative  womb  of  the  World.  Pradhana,  unmodi-
fied Matter — that  which  is  the  first  form  of  Prakriti,  or  material,  visible,

*  Thus,  what  the  writer  of  the  present  work  said  ten  years  ago  in  Isis  Unveiled  was,  it  seems,
prophetic.  These  are  the  words:  "Many  of  these  mystics,  by  following  what  they  were  taught  by
some  treatises,  secretly  preserved  from  one  generation  to  another,  achieved  discoveries  which  would
not  be  despised  even  in  our  modem  days  of  exact  sciences.  Roger  Bacon,  the  friar,  was  laughed  at
as  a  quack,  and  is  now  generally  numbered  among  'pretenders'  to  magic  art;  but  his  discoveries
were  nevertheless  accepted,  and  are  now  used  by  those  who  ridicule  him  the  most.  Roger  Bacon
belonged  by  right,  if  not  by  fact,  to  that  Brotherhood  which  includes  all  those  who  study  the  Occult
Sciences.  l,iving  in  the  thirteenth  century,  almost  a  contemporary,  therefore,  of  Albertus  Magnus
and  Thomas  Aquinas,  his  discoveries — such  as  gunpowder  and  optical  glasses,  and  his  mechanical
achievements — were  considered  by  everyone  as  so  many  miracles.  He  was  accu.sed  of  having  made  a
compact  with  the  Evil  One."    (Vol.  I,  pp.  64,  65.)

t  Just  so;  "those  forms  of  energy  .  .  .  which  become  evident  .  .  ."in  the  laboratory  of  the
Chemist  and  Physicist;  but  there  ate  other  forms  of  energy  wedded  to  other  forms  of  matter,  which
are  super  sensuous,  yet  are  known  to  the  Adepts.

J  Presidential  Address,  p.  16.


THE   TRINITY   IN   UNITY.  637

as  well  as  invisible  Nature — and  Purusha,  Spirit,  are  eternally  one;
and  they  are  Nirupadhi,  without  adventitious  qualities  or  attributes,
only  during  Pralaya,  and  when  beyond  any  of  the  planes  of  conscious-
ness of  existence.  The  Atom,  as  known  to  modern  science,  is  insepar-
able from  Purusha,  which  is  Spirit,  but  is  now  called  "energ>'"  in
Science.  The  Protyle  Atom  has  not  been  comminuted  or  subtilized:
it  has  simply  passed  into  that  plane,  which  is  no  plane,  but  the  eternal
state  of  everything  beyond  the  planes  of  illusion.  Both  Purusha  and
Pradhana  are  immutable  and  unconsumable,  or  Aparinamin  and  Av-
yaya,  in  eternity;  and  both  may  be  referred  to  during  the  Mayavic
periods  as  Vyaya  and  Parinamin,  or  that  which  can  expand,  pass  away
and  disappear,  and  which  is  "modifiable."  In  this  sense  Purusha,
must,  of  course,  be  held  distinct  in  our  conceptions  from  Parabrahmau.
Nevertheless  that,  which  is  called  "energj-"  or  "force"  in  Science,  and
which  has  been  explained  as  a  dual  force  jy  Metcalfe,  is  never,  in  fact^
and  cannot  be,  energy  alone;  for  it  is  the  Substance  of  the  World,  its
Soul,  the  All-permeant,  Sarvaga,  in  conjunction  with  Kala,  Time.
The  three  are  the  trinity  in  one,  during  Manvantara,  the  all-potential
Unity,  which  acts  as  three  distinct  things  on  Maya,  the  plane  of
illusion.  In  the  Orphic  philosophy  of  ancient  Greece  they  were  called
Phanes,  Chaos,  and  Chronos — the  triad  of  the  Occult  Philosophers  of
that  period.

But  see  how  closely  Mr.  Crookes  brushes  the  "Unknowable,"  and
what  potentialities  there  are  for  the  acceptance  of  Occult  truths  in  his
discoveries.     He  continues,  speaking  of  the  evolution  of  Atoms :

Let  us  pause  at  the  end  of  the  first  complete  vibration  and  examine  the  result.
We  have  already  found  the  elements  of  water,  ammonia,  carbonic  acid,  the  atmo-
sphere, plant  and  animal  life,  phosphorus  for  the  brain,  salt  for  the  seas,  clay  for
the  solid  earth  .  .  .  phosphates  and  silicates  sufficient  for  a  world  and  inhabit-
ants not  so  very  different  from  what  we  enjoy  at  the  present  day.  True  the  humati
inhabitants  would  have  to  live  in  a  state  of  more  than  Arcadian  simplicit}-,  and  the
absence  of  calcic  phosphate  would  be  awkward  as  far  as  the  bone  is  concerned.*
.  .  .  At  the  lower  end  of  our  curve  ...  we  see  a  great  hiatus.  .  .  .  Thi.s
oasis,  and  the  blanks  which  precede  and  follow  it,  may  be  referred  with  much
probability  to  the  particular  way  in  which  our  earth  developed  into  a  member  of
our  solar  system.  If  this  be  so,  it  may  be  that  on  our  earth  only  these  blanks-
occur,  and  not  generally  throughout  the  universe.

This  justifies  several  assertions  in  the  Occult  works.


•  It  is  just  the  existence  of  such  worlds  on  other  planes  of  consciousness  that  is  asserted  by  the
Occultist.  The  Secret  Science  teaches  that  the  primitive  race  was  boneless,  and  that  there  are-
worlds  in\'isible  to  us,  peopled  as  our  own,  besides  the  populations  of  Dhyan  Chohans.


.638  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Firstly,  that  neither  the  stars  nor  the  Sun  can  be  said  to  be  con-
stituted of  those  terrestrial  elements  with  which  the  Chemist  is  familiar,
though  they  are  all  present  in  the  Sun's  outward  robes — as  well  as  a
host  more  of  elements  so  far  unknown  to  Science.

Secondly,  that  our  globe  has  its  own  special  laboratory  on  the  far-
away outskirts  of  its  atmosphere,  crossing  which,  every  Atom  and
molecule  changes  and  differentiates  from  its  primordial  nature.

And  thirdly,  that  though  no  element  present  on  our  Earth  could
ever  possibly  be  found  wanting  in  the  Sun,  there  are  many  others
there  which  have  either  not  reached,  or  not  as  yet  been  discovered  on,
our  globe.

Some  may  be  missing  in  certain  stars  and  heavenly  bodies  in  the  process  of
formation ;  or,  though  present  in  them,  these  elements,  on  account  of  tlieir  present
state,  may  not  respond  as  yet  to  the  usual  scientific  tests.*

Mr.  Crookes  speaks  of  helium,  an  element  of  still  lower  atomic
weight  than  hydrogen,  an  clement  purely  hypothetical  as  far  as  our  earth
is  concerned,  though  existing  in  abundance  in  the  chromosphere  of
the  Sun.  Occult  Science  adds  that  not  one  of  the  elements  regarded
as  such  by  Chemistr}*  really  desen'cs  the  name.

Again  we  find  Mr.  Crookes  speaking  with  approbation  of

Dr.  Carnelly's  weighty  argument  in  favour  of  the  compound  nature  of  the  so-
called  elements,  from  their  analogy  to  the  compound  radicles.

Hitherto,  Alchemy  alone,  within  the  historical  period,  and  in  the
so-called  civilized  countries,  has  succeeded  in  obtaining  a  real  element,
or  a  particle  of  homogeneous  Matter,  the  Mysterium  Magnum  of  Para-
celsus.    But  then  that  was  before  Lord  Bacon's  day.f

.  .  .  Let  us  now  turn  to  the  upper  portion  of  the  scheme.  With  hydrogen
of  atomic  weight  =1,  there  is  little  room  for  other  elements,  save,  perhaps,  for
hypothetical  Helium.  But  what  if  we  get  "through  the  looking-glass,"  and  cross
the  zero  Hue  in  search  of  new  principles — what  shall  we  find  on  the  other  side  of
zero.'  Dr.  Camelly  asks  for  an  element  of  negative  atomic  weight;  here  is  ample
room  and  verge  enough  for  a  shadow  series  of  such  unsubstantiaHties.  Helmholtz
says  that   electricity  is  probabl}'   as   atomic   as  matter;  is  electricity  one  of  the

*  Five  Years  of  Theoiopky,  p.  258  et  seq.

+  Says  Mr.  Crookes  in  the  same  address:  "The  first  riddle  which  we  encounter  in  chemistry  is:
'What  are  the  elements?'  Of  the  attempts  hitherto  made  to  define  or  explain  an  element,  none
satisfy  the  demands  of  the  human  intellect.  The  text  books  tell  us  that  an  element  is  'a  body  which
has  not  been  decomposed;'  that  it  is  'a  something  to  which  we  can  add,  but  from  which  we  can  take
nothing,'  or  'a  body  which  increases  in  weight  with  every  chemical  change.'  Such  definitions  are
doubly  unsatisfactorj- :  they  are  provisional,  and  may  cease  to-morrow  to  be  applicable  in  any  given
case.  They  take  their  stand,  not  on  any  attribute  of  the  things  to  be  defined,  but  on  the  limitations
of  human  power:  they  are  confessions  of  intellectual  impotence."


GENESIS  OF  THE  ELEMENTS.  639

negative  elements,  and  the  luminiferous  ether  another?  Matter,  as  we  now  know
it,  does  not  here  exist;  the  forms  of  energj'  which  are  apparent  in  the  motions  of
matter  are  as  yet  only  latent  possibilities.  A  substance  of  negative  weight  is  twi
inconceivable*  But  can  we  form  a  clear  conception  of  a  body  which  combines  with
other  bodies  in  proportions  expressible  by  negative  qualities  ?t

A  genesis  of  the  elements  such  as  is  here  sketched  out  would  not  be  confined
to  our  little  solar  system,  but  would  probably  follow  the  same  general  sequence  of
events  in  every  centre  of  energy  now  visible  as  a  star.

Before  the  birth  of  atoms  to  gravitate  towards  one  another,  no  pressure  could
be  exercised;  but  at  the  outskirts  of  the  fire-mist  sphere,  within  which  all  is
protyle — at  the  shell  on  which  the  tremendous  forces  involved  in  the  birth  of  a
chemical  element  exert  full  sway — the  fierce  heat  would  be  accompanied  by  gravi-
tation sufficient  to  keep  the  newly-born  elements  from  flying  off  into  space.  A&
temperature  increases,  expansion  and  molecular  motion  increase,  molecules  tend
to  fly  asunder,  and  their  chemical  affinities  become  deadened ;  but  the  enormous
pressure  of  the  gravitation  of  the  mass  of  atomic  matter,  outside  what  I  may  for
brevity  call  the  birth-shell,  would  counteract  the  action  of  heat.

Beyond  the  birth-shell  would  be  a  space  in  which  no  chemical  action  could  take
place,  owing  to  the  temperature  there  being  above  what  is  called  the  dissociation-
point  for  compounds.  In  this  space  the  lion  and  the  lamb  would  lie  down  together:
phosphorus  and  oxygen  would  mix  without  union ;  hydrogen  and  chlorine  would
show  no  tendency  to  closer  bonds;  and  even  fluorine,  that  energetic  gas  which
chemists  have  only  isolated  within  the  last  month  or  two,  would  float  about  free
and  uncombined.

Outside  this  space  of  free  atomic  matter  would  be  another  shell,  in  which  the
formed  chemical  elements  would  have  cooled  down  to  the  combination  point,  and
the  sequence  of  events  so  graphically  described  by  Mr.  Mattieu  Williams  in  The
Fuel  of  the  Sun  would  now  take  place,  culminating  in  the  solid  earth  and  the
commencement  of  geological  time  (p.  19).

This  is,  in  strictly  scientific,  but  beautiful  language,  the  description
of  the  evolution  of  the  differentiated  Universe  in  the  Secret  Teachings.
The  learned  gentleman  closes  his  address  in  words,  ever>'  sentence  of
which  is  like  a  flash  of  light  from  beyond  the  dark  veil  of  materiality,
hitherto  thrown  upon  the  exact  sciences,  and  is  a  step  forward  towards
the  Sanctum  Sanctorti7n  of  the  Occult.     Thus  he  says:

We  have  glanced  at  the  difficulty  of  defining  an  element;  we  have  noticed,  too,  the
revolt  of  many  leading  physicists  and  chemists  against  the  ordinary  acceptation  of
the  term  element;  we  have  weighed  the  improbability  of  their  eternal  existence,  :J  or
their  origination  by  chance.  As  a  remaining  alternative,  we  have  suggested  their  origin

•  And  the  lecturer  quotes  Sir  George  Airy,  who  .says  (in  Faraday's  Life  and  Letters.,  Vol.  11.,  p.  .154)!
"  I  can  easily  conceive  that  there  are  plenty  of  bodies  about  us  not  subject  to  this  intermutual  action^
and  therefore  not  subject  to  the  law  of  gravitation."

+  The  Vedantic  philosophy  conceives  of  such;  but  then  it  is  not  physics,  but  metaphysics,  called
by  Mr.  Tyndall  "poetry"  and  "fiction."

i  In  the  form  they  are  now,  we  conceive.-'


640  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

by  a  process  of  evolution  like  that  of  the  heavenly  bodies  according  to  Laplace,  and
the  plants  and  animals  of  our  globe  according  to  L,amarck,  Darwin,  and  Wallace.*
In  the  general  array  of  the  elements,  as  known  to  us,  we  have  seen  a  striking
approximation  to  that  of  the  organic  world. t  In  lack  of  direct  evidence  of  the
decomposition  of  any  element,  we  have  sought  and  found  indirect  evidence.
We  have  next  glanced  at  the  view  of  the  genesis  of  the  elements;  and  lastly  Mv-e
have  reviewed  a  scheme  of  their  origin  suggested  by  Professor  Reynolds'  method
of  illustrating  the  periodic  classification  J  .  .  .  Summing  up  all  the  above  con
siderations  we  cannot,  indeed,  venture  to  assert  positively  i/iai  our  so-called  element^
have  been  evolved  from  one  primordial  matter;  but  zve  may  contend  that  the  balance  oj
evidence,  I  think,  fairly  weighs  in  favour  of  this  speculation.


•  And  to  Kapila  and  Manu — especially  and  originally.

t  Here  is  a  scientific  corroboration  of  the  eternal  law  of  correspondences  and  analogy.

t  This  method  of  illustrating  the  periodic  law  in  the  classification  of  elements  is,  in  the  words  of
Mr.  Crookes,  proposed  by  Professor  Emerson  Reynolds,  of  Dublin  University,  who  ....  "points
out  that  in  each  period,  the  general  properties  of  the  elements  vary  from  one  to  another,  with
approximate  regularity  until  we  reach  the  sevenLh  member,  which  is  in  more  or  less  striking  contrast
with  the  first  element  of  the  same  period,  as  well  as  with  the  first  of  the  next.  Thus  chlorine,  the
seventh  member  of  MendeleeP.s  third  period,  contrasts  sharply  with  both  sodium,  the  first  member
of  the  same  series,  and  with  potassium,  the  first  member  of  the  next  series;  whilst  on  the  other
hand,  sodium  and  potassium  are  closely  analogous.  The  six  elements,  whose  atomic  weight.s
intervene  between  sodium  and  potassium,  vary  in  properties,  step  by  step,  until  chlorine,  the
contrast  to  sodium,  is  reached.    But  from  chlorine  to  potassium,  the  analogue  of  sodium,  there  is  a

change  in  properties  per  salium If  we  thus  recognize  a  contrast  in  properties— more  or

less  decided— between  the  first  and  the  last  members  of  each  series,  we  can  scarcely  help  admitting
the  existence  of  a  point  of  mean  variation  vidthin  each  system.    In  general  Xh^  fourth  element  of

each  series  possesses  the  property  we  might  expect  a  transition -element  to  exhibit Thus

for  the  purpose  of  graphic  translation.  Professor  Reynolds  considers  that  the  fourth  member  of  a
period— silicon,  for  example— may  be  placed  at  the  apex  of  a  symmetrical  curve,  which  shall  repre-
sent for  that  particular  period,  the  direction  in  which  the  properties  of  the  series  of  elements  vary
with  rising  atomic  weights."

Now,  the  writer  humbly  confesses  complete  ignorance  of  modern  Chemistry  and  its  mysteries.
But  she  is  pretty  well  acquainted  with  the  Occult  Doctrine  with  regard  to  correspondences  of  types
and  antetypes  in  nature,  and  to  perfect  analogy  as  a  fundamental  law  in  Occultism.  Hence  she
ventures  on  a  remark  which  will  strike  every  Occultist,  however  it  may  be  derided  by  orthodox
Science.  This  method  of  illustrating  the  periodic  law  in  the  behaviour  of  elements,  whether  or  not
still  a  hypothesis  in  Chemistry,  is  a  law  in  Occult  Sciences.  Every  well-read  Occultist  knows  that
the  seventh  and  fourth  members— whether  in  a  septenary  chain  of  worlds,  the  septenary  hierarchy  of
angels,  or  in  the  constitution  of  man,  animal,  plant,  or  mineral  atom— that  the  seventh  and  fourth
members,  we  say,  in  the  geometrically  and  mathematically  uniform  workings  of  the  immutable
laws  of  Nature,  always  play  a  distinct  and  specific  part  in  the  septenary  system.  From  the  stars
twinkling  high  in  heaven,  to  the  sparks  flying  asunder  from  the  rude  fire  built  by  the  savage
in  his  forest;  from  the  hierarchies  and  the  essential  constitution  of  the  Dhyan  Chohans—
organized  for  diviner  apprehensions  and  a  loftier  range  of  perception  than  the  greatest  Western
Psychologist  ever  dreamed  of,  down  to  Nature's  classification  of  species  among  the  humblest  insects;
finally  from  Worlds  to  Atoms,  everything  in  the  Universe,  from  great  to  small,  proceeds  in  its
spiritual  and  physical  evolution,  cyclically  and  septennially,  showing  its  seventh  and  fourth  number
(the  latter  the  turning  point)  behaving  in  the  same  way  as  is  shown  in  that  periodic  law  of  Atoms.
Nature  never  proceeds  per  saltum.  Therefore,  when  Mr.  Crookes  remarks  on  this  that  he  does  not
"wish  to  infer  that  the  gaps  in  Mendeleef's  table,  and  in  this  graphic  representation  of  it  [the
diagram  showing  the  evolution  of  Atoms]  necessarily  mean  that  there  are  elements  actually  existing
to  fill  up  the  gaps;  these  gaps  may  only  mean  that  at  the  birth  of  the  elements  there  was  an  easy
potentiality  of  the  formation  of  an  element  which  would  fit  into  the  place"— an  Occultist  would
respectfully  remark  to  him  that  the  latter  hypothesis  can  only  hold  good,  if  the  septenary  arrange-
ment of  Atoms  is  not  interfered  with.  This  is  the  one  law,  and  an  infallible  method  that  must
always  lead  one  who  follows  it  to  success.


PURANAS   VBRSUS   ROYAL  SOCIETY.  64I

Thus  inductive  Science,  in  its  branches  of  Astronom)',  Physics,  and
Cheniisti-y,  while  advancing  timidly  towards  the  conquest  of  Nature's
secrets  in  her  final  effects  on  our  terrestrial  plane,  recedes  to  the  days
of  Anaxagoras  and  the  Chaldees  in  its  discoveries  of  (a)  the  origin  of
our  phenomenal  world,  and  (b)  the  modes  of  formation  of  the  bodies
that  compose  the  Universe.  And  having,  for  their  cosmogonical  hypo-
theses to  turn  back  to  the  beliefs  of  the  earliest  philosophers,  and  the
systems  of  the  latter— systems  that  were  all  based  on  the  teachings  of
a  universal  Secret  Doctrine  with  regard  to  primeval  Matter,  with  its
properties,  functions,  and  laws— have  we  not  the  right  to  hope  that  the
day  is  not  far  off  when  Science  will  show  a  better  appreciation  of  the
Wisdom  of  the  Ancients  than  it  has  hitherto  done?

No  doubt  Occult  Philosophy  could  learn  a  good  deal  from  exact
Modern  Science;  but  the  latter,  on  the  other  hand,  might  profit  by
ancient  learning  in  more  than  one  way,  and  chiefly  in  Cosmogony.  It
might  learn,  for  instance,  the  mystical  signification,  alchemical  and
transcendental,  of  the  many  ivipondcrabie  substances  that  fill  inter-
planetary space,  and  which,  interpenetrating  each,  are  the  direct  cause,
at  the  lower  end,  of  the  production  of  natural  phenomena  manifesting
through  so-called  vibration.  The  knowledge  of  the  real,  not  the  hypo-
thetical, nature  of  Ether,  or  rather  of  the  Akasha,  and  other  mysteries,
in  short,  can  alone  lead  to  the  knowledge  of  F'orces.  It  is  that  Sub-
stance against  which  the  Materialistic  school  of  the  Physicists  rebels
with  such  i\xry,  especially  in  France,*  and  which  exact  Science  has  to
advocate  notwithstanding.  They  cannot  make  away  with  it  without
incurring  the  risk  of  pulling  down  the  pillars  of  the  Temple  of  Science,
like  a  modern  Samson,  and  of  getting  buried  under  its  roof.

The  theories  built  upon  the  rejection  of  Force,  outside  and  indepen-
dent of  Matter  pure  and  simple,  have  all  been  shown  to  be  fallacious.
They  do  not,  and  cannot,  cover  the  ground,  and  many  of  the  scientific
data  are  thus  proved  to  be  unscientific.  "Ether  produced  Sound"  is
said  in  the  Purdnas,  and  the  statement  is  laughed  at.  Sound  is  the
result  of  the  vibrations  of  the  air,  we  are  corrected.  And  what  is  air?
Could  it  exist  if  there  were  no  etheric  medium  in  Space  to  buoy  up  its
molecules?     The  case  stands  simply  thus.     Materialism  cannot  admit

*  A  group  of  electricians  has  just  protested  against  the  new  theory  of  Clausius,  the  famous  pro-
fessor of  the  University  of  Bonn.  The  character  of  the  protest  is  shown  in  the  signature,  which  has
"Jules  Bourdin,  in  the  name  of  the  group  of  Electricians,  which  had  the  honour  of  being  introduced
to  Professor  Clausius  in  1881,  and  whose  war-cr>'  {cri  de  ralli'ement)  is  A  bas  I' Ether" — down  with
Ether,  even ;  they  want  Universal  Void,  you  see  1  „


642  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE-

the  existence  of  anj^thiiig  outside  Matter,  because  with  the  acceptance
of  an  imponderable  Force — the  source  and  head  of  all  the  physical
Forces — other  intelligent  Forces  would  have  to  be  virtually  admitted,
and  that  would  lead  Science  very  far.  For  it  would  have  to  accept  as
a  sequel  the  presence  in  Man  of  a  still  more  spiritual  power — entirely
independent,  for  once,  of  any  kind  of  Matter  about  which  Physicists
know  anj'thing.  Hence,  apart  from  a  hypothetical  Ether  of  Space  and
gross  physical  bodies,  the  whole  sidereal  and  unseen  Space  is,  in  the
sight  of  Materialists,  one  boundless  void  in  Nature — blind,  unintelli-
gent, useless.

And  now  the  next  question  is :  What  is  that  Cosmic  Substance,  and
how  far  can  one  go  in  suspecting  its  nature  or  in  wrenching  from  it  its
secrets,  thus  feeling  justified  in  giving  it  a  name?  How  far,  especially,
has  Modern  Science  gone  in  the  direction  of  those  secrets,  and  what  is
it  doing  to  solve  them?  The  latest  hobby  of  Science,  the  Nebular
Theory,  may  afford  us  some  answer  to  this  question.  Let  us  then
examine  the  credentials  of  this  Nebular  Theorv.


SECTION  XII.

Scientific  and  Esoteric  Evidence  for,  and

Objections  to,  the  Modern

Nebular  Theory.


Of  late,  Esoteric  Cosmogony  has  been  frequently  opposed  by  the
phantom  of  this  theory  and  its  ensuing  hypotheses.  ''Can  this  most
scientific  teaching  be  denied  by  your  Adepts?"  it  is  asked.  "Not
entirely,"  is  the  reply,  "but  the  admissions  of  the  men  of  Science
themselves  kill  it:    and  there  remains   nothing    for   the  Adepts   to

deny."

To  make  of  Science  an  integral  whole  necessitates,  indeed,  the  study
of  spiritual  and  psychic,  as  well  as  of  physical,  Nature.  Otherwise  it
will  ever  be  like  the  anatomy  of  man,  discussed  of  old  by  the  profane
from  the  point  of  view  of  his  shell-side,  and  in  ignorance  of  the  interior
work.  Even  Plato,  the  greatest  Philosopher  of  his  country,  was  guilty,
before  his  Initiation,  of  such  statements  as  that  liquids  pass  into  the
stomach  through  the  lungs.  Without  metaphysics,  as  Mr.  H.  J.  Slack
says,  real  Science  is  inadmissible.

The  nebulse  exist;  yet  the  Nebular  Theory  is  wrong.  A  nci;ula
exists  in  a  state  of  entire  elemental  dissociation.  It  is  gaseous  and —
something  else  besides,  which  can  hardly  be  connected  with  gases
as  these  are  known  to  Physical  Science;  and  it  is  self-luminous.  But
that  is  all.  The  sixty-two  "coincidences"  enumerated  by  Professor
Stephen  Alexander,*  confirming  the  Nebular  Theory,  may  all  be  ex-
plained by  Esoteric  Science;  though,  as  this  is  not  an  astronomical
work,  the  refutations  are  not  attempted  at  present.  Laplace  and  Faye
come  nearer  to  the  correct  theory  than  any;  but  of  the  speculations  of


•  Smithsonian  Contributions,  xxi.,  Art.  i.  pp.  79-97.


644  '^^^  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Laplace  there  remains  little  in  the  present  theory  beyond  its  general
features.

Nevertheless,  says  John  Stuart  Mill:

There  is  in  Laplace's  theory  nothing  hypothetical;  it  is  an  example  of  legitimate
reasoning  from  present  effect  to  its  past  cause;  it  assumes  nothing  more  than  that
objects  which  really  exist  obey  the  laws  which  are  known  to  be  obeyed  by  all
terrestrial  objects  resembling  them.*

From  such  an  eminent  logician  as  was  Mill,  this  would  be  valuable,
if  it  could  only  be  proved  that  "terrestrial  objects  resembling"  celestial
objects  at  such  a  distance  as  are  the  nebulae,  resemble  those  objects  in
reality,  and  not  only  in  appeara7ice.

Another  of  the  fallacies,  from  the  Occult  standpoint,  embodied  in  the
modern  theory  as  it  now  stands,  is  the  hypothesis  that  the  Planets
were  all  detached  from  the  Sun ;  that  they  are  bone  of  his  bone,  and
flesh  of  his  flesh ;  whereas  the  Sun  and  the  Planets  are  only  co-uterine
brothers,  having  the  same  nebular  origin,  but  in  a  diff"erent  mode
from  that  postulated  by  modern  Astronomy.

The  many  objections  raised  by  some  opponents  of  the  modern
Nebular  Theory  against  the  homogeneity  of  original  diff"use  Matter,
on  the  ground  of  the  uniformity  in  the  composition  of  the  fixed  Stars,
do  not  affect  the  question  of  that  homegeneity  at  all,  but  only  the
theory  itself.  Our  solar  nebula  may  not  be  completely  homogeneous,
or,  rather,  it  may  fail  to  reveal  itself  as  such  to  the  Astronomers,  and
yet  be  de  facto  homogeneous.  The  Stars  do  differ  in  their  constituent
materials,  and  even  exhibit  elements  quite  unknown  on  Earth;  never-
theless, this  does  not  affect  the  point  that  Primeval  Matter— Matter  as
it  appeared  even  in  its  first  diflerentiation  from  its  laya-conditionf — is
yet  to  this  day  homogeneous,  at  immense  distances,  in  the  depths  of
infinitude,  and  likewise  at  points  not  far  removed  from  the  outskirts  of
our  Solar  System.

Finally,  there  does  not  exist  one  single  fact  brought  forward  by  the
learned  objectors  against  the  Nebular  Theory  (false  as  it  is,  and  hence,
illogically  enough,  fatal  to  the  hypothesis  of  the  homogeneity  of
Matter),  that  can  withstand  criticism.  One  error  leads  to  another.  A
false  premiss  will  naturally  lead  to  a  false  conclusion,  although  an
inadmissible  inference  does  not  necessarily  affect  the  validity  of  the
major  proposition  of  the  syllogism.  Thus,  one  may  leave  every  side-
issue  and  inference  from  the  evidence  of  spectra  and  lines,  as  simply

•  System  of  Logic,  p.  229.  t  Beyond  the  zero-line  of  action.


MODERN   SCIENCE  AND   OCCULTISM.  645

provisional  for  the  present,  and  abandon  all  matters  of  detail  to
Physical  Science.  The  duty  of  the  Occultist  lies  with  the  Sozd  and
Spirit  of  Cosmic  Space,  not  merely  with  its  illusive  appearance  and
behaviour.  That  of  official  Physical  Science  is  to  analyze  and  study
its  shell— th.e  Ultima  Thule  of  the  Universe  and  Man,  in  the  opinion
of  Materialism.

With  the  latter,  Occultism  has  nought  to  do.  It  is  only  with  the
theories  of  such  men  of  learning  as  Kepler,  Kant,  Oersted,  and  Sir
William  Herschell,  who  believed  in  a  Spiritual  World,  that  Occult
Cosmogony  might  treat,  and  attempt  a  satisfactory  compromise.  But
the  views  of  those  Physicists  differed  vastly  from  the  latest  modern
speculations.  Kant  and  Herschell  had  in  their  mind's  eye  speculations
upon  the  origin  and  the  final  destiny,  as  well  as  upon  the  present
aspect,  of  the  Universe,  from  a  far  more  philosophical  and  psychic
standpoint ;  whereas  modern  Cosmology  and  Astronomy  now  repudiate
anything  like  research  into  the  m)'Steries  of  Being.  The  result  is
what  might  be  expected:  complete  failure  and  inextricable  contradic-
tions in  the  thousand  and  one  varieties  of  so-called  Scientific  Theories,
and  in  this  Theory  as  in  all  others.

The  nebular  hypothesis,  involving  the  theory  of  the  existence  of  a
Primeval  Matter,  diffused  in  a  nebulous  condition,  is  of  no  modern  date
in  Astronomy,  as  ever>'one  knows.  Anaximenes,  of  the  Ionian  school,
had  already  taught  that  the  sidereal  bodies  were  formed  through  the
progressive  condensation  of  a  primordial  pregenetic  Matter,  which  had
almost  a  negative  weight,  and  was  spread  out  through  Space  in  an
extremely  sublimated  condition.

Tycho  Brahe,  who  viewed  the  Milky  Way  as  an  ethereal  substance,
thought  the  new  star  that  appeared  in  Cassiopeia,  in  1572,  had  been
formed  out  of  that  Matter.*  Kepler  believed  that  the  star  of  1606  had
likewise  been  formed  out  of  the  ethereal  substance  that  fills  the
universe.!  He  attributed  to  that  same  Ether  the  apparition  of  a
luminous  ring  round  the  Moon,  during  the  total  eclipse  of  the  Sun
observed  at  Naples  in  1605.]:  Still  later,  in  17 14  the  existence  of  a
self-luminous  Matter  was  recognized  by  Halley  in  the  Philosophical
Transactions.  Finally,  the  journal  of  this  name  published  in  1811  the
famous  hypothesis  of  the  eminent  Astronomer,  Sir  William  Herschell,


•  Progymnasmaia,  p.  795.

+  De  Stella  Nov&.  in  Pede  Serpenlarii,  p.  115.

X  HyPothises  Cosmogoniques,  p.  2,  C.  Wolf,  1886.


646  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

on   the  transformation  of  the  nebulae   into  Stars,*  and  after  this  the
Nebular  Theory  was  accepted  by  the  Royal  Academies.

In  Five  Years  of  Theosophy,  on  p.  245,  may  be  read  an  article  headed,
"Do  the  Adepts  deny  the  Nebular  Theory?"  The  answer  there
given  is:

No ;    they  do  not  deny  its  general  propositions,  nor  the  approximative

truth  of  the  scientific  hypotheses.     They  only  defiy  the  completejiess  of  the

present,  as  well  as  the  entire  error  of  the  many  so-called  *' exploded''  old

theories,  which,  during  the  last  century,  have  followed  each  other  in  such

rapid  succession.

This  was  asserted  at  the  time  to  be  "an  evasive  answer."  Such
disrespect  to  official  Science,  it  was  argued,  must  be  justified  by
the  replacement  of  the  orthodox  speculation  by  another  theory  more
complete,  and  having  a  firmer  ground  to  stand  upon.  To  this  there
is  but  one  reply:  It  is  useless  to  give  out  isolated  theories  with  regard
to  things  embodied  in  a  complete  and  consecutive  system,  for,  when
separated  from  the  main  body  of  the  teaching,  they  would  necessarily
lose  their  vital  coherence  and  would  thus  do  no  good  when  studied
independently.  To  be  able  to  appreciate  and  accept  the  Occult  views
on  the  Nebular  Theory,  we  must  study  the  whole  Esoteric  cosmo-
gonical  system.  And  the  time  has  hardly  arrived  for  the  Astronomers
to  be  asked  to  accept  Fohat  and  the  Divine  Builders.  Even  the  un-
deniably correct  surmises  of  Sir  William  Herschell,  which  had  nothing
"supernatural"  in  them,  as  to  the  Sun's  being  called  a  "globe  of  fire,"
perhaps  metaphorically,  and  his  early  speculations  about  the  nature  of
that  which  is  now  called  the  Nasmyth  Willow-leaf  Theory,  only  caused
that  most  eminent  of  all  Astronomers  to  be  smiled  at  by  other,  far
less  eminent,  colleagues,  who  saw  and  now  see  in  his  ideas  purely
"imaginative  and  fanciful  theories."  Before  the  whole  Esoteric  Sj^stem
could  be  given  out  and  appreciated  by  the  Astronomers,  the  latter
would  have  to  return  to  some  of  those  "antiquated  ideas,"  not  only  to
those  of  Herschell,  but  also  to  the  dreams  of  the  oldest  Hindu
Astronomers,  and  thus  abandon  their  own  theories,  which  are  none
the  less  "fanciful"  because  they  have  appeared  nearly  eighty  years
later  than  the  one,  and  many  thousands  of  years  later  than  the  others.
Foremost  of  all  they  would  have  to  repudiate  their  ideas  of  the  Sun's
solidity  and  incandescence;  the  Sun  "glowing"  most  undeniably,  but
not  "burning."     Then  the  Occultists  state,  with  regard  to  the  "willow-

*  See  Philosophical  Transactions,  p.  269,  et  seq.


FORCES   ARE   EMANATIONS.  647

leaves,"  that  those  "objects,"  as  Sir  William  Herschell  called  them,
are  the  immediate  sources  of  the  solar  light  and  heat.  And  though
the  Esoteric  Teaching  does  not  regard  these  as  he  did — namely,  as
"organisms"  partaking  of  the  nature  of  life,  for  the  Solar  "Beings"
will  hardly  place  themselves  within  telescopic  focus — yet  it  asserts
that  the  whole  Universe  is  full  of  such  "organisms,"  conscious  and
active  according  to  the  proximity  or  distance  of  their  planes  to,  or
from,  our  plane  of  consciousness;  and  finally  that  the  great  Astronomer
was  right  while  speculating  on  those  supposed  "organisms,"  in  saying
that  "we  do  not  know  that  vital  action  is  incompetent  to  develop  at
once  heat,  light,  and  electricity."  For,  at  the  risk  of  being  laughed  at
by  the  whole  world  of  Physicists,  the  Occultists  maintain  that  all  the
"Forces"  of  the  Scientists  have  their  origin  in  the  Vital  Principle,  the
One  Life  collectively  of  our  Solar  System — that  "Life"  being  a  portion,
or  rather  one  of  the  aspects,  of  the  One  Universal  Life.

We  may,  therefore — as  in  the  article  under  consideration,  wherein,
on  the  authorit}^  of  the  Adepts,  it  was  maintained  that  it  is  "sufficient
to  make  a  resume  of  what  the  solar  Physicists  do  not  know" — we  may,
we  maintain,  define  our  position  with  regard  to  the  modern  Nebular
Theor\^  and  its  evident  incorrectness,  by  simply  pointing  out  facts
diametrically  opposed  to  it  in  its  present  form.  And  to  begin  with,
what  does  it  teach  ?

Summarizing  the  aforesaid  hypotheses,  it  becomes  plain  that  La-
place's theory — now  made  quite  unrecognizable,  moreover — was  an
unfortunate  one.  He  postulates  in  the  first  place  Cosmic  Matter,
existing  in  a  state  of  diffuse  nebulosity  "so  fine  that  its  presence  could
hardly  have  been  suspected."  No  attempt  is  made  by  him  to  penetrate
into  the  Arcana  of  Being,  except  as  regards  the  immediate  evolution  of
our  small  Solar  System.

Consequently,  whether  one  accepts  or  rejects  his  theory-  in  its
bearing  upon  the  immediate  cosmological  problems  presented  for
solution,  he  can  only  be  said  to  have  thrown  back  the  mystery  a  little
further.  To  the  eternal  query:  "Whence  Matter  itself;  whence  the
evolutionary-  impetus  determining  its  cyclic  aggregations  and  dis-
solutions; whence  the  exquisite  symmetry  and  order  into  which  the
primeval  Atoms  arrange  and  group  themselves?"  no  answer  is  at-
tempted by  Laplace.  All  we  are  confronted  with,  is  a  sketch  of  the
probable  broad  principles  on  which  the  actual  process  is  assumed  to  be
based.     Well,  and  what  is  this  now  celebrated  note  on  the  said  process?


648  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

What  has  he  given  so  wonderfully  new  and  original,  that  its  ground-
work, at  any  rate,  should  have  served  as  a  basis  for  the  modern  Nebular
Theory?    The  following  is  what  one  gathers  from  various  astronomical

works.

I^aplace  thought  that,  in  consequence  of  the  condensation  of  the
atoms  of  the  primeval  nebula,  according  to  the  "law"  of  gravity,  the
now  gaseous,  or  perhaps,  partially  liquid  mass,  acquired  a  rotatory
motion.  As  the  velocity  of  this  rotation  increased,  it  assumed  the  form
of  a  thin  disc;  finally,  the  centrifugal  force  overpowering  that  of
cohesion,  huge  rings  were  detached  from  the  edge  of  the  whirling
incandescent  masses,  and  these  rings  contracted  necessarily  by  gravita-
tion (as  accepted)  into  spheroidal  bodies,  which  would  necessarily  still
continue  to  preserve  the  orbit  previously  occupied  by  the  outer  zone
from  which  they  were  separated.*  The  velocity  of  the  outer  edge  of
each  nascent  planet,  he  said,  exceeding  that  of  the  inner,  there  results
a  rotation  on  its  axis.  The  more  dense  bodies  would  be  thrown  off
last;  and  finally,  during  the  preliminary  state  of  their  formation,  the
newly-segregated  orbs  in  their  turn  throw  off  one  or  more  satellites.
In  formulating  the  history  of  the  rupture  and  planetation  of  rings
Laplace  says :

Almost  always  each  ring  of  vapours  must  have  broken  up  into  numerous  masses,
which,  moving  with  a  nearly  uniform  velocity,  must  have  continued  to  circulate  at
the  same  distance  around  the  sun.  These  masses  must  have  taken  a  spheroidal
form  with  a  motion  of  rotation  in  the  same  direction  as  their  revolution,  since  the
inner  molecules  (those  nearest  the  sun)  would  have  less  actual  velocity  than  the
exterior  ones.  They  must  then  have  formed  as  many  planets  in  a  state  of  vapour.
But,  if  one  of  them  was  sufficiently  powerful  to  unite  successively,  by  its  attraction,
all  the  others  around  its  centre,  the  ring  of  vapours  must  have  been  thus  trans-
formed into  a  single  spheroidal  mass  of  vapours  circulating  around  the  sun  with  a
rotation  in  the  same  direction  as  its  revolution.  The  latter  case  has  been  the  more
common,  but  the  solar  system  presents  us  the  first  case,  in  the  four  small  planets
which  move  between  Jupiter  and  Mars.

While  few  will  be  found  to  deny  the  "magnificent  audacity  of  this
hypothesis,"  it  is  impossible  not  to  recognize  the  insurmountable  diffi-
culties with  which  it  is  attended.  Why,  for  instance,  do  we  find  that
the  satellites  of  Neptune  and   Uranus   display   a   retrograde   motion?


*  I^aplace  conceived  that  the  external  and  internal  zones  of  the  ring  would  rotate  with  the  same
angular  velocity,  which  would  be  the  case  with  a  solid  ring;  but  the  principle  of  equal  areas  requires
the  inner  zones  to  rotate  more  rapidly  than  the  outer.  (  World-Life,  p.  121.)  Prof  Winchell  points
out  a  good  many  mistakes  of  I^aplace ;  but  as  a  geologist  he  is  not  infalUble  himself  in  his
"astronomical  speculations."


UNANSWERABLE   QUERIES.  649

Why,  in  spite  of  its  closer  proximity  to  the  Sun,  is  Venus  less  dense
than  the  Earth?  Why,  again,  is  the  more  distant  Uranus  denser  than
Saturn?  How  is  it  that  there  are  so  many  variations  in  the  inclination
of  their  axes  and  orbits  in  the  supposed  progenj'-  of  the  central  orb ;
that  such  startling  variations  in  the  size  of  the  Planets  are  noticeable;
that  the  satellites  of  Jupiter  are  more  dense  by  -288  than  their  primary;
that  the  phenomena  of  meteoric  and  cometary  systems  still  remain
unaccounted  for?     To  quote  the  words  of  a  Master:

They  [the  Adepts]  fiyid  that  the  centrifugal  theory  of  Western  birth  is
tinable  to  cover  all  the  ground.  That,  unaided,  it  ca?i  fieither  account  for
every  oblate  spheroid,  nor  explain  away  such  evident  difficulties  as  are  pre-
sented by  the  relative  density  of  some  planets.  How,  iyideed,  can  any
calculatio7i  of  ce7itrifugal  force  explain  to  us,  for  instance,  why  Mercury,
whose  rotatio7i  is,  we  are  told,  only  ''about  one-third  that  of  the  Earth,  and
its  de?isity  only  about  one-fourth  greater  thaii  the  Earth,'''  should  have  a
polar  compression  more  thaii  ten  times  greater  than  the  latter?  A7id  again,
why  fiipiter,  whose  equatorial  rotation  is  said  to  be  *' twenty-seven  times
greater,  and  its  density  only  about  07ie-fifth  that  of  the  Earth''  should  have
its  polar  co7)ipressio7i  seve7iteen  ti?7ies  greater  tha7i  that  of  the  Earth?  Or
why  Sat2ir7i,  with  an  equatorial  velocity  fifty-five  ti7nes  greater  than
Merctiry  for  ce7itripetal  force  to  contend  with,  sho^dd  have  its  polar  com-
pression 07ily  three  ti7nes  greater  than  Merctiry' s?  To  crow7i  the  above
co7itradictio7is,  we  are  asked  to  believe  in  the  Central  Forces,  as  taught  by
Moder7i  Science,  even  when  told  that  the  equatorial  matter  of  the  Sun,  with
more  than  four  ti77ies  the  centrifugal  velocity  of  the  Earth's  eqtcatorial
surface,  a7id  only  about  one-fourth  part  of  the  gravitatio7i  of  the  equatorial
7natter,  has  7iot  ma7iifested  any  te7idc7icy  to  bulge  at  the  solar  equator,  7ior
shown  the  least  flatte7ii7ig  at  the  poles  of  the  solar  axis.  In  other  and
clearer  words,  the  Su7i,  with  only  07ie-fourth  of  our  Earth's  de7isity  for  the
centrif legal  force  to  work  up07i,  has  no  polar  compressio7i  at  all !  We  find
this  objectio7i  made  by  more  than  one  astro7iomer,  yet  ?iever  explai7ied  away
satisfactorily,  so  far  as  the  ''Adepts"  are  aware.

Therefore,  do   they  [the  Adepts]  say,  that  the  great  me7i  of  Science  of

the   West,  k7iowing next  to  nothi7ig  either  about  cometarv

matter,  ce7itrifugal  a7id  ce7itripetal  forces,  the  7iattire  of  the  nebulcs,  or  the
physical  constitutio7i  of  the  Sun,  the  Stars,  or  even  the  Moon,  are  i7nprudc7it
to  speak  so  co7ifidc7itly  as  they  do  about  the  "central  mass  of  the  Su7i,"
whirli7ig  out  into  space pla7iets,  comets,  a7id  what  not.  .  .  .  We  7nai7i-
tain  that  it  [the  Sun]  evolves  out  07ily  the  life-pri7iciple,  the  Soul  of  these


650  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

bodies,  <nving  and  receiving  it  back,  in  our  little  Solar  System,  as  the
"  Ujiiversal  Li/e-Giver''  .  .  .  in  the  Infinitude  a7id  Etei-ity ;  that
the  Solar  System  is  as  much  the  Microcosm  of  the  One  Macrocosm  as  7nan
is  the  former  when  compared  with  his  own  little  Solar  Cosmos*

The  essential  power  of  all  the  cosmic  and  terrestrial  Elements  to
generate  within  themselves  a  regular  and  harmonious  series  of  results,
a  concatenation  of  causes  and  effects,  is  an  irrefutable  proof  that  they
are  either  animated  by  an  Intelligence,  ab  extra  or  ab  iritra,  or  conceal
such  within  or  behind  the  "manifested  veil."      Occultism   does  not
deny  the  certainty  of  the  mechanical  origin  of  the  Universe;  it  only
claims  the  absolute  necessity  of  mechanicians  of  some  sort  behind  or
within  those   Elements — a  dogma  with  us.      It  is  not  the  fortuitous
assistance  of  the  Atoms  of  Eucretius,  as  he  himself  knew  well,  that
built  the  Kosmos  and  all  in  it.      Nature  herself  contradicts  such  a
theory.      Celestial  Space,   containing  Matter  so  attenuated  as  Ether,
cannot  be  called  on,  with  or  without  attraction,  to  explain  the  common
motion  of  the  sidereal  hosts.      Although  the  perfect  accord  of  their
inter-revolution  indicates  clearly  the  presence  of  a  mechanical  cause
in  Nature,  Newton,  who  of  all  men  had  most  right  to  trust  to  his
deductions,  was  nevertheless  forced  to  abandon  the  idea  of  ever  ex-
plaining the  original  impulse  given  to  the  millions  of  orbs,  by  merely
the  laws  of  known  Nature  and  its  material  Forces.     He  recognized  fully
the  limits  that  separate  the  action  of  natural  Forces  from  that  of  the
Intelligences  that  set  the  immutable  laws  in  order  and  action.     And  if  a
Newton  had  to  renounce  such  hope,  which  of  the  modern  materialistic
pigmies  has  the  right  of  saying:  "  I  know  better"  ?

A  cosmogonical  theory,  to  become  complete  and  comprehensible,  has
to  start  with  a  Primordial  Substance  diffused  throughout  boundless
Space,  of  an  intellectual  and  divine  nature.  That  Substance  must  be
the  Soul  and  Spirit,  the  Synthesis  and  Seventh  Principle  of  the  mani-
fested Kosmos,  and,  to  serve  as  a  spiritual  Upadhi  to  this,  there  must
be  the  sixth,  its  vehicle — Primordial  Physical  Matter,  so  to  speak,
though  its  nature  must  escape  for  ever  our  limited  normal  senses.  It
is  easy  for  an  Astronomer,  if  endowed  with  an  imaginative  faculty,  to
build  a  theory  of  the  emergence  of  the  Universe  out  of  Chaos,  by
simply  applying  to  it  the  principles  of  mechanics.  But  such  a  Uni-
verse will  always  prove  a  Frankenstein's  monster  with  respect  to  its
scientific  human  creator;    it  will  lead  him  into  endless  perplexities.

•  Five  Years  of  Theosophy,  pp.  249-251,  Art.  "Do  the  Adepts  deny  the  Nebular  Theory?"


WHAT   ARE   THE   NEBULA?  65I

The  application  of  mechanical  laws  only  can  never  carry  the  speculator
beyond  the  objective  world;  nor  will  it  unveil  to  men  the  origin  and
final  destiny  of  Kosmos.  This  is  whither  the  Nebular  Theory  has  led
Science.  In  sober  fact  and  truth  this  Theory  is  twin  sister  to  that  of
Ether,  and  both  are  the  offspring  of  necessity;  one  is  as  indispensable
to  account  for  the  transmission  of  light,  as  is  the  other  to  explain  the
problem  of  the  origin  of  the  Solar  Systems.  The  question  with  Science
is,  how  the  same  homogeneous  Matter*  could,  obeying  the  laws  of
Newton,  give  birth  to  bodies— Sun,  Planets,  and  their  satellites— subject
to  conditions  of  identity  of  motion,  and  formed  of  such  heterogeneous
elements.

Has  the  Nebular  Theory  helped  to  solve  the  problem,  even  if  applied
solely  to  bodies  considered  as  inanimate  and  material?  We  say:  most
decidedly  not.  What  progress  has  it  made  since  181 1,  when  first  Sir
William  Herschell's  paper,  with  its  facts  based  on  observation  and
showing  the  existence  of  nebular  matter,  made  the  sons  of  the  Royal
Society  "shout  for  joy"?  Since  then  a  still  greater  discovery,  through
spectrum  analysis,  has  permitted  the  verification  and  corroboration  of
Sir  William  Herschell's  conjecture.  I^aplace  demanded  some  kind  of
primitive  "world-stuff"  to  prove  the  idea  of  progressive  world-evolu-
tion and  growth.     Here  it  is,  as  offered  two  millenniums  ago.

The  "world-stuff,"  now  called  nebulae,  was  known  from  the  highest
antiquity.  Anaxagoras  taught  that,  upon  differentiation,  the  resulting
commixture  of  heterogeneous  substances  remained  motionless  and
unorganized,  until  finally  the  "Mind" — the  collective  body  of  Dhyan
Chohans,  we  say — began  to  work  upon,  and  communicated  to,  them
motion  and  order.f  This  theory  is  now  taken  up,  so  far  as  concerns  its
first  portion;  the  last,  that  of  any  "Mind"  interfering,  being  rejected.
Spectrum  analysis  reveals  the  existence  of  nebulae  formed  entirely  of
gases  and  luminous  vapours.  Is  this  the  primitive  nebular  Matter?
The  spectra  reveal,  it  is  said,  the  physical  conditions  of  the  Matter
which  emits  cosmic  light.  The  spectra  of  the  resolvable  and  the  irre-
solvable nebulae  are  shown  to  be  entirely  different,  the  spectra  of  the


•  Had  Astronomers,  in  their  present  state  of  knowledge,  merely  held  to  the  hypothesis  of  Laplace,
which  was  simply  the  formation  of  the  Planetary  System,  it  might  in  time  have  resulted  in  some-
thing like  an  approximate  truth.  But  the  two  parts  of  the  general  problem — that  of  the  formation
of  the  Universe,  or  the  formation  of  the  Suns  and  Stars  from  the  Primitive  Matter,  and  then  the
development  of  the  Planets  round  their  Sun— rest  on  quite  different  facts  in  Nature  and  are  even  so
viewed  by  Science  itself.    They  are  at  the  opposite  poles  of  Being.

t  Aristotle's /%_>'J«'ca,  viii.  i.


652  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

latter  showing  their  physical  state  to  be  that  of  glowing  gas  or  vapour.
The  bright  lines  of  one  nebula  reveal  the  existence  of  hydrogen,  and
of  other  material  substances  known  and  unknown.  The  same  as  to  the
atmospheres  of  the  Sun  and  Stars.  This  leads  to  the  direct  inference
that  a  Star  is  formed  by  the  condensation  of  a  nebula;  hence  that  even
the  metals  themselves  are  formed  on  earth  by  the  condensation  of
hydrogen  or  of  some  other  primitive  matter,  some  ancestral  cousin  to
helium,  perhaps,  or  some  j^et  unknown  stuff.  This  does  not  clash  with
the  Occult  Teachi7igs.  And  this  is  the  problem  that  Chemistry  is  trying
to  solve;  and  it  must  succeed  sooner  or  later  in  the  task,  accepting
nolens  volens,  when  it  does,  the  Esoteric  Teaching.  But  when  this  does
happen,  it  will  kill  the  Nebular  Theory  as  it  now  stands.

Meanwhile  Astronomy  cannot  accept  in  any  way,  if  it  is  to  be
regarded  as  an  exact  Science,  the  present  theory  of  the  filiation  of  Stars
— even  if  Occultism  does  so  in  its  own  way,  seeing  that  it  explains  this
filiation  differentlj^ — because  Astronomy  has  riot  one  single  physical
datum  to  show  for  it.  Astronom)^  could  anticipate  Chemistry  in  prov-
ing the  existence  of  the  fact,  if  it  could  show  a  planetary  nebula
exhibiting  a  spectrum  of  three  or  four  bright  lines,  gradually  condens-
ing and  transforming  into  a  Star,  with  a  spectrum  all  covered  with  a
number  of  dark  lines.     But

The  question  of  the  variability  of  the  nebulse,  even  as  to  their  form,  is  yet  one  of
the  mysteries  of  Astronomy.  The  data  of  observation  possessed  so  far  are  of  too
recent  an  origin,  too  uncertain,  to  permit  us  to  affirm  anything.*

Since  its  discovery,  the  magic  power  of  the  spectroscope  has  revealed
to  its  adepts  only  one  single  transformation  of  a  Star  of  this  kind ;  and
even  that  showed  directly  the  reverse  of  what  is  needed  as  proof  in
favour  of  the  Nebular  Theory ;  for  it  revealed  a  Star  transfor?7iing  itself
into  a  planetary  neMila.  As  related  in  The  Observatory,]  the  temporary
Star,  discovered  by  J.  F.  J.  Schmidt  in  the  constellation  Cygnus,  in
November,  1876,  exhibited  a  spectrum  broken  by  very  brilliant  lines.
Gradually,  the  continuous  spectrum  and  most  of  the  lines  disappeared,
leaving  finally  one  single  brilliant  line,  which  appeared  to  coincide
with  the  green  line  of  the  nebula.

Though  this  metamorphosis  is  not  irreconcileable  with  the  hypothesis
of  the  nebular  origin  of  the  Stars,  nevertheless  this  single  solitary  case
rests  on  no  observation  whatever,  least  of  all  on  direct  observation.

*  Hypotheses  Cosmogoniques,  p.  3,  Wolf.

t  Vol.  I.,  p.  185,  quoted  by  Wolf,  p.  3.    WolPs  argument  is  here  summarised.


COMETARY  MATTER.  653

The  occurrence  may  have  been  due  to  several  other  causes.  Since
Astronomers  are  inclined  to  think  our  Planets  are  tending  toward
precipitation  into  the  Sun,  why  should  not  that  Star  have  blazed  up
owing  to  a  collision  of  such  precipitated  Planets,  or,  as  many  suggest,
the  appulse  of  a  Comet?  Be  that  as  it  may,  the  only  known  instance
ot  star-transformation  since  181 1  is  not  favourable  to  the  Nebular
Theory.  Moreover,  on  the  question  of  this  Theor>-,  as  on  all  others,
Astronomers  disagree.

In  our  own  age,  and  before  Laplace  ever  thought  of  it,  Buffon,  being
very  much  struck  by  the  identity  of  motion  in  the  Planets,  was  the
first  to  propose  the  hypothesis  that  the  Planets  and  their  satellites
originated  in  the  bo.som  of  the  Sun.  Forthwith  and  for  this  purpose,
he  invented  a  special  Comet,  supposed  to  have  torn  out,  by  a  powerful
oblique  blow,  the  quantity  of  matter  necessary  for  their  formation,
Laplace  gave  its  dues  to  the  "Comet"  in  his  Exposition  du  Systeme  du
Monde*  But  the  idea  was  seized  and  even  improved  upon  by  a  con-
ception of  the  alternate  evolution,  from  the  Sun's  central  mass,  of
Planets  apparently  without  weight  or  influence  on  the  motion  of  the
visible  Planets— and  as  evidently  without  any  more  existence  than  the
likeness  of  Moses  in  the  Moon.

But  the  modern  theory  is  also  a  variation  on  the  systems  elaborated
by  Kant  and  Laplace.  The  idea  of  both  was  that,  at  the  origin  of
things,  all  that  Matter  which  now  enters  into  the  composition  of  the
planetar>'  bodies  was  spread  over  all  the  space  comprized  in  the  Solar
System— and  even  beyond.  It  was  a  nebula  of  extremely  small  density,
and  its  condensation  gradually  gave  birth,  by  a  mechanism  that  has
hitherto  never  been  explained,  to  the  various  bodies  of  our  System.
This  is  the  original  Nebular  Theory,  an  incomplete  yet  faithful  repeti-
tion— a  short  chapter  out  of  the  large  volume  of  universal  Esoteric
Cosmogony — of  the  teachings  of  the  Secret  Doctrine.  And  both
systems,  Kant's  and  Laplace's,  differ  greatly  from  the  modern  Theory,
redundant  with  conflicting  sub-\.\\^ox\&s  and  fanciful  hypotheses.  Say
the  Teachers:

The  essence  of  cometary  matter  [and  of  that  which  composes  the
Stars]  .  ...  is  totally  different  from  any  of  the  cheynical  or  physical
characteristics  with  which  the  greatest  Chemists  and  Physicists  of  the  earth
are  familiar.  .  .  .  While  the  spectroscope  has  shown  the  probable  simi-
larity [owing  to  the  chemical  action  of  terrestrial  light  upon  the  inter-

•  Note  vii.    Summarized  from  Wolf,  p.  6.


654  '^^^   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

cepted  rays]  of  terrestrial  and  sidereal  substa7ice,  the  chemical  actions
peculiar  to  the  variously  progressed  orbs  of  space,  have  not  been  detected,
nor  proven  to  be  identical  with  those  observed  on  our  own  pla?iet*

Mr.  Crookes  says  almost  the  same  in  the  fragment  quoted  from  his
lecture,  Elements  and  Meta- Elements.  C.  Wolf,  Member  of  the  Insti-
tute, Astronomer  of  the  Observatory,  Paris,  observes:

At  the  utmost  the  nebular  hypothesis  can  only  show  in  its  favour,  with  W.
Herschell,  the  existence  of  planetary  nebulae  in  various  degrees  of  condensation,
and  of  spiral  nebulse,  with  nuclei  of  condensation  on  the  branches  and  centre. t
But,  in  fact,  the  knowledge  of  the  bond  that  unites  the  nebulae  to  the  stars  is  yet
denied  to  us;  and  lacking  as  we  do  direct  observation,  we  are  even  debarred  from
establishing  it  on  the  analog)'  of  chemical  composition.  J

Even  if  the  men  of  Science — leaving  aside  the  difficulty  arising  out
of  such  undeniable  variety  and  heterogeneity  of  matter  in  the  constitu-
tion of  nebulse — did  admit,  with  the  Ancients,  that  the  origin  of  all  the
visible  and  invisible  heavenly  bodies  must  be  sought  for  in  one  pri-
mordial homogeneous  world-stuff,  in  a  kind  of  /'ri'-Protyle,§  it  is  evident
that  this  would  not  put  an  end  to  their  perplexities.  Unless  they  admit
also  that  our  actual  visible  Universe  is  merely  the  Sthiila  Sharira,  the
gross  body,  of  the  sevenfold  Kosmos,  they  will  have  to  face  another
problem ;  especially  if  they  venture  to  maintain  that  its  now  visible
bodies  are  the  result  of  the  condensation  of  that  one  and  single  Pri-
mordial Matter.  For  mere  observ^ation  shows  them  that  the  operations
which  produced  the  actual  Universe  are  far  more  complex  than  could
ever  be  embraced  in  that  theory.

First  of  all,  there  are  two  distinct  classes  of  "irresolvable"  nebulae,
as  Science  itself  teaches.

The  telescope  is  unable  to  distinguish  between  these  two  classes,  but
the  spectroscope  can  do  so,  and  notices  an  essential  difference  between
their  physical  constitutions.

The  question  of  the  resolvability  of  the  nebulae  has  been  often  presented  in  too
affirmative  a  manner  and  quite  contrary  to  the  ideas  expressed  by  the  illustrious


•  Five  Years  of  TheoiOphy,  pp.  241,  242,  and  239.

+  But  the  spectra  of  these  nebulse  have  never  j'et  been  ascertained.  When  they  are  found  with
bright  lines,  then  only  may  they  be  cited.

X  Hypoihises  Cosmogoniques,  p.  3.

\  Mr.  Crookes'  Protyle  must  not  be  regarded  as  the  primary  stuff ,  out  of  which  the  Dhyan  Chohans,
in  accordance  %vith  the  immutable  laws  of  Nature,  wove  our  Solar  System.  This  Protyle  cannot  even
be  the  Prima  Materia  of  Kant,  which  that  great  mind  saw  used  up  in  the  formation  of  the  worlds,
and  thus  existing  no  longer  in  a  diffused  state.  Protyle  is  a  mediate  phase  in  the  progressive  differ-
entiation of  Cosmic  Substance  from  its  normal  undifferentiated  state.  It  is,  then,  the  aspect  assumed
by  Matter  in  its  middle  passage  into  full  objectivity.


WHAT  IS  PRIMITIVK   MATTER?  655

eTt>erim enter  with  the  spectra  of  these  constellations — Mr.  Huggins.  Every  nebula
whose  spectrum  contains  only  bright  lines  is  gaseous,  it  is  said,  and  hence  is  irre-
solvable ;  every  nebula  with  a  continuous  spectrum  must  end  by  resolving  into
stars  with  an  instrument  of  suflBcient  power.  This  assumption  is  contrary  at  once
to  the  results  obtained,  and  to  spectroscopic  theor>-.  The  "Lyra"  nebula,  the
"Dumb-bell"  nebula,  the  central  region  of  the  nebula  of  Orion,  appear  resolvable,
and  show  a  spectrum  of  bright  lines;  the  nebula  of  Canes  Venatici  is  not  resolvable,
and  gives  a  continuous  spectrum.  Because,  indeed,  the  spectroscope  informs  us  of
the  physical  state  of  the  constituent  matter  of  the  stars,  but  affords  us  no  notions
of  their  modes  of  aggregation.  A  nebula  formed  of  gaseous  globes  (or  even  of
nuclei,  faintly  luminous,  surrounded  by  a  powerful  atmosphere)  would  give  a
spectrum  of  lines  and  be  still  resolvable ;  such  seems  to  be  the  state  of  Huggins'
region  in  the  Orion  nebula.  A  nebula  formed  of  solid  or  fluidic  particles  in  a  state
of  incandescence,  a  true  cloud,  will  give  a  continuous  spectrum  and  will  be.
irresolvable.

Some  of  these  nebulae,  Wolf  tells  us,  •

Have  a  spectrum  of  three  or  four  bright  lines,  others  a  continuous  spectrum.
The  first  are  gaseous,  the  others  formed  of  a  pulverulent  matter.  The  former  must
constitute  a  veritable  atmosphere:  it  is  among  these  that  the  solar  nebula  of  Laplace
has  to  be  placed.  The  latter  form  an  ensemble  o^  particles  that  may  be  considered  as
independent,  and  the  rotation  of  which  obeys  the  laws  of  internal  weight:  such  are
the  nebulae  adopted  by  Kant  and  Faye.  Observation  allows  us  to  place  the  one  as
the  other  at  the  very  origin  of  the  planetary  world.  But  when  we  try  to  go  beyond
and  ascend  to  the  primitive  chaos  which  has  produced  the  totality  of  the  heavenly
bodies,  we  have  first  to  account  for  the  actual  existence  of  these  two  classes  of
nebulae.  If  the  primitive  chaos  were  a  cold  luminous  gas,*  one  could  understand
how  the  contraction  resulting  from  attraction  could  have  heated  it  and  made  it
luminous.  We  have  to  explain  the  condensation  of  this  gas  to  the  state  of  in-
candescent particles,  the  presence  of  which  is  revealed  to  us  in  certain  nebulae  by
the  spectroscope.  If  the  original  chaos  was  composed  of  such  particles,  how  did
certain  of  their  portions  pass  into  the  gaseous  state,  while  others  have  preserved
their  primitive  condition  }

Such  is  the  synopsis  of  the  objections  and  difficulties  in  the  way  of
the  acceptance  of  the  Nebular  Theory,  brought  forward  by  the  French
savant,  who  concludes  this  interesting  argument  by  declaring  that:

The  first  part  of  the  cosmogonical  problem — what  is  the  primitive  matter  of
chaos;  and  how  did  that  matter  give  birth  to  the  sun  and  stars? — thus  remains
to  this  day  in  the  domain  of  romance  and  of  mere  imagination. t


•  See  stanza  'in,  Commentary  9,  (p.  109)  about  "Light,"  or  "  Cold  Flame,"  where  it  is  explained
that  the  "Mother"— Chaos— is  a  cold  Fire,  a  cool  Radiance,  colourless,  formless,  devoid  of  every
quality.  "Motion  as  Ihr  One  Eternal  is,  and  contains  the  potentialities  0/ every  quality  in  the  Man-
vantaric  IVorlds,"  it  is  said.

+  Hypothiies  Cosmogoniques,  pp.  4,  5.


656  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

If  this  is  the  last  word  of  Science  upon  the  subject,  whither  then

should  we  turn  in  order  to  learn  what  the  Nebular  Theory  is  supposed

to  teach?    What,  in  fact,  is  this  theory?    What  it  is,  no  one  seems  to

know  for  certain.     What  it  is  not — we  learn  from  the  erudite  author  of

World-Life.     He  tells  us  that  it:

i.  Is  not  a  theory  of  the  evolution  of  the  Universe.  It  is  primarily  a  genetic
explanation  of  the  phenomena  of  the  solar  system,  and  accessorily  a  co-ordination
in  a  common  conception  of  the  principal  phenomena  in  the  stellar  and  nebular
firmament,  as  far  as  human  vision  has  been  able  to  penetrate.

ii.  It  does  not  regard  the  comets  as  involved  in  that  particular  evolution  which
has  produced  the  Solar  System.  [The  Esoteric  Doctrine  does,  because  it,  too,
"recognizes  the  comets  as  forms  of  cosmic  existence  co-ordinated  with  earlier
stages  of  nebular  evolution";  and  it  actually  assigns  to  them  chiefly  the  formation
of  all  worlds.]

iii.  //  does  not  deny  an  antecedent  histoiy  of  the  lutninous  fire  mist — [the  secondary
stage  of  evolution  in  the  Secret  Doctrine]  [and]  .  .  .  makes  no  claim  to  having
reached  an  absolute  beginning.  [And  even  it  allows  that  this]  fire  mist  may  have
previously  existed  in  a  cold,  non-luminous  and  invisible  condition.

iv.  [And  that  finally]  it  does  not  prof  ess  to  discover  the  origin  of  things,  but  only  a
stadium  in  material  history  ....  [leaving]  the  philosopher  and  the  theologian
as  free  as  they  ever  were  to  seek  the  origin  of  the  modes  of  being.*

But  this  is  not  all.  Even  the  greatest  philosopher  of  England — Mr.
Herbert  Spencer — arrayed  himself  against  this  fantastic  theory  by
saying  that  (a)  "The  problem  of  existence  is  not  resolved"  by  it;
{b)  the  nebular  hypothesis  "throws  no  light  upon  the  origin  of  diffused
matter"  ;  and  {c)  that  "the  nebular  hypothesis  (as  it  now  stands)  implies
a  First  Cause. "f

The  latter,  we  are  afraid,  is  more  than  our  modern  Physicists  have
bargained  for.  Thus,  it  seems  that  the  poor  "hypothesis"  can  hardly
expect  to  find  help  or  corroboration  even  in  the  world  of  the  Meta-
physicians.

Considering  all  this,  the  Occultists  believe  they  have  a  right  to
present  their  Philosophy,  however  misunderstood  and  ostracized  it  may
be  at  present.  And  they  maintain  that  this  failure  of  the  Scientists  to
discover  the  truth  is  entirely  due  to  their  Materialism  and  their  con-
tempt for  transcendental  Sciences.  Yet  although  the  scientific  minds
in  our  century  are  as  far  from  the  true  and  correct  doctrine  of  Evolu-
tion as  ever,  there  may  be  still  some  hope  left  for  the  future,  for  even
now  we  find  another  Scientist  giving  us  a  faint  glimmer  of  it.


•  World-Life,  p.  196.  t  Westminstef  Review,  XX.,  July  27,  i868.


THE  FUTURE   SYNTHESIS.  657

In  an  article  in  the  Popular  Science  Review  on  "Recent  Researches
in  Minute  Life,"  we  find  Mr.  H.  J.  Slack,  F.C.S.,  Sec.  R.M.S.,  saying:

There  is  an  evident  convergence  of  all  sciences,  from  physics  to  chemistry  and
physiology,  toward  some  doctrine  of  evolution  and  development,  of  which  the  facts
of  Darwinism  will  form  part,  but  what  ultimate  aspect  this  doctrine  will  take,  there
is  little,  if  any,  evidence  to  show,  and  perhaps  it  will  not  be  shaped  by  the  human
mind  until  metaphysical  as  well  as  physical  inquiries  are  much  more  advanced.*

This  is  a  happy  forecast  indeed.  The  day  may  come,  then,  when
"Natural  Selection,"  as  taught  by  Mr.  Darwin  and  Mr.  Herbert
Spencer,  will,  in  its  ultimate  modification,  form  only  a  part  of  our
Eastern  doctrine  of  Evolution,  which  will  be  Manu  and  Kapila
Esoterically  explained.

•  Vol.  XIV.  p.  252.


43


SECTION  XIII.

Forces— Modes  of  Motion  or  Intelligences?


This  is,  then,  the  last  word  of  Physical  Science  up  to  the  present
year,  1888.  Mechanical  laws  will  never  be  able  to  prove  the  homo-
geneity of  Primeval  Matter,  except  inferentially  and  as  a  desperate
necessity,  when  there  will  remain  no  other  issue — as  in  the  case  of
Ether.  Modern  Science  is  secure  only  in  its  own  domain  and  region ;
within  the  physical  boundaries  of  our  Solar  System,  beyond  which
everything,  every  particle  of  Matter,  is  different  from  the  Matter  it
knows,  and  where  Matter  exists  in  states  of  which  Science  can  form
no  idea.  This  Matter,  which  is  truly  homogeneous,  is  beyond  human
perception,  if  perception  is  tied  down  merely  to  the  five  senses.  We
feel  its  effects  through  those  Intelligences  which  are  the  results  of
its  primeval  differentiation,  whom  we  name  Dhyan  Chohans,  called  in
the  Hermetic  works  the  "Seven  Governors";  those  to  whom  Pymander,
the  "Thought  Divine,"  refers  as  the  "Building  Powers,"  and  whom
Asklepios  calls  the  "Supernal  Gods."  This  Matter — the  real  Primor-
dial Substance,  the  Noumenon  of  all  the  "matter"  we  know  of — some
of  our  Astronomers  even  have  been  led  to  believe  in,  for  they  despair
of  the  possibility  of  ever  accounting  for  rotation,  gravitation,  and  the
origin  of  any  mechanical  physical  laws,  unless  these  Intelligences
be  admitted  by  Science.  In  the  above-quoted  work  upon  Astronomy
by  Wolf,*  the  author  endorses  fully  the  theory  of  Kant,  and  the  latter
theory,  if  not  in  its  general  aspect,  at  any  rate  in  some  of  its  features,
reminds  one  strongly  of  certain  Ksoteric  Teachings.  Here  we  have
the  world's  system  "reborn  from  its  ashes,"  through  a  nebula — the
emanation  from  the  bodies,  dead  and  dissolved  in  Space,  resultant  of
the  i7icandescerice  of  the  Solar  Centre — reanimated  by  the  combustible
matter  of  the  Planets.     In  this  theory,  generated  and  developed  in  the


*  Hypothhes  Cosmogoniques.


KANT   AND   OCCULTISM.  659

brain  of  a  young  man  hardly  twenty-five  years  of  age,  who  had  never
left  his  native  place,  Konigsberg,  a  small  town  of  Northern  Prussia,
one  can  hardly  fail  to  recognize  either  the  presence  of  an  inspiring
external  power,  or  an  evidence  of  the  reincarnation  which  the  Occul-
tists see  in  it.  It  fills  a  gap  which  Newton,  with  all  his  genius,  failed
to  bridge.  And  surely  it  is  our  Primeval  Matter,  Akasha,  that  Kant
had  in  view,  when  he  postulated  a  universally  pervading  primordial
Substance,  in  order  to  solve  Newton's  difficulty,  and  his  failure  to
explain,  by  natural  forces  alone,  the  primitive  impulse  imparted  to  the
Planets.  For,  as  he  remarks  in  Chapter  viii,  if  it  is  once  admitted  that
the  perfect  harmony  of  the  Stars  and  Planets  and  the  coincidence  of
their  orbital  planes  prove  the  existence  of  a  natural  Cause,  which
would  thus  be  the  Primal  Cause,  "that  Cause  cannot  really  be  the
matter  which  fills  to-day  the  heavenly  spaces."  It  must  be  that  which
filled  Space — was  Space — originally,  whose  motion  in  differentiated
Matter  was  the  origin  of  the  actual  movements  of  the  sidereal  bodies;
and  which,  "in  condensing  itself  in  those  very  bodies,  thus  abandoned
the  space  that  is  to-day  found  void."  In  other  words,  it  is  of  that  same
Matter  that  are  now  composea  -ne  Planets,  Comets,  and  the  Sun  him-
self, and  that  Matter,  having  originally  formed  itself  into  those  bodies,
has  presented  its  inherent  quality  of  motion;  which  quality,  now
centred  in  their  nuclei,  directs  all  motion.  A  very  slight  alteration
of  words  in  this  is  needed,  and  a  few  additions,  to  make  of  it  our
Esoteric  Doctrine.

The  latter  teaches  that  it  is  this  original,  primordial  Prima  Materia,
divine  and  intelligent,  the  direct  emanation  of  the  Universal  Mind,  the
Daiviprakriti — the  Divine  lyight*  emanating  from  the  Logos — which
formed  the  nuclei  of  all  the  "self-moving"  orbs  in  Kosmos.  It  is  the
informing,  ever-present  moving-power  and  life-principle,  the  Vital
Soul  of  the  Suns,  Moons,  Planets,  and  even  of  our  Earth;  the  former
latent,  the  latter  active — the  invisible  Ruler  and  Guide  of  the  gross
body  attached  to,  and  connected  with,  its  Soul,  which  is  the  spiritual
emanation,  after  all,  of  these  respective  Planetarj^  Spirits.

Another  quite  Occult  Doctrine  is  the  theory  of  Kant,  that  the  Matter
of  which  the  inhabitants  and  the  animals  of  other  Planets  are  formed  is
of  a  lighter  and  more  subtle  nature  a7id  of  a  more  perfect  conforjnation,  in
proportion  to  their  distance  from  the  Sun.  The  latter  is  too  full  of  Vital
Electricity,  of  the  physical,  life-giving  principle.     Therefore,  the  men

•  Which  "Ught"  we  call  Fohat.


66o  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

on  Mars  are  more  ethereal  than  we  are,  while  those  on  Venus  are  more
gross,  though  far  more  intelligent,  if  less  spiritual.

The  last  doctrine  is  not  quite  ours — yet  these  Kantian  theories  are  as
metaphysical,  and  as  transcendental  as  any  Occult  Doctrines;  and
more  than  one  man  of  Science  would,  if  he  but  dared  speak  his  mind,
accept  them  as  Wolf  does.  From  this  Kantian  Mind  and  Soul  of  the
Suns  and  Stars  to  the  Mahat  (Mind)  and  Prakriti  of  the  Puraiias  there
is  but  a  step.  After  all,  the  admission  of  this  by  Science  would  be
only  the  admission  of  a  natural  cause,  whether  it  would  or  would  not
stretch  its  belief  to  such  metaphysical  heights.  But  then  Mahat,  the
Mind,  is  a  "God,"  and  Physiology  admits  "mind"  only  as  a  temporary
function  of  the  material  brain,  and  no  more.

The  Satan  of  Materialism  now  laughs  at  all  alike,  and  denies  the
visible  as  well  as  the  invisible.  Seeing  in  light,  heat,  electricity,  and
even  in  tht  phenomenon  of  life,  only  properties  inherent  in  Matter,  it
laughs  whenever  life  is  called  the  Vital  Principle,  and  derides  the  idea
of  its  being  independent  of  and  distinct  from  the  organism.

But  here  again  scientific  opinions  differ  as  in  everything  else,  and
there  are  several  men  of  Science  who  accept  views  very  similar  to  ours.
Consider,  for  instance,  what  Dr.  Richardson,  F.R.S.  (elsewhere  quoted
at  length)  sa3^s  of  that  "Vital  Principle,"  which  he  calls  "Nervous
Ether":

I  speak  only  of  a  veritable  material  agent,  refined,  it  may  be,  to  the  world  at
large,  but  actual  and  substantial :  an  agent  having  quality  of  weight  and  of  volume,
an  agent  susceptible  of  chemical  combination,  and  thereby  of  change  of  physical
state  and  condition,  an  agent  passive  in  its  action,  moved  alwaj^s,  that  is  to  say,  by
influences  apart  from  itself,*  obeying  other  influences,  an  agent  possessing  no
initiative  power,  no  vis  or  energeia  naturce,\  but  still  playing  a  most  important,  if
not  a  primary  part  in  the  production  of  the  phenomena  resulting  from  the  action
of  the  energeia  upon  visible  matter.  |

As  Biology  and  Physiology  now  den3%  in  toto,  the  existence  of  a
Vital  Principle,  this  extract,  together  with  De  Quatrefages'  admission,
is  a  clear  confirmation  that  there  are  men  of  Science  who  take  the  same
views  about  "things  Occult"  as  do  Theosophists  and  Occultists.  These
recognize  a  distinct  Vital  Principle  independent  of  the  organism —


•  This  is  a  mistake,  which  implies  a  material  agent,  distinct  from  the  influences  which  move  it,
i.e.,  blind  matter  and  perhaps  "God"  again,  whereas  this  One  Life  is  the  very  God  and  Gods
"Itself"

+  The  same  error.

X  Popular  Science  Review,  Vol.  X.


MIND   IN   NATURE.  66 1

material,  of  course,  as  physical  Force  cannot  be  divorced  from  Matter,  but
of  a  Substance  existing  in  a  state  unknown  to  Science.  Life  for  them
is  something  more  tha?i  the  mere  iyiteraction  of  molecules  and  atoms.  There
is  a  Vital  Principle  without  which  no  molecular  combinations  could
ever  have  resulted  in  a  living  organism,  least  of  all  in  the  so-called
"  inorganic"  Matter  of  our  plane  of  consciousness.

By  "molecular  combinations"  are  meant,  of  course,  those  of  the
Matter  of  our  present  illusive  perceptions,  which  Matter  energizes  only
on  this,  our  plane.     And  this  is  the  chief  point  at  issue.*

Thus  the  Occultists  are  not  alone  in  their  beliefs.  Nor  are  the)-  so
foolish,  after  all,  in  rejecting  even  the  "gravity"  of  Modern  Science
along  with  other  physical  laws,  and  in  accepting  instead  attractioii  and
rcp2ilsion.  They  see,  moreover,  in  these  two  opposite  Forces  only  the
two  aspects  of  the  Universal  Unit,  called  Manifesting  Mind;  in  which
aspects.  Occultism,  through  its  great  Seers,  perceives  an  innumerable
Host  of  operative  Beings:  cosmic  Dh3'an  Chohans,  Entities,  whose
essence,  in  its  dual  nature,  is  the  Cause  of  all  terrestrial  phenomena.
For  that  essence  is  con-substantial  with  the  universal  Electric  Ocean,
which  is  Life  ;  and  being  dual,  as  said — positive  and  negative — it  is
the  emanations  of  that  duality  that  act  now  on  Earth  under  the  name
of  "modes  of  motion";  even  Force  having  now  become  objectionable
as  a  word,  for  fear  it  should  lead  someone,  even  in  thought,  to  separate
it  from  Matter !  It  is,  as  Occultism  says,  the  dual  effects  of  that  dual
essence,  which  have  now  been  called  centripetal  and  centrifugal  forces,
now  negative  and  positive  poles,  or  polarity,  heat  and  cold,  light  and
darkness,  etc.

And  it  is  further  maintained  that  even  the  Greek  and  Roman
Catholic  Christians  are  wiser  in  believing,  as  they  do — even  if  blindly
connecting  and  tracing  them  all  to  an  anthropomorphic  God — in
Angels,  Archangels,  Archons,  Seraphs,  and  Morning  Stars,  in  all  those
theological  delicia;  humani  generis,  in  short,  that  rule  the  Cosmic
Elements,  than  Science  is,  in  disbelieving  in  them  altogether,  and  in

•  "Is  the  Jiva  a  myth,  as  Science  says,  or  is  it  not?"  ask  some  Theosophists,  wavering  between
materialistic  and  ideaHstic  Science.  The  difficulty  of  really  grasping  Esoteric  problems  concerning
the  "ultimate  state  of  Matter"  is  again  the  old  crux  of  the  objective  and  the  subjective.  What  is
Matter?  Is  the  Matter  of  our  present  objective  consciousness  anything  but  our  sensations f  True,
the  sensations  we  receive  come  from  without,  but  can  we  really— except  in  terms  of  phenomena-
speak  of  the  "gross  matter"  of  this  plane  as  an  entity  apart  from  and  independent  of  us?  To  all
such  arguments  Occultism  answers :  True,  in  reality  Matter  is  not  independent  of,  or  existent  outside,
our  perceptions.  Man  is  an  illusion :  granted.  Hut  the  existence  and  actuality  of  other,  still  more
illusive,  but  not  less  actual,  entities  than  we  are,  is  not  a  claim  which  is  lessened,  but  rather  streng-
thened, by  this  doctrine  of  Vedantic  and  even  Kantian  Idealism.


662  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

advocating  its  mechanical  Forces.  For  these  act  very  often  with  more
than  human  intelligence  and  pertinency.  Nevertheless,  that  intelli-
gence is  denied  and  attributed  to  blind  chance.  But,  as  De  Maistre
was  right  in  calling  the  law  of  gravitation  merely  a  word  which  replaced
"the  thing  unknown,"  so  are  we  right  in  applying  the  same  remark  to
all  the  other  Forces  of  Science.  And  if  it  is  objected  that  the  Count
was  an  ardent  Roman  Catholic,  then  we  ma}^  cite  I,e  Couturier,  as
ardent  a  Materialist,  who  said  the  same  thing,  as  did  also  Herschell
and  many  others.*

From  Gods  to  men,  from  Worlds  to  atoms,  from  a  Star  to  a  rush-light,
from  the  Sun  to  the  vital  heat  of  the  meanest  organic  being — the  world
of  Form  and  Existence  is  an  immense  chain,  the  links  of  which  are  all
connected.  The  Law  of  Analogy  is  the  first  key  to  the  world-problem,
and  these  links  have  to  be  studied  coordinately  in  their  Occult  rela-
tions to  each  other.

When,  therefore,  the  Secret  Doctrine— postulating  that  conditioned
or  limited  space  (location)  has  no  real  being  except  in  this  world  of
illusion,  or,  in  other  words,  in  our  perceptive  faculties — teaches  that
every  one  of  the  higher,  as  of  the  lower  worlds,  is  interblended  with
our  own  objective  world;  that  millions  of  things  and  beings  are,  in
point  of  localization,  around  and  iji  us,  as  we  are  around,  with,  and  in
them ;  this  is  no  mere  metaphysical  figure  of  speech,  but  a  sober  fact  in
Nature,  however  incomprehensible  to  our  senses.

But  one  has  to  understand  the  phraseology  of  Occultism  before
criticizing  what  it  asserts.  For  example,  the  Doctrine  refuses— as
Science  does,  in  one  sense— to  use  the  words  "above"  and  "below,"
"higher"  and  "lower,"  in  reference  to  invisible  spheres,  since  here
they  are  without  meaning.  Even  the  terms  "East"  and  "West"  are
merely  conventional,  necessary  only  to  aid  our  human  perceptions.
For  though  the  Earth  has  its  two  fixed  points  in  the  poles.  North
and  South,  yet  both  East  and  West  are  variable  relatively  to  our
own  position  on  the  Earth's  surface,  and  in  consequence  of  its  rota-
tion from  West  to  East.  Hence,  when  "other  worlds"  are  mentioned—
whether  better  or  worse,  more  spiritual  or  still  more  material,  though
both  invisible— the  Occultist  does  not  locate  these  spheres  either  out-
side or  inside  our  Earth,  as  the  theologians  and  the  poets  do ;  for  their
location  is  nowhere  in  the  space  known  to,  or  conceived  by,  the
profane.     They  are,   as  it  were,  blended  with  our  world — interpene-

*  See  Mtisie  des  Sciences,  August,  1856.


OCCULT  AND   PHYSICAL  SCIENCES.  663

tiating  it  and  interpenetrated  by  it.  There  are  millions  and  millions
of  worlds  and  firmaments  visible  to  us;  there  are  still  greater  numbers
beyond  those  visible  to  the  telescope,  and  many  of  the  latter  kind  do
not  belong  to  our  objective  sphere  of  existence.  Although  as  invisible
as  if  they  were  millions  of  miles  be3'^ond  our  Solar  System,  they  are
yet  with  us,  near  us,  within  our  own  world,  as  objective  and  material  to
their  respective  inhabitants  as  ours  is  to  us.  But,  again,  the  relation
of  these  worlds  to  ours  is  not  that  of  a  series  of  egg-shaped  boxes
enclosed  one  within  the  other,  like  the  toys  called  Chinese  nests;  each
is  entirely  under  its  own  special  laws  and  conditions,  having  no  direct
relation  to  our  sphere.  The  inhabitants  of  these,  as  already  said,  may
be,  for  all  we  know,  or  feel,  passing  through  and  around  us  as  if  through
empty  space,  their  very  habitations  and  countries  being  interblended
with  ours,  though  not  disturbing  our  vision,  because  we  have  not  yet
the  faculties  necessary  for  discerning  them.  Yet  by  their  spiritual
sight  the  Adepts,  and  even  some  seers  and  sensitives,  are  always  able
to  discern,  whether  in  a  greater  or  smaller  degree,  the  presence  and
close  proximity  to  us  of  Beings  pertaining  to  other  spheres  of  life.
Those  of  the  spiritually  higher  worlds  communicate  only  with  those
terrestrial  mortals  who  ascend  to  them,  through  individual  efforts,  on
to  the  higher  plane  they  are  occupying.

The  S071S  of  Bhiinii  [Earth]  regard  the  Sons  of  Deva-lokas  [Angel-
spheres]  as  their  Gods;  and  the  Sons  of  lower  kingdo?ns  look  up  to  the  7ncn
of  Bhumi  as  to  their  Devas  [Gods] ;  meji  remaiiiing  unaware  of  it  iji  their
blindness.  .  .  .  They  [men]  tremble  before  them  while  using  them  [for
magical  purposes].  .  .  .  The  First  Race  of  Men  were  the '' Mind-born
Sons''  of  the  former.     They  [the  Pitris  and  Yi^\ia&\  are  oiir  progenitors.^

"Educated  people,"  so-called,  deride  the  idea  of  Sylphs,  Salaman-
ders, Undines,  and  Gnomes;  the  men  of  Science  regard  any  mention
of  such  superstitions  as  an  insult;  and  with  a  contempt  of  logic  and
common  good  sense,  that  is  often  the  prerogative  of  "accepted  au-
thority," they  allow  those,  whom  it  is  their  duty  to  instruct,  to  labour
under  the  absurd  impression  that  in  the  whole  Kosmos,  or  at  any  rate
in  our  own  atmosphere,  there  are  no  other  conscious,  intelligent  beings,
save  ourselves.f  Any  other  humanity  (composed  of  distinct  human
beings)  save  a  mankind  with  two  legs,  two  arms,  and  a  head  with

•  Book  II.  of  the  Commentary  on  the  Book  of  Dzyan.

■t  Even  the  question  of  the  plurality  of  worlds  inhabited  by  sentient  creatures  is  rejected,  or  is
approached  with  the  greatest  caution!  And  yet  see  what  the  g^-eat  astronomer,  Camille  Klammarion,
•ays  in  his  IHuralili  des  Mondts.


664  'THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

man's  features  on  it,  would  not  be  called  human ;  though  the  etymology
of  the  word  would  seem  to  have  little  to  do  with  the  general  appearance
of  a  creature.  ,Thus,  while  Science  sternly  rejects  even  the  possibility
of  there  being  such  (to  us,  generally)  invisible  creatures.  Society,  while
believing  in  it  all  secretly,  is  made  to  deride  the  idea  openly.  It  hails
with  mirth  such  works  as  the  Comte  de  Gabalis,  and  fails  to  understand
that  open  satire  is  the  sectirest  mask.

Nevertheless,  such  invisible  worlds  do  exist.  Inhabited  as  thickly
as  is  our  own,  they  are  scattered  throughout  apparent  Space  in  immense
numbers ;  some  far  more  material  than  our  own  world,  others  gradually
etherealizing  until  they  become  formless  and  are  as  "breaths."  The
fact  that  our  physical  eye  does  not  see  them,  is  no  reason  for  dis-
believing in  them.  Physicists  cannot  see  their  Ether,  Atoms,  "modes
of  motion,"  or  Forces.     Yet  they  accept  and  teach  them.

If  we  find,  even  in  the  natural  world  with  which  we  are  acquainted,
Matter  affording  a  partial  analogy  to  the  difficult  conception  of  such
invisible  worlds,  there  seems  little  difficulty  in  recognizing  the  possi-
bility of  such  a  presence.  The  tail  of  a  Comet,  which,  though  attract-
ing our  attention  by  virtue  of  its  luminosity,  yet  does  not  disturb  or
impede  our  vision  of  objects,  which  we  perceive  through  and  beyond
it,  affords  the  first  stepping-stone  toward  a  proof  of  the  same.  The
tail  of  a  Comet  passes  rapidly  across  our  horizon,  and  we  should
neither  feel  it,  nor  be  cognizant  of  its  passage,  but  for  the  brilliant
coruscation,  often  perceived  only  by  a  few  interested  in  the  pheno-
menon, while  everyone  else  remains  ignorant  of  its  presence  and  of
its  passage  through,  or  across,  a  portion  of  our  globe.  This  tail  may,
or  may  not,  be  an  integral  portion  of  the  being  of  the  Comet,  but  its
tenuity  subserves  our  purpose  as  an  illustration.  Indeed,  it  is  no  ques-
tion of  superstition,  but  simply  a  result  of  transcendental  Science,  and
of  logic  still  more,  to  admit  the  existence  of  worlds  formed  of  even  far
more  attenuated  Matter  than  the  tail  of  a  Comet.  By  denying  such  a
possibility,  Science  has  for  the  last  century  played  into  the  hands  of
neither  Philosophy  nor  true  Religion,  but  simply  into  those  of  Theo-
logy. To  be  able  to  dispute  the  better  the  plurality  of  even  material
worlds,  a  belief  thought  by  many  churchmen  incompatible  with  the
teachings  and  doctrines  of  the  Bible,^'  Maxwell  had  to  calumniate  the

*  Nevertheless,  it  may  be  shown  on  the  testimony  of  the  Bible  itself,  and  of  such  good  Christian
theologians  as  Cardinal  Wiseman,  that  this  plurality  is  taught  in  both  the  Old  and  the  New
Testament!,.


PLURALITY   OF  WORLDS.  665

memory  of  Newton,  and  to  try  and  convince  his  public  that  the  princi-
ples contained  in  the  Newtonian  philosophy  are  those  "which  lie  at
the  foundation  of  all  atheistical  systems."*

"Dr.  Whewell  disputed  the  plurality  of  worlds  by  appeal  to  scientific
evidence,"  writes  Professor  Winchell.f  And  if  even  the  habitability
of  physical  worlds,  of  Planets,  and  distant  Stars  which  shine  in  myriads
over  our  heads  is  so  disputed,  how  little  chance  is  there  for  the  accept-
ance of  invisible  worlds  within  the  apparently  transparent  space  of
our  ovvii !

But,  if  we  can  conceive  of  a  world  composed  of  Matter  still  more
attenuated  to  our  senses  than  the  tail  of  a  Comet,  hence  of  inhabi-
tants in  it  who  are  as  ethereal,  in  proportion  to  their  Globe,  as  we  are
in  comparison  with  our  rock}-,  hard-crusted  Earth,  no  wonder  if  we  do
not  perceive  them,  nor  sense  their  presence  or  even  existence.  Only,
in  what  is  the  idea  contrary  to  Science?  Cannot  men  and  animals,
plants  and  rocks,  be  supposed  to  be  endowed  with  quite  a  difi'erent  set
of  senses  from  those  we  possess?  Cannot  their  organisms  be  born,
develop,  and  exist,  under  other  laws  of  being  than  those  that  rule
our  little  world?  Is  it  absolutely  necessary  that  every  corporeal  being
should  be  clothed  in  "coats  of  skin"  like  those  that  Adam  and  Eve
were  provided  with  in  the  legend  of  Genesis?  Corporeality,  we  are
told,  however,  by  more  than  one  man  of  Science,  "may  exist  under
very  divergent  conditions."  Professor  A.  Winchell — arguing  upon  the
plurality  of  worlds — makes  the  following  remarks:

It  is  not  at  all  improbable  that  substances  of  a  refractory  nature  might  be  so
mixed  with  other  substances,  known  or  unknown  to  us,  as  to  be  capable  of  endur-
ing vastly  greater  vicissitudes  of  heat  and  cold  than  is  possible  with  terrestrial
organisms.  The  tissues  of  terrestrial  animals  are  simply  suited  to  terrestrial  condi-
tions.    Yet  even  here  we  find  different  types  and  species  of  animals  adapted  to  the

trials  of  extremely  dissimilar  situations That  an  animal  should  be

a  quadruped  or  a  biped  is  something  not  depending  on  the  necessities  of  organiza-
tion, or  instinct,  or  intelligence.  That  an  animal  should  possess  just  five  senses  is
not  a  necessity  of  percipient  existence.  There  may  be  animals  on  the  earth  with
neither  smell  nor  taste.  There  ma}'  be  beings  on  other  worlds,  and  even  on  this,
who  possess  more  numerous  senses  than  we.  The  possibility  of  this  is  apparent
when  we  consider  the  high  probability  that  other  properties  and  other  modes  of
existence  lie  among  the  resources  of  the  Cosmos,  and  even  of  terrestrial  matter.
There  are  animals  which  subsist  where  rational  man  would  perish — in  the  soil,  in

•  See  Plurality  of  IVorlds,  Vol.  II.

♦  See  on  this  La  PluraliU  des  Mondes  Habitcs.  par  C.  Fhimmarioii,  wherein  is  given  a.  list  of  the
many  men  ol  Science  who  have  written  to  prove  the  theory.


666  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

the  river,  and  the  sea  .  .  .  [and  why  not  Jmman  beings  of  different  organiza-
tions, in  such  case  ?]  .  .  .  Nor  is  incorporated  rational  existence  conditioned  on
warm  blood,  nor  on  any  temperature  which  does  not  change  the  forms  of  matter  of
which  the  organism  may  be  composed.  There  may  be  intelligences  corporealized
after  some  concept  not  involving  the  processes  of  injection,  assimilation,  and  re-
production. Such  bodies  would  not  require  daily  food  and  warmth.  They  might
be  lost  in  the  abysses  of  the  ocean,  or  laid  up  on  a  stormy  cliff  through  the  tempests
of  an  Arctic  winter,  or  plunged  in  a  volcano  for  a  hundred  years,  and  yet  retain
consciousness  and  thought.  It  is  conceivable.  Why  might  not  psychic  natures  be
enshrined  in  indestructible  flint  and  platinum?  These  substances  are, no  further
from  the  nature  of  intelligence  than  carbon,  hydrogen,  oxygen,  and  lime.  But,
not  to  carry  the  thought  to  such  an  extreme  [?],  might  not  high  intelligence  be
embodied  in  frames  as  indifferent  to  external  conditions  as  the  sage  of  the  western
plains,  or  the  lichens  of  Labrador,  the  rotifers  which  remain  dried  for  years,  or  the
bacteria  which  pass  living  through  boiling  water.  .  .  ,  These  suggestions  are
made  simply  to  remind  the  reader  how  little  can  be  argued  respecting  the  neces-
sary conditions  of  intelligent,  organized  existence,  from  the  standard  of  corporeal
existence  found  upon  the  earth.  Intelligence  is,  from  its  nature,  as  universal  and
as  uniform  as  the  laws  of  the  viniverse.  Bodies  are  merely  the  local  fitting  of  intel-
ligence to  particular  modifications  of  universal  matter  or  force.*

Do  not  we  know  through  the  discoveries  of  that  same  all-den5nng
Science  that  we  are  surrounded  by  myriads  of  invisible  lives?  If  these
microbes,  bacteria  and  the  tutti  guajiti  of  the  infinitesimally  small,  are
invisible  to  us  by  virtue  of  their  minuteness,  cannot  there  be,  at  the
other  pole,  beings  as  invisible  owing  to  the  quality  of  their  texture  or
matter — to  its  tenuity,  in  fact?  Conversely,  as  to  the  effects  of
cometary  matter,  have  we  not  another  example  of  a  half  visible  form  of
lyife  and  Matter?  The  ray  of  sunlight  entering  our  apartment  reveals
in  its  passage  myriads  of  tiny  beings  living  their  little  life  and  ceasing
to  be,  independent  and  heedless  of  whether  they  are  or  are  not  perceived
by  our  grosser  materiality.  And  so  again,  of  the  microbes  and  bacteria
and  such-like  unseen  beings  in  other  elements.  We  passed  them  by,
during  those  long  centuries  of  dreary  ignorance,  after  the  lamp  of  know-
ledge in  the  heathen  and  highly  philosophical  systems  had  ceased  to
throw  its  bright  light  on  the  ages  of  intolerance  and  bigotry  of  early
Christianity;  and  we  would  fain  pass  them  by  again  now.

And  yet  these  lives  surrounded  us  thot  as  they  do  now.  They  have
worked  on,  obedient  to  their  own  laws,  and  it  is  only  as  they  have  been
gradually  revealed  by  Science  that  we  have  begun  to  take  cognizance
of  them  and  of  the  effects  produced  by  them.

*  World-Life,  pp.  496-498,  el  seq.


THE   GEOLOGY   OF  ENOCH.  667

How  long  has  it  taken  the  world  to  become  what  it  now  is?  If  it
can  be  said  that  even  up  to  the  present  day  cosmic  dust,  "which  has
never  belonged  to  the  earth  before,"*  reaches  our  Globe,  how  much
more  logical  is  it  to  believe — as  the  Occultists  do — that  through  the
countless  millions  of  years  that  have  rolled  away  since  that  dust  aggre-
gated and  formed  the  Globe  we  live  in  round  its  nucleus  of  intelligent
Primeval  Substance,  many  humanities — differing  from  our  present
mankind  as  greatly  as  the  humanity  which  will  evolve  millions  of  years
hence  will  differ  from  our  races — appeared  but  to  disappear  from  the
face  of  the  Earth,  as  will  our  own.  These  primitive  and  far-distant
humanities  are  denied,  because,  as  Geologists  think,  they  have  left  no
tangible  relics  of  themselves.  All  trace  of  them  is  swept  away,  and
therefore  they  have  never  existed.  Yet  their  relics — though  very  few
of  them,  truly — are  to  be  found,  and  they  must  be  discovered  by
geological  research.  But,  even  if  they  were  never  to  be  met  with,  there
would  be  no  reason  to  say  that  no  men  could  have  ever  lived  in  the
geological  periods  to  which  their  presence  on  earth  is  assigned.  For
their  organisms  needed  no  warm  blood,  no  atmosphere,  no  feeding;  the
author  of  World-Life  is  right,  and  there  is  no  extravagance  in  believing
as  we  do,  that  as,  on  scientific  h3'potheses,  there  may  be  to  this  day
"psychic  natures  enshrined  in  indestructible  flint  and  platinum,"  so
there  were  psychic  natures  enshrined  in  forms  of  equally  indestructible
Primeval  Matter — the  real  forefathers  of  our  Fifth  Race.

When,  therefore,  as  in  Volume  II,  we  speak  of  men  who  inhabited
this  Globe  18,000,000  years  ago,  we  have  in  mind  neither  the  men  of
our  present  races,  nor  the  present  atmospheric  laws,  thermal  con-
ditions, etc.  The  Earth  and  Mankind,  like  the  Sun,  Moon,  and
Planets,  all  have  their  growth,  changes,  development,  and  gradual
evolution  in  their  life-periods;  they  are  born,  become  infants,  then
children,  adolescent,  grown-up,  they  grow  old,  and  finally  die.  Why
should  not  Mankind  be  also  under  this  universal  law?  Says  Uriel
to  Enoch:

Behold,  I  have  showed  thee  all  things,  O  Enoch.  .  .  .  Thou  seest  the  sun,  the
moon,  and  those  which  conduct  the  stars  of  heaven,  which  cause  all  their  opera-
tions, seasons,  and  arrivals  to  return.  In  the  days  of  sinners  the  years  shall  be
shortened  .  .  .  everything  done  on  earth  shall  be  subverted  .  .  .  the  moon
shall  change  its  laws.t

*  World-Life.  t  The  Book  of  Enoch.    Trans,  by  Archbishop  Laurence,  Ch.  LXXIX.


668  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

The  "days  of  sinners"  meant  the  days  when  Matter  would  be  in  its
full  sway  on  Earth,  and  man  would  have  reached  the  apex  of  physical
development  in  stature  and  animality.  That  came  to  pass  during  the
period  of  the  Atlanteans,  about  the  middle  point  of  their  Race,  the
Fourth,  which  was  drowned,  as  prophesied  by  Uriel.  Since  then  man
has  been  decreasing  in  physical  stature,  strength,  and  years,  as  will
be  shown  in  Volume  II.  But  as  we  are  at  the  mid-point  of  our  sub-
race  of  the  Fifth  Root-Race — the  acme  of  materiality  in  each — the
animal  propensities,  though  more  refined,  are  none  the  less  developed;
and  this  is  most  marked  in  civilized  countries.


SECTION  XIV.

Gods,  Monads  and  Atoms.


SoMK  years  ago  we  remarked  that :

The  Esoteric  Doctrine  may  well  be  called  .  .  .  the  "Thread  Doctrine,"  since,
like  Sutratma  [in  the  VedSnta  Philosophy*],  it  passes  through  and  strings  together
all  the  ancient  philosophical  religious  systems,  and  .  .  .  reconciles  and  explains
them.t

We  now  say  it  does  more.  It  not  only  reconciles  the  various  and
apparently  conflicting  systems,  but  it  checks  the  discoveries  of  modern
exact  Science,  showing  some  of  them  to  be  necessarily  correct,  since
they  are  found  corroborated  in  the  Ancient  Records.  All  this  will,  no
doubt,  be  regarded  as  terribly  impertinent  and  disrespectful,  a  veritable
crime  of  lhc-scic?ice;  nevertheless,  it  is  a  fact.

Science  is,  undeniably,  ultra-materialistic  in  our  days;  but  it  finds,
in  one  sense,  its  justification.  Nature  behaving  ever  esoterically  in
acfu,  and  being,  as  the  Kabalists  say,  i?i  abscondito,  can  only  be  judged
by  the  profane  through  her  appearance,  and  that  appearance  is  always
deceitful  on  the  physical  plane.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Naturalists
refuse  to  blend  Physics  with  Metaphysics,  the  Body  with  its  informing
Soul  and  Spirit.  They  prefer  to  ignore  the  latter.  This  is  a  matter
of  choice  with  some,  while  the  minority  very  sensibly  strive  to  enlarge
the  domain  of  Physical  Science  by  trespassing  on  the  forbidden
grounds  of  Metaphysics,  so  distasteful  to  some  Materialists.  These
Scientists  are  wise  in  their  generation.  For  all  their  wonderful  dis-
coveries will  go  for  nothing,  and  remain  for  ever  headless  bodies,  unless
they  lift  the  veil  of  Matter  and  strain  their  eyes  to  see  beyond.  Now
that  they  have  studied  Nature  in  the  length,  breadth,  and  thickness  of
her  physical  frame,  it  is  time  to  remove  the  skeleton  to  the  second

•  The  Atma,  or  Spirit,  the  Spiritual  Self,  passing  like  a  thread  through  the  five  Subtle  Bodies,  or
Principles,  Koshas,  is  called  "Thread-soul,"  or  Sutratma  in  VedSntic  Philosophy.
T  "The  Septenary  Principle,"  Five  Years  of  Theosophy,  p.  197.


670  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

plane,  and  search  within  the  unknown  depths  for  the  living  and  real
entity,  for  its  ^-^.^-stance — the  noumenon  of  evanescent  Matter.

It  is  only  by  acting  along  such  lines  that  some  truths,  now  called
"exploded  superstitions,"  will  be  discovered  to  be  facts,  and  the  relics
of  ancient  knowledge  and  wisdom.

One  of  such  "degrading"  beliefs — degrading  in  the  opinion  of  the
all-denying   Sceptic — is   found   in   the   idea  that  Kosmos,  besides  its
objective    planetary  inhabitants,   its    humanities    in    other   inhabited
worlds,  is  full  of  invisible,  intelligent  Existences.     The  so-called  Arch-
Angels,  Angels  and  Spirits,  of  the  West,  copies  of  their  prototypes,
the  Dhyan  Chohans,  the  Devas  and  Pitris,  of  the  East,  are  not  real
Beings,  but  fictions.     On  this  point  materialistic  Science  is  inexorable.
To  support  its  position,  it  upsets  its  own  axiomatic  law  of  uniformity
and  of  continuity  in  the  laws  of  Nature,  and  all  the  logical  sequence
of  analogies  in  the  evolution  of  Being,     The  masses  of  the  profane
are  asked,  and  are  made,  to  believe  that  the  accumulated  testimony
of  History' — which  shows  even  the  "Atheists"  of  old,  such  men  as
Epicurus   and  Democritus,   as  believers  in  Gods — is  false;    and   that
Philosophers  like  Socrates  and  Plato,  asserting  such  existences,  were
mistaken  enthusiasts  and  fools.     If  we  hold  our  opinions  merely  on
historical  grounds,  on  the  authority  of  legions  of  the  most  eminent
Sages,  Neo-Platonists,  and  Mystics  in  all  ages,  from  Pythagoras  down
to  the  eminent  Scientists  and  Professors  of  the  present  century,  who,  if
they  reject   "Gods,"  believe  in   "Spirits,"  are  we   to   consider  such
authorities  to  be  as  weak-minded  and  foolish  as  any  Roman  Catholic
peasant,  who  believes  in  and  prays  to  his  once  human  Saint,  or  the
Archangel  St.  Michael?     But  is  there  no  difference  between  the  belief
of  the  peasant  and  that  of  the  Western  heirs  of  the  Rosicrucians  and
Alchemists  of  the  Middle  Ages?     Is  it  the  Van  Helmonts,  the  Khun-
raths,  the  Paracelsuses  and  Agrippas,  from  Roger  Bacon  down  to  St.
Germain,  who  were  all  blind  enthusiasts,  hysteriacs  or  cheats,  or  is  it
the  handful  of  modern  Sceptics — the  "leaders  of  thought" — who  are
struck  with  the  cecity  of  negation?     The  latter  is  the  case,  we  opine.
It  would  indeed  be  a  miracle,  quite  an  abnormal  fact  in  the  realm  of
probabilities  and  logic,  were  that  handful  of  negators  to  be  the  sole
custodians  of  truth,  while  the  million-strong  hosts  of  believers  in  Gods,
Angels,  and  Spirits — in  Europe  and  America  alone — namely,  Greek
and  Latin  Christians,  Theosophists,  Spiritualists,  Mystics,  etc.,  should
be  no  better  than  deluded   fanatics  and   hallucinated   mediums,   and


WHO   ARE   THE   BUND?  67 1

often  no  higher  than  the  victims  of  deceivers  and  impostors!  How-
ever var>-ing  in  their  external  presentations  and  dogmas,  beliefs  in  the
Hosts  of  invisible  Intelligences  of  various  grades  have  all  the  same
foundation.  Truth  and  error  are  mixed  in  all.  The  exact  extent,
depth,  breadth,  and  length  of  the  mysteries  of  Nature  are  to  be  found
only  in  Eastern  Esoteric  Science.  So  vast  and  so  profound  are  these
that  scarcely  even  a  few,  a  ver\^  few  of  the  highest  Initiates — those
whose  very  existence  is  known  but  to  a  small  mimber  of  Adepts — are
capable  of  assimilating  the  knowledge.  Yet  it  is  all  there,  and  one
by  one  facts  and  processes  in  Nature's  vvorkshops  are  permitted  to  find
their  way  into  exact  Science,  while  mysterioun  help  is  given  to  rare
individuals  in  unravelling  its  arcana.  It  is  at  the  close  of  great  Cycles,
in  connection  with  racial  development,  that  such  events  generally  take
place.  We  are  at  the  very  close  of  the  cycle  of  5,000  years  of  the
present  Ar>-an  Kali  Yuga;  and  between  this  time  and  1S97  there  will
be  a  large  rent  made  in  the  Veil  of  Nature,  and  materialistic  Science
will  receive  a  death-blow.

Without  throwing  any  discredit  upon  time-honoured  beliefs,  in  any
direction,  we  are  forced  to  draw  a  marked  line  between  blind  faith,
evolved  by  theologies,  and  knowledge  due  to  the  independent  researches
of  long  generations  of  Adepts ;  between,  in  short,  faith  and  Philosophy.
There  have  been,  in  all  ages,  undeniably  learned  and  good  men  who,
having  been  reared  in  sectarian  beliefs,  died  in  their  crystallized  con-
victions. For  Protestants,  the  garden  of  Eden  is  the  primeval  point  of
departure  in  the  drama  of  Humanity,  and  the  solemn  tragedy  on  the
summit  of  Calvary  is  the  prelude  to  the  hoped-for  Millennium.  For
Roman  Catholics,  Satan  is  at  the  foundation  of  Kosmos,  Christ  in  its
centre,  and  Antichrist  at  its  apex.  For  both,  the  Hierarchy  of  Being
begins  and  ends  within  the  narrow  frames  of  their  respective  theologies;
one  self-created  personal  God,  and  an  empyrean  ringing  with  the
Hallelujas  of  created  Angels;    the  rest,  false  Gods,  Satan  and  fiends.

Theo-Philosophy  proceeds  on  broader  lines.  From  the  very  be-
ginning of  aeons — in  time  and  space  in  our  Round  and  Globe — the
mysteries  of  Nature  (at  any  rate,  those  which  it  is  lawful  for  our  Races
to  know)  were  recorded  by  the  pupils  of  those  same,  now  invisible,
"Heavenly  Men,"  in  geometrical  figures  and  symbols.  The  keys
thereto  passed  from  one  generation  of  "Wise  Men"  to  another.  Some
of  the  symbols  thus  passed  from  the  East  to  the  West,  brought  from
the  Orient  by  Pythagoras,  who  was  not  the  inventor  of  his  famous


672  the;  secret  doctrine.

"Triangle."  The  latter  figure,  along  with  the  square  and  circle,  are
more  eloquent  and  scientific  descriptions  of  the  order  of  the  evolution
of  the  Universe,  spiritual  and  psychic,  as  well  as  phj^sical,  than  volumes
of  descriptive  Cosmogonies  and  revealed  "Geneses."  The  ten  Points
inscribed  within  that  "Pythagorean  Triangle"  are  worth  all  the
theogonies  and  angelologies  ever  emanated  from  the  theological  brain.
For  he  who  interprets  these  seventeen  points  (the  seven  Mathematical
Points  hidden) — on  their  very  face,  and  in  the  order  given — will  find
in  them  the  uninterrupted  series  of  the  genealogies  from  the  first
Heavenly  to  Terrestrial  Man.  And,  as  they  give  the  order  of  Beings,
so  they  reveal  the  order  in  which  were  evolved  the  Kosmos,  our  Earth,
and  the  primordial  Elements  by  which  the  latter  was  generated.  Be-
gotten in  the  invisible  "  Depths,"  and  in  the  Womb  of  the  same
"Mother"  as  its  fellow-globes — he  who  masters  the  mysteries  of  our
own  Earth  will  have  mastered  those  of  all  others.

Whatever  ignorance,  pride  or  fanaticism  may  suggest  to  the  contrary.
Esoteric  Cosmology  can  be  shown  to  be  inseparably  connected  with
both  Philosophy  and  Modern  Science.  The  Gods  and  Monads  of  the
Ancients — from  P5^thagoras  down  to  Eeibnitz — and  the  Atoms  of  the
present  materialistic  schools  (as  borrowed  by  them  from  the  theories
of  the  old  Greek  Atomists)  are  only  a  compound  unit,  or  a  graduated
unity  like  the  human  frame,  which  begins  with  body  and  ends  with
Spirit.  In  the  Occult  Sciences  they  can  be  studied  separately,  but
they  can  never  be  mastered  unless  they  are  viewed  in  their  mutual
correlations  during  their  life-cycle,  and  as  a  Universal  Unity  during
Pralayas.

La  Pluche  shows  sincerity,  but  gives  a  poor  idea  of  his  philo-
sophical capacities,  when  declaring  his  personal  views  on  the  Monad
or  the  Mathematical  Point.     He  says:

A  point  is  enough  to  put  all  the  schools  in  the  world  in  a  combustion.  But
what  need  has  man  to  know  that  point,  since  the  creation  of  such  a  small  being  is
beyond  his  power?  A  fortiori,  philosophy  acts  against  probability  when,  from
that  point  which  absorbs  and  disconcerts  all  her  meditations,  she  presumes  to  pass
on  to  the  generation  of  the  world.

Philosophy,  however,  could  never  have  formed  its  conception  of  a
logical,  universal,  and  absolute  Deity,  if  it  had  had  no  Mathematical
Point  within  the  Circle  upon  which  to  base  its  speculations.  It  is  only
the  manifested  Point,  lost  to  our  senses  after  its  pregenetic  appearance
in  the  infinitude  and  incognizability  of  the  Circle,  that  makes  a  recon-


THE   MATHEMATICAI,  POINT.  673

ciliation  between  Philosophy  and  Theology  possible — on  condition  that
the  latter  should  abandon  its  crude  materialistic  dogmas.  And  it  is
because  Christian  theolog\'  has  so  unwisely  rejected  the  Pythagorean
Monad  and  geometrical  figures,  that  it  has  evolved  its  self-created
human  and  personal  God,  the  monstrous  Head  whence  flow  in  two
streams  the  dogmas  of  Salvation  and  Damnation.  This  is  so  true,
that  even  those  clergj^men  who  are  Masons,  and  who  would  be  Philo-
sophers, have,  in  their  arbitrary  interpretations,  fathered  upon  the
Ancient  Sages  the  queer  idea  that:

The  Monad  represented  [with  them]  the  throne  of  the  Omnipotent  Deity,  placed
in  the  centre  of  the  empyrean  to  indicate  T.G.A.O.T.U.  [read  the  "Great  Architect
of  the  Universe  "].*

A  curious  explanation  this,  more  Masonic  than  strictly  Pythagorean.

Nor  did  the  "Hierogram  within  a  Circle,  or  equilateral  Triangle,"
ever  mean  "the  exemplification  of  the  unity  of  the  divine  Essence";
for  this  was  exemplified  by  the  plane  of  the  boundless  Circle.  What  it
really  meant  was  the  triune  coequal  Nature  of  the  first  differentiated
Substance,  or  the  con-substantiality  of  the  (manifested)  Spirit,  Matter
and  the  Universe — their  "Son" — which  proceeds  from  the  Point,  the
real.  Esoteric  Logos,  or  Pythagorean  Monad.  For  the  Greek  Monas
signifies  "Unity"  in  its  primary  sense.  Those  unable  to  seize  the
difi"erence  between  the  Monad — the  Universal  Unit — and  the  Monads
or  the  manifested  Unity,  as  also  between  the  ever-hidden  and  the
revealed  Logos,  or  the  Word,  ought  never  to  meddle  with  Philosophy,
let  alone  with  the  Esoteric  Sciences.  It  is  needless  to  remind  the
educated  reader  of  Kant's  Thesis  to  demonstrate  his  second  Antinomy.!
Those  who  have  read  and  understood  it  will  see  clearly  the  line  we
draw  between  the  absolutely  ideal  Universe  and  the  invisible  though
manifested  Kosmos.  Our  Gods  and  Monads  are  not  the  Elements  of
extension  itself,  but  only  those  of  the  invisible  Reality  which  is  the
basis  of  the  manifested  Kosmos.  Neither  Esoteric  Philosophy,  nor
Kant,  to  say  nothing  of  Leibnitz,  would  ever  admit  that  extension  can
be  composed  of  simple  or  unextended  parts.  But  theologian-philo-
sophers will  not  grasp  this.  The  Circle  and  the  Point — the  latter
retiring  into  and  merging  with  the  former,  after  having  emanated  the
first  three  Points  and  connected  them  with  lines,  thus  forming  the  first
noumenal  basis  of  the  Second  Triangle  in  the  Manifested  World — have

•  Pythagorean  Triangle,  by  the  Rev.  G.  Oliver,  p.  36.

+  See  Kant's  Crilique  de  la  Raison  Pure,  Bami's  tranel.,  II.  54.

44


674  '^^^  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

ever  been  an  insuperable  obstacle  to  theological  flights  into  dogmatir
empyreans.  On  the  authority  of  this  Archaic  Symbol,  a  male,  personal
God,  the  Creator  and  Father  of  all,  becomes  a  third-rate  emanation,
the  Sephira  standing  fourth  in  descent,  and  on  the  left  hand  of
Ain  Suph,  in  the  Kabalistic  Tree  of  Life.  Hence,  the  Monad  is
degraded  into  a  Vehicle — a  "Throne"!

The  Monad — the  emanation  and  reflection  only  of  the  Point,  or
lyOgos,  in  the  phenomenal  World — becomes,  as  the  apex  of  the  mani-
fested equilateral  Triangle,  the  "Father."  The  left  side  or  line  is  the
Duad,  the  "Mother,"  regarded  as  the  evil,  counteracting  principle;*
the  right  side  represents  the  "Son,"  "his  Mother's  Husband"  in  every
Cosmogony,  as  being  one  with  the  apex;  the  base  line  is  the  universal
plane  of  productive  Nature,  unifying  on  the  phenomenal  plane  Father-
Mother-Son,  as  these  were  unified  in  the  apex,  in  the  supersensuous
World. t  By  mystic  transmutation  they  became  the  Quaternary — the
Triangle  became  the  Tetraktys.

This  transcendental  application  of  geometry  to  cosmic  and  divine
theogony — the  Alpha  and  the  Omega  of  mystical  conception — was
dwarfed  after  Pythagoras  by  Aristotle.  By  omitting  the  Point  and
the  Circle,  and  taking  no  account  of  the  apex,  he  reduced  the  meta-
physical value  of  the  idea,  and  thus  limited  the  doctrine  of  magnitude
to  a  simple  Triad — the  line,  the  S2irface,  and  the  body.  His  modern
heirs,  who  play  at  Idealism,  have  interpreted  these  three  geometrical
figures  as  Space,  Force,  and  Matter — "the  potencies  of  an  interacting
Unity."  Materialistic  Science,  perceiving  but  the  base  line  of  the
manifested  Triangle — the  plane  of  Matter — translates  it  practically  as
(Father)-J/a//£'r,  (yioiher)- Matter,  and  (Son)- Ma  iter,  and  theoretically
as  Matter,  Force,  and  Correlation.

But  to  the  average  Physicist,  as  remarked  by  a  Kabalist  :

Space,  and  Force,  and  Matter,  are  what  signs  in  Algebra  are  to  the  Mathemati-
cian, merely  conventional  symbols,  or  Force  as  Force,  and  Matter  as  Matter,  are  as
absolutely  unknowable  as  is  the  assumed  empty  space  in  which  they  are  held  to
interact. J

*  Plutarch,  £>e  Placitis  Philosophorum.

+  In  the  Greek  and  Latin  Churches— which  regard  marriage  as  one  of  the  sacraments— the  officiat-
ing priest  during  the  marriage  ceremony  represents  the  apex  of  the  triangle;  the  bride,  its  left
feminine  side,  and  the  bridegrroom  the  right  side,  while  the  base  line  is  symbolized  by  the  row  of
witnesses,  the  bridesmaids  and  best  men.  But  behind  the  priest  there  is  the  Holy  of  Holies,  with  its
mysterious  containments  and  symbolic  meaning,  inside  of  which  no  one  but  the  consecrated  priests
should  enter.  In  the  early  days  of  Christianity  the  marriage  ceremony  was  a  mystery  and  a  true
symbol.    Now,  however,  even  the  Churches  have  lost  the  true  meaning  of  this  symbolism.

%  New  Aspects  of  Life  and  Religion,  by  Henry  Pratt,  M.D.,  p.  7.     Ed.  1886.


SPACE,  FORCE,  AND  MATTER.  675

Symbols  represent  abstractions,  and  on  these

The  phj^sicist  bases  reasoned  hypotheses  of  the  origin  of  things  ....  he
sees  three  needs  in  what  he  terms  creation  :  A  place  wherein  to  create.  A  medium
by  which  to  create.  A  material  from  which  to  create.  And  in  giving  a  logical
expression  to  this  hj'pothesis  through  the  terms  space,  force,  matter,  he  believes
he  has  proved  the  existence  of  that  which  each  of  these  represents  as  he  conceives
it  to  be.*

The  Physicist  who  regards  Space  merely  as  a  representation  of  our
mind,  or  extension  unrelated  to  things  in  it,  which  Locke  defined  as
capable  of  neither  resistance  nor  motion ;  the  paradoxical  Materialist,
who  would  have  a  void  there,  where  he  can  see  no  Matter,  would  reject
with  the  utmost  contempt  the  proposition  that  Space  is
A  substantial  though  [apparently  an  absolutely]  unknowable  living  Entity. t
Such   is,    nevertheless,   the   Kabalistic   teaching,    and   it   is   that   of
Archaic  Philosophy.     Space  is  the  real  World,  while  our  world  is  an
artificial  one.     It  is  the  One  Unity  throughout  its  infinitude:    in  its
bottomless  depths  as  on  its  illusive  surface;    a  surface  studded  with
countless   phenomenal   Universes,    Sj'stems   and   mirage-like   Worlds.
Nevertheless,  to  the  Eastern  Occultist,  who  is  an  objective  Idealist  at
bottom,  in  the  real  World,  which  is  a  Unity  of  Forces,  there  is  "a
connection  of  all  Matter  in  the  Plenum,"  as  Leibnitz  would  say.     This
is  symbolized  in  the  Pythagorean  Triangle.

It  consi.sts  of  Ten  Points  inscribed  pyramid-like  (from  one  to  four)
within  its  three  sides,  and  it  symbolizes  the  Universe  in  the  famous
Pythagorean  Decad.  The  upper  single  point  is  a  Monad,  and  re-
presents a  Unit-Point,  which  is  the  Unity  whence  all  proceeds.  All  is
of  the  same  essence  with  it.  While  the  ten  points  within  the  equilateral
Triangle  represent  the  phenomenal  world,  the  three  sides  enclosing
the  pyramid  of  points  are  the  barriers  of  notwtetial  Matter,  or  Substance,
that  separate  it  from  the  world  of  Thought.

Pythagoras  considered  a /-ozV/^  to  correspond  in  proportion  to  unity ;  &  line  to  2;
a  superficeto  3;  a.  solid  to  4;  and  he  defined  a  point  as  a  monad  having  position,
and  the  beginning  of  all  things;  a  line  was  thought  to  correspond  with  duality,
because  it  was  produced  by  the  first  motion  from  indivisible  nature,  and  formed
the  junction  of  two  points.  A  superfice  was  compared  to  the  number  three
because  it  is  the  first  of  all  causes  that  are  found  in  figures;  for  a  circle,  which  is
the  principal  of  all  round  figures,  comprises  a  triad,  in  centre— space— circum-
ference. But  a  triangle,  which  is  the  first  of  all  rectilineal  figures,  is  included  in  a
ternary,  and  receives  its  form  according  to  that  number;   and  was  considered  by


•  Ibid.,  pp.  7,  8.  +  Ibid.,  p.  9.


676  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

the  Pythagoreans  to  be  the  author  of  all  sublunary  things.  The  four  points  at  the
base  of  the  Pythagorean  triangle  correspond  with  a  solid  or  cube,  which  combines
the  principles  of  length,  breadth,  and  thickness,  for  no  solid  can  have  less  than
four  extreme  boundary  points.*

It  is  argued  that  "the  human  mind  cannot  conceive  an  indivisible
unit  short  of  the  annihilation  of  the  idea  with  its  subject."  This  is  an
error,  as  the  Pythagoreans  have  proved,  and  a  number  of  Seers  before
them,  although  there  is  a  special  training  needed  for  the  conception,
and  although  the  profane  mind  can  hardly  grasp  it.  But  there  are
such  things  as  '' Meta-mat/ie77iatics"  and  ''  Meta-geomeiryr  Even  Mathe-
matics pure  and  simple  proceed  from  the  universal  to  the  particular,
from  the  mathematical  indivisible  point  to  solid  figures.  The  teach-
ing originated  in  India,  and  was  taught  in  Europe  by  Pythagoras,  who,
throwing  a  veil  over  the  Circle  and  the  Point — which  no  living  man
can  define  except  as  incomprehensible  abstractions — laid  the  origin  of
the  differentiated  cosmic  Matter  in  the  base  of  the  Triangle.  Thus  the
latter  became  the  earliest  of  geometrical  figures.  The  author  of  New
Aspects  of  Life,  dealing  with  the  Kabalistic  Mysteries,  objects  to  the
objectivization,  so  to  speak,  of  the  Pythagorean  conception  and  the
use  of  the  equilateral  triangle,  and  calls  it  a  "misnomer."  His  argu-
ment that  a  solid  equilateral  body —

One  whose  base,  as  well  as  each  of  its  sides,  form  equal  triangles — must  have
four  co-equal  sides  or  surfaces,  while  a  triangular  plane  will  as  necessarily  possess
five,t

— demonstrates  on  the  contrary  the  grandeur  of  the  conception  in
all  its  Esoteric  application  to  the  idea  of  the  pregencsis,  and  the  genesis
of  Kosmos.  Granted,  that  an  ideal  Triangle,  depicted  by  mathematical,
imaginary  lines.

Can  have  no  sides  at  all,  being  simply  a  phantom  of  the  mind  to  which,  if  sides
be  imputed,  these  must  be  the  sides  of  the  object  it  constructively  represents.  J

But  in  such  case  most  of  the  scientific  hypotheses  are  no  better  than
"phantoms  of  the  mind"  ;  they  are  unverifiable,  except  on  inference,
and  have  been  adopted  merely  to  answer  scientific  necessities.  Further-
more, the  ideal  Triangle — "as  the  abstract  idea  of  a  triangular  body,
and,  therefore,  as  the  type  of  an  abstract  idea" — accomplished  and
carried  out  to  perfection  the  double  symbolism  intended.  As  an
emblem  applicable  to  the  objective  idea,  the  simple  triangle  became  a
solid.     When  repeated  in    stone,   facing   the   four   cardinal   points,    it

*  Pythagorean  Triangle,  by  the  Rev.  G.  Oliver,  pp.  18,  19.  t  P.  387.  t  P.  387.


PHANTOMS   OF  THE   MIND.  677

assumed  the  shape  of  the  Pyramid— the  symbol  of  the  phenomenal
merging  into  the  noumenal  Universe  of  thought,  at  the  apex  of  the
four  triangles ;  and,  as  an  "  imaginary  figure  constructed  of  three
mathematical  lines,"  it  symbolized  the  subjective  spheres — these
lines  "enclosing  a  mathematical  space — which  is  equal  to  nothing
enclosing  nothing."  And  this  because,  to  the  senses  and  the  un-
trained consciousness  of  the  Profane  and  the  Scientist,  everything
beyond  the  line  of  differentiated  Matter — i.e.,  outside  of,  and  beyond
the  realm  of  even  the  most  Spiritual  S2ibsta7icc—h2iS  to  remain  for  ever
eqital  to  nothing.     It  is  the  Ain  Suph— the  N'o  Thing.

Yet  these  "phantoms  of  the  mind"  are  in  truth  no  greater  abstrac-
tions than  the  abstract  ideas  in  general  as  to  evolution  and  physical
development — e.g..  Gravity,  Matter,  Force,  etc. — on  which  the  exact
Sciences  are  based.  Our  most  eminent  Chemists  and  Physicists  are
earnestly  pursuing  the  not  hopeless  attempt  of  finally  tracing  to  its
hiding-place  the  Protyle,  or  the  basic  line  of  the  Pythagorean  Triangle.
The  latter  is,  as  we  have  said,  the  grandest  conception  imaginable,  for
it  symbolizes  both  the  ideal  and  the  visible  universes.*     For  if

The  possible  unit  is  only  a  possibility  as  an  actuality  of  nature,  as  an  individual  of
any  kind,  [and  as]  every  individual  natural  object  is  capable  of  division,  and  by
division  loses  its  unity,  or  ceases  to  be  a  unit,t

this  is  true  only  of  the  realm  of  exact  Science  in  a  world  as  decep-
tive as  it  is  illusive.  In  the  realm  of  Esoteric  Science  the  Unit  divided
ad  infinitiun,  instead  of  losing  its  unity,  approaches  with  every  division
the  planes  of  the  only  eternal  Reality.  The  eye  of  the  Seer  can
follow  it  and  behold  it  in  all  its  pregenetic  glor)\  This  same  idea  of
the  reality  of  the  subjective,  and  the  unreality  of  the  objective  Universe,
is  found  at  the  bottom  of  the  Pythagorean  and  Platonic  Teachings —
limited  to  the  Elect  alone;  for  Porphyry,  speaking  of  the  Monad  and
the  Duad,  says  that  the  former  only  was  considered  substantial  and
real,  "that  most  simple  Being,  the  cause  of  all  unit}'^  and  the  measure
of  all  things."

But  the  Duad,  although  the  origin  of  Evil,  or  Matter — hence  tmreal
in  Philosophy — is  still  Substance  during  Manvantara,  and  is  often
called  the  Third  Monad,  in  Occultism,  and  the  connecting  line  as
between  two  Points,  or  Numbers,  which  proceeded  from  That,  "which


•  In  the  World  of  Form,  symbolism  finding  expression  in  the  Pyramids,  has  in  them  both  triangle
and  square,  four  co-equal  triangles  or  surfaces,  four  basic  points,  and  the  fifth— the  apex,
t  Pp.  385,  386.


678  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

was  before  all  Numbers,"  as  expressed  by  Rabbi  Barahiel.  And  from
this  Duad  proceeded  all  the  Scintillas  of  the  three  Upper  and  the  four
Lower  Worlds  or  Planes — which  are  in  constant  interaction  and  corres-
pondence. This  is  a  teaching  which  the  Kabalah  has  in  common  with
Eastern  Occultism.  For  in  the  Occult  Philosophy  there  is  the  "One
Cause"  and  the  "Primal  Cause,"  the  latter  thus  becoming,  paradoxi-
cally, the  Second,  as  is  clearly  expressed  by  the  author  of  the  Qabbalah,
from  the  Philosophical  Writings  of  Ibn  Gabirol,  who  says:

In  the  treatment  of  the  Primal  Cause,  two  things  must  be  considered,  the  Primal
Cause  per  se,  and  the  relation  and  connection  of  the  Primal  Cause  with  the  visible
and  unseen  universe.*

Thus  he  shows  the  early  Hebrews,  as  the  later  Arabians,  following
in  the  steps  of  the  Oriental  Philosophy,  such  as  the  Chaldean,  Persian,
Hindu,  etc.     Their  Primal  Cause  was  designated  at  first.

By  the  triadic  ''^tI?  Shaddai,  the  [triune]  Almighty,  siibsequently  by  the  Tetra-
grammaton,  TV\T\^->  YHVH,  symbol  of  the  Past,  Present,  and  Future, t

and,  let  us  add,  of  the  eternal  IS,  or  the  I  AM.  Moreover,  in  the
Kabalah  the  name  YHVH  (or  Jehovah)  expresses  a  He  and  a  She,
male  and  female,  two  in  one,  or  Chokmah  and  Binah,  and  his,  or  rather
their  Shekinah  or  synthesizing  Spirit  (or  Grace),  which  again  makes
of  the  Duad  a  Triad.  This  is  demonstrated  in  the  Jewish  lyiturgy  for
Pentecost,  and  the  prayer :

"In  the  name  of  Unity,  of  the  Holy  and  Blessed  Hu  [He],  and  His  She'keenah,
the  Hidden  and  Concealed  Hu,  blessed  be  YHVH  [the  Quaternary]  for  ever."  Hu
is  said  to  be  masculine  and  YaH  feminine,  together  they  make  the  "rnj^  rfliT'
i.e.,  one  YHVH.  One,  but  of  a  male-female  nature.  The  She'keenah  is  always
considered  in  the  Qabbalah  as  feminine. |

And  so  it  is  considered  in  the  exoteric  Purd7ias,  for  Shekinah  is  no
more  than  Shakti — the  female  double  of  any  God — in  such  case.  And
so  it  was  with  the  early  Christians,  whose  Holy  Spirit  was  feminine,  as
Sophia  was  with  the  Gnostics.  But  in  the  transcendental  Chaldean
Kabalah,  or  Book  of  Numbers,  Shekinah  is  sexless,  and  the  purest  ab-
straction, a  state,  like  Nirvana,  neither  subject  nor  object,  nor  anything
except  an  absolute  Presence.

Thus  it  is  only  in  the  anthropomorphized  systems — such  as  the
Kabalah  has  now  for  the  most  part  become — that  Shekinah-Shakti  is
feminine.  As  such  she  becomes  the  Duad  of  Pythagoras,  the  two
straight  lines  which  can  form  no  geometrical  figure  and  are  the  symbol


op.  cit.    By  Isaac  Myer.     P.  174-  +  P-  i75-  *  P-  i75-


ATOMIC   SOULS.  679

of  Matter.  Out  of  this  Duad,  when  united  in  the  basic  line  of  the
Triangle  on  the  lower  plane  (the  upper  Triangle  of  the  Sephirothal
Tree),  emerge  the  Elohim,  or  Deity  in  Cosmic  Nature,  with  the  true
Kabalists  the  lowest  designation,  translated  in  the  Bible  "God."--'  Out
of  these  (the  Elohim)  issue  the  Scintillas.

The  Scintillas  are  the  "Souls,"  and  these  Souls  appear  in  the  three-
fold form  of  Monads  (Units),  Atoms  and  Gods— according  to  our
Teaching.     As  says  the  Esoteric  Catechism :

Every  Atom  becomes  a  visible  complex  unit  [a  molecule],  and  once
attracted  into  the  sphere  of  terrestrial  activity,  the  Monadic  Essence,
passing  thro7igh  the  mineral,  vegetable,  a7id  animal  kingdoms,  becomes
man.

Again :

God,  Monad,  and  Atom  are  the  correspo?idences  of  Spirit,  Mind,  and
Body  [Atma,  Manas,  and  Sthula  Sharira]  iji  man.

In  their  septenary  aggregation  they  are  the  "Heavenly  Man,"  in  the
Kabalistic  sense;  thus,  terrestrial  man  is  the  provisional  reflection  of
the  Heavenly.     Once  again :

The  Monads  [Jivas]  are  the  Souls  of  the  Atoms;  both  are  the  fabric  in
which  the  Chohans  [Dhyanis,  Gods]  clothe  themselves  when  a  form  is
needed.

This  relates  to  cosmic  and  sub-planetary  Monads,  not  to  the  super-
cosmic  Monas,  the  Pythagorean  Monad,  as  it  is  called,  in  its  synthetic
character,  by  the  Pantheistical  Peripatetics.  The  Monads  of  the
present  dissertation  are  treated,  from  the  standpoint  of  their  indivi-
duality, as  Atomic  Souls,  before  these  Atoms  descend  into  pure  terres-
trial form.  For  this  descent  into  concrete  Matter  marks  the  medial
point  of  their  own  individual  pilgrimage.  Here,  losing  in  the  mineral
kingdom  their  individuality,  they  begin  to  ascend  through  the  seven
states  of  terrestrial  evolution  to  that  point  where  a  correspondence  is
firmly  established  between  the  human  and  Deva  (divine)  consciousness.
At  present,  however,  we  are  not  concerned  with  their  terrestrial  meta-
morphoses and  tribulations,  but  with  their  life  and  behaviour  in  Space,

•  "The  lowest  designation,  or  the  Deity  in  Nature,  the  more  general  temi  Elohini,  is  translated
CJod."  (P.  T75.)  Such  recent  works  as  the  Qabbalah  of  Mr.  Isaac  Myer,  and  of  Mr.  S.  \,.  MacGregor
Mathers,  fully  justify  our  attitude  towards  the  Jehovistic  Deity.  It  is  not  the  transcendental,  philo-
sophical, and  highly  metaphysical  abstraction  of  the  original  Kabalistic  thought— Aiti-Suph-
Shekinah-Adam-Kadmon,  and  all  that  follows— that  we  oppose,  but  the  crj-stallization  of  all  these
into  the  highly  unphilosophical,  repulsive,  and  anthropomorphic  Jehovah,  the  androgynous  and
finitf.  deity,  for  which  eternity,  omnipotence,  and  omniscience  are  claimed.  We  do  not  war  against
the  Idtal  Reality,  but  the  hideous  theological  Shadow.


68o  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

on  planes  wherein  the  eye  of  the  most  intuitional  Chemist  and  Physicist
cannot  reach  them — unless,  indeed,  he  develops  in  himself  highlj^
clairvoyant  faculties.

It  is  well  known  that  Leibnitz  came  very  near  the  truth  several
times,  but  he  defined  Monadic  Evolution  incorrectly,  a  thing  not  to  be
wondered  at,  since  he  was  not  an  Initiate,  nor  even  a  Mystic,  but  only
a  very  intuitional  Philosopher.  ■'  Yet  no  Psycho-physicist  ever  came
nearer  than  has  he  to  the  Esoteric  general  outline  of  evolution.  This
evolution — viewed  from  its  several  standpoints,  i.e.,  as  the  Universal
and  the  Individualized  Monad,  and  the  chief  aspects  of  the  Evolving
Energy  after  differentiation,  the  purely  Spiritual,  the  Intellectual,  the
Psychic  and  the  Physical — may  be  thus  formulated  as  an  invariable
law:  a  descent  of  Spirit  into  Matter,  equivalent  to  an  ascent  in  physical
evolution ;  a  reascent  from  the  depths  of  materiality  towards  its  status
quo  ante,  with  a  corresponding  dissipation  of  concrete  form  and  sub-
stance up  to  the  Eaya-state,  or  what  Science  calls  the  "zero-point,"
and  beyond.

These  states — once  the  spirit  of  Esoteric  Philosophy  is  grasped —
become  absolutely  necessary-  from  simple  logical  and  analogical  con-
siderations. Physical  Science  having  now  ascertained,  through  its
department  of  Chemistry,  the  invariable  law  of  this  evolution  of  Atoms
— from  their  "protjdean"  state  down  to  that  of  a  physical  and  then  a
chemical  particle,  or  molecule — cannot  well  reject  these  states  as  a
general  law.  And  once  it  is  forced  by  its  enemies — Metaphysics  and
Psychology* — out  of  its  alleged  impregnable  strongholds,  it  will  find  it
more  difiicult  than  it  now  appears  to  refuse  room  in  the  Spaces  of
Space  to  Planetary  Spirits  (Gods),  Elementals,  and  even  the  Elemen-
tary Spooks  or  Ghosts,  and  others.  Already  Figuier  and  Paul  D'Assier,
two  Positivists  and  Materialists,  have  succumbed  before  this  logical
necessity.  Other  and  still  greater  Scientists  will  follow  in  that  in-
tellectual "Fall."  They  will  be  driven  out  of  their  position  not  by
spiritual,  theosophical,  or  any  other  physical  or  even  mental  phe-
nomena, but  simply  by  the  enormous  gaps  and  chasms  that  open  daily
and  will  still  be  opening  before  them,  as  one  discovery  follows  the
other,  until  they  are  finally  knocked  off  their  feet  by  the  ninth  wave  of
simple  common  sense.

•  Let  not  the  word  "Psychology"  cause  the  reader,  by  association  of  ideas,  to  carry  his  thought  to
modem  "  Psychologists,"  so-called,  whose  Idealism  is  another  name  for  uncompromising  Materialism,
and  whose  pretended  Monism  is  no  better  than  a  mask  to  conceal  the  void  of  final  annihilation — even
of  consciousness.     Here  spiritual  Psychology  is  meant.


THE   CHEMISTRY  OF  THE   FUTURE.  68l

We  may  take  as  an  example,  Mr.  W.  Crookes'  latest  discovery  of
what  he  has  named  Protyle.  In  the  Notes  07i  the  Bhagavad  Gita,  by
one  of  the  best  metaphysicians  and  Vedantic  scholars  in  India,  the
lecturer,  referring  cautiously  to  "things  Occult"  in  that  great  Indian
Esoteric  work,  makes  a  remark  as  suggestive  as  it  is  strictly  correct.
He  says:

Into  the  details  of  the  evohition  of  the  solar  system  itself,  it  is  not  necessary  for
me  to  enter.  You  may  gather  some  idea  as  to  the  way  in  which  the  various
elements  start  into  existence  from  these  three  principles  into  which  Mulaprakriti
[the  Pythagorean  Triangle]  is  differentiated,  by  examining  the  lecture  delivered  by
Professor  Crookes  a  short  time  ago  upon  the  so-called  elements  of  modern
chemistry.  This  lecture  will  give  you  some  idea  of  the  way  in  which  these
so-called  elements  spring  from  Vishvanara,*  the  most  objective  of  these  three
principles,  which  seems  to  stand  in  the  place  of  the  protyle  mentioned  in  that
lecture.  Except  in  a  few  particulars,  this  lecture  seems  to  give  the  outlines  of  the
theory  of  physical  evolution  on  the  plane  of  Vishvanara,  and  is,  so  far  as  I  know,
the  nearest  approach  made  by  modem  investigators  to  the  real  occult  theory  on
the  subject. t

These  words  will  be  reechoed  and  approved  by  every  Eastern  Occul-
tist. Much  from  the  lectures  by  Mr.  Crookes  has  already  been  quoted
in  Section  XI.  A  second  lecture  has  been  delivered  by  him,  as  re-
markable as  the  first,  on  the  "Genesis  of  the  Elements,"!  and  also
a  third  one.  Here  we  have  almost  a  corroboration  of  the  teachings  of
Esoteric  Philosophy  concerning  the  mode  of  primeval  evolution.  It
is,  indeed,  as  near  an  approach,  made  by  a  great  scholar  and  specialist
in  Chemistry,§  to  the  Secret  Doctrine,  as  could  be  made  apart  from  the
application  of  the  Monads  and  Atoms  to  the  dogmas  of  pure  transcen-
dental Metaphysics,  and  their  connection  and  correlation  with  "Gods
and  intelligent  conscious  Monads."  But  Chemistry  is  now  on  its
ascending  plane,  thanks  to  one  of  its  highest  European  representa-
tives. It  is  impossible  for  it  to  go  back  to  that  day  when  Materialism
regarded  its  5z^<^-elements  as  absolutely  simple  and  homogeneous
bodies,  which  it  had  raised,  in  its  blindness,  to  the  rank  of  Elements.

*  "Vishvanara  is  not  merely  the  manifested  objective  world,  but  the  one  physical  basis  [the
horizontal  line  of  the  triangle]  from  which  the  whole  objective  world  starts  into  existence."  And
this  is  the  Cosmic  Duad,  the  Androgynous  Substauce.    Only  beyond  this  is  the  true  Protyle.

t  T.  Subba  Row.     See  Theosophist,  Feb.  1887.

%  By  W.  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  V.P.C.S.,  delivered  at  the  Royal  Institution,  London,  on  Fridaj',  February
18th,  1887.

}  How  true  it  is  will  be  fully  demonstrated  only  on  that  day  when  Mr.  Crookes'  discovery  of
radiant  matter  will  have  resulted  in  a  further  elucidation  with  regard  to  the  true  source  of  light,  and
will  have  revolutionized  all  the  present  speculations.  Further  familiarity  with  the  northern  streamers
of  the  aurora  borealis  maj'  help  the  recognition  of  this  truth.


682  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

The  mask  has  been  snatched  off  by  too  clever  a  hand  for  there  to
be  any  fear  of  a  new  disguise.  And  after  years  of  pseudology,  of
bastard  molecules  parading  under  the  name  of  Klements,  behind  and
beyond  which  there  could  be  nought  but  void,  a  great  professor  of
Chemistry  asks  once  more:

What  are  these  elements,  whence  do  they  come,  what  is  their  signification  }  .  .  .
These  elements  perplex  us  in  our  researches,  baffle  us  in  our  speculations,  and
haunt  us  in  our  very  dreams.  They  stretch  like  an  unknown  sea  before  us —
mocking,  mystifying,  and  murmuring  strange  revelations  and  possibilities.*

Those  who  are  heirs  to  primeval  revelations  have  taught  these
"possibilities"  in  every  century,  but  have  never  found  a  fair  hearing.
The  truths  inspired  into  Kepler,  Leibnitz,  Gassendi,  Swedenborg,  etc.,
were  ever  alloyed  with  their  own  speculations  in  one  or  another  pre-
determined direction — hence  were  distorted.  But  now  one  of  the  great
truths  has  dawned  upon  an  eminent  professor  of  exact  Modern  Science,
and  he  fearlessly  proclaims  as  a  fundamental  axiom  that  Science  has
not  made  itself  acquainted,  so  far,  with  real  simple  Elements.  For
Mr.  Crookes  tells  his  audience:

If  I  venture  to  say  that  our  commonly  received  elements  are  not  simple  and
primordial,  that  they  have  not  arisen  by  chance  or  have  not  been  created  in  a
desultory  and  mechanical  manner,  but  have  been  evolved  from  simpler  matters — or
perhaps,  indeed,  from  one  sole  kind  of  matter — I  do  but  give  formal  utterance
to  an  idea  which  has  been,  so  to  speak,  for  some  time  "in  the  air"  of  science.
Chemists,  physicists,  philosophers  of  the  highest  merit,  declare  explicitly  their
belief  that  the  seventy  (or  thereabouts)  elements  of  our  text-books  are  not  the
pillars  of  Hercules  which  we  must  never  hope  to  pass.  .  .  .  Philosophers  in
the  present  as  in  the  past — men  who  certainly  have  not  worked  in  the  laboratory —
have  reached  the  same  view  from  another  side.  Thus  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer  records
his  conviction  that  "the  chemical  atoms  are  produced  from  the  tnie  or  physical
atoms  by  processes  of  evolution  under  conditions  which  chemistry  has  not  yet
been  able  to  produce."  ....  And  the  poet  has  forestalled  the  philosopher.
Milton  {Paradise  Lost,  Book  V.)  makes  the  Archangel  Raphael  say  to  Adam
instinct  with  the  evolutionary  idea,  that  the  Almighty  had  created

.     .     .     "One  first  matter,  all

Indued  with  various  forms,  various  degrees

Of  substance."

Nevertheless,  the  idea  would  have  remained  crystallized  "in  the  air
of  Science,"  and  would  not  have  descended  into  the  thick  atmosphere
of  Materialism  and  profane  mortals  for  years  to  come,  perhaps,  had
not  Mr.  Crookes  bravely  and  fearlessly  reduced  it  to  its  simple  con-

*  Genesis  of  the  Elements,  p.  i.


ARYAN   AND   WESTERN   SCIENCE.  683

stituents,    and    thus    publich'    forced    it   on    scientific   notice.       Says
Plutarch :

An  idea  is  a  Being  incorporeal,  which  has  no  subsistence  by  itself,  but  gives
figure  and  form  unto  shapeless  matter,  and  becomes  the  cause  of  the  manifestation.*

The  revohition  produced  in  old  Chemistry  by  Avogadro  was  the  first
page  in  the  volume  of  "New  Chemistry."  Mr.  Crookes  has  now
turned  the  second  page,  and  is  boldly  pointing  to  what  may  be  the  last.
For  Protyle  once  accepted  and  recognized — as  invisible  Ether  was,
both  being  logical  and  scientific  necessities— Chemistry  will  have  vir-
tually ceased  to  live:  it  will  reappear  in  its  reincarnation  as  "New
Alchemy,"  or  "  Meta-cheraistry."  The  discoverer  of  radiant  matter
will  have  vindicated  in  time  the  Archaic  Aryan  works  on  Occultism,
and  even  the  Vedas  and  Picrdnas.  For  what  are  the  manifested
"Mother,"  the  "Father-Son-Husband"  (Aditi  and  Daksha,  a  form  of
Brahma,  as  Creators),  and  the  "Son"— the  three  "First-born"— but
simply  Hydrogen,  Oxygen,  and  that  which  in  its  terrestrial  mani-
festation is  called  Nitrogen.  Even  the  exoteric  descriptions  of  the
"First-born"  Triad  give  all  the  characteristics  of  these  three  "gases."
Priestley,  the  "discoverer"  of  Oxygen,  or  of  that  which  was  known  in
the  Jiighest  antiquity!

Yet  all  the  ancient,  mediaeval,  and  modern  Poets  and  Philosophers
have  been  anticipated  even  in  the  exoteric  Hindu  books  as  to  the
Elemental  Vortices  inaugurated  by  the  Universal  Mind— Descartes'
"Plenum"  of  Matter  differentiated  into  particles;  Leibnitz's  "ethereal
fluid "  ;  and  Kant's  "  primitive  fluid "  dissolved  into  its  elements ;
Kepler's  solar  vortex  and  systemic  vortices;  in  short,  through  Anaxa-
goras,  down  to  Galileo,  Torricelli,  and  Swedenborg,  and  after  them  to
the  latest  speculations  by  European  Mystics— all  this  is  found  in  the
Hindu  Hymns,  or  Mantras,  to  the  "Gods,  Monads  and  Atoms,"  in
their  Fulness,  for  they  are  inseparable.  In  Esoteric  Teachings,  the
most  transcendental  conceptions  of  the  Universe  and  its  mysteries,
as  also  the  most  seemingly  materialistic  speculations,  are  found  recon-
ciled, because  these  Sciences  embrace  the  whole  scope  of  evolution
from  Spirit  to  Matter.      As  declared  by  an  American  Theosophist:

The  Monads  [of  Leibnitz]  may  from  one  point  of  view  be  called  force,  from
another  matter.  To  Occult  Science,  force  and  matter  are  only  two  sides  of  the  same
substance,  t

Let  the  reader  remember  these  "Monads"  of  Leibnitz,  every  one  of

•  De  Placit.  Philos.  +  The  Path,  I.  10,  p.  297.


684  '^^^   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

which  is  a  living  mirror  of  the  Universe,  every  Monad  reflecting  every
other,  and  compare  this  view  and  definition  with  certain  Sanskrit
Shlokas  translated  by  Sir  William  Jones,  in  which  it  is  said  that  the
creative  source  of  the  Divine  Mind,

Hidden  in  a  veil  of  thick  darkness,  formed  mirrors  of  the  atoms  of  the  world,
and  cast  reflection  from  its  own  face  on  every  atom.

When,  therefore,  Mr.  Crookes  declares  that:

If  we  can  show  how  the  so-called  chemical  elements  might  have  been  generated
we  shall  be  able  to  fill  up  a  formidable  gap  in  our  knowledge  of  the  universe,

the  answer  is  ready.  The  theoretical  knowledge  is  contained  in  the
Esoteric  meaning  of  every  Hindu  cosmogony  in  the  Puranas ;  the
practical  demonstration  thereof— is  in  the  hands  of  those  who  will
not  be  recognized  in  this  century,  save  by  the  very  few.  The  scientific
possibilities  of  various  discoveries,  that  must  inexorably  lead  exact
Science  into  the  acceptation  of  Eastern  Occult  views,  which  contain
all  the  requisite  material  for  the  filling  of  those  "gaps,"  are,  so  far,  at
the  mercy  of  Modern  Materialism.  It  is  only  by  working  in  the
direction  taken  by  Mr.  William  Crookes  that  there  is  any  hope  for  the
recognition  of  a  few,  hitherto  Occult,  truths.

Meanwhile,  any  one  thirsting  to  have  a  glimpse  at  a  practical  diagram
of  the  evolution  of  primordial  Matter — which,  separating  and  differen-
tiating under  the  impulse  of  cyclic  law,  divides  itself  on  a  general  view
into  a  septenary  gradation  of  Substance — can  do  no  better  than  examine
the  plates  attached  to  Mr.  Crookes'  lecture.  Genesis  of  the  Eleme7its,  and
ponder  well  over  some  passages  of  the  text.     In  one  place  he  says :

Our  notions  of  a  chemical  element  have  expanded.  Hitherto  the  molecule  has
been  regarded  as  an  aggregate  of  two  or  more  atoms,  and  no  account  has  been
taken  of  the  architectural  design  on  which  these  atoms  have  been  joined.  We  may
consider  that  the  structure  of  a  chemical  element  is  more  complicated  than  has
hitherto  been  supposed.  Between  the  molecules  we  are  accustomed  to  deal  with  in
chemical  reactions  and  ultimate  atoms  as  first  created,  come  smaller  molecules  or
aggregates  of  physical  atoms;  these  sub-molecules  differ  one  from  the  other,
according  to  the  position  they  occupy  in  the  yttrium  edifice.

Perhaps  this  h3'pothesis  can  be  simplified  if  we  imagine  yttrium  to  be  repre-
sented by  a  five-shilling  piece.  By  chemical  fractionation  I  have  divided  it  into
five  separate  shillings,  and  find  that  these  shillings  are  not  counterparts,  but  like
the  carbon  atoms  in  the  benzol  ring,  have  the  impress  of  their  position,  i,  2,  3,  4,  5,
stamped  on  them.  ...  If  I  throw  my  shillings  into  the  melting-pot  or  dissolve  them
chemically,  the  mint  stamp  disappears  and  they  all  turn  out  to  be  silver.*

This  will  be  the  case  with  all  the  Atoms  and  molecules  when  they

«  p.  ir.


HERMES  OR   HUXLEY?  685

have  separated  from  their  compound  forms  and  bodies — when  Pralaya
sets  in.  Reverse  the  case,  and  imagine  the  dawn  of  a  new  Manvantara.
The  pure  "silver"  of  the  absorbed  material  will  once  more  separate
into  Substance,  which  will  generate  "Divine  Essences"  whose  "Prin-
ciples"* are  the  Primary  Elements,  the  Sub-elements,  the  Physical
Energies,  and  subjective  and  objective  Matter;  or,  as  these  are  epitom-
ized— Gods,  Monads,  and  Atoms.  If  leaving  for  one  moment  the
metaphysical  or  transcendental  side  of  the  question — dropping  out  of
the  present  consideration  the  supersensuous  and  intelligent  Beings
and  Entities  believed  in  by  the  Kabalists  and  Christians — we  turn  to
the  theory  of  atomic  evolution,  the  Occult  Teachings  are  still  found
corroborated  by  exact  Science  and  its  confessions,  so  far,  at  least,  as
regards  the  supposed  "simple"  Elements,  now  suddenly  degraded  into
poor  and  distant  relatives,  not  even  second  cousins  to  the  latter.  For
we  are  told  by  Mr.  Crookes  that :

Hitherto,  it  has  been  considered  that  if  the  atomic  weight  of  a  metal,  determined
by  different  observers,  setting  out  from  different  compounds,  was  always  found  to
be  constant  .  .  .  then  such  metal  must  rightly  take  rank  among  the  simple  or
elementary  bodies.  We  learn  .  .  .  that  this  is  no  longer  the  case.  Again,  we
have  liere  wheels  within  wheels.  Gadolinium  is  not  an  element  but  a  compound.
.  .  .  We  have  shown  that  yttrium  is  a  complex  of  five  or  more  new  constituents.
And  who  shall  venture  to  gainsay  that  each  of  these  constituents,  if  attacked  in
some  different  manner,  and  if  the  result  were  submitted  to  a  test  more  delicate  and
searching  than  the  radiant-matter  test,  might  not  be  still  further  divisible.'  Where,
then,  is  the  actual  ultimate  element?  As  we  advance  it  recedes  like  the  tantalizing
mirage  lakes  and  groves  seen  by  the  tired  and  thirsty  traveller  in  the  desert.  Are
we  in  our  quest  for  truth  to  be  thus  deluded  and  baulked.'  The  very  idea  of  an
element,  as  something  absolutely  primary  and  ultimate,  seems  to  be  growing  less
and  less  distinct.t

In  Isis  Unveiled,  we  said:

This  mystery  of  first  creation,  which  was  ever  the  despair  of  Science,  is  un-
fathomable unless  we  accept  the  doctrine  of  Hermes.  Could  he  [Darwin]  remove
his  quest  from  the  visible  universe  into  the  invisible,  he  might  find  himself  on  the
right  path.     But  then,  he  would  be  following  in  the  footsteps  of  the  Hermetists.J

Our  prophecy  begins  to  assert  itself.

But  between  Hermes  and  Huxley  there  is  a  middle  course  and
point.  Let  the  men  of  Science  only  throw  a  bridge  half-way,  and
think  seriously  over  the  theories  of  Leibnitz.      We  have  shown  our

•  Corresponding  on  the  cosmic  scale  with  the  Spirit,  Soul,  Mind,  Life,  and  the  three  Vehicles — the
Astral,  the  Maya  vie  and  the  Physical  Bodies  (of  mankind),  whatever  division  is  made,
t  Ibid.,  p.  16.
t  Vol.  I,  p.  429.


586  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

theories  with  regard  to  the  evolution  of  Atoms — their  last  formation
into  compound  chemical  molecules  being  produced  within  our  terres-
trial workshops  in  the  Karth's  atmosphere  and  not  elsewhere — as
strangely  agreeing  with  the  evolution  of  Atoms  shown  on  Mr.  Crookes'
plates.  Several  times  already  it  has  been  stated  in  this  volume  that
Marttanda,  the  Sun,  had  evolved  and  aggregated,  together  with  his
seven  smaller  Brothers,  from  his  Mother  Aditi's  bosom,  that  bosom
being   Prima  Maier-ia—the  lecturer's  primordial    Protyle.      Esoteric

Doctrines  teach  the  existence  of

An  antecedent  form  of  energy  having  periodic  cycles  of  ebb  and  swell,  rest  and
activity.*

And  behold  a  great  scholar  in  Science  now  asking  the  world  to
accept  this  as  one  of  his  postulates!  We  have  shown  the  "Mother,"
fiery  and  hot,  becoming  gradually  cool  and  radiant,  and  this  same
Scientist  claims  as  his  second  postulate — a  scientific  necessity,  it  would

seem —
An  internal  action,  akin  to  cooling,  operating  slowly  in  the  protyle.

Occult  Science  teaches  that  the  "Mother"  lies  stretched  in  Infinity,
during  Pralaya,  as  the  great  Deep,  the  ''dry  Waters  of  Space,"  accord-
ing to  the  quaint  expression  in  the  Catechism,  and  becomes  wet  only
after  the  separation  and  the  moving  over  its  face  of  Narayana,  the

Spirit  zvhich  is  ijivisible  Flame,  which  never  burns,  but  sets  on  fire  all
that  it  touches,  and  gives  it  life  and  generation.]

And  now  Science  tells  us  that  "the  first-born  element  .  .  .  most
nearly  allied  to  protyle"  would  be  ''hydrogen  .  .  .  which  for  some
time  would  be  the  only  existing  form  of  matter"  in  the  Universe.
What  says  Old  Science?  It  answers:  Just  so;  but  we  would  call
ilydrogen  (and  Oxygen),  which— in  the  pre-geological  and  even  pre-
^enetic  ages— instils  the  fire  of  life  into  the  "Mother"  by  incubation,  the
spirit,  the  noumeyion,  of  that  which  becomes  in  its  grossest  form  Oxygen
and  Hydrogen  and  Nitrogen  on  Earth— Nitrogen  being  of  no  divine
origin,  but  merely  an  earth-born  cement  for  uniting  other  gases  and
fluids,  and  serving  as  a  sponge  to  carry  in  itself  the  Breath  of  Eife,
pure  air.:!:  Before  these  gases  and  fluids  become  what  they  are  in  our
atmosphere,  they  are  interstellar  Ether;  still  earlier  and  on  a  deeper
plane — something  else,  and  so  on  in  infinitum.  The  eminent  and
learned  gentleman  must  pardon  an  Occultist  for  quoting  him  at  such

•  Ibid.,  p.  21.

+  "The  Ivord  is  a  consuniiug^r«."    "In  him  was  life,  and  the  life  was  the  light  of  men."

X  Which  if  separated  alchcmically  would  yield  the  Spirit  of  Life,  and  its  Elixir.


LEIBNITZ  AND   OCCULTISM.  687

length;  but  such  is  the  penalty  of  a  Fellow  of  the  Royal  Society  who
approaches  so  near  the  precincts  of  the  Sacred  Adytum  of  Occult
Mysteries  as  virtually  to  overstep  the  forbidden  boundaries.

But  it  is  time  to  leave  Modern  Physical  Science  and  turn  to  the
psychological  and  metaphysical  side  of  the  question.  We  would  only
remark  that  to  the  "two  very  reasonable  postulates"  required  by  the
eminent  lecturer,  "to  get  a  glimpse  of  some  few  of  the  secrets  so  darkly
hidden"  behind  "the  door  of  the  Unknown,"  a  third  should  be  added*
— lest  no  battering  at  it  should  avail ;  the  postulate  that  Leibnitz  stood
on  a  firm  groundwork  of  fact  and  truth  in  his  speculations.  The
admirable  and  thoughtful  synopsis  of  these  speculations — as  given  b}'
John  Theodore  Mertz  in  his  "L,eibnitz" — shows  how  nearly  he  has
brushed  the  hidden  secrets  of  Esoteric  Theogony  in  his  Monadologie.
And  yet  this  philosopher  has  hardly  risen  in  his  speculations  above
the  first  planes,  the  lower  principles  of  the  Cosmic  Great  Body.  His
theory  soars  to  no  loftier  heights  than  those  of  the  manifested  life,  self-
consciousness  and  intelligence,  leaving  the  regions  of  the  earlier  post-
genetic  mysteries  untouched,  as  his  ethereal  fluid  is  post-planetary.

But  this  third  postulate  will  hardly  be  accepted  by  the  modern  men
of  Science;  and,  like  Descartes,  they  will  prefer  keeping  to  the  proper-
ties of  external  things,  which,  like  extension,  are  incapable  of  explain-
ing the  phenomenon  of  motion,  rather  than  accept  the  latter  as  an
independent  Force.  They  will  never  become  anti-Cartesian  in  this
generation;  nor  will  they  admit  that:

This  property  of  inertia  is  not  a  purely  geometrical  property ;  that  it  points  to
the  existence  of  something  in  external  bodies  which  is  not  extension  merely.

This  is  Leibnitz's  idea  as  analyzed  by  Mertz,  who  adds  that  he  called
this  "something"  Force,  and  maintained  that  external  things  were
endowed  with  Force,  and  that  in  order  to  be  the  bearers  of  this  Force
they  must  have  a  Substance,  for  they  are  not  lifeless  and  inert  masses,
but  the  centres  and  bearers  of  Form — a  purely  Esoteric  claim,  since
Force  was  with  Leibnitz  an  active  principle — the  division  between  Mind
and  Matter  disappearing  by  this  conclusion.

The  mathematical  and  dynamical  enquiries  of  Leibnitz  would  not  have  led  to  the
same  result  in  the  mind  of  a  purely  scientific  enquirer.  But  Leibnitz  was  not  a
scientific  man  in  the  modem  sense  of  the  word.  Had  he  been  so,  he  might  have
worked  out  the  conception  of  energy,  defined  mathematically  the  ideas  of  force  and

•  Foremost  of  all,  the  postulate  that  there  is  no  such  thing  in  Nature  as  inorganic  substances  or
bodies.  Stones,  minerals,  rocks,  and  even  chemical  "atoms"  are  simply  organic  units  in  profound
lethargy.    Their  coma  has  an  end  and  their  inertia  becomes  activity.


688  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

mechanical  work,  and  arrived  at  the  conclusion  that  even  for  purely  scientific
purposes  it  is  desirable  to  look  upon  force,  not  as  a  primary  quantity,  but  as  a
quantity  derived  from  some  other  value.

But,  luckily  for  truth :

Leibnitz  was  a  philosopher;  and  as  such  he  had  certain  primary  principles,  which
biassed  him  in  favour  of  certain  conclusions,  and  his  discovery  that  external  things
were  substances  endowed  with  force  was  at  once  used  for  the  purpose  of  applying
these  principles.  One  of  these  principles  was  the  law  of  continuity,  the  conviction
that  all  the  world  was  connected,  that  there  were  no  gaps  and  chasms  which  could
not  be  bridged  over.  The  contrast  of  extended  thinking  substances  was  unbearable
to  him.  The  definition  of  the  extended  substances  had  already  become  untenable:
it  was  natural  that  a  similar  enquiry  was  made  into  the  definition  of  mind,  the
thinking  substance.

The  divisions  made  by  L,eibnitz,  however  incomplete  and  faulty  from
the  standpoint  of  Occultism,  show  a  spirit  of  metaphysical  intuition  to
which  no  man  of  Science,  not  Descartes,  not  even  Kant,  has  ever
reached.  With  him  there  existed  ever  an  infinite  gradation  of  thought.
Only  a  small  portion  of  the  contents  of  our  thoughts,  he  said,  rises  into
the  clearness  of  apperception,  "into  the  light  of  perfect  consciousness."
Many  remain  in  a  confused  or  obscure  state,  in  the  state  of  "percep-
tions"; but  they  are  there.  Descartes  denied  soul  to  the  animal,
Leibnitz,  as  do  the  Occultists,  endowed  "the  whole  creation  with
mental  life,  this  being,  according  to  him,  capable  of  infinite  grada-
tions."    And  this,  as  Mertz  justly  observes:

At  once  widened  the  realm  of  mental  life,  destroying  the  contrast  of  animate  and
inanimate  matter;  it  did  yet  more — it  reacted  on  the  conception  of  matter,  of  the
extended  substance.  For  it  became  evident  that  external  or  material  things  pre-
sented the  property  of  extension  to  our  senses  only,  not  to  our  thinking  faculties.
The  mathematician,  in  order  to  calculate  geometrical  figures,  had  been  obliged  to
divide  them  into  an  infinite  number  of  infinitely  small  parts,  and  the  physicist  saw
no  limit  to  the  divisibility  of  matter  into  atoms.  The  bulk  through  which  external
things  seemed  to  fill  space  was  a  property  which  they  acquired  only  through  the
coarseness  of  our  senses.  .  .  .  Leibnitz  followed  these  arguments  to  some  ex-
tent, but  he  could  not  rest  content  in  assuming  that  matter  was  composed  of  a
finite  number  of  very  small  parts.  His  mathematical  mind  forced  him  to  carry  out
the  argument  in  infinitum.  And  what  became  of  the  atoms  then.?  They  lost  their
extension  and  they  retained  only  their  property  of  resistance;  they  were  the  centres
of  force.  They  were  reduced  to  mathematical  points.  .  .  .  But  if  their  extension
in  space  was  nothing,  so  much  fuller  was  their  inner  life.  Assuming  that  inner
existence,  such  as  that  of  the  human  mind,  is  a  new  dimension,  not  a  geometrical
but  a  metaphysical  dimension,  .  .  .  having  reduced  the  geometrical  extension
of  the  atoms  to  nothing,  Leibnitz  endowed  them  with  an  infinite  extension  in  the


SPINOZA   AND   LEIBNITZ.  689

direction  of  their  metaphysical  dimension.  After  having  lost  sight  of  them  in  the
world  of  space,  the  mind  has,  as  it  were,  to  dive  into  a  metaphysical  world  to  find
and  grasp  the  real  essence  of  what  appears  in  space  merely  as  a  mathematical  point.
.  .  .  As  a  cone  stands  on  its  point,  or  a  perpendicular  straight  line  cuts  a  hori-
zontal plane  only  in  one  mathematical  point,  but  may  extend  infinitely  in  height
and  depth,  so  the  essences  of  things  real  have  only  a  punctual  existence  in  this
physical  world  of  space;  but  have  an  infinite  depth  of  inner  life  in  the  metaphysical
world  of  thought.*

This  is  the  spirit,  the  very  root  of  Occult  doctrine  and  thought.
The  "Spirit-Matter"  and  "Matter-Spirit"  extend  infinitely  in  depth,
and  like  the  "essence  of  things"  of  Leibnitz,  our  essence  of  things  real
is  at  the  seventh  depth ;  while  the  unreal  and  gross  matter  of  Science
and  the  external  world,  is  at  the  lowest  extreme  of  our  percep-
tive senses.  The  Occultist  knows  the  worth  or  worthlessness  of  the
latter.

The  student  must  now  be  shown  the  fundamental  distinction  between
the  sj'stem  of  Leibnitz  f  and  that  of  Occult  Philosophj^  on  the  question
of  the  Monads,  and  this  ma}-  be  done  with  his  Monadologie  before  us.
It  may  be  correctly  stated  that  were  Leibnitz'  and  Spinoza's  systems
reconciled,  the  essence  and  spirit  of  Esoteric  Philosophy  would  be
made  to  appear.  From  the  shock  of  the  two — as  opposed  to  the
Cartesian  system — emerge  the  truths  of  the  Archaic  Doctrine.  Both
oppose  the  Metaphysics  of  Descartes.  His  idea  of  the  contrast  of
two  Substances — Extension  and  Thought — radically  differing  from
each  other  and  mutually  irreducible,  is  too  arbitrary  and  too  un-
philosophical  for  them.  Thus  Leibnitz  made  of  the  two  Cartesian
Substances  two  attributes  of  one  universal  Unit)^  in  which  he  saw
God.  Spinoza  recognized  but  one  universal  indivisible  Substance,  an
absolute  All,  like  Parabrahman.  Leibnitz,  on  the  contrary,  per-
ceived the  existence  of  a  plurality  of  Substances.  There  was  but
One  for  Spinoza;  for  Leibnitz  an  infinitude  of  Beings,  from,  and  in,
the  One.  Hence,  though  both  admitted  but  Oiie  Real  Ejility,  while
Spinoza  made  it  impersonal  and  indivisible,  Leibnitz  divided  his
personal  Deity  into  a  number  of  divine  and  semi-divine  Beings.
Spinoza  was  a  siibjective,  Leibnitz  an  objective  Pantheist,  yet  both
were  great  Philosophers  in  their  intuitive  perceptions.

Now,  if  these  two  teachings  were  blended  together  and  each  cor-


•  Ibid.,  p.  144.

+  The  orthography  of  the  name— as  spelt  by  himself— is  Leibniz.    He  was  of  Slavonian  descent
though  born  in  Germany.

43


6go  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

rected  by  the  other— and  foremost  of  all  the  One  Reality  weeded  of  its
personality — there  would  remain  as  sum  total  a  true  spirit  of  Esoteric
Philosophy  in  them;  the  impersonal,  attributeless,  absolute  Divine
Essence,  which  is  no  "being"  but  the  root  of  all  Being.  Draw  a  deep
line  in  your  thought  between  that  ever-incognizable  Essence,  and  the
as  invisible,  yet  comprehensible  Presence,  Mulaprakriti  or  Shekinah,
from  beyo7id  and  through  which  vibrates  the  Sound  of  the  Verbum,
and  from  which  evolve  the  numberless  Hierarchies  of  intelligent
Egos,  of  conscious  as  of  semi-conscious,  "apperceptive"  and  "per-
ceptive" Beings,  whose  Essence  is  spiritual  Force,  whose  Substance
is  the  Elements,  and  whose  Bodi-es  (when  needed)  are  the  Atoms —
and  our  Doctrine  is  there.     For,  says  Leibnitz:

The  primitive  element  of  every  material  body  being  force,  which  has  none  of
the  characteristics  of  [objective]  matter— it  can  be  conceived  but  can  never  be  the
object  of  any  imaginative  representation.

That  which  was  for  him  the  primordial  and  ultimate  element  in
every  body  and  object  was  thus  not  the  material  atoms,  or  molecules,
necessarily  more  or  less  extended,  as  those  of  Epicurus  and  Gassendi,
but,  as  Mertz  shows,  immaterial  and  metaphysical  Atoms,  "mathe-
matical points,"  or  real  souls— 2iS  explained  by  Henri  Lachelier  (Pro-
fesseur  Agrege  de  Philosophic),  his  French  biographer.

That  which  exists  outside  of  us  in  an  absolute  manner,  are  Souls  whose  essence
is  force.*

Thus,  reality  in  the  manifested  world  is  composed  of  a.  U7iity  o/zmits,
so  to  say,  immaterial — from  our  standpoint — and  infinite.  These  Leib-
nitz calls  Monads,  Eastern  Philosophy  Jivas,  while  Occultism,  with  the
Kabalists  and  all  the  Christians,  gives  them  a  variety  of  names.  With
us,  as  with  Leibnitz,  they  are  "the  expression  of  the  universe,"!  and
every  physical  point  is  but  the  phenomenal  expression  of  the  noumenal,
metaphysical  Point.  His  distinction  between  "perception"  and  "ap-
perception" is  the  philosophical  though  dim  expression  of  the  Esoteric
Teachings.  His  "reduced  universes,"  of  which  "there  are  as  many  as
there  are  Monads"— is  the  chaotic  representation  of  our  Septenary
System  with  its  divisions  and  sub-divisions.

As  to  the  relation  his  Monads  bear  to  our  Dhyan  Chohans,  Cosmic
Spirits,  Devas,  and  Elenientals,  we  may  reproduce  briefly  the  opinion

*  Monadologie,  Introd.

f  "Leibnitz's  dynamism,"  says  Professor  Lachelier,  "would  offer  but  little  difficulty  if,  with  him,
the  monad  had  remained  a  simple  atom  of  blind  force.  But  .  .  .  ."  One  perfectly  understands
the  perplexity  of  Modern  Materialism !


THE  NATURE  OF  THE  MONAD.  69 1

of  a  learned  and  thoughtful  Theosophist,  Mr.  C.  H.  A.  Bjerregaard,  on
the  subject.  In  an  excellent  paper,  "On  the  Elementals,  the  Elemen-
tary Spirits,  and  the  Relationship  between  Them  and  Human  Beings,"
read  by  him  before  the  Aryan  Theosophical  Society  of  New  York,  Mr.
Bjerregaard  thus  distinctly  formulates  his  opinion:

To  Spinoza,  substance  is  dead  and  inactive,  but  to  Leibnitz's  penetrating  powers
of  mind  everything  is  living  activity  and  active  energy.  In  holding  this  view,  he
comes  infinitely  nearer  the  Orient  than  any  other  thinker  of  his  day,  or  after  him.
His  discovery  that  a«  active  energy  forms  the  essence  of  substance  is  a  principle  that
places  him  in  direct  relationship  to  the  Seers  of  the  East.*

And  the  lecturer  proceeds  to  show  that  to  Leibnitz  Atoms  and
Elements  are  Centres  of  Force,  or  rather  "spiritual  beings  whose  very
nature  it  is  to  act,"  for  the

Elementary  particles  are  vital  forces,  not  acting  mechanically,  but  from  an
internal  principle.  They  are  incorporeal  spiritual  units  ["substantial,"  however,
but  not  "immaterial"  in  our  sense]  inaccessible  to  all  change  from  without  .  .  .
[and]  indestruevJbi.e  by  any  external  force.  Leibnitz'  monads  differ  from  atoms
in  the  following  particulars,  which  are  very  important  for  us  to  remember,  other-
wise we  shall  not  be  able  to  see  the  difference  between  Elementals  and  mere
matter.  Atoms  are  not  distinguished  from  each  other,  they  are  qualitatively  alike ;
but  one  monad  differs  from  every  other  monad  qualitatively;  and  everyone  is  a
peculiar  world  to  itself.  Not  so  with  the  atoms;  they  are  absolutely  alike  quanti-
tatively and  qualitatively,  and  possess  no  individuality  of  their  own.t  Again,  the
atoms  [molecules,  rather]  of  materialistic  philosophy  can  be  considered  as  extended
and  divisible,  while  the  monads  are  mere  "metaphysical  points"  and  indivisible.
Finally,  and  this  is  a  point  where  these  monads  of  Leibnitz  closely  resemble  the
Elementals  of  mystic  philosophy,  these  monads  are  representative  beings.  Everj^
monad  reflects  every  other.  Every  monad  is  a  living  mirror  of  the  Universe  within
its  own  sphere.  And  mark  this,  for  upon  it  depends  the  power  possessed  by  these
monads,  and  upon  it  depends  the  work  they  can  do  for  us;  in  mirroring  the  world,
the  monads  are  not  mere  passive  reflective  agents,  but  spofitajieously  self-active;  they
produce  the  images  spontaneously,  as  the  soul  does  a  dream.  In  every  monad,
therefore,  the  adept  may  read  everything,  even  the  future.  Every  monad— or  Ele-
mental—is a  looking-glass  that  can  speak.

•  The  Path,  I.  10,  p.  297.

-r  Leibnitz  was  an  aiio/w/^"  Idealist  in  maintaining  that  "material  atoms  are  contrary  to  reason."
{Syslimc  Nouveau,  Erdmann,  p.  126,  col.  2.)  For  him  Matter  was  a  simple  representation  of  the
Monad,  whether  human  or  atomic.  Monads,  he  thought  (as  do  we),  are  everywhere.  Thus  the
human  soul  is  a  Monad,  and  every  cell  in  the  human  body  has  its  Monad,  as  has  every  cell  in  animal,
vegetable,  and  even  in  the  so-called  inorganic  bodies.  His  Atoms  are  the  molecules  of  modern
Science,  and  his  Monads  those  simple  atoms  that  Materialistic  Science  takes  on  faith,  though  it  will
never  succeed  in  interviewing  them— except  in  imagination.  But  Leibnitz,  is  rather  contradictory  in
his  views  about  Monads.  He  speaks  of  his  "Metaphysical  Points"  and  '•Formal  Atoms,"  at  one
time  as  r<ra/»ViV75,  occupying  space;  at  another  as  pure  spiritual  ideas;  then  he  again  endows  them
with  objectivity  and  aggregates  and  positions  in  their  co-relations.


6g2  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

It  is  at  this  point  that  Leibnitz's  philosophy  breaks  down.  There  is
no  provision  made,  nor  any  distinction  established,  between  the  "Ele-
mental" Monad  and  that  of  a  high  Planetary  Spirit,  or  even  the  Human
Monad  or  Soul.  He  even  goes  so  far  as  to  sometimes  doubt  whether
God  has  ever  made  anything  but  monads  or  substances  without  extension.*
He  draws  a  distinction  between  Monads  and  Atoms,!  because,  as  he
repeatedly  states:

Bodies  with  all  their  qualities  are  only  phenomenal,  like  the  rainbow.  Corpora
omnia  cum  omnibus  qualitatibus  suis  non  sunt  aliiid  quam  phenomena  bene  fundata,
ut  Iris-X

But  soon  after  he  finds  a  provision  for  this  in  a  substantial  corres-
pondence, a  certain  metaphysical  bond  between  the  Monads — vinculum
substantialc.  Esoteric  Philosophy,  teaching  an  objective  Idealism —
though  it  regards  the  objective  Universe  and  all  in  it  as  Maya,  Tem-
porary Illusion — draws  a  practical  distinction  between  Collective  Illu-
sion, Mahamaya,  from  the  purely  metaphysical  standpoint,  and  the
objective  relations  in  it  between  various  conscious  Egos  so  long  as  this
Illusion  lasts.  The  Adept,  therefore,  may  read  the  future  in  an  Ele-
mental Monad,  but  he  has  to  draw  together  for  this  object  a  great
number  of  them,  as  each  Monad  represents  only  a  portion  of  the
Kingdom  it  belongs  to.

It  is  not  in  the  object,  but  in  the  modification  of  the  cognition  of  the  object  that
the  monads  are  limited.  They  all  tend  (confusedly)  to  the  infinite,  to  the  whole,
but  they  are  limited  and  distinguished  by  the  degrees  of  distinctness  in  their
perception.  §

And  as  Leibnitz  explains:

All  the  portions  of  the  universe  are  distinctly  represented  in  the  monads,  but
some  are  reflected  in  one  monad,  some  in  another.

A  number  of  Monads  could  represent  simultaneously  the  thoughts
of  the  two  million  inhabitants  of  Paris.

But  what  say  the  Occult  Sciences  to  this,  and  what  do  they  add?

They  say  that  what  is  called  collectively  Monads  by  Leibnitz —
roughly  viewed,  and  leaving  every  subdivision  out  of  calculation,  for

*  Examen  des  Principes  du  P.  Malebranche.

t  The  Atoms  of  r,eibnitz  have,  in  truth,  nothing  but  the  name  in  common  with  the  atoms  of  the
Greek  Materialists,  or  even  the  molecules  of  Modem  Science.  He  calls  them  "  Formal  Atoms,"  and
compares  them  to  the  "Substantial  Forms"  of  Aristotle.    (See  Systime  Nouveau,  \  3.)

X  Letter  to  Father  Desbosses,  Correspondence,  xviii.

§  Monadologie,  \  60.  Leibnitz,  like  Aristotle,  calls  the  "created"  or  emanated  Monads  (the  Elemen-
tals  issued  from  Cosmic  Spirits  or  Gods)— Entelechies,  EvT€A.e;!^€tai,  and  "incorporeal  automata."
{Monadologie,  \  i8.)


SPIRIT  AND   MATTER   ONE.  693

the  present — may  be  separated  into  three  distinct  Hosts,*  which,
counted  from  the  highest  planes,  are,  firstly,  "Gods,"  or  conscious,
spiritual  Egos;  the  intelligent  Architects,  who  work  after  the  plan  in
the  Divine  Mind.  Then  come  the  Elementals,  or  "Monads,"  who  form
collectively  and  unconsciously  the  grand  Universal  Mirrors  of  every-
thing connected  with  their  respective  realms.  L,astly,  the  "Atoms,"
or  material  molecules,  which  are  informed  in  their  turn  by  their  "per-
ceptive" Monads,  just  as  every  cell  in  a  human  body  is  so  informed.
There  are  shoals  of  such  informed  Atoms  which,  in  their  turn,  inform
the  molecules;  an  infinitude  of  Monads,  or  Elementals  proper,  and
countless  spiritual  Forces — Monadless,  for  they  are  pure  iucorpo-
realities,t  except  under  certain  laws,  when  they  assume  a  form — not
necessarily  human.  Whence  the  substance  that  clothes  them — the
apparent  organism  they  evolve  around  their  centres?  The  Formless
(Arupa)  Radiations,  existing  in  the  harmony  of  Universal  Will,  and
being  what  we  term  the  collective  or  the  aggregate  of  Cosmic  Will  on
the  plane  of  the  subjective  Universe,  unite  together  an  infinitude  of
Monads — each  the  mirror  of  its  own  Universe — and  thus  individualize
for  the  time  being  an  independent  Mind,  omniscient  and  universal;
and  by  the  same  process  of  magnetic  aggregation  they  create  for  them-
selves objective,  visible  bodies,  out  of  the  interstellar  Atoms.  For
Atoms  and  Monads,  associated  or  dissociated,  simple  or  complex,  are,
from  the  moment  of  the  first  differentiation,  but  the  "principles,"
corporeal,  psychic  and  spiritual,  of  the  "Gods" — themselves  the  Radia-
tions of  Primordial  Nature.  Thus,  to  the  eye  of  the  Seer,  the  higher
Planetarj'^  Powers  appear  under  two  aspects:  the  subjective — as  in-
fluences, and  the  objective — as  x^y-Axo.  forms,  which,  under  Karmic  law,
become  a  Preseyice,  Spirit  and  Matter  being  One,  as  repeatedly  stated.
Spirit  is  Matter  on  the  seventh  plane;  Matter  is  Spirit  at  the  lowest
point  of  its  cyclic  activity;  and  both  are — Maya.

•  These  three  "  rough  divisions"  correspond  to  Spirit,  Mind  (or  Soul),  and  Body,  in  the  human
constitution.

t  Brother  C.  H.  A.  Bjerregaard,  in  the  lecture  already  mentioned,  warns  his  audience  not  to  regard
the  Sephiroth  too  much  as  individualities,  but  to  avoid  at  the  same  time  seeing  in  them  abstractions.
"We  shall  never  arrive  at  the  truth,"  he  says,  "much  less  the  power  of  associating  with  these
celestials,  until  we  return  to  the  simplicity  and  fearlessness  of  the  primitive  ages,  when  men  mixed
freely  with  the  gods,  and  the  gods  descended  anjong  men  and  guided  them  in  truth  and  holiness."
(P.  296.)  "There  are  several  designations  for  'angels'  in  the  Bible,  which  clearly  show  that  beings
like  the  elementals  of  the  Kabbala  and  the  monads  of  Leibnitz,  must  be  understood  by  that  term
rather  than  that  which  is  commonly  understood.  They  are  called  '  morning  stars,'  '  flaming  fires,' '  the
mighty  ones,'  and  St.  Paul  sees  them  in  his  cosmogonic  vision  as  '  Principalities  and  Powers.'  Such
names  as  these  preclude  the  idea  of  personality,  and  we  find  ourselves  compelled  to  think  of  them  as
impersonal  existences    ...    as  an  influence,  a  spiritual  substance,  or  conscious  force."  (Pp.  321,  322.)


694  'T^I^  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Atoms  are  called  Vibrations  in  Occultism ;  also  Sound — collectively.
This  does  not  interfere  with  Mr.  Tyndall's  scientific  discovery.  He
traced,  on  the  lower  rung  of  the  ladder  of  monadic  being,  the  whole
course  of  the  atmospheric  Vibrations — and  this  constitutes  the  objective
part  of  the  process  in  Nature.  He  has  traced  and  recorded  the  rapidity
of  their  motion  and  transmission;  the  force  of  their  impact;  their
setting  up  vibrations  in  the  tympanum  and  their  transmission  of  these
to  the  otoliths,  etc.,  till  the  vibration  of  the  auditory  nerve  commences
— and  a  new  phenomenon  now  takes  place:  the  subjective  side  of  the
process  or  the  sensatio?i  of  sound.  Does  he  perceive  or  see  it?  No;
for  his  specialty  is  to  discover  the  behaviour  of  Matter.  But  why
should  not  a  Psychic  see  it,  a  spiritual  Seer,  whose  inner  Eye  is  opened,
one  who  can  see  through  the  veil  of  Matter?  The  waves  and  undula-
tions of  Science  are  all  produced  by  Atoms  propelling  their  molecules
into  activity y^z^  within.  Atoms  fill  the  immensity  of  Space,  and  by
their  continuous  vibration  are  that  Motion  which  keeps  the  wheels  of
lyife  perpetually  going.  It  is  that  inner  work  that  produces  the  natural
phenomenon  called  the  correlation  of  Forces.  Only,  at  the  origin  of
every  such  "Force,"  there  stands  the  conscious  guiding  Noumenon
thereof — Angel  or  God,  Spirit  or  Demon,  ruling  powers,  yet  the  same.

As  described  by  Seers — those  who  can  see  the  motion  of  the  inter-
stellar shoals,  and  follow  them  clairvoyantly  in  their  evolution — they
are  dazzling,  like  specks  of  virgin  snow  in  radiant  sunlight.  Their
velocity  is  swifter  than  thought,  quicker  than  any  mortal  physical  eye
can  follow,  and,  as  well  as  can  be  judged  from  the  tremendous  rapidity
of  their  course,  the  motion  is  circular.  Standing  on  an  open  plain,  on
a  mountain  summit  especially,  and  gazing  into  the  vast  vault  above
and  the  spatial  infinitudes  around,  the  whole  atmosphere  seems  ablaze
with  them,  the  air  soaked  through  with  these  dazzling  coruscations.
At  times,  the  intensity  of  their  motion  produces  flashes  like  the
Northern  lyights  in  the  Aurora  Borealis.  The  sight  is  so  marvellous,
that,  as  the  Seer  gazes  into  this  inner  world,  and  feels  the  scintillating
points  shoot  past  him,  he  is  filled  with  awe  at  the  thought  of  other,
still  greater  mysteries,  that  lie  beyond,  and  within,  this  radiant  ocean.

However  imperfect  and  incomplete  this  explanation  on  "Gods,
Monads  and  Atoms,"  it  is  hoped  that  some  students  and  Theosophists,
at  least,  will  feel  that  there  may  indeed  be  a  close  relation  between
Materialistic  Science  and  Occultism,  which  is  the  complement  and
missing  soul  of  the  former.


SECTION  XV.

Cyclic  Evolution'  and  Karma.


It  is  the  spiritual  evolution  of  the  i7iner,  immortal  Man  that  forms
the  fundamental  tenet  of  the  Occult  Sciences.  To  realize  even  distantly-
such  a  process,  the  student  has  to  believe  {a)  in  the  One  Universal
Life,  independent  of  Matter  (or  what  Science  regards  as  Matter) ;  and
ip)  in  the  individual  Intelligences  that  animate  the  various  manifesta-
tions of  this  Principle.  Mr.  Huxley  does  not  believe  in  Vital  Force ;
others  Scientists  do.  Dr.  J.  H.  Hutchinson  Stirling's  work  As  regards
Protoplasm  has  made  no  small  havoc  of  this  dogmatic  negation.  Pro-
fessor Beale's  decision  also  is  in  favour  of  a  Vital  Principle;  and  Dr.
B.  W.  Richardson's  lectures  on  Nervous  Ether  have  been  sufficiently
quoted.     Thus,  opinions  are  divided.

The  One  Life  is  closely  related  to  the  One  Law  which  governs  the
World  of  Being — Karma.  Exoterically,  this  is  simply  and  literally
"action,"  or  rather  an  "effect-producing  cause."  Esoterically,  it  is
quite  a  different  thing  in  its  far-reaching  moral  effects.  It  is  the  un-
erring Law  of  Retribution.  To  say  to  those  ignorant  of  the  real
significance,  characteristics,  and  awful  importance  of  this  eternal  im-
mutable Law,  that  no  theological  definition  of  a  Personal  Deity  can
give  an  idea  of  this  impersonal,  yet  ever  present  and  active  Principle,
is  to  speak  in  vain.  Nor  can  it  be  called  Providence.  For  Providence,
with  the  Theists — the  Protestant  Christians,  at  any  rate — rejoices  in  a
personal  male  gender,  while  with  the  Roman  Catholics  it  is  a  female
potency.  "Divine  Providence  tempers  His  blessings  to  secure  their
better  effects,"  Wogan  tells  us.  Indeed  "He"  tempers  them,  which
Karma — a  sexless  principle — does  not.

Throughout  the  first  two  Parts,  it  has  been  shown  that,  at  the  first
flutter  of  renascent  life,  Svabhavat,  ''the  Mutable  Radiance  of  the  Im-
mutable Darkness  unconscious  in  Eternity,''  passes,  at  every  new  rebirth
of  Kosmos,  from  an  inactive  state  into  one  of  intense  activity;  that  it


696  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

differentiates,  and  then  begins  its  work  through  that  differentiation.
This  work  is  Karma.

The  Cycles  are  also  subservient  to  the  effects  produced  by  this
activity.

The  07ie  Cosmic  Aiom  becomes  seven  Atoms  on  the  plane  of  Matter,  ana
each  is  transformed  into  a  centre  of  energy;  that  sa^ne  Atom  becomes  seven
Rays  on  the  plane  of  Spirit;  and  the  seve?i  creative  Forces  of  Nature,

radiating fvm  the  Root-Esseyice follow,  one  the  right,  the  other  the

left  path,  separate  till  the  end  of  the  Kalpa,  and  yet  in  close  embrace.
What  unites  them  ?     Karma.

The  Atoms  emanated  from  the  Central  Point  emanate  in  their  turn
new  centres  of  energy,  which,  under  the  potential  breath  of  Fohat,
begin  their  work  from  within  without,  and  multiply  other  minor
centres.  These,  in  the  course  of  evolution  and  involution,  form  in
their  turn  the  roots  or  developing  causes  of  new  effects,  from  worlds
and  "man-bearing"  globes,  down  to  the  genera,  species,  and  classes  of
all  the  seve?i  kingdoms,  of  which  we  know  only  four.  For  as  says  the
Book  of  the  Aphorisms  of  Tson-ka-pa  :

The  blessed  workers  have  received  the  Thyan-kam,  in  the  eternity.

Thyan-kam  is  the  power  or  knowledge  of  guiding  the  impulses  of
Cosmic  Energy  in  the  right  direction.

The  true  Buddhist,  recognizing  no  "personal  God,"  nor  any
"Father"  and  "Creator  of  Heaven  and  Earth,"  still  believes  in  an
Absolute  Consciousness,  Adi-Buddhi;  and  the  Buddhist  Philosopher
knows  that  there  are  Planetary  Spirits,  the  Dliyan  Chohans.  But
though  he  admits  of  "Spiritual  Lives,"  yet,  as  they  are  temporary  in
eternity,  even  they,  according  to  his  Philosophy,  are  "the  Maya  of
the  Day,"  tlic  Illusion  of  a  "Day  of  Brahma,"  a  short  Manvantara  of
4,320,000,000  years.  The  Yin-Sin  is  not  for  the  speculations  of  men,
for  the  Lord  Buddha  has  strongly  prohibited  all  such  enquiry.  If  the
Dhyan  Chohans  and  all  the  Invisible  Beings — the  Seven  Centres  and
their  direct  Emanations,  the  minor  centres  of  Energy — are  the  direct
reflex  of  the  One  Light,  yet  men  are  far  removed  from  these,  since  the
whole  of  the  visible  Kosmos  consists  of  ''  self  produced  beings,  the
creatures  of  Karma."  Thus  regarding  a  personal  God  "as  only  a
gigantic  shadow  thrown  upon  the  void  of  space  by  the  imagination  of
ignorant  men,"*  they  teach  that  only  "two  things  are  [objectively]

•  Buddhist  Catechism,  by  H.  S.  Olcott,  President  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  p.  51.


IS   MAN   A   GOD    OR    A    BEAST?  697

eternal,  namely  Akasha  and  Nin^ana" ;  and  that  these  are  one  in  reality,
and  but  a  Maya  when  divided.

Everything  has  come  out  of  Akasha  [or  Svabhavat  on  our  earth]  in  obedience  to
a  law  of  motion  inherent  in  it,  and  after  a  certain  existence  passes  away.  No  thing-
ever  came  out  of  nothing.  We  do  not  believe  in  miracles;  hence  we  deny  creation
and  cannot  conceive  of  a  creator.  *

If  a  Vedantic  Brahman  of  the  Advaita  Sect,  were  asked  whether  he
believed  in  the  existence  of  God,  he  would  probably  answer,  as  Jacolliot
was  answered — "I  am  myself  'God';"  while  a  Buddhist  (a  Sinhalese
especially)  would  simply  laugh,  and  say  in  reply,  "There  is  no  God;
no  Creation."  Yet  the  root  Philosophy  of  both  Advaita  and  Buddhist
scholars  is  ideyifical,  and  both  have  the  same  respect  for  animal  life,  for
both  believe  that  every  creature  on  Karth,  however  small  and  humble,
"is  an  immortal  portion  of  the  immortal  Matter" — Matter  having  with
them  quite  another  significance  from  that  which  it  has  with  either
Christian  or  Materialist — and  that  every  creature  is  subject  to  Karma.

The  answer  of  the  Brahman  would  have  suggested  itself  to  every
ancient  Philosopher,  Kabalist,  and  Gnosti^  of  the  early  days.  It
contains  the  very  spirit  of  the  Delphic  and  Kabalistic  commandments,
for  Esoteric  Philosophj'  solved,  ages  ago,  the  problem  of  what  man  was,
is,  and  will  be;  his  origin,  life-cycle — interminable  in  its  duration  of
successive  incarnations  or  rebirths — and  his  final  absorption  into  the
Source  from  which  he  started.

But  it  is  not  Physical  Science  that  we  can  ever  ask  to  read  man  for
us,  as  the  riddle  of  the  Past,  or  of  the  Future;  since  no  Philosopher  can
tell  us  even  what  man  is,  as  known  to  both  Physiolog}^  and  Psj'chology.
In  doubt  whether  man  was  a  God  or  a  beast,  Science  has  now  con-
nected him  with  the  latter  and  derives  him  from  an  animal.  Certainly
the  task  of  analyzing  and  classifying  the  human  being  as  a  terrestrial
animal  may  be  left  to  Science,  which  Occultists,  of  all  men,  regard
with  veneration  and  respect.  They  recognize  its  ground  and  the  won-
derful work  it  has  done,  the  progress  achieved  in  Physiology,  and  even
— to  a  degree — in  Biology.  But  man's  ijmer,  spiritual,  psychic,  or  even
moral,  nature  cannot  be  left  to  the  tender  mercies  of  an  ingrained
Materialism  ;  for  not  even  the  higher  psychological  Philosoph3'  of  the
West  is  able,  in  its  present  incompleteness  and  tendency  towards  a
decided  Agnosticism,  to  do  justice  to  the  inner  man;  especially  to  his
higher  capacities  and  perceptions,  and  to  those  states  of  consciousness,

•  Ibid.,  51,  52.


698  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

across  the  road  to  which  such  authorities  as  Mill  draw  a  strong  line,
saying  "  So  far,  and  no  farther  shalt  thou  go."

No  Occultist  would  deny  that  man — together  with  the  elephant  and
the  microbe,  the  crocodile  and  the  lizard,  the  blade  of  grass  and  the
crystal — is,  in  his  physical  formation,  the  simple  product  of  the  evo-
lutionary forces  of  Nature  through  a  numberless  series  of  transfor-
mations ;  but  he  puts  the  case  differently.

It  is  not  against  zoological  and  anthropological  discoveries,  based  on
the  fossils  of  man  and  animal,  that  every  Mystic  and  believer  in  a
Divine  Soul  inwardly  revolts,  but  only  against  the  uncalled-for  con-
clusions built  on  preconceived  theories  and  made  to  fit  in  with  certain
prejudices.  The  premisses  of  Scientists  may  or  may  not  be  alwaj'S  true;
and  as  some  of  these  theories  live  but  a  short  life,  the  deductions  there-
from must  ever  be  one-sided  with  materialistic  Evolutionists.  Yet  it  is
on  the  strength  of  such  very  ephemeral  authority,  that  most  of  the
men  of  Science  frequently  receive  honours  where  they  deserve  them
the  least.*

To  make  the  working  of  Karma — in  the  periodical  renovations  of  the
Universe — more  evident  and  intelligible  to  the  student  when  he  arrives
at  the  origin  and  evolution  of  man,  he  has  now  to  examine  with  us  the
Esoteric  bearing  of  the  Karmic  Cycles  upon  Universal  Ethics.  The
question  is,  do  those  mysterious  divisions  of  time,  called  Yugas  and
Kalpas  by  the  Hindus,   and  so  very  graphically,  kvkXol,  cycles,  rings

'*  We  refer  those  who  would  regard  the  statement  as  an  impertinence  or  irreverence  levelled  at
accepted  Science,  to  Dr.  James  Hutchinson  Stirling's  work  As  regards  Protoplasm ,  which  is  a  defence
of  a  Vital  Principle  versus  the  Molecularists — Huxley,  Tyndall,  Vogt,  and  Co. — and  request  them  to
examine  whether  it  is  tme  or  not  to  say  that,  though  the  scientific  premisses  ma3'  not  be  always
correct,  they  are,  nevertheless,  accepted,  to  fill  up  a  gap  or  a  hole  in  some  beloved  materialistic
hobby.  Speaking  of  protoplasm  and  the  organs  of  man,  as  "viewed  by  Mr.  Huxley,"  the  author
says :  "  Probably  then,  in  regard  to  any  continuity  in  protoplasm  of  power,  of  form,  or  of  substance,
we  have  seen  lacunce  euow.  Nay,  Mr.  Huxley  himself  can  be  adduced  in  evidence  on  the  same  side.
Not  rarely  do  we  find  in  his  essay  admissions  oi  probability,  where  it  is  certainty  that  is  alone  in
place.  He  says,  for  example:  'It  is  more  than  probable  that  ivhen  the  vegetable  world  is  thoroughly
explored  we  shall  find  all  plants  in  possession  of  the  same  powers.'  When  a  conclusion  is  decidedly
announced,  it  is  rather  disappointing  to  be  told,  as  here,  that  the  premisses  are  still  to  collect  [!  !]

Again,  here  is  a  passage  in  which  he  is  seen  to  cut  his  own  '  basis '  from  beneath  his  own

feet.  After  telling  us  that  all  forms  of  protoplasm  consist  of  carbon,  hydrogen,  oxygen  and  nitrogen
'in  very  complex  union,'  he  continues  :  'To  this  complex  combination,  t/ie  natttre  of  which  has  never
been  determined  with  exactness  [!  !],  the  name  of  protein  has  been  applied.'  This,  plainly,  is  an
identification,  on  Mr.  Huxley's  own  part,  of  protoplasm  and  protein;  and  what  is  said  of  one,  being
necessarily  true  of  the  other,  it  follows  that  he  admits  the  nature  of  protoplasm  never  to  have  been
determined  with  exactness,  and  that  even  in  his  eyes  the  lis  is  still  sub  judice.  This  admission  is
strengthened  by  the  words,  too,  'If  we  use  this  term  (protein)  with  such  caution  as  may  properly
arise  out  of  our  cow.'/arai'/i//? /;§-«ora«i:«  of  the  things  for  which  it  stands'"  .  .  .  etc.  {pp.  33  and  34,
ed.  1872,  in  reply  to  Mr.  Huxley  in  Yeast).

This  is  the  eminent  Huxley,  the  king  of  physiology  and  biology,  who  is  proven  playing  at  blind
man's  \i\xSW\\.\\ pretnisses  and  facts!    What  may  not  the  "smaller  fry"  of  Science  do  after  this!


THE   SWING   OF   KARMA,  699

or  circles,  bj'  the  Greeks,  have  any  bearing  upon,  or  any  direct  con-
nection with,  human  life?  Even  exoteric  Philosophy  explains  that
these  perpetual  circles  of  time  are  ever  returning  on  themselves,
periodically  and  intelligently,  in  Space  and  Eternity.  There  are
"Cycles  of  Matter,"*  and  there  are  "Cycles  of  Spiritual  Evolution,"
and  racial,  national,  and  individual  Cycles.  May  not  Esoteric  specu-
lation allow  us  a  still  deeper  insight  into  their  workings?

This  idea  is  beautifully  expressed  in  a  very  clever  scientific  work.

The  possibility  of  rising  to  a  comprehension  of  a  system  of  coordination  so  far
outreaching  in  time  and  space  all  range  of  human  observations,  is  a  circumstance
which  signalizes  the  power  of  man  to  transcend  the  limitations  of  changing  and
inconsistent  matter,  and  assert  his  superiority  over  all  insentient  and  perishable
forms  of  being.  There  is  a  method  in  the  succession  of  events,  and  in  the  relation
of  coexistent  things,  which  the  mind  of  man  seizes  hold  of;  and  by  means  of  this
as  a  clue,  he  runs  back  or  forward  over  aeons  of  material  history  of  which  human
experience  can  never  testify.  Events  germinate  and  unfold.  They  have  a  past
which  is  connected  with  their  present,  and  we  feel  a  well-justified  confidence  that
a  future  is  appointed  which  will  be  similarl}'  connected  with  the  present  and  the
past.  This  continuity'  and  unity  of  history  repeat  themselves  before  our  eyes  in  all
conceivable  stages  of  progi-ess.  The  phenomena  furnish  us  the  grounds  for  the
generalization  of  two  laws  which  are  truly  principles  of  scientific  divination,  by
which  alone  the  human  mind  penetrates  the  sealed  records  of  the  past  and  the  un-
opened pages  of  the  future.  The  first  of  these  is  the  law  of  evolution,  or,  to  phrase
it  for  our  purpose,  the  law  of  correlated  successiveness  or  organized  history  in  the
individual,  illustrated  in  the  changing  phases  of  every  single  maturing  system  of
results.  .  .  .  These  thoughts  summon  into  our  immediate  presence  the  measure-
less past  and  the  measureless  future  of  material  history.  They  seem  almost  to  open
vistas  through  infinity,  and  to  endow  the  human  intellect  with  an  existence  and  a
vision  exempt  from  the  limitations  of  time  and  space  and  finite  causation,  and  lift
it  up  towards  a  sublime  apprehension  of  the  Supreme  Intelligence  whose  dwelling
place  is  eternity. t

According  to  the  teachings,  Maya — the  illusive  appearance  of  the
marshalling  of  events  and  actions  on  this  Earth — changes,  varying  with
nations  and  places.  But  the  chief  features  of  one's  life  are  always  in
accordance  with  the  "Constellation"  under  which  one  is  born,  or,  we
should  say,  with  the  characteristics  of  its  animating  principle  or  the
Deity  that  presides  over  it,  whether  we  call  it  a  Dhyan  Chohan,  as  in
Asia,  or  an  Archangel,  as  with  the  Greek  and  Latin  Churches.  In
ancient  Symbolism  it  was  alwaj^s  the  Sun — though  the  Spiritual,  not
the  visible,  Sun  was  meant — that  was  supposed  to  send  forth  the  chief

•  "The  Cycles  of  Matter,"  a  name  given  by  Professor  Winchell  to  an  Essay  written  in  i860,
t  World-Life,  pp.  535,  548.


700  THK  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Saviours  and  Avataras.  Hence  the  connecting  link  between  the
Buddhas,  the  Avataras,  and  so  many  other  incarnations  of  the  highest
Seven.  The  closer  the  approach  to  one's  Prototype,  in  "Heaven,"  the
better  for  the  mortal  whose  Personality  was  chosen,  by  his  own  personal
Deity  (the  Seventh  Principle),  as  its  terrestrial  abode.  For,  with  every
effort  of  will  toward  purification  and  unity  with  that  "Self-God,"  one
of  the  lower  Rays  breaks,  and  the  spiritual  entity  of  man  is  drawn
higher  and  ever  higher  to  the  Ray  that  supersedes  the  first,  until,  from
Raj'  to  Ray,  the  Inner  Man  is  drawn  into  the  one  and  highest  Beam  of
the  Parent-Sun.  Thus,  "  the  events  of  humanity  do  run  coordinately
with  the  number  forms,"  since  the  single  units  of  that  humanity  pro-
ceed one  and  all  from  the  same  source — the  Central  Sun  and  its  shadow,
the  visible.  For  the  equinoxes  and  solstices,  the  periods  and  various
phases  of  the  solar  course,  astronomically  and  numerically  expressed,
are  only  the  concrete  symbols  of  the  eternally  living  verity,  though
they  do  seem  abstract  ideas  to  uninitiated  mortals.  And  this  explains
the  extraordinary  numerical  coincidences  with  geometrical  relations,
shown  by  several  authors.

Yes;  "our  destiny  is  written  in  the  stars"!  Only,  the  closer  the
union  between  the  mortal  reflection  Man  and  his  celestial  Prototype,
the  less  dangerous  the  external  conditions  and  subsequent  reincarna-
tions— which  neither  Buddhas  nor  Christs  can  escape.  This  is  not
superstition,  least  of  all  is  it  fatalism.  The  latter  implies  a  blind
course  of  some  still  blinder  power,  but  man  is  a  free  agent  during  his
stay  on  earth.  He  cannot  escape  his  ruling  Destiny,  but  he  has  the
choice  of  two  paths  that  lead  him  in  that  direction,  and  he  can  reach
the  goal  of  misery — if  such  is  decreed  to  him — either  in  the  snowy
white  robes  of  the  martyr,  or  in  the  soiled  garments  of  a  volunteer  in
the  iniquitous  course;  for  there  are  external  and  internal  co7iditio7is
which  affect  the  determination  of  our  will  upon  our  actions,  and  it  is
in  our  power  to  follow  either  of  the  two.  Those  who  believe  in  Karma
have  to  believe  in  Destiny,  which,  from  birth  to  death,  every  man
weaves  thread  by  thread  round  himself,  as  a  spider  his  web;  and  this
Destiny  is  guided  either  by  the  heavenly  voice  of  the  invisible  Proto-
type outside  of  us,  or  by  our  more  intimate  astral,  or  inner  man,  who  is
but  too  often  the  evil  genius  of  the  embodied  entity  called  man.  Both
these  lead  on  the  outward  man,  but  one  of  them  must  prevail;  and
from  the  verj'  beginning  of  the  invisible  affray  the  stern  and  implacable
I^aw  of  Compensation  steps  in  and  takes  its  course,  faithfully  following


THE  NETWORK  OF  DESTINY.  70I

the  fluctuations  of  the  fight.  When  the  last  strand  is  woven,  and  man
is  seemingly  enwrapped  in  the  network  of  his  own  doing,  then  he  finds
himself  completely  under  the  empire  of  this  self-made  Destiny.  It  then
either  fixes  him  like  the  inert  shell  against  the  immovable  rock,  or
carries  him  away  like  a  feather  in  a  whirlwind  raised  by  his  own
actions,  and  this  is — Karma.

A  Materialist,  treating  of  the  periodical  creations  of  our  globe,  has
expressed  it  in  a  single  sentence:

The  whole  ^«5^  of  the  earth  is  nothing  but  an  yxn^oM^^^  present.

The  writer  was  Biichner,  who  little  suspected  that  he  was  repeating
an  axiom  of  the  Occultists.  It  is  quite  true  also,  as  Burmeister  remarks,
that:

The  historical  investigation  of  the  development  of  the  earth  has  proved  that  now
and  then  rest  upon  the  same  base;  that  the  past  has  been  developed  in  the  same
manner  as  the  present  rolls  on;  and  that  the  forces  which  were  in  action  ever
remained  the  same.*

The  Forces — their  Noumena  rather — are  the  same,  of  course;  there-
fore, the  phenomenal  Forces  must  be  the  same  also.  But  how  can  any
one  feel  so  sure  that  the  attributes  of  Matter  have  not  altered  under
the  hand  of  Protean  Evolution  ?  How  can  any  Materialist  assert  with
such  confidence,  as  is  done  by  Rossniassler,  that :

This  eternal  conformity  in  the  essence  of  phenomena  renders  it  certain  that  fire
and  water  possessed  at  all  times  the  same  powers  and  ever  will  possess  them.

Who  are  they  "that  darken  counsel  with  words  without  knowledge,"
and  where  were  the  Huxleys  and  Biichners  when  the  foundations  of
the  Earth  were  laid  by  the  Great  Law?  This  same  homogeneity  of
Matter  and  immutability  of  natural  laws,  which  are  so  much  insisted
upon  by  Materialism,  are  a  fundamental  principle  of  the  Occult  Philo-
sophy; but  this  unity  rests  upon  the  inseparability  of  Spirit  from
Matter,  and,  if  the  two  were  once  divorced,  the  whole  Kosmos  would
fall  back  into  Chaos  and  Non-being.  Therefore,  it  is  absolutelyy2z/5<?,
and  but  an  additional  demonstration  of  the  great  conceit  of  our  age,  to
assert,  as  men  of  Science  do,  that  all  the  great  geological  changes  and
terrible  convulsions  of  the  past  have  been  produced  by  ordi7iary  and
known  physical  Forces.  For  these  Forces  were  but  the  tools  and  final
means  for  the  accomplishment  of  certain  purposes,  acting  periodically,
and  apparently  mechanically,  through  an  inward  impulse  mixed  up

•  Quoted  in  Biichner's  Force  and  Matter.


702  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.  .

with,  but  beyond  their  material  nature.  There  is  a  purpose  in  every
important  act  of  Nature,  whose  acts  are  all  cyclic  and  periodical.  But
spiritual  Forces  having  been  usually  confused  with  the  purely  physical,
the  former  are  denied  by,  and  therefore,  because  left  unexamined,  have
to  remain  unknown  to  Science.*    Says  Hegel:

The  history  of  the  World  begins  with  its  general  aim,  the  realization  of  the  Idea
of  Spirit- — only  in  an  implicit  form  {an  sich),  that  is,  as  Nature ;  a  hidden,  most  pro-
foundly hidden  unconscious  instinct,  and  the  whole  process  of  History  ...  is
directed  to  rendering  this  unconscious  impulse  a  conscious  one.  Thus  appearing
in  the  form  of  merely  natural  existence,  natural  will — that  which  has  been  called
the  subjective  side — physical  craving,  instinct,  passion,  private  interest,  as  also
opinion  and  subjective  conception — spontaneously  present  themselves  at  the  very
commencement.  This  vast  congeries  of  volitions,  interests  and  activities  constitute
the  instruments  and  means  of  the  World-Spirit  for  attaining  its  object;  bringing  it
to  consciousness  and  realizing  it.  And  this  aim  is  none  other  than  finding  itself —
coming  to  itself— and  contemplating  itself  in  concrete  actuality.  But  that  those
manifestations  of  v-itality  on  the  part  of  individuals  and  peoples,  in  which  they  seek
and  satisfy  their  own  purposes,  are  at  the  same  time  the  means  and  instruments  of
a  higher  and  broader  purpose  of  which  they  know  nothing — which  they  realize  un-
consciously—might  be  made  a  matter  of  question;  rather  has  been  questioned  .  .  .
on  this  point  I  announced  my  view  at  the  very  outset,  and  asserted  our  hypothesis
and  our  belief  that  Reason  governs  the  World  and  has  consequently
governed  its  history.  In  relation  to  this  independently  universal  and  substantial
existence — all  else  is  subordinate,  subservient  to  it,  and  the  means  for  its  de-
velopment, t

No  Metaphysician  or  Theosophist  could  demur  to  these  truths,
which  are  all  embodied  in  Esoteric  Teachings.  There  is  a  predestina-
tion in  the  geological  life  of  our  globe,  as  in  the  history,  past  and
future,  of  races  and  nations.  This  is  closely  connected  with  what  we
call  Karma,  and  what  Western  Pantheists  called  Nemesis  and  Cycles.
The  law  of  evolution  is  now  carrying  us  along  the  ascending  arc  of  our
cycle,  when  the  effects  will  be  once  more  re-merged  into,  and  re-become
the  now  neutralized  causes,  and  all  things  affected  by  the  former  will
have  regained  their  original  harmony.  This  will  be  the  cycle  of  our
special  Round,  a  moment  in  the  duration  of  the  Great  Cycle,  or
Mahayuga.

The  fine  philosophical  remarks  of  Hegel  are  found  to  have  their

*  Men  of  Science  will  saj- :  We  deny,  because  nothing  of  the  kind  has  ever  come  within  the  scope
of  our  experience.  But,  as  argued  bj-  Charles  Kichet,  the  Physiologist:  "So  be  it,  but  have  you  at
least  demonstrated  the  contrary  ?  .  .  .  Do  not,  at  any  rate,  deny  a  priori.  Actual  Science  is  not
sufficiently  advanced  to  give  you  such  right." — La  Suggestion  Mentale  ei  le  Calail  des  Probabilites.

t  Lectures  on  the  Philosophy  of  History,  p.  26.     Sibrec's  Eng.  Transl.


CYCLIC   WHEELS  WITHIN  WHEELS.  703

application  in  the  teachings  of  Occult  Science,  which  shows  Nature
ever  acting  with  a  given  purpose,  whose  results  are  always  dual.  This
was  stated  in  our  first  Occult  volumes,  in  the  following  words:

As  our  Planet  revolves  once  every  year  around  the  Sun,  and  at  the  same  time
turns  once  in  every  twenty-four  hours  upon  its  own  axis,  thus  traversing  minor
circles  within  a  larger  one,  so  is  the  work  of  the  smaller  cyclic  periods  accomplished
and  recommenced  within  the  Great  Saros.  The  revolution  of  the  physical  world,
according  to  the  ancient  doctrine,  is  attended  by  a  like  revolution  in  the  world  of
intellect— the  spiritual  evolution  of  the  world  proceeding  in  cycles,  like  the  physical
one.  Thus  we  see  in  history  a  regular  alternation  of  ebb  and  flow  in  the  tide  of
human  progress.  The  great  kingdoms  and  empires  of  the  world,  after  reaching
the  culmination  of  their  greatness,  descend  again,  in  accordance  with  the  same  law
by  which  they  ascended;  till,  having  reached  the  lowest  point,  humanity  reasserts
itself  and  mounts  up  once  more,  the  height  of  its  attainment  being,  by  this  law  of
ascending  progression  by  cycles,  somewhat  higher  than  the  point  from  which  it
had  before  descended.*

But  these  cycles— wheels  within  wheels,  so  comprehensively  and
ingeniously  symbolized  by  the  various  Manus  and  Rishis  in  India,
and  by  the  Kabiri  in  the  West  f — do  not  affect  all  mankind  at  one  and  the
same  time.  Hence,  as  we  see,  the  difficulty  of  comprehending,  and  of
discriminating  between  them,  with  regard  to  their  physical  and  spiritual
effects,  without  having  thoroughly  mastered  their  relations  with,  and
action  upon,  the  respective  positions  of  nations  and  races,  in  their
destiny  and  evolution.  This  system  cannot  be  comprehended  if  the
spiritual  action  of  these  ^^xiodA—pfeordained,  so  to  say,  by  Karmic  law
—is  separated  from  their  physical  course.  The  calculations  of  the  best
Astrologers  would  fail,  or  at  any  rate  remain  imperfect,  unless  this  dual
action  is  thoroughly  taken  into  consideration  and  mastered  upon  these
iines.     And  this  master^'  can  be  achieved  only  through  Initiation.

The  Grand  Cycle  includes  the  progress  of  mankind  from  the  appear-
ance of  primordial  man  of  ethereal  form.  It  runs  through  the  inner
Cycles  of  man's  progressive  evolution  from  the  ethereal  down  to  the
semi-ethereal  and  purely  physical;    down  to  the   redemption  of  man

•  Isis  Unveiled,  Vol.  I,  p.  34.

T  This  symbolism  does  not  prevent  these  now  seemingly  mythic  personages  from  having  ruled  the
Earth  once  upon  a  time  under  the  human  form  of  actual  living,  though  truly  divine  and  god-like
Men.  The  opinion  of  Colonel  Vallancey— and  also  of  Count  dt  Gebelin—that  the  "  names  of  the
Kabiri  appear  to  be  all  allegorical,  and  to  have  signified  no  more  [?]  than  an  almanac  of  the  vicissi-
tudes of  the  seasons— calculated  for  the  operations  of  agriculture  "  (Coittci.  de  Reb.  Hibcrn.,  No.  13,
Praf.  Sect.  5),  is  as  absurd  as  his  assertion  that  /Eon,  Cronus,  Saturn  and  Dagon  are  all  one,  namely,
the  "Patriarch  Adam."  The  Kabiri  were  the  instructors  of  mankind  in  agriculture,  because  they
were  the  Regents  over  the  seasons  and  Cosmic  Cycles.  Hence  it  was  they  who  regulated,  as  Plane-
tary Spirits  or  Angels  (Messengers),  the  mysteriei  of  the  art  of  agriculture.


704  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

from  his  "coat  of  skin"  and  matter,  after  which  it  continues  running
its  course  downward  and  then  upward  again,  to  meet  at  the  culmina-
tion of  a  Round,  when  the  Manvantaric  Serpent  "swallows  its  tail"
and  seven  Minor  Cycles  are  passed.     These  are  the  great  Racial  Cycles
which  affect  equally  all  the  nations  and  tribes  included  in  that  special
Race;  but  there  are  minor  and  national,  as  well  as  tribal,  Cycles  within
these,  which  run  their  course  independently  of  each  other.     They  are
called  in  Eastern  Ksotericism  the  Karmic  Cycles.     In  the  West — since
Pagan  Wisdom  has  been  repudiated  as  having  grown  from  and  been
developed  by  the  Dark  Powers,  supposed  to  be  at  constant  war  with
and  in  opposition  to  the  little  tribal  Jehovah — the  full  and  awful  signifi-
cance of  the  Greek  Nemesis,  or  Karm.a,  has  been  entirely  forgotten.
Otherwise  Christians  would  have  better  realized   the   profound  truth
that  Nemesis  is  without  attributes ;  that  while  the  dreaded  Goddess  is
absolute  and  immutable  as  a  Principle,  it  is  we  ourselves — nations  and
individuals — who  propel  it  to  action  and  give  the  impulse  to  its  direc-
tion.    Karma-Nemesis  is  the  creator  of  nations  and  mortals,  but  once
created,  it  is  they  who  make  of  her  either  a  Fury  or  a  rewarding  Angel.
Yea-
Wise  are  they  who  worship  Nemesis  *

— as  the  Chorus  tells  Prometheus.  And  as  unwise  the}',  who  believe
that  the  Goddess  may  be  propitiated  by  any  sacrifices  and  prayers,  or
have  her  wheel  diverted  from  the  path  it  has  once  taken.  "The
triform  Fates  and  ever  mindful  Furies"  are  her  attributes  only  on
Earth,  and  begotten  by  ourselves.  There  is  no  return  from  the  paths
she  cycles  over;  yet  those  paths  are  of  our  own  making,  for  it  is  we,
collectively  or  individually,  who  prepare  them.  Karma-Nemesis  is  the
.synonym  of  Providence,  minus  design,  goodness,  and  every  other  finite
attribute  and  qualification,  so  unphilosophically  attributed  to  the  latter.
An  Occultist  or  a  Philosopher  will  not  speak  of  the  goodness  or  cruelty
of  Providence;  but,  identifying  it  with  Karma-Nemesis,  he  will  never-
theless teach  that  it  guards  the  good  and  watches  over  them  in  this,  as
in  future  lives;  and  that  it  punishes  the  evil-doer — aye,  even  to  his
seventh  rebirth — so  long,  indeed,  as  the  effect  of  his  having  thrown
into  perturbation  even  the  smallest  atom  in  the  Infinite  World  of
Harmony  has  not  been  finally  readjusted.  For  the  only  decree  of
Karma — an  eternal  and  immutable  decree — is  absolute  Harmony  in  the

*  "Who  dread  Karma-Nemesis,"  would  be  better.


KARMA-NEMESIS.  /05

world  of  Matter  as  it  is  in  the  world  of  Spirit.  It  is  not,  therefore,
Karma  that  rewards  or  punishes,  but  it  is  we  who  reward  or  punish
ourselves,  according  as  we  work  with,  through  and  along  with  Nature,
abiding  by  the  laws  on  which  that  harmony  depends,  or — breaking
them.

Nor  would  the  ways  of  Karma  be  inscrutable  were  men  to  work  in
union  and  harmony,  instead  of  disunion  and  strife.  For  our  ignorance
of  these  ways — which  one  portion  of  mankind  calls  the  ways  of  Provi-
dence, dark  and  intricate,  while  another  sees  in  them  the  action  of
blind  Fatalism,  and  a  third,  simple  Chance,  with  neither  Gods  nor
Devils  to  guide  them — would  surely  disappear,  if  we  would  but  attri-
bute all  of  them  to  their  correct  cau.se.  With  right  knowledge,  or
at  any  rate  with  a  confident  conviction  that  our  neighbours  would  no
more  work  to  hurt  us  than  we  would  think  of  harming  them,  two-thirds
of  the  world's  evil  would  vanish  into  thin  air.  Were  no  man  to  hurt
his  brother,  Karma-Nemesis  would  have  neither  cause  to  work  for,  nor
weapons  to  act  through.  It  is  the  constant  presence  in  our  midst  of
every-  element  of  strife  and  opposition,  and  the  division  of  races,
nations,  tribes,  societies  and  individuals  into  Cains  and  Abels,  wolves
and  lambs,  that  is  the  chief  cause  of  the  "ways  of  Providence."  We
cut  these  numerous  windings  in  our  destinies  daily  with  our  own
hands,  while  we  imagine  that  we  are  pursuing  a  track  on  the  royal  high
road  of  respectability  and  diity,  and  then  we  complain  because  these
Avindings  are  so  intricate  and  .so  dark.  We  stand  bewildered  before  the
mystery  of  our  own  making,  and  the  riddles  of  life  that  we  will  not
solve,  and  then  accuse  the  great  Sphjnx  of  devouring  us.  But  verily
there  is  not  an  accident  in  our  lives,  not  a  misshapen  day,  or  a  mis-
fortune, that  could  not  be  traced  back  to  our  own  doings  in  this  or  in
another  life.  If  one  breaks  the  laws  of  Harmony,  or,  as  a  theosophical
writer  expresses  it,  the  "  laws  of  life,"  one  must  be  prepared  to  fall  into
the  chaos  oneself  has  produced.     For,  according  to  the  same  writer:

The  only  conclusion  one  can  come  to  is  that  these  laws  of  life  are  their  own
avengers;  and  consequently  that  every  avenging  angel  is  only  a  tA'pified  represen-
tation of  their  reaction.

Therefore,  if  any  one  is  helpless  before  these  immutable  laws,  it  is

not  ourselves,  the  artificers  of  our  destinies,  but  rather  those  Angels.

the   guardians   of  Harmony.      Karma-Nemesis   is   no  more  than  the

spiritual   dynamical  effect  of   causes  produced,   and  forces  awakened

into  activity,  by  our  own  actions.     It  is  a  law  of  Occult  dynamics  that

46


706  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

"a  given  amount  of  energy  expended  on  the  spiritual  or  astral  plane
is  productive  of  far  greater  results  than  the  same  amount  expended  on
the  physical  objective  plane  of  existence."

This  condition  of  things  will  last  till  man's  spiritual  intuitions  are
fully  opened,  and  this  will  not  be  until  we  fairly  cast  off  our  thick
coats  of  Matter;  until  we  begin  acting  from  within,  instead  of  ever
following  impulses  from  without,  impulses  produced  b}^  our  physical
senses  and  gross  selfish  body.  Until  then  the  only  palliatives  for  the
evils  of  life  are  union  and  harmony — a  Brotherhood  in  actu,  and
Altruism  not  simply  in  name.  The  suppression  of  one  single  bad
cause  will  suppress  not  one,  but  many  bad  effects.  And  if  a  Brother-
hood, or  even  a  number  of  Brotherhoods,  may  not  be  able  to  prevent
nations  from  occasionally  cutting  each  other's  throats,  still  unity  in
thought  and  action,  and  philosophical  research  into  the  mysteries  of
being,  will  always  prevent  some  persons,  who  are  trying  to  compre-
hend that  which  has  hitherto  remained  to  them  a  riddle,  from  creating
additional  causes  of  mischief  in  a  world  already  so  full  of  woe  and
evil.     Knowledge  of  Karma  gives  the  conviction  that  if

.     .     ,     .     virtue  in  distress,  and  vice  in  triumph
Make  atheists  of  mankind,*

it  is  only  because  mankind  has  ever  shut  its  e5'es  to  the  great  truth
that  man  is  himself  his  own  saviour  and  his  own  destroyer.  He  need
not  accuse  Heaven  and  the  Gods,  Fates  and  Providence,  of  the  appa-
rent injustice  that  reigns  in  the  midst  of  humanit5^  But  let  him  rather
remember  and  repeat  this  fragment  of  Grecian  wisdom,  which  warns
man  to  forbear  accusing  That  which

Just,  though  mysterious,  leads  us  on  unerring
Through  ways  unmark'd  from  guilt  to  punishment;

and  such  are  now  the  ways  on  which  the  great  European  nations  move
onward.  Every  nation  and  tribe  of  the  Western  Aryans,  like  their
Eastern  brethren  of  the  Fifth  Race,  has  had  its  Golden  and  its  Iron
Age,  its  period  of  comparative  irresponsibilit5%  or  its  Satya  Age  of
purity,  and  now,  several  of  them  have  reached  their  Iron  Age,  the
Kali  Yuga,  an  age  black  with  horrors.

On  the  other  hand,  it  is  true  that  the  exoteric  Cycles  of  every  nation
have  been  rightly  derived  from,  and  shown  to  depend  on,  sidereal
motions.      The  latter   are   inseparably  blended  with  the  destinies  of

*  Dryden.


ANCIKNT   AND   MODERN    PROPHECIES.  707

nations  and  men.  But,  in  the  purely  physical  sense,  Europe  knows  of
no  Cycles  other  than  the  astronomical,  and  it  makes  its  computations
accordingly.  Nor  will  it  hear  of  any  other  than  imaginary  circles  or
circuits  in  the  starry  heavens  that  gird  them,

With  centric  and  eccentric  scribbled  o'er
Cycle  and  epicycle,  orb  in  orb.

But  with  the  Pagans — of  whom  Coleridge  rightly  says,  "Time,  cycli-
cal time,  was  their  abstraction  of  the  Deity,"  that  "Deity"  manifesting
coordinately  with,  and  only  through,  Karma,  and  being  that  Karma-
Nemesis  itself — the  Cycles  meant  something  more  than  a  mere  succes-
sion of  events,  or  a  periodical  space  of  time  of  more  or  less  prolonged
duration.  For  they  were  generally  marked  with  recurrences  of  a  more
varied  and  intellectual  character  than  are  exhibited  in  the  periodical
return  of  seasons  or  of  certain  constellations.  Modern  wisdom  is
satisfied  with  astronomical  computations  and  prophecies,  based  on
unerring  mathematical  laws.  Ancient  Wisdom  added  to  the  cold
shell  of  Astronomy  the  vivifying  elements  of  its  soul  and  spirit —
Astrolog>'.  And,  as  the  sidereal  motions  do  regulate  and  determine
other  events  on  Earth  besides  potatoes  and  the  periodical  diseases  of
that  useful  vegetable — a  statement  which,  not  being  amenable  to
scientific  explanation,  is  merely  derided,  while  none  the  less  accepted
— these  events  have  to  submit  to  predetermination,  by  simple  astro-
nomical computations.  Believers  in  Astrology  will  understand  our
meaning,  sceptics  will  laugh  at  the  belief  and  mock  the  idea.  Thus
they  shut  their  eyes,  ostrich-like,  to  their  own  fate.*

This  because  their  little  historical  period,  so  called,  allows  them  no
margin  for  comparison.  Sidereal  heaven  is  before  them ;  and  though
their  spiritual  vision  is  still  unopened,  and  the  atmospheric  dust  of
terrestrial  origin  seals  their  sight  and  chains  it  within  the  limits  of


•  Not  all,  however,  for  there  are  men  of  Science  awakening  to  truth.  This  is  what  we  read :  "What-
ever way  we  turn  our  eyes  we  encounter  a  mystery  ...  all  in  Nature  for  us  is  the  unknown.  .  .
Yet  they  are  numerous,  those  superficial  minds  for  whom  nothing  can  be  produced  by  natural  forces
outside  of  facts  observed  long  ago,  consecrated  in  books  and  grouped  more  or  less  skilfully  with  the
help  of  theories  whose  ephemeral  duration  ought,  by  this  time,  to  have  demonstrated  their  in-
sufficiency, ....  I  do  not  pretend  to  contest  the  possibility  of  invisible  beings,  of  a  nature
different  from  ours  and  capable  of  moving  matter  to  action.  Trofound  philosophers  have  admitted
this  in  all  epochs,  as  a  consequence  of  the  great  law  of  continuity  which  rules  the  universe.  That
intellectual  life,  which  we  see  starting  in  some  way  from  non-being  (nianl)  and  gradually  reaching
man,  can  it  stop  abriiptly  at  man  to  reappear  only  in  the  infinite,  in  the  sovereign  regulator  of  the
world?  This  is  little  probable."  Therefore,  "I  no  more  deny  the  existence  of  spirits  than  I  deny
soul,  while  I  yet  try  to  explain  certain  facts  without  this  hypothesis."  The  Non-Defined  Forces,
Hisloiical  and  Experimental  Researches,  p.  3.  (Paris,  1877.)  The  author  is  A.  de  Kochas,  a  well-
known  man  of  .Science  in  France,  and  his  work  is  one  of  the  signs  of  the  time.


708  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

physical  systems,  still  they  do  not  fail  to  perceive  the  movements  and
note  the  behaviour  of  meteors  and  comets.  They  record  the  periodical
advents  of  those  wanderers  and  "flaming  messengers,"  and  prophesy,
in  consequence,  earthquakes,  meteoric  showers,  the  apparition  of  cer-
tain stars,  comets,  etc.  Are  they,  then,  soothsayers  after  all?  No;
they  are  learned  Astronomers.

Why,  then,  should  Occultists  and  Astrologers,  as  learned  as  these
Astronomers,  be  disbelieved  when  they  prophesy  the  return  of  some
cyclic  event  on  the  same  mathematical  principles?  "Why  should  the
claim  that  they  hiow  this  return  be  ridiculed?  Their  forefathers  and
predecessors,  having  recorded  the  recurrence  of  such  events  in  their
time  and  day,  throughout  a  period  embracing  hundreds  of  thousands
of  years,  the  conjunction  of  the  same  constellations  must  necessarih'
produce,  if  not  quite  the  same,  at  any  rate  similar,  effects.  Are  the
prophecies  to  be  derided,  because  of  the  claim  made  for  hundreds  of
thousands  of  years  of  observation,  and  for  millions  of  years  for  the
human  Races?  In  its  turn,  Modern  Science  is  laughed  at  by  those
who  hold  to  Biblical  chronology,  for  its  far  more  modest  geological  and
anthropological  figures.  Thus  Karma  adjusts  even  human  laughter,
at  the  mutual  expense  of  sects,  learned  societies,  and  individuals.
Yet  in  the  prognostication  of  such  future  events,  at  any  rate,  all  fore-
told on  the  authority  of  cyclic  recurrences,  no  psychic  phenomenon  is
involved.  It  is  neither  prevision,  nor  prophecy ;  any  more  than  is  the
signalling  of  a  comet  or  star,  several  years  before  its  appearance.  It
is  simply  knowledge,  and  mathematically  correct  computations,  which
enable  the  Wise  Men  of  the  East  to  foretell,  for  instance,  that  England
is  on  the  eve  of  such  or  another  catastrophe;  that  France  is  nearing
such  a  point  of  her  Cycle;  and  that  Europe  in  general  is  threatened
with,  or  rather  is  on  the  eve  of,  a  cataclysm,  to  which  her  own  Cycle
of  racial  Karma  has  led  her.  Our  view  of  the  reliability  of  the  infor-
mation depends,  of  course,  on  our  acceptation  or  rejection  of  the  claim
for  a  tremendous  period  of  historical  observation.  Eastern  Initiates
maintain  that  they  have  preserved  records  of  racial  development  and
of  events  of  universal  import  ever  since  the  beginning  of  the  Fourth
Race — their  knowledge  of  events  preceding  that  epoch  being  tradi-
tional. Moreover,  those  who  believe  in  Seership  and  in  Occult  Powers
will  have  no  difficulty  in  crediting  the  general  character,  at  least,  of
the  information  given,  even  if  it  be  traditional,  once  the  tradition  is
checked  and  corrected  by  clairvoyance  and  Esoteric  Knowledge.     But


ASTROLOGY   A   SCIENCE.  709

in  the  present  case  no  such  metaphysical  belief  is  claimed  as  our
chief  dependence,  for  proof  is  given — on  what,  to  every  Occultist,  is
quite  scientific  evidence — the  records  preserved  through  the  Zodiac
for  incalculable  ages.

It  is  now  amply  proved  that  even  horoscopes  and  judiciary  Astrology
are  not  quite  based  on  fiction,  and  that  Stars  and  Constellations,  con-
sequently, have  an  occult  and  mysterious  influence  on,  and  connec-
tion with,  individuals.  And  if  with  the  latter,  why  not  with  nations,
races,  and  mankind  as  a  whole  ?  This,  again,  is  a  claim  made  on  the
authority  of  the  Zodiacal  records.  We  shall  then  enquire  how  far  the
Zodiac  was  known  to  the  Ancients,  and  how  far  it  is  forgotten  by  the
Moderns.


SECTION  XYL

The  Zodiac  and  its  Antiquity.


"  Ai,i.  men  are  apt  to  have  a  high  conceit  of  their  own  understanding,
and  to  be  tenacious  of  the  opinions  they  profess,"  said  Jordan,  justly
adding  to  this — "and  yet  almost  all  men  are  guided  by  the  understand-
ings of  others,  not  by  their  own;  and  may  be  said  more  truly  to  adopt,
than  to  beget,  their  opinions."

This  is  doubly  true  in  regard  to  scientific  opinions  upon  hypotheses
offered  for  consideration — the  prejudice  and  preconceptions  of  "au-
thorities," so  called,  often  deciding  upon  questions  of  the  most  vital
importance  for  history.  There  are  several  such  predetermined  opinions
held  by  our  learned  Orientalists,  and  few  are  more  unjust  or  illogical
than  the  general  error  with  regard  to  the  antiquity  of  the  Zodiac.
Thanks  to  the  hobby  of  some  German  Orientalists,  English  and
American  Sanskritists  have  accepted  Professor  Weber's  opinion  that
the  peoples  of  India  had  no  idea  or  knowledge  of  the  Zodiac  prior  to
the  Macedonian  invasion,  and  that  it  is  from  the  Greeks  that  the
ancient  Hindus  imported  it  into  their  country.  We  are  further  told,  by
several  other  "authorities,"  that  no  Eastern  nation  knew  of  the  Zodiac
before  the  Hellenes  kindly  acquainted  their  neighbours  with  their
invention.  And  this,  in  the  face  of  the  Book  of  Job,  which  is  declared,
even  by  themselves,  to  be  the  oldest  in  the  Hebrew  canon,  and  certainly
prior  to  Moses;  a  book  which  speaks  of  the  making  of  "Arcturus,
Orion,  and  Pleiades  [Osh,  Kesil,  and  Kimah]  and  the  chambers  of
the  South"*;  of  Scorpio  and  the  Mazaruth — the  twelve  signs  j;  words
which,  if  they  mean  anything,  imply  knowledge  of  the  Zodiac  even
among  the  nomadic  Arabian  tribes.  The  Book  of  Job  is  alleged  to  have
preceded  Homer  and  Hesiod  by  at  least  one  thousand  years — the  two
Greek  poets  having  themselves  flourished  some  eight  centuries  before
the  Christian  era  (! !).     Though,  by  the  bye,  one  who  prefers  to  believe

*  ix.  9.  t  xiiviii.  31,  32.


THE   ZODIAC   IN  THE   BIBLE.  '/II

Plato — who  shows  Homer  flourishing  far  earlier — could  point  to  a  num-
ber of  Zodiacal  signs  mentioned  in  the  Iliad  and  Odyssey,  in  the  Orphic
poems,  and  elsewhere.  But  since  the  cock-and-bull  hypothesis  of  some
modern  critics  that,  so  far  from  Orpheus,  not  even  Homer  or  Hesiod
has  ever  existed,  it  would  seem  time  lost  to  mention  these  archaic
authors  at  all.  The  Arabian  Job  will  suffice;  unless,  indeed,  his  volume
of  lamentations,  along  with  the  poems  of  the  two  Greeks,  to  which  we
may  add  those  of  Linus,  should  now  also  be  declared  to  be  the  patriotic
forgery  of  the  Jew  Aristobulus.  But  if  the  Zodiac  was  known  in  the
days  of  Job,  how  could  the  civilized  and  philosophical  Hindus  have
remained  ignorant  of  it?

Risking  the  arrows  of  modern  criticism — rather  blunted  by  misuse —
the  reader  may  make  himself  acquainted  with  Bailly's  learned  opinion
upon  the  subject.  Inferred  speculations  may  be  shown  to  be  erroneous.
Mathematical  calculations  stand  on  more  secure  grounds.  Taking  as
a  starting  point  several  astronomical  references  in  Job,  Bailly  devised
a  very  ingenious  means  of  proving  that  the  earliest  founders  of  the
Science  of  the  Zodiac  belonged  to  an  antediluvian,  primitive  people.
The  fact  that  he  seems  willing  to  see  some  of  the  Biblical  patriarchs
in  Thoth,  Seth,  and  in  the  Chinese  Fohi,  does  not  interfere  with  the
validity  of  his  proof  as  to  the  antiquity  of  the  Zodiac*  Even  accepting,
for  argument's  sake,  his  cautious  3700  years  B.C.  as  the  correct  age  of
the  Zodiacal  Science,  this  date  proves  in  the  most  irrefutable  way  that
it  was  not  the  Greeks  who  invented  the  Zodiac,  for  the  simple  reason
that  they  did  not  exist  as  a  nation  thirty-seven  centuries  B.C. — at  an)'
rate  not  as  a  historical  race  admitted  by  the  critics.  Bailly  then
calculated  the  period  at  which  the  constellations  manifested  the  atmo-
spheric influence  called  by  Job  the  "sweet  influences  of  the  Pleiades,"!
in  Hebrew  Kimah ;  that  of  Orion,  Kesil ;  and  that  of  the  desert  rains
with  reference  to  Scorpio,  the  eighth  constellation;  and  found  that  in
presence  of  the  eternal  conformity  of  these  divisions  of  the  Zodiac,  and
of  the  names  of  the  Planets  applied  in  the  same  order  everywhere  and
always,  and  in  presence  of  the  impossibility  of  attributing  it  all  to
chance  and  "coincidence" — "which  never  creates  such  similarities" — a
very  great  antiquity  indeed  must  be  allowed  for  the  Zodiac.  J

•  A  sir  onomie  Antique.

■*  The  Pleiades,  as  all  know,  are  the  seven  stars  beyond  the  Bull,  which  appear  at  the  beginning-  of
spring.  They  have  a  very  Occult  meaning:  in  the  liindu  Esoteric  Philosophy,  and  are  connected  u-ith
Sound  and  other  mystic  principles  in  Nature.

i  See  Astronomie  Aniigue,  pp.  63  to  74.


712


THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.


Again,  if  the  Bible  is  supposed  to  be  an  authority  on  any  matter —
and  there  are  some  who  still  regard  it  as  such,  whether  from  Christian
or  Kabalistical  considerations — then  the  Zodiac  is  clearly  mentioned  in
//  Ki7igs,  xxiii.  5.  Before  the  "book  of  the  law"  was  "found"  by
Hilkiah,  the  high  priest,  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac  were  known  and  wor-
shipped. These  were  held  in  the  same  adoration  as  the  Sun  and  Moon,
since  the

priests,  whom  the  kings  of  Judah  had  ordained  to  burn  incense  .  .  .  unto  Baal,
to  the  sun,  and  to  the  moon,  and  to  the  planets,  and  to  all  the  host  of  heaven,

or  to  the  "twelve  signs  or  constellations,"  as  the  marginal  note  in  the
English  Bible  explains,  had  followed  the  injunction  for  centuries.
They  were  stopped  in  their  idolatry  only  by  King  Josiah,  624  B.C.

The  Old  Testa^nent  is  full  of  allusions  to  the  twelve  zodiacal  signs,
and  the  whole  scheme  is  built  upon  it — heroes,  personages,  and  events.
Thus  in  the  dream  of  Joseph,  who  saw  eleven  "Stars"  bowing  to  the
twelfth,  which  was  his  "Star,"  the  Zodiac  is  referred  to.  The  Roman
Catholics  have  discovered  in  it,  moreover,  a  prophecy  of  Christ,  who  is
that  twelfth  Star,  they  say,  and  the  others  the  eleven  apostles;  the
absence  of  the  twelfth  being  also  regarded  as  a  prophetic  allusion  to
the  treachery  of  Judas.  The  twelve  sons  of  Jacob,  again,  are  a  refer-
ence to  the  same,  as  is  justly  pointed  out  by  Villapandus.*  Sir  James
Malcolm,  in  his  History  of  Persia, ■\  shows  the  Dabistan  echoing  all  such
traditions  about  the  Zodiac.  He  traces  the  invention  of  it  to  the  palmy
days  of  the  Golden  Age  of  Iran,  remarking  that  one  of  the  said  tra-
ditions maintains  that  the  Genii  of  the  Planets  are  represented  under
the  same  shapes  and  figures  they  had  assumed  when  they  showed  them-
selves to  several  holy  prophets,  and  thus  led  to  the  establishment  of  the
rites  based  on  the  Zodiac.

Pythagoras,  and  after  him  Philo  Judseus,  held  the  number  12  as  very

sacred.

This  duodenary  number  is  perfect.  It  is  that  01''  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  which
the  sun  visits  in  twelve  months,  and  it  is  to  honour  that  number  that  Moses
divided  his  nation  into  twelve  tribes,  established  the  twelve  cakes  of  the  shew-
bread,  and  placed  twelve  precious  stones  upon  the  breast-plate  of  the  pontiffs.  J

According  to  Seneca,  Berosus  taught  prophecy  of  every  future  event
and  cataclysm  by  the  Zodiac ;  and  the  times  fixed  by  him  for  the  con-


•  Temple  de  Jerusalem,  Vol.  II,  Part  II,  Chap.  xxx.

+  Ch.  vii.

X  Quoted  by  De  Mirville,  Des  Esprits,  iv.  p.  58.


ANTIQUITY   OF   ZODIAC.  713

Sagration  of  the  World— Pralaya— and  for  a  deluge,  are  found  to
answer  to  the  times  given  in  an  ancient  Egyptian  papyrus.  Such  a
catastrophe  comes  at  every  renewal  of  the  cycle  of  the  Sidereal  Year  of
25,868  years.  The  names  of  the  Akkadian  months  were  called  by,  and
derived  from,  the  names  of  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  and  the  Akkadians
are  far  earlier  than  the  Chaldseans.  Mr.  Proctor  shows,  in  his  Myths
and  Marvels  of  Astronomy,  that  the  ancient  Astronomers  had  acquired
a  system  of  the  most  accurate  Astronomy  2,400  years  B.C. ;  the  Hindus
date  their  Kali  Yuga  from  a  great  periodical  conjunction  of  the  Planets
thirty-one  centuries  B.C. ;  but,  withal,  it  was  the  Greeks,  belonging  to
the  expedition  of  Alexander  the  Great,  who  were  the  instructors  of
the  Aryan  Hindus  in  Astronomy!

Whether  the  origin  of  the  Zodiac  is  Aryan  or  Eg3'ptian,  it  is  still  of
an  immense  antiquity.  Simplicius,  in  the  sixth  century  a.d.,  writes
that  he  had  always  heard  that  the  Egyptians  had  kept  astronomical
observations  and  records  for  a  period  of  630,000  years.  This  statement
appears  to  frighten  Mr.  Gerald  Massey,  who  remarks  on  it  that:

If  we  read  this  number  of  years  by  the  month  which  Euxodus  said  the  Eg>'ptians
termed  a  year,  i.e.,  a  course  of  time,  that  would  still  yield  the  length  of  two  cycles
of  precession  [51,736  years].*

Diogenes  I^aertius  carried  back  the  astronomical  calculations  of  the
Egyptians  to  48,863  years  before  Alexander  the  Great.f  Martianus
Capella  corroborates  this  by  telling  posterity  that  the  Eg>'ptians  had
secretly  studied  Astronomy  for  over  40,000  years,  before  they  imparted
their  knowledge  to  the  world.:]:

Several  valuable  quotations  are  made  in  Natural  Genesis  with  the
view  of  supporting  the  author's  theories,  but  they  justify  the  teaching
of  the  Secret  Doctrine  far  more.  For  instance,  Plutarch  is  quoted
from  his  Life  of  Sulla,  saying:

One  day  when  the  sky  was  serene  and  clear,  there  was  heard  in  it  the  sound  of  a
trumpet,  so  loud,  shrill,  and  mournful,  that  it  affrighted  and  astonished  the  world.
The  Tuscan  sages  said  that  it  portended  a  new  race  of  men,  and  a  renovation  of
the  world;  for  they  affirmed  that  there  were  eight  several  kinds  of  men,  all  being
different  in  life  and  manners;  and  that  Heaven  had  allotted  each  its  time,  which
was  limited  by  the  circuit  of  the  great  year  [25,868  years]. §

This  reminds  one  strongly  of  our  Seven  Races  of  men,  and  of  the

•  Natural  Genesis,  ii.  p.  318.

+  Piocem,  2.

X  Astronomy  of  the  Ancients,  Lewis,  p.  2O4.

t  Natural  Genesis,  ii.  p.  319.


714  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

eighth — the  "animal  man" — descended  from  the  later  Third  Race;  as
also  of  the  successive  submersions  and  destruction  of  the  continents
which  finally  disposed  of  almost  all  that  Race.     Says  lamblichus:

The  Assyrians  have  not  only  preserved  the  memorials  of  seven-and-twenty
myriads  of  years  [270,000  years],  as  Hipparchus  says  they  have,  but  likewise  of  the
whole  apocatastases  and  periods  of  the  Seven  Rulers  of  the  World.*

This  is  as  nearly  as  possible  the  calculation  of  the  Esoteric  Doctrine.
For  1,000,000  years  are  allowed  for  our  present  Root-Race  (the  Fifth),
and  about  850,000  j^ears  have  passed  since  the  submersion  of  the  last
large  island — part  of  the  continent  of  Atlantis — the  Ruta  of  the  Fourth
Race,  the  Atlanteans;  while  Daitya,  a  small  island  inhabited  bj^  a
mixed  race,  was  destroyed  about  270,000  years  ago,  during  the  Glacial
Period  or  thereabouts.  But  the  Seven  Rulers,  or  the  seven  great
Dynasties  of  the  Divine  Kings,  belong  to  the  traditions  of  every  great
people  of  antiquity.  Wherever  twelve  are  mentioned,  they  are  invari-
ably the  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac.

So  patent  is  this  fact,  that  the  Roman  Cathdlic  writers — especially
among  the  French  Ultramontanes — have  tacitly  agreed  to  connect  the
twelve  Jewish  Patriarchs  with  the  Signs  of  the  Zodiac.  This  is  done
in  a  kind  of  prophetico-mystic  way,  which  sounds  to  pious  and  ignorant
ears  like  a  portentous  token,  a  tacit  divine  recognition  of  the  "chosen
people  of  God,"  whose  finger  has  purposely  traced  in  heaven,  from  the
beginning  of  creation,  the  numbers  of  these  patriarchs.  For  instance,
curiously  enough,  these  writers,  De  Mirville  among  others,  recognize
all  the  characteristics  of  the  twelve  Signs  of  the  Zodiac,  in  the  words
addressed  by  the  dying  Jacob  to  his  Sons,  and  in  his  definitions  of  the
future  of  each  Tribe.f  Moreover,  the  respective  banners  of  the  same
tribes  are  said  to  have  exhibited  the  same  symbols  and  the  same  names
as  the  Signs,  repeated  in  the  twelve  stones  of  the  Urim  and  Thummim,
and  on  the  twelve  wings  of  the  two  Cherubs.  Leaving  to  the  said
Mystics  the  proof  of  exactitude  in  the  alleged  correspondence,  we
quote  it  as  follows :  Man,  or  Aquarius,  is  in  the  sphere  of  Reuben,  who
is  declared  as  "unstable  as  water"  (the  Vulgate  has  it,  ''rushing  like
water");  Gemini,  in  that  of  Simeon  and  Levi,  because  of  their  strong
fraternal  association;  Leo,  in  that  of  Judah,  "the  strong  Lion"  of  his
tribe,  "the  lion's  whelp";  Pisces,  in  Zabulon,  who  "shall  dwell  at  the
haven  of  the  sea";  Taurus,  in  Issachar,  because  he  is  "a  strong  ass
couching    down,"    etc.,    and    therefore    associated   with    the    stables;

*  Proclus,  In  Timceum,  i.  t  Genesis,  xlix.


THE   ZODIAC   AND  THE   PATRIARCHS.  715

(Virgo-)  Scorpio,  in  Dan,  who  is  described  as  "a  serpent,  an  adder
in  the  path  that  biteth,"  etc.;  Capricornus  in  Naphtali,  who  is  "a  hind
(a  deer)  let  loose";  Cancer,  in  Benjamin,  for  he  is  "ravenous";  Libra,
the  Balance,  in  Asher,  whose  "bread  shall  be  fat";  Sagittarius  in
Joseph,  because  "his  bow  abode  in  strength."  To  make  up  for  the
twelfth  Sign,  Virgo,  made  independent  of  Scorpio,  we  have  Dinah,  the
only  daughter  of  Jacob.  Tradition  shows  the  alleged  tribes  carrying
-.:he  twelve  signs  on  their  banners.  But  indeed  the  Bible,  in  addition  to
the  above,  is  filled  with  theo-cosmological  and  astronomical  symbols
and  personifications.

It  remains  to  wonder,  and  to  query— if  the  actual,  living  Patriarchs'
destiny  was  so  indissolubly  wound  up  with  the  Zodiac — how  it  is  that,
after  the  loss  of  the  ten  tribes,  the  ten  signs  also  out  of  the  twelve  have
not  miraculously  disappeared  from  the  sidereal  fields?  But  this  is  of
no  great  concern.  Let  us  rather  busy  ourselves  with  the  historv'  of  the
Zodiac  itself.

The  reader  may  be  reminded  of  some  opinions  expressed  as  to  the
Zodiac  by  several  of  the  highest  authorities  in  Science.

Newton  believed  that  the  invention  of  the  Zodiac  could  be  traced  as
far  back  as  the  expedition  of  the  Argonauts;  and  Dulaure  fixed  its
origin  at  6,500  years  B.C.,  just  2,496  years  before  the  creation  of  the
world,  according  to  the  Bible  chronology.

Creuzer  thought  that  it  was  very  easy  to  show  that  most  of  the
Theogonies  were  intimately  connected  with  religious  calendars,  and
were  related  to  the  Zodiac  as  to  their  prime  origin ;  if  not  to  the  Zodiac
known  to  us  now,  then  to  something  very  analogous  with  it.  He  felt
certain  that  the  Zodiac  and  its  mystic  relations  are  at  the  bottom  of  all
the  mythologies,  under  one  form  or  another,  and  that  it  had  existed  in
the  old  form  for  ages,  before  it  was  brought  out  in  the  present  defined
astronomical  garb,  owing  to  some  singular  coordination  of  events.*

Whether  the  "genii  of  the  planets,"  our  Dhyan  Chohans  of  supra-
mundane  spheres,  showed  themselves  to  "holy  prophets,"  or  not,  as
claimed  in  the  Dabistan,  it  would  seem  that  great  la3'men  and  warriors
were  favoured  in  the  same  way  in  days  of  old  in  Chaldaea,  when  astro-
logical Magic  and  Theophania  went  hand  in  hand.

Xenophon,  no  ordinary  man,  narrates  of  Cyrus  ....  that  at  the  moment
of  his  death  he  thanked  the  Gods  and  heroes,  for  having  so  often  instructed  him
themselves  about  the  signs  in  heaven — ev  ovpaviots  cn;/iet'ots.f


»  Creuzer,  iii.  p.  930.  t  Cyropadia,  %iii.  p.  7>  as  quoted  in  Des  Es{>riU,  iv.  p.  55.


7l6  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Unless  the  Science  of  the  Zodiac  is  admitted  to  be  of  the  highest
antiquity  and  universality,  how  can  we  account  for  its  Signs  being
traced  in  the  oldest  Theogonies?  I^aplace  is  said  to  have  felt  struck
with  amazement  at  the  idea  of  the  days  of  Mercury  (Wednesday),
Venus  (Friday),  Jupiter  (Thursday),  Saturn  (Saturday),  and  others,
being  related  to  the  days  of  the  week  in  the  same  order  and  with  the
same  names  in  India  as  in  Northern  Kurope,

Try,  if  you  can,  with  the  present  system  of  autochthonous  civilizations,  so  much
in  fashion  in  our  day,  to  explain  how  nations  with  no  ancestry,  no  traditions  or
birthplace  in  common,  could  have  succeeded  in  inventing  a  kind  of  celestial  phan-
tasmagoria, a  veritable  imbroglio  of  sidereal  denominations,  without  sequence  or
object,  having  no  figurative  relation  with  the  constellations  they  represent,  and
still  less,  apparently,  with  the  phases  of  our  terrestrial  life  they  are  made  to  signify,

— had  there  not  been  a  gc?ieral  intention  and  a  universal  cause  and
belief,  at  the  root  of  all  this !  *    Most  truly  has  Dupuis  asserted  the  same :

II  est  impossible  de  d^couvrir  le  moindre  trait  de  ressemblance  entre  les  parties
du  ciel  et  les  figures  que  les  astronomes  y  ont  arbitrairement  tracees;  et  de  I'autre
c6te,  le  hasard  est  impossible.^

Most  certainly  chance  is  "impossible.'"  There  is  no  "chance"  in
Nature,  wherein  everything  is  mathematically  coordinate,  and  inter-
related in  its  units.     Says  Coleridge:

Chance  is  but  the  pseudonym  of  God  [or  Nature],  for  those  particular  cases  which
He  does  not  choose  to  subscribe  openly  with  His  sign  manual.

Replace  the  word  "God"  by  Karma,  and  it  will  become  an  Eastern
axiom.  Therefore,  the  sidereal  "prophecies"  of  the  Zodiac,  as  they  are
called  by  Christian  Mystics,  never  point  to  any  one  particular  event,
however  solemn  and  sacred  it  may  be  for  some  one  portion  of  humanity,
but  to  ever-recurrent,  periodical  laws  in  Nature,  understood  only  by  the
Initiates  of  the  Sidereal  Gods  themselves.

No  Occultist,  no  Astrologer  of  Eastern  birth,  will  ever  agree  with
Christian  Mystics,  or  even  with  Kepler's  mystical  Astronomy,  his  great
vScience  and  erudition  notwithstanding;  and  this  because,  if  his  pre-
misses are  quite  correct,  his  deductions  therefrom  are  one-sided  and
biassed  by  Christian  preconceptions.  Where  Kepler  finds  a  prophecy
directly  pointing  to  the  Saviour,  other  nations  see  a  symbol  of  an
eternal  law,  decreed  for  the  actual  Manvantara.  Why  see  in  Pisces  a
direct  reference  to  Christ — one  of  the  several  world-reformers,  a
Saviour  for  his  direct  followers,  but  only  a  great  and  glorious  Initiate

"  Des  Esprils,  iv.  pp.  59,  60.  t  Origine  detous  les  Cultes,  "Zodiaque."


THE  SIGN   OF  JONAS.  71/

for  all  the  rest — when  that  constellation  shines  as  a  sj^mbol  of  all  the
past,  present,  and  future  Spiritual  Saviours,  who  dispense  light  and
dispel  mental  darkness?  Christian  symbologists  have  tried  to  prove
that  this  sign  belonged  to  Ephraim,  Joseph's  son,  the  elect  of  Jacob,  and
that  therefore,  it  was  at  the  moment  of  the  Sun's  entering  into  the  sign
of  Pisces,  the  Fish,  that  the  "Elect  Messiah,"  the  'Ix^i-s  of  the  first
Christians,  had  to  be  born.  But  if  Jesus  of  Nazareth  was  that  Messiah,
was  he  really  born  at  that  "moment,"  or  was  his  birth-hour  thus  fixed
by  the  adaptation  of  Theologians,  who  sought  only  to  make  their  pre-
conceived ideas  fit  in  with  sidereal  facts  and  popular  belief?  Everyone
is  aware  that  the  real  time  and  year  of  the  birth  of  Jesus  are  totally
unknown.  And  it  is  the  Jews— whose  forefathers  made  the  word  Dag
signify  both  "Fish"  and  "Messiah"  during  the  forced  development  of
their  rabbinical  language— who  are  the  first  to  deny  this  Christian
claim.  And  what  of  the  further  facts  that  Brahmans  connect  their
"Messiah,"  the  eternal  Avatara  Vishnu,  with  a  Fish  and  the  Deluge,
and  that  the  Babylonians  also  made  a  Fish  and  a  Messiah  of  their  Dag-
On,  the  Man-Fish  and  Prophet?

There  are  learned  iconoclasts  among  Egyptologists,  who  say  that :

When  the  Pharisees  sought  a  "sign  from  heaven,"  Jesus  said,  "there  shall  no
sign  be  given  ....   but  the  sign  of  the  prophet  Jonas."     {Mat.,  xvi.  4.)    .    .    .    .

The  sign  of  Jonas  is  that  of  the  Oan  or  Fish-Man  of  Nineveh Assuredly

there  was  no  other  sign  than  that  of  the  Sun  reborn  in  Pisces.  The  voice  of  the
Secret  Wisdom  says  those  who  are  looking  for  signs  can  have  no  other  than  that  of
the  returning  Fish-Man  Ichthys,  Cannes,  or  Jonas— who  could  not  be  made  flesh.

It  would  appear  that  Kepler  maintained  it  as  a  positive  fact  that,  at
the  moment  of  the  "incarnation,"  all  the  planets  were  in  conjunction
in  the  sign  Pisces,  called  by  the  Jewish  Kabbalists  the  "constellation
of  the  Messiah."     Kepler  averred:

It  is  in  this  constellation  that  the  star  of  the  Magi  is  to  be  found.

This  statement,  quoted  from  Dr.  Sepp*  by  De  Mirville,  emboldened
the  latter  to  remark  that :

All  the  Jewish  traditions,  while  announcing  that  star  that  many  nations  have
seen  [!],t  further  added  that  it  would  absorb  the  seventy  planets  that  preside  over


•   Vie  de  Notre  Seigneur  Jisus  Christ,  I.  p.  9.

+  Wliether  many  nations  have  seen  that  identical  star,  or  not,  we  all  know  that  the  sepulchres  of
the  "three  Magi"— who  rejoice  in  the  quite  Teutonic  names  of  Kaspar  and  Melchior,  Balthazar  being
the  only  exception,  and  the  two  having  little  of  the  Chaldean  ring  in  them— are  shown  by  the  priests
in  the  famous  cathedral  of  Cologne,  where  the  Magian  bodies  are  not  ouly  supposed,  but  firmly
believed  to  have  been  buried.


•jlS  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

the  destinies  of  various  nations  on  this  globe.*  "In  virtue  of  those  natural
prophecies,"  says  Dr.  Sepp,  "it  was  written  in  the  stars  of  the  firmament  that  the
Messiah  would  be  born  in  the  lunar  year  of  the  world  4320,  in  that  memorable  year
when  the  entire  choir  of  the  planets  would  be  celebrating  its  jubilee."t

There  was  indeed  a  rage,  at  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  for
claiming  restoration  from  the  Hindus  for  an  alleged  robbery  from  the
Jews  of  their  "  Gods,"  patriarchs,  and  chronolog5^  It  was  Wilford  who
recognized  Noah  in  Prithi  and  in  Satyavrata,  Enos  in  Dhruva,  and
even  Assur  in  Ishvara.  After  being  residents  for  so  many  years  in
India,  some  Orientalists,  at  least,  ought  to  have  known  that  it  was  not
the  Brahmans  alone  who  had  these  figures,  or  who  had  divided  their
Great  Age  into  four  minor  ages.  Nevertheless  writers  in  the  Asiatic
Researches  indulged  in  the  most  extravagant  speculations.  S.  A.
Mackey,  the  Norwich  "philosopher,  astronomer,  and  shoemaker,"
argues  very  pertinently:

Christian  theologians  think  it  their  duty  to  write  against  the  long  periods  of
Hindu  chronology,  and  in  them  it  may  be  pardonable:  but  when  a  man  of  learning
crucifies  the  names  and  the  numbers  of  the  ancients,  and  wrings  and  twists  them
into  a  form,  which  means  something  quite  foreign  to  the  intention  of  the  ancient
authors;  but  which,  so  mutilated,  fits  in  with  the  birth  of  some  maggot  preexisting
in  his  own  brain  with  so  much  exactness  that  he  pretends  to  be  amazed  at  the  dis-
covery, I  cannot  think  him  quite  so  pardonable.  J

This  is  intended  to  apply  to  Captain  (later  Colonel)  Wilford,  but  the
words  may  fit  more  than  one  of  our  modern  Orientalists.  Colonel
Wilford  was  the  first  to  crown  his  unlucky  speculations  on  Hindu
chronolog)'  and  the  Purdnas  by  connecting  the  4,320,000  years  with
biblical  chronologj^  bj'  simply  dwarfing  the  figures  to  4,320  years — the
supposed  lunar  year  of  the  Nativit}^ — and  Dr.  Sepp  has  simply  plagi-
arized the  idea  from  this  gallant  officer.  Moreover,  he  persisted  in
seeing  in  them  Jewish  property,  as  well  as  Christian  prophecy,  thus
accusing  the  Aryans  of  having  helped  themselves  to  Semitic  revelation,
whereas  the  reverse  was  the  case.  The  Jews,  moreover,  need  not  be
accused  of  directly  despoiling  the  Hindiis,  of  whose  figures  Ezra
probabl}^  knew  nothing.  They  had  evidently  and  undeniably  borrowed
them  from  the  Chaldeans,  along  with  the  Chaldean  Gods.     They  turned

•  This  tradition  about  the  "seventy  planets"  that  preside  over  the  destinies  of  nations,  is  based  on
Uie  Occult  cosmogonical  teaching  that  besides  our  own  septenary  chain  of  World- Planets,  there  are
many  more  in  the  Solar  System.

f  Des  Esprits,  iv.  p.  67.

}  T7ie  Mythological  Astronomy  of  the  Ancients  Demonstrated;  Part  the  Second,  or  The  Key  of
Urania:  pp.  23,  24.    Bd.  1823.


CHAI,DEO-JUDEAN   GODS.  710

the  432,000  years  of  the  Chaldean  Divine  Dynasties*  into  4,320  luna.-
years  from  the  world's  creation  to  the  Christian  era;  as  to  the  Baby-
lonian and  Egyptian  Gods,  they  quietly  and  modestly  transformed
them  into  Patriarchs.  Every  nation  was  more  or  less  guilty  of  such
refashioning  and  adaptation  of  a  Pantheon — once  common  to  all — of
universal  into  national  and  tribal  Gods  and  Heroes.  It  was  Jewish
property  in  its  new  Pentateuchal  garb,  and  no  one  of  the  Israelites  has
ever  forced  it  upon  any  other  nation — least  of  all  upon  the  European.

Without  stopping  to  notice  this  very  unscientific  chronology  more
than  is  necessary,  we  may  yet  make  a  few  remarks  that  may  be  found
to  the  point.  The  4,320  hmar  years  of  the  world — in  the  Bible  the  solar
years  are  used — are  not  fanciful,  as  such,  even  if  their  application  is
quite  erroneous;  for  they  are  only  the  distorted  echo  of  the  primitive
Esoteric,  and  later  of  the  Brahmanical  doctrine  concerning  the  Yugas.
A  Day  of  Brahma  equals  4,320,000,000  years,  as  also  does  a  Night  of
Brahma,  or  the  duration  of  Pralaya,  after  which  a  7iew  "sun"  rises
triumphantly  over  a  7iew  Manvantara,  for  the  Septenary  Chain  it  illu-
minates. The  teaching  had  penetrated  into  Palestine  and  Europe
centuries  before  the  Christian  era,t  and  was  present  in  the  minds  of
the  Mosaic  Jews,  who  based  upon  it  their  small  Cycle,  though  it  re-
ceived full  expression  only  through  the  Christian  chronologers  of  the
Bible,  who  adopted  it,  as  also  the  25th  of  December,  the  day  on  which
all  the  solar  Gods  were  said  to  have  been  incarnated.  What  wonder,
then,  that  the  Messiah  was  made  to  be  born  in  "the  Imiar  year  of  the
world  4,320"?  The  "Sun  of  Righteousness  and  Salvation"  had  once
more  arisen  and  had  dispelled  the  pralayic  darkness  of  Chaos  and  Non-
being  on  the  plane  of  our  objective  little  Globe  and  Chain.     Once  the

*  Every  scholar  is  aware,  of  course,  that  the  Chaldeans  claimed  the  same  digits  (432),  or  432,000,
for  their  Divine  Dynasties  as  the  Hindus  do  for  their  Mahayuga,  namely  4,320,000.  Therefore  has
Dr.  Sepp,  of  Munich,  undertaken  to  support  Kepler  and  Wilford  in  their  charge  that  the  Hindus
borrowed  them  from  the  Christians,  and  the  Chaldeans  from  the  Jews,  who,  it  is  claimed,  expected
their  Messiah  in  the  lunar  year  of  the  world  4,320 !.!  !  As  these  figures,  according  to  ancient  writers,
were  based  by  Berosus  on  the  120  Saroses — each  of  the  divisions  meaning  six  Neroses  of  600  years
each,  making  a  sum  total  of  432,000  years— they  would  appear  to  be  peremptory,  remarks  De  Mirville
(Des  Esprits,  iii.  p.  24).  So  the  pious  professor  of  Munich  undertook  to  explain  them  in  the  correct  way.
He  claims  to  have  solved  the  riddle  by  showing  that  "the  saros  being  composed,  according  to  Pliny,
of  222  synodial  months,  to  wit,  18  years  6/10,"  the  calculator  naturally  fell  back  on  the  figures  "given
by  Siiidas,"  who  affirmed  that  the  "120  saroses  made  2,222  sacerdotal  and  cyclic  years,  which  equalled
1,656  solar  years."     (  Vie  de  Notre  Seigneur  Jhus  Christ,  ii.  p.  417.)

But  Suidas  said  nothing  of  the  kind;  and,  even  supposing  he  had,  he  would  prove  little,  if  any-
tliing,  by  such  a  statement.  The  Neroses  and  Saroses  were  the  same  thorn  in  the  side  of  uninitiated
ancient  writers  as  the  apocalyptic  666  of  the  "Great  Beast "  is  in  that  of  the  modem,  and  the  former
figures  have  found  their  unlucky  Newtons,  as  have  the  latter.

t  See  Isis  Unveiled,  ii.  p.  132.


720  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

subject  of  the  adoration  was  settled  upon,  it  was  easy  to  make  the
supposed  events  of  his  birth,  life,  and  death,  fit  in  with  the  Zodiacal
exigencies  and  the  old  traditions,  though  they  had  to  be  somewhat
remodelled  for  the  occasion.

Thus  what  Kepler  said,  as  a  great  Astronomer,  becomes  comprehen-
sible. He  recognized  the  grand  and  universal  importance  of  all  such
planetary  conjunctions,  "each  of  which" — as  he  has  well  said — "is
a  climacteric  year  of  Humanity."*  The  rare  conjunction  of  Saturn,
Jupiter,  and  Mars  has  its  significance  and  importance  on  account  of
its  certain  great  results,  in  India  and  China  as  much  as  it  has  in
Europe,  for  the  respective  M3'stics  of  these  countries.  And  it  is
certainlj'  now  no  better  than  a  mere  assumption  to  maintain  that
Nature  had  only  Christ  in  view,  in  building  her  (to  the  profane)
fantastic  and  meaningless  constellations.  If  it  is  claimed  that  it  was
no  hazard  that  could  lead  the  archaic  architects  of  the  Zodiac,  thou-
sands of  years  ago,  to  mark  the  figure  of  Taurus  with  the  asterisk  a,
with  no  better  or  more  valid  proof  of  it  being  prophetic  of  the  Verbum
or  Christ  than  that  the  alcph  of  Taurus  means  the  "one"  and  the
"first,"  and  that  Christ  was  also  the  alpha  or  the  "one,"  then  this
"proof"  may  be  shown  to  be  strangely  invalidated  in  more  than  one
way.  To  begin  with,  the  Zodiac  existed  before  the  Christian  era,  at
all  events;  further,  all  the  Sun-Gods — Osiris,  for  instance — had  been
mystically  connected  with  the  constellation  Taurus  and  were  all  called
by  their  respective  votaries  the  "First."  Further,  the  compilers  of
the  mystical  epithets  given  to  the  Christian  Saviour  were  all  more  or
less  acquainted  with  the  significance  of  the  Zodiacal  signs;  and  it  is
easier  to  suppose  that  they  should  have  arranged  their  claims  so  as  to
match  the  mystic  signs,  than  that  the  latter  should  have  shone  as  a
prophecy  for  one  portion  of  humanity,  for  millions  of  years,  taking  no
heed  of  the  numberless  generations  that  had  gone  before,  and  of  those
that  were  to  be  born  hereafter.

We  are  told :

It  is  not  simple  chance  that,  in  certain  spheres,  has  placed  on  a  throne  the  head
of  this  bull  [Taurus]  trying  to  push  back  a  Dragon  with  the  ansated  cross;  we


*  The  reader  has  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  phrase  "climacteric  year"  has  more  than  the  usual
significance,  when  used  by  Occultists  and  Mystics.  It  is  not  only  a  critical  period,  during-  which
some  great  change  is  periodically  expected,  whether  in  human  or  cosmic  constitution,  but  it  like-
wise pertains  to  universal  spiritual  changes.  The  Europeans  called  everj-  63rd  year  the  "grand
climacteric,"  and  perhaps  justly  supposed  those  years  to  be  the  years  produced  by  multiplying  7  into
the  odd  numbers  3,  5,  7  and  9.  But  7  is  the  real  .scale  of  Nature,  in  Occultism,  and  7  has  to  be  multi-
plied in  quite  a  different  way  and  method  than  is  as  yet  known  to  European  nations.


THE   DRAGON   AND   THE    BUI.L.  721

should  know  that  this  constellation  of  Taurus  was  called  ''the great  city  of  God  and
the  mother  of  revelations"  and  also  "the  interpreter  of  the  divine  voice"'  the  Apis
Pacis  of  Hermontis,  in  Egypt,  which  [as  the  patristic  fathers  would  assure  the
world]  is  said  to  have  proffered  oracles  that  related  to  the  birth  of  the  Saviour.*

To  this  theological  assumption  there  are  several  answers.  Firstly,
the  ansated  Eg"yptian  cross,  or  Tau,  the  Jaina  cross,  or  Svastika,  and
the  Christian  cross,  have  all  the  same  meaning.  Secondly,  no  peoples
or  nations  except  the  Christians  gave  the  significance  to  the  Dragon
that  is  given  to  it  now.  The  Serpent  was  the  symbol  of  Wisdom;  and
the  Bull,  Taurus,  the  symbol  of  physical  or  terrestrial  generation.  Thus
the  Bull,  pushing  off  the  Dragon,  or  spiritual  Divine  Wisdom,  Math  the
Tau,  or  Cross — which  is  esoterically  "the  foundation  and  framework  of
all  construction" — would  have  an  entirely  phallic,  physiological  mean-
ing, had  it  not  had  yet  another  significance  unknown  to  our  Biblical
scholars  and  symbologists.  At  any  rate,  it  has  no  special  reference  to
the  Verbum  of  St.  John,  except,  perhaps,  in  a  general  sense.  The
Taurus — which,  by  the  way,  is  no  lamb,  but  a  bull — was  sacred  in
every  Cosmogony,  with  the  Hindus  as  with  the  Zoroastrians,  with  the
Chaldees  as  with  the  Eg}'ptians.     So  much,  every  schoolboy  knows.

It  may  perhaps  help  to  refresh  the  memory  of  our  Theosophists  if
we  refer  them  to  what  was  said  of  the  Virgin  and  the  Dragon,  and  the
universality  of  periodical  births  and  re-births  of  World-Saviours — Solar
Gods — in  his  Unveiled,]  with  regard  to  certain  passages  in  Revelation.

In  1853,  the  savant  known  as  Erard-Mollien  read  before  the  Institute
of  France  a  paper  tending  to  prove  the  antiquity  of  the  Indian  Zodiac,
in  the  signs  of  which  were  found  the  root  and  philosophy  of  all  the
most  important  religious  festivals  of  that  country;  the  lecturer  tried  to
demonstrate  that  the  origin  of  these  religious  ceremonies  goes  back
into  the  night  of  time  to  at  least  3,000  B.C.  The  Zodiac  of  the  Hindus,
he  thought,  was  long  anterior  to  the  Zodiac  of  the  Greeks,  and  differed
from  it  much  in  some  particulars.  In  it  one  sees  the  Dragon  on  a  Tree,
at  the  foot  of  which  the  Virgin,  Kanya-Durga,  one  of  the  most  ancient
Goddesses,  is  placed  on  a  L,ion  dragging  after  it  the  solar  car.  He
said :

This  is  the  reason  why  this  Virgin  Durga  is  not  the  simple  memento  of  an  astro-
nomical fact,  but  verily  the  most  ancient  divinity  of  the  Indian  Olympus.  She  is
evidently  the  same  whose  return  was  announced  in  all  the  Sibylline  books — the
source  of  the  inspiration  of  Virgil— an  epoch  of  universal  renovation


»  Des  EspriU,  iv.  p.  61.  +  ii.  p.  490-

<7


722  THE   SECRET   DOCTRINE.

And  why,  since  the  months  are  still  named  after  this  Indian  solar  Zodiac,  by  the
Malayalim-speaking  people  [of  southern  India],  should  that  people  have  abandoned
it  to  take  that  of  the  Greeks?  Everything  proves,  on  the  contrary,  that  these
zodiacal  figures  were  transmitted  to  the  Greeks  by  the  Chaldeans,  who  got  them
from  the  Brahmans.*

But  all  this  is  very  poor  testimony.  I^et  us,  however,  remember  also
that  which  was  said  and  accepted  by  the  contemporaries  of  Volney,
who  remarks  that  as  Aries  was  in  its  fifteenth  degree  1,447  ^.C,  it
follows  that  the  first  degree  of  L/ibra  could  not  have  coincided  with  the
vernal  equinox  later  than  15,194  years  B.C.;  if  we  add  to  this,  he  argues,
the  1,790  years  that  have  passed  since  the  birth  of  Christ,  it  appears
that  16,984  years  must  have  elapsed  since  the  origin  of  the  Zodiac. f

Dr.  Schlegel,  moreover,  in  his  Ura^iographie  Chinoise,  assigns  to  the
Chinese  Astronomical  Sphere  an  antiquity  of  18,000  years.]:

Nevertheless,  as  opinions  quoted  without  adequate  proofs  are  of  little
avail,  it  may  be  more  useful  to  turn  to  scientific  evidence.  M.  Bailly,
the  famous  French  Astronomer  of  the  last  century.  Member  of  the
Academy,  etc.,  asserts  that  the  Hindu  systems  of  Astronomy  are  by
far  the  oldest,  and  that  from  them  the  Egyptians,  Greeks,  Romans,  and
even  the  Jews  derived  their  knowledge.  In  support  of  these  views  he
says :

The  astronomers  who  preceded  the  epoch  1491  are,  first,  the  Alexandrian  Greeks;
Hipparchus,  who  flourished  125  years  before  our  era,  and  Ptolemy,  260  years  after
Hipparchus.  Following  these  were  the  Arabs,  who  revived  the  study  of  astronomy
in  the  ninth  centur)'.  These  were  succeeded  by  the  Persians  and  the  Tartars,  to
whom  we  owe  the  tables  of  Nassireddin  in  1269,  and  those  of  Ulug-beg  in  1437.
Such  is  the  succession  of  events  in  Asia  as  known  prior  to  the  Indian  epoch  149 1.
What,  then,  is  an  epoch  ?  It  is  the  observation  of  the  longitude  of  a  star  at  a  given
moment,  the  place  in  the  sky  where  it  was  seen,  and  which  serves  as  a  point  of
reference,  a  starting-point  from  which  to  calculate  both  the  past  and  future  posi-
tions of  the  star  from  its  observed  motion.  But  an  epoch  is  useless  unless  the
motion  of  the  star  has  been  determined.  A  people,  new  to  science  and  obliged  to
borrow  a  foreign  astronomy,  finds  no  difficulty  in  fixing  an  epoch,  since  the  only
observation  needed  is  one  which  can  be  made  at  any  moment.  But  what  it  needs
above  all,  what  it  is  obliged  to  borrow,  are  those  elements  which  depend  on  accurate
determination,  and  which  require  continuous  observation ;  above  all,  those  motions
which  depend  on  time,  and  which  can  only  be  accurately  determined  by  centuries
of  observation.  These  motions,  then,  must  be  borrowed  from  a  nation  which  has
made  such  observations,  and  has  behind  it  the  labours  of  centuries.    We  conclude.


*  See  Recueil  de  VAcademie  des  Inscriptions,  1853,  quoted  in  Des  Esprits,  iv.  d.  62
+  Ruins  of  Empires,  p.  360.
:..  Zcz  pp.  54,  196,  et  scgq.


bailly's  conclusions.  723

therefore,  that  a  new  people  will  not  borrow  the  epochs  of  an  ancient  one,  without
also  borrowing  from  them  the  "average  motions."  Starting  from  this  principle  we
shall  find  that  the  Hindu  epochs  1491  and  3102  could  not  have  been  derived  from
those  of  either  Ptolemy  or  Ulug-beg.

There  remains  the  supposition  that  the  Hindiis,  comparing  their  observations  in
1491  with  those  previously  made  by  Ulug-beg  and  Ptolemy,  used  the  intervals
between  these  observations  to  determine  the  average  motions.  The  date  of  Ulug-
be<>-  is  too  recent  for  such  a  determination ;  while  those  of  Ptolemy  and  Hipparchus
were  barely  remote  enough.  But  if  the  Hindu  motions  had  been  determined  from
these  comparisons,  the  epochs  would  be  connected  together.  Starting  from  the
epochs  of  Ulug-beg  and  Ptolemy  we  should  arrive  at  all  those  of  the  Hindiis.
Hence  foreign  epochs  were  either  imknown  or  useless  to  the  Hindus.*

We  may  add  to  this  another  important  consideration.  When  a  nation  is  obliged
to  borrow  from  its  neighbours  the  methods  or  the  average  motions  of  its  astrono-
mical tables,  it  has  even  greater  need  to  borrow,  besides  these,  the  knowledge  of
the  inequalities  of  the  motions  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  the  motions  of  the  apogee,
of  the  nodes,  and  of  the  inclination  of  the  ecliptic;  in  short,  all  those  elements  the
determination  of  which  requires  the  art  of  obsei-ving,  some  instrumental  appliances,
and  great  industry.  All  these  astronomical  elements,  differing  more  or  less  with  the
Greeks  of  Alexandria,  the  Arabs,  the  Persians  and  the  Tartars,  exhibit  no  resem-
blance whatever  with  those  of  the  Hindiis.  The  latter,  therefore,  borrowed  nothing
from  their  neighbours.

If  the  Hindus  did  not  borrow  their  epoch,  thej'  must  have  possessed  a  real  one  of
their  own,  based  on  their  own  observations;  and  this  must  be  either  the  epoch  of
the  year  1491  after,  or  that  of  the  year  3102  before  our  era,  the  latter  preceding  by
4.592  years  the  epoch  1491.  We  have  to  choose  between  these  two  epochs  and  to
decide  which  of  them  is  based  on  observation.  But  before  stating  the  arguments
which  can  and  must  decide  the  question,  we  may  be  permitted  to  make  a  few
remarks  to  those  who  may  be  inclined  to  believe  that  it  is  modern  observations  and
calculations  which  have  enabled  the  Hindus  to  determine  the  past  positions  of  the
heavenly  bodies.  It  is  far  from  easy  to  determine  the  celestial  movements  -with
sufficient  accuracy  to  ascend  the  stream  of  time  for  4,592  years,  and  to  describe  the
phenomena  which  must  have  occurred  at  that  period.  We  possess  to-day  excellent
instruments;  exact  observations  have  been  made  for  some  two  or  three  centuries,
which  already  permit  us  to  calculate  with  considerable  accuracy  the  average
motions  of  the  Planets;  we  have  the  obser%'ations  of  the  Chaldeans,  of  Hippar-
chus and  of  Ptolemy,  which,  owing  to  their  remoteness  from  the  present  time,
permit  us  to  fix  these  motions  with  greater  certainty.  vStill  we  cannot  undertake
to  represent  with  invariable  accuracy  the  observations  throughout  the  long  period
intervening  between  the  Chaldeans  and  ourselves;  and  still  less  can  we  undertake
to  determine  with  exactitude  events  occurring  4^592  years  before  our  day.  Cassini
and  Maier  have  each  determined  the  secular  motion  of  the  moon,  and  they  differ
by  3ni.  43s.    This  difference  would  give  rise  in  forty-six  centuries  to  an  uncertainty

•  For  a  detailed  scientific  proof  of  this  conclusion,  see  page  121  of  M.  Bailly's  work,  where  the
.subject  is  discussed  technically.


724  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

of  nearly  three  degrees  in  the  moon's  place.  Doubtless  one  of  these  determina-
tions is  more  accurate  than  the  other;  and  it  is  for  observations  of  very  great
antiquity  to  decide  between  them.  But  in  very  remote  periods,  where  observations
are  lacking,  it  follows  that  we  are  uncertain  as  to  the  phenomena.  How,  then,
could  the  Hindus  have  calculated  back  from  the  year  1491  A.D.  to  the  year  3102
before  our  era,  if  they  were  only  recent  students  of  Astronomy  ?

The  Orientals  have  never  been  what  we  are.  However  high  an  opinion  of  their
knowledge  we  may  form  from  the  examination  of  their  Astronomy,  we  cannot
suppose  them  ever  to  have  possessed  that  great  array  of  instruments  which  dis-
tinguishes our  modern  observatories,  and  which  is  the  product  of  simultaneous
progress  in  various  arts,  nor  could  they  have  possessed  that  genius  for  discovery,
which  has  hitherto  seemed  to  belong  exclusively  to  Europe,  and  which,  supplying
the  place  of  time,  causes  the  rapid  progress  of  science  and  of  human  intelligence.
If  the  Asiatics  have  been  powerful,  learned  and  wise,  it  is  power  and  time  which
have  produced  their  merit  and  success  of  all  kinds.  Power  has  founded  or
destroyed  their  empires;  now  it  has  erected  edifices  imposing  by  their  bulk,  now
it  has  reduced  them  to  venerable  ruins;  and  while  these  vicissitudes  alternated
with  each  other,  patience  accumulated  knowledge;  and  prolonged  experience  pro-
duced wisdom.  It  is  the  antiquity  of  the  nations  of  the  East  which  has  erected
their  scientific  fame.

If  the  Hindfis  possessed  in  1491  a  knowledge  of  the  heavenly  motions  sufficiently
accurate  to  enable  them  to  calculate  backwards  for  4592  years,  it  follows  that  they
could  only  have  obtained  this  knowledge  from  very  ancient  observations.  To  grant
them  such  knowledge,  while  refusing  them  the  observations  from  which  it  is  de-
rived, is  to  suppose  an  impossibility ;  it  would  be  equivalent  to  assuming  that  at  the
outset  of  their  career  they  had  already  reaped  the  harvest  of  time  and  experience.
While  on  the  other  hand,  if  their  epoch  of  3102  is  assumed  to  be  real,  it  would
follow  that  the  Hindus  had  simply  kept  pace  with  successive  centuries  down  to  the
year  1491  of  our  era.  Thus,  time  itself  was  their  teacher;  they  knew  the  motions
of  the  heavenly  bodies  during  these  periods,  because  they  had  seen  them ;  and  the
duration  of  the  Hindu  people  on  earth  is  the  cause  of  the  fidelity  of  its  records  and
the  accuracy  of  its  calculations.

It  would  seem  that  the  problem  as  to  which  of  the  two  epochs  of  3102  and  1491  is
the  real  one  ought  to  be  solved  by  one  consideration,  viz.,  that  the  ancients  in
general,  and  particularly  the  Hindus,  as  we  may  see  by  the  arrangement  of  their
Tables,  calculated,  and  therefore  observed,  eclipses  only.  Now,  there  was  no
eclipse  of  the  sun  at  the  moment  of  the  epoch  1491;  and  no  eclipse  of  the  moon
either  fourteen  days  before  or  after  that  moment.  Therefore  the  epoch  1491  is  not
based  on  an  observation.  As  regards  the  epoch  3102,  the  Brahmans  of  Tirvaloor
place  it  at  sunrise  on  February  i8th.  The  sun  was  then  in  the  first  point  of  the
Zodiac  according  to  its  true  longitude.  The  other  Tables  show  that  at  the  pre-
ceding midnight  the  moon  was  in  the  same  place,  but  according  to  its  average
longitude.  The  Brahmans  tell  us  also  that  this  first  point,  the  origin  of  their  Zodiac,
■was,  in  the  year  3102,  54  degrees  behind  the  equinox.  It  follows  that  the  origin
■ — the  first  point  of  their  Zodiac — was  therefore  in  the  sixth  degree  of  Aquarius.


THE    BEGINNING    OF   KAU    YUGA.  725

There  occurred,  therefore,  about  this  time  and  place  an  average  conjunction;  and
indeed  this  conjunction  is  given  in  our  best  Tables:  La  Caille's  for  the  sun  and
Maier's  for  the  moon.  There  was  no  eclipse  of  the  sun,  the  moon  being  too  distant
from  her  node;  but  fourteen  days  later,  the  moon  having  approached  the  node,
must  have  been  eclipsed.  Maier's  tables,  used  without  correction  for  acceleration,
give  this  eclipse;  but  they  place  it  during  the  day  when  it  could  not  have  been
observed  in  India.  Cassini's  tables  give  it  as  occurring  at  night,  which  shows  that
Maier's  motions  are  too  rapid  for  distant  centuries,  when  the  acceleration  is  not
allowed  for;  and  which  also  proves  that  in  spite  of  the  improvement  of  our  know-
ledge we  can  still  be  uncertain  as  to  the  actual  aspect  of  the  heavens  in  past  times.

Therefore  we  believe  that,  as  between  the  two  Hindu  epochs,  the  real  one  is  the
year  3102,  because  it  was  accompanied  by  an  eclipse  which  could  be  observed,  and
which  must  have  served  to  determine  it.  This  is  a  first  proof  of  the  truth  of  the
longitude  assigned  by  the  Hindus  to  the  sun  and  the  moon  at  this  instant;  and  this
proof  would  perhaps  be  sufficient,  were  it  not  that  this  ancient  determination
becomes  of  the  greatest  importance  for  the  verification  of  the  motions  of  these
bodies,  and  must  therefore  be  borne  out  by  every  possible  proof  of  its  authenticity.

We  notice,  ist,  that  the  Hindiis  seem  to  have  combined  two  epochs  together  into
the  year  3102.  The  Tirvaloor  Brahmans  reckon  primarily  from  the  first  moment
of  the  Kali  Yuga;  but  they  have  a  second  epoch  placed  2d.  3h.  32m.  30s.  later.  The
latter  is  the  true  astronomical  epoch,  while  the  former  seems  to  be  a  civil  era.  But
if  this  epoch  of  the  Kali  Yuga  had  no  reality,  and  Avas  the  mere  result  of  a  calcula-
tion, why  should  it  be  thus  divided  ?  Their  calculated  astronomical  epoch  would
have  become  that  of  the  Kali  Yuga,  which  would  have  been  placed  at  the  conjunc-
tion of  the  sun  and  the  moon,  as  is  the  case  with  the  epochs  of  the  three  other
Tables.  They  must  have  had  some  reason  for  distinguishing  between  the  two;
and  this  reason  can  onl>  De  due  to  the  circumstances  and  the  time  of  the  epoch;
which  therefore  could  not  be  the  result  of  calculation.  This  is  not  all;  starting
from  the  solar  epoch  determined  by  the  rising  of  the  sun  on  February  i8th,  3102,
and  tracing  back  events  2d.  3h.  32m.  30s.,  we  come  to  2h.  27m.  30s.  a.m.  of  February
i6th,  which  is  the  instant  of  the  beginning  of  Kali  Yuga.  It  is  curious  that  this
age  lias  not  been  made  to  commence  at  one  of  the  four  great  divisions  of  the  day.
It  might  be  suspected  that  the  epoch  should  be  midnight,  and  that  the  2h.  27m.  30s.
are  a  meridian  correction.  But  whatever  may  have  been  the  reason  for  fixing  on
this  moment,  it  is  plain  that  were  this  epoch  the  result  of  calculation,  it  would
have  been  just  as  easy  to  carry  it  back  to  midnight,  so  as  to  make  the  epoch  corres-
pond to  one  of  the  chief  diA-isions  of  the  day,  instead  of  placing  it  at  a  moment
fixed  by  the  fraction  of  a  day.

2nd.  The  Hindus  assert  that  at  the  first  moment  of  Kali  Yuga  there  was  a  con-
junction of  all  the  planets;  and  their  Tables  show  this  conjunction  while  ours
indicate  that  it  might  actually  have  occurred.  Jupiter  and  Mercury  were  in
exactly  the  same  degree  of  the  ecliptic;  Mars  being  8°  and  Saturn  17°  distant
from  it.  It  follows  that  about  this  time,  or  some  fifteen  days  after  the  commence-
ment of  Kali  Yuga,  and  as  the  sun  advanced  in  the  Zodiac,  the  Hindus  saw  four
planets  emerge  successively  from  the  Sun's  rays;    first  Saturn,  then  Mars,  then


726  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Jupiter  and  Mercury,  and  these  planets  appeared  united  in  a  somewhat  small  space.
Although  Venus  was  not  among  them,  the  taste  for  the  marvellous  caused  it  to  be
called  a  general  conjunction  of  all  the  planets.  The  testimony  of  the  Brahmans
here  coincides  with  that  of  our  Tables;  and  this  evidence,  the  result  of  a  tradition,
must  be  founded  on  actual  observation.

3rd.  We  ma}'  remark  that  this  phenomenon  was  visible  about  a  fortnight  after
the  epoch,  and  exactly  at  the  time  when  the  eclipse  of  the  moon  must  have  been
observed,  which  served  to  fix  the  epoch.  The  two  observations  mutually  confirm
each  other;  and  whoever  made  the  one  must  have  made  the  other  also.

4th.  We  may  believe  also  that  the  HindHs  made  at  the  same  time  a  determina-
tion of  the  place  of  the  moon's  node;  this  seems  indicated  by  their  calculation.
They  give  the  longitude  of  this  point  of  the  lunar  orbit  for  the  time  of  their  epoch,
and  to  this  they  add  as  a  constant  40m.,  which  is  the  node's  motion  in  I2d.  I4h.  It
is  as  if  they  stated  that  this  determination  was  made  thirteen  days  after  their  epoch,
and  that  to  make  it  correspond  to  that  epoch,  we  must  add  the  40m.  through  which
the  node  has  retrograded  in  the  interval.  This  observation  is,  therefore,  of  the
same  date  as  that  of  the  lunar  eclipse;  thus  giving  three  observations,  which  are
mutually  confirmatory'.

5th.  It  appears  from  the  description  of  the  Hindft  Zodiac  given  by  M.  C.  Gentil,
that  on  it  the  places  of  the  stars  named  the  Eye  of  Taurus  and  the  Wheat-ear  of
Virgo,  can  be  determined  for  the  commencement  of  the  Kali  Yuga.  Now,  compar-
ing these  places  with  the  actual  positions,  reduced  by  our  precession  of  the  equi-
noxes to  the  moment  in  question,  we  see  that  the  point  of  origin  of  the  Hindu
Zodiac  must  lie  between  the  fifth  and  sixth  degree  of  Aquarius.  The  Brdhmans,
therefore,  were  right  in  placing  it  in  the  sixth  degree  of  that  sign,  the  more  so
since  this  small  difierence  may  be  due  to  the  proper  motion  of  the  stars,  which  is
unknown.  Thus  it  was  yet  another  observation  which  guided  the  Hindus  in  this
fairly  accurate  determination  of  the  first  point  of  their  movable  Zodiac.

It  does  not  seem  possible  to  doubt  the  existence  in  antiquity  of  observations  of
this  date.  The  Persians  say  that  four  beautiful  stars  were  placed  as  guardians  at
the  four  corner-s  of  the  world.  Now  it  so  happens  that  at  the  commencement  of
Kali  Yuga,  3,000  or  3,100  years  before  our  era,  the  Eye  of  the  Bull  and  the  Heart  of
the  Scorpion  were  exactly  at  the  equinoctial  points,  while  the  Heart  of  the  Lion
and  the  Southern  Fish  were  pretty  near  the  solstitial  points.  An  observation  of
the  rising  of  the  Pleiades  in  the  evening,  seven  days  before  the  autumnal  equinox,
also  belongs  to  the  year  3000  before  our  era.  This  and  similar  observations  are
collected  in  Ptolemy's  calendars,  though  he  does  not  give  their  authors;  and  these,
which  are  older  than  those  of  the  Chaldeans,  may  well  be  the  work  of  the  Hindus.
They  are  well  acquainted  with  the  constellation  of  the  Pleiades,  and  while  we
call  it  vulgarly  the  "Poussiniere,"  they  name  it  Pillaloo-codi— the  "Hen  and
chickens."  This  name  has,  therefore,  passed  from  people  to  people,  and  comes
to  us  from  the  most  ancient  nations  of  Asia.  We  see  that  the  Hindus  must  have
observed  the  rising  of  the  Pleiades,  and  have  made  use  of  it  to  regulate  their
years  and  their  months;  for  this  constellation  is  also  called  Krittika.  Now  they
have   a  month  of  the   same   name,   and  this  coincidence  can  only  be  due  to  the


hind6  astronomicai.  methods.  727

fact  that  this  month  was  announced  by  the  rising  or  setting  of  the  constellation  in
question.

But  what  is  even  more  decisive  as  showing  that  the  Hindus  observed  the  stars,
and  in  the  same  way  that  we  do,  marking  their  position  by  their  longitude,  is  a  fact
mentioned  by  Augustinus  Riccius  that,  according  to  observations  attributed  to
Hermes,  and  made  1,985  years  before  Ptolemy,  the  brilliant  star  in  the  Lyre  and  that
in  the  heart  of  the  Hydra  were  each  seven  degrees  in  advance  of  their  respective
•positions  as  determined  by  Ptolemy.  This  determination  seems  very  extraordinary.
The  stars  advance  regularl)^  with  respect  to  the  equinox;  and  Ptolemy  ought  to  have
found  the  longitudes  28  degrees  in  excess  of  what  they  were  1,985  years  before  his
time.  Besides,  there  is  a  remarkable  peculiarity  about  this  fact,  the  same  error  or
difference  being  found  in  the  positions  of  both  stars ;  therefore  the  error  was  due  to
some  cause  affecting  both  stars  equally.  It  was  to  explain  this  peculiarity  that  the
Arab  Thebith  imagined  the  stars  to  have  an  oscillatory  movement,  causing  them  to
advance  and  recede  alternately.  This  hypothesis  was  easily  disproved;  but  the
observations  attributed  to  Hermes  remained  unexplained.  Their  explanation,  how-
ever, is  found  in  Hindu  Astronomy.  At  the  date  fixed  for  these  observations,  1,985
3'ears  before  Ptolemy,  the  first  point  of  the  Hindu  Zodiac  was  35  degrees  in  advance
of  the  equinox;  therefore  the  longitudes  reckoned  for  this  point  are  35  degrees  in
excess  of  those  reckoned  from  the  equinox.  But  after  the  lapse  of  1,985  years  the
stars  would  have  advanced  28  degrees,  and  there  would  remain  a  difference  of  only
7  degrees  between  the  longitudes  of  Hermes  and  those  of  Ptolemy,  and  the  differ-
ence would  be  the  same  for  the  two  stars,  since  it  is  due  to  the  difference  between
the  starting-points  of  the  Hindu  Zodiac  and  that  of  Ptolemj',  which  reckons
from  the  equinox.  This  explanation  is  so  simple  and  natural  that  it  must  be  true.
"We  do  not  know  whether  Hermes,  so  celebrated  in  antiquity,  was  a  Hindu,  but  we
see  that  the  observations  attributed  to  him  are  reckoned  in  the  Hindu  manner,  and
we  conclude  that  they  were  made  by  the  Hindus,  who,  therefore,  were  able  to  make
all  the  observations  we  have  enumerated,  and  which  we  find  noted  in  their  Tables.
6th.  The  observation  of  the  year  3102,  which  seems  to  have  fixed  their  epoch,
was  not  a  difficult  one.  We  see  that  the  Hindfis,  having  once  determined  the
moon's  daily  motion  of  13°  10'  35",  made  use  of  it  to  divide  the  Zodiac  into  27  con-
stellations, related  to  the  period  of  the  moon,  which  takes  about  27  days  to
describe  it.

It  was  by  this  method  that  they  determined  the  positions  of  the  stars  in  this
Zodiac;  it  was  thus  they  found  that  a  certain  star  of  the  Lyre  was  in  8^  24°,  the
Heart  of  the  Hydra  in  4*"  7",  longitudes  which  are  ascribed  to  Hermes,  but  which  are
calculated  on  the  Hindu  Zodiac.  Similarly,  they  discovered  that  the  Wheat-ear
<3f  Virgo  forms  the  commencement  of  their  fifteenth  constellation,  and  the  Eye  of
Taurus  the  end  of  the  fourth ;  these  stars  being  the  one  in  6*  6°  40',  the  other  in
js  23"  20'  of  the  Hindu  Zodiac.  This  being  so,  the  eclipse  of  the  moon  which  oc-
curred fifteen  days  after  the  Kali  Yuga  epoch,  took  place  at  a  point  between  the
AVheat-ear  of  Virgo  and  the  star  6  of  the  same  constellation.  These  stars  are  very
approximately  a  constellation  apart,  the  one  beginning  the  fifteenth,  the  other  the
sixteenth.      Thus  it  would  not  be   difficult  to   determine   the  moon's  place  by


728  THE   SECRET  DOCTRINE.

measuring  her  distance  from  one  of  these  stars  ;  from  this  they  deduced  the  posi-
tion of  the  sun,  which  is  opposite  to  the  moon,  and  then,  knowing  their  average
motions,  they  calculated  that  the  moon  was  at  the  first  point  of  the  Zodiac  accord-
ing to  her  average  longitude  at  midnight  on  the  I7th-i8th  February  of  the  year
3102  before  our  era,  and  that  the  sun  occupied  the  same  place  six  hours  later  ac-
cording to  his  true  longitude;  an  event  which  fixes  the  commencement  of  the
Hindu  year.

7th.  The  Hindus  state  that  20,400  years  before  the  age  of  Kali  Yuga,  the  first
point  of  their  Zodiac  coincided  with  the  vernal  equinox,  and  that  the  sun  and  moon
were  in  conjunction  there.  This  epoch  is  obviously  fictitious;  *  but  we  may  enquire
from  what  point,  from  what  epoch,  the  Hindus  set  out  in  establishing  it.  Taking
the  Hindu  values  for  the  revolution  of  the  sun  and  moon,  viz.,  365d.  6h.  12m.  30s.,
and  27d.  7h.  43m.  13s.,  we  have—

20,400  revolutions  of  the  sun  =  7,451, 277d.  2h.
272,724  "        "         moon  =  7,451, 277d.  7h.

vSuch  is  the  result  obtained  by  starting  from  the  Kali  Yuga  epoch ;  and  the  as-
sertion of  the  Hindus,  that  there  was  a  conjunction  at  the  time  stated,  is  founded
on  their  Tables ;  but  if,  using  the  same  elements,  we  start  from  the  era  of  the  year
1491,  or  from  another  placed  in  the  year  1282,  of  which  we  shall  speak  later,  there
will  always  be  a  difference  of  almost  one  or, two  dajs.  It  is  both  just  and  natural,  in
verifying  the  Hindu  calculations,  to  take  those  among  their  elements  which  give
the  same  result  as  they  had  themselves  arrived  at,  and  to  set  out  from  that  one
among  their  epochs  which  enables  us  to  arrive  at  the  fictitious  epoch  in  question.
Hence,  since  to  make  this  calculation  they  must  have  set  out  from  their  real  epoch,
the  one  which  was  founded  on  an  observation  and  not  from  any  of  those  which
were  derived  by  this  very  calculation  from  the  former,  it  follows  that  their  real
epoch  was  that  of  the  year  3102  before  our  era.

8th.  The  Tirvaloor  Brahmans  give  the  moon's  motion  as  7^  2«  o'  7"  on  the  mov-
able Zodiac,  and  as  9^  70  45'  i"  as  referred  to  the  equinox  in  a  great  period  of
1,600,984  days,  or  4,386  years  and  94  days.  We  believe  this  motion  to  have  been
determined  by  observation ;  and  we  must  state  at  the  outset  that  this  period  is  of
an  extent  which  renders  it  but  ill  suited  to  the  calculation  of  the  mean  motions.

In  their  astronomical  calculations  the  Hindus  make  use  of  periods  of  248,  3,031,
and  12,372  days;  but,  apart  from  the  fact  that  these  periods,  though  much  too  short,
do  not  present  the  inconvenience  of  the  former,  they  contain  an  exact  number  of
revolutions  of  the  moon  referred  to  its  apogee.  They  are  in  reality  mean  motions.
The  great  period  of  1,600,984  days  is  not  a  sum  of  accumulated  revolutions;  there  is
no  reason  why  it  should  contain  1,600,984  rather  than  1,600,985  days.  It  would  seem
that  observation  alone  must  have  fixed  the  number  of  days  and  marked  the  begin-
ning and  end  of  the  period.  This  period  ends  on  the  21st  of  May,  1282  of  our  era,
at  5h.  15m.  30s.  at  Benares.  The  moon  was  then  in  apogee,  according  to  the
Hindus,  and  her  longitude  was  . .  7^  13°  45'  i"

Maier  gives  the  longitude  as  . .  7    I3    53    4^

And  places  the  apogee  at  . .  . .  7    ^4      6    54

•  Whv  it  should  be  '■  fictitious"  can  never  be  made  plain  by  European  Scientists.


THE   ARYAN   HINDUS   VINDICATED.  729

The  determination  of  the  moon's  place  by  the  Brahmans  thus  differs  only  by  nine
minutes  from  ours,  and  that  of  the  apogee  by  twenty-two  minutes,  and  it  is  very
evident  that  they  could  only  have  obtained  this  agreement  with  our  best  Tables
and  this  exactitude  in  the  celestial  positions  by  observation.  If  then,  observation
fixed  the  end  of  this  period,  there  is  every  reason  to  believe  that  it  determined
its  commencement.  But  then  this  motion,  determined  directly,  and  from  nature,
would  of  necessity  be  in  close  agreement  with  the  true  motions  of  the  heavenly
bodies.

And  in  fact  the  Hindti  motion  during  this  long  period  of  4,883  years,  does  not
differ  by  a  minute  from  that  of  Cassini,  and  agrees  equally  with  that  of  ISIaier.
Thus  two  peoples,  the  Hindus  and  the  Europeans,  placed  at  the  two  extremities  of
the  world,  and  perhaps  as  distant  by  their  institutions,  have  obtained  precisely  the
same  results  as  regards  the  moon's  motions ;  and  an  agreement  which  would  be
inconceivable,  if  it  were  not  based  on  the  observation  and  mutual  imitation  of
nature.  We  must  remark  that  the  four  Tables  of  the  Hindus  are  all  copies  of
the  same  Astronomy.  It  cannot  be  denied  that  the  Siamese  Tables  existed  in
1687,  when  they  were  brought  from  India  by  M.  de  la  Loubere.  At  that  time  the
tables  of  Cassini  and  Maier  were  not  in  existence,  and  thus  the  Hindus  were  already
in  possession  of  the  exact  motion  contained  in  these  Tables,  while  we  did  not  yet
possess  it.*  It  must,  therefore,  be  admitted  that  the  accuracy  of  this  Hindu  motion
is  the  point  of  observation.  It  is  exact  throughout  this  period  of  4,383  years,
because  it  was  taken  from  the  sky  itself;  and  if  observation  determined  its  close,  it
fixed  its  commencement  also.  It  is  the  longest  period  which  has  been  observed
and  of  which  the  recollection  is  preserved  in  the  annals  of  Astronomy.     It  has  its

•  "  The  following  is  an  answer  to  those  men  of  science  who  might  suspect  that  our  astronomy  was
carried  to  India  and  communicated  to  the  Hindus  by  our  Missionaries,  ist.  Hindu  astronomy  has
its  own  peculiar  forms,  characterized  by  their  originalit}';  if  it  had  been  our  astronomy  translated,
great  skill  and  knowledge  would  have  been  needed  to  disguise  the  theft.  2nd.  When  adopting  the
mean  movement  of  the  moon,  they  would  have  adopted  also  the  inclination  of  the  ecliptic,  the
equation  of  the  sun's  centre,  the  length  of  the  year;  these  elements  differ  completely  from  ours,  and
are  remarkably  accurate  as  applying  to  the  epoch  of  3102  ;  while  they  would  be  exceedingly  erroneous
if  they  had  been  calculated  for  last  century.  3rd.  Finally,  our  missionaries  could  not  have  communi-
cated to  the  Hindus  in  1687  the  tables  of  Cassini,  which  were  not  then  in  existence;  they  could  have
known  only  the  mean  motions  of  Tyclio,  Riccioli,  Copernicus,  Bouillaud,  Kepler,  I,ongomontanus,
and  those  of  the  tables  of  Alphonso.  I  will  now  give  a  tabular  view  of  these  mean  motions  for  4,385
years  and  94  days  (Riccioli,  Ahnag.  I.  p.  255):

Table.  Mean  Motion.  Difference  from  HindQ.

D.  n.  M.  s.  H.  M.  s.

Alphonso  9    7    2  47    —    o  42  14

Copernicus   9    6    2  13    ~    i  42  48

Tycho 9     75440     +     o    9  39

Kepler 9    6  57  35    —    o  47  26

Longomontanus 9    7    z  J3    —    0  42  48

Bouillaud  9    6  48    8    —    0  58  5.3

Riccioli   9    7  53  57     +     o    8  56

Cassini    9    7  44  "    —    o    o  50

India    9    7  45     i

"  None  of  these  mean  motions,  except  Cassini's,  agrees  with  that  of  the  HindGs,  who  therefore,  did
not  borrow  their  mean  motions,  since  their  figures  agree  only  with  those  of  Cassini,  whose  tables
were  not  in  existence  in  1687.  This  mean  motion  of  the  moon  belongs,  therefore,  to  the  Hindus,  who
could  only  have  obtained  it  by  observation."— /6irf..  note,  pp.  xxxvi,  xxxvii.


730  'I*HE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

origin  in  the  epoch  of  the  year  3102  B.C.,  and  it  is  a  demonstrative  prooL'  of  the
reality  of  that  epoch.*

Bailly  is  referred  to  at  such  length,  as  he  is  one  of  the  few  scientific
men  who  have  tried  to  do  full  justice  to  the  Astronomy  of  the  Aryans.
From  John  Bentley  down  to  Burgess'  Surya-Siddhanta,  not  one  Astro-
nomer has  been  fair  enough  to  the  most  learned  people  of  Antiquity.
However  distorted  and  misunderstood  the  Hindu  Symbology  may  be,
no  Occultist  can  fail  to  do  it  justice  once  that  he  knows  something  of
the  Secret  Sciences ;  nor  will  he  turn  away  from  their  metaphysical
and  mystical  interpretation  of  the  Zodiac,  even  though  the  whole
Pleiades  of  Royal  Astronomical  Societies  rise  in  arms  against  their
mathematical  rendering  of  it.  The  descent  and  reascent  of  the  Monad
or  Soul  cannot  be  disconnected  from  the  Zodiacal  signs,  and  it  looks
more  natural,  in  the  sense  of  the  fitness  of  things,  to  believe  in  a
mysterious  sympathy  between  the  metaphysical  Soul  and  the  bright
constellation.?,  and  in  the  influence  of  the  latter  on  the  former,  than  in
the  absurd  notion  that  the  creators  of  Heaven  and  Earth  have  placed
in  Heaven  the  types  of  twelve  vicious  Jews.  And  if,  as  the  author  of
The  Gnostics  and  their  Remains  asserts,  the  aim  of  all  the  Gnostic
schools  and  the  later  Platonists

was  to  accommodate  the  old  faith  to  the  influence  of  Buddhistic  theosophy,  the
verj'  essence  of  which  was  that  the  innumerable  gods  of  the  Hindu  mythology  were
but  names  for  the  Energies  of  the  First  Triad  in  its  successive  Avatars  or  mani-
festations unto  man,

whither  can  we  better  turn  to  trace  these  theosophic  ideas  to  their  very
root,  than  to  the  old  Indian  wisdom?  We  say  again:  Archaic  Occult-
ism would  remain  incomprehensible  to  all,  if  it  were  to  be  rendered
otherwise  than  through  the  more  familiar  channels  of  Buddhism  and
Hinduism.  For  the  former  is  the  emanation  of  the  latter;  and  both
are  children  cf  one  mother — ancient  Ivcmuro-Atlantean  Wisdom.

*  BaiUy's  Traite  deV Astronomie  Indienne  et  Orienialc,  pp.  xx.  el  seq.     Ed.  1787.


SECTION  XVIL

Summary  of  the  Position.


The  reader  has  had  the  whole  case  presented  to  him  from  both  sides,
and  it  remains  with  him  to  decide  whether  its  summary  stands  in  our
favour  or  not.  If  there  were  such  a  thing  as  a  void,  a  vacuum  in
Nature,  one  ought  to  find  it  produced,  according  to  a  physical  law,  in
the  minds  of  helpless  admirers  of  the  "lights"  of  Science,  who  pass
their  time  in  mutually  destroying  their  teachings.  If  ever  the  theory
that  "two  lights  make  darkness"  found  its  application  it  is  in  this  case,
where  one-half  of  the  "lights"  imposes  its  forces  and  "modes  of
motion"  on  the  belief  of  the  faithful,  and  the  other  half  opposes  the
very  existence  of  the  same.  "Ether,  Matter,  Energy"— the  sacred
hypostatical  trinity,  the  three  principles  of  the  truly  unknown  God  of
Science,  called  by  them  Physical  Nature  !

Theology  is  taken  to  task  and  ridiculed  for  believing  in  the  union  of
three  persons  in  one  Godhead — one  God  as  to  substance,  three  persons
as  to  individuality;  and  we  are  laughed  at  for  our  belief  in  unproved
and  unprovable  doctrines,  in  Angels  and  Devils,  Gods  and  Spirits.
And,  indeed,  that  which  made  the  Scientists  win  the  day  over  Theo-
logy in  the  Great  "Conflict  between  Religion  and  Science,"  was  pre-
cisely the  argument  that  neither  the  identity  of  that  substance,  nor  the
triple  individuality  claimed — after  having  been  conceived,  invented,  and
worked  out  in  the  depths  of  Theological  Consciousness — could  be  proved
to  exist  by  any  scientific  inductive  process  of  reasoning,  least  of  all
by  the  evidence  of  our  senses.  Religion  must  perish,  it  is  said,  because
it  teaches  "mysteries."  "Mystery  is  the  negation  of  Common  Sense,"
and  Science  repels  it.  According  to  Mr.  Tyndall,  Metaphysics  is
"fiction,"  like  poetry.  The  man  of  Science  "takes  nothing  on  trust";
rejects  everything  "that  is  not  proven  to  him,"  while  the  Theologian
accepts   "everything    on   blind    faith."       The    Theosophist    and    the


732  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

Occultist,  who  take  nothing  on  trust,  not  even  exact  Science,  the
Spiritualist  who  denies  dogma  but  believes  in  Spirits  and  in  invisible
but  potent  influences,  all  share  in  the  same  contempt.  Very  well,  then ;
what  we  have  to  do  now,  is  to  examine  for  the  last  time  whether  exact
Science  does  not  act  precisely  in  the  same  way  as  do  Theosophy,
Spiritualism,  and  Theology.

In  a  work  by  Mr.  S.  Ivaing,  considered  a  standard  book  on  Science,
Modern  Science  and  Modern  Thought,  the  author  of  which,  according  to
the  laudatory  review  of  the  Times,  "exhibits  with  much  power  and
effect  the  immense  discoveries  of  Science,  and  its  numerous  victories
over  old  opinions,  whenever  they  have  the  rashness  to  challenge  con-
clusions with  it,"  we  read  as  follows:

What  is  the  material  universe  composed  of?    Ether,  Matter,  Energy.

We  Stop  to  ask,  What  is  Ether?  And  Mr.  Laing  answers  in  the
name  of  Science :

Ether  is  not  actually  known  to  us  by  any  test  of  which  the  senses  can  take
cognizance,  but  is  a  sort  of  mathematical  substance  which  we  are  compelled  to
assume  in  order  to  account  for  the  phenomena  of  light  and  heat.*

And  what  is  Matter?  Do  you  know  more  about  it  than  you  do  about
the  "hypothetical"  agent,  Ether?

In  perfect  strictness,  it  is  true  that  chemical  investigations  can  tell  us  ...  .
nothing  directly  of  the  composition  of  living  matter,  and  ....  it  is  also  in
strictness  true,  that  we  know  nothing  about  the  compositions  of  any  [material]  body
whatever  as  it  is.t

And  Energy?  Surely  you  can  define  the  third  person  of  the  Trinity
of  your  Material  Universe?  We  can  take  the  answer  from  any  book
on  Physics:

Energy  is  that  which  is  only  known  to  us  by  its  effects.

Pray  explain,  for  this  is  rather  hazy.

[In  mechanics  there  is  actual  and  potential  energy:  work  actually  performed,  and
the  capacity  for  performing  it.  As  to  the  nature  of  molecular  Energy  or  Forces],
the  various  phenomena  which  bodies  present  show  that  their  molecules  are  under
the  influence  of  two  contrary  forces,  one  which  tends  to  bring  them  together,  and
the  other  to  separate  them.  .  .  .  The  first  force  ...  is  called  moleailar
attraction    ....    the  second  force  is  due  to  the  vis  viva,  or  moving  force.  J

Just  so :  it  is  the  nature  of  this  movijig  force,  of  this  vis  viva,  that  we
want  to  know.     What  is  it  ?

'  Ch.  III.  "On  Matter."

t  Lecture  on  Protoplasm,  by  Mr.  Huxley.

%  Ganot's  Physics,  p.  68,  Atkinson's  Translation.


THE  EXACT  SCIENCE   OF — NEGATION.  735

"We  do  not  know!"  is  the  invariable  answer.  "It  is  an  empty
shadow  of  my  imagination,"  explains  Mr.  Huxley  in  his  Physical  Basis
of  Life.

Thus  the  whole  structure  of  Modern  Science  is  built  on  a  kind  of
"mathematical  abstraction,"  on  a  Protean  "Substance  which  eludes
the  senses"  (Dubois  Reymond),  and  on  effects,  the  shadowy  and  illusive
will-o'-the  wisps  of  a  somethitig  entirely  unknown  to,  and  beyond  the
reach  of.  Science.  "' Self-moving''  AX.ovxs>\  ►S"<?^-w(7t//7z^ Suns,  Planets,
and  Stars!  But  who,  then,  or  what  are  they  all,  if  they  are  self-
endowed  with  motion?  Why  then  should  you.  Physicists,  laugh  at  and
deride  our  "Self-moving  Archseus"?  M3Stery  is  rejected  and  scorned
by  Science,  and  as  Father  Felix  has  truly  said :

She  cannot  escape  it.     Mystery  is  the  fatality  of  Science.

The  language  of  the  French  preacher  is  ours,  and  we  quote  it  in  Isis
Unveiled.     Who — he  asks — who  of  you,  men  of  Science:

Has  been  able  to  penetrate  the  secret  of  the  formation  of  a  body,  the  generation  of
a  single  atom  ?  What  is  there,  I  will  not  say  at  the  centre  of  a  sun,  but  at  the  centre
of  an  atom  ?  WTio  has  sounded  to  the  bottom  the  abyss  in  a  grain  of  sand  ?  The
grain  of  sand,  gentlemen,  has  been  studied  four  thousand  years  by  science;  she  has
turned  and  returned  it;  she  divides  it  and  subdivides  it;  she  torments  it  with  her
experiments;  she  vexes  it  with  her  questions  to  snatch  from  it  the  final  word  as  to
its  secret  constitution;  she  asks  it,  with  an  insatiable  curiosity:  "Shall  I  divide
thee  infinitesimally?"  Then  suspended  over  this  abyss,  science  hesitates,  she
stumbles,  she  feels  dazzled,  she  becomes  dizzy,  and  in  despair  says:  "i  do  not

KNOW."

But  if  you  are  so  fatally  ignorant  of  the  genesis  and  hidden  nature  of  a  grain  of
sand,  how  should  you  have  an  intuition  as  to  the  generation  of  a  single  living
being  ?  Whence  in  the  living  being  does  life  come  ?  Where  does  it  commence  ?
What  is  the  life  principle  ?  *

Do  the  men  of  Science  deny  all  these  charges?     By  no  means:  for
here  is  a  confession  of  Tyndall,  which  shows  how  powerless  is  Science,
even  over  the  world  of  Matter.

The  first  marshalling  of   the  atoms,  on  which  all   subsequent  action  depends,

baffles  a  keener  power  than  that  of  the  microscope Through  pure

excess  of  complexity,  and  long  before  observation  can  have  any  voice  in  the  matter,
the  most  highly  trained  intellect,  the  most  refined  and  disciplined  imagination,
retires  in  bewilderment  from  the  contemplation  of  the  problem.  We  are  struck
dumb  by  an  astonishment  which  no  microscope  can  relieve,  doubting  not  only  the

•  See  Vol.  I.  pp.  338,  339,  quoted  from  Le  Mytiire  ei  la  Science,  Conferences,  PJre  P6Hx  de  Notre
Dame.


734  'I*^^  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

power  of  our  instrument,  but  even  whether  we  ourselves  possess  the  intellectual
elements  which  will  ever  enable  us  to  grapple  with  the  ultimate  structural  energfies
of  nature.

How  little  is  known  of  the  material  Universe,  indeed,  has  now  been
suspected  for  years,  on  the  very  admissions  of  these  men  of  Science
themselves.  And  now  there  are  some  Materialists  who  would  even
make  away  with  Ether — or  whatever  Science  calls  the  infinite  Sub-
stance, the  noumenon  of  which  the  Buddhists  call  Svabhavat — as
well  as  Vv^ith  Atoms,  too  dangerous  both  on  account  of  their  ancient
philosophical,  and  their  present  Christian  and  theological,  associations.
From  the  earliest  Philosophers,  whose  records  passed  to  posterity,
down  to  our  present  age — which,  if  it  denies  Invisible  Beings  in  Space,
can  never  be  so  insane  as  to  deny  a  Plenum  of  some  sort — the  Fulness
of  the  Universe  has  been  an  accepted  belief.  And  what  it  was  said
to  contain,  one  learns  from  Hermes  Trismegistus  (in  Dr.  Anna
Kingsford's  able  rendering),  who  is  made  to  say:

Concerning  the  void  .  .  .  my  judgment  is  that  it  does  not  exist,  that  it  never
has  existed,  and  that  it  never  will  exist,  for  all  the  various  parts  of  the  universe
are  filled,  as  the  earth  also  is  complete  and  full  of  bodies,  differing  in  quality  and
in  form,  having  their  species  and  their  magnitude,  one  larger,  one  smaller,  one
solid,  one  tenuous.  The  larger  .  .  .  are  easily  perceived;  the  smaller  .  .  .
are  difficult  to  apprehend,  or  altogether  invisible.  We  know  only  of  their  existence
by  the  sensation  of  feeling,  wherefore  many  persons  deny  such  entities  to  be
bodies,  and  regard  them  as  simply  spaces,*  but  it  is  impossible  there  should  be  such
spaces.  For  if  indeed  there  should  be  anything  outside  the  universe  .  .  .  then
it  would  be  a  space  occupied  by  intelligible  beings  analogous  to  its  [the  universe's]

Divinity I  speak  of  the  genii,  for  I  hold  they  dwell  with  us,  and  of

the  heroes  who  dwell  above  us,  between  the  earth  and  the  higher  airs;  wherein  are
neither  clouds  nor  any  tempest.t

And  we  "hold"  it  too.  Only,  as  already  remarked,  no  Eastern
Initiate  would  speak  of  spheres  ''above  us,  between  the  eai'th  and  the
airs,"  even  the  highest,  as  there  is  no  such  division  or  measurement  in
Occult  speech,  no  above,  as  no  below,  but  an  eternal  within,  withiyi
two  other  withins,  or  the  planes  of  subjectivity  merging  gradually  into
that  of  terrestrial  objectivity — this  being  for  tna?i  the  last  one,  his  own


*  Behold  the  work  of  Cycles  and  their  periodical  return!  Those  who  denied  such  "Entities"
(Forces)  to  be  bodies,  and  called  them  "Spaces,"  were  the  prototypes  of  our  modern  "science-struck"
public,  and  their  official  teachers,  who  speak  of  the  Forces  of  Nature  as  the  imponderable  energy  of
Matter  and  as  modes  of  motion,  and  yet  hold  electricity,  for  one,  as  being  as  atomic  as  Matter  itself
— (Helmholtz).     Inconsistency  and  contradiction  reign  as  much  in  official  as  in  heterodox  .Science.

The  Virgiti  of  the  World  of  Hermes  Mercurius  Trismegistus,  rendered  into  English  by  Dr.  Anna
Kingsford  and  Edward  Maitland.    Pp.  83,  84.


FORCES  ARK   GODS.  735

plane.  This  necessar\'  explanation  ma}-  be.  closed  here  by  giving,  in
the  words  of  Hermes,  the  belief  on  this  particular  point  of  the  whole
world  of  Mystics:

There  are  many  orders  of  the  Gods;  and  in  all  there  is  an  intelligible  part.  It
is  not  to  be  supposed  they  do  not  come  within  the  range  of  our  senses;  on  the
contrary,  we  perceive  them,  better  even  than  those  wliich  are  called  visible.  .  .
There  are  then  Gods,  superior  to  all  appearances;  after  them  come  the  Gods
whose  principle  is  spiritual;  these  Gods  being  sensible,  in  conformity  with  their
double  origin,  manifest  all  things  by  a  sensible  nature,  each  of  them  illuminating
his  works  one  by  another.*  The  supreme  Being  of  heaven,  or  of  all  that  is  com-
prehended under  this  name,  is  Zeus,  for  it  is  by  heaven  that  Zeus  gives  life  to  all
things.  The  supreme  Being  of  the  sun  is  light,  for  it  is  by  the  disk  of  the  sun  that
we  receive  the  benefit  of  the  light.  The  thirty-six  horoscopes  of  the  fixed  stars
have  for  supreme  Being,  or  prince,  him  whose  name  is  Pantoviorphos,  or  having  all
forms,  because  he  gives  divine  forms  to  divers  types.  The  seven  planets,  or
wandering  spheres,  have  for  supreme  Spirits  Fortune  and  Destiny,  who  uphold
the  eternal  stability  of  the  laws  of  Nature  throughout  incessant  transformation  and
perpetual  agitation.  The  ether  is  the  instrument  or  medium  by  which  all  is
produced,  t

This  is  quite  philosophical  and  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  of
Eastern  Esotericism:  for  all  the  Forces,  such  as  IJght,  Heat,  Elec-
tricity, etc.,  are  called  the  "Gods" — Esoterically.

This,  indeed,  must  be  so,  since  the  Esoteric  Teachings  in  EgA'pt  and
India  were  identical.  And,  therefore,  the  personification  of  Fohat,
synthesizing  all  the  manifesting  Forces  in  Nature  is  a  legitimate  result.
Moreover,  as  will  be  shown  later,  the  real  and  Occult  Forces  in  Nature
only  now  begin  to  be  known — and  even  in  this  case,  by  heterodox,  not
orthodox,  Science,t  though  their  existence,  in  one  instance  at  any  rate,
is  corroborated  and  certified  by  an  immense  number  of  educated  people,
and  even  by  some  official  men  of  Science.

The  statement,  morever,  in  Stanza  VI — that  Fohat  sets  in  motion
the  primordial  World-Germs,  or  the  aggregation  of  Cosmic  Atoms
and  Matter,  "some  one  wa5%  some  the  other  way,"  in  the  opposite
direction — looks  orthodox  and  scientific  enough.  For  there  is,  at  all
events,  in  support  of  this  position,  one  fact  fully  recognized  by  Science,
and  it  is  this.     The  meteoric  showers,   periodical  in   November  and


"*  "Hermes  here  includes  as  Cods  the  sensible  Forces  of  Nature,  the  elements  and  phenomena  of
..he  Universe,"  remarks  Dr.  A.  Kingsford  in  a  foot-note  explaining  it  very  correctly.  So  does  Kasteni
Philosophy.

t  Ibid.,  pp.  6^,  65.

t  See  also  Section  IX,  The  Coming  Force.


730  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

August,  belong  to  a  system  moving  in  an  elliptical  orbit  around  the
Sun.  The  aphelion  of  this  ring  is  1,732  millions  of  miles  beyond  the
orbit  of  Neptune,  its  plane  is  inclined  to  the  Earth's  orbit  at  an  angle
of  64°  3',  and  the  direction  of  the  meteoric  swarm  moving  round  this
orbit  is  contrary  to  that  of  the  Earth's  revolution.

This  fact,  recognized  only  in  1833,  shows  it  to  be  the  modern  redis-
covery of  what  was  very  anciently  known.  Fohat  turns  with  his  two
hands  in  contrary  directions  the  "seed"  and  the  "curds,"  or  Cosmic
Matter;  in  clearer  language,  is  turning  particles  in  a  highly  attenuated
condition,  and  nebulae.

Outside  the  boundaries  of  the  Solar  System,  it  is  other  Suns,  and
especially  the  mysterious  Central  Sun — the  "Abode  of  the  Invisible
Deity"  as  some  reverend  gentlemen  have  called  it — that  determines
the  motion  and  the  direction  of  bodies.  That  motion  serves  also  to
differentiate  the  homogeneous  Matter,  round  and  between  the  several
bodies,  into  Elements  and  Sub-elements  unknown  to  our  Earth,  and
these  are  regarded  by  Modern  Science  as  distinct  individual  Elements,
whereas  they  are  merely  temporary  appearances,  changing  with  ever\'
small  cycle  within  the  Manvantara,  some  Esoteric  works  calling  them
"Kalpic  Masks."

Fohat  is  the  key  in  Occviltism  which  opens  and  unriddles  the  multi-
form symbols  and  allegories  in  the  so-called  mytholog}?-  of  every
nation;  demonstrating  the  wonderful  Philosophy  and  the  deep  insight
into  the  mysteries  of  Nature,  contained  in  the  Egyptian  and  Chaldean

A.

as  well  as  in  the  Arj^an  religions.  Fohat,  shown  in  his  true  character,
proves  how  deeply  versed  were  all  those  prehistoric  nations  in  every
Science  of  Nature,  now  called  the  physical  and  chemical  branches  of
Natural  Philosoph3\  In  India,  Fohat  is  the  scientific  aspect  of  both
Vishnu  and  Indra,  the  latter  older  and  more  important  in  the  Rig  Veda
than  his  sectarian  successor;  while  in  Egypt,  Fohat  was  known  as
Toom  issued  of  Noot,*  or  Osiris  in  his  character  of  a  primordial  God,
creator  of  heaven  and  of  beings. f  For  Toom  is  spoken  of  as  the  Protean
God  who  generates  other  Gods  and  gives  himself  the  form  he  likes ;  the
''Master  of  Eife,  giving  their  vigour  to  the  Gods.":]:  He  is  the  overseer
of  the  Gods,  and  he  "who  creates  spirits  and  gives  them  shape  and

'  ''o  Toom,  Toom!  issued  from  the  great  [female]  which  is  in  the  bosom  of  the  waters  [the  great
Deep  or  Space],  luminous  through  the  two  Lions,"  the  dual  Force,  or  power  of  the  two  solar  eyes,  or
the  electro-positive  and  the  electro-negative  forces.    See  Book  of  the  Dead,  ch.  i;i.

t  See  Book  of  the  Dead,  chapter  xvii.

X  Chapter  Ixxix.


THE  ALIASES  OF   FOHAT.  737

life";  he  is  "the  North  Wind  and  the  Spirit  of  the  West";  and  finally
the  "Setting  Sun  of  Life,"  or  the  vital  electric  force  that  leaves  the
body  at  death ;  wherefore  the  Defunct  begs  that  Toom  should  give  him
the  breath  from  his  right  nostril  (positive  electricity)  that  he  might  live
in  his  second  form.  Both  the  hieroglyph,  and  the  text  of  chapter  xlii
in  the  Book  of  the  Dead,  show  the  identity  of  Toom  and  Fohat.  The
former  represents  a  man  standing  erect  with  the  hieroglyph  of  the
breaths  in  his  hands.     The  latter  says:

I  open  to  the  chief  of  An  (Heliopolis).  I  am  Toom.  I  cross  the  water  spilt  by
Thot-Hapi,  the  lord  of  the  horizon,  and  am  the  divider  of  the  earth  [Fohat  divides
Space  and,  with  his  Sons,  the  Earth  into  seven  zones]    ....

I  cross  the  heavens;  I  am  the  two  Lions.  I  am  Ra,  I  am  Aam,  I  eat  my  heir.*
....  I  glide  on  the  soil  of  the  field  of  Aauroo,t  given  me  by  the  master  of
limitless  eternity.  I  am  a  germ  of  eternity.  I  am  Toom,  to  whom  eternity  is
accorded.

The  very  words  used  by  Fohat  in  the  Xlth  Book,  and  the  very  titles
given  him.  In  the  Egyptian  Papyri  the  whole  Cosmogony  of  the
Secret  Doctrine  is  found  scattered  about  in  isolated  sentences,  even  in
the  Book  of  the  Dead.  Number  seven  is  quite  as  much  insisted  upon
and  emphasized  therein  as  in  the  Book  of  Dzyan.  "The  Great  Water
[the  Deep  or  Chaos]  is  said  to  be  seven  cubits  deep"— "cubits"  stand-
ing here  of  course  for  divisions,  zones,  and  principles.  Therein,  "in
the  great  Mother,  all  the  Gods,  and  the  Seven  Great  Ones  are  born."
Both  Fohat  and  Toom  are  addressed  as  the  "Great  Ones  of  the  Seven
Magic  Forces,"  w^ho,  "conquer  the  Serpent  Apap"  or  Matter.^

No  student  of  Occultism,  however,  ought  to  be  betrayed,  by  the
usual  phraseology  used  in  the  translations  of  Hermetic  Works,  into
believing  that  the  ancient  Eg^'ptians  or  Greeks  spoke  of,  and  referred,
monk-like,  at  every  moment  in  conversation,  to  a  Supreme  Being,  God,


•  An  image  expressing  the  succession  of  divine  functions,  the  transmutation  of  one  fonn  into
another,  or  the  correlation  of  forces.  Aam  is  the  electro-positive  force,  devouring  all  others,  as
Saturn  devoured  his  progeny.

t  Aanroo  is  in  the  domain  of  Osiris,  a  field  divided  into  fourteen  sections,  "surrounded  with  an
iron  enclosure,  within  which  grows  the  corn  of  life  seven  cubits  high,"  the  Kama  Loka  of  the  Egyp-
tians. Those  only  of  the  dead,  who  know  the  names  of  the  janitors  of  the  "seven  halls,"  \rill  be
admitted  into  Amenti  for  ever ;  i.e.,  those  who  have  passed  through  the  Seven  Races  of  each  Round —
otherwise  they  will  rest  in  the  lower  f  elds ;  and  it  represents  also  the  seven  successive  Devachans,
or  Lokas.  In  Amenti  one  becomes  pure  spirit  for  the  eternity  (xxx.  4);  while  in  Aanroo  the  "soul  of
the  spirit,"  or  the  Defunct,  is  devoured  each  time  by  Urseus — the  Serpent,  Son  of  the  Earth  (in
another  sense  the  primordial  vital  principles  in  the  Sun),  i.e..  the  Astral  Body  of  the  deceased  or  the
"  Elementary"  fades  out  and  disappears  in  the  "Son  of  the  Earth,"  limited  time.  The  soul  quits  the
fields  of  Aanroo  and  goes  on  earth  under  any  shape  it  likes  to  assume.  (See  chapter  xcix.,  Book  of
the  Dead.)

X  See  Book  of  the  Dead,  chapter  cviii.  4.  48


738  THE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

the  "One  Father  and  Creator  of  all,"  etc.,  in  the  way  found  on  every
page  of  such  translations.  No  such  thing  indeed ;  and  those  texts  a7-e
not  the  original  Egyptian  texts.  They  are  Greek  compilations,  the
earliest  of  which  does  not  go  beyond  the  early  period  of  Neo-Platonism.
No  Hermetic  work  written  by  Kgyptians — as  we  may  see  by  the  Book
of  the  Dead — would  speak  of  the  one  universal  God  of  the  Monotheistic
systems;  the  one  Absolute  Cause  of  all,  was  as  unnameable  and  unpro-
nounceable in  the  mind  of  the  ancient  Philosopher  of  Egypt,  as  it  is  for
ever  Unknowable  in  the  conception  of  Mr.  Herbert  Spencer.  As  for  the
Egyptian  in  general,  as  M.  Maspero  well  remarks,  whenever  he

Amved  at  the  notion  of  divine  Unity,  tlie  God  One  was  never  "God"  simply.
M.  Lepage-Renouf  very  justly  observed  that  the  word  Nouter,  Nouti,  "God"  had
never  ceased  to  be  a  generic  name  to  become  a  personal  one.

Every  God  was  the  "  one  living  and  unique  God  "  with  them.     Their

Monotheism  was  purely  geographical.  If  the  Egyptian  of  Memphis  proclaimed
the  Unity  of  Phtah  to  the  exclusion  of  Ammon,  the  Thebeian  Egyptian  proclaimed
the  unity  of  Ammon  to  the  exclusion  of  Phtah  [as  we  now  see  done  in  India  in  the
case  of  the  Shaivas  and  the  Vajshnavas].  Ra,  the  "  One  God"  at  Heliopolis  is  not
the  same  as  Osiris,  the  "One  God"  at  Abydos,  and  can  be  worshipped  side  by  side
with  him,  without  being  absorbed  by  him.  The  one  God  is  but  the  God  of  the
nome  or  the  city,  Noutir  Nouti,  and  does  not  exclude  the  existence  of  the  one
God  of  the  neighbouring  town  or  nome.  In  short,  whenever  we  are  speaking  of
Eg3'ptian  Monotheism,  we  ought  to  speak  of  the  Gods  One  of  Egypt,  and  not
of  the  One  God.*

It  is  by  this  feature,  preeminently  Egyptian,  that  the  authenticity  of
the  various  so-called  Hermetic  Books,  ought  to  be  tested;  and  it  is  totally
absent  from  the  Greek  fragments  known  under  this  name.  This  proves
that  a  Greek  Neo-Platonic,  or  perhaps  a  Christian  hand,  had  no  small
share  in  the  editing  of  such  works.  Of  course  the  fundamental  Philo-
sophy is  there,  and  in  many  a  place — intact.  But  the  style  has  been
altered  and  smoothed  in  a  monotheistic  direction,  as  much,  if  not  more
than  that  of  the  Hebrew  Genesis  in  its  Greek  and  Eatin  translations.
They  may  be  Hermetic  works,  but  not  works  written  by  either  of  the  two
Hermes — or  rather,  by  Thot  Hermes,  the  directing  Intelligence  of  the
Universe  t  or  by  Thot  his  terrestrial  incarnation  called  Trismegistus,  of
the  Rosetta  stone.

But  all  is  doubt,  negation,  iconoclasm  and  brutal  indifference,  in  our


*  Maspero  in  the  Guide  au  Musee  de  Boulaq,  p.  152.    Ed.  18
+  See  Book  of  the  Dead,  ch.  xciv.


LEGEND  AND   HISTORY.  739

age  of  a  hundred  "isms"  and  no  religion.     Every  idol  is  broken  save
the  Golden  Calf.  ,

Unfortunatel}-,  no  nation  or  nations  can  escape  their  Karmic  fate,  any-
more than  can  units  and  individuals.  Historj^  itself  is  dealt  with  by
the  so-called  historians  as  unscrupulously  as  legendary  lore.  For  this,
Augustin  Thierr}'  has  made  the  amende  honorable,  if  one  may  believe  his
biographers.  He  deplored  the  erroneous  principle  that  made  all  the
would-be  historiographers  lose  their  way,  and  each  presume  to  correct
tradition,  "  that  vox populi  which  nine  times  out  of  ten  is  vox  Dei" ;  and
he  finally  admitted  that  in  legend  alone  i'ests  real  history  ;  for  he  adds  :

Legend  is  living  tradition,  and  three  times  out  of  four  it  is  truer  than  what  we
call  History.*

While  Materialists  deny  everything  in  the  Universe,  save  Matter,
Archaeologists  are  trying  to  dwarf  Antiquity,  and  seek  to  destroy  ever}-^
claim  of  Ancient  Wisdom  by  tampering  with  Chronology.  Our  present-
day  Orientalists  and  historical  writers  are  to  Ancient  History  that
which  the  white  ants  are  to  the  buildings  in  India.  More  dangerous
even  than  those  Termites,  the  modern  Archaeologists — the  "authorities'
of  the  future  in  the  matter  of  Universal  History — are  preparing  for  the
history  of  past  nations  the  fate  of  certain  edifices  in  tropical  countries.
As  said  Michelet:

History  will  tumble  down  and  break  into  atoms  in  the  lap  of  the  twentieth  cen-
tur3%  devoured  to  its  foundations  by  her  annalists.

Very  soon,  indeed,  under  their  combined  efforts,  it  will  share  the  fate
of  those  ruined  cities  in  both  Americas,  which  lie  deeply  buried  under
impassable  virgin  forests.  Historical  facts  will  remain  concealed  from
view  by  the  inextricable  jungles  of  modern  hj-potheses,  denials  and
scepticism.  But  very  happily  actual  History  repeats  herself,  for  she
proceeds,  like  everj'thing  else,  in  cycles;  and  dead  facts,  and  events
deliberately  drowned  in  the  sea  of  modern  scepticism,  will  ascend  once
more  and  reappear  on  the  surface.

In  Volume  II,  the  very  fact  that  a  work  with  pretensions  to  Philo-
sophy, which  is  also  an  exposition  of  the  most  abstruse  problems,  has
to  be  commenced  by  tracing  the  evolution  of  mankind  from  what  are
regarded  as  supernatural  beings — Spirits — will  arouse  the  most  male-
volent criticism.     Believers  in,  and  the  defenders  of,  the  Secret  Doc-


•  Revue  des  Deux  Mondes,  1865,  pp.  157  and  158.


740  I'HE  SECRET  DOCTRINE.

trine,  however,  will  have  to  bear  the  accusation  of  madness  ajid  worse,
as  philosophically  as  for  long  years  already  the  writer  has  done.
Whenever  a  Theosophist  is  taxed  with  insanity,  he  ought  to  reply  by
quoting  from  Montesquieu's  Lettres  Persanes  :

By  opening  so  freely  their  lunatic  asylums  to  their  supposed  madmen,  men  only
seek  to  assure  each  other  that  they  are  not  themselves  mad.


End  op  Volume  I.


Princeton  Theological  Seminary-Speer  Library


1    1012  0


085  1766


kg  27  '38


';-'    O  "«     '■■''^


Ap20  4


j^y


fiPR


19^


Date  Due
