A
COMPARATIVE  GRAMMAR
Oh’
SOUTE  AFEICAE  LANGUAGES,
BY
W.  H.  I.  BLEEK,  Ph.D.
PART  I.
FHONOLOGY.
LONDON:
TRUBNER  & Co.,  60,  PATERNOSTER  ROW.
1862.
CONTENTS  OF  PART  I,
PAGE.
Preface  ...  ...  ...  ...  vii
INTRODUCTION
§ 1-49
I.  Classification  of  fcioutli  African  languages  ...
1-14
1
U.  Short  view  of  the  literature  of  the  dialects
described
15-49
1.  Hottentot  language
15-  18
a.  Nama  dialect
15
4
b.  .'Kora  dialect
16
4
c.  Cape  dialect
17
4
r/.  Eastern  dialects
18
4
2.  South  African  Bd-ntu  languages
19-49
4

a.  South-eastern  Branch

22-32

5

aa.  Kafir  language

26

6

hb.  Zulu  language  ...

27

6

cc.  Se-tshuana

28-31

6

dd.  Tekeza  dialects...

32

7

b.  Middle  Branch

33-45

aa.  South-eastern,  or  Mosambique  genus

33-34

7

bb.  North-eastern,  or  Zangian  genus  ...

35-36

7

cc.  South-western,  or  Bunda  genus

37-42

8

dd.  North-western,  or  Kongo  genus  ...

43-45

9

c.  North-western  Branch

46-48

9

d.  Unknown  Ba-ntu  languages  ...

49

9

A.  PHONOLOGY

50  - 397

I.  General  characteristics  ...

50-53

11

II.  Consonants

54-240

1.  Clicks

54-73

11

2.  Aspirated  Linguals

74-80

15

3.  Explosive  consonants...

81-119

a.  Faucal  explosives  ...

81  - 82

17

b.  Guttural  explosives

83-90

17

c.  Dental  explosives  ...

91-107

19

d.  Labial  explosives  ...

108-119

21

4.  Fricative  consonants  ...  ...

120-160

22

a.  Faucal  fi’icatives  ...

122-131

23

b.  Guttural  fricatives...

132-135

24

c.  Labial  fricatives

136-144

25

d Dental  fricatives,  or  sibilants

145-158

27

e.  Semivowels

159-160

28

IV


CONTENTS  OF  PART  I.


PAGE.


5.  Liquid  consonants

§ 161-165

29

6.  Combined  consonants,  or  consonant  diph-

thongs ..

166-208

a.  in  the  Hottentot  language  ...

166

30

h.  in  the  Kafir  species

167-170

30

c.  in  the  Se-tshufina  dialects  ...

171-174

31

d.  in  the  Tekeza  species

175-181

31

e.  in  the  Eastern  Middle  Branch

182-199

32

/.  in  the  Western  Middle  Branch

200-206

34

g.  in  the  Nortli-'vvestern  Branch

h.  Combinations  of  lingual  and  guttural

207

35

consonants

208

35

7.  Nasal  sounds

209-240

a.  Hottentot  nasals  ...

209-210

36

b.  Bantu  nasals

211

36

c.  Nasalisation  in  Kafir

212-217

36

d.  Nasalisation  in  Se-tshuana  and  Tekeza

218-223

37

e.  Nasalisation  in  the  Middle  Branch  ...

224-233

39

f.  N asalisation  in  the  North-  western  Branch

234-235

41

g.  Nasalisation  in  the  Hottentot  language

236-240

42

Vowels

241-251

a.  in  the  Hottentot  language  ...

241-247

43

6.  in  the  Ba-ntu  languages

248-251

43

Syllables

252-260

1.  Simplicity  of  their  structure  ...

252-253

45

2.  Nasal  terminations

254-256

45

3.  Consonantal  terminations

257-260

a.  in  Ba-ntu  languages

257

46

h.  in  the  Hottentot  language  ...

258-260

46

Radical  and  servile  letters

261-265

47

Grammatical  changes  of  sound

1.  Phonetic  influence  of  the  Suffixes  upon

266-368

49

the  Stem

268-304

a.  Suppression  of  the  original  terminal

vowel  ...

268-269

49

h.  Assimilation  of  vowels

270-271

50

c.  Transmutation  of  consonants

272-300

aa.  Palatalisation  of  labials

273-290

51

hh.  Permutations  of  other  consonants

291-300

56

d.  A’'o\\  cl  Harmony  ...

301-302

58

e.  The  Initial  of  the  stem  aflcctcd  by  the  end

303-304

59

CONTENTS  OF  TART  1.


V


PAGE.

2.  Phonetic  influence  of  the  Stem  upon  liie


Suffixes  ...

§ 305-319

a.  Assimilation  of  consonants  ...

305-307

59

b.  Vowel  Harmony  ...

308-316

60

c.  Assimilation  of  vowels

317-319

62

3.  Phonetic  influence  of  the  Stem  upon  the

Prefixes  ...

320-328

63

a.  Adaptation  of  nasals

321

63

b.  Depression  of  the  vowel  a ...

322-324

64

c.  Coalescence  of  vowels

325-328

64

4.  Phonetic  influence  of  the  Prefixes  upon

the  Stem

329-368

67

a.  Initial  Vowels

330

67

b.  Nasal  Prefixes

331-364

68

aa.  in  Kafir

332-334

68

bh.  in  Se-tshnana  and  Tekeza

335-344

69

cc.  in  the  Middle  Branch

345-353

72

rffZ.  in  the  Kongo  genus

354-364

74

c.  Initial  inflection  in  Mpongwe

365-368

77

Intonation  and  Accentuation

369-378

1.  Intonation  ...

369-373

79

2.  Accent

374-378

80

Dialectical  Transitions  of  Consonants

379-397

1.  in  the  Hottentot  language

379

81

2.  in  the  Ba-ntu  languages

380-397

81

a.  Tables  of  transitions  from  the  Kafir  ...

381-387

aa,  to  Se-tsliuana  and  Tekeza  (South-

eastern Branch)

381

82

hb.  to  the  Mosambique  genus  (Tette,

Sena  and  Makua)

382

83

cc.  to  the  Zangian  genus  (Kisuaheli  and

Ki-nika)

383

84

(Id.  to  the  Bunda  genus  (Angola  and

oTyi-herero)

384

85

ce.  to  the  Kongo  genus  (Kongo  and

Mpongwe)  ...

385

86

ff.  to  the  North-eastern  Branch  (Bcnga,

Isubu  and  Dualla)

386

87

b.  Comparative  Etymology

388-397

88

The  name  of  God  ...

389-397

88

Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive
in  2015


%


https://archive.org/details/comparativegramm00blee_0


PREFACE.


The  liistory  of  South  Africa,  as  far  as  it  can  be  learnt  from
written  records,  does  not  extend  beyond  a few  centuries  back,
and  refers  only  to  some  small  portions  of  the  coast  line  of  this
continent.  But  there  is  another  kind  of  historical  research
accessible  to  us,  which  embraces  thousands  of  years  of,  the
bygone  times  of  our  race.  From  the  facts  brought  to  light  by
Comparative  Philology  and  Ethnology,  a knowledge  can  be
gained — superior  in  its  certainty  to  that  of  the  liistorical
record — of  the  descent  and  mixture  of  the  different  nations
inhabiting  South  Africa,  their  consanguinity  with  and  in-
fluence upon  each  other,  their  gradual  breaking  up  into
several  tribes,  or  the  confluence  of  different  tribes  into  one
powerful  nation.  We  shall  be  able  to  learn  by  these  means,
whence  and  by  what  races  South  Africa  was  oi'iginally  peopled,
how  they  came  into  contact  with  each  other,  whether  they
peacefully  commingled,  or  whether  the  stronger  drove  the
weaker  race  victoriously  before  them.  We  may  with  some
degree  of  certainty  even  ascertain  at  what  periods  and  from
what  causes  the  different  nations  of  each  race  were  separated,
and  w'hen  and  how  their  tribal  subdivision  took  place, — each
individual  branch  of  a race  fashioning  in  its  own  way  what  it
had  inherited  from  the  common  stock,  with  regard  to  lan-
guage, liabits  and  customs,  religious  ideas,  and  political  insti-
tutions. Small  in  comparison  with  this  grand  history  of
South  Africa,  accessible  to  us  by  means  of  Comparative  Phi-
lology and  Ethnology,  are  the  facts  revealed  by  the  traditions  of
the  different  tribes  and  nations,  though  they  go  in  one  instance
at  least  (that  of  the  Frontier  Kafirs),*  as  far  as  eighteen  gener-
ations back,  and  are  all  well  worth  recording.

There  are  some  main  facts  established  through  the  last  twelve
years’  researches  which  stand  in  bold  relief  to  the  groping
uncertainty  till  then  existing  with  regard  to  African  Ethnology.

* Vide  Dr.  Nicholson’s  notes  at  pp.  166-168  of  Col.  Maclean’s  “Com-
pendium of  Kafir  Laws  and  Customs,”  No.  164a  of  Sir  G.  Grey’s
Library,  Vol.  I.


TREFACE.


\’iii

One  is  the  Nortli  African  origin  of  tlie  Hottentots,*  tlie  other
tlic  extension  of  that  class  of  languages  and  nations  to  which  the
Kafir  belongs  over  all  parts  of  South  Africa  known  to  us  (with
the  exception  of  those  inhabited  by  the  Hottentot  and  Bushman
tribes),  and  over  the  greater  part  of  Western  Africans  far  as  13°
northern  latitude,  extending  in  that  region  from  the  banks  of  the
Senegal  to  those  of  the  upper  Nile.f  This  knowledge  that  the
great  mass  of  African  languages  is  reducible  to  two  families  is
mainly  due  to  comparative  researches  which  had  taken  as  their
basis  the  Hottentot  and  Kafir  languages,  as  exhibiting  in  general
the  most  primitive  state  of  the  two  races,  in  speech,  customs,  &c.

Thus  the  two  principal  native  races  inhabiting  the  borders
of  this  colony  may  be  said  to  furnish  us  with  a firm  basis
for  the  general  history  of  the  Afi'ican  races,  as  far  as  this  can
be  gained  by  means  of  ethnologieal  and  philological  compa-
risons. If,  therefore,  besides  the  practical  advantage  and
political  expediency  of  facilitating  our  intercourse  with  the
different  native  races,  a particular  interest  is  attached  to  such
philological  and  ethnological  studies  at  the  Cape,  as  forming
our  only  extensive  legitimate  field  of  colonial  historical  re-
searches,— the  importanee  of  the  South  Afriean  languages  (and
particularly  of  the  Kafir  and  Hottentot)  for  Comparative
Philology,  or  the  so-called  “ Scienee  of  Language,”  cannot
well  be  overvalued.  Nay,  it  is  perhaps  not  too  much  to  say
that  similar  results  may  at  present  be  expected  from  a deeper
study  of  such  primitive  forms  of  language  as  the  Kafir  and
Hottentot  exhibit,  as  followed  at  the  beginning  of  this  century

* The  fact  that  the  Hottentot  language  is  nearer  akin  to  North  Afri-
can languages  than  to  those  of  the  black  nations  of  South  Africa  was
ascertained  independently  and  almost  at  the  same  time  by  different
scholars,— for  example  by  the  Eev.  Dr.  J.  C.  Adamson  (Journal  of  the
American  Oriental  Society  Vol.  iv,  No.  2,  1854,  p.  448),  by  Mr.  Logan
(in  the  Journal  of  the  Indian  Archipelago,  if  I recollect  rightly,  about
185.8),  and  by  myself  (De  Nominum  Generibus  Linguarum  Africae
Australis,  &c.,  1851,  pp.  45-60).

f The  late  lamented  first  Bishop  of  Sierra  Leone,  0.  E.  Vidal,  was  the
first  who  publiely  stated  that  some  of  the  languages  of  Sierra  Leone
(the  Timneh  and  Bullom)  belong  to  the  Ba-ntu  family  of  languages
(Introductory  Kemarks  to  Crowther’s  Yoruba  Dictionary,  1852,  p.  7).
The  same  fact  had  independently  about  that  time  become  clear  also  to
other  observers,— for  example,  to  Mr.  Norris  (Prichard’s  Natural  History
of  Man,  4th  edition,  edited  by  E.  Norris,  1855,  vol.  ii,  p.  421).


PREFACE.


IX


the  discovery  of  Sanscrit  and  the  comparative  researches  of
Oriental  scliolars.  The  origin  of  the  grammatical  forms  of
gender  and  number,  the  etymology  of  pronouns,  and  many  other
questions  of  the  highest  interest  to  the  philologist  find  their
true  solution  in  Southern  Africa.  *>

The  forms  of  a language  may  be  said  to  constitute  in
some  degree  the  skeleton  frame  of  the  human  mind
whose  thoughts  they  express.  Sounds,  too  may  be  con-
sidered as  forming  the  elements  of  language;  and,  the
portion  of  my  work  relating  to  these  has,  therefore,  some
analogy  to  organic  chemistry  in  its  application  to  animal
structures.  Such  phonological  researches  are  of  course  neces-
sary for  any  sound  investigation  into  the  nature  of  a language ;
but  they  have  not  that  interest  and  practical  importance  which
the  exposition  of  the  structure  of  the  languages  will  present.
The  organic  features  of  the  languages,  as  they  will  be  laid
down  in  the  following  parts  of  this  book,  are  in  one  respect
especially  attractive,  since  they  afford  the  clue  to  the  original
mental  tendencies  of  the  two  races,  of  which  the  Kafir  and
Hottentot  are  the  most  primitive  representatives.  For  any
one  who  has  studied  the  subject,  the  dependence  to  a great
extent  of  a nation’s  mode  of  thought  on  the  forms  of  their  lan-
guage is  a well-known  fact.  How  dependent,  for  example,
the  highest  products  of  the  human  mind,  the  religious  ideas
and  conceptions  of  even  highly  civilized  nations,  may  be  upon
their  manner  of  speaking  has  been  ingeniously  shown  by  Max
Muller,  in  his  essay  on  Comparative  Mythology  (Oxford
Essays,  1856}.  This  will  become  still  more  evident  from  our
African  researches.  The  primary  cause  of  the  ancestor  wor-
ship of  the  one  race  (Kafirs,  Negroes,  and  Polynesians)  and
of  the  sidereal  worship  (or  of  those  forms  of  religion  which
have  sprung  from  the  veneration  of  heavenly  bodies)  of  the
other  (Hottentots,  North  African,  Semitic  and  Aryan  nations)
is  supplied  by  the  very  forms  of  their  language.

The  nations  speaking  Sex-denoting  languages  are  dis-
tinguished by  a higher  poetical  conception,  by  which  human
agency  is  transferred  to  other  beings,  and  even  to  inanimate
things,  in  consequence  of  which  their  personification  takes
place,  forming  the  origin  of  almost  all  mythological  legends.
This  faculty  is  not  developed  in  the  Kafir  mind,  because  not
suggested  by  the  forms  of  their  language,  in  which  the  nouns


X


rUEFACK.


of  persons  are  not  (as  in  the  Sex-denoting  languages)  ihrowii
together  with  tliose  of  inanimate  beings  into  the  same  classes  or
genders,  but  are  in  separate  classes,  without  any  grammatical
distinction  of  sex.  This  can,  of  course,  not  be  fully  understood
without  entering  into  all  the  details  of  the  grammatical  classifi-
cation of  nouns  and  pronouns,  and  I must,  therefore,  refer  for
further  explanation  to  the  second  part  of  this  book,  which  will
treat  of  the  nouns,  pronouns,  adjectives,  &c.

It  seems  here,  however,  important  to  point  out  the  fact  that
not  only  the  grammatical  structure  of  the  language  in  this
regard  Avas  fixed,  before  the  Hottentots  separated  from  their
N orth  African  cousins.  The  very  tendency  of  the  mind  produced
by  the  peculiar  structure  of  the  language,  must  to  a certain
extent  have  been  settled  before  the  period  of  separation.
Tlie  lunar  worship,  which,  according  to  Kolb,  formed  origi-
nally the  main  feature  of  the  devotional  practices  of  the
Hottentots,  renders  it  probable  that  their  religious  ideas  already
had  a direct  tendency  in  favour  of  sidereal  worship  before  they
were  cut  off  from  the  more  northern  Sex-denoting  nations.

The  character  of  the  Hottentot  literature,  as  far  as  we  are  as
yet  acquainted  with  it,  shows  a singular  agreement  with  the
most  primitive  phases  of  our  own  literature.  The  personifi-
cation of  irrational  beings,  which  is  caused  in  the  first  instance  by
the  structural  peculiarities  of  the  Sex-denoting  languages,  leads
to  that  class  of  fictitious  tales  known  as  fables  which  form  such
a charming  portion  of  our  early  literature.  The  Hottentot
imagination  seems  to  have  been  employed  in  the  same  direction  j
and  many  of  the  fables  which  have  been  collected  from  the  mouth
of  the  natives  bear  a great  resemblance  to  parts  of  the  poem  of
Reynard  the  Fox  and  other  world-renowned  fables.  It  is  possible
that  one  or  more  of  these  fables  may  have  been  derived  from
European  sources,  but  the  majority  is  certainly  original  j and
the  very  facility  with  which  those  others  have  been  adopted  by
the  natives  is  a great  proof  of  that  congeniality  of  disposition  in
the  Hottentot  mind  which  we  ascribe  to  common  ancestry.

It  is  true,  also,  that  in  the  legends  of  the  black  nations  of
South  Africa  animals  are  sometimes  made  to  act  and  speak
like  men  ; but  then,  in  general,  this  is  less  a real  personification
than  amcrcconscquenceof  theirreligious  belief  in  metempsychosis
or  migration  of  the  soul,  and  intimately  connected  with  their
ancestor  worship.  The  literature  of  the  negro  tribes  has  mainly


ri'vEFACE.


XI


an  epical,  historical  or  half  historical  character,  relating  the
adventures  of  real  men,  varied  sometimes  by  spectral  phantoms
or  metamorphoses  of  men  into  lions  or  other  animals.  Witch-
craft is,  of  course,  here  one  of  the  principal  moving  agents.

I do  not  lay  much  stress  here  upon  the  fact  that  the  law  of
composition  in  Hottentot  poetry  seems  to  be  the  same  as  that
met  with  in  the  productions  of  the  Semitic  poets.  The  paral-
lelism which  in  the  Psalms  and  other  poetical  portions  of  the
Old  Testament  takes  the  place  of  the  rhyme,  metre  and
alliteration  of  the  Aryan  languages,  seems  also  to  constitute  the
essential  quality  of  Hottentot  poetry.  As  a specimen  I give
the  following  song,  furnished  by  Mr.  Krbnlein  :*

THE  ZEBRA.

Thou  who  art  thrown  at  by  the  great  (shepherd)  boys,

Thou  whose  head  the  (kirrie’s)  throw  misses  !

Thou  dappled  fly,

Thou  party-coloured  one.

Thou  who  spiest  for  those
Who  spy  for  thee.

Thou  woman’s  thigh.

Thou  thigh  of  jealousy  !

Regarding  the  stage  of  civilization  in  which  the  Sex-denoting
nations,  (if  this  title  is  admissible)  stood  at  the  time  of  separ-
ation, it  is  probable  (though  by  no  means  certain)  that  the  use
of  domestic  cattle  had  already  been  introduced.  At  all  events
it  is  singular  that  amongst  the  Hottentots  as  well  as  amongst
the  more  Northern  nations,  the  milking  of  the  cows  is  woman’s
business,  whilst  amongst  Kafirs  and  kindred  tribes  a woman
generally  is  not  allowed  to  touch  the  cattle,  or  enter  the  cattle
fold. — (Cape  Monthly  Magazine,  Vol.  i,  April,  1857,  p.  207.)

It  was  my  intention  to  say  a few  words  regarding  the
nomenclature  employed,  and  the  principle  of  classification  on
which  it  is  based.  But  as  I foresee  that  this  would  lead  me
too  far,  I must  defer  it  to  an  other  opportunity,  trusting  that
the  terms  which  I have  used  are  sufficiently  clear  in  them-
selves to  be  understood  without  any  particular  explanation.

Extended  introductory  remarks  were  not  required,  as  all
the  necessary  information  regarding  the  different  languages,

The  Rev.  G.  Kronlein  has  already  enriched  Sir  George  Grey’s
Library  with  thirteen  fables,  thirty- two  proverbs,  five  riddles,  and  five
songs,  all  in  Nama  Hottentot,  with  German  translation  and  notes.  (§  15. —
Cape  Monthly  Magazine,  Vol.  xi.  No.  65,  May,  1862,  p 316.)


riilCFACK.


xii

and  a detailed  descrijjtion  of  their  respective  literatures,  has  been
given  in  the  first  volume  of  the  catalogue  of  “ Sir  George
Grey’s  Library.”  The  literary  treasures  of  this  collection
were,  however,  out  of  my  reach,  when  I wrote  this  first  part
of  my  work.  Amongst  them  there  is  perhaps  not  one  work
which  I missed  more  than  Livingstone’s  Analysis.  (Vide  § 30.)

I am  aware  that  on  this  and  many  other  accounts,  the
present  work  cannot  but  be  in  some  degree  deficient ; but  I
thought  it  better,  while  I had  the  time  and  strength,  to  give
those  results  of  my  labours  which  I considered  would  be  useful
to  the  student  of  these  languages.

With  regard  to  the  selection  of  my  sources  of  information,  I
am  conscious  that  in  general  I have  been  sufficiently  particular.
Only  in  the  case  of  the  dialects  of  the  Mosambique  genus,  I
felt  myself  constrained  to  rely  upon  data  furnished  by  a mere
traveller  j and  here,  therefore,  my  statements  may  be  most
liable  to  error.  But  this  will  not,  I trust,  be  found  materially
to  affect  the  rules  laid  down.

The  reader  will  see  that  I have  endeavoured  to  follow
Lepsius’s  Standard  Alphabet  in  general  as  much  as  possible.
In  some  cases,  however,  the  typographical  difficulties  were  too
great;  and  on  this  account,  for  example,  sh  and  tsh  had  to  repre-
sent his  / and  ts^.  In  writing  the  aspirated  linguals,  I have
ventured  to  add  the  x (which  sound  is  really  heard  in  these
letters)  to  the  signs  chosen  by  him.

For  a comparative  work  of  this  nature,  the  adoption  of  a
uniform  system  of  transcription  was  almost  a necessity.  With
reference  to  publications  in  the  different  native  languages  I may
be  allowed  to  say  that  a general  agreement  in  their  orthogra-
phies would  indeed  be  very  desirable ; but  I am  afraid  that
ainder  present  circumstances  an  immediate  change  for  this
purpose  would  be  connected  with  great  practical  inconveni-
.ences.  Gradual  alterations,  however,  with  a view  to  ultimate
uniformity,  can  easily  be  introduced  with  advantage.

Finally,  I have  thankfully  to  acknowledge  the  aid  which  has
been  afforded  in  the  publication  of  this  work  by  numerous
subscriptions,  among  Avhich  I may  especially  mention  those  of
the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  N atal,  and  Imperial  Governments.

W.  H.  I.  Bleek.

Capetown,  18th  June,  18G2.


A COMPARATIVE  GRAMMAR


OF

SOUTH  AFHICAlNr  LANGUAGES.


INTRODUCTION.

I.  CLASSIFICATION  OF  SOUTH  AFRICAN  LANGUAGES.

1.  It  is  the  object  of  this  work  to  give  a comparative
view  of  the  structure  of  the  languages  spoken  in  Africa
to  the  South  of  the  Equator,  as  far  as  we  are  yet  acquainted
with  them.  These  languages  are,  according  to  their
structure  and  origin,  divided  into  three  classes.  As
representatives  of  these  three  classes  we  may  name  the
languages  of  the  Kafir,  the  Hottentot,  and  the  Bushman.

2.  The  Bushman  tongue  is  as  yet  too  insufficiently
known  to  allow  us  to  assign  to  it  its  proper  place  in  a
general  classification  of  languages ; but  it  seems  to  be
clear  that  its  relationship  to  the  Hottentot  language  is,  at
least,  very  remote.  In  fact,  the  probability  is  that  it  will
be  found  to  belong  to  what  may  be  called  the  class  of
Genderless  Languages.  Members  of  this  class  seem  to
exist  in  almost  all  other  parts  of  the  world,  and  they
interrupt  particularly  the  contiguity  of  Sex-denoting
languages,  in  Northern  Africa  fBornu,  Mandenga,  &c.),
Europe  (Basque,  Hungarian,  Finnian,  &c.),  Asia  (Tarta-
ric, Mongolian,  Dravldian,  &c.)  They  occupy  also  some
portions  of  America,  and  the  whole  Australian  continent.

3.  The  Hottentot  language  is  known  to  us  in  three  or
four  different  dialects,  one  of  which  (the  Nama  lan-
guage) is  represented  by  a large  amount  of  missionary

BIppIc,  S,  Afr.  Comp,  Grammar.  B


Classification.


•2

literatui’e.  Its  nearest  relations  are  met  with  in  Northern
Africa,  whilst  its  relationship  to  other  South  African
Languages  is,  perhaps  still  more  distant  than  to  the
Bushman  Language.

4.  The  Kafir  Language  belongs  to  an  extensive  family
of  languages  which  occupy  (as  far  as  our  knowledge
goes)  the  Avhole  remaining  portion  of  the  South  African
continent,  extending  on  the  Eastern  side  from  the  Kels-
kamma  to  the  equatoi’,  and  on  the  Western  side  from
32°  southern  to  about  8°  northern  Latitude.

5.  Members  of  this  family  of  languages,  which  we
call  the  Ba-rdu  family  (§12  and  140),  are  also  spread  over
portions  of  Western  Africa,  as  far  west  as  Sierra  Leone,
where  the  Bullom  and  Tirnneh  languages  are  cousins  of
the  Kafir.  They  are  here  interspersed  particularly  by
members  of  the  Gor  family  of  languages  (Fulah,
Wolof,  Ga,  &c.),  which  belongs  to  the  same  class  of
languages  as  the  Ba-ntu  family,  and  forms  together
with  it  the  African  section  of  this  class ; whilst  the
Malay,  Polynesian,  and  Papuan  families  are  to  be  con-
sidered as  members  of  the  Oceanic  section  of  the  same
class.

6.  The  chief  characteristic  of  this  class  of  inter-
tropical  languages  is  that  the  pronouns  are  originally
borrowed  from  the  derivative  prefixes  of  the  nouns,  whilst
in  that  class  of  languages  to  which  the  Hottentot,  Egyp-
tian, Semitic,  and  Aryan  or  Indo-European  families
belong,  the  pronouns  are  originally  borrowed  from  the
derivative  suffixes  of  the  nouns.

7.  The  former  class  is,  on  this  account,  called  that  of
Prefix-pronominal  Languages,  and  the  latter  the  class  of
Suffix-pronominal  Languages;  both  classes  together  are
included  in  the  group  of  Pronominal  Languages.

8.  Their  main  distinctive  feature  is  a concord  of  the
pronouns  and  of  every  part  of  speech,  in  the  formation  of
which  pronouns  are  employed  (c.  g.  adjectives  and  verbs)
u'ith  the  nouns  to  which  they  respectively  refer,  and  the


Sex-denoting  and  Bd-ntu  Banguages.  3

hereby  caused  distribution  of  the  nouns  into  classes  or
genders.

9.  This  concord  is  evidently  produced  through  the
original  identity  of  each  pronoun  with  the  respective
derivative  particle  (prefix,  or  suffix)  of  the  nouns  which
may  be  represented  by  it.

10.  The  different  classes  or  gender  of  the  nouns  are,
in  the  only  family  of  Suffix-pronominal  languages  which
has  as  yet  been  clearly  made  out,  brought  into  some
reference  to  the  distinction  of  sex  as  seen  in  nature.
They  are,  therefore,  termed  Sex-denoting  Languages.

11.  Among  the  classes  or  genders  of  the  nouns  in  the
Prefix-pronominal  languages,  only  two  have  a decided
reference  to  the  distinctions  observed  in  nature,  being
restricted  to  nouns  denoting  reasonable  beings,  the  one  in
the  singular  the  other  in  the  plural.

12.  That  the  derivative  prefix  and  pronouns  of  this
last  gender  (of  personal  nouns  in  the  plural)  are  either
actually  Ja-,  or  contracted,  or  in  some  other  manner
changed  from  it,  is  one  of  the  characteristics  of  the
Bd-ntu  family  of  languages,  which  have  on  this  account
been  called  Ba-Languages  by  Dr.  H.  Barth.

13.  If  we  leave,  therefore,  the  Bushman  language,  as
too  little  known,*  out  of  sight,  we  have  here  to  do,  on  the
one  hand  with  a South  African  species  of  the  Sex-denoting
languages,  and  on  the  other  with  the  South  African  divi-
sion of  the  Bd-ntu  family  of  languages.

14.  The  former  is  represented  merely  by  a few  dialectical
varieties  of  one  and  the  same  language  (the  Hottentot),
whilst  the  latter  is  divided  into  three  great  branches,  each
branch  comprising  several  languages  which  are  as  distinct
from  each  other  as,  perhaps,  English  is  from  German,  or
French  from  Italian  and  Portuguese.

* A manuscript  grammar  of  the  Bushman  language  by  the  Kev.  C.
F.  Wuras  is  in  Sir  G.  Grey's  Library.


4


Introduction.


II.  SHORT  VIEW  OF  THE  DIALECTS  DESCRIBED.

15.  The  most  imporlant  Hottentot  dialect  is  that  of  the
Nama-qua  (msc.  plur.  obj.)  or  Nama-na  (comm.  plur.
obj.),  which  is  still  spoken  by  about  20,000  souls,  and  is
the  fullest  in  forms  and  the  most  original  in  structure.
It  is  described  in  two  gi-ammars  (Wallmann’s  in  German,
Tindall’s  in  English,  the  latter  being  the  best),  and  a
large  amount  of  missionary  literature  has  been  published
in  it.  A few  pieces  of  native  literatui'e  are  in  manu-
script in  Sir  G.  Grey’s  Library  ; and  also  two  gramma-
tical documents,  one  by  Mr.  Josias  C.  Rivers,  the  other
by  the  Rev.  H.  C.  Knudsen.

16.  The  !Kora  Hottentot  dialect,  which  resembles  most
nearly  the  Nama  dialect,  is  now  nearly  extinct.  An
extract  of  a grammar  of  this  dialect  by  Mr.  Wuras  is
published  in  Appleyard’s  Kafir  grammar.  A manuscript
dictionary  by  the  same  author  is  in  Sir  G.  Grey’s  Library,
together  with  a manuscript  revision  of  a catechism
in  this  dialect,  the  published  copies  of  which  are
defective.

17.  The  Cape  Hottentot  dialect  has  disappeared  many
years  ago.  Specimens  of  it  are  preserved  in  translations
made  previous  to  1679,  and  published  in  Leibnitz’s
Collectanea  Etymologica,  and  in  Witsen’s  vocabularies  (of
1691),  published  in  Junckeri  Vita  Ludolfi.  Both  these
texts  and  vocabularies  were  reprinted  in  the  January  and
February  numbers  of  the  ‘^Cape  Monthly  Magazine”  of
1858.

18.  In  the  Eastern  Hottentot  dialects  only  scanty  voca-
bularies are  now  in  existence ; for  Dr.  van  der  Kemp’s
catechism  (published  in  1805  or  1806)  which  represented
one  of  these  dialects,  has  totally  disapjieared.

19.  The  South  African  division  of  the  Bd-ntu  family
of  lamjuarjes  consists  of  one  large  middle  body,  occupying


South-eastern  Branch.


5


almost  the  whole  known  territory  between  the  tropic  of
Capricorn  and  the  equator,  and  of  two  detached  branches,
one  to  the  south-south-east  and  the  other  to  the  north-
north-west.

20.  In  the  Middle  Branch  the  Eastern  and  Western
languages  offer  distinct  characteristics  ; and  this  branch  is
accordingly  divide'd  into  two  portions,  each  of  which
contains  again  at  least  two  genera.

21.  The  Middle  branch  languages  are,  as  a whole,
distinguished  by  a greater  softness  of  pronunciation,  and
by  a tendency  to  mollification,  which  shows  itself  most
strongly  in  the  Western  portion,  and  particularly  in  the
South-western  or  Bunda  genus.  The  members  of  the
latter  particularly  offer,  in  comparison  with  those  of  the
South-eastern  branch,  a strikingly  opposite  phonetical
development.

Their  main  difference  seems  to  be  that  in  the  languages
of  the  South-eastern  branch,  the  terminations  of  the
words  affect,  almost  exclusively,  the  preceding  syllables,
whilst  in  those  of  the  Western  portion  of  the  Middle
branch,  the  terminations  are  also  varied  in  accordance
with  the  preceding  syllables.  The  prior  tendency  has
particularly  led  to  the  palatalisation  of  consonants,  and
the  latter  to  vowel-harmonic  changes,  and  to  an  allitera-
tion of  consonants.

22.  The  South-eastern  Branch  consists  of  three  distinct
species,  Kafir,  Se-tshudna,  and  Tekeza.

23.  Of  these  three  languages  the  Kafir,  with  Its
variety  the  Zulu,  presents  in  general  the  fullest  forms,
and  the  most  original  features  with  regard  to  its  structure,
and  the  greatest  melodiousness  in  its  sounds.

24.  The  Tekeza  is  broader,  and  Se-tshudna  more  guttu-

ral and  less  nasal,  with  darker  vowels  and  less  primitive
consonants.  r

25.  The  Kafir  proper  differs  from  the  Zulu  less  in  the
form  of  the  words  than  in  their  idiomatic  use.


6


Introduction


26.  Besiclesagreat  amountof  missionary  literature, there
are  three  grammars  of  the  Kafir  language  published  by  com-
petent authors,  Messrs.  Boyce,  Davis  (who  describes
particularly  the  Ma-mpondo  dialect),  and  Appleyard,  and  a
neat  little  English-Kafir  vocabulary  by  AylifF.  A Kafir-
English  dictionary  is  much  wanted.  A few  pieces  of  native
literature  are  in  manuscript  in  Sir  G.  Grey’s  Library.

27.  In  Zulu  a great  portion  of  the  native  literature
has  been  brought  to  light,  particularly  by  the  labours  of
J.  W.  Colenso,  Bishop  of  ISTatal.  Other  pieces  collected
by  the  Rev.  Dr.  H.  Callaway  are  in  manuscript  in  Sir
G.  Grey’s  Library.  Very  useful  grammars  were  also
published  by  the  Bishop  of  Natal,  and  by  an  American
missionary,  the  Rev.  L.  Grout.  Small  Zulu-English
and  English-Zulu  vocabularies  by  Mr.  J.  Perrin  were
published  by  the  Bishop  of  Natal ; and  a large  Zulu-
English  dictionary  by  Rev.  J.  L.  Ddhne  was  printed  at
Cape  Town  under  the  patronage  of  Sir  G.  Grey.*

28.  The  amount  of  dialectical  variety  is  much  greater
in  Se-tshudna  than  in  the  Kafir  species.

29.  The  Eastern  Se-tshudna  dialects  approach  nearer  to
the  Kafir  and  Zulu  than  those  of  the  west.

30.  Numerous  missionary  publications  have  been  issued
in  one  eastern  Se-tshuana  dialect  (the  Se-suto),  and  in
two  western  dialects,  the  Se-rolon  and  Se-xlapi.  Into  the
latter  the  whole  Bible  has  already  been  translated.  The
remarks  in  Casalis’  Etudes  give  only  scanty  fragments  of
a Se-suto  grammar,  and  Livingstone’s  Analysis  (printed
only  in  twenty -five  copies)  is  of  course  not  accessible  to
the  general  public.  A manuscript  dictionary  by  the
same  author,  revised  by  Mr.  Moffat,  and  a manuscript
grammar  by  Mr.  I.  Hughes  are  in  Sir  G.  Grey’s  Library.

31.  The  difference  between  the  Se-xlapi  and  Se-rolori
dialects  is  apparently  not  even  so  great  as  that  between
Kafir  and  Zulu.

* Its  usefulness  might  be  increased  by  tlic  addition  of  an  English-
Zulu  vocabulary. — A complete  Zulu-English  dictionary  by  the  Bishop
of  Natal  has  just  been  published.


Eastern  Middle  Branch.


7


32.  Telieza  dialects  are  known  to  us  only  through
short  vocabularies,  the  largest  of  which  (referring  to  the
dialect  of  Lourenzo  Marques  at  the  Delagoa  Bay)  is
published  in  my  edition  of  Dr.  Peters’  Mosambique
vocabularies.

33.  The  Southern  Genus  of  the  Eastern  portion  of  the
Middle  branch,  extending  over  the  Mosambique  Coast  and
the  Zambezi  River  system,' is  represented  mainly  by  voca-
bularies, of  which  those  collected  by  Dr.  Peters,  referring
mainly  to  dialects  spoken  on  or  near  the  coast,  are
published,  whilst  those  from  the  farther  interior,  collected
by  Dr.  Livingstone,  are  still  in  manuscript  in  Sir  G.
Grey’s  Library,  together  with  a few  manuscript  texts  in
the  dialects  of  Tette  and  Sena,  with  grammatical  tables
of  the  latter  dialect,  and  with  specimens  of  conjugations
in  several  Mosambique  languages.

34.  With  regard  to  their  phonetlcal  characteristics,
most  of  these  Mosambique  languages  show  only  slight
modifications  (consisting  mainly  in  contractions,  abbre-
viations, mutation  of  more  difficult  consonants,  &c.)  in
comparison  with  the  structure  of  the  Kafir  language.
Striking  transitions  of  sound  occur,  however,  in  the
Makua  language.

35.  In  three  of  the  languages  of  the  Northern  Genus
of  this  Eastern  portion  of  the  Middle  branch,  extending
along  the  Zanzibar  Coast,  books  have  been  published,
viz.,  in  Ki-suaheli,  Ki-nika,  and  Ki-kamba.  The  two
former  dialects  have  been  described  grammatically  by
Dr.  L.  Krapf,  who  has  also  published  extensive  vocabu-
laries of  these  three  dialects  and  of  the  Ki-pokomo*  *

36.  Also  the  Hinzuan  spoken  on  Joana  (one  of  the
Comoro  Islands)  and  described  in  Mr.  Elliott’s  manuscript

* The  Ki-hiau  belongs  more  properly  to  the  South-eastern  or  Mosam-
bique genius.  It  is  nearest  akin  to  the  Marawi,  &c.


8


Introduction.


grammars  and  vocabulary,  which  are  in  Sir  Gr.  Grey’s
Library,  belongs  to  this  North-eastern  or  Zangian  genus;
and  likewise  the  jargon  spoken  by  the  Sidi  in  Sindh,
of  which  a short  vocabulary  is  published  by  R.  F.
Burton.

37.  The  languages  of  the  Southern  Genus  of  the  Wes-
tern -portion  of  the  Middle  branch  are  distinguished  from
the  North-western  or  Zangian  genus  by  a still  farther
extension  and  more  striking  application  of  vowel-har-
monic influences  affecting  the  terminating  syllables.

38.  Pnblications  have  been  issued  by  missionaries  in
two  languages  of  the  South-western  or  Bunda  genus,  the
o Tyi-herero,  spoken  by  the  o V a-herero,  and  the  Bunda
proper,  or  language  of  Angola.

39.  The  former,  though  now  almost  extinct,  has  only  of
late  been  made  known  through  the  labours  of  two
Rhenish  missionaries,  one  of  whom  (C.  H.  Hahn)  has
also  published  a grammar  and  dictionary  of  the  language.
Sir  G.  Grey’s  Library  contains  also  valuable  pieces  of
native  literature  in  o Tyi-herero,  collected  by  the  Rev.
J.  Rath.

40.  The  Angola  (or  Bunda)  catechism,  four  editions  of
which  have  been  published,  represents  the  language  as
it  was  spoken  two  centuries  ago.  It  was  written  by  a
Jesuit,  F.  Pacconlo.  Another  Jesuit,  P.  Dias,  has  com-
piled a Bunda  grammar,  mostly  with  reference  to  this
catechism.  It  is  not  known,  whether  more  than  one
printed  copy  of  this  grammar  is  still  in  existence.  A
manuscript  copy  is  in  ISir  G.  Grey’s  Libi’ary.

41.  Of  the  language  of  Benguela,  which  is  quite  dis-
tinct from  that  of  Angola  as  well  as  from  the  Herero
species,  a vocabulary  with  a few  songs,  has  been  col-
lected from  the  mouth  of  a liberated  slave.

42.  A Londa  vocabulary  compiled  by  Dr.  Livingstone
is  in  manuscript  in  Sir  G.  Grey’s  Library.


North-western  Branch.


9


43.  Among:  the  languages  of  the  Northern  Genus  of
this  Westei’n  portion  of  the  Middle  branch,  the  Kongo  \s,
the  most  important,  and  it  seems  to  be  well  described  in
Brusciotto  a Vetralla’s  grammar,  printed  more  than  two
hundred  years  ago.  A Kongo  catechism,  published  in  two
editions  before  that  time,  is  mentioned  by  Cannecattim.

44.  A few  grammatical  remarks  referring  to  the  Ka-
kongo  language  were  published  in  Proyart’s  History  of
Loango,  &c.,  nearly  a hundred  years  ago.

45.  The  third  known  member  of  this  North-western  or
Kongo  genus,  the  Mpongwe,  is  accessible  through  a
considerable  amount  of  missionary  literature,  published
by  American  missionaries,  together  with  a grammar  and
vocabularies  of  the  language,  which  in  comparison  with
the  more  southern  species  of  this  genus,  exhibits  very
broken  and  mutilated  structural  features.

46.  The  North-western  branch  extends  along  the  coast
from  1°  to  4|°  northern  latitude,  but  in  the  interior  it
reaches  several  degrees  south  of  the  line  and  to  at  least
8°  northern  latitude.

47.  The  Di-hele  is  the  only  inland  language  of  this
branch,  which  is,  as  yet,  represented  by  missionary
publications,  and  described  in  a grammar  and  voca-
bulary.

48.  The  Benga,  Dualla,  and  Isubu  are  three  coast  lan-
guages of  this  branch,  regarding  which  grammatical
works  have  been  published,  and  portions  of  vocabularies
of  the  latter  two  dialects  have  also  been  printed.  A
large  amount  of  missionary  literature  exists  in  Dualla,
and  also,  though  less,  in  Isubu,  which  seems  to  differ
only  dialectically  from  the  Dualla.  In  Benga  a primer
and  catechism  are  the  only  texts  known  to  us.

49.  A vast  amount  of  Inland  territory  between  10°
northern  and  10°  southern  latitude,  being  wholly  un-
known, it  may  be  supposed  that  numerous  members  of


BleeJc,  S»  Afr.  Comp,  Grammar,


C


10


Introduction,


the  South  African  division  of  the  Ba-ntu  family  of  lan-
guages will  eventually  be  discovered  here  ; and  it  is  very
possible  that  several  new  genera  of  this  division,  and
perhaps  even  some  new  branches,  of  which,  as  yet,  not  a
single  dialect  is  recognized,  are  here  still  hidden  from
our  view.


THE  COMPARATIVE  GRAMMAR.

A.  PHONOLOGY.


I.  GENERAL  CHARACTERISTICS.

50.  Regarding  their  primary  elements  the  main  differ-
ence between  the  Hottentot  dialects  and  the  languages  of
the  Ba-ntu  family  is  that  the  structure  of  the  former  is
monosyllabic  and  that  of  the  Ba-ntu  languages  polysyl-
labic.

51.  This  means  to  say  merely  that  most  words  in  the
Hottentot  language  which  are  not  monosyllabic  are  at
once  recognized  as  derivatives  and  composites ; whilst  in
the  Ba-ntu  languages  such  a reduction  is,  in  general,
even  beyond  the  reach  of  deeper  analytical  researches.

52.  This  is  in  a great  measure  due  to  the  fact  that  the
syllables  of  a compounded  or  derived  word  in  Hottentot
do  not  cohere  so  closely  together,  nor  do  they  influence
and  affect  each  other  to  such  an  extent  as  in  the  B^-ntu
languages.  In  fact,  the  syllables  of  a Hottentot  word
stand  more  in  juxtaposition,  each  having  its  own  peculiar
accent,  than  form  a continuous  whole,  bound  together  by
an  overruling  accent,  as  is  the  case  in  the  Ba-ntu  words,
in  which  almost  every  syllable  of  a word  is  more  or  less
affected  in  sound  by  the  syllables  surrounding  it,  and  has
been  brought  into  some  accordance  with  it.

53.  The  tendency  towards  an  easier  pronunciation  of
the  words  which  is  visible  herein  is  also  shown  by  the
abandonment  in  the  Ba-ntu  languages  of  such  syllabic
elements  as  are  more  difficult  of  pronunciation.

II.  CONSONANTS.

1.  CLICKS.

54.  In  the  Hottentot  language,  three  fourths  of  the
syllabic  elements  of  the  language  begin  with  clicks.


12


rhonolofjt/.


55.  Among  the  Ba-iitu  languages  known  to  us,  clicks
appear  only  in  languages  adjoining  the  Hottentots,  namely,
in  the  varieties  of  the  Kafirs  species,  and  in  the  dialect
of  the  Ba-yeye.  It  is  probable  that  in  both  cases  they
are  due  to  Hottentot  influence,  though  none  of  the
Se-tshuana  dialects  (except  the  Se-suto,  vide  § 61)  have
been  tinged  with  this  phonetical  feature,  nor  has  the
oTyi-herero,  another  neighbour  of  the  Hottentots.  This
may,  perhaps,  arise  from  the  circumstance  that  these
languages  seem  not  to  have  encroached  so  much  upon
former  Hottentot  territory  as  the  Kafir  has,  or  they  may
only  in  later  periods  have  come  in  contact  with  clicking
tongues.

56.  The  two  easiest  Hottentot  clicks,  the  dental  and
cerebral,  have,  without  any  remarkable  modification,  been
adopted  by  the  Kafirs.

57.  The  dental  click  i (A  of  Le  Vaillant,  of  Lich-
tenstein, — of  Schmelen,  • of  Knudsen,  "y  of  Schreu-
der,  c in  Kafir  and  Zulu  books,  q in  Se-suto)  is  in  Kafir,
as  in  Hottentot,  “ sounded  by  pressing  the  tip  of  the
tongue  against  the  front  teeth  of  the  upper  jaw,  and  then
suddenly  and  forcibly  withdi’awing  it.”  (Tindall.)  It
resembles  our  interjection  of  annoyance.

58.  The  cerebral  click  ! (^  I of  Schmelen,  ‘ of  Knud-
sen, ^ of  Schreuder,  q of  Kafir  and  Zulu  books,  + of  the

Ehenish  Missionaries,)  is  “ sounded  by  curling  up  the  tip
of  the  tongue  against  the  roof  of  the  palate,  and  with-
drawing it  suddenly  and  forcibly.”  (Tindall.)

59.  A third  click,  generally  called  lateral  ||  (V  of  Le
Vaillant,  of  Lichtenstein,  ’ of  Schmelen  and  Knud-

sen,  ^ of  Schreuder)  is,  according  to  ii  indall,  in  Kama
Hottentot  generally  articulated  by  covering  with  the
tongue  the  whole  of  the  palate,  and  producing  the  sound
as  far  back  as  possible,  either  at  what  Lepsiiis  calls  the
faucal  or  the  guttural  point  of  the  palate.  European


dicks:.


13


learners,  however,  imitate  the  sound  by  placing  the  ton-
o-ue  ao’ainst  the  side  teeth  and  then  withdrawing  it.  This
latter  articulation,  harsh  and  foreign  as  it  is  to  the
Hottentot  ear,  is,  however,  also  that  of  the  corresponding
Kafir  and  Zulu  click,  which  is  in  most  books  expressed
by  the  letter  x.  A similar  sound  is  often  made  use  of
in  urging  forward  a horse.

60.  The  palatal  click  (A  of  Le  Vaillant,  of
Lichtenstein,  rv  of  Schmelen,  : of  Knudsen,  \ of  Lep-
sius)  is  in  Nama  Hottentot  sounded  by  pressing  the  tip
of  the  tongue  with  as  flat  a surface  as  possible  against  the
termination  of  the  palate  at  the  gums,  and  removing  it  in
the  same  manner  as  during  the  articulation  of  the  other
clicks.  This  diflScult  click  is  rarely,  if  ever,  employed  in
Kaflr  and  Zulu  words.  ( Vide  Boyce-Davis,  p.  4,  where
the  qc  is  probably  intended  to  indicate  this  sound.)

61.  The  occurrence  of  clicks  in  the  Kafir  dialects
decreases,  almost  in  pi’oportion  to  their  distance  from  the
Hottentot  border.  Yet  the  most  southern  Tekeza  dia-
lects and  the  Se-suto  have  also  (probably  through  Kafir
influence)  become  to  a slight  extent,  possessed  of  this
remarkable  phonetical  element.

62.  There  is,  further  this  distinction  between  the  Hot-
tentot and  Kafir  clicks,  namely,  that  the  latter  are  only
found  in  the  place  of  other  consonants,  and  are  used  like
consonants  at  the  beginning  of  syllables,  whilst  in  Hot-
tentot a guttural  explosive  consonant  (Ji,  kh,  or  g),  the
faucal  spirant  h and  the  nasal  n,  can  be  immediately
preceded  by  a click,  and  form  together  with  it  the  initial
element  of  the  syllables.

63.  The  so-called  harder  or  guttural  modification  of
the  Kafir  clicks,  which  is  generally  indicated  by  a pre-
fixed g,  seems  to  be  rather  a guttural  pronunciation  of
the  click  than  a full  guttural  sound  added  to  it.

64.  In  the  Bushman  language,  even  labial  (and  proba-
bly also  dental)  consonants  are  pronounced  together  with
clicks,  and  e.  g.,  the  Bushman  word  for  “ to  sleep”  seems


14


Phonology.


(o  be  \ phhoinye,  beginning  with  a combination  of  dental
click,  aspirated  labial,  and  guttural  tenuis,  in  which  three
letters  are  sounded  together.  (Compare  also  the  Bush-
man words  for  “ louse,”  “ food,”  &c.)

65.  According  to  Wuras,  however,  the  Bushman  lan-
guage has,  what  he  calls,  a labial  click  S to  articulate
which  the  tongue  moves  very  quickly,  like  that  of  the
performer  on  a flute.

66.  He  distinguishes  also,  a dental  click  peculiar  to
the  Bushman  tongue,  > which  is  produced  by  pressing
the  air  through  the  upper  and  lower  teeth,  which  stand
slightly  apart.

67.  Clicks  are,  besides,  as  far  as  we  know,  only  found
in  one  other  African  language,  the  Galla*,  a member  of
the  Semitic  family  of  Sex-denoting  languages,  and,  there-
fore, nearer  akin  to  the  Hottentot  than  to  the  Kafir.
The  Galla  language  agrees,  however,  in  its  whole  phone-
tical  system,  as  also  in  the  mode  of  employing  clicks,  far
more  with  the  Kafir  than  with  the  Hottentot  dialects.

68.  Clicks  occur,  according  to  v.  Klaproth,  also  in  the
Circassian  tongue ; and  two  clicks  are  distinguished  in
the  \i^e  ( ^ , idle)  language,  spoken  in  Guatemala,  of

which  an  old  Spanish  grammar  is  in  manuscript  in  Sir
G.  Grey’s  Library.

69.  Here  the  click  expressed  by  the  letter  is  pro-
duced with  the  middle  of  the  tongue,  by  withdrawing
the  breath  within,  and  giving  a little  snap  (castanetllla)
in  the  beginning  of  the  palate  with  the  centre  of  the
tongue,  in  such  a manner  that  a sound  is  formed  in  the
interior  of  the  throat  like  as  a guttural,  if  not  something
more  in  addition.


* I write  this,  subject  to  correction,  for  I have  not  one  of  Tutschek’s
liublications  with  me,  and  see  from  Lepsius’s  Standard  Alphabet  that  he
has  not  noted  any  clicks  in  Galla.  As  I am,  however,  not  the  only  one
who  believes  that  according  toTutschok’s  description,  two  of  his  letters
indicate  clicks,  I think  it  riglit  to  draw  attention  to  this  point.


Clicks.


15


70.  An  other  click  is  marked  hy  and  pronounced
with  force  by  beating  (slamming)  the  tip  of  the  tongue,
which  is  for  that  purpose  drawn  back  sufficiently,  against
the  upper  teeth  to  their  highest  point.  It  is  somewhat
retarded  or  detained  in  its  pronunciation.

71.  One  cannot  say  that  these  lixo  clicks  are  exactly
identical  with  any  of  the  Hottentot  clicks ; but  the
second  ^ , resembles  mostly,  the  Hottentot  dental  click  I ,

and  the  first  the  palatal  ^ combined  with  some  gut-
tural.

72.  The  drawing  in  of  the  breath  appears  to  me  to  be
a distinguishing  feature  in  the  pronunciation  of  lixe
clicks,  though  by  Lepsius  it  is  also  ascribed  to  African
clicks.

73.  Whether  some  other  sounds  in  lixe  are  meant  for
clicks  is  doubtful ; e.  g.  the  which  is  to  be  pro-
nounced with  the  tip  of  the  tongue  beginning  to  pronounce
t,  and  ending  in  z,  and  by  bringing  quickly  the  tip  of
the  tongue  to  the  upper  teeth.  If  this  is  a click,  it  is  of
course,  one  of  the  dental  order.


2.  ASPIRATED  LINGUALS.

74.  Next  to  the  clicks,  the  sounds  most  difficult  in
pronunciation  are  the  aspirated  linguals.  They  are,  how-
ever, found  only  in  the  languages  of  the  South-Eastern
Branch  of  the  BS,-ntu  family.

75.  In  Kafir  proper  three  letters  of  this  class  are
distinguished,  in  Zulu  and  Se-suto  two,  in  the  Western
Se-tshu^na  one,  and  in  the  Tekeza  of  Lourenzo  Marques,
again,  three,  which  seem,  however,  to  differ  somewhat
from  the  Kafir  aspirated  linguals  in  pronunciation.


IG


Phonology.


76.  The  first  aspirated  lingual  iii  Kafir  hooks,

\ of  Schreucler,  tl  of  the  Se-tshuaua,  tlh  of  a Lourenzo
Marques  manuscript,  of  Lepsius,)  sounds  in  Kafir  as  if
the  sounds  of  the  guttural  fricative  x (like  the  German  ch
in  “ suchen”)  was  pronounced  in  combination  and  at  the
same  time  with  the  lingual  1.

77.  The  second  aspirated  lingual  x^  {hi  in  Kafir,  clh  of
the  Lourenzo  Marques  manuscript)  appears,  in  Kafir  at
least,  to  be  merely  a stronger,  or  sharper,  pronunciation
of  the  first,  in  the  place  of  which  it  always  stands  after
a nasal,  nor  is  it  found  otherwise.  In  fact,  Appleyard  is
probably  right  when  he  says  that  it  ought  to  be  written

hhl  (or  hM),  the  intermediate  k between  the  h and  x^
facilitating  in  the  same  manner  the  pronunciation,  as,  e.g
the  p does  between  m and  t in  the  medieval  Latin  words
“ assumpta^'  “ redemptio"  or  the  t between  n and  s in
Kafir  words,  as  intsapo,  children  (plural  of  usapo,  child).
In  Delagoa  Bay  this  aspirated  lingual  occurs,  indeed,
without  a preceding  nasal ; but  we  have  already  remarked
that  the  pronunciation  of  the  Tekeza  aspirated  linguals
is  different  from  that  of  the  corresponding  Kafir  letters.
The  Se-tshuana  tl  is,  in  fact,  rather  this  harder  x^  than
the  first  aspirated  lingual.

78.  The  third  aspirated  lingual  {ghl,  jl,  and  dhl  in
Kafir  books,  | of  Schreuder,  thl  of  the  Sesuto,  dlh  or  Ih
of  the  Lourenzo  Marques  manuscript,  'I'  of  Lepsius,)
sounds  in  Kafir  as  if  the  aspirated  palatal  fricative  ^
(like  the  ch  in  German  ich)  was  pronounced  simultane-
ously with  the  lingual  Z.

79.  The  aspirated  linguals  of  the  South-eastern  Branch
languages  are,  in  other  Ba-ntu  languages,  changed  into
guttui'al,  dental,  or  palatal  consonants,  and  also  into  sibi-
lants, pure,  aspirated,  or  lisping.

80.  Regarding  the  probable  later  origin  of  aspirated
linguals  by  means  of  a gutturalisation  of  pure  linguals,
or  in  some  other  way,  vide  § 208.


Consonants,


17


3.  EXPLOSIVE  CONSONANTS.
a.  FAUCAL  EXPLOSIVES.

81.  The  .^Kora  dialect  has,  probably,  the  faucal  explo-
sive ^ (the  Semitic  y,  ^am'),  if  we  are  right  in  assigning
this  pronunciation  to  the  sound  indicated  by  Wuras  (in
Appleyard’s  grammar)  by  the  letter  x.  In  the  corres-
ponding Nama  words  this  letter  has  generally  been
changed  into  the  “ spiritus  lenis.”

82.  None  of  the  South  African  Ba-ntu  dialects  as
yet  known  to  us,  seem  to  possess  a faucal  explosive,
except,  perhaps,  the  Kafir  and  Zulu,  where  we  find  “ a
peculiar  hard,  rough  sound,  which  seems  to  be  made  by
contracting  the  throat,  and  giving  the  breath  a forcible
expulsion,  at  the  same  time  modifying  the  sound  with  a
tremulous  motion  of  the  epiglottis,”  as  Grout  says,  who
marks  it  by  x,  certainly,  not  in  accordance  with  Lepsius’
system,  as  he  intended  to  do.  The  Bishop  of  Natal
expresses  it  by  x,  and  says  that  “ it  may  be  pronounced
either  as  a guttural  from  the  bottom  of  the  throat,  or  as
a click  in  a peculiar  way.”*  We  must  acknowledge  to  be,
as  yet,  at  a loss  regarding  the  sound  of  this  letter  which
occurs  only  in  very  few  words.

b.  GUTTQKAL  EXPLOSIVES.

83.  Among  the  explosives,  those  of  the  guttural  class
are  the  most  common  in  the  Hottentot  language.  They
are  three  in  number,  k,  klv\  and  g.  Of  these  the  g is
least  frequently  used,  though  different  observers  vary
considerably,  some  writing  g,  where  others  employ  k.

84.  Also  in  Kafir  g is  much  less  frequent  than  k,
except  after  a nasal.

* He  distinguishes  it  from  the  lateral  click  (§  59)  by  using  an  Italic
X for  the  faucal  among  Roman  letters,  or  a Roman  x among  Italics.

f Kronlein  assures  me  (in  a letter)  that  this  consonant  (which  he
writes  A')  is  merely  a sharply  aspirated  guttural,  and  not  the  consonantal
dipthong  kx~

Bleelc,  S,  Afr.  Comp.  Grammar.


I)


]8


Phonology.


85.  The  aspiration  of  tlie  latter  letter  is  so  slight  in
Kafir  and,  perhaps,  even  more  in  Zulu,  that  it  has  very
rarely  been  distinguished  in  writing.  If  we  are  not
mistaken,  it  is,  in  fact,  rather  a stronger  aspirated  pro-
nunciation of  the  g,  which  brings  it  near  in  sound  to  the
h,  than  really  an  aspiration  of  the  h.

86.  In  Zulu  the  g is  more  frequent,  but  in  most  cases
it  is  not  exactly  a g,  but  a floating  sound  between  g
and  h.

87.  In  Se-tshud.na  the  g does  not  exist  at  all.  The  h.
of  this  language  corresponds  to  the  Kafir  ng  (§  219);
and  the  hU  of  the  Se-suto,  of  the  Western  Se-tshuana
(§  174),  to  the  Kafir  nk\  whilst  the  Kafir  -h  has  in  the
Western  Se-tshuana  been  mollified  into  the  fricative
guttural  x>  and  in  the  Eastern  Se-suto  dialect,  into  the
faucal  K (both  x and  written  g in  Se-tslmana  books.)
Kafir  g has  probably  in  Se-tshuana  been  dissolved  into
the  “ spiritus  lenis.”

88.  In  the  Northern  Tekeza  the  existence  of  the  not-
nasalized  g is  very  doubtful ; hg  is  found  here  in  place  of
the  same  Kafir  letter;  but  Tekeza  k corresponds,  not
only  to  the  A,  but  also  to  the  sh  of  the  Kafir  language.
If  an  aspirated  form  of  the  k is  distinguished  in  the
pronunciation  of  the  Tekeza,  it  has  at  least,  not  been
indicated  in  writing.

89.  The  Kafir  hk  is  entirely  dropped  in  the  Tekeza,
and  also  in  the  dialect  of  Inhambane,  the  spiritus  lenis
taking  its  place ; but  in  almost  all  languages  of  the
Middle  Branch,  it  becomes  hg,  which  letter  stands  here
also  generally  for  Kafir  hg,  whilst  hk  is  scarcely  ever
found,*  except  in  the  languages  of  the  North-western
Gienus,  Kongo  and  Mpongwe,  where  it  is  found  occa-
sionally. Also  in  Isubu  and  Dualla  it  is  seldom  met  with,
and  in  Benga  it  seems  not  to  occur  at  all.

* In  oTyi-liercro  one  nussionary  (J.  Hath)  avrihs  in  a few  cases
nk,  whilst  tlie  other  (0.  II.  Hahn)  has  constantly  rty.


ExjAosive  Consonants,


19


90.  G is  rare  in  the  Middle  Branch  languages,  and
also  in  the  North-western  Branch  dialects,  except  as  a
mollification  of  h and  of  ng,  and  even  then  generally
only  at  the  beginning  of  a word.

C.  DENTAL  EXPLOSIVES.

91.  Next  to  the  guttural  explosives,  those  of  the  dental
order  are  most  frequent  in  the  Hottentot  language,  and
here  the  stronger  t is  well  distinguished  from  the  softer
d ; though  there  are  a number  of  cases,  in  which  some
observers  have  heard  a d,  and  others  a t.

92.  Also  the  Kafir  language  has  both  these  dental
explosives  ; but  the  Se-tshuana  has  no  d,  and  its  t corres-
ponds to  the  Kafir  nd,  whilst  an  aspirated  modification  of
the  tenuis  th  (giot  the  lisping  English  tli),  takes  the  place
of  the  Kafir  nt.

93.  In  the  Northern  Tekeza  the  d is  only  found  before
i as  a demipalatalized  sound ; otherwise,  as  in  Se-tshuana,
the  liquids  r and  I correspond  to  the  Kafir  explosives  t
and  d,  whilst  the  Tekeza  t stands  in  the  place  of  a Kafir
z and  Se-tshuana  ts.

94.  Kafir  nd,  however,  is  not  altered  in  the  Tekeza ;
but  of  Kafir  nt  only  the  nasal  n remains  in  the  Tekeza.

95.  In  Inhambane,  d,  nd,  and  t are  found,  the  t stand-
ing for  Kafir  t,  nt,  x^,  z,  and  nz,  though  sometimes  also  d
is  found  instead  of  Kafir  t and  z.

96.  In  Sofala,  Sena  and  Tette,  d,  nd,  t,  nt,  and  also  tt
and  ntt  (stronger  explosives)  are  met  with,  generally
corresponding  in  use  to  the  identical  Kafir  letters.

97.  The  same  is  the  case  in  the  Makua  language,
though  here  particularly  the  t,  not  unfrequently,  repre-
sents the  sibilant  of  other  dialects.

98.  In  this,  it  agrees  with  the  Coast  language  of  the
North-eastern  or  Zangian  Genus,  the  Kisuaheli,  where  t
and  nt  (and  even  sometimes  nd)  stand  frequently  for  z
and  ns  of  the  Kinika  and  Kipokomo.


20


Phonology.


99.  On  the  other  hand,  the  t of  the  Kisuaheli,  Ki-
kamba  and  other  dialects  is  changed,  in  Kinika  and
Kipokomo,  into  h.

100.  The  original  nt  of  the  Kafir  is  generally  only
preserved  in  Kipokomo,  wliilst  in  Kinika  and  Kisuaheli
(as  well  as  in  the  Makua  language)  it  becomes  i,  and  in
Kikamba  (and  Kihiau)  nd.

101.  The  nd  is  more  constant  in  the  Zangian  dialects,
whilst  the  d occurs  in  Kisuaheli  and  Kinika  mostly  in
Arabic  words ; but  it  is,  frequently  indigenous  in  Ki-
kamba and  Kihiau,  which  two  languages  seem,  however,
to  have  no  nt.

102.  The  latter  letter  is  also  very  rarely,  if  ever,  found
in  the  languages  of  the  South-western,  or  Biinda  Genus,
being  changed  in  oTyiherero  (as  in  Kikamba  and  Ki-
hiau) into  nd,  in  Benguela  (as  in  the  Tekeza)  into  n,  and
in  Angola  (as  in  the  Se-tshuana)  into  t.

103.  But  in  the  North-western,  or  Kongo  Genus  the
nt  is  retained,  and  corresponds  in  Kongo  at  least  to  the
same  Kafir  sound.

104.  The  simple  t and  the  nasalized  nd  are  in  all  the
languages  of  the  Western  portion  as  frequent  as  in  the
other  members  of  the  Middle  branch.

105.  But  the  unnasalized  d,  which  is  very  rare  in  the
languages  of  the  South-western  or  Bunda  Genus,  whilst
in  the  Kongo  language  it  seems  to  be  only  found  as  a
modification  of  the  r of  other  dialects,  is  here  written  d,
and  has  probably,  a peculiar  pronunciation  (§  165).  In
Mpongwc,  however,  the  d is  not  unfrequent.

106.  In  the  North-western  Branch  languages  (Benga,
Dualla,  and  Isubu),  the  nt  is  again  discarded  and  becomes
here  (as  in  the  Angola  and  Se-tshuana)  t,  besides  which
nd  is  here  very  frequently  met  with.

107.  Simple  d is  in  these  dialects  (of  the  North-wes-
tern branch)  generally  interchangeable  with  the  liquids
/ and  r,  and  corresponds,  not  rarely,  to  an  original  z.


Explosioe  Consonants,


21


d.  LABIAL  EXPLOSIVKS.

108.  The  Hottentot  language  possesses  both  labial
explosives  p and  b ; but  the  former  (p)  seems  to  be  found
only  in  one  case  at  the  beginning  of  a syllable^  namely
in  pirip  goat,  and  its  derivatives,  as  Pirikic  (obj.  Pirikiva
in  the  .^Kora,  Piriha  in  the  Kama  Dialect),  the  Be-tshuana
and  Kafir  tribes.

109.  In  Kafir  both  labials  are  found  in  their  simple  as
well  as  in  their  nasalized  forms.

110.  The  Kafir  p is  in  Sesuto  ehanged  into  the  corres-
jionding  fricative  f,  and  in  the  Western  Se-tshuS,na  into
the  spirant  h,  whilst  in  Tekeza  it  generally  disappears
altogether.

111.  The  dialects  of  the  Tekeza  species  seem  to  be
entirely  destitute  of  this  labial  tenuis  {p) ; but  in  Se-
tshuana  the  p stands  in  the  place  of  Kafir  mb  and  mv,
and  of  Tekeza  mb  and  mf.

112.  An  aspirated  ph  corresponds,  in  Se-tshuana,  to
the  Kafir  mjj,  which  sound  becomes  m in  the  Tekeza.

113.  On  the  other  hand,  in  such  cases  where  Kafir  mb-
Is  contracted  from  mub-,  and  corresponds,  therefore,  to
Tekeza  mob-,  the  explosive  has  prevailed  over  the  nasal
in  the  Se-tshuana,  which  has  retained  here  a simple  m.
For  example,  Kafir  si-m-buza  we  ask  him  = Tekeza  tu-
mo-botisa  — Se-tshu4na  re-motsa  (from  x^-botsa  to  ask,
re-botsa  we  ask)  = oTyi-herero  tu-mu-pura.

114.  The  unnasalized  b of  the  Kafir,  generally  retained
in  Se-tshuana,  keeps  also  its  place  in  the  Tekeza  as  the
initial  of  the  stem  of  a word ; but  in  other  cases  it  has,
in  the  Northern  Tekeza,  been  softened  into  v.

115.  This  is  most  generally  the  case  in  the  Middle
Branch  languages,  in  which  the  b is  either  softened  into
the  corresponding  fricative  v (rarely  /),  or  the  semivowel
w,  or  it  is  dropped  altogether.  Where  a is  here  found,
it  does  not  in  general  correspond  to  the  b,  but  to  the  p or


22  Phonology.

mb  of  the  Kafii’,  or  it  is  of  foreign  origin,  as  in  many
Ki-sudheli  words.

116.  Thus  h is  not  unfrequent  in  the  Angola,  h and  bh
in  the  Kongo  language.  For  example,  Bunda/z<5a  (meal
flour)  is  the  Kafir  impupu,  Tekeza  mupu,  Maravi  upfa  ;
and  Kongo  bhobha  (to  speak,  talk)  is  Herero  popa  (to
warn,  persuade).

117.  In  fact  in  the  Kongo  language  simple  p is  rare,
whilst  in  other  Middle  Branch  languages  it  is  generally
more  tenacious,  except  in  the  Ki-nika,  where  we  see  it
sometimes  changed  into  v,  and  in  Ki-kamha  into  w.

118.  Nasalized  mp  is  most  generally  commuted  in  the
Middle  Branch  languages  into  mb,  which  corresponds,
therefore,  both  to  the  mp  and  mb  of  the  Kafir.  Yet  in
Sena  and  Tette  we  find  occasionally  mp,  and  also  in
Kongo.  In  oTyi-herero,  whilst  one  missionary  (Hahn)
writes  always  mb,  another  (Rath)  has  here  and  there  mp,
though  in  cases,  where  it  does  not  correspond  to  the  Kafir
mp,  as  for  example,  in  ompura  or  ombura  (rain),  Kafir
imvula,  Se-tshuana  jow/a,  Tekeza  infula,  Inhambane  nvula,
Tette  vura,  Mosambique  ipulla,  Ki-hiau  and  Ki-nika
mfula,  Ki-kamba  mbua,  Ki-suaheli  mfua,  Ki-pokomo
mfuiya,  Benguela  ombela,  Angola  and  Kongo  nvula,
Dualla  and  Isubu  'mbua.

119.  The  Mpongwe  language,  again,  shares  with  the
members  of  the  North-western  Branch  the  possession  of
all  these  labial  sounds  p,  mp,  b,  mb.


4.  FRICATIVE  CONSONANTS.

120.  Of  fricative  sounds,  the  Hottentot  language
possesses  only  the  faucal  spirant  h,  the  guttui’al  x(Schme-
len’s  g,  Knudsen’s  ch,  Tindall’s  gh,  said  to  be  pronounced
like  Dutch  g in  gaan”  and  German  ch  in  lachen,”)
the  sibilant  s,  and  jierhaps  the  semivowel  lo.  But  it  has


Fricative  Consonants.


23


neithei*  a palatal  semivowel  (?/),  nor  the  labial  spirants  f
and  V.*  In  tliis  poverty  of  fricative  sounds  it  approaches
very  near  to  the  condition  of  the  Australian  languages
which  are  entirely  destitute  of  fricatives,  except  the
semivowels.

121.  Among  the  Ban-tu  languages,  the  Kafir  exhibits,
perhaps,  on  the  whole  the  greatest  number  of  fricative
consonants.

a.  FAUCAL  FRICATIVES.

122.  The  faucal  spirant  1i  is  found  in  few  Kafir  words,
part  of  which  are  of  foreign  extraction.  In  others  it
seems  to  be  a mollification  from  some  other  consonant,  for
example  for  hamba  (walk)  the  dialects  of  Sena,  Sofala,
Inhambane,  and  the  Northern  Tekeza  (Lourenzo  Mar-
ques) have  the  form  famba,  and  the  Southern  Tekeza
(Ma-nlolosi)  karnba.

123.  In  Zulu  the  li  has,  except  in  a few  cases,  a more
aspirated  pronunciation,  like  U , or  almost  like  x-

124.  In  the  Eastern  Se-tshuana  (Se-suto)  h rarely
occurs,  and  seems  then  derived  from  a Kafir  h (Western
Se-tshuana  x>  § 135),  whilst  in  the  Western  Se-
tshuana  the  labial  spirant  ./"  of  the  Se-suto  (corresponding
to  the  p and  f of  the  Kafir  and  Zulu)  has  been  changed
into  h.

125.  The  h of  the  Northern  Tekeza  is  similarly  des-
cended either  from  nk  or  p,  and  seems  frequently  to  have
been  further  softened  into  the  “ spiritus  lenis.”  In  the
words  of  the  Southern  Tekeza  which  are  known  to  us,
this  letter  does  not  occur  at  all.

126.  In  the  dialect  of  Inhambane  the  spirant  h seems
usually  to  represent  a sibilant  (s)  and  sometimes  a A;
whilst  in  that  of  Sofala  it  stands  generally  for  k,  and
occasionally  for  a sibilant.

* Except  in  the  pronunciation  of  the  Orlams,  who  have  softened  th®
explosive  h frequently  to  the  fricative  v,  written  w by  the  Rhenish
missionaries.


24


Phonology.


127.  In  the  Makua  lancruase  the  h has  also  come  from
a sibilant  s,  (z),  nz,  or  the  dental  t ; and  this  dental  tenuis
is  in  the  Ki-nika  and  Ki-pokomo  most  frequently  softened
to  h,  and  sometimes  this  is  also  the  case  in  these  dialects
with  regard  to  the  labial  tenuis  p.

128.  The  h of  the  Ki-hlau  language  is  generally  des-
cended from  a labial  consonantly,  v,  p,  or  mb,

129.  In  Ki-suaheli  the  h is  of  frequent  occurrence,  but
mostly  in  foreign  (particularly  Arabic)  words  which  have
been  introduced  into  this,  and,  in  a less  degree,  into  the
Ki-nika  and  Ki-pokomo  dialects.

130.  In  Ki-kamba  and  in  the  dialects  of  the  Maravi,
Tette,  and  Sena,  the  spirant  h does  not  occur  at  all ; and
it  seems  to  be  entirely  foreign  to  the  Western  languages
of  the  Middle  Branch  (certainly  to  the  Mpongwe,  Ka-
kongo,  Kongo,  and  probably  to  the  language  of  Angola),
with  the  exception  of  the  oTyl-herero,  where  it  is  a sort
of  floating  sound  between  sh  and  h {vide  § 156)  corres-
ponding to  the  s (or  ss)  of  the  Bunda,  Kongo,  and  Kafir.

131.  In  the  same  manner  the  Benga  h is  derived  from
an  original  s,  as  still  preserved  not  only  in  the  above-
mentioned  languages,  but  also  in  other  dialects  of  the
North-western  Branch,  as  in  the  Isubuand  Dualla,  which
latter  dialects  are  again  destitute  of  the  spirant  h.

1).  GUTTURAL  FRICATIVES.

132.  The  Kafir  guttural  x of  missionary  orthogra-
phy), is  found  again  in  the  Western  Se-tshuana  (where
it  is  written^),  in  the  Tekeza  (for  certain  in  the  Southern
dialect  of  the  Ma-nlolosi),  and  also  in  at  least  some
of  the  Eastern  languages  of  the  Middle  Branch  (for
example,  in  the  dialects  of  Sena,  Tette,  the  Maravi  and
Ki-suaheli,  where  Krapf  writes  it  c),  and  in  the  dialects
of  the  A-lui,  of  Benguela  and  Angola  (Cannecattim’s  y,
and  perhaps  also  h!- , represented  by  in  the  Bunda
Catechism.)


Fricative  Consonants.


25


133.  But  neither  the  oTyi-herero,  nor  the  Kongo  and
Mpongwe  languages  seem  to  have  a guttural  fricative,
nor  is  it  found  in  the  North-western  Branch  dialects,  the
Benga,  Dualla,  and  Isubu.

134.  In  those  Ba-ntu  languages,  in  which  this  conso-
nant is  found,  it  is  everywhere  of  rare  occurrence,  except
in  the  Western  Se-tshuana,  where  it  takes  throughout
the  place  of  the  explosive  k of  the  Kafir  and  most  other
Ba-ntu  languages.

135.  In  the  Eastern  Se-tshuana  dialect  (the  Se-suto)
this  guttural  has  been  changed  into  the  aspirated  faucal
spirant  h’  (written  also  g in  Sesuto  books),  which  has
occasionally  been  converted  into  the  pure  spirant  h (vide
§ 124).  This  aspirated  faucal  is,  perhaps,  also  indicated
by  Cannecattim’s  (the  h of  the  Bunda  Catechism.)

C.  LABIAL  FRICATIVES.

136.  The  labial  fricatives  f and  v of  the  Kafir,  are
very  common  among  the  Middle  branch  languages,  whilst
the  more  northern  of  the  North-western  Branch  dialects,
namely,  the  Isubu  and  Dualla,  have  no  v,  and  very
rarely  use  f.  The  Benga,  however,  has  a v which  is
generally  derived  from  an  original  jo  ; but  they  seems  in
Benga  not  to  occur  except  in  foreign  words,  as  for  exam-
ple mfato  stocking,  probably  derived  from  the  Portuguese
fato.

137.  Among  the  Se-tshuana  dialects,  the  Eastern
(Se-suto)  has  lost  the  v,  but  retained  the  f,  which  latter
letter  is,  in  the  South-western  Se-roloii  and  Se-^lapi,
constantly  changed  into  A,  whilst  the  North-western
Se-tshuana  dialects  have  a v instead  of  it.

138.  In  Tegeza,  the/  stands,  not  only  for  the  same
letter  of  the  Kafir,  but  also  for  the  v of  this  language  ;
whilst  the  Northern  Tekeza  dialects  have  mollified  the
b,  in  the  grammatical  parts  of  the  language  and  in  some
other  cases,  into  v.


Bleek,  S,  Afr.  Comp.  Grammar.


£


26


Phonology,


139.  It  may  be  said  that  the  Tekeza  in  this  regard,
and  in  some  others,  has  been  influenced  by  the  Middle
Branch  languages,  where  the  same  mollification  is  most
general.

140.  For  example,  the  Kafir  word  a-bd-ntu  (people),
Se-tshuana  bathu,  Isubu  and  Dualla  batu,  Benga  bato.
Southern  Tekeza  (Ma-nlolosi)  bdnu,  becomes  in  the  Nor-
thern Tekeza  vanu,  in  Sofala,  Sena,  Tette  vdnttu,  oTyi-
herero  o-vandu,  Nano  omano  (by  assimilation  from  ovano,
formed  like  ova-lome  men).

141.  This  V has  then  further  been  softened  down  into
the  semivowel  w,  in  the  Maravi  and  Ki-pokomo  form
xodntu,  Ki-hiau  wd-ndii,  Ki-suaheli  tvdtu.  Cape  Delgado
wdnu ; and  it  has  been  entirely  dropped  in  the  Makua
form  attu,  Quellimane  antu,  Ki-kamba  andu,  Kinika  atu,
and  among  the  Western  Middle  Branch  languages,  in
Angola  o-atu,  Kongo  o-antu,  Mpongwe  anioana  (children
= Zulu  abantuana,  diminutive  of  abantu.)

142.  If  we  may  trust  to  Krapf’s  orthography,  the
Ki-hiau  language  has  no  v at  all,  and  the  Ki-kamba
neither  v nor  jf.

143.  The  latter  letter  (f)  has  also  disappeared  in  oTyi-
herero*  and  Nano,  but  the  more  Northern  languages  of
the  Western  side  have  it,  as  for  example,  the  Bunda  and
Kongo.  The  latter  language  seems,  however,  to  be
without  the  v ; but  both  labial  spirants  are  again  found
in  the  Mpongwe.

144.  The  orthography  of  Portuguese  and  German
writers,  from  whom  most  of  our  Information  reorarding:
the  Middle  Branch  languages  is  derived,  renders  it
extremely  difficult  to  know  in  all  cases,  whether  the
spirant  v,  or  the  semivowel  w,  is  intended  to  be  expressed  ;
and  it  is,  therefore,  possible  that,  in  this  regard,  the
above  remai'ks  may  be  open  to  correction.


* Where  it  is  eoiimuileU  into  S'.— (Fh/r  § 150.)


Fricative  Co/iso?iants.


27


d.  DENTAL  FRICATIVES,  OR  SIBILANTS.

145.  In  a similar  predicament  we  are  with  regard  to
the  geographical  distribution  of  the  sibilants  s and  z.

146.  Both  letters  s and  z seem  to  be  found  in  the
dialects  of  Sena  and  Tette,  but  we  have  no  evidence
that  they  are  distinguished  in  any  other  of  the  Eastern
dialects  of  the  Middle  Branch,  and  the  presumption  is
that  only  s is  known  to  most  of  them.

147.  Among  the  Western  languages  both  letters  (s
and  z)  are  found  in  Mpongwe,  and,  probably,  also  in
Kongo  and  Angola.

148.  The  Nano  language  (of  Benguela)  seems  to  pos-
sess only  s,  whilst  the  oTyiherero  has  lost  these  sibilants
altogether.

149.  It  has,  however,  two  lisping  sibilants  (similar  to
the  English  th  in  “ think”),  and  (similar  to  the  English
th  in  “ this”  and  “ that”),  which  in  the  missionary
orthography  are  expressed  by  s and  z (s  and  z in  Hahn’s
last  publications).

150.  The  softer  which  is  also  found  in  the  Nano
language,  sounds  sometimes  much  like  I,  and  corresponds
to  the  z of  the  Kafir  and  other  kindred  languages,  whilst
the  sharper  B’’  is  descended  from  an/",  as  found  in  cor-
responding words  of  the  Bunda,  Kafir,  and  other  Ba-ntu
languages.

151.  The  North-western  branch  seems  also  to  have
only  the  sharper  sibilant  s,  as  far,  at  least,  as  we  are
able  to  judge  from  the  Benga,  Dualla,  and  Isuhu.

152.  Among  the  languages  of  the  South-eastern  Branch
the  Kafir  and  Zulu  alone  have  both  s and  z,  but  the
Tekeza  and  Se-tshuana  dialects  do  without  the  latter
softer  letter,  which  is  converted  into  t in  the  Tekeza
(and  also  in  the  aMa-swazi  dialect),  and  into  ts,  or  I,  and
r in  the  Se-tshu^na.

153.  The  Hottentot  dialects  have  only  one  sibilant  s,
being  also  destitute  of  the  aspirated  sibilant  sh,  the  * of


28


Phonology,


Lepsius  Standard  Alphabet  which  I should  have  followed
also  in  this  instance,  if  not  prevented  by  typographical
difficulties.

154.  This  aspirated  sibilant  (s/<)  is  found  in  Kafir,
Se-tshuana,  and  Tekeza.  In  the  latter  it  represents
Kafir  yj,  {hi)  and  s,  whilst  Instead  of  Kafir  sh  we  find  in
the  Tekeza  generally  a k.

155.  The  sh  is  also  found  in  most  languages  of  the
Eastern  Coast,  except  in  the  Ki-kamba  and  Ki-pokomo,
in  which  it  seems  not  to  exist.

156.  Among  the  Western  languages  of  the  Middle
Branch,  the  absence  of  sh  is  apparent  in  the  Nano  and  in
the  Kongo  language.  It  is  doubtful  in  the  Bunda,  but
certain  in  Mpongwe,  whilst  in  oTyi-herero  (as  in  some
New  Zealand  and  other  Polynesian  dialects)  an  inter-
mediate, or  floating  sound  between  s and  h,  takes  its
place  (written  h in  the  missionary  orthography),  derived
in  most  words,  from  the  sharper  unaspirated  sibilant  of
other  languages  (Kafir  s,  Angola  ss,  &c.)

157.  In  the  dialects  of  the  North-western  Branch
again,  in  the  Benga,  Dualla,  and  Isubu,  no  aspirated
sibilant  is  in  use.

158.  I do  not,  however,  include  here  such  cases  where
an  aspirated  sibilant  joined  to  a dental  (or  guttural,  or
labial)  explosive,  forms  a palatalised  consonant;  as  I
shall  treat  of  all  such  palatal  sounds  under  the  head  of
consonantal  diphthongs.

e.  SEMIVOWELS.

159.  Regarding  the  semivowels  y and  w (particularly
the  latter),  it  is  frequently  very  uncertain,  whether  they
may  be  said  to  belong  to  a language,  or  not ; for  they
are  very  liable  to  be  expressed  by  the  vowels  i and  u.

160.  For  example,  Tindall  enumerates  them  among  the
sounds  of  the  Hottentot  language  ; but  in  his  vocabulary
we  find  only  one  word  with  y {yap,  a rebok,)  and  two  or
three  with  lo  {wa  all,  oica  return,  and  swas  water  barrel.


Fricative  and  Liquid  Cunsonants.


29


written  by  Knuclsen  hoa,  oa,  and  soas,  and  by  Schmelen
howa,  oowaa.)  In  fact,  Schmelen’s  w seems  frequently
meant,  not  for  the  v sound,  which  it  generally  represents,
but  for  the  semivowel.


5.  LIQUID  CONSONANTS.

161.  The  Hottentot,  as  well  as  the  Kafir,  dialects  are
restricted  to  one  liquid  consonant  for  each  language  ; but
this  is  r in  Hottentot  and  I in  Kafir,  Zulu,  and  the
Southern  Tekeza  (aMa-nlolosi.)

162.  The  Se-tshuana  and  the  Northern  Tekeza  (Lou-
renzo  Marques)  have  both  letters  I and  r (the  latter
sound  being  most  frequently  descended  from  a Kafir  t).

163.  Among  the  Middle  Branch  languages,  the  Ki-
kamba,  Mbiza,  and  Kakongo  agree  with  the  Kafir  in
possessing  only  the  I,  and  the  dialects  of  Tette  and
Sofala,  and  likewise  the  oTyi-herero,  have  only  r.  But
both  letters  I and  r are  again  found  in  all  the  other
languages  of  this  branch  known  to  us  ; for  example,  on
the  Eastern  side,  in  those  of  the  Maravi,  Sena,  Inham-
bane,  Quellimane,  Mosamblque,  Cape  Delgado,  Kinika,
Kipokomo,  and  Kisudheli  (where  r is  however  chiefly,
or  perhaps  exclusively,  used  in  words  of  Arabic  origin) ;
and  on  the  Western,  in  those  of  Angola,  the  Kongo,  and
Mpongwe.

164.  Among  the  dialects  of  the  North-western  Branch
the  Benga  has  only  the  I,  but  the  Isubu  and  Dualla
have  again  both  letters,  I and  r.

165.  With  regard  to  the  r,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  it
is  never  guttural,  but  always  dental  (sometimes  perhaps
lingual),  and  approaches  frequently  in  sound  the  I and  d
very  nearly,  as,  for  example,  in  the  Se-tshuana.  In
Kongo  it  is  then  written  <t\  e.  g.  Kongo  sambuadi
(seven)  corresponds  to  Bunda  sambudri,  oTyi-herera
hambombari.


30


Phonology .


fi.  COMBINED  CONSONANTS.
a.  HOTTUNTOT  COMBINATIONS  OF  CONSONANTS.

166.  Of  SO  called  consonantal  diphthongs,  the  Hotten-
tot language  possesses  only  ts  (usually  written  z),  if  we
do  not  comprise  under  this  head  the  combinations  of  click
with  guttural,  faucal,  or  nasal  consonant  (§  62.)  The
so  called  palatal  class  of  explosives  is  entirely  missing
here.*


b.  KAFIR  COMBINATIONS  OF  CONSONANTS.

167.  In  Kafir,  on  the  contrary,  the  palatal  sounds  ty,
tsh,  and  dsh  {j)  are  of  frequent  occurrence.

168.  In  Zulu  books,  the  tsh  is  frequently  written  ty,
and  etymologically  this  is  perhaps,  not  wrong,  though  it
does  not  always  express  the  exact  pronunciation.

169.  We  shall  see  afterwards,  how  in  certain  cases  in
the  Kafir  (and  Zulu)  language,  a p and  mp  is,  in  the
middle  of  a word,  changed  into  tsh  and  ntsh,  and  a h and
mb  into  ty  or  dsh  and  ndsh  (§  280).  Also  in  other  Kafir
words  palatal  sounds  can,  by  comparison  with  other
dialects,  be  traced  to  a palatalisation  of  original  labial
explosives  (§  277),  and  it  is  doubtful  whether,  in  any
case,  a Kafir  palatal  sound  can  be  considered  as  primitive.

170.  Also  the  combination  ts  is  found,  though  it  occurs
not  frequently  without  a preceding  nasal  in  the  proper
Kafir  language,  and  never  in  Zulu.  The  nasalized  form
nts  seems  to  be  derived  from  ns,  the  t being  a mere  help
to  the  pronunciation.  (§  77.)  That  the  simple  ts  is
rather  a foreign  introduction,  we  are  also  led  to  assume
from  the  fact  of  its  prevalency  in  the  Kafir  female
Xlonipa  words,  where  it  stands  for  common  d.

* In  the  .'Kora  dialect  Wuras  distinguishes  a hy  (written  by  him  kj),
which  is  found  in  a few  cases  corresponding  to  tlie  simple  h of  the  Nama
dialect.


Combined  Coiisona7its.


31


C.  SK-TSHUaNA  COMBINATIONS  OP  CONSONANTS.

171.  In  Se-tshuana  the  ts  is  very  common,  and  It
corresponds  here,  usually,  to  Kafir  z,  and  Tekeza  t',  but
there  is  a general  tendency  towards  this  sound  in  the
Western  Se-tshuana  dialects,  by  which  also  other  con-
sonants (as  aspii'ated  linguals,  or  the  simple  lingual  I,  or
hard  guttural  or  labial  explosives)  may  be  commuted  into
ts.  It  can  also  stand  merely  for  Kafir  ns  and  nts,  though
the  Se-tshu4na  has  also  the  nasalized  nts.

172.  Besides  this,  the  Se-tshuana  has  the  tsh  {ch  of
Se-suto,  c of  Se-xlapi  books),  which  stands,  usually,
instead  of  the  same  Kafir  sound.  It  also  occurs,  as  a
modification  of  the  ts,  in  certain  inflections  (vide  § 281),
and  in  some  cases  it  is  used  even  where  the  Kafir  has  a
labial  sound ; for  example  tshudna  (be  alike)  is  the  Kafir
and  Ki-suaheli  fana,  oTyi-herero  ^'^ana,  Bunda  fdngana,
Kongo  fanana.

173.  The  other  palatals  ty  and  dsh  do  not  exist  in  the
Se-tshuana ; but  when  h is  palatalised,  it  disappears
altogethei’,  before  the  inserted  y,  which  therefore,  cor-
responds in  these  cases,  to  Kafir  ty  and  dsh.

174.  Another  consonantal  diphthong  peculiar  to  the
Se-tshuana,  is  the  liW  of  the  Sesuto,  hx  of  the  Western
dialects  (both  sounds  expressed  alike  by  hh  in  the  mission-
ary orthography,  kg  in  some  native  manuscripts),  which
corresponds  to  Kafir  nk,  and  seems  to  be  originally  a
mere  aspiration  of  the  guttural  explosive,  intended  to
compensate  for  the  loss  of  the  suppressed  nasal.

d.  TEKEZA  COMBINATIONS  OF  CONSONANTS.

1/5.  Though  in  the  Northern  Tekeza  (Lourenzo
Marques),  the  process  of  palatalisation  is  not  carried  so
far  as  in  Kafir,  yet  we  have  a greater  variety  of  palatal
sounds,  the  intermediate  changes  of  palatalisation  showing
here  very  prominently  its  origin.

1/6.  Thus  we  find  in  Lourenzo  Marques  corres-
ponding to  Kafir  ty,  and  rnbdsh  to  Kafir  ndsh  ; e.g.  ribdsha


32


Phonology.


(stone),  Kafir  ilitye,  Sexlapi  leintshue  (pi.  niaye) ; and
imbdshana  (little  dog),  Kafir  indshana,  Sesuto  ntshana  ;
and  also  nambdshana  (little  river),  Kafir  umlandshana,
Se-tshuana  molatshana,  from  nambo  (river),  Kafir  um-
lambo,  Se-tshuana  molapo.

177.  Then  we  find  in  Lourenzo  Marques  mps  instead
of  Kafir  tsh,  as  ma-mpsa  6.  (new),  Kafir  ( u)ma-tsha,  6.
Se-Hapl  {a)ma-sha  ,Inhambane  and  Ki-suaheli  -pia,  Ma-
kua  -psia,  Sena  and  Tette  -psa,  Sofala  -psha,  Kinika  and
Ki-pokomo  -Jia,  Ki-kamba  -nsao,  oTyi-herero  -pe,  Bunda
-be.  This  shows  evidently  a descent  of  the  tsh  from  a
palatalised  labial.

178.  In  the  same  manner,  ps  of  the  Lourenzo  Marques,
corresponding  to  a z in  Kafir,  indicates  the  latter’s  origin
from  an  original  p,  as  found  still  in  Middle  Branch
dialects.

179.  Also  tsh  is  not  unfrequent  in  the  Lourenzo  Mar-
ques. It  does  not,  however,  correspond  to  Kafir  tsh,  but  to
Kafir  s;  and  it  is  (as  from  comparison  can  easily  be
seen)  derived  from  an  original  k.

180.  A dsh  is  once  or  twice  found  in  the  Lourenzo
Marques,  corresponding  to  a Kafir  k.

181.  Ts  corresponds  in  Lourenzo  Marques  almost
constantly  to  Kafir  t (particularly  before  i and  e)  and  d
(particularly  before  u and  o) ; whilst  the  dz  of  Lourenzo
Marques  is  descended  from  a Kafir  and  Se-tshuana  I,
when  followed  by  i,  or  e.

e.  EASTERN  MIDDLE  BRANCH  COMBINATIONS  CONSONANTS.

182.  In  the  most  Southern  languages  of  the  South-
eastern or  Mosamblque  genus  of  the  Middle  Branch,
consonantal  diphthongs  are,  in  general,  less  usual.

183.  In  the  dialect  of  Inhambane  tsh  occurs,  not
unfrequently.  Instead  of  Kafir  s,  sometimes  also  instead
of  X/  {111)  and  I (dental  click)  of  the  Kafir,  corresponding,
in  the  latter  case,  to  a ^ of  the  Tekeza.


Comhined  Consonants.


33


184.  The  softer  palatals  dsh  and  ndsh  occur  less  fre-
quently in  Inhambane,  where  they  are  found  corresponding
to  Kafir  nxl  (ndhl),  the  ndsh  also  to  Kafir  nz,  as  inya-
ndslie  (fish),  Kafir  inxlanzi,  Lourenzo  Marques  nxlamfe,
Se-tshuana  xlapi.

185.  In  Sofala  the  tsh  is  of  much  rarer  use,  though
also  corresponding  to  Kafir  s ; but  dsh  is  not  unfrequent
in  the  place  of  Kafir  z (particularly  before  i),  and  ndsh  in
the  place  of  Kafir  nz  and  nxl  (ndhl).  Once  at  least
Sofala  ndsh  corresponds  to  an  hp  of  the  Western  langu-
ages, namely  in  vandshi  (elder  brother),  Bunda  pangi,
Kongo  mpangi,  Mpongwe  omwahgwe.

186.  In  one  solitary  instance,  ty  is  found  in  Sofala,
namely  in  batya  moriro  (light  a fire),  Kafir  basa  umlilo.

187.  A greater  variety  of  consonantal  diphthongs  is
again  found  in  the  dialects  of  the  interior  (Sena,  Tette,
Maravi),  in  which,  again,  combinations  of  labial  sound
with  sibilant  are  found,  though  in  these  cases  the  sibilant
is  not  aspirated.

188.  Thus  we  find  ps  in  Tette  instead  of  Kafir  z in
cases  where  the  dialect  of  Sena  has  retained  the  primitive
p.  In  an  other  case,  where  both  dialects  (Sena  and  Tette)
have  ps,  the  Kafir  has  merely  sh,  whilst  other  dialects
show  the  primitive  simple  p (vide  § 177.)

189.  The  bz  of  Tette,  when  corresponding  to  Kafir  z
(and  Sena  dz),  seems  to  be  merely  a mollification  of  the
ps.  In  other  cases  it  corresponds  to  Kafir  s,  whilst  the
Sena  has  the  unpalatalised  bv.  In  several  instances
Tette  and  Sena  bz  is  found  in  the  place  of  Kafir  ty.  In
one  word  the  dialect  of  Sena  has  bz  for  Kafir  zw,  namely
ribze  (voice,  word),  Kafir  ilizwi,  Sesuto  leintsue,  Lourenzo
Marques  rito,  Inhambane  lito,  Mosambique  inzu  (pi.
mazu),  Angola  risui  (pi.  masui).

190.  The  combinations  ts  and  dz  occur  in  Sena,  Tette
and  Maravi,  corresponding  to  Kafir  nts,  nz  and  z.

191.  The  aspirated  tsh  is  found  in  Tette  and  Sena
(which  has  also  dsh)  instead  of  Kafir  s (before  i)  and  the

BleeTcy  5',  Afr,  Comp,  Grammar,


F


34


Phonology.

more  primitive  h of  some  other  Middle  Branch  languages,
whilst  the  Maravi  has,  in  these  Instances,  either  the
intermediate  lish,  or  the  more  palatal  sounds  ty  and  dy.

192.  Also  labial  combinations  occur  In  these  dialects,
as  hf  (ov  pf^  in  Sena  and  Tette  in  the  place  of  Kafir  f,
and  bv*  in  Sena  and  Maravi  instead  of  Kafir  v and  Zulu
zw.

193.  A gutturalised  labial  occurs  in  the  Maravi  word
mpxanga,  brother.

1 94.  The  combination  ps  occurs  in  the  Mosambique
Makua  word  for  “new”  (§  177),  and  bz  in  one  other
word  of  this  language.

195.  The  Cape  Delgado  dialect  of  the  Kisuahell  offers
one  instance  of  the  use  of  mps,  and  a few  cases  of  words
with  bv.

196.  Otherwise  the  languages  of  the  North-eastern  or
Zangian  genus  known  to  us,  do  not  offer  any  instance  of
a combination  of  labials  with  palatals  or  sibilants.

197.  The  palatal  tsh  (mostly  derived  from  k,  and
corresponding  to  Kafir  s)  occurs  in  the  Makua  dialects
of  Quellimane  and  Mosambique,  In  the  Kisuaheli  dia-
lects of  Cape  Delgado  and  Mombas,  and  in  the  Ki-hlau,
where  Krapf  writes  it  tj.

198.  The  softer  dsh  (j')  is  not  only  found  in  these
dialects,  but  also  in  the  Kinlka,  Kik^mba  and  Kipokomo.
It  is  found  here  also  nasalised.

199.  The  Kisuaheli  and  Kinika  dialects  distinguish
besides  also  the  dy  (written  j by  Krapf)  and  ndy.

f.  WESTERN  MIDDLE  BRANCH  COMBINATIONS  OF  CONSONANTS.

200.  On  the  Western  coast,  the  palatal  sounds,  or
consonantal  diphthongs  are  comparatively  few.

201.  The  oTyIherei’6  has,  indeed,  even  the  labial
palatals  py  and  mby,  but  they  occur  extremely  seldom.

* I am  not  quite  certain,  whether  the  v does  not  here  indicate  the
semivowel  w.  (Virk  § 144.)


Combiued  Consonants.


35


202.  Frequent  are,  however,  in  this  language,  palatal
sounds  descended  from  gutturals,  namely  ty  and  ndy
(Hahn’s  k'  and  ng')  which,  like  the  Zulu  ty,  have  a
tendency  to  be  pronounced  as  tsh  and  ndsh.*

203.  Also  in  Nano  (Benguela)  ty  and  ndy  are  found  ;
but  whether  the  language  of  Angola  possesses  similar
palatal  sounds  is  doubtful.

204.  The  old  Kongo  language  keeps  entirely  clear
from  palatal  sounds,  or  any  other  consonantal  diphthongs.

205.  The  modernised  state  of  the  Mpongwe  language
is  sufficiently  shewn  in  its  possessing,  not  only,  the  pala-
tals dsh,  ndsh  and  nty,  but  also  the  palatalised  soft
sibilant  zy.

206.  The  Mpongwe  has  also  a labial  sound,  inter-
mediate between/,  v and  w,  usually  written  fw  or  vxo,
which  is  probably  similar  in  pronunciation  to  the  hv
noted  above  (§  192).

g.  NOETH-WESTERN  BRANCH  COMBINATIONS  OF  CONSONANTS.

207.  In  the  North-western  Branch,  the  palatal  dsh  (j),
with  ndsh  (nj),  occurs  in  Benga,  Dualla,  and  Isubu,
which  latter  dialect  has  also  the  intermediate  forms  gy
and  dy,  whilst  in  the  Benga  again  the  labial  combination
bw  is  found.

h.  COMBINATIONS  OF  LINGUAL  AND  GUTTURAL  CONSONANTS.

208.  It  is  possible  that  the  so-called  aspirated  linguals
may  also  not  improperly  be  considered  as  consonantal
diphthongs.  Very  frequently  their  origin  seems  indeed
to  be  that  of  a linguallsed  guttural,  or  of  a gutturalised
lingual.  For  example,  Kafir  xlala  (sit)  seems  derived
from  Inhambane  and  Mosambique  hala,  Sofala  gara,
Tette,  Sena,  and  Maravi  hdra.  Cape  Delgado  ikdla,  Ki-
suaheli  kd,  Ki-nika  sagala,  Ki-kamba  ikala,  Ki-pokomo

* In  bis  last  publications  Hahn  distinguishes  also  the  semipalatised
letters  l and  H,  as  he  writes  them,  and  the  nasalised  tid.  Tlie  latter
represents  here  also  the  nd^’’  {ndz)  of  his  grammar.  ( Vide  § 230.)


36


Phonology.


kaa,  oTyi-herero  hara,  Angola  hala,  Kongo  ikala,  Dualla
ga  or  dsha,  Isubu  gya  or  dsha.  The  Kongo  and  Ki-
kamba  form  seems  here  the  most  primitive,  and  from  it
(by  a change  produced  by  assimilation,  the  initial
guttural  becoming  an  aspirated  lingual)  the  Kafir  form
may  have  descended.

7.  NASAL  SOUNDS.
a.  HOTTENTOT  NASALS.

209.  A distinguishing  trait  of  the  Hottentot  language
is  also  its  small  variety  of  clear  nasal  consonants.

210.  The  Hottentot  language  is  mainly  restricted  to
the  dental  nasal  n and  to  the  labial  m ; and  these  nasals
are  not  found  before  other  consonants  at  the  beginning  of
a syllable,  but  they  either  immediately  precede  a vowel,
or  follow  it,  closing  the  syllable.  In  the  latter  position,
also,  the  guttural  nasal  h is  met  with,  though  exceedingly
rarely.  At  the  beginning  of  a syllable,  however,  the
dental  nasal  n can  (like  the  guttural  explosives  and  the
faucal  spirant)  have  a click  before  it.  (§  62.)

b.  Ba-NTU  NASALS.

211.  The  Bantu  languages  have  at  once  a greater
variety  of  nasal  consonants,  and  they  are  here  made  to
jorecede  most  other  consonants  at  the  beginning  of  a
syllable.

C.  NASALISATION  IN  KAFIR.

2 1 2.  This  is  particularly  the  case  in  the  most  primitive
types  of  these  languages  ; for  example,  in  the  Kafir.

213.  Here  we  find  not  only  the  simple  n and  m,  and
the  palatalised  ny  beginning  syllables,  but  all  other  con-
sonants (except  h,  x?  sh,  and  1)  can  be  preceded  by  a
nasal.

214.  This  initial  nasal  is  the  guttural  h (which  is,
however,  in  Kafir  and  Zulu  books  ahvays  written  ?i)
before  the  guttural  consonants  (as  nk  and  ?/g),  the  aspi-


Nasalisatio?i.


37


rated  lingual  (as  n*xl),  and  of  course  also  before  the
guttural  pronunciation  of  the  clicks  (as  n\\,  n! , vide
§ 63);  whilst  the  labial  m is  constantly  found  before
labial  consonants,  (as  mp,  mb,  mv,  mf) ; and  whenever,  in
the  course  of  grammatical  formation,  the  dental  nasal  is
put  before  a guttural  or  labial  consonant,  it  is  changed,
respectively  into  the  guttural  or  labial  nasal.

215.  The  dental  nasal  n is,  therefore,  only  found
before  dental  explosives  (as  nt  and  nd)  and  fricatives  (as
ns  and  nz\  pure  palatals  as  {iity,  ntsh,  ndsh,  nxl,)*  and
clicks  (as  n,\  n\\,  n!).

216.  When  n comes  to  stand  before  s and  sh,  a ^ is
inserted,  so  as  to  produce  the  combinations  7its  and  ntsh.
(§  170.)  Before  h and  /,  the  nasal  is  usually  dropped.

217.  This  nasalisation  of  consonants  is  a very  ancient
characteristic  of  the  Kafir  language,  which  has  frequently
been  lost  in  more  modernised  Ba-ntu  languages  ; whilst
the  employment  of  an  initial  labial  nasal  m before  all
consonants,  of  whatever  order,  is  a recent  feature,  and
has  evidently  arisen  from  the  suppression  of  some  vowel
(most  generally  u)  which  is  still  visible  in  most  cognate
dialects.  In  fact,  a sort  of  indistinct  vowel  sound  may
still  be  said  to  be  heard  with  this  initial  m,  separating  it
to  such  an  extent,  from  the  following  consonant,  as  to
prevent  its  influencing  or  being  influenced  by  the  latter,

d.  NASALISATION  IN  SE-TSHUaNA  AND  TEKEZA.

218.  Whilst  the  Se-tshuana  and  Tekeza  have  in  the
lastmentioned  cases,  by  the  retention  of  the  vowel  (which

* It  is  a misprint  in  Hahn’s  Herero  Grammar,  p.  3,  when  in  the  sys-
tem of  consonants  given  there  according  to  my  arrangement,  the  palatal
nasal  is  made  to  precede  the  palatal  media.  It  ought  to  be  (i.e.  nd;/')
instead  of  n'y'  (i.e.  nydy).  Besides  the  n m,  n and  n'  (ny),  Hahn  distin-.
guishes  in  his  latest  Herero  publications  also  an  n,  a nicety  of  pronun-
ciation which  is  observed  by  him  alone.  This  n seems  to  be  lingual,  as

it  is  said  to  be  pronounced  broadly,  the  tongue  being  pressed  flat  against
the  palate.


38


Phonology.


9


00  n-

a CD  E^>D=3  §


.5d


a (3
•S  <1^
o

CO


O ^ rv

.M

O

B ^

t>.

^ O’:^

.s  a|-5^

g a ^•'  8

^ ^ <i>

^ 03  g ■ g-i

^ »t:3  03  S p.

as  9 ^

g rfl  hC  g
S f-  fl

rS  a>  C3


o


CO


CD


1 ^
te


2

rC


« a

OT  p32  ^


o ^
r C=I


CO

' p
9 cO
p
o


P


03  i-P  O


=«6  o3


fl

O cS

> o

cS  <c3

-•  ®


-9  O


CO


P~i

f3


C

*

r£3

o

p

c3

u

PQ


p

O

C/3

05

rP


(O

d

P

o

a'-i


'*"•1

s'


. S ■;  r-oi


p p S p S p

S « a ‘rS  P ^ CS

C/3  os  _,  p

^ CO  g o 'T3  •*->

p - C3  9 ^ 05

p qP  S eg
g P O “
P-l"-'  +-=  ^


P

^ CO


p ^

Q-,  o

^ -

!=>  a

CO  O


P P
o

cS


p pa  p


ci

bo^'^

1^93

> p p
P p fa.

P

p


p p

W


p .. .

• rH  ^

CO  P


O jg,

® ce  « ^ ^ b£)

:=>  p 3

S'p  a ” %

p'.^'.^n3  o


"13

S


P

P

P

P


O

a

CD  -p  ^03

P p P 05  ,2

P ,«  ,£3  P „ vn

^ rP  n3  P

P m 05  OT  ^

^ 2 2.-P

P—I  g

p Oj  p Ph  o

.2

5 22  ’p3  ^


iM


T3

P


P

P

P


&


P

P

<P

P

rP


P

C/3


P

• rH

03

a

rcS

03


C3

Pi

tp

p

M


o

ofcl


p

P-i


p

Ph


p

p

bC

P


P

P _,
bC  ^
P


p


Ph

a


c3

<c^

M


03

C/2


03


PU,


C«

fl

<o3


nr5

03

CO
CO

c3

fl  _
Sh  I

^ c/2

W O

g

p


p

p

bC

P


ca3

p


Ph


P

?-i

'Ph


Ph

a


P

Ph


■??.


"13

S


M P
P P
P <P


Si


Si

s


"S

p


Ph

X

P


Ph


Ph

X

P

g


03

O

>

‘a

03


03

O
>

• rH

a

03

CO

U a

n3

03
N


c$

4-J

"3

03

— I

Ph


on  P
P c/3
!vl  HH


p

p

p

pa

p

w


p

p

<p

p

rP


P

C/3


Nasaliaatiov.


39


220.  In  fact,  in  Se-tshuana  a consonant  following
immediately  a nasal  sound,  may  be  said  to  become,
almost  throughout,  more  explosive,  and  on  account  of  the
greater  stress  laid  upon  the  explosive  pronunciation,  the
nasalisation  dwindles  almost  entirely  away.

221.  The  Tekeza  has,  on  the  contrary,  nearly  through-
out, retained  the  nasal,  and  before  a tenuis  the  nasal  has
even  prevailed  entirely,  and  has  made  the  tenuis  disap-
pear after  it,  so  that  Kafir  nt  becomes  n in  Tekeza,
Kafir  becomes  TO  in  Tekeza;  and  the  guttural  nasal
entirely  disappearing,  Kafir  iik  is  in  Tekeza  dissolved
into  the  “ spiritus  lenis.”

222.  In  other  cases,  before  a soft  explosive  (media),  or
before  an  aspirated  lingual,  the  nasalisation  remains,  in
general,  in  the  same  cases  as  in  Kafir,  with  slight  changes
of  course  in  the  pronunciation,  such  as  the  relation  in
which  both  languages  stand  to  each  other  may  require.
For  example,  Kafir  mv  is  in  Tekeza  changed  into  mf.

223.  Whether  the  Se-tshuana  n {ng  of  Sesuto,  n of
Sexlapi  books)  is  exactly  like  the  Kafir  and  Tekeza  ng
is  uncertain.  It  certainly  is,  to  such  a degree,  peculiar
in  its  use,  as  it  occurs  most  usually  at  the  end  of  a
syllable,  and  particularly  of  a word,  and  is  here  gene-
rally descended  by  contraction  from  the  Kafir  syllables
-ni  and  -nga.

e.  NASALISATION  IN  THE  MIDDLE  BRANCH  LANGUAGES.

224.  Among  the  Middle  Branch  languages,  few  have
preserved  the  initial  nasals  in  such  integrity  as  we  find
them  in  Kafir ; but  none  have  gone  quite  so  far  in  dis-
carding them  as  the  Se-tshuana.

225.  The  Middle  Branch  languages  agree  with  the
Tekeza  in  retaining,  generally,  the  nasal  media,  whilst
the  nasal  tenuis  is  rarely  met  with,  except  in  the  North-
western genus  (Kongo,  Mpongwe).  In  other  Middle
Branch  languages,  the  nasal  tenuis  is  either  converted
into  the  nasal  media,  or  it  is  changed  in  some  other  way.


40


Phonology.


226.  Thus  the  dialect  of  Inhambane  agrees  with  its
neighboui',  the  Tekeza,  iu  the  elision  of  the  nk  (parti-
cularly at  the  beginning  of  words).  For  example,  Kafir
inkosi  (chief)  becomes  in  Se-tshuina  kxosi  or  kh^osi,  in
Lourenzo  Marques  a-hose,  and  at  Inhambane  osi.  Farther,
Kafir  ihkomo  (cow,  ox)  is  in  Se-tshuana  h^omu,  or  kJfomo,
Lourenzo  Marques  omo,  Inhambane  ombe,  Makua  inyope,
and  in  all  other  Eastern  Middle  Branch  languages  hgombe,
and  in  the  South-western  or  Bunda  genus  ohgombe.*

227.  The  nt  offers  a far  greater  variety  in  its  treatment.
It  is  retained  in  Sofala,  Sena,  Tette,  Kipokomo,  and  in
the  languages  of  the  North-western  genus  (Kongo,  &c.)
It  is  softened  into  nd  in  the  Kikamba,  Ki-hiau  and  the
oTyi-herero.  It  loses  (as  in  the  Se-tshuana)  the  nasal
and  becomes  t in  the  Eastern  Coast  dialects  of  Inham-
bane, Quellimane,  Mosambique,  Ki-suaheli  and  in  the
language  of  Angola.  Finally,  the  t disappears  and  the
nasal  n alone  is  retained  (as  in  the  Tekeza)  in  the  lan-
guage of  Benguela.

228.  The  mp  stands  only  in  Sena,  Tette,  and  in  the
North-western  or  Kongo  genus.  Otherwise  a mollifica-
tion of  this  sound  to  mb  takes  place,  most  generally,
throughout  the  Middle  Branch.

229.  The  North-western  or  Kongo  genus  of  the
Middle  Branch  has  retained  the  nasal  not  only  (as  many


* Is  this  perhaps  the  same  word  with  the  Nama  Hottentot  word  gumap
(of  Tindall,  Le  Vaillant  and  others,  komap  of  Schmelen,  kamab  of  Knud-
sen)  msc.  sng.  ox,  with  the  plur.  gumahu  oxen,  fern.  sng.  gumas  cow>
phir.  gumati  cows,  common  plur.  guman  cattle,  &c.?  Or  is  the  similarity
merely  accidental?  In  the  North- western  branch  of  the  South  African
division  of  the  Ba-ntu  languages,  other  words  for  cattle  are  found,  and
this  is  also  the  case  in  Mpongwe.  In  the  latter  language  a cow  is  called
ni/are,  which  word  corresponds  exactly  to  the  Kafir  noun  innyaii
(bufflilo),  Lourenzo  Marques  inyarre,  Inhambane  nyarri,  Sofala,  Sena,
Tette  and  Kisuaheli  nydti,  Makua  nare,  Ki-nika  and  Ki  pokoma  nydhi,
oTyi-herero  o-nyati.  On  the  other  hand,  Madagascar  has  borrowed
the  first  word  from  the  Continent  of  Africa,  the  Malagasy  form  umbi
(written  mytby)  coinciding  most  nearly  with  that  of  the  dialect  of
Inhambane.


Nasalisation.


41


other  Middle  Branch  languages)  before  v and  z,  but  also
before/ and  s.

230.  The  nz  is  also  found  in  the  language  of  Angola,
and  corresponds  here  to  the  {ndz')  of  the  oTyi-herero.
(§  202  note.)  In  the  latter  language  the  nasal  is  always
dropped  before  (s)  and  h.

231.  It  is  curious  to  remark  that  in  Brusciotto  de
Vetralla’s  Kongo  Grammar,  the  nasal  before  a labial
consonant  (p,  hh,  f,  v),  is  always  written  n.  Whether
this  is  merely  an  orthographical  habit,  or  whether,  indeed
the  dental  (and  not  the  labial)  nasal  was  here  heard,  is
not  quite  clear.  In  some  Mosambique  languages,  a
similar  orthography  is  not  unfrequently  observed.

232.  The  so-called  false  labial  nasalisation  of  the  Kafir
(§  217)  occurs  only  in  very  few  Middle  Branch  languages,
as  in  Ki-suaheli  and  Ki-nika,  and  is  here  quite  evidently
(as  in  Kafir)  a mere  modern  contraction.

233.  In  Mpongwe  a few  cases  are  mentioned  in  which
a nasal  precedes  a liqulda,  as  nl.  Here,  however,  the  n
is  said  not  to  belong  to  the  consonant,  but  to  indicate  the
nasal  pronunciation  of  the  preceding  vowel.  We  suppose,
therefore,  that  in  the  monosyllables  which  begin  with  this
sound,  the  n has  a similar  power.*  A nasal  pronuncia-
tion is  also  ascribed  to  other  syllables.  (Mpongwe  Gram-
mar, p.  9.)

f.  NASALISATION  IN  THE  NORTH- WESTERN  BRANCH  LANGUAGES.

234.  In  the  North-western  Branch  (Benga,  Dualla,
&c.,)  the  nasalised  guttural  and  labial  tenues  are  indeed
found,  but  they  occur  very  rarely,  and  are  perhaps  even
then  not  original.  The  nasal  nt  is  here  (as  in  the  Se-
tshuS,na,  &c.,  § 227)  changed  into  t.

235.  In  Isubu,  in  one  instance  at  least,  a guttural
nasal  is  found  before  a labial  media,  namely  in  ‘ngbwa  or

* Comparative  philology  seems  to  render  it  probable  that  the  Mpongwe
sound  nl  (more  frequent  in  modern  publications  in  that  language)  is
intended  to  indicate  an  intermediate  sound  between  the  liquid  and  the
nasal,  or  an  I which  is  in  the  course  of  transformation  into  n.


Bleek^  S.  Afr.  Comp.  Grammar,


0


42


Phonology.


mbwa  (dog),  Dualla  mho,  in  Mpongwe  and  in  the  North-
eastern or  Zangian  genus  mboa,  in  the  South-western  or
Bunda  genus  o-mbua,  in  the  South-eastern  or  Mosambique
genus  and  in  the  Tekeza  imbua,  (whence  the  Malagasy
ambua,  written  amboa),  but  in  the  other  South-eastern
branch  languages  palatalised  to  Sesuto  mptsha,  Sexlapi
entsha,  Kafir  indsha.  If  this  were  more  than  a solitary
instance  of  such  a combination  of  sounds  in  the  Isubu,
it  would  invite  a comparison  with  the  sounds  kp  and  gb,
which  are  so  frequently  met  with  in  West  African
languages.

g.  NASALISATION  IN  THE  HOTTENTOT  LANGUAGE.

236.  We  mentioned  above  that  in  the  Hottentot  lan-
guage (in  distinction  from  the  B4-ntu  languages)  a nasal
cannot  precede  another  consonant,  or,  ^^at  least,  form  the
beginning  of  a syllable  in  combination  with  it.  But
notwithstanding  the  hereby  limited  use  of  clear  nasal
sounds,  the  Hottentot  language  sounds  much  more  nasal
than  the  Ba-ntu  languages.  This  is  produced  by  an
unclear  nasal  pronunciation,  which  affects  very  many
syllables,  and  though  it  extends  over  the  whole  length  of
a syllable,  is  perhaps,  most  strongly  felt  in  its  vowel.

237.  This  unclear  nasalisation  of  Hottentot  syllables
has  been  marked  by  different  writers  in  a very  different
manner.  Scbmelen’s  method  in  this  regard  is  not  quite
clear,  but  a ^ at  tlie  end  of  a syllable  seems  frequently
intended  for  this  purpose,  and  sometimes  an  n.  Knudsen
marks  it  in  his  spelling-book  by  a star  prefixed  to  the
syllable,  and  in  his  Luke  by  a prefixed  dot  at  the  bot-
tom of  the  line.  Wallmann  in  fils  vocabulary,  Tindall
and,  recently,  the  Bhenish  missionariog  indicate  it  by  a
French  circumflex  A over  the  vowel ; bnt  in  his  gram-
mar Wallmann  has,  in  accordance  with  Lepsius’s  standard
alphabet,  commuted  the  latter  mark  into  the  Greek
circumflex  .


Nasalisation  and  Votoels.


43


238.  For  example^  Schmelen’s  siig  (and)  is  Kjaudsen’s
*zi  (of  the  spelling  book)  and  .zi  (of  the  Gospels),  Tin-
dall’* zt,  Wallmann’s  zl  (to  be  pronounced  tsi)\  and
Schmelen’s  hain  (good)  is  Knudsen’s  ^^*gai  (of  the  spell-
ing book)  and  .^gai  of  the  gospels),  Wallmann’s  (vocabu-
lary) '^gdi,  Tindall’s  qkai,  and  Wallmann’s  (grammar)
fgdi.

239.  In  the  /Kora  Dialect,  Wuras  dlstinguiskes  even
a slight  nasal  pronunciation  (which  he  expresses  by  a
prefixed  ^j)  from  a broad  nasal  sound,  marked  by  a
Greek  circumflex  over  the  vowel.  ( Vide  Sir  G.  Grey’s
Library,  vol.  i,  p.  20.)

240.  This  unclear  nasalisation  of  the  Hottentot  lan-
guage seems,  in  some  cases  at  least,  to  have  been  caused
by  an  ending  nasal,  which  has  at  present  disappeared,
but  is  still  felt  in  the  nasal  pronunciation  of  the  syllable
which  it  once  followed.


III.  VOWELS.

a.  IN  THE  HOTTENTOT  LANGUAGE.

241.  The  Hottentot  differs  further,  most  decidedly,
from  the  Ba-ntu  languages  by  the  possession  of  diph-
thongs. Whilst  tbe  latter  languages  are  almost  entirely
restricted  to  clear  simple  vowels,  the  Hottentot  language
has  besides  them  at  least  half  a dozen  different  diphthongs,
by  which  very  nice  distinctions  of  pronunciation  are
marked.

242.  Thus  we  find  in  Kama  Hottentot  distinguished
ei  (Knudsen’s  cei,  Schmelen’s  y)  and  ai  (Schmelen’s  ay').
The  difference  between  both  diphthongs  is  probably
nearly  the  same  as  that  between  Dutch  ij  and  ei,  Tin-
dall says  that  ai  is  like  English  y in  “ my,”  and  ei  like
English  ey  in  “ they.”  The  latter  comparison  is,  indeed,
only  approximate.

243.  The  Kama  Hottentot  diphthongs  au  and  ou  may
be  supposed  to  be  identical  with  the  same  Dutch  sounds.


44


Phonology.


Tindall  assigns  to  au  the  sound  of  English  ou  in  “ house,”
and  to  ou  that  of  English  ow  in  “ sow.”  Wallmann
writes  the  latter  diphthong  ou.  »

244.  Finally,  the  Nama  Hottentot  has  oi  (like  English
oy  in  hoy”)  and  ui  (like  Dutch  ui  in  “ tuin.”)

245.  The  ae  of  Tindall  (like  English  ay  in  “ hay”)
seems  not  to  he  exactly  a diphthong,  hut  merely  the
broader  pronunciation  of  the  e,  (Lepsius’s  e German  d
or  ae.~)

246.  Wallmann  distinguishes  also  a more  indistinct
pronunciation  of  the  vowels  noted  hy  a circle  written
under  the  letter,  namely,  a,  e,  i,  o,  u,  &c.  He  states  also

o o o o o

that  in  the  pure  ISTama  dialect  an  intermediate  vowel
between  u and  o is  met  with,  which  he  writes  o,  hut
Avhich  would  better  he  represented  by  u.  The  Orlams
pronounce  an  almost  clear  o instead  of  it.

247.  In  the  orthography  of  a great  number  of  Nama
words,  different  observers  are  found  to  vary  greatly,
particularly  with  regard  to  the  exact  vowel  sounds  to  be
ascribed  to  them.

b.  VOWELS  IN  THE  Ba-NTU  LANGUAGES.

248.  The  Ba-ntu  languages  may  be  said  to  have  no
diphthongs  at  all ; yet  some  vowels,  as  ai  and  particu-
larly au,  are  frequently — (for  example,  in  Kafir  and
oTyi-herero)  pronounced  so  rapidly,  as  almost  to  approach
the  sound  of  a diphthong  (like  English  i in  “ mine,”  and
ou  in  “ house”).

249.  Though  in  general,  in  the  systems  of  writing
adopted  for  the  different  South  African  Ba-ntu  languages,
only  the  five  clear  vowels  a,  e,  i,  o,  u (with  German  or
Italian  pronunciation,)  are  distinguished,  it  cannot,  how-
ever, he  denied  that  in  many  of  them  also  nicer  shades  of
pronunciation  can  easily  be  marked,  besides  those  neces-
sarily arising  from  difference  of  quantity  and  accentuation.


Vowels  and  Syllables.


45


250.  In  Zulu,  for  example,  and  in  Se-suto  a sound
intermediate  between  u and  o is  found,  which  properly

O

ought  to  be  written  u,  but  which  is  generally  in  the
former  language  merely  expressed  by  ?<,  and  in  the  latter

by  0.  The  sons  of  Moshcsh  denoted  it  by  o {o  with  a
u over  it,  instead  of  our  u with  an  o over  it.)

251.  The  broad  vowel  o (having  the  sound  of  English  a
in  “ water”  or  “ all,”  and  of  Danish  aa)  is  met  with  in
Mosambique  languages,  and  also  in  the  Mpongwe.  In
the  missionary  orthography  of  the  latter  language  it  is
expressed  by  d.


IV.  SYLLABLES.

1.  SIMPLICITY  OF  THEIR  STRUCTURE.

252.  The  Ba-ntu  languages  and  the  Hottentot  dialects
agree,  in  general,  with  regard  to  the  simplicity  of  the
composition  of  their  syllables.  In  both  these  families  of
South  African  languages,  a syllable  can  begin  with  only
one  of  the  above  described  consonants  (consonantal
diphthongs,  nasalised  consonants,  and  combinations  of
clicks  with  other  consonants  reckoned  for  this  purpose  as
substantially  simple  consonants).  The  semivowel  w may,
however,  intervene  between  a consonant  and  a following
vowel.

253.  A South  African  syllable,  as  a general  rule,  ends
always  either  in  a vowel,  or  in  a nasal  sound,  but  never
in  any  other  consonant.  (Exceptions  vide  § 257 — 260.)


2.  NASAL  TERMINATIONS.

254.  In  the  Hottentot  language,  syllables  and  words
end  frequently  with  nasals  {m,  n,  and  once  or  twice  h.)

255.  But  in  the  Kafir  and  Zulu  and  most  Ba-ntu
languages  originally  no  word  is  found  to  end  in  a nasal ;
and  nasals  in  the  middle  of  a word  generally  may  more


46  Phonology.

properly  be  said  to  belong  to  the  initial  consonant  of  the
following,  than  to  the  termination  of  the  preceding
syllable.

256.  In  Se-tshuana,  however,  the  ringing  n (?^y  of  the
Se-suto  and  » of  the  Sexlapi)  is  very  frequent  at  the
end  of  words,  being  here  mostly  descended  from  the
terminations  -ni  and  -nga  as  found  in  Kafir.


3.  CONSONANTAL,  TERMINATIONS.
a.  IN  Ba-NTU  LANGUAGES.

257.  By  the  falling  off  of  the  generally  extremely
short  and  almost  indistinct  terminal  vowel  of  a word,
there  are  sometimes,  in  Bd-ntu  languages,  instances
produced  of  consonantal  endings  of  words.  ( Vide  Hahn’s
Herero  grammar  § 3.*)  These  cases  are,  however,  so
exceptional  that  they  do  not  affect  the  character  of  the
language,  or  the  general  constancy  of  the  above  rule.

b.  IN  THE  HOTTENTOT  LANGUAGE.

258.  In  the  Hottentot  language,  on  the  contrary,  this
rule  of  non-consonantal  terminations  of  syllables  applies,
in  strictness,  only  to  the  roots  of  the  words,  but  in  the
grammatical  portions  of  the  language,  consonants  are
frequently  made  to  close  syllables.

259.  Thus,  as  derivative  suffixes  of  the  nouns  and  as
suffixed  pronouns,  we  find  most  extensively  used  in  Hot-
tentot the  sex-denoting  and  personal  endings  -p  (masc.
sng.),  -s  (fern,  sng.,  and  II.  sng.  fern,  j,  -ts  (i/.  sng.  masc.)
and  in  the  .^Kora  dialect  also  -r  (/.  sng.)

260.  There  is  no  doubt  that  these  consonantal  endings
were  produced  by  a mere  throwing  off  of  a following

* The  interjection  ih!  (pronounced  ish!  or  sh!')  given  by  Hahn  may  more
properly  be  said  to  consist  merely  of  the  aspirated  sibilant,  used  here
like  a vowel,— in  the  same  manner  as  also  a click  sound  is  used  in
the  Kafir  and  Zulu  interjection  ||  (.r).  Also  in  European  languages  clicks
and  spirants  are  in  this  way  employed  as  interjections.


Hottentot  Grammatical  Elements.


47


vowel,  and  what  this  vowel  was  can,  in  some  instances
at  least,  still  be  clearly  shown.


V.  EADICAL  AND  SEE  VILE  LETTEES.


261.  The  last  paragraphs  afford  a very  clear  exempli-
fication of  the  observation,  that  the  more  frequent  use  to
which,  generally,  the  grammatical  elements  of  a language
are  subject  has  the  tendency  to  more  rapidly  wear  them  off,
and  by  such  modifications  to  bring  them,  as  a general  rule,
into  a more  advanced  stage  of  phonetical  development.

262.  It  is  on  this  account  that,  in  the  grammatical
elements  of  the  Hottentot  language,  clicks  and  diph-
thongs have  entirely  disappeared  ;*  and  though  three-
fourths  of  the  words  of  this  language  may  be  said  to
contain  clicks,  yet  it  is  as  possible  to  speak  whole  sen-
tences without  a click  as  it  is  to  write  a page  in  English
without  using  any  but  Avords  of  Anglo-Saxon  origin.

263.  For  example  among  the  phrases  given  by  Tindall
in  his  Grammar,  the  following  are  quite  clickless :


Taro  ho-tsi  ha  ?

Hui-'i  ha-ha- Ui-dama  ha,

Nep  he  amaha-ra  mi^  noup  ke-ra
hara.

Tariba  dausa  sori'i  ?

Hamo  ni  soua  f
Tsi  ni  hamo  uwa  ?

Ho-n-ta  hmi.

He-e,  arin  u-si-ha.

BurU')(a  khoi-ts  he  satsa.

Turi  konkon-tsi  ha  ?


What  is  the  matter  with  you  ?
There  is  no  help  for  you.

This  one  tells  the  truth,  the  other
deceives.

What  a burning  sun  ?

When  will  it  be  fine  weather  ?
And  when  will  it  return  ?

Just  as  they  find.

ISTo,  the  dogs  have  her.

You  are  a strange  person.

What  has  disturbed  you  ?


* There  are,  indeed,  several  directives  and  emphatical  pronouns  whicli
begin  with  clicks ; but  as  almost  all  these  are  also  found  used  as  other  parts
of  speech,  and  their  etymology  as  such  is  very  clear,  they  cannot  be
called  mere  grammatical  elements  with  any  more  right  than,  for  example,
the  English  “on  account  of”  may  be  called  a mere  preposition,  or  “His
Honour”  a pronoun.


48


Phonology.


Maha  la  huiba  ni  ho  ?

Te-ti-ts-ka,  o-ta  ha  mi-ba-tsika
ha-

O-ta  hmo  ni  owa.

Anip  ta  a.

Ti  sisinsa  ta  ko  di  twa.


Where  shall  I find-help  ?

If  you  had  asked  me,  I would
have  told  you.

Then  I will  return.

The  cock  crows.

I have  finished  my  work.


In  some  Nama  fables  collected  by  Mr.  Krbnleln,  the
following  clicldess  sentences  occur  :


I.  In  the  fable  of  the  elephant :


Os  gere  mi :

“ Hem  I ti  oab  geib  go  huga
ml-hetamanara  miheo."

“ O!  huga  ta  hi  titee  ta  hXa."

“ Huga  ml-hetamanara  mle  %uige
dlbaxare  F'


And  she  said  :

“Umph!  By  the  wife  of  my  eldest
son  things  are  said  which  she
never  had  said  (before).”

“ Oh  ! what  I always  should  not
do,  I do.”

“ As  she  says  things  which  she
never  said  (before),  do  itthen!”


II.  In  the  fable  of  the  flying  lion :


xami  ge  goma  hana  hana  ge  toe.

Tslh  gege  ml ; “ H&b  garao,  o~ml-
babi.

Tsl  slbge,  obge  ge  te  : “ Hamtiro
dl-haf"  timi,  ^c.

“ Nela  ge  aue  go  ha."

“ Ne  ;i^u«  ge  hhom  ta  titee."


The  lion,  it  is  said,  used  once
to  fly.

And  he  said  : “When  he  comes,
so  say  to  him  :”

And  when  he  came,  he  asked :
“ How  have  you  made  it?”
saying,  &c.

“ Here  came  a man.”

“ Of  that  matter  nothing  is  to  be
said.”


III.  In  the  fable  of  the  giraffe  and  the  tortoise :

“ Hugas  ta  di  gamte,  os  m di  “ Have  3'ou  not  always  sprinkled
gamte  f"  me  (with  boochoo)  that  you

will  sprinkle  me  now  ?”

IV . In  the  fable  of  the  white  man  and  the  snake :

“ Ta  uhhai  eibi !"  “ Do  not  lift  him  up.”

V.  In  the  fable  of  the  ostriches  hunted  by  tortoises  :

Tsl  gu  ge  maguhaiagehanategu:  And  standing  they  asked  each
'■'■Ha.tsa?"  ti  ml.  other:  “Art  thou  there?”  so

saying.

264.  In  the  same  manner  Appleyard,  distinguishes  in
Kafir  the  clicks,  the  deep  guttural,  and  the  spirants  (y,


Mutability  of  Grammatical  Elements.


49


f,  h)  as  “ radical  lettex’s,  as  they  are  only  found  in  the
roots  of  words,”  and  proposes  to  call  the  remaining  letters
“ serviles,  as  they  are  used  in  the  foi’mation  and  inflee-
tion  of  words,  as  well  as  in  their  roots.”

265.  This  rule  allows  of  much  nicer  distinctions,  and
similar  natural  distinctions  of  sounds  can  be  observed  in
many  other  languages  besides  those  of  South  Africa.


VI.  GRAMMATICAL  CHANGES  OF  SOUND.

266.  In  the  grammatical  portions  of  the  Hottentot
language,  also,  the  rigidity  of  the  non-interference  prin-
ciple of  its  syllables  with  each  other  (§  52)  is  most
signally  broken  through,  particularly  with  regard  to  the
derivative  suffixes  of  nouns,  the  pronouns  derived  from
them,  and  the  personal  particles.  Here  we  find  the
different  elements  affecting  each  other  to  a considerable
extent,  and  sevei’al  coalescing  into  indivisible  unities,  the
single  component  parts  of  which  are  not  discernible,
except  to  the  most  searching  comparative  analysis.  As,
however,  these  cases  are  too  few  in  number  to  allow  us  to
deduct  from  them  any  constant  rules  of  euphony,  we
leave  the  deduction  of  what  can  be  made  out  in  this
regard  to  the  chapters  regarding  the  analysis  of  the
different  parts  of  speech.

267.  In  the  Ba-ntu  languages,  on  the  contrary,  such
phonetical  changes  do  not  only  affect  the  grammatical
portions  of  the  language,  but  the  very  stems  of  the  words
are  commuted,  not  unfrequently,  in  accordance  with  the
grammatical  elements  (suffixes  or  prefixes),  and  the
different  syllables  of  a stem  can  affect  each  other.

1.  PHONETICAL  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  SUFFIXES  UPON
THE  STEM.

a.  SUPPRESSION  OF  THE  ORIGINAL  TERMINAL  VOWEL.

268.  In  this  manner,  the  ending  vowel  of  the  stem  of
almost  aU  verbs  has  been  entirely  lost ; for,  in  all  verbal

Bleekf  S,  Afr^  Comp.  Grammar,


II


50


Phonology.

forms  grammatical  suffixes  are  found,  and  before  these
the  ending  syllable  of  the  stem  has  been  constantly
suppressed.

269.  For  example,  in  Zulu  uku-tand-a  is  “to  love”
and  ngi-tand-ile  “ I have  loved.”  This  would  give  the
stem  TAND  ; but  as  (according  to  § 253)  a consonantal
ending  is  incompatible  with  the  original  principles  of
structure  in  the  Ba-ntu  languages,  a vowel  must  be
supposed  to  have  been  suppressed  before  the  -a,  which  is
the  grammatical  ending  of  the  positive  infect  in  the
infinitive,  indicative,  &c.,  and  before  the  -He  of  the  per-
fect, as  well  as  before  other  grammatical  terminations.
As,  however,  the  verb  is  always  found  with  such  gram-
matical terminations,  it  is  scarcely  possible,  in  the  case  of
any  verb,  to  say  what  was  the  original  ending  vowel  of
its  stem ; but  for  the  purpose  of  analysis  of  the  forms  of
the  verbs,  we  shall  indieate  this  obliterated  vowel  by  the
sign  of  the  Hebrew  x (aleph) ; and  we  can,  therefore,
say  that  tanda  is  contracted  from  TANDn-A.

b.  ASSIMILATION  OP  VOWELS.

270.  If  we  reduce  in  this  manner  any  of  the  deriva-
tive forms  of  the  verb,  for  example  the  causative  tandisa
to  TANDx-IS-A,  tbe  causative  suffix  seems  to  have  the
form  IS,  which  is  a^ain  impossible  in  the  Ba-ntu  lan-
guages. But  by  analogy,  we  are  led  to  conclude  that
the  original  form  of  this  causative  particle  was  SI,  and
that  its  ending  vowel  generally  disappeared,  after  having
influenced  the  preceding  end  vowel  of  the  stem,  in  which
it  is,  therefore,  still  preserved.  Thus  TANDx-SI-A
became  by  assimilation  of  vowels  first  TANDISIA,
then  by  contraction  tandisa.

271.  Similarly,  in  most  verbal  terminations,  a vowel
does  not  originally  belong  to  the  syllable  in  which  it  is
found,  but  is  derived  from  the  syllable  following  it.  For
example,  bonahalisela  (be  manifest  to)  is  probably  to  be
dissolved  into  BONx-KALA-SI-LE-A.


The  Stem  affected  by  the  Suffixes.


51


C.  TRANSMUTATION  OF  CONSONANTS.

272.  But  not  only  the  ending  vowel  of  the  stem  is
affected  by  the  grammatical  terminations  following  it,
but  also  in  certain  cases  the  last  consonant,  and  sometimes
the  consonant  of  even  distantly  preceding  syllables  (very
rarely,  however,  that  beginning  the  stem)  is  changed
through  the  influence  of  a grammatical  suffix.

aa.  Palatalisation  of  Labials.

273.  This  is  regularly,  under  certain  conditions,  the
case  in  the  languages  of  the  South-eastern  branch,  being
effected  by  means  of  a palatalisation  of  labials.  The
rule  by  which  this  sort  of  palatalisation  has  been  origi-
nated is  that,  when  a labial  explosive  {p,  mp,  b,  mb,  or  m)
is  followed  by  a labial  vowel  {u,  o)  or  semivowel  {to)
which  is  by  a succeeding  vowel  or  syllable  pressed  against
it, — then,  for  the  purpose  of  facilitating  the  pronuncia-
tion, which  seems  rather  impeded  by  the  immediate
contact  of  two  labial  sounds,  the  palatal  semivowel  y is
produced  as  separating  them  from  each  other.

274.  Through  this  insertion  of  y,  there  are  in  the  first
instance  such  palatal  labial  sounds  produced  as  py,  mpy,
by,  mby,  my.  From  these  primitive  labial  palatals,  all
those  palatal  sounds  which  are  descended  from  labials,
are  to  be  derived,  the  labial  rarely  remaining  such,  but
being  generally  converted  into  a more  dental  sound,
which,  together  with  the  following  y,  forms  then  a true
palatal  consonant.  The  y may  then  also,  through  the
influence  of  the  preceding  dental,  go  over  into  an
aspirated  sibilant,  and  thus  :

ty,  nty,  dy,  and  ndy  can  become
tsh,  ntsh,  dsh,  and  ndsh.

275.  The  true  explanation  is  indeed  that  the  dental
has,  in  these  cases,  originally  been  first  inserted  between
the  labial  and  palatal,  and  has  then  most  generally  got
the  better  of  the  labial,  so  as  to  make  it  entirely  dis-
appear before  it.


52


Phonology.


276.  In  the  same  manner^  even  the  palatal  semivowel
y may  completely  swallow  up  the  labial  consonant  before
it,  on  account  of  which  it  was  a'r  first  originated,  and  it
may,  therefore,  at  present  appear  as  if  the  labial  had  been
immediately  commuted  into  this  semivowel.

277.  How  in  such  a manner  a Kafir  and  Se-tshuana
palatal  may  have  descended  from  an  original  labial,  as
still  preserved  in  the  more  Northern  languages,  can  be
seen  from  the  example  of  the  Kafir  and  Zulu  word
indslia  (dog),  Sexlapi  entsha,  Sesuto  ^mptsha,  if  compared
with  the  form  of  the  Tekeza  and  of  the  Mosambique
Genus  imbua  &c.  (§  235).  That  we  find  here  in  a
Tekeza  dialect  (the  most  southern  one,  spoken  by  the
Manlolosi)  the  same  form  as  in  its  neighbours  of  the
Middle  branch,  may  probably  to  some  extent  be  due  to
the  influence  of  the  latter;  for,  otherwise  the  Tekeza
shows  generally  intermediate  forms  (§  175 — 177.)  One
Northern  Tekeza  dialect  (that  of  the  Ma -tonga)  has,
however,  the  form  inibiya.  What  may  be  the  exact
Lourenzo  Marques  form  of  this  word  cannot  be  clearly
made  out  from  the  diminutive  imbdshana  (§  176).

278.  But  what  concerns  us  here  much  more,  and  is  of
far  greater  importance  from  a grammatical  point  of  view,
is  the  constant  phonetical  change  from  labial  to  palatal
sound  which  takes  place  within  the  same  language,  wdien
in  the  course  of  inflection  those  circumstances  are  pro-
duced under  which  such  a palatalisation  is  effected.

279.  This  is  most  regularly  the  case  in  the  formation
of  passive  forms  of  verbs  in  Kafir  and  Se-tshuana.
Whether  also  in  Tekeza,  we  do  not  know,  since  no
specimens  of  passive  forms  are  given  in  our  scanty  voca-
bularies of  Tekeza  dialects.

280.  The  passive  voice  being  formed  by  the  apparent
insertion  of  a labial  vowel  (u  in  Kafir  and  Zulu,  o in
Se-tshuana)  before  the  terminal  vowel  of  the  inflection
of  the  verb,  a preceding  labial  explosive  is,  in  these


Palatalisation  of  Labials.


53


languages,  always  palatalised  in  consequence ; and  in
this  manner  in  Kafir  and  Zulu

p mp  h mb  and  m of  active  verbs  become

tsli  ntsh  ty,  or  dsh  ndsh  and  ny  of  the  passive ;
whilst  in  Se-tshuana,  where  the  nasal  pronunciation  has
generally  been  converted  into  a stronger  explosive  one,
with  similar  regularity  in  passive  forms
p b and  m become

, A ^

tsh,  or  pi  y and  n,  the  latter  being  a further  change
from  ny,  which  palatal  nasal,  even  when  found  in  the
active  form  of  Se-tshuana  verbs  is  always,  in  the  passive,
converted  into  the  above  guttural  nasal  n {ny  or  rj.)

281.  The  Se-tshuana  offers  indeed  a number  of  semi-
palatal changes  of  other  consonants,  besides  labials,  in  the
passive  formation.  For  example,  the  insertion  of  an  i
before  the  o takes  place  after  u,  s,  ts,  and  nts ; and  this  is
accompanied  by  a liquidisation  of  ts  to  r,  when  the  ts
is  contracted  from  LIS  (§  296.)  But  when  the  ts  is
derived  from  an  L which  followed  the  syllable -s^- ( § 306),
it  is  merely  commuted  into  tsh  before  the  passive  -o-,
without  an  intervening  i,

282.  These  changes,  however, — though  they  may  either
be  explained  by  assuming  that  the  passive  inflection
itself  contained  originally  the  vowel  ^ besides  its  charac-
teristic labial  sound,  or  that  the  labial  vowel  is  (as  the
English  ^^)  even  without  a preceding  labial,  apt  to  call
into  existence  an  i or  y before  itself, — do  not  affect  the
indubitable  rule  of  the  palatalisation  of  labials,  a rule
not  only  apparent  in  these  passive  forms,  but  also  in
other  inflections,  as  in  diminutive  nouns,  and  in  the  suffix
locative  case.

283.  But  before  we  proceed  to  a contemplation  of  the
further  illustrations  of  this  rule,  it  is  necessary  to  men-
tion that  this  palatalisation  of  labial  sounds  never  affects
the  first  consonant  of  the  stem  of  the  verb ; though,  if
the  passive  ending  stands  immediately  after  it,  the  first


54


Phonology.


step  towards  palatalisation,  namely  the  Insertion  of  the  i
before  the  u,  takes  place.  This  change  does  not,  however,
depend  upon  the  precedence  of  a labial,  but  is  general
with  such  verbal  stems  with  one  consonant.  Thus  we
have  in  Kafir

pa  (give)  pass,  piwa,  but  Impa  (turn  out)  pass.
liutslma ;

bha  (steal)  pass,  bhiica,  aba  (judge)  pass,  abhoa,  but
Ihuba  (drive)  pass,  lliutywa  ;
and  likewise

aha  (build)  pass,  ahiioa,  but  faha  (put  in)  pass.
fakwa ;

ya  (go)  pass,  yiwa^  \>\\.tfuya  (possess)  pass,  yhyit’n  ;

ta  (j)our)  pass,  tiwa,  but  pata  (touch)  pass,  pativa  ;
and  in  Se-tshuana  ya  (eat)  pass.  yeoa.

284.  The  palatalisation  of  a labial  consonant,  according
to  the  above  rule,  seems  only  then  ascribable  to  merely
phonetical  influences,  when  labial  and  labial  come  imme-
diately in  contact  with  each  other,  i.e.,  when  the  commu-
table  consonant  stands  immediately  before  the  passive
termination.  Yet  in  Kafir  and  Zulu  also  labials  separated
by  one  or  more  syllables  from  the  passive  u,  are  changed
into  palatals.  In  this  manner,  sibilants  (as  s and  z),
liquids  (/),  or  nasals  (w),  and  in  fact  any  inflectional
elements  (or  servile  letters,  § 264)  may  intervene  between
the  two  labial  sounds,  without  apparently  interrupting
the  mutual  influence  which  they  have  upon  each  other  in
the  above  described  manner.  It  may  be,  however,  that
these  cases  of  apparently  far-working  phonetical  influence
are  rather  to  be  explained  as  formations  caused  by
analogy,  or  as  grammatical  inferences  of  the  natives.  I
mean  to  say  that  any  one  who  was  accustomed  to  the
form  botshwa  (be  bound)  as  passive  of  bopa  (bind),  would
by  analogy  form  from  bopela  (bind  for)  the  passive
botshelwa ; or  from  bambelela  (hold  on)  bandshelehca,  as
from  bamba  (hold)  came  the  passive  bandshu-a.  Similarly,


Palatalisation  of  Labials.


55


of  hubisa  (destroy)  the  passive  is  budshisioa,  of  kiimsha
(KUMUSHA,  translate)  kunyushioa,  of  gubungela  (cover)
gudshungelwa,  See.  &c.

285.  This  Indirect  palatalisation  of  labials,  in  conse-
quence of  which  this  process  has  from  a mere  euphonic
change,  become  in  Kafir  and  Zulu  quite  a characteristic
of  the  passive  voice,  has  not  made  its  appearance  in  the
Se-tshuana,  nor  does  it  extend  to  the  other  cases  of
regular  inflectional  palatalisation  of  labials,  which  occur
in  the  languages  of  the  South-eastern  Branch.

286.  Among  these  cases,  one  at  least  which  is  also
restricted  to  the  Kafir  and  Zulu,  is  produced  by  the  same
causes  as  the  direct  labial  palatalisation  before  the  passive
termination.  This  palatalisation  takes  place  before  the
only  case  termination  of  nouns,  existing  in  the  Ba-ntu
languages,  that  of  the  locative  case,  which  is  formed  in
Kafir  and  Zulu  by  the  suffix  -ini  or  -eni.  When,  there-
fore, the  end  vowel  of  the  noun  is  a labial  (m  or  o),
preceded  by  a labial  consonant,  those  circumstances  arise
which  require  the  palatalisation  of  the  latter  consonant
(§  273).  The  palatalisation  is,  however,  here  accompanied
by  the  disappearance  of  the  ending  vowel  which  pri-
marily by  its  presence  caused  the  palatalisation.  The
changes  of  sound  effected  hereby  are  the  same  as  In  the
passive  formations.  But  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  the
palatalisation  in  the  locative  case  is  by  no  means  so
universal  as  in  the  passive, — there  being  not  few  cases,
in  which  the  labial  consonant  here  remains  unaltered.

287.  This  case  termination  having  in  Se-tshuana
dwindled  down  into  a mere  ringing  nasal  sound  at  the  end
of  the  syllable,  the  circumstances  which  would  pi’oduce  a
palatalisation  of  a labial  sound  did  not  arise  (§273)  ; and,
therefore,  such  commutations  are  not  found  in  this
instance  in  the  Se-tshuana  language.

288.  The  third  case  of  inflectional  palatalisation  of
labials,  that  of  diminutives  of  nouns,  is  common  to  all


56


Phonology.

three  species  of  the  South-eastern  Branch.  It  is  pro-
duced by  the  addition  of  the  diminutive  suffixes  -ana,
-anyana,  &c.  Here,  however,  the  palatalisation  of  the
labial  explosives  is  not  merely  restricted  to  such  cases,
where  an  original  ending  labial  vowel  (o  or  u)  has  been
suppressed  before  this  termination,  but  in  Kafir  and
Zulu  at  least,  the  change  takes  also  place  in  numerous
nouns  ending  in  other  vowels  (as  a,  e,  i).  For  example  :
indaba  news,  indatyana  little  news,
ihlidbi  ox,  ihkatyana  a little  ox,
mxlope  v/hite,  mxlotshana  a little  white,
fupi  xiQWyfutshane  rather  near.

289.  We  find  corresponding  to  these  last  words  in  the
Western  Se-tshuana : ■^a-uhe  near,  and  xa-utsliuanyana
rather  near,  where  the  change  from  the  original  p to  h,
peculiar  to  this  dialect  (§  110  and  124),  produces  the
appearance  of  a change  of  the  spirant  to  palatal  sound.

290.  In  Tekeza  one  instance  of  a palatalised  labial  in
a case  of  this  inflection  is  on  record,  namely,  nambo
(river,  Kafir  umlambo,  Se-tshuana  molapo')  has  as  diminu-
tive form  nambdshana  (little  river,  Kafir  umlandshana,
Se-tshu&na  molatshand).

hb.  Permutations  of  other  Consonants.

291.  In  Se-tshuana,  some  other  changes  at  the  end
of  the  stems,  or  in  the  terminations,  take  place,  arising
also  out  of  the  incompatibility  of  some  consonant  with
a following  vowel.  In  this  manner  the  vowel  o cannot
stand  immediately  after  the  sibilants  s and  ts.

292.  It  is  shown  above  (§  281)  how  this  is  obviated  in
the  case  of  passive  verbs,  by  the  insertion  of  the  vowel  i,
accompanied  in  the  case  of  ts  by  the  latter’s  commutation
into  r.

293.  But  in  the  case  of  verbal  nouns  formed  by  the
suffix  0,  an  aspiration  of  a preceding  sibilant  takes  place,
and  s and  ts,  therefore,  become  in  this  case  in  the
Se-tshuana,  sh  and  tsh  ( ch  or  c.)


Transmutations  of  Consonants.


57


294.  Even  of  more  extensive  influence  in  Se-tshuana
is  perhaps  the  incompatability  of  the  sharp  vowel  i with
a preceding  L*

295.  If  such  a combination  happens  to  take  place  in
the  formation  of  verbal  nouns,  then  the  I is  always
commuted  into  r,  and  in  this  case  the  rule  extends  also
to  such  instances,  in  which  the  labial  vowel  o,  indicative
of  the  passive  voice,  intervenes  between  the  liquid  and
the  i, — e.g.,  moaberoi  a partaker,  from  aheloa  partake.

296.  But  when  in  the  Se-tshuana,  the  i (after  L)  is
followed  by  the  s of  causative  verbs,  or  by  the  -le  of  the
perfect  form,  then  the  preceding  I is  either  also  merely
changed  into  r (in  which  case  the  following  termination
remains  without  alteration),  or  into  ts.  In  the  latter
case,  the  vowel  and  consonant  following  (that  is  the  -is-
of  the  causative  and  -il-  of  the  perfect)  become  con-
tracted with  this  sibilant  explosive.  Thus  from  verbs
terminating  in  -ola,  causative  verbs  are  formed  ending  in
-orisa  (-X-LO-SI-A)  ; and  from  those  in  -ala  and  -ela,
causatives  in  -atsa  (-X-LA-SI-A)  and  -etsa  (-K-LE-
SI-A).f  Likewise  of  verbs  ending  in  -ila,  -ula,  and
-ala,  the  perfect  termination  is  -irile,  -urile,  and  -arile,
and  from  others  in  -ela  and  -ola,  it  is  -etse  and  -otse.

297.  Other  cases  where  the  Z of  a suffix  is  influenced
by  the  preceding  syllable  will  be  treated  afterwards  (S
306  and  307.)

298.  When  in  the  Angola  language,  the  end  consonant,

is  an  I,  t,  nd,  or  it  is  changed  into

r,  tsh{ch),  ndsli{ng),  or  dsh(g),  if  the  perfect  ter-
mination immediately  following  it  is  -He;  and  this  is
always  the  case,  when  the  vowel  preceding  it  is  sharp
(Z  or  M,  § 311),  Dias  p.  26.

* Also  in  Kongo  and  Bunda,  the  / before  i is  changed  into  r;  but  of
course  not  in  Kakongo,  this  language  having  no  r (§  163).

f The  Kafir  goes  in  this  instance  quite  with  the  Se-tshuana,  forming
from  primitive  verbs  in  -ala  and  -ela,  causatives  in  -aza  and  -eza,  the  z
corresponding  to  Se-tshuana  ts,  (§  171  )

BLeeJcy  S.  Afr»  Comp.  Grammar,


I


58


Phonology.


299.  In  the  case  of  the  perfect  of  inversive  verbs,
however,  generally  a contraction  takes  place,  the  first
liquid  (or  nasal,  vide  § 305)  being  omitted;  and  the
initial  vowel  of  the  perfect  termination  by  coming  into
immediate  contact  with  the  vowel  characteristic  of  the
inversive  verbs,  retains  its  sharp  nature,  whilst  it  trans-
forms in  its  turn  a preceding  flat  vowel  into  a sharp  one
(§  302).  For  example,  sukula  (wash,)perf.  sukuile,  sokola
(gather)  perf.  sohuile,  samuna  (comb)  perf.  samuine,

300.  The  Kongo  has  in  this  case  similar  contractions,
preserving  however,  the  vowel  harmonic  law  in  letting
the  quality  of  the  preceding  vowel  preponderate  over  the
following  (§  310),  as  in  zimuna  (speak  ironically)  perf.
zimuini,  funguna  (confess)  perf.  fungini,  ehhola  perf.
blioele,  and  mona  (see)  perf.  muene,  the  u of  which  is
probably  Intended  for  the  semivowel  %v.

d.  VOWEL  HARMONY.

301.  An  influence  of  the  beginning  vowel  of  the
suffixes  of  the  verbs  upon  the  last  syllable  of  the  stem  is
also  sometimes  remarked.  For  example,  the  Kafir  per-
fect of  the  verb  ambat-a  (dress,  Se-tshu4na  apara)  is
ambete  (Se-tshuana  apere~)  which  is  contracted  from

i

AMBATnLE  ; and  in  the  same  manner  we  have  the
perfects  pete  from  pata  (touch,  handle),  twele  from  twala
(carry),  lele  from  lala  (sleep),  biilele  from  bulala  (kill).
The  case  of  the  change  of  the  termination  of  reciprocal
verbs  in  -ana,  passive  -anioa  in  the  perfect  into  -ene,

passive  -entoe  as  contracted  from  -ANxLE  or  (-xNALI)

and  -ANnLWE  (or  -xNALWI),  comes  more  under  the
head  of  § 271.

302.  But  the  alteration  of  the  ending  u of  the  stem
into  0 before  the  termination  -e  of  the  subjunctive,  which
is  visible  in  the  Se-tshuana  verb  iitshua  (steal),  subj.


Injiectwnal  Changes  of  Sound.


59


utshoe,  betrays  a tendency  for  accommodating  the  stem
to  the  suffixes.  For  a similar  case  in  the  Angola  language
vide  § 299  {sokuile).

e.  THE  INITIAL  OF  THE  STEM  AFFECTED  BY  THE  END.

303.  The  same  is  the  case  even  with  regard  to  the
initial  consonant  of  the  stem,  in  the  perfect  form  of  lula

i

(sit)  which  is  rutse,  instead  of  LULnLE,  the  influence
of  the  i which  has  now  actually  disappeared,  having
extended  so  far  back  as  to  touch  even  the  more  distant
liquid,  which  forms  the  initial  of  the  stem  of  this  verb.

304.  An  analogous  action  of  the  posterior  consonants
of  a stem  upon  its  initial  is  observable  in  the  South-
western or  Bunda  genus  of  the  Middle  Branch,  in  which
the  nasals  are  apt  to  overrule  the  other  consonants,  and
to  attract  them  in  such  a manner  that  they  are  them-
selves transformed  into  nasals.  Thus  the  verb  bona  (see)
of  the  South-eastern  branch  {yona  of  Sofala,  pona  of  the
Mpongwe)  becomes  by  this  process  muna  in  oTyi-herero,
mona  in  Bunda  and  Kongo,  whilst  in  the  other  Middle
Branch  languages,  the  initial  spirant  v has  been  entirely
dropped  in  the  form  ona.  And  in  another  language  of
this  South-western  genus,  the  Nano  (of  Benguela),  the
noun  omano  (men,  sing,  omuno)  is  in  like  manner  des-
cended from  ovano  (oTyi-herero  ovandu)  corresponding
to  the  Kafir  abantu  (sng.  umuntu),  Northern  Tekeza  vanu
(sing,  munu)  § 140.

#

2.  PHONETIC  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  STEM  UPON  THE
SUFFIXES.

a.  ASSIMILATION  OF  CONSONANTS.

305.  This  process  of  nasal  alliteration  is,  however,  of
considerably  more  importance,  as  affecting  some  verbal
terminations  in  the  Western  languages  of  the  Middle
Branch  ; and  in  this  case,  the  suffixes,  instead  of  influen-
cing the  stem,  are  influenced  by  it,  or  rather  in  this  case


60


Phonology.


by  its  last  consonant.  It  is  here  again  the  liquid  (/  or  r
of  the  Kongo  and  Angola  languages,  and  r of  the  oTyi-
herero)  which,  when  in  the  termination  of  respective
verbs  and  perfect  forms,  it  happens  to  follow  a preceding
nasal  m or  n (be  this  radical  or  inflectional),  is  itself
transformed  into  a nasal.  Thus  for  the  Kafir  tumela
(send  to)  and  tumile  (have  sent),  Se-tshuana  romela  and
romile,  the  Bunda  genus  (i.  e.,  the  oTyi-herero,  and  the
Angola  language)  has  the  forms  tumina  and  tumine,  the
latter  of  which  sounds  in  Kongo  tumini ; and  instead  of
the  Kafir  perfect  of  the  respective  forms  of  verbs  tumele
(contracted  from  tumelile,  have  sent  for),  Se-tshuana
rometse,  the  oTyi-herero,  has  the  form  tuminme,  and  the
Angola  language  tuminene.  This  rule  applies  also  to
some  extent  to  the  terminations  of  inversive  verbs.

306.  In  Se-tshuana,  the  liquid  I is  in  the  perfect  suffix
also  sometimes  influenced  by  the  preceding  consonant;
namely,  when  this  is  a sibilant  s or  ts,  after  which  the
above  liquid  becomes  itself  the  sibilant  explosive  ts.  To
avoid,  however,  the  close  approach  of  two  such  identical
consonants,  the  preceding  consonant  when  ts,  is  then  in
its  turn  liquidised  (to  r),  and,  therefore,  the  Se-tshuana
verbs  ending  in  -sa  and  -tsa  are  in  the  perfect  commuted
in  -sitse  and  -ritse,  instead  of  -SILE  and  -TSILE,  the
latter  of  which  is  itself  most  frequently  a contraction
from  -LISILE  f§  296).

307.  In  case  of  verbs  with  the  sibilant  explosive  ts  as
end  consonant,  this  change  extends  also  to  the  resj^ective
forms  of  verbs,  which  end,  therefore,  in  -letsa  instead  of
-TSELA,  or  -LISELA  (§  296).

h.  vowp;l  haemony.

308.  But  the  most  general  Instance  of  a modification .
of  the  inflectional  terminations  in  accordance  with  the
stem  of  the  -word,  takes  place  in  consequence  of  the  law
of  vowel  harmony.  According  to  this  law,  the  vowel  of
the  suffix  is  in  so  far  brought  into  accordance  with  that


Vowel  Harmony.


61


preceding  it  that,  after  a flat  vowel  (a,  e,  o),  one  of  the
same  class  is  to  follow,  and  likewise  after  a sharp  vowel
(/,  u)  only  a sharp  vowel.

309.  This  rule,  in  the  Kafir  and  Tekeza  species,  affects
only  the  locative  termination,  which  is  regulated  in  this
manner,  according  to  the  quality  of  the  terminating
vowel  of  the  noun  to  which  it  is  suffixed.  The  latter
disappears  before  the  vowel  of  the  suffix,  or  in  case  it  is
a labial  vowel  (o,  u),  it  may  also  remain,  being  in  that
case  in  Kafir  commuted  into  the  semivowel  w.  Thus
Kafir  nouns  ending  in  -a  or  -e,  form  their  locative  in  -eni
(Se-tshuana  -en),  and  those  ending  in  -o  either  in  -eni  or
-iceni  (Lourenzo  Marques  -oeni,  Se-tshuana  -on),  whilst
the  nouns  ending  in  -i  change  this  in  the  locative  into
-ini  (at  Lourenzo  Marques  also  -ini,  Se-tshuana  -in),  and
those  in  -u  have  -ini  or  -wini  (Se-tshuana  -uh.)

310.  The  immediate  contact  of  the  vowels  may  be  said
to  have  had  here  this  harmonizing  influence ; but  in  the
Bunda  Genus  and  in  the  Kongo  language,  we  meet,
besides  similar  cases  (§  300),  also  regularly  with  such
applications  of  this  rule,  in  which  its  force  is  not  inter-
rupted by  an  intervening  consonant.  On  the  contrary  it
is  the  vowel  preceding  the  last  consonant  of  the  stem,
which  here  exerts  its  power  over  the  vowel  following  it
and  belonging  to  the  flectional  termination  {vide  § 270).

311.  In  this  manner  the  ending  of  respective  verbs  is
in  Kongo  and  Angola  -ela  (oTyl-herero  -era)  or  -ena  after
flat,  and  -ila  (oTyi-herero  -ira)  after  sharp  vowels.  The
ending  of  the  perfect  form  is  in  Kongo  and  Angola  -ele
(oTyi-herero  -ere),  or  -ene  after  flat  vowels,  and  in  Angola
-He  (oTyi-herero  -ire)  after  sharp  vowels.  The  Kongo,
in  exhibiting  in  this  latter  instance  the  endings  -iri  or
or  -ini, — has  carried  the  principle  of  vowel  harmony  also
to  the  last  syllable  ; wherewith  the  commutation  of  the
/ into  r follows  as  matter  of  course  {vide  § 294  note.)

312.  Whether  the  application  of  this  rule  to  the  ending
of  subjective  causative  verbs,  Avhich  is  in  oTyi-herero


62


Phonology.


-elm  after  flat,  and  -iha  after  sharp  voAvels,  extends  also  to
other  Western  Middle  Branch  languages,  is  uncertain.

313.  In  oTyi-herero  the  rule  has  certainly  no  reference
to  the  almost  identical  ending  of  subjective  intransitives,
-iha  which  retains  its  i also  after  flat  vowels ; and  the
same  is  the  case  with  the  causative  termination  -isa  in
oTyi-herero,  though  in  Kongo  the  latter  is  after  e and  o
(but  not  after  a)  converted  into  -esa.

314.  In  oTyi-herero  we  find  also  that  the  character-
istic vowel  of  the  passive  termination  varies  in  this  manner,
being  u after  sharp,  and  o after  flat  vowels.  The  Kongo
passive  forms  appear  not  to  be  affected  in  this  manner.

315.  This  rule  of  vowel  harmony  is  in  a very  restricted
manner  carried  out  in  the  termination  of  inversive  verbs,
-ura  or  -U7ia,  which  becomes  -ora  or  -ona  after  a preced-
ing 0,  but  retains  its  sharp  vowel  after  all  other  vowels,
even  after  the  flat  a and  e.

316.  The  law  of  vowel  harmony  in  its  full  application
is  not  restricted  to  these  South  African  languages  ; but
almost  the  same  law  is  found  in  many  other  languages,
particularly  Tataric ; and,  in  fact,  it  has  here  been  con-
sidered by  some  comparative  grammarians  as  a distin-
guishing characteristic  of  this  family  or  class  of  languages.
A detailed  comparison,  however,  of  the  Asiatic  and
South  African  modifications  of  this  grammatical  feature
cannot  at  present  be  given.

C.  ASSIMILATION  OF  VOWELS.

317.  More  striking  even  than  the  vowel  harmonic
changes  are  those  of  the  assimilation  of  vowels.  They
apply,  as  far  as  we  know,  only  to  the  terminative  -a  of
verbs,  which  is,  in  the  Bunda  Genus,  in  certain  cases
commuted  into  the  vowel  of  the  preceding  syllable,
whatever  this  may  be.  Thus  in  oTyi-herero  suta  (pay),
tona  (beat),  pita  (go  out),  telm  (dip),  and  taha  (turn,
swing),  are  respectively  commulcd  into  siiiv,  tcno,  piti,


Inflectional  Changcx  of  Sound.


63


teke,  and  taka*,  and  in  the  Angola  language  tunda  (go
out),  zola  (love),  dshiba  (kill),  enda  (walk),  hanga  (make),
become  tundu,  zolo,  dskihi,  ende,  and  bange

318.  That  in  the  Angola  language  (as  in  the  last  verb)
the  a is  also  after  another  a,  in  this  case,  commuted  into
e,  shows  that  the  whole  originated  in  a depression  or
shortening  of  the  pronunciation  of  the  end  vowel,  the
quality  of  which  being  laid  less  stress  upon,  it  became
sufficiently  indistinct  or  undefined  to  be  attracted  by  the
preceding  vowel  so  as  to  be  assimilated  to  it.

319.  This  assimilation  has  in  the  Angola  language  as
yet  only  been  recognised  in  one  tense ; but  in  oTyi-
herero  in  several  positive  infect  tenses  of  the  indicative
active,  and  in  one  negative  imperative  active  form.
Where,  however,  the  imperative,  infinitive,  and  parti-
cipial forms  have  originally  the  termination  a,  this  is  also
retained  unaltered  in  oTyi-herero.

3.  PHONETIC  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  STEM  UPON  THE
PREFIXES.

320.  Though  the  stem  of  a word  very  frequently  quite
overwhelms  the  prefixes  which  are  thus  contracted,
suppressed  and  wholly  absorbed  by  it,  yet  there  are  only
few  cases  of  regular  inflectional  changes  on  this  account.

a.  ADAPTATION  OF  NASALS.

321.  The  nasal  n,  of  course,  when  forming  a prefix  or
ending  it,  is  accommodated  to  the  consonant  which  it
precedes,  and  is  therefore,  changed  before  a labial

* Hahn  is  wrong  in  considering  the  assimilated  as  the  radical  forms
of  such  verbs.  Even  if  sutu  and  tono  were  not  derived  from  suta  and
tona,  the  end  vowel  can  only  have  been  produced  by  assimilation  from
SUTS  and  TONK;  or  if  the  end  vowel  were  here  really  preserved,  then
the  preceding  vowel  must  have  been  assimilated  with  it,  and  the  above
forms  have  descended  from  S^TU  and  TkNO;  so  that  in  neither  case  we
are  able  to  get  at  the  full  form  of  the  stem  of  the  verb.  It  is,  however,
in  the  highest  degree  probable  that  the  explanation  given  above  in  the
text,  is  the  right  one.


G4


Phonohc/ij.


consonant  into  m*  and  before  a guttural  into  n which
latter  letter  is,  however,  in  most  orthographies  written  7i
(§  214).

1).  DEPRESSION  OE  THE  VOWEL  a.

'322.  A depression  of  the  vowel  a to  e in  prefixes  is
frequently  caused,  not  through  the  influence  of  the  stem,
but  through  the  pressure  of  other  prefixes  following  it
and  intervening  between  the  commutable  vowel  and  the
stem.  Thus  when  in  oTyi-herero  the  objective  (pro-
nominal and  personal)  prefixes  are  immediately  preceded
by  prefixes  ending  in  a,  this  vowel  is  depressed  to  e.

323.  Similarly  in  Kafir  the  negative  prefix  particle
nga-  becomes  nge-  when  standing  before  the  verbal  prefix
particle  ha-  (yet),  or  when  placed  before  any  simple  or
demonstrative  pronoun,  or  personal  particle,  in  such  a con-
junction as  that  thereby  the  substantive  verb  is  Implied.

324.  But  whether  the  change  of  the  a to  e,  observable
not  unfrequently  in  pronoun  prefixes  (for  example  in  the
objective  pronouns  of  the  oTyl-herero,  and  the  parti-
cipial subjective  pronouns  cf  the  Kafir),  is  also  due  to
mere  pressure,  or  other  various  causes,  is  not  quite  clear.

C.  COALESCENCE  OF  VOWELS.

325.  The  change  of  the  a of  prefixes  which  takes  place
immediately  before  the  stem  of  certain  verbs  in  oTyi-
herero  as  well  as  in  Kafir  and  Se-tshuana,  seems  not  so
much  caused  by  depression  as  by  a coalescence  with  a
vowel  ^ or  e,  which  formed  originally  the  initial  of  the

* The  n of  the  derivative  prefixes  of  the  nouns  of  the  9 th  (n-)  and.
10th  {Zin-)  classes  seems  indeed  in  Kafir  and  Zulu  also  before  the
“ spiritus  lenis”  to  be  changed  into  (Appleyard  p.  100,  Colenso  § 63,
Grout  § 96).  One  of  the  few  nouns  e.vemplifying  this  rule  is,  however,
evidently  contracted,  namely  Kafir  imazi  9.  (cow)  from  Zulu  inkomazi,
which  is  probably  itself  derived  from  I-N-KOMO  KAZI.  Others  are
of  foreign  origin,  for  example  imali  (money)  which  is  most  likely  of
Arabic  origin,  and  the  rti  belongs  here  to  the  stem.  In  other  cases,  as  in
tliat  of  the  Kafir  noun  imalato  9.  (forefinger)  from  alata  (point  out),  we
cannot  know  whether  an  initial  labial  formerly  appertaining  to  this
stem,  did  not  influence  the  nasal,  as  in  some  Tekeza  nouns,  in  which
the  VI  is  now  found  immediately  before  a vowel  (§  340).


Injiectional  Changes  of  Vowels  of  Prefixes.


65


stem,  but  has  now  in  most  cases  been  entirely  suppressed,
and  is  only  visible,  when  in  the  above  manner  it  has
coalesced  with  the  u of  prefixes.  For  example,  from  the
oTyi-herero  verb  liu-ya  to  come,  Kafir  u-ku-za,  Se-tshuana
yo-xla  {go  tla~)  we  have  the  irregular  forms  u-e-ya  he
came,  Kafir  w-e-za,*  and  the  Se-tshuana  xe-xla  {ge  tla
Luke  xxii,  7 &c.)  there  came  (besides  which  we  find
indeed  also  \a-xla  in  Moffat’s  books  as  Mark  x,  35,  &c.)
The  original  initial  ^ of  this  stem  is  still  apparent  in  the
Angola  form  iza,  and  the  Ki-hiau  issa.  In  other  verbs
the  original  initial  vowel  ^ is  still  more  generally  found,
though  in  the  Kafir  language  it  is  now  only  visible  in  the
alteration  of  the  a of  prefixes.  For  example,  the  Kafir
w-e-hlia  he  stole,  from  u-hu-bha  to  steal  (but  lu-a-ba  he
was,  from  u-ku-ba  to  be)  can  be  easily  explained  by
comparison  with  the  Quellimane  infinitive  w-iba  to  steal,
Mosambique  w-iya,  Cape  Delgado  ku-iiua,  the  Ki-sua-
heli  and  Ki-hiau  imperatives  iba  steal,  Ki-pokomo  iioda,
Ki-nika  ia,  Angola  iya,  Dualla  and  Isubu  iba,  and  with
the  Mosambique  noun  muiyi  1.  thief.  Cape  Delgado  midvi,
Ki-suaheli,  Ki-nlka  and  Ki-pokomo  muifi  (pi.  waif.  2.),
Ki-hiau  muihi,  Kongo  muivi  {evi  2.),  Mpongwe  ofe.'\

326.  The  last  paragraph  shows  in  the  Kongo  plural
form  evi  2.  thieves  (whilst  Ki-pokomo  iva-ifi  remains

* Whilst  tlie  regular  form  M)-a-2a  meaning  “then  he  was,”  or  “then
he  did”  is  peculiar  to  the  idiomatic  use  of  this  verb,  as  a sort  of
auxiliary  verb.  (Appleyard,  § 568.)

f If  the  Mpongwe  verb  dshvfa  “ steal”  and  the  corresponding  Se-
tshuana  word  uUhua  are  really  identical  with  the  above  verb  iha,  then
it  becomes  probable  that  the  original  form  of  this  verb  was  IBUA,  or
some  similar  word,  the  u of  which  has  now  everywhere  been  lost  except
in  the  Se-tshuana,  in  which  language  it  has  produced  the  necessary
palatalisation  of  labial  consonants,  whilst  at  the  same  time  it  has  caused
the  assimilation  of  the  iinto  u.  The  same  process  of  assimilation  seems
also  to  have  caused  the  form  of  the  Se-tshuana  verb  xo-uXlua  ( yo  utluaj
“ to  hear,”  if  we  compare  it  with  Kafir  u-hu-va,  Zulu  u -ku-zwa  (from  which
is  derived  w-e-va  or  w-e-zwa  he  heard),  Lihambane  ku-pua,  Sofala  ko-zua,
Tette  and  Sena  ku-bva,  Quellimane  u-iivoa,  Mosambique  w-iwa,  Maravi
ku-mva,  Ki-kamba  hu-iwa,  oTyi-herero  ku-^^uva  (Jtu-zuva),  Angola
ku-uva.  The  primitive  form  of  this  verb  is,  however,  not  yet  quite  clear.

Bleek,  S.  Afr^  Comp,  Grammar,


K


66


Phonology.


uncontracted)  an  instance  of  a coalescence  of  the  initial  i
of  the  stem  with  the  a of  the  derivative  prefix  of  the
noun.  This  initial  vowel  of  the  stem  may  then  also
entirely  disappear,  its  former  presence  being  only  visible
in  such  cases  of  coalescence  or  in  kindred  dialects.  In
the  latter  then  sometimes  this  initial  vowel  is  found  to  be
even  preceded  by  a consonant  which  has  in  the  other
dialects  entirely  vanished.  For  example,  the  Kafir  noun
i-zinyo  5.  (Tekeza  fmyo)  ‘‘tooth”  has  as  plural  either
a-ma-zinyo  6.  (Tekeza  ma-tinyd)  teeth,  or  with  elision  of
the  z,  the  contracted  form  a-menyo.  The  corresponding
Se-tshuana  forms  are  le-ino  5.  and  rtmio  6.  The  Mosam-
hique  dialects  have  correspondingly,  Sofala  zino  5.  and
meno  6.,  Tette  and  Sena  zino  5.  and  manu  6.,  Quellimane
zino  5.  and  ?nenu  6.,  Mosambique  n-ino  5.  me^no  6.  ; and
the  Zangian  dialects,  Cape  Delgado  rinu  5.  and  menu  6.,
Ki-suaheli  dshino  5.  and  meno  6.,  Ki-nika  zino  5.  and
meno  6.,  Ki-kamba  'io  5.  and  mayo  6.  The  Ki-kamba
forms  are,  with  the  exception  of  the  accent,  almost  iden-
tical with  oTyi-herero  e-yo  5.  tooth,  o-ma-yo  6.  teeth.
Cannecattim  gives  as  the  Angola  forms  ri-shu  {richu ) 5.
and  md-shu  {mdchu')  6.,  and  as  Kongo  plural  menu  6.
In  Mpongwe  the  corresponding  forms  are  i-no^  5.  tooth,
and  a-no  6.  teeth.

327.  A similar  instance  of  contraction  by  which  appa-
rent fiectional  irregularities  are  produced,  is  met  with  in
the  plural  of  the  South  African  Ba-ntu  word  for  “ eyes”,
namely  Kafir  a-mexlo  6.  (sng.  i-li-so  5.  an  eye),  Tekeza
a-ma-'x-lo  6.  (sng.  tixlo  5.),  Se-suto  ma-xh  6.,  Se-xlapi
maixlo  6.  {le-ixlo  5.),  Sofala  messo  6.  (dshisso  5.),  Tette
and  Sena  maso  6.  {dziso,  or  diso  5.),  Quellimane  meto  6.
{ni-to  5.),  Cape  Delgado  masho  6.  (risho  5.),  Ki-suaheli
md-to  6.  {dshito  5.),  Ki-nika  ma-tso  6.  (^dzitso  5.),  Ki-
kamba  medo  6.  {ido  5.),  oTyi-herero  o-me-ho  6.  {e-ho  5.),
Angola  o-me-sso  6.  (with  the  singular  rissu  5.  according
to  Cannecattim  who  also  gives  the  Kongo  form  dissu  5.),
Mpongwe  antyg  6.  {intyo  5.),  Benga  mih<i  6.  {diho^  5.),


Coalescence  of  Voioels.


67


Dualla  and  Isubu  miso  6.  (diso  5.)  Whilst  the  forms  of
the  Kafir,  Sofala,  Makua  and  Ki-kamba  languages  and  of
the  Bunda  genus  have  here  been  produced  by  a coales-
cence of  the  a with  the  initial  i to  e, — most  other  South
African  languages  have  allowed  the  a to  prevail  over  the
i.  But  in  this  instance  the  North-western  branch  has,
before  the  ^,  suppressed  the  vowel  a of  the  prefix,  which
has  hereby  in  form  become  identical  with  the  mi-  prefix  of
the  fourth  class  of  nouns.  An  analogy  to  this  case  is
found  in  the  Se-tshu^na  plural  mixlua  thorns  (Se-suto
meuxlua,  Mosambique  miwa),  if  we  compare  it  with  the
corresponding  Kafir  word  a-meva  6.  (sng.  i-li-va  5.  a
thorn).  But  this  Se-tshuana  word  mixlua  has  not  only
in  form,  but  now  also  in  use  been  transferred  to  the
fourth  class  of  nouns,  and  is  found  constructed  with
pronouns  and  adjectives  of  this  fourth  class.

328.  In  Kafir  the  a of  prefixed  particles  coalesces  as  a
general  rule  with  the  initial  vowel  of  the  derivative

o

prefixes  of  nouns  (which  vowel  forms  really  a sort  of
prefixed  article,)  and  in  this  manner :

a with  a coalesces  to  a
a „ i „ e

a „ u „ 0

In  other  South  African  Bantu  languages  (few  of  which
have  retained  any  traces  of  this  old  article,)  these  cases
of  coalescence  have  not  yet  been  observed.


4.  PHONETIC  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  PREFIXES  UPON  THE

STEM.

329.  With  regard  to  the  beginning  of  the  stem  of  a
word,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  it  is,  in  the  course  of
inflection,  usually  much  less  affected  by  the  prefixes,  than
the  end  of  the  stem  by  the  suffixes.

a.  INITIAL  VOWELS.

330.  Regarding  stems  beginning  with  vowels,  it  is
indeed  true  that  a contraction  of  the  later  with  a pre-


68


Phonology.

ceding  vowel,  or  even  their  entire  elision,  is  a circum-
stance of  so  very  general  occurrence,  that  in  many
instances  such  an  initial  vowel  is  only  in  very  rare  cases
visible,  or  has  indeed  in  many  languages  been  entirely
lost, — its  former  existence  being  recognised  merely  by
comparison  of  kindred  dialects  or  languages.


h.  NASAL  PREFIXES.


331.  But  if  the  fii’st  letter  of  the  stem  is  a conso-
nant, it  generally  remains  immutable,  except  when  it
comes  in  immediate  contact  with  a preceding  consonant.
As  this,  however,  according  to  the  phonetic  principles
of  the  Ba-ntu  languages  (§  253),  can  only  be  a nasal,
it  is  but  in  cases  where  the  prefix  either  ends  in,  or
consists  entirely  of,  a nasal,  that  such  initial  changes  of
the  stems  of  words  are  generally  visible.


aa.  Nasal  Prefixes  in  Kafir.


332.  In  the  Kafir  species  such  a nasal  occurs  purely
only  in  the  derivative  prefix  of  the  9th  (N~)  and  10th  {Zin-)
classes  of  nouns  and  adjectives,  and  impurely  in  the
derivative  prefixes  of  the  1st  (ilf-  personal)  and  3rd  (ilf-  im-
personal) classes  of  nouns  and  adjectives,  and  in  the
objective  pronouns  of  the  1st  (ilf-  personal)  class.


333.  In  the  latter  cases  the  stem  remains,  in  the  Kafir
species,  always  unaltered,  and  in  the  first  case  (of  pure
nasalisation)  the  only  alteration  which  takes  place,  occurs
in  the  stronger  pronunciation  of  a few  consonants,  when
as  initials  of  the  stem  they  are  preceded  by  the  nasal.
(§  77,  170,  and  216).

334.  In  this  manner  in  the  Kafir  language
Initial  s after  prefixed  nasal  becomes  ts


sh  „
xl{hl)  „

I {c)  „

II  (•^•)

! (?)  .


tsh

Xl{1il)

II  igx)
•!  (.??)


5?


69


Injlectional  Changes  of  Initial  Consonants.


bb.  Nasal  Prefixes  in  Se-lshuuna  and  Tekeza.

335.  In  Se-tshudna  this  stronger  explosive  pronuncia-
tion of  consonants  after  pure  nasalisation  is  of  far  more
general  extent,  and  takes  place,  not  only  where  the  nasal
is  still  visible,  as  in  the  derivative  prefixes  of  a few
nouns  of  the  9th  (iV-)  and  10th  (Zm-)  classes,  and  (befoi'e
active  verbs)  in  the  objective  prefix  of  the  first  person
singular  'n-  or ’m-,  but  also  where  it  has  now  vanished,
leaving  as  trace  of  its  former  presence  an  increase  of
the  explosive  force  of  the  initial  consonant.  This  dis-
appearance of  the  nasal,  combined  with  retention  of  the
commutation  of  the  initial  of  the  stem  efiected  by  it,  is
met  with  in  most  of  the  nouns  and  adjectives  of  the  9th
(iV-)  and  10th  (Z  in-)  classes,  and  in  the  reflective  verbs,
which  are  formed  at  present  by  the  prefix  i-.  That  the
latter  has  the  influence  of  commuting  the  following  ini-
tial consonant  (if  changeable)  in  the  same  manner  as  if
a nasal  preceded  it,  or  had  been  suppressed,  renders  it
probable  that  really  this  prefix  once  contained  a nasal,
though  none  at  present  is  visible  here,  either  in  Se-
tshuana,  or  in  any  of  the  kindred  Ba-ntu  languages
known  to  us.


336.  Including,  therefore,  the  latter  case  in  this  our
rule,  we  may  say  that  in  the  Western  Se-tshuana
initial  x*  after  prefixed  or  suppressed  nasal  becomes  k


xig)

h „

b

I

r (before  sharp  vowels)
T (before  flat  vowels  j
S


„ hxikh)
kyfhh)  or  ph

« P

„ t

>5  ^

„ th

„ ts


,,  sh  ,,  ,,  tsh  (c,  or  cJi)

The  harder  consonants  k,  ihh),  p,  t,  th,  ts  and  also  xl
{tX),  m,  n,  ny,  being  of  course  incapable  of  any  further


* The  Hebrew  Aleph  serves  us  to  indicate  the  " spiritus  lenis.”


7 0 Phonology.

hardening,  remain  unaltered  after  a nasal  sound ; and
cannot,  therefore,  by  themselves  afford  any  indication  of
the  former  presence  of  nasalisation  of  the  stems  which
begin  with  them,

337.  If  we  compare  with  the  preceding  table  that  of
the  correspondence  of  Kafir  nasalised  to  Se-tshu^na
unnasalised  consonants  (§  219),  the  origin  of  most  of  the
above  changes  becomes  clear,  particularly  if  we  bear  in
mind  that  Se-tshuana  I and  r are  frequently  descended
from  d,  and  likewise  r from  t,  as  still  preserved  in  the
corresponding  Kafir  words  (§  162,  165),  that  Se-tshu^na
h is  derived  from  Kafir  p and  f *24),  and  x (5')  cor-
responds to  Kafir  ^ (§  87  and  134).

338.  Whilst  in  this  manner  the  initial  of  the  stem  is
in  the  Se-tshuana  strengthened  through  the  influence  of
a preceding  nasal  (even  when  the  latter  has  now  entirely
disappeared), — in  the  Tekeza,  on  the  contrary,  a prefixed
nasal  has  a tendency  to  make  away  with  the  beginning
consonant  of  the  stem,  before  which  it  stands.  The
changes  hereby  produced  are,  however,  of  such  a nature
that  they  can  only  be  explained  by  comparison  with  the
more  primitive  Kafir  forms.  For  example,  mararo,  as
numeral  adjective  of  the  6th  (flfa-)  and  tinaro  of  the
10th  class  ( Tin-)  class,  both  meaning  “ three,”  correspond
to  Kafir  amatatu  6.  and  ezintatu  10.  (three) ; and  the  rule
deducible  from  this  comparison  is  that  in  Delagoa  Bay
the  initial  r of  a stem  is  suppressed  after  a nasal  preceding
it  (§221).

339.  In  the  case  of  an  initial  k,  the  disappearance  of
this  consonant  is,  in  the  Tekeza,  accompanied  by  that  of
the  preceding  nasal,  and  thus  the  “ spiritus  lenis”  of  the
Tekeza  corresponds  here  to  Kafir  nk  (§  221).  For
example,  e-ulo  (great)  9.  is  the  Kafir  e-n-hulu  9.,  Se-
tshuana  e-kyolu  {e  liholu)  from  the  stem  -kulo,  Kafir  -hulu,
Se-tshuana  -x^/m  {-golu).

340.  As  the  Kafir  p also  disappears  in  the  Tekeza,  and
Kafir  mp  in  Tekeza  becomes  m,  such  words,  in  which  an


Nasal  Prefixes  in  Se-tshudna  and  Teheza.  71

original  initial  p was  nasalised,  appear  in  the  Tekeza
as  if  the  initial  required  by  itself  the  labial  nasal
before  it,  whilst  the  labial  quality  of  this  nasal  is,
of  course,  only  due  to  the  omitted  labial  explosive.  For
example,  Hondo  is  the  Lourenzo  Marques  word  for  Kafir
and  Zulu  upondo  11.  (horn).  We  do  not  know  the
exact  plural  of  the  word  in  this  dialect ; but  in  another
Northern  Tekeza  dialect,  we  find  timondo  ta  teomo  10.
for  Kafir  impondo  zenkomo  (ZI-ZIM-PONDO  ZI-A-
ZI-ZIN-KOMO)  the  horns  of  the  cattle.

341.  No  other  cases  of  pure  nasalisation  of  the  initial
consonant  have  been  observed  (in  the  few  specimens  of
the  Tekeza  language  as  yet  collected)  besides  those  of
the  prefixes  of  nouns  (and  adjectives)  of  the  9th  (iV-)  and
10th  ( Tin-')  classes.  It  is,  however,  not  improbable  that
these  are  the  only  instances  existing  in  this  language.

342.  Although  the  Tekeza  and  Se-tshuana  avoid  even
the  appearance  of  an  impure  indiscriminate  labial  nasalisa-
tion by  retaining  the  vowel  of  the  derivative  prefix  (of  the
nouns  and  adjectives)  or  objective  pronoun,  the  disap-
pearance of  which  gives  rise  to  this  feature  of  the  Kafir
language  (§  217  and  218), — yet  each  of  the  two  former
languages  has,  before  one  particular  initial  consonant  of
the  stem,  not  only  omitted  the  vowel  of  this  prefix  (wo-
of the  Se-tshuana,  mu-  of  the  Tekeza  and  Zulu),  but
also  the  initial  consonant  of  the  stem.

343.  In  Se-tshuana  this  omission  takes  place  when  the
prefix  of  the  1st  and  3rd  classes  comes  to  stand  before  an
initial  b (§  113),  and  in  Tekeza  before  an  initial  1.  In
the  latter  case  also  the  m-  of  the  prefix  undergoes  a
change,  being  converted  into  the  dental  nasal  Thus
in  Lourenzo  Marques,

nando  1.  slave,  follower  (MULANDA)  is  derived
from  e-ko-landa  15.  (Kafir  uhu-landa)  to  follow;

nomo  3.  mouth  (Kafir  umlomo,  Se-tshuana  molomo)  from
e-ko-luma  15.  (Kafir  u-ku-luma,  Se-tshuana  xo-^oma)  to
bite ;


72


Phonology.


namho  3.  river  (Kafir  umlarnbo,  Se-tshuana  molago') ;

nege  3.  leg  (Kafir  umlenze),  plur.  milenge  4.  legs  (Kafir
imilenze') ;

a-noi  1.  sorcerer,  (Sofala  muroi,  Se-tshuana  moloi,  from
"^o-loa,  15.  to  bewitch).

344.  This  n-  seems,  however,  not  to  have  immediately
descended  from  MUL-,  or  ML-,  but  the  liquid  I seems
in  the  first  instance  to  have  been  commuted  into  the  dental
explosive  d which  then  disappeared  after  having  effected
the  commutation  of  the  labial  m-  before  it,  into  the
dental  nasal  n-.  The  intermediate  stage  of  nd  is  even
preserved  in  the  Lourenzo  Marques  word  a-ndolo-ene  in
the  fix'e  (Kafir  e-m-lilw-eni,  from  u-m-lilo  fire,  Se-tshuana
mu-lelo.  Southern  Tekeza  unilo),  the  first  o of  which  is
evidently  due  to  the  principle  of  assimilation  of  vowels
{vide  §§  270  and  271).  In  fact  the  Matonga  dialect
supplies,  as  an  intermediate  link,  the  form  undilo  fire.

cc.  Nasal  Prefixes  in  the  Middle  Branch.

345.  Contractions  of  these  labial  nasal  prefixes  of
nouns  of  the  1st  and  2nd  classes  with  the  initial  of  the
stem,  occur  indeed  also  in  the  Middle  Branch  languages,
but  no  certain  rules  on  this  head  can  as  yet  be  laid  dov/n.

346.  With  regard  to  the  pure  nasalisation  by  means  of
a prefix  of  the  9th  and  10th  classes  of  nouns  and  adjectives,
it  is  to  be  remarked  that,  where  in  the  languages  of  the
Middle  Branch,  the  nasalisation  is  here  not  altogether
thrown  off,  it  has  a similar  tendency  as  in  the  Tekeza,
viz.,  of  softening  the  initial  of  the  stem,  without,  however,
(as  in  that  South-eastern  species)  entirely  suppressing  it.

347.  This  is  connected  with  the  tendency  which  this
Branch  (excepting  always  the  Kongo  genus)  has  for  the
combination  of  a media  explosive  with  a preceding  nasal
(§  225),.  whereby  generally  not  only  tenues,  but  also
fricative  and  liquid  consonants,  are  after  pure  nasal-
isation changed  into  media;.

348.  Thus  we  find  in  Kikamba  11.  firewood  (Kafir
and  Kisuahell  ukuni,  Western  Se-tshuana  loyoh,  Mpongwe


Inflectional  Changes  of  Initial  Consonants.  73

okoni)  with  the  plural  ngu  10.  (Kafir  inhuni,  Kisudheli
kuni,  Southern  Tekeza  tuni  [i.e.  TIN-KUNI],  Western
Se-tshuana  likxoh,  oTyi-herero  ohgune.)

349.  In  this  language  (the  Kikamba),  an  initial  ts
disappears  even  altogether,  after  nasalisation,  as

utsiegiW.  straw,  plural  niegi  10.;
utsigi  11.  mule,  plural  nigi  10.

350.  The  same  is  the  case,  in  atleast  one  noun  in  Kinika:
lutserre  11.  hair  (Kafir  unwele,  Zulu  unioeli,  Kisuaheli
unuelle),  plur.  nierre  10.  (Kafir  innwele,  Zulu  izinnwele,
Kisuaheli  nuelle').

351.  In  Kisuaheli  we  have  instances  of  a change  of  a
liquid  consonant,  and  also  of  a labial  spirant  (or  semi-
vowel ? vide  § 144)  into  the  corresponding  media ; for
example,  ulimi  11.  tongue  (Kafir  ulwimi,  Sexlapi  loleme^
Sofala  rurimi,  Kihiau  luHmi,  Cape  Delgado  lurimi,  Kinika
urimi,  Kikamba  uimi,  Kipokomo  dshuimi,  Kongo  ludimi,
Mpongwe  oleme)  has  as  plural  ndimi  10.  (Kafir  izilwimi,
Sexlapi  liteme)  ; uwingo  11.  heaven,  plur.  mhingo  10.

352.  In  oTyl-herero  the  commutation  of  the  initial  of
the  stem  of  nouns  after  the  nasal  of  these  prefixes  into
a media  is  most  general.  In  this  manner  :

^ y tg  p V t r become

ng  hg  ndy  ndy  mb  mb  nd^^  nd  nd,  which  changes
are  in  their  tendency  almost  exactly  opposite  to  those
observable  in  the  Se-tshuana  under  the  same  circum-
stances (§  335  and  336.)

353.  By  nasalisation  the  liquid  I becomes  Indeed  d in
the  Angola  language,  but  then  the  nasal  before  it  is
dropped.  This  disappearance  of  the  prefixed  nasal  seems

• The  Se-suto  which,  by  cominuting  the  lo-  prefix  of  the  11th  class
into  le-,  has  combined  the  11th  with  the  5th  (Le-)  class  of  nouns,  shows
here  of  course  the  form  leleme  5.  tongue.  Also  in  other  South  African
I a-ntu  languages,  this  noun  seems  to  belong  to  the  5th  class,  as  in
Lourenzo  Marques  redime,  Inhambane  and  Quellimane  lilime,  Mosara-
bique  inlimi,  Sena  and  Tette  ririmi,  Maravi  lerume,  Angola  ririmi.  The
Dualla  form  eyemi  (tongue),  however,  seems  to  belong  to  the  7th  cliss,
plur.  beyemi  8.  (tongues.)


Bleek,  S.  Afr,  Comp.  Grammar.


h


74


Phonology,


also  to  take  place  before  tenues,  which  here  are  not  con-
verted into  medias  ; nor  is  this  the  case  with  the  fricatives.
But  the  fricative  media  retains  the  nasal  of  the  prefix
before  it.  For  example,

nvunda  9.  quarrel  (oTyi-herero  omhunda),  phir.
{d)shinvunda  10.  (oTyi-herero  oB'‘ombunda');

nvula  9.  rain  (Kafir  imvula,  oTyi-herero  ombura,  §118);

Juba  9.  flour,  (Kafir  impupu,  § 116),  plur.  {d)shifuba  10. ;

pango  9.  plan,  design  (oTyi-herero  ombahgo  will,  inten-
tion,) plur.  {d)shipahgo  10.

dd.  Nasal  Prefixes  in  the  Kongo  Genus.

354.  In  the  Kongo  language  we  find,  as  a case  of
change  of  I into  d after  the  prefixes  of  the  nouns  of  the
9th  and  10th  classes,  the  word  ndongi  9.  and  10.  teacher
(Angola  dongishi)  from  longa  (teach,  oTyi-herero  ron^'a),
from  which  also  the  Angola  vfovdismulongi  1.  teacher,  and
mulonga  3.  doctrine,  plur.  milonga  4.  are  derived.

355.  But  the  Kongo  Genus  is  particularly  distinguished

by  certain  changes  of  the  initial  consonants  of  the  verbs.
These  changes  are,  in  the  Kongo  language,  restricted  to
the  case  when  the  prefix  pronoun  of  the  first  person  singu-
lar (subjective  or  objective)  which  is  here  abbreviated  to
n-  or  m-  (from  as  still  preserved  in  the  Zulu  and

Bunda)  comes  to  be  placed  immediately  before  the  stem  of
verbs  commencing  with  I and  bh.  These  initial  letters  are
under  such  circumstances  converted  respectively  into  d
and  p or  ph.  For  example,  we  find :

hu-lakama  15.  to  persecute,  n-dakama  (I.s.)  persecute
me,  n-daharnini  I.s.  I persecute  or  have  persecuted ;

hu-bhinga  15.  to  pray,  n-pingiri  I.s.  I have  prayed ;

hu-bhingila  15.  to  pray  for,  u-m-pingila  1.  (I.s.)  he  prays
for  me ;

ku-bhobha  15.  to  speak,  I.s.  I have  spoken;

ku-bhobhesiana  15.  to  speak  with  one  another,  n-pobhe-
seanini  I.s.  I have  spoken  together  with ;


Inflectional  Chany es  of  Initial  Consonants.  75

hu-hhobhabhobha  15.  to  be  talkative,  n-pobhabhobhele
I.s.  I have  been  talkative  ;

hu-bhanga  15.  to  make,  n-pangiri  I.s.  I have  made,  but
a-bhangiri  2.  they  have  made.

356.  It  is  to  be  remarked  that  an  initial  r remains
unaltered  after  this  nasal,  at  least  in  the  one  case  ■which
came  under  observation,  ku-ria  15.,  perfect  n-riri  I.s.,  pass.
hu-riua\5.,  perfect  pass,  nrilul.s.  This  word  occurs  in
the  idiom  huria  mukuri  esse  dominum  mortis,  and  kuriua
mukuri  esse  captivum  mortis.  It  means  probably  “ eat”
corresponding  to  the  Kafir  xla  (dhla)  and  tga,  Se-tshuana
ga,  Lourenzo  Marques,  Sena,  Tette,  Maravi,  Mudshau
d'ia,  Sofala,  Cape  Delgado,  Kihiau,  Kinlha,  oTyi-herero,
Angola  ria,  Quellimane  dsha,  Mosambique,  Benguela,
Kakongo  lia,  Anjuane  and  Isubu  la,  Mpongwe  nga  or
nge,  Dualla  da.

357.  In  the  contraction  of  the  objective  prefix  of  the
first  person  singular  to  n-  and  m-,  and  the  hereby  caused
affection  of  the  initial  of  the  stem,  the  Kongo  agrees
with  the  Se-tshuana  (§  335  and  336).  But  whilst  in  the
latter  language  a total  distinction  between  the  objec-
tive and  subjective  forms  of  this  personal  prefix  has  been
effected  by  assigning  to  the  form  hi-  (also  descended
from  Kafir  ngi-)  the  latter  (subjective)  meaning, — in  the
Kongo  language,  on  the  contrary,  the  form  with  the  mere
nasal  is  used  with  both,  subjective  and  objective  meanings.
There  is,  however,  also  another  abbreviation  from  NGI,
namely  i or  g,  used  in  Kongo  as  subjective  verbal  prefix
of  the  first  person.

358.  Of  the  Loango  or  Kakongo  verbs  we  read  that
verbs  commencing  with  I and  v change  these  letters  in
certain  tenses  respectively  into  d and  p.  Whether  this
takes  place  only  in  the  first  pex'son  singular,  as  in  Kongo,
or  whether  it  agrees  more  with  the  Mpongwe  practice,  I
am,  from  want  of  examples,  unable  to  say.  I am,  how-
ever, more  inclined  to  the  latter  opinion.


76


Phonology.


359.  The  modernised  state  of  the  Mpongwe  language
has  given  rise  to  numerous  contractions  and  abbreviations,
and  in  this  manner  new  instances  have  arisen  in  which
the  prefixes  press  immediately  upon  the  begining  of  the
stem  of  nouns  or  vei’bs,  and  either  are  amalgamated  with
it  (whereby  they  are  not  unfrequently  entirely  lost  in  it),
or  the  initial  consonant  of  the  stem  is  affected  by  them,

360.  For  example,  by  elision  of  the  end  vowel  of  the
prefix  ma-  or  a-ma-  of  Mpongwe  nouns  and  adjectives  of
the  6th  class,  the  labial  nasal  (m-)  comes  to  stand  imme-
diately before  the  initial  of  the  stem,  and  when  this  is  a
V,  this  fricative  labial  is  converted  after  this  m into  a
corresponding  explosive,  either  p or  b,  as  i-vava  5.  wing,
plur.  a-m-pava  6.  (Lourenzo  Marques  li-papa  5.,  Inham-
bane  ma-papi  6.,  Sena  and  Tette  papidwe  5.  plur,  ma-
pupidwe  6.,  Quellimane  papiko  5.,  Kafir  i-piko  5.  plur.
ma-piho  6.),  with  which  one  may  also  compare  Kafir
u-pape  11.  quill,  feather,  plur.  i-m-pape  10.  (Mombas  Sua-
hell  u-bdwa  11.  plur,  m-bdwa  10.,  Cape  Delgado  Iw-awa
11.  plur,  bdioa  10.)

361.  The  same  is  the  case  in  Mpongwe  (at  least  in
adjectives)  not  only  (as  in  Kafir)  with  the  prefixes  of  the
1st  (il/o-  personal)  and  3rd  (ilfo-  impersonal)  classes,  but
also  with  that  of  the4th(il/f-)  class.  When  these  Mpongwe
prefixes  preserve  their  nasal,  they  lose  the  vowel  follow-
ing it,  and  bring,  therefore,  the  nasal  into  immediate
contact  with  the  initial  of  the  stem.  The  latter,  when  a
V,  is  then  after  them,  as  also  after  the  prefixes  of  the  9th
(iV-)  and  10th  (^Sin-)  classes  (which  show  of  coui’se  here
also  a labial  nasal,  as  m-  9.  and  sim-  10.),  changed  either
into  p or  b.  For  example,  the  Mpongwe  adjective
“large”  sounds  in  the  2nd  class  a-volu,  in  the  5th  i-volu,
in  the  7th  e-volu,  and  in  the  8th  volu\  but  in  the  1st  and
3rd  classes  o-m-polu,  in  the  4th  i-m-polu,  in  the  9th  m-polu,
and  in  the  10th  i-m-polu  or  sim-polu.  In  the  same  manner
“ bad”  is  in  Mpongwe  o-m-bc  1.,  a-ve  2.,  o-m-beZ.,  i-m-be
4.,  i-ve  5.,  a-m-be  6.,  e-ve  7 , re  8.,  yn-be  9.,  i-yn-be  or  swi-be


Nasal  Prefixes  in  Mpongwe.


77


10.  (Kafir  o-mu-hi  1.,  a-ba-bi  2.,  o-m.u-bi  3.,  e-mi-bi  4.,  e-li-
bi  5.,  a-ma-bi  6.,  e-si-bi  7.,  e-zi-bi  8.,  e-m-bi  9.,  e-zim-bi

10.,  &c.)  And  “ two”  in  Mpongwe : a-vani  2.,  i-m-
bani  4.,  a-m-bani  6.,  vani  8.,  m-bani  10.,  (Kafir  a-ba-bbii

2.,  e-mi-bini  a-ma-bini  6.,  ezi-biniS.,  e-zim-bini  10);
the  Mpongwe,  together  with  most  other  Western  Ba-ntu
languages,  being  here  probably  more  original  as  far  as
concerns  the  preservation  of  the  first  vowel  of  the  stem,
which  has  been  assimilated  to  the  second  in  Kafir  and
other  Eastern  languages,  whilst  both  the  Kafir  proper
and  the  Mpongwe  have  substituted  a nasal  for  the  pri-
mary liquid  of  Zulu  -bili,  Se-tshuana  -beri,  Lourenzo
Marques  -hire,  &c.,  &c.  The  ground  form  of  the  stem  of
this  numeral  is  evidently  BALI.

362.  It  is,  however,  only  after  the  original  nasal  pre-
fixes of  the  9th  (A-)  and  10th  (Sm-)  classes  that  in
Mpongwe  I becomes  d,  and  r and  t become  ty.  For
example,  long”  is  in  Mpongwe  o-la  1.,  a-Ia  2.,  o-la  3.,
i-la  4.,  i-la  5.,  a-la  6.,  e-la  7.,  la  8.,  n-da  9.,  i-n-da  10.
(Kafir  o-m-de  1.,  a-ba-de  2.,  o-m-de  3.,  e-mi-de  4.,  e-li-de  5.,
a-ma-deQ.,  i-si-de7.,  e-zi-de  8.,  e-n-de  9.,  e-zin-de  10).

363.  In  case  of  the  r and  t being  changed  into  ty,  the
original  nasal,  on  account  of  which  this  change  took  place,  is
now  lost  in  Mpongwe ; for  example,  in  the  third  numeral
a~raro  2.,  i-raro4:.,  a-raro  6.,  raro  8.,  tyaro  10.  (Kafir  a-ba^
tatu  2.  i-mi-tatu  4.,  a-ma-tatu  6.,  e-zi-tatu  8.,  e-zin-tatu
10.),  and  in  the  fifth  a-tani  2.,  i-tani,  4.,  a-tani  6.,  tani8.,
tyani  10.  (Kafir  a-ba-xlanu  2.,  i-mi-xlanu  4.,  a-mu-xlanu

6.,  e-zi-xlanu  8.,  e-zin-bdanu  10.)

364.  We  see  that  it  may  in  general  be  said  that  the
more  original  form  of  the  Initial  has,  in  Mpongwe,  been
preserved  after  the  nasal,  or  in  such  forms  which  began
formerly  with  a nasal,  whilst  the  unnasalised  forms  are
generally  softened  or  liquidised.

C.  INITIAL  INFLECTION  IN  MPONGAVE.

365.  But  the  most  remarable  change  of  letters  in
Mpongwe  is  that  affecting  the  initial  consonant  of  almost


78


Phonology.

all  the  verbs.  They  begin  In  the  imperative  and  in
one  historical  tense,  with  a soft  or  liquid  letter,  which
is  in  all  other  moods  and  tenses  and  even  in  the  nega-
tive of  the  above  mentioned  historical  tense,  commuted
into  a harder  or  more  explosive  consonant.  Thus

g r I V w y zy  z become

k t d p,  or  f f,  or  b dsh  (j)  sh  s
and  only  the  nasals  and  n remain  unaltered.

3()6.  In  the  Mpongwe  Grammar  this  is  described  as  a
change  from  the  harder  to  the  softer  consonant,  and
according  to  its  real  origin  the  harder  sound  was  probably
more  original  with  most  beginnings  than  the  softer.  But
for  the  grammatical  and  lexical  purposes  of  the  Mpongwe
language,  the  form  with  the  soft  initial  is  to  be  considered
as  the  ground  form  ; for,  from  it  most  derivations  take
place.  For  example,  from  gamba  speak,  infinitive  go-
hamba  (Bunda  o-hu-amba),  comes  gambagamba  speak  at
random,  infinitive  go-hambagamba,  and  also  i-gamba  5.
word,  pi.  a-gamba  6.  (perhaps  Kafir  i-gama  5.  name,  plur.
a-ma-gama  6. ) ;

from  roma  send  (Kongo,  Bunda,  Kisuahell,  Kikamba,
Tette,  Sena,  Sofala  and  Kafir  tuma,  Kinika  huma,
Mosambique  ruma,  Se-tshuana  roma),  infinitive  go-toma
to  send,  comes  eromi  7.  messenger ;

from  lingilia  mark,  infinitive  go-dingilia,  comes  e-lingilio
7.  mark;

from  genda  go,  walk  (Kongo  and  Kafir  enda),  infinitive
go-henda,  comes  o-genda  1.  visitor,  stranger,  &c.,  &c.

367.  Begardlng  the  origin  of  this  change  of  Initials,  it
seems  probable  that  in  its  tendency  for  shortening  the
pronunciation,  the  Mpongwe  pressed  all  such  prefixes  of
the  verbs  (be  they  subjective  or  objective  pronouns,  or
verbal  particles)  which  consisted  only  of  a nasal  or  of  a
short  vowel,  with  or  without  preceding  consonant,  hard
towards  the  beginning  of  the  stem,  thereby  either  raising
the  explosive  character  of  the  initial  consonant  of  tlie


Initial  Inflection  in  Mpongwc.


79


verb,  or  retaining  Its  primitive  harder  pronunciation,  which
otherwise  where  this  pressure  did  not  take  place,  has
generally  been  softened  down.  The  softer  pronunciation
has  thus  been  attached  to  the  imperative  form  which  is
generally  destitute  of  prefixes,  and  after  the  open  a-  of
the  historical  tense  and  of  the  optative  ga-  and  a-  (first  per-
son of  the  imperative,  and  negative  imperative).  By  the
strong  tendency  to  contraction  which  makes  the  Mpongwe
quite  a modern  language,  the  original  verbal  prefixes  have
mostly  been  suppressed  before  the  harder  form  of  the
initial ; and  with  their  disappearance,  the  reason  for  this
hardening  of  the  Initial  has  also  disappeared.  This  harder
pronunciation  must  then  have  been  so  frequent  in  certain
tenses  and  moods,  that  from  a mere  phonetic  process  it
has  become  quite  a characteristic  of  these  tenses  and
moods ; and  so  it  came  to  pass  that,  also  with  such  verbs,
which  had  originally  the  harder  Initial,  the  change  into
the  softer  was  by  analogy  enforced  for  those  tenses  and
moods,  which  in  the  other  verbs  claimed  a softer  consonant.

368.  This  explanation  is  of  course  partly  hypothetical;
and  it  is  very  possible  that  a stricter  investigation  of  the
Mpongwe  language,  and  a comparison  with  those  dialects
and  languages  which  are  most  nearly  related  to  it, — as,
for  example,  those  of  Kakongo  and  Loango, — will  enable
us  to  understand  more  clearly  and  Avith  greater  certainty
the  development  of  the  verbal  formations  in  Mpongwe.


VII.  INTONATION  AND  ACCENTUATION.

1.  INTONATIOi^.

369.  A striking  feature  of  the  Mpongwe  is  also  the  use
which  has  been  made  of  the  different  modes  of  intonation
for  the  distinction  of  the  negative  form.  Probably  this
was  originally  indicated  by  one  or  more  prefixed  particles,
and  a prefixed  n-  is  still  used  for  the  indication  of  the
negative  of  the  past  tenses,  and  an  a-  in  the  imperative.


80


Phonology.


But  even  in  these  cases  the  intonation  or  prolongation  of
the  penultimate  seems  to  be  more  characteristic  of  the
negative  form  than  those  prefixed  letters,

370.  We  have  evidently  here  again  to  do  with  a case,
in  which  what  was  at  first  an  external  distinction  has
been  commuted  into  an  internal  inflection, — thatform  which
was  originally  longer,  in  its  present  contraction  being
distinguished  by  this  intonation  or  prolongation  from  an
originally  shorter  form,  with  which  the  former  had  other-
wise, in  its  phonetic  elements,  become  identical.

371.  The  exact  nature  of  this  intonation  is  not  quite  clear;
it  seems,  however,  that  it  consists  rather  in  a prolongation
of  the  accented  syllable  than  in  anything  else ; so  that
mi  kdmba  means  “ I speak,”  and  mi  kdmba  “ I do  not
speak.”  In  Mpongwe  books  the  latter  is  indicated  by  an
italic  letter  for  the  distinguishing  vowel,  as  “ mi  kamba,”
or  “ mi  hamba''

Z12.  Such  cases  of  intonation  used  for  the  distinction
of  homophonous  words  occur  also  in  other  Ba-ntu
languages, — for  example,  in  Kafir  and  Zulu.  Thus  Kafir
intdnga  9.  is  “ the  house  of  the  second  wife,”  &c.,  and
intdnga  9.  “seed  of  pumpkin,”  umkombeZ.  rhinoceros,  and
umkombe  3.  ship.  (Appleyard  § 68,  Colenso  § 28.)

373.  The  Hottentot  language  seems,  however,  to  avail
Itself  much  more  extensively  of  the  difference  of  Intonation
for  the  distinction  of  different  words,  the  sounds  of  which
are  otherwise  the  same.  Wuras  distinguishes  in  this
manner  three  keys  (as  he  calls  them),  in  which  words
which  have  otherwise  the  same  sound  may  be  spoken.
( Vide  Sir  G.  Grey’s  Library,  Vol.  I.  p.  20).

2.  ACCENT.

374.  On  what  principles  the  accentuation  in  the  Hot-
tentot Language  may  be  based,  is  not  clear  to  roe,

375.  In  the  Ba-ntu  languages  the  accent  lies,  most
generally,  on  the  penultimate — (may  this  form  a part  of
the  stem  of  the  word,  or  be  merely  an  Inflectional  syl-


81


Accentuation  and  Dialectical  Changes,

lable) — and  it  is  shifted  with  a tei’ininal  increase  of  a word.
For  example,  in  Kafir  imvu  is  ‘'a  sheep,”  irnvdna  “a
lamb,”  imvukdzi  “ an  ewe,”  imvukazdna  “ a little  ewe,”
&c.  ; u-ku-bona  “ to  see,”  u-ku-bonahalisela  “ to  manifest
to,”  &c.,  &c.

376.  Of  the  Eastern  Middle  Branch  languages,  the
Kikamba  forms  an  exception  by  throAving  the  accent  as
close  as  possible  to  the  beginning  of  the  word,  Avhilst  its
nearest  neighbours,  the  Kinika  and  Kisuaheli,  agree,  as
regards  accentuation,  with  the  Kafir.

377.  Of  the  Western  Middle  Branch  languages,  the
oTyi-herero,  for  certain,  has  the  accent  generally  on  the
last  syllable  of  the  word,  although  there  are  also  a large
number  of  oTyi-herero  words  which  have  the  accent  on
the  penultimate.

378.  How  the  shifting  of  the  accent  affects  the  struc-
ture of  the  language,  and  influences  the  phonetic  formation
of  the  AVords,  is  still  to  be  ascertained.


VIII.  DIALECTICAL  TRANSITIONS  OF
CONSONANTS.

379.  The  comparative  study  of  the  Hottentot  dialects
has  not  yet  been  carried  to  such  an  extent  as  to  enable  us
to  state  Avhat  changes  of  sound  take  place  between  them ;
and  still  less  is  this  the  case  with  regard  to  the  relations
obtaining  betAveen  the  Hottentot  and  the  kindred  Sex-
denoting  languages.  Yet,  Ave  may  state  that  in  the
flectional  or  grammatical  parts  of  speech,  a Nama-Hotten-
tot  t (before  i or  e)  is  liable  to  be  converted  into  r in  the
.H^ora  and  Cape  dialects,  and  that  an  ancient  t has  in
Hottentot  an  inclination  to  be  converted  into  the  sibi-
lant s.

380.  The  transitions  of  consonants  in  the  vai’ious
Ba-ntu  languages  are  so  multifarious  that  it  is  impossible

Bleek,  S.  Afr»  Comp»  Grammar.


82


Phonology.


to  note  them  all  here.  I give,  however,  a few  tables  of
changes  obtaining  between  the  Kafir  and  other  languages
of  the  South  African  Division.  It  need  not  be  remarked
that  the  Kafir  by  no  means  always  exhibits  a more  origi-
nal form  of  consonant,  but  not  rarely  a more  modern  one,
effected  by  palatalisation  or  other  phonetic  influences.
For  example,  a h before  i is  palatalised,  in  most  Bantu
languages,  to  tyi  or  tshi ; and  this  palatal  sound  has,  in
Kafir,  sunk  down  to  the  mere  sibilant  s.  On  the  other
hand,  the  Kafir  I is,  in  perhaps  the  greater  number  of
kindred  South  African  languages,  changed  into  r ; in  a
few  it  is  commuted  into  n (as  in  Makua  and  Mpongwe),
or  into  y (as  in  the  Tefula  dialect  of  the  Zulu  language),
and  in  others,  it  has  entirely  disappeared.

381.  Tlie  changes  of  sound  obtaining  between  the
different  species  of  the  South  Eastern  Branch  have  been
at  first  noted  at  p.  40  of  Sir  G.  Grey’s  Library,  Vol.  I.,
and  are  given  here  Avith  a slightly  altered  aiTangement :

KAFIR.  TEKezA.  SE-TSHUaNA.

(Kafir  and  Zulu.)  (Lourenzo  Marques.)  (Se-Xlapi  and  Se-sutn.)


The  k corresponds  to

k and

to

X or  ig)

,,  nk

99

99

N or  h „

99

kx  or  hlP  (hh)

99

99

99

li

„ t

99

99

r „

99

r

„ nt

99

99

n „

99

th

,,  cl

99

99

I

99

1

,,  nd

99

99

nd  „

99

t

» P

99

99

N or  h „

99

f or  h

« P

99

99

hz  „

99

P

„ mp

99

99

m „

99

ph

„ h

99

99

b or  V „

99

b

,,  mb

99

99

mb  ,,

99

P

,,  mh-

99

99

mob-  ,,

99

m-

M f

99

99

f »

99

f ox  h

„ ^

99

99

f 53

99

b or  r

„ V

99

99

99

hu  or  tshu  [chu)

Dialectical  Transitions  of  Consonants.


83


KAFIK.  TEKezA.  SE-TSIIUaNA.

(Kafir  and  Zulu.)  (Lourenzo  Marques.)  (Se-Xlapi  and  Se-suto.)
The  corresponds  to  7if  and  to  p


s

33

33

5

33

33

s

s

33

33

tsh

33

33

ts

a

z

33

33

t

33

33

ts  or  xl  (tl)

35

zi

33

33

te

33

33

li  or  ri

33

1IZ

33

33

t

33

33

ts

33

nz

33

33

mf

33

33

P

33

sh

33

33

k

33

33

sh

33

ty

33

33

bdsh

33

33

y

33

1

33

33

1

33

33

i

33

li

33

33

li  or  dzi

33

33

le

33

7UI-

33

33

ri-

33

33

mol-

33

n

33

33

ll  or  ny

33

33

n

33

ny

33

33

ny

33

33

n

33

-ni

33

33

-ne

33

33

-h  ill  or  ny')

33

m

33

33

m

33

33

m

382.  Comparing  the  Eastern  portion  of  the  Middle
Branch,  we  have  observed  in  the  Mosambique  Genus
mainly  the  following  changes  :


KAFIR.  TETTE  AND  SENA.  MAKUA.


The  A corresponds  to

A

and

to

y

33

nk

33

33

33

33

A or  y

33

ny

33

33

33

3 3

hy

33

t

33

33

33

33

r

33

nt

33

33

ntt

33

33

tt

33

d

33

33

t

33

33

33

V

33

33

P

33

33

0

33

mp

33

33

P

33

33

P

33

h

33

33

N

33

33

X

mb

33

3 3

P

33

f

33

33

P

33

33

V

33

f

33

33

V

33

33

1 or  r

33

fu

33

33

33

33

hu  or  (

84


Phonology.


KAFIK.


TETTE  AND  SENA.


MAKUA.


The/w  corresponds  to

ku

and  to

u

„ xl  (hi)  or  s

s

55  55

t

55  ^ 55

s

55  55

h or  X

55  ^ 55

55

dz  (?)

55  55

d ox  r

55  ^ 55

55

r

55  55

1

55  55

55

ri

55  55

ni

383.  In  the  Zangian

Genus

the  following

have  been  observed :

KAFIR.  KI-SUAHELI.  KI-NIKA.


(Mombas.)  (Habbai.)


The  k corresponds  to

A

and

to

k

55

k

55

55

5^

55

55

9

55

nk

55

55

55

55

lig

55

hg

55

55

55

55

hg

55

t

55

55

t

55

55

h

55

nt

55

55

t

55

55

t

55

nd

55

55

nd

55

55

nd

55

55

55

nd

55

55

t

55

nxl  {ndhl)

55

nd

55

55

ns,  nts  (nz)

55

Xl{hl)

55

35

t

55

55

ts  (z)

55

P

55

55

P

55

55

h ox  V

55

b

55

55

w

55

55

X

35

ha

5?

55

ha

35

55

ba

55

mb

55

55

mb

55

55

mb

55

f

55

55

f

55

55

f

55

V

55

55

f

53

55

f

55

s

55

55

s (^ss)

55

55

s (ss)

55

si

55

55

lii

55

55

dslii

55

ns

55

55

nt

55

55

ts  (z)

55

z

55

55

dsh

55

55

ts  (z)

55

z

55

55

z (?s)

55

55

z (?s)

55

nz

55

55

dy

55

55

ts

55

1

55

55

1 or  ll

55

55

r or  rr

55

la

55

55

la

55

55

la

55

1

55

55

X

55

55

1

55

n

55

55

n

35

55

n

55

rn

55

55

nt

55

55

m

Dialectical  Transitions  of  Consonants.


85


384.  The  transitions  of  consonants  observed,  in  the
South-Western  or  Bunda  Genus  are  as  follows  :

KAFIR.  oTyI-IIERERO.  ANGOLA.


(Damara  Language.)  (Bunda  Language.)


The  k corresponds  to

It

and

to

li

nil

yy

yy

ng

yy

yy

ng

ng

yy

yy

ng

yy

yy

ng

}}

t

yy

yy

t or  s

yy

yy

t

yy

ti

yy

yy

ti

yy

yy

tshi  {chi)

yy

nt

yy

yy

nd

yy

yy

t

yy

d (?)

yy

yy

t

yy

yy

nd  or  1

yy

nd

yy

yy

nd

yy

yy

nd

yy

P

yy

yy

P

yy

yy

b

yy

b

yy

yy

P

yy

yy

b

yy

b

yy

yy

V

yy

yy

N

yy

mb

yy

yy

mb

yy

yy

mb

yy

f

yy

yy

yy

yy

f{ff)

yy

/“

yy

yy

t

yy

yy

/“

yy

V

yy

yy

(.)

yy

yy

/

yy

mv

yy

yy

mb

yy

yy

^{f

yy

mvu

yy

yy

nd or nd^

:>

yy

yy

yy

s

yy

yy

t

yy

yy

s

yy

s

yy

yy

ty

yy

yy

k

yy

s or  \l

yy

yy

k

yy

yy

yy

s or  x7

yy

yy

h

yy

yy

s (ss)

yy

z

yy

yy

^\z)

yy

yy

sh  (.r  or  g)

yy

z

yy

yy

h

yy

yy

sh  {x)

yy

z

yy

yy

y

yy

yy

N

yy

yy

yy

r

yy

yy

1

yy

tsll

yy

yy

pi

yy

yy

be

yy

ndsh

yy

yy

mbu

yy

yy

mbu

yy

nix

yy

yy

ndij

yy

yy

nz

yy

nxle

yy

yy

ndyi

yy

yy

ndshi  {ngi)

yy

1

yy

yy

r

yy

yy

1

yy

li

yy

yy

ri

yy

yy

ri

yy

y

yy

yy

y

yy

yy

ny  (jih)

yy

ny

yy

yy

ny

yy

yy

yy

n

yy

yy

n

yy

yy

n

yy

m

yy

yy

m

yy

yy

m

86


Phonology.


S85.  In  the  Xorth  Western  or  Kongo  Genus  the  fol-
lowing transitions  of  consonants  have  been  noted ;


KAFIE,  KONGO.  MPONGWE.


The  k corresponds  to

and  to

9

hk

33

33

33

33

k

5?

nil  ( Se-

•tshuana  xl)

nz

33

33

d

5?

33

33

33

33

9

33

33

33

ng

33

33

hg

33

t

33

33

t

33

33

T

33

nt

33

33

nt

33

33

33

nt

33

35

t

33

33

33

d

33

33

33

33

1

33

nd

33

33

33

33

nd

33

V

33

33

33

33

V

33

h

33

33

K

33

33

V

33

hh

35

33

w

33

33

f

hh

33

33

P

33

mb

33

33

33

33

mb

33

f

33

33

f

33

33

w

33

mv

33

33

nv

53

33

33

s

33

33

33

33

zy  or  nty

33

s{?)

33

33

33

33

N or  A

33

s

33

33

k

33

33

z

33

s or  xl  {hi)

33

ss

33

33

33

su

35

33

>

33

33

33

ns  (?)

33

33

nz

33

33

nty

33

z

33

33

z

33

33

g or  s

33

z

33

33

33

33

dsh  (J)

33

nz

33

33

nz

33

33

33

nz

33

33

33

33

ndsh  (nj)

33

sh

33

33

k

33

33

9

33

xl{hl)

33

33

t

33

33

t

33

nxl  {nlil)

33

t

33

33

ty

33

nil  {ndhl)

33

nz

33

33

33

nil  (ndhl)

33

33

33

ndsh  {nj)

33

1

33

33

1

33

33

n or  nl

33

1

33

33

33

33

ny

33

ml

33

33

33

33

n

33

n

33

33

n

33

33

n

33

m

33

33

m

33

33

m

Dialectical  Transitions  of  Consonants.


87


386.  In  the  North-Western  Branch  the  transitions  of
consonants  which  have  been  observed  are  :


KAFIR.


BENGA.


isuBu  (Dualla.)


The  k corresponds  to

and

to

A

t

99

99

1

99

99

1

,,  nt

99

99

t

99

99

t

,,  nd

99

99

99

99

n

» P

99

99

99

99

10

„ b

99

99

h

99

99

b

,,  mb

99

99

mb

99

99

mb

» /

99

99

V

99

99

„ mvu

99

99

99

99

ngu

„ i-

99

99

h

99

99

s

,,  ns

99

99

99

99

s

35  ^

99

99

d

99

99

r

„ nz

99

99

N

99

99

d

,,  ndsh  {nj)

99

99

99

ncjb

,,  n^lfidhl)

99

7idsh

(nt)  33

99

ndsh

3,  i

99

99

d

99

99

d

33  i

99

99

99

99

1

33  1

99

99

N

99

99

N

33  n

99

99

n

99

99

n

33  riy

j9

99

n

99

99

n

33  ntj

99

99

99

99

ny

33  m

99

99

m

99

99

m

33  m

99

99

99

99

mb

387.  It

does  not

appear  to

> be  as

yet

prad

bring  these  different  tables  of  transitions  of  consonants
into  one  large  table,  showing  the  correspondence  of  con-
sonants throughout  the  South  African  Division  of  the
Ba-ntu  languages.  For,  though  some  of  these  transitions
are  very  general,  others  are  only  partial,  i.  e.,  restricted
to  certain  cases  of  the  occurrence  of  such  consojiants ;
and  they  take  perhaps  place  only  under  peculiar  circum-
stances. The  same  Kafir  letter  can,  therefore,  in
different  cases,  correspond  to  different  consonants  of  one
and  the  same  other  language ; and  as  the  conditions


88


Phonology.


under  wliich  these  variations  in  the  transition  of  conso-
nants are  met  with,  liave  not  been  fully  ascertained,  or
stated  here, — it  is  impossible  to  assign  to  all  these  instances
of  mutual  correspondence,  their  right  place  in  a general
table.  Some  further  researches  will,  however,  it  is  hoped,
soon  render  it  feasible  to  construct  at  least  an  outline
table  of  the  most  general  transitions  of  sound  noticed
throughout  the  different  members  of  the  Bi-ntu  family
of  lanQ-uao-es.

O O

388.  It  must  be  evident  to  any  one  who  looks  through
these  tables  how  futile  any  attempt  at  etymology  on  a
larger  scale  must  be  from  the  narrow  point  of  view  of  one
particular  language,  even  if  this  were  the  Kafir  or  Zulu,
which  languages  have  in  general  best  preserved  the
ancient  forms.  But  as  they  have  not  done  so  in  every
regard,  and  as  there  are  many  instances  in  which  the
kindred  languages  are  more  original,  it  follows  that  only
on  the  basis  of  a comprehensive  comparison,  any  sound
and  satisfactory  etymology  of  the  South  African  Ba-ntu
languages  can  be  instituted.  The  limited  space  does  not
allow  me  to  give  here  more  than  one  specimen  of  etymo-
logical comparison,  in  illustration  of  these  rules  of
phonology.


THE  NAME  OF  GOD.

389.  The  word  by  which  “ God”  is  translated  in  Zulu
by  the  best  authorities  is  Uhhulunkulu  1.  It  is  derived
by  reduplication  of  a (nasalised)  form  of  the  9th  (i\-)
class  from  the  adjective  stem  -kulu  (great,  large,  old,
u-hu-hala  15,  to  grow,  &c.),  and  seems  to  mean  originally
“ a great-great -grand  father,”  or  the  first  ancestor  of  a
family^  or  tribe,  though  perhaps  the  uunasalised  form
u-kuluhulu  1.  mo-h^  oluh'- olu)  is  at  present  more

usual  in  this  signification.  Then  it  was  ajiplied  by
metaphor  to  that  being  from  whom  everything  was  derived,
Avho  according  to  the  Zulu  tradition  has  created  all  men.


Comparative  Etymology.


89


animals  and  other  things  to  whom  life  and  death  is
due,  &c.*

390.  Regarding  the  form  U-nkuluhkulu,  it  is  to  be
remarked  that  like  many  proper  names  and  nouns  ex-
pressing relationship  it  seems  to  have  been  transferred
from  the  9th  {N-)  class,  to  which  originally,  according  to
its  prefix  (n-)  it  must  have  belonged,  to  the  1st  (ikfw-
personal  class)  to  which  it  is  referred  by  the  prefixed
article  u.  (Bleek,  De  Nominum  Geneifibus,  &c.,  cap.  ix,
p.  45.)  As  the  latter  is  derived  from  the  prefix  Mu-,  the
full  form  of  the  word  may  be  concluded  once  to  have  been
MU-N-KULU-N-KULU.  From  this,  there  descended
then,  with  suppression  of  the  first  nk,  and  commutation  of
the  second  nk  into  the  corresponding  nasalised  media  hy
(§§89  and  226),  the  Inhambane  word  for God  ” Mu-
lu'ngulu  1.  In  this  inconstancy  with  regard  to  the
transition  of  the  nk,  the  dialect  of  Inhambane  shows  its
character  as  an  intermediate  link  between  the  Tekeza
dialects  (which  almost  constantly  suppress  the  and  the
Middle  Branch  languages  which  are  generally  inclined
to  the  nasalised  media.  Of  course,  the  position  of  the
first  ilk  close  to  the  unaccentuated  beginning  of  the  word
had  also  something  to  do  with  its  disappearance.

391.  The  language  of  Inhambane  is,  however,  the
only  Middle  Branch  dialect  in  which  the  two  liquids  (Z)
of  this  word  are  preserved ; for,  in  all  other  languages  of
theMosambique  as  well  as  of  the  Zangian  genus,  the  second
Z (that  immediately  following  the  accentuated  syllable,
and,  therefore,  for  contrast’s  sake,  least  intoned)  has  been
elided.  Thus  we  find  in  Ki-hiau,  Ki-kamba  and  Ki-nika

* I have  treated  this  subject  at  greater  length  in  a paper  which  pro-
bably soon  will  be  published.

t For  example  in  Lourenzo  Marques  le-ulo  (Kafir  e-n-kulu,  Se-suto
e-htfolu,  Se-Xlapi  e-kxolu,  Sena  and  Tette  i-kunt)  as  adjective  form  of  the
9th  {N-)  class  from  the  stem  -kulo  great  (Kafir,  Cape  Delgado  and
Kinika  -hulu,  Sc-suto -// °o/w,  Se-Xlapi  Sofala Sena  and  Tette
■kuru,  Ki-suaheli  and  Ki-pokorao  -hi).

Bleok.  S.  Afr.  Com  Cnimmnr,


N


90


Phonolocjy.


the  form  Muluiigu*  (the  accent  retrograding  according  to
§ 375),  and  with  suppression  of  the  vowel  of  the  prefix
(§  232)  in  the  Ki-suaheli  dialect  of  Cape  Delgado  Mlungu.

392.  From  the  form  Mulungu,  as  general  primitive
type  of  this  word  in  the  Eastern  Middle  Branch  languages,
there  are  also  derived,  on  the  one  hand,  by  transition  of
the  ng  (as  derived  from  an  original  nit)  into  k or  ^ (§  382),
the  Makua  form  Mulugo  or  Miiluho  (Quellimane  and
Mosambique)  ; and  on  the  other  hand,  with  commutation
of  the  I into  r,  in  those  dialects  which  have  no  I (§  163),
the  Sofala  word  Murungu,  Tette  Murxmgo  or  Moi  ungo.
The  Tette  form  is  also  employed  in  the  dialect  of  Sena,
which  has  otherwise  the  1.  Lastly,  the  Ki-suaheli  dialect
of  Mombas,  which  retains  an  original  I only  in  such  cases
where  the  Ki-nika  has  an  r instead  of  it  (§  383),  has  the
further  contraction  Muhgu,  and  the  Ki-pokomo  Mungo.

393.  Of  course  it  is  surprising  at  first  to  find  that  two
apparently  so  different  words  as  this  Mungo  and  the  Zulu
Unkulunkulu  are  really  identical,  but  w'e  can  follow  the
gradual  mutilation  of  the  word  in  this  instance  so  closely
that  no  doubt  can  remain.  It  deserves  to  be  remarked
that,  notwithstanding  its  otherwise  strongly  contracted
form,  the  Ki-pokomo  has  yet  preserved  one  letter  which
the  full  Zulu  form  has  already  lost, — namely,  the  initial
labial  nasal.

394.  Among  the  Western  Middle  Branch  languages,
only  the  oTyi-herero  has  derived  its  name  for  the  deity,
from  the  same  stem  ; but  here  neither  a reduplication  of  the
stem,  nor  a derivation  from  the  nasalised  form  has  taken
place ; and  thus  we  have  oMuhuru,]  which,  however,  in

* This  is  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  Kafir  and  Zulu  word  u-m-hrigu
1.  wliite  man,  European  (plur.  a-be-luvgu  2.),  to  -which  corresponds  the
Ki-nika  noun  mu-zungu,  Ki-suaheli  m-zuhgu  1.  (plur.  wa-zuhgu,  2.)

f It  is  not  improbable  that  the  Timneh  (§5)  word  for  God,  Kuruli  1.,  is
also  to  be  compared  here-with  ; but  the  la-ws  of  transitions  of  sounds
obtaining  between  this  West  African  and  the  South  African  Ba-ntu
languages  must  of  course  be  first  ascertained  before  such  a comparison
can  be  considered  as  in  any  way  reliable.


The  Name  of  God.


91


almost  every  detail  of  its  signification,  seems  exactly  to
correspond  to  the  Zulu  Unlmluliihkulu.  The  oTyi-herero
adjective  stem  -kuru  {o-n-guru  9.)  means,  as  the  correspond-
ing Kongo  stem  -kulu,  “ old,”  and  the  idea  of  age  is  also
generally  implied  in  the  meaning  of  the  identical  East
African  adjective  (§§  389  and  390,  note).

395.  In  other  South  African  languages,  different
words  are  found  indicating  the  idea  of  a supreme  being  ;
hut  in  Se-tshu5.na  at  least  the  word  for  “ God  ” has  a
similar  reference  to  their  ancestor- worship,  as  the  Zulu
Unhuluhhulu  (§  389).  Thus  in  Se-suto  Mo-limo*  3.
means  God,  and  me-limo  4.  gods,  but  molimo  1 . ancestral
spirit,  plur.  ha-limo  2.  The  corresponding  Se-xlapi
words  are  : Mo-rimo  3.,  me-rimo  4.,  morimo  L,  harirno  2.
In  Zulu  the  Bishop  of  Natal’s  Dictionary  furnishes  us  the
almost  obsolete  word  uM-zimu  “ apparently  a collective
name  for  a-ma-tongo"  {f>.  dream-ghosts  a-ma-xloziQ.,  Kafir
i-mi-shologu  4.,  Se-suto  liriti  8.,  i.  e.  shadows  of  the  dead,
oTyi-herero  o-vi-riiru  8.  spectres),  “used  only  in  the
phrase  e-z-o-m-zimu  {iziiihomo  10.)  e-z-e-mi-livane,  the
cattle  killed  in  honour  of  the  ancestral  spirits.”  The  word
for  “spirit,  soul”  in  Sena  and  Quellimane  is  muz'imo  1..,
plur.  azimo  2.  The  Maravi  word  for  “ God,”  ^nsimmo,  is
probably  of  the  same  origin.  Except  in  these  languages
of  the  Mosambique  genus,  no  traces  of  this  word  have  as
yet  been  discovered  in  any  other  Middle  Branch  dialects ;
but  it  occurs  again  in  the  North-western  Branch  in
Dualla  modimo  1.  demon,  Isubu  modimo  1.  ghost,  spirit  of
a dead,  plur.  hadimo  2.,  besides  the  synonymous  Isubu
nouns  edimo  7.,  plur.  hedimo  8.

* A derivation  of  Molimo  from  MoK^olimo,  as  “ one  who  is  in  heaven,”
has  been  proposed  by  Mr.  Casalis  (“Les  Bassoutos,”  p.  262);  but  this  is
the  more  improbable  as  the  spiritual  world,  for  the  ancestor-worshipping
nations,  is  beneath,  as  Mr.  Casalis  has  himself  remarked  (p.  261).
Whatever  may  be  the  origin  of  the  words  ¥olimo  (Se-Xlapi  Xorimo)  above,
and  hh^olimo  5.  heaven,  plur.  ma¥olimo6.  (Se-Xlapi  kxorimo  5.  maxorimo
6.),  their  similarity  with  Molimo  seems  to  be  almost  accidental.


92


Phonology.


396.  In  these  North-western  Branch  languages,  how-
ever, “ God  ” is  indicated  by  other  words,  as  Obasi  in
Isuhu,  Loba  in  Dualla,  and  Anyambi  in  Benga.  The
latter  word  belongs  properly  to  the  Kongo  genus,  where
we  find  in  Mpongwe  Anyambia,  and  in  Kongo  Nzambi-
a-npungu,  which,  according  to  W.  D.  Cooley  (Inner
Africa  laid  open,  1852,  p.  6),  means  “the  spirit  above,
or  on  high.”  Also  the  language  of  Angola  uses  oNzambi
9.  God,  and  o-u~nzambi  14.  divinity.

397.  For  completeness’  sake,  I add  here  the  Hottentot
name  for  God,  which  is  Tsui  ||  hwap  (Schmelen’s  Tsoei-
kwap')  or  Tsui  \goap  (Wallmann’s  Zui  || goab)  In  the  Nama
and  Tshu  ||  hoap  in  the  .T^ora  dialect,  Thui  ||  hwe  (Van  der
Kemp’s  Thuicliwe)  amongst  the  Eastern  Hottentots,  and
Ti'^h(ic)oa  (Kolb’s  Tihq  uod,  or  touquoa)  near  the  Cape.
The  Kafir  word  for  “ God”  borrowed  from  the  Hottentot,
uTi\o  {uTixo'),  agrees  best  with  the  form  of  the  Cape
dialect.  Whilst  this  word  is  in  Zululand  comparatively
unknown,  it  occurs  again  in  the  Tekeza  dialect  of  Lou-
renzo  Marques,  in  which  the  word  Tillo  1.  (God)  betrays
at  once  its  late  foreign  introduction,  by  not  observing  the
regular  transition  of  consonants  from  Kafir  to  Tekeza  {t
to  r,  or  2:to  ?,  § 381).  The  origin  and  true  etymology  of
this  Hottentot  name  of  “ God  ” is  not  yet  established
with  any  amount  of  certainty.  It  would  perhaps  be  bold
to  assert  that  the  word  did  not  exist  two  hundred  years
ago,  because  in  the  texts  sent  by  Witsen  at  the  end
of  the  seventeenth  century  to  Leibnitz  (§17),  God  is
called  Thoro.  Or,  is  perhaps  this  last  word  really  iden-
tical with  Theu\hoap  (msc.  sng.),  as  I have  heard  a
Hottentot  woman  at  Robben  Island  name  God,  and  Avith
the  Theu^ge  or  Tui^  ho  of  two  Bushmen  from  the  same
place  ? Kolb’s  Ton  ||  kiooa  (if  that  is  not  a misprint  at
p.  414  of  the  German  original  edition)  leads  us  also  on
this  trace.


SAUL  SOT.OMON  AND  CO.,  STEAM  PRINTING  OI-TU’E,  CAPE  TOWN.


A


COMPARATIVE  GRAMMAR

OP

SOUTH  APEICAN  LANGUAGES,

BT

W.  H.  I.  BLEEK,  Ph.D.


PART  II.

THE  CONCORT).

SECTION  I.

THE  NOUN.


LONDON :

TROBNER  & Co.,  60,  PATERNOSTER  ROW.
1869.


I ttinwg-Ji  fsiii  v.f  8M3inw


r>fOaTio^)


<«§,€  4


.‘•r

r?Ui>

.'»( — -m

vi.v

V*'

■ " - V

;.►»**  ••  <•

<>,  i

tfif

(

UW— ct*.  ■

ce<

'A  1-  -Ay

■'li^  'TiCf.

I>’ici3«oO  ^sh  >0  oiisi*i7i  '4T  .1. ,

y.  ?fl'K*u$5  ni  ,r

orilj  «r

k^miull  wH  )tf  ,w
i6ttj4>voiy''i  wit  la/vsoloan/a  J1


,r,^  „ VA.'/  *'>  V/Utf  .

syi^/iviiftd  ,o;b  )o  v^o(ortr/i3  .»

•>vIi«vi'isCl  s«St  io  v;^£)Jf.fnx*a  .S

'*-*  »a»  , •*,  rn (if(i

>*’  .»>  ?flu:c.;.  (enA  .€

Kv  s«tliaw.rtr  i/*3i  ^iiAssfitO  10)  AwhnoO  9i(T  .IIJ

••''  ' ,,.  ftcufO^  fii  y*


...  • fc'5s«wga&.l  ojrf-i'il  9(jj
‘‘(K)aoLi«flC{a9'ne»  fcoA  tioffiv  l86iT:inu<M


.:.Z


I T*  iO


sioiiBOT)  10  to _sotiAiie^<|isas<i  i

' "f’'  1

.'liij.  ijoiiT  at  'icujofi  aiji/  to  asjci'wi^  oJT  a.
iaoiTOfiiwa  j/otiJi  ai'  fe*7K  7fiaol  laaisl

...  ...  05n»f)K0<j^fiT»:.-

...  ik«fl-;^£'  .img.r.-'-t(tuoy  .);ir  oj  ^

Lm«  iquI^'S)  »;7ni.«t|aJ9<t -tillA,

- !aM  oaa^'Wf^J)  44  .!•.!<»«.  ,;.vjjitjT' >riT  '

' • - ' .'  ■ j . 1 .....  '

y ' M.n'

* A**  '*'  *f  ‘ " ■ * " , '■*  '•'


n^'


CONTENTS  OF  PART  II-SECTION  I.


PAGE.

Preface  ...  . . ...  ...  xix

B.  THE  CONCORD.


I.  The  Nature  of  the  Concord

§ 398—425

1,  In  general

398—404

93

2.  In  the  Ba-ntu  Languages

405—420

96

3.  In  the  Hottentot  Language

421—425

112

n.  Etymology  of  the  concord-indicatmg  Deriv-

ative  Particles  of  the  Nouns

426—447

1.  Etymology  of  the  B^-ntu  Derivative

Prefixes  ...

426—443

123

2.  Etymology  of  the  Hottentot  Derivative

Suffixes  ...

444  & 445

133

3.  Analogies

446  & 447

137

HI.  The  Genders  (or  Classes)  and  Numbers  of

Nouns  ...

448—558

1.  The  Classes  and  Numbers  of  Nouns  in

the  Ba-ntu  Languages

448—540

a.  Numerical  value  and  correspondence

of  the  Derivative  Prefixes  of  the  Nouns

448—454

139

b.  Disappearance  of  Classes  or  Genders

455—457

146

c.  Nomenclature

458—460

148

d.  The  Prefixes  of  the  Nouns  in  their  dif-
ferent forms  and  in  their  numerical

correspondence

461—514

A.  In  the  South-eastern  Branch

461—471

The  Kafir  Species  (Kafir  and  Zulu)...

461—468

150

The  Setshuana  Species  (Sexlapi  and

Sesuto)

469 & 470

162

The  Tekeza  Species  (Lourenzo  Mar-

ques)

471

167

B.  In  the  Middle  Branch

472—501

aa.  The  Mosambique  Genus

472-475

Dialects  of  Tette  and  Sena

472  & 473

169

HhifCiS,  Afr.  Comp.  Grammar.

xvi


CONTENTS  OF  PART  II,


The  Makua  Language

PAGE.

§ 474  174

Kihiau  (Tshiyao  &c.)

• ••

475

176

u.

The  Zangian  Genus

• ••

476—484

178

Kikdmha

• ••

481

184

Kinika  and  Kisudheli

• ••

482  & 483

186

Kisamhala  (Shambala)

• ••

484

190

cc.

Languages  of  the  Interior

485  & 486

192

Bayeiye  or  Bakxoha  ...

486

193

dd.

The  Bunda  Genus

• ••

487-497

196

Otyihererd  (Damara  language)

490—494

197

Sindonga  (Ovamho)  ...

...

495

212

Nano  (Benguela)

496

216

The  Angola  Language  (Bunda)

497

220

ee.

The  Kongo  Genus

498—501

223

The  Kongo  Language

...

499

224

The  Mpongwe  Language

...

500  & 501

227

C.  In  the  North-western  Branch

...

502—514

231

Dikele

...

507

234

Benga

...

508

237

Dualla  and  Isubu

509—512

240

Fernandian

*«•

513&514

248

e.  Review  of  tlie  Derivative  Prefixes  of  the


Nouns  (Occurrence,  Forms,  Etjnnology,


Range  of  Meaning,  and  Correspondence)

515—533

251

Fu’st  Prefix  (MU-)

516

251

Table  of  Forms  of  the  First  Prefix  ...

252

Second  Prefix  (BA-)

517

254

Table  of  Forms  of  the  Second  Prefix...

254

Third  Prefix  (MU-)

518

255

Table  of  Forms  of  the  Third  Prefix  ...

256

Fourth  Prefix  (MI-)

519

258

Table  of  Forms  of  the  Fourth  Prefix...

258

Fifth  Prefix  (Dl-  or  1I-)

520

259

Table  of  Forms  of  the  Fifth  and  Sixth

Prefixes

260

Sixth  Prefix  (MA-)

521

261

Seventh  Prefix  (KI-)

522

262

Table  of  Forms  of  the  Seventh  and

Eighth  Prefixes

264

Eighth  Prefix  (PI-)

523

264

Ninth  Prefix  (N-)

524

265

Table  of  Forms  of  the  Ninth  Prefix  ...

266

Tenth  Prefix  (THIN-)  ...

525

267

Table  of  Forms  of  the  Tenth  Prefix  ...

268

CONTENTS  or  PART  II.

XVll

PAGE.

Eleventh  Prefix  (IiV-)  ...

§ 526

269

Table  of  Forms  of  the  Eleventh,

Twelfth,  and  Thirteenth  Prefixes  ...

270

Twelfth  Prefix  (TU-)  ...

527

271

Thu'teenth  Prefix  (KLA-)...

528

272

Fourteenth  Prefix  (BU-)...

529

273

Table  of  Forms  of  the  Fourteenth  and

Fifteenth  Prefixes  ...

274

Fifteenth  Prefix  (ItU-)  ...

530

275

Sixteenth  Prefix  (PA-)  ...

531

276

Table  of  Forms  of  the  Sixteenth,  Seven-

teenth, and  Eighteenth  Prefixes  ...

276

Seventeenth  Prefix  (K.O-)

532

277

Eighteenth  Prefix  (MO-)...

533

277

if-

The  different  Systems  of  Classification

534

280

Synoptical  Table  ...  ...

278

g-

The  Ancient  Forms  of  the  Derivative

Prefixes  of  the  Nouns

53S&536

281

Table  of  the  Fullest  and  most  Primi-

tive Forms  ...  ...  ...

282

h.

The  Mutual  Correspondence  of  the

Classes  of  Nouns  as  Singular  and

Plural  ...

537—540

287

Table  shewing  the  Distribution  of  the

Correspondences  ...  ...

288

2.  The  Genders  and  Numbers  of  Nouns  in

the  Hottentot  Language

541—558

292

The  Nama  Dialect

546—552

299

The  IKora  Dialect

553—555

310

The  Cape  Dialect ...

556  & 557

315

Review  of  the  Concord-indicating  Deriv-

ative  Suffixes  of  Hottentot  Nouns  ...

558

320

Table  of  F orms  of  the  Hottentot  SufiSxea

321

' ':n'  'Wr.'M

r •■

% ■■■-■

. ..  w 'f  :•

««>  C j = /V;  ; ,i,;v,^?-'it'

Ji'vV  I..  >■  f«>'T79lor' «■

I r • !-■  ' ■;>•■  ■.■J’:-i  H . ‘?'tKt/>  ;r.1''>  -;Trt'

■■■^h  ^ i , ,^  ■ ■I'Tf

Ijl^o  i..>i  J^.i^,.

rr%v  ' s .■•  ■ }> :^iR.s  > *'.'{‘iT(»  oVfiM  tvMvvp^^

■5it Ki  > V^Wt'C f ■»'<''o^‘'^OTo  _af  jibn » w

yl/'  Ip , I»ai5«fo^  r-sri

Vl.  "‘W,  pB:'''  1o,

j"'  ^ . vi^  r/tut  .^jtiiU^  X ripit«  ato^ad  (’•jjwv

f j,  '*■"  >,-^i3'i  yfOCT.d  fbidg;Xgtfe^if^W»mcoUdgg|  eif*  T»tpl>

, -»i;;*i.:.-<  f-i.  I iv^ii‘0’'  -5^  LJ9pfdr#’Mi'rvftHti((  »dT  -

'>  "ii  .'-;.'.i^  pdf/fi?

v.-,.-  i-i*!it??v.i^  -j.-inA  i:i;atiHf  "to  diic*r  19905  i i'.ij'jfiTt^x?)  oidra><it

V . r Brrt’iol  '^Urfo^s^

"’'  g-  ?'■';  . ,Qf.  pr4d  fioliaiii.!  '^a«''9  5m  lOTfo^

-fe'-  , ;>'V^ar  050'?^:  ptU  \t;i  twijfcotq  anotBtfOnfffu

®'*d1ed  ^t->»  .Ixtim

d'udw  efi^f  tX>  oiom  one

■ *■'  -’ ' ■’•'•  "fierw  ■ftiyri,s.'»09  gooofnmp

■ . .,  , V-.,  *■l;•.;^.V^.•;s3^^'.,»ffl  yfldd.-*'

^ .-  ' ^ frt  * adt  ”?* '^'tx'irtA  ♦fT?'/v’?fffJrfv ''fri  .jfiaooaB  Atdi

■ ''  • ■ .'  * 89aifitJ'>  jjfi'bittrf  !‘i(i  8fnrnj  89yf,i«3nnt


..!  ':  ei!'.>ij<-p0it00Biuf  h«ft

»,vc;..4*«-  - 1

:>d»  no*!'-:  td  ylno  ii«9  hiTim  V-

Ml  ■ ■ '

- -'.v<^  rtBniiiii'fA^rfnd’t  idt  oj/v  «3iio'*t:*89'T

•rtiiT-'!.  vt  ,»'"'''''J,^.t>^

Ml  ''•'!■;(  ,■>  . M-r  ;,,ij  )i-,

.'■  ixJi  ''i"t  1 .!•<  ■'  ■ .,ff.i>1'iifk'  to mfi'K  ’

viO.’lO-  (8  . t(  |Ot|i'  #».  ♦ 11

*._

,/|t;HfrtV«  (|  "»  ' ' B||M|^^  ril-piM  • •

I'.


■ I

ttk.


.


PEEFACE.


In  presenting,  after  seven  years  interval,  another  portion  of
this  Comparative  Grammar  to  the  public,  I am  grateful  that  I
have  been  permitted  to  proceed,  at  least  so  far,  with  my  work.
Yet  I feel  truly  sorry  that  I have  not  been  able  to  publish,  at
the  same  time  with  this,  the  remaining  portion  of  the  Second
Part.  For,  in  giving  only  the  Noun,  and  not  all  the  other
forms  of  Concord,  I have  only  afforded  half  a view  of  a subject
which,  in  order  to  be  rightly  understood,  almost  requires  to  be
presented  in  its  entirety.  For  my  own  part,  I should  gladly
have  delayed  the  publication  of  this  first  section  until  the
completion  of  the  whole  of  the  Second  Part ; but  as  it  may  be
years  before  such  is  the  case,  I think  that  I have  no  right  to
defer  the  publication  of  that  which  is  now  ready.

The  more  I study  the  subject,  the  more  I become  convinced
of  the  great  dependence  of  human  thought  upon  language,  and
the  more  examples  I meet  with  of  human  errors  that  are  mere
consequences  of  the  forms  of  language.  The  sources  of  popular
error  in  every  nation  have  to  be  mainly  looked  for  in  the
impressions  produced  by  the  spoken  idiom  upon  the  national
mind.  Language  frequently  sets  before  our  eyes  images  which
are  more  or  less  distorted,  which  deceive  us,  and  lead  us  to
erroneous  conceptions.  The  forms  of  a language,  especially,
are  continually  moulding  our  thoughts,  keeping  them  in
certain  grooves,  and  confining  them  within  certain  limits.  On
this  account,  an  intelligent  study  of  the  structure  of  different
languages  gives  us  the  leading  outlines  of  the  history  of  human
conceptions  and  misconceptions ; and  the  gradual  development
of  mind  can  only  be  traced  upon  the  basis  of  comparative
researches  into  the  forms  of  human  speech.  Those  classifications
of  the  nouns,  particularly,  which  are  based  upon  the  different
forms  of  concord,  exert  a powerful  influence  upon  the  mind,
and  impress  upon  it  different  associations  of  ideas.  The  Bantu
languages,  for  example,  with  their  sixteen  distinct  pronouns,
which  indicate  as  many  separate  classes  of  nouns,  not  one  of


XX


PREFACE-


■wliich  has  any  I’eference  to  sex, — must  naturally  cause  the
mind  to  view  the  world  very  differently  from  the  Hottentot
language,  in  which  the  pronouns,  although  eight  in  number,
have  each  a certain  sex-denoting,  as  well  as  numerical,  meaning
connected  with  them.  For  these  reasons,  the  apparently  dry
study  and  exact  comparison  of  the  forms  of  the  concord  in  the
different  South  African  languages,  and  the  inquiry  into  the
causes  and  origin  of  this  concord,  possess  an  interest  extending
far  beyond  that  of  facilitating  the  study  of  the  individual
languages.

The  principle  of  representing  the  whole  of  a compound  noun
by  one  of  its  parts  (which  has  led  to  the  concord,  and  to  the
classification  of  the  nouns  as  we  find  it  regularly  developed  in
the  South  African  languages)  may  possibly  be  identical  in  the
main  with  the  so-called  mode  of  “ incorporation  ” peculiar  to
many  American  languages.  I say  this,  however,  with  hesita-
tion j for,  upon  the  whole,  this  region  is  still  a terra  incognita,
— no  trained  philologist  having  yet  been  found  to  devote  himself
to  the  comparative  study  of  these  languages.  If  even  as  much
were  done  for  America,  as  has  been  already  accomplished  for
the  African  languages,  general  philology  would  be  in  a very
different  position,  and  we  should  be  able  to  obtain,  at  least,
some  glimpses  of  the  general  history  of  human  conceptions.
However,  it  is  not  as  if  much  had  been  done  for  Africa.
On  the  contrary,  the  field  of  inquiry  is  very  large,  and  promises
a wealth  of  important  results  and  new  discoveries.  Yet,
excepting  those  who  are  practically  engaged  with  one  or  another
of  these  languages,  scarcely  any  one  has  occupied  himself  with
this  branch  of  philology.

It  is  to  be  regretted,  that  the  greater  number  of  comparative
philologists  appear  to  be  still  in  a sort  of  rudimentary  stage,
corresponding  to  that  in  which  zoologists  would  be  if  they
refused  to  study  any  animals  excepting  those  directly  useful
to  man,  and  their  nearest  kindred  species.  In  fact,  the  so-
called  Indo-European  Comparative  Philology  now  occupies
the  same  place  that  Classical  Philology  did  fifty  or  sixty
years  ago.  It  will  not  go  beyond  itself,  and,  as  it  were,  shuts
its  eyes  to  the  possibility  that  any  other  circle  of  languages
can  be  akin  to  the  Aryan,  Yet  it  is  clear  that  the  complex


PREFACE.


XXI


phenomena  which  characterise  the  Aryan  circle  of  languages
cannot  be  rightly  understood  without  a careful  comparative
examination  of  other  languages  of  simpler  organisation,  which
shew  more  of  the  ancient  structure.  Some  of  that  energy,
now  so  frequently  wasted  upon  the  discussion  of  questions  to
which  the  Indo-European  circle  of  languages  alone  can  never
afford  the  clue,  might  well  be  given  to  the  systematic  com-
parative study  of  the  more  primitive  Sex-denoting  languages.
To  direct  the  attention  of  comparative  philologists  to  these
lower  forms  of  language,  and  to  prove  the  relations  in  which
they  stand  with  regard  to  the  more  highly  developed  Sex-denot-
ing tongues,  is  one  of  the  chief  aims  of  this  work.  On  this
account,  I particularly  regret  that  the  present  volume  only
elucidates  one  part  of  that  grand  system  of  Concord  which
is  the  fundamental  principle  of  the  Pronominal  languages.
To  have  shown  how  the  pronominal  elements  pervade  the
whole  life  of  these  languages,  and  how  the  concord  is  every-
where originally  due  to  the  presence  of  such  representative
elements,  would  have  removed  many  difficulties,  and  would
have  given  the  student  a fuller  insight  into  the  relations  which
the  different  Pronominal  languages  occupy  towards  each  other,
and  especially  that  in  which  Hottentot  stands  with  respect  to
some  of  the  more  northern  Sex-denoting  languages, — such  as
the  Egyptian,  the  Semitic,  and  the  Aryan  or  Indo-European.

I desire  gratefully  to  acknowledge  the  assistance  I have
received  in  my  labours  from  many  who  are  special  authorities
in  different  departments  of  these  languages,  among  whom  I may
particularly  mention, — for  Kafir,  the  Revds.  J.  W.  Appleyard
and  Tiyo  Soga, — for  Zulu,  the  Rev.  H.  Callaway,  M.D.,
and  the  Right  Rev.  J.  W.  Colenso,  D.D.,  Bishop  of  Natal,
— for  Setshuana,  the  Rev.  I.  Hughes  and  the  late  Rev.  J.
Fredoux, — for  Setshuana  and  other  languages  of  the  Interior,
Dr.  Livingstone,— for  the  Zangian  languages,  the  Rev.  Dr.
Stbere, — for  those  of  the  Bunda  Genus,  the  Revds.  C.  H.
Hahn  and  J.  Rath, — for  Hottentot,  the  Revds.  G.  Kronlkin,
H.  Tindall,  and  the  late  Rev.  F.  H.  Vollmer.

I need  not  say  how  much  I am  in  every  way  indebted  to
Sir  George  Grey,  to  whom  it  is  mainly  due  that  I could
undertake  this  grammatical  work,  helped  by  so  unique  a


xxii


PREFACE.


philological  collection  referring  to  South  African  languages,
as  that  in  the  Grey  Library.

To  the  present  Governor  of  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  Sir
Philip  Wodehouse,  to  the  Executive,  and  to  the  Legislature
of  the  Colony  especial  thanks  are  due  for  having  enabled  me
to  complete  this  portion  of  my  Comparative  Grammar.


Cape  Town,  2nd  April,  1869.


W.  H.  I.  Bleek.


B.  THE  CONCORD,


I.  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  CONCORD.

1.  GENERAL  REMARKS.

398.  As  we  indicated  already,  in  the  first  part  of  this
Grammar  (§§  6 — 9),  the  common  characteristic  of  the  so-
called  Pronominal  Languages  is  that  a concord  exists
between  nouns  and  certain  other  parts  of  speech,  which
are  thereby  referred  to  their  respective  nouns.  Through
this,  a distribution  of  the  nouns  into  classes  (or  genders)*
takes  place,  which  does  not  exhibit  a strict  analogy  with
any  natural  distinction,  except  in  some  of  the  most
advanced  of  these  languages, — particularly  in  English,  and
with  modifications  in  Danish.  But  in  all  the  more  primi-
tive types  of  the  Pronominal  Languages,  the  classes  of
nouns  do  not  correspond  exactly  to  the  distinctions  observed
in  nature,  though  they  may  have  a certain  reference  to
them.  English  he,  Danish  han,  refers  only  to  male  beings,
and  English  she,  Danish  hun,  similarly  to  the  opposite
sex ; whilst  every  noun  denoting  a being  in  which  such
distinctions  of  sex  are  not  discernible  is  referred  to  in
English  by  it,  and  in  Danish,  in  some  nouns,  by  den,  in
others  by  det.

* This  use  of  the  term  gender  has  been  objected  to.  In  explanation  I
beg  to  state  that  in  investigating  the  origin  of  the  grammatical  gender
of  nouns  it  wiU  be  found  that  the  further  we  go  back,  the  more  it  loses
the  apparent  identity  which  it  has  at  present  in  the  English  language,
with  the  distinctions  of  sex.  It  is,  therefore,  necessary  to  divest  one-self
of  the  idea  that  gender  must  imply  sex,  and  to  treat  the  genders  of  nouns
as  that  which  they  originally  were, — namely,  classes  ; thus  giving  to  the
term  gender  a wider  meaning,  having  no  necessary  reference  to  sex.

Bleef:,  S.  Afr,  Comp,  Gfamma7\  D


94


The  Concord.


399.  In  German,  however  (though  this  language  is
nearly  akin  to  both  English  and  Danish),  the  pronoun  er
is  not  only,  like  the  English  he  and  Danish  han,  referred
to  nouns  expressing  male  beings,  but  also  to  a great  num-
ber of  inanimate  things,  which  are  in  English  referred  to
by  it,  and  in  Danish  by  den  ; and  in  the  same  manner  the
German  sie  corresponds  frequently  in  the  extent  of  its
meaning  not  only  to  the  English  she,  Danish  hun,  but
also  to  the  English  it,  Danish  den.  It  follows  thence  that
the  German  es,  though  etymologically  identical  with  the
English  it,  is  by  no  means  so  extensively  used  as  the
latter  word  ; for  the  es  does  not  refer  by  any  means  to  all
nouns  expressing  inanimate  things,  but  only  to  a certain
portion  of  them, — mainly  to  those  to  which  also  the  Danish
det  refers.

400.  We  all  know  that  a comparison  of  the  kindred
languages, — nay,  a mere  retracing  of  the  English  to  its
Anglo-Saxon  parent — shows  that  the  German  has  in  this
case  preserved  the  more  original  conditions  of  the  lan-
guage, and  that  the  more  logical  arrangements  of  the
English  and  Danish  tongues  are  of  modern  origin.

401.  But  it  is  not  only  with  regard  to  the  more  logical
arrangement  of  the  classes  (or  genders)  of  nouns  that  the
English  differs  from  German  and  other  kindred  languages;
but  also  with  regard  to  the  more  limited  extent  of  the
concord  between  nouns  and  other  parts  of  speech.  Thus,
if  we  compare  the  English  sentences.  This  handsome  man
appears,  vie  love  him,  and  This  handsome  woman  appears,
we  love  her,  we  see  that  the  only  words  in  which  the  dis-
tinction of  the  nouns  into  classes  (or  genders)  is  visible,
are  the  end  words  him  and  her.  But  if  we  translate  the
same  sentence  into  German,  we  have  Dieser  schone  mann
erscheint,  wir  lieben  ihn,  and  Diese  schone  frau  erscheint,
wir  lieben  sie,  in  which  sentences  a concord  is  apparent,
not  only  in  the  last  words  {ihn  and  sis'),  but  also  in  the
first  ones,  dieser  and  diese.  And  if  we  go  back  to  Latin,
and  render  the  above  sentences  literally.  Hie  pulcher  vir


General  Remarks,


95


apparet,  amamus  eum,  and  Hcec  pulchra  mulier  apparet,
amamus  earn,  we  meet  with  various  forms  for  the  different
genders,  not  only  in  the  first  and  last  words  (Jiic  and  hose,
eum  and  earn),  but  also  in  the  second  word  {pulcher,
pulchra).

402.  On  the  whole,  a comparison  of  the  different  Aryan
languages,  and  a study  of  their  various  development,  tend
to  show  that,  in  general,  those  languages  in  which  the
division  of  the  nouns  into  classes  (or  genders)  is  rendered
visible  through  the  concord  of  the  greatest  number  of
other  parts  of  speech  with  the  nouns  to  which  they  refer,
may  prima  faci%  be  expected  to  exhibit  the  most  primi-
tive structural  features.  Further  we  may  consider  it  as
in  the  highest  degree  probable  that  the  less  the  classes
(or  genders)  of  nouns  in  a language  agree  with  natural
distinctions,  the  more  original  will  be  found  to  be  the  state
of  that  language.  In  both  these  regards  the  South  African
languages  claim  a prominent,  if  not  the  most  prominent,
position  among  all  the  languages  as  yet  known  to
us.  The  Ba-ntu  languages  particularly  extend  the
concord  with  the  noun  to  almost  all  other  parts  of  speech,
and  make  it  strongly  visible  in  the  various  forms  which
these  parts  assume,  when  referred  to  different  classes  (or
genders)  of  nouns.  The  number  of  classes  (or  genders)
into  which  the  nouns  are  here  distributed,  is  far  greater
than  in  any  other  known  language,  amounting  in  most  of
the  South  African  languages  to  more  than  a dozen  classes
(or  genders),  and  in  one,  at  least,  to  sixteen  (if  not
eighteen);  and  of  this  large  number  of  classes  (or  genders)
in  the  Ba-ntu  languages  only  two  agree  with  any  natural
distinctions,  being  restricted  to  nouns  indicating  personal
beings  (though  not,  however,  including  all  of  them),  one
class  (or  gender)  to  them  in  the  singular,  the  other  in  the
plural.

403.  If,  therefore,  it  should  be  ascertained  that  the  dis-
tribution of  the  nouns  into  classes  (or  genders),  as  we  find
it  in  our  (European  and  other  Aryan)  languages,  is  based


96


The  Concord.


upon  the  same  principle  as  in  the  South  African  languages,
— it  seems  highly  probable  that  the  cause  of  this
curious  structural  arrangement  will  be  more  easily  dis-
cernible in  the  latter  languages  (the  South  African)  than
in  the  former  (the  Aryan).

404.  Our  plan  is  now,  first  to  inquire  into  the  cause  of
the  distribution  of  the  nouns  into  classes  (or  genders),  in
the  Ba-ntu  languages,  as  well  as  in  the  Hottentot
language,  this  South  African  member  of  the  Sex-
denoting Family;  then,  to  show  how  this  affects  the
different  parts  of  speech  in  the  various  South  African
languages ; and,  lastly,  to  see  whether  the  distribution
of  the  nouns  into  classes  (or  genders)  in  the  other  Sex-
denoting languages  is  ascribable  to  the  same  cause  as  in
Hottentot.


2.  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  CONCORD  IN  THE  si-NTU
LANGUAGES.

405.  In  order  to  introduce  the  student  at  once  to  the
structural  peculiarities  of  the  Ba-ntu  languages,  I begin
with  sentences  in  Zulu,  which  are  similar  to  the  above-
given English  and  German  ones,  and  will  exhibit  the
changes  which  the  different  parts  of  speech  undergo  when
brought  into  reference  to  the  different  classes  (or  genders)
of  nouns.  Without  entering  into  any  further  explanation,
I will  merely  mention  that  the  part  of  the  noun  whereby
the  same  is  referred  to  a certain  class  (or  gender)  is  marked
here  by  being  printed  in  Antique  type,  while  those
portions  of  the  other  parts  of  speech  which  indicate  their
concord  with  the  noun  are  in  Roman  letters,  to  distinguish
them  from  the  Italics,  in  which  native  words  and  sentences
are  generally  given  here.

1.  U-mu-wfe  w-eiu  o-mn-Xle  w-ya-honakala,  si-m-tanda.

IMan  (or  woman)  ours  handsome  appears,  we  him  love.

Our  handsome  man  (or  woman)  appears,  we  love  him  (or  her).


Its  Nature  in  the  Bd-ntu  Languages.


97


Thus  also  w-vcL-fazi  woman,  u-ra-fundisi  teacher,  u-mu-ne
elder  brother,  and  almost  all  nouns  of  person  formed  with  the  derivative
prefix  mu-,  or  its  abbreviations.

2t  A-ba-wftt  \)-etu  a-ba-XZe  \>^-ya-honakala^  si-\>z.-tanda.

People  ours  handsome  appear,  we  them  love.

Our  handsome  people  appear,  we  love  them.

Thus  e.g".,  a-l)a-/azj  women,  &-\i9.-fundisi  teachers,  a-ba-ne
elder  brothers,  and  all  nouns  formed  with  the  prefix  ba-,  which  are
all  plurals  to  personal  nouns  in  mu-(l.)

3.  U-mu-te  w-etu  o-mu-XZe  \x-ya-bonakala^  si-wa-tanda.

Tree  ours  handsome  appears,  we  it  love.

Our  handsome  tree  appears,  we  love  it.

Thus  e.g,,  u-mu-zi  kraal,  u-mu-nwe  finger,  u-mu-x’fe  day,
M-vci-lilo  fire,  and  almost  all  impersonal  nouns  formed  with  the
derivative  prefix  mu-.

4t.  I-ml-ti  y-etu  e-mi-XZe  i-ya-bonakala,  si-y\-tanda.

Trees  ours  handsome  appear,  we  them  love.

Our  handsome  trees  appear,  we  love  them.

Thus  e.g.,  i-mi-21  kraals,  i-mi-nwe  fingers,  i-mi-XZa  days,  and
all  nouns  formed  with  the  derivative  prefix  ml-,  which  are  all
plurals  of  impersonal  nouns  in  mu-  (3.)

5.  I-li  -zwe  \-etu  e-li-XZe  W-ya-bonahala,  si-\i-tanda.

Country  ours  fine  appears,  we  it  love.

Our  fine  country  appears,  we  love  it.

Thus  also  i-li-2M;i  or  \-zwi  voice,  i-\i-tye  or  i-tye  stone,  \-zuhi
heaven,  i-gama  name,  &c.,  &c.

6.  A-ma-2tce  eta  a-ma-xfe  a,-ya-bonahala  si-wa.-tanda.

Counti’ies  om-s  fine  appear,  we  them  love.

Our  fine  countries  appear,  we  love  them.

Thus  also,  a-ma-2wi  words,  a-ma-<ye  stones,  a-msi-zulu  heavens,
a.-ma.-gama  names,  a-ma-kosi  kings  (sng.  i-n-kosi  9.  king),  a-ma-
doda  men  (sng.  i-n-doda  9.  man),  and  all  other  nouns  formed  with
the  derivative  prefix  ma-,  be  they  plurals  to  nouns  m the  singular  of
the  5tli  (11-)  class  (as  most  of  tliem  are),  or  of  the  9th  (n-)  class,  or
of  other  classes, — or  be  they  without  corresponding  singular,  as
a-ma-nzi  water,  and  similar  nouns.


98


The  Concord.


7.  I-sl  ~zwe  S-c<M  e-si-x/e  &i-ya-bonakala,  si-si-tanda.

Nation  oiu’s  fine  appeal’s,  we  it  love.

Oui-  fine  nation  appeal’s,  we  love  it.

Thus  also,  i-sI-?o  wild  animal,  isi-tya  a vessel  for  eating  or
drinking,  i-sl-ta  enemy,  and  all  other  nouns  formed  with  the
derivative  prefix  si-.

8.  I-zl  -zwe  z-etu  e-zi-^Ze  zi-ya-bonahala,  si-zi-tanda.

Nations  ours  fine  appear,  we  them  love.

Our  fine  nations- appear,  we  love  them.

Thus  also,  i-zl-Zo  wild  animals,  i-zi-tya  vessels  for  eating  or
di’inking,  i-zl-Za  enemies,  and  all  other  plui’als  of  nouns  formed  with
si-  in  the  singular.

9.  1-n-tombi  y-etu  e-n-XZe  i-ya-bonakala  si-yi-tanda.

Girl  ours  handsome  appears,  we  her  love.

Our  handsome  girl  appears,  we  love  her.

Thus  also,  i-n-Zo  thing,  i-m-rw  sheep,  i-n-kosi  king,  i-n-doda
man,  &c.,  &c.

10.  1-zin-tombi  z-etu  e-zin-XZe  zi-ya-boruxkala,  si-zi-tanda.

Gu’ls  ours  handsome  appear,  we  them  love.

Om’  handsome  girls  appear,  we  love  them.

Thus  also,  i-zln-Zo  things,  i-zlm-rw  sheep,  i-zln-Zi  sticks  (sng.
u-lu-ZZ  11.  stick),  and  many  other  plurals  to  nouns  of  the  9th  (n-)
and  11th  (lu.)  classes.

11.  U-lu  -ti  Iw-eZw  o-lu-XZe  Ivi-ya-bonakala,  si-l\i-ianda.

Stick  ours  handsome  appears,  we  it  love.

Our  handsome  stick  appears,  we  love  it.

Thus  also,  u-bambo  rib,  n-nwele  hair,  &c.,  &c.

The  12th  and  13th  classes  of  nouns  are  lost  in  the  languages  of  the
South-eastern  Branch  (of  the  South  Afirican  Division  of  the  Bl-ntu
languages),  to  which  the  Zulu  belongs ; but  they  are  met  with  in  the
languages  of  the  Middle  Branch ; and  in  Otyihebero,  the  most
southern  language  of  the  South-western  Genus,  the  12th  (tu-)  class
corresponds  as  pliu’al  to  the  11th  (ru-)  class,  and  thus  we  have  in
Otyiherero :


Its  Nature  in  the  Bd-utu  Languages.


99


11.  O-rVL-vio  \'u-etu  o-v-ua*  vn-a-munika,  ma-ta-\xi-^'uvere.

Knife  ours  fine  appears,  we  it  love.

Our  fine  knife  appears,  we  love  it.

Thus  also,  o-TVi-pati  rib,  o-m-hingo  long  kind  of  stick,  o-TVL-huaku
thick  ironwire,  o-rvi-horo  breast  (chest),  and  alt  other  nouns  foimed
with  the  derivative  prefix  ru-.

12.  O-ta-vio  tu-e<M  o-t-ua*  t\x-a-munika,  ma-tu-ta-S^'uvere,

Knives  ours  fine  appear,  we  them  love.

Our  fine  knives  appear,  we  love  them.

Thus  also,  o-tvL-pati  ribs,  o-tVL-hingo  long  sticks,  o-tix-huaka
bracelets  of  ironwii’e,  o-tu-^oro  breasts  (chests),  and  all  other  nouns
formed  with  the  derivative  prefix  tu-,  which  are  almost  all  plurals
of  nouns  formed  in  the  singular  with  the  prefix  ru-f.

13.  0-ka-ft'  k-eft<  o-ka-wa  \i-a-munika,  ma-tu-kQ-ti'uvere.

Stick  ours  fine  appears,  we  it  love.

Our  fine  stick  appears,  we  love  it.

Thus  also,  o-ka-pwAa  a little  animal,  o-\^A-rume~ndu  a little  man,
and  all  other  nouns  fonned  with  the  derivative  prefix  ka-,  most  of
which  are  in  Otyiherero  diminutives. J

14.  0-VL-ti  n-etu  o-u-wa  u-a-muKiAa,  ma-tu-u-^'uvere.

Sticks  ours  fine  appear,  we  them  love.

Our  fine  sticks  appear,  we  love  them.

Thus,  o-M-pu\a  little  animals,  o-vi-rume-ndu  little  men,  and  all
other  nouns  formed  with  the  derivative  prefix  u-,  some  of  which  are
in  Otyiherero  plurals  to  nouns  of  the  13th  (ka-)  class,  whilst  others

* Contracted  respectively  from  o-ru-«a  and  o-tu-aa.

f Mr.  Rath  enumerates  the  following  Otyiherero  nouns  formed  with
the  derivative  prefix  tu-,  which  have  no  singular  corresponding  to  them,
viz.  : O-tU-nrfa  elevation,  o-tn-ndu  mould,  o-tn-tumukua  death-rattle,
o-tU-pihua  field  (as  opposed  to  home),  o-tn-nde  a bone  in  the  nape  of
the  neck.

f Other  nouns  (not  diminutives)  formed  with  list-  in  Otyiherero  are
according  to  Mr.  Rath,  the  following  ; O-'iLin-numaere  evening  star,
o-ka-p«<e  hook,  0-li.^-hihuinini  a kind  of  partridge,  o-Ka-Aue  cat,
o-li'Sk.-ndukanamhaka  frog,  toad,  o-VM.-pendomuti  a bird,  o-li.Vi-rum.ata-
vahona  a snake,  o-fca-'^'eni  kind  of  antelope,  o-fca-tyayui  spider.


100


The  Concord.


are  clearly  of  the  singular  number,  e.g.  o-VL-iiikn  night  (pi.  o-ma-n-
tuliu  6.  nights),  o-u-te  bow  (pi.  o-raB.-u-ta  6.  bows),  o-\x-hona
kingdom,  o-VL-nene  greatness,  and  alt  similar  abstract  nouns  in  u-.

The  14th  class  is  also  found  in  Zulu,  but  the  nouns  included  in  it
do  not  clearly  imply  the  singular  or  the  plural  number ; therefore  this
class  does  not  correspond  here  to  any  other  (as  singular  or  plural),  but
includes  mostly  absti-act  nouns,  as  u-}3xx.-kulu  greatness,  M-bu-XZe
beauty,  u-bu-Si  evil,  u-bu-Aosi  chieftainship,  &c.

U-bu-swAzi  h-etu  o-bu-XZe  hvL-ya-hondkala,  si-hu-tanda.

Night  om’S  fine  appears,  we  it  love.

Our  fine  night  appears,  we  love  it.

15.  U-ku-te(fa  ku-e<w  o-ku-Aw/w  ku-ya-AowaAaZa,  a-ba-nZw

Loving  ours  gi'eat  appears,  men

ba-ku-Aona,  si-ka.-bonakalisa.

it  see,  we  it  appear  make.

Our  gi'eat  love  appears,  men  see  it,  we  make  it  appear.

Thus,  also,  Vi-'bxL-luvga  righteousness,  u-ku-XZa  food,  u-ku-sa
dawn,  morning,  u-ku-Aawya  light,  u-ku-Zyu  saying,  and  all  other
nouns  formed  with  ku-,  among  which  are  found  the  infinitives  of
all  verbs.

As  the  16th  pa-  class  (or  gender)  has  disappeared  in  Zulu  (§  430)
we  give  an  example  of  this  class  in  Ottiherero,  viz. :

16.  0-po  -na  p-eZa  o-po-pa-wa  pa-znawiAa  ma-tu-'pe-yuvere.

Place  ours  fine  appears,  we  it  love.  '

Our  fine  place  appears,  we  love  it.

406.  A look  at  the  above  Zulu  sentences  will  show  us
that  in  the  examples  which  are  given  of  the  11th  (lu-)
and  15th  (ku-)  classes  (or  genders),  the  concord  between
the  noun  and  the  other  parts  of  speech  consists  in  the  full
repetition  of  a part  of  the  noun  which  we  call  its  derivative
prefix.*  In  the  2nd  (ba-),  5th  (li-),  Vth  (si-),  8th  (zi-),
and  14th  (bu-)  classes  (or  genders),  the  same  rule  holds

* We  do  not  take  here  into  eonsideration  the  initial  vowels  of  the
prefixes  of  the  nouns,  and  of  the  adjectives,  between  which  and  the  pre-
fixes there  is  an  evident  agreement,  as  this  will  be  further  elucidated  in
the  course  of  our  researches.  (§.  461—466.)


101


Its  Nature  in  the  Bd-ntu  Languages.

good,  with  the  exception  that  the  vowels  of  the  syllables
indicating  the  concord  are  elided  before  other  vowels.
Also  in  the  other  classes  (or  genders)  the  agreement
between  the  forms  of  the  nouns  and  of  the  other  parts
of  speech  is  such  as  to  favour  the  idea  that  there  also,
originally,  a mere  repetition  of  some  part  of  the  noun
took  place,  and  that  it  is  only  through  wear  and  tear
that  the  forms  have  assumed  a somewhat  reduced  shape,
which,  though  indicating  a correspondence,  no  longer
amounts  to  an  actual  repetition  of  some  part  of  the  noun.

A comparison  of  all  the  various  forms  in  the  different
dialects  of  this  family  of  languages  convinces  us  of  the
truth  of  this  presumption ; and  as  it  is  Important  to  have
this  point  at  once  cleared  up,  we  will  here  give  at  least
one  proof  by  tracing  some  of  those  forms  of  the  posses-
sive adjective  “ our,”  which  in  Zulu  seemed  to  deviate
from  this  rule  of  actual  bodily  repetition.

407.  Thus  in  the  3rd  (mu-)  class  (or  gendei*)  instead
of  the  Zulu  M-'m.-lenze  yf-etu  n-o-lOdM-nwe  w-ami,

leg  om'3  and  finger  mine

the  Isubu  has  mo-indi  mo-su  na  niu-«e  mo-am.

The  corresponding  plurals  of  the  4th  (mi-)  class
are  in  Zulu  i-lOlidenze  j-etu  n-e-TOdUnwe  y-ami,
legs  ours  and  fingers  mine

but  in  Isubu  me.-indi  mi~asu  na  mi-ne  mi-am.

And  though  in  the  3rd  (mu-)  class  (or  gender)  the
Kongo  words  THiU-tima  etii  correspond  exactly  to  the
heart  ours

Isubu  words  XQ.c-lema  mo-sw,  yet  in  the  plural  we  find  that
the  Kongo  translates  with  TQ.^-tima  mx-etu  what  again  the

hearts  ours

Isubu  would  express  by  M\.i-lema  mi-asw.  The  Otyihe-  "
rero  has  in  this  case  preserved  an  intermediate  stage  in
o-ml-tima  Vi-etu  (our  hearts).

408.  Thus  in  the  case  of  the  3rd  (mu-)  and  4th  (ml-)
classes  (or  genders),  the  Isubu  forms  (and  in  the  latter
class  those  of  the  old  Kongo  language  also,)  prove  that

Bhfk,  S.  Afr,  Vomp.  Grnininnr.  ^


102


The  Concord,


the  Zulu  forms  yf-etu  3.  and  j-etu  4.  are  here  respectively-
derived  from  an  original  mu-etu  3.  and  mi-etu  4.  This
tends  to  make  us  believe  that  -wherever  in  the  3rd  class
(or  gender)  we  find  now  a w and  in  the  4th  a 5^,  as  a sign
of  class,  the  w is  derived  from  an  original  mu,  and  the  y
from  an  original  mi.

409.  Similarly  in  the  6th  (ma-)  class  (or  gender),  the
Zulu  a-ma-nzi  etu  is  translated  literally  in

water  ours

Isubu  vcL'di-diba  ma-«M ; and  with  this  fuller  form  ma-sw
there  agree  also  the  corresponding  forms  of  this  posses-
sive adjective  in  the  6th  (ma-)  class  (or  gender),  in
Kongo  m-etu  (our),  and  in  Mpongwe  ma-73/0.

410.  As  we  have  shown  how  the  Zulu  etu  of  the  6th
(ma-)  class  (or  gender)  is  derived  from  a former  maetu,
— in  the  same  manner  all  the  other  cases  of  concord
between  the  nouns  and  other  parts  of  speech  (with  a few
particular  exceptions  which  will  afterwards  be  considered)
^an  be  proved  to  have  arisen  from  an  actual  identity  of
the  original  forms  of  the  derivative  prefixes  of  the  nouns
with  those  portions  of  the  other  parts  of  speech  which
indicate  the  concord,  or  are,  as  we  would  call  them,  signs
of  the  gender.  The  question  is  now,  how  this  identity
has  arisen,  and,  consequently,  what  is  the  real  cause  of
this  peculiar  division  of  the  nouns  into  classes,  or  genders.

411.  The  most  obvious  explanation  appears  to  be  to
assume  that  those  portions  which  indicate  the  concord  are
pronouns,  and  that  they  were  prefixed  to  the  nouns  in  a
similar  manner  as,  for  example,  he  and  she  are  to  he-bear
and  she-goat.  Now,  where  these  marks  of  concord,  indi-
cative of  class  (or  gender),  are  found  in  other  parts  of
speech,  as  referring  these  to  nouns,  it  is  true  that  they
must  be  admitted  and  are  to  be  considered  as  true  pro-
nouns,— i.e.,  as  mere  representatives  of  the  nouns  to  which
they  respectively  refer.  But  if  we  assumed  that  the
derivative  prefixes  of  nouns  were  originally  pronouns,
this  would  not  explain  how  there  came  to  be  such  a


103


Its  Nature  in  the  Bd-ntu  Languages.

variety  of  different  classes  (or  genders)  of  pronouns,  or
what  was  the  principle  on  which  they  were  respectively
used  for  the  formation,  or  for  the  classification,  of  the
nouns.  It  has,  indeed,  been  suggested  by  Sir  George
Grey  that  they  were  chosen  mainly  for  euphony’s  sake, —
i.e.,  there  being  a variety  of  prefixes  which  could  be  used
with  nouns,  those  were  selected  which  were  most  in
harmony  as  to  sound  with  the  remaining  part  of  the
noun.  This  theory  is  probably  true  in  a certain  restricted
sense, — ie.,  that  where  there  were  two  or  more  forms  of
nouns  with  different  prefixes  which  expressed  very  nearly
the  same  meaning,  that  form  would  probably  be  generally
retained  which  was  the  most  euphonious,  or  at  least  the
most  easily  pronounced.

412.  But  such  an  explanation  does  not,  however,  ex-

clude the  fact  that  every  one  of  these  different  forms  of
the  nouns  conveyed  originally  a meaning  of  its  own,  and
that  each  prefix  possessed  a distinct  power.  That  this  is
really  the  case  is  clearly  perceived  even  by  a cursory
glance  at  a variety  of  nouns  in  the  Ba-ntu  languages  be-
longing to  different  classes,  though  formed  from  the  same
stems.  For  example,  in  Zulu  we  have  the  noun  u-mu-
ntu  (human  being,  person,)  belonging  to  the  1st  (mu-)
class  (or  gender),  and  its  plural  a-ba-n^w  (people)  to  the
2nd  (ba-)  class,  and  from  the  same  stem  (human

race,  mankind,)  of  the  7th  (si-)  class,  u-bu-n^w  (human
nature)  of  the  14th  (bu-)  class,  besides  which  the  Kafir
language  has  u-lu-n^z<*  of  the  11th  (lu-)  class,  which  here
means  “ human  race,  human  kind,”  whilst  i-si-ra/w  7.  in
Kafir,  according  to  Appleyard,  indicates  “ human  species.”

413.  In  Se-s«^o,  the  name  of  the  language  itself  belongs
to  the  7th  (se-)  class  (or  gender),  whilst  the  people  who
speak  it  are  called  by  a noun  of  the  2nd  (ba-)  class  (or
gender)  Ba-szi/o,  and  one  of  them  is  a M-C-suto,  which  is

* In  Zulu  this  word  lias  the  meaning  of  “outer  covering  of  bowels,”
but  a meaning  similar  to  the  Kafir  one  has  also,  though  rarely,  been
observed.  (Bishop  of  Natal’s  Grammar  p.  16,  Dictionary  p.  354.)


104


The  Concord.


a noun  of  the  1st  (mo-)  class.  The  name  of  their  country
is  "Le-suto,  a noun  of  the  5th  (le-)  class.  Similarly,  a Mo-
tshuana  (1st  class)  is  one  of  the  nation  of  the  "Qe-tshudna
or  'B^-tshudna  (2nd  class),  who  speak  Se-tshudna  (7th
class)*  ; and  an  0-mu-Acrero  1 . is  one  of  the  O-Yd^-herero,
2.  (Damaras),  who  speak  O-tyi-herero  7.,  i.e.,  in  Dama-
ra  fashion,  t

414.  A chief  is  called  in  Kafir  i-n-Aosi  9.,  and  several
a-ma-Aos^  6.,  and  chieftainship  is  u-bU-Aosi  14.  In
Otyiherero,  a chief  is  o-VOXL-hona  1.,  chiefs  are  o-Ydi-hona
2.,  and  chieftainship  o-M-hona  14.

415.  These  specimens  may  suflSce  for  the  present  to
exemplify  the  fact  that  the  derivative  prefixes  of  the
nouns  in  the  Bd-ntu  languages  have  a similar  power  and
meaning,  as  e.g.,  the  English  derivative  suffixes  -dom,
-ship,  -ness,  -ar,  -hood,  &c.  Now,  not  even  by  the
most  strenuous  upholders  of  the  so-called  Pronominal
Theory  J have  these  English  derivative  suffixes  been
deduced  from  pronouns ; and  there  is  no  doubt  that
originally  the  nouns  formed  with  these  suffixes  were
compound  nouns,  and  that  these  syllables  (-dom,-  ship,
-ness,  &c.)  had  almost  all  at  an  earlier  period  of  the
language  the  value  and  meaning  of  nouns,  and  were  used
separately  as  such.

416.  It  is,  therefore,  the  most  natural  assumption,  that
the  derivative  prefixes  of  the  nouns  in  the  B^-ntu  lan-
guages also,  had  originally  a separate  value  and  meaning,
and  that  nouns  formed  with  them  were  compounded,  and


* Vide  the  note  on  pp.  109—112,

t That  0-tyi-herer6  does  not  mean  merely  the  Damara  Language,  is
clear  from  such  sentences  as  o-n-dyuo  y-a-tungua  0-tyi-herer6,  the  house
is  built  in  Damara  fashion. — (J.  Rath).

X I here  call  by  the  name  of  Pronominal  Theory  a mania  by  which
some  of  the  most  eminent  philologists  were  once  seized,  of  deriving  all
those  grammatical  elements  of  the  language  of  which  the  explanation
was  not  obvious,  from  so-called  pronouns,  really,  however,  from  demon-
fitrative  particles.


105


Its  Nature  in  the  Bd^-niu  Languages.

that  when  the  parts  to  he  determined*  lost  their  meaning
as  separate  words,  {i.e.,  became  obsolete,)  these  nouns,
originally  compound,  became  derivatives.

417.  Now,  if  the  derivative  particles  of  the  nouns  in
the  Ba-ntu  languages  were  still  merely  parts  of  compound
nouns,  and  could  still  be  used  separately,  there  would  be
nothing  remarkable  in  their  use  as  representatives  of  the
nouns  which  are  compounded  with  them.  This  use  is
found  in  all  languages.  In  English,  for  example,  in  speak-
ing of  such  compound  nouns  as  spyglass,  looMngglass,  wine-
glass, &c.,  we  may  use  the  simple  nouns  glass  for  each  of
them,  though  in  a slightly  different  meaning  from  its
separate  and  independent  use.  Supposing,  now,  that  this
word  glass  had  lost  its  separate  and  independent  meaning,
yet  retained  its  power  of  representing  those  compound
nouns,  of  which  it  constitutes  the  principal  nominal
element,  it  would  have  become  a pronominal  element,  or
a particle  to  be  used  in  order  to  refer  other  parts  of
speech  to  the  noun  which  it  at  the  time  represented.
Now,  in  the  Ba-ntu  languages  the  derivative  prefixes  of
the  nouns  have  done  this ; they  have  lost  their  separate
value  as  nouns,  but  retained  the  power  of  being  used  as
representatives  of  the  nouns  of  which  they  form  a part.

418.  Or,  to  illustrate  the  case  by  another  analogy.
Let  us  suppose  that  in  English,  for  example,  the  syllable
dom  could  still  be  used  by  itself  as  representative  of  such
words  as  are  compounded  with  it,  and  we  could,  therefore,
speak  of  the  fine  dom  meaning  the  fine  kingdom  or  the  fine
dukedom,  or  any  other  dom.  In  olden  times,  of  course,
when  dom  (related  to  doom,)  was  used  as  an  indepen-
dent noun,  it  could  represent  a noun  of  which  it  formed  a

* In  order  not  to  be  obscure,  I should  perhaps  remind  the  general
reader  that  in  compound  words  one  part  is  called  the  determining,  i.e,,
that  which  points  out  or  determines  more  exactly  the  Talue  of  the  other,
which  latter  is  called  the  part  to  be  determined.  For  example,  in  the  com-
pound words  “ horse-shoe,”  “ horse-flesh,”  “ rail-way,”  “ tram-way,”  &c.,
&c.,  horse,  rail,  and  tram,  are  the  determining  elements,  showing  what
kind  of  shoe,  flesh,  or  loay,  is  meant.


106


The  Concord.


component  part  in  the  same  manner,  as,  for  example,  the
word  empire  can  now  stand  for  the  fuller  king's  empire.
But  when  it  lost  its  independent  position,  it  lost  with  it
the  representative  power  of  standing  instead  of  the  nouns,
of  which  it  formed  a component  part.  For,  in  the  more
advanced  stages  of  morphological  development,  even  in
Pronominal  Languages,  it  generally  seems  that  the  repre-
sentative power  of  a noun  is  lost  with  its  (the  noun’s)
independent  use.  Thus  we  can  no  longer  use  the  syllable
-ship  (German  -schaft,  which  belongs  originally  to  the
same  root  as  shape)  for  such  nouns  ending  with  it  as,  for
exomplQ, governorship,  clerkship,  stewardship,  &c.* ; though
we  can,  on  the  other  hand,  indicate  a governor  s o^ce  by
the  use  of  the  latter  noun  office,  because  this  has  continued
to  be  used  as  an  independent  noun,  and  has,  when  alone,
a meaning  of  its  own,  which  includes  that  of  the  more
specified  term ; and  for  the  same  reason  the  independent
noun  ship  (German  schiff ) can  still  be  used  in  English  as
representative  of  nouns  compounded  with  it, — as,  steam-
ship, flagship,  &c. ; for  these  nouns  do  not  merely  end  with
ship,  but  indicate  ships.  If,  however,  the  noun  ship  had
lost  its  independent  meaning,  the  words  compounded  with
it  could  no  longer  be  referred  to  by  this  simple  syllable,
though  they  might  continue  to  exist  as  derived  nouns.

419.  When  the  formation  of  the  pronominal  elements,
(by  which  the  concord  of  the  noun  with  other  parts  of
speech  was  effected,)  first  took  place  in  the  so-called
Pronominal  Languages, — syllables,  after  losing  their  inde-
pendent value  as  nouns,  were  retained  for  the  purpose
of  representing  those  nouns,  of  which  they  formed  prin-
cipal parts.  Thus  the  Zulu  sentence  “ u-bu-Aosz  \>-etu

* It  is  true  that  by  a satirical  licence,  such  a word  as  ology  is  made  to
represent  nouns  ending  with  this  termination.  But  this  is  an  exception
which  rather  tends  to  prove  the  rule  that  such  formations  (which  appear,
however,  to  differ  entirely  in  their  origin  from  that  of  the  pronouns  in
the  South  African  languages,)  cannot  be  seriously  employed  at  present  in
our  languages.


Its  Nature  in  the  Ba-ntu  Languages.  107

o-Lu-Am/m  hn-ya-bonakala,  si-hu-tanda,^'  would  literally  be
in  English  “ the  Am^-dom,  our  dom,  which  dom  is  the
great  dom,  the  dom  appears,  we  love  the  dom,” — a manner
of  speaking  which  sounds,  of  course,  absurd  in  English;
and  so  does  also  its  most  literal  German  translation  “ das
kbnig-fhXiVD,  unser  thum,  welches  thum  ist  ein  grosses
thum,  das  thum  erscheint,  wir  Helen  das  thum.”  But  it
becomes  at  least  intelligible,  if,  instead  of  the  derived
noun  kbnig-thum  (kingdom),  we  use  the  compound  noun
hbnig-reich  (king’s  empire),  and  say : “ das  Aowzy-reich,
unser  reich,  welches  reich  ist  ein  grosses  reich,  das  reich
erscheint,  wir  Helen  das  reich  ;”  i,e.  “ the  king's  empire,
our  empire,  which  empire  is  the  great  empire,  the  empire
appears,  we  love  the  empire.”  In  like  manner,  though  we
cannot  say  “ the  steam-QY,  our  er,  which  er  is  a great  er,
the  er  appears,  we  love  the  er,”  because  the  syllable  er  is
here  merely  a derivative  suffix  which  has  no  meaning  of
its  own ; — if  we  use  instead  of  the  derived  word  steamer
the  compound  one  steamship,  the  last  syllable  of  this  word
may  be  employed  to  represent  the  whole,  and  thus  we
might  say : “ the  5?eam-sllip)  our  ship,  which  ship  is  a
great  ship,  the  ship  appears,  we  love  the  ship.”  But  in
words  where  the  syllable  ship  is  a derivative  suffix,  it  is
incapacitated  from  being  used  by  itself  for  the  purpose  of
representing  the  whole  compound  noun.  Thus  it  would
be  absurd  to  say,  “ the  friend-^’hi^,  our  ship,  which  ship  is
a great  ship,  the  ship  appears,  we  love  the  ship.”  The  Zulu
construction  is,  as  far  as  regards  the  quality  of  the  noun,
(which  is  a derived  one  like  kingdom,  kbnigthum,  steamer,
friendship,  &c.,  not  a compound  one  as  hbnigreich,  steam-
ship, &c.),  similar  to  that  of  those  sentences  which  are  now
impossible  to  us ; but  also  like  that  of  the  other  sentences
(at  least  allowable,)  in  the  power  of  representing  the  whole
of  a composite  noun  by  means  of  its  principal  element.

420.  There  is  an  appearance  of  redundancy  in  this
frequent  repetition  of  the  representative  elements  of  the
noun,  when  they  are  thus  used  with  all  parts  of  speech.


108


The  Concord.


which  have  a reference  to  it.  But  this  will  not  much
astonish  those  who  have  studied  the  literature  of  primitive
races,  and  know  the  construction  of  their  compositions

“ With  their  frequent  repetitions,

And  their  wild  reverberations.”

The  less  people  as  yet  express  slight  changes  in  their
meaning  by  the  mere  position  of  words,  by  internal
changes,  or  slight  variations  of  pronunciation, — the  more
necessity  there  is  for  actual  verbal  expression,  and  repe-
tition of  that  which  is  to  be  referred  to.  Besides,  it
must  be  remembered  that  these  repetitions  of  parts  of
the  noun  take  the  place  of  pronominal  elements,  and  a
careful  analysis  of  most  of  the  highly  civilized  languages
will  show  that  in  the  grammatical  forms  indicating  the
concord,  pronouns  were  originally  used,  which  have  now
generally  disappeared,  though  their  Influence  continues  to
be  felt.  Still  the  Ba-ntu  languages  far  exceed  in  cumber-
some repetition  even  the  lowest  known  types  of  Sex-
denoting languages.*

* Dr.  Livikgstone  in  his  “Analysis,”  page  9,  says  : “The  chief  use
in  the  extraordinary  repetition  of  the  signs  of  nouns  which  occur  in  pure
Setshuana,  may  be  generally  stated  to  be  to  give  precision  to  the
sentence.  They  impart  energy  and  perspicuity  to  each  member  of  a
proposition^  and  prevent  the  possibility  of  a mistake  as  to  the  antecedent ,
They  are  the  means  by  which  with  a single  syllable  or  letter  a recurrent
allusion  to  the  subject  spoken  of  is  made,  which  cannot  be  accomplished
by  our  lawyers  without  the  clumsy  circumlocution  of  ‘ said  defendant,’

‘ said  subject  matter,’  &c.,  &c.  They  are,  moreover,  used  as  the  articles
are  in  Greek,  but  invariably  follow,  never  precede  the  noun.”  [In
Kafir  and  some  other  Ba-ntu  languages,  they  also  precede  the  noun. —
W.  H.  I.  B.]  “ They  are  also  demonstrative  pronouns,  &c.,  &c.,  as  we
shall  hereafter  show.  ”

In  a letter  from  Zanzibar,  dated  March,  2nd,  1866,  he  further  remarks:
“ I cannot  quite  sympathize  with  you  when  you  speak  of  that  use  as
‘ cumbersome  repetition.’  The  absence  of  it,  in  the  mouths  of  halfcastes,
speaking  an  impure  form  of  Setshuana,  used  to  sound  in  my  ears
excessively  harsh.  And  the  fact  of  the  sign  being  the  easily  recognizable
initial  sound  of  the  noun,  prevented  any  of  that  doubt  which  always
clings  to  those  abominations  of  the  English  language,  ‘former’  and
‘ latter  ’.  See  how  much  difficulty  you  had  to  express  yourself  in
Par.  40.S.  ”


Its  Nature  m the  Bd-ntu  Languages.  109

MO-TSHUANA,  BE-TSIIUANA,  SE-TSHUANA.

[Note  to  § 413,]

With  reference  to  the  etymology  of  these  words,  the  Kev.  R.  Moffat
stated  that  the  words  Sc-tshuana  7.,  Hc-tshuana  2.,  and  Wto-tshuana
1.,  were  not  derived,  as  generally  believed  (vide  “ Livingstone’s  Travels,”
p.  200)  from  the  verb  tshuana  (be  like  each  other,  Kafir  fund),  but  from
the  adjective-stem  tshuana  (Kafir  -mXlotshana)  a little  white,  or  inclining
to  white,  light-coloured,  (i.e.,  not  black,  probably  in  opposition  to  the  more
dark-coloured  tribes  of  the  North,)  a diminutive  form  from  tshueu
(Kafir  -mXlope,  Ki-kamba  -eu,  Mpongwe  -pupu)  white.  (Sir  G.  Grey’s
Library,  Vol.  I.  Part  I.  p.  184.)

This  derivation  was,  however,  rejected  by  the  late  Rev.  J.  Fredoux,
who  said  in  a letter  to  the  author  : “ 9IO-tshudna  1.  is  not  the  diminutive
form  from  tshueu  9.  (white),  but  from  -ntshu  (black),  and  means,
therefore,  not  ‘ inclining  to  white,  ’ but  ‘ inclining  to  black,  ’ as  the  colour
of  the  Betshuana.  When  an  individual  of  that  nation  is  rather  whitish,
he  is  sometimes  said  to  be  mo-shudna  (pronounced  mo-sheuana)  1.,  and
this  is  the  dimmutive  form  from  tshueu  9.  (mo-shueu  1.),  meaning
‘ inclining  to  white.’  ”

Further,  Dr.  D.  Livingstone,  in  a letter  dated  “ Tette,  22nd  February,
1859,”  made  the  following  remarks  on  this  subject:  “Mr.  Moffat’s
idea,”  he  says,  “ is  probably  the  right  one,  but  as  a philologist  you
may  like  to  hear  why  some  minds  prefer  the  meaning  of  ‘ likeness  or
equality.’

“ When  sex  is  spoken  of  in  connection  with  colour,  the  diminutive
form  is  invariably  applied  (the  diminutive  being  referred  to  the  colour,
not  size).  Thus  kxomu  e tsheu  9.  a white  ox,  i.c.,  altogether  white  ;
kxomu  e tshuana  9.  a white  cow,  not  a little,  but  entirely  ; kxomu  e
e-ntshu  9.  a black  ox  ; kxomu  e tshuana  9.  black  cow  ; kxomu  e kxueba  9.
a speckled  ox  j kxomu  e kxuebana  9.  a speckled  cow.  The  idea  of  little-
ness seems  to  go  to  denote  sex  by  the  lesser  size  of  the  females,  the  males
being  denoted  by  tona  9.,  in  the  same  way.

“ This  point  is  not  adverted  to  in  the  “ Analysis,”  but  it  is  so
distinctly  adhered  to  in  the  language  that  an  additional  syllable  is  intro-
duced to  express  a little  of  any  colour.  Thus  Mo-sheu  1.  a white  man  ;
Mo-sheunyana  1.  a little  white  man  ; Mo-ntshu  1.  a black  one ; Mo-
ri tsAu/iyun  a 1.  a little  black  one.  One  of  Sebituane’s  daughters  is  called
Muntshunyana  from  her  colour,  being  as  light  as  an  Arab  woman’s,  i.e.,
only  a little  black.

“ Were  it  not  for  the  cow  difficulty  the  term  TtH-tshudna  2.  would  be
better  translated  ‘ a little  black,’  instead  of  ‘ a little  white.’  They  were  a
little  blacker  than  the  Bushmen  and  Hottentots.  They  had  intercourse
with  them,  but  Ibej'  Imd  none  with  the  people  beyond  the  Desert.  To

Q


S.  Afr.  C>’>np.  (Grammar.


110


The  Concord.


say  they  are  a little  whiter  than  these  people  is  to  reason  from  onr  own
knowledge  of  what  is  only  partially  the  case.  The  ~Rsi-t6ka  2.,  for
instance,  the  Ba-«yai  2.,  and  other  tribes  are  as  light  as  they  are.”

Then,  Dr.  Livingstone  quotes  one  sentence,  apparently  in  support  of
his  first  etymology.  “ A man  was  checked  by  Setshele  for  telling  him
some  heathen  story.  He  did  not  wish  to  hear  it.  ‘ You  are  under  the
Southern  people,’  said  the  man,  in  a pet.  * Re  Batshuana’  [We  are
Betshuana,  or  alike  ?],  replied  Setshele,  ‘I  follow  what  I found  in  the
book  ; I am  not  inferior  or  under  them.’  If  he  had  been  applying  a
feminine  term  to  himself,  the  assertion  of  equality  would  have  been
meaningless.”

Lastly  Mr.  Tredoux  in  a subsequent  letter,  dated  Motito,  Pebruary
16th,  1866,  wrote  as  follows  :

“ As  you  have  noticed  in  a note  the  various  derivations  given  of  the
word  Be-teAuana,  I shall  add  here,  on  that  account,  the  following
remarks  which  may  be  of  interest  to  you.

“ I.  Objections  which  may  be  made  to  what  is  said  in  favour  of  the
common  derivation  (from  xO  tshuana  15.  to  be  alike).

“ 1°.  Dr.  Livingstone  says  (in  his  book)  that  the  Betshuana  use  that
name  as  meaning  Equals.  I have  never  observed  that,  and  I believe  no
Motshuana  will  say  that  such  is  the  meaning  of  the  word.  In  fact,  Dr.  L.
himself  admits  nearly  as  much  by  saying  a little  farther,  that  the
Betshuana  cannot  explain  the  derivation  of  their  name,  which  would  be
the  simplest  thing  in  the  world,  if  they  attached  to  it  the  meaning
expressed  by  a verb  which  they  use  continually.  Thus  they  would  say
at  once  Re  Betshuana  \one  rea  tshuana  (We  are  Betshuana,  because  we
are  like  each  other),  or  Betshuana  hi  re  ba  ba  tshuanah  (Betshuana
that  is  to  say  those  who  are  like  each  other).

“ 2°.  Dr.  Livingstone  says  in  support  of  his  derivation  that  the
Betshuana  call  themselves  by  that  name  exactly  in  the  same  sense  as
Irishmen,  &c.,  would  say,  ‘We  are  Britons  or  Englishmen.’  Now  this
would  favour  his  derivation  only  if  it  eould  be  shown  that  both  the  words
Britons  and  Englishmen  also  mean  Equals,  since  these  are  used  exactly
in  the  same  sense  as  Betshuana  is  used.  If  Britons  and  Englishmen  do
not  mean  Equals,  what  he  says  here  is  rather  against  him.

“ 3®.  But  again  x©  tshuana  15.  does  not  mean  properly  to  be  equals,  but
to  be  alike.  Such  being  the  case,  the  noun  would  mean  Those  who  are
alike  or  those  who  are  like  each  other,  rather  than  ‘ Equals.’  Now  it  is
difiScult  to  understand  how  a nation  could  call  itself  by  such  a name,
except  its  members  distinguished  themselves  among  other  peoples  by
being  so  very  much  like  each  other  in  colour  and  forms,  which  is  not  the
assumption.

“ 4°.  I may  add,  without  giving  too  much  importance  to  this,  that
according  to  that  derivation,  ’Sa.-tshuana  2.  would  be  properly  a phrase
rather  than  a noun,  and  that  the  sing,  would  be  Q-a-tshuana  1.  rather
than  ^o-tshuana  1.


Etymology  of  “ Betshudna."


Ill


" 5®.  In  the  letter  you  quote,  Setshele  seems  to  be  made  to  apply  the
name  Batshuana  not  only  to  himself  and  his  people,  but  even  to  the
Whites.  According  to  that,  that  word  ought  not  to  be  considered  any
more  as  a proper  name  and  as  the  particular  name  of  the  Betshuana.  It
would  be  a common  word  of  the  language.  But  there  must  be  some
mistake  here,  perhaps  on  my  part.  Setshele  cannot  have  said,  ‘ I and
the  Southern  people  are  Betshuana,’  except  by  ‘ Southern  people  ’ he
meant  Southern  Betshuana,  such  as  the  BaXlapi.

“ My  opinion  is  that  whatever  may  be  the  root  of  the  name,  it  is  now
used  merely  as  a name,  without  any  other  meaning  being  attached  to  it  ;
and  therefore,  even  if  it  was  properly  and  originally  a feminine,  Setshele
might  with  propriety  apply  it  to  himself.

“ II.  What  may  be  said  in  favour  of  the  derivation  which  was  proposed
by  me  (from  ntsho  black).

“1®.  The  word  motshuana  1.  means:  (1)  A blackish  person,  y/ithoni,
reference  to  sex  or  size  ; (2)  a Motshuana,  a person  of  the  Betshuana
nation.  Now  it  seems  to  be  extremely  natural  to  derive  the  second
meaning  from  the  first,  without  seeking  for  another  etymology,  when  the
word  is  taken  in  the  second  sense, — just  as  when  we  find  the  surname
Brown  in  English,  we  think  it  is  quite  unnecessary  to  hunt  for  another
root,  when  we  have  the  adjective  brown.

“ 2®.  W e seem  to  be  still  more  pressed  to  agree  to  the  above  explanation
of  the  name  Motshuana,  when  we  consider  that  that  word,  when  used  in
the  first  sense,  denotes  precisely  the  typical  colour  of  the  Betshuana.
If  you  take  a native  who  is  rather  dark-coloured  for  a Motshuana  and
ask  what  is  his  colour,  the  answer  will  be  : montsho  1.  (black)  ; if  you
take  one  who  is  somewhat  light-coloured,  the  answer  will  be;  moshueu
or  moshouana  (pronounced  also  moshuaana)  ; if  you  take  one  who  is  of
the  usual  colour,  the  answer  will  be  : motshuana.  This  may  be  tried  by
any  one  ; the  result  is  always  the  same.

“ 3®.  If  it  be  asked  why  that  explanation  of  the  name  of  the  Betshuana
was  not  thought  of  from  the  first,  and  generally  received,  my  answer
will  be  : For  the  very  simple  and  sufficient  reason  that  the  first  meaning
of  the  word  motshuana  had  been  noticed  by  few,  if  by  any  Europeans.
You  see  from  Livmgstone’s  remarks  that  when  he  wrote  his  letter  to  you,
he  was  not  aware  of  that  sense.  Hence  his  ‘ cow  difficulty.’  That  sense,
however,  is  known  to  all  the  Betshuana,  and  there  is  no  possibility  of
denying  its  existence,  when  one  has  questioned  the  natives  about  it.  (See
the  late  Bob.  Moffat’s  work  on  Phonology,  page  15.)

“ You  will  perhaps  be  surprised,  after  all  1 have  said  above,  to  hear
me  add  that,  after  all,  I do  not  feel  absolutely  sure  that  my  explanation
of  the  name  Betshuana  was  the  right  one,  and  that  I am  now  some-
what inclined  to  confess  my  ignorance  on  that  point,  as  the  Betshuana
themselves  do.

“ The  word  motshuana  “ a blackish  person”  is  not  pronounced  exactly
like  niotshuana,  “ a Mochuana.”  Had  the  two  words  had  the  same  pro-
nunciation, very  likely  the  natives  themselves  might  give  to  their  name


112


The  Concord.


the  above-mentioned  derivation,  which  they  do  not  do.  According  to
the  orthography  followed  in  my  “ Sketch  of  Grammar,”  the  first  word
is  pronounced  mochmna  ( mo-tshuana),  whilst  the  other  appears  to  be
pronounced  Mocuana  ( Mo-tsK  uana.)  There  may  be  besides  some  difference
in  the  pronunciation  of  the  first  a.  This,  however,  goes  about  as  much
against  the  derivation  from  xO-tshuana  as  against  that  from  -ntsho.  I
confess  this  difference  of  pronunciation  seems  to  me  to  be  a great
difficulty.  To  get  over  it,  we  would  have  to  say  that,  in  the  course  of  time,
the  proper  name  was  slightly  altered,  and  this  is  not  an  impossibility.

“ But  has  that  name  been  in  use  for  many  generations  ? This  may
perhaps  be  doubted.  It  appears  to  be  pretty  certain  that  the  word
Betshuana  originated  in  the  South  ; that  not  very  long  ago,  say  40  or  50
years  ago,  it  was  unknown  among  the  Bahurutse,  the  Bahuaketsi,  and  the

, C

other  northern  tribes  ; and  that  these  first  heard  it  from  the  BaXlapis,
who  applied  it  to  them  (to  the  northern  tribes),  and  not  to  themselves.
This  is  what  I am  assured  of  by  the  natives,  for  instance  by  an  old
Mohurutse  and  an  old  Mohuaketsi,  who  live  here.  At  the  beginning  of
the  present  century,  however,  travellers  found  the  word  in  existence  at

C

Lithakoh  and  Kuruinan,  and,  it  would  seem,  applied  it  to  the  BaXlapis  as
well  as  to  the  other  tribes.”


3.  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  CONCORD  IN  THE  HOTTENTOT
LANGUAGE.

421.  This  appears  at  once,  if  we  translate  the  first  of
the  previous  examples  into  the  Hottentot  language,  and
vary  it  according  to  the  different  classes  (or  genders).*
Masc.  sing.  Si-da  e-sa  khoi-p  ta  hhui,  Inam-hi-da-ra.

Our  handsome  man  does  appear,  love  him  we  do.

Our  handsome  man  (husband)  appears,  we  love  him.

* The  Hottentot  sentences  given  in  this  and  the  following  paragraph
are  (with  one  exception,  that  illustrating  the  common  sing,  in  § 421)
taken  from  a manuscript  in  the  Grey  Library,  kindly  furnished  by  the
late  Rev.  F.  H.  Vollmer.  The  orthography  has  been  slightly  altered.
In  their  revision,  use  has  been  made  of  some  valuable  notes  by  the
Superintendent  of  Missions  in  Great  Namaqualand,  the  E.  Rev.  G.
Kronlein.  It  mu.st  be  borne  in  mind  that  the  pronunciation  of  some
words  in  the  dialect  of  the  Gei-ljhhous,  or  lioode  Volk,  among  whom  Mr.
Vollmer  resided,  differs  from  that  in  which  Krbnlein’s  translation  of  the
New  Testament  is  written.  Tire  Gei-ljkhous  for  example,  say  go>na-n
(common  sing)  “oxen”  instead  of  gama-n  (§-'26,  note),  /en-s  (f,  s.)

name”  for  ,'on-s,  Igoira-p  (m.  s.)  “ jackal  " for  /ybi'-p,  &c.


Its  Nature  in  the  Hottentot  Language.


113


Masc.  plur.  Si-da  e-sa  A/iOi-g-u  ra  khui,  Inam-gu-da-ra.

Our  handsome  men  do  appear,  love  them  we  do.
Our  handsome  men  (husbands)  appear,  we  love  them.

Masc.  dual.  Si-da  jgam  e-sa  AAui-kha  ra  hhui,  lnam-kha.-da-ra.

Our  two  handsome  men  do  appear,  love  them  we  do.
Our  two  handsome  men  (husbands)  appear,  we  love  them.

Fem.  sing.  Si-da  e-sa  tara-s  ta  khui,  jnam-s\-da-ra.

Our  handsome  woman  does  appear,  love  her  we  do.

Our  handsome  woman  appears,  we  love  her.

Fem.  plur.  Si-da  e-sa  tara-ti  ra  khui,  jnam-ix-da-ra.

Our  handsome  women  do  appear,  love  them  we  do.

Our  handsome  women  appear,  we  love  them.

Common  sing.  Esa  Itkoi-x  ra  khui,  jnam-i-da-ra.

Handsome  person  any  appears,  we  him  love.

Any  handsome  person  appears,  we  love  him  (or  her.)

Common  plur.  Si-da  e-sa  khoi-n  ta  khui,  jnam-\n-da-ra.

Our  handsome  people  do  appear,  love  them  we  do.
Our  handsome  people  appear,  we  love  them.

Common  dual.  Si-da  jgam  e-sa  khoi-ra  ra  khui,  jnam-ra,-da-ra.

Our  two  handsome  persons  do  appear,  love  them  we  do.
Our  two  handsome  persons  appear,  we  love  them.

422.  In  these  sentences  the  concord  is  apparent  in
the  objective  pronouns  only,  not  in  the  so-called  posses-
sive pronouns,  or  other  adjectives,  nor  in  the  verb,  as
referring  to  its  subject ; the  variation  of  ta  for  ra  being
entirely  dependent  upon  the  nature  of  the  preceding
letter.*  The  concord  will,  however,  become  more  evident,
if  we  take  other  sentences  as  examples,  in  which  adjectival
forms  follow  their  nouns,  &c.

MASCULINE  SINGULAR.

IjNa  aa-p  si-da  !hau-s-di-^,  !kku-kd-^,  jni  !d-s-!na  //an-Aa-p,
That  man  our  tribe’s  he,  rich  being,  another  village-in  dvxlling,


* If  emphasis  is  required,  ^ye-ra  is  employed  instead  of  ra  or  ta.


114


The  Concord,


lib-\n-da-ra,  gare-da-ra  goma-n  a-b-a,  tsi-\<~ta  jkai-da
find  him  we  do,  praise  we  do  cattle  of  him,  and  he  does  present  us
Igam  tsau-n  jlei-^-di-n-xa.
two  calves  his  from.

The  man  who  belongs  to  our  tribe,  who  is  rich,  who  dwells  in  that
village,  we  find  him,  we  praise  his  cattle,  and  he  presents  us  with  two
of  his  calves.

IjNd  !nau-p  tara-s-di-p,  Hiid-p  gei-p,  om-mi-!na  Hgoe-p,mu-hi-da-ra,
That  beam  woman’s  it,  that  large,  house-in  lying,  see  it  we  do,
llei-h-di  Hou-b-a  da-ra  ma-^an,  tsi-da  i-p  a-b-a  ra  jnam,
its  thickness  we  do  see-know,  and  we  appearance  of  it  do  like,
isi-p-ta  om-m-a  z^td-!na.
and  it  does  the  house  support.

The  beam  which  belongs  to  the  woman,  which  is  large,  which  lies
in  the  house,  we  perceive  its  thickness,  and  we  like  its  appearance,
and  it  supports  the  house.

This  class  or  gender  (masculine  singular)  includes  all  nouns  ter-
minating in  -p  (written  -b  by  the  Rhenish  Missionaries),  and  a few
ending  in  -mi,  -ni,  (and  perhaps  -ri,)  as  om-xai  (Tindall  and
Krbnlein’s  omi,  Vollmer’s  umi)  “house,”  &c.  (^Vide  § 423.)

MASCULINE  PLURAL.

llNd  au-g'u,  si-da  !hau-s-di-ga,  Ini  !d-s-!na  Ijan-hd-gn,  ho-
Those  men  our  tribe’s  they,  another  village-in  dwelling,  find
gu.-da-ra,  gare-da-ra  goma-n  a-g-a,  isi-gp-gye-ra  jkai-da  Igam
them  we  do,  praise  we  do  cattle  of  them,  and  they  do  present  us  two
tsau-n  jjei-ga-di-n-xa.
calves  theirs  from.

The  men  of  our  tribe  who  dwell  in  that  village,  we  find  them,  we
praise  their  cattle,  and  they  present  us  with  two  of  their  calves.
jjNd  !nau-gvi  tara-s-di-  gu,  //nd-gu  gei-gn,  om-mi-lna  jlgoe-ga,  mu-
Those  beams  woman’s  they,  those  large,  house-in  lying,  see
gu-da-ra,  Uei-ga-di  jjou-g-a  da-ra  mik^n,  tsi-da  i-p
them  we  do,  their  thicknesses  we  do  perceive,  and  we  appearance
d-g-a  ra  jnam,  tsi-ga-gye  om-m-a  ra  ^kdlna.
of  them  do  like,  and  they  house  do  support.


Its  Nature  in  the  Hottentot  Language.


115


The  beams  which  belong  to  the  woman,  which  are  large  and  lie  in
the  house,  we  see  them,  we  perceive  their  thickness,  and  like  their
appearance,  they  support  the  house.

To  this  class  or  gender  (masculine  plural)  belong  all  nouns
terminating  in  -gu  (Knudsen’s  and  Tindall’s  -leu,  Schmelen’s  -koe),
most  of  which  are  plurals  to  nouns  of  the  preceding  (-p)  class  or
gender.

MASCULINE  DUAL.

//iVd  jgam  a«-klia,  si-da  Ihau-s-di-kba,,  Ini  !d-s-Ina  Ijan-hd-kha,
Those  two  men,  our  tribe’s  they,  another  village-in  dwelling,
ho-kha.-da-ra,  gare-da-ra  goma-n  a-kha,  tsi-k\\A-gye-ra  jkai-da
find  them  we  do,  praise  we  do  cattle  of  them,  and  they  do  present  us
Igam  tsdu-n  Hei-kha-di-n-xa.
two  calves  theirs  from.

The  two  men  of  our  tribe,  who  dwell  in  that  village,  we  find  them,
we  praise  their  cattle,  and  they  present  us  with  two  of  their  calves.

IjNd  Igam  /naM-kka,  ta-ra-s-di-kha,  gei-hd-kha,  om-mi-!na
Those  two  beams,  woman’s  they,  large  being,  house-in

llgoe-hd-kha,  mu-kha-da-ra,  jjou-p  d-kha  da-ra  mu::^an,  tsi-
lying,  see  them  we  do,  thickness  of  them  we  do  perceive,  and
da  i-p  d-kha  ra  Inam,  tsi-kha-gye  om-m-a  ra^kd-lna.
w«  appearance  of  them  do  love,  and  they  the  house  do  support.

The  two  beams  which  belong  to  the  woman,  which  are  large
and  lie  in  the  house,  seeing  them  we  perceive  them  thickness,  we  like
them  appearance,  they  support  the  house.

This  class  or  gender  (masculine  dual)  includes  all  nouns  terminating
in  -kha,  which  are  all  dual  forms  corresponding  to  nouns  which  in
the  singular  end  in  -p,  -mi,  or  -ni,  &c.

FEMININE  SINGULAE.

IjNd  tara-s  si-da  !Jia7i-s-di-s,  !khu-hd-s,  Ini  !a-s-!na  l[an-hd-s,
That  woman  our  tribe’s  she,  rich  being,  another  village-in  dwelling,
ho-si-da-ra,  gare-da-ra  goma-n  d-s-a,  isi-s-ta  jkai-da
find  her  we  do,  praise  we  do  cattle  of  her,  and  she  does  present  us
Igam  tsau-n  jjei-5-di-n-xa.
two  calves  hers  from.


116


The  Concord.


The  woman  of  our  tribe,  who  is  rich  and  lives  in  that  village,  we
find  her,  we  praise  her  cattle,  and  she  presents  us  with  two  of  her
calves.

Hei-&  tara-s-di-s,  //ei-s  ffei-3,  !hana-p-!na  md-3,  mu-3i-da-ra,
The  tree  woman’s  it,  it  large,  garden-in  standing,  see  it  we  do,
jjei-3-di  Ijou-b-a  da-ra  mih^an,  tsi-da  i-p  d-s-a  ra  jnam,

its  thickness  we  do  perceive,  and  we  appearance  of  it  do  like,
tsi-s-gye  !hana-h-a  ra  e-e.
and  it  the  garden  does  make  fine.

The  tree  which  belongs  to  the  woman,  which  is  large,  and  stands  in
the  garden,  we  see  it,  we  perceive  its  thickness  and  like  its  appearance ;
it  is  an  ornament  to  the  garden.

To  this  class  or  gender  (feminine  singular)  belong  all  nouns  ter-
minating in  -s.

FEMININE  PLURAL.

//Nd  tara-ti,  sida  !hau-s-di-i.\,  Jm  !d-s-!na  Ijan-hd-ti,  Ao-ti-
Those  women  our  tribe 's  they,  another  village-in  dwelling,  find  them
da-ra,  gare-da-ra  goma-n  d-te,  tsi-t\-gye-ra  jkai-da  Igam  tsau-n
we  do,  praise  we  do  cattle  of  them,  and  they  do  present  us  two  calves
jjei-ti-di-n-xa.
theirsfi’om.

The  women  of  our  tribe  who  live  in  that  village,  we  find  them,
we  praise  theii'  cattle,  and  they  present  us  with  two  of  their  calves.

Hei-ti  tara-s-di-ti,  //«-ti  gei-ti,  jjei-ti  !hana-p-!na  wid-ti,  mu-
Trees  woman’s  they,  they  large,  they  garden-in  standing,  see
ti-da-ra,  jlei-ti-di  jjou-b-a  da-ra  muz^n,  tsi-da  i-p

them  we  do,  their  thickness  we  do  perceive,  and  we  appearance
d-te  ra  jnam,  tsi-tl-gye  !hana-b-a  ra  e-e.
of  them  do  like,  and  they  the  garden  do  make  fine.

The  trees  which  belong  to  the  woman,  which  are  large,  and  stand  in
the  garden,  we  see  them,  we  perceive  their  thickness  and  like  their
appearance  ; they  are  an  ornament  to  the  garden.

This  class  or  gender  (feminine  plural)  comprehends  all  nouns  with
the  termination  -ti.  They  are  plurals  to  nouns  of  the  preceding  (-s)
class  or  gender.


Its  Nature  in  the  Hottentot  Language.


117


COMMON  SINGULAR.

Ktioi-i  si-da  !kau-s-di-i,  !khu-ha-i,  ini  !d-s-!na  jjan-ha-'i,  ho-
A person  our  tribe’s  lie,  rich  being,  another  village-in  dwelling,  find
i-da-ra,  gare-da-ra  goma-n  5-e,  tsi-\-gye-ra  jkai-da  Igam
him  we  do,  praise  we  do  cattle  of  him  and  he  does  present  us  two
tsau-n  jjei-i-di-n-xa.
calves  his  from.

A person  of  our  ti-ibe  who  is  rich,  and  lives  in  that  village,  we  find
him  (or  her),  we  praise  his  (or  her)  cattle,  and  he  (or  she)  presents
us  with  two  of  his  (or  her)  calves.

Hei-i  tara-s-di-i,  jjei-i  gei-i,  om-mi-!na  Ugoe-i,  mu-i-da-ra,
The  stick  woman’s  it,  it  large,  house-in  lying,  see  it  we  do,
jjei-i-di  jjou-b-a  da-ra  mu^an,  tsi-da  i-p  a-e  ra  Inam,  tsi-

its  thickness  we  do  perceive,  and  we  appearance  of  it  do  like,  and
i-gye  om-m-a  ra  e-e.
it  the  house  does  make  fine.

The  stick  which  belongs  to  the  woman,  which  is  large  and  lies  in
the  house,  we  see  it,  we  perceive  its  thickness,  and  like  its  appearance  ;
it  is  an  ornament  to  the  house.

To  this  class  or  gender  (common  singular)  belong  all  nouns  formed
with  the  termination  -i,  exclusive,  of  course,  of  those  in  -ml,  -ni,
&c.,  of  the  masculine  singular  (-p  class),  and  of  those  in  -ti  of  the
feminine  plural.  This  termination  -i  imparts  a kind  of  indefinite*
sense,  in  many  cases  corresponding  in  meaning  to  oui'  indefinite  article,
or  to  the  word  “ any,”  &c.  Nouns  formed  with  this  termination  are
infrequent  even  in  the  Nama,  and  seem  no  longer  to  exist  in  the
other  Hottentot  dialects.  Also  in  the  more  Northern  Sex-denoting
languages,  no  trace  of  this  class  or  gender  has  been,  as  yet,
discovered.

COMMON  PLURAL.

llNd  khoi-n,  si-da  thau-s-di-ni,  jni  !a-s-!na  jjan-hd-n,  hd-

Those  people  our  tribe’s  they,  another  village-in  dwelling,  find
'in-da-ra,  gare-da-ra  goma-n  a-n-a,  tsi-'m-gye-ra  jkai-da  jgam
them  we  do,  praise  we  do  cattle  of  them,  and  they  do  present  us  two
tsdu-n  Ijei-n-din-xa.
calves  theirs  from.


Bltek,  S.  Afi',  Comp.  Grammar.


R


118


The  Concord.


The  people  of  our  tribe  who  dwell  in  that  village,  we  find  them,
we  praise  their  cattle,  and  they  present  us  with  two  of  their  calves.

This  class  or  gender  (common  plm-al)  comprehends  all  nouns  with
the  termination  -n,  most  of  which  are  plurals  to  nouns  of  the  pre-
ceding (common  singular)  class.

COMMON  DUAI..

//iVa  Igam  khoi-ra  si-da  !kau-s-di-ra,  jni  !d-s-!na  //an-A5-?’«,

Those  two  persons  our  tribe’s  they,  auother  village-in  dwelling,

hd-xa.-da-ra,  gare-da-ra  goma-n  5-ra,  tsi-ra,-gye-ra  fkai-da
find  them  we  do,  praise  we  do  cattle  of  them,  and  they  do  present  us
Igam  tsau-n  jlei-ia,-di-n-xa.
two  ealves  theirs  from.

Those  two  (a  man  and  a woman,  or  two  women)  of  om'  tribe  who
dwell  in  that  village,  we  find  them,  we  praise  their  cattle,  and  they
present  us  with  two  of  their  calves.

This  class  or  gender  (common  dual)  includes  all  nouns  with  the
termination  -ra.  They  are  duals  to  nouns  of  the  common  and
feminine  singular  classes  (-1  and  -s).

423.  Though  the  signs  of  the  concord  are  not  so  fre-
quently repeated  here  as  in  the  Bd-ntu  languages,  it  is
.evident  that  its  nature  is  the  same  ; viz.,  that  it  consists
in  the  identity  of  the  pronouns  (or  pronominal  elements)
with  the  derivative  particles,  (§  406,  410,)  which,  how-
ever, in  Hottentot  are  suffixed,  not  prefixed,  as  in  the
Ba-ntu  languages.  This  identity  is  even  clearer  in  the
Namaqua  dialect,  than  in  the  Kafir  and  kindred  lan-
guages ; for,  the  forms  of  the  pronouns  in  Namaqua,  are
either  the  same  as  those  of  the  terminations  of  the  nouns,
or  they  are  so  manifestly  derived  from  them  as  to  render
it  hardly  necessary  to  say  a word  in  explanation  of  the
slight  variations  which  occur.  The  two  chief  exceptions
to  this  rule  are  the  forms  of  the  objective  pronominal
suffixes  of  the  verb  in  the  masculine  singular  and  feminine
singular  classes  or  genders.  These  forms  (-bi  and  ~si)
have  probably  retained  the  ancient  vowel  which  has


Its  Nature  in  the  Hottentot  Language.


119


generally  been  lost  in  the  forms  of  the  pronouns,  as  well
as  in  those  of  the  derivative  suffixes  of  the  nouns.  The
original  vowel  of  the  termination  of  the  masculine  singular
has  again  been  preserved,  as  a derivative  suffix,  where  the
labial  consonant  of  this  termination  is  either  assimilated  to
a consonant  ending  the  stem  {-m-,  -n~,  and  perhaps  -r-),  or
elided  after  it.  For  example,  this  is  the  case  in  om-mi
house  (objective  orn-m-a,  pi.  om-gii,  dual  0/n-kh.a),  !hom-
mi  mountain  (obj.  Ihom-xora,  pi.  Ihom-^M,  dual  Ihom-
kha),  Inom-mi  hillock  (obj.  Inom-mro.,  pi.  .'nom-gu,  dual
.'woOT-kha),  lom-mi  hand  (obj.  fom-m-a,  pi.  fom-gu,  dual
/oOT-kka),  lion  (obj.  %am-m-a,  pi.

llgam-mi  water  (obj.  Ilgam-jR-a,  dual  //yam-kh.a),  ausen-i
perspiration  (obj.  awsen-a),  &c.*

424.  If  the  nature  of  the  concord  in  the  Hottentot
language  is  thus  similar  to  that  in  the  B&-ntu  Languages,
— its  peculiar  sex-denoting  character  in  the  Hottentot
might  suggest  that  the  identity  of  the  pronouns  and  the
derivative  particles  of  the  nouns  (and,  consequently,  the
cause  of  the  division  of  the  nouns  into  classes  or  gen-
ders,) may  have  a different  origin  in  the  two  families  of
South  African  Languages ; and  that  the  derivative
suffixes  of  the  nouns  in  Hottentot  were  originally  pro-
nouns, as  some  grammarians  (Knudsen,  &c.)  maintain.

* We  do  not  find  it  noticed  in  any  of  the  grammatical  works  on  this
language  (by  Messrs.  Knudsen,  Wallmann,  and  Tindall)  that  these  nouns
are  of  the  masculine  singular  class  or  gender.  On  the  contrary,  the  two
first  of  these  writers,  at  least,  class  them  in  the  common  singular  gender.
That  this  is  an  error,  is  evident  from  the  fact  that  all  pronouns  referring
to  these  nouns  belong  to  the  masculine  singular  class  or  gender.  Another
feature  which  distinguishes  these  nouns  from  those  of  the  common
singular  class  or  gender,  is  that  when  they  are  used  with  the  termination
-a  (indicating  the  objective,  &c.),  their  end  -i  is  suppressed  before  the  -a,
instead  of  (as  in  all  nouns  of  the  common  singular  class)  being  commuted
by  a process  of  vowel  harmony,  into  -e,  after  which  the  suffix  -a  dis-
appears. These  nouns  can  be  further  recognized  as  belonging  to  the
masculine  singular  class  (or  gender),  from  their  exchanging  their  sin-
gular termination  -mi  or  -i  for  -g’aa  (masculine  plural)  and  -kba
(masculine  dual).


120


The  Concord.


(§  411.)  Such  an  explanation  appears  plausible,  so  long
as  we  have  only  to  do  with  nouns  to  which  the  distinction
of  sex  is  naturally  applicable.  Thus  in  AAoz-p  man
(husband),  hhoi-^u  men  (husbands),  two  men

(husbands),  khoi-3  woman,  khoi-ti  women,  khoi-i  person,
hhoi-n  people,  khoi-vdi  two  persons  (man  and  woman,  or
two  women),  &c.,  the  terminations  might  with  some
semblance  of  probability  be  concluded  to  be  pronouns
affixed  for  the  purpose  of  distinguishing  number  and
gender.  But  a similar  explanation  is  inapplicable,  when
we  observe  the  use  of  these  terminations,  with  regard
to  nouns  expressing  objects,  in  which  sex  cannot  be
distinguished, — for  example,  mu-'p  eye  (as  an  object  in
space,  mu-'g-!na  in  the  eye,  &c,),  pi.  wJM-gu,  dual  msi-klia;
mus  the  organ  of  vision,  pi.  dual  mw-ra;  Aei-p

log  of  wood,  beam,  pi.  /iei-gu,  dual  Aei-klia;  hei-B  tree
(growing),  pi.  hei-ti,  dual  hei-Tdi ; hei~\  stick,  pi.  hei-n,
dual  hei-XB. ; om-mi  house  {oIk6q),  pi.  om-gu,  dual  om-
kka;  om-s  habitation  (oki'a),  pi.  om-ti,  dual  om-ra;  om-i
any  house,  pi.  om~ji",  tse-'p  day  (as  a date,  “jour”),  pi.
tse-gu,  dual  <se-kha ; tse-s  day  (as  a period,  “ journee),
pi.  tse-tA  ; any  day,  pi.  tse-n,  dual  tse-x2i\  &c.  With
many  shades  of  meaning,  the  termination  of  the  mascu-
line singular  class  or  gender  most  frequently  indicates
the  idea  of  locality  ; that  of  the  feminine  singular  implies
causality,  life,  essence,  &c.  These  meanings  could
only  be  derived  with  great  violence  from  an  original
intention  of  transferring  the  sex-denoting  distinctions  to
nouns,  to  which  they  are  not  strictly  applicable.*  On  the

* As  the  translator  of  the  New  Testament  into  Namaqua  is  of  a different
opinion  regarding  the  distinction  of  gender  in  Hottentot,  the  reader  will
thank  me  for  subjoining  his  observations  on  the  subject.  Mr.  Kronlem
says  : “ In  Bezug  auf  die  Unterseheiduiig  des  Geschlechtes  hemerke  ich
folgendes  :

“ Bei  den  lebendigen  Wesen  ergiebt  sich  das  Geschlecht  von  selbst.
Sie  sind  entweder  Masculina  oder  Feminina.  Kenne  ich  aber  das
Geschlecht  des  betrelfenden  Weseiis  noch  uicht,  so  rede  ich  im  Communis,
i.  B.  Ma  Igoa  e-s  gye  hb  ? (Was  fur  du  Kind  gebar  sie?)  Die  Antwort


Its  Nature  in  the  Hottentot  Language.  121
contrary,  it  is  far  more  probable  that  the  terminations


lautet  entweder  ao-re-ro-l»-a  (ein  Mannlein)  oder  ta-ra-re-H-a  (ein
Weiblein).  Ta-re-be  hd-c  kha  ne-e  ? (Was  fiir  ein  Pferd  ist  das  ?)
:=fzKarw-hd-^  gumo.  (Es  ist  der  Hengst.)  z^Nu  hd-S  gumo.  (Es  ist  die
Bchwarze  Stute.)  &c.

“ In  Bezug  auf  die  leblosen  Gegenstande  gilt  die  Kegel,  welche  ganz
der  subjectiven  Ansicht  des  Eedenden  anheimgegeben  ist :

“ a.  Dass  alle  Gegenstande,  die  man  sich  als  gross  und  hervorstechend
denkt,  munnlicli  aufgefasst  vrerden,  z.  B.  hei-lt»  (m.  s.)  ist  der
Baum,  der  durch  seinen  schlanken,  iiber  die  andern  hinausgehenden
Wuchs  sich  auszeicbnet.  Om-ini  (m.  s.)  ist  das  Hans,  welches  durch
seine  Grosse  und  A nsehnhchkeit  andere  iibertriift,  &c.

“ jS.  Alle  Gegenstande  dagegen  die  kleiner  oder  kiirzer  siud,  imd  mehr
in  die  Breite  gehen  als  in  die  Hohe,  sind  femiiiinintt,  z.  B.  hei-»
ist  der  Baum,  der  eiuen  kurzen  Stamm  hat,  aber  seine  Zweige  gehorig
ausbreitet  (Bild  der  Hottentoten  Erauen),  oder  auch  wohl  der  gewbhn-
liche  Busch  oder  Strauch.  Om-H  (f.  s.)  ist  das  Haus,  welches  gegen
andere  in  seiner  Hohe  und  Dimension  zuriicksteht.

“ In  Bezug  auf  ma-S  (f . s.)  und  mu-lt  (m.  s.)  ist  mu-S  am  gebrauch-
lichsten.  wird  nur  in  solchen  Eablen  gebraucht,  wo  sich  der

Kedende  das  Auge  dessen,  von  dem  er  redet,  als  durch  bose  EinbUdung
oder  Einfliisterung  als  vergrdssert  denkt,  z.  B.  sa  mu-b-'.na  ta  a zjzkawa,
Xawe-ta  Ijna-ti-i  tama  hd  (in  deinem  Auge  bin  ich  bose,  aber  ich  bins
nicht).  In  den  Abstractas  kommt  es  nur  darauf  an  wie  sich  der  Gebrauch
gebildet,  oder  wie  sich  der  Kedende  den  abstracten  BegrifiE  denkt : z^oms
(f.  s.,  Glauben),  :^hanu-ei-si-lt  (m.  s.,  Gerechtichkeit),  !ou-ba-sen-t^  (f.  s.,
HofEnung),  Inam-mi  (m.  s.,  Liebe),  &c.

“ Der  Comiuunis : om-\  (ein  Haus,  pi.  om-n),  hei-\  (ein

Stock,  pi.  hei-n),  tse-i  (ein  Tag,  pi.  tse-n),  ist  selbst  verstandlich.  Er
liisst  den  BegriEE  unbestimmt.

“ Ausser  dem  Gebrauch,  der  sich  /esigebildet  bei  einer  grossen  Anzahl
von  Wbrtern,  hangt  die  Geschlechtsbestimmung  also  rein  von  der
Anschauung  und  dem  subjektiven  Ermessen  des  Kedenden  ab,  und  er
wird  sogleich  verstanden,  warum  er  seinen  Gegenstand  so  oder  so
aufEasst.”

To  this  I may  add  the  remark  that  ma-j*  Ina  (moep  na  “ in  the  eye  ”)
is  found  in  Schmelen’s  version  of  the  Four  Gospels,  Matth.  vii.  3 (twice),
4 (twice),  and  5.  In  these  places  both  Tindall  and  Kronlein  have  mu-s-!na.
The  masculine  form  &c.,  &c.,  is  nowhere  met  with  in  Tindall’s

version  of  St.  Matthew’s  Gcspel,  nor,  I believe,  in  Kronlein’s  New
Testament.

The  gender  may  have  to  a certam  extent  the  import  which  Mr.
Kronlein  ascribes  to  it ; but  this  is  clearly  a derived  faculty,  and  can  by
no  means  be  said  to  apply  to  all,  or  even  to  the  majority  of  nouns  indicat-
ing inanimate  things  or  ideas  in  Hottentot.


122


The  Concord.


which  indicate  the  class  or  gender  of  the  nouns  in  the
Namaqua  language,  were  originally  derivative  particles,
similar  in  their  nature  to  the  derivative  prefixes  in  the
Ba-ntu  languages ; and  that  the  origin  of  the  division
of  the  nouns  in  both  languages  into  classes  or  genders  is
based  upon  the  same  principle.  The  apparent  sex-deno-
ting character  which  the  classification  of  the  nouns  now
has  in  the  Hottentot  language,  was  evidently  imparted  to
it,  after  a division  of  the  nouns  into  classes  had  taken
place.  It  probably  arose,  in  the  first  instance,  from  the
possibly  accidental  circumstance  that  the  nouns  indicating
(respectively)  man  and  woman  were  formed  with  diffe-
rent derivative  suffixes,  and,  consequently,  belonged  to
different  classes  (or  genders)  of  nouns,  and  that  these
suffixes  thus  began  to  indicate  the  distinctions  of  sex  in
nouns  where  it  could  be  distinguished.

425.  It  may  be  assumed  that  the  original  meaning  of
the  derivative  suffixes  of  the  nouns  in  Hottentot  has
been  Impaired  and  modified,  and  that  they  by  no  means
impart  as  full  a meaning  as  some  of  the  prefixes  in  the
Ba-ntu  languages,  and  are,  therefore,  still  less  equal  in
value  to  the  derivative  suffixes  of  modern  languages.
(§  415.)  Yet  there  can,  however,  be  no  doubt  that  their
origin  is  similar,  and  that  if  our  explanation  of  the  nature
and  origin  of  the  concord  holds  good  for  the  Ba-ntu
languages,  it  is  equally  applicable  to  the  Hottentot.  But,
in  order  to  be  more  certain  concerning  this,  we  must
proceed  to  examine  how  far  we  can  ascertain  the  original
meaning  of  the  derivative  prefixes  and  suffixes,  on  which
the  division  of  the  nouns  into  classes  or  genders  is  respec-
tively based  in  the  Ba-ntu  and  Hottentot  languages.


Etj/mology  of  the  Bd-ntu  Derivative  Prefixes.  123


n.  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE  CONCORD-
INDICATING  DERIVATIVE  PAR-
TICLES OF  THE  NOUNS.


1.  ETYMOLOGY  OF  THE  bI-NTU  DERIVATIYE  PREFIXES.

426.  As  the  derivative  prefixes  of  the  nouns  in  the
BS.-ntu  languages  are  no  longer  used  separately,  it  is  now
somewhat  difficult  to  ascertain  what  was  their  exact
meaning  while  so  employed.  There  are  two  ways  of
ascertaining  this,  approximately.  The  power  which  these
prefixes  apparently  possess  for  the  formation  of  derivative
nouns,  and  the  general  character  of  the  nouns  belonging
to  the  same  class  or  gender,  tend  to  point  towards  the
meaning  which  the  prefix  had,  when  still  a separate  word.
But  this  alone  is  by  no  means  a safe  guide.  It  is  possible
that  in  many  nouns,  perhaps  sometimes  in  the  majority  of
those  belonging  to  one  class,  the  prefix  has  not  its  original
value,  but  only  that  of  a pronoun,  from  these  words  having
been  originally  adjectival  formations.  For  example,  a
great  number  of  nouns  of  the  1st  (mu-)  class  or  gender
may  have  been,  ox’iginally,  adjectives  referred  to  u-mu-wfw
“ man and,  in  that  case,  the  mu-  in  them  Avould  be
only  a pronoun  used  as  representative  of  u-mu-w^z/,  whilst
the  mu  in  u-mu-?z#M  might  originally  have  had  quite  a
different  meaning.  ( Vide  § 412.)  Yet,  it  is,  of  course,
also  possible  that  the  original  meaning  of  the  mu-  in
u-mu-«i?M  is  that  of  a single  person,  and  that,  on  this
account,  the  nouns  of  the  1st  (mu-)  class  almost  all  re-
present personal  beings  in  the  singular  number.

427.  Similarly,  a great  number  of  names  of  rivers  are
formed  in  Zulu  with  the  prefix  mu-  (3rd  class)*.  Yet

* Umzimvubu,  (Sea-cow  River),  Umzinto,  Umzvmhe,  Umlazi,  Umzim-
kulu,  Umflanga,  Umxloti,  Umx  laluzane,  Umxlali,  Umsunduze,  Umtywati,
Umkomazi,  Umpanza,  Umhku,  Umkeze,  Umvoti,  Urngeni,  Umnamhiti,
Umtwalumc,  Umbilu,  Umzimayi,  Umzimhulwana,  See,  (Colenso’s  Dictionary.)


124


The  Concord.


it  would  be  rash  to  infer  from  this  that  the  original  mean-
ing of  the  prefix  mu- (3rd  class),  when  still  an  independ-
ent noun,  was  “ river.”  It  is  indeed  more  probable  that
these  nouns  were  either  formed  as  adjectives  referring
to  the  Zulu  noun  umfula  “ river,”  (the  Kafir  umlambo,
Setshuana  molapo,  Tekeza  namho,') — or  in  mere  analogy
with  this  and  similar  nouns.

428.  Still  greater,  perhaps,  is  the  number  of  names  of
trees  formed  with  this  prefix  mu-  (3rd  class).  We  find
about  a hundred  such  nouns  in  the  Bishop  of  Natal’s
Zulu-English  Dictionary,  and  about  fifty  in  the  consi-
derably shorter  Dictionary  of  the  Otyiherero,  or  Damara
language,  by  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Hahn.  In  many  other
South  African  languages  equally  numerous  examples  of
names  of  trees  formed  with  this  prefix  mu-  occur;  yet
we  are  not,  on  this  account,  justified  in  asserting  that
the  original  meaning  of  this  syllable  mu-,  when  used
separately,  was  that  of  a “ tree”  or  “ plant.”  It  is,  upon
the  whole,  much  more  probable  that  these  nouns  were
formed  in  analogy  with  the  generally  used  noun  u-mu-j?i
3 “ plant,  herb,  tree,  wood,  medicine,”  pi.  i-mi-^2  4.*
That  the  last  syllable  -ti  has  the  meaning  of  vegetable
matter  here,  is  rendered  probable  by  other  nouns  formed
from  this  stem,  such  as  Kafir  u-lu-fz  11.  “rod,  stick,”
pi.  i-zin-ti  10,,  Otyiherero  o-ka-^i  13.  “ stick,”  pi.

14.,  Kafir  and  Zulu  u-bu-^i  14.  “ poison,  charm,”  Sena,
Tette,  and  Cape  Delgado  13.  “shrub”  (Ki-

kfimba  ']^L3^-mu-di  13.,  pi.  tu-wiiWz  12.),  &c.

429.  How  difficult  it  is  in  this  manner  to  infer  the
original  value  of  the  prefixes  of  nouns  from  their  present
use,  will  be  easily  understood  by  any  one  who  may  have

* Kafir  3.,  pi.  i-iui-ti  4.,  Southern  Tekeza  u-tsi  3.,  pi.

4.,  Lourenzo  Marques  and  Quellimane  mure,  Inhambane  muri  (rn),
Tette,  Sena,  and  Cape  Delgado  naii-n'  3.,  pi.  nii-tt  4.,  Mosambique  mwiri,
Suaheli  mti  3.,  pi.  min'  4.,  Kinika  and  Kipokomo  mil/h  3.,  pi.  mi/iz  4.,
Kikamba  mu-di3.,pl.ml-*'  4.,  Otyiherero  o-mil-O'  3.,  pi.  o-ml-0'  4.,
Ovambo  3.,  Benguela  o-U-n'  3.,  pi.  o-vi-n'  4.,  Bunda  mu-sAi

(muchi)  3.,  pi.  mi-shi  4.


Etymology  of  the  Bd-ntu  Derivative  Prefixes.  125

tried  to  ascertain  the  original  meaning  of  such  English
suffixes  as  -dom,  -ness,  -ship,  &c.,  from  an  analysis  of  the
nouns  formed  with  them.  A comparison  of  such  nouns
as  “ kingdom,  martyrdom,  freedom,”  &c.,  may  give  us  an
idea  of  the  present  value  of  the  suffix  -dom,  and  of  the
meaning  which  it  would  give  to  such  nouns  as  we  can
now  form  with  it.  But  this  is  a very  different  thing
from  knowing  what  was  the  meaning  of  the  syllable  -dom
when  used  independently ; and  we  imagine  that  any  guess
at  that  meaning,  without  tracing  it  back  historically,
might  be  far  from  the  truth.

430.  This  difficulty  is  the  greater,  as  the  different  lan-
guages and  dialects  (though  agreeing  in  the  main  regard-
ing the  value  attached  to  each  class  of  nouns  and  in  the
prefix  denoting  it,)  exhibit  much  variety  as  to  the  exact
force  which  each  prefix  has  in  them.  To  give  an  in-
stance, whilst  in  the  three  other  genera  of  the  Middle
Branch  the  prefix  ka-  of  the  13th  class  is  used  for  the
purpose  of  forming  diminutives,  it  appears  not  to  have
this  force  in  the  North  Western  (Kongo)  genus.  In  the
Kongo  language  the  only  nouns  of  the  13th  (ka-)  class  (or
gender,)  enumerated  in  Brusciotto  ^ Vetralla’s  Grammar,
are  ka-^^-fl!-w^^  13.  “ the  middle”  {vide  § 436,  note)  and
ka-sa«7a  13.  “ height.”  Curiously  enough,  diminutives
are  formed  in  this  language  with  the  prefix  of  the  7th  class
ki-,  joined  to  a reduplication  of  the  stem,  as  "WL-mu-ntu-
mu-ntu  7.  ‘‘a  little  man”  (§  426),  "ki-leke-leke  7.  "a  little
boy,”  pi.  i-lekeleke  8.  from  mVL-lehe  1.  “a  boy,”  pi,  a-Me  2;
whilst  this  same  7th  prefix  in  Tette  (tshi-  or  shi-)  and
Sena  (ski-)  is  employed  for  the  purpose  of  indicating  large
objects,  as  Sena  7.  “a  large  tree,”  pi.  -pi-mi-ii8.

(§  428,  note),  Tette  tshi-w-te  7.  “ a large  bow,”  tsh.i-
md-zi  7.  “ large  water,  river  ” (§  452),  tshi-nyumba  7.
" large  house.”  In  Otyiherero  again  o-tyi-ndu  7.  is  an
old  man  or  woman,”  whilst  in  Kafir  the  identical  word
i-si-H^?<  7.  means  “ human  species,”  and  in  Zulu  “ human
race,  mankind.”  (§  412.)  It  is  clear  that  there  is  a very

Bhck,  S.  Afr.  Comp.  Grammar.  S


126


The  Concord.


great  difference  in  the  meanings  which  the  7th  prefix
has  respectively  in  Kongo  and  Tette,  in  Otyiherero
and  Kafir.

431.  Another  circumstance  which  contributes  much  to
complicate  this  mode  of  investigation,  is  that  we  cannot
always  be  sure  whether  two  or  more  classes  or  genders  of
nouns  may  not  have  been  thrown  together.  This  process
would  always  be  favoured  by  great  similarity  in  the  forms
of  the  derivative  prefixes  and  the  pronouns  derived  from
them,  by  similarity  in  the  value  of  the  prefixes,  or  by
both  causes  combined.  The  history  of  the  South  African
languages  (as  we  shall  see  more  especially  hereafter,)
shews  many  clear  instances  of  these  three  ways,  by
which  classes  that  were  originally  distinct,  have  been
amalgamated.

432.  Therefore  we  should  probably  be  unable  to  ascer-
tain anything  of  the  original  meanings  of  the  derivative
prefixes  of  the  nouns  in  these  South  African  languages,
if  this  were  the  only  method  of  discovering  them.  But
although  we  do  not  now  find  the  prefixes  used  in  their
separate  state  as  independent  nouns,  some  of  them  are
still  found  as  other  parts  of  speech,  particularly  as  prefixed
directives  or  prepositions ; or,  as  the  case  might  also  be
represented,  there  are  some  other  words,  particularly  pre-
positions, which  seem  to  be  closely  related  to,  if  not
originally  identical  with,  certain  derivative  prefixes  of
nouns.

433.  Thus  there  cannot  be  the  least  doubt  that  the
derivative  prefix  ku-  of  the  15th  class  or  gender,  is  iden-
tical with  the  prefixed  directive,  or  preposition  ku-  which
means  “ to.”  In  fact,  the  employment  of  this  preposition
for  the  formation  of  the  infinitive  of  verbs,  is  analogous  to
that  of  the  corresponding  English  preposition.  Thus,  in
Zulu  ngi-ya-hu-tanda,  (I  shall  love,)  which  is  literally
“ I go  to  love,”  (just  as  ngi-ya  ku-Iaba-bantu  means  “ I
<To  to  these  people,”)  the  ku  is  merely  used  as  a directive
like  the  “ to  ” in  “ to  love ;”  whilst  in  the  sentence


Etymology  of  the  Bd-ntu  Derivative  Prefixes.  127

u-ku-/««c?a  \xi-mnandi,  “ to  love  is  sweet,”  the  first  ku  is
used  as  a derivative  prefix,  to  which  the  second  ku  refers
as  a pronoun.  But  no  one  can  doubt  here  that  the  pre-
fixed directive  (or  preposition)  and  the  derivative  prefix
are  identical  in  origin.

434.  Besides  the  clear  infinitives  of  verbs  used  as
nouns,  there  are,  in  almost  all  South  African  B^-ntu  lan-
guages, a number  of  nouns  belonging  to  this  15th  class  or
gender,  which  were  originally  infinitives,  but  have  now
a more  concrete  meaning.  Such  are,  for  example,  Kafir
u-ku-XZfl  “ food,”  (really  “ eat-ing,”)  u-ku-sa  “ morning,”
and  u-ku-X/tija  “ evening,”  which  latter  words  both  mean
“dawn-ing,”  the  one  the  early  dawn,  the  other  the  growing
dark  at  sunset.  The  Middle  Branch  languages  also  con-
tain a number  of  nouns  of  this  class  or  gender,  which
evidently  were  not  infinitives  of  verbs  originally,  such  as
the  Otyiherero  nouns  o-liXi-Jigururu  “ desert,”  o-ku-^z
(Ovambo  o-ku-<0  “ field,  country  land,”  pi.  o-mSi-hu-ti  6.,
o-'kxi-vare  “ a great  open  place,”  o-ku-yere  “ flats,  open
place,”  o-ku-rwo  “ sacred  place  for  the  holy  fire  ” &c.,
o-ku -ara  “ floor  (of  a hut),”  o-'^\i-pepera  “ winter,”
o-ku-roro  “ rainy  season  (autumn).”  In  these  nouns
which  indicate  place  and  time,  the  common  origin  of
that  prefix  ku-  and  the  preposition  ku-  (to)  is  almost
self-evident.  This  is  not  quite  as  clear  in  the  following
Otyiherero  nouns,  which  also  belong  to  the  15th  class  or
gender,  viz,,  o-ku-(va  thorn,”  pi.  o-ma-Aw-iya  6.
(Ovambo  o-'kXi-edya  15.,  pi.  o-mdi-ku-edya  6.),  o-ku-
rama  (Ovambo  o-kU-/a»?a)  ‘‘leg,”  o-ku-o^o  “arm,”
(Ovambo  o-ku-eAo  15.,  pi.  o-ma-eAo  6.),  o-ku-<Mi  “ ear,”
pi.  0-m.di-tui  6.*

435.  An  almost  equally  strong  case  of  original  identity
with  a prefixed  directive  (or  preposition)  is  presented  by

* Ovambo  o-1H»Mshui  15.  pi.  6.,  Bashubea  kotoe,

Batoka  khotoe,  Maponda  and  Borotse  kuioe,  Banyenko  kutue,  Bayeiye
kuti,  Tette  and  Sena  kutu  pi.  mf%.^kutu  6.,  Kikamba  15.  pi.

niil-da  6.,  Kongo  15.  pi.  ina-lw  6.,  Mpongwe  o-roi.


128


The  Concord.


the  derivative  prefix  (PA-)  of  the  16th  class  or  gender.
In  the  dialects  of  the  South  Eastern  Branch  of  the  South
African  Division  of  Ba-ntu  languages,  (Kafir,  Setshuana,
and  Tekeza,)  this  prefix  is  obsolete,  though  clear  traees
of  its  former  existence  are  still  found,  at  all  events,  in
the  Kafir  species  and  in  Setshuana.  Some  of  the  forms  of
the  pronouns  of  the  15th  (ku-)  class  or  gender,  in  both
species,  evidently  belonged  originally  to  the  16  th  (pa-)
class;  and  the  16th  may  be  said  in  these  languages  to
have  been  absorbed  by  the  15th  (ku-)  class.  In  Se-
tshuana this  amalgamation  was  facilitated  by  the  change
of  original  A to  x or  A',  and  p to  A.  (§  87  & 110.)  Thus,
it  became  difficult  to  distinguish  apart  those  forms  of  the
pronouns,  in  which  the  original  vowels  of  these  prefixes
were  elided.  In  many  Middle  Branch  langTtages  the
16  th  (pa-)  class  or  gender  has  continued  distinct,  but
generally  contains  a few  nouns  only,  in  some  languages,
perhaps,  not  more  than  one.  Thus  we  find  in  the  lan-
guage of  Nyungwe  (Tette)  pa-2fwrM  pa-?nwendo  "span  of
the  foot,”  i.e.,  “ what  is  above  the  foot.”  (Dr.  Peters’
Mosambique  Voc.  No.  179.)  In  Kisuaheli  the  noun
jndihdli  or  "pahali  belonging  to  this  16th  (pa-)  class*
seems  to  indicate  that  the  Setshuana  noun  helo  " place  ”
which  is  the  only  noun,  not  an  Infinitive,  now  belonging
to  the  1 5th  class  in  this  language,  was  originally  a noun
of  the  16th  class.  In  Kinika  we  have  the  noun  vaifw,t
in  Kipokomo  WSi-ntu,  in  Kikdmba  vjSL-ndu  (as  'wSL-ndu
vf-onde  “ everywhere  ”),  in  Kihiau  pa-wdw  (as  "psi-ndu  pa
jnoito  “ fire  place  ”),  expressing  the  same  meaning.  The
corresponding  word  in  Otyiherero  is  o-po-na  (as  o-po-na
pa-ndpe  o-po-mha  “ my  place  is  here”),  and  in  this  lan-
guage we  have  also  a few  other  nouns  of  the  16th  class

* Krapfs  Outlines  pp.  37,  43,  78,  81,  82,  84,  85,  90,  96,  97,  as  in
• ina/ia/i  or  \nxhali  pa  ?-aho  “place  of  rest.”  Vide  Dr.  Steere’s  “ Table
of  Concords.”

f Krapf’s  Outl.  pp.  36,  38,  78,  81,  84,  85,  90,  as  in  VJI-/k  va  aiu.
“ place  of  men.”


Etymology  of  the  Bd-ntu  Derivative  Prefixes.  129

or  gender;  whilst  in  the  other  Western  languages  of  the
Middle  Branch,  traces  of  this  class  have  as  yet  been
discovered  in  the  old  Kongo  language  only,  and  it  cannot,
even  there,  be  proved  to  exist  now  as  a distinct  class  of
nouns.  Among  the  dialects  of  the  North  Western  Branch
it  is  possible  that  the  Isubu  noun  oma  (as  in  oma  wa
sohggo  “place  of  graves,”  wano  oma  “this  place”)  belongs
to  the  16th  class  or  gender.

436.  As  to  the  origin  of  the  prefix  of  the  16th  class  or
gender,  the  nouns  of  which,  few  as  they  are,  all  indicate
locality,  there  cannot  be  the  least  doubt  that  it  is  iden-
tical with  the  local  preposition  (or  prefixed  directive)  pa-,
found  in  so  many  South  African  B^-ntu  languages.  In
Kafir  and  Zulu  this  pa-  is  no  longer  used  as  a regular
directive,  but  occurs  with  the  directive  meaning  in  certain
adverbial  forms  (used  also  as  prepositions),  which  are
derived  from  nouns,  most  of  which  are  now  obsolete.
Appleyard  (§  319)  derives  parCkle  “outside”  from  in^ile
9.  “ field,”  pantsi  “ beneath  ” from  izantsi  “ lower  part  ”
(Zulu  inzansi),  pezolo  “last  night”  from  izolo  “yesterday,”
pezulu  “ above  ” from  izulu  “ heaven.”  But  to  these
must  be  added  the  Kafir  and  Zulu  preposition  pakati
(Setshuana  ha^are^  “ within,  between,  among,  inside,  in
the  middle,”  which  is  a sort  of  locative  form  of  an  obsolete
noun  of  the  14th  (ka-)  class*,  (a  gender  which  is  now
extinct  in  the  South  Eastern  Branch;)  also  the  Zulu  and
Kafir  prepositions  and  adverbs  pambili  “in  front  of,”
pambi  “before,”  pesheya  (Zulu  petsheya  according  to
Colenso)  “beyond,  on  the  other  side,”  &c.  In  Western
Setshuana  this  particle  has  the  sound  of  ha  and  is  still
used  as  a preposition,  as  Mark  xiv.  35,  a oela  ha  hatsi
“ he  fell  down  ort  the  ground.”  In  some  of  the  Middle
Branch  languages  pa  is  more  generally  used  either  as  a
prefixed  particle,  or  as  a preposition,  and  has  the  same  form
pa  in  Inhambane,  Sofala,  Tette,  Sena,  Maravi,  Kihiau,  &c.
In  Otyiherero  this  preposition  has,  generally  speaking,

* Compare  also  the  Otyiherero  prepositions  mokati  and  pokati.


130


The  Concord.


lost  its  vowel  before  the  initial  vowel  of  the  noun  (the
article),  but  Hahn  records  its  form  as  the  labial
quality  of  the  vowel  being  probably  in  some  manner  due
to  the  influence  of  the  labial  consonant  which  precedes  it.

437.  A third  prefix,  that  of  the  3rd  class  or  gender,  is
also  one  in  which  the  meaning  of  many  of  the  nouns
formed  with  it,  renders  it  probable  that  it  is  allied  to  a
directive  bearing  in  most  of  these  languages  the  same
form.  This  prefix  is  mu-  and  m-  in  Zulu,  m-  in  Kafir,
mo-  in  Setshuana,  mu-  in  most  Middle  Branch  lan-
guages (except  in  Mpongwe,  which  has  shortened  it  to  o-);
in  the  North  Western  Branch,  again,  it  is  in  Dualla  and
Isubu  me-,  in  Benga  mw-  and  u-,  in  Fernando  Po
b0“,  &c.

438.  We  claim  for  this  prefix  an  original  identity  with
the  prefixed  directive  or  preposition  mu-  of  the  Kongo
language,  as  mu-n-zo  9.  “ in  the  house.”  This  preposi-
tion occurs  in  the  same  or  similar  forms  in  many  Middle
Branch  languages ; it  is  for  example  m-  or  mo-  in  the
South  Western  genus,  as  Otyiherero  m-o-n-dyuo  ^‘in  the
house.”  In  Setshuana  it  has  the  form  mo  ( mo-'X.lu-h  ^'in
the  house”)  ; but  it  is  extinct  in  Kafir,  which  uses  in  its
place  a prefixed  se-  or  e-,  in  conjunction  with  an  affixed
-ini  or  -eni  (Setshuana  -en),  as  {s)e-n-Xlw-ini  “ in  the
house.”

439.  The  local  meaning  of  many  nouns  formed  with  the
derivative  prefix  of  the  3rd  (mu-)  class  (or  gender)  is  still
very  clear,  as  In  the  following  Kafir  nouns:  u-Ul-pambili
“front”  (pambili  “before”  § 436),  u-in.-lima  n'^lela  “land
mark  ” {lima  “ dig,  plough,  cultivate,”  i-n-'^lela  9.  “ way,
road  ”),  n-m-rnanffo  “ ridge,”  u-m-nyango  “ doorway,”  pi.
i-mi-nyango  4.,  u-m-'^laba  “earth,”  u-va.-da  “boundary,”
pi.  i-m\-da  4.  {-de  “ long,”  vide  § 362),  u-m-ua  “ back,”
M-XC\.-lomo  “ mouth,”*  u-m-z?  (Zulu  u-mu-zz)  “ kraal,

* The  Kafir  and  Zulu  noun  u-m4omo  “mouth”  (Setshuana  mo-
lomo,  Tekeza  nomo  § 343,  Sofala,  Sena,  and  Tette  mu-?omo,  Quellimane
Maravi  mo-Zomo,  Dualla  and  Isuhu  vxn-himhv may  be


Etymology  of  the  Bd-ntu  Derivative  Prefixes.  131

place,  residence,”  pi.  \-m.i-zi  4.,  \i-iCQ.-tomho  " fountain,”
pi.  {-mi-tornbo  4.,  and  also  such  nouns  as  u-m-XZa
(Zulu  u-mu-X/a)  “day,”  pi.  i-mi-XZa,  n-nyakaZ.  (Zulu
u-m-nyaha)  “year,”  pi.  \-ia\.i-nyaka  4.,  u-'m-zuzu  “some
time,  a-while,”  u-m-so  (Zulu  u-mu-so,  Setshudna  VHO-sho)
“ morrow, morning,”  from  u-ku-sa  15.  “to  dawn.”  (§  434.)

440.  The  number  of  nouns  of  the  3rd  (mu-)  class  or
gender,  which  have  a clearly  local  meaning,  is  compara-
tively smaller  in  Otyiherero  than  in  Kafir ; but  this  may
be  because  a large  number  of  ancient  nouns  of  this  class
have  been  lost  in  Otyiherero,  and  new  ones  have  arisen,
in  which  the  prefix  has  not  so  much  the  original  derivative
meaning,  as  one  of  a reflected  kind.  (§  426 — 428.)  On  the
whol^  however,  it  is  not  only  possible,  but  probable,  that
two  or  more  classes  of  nouns,  originally  distinct,  have
by  similarity  of  their  prefixes  (and  pronouns)  coalesced
(§  431),  and  that  one  of  these  prefixes  was  identical  with
the  directive  (or  preposition)  mu-  “ in.”

441.  With  regard  to  other  derivative  prefixes  of  nouns,
all  that  can  be  said,  is  that  more  or  less  successful  guesses
may  be  made  at  the  etymology  of  some  of  them.  It  may
be  that  the  prefix  li-  of  the  5th  class  or  gender  was
originally  identical  with  the  derivative  suffix  of  respective
verbs  in  -el-a  (which,  according  to  § 270  and  271,  must
originally  have  had  the  form  LE-A  or  -H-  LI-A),
and  that,  similarly,  the  prefix  of  the  11th  class  or  gender

derived  from  Kafir  and  Zulu  u-liu-fema  15.  “to  bite,”  (Setshuana
Xo-loma,  Tekeza  e-\iO-luma,  Sena  and  Tette  Ku-ri2ma,  Makua  n-luma,
Cape  Delgado,  Kfiiiau  and  IQnika  lin-luma,  Kikamba,  Kisuaheli,  and
Kipokomo  Jiu-iima,  Otyiherero  o-Itu-rumata,  Ovambo  and  Bunda
o-Miu-luma(a,  Mpongwe  ffo-noma).  This  etymology  will,  however,
appear  doubtful  to  many,  on  account  of  the  difference  of  the  vowel  of
the  stem  in  Kafir  um-lomo  and  uku-hma ; though  the  infiuences  of  vowel
harmony  will  account  for  this  change.  In  fact,  in  a noun  of  as  ancient
formation  as  um-lomo  clearly  is,  the  final  passive  suffix  -o  could  hardly
be  expected  not  to  have  exerted  an  infiuence  upon  the  preceding  vowel
of  the  stem.  If  this  etymology  is  right,  u-m-lorno  originally  indicated
the  place  where  there  is  biting,  or  rather,  where  there  is  being  bitten,
i.e,,  where  one  bites.


132


The  Concord.


lu-  is  related  to  the  suffix  of  inversive  verbs  in  -ul-a
(originally  LU-A).  There  is,  at  all  events,  a pro-
bability that  the  prefix  of  the  7 th  class  or  gender  (of
which  the  forms  ki-,  as  found  in  Kikamba,  Kinika,
Kisuaheli,  Bunda,  Kongo,  and  Kakongo,  and  si-,  as
found  in  Kafir,  se-  in  Setshu^na,  Z-  in  Mpongwe,  are
most  likely  identical  in  their  origin)*,  is  allied  to  the
suffixes  of  causative  verbs  in  -is-a  and  -ik-a,  of  which  the
primitive  forms  must  be  supposed  to  have  been  SI- A

and  -J^-  KI-A.  The  meaning  of  many  nouns  of  the
7th  class  (as  Kafir  i-si-va^o  7.  “apparel,”  pi.  \-2X-vato  8.
from  VL-lsJX-vata  15.  “to  dress,”  i-si-^  7.  “disease,  sick-
ness,” pi.  i-z\-fo  8.  from  u-ku-/a  15.  “ to  die,”  &c.,)
seems  much  to  favour  such  a derivation.  And  with
regard  to  the  derivative  prefix  ka-  of  the  13th  class  or
gender,  which  is  now  found  only  in  the  Middle  Branch
languages,  {vide,  however,  § 436,)  and  generally  with  a
diminutive  meaning,  we  can  hardly  help  comparing  it
with  the  prefixed  genitive  particle  ha-  (“  of  ”),  employed
in  Kafir  with  certain  nouns  (§  463),  and  also  (though
more  restricted  in  its  use)  in  Setshuana,  where  it  has  the
form  (written  go)  according  to  § 87  and  381.

442.  All  that  can  be  said  is  that  none  of  these  deriva-
tions is  impossible;  but  it  must  be  observed  that  (as
stated  in  § 261 — 265)  the  formative  or  grammatical  por-
tions of  most  languages  (and  particularly  of  the  South
African  tongues)  are  reduced  to  a very  small  number  of
sounds,  and  that  the  difficulties  in  pronunciation  are
made  to  disappear  much  more  rapidly  here  than  in  other
parts  of  speech.  On  this  account,  the  cases  of  homo-
phony of  grammatical  elements,  quite  distinct  in  their
origin,  are  of  such  frequent  occurrence,  that  a coincidence
in  form  between  two  grammatical  elements  can  by  no
means  be  considered  as  a proof  of  their  original  identity,

* There  are  between  them  the  intermediate  forms,  tyi-  of  the
Otyiherero  and  Benguela,  tslii-  and  Shi-  of  Lourenzo  Marques,  Tette
and  Sena.


Etymology  of  the  Ba-ntu  Derivatioe  Prefixes.  133

or  even  of  their  derivation  from  a common  source.
Etymology  is,  therefore,  seldom  more  difficult  than  in
the  analysis  of  the  formative  or  grammatical  portions
of  a language,  the  suffixes  and  the  prefixes,  &c.  It  would,
perhaps,  hardly  be  necessary  to  lay  any  stress  upon  this
evident  rule,  had  it  not  been  so  frequently  and  flagrantly
violated,  particularly  by  advocates  of  the  so-called  Pro-
nominal Theory.  ( Vide  § 415,  note.)

443.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  original  meaning
of  the  prefixes  has  also  been  obscured  by  the  custom  of
correspondence  which  established  itself  between  prefixes
of  different  numerical  value,  whereby  the  meaning  of  one
prefix  became  affected  by  that  of  another,  to  which  it
corresponded,  either  as  singular  or  plural.  The  prefixes  of
the  plural  number  were  naturally  most  affected  in  this  way;
and  it  may  be  on  this  account  that  their  etymology  is  still
less  certain  than  that  of  those  of  the  singular  number.  It
is,  indeed,  possible  that  the  derivative  prefix  ba-  of  the
2nd  class  (or  gender),  by  which  the  plural  of  almost  all
nouns  of  the  1st  (mu-)  class  (personal  nouns)  is  formed,
has  something  to  do  with  the  Setshudna  auxiliary  verb
ha  “ be  again  ” (perfect  bile  or  he,  as  hi  bile  hi  tsile  “ I
have  come  again  ”)  and  also  with  the  stem  of  the  second
numeral,  of  which  the  primitive  form  -bali  (§  361)  is  still
used  in  the  Benga  language.


2.  ETYMOLOGY  OE  THE  HOTTENTOT  DERIVATIVE
SUFFIXES.

444.  The  number  of  the  classes  (or  genders)  of  nouns
in  the  Hottentot  language,  being,  as  we  have  seen,  much
smaller  than  in  the  Ba-ntu  languages,  the  cases  in  which
(two  or  more)  suffixes,  originally  distinct,  and  marking
different  classes,  have  coalesced,  are  probably  more
numerous.  At  the  same  time,  the  regularity  in  tlie
numerical  coiTespondence  (as  singular,  plural,  and  dual)  of

Bleek,  S.  Afr.  Comp.  Grammar.  T


134


The  Concord.


the  different  classes  or  genders  to  each  other  has  been  far
more  strictly  carried  through.  These  causes  combine  to
render  the  etymology  of  the  derivative  suffixes  which  indi-
cate the  classes  or  genders  in  Hottentot,  even  more  obscure
than  that  of  the  prefixes  in  the  Ba-ntu  languages.  In
fact,  none  of  the  derivations  which  suggest  themselves
with  regard  to  these  Hottentot  terminations  of  nouns,  is
more  than  possible.  Curiously  enough,  the  terminations
which  can  most  easily  be  compared  to  other  parts  of
speech,  are  those  of  the  masculine  plural  and  masculine
dual  classes.  The  form  of  the  masculine  plural  -gu
(Knudsen’s  and  Tindall’s  -ku)  is  identical  with  the  suffix,
by  which  the  reciprocal  form  of  the  verb  is  distinguished.
Thus  mu-gu  is  “ see  one  another”  (with  reference  to  both
plural  and  dual,  and  to  all  genders  and  persons),  but  mu-gw.
is  “ see  them,”  or  “ they  seeing,”  and  mu-gM  “ eyes  ”
(§  424), — the  termination  -gu  in  the  two  latter  cases  be-
longing to  the  masculine  plural  class  (or  gender),  in  the
one  case  as  pronoun  either  objective  or  subjective,  in  the
other  as  derivative  suffix.  It  is  quite  possible  that  the
plural  and  reciprocal  meaning  sprung  from  the  same
original  idea ; but  it  may  be,  also,  that  the  identity  is  only
apparent,  just  as  in  German  the  same  form  of  pronoun
(sie ) does  service  now  in  the  feminine  singular  (English
“ she  ”)  and  common  plural  (English  “ they  ”),  and  the
syllable  ihr  may  either  indicate  the  possessive  adjectives
of  the  feminine  singular  (English  “ her  ”)  and  common
plural  (English  " their  ”),  or  the  dative  case  of  the
former  (English  “ to  her,”  &c.),  or  even  be  the  so-called
pronoun  of  the  second  person  plural  (English  “ you  ”).
But  such  cases  of  homophony  of  forms  which  were
originally  distinct,  are  so  numerous,  that  it  ought  to
be  superfluous  to  warn  grammai’ians  of  the  snares  which
they  contain.  With  the  same  reservation,  we  may  also
compare  the  termination  of  the  masculine  dual  -kha
with  the  stem  kha-  in  khd-'p  m.  s.  “war”  (also  “a
bow  ”),  kha-koi-'p  “ an  enemy.”  The  Latin  helium  (i.e.


Etymology  of  the  Hottentot  Derivative  Prefixes.  135

duellum),  German  words  like  “ Zwietracht,  entzweien,”
and  the  English  phrase  “ it  takes  two  to  make  a quarrel,”
come  forward  as  advocates  for  such  a suggestion,  but  it
cannot  be  considered  as  anything  more.  With  regard  to
the  other  terminations  of  the  classes  or  genders,  we  are
even  destitute  of  such  hypothetical  etymologies,  excepting
as  far  as  the  present  general  meaning  of  the  suffix  may
be  considered  a safe  guide.  Thus  the  termination  of  the
feminine  singular,  of  which  the  original  form  appears  to
have  been  -si  (§  423),  may  have  a causal  meaning  similar
to  that  of  the  7 th  prefix,  of  which  the  Kafir  form  is  also
ei-  (§  447).  In  the  Nama  verb  dai-si  “to  suckle,”  (com-
pare dai  “to  suck,”)  the  same  suffix  appears  to  have  such  a
causal  meaning ; but,  as  yet,  the  above  instance  is  the  only
one  known  in  which  this  suffix  is  used  for  the  formation
of  causative  verbs.  {Si  by  itself,  used  as  a verb,  means  “to
go  to,  arrive  at.”)  The  identity  of  these  terminations
(the  noun  suffix  -s  and  the  verbal  suffix  -si)  with  that
of  the  ! Kora  causative,  or  rather  permissive,  verbs  in
-kosi,*  (which  seem  to  be  unknown  in  the  Nama  dialect,)
is  still  less  clear.  That  the  termination  of  nouns  in  the
masculine  singular  -bi  (§  423)  had  originally  a local
signification,  is  rendered  probable  by  the  meaning  of  many
nouns  formed  with  it,  and  by  those  adverbial  forms  which
were  originally  demonstrative  and  interrogative  pronouns
of  this  gender,  as  ne-h-a  “ here,”  una-h-a  “ there,”  ma-h-a
“where;”  whilst  ne-s-a  means  “thus,”  ma-s-a  “what,
why,”  &c.  These  Hottentot  adverbs  are  similar  in  their
use  and  etymology  to  the  Kafir  adverbial  expressions  a-pa
“here,”  a-p-o  “there,”  and  pi-rea  “where,”  which  evi-
dently were  originally  demonstrative  and  interrogative
pronouns  of  the  now  obsolete  16th  (pa-)  class.  (Vide§
435).  But  if  it  were  allowable  to  identify  derivative  suffixes
of  the  Hottentot  nouns  with  the  prefixes  of  the  nouns  in
the  Ba  ntu  languages, — then  the  suffix  -b  or  -bi,  in  its
junction  of  masculine  and  local  meaning,  would  almost
^ Appleyard,  p.  25,  XVIII.


136


The  Concord.


suggest  the  hypothesis  that  the  homophonous  prefixes  of
the  1st  and  3rd  classes  (mu-)  had  here  been  combined,  so
that  the  local  meaning  of  the  3rd  class  had  joined  the  per-
sonal one  of  the  1 st,  and  that  by  an  accidental  exclusion  of
the  feminine  nouns  {vide  § 424),  the  latter  class  had  been
restricted  to  nouns  Indicating  male  beings.  But  we  need
not  say  that  we  do  not  ascribe  the  least  weight  to
these  comparisons,  nor  do  we  believe  that  we  have  proved
even  the  probability  of  the  identity  of  certain  derivative
suffixes  of  nouns  in  Hottentot,  and  similar  prefixes  in  the
Ba-ntu  languages.  It  is  enough  for  us,  here,  to  have
ascertained  that  the  principle,  upon  which  the  Concord
in  both  these  families  of  languages  is  based,  is  primarily
the  same.  I do  not,  however,  maintain  that,  before  the
question  of  any  special  Identity  of  the  suffixes  of  the  one
and  the  prefixes  of  the  other  family  of  languages  can  be
mooted,  it  must  first  have  become  clear  that  one  of  these
families  of  languages  (either  the  Prefix-Pronominal  or
the  Suffix-Pronominal)  has  inverted  the  original  position
of  the  derivative  particles,  and  that  thus,  either  the  prefixes
of  the  B^-ntu  nouns,  or  the  suffixes  of  the  Hottentot,  have
to  be  regarded  as  articles  originally  descended  from  the
derivative  particles  (which  must  now  have  wholly  dis-
appeared) rather  than  as  derivative  prefixes.*  On  the


* To  make  our  meaning  clearer,  we  may  refer  to  the  circumstance  that
nouns  in  the  Ba-ntu  languages  frequently  lose  their  derivative  prefixes,
and  merely  indicate  the  concord  by  the  pronominal  elements  referring
to  each  noim.  Let  this  practice  be  accompanied  by  the  habit  of  placing
demonstrative  pronouns  only  at  the  end  of  the  noun  (as  in  Setshuana),
and  not  prefixing  them  (as  in  Kafir), — then  a simple  pronominal  element
used  as  an  article,  at  the  end  of  the  noun,  may  frequently  become  the
chief  mark,  by  which  the  class  of  each  noun  is  distinguished.  It  must,
of  course,  be  supposed  that  the  use  of  such  a sufldxed  article  had  become
so  prevalent  as  to  cause  the  original  derivative  prefix  (no  longer  necessary
as  a mark  of  the  concord)  to  disappear  entirely, — before  we  can  assume
this  to  have  been  the  origin  of  the  concord-indicating  sufiixes  of  the
nouns  in  Hottentot.  Such  a process  is  not  impossible,  but  in  the  present
state  of  our  knowledge  it  would  be  wrong  to  look  upon  it  as  probable .
If)  however,  it  were  to  have  taken  place,  then  what  we  now  call  derivative


Etymology  of  the  Hottentot  Derivative  Prefixes  137

contrary,  it  is  quite  possible  that  in  the  primary  stages  of
the  Pronominal  languages,  the  position  of  these  deriva-
tive particles  of  the  nouns  was  not  fixed,  and  that  they
could  either  precede  or  follow  the  other  parts  of  the
noun.  Their  position,  as  prefixes  or  suffixes,  may  have
afterwards  fixed  itself,  and  thus  an  original  identity  of
some  among  such  prefixes  and  suffixes  is  not  impossible.
But,  of  course,  a few  casual  coincidences  can  by  no
means  establish  an  actual  identity.

445.  Upon  the  whole,  the  etymology  of  almost  all  the
derivative  suffixes  of  the  nouns  in  Hottentot,  and  of  most
of  the  derivative  prefixes  in  the  Ba-ntu  languages,  may
be  said  to  be  as  uncertain  as  that  of  the  most  ancient
derivative  suffixes  in  our  own  languages.  We  do  not
doubt  that  these  had  originally  an  independent  meaning,
just  as  much  as  the  more  modern  suffixes,  of  which  we
can  still  trace  the  derivation.


3.  ANALOGIES.

446.  Between  some  of  the  derivative  prefixes  of  the
Ba-ntu  languages,  and  certain  derivative  suffixes  in  our
own,  we  notice  a sort  of  correspondence.  For  example,
in  the  formation  of  verbal  nouns,  the  derivative  prefix
mu-  of  the  1st  class  or  gender  almost  corresponds  with
the  suffix  -er  in  English  and  German.  Thus,  from  Kafir
Vi-']i^x-fund^sa  15.  "to  teach”  is  derived  u-rci-fundisi  1.
"teacher,”  from  u-'kxi-zinga  15.  "to  tempt”  n-vn-zingi

sufiSixes  of  nouns  in  the  Hottentot  language,  would  have  to  be  considered
as  pronouns,  originally  identical  in  form  with  derivative  prefixes  which
have  now  disappeared.  If  this  were  the  case,  although  it  would  alter  our
opinion  regarding  the  status  of  the  terminations  indicating  the  gender
of  nouns  in  Hottentot,  yet  our  explanation  of  the  origin  of  the  concord
in  that  language  would  not  be  affected  by  it ; for,  if  the  present  termina-
tions are  merely  pronominal  elements  and  not  derivative  particles,  they
must  at  all  events  be  referred  to  derivative  particles  (either  prefixed  or
sufSxed),  which  were  originally  determinative  of  the  class  or  gender,
although  they  may  now  have  disappeared.


138


The  Concord.


“ tempter,”  &c.  A still  more  decided  correspondence  of
meaning  is  found  between  the  power  of  the  prefix  of  the
14th  class  (Tdu-  in  Kafir,  bO-  in  Setshu^na,  u-  in  Otyi-
herero)*  and  our  derivative  sufiixes  -ness,  -ship,  -hood,
-dom,  and  -ing,  as  \x.-\m-nyakama  14.  “ dampness  ” from
M-'^XL-nyakama  “to  become  damp,”  u-bu-soAa  14.  “bache-
lorship” from  \-soka  5.  “bachelor,”  M-^yXi-ntwana  14.
“childhood”  from  u-m-^wowa  1.  (Zulu  Vi-va.Xi-ntwana
1.  pi.  a,-\i2i-ntwana  2.)  “child,”  \x-\yXL-doda  14.  “man-
hood” from  i-yy-doda  9.  “man”  (pi.  &-J3ldi-doda  6.  “men”),
Vi-\iXL-lumko  14.  “wisdom”  from  Vi-'k.Xi-lumka.  15.  “to
heed,  to  care,  to  be  wise,”  &c.  Points  of  analogy  may
also  be  observed  between  other  derivative  prefixes  in  the
Ba-ntu  languages,  and  the  derivative  suffixes  of  the  nouns
in  ours ; although  none  of  these  analogies  are  so  exten-
sive as  to  allow  us  to  identify  the  meaning  of  any  Ba-ntu
derivative  particle,  with  that  of  one  of  our  own.f

447.  Correspondence  does  not  exist  to  this  extent
between  any  of  the  sex-denoting  suflSxes  in  Hottentot,  and
the  so-called  derivative  suflSxes  of  nouns  in  our  own  lan-
guages. Evidently,  the  original  power  of  those  Hottentot
derivative  suflSxes,  (which  indicate  the  concord,)  has  been

* In  the  Dakota  Language,  spoken  by  the  Sioux  in  North  America,  the
derivative  prefix  wo-  is  used  for  the  purpose  of  forming  abstract  nouns
from  verbs  and  adjectives.  (Dakota  Grammar  4to,  1852,  § 5,  5;  § 62,  3.)

t The  vowel  terminating  the  nouns,  in  the  Ba-ntu  languages,  is  in
no  way  derived  from,  or  connected  with  the  derivative  prefixes,  and  has
no  reference  whatever  to  the  concord.  The  nature  of  this  vowel  is,
however,  of  importance  to  the  meaning  of  the  noun,  particularly  if
derived  from  a verb.  In  this  case  the  noun  generally  ends  in  one  of  the
following  vowels,  -a,  -i  (or  -e),  and  -o.  The  termination  -o  here  clearly
implies  a passive  meaning,  the  -i  an  active  or  causative,  whilst  the  -a  has
a neutral  force.  It  follows  from  the  meaning  which  each  of  these
vowels  conveys,  that  certain  prefixes  are  either  constantly  or  generally
accompanied  by  one  of  these  terminations.  For  instance,— all,  or  almost
all,  the  infinitives  of  verbs  end  m -a,  and  thus  the  great  mass  of  the
norms  of  the  \5th  (l4«-)  class  end  also  in  -a.  Similarly,  most  of  the
verbal  nouns  of  the  1st  (mil-)  class  (of  personal  beings)  end  in  -i,  and
most  of  those  of  the  3rd  (mil-)  class  have  -o  as  their  terminating  vowel.


139


Analogies.

weakened,  and  their  meaning  obscured.  They  have,
therefore,  no  longer  that  derivative  force  which  they
must  have  possessed  formerly,  and  have  become  chiefly
signs  of  gender  (or  class)  and  number.  In  fact,  to  some
extent,  the  local  and  causal  meanings  which  the  two  most
important  of  these  suffixes  (those  of  the  masculine  and
feminine  singular)  impart  to  many  of  the  nouns  formed
with  them,  seem  to  place  them  almost  in  analogy  with
some  case  terminations  in  the  Aryan  languages.  Yet
these  concord-indicating  suffixes  in  Hottentot  are  suffi-
ciently used  for  the  purposes  of  derivation,  and  of  deline-
ating various  shades  of  meaning,  to  render  it  evident  that
they  (like  the  B^-ntu  prefixes  of  nouns)  were  formerly
employed  as  derivative  particles,  descended  from  words
once  independent.


III.  THE  GENDERS  (OR  CLASSES)
AND  NUMBERS  OF  NOUNS.

1.  THE  CLASSES  AND  NUMBEBS  OF  NOUNS  IN  THE
Bi-NTU  LANGUAGES.


a.  NUMERICAL  VALUE  AND  CORRESPONDENCE  OF  THE  DERIVATIVE
PREFIXES  OF  THE  NOUNS.

448.  With  regard  to  the  analogy,  which  we  observed
between  the  concord-indicating  derivative  prefixes  in  the
B^-ntu  languages,  and  the  derivative  suffixes  of  nouns  in
our  own,  this  difference  is,  however,  to  be  noted,  that
whilst  our  derivative  suffixes  do  not  by  themselves  indicate
either  the  singular  or  plural  (the  number  being  marked
by  the  declension  of  the  noun),  most  of  the  Ba-ntu  deri-
vative prefixes  of  nouns  (like  the  terminations  indicating
the  gender  in  the  Hottentot  and  Semitic  languages)
imply  a certain  numerical  value  ; and,  as  a general  rule,
one  derivative  prefix  corresponds  to  another,  either  as
singular  or  plural.  Thus  Zulu  XL-JX\.-fundisi  1.  (Naraa


140


The  Concord.


jjhha-llkhd-au-'p  m.  s.)  is  “a.  teacher,”  and  a,-hQ.-fundisi  2.
(Nama  llkhd-Hkhd~au-'k\i  m.  pi.)  “ teachers,”  i-si-fundiso  7.
(Nama  jjkhd^Hkhd--p  m.  s.  or  Ijkhd-llkhd-S  f.  s.)  “ doctrine,”
and  i-zi-fundiso  8.  (N ama  llkhd-jlkhd-ei-ti  f.  pi.)  “ doctrines,”
3.  (Nama  hei-3  f.  s.)  ‘‘a  tree,”  and  i-mi-#2  4.
(Nama  hei-ti  f.  pi.)  ‘‘trees,”  u-lu-ti  11.  (Nama  hei-i
common  s.)  “a  stick,”  and  i-zin-ti  IQ,  “sticks,”  \-\i-zwe  5.
“ country,”  and  a.-TCLdi-zwe  6.  “ countries,”  x-3\-zwe  7.
“ nation,”  and  \-zi-zwe  8.  “ nations,”  &c.

449.  Although  this  is  the  general  rule,  it  is  by  no
means  necessary  that  each  prefix  should  convey  a certain
numerical  value,  or  that  a prefix  indicating  the  plural
number  should  only  correspond  to  one  of  the  singular.
On  the  contrary,  though  the  power  of  analogy,  (parti-
cularly in  the  more  advanced  languages  of  the  B^-ntu
family,)  has  produced  great  regularity  with  regard  to
such  correspondence,  it  still  frequently  occurs  that  one
prefix  of  the  plural  number  corresponds  to  two  or  more
different  prefixes  of  the  singular  number,  and  that  two
or  three  different  plural  prefixes  are  found  in  corres-
pondence with  one  of  the  singular  number.

450.  Thus  the  (singular)  prefix  n-  of  the  9th  class  or
gender  is  usually  exchanged  in  the  plural  for  zin-  of  the
10th  class.  Yet  there  are  some  nouns  of  the  9th  class
(as  i-i[x.-doda  “ man,”  x-H-simu  “ garden,”  i-n-Aosi  “ chief,”)
the  plurals  of  which  are  formed  with  the  derivative  prefix
ma-  of  the  6th  class,  as  a-m.'a.-doda  “ men,”  a-ma-smw
“gardens,”  a-ma-^osf  “chiefs.”  (Colenso  §§  58 — 60.)
Similarly,  the  prefix  zin-  of  the  10th  class  generally
corresponds  as  plural  to  In-  of  the  1 1 th  class  ; but  a few
nouns  in  In-  have  also  their  plurals  formed  with  the  prefix
ma-,  as  M-suku  (vocative  1u-smAm)  11.  “ day,”  pi.  a~ma-
suku  6.,*  and  in  Kafir  xx-hala  11.  “desert,”  pi.  a-ma-iaZa  6.,

* In  Zulu  we  find  besides  the  form  a-ma-sjiAw  6.  two  other  plurals
corresponding  to  \x-sulm  ll.,  viz  , i-mn-suku  or  i-n-swAa  10.  and  i-mi-
suhu  4.  The  latter  is  only  used  in  the  locative  case,  or

e-tM-svhv-eni  “ every  day.”  (Colenso’s  Dictionary  p.  458.)


Correspondence  of  Singular  and  Plural  Prefixes.  141

u-lwalwa  11.  “rock,”  pi.  Q.-xUdi-lwalwa  6.  Examples  of
the  latter  kind  of  correspondence  appear  to  be  more
frequent  in  Setshuana  than  in  the  Kafir  species,  as  \o-unuo
11.  “fruit,”  pi,  ma  -uhuo  6.,  \o-loapa  11.  “court,”  pi.
VX2i-loapa  6.,  \o-humo  11.  “wealth,”  pi.  TXidi-liumo  6.,
\0-rato  11.  “love,”  pi.  ma-ra^o  6.,  &c.

451.  The  prefix  ma-  of  the  6 th  class  or  gender
corresponds  most  regularly  as  plural  to  the  prefix  of
the  singular  number  li-  (of  the  5th  class),  which  li-
is  not  exchanged  for  any  other  plural  prefix.  Besides
this,  the  prefix  ma-  (as  has  just  been  stated  § 450,)
is  used  for  forming  plurals  to  certain  nouns  of  the
singular  number  with  the  prefixes  n-  of  the  9th  and
lu-  of  the  11th  classes  (or  genders).  In  Kafir,  also,
a few  of  the  nouns  formed  with  ma-  (as  a-ma-
pakati  6.  “councillors,”  A-ma-//o5«  “Frontier  Kafirs,”
&c.,)  are  plurals  to  nouns  of  the  1st  (mu-)  class  of
personal  beings,  {\i-T0il-pakati  1.  ‘'councillor,”  U-m-//osa
1.  “a  Frontier  Kafir,”)  which  generally  has  the  2nd
(ba-)  class  as  its  corresponding  plural.  In  Setshuana,
and  in  many  of  the  more  northern  languages,  this
prefix  ma-  is  also  used  for  the  formation  of  plurals
to  nouns  having  in  the  singular  number  the  prefixes
of  the  14th  (Setshuana  bO-,  Otyiherero  U-)  and
15th  (Setshuana  x^~>  Otyiherero  ku-)  classes, — as  Se-
tshuana bo-si'xo  14.  “night,”  pi.  ma-S2‘xo  6.  (§  453),
Otyiherero  o-ku-^wj  15.  “ ear,”  pi.  o-ma-iw?  6.*  (§  434,
note.)

452.  We  find  also  a number  of  nouns  formed  with  the
prefix  ma-  which  do  not  correspond  as  plural  to  any
singular  nouns,  but  have  a collective  meaning.  The  nouns
of  this  kind  which  are  the  most  numerous  and  which
are  common  to  all  languages  of  this  family,  are  those

* With  reference  to  the  apparent  probability  that  the  msi-  in  these
cases  was  originally  prefixed  to  the  prefixes  of  the  11th  (III-),  14th
(bu-),  and  15th  (feu-)  classes,  rather  than  substituted  for  them,  see
below,  § 454.

BUe\\  S.  Afr.  Comp.  Qrommar.


u


142


The  Concord.


signifying  liquids,  as  Kafir  a-ma-n^i*  “ water,”  a-ma-si't
“ milk,”  a-ma-/M?«  “oil,  fat,  butter ”|,  a-ma-^e  “spittle,”
Setsbu^na  raa-W  “blood,”  &c.§  We  also  meet  with  a

* Sesuto  metsi,  Se^lapi  metse,  Tekeza  and  Inhambane  ma-ft’,  Sofala
and  Kisuaheli  ina-c?«Ai,  Tette,  Sena,  and  Maravi  msi-dze  and  mst-dzi,
Quellimane  mm-ndshe  or  ma-msAe,  Makua  nia-zi,  Kihiau  (Mudshan,
Ajoua)  meze  (Peters)  or  messi  (Koelle),  Kikamba  ma-nsi,  Kinika  and
Kipokomo  ma-zz,  Basbubea  menze,  Batonga  ma-nzi  (Cbapman),
Batoka  meye  (Livingstone),  Borotse  mei,  Banyenko  meyo,  Bakboba
(Bayeiye)  ami,  Balojazi  and  Maponda  mema,  Otyiberero  omeva,  Ovambo
omea,  Nano  (Benguela)  ovova,  Bunda  (Angola)  menya,  Kongo  mdsa,  Dikele,
Dualla,  and  Isubu  m<X-diba,  Benga  miha,  Timneb,  m’antr,  Bullom  men.
Tbe  original  form  of  tbis  noun  was  probably  similar  to  that  still  preserved
in  tbe  Nortb-western  Branch  (Dikele  &c.),  perhaps  MA-NDIBA.

f Sesuto  Mia-:/?,  Sexlapi  and  Balojazi  ma-sA?,  (Inhambane  ma-
pisa,)  Suaheli  and  Kipokomo  msi-siwa,  Kinika  messia,  Ba-nyenko
lUStrwe,  Basbubea  ma-sAue,  (Bayeiye  m^-shota,)  Otyiberero  o-ma-
ihi,  Sindonga  (Ovambo)  o-ma-Xfni,  (Batoka  ma-b'/e.  Nano  or  Benguela
o-va-veZe,  Benga  msi-nyanga,  Dikele  m^-nyandiba,  Dualla  ma-
nyongo-diba,)  &c.

t Sena,  Tette,  Cape  Delgado,  Batoka,  and  Basbubea  msi-futa,  Inhani-
bane,  Tekeza  and  Sesuto  m^-fura,  Sexlapi  ma-A«ra,  Makua  ma-
kura,  Suaheli  mn,-fuda,  Kihiau  msk,-fuda  or  m^-buda,  Kinika  and
Kipokomo  mfH.-fuha,  Kikamba  ma-«da ; Banyenko,  Barotse  and
Balojazi  ma-d^,  Bayeiye  a-ina-ze,  Baponda  ma-ze,  Otyiberero
o-ma-3’e,  Bunda  ma-sAi  (magi'),  &c.

§ This  structural  peculiarity,  (viz.  that  a good  number  of  nouns  indi-
cating liquids  are  formed  with  the  derivative  prefix  ma-,  and  are,  in
consequence,  represented  by  pronouns  of  which  the  original  form  was
also  ma-,)  is  so  characteristic  that  it  would  be  a most  curious  coinci-
dence, if  it  originated  in  different  languages  independently  of  each  other.
It  was  on  tbis  accormt,  that  when  nothing  more  was  known  to  me  of  the
Bdllom  language  than  the  short  notice  in  Vater’s  “ Mithridates  ” (Vol.
IV.  p.  438),  tbe  fact  there  mentioned  of  tbis  language  possessing  a
peculiar  relative  pronoun  ma  referring  to  liquids,  seemed  at  once  to  sug-
gest a relationship  with  tbe  Ba-ntu  languages.  (De  Nominum  Generibus
1851,  p.  39.)  Soon  afterwards,  when  Nyliinder’s  publications  became
accessible  to  me,  this  hypothesis  was  converted  into  certainty.  Subse-
quently, I found  that  tbe  first  Bishop  of  Sierra  Leone  (O.  E.  Vidal)  bad,
about  tbe  same  time,  “ discovered  tbe  Temneb  (with  its  two  cognates,  tbe
Sberbro  and  tbe  Bullom)  to  be  a branch”  of  what  be  calls  “the  South
African  family  ” of  languages.  (Crowtber’s  Yoruba  Vocabulary,  1852,
Introd.  Remarks,  p.  7.)  Later,  I learnt,  in  perusing  Hazelwood’s  Gram-
mar of  tbe  Fiji  language,  that  the  genitive  particle  mei  was  especialh'


Correspondence  of  Singular  and  Plural  Prefixes,  143

number  of  abstract  nouns  of  the  6th  (ma-)  class  without
any  corresponding  singular  or  plural,  particularly  in  the
more  northern  of  the  South  African  Bd-ntu  languages.

453.  Furthei’,  a derivative  prefix  may  in  some  nouns
have  a plural  value,  and  thus  correspond  to  a prefix  of  the
singular  number,  while  in  other  nouns  the  same  prefix
may  indicate  the  singular  number,  and  have  a plural
prefix  corresponding  to  it.  Such  is  the  case  with  the
14th  prefix.  This  prefix  (bu-)  in  Kafir  and  Zulu  is  of
no  definite  number,  and  has  no  other  prefix  corresponding
to  it,  either  as  singular  or  plural.  Most  of  the  nouns
formed  with  it  are  abstract  nouns.  (§  446.)  In  the
kindred  Setshuana,  however,  the  same  prefix  bo-  is  of
the  singular  number,  and  the  nouns  formed  with  it
exchange  it  in  their  plural  for  ma-j  the  derivative  prefix
of  the  6th  class.  Similarly,  many  Middle  Branch  lan-
guages either  displace  the  14th  prefix  (in  these  languages
generally  abbreviated  to  T1-)  for  the  6th  prefix  (ma-)  in
order  to  form  the  plural ; or,  for  the  same  purpose,  they
prefix  ma-  to  the  form  beginning  with  u-.  Thus  Otyihe-
rero  o-\x.-tuliu*  14.  (night)  has  as  corresponding  plural  the

used  in  this  language  to  indicate  “ the  possession  of  a thing  to  be  drunk,”
as  “ a me  (the  drink)  i (of)  Varani.”  (“  Grammar  ” p.  19.)  The  natural
inference  suggested  itself  that  this  feature  of  the  language  was  again
to  be  considered  as  a trace  of  the  common  origin  of  the  Fiji  and
the  Ba-ntu  languages.  This  probability  was  then  further  confirmed  by
so  many  other  evidences,  particularly  those  met  with  in  the  Papuan
languages,  that  no  doubt  could  any  longer  remain  as  to  the  fact  that  the
Papuan,  Polynesian,  and  Malay  languages  are  related  to  the  Ba-ntu
languages,  and  that  thus  the  Prefix-Pronominal  Class  forms  almost  one
continuous  belt  of  languages  on  both  sides  of  the  equator,  from  the
mouth  of  the  Senegal  to  the  Sandwich  Islands.  The  observations  on
the  position  of  the  Oceanic  section  of  these  languages  were  embodied  in
a treatise,  which  is  in  the  possession  of  Sir  George  Grey.

* Kafir  u-lbu-sM^M,  Sesuto  I»o-sio,  Setshuana  Ibo-sixo,  Tekeza
(Lourenzo  Marques)  besiko,  Inhambane  w-shiku  or  n-shigu,  Sofala
Tette  w-siku,  Maravi  ii-siAo,  Mosambique  w-Myu,  Kisuaheli,
Kinika,  and  Kipokomo  n-siku,  Kikamba  VL-tuku,  Banyenko  O-thiko,
Batoka  and  Borotse  Bamponda  hto-tihe.  Nano  (Benguela)

n-Uke,  Bunda  (Angola)  Dualla  and  Isubu  bulu.


144


The  Concord,


form  o.vil2i~u-tuhu*  6.  (nights).  But  in  Otyiherero  (and
also  in  several  other  Middle  Branch  languages,)  the
same  prefix  u-  of  the  14th  class  is  not  of  the  singular
number  only.  It  is  also  used  for  the  purpose  of  forming
nouns  of  the  plural  number,  which  correspond  to  singular
nouns  with  the  prefix  ka- of  the  13th  class,  as  o-ka*^*
13.  "stick,”  pi.  o-U-ifi  14.  "sticks”;  whilst  the  nouns  of
the  13th  (ka-)  class,  in  some  of  the  Middle  Branch
languages,  again  have  as  corresponding  plurals,  nouns
formed  with  the  prefix  of  the  12th  class  tu-,  which  is
used  in  Otyiherero  and  other  languages  as  plural  of  the
11th  (ru-  or  lu-)  class.  (§  405.)

454.  At  an  early  period  of  the  language,  when  the
present  derivative  prefixes  (or  suffixes)  were  still  used  by
themselves  with  an  independent  meaning,  and  when  the
nouns  of  which  they  formed  part,  were,  therefore,  not
derivatives,  but  composites, — it  seems  that  there  was
no  general  distinction  of  the  number  of  nouns.  The
grammatical  number  of  nouns  is  only  a consequence  of
their  distribution  into  classes ; for,  a regular  indication  of
the  number  can  only  in  this  way  have  been  effected.
Few  nouns  in  themselves  necessarily  implied  either  the
singular  or  plural  number,  excepting  those  which  stood  in
such  relation  to  each  other  as  some  of  our  collectives  stand
to  the  single  nouns  corresponding  to  them, — " people  ” to
"person,”  "army”  to  "soldier,”  "forest”  to  "tree,”
" fleet  ” to  " ship,”  &c.  In  this  way,  when  some  of  the
present  derivative  prefixes  (or  suffixes)  of  nouns  occupied
this  relative  position,  the  habit  may  have  gradually  arisen
of  indicating  that  difference  in  the  number  of  the  nouns
which  was  not  yet  a ruling  principle  in  the  structure  of  the
language,  by  the  contrast  of  these  parts  of  the  nouns  which
we  may  call  their  determinatives.  But  it  does  not,  of
course,  follow  that  all  those  parts  of  the  nouns  which  were

* Setshuana  nia-sixo,  Sena  ma-*i^o  or  ma-sl^«,  Bashubea
(Livingstone)  and  Batonga  (Chapman)  ma-sf^o,  Bak^oba  (Bayeiye)
ma-sw/w.


Correspondence  of  Singular  and  Plural  Prefixes.  145

converted  into  derivative  prefixes  (or  suflfixes)  indicating
the  concord,  once  stood  in  this  relation  to  each  other ;
though  the  progressive  development  of  the  language  must
have  had  the  tendency  to  identify  this  grammatical  classi-
fication of  the  nouns  with  general  distinctions  observed
in  nature.  (§  398 — 402.)  But,  to  the  regularity  in  the
correspondence  of  the  singular  and  plural  prefixes,  another
exception  is  found  in  the  numerous  cases  in  which  deri-
vative prefixes  of  the  plural  number  are  prefixed  to  the
corresponding  singular  prefixes,  instead  of  replacing  the
latter.  In  such  cases,  the  form  with  the  prefix  of  the
singular  has  to  be  considered  as  the  stem  from  which  (by
the  addition  of  its  own  prefix)  the  plural  is  formed.  In
the  South-eastern  genus  of  the  Middle  Branch  languages,
the  prefix  of  the  6th  class  (ma-)  is  found  prefixed  in  this
manner  to  nouns  formed  with  the  prefixes  of  the  11th
(1U-),  14th  ((1d)ix~),  and  15th  (l^ix- ) classes,  as  ^Bunda  Iix—
(Otyiherero  o-ru-^wo)  11.  ‘'spoon”  pi.  6.,  u-to

(Otyiherero  o-u-ta)  14.  “ bow  ” pi.  ma-w-to  (Otyiherero
o-TDO.di-u-ta')  6.,  Sindonga  (Ovambo)  o-')s.o-tshui,  15.  “ ear  ”
pi.  o-vudi-M-tshui  6.  (§  434,  note)  ; &c.  In  the  South-
eastern Branch  a similar  case  is  only  met  with  in  Se-
tshudna,  where  the  prefix  bo-  of  the  second  class  sometimes
stands  before  forms  of  the  1st  class  with  the  prefix  mo-,
as  \iQ-mo-nnaue  2.  “ younger  brothers,”  sing.  vO-Q-nnaue
(Kafir  u-VO.-nina-we)  “ younger  brother.”  It  is  not  impro-
bable that  in  these  cases  the  forms  with  double  prefixes
are  the  originals,  from  which  the  forms  with  single
plural  prefixes,  found  in  other  dialects,  are  contracted.
Yet  the  whole  system  of  substituting  a plural  prefix  for
a singular  one  is  certainly  older  than  that  of  adding  a
particle  indicating  the  plural  to  the  form  with  a singular
prefix.  There  are  similar  cases  in  some  Middle  Branch
languages,  where  other  concord-indicating  prefixes  pre-
cede the  forms  of  full  nouns,  as  in  Kikamba  ka,-mu-di  13.
“little  tree,”  pi.  tll-mi-di  12.,  Sena  7.  “large


146


The  Concord.


tree,”  pi.  8.  (§  428),  &c.  In  all  these  instances,

however,  it  must  be  remarked  that  the  first  prefix  only
is  to  be  taken  into  consideration  as  regards  the  concord.
In  this  respect,  these  cases  diiFer  entirely  from  that  of  the
10th  (TIN-)  class,  if  the  latter  was  formed  from  the  prefix
of  the  9th  (N-)  class,  by  an  old  plural  prefix  (TI-J ; for,
the  concord  here  takes  account  of  the  full  form  TIN-.
But  the  correspondence  of  this  10th  prefix  as  plural  to
the  prefix  of  the  11th  (lu-)  class,  of  which  examples  are
met  with  in  many  B^-ntu  languages,  is  rather  against
the  supposition  that  the  tenth  prefix  (TIN-)  is  composed
of  an  old  plural  prefix  (TI-)  and  the  singular  prefix  N-  of
the  9th  class.

h.  disappearance  op  classes  OB  GENDERS.

455.  When  the  concord-indicating  derivative  prefixes
first  came  into  existence  as  such,  (by  ceasing  to  be  used
as  independent  words,)  they  were  probably  far  more
numerous  than  we  now  find  them  in  those  B^-ntu  lan-
guages which  have  as  yet  come  under  our  observation.
Traces  of  some  such  extinct  prefixes  might  possibly  still
be  detected  by  careful  analysis, — just  as  in  Kafir  we
clearly  find  remains  of  demonstrative  pronouns  of  the
extinct  16th  (PA-)  class,  which  lie  imbedded  like  petrefac-
tions  among  the  adverbs  and  conjunctions  (§  435  and  444),
and  as  the  remains  of  an  obsolete  noun,  of  the  also  extinct
13th  (KA-)  class,  are  met  with  among  the  prepositions.
(§  436.)

456.  The  disappearance  of  whole  classes  of  nouns  may
have  been  produced  in  two  ways, — either  by  the  nouns
belonging  to  them  becoming  obsolete,  or  by  their  deri-
vative prefixes,  and  the  pronouns  referring  to  them,
becoming  assimilated  to  those  of  another  class.  For
example,  the  latter  is  the  case  in  Sesuto  with  the  11th
class.  This  class  is  still  perfectly  distinct  in  Western
Setshuana,  where  its  prefix  is  lo- ; but  by  a phonetic


Disappearance  of  Classes  or  Genders.  147

change  of  the  o into  e in  Sesuto,  (of  which  change  other
instances  also  occur,)  this  prefix  has  here  become  identical
with  that  of  the  5th  (le-)  class,  and  these  two  classes  have
thus  coalesced.  Of  course,  the  mere  homophony  of  the
derivative  prefixes  does  not  in  itself  constitute  the  identity
of  two  classes  of  nouns.  Such  a thorough  amalgamation
can  only  be  said  to  exist,  where  all  the  different  pronominal
elements  (or  all  the  forms  of  concord  referring  respectively
to  nouns  of  the  two  originally  different  classes)  have  also
assumed  identical  forms.  Such  appears  to  be  the  case
with  the  11th  and  5 th  classes  of  nouns  in  Sesuto;  it  is,
however,  not  so  with  regard  to  the  10th  (zin-)  and  8th
(zi-)  classes  in  Ka6r  (and  Setshuana),  though  the  pre-
fixes and  the  pronominal  elements  have  in  most  instances
assumed  the  same  forms;  but  as  this  is  not  universal,
the  two  classes  are  still  to  be  viewed  as  distinct  from
each  other.

457.  Processes  similar  to  these,  which  in  comparatively
recent  times  have  reduced  the  number  of  classes  (or
genders)  in  many  Ba-ntu  languages,  may  also  safely  be
assumed  to  have  been  at  work  during  the  previous  periods
through  which  these  languages  passed.  Thus  the  number
of  classes  (or  genders)  of  nouns,  which  was  in  all  proba-
bility originally  very  large,  has  been  reduced  to  less  than
a score ; and  these  have  assumed  such  relations  to  each
other,  that  one  class  implying  the  singular  number  gener-
ally corresponds  to  another  of  the  plural.  This  cannot
have  been  the  case  at  the  beginning,  nor  is  this  rule,  even
now,  strictly  carried  out  in  any  Ba-ntu  language ; but
it  indicates  the  direction  in  which  the  progress  of  the
language  tends.  How  this  principle  has  been  at  work
in  the  different  Ba-ntu  languages  which  we  are  able  to
compare,  will  be  seen  from  the  tables,  in  which  the
different  forms  of  the  derivative  prefixes  of  each  language
are  so  exhibited  that  the  correspondence  of  the  classes  (or
genders)  of  the  singular  and  plural  numbers  can  be
perceived  at  once.


148


The  Concord.


C.  NOMENCLATURE.

458.  For  the  purpose  of  identifying  the  several  forms
of  the  same  class  (or  gender)  in  the  different  B^-ntu  lan-
guages, it  is  necessary  to  indicate  each  class  by  a number.
No  other  way  of  distinguishing  the  classes  is  equally
capable  of  general  application.  Since  they  have  not  been
connected  with  natural  distinctions,  as  in  the  Sex-denoting
languages,  the  only  ways  of  clearly  indicating  them  are
either  by  numerals,  or  by  employing  for  this  purpose  the
most  usual  form  of  each  derivative  prefix.  The  latter
nomenclature,  however,  would  be  useless  for  the  purposes
of  comparison,  or  to  say  the  least,  very  confusing ; for,
as  the  prefixes  have  different  forms  in  the  different  lan-
guages, the  same  syllable  is  not  infrequently  used  in
one  language  as  the  prefix  of  one  class,  and  in  another  as
that  of  one  wholly  different.  Thus  li-  in  Kafir  is  the
prefix  of  the  5th  class  (=  Setshuana  le-),  whilst  li-  in
Setshuana  is  the  prefix  of  the  8th  class  of  nouns,*  of
which  the  Kafir  form  is  zi-.  Such  cases  of  apparent
phonetic  identity  of  different  prefixes  in  different  lan-
guages, as  well  as  instances  of  different  forms  for  the  same
prefix,  are  often  met  with  in  comparing  these  languages
with  one  another.  For  example,  whilst  in  the  above
instance  the  consonant  z belongs  in  Kafir  to  the  8th  (zi-)
and  10th  (zin-)  classes, — in  Mpongwe  the  same  letter  is
characteristic  of  the  7th  prefix  (Kafir  si-) ; and  the  8th
class  in  Mpongwe  has  y,  and  the  10th  s,  instead  of  this  z.

459.  Most  Grammarians  who  describe  these  languages,
have  also  distinguished  by  numbers  what  they  call  "prin-
cipiations”  (Brusciotto  a Vetralla),  “ classes,”  “species,”
or  “ declensions  ” of  the  nouns  ; but  they  have  generally
combined  the  singular  and  plural  forms  corresponding
to  each  other  into  one  class,  thereby  greatly  complicating
their  grammatical  labours.  For,  as  one  (and  the  same)

* In  his  latest  edition  of  the  New  Testament  Mr.  MofEat  gives  I'l-  as
the  form  of  this  prefix,  and  also  of  the  10th;  but  in  all  former  Setshuana
publications,  and  also  in  Mr.  Fredoux’s  “Grammar,”  we  find  11-.


Nomenclature.


149


derivative  prefix  of  the  plural  frequently  corresponds  to
more  than  one  prefix  of  the  singular  number,  in  such
cases  the  grammatical  forms  referring  to  each  plural  prefix
(as  pronouns,  adjectives,  &c.,)  must  be  twice  or  thrice
repeated.

460.  The  order  in  which  the  classes  for  genders)  of
nouns  in  the  Ba-ntu  languages  are  placed  here,  is  almost
the  same  as  that  which  is  followed  in  my  dissertation  “ De
Nominum  Generibus”  &c.  (Bonn,  1851);  excepting  that
the  13th  and  14th  classes  have  changed  their  numbers.
The  present  arrangement  has  been  completely  adhered  to
in  my  edition  of  Dr.  Peters’  Mosambique  Vocabularies
(London,  1856),  in  Hahn’s  Otyiherero  Grammar  and
Dictionary  (Berlin,  1857),  and  in  Fredoux’s  “ Sketch
of  the  Sechuana  Grammar  ” (Cape  Town,  1864).  It  is,
however,  right  to  state  that  the  Kev.  C.  H.  Hahn
objects  to  this  order  of  the  prefixes,  and  considers  it
arbitrary.  (“  Grammatik  ” p.  7,  note.)  It  does  not,
however,  appear  to  me  that  any  better  arrangement
has  been  proposed ; and  ours  has,  at  all  events,  the
advantage  that  in  Otyiherero  (which  language,  as  pos-
sessing the  greatest  number  of  classes  of  any  known
Ba-ntu  dialect,  has  been  mostly  considered  in  making
this  arrangement,)  all  the  odd  numbers  from  1 to  13
Indicate  classes  of  the  singular  number,  whilst  the  most
usual  plural  class  corresponding  to  each  of  these  sin-
gular classes,  is  named  by  the  even  number  following.
The  mu-  class  of  personal  nouns,  with  the  correspond-
ing ba-  class,  naturally  head  the  series.  Then  follows,
as  third,  the  other  mu-  class  with  its  corresponding  plural
as  fourth;  and  with  regard  to  the  order  in  which  the
remaining  classes  have  been  arranged,  certain  reasons,
either  founded  upon  the  present  use  of  the  prefixes,  or
upon  their  probable  origin,  have  prevailed ; but  as  they
are  chiefly  of  a practical  nature,  it  is  unnecessary  to
explain  them  here.


BUclc,  S.  A/r.  Comp.  Qrammar.


X


150


The  Concord.


d.  THH  PREFIXES  OF  THE  NOUNS  IN  THEIE  DIFFERENT  FORMS  AND  IN  THEIR
NUMERICAL  CORRESPONDENCE.

A.  IN  THE  SOUTH-EASTERN  BRANCH.

THE  KAFIR  SPECIES.

461.  The  most  usual  forms  in  which  the  derivative
prefixes  of  the  nouns  in  the  Kafir  species  occur^  are  those
preceded  by  a vowel,  which  is  always  identical  with  the
vowel  ending  the  prefix  itself,  provided,  of  course,  that
this  ends  with  a vowel.  Such  is  everywhere  the  case  in
the  Kafir  language,  excepting  the  prefixes  of  the  9th
(n-)  class,  and  those  of  the  1st  and  3rd  (m-)  classes.  In
both  the  latter  instances,  however,  the  Zulu  yet  shews
with  monosyllabic  stems  the  fuller  and  older  form  mu-.
The  initial  vowel  is  chiefly  absent  in  cases  where  the
employment  of  an  article  would  be  inadmissible, —always
in  the  vocative,*  and  in  certain  negative  sentences.f  We
thus  recognise  in  this  vowel  an  article,  which,  according
to  its  origin,  is  a pronoun  that  was  in  the  first  instance
identical  with  the  derivative  prefix  which  it  precedes.

462.  That  the  article  had  originally  the  full  form  of
the  prefix  is  clear  from  an  analysis  of  the  so-called  causal
form  (or  case)  of  nouns  in  Kafir.  (Appleyard  § 114.)  This
case  was  originally  formed  by  prefixing  the  preposition
of  identity  and  causality  ngi-  ‘‘it  is,  by”  (Setshuana  hi-,
Makua,  Kihiau,  Kinika,  and  Kisuaheli  ni-,  Otyiherero
i-J)  to  the  form  of  the  noun  with  the  article.  Thus  with
nouns  of  the  1st  (m-),  2nd  (ba-),  3rd  (m-),  and  6th  (ma-)
classes  the  vowel  only  of  this  ngi-  has  been  suppressed,
and,  of  the  article,  the  vowel  alone  retained.  We  have
thus  ng-xi-TOi-fazi  1.  “it  is  a woman”  (=  Setshuana

* Appleyard  § 113,  Colenso  § 92,  Grout  § 123.

f Appleyard  § 315  and  364,  Colenso  § 126.

J In  the  dialect  of  Sena,  in  Bunda,  Kongo,  Mpongwe,  and  Isubu
this  preposition  appears  to  have  merged  into  another  preposition,  common
to  most,  if  not  all,  Ba-ntu  languages,  viz.  na-  “with,  and.”


Kafir  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns,


151


hi  ToiO-sari),  ng-9,-^2rfazi  2.  “they  are  women”  (=  Set-
shuana  hi  \iB.-sari),  ng-VL-V(l.-lomo  3.  “it  is  a mouth”
(=  Setshu^na  hi  Tdo-lomo),  ng-&-m.2i-fu  6.  “they  are
clouds”  (=  Setshuana  hi  ma-rw).  But  before  nouns
of  the  5th  (li-),  7th  (si-),  8th  (zi-),  10th  (zin-),  11th
(lu-),  14th  (bu-),  and  15th  (ku-)  classes,  the  preposition
ngi-  is  now  wholly  elided,  though  its  influence  is  felt  in
the  retention  of  a fuller  fornj  of  the  article.  This  fuller
form  consists  of  the  first  two  letters  of  that  derivative
prefix,  from  which  each  article  has  descended.  Thus  we
find  \\-\i-fu  5.  “it  is  a cloud”  (=  Western  Setshudna
hi\e-ru'),  &\-si-fuba  7.  “it  is  the  chest,  breast”  (=  Set-
shuana hi  BQ-huba'),  zi-7ii-fuba  8.  “ they  are  chests  ”
(=  Setshuana  hi  \i-huba\  zi-zim-uM  10,  “they  are  sheep”
(=  SetshuS.na  hi  lin-Aw),  lu-lu-^i  11.  “it  is  a stick,”
In-nyaioo*  11.  “it  is  a foot”  {—  Setshuana  hi  \o-nao'),
bu-bu-SMAw  14.  “it  is  night  ”(=  Setshuana  bo-sz'xo)}
^M.-'k.M-tanda  15.  “it  is  to  love”  (=  Setshuana  hi  xO-rato).f
We  thus  clearly  see,  that  whilst  in  the  former  examples
the  preposition  ngi-  has  amalgamated  with  the  article
(which,  in  this  case,  usually  preserves  only  its  vowel), — in
the  latter  instances  the  preposition  has  disappeared  before
the  consonant  of  the  article,  which  consonant,  by  the
influence  of  the  preposition,  has  been  retained.  In  the
case  of  the  2nd  (ba- ) class  both  changes  of  form  (dropping
the  preposition,  and  its  amalgamation  with  the  vowel  of
the  article)  are  met  with  in  different  dialects  of  the  Kafir
language;  the  Amampondo  dialect  having  the  causal  form
ba-ba-,  as  in  ba-ba-w7w  (Boyce-Davis,  § 25)  = ng-Sk-\)2i-ntu
of  the  Ama//osa  (Frontier  Kafirs).  These  two  forms  are
equally  derived  from  an  ancient  form  A7'G/-B  A-BA-A7TZ7
(Setshuana  hi  ba-7Aw).

* Contracted  from  NGI-liU-ij\^-NYAWO.  Vide  § 4G5.

t In  y-i-ttkl-lambo  4.  *'  they  are  rivers  ” (=  Setshuana  hi  me-lajjo),
and  y-i-m-KM  9.  “it  is  a sheep”  (=  Setshuana  hi  ti-hu)  the  y is  probably
a weakened  form  of  the  «y.  In  Zulu  we  also  find  this  yi-  (=  »yi~)  used
in  several  other  classes,  (Colenso  § 138—140.)


152


The  Concord.


463.  Whilst  the  article  is  thus  constantly  retained  in
the  causal  case  in  Kafir,  and  appears  either  fully,  or  as  a
mere  vowel, — ^it  is  as  regularly  omitted  after  some  other
prepositions  (which  form,  as  it  were,  cases  of  the  nouns),
particularly  after  ha-  of  the  genitive,  and  kwa-  of  the
locative,  both  of  which  prepositions  are  only  used  with
personal  nouns  (Appleyard  § 102,  104,  and  112),  being
principally  restricted  to  proper  names*.  If  the  article
were  employed  in  the  examples  given  below,  the  vowel
(a)  of  the  preposition  would  have  coalesced  with  the
vowel  u of  the  article  of  the  1st  (m-)  class,  forming  o,
and  with  the  i of  the  9th  (n-)  class,  forming  e.  (§  328.)
Such  a contraction  of  the  end  a of  the  preposition  with
the  vowel  ^ of  the  article  in  the  4th  (mi-),  5th  (li-),  7 th
(si-)j  8th  (zi-),  9th  (n-),  and  10th  (zin-)  classes  to  e,
and  with  the  u of  the  1st  (m-),  3rd  (m-),  11th  (lu-),
14th  (bu-),  and  15th  (ku-)  classes  to  o,  regularly  occurs
in  the  case  of  the  usual  genitive  particle  -a-  “of,”  and  in
those  of  the  prepositions  na-  with,  and,”  and  nga-  by,
through,  with.”t  Again  the  omission  of  the  article  is
sufficiently  clear  in  the  case  of  the  local  preposition  ('s Je-,
the  present  use  of  which,  as  far  as  we  know,  is  restricted
to  the  Kafir  species.  (§  438,  Appleyard  § 107.)


* For  example,  in  the  following  instances  taken  from  Appleyard
(§  104),  u-mdazi  ka-Pato  “ the  wife  of  Pato,”  a-TbSi-Jazi  ha-ka-Pato
“ the  women  of  Pato,”  u-m-h'  ha-Kobi  “ the  tree  of  Kobi,”  i-mi-ti
ka-Kobi  “the  trees  of  Kobi,”  i-hashe  li-ka-bawo  “the  horse  of  my  father,”
a-ina-AfflA'/ie  ka-bawo  “ the  horses  of  my  father,”  the  article  tc  of  the  1st
(m-)  class  does  not  precede  the  nouns  n-Pato,  u-Kobi,  u-bawo,  (my,
or  our  father)  ; and  in  i-n-Xlu  ha-n-kosi  “ the  house  of  the  chief  ” and
i-zin-X/w  zi-ka-n-kosi  “the  houses  of  the  chief,”  the  article  i of
i-M-^osi  9.  “chief”  is  omitted.  Similarly  in  kwa-Pato  “at  (to  or  from)
Pato’s  place,”  kwa-Mhala  “ at  (to  or  from)  Umhala’s  place,”  the  article
u is  again  omitted.

f U-ttl-Jazi  w-e-n-bosi  “ the  wife  of  the  king,”  i-si-fya  s-o-m-yhii
“ the  dish  of  the  woman,”  u-lUu.-rfe  b-e-li-zwe  “ the  length  of  the
country,”  n-o-m-Ji/zi  “ with  the  wife,”  7t-e-li-zwi  “ and  the  word,”
vff-o-m-ti  “ through  the  tree,”  fly-c-li-2!ci  “by  the  word,”  &c.


Kafir  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


153


464.  Although  it  is  clear  that  the  initial  vowel  was
originally  a pronoun,  (derived  from  and,  at  first,  identical
with  the  derivative  prefix  which  it  precedes,  and)  used
with  the  force  of  an  article,  it  can  hardly  be  said  now  to
have  this  power.  Its  employment  appears  mainly  to
depend  upon  usage,  and  scarcely  upon  any  intention  of
thereby  defining  the  noun.  The  position  of  this  ancient
article  at  the  beginning  of  the  noun  accords  with  the
general  position  of  the  demonstrative  pronouns  in  Kafir,
which  in  this  language,  as  well  as  in  Isubu,  precede  the
noun,  instead  of  being  placed  after  it,  as  in  Setshuana
and  most  of  the  other  Ba-ntu  languages.  Vestiges  of  this
old  article  are  also  found  in  some  other  Ba-ntu  languages
(as  in  Mpongwe) ; and  this  renders  it  probable  that  this
form  of  article  (originally  identical  with  the  prefix)  was
used  at  the  period  preceding  the  dispersion  of  the  South
African  Ba-ntu  languages.  We  generally  find,  however,
that,  in  these  languages,  either  forms  without  an  article  are
used,  or  that  the  demonstrative  particle  o-  (which  is  not  a
pronominal  element  originally  identical  with  a concord-
indicating  derivative  prefix)  precedes  the  prefixes  with  the
force  of  an  article,  as  is  the  case  in  the  languages  of  the
South-western  genus  (Otyiherero,  Bunda,  &c.,).

465.  A contraction  of  this  ancient  Kafir  article  with
the  derivative  prefix  which  it  precedes,  (by  which  the
latter  appears  to  have  been  elided,)  takes  place  frequently
in  those  cases  where  the  latter  contains  an  I,  viz.  in  the
5th  (li-)  and  11th  (lu-)  classes  (or  genders,)  as

\-zwe  5.  for  i-\i-zwe  “land”  (pi.  u-ntu  for  u-lu-w<u  11.  “human
a-ma-zz4>e  6.)  ; race

i-gama  5.  “name”  (pi.  a-ma-  n-nwele  11.  “hair;”
gama  G.) ; u-zwane  11.  “toe”  (pi.  a-ma-

i-soka  5.  “bachelor”  (pi.  a-ma-  zwaneG.');

sokaG.);  n-kuko  11.  “mat;”

i-siko  5.  “custom,  law”  (pi.  a-  u-bambo  11.  “rib;”
tasL-siko  6 ) ; u-pondo  11.  “ horn;”

i-ziko  (Tekeza  tiko)  5.  “fire-  u-sopo  11.  “child;”
place”  (pi.  a-ma-zi'Ao  6.)  ; vi-lwimi  11.  “tongue.”


154


The  Concord.


In  the  same  manner  the  (bu-)  of  the  14th  (bu-)  and  the
Zi-  of  the  10th  (zin-)  classes  of  nouns  may  disappear  in
combination  with  the  article,  and  the  forms  of  these
prefixes  with  the  article  may  thus  be  reduced  to  u-  and
i-n-  (with  its  euphonic  representatives  according  to
§ 214—216,)*  as

u-tyalwa  (Zulu  Vi-hM-tywala,  Se-  i-ix-kulio  10.  “ mats
tshuana  'bo-yaloa')  14.  “Kafir  i-n-nwele  10.  “hairs;”
beer;”  i-n.-tsapo  10,  “ childi’en ;”

VL-tyani  (Setshuana  bo-yah  14.)  i-jn.-lamho  10.  “ribs;”

“ grass ;”  i-ra-pondo  10.  “ horns ;”

i-n-^ojwo  10.  for  i-zln-^omo  i-lwimi  10.  “tongues”

“ cattle ;”

All  these  cases  of  contraction  are  more  frequent  with
polysyllabic  stems,  and  in  some  of  the  latter,  such  con-
tractions are  the  rule,  and  the  full  form  with  the  inter-
mediate consonant  the  exception.  But  the  form  with  the
consonant  reappears  in  nouns  of  the  10th  (zin-)  and  11th
(lu-)  classes,  when  they  are  used  without  the  article
(§  461),  as  zin-Ao?uo  10.  “cows!”  zim-5a>w5o  10.  “ribs!”
7X-lwimi  \0.  “tongues!”  e-7A.-lwimi-ni  10.  “in  the  ton-
gues,” e-ziVi-tsatsh-eni  10.  ‘'among  the  children,”  \\x-sapo
11.  “child!”  &c.  Such  a reappearance  of  the  consonant
does  not,  however,  take  place  in  nouns  of  the  5th  (li-)
class, t unless  their  stem  is  monosyllabic,  as  \i-zwe  5.
“ land !”  Nor  does  it  occur  when  the  consonant  which
has  disappeared  is  the  ending  nasal  of  the  prefix  of  the
9th  (n-)  or  10th  (zin-)  class;  for,  the  nasal  is  suppressed
before  the  initial  consonant  of  the  stem  when  incompatible

* The  nasal  in  the  prefixes  m-  (9th)  and  zin-  (10th  class)  is  not
changed  intS  n in  Kafir,  as  was  erroneously  stated  in  Part  I.  of  this
Grammar.  Por  the  correction  of  this  mistake  I am  obliged  to  the  kind
communication  of  the  Kev.  J.  W.  Appleyard,  in  a letter  dated  Mount
Coke,  January  31,  1866.

t E-kaya  “ at  home  ” from  i-kaya  5.  “ home,”  Kafir  ndi-nge  na-tyala
l-a-n-to  (I  not  being  with  guilt  of  thing,  i-tyala  5.  “ guilt,”  i-n-fo  9.
“thing”)  “not  having  the  guilt  of  the  thing,”  Zulu  u-na-hashi  li-nini-nd?
(thou-with-horse-which  ? i-hashi  5.  horse)  “ what  horse  hast  thou  ?”


Kafir  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.  155

with  the  latter,  as  hangu  9.  “pig!”  e-zi~gush~eni  “among
the  sheep  ” {\-gusha  10.  “ sheep  ”),  &c.  Here  the  forms
without  the  article  are  equally  devoid  of  the  nasal  with
those  which  retain  it.  One  case  of  this  kind  is  also  met
with  in  the  3rd  (m-)  class,  where  the  noun  n-nyaha  “ a
year”  (pi.  i-Tn i -nyaka  4.)  has  lost  its  prefixual  m on
account  of  the  following  nasal.  (Appleyard  § 75.  6.  ii.)

466.  Totally  different,  however,  is  the  case  with  regard
to  those  nouns  of  the  1st  (m-)  class,  in  which  we  find  the
article,  but  no  derivative  prefix.  Here,  as  a rule,  the
prefix  has  not  been  elided,  for  the  simple  reason  that
these  nouns  have  not  been  formed  with  the  prefix  of  the
1st  (m-)  class.  Some  of  them  have  not  been  formed  with
any  of  the  concord-indicating  derivative  prefixes,  but  are
remnants  of  an  early  formation  of  nouns,  as  u-baha  “ my
father,”  \i-ma{=  Zulu  \x-mame)  ''my  mother,”  &c.  Others
again  are  nouns  from  originally  different  classes  (or  even
other  parts  of  speech),  which,  used  as  proper  names  of
persons,  are  on  this  account  constructed  like  nouns  of
the  1st  (m-)  class  (or  gender),  as  TJ-mboXla  1.  "Wildcat”
(i-m-io^fa  9.),  \J-kala  1.  "Cry-out”  (u-kU-/m/a  15.),
VL-ewe  1.  "Yes,”  \i-hai  1.  " No,”  &c.  (Appleyard  § 75.  1.)
These  latter  nouns  were  transferred  to  the  1st  (m-)  class
by  a logical  tendency  of  the  language,  because  they
indicate  (or  are  metaphorically  conceived  to  indicate)
persons  in  the  singular.  On  this  account  they  are  pre-
ceded by  the  article  of  the  1st  class,  and  used  with  the
forms  of  concord  of  that  class.  Examples  of  a similar
logical  transference  of  nouns  from  one  class  or  gender  to
another  are  frequently  met  with  in  different  languages.
In  English  this  process  has  been  fully  developed  by
incorporating  into  the  neuter  class  (or  gender)  those
nouns,  which,  originally  belonging  to  the  masculine  and
feminine  classes,  contain  no  reference  to  the  natural  dis-
tinctions of  sex.  In  the  languages  akin  to  the  Kafir,
instances  of  the  transference  of  nouns  by  reason  of  their
personal  meaning  from  other  classes  to  the  first  class  occur


156


The  Concord.


frequently ; and  in  some  of  these  instances  the  process  of
transition  is  still  visible.  For,  whilst  in  Kafir  these  nouns
are  now  constructed  as  belonging  entirely  to  the  1st  (m-)
class,  in  some  other  languages  the  forms  of  the  pronouns
and  adjectives  used  with  the  nouns  are  partly  those  of  the
original  class  (or  gender)  to  which  their  prefixes  refer  them.
In  Otyiherero  those  nouns  of  the  5th  (ri-),  7th  (tyi-),
9th  (n-),  and  1 3th  (ka-)  classes  which  indicate  human
beings,  can  either  be  constructed  according  to  the  class  of
their  prefixes,  or  as  if  they  were  nouns  of  the  1st  (mu-)
class,  with  the  pronouns,  adjectives,  &c.,  of  that  class ;
and  the  respective  plural  nouns  of  the  6th  (ma-),  8th
(vi-),  10th  {Sr'on.-),  and  14th  (u-)  classes  can  likewise  be
treated  either  as  nouns  of  the  2nd  (va-)  class,  or  with
reference  to  their  own  derivative  prefixes.  (Hahn  § 34.)*
This  is  analogous  to  the  occasional  use  in  German  of  the
pronoun  sie  in  referring  to  such  nouns  as  “ W eib,
Madchen,”  instead  of  the  more  grammatically  correct
es.  In  the  Swaheli  language  of  Zanzibar  not  only
names  of  persons,  but  also  those  of  other  living  beings,
originally  belonging  to  other  classes,  can  be  in  this

* In  ‘ e-rumbi  x-d-ndye  Q-kuru  T-d-ya  ’ (my  eldest  brother  has  gone
away)  the  pronominal  elements  are  in  concord  with  the  derivative  prefix
of  the  5th  (ri-)  class,  with  which  the  noun  c-rumbi  (i.e.  O-WI-I?  UMBl)
is  formed,  but  in  ‘ e-rumbl  u-dndye  o-Tan-kuru  M-d-ya  ’ they  belong  to  the
1st  (mn-)  class,  to  which  the  noun  ‘ e-rumbi’  has  been  here  logically
transferred.  In  Otyiherero,  a noun  is  not  unfrequently  used  with
both  forms  of  concord  at  once  ; the  possessive  adjective,  at  all  events,
frequently  following  the  class  of  the  prefix  of  the  noun,  while  the  sub-
jective pronoim  of  the  verb  agrees  with  the  class  to  which  the  noun
(on  account  of  its  meaning)  has  been  transferred.  Thus  in  Hahn’s
“ Omahungi,”  &c.  (1861)  p.  47,  in  the  sentence  ‘ o-m^-rurnbi  o-a
Yozev  tyi  Ya,-ka-ri^'ire  ’ (the  sons  of  Joseph  when  they  herded),  the  ‘ o-  ’
preceding  the  genitive  particle  ‘ -a-  ’ is  a pronominal  element  of  the
6th  (Mia-)  class,  whilst  the  ‘ va  ’ in  ‘ va,-ka-riB'ire  ’ (they  herded)  is  a
subjective  pronoun  of  the  2nd  (va-)  class  ; and  on  p.  288,  in  the  sentence
‘ Zakarias  ihe  y-e  \i-a-uriyirue  ’ (Zacharias  his  father  was  filled),  the
‘ y-e  ’ (his)  is  of  the  9th  (M-)  class,  to  which  ‘ ihe  ’ (father)  appears
to  have  belonged  originally,  and  in  ‘ u-a-uriSr'irue  ’ (he  was  filled)  the
pronoun  ‘u  ’ is  of  the  1st  (mu-)  class.


Kafir  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.  157

mariner  transferred  to  the  1st  (m-)  and  2nd  (wa-)  classes,
as  H-gombe  9.  “ox,”  pi.  H-gombe  10.  ‘'oxen.”  (Dr.
Steere’s  “ Table  of  Concords  ” in  his  “ Handbook  of
Swaheli.”)  Whilst  the  plurals  of  these  nouns  (in  Otyi-
herero,  Kisuah61i,  &c.,)  depend  upon  the  usual  rules  of
correspondence  governing  those  prefixes  with  which  the
nouns  were  originally  formed, — the  Kafir  nouns  which
have  been  transferred  into  the  1st  (m-)  class,  form  their
plurals  with  the  prefix  bo-,  which,  when  used  with  its
article,  is  contracted  to  o-.  The  etymology  of  this  form
is  not  clear.  It  may  be  a mere  modification  of  the  2nd
prefix  ba-,  or  a distinct  prefix  which  originally  marked
a class  of  its  own,  but  has  now  been  absorbed  by  the  2nd
class.

467.  The  mutual  correspondence  with  regard  to  num-
ber, which  takes  place  between  the  different  concord-
indicating  derivative  prefixes  of  nouns  in  the  Kafir
language,  is  best  shewn  by  the  following  tables.  The
cases  in  which  the  prefix  has  fallen  off  or  been  elided
before  the  stem,  are  indicated  by  the  mark  ( — ).


liUek^  S\  xi/r.  Comp.  Orammor.


Y


158


The  Concord.


DERIVATIVE  PREFIXES  OF  THE  NOUNS  IN  THE


A.  WITHOUT  ARTICLE.  B.  WITH  ARTICLE.


SINGULAR.

PLURAL.

SINGULAR.

PLURAL.

1.

2.

1.

2.

m-,  (— )

ba-,  bo-

u-m-,  u-

a-ba-,  0-

b-

i

z

a-b-

M

z

be-

a-be-

O

o

CO

(4

6.

Vi

6.

»

P4

ma-

(4

A<

a-ma-

3.

4.

3.

4.

m-

ml-

u-m-

i-ml-

(-)

u-

5.

6.

5.

6.

(-)

ma-

i ll-,  i-

a-ma-

m-

a-m*

7.

8.

7.

8.

si-

zl-

i-sl-

i-zl-

s-

z-

i-s-

i-z-

9.

19.

9.

10.

n-

zin-

i-n-

i-zln-,  i-n-

m-

zlm-

i-m-

i-zlm-,  i-m-

(-)

zl-

i-

(i-zl-),  i-

«.

6.

ma-

a-ma-

11.

10.

11.

10.

lu-

zin-

u-lu-,  u-

i-zln-,  i-n-

zlm-

i-zim-,  i-m-

zl-

(i-zl-),  i-

6.

6.

ma-

a-ma-

H

^ 14.

^ 14.

S bu-

M u-bu-,  u-

m

n

b-

S u-b-

<:

a J

M ^ 15

M ^ 1.5

^ o 1rii.

;z;  kJ

g s u-ku-

E P kw-

E u-kw-

£ *

^ 3

Kafir  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


159


KAFIR  LANGUAGE.


KAFIR  NOUNS.


C.  WITH  AUTICLE  AND  PREPOSITION  NOI.


SINGULAR.

PLURAL.

1.

ng-u-m-,  ng-v-

i

r,

o

c/1

di

et

(4

2.

ng--a-ba-,  ng-o-

ng-a.-'b-

ng-a.-he-

6.

ng-a-ma-

3.

ng'-u-m-

ng-VL-

y-i-ml-

5.

li-11-,  li-

6.

wg--a-ma-

ng-a-m-

7.

si-sl-

si-s-

a.

zi-zl-

zi-z-

9.

y-i-n-

y-i-m-

y-i-

10.

zi-zln-,  zi-n-
zi-zim-,  zi-m-
(zi-zl-),  zi-

6.

7!g--a-ma-

11.

lu-lu-,  lu-

10.

zi-zln-,  zi-n-
zi-zlm-,  zi-m-
(zi-zi-),  zi-

6.

ng-a-vaa,-

H

^ 14.

g bu-bu-,  bu-

S bu-b-

<

>i  15

H t>

g S ku-ku-

E 9 ku-kw-

n-tn-ntu  (Zulu  u-ma-
ntu)  1.  “man,  person,”
pi.  a-ba-n^M  (Z.)  2.
“ people

u-m-/a2i(Z.)  l.“ woman,"
pi.  (Z.)  2. ;

M-m.-enzi  1.  “maker,”
pi.  a-b-enzi  2. ;
u-m-oni  (Z.)  1.  “sinner,”
pi.  a-b-oret  (Z.)  2. ;
u-m-lungu  (Z.)  1.  “Euro-
2iean,”  pi.  a-he-ltingu
(Z.)  2.  ;

u-yise  (Z.)  1.  “ (his,  &c.)

father,”  pl.o-ywe  (Z.)  2.;
n-m-pakati (Z.)  1.  “coun-
cillor,” pi.  a.-ma.-pdkati
(Z.)  6.;

U-m-ponrfo  1.  “aMpondo,
a man  of  Faku’s  tribe,”
pi.  K-va.'a.-mpondo  (Z.)
6.;

M-ra-hona  1.  “maize,  In-
dian corn

u-m-ti  (Zulu  u-mn-ti)  3.
“ ti-ee,  medicine,”  pi.
i-ml-ft'  (Z.)  4. ;
M-ra-zimla  (Z.)  3.  “body,"
pi.  i-xa\‘zimha  (Z  ) 4.;

* The  corresponding  word
in  Zulu  u-m-6t7a  belongs
to  the  3rd  class  ; the  na-
tives say  si-ya-vru-tanda  (3.)
“ we  like  it,”  not  si-ya-m-
tanda  (3.).  That  the  word
signifying  “ maize  ” is  a
personal  being  in  Kafir  has
its  parallel  in  the  legend  of
Mondamin,  told  by  the
North  American  Indians
(Longfellow’s  “Hiawatha”
XIII.)


160


The  Concord.


Vi-nyaka  (Z.)  3.  “year,”  pi.  i-ml-
nyaka  (Z.)  4. ;

*VL-xa-melwane  3.  “ neighbour,”
pi.  \-va.i-melwane  4.  and  a-ba-
melwane  2. ;

*u-m-xfoJo  3.  “friend,”  pi  t-ml-
Xlobo  4.  and  a-ba-Xfo&o  2. ;
*'a-va.-lwelwe  3.  “ infirm  person,”
pi.  \-mi.-lwelwe  4. ;
i-11  -zwi  (Z.)  5.  “ word,”  pi.  a-
■msi-zwi  (Z.)  6. ;
i-siho  (Z.)  5.  “ custom,”  pi.  a-ma-
siko  6. ;

i-zuiu  (Z.)  5.  “ heaven,  sky,”  pi.

a.-m.a,-zulu  (Z.)  6.;
a-ma-si  (Z.)  6.  “ sour  milk
^-va.-endu  6.  “speed;”
i-si-fuba  (Z.)  7.  “ chest,  breast,”
pi.  i-z\-fuba  (Z.)  8. ;
is-anXla  (Z.)  7.  “ hand,”  pi.  i-
^-anXla  (Z.)  8.;

i-s-on^a  (Zulu  isi-nkwa)  7.
“ bread,  loaf,”  pi.  i-^-onka
(Zulu  \-xi-nliwa)  8. ;
i-n-to  (Z.)  9.  “thing,”  pi.  i-zln-
to  (Z.)  10. ;

i-m-uM  (Z.)  9.  “ sheep,”  pi.  i-zim-
vu  (Z.)  10. ;

\-hangu  9.  (Hottentot  hagu-p
masc.  sing.)  “ hog,”  pi.  i-zi-
hangu  10. ;

i-n-tombi  (Z.)  9.  “girl,”  pi.  i-n-
tombi  (Zulu  i-zin-fombi)  10. ;


i-m-mini  (Z.)  9.  “ daytime,  day,”
pi.  i-m-mini  10.;
i-mazi  (Zulu  i-n-kom-azi^  § 321,
note)  9.  “cow,”  pi.  i-mazi
10.;

i-gusha  9.  (Hottentot  gu-s-a  fern,
sing,  obj.)  “sheep,”  pi.  i-gusha
10.;

i-n-doda  (Z.)  9.  “ man,  hus-
band,” pi.  s.-ma.-doda  (Z )
6.;

u-lu-*’  (Z.)  11.  “stick,”  pi.  i-zln-
ti  (Z.)  10. ;

u-lu-»o  11.  “ feeling,”  pi.  i-zlm-
vo  10.  ;

u-suku  (Z.)  “ day,”  pi.  i-jx-tsuku
10.  (Zulu  i-n-suku  10.  and
&-msL-suku  6.) ;

Vi-bambo  (Z.)  11.  “rib,”  pi.  i-m-
bambo  (Zulu  i-zim-bambo)  10. ;
u-lwimi  (Zulu  n-limi)  11.  “ton-
gue,” pi.  i-lwimi  10.  (Zulu
i-zi-limi  10.  and  a,-ma-limi
6.);

n-bala  (Z.)  11.  “ desert,  wilder-
ness,” pi.  a-mSL-bala  6. ;
u-lwalwa  11.  “flat  rock,”  pi.  a-
msi-lwalwa  6. ;
u-bu-so  (Z.)  14.  “ face ;”
u-bu-sM^M  (Z.)  14.  “night;”
u-bu-si  (Z.)  14.  “ honey ;”
u-bu-ze  (Z.)  14.  “nakedness;’,
u-b-owi  14.  “ evil ;”


* These,  the  only  nouns  of  persons  which  belong  to  the  3rd  class,  are
occasionally  construed  according  to  their  meaning,  and  not  according
to  their  grammatical  class  (or  gender).  Thus,  with  reference  to  u-m-
vielwane  3.,  u-m-x/o6o  3.,  or  u-m-lwelwe  3.,  I am  informed  (by  the
Eev.  Tiyo  Soga)  that  it  is  correct  to  say  ndi-m-tandile  (1.)  “ I have  loved
him,”  and  not  ndi-wu-tandile  (3.).  But  on  the  other  hand,  with  reference
to  u-m-me/tcane  3.,  the  Kafirs  do  not  say  ye-na  1.  “he,”  but  w-ona  3.,
nor  a-ka-Ao  1.  “he  is  not  there,”  but  a-w\i-ko  3.  In  the  latter  case
u-iu-X/060  3.  is  said  to  be  used  with  both  forms,  a-wxi-ko  3.  as  well  as
a-ka-Ao  1.  {Vide  § 166.)


Kafir  and  Zulu  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.  161


u-tyuni  (Z.*)  14.  “gi’ass;”
a-tyalwa  (Zulu  v.-'bvi-tywala  or
\x-tywala*)  14.  “Kafir  beer;”
VL-boya  (Z.)  14.  “hair  of  an
animal

n-homi  (Z.)  14.  “life,  happiness;”
Vi-'kXi-kanya  (Z.)  15.  “ light;”
u-ku-tete  15.  “language”  (Zulu
“ talk,”  &c.) ;

u-kw-a2i  (Z.)  “knowledge;”
u-kw-ojia  (Zulu  u-kw-ona  or  u-
k-owa)  15.  “to  sin”

468.  From  the  preceding
list  of  nouns,  in  which  those
which  are  identical  in  form
and  meaning  in  Zulu  are
indicated  by  the  letter
“ (Z.),”  it  will  be  seen  that
the  correspondence  of  the
classes  of  the  singular  and
plural  numbers  does  not
dilfer  much  in  Zulu  from
that  in  the  language  of  the
Frontier  Kafirs  (Ama//osa).
In  Zulu,  however,  we  have
to  notice,  that  no  nouns
of  the  9th  (n-)  class  appear
to  exist  in  which  the  nasal
has  been  entirely  dropped.
Those  in  Kafir,  in  which
this  is  the  case,  are  evi-
dently late  importations  into
the  language.

* In  the  Bishop  of  Natal’s  Dic-
tionary (p.  495  and  504)  these
noims  \x-tyani  and  w-tywala  are,  by
misprint,  ascribed  to  the  lUh
(III-)  class.


ZVXiV  PREFIXES.


WITH  ARTICLE.


SINGULAR.

PLURAL.

1.

u-mu-,  u-

u-m-

i

1

a

s

2.

a-ba-,  0-

a-b-

a-be-

6.

a-ma-

3.

u-mu-

u-m-

u-

i-ml-

5.

i-11-,  1-

6.

a-ma-

a-m-

7.

i-Bl-

i-s-

8.

i-zi-

i-z-

9.

i-n-

i-m-

10.

i-zin-,  i-n-
i-zim-,  i-m-

6.

a-ma-

11.

u-lu,  u-

10.

i-zln-,  i-n-
i-zim-,  i-m-
i-zl-

6.

a-ma-

H

^ 14.

« u-bu-,  u-

S u-b-

•*s1

S o u-ku-

2 u-kw-

Cm  fi  n t

z U-K-

162


The  Concord.


THE  SETSHUANA  SPECIES.

469.  In  the  Setshuana  and  Tekeza  dialects  some  of  the
prefixes  coalesce  more  with  the  stem  of  the  noun  than
they  do  in  Kafir,  and  this  either  causes  the  suppression
of  the  initial  consonant  of  the  stem,  or  the  disappearance
of  the  whole  or  a part  of  the  prefix  combined  with  a
stronger  explosive  pronunciation  of  the  initial  of  the
stem.  For  example,  the  former  is  the  case  with  the
initial  b in  Setshuana  when  following  the  prefix  mo-
of  the  1st  or  3rd  class.  The  mo-S  is  contracted
here  to  m-  (§  113  and  343)  as  in  m-opi  I.  “potter”
(=  Kafir  u-VDi-bumbi),  from  xO  bopa  (Sesuto  h'o  bopa,
Kafir  u-ku-&Mff2ia)  15.  “ to  make  pottery,”  m-i'/rt  3.
“street”  (Zulu  u-m.-zila  “cattle  track”)  pi.  -mQ-bila  4.,
xa-ele  (Sesuto)  3.  “ body  ” pi.  Jn.Q-bele  4.  (compare  Kafir
i-si-5i7i  7.  “substance  of  a body”),  &c.  Whilst  the
prefix  has  prevailed  over  the  beginning  of  the  stem  in
the  instances  given  above, — we  find  again  in  the  9th  (n-)
and  10th  (lin-)  classes  (according  to  the  rules  explained
in  § 218 — 220,  and  335 — 337,)  that  the  nasal  of  the
prefix  almost  always  disappears,  excepting  before  mono-
syllabic stems.  In  these  cases,  however,  the  strengthened
form  of  the  initial  consonant  of  the  stem  (when  this  is
capable  of  being  strengthened)  which  has  in  the  first
instance  been  called  into  existence  by  the  nasal,  remains,
— becoming,  as  it  were,  characteristic  of  these  classes,
and,  in  the  9th  (n-)  class,  almost  representing  the  prefix. .
To  indicate  the  presence  of  the  consonant  thus  strength-
ened, the  mark  has  been  used.

The  case  is  different  in  the  SexLAPi  dialect,  after  the
prefix  of  the  5th  (le-)  class.  Here,  as  the  nature  of  the
vowel  of  the  prefix  is  apparently  favorable  to  a succeeding
sibUant,  we  find  that  the  initial  of  the  stem,  when  a
sibilant,  is  retained  ; while  after  the  corresponding  plural
prefix  ma-  the  same  initial  sibilant  is  converted  into  a
liquid,  as  \Q-sapo  5.  “ bone,”  pi.  ma-ra^o  6.  Also  where
there  is  a tendency  towards  palatalisation  of  a labial,  it  is


Sexlapi  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


163


carried  through  after  the  5th  (le-)  prefix,  whilst  after  the
6 th  (ma-)  the  original  labial  may  be  retained, — as  le-
tsele  5.  “ female  breast,”  pi.  mSL~dele  6.

SExLAPI  NOUNS.
mo-thu  (Se-sutomo-ft<,  § 92)

1.  “person,”  pi.  'ba,-tku
(Sesuto  ba-^M,  § 140)  2.
“ people;”

md-sari  (Se-suto  mo-sali,
Kafir  u-m-/azO,  pl.ba-safi
(Sesuto  ba-sali)  2.;
mo-loi  (Ses.)  1.  “sorcerer,”
pi.  ha-loi  (Ses.)  2. ;
m-olai  (Ses.,  = Kafir  u-m-
hulali)  1 . “ a murderer,”  pi.
ba-holai  (Ses.,  = Kafir
a-ba-bulali)  2.  from  5^0-
bolaea  (Sesuto  b'o-bolaia,
Kafir  VL-bn-bulala)  15.  “to
kill,”  xo-m-olaea  (Sesuto
h'o-m-oZai'a,  Kafir  u-ku-
xa-bulala)  “to  kill  him;”
mo-rena  (Ses.)  1.  “lord,
king,”  pi.  ba-rena  2.  (Sesuto
raa-rena  6.) ;

va-aba  1.  “enemy,”  pi.  b-aba
(i  e T&A,-BABA~)  2.  (com-
pare Kafir  vi-tshaba  11.
“enemy”) ;

mu-n  (Sesuto  mo-?!,  Kafir  u-
m-nini)  1 . “ master,  owner,”
pi.  be-n  (Sesuto  be-n,  Kafir
• a,~ba-nini)  2. ;
mo-n  {ba)  1.  “neighbour,”
pi.  ba-n  {kd)  2. ;
mo-ere  1.  “stranger,”  pi.  ba-
en  2. ;

ntsM  1 (Zulu  i-XL-tye  9.)  “os-
trich,” pi.  bb-ntshe  2. ;
tshuene  1.  (Kafir  i-m-/ene
9.,  pi.  a-jna-m-fene  6)
“baboon,”  pi.  bo-tshuene

2. ;


SE^liAFI  PREFIXES.


SINGULAR.

PLURAL.

FEES

ONAL.

1.

2.

mo-,  (— )

ba-,  bo-

mu-

be-

nu

b-

m-  (MO-B-)

ba-5-

bo-mo-

3.

4.

mo-

(o)m-

me-

m-  (XtlO-B-)

me-i-

mu-

6.

(-)

ma-

5.

6.

le-,  (-)

ma-

m-

7.

8.

se-,  (— )

11-  (ri-),  (-)

9.

10.

n-

lln-  *.•

m-  •,*

11m-

n-

lln-

(-)  •••

11-  (-)  •.•
6.
ma-

11.

10.

I0-,  (— )

lln-  •/

11m-
lln-  *.•

11-  •.•,  (-)  *.•
e.

ma-

ABSTRACT

AND  LOCAL.

14.

€.

bo-,  (— )

ma-

INFINITIVE

AND  LOCAL.

15.

6.

xo-(g-o-),(— )

ma-

164


The  Concord.


'ma  Ses.(Kafir  u-ma,  Zulu  u-mame)
1,  “mother,”  pi.  bo-ma  Ses.
(Kafir  o-ma,  Zulu  o-mame)  2 ;
ttLO-xolu  (Kafir  VL-va-hulu-we)
1.  “ elder  brother,”  pi.  bo-mo-
\olu  (Kafir  a-ba-Sw^M-we)  2. ;
nuana  Ses.  (Zulu  M-vuvi-ntw-ana)
1.  “child,”  pi.  b-awa  Ses.  (Zulu
B,-la?i-ntw-ana)  2. ;
vno-tsi  3.  “ day,”  pi.  rae-tsi  4. ;
mo-fee  (Sesuto  mo-fei,  Zulu  u-
mu-zi)  3.  “ village,  kraal,”  pi.
me-fee  (Ses.  me-fei  4.)  ;
tao-rimo  (Sesuto  rao-Umo  3.
“ god,”  pi.  me-rimo  (Ses.  me-
limo')  4.  (§  395)  ;

m-oea  Ses.  (Kafii'  u-m-moya)  3.
“spii-it,”  pi.  me-oea  (Sesuto
me-ea,  Kafir  \-jxLi-moya)  4. ;
va.-ila  3.  “ street,”  pi.  me-bila  4. ;
mu-ei  or  mo-5?  (Sesuto  mo-si,
Zulu  u-mu-si)  3.  “smoke” ;
mxL-lelo  (Sesuto  mo-lelo,  Kafir
u-m-^uo,  § 344)  3.  “ fire ;”
(p)m-bu  or  mu-5w  (Sesuto  mo-
hu)  3.  “gi'ound,”  pi.  mo-hu  4. ;
nuaxa  (Sesuto  nudKa,  Kafir  u-
nyakd)  3.  “ year,”  pi.  in  Sesuto
me-nuah'a  4.  (the  SeXlapi
plural  ll-wya^a  10.  “years”
belongs  to  a singular  of  the  9th
class) ;

mo-kala  3.  “ camel-thorn,”  pi.
ma,-kala  6. ;


le-ru  Ses.  (Kafir  \-\i-fri)  5.

“ cloud,”  pi.  ma-ru  6. ;
le-ixlo  Ses.  (Kafir  i-li-so)  5.
“ eye,”  pi.  ma-ixlo  (Sesuto
ma-Xlo,  Kafir  a-m-eXto,  §327)
6.;

le  -ino  Ses.  (Kafir  \-zinyd)  5'
“tooth,”  pi.  ma-ino  (Sesuto
m-eno,  Kafir  a,-ma-zinyo  or
a-m-enyo,  § 326)  6. ;
le-infshue  (Sesuto  le-yoe,  Kafir
i-ll-<ye)  5.  “ stone,”  pi.  ma-ye
(Sesuto  ma-yoe,  Kafir  a-ma-
tye)  6.  ;

\e-tsele  (Kafir  \-bele)  5.  “ female
breast,”  pi.  ma-bele  (Sesuto
ma-tsuele,  Kafir  a-ma-bele)
Q.f

\9-tshoxo  (Sesuto  le-tshoVo,  Te-
keza  boko)  5.  “ arm,”  pi.  ma-
boxo  (Sesuto  ma-tshoh'o,  Te-
keza  ma-boko)  6. ;
le-sapo  or  sapo  (Sesuto  le-sapo,
Kafir  i-tambo)  5.  “bOne,”  pi.
ma-rapo  (Sesuto  ma-sapo,
Kafir  a-ma-tambo)  6. ;

\e-huku  or  kuku  5.  “word,”  pi.
ma-kuku  6. ;

le-katsi  or  kalsi  (Sesuto  le-fatsi)
5.  “land,”  pi.  ma-katsi  6.
(compare  Kafir  pa-nsi  “ be-
neath,” § 436) ;

ma-n  (Ses.)  6.  “blood”  (com-
pare Kafir  i-gazi  “blood”)  ;


* Setshuana  m9.-b6le  (Zulu  a-ma-5e?e)  6.  means  also  “ Kafir  corn  ”
(=  Kafir  a-mSl-zimba  6.).  In  Zulu  the  singular  of  this  noun,  i-bele  5.,
has  the  meaning  “ ear  of  Kafir  corn,”  and  also  that  of  “ female  breast,
cow’s  udder.”  From  the  same  stem  *there  are  in  Zulu  the  following
nouns,  a-m-hele  3.  “ cow’s  teat,”  (“  nipple  of  an  animal  ” in  Kafir,
Ayliff,)  i-si-5e/e  7.  “ man’s  nipple  ” (in  Kafir  “ mercy,”  pi.  i-ai-5efe  8.,
Appleyard§  491,2.),  and  u-bii-iele  14.  “tenderness,  compassion”  (in
Kafir  “ grace,  pity,  kindness,  mercy,  affection,  compassion  ”).  Colenso’s
Grammar  p.  viii.  Dictionary  p.  28,


165


Sexlapi  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


BC-huba  (Sesuto  ee-fuba,  Kafir
i-ai-fuba)  7.  “breast,  chest,”
pi.  li-huba  (Sesuto  li-fuba)  8. ;
se-aXla  or  aXla  (Kafir  i-a-anXla) ;

7.  “ hand,”  pi.  li-aXla  8. ;
ae-xlaku  or  xlaliu  (Kafir  i-sl-
xlaiigu)  7.  “ shoe,”  pi.  11-
Xlaku  8.  ;

ae-nlikna  (Zulu  i-ai-nkwa,  Kafir
i-s-ow^a)  7.  “bread,  loaf,”  pi.
li-nkhua  (Zulu  i-zi-nkwa,  Kafir
i-Z-onha)  8.  ;

{e)n-tsha  (Sesuto  m-ptsha,  Kafir
i-n-clsha,  § 277)  9.  “ dog,”  pi.
lin^tsha  (Ses.  10. ;

(e)h-ku  Ses.  (Kafir  i-m-uw)  9.

“ sheep,”  pi.  10. ;

(e)ii-7w  (Sesuto  n-/id)  9.  “ nose,”
pi.  (Ses.  lin-/do)  10. ;

(e)m-j3«  (Ses.)  9.  “belly,”  pi.

(Ses.)  10. ;

phukuye  (Sesuto  phokoyoe,  Kafir
i-xa-pungidye)  9.  “jackal,”  pi.
li-phulmye  (Sesuto  li-pokoyoe)
10.;

thuto  (Ses.)  9.  “ doctrine,”  pi- 11-
thuto  (Ses.)  10.  (xo-ruta  15.
“ to  teach  ”)  ;

tau  Ses.  (Lour.  Marques  \-n.-dao')
9.  “lion,”  pi.  li-taM  (Ses.)  10.;
ku-ana  (Sesuto  konyana,  Kafir
i-xa-vand)  9.  “ lamb,”  pi.  11-
kuana  (Sesuto  W-konyana)  10. ;


phiri  (Sesuto  piri^  Zulu  i-xa-pisi)

9.  “ hyena,”  pi.  li-phiri  (Se-
suto li-piri)  10. ;

kxomu  (Sesuto  kk'omo,  § 226)  9.
“ cow,  ox,”  pi.  ll-kxomu  (Se-
suto li-kh'omo')  10. ;

(ei)n-XZM  (Sesuto  n-XZw,  Kafir
i-n-XZw)  9.  “ house,”  pi.  ma-
ilu  (Ses.)  10. ;

tsephe  (Zulu  i-n-se^e)  9.  “spring-
bok,” pi.  ma-sepke  6.  ;*

1o-sAm  11.  (Ses.  le-Ju  5.)  “death,”
pi.  lln-Mw  10.  (xo-shua  15.
“ to  die”  = Kafir  u-ku-/«)  ;
l6-ri  11.  “ cord,”  pi.  lin-t*  10. ;
Id-bu  11.  “saltpetre  or  bi-ackish
gi’ound  ” (Livingstone),  pi.
llm-jOM  10. ;

lo-leme  (Kafir  n-lwimi,  Zulu
u-limi)  11.  “tongue,”  pi.

10.  (Sesuto  le-leme  5.,  pi.
ma-leme  6.)  ;

lo-naka  1.  (Sesuto  le-naka  5.)
“horn,”  pi.  (Ses.)  10.

(§  472,  note) ;

lo-nao  (Ka,fiv u-nyatvo)  11.  “foot,”
pi.  li-nao  10. ;

lo-xaia  11.  (Sesuto  le-h'aia  5.)
“ skull,”  pi.  li-kxata  10.  (com-
pare Zulu  i-kanda  5.  “ head,”
i-ai-kanda  7.  “ knob,”  i\-kanda

11.  “top  of  bullock’s  head,  cut
ofi‘  with  the  horns  ”)  ;


* The  prefix  nm-  of  the  Gth  class  (or  gender)  is  sometimes  used  for
the  purpose  of  forming  a sort  of  second  plural  to  nouns  of  the  9th  (bi-)
class  besides  their  usual  plural  of  the  10th  (liii-)  class.  The  uin-
seems  to  denote  “a  collection  or  company”  (I.  Hughes,  Manuscript
Grammar),  or  “ a large  number  ” (Frodoux).  Thus  pitse  9.  “a  horse,”
\i-pitse  10.  “horses,”  ma-iitse  6.  “troops  of  horses  ;”  (e)ai-^M  9.  “a
sheep,”  lO.  “sheep,”  6.  “flocks  of  sheep.”  This

explains,  to  some  extent,  how  Archhell  (“  Grammar  of  the  Bechuana
Language”  p.  10,  § 6)  fell  into  the  mistake  of  considering  the  form  with
the  prefix  li-  as  the  dual,  and  that  beginning  with  Bosa-  as  the  plural
form.


JilccK\  S.  Afi\  Com-p.  Grammar.


Z


166


The  Concord.


\o-ldapa  11.  “ yard,”  pi.  ma-
Idapa  6. ;

lo-uhuo  11.  “fruit,”  pi.  ma-
unuo  6 ;

lo-humo  11.  “ryealtli,”  pi.

ma-^Mwio  6. ;

\o-rato  11.  (Sesuto  le-rato  5.,
Kafir  u-tec?o  11.)  “love,”
pi.  xasL-rato  6. ;
bo-six^  (Sesuto  bo-s«Su,  Kafir
u-bu-SM^w)  14.  “night,”  pi.
ma-sfxo  (Sesuto  ma-s«Ao)
6.;

bo-n’no  14.  “ dwelling  idace,”
pi.  ma-nno  6. ;

bo-xosi  (Sesuto  "bo-liosi, '
Kafir  u-bu-Aosi)  14.  “chief-
tainship, kingdom,”  pi.  ma-
■)(Osi  6.  {Jixosi  9.  “chief”
= Kafir  i-n-Aosi) ;
bo-yaw  (Sesuto  dskoan,  Kafir
M-tyani)  14.  “gi’ass;”
ho-yaloa  (Sesuto  yoala,  Kafir
u-tyalwa,  Zulu  u-tywala)  14.
“ Kafir  beer ;”

Mlo  15.  “ place,”  pi.  vaai-Mlo
6.  (§  435)  ;

xo-rato  (Sesuto  h'o-wata,
Kafir  u-tu-toda)  15.  “ to
love.”

470.  The  Sesuto  dia-
lect thus  varies  little,
either  in  the  forms  of  the
prefixes  or  in  their  mu-
tual correspondence,  from
that  of  Western  Se-
tshuana,  the  examples
of  which  given  here  are
taken  from  the  SeXlapi
dialect.  How  the  11th
class  or  gender  in  Sesuto


SSSUTO  PREFIXES.


SINGULAR.

PLURAL.

PERS

ONAL.

1.

mo-,  (— )

2.

ba-,  bo-

"bo-mo-

b-

’m-  (miS-i?-)

ba-6-

6.

ma-

3.

4.

mo-

me-

’m-  (BIO-J5-)

me-&-

5.  (&  11.)

6.

le-,  (-)

ma-

m-

10.

li-

7.

8.

se-

li-

3.

10.

n-

lin-  •.*

m-

lim-

(-)

li-

6.

ma-

ABST

RACT.

1€.

6.

bo-

ma-

INFINITIVE

AND  LOCAL.

15.

ho-

(ffo-)

Sesuto  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.  167

has  become  homophonically  identical  with  the  5th  (le-)
class,  has  been  previously  explained,  § 456.  As  all
the  grammatical  forms  of  the  11th  class  now  seem  to
coincide  with  those  of  the  5th,  the  11th  class  or  gender
has  virtually  ceased  to  exist  in  Sesuto ; many  nouns
originally  belonging  to  the  11th  class  having  even
adopted  the  6th  (ma-)  class  as  their  corresponding
plural,  although  the  same  nouns  in  SeXlapi  are  always
used  with  plurals  of  the  10th  (lin-)  class.  But  in-
stances of  the  latter  plural  to  nouns  of  the  old  11th
class  are  still  occasionally  to  be  found  in  Sesuto,  and
this  causes  it  to  appear  as  if  the  5th  (le-)  class  or
gender  were  less  exclusively  restricted  to  plural  forms  of
the  6th  (ma-)  class  in  Sesuto,  than  in  any  of  the  other
South  African  B^-ntu  languages.  With  regard  to  the
6th  (ma-)  class  or  gender,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that,  in
one  case  at  least  in  this  dialect,  it  is  found  corresponding
to  the  1st  (mo-)  class.  Examples  of  local  nouns  of  the
15th  (h'o-)  class  with  corresponding  plurals  have  not,  as
yet,  been  found  by  me  in  Sesuto.

THE  TEREZA  SPECIES.

471.  The  contraction  of  the  form  mu-Z  to  n-  in  the
first  and  third  classes  (§  343)  is  the  chief  characteristic  of
the  Tekeza  species.  In  other  respects  the  forms  of  the
prefixes  are  nearer  to  those  in  the  Middle  Branch  lan-
guages than  we  find  them  to  be  in  either  of  the  remaining
species  of  the  South-eastern  Branch  (Kafir  and  Setshuana).
The  following  table  shewing  the  correspondence  of  the
derivative  prefixes  of  nouns  in  the  Northern  Tekeza
dialect  spoken  at  Lourenzo  Marques,  Delagoa  Bay,  is,
of  course,  incomplete.  It  is  supposed  that  the  form  of  the
8th  prefix  here  is  psi-,  as  in  the  dialect  of  Tette,  but  the
vocabularies  (as  yet  our  only  materials  for  the  know-
ledge of  these  dialects)  contain  no  positive  evidence  of
this.  An  initial  vowel  (frequently  a),  which  is  evidently
unconnected  with  the  prefix,  occasionally  precedes  the


168


The  Concord.


noun  in  these  vocabularies.  The  nature  of  this  vowel  is
not  clear.  When  an  a it  may  be  merely  the  genitive
particle.

TEKCZA  PEEFIXES.  TEKEZA  NOUNS.

a-mu-no  (Southern  Tekeza
mu-wM,  Zulu  u-mu-wtM)

1.  “man,  person,”  pi.
va-wo  (S.  T.  ba-HM  or
va-WM,  Kafir  a-ba-wtw)

2. ;

n-dnda  1.  “slave,  poor  fol-
lower,” (fi'om  e-'^o-landa,
Kafir  u-'ym.-landa  15.  “ to
follow  ”) ;

a-n-oi  (Setshuana  ta.o-loi)  1.
“ sorcerer  ” ;

wana  (Matonga  wuana,  Ma-
n/olosiM-w«awa,  Zuluu-mu-
ntw-ana)  1 . “ child  ;”
mu-iff  (Zulu  u-mu-zf)  3.
“settlement,  village,”  pi.
mi-^  (Kafir  i-mi-z^)
4.;

mu-se  (Zulu  u-mu-sf)  3.
“ smoke ;”

mu-re  (Zulu  u-mu-^i)  3.
“ ti’ee

n-ege  (Kafih’  u-m-lenze)  3.
“leg”  (?),  pi.  mi-lenge
(Kafir  i-mi-?ew^e)  4. ;
n-ambo  (Kafir  u-m-lambo,
Setshuana  vao-lapo)  3.
“ river  ” ;

n-ambshana  (Kafu'  u-m-Za-
ndskand)  3.  “ rivulet ;”
ti-omo  (Kafir  n-m-lomo)  3.
“ mouth  ” ;

(?)  a-m-iu  (Kafir  u-m-
oya,  Setshuana  m.-oea)  3.
“ wind  ” ;

ri-to  (Kafir  \-\i-zwi,  Sesuto
\e~ntshue)  5.  “ voice  ” ;


SINGULAR.

PLURAL.

PERS

ONAL.

1.

2.

mu-

va-

n-  (BdU-X-)
(-)

3.

4.

mu-

ml-

n-  (IttU-i-)

mi-Z-

m-

5.

6.

ri-

ma-

(-)

7.

8.

tsbi-

tsbe-

9.

10.

in-,  en-

(ti-in-)

im-,  em-

thin-,  tin-

(-)

tim-

thi-,  the-

11.

10.

11-

tin-

tim-

ABSTRACT.

14.

bu-

? be-

INFINITIVE.

15.

ko-

ku-

Tekeza  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


169


ri-hdsha  (Kafir  \-\i-tye,  Sesuto
\e-yoe,  Sexlapi  le-intshue)  5.
“ stone  ” ;

tanda  (Kafir  i-!anda)  5.  “ egg,”
pi.  xaei-tanda  or  a-vx-anda
(Kafir  a-ma-.'a«<^aj  6. ;

Uto  (Zulu  \-hizo,  Sesuto  le-6«feo)

5.  “name,”  pi.  a-naa-lito  (Zulu
a-ma-ifzo,  Sesuto  xaSL-litso')

6. ;

tinyo  (Kafir  i-zinyo)  5.  “ tooth,”
pi.  a-tna.-tinyo  (Kafir  a-ma-
zinyo  or  a.-m-enyo')  6. ;

iixlo  (Kafir  i-li-so,  Setshuana
le-ixlo)  5.  “eye”,  pi.  %-
ma-xfo  (Kafir  a-xn-eXZo,
Sesuto  ma-xfo,  SeXlapi  ma-
iXlo')  6.  ;

a-raSL-rre  (Kafir  a-ma-fe,  Se-
tshuana zaa-the)  6.  “spittle” ;

tahi-fuva  (Kafir  i-&i-fuha)  7.
“ breast,  chest  ” ;

tshe-vinde  (Kafir  i-si-bindi)  7.
“ liver  ” ;

tahi-londa  (Kafir  i-si-londa)  7.
“woimd,  sore”;

in-Xto  (Kafii'  i-n-XZw)  9.
“house,”  pi.  ti-in-Xlo  (Kafir
i-zin-X^zt)  10.

in-Xloko  (Kafir  i-n-Xloko)  9.
“ head  ” ;

in-g'we  (Kafir  i-xi-gwe)  9.  “ leo-
pai’d  ” ;

ira-bilo  (Setshuana  pelu)  9.
“ heaid  ” ;

en-kollo  (Portuguese  coUo)  9.
“ neck  ” ;


em-bute  (Kafir  i-xa-buzi)  9.
“goat”;

tin-Xlamfe  (Zulu  i-xin-xlanzi,
Setshuanali-xZapi)  10.  “fishes”;
omo  (Kafir  i-n-ltomo,  Sesuto
kh'omo,  Sexlapi  kXomu)  9.
“ cow,”  pi.  te-omo  (Zulu  i-zln-
komo)  10.  (§  226)  ;
uko  (Kafir  i-n-kuku,  SeXlapi
koku)  9.  “fowl,”  pi.  thl-wSo
(Zulu  i-xin-kuku)  10.

{a-)hose  (Kafir  i-n-Aosf,  Sexlapi
kXosi)  9.  “ king  ” ;
habo  (Kafir  i-n-kawo)  9.  “ mon-
key”;

xa-isse  (Zulu  i-m-pisi,  Setshuana
phiri)  9.  “hyena”;
tin-uala  (Kafii’  i-n-twala)  10.
“ lice  ” ;

li-tiu  (Ks&e  M-zipo')  11.  “finger,
toe,”  pi.  tin-tm  (Kafii’  i-n-
zipo')  10. ;

\i-ondo  (Matonga  \\x-pondo,  Kafir
Vi-pondd)  11.  “horn” ; pi.  tim-
ondo  (Zulu  i-xiva.-pondo')  10.
li-khuko  (Kafii’  VL-khukd)  11.
“mat” ;

\i\L-Xlungo  14.  “powder”  (Kafii’
u-bu-x^wn^M  14.  “poison,  pow-
der ”)  ;

he-siko  (Kafii’  u-bu-sMSw,  Se-
tshuana bo-sixo)  14.  “ night”  ;
i-'b.VL-fa  (Kafii’  u-bu-/a)  15.  “to
die  ” ;

e-'^o-tskava  (Zulu  u-ku-sa&a)
15.  “to  be  afraid”  (Kafir
u-ku-sa5a  15.  “to  flee”).


B.  IN  THE  MIDDLE  BRANCH.

aa.  The  Mosambique  Genus.

DIALECTS  OF  TETTB  AND  SENA.

472.  The  possession  of  the  12th  (tu-),  13th  (ka-)j  and
16th  (pa-)  classes  distinguishes  most  of  the  languages  of


no


The  Concord.


the  Middle  Branch  from  those  of  the  South-eastern.
The  dialects  of  the  Middle  Branch,  which  are  the  most
nearly  allied  to  the  languages  of  the  South-eastern
Branch,  are  only  known  to  us  in  vocabularies  which  do
not  enable  us  to  construct  any  satisfactory  tables  of  the
prefixes.  The  languages  of  Sena  and  Tette  agree
with  the  Kafir  lano-uage  in  the  forms  of  most  of  their
prefixes,  those  of  the  10th  (zin-)  class,  for  example,
being  remarkably  similar.  Where  they  difFer  from
the  Kafir  prefixes  they  generally  resemble  those  of
the  Tekeza,  as  in  the  2nd  (va-),  7th  (tshi-  or  slli-),
and  8th  (pi-  or  psi-)  classes.  In  the  14th  (BU-)
class  the  initial  consonant  has  been  almost  invariably
dropped  in  the  Middle  Branch  languages ; having  been
preserved  in  Sofala  in  a softened  form  (vu-).  No
certain  evidence  of  the  existence  of  the  11th  (LTJ-)
class  has  as  yet  been  observed  in  the  dialects  of  Tette
and  Sena.  Ri-nme  “tongue”  may  belong  to  the  5th
class  (§  351,  note),  although,  if  it  be  so,  it  is  the
only  noun  of  this  class  as  yet  known  to  us  in  the
dialect  of  Tette,  in  which  the  form  of  the  prefix  ri-
has  been  preserved.  In  Sena,  however,  we  find  also  ri-
kombo  5.  “ oyster,”  pi.  xadi-kombo  6.  In  some  nouns  of
the  Tette  dialect  the  prefix  of  the  5th  class  seems  to  have
the  form  zi“i  as  zi-«yaw^a  (Sena  wyaw^a)  5.  “horn,”  pi.
TOU^-nyahga  6.*,  zi-rumi  5.  “ wasp,”  pi.  6.  In

* SeXlapi  Vo-naka  11.  pi.  li-rea^a  10.,  Sesuto  \e-naka  5.  pi.  W-naka
10.,  Cape  Delgado  Xn-nyafiga  11.  pi.  nyafiga  (10.),  QueUimane  IU11-
nyanga  3.  pi.  mx-nyanga  4.  One  might  he  inclined  to  derive  the  Kafir
and  Zulu  noun  i-m-yanga  9.  “ moon  ” from  this  stem,  thinking  of  the
horns  of  the  moon.  Yet  it  is  more  probable  that  this  noun  has  been
fashioned  from  a Hottentot  word  for  moon  Qjhha),  as  it  has  not  been
met  with  in  this  signification  in  any  other  Ba-ntu  languages.  The  very
similar  noun  i-n-nyangd  9.  “doctor”  is,  on  the  contrary,  common  to
most,  if  not  all,  of  the  South  African  Ba-ntu  languages.  The  Hotten-
tot word  for  moon  is  written  by  Ludolf  (1710)  t’Ga  and  k’cha,  by
Kolb  (1719)  Tcha  in  the  Cape  dialect ; Ka  by  Barrow  (1806)  in  a
more  Eastern  Hottentot  dialect ; in  the  IKora  dialect  t’gaam  by  Borcherds
(1801),  Vhhaam  (m.  s.)  and  f'/i'-haang-S  (f.  s.  “month  ”)  b)'  Lichtenstein


Tette  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns,


m


some  nouns  (as  ziso  “ eye  ”
§ 327,  zino  “ tooth  ” § 326)
the  initial  zi,  though  disap-
pearing in  the  plural  (jaSi-nu
and  ma-so),  evidently  be-
longs to  the  stem.  In  others
again  it  is  difficult  to  say
whether  zi  is  the  prefix  or
part  of  the  stem  of  the  noun.
The  following  tables  of  the
dialects  of  Tette  and  Sena
can  but  be  more  or  less  in-
complete, and  in  need  of  cor-
rection. In  the  enumeration
of  Tette  nouns,  those  which
have  the  same  form  in  Sena,
are  followed  by  the  letter

“ S.”

TETTE  NOUNS.
mxi-nttu  or  S.  (Zulu  u-mu-

ntu)  1 . “ man,  person,”  pi.  va-nttu
(S.)2.;

taxL-kuzi  S.  (Zulu  u-m-fazi)  1.
“woman,”  pi.  va-hizi  or  a-kazi
(S.)2.;

mu-awa  S.  (Zulu  v-tavi-ntwana)
1.  “child,”  pi.  w-ana  (S.)  2.  ;
T/lu-mbo  1.  (an  inhabitant  of  XLu-
mbo  15.),  pi.  "Va-mbo  2.;
bdba  S.  (Zulu  u-baba)  1.  “father”;
mu-ene  or  mo-ene  S.  (Zulu  u-m-
nini)  1.  “master;”
mama  S.  (Zulu  u-mame)  1.  “ mo-
ther ” ;

ToaxL-shinda  (S.)  1.  “prince,”  (Sena
pi.  taa-shinda  6-) ;


tette  prefixes.


SINGULAR.

PLUEAL.

PEES

ONAL.

1.

z.

mu-,  (— )

va-

mo-

wa-

a-

3.

4.

mu-

mi-

5.

6.

(-)

ma-

zi-

7.

8.

tshi-

sM-

psi-

9.

10.

n-

zin-

m-

zim-

C-)

zi-

(— )

6.

ma-

DIMIN

UTIVE.

13.

ri

ka-

tu-

ABSTRACT,

lit.

u-

INPINITIVE  AND  LOCAL.

15.

ku-

LOCAL.

16.

pa-

(1812),  ’kaam  by  Burchell  (1824),  qchaam  (m.  s.)  by  Wuras  (1850)  ;
whilst  in  the  Namaqua  dialect  the  noun  has  still  the  derivative  sufHx
of  the  masculme  singular  in  the  form  jlkhd-'p.


172


The  Concord.


nyarugwe  (S.)  1.  “tiger”  ;
mu-ti  S.  (Zulu  u-mu-ft’)  3.

“ tree,”  pi.  lai-ti  (S.)  4.
ma-nwe  (Zulu  u-mu-wwe)  3.

“ finger,”  pi.  mi-nwe  4. ;
mu-seae  (Sofala  tnu-sheve)  3.

“ an’ow,”  pi.  mi-seue  4. ;
mu-zi  (Sena  in.xi-tshitsr)  3.

“ root,”  pi.  mi-zi  4. ;
mu-afta  (Zulu  u-vd-nyaka)  3.

“ year,”  pi.  mi-a^a  4. ;
zino  S.  (Zulu  i-zinyd)  5.  “ tooth,”
pi.  ma-KM  S.  (Zulu  a-ma-
zinyo)  6.  (§  326)  ;
ziso  (Sena  diso,  Zulu  i-li-so,
Setshu^a  \e-ixlo,  Lourenzo
Marques  t&lo)  5.  “ eye,”  pi.
ma-so  (Zulu  a-m-eXZo,  Setshua-
na  ma-txZo,  Lour.  Marq.  ma-
Xlo)  6.  (§  327)  ;

zanskab.  “hand,”  pi.  Vdd-nska  6.;
zina  S.  (Setshuana  le-iwa,  Bunda
o-ri-sAtwa)  5.  “ name  ” ;
zirumi  5.  “ wasp,”  pi.  taa-rumi
6.;

zirua  (Sena  rva)  5.  “ flower,”  pi.
ma-rua  (S.)  6. ;

zuku  5.  “female  breast,”  pi.  ma-
zuhi  6. ;

ziko  5.  “ kingdom  ” ;
zuro  S.  (Zulu  i-zo/o)  5.  “yester-
day” ;

zai  5.  “ egg,”  pi.  m.a-zai  6. ;
sezi  5-  “toad,”  pi.  ma-sez?  6. ;
zindwe  5.  “pig-nut,”  pi.  ma-
ndwe  6. ;

tsosi  5.  “ tear,”  pi.  m.a-tsosi  6. ;
tupi  5.  “ body  ” ;

shira  (S.)  5.  “native  cloth,”  pi.

xaa-sMra  (S.)  6. ;
tsumba  (S ) 5.  “ leaf,”  pi.  ma-
tsamba  (S.)  6. ;
tonshe  (S.)  5.  “ cotton  ” ;


tenga  5,  “ feather,”  pi.  xaa-ienga

6.;

tondo  5.  (fi-uit  of  mu-tondo  3.),
pi.  Txia-tondo  6. ;
fara  (S.)  5.  “ voice  ” ;
guni  (S.)  5.  “ cloth  ” ;
fupa  (S.)  5.  “ bone,”  pi.  taa-fupa
(S.)  6. ;

putu  (S.)  5.  “ cheek,”  pi.  ma-
putu  (S.)  6. ;

bondo  (S.)  5.  “knee,”  pi.  ma-
bondo  (S.)  6. ;

papidwe  (S.)  5.  “ wing,”  pi.  ma-
papidwe  (S.)  6.  (Zulu  u-ku-
papa,  Setshuana  x^-^oka.,  Te-
keza  i\Lo-kaka  15.  “ to  fly  as  a
bird,”  § 360) ;

piri  (S.)  5.  “hill,”  pi.  xaa-piri  6.;
bete  5.  “cockroach,”  pi.  raa-bete
6.  (Sena  pempe  5.,  pi.  ma-
pempe  6.)  ;

m.a-pira  (S.)  6.  “ millet  ” ;
m.a-ta  S.  (Kafir  a-ma-^e)  6.
“ saliva  ” ;

shi-kope  7.  “ eyelash,”  pi.  psi-
kope  8.  (Kafir  n-kope  11.  “eye-
lash,” pi.  i-zin-/iope  10.)  ;
slii-porop6ro  (Sena  dsUi-poro-
poro)  7.  “ ball,”  pi.  psi-poro-
poro  8. ;

Sena  shi-mu-ti  7-  “ large  tree,”
pi.  pi-mi-ti  (S.)  8.  (§  430  and
454);

(t)shi-w-fe  7.  “ gi’eat  bow  ” ;
(t)shi-ma-zi  7.  “ large  water,
river  ” ;

(t^shi-nyumba  7.  “large  house”;
n-yumba  (S.)  9.  “ house,”  pi.  zi-
nyumba  10.  and  xaa-nyumba  6. ;
(i)n-yo^a  S.  (Zulu  {--a-nyoka)  9.

“ snake,”  pi.  zin-yo/m  (S.)  10. ;
dzdu  S.  (Zulu  \-n-Xlovu)  9.  “ ele-
phant,” (Sena  pi.  dzou  10.)  ;


Tette  and  Sena  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.  173


hunha  (S.)  9.  “ tame  pig,”  pi.

xin-Mmba  (S.)  10. ;
xa-paha  (Zulu  i-xa-palia)  9.

“ cat,”  pi.  xivcL-puka  10. ;
va.-Mdu  (Sena  \m.-bu)  9.  “mos-
quito,” pi.  xim-budu  10. ;
va.-pete  (S.)  9.  “ ring,”  pi.  zim-
pcte  10, ;

zomba  (Sena  nsbmba  or  somba,
Zulu  i-TX~Xlanzi,  Setshuaua
Xlapi)  9.  “fish,”  pi.  xl-zomba
10.;

(ii)guo  S.  (Kafir  i-n-gubo')  9.

“ cloth,”  Sena  pi.  giio  10. ;
'k.a-piri  13.  “hillock;”
lia-dz&mba  13.  “small  leaf,”  pi.

tu.-ma.-dzdm.ba  12.  (-j-  6.)  ;
'k.a-muti  (S.)  1 3.  ( -|-  3.)  “ a shrub ;”
ka-ma-cfsi  13.(-f-6.)  “arivulet;”
'k.a-nyumba  (4-9.)  “a  hut;”
u-sM  (Sena  u-dsM.,  Kafir  u-bu-
si)  14.  “ honey;”
u-zua  (Sena  u-dzu,  pi.  xaa-u-
dzu)  14.  “straw”  (Sofala  vu-
shua  14.,  Kafir  u-tyani  14.
“ grass  ”)  ;


u-ture  S.  (Sofala  vu-tare)  14.
“ iron ;”

u-siku  or  u-siho  (Kafir  u-bu-
suku)  14.  “ night,”  (Sena  pi.
ma-siko  or  xua-siku  6. ) ;
u-ta  S-  (Setshuana  bo-m)  14
“ boAV ;”

u-hga  (S.)  14.  “powder  ;”

'k.u-dia  S.  (Kafir  u-ku-fya)  15,
“ food ;”

ku-^wmaS.  (Zuluu-ku-pe/MmwZa
“to  breathe”)  15.  “breath;”
'b.u-roara  S.  (Zulu  u-ku-/ofioZa
“ to  settle  for  a wife  with
the  girl’s  father”)  15.  “mar-
riage ;”

'biu-nungha  S.  (Zulu  u-ku-nwAa)
15.  “ bad  smell ;”

■ga-nsi  16.  “ land,  country,  king-
dom” (Kafir  preposition  pansi
“ below,  beneath,”  § 436)  ;
ga-kati  p-a  u-siku  (Sena  ga-kati
p-«  tsiku)  16.  “ midnight ;”
ga-dzuru^-a  muendo  15.  “span
of  the  foot”  (zuru  = Kafir
\-zulu  5.  “heaven”),  § 435.


473.  The  difference  between  the  dialects  of  Sena
and  Tette  is  very  small^  the  derivative  prefixes  in
both  languages  being  almost  identical.  Psi-,  the  form
of  the  8th  prefix  in  Tette,  is  intermediate  between  the
Sena  form  pi-  and  the  Kafir  zi-  (Setshuana  li-  or  ri-).
It  may  be  well  to  observe  here  that  the  language
spoken  at  Tette  and  Sena  extends  also  to  Maravi,  to
Sofala,  and  to  Andersson’s*  Chjilimanse.  The  dia-
lect of  the  latter  agrees  most  nearly  with  that  of  Tette,
and  next  to  it  with  Sofala.  A few  Chjilimanse  Avords,
however,  shew  a close  resemblance  to  the  dialect  of
Inhambane.

* “ Journey  to  Lake  ’Ngami.” — (Reprinted  from  the  S.  A.  Commercial
Advertiser  and  C,  T,  Mail,)  1854.  p.  20.

BUeki  S.  Afv.  Corny.  Grammctr.  ^ ^


174


The  Concora,


SSNA  PREFIXES.


SINGTJLAK.

PLTJEAL,

PEES

1.

mu-,  (— )

■ ■

O

3.

mu-

4,

mi-

5.

ri-

(d)zi-

(-)

6.

ma-

7.

tshi-

tsh-

dsh-

8.

psi-

9.

n-,  in-
m-

(-)

10.

n-,  zin-
m-

(-)

13.

ka-

12.

tu-

ABSTRACT.

14.

u-

INFINITIVE  AND  LOCAX.

15.

ku-

LOCAL.

16.

pa-

MAKUA  I/ANGUAGE.

474.  We  notice  in  the  lan-
guage of  the  Makua  a re-
markable form  of  the  5th
prefix,  in  which  the  liquid
consonant  (Z)  has  been  chan-
ged into  a nasal  (w).  We


MAKUA  PREFIXES.


SINGULAR.

PLURAL.

PER

1.

mu-

m-

SONAL.

2.

a-

3.

mu-

m-

4.

mi-

5.

ni-

n-

in-

6.

ma-

m-

7.

ikl-

ik-

i-

9.

n-,  in-

(-)

13.

ka-

14.

u-

6.

ma-

INFINITIVE.

15.

u-

w-

Mahua  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


175


also  find  here  that  the  15th  prefix  has  lost  its  consonant,
and  has  thus  become  identical  in  form  with  the  14th.
On  the  other  hand,  the  7th  (ki-)  prefix  appears  to  have
retained  a more  primitive  form  than  either  in  Sena  or
Tette.  Of  the  8th,  10th,  and  12th  classes  the  forms  are
uncertain,  and  we  are  thus  Ignorant  as  to  the  corres-
ponding plurals  of  the  7th  (ki-),  9th  (n),  and  13th  (ka-)
classes.  That  the  11th  class  may  have  merged  into  the
5th  is  not  an  unnatural  hypothesis.  Traces  of  the  old
initial  articles  are  apparently  met  with  in  some  of  the


forms  of  the  prefixes.

MAKUA

(Zulu  u-mu-nfe)  1.
“ person,”  pi.  a.-ttu  (Zulu
a-ba-Kfe)  2. ;

ta-bewe  1,  “king,”  pi.  B,-bewe  2. ;
mvi-rima  (Sena  and  Tette  mu-
timd)  3.  “heart,”  pl.mi-rfma  4.;
m-ono  (Cape  Delgado  mu-^dno)
3.  “ arm,”  pi.  mi-wo  4. ;
mxL-tethe  3.  “ feather,”  pi.  ml-
tethe  4. ;

mxL-ishi  (Zulu  u-mu-si)  3,
“ smoke

mu-iri (Zulu u-mu-<i) 3.  “tree ;”
m.-6ro  (Tette,  Sena,  Kihiau,  and
Sudheli  va.-otto')  3.  “ fii’e  ;”
ni-huva  (Tette  and  Sena  fupa)

5.  “bone,”  pi.  ■ma-kuva  (T.
and  S.  raa-fupa)  6.  ;

n-ito  (Kafir  i-li-so)  5.  “ eye,”  pi.

xue-io  (Kafir  &-va.e-'Klo)  6. ;
XL-rama  5.  “ cheek,”  pi.  xaa,-rama

6. ;

i-n-^a^o  5.  “ lip,”  pi.  jaa-lako  6. ;
i-n-zM  (Zulu  i-li-zwi,  Delagoa
Bay  a-rl-to,  Sena  vi-bze)  5.
“ voice,”  pi.  ma-zu  6. ;
jxi-pardri  5.  “ rib,"  pi.  ma-p«-
rdri  6. ;


NOUNS.

n'i-odshe  5.  “ egg,”  pi.  m-odshe  6. ;
i-b.-arari  7.  “hair”  (dz-a  reru
“ of  the  chin,”  i.e.  beard)  ;
i-ki-ndmbo  (Tette  and  Sena
dshi-nambo,  Cape  Delgado  ki-
ndmbo~)  7.  “ lime
i-reru  (Kafir  \-si-lem,  Sena  and
Tette  [t]shi-d'eaa.  Cape  Del-
gado bi-rehvu)  7.  “ chin
i-n-yope  9.  “ ox  ” (§  226) ;
i-nupa  (in  all  other  Eastern
dialects  of  the  Middle  Branch
nyumba)  9.  “ house ;”

\-guo  (Kafir-  i-n-gubo,  Sena  and
Tette  \ri\guo')  9.  “ cloth  ;”
gulue  (Kafir  i-ix-gu-lube)  9.
“pig;”

i-puri  (Kafir  i-xa-buzi)  9.  “goat ;”
i-pula  (Kafir- i-m-«M to)  9.  “rain;”
XL-darama  (Inhambane,  Tette,  and
Sena  dardmd)  9.  “ gold ;”
b9.-puti  13.  “gun”  (Sofala, Sena,
and  Tette  futi)  ;

VL-Myu  (Kafir  u-bu-iwAw)  14.
“ night ;”

vi-ga  or  u-^a  (Sofala  vu-nga,
Inhambane,  Sena,  and  Tette  u-
nga)  14.  “ gurrpomler  ;”


176


The  Concord.


VL-Uala  (Kafir  n-'b.VL-lihdla,  Se-  w-ama  (Sena  and  Tette  ku-
tshuana  xo-lebala,  Tekeza  e-  kdmd)  15.  “to  milk”  (Zulu

lio-dzivala,  Inhambaiie  ku-  u-ku-Aama  15.  “to  squeeze,

divala,  Tette  and  Sena  ku-  drain  out  as  a milkpaii,”  &c).
divdra.  Cape  Delgado  ku-
riwdla)  15.  “to  forget;”

KIHIAU.

475.  The  fuller  table  which  we  have  of  the  prefixes  of
the  nouns  in  the  'KX-hidu  language,  contains  but  one  class


K.IHIA.U  PREFIXES.


SINGULAR.

PLURAL.

PERS

ONAL.

1.

2.

mu-,  (— )

va-  (wa-)

m-

3.

4.

mu-

mi-

m-

5.

6.

li-

ma-

ri-

m-

(-)

7.

8.

dshi-

hi-

ki-

vi-  (wi-)

9.

10.

n-

n-

m-

m-

C-)

(-)

11.

10.

lu-

(-)

ABST

RACT.

ri

6.

U-

ma-

(-)

INFINITIVE.

15.

ku-


LOCAL.

16.

pa-


which  has  not  been  preserved
in  Kafir.  This  is  the  16th
(pa--)  class.  The  12th  (TU-)
and  13  th  (KA-)  classes
(which  are  also  lost  in  Kafir)
have  either  disappeared  in
Kihiau,  or  are  so  rarely  used
as  not  to  occur  in  Krapf’s
extensive  vocabulary.  We
notice  in  this  language  a
number  of  abstract  nouns
formed  with  the  derivative
prefix  of  the  6th  class  (ma-)
which,  in  these  cases,  does  not
correspond  as  plural  to  any  sin-
gular prefix.  'K.i-hidu  7.  is
spoken  by  the  W2c-hidu  or
Ye-ido  2.  who  live  in  Ku-y“o
15.  and  are  called  InMaua  by
the  Maravi,  and  A.-dsh6ua  or
A.-dshdwa  2.  (sing.  MVL-dshau
1.)  by  other  foreigners.

KIHIAU  NOUNS.

(Zulu  u-mu-?i<w.)  1-  “per-
son,” pi.  -va-ndu  2 ;
mu-i7iJ  (§  325)  1.  “thief”  ;
m-ana-dslie  (OUilierero  o-ja-a-tye)
1.  “child,”  pi.  v-ana-dshe  (Otyi-
herero  o-v-am-tye)  2. ;


Kihiuu  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


Ill


“farmer,”  (from  ku-
lima  — Kafir  u-ku-^fma  15.
“ to  cultivate  ”) ;

dude  1.  “fatlier,”  pi.  va.-ddde

2.;

vaxL-aUa  (Zulu  v.-xnxL-nyalia)  3,
“year,”  pi.  vai-aha  (Zulu  i-mi-
nyalia)  4.;

(Zulu  u-mu-f(,  § 428
note)  3.  “ tree  ;”

vaxi-dsM  (Zulu  u-mu-zi)  3.
“ village ;”

xn.-l6mo  (Kafir  u-m-fomo,  § 439
note)  3.  “ lip

TCL-otto  3.  “fire”  (the  same  in
Maravi,  Tette,  Sena,  and  Ki-
suaheli)  ;

11  -verve  (Kafir  \-bele')  5.  “ teat,”
pi.  zaa-verre  6.  (p.  164,  note)  ;

samba  5.  “ branch,”  pi.  juSL-sam-
ba  6.;

rembo  5.  “ grave,”  pi.  taa-rembo

6.;

lua  (Tette  zi.-rua')  5.  “flower,”
pi.  raa-lua  6.  ;

\i-yere  5.  “ egg,”  pi.  ma-yere

6.;

r-ino  (Zulu  i-zinyo,  § 326)  5.
“ tooth,”  pi.  m-ewo  6. ;

T-isso  (Zulu  i-ll-so,  § 327)  5.
“ eye,”  pi.  xa-esso  6. ;

U-6ka  or  ri-dshoka  (Koelle’s
li-dshoya)  5.  (Ovambo  e-oka
5.  pi.  o-ma-o/ea,  6.)  “ serpent,
viper;”

xaa,-tumbako  6.  “m’ath,”  (ku-
tumbaka  15.  “ to  be  angry  ”)  ;

ma-sd/do  6.  “ love,  will  ” (ku-
saka  15.  “ to  love,  to  will”)  ;


dski-ndw  or  b.i-ndu  (Ki-kamba
b-i-ndu)  7.  “thing,”  pi.  vi-ndu
8.;

dshl-gombo  7.  “ uten.sil,”  pi.
bi-gombo  (Suaheli  vi-ombo)
8.;

bi-nolo  (the  same  in  Kinika,  ki-
nuo  in  Kisuaheli  and  Kipokomo)
7.  “ whet.stone

bi-sidsM  (the  same  in  Kipokomo,
bi-sihi  in  Kisuaheli  and  Ki-
nika) 7.  “ stem
dshi-*d>M  7.  “ body  ;”
€isbi-dsliondslio  7.  “ potsherd ;”
dslii-d;d^a  7.  “ pan ;”
ii-gombe  9.  “ cow,  ox  ” (§  226)  ;
*xa-buzi  (Kafir  l-xa-buzi)  9.
“ goat ;”

*va.-bua  9.  “dog”  (§  235  and
277);

jx-iota  9.  “ star ;”
m-bebo  or  xa-hevo  (Setshuana
pheho)  9.  “ wind  ;”
xx-gbnya  (Kafir  \-xx-gwenya)  9.
“ aliigator ;”

nidma  (Kafir  \-xx-nyama)  9.  “flesh,
meat ;”

niumba  or  nyumba  (the  same  at
Sofala,  Sena,  Tette,  Maravi,  and
m all  Zangian  dialects)  9.
“ house ;”

somba  (Tette  zomba,  Sena  somba
or  nsomba)  9.  “ fish  ;”

\\l-humbo  l\.  “hair,”  pi.  humbo

10.;

1-uiko  (Sena  and  Tette  r-uko)
11.  “ spoon,”  pi.  uiko  10.  (Se-
tshuana lu-sAo  11.,  pi.  lin-Mo
10.)  ;t


* These  nouns  indicating  animals  are  also  found  construed  as  noims
of  the  1st  (lUU-)  class.  (§  466.)

t Inhambane  and  Sofala  iii-i</do  3.,  Suaheli,  liinika,  and  Ifipokomo
lU-i/do  3.  pl,  mi-i/do  4.,  Kikamba  m-Hd  3. ; Cape  Delgado  Ki-Ao  7.


178


The  Concord,


Ivi-wemhe  11.  “fly,”  pi.  wemhe  10,
(Cape  Delgado  memhe) ;
lvL-g6no  11.  “sleep;”*

11.  “yarn;”

n-tumbo  14.  “gut,”  pi.  ma-
tunibo  (Kafir  a,-msL-tumbu,
with  sug.  i-tumbu  5.)  6.

“ bowels ;”

vt-mi  (Kafir  n-bomi)  14.  “ life  ;”
VL-gono  1 4.  “ bed  ;”*


u-iwi&o  14.  “song”  (Kihiau,  Ki-
nika,  Suaheli,  Sena,  Tette,  So-
fala,  Tekeza,  and  Otyiherero
imba,  Makua  ipa,  Mpongwe
jemba  “ sing  ”)  ;
n-kulungua  14.  “ gi’eatness
oga  14.  “feai’”  (Kafii-  u-Inu-
oyika  15.  “to  fear,”  Kihiau
ogopa  “ be  afraid  ”)  ;
pa-ndu  (§  435)  16.  “place.”f


bb.  The  Zangian  Genus.

476.  Our  limited  knowledge  of  the  Eastern  members
of  the  Middle  Branch  does  not  enable  us  to  define  clearly
the  characteristics  by  which  the  different  genera  of  this
Branch  may  be  distinguished  from  each  other.  Upon
the  whole,  our  division  of  the  genera  into  a South-eastern
or  Mosamhique  Genus,  and  a North-eastern  or  Zangian
Genus  is  mainly  geographical.  Yet  Kikdmba,  Kinika,
Kisudheli,  Kipohomo,  and  Kisamhdla  are  certainly  more
closely  related  to  each  other  than  they  are  to  the  dialects
of  Sena  and  Tette,  to  Kihiau,  or  to  the  Makua  language.

* Prom  hu-jiona  15.  “ to  sleep  ” in  IChiau,  Maravi,  Tette,  Sena,  and
QueUimane.

■f  The  preceding  specimens  of  the  Kihiau  language  are  taken  from
Dr.  Krapf’s  vocabularies,  in  wliich  the  pronunciation  of  some  of  the
consonants  is  not  quite  clear.  Dr.  Steere  (in  a letter  dated  Dec.  22nd,
1866,)  has  furnished  the  following  examples  of  this  language,  which  he
calls  XsI>i-yao  (^Chiyao)  7.  These  examples  give  a few  different
forms  of  the  prefixes.  It  also  appears  from  them  that  the  6th  (mst-)
prefix  may  in  this  language  correspond  as  plural  to  the  1 1th  (111-)  prefix.


SINGULAR.  PLURAL.


1.

mil-ndu

“ man,”

wa-ndu  “ people

3.

lU-tera  “

tree,”

4.

mi-fern  “ trees

*•1

1 )

“ lion,”

O.

( Ilia-sunia  ) “lions;”

1 li-wago  }

“ axe,”

1

1 mSl-wago  > “ axes

■S’.

tSlli-«da  (chindu)  “thing,”

i-ndu  “ things  ;”

o.

n-yumba

“ house,”

lO.

n-yumba  “ houses

ll.  \w  godshi  (lugoji)  “ rope,”  O.  “rop^sr”

].£».  ^VL-tu-n6nyera  “ to  love  us
lO.  l»a-ndu  “ place  and  places.”


179


Zangian  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.

477.  In  the  Zangian  Genus,  we  see  that  the  prefix  of
the  10th  class  has  invariably  lost  the  initial  part  preceding
its  ending  nasal,  having  been  reduced  to  the  latter,  with
or  without  a following  vowel  (n-,  or  ni~).  In  some  cases,
the  nasal  of  the  10th  prefix  has  a strong  effect  upon  the
initial  of  the  stem  which  follows.  Thus  in  Kikamba  and
Kinika  an  initial  ts  may  disappear  after  this  n-  (§  349  and
350),  and  after  the  same  prefix  in  Kisuaheli  the  initial
I is  changed  into  d,  and  the  initial  w into  b.  (§  351.)  The
rule  that  nouns  of  the  9th  (n-)  and  10th  (n-)  classes
indicating  persons  or  animals  are  construed  as  nouns  of
the  1st  (mu-)  and  2nd  (va-)  classes  is  of  extensive  appli-
cation in  the  Zangian  Genus.  (§  466.)

478.  It  is  a most  singular  trait  in  the  languages  of  this
genus  that  nouns  of  whatsoever  class,  when  standing  in
the  locative  case  (which  is  indicated  by  the  suffix  -m)  are
construed  as  if  they  belonged  to  one  of  two  local  classes,
viz.  the  15th  (ku-),  or  18th  (MTJ-)  class.  According
to  Dr.  Steere’s  “ Table  of  Concords,”  this  locative  case
in  Swaheli  is  in  concord  with  forms  in  ku  “ when  imply-
ing motion  to,  or  distance  from  ” a thing,  and  with  forms
"in  mu,  if  it  merely  expresses  being  within.”

lu  the  Kikamba  sentence  y-u-naikie  tu-ala  voA-ddu-ni  'kv.-a-he
(Mark  vii.  33)  “ he  put  the  fingers  into  his  ears,”  the  ku-a-^e  “ his  ”
belongs  to  the  15th  (liu-)  class,  although  the  noun  voi9,-ddu  “ears”
is  of  the  6th  (ma-)  class,  and,  as  sucli,  usually  requmes  the  fonn
m-ake  6.  “ his,”  as  (Mark.  vii.  35.)  vaa,-ddu  ra-a-ke  va.2L-na-winguiwe
“his  ears  were  opened.”  (Compare  Kmika  ma-siAiro-wj  mu-ena  18.
“ in  yom-  ears,”  Luke  ix.  44,  with  taa-sikiro  g-enu*  6.  “ your
ears,”  Luke  iv.  21.)  Further  in  Kikamba  the  noun  ma-a  “ feet  ” is  of
the  6th  (ma-)  class,  and,  as  such,  rules  forms  like  m-a-ga  “thy,”  m-a-^e
“ his,  her,”  m-en?a  “ your,” — notwithstanding  which,  we  read  iwiaiyei
(shake  ye  off)  mu  (the  dust)  ma-a-wi  ku-eafa  (from  youi’  feet),  Mark,
vi.  11,  and  yu-na  walukile  ma-a-ne  mu-a-Ae  (Mark.  v.  22,  “ he  fell

* This  g in  Kinika  is  a pronominal  representative  of  the  m of  the
6th  (ma-)  prefix,  pointing  to  an  original  form  of  this  prefix  (perhaps
NGA),  in  which  probably  the  nasal  and  the  guttural  explosive  {g)
were  both  represented,  as  will  be  more  clearly  explained  m a succeeding
chapter.


180


The  Concord.


to  his  feet”) — the  \VL-eniu  “your”  belongiug  to  the  15th  (ku-),  and
the  mn-a-he  “his”  to  the  18th  (mu-)  class.  (Compare  Kinika  ma-
gulu-ni  ma-a-liwe  18.  “to  his  feet”  with  ma-gw^w-g-e  6.  “his  feet,”
Luke  vii.  38.)  Shuilaidy,  although  niumha  “ house  ” in  the  singular
is  of  the  9th,  and  in  the  plui’al  of  the  10th  class,  Ave  find  that  “go
into  thine  house”  (Mark  v.  19)  is  translated  into  Kikamba  thus,  di
niumba-ni  ku-a-gw  15.,  and  “ into  then-  houses  ” (Mai’k  viii.  3)  niu-
mha-ni  mu-a-o  18.  (Kinika  niumba-ni  mu-a-hwe  18.  “ iuhis  house,”
Luke  V.  29,  wiMwiSa-wi  mu-a-Ao  18.  “iu  thy  house,”  Luke  vii.  44.)
It  must,  hoAvever,  be  remarked  that  in  Krapf’s  translations  this  rule
is  by  no  means  strictly  carried  out;  for  sometimes  the  genitives
following  nouns  in  the  locative  case  are  in  concord  Avith  the  class  of
the  nomas,  instead  of  having  the  genitive  foi’m  of  one  of  the  two
locative  classes  (15th  or  18th)  mentioned  above.  Thus  Ave  find
(Mark.  xi.  15  &c.)  niumba-ni  y-o  Mulungu  9.  “ into  or  in  the  house  of
God,”  and  (Mark  xi.  1)  "ki-ima-ni  dsh-a  ma-pelal.  “at  the  mount
of  Olives,”  &c.  It  will  also  be  perceived,  in  the  examples  taken
fi-om  Dr.  Krapf’s  translations,  that  the  distinction  Avhich  Di%  Steere
has  observed  with  regard  to  the  use  of  mu  and  Am,  has  not  been
folloAved  throughout.

479.  As  far  as  we  know,  the  locative  suffix  -ni  is  only
met  with  in  the  languages  of  the  Zangian  Genus  of  the
Middle  Branch  and  in  those  of  the  South-eastern  Branch,
— where  its  form  in  the  Kafir  species  is  -ini  or  -eni,  in  the
Tekeza  -ine  or  -ene,  and  in  the  Setshuana  -eh,  8ic.  (§  309
and  273.)  In  the  languages  of  the  South-eastern
Branch  the  nouns  Avith  this  suffix  are  always  to  be  con-
strued according  to  the  class  of  their  prefixes,  without
reference  to  their  local  meaning.  There  is,  however,  an
analogous  case  iu  Kafir  in  the  concord  required  by  the
majority  of  prepositions.  These  are  mostly  local  or  other
forms  of  nouns  which  are  either  still  used  as  such  or  have
lately  become  obsolete.  Such  a noun  would  naturally
require  the  genitive  following  it  to  agree  with  its  own
prefix ; and,  accordingly,  in  the  Middle  Branch  langu-
ages these  prepositions  are  still  generally  followed  by  a
genitive  form  in  accordance  with  the  class  of  that  noun
from  which  the  preposition  has  been  formed.  But  in
Kafir,  Zulu,  and  Setshuana,  almost  all  those  prepositions
which  were  originally  nouns,  require  a genitive  form  of


181


Zangian  Locative  Cases.

the  local  15th  (Kafir  ku-j  Setshu^na  xo-)  class  to  follow
them.  (Appleyard  § 491,  Colenso  § 270.)  A case  which
completely  resembles  that  of  the  Zangian  locatives  is
met  with  in  the  Zulu  sentence  e-jal-eni  kw-O-m-^ew^
“ on  one  side  of  the  Umgeni  ” (Colenso’s  Grammar  p.
82),  from  i-jala,  a noun  of  the  5th  (li-)  class,  which
according  to  its  prefix  would  require  after  it  the  form
1-0-m-^ewj.  In  such  cases,  I formerly  believed  that  the
Am-  was  not  to  be  considered  as  a pronominal  element,  but
as  a directive.  In  fact,  I assumed  (as  Grout  does)  that
the  form  kwa~  which  occurs  here,  was  identical  with  the
prefixed  directive  kwa-  (Appleyard  § 112;  § 165,  3;
§ 172,  3;  Colenso  § 130)*:  but  the  fact  that  before
proper  names  of  persons,  where  otherwise  kwa  has  its
most  usual  place,  it  is  replaced  by  ku-Aa-  (j)a-m.~bi
\in-ka-Faku  “ before  Faku,”  Grout  § 326),  renders  it
more  probable  that  the  “ Am  ” in  these  cases  is  to  be
regarded  as  a pronominal  element.  Still  more  convincing
proofs  are  furnished  by  a comparison  of  Setshuana ; for,
similar  prepositions  in  this  language  are  followed  by
X-U-,  which  is  clearly  the  genitive  form  referring  to
the  15th  (xO-)  class  (Kafir  kw-a-), — whilst  the  Kafir
preposition  kwa-  has  been  retained  in  Setshuana  in  the
form  kua.

480.  In  trying  to  explain  this  curious  feature  of  the
language,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  in  Kafir  and  Zulu
the  suflix  -ini  or  -eni  is  only  found  when  the  noun  is
preceded  by  the  prefixed  directive  {s)e~,  which  latter  has,
as  yet,  been  met  with  only  in  these  two  languages.f  In

* Forms  in  -eni-kw-eni,  as  e-m-v-eni-kw-eni  “ after  ” (=  e-m-v-eni
from  u-m-ua  3.  “ back  part  of  an  object”),  jj-eni-kw-eni  “at  the  time
when”  (i-jja  5.  “ time”),  e-m-xl-eni-k\v -eni  “ in  the  day  when  ” (u-m-
Xla  3,  “ day  ”),  Hesk-eni-kw-eni  “ at  the  time  when  ” (i-ljesha  5.  “ time  ”),
seem  only  to  add  to  the  perplexity  which  surrounds  the  construction  of
forms  in  -ini  or  -eni.  (Appleyard  § 322;  336,  1.)

•f  In  the  Tekeza  dialect  of  Lourenzo  Marques,  however,  if  our  voca^
bularies  can  be  trusted,  the  suffix  -ine  or  -ene  is  used  with  a prefixed  a-,
which  may  be  identical  with  the  Kafir  prefixed  directive  (s)e-.  Tekeza

BUek,  S.  Afr.  Comp,  Grammar,  1 ®


182


The  Concord.


Setshuana,  on  the  contrary,  we  find  that  the  prefixed
directives  mo  “in”  (§  438),  ha  “at”  (Kafir  pa,  § 436),
and  hua  “ in  the  direction  of,  to,  till,  in,  at  ” (Kafir
kwd),  are  always  followed  by  the  form  with  the  suffix
-eh,  which,  also,  frequently  occurs  with  nouns  which
are  not  preceded  by  any  preposition.  In  the  latter  case,
however,  Livingstone  (Analysis  p.  17)  and  Fredoux
(§7)  consider  this  termination  to  imply  the  presence  of
such  a prefixed  directive  (or  preposition).  In  the  Zan-
gian  languages,  nouns  with  the  suffix  -ni  are  not  now
preceded  by  any  of  these  prefixed  directives ; but  the
forms  of  concord  used  with  nouns  in  this  locative  case
appear  to  indicate  that  it  was  formerly  preceded  by  one
of  two  (or  more)  prefixed  directives,  which  were,  in  this
instance,  promoted  to  the  rank  of  concord-indicating
prefixes  of  nouns.  These  prefixed  particles  (which  were
originally  case-indicating  directives  preceding  the  regular
derivative  prefix  of  the  noun)  have  now  fallen  off,  but
the  concord  still  indicates  their  former  presence.  Let  us
take  for  an  example  the  Kikamba  phrase  y-u-na-wa-
luhile  ma-u-ni  mu-a-Ae  18.  “ he  fell  at  his  feet  ” (Mark.
V.  22),  and  compare  it  with  the  Setshuana  translation
a oela  mo  nao-n  ts-a  xayue  10.  The  prefixed  directive
MU-  (which  probably  originally  preceded  the  ma-M-ni)
has  been  lost  in  Kikamba,  but  is  still  indicated  by  the
pronominal  element  mu,” — (the  prefixed  directive  hav-

ing become  here  the  concord-indicating  element).  In
Setshuana,  in  which  (as  we  have  seen  in  these  cases)  the
forms  of  concord  always  agree  with  the  derivative  prefix
of  the  noun,  the  latter  has  been  dropped,  nao  being  an
abbreviation  of  \i-nao  (Kafir  x-zim-nyawo  or  \-ia.-nyaw6)
10.,  the  plural  of  \o-nao  (Kafir  VL-nyawo')  11.  The  con-
cord also  here  is  visible  in  the  pronominal  element  “ ts  ”

a-mi-tz-ne  = Kafir  e-mi-zi-ni  (Setshuana  mo-mc-tse-n)  “in  the  settle-
ments, kraals,”  Tekeza  a-mst.-Xlo-ene  = Kafir  e-m-eXlw-eni  (Setshuana
mo-msi-ixlo-n)  “ in  the  eyes,”  Tekeza  a-u-dolo-ene  = Kafir  e-m-lilw-eni
(Setshuana  “ on  the  fire.”


Zanyian  Locative  Cases.


183


(Kafir  “ z which  is  a representative  of  the  derivative
prefix  li-  or  ri-  (Kafir  zi-).  The  translations  of  this
phrase  into  both  languages  (Kikfimba  and  Setshuana)  thus
agree  in  making  the  concord  only  visible  in  the  forms
following  the  noun,  whilst  the  prefixed  particle,  which
may  be  considered  as  the  source  of  the  concord,  has  been
dropped.  In  fact  we  conclude  that  Kikamba  ma-u-ni
vaM-a-he  stands  for  ULU-ma-u-ni  mu-a-Ae,  just  as  Se-
tshuana mo  na-o-h  ts-a  \a)(ue  is  an  abbreviation  of  mo  li-
nao-in.  ts-a  xo-xue.  But  the  two  languages  differ  in  this —
that  in  Setshuana  the  concord-indicating  particle  was  a
derivative  prefix,  and  in  Kikamba  a directive,  prefixed
to  the  form  of  the  noun  with  its  own  derivative  prefix.*
In  the  latter  Instance,  the  local  directive  has  assumed  the
position  of  a concord-indicating  prefix,  and  thus  the  forms
of  concord  refer  to  it,  and  not  to  the  regular  derivative
prefix  of  the  noun.f

480.  The  prefixed  directives  mentioned  above  as  having
assumed  the  character  of  concord-indicating  derivative  pre-
fixes of  nouns,  were  probably  originally  not  quite  identical
with  the  prefixes  mu-  of  the  3rd,  and  ku-  of  the  15th  class.
At  all  events,  the  forms  of  concord  required  by  the  Zangian
locative  case  in  MU-  are  different  from  those  of  the  3rd
(mu-)  class,  and  we  have,  therefore,  provisionally  iden-
tified these  MU-  forms  with  the  18th  (mo-)  class  in  Otyi-
herero.  Similarly,  it  is  not  improbable  that  the  Zangian
forms  in  “ ku-”  which  are  in  concord  with  the  locative
case,  may  have  originally  belonged  to  the  17th  (Otyiherero
kO-)  class;  but  as  their  forms  are,  as  far  as  we  know,  the
same  as  those  employed  in  the  15th  (ku-)  class,  we  have
placed  them  under  the  head  of  this  latter  class.

* Just  as  we  find  plural  or  diminutive  prefixes  prefixed  to  nouns
formed  with  other  prefixes.  (Fide  p.  145.)

t That  local  derivative  particles  of  nouns  may  impart  to  the  nouns
formed  with  them  a meaning  analogous  to  om-  case  terminations,  has
been  already  remarked  with  regard  to  some  Hottentot  derivative  suffixes.
(§  447.)


184


The  Concord.


K.1KAIKCBA  PEEFIXES.


SINGULAE.

PLURAL.

PEBS

ONAE.

1.

2.

mu-,  (— )

a-

m-

6.

?(-)

3.

4.

mu-

mi-

m-

5.

6.

i-,  (-)

ma-

y-

m-

7.

8.

ki-

1-

dsh-

9.

10.

n-

n-

m-

m-

(-)

(-)

12.

tu-

11.

10.

U-,  u-^s-

n-

m-

(-)

13.  (-1-3.)

12.  (+4.)

ka-,  ka-«nu-

tu-,  XVL-mi-

k-

ABST

BACT.

14.

6.  (-fl4.)

u-

ma-B-

INFINITIVE

AND  LOCAL.

15.

6.

ku-

ma-

LOCAE.

16

■

wa-

« 15. (?

17.)

. . -nz

d 18

■

S (-)  . .

. ~ni

KIKAMBA.

481.  Ki-Mmia  7.  (spok-
en by  the  Krhdmha  2.)
has  more  fully  preserved
the  original  distribution
of  the  nouns  into  classes
or  genders  than  either
Kinika  or  Kisudheli.  In
the  two  latter  languages
we  have  not,  as  yet,  met
with  any  traces  of  the
12th  (tu-)  class.  Ki-
kamba  agrees  with  the
languages  of  the  Mosam-
bique  Genus  in  making
the  12th  (tu-)  class  cor-
respond as  plural  to  the
13th  (ka-).  As  we  shall
see  hereafter,  the  Angola
language  is  distinguished
by  the  same  peculiarity,
although  in  this  respect
it  appears  to  stand  alone
among  the  members  of
the  South-western  or
Bunda  Genus,  in  which
the  14th  (u-)  class  gener-
ally corresponds  as  plural
to  the  13th  (ka-).

KIKAIMBA  NOUNS.

mxL-ndu  (Zulu  u-mu-w<w,  Ki-
sambala  va.\i-ntu,  Kinika
mu-<M,  Suaheli  m-tu)  1.
“man,  person,”  pi.  &-ndu
(Kafii'  a-ba-wifM,  Kisarabala
wa-n<M,  Kinika  a-fo,  Sua-
hcli  wa-<w)  2. ;


Kikdmba  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


185


mxx-ha  1.  (Zulu  u-m-Aa-  1.,  pi.
o-m-ha-  2.  Colenso’s  Diet.  p.
119;  Kinlka  vaxi-dshe,  Sua-
heli  xa-ke  1.)  “ wife,”  pi.  a-Aa
(Kinika  a,-dshe,  Sudheli  a-Ae)
2.;

mu-ina  (Kafir  u-m-nina-we
“ younger  br.”)  1.  “brother,”  pi.
a-ina  2. ;

xa-ume  (Kinika  jxx\x-lume,  Sua-
lieli  m-M»we)  1.  “husband,”  pi.
a-ume  2. ;

ide  (w-a-o)  1.  “ (then’)  father,”
pi.  ide  (ra-a-o)  6. ;

vaxL-dshi  (Zulu  u-m^-zi  Ki-
nika mu-fci,  Suaheli  va.-dshi)

3.  “ town,”  pi.  ml-&Ai  Suah.
(Kinika  mi-fci)  4. ;

mu-fee  (Kihiau  m-fee,  Batoka
and  Banyenko  xao-t?ioe,  Bo-
rotse  mo-thu,  Balojazi  mo-
thue,  Maponda  and  Bashubea
mo-fee)  3.  “ head,”  pi.  mi-fee

4. ;

mu-<fi  (Zulu  u-mu-<i,  Kisam-
bala  mu-ti,  Kinika  xaCi-hi,
Sudheli  xa-ti)  3.  “ tree,”  pi.
ml-«fi  (Kisambala  ml-ti,  Ki-
nika mi-Az,  Sudheli  ml-^i)  4.
(§  428)  ;

xaxL-denia  3.  “ day,”  pi.  ml-
denia  4.  ;

m-oAo  (Sofala  mu-woAo)  3.
“ arm,”  pi.  ml-oAo  4.  (Setshu-
ana  \e-tsho%o  5.  “arm,”  pi.
ma-Aoxo  6.) ;


mu-iwa  (Kinika  xa-ia,  Kisuaheli
XXk-iba)  3.  “ thistle,”  pi.  xxx-iwa
(Kinika  xa-ia,  Kisuaheli  m-
ibd)  4. ;

xavL-io  (Kinika,  Kisudheli,  Kipo-
komo,  and  Kihiau  xa-sigo)  3.
“ load,”  pi.  ml-20  4. ;
l-temma  5.  “liver,”  pi.  xna-temma
6.;

l-dumo  (Inhambane
Kinika,  Suaheli,  Kipokomo,  Ki-
hiau fumo)  5.  “lance,  spear,”
pi.  xasL-dumo  6. ;
t-modoi  5.  “ tear,”  pi.  xaa-modoi  6 . ;
i.-woi  (Setshuana  \e-phui)  5.

“ pigeon,”  pi.  ma-woi  6. ;
i-w6i  5.  “ lung,”  pi.  xna,-w6i  6. ;
i-londu  5.  “ sheep,”  pi.  xaa-londu
6.;

V-huyu  5,  “ fish,”  pi.  xna-kuyu  6. ;
i-dangu  5,  “leaf,”  pi.  xaa-dangu
6.;

\-wia*  5.  “ stone,”  pi.  xaa-wia  6. ;
i-do  5.  “eye,”  pi.  xae-do  6.
(§  327)  ;

i-o  5.  “ tooth,”  pi.  ma-yo  6.
(§  326) ;

yl-M  5.  “ knee,”  pi.  ma-u  6.  ;
i 5.  “ door,”  pi.  ma-f  6. ;
jua  (Tette  ^i-rua,  Sena  and  Ki-
nika rua,  Kihiau  lua,  Suaheli
ud)  5.  “ flower,”  pi.  ma-wa
(Sofala  xaa-ruva,  Tette,  Sena,
and  Kinika  xaa-rua,  Cape
Delgado  and  Kihiau  xaa-lua,
Suaheli  ma-da)  6 ;


* Probably  from  K.E-BUA,  Batoka  le-bue,  Borotse  li-ae  (pi.  ina-
biwe  or  ma-oua),  Banyenko  li-ae  (pi.  ma-ae),  Balojazi  li-aoe  (pi.
ina-ae),  Otyiherero  e-oe  (pi.  o-ma-oe),  Batoka  tshue  (pi.  Jl»a-«e),
Kinika  dziwe  (pi.  ina-iee),  Kisuaheli  dsliiwe  (pi.  lis<»-2ee),  Cape
Delgado  ri-zee  (pi.  xna-we),  Quellimane ' li-6iee,  Sofala  bite,  Tekeza
(Lourenzo  Marques)  ri-bdsha,  SeXlapi  le-ntshue  (pi.  lua-ye),  Sesuto
le-yoc  (pi.  nia-yoc),  Kafli- i-Il-/ye  (pi.  a-ina-fee).  Vide  § 176.


186


The  Concord,


lema  (Kinika  rema)  5.  “ net,”  pi.
msL-lema  (Kinika  xaa-rema)
6.;

hi-tuo  (Kinika  kl-turro)  7.
“ shoulder,”  pi.  8.

n-sia  (Kafir  i-n-Xlela,  Kinika  [e-]
n-dshira,  Kipokomo  n-dshia,
Sudheli  n-sid),  9.  “way,  path,”
pi.  n-sia  (Kinika  [e-]n-&Ai>a)
10.;

ta-bewo  (Kafii*  i-m-pepo,  “cold
wind,”  Setshuana  pheho
“wind”)  9.  “wind,”  pl.m-6ea)o
10.  (Zulu  i-sl-pepo  7.  “gust,
gale,  storm  ”) ;

(?)n-dumba  9.  “slave,”  pi.  tu-
dumba  12. ;

n-ku  (Kafii’  u-hunt)  11.  “wood,”
pi.  n-gu  (Kafir  i-n-kuni)  10.
(§  348)  ;

Vi-tsea  11.  “ wing,”  pi.  n-tsea  10.;

VL-bdu  (Kafir  u-bambd)  11.  “rib,”
pi.  jn-bdu  (Kafir  i-vn-bambo)
10.;

\x-tsigi  11.  “ mule,”  pi.  n-igi  10. ;


VL-tsiegi  (u-umu)  11.  “(dry)
straw,”  pi.  n-iegi  (ni-MTOw)  10. ;

'kA-miloa  13.  “thorn,”  pi.  tu-
miloa  12. ;

ka,-ka  (k-a  mu-ahi)  13.  “spark
(of  fire),”  pi.  tu-Aa  (tu-a
mu-aki)  12. ;

k-ana  13.  “child,  son,  &c.,”  pi.
tu-dna  12.;

k-ala  13.  “ claw,”  pi.  tn-ala  12. ;

ka.-mu-di  13.  “ shrub,”  pi.  tu-
mi-di  12.  (§  454)  ;

n-ndu  14.  “ state,  thing,”  pi.  ma-
u-ndu  6. ;

u-ta  (Setshuana  bo-ra,  Otyihe-
rero  o-u-ta)  14.  “ bow ;”

n-dio  (Kinika,  Kisuaheli,  &c.  u-
sio,  Kihiau  u-ssia,  Kafir  u-bu-
sd)  14.  “ face ;”

n-tsumbe  (Kinika)  14.  “ king-
dom ;”

ku-dw  15.  “ear,”  pi.  xna-ddu  6.
(§  434,  note)  ;

ku-u  15.  “foot,  leg,”  pi.  ma-d  6. ;

XffSL-ndu  16.  “ place  ” (§  435).


KINIKA  AND  KISUAHELI.

482.  In  Kinika  and  Kisuaheli  the  decay  of  the  origi-
nal grammatical  structure  is  far  greater  than  in  Kikdmba.
We  find  in  Kinika  that  a noun  which  originally  belonged
to  the  3rd  (mil-)  class,  is  now,  on  account  of  the  loss  of  its
initial  nasal,  in  concord  with  forms  of  the  14th  (u-)  class,
although  retaining  a plural  form  of  the  4th  (mi-)  class,
which  latter  thus  appears  in  Kinika  to  correspond  to  the
14th  (u-)  class.  It  is  also  remarkable  in  Kinika  and
Kisuaheli  that  the  10th  prefix  may  precede  ^instead  of
replacing  the  11th,  which  in  this  case  always  loses  its
initial  liquid  (/),  which  is  otherwise  retained  in  Kinika.
When  the  10th  prefix  either  precedes  the  U-  of  the  11th,
or  replaces  the  latter,  it  (the  10th  prefix)  assumes  in


Kimha  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


187


KZNXKA  PREFIXES.


SINGULAR.

PLURAL.

PERS

ONAL.

1.

2.

mu-,  (— )

a-

m-

(-)

3.

4.

mu-

m-

ml-

5.

6.

(— ),  (-)-isi

ma-

m-

7.

8.

kl-

dshl-,  dsh-

vl-  (wl-)

9.

e

H

(e)n-,  un-

(e)n-,  un-

(e)m-

(e)m-

(-)

(-)

11.

e

H

lu-

nl-M-

lu-to-

ni-

ml-

(-)

DIMIN

13.

ka-

UTIVE.

1

ABST  KACT.

14.

4.

(— )

ml-

INFINITIVE.

15.

ku-


LOCAL.

16.

va-

w 15.  ( ? 17.)
g (— ) ni

o 18.

S ( — ) ....  -ni


Kinika  (and  sometimes  in
Klsuaheli)  the  form  ni-,
and  in  Kinika,  before
labials,  mi-.

KINIKA  NOUNS.

tavL-hoho  (Suaheli  va.-toto)  1.
“ child,”  pi.  a-7ioho  (Suaheli
xra-toto)  2. ;

vaxL-myi  (Suah.)  1.  “ possessor,”
pi.  enyi  (Suaheli  w-enyi)  2. ;
xa-ana  Suah.  (Zulu  u-mu-wtoa-
na)  1.  “son,  daughter,  child,”
pi.  ana  (Zulu  a,-ha,-nfw-ana,
Suaheli  v-ana)  2. ;

VU&-I10  (Suaheli  m-<u.  Cape  Del-
gado mu-to,  Anjuane  mu-rrd)
3.  “river,”  pi.  mi-Au  (Suaheli
ml-to)  4.  ;

va.-oyo  Suah.  (Kipokomo  m-o-
tsho.  Cape  Delgado  and  Sofala
m-oio)  3.  “ heart,”  pi.  xai-oyo
(Suah.)  4. ;

tsina  (Setshuana  le-ina,  Suaheli
dsJiina)  5.  “ name,”  pi.  ma-
tsina  (Setshuana  ma-ina,  Sua-
heli laa-dshina)  6. ;
neno  (Suah.)  5.  “ word,”  pi.  ma-
neno  (Suah.)  6. ;

tsdsi  (Suaheli  tosi,  Kipokomo  and
Tette  tsosi,  Kihiau  li-ndshdsi,)
Makua  ni-tori)  5.  “ tear,”  pi.
ma-tsosi  (Suaheli  ma-tosz
Tette  laa-tsosi,  Kihiau  ma-
ndshdsi,  Makua  me -ton')  6. ;
tsiwe  (Suaheli  dshiive,  note  to  § 48 1 )
5.“  stone,”  pi.  tna-uie  (Suah.)  6. ;
isino  (Suaheli  dskino')  5.  “ tooth,”
pi.  m-ewo  (Suah.)  6.  (§  326)  ;
Aotsa  5.  “leaf,”  pi.  ma-ftofoa  6. ;
ki-to  Suah.  (Kikamba  ki-ndu,
Kihiau  dsli£-w<??z)  7.  “thing,”
pi.  vi-to  (Suah.)  8. ;


188


The  Concord.


kl-fooa  (Suaheli  ki-toa,  Cape
Delgado  ki-sua)  7.  “ head,”  pi.
vi-tsoa  (Suaheli  vi-ioa)  8. ;

dsk-aZa  (Suaheli  dsh-dnda,  Sena
and  Tette  tsh-ara,  Maravi
ki-dia)  “ finger,”  pi.  vi-nla
(Suaheli  vi-dnda,  Sena  pi-ara,
Maravi  dz-ala)  8. ;

dehl-a  (Kipokomo  ki-dsha)  7.
“ vessel,  insti'ument,  utensil,”
pi.  vi-a  (Kipokdmo  vl-dsha)
8.;

ki-^e  (Suaheli  ki-ft',  Kipokomo
dshi-Az)  7.  “thi'one,”  pi.  vl-
ht  (wl-M)  8. ;

(ji)n-dvgu  (Suah.  and  Kipokomo)

9.  “ brother,”  pi.  (€)jx-dugu

10. ;

(e)m-Sira  (Kikamba  ta-bia,  Ki-
pokomo vn-bera)  9.  “gi’ave,
tomb,”  pi.  (€)m.-hira  10. ;

tsiliu  (Suaheli,  Kipokomo,  and
Kihiau  siku,  Sena  n-tsiku)  9.
“ day,”  pi.  tsiku  10.  (Kafir  u-
suku  11.  “day  [including
night]”),  pi.  i-n-tsuku  10.
(Compare  § 453  notes,  and  §
450  note) ;

baba  (Suah.)  9.  “ father,”  pi.  baba

10.;

(u)n-g’MO  Suah.  &c.  (Kafir  i-n-
gubo,  Setshuana  kobo,  Sofala
guvo,  Tette,  Sena,  Cape  Del-
gado A-guo  or  guo,  Kikamba
[ujn-g'wa)  9.  “cloth,  cloak,”
pi.  (yL)n-guo  (Suah.)  10. ;


tsi  (Suaheli  n-ti,  Kikdmba  n-di,
Kipokomo  n-si)  9.  “land,  coun-
tiy,”  pi.  tsi  (Suaheli  n-ti)
10.;

In-rimi  (Suaheli  xi-limi)  11.
“ tongue,”  pi.  xA-u-rimi  (Suah.
m-dimi)  10.  (§  351)  ;
lu-faoa  11.  “worm,”  pi.  ni-u-
tsoa  10.  (Suaheli  m.-toa  3.
“ white  coloured  worm,”  pi.
mi-toa  4.)  ;

Ivi-ffu*  11.  “dead,”  pi.  vd-u-ffu

10.  (Suaheli  va.-fu  1.  pi.  wa-
fu  2. ; but  in  Setshu^a  1o-sAm

11.  is  “death,”  pi.  lin-faAw

10.)  ;

Va-dyo  (Suaheli  \r-ayo,  Kipo-
komo tsu-afoAo)  11.  “ti-ace,”
pi.  rx\-dyo  Suah.  (Kipokomo
•nl-dtshd)  10.;

\\x-tserre  (Suaheli  vi-nuelle)  11.
“hair,”  pi.  jxi-erre  (Suaheli
nuelle)  10.;

\vi~ni6ga  (Kipokomo  vt.-niodsha')
11.  “feather,  wing,”  pi.  nidga
10.;

IxL-fusi  11.  “wool,”  pi.  mi-/Msi
10.  (Suaheli  fusi  5.)  ;
ka,-koho  (Kipokomo  ka.-dudu)
13.  “ a young  one  ;”
n-miro  14.  “ voice,”  pi.  mi-miro
4.;

kVL-londa  15.  “desire;”
kVL-loha  (Suaheli  kvL-dta)  15.
“ di’eam ;”

va-fM  16.  “ place  ” (§  435).


* Prom  "kn-ffua  (Suaheli  and  Kipokomo  kll-^a,  Kisambala
Kikamba  kn-gua,  Kihiau  k'A-hua,  Makua  lA-kwa  or  u-6kwa,  Sena,
Tette,  Sofala,  Inhambane,  and  Delagoa  Bay  k\i-fa,  Kafir  u-lcii-/«,
Sesuto  k'o-fua,  SeXlapi  x'O-shua,  Batoka  ko-fua,  Otyiherero  o-k^I-^a,
Sindonga  [Ovambo]  o-kii-S'a  or  o-k'O.-fa,  Nano  o-g'ii  fa,  Bunda
[Angola]  kii-ybd,  Kongo  kn-fua)  15.  “ to  die  ” (Mpongwe  dshuwa,
Dikele  gwa,  Dualla  and  Isubu  wa  “ die  ”).


Kisiidheli  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


189


483.  By  the  loss  of  its
prefix  in  Kisuaheli  has
14th  (u) ; and  the  11th
coalesced.  (§  456  and  457.)

KXSVABSIiX  PREFIXES.


SINGULAR.

PLURAL.

PERS

1.

m-,  (— )

mu-

ONAL.

2.

wa-,  (— )
w-

3.

mu-

m-

4.

ml-

5.

(— ),  (— ) -dshi-

6.

ma-

m-

7.

kl-

dsk-

8.

vl-  (wl-)

9.

n-,  (u)n-
m-
(-)

10.

n-,  (u)n-
m-

(-)

11.  (&  14.)
U-,  w-

10.

n-,  nl-
m-,  ni-u-

(-)

6.

ma-

INFINITIVE.

15.

ku-,  kw-

LOCAL.

16.

ma-,  pa-

w ■ 15.  (?  17.)

5 (-)

13.

(— ) -ni


S.  A/r.  Comp.  Gramtnar.


initial  lingual  (/),  the  11th
become  identical  with  the
and  14th  classes  have  thus
This  transference  has  gone
so  far,  that  nouns  which
formerly  clearly  belonged
to  the  14th  class,  as  u-ssc
(Kafir  u-bu-so  14.)  “face,”
have  adopted  a plural  of  the
10th  (n-)  class.  It  is  proba-
ble that  this  peculiar  cor-
respondence of  the  classes
is  not  an  ancient  feature  in
the  structure  of  the  BS-ntu
languages,  but  due  to  the
influence  of  modern  false
analogies.  On  account  of
this  plural  correspondence,
I considered  it  practically
more  convenient  to  call  this
amalgamated  ( U-)  class  the
11th,  although  it  includes
a great  number  of  abstract
nouns  which  originally  be-
longed to  the  14th  class.
To  the  Kisuaheli  nouns
previously  given  in  the
Kikamba  and  Kiaika  lists,
it  is  only  necessary  to
add  the  few  which  follow.
They  are  all  taken  from
Krapfs publications;  but, in
the  construction  of  the  Table
of  the  Kisuaheli  prefixes.
Dr.  Steere’s  “ Table  of  Con-
cords” has  been  of  much
assistance.  The  latter  work
1 c


190


The  Concord.


illustrates  the  Swaheli  language  as  spoken  at  Zanzibar,
whilst  Dr.  Krapfs  publications  represent  the  same  lan-
guage as  spoken  at  Mombas  {"KA-suaheli  dsh-a  Om-wita).
A vocabulary  of  the  Swaheli  dialect  of  Cape  Delgado  is
in  Dr.  Peter’s  Collection ; and  manuscripts  containing
pieces  of  native  literature  exist  in  the  purest  and  most
ancient  of  the  Swaheli  dialects, — that  which  is  spoken  on
the  Islands  of  Patta  and  Lamu.


KISUAHELI  NOUNS.


M-hdfu  (Kimka  lu-Jd/w,  Kikam-
ba  vL-bdu,  Kipokomo  yu-a/w,
Kafii’  M-hambo')  11.  “rib,”  pi.
ja-bafu  (Kikdmba  za-bdu,  Ka-
fir i-m-bambo)  10. ;
u-wingu  (Kipokomo  yn-wingo)
11.  “ heaven,”  pi.  xa-bingu  10. ;
n-niorja  11.  “ wool,”  pi.  ma-moya
6.;

XL-kuni  (Kafir  11.  (Kinika

VL-kuni  14.)  “wood,”  pi.  kuni
(Kafir  i-n-Awni)  10.  (§  348)  ;


u-<M  (Kafir  u-lu-to)  11.  (Kinika
VL-tu  14.)  “ thing,”  pi.  nl-u-tu
10.;

u-sso  11.  (Kinika  u-sso,  Kafir
u-bu-so  14.)  “ face,”  pi.  ni-w-
sso  10.

xn-ardka  11.  (14.  in  Kinika)
“letter,”  pi.  Tol-araba  10.;
Tm-ffa  15.  “death”  (§  482  note);
kw-aHsa  15,  “beginning ;”
xaa,-bali  or  ■pa.-hali  16.  “place”
(§  435).


KISAMBALA.

484.  TLi-sambala  7.  is  spoken  in  U-sambala  14.  by  a
people  called  by  Dr.  Krapf  "Wdi-sambdra.  The  follow-
ing nouns,  given  in  a letter  from  Dr.  Steere  (dated
Dec.  22nd,  1866),  are  my  only  materials  for  forming
an  outline  table  of  the  derivative  prefixes  of  the  nouns
in  the  Kisambala  language.  It  appears  as  if  false  analogies
had  also  extended  their  influence  to  this  language.  At
least,  we  attribute  to  this  cause  the  fact  that  the  8th
(vi-)  prefix  corresponds  here  as  plural  not  only  to  the
7 th  (ki-),  but  also  to  the  13th  (ka-).  The  identity  of  the
consonant  of  the  two  singular  prefixes  ki-  and  ka-  appears
to  have  been  the  misleading  element.  The  use  of  the
10th  (ny-)  prefix  as  plural  to  the  14th  (u-)  is  also  ascriba-
ble  to  the  identity  of  the  vowel  of  this  latter  prefix  with
that  of  the  11th  (lu-);  the  11th  prefix  being  properly
entitled  to  the  1 0th  (n-)  as  its  corresponding  plural.  It  has


Kisambala  Derioative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.  191

already  been  remarked  that  the  prefix  of  the  11th  (lu-)
class  has  in  the  Zangian  dialects  a strong  tendency  to  lose
its  initial  letter,  thus  becoming  identical  in  form  with  the
14th  (u-)  prefix.  The  Kisambala  language  appears,
phonetically  speaking,  to  stand  nearest  to  ~K.i-pokomo  7.
(spoken  by  the  'Wdi-pokomo  2.);  in  fact  many  words  in
the  two  languages  are  identical.


K.IS ADIBAZ.A  FEEFIXES.


SINGULAB.

PLURAL.

PERS

ONAL.

1.

2.

mu-,  (— )

wa-,  (— )

3.

4.

mu-

ml-

5.

6.

(-)

ma-

7.

8.

kl-

vl-

9.

10.

n-

n-

11.

H

e

lu-

(-)

13.

8.

ka-

vi-

14.

10.

u-

ny-

INFINITIVE.

15.

ku-

LOCAL.

16.

ha-

KISAMBALA  NOUNS.
mxi-ntu  (note  after  § 494)  1.

“ man,”  pi.  vra-ntu  2.  “ people
hgomhe  1.  “ox,”  pi.  ngombe  2.

(§  226  and  466)  ;
mu-^'  (Zulu  u-mu-ft)  3.  “ tree,"
pi.  mi-^e  4.  (§  428)  ;
zina*  5.  “ name,”  pi.  xn.9,-zina
6.;

kl-ntw  (Kipokomo)  7.  “ thing,”
pi.  vl-ntu  8. ;

n.-yumha  (Kipokomo,  &c.)  9.

“ house,”  pi.  n-ywriba  10. ;
lu-zi'x*  1 1 • “ rope,”  pi.  zi\i  10.

(Kipokomo  msidshi) ;
ka-xosAi  13.  “youth,”  pi.  vl-
Xoshi  8. ;

\x-ila  (Kipokomo  w-fa)  14.

“song,”  pi.  jxy-ila  10. ;
ku-/a  (Kipokdmo  ku-jfa,  § 482
note)  15.  “ dying;”
ha-Kftf  (Kipokdmo  va-nfu,  §
435)  16.  “place  and  places.”

♦ Maravi,  Quellimane,  Sena,  and
Tette  (d)zina,  Makua  n-zina,  Cape
Delgado  s(na,  Suaheli  dshina  (pi.
m^-dshina  6.),  Kinika  tsina  (pL
ma-is(na  6.),  Kihiau  r-ina,  In-
hambane  l-ind,  Setshuana  le-fna
(pi.  ma-ina  6.),  Otyiherero  e-na
(pi.  o-ma-na  6.),  Sindonga  e-^'ina
{e-sina^y  Angola  o-ri-shina  (pi.
o-ma-shina  6.),  Mpong  we  i-7ia  (pi.
a-na  6.),  Dikele,  Benga,  Dualla,
and  Isubu  H-ina  (pi.  ni-ina  6.).


192


The  Concord.


cc.  Languages  of  the  Interior.

485.  Comparative  philology  can  only  follow  at  a dis-
tance the  march  of  geographical  discovery.  The  extensive
vocabularies  collected  % Dr.  Livingstone  in  the  course
of  his  travels,  and  preserved  in  manuscript  in  the  Grey
Library,  are  most  valuable  in  affording  a knowledge  of  the
languages  of  the  region  between  those  tracts  of  country
in  which  the  better  known  languages  of  the  Mosamhique
and  Bunda  genera  are  spoken.  But  we  must  know  more
with  regard  to  the  plural  forms  of  the  nouns,  and  also
have  the  forms  of  concord  illustrated  by  some  phrases,
before  it  be  possible  to  construct  reliable  tables  illustrating
the  correspondence  of  the  derivative  prefixes  in  these
intermediate  languages*.  Among  the  latter,  the  dialects
of  the  "Qdi-lojazi  2.  (?  Lobale)  and  lUdi-ponda  6.  (Ba-
mapoTida  or  "Qd^-fonda  2.)  are  evidently  varieties  of  one
language,  which  can  be  recognised  as  belonging  to  the
South-western  or  Bunda  Genus.  To  define  the  exact
position  which  the  dialects  of  the  Ba-wyenAo,  Ba-^oAa,
Ba-  rotse,  "Sdi-shuhea,  and  "Bd^-yciye  or  would

occupy  in  a classification  of  the  languages  of  the  Middle
Branch,  must  be  the  work  of  further  research.

We  find  that  mo-  is  the  prefix  of  the  3rd  class  in  all  these  dialects,
and  corresponds  to  mi-  of  the  4th  class  in  the  dialects  of  the
Balojazi,  Batoka,  and  Bashuhea.  In  the  dialects  of  the  Maponda
and  Banyenko  the  4th  prefix  hears  the  form  of  me-.  The  5th  prefix
is  li-  in  the  dialects  of  the  Balojazi,  Banyenko,  and  Borotse,  11-  or
le-  in  those  of  the  Maponda  and  Bayeiye,  and  li-  or  1-  in  that  of
the  Bashuhea.  Its  plural  is  (as  always)  formed  hy  the  6th  prefix,
which  is  ma-  in  all  these  dialects,  with  a variation  to  me-,  which  at
least  occurs  in  the  dialects  of  the  Batoka,  Bashuhea,  and  Bayeiye.
The  11th  prefix  has  the  form  lo-  in  the  dialects  of  the  Maponda,
Banyenko,  and  Bashuhea,  do-  in  that  of  the  Borotse,  and  ro-  in
that  of  the  Bayeiye.

* When  Livingstone’s  more  extensive  vocabulary  of  the  language  of
the  Barotse  (which  is  accompanied  by  a Setshuana  translation  only)  has
been  fully  deciphered,  we  shall  doubtless  be  able  to  construct  a fairly
satisfactory  table  of  the  derivative  prefixes  of  the  nouns  in  this  language.


193


Bayeiye  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.

486.  Of  the  derivative  prefixes  of  nouns  in  the  lan-
guage of  the  "32i.-yeiye  2.  (a  people  called  Ba-Axo&a  2.  or
"S/Ldi-k-^ola  6.  by  the  Betshuana)  I have  drawn  up  the
following  table,  which  I give  here  as  a mere  attempt.
The  table  is  incomplete,  as  the  plurals  corresponding  to
the  7th  (se-)  and  11th  (ro-)  classes  have  not  yet  been
ascertained.  The  correspondence  of  the  10th  (zin-)  class


as  plural  to  the  13th  (ka-)
established  in  one  instance


BAVEXVE  PREFIXES.


SINGULAR.

PLURAL.

1.

mo-

2.

ba-

3.

mo-,  om-
mu-

m-(5)-

4.

me-

5.

lo-

ll-

6.

ma-,  ama-

7.

se-

9.

H-,  o-n-,  en-
m-,  ?<-m-

10.

zin-

11.

ro-  (lo-)

13.

ka-

10.

zin-

14.

o-

15.

ko-


is  still  doubtful ; having  been
only,  and  it  is  possible  that
the  plural  zihrkone  10.  cor-
responds here  (as  in  most
kindred  languages,  §348)  to
a singular  of  the  11th  (ro-
or  Ic-)  class,  and  that  the
word  with  the  prefix  ka-
(ka-Aone  13.)  given  in  Dr.
Livingstone’s  vocabulary  is
merely  a diminutive.  But,
on  the  other  hand,  we  have
to  take  into  consideration  the
fact  that  also  in  the  Nano
language  of  Benguela  at
least  one  case  occurs  in  which
the  10th  (^’o-)  class  forms
the  plural  to  a noun  of  the
13th  (ka-)  class.  (§  495.)

BAYEIYE  NOUNS.

xao-rume  (Otyiherero  o-mu-
rume  “male,”  Benguela  vi-lome,
Angola  raxL-lumi,  Kinika  and
Kihiau  ravL-lume,  Kipokomo
raa-yume,  KikambaandKisud-
heli  m-wme,  Mpongwe  o-nomi.,
Dikele  n-Sr’omi,  Benga,  Dualla,
and  Isubu  ra-omi,  Fernando  Po
ho-obe)  1.  “man,  husband
mo-kazi  1.  “ woman,”  (vide  note
at  end  of  § 494)  ;


194


The  Concord.


m.o-via  (Borotse  mo-bika,  Sin-
donga  u-m-pika,  Angola  mu-
bika,  Kongo  o-mvL-bhiga)  1.
“ servant,  slave

vno-rumb-one  (Sofala  and  Sena
vaxL-rumbu-ana)  1.  “a  lad;"
vao-ha-na  (Bashubea  rao-kas-
ana,  Otyiherero
owa,  Sindonga  1.

“ girl

vao-yene  (Setshuana  mo-en,
Dualla  mo-en  or  mw-ew)  1.
“ stranger

rao-nziri  (Bashubea  mo-n^ure)
1.  “teacher;”

ba-zmo  Baponda  (Bashubea
ba-S«»*o,  § 395)  2.  “ ancestral
spirits ;”

xao-nve  (Otyiherero  o-iau-nue,
§494)  3.  “finger,”  pi.  me-n'
(anga)  4.  “ (my)  fingers  ;”
mo-shoro  (Sofala  joa-shoro,
Tette  and  Sena  mu-sdro)  3.
“head;”

va.o~sh.ana  (Batoka  and  Bashu-
bea voo-sana,  Setshuana  mo-
Xlana')  3.  “ back ;”
vao-sinza  (Borotse  and  Baponda
vao-sindshe')  3.  “whey;”
mu-si  (Zulu  u-mu-si,  Ofyihererd
o-vavi-ise,  § 494)  3.  “ smoke
mo-zt  or  mo-si  (Zulu  u-mu-zi,
Setshulna,  Bashubea,  Balojazi
mo-fee,  Banyenko  and  Borotse
vao-nde)  3.  “ town ;”
vao-aha  (the  same  in  the  dialects
of  the  Banyenko,  Batoka,  Bo-
rotse, Bashubea,  Balojazi,  Ba-
ponda, u-va-nyaka  in  Zulu,
huaxa  in  Setshuana,  mu-«^a
in  Manika,  Tette,  Kihiau,  Ki-
suaheli,  Kinika,  Kikamba,  and
Kipokomo)  3.  “ year


vao-tshu  (Setshuana  vao-tshui,
Sofala  vaxi-sheve,  Tette  mu-
zeve,  Quellimane  mu-«e)  3.
“ arrow ;”

vao-ndiro  (Banyenko  and  Bashu-
bea vao-lilo,  Setshuana  and  Ba-
rotse  vao-lelo,  § 344)  3.  “fire;”
vao-rohka  (Borotse  and  Batoka
mo-rohga,  Banyenko  mo-
lohha)  3.  “ river  bed ;”
va-biri  (Setshuana  va-ele.,  § 469,
Banyenko  vao-iri,  Batoka  and
Bashubea  vao-biri,  Balojazi
vao-bila,  Bamaponda  vao-bela}
3.  “ body ;”

o-va-oio  (Sofala  and  Batoka
m-oio,  Kinika  and  Kisuaheli
va-oyo,  Kipokomo  m-ofeAo)  3.
“ heart ;”

o-m-oa  (Kafir  M-moya,  Setshuana
mo-ea,  Batoka  vao-ia,  Bo-
rotse vao-iya,  &c.)  3.  “ soul,
breath ;”

\i-dzi  5.  “knee,”  pi.  ma-dz’[a]
(Bashubea  vaa-dzue)  6. ;
\o-ueri  or  tshue  5.  “stone,”  pi.

vaa-we  6.  (p.  185,  note)  ;
le-iro  (Otyiherero  e-uru,  § 494)
5.  “ nose ;”

le-oko  (Balojazi  li-boko,  Setshu-
ana le-tshoxo)  5.  “ arm ;”

11  ■ua  or  le-oa  (Otyiherero  e-yuva,
§ 494)  5.  “sun;”

11  -ru  (Otyiherero  e-yuru,  § 494)
5.  “ sky ;”

vaSL-dzunza  6.  “ clouds ;”
vasL-shota  or  vaa-shuta  6.  “ sweet-
milk  ;”

vaa-ropa  6.  “ blood ;”
a-ma-<ize  6.  “butter,  fat”  (p.

142,  end  of  third  note)  ;
a-m-i  6.  “ water,”  (p.  142,  first
note)  ;


Bayeiye  Derivative

ae-kabi  (Bashubea  kl-AaJi)  7.
“ skin  or  hide

ae-rapo  (Banyenko  ae-labo,  Bo-
rotse  ai-rabo,  Bamaponda  she-
lapo,  Bashubea  lb.i-raho)  7.
“ paddle

n-kombe  Baponda  (Banyenko,
Bashubea,  Balojazi  a-gombe)  9-
“ ox,”  pi.  zin-gombe  10.  (§  226) ;

n-ko  (Kafir  i-u-gubo,  Setshuana
kobo,  Batoka  u-kobo,  Bashubea
and  Balojazi  a-gobo)  9 “a
kaross,  cloak

u-koku  (Kafir  i-n-kuku,  Setshuana
koku,  Barotse  Vi-oku,  Bashubea
Ti-kobu)  9.  “ fowl

Ta-dshera  9.  “path”  (§  493,  note);

va.-bua  (Banyenko,  Batoka,  Bashu-
bea, and  Bayeiye)  9.  “dog”
(§  235  and  277)  ;

o-n-dshovo  (Kafir  i-n-Xlovu,  Se-
tshuana xlou,  Loui’enzo  Marques
i-n-Xl6fo,  Sofala  i-n-dshbu,
Tette,  Sena,  and  Makanga
dzou,  Quellimane  dou,  Kisuaheli
n.-d6fu,  Kinika  and  Kipokomo
u-ts6fu,  Kikamba  n-sdw,  Batoka
n-dshovo,  Borotse  dshovo  or
n-dobo,  Bashubea  ^ovo,  Otyihe-
rero  o-n-dyou,  Kongo  n-zau,
Mpongwe  n-dshagu,  Dikele
a-dshaki  1.,  Isubu  n-dshoku)  9.
“ elephant

o-n-iavo  (Setshuana  iau,  Lou-
renzo  Marques  i-n-ddo,  Batoka
n-dahu,  Bashubea  n-tavo)  9.
“ lion

0- n-yati  (Setshuana  nari,  Ba-
nyenko, Borotse,  Bashubea,  and
Isubu  VL-yati,  Balojazi  ia-gati,
§ 226,  note)  9.  “ buffalo

1- Ji-yene  (Zulu  i-Vi-nyoni,  Inham-

bane  n-yoni,  Kihiau  dskiuni,


Prefixes  of  Nouns.  195

Kikamba,  Kinika,  Kipokomo,
and  Kisuaheli  rx-iuni,  Banyenko
eijunye,  Kongo  nuni,  Mpongwe
m-yani,  pi.  ia-ya.ni)  9.  “ bird  ”
(Dikele  vi-nuni,  pi.  la-nanf,
Benga  i.-nani,  pi.  \o-nani,  Dualla
i-nun,  pi.  bi-nun,  Isubu  i-noni,
pi.  lo-noni,  Fernando  Po  si-node,
pi.  to -node)  ;

ta-peo  (Setshuana  joeXZo,  Bashubea
and  Batoka  m-bezo,  Zulu
i-m-&azo,  Tette  bdzo,  Sena
badzo,  Makua  i-bazo,  “an  axe  ”)

9.  “ an  adze ;”

e-a-fera  (Banyenko  xa-vula,  Ba-
shubea n-yieZa,  § 118)  9.  “rain;”
i-n-«Aoe  (Batoka  and  Bashubea
\-a-shue)  9.  “ fish,”  pi.  zia-shue

10. ;

0-ia-vuvu  (Otyiherero  o-a-iuu,
§ 494)  9.  “ hippopotamus ;”
a-tshu  or  a-dsku  (Kafir  i-n-^Zu,
Setshuana  n xZu,  Tekezai-n-XZo,
Banyenko  a-duo,  Borotse  n-do,
Bashubea  a-Qobo,  Balojazi  and
Bamaponda  a-dshobo,  Otyihe-
rerd  o-a-dyuo,  Sindonga  o-n-
dshuo,  Angola  and  Kongo  n-zo)

9.  “ house ;”

ro-reme  (Banyenko  \o-lime,  Bo-
rotse 6.0-leme,  Bashubea  lo-
leme,  Maponda  lo-limi,  § 351)
11.  “the  tongue;”
lo-anga  (Andersson’s  vo-anga)
11.  “spear”  (Balojazi  and
Baponda  li-ong-a  5.,  Banyenko
plur.  ma-ong-a  6.) ;
ka-fcne  13.  “ stick,”  pi.  zia-kone

10.  (Bashubea  and  Batoka  lo-
kone,  Borotse  \o-konye  11.,  §
348)  ;

iLa-embe  13.  “an  axe”  (Kafir
\-zembe  5.)  ;


196


The  Concord.


o~ra  (Otyihererd  o-VL-ra  “entrails,
intestines”)  14.  “ belly
ko-^oa  Borotse  (Kafir  u-ku-wa,
Setshuana  xo-oa,  Lourenzo
Marques  z-k-wa,  Tette  and
Sena  ku-g-aa,  Cape  Delgado
'kii-hwa,  Otyilierero  o-ku-aa)


15.  “to  fall  on  the  ground”
(Kihidu  giia,  Kipokomo  gda,
Kinika  bua  and  gua,  Kongo
bua,  Mpongwe,  Dikele,  and
Isubu  kma,  Dualla  ho  “ fall”) ;
ko-e.9^a  15  “to  roast.”


dd.  The  Bunda  Genus

487.  The  languages  of  the  South-western  or  Bunda
Genus  are  distinguished  by  the  use  of  the  demonstrative
particle  o-  as  prefixed  article.  This  article  itself,  in  the
Bunda  Genus,  is  only  slightly  affected  by  the  prefix
which  follows  it ; but  the  vowel  of  the  derivative  prefix
of  the  noun  has  been,  in  more  than  one  instance,
assimilated  to  the  vowel  of  the  article ; and  the  prefix
may  even  adopt  the  latter  vowel  when  used  without
the  article.  This  is  chiefly  the  case  with  the  10th
prefix,  of  which  the  vowel  ^ (supposed,  as  we  shall
see  hereafter,  to  have  descended  from  an  original  a)
has  been  converted  into  o in  most  Bunda  languages.
In  the  case  of  this  prefix  (Otyiherero  ^’on-),  and  in
those  of  the  Otyiherero  16th  (po),  17th  (ko-),  and
18th  (mo-)  prefixes,  we  are  not  sure  whether  it  is
a merely  euphonic  influence  which  has  commuted  the
vowels  of  these  prefixes,  or  whether  we  have  to  do
here  with  demonstrative  pronouns  preceding  nouns
which  have  lost  their  original  derivative  prefixes,  or,
at  least  the  main  portion  of  them.  Thus  Otyiherero
S’on-  might  be  really  ^’-o-n-,  the  n-  being  in  this  case  to
be  considered  as  the  only  remnant  of  the  original  deriva-
tive prefix,  whilst  the  would  be  a pronominal  element
of  the  10th  class  forming  with  the  demonstrative  particle
-0  a demonstrative  pronoun.  However,  it  must  be  re-
membered that  this  explanation  is  merely  hypothetical,
and  I should  prefer  to  ascribe  the  -o  which  is  now  found
in  these  prefixes,  to  the  force  of  euphonic  assimilation


Banda  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


197


wliich  had  moulded  vowels,  originally  dilFerent,  into  like-
ness with  the  article  which  so  frequently  preceded  them.

488.  It  may  also  be  that  the  article  o-,  like  the  English
article  the,  is  only  the  remainder  of  an  old  demonstrative
pronoun,*  which  originally  had  dilferent  forms  agreeing
with  the  various  classes  of  nouns  to  which  it  referred.
Admitting  that  the  pronominal  element  may  be  reduced
to  a mere  vowel  (as  we  have  seen  it  to  be  in  Kafir), — such
a vowel  would  be  exceedingly  liable  to  amalgamate  with
the  demonstrative  particle  o.  It  may  be  that  further
investigations  will  afford  historical  proof  of  this  combina-
tion ; but  until  such  proof  has  been  found,  it  will  be  safer
merely  to  consider  this  o-  as  a demonstrative  particle  used
as  an  article.

489.  In  the  Bunda  Genus  the  article  o-  precedes  nouns
in  similar  circumstances  to  those  in  which  the  Kafir
article  is  employed.  The  latter  was,  as  we  have  seen,
originally  a pronominal  element  identical  with  the  deriv-
ative prefix.  (§  461 — 464.)  Usage  must,  upon  the
whole,  determine  in  which  instances  this  article  is  to  be
employed,  and  in  which  to  be  omitted,  in  the  Bunda
languages.  As  a general  rule  it  may  be  stated  that  this
0-  in  the  Bunda  Genus  possesses  more  clearly  the  power
of  an  article  than  the  initial  vowel  which  precedes  the
derivative  prefixes  in  Kafir ; and  that  it  has  far  less
become  a part  of  the  derivative  prefix  than  is  the  case
with  the  initial  vowel  in  Kafir.


OTYIHERERO.

490.  The  O-tYi-herero  or  Damara  language  (spoken
by  the  O-vd^-herero  2.  and  O-'^drmbandieru  2.)  is  richer
in  classes  of  nouns  than  any  other  known  Ba-ntu  language.
Besides  the  sixteen  classes  which  originally  belonged
to  the  Middle  Branch  languages,  Otyiherero  has  two
others  which  are  apparently  the  individual  property  of


* Formed  by  the  combination  of  a demonstrative  particle  with  the
pronominal  element.

1 D


aieek\  S.  A/r.  Comp.  Grammar.


198


The.  Concord.


the  language.  It  may  be  that  the  17th  (ko-)  and  18th
(mo-)  classes  are  only  later  modifications  of  the  15th
(ku-)  and  3rd  (mn-)  classes  respectively ; for,  the  forms
in  0 may  have  been  originally  demonstrative  pronouns
rather  than  true  derivative  prefixes.  But  at  the  pre-
sent time,  at  all  events,  the  17th  (kO-)  and  18th  (mo-)
prefixes  have — by  certain  distinct  forms  of  concord  in
vs^hich  they  respectively  differ  from  the  15th  (kU-)  and
3rd  (mu-)  classes, — gained  the  right  to  be  considered
as  distinct  classes ; nor  can  it  be  denied  that  the  kO-  and
mo-  may  originally  have  been  distinct  prefixes.  It  may,
however,  also  be,  that  the  vowel  o of  these  prefixes  is  due
to  that  process  of  assimilation  of  the  vowel  of  the  prefix
to  that  of  the  article,  which  has  been  noticed  in  § 487,
and  which,  as  regards  Otyiherero,  appears  to  have  perma-
nently affected  the  forms  of  the  prefixes  of  the  10th
(^’on-)  and  16th  (po-)  classes.

491.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  5th  prefix  (which  origin-
ally must  have  had  the  form  RI-)  is  always  contracted
in  Otyiherero  to  6-,  before  which  form  the  article  o-
disappears.  The  same  contraction  occurs  in  Sindonga
(Ovambo)  and  Nano  (Benguela),  also  in  Angola  and
Kongo,  although  the  two  last-named  old  languages  have
retained  in  many  cases  the  original  form  ri-  (with  the
article,  o-ri-  in  Angola  and  e-ri  in  Kongo).*  In  no  other
Otyiherero  class  is  the  prefix  omitted,  or  as  strongly  con-
tracted as  in  the  5th  (ri-)  class.  In  the  10th  (•S’cn-)  class
the  two  first  letters  of  the  prefix  (•&’<>-)  are  always  re-
tained in  Otyiherero  nouns,  and  the  ending  nasal  only  is
modified.  (§  321.)  The  few  plurals  to  singular  nouns  of
the  14th  (u-)  class  are  all  formed  by  placing  the  6th
(ma-)  prefix  before  the  full  form  with  the  14th  prefix  U-,
whilst  the  plurals  of  singular  nouns  of  the  15th  (ku-)

* It  may,  however,  also  be  that  the  e-  is  a contraction  of  o-i‘l  ,
and  not  merely  an  abbreviation  of  ri-,  and  that  the  contracted  form
with  the  article  (e-)  superseded  the  form  ri-  without  the  article  in
Otyiherero  and  other  languages.


199


Otyiherero  Derioative  Prefixes  of  Nouns,

class  either  substitute  ma-  for  ku-,  or  add  ma-  to  the
form  with  ku-.  (§  454.)

492.  With  regard  to  nouns  which  indicate  personal
beings,  they  may  be  transferred  from  any  class  to  the
first,  and  may  be  used,  either  wholly  or  partly,  with
forms  of  concord  of  the  1st  (mu-)  class  and  in  the  plural
of  the  2nd  (va-)  class.  The  nouns  indicating  “ father  ”
and  “ mother  ” appear  to  have  been  originally  treated  as
if  of  the  9th  (n-)  and  10th  (^’on-)  classes,  although  the
prefixual  n does  not  appear  in  them,  and  they  may  not
even  have  been  originally  formed  with  one  of  these
prefixes.  When  transferred  in  the  plural  to  the  2nd
(va-)  class  they  usually  have  0-  as  their  prefix,  which
appears  to  be  identical  with  the  Kafir  and  Setshuana
prefix  bo-  used  with  the  same  nouns.  (§  463.)  This
derivation,  at  all  events,  appears  more  probable  than  that
this  Otyiherero  plural  prefix  o-  is  derived  from  an  origi-
nal S^’o-  of  the  10th  class,  as  Hahn  seems  to  suggest.

493.  The  Missionaries  who  first  learned  and  described
this  language  are  more  positive  with  regard  to  the
meaning  which  they  ascribe  to  the  derivative  prefixes  of
the  nouns,  than  any  other  observers  of  the  peculiarities
of  the  Ba-ntu  languages.  Although  some  of  their  dis-
tinctions are  fanciful,  and  others  at  least  subject  to
numerous  exceptions,  it  cannot  be  denied  that  in  more
than  one  instance  they  have  given,  if  not  the  original
meaning  of  the  prefix,  at  least  that  which  it  now  chiefly
possesses  in  the  language.  What  the  Rev.  C.  H.  Hahn
thinks  about  the  prefixes  is  to  be  found  in  his  “ Gram-
matik it  may,  however,  be  interesting  to  the  student  to
hear  what  the  Revd.  J.  Rath  says  upon  the  same
subject  in  his  Manuscript  Vocabulary  preserved  in  the
Grey  Library,  and  in  order  to  state  this  in  his  own  words,
I shall  give  the  German  untranslated.

1-  mu-  (pi.  2.  va-)-  “ Dieses  Pi’afix  hat  iiur  der  Mensch.  Vorein
Verbum  gesetzt,  bezeiclinet  das  dadurch  gebildete  Substaiitiv  den  Oder
die,  welche  die  Haiidlung  verrichten  oder  in  dem  Zustande  sich  be-
finden,  welche  im  Verbum  liegen."  (MSS.  p.  446.)


200


The  Concord.


3-  mu-  (pi.  4.  ml-).  “ Die  meisten  Pflaiizen  haben  dieses  Pra-
fix.”  (§  428.)  “ Die  damit  vorhandenen  abstracten  Worte  geben  deu
Eindruck,  dass  der  Begriif  einer  gewissen  Vollstiindigkeit  damit  ver-
bunden  ist.”  (MSS.  p.  446.)

5.  e-  (pi.  6.  ma-).  “ Das  Prafix  e-  findet  sich  haufig  an  solchen

Gegenstanden,  welche  mu-  in  der  Einzahl  Oder  paarweise  vorlianden
sind : e-yuru  Himmel ; Nase  ” (vide  § 494,  list  of  Otyiherero
nouns)  ; “ e-hi  Erde  ; e-tambo  Rticken  ; e-nkoti  Nacken,  Genick  ;
e-yo,  o-msL-yo  Zahn,  Zahne,  die  beiden  Reihen;  e-ke,  o-ma-ke
Hand,  Hande ; e-punga,  o-xaa-punga  Lunge,  Lungen.  Mbglich,
dass  ersteres  die  Ursache  ist,  dass  es  auch  absti-act  und  anders  fiir
Gegenstande  gebraucht  wird,  welche  einzig  in  ihrer  Art  sind,  so-ivohl
im  guten  als  bbsen  Sinn ; und  dass  durch  letzteres  der  Plural  gewis-
sermassen  zum  Dual  wird.  Steigbiigel  nennen  die  Damara  o-ma-
poha,  und  da  sie  diese  erst  nach  der  Ankunft  der  Europaer,  Oder  doch
nicht  vor  ihrer  genauern  Bekanntschaft  mit  den  Namaqua  kennen
gelernt,  so  sollte  man  vermutlien,  dass  sie  noch  das  Gefiihl  haben,  ma-
sei  dass  passende  Prafix  fiir  paarweise  existirende  Sachen.”  (MSS.  pp.
94  and  95.)  Vide  p.  165,  note.

6.  ma-.  “ Zu  dem  bei  e-  bemerkten,  dass  es  namlich  haufig  bei
paarweise  vorhandenen  Gegenstanden  angewandt  wird,  lasst  sich  noch
hinzufiigen.

“ a.  Dass  es  oft  mit  Verbas  verbunden  wird  um  einen  Ort  anzu-
zeigen,  wo  eine  derartige  Handlung  statt  findet,  z.  B.  o-xaa-pa-
mbero  ” (Nath,  pamba  fiechten ; dicht  zusammenkommen,  verei-
nigen),  “ o-ma-ko-turiko  ” (Aufhangestelle,  turika  aufhangeu),
“ o-xaa-kondero  ” (ubergangstelle,  Furth,  konda  llbersetzen,  iiber-
gehen),  ‘-&c.  In  diesem  Falle  ist  das  Prafix  wahrscheinlich  von
0-vao-n.a  18.  abgeleitet.”  (The  last  suggestion  Ls  very  doubtful.)

“Z».  Bei  Worten  wie o-ma-indyombo, o-m.a-ynmbe”  (Verlaumdung,
yamba  verlaumden),  “ und  derlei  hangt  das  Prafix  wahrscheinlich  mit
0-va.a-mbo"  (Worte)  “zusammen,  so  dass  solche  Worte  eigentlich
bedeuten  : Lugenworte,  Verlaumdungsworte.”  (§  426.)

“c.  Die  meisten  Sammelnamen  haben  dieses  Prafix.”  (MSS.  p.
421.)

7.  tyi-  (pi.  8.  vi-).  “Fiir  dieses  Prafix  passt  am  besten  die
Bezeichnmig:  ‘ sachlich.’  Es  findet  seine  Anwendung  bei  Werk-
zeugen,  als  Dingen,  womit  die  in  der  Wurzel  liegcnde  Handlung
bewirkt  wird,  oder  die  dazu  vei’Avandt  werden,  z,  B.  o-tyi-have?'o
Sitzding  ” (Stuhl,  Bank)  ; “ o-tyi-kamo  Deckel ; o-tyi-hupuro  Spa-
ten;  von  havera”  (sitzen),  “Aaraa”  (driicken,  au.swinden),  ^'■Impura"
(graben).  “In  diesem  Falle  hiingt  das  Prafix  wold  mit  o-tyi-nu.
Ding,  zusammen.”  (§  441.)  “Auch  auf  andcrc  Gegenstande,  wie
Menseh,  &c.,  angewandt,  werden  die,se  zur  blossen  Sachc  erniedrigt.


201


Otjjiherero  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.

wie  0-tyi-mu-ndu  alter,  unbrauchbarer  Menscli”  (§  430),  “o-tyi-n-
gomhe  alter  Ochs”  (§  226),  “ o-tyi-^’?*  altes  Schaf”  {ii-'a.-tu  or
o-n-dSi’u  9.  “ sheep  ”=  Kafir  Setshuauaii-/dM).  “Ausser  clem

zweifelhafteu  o-tyi-angapara"  (Gliick)  “ ist  bis  jetzt  kein  abstractes
Wort  mit  diesem  Priifix  gefunclen,  das  einen  guten  BegrifF  hat.  Dasselbe
gilt  auch  von  dem  Plural  vi-,  mit  clem  sich  mehrere  Worte  finden,
welche  keinen  Singular  haben.  In  einigen  wenigen  Fallen  kommt
tyl-  auch  bei  Platzeigennamen  vor,  wo  es  mit  o-tyi-rongo,  Platz,
zusammenhangt,  unci  eigentlich  Adjektiv  ist.”  (MSS.  pp.  554  and  555.)

9.  n-  (pi.  10.  yon-).  “Diemeisten  Thiernamen  haben  dieses
Priifix;  die  damit  versehenen  abstracten  Worte  haben  vorwaltend
einen  gniten  Begriff.”  (MSS.  p.  391  )

11.  ru-  (pi.  tu-).  “Die  bis  jetzt  mit  diesem  Priifix  aufgefundenen
concreten  Wbrter  geben  den  Eindruck,  dass  damit  der  Begi'iff  der
Lange,  Plbhe,  Ausgestrecktheit  und  Ausgedehntheit,  Diinne  verbunden
ist.  Aehnliches  zeigt  sich  auch  bei  den  abstracten  Wbrtern,  bei  denen
hiiufig  der  Begriff  der  (jbertragung  auf  andere  scheint  statt  zu  finden.
Vergleiche  e-pondo”  (5.  Becliichtigkeit,  Langsamkeit,  Gelassenheit,
Gedulcl)  “mit  o-rn-a-ponda"  (11.,  u-n-o-m-a-ponda,  wenn  jemand
sehr  lange  krank  ist,  ohne  sich  zu  bessern ; auch  wenii  eiu  Kind  lange
nicht  ans  Gehen  kommt)  ; “ e-ho-B’e  ” (5.  Thrane)  “ mit  o-ru-/*oye  ”
(11  Traiu'igkeit,  Behiibniss ; das  Weinen)  ; “u-ndy-?ra”  (9.  Weg,
Pfad)  “mit  o-ru-ira”  (11.  Fusspfad*)  ; o-mxL-tyira"  (3.  Scliwanz,
&c.)  “ mit  o-TVL-tyira  ” (11.  langer,  diinn  gestreckter  Schwanz),  “ o-u-
oaru"  (14.  Ansehen,  Macht,  Herrschaft  liber  Dinge)  “mit  o-vvi-vara"


* It  appears  to  me,  however,  probable  that  the  nouns  o-Vl-dyira  9.
“way,  path”  and  o-vn-ira  11.  “footpath”  are  formed  from  different
stems.  I identify  the  stem  of  the  latter  noun  (o-ru  ira  11.)  with  that
of  Zulu  u-iii-zi/a  3.  “cattle  track”  = Setshuana  m-ila  (i.e.  MO-
BILA)  3.  “ street,”  pi.  me-bila  4.  The  former  noun  (o-n-dyira  9.)
occurs  in  the  same  meaning  as  in  Otyiherero  and  in  forms  varying  only
slightly,  in  almost  all  the  South  African  Ba-ntu  languages  : Kafir  and
Tekeza  i-n-Xlela  (Zulu  pi.  i-xin-Xlela  10.),  Setshuana  tsela  (pi.  li-
tsela  10.),  Inhambane  dshilla,  Tette  dshiru,  Sena  shira,  Quellimane
n-dda,  Cape  Delgado  n-shira,  Kisuaheli  (Mombas)  n-dia,  Swaheli  (Zan-
zibar) and  Kipokomo  n-dshia,  Kinika  {g)n-dslura  (pi.  [Q]n-dshira
10.),  Kikamba  Bi-sia  (pi.  n-s/a  In.),  Banyeiiko  ii-Sera  (or  n-dshcla'),
Batoka  vt-zela,  Bashubea  n-zera  (tl-zela,  or  tsera),  Bayeiye  n-dshera,
Borotse  n-dera  or  n-dela,  Balojazi  and  Baponda  xelci  cLivingstone’s
iiyeld),  Otyiherero  o n-rfyfra  (pi.  o-Si’ an-dyira  10.),  Sindonga  (Ovambo)
o-n-dyila,  Nano  (Benguela)  o-n-dyilla  (pi.  o-B’on  dyUla  10.),  Angola
o-n-shi(a  (Cannecattim’s  ngilla,  pi.  jinyilla  10.),  Kongo  n-sltiUa  (Cann.),
Dikele  n-zyeS'u  (pi.  ma-n-zycS’a  6.),  Benga  n-dshea  (pi.  n-dshea  10.),
Dualla  H-17/a  (pi.  ina-H  (j'm  6.),  isiilni  n-dshca  (pi  ina-a  dshca  6.).


202


The  Concord.


(11.  “Macht,  Ansehen  iibei’  andere  Menschen,  dabei  kann  maim  aber
arm  an  Griiteni  sein  ”).  “ Audi  ist  zu  bemerken,  dass  Adverbia  der

Zeit,  wie  a-ru-^e  ‘immer’  mit  diesem  Prafix  zusammenhangen  ; siehe
o-ru-»eAe”  (11.  Kaum,  Gegend,  Stelle,  Zeit).  “Ebenso  werden
die  Wiederholimgszahlen  damit  gebildet ; x\x-mue  einmal,  tu-uari
zweimal.”  (MSS.  p.  525.)

13.  ka-  (pi.  14:.  U-).  a.  “ Verkleinerungs-Prafix,  o-mxi-ndu  (1.)
Mensch,  o-ka-ndw  Menschlein;  o-n-tu  (9.)  Schaf,  o-ka-&’w  Schaflein;
o-n-dyuo  (9.)  Haus,  o-\La.-n-dyuo  Hauslein.”

“ b.  Mit  ka-  werden  abstracte  Worte  gebildet,  welche  in  ihrer
Art  auch  eine  Verkleinerung  ausdriicken ; o-ka-w?/e  scheint  kleiner
Hass  zu  sein,  von  nyengua  ” (passive  Form  mit  activer  und  passiver
Bedeutung,  hassen,  veracliten) ; “ o-'k.a-d’uva-iui  feines,  scliarfes,  gutes
Gehdr”  (S^’w^a  lidren,  verstelien,  o-ku-twi  15.  Olir)  ; “o-ka-tarem
wenn  einer  meint  alles  sehen  zu  miissen  ” (das  Zuseheu,  von  tarera
aufpassen,  sich  vorsehen,  die  respective  Form  von  tara  sehen).

“ c.  Mit  ka-  beginnen  im  Otyihererd  fast  alle  Eigennamen.”  (The
proper  names  of  persons  formed  with  ka-  do  not  however  belong  to  the
14th  [ka-],  but  to  the  1st  [mu-]  class  of  nouns.)  “ Ob  es  das  Anrede-
Prafix  ist?  In  einer  Erzahlung  wh-d  ein  Fluss  angeredet  ka-ndundu!"
(o-VL-dundu  9.  mountain,  hill.)  “ Hat  es  etwa  Ahnlichkeit  mit  der
deutschen  Nachsilbe  -chen,  Fritz,  Fritzchen  ? Bei  einer  Frage,
warum  ein  Hauptling  Hukanun,  und  nicht  wie  fast  alle  andern  mit
einem  Namen  genannt  ist,  der  mit  ka-  beginnt,  -wui’de  geantwortet,  er
sei  ja  ein  sehr  angesehener  Mann.  Ganz  richtig  wai’  die  Antwort
nicht,  denn  es  gab  machtigere  Hauptlinge,  als  dieser  war,  deren
Namen  mit  ka-  begannen.  Vielleicht  aber  hat  sich  vom  Sprachgefuhl
«twas  in  der  Antwort  ausgesprochen.”  (MSS.  p.  405.)

14.  U-.  “ Bei  diesem  Prafix  liisst  sich  ein  dreifacher  Gebrauch
unterscheiden.

“ 1.  Ist  es PliU’al-Prafix  von  ka- : o-h.a,-kambe”  (Pferd)  “pi.  o-u-
kambe ; o-ka-ti  ” (Stock ) “ pi.  o-VL-ti ;

“ 2.  Bei  einigen  wenigen  Worten  ist  es  Singular-Prafix,  und  nimmt
dann  das  Prafix  ma-  als  Plural-Prafix  an.

o-VL-ta"  (Bogen)  “plur.  o-ma-w-to  (6.)  ;

o-n-tuku"  (Nacht)  “ 14.  o-iaB,-u-tuku  (6.)  ;

“ 3.  Finden  sich  mit  diesem  Prafix  verhaltnissniiissig  die  meisten
abstracten  Worte ; und  es  ist  nicht  unmbglich,  dass  es  sich  dem
grdssten  Theil  der  Wm-zeln  vorsetzen  lasst,  um  ein  Abstractum  davon
zu  bilden.”  (MSS.  p.  587.)

15.  ku-  (plur.  6.  ma-).  “ Prafix  des  Infinitiv.  Bei  mancheii
Worten  bleibt  die  Silbe  Am-  auch  im  Plm-al,  z.  B.  o-ku-d  ” (Feld,
Land,  Gegend)  “pi.  o-vaa,-kuti;  bei  andern  falltsie  aus,  o-ku-rnmn”
<Bein,  Englisch  “leg”)  “pi.  o-ma-mn«."  (MSS.  p.  415.)


203


Otuiherero  Derivutioe  Prefixes  of  IStouns.


OTVIKEREBO  PREFIXES.


SINGULAR.

PLURAL.

PEES

1.

0-mu-,  0-
o-m-,  u-
(-)

ONAE.

2.

o-va-,  0-0-

0-V-,  0-

3.

o-mu-

4.

o-mi-

5.

e-

6.

o-ma-

o-me-

7.

o-tyi-

o-ty-

8.

o-vi-

9.

o-n-

o-n-

o-m-

0-

10.

o-S’’on-

o-s’on-

o-s’om-

o-B’o-

11.

o-ru-

12.

o-tu-

10.

o-yon-

o-^'on-

o-^’om-

0-3r’O-

DIMIN

13.

o-ka-

UTIVE.

14.

o-u-

ABST

14.

0-U-

RACT.

6.  (+  14.)
0-ma-M-

INFIN

15.

G-ku-

0-k-

ITIVE.

6.

o-ma  -

o-ma-/w-

f 16.

1 o-po-

TVOO'I  1

17.

o-ko-

18.

o-mo-

491.  As  the  Otylherero
forms  of  the  derivative  pre-
fixes are  not  contracted
when  combined  with  the
article  o-,  excepting  in  the
5th  (ri-)  class, — it  appears
superfluous  to  give  more
than  the  table  of  the  pre-
fixes with  the  article  ; for,
the  forms  without  articles
can  in  all  cases  (excepting,
of  course,  the  5th  class)
be  arrived  at,  by  merely
eliding  the  0-.  As  regards
the  vocative,  it  is  worthy
of  remark  that  not  only
the  article,  but  even  the
derivative  prefix  is  occa-
sionally omitted  in  this
case.  The  nasal  of  the
prefixes  of  the  9th  (n-)
and  10th  (S’cil-)  classes
falls  off  before  stems  be-
ginning with  h and  Sr'  {s)y
as  stated  § 230 ; while  ini
some  other  cases  the  nature
of  the  initial  consonant  of
the  stem  is  in  its  turn;
affected  by  the  nasal,  as
described  in  § 352.

OTYIHEREEO  NOUNS.

o-in,vL-liaSre-ndu*  1.  “wife,”  pL

o-va,-kaSr’e~ndu  2. ;
o-txm-rume-ndu  1.  “ man,”  pi.

o-vSL-rume-ndu  2. ;

* Vide  note  at  the  end  of  this
paragraph.


204


The  Concord.


o-m.-a-tye  (for  o-vnvi-na-tye,  Ki-
hiau  txi-ana-dshe)  1.  “child,”
pi.  o-v-ana-tye  (Kihiau  v-ana-
dshe)  2. ;

o-m-irityimuhe  1.  “ a presumptu-
ous, audacious  one,”  pi.  o-v-
erityimuke  2.  ;

o-mu-mt  (Kafir  n-xa-nini)  1.
“ owner,  possessor,”  pi.  o-v-eni
(Kafir  a-ba-7««Ki)  2. ;
o-m-angu  1.  “younger  brother
or  sister,”  pi.  o-v-angu  2, ;
o-tate  (Bunda  fata)  9.  and  1.
“ (my,  our)  lather,”  pi.  o-o-
tate  2.  ;

o-mama  (Zulu  M-mame)  9.  and  1 .
“ (my,  our)  mother,”  pi.  o-o-
mama  (Zulu  o-mame)  2. ;
u-nyoJto  (Kafir  n-nyoko)  9.  and  1 .

“ (your)  mother ;”
ina  (Kafir  u-nina)  9.  and  1.
“ (his,  her,  their)  mother,”  pi.
o-o-ina  (Kafir  o-nina)  2 ;
iho  (Kafir  \x-yixlo')  9.  and  1.

“ (your)  father ;”
ihe  (Kafir  \x-yise)  9.  and  1.  “(his,
her,  their)  father,”  pi.  o-o-ihe
(Kafir  o-yise)  2. ;


o-mu-<* * * §  3.  “ tree,  plant,  medi-
cine,” pi.  o-mi-<i  (§  428)  ;
o-vaxL-tima  (Sena  and  Tette  mu-
tima^  Makua  vaxk-rima,  Kihiau
m-tuna,  Banyenko  va.o-tima,
Sindonga  u-ra-tima  “ breath,”
Nano  u-tima,  Angola  mu-sA?-
ma,  Kongo  mu-<ma,  Mpongwe
o-rema,  Dikele  lema,  Dualla  and
Isubu  mo-lema)  3.  “heart,”
pi.  0-ra.i-tima  (Makua  mi-
rima.  Nano  o-vi-tima,  Angola
vai-sMma^  Kongo  vai-tima,
Dikele,  Dualla,  and  Isubu  mi-
lema)  4, ;

o-mu-eAe*  3.  “ moon,  month,”
pi.  o-mi-eB’e  4. ;
o-mu-we  (Zulu  u-nm-si,  Kafir
u-m-si,  Setshuana  tnd-si  or
mu-.S2,  Tekeza  tao-se,  Makua
zaw-ishi,  Kini'ka  and  Kipo-
komo  mo-.Mi,  Kisuaheli  mo-
shi,  Banyenko  and  Bayeijm
mu-s2,  Batokam-fiMsz,  Balojazi
mo-ezi)  3.  “ smoke ;”
o-iaix-nue  (Zulu  u-mu-nwe,
Kafir  u-m-nwe,  Tette  mu-
nwe,  Barotse  and  Bayeiye  mo-


* Sofala  mu-edze,  Manika,  Sena,  Tette,  Maravi,  Anjoane,  and  Cape
Delgado  mtl-ezi  or  mu-cze,  Makua  mil-erj  or  inil-erc,  Kikamba
Kisuaheli,  Kinika,  Kipokomo,  and  Kihiau  m-ezi,  Batoka  and
Borotse  Bashubea  mo-edzi,  Sindonga  Mpongwe

0- gweli,  Dikele  BMi-eh'  (“  moonlight  ”),  Dualla  ni«-arfi  (pi.  mi-adi
4.),  Isubu  BUW-m' (‘moonbeam,  moonlight”).  Compare  also  Sexlapi
kxueri  9.  (pi.  W-h^ueri  or  kxueri  10.)  or  ngueri,  Sesuto  kh'ueli  9.  (pi.
li  hh'ueli  10.),  Tekeza  uete  9.,  Angola  o-vt-beshi  9.  “moon,  month  Kafir

1- n-kwe-n-kwezi  9 and  10.  “star  and  stars  Kafir  and  Zulu  i-kwezi  5.
“ morning-star  Zulu  n-m^-kwezi-kwezi  6.  “ bright  stripes.”  The
original  Kafir  noun  for  “ moon  ” (which  may  be  presumed  to  have  been
l-'H-KWEZI  9.)  seems  to  have  disappeared  early,  perhaps  in  conse-
quence of  the  custom  of  “ u h n-honipa  ”15.  (Ayliff’s  Vocabulary  p.  vi),
and  the  correspondmg  Hottentot  word  for  this  venerated  object  may
have  been  introduced  into  Kafir  by  the  captured  Hottentot  women.  ( Vide

§ 472  note,  and  Cape  Monthly  Magazine,  vol.  1.  April  1857,  p.  203.)


205


Otyiherero  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


7iue,  Sindonga  u-m.-rme,  Mpon-
gwe  om-enlo,  Dualla  and  Isubu
mu-ne)  3.  “finger,  toe,”  pi.

0- ml-nue  Sindonga  (Kafir

1- ml-nwe,  Tette  rai-nwe,  Ba-
nyeriko  me-nu£,  Batoka  ml-
noe,  Bashubea  ml-nwe,  Balojazi
mi-nye,  Maponda  me-nye,
Dikele  mi-na,  Dualla  and  Isubu
ml-Tn*)  4. ;

o-mu-na  3.  “ lip,”  pi.  o-ml-na

4.  (o-mu*na  1.  = Zulu  u-mu-
ntw-ana  1.  “child,”  vide  note  at
the  end  of  this  paragraph) ;

o-mxL-ko  3.  “ bowstring,”  pi.
o-mi-Ao  4. ;

o-vaxL-ruhgu  3.  “ face,”  pi.  o-
m\-rungu  4. ;

o-Toavi-tyira  (Kafir  u-m.-sild)  3.

“ tail,”  pi.  o-voi-tyira  4. ;
e-yuva  (Sofala  and  Tette  zuva,
Sena  dzuvoa,  Maravi  dzua,  Ma-
kua  la-zua,  Kikamba,  Kisud-
heli,  and  Anjoane  dshua,  Kinika
tsua,  Batoka  le-2«ra,  Banyenko
11  -oua,  Borotse  le-shoba,  Ba-
yeiye  li-ra,  Sindonga  e-uya,
Dikele  dl-o6a)  5.  “ sun,  day,”
pi.  o-jna-yuva  6. ;
e S/'ulio  or  e-ruko  (Kafir  i-ziko)

5.  “fireplace,”  pi.  o-ma-Sr’uko

6. ;

e-ieteoe  (Zulu  i-titihoya)  5.

“ peewit,”  pi.  0-m.SL-teteoe  6. ;
e-vere  (Zulu  i-bele)  5.  “female
breast,”  pi.  o-vusL-vere  6.  (p.
164,  note)  ;

e-uru  (Banyenko  and  Borotse
11-ofo,  Balojazi  li-yolo,  Ma-
ponda le-olo,  Bashubea  i-tholo,
Sindonga  e-yulu,  Angola  rl-
zulo)  5.  “nose,”  pi.  o-xaa,-uru
6.;


e-yuru  (Kafir  i-zulu,  Banyenko
ll-o?o,  Batoka  le-dshuru,  Bo-
rotse W-uilo,  Bashubea  \i‘ulo,
Balojazi  Bayeiye  liru  or
leru,  Sindonga  e~ulu,  Angola
e-ulu  or  o-ri-eulu)  5.  “ heaven,
sky,”  pi.  o-taa-yuru  (Angola
0-m.a-ulu)  6.;

o-tupa  (Tette  and  Sena  fupa,
Makua  a\-kuva)  5 “ bone,”  /.

pi.  o-xaa-tupa  (Tette  and  Sena
ma-fupa,  Makua  ma-kuva)  6. ;
e-tha  (Kafir  i-li-fa)  5.  “ inheri-
tance, property  left  by  one
deceased,”  pi.  o-xaa-tha  6.
(from  o-ku-tAa  15.  “to  die,”  §

482,  note)  ;

e-nga  (Sindonga  e-onga)  5.

“assagay,”  pi.  o-ma-nga  6. ;
e-rumbi  5.  a,nd  1.  “brother,”  pi.
o-tna-rumbi  6.  and  2.  (§  466,
note) ;

e-ke  (or  e-rie)  5.  “ hand,"  pi.
o-ma-ke  6. ;

e-pia  5.  “gum,  resin,”  pi.  o-ma-
pia  6. ;

e-raka  (Sindonga  e-laka)  5.
“tongue,  language,”  pi.  o-ma-
raka  6- ;

e-ka^’e-ndu  5.  and  1.  “very  tall
woman,”  pi.  o-raa-ha^’e-ndu  6.
(vide  note  at  the  end  of  this
paragraph) ;

o-jsxe-va  (VHA.-NDIBA,  p.  142,
first  note)  6.  “ water
o-ma-hakiSr'e  6.  “ sour  milk,
shaken  in  the  calabash ;”
o-ma-kenda  6.  “ thick  milk
o-vxa-ihi  or  o-ma-i^'i  6.  “ sweet
milk

o-raa-kande  6.  “ thick  milk
o-raa-tovero  6.  “ last  bad  milk,
before  a cow  dries  up

1 E


JSUek,  S.  Afr.  Cowp.  Gfumviar.


206


The  Concord.


o-iasL-tuka  6.  “ buttermilk
o-rasL-yere  or  o-xua-ire  (Sin-
donga  o-md-^e)  6.  “ sour
milk

o-ma-ewe  6.  “ a sort  of  boochoo
o-ma-AoS’e  (Kinika  ma-feosi,  p.
187)  6.  “teai-s;”

o-msL-kaya  (Sindonga  o-ma-
kdya)  6.  “ tobacco
o-m.a,-hgeha  6.  “ wild  hemp
o-ma-m'  6.  “ honey  which  sticks
to  one’s  body

o-m.a,-nina  6.  “ mucus  from  the
nose

o-xaa,-nyenya  6.  “ Scotch  mist,
misty  rain

o-m,a,-nyune  6.  “ soup
o-rasi-pupe  6.  “running  water
o-ma-<e  6.  “ saliva
o-ma-S’e  6.  “ melted  fat
o-raa.-Sr'a  (Kafir  a-ma-«x?a,  Se-
tshuana  ma-X/a  “power”)  6.
“ marrow,  strength,  power
o-tyi-wa  7.  “thing,”  pi.  o-vi-na
8.;

o-Xyi-nyo  7.  “ mouth,”  pi.  o-vl-
nyo  8.  ;

o-tyi-^a  (Zulu  i-sl-pa)  7.
“ branch,”  pi.  o-vi-pa  (Zulu
i-zi-pa)  8.  (Otyihererd  o-
ru-pa  11.  “branch,”  Zulu
u-mu-j9a  3.  “stalk  of  maize
with  cob”)  ;

o-Xyi-vere  (Zulu  \-si-hele  “man’s
nipple  ”)  7.  “ large  female

breast,”  pi.  o-vi-vere  8.  (p.  164,
note)  ;

o-tyi-  yire  (Kafir  is\-tunzi)  7.
“ shadow  of  man,  &c.,”  pi-
o-vi-S’ire  8.  (Otyihererd  o-
mu-yire  = Kafir  n-m-tunzi,
Setshuana  xtxo-ruti  or  mo-
roti,  3.  “shadow  of  a tree,


&c. Kafir  i-tunzi  5.  “ shadow
of  a cloud,  &c.”)  ;
o-ty  -oSt'e  7.  “ the  Pleiades
o-tj-unda  7.  “ fence,”  pi-  o-vl-o-
ty-unda  8. ;

o-Xyi-rongo  (Sindonga  o-shl-
Idngo)  7.  “place,”  pi.  o-vi-
rohgo  (Sindonga  o-i-longo)
8.;

o~Xyi-vava  7.  “ wing,”  pi.  o-vl-
vava  8.  (§  360)  ;

o-Xyi-n-dyuo  7.  “ old  house  ” (o-
n-dyuo,  Kafir  i-n-x^w  9.
“ house”) ;

o-Xyl-n-gaye  7.  “old  woman;”
o-ii-gaye  9.  “ a female,”  pi.  o-
y on-gay e 10.  {vide  note  at  the
end  of  this  paragraph)  ;
o-n-tuu  (Kafir  i-m-vubu,  Se-
tshuana kxubu  or  kubu,  Lourenzo
Marques  in-fuvo,  Inhambane
im-vuo,  Sofala  xn-vuo,  Sena
m-vu,  Tette  vu,  Kipokdmo  un-
guu,  Banyehko  n-t'u,  Barotse
m-bo,  Bashubea  n-vuvu,  Ba-
yeiye  o-n-vuvu,  Balojazi  govo,
Batoka  n-tskoho,  Mpongwe
n-guu,  Dikele  n-gubi,  Dualla
and  Isubu  n-gubu)  9.  “ hippo-
potamus,” pi.  o-yon-tuu  10. ;
o-n-ya  9.  “ horn,”  pi.  o-yon-ya
10.  (§  472)  ;

o-n-ganga  (Kafir  i-n-nyangd,
Setshuana  naka,  Inhambane
in-yanga,  Sena,  Banyenko,
Batoka,  Borotse,  and  Bayeiye
n-ganga.  Nano  o-n-ganga)  9.
“doctor,”  pi.  o-yon-ganga  10.
(Kisuiheli,  Kinika,  Kihiau  m-
ganga,  Mpongwe  o-ganga,  Di-
kele nga  1.;  Isubu  mo-^  a
ngahga  1.,  pi.  ba-t«  ba  nganga
2.);


Otyiherero  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.  207


o-rx~dyuo  (Bayeiye  n-tshu  or
/ - n-dshu,  § 486)  9.  “bouse,”
pi.  o-d’on-dyuo  (Kafir  i-zln-
iclu,  Angola  o-shln-20)  10. ;

o-m-bua  9.  “dog,”  pi.  o-d’orn-
bua  10.  (§§  235  and  277)  ;

o-honi  (Kafii"  i-n-XZoni)  9.
“ shame  ” (o-h.vi-honipara  =
Kafir  n-’kxL-Xlonipa  15.  “to  be
ashamed  ”) ;

o-Si’on-dyeru  (Kafir  i~z,ia-devu)

10.  “ whiskers

o-rvi-hune  (Kafir  n-kuni,  Sin-
donga  o-ru-  kuni)  11.  “ large
piece  of  firewood,”  pi.  o-yon-
gune  (Kafir  i-n-kuni)  10.  (§
348);

j o-ru-roto  11.  “dream,”  pi.  o-tu-
roto  12. ;

o-TU-tuo  (Angola  lu-to,  § 497)

11.  “spoon,”  pi.  o-tu-tMo  12.
(pp  145  and  177)  ;

o-ru-«  11.  “reed,”  pi  o-tu-w

12. ;

o-TVL-tenda  11.  “long  thin  iron
chain,”  pi.  o-Xvi-tenda  12.
(p-tyi~tenda  7.  “iron,  metal”) ;

o-rvL-vio  11.  “knife,  lot,”  pi.
o-tu-OTo  12. ;

o-ka-<i  13.  “ stick,”  pi.  o-vL-ti
14.  (§  428);

o-’^'O.-na-tye  13.  “ little  child,”
pi.  o-M-na-tye  14.  (o-m-a-

tye  1.  child,”  pi.  o-v-ana-tye

2.):

0-ka-S’em  13.  “ little  bird,”  pi.
o-Vi-^'era  14.  {p-XL-d^’ era  or
o-ry-tera  9.  “ bird  ”)  ;

o-\ia,-puha  13.  “ little  animal,”
pi.  o-M~puha  14.  {o-Xyl-puha
7.  “game”)  ;

o-\y~tuku  14.  “ night,”  pi.  o-ma-
'S'  " u-tuku  6 (§  453,  notes) ;


o-u-ta  (Sindonga)  14.  “bow,”
pi.  o-ma-u-ta  6.  (§  496)  ;
o-vL-vi  (Kafir  u-bu-5t)  14.
“ evil ;”

o-VL-re  (Kafir  u-bu-de)  14.
“length,  depth,  height”  (§
362);

o-vL-tyi  (Kafir  u-bu-si)  14.
“ honey ;”

o-u-ye  14.  “world,  land;”
o-u-jpe  (Kafir  u-bu-<sAa)  14.
“ youth,  state  of  freshness,  new-
ness ” (§  177)  ;

o-ku-ft'  (Sindonga  o-ku-ft)  15.

“ field,”  pi.  o-msL-kuti  6. ;
o-ku-<wi  15.  (Sindonga  o-ko-
tshui)  “ ear,”  pi.  o-ma-fw*
(Sindonga  o-msL-ko-tshui)  6.
(§  434,  note)  ;

o-'k.u-rama  (Sindonga  o-ku-
lamd)  15.  “leg,”  pi.  o-ma-
rama  6. ;

o-ku-oAo  (Sindonga  o-ku-eAo)
15.  “ arm,”  pi.  o-ma-a^o  (Sin-
donga o-ma-eSo)  6. ;
o-ku-iya  (Sindonga  o-'k.vL-edsha)
15.  “thorn,”  pi.  o-ma-Aw-
iya  (Sindonga  o-ma-ku-edsha)
6.;

o-ku-ara  15.  “floor;”
o-lsxL-roro  1 5.  “ autumn,  rainy
season ;”

o-ku-ni  15.  “spring;”
o-lLVL-pepera  15.  “winter;”
o-ku-rao  15.  “altar;”
o-ku-Aa  15.  “ opinion  ;"
o-ku-/aa  (Kafir  u-ku-/«aa)  15.

“ quarrel ;”
o-po-wa  16.  “place;”
o-ko-na  17.  “a  distant  place ;”
o-mo-ntt  18.  “place  where  one
is.”


208


The  Concord.


OMUKAe’ENDU,  OVAKAe’ENDU,  &c.

[Note  to  p.  203  ]

The  Otyilierei’6  noun  o-roKi-kad'e-ndu  1.  is  composed  of  the  stem
-ka^’e*  and  the  noun  o-xaxL-ndu  1.  “man,  person,  human  being.”
The  latter  noun  is  met  with  in  almost  all  South  African  Ba-ntu
languages ; and,  in  fact,  the  name  of  this  family  of  languages  is
the  plural  form  of  the  identical  Kafir  noun  mu-nfe.  The  terms
u-mu-«<M  and  a-ba-ntw,  and  the  corresponding  words  in  the  kindred
languages,  are  frequently  used  in  the  restricted  sense  of  indicating  the
black  inhabitants  only, — in  contradistinction  to  the  Europeans,  Arabs,
Hottentots,  and  Bushmen,  to  whom  the  word  a-ba-w<M  only  applies  in
a wider  sense.  We  may  consider  the  most  original  forms  of  this
noun  to  be  those  used  in  Zulu  and  Kafir  (u-mu-wta  or  u-m-ntw  1-,
pi.  a-ba-Hfe  2.),  Sofala  (pi.  va-n<a  2.),  Sena  and  Tette  (mu-nto  or
mu-wfto  t.,  pi.  •va.-nttu  or  xB,-ntto  2.),  Quellimane  (mu-nta  1.,  pi.
a-aftt  2.),  Maravi  (xaxL-ntu  1.,  pi.  vaSi-nthu  2.),  Kisambala  and
Kipokomo  {vaxL-ntu  1.,  pi.  vsa-ntu  2.),  Batoka  (mo-wfttl.),  Bashubea
(mo-nto  1.),  Sindonga  or  Ovambo  {u-m-tu  1.,  pi.  o-&,-ntu  2.),  and
Kongo  (o-mu-w<M  1.,  pi.  o-Si-ntu  2.).  The  nt  of  the  stem  has  become
nd  in  Kikamba  {tsm-ndu  1.,  pi.  B.-ndu  2.),  Kihiau  (mu-nc?M  1.,  pi.
xira-ndu  2.),  Anjoane  (mu-»nfu  1.),  and  Otyihei’ero  (o-xan-ndu  1.,
pi.  o-xa-ndu  2.).  The  nasal  of  the  nt  has  been  lost  (with  or  without
subsequent  aspii-ation  of  the  t)  in  Setshuana  {rao-tliu  1.,  pi.  ba-tAu  2.),
Inhambane  (mu-ia  1.),  Quellimane  (mxi-ttu  1.,  pi.  a-ttu  2.),  Kinika
(xnu-ta  1.,  pi.  a-tu  2.),  Suaheli  (m-ta  1.,  pi.  xta-tu  2.),  Angola
(o-mu-ta  1.,  pi.  o-a-tu  2.),  Benga  (mo- to  1.,  pi.  ba-to  2.),  Dualla
and  Isubu  (mo-ta  1.,  pi.  ba-<a  2.).  A palatalisation  of  the  t has  pro-
duced such  forms  as  we  find  used  in  Dikele  {vaa-tyi  1.,  pi.  "bo-tyX  2.)
and  in  Fernando  Po  (bo-feAa  1.,  pi.  bu-toAa  2.).  Finally  the  nasal
of  the  stem  (n)  has  prevailed  over  the  t in  Tekeza  (mu-wo  or  xavL-nu
1.,  pi.  xa-nu  or  ba-aa  2.),  Barotse  and  Balojazi  (mo-wa  1.),  Banyenko
and  Baponda  (mo- no  1.),  and  in  the  Nano  language  of  Benguela
(o-mu-no  1.,  pi.  o-ma-no  2.).  Vide  §§  140,  141,  412,  426.  The
diminutive  which  is  formed  from  the  stem  xxm-ntu  (&c.)  is  subject  to
various  and  very  strong  contractions.  Even  in  Zulu,  the  unabbre-
viated form  n-xxia-ntw-ana  1.  “ child,  prince  ” (pi.  a,-ha-ntw-ana  2.)  is
chiefly  used  when  speaking  of  royal  children,  and  has  thus  become
almost  synonymous  with  the  Spanish  infante  and  infanta.  When
applied  to  common  children,  u-mu-nfw-ana  is  abbreviated  to
u-m-fioona  or  u-m-tona,  and  even  to  u-m-to.  In  the  Mosambique

* Compare  o-ii-ga^’e  9.  “ female,”  and  e-ka^'e  5.  “ tendency  of  a
woman  to  produce  none  but  female  offspring,” — e-rume  5.  indicating  the
tendency  of  bringing  forth  boys  only.


Etymology  of  “ omukaSiendu,  §’c.”


209


Genus  the  same  diminutive  noun  passes  through  various  stages  of
abbreviation,  such  as  muana,  mua,  &c.,  and  in  Lourenzo  Marques
wana  (Matonga  wuana,  Man/olosi  n-nuana)  1.  “ child  ” appears  to  be
contracted  to  wa.  The  Setshuana  form  of  this  noun  is  nuana  1.
(pi.  "b-ana  2.),  and  in  the  Middle  Branch  languages  it  is  gener-
ally mu-ana  1.,  as  in  Inhambane,  Tette,  Sena  (pi.  xr-ana  2.),
Makua,  Cape  Delgado,  Batoka,  and  Kongo  (pi.  ana  2.), — or  xa-dna  1.,
as  in  Kipokdmo,  Kinika  (pi.  ana  2.),  and  Kisuaheli  (pi.  xr-ana  2.).
Other  variations  of  this  noun  in  the  Middle  Branch  are  Sindonga
u-m-nona  1.,  Angola  mo-na  1.  (pi.  a-na  2.),  and  Mpongwe  o-nwana  1.
(pi.  a-nwana  2.).  The  N'orth-western  Branch  has  mw-ana  1.  in
Benga  and  Isubu,  mi-ana  or  jxi-ana  1.  in  Dikele,  and  mu-na  in
Dualla, — with  the  plural  form  b-ana  2.  in  all  these  dialects.  From
the  same  stem,  with  an  affix,  is  derived  the  Kihiau  m-ana-dshe  1.
“ child  ” ( pi  v-ana-dshe  2.),  and  also  the  identical  Otyihererd  noun
o-m-a-tye  1.  (pi.  o-x-ana-tye  2.),  whence  the  diminutive  o-ka-wa-fye
13.  “ little  child,”  with  which  we  may  compare  the  Kikamba
diminutive  (without  the  affix)  k-ana  13.  “child”  (pi.  tu-ana  12.).

The  stem  -Aa&’e,  which  occupies  in  the  Otyiherero  word  o-mu-
ha^'e-ndu^  as  well  as  in  others,  a position  in  the  middle  of  the  word,
is  in  other  languages  frequently  used  as  a suffix  for  the  pm-pose  of
indicating  the  female  sex.  As  such,  it  has  in  Kafir  the  form  -Aaze,  in
Sesuto  -Kali  {-gali),  in  SeXlapi  -xari  {-gari),  &c.  Nouns  of  the  1st
and  2nd  classes  are  formed  from  this  stem  by  the  mere  addition  of
the  derivative  prefixes  of  these  classes,  as  Tette  and  Sena  mu-Adzi  1 .
(pi.  xa-kazi  and  a-kdzi  2.),  Bayeiye  xao-kazi  1.,  Borotse  xao-hati  1.,
Banyenko  tao-kathi  1.,  Cape  Delgado  mu-Aa  1.,  Kikdmba  mu-Aa  1.
(pi.  a-ka  2.),  Kipokdmo  mu-Ae  1.,  Kisuaheli  la-ke  1.  (pi.  a-ke  2.),
Kinika  mu-dshe  1.  (pi.  a-dshe  2.),  Setshuana  mo-xn^s’-  1-,  Kafir
u-m-Aa  1.  (pi.  o-m-Aa  2.).  This  last  may  be  a contracted  form  of
a-ItlXt-KAZI ka-,  or  n-xa-fazi  ka-  (wife  of-) ; for,  the  original  k in  this
noun  has  been  softened  to  f in  the  Kafir  and  Zulu  pronunciation,  and  we
thus  have  in  these  languages  u-xa-fazi  1.  “woman”  (pi.  ^.-ba-fazi  2.;
Zulu  i-sl-yaz-ana  7.  “collection  of  females,  womankind”).  Theoriginal
k is  still  preserved  in  the  Kafir  diminutive  i-xi-kaz-ana  9.  “young
woman”  (pi.  a.-xxLa-n-kaz-ana  6.;  \-ai-n-haz-ana  7.  “genitalia  mulie-
bria”).  Still  greater  is  the  change  in  the  Setshuana  form  xxxo-safi
(Sesuto mo -sah)  1.  “woman,”  pl.ba-sa/v  (Sesuto ba-«a/i)  2.  (se-sari
7.  “womankind,”  kxosi  e-a  se-sari  9.  “a  female  king,”  i.e.  a queen;
tvari  9.  “female  of  animals”).  The  Tekeza  forms  fati*  and  -safef

* The  Ma-n/olosi  use  the  noun  fati  for  the  Kafir  Vi-xa-fazi.

t The  suffix  -sate  seems  to  correspond  in  the  dialects  of  the  Matonga
and  Maxloenga  to  the  Kafir  suffix  -kazi  = Man/olosi  -had.


210


The  Concord.


appear  to  connect  the  above  Setshu&na  nouns  with  the  others,  notwith-
standing the  great  change  of  k to  s which  this  identification  presup-
poses. However,  I cannot  yet  consider  it  as  fully  proved  that  the
above  Setshuana  forms  are  derived  fi-om  the  same  root.

The  compound  noun  for  “ woman  ” (which  has  in  Otyihererd  the
form  0-m.M-haSi’e-ndu)  occurs  in  most  of  the  Western  members  of  the
South  African  Division  of  Bantu  languages.  In  some  of  these  lan-
guages the  compound  form  only  is  met  with,  whilst  in  others  we  also
find  the  more  simple  form,  which  is  identical  with  Tette  and  Sena  mu-
kdzi  1.  “wife,  woman”  (pi.  •va-hazi  2.1.  In  almost  all  these  languages
the  compound  form  is  more  or  less  sti’ongly  contracted,  sometimes  so
greatly  as  to  cause  the  middle  portion  of  the  noun  (which  corresponds
to  Otyihererd  -kaSi’e,  = Kafir  -kazi)  to  disappear ; and  in  conse-
quence of  this  contraction,  the  Dualla  form  for  o-m.VL-kaSr’e-ndu  (which
is  mu-fu  1.,  pi.  h-i-tu  2.)  differs  little  in  appearance  from  the  Dualla
noun  mo-fa  1.  (pi.  ba-fa  2.),  which  is  identical  rvith  Zulu  u-mu-
niu  1.  (pi.  a-ba-afa  2.).  The  following  table  exhibits  the  forms
which  correspond  in  the  different  Western  languages  to  Otyiherero
0-m.u-haSi’e-ndu  1.  (woman),  o-va-kaB’e-ndu  2.  (women),  o-mu-nda
1.  (man,  person),  and  o-va-ndu  2.  (people),  and  to  Tette  jua-Mzi  1.
(wife),  and  va-hdzi  2.  (wives).


Etymology  of  “ omukaB’endu,  §•<?.


211


212


The  Concord.


SZNDOHGA  PKEFIXES.


SINGULAR.

PLURAL.

PEES

1.

u-mu-,  mu-
«-m-
(— )

ONAL.

2.

fill”

3.

u-mu-,  o-mu-
M-m-

4.

o-ml-

(D

1

o-ma-

7.

o-shl-

o-sh-

8.

o-vi-
o-i-,  1-

6.

o-ma-

9.

o-n-

o-n-

o-m-

0-

10.

o-n-

o-n-

o-m-

o-.Vo-

11.

O-PU-

0-lu-

12.

o-ta-

10.

o-n-

DIMINUTIVE.

13.

o-ka-

ABSTRACT.

14.

o-u-

INFINITIVE.

15.

o-ku-

o-ko-

6.  (+15.)
o-mA-ku-
o-ma-Ao-
o-ma-

81NDONGA.

495.  Sindonga,  or  the
language  of  the  0-YSi-mbo
(2.),*  differs  but  little  from
Otyiherero  in  the  forms  of
the  prefixes.  In  Sindonga
the  10th  prefix  generally
appears  in  a contracted  form,
in  which  it  is  identical  with
the  9th.  Nouns  of  the  9th
(n-)  class,  therefore,  have
for  their  plurals  (of  the  10th
class)  the  same  form  as  the
singular.  Plurals  corres-
ponding to  singular  nouns
of  the  13th  (ka-)  and  14th
(U-)  classes  are  not  met  with
in  the  specimens  of  the
Sindonga  language  in  our
possession.  These  are  con-
tained in  a manuscript  voca-
bulary, presented  to  the
Grey  Library  by  the  Rev.
C.  H.  Hahn.  The  follow-
ing list  of  nouns  taken  from

* Mr.  Palgrave  informs  me  that
there  are  between  the  Cunene  river
and  the  18th  degree  of  South  Lati-
tude about  fourteen  tribes,  distinct
from  each  other,  although  preser-
ving to  an  unusual  extent  similar
characteristics.  Of  these,  five  speak
Sindonga,  viz.  the  O-’v&.-mbo  of
O-n-donga,  the  O-VSt-kua-vibi
(Chief  Nayuma),  O-'V  iX-kua-n-
dshera  (late  Chief  Tshipakd),  O-
'VSX-nguarui^'e  or  O-karu^'e  (Chief
Tshikongo),  and  Okoronga^'e  (no
Chief).


Sindonga  ( Ovambo ) Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.  2 1 3

this  vocabulary  has  been  revised  by  Wm,  Coates  Palgrave
Esq,,  whose  emendations  are  distinguished  by  the  letter
“ P.”  As  we  find  that  most  of  the  nouns  are  given  wit/i
the  article,  we  have  placed  the  few  forms  of  the  prefixes
which  occur  without  it  in  the  same  table.

SINDONGA  NOUNS.


u-m-/u  1.  “man,  person,”  pi,
o-A-ntu  2.  (p.  208)  ;
u-m-M-ntu  1,  “woman”  (p.
211);

u-mxL-hungu  1.  “married  man,”
pi.  Si-hungu  2. ;

u-m-piha  (Bayeiyemo-ria,  § 486)
1.  “servant,”  pi.  a-piha  (Angola
a-bika)  2. ;

or  u-mdti  1.  “young
unmarried  man,  youth,  boy,”
pi.  eL-mdti  2.  ;
u-m-samdni  1.  “ old  man  ;”
u-ia-ndna  (Zulu  u-ma-ntwana,
p.  209)  1.  “ child
u-m-ba^ona  (Otyihererd  o-mu-
ka^’ona)  1.  “ girl

u-ta-fuko  (Otyiherero  o-mu-
yuko)  1.  “young  woman
u-m-hdu-ndu  1.  “eldest  brother”
(compare  Kafir  u-m-kulu-we,
Setshuana  mo-xoZu  1.  “elder
brother ”) ;

o-mu-S'tdna  (Otyihererd)  “ poor
man  ;”

u-m-lumhu  (Kafir  n-m-lungu  ?)

1.  “white  man;”
u-mburushdta  1.  “a  Portuguese,”
pi.  a-mburuskata  2. ;
u-xa-ric^'i  1.  “black  man;”
mu-mi  (Otyihererd  o-mu-ini)  1 .

“ owner ;”
u-mua  1.  “ king ;”
u-va-kanUoa  1.  “ king  ;”
u-va-^'&i  1.  “God;”
kaluiiga  1.  “ God ;”


o-mu-3'i»i«  3.  “ fountain,”  pi.

o-mi-S'ima  4. ;
u-ta-ti  3.  “tree”  (§  428)  ;
u-ia-skila  (Kafir  ix-ia-sila,  Tette
mu-sAim,Quellimane  mvr-ira,
Kihiau  m-dsMra,  Kipokdmo
tnu-dshia,  Kinika  xa-kira,
Suaheli  va-Ma,  Otyihererd
o-YavL-tyira,  Angola  vaxL-Ula)
3.  “ tail ;”

u-ta-Ulo  (Otyiherero  o-mu-riro,
§ 344)  3.  “ fire ;”

u-va.-lu.nga  (Otyihererd  o-mu-
ruhga')  3.  “ palm-tree ;”
u-va.-lungu  (Otyihererd  o-mu-
ruhgu)  3.  “ face ;”
u-mu-ele  or  u-mu-eye  (u-xa-ere
P.)  3.  “ dagger,  knife  ;”
c-mu-xu,  o-mu-Ao,  or  o-mu-s^o
(Otyiherei’6  o-mu-Ao)  3.  “ calf
of  leg ;”

o-vau-enge  3.  “ sugar-cane ;”
u-va-tenya  3.  “ day  ;”
u-va-tse  (Benguela  n-iue,  Ki-
kamba  xw&.-tue,  p.  185)  3.
“ head ;”

o-mu-S’imia  (Kafir  n-va-zimba
“ body  ”)  3.  “ dead  body ;”
u-m-3-’ire  (Kafir  \x-va-tunzi,
Otyiherero  o-vavL-d’ire,  p.  206)
3.  “ shadow ;”
u-va-tara  3.  “ bellows ;”
o-mu-i^’i  3.  “ grass ; ’
u-va-tdko  3.  and  u-xa-te  3.
“ ashes ;”

fi-m-^'ia  3.  “ giraffe  acacia  ;”

1 F


Bh‘ck,  S.  Afr.  Com-p.  Grammar.


214


The  Concord.


e-shendyo  5.  “ tooth,"  pi.  o-ma-
shendyo  6.  (Kafii‘  i-zinyo  5.,  pi.
a-xa-enyo  6.,  § 326)  ;
e-temo  5.  “a  pick,”  pi.  o-ma-
temo  6. ;

e-yi  (e-we  P.,  Otyiherero  e-i)  5.

“ egg,”  pi.  o-ma-yi  6. ;
e-kakara  5.  “large  eatable  lizard,"
pi.  o-ma,-kakara  6. ;
e-kdxa  (Nano  e-ka,  Otyihei’ero
e-ke)  5.  “ hand  ” (also  o-shl-
Jiaxa  7.),  pi.  o-xaa,-kaxa  (Nano
o-vsi-ka)  6. ;

e-hinga  or  e-skmga  5.  “leopard,”
pi.  o-rast-htnga  or  o-m.eL-shmga
6.;

e -6ka  (Kihidu  li-oka  or  rl-dshoka)
5.  “ snake,”  pi.  o-ma-yoJta  6.
(Otyiherero  o-jx-yoka  9.) ;
e-Sr’ina  (=  e-zina,  not  e-^'ina  =
e-sina,  as  stated  wrongly  § 484,
note)  5.  “ name ;”
e-pepe  5.  “ shoulder  ;”
e-tdngo  5.  “ sun  ;”

6-u  5.  “ seed  of  sugar-cane ;”
e-ievga  5.  “a  bamboos  (vessel
for  milking)

e-pia  (Nano)  5.  “ garden,  field
e-kuya  (Otyiherero  e-kuva)  5.
“ hatchet ;”

e-sho  (je-ho  P.)  5.  “eye”  (§  327) ;
e-umho  5,  “ kraal  ” (Otyihererd
o-ru-mbo  11.);

4-la  5.  “ belly ;”

6-wi  (e-hi  or  e-shi)  5.  “ earth
4-^’ia  5.  “pool,  fountain  ;”
e-totuno  5.  “ wild  cat
e-humbu  5.  “ a commando
e-nyanda  5.  “ cattle
e-p6ra  5.  “ way
e-xo^enye  5.  “ love  ;”
e-penda  (Otyiherero)  5.  “ hero,
brave  one


e-^iro  5.  “ dirt

6.  “ hau’

o-ma.-kunde  (Otyihererd)  6.
“ beans ;”

o-msL-pungu  6.  “maize;”
o-m^-oe  or  o-ma-we 6.  “stones”
(§481,  note)  ;
o-ma,-Mngu  6.  “ millet ;”
o-va4,-mbo  (Otyihererd)  6.
“ words ;”

o-jxxsi-xini  6.  “milk ;”
o-nx9,-nyehge  6.  “ rushes ;”
o-ra.a,-rovu  6.  “beer;”
o-slii-Aob  7.  “ cloud,”  pi.  i-ho'6
8.;

o-shi-temba  7.  “ a trough,”  pi.  o-
ma-temba  6.  (Otyiherero  e-
iemba  5.)  ;

o shl- Jidmbo  7.  “ goat  ” (Otyi-
hererd  o-Tx-gombo  9-)  ;

r

o-sh-eZa  7.  “ iron,”  pi.  i-yera

8.;

o-sbi-pakoroa  s-o-Si’enya  7.
“ snufl-horn ;”

o-shi-ti  B-o-^'ena  7.  “ snuff-
spoon  ; ”

o-Bbi-fufnta  7.  “ gun  ;"
osTaX-rndna  7.  “ pearl ;”
osb-ana  (Otyiherero  o-ty-ana)

7.  “ a plain,  flats  ;”
osbi-nima  7.  “ thing,”  pi.  o-i-na

8. ;

o-v\-lya  (p-vi-d'ia  P.)  8.  “ Kafir
corn ;”

o-v\.-yera  8.  “ rings  ” (=  o-vl-
garinge  8.  P.)  ;

t-l-ta  (Otyiherero  o-vl-ta)  8.
“ war  ” (Zulu  u-bu-ta  14.
“enmity,”  i-sl-ta  7.  “enemy;”
vide  Nano  u-ta  14.  “bow,”
§ 496)  ;

6-xi  or  6-shi  (Nano o-ss2)  9.  “ fish,”
pi.  o-\o-shi  10. ;


Sindonga(  Ovamlo)  Derioative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.  215


o-n-d'imbo  9.  “ stick,”  pi.  o-n-
Sf'imbo  10. ;

o-n-g6mbe  9.  “ ox,  cow,”  pi.  o-n-
gombe  10.  (§  226)  ;
o-Si'ena  9.  “ snufF
o-ra-ba^’e  (Otyiherer6)  9.  “ foot
o-Si'ona  9.  “ wether
o-fuhua  9.  “ potatoe
o-n-dzhdla  or  o-n-dydla  (Otyi-
herer6  o-n-dyard)  9.  “hun-
ger;”

o-n-yota  (Otyiherero)  9.  “thirst;”
o-n-dydmba  (o-n-djamba  P.)

Benguela  9.  “ elephant ;”
o-n-dd’ira  (Otyiherer6  o-n-tera)
9.  “ bird ;”

o-n.-dumetdna  9.  “ large  ox  ;”
o-tn-vula  (Otyiherero  o-ra-bura,
§ 118)  9.  “rain;”
o-TX-guru-Wimbo  9.  “knobstick;”
d-Ti-^’i  (Ofyiherero  o-n-tui)  9.
“ seed ;”

o-tk-Sf'i  (o-n-s«,  Otyiherero  o-n-fti
or  o-n-^S’w,  Setshuana  A-lui,
Kafir  i-m-wa)  9.  “ sheep,”  pi.
o-n-S’i  (Otyiherero  o-.&’on-<MOr
Setshuana
Kafir  i-zim-uw)  10. ;
o-ra-bila  9.  “ grave ;”
o--n.-sha  (o-en-na  P.)  9.  “ food  ”
(z=  i-ku-lyia  8.)  ;
o-ra-binda  (Otyiherero)  9.  “pig;”
o-n-dyushua  (Otyiherero  o-n-
dyuhud)  9.  “ fool ;”

(Otyiherero)  9.  “mount-
ain ;”

{o-n.-dendu  9.  “ river  ” P.)  ;
o-n-yushi  (Nano  o-n-yihi,  § 496)
9.  “bee;”

o-n-yd^'i  (Otyiherero  o-n-yoS'e)
9.  “star,”  pi.  o-n-ydSr'i  10. ;
o-m-bepo  (Otyiherero)  9-  “ wind
o-nix6  9.  “ needle


o-n-tdna  (Otyihererd  o-n-tana)
9.  “calf;”
o-shelo  9.  “ door ;”
o-n-dete  9.  “ breast ;”
o-XL-tulo  9.  “ breast ;”
o-tk-ydti  (Otyiherero  and  Bayeiye,
p.  193)  9.  “buffalo,”  pi.  o-n-
ydii  10.  (§  226,  note)  ;
o-xa-bdshe  (Otyiherero  o-m-bdhe
P.)  9.  “ gu’affe ;”

o-shordngo  (Otyiherero  o-horongo)
9.  “ koodoo ;”

o-n-garagombe  (Otyihererd  o-n-
garangomhe)  9.  “ eland ;”
o-vcL-pdnda  9.  “ rhinoceros ;”
6-XL-goro  (Otyiherei'6  o-n-goro)
9.  “ zebra ;”
o-m-pukulu  9.  “ gnu  ;”
o-^'ind  9.  “ gemsbok  ;”
b-xa-po  (Otyiherero  o-m-bo)  9.
“ ostrich ;”

o-TL-dyambamea  (p-xx-djamba-me-
va  “water-elephant”  P. ; Kihiau,
Kikamba,  Kinika,  and  Kisuaheli
mamba)  9.  “ hippopotamus  ;”
6-xi-gwe  (Kafir  i-xi-gwe,  Otyi-
herero o-xi-gue)  9.  “ leopard ;”

0- nime  9.  “ lion  ;”

1- xa-bungu  (Otyiherero  o-xa-bun-
gu)  9.  “ hyena ;”

o-xa-pampdni  9.  “ old  man  ;”
o-xxi-bixa  (o-xa-bika  P.,  Nano
o-xa-bia^  § 496)  9.  “ pot ;”
o-xa-bixd  y-o-ku~tereka  9.  “ cook-
iug-pot ;”

o-xxk-bixa  y-o-ma-kaya  9.  “ tobacco
pipe ;”

o-xxi-bunda  9.  “ back  ;”
o-nyekeskua  9.  “ pod  ;”

6--&-guo  (Kafir  \.-xx-gubo,  Bayeiye
xi-ko,  § 486)  9.  “ apron ;”
o-xx-gendyo  or  o-xi-gensho  or  o-
A-genzo  9.  “ bell ;"


216


The  Concord.


o-shdtigi  9.  “ peace
o-n-duko  9.  “ speed
o-jx-dyila  (Otyiherero  o-n-dshira
p.  201,  note)  9.  “ way
o-nydnya  9.  “ malice,  hatred
o-tx-gula  9.  “ morning,  morrow
o-xela  9.  “ yesterday
o-nena  9.  “ to-day
o-lu-Mku  (Otjdherero  o-ru-^a^w)
11.  or  o-n-gaku  9-  “sandal,”
pi.  o-n-galiu  (Otyiherero  o-
^’oxx-gahu)  10.  ;

o-TXL-tutu  (Otyiherero  o-ru-*<)
11.  “ body,”  pi.  o-tVL-tu  12. ;
o-TTX-tura  11.  “meal,  flomr;”
o-TVi-shindo  11.  “ spoon
o-VM-dS/’i  11.  “lightning;”
o-r\x-panda  11.  “ cheek
o-rvi~hula  11.  “ochre
o-'k.di-talilo  13.  “looking-glass;”


o-ka-xflKdna  13.  “baby;”
o-ka-Kowo  13.  “little  child;”
o-'k.a-xumha  or  o-'k.a-h'umia
(Otyiherero  o-'ka-kambe)  13.
“ hartebeest ;”
o-ka-na  13.  “ moon  ;”
o-XL-enda  (Otyiherei’6)  14.  “jour-
ney ;”

o-a-Sr’dno  14.  “ play,  dance ;"
o-a-tarard  14.  “ cold,  wet ;”
U-Sr'ila  14.  “floui';”
o-n-ydni  14.  “world;”
o-ko-tshui  15.  “ear,”  pi.  o-ma-
kd-tshui  6.  (§  434)  ;

0- k^-ii  (Otj’iherero  o-ku-ti)  15.
“ field;”

1- kli-ti  15.  “ arrow ;”

o-ku-S  'a or  o-ku-yh  15.  “to  die,
death  ” (§  482,  note).


THE  NANO  LANGUAGE.

496.  The  language  of  Benguela,  of  which  Nano  is  one
variety,  is  distinct  from  that  of  Angola  as  well  as  from
the  more  Southern  members  of  the  Bunda  Genus  (Otyi-
herero and  Sindonga).  With  regard  to  the  forms  of  the
prefixes,  it  is  to  be  remarked  that  the  m of  the  4th  prefix
has  not  unfrequently  become  v;  and  also,  that  the  same
change  has  throughout  afiected  the  6th  prefix, — which  has
thus  become  identical  in  form  with  the  2nd  (va-).  Again,
in  one  noun,  at  least,  the  v of  the  2nd  prefix  has  been
converted  (by  the  influence  of  a following  nasal)  into  the
labial  nasal  m.  Thus  the  2nd  (va-)  prefix  has  adopted  in
this  one  noun  o-ma-no  (Otyiherero  o-va.-ndu  § 140)  the
form  which  the  6th  prefix  has  relinquished  in  this  language.
With  regard  to  the  correspondence  of  the  prefixes,  we
have  to  notice  that  the  6th  (va-)  and  10th  (■&’0-)  pre-
fixes correspond  here  as  plurals  to  the  13th  prefix  (ga-)*,

♦ Eegarding  an  apparent  case  of  correspondence  of  the  10th  prefl.K  as
plural  to  the  13th,  in  the  Bayeiyc  language,  vide  § 486.


Nano  ( Benguela)  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.  217

and  the  8th  (vi-)  to  the  14th  (u-).  But  the  vi-  in
this  instance  may  be  merely  the  softened  form  of  the
4th  prefix  (mi-),  which  in  Kinika  (§  482),  and  also  in
some  languages  of  the  North-western  Branch  (§  504),
corresponds  as  plural  to  the  14th  (u-).  The  reason
for  this  correspondence  may  be,
that  the  form  of  the  14th
prefix  has  been  mistaken  for
the  homophonous  abbreviated
form  of  the  3rd  prefix  mu-  (to
which  the  4th  forms  the  usual
plural) ; but  it  may  also  be  that
this  is  an  ancient  manner  of
correspondence  which  has  been
retained  here.  The  absence  of
the  12th  prefix  (TU-)  from  our
list  of  Nano  nouns  is  remarkable;
— the  10th  ($’o-)  has  apparently
taken  its  place.  But  the  incom-
pleteness of  our  material  allows
of  no  certainty  with  regard  to  the
non-existence  of  any  class  in  the
Nano  language ; nor  am  I even
sure  that  I have  assigned  each
noun  to  the  right  class.  The
specimens  of  the  language  given
below  were  obtained  by  me  from
one  of  the  Ndi-kua-nano  or  Va-
7iano  (2.) ; but  they  agree  in  all
essentials  with  the  Nano  words
given  by  Mr.  Bath  in  a manu-
script of  the  Grey  Library,  also
with  the  Ba-roKc?M(2.)and  0-tyi-
vanda  (7.)  vocabularies  in  Hahn’s
“ Grammatik  des  Herero,”  and
with  the  Pa/iyeZa  words  in  Koelle’s
“ Polyglotta  Africana.”


KANO  PREFIXES.


SINGULAR.

I>LURAL.

PERS

ONAL.

1.

2.

0-mu-,  ( — )

o-va-

u-

o-ma-

3.

4.

o-mu-

o-mi-

u-

o-vi-

5.

6.

e-

o-va-

i-

o-v-

7.

8.

o-tyl-

o-vi-

9.

10.

o-n-

o-S’cn-

o-ix-

o-s’on-

o-m-

o-Sr’om.-

0-

O-B’o-

11.

(?)  10.

0-lU-,  0-

o-S’o-

DIMIN

UTIVE.

13.

6.

o-g-a-

o-va-

o-ka-

10.

o-3’o-

ri

8.

U-

o-vi-

INriNITIVE.

15.

o-ffu-

218


The  Concord,


NANO  NOUNS.


o-niu-no  (Otyiherer6  o-ra\i-ndu)
1.  “person,”  i>l.  o-ma-no
(Otyilierero  o-va-ndu)  2.  (note
at  the  end  of  § 494)  ;
u-lome  (Bayeiye mo-rume,  §486)
1.  “ man,”  pi.  o-va-lome  2. ;
tate  9.  and  1 . “ my  father  ;”
mandijange  1.  “sister,”  pi.  o-va-
mandyange  2. ;

hotaliartge  1.  “brother,”  pi. o-va-
kotaliange  2. ;

o-mu-<M  3.  “ pumpkin,”  pi.  o-ml-
tu  4. ;

u-ti  3.  “ ti-ee,”  pi.  o-vi-ti  4.
(§  428,  note) ;

M-tanga  3.  “ day,”  pi.  o-xi-tanga
4.;

vi-tue  (Kikdmba  mu-twe,  § 481)

3.  “ head,”  pi.  o-vi-tue  4. ;
Vi-tima  (Otyilierero  o-voM-tima,

§ 494)  3.  “heart,”  pi.  o-xi-tima

4. ;

e-kdla  Sindonga  (OU'ihererd  e-
hard)  5.  “ coal,”  pi.  o-xa-kala
6.;

e-la%a  (Sindonga  e-laka,  Otyi-
herero  e-raka)  5.  “ tongue,”  pi.
o-xa-laxa  6. ;

e-tama  (Sesuto  le-rama,  Sexlapi
le  -sama,  Makua  xi-rama,  Dualla
and  Isubu  i-lama  or  i-tama)

5.  “ cheek,”  pi.  o-xa-tama
(Setshuana  and  Makua  ma-
rama,  Isubu  ma-tama  or  ma-
lamd)  6. ;

e-tui  (Augola  ri-tui,  Balojazi  11-
twi-twi,  Dualla  i-toi,  Isubu  dl-
to,  i-to,  or  i-toi)  5.  “ear,”
pi.  o-xa-tui  (Angola  tna-tui,
Dualla  ma- toi,  Isubu  ma- toi
or  ma-Co)  6.  (§  434,  note)  ;


e-timba  5.  “ carcase,”  pi.  o-xa-
timba  6.  (Kafir  u-m-«mJa  3.
“ body  ”) ;

e-yo  5.  “ tooth,”  pi.  o-xa-yo  6.
(§  326) ;

i-lu  (Otyihererd  e-yuru,  § 494)  5.
“ sky,  heaven

i-sso  5.  “ eye,”  pi.  o-xa-sso  6-
(§  327)  ;

e-kumbi  (Angola  kumbi  “hour”)
5.  “ sun ;”

e-pungo  5.  “ maize ;”
o-xa-vele  6.  “ milk  ;”
o-x-ova  6.  “ water  ” (§  452,  first
note)  ;

o-xa-kaya  (Otyiherero  o-ma-
kayd)  6.  “ tobacco ;”
o-tyi  -ngere  7.  “earring,”  pi.  o-
xi-ngere  8. ;

o-tyi-ntere  7.  “ European,”  pi.  o-
xi-ntere  8. ;
o-tyi-buM  7.  “ bean
o-tyi  -bomba  7.  “ native  beer
o-n-guru  (Kafir  i-n-gulube,  Se-
tshuana Ttolobe,  Lom-enzo  Mar-
ques \-n-goluve,  Makua  guide,
Kihidu  and  Kinika  via-gulue,
Kipokomo  \m.-guyue,  Kikamba
and  Kisuaheli  VLH-gue,  Otyi-
herero o-XL-guruve,  Angola  and
Kongo  n-gulu,  Mpongu'e  n-
gowa  or  ji-goa,  Dikele  jy-goya,
Dualla  and  Isubu  ii-goa)  9.
“ pig,”  pi.  o-^’ oa-guru  10. ;
o-a-gundi  9.  “ door,”  pi.  o-S’on-
gundi  10. ;

o-a-gandu  (Ofyiherero)  9.  “alli-
gator,” pi.  o-Si’oa-gandu  (Otyi-
herero) 10. ;

o-a-ganga  (Otyiherero,  § 494)  9.
“ poison-doctor ;”


Nano  ( BengueTa)  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.  219


o-u-guli  9.  “ lion
o-n-dyiUa  (Sindoiiga  o-n-dytla)
9.  “way,”  pi.  o-^'on-dyilla  10.
(p.  201,  note)  ;

o-n-yoha  Otyiherero  and  Angola
(Kafir,  Tekeza,  Sena,  and  Tette
\-n-yoka,  Setshuana  noya,
Inhambane,  Sofala,  Kinika,
Kipokonio,  and  Kisuaheli  n-
yoka  or  n-ioka,  Kikamban-so7?a,
Makua  n-da  or  i-n-oa,  Dikele
nyo)  9.  “snake,  serpent,”  pi.
o-d’oti-yoka  (Otyiherero)  10.;
o-n-yihi  (Kafir  \-n-yosi,  Sena
n-yudshi,  Makua  nai,  Kihiau,
Kipokomo,  and  Kinika 7,
Kikamba  a-suki,  Kisuaheli
jx-ioki,  Otyiherero  o-n-rjuityi,
Sindonga  o-n-yushi,  Angola  n-
yuki,  Kongo  n-yossi,  Mpongwe
n-yowe)  9.  “bee,”  pi.  o-S’on-
yihi  (Setshuana  li-notse,  Lou-
renzo  Marques  tin-yoshe,  Di-
kele xx-yui)  10. ;

o-n-gomhe  9.  “ cow,”  pi.  o-3’on-
gombe  10.  (§  226)  ;
o-n-dalu  or  o-n-dalo  9.  “ fire
o-xa-bongulu  9.  “ star,”  pi.  o-
^'ota-bongulu  10. ;
o-m.-bia  (Kafir  \-va.-biza,  Setshul-
na  pitsa,  Kinika  m-biga,
Sindonga  o-jn.-bidya,  Angola
im-d7a)  9.  “ pot,”  pi.  o-&’om-
bia  10. ;

o-'Ba.-bela  (Bayeiye  e-n-fera,
§ 486)  9.  “rain”  (§  118)  ;
o-sn-bambi  (Otjdhererd)  9.  “kind
of  antelope  (much  resembling
the  roe),”  pi.  o-^'om-bambi  10.;
o-moko  (Tekeza  mukwa,  Ba-
nyenko  and  Balojazi  moko,
Angola  jboAm)  9.  “knife,”  pi.
o-^’o-moko  10. ;


o-m-bevo  9.  “ tortoise,”  pi.  o-
Sf’ova-bevo  10.;

o-mota  9.  “bead,”  pi.  o-Si'a-mota

10.;

o-mai  9.  “ toe,”  pi.  o-^'o-mai

10.;

o-mela  9.  “ mouth,”  pi.  o-Si’o-mela

10.;

o-messi  9.  “ tobacco  pipe,”  pi.  o-
Si’o-messi  10. ;

o-memi  9.  “.sheep,”  pi.  o-Sr'o-
memi  10.  (Kongo  e-meme,  Ka-
kongo  \i-meme  5.)  ;
o-mela  9.  “leaf,” pi.  o-^’ o-mela  10. ;
o-munda  9.  “ mountain,”  pi.  o-St'o-
munda  10. ;

o-nanga  (Balojazi  nanga,  Baponda
ntanga)  9.  “ dress,  apron,”  pi.
0-^'  o-nanga  10. ;

o-ssi  (Sindonga  6-\i  or  6-s'hi)  9.

“ fish,”  pi.  o-y o-ssi  10. ;
o-ssive  9.  “hair,”  pi.  o-yo-ssive  1 0. ;
o-sapi  9.  “dish,”  pi.  o-yo-sapi  10. ;
o-ssima  (Tette  and  Sena  in-shima,
Otyiherero  o-jx-dyimu,  Angola
h'ima^  Mpongwe  n-kema,  Dikele
Memo.)  9.  “monkey,”  pi.  o-.^’o-
ssima  (Otyiherero  o-yon-
dyimd)  10.  (Otyiherero  o-ka-
ima  13.  “ little  baboon  ”)  ;
o-ssai  9.  “ moon  ; ”
o-zanye  9.  “fowl,”  pi.  o-yo-zanye
10.;

0-fela  9.  “ wind  ;”
o-kita  9.  “ porridge,”  pi.  o-yo-kita
10.;

(?)  o-rni  9.  “river,”  pi.  o-yo-rui
10,  (Otyiherero  o-ru-i  11.
“spring,  fountain,”  pi.  o-tu-i
12.);

sekulu  9.  “ chief,”  pi.  o-yo-sekulu

10.;

o-ln-kongo7'o  11.  “rainbow;”


220


The  Concord.


o-hiru  11.  “leg,”  pi.  o-Sr'o-kuru
10.  (Kinika  Kisudheli  gu
pi.  ma-g'M  6.,  Kikamba  ku-21 15.
pi.  ma-u  6.) ;

o-ha-n-dyu  (Otyihererb  o-ka-
n-dyuo')  1 3.  “ small  house,”  pi.
o-vSL-n-dyu  6. ;

o-'b.a,-ntimha  13.  “hare,”  pi.  o-va-
ntimha  6.  ;

o-^Si-hwendye  12.  “young  man,”
pi.  o-'va.-hwendye  (6.  or  2.)  ;
o-^A-veko  13.  “ girl,”  pi.  o-va-
veko  (6.  or  2.)  ;

o-ka-rm"  (Otyihererb)  13.  “rivu-
let,” pi.  o--VA-hii  or  o-ve-rui  6. ;
o-'k.A-n-dyila  13.  “ bird,”  pi.  o-
B’on-dyila  10. ;

o-’k.A-n-dyilla  13.  “ little  way  ;”
o-'k.A-n-yonki  13.  “flower,”  pi.
o-^on-yonki  10.  ;


o-ga-mora  13.  “little  child,”  pi.
o-5r’o-mora  10. ;

VL-lela  14.  “ fat

VL-ta  (Setshuana  bo-ra,  Sofala
VM-ta,  Sena  and  Tette  u-ta,
Anjoane  M-td,  Makua  u-w,
Oiyiherero,  Sindonga,  and  An-
gola o-VL-ta)  14.  “bow  (gun?),”
pi.  o-vi-ta  8.  (Otyiherero  o-vl-
ta  = Sindonga  8.  “ enmity,

commando,  war  ;”  Zulu  i-si-ta
7.  “ enemy  ” pi.  i-zi-ta  8.,
u-bu-ta  14.  “enmity”)  ;

u-^eAe  (§  453,  note)  14.  “night,”
pi.  o-vi-Me  8. ;

o-^VL-lila  (Kafir  u-ku-Zj7a,  Otyi-
hererd  o-ku-n>a)  15.  “ weep-
ing ;”

o-^M-lima  (Kafir  u-ku-Zma)  15.
“ to  plough,  dig.”


THE  ANGOLA  LANGUAGE.

497.  The  old  Angola  language*  has,  upon  the  whole,
retained  older  forms  of  the  prefixes  than  the  other  Bunda
tongues,  although  only  fifteen  of  the  classes  of  nouns
have  been  found  here.  The  double  forms  of  the  prefixes
of  the  10th  (shin-)  class  are  remarkable.  In  these  we
find  forms  with  the  vowel  i,  and  also  with  the  vowel  0.
In  the  5th  (ri-)  class  we  find  the  form  o-ri-  instead  of  the
contracted  e-  of  the  other  Bunda  languages.  ( Vide  § 491,
and  first  note  on  p.  222.)  The  fact  of  the  correspondence
of  the  12th  (tu-)  prefix  to  the  13th  (ka-),  and  not,  as
in  the  other  Bunda  tongues,  to  the  11th  (lu-),  has  already
been  remarked.  (§  453.)  The  14th  prefix  (which  in
Otyiherero  corresponds  as  plural  to  the  13th)  is  in  Angola
of  the  singular  number  only.  The  15th  (ku-)  class  in
Angola  appears  only  to  include  infinitives,  and  has,  there-
fore, no  plural  corresponding  to  it.

♦The  liii-amJflt  ku-a  Ngola  15.  is  represented  by  the  Jesuit  Catechism
(1643,  1661,  1784,  1855),  and  by  Dias’  Grammar  (“Arte,”  1697).


Angola  Derivative  Prejixe»  of  Nouns.  221

ANaOIiA  DERIVATIVE  PREFIXES  OF  NOUNS-

WITHOUT  ARTICLE.  WITH  ARTICLE.


SINGULAR.

PLURAL.

PERS

ONAL.

1.

2.

mu-,  (— )
mo-

a-

10.

ski-,  sho-

3.

4.

mu-

ml-

5.

6.

rl-,  (— )

ma-

m-

7.

8.

kl-(qul-)

1-

hl-

y-

9.

10.

n-

Bliln-(g'ln-),  shon-

(i)m-

shim-,  shorn-

(-)

shl-,  sho-,  ( — )

11.

«.  (+  11.)

lu-

xaa-lu-

DIMIN

UTIVE.

13.

12.

ka-

tu-

ABSTRACT.

14.

6.  (+  14.)

u-

ma-u-

w-

ma-w-

INFINITIVE.

15.

ku-

SINGULAR.

PLURAL.

PEES

ONAL.

1.

2.

o-mu-,  0-
G-mo-

o-a-

10.

o-shl-,  o-sho-

3.

4.

o-mu-

o-ml-

5.

6.

o-rl-

0-ma-

o-m-

7.

8.

o-kl-

0-1-

o-hl-

o-y-

9.

10.

o-n-

o-shln-,  o-shon-

o-m-

o-shlm-,  o-shom-

0-

o-shl-,  o-sho-

11.

«.  (+  11.)

o-lu-

o-ma-Zu-

DIMIN

UTIVE.

13.

12.

o-ka-

o-tu-

ABSTRACT.

14.

€.  (+  14.)

o-u-

o-ma-M-

INFINITIVE.

15.

o-ku-

G 1


BUek^  S.  Afr,  Comp.  Grammar .


222


The  Concord.


ANGOLA  NOUNS.


mu-<M  1.  “man,  person,” pi.  a-<w
2.  (note  at  the  end  of  § 494)  ;
ma-hika  (Bayeiyemo-wia,  §486)

1.  “ slave,”  pi.  9,-bika  2. ;
xaM-hai-iu  1.  “woman,”  pi.  a-hai-

tu  2.  (note  at  end  of  § 494)  ;
mu-AasAs  1.  “wife”  (note  at  end
of  § 494);

nm-lumi  (Bayeiye  mo-rume,
§486)  1.  “man,”  pi.  a,-lumi  2.;
taa-biri  1.  “ herdsman,”  pi.  a-
biri  2.  ;

mXL-lambi  1.  “ cook,”  pi.  a-lambi

2. ;

voxL-kwa  1 . “ inhabitant ;”
mo-wa  1.  “ son,  child,”  pi.  a-na
2.  (p.  209) ;

1.  “ Francis,”  pi.  Shi-fula

10.;

ngana  1.  “master,”  pi.  sihi-ngana

10.;

mu-5Ai  3.  “piece  of  wood,  stick,”
pi.  rai-sM  4.  (§  428)  ;
XDXL-sMma  (Otyiherero  o-mu-
*'ma“  heart,”  § 494)  3.  “will,
wish ;”

vaxL-longa  3.  “word,”  pi.  mi-
longa  4. ;

mu-^wa  3.  “a  certain  kind  of
fi’uit ;”


0-xi-e.ulu  or  eulu*  (Otyiherei’6  e-
yuru,  § 494)  5.  “ heaven,”  pi.
o-xa4i~ulu  6. ;

o-xt-shina  or  shina^  (Kisambala
zina,  § 484)  5.  “ name,”  pi.  o-
xasb-sMna  6. ;

xi-embe  or  embe  5.  “pigeon,”  pi.
Tna,-embe  6. ;

nbataf  5.  “house,”  pi.  msL-bata  6. ;

nbubaf  5.  “ whirlpool,”  pi.  ma-
buba  6. ;

nbombelo  5.  “flattery,”  pi.  ma-
nbombelo  6.  (ku  -nbomba  15.
“to  flatter,”  bXL-nbombela  15.
“ to  pet,  to  be  kind  ”)  ;

yala  5.  “ man,  male,”  pi.  xaeL-yala

6.;

soshi  (Otyiherero  e-hoB’e,  Kinika
tsosi,  § 482)  5.  “ tear  (lagrima),”
pi.  ma-soshi  (Otyiherero  o-
ma-Ao&’e)  6. ;

sote  5.  “ fi'Og,”  pi.  xasL-sote  6. ;

Juma  5.  “notice,”  pi.  lasL-fuma  6.;

xi-nongwenna  5.  “ chameleon ;”

xi-zulo  (Otyihererd  e-uru,  § 494)
5.  “ nose ;”

’k.i-halakalo  7.  “work,”  pi.  1-
kalakalo  8.  (^o-'hvL-hala-kala  15.
“ to  work,”  from  o-ku-AdZa  15.
“to  be,”  § 208)  ;


* I had  first  believed  the  e in  this  form  eulu  to  be  a contraction  of  the
5th  prefix,  with  or  without  the  article, — like  the  e-  which  occurs  in
Otyiherero,  Sindonga,  and  Nano.  (§  491.)  But  it  is  now  clear  to  me  that
the  e of  £ulu  belongs  to  the  stem  of  the  noun,  and  corresponds  to  the
Otyiherero  y-.  And,  as  far  as  our  examples  go,  the  existence  of  e-  as  a
form  of  the  5th  prefix  in  Angola  is  not  proved.

f The  forms  nshina,  nbata,  and  nhuba  have  as  yet  been  found  only  in
Dias’  “Arte.”  They  may  either  he  misprints  for  vx-shina,  vx-bata,
and  v\-buba,  or  the  n in  them  may  be  the  first  consonant  of  the  stem,
before  which  the  derivative  prefix  has  fallen  away.  It  is,  at  all  events,
unlikely  that  the  5th  prefix  in  Angola  should  (as  in  Makua)  have  adopted
a nasal  form.


223


Angola  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


iLi-tushi  7.  “ debt,”  pi.  i-tushi  8. ;
kl-i2ma  (Kongo)  7.  “thing,”  pi.

y-uma  (Kongo)  8. ;

'b.i-lwishi  7.  “river;”

'k.i-yala  7.  “ a great,  strong  man  ”
(vide  yala  5.)  ;

■a-dandu  9.  “ relative,”  pi.  shin-
dandu  10. ;

Vt-zambi  9.  “God,”  pi.  shin-
zambi  10. ;

im-Sia  (Nano  o-ra-bidya,  § 496)
9.  “ pot,”  pi.  shlm-6ta  10. ;
fuba  (§§  116  and  353)  9.  “flour,
meal,”  pi.  shi-fuba  10. ;
hanga  9.  “ parti’idge,”  pi.  shi-
hariga  10.  ;


tulo  9.  “ breast,”  pi.  eTai-tulo  10. ;

shitv.  (Nano  o-ssitu)  9.  “ flesh,”
pi.  shi  -shitu  10.  ;

lu-to  (Otyihererb  o-ra-tuo)  1 1 .
“spoon,”  pi.  ma-luto  6.  (pp.
145  and  177) ;

lu-bango  11.  “stick,”  pi.  ma,-lu-
bango  6. ;

\cA-musete  13.  “ little  box,”  pi.
XVL-musete  12. ;

u-ta  (Nano,  § 496)  14.  “bow,”
pi.  ma-u-ta  6. ;

vr-ahga  14.  “ fetish,”  pi.  ma-w-
anga  6. ;

Ku-zola  15.  “to  love.”


ee.  The  Kongo  Genus.

498.  The  Kongo  Genus  is  represented  by  two  languages,
which  exhibit  remarkable  differences  from  each  other  by
reason  of  the  widely  removed  stages  of  development  in
which  they  appear.  The  old  Kongo  language,  as  spoken
in  that  empire  two  hundred  years  ago,  shews  the  prefixes
in  forms  almost  equally  full  with  those  generally  possessed
by  the  other  Middle  Branch  languages ; while  Mpongwe,
modernised  probably  not  only  by  time,  but  situation  and
other  circumstances,  has  abbreviated  most  of  the  forms  of
the  prefixes,  usually  retaining  only  their  vowels.  Hence,
in  Mpongwe,  several  originally  distinct  prefixes  and  forms
of  concord  having  become  homophonous,  some  of  the
classes  of  nouns  have  coalesced,  and  one,  at  least,  seems
to  have  disappeared.  It  is  certain  that  the  old  Kongo
language  possesses  fifteen  of  the  sixteen  classes  of  nouns
generally  inherited  by  the  Middle  Branch  ; but  Mpongwe
appears  to  have  reduced  this  number  to  ten,  chiefly  by
processes  of  amalgamation.  As  article  in  Kongo,  we  only
meet  with  the  demonstrative  particle  o-  with  its  euphonic
modifications  ; whilst  in  Mpongwe  we  find  initial  vowels,
which  (like  the  Kafir  articles,  § 464)  appear  to  have  been


224


The  Concord.


pronouns,  originally  identical  in  form  with  the  derivative
prefixes  themselves.  In  one  case,  (that  of  a noun  of  the
6th  class)  it  appears  as
if  the  article  derived
from  the  pronoun  were
also  met  with  in  Kongo ;
but  as  this  noun  (a-
ma-Ao)  occurs  only
once,  it  is  doubtful
whether  it  may  not  be
a misprint  for

THE  KONGO  LANGUAGE.

499.  TheKongolan-
guage  shares  with  the
members  of  the  Bunda
Genus  the  use  of  the
prefixed  o-  as  a sort
of  article ; but  in
Kongo  this  o-  is  always
changed  into  an  e-  be-
fore prefixes  which  con-
tain the  vowel  ^,  such
as  the  4th  (mi-),  5th
(ri-),  7 th  (ki-),  8th
(i-),  and  10th  (zin-),

— also  when  preceding
a prefix  in  which  i was
the  vowel,  although
now  suppressed,  such
as  the  9th  (n-).  But
before  prefixes  con-
taining the  vowels  m,

0,  or  a,  the  article
0-  remains  unaltered.

With  regard  to  the
prefixes,  it  is  to  be


KONGO  PHEFIXES.


SINGDLAK.

PLURAL.

PERS

ONAL.

1.

z.

mu-,  o-mu-

m-

(-)

u-

6.

(-)

ma-,  a-ma-

3.

4.

mu-,  o-mu-
m-

mi-,  e-mi-

5.

6.

e-,  e-ri-

ma-,  o-ma-
m-

2.

e-ye-

a-

7.

8.

kl-,  e-ki-

i-,  e-i-

ke-

y-,  e-y-

9.

10.

n-‘.*,  e-n-*.’

n-V,  e-zin-\*

2.

o-n-*.*

a-n-*.*,  0-a-n-’.'

11.

12.

lu-

tu-,  o-tu-

lu-/-

tu-n-

1-

10.

u-

n-‘.’

13.

ka-

ABSTRACT.

14.

6.

U-,  o-u-
0-,  0-0-

ma-,  o-ma-

INFINITIVE.

15.

6.

ku-,  o-ku-

ma-,  o-ma-

225


Kongo  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns,

remarked  that,  excepting  the  disappearance  of  the  labial
explosive  consonant  in  the  2nd  (BA-),  8th  (PI-),  and  14th
(BU-)  prefixes,  their  forms  are  as  original  as  those  to  be
met  with  in  any  of  the  other  Middle  Branch  languages.
That  the  6th  (ma-)  prefix  corresponds  here,  in  some
cases,  as  plural  to  the  first  (mu-),  appears  to  be  an
ancient  feature  of  the  language;  for,  it  also  occurs  in
Kafir  (§  451),  Sesuto,  Sena,  and  perhaps  in  Kikamba.
Those  of  the  nouns  of  the  5th  (ri-)  and  9th  (n-)  classes
which  indicate  persons  are  frequently  treated  as  if  of
the  1st  (mu~)  class,  and  in  this  case  they  adopt  the  2nd
(a-)  prefix  as  their  plural.  (§  466.)  The  forms  with
the  article  are,  as  far  as  they  can  be  ascertained,  placed
by  the  side  of  those  without  it.


KONGO

o-mvL-ntu.  1.  “man,  person,”
pi.  o-a,-ntu  2.  “ people  ” (p.
208);

xtiM-tinu  or  ra-tinu  1.  “ king
0-m.M-hhiga  (Bayeiye  vao-via,
§ 486)  1.  “servant;”
mu-awa  1.  “ son,  child,  descend-
ant, nephew,”  pi.  ana  2.  (p.
209);

o-vaxk-lelie  1.  “boy,”  pi.  o-a.-leke
2.;

mn-ke-ntu  1.  “woman,”  pi.  a-
ke-ntu  2.  (p.  211)  ;
raa-tangi  1.  “ teacher,”  pi.  a-
tangi  2.  ;

xua-iwi  1.  “ thief,”  pi.  e^oi  2.
(§§  325  & 326)  ;

mu-bhangi  1.  “doer,  actor,”  pi.
Si-bhangi  2. ;

xavL-bhobkeri  or  m-bhobheri  1.
“ advocate ;”

ma-te-kulu  1.  “grandchild,”  pi.

A-te-kiilu  2.  ;

Npetelo  1 . “ Peter  ;"


NOUNS.

u-^o  1.  “father-in-law,  mother-
in-law,  son-in-law,  daughter-in-
law,”  pi.  a-ma-^o  or  ma-ko
6.;

o-mu-kunga  3.  “song,”  pi.  e-ml-
hunga  4. ;

o-mxL-funu  (xa-funu)  3.  “ work,”
pi.  e-tai-funu  (xa-funu)  4. ;
mu-sa^a  3.  “ ear  of  corn,”  pi.
tai-saba  4. ;

mu-n^-aa  3.  “ salt,”  pi.  ml-ngua

4. ;

mu-u)M  3.  “year,”  pi.  vai-wu

4- ;

mu-saag'M  3.  “ tribute ;”
raa-zdla  3.  “ hunger ;”
mu-awM  3.  “ manner,  mode,”  pi.
mi  -anu  4. ;

xavL-tima  (xa-tima,  Otyiherero  o-
xaa-tima^  § 494)  3.  “heart,
consciousness,”  pi.  xai-tima  4. ;
e-xi-tondo  or  e-(n)tondo  5.

“praise,”  pi.  o-xaa-to7ido  6, ;
e-ri-bhitu  and  e-hhifv  5.  “door  ;”


226


The  Concord.


e-sarikwa  5.  “beginning,”  pi.
xaa-sarihwa  6. ;

e-kesa  5.  “ soldier,”  pi.  ma-Aesa

6.;

e-bhanda  5.  “ branch,”  pi.  ma-
bkanda  6. ;

tn-esso  (Kafir  a-m-eXte)  6.
“eyes”  (§  327);

e-sse  S.  & 1.  “father,”  pi.  ma-sse
6.  & 2.  (Kafir  u-yise  1.  “ his  or
then’  father,”  pi.  o-yise  2.)  ;
e-yehala  5.  “ human  being,”  pi.  a-
Jiala  2. ;

e-meme  (Kakongo  \i-meme)  5.

“ sheep  ” (Nano  o-meme  9.)  ;
e-'ki-lumbu  7.  “ day,”  pi.  e-i-
lumbu  8. ;

e-\a.-hmia  7.  “ debt,”  pi.  e-i-
buma  8. ;

e-ki  -(w)uma  (Angola  ki-wma)  7.
“ thing,”  pi.  e-j-uma  (Angola
y-uma)  8. ;

kl-/M  7.  “ custom,”  pi.  i-fu  8. ;
b.i-nkete  7.  “ a mechanic,”  pi.  1-
nkete  8. ;

h.i-sunga  7.  “memory,”  pi.  J-
sunga  8. ;

b.e-ndika  7.  “obstacle,”  pi.  i-
ndika  8. ;

'ki-bhenzo  7.  “ brightness,”  pi.
i-bhenzo  8. ;

ki-nbungu  7.  “ hyena  ” (Otyi-
hererd  o-m-bungu  9.)  ;
ki-tanga  7.  “ teacher  ;”
k\-taiigilu  7.  “ manner  of  teach-
ing, counting,  reading
ki.-rilu  7.  “ lamentation
kl-ririlu  7.  “manner  of  momm-
ing;”

ki-bhangua  7.  “ a thing  done


ki-bhanga  7.  “ doer,”  pi.  l-bhanga

8.;

ki-zitisua  7.  “ a beloved  object
ki-zitisa  7.  “ a lover,”  pi.  i-ziiisa
8.  ;*

ki-ta  7.  “ one  who  goes  home,”
pi.  i-ta  8.  ;*

ki-mu-ntu-mu-ntu  7.  “ a little
man  ” (§  430)  ;

ki-leke-leke  7.  “ a little  boy  ”
(§  430)  ;

ki  -mu-ana-mu-ana  7.  “ a little
child”  (ki-mu-ana-mu-ana  ki-
e-meme  “ a little  child  of  a
sheep,”  i.e.  “ a little  lamb  ”),  pi.
y -ana-ana  8.  (§  430)  ;
k\-tumbu  7.  “correction;”
ki-hula  7.  “ friendship  ;”
ki-sonekelo  7.  “ manner  of  writ-
ing ;”

ki-tarilu  7.  “manner  of  laughing;’’
e-n-bongo  9.  “ seed,  fruit,”  pi.  e-
^in-bongo  10. ;

n-bhele 9.  “knife,”  pi.  e-z,ta-bhele

10.;

n-wula  (§  118)  9.  “rain,”  pi.  e-
xin-wula  10. ;
e-n-tazi  9.  “ horn-,  sun  ;”
tt-zo  (Bayeiye  ix-ishu,  § 486)  9.
“ house,”  pi.  n-zo  (Angola
shin-2o)  10. ;
xi-za  9.  “ world ;”
u-pobho  9.  “language,”  pi.  n-
pobho  10.  (ku-bhobha  15.  “to
speak,”  § 355)  ;

TL-dogi  9.  “ teachei',”  pi.  n-dongi
10.  (§  354)  ;

■a-dinga  9.  “ voice,”  pi.  n-dtnga

10.;

jx-butete  9.  “star,”  pi.  n-butete  10. ;


Vetralha  (p.  75)  gives  as  additional  plurals  of  these  nouns  (ki-zitisa
7.  and  ki-ta  7.)  the  forms  it-mi-nzitisa  or  a-inzitisa,  and  n-minta  or  a-
dnta,  which  evidently  belong  to  the  2nd  (a-)  class.


227


Kongo  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


n-huhu  or  n-hunbu  9.  “ time
(German  mal)”  pi  li-kuhu  or
n-kunbu  10.  ;

n-gonde  (Balojazl  ix-gonde,  Ba-
maponda  gonde  “moon”)  9.
“ month,”  pi.  n-gonde  10. ;
n-kosi  (perhaps  = Kafir  i-n-hosi
Setshuana  hyosi,  Tekeza  hose
“ chief”)  9.  “ lion ;”
n-banza (Angola  n-bata  “house”)

9.  “ town

n-susu  (Bayeiyen-koku,  § 486)  9.

“ fowl,”  pi.  n-susu  10. ;
n-pangi  9.  “brother,”  pi.  n-pangi

10.  (§  185);

n-zari  9.  “relation,”  pi.  n-zari
10.  or  n-n-zari  2. ;
o-n-fumu  9.  “ lord,  master,”  pi.

n-fumu  10.  and  o-n-n-fumu  2. ;
\n-tumu  11.  “prescription,”  pi.

tn-tumu  or  o-tn-tumu  12. ;
In-azimu  11.  “splendour,”  pi.
tn-azimu  12.  ;

In-langanime  11.  “obstinacy,”
pi.  tvi-nanganime  12. ;

1u-i7m  11.  “fervour,”  pi.  tu-z7w

12.;

lu-ina  11.  “perspiration,"  pi.  tu-
ina  12.  ;

n-ssolo  11.  “choice,”  pi.  tn-ssolo

12.;

In-zolo  11.  “desire,  wish,”  pi.
tn-zolo  12. ;

\n-tangu  11.  “ computation  ;”
In-fumu  11.  “ chapter  ;”
lu-zaisa  11.  “ news  ;”

\-oko  11.  “ act  of  diying;”
\-ondeko  11.  “ act  of  wetting  ;”


\n-sangu  11.  “ tribute  ;”

In-tumbu  11.  “ correction  ;”
\n-akirilu  11.  “support;”
In-kanu  11.  “determination;”
\n-fuku  11.  “ten  thousand,”  pi.
n-fuku  10. ;

\n-bhebhe  11.  “hundred  thou-
sand,” pi.  n-pebke  10. ;
tn-bhia  or  tu-5ia  12.  “ fire  and
fires ;”

tu-fe  12.  “ sleep  ;”
ka-ti-a-nzi  13.  “middle,  centre;”
ka-sas?7a  13.  “height;”
o-n-lungu  14.  “ship,”  pi.  o-ma-
lungu  6. ;

n-zitu  or  o-zitu  14.  “ honour ;”
O-nga  or  o-o-nga  14.  “ fear  ;”
n-ntu  (Kafir  u-bu-wfe  § 412,
Otyiherero  o-n-ndu)  14.  “hu-
manity ;”

n-ingi  (Zulu  u-bu-wing-i)  14.

“ multitude ;”
n-ndima  14.  “badness;”
n-ita  14.  “war”  (vide  Nanou-ta
14.  “ bow,”  p.  220)  ;
ku-tM  15.  “ ear,”  pi.  ma-ta  6.
(§  434,  note)  ;

o-ku-ria  (Kafir  u-ku-fea)  15..
“ food ;”

^n-lenda  15.  “power;”
^n-soneka  or  ^n-zoneka  15.
“ writing ;”

'k.VL-tanga  15.  “reading,  lesson;”
'kxL-angalala  15.  “joyfulness;”
\Ln-nunkua  (Kafir  u-ku-nwAwa)
“ prophecy,  the  being  smelt
out ;”

'^n-bhinga  15.  “service.”


THE  MPONGWE  LANGUAGE.

500.  In  their  present  form,  the  derivative  prefixes  of
the  nouns  in  the  Mpongwe  language  consist  of  a vowel,
which  is  rarely  preceded,  although  sometimes  followed,  by  a


228


The  Concord,


consonant.  These  vowels  seem  to  have  been  articles,
rather  than  original  derivative  prefixes.  The  derivative
prefixes  themselves  appear  to  have  been  so  contracted  with
their  articles  that  they  have  either  wholly  disappeared,  or
retained  their  consonant  only.  It  can  hardly  be  sup-
posed that  the  initial  vowels  of  the  Mpongwe  prefixes  can
have  descended  from  the  article  o-  which  we  find  in  the
Kongo  language ; for,  in  that  case  this  o-  must  have
entirely  assimilated  itself  to  the  vowel  of  each  prefix  in
Mpongwe, — changing  into  an  a before  prefixes  containing
this  vowel  (such  as  the  6th),  &c.  It  is  far  more  probable
that  we  meet  here  with  remnants  of  the  old  B^ntu  article
derived  from  pronominal  elements  originally  identical
with  the  prefixes, — that  article  which  we  find  also  in
Kafir,  &c.  (§  464.)  As  a third  explanation,  we  would
suggest  that  forms  of  the  prefixes  such  as  am-  (6.)  and
OW-  (14.)  may  have  been  mere  transpositions  of  MA-
and  WO-;  but,  however  this  may  be,  the  present
forms  have  now  no  trace  of  the  meaning  of  an  article  in
themselves,  and  have  practically  to  be  looked  upon  entirely
in  the  light  of  derivative  prefixes ; and  have,  therefore,
been  noted  as  such.

501.  By  this  mutilation  of  the  forms  of  the  prefixes,
those  of  the  11th,  14th,  and  15th  classes  have  become
identical  with  that  of  the  3rd  (o-)  class;  and  as  the  other
forms  of  concord  of  these  classes  appear  also  to  have
assimilated,  we  can  now  only  discern  by  the  different
plural  prefixes  that  a noun  belonged  originally  to  the  11th,
14th,  or  15th  class, — instead  of  to  the  3rd  (0-)  class.  Thus
in  Mpongwe  the  11th,  14th,  and  15th  classes  appear  to
have  been  incorporated  into  the  3rd  (0-)  class,  and  to  have
practically  ceased  to  exist.  It  is,  therefore  only  for
purposes  of  comparison  that  we  have  assigned  to  them
separate  places  here.  It  is  remarkable  that  whilst  the  k
of  the  7th  class  has  become  Z (and  not  S,  as  in  the
corresponding  Kafir  prefix),  the  10th  prefix  has  a form
sin-  corresponding  to  the  Kafir  zin- ; so  that  s and  z seem


Mpongwe  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


229


MPONGWE  NOUNS.


to  have  reversed  their  respective  positions  in  these  two
languages.  (§  385.)  The  strengthened  form  of  the  initial
consonant  of  the  stem  (indicated  by  the  mark  *.• ) occurs  in
Mpongwe  after  the  prefixes  of  the  9th  (n-)  and  10th  (sin-)
classes,  and  also  after  that  of
the  6th  (am-)  class,  when  the
latter  is  placed  in  its  full  form
before  a labial  fricative.  (§§360
& 361.)  The  formation  of
abstract  nouns  of  the  10th
(sin-)  class  in  this  language
also  deserves  notice.


MPONGWB  PREFIXES.


SINGULAR.

PLURAL.

PERS

ONAL.

1.

2.

o-

a-

om-

(-)

3.

4.

o-

i-

om-

In-

5.

6.

1-

a-

am-

7.

8.

ez-

y-

e-

(-)

1-

9.

10.

n-  *.•

In-  •.•,  sin-  *.•

m-  *.•

im-

(-)  •••

i-  si-

3.  (11.)

10.

o-

1-  *.•,  shl-

3.  (14.  01-15.)

6.

o-

a-

ow-

am-

o-nomi  (Bayeiye  tao-rwme,
§486)  1.  “man,”  pi.  a-nomi
2.;

o-nw~ana  1.  “child,”  pi.  a,-nw-
ana  2.  (p.  209)  ;
oxu-a-nto  1.  “woman,”  pi.
SL-nto  2,  (note  at  end  of
§ 494)  ;

O-nw-a-nto  1.  “ girl ;”
o-ffia  1.  “person,”  pi.  et,-nlaga
2.;

o-noki  1.  “ liar

o-lavi  3.  “ river,”  pi.  i-l8.vi  4. ;
o-londa  3.  “bud,  nut,”  pi.
i-londa  4. ;

o-tondo  3.  “basket,”  pi.  i-tondo
4. ;

o-rema  (Otyiherero  o-mu-
tima,  § 494)  3.  “ heart,”  pi.
i-rema  4. ;

o-ronginu  3.  “ grave,”  pi.
i-ronginu  4. ;

o-gweli  (Otyiherero  o-mu-
eS’e,  § 494)  3.  “ moon  ;”
o-lumhu  (Kafir  u-m.-lomo,
§ 439  note)  3.  “ lip,”  pi.  in-
lurribu  4. ;

O-gwera  3.  “ night,”  pi.  i-
gwera  4. ;

om-ewZo  (Otyiherero  o-mu-
nue,  § 494)  3.  “ finger ;”

0- ramba  3.  “root,”  pi.  i-
ramba  4. ;

1- ddmbe  5-  “ sheep,”  pi.  a-
ddmbe  6. ;

i-z8ge  5.  “ duck,”  pi.  a,-zSge
6.;

H 1


Bleek\  S.  Afr,  Comp.  Qrammav.


230


The  Concord.


i-vanga  5.  “ law,”  pi.  a,tu-panga

6.;

i-vava  5.  “wing,”  pi.  am-pava
6.  (§  360)  ;

i-vare  5.  “ branch,”  pi.  am-pare

6.;

l-wugu  5.  “ cheek,”  pi.  am-bvgu

6.;

i-niya  5.  “ eye,”  pi.  a-ntyB.  6.
(§  327)  ;

l-(?o  (§  481,  note)  5.  “stone,”  pi.
a-do  6. ;

l-nd  5,  “tooth,”  pi.  a-nS  6.
(§  326)  ;

l-g8vi  5.  “ war,”  pi.  a-gSvi  6. ;
i-gamba  5.  “ word,”  pi.  a-gamha
6.  (§  366)  ;
a-ningo  6.  “ water ;”
a-lugu  6.  “ rum
a-gali  6.  “ oil

ex-ango  7.  “book,”  pi.  y-ango

8.;

ex-a  7.  “ thing,”  pi.  y-a  8. ;
ex-Bma  7.  “ thing,”  pi.  y-'hma  8. ;
ex-^mbMalB  7.  “ broom,”  pi.  y-
Smb&lBlS  8. ;

e-gar  a 7-  “ chest,  box,”  pi.  gara

8.;

e-rere  7.  “ tree,”  pi.  rere  8.
(Dikele  dsh-eh'  13.,  pi.  bl-eZe
8.,  § 507);


e-rem  7.  “ axe ;”
e-wondsho  7.  “head,”  pi.  tvondsho
8.;

e-beikei  7.  “babe,  infant,”  pi.
keikei  8. ;

e-g&mba  7.  “allegory,  parable,”
pi.  g&mba  8. ;

e-gombe  7.  “ time,”  pi.  gombe  8. ;
e-keva  7.  “ wave,”  pi.  i-keva  8. ;
e-pa  7.  “ bone,”  pi.  pa  8. ;
e-vindi  7.  “ cloud,”  pi.  vindi  8. ;
n-yare  or  a-yari  9.  “ cow,  bull-
ock, ox,”  pi.  ia-yare  or  sln-
yare  10.  (§  226,  note)  ;
swaka  9.  “ knife,”  pi.  i-swaka  or
ai-swaka  10. ;

tondo  9.  “ basket,”  pi.  i-tondo  or
a\-tondo  10.;

va-boni  (Kafir-  \-va-buzi,  Sesuto
pulii,  SeXlapi  puri*  Tekeza
enx-bute,  Inhambane  buti,  Sofala
budshi,  Tette,  Quellimane,
Kihiau,  Kinika,  and  Kisudheli
ta-buzi,  Makuai-pwriori-SMm,
Kikamba  la-bui,  Dikele  am-
boli,  Benga  and  Dualla  xa-bodi,
Isubu  va-bori)  9.  “ goat,”  pi.
im.-boni  10.  (Tumale  yXmbute
“ goats  ”) ;

m-Soa  (§§  235  & 277)  9.  “dog,”
pi.  lm-5na  10. ;


* Hence  the  word  for  “ goat,”  used  by  the  IKorana,  Namaqua,  and
Bushmen:  viz.  IKora  birii-lb  (m.  s.)  of  Lichtenstein,  or  bri  (bree)  of
Burchell, — Nama  bri-\  (c.  s.)  and  bri-H  (f.  s.)  of  Le  Vaillant,

(f.  p.)  andpZi-ro-1  (c.  s.  of  diminutive)  of  Schmelen,  biri-ro-e  (c.  s.  obj.
of  diminutive)  of  Knudsen,  piVi-p  (m.  s.)  and  piri-r«-\  (e.  s.  of  dimin.)
of  Tindall,  (m.  s.)  and  b^i-ro-\  (c.  s.  of  dim.)  of  Kronlein, —

Bushman  piri  (Lichtenstein),  bri  or  bli  (own  observation).  It  is  prob-
able that  these  nations  (the  Hottentots  and  Bushmen)  became  first  ac-
quainted with  goats  by  means  of  the  Western  Betshuana,  from  whom  they
seem  to  have  borrowed  the  name,  and  whom  they  call  the  “goat  people,”
Hri-qu-a  or  Brii-'h'w-ah  (m.  pi.  obj., Lichtenstein)  and  Ptn'-ltii  (m.  pi.,
Tindall).  This  term  has  now,  however,  a meaning  so  extended  as  to
indicate  not  only  the  Betshuana  but  also  the  kindred  Kafir  tribes.


231


Mpongwe  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


m-pSnlS  9.  “path,  road,”  pi.  Im-
pSnlH  10. ;

xa-bora  9.  “ place,”  pi.  itn-bora
10.;

rx-ago  9.  “house,”  pi. in-ago  10.;
n-kala  9.  “ town,  village,”  pi.  In-
kala  10. ;

n-tySni  (Kafir  i-n-xloni,  Otyihe-
rer6  o-honi,  p.  207)  9.  “ shame ;”
n-ySni  (Bayeiye  i-n-yewe,  p.  195)

9.  “ bird,”  pi.  lu-ySni  10. ;
n-tyina  9.  “ blood  ;”

n-gowa  9.  “ hog,”  pi.  in-goa  10. ;
rx-tyozyo  9.  “ foot,”  pi.  In-tyozyo

10. ;

n-dego  9.  “friend,”  pi.  ivx-dego

10.;

n-omba  9.  “ mountain,  hill,”  pi.
in-omba  10. ;

shape  9.  “ key,”  pi.  i-shape  10. ;


i-numba  10.  “ hatred  ;”
i-tonda  10.  “love”  {ronda  “love
thou,”  §§  365—368)  ;
i-bcnda  10.  “ wrath;”
o-wowa  3.  (11.)  “ feather,”  pi.  i-
bowa  1 0. ;

o-rue  11.  “hail*,”  pi.  i-iue  or  1-
lui  (or  sYki-tue)  10. ;
o-g&  3.  (14.)  “ arm,”  pi.  a-gS.  6.;
OW-atanga  3.  (14.)  “ ship,”  pi.
axa-atanga  6. ;

ow-aro  3.  (Dikele  \ii-ali  14.,
§ 507)  “ canoe,”  pi.  am-aro  6. ;
o-roi  3.  (15.)  “ear,”  pi.  a-roi  6.
(§  434,  note) ;

o-zyo  3.  (Kikamba  vi-dio  14.,
§ 481)  “ face,”  pi.  a,-zyo  6. ;
o-golu  3.  (Kikamba  ku-u  15.)
“ leg,”  pi.  a,-golu  (Kikamba
ma-u)  6.


C.  IN  THE  NOKTH-WESTEEN  BRANCH.

502.  The  derivative  prefixes  of  the  nouns  in  the
languages  of  the  North-western  Branch  exhibit  a strong
preference  for  the  letter  b.  This  is  shown,  not  only  as
in  Kafir  and  Setshuana,  by  the  retention  of  the  letter  in
those  prefixes  which  originally  possessed  it,*  but  also  by
a tendency  to  convert  other  labials  into  this  media.
In  the  languages  of  the  North-western  Branch  generally,
the  consonant  of  the  8th  prefix  (PI-)  has  been  thus  trans-
formed. But  in  one  of  these  languages  (that  of  Fernando
Po),  the  labial  nasal  of  the  prefixes  of  the  1st  (MU-),
3rd  (MU-),  4th  (MI-),  and  6th  (MA-)  classes  has  also
been  changed  into  the  labial  media  b.  On  the  other  hand,
the  letter  k is  no  longer  met  with  in  the  prefixes  of  the
nouns  which  are  used  in  these  languages.  It  has  either
been  entirely  dropped,  or  it  appears  in  the  form  of  some
other  letter, — for  inslance,as  dsh  in  the  13th  Dikele  prefix,


* Viz.  the  2nd  (btl')  and  14th  (Imi-).


232


The  Concord.


s in  the  7th  Fernandian  prefix,  and  v in  the  same  7th
prefix  in  Benga  and  Dikele.

503.  The  recognition  of  the  7 th  and  13th  prefixes  in
these  languages  was  difficult,  especially  as  here  the  7th
prefix  has  generally  the  12th,  and  the  13th  the  8th,  as
corresponding  plural ; whilst  in  all  other  known  South
African  B^ntu  languages  the  8th  prefix  always  forms  the
plural  of  the  7th,  and  the  12th  (in  those  languages  which
possess  it)  is  plural  to  the  11th  or  13th.  Nor  are  the
forms  in  which  these  prefixes  more  usually  occur,  such  as
to  render  their  identification  an  easy  task.  The  singular-
prefix  e-  or  y-,  to  which,  in  most  of  these  languages,  the
8th  (be-)  prefix  corresponds  as  plural,  would  naturally
suggest  an  identification  with  the  7th  prefix  (as  usually
found  in  correspondence  with  the  8th),  especially  as  we
have  seen  in  Mpongwe  that  the  form  of  the  7th  prefix
has  dwindled  to  e-.  However,  the  very  same  nouns
which  in  the  other  languages  of  the  North-western
Branch  possess  this  e-  prefix,  begin,  in  Dikele,  with  a-,
which  can  but  be  identified  with  the  13th  (KA-)  prefix
of  the  Middle  Branch  languages.  Therefore  the  e-  of
the  other  languages  of  the  North-western  Branch  is
evidently  to  be  ascribed  to  a darkening  of  the  vowel  of
the  13th  prefix.  On  the  other  hand,  I was  long  doubtful
as  to  which  class  to  assign  a prefix  which  generally  cor-
responds as  singular  to  the  12th  (lo-).  The  form  of  this
prefix  is  i-  in  Isubu  and  Dualla,  i-  and  vi-  in  Benga,  and
vi- in  Dikele.  However,  the  Fernandian  form  of  this
prefix  (which  is  si-  or  s-)  renders  it  probable  that  the
7th  prefix  is  to  be  discovered  here.  This  7th  prefix  (in
Fernandian  certainly,  and  probably  also  in  some  other
languages  of  the  North-western  Branch)  possesses  the
power  of  forming  diminutives, — a feature  which  we  also
occasionally  meet  with  among  the  other  South  African
Bantu  languages.  (§  430.)

504.  The  various  correspondences  of  the  singular  and
plural  prefixes  in  the  languages  of  the  North-western


North-  Western  Branch  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.  233

Branch  (which  languages,  in  this  respect,  differ  from
each  other,  as  well  as  from  those  of  the  Middle  and  South-
eastern Branches)  seem  to  shew  that  the  original  range  of
correspondence  of  many  of  the  plural  prefixes  was  a far
wider  one  than  would  have  been  concluded  from  a com-
parison of  the  more  Southern  B^ntu  languages  only.
Yet,  even  in  the  latter,  we  meet  with  occasional  traces  of
some  unusual  methods  of  correspondence  which  are  only
found  to  occur  with  regularity  in  the  North-western
Branch.  Thus,  in  Kisambala  (§  484)  we  find  the  8th  (vi-)
prefix  corresponding  as  plural  to  the  13th  (ka-),  just  as  it
does  in  the  languages  of  the  North-western  Branch, —
and  it  appears  hardly  probable  now,  that  this  can  be
referred  (as  I formerly  suggested)  to  a confusion  of  the
13th  (ka-)  prefix  with  the  7th  (ki-).  Similarly,  in  the
languages  of  the  North-western  Branch,*  the  frequent
occurrence  of  the  4th  (mi-)  prefix  as  plural  to  the  14th
(bo-)  renders  it  highly  probable  that  the  similar  case  in
Kinika  is  to  be  explained  as  a remnant  of  an  old  mode
of  correspondence  which  has  become  obsolete  in  the  other
known  members  of  the  Middle  Branch.

505.  As  to  the  forms  of  the  prefixes,  besides  the  pref-
erence for  the  b,  and  the  avoidance  of  the  k sound,  the
prefixes  of  the  North-western  Branch  generally  retain  the
labial  nasal  m,  excepting  in  the  case  of  the  Fernandian
language.  In  the  5th  prefix,  instead  of  I or  r,  we
usually  find  the  dental  media  d.  On  the  other  hand,
the  dental  tenuis  of  the  12th  prefix  (TU-)  has  been
converted  into  the  liquid  / in  all  the  North-western  Branch
languages,  excepting  the  Fernandian ; and  the  same  liquid
has  also  been  retained  as  the  consonant  of  the  11th
prefix.

506.  We  have  admitted  that  some  of  the  correspond-
ences between  singular  and  plural  prefixes  which  are
peculiar  to  the  North-western  Branch,  or  only  shared  by


* In  Bcnga,  Dualla,  and  Isuhu.


234


The  Concord.


one  or  two  other  Bantu  languages,  are  probably  not
innovations, — but  retentions  from  a former  period,  when,
as  yet,  many  of  the  plural  prefixes  had  not  regularly
attached  themselves  to  certain  singular  forms.  We  also,
on  one  or  more  occasions,  meet  with  a prefixual  form
which  appears  to  be  more  original  than  those  found  in
the  other  two  Branches  of  the  B^ntu  languages.  But  all
the  peculiarities  which  are  distinctive  of  the  North-
western Branch  do  not  admit  of  this  explanation.  The
forms  of  some  of  the  prefixes  have  been  so  strongly  con-
tracted as  almost  to  defy  identification.  Thus  prefixes  may
have  been  confounded  with  each  other,  and  correspondences
differing  from  the  original  ones  may  have  arisen  through  the
force  of  analogy.  At  the  same  time,  the  concord  appears
to  be  frequently  employed  in  the  North-western  languages
rather  as  an  alliterative  process,  than  in  its  original  gram-
matical sense,  or  as  a division  of  the  nouns  into  classes.
The  incompleteness  of  our  materials  for  a knowledge  of
these  languages  renders  it  probable  that  the  rules  based
upon  them  will  have  to  be  altered  or  modified  in  some  of
their  details.

DIKELE.

507.  Di-AeZe  5.  is  spoken  by  the  2.,  sing.  N-AeZe

(Mpongwe  0-hele)  1.  In  this  language,  as  in  Kafir,  the
forms  of  the  1st  and  3rd  prefixes  are  usually  contracted  to
a mere  consonant.  Dikele,  however,  proceeds  a step
farther  than  Kafir,  and  adapts  this  m-  to  the  nature  of  the
initial  consonant  of  the  stem.  Thus  the  m-  frequently
becomes  an  n-,  or  in  some  cases  falls  off  entirely.  The
most  usual  forms  of  the  1st  and  3rd  prefixes  are,  therefore,
identical  with  those  of  the  9th,  and  these  three  classes  are
frequently  only  to  be  distinguished  by  means  of  the  forms
of  concord  which  refer  to  them.  Many  nouns  which
indicate  animals,  parts  of  the  body,  &c.,  have  evidently
been  transferred  from  the  9th  (or  some  other)  class  to  the
1st,  and  now  have  plurals  of  the  2nd  (ba-)  class.  In
cases  where  the  vowel  of  the  1st  and  3rd  classes  is  retained,


235


Dihele  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


the  M sound  is  usually  converted
into  i,  which  renders  these
prefixes  homophonous  with  the
4th  (mi-).  In  one  instance
{gwana  3.  “mouth”)  it  almost
seems  as  if  the  3rd  prefix  had  in
Dikele  the  unusual  form  gW-,
but  a comparison  of  Mpongwe
shews  that  the  gw  here  is  part
of  the  stem,  although  it  falls
off  before  the  plural  prefix  mi-.
It  is  remarkable  that  the  vowel
u of  the  11th  and  12th  prefixes
has  been  changed  into  a in
Dik  ele.  This  renders  it  a little
doubtful  whether  the  prefix  a-
or  dsll-  is  really  identical  with
the  ka-  of  the  Middle  Branch,
and  to  be  assigned  to  the  13  th
class.  It  is  possible  that  the
letter  a,  as  given  by  the  miss-
ionaries, may  be  more  of  an
indistinct  short  sound,  derived
from  any  other  original  vowel.
Very  curious,  if  true,  is  the  case
of  a noun  which  beginning  with
m-  in  the  singular,  is  said  to
belong  to  the  6th  class,  and
forms  its  plural  with  the  4th
prefix  mi-.  The  i of  the  5 th
(di-)  prefix  is  retained  in
Dikele  before  a,  a,  o,  and  e, —
but  is  suppressed  before  i and
u;  whilst  the  a of  the  6 th  prefix
(ma-)  always  disappears  when
the  stem  before  which  it  is
placed  begins  with  a vowel.


DXK.SIiZ:  PREFIXES.


SINGULAR.

PLURAL.

1.

z.

(— ),  mu-

ba-,  bo-

n-

m-

ml-

b-

3.

4.

(— ),  gw-

mi-

ml-

m-

6.

n-

ma-

5.

6.

dl-

ma-

d-

m-

6.

4.

m-

ml-

7.

12.

vl-

la-

V-

1-

4.

ml-

9.

6.  (+  9.)

n-

ma-n-

m-

ma-m-

(-)

ma-

11.

6.

la-

ma-

S’a-

10.

(-)

13.

8.

dsb-,  a-

bl-

6.

ma-

1-1.

6.

bi-

ma-,  rua,-bi-

b-

m-

bo-

jna-bo-

236


The  Concord.


DIKELE

1.  “man,  person,”  pi. bo-
tyi  2.  (p.  208)  ;

mi-ana  or  m-ana  1.  “ child,”  pi.

b-ana  2.  (p.  209)  ;
rn.-8.na  (Mpongwe  m-SnlS)  1.

“ mullet,”  pi.  b-8n8  2. ;
tx-kay8  1.  “ a bachelor,”  pi.  ba-
h8^’S  2. ;

n-loh  (Mpongwe  o-nlogi)  1.
“ builder,”  pi.  ba-fcn  2. ;

(Mpongwe  o-yonzsi)  1.
“ killer,”  pi.  ba-dsho^’i  2. ;
koshe  1.  “parrot,”  pi.  ba-^os^e
2.  (Mpongwe  n-gozyo,  Benga
koho  9.) ;

gwale  1.  “ ear,”  pi.  bSL-gwale  2. ;
lema  (Otyiherero  o-m.vi-tima,
§ 494)  3.  “heart,”  pi.  ml  -lema  4. ;
mbeha  3.  “ hill,”  pi.  ml  -mbeka  4.;
nkoma  3.  “ring,”  pi.  xni-nkoma4.  ;
Si’ali  or  n-B'ali  3.  “ law,”  pi.  ml-
B’ali  4. ;

gwana  (Mpongwe  o-gwand)  3.

“ mouth,”  pi.  ml-ana  4. ;
m-ai  3.  “ belly,  womb,”  pi.  ml-
Si  4. ;

m-ulie  3.  “ head,”  pi.  tai-ulie  4. ;
m-nn  3.  “ a corpse,”  pi.  ml-Sn  4. ;
mi-afta  3.  “ a castrated  animal,”
pi.  mi-aAa  4. ;

mi-aya  3.  “ white  ant,”  pi.  mi-
atja  4. ;

voA-ahyd  3.  “ fur,  hair  of  the  body,”
pi.  tai-dhyd  4. ;

mi-enye  3. “lunatic,”  pi.  vai-ehye

4.;

rak.i-endshi  3.  “messenger,”  pi.
va.i.-endshi  4. ;

mi-e6e  3.  “ a swelling,”  pi.  mi-
ebe  4. ;

tn-ieli  3.  “ moonlight,”  pi.  mi-e/t
4.  (p.  204,  note)  ;


NOUNS.

m.i-elia  3.  “measure  (of  length),”
pi.  mi-elia  4. ;
ml-e.^’e  4.  “ entrails ;”
ml-nyungwa  3.  “fi’agment,”  pi.

mi-nyungwa  4. ;
m-&5  3.  “ arm,”  pi.  vaa-bo  6. ;
n-ko^’i  (Mpongwe  o-golu)  3.

“ leg,”  pi.  ma-^o3’i  6. ;
a.i-k8ki  5.  “ stone,”  pi.  Taa.-k8ki
6.;

dl-ashika  5.  “ a door,  doorway,”
pi.  xu-ashika  6. ;
dl-5^f  5.  “ nape,”  pi.  m.-8li  6. ;
di-eAi  or  Ai-eke  5.  “ law,”  pi.  m-
eki  6. 5

dl-ot  (Zulu  i-li-zwi,  Mpongwe
inyoi)  5.  “ voice,”  pi.  m-oi  6.
(Isubu  do,  Dualla  doi  pi.  ma-
doi  6.) ;

A-ishl  (Benga  A-ih8,  Dualla  and
Isubu  A-isd)  5.  “ eye,”  pi.  m-
ishi  (Benga  ia-ih8,  Dualla  and
Isubu  m-wo)  6.  (Kafir  i-li-so
5.,  &c.,  § 327)  ;
d-M  5.  “ fire,”  pi.  m-w  6. ;

A-umba  (Mpongwe  i-gumba)  5.

“ cargo,”  pi.  ra-umba  6. ;

A-ushi  5.  “a  brush,”  pi.  xa-usht  6.;
xna,-kiemba  6.  “ salt
xa-anga  (Mpongwe)  6.  “ ma-
natus,  seal,  and  seals
m.-oka  6.  “ sole  fish,”  pi.  ml-oAa
4.;

xi-nani  (Benga  t-n8ni,  Dualla
i-nun,  Isubu  i-noni,  Fernando
Po  si-nodi)  7.  “ bird,”  pi.  la-
nani  (Benga  \o-nani,  Isubu  lo-
noni,  Fernando  Po  to-nodi)  12.
(Bayeiye  i-xi-yene  9.,  § 486,  p.
195);

vi-lambe  7.  “a  trap,  snare,”  pi.
la,-lambe  12.;


Dikele  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


237


vl-ondshi  7.  “ hatchet,”  pi.  1-
ondshi  12.  (Isubu  e-ondo  13.
“ axe,”  pi.  'be-ondo  8.)  ;

v- eia  7.  “firewood,”  pi.  l-eia  12,
(Dualla  and  Isubu  wea)  ;

vi- na  7.  “ finger,”  pi.  mi-wa
(Otyiherero  o-mi-nwe,  § 494)
4- ;

n-dshali  (Mpongwe)  9.  “gun,”
pi.  ma,-n-dshali  6. ;
m-hute  (Mpongwe)  9.  “ bottle,”
pi.  msL-m-bute  6. ;
pendshe  9.  “world,  earth,  land,
woods,”  pi.  lUSL-pendshe  6. ;
skeba  9.  “ ivory,”  pi.  xaa,-s7ieba
6.;

la,-ngakS  11.  “head,”  pi.  ma-
ngdhd  6.  ;

ya-paS’a  11.  “hoof,”  pi.  nsa-
pad'a  6.  (?  Mpongwe  m-pSndu

9.,  Isubu  faki)  ;

\a,-nyui  11.  “honey-bee,”  pi.

nyui  10.  (Mpongwe  nyowe)  ;
la-wyaS’a  11.  “a  flea ;”
\a,-nddngd  11.  “the  end,”  pi.
ndxmgd  10.  and  raa-nd&igu
6.;

dsh-efi  (Benga  e-le)  13.  “ tree,”
pi.  bi-eli  (Benga  be-/e)  8.
(Mpongwe  e-rere  7.  pi.  rere  8.,
Setshuana  &e-xla-re  7.  pi.  li-
xla-re  8.,  Zulu  u-mu-ff  3.  pi.


i-ml-fj  4.  § 428  note,  Dualla
bo-eli  14.  pi.  mi-eff  4.,  Isubu
bxv-eli  14.  pi.  ma-Zi  6.)  ;
a,-vata  (Benga  e-gald)  13.  “ chest,”
pi.  bi-vata  (Benga  be-gala)  8.
(Mpongwe  e-gara  7.)  ;

SL-bobi  13.  “ hat,”  pi.  bi-bobi  8. ;
a.-shu  13.  “^day  (of  24  hours),”
pi.  bi-sA?/  8.  and  ma-s^w  6. ;
bi-a^8  (Mpongwe  o-waro,  Isubu
b-o?o)  14.  “a  canoe,”  pi.  m.-ali
(Mpongwe  axa-aro,  Isubu  m-
olo)  G.  (Benga  b'w-alu  14.  pi.

4.,  Dualla  b-glo  14.  pi.
xai-glo  4.)  ;

bo-she  (Mpongwe  o-zye,  Isubu
bo-so)  14.  “ face,”  pi.  ma-bo-
ebe  (Isubu  ma-so)  6.  (Benga
bo-lio  14.  pi.  Tsnl-o-ho  4.,
Dualla  bo-so  14.  pi.  mi-o-so

4.,  Kafir  u-bu-so  14.,  Makua
xv-it6  14.,  Kihiau  \x-ssio  14.,
Kikainba  \i-dio  14.,  Kinika  u-
sso  14.,  Kisuaheli  u-sso  11.  pi.
ni-w-sso  10.  § 483)  ;*
bi-wobi  14.  “a  piece  of  cloth,”  pi.
xaa,-wobi  6. ;

bi-ail  (Dualla  and  Isubu  bo-wg-o)
14.  “ brain,”  pi.  m-dii  6. ;
bi-shiliwe  14.  “ back -yard,”  pi.

ma-bi-shiltwe  6.  ;
b-uli  14.  “ cavern,”  pi.  m-uli  6.


THE  BENGA  I.ANGUAGE.

508.  The  Benga  language,  spoken  on  the  islands  of
Corisco  Bay,  belongs  to  a different  species  from  Dikele.
In  our  limited  specimens  of  Benga,  no  trace  of  the  11th

* This  noun  evidently  belongs  to  the  same  stem  as  <l-isAi  (=  Kafir  i-
li-«o)  5.  “ eye.”  ( Fide  p.  236  and  § .327.)  The  phiral  forms  mi-o-Ao
and  mi-o-so  4.  in  Benga  and  Dualla  are  very  suggestive,  when  com-
pared with  the  ICisuaheli  plural  ni-«-S5o  10.


238


The  Concord.


class  of  nouns  has,  as  yet,  been  discovered.  The  10th
(n-)  class  appears  to  be  in  regular  correspondence  with
the  9th  (n-).  The  Benga  language  agrees  with  Dualla  in
using  the  prefix  of  the  4th  class  (mi-)  as  plural  to  the
14th  (bo-).  One  noun  of  the  14th  class  is,  however,
irregular,  and  appears  to  possess  a plural  of  the  10th  (n-)
class.  It  is  remarkable  that  the  prefix  (mw-)  of  the  3rd

class  frequently  loses  its  conso-
nant, and  that  the  vowel  u-  then
represents  in  Benga  the  same  3rd
prefix  which  we  often  find  in
Dikele  converted  into  an  n-.
The  5 th  (di-)  and  7th  (vi-)
prefixes  frequently  lose  their
consonants,  and  become,  in  this
shorter  form,  apparently  homoph-
onous.  This  may  sometimes
have  occasioned  the  transference
of  nouns  from  one  of  these  two
classes  to  the  other.

BENGA  NOUNS.

mo-to  1.  “man,  person,”  pi.  "toa-to  2.
“ people  ” (p.  208)  ;

tavr-ana  1.  “ child,”  pi.  b-ana  2.  (p.
209);

mo-m-o  (?  = Otyiherero  o-mvt-rume-
ndu)  1.  “ man,”  pi.  ba-wi-o  2. ;
vaxv-a-dsho  1.  “ woman,”  pi.  "b-a-dyo
2.  (p.  211);

Anyambi  (Dikele  Anyamhie)  1.  “God”
(§  396);  _

vcivj-adi  (Dikele  xai-adi)  3.  “female”

(p.  211)  ;

VL-dumbu  (Dualla  and  Isubu  mo-lumbu,
§ 439  note)  3.  “mouth,”  pi.  me-
dumbu  4. ;

u-bSki  3.  “ axe,”  pi.  xae-bSM  4. ;
n-va7ida  (Dikele  n-w5««ta)  3.  “cassada,”
pi.  me-vSnda  4. ;


BSMG-A  PKEFIXES.


SINGULAR.

PLURAL.

1.  P£RS

ONAL.  2.

mo-,  (— )

ba-

mw-

b-

m-

3.

mw-

mi-

m-

me-

u-

5.

6.

di-

ma-

dy-

m-

d-

1-

7.

12.

i-

lo-

vi-

1-

V-

9,

10.

n-

n-

m-

m-

(-)

(-)

13.

8.

e-

be-

y-

bi-

1^.

bw-

mi-

b-

me-

bo-

mi-G-

bu-

10.

(-)

239


Benga  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


VL-diki  (Dikele  n-dushiki)  3.

“ pestle,”  pi.  me-diki  4. ;
jx-kwala  (Dikele  n-hwata,
Mpongwe  o-kwara)  3.  “cut-
las.s,”  pi.  me-kwala  4. ;

VL-vtitd  3.  “ body  hair,”  pi.  me-
vdt&  4. ;

Vi-namha  (Dikele  n-damba,
Mpongwe  o-lamba)  3.  “ cloth,”
pi.  me-namba  4.  ;
u-ngoko  (Dikele  n-hokwe)  3.
“ sugar-cane,”  pi.  me-ngoko  4.
(Mpongwe  i-hoko)  ;
mvr-anga  3.  “garden,”  pi.  mi-
anga  4. ;

ta-olo  3.  “ head,”  pi.  mi  olo  4. ;
i-kadu  (Dikele  Ai-handshi  = ?
Sena  and  Tette  x-ansha)  5.
“ hand,”  pi.  xo.a,-kadu  (?  Sena
TCk-ansha)  6. ;

i-tdtd.  Mpongwe  (Dikele  Ai-tata)

5.  “banana,”  pi.  xnsL-tStd  6.;
i-paki  (Mpongwe)  5.  “ cap,”  pi.

xa?L-paki  6.  (Dikele  a,-pahi
13.);

i-bdtd  5.  “ dress,”  pi-  ma-6  id  6.
(bdtd-kd,  Dualla  bqio,  “ to
dress”) ;

i-dydge  5.  “ duck,”  pi.  ta.Si-dydge
6-;

i-keng&  5,  “ razor,”  pi.  lasL-kengd

6.  (Dikele  vi  -kien  7.)  ;

l-tdi  (Isubu  i-toi)  5.  “ drop,”  pi.

mtL-tui  (Isubu  ma-toi)  6. ;
i-ngongo  (Mpougwe)  5.  “ tin,”
pi.  xaa,-ngongo  6.  (Dikele  a-
ngwengwe  13.)  ;

i-bongo  5.  “ boat,”  pi.  ma-boiigo

6. ;

i-lali  Isubu  (Dualla  i-dali)  5.
“ stone,”  pi.  uxa-lali  Isubu
(Dualla  xaa-dali)  6. ;
i-beke  5.  “shoulder,”  pi,  ma-beke
6.  (Dikele  a-behe  13.)  ;


di-<^  (Dualla  i-foi,  Nano  e-iui,
p.  218)  5.  “ear,”  pi.  ma-td
(Dualla  ma-to«)  6.  (§  434,
note)  ;

di-ke  (Dikele  di-a/«',  Mpongwe
i-ki,  Sindonga  6-yi,  p.  214)  5.
“egg,”  pi.  xaa-ke  6. ;
d-ina  (Dikele,  Dualla,  and  Isubu)

5.  “ name,”  pi.  ta-ina  (Dikele,
Dualla,  and  Isubu)  6.  (§  484,
note)  ;

dy-oba  (Dikele  di-o6a,  Otyi-
herei’6  e-yuva,  p.  205)  5.  “sun,”
pi.  vcL-oba  6. ;

dy-dmbi  (Dualla  dsb-ombe,
Isubu  dy-ombe')  5.  “ door,”  pi.
xa-ambi  (Isubu  m-ombe)  6. ;
d-id  (Dualla  and  Isubu  d-to,
Otyiherero  e-^’uko  p.  205)  5.
“ fire-place,”  pi.  m-id  (Isubu
m-to)  6.  ;

xa-iba  (Dikele,  Dualla,  and  Isubu
xaa-diba,  p.  142,  first  note)  6.
“ water

xsia-vule  (Isubu  xaa-ula,  Kafir
&-xaa-futa,  p.  142,  third  note)

6.  “ oil ;”

vaa-kdndd  (D\kQ\Qxaa-Mndsliika,
Mpongwe  a-ba)  6.  “ sap
xiaa-ku  (Dikele  ma-S’aA’,
Mpongwe  a-lugu)  6.  “rum;”
xna-kia  Isubu  (Dualla  xxxa-iya)
6 “ blood

xxi-dnyangd  6.  “ milk ;”
i-boho  7.  “place,”  pi.  lo-boko  12.;
i-kadada  7.  “pepper,”  pi.  lo-
kadada  12. ;

i-bobeli  7.  “ spider,”  pi.  lo-bobeli
12.  (Mpongwe  i-boboti  5.)  ;
•vi-aha  7.  “a  lime,”  pi.  l-aha  12.
(Dikele  dl  •loshi  5.,  Mpongwe
o-loshi  3.)  ;

vl-anga  (Mpongwe  ex-angn)  7.
“ salt,"  pi.  V-anga  12. ;


240


The  Concord,


v-itua  7.  “ candle,”  pi,  l-itua  12. ;
n-daho  (=  Bashubea  n-dobo,
Bayeiye  n-tshu  or  n-dshu,  &c.,
p.  195)  9.  “house,”  pi.  ix-dabo
10.  (Dualla  and  Isuhu  n-dabo
9.,  pi.  xaSL-n-dabo  6.)  ;
a-dshea  9.  “path,”  pi.  u-dsnea
10.  (p.  201,  note)  ;
xa-boka  Isuhu  (Dualla  xa-bod)  9.
“ town,”  pi.  xn-boTia  10.  (Dikele
xxL-boke  3.)  ;

xa-bwia  (Dikele  Dualla

and  Isuhu  xxi-bua,  Bayeiye  e-n-
fera  p.  195)  9.  “rain”  (§  118)  ;
xn-bandsha  9.  “ hamhoo,”  pi.  m-
bandsha  10.  (Dikele  a-ban-
dsJiika  13.)  ;

pavo  9.  “ knife,”  pi.  pavo  1 0. ;
e-lombo  (Dikele  a,-lombi)  13.

“ thing,”  pi.  "be-lombo  8. ;
e-lendi  (Dikele  a-lendshi)  13.
“hoat,”  pi.  he-lendi  8.
(Mpongwe  e-le7ide) ;
e-linga  (Dikele  a-linga)  13.
“dress,”  jd.  he-linga  8.
(Mpongwe  e-linga  7.)  ;
e-huka  (Dikele  a-shuka)  13.
“jug,”  pi.  he-buka  8,  (Mpongwe
Xk-tyuga  9.)  ;

e-bonga  13.  “chair,”  pi.  he-bonga

8.  ;


e-kui  (Dikele  a-kandS)  13.  “ plan-
tain,” pi.  he-kai  8.  (Mpongwe
i-kala  5.)  ;

e-pokolo  13,  “hat,”  pi.  he-pokolo
8.  (Mpongwe  e-pokolu  7.)  ;

e-dyaka  13.  “fish,”  pi.  he-dyaka

8. ;

e-na  13.  “ arm,”  pi.  be-na  8. ;

y-apa  (Dikele  dsh-a7>a)  13.  “ a
fiat  basket,”  pi.  bi-a^a  8. ;

y-uhu  13.  “a  large  family  fetish,”
pi.  8. ;

y-alu  13.  “ a hoat  of  peculiar
form,”  pi.  bi-aZw  8. ;

bw-«?M  (Dikele  bi-ah',  § 507)
14.  “canoe,”  pi.  xxii-alu  (Dualla
mi-ofo)  4. ;

\jo-ho  (Dikele  bo-sAe,  § 507)
14.  “ face,”  pi.  xxki-o-ho  (Dualla
mi-o-so)  4. ;

b-oAS  14.  “ rainy  season,”  pi.  mi-
oku  4.  ;

'hvr-anga  Dualla  (Dikele  bi-aw)
14.  “ medicine,”  pi.  xai-anga
4. ;

ho-lohi  14.  “orange,”  pi.  me-
lohi  4.  (Mpongwe  o-lasha  3.,
Dikele  &i-liasa  5.) ;

hu-ivha  14.  “ day,”  pi.  ivhi  10.
(Isuhu  and  Dualla  bu-nya  14.,
pi.  ml-wya  4.).


DUALLA  AND  JSUBU.

509.  In  Dualla  and  Isubu  we  perceive  an  irregular
correspondence  of  the  2nd  (ba-)  prefix,  which  we
occasionally  find  here  as  plural  to  the  3rd  (mo-);  and  in
each  language,  in  one  case  at  least,  the  4th  prefix
(mi-)  corresponds  as  plural  to  the  1st  (mo-).  It  is
probable  that  these  irregularities  are  in  some  way  con-
nected with  the  existence  in  these  dialects  of  personal
nouns  of  the  3rd  and  4th  classes.  It  is  clearly  shewn  by


Dualla  and  Isubu  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.  241

the  few  Kafir  nouns  of  persons  which  belong  to  the
3rd  (m-)  and  to  the  4th  (mi-)  class  that  it  is  natural  for
such  nouns  to  be  either  partly  or  wholly  treated  as
if  they  belonged  to  one  of  the  two  personal  classes.
{Vide  p.  160,  note.)  The  contest  between  gram-
matical and  logical  gender,  between  ancient  usage  and
modern  analogy,  continually  produces  similar  apparent
irregularities.

510.  It  is  a second  peculiarity  of  these  dialects  that  in
them  the  12th  (lo-)  prefix  corresponds,  in  a few  cases,  as
plural  to  the  5th  (di-).  The  5th  prefix  in  the  Bantu  lan-
guages almost  universally  has  the  6th  as  its  corresponding
plural ; the  only  exception  besides  the  present  being  that  of
one  personal  noun  in  Kongo,  which  belongs  to  the  5th  (ri-)
class,  but  forms  its  plural  with  the  2nd  prefix  (a-).  As
the  5th  prefix  in  Dualla  and  Isubu  is,  when  abbreviated,
homophonous  with  the  usual  form  of  the  7th  i-  (to  which
here  the  12th  prefix  generally  corresponds),  it  may  be  that
this  circumstance  has  led,  by  error  or  analogy,  to  the
above-mentioned  exceptional  correspondence.  The  9th
(n-)  class  in  these  dialects  has  not  only  the  10th  (n-),  but
also  the  6th  (iiia-)^  and  2nd  (ba-),  as  corresponding  plurals.
The  respective  prefix  of  each  of  the  two  latter  classes
is  placed  before  the  form  with  the  9th  (n-)  prefix.
We  notice  in  Dualla,  as  in  Benga,  that  the  4th  (mi-)
prefix  corresponds  as  plural  to  the  14th ; whilst  in  Isubu
(as  well  as  Dikele  and  Fernandian)  the  14th  class  more
usually  forms  its  plural  with  the  6th  prefix.  A few  Isubu
nouns  of  the  14th  (bo-)  class  have,  however,  plurals  of
the  4th.

511.  The  Dualla  (or  Caraeroous)  language  differs
but  slightly  from  Isubu.  In  a few  Dualla  words  we
find  the  palatalised  form  (dsh-)  of  the  5th  (di-)
prefix.  The  11th  (1-)  class  appears  to  be  distinct  from
the  5th.  The  7th  prefix  (i-),  in  a few  nouns  at  least,
has  the  8th  (bi-)  as  its  corresponding  plural,  although
the  12th  (lo-)  is  the  usual  plural  in  Dualla.  Of  this


242


The  Concord,


partial  agreement  with  the  general  rule  of  correspond-
ence of  the  7 th  and  8 th  classes  in  the  B^ntu  languages,
Dualla  and  Fernandian  alFord,  as  far  as  we  know,  the
only  instances  among  the  languages  of  the  North-western
Branch.


DUAIiIia.  FEEFIXES.


SINGULAE.

PLURAL.

PEES

ONAL.

1.

2.

mo-

ba-

mu-

b-

m-

4.

ml-

3.

4.

mo-

mi-

m-

2.

b-

5.

6.

di-,  dsh-

ma-

d-

m-

i-

12.

lo-

7.

12.

i-

lo-

8.

bi-

9.

10.

n-,  m-,  (— )

n-,  (— )

6.  (-1-  9.)
ma-w-,  ma-w?-

2.

ba-

11.

6.

1-

m-

13.

8.

e-

be-

14.

4.

bo-

mi-

b-

mi-0-

DUALLA  NOUNS.

xao-tu  (Isubu)  1.  “man,”  pi.
ba-te  (Isubu)  2.  (p.  208)  ;

mu-^u  (Isubu  ra^-ai-tu)  1.
“woman,”  pi.  ti-i-tu  (Isubu
"b-ai-tu)  2.  (pp.  210  aud  211)  ;

VOLO-kum  (Isubu  vao-komi)  1.
“slave,”  pi.  bB,-kum  (Isubu
ba.-komi)  2. ;

xao-longeri  1.  “ singer,”  pi.  ba-
longeri  2. ;

mo-abedi  1.  “ divider,”  pi.  ba-
dbedi  2. ;

xao-abuedi  1.  “ climber,”  pi.  ba-
abuedi  2. ;

tao-aledi  1.  “holder,  peace-
maker,” pi.  bdi-aledi  2. ;

vcLO-anedi  1.  “ruler,  governor,”
pi.  bZL-anedi  2. ;

lao-dimo  (Isubu)  1.  “demon,
apparition,  ghost,  spirit,”  pi.
ba-dimo  (Bayeiye  bB.-zimo  p.
194)  2.  (§  395)  ;

vtxo-dieri  1.  “ leader,  guide,”  pi.
ba,-dieri  2. ;

tao-dun  1.  “ aged,”  pi.  ba-dun  2.
(Isubu  vao-luni,  pi.  tai-luni

4.);

xao-ibedi  (Isubu  lao-iba)  1.
“thief,”  pi.  bSL-ibedi  (Isubu
ba-i6a)  2.  (§  325)  ;

xao-biedi  1.  “ learned  person,
doctor,”  pi.  bdi-biedi  2. ;

xao-boedi  1.  “sick  person,”  pi.
ba,-boedi  2. ;

jXkO-boledi  1 . “ worker,  labourer,”
pi.  b2i-boledi  2. ;


Dualla  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


243


xao-langedi  1.  “calculator,”  pi.
ha,-langedi  2. ;

mo-leedi  1.  “teacher,”  pi.  ba-
leedi  2. ;

mo-toedi  1.  “ curser,  swearer,”
pi.  ha,-loedi  2. ;

mu-na  (Isubu  mvr-ana)  1.
“ child,  son,  offspring,”  pi.  ba-
na  (Isubu  b-a?ia)  2.  (p.  209)  ;

mo-okeli  (Isubu  mo-okoa)  1.
“ leanier,”  pi.  ba-ofteli  (Isubu
ba-okoa)  2. ;

mo-ew(i)  or  mvr-en  (Bayeiye
xuo-yene,  Setshuana  mo-e»
pi.  ba-ew  2.)  1.  “sti-anger,”  pi.

mi-en  4.  ;

xao-lopo  (Isubu)  3.  “head,”  pi.
rai-lopo  4. ;

VOLO-Iema  Isubu  (Otyiherei’6  o-
taxi-tima,  § 494)  3.  “ heart,”
pi.  ml-/ema  (Isubu)  4. ;

mo-nm  3.  “ parable,”  pi.  tai-nia

4.;

va-benga  (Isubu)  3.  “ dove,”  pi.
mi-henga  4. ;

la-bia  (Isubu)  3.  “ palm-nut,”  pi.
mi-iia  4. ;

m-pimba  (Isubu  nx-bemba)  3.
“ nose,”  pi.  mi-pimba  4. ;

vcL-odi  3.  “ female,”  pi.  vai-odi
l(p.  211);

mo-awMOrmw-awM  3.  “thought,”
pi.  mi-a»u  4. ;

mo-lumbu  (Isubu)  3.  “ mouth,”
pi.  mi-lumbu  (Isubu)  4.  (§  439,
note)  ;

m-omt  (Benga)  3.  “ male,”  pi.
b-omi  (Isubu)  2.  (Isubu  m-
omi  1.,  Bayeiye  tao-rume,
§ 486)  ;

Al-kom  5.  “ friend,”  pi.  xaa,-twm

6.;

Ai-bondi  (Isubu)  5.  “ cup,  mug,”
pi.  mSL-bondi  (Isubu)  6. ;


dl-bongo  (Isubu  di-bongo-bongo}

5.  “knee,”  pi.  ma,-bongo  (Isubu
msi-bongo-bongo)  6. ;

di-a  (Isubu  di-A«,  Sindonga  e-
hdxa,  Nano  e-ka,  Otyihereroe-
ke)  5.  “ hand,”  pi.  xna-a  (Isubu
msL-ka,  Sindonga  o-ma,-baxa,
Nano  o-vsi-ka,  Otyiherero  o-
xna-ke)  6. ;

dsb-ongise  5.  “ salvation,”  pi.
xaa,-ongise  6.  ;

d-Mo  (Isubu)  5.  “ eye,”  pi.  xa-iso
(Isubu)  6.  (§  327)  ;

d-umbu  (Isubu)  5.  “ a bird’s
nest,”  pi.  m.-umbu  (Isubu)  6. ;

i-du  (Isubu)  5.  “ cork,”  pi.  ma-
du  (Isubu  ma,-du  or  xnsi-lu)

6. ;

i-tanga  5.  “ foot,”  pi.  jua-tanga

6.;

i-nama  5.  “ arm,”  pi.  raa-nama

6.;

di-kongo  5.  “ shot,”  pi.  \o-kongo

12.;

i-bon  (Isubu  i-boni)  7-  “ a ball,”
pi.  lo-bon  (Isubu  lo-boni)  12. ;

i-sangu  7.  “ idol,”  pi.  lo-sangu

12.;

i-sun  7.  “a  di’op,”  pi.  lo-sun

12.;

i-nun  (Isubu  i-noni,  Dikele  vi-
nSni,  p.  236)  7.  “ bii’d,”  pi.  bi-
nun  8.  (vide  Bayeiye  i-u-yene
9.,  p.  195) ;

l-lipa  7.  “ fleecy  cloud,”  pi.  bi-
lipa  8. ;

l-tambi  7.  or  e-tambi  13.  “ shoe,”
pi.  be-tambi  8. ;

n-dabo  (Isubu  and  Benga,  § 508)
9.  “ house,”  pi.  raa-n-dabo
6.;

ra-boa  (Isubu  and  Benga  xa-boka,
§ 508)  9.  “ abode,”  pi.  xaa-m-
boa  (Isubu  xaa-m-boka)  6. ;


244


The  Concord.


vcL-hasi  (Isubu)  9.  “corn,”  pi,
mSL-m-basi  (Isubu)  6. ;
xa-bimba  9.  “ corpse,”  pi.  ma-m-
bimba  6., — Isubu  m-bimba,
(Kafir  n-m-zimba,  Southern
Tekeza  VL-timba  “ body  ”)  3.,  pi.
va.-bimba  4. ;

n-yaha  (Isubu)  9.  “ ox,  ’ pi.  n-
yaka  (Isubu)  10. ;
n-denge  9.  “ sufiFering,  distress
kalati  (Isubu)  9.  “book,”  pi.  kalati
(Isubu)  10. ;

bunga  (Isubu  hohga  or  kunga)  9.
“ boat

1-0^0  (Isubu)  11.  “game,  play,
sport,”  pi,  xn-oko  (Isubu)
6.;

1-ongo  (Isubu  1-on^o)  11.  “a  part,
portion,  share,”  pi.  m-ongo
(Isubu  xa-ongd)  6. ;

\-ambu  (Isubu)  11.  “thing,”  pi.
xa-ambu  6. ;

e-puma  Isubu  (Dikele  a-bumd)
13.  “fruit,”  pi. (Isubu)
8.;

e-kotu  (Isubu  e-koto)  13.  “ cap,”
pi.  he-kotu  (Isubu  he-hoto)
8.;


e-bolu  (Dikele  VL-skali)  13,
“work,”  pi.  Tae-bolu  8. ;

e-idi  or  e-ili  (Isubu  e-eli  “ bush,
thick  slu'ub,”  Dikele  dsh-eZz
“ti-ee,”  § 507)  13.  “forest,
wilderness,”  pi.  lae-idi  (Isubu
be-eli)  8. ;

e-yala  13.  “ word,”  pi.  be-yala

8.;

bu-nya  (Isubu)  14.  “day,”  pb
xai-nya  (Isubu)  4. ;

ho-eli  (Isubu  bw-eZt)  14.  “ tree,”
pi.  mi-eZi  4.  (Zulu  u-mu-ZZ

3.,  pi.  i-mi-ZZ  4.,  § 428  note ;
Dikele  dsb-eZZ  13.  pi.  bi-eZZ

8.,  § 507)  ;

ho-ambu  (Isubu)  13.  “language,”
pi.  xai-ambu  4. ;

bo-anga  14.  “breast,”  pi.  ml-
anga  4. ;

bo-so  Isubu  (Benga  bo-.^o,
Dikele  bo-s^e,  § 507)  14

“ face,”  pi.  mi-o-so  (Benga  mi-
o-ho)  4. ;

b-pZo  (Isubu  b-oZo,  Benga  bw-
alu,  Dikele  bi-aZZ,  § 507)  14.
“ canoe,”  pi.  mi-oZo  (Benga
mi-aZ?t)  4.


512.  The  characteristics  which  distinguish  Isubu  from
its  variety,  Dualla,  are  few.  Among  the  North-western
Branch  languages,  Isubu  alone  has  retained  the  ancient
feature  of  a local  class  (O-),  which  is  probably  to  be
identified  with  the  16  th  (PA-)  class.  (§  435.)  The
11th  (1-)  class,  on  the  contrary,  can  hardly  (if  at  all)  be
distinguished  in  its  concord  from  the  5th  (di-).  Although
the  prefix  of  this  latter  class  occasionally  dwindles  to
y-,  it  has  never  been  palatalised  in  Isubu,  as  it  has  in
Dualla.  On  the  contrary,  the  prefix  dsh-  in  Isubu
belongs  to  the  7th  (i-)  class,  being  derived  from  an
ancient  k.  ( Vide  § 502.)  To  the  Isubu  nouns  given  in
the  Dualla  list,  we  add  the  following.


Isubu  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns,  245

ISUBU  NOUNS.


tao-hitu  (Dualla  mo-
utu)  1.  “child,”  pi.
h?i-hitu  (Dualla  ba-
utu)  2. ;

m.o-kanea  (Dualla  mo-
anedi)  1.  “ruler,”  pi.
ba-Sawea  (Dualla
\ta.-ariedi)  2. ;
vavi-ai-tu  1.  “woman,”
pl.b-a«-^M2.  (p.211);
va.-omi  1.  “male,”  pi.
’h-omi  (Dualla)  2.
(Dualla  and  Beiiga
va-omi  3.,  Bayeiye
mo-rurne,  § 486) ;
jXi-om-ana  (Dualla  m-
om-a)  1.  “ husband,”
pi.  b -om-ana  2. ;
lao-ongise  (Dualla  mo-
ongiseri)  1.  “sav-
iour,” pi.  h2L-ongise
2-;

rao-nya  1.  “brother-in-
law,  sister-in-law,”
pi.  ba-wye  2.  or
mi-nye  4. ;

xao-ngonibi  3.  “gar-
ment,” pi.  mi-ngomhi
4.;

m-ulu  or  m.-uru  (Dualla
rao-udi)  3.  “breath,”
pi.  xai-uru  4. ;
la-bu  (Dualla)  3.

“ year,”  pi.  m-bu
(Dualla  mi-5«)  4. ;
mu-wi  (Dualla  xnu-ne,
Otyihererd  o-mu-
nne,  § 494)  3.  “finger,”
pi.  mi-Ki  (Dualla
mi-nc)  4. ;

mw-iri  3.  “side,”  pi.
mi-iVi  4. ;

1 K


ISUBU  PREFIXES.


flINOULAR.

PLURAL.

1.  PEBS

ONAL.  2.

mo-

ba-

mw-

b-

m-

4.

mi-

3.

4.

mo-

mi-

mu-

me-

m-

m-

mw-

2.

ba-

5.

6.

dl-

ma-

d-

m-

1-

12.

y-

lo-

7.

12.

i-

lo-

y-

1-

dsb-

9.

10.

n-,  m-,  n-,  (— )

n-,  m-,  n-,  (— )

6.

ma-n-,  ma-m-,  m-

2.

ba-w-,  ba-m-,  ba-

11.

6.

1-

ma-^-

m-

13.

8.

e-

be-

y-

bi-

ABSTRACT.

14;.

6,

bo-,  bw-

ma-

b-

m-

bu-

•£.

ml-

LOCAL.  16.  (IS.)
o-

JilecK\  S.  Afr.  Comp.  Grammar.


246


The  Concord.


xae-aiigo  (Dualla)  4.  “ news
xa-ea  (Dualla  ml-ea)  4.  “ bowels
m-bimba  (Dualla)  3.  “ carcase,”
pi.  jai.-bim.ba  4. ;
jaxtr-andsha  3.  “sea,”  pi.  mi-
andsha  4. ;

jao-haki  3.  “ giant,”  pi.  xai.-'kaki

4.;

javi-ari  3.  “ female,”  pi.  "b-ari  2.

or  jai-ari  4.  (p.  211)  ;
jao-kuta  3.  “bag,”  pi.  xai-buta
4. ;

jao-hita  3.  “ body  or  trunk  of  a
ti’ee,”  pi.  xai-Mta  4. ;
mo-ese  (Dualla)  or  mw-ese  3.

“ daylight,”  pi.  mi-ese  4. ;
tao-ke  3.  “ egg,”  pi.  me-Ae  4. ;
jao-seba  3.  “ horn,”  pi.  ■m.i-seba
4.;

xao-indi  (Dualla  xao-endi)  3.
“leg,”  pi.  jao-indi  (Dualla
rai-endi)  4. ;

Ai-hahi  (Dualla)  5.  “promise,”
pi.  xaa-kaki  (Dualla)  6. ;
Ai-bondi  5.  “a  post,”  pi.  ma-
kondi  6. ;

di-Aosi  5.  “bow,”  pi.  xasb-hosi  6.;
dl-^on^o  5.  “ dart,”  pi.  taa-bongo
6.;

Ai-indu  5.  “ cloud,”  pi.  raSL-indu

6.;

Ai-bondu  5.  “ hut,”  pi.  jaaSL-bondu

6.;

A-iebo  5.  “ grindstone,”  pi.  xa-iebo

6.;

A-uwendi  (Dualla  Ai-windi)  5.
“ knife,”  pi.  xaa-wendi  (Dualla
xati-windi,  xaeL-wendi  or  ma-
endi)  6. ;

i-angane  5.  “ supplication,”  pi.
xaa-angane  6. ;

l-tama  or  i-lama  (Dualla  i-lama,
Nano  e-<o'»iap.218)5.  “cheek,”
pi.  xaOi-loma  (Dualla)  6.  ;


i-ombe  or  Ai-ombe  (=  dy  -ombe,
Dualla  dsh-om&e)  5.  “ door,”
pi.  xa-ombe  6. ;

i-obi  or  y-obi  5.  or  1-obi  11.
“ hook,”  pi.  xasi-obi  6. ;

1-nongo  5.  “bed,”  pi.  xaa-nongo

6.  ;

1-tutii  (Dualla)  5.  “ a bamboo
palm,”  pi.  xaa-tutu  (Dualla)
6. ;

i-teke  5.  “ dirt,  mud,”  pi.  xaa-teke

6.;

i-tua  1-a  bw-eli  5.  “gum,”  pi.  lo-
tua  lo  bw-eli  12.  ;

i-bongo  7.  “ a box,”  pi.  lo-bohgo

12.;

i-obi,  y-obi,  or  dsh-o&i  7.  “ fish-
hook,” pi.  1-obi  12. ;

i-duwa  7.  “ basket  used  by  fisher-
men,” pi.  lo-duwa  12. ;

l-toti  7.  “ hissing,”  pi.  lo-toti

12.;

i-ya  7.  “ the  little  ant-eater,”  pi.
lo-ya  12. ;

i-ongo  or  y-oiigo  7.  “pot,”  pi.
lo-ongo  12. ;

i-tololo  7.  “ frog,”  pi.  lo-tololo

12.;

i-miti  7.  “ a small  stinging  fly,”
pi.  lo  -miti  12. ;

a-doki  9.  “ folly,”  pi.  a-doki  10. ;

a-dshoku  (Bayeiye  o-a-dskovo,  p.
195)  9.  “ elephant,”  pi.  n-
dshoku  10. ;

xi-bwa  or  xa-bwa  (Dualla  xa-bg,
Fernandian  xa-pwd)  9.  “ dog,”
pi.  a-bwa  or  xa-bwa  10.  (§§  235
and  277,  Dikele  xa-bia  1.,  pi.
ha-m-bia  2.)  ;

xa-bori  (Mpongwe  xa-boni,  § 501)
9.  “ goat,”  pi.  xa-bori  10. ;

faki  (Fernandian  n-kapi)  9.
“ paddle,”  pi.  faki  (Fernandian
i-kapi)  10. ;


Isuhu  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.


247


tamba  (Dualla)  9.  “hat,”  pi.  tamha

10.;

soe  9.  “ hair,”  pi.  soe  10. ;
wanga  9.  “bush,”  pi.  wanga  10. ;
honda  (Dualla)  9.  “ chair,”  pi.
konda  10. ;

n-dabo  (Dualla)  9.  “ house,”  pi.
TXia,-n-dabo  (Dualla)  6.  or  n-
dabo  10. ;

xa-boka  (Dualla  va.-boa)  9.
“ abode,”  pi.  tnA-m-boka
(Dualla  tnsL-m-boa)  6. ;
akwasa  9.  “ boil,”  pi.  m.-akwasa
6.;

n-yaiigo  9.  “ mother,”  pi.  ba-w-
yahgo  2.  (Dualla  nyango  1.,  pi.
\ia,-nyango  2.)  ;

vci-bamba  9.  “ gi-andfather,  grand-
child,” pi.  laa,-m-bamba  2. ;
sango  9.  “ father,”  pi.  \ta,-sango
2.  (Dualla  sango  1.,  pi.  ba-
sango  2.)  ;

\-ongo  11.  “trade,”  pi- ma-^-uwgo

6.;

l-oiigo  (Dualla)  11.  “part,  share,”
pi.  ta-oiigo  (Dualla)  6. ;

1-oio  11.  “charm,”  pi.  ta-obo

6.;

e-kwali  (Dualla)  13.  “word,”  pi.

Tae-kwali  (Dualla)  8. ;
e-bambu  (Dualla)  13.  “ board,”
pi.  lae-bambu  (Dualla)  8. ;
e-boliri  13.  “ custom,  manner,”  pi.
"be-boliri  8. ;

e-ivesi  (Dualla  e-isi  or  e-wisi,
Dikele  a-vesha')  13.  “bone,”
]rl.  be-jcesi  (Dualla  be-wi)
8.;

e-koni  (Dualla  e-kon,  Dikele
a-S'W)  13.  “enmity,”  pi.  be-
koni  8. ;

e-sai  (Dualla  e-sau,  Dikele  a-
sha^a)  13.  “ a feather,"  pi.  be-
sai  (Dualla  bi-sa«)  8. ;


y-oma  13.  “ thing,”  pi.  be-»na
(Dualla  bi-»ia)  8.  (Angola  and
Kongo  e-kl-[it)]w?na  7.  pi.  e-y-
uma  8.,  Mpongwe  e%-uma  7.  pi.
y-uma  8.)  ;

e-lela  (Dualla  e-lele)  13.  “duck,”
pi.  "be-lela  8.  ;

Q-embi  (Dualla)  13.  “ cattle,”
pi.  "bi-embi  (Dualla  he-embi)
8.;

e-wake  (Dualla)  13.  “baboon,”
pi.  be-wake  (Dualla)  8. ;

e-wolu  (Dualla)  13.  “ bread,”  pi.
be-ivolu  (Dualla)  8. ;

e-ondo  13.  “axe,”  pi.  be-ondo

8.;

e-dimo  13.  “ghost,  spiidt  of  a
dead  person,”  pi.  be-dimo  8.
(§  395) ;

e-dshieli  or  e-gieli  13.  “abiding
place,”  pi.  bi-dshieli  or  bi-gieli
8.;

e-ondi  13.  “island,”  pi.  be-ondi

8.;

bo-ndene  Dualla  (Otyihererd
o'-jx-nene,  Kikamba  u-nene)
14.  “greatness,”  pi.  ma-ndene
(Dualla)  6. ;

bo-longi  14.  “ building,”  pi.  ma-
lohgi  6. ;

bo-tumba  14.  “ colour,  sort,”  pi.
xe%.2L-tumba  6. ;

bo-endi  14.  “ cotton,”  pi.  va.-endi

6.  ;

bo-ambu  or  b’vu-ambu  (Dualla)
14.  “ language,  dialect,  tongue,
dialogue,”  pi.  xa-ambi  6. ;

b-uma  (Dualla)  14.  “ the  cotton
tree,  ceiba,”  pi.  xxi-uma  6. ;

bu-luwe  14.  “loin,”  pi.  xa.a,-luwe

6.;

bvL-len(i)  14.  “night,”  pi.  mi-
ten(f)  4. ;

o-ma  16.  (or  15.)  “place.”


248


The  Concord.


FEENANDIAN.

513.  The  striking  peculiarity  of  the  Fernandian  deriv-
ative prefixes  of  nouns  is  the  change  of  the  labial  nasal
(m)  into  the  labial  media  (5).  By  this,  the  1st  and  3rd
prefixes  have  become  homophonous  with  the  14th  (bo-),
the  6th  prefix  with  the  2nd  (ba-),  and  the  4th  with  the
8th  (bi“).  The  number  of  the  prefixes  has  thus  been
practically  reduced  to  eleven;  but  it  has  been  deemed
better,  for  the  purpose  of  comparison,  to  separate  in  the
table  of  the  prefixes  those  classes  which  have  now  virtually
coalesced,  viz.  the  2nd  and  6th  (ba-),  the  3rd  and  14th
(bo-),  and  the  4th  and  8th  (bi-).  This  change  of  m into
h does  not,  however,  appear  to  take  place  in  all  the
dialects  spoken  on  the  island  of  Fernando  Po.  At  least,
the  usual  forms  of  the  numerals  in  the  Southern  part  of
the  island  abound  in  the  letter  m,  where  those  employed
in  other  parts  of  the  island  have  a h.  (J.  Clarke’s  Intro-
duction to  the  Fernandian  Tongue,  1848,  pp.  22  and  23.)
The  nouns  given  in  the  appended  list  probably  belong  to
dialects  spoken  near  Clarence,  in  the  North  of  the  island.
An  analogy  to  the  general  change  of  the  m into  b in
Fernandian,  is  met  with  in  the  Nano  language,  in
which  the  m of  the  6th  prefix  is  always  changed  into  v,
whilst  the  m of  the  other  prefixes  is  in  some  cases
retained,  but  in  others  also  converted  into  u,  or,  before
M,  falls  off  entirely.  Thus  in  Nano,  the  6th  prefix  cannot
be  distinguished  from  the  2nd  (va-),  and  the  4th  has,
besides  its  own  ancient  form  (mi-),  a softened  one  (vi-)
which  is  homophonous  with  that  of  the  8th  prefix.  The
1st  and  3rd  classes  in  Nano  also  possess,  in  addition  to
the  regular  form  of  their  prefix  (mu-),  a second  form  (u-),
which  is  identical  with  the  14th  prefix  in  Nano.  (§  496.)
In  Fernandian,  also,  the  1st  and  3rd  prefixes  (bo-)  occa-
sionally lose  their  consonant  entirely.

514.  Another  characteristic  of  the  Fernandian  language
is  the  form  of  the  7 th  prefix  (si-),  in  which,  curiously
enough,  Fernandian  agrees  with  Kafir,  although  the


Fernandian  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.  249


rERN ANDI AM

PREFIXES.


diminutive  meaning  which  the  7th  prefix  possesses  in
Fernandian  is  not  to  be  met  with  in  this  prefix  in
Kafir.  In  Kongo,  however,  the  same  7 th  prefix  (ki-)
appears  to  possess  some  sort  of
diminutive  force.  (§  430.)  Fer-
nandian is  also  distinguished
from  the  other  languages  of
the  North-western  Branch  by
the  retention  of  the  original
consonant  (f)  of  the  12th  pre-
fix, which  consonant,  in  this
Branch,  has  been  generally  con-
verted into  1.  The  I of  the  11th
prefix  has  also  been  retained  in
Fernandian;  the  r in  v-oto  “bag”
belonging  probably  to  the  5th
(di-)  class,  as  the  6 th  (ba-)  class
(to  which  \)-oto  “ bags  ” belongs)
has  not  yet  been  met  with  in
any  other  Fernandian  noun  in
plural  correspondence  with  the
11th  (lo-)  class.  A case  in  which
the  8th  (bi-)  prefix  occurs  as
plural  to  the  5 th  (di-)  is  unique  in
its  kind  and  exceedingly  doubtful.

In  fact,  we  dare  not  draw  any
stringent  conclusion  from  the
insufficient  materials  which  have
as  yet  been  published  in  the
Fernandian  tongue.  Full  as
they  are  of  misprints  and  in-
consistencies, they  are  still  val-
uable in  furnishing  us  with  a
certain  kind  of  knowledge  of
a language  which,  in  some
ways,  has  been  very  peculiarly
shaped.


SINGULAK.

PLURAL.

PERS

ONAL.

1.

2.

bo-,  (— )

ba-

bw-

b-

bu-

be-  (bu-)

mo-

(?)  bi-

o-

3.

4.

bo-,  (— )

bi-  (bli  )

bu-

be-

b-

o-

5.

6.

di-,  1-

ba-

d-

b-

r-

S.

bi-

DIMIN

UTIVE.

7.

12.

si-

to-

s-

tw-

t-

9.

10.

n-

i-

m-

11.

10.

lo-

n-,  i-

lu-

m-

1-

13.

8.

e-

bi-

i-

1€.

6.

bo-

ba-

bu-

250


The  Concord.


FERNANDIAN  NOUNS.


\iO-tukwe  1.  “king,”  pi.  ba-feAwe

2.;

lao-riha  1.  “stranger,”  pi.  ba-n'5a

2.;

"bo-ie  1.  “ man,”  pi.  ba-ie  2. ;
bo-ole  or  b-o5e  (Benga,  Dualla,
and  Isubu  m-omi,  Bayeiye
va.o-rume,  § 486)  1.  “male,
man,”  pi.  ba-o&e  (Dualla  and
Isubu  b-o?wi)  2. ;
b\a-adi  (Benga  mw-acZi)  1.  “ fe-
male,” pi.  b-adi  (Isubu  b-ari)

2.  (p.  211)  ;

bw-ai-so  (Isubu  Tovu-ai-tu)  1.
“woman,”  pi.  b-ai-so  (Isubu
b-ai-tu)  2.  (p.  211)  ;
bo-te^M  (Dualla  and  Isubu  mo-
tu)  1.  “ man,  person,”  pi.  bu-
tshu  or  be-fo^M  (Dualla  and
Isubu  ba-tw)  2.  (p.  208)  ;
bvL-eta  or  bw-eta  1.  “sister,”  pi.
be-eta  2. ;

bw-itsM  (?  Xvi-itshi)  1.  “brother,”
pi.  bi  -itshi  2. ;

mo-w5e  (Isubu  mo-iha,  vide
Dualla  mo-ibedi  p.  242)  1.
“ thief,”  pi.  bs-uhe  (Isubu  ba-
iba)  2.  (§  325)  ;

o-bola  1.  “a  poor  man,”  pi.  a-
bola  2. ;

O-bedi  or  o-beri  (Shambala  m-
toele)  1.  “ woman,  mother,”  pi.
SL-bedi  (Shambala  vra-vele)  2.  ;
O-bitsha  1.  “rat,”  pi.  a,-bitsha  2. ;
omi  1.  “ mother,”  pi.  b-omi  2. ;
bo-tsJiikaS.  “spear,”  pi.  bi-tsMka
4.;

bo-mpo  3.  “nose,”  pi.  bii-»npo
4.;

bo-so  3.  “fire,”  pi.  be-so  4. ;
bVL-ee  3.  “ mouth,”  pi.  bi-ee  4. ;
b-oba  3.  “ground,"  pi.  bV-oba  4. ;


0- pelo  3.  “ bolt,”  pi.  bo-pelo  4. ;

oho  3.  “ owl,”  pi.  bi  -oho  4. ;

dl-aZa  (Dualla  di-a,  § 511)  5.

“ hand,”  pi.  ba-aZa  (Dualla
ma-«)  6. ;

di-AoZo  (Isubu  di-Aoso  ?)  5.
“ foot,”  pi.  ba-AoZo  (ba-AoZa  ?)
6.;

A-aatshi  5.  “bed,”  pi.  b-aatsM  6.;

T-oto  5.  (?)  “bag,”  pi.  b-oZo  6. ;

1- Ze  (Kafu*  i-li-Zye,  § 176,  and
§481  note)  5.  “stone,”  pl.ba-Ze
6.  or  bi-Ze  8. ;

ai-nodi  (Dikele  vi-wSwi,  Benga
i-nani,  Dualla  i-nun,  Isubu  i-
noni)  7.  “ a small  bird,”  pi.  to-
nodi  (Dikele  la-nawZ,  Benga
lo-na«Z,  Isubu  lo-noni)  12.
(Bayeiye  i-n-yene  9.,  p.  195)  ;

Si-J9u  7.  “ a small  ring  or  armlet,”
(e-pa  13.  “an  armlet”)  ;

si-so  7.  “a  small  fire”  (bo-so
14.  “ fire  ”)  ;

ai-neneheh  7.  “ a babe ;”

a-inki  7.  “ a small  fly,”  pi.  to-
inki  12.  ;

s-oZo  7-  “ a small  bag,”  pi.  t-oZo

12.;

a-ahah  7.  “ staif,”  pi.  tW-flAaA

12.;

a-etshi  7.  “ gazelle,”  pi.  tw-eZsAZ

12.;

ai-lu  7.  “yam”  (e-lu  13.,  pi.  bl-

lu  8.)  ;

TX-tshobo  9.  “ house,”  pi.  i-fshobo

10.  ;

n-tshodu  9.  “ sheep,”  pi.  i-tshodu
10.;

n-hapi  (Isubu  faki,  Mpongwe  n-
kabi)  9.  “ paddle,”  pi.  i-kapi
10.  (Dikele  Ist-hapi  11.,  pi.
kapi  10.)  ;


Fernandian  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.  251


■a-ko  (Isubu  h.-goso,  Mpongwe
n-gozyo)  9.  “ parrot,”  pi.  i-ho
10.  (Dikele  koshe  1.  pi.  ba-
koshe  2.)  ;

tx-kopo  or  kopo  9.  “ ox
va-podi  (Mpongwe  xa-boni,  p.

230)  9.  “ goat,”  pi.  i-podi  10. ;
ta-pela  9.  “ snake,  eel,”  pi.  i-pela
10.;

lo-oba  11.  “goui’d,”  pi.  jx-kobe
10.;

lo-bebo  11.  “tongue,”  pi.  i-bebo
or  m-bebo  10. ;


lu-ka(e  11.  “bat,”  pi.  jx-kate  10.;
\-oba  11.  “knife,”  pi.  n-koba  10. ;
1-wa  11.  “ clothes,”  pi.  xx-kue  10. ;
e-aou  13.  “hatchet,”  pl.bi-aowS. ;
e-lu  13.  “ yam,”  pi.  "toi-lu  8. ;
e-tata  13.  “gun,”  pi.  i-tata  8.;
e-tsM  (ov  i-tshi)  13.  “country,”
pi.  bi-tsAi  8. ;

e-buta  13.  “hat,”  pi.  i-buta  8. ;
bo-<j  or  bu-<j  (Isubu  bw-eZf,
Dualla  \iO-eli,  p.  244)  14.

“ tree,”  pi.  ba-ti  (Isubu  ma,-li)

6.


e.  REVIEW  or  THE  DERIVATIVE  PREFIXES  OF  THE  NOUNS.

515.  Having  thus  gone  through  the  known  South
African  B^ntu  languages,  and  shown  the  different  sys-
tems of  correspondence  between  the  concord-indicating
derivative  prefixes  of  the  nouns,  which  obtain  in  each,-—
we  can  now  pass  these  prefixes  in  review.  Of  each
prefix  it  will  be  stated  in  what  languages  it  occurs,
in  what  forms  it  appears,  and  what  is  (as  far  as  these
can  be  ascertained)  its  etymology,  force,  and  meaning
also  to  what  other  class  or  classes  the  class  indicated
by  it  corresponds  either  as  singular  or  plural.  We
shall  thus  furnish  a kind  of  descriptive  catalogue  of  the
different  South  African  Bantu  Prefixes  of  the  nouns,
giving,  as  it  were,  a resume  of  their  Natural  History.
We  shall  see  the  general  constancy  in  the  form  of  each
prefix,  with  many  minor  phonetic  variations,  and  also
how  far  the  different  languages  agree  or  vary  in  their
modes  of  replacing  each  singular  prefix  by  a correspond-
ing plural  one.

1.  FIRST  PREFIX  : MV-.

516.  The  first  prefix  (MU-)  is  common  to  all  South
African  Bantu  languages.


252


The  Concord.


FORMS  OF  THE  FIRST  (MU-)  PREFIX.


* 'S£.\-samhala  (Dr.  Steere’s  letter,  § 484)  or  'R\-sambara  (Dr.  Krapf)  7.  is  called  by  the  Swaheli  Ma-ne»o  y-a
HA-sambaa  6.;  and  by  the  people  themselves  (the  St-shambala  2.,  sing.  ^K-shambala  1.)  UtK-buli  z-a  'SL\-shambala  10.
Vide  Dr.  Steere’s  “Collections  for  a Hand-book  of  the  Shambala  Language,  Zanzibar  1867,”  which  I have  received  while
this  page  is  going  through  the  press.  The  following  tables  of  the  forms  of  the  prefixes  will  receive  a few  slight  additions
from  this  book.


Review  of  the  First  Derivative  Prefix  of  Nouns.  253

FORMS,  mu-  in  all  these  languages,  excepting  Kafir,  Sesuto,
Bayeiye,  Mpongwe,  Benga,  Isubu,  and  Fernandian.  N.B.
Marked  as  short  (mu-)  in  Tette  and  Angola,
mw-  in  Benga  and  Isubu  before  vowels,
mo-  regularly  in  SetsTmana'(^QX\3.'p\  and  Sesuto),  Benga,
Dualla,  and  Isubu ; occasionally  in  Tette  and  Angola  (besides
the  more  usual  form  mu-),  and  in  at  least  one  noun  in
Fernandian.  N.B.  Marked  as  long  (mo-)  in  SeXlapi.  The
form  mo-  met  with  in  Bayeiye  and  Balojazi,  according
to  Livingstone’s  Vocabulary,  may  be  due  to  Setshuana
orthography.

ml-  fi'equently  in  Dikele.

m-  the  only  form  met  with  in  the  Kafr  language,  and  occm'-
ring,  with  other  forms,  in  Zulu,  Makua,  Kihiau,  Kikamba,
Kinika,  Sudheli,  Kisambala,  Otyihercrd,  Sindonga,  Kongo,
Dikele,  Benga,  Dualla,  and  Isubu.  N.B.  Setshuana  m-  =
mo-B-.
om-  in  Mpongwe.

n-  in  Dikele.  N.B.  Tekeza  n-  = MU-L-.
bu-,  bw-,  bo-  in  Fernandian.

U-  in  Nano  and  Kongo.

o-  in  Mpongwe  and  Fernandian.

( — ) The  prefix  is  probably  omitted  in  all  the  known  South
African  Bantu  languages, — although  instances  of  such  omiss-
ion have  not  as  yet  been  proved  in  Makua,  Bayeiye,
Mpongwe,  Dualla,  and  Isubu.

RANGE  OF  MEANING.  This  prefix  indicates  persons  in  the
singular  number,  and  is  sometimes  (particularly  in  the  Middle  and
North-western  Branch  languages)  extended  to  animals.  Other  things,
when  treated  as  persons,  may  also  belong  to  this  class.
CORRESPONDENCE.  This  class  corresponds  as  Singular
TO  THE  2nd  (B  A-)  class  throughout  the  Bantu  languages.  N.B.  When
the  prefix  of  the  2nd  class  has  the  form  bo-  in  the
Kafir  and  Setshuana  dialects,  it  either  corresponds  to  a
singular  of  the  1st  class  in  which  the  prefix  has  been
omitted,  or  bo-  is  prefixed  to  the  form  with  mo-, — thus,
bo-mo-.

,,  „ 6th  (BIA-)  class  in  some  especial  cases  in  Kafir,  Zulu,  Sesuto
Sena,  (perhaps  Kikamba,')  and  Kongo.

„ „ 10th  (TIN-)  class  in  a few  nouns  in  Angola,  transferred  from
the  9th  (N-)  class.

„ „ 4th  (MI-)  class  in  one  noun  in  Dualla  and  another  in  Isubu,

which  have  probably  been  transferred  fi-om  the  3rd  (MU-)
class.

1 L


Bkck^  S.  Afr.  Comp.  Grammcir.


254


The  Concord,


2,.  SECOND  prefix:  BJL-.

517.  The  second  prefix  (BA-)  is  common  to  all  South
African  Bantv  languages.

FORMS  OF  THE  SECOND  (BA-)  PREFIX.  iS


pa

KAFIR  SPECIES.

«

H

SEXLAPI.

n

SESUTO.

H

&

w

TEKEZA.

&

TETTE.

sa

H

ba-


be-


bo-


va-


va-  wa-


KIKAMBA.


KISAMBALA.


BAYEIYE.


otyiherer6.

SINDONGA.


NANO.


ANGOLA.


KONGO.

MPONGWE.


DIKELE.


a-


(-


w-


ba-


va-  V-


o-


a-


va-  ma-


(-)


bo-


}-ba-  b-  \


.be-(bu-),  (?)bi-


s,


H CO
<cS

m ^

n

a

.■§»c4'

^ i->4

o

^ p-T

■3  2

.s

CO  2
<D  ^ .
CO  ,

c§

o


Oi

O

' (M

§


n


fi.


Jv  00
§ ^
d.  ^

p.  »


a

o K

M g tq

's  5 K

P »— * rf


bo  •

.s


a

?3

O

(2;


pC3  •

-4->  S

bp  .

'S


1 i ^

3 s

3 p -T3
3

^ ,<v  c>

1 ^


s

§ h ,

C3  ■ I

bc  ^ |9


H


Review  of  the  Second  Derivative  Prefix  of  Nouns.  255

FORMS,  ba-  in  the  North-western  Branch  languages,  and  in  the
Kafir  and  Setshuuna  dialects.  N.B.  The  ba-  in  Bayeiye
may  be  due  to  Setshuana  orthography,
be-  in  a few  cases,  in  Kafir,  Zulu,  Sexlapi,  and  Fernandian.
bu-  and  bi-  doubtful  in  Fernandian.

b-  (before  vowel  stems)  in  the  North-western  Branch  languages,
and  also  in  the  Kafir  and  Setshuana  dialects,
va-  regularly  in  Teheza,  Otyihererd,  and  Nano.

V-  (before  vowels)  in  Otyiherero-
wa-  or  wa-  in  Tette,  Sena,  and  Kihiau.
wa-  in  Suaheli  and  Kisamhala.
w-  (before  vowels)  in  Suaheli.
ma-,  by  assimilation,  in  one  case  in  Nano.
a-  (the  only  form  of  the  prefix)  in  Mahua,  Kihamba,  Kinika,
Sindonga,  Angola,  and  the  Kongo  Genus  (Kongo  and
Mpongwe), — and  (with  other  forms)  in  Tette  and  Sena.
bo-  (a  mere  phonetic  modification  of  ba-)  in  one  Dikele
noun.

bo-  (probably  = UtL-MU-)  in  the  Kafir  and  Setshuana
dialects,  with  certain  classes  of  nouns.

O-  in  Otyiherero  = Kafir  and  Setshuana  bo-
( — ) The  prefix  omitted  in  the  Zangian  and  Kongo  Genera.

ETYMOLOGY.  Vide  § 443.

RANGE  OF  MEANING.  Restricted  to  personal  nouns  in  the  plural,

— the  meaning  chiefly  defined  by  the  correspondence  of  this  class  to

the  first.

CORRESPONDENCE.  This  class  corresponds  as  Plural

TO  THE  1st  (MU-)  class  in  all  South  Afi-ican  Bantu  languages.
N.B.  In  the  form  bo-  or  bo-mo-  (=  BA-MC/-)  in
certain  cases  in  the  Kafir  and  Setshuana  dialects.  {Vide
p.  253.)

„ „ 9 th  (N-)  class  in  a few  personal  nouns  (which  can  also  be
transferred  to  the  1st  class)  in  Kongo,  Dualla,  and  Isubu.
N.B.  In  these  cases  the  2nd  prefix  is  prefixed  to  the  9th,
as  ba-M-,  a-K-,  &c.

„ „ 5th  (OI-)  class  in  one  noun  in  Kongo.

„ „ 3rd  (MU-)  class  in  a few  Dualla  and  Isubu  nouns  which
indicate  persons.


3.  THIRD  prefix:  MU-.

518.  The  third  prefix  (MU-)  is  coimnon  to  all  South
African  Bantu  languages.


256


The  Concord.


FORMS  OF  THE  THIRD  (MtT-)  PREFIX.


SEXLAPI.


SESUTO,


•}  "•  I'

J (I


1


)■  (-)


m-

iao-.B-)


mu-  m-  n-(iau-i-)


mu-


KINIKA.


► m-


SUAHELI.


- mu-


KISAMBALA.


OTYIHERERO.


SINDONGA.


mo-,  om-,  m(6)-


m-


u-


mu-


KOEGO-


m-


MPONGWE.


om-


EERNANDIAK.


mi-  n-


mw-


mu-  mo-


r (-)


u-


- m-


bu-  bo-  b-  o-  ( — )


Original  Bantu  Nouns  of  the  Third  (MU-)  and  Fourth  (MI-)  Classes.

V-TIS.  “tree,  plant,”  pi.  mZ-TI 4.  (§§  428,  519  note)  ;

\JJ-TIWIA  3.  “heart,”  pi.  lai- TIMA  4.  (p.  204)  ;

IS-NUE  3.  “ finger,”  pi.  mi-NUE  4.  (pp.  204  and  205)  ;

\V-LUM-{B)0  3.  “mouth,  lip,”  pi.  V/a-LUM-{B)0  4.  (§  439  note,  pp.  238  and  243).


Review  of  the  Third  Derivative  Prefix  of  Nouns.  257

FORMS,  mu-  in  all  these  languages,  excepting  Kafir,  Sesuto,
Mpongwe,  Dikele,  Benga,  and  Fernandian.  N.B.  The  only
form  met  with  in  Tette,  Sena,  Otyihererd,  and  Angola ; in
Tette  and  Angola  noted  as  long  (mu-).

mw-  in  Benga  and  Isulu  before  vowels.

mo-  regularly  in  Setshudna  (SeXlapi  and  Sesuto),  Dualla,
and  Isuhu.  N.B.  The  vowel  noted  as  long  in  Sexlapi
(mo-).  The  mo-  in  Bayeiye  may  be  due  to  Setshuana
orthography.

ml-  occasionally  in  Dikele.

m-  the  only  form  met  with  in  the  Kafr  language,— with
other  forms  in  Zulu,  Tekeza,  Mahua,  Kihiau,  Kikamba,
Kinika,  Suaheli,  Kisamhala,  Bayeiye,  Sindonga,  Kongo,
Dikele,  Benga,  Dualla,  and  Isuhu.  N.B.  Setshuana  m-
= THO-B-.

(o)m-  m Sexlapi  and  Bayeiye.

om-  in  Mpongwe.

n-  before  certain  consonants  in  Dikele.  N.B.  Tekeza  n-  =

MU-i-.

bu-,  bo-,  b-  in  Fernandian.

u-  (with  other  forms)  in  Nano  and  Benga.

O-  in  Mpongwe  and  Fernandian.

( — ) The  prefix  falls  off  in  very  few  cases,  noted,  as  yet,  only
in  Kafir,  Zulu,  SeXlapi,  Dikele,  and  Fernandian.
ETYMOLOGY.  Probably  originally  identical  with  the  preposition
mu-  “in,”  of  Kongo,  and  mo-  of  the  Bmida  Genus  and  of  Setshuana.
(§§  437—440.)

RANGE  OF  MEANING.  The  original  local  meaning  is  not  always
clearly  visible  in  nouns  of  this  class,  which  includes  particularly
many  names  of  trees,  and,  in  the  South-eastern  Branch,  names  of
rivers.  Although  the  personal  nouns  which  originally  belonged  to
this  class,  have  as  a general  rule  been  dr’awn  over  to  the  1st  (MU-)
class, — a few  such  are  still  to  be  found  in  the  3rd  class  in  most  of  the
South  African  Bantu  languages.*

CORRESPONDENCE.  This  class  coreesponds  as  Singular
TO  THE  4th  (MI-)  class  universally;


* For  personal  nouns  of  the  3rd  (MU-)  class  in  Kafir,  vide
p.  160  (note),  to  which  the  Rev.  J.  W.  Appleyard  adds  the  following
remarks;  “There  are  a few  more  personal  nouns  in  the  3rd  class
than  those  you  mention.  Thus  vi-m-duna  3.  ‘ a person  of  eminence
or  rank,’  pi.  i-m\-duna  4.;  \x-m-ginwa  3.  ‘a  profane  person,’  pi.
i-mi-gina)a  4.  Tribal  names  are  also  found  in  the  same  class,  as  the
l-mX- dushane  4.”


258


The  Concord.


TO  THE  6th  (MA-)  class,  in  a few  cases,  with  a special  plural  meaning,
in  SeXlapi,  (perhaps  in  Mpongwe,)  and  in  Dikele.

„ „ 10th  (TIN-)  class,  only  in  nouns  which  have  been  trans-
ferred from  the  11th  (liIT-)  class,  in  Mpongwe.

„ „ 2nd  (BA-)  class  in  a few  nouns  (of  persons)  in  Dualla  and
Isubu.

4.  FOURTH  prefix:  Ml-.

519.  The  fourth  prefix  (MI-)  is  met  with  in  all  South
African  Bantu  languages.

FORMS,  mi-  in  all
South  African
Bantu  languages,
excepting  the  Se-
tshuana  dialects,
(Bayeiye,)  Mpo-
ngwe,  and  Fer-
nandian.  N.B.
With  other  forms
in  Nano,  Benga,
Dualla,and  Isubu .
me-  the  only  form
in  Setshudna,-^
with  other  forms
in  Benga,  Dualla,
and  Isubu.  N.B.
Bayeiye  me-
may  be  dne  to
Setshuana  orthog-
raphy.

m-  in  Isubu.

In-  and  i-  in
Mpongwe.
vi-  in  Nano.
bi-  and  be-  in
Fernandian.

RANGE  OF  MEAN-
ING. Apparently  entire-
ly dependent  upon  its
correspondence  to  the  3rd
(MU-)  class.


THE  FOURTH  (MI-)  PREFIX.


SOUTH-EAST.  EH.  I

KAFIR  SPECIES.

mi-

SETSHUANA.

me-

TEKEZA.

-mi-  -

r

MOSAMBIQUE  GEN,

ZANGIAN  GENUS.

-

BAYEIYE.

me-

eq

p

O

<

a

P

pa

OTYIHERERO.

.

-mi-  -

-

SINDONGA.

NANO.

Vi-

ANGOLA.

d

o

C9

'Z

o

w

KONGO.

-

MPONGWE.

in-  i-

W

u

55

<

a

a

SB

d

H

H

H

H

H

Pi

O

z

DIKELE.

'

BENGA.

-mi-  1

J

DUALLA.

ISUBU.

(m-

FERNANDIAN.

bi(i)-  be-

Review  of  the  Fourth  Derivative  Prefix  of  Nouns.  259

CORRESPONDENCE.  This  class  cobresponds  as  Plural
TO  THE  3rd  (MXT-)  class  universally.

„ „ 14th  (BIT-)  class  regularly  in  Kinika,  Benga,  Dualla,  and
Isubu*

„ „ 1st  (MU-)  class  in  one  noun  in  Dualla,  and  another  in  Isubu,
which  probably  belonged  originally  to  the  3rd  (MU-)  class.
„ „ 7th  (Itl-)  class  in  one  Diliele  noun,  which  is  probably  a sort
of  diminutive  of  a noun  belonging  to  the  3rd  (MTT-)  class.
„ „ 6th  (MA-)  class  in  one  Dikele  noun,  doubtful.

5.  FIFTH  PEEFIX  : 1>X-  OR  X.I-.

520.  Nouns  of  the  fifth  (DI-)  class  are  met  with  In  all
South  African  Bantu  languages.

FORMS,  di-  in  the  languages  of  the  North-western  Branch.

d-  (before  certain  vowels)  in  the  languages  of  the  North-
western Branch,
dy-  in  Benga.
dsb*  in  Dualla.

(d)zi-  in  Sena,  besides  the  more  usual  ri-.
zi-  in  Tette.

11-  regularly  in  Kafir  and  Zulu, — with  other  forms  in  Kihiau
and  Bayeiye.

le-  in  the  Setshudna  dialects  (Sesuto  and  SeXlapi).  N.B.  Ba-
yeiye le-  may  be  Setshuana  orthography,
ri-  in  Teheza,  Sena,  Kihiau,  Angola,  and  Kongo.
r-  a doubtful  form  in  Fernandian.

e-  (=  o-B,I-)  regularly  in  Otyiherero  and  Sindonga, — with
other  forms  in  Nano  and  Kongo.
ni-  and  (i)n-  regularly  in  Mahua.

1-  regularly  in  Mpongwe, — with  other  forms  in  Kihdmba,
Nano,  Benga,  Dualla,  Isubu,  and  Fernandian.
y-  in  Kihdmba  and  Isubu.  N.B.  Modified  from  I-.

( — ) The  prefix  elided  in  the  languages  of  the  South-eastern
Branch,  in  Tette,  Sena,  and  Kihiau,  in  the  Zangian  Genus
(being  altogether  omitted  in  Kinika,  Kisuaheli,  and  Kisam-
bala),  and  in  Angola.

*The  case  of  Dualla  (Isubu  Ibw-efi)  14.  “tree”  pi.  mi-

eli  4.,  when  compared  with  Zulu  u-mu-ti  3.  pi.  i-mi-ti  4.  (§  428,
note),  seems  to  suggest  that  this  correspondence  of  nouns  of  the  1 4th
(BIJ-)  class  to  those  of  the  4th  (MI-)  may  have  arisen  from  the
circumstance  that  a noun  of  the  3rd  (MU-)  class  (by  a change  of
the  consonant  of  the  prefix)  had  acquired  the  form  of  the  14th  (BU  -)


260


The  Concord.


THE  FIFTH  (tl-)  AND  SIXTH  (IttA-)  PREFIXES.


KAFIR  SPECIES.


SETSHUANA.


TEKEZA.


TETTE.

SENA.


MAKUA.


KIKAMEA.


11-


le-


ri-


V (-)


zi-


ri-  (d)zi-  J


ni-


(i)n-


11-


1-


y-


(-)


KISAMBAEA.


BATEITE.


OTTIHEREKO.

SINDONGA.


NANO.


ANGOLA.


MPONGWE.


DIKELE.


BENGA.


ISUBU.


FERNANDIAN.


11-  le-


>e-  (=  0-RI-)


1-


1-


1-


^dl-,d-


J


dy-


dsh-


y-


L


r-


1


xn-


ma-


m-


me-


ama


me-


va-


ma-


m-


am-


a-


► ina-


m-


ba-


b-


class.  It  would  then  either  retain  its  old  plural  form  with  the  4th
(]fH-)  prefix,  or  gain,  by  analogy,  a new  plural  with  the  6th  (MA-)
prefix,  as  Isubu  ma-fi  6.  “ trees.”


Review  of  the  Fifth  Derivative  Prefix  of  Nouns.  261
ETYMOLOGY.  Vide%A^\.

RANGE  OF  MEANING.  In  Kisambala  “if  anything  is  to  be  spoken
of  as  remarkably  large,  it  is  brought  into  this  class.”  (Dr.  Steere’s
Collection  for  a Handbook  of  the  Shambala  Language,  p.  6.)  In
Otyihererd,  also,  Hahn  observes  (“  Grammatik  ” § 38)  that  the  nouns
of  this  class  particularly  indicate  subjects  in  which  there  is  some-
thing remarkable,  prominent,  especial,  &c.  We  seem  to  observe  this
in  e-kaSi’e-ndu  5.  “ very  tall  woman,”  pi.  o-tn.a,-ha^’e-ndu  6.,  when
compared  with  o-vaxi-liaSi e-ndu  1.  “ woman,”  pi.  o-va-ka^‘e-ndu  2.
(§  494  and  note.)  Vide,  however,  also  e-ka^’e  5.  “tendency  to
produce  none  but  female  otfspring,”  &c.,  p.  208,  note.  Rath’s  obser-
vation, that  this  prefix  is  mainly  used  when  one  of  two  things  which
constantly  occur  in  pans,  is  to  be  indicated  (p.  200),  is  liable  to  many
exceptions.

CORRESPONDENCE.  This  class  corresponds  as  Singular
TO  THE  6th  (MA-)  class  in  all  South  African  Bantu  languages.

„ „ 2nd  (BA-)  class  in  one  Kongo  noun.

„ „ 12th  (TU-)  class  in  a few  exceptional  cases  in  Dualla  and
Isuhu, — probably  in  consequence  of  homophony  with  the
7th  prefix.

„ „ 8th  (P1-)  class,  doubtful,  in  Fernandian.


6.  SIXTH  PREFIX  : 1MCA-.

521.  The  sixth  prefix  (MA-)  is  common  to  all  South
African  Bantu  languages.

FORMS,  ma-  in  all  these  languages,  excepting  Nano,  Mpongwe,
and  Fernandian.

me-  in  a few  cases  in  KiMmha,  Kisambala,  Otyihererd,  &c.
m-  before  vowels,  in  Kafir,  Zulu,  Setshudna,  Mahua,  KiJiiau,
Kinika,  Sudheli,  Angola,  Kongo,  Dikele,  Benga,  Dualla,
and  Isubu.  N.B.  Although  m-  is  only  found  before  vowels,
yet  ma-  before  vowels  is  not  always  shortened  to  m-.
va-  and  v-  in  Nano.
ba-  and  b-  in  Fernandian.

am-  *.•  (with  the  initial  consonant  of  the  stem  strengthened)
and  a-  in  Mpongwe.

( — ) Prefix  omitted  perhaps  in  Kikamba.

RANGE  OF  MEANING.  Plural  (in  Setshuana  sometimes  in-
dicating a very  great  number),  collective  (particularly  applied  to
liquids),  sometimes  abstract.  (§  452.)  The  liquid  meaning,  which
may  be  after  all  a secondary  one  like  that  of  tree  or  river  in  the  3rd
prefix,  appears,  however,  to  have  stamped  this  class  early  with  the

Bleek,  S.  Afr  Comp.  Grammar,  ^ ^


262


The  Concord.


character  of  a liquid  class  (or  gender).  Evidences  of  this  ancient
structural  peculiarity  of  the  South  African  Bantu  languages,  are  also
visible  in  some  West  African  Bantu  languages,  as  in  Timneh
(Schlenker’s  “Grammar  ” p.  89)  andBuLLou  (Nylander’s  “Grammar”
p.  18), — and  in  at  least  one  of  the  Oceanic  Prefix -pronominal  lan-
guages, viz,  in  Fiji  (Hazlewood’s  “Grammar”  p.  19).
CORRESPONDENCE.  This  class  cokbbsponds  as  Plural
TO  THE  5th  (DI-)  class  regularly  in  all  South  Afi-ican  Bantu
languages.

„ „ 14th  (SIT-)  class  regularly  in  Setshuana,  Makna,  Kihiau,
Kikdmba,  Otyihererd,  Angola,  in  the  Kongo  Genus  (Kongo
and  Mpongwe),  in  Dikele,  Isubu,  and  Fernandian.  N.B.
In  Kikamba,  Otyiherero,  Angola,  and  Dikele,  cases  occur  in
which  the  6th  prefix  is  prefixed  to  the  14th,  instead  of  taking
its  place.

„ „ 11th  (liXT-)  class  occasionally  in  the  Kafir  and  Setshuana
dialects,  in  Tshiyao,  Sudheli,  Angola,  Dikele,  Dualla,  and
Isubu.  N.B.  In  some  cases  in  Angola  and  Isubu  the  6th
prefix  is  prefixed  to  the  11th  (as  ma-fw-),  instead  of
replacing  it.

„ „ 9th  (N-)  class  frequently  in  the  North-western  Branch
languages  (Benga  and  Fernandian  excepted), — in  a few
cases  in  the  Kafir  and  Setshuana  dialects,  and  in  Tette.
N.B.  Prefixed  to  the  9th  (as  ma-w-)  in  Tette,  Dikele,
Dualla,  and  Isubu.

„ „ 15th  (ItU-)  class  in  Sexlapi,  Kikamba,  Otyiherero,  Sindonga,
and  in  the  Kongo  Genus  (Kongo  and  Mpongwe).  N.B.
Prefixed  to  the  15th  prefix  (as  ma-Sw-),  in  some  cases,  in
Otyihererd  and  Sindonga.

„ „ 1st  (MXT-)  class  in  a few  special  cases  in  Kafir,  Zulu,  Sesuto,
Sena,  (perhaps  Kikamba,')  aud  Kongo.

„ „ 3rd  (OTtX-)  class  in  Sexlapi  (in  which  correspondence  the
6th  prefix  has,  however,  more  of  a collective  meaning),  in
Dikele,  and  perhaps  in  Mpongwe.

„ „ 13th  (ItA-)  class  in  Nano  and  Dikele.

„ „ 7th  (Itl-)  class,  very  doubtful,  in  one  Sindonga  noun.

This  (sixth)  class  is  said  also  to  correspond  as  Singular
TO  THE  4th  (Ml-)  class  in  one  case  in  Dikele,  which  is,  however,
very  doubtful.

7.  seventh  prefix  : K.I-.

522.  With  this  modification,  that  the  identity  of  the
forms  (vi-  and  i-)  in  the  North-western  Branch  with


Review  of  the  Seventh  Derivative  Prefix  of  Nouns.  263

this  prefix  is  not  perfectly  certain  (§§  503  and  507),  we
may  state  that  the  seventh  prefix  (KI-)  is  met  with  in
all  South  African  Bantu  languages.

FOKMS.  kl-  in  the  Zangian  Genus,  in  Kihiau^  Angola,  and  Kongo
— in  the  two  latter  languages  written  in  Portuguese  orthog-
raphy qui-.

ke-  once  or  twice  in  Kongo.

ikl-  or  ik-  in  Makua.

tyl-  in  Otyihererd  and  Nano.

ty-  (before  vowels)  in  Otyiherero.

tshl-  in  Tekeza,  Tette,  Sena,  and  perhaps  Kihiau.

tsbe-  occasionally  in  Tekeza.

tsk-  (before  vowels)  in  Sena  and  Kisambala.

dsbl-  in  Kihiau  and  Kinika.

dsh-  (before  vowels)  in  Sena,  Kihamba,  Kinika,  Kisudkeli,
and  Isubu.

ski-  in  Tette  and  Sindonga.
sk-  (before  vowels)  in  Sindonga.
si-  and  s-  in  Kafir,  Zulu,  and  Fernandian.
se-  in  Setshuana.  N.B.  Bayeiye  se-  may  be  due  to  Setshuana
orthography.

ez-  (before  vowels)  in  Mpongwe,
vl-  and  V-  in  Dikele  and  Benga.

1-  in  Benga,  Dualla,  and  Isubu.  N.B.  Makua  i-  is  probably
merely  the  article,  while  the  derivative  prefix  of  the  noun
has  been  omitted.

©-  regularly  in  Mpongwe.

y-  (before  some  vowels)  in  Dualla  and  Isubu.

( — ) The  prefix  omitted,  as  far  as  we  know,  only  in  SeXlapi
and  Makua.

ETYMOLOGY.  Vide  §441.

RANGE  OF  MEANING.  Various, — chiefly  either  instrumental,  or
neutral, — in  Tette  and  Sena  indicating  largeness,  in  Kongo  and  Fernan-
dian used  for  the  formation  of  diminutives.  (§§  430,  503,and  514.)
CORRESPONDENCE.  This  class  coeeesponds  as  Singular
TO  THE  8th  (P1-)  class  in  the  South-eastern  Branch  and  Middle
Branch  languages,  and  in  Dualla.  N.B.  Although  this
correspondence  has  not  yet  been  proved  in  Tekeza,  Makua,
and  Bayeiye,  we  do  not  doubt  that  it  also  takes  place  in
these  languages.

„ „ 12th  (TU-)  class  in  the  North-western  Branch  languages.

„ „ 4th  (MI-)  class  in  one  noun  in  Dikele,  doubtful.

6th  (MA-)  class,  very  doubtful,  in  one  Sindonga  noun.


>1  «


264


The  Concord.


THE  SEVENTH  (KLI-)  & EIGHTH  (PI-)  PREFIXES.


523.  The  eighth  prefix  (PI-)  probably  occurs  in  all
South  African  Bantv  languages, — although,  as  yet  in


Review  of  the  Eighth  Derivative  Prefix  of  Nouns.  265

Tekeza,  Makua,  and  Bayeiye,  the  forms  of  this  prefix
have  not  been  ascertained.

FOEMS.  pi-  in  Sena.  N.B.  psi-,  on  p.  174,  is  a misprint,
bl-  in  the  North-western  Branch  languages,
be-  (a  variety  of  bi-)  in  Benga,  Dmlla,  and  Isuhu.
vi-  in  Otyihererd,  Sindonga,  Nano,  and  Kisamhala.
vy-  (before  vowels)  in  Kisamhala.
vl-  or  wi-  in  Kihiau,  Kinika,  and  Kisudheli.
psl-  in  Tette.

zl-  and  z-  in  Kafir  and  Zulu.

11-  or  f 1-  in  Setshuana.
bl-  (1-)  in  Kihiau  and  Angola.

1-  in  Kikamba,  Sindonga,  Angola,  Kongo,  Mpongwe,  and
Fernandian.

y-  in  Angola,  Kongo,  and  Mpongwe.

(— ) The  prefix  may  be  elided  in  SeXlapi  and  Mpongwe.

COKRESPONDENCE.  This  class  corresponds  as  Plural

TO  THE  7th  (KX-)  class  regularly  in  the  South-eastern  Branch  and
Middle  Branch  languages, — and  occasionally  in  Dualla.

„ „ 13th  (XLA-)  class  regularly  in  the  North-western  Branch
languages  and  in  Kisamhala.

„ „ 14th  (BU-)  class  regularly  in  Nano.

„ „ 5th  (X>I-)  class  in  one  doubtful  case  in  Fernandian.

9.  NINTH  PREEIX  : N-.

524.  The  ninth  prefix  (N-)  occurs  in  all  South  African
Bantu  languages.

FORMS,  n-  in  all  Bantu  languages.  N.B.  Sometimes  a short
vowel  precedes  the  nasal,  as  in-  in  Tekeza,  Sena,  Tette,
and  Makua, — en-  in  Tekeza,  Kinika,  and  Bayeiye, — un-  in
Kinika  and  Kisuaheli.

n-*.’  (with  the  initial  consonant  of  the  stem  strengthened)  in
the  Kafir  and  Setshuana  dialects,  and  in  the  Kongo  Genus.
N.B.  The  only  form  in  the  Kongo  language,
m-  before  labials,  in  all  South  African  Bantu  languages,
excepting  Kongo.  N.B.  Sometimes  a short  vowel  precedes
this  nasal,  as  im-  in  Tekeza  and  Angola, — em-  in  Tekeza
and  Kinika.

m-*.'  (with  the  initial  consonant  of  the  stem  strengthened)  in
the  Kafir  and  Setshuana  dialects,  and  in  Mpongwe.
ri-  before  gutturals,  in  Otyihererd,  Sindonga,  Nano,  and  Isnhu,


266


The  Concord.


FORMS  OF  THE  NINTH  (N-)  PREFIX.


SEXLAPI.


SENA.


MAKUA.


KIKAMBA.


KINIKA.


KISAMBAXA.


OTYIHERERO.


SINDONGA.


NANO.


KONGO.


MPONGWE.


DIKELE.


BENGA.

DUAXLA.

ISUBUt


FERNANDIAN.


► n-’


m-’.’  4


r

(-)

J

“-•••  1

1 J

in-


im-


n-


I (i)n-


y m-  ^


n-


I («)n-  |-


en-  em-


m-


(-)


n-


J-  m-


n-


y (-)


im-


(-)•••


)-  n-  m-  ^


y (-)


*-  J


Approximate  Forms  of  some  Original  Bantu  Nouns  of  the  Ninth  (N-)  Class.

-KUB0  9.  “hippopotamus,”  pi.  TXIS-KUBO 10.  (p.  206) ; N-GUA  {tt-BUA)  9.  “ dog,”  pi.  TlKT-GfM  10.  (SS  235  and
-BUTI 9.  “ goat,”  pi.  •SXSX-BVTI 10.  (p.  230)  ; 277,  p.  247)  ;

-GILA  9.  “ way,  road,”  pi.  ^XTA-GILA  10.  (p.  201  note)  ; GU  9.  “ house,  hut,”  pi.  WIA.-N-DAGU  6.  fpp.  195

.HC7ZH9.“rain,”pl.TIN-J5Z7ZH  10.(§118,pp.l95&240);  231,  and  240).


Review  of  the  Ninth  Derivative  Prefix  of  Nouns.  267


n-‘.‘  (with  the  initial  consonant  of  the  stem  strengtliened)  in
Se\lapi.

( — ) The  prefix  very  frequently  elided  or  omitted  in  all  South
Afi'ican  Bantu  languages,  Zulu  and  Kongo  excepted.  N.B.
Cases  of  such  omission  have  not  yet  been  proved  in
Bayeiye  and  Fernandian  ; but  we  cannot  doubt  that  they
also  occur  in  these  languages.

( — ) •.*  (with  sferengthened  initial  of  the  stem)  in  Setshudna
and  Mpongwe.

CORRESPONDENCE.  This  class  corresponds  as  Singular
TO  THE  10th  (TIN-)  class  in  all  South  African  Bantu  languages,
excepting  Dikele.

„ „ 6th  (BIA-)  class  (by  preference)  in  the  North-western  Branch
languages,  Benga  and  Fernandian  excepted ; — rarely  in  the
Kafr  and  Setshudna  dialects,  and  Tette.  N.B.  The  6th
(ma-)  prefix  is  frequently  prefixed  to  the  9th  (as  ma-n-,
ma-»i-)  in  Tette,  Dikele,  Dualla,  and  Isubu.

„ „ 12th  (TTT-)  class,  in  one  doubtful  case  in  Kikdmba.

„ „ 2nd  (BA-)  class  in  Kongo,  Dualla,  and  Isuhu  (personal
nouns).  N.B.  The  2nd  prefix  is,  however,  prefixed  to
the  9th  (as  ba-w-,  a-n-'.‘,  a-'.',  &c.).

10.  TENTH  PREFIX  : TIN-.

525.  The  tenth  prefix  (TIN-  or  THIN-)  is  met  with
in  all  South  African  Bantu  languages.  The  Makua  form
of  this  prefix  has,  however,  not  yet  been  ascertained.

FORMS,  thin-,  tin-  (tl-in-),  tim-,  thl-,  and  the-  in  Tekeza.
zin-  in  Kafir,  Zulu,  Tette,  Sena,  Bayeiye,  and  Kongo.  N.B,
With  strengthened  initial  of  the  stem  (zin-'.‘)  in  Kafir,
Zulu,  and  Kongo.

zlm-  (before  labials)  in  Kafir,  Zulu,  and  Tette.  N.B.  With
strengthened  initial  of  the  stem  (zlm-*.*)  in  Kafir  and
Zulu.

zi-  in  Kafir,  Zidu,  and  Tette.

lin-*.',  lim-*.‘,  lin-'.',  and  (with  strengthened  initial
of  the  stem)  in  Setshudna.  N.B.  In  Moffat’s  last  edition
of  the  New  Testament  in  SeXlapi,  r takes  the  place  of  I in
this  prefix,  as  well  as  in  the  eighth,
sin-'.’,  si-'.',  and  shl-’.'  (with  strengthened  initial  of  the
stem)  rarely  in  Mpongwe.
shin-  (ffln-),  shim-,  and  shl-  in  Angola.
shon-  (jon-),  shorn-,  and  sho-  in  Angola.


268


The  Concord.


FORMS  OF  THE  TENTH  (TIN-)  PREFIX,


s

u

S5

•<

n

%

H

<

H

tt

P

O

KAFIR.

j-  zia-*.*,  n-v,  zim-’.',  m-,  zl-

ZULU.

i

SExLAPI.

rln-*.*  rim-*.*  rin-'/  fl-'.'  (— )

SESUTO.

lin-*.*  U-'.*

TEKEZA.

thin-  thlm-  thi-  the-

&

SB

H

0

»

t=>

<S

n

!S

<

o

TEXTS.

j-  zin-  zim-  -

r '

SENA.

. n-  m-  .

MAKUA.

KIHIAU.

1 - 1

a-  m-

' (-)

ZANGIAN  GENUS.  |

KIKAMBA.

j J

KINIKA.

1 (n)n-  ni-

en-  em-  mi-

SUAHELI.

KISAMBAXA.

a-  ay-  ^

SB

BAYEITE.

zin-

&

SB

H

&

<

P

P

n

otyiherer6.

S’on-  S’om-  ■S’’on-

■ s’o-

SINDONGA.

a-  m-  a-

NANO,

&’on-  S’om-  Son-

ANGOLA.

shin-, shon-, shim-, shorn-, Shi-, she-, ( — )

6

o

o

Ss

o

M

KONGO.

zin-'.'  a-'.'

MPONGWE.

sin-'.'  in-'.'  im-'.'  s(h)i-'.'  i-'.'

W

u

:zi

<

a

n

H

n

W

H

H

O

SB

DIKELE.

1

(-)

BENGA.

1

1

J-  a-  m-  -{

)

r

DUALLA.

i

ISUBU.

a-  J

FERNANDIAN.

i-

Review  of  the  Tenth  Derivative  Prefix  of  Nouns.  269

^’on-,  3’om-,  and  ^’on-  in  Otyiherero  and  Nano.

S-'o  in  OtyihererO.,  Sindonga,  and  Nano.

n-  in  Kafr,  Zulu,  Sena,  Kihiau,  the  Zangian  Genus,  Sindonga,
Kongo,  Bcnga,  Dualla,  Isuhu,  and  Fernandian.  N.B.  AVith
strengthened  initial  of  the  stem  (n-'.’)  in  Kafir,  Zulu,  and
Kongo. — A short  vowel  sometimes  precedes  the  nasal,  as —
un-  in  Kisuaheli  and  Kinika, — and  en-  in  Kinika.

m-  (before  labials)  in  Kafr,  Zulu,  Sena,  Kihiau,  the  Zangian
Genus,  Sindonga,  JSenga,  Dualla,  Isuhu,  and  Fernandian.
N.B.  With  strengthened  initial  of  the  stem  (m-'.’)  in  Kafir
and  Zulu. — A short  vowel  sometimes  precedes  the  nasal,  as
em-  in  Kinika.

in-  and  Im-  (with  strengthened  initial  of  the  stem)  in
Mpongwe.

ni-  (before  the  11th  prefix,  as  ni-w-)  sometimes  in  Kiniha
and  Kisuaheli.

ny-  sometimes  in  Kisamhala.

ml-  (in  certain  combinations)  in  Kiniha.

i-  ill  Fernandian,  and  (with  strengthened  initial  of  the  stem,  as
1-'.’)  in  Mpongwe.

( — ) The  prefix  elided  in  the  Kafr  language,  in  SeXlapi,
Tette,  Sena,  Kihiau,  the  Zangian  Genus,  Angola,  Dihele,
Benga,  Dualla,  and  Isuhu.  N.B.  The  strengthened  initial
of  the  stem  is,  howevei’,  retained  ( — *.•)  in  SeXlapi.
CORRESPONDENCE.  This  class  corresponds  as  Plural
TO  THE  9th  (N-)  class  in  all  Bantu  languages,  excepting  Dikele.

„ „ 11th  (liU-)  class  in  the  South-eastern  Branch  languages,  in
Kihiau,  in  the  Zangian  Genus,  in  Otyihererd,  Sindonga,
Nano,  Kongo,  (perhaps  in  Mpongwe,)  in  Dihele  and  Fer-
nandian.

,,  „ 13th  (KA-)  class  in  Bayeiye  and  Nano.

„ „ 14th  (BU-)  class  in  Kisamhala  and  Benga.

„ 1st  (B11T-)  class  in  Angola,  in  nouns  transferred  from  tlie  9th
(N-)  to  the  1st  class.

11.  ELEVENTH  PREFIX  : XlU-.

526,  The  eleventh  (LTJ-)  class  has  not  yet  been  found
in  Tette,  Sena,  Makua,  or  Benga, — although  it  may  exist
in  these  languages.  It  has  amalgamated  with  the  5th  (le-)
class  in  Sesuto,  with  the  14th  (u-)  in  Kisuaheli,  and  with
the  3rd  (o-)  in  Mpongwe.  In  the  remaining  South  African
Bantu  languages  the  11th  exists  as  a separate  class.

Block,  S.  Afr.  Comp,  Grammar,  1 -N


270


The  Concord.


FORMS  OP  THE  ELEVENTH  (1.V-),  TWELFTH  (TW-),
AND  THIRTEENTH  (HLA-)  PREFIXES.


KAFIR  SPEC.


SExLAPI.


SESUTO.


SENA.


MAKUA.


KISAMBAEA.


BATEIYE.


ottiherer6.


SINDONGA.


MPONGWE.


DIKELE.


BENGA.


DUALLA.


ISUBU.


FERNANDIAN


lu-


lo-


-(-)


(le-)


li-


lu-


u-


lu-


u-  w-


lu-


lo-  ro-


-I


ru-


(-)


Mu  —

I

J 1-  u-


(0-)


la-  &’a-


1-


lu-  lo-


}.u-

tu-

j-  tu-

|tu-

] 1.

|.o,_

to-,  tw-,  t-

(KA-)


(XA-)


(K-A-)


>ka-


k-


T r


J^ka-  -


ffa-


a-  dsk-


y e-


y-


Review  of  the  Eleventh  Derivative  Prefix  of  Nouns.  271

FOKMS.  lu-  in  Kafir,  Zulu,  Kihidu,  Kinika,  Kisambala,  Sindonga,
Nano,  Angola,  Kongo,  and  Fernandian.

10-  in  SeXlapi  and  Fernandian.  N.B.  Bayeiye  lo-  may  be
Setshuana  orthography.

11-  in  Tekeza  (Lourenzo  Marques).

le-  in  Sesuto,  homophonous  with  the  5th  prefix.

la-  and  ^’a-  in  Dikele.

1-  in  Kongo,  Dualla,  Isubu,  and  Fernandian.

ru-  in  Otyihererd  and  Sindonga.

ro-  in  Bayeiye.

u-  in  Kikdmba,  Kisudheli,  and  Kongo,  N.B.  In  Kisuaheli
homophonous  with  the  14th  prefix.

w-  (before  vowels)  in  Kisudheli,  homophonous  with  the  14th
prefix.

o-  in  Mpongwe,  homophonous  with  the  3rd  prefix.

( — ) The  prefix  elided  in  Kafir,  Zulu,  SeXlapi,  and  Nano.
ETYMOLOGY.  Vide  § 441.

KANGE  OF  MEANING.  In  Otyihererd  the  missionaries  believe
that  they  have  observed  in  this  prefix  the  idea  of  length,  extension,  &c.
It  tallies  curiously  with  this,  that  in  Timneh  (a  Bantu  language  spoken
near  Sierra  Leone)  “ rope-like  or  creeping  plants  have  commonly  the
prefix  ra-  in  the  singular.”  (Schlenker’s  Grammar  of  the  Temue
language,  p.  38.)

CORRESPONDENCE.  This  class  corresponds  as  Singular
TO  THE  10th  (TIN-)  class  in  the  South-eastern  Branch  languages,
in  Kihiau,  in  the  Zangian  Genus,  in  Otyihererd,  Sindonga,
(perhaps  in  Nano,)  in  the  Kongo  Genus  (Kongo  and
Mpongwe),  in  Dikele,  and  Fernandian.  N.B.  The  11th
prefix  may  have  the  10th  prefixed  (as  ni-w-)  in  Kinika  and
Kisuaheli.

„ „ 6th  (WCA-)  class  in  the  Kafir  and  Setshuana  dialects,  in
Tshiyao  (p.  178,  note),  Suaheli,  Angola,  Dikele,  Dualla,
and  Isuhu.  N.B.  The  6th  prefix  is  regularly  prefixed  to  the
11th  in  Angola  (as  ma-Zw-),  and  sometimes  in  Isubu  (as

ma-Z-).

„ „ 12th  (TIT-)  class  regularly  in  Otyihererd,  Sindonga,  and
Kongo.

12.  TWELFTH  prefix:  TU-.

527.  The  twelfth  prefix  (TU-)  occurs  in  all  the  North-
western Branch  languages,  in  Tette,  Sena,  Kikamba,  Otyi-
herero,  Sindonga,  Angola,  and  Kongo, — but  is  extinct  in
the  South-eastern  Branch,  and  in  Kinika,  Kisuaheli,  and


272


The  Concord,


Mpongwe.  It  has  not  yet  been  met  with  in  Makua,
Kihiau,  Kisambala,  Bayeiye,  and  Nano,  although  it  may
possibly  occur  in  one  or  more  of  these  languages.

FORMS,  tu-  in  all  Middle  Branch  languages  which  possess  this
prefix,  viz.,  m Tette,  Sena,  Kikamha,  Otjiherero,  Sindonga,
Angola,  and  Kongo,
to-,  tw-,  and  t-  in  Fernandian,
lo-  in  Benga,  Dualla,  and  Isubu.
la-  in  Dikele.

1-  in  Dikele,  Benga,  and  Isubu.

RANGE  OF  MEANING.  Diminutive  Plural  in  Tette,  Sena,
Kikamha,  Angola,  and  Fernandian ; in  other  languages  it  has  a
different  meaning.

CORRESPONDENCE.  This  class  corresponds  as  Plural
TO  THE  13th  (K.A-)  class  regularly  in  Telle,  Sena,  Kikamha,  and
Angola.

„ „ 11th  (liU-)  class  regularly  in  Olyikerero,  Sindonga,  and
Kongo.

„ „ 7th  (ILI-)  class  regularly  in  the  North-western  Branch
languages.

„ „ 5th  (I>I-)  class,  in  a few  cases  (probably  mistaken  for  the
7th),  in  Dualla  and  Isubu.

„ „ 9th  (N-)  class,  in  one  doubtful  case,  in  Kikamha.

13.  THIRTEENTH  PREFIX:  K.A-.

528.  Provided  that  our  identification  of  the  forms  of
the  13th  prefix  (KA-)  he  correct,  we  may  say  that  it  is
found  in  all  the  North-western  Branch  languages,  and  also
in  all  the  Middle  Branch  languages,  excepting  Suaheli  and
Mjiongwe.*  In  the  two  latter  languages,  as  well  as  in
those  of  the  South-eastern  Branch,  it  is  now  obsolete.
FORMS,  ka-  in  all  those  Middle  Branch  languages  in  ivliich  it
occurs.  N.B.  This  was  also  the  old  Kafir  form,  as  in  pa-
Ita-fj.  (Fide  § 436.)
k-  (before  vowels)  in  Kikamha.
ga-  in  Nano,  besides  ka-.

XA-  in  ScXlapi,  and  H'A-  in  Sesuto,  obsolete  forms,  = Kafir
KA-.  (§§  87  and  436.)

* Notwithstanding  that  the  1 3th  prefix  lias  no/  yet  been  met  with  in
the  Kihiau  vocabularies,  it  is  not  impossible  that  it  may  occur  in  this
language.


Review  of  the  Thirteenth  Derivative  Prefix  of  Nouns.  273

dsh'  (before  vowels)  and  a-  (before  consonants)  in  Dikcle.
y-  (before  some  vowels)  in  JBenga,  Dualla^  and  Isubu.
e-  regularly  in  Benga,  Dmlla,  Isubu,  and  Fernandian.
ETYMOLOGY.  Perhaps  related  to  the  Kafir  genitive  particle  ka-
(Setshuana  ya)  “of.”  Vide  § 441.

RANGE  OF  MEANING.  Diminutive  Singular  in  the  Middle
Branch  languages,  excepting  in  Kongo.  It  has,  however,  no  diminutive
meaning  in  the  North-western  Branch  languages.
CORRESPONDENCE.  Tms  class  corresponds  as  Singular
TO  THE  12th  (TU-)  class  regularly  in  Tette,  Sena,  Kikamba,  and
Angola,

„ „ 8th  (PI-)  class  regularly  in  the  North-western  Branch  lan-
guages, and  in  Kisambala.

„ „ 14th  (BIT-)  class  regularly  in  Otyiherero.

„ „ 6th  (MA-)  class  frequently  in  Nano,  and  at  least  once  in
Dikele.

„ „ 10th  (TIN-)  class  in  Baijeiye  and  Nano.


14.  FOURTEENTH  PREFIX  : BIT-.

529.  The  fourteenth  prefix  (BU-)  is  common  to  all
South  African  Bantu  languages, — although,  in  some  of
them,  it  appears  to  have  almost  amalgamated  with  other
classes.

FORMS-  bu-  in  Kafir,  Zulu,  Tekeza,  Benga,  Isubu,  and  Fernandian.
bo-  in  Setshuana,  and  in  the  North-western  Branch  languages,
bw-  (before  vowels)  sometimes  in  Benga,  Dualla,  and  Isubu.
bi-  usually  in  Dikele.
be-  in  Tekeza,  doubtful.

b-  (before  some  vowels)  in  Kafir,  Zulu,  Dikele,  Benga,  Dualla,
and  Isubu.

u-  in  all  Middle  Branch  languages  here  described,— excejoft'ng'
Mpougwe,  and  perhaps  Bayeiyc.
w-  (before  vowels)  in  Makua,  Suciheli,  and  Angola.
ow-  (before  vowels)  in  Mpongwe.

O-  in  Bayeiye,  Kongo,  and  Mpongwe,

(— ) The  prefix  sometimes  elided  in  the  Kafir  and  Setshuana
dialects,  in  Kihidu  and  Kinika.

RANGE  OF  MEANING.  This  prefix  implies  very  generally  an
abstract  meaning,  and  in  a few  nouns  in  Sexlapi  it  has  a local  one.
Ill  Otyihcrerd,  besides  the  abstract  meaning  in  the  singular,  it  is  also
used  in  a plural  sense  with  reference  to  diminutives.


274

FOURTEENTH  (BU-)


The  Concord.

AND  FIFTEENTH  (KW-)  PREFIXES.


KAFIK.


SEXLAPI.


SESUTO.


TEKEZA.


TETTE.


KIEAMBA.


KINIKA.


SUAHELI.


KISAMBAEA.


BAYEIYE.


OTYIHERERO.


SINDONGA.


NANO.


ANGOLA.


KONGO.


MPONGWE.


-bu-


b-


H-)


bo-


bu-  be-


w-


u-  ^


(-)


(-)


w-


^ u-


w-


ow-1


o-


'

■ ku-

kw-  -1  —

U-

xo-  (go-)  (— )

b'o-

(go-)

*

ko-

■ ku--

u-

w-

-

-

- ku--

kw-

ko-

1

r

J

ko-

gu-

1

r

J

[

Cow-

0-)

DIKELE.


bi-  1


bu-


DUAELA.


!■  b-

" bo-  Vbw-


-bu-


FERNANDIAN.


Review  of  the  Fourteenth  Derivative  Prefix  of  Nouns.  275

CORRESPONDENCE.  This  class  cokresponds  as  Singular
TO  THE  6th  (MA-)  class  in  Setshuana,  Sena,  Makua,  Kihidu,
Kikdmba,  Otyiherero,  Angola,  Kongo,  Mpongwe,  Dihele,
Isuhu,  and  Fernandian.  N.B.  The  ma-  may  he  prefixed  (as
Vtl£k.-BU-')  in  Kikamba,  Otyiherero,  Angola,  and  Dikele.

„ „ 4ith  (MI-)  class  in  Kinika,  Benga,  Dualla,  and  Isuhu.  N.B.
The  fourth  prefix  may  be  prefixed  (as  mi-o-)  in  Benga  and
Dualla.

„ „ 8th  (P1-)  class  in  Nano,  the  4th  (ml-)  prefix  being  prob-
ably softened  here  (as  it  sometimes  is)  to  the  form  of  the
8th  (vl-).

„ „ loth  (TKIZT-)  class  in  Kisuaheli  and  Kisambala,  and  in
one  case  in  Benga.  N.B.  The  10th  may  be  prefixed  to  the
14th  prefix  (as  nl-w-)  in  Kisuaheli.  This  correspondence
probably  originates  in  the  fom-teenth  prefix  having  been  con-
• founded  by  homophony  with  the  eleventh.

This  class  also  corresponds  as  Plural
TO  THE  13th  (KA-)  class  regularly  in  Otyikererd.

15.  FIFTEENTH  PREFIX  : ZLV-.

530.  The  fifteenth  prefix  (KTJ-)  is  met  with  in  all
the  South-eastern  Branch  and  Middle  Branch  languages,
excepting  Mpongwe,  where  it  has  apparently  amalgamated
with  the  3rd  prefix  (ow-).  The  fifteenth  class  does  not
occur  in  the  North-western  Branch  languages,  excepting
a faint  trace  of  it  in  Isuhu.

FORMS,  ku-  in  Kafir,  Zulu,  Tekeza,  Tette,  Sena,  Kihidu,  in  the
Zangian  Genus,  in  Otyikererd,  Sindonga,  Angola,  and  Kongo.
kw-  (before  vowels)  in  Kafir,  Zulu,  and  Sudkeli.
ko-  in  Tekeza,  Bayeiye,  and  Sindonga.
k-  (before  certain  vowels)  in  Zulu,  and  Otyikererd.
gru-  in  Nano.

XO-  (ffo-)  in  SeXlapi.
h'o-  (so-)  in  Sesuto.
u-  and  w-  in  Makua.

ow-  and  o-  in  Mpongwe,  homophonous  with  the  third  prefix,
and  apparently  amalgamated  with  the  3rd  class.

( — ) The  prefix  does  not  appear  in  one  SeXlapi  noun,  which
has,  however,  probably  been  transfeiTed  to  the  15th  from  the
16th  class.  (§  435.)  N.B.  The  omission  of  this  (or  the  kindred
17th)  prefix  in  the  Zangian  Genus  has  occasioned  the  curious
construction  of  the  Zangian  locative  cases.  (§§  478—480.)


276  The  Concord.

ETYMOLOGY.  Originally  identical  with  the  preposition  hu-  “ to.”
(§§  433  and  434.)

RANGE  OP  MEANING.  Infinitive  and  local.
CORRESPONDENCE.  This  class  corresponds  as  Singular
TO  THE  6th  (niA-)  class  in  SeXlapi,  Kikdmha,  Otyiherero,  Sindonga,
Kongo,  and  Mpongwe.  N.B.  The  6th  prefix  may  be  pre-
fixed (as  ma-ku-)  in  Otyiherero  and  Sindonga.

SIXTEENTH  (PA-),  SEVENTEENTH,  AND  16.  sixteenth
EIGHTEENTH  PREFIXES.  prefix  : PA-.


531.  The  six-
teenth (PA-)
class  includes
very  few  nouns,
and  in  most  lan-
guages in  which
it  occurs,  only
one.  This  pre-
fixhasbeenmet
with  in  Tette,
Sena,Kihidu,  in
theZanffianGe-
nus,  in  Otyihe-
rero, and  prob-
ably in  Isubu.
It  has  not  been
found  in  any  of
the  languages  of
the  South-east-
ern Branch,  nor
in  those  of  the
North-western
(excepting  per-
haps in  one  case
in  Isubu),  nor
in  the  Kongo
Genus.  Whe-
ther it  occurs


C)

{5

H

U

<3

n

<

o

TETTE.

SENA.

1 pa-

MAKUA.

KIHIAU.

pa-

&

:z;

u

o

s?

<

s

55

•<

N

KIKAMBA.

wa-

■(-)

(-)

KINIKA.

va-

SUAHELI.

pa-  ma-

KISAMBAXA.

ha-

EH

55

EATEIYE,

s

'A

<

n

55

P

n

OTYIHERERO.

po-

ko-

mo-

SINDONGA.

NANO.

ANGOLA.

P

o

o

55

O

14

KONGO.

MPONGWE.

W

o

55

<

m

55

A

Eh

»

K

EH

(A

O

55

DIKEXE,

BENGA.

DUALLA.

ISUBU.

o-

FERNANDIAN.

Review  of  the  Sixteenth  Derivative  Prefix  of  Nouns.  277

in  Makua,  Bayeiye,  Sindonga,  Nano,  and  Angola,  is
uncertain.

FORMS,  pa-  in  Tette,  Sena,  Kihidu,  and  Kisudheli,
va-  in  Kiniha.
wa-  in  Kihdmha.
ma-  (besides  pa-)  in  Kisudheli,
ha-  in  Kisamhala.
po-  in  Otyihererd.

O-  in  Isubu.

ETYMOLOGY.  Identical  with  the  preposition  pa-  ‘‘at,  near."
(§§  435  and  436.)

RANGE  OF  MEANING.  Near  locality ; without  correspondence
to  any  other  prefix  as  singular  or  plural.

17.  SEVENTEENTH  PREFIX  : XC.O-.

532.  The  seventeenth  prefix  (KO-)  occurs  only  in
Otyiherero,  and  perhaps  in  the  Zangian  Genus.

FORMS,  ho-  in  Otyihererd.

( — ) The  prefix  elided  (with  -ni  suffixed  to  the  stem)  in  the
Zangian  Genus  (Kikdmba,  Kinika,  Kisudheli,  &c.).
ETYMOLOGY.  Related  either  to  the  Kafir  preposition  hwa-  (Se-
tshuana  kua-')  “ from,”  or  to  Au-  “ to,  from.”  In  the  latter  case,
this  class  has  merely  branched  off  from  the  15th  (ku-)  class.

RANGE  OF  MEANING.  Distant  locality ; without  correspondence
to  any  other  prefix  as  singular  or  plural.

18.  EIGHTEENTH  PREFIX  : MO’-

533.  The  eighteenth  prefix  (MO-)  is  only  met  with
in  Otyiherero,  and  probably  in  the  Zangian  Genus  (Ki-
kdmba,  Kinika,  Kisudheli,  &c.).

FORMS,  mo-  in  Otyihererd.

( — ) The  prefix  elided  (with  -ni  suflixed  to  the  stem)  in  the
Zangian  Genus.

ETYMOLOGY.  The  meaning  of  the  Zangian  preposition  mwa-
“from”  appears  to  be  too  different  from  that  of  the  18th  prefix  to  admit
of  a comparison.  It  is  more  probable  that  the  preposition  mu-  “ in  ”
is  to  be  looked  for  in  this  prefix ; and  that  the  18th  class  has  branched
off  from  the  3rd  (mu-)

RANGE  OF  MEANING.  Present  locality ; without  correspond-
ence to  any  other  prefix  as  singular  or  plural.

£leik,S.  Afr.  Comp.  Grammar.  1 o


278


The  Concord.


SYNOPTICAL  Table  of  the  Systems  adopted  by  different


DATE.

CO

CO

o

CO

o (T'X  a
xo  to  la

OO  00  CO

1855.

1859.

CO

00

MSS.

1865.

00

CO

NOMEN-

CLATUKE.

1

Declensions.

“ Begyndelser.”

Species.

“ Classen.”
Classes.

1 Species.
1 Classes.

Declensions.

Concords.

Classes.

1

Classes.

“ Genera.”

AUTHORS.

(^Languages.')

! BOYCE  *

i

SCHREUDER.

§gs

.

M H H
P40P^

COLENSO.

{Zulu,')

1

ARCHBELL.

{SetshuSna.)

HUGHES.

W-CT

Pd  ~
H Co

9 «

BLEEK.

iffitr-

1.

1.

}■•

-I

1.

1.

1 1.  & 2.

1.  & 2.  1

1.

BA-

9.

9.

6.

2.

2.

IttU-

6.

6.

1 '•

" 1

2.

3.

1

3.  {

3.

MX-

12.

13.

7.

4.

4.

x>x-

2.

2.

1 "

H

(3.  ?)

7.

1 '•

n

5.

MA-

10.

10.

9.

8.

6.

K.I-

4.

4.

h-

4.

10.

1

7.

PI-

11.

12.

8.

12.

8.

N-

3.

3.

3.

3.

3.

11.

4.

4.

9.

TIN-

11.

11.

3.  & 5.

3.  & 6.

8.

12.

4.,  7.,&  8.

4.  & 6.

10.

Z.1X-

5.

5.

5.

6.

10.

9.

7.

6.

11.

TU-

12.

K.A-

5.

14.

BV-

7.

7.

7.

7.

5.

5.

8.

6.

13.

XS.U-

8.

8.

8.

8.

6.

10.

9.

15.

PA-

9.

8.

16.

K.O-

11.

MO-

12.

* Also  in  the  later  editions  of  BOYCE’S  Grammar  of  the  Kafir  Languafre,  1844  and  1863.


The  different  Systems  of  Classifying  the  Bantu  Nouns.  279


Authors  for  the  Classification  of  Nouns  in  the  Bantu  Languages.


CD

lO

OO

1659.

00

00

1855.

1855.

00

P

P

PH

O

P

P

0

m

02

pa

M

Classes.

“ Principia-
tiones.”

j Declensions.

Declensions.

1

Classes.  j

Classes.  |

j

Classes.

BLEEK.*

<

§

O 04
2 §

PRESTON

AND

BEST.

{Dikele.)

E e

r N ^

X R

3s

W s
cc  3

MERRICK.

{Isuhu.')

1.

2.

1

4.  ^

1

J

'

} *■

5.

1.

2.

Sng.

2.

1.  & 2.

Pd.

3.

IH

[ " {

3.

}

3.

Sng.

4.

3.  & 4.

Pl.

1.

1 " •

1

2.

3.

6.

Sng.

6.

1.  & 2.

2.,  5.,  7.,  & 9.

3.,  5,,  & 6.

00

CD

Pl.

7.

1

2.  .

8.

6.

7.

4.

Sng.

8.

1.

1.

4.

1.

Pl.

9.

1.

7.

6.  & 8.

7.  & 9.

Sng.

10.

1.  & 4.

6.

8.

9.

Pl.

11.

7.

4.

5.  & 6.

6.

6.

Sng.

12.

7.  & 8.

8.

6.

7.

4.

Pl.

13.

6.

1.

1.

4.

1.

Sng.

14.

2.

[‘■1

9.

4.

2.

5.

Sng.

15.

5.

Sng.

16.

P

O

o

p

17.

18.

•Also  in  HAHN‘3  “ Gramm,  des  Herer6  ” 1857,  FREDOUX’S  “ Sechuana  Gramm,”  1864,  &c.


280


The  Concord.


f.  THE  DIFFEKENT  ST8TEMS  OF  CLASSIFICATIOK.

534.  In  order  to  guide  the  student  in  the  perusal  of  other
South  African  grammars,  and  to  facilitate  the  comparison
of  our  nomenclature  with  that  of  other  grammarians,  the
Synoptical  Table  on  pp.  278  and  279  has  been  con-
structed. From  this,  it  will  be  seen  that  every  one  of  the
various  modes  of  classification  is  mainly  founded  upon  one
of  two  principles.  The  majority  of  these  systems  combine
the  singular  and  plural  forms  corresponding  to  each  other
into  one  class.  The  objections  to  this  method  have  been
already  stated,  § 45  9.  Although  Apple  yard  theoretically
agrees  with  us  on  this  point,  he  still  thinks  that  in
particular  grammars ” “it  may  be  as  well  to  include  such
corresponding  prefixes  under  one  class,”  “ as  bringing  the
matter  into  more  convenient  shape.”  In  this,  I cannot
agree  with  this  excellent  grammarian.  The  plan  might
answer  suflSciently  well,  if  it  concerned  the  forms  of  the
nouns  alone ; but  in  giving  the  other  forms  of  concord,  it
is  surely  superfluous  and  encumbering  to  have,  for  Instance,
to  give  doubly  the  forms  of  our  10th  (zin-)  class  in
Kafir,  because  it  corresponds  as  plural  to  the  9th  (n-),  and
also  to  the  11th  (lu-)  class, — or  is  by  A ppleyard  Included
with  them  under  his  3rd  and  5th  “ species  ” respectively.
A few  of  the  systems  of  classification  agree  with  ours
in  assigning  each  distinct  concord-indicating  derivative
prefix  to  a separate  class.  Here,  some  give  in  one
row  all  the  classes  of  the  singular  number,  and  let
the  plural  classes  follow  in  another.  Among  these
grammarians  is  Boyce,  the  compiler  of  the  first  Kafir
Grammar;  he  has,  however,  wrongly  placed  our  8th
and  10th  classes  together  in  his  11th  “declension.”*
The  Zulu  grammarian  Schreuder  has  corrected  this  error,

* In  this  he  is  followed  by  the  Zulu  grammarian  Bktant,  whose
system  has  not  been  incorporated  into  our  table,  as  it  is  only  given  in  an
essay  published  in  a periodical.  It  is  identical  with  Boyce’s,  with  the
exception  that  Boyce’s  2nd  Declension  (our  5th  class)  is  Bryant’s  3rd
Class,  and  Boyce’s  3rd  Declension  (our  0th  class)  is  Bryant’s  2nd  Class.


The  different  Systems  of  Classifying  the  Bantu  Nouns,  281

and  thus  enumerates  thirteen  “ beginnings the  first  ten
of  which  are  identical  in  numbers  with  Boyce’s  declensions.
The  Setshuana  grammarian  Hughes  agrees  with  us  in
our  numeration  of  the  " classes  ” as  far  as  the  4th  of  his
concords  but  in  the  numbering  of  his  remaining  “ con-
cords ” no  clear  principle  can  be  discovered.  In  our  own
classification  (the  numbers  of  which,  as  now  fixed,  date
from  about  the  year  1853)  the  principle  upon  which  the
houses  in  streets  are  so  frequently  numbered,  has  been
(as  far  as  possible)  adopted.  One  side  of  the  street  may
be  supposed  to  contain  all  the  singular  classes  and  odd
numbers,  while  the  other  side  contains  the  plural  classes,
which  are  indicated  by  the  even  numbers.  The  practical
convenience  of  this  method  will,  we  trust,  soon  lead  to
its  general  adoption,  and  thus  obviate  the  interminable
confusion  which  the  practice  of  employing  a different
nomenclature  for  each  language  inevitably  causes.  It  will
be  seen  that  the  only  other  system  of  classifieation,  which
has  been  adopted  by  more  than  one  author,  Is  A ppleyard’s.
This,  besides  being  based  upon  an  arrangement  of  which
we  cannot  approve,  does  not,  of  course,  provide  for  the
enumeration  of  those  classes  which  are  not  to  be  found
in  Kafir ; nor  Is  its  principle  apparently  favorable  to
extension.

g.  THE  ANCIENT  FORMS  OF  THE  DERIVATIVE  PREFIXES  OF  THE  NOUNS.

535.  The  forms  possessed  by  the  derivative  prefixes  of
the  nouns  in  that  language  from  which  the  present  South
African  Bantu  languages  have  descended,  can  be  arrived
at  by  a comparison  of  the  most  primitive  existing  forms
in  the  different  dialects.  ( Vide  Table  on  pp.  282 — 284.)
The  primitive  forms  of  the  prefixes  are  tolerably  constant,
while  most  of  the  secondary  ones  bear  internal  evidence
of  a more  recent  origin,  dating  since  the  division  of  the
one  language  of  the  original  B4ntu  nation  into  different
branches,  genera,  and  species.  It  is  only  in  one  or  two
instances  that  we  cannot  be  quite  sure  as  to  the  form


JtfOSAMBIQUE  GENT7S,


282  The  Concord.

THE  FULLEST  FORMS  OF  THE  DERIVATIVE  PREFIXES


Class  of  Prefix.


KAFIR.


SE^LAPI.


TEKEZA.


MAKUA.


KIBLAMBA.


KISAMBALA.


BAYEIYE.


OTYIHEBERO.


SINDONGA.


NANO.

ANGOLA.


KONGO.


MPONGWE.


BENGA.


DUALLA.


ISUBU.


FERNANDIAN.


ANCIENT  BANTU.


m-


mu-


mo-


xnu-


mu-


^ mu-


mo-


mu-


mu-


mu-


om-


mu-


mo-


mo-


bu-


saxj-


2.


)■  ba-


va-


a-


va-


}


a-


}


wa-


ba-

va-


a-


va-


a-


)■  ba-


n&.-


3.


m-


mu-


}


md-


mu-


mu-


y mu-


om-


ini-

mw-


mo-


mu-

bu-


mv-


4.


I


ml-


}


me-


y mi-


me-


y mi-


in-


- mi-


bi-


mi-


3.


11-


le-


ri-


zi-


rl-


nl-


11-


1-


(-)


11-


>e-(o-S.l-)


ri-


1-


I-  dl-


J


X>X-  (I.X-)


Ancient  Forms  of  the  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.  283


OF  THE  NOUNS  IN  THE  BANTU  LANGUAGES.


6.

7.

8.

9.

10.

11.

■

}

zl-

1

1 zin-*.'

In-

j-  Be-

rin-'.’

lo-

li-

lin-'.'

(le-)

tshl-

thin-

li-

psl-

j-  zin-

pi-

^ ma-

!-  ki-

vi-

- n-

lu-

i-

u-

lu-

u-

)

- n-

J

J

lu-

se-

zin-

lo-

tyl-

1

S’en-

ru-

abl-

&’o-,  n-

'

- lu-

va-

tyi-

Son-

ma-

kl-

!-

shin-

zin-'.'

am-'.’

ez-

sin-’.'

(0-)

1

)■  ma-

} ’*•

y bi-

J

(-)

la-  (S’a-)

1-

1-

dsh-

ba-

si-

n-  i-

lu-

TOLA-

XS.I-

PI-

N-

T»XK-

IiU-

284


The  Concord.


THE  FULLEST  FORMS  OF  THE  BANTU  PREFIXES.  (Con/.)


Class  of  Prefix.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.

n

u

KAFIR.

► (KA-)

bu-

ku-

<

A

n

ZULU.

H

H

SEXBAPI.

(XA-)

bo-

xo-

<

SESUTO.

(K'A-)

ko-

P

o

TEKEZA.

bu-

>

p

TETTE.

tu-

>

1

> ku-

1 pa-

M

C9

U

P

SENA.

;►  ka-

1

oJ

n

S

MAKUA.

u-

o

S

KIHIAU.

■

pa-

09

KIKAMBA,

tu-

j-  ka-

wa-

H

0

KIJSIKA.

- ku-

va-

<

3

SUAHELI.

pa-

KTSAMBAI.A.

J

ka-

H

K

BAYEIYE.

o-

ko-

OTYIHERERO.

)

tu-

■

1

- ku-

po-

P

S5

O

SINDONGA.

ka-

J

•4

a

NANO.

- u-

&U-

n

ANGOLA.

tu-

1

- ku-

0

©

KONGO.

.

-

J

X

o

M

MPONGWE.

(OW-)

(0-)

H

p

DIKELE.

la-

dsh-,  a-

<

BS

P

BENGA.

)

»

DUAXLA.

[

- bo-

w

If

a

ISUBU.

}

r ®‘

o-

a

o

a

FERNANDIAN.

to-

J

ANCIENT  BANTU.

TU-

K.A-

BU-

KU-

FA-

Ancient  Forms  of  the  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns.  285

possessed  by  the  derivative  prefixes  of  the  nouns  in  the
original  B^ntu  language.  The  form  of  the  5 th  prefix
must  have  been  either  DI-  or  LI-,  and  that  of  the  10th
prefix  -was  probably  THIN-.  But  there  can  be  no  doubt
that,  in  the  original  Bantu  language,  MU-  was  the  deriv-
ative prefix  of  the  nouns  of  the  1st  class,  BA-  of  those  of
the  2nd,  MU-  of  the  3rd,  MI-  of  the  4th,  MA-  of  the
6th,  KI-  of  the  7th,  PI-  of  the  8th,  N-  of  the  9th,  LU-
of  the  11th,  TU-  of  the  12th,  KA-  of  the  13th,  BU-  of
the  14th,  KU-  of  the  15th,  and  PA-  of  the  16th  class.

536.  Although  comparison  clearly  shews  that  the  forms
given  above  must  have  been  those  of  the  derivative
prefixes  of  the  nouns  at  that  period  which  immediately
preceded  the  dismemberment  of  the  original  Bdntu  lan-
guage,— there  are.  In  some  instances,  forms  yet  older,
at  which  we  can  still  arrive.  To  ascertain  these,  we
have  to  consult,  besides  the  derivative  prefixes  of  the
nouns,  also  the  pronominal  elements, — which  were  origin-
ally identical  with  the  prefixes,  and  which  constitute  the
different  forms  of  concord  referring  to  them.  Thus  it
will  appear  (for  example)  that  MU-  was  not  the  most
ancient  form  of  the  first  prefix,  but  merely  a phonetic
adaptation  of  a still  older  form,  which  appears  to  have
been  something  like  NGUA-.  The  forms  of  particles  as
short  as  were  these  derivative  prefixes  of  the  nouns,
must  have  been  early  affected,  by  their  peculiar  prefixed
position,  in  a different  manner  from  that  in  which  the
same  elements  would  be  moulded,  when  occurring  in  their
pronominal  capacity  as  marks  of  concord.  The  crushing
weight  of  the  stem  must  always  have  had  the  tendency  to
grind  the  prefixes  into  the  most  easily  articulated  forms.
The  influence  of  the  stem  can  be  clearly  seen  in  the
Zulu  prefixes  of  the  1st  and  3rd  classes;  which  usually
retain  the  form  mu-  before  monosyllabic  stems  only,
and  before  longer  stems  are  contracted  to  m-.  In  Se-
tshuana  the  9th  prefix  is  entirely  absorbed  before  almost
all  stems  which  are  not  monosyllabic, — as  kuana  9.  "lamb,”

£ltek,S.  Afr.  Comp,  Grammar . 1 I*


286


The  Concord.


from  n-Jiu  9.  “sheep,”  &c.  In  positions,  therefore,
where  the  weight  of  the  stem  was  not  pressing  upon  the
forms  of  concord  (with  which  the  derivative  prefixes  of
the  nouns  were  originally  identical),  and  where  they
stood  either  unencumbered,  or  else  combined  with  such
elements  as  affected  them  differently,  we  may  expect  that
they  would  sometimes  better  preserve  their  original  form.
The  tendency  towards  the  use  of  such  sounds  as  are  most
easily  pronounced  in  the  prefixual  position,  explains  the
fewness  of  the  phonetic  elements  now  to  be  met  with  in
the  whole  number  of  the  prefixes  of  the  nouns.  "We  shall
see  this  more  clearly  by  arranging  the  prefixes  of  the
nouns,  according  to  their  phonetical  relations,  in  the  forms
which  they  probably  had  in  the  original  Bantu  language.


A

I

U

M jytA-  (6.)

MI-  (4.)

MU-  (1.,  3.,  & 18.)

K K.A-  (13.)

K.I-  (7.)

KIT-  (15.  & 17.)

P PA-  (16.)

PI-  (8.)

B BA-  (2.)

BV-  (14.)

L

I.I-  or  BI-  (5.)

X.V-  (11.)

T

TIN- or  THIN- (10.)

TU-  (12.)

N

N-  (9.)

It  will  be  seen  from  this  that  m.  and  k are  favorite  letters
as  consonants  of  these  prefixes.


In  the  course  of  the  second  section  of  'this  part,  it  will
be  our  business  to  ascertain  (by  analysis  of  the  different
forms  of  concord  belonging  to  each  class)  the  original
form  of  each  derivative  prefix,  as  indicated  by  the  various
pronominal  elements  which  must  once  have  been  identical
with  it.  It  is  necessary  thus  to  elucidate  the  most
ancient  ascertainable  forms  of  the  prefixes,  if  we  desire  to
extend  this  comparison  to  those  members  of  the  Bdntu
family  which  are  found  out  of  South  Africa  (as  Timneh,


Ancient  F arms  of  the  Derivative  Prefixes  of  Nouns,  287

Bullom,  &c.),  and  still  more  to  other  Prefix-pronominal
languages  (such  as  the  Gor  family,  &c.).  Those  com-
parisons which  already  offer  themselves  will,  therefore,
be  deferred  until  the  end  of  this  part  of  our  Grammar.

h,  THE  MUTUAL  CORHESPONDENCE  OF  THE  CLASSES  OF  NOUNS  AS
SINGULAR  AND  PLURAL.

537.  As  some  of  the  correspondences  between  those
prefixes  which  answer  to  each  other  as  singular  and
plural,  occur  regularly  in  aU  Bdntu  languages,  while
others  are  only  met  with  in  some,  or  even  one,  of  these
languages, — the  following  table  has  been  constructed,  in
order  to  shew  the  distribution  of  the  correspondences  of
the  different  classes  (or  genders),  throughout  the  South
African  Bantu  languages.  In  this  table,  the  ten  prefixes
of  the  singular  number  are  arranged  from  the  top  to  the
bottom  of  the  table,  and  the  seven  plural  prefixes  from
left  to  right.  The  table  contains  seventy  squares,  and  all
of  these  in  which  such  singular  and  plural  prefixes  meet
as  do  not  correspond  to  each  other,  have  been  left  blank.
Those  squares  which  indicate  correspondences  met  with
in  all  SOUTH  AFRICAN  BANTU  languages,  have
these  words  printed  so  as  almost  to  fill  the  square.  Those
correspondences  again,  which  are  only  met  with  in  some
of  these  languages,  are  indicated  (in  the  squares)  by
the  names  of  the  Branches,  Genera,  Species,  or  single
languages  in  which  they  occur.  The  names  of  the  dif-
ferent languages  have  been  so  placed  in  each  square,  as
to  indicate  to  some  degree  their  geographical  position ;
thus  the  Western  languages  are  to  the  left,  the  Eastern  to
the  right,  the  Northern  in  the  upper,  and  the  Southern  in
the  lower  part  of  the  square.  The  North-western  Branch
(N.W.  Bk.)  has  always  been  placed  in  the  left  hand
corner  at  the  top,  the  South-eastern  Branch  (S.E.  Be.)
in  the  right  hand  corner  at  the  bottom;  the  Bunda  Genus
occupies  the  opposite  lower  left  hand  corner,  and  the
Zangian  Genus  is  opposite  to  the  North-western  Branch


Table  shewing  the  Distribution  of  the  Correspondences  between  the  Singular  and  Plural
Derivative  Prefixes  (and  Classes)  of  Nouns  in  the  South  African  Bantu  Languages.


288


The  Concord.


•<


rim

Nta

ll

mQ

PQ

1

e H
hW
t*

*0

bO

a

1

a

0

Q.

a

P2

w w pq

a.

PI-

c

a

n 15
p

Q

■3

.£3

.ill

Kongo  Sena

Sesuto
"Kafir  Sp.

Dikele

(Mpongwe)

Setshnana

SOUTH  AFRICAN

BANTU

&o

•a

.2

. H

SOUTH  AFRICAN

BANTU

.-a

Q

5

4

SOUTH  AFRICAN

BANTU

t2P

c

0

^ /

(52  /

p / .

/ ^

/ P

1

1

"S

“S

1

* ^

1

/ £

/ 03

Mvtual  Correspondences  of  the  Classes  of  Nouns.  289


Otyihcre

ri  (4

flS

.o

B

d

«d  ^
bo  u
O P <u

bo  Oja

a '2'c:

o Op*

Kikamba

Tette

Sena

Angola

^E«

1^1

g ^ 1

s pq  S

S S|p4  M

'Sogioi  W

£ -S

a ?„  mk

§ =|l

S :iSa  “SS‘
b 03  !5toO

o

K

ts

n

o

p

d

d

'3

.o

i

■3

d

bo

n

1

. K

d

•a

A

K 1

PQil

o

§

N.W.  Br.

{exciting  Benga)

Tette
Setshuana
Kafir  Sp,

N.W.  Br.

(excepting  Benga)
Snaheli
Tehi-yno

Angola

Setshuana
Kafir  Sp.

*S  o

i

Q 9S

5 d 3
§ <§

i ^ . 1

3 O "S.O

1 o ” fc

i-al  ^2  a B

Md;  o

Kikamba

Kongo  G.

Sindonga  ®'XlaP'
Otyiherer6

1

•<4

1

i2

sJ2
s 3 3
i^Att

1

. H

•^S

Isubu

Dualla

Kongo

•

• ■
c\Z

rift

«|3

H|q

m'P

-H|4

\ ^

\ ^

A S

A \

05  \

S5  \

03  \

290


The  Concord.


in  the  right  hand  top  corner.  As  some  of  the  corres-
pondences between  the  classes  of  nouns  (as  singular  and
plural)  are  so  exceptional  as  to  occur  in  one  language  only,
and  occasionally  in  only  one  instance,  the  cipher  “ 1 ” has
been  added  to  indicate  the  latter  anomalous  cases.

538.  It  must,  however,  be  borne  in  mind,  that  in  some
instances  the  plural  prefixes  do  not  replace  those  of  the
singular,  but  are  prefixed  to  them.  Thus  we  find :

the  2nd  prefix  (BA-)  prefixed  to  the  1st  (BSU-),  in  the
Kajir  and  Setshudna  dialects,  and  in  Otyihererd.  In  Sexlapi
these  combined  prefixes  have  still  sometimes  the  form  bo-wio-,
but  they  are  generally  now  contracted  to  bo-  in  the  Kafir
and  Setshuana  dialects,  and  in  Otyihererd  to  o-.

BA-A-,  the  2nd  prefix  (3A-)  preceding  the  9th  (N-),  in  Kongo
(a-n-)  and  Isuhu  (ba-n-).

niA-A-,  the  6th  prefix  (1MCA-)  preceding  the  9th  (N-),  in  Dikele,
Dualla,  and  Isubu.

X/IA-LU-,  the  6th  prefix  (MA-)  preceding  the  11th  (liU-),  in
Angola  and  Isuhu.

XltA-BU-,  the  6th  prefix  (mA-)  preceding  the  14th  (BIT-),  in
Kikdmba,  Otyihererd,  Angola,  Dikele,  and  Dualla.
"SHA-KU-,  the  6th  prefix  (1WCA-)  preceding  the  15th  (StU-),  in
Otyihererd  and  Sindonga.

TK1N-XZ7-,  the  10th  prefix  (THIN-)  preceding  the  11th  (LU-),
in  Kinika  and  Kisudheli  (ni-w-,  ml-u-,  &c.).

XdX-X  U-,  the  4th  prefix  (Ml-)  preceding  the  1 1th  (IiXT-),  in  Benga
and  Dualla.

539.  There  is,  of  course,  no  doubt  that  the  correspond-
ences which  are  common  to  all  South  African  Bantu
languages,  already  existed  in  the  mother  tongue  whence
all  these  spring.  Nor  can  we  doubt  that  the  same  is  the
case  with  regard  to  correspondences  which,  although  not
present  in  every  Bantu  language,  are  yet  of  more  or  less
frequent  occurrence  in  each  of  the  three  Branches.  Con-
cerning correspondences  which  are  met  with  in  one  Branch*
only,  or  merely  in  one  language,!  it  is  more  difficult  to

* Such  as  the  correspondence  of  the  12th  (TU-)  class  as  plural  to
the  7th  (K.I-)  in  the  North-western  Branch,

t E.g.  the  14th  (BU-)  class  as  plural  to  the  13th  (K.A-)  in
Otyihererd.


Mutual  Correspondences  of  the  Classes  of  Nouns.  291

decide  whether  they  are  ancient  arrangements  which  have
been  retained,  or  special  acquisitions  of  the  language  or
group  of  languages  in  which  they  occur.  But  with  regard
to  many  of  the  correspondences,  which  appear  in  a few
languages,  sometimes  only  in  one, — there  is  no  doubt  that
the  surrounding  circumstances  are  such  as  to  render  it
highly  probable  that  they  only  owe  their  existence  to  the
power  of  analogy  or  of  logical  inference.  Few  of  these
latter  can,  with  any  degree  of  probability,  be  supposed  to
be  more  than  modern  innovations.  As  far  as  we  can  see,
the  mother  tongue,  whence  the  present  South  African
BS,ntu  languages  are  derived,  may  have  possessed  a system
of  prefixual  correspondence  approximate  to  that  laid  down
in  the  following  table.  Those  correspondences,  regarding
the  originality  of  which  we  are  not  perfectly  certain,  have
been  marked  “ (?).”  More  doubtful  cases  have  been
entirely  omitted.

The  Probable  Ancient  Corkespondences  of  the  Derivative  Prefixes
of  the  Nouns  in  the  South  African  Bantu  Languages.


SINGULAR

PREFIXES.

PLURAL  PREFIXES  OP  THE  NOUNS.

2.

4.

6.

8.

10.

12.

14.

i.iair-

BA-

XHCA-

s.ivEfr-

laz-

»IA-

5.  DX-

TULA.-

1

7 K.I-

PI-

|(?)TV-

9.N-

TttA-N-

THIN-  I

'

11.  X.TT-

VtlA-LU-

THIN-  1 TU-

13.  XLA-

(?)  1«A-

PI-

(?)THIN-

TU-

(?)BU-

1^.  BTT-

VtlA-BU-

15.  KV-

mA-KU-

540.  A comparison  of  the  tables  which  illustrate  the
present  and  ancient  correspondence  of  the  prefixes,  will


292


The  Concord.


shew  that  not  even  the  fullest  of  the  present  South
African  B^ntu  languages  has  retained  all  the  corres-
pondences which  certainly  existed  at  the  period  preceding
their  separation  from  the  parent  stock.  Upon  the  whole,
there  is  an  evident  tendency  in  these  languages  to  restrict
each  singular  prefix  to  the  use  of  one  especial  plural ; and
thus  to  introduce  a greater  regularity  into  the  method  of
correspondence.  But,  in  some  languages,  this  tendency
is  counteracted  ; chiefly  because  certain  prefixes  of  nouns
have  been  confounded  with  others  (on  account  of  their
similarity  of  form),  and  the  correspondence  belonging  to
the  one  class  thus  applied  to  the  other.  The  extensive
domain  of  correspondence,  which  seems  to  have  been  the
original  property  of  the  6th  (MA-)  class,  suggests  the
facility  with  which  this  prefix  might  either  have  superseded
all  other  plural  prefixes,  becoming  itself  the  exclusive
indicator  of  the  plural ; or  have  acquired  (by  the  side
of  the  difierent  plural  correspondences)  the  force  of  a
dual  prefix, — a meaning  which,  in  a certain  very  restricted
sense,  it  even  now  possesses.  ( p.  200.)  The  con-
templation of  such  possibilities  is  by  no  means  futile,
for  we  generally  find  that  wherever  peculiar  facilities
exist  for  a different  grammatical  arrangement  in  a given
language  (or  group  of  languages), — it  will  be  observed  as
an  achieved  fact,  in  some  kindred  language  or  family  of
languages.

2.  THE  GENDEKS  AND  NUMBERS  OF  NOUNS  IN  THE  HOTTENTOT

LANGUAGE.

541.  In  comparing  the  different  forms  of  the  derivative
particles  (prefixes)  of  nouns  in  the  South  African  Bantu
languages,  we  perceive  that  they  evince  a tendency  to
reduce  the  derivative  particle  (prefix)  to  a single  letter
(either  vowel  or  nasal), — or  even  to  elide  it  altogether.  In
the  latter  case,  the  class  of  the  noun  is  no  longer  indicated
by  any  formal  element  in  the  noun  itself;  and  in  the
former,  many  instances  of  homophony  of  the  prefixes  are


Hottentot  Classes  or  Genders  of  Nouns.  293

produced,  which  render  the  derivative  particle  itself  an
uncertain  guide  to  the  class  of  the  noun  of  which  it  forms  a
part.  And  while  derivative  particles,  originally  different,
have  thus  become  identical  in  form,  the  same  phonetic
changes  may  have  taken  place  in  the  signs  of  concord
(derived  from  the  prefixes)  rendering  these  also  through-
out identical.  In  this  case,  two  originally  distinct  classes
of  nouns,  by  mere  homophony,  become  one,  as  has  been
the  case  with  regard  to  the  5th  and  11th  (le.)  classes  of
nouns  in  Sesuto.  (§  456.)  On  the  other  hand,  although  the
forms  of  different  derivative  particles  may  become  identical,
the  forms  of  concord  referring  to  them  may  yet  remain
either  partly  or  wholly  distinct ; in  which  case  the  two
classes  continue  to  be  kept  separate  ; not,  however,  on
account  of  the  forms  of  their  derivative  particles,  which
have  become  homophonous,  but  because  some  of  their  forms
of  concord  have  remained  distinct.  In  this  manner,  the
1st  and  3rd  (MU-)  classes  (which  in  most  B^ntu  lan-
guages have  the  same  forms  for  their  derivative  prefixes)
still  exist  as  perfectly  distinct  classes  in  all  known  South
African  Bdntu  languages,  because  they  differ  in  some  of
their  forms  of  concord, — as  -mu-  Zulu  objective  pronoun  of

the  1st,  and  -wu-  the  same  of  the  3rd  class, ke  possessive

pronoun  suffix  of  the  1 st,  and  -w-o  of  the  3rd  class.  The
natural  inclination  to  maintain  logical  distinctions  in  the
grammatical  classification  of  the  nouns  may  have  assisted
in  keeping  these  classes  asunder,  notwithstanding  the
homophony  of  their  derivative  prefixes.  This  tendency
may  also,  on  the  other  hand,  lead  to  the  combination  of  two
originally  distinct  classes,  on  account  of  their  similarity
of  meaning.  The  two  local  classes,  the  15th  (KU-)  and
16  th  (PA-)  appear  in  the  South-eastern  Branch  languages
to  have  been  thus  thrown  into  one.  Classes  may  also
disappear,  because  the  derivative  particles,  which  in  the
first  instance  constituted  them,  cease  to  be  employed.  In
this  manner  the  13th  (KA-)  class  is  unknown  in  the  South-
eastern Branch  languages, — diminutives  being  formed  here

BU.ek^S,  J/r.  Contp.Crammar.  1 Q


294


The  Concord.


exclusively  by  suffixes  {-ana,  -anyana,  See.),  and  not  by
the  prefix  KA-,  so  commonly  used  for  the  same  purpose
in  the  Middle  Branch.  Lastly,  a class  which  only  con-
tains one  or  a few  nouns  must  disappear,  when  the  noun
or  nouns  which  constitute  it,  become  obsolete.

542.  We  must  also  particularly  bear  in  mind  that,
although  the  form  of  the  derivative  particle  was,  in  the
first  instance,  the  determining  element  of  the  concord,
and  indicative  of  the  class  (or  gender)  to  which  a noun
belonged, — yet  the  more  a language  has  subsequently
undergone  phonetic  changes,  the  less  we  shall  find  this
to  be  the  case.  This  goes  frequently  so  far  that  a
noun  may  belong  to  a class  without  bearing  any  visible
mark  of  the  derivative  particle  which,  in  the  first  instance,
constituted  the  class  (or  gender),  and  was  its  sign.  These
general  rules  (deduced  from  the  comparative  study  of
the  concord-indicating  derivative  particles  of  the  nouns
in  the  South  African  Bantu  languages)  are  also  borne  out
by  a comparison  of  the  forms  of  the  derivative  particles  of
the  nouns  in  the  different  Hottentot  dialects, — and  still
further  by  a comparison  of  the  latter  with  those  met  with
in  the  kindred  Sex-denoting  languages.

543.  Firstly,  the  comparatively  small  number  of  eight
classes  (or  genders)  to  be  found  in  the  fullest  Hottentot
dialed,  leads  us  to  suppose  that  an  originally  larger  num-
ber has  been  reduced  to  this  by  means  of  the  processes
Indicated  in  § 541.*  In  Mpongwe,  one  of  the  most

* Although,  we  do  not  assert  that  it  is  either  right  or  advisable  to
compare,  in  detail,  the  Hottentot  derivative  suffixes  of  the  nouns  with  the
Bantu  prefixes,  it  is  not  wholly  impossible  that  such  a comparison  may
be  justified  at  a future  stage  of  our  researches.  One  inclined  to  hypothesis
would  at  once  suggest  that  in  the  Hottentot  masculine  singular  gender
(-p  or  -lUi,  -Mfti,  &c.)  we  may  be  supposed  to  see  a combination  of
the  Bantu  1st  (MLIJ-),  3rd  (MU-),  14th  (BU-),  15th  (M.U-))  and
16th  classes,  with  their  personal,  local,  and  abstract  meanmgs  ;

—that  the  2nd  (B  A-)  class  has  assumed  the  dual  meaning  so  consonant
with  its  supposed  etymology  in  the  Bantu  languages,  and  is  to  be  discerned
in  the  Hottentot  masculine  dual  (-lilia)  gender.  The  masculine  plural
(-liis)  gender  might  then  (by  the  same  power  of  forcible  liypothesis)  be


Hottentot  Classes  or  Genders  of  Nouns.  295

modernized  of  the  South  African  B5ntu  languages,  we
have  seen  that  the  number  of  the  classes  of  nouns  has
been  reduced  from  sixteen  to  ten.  The  Hottentot  language
is,  however,  not  merely  remarkable  for  a yet  greater  reduc-
tion in  the  number  of  the  classes, — its  distinctive  charac-
teristic among  the  South  African  languages  being  that
the  division  of  the  nouns  into  classes  has  been  brought
throughout  into  some  reference  to  certain  logical  distinc-
tions.  Every  class  (or  gender)  in  Hottentot  possesses
a distinct  numerical  value,  and  five  out  of  the  eight
classes  (or  genders)  contain  a clear  reference  to  sex ;
while  the  remaining  three  classes  (or  genders)  are  also
logically  distinct,  as  leaving  the  sex  undetermined.  We
thus  have,  with  easy  nomenclature,  three  masculine  gen-
ders or  classes  (masc.  singular,  masc.  plural,  and  masc.
dual),  two  feminine  ones  (fern,  singular  and  fern,  plural),
and  three  common  genders  or  classes  (common  singular,
common  plural,  and  common  dual).  The  numerical  cor-
respondence of  these  classes  appears  upon  the  whole  to  be
very  strictly  carried  through  in  the  Hottentot  language ;
but  the  reference  to  sex  really  extends  only  to  such  nouns
as  indicate  beings  in  which  the  sex  can  be  distinguished.
Other  nouns  belong  respectively  to  masculine,  feminine,
or  common  classes  (or  genders),  merely  on  account  of  the
sufl&x  with  which  they  are  formed.  It  must,  however,
be  remarked  that  there  are  a good  number  of  nouns  of

identified  with  the  12th  (TIT-)  class,  the  feminine  singular  (-S  or  -si)
with  the  7th  (K.I-,  Kafir  si-)  class,  and  the  feminhie  plural  (-f  i)  with
the  corresponding  plural  8th  (B?5-)  class.  The  common  singular  (-i)
and  plural  (-ii)  classes  might  then  appropriate  the  9th  (W-)  and  10th
(XHIU^-)  classes  to  themselves,  whilst  for  the  common  dual  (-ra)
gender  would  only  remain  the  6th  (ISE  A-)  class  with  its  inclination  to  a
dual  meaning.  Such  an  explanation  would  only  allow  three  classes  (the
4th  MI-,  nth  liU-,  and  1.3th  K.A-)  to  have  become  quite  extinct.
But,  well  as  it  provides  for  the  other  classes,  it  does  so  merely  upon
wild  assumptions  which  are  without  a shadow  of  scientific  proof.  But,  as
mere  hypotheses,  shewing  the  possibility  of  a system  of  classification  so
extensive  as  that  of  the  Bantu  languages,  being  compressed  within  as
narrow  a sphere  as  that  of  the  Hottentot  classes  (or  genders)  of  nouns ,
these  suppositions  are  perhaps  not  wholly  out  of  order.


296


The  Concord,


this  impersonal  character  which  are,  with  slight  changes
of  meaning,  used  either  with  masculine,  feminine,  or
common  suffixes.  Thus  many  nouns  belong,  in  one  dialect,
to  one  gender  (or  class),  and  in  another  to  a different
gender,  and  even  in  the  same  dialect  some  authors  give  a
noun  with  a masculine  suffix,  which  others  appear  to
know  only  as  feminine,  or  common,  and  vice  versa.  The
lists  of  nouns  given  below  afford  many  examples  of  this
plurality  in  the  genders  belonging  to  one  and  the  same
noun,  and  the  frequent  recurrence  of  such  instances
renders  it  probable  that  many  nouns  exist  in  different
genders  with  variations  of  meaning  which  are  so  slight  as
to  be  barely  perceptible  to  a foreigner.*  To  discern  the
delicate  meanings  implied  by  these  changes  in  the  forms
of  the  nouns,  and  to  interpret  them  aright  is  one  of  the
most  difficult  tasks  in  the  synonymique  of  the  Hottentot
language ; and  the  different  authorities  are  very  frequently
at  variance  on  these  almost  intangible  points.  According
to  the  Rhenish  missionaries,  Krbnlein(p.  121)  and  Vollmer,
the  masculine  gender  in  Hottentot  implies  something
large  and  prominent.  This  seems  also  in  some  way  to
be  the  case  in  the  Iloigob  language  (Ukuafi  and  Masai)
which,  geographically  speaking,  is  in  East  Africa  the
nearest  sex-denoting  language  to  the  Hottentot.  (Erhardt’s
“Vocabulary  of  the  Enguduk  Iloigob,”  1857.)  It  is  clear
that  the  presence  of  nouns  representing  impersonal  objects
in  classes  (or  genders)  to  which  a sex-denoting  character
had  become  attached,  must  naturally  have  favoured  their
personification,  thereby  frequently  leading  the  mind  to
ascribe  to  these  objects  the  most  obvious  attributes  of  the

* In  this  respect  we  may  study  with  particular  advantage  such  pieces
of  Hottentot  traditional  literature  as  have  been  taken  down  from  the
lips  of  natives.  The  first  translation  of  the  Gospels  into  the  Nama
dialect  appears  to  me  for  this  very  reason  also  particularly  worthy  of
attention,  as  being  chiefly  the  work  of  a native  (the  excellent  Mrs.
Sehmelen)  and,  therefore,  probably  in  some  ways  more  idiomatic  than
any  of  the  later  translations.  However,  as  it  was  the  first  attempt  at
translation  into  this  difficult  language,  we  must  not  expect  too  much
from  it  as  a source  of  knowledge  of  the  language.


297


Hottentot  Derivative  Suffixes  of  Nouns.

respective  sexes.  But  this  does  not  prove  that  the  suffix,
which  now  indicates  the  gender,  had  not  originally  quite  a
different  meaning.  In  fact,  in  many  masculine  nouns  in
Hottentot  there  Is  no  doubt  that  the  suffix  of  the  mascu-
line singular  has  a sort  of  local  meaning,  and  this  mean-
ing seems  also  to  influence  the  character  of  this  gender^
even  in  some  of  the  most  advanced  Sex-denoting  languages.
For  example,  in  Latin,  die-s  (French  "jour  ”)  m.  s.,  and
(French  "journee”)  f.  s.  differ  from  each  other  almost
in  the  same  manner  as  the  corresponding  Hottentot  nouns
tse--p  m.  s.  "day  as  date,”  and  tse~B  f.  s.  "day  as  a period.”
544.  The  division  of  the  nouns  into  classes  in  Hottentot
is  radically  based  upon  the  same  principle  as  in  the  Bantu
languages ; but  the  present  state  of  the  Hottentot  lan-
guage shews  that  the  power  of  analogy  has  been  far  more
actively  exercised  in  it.  This  power  of  analogy  has
been  chiefly  brought  to  bear  upon  the  correspondences  of
singular,  plural,  and  dual  classes.  It  is  not  impossible
that  one  or  two  of  the  derivative  suffixes  of  the  nouns  in
Hottentot  may  originally  have  had  a sex-denoting  meaning,
or  a meaning  which  at  least  predisposed  them  to  indicate
difference  of  sex, — yet  it  would  be  absurd  to  suppose  that
all  of  the  eight  concord-indicating  derivative  suffixes  of
nouns  in  the  Hottentot  language  (or  even  the  majority  of
them)  can  have  originally  denoted  those  distinctions  of
sex  which  they  now  impart  to  nouns  indicating  beings  In
which  this  distinction  can  be  naturally  observed.  When
the  idea  of  so  profound  a natural  distinction  as  that  of
sex  (with  its  soul-stirring  associations)  was  once  clearly
imparted  to  the  grammatical  division  of  the  nouns  into
classes,  it  must  have  had  the  tendency  of  bringing  this
classification  more  and  more  into  harmony  with  itself.
It  must  have  developed  the  power  of  analogy,  thereby
placing  the  correspondences  between  singular,  plural,  and
dual  classes  upon  a more  regular  footing,  and  attaching
to  every  one  of  the  classes  a distinct  logical  meaning.
This  same  tendency,  in  the  English  language,  has  expelled


298


The  Concord.


from  tlie  two  sex-denoting  genders  (or  classes)  almost  all
nouns  representing  things  or  ideas  in  which  sex  cannot
be  distinguished,  and  has  thus  obliterated  In  English  those
perplexing  features  of  the  Sex-denoting  languages,  which
are  still  so  clearly  visible  in  its  German  cousins.  It  is
this  same  tendency  towards  a coincidence  of  logical  and
grammatical  classification,  which,  in  the  first  instance,
after  the  distinction  of  sex  had  been  introduced,  made  the
whole  world  appear  as  if  divided  by  sexual  distinctions.

545.  But  it  is  not  necessary,  nor  even  probable,  that
the  original  meaning  of  any  of  the  concord-indicating
derivative  suffixes  of  nouns  in  the  Hottentot  language
implied  a distinction  of  sex.  To  assume,  for  example,
that  the  suffix  of  the  masculine  singular  (-p)  had  origin-
ally the  meaning  of  “ man,”  or  the  feminine  singular  (-s)
that  of  “ woman,”  would  in  no  way  explain  the  peculiar
division  of  the  nouns  into  classes,  as  we  find  it  in  Hottentot,
and  would  be  opposed  to  aU  that  is  probable  regarding
the  etymology  of  these  suffixes,  and  also  to  the  fact  that
so  many  nouns  are  included  in  the  sex-denoting  classes
to  which  the  distinction  of  sex  can  only  by  great  force  be
applied.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  probable  that  the  idea  of
sex  was  at  first  as  little  implied  in  any  of  the  Hottentot
derivative  suffixes,  as  the  idea  of  “ tree  ” or  “ river  ” in
the  3rd  Bantu  prefix,  although  the  latter  prefix  now
appears  to  impart  to  many  nouns  one  of  these  two  ideas.
(§§  427  & 428.)  As  the  idea  of ‘'tree”  or  “plant”  was  prob-
ably grafted  upon  this  prefix  by  the  process  of  forming
nouns  in  analogy  with  MU-TT  3.,  in  like  manner  the  idea
of  masculine  or  feminine  gender  may  have  been  imparted  to
Hottentot  suffixes  which  had  no  such  meaning  originally.
If  the  word  for  “ man  ” were  formed  with  one  suffix  (-p),
and  the  word  indicating  “woman”  (be  it  accidentally  or
not)  by  another  (-s),  then  other  nouns  would  be  formed
with  the  same  suffixes,  in  analogy  with  these,  until  the
majority  of  the  nouns  of  each  sex  were  formed  with  certain
siiffixes  which  would  thus  assume  a sex-denoting  character.


299


Hottentot  Derivative  Suffixes  of  Nouns.

This  has  been  carried  so  far  in  Hottentot,  by  the  power
of  analogy,  that  (as  far  as  we  know)  no  noun  indicating  a
female  being  now  belongs  to  the  masculine  class  or  gender,
— an  apparent  anomaly  which  is  still  to  be  met  with  in
GtAELIC,*  if  I may  trust  to  A.  Stewart’s  " Elements  of
Galic  (jrammar,”  1801,  p.  46.  But  a neuter  gender  (i.e.
a class  which  comprehends  nouns  to  which  the  distinctions
of  sex  do  not  apply)  had  not  yet  been  brought  into
existence ; and  the  neuter  nouns  were  still  in  the  same
classes  with  those  in  which  sex  could  be  naturally
distinguished.  The  classes  of  the  nouns  in  Hottentot  thus
possessed  no  naturally  inherent  sex-denoting  character,
but  were  (so  to  speak)  merely  coloured  by  a sex-denoting
dye,  which  has  only  thoroughly  pervaded  the  nature  of
the  classes  in  the  most  advanced  of  our  Sex-denoting
languages.

THE  NAMA  DIALECT.

546.  The  Nama  dialect  possesses  the  best  preserved
forms  of  the  concord-indicating  derivative  suffixes  of  the
nouns,  and  also  contains  a greater  number  of  genders  (or
classes)  of  nouns  than  any  other  Hottentot  dialect.  The
common  singular  (-i)  gender  (or  class)  is  only  met  with
in  Nama,  or,  at  least,  has  only  been  proved  to  exist  in  this
dialect.  We  frequently  find  some  of  the  forms  of  the
masculine  singular  suffix  confounded  with  this  common
singular  suffix  (-i).  The  original  form  of  the  suffix  of  the
masculine  singular  appears  to  have  been  -BI ; but  it  is
rarely  met  with  in  this  form,f.  even  in  Nama,  excepting  as

* We  must  remember  that  in  German  student  slang  the  most  usual
term  by  which  a woman  is  indicated  is  also  a masculine  word.

t In  the  sentences  o-p  ge  ge  te-lie  “then  he  was  questioned  by

the  jackal,”  and  arei-p  ge  goma  Iglri-Tbi  ge  jkuri-he  “ the  cock  was  once,
it  is  said,  overtaken  by  the  jackal  ” (Kronlein’s  M.S.  in  the  Grey  Library,
p.  29),  the  -1»i  of  Iglri-hi  “jackal”  appears  to  be  the  full  form  of
the  suffix  retained  for  the  purpose  of  indicating  the  causal  case.  In  like
manner,  the  ancient  form  of  the  sufiSx  of  the  feminine  singular  (-Si)
appears  to  be  retained  in  the  same  circumstances.  Thus  we  find,  on  the
same  page,  o-p  ge  ■=fzliira-H\  ge  lanalga-he  “ then  he  was  accused  by  the


300


The  Concord.


an  objective  pronoun  (-bi)  after  the  verb.  After  vowel
stems  the  suflSx  always  loses  its  own  vowel,  but  retains,  in
Nama,  the  labial  explosive  consonant, — which  is  either  -b
or  -p,  according  to  its  position  at  the  beginning  or  end  of  a
syllable.  This  derivative  suffix  is  -b  when  (“anlautend”)
it  combines  with  a following  vowel  (-a,  in  the  so-called
objective  case),  and  thus  begins  a separate  syllable ; but  it
is  -p  when  the  suffix  (“auslautend  ”)  terminates  a syllable.*
If,  however,  the  stem  ends  in  a consonant  (nasal  m or  n,  or
liquid  r)  the  vowel  of  the  masculine  singular  suffix  remains,
whilst  the  consonant  of  the  suffix  is  either  assimilated  to
the  ending  consonant  of  the  stem,  or  elided  after  it.f
Thus  -mi,  -ni,  and  -i  are  only  modified  forms  of  the
masculine  singular  suffix  -BI, — and,  in  their  peculiar  posit-
ions, equivalent  to,  and  etymologically  identical  with,  the
forms  -b  or  -p.  (§  423.)  No  other  concord-indicating
suffix  in  Nama  undergoes  any  change  through  the  influence
of  the  stem,  excepting  that  the  suffix  of  the  common  plural
(-n)  may  adopt  a vowel  before  the  nasal  (as  -in)  when  fol-
lowing a stem  which  ends  with  a consonant.  The  suffix
of  the  masculine  plural  which  is  -ku,  according  to
Schmelen,  Knudsen,  and  Tindall,  is  by  Vollmer  and
Kronlein  written  -gu.  I am  inclined  to  consider  the

hyena.”  It  may,  however,  be  that  the  i,  in  which  in  these  eases  the
suffixes  end,  is  not  part  of  the  original  derivative  suffix,  but  identical
with  the  substantive  particle,  which  we  observe  in  the  !Kora  forms
kuee-Kt-i  m.  s.  “he  is  a man,”  kuee-'U.n.-i  m.  pi.  “ they  are  men,”  kuee-n-a-i
com.  pi.  obj.  “ they  are  people.”  (Appleyard,  pp.  21  and  22.)  The
use  of  the  substantive  particle  for  the  formation  of  a sort  of  causal  case
would  he  analogous  to  the  way  in  which  the  Setshuana  particle  hi  (and
the  corresponding  so-called  causal  form  in  Kafir,  § 4G2)  is  employed  after
passive  verbs.

* This  is  Schmelen’s  and  Tindall’s  orthography,  which  we  believe  to
he  the  correct  one  upon  this  point.  The  Rhenish  missionaries  write  -1>
in  both  cases.  Schmelen  frequently  gives  -pli-a  as  the  objective  form  of
the  masculine  singular.

f Schmelen  and  Knudsen  assimilate  the  consonant  of  this  suffix  to  an
in  ending  the  stem,  while  more  modern  authors  appear  to  elide  it.


Nama  Hottentot  Derivative  Suffixes  of  Nouns.  301

former  orthography  as  the  better  one,  although  in  the
examples  given  in  §§  421 — 424  and  § 444  I have  followed
the  other.

547.  Besides  the  simple  forms  of  the  suffixes,  we  have
those  with  the  suffixed  particle  -a,  which,  in  Nama,  always
coalesces  with  the  concord-indicating  derivative  suffix.
When  the  vowel  of  the  derivative  suffix  is  an  a,  the
suffixed  -a  combines  with  this  and  forms  one  vowel
only.  The  same  is  the  case  with  regard  to  the  vowel
i,  in  the  suffix  of  the  feminine  plural  (-ti)  and  in  that
of  the  common  singular  (-i).  The  i sound  in  these  two
suffixes  is  changed,  by  vowel  harmony,  through  the
influence  of  the  a into  an  -e  (the  suffixed  -a  being  itself
absorbed  by  the  vowel  -e), — and  -te  and  -e  are  .thus
the  modified  forms  of  these  suffixes.  The  vowel  u of
the  suffix  of  the  masculine  plural  (-ku)  and  the  i of
some  forms  of  the  masculine  singular  (-mi,  -ni,  and  -i)
are  not  treated  in  this  manner,  but  are  simply  elided
before  the  suffixed  -a  (as  -k-a  masc.  plur.,  -m-o,  -n-o,
and  -a  masc.  sing.).

548.  In  this  form  with  the  suffixed  -a  two  principal
meanings  are  to  be  discerned.  Firstly,  it  is  always  used
whenever  a noun  is  in  the  accusative  or  objective  case ; and
on  this  account  we  call  it  the  ohjeciive  form,  although  the
title  refers  only  to  one  portion  of  its  meaning.  Secondly,
the  -a  appears  also  to  possess  the  value  of  a relative
particle,  which  refers  the  noun  or  adjective  to  an  ante=
cedent  pronoun  or  noun,  and  thus  gives  it  the  character
of  an  apposition.

!nu-p-ei-\)  ge  igiri-h-a  ge  !awa  “then  he,  the  jackal,  ascended;”
o-p  ge  xetm-xa-a  ge  ml  “ then  he,  the  lion,  said
o-s  ge  khoi-s-a  ge  llna  “ then  she,  the  woman,  fell.”

Whether  the  objective  and  also  the  appositional  or  relative
value  are  to  be  derived  from  one  original  meaning,  or
whether  two  primarily  different  suffixes  have  by  homophony
been  thrown  into  one,  is,  as  yet,  uncertain.  As  it  now
stands,  the  twofold  meaning  of  this  form  is  frequently

1 K


BViek,  S.  Afr.  Comp.  Grammar.


302


The  Concord.


perplexing  and  confusing,  where  identity  of  class  (or
gender)  exists  between  a subjective  pronoun  and  an  ob-
jective noun  following  it.  In  the  sentence

o-p-g-e  lau-h-a  iTiu-h-a  ra  ria  j/ga  “then  he,  the  serpent,  the  white
man  did  bite  want”  (then  the  serpent  wanted  to  bite  the
white  man),

both  nouns  are  formed  with  this  sufiSxed  -a,  although  the
one  only  as  the  object  of  the  verb,  and  the  other  as  in
apposition  to  the  subjective  pronoun  ; but  if  either  /aw-'b-a
or  Ihu-b-a  were  omitted,  the  context  alone  could  shew  in
what  sense  (as  objective,  or  in  apposition)  the  remaining
form  with  -a  was  used.

549.  The  form  with  the  suffixed  -a,  besides  indicating
either  the  object  or  an  apposition,  is  also  used  merely  as  a
variation  of  the  form  without  -a,  before  certain  suffixed
directives  (or  postpositions).  Euphony  alone  appears  to
decide  that,  for  example,  the  postposition  ~x«  “ from  ” is
generally  preceded  by  the  form  with  the  suffixed  -a, —
whilst  -x«  “ by,”  -!na  “ in,”  and  most  other  postpositions
usually  accompany  the  form  of  the  noun  without  the  suffixed
-a.  The  employment  of  this  suffixed  -a  is  thus  similar  to
that  of  the  Kafir  article,  which  is  now  more  dependent
upon  usage  and  euphony  than  on  any  logical  requirement.
(§§  463  and  464.)  On  this  account  I once  named  the
form  with  -a  the  “ definite  form  ” of  Hottentot  nouns.
(De  Nominum  Generibus,  p.  40.)  But  the  fact  that  the
objective  or  accusative  case  of  nouns  in  Hottentot  is
never  found  without  this  suffixed  -a,  renders  the  term
‘‘objective”  the  most  convenient  name  for  this  form,
although  it  does  not  convey  its  whole  force  and  meaning.
A comparison  of  this  Hottentot  objective  form  with  the
Ethlopic  and  Arabic  termination  -a,  for  the  accusative  of
nouns,  naturally  suggests  itself, — always  supposing  that
these  languages  stand  sufficiently  near,  grammatically
speaking,  to  the  Hottentot,  to  admit  of  such  a comparison.
In  some  ways,  we  are  also  reminded  of  the  termination  -a
of  the  so-called  “ status  emphaticus  ” of  Aramaic  nouns.


Naina  Hottentot  Derivative  Suffixes  of  Nouns.  303

which  is  also  said  to  be  met  with  in  the  Assyrian  lan-
guage,— and  may,  or  may  not,  be  identical  in  origin  with
the  accusative  termination  in  Arabic  and  Ethiopic.

550.  With  regard  to  the  Hottentot  objective  form  in  -a,
it  is,  however,  to  be  remarked  that  the  -a.  is  by  no  means
inseparably  connected  with  the  derivative  suffix  of  the
noun,  but,  on  the  contrary,  always  stands  after  whatever
may  follow  the  noun  to  define  it.  E.g.,  when  a so-called
possessive  pronoun  is  suffixed  to  the  noun,  the  -a  stands
after  the  pronoun,  combining  with  it  in  the  same  manner
as  in  other  positions  with  the  derivative  suffix  of  the
noun.

tara-s  f.  s.  “wife,”  obj.  tara-s-a, — tara-s  a-p  “his  wife,”  obj.
tara-&  5-b-a  ;

tam-ti  f.  pi.  “ wives,”  obj.  <ara-te, — tara-ti  a-p  “his  wives,”  obj.
tara-%i  a-b-a ;

g-oma-n  comm.  pi.  “cattle,”  obj.  goma-n-a, — goma-n  a-ti  “their
(the  women’s)  cattle,”  obj.  goma-n  5-te  ;
tana-ti  f.  pi.  “ heads,”  obj.  tana-te, — tana-ti  a-ku  “ their  (the
men’s)  heads,”  obj.  iana-ti  S-k-a,  &c.

Or,  when  two  or  more  nouns,  very  closely  connected  by
the  conjunction  tsl  “ and,”  are  in  syntactical  positions
requiring  the  -a  form,  the  various  terminations  of  the
nouns  do  not  themselves  adopt  the  particle  -a,  but  it  is
affixed  to  the  pronoun  which,  following  the  conjunction
ts7,  represents  all  the  preceding  nouns.  In  the  sentence
ts7  Igui  gama-B  ts7  jgui  gu-s  ts7  Igui  beri-B  ts7-n-a  x^-ia-bi
and  (she,  the  woman)  one  cow  and  one  sheep  and  one
goat  and-them  left-for-him  ” (and  she  left  one  cow,  one
sheep,  and  one  goat  for  him),  gama-B  “cow,”  gu-B  “ sheep,”
and  beri-B  “ goat,”  are  not  given  in  the  objective  form,
although  used  in  an  objective  sense,  and  the  common
singular  pronoun  -n  (employed  here  instead  of  the  femi-
nine plural,  because  the  sex  is  a matter  of  indifference)  is
followed  by  the  objective  particle  -a,  instead  of  the  latter
being  suffixed  to  each  of  the  different  nouns  to  which  the
pronoun  refers.


304


The  Concord.


551.  The  non-existence  of  a feminine  dual  suffix  in
Nama  causes  the  suffix  of  the  common  dual  (-ra)  to  be
used  wherever  a feminine  dual  is  required.  Upon  the
whole,  the  common  genders  (or  classes)  are  not  unfre-
quently  used  in  place  of  the  sex-indicating  ones,  in  cases
where  the  sex  of  the  noun  is  a matter  of  indifference.
Thus  the  common  plural  suffix  (-n),  especially,  is  fre-
quently used  in  correspondence  with  the  masculine  singular
(-p),  or  the  feminine  singular  (-s)  suffix.  For  example,
nouns  indicating  animals  which  (like  our  “dog”  and  “cat”)
generally  belong  in  the  singular  to  one  of  the  sex-indicating
genders  (masculine  or  feminine)  even  when  used  without
any  reference  to  sex,  have  often  a corresponding  plural
suffix  of  the  common  gender.  Also  names  of  other  things,
in  which  no  distinction  of  sex  is  naturally  present,  some-
times have  the  common  plural  corresponding  to  a masculine
or  feminine  singular.  That  the  masculine  singular  (-p)
gender  is  particularly  inclined  to  this  correspondence  with
the  common  plural  (-n)  deserves  to  be  noticed ; for,  the
same  correspondence  will  also  be  found  in  some  kindred
languages.  For  the  same  reason,  it  is  important  to  remark
that  the  feminine  singular  suffix  in  Nama  may  also  have
a collective  meaning.  For  instance,  ^m-s  f.  s.  may  simply
mean  “ ewe,”  or,  as  colleetive,  “ flock  of  sheep  ” = gu-
Ihau-s  f.  s.

552.  The  following  tables  will  illustrate  two  ways  in
which  the  correspondence  of  the  Nama  derivative  suffixes
(and  genders  or  classes)  of  nouns  may  be  viewed.  The
Nama  nouns  have  generally  been  transcribed  according  to
the  System  of  Lepsius ; but  the  pronunciation  of  most  of
the  nouns  in  the  other  Hottentot  dialects  is  too  imperfectly
indicated  to  render  such  a transcription  feasible.  The
IKora,  Cape,  and  Eastern  nouns  in  the  following  lists,  are,
therefore,  spelt  as  they  appear  in  the  vocabularies  or
texts  furnished  by  the  respective  authorities,  whose  names
arc  always  appended.


Nama  Hottentot  Derivative  Suffixes  of  Nouns.  305


NAMA  DERIVATIVE  SUFFIXES  OF  NOUNS.


X)7ama

Without  suffixed  ~a.

With  suffixed  -a.

(Objective,  &c.)

Suffixes.

Maseuline.

Feminine.

Masculine.

Feminine.

Singular.

-P  (-b)
-mi
-ni
-i

-s

i

-b-a

-m-a

-n-a

-a

-s-fl

Indefinite-

-i

-

e

Plural.

-ku  (-g-u)

-ti

1

-k-a

-te

Indefinite.

-n

-in

-n-a

-in-a

Dual.

-kha

-kha

i

Indefinite.

-ra

-ra

Abbreviations  of  the  Names  of  Authorities  in  the  Lists  of
Hottentot  Nouns.

FOE  THE  NAMA  DIALECT.

Schm.  Sclimeleii.  (Gospels  1831,  &c.)

Kii.  Kiiuclsen.  (Luke  1846,  MS.  Grammar  in  Sir  G.  Grey’s
Libr.,  &c.)

Tind.  Tindall.  (Gramm,  and  Voc.  1857,  MS.  Matthew  in  Sir  G.
Grey’s  Libr.,  &c.)

Kr.  Krbulein.  (MSS.  in  Sii-  G.  Grey’s  Libr.,  New  Testament
1866,  &c.)

FOE  THE  IkOEA  DIALECT.

Licht.  Lichtenstein.  (Vocabularies  in  “ Travels,”  &c.)

Borch.  Borcherds.  (MS.  Vocab.  1801,  in  Sir  G.  Grey’s  Libr.)
Burch,  Burchell.  (Vocabulary  in  “ Travels,”  1824.)

AV.  AATiras.  (Grammar  in  Appleyard  1850,  MS.  Catechism  in

Sii'.  G.  Grey’s  Libr,,  &c  )


306


The  Concord.


FOB  THE  EASTEEN  DIALECT.

Sparrm.  Sparrmann.  (Vocabulary  in  “ Travels,”  1782.)

Thunb.  Thunberg.  ( „ „ „ 1789.)

Barr.  Barrow.  ( „ „ „ 1806.)

Van  d.  K.  Van  der  Kemp.  (Title  of  lost  Catechism,  1806.)


FOE  THE  CAPE  DIALECT.

Herb.  Herbert.  (Vocabulary  in  “ Travels,”  1638.)

Ten  Rh.  Ten  Rhyne.  (Voc.  in  Latin  description  of  the  Cape,  1668.)
Lud.  a Ludolf.  (First  Vocabul.,  received  from  N.  Witsen,  1710.)
Lud.  b ,,  (Second  „ „ ,,  ,,  ,,  „ )

Leibn.  Leibnitz.  (Texts  received  from  N.  Witsen,  1717.)


NAMA

SUFFIXES.

WITHOUT  AND  WITH  SUFFIXED  -a.

Singular.

Plural.

Dual.

Masculine.

-P  (-b)
-mi
-ni
-i

-b-a

-m-a

-n-a

•a

-ku

(-g-u)

-k-a

(-&-«)

-kha

Feminine.

-s

-s-a

-ti

-te

Common.

-1

-e

-n

-in

-n-a

-in-a

-ra

KAMA  HOTTENTOT  NOUNS.


khoX-p  Tindall  (kooi-p  Schmelen,
^oi-b  Knudsen,  A/ioi'-bKrbnlein,
IKora  Adw-b  or  keu-h  Lichten-
stein or  kwee-p  Borcherds  or
kuee-li  Wuras,  Eastern  kui-p
Thunberg,  Cape  que  Ludolf  b)
masc.  sing,  “man,”  khoi-h-a  m.  s.
obj.,  khoi-'k.VL  (IKora  Aaee-ku
Wuras)  m.  pi.,  khoi-b.-a  m.  pl.
obj.,  hhoi-UhSL  (IKora  A«ee-ka
Wuras)  m.  dual, — khoi-e  (IKora
huee-B,  Eastern  ku-B  Thunberg,
Cape  quie-B  Leibnitz  or  qni-B


Ludolf b)  fern.  sing,  “woman,
female,  gud,”  khoi-B-a  (Eastern
quai-Bh.-a  Barrow)  f.  s.  obj.,
kkoi-%i  (IKora  kuee-tee  Wu-
ras) f.  pl.,  kkoi-te  f.  pl.  obj., —
kkoi-i  com.  sing,  “man,  person,”
kkoi-e  c.  s.  obj.,  kkoi-n  (IKora
koh-n  Lichtenstein  or  kuee-n.
Wm'as)  c.  pl.,  kkoi-VL-a  (IKora
kuee-n-a  Wuras,  Eastern  keu-
n-a  Thunberg  or  quai-n-a  Bar-
row,  Cape  quee-n-a  Leibnitz)
com.  pl.  obj.,  kkoi-TSL  com.  dual;


Nama  Hottentot  Derivative  Suffixes  of  Nouns.  307


ait-p  (ao-b  Kronl.,  !Kora  au-h
Wuras)  m.  s.  “ man,  husband,
aged  man,”  au-h-a  m.  s.  obj.,
au-  ku  m.  pi.,  aa-k-a  m.  pi.
obj.,  aw-kha  m.  dual, — au-s  f.
s.  “ a woman,  an  aged  female,”
— au-i  c.  s.  “ any  aged  person,”
OM-S  c.  s.  obj. ;

axa--p  m.  s.  “ a lad,  youth,”  axa-
ku  m.  pL, — s.
(dimin.)  “ little  boy,”  axa-ro-n
c.  pi.  “ little  children,” — axa-s
f.  s.  “ a girl,”  axa-ti  f.  pi. ;
^dd-'p  (IKora  oaam  Wuras)  m.  s.
“ son,”  oa-'b-a  m.  s.  obj.,  oa-ku
m.  ph,  oa-k-a  m.  pi.  obj.,  5«-kba
m.  dual, — oa-s  f.  s.  “daughter,”
oa-s-a  f.  s.  obj.,  da-ti  f.  ph,
da-Xe  f.  pi.  obj., — oa-n  c.  pi.
“ children,”  da-n-a  c.  pi.  obj. ;

* jkoa-p  (Jliud-p  Tindall,  /g-oa-b
Knudsen,  Krbnlein,  and  Voll-
mer)  m.  s.  “ boy,  son,”  jkoa-b-a
m.  s.  obj.,  /Aoa-ku  m.  ph,  jkoa-
k-a  m.  ph  obj.,  /Aoa-kha  m.
dual, — jkda-s  f.  s.  “girl,  daugh-
ter,” jkoa-s-a  f.  s.  obj.,  jkoa-tl
f.  ph,  jkoa-te  f.  ph  obj., — jkoa-'i
c.  s.  “any  child,”  jkoa-e  c.  s.  obj.,
Ikoa-tx  c.  ph  “childi’en,”  jkoa-
n-a  c.  ph  obj., — jkda-ro-p  m.  3.
“ little  boy,  little  son,”  &c. ;
.'g'd-p  (IKora  f'gaa-'b  Lichten-
stein) m.  s.  “ servant,”  !gd-b-a
m.  s.  obj.,  .'g-a-ku  m.  ph,  !gd-


k-a  m.  ph  obj.,  /gd-kha  m.
dual, — !gd-a  f.  s.  “ maid-ser-
vant,” !gd-s-a  f.  s.  obj,,  .'gd-tl
f.  ph,  !gd-te  f.  ph  obj.,— .I’gd-'f
com.  s.  “ any  servant,”  !gd-e
c.  s.  obj.,  !gd-n  c.  ph,  !gd-u-a
c.  ph  obj. ;

!kdsa-p  or  !kd-p  Tindall  (!gasa-h
or  .'gd-b  Knudsen,  Kronlein,
and  Vollmer)  m.  s.  “ brother,”
Ikdsa-b-a  or  !hd-b-a  m.  s.  obj.,
!Msa-b.\i  or  .Vta-ku  m.  ph,
Jhasa-bi-a  or  th.d-b.-a  m.  ph  obj.,
.^Msa-kha  or  thd-hu-bba,  m.
dual, — tkdsa-a  or  tkd-s  f.  8.
“ sister,”  !kdsa-s-a  or  Ihd-a-a
f.  s.  obj.,  !kdsa-Xi  or  f.  ph,
— !kd-i  c.  s.  “ brother  or  sister,”
thd-n  c.  ph  (German  “ Ge-
schwister  ”)  ;

fgui-p  (IKora  t''geu-b  Licht.,
Eastern  t'koi  Sparrmann  or  hoy-
p Thunberg,  Cape  qui  Ludolf
b)m.s.  “nose,” — ^tgai-s Kronl.
(Western  z^deu-s)  f.  s. ;

llkhai-p  m.  s.  “ breast,  chest,”
llhhai-bu  m.  ph, — jjhhai-B  (Kr.)
f.  s.;

!nd-p  m.  s.  “ belly,  stomach  ”
(“inside,”  from  tna  “ in  ”),  tnd-
b-a  m.  s.  0.,  .'n«-ku  m.  ph  ;

sd-p  (or  sot-p  Tind.,  Western
soe-p)  m.  s.  “ lung,”  so-kha
m.  dual, — so-n  c.  ph,  sd-xi-a  c.
ph  0. ;


* The  noun  6a-p  usually,  if  not  always,  follows  another  noun  (or
pronoun)  which  is  in  the  possessive  case,  in  the  manner  of  a suffix,  and
there  can  be  hardly  any  doubt  that  it  is  a mere  variety  of  the  fuller
noun  Ikda-p,  which,  when  thus  following  a noun  or  pronoun,  loses  its
initial  consonant  and  click.  It  appears  to  be  an  abbreviation  similar  in
its  nature  to  that  of  the  Zulu  noun  u-mn-ntw-ana,  which,  when  standing
before  another  noun,  is  frequently  contracted  to  u-m-to,  as  u-m-fa  ha
baba  “ child  of  my  father,”  &c.


308


The  Concord.


Ilai-p  m.  s.  “ time,”  Hai-h-a  m.  s.
0.,  //az-ku  m.  pi.,  Ijai-’i  c.  s.,
—Ijai-s  f,  s.  “nation,”  Ijai-s-a
f.  s.  0.,  Ijai-ti  f.  pi.,  Ijai-te  f.
pi.  0. ;

jai-p  (IKora  f^ai-h  Licht.  or  'hai-p
Burchell,  or  A ei-b  Wuras,  East-
ern fei Sparrm.  &c.,  “fire”) m. s.
“piece  of  firewood,  large  fire”
(Vollmer),  “ fuel,  firewood  ”
(Tindall), — jai-s  (lKova,fgey-s
Borcherds)  f.  s.  “ fire,” — jai-jx-a
c.  pi.  0.  “firewood”  Vollmer
Qai-\a  “ fiery,  hot,”  &c.)  ;
hei-p  (IKora  heyie-p  Borcherds
or  hei-\>  AVuras,  Cape  ay
Ltidolf  a)  m.  s.  “ log  of  wood,
pole,  beam,”  Aei-ku  m.  pi.,  Jiei-
k-a  (IKora  ^ei-kd-a  Licht.,
Cape  e-qu-a  Lud.  b and  Ten
Rhyne)  m.  s.  o.,  Aez-kha  m.
dual,— M-s  f.  s.  “tree  (gi-ow-
ing),”  Aez-tl  f.  ph,  hei-te  f.  pi.
o., — hei-i  c.  s.  “ stick,”  hei-ix  c.
pi.,  Tiei-Ta.  c.  dual ;

!hau-p  m.  s.  “ a rock,” — !kau-s
f.  s.  “ rocky  ground,”  !hau-s-a
f.  8.  0.,  !hau-ti  f.  pi.,  !hau-te  f.
pi.  0. ;

^ara-p  m.  s.  “ kernel,”  ^ara-
ku  m.  pi.,  :^ara-n  c.  pi. ;
ari-p  (IKora  am-b  Licht.)  m s.
“ dog,”  an-ku  m.  pi., — ari-s
(IKora  arries  Licht.)  f.  s., —
ari-n  (alii-rx  Schm.)  c.  pi.,  ari-
n-a  (IKora  ali-n-a  Borch.)  c.
pi.  0.;

jari-p  m.  s.  “ a red  wild  edible
root,  with  small  fine  leaves,” —
jari-s  f.  s.  “a  yellow  root,”
jari-ti  f.  pi. ;


!aita-p  m.  s.  “ a flea,” — laita-s  f.  s. ;
ani-p  m.  s.  “ bh’d,”  ani-n  c.  ph, —
ani-s>  f.  S.,  anz-ti  f.  ph, — ani-ro-
i c.  s.  (dim.)  “ little  bird”  (vide
Cape  h'anni-€iVL-a,  § 557) ;
!khei-p  Tind.  (hayi-p  Schm.,
!kai-l3  Kn.,  IKora  "g-ei-b)  m.
s.  “ pockethandkerchicf,”  IkJiei-
b-a  m.  s.  0.,  .'^^ei-ku  m.  ph,
— Ihhei-B  (IJiay-s  Schm.)  f.  s.,
IJthei-s-a  f.  s.  0., — !khei-i  c.  s.,
Ikhei-Vk  c.  ph,  Pthei-n-a  c.  pi.  O. ;
Ijku-p  (IKora  f'kvJim  Licht.,  &c.)
Tind.  (Ilgu-h  Kn.  and  Kr.)  m.
s.  “ tooth,”  llku-h-a  m.  s.  o.,
//Aw-ku  m.  ph  ('koe-s  Schm.

f-  s.) ;

!kd-p  (!gd-h  Kr.  and  V.)  m.  s.
“ back ;”

jjd-p  (Kr.)  m.  s.  “ back,” — //^-s
(Vollm.)  f.  s.  “piece  from  the
back,”  lla-i  c.  s. ;

llkan-ni  m.  s.  “ flesh,”  jjkan-n-a
(Schm.  John  xi.  51.)  m.  s.  o.,
— jjkan-B  f.  s.,  Ijka7i-s-a  f.  s.  o.,
Ilkan-tl  f.  ph, — jjkan-i  (Krbnh)
c.  s.,  jjkan-in  c.  ph  ;
llkam-mi  Schm.  (jigam-mi  Kn.
and  Vollm.)  m.  s.  “water,”
ljkam-m.-a  (IKora,  Cape,  and
Eastern)  m.  s.  o.,  jjkam-'k.JX  m.
ph,  //Aanz-k-am.pho., — Ijkam-s
Tind.  (Ijgam-B  Kr.)  f.  s.  Ukam-
B-a  f.  s.  o.  (Ilkam-d  “with-
out water,  waterless,”  jlkam-
ro-p  m.  s.  (diminut.)  “ a tear,”
Ijkam-a  “to  fetch  water,”  Ukam-
soa-B  f.  s.  “ watercask  ”)  ;
am-mi  m.  s.  “ shore,” — am-B  f.  s.
“mouth,  lip,  door,”*  am-ti  f.  ph
“songs”  (am  “front”)  ;


* In  the  other  dialects  we  find  masculine  suffixes  for  the  word
mouth.”  Vide  Cape  Aam-q«-a,  § 557.


Nama  Hottentot  Derivative  Suffixes  of  Nouns.  309


om-mi  or  um-jai  (Cape  k?om-
me  Leibnitz)  m.  s.  “ house
as  a place,”  om-ra-a  (IKora
f^kckom-m-a  Licht.  or  kgom-a
Borcherds,  Eastern  kom-m-a
or  om-ra-a  Thunberg)  m.
s.  0.,  om-ku  m.  pi.,  om-k-a
m.  pi.  0.,  om-kka  m.  dual,
— om-B  or  um-a  f.  s.  “ habi-
tation, dwelling,”  om-ti  f.  pi,
— om-x  c.  s.  “ store-room,”  om-e
c.  s.  0.  ;

!hom-ral  m.  s.  “ mountain,”
Ihom-xa-a  (IKora  t'koem-a
Borch.)  m.  s.  o.,  .'Aom-ku  m.
pi.  ‘‘  mountains,” — !Jiom-a  c.
pi.  “ hills,  mountains  as  ele-
vations

dom-rai  (toem-rai  Schm.)  m.  s.
“ throat,  voice,  manner,”  dom-
ra-a  (Cape  dom-ra-a  Lud.  b)
m.  s.  0., — dom-s  (dum-a  Tind.)
f.  s.;

tara-a  f.  s.  “ a woman,  wife,”
tara-a-a  f.  s.  obj.,  tara-ti  f.  pi,
tara-te  f.  pi.  obj.  ;

soro-s  f.  s.  “body,”  soro-a-a
f.  s.  obj.,  soro-ti.  f.  pi,  soro-
te  f.  pi.  obj.  (tsooroo-'p
Schmelen  m.  s.,  tsooroo-li-a
m.  s.  obj.)  ;

tana-a  (tanna-as  Schmelen,  dana-
s Tindall)  f.  s.  “ head,”  tana-a-
a f s.  obj.,  tana-ti.  f.  pi,  tana-te
f.  pi.  obj.  (also  tanna-p  Schme-
len m.  s.)  ;

gaka-a  Tind.  (Jtaga-a  Kn.,  gaga-a
Kr.  and  Vollm.)  f.  s.  “spirit,
ghost,”  gaka-a-a  (kaka-aa-a
Schm.)  f.  s.  0.  (gaga-\t  Vollm.
m.  s.)  ;

!han-a  Tmd.  {!gan-a  Kn.,  !gan-a
Vollm.)  f.  s.  “ chin  ” (Cape

Afr.  Comp.  Grammar.


gan-a-a  Lud.  b.  Western  gan-
a-a  m.  s.  o.)  ;

^kai-a  (ffigai-a  Knud,  and  Kr.)
f.  s.  “ ear,”  zfkai-a-a  f.  s.
obj.,  ^kai-ti  f.  pi,  z^Dtai-
te  f.  pi  obj.,  ^kai-ra.  c.
dual, — zfkai-p  Schmelen  m.
s.,  z^hai-Ta-a  Schm.  m.  s.
obj.,  zfkai-lLVL  Schm.  and  Kn.
m.  pi,  ^t/mi-kka  Schm.  m.
dual, — zjtzkai-n-a  Schm.  com.
pi  obj. ;

kamana-a  Tind.  (gamana-a  Kr.)
f.  s.  “ loin,”  kamana-ti  Kn.  f.
pi, — hamana-p  {ga-mana-la  V.)
m.  s. ;

lani-a  f.  s.  “ pit  of  the  stomach,”
— /am'-ku  m.  pi.  “lower  part
of  chest

hoa-a  Tind.  (gda-a  Kr.)  f.  s.
“ knife,” — koa-p  Schm.  (^goa-p
Kn.,  Cape  droa-f  Herbert)  m.
s.,  Aoa-b-a  m.  s.  o.,  Auo-ku  m.
pi , Ada-kha  m.  dual ;

!guru-a  Tind.  (IKora  guruh-a
Licht.)  f.  s.  “quiver,” — !guru-p
(IKora  t'^guruh  Licht.  or  "guru-
p Burchell  or  kurru-\i  Wuras,
Eastern  fgulu  Sparrm.  &c.)  m.
s.  “thunder;”

XM-s  f.  s.  “ a vessel  ” (5-xm-s  f.
s.  “a  vessel  to  drink  out  of”),
XM-ti f. pi, — x“'i' 0- s “a thing,”
XM-n  c.  pi  “ goods,”  x«-n-«  c,
pi.  0.  (-x«  “ from,”  x“  “ to
leave,”  IKora  cAwA-b  Licht.  or
gu-b  Wur.  m.  s-,  cAii-ko-u
Licht.  or  gw-ku-a  W.  m.  pi.  o.
“ goods,  things  ”)  ;

^u-i  c.  s.  “ food,”  c.  s.  o.,
— ^u-a  c.  pi,  z^u-a-a  c.  pi.  o.
(Cape  oun-qy-a  Kolb,  IKora
f^aAn-ko-a  Licht.  m.  pi.  o.).

1 s


310


The  Concord.


THE  !kOKA  DIAI.ECT.

553,  The  forms  of  the  concord-indicating  suffixes  of
the  nouns  in  the  IKoea  dialect  are  essentially  the  same
as  in  Nama.  The  suffix  of  the  IKora  masculine  dual
(Nama  -kha)  is  written  -ka  by  Wuras ; but  as  Schmelen
has  the  same  spelling  for  it  in  Nama,  it  is  possible  that
the  IKora  and  Nama  pronunciations  of  this  suffix  do  not
materially  differ.  The  vowel  termination  of  the  IKora
feminine  plural  suffix  -te  (or  -de)  agrees  more  nearly
with  the  objective  form  of  this  suffix  in  Nama  (-te),  than
with  the  Nama  form  without  the  -a  (-ti).  No  double  form
of  this  suffix  is  given  by  the  IKora  grammarian  Wuras;
but  as  the  Nama  grammarian  Tindall  has  also  not  noticed
the  fine  distinction  between  the  vowel  sounds  of  these  two
forms  (so  clearly  laid  down  by  the  Ehenlsh  Mission-
aries Knudsen  and  Kronleln),  it  is  not  impossible  that
the  IKora  dialect  may  also  possess  such  double  forms  with
their  different  shades  of  meaning.  The  other  objective
forms  of  the  suffixes  are  exactly  the  same  as  in  Nama,
with  this  exception,  that  the  masculine  plural  suffix  -ku
retains  its  u before  the  objective  particle  (-«)  in  IKora  as
well  as  in  the  Cape  and  Eastern  dialects.  The  common
singular  (-i)  gender  or  class  of  nouns  has,  as  yet,  been
found  in  the  Nama  dialect  only;  and  appears,  at  all
events,  to  be  unknown  in  IKora.  The  common  dual  suffix
-ra  is  given  by  Wuras  as  suffixed  to  the  objective  form
of  the  feminine  singular,  as  kuee-s-a~T2i  “ two  women.”
(Appleyard,  p.  18.)  As  yet,  we  have  met  with  no  pre-
cisely analogous  formation  in  Nama  ; but,  in  one  instance,
the  masculine  dual  suffix  (-kka)  appears  to  be  affixed  to
the  form  of  the  masculine  plural  (-ku),  viz.  Nama  !ha-ku-
kha  m.  dual,  “ two  brothers.”

554.  The  derivative  suffix  of  the  masculine  singular  is
the  same  in  the  IKora  dialect  as  in  Nama,  viz.  -p  or  -b,
with  its  variety  -mi  after  stems  ending  in  m (as  IKora
ViM/Tj-mi  Wur.  = Nama //m/«-mi  m.  s.  “heaven”),  &c.


!Kora  Hottentot  Derivative  Suffixes  of  Nouns.  311

We  must,  however,  except  those  cases  in  which  the  m
ending  the  stem  appears  not  to  be  a full  nasal  consonant,
but  merely  an  indication  of  that  nasal  pronunciation  of
the  syllable  which  we  have  marked  in  Nama,  according
to  the  system  of  Lepsius,  by  a Greek  circumflex  " over
the  vowel.  In  !Kora  this  nasalization  appears,  in  the
masculine  singular  and  in  the  feminine  singular,  in  the
substantial  shape  of  a nasal  preceding  the  consonant  in
which  the  syllable  terminates.  The  ending  nasal  adapts
itself  in  these  cases  to  the  nature  of  the  consonant  of  the
suffix,  being  n or  n before  the  -S  of  the  feminine  singular,
and  m before  the  -p  of  the  masculine  singular.  But  the
-p  of  the  latter  suffix  is  most  generally  elided  after  this  m
(which  represents  the  nasalization  of  the  syllable  which  it
terminates),  and  the  nouns  thus  frequently  appear  without
derivative  suffix ; for  example,

t'^haam  Licht.  (=  Nama  !ka-p)  m.  s.  “brother,”
f^kaan-s  Licht.  (=  Nama  !ka-s)  f.  s.  “sister.”

In  the  plural  and  dual  forms  of  these  nouns,  the  nasalization
has  not  been  marked  at  all  by  Wuras  in  the  only  examples
of  them  which  he  has  given  :
mum-p  {muhm  Licht.  = Nama  mu-p)  ni.  s.  “ eye,”
ma-ku  (Nama  ma-ku)  m.  pi.  “ eyes,”
wia-ka  (Nama  jwa-kha)  m.  dual  “ two  eyes.”

555.  The  scantiness  of  our  materials  for  a knowledge
of  the  IKora  dialect,  obliges  us  to  make  use  of  all  that
is  accessible  to  us,  and  to  place  nouns  supplied  by
Borcherds,  Burchell,  and  Lichtenstein,  side  by
side  with  the  very  few  that  are  given  by  Wuras,  in
his  grammatical  sketch  (Appleyard  pp.  17 — 26)  and  in
his  short  Catechism,  a manuscript  revision  of  which  is  in
Sir  George  Grey’s  Library.  (No.  2 Id.)  We  should  be
in  a very  different  position,  if  Wuras’  Vocabulary  of
the  <^Korana  language  ” (a  manuscript  of  32  pages,  with
double  columns,  containing  an  English-IKora  vocabulary
of  more  than  1700  words),  presented  by  the  author  to
Sir  George  Grey,  had  been  accessible  to  us.  Probably


312


The  Concord.


in  that  case  it  would  also  have  been  feasible  to  adopt  one
uniform  orthography*  for  IKora ; but  it  has  now  been
deemed  safer  to  allow  the  ditferent  authorities  to  spell
their  nouns  in  their  own  fashion,  and  we  have  not  even
tried  to  reconcile  the  Wuras  of  the  Grammar,  who  uses
the  letters/(/),  y (//),  q (/),  and  v to  designate  the
clicks,  with  the  Wuras  of  the  Catechism,  who  expresses
them  by  the  signs  A (/),  fl  (//),  ^ (!)  and  -]  (:^).


!K.OXlA

DERIVATIVE
SUEEIXES
OF  NOUNS.

WITHOUT  AND  WITH  StlFriXED  -a.

Singular.

Plural.

Dual.

Masculine.

-p,  -b
-mi

(-)

-b-a

-m-fl

-ku

-ku-a

(-ko-ff)

-ka

Feminine.

-s

-S3-a

-te  (-tee)
-de  (-dee)

“S-a-ra

Common.

-n

-n-a

!KOEA  HOTTENTOT  NOUNS.


kuee-la  Wuras  or  Aow-b  or  keu-\i
Lichtenstein  or  kwee--p  Bor-
cherds  (Nama  AAoi-p)  m.  s.
“man,”  kuee-'kVL  W.  (Nama
hlioi-'k.VL)  m.  pi.,  Awee-ka  W.
(Nama  AAoi-kha)  m.  dual, —
kuee~s  W.  (Nama  h.Jioi-a)  f.  s.,
kuee-Xee  AV.  (Nama  khoi-ti)  f.


pi.,  kuee-s-a-ra,  W.  f.  dual,
— kuee-n  W.  or  koh-n,  Licht.
(Nama  kkoi-jx)  com.  pi.,  kuee-
n-a  W.  (Nama  khoi-n-a)  c.  pi.
obj.;

f'ko-h  Licht.  or  t'koo-h  Borch.
or  fkoo-p  AVm-as  (Nama  Iko-p,
Eastern  t'go  Sparrm.,  Cape  koo,


* In  this  Manuscript  Vocabulary,  wliich  begins  with  remarks  on
Pronunciation,  AVuras  distinguishes  eight  different  clicks,  viz.
the  palatal  or  very  broad  click  n (//),  the  semi-palatal  or  half  broad
click  U;

the  second  palatal  or  round  click  O (!),  the  semi-second  palatal  or
half  round  click  vj ;

the  third  palatal  click  f (9^).  the  semi-third  palatal  click  "1 ;
the  dental  click  A (/)>  the  semi-dental  click  V-


I Kora  Hottentot  Derivative  Suffixes  of  Nouns.  313


Lud.  b)  m.  s.  “ child,  boy,” —
t"ko-»  Licht.  or  fkoo-&  W.
(Nama  /Ao-b,  Eastern  fgo-s
Sparrm.,  Cape  goi-s  Lud.  a or
ko-s  Lud.  b or  kfo-s  Leibn.)
f.  s.  “ gu'l,”— ^o-n-a  (Cape
go-n-a  Lud.  a)  com.  pi.  obj.
“ children

t'^gaa-\i  Licht.  (Nama  !ga-p)  m.
s.  “ servant

'goe-b  or  "gu-b  Wuras  (Nama
Ikhu-  P)  m.  s.  “ lord,  master,”
"g'M-ku  '(Nama  /Ma-ku)  m.
pi.,  "ga-ku-a  (Nama  !khu-b.-

a)  m.  pi.  0. ;

Saa-b  (Nama  Sa--p)  m.  s.  “Bush-
man” (Cape  jSba-qu-a,  Soan-
qu-a  or  (Soa-qu-a  Records
m.  pi.  0.) ;

Cy  n Iwa-b  or  Ts^a’^oa-b  Wuras
(Nama  Tsm-jlkwa-'p  I'ind.
or  Tsoei-hwa-'p  Schm.  or  Tsui-
llgoa-b  Krbnlein,  Cape  Tikquod
Kolb,  Eastern  Tkuickwe  Van
der  Kemp,  Western  Tkeu-jjkwa-
P)  m.  s.  “ God,”  Cy  n koa-b-
a (Nama  Tsui-ljkwa-b-a)  m.  s.
obj.  (§  397) ;

kaa-b  W.  (Nama  Aa-p)  m.  s.
“ horse,”  ka-cqvL-a  Licht.  m.
pi.  obj.,— /ma-s  W.  (Nama  kd-

b)  f.  s., — ka-n-a  W.  com.  pi.
obj.;

dau-b  Licht.  (Eastern  <faa
Sparrm.)  m.  s.  “zebra,” — dau-s
Licht.  f.  s.  (Cape  rfoa-qu-a
Records  m.  pi.  o.)  ;

t'^kai-b  Licht.  or  t'kei-p  Borch.
(Nama  /nai-p)  m.  s.  “ gkaffe ;”

Chiaitaa-b  Licht.  (Nama  jnira-p)
m.  s.  “ baboon


am-b  Licht.  (Nama  ari-p)  m.  s.
“ dog,” — arrie-s  Licht.  (Nama
aris)  f.  s.  “bitch,”  ali-n-a
Borch.  (Nama  alii-jxa-a  Schm.
or  ari-xk-a  Vollmer)  c.  pi.  o.
“ dogs

f^geuee-b  (Nama  igJri-b  or
Igeira-p  p.  112  note.  Cape
kenlee  Lud.  b)*  m.  s.  “jackal

ckai-b  Licht.  or  gei-p  Borch.
(Nama  x®*'P)  s.  “koodoo,”
— ckai-s  f.  S.  (Nama  \ei-i  c.  s.) ;

gau-b  Licht.  or  gkow  Borch.
(Nama  gau-p)  m.  s.  “gnu,
wildebeest ;”

'karra-b  Burchell  (N  ama  z^kkara-
p.  Cape  't  'ckaka  Lud.  b)  m.
s.  “ whale

f^kaa-p  Licht.  (Nama  kdd-p
Schmelen,  Ikka-p  Tind.)  m.  s.
“ body

f'gneu-b  Licht.  (Nama  jjnui-p)
m.  s.  “ fat

Ckoo-b  Licht.  (Eastern  fgo
Sparrm.,  ko-p  Thunb.)  m.  s.
“ meat,  flesh ;”

t''kei-b  Licht.  (Nama  ^tel-p.  Cape
y Lud.  b)  m.  s.  “ foot  ” (Cape
z-qu-a  = Nama  ^fcez-k-a  m.
s.  0.)  ;

Urn  W.  (Nama  z-p)  m.  s.
“ father ;”

naam  Licht.  (Nama  Ika-p)  m.
s.  “brother,” — Ckaan-s  Licht.
(Nama.'Aa-s,  Eastern  fkang-s
SpaiTm.  or  kan-s  Thunb.)  f.  s.
“ sister

oaam  Wur.  (Nama  ba-p)  m.  s.
“ son ;”

gomaa-p  Borch.  or  'komdam-p
Burchell  (Nama  koma-p  Schm.


* From  this  word,  which  I have  also  heard  pronounced  Igle-b  by  some
Western  Hottentots,  the  Kafir  i-n-/z  9.  is  probably  derived.


314


The  Concord.


org-owa-p  Vollm.  or  gvma-p
Tind.  or  kama-h  Knuds,  or
gama-p  Krdnl.,  Eastern  kuma-
p Thunb.,  Western  gMwia-p)  m,
s.  “ ox,” — gom.aa-a  Borch.  or
gwmangs  Licht.  (Kama  goma-
8,  &c.)  f.  s.  “ cow,”  guman-Ae
Licht.  (Kama  goma-ti,  &c.)
f.  pi., — guma-n  Licht.  (Kama
goma-n,  &c.)  c.  pi.  “cattle”
(§  226,  note)  ;

t'^uhnkam  Licht.  or  fkchaam
Borch.  (Cape  thouqua  Lud.  a or
ouck'ha  Lud.  b.  Eastern  guka
or  nuka  Sparrm.  or  koka
Thunb.)f  m.  s.  “ hyena ;”

C'nom  Licht.  (Kama  tsau-p')  m.  s.
“calf,” — t'^nouns  Licht.  f.  s.
(Cape  t'nona  Lud.  a or  nona
Lud.  b)  ;

t'^kaum-p  Licht.  (Cape  K'on  Lud.
b)  m.  s.  “hyi-ax  capensis,” —
t'^kaung-3  Licht.  f.  s. ;

t'^naum  Licht.  (Cape  7iouw  Lud.  a)
m.  s.  “ ear,”  (Eastern  t'nun-
qu-a  Sparrm.  m.  pi.  o., — IKora
qnau  or  Dnau  W-,  Kama  jlnau
Tind.  or  ijndu  Krdnl.,  Cape
k'nom  Lud.  b “ to  hear  ”)  ;

Licht.  (Kama  //7e«-p,  Cape
kon  Lud.  a.  Eastern  kom  Thunb.)
m.  s.  “ tooth

t'^kam  Licht.  (Kama  Jka-p)  m,  s.
“ back

nmkm  Licht.  or  mum-p  Wur.
(Kama  mu-p,  Cape  moe  Lud.  a
or  mon  Lud.  b)  m.  s.  “ eye,”
»!M-ku  (Kama  wa-ku)  m.  pi,
mu-lia,  (Kama  mu-kha)  m.
dual  (mu  W.,  Kama  mu,  Cape
k'mon  Lud.  b “ to  see  ”) ;

I Thence  Kafir

Maxloenga  m-«4e,


f'kddm  Licht.  or  'oam  or  ’'oam
Wuras  (Kama  Ijoa-p,  Cape  6d
Lud.  b or  kod  Leibn.)  m.  s.
“ arm

Him  Licht.  m.  s.  “ thigh  ” (Kama
ti-s  f.  s.) ;

koeem-Tn-a  Wuras  (Kama  az-b-a)
m.  s.  obj.  “life”  (Cape  kfbin
Leibn.) ;

'hum-vai  or  'koem-mi  or  'kum-i.
Wuras  (Kama  Ikom-mi  Knud-
sen  or  jkum-i  Tind.,  Cape^.^^om-
mi  or  i?hom-me  Leibn.)  m.  s.
“ heaven ;”

f^fwm-xa-a  Licht.  (Cape  gom-ta-
a Lud.  a or  ckom-xa-a  Lud.  b)
m.  s.  0.  “ belly  ;”
f'oa-ko-a  Licht.  (Kama  lu-'k.-a.
Cape  nac-qu-a  Lud.  b)  m.  pi.
0.  “ hah-

f^koro-Ts.o-a  Licht.  (Kama  Ijkoro-
ka,  East,  fkolo-qn-a  Sparrm.)
m.  s o.  “nails”  (Cape  do  Lud.
b = Kama  llkoro-p  m.  s.)  ;
fhin-lio-a  Licht.  (Kama  jkunu-
k-a.  Cape  oa-cqu-a  Lud.  b)
m.  pi.  0.  “ fingers  ;”
oa-gei-s  W.  (Kama  oa-Xai-s)
f.  s.  “ virgin

f^kaau-s  Licht.  or  fkoe-s  Borch.
(Kama  Ikkau-s)  f.  s.  “hip-
popotamus ” (Cape  t kou-yv
Ludolf  a or  ckd  au  Lud.  b.
Eastern  fgao  Sparrm.  or  kou
Thunb.  m.  s.) ;

fkabaa-s  Borcherds  (Kama  hiaba-
s)  f.  s.  “ rhinoceros  ” (Cape
tnabba  Lud,  a or  nabba  Lud.  b) ;
saan-a  f.  s.  “ rheebok,  redunca
capreolus”  (Cape  sad  Lud.  b
= Kama  ya-p  m.  s.)  ;


i-n-njuka  9.  (=  Zulu  i-in-pwf,  Man/olosi
Sesuto  plre,  SeXlapi  phiri).


!Kora  Hottentot  Derivative  Suffixes  of  Nouns,  315

t'hunns  Licht.  or  t'koo-B  Borch.  dariings  Licht.  (Nama  dani-B
f.  s.  “springbok”  (Nama //M-p  Tindall  or  taawz-ss  Schmelen)
m.  s.)  ; f.  8.  “ honey  ” (Nama  taani--p

Schm.  m.  s.).

THE  CAPE  DIALECT.

556.  The  forms  of  the  derivative  suffixes  of  nouns  in
the  Hottentot  dialect  spoken  at  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope
nearly  two  hundred  years  ago,  agree,  as  far  as  we  can
ascertain  them,  almost  entirely  with  those  in  the  IKora
dialect.  The  masculine  plural,  especially,  has  the  same
uncontracted  objective  form  -kw-a  (spelt  -qu-n  in  the
vocabularies)  as  in  IKora.  The  feminine  plural  suffix  -die
stands  nearest  to  the  -dee  {i.e.  -de)  which  we  occasionally
find  in  IKora.  The  masculine  singular  also,  after  stems
which  end  in  m,  has  the  same  form  (-mi)  as  in  Nama  and
IKora  (with  an  occasional  slight  variation  -me  in  the  Cape
dialect  only)  and  -m-a  in  the  objective.  This  is  the
only  instance  in  which  we  have  been  able  to  ascertain  the
existence  of  double  forms  (with  and  without  suffixed  -a)
in  the  Cape  dialect;  and,  generally  speaking,  the  materials
for  this  dialect  are  so  scanty  that  it  is  much  If  we
succeed  in  ascertaining  even  one  form  of  each  suffix.  No
dual  suffixes  have  as  yet  been  discovered  in  our  specimens
of  this  dialect,  but  this  Is,  of  course,  no  proof  of  their
non-existence.

557.  The  only  remarkable  exception  to  the  similarity
of  the  suffixes  in  the  Cape  and  IKora  dialects  is  that  the
suffix  of  the  masculine  singular,  when  following  a vowel,
has  fallen  off  in  the  Cape  dialect,  in  all  but  a few  cases.
In  the  first  instance,  the  original  -b  of  tliis  suffix  appears
to  have  been  pronounced  softly,  like  v,  or  German  w (as
it  so  frequently  is  in  Nama,  especially  by  the  Orlams),
and  in  the  rare  cases  above  alluded  to  in  the  Cape  dialect
the  nouns  of  the  masculine  singular  have  still  retained
their  derivative  suffix  in  this  softened  form,  as  -w  or-lbO.*

* What  the  latter  curious  letter  is  really  intended  to  indicate  is  not
quite  clear  to  us,  but  it  may  have  been  merely  meant  for  a double
V (-W),  the  old  sign  for  w.


316


The  Concord.


t kau-vT  (Lud.  a)  m.  s.  “ hippopotamus

choassou-w  Lud.  h or  t gwassou  Lud.  a (IKora  choas-au-h  Licht.)
m.  s.  “ leopard,  tiger

t'Au-fafy  Lud.  b (Nama  and  IKora  jkau-p  or  jkau-h)  m.  s.
“ buffalo

k'ou-(3fo  (Lud.  b)  m.  s.  “ musk  cat.”

But  all  other  masculine  singular  nouns  with  vowel  stems,
that  occur  in  the  vocabularies  and  texts  which  constitute
the  material  for  our  knowledge  of  the  Cape  dialect,  are
destitute  of  any  vestige  of  the  derivative  suffix.  A more
partial  apocope  of  this  suffix  has  been  observed  in  IKora,
where  it  generally  disappears  after  nasalized  syllables.
There  are  some  other  instances  in  Nama  and  IKora,  in
which  the  suffixes  of  nouns  of  the  masculine  singular  appear
to  be  missing,*  but  as  they  are  not  certain,  these  cases  have
not  been  noticed  in  the  tables.  In  Sparrmann’s  vocabu-
lary, no  masculine  singular  noun  with  a vowel  stem
retains  any  trace  of  the  suffix,  while  Thunberg  generally
gives  the  suffix  -p.  The  labial  nature  of  the  masculine
singular  suffix  in  Hottentot  has  evidently  given  it  a


CAPE

SOTTSSTOT

SUFFIXES.

■WITHOUT  OR  WITH  SUFFIXED  -Cf.

Singular.

Plural.

Masculine.

-w

-mi,  -me

(-)

-m-a

-n-a

-kw-a

(-qu-a)

Feminine.

-s

-die

Common.

-n-a

* Nama  (Vollmer)  “hollow  of  the  hand  ” m.  dual)

and  jua  (Cape  tga  Lud.  a)  are  probably  nouns  of  the  masculine  singular.
Lichtenstein  ends  several  IKora  nouns  with  h,~  which  may,  or  may  not,
be  a misprint  for  b.


Cape  Hottentot  Derivative  Suffixes  of  Nouns,  317


natural  tendency  to  disappear, — and,  therefore,  we  must
not  wonder  that,  in  comparing  the  more  developed  Sex-
denoting languages,  we  find  that  they  have  very  frequently
entirely  thrown  off  this  concord-indicating  derivative
suffix,  whilst  retaining  the  more  tenacious  one  of  the
feminine  singular.

CAPE  HOTTENTOT  NOUNS.


r’aw-66  Ludolf  b (Nama  [^aw-p,
!Kora  t'^haan-h  Lichtenstein)
m.  s.  “buffalo”  (!Kora  r’^oM-s
Borclierds  f.  s.)  ;

choassou-w  Ludolf  b oi’  tgwassou
Lud.  a (IKora  chdasau-b  Licht,,
Eastern  koessau  Sparrmann  or
gvassu--p§  Thunb.,  Western
yuazau-  P)  m.  s.  “ leopard,
tiger

qriao  Lud.  b (Nama  .^aw-p,
IKora  Licht.)  m.  s.

“ neck

qvHau  Lud.  b (Nama  fzkau--p
Tindall  or  ^gau-b  Krbulein)
m.  s.  “ heart

k?chou  Leibnitz  (Nama  !liu-p,
IKora  'hoe-b  or  "hu-b  Wuras)
m.  s.  “ earth,  land

thoughou  Lud.  a (Nama  tsu\u--p)
m.  s.  “night”  (Bantu  BU-
TUKU  14.  § 453,  notes)  ;

hacquou  Lud.  b or  haghgou  Lud.  a
(Nama  liagu-'p^  Eastern  liango*
Sparrm.)  m.  s.  “ hog  ” (Nama
/iug-M-Iiu  m.  pi.,  Tiagu-b.-a  m.
pi.  obj., — hagu-n  c.  ph,  hagu-
n-a  c.  pi.  0.)  ;

ceregou  Lud.  b (?Nama  Ihuro-b)
m.  s.  “land-tortoise,” — sirigoe-s
Ten  Rhyne  f.  s. ;

Id  Leibnitz  (Nama  abo-p,  IKoi’a
aboo-b  Licht.)  m.  s.  “ father


koo  Lud.  a or  kfod  Leibn.  (Nama
//o-p,  IKora  'oo-b  or  nuo-b
Wuras)  m.  s.  “ death
to  Leibn.  or  koo  Lud.  b (Nama
jko-p  Tind.  or  \go-p  Krbnl.,
IKora  fkoo-p  Wuras,  Eastern
t'go  Sparrm.)  m.  s.  “ boy,  son ;”
k'dd  Lud.  b or  toa  Lud.  a (Nama
!od-p  Knudsen,  IKora  t'^koam-
p Licht.)  m.  s.  “ hare  ” (Nama
!ud-B  Tind.  or  Idas  Krbnl.,
IKora  Ckoang-s  Licht.  f.  s.)  ;
choa  Lud.  b or  twoha  Lud.  a (Nama
^khua-p  Tind.  or
Knuds.,  IKora  Ckoaa-b  Licht.)
m.  s.  “elephant”  (IKora <’’Aoaa-
s Licht.  f.  s.)  ;

cia  Lud.  b or  kdd  Leibn.  or  Oud
Kolb  (Nama  jjua-p  or  Ijod-p,
IKora  t'^koam  Licht.  or  'oam
Wur.)  m.  s.  “ arm,”  one-qu-a
Lud.  a (Nama  Ijod-lL-a)  m.  pi.
0.  (Nama  //od-kha  m.  dual)  ;
choaa  Lud.  b (Nama  fkoa-p,
IKora  t'goaa-p  Borch.)  m.  s.
“ cat

ioya  Lud.  a (Nama  foa-p,  IKora
f^koaa-b  Licht.  or  'kud-p
Bm'chell,  Eastern  qua  Barrow)
m.  s.  “ wind  ;”

tGa  Lud.  a or  h'cka  Lud.  b (Nama
Ijkhd-p,  &c.,  § 472  note)  m.  s.
“ moon


* Kafir  i-han(ju  9.,  p.  160.

DUek,S.  A/r.  Comp.  Grumiuar.


318


The  Concord.


Tkd  Lud.  a (Nama  jka-p)  m.  s.

“ grass  i”

k'd  (Nama  !d-p,  !Kora  f'kah-p
Licht.)  m.  s.  “river;”
k'gcd  Lud.  b (Nama  gd-p)  m.  s.
“gander,  goose”  (Nama  gd-a
f.  s.,  Dutch  gans)  ;
cM  Lud.  b (Nama  x“-P)  Eastern
fka  Sparrm.)  m.  s. ;
chra  Lud.  b or  kearra  Lud.  a
(Nama  ^khara-p')  m.  s. ;
'fchaka  Lud.  b (Nama  z^khara-
p Tind.,  IKora  'karra-li  Burch.)
m.  s.  “ whale ;”

qua  Lud.  b (Nama  jjkwd-p)  m.  s.
“ knee ;”

qua  Leibn.  m.  s.  “ day,”  qua-qvL-a
m.  pi.  o.  (Qua-nti  “ Dagh-
kloof  ” Records  p.  435,  Nama
Ijkua  “ to  dawn  ”)  ;
sad  Lud.  b (Nama  yd-p)  m.  s.
“ rheebok  ” (IKora  saan-s  Licht.
f.  s.)  ;

K'kamma  Lud.  b (Nama  Hkhama-
p,  IKora  fkamkam  Borch.,
Eastern  kamma-p  Thunb.)  m.
s.  “ hartebeest,” — t hammma-a
Lud.  a (IKora  k'hdmaa-a  Licht.)
f.  s.;

bree  Lud.  a (Nama  bere-p,  IKora
barii-p  Burchell,  Eastern  bra
Sparrm.  or  bre  Thunb.)  m.  s.
“ bread

houry  Lud.  b or  Jiouri  Leibn.

(Nama  huri-p)  m.  s.  “ sea ;”
qui  Lud.  b (Nama  ^ui-p,  IKora
t'^geu-Ta  Licht.,  Eastern  t'koi
Sparrm.  or  koy-p  Thunb-)  m.
s.  “nose;”

k'qui  que  Lud.  b (Nama  jkui  khoi-
p)  m.  s.  “ one  man,”  quee-n-a
Leibn.  (Nama  khoi-n-a  or  koi-
n-a,  IKora  kuee-n-a  Wuras,
Eastern  keu-n-a  Thunb-)  com.


pi.  obj.  “ men,  people,  Hotten-
tots” (=  Nama  Khoi-khoi-n-a,
Gona  Hottentot  Kkwe-kkwe-n-a
Van  der  Kemp,  com.  pi.  obj.)  ;
unwie  Lud.  a or  Ounivie  Kolb
(Nama  Ijnui-i  c.  s.  or  Ijnui-p
m.  s.)  “ butter,  fat ;”
sorrie  Lud.  a or  sore  Lud.  b
(IKora  soro^h-h  Licht.  or  sorrei-
p Burchell,  Eastern  surrie  Bar-
row)  m.  s.  “ sun  ” (Nama  sori-
s,  IKora  solee-a  Borcherds  or
sorree-s  Wm-as  f.  s.)  ;
ammy  Lud.  b (Nama  /ami-p,
IKora  fkammie-p  Borcherds)
m.  s.  “ ostrich  ” (Nama  jami-B
f.  s.) ;

sem-m.6  Lud.  a or  sam-va.e  Kolb
m.  s.  “ female  breast  ” (Eastern
sam-ra-a  Thunb.  m.  s.  o.,  Nama
foam-koe  Schmelen  or  sam-ku
Tind.  m.  pi.,  tsam-Ts.a.  Schm.
m.  dual, — Western  sam-a  f.  s.,
Nama  sam-ra,  Kn.  com.  dual)  ;
t?kom-mi  or  t?hom-xae  Leibn.
(Nama  jhom-mi,  IKora  'koem-
mi  or  ’Aam-mi  Wuras,  Eastern
kom  Barr.  “ air,  light  ”)  m.  s.
“ heaven,  sky ;”

tfam-vtii  Leibn.  or  kam-tae
Lud.  a or  chiam-mey  Herbert
(Nama  Ukam-voi)  m.  s.  “ wa-
ter,” kam-m.-a  Lud.  b (Nama
llkam-m-a,  IKora  f'kam-xa-a
Licht.  and  Borch.,  Eastern
fkam-ia-a  Sparrm.  or  kam-m-
a Thunb.)  m.  s.  o. ;
k?om-nxe  Leibn.  (Nama  om-mi
or  MOT-ml)  m.  s.  “ house,”
k?om-va.-a  Lud.  b (Nama  om-
m-«,  IKora  t'^kchom-xa-alAcht,
or  kgom-a  Borch.,  Eastern  kom-
m-a  or  om-ra-a  Thunb.)  m.
s.  0. ;


Cape  Hottentot  Derivative  Suffixes  of  Nouns.


om-m-a  Lud.  b (Nama  !om-m-a
or  tum-ia-a)  m.  s.  o.  “ hand
TGam-m-a  (Lud,  a)  or  Cham-
xa-a  (Lud.  b)  or  gam-m-a  Ten
Rhyue  (Nama  xam-m-a,  !Kora
ckam-m-a  Licht.  or  gam-m~a
Borch.,  Eastern  f Gam-m-a
Sparrm.  or  Kdm-a  Thunb.)  m.
s.  0.  “ lion

tam-m-a  Lud.  a (!Kora  tam-m-a
Licht.)  m.  s.  o.  “ tongue  ” (Kama
nam-s,  Western  tam-s,  f.  s.)  ;
dom-m-a  Lud.  a (Kama  toem-
m-a  Schmelen  or  dom-m-a
Knudsen)  m.  s.  o.  “ thi’oat
k'aum  Lud.  b (Nama  Ijou-p,
IKora  Ckchau-h  Licht.,  East-
ern fgau  Sparrm.)  m.  s.  “ fish
qu'ein  Lud.  b or  Qu'eXn  Kolb
(Nama  et-p)  m.  s.  “ liver
y Lud.  b (Nama  ^ei-p,  IKora
i”Aei-b  Licht.)  m.  s.  “ foot,”
i-qu-a  Lud.  a (Nama  ^ei-’b.-a)
m.  pi.  0.  “ feet

y-qu-a  Lud.  b (Nama  /wi-k-a)  m.
pi.  0.  “stones”  (Nama  \ui-p,
IKora  Ceu-'h  Licht.,  Eastern
Oi-p  Thunb.  m.  s.  “ stone  ”)  ;
OM-cqu-a  Lud.  b (IKora  f^in-
kd-a  Licht.,  Eastern  t'nani-
qu-a  Sparrm.,  Nama  jkunu-
k-a)  m.  pi.  0., — or  ou-n-a
(Lud.  a)*  c.  p.  0.  “ fingers
Aa-ckw-a  Lud.  a or  ha-cqu-a
Lud.  b and  Leibn.  or  ha-
qu-a  Records  (!  Kora  Aa-cqu,-tt
Licht.,  Nama  ha-'b.-a,  Eastern
han-qa-a  Sparrm.  or  ha-'k.v-a
Thunb.)  m.  pi.  o,  “horses”


319

(Nama  and  IKora  hd-p.  East-
ern haa-p  Thunb.  m.  s., — Nama
and  IKora  hd-s,  Eastern  Aa-ss
Thunb.  f.  s.  = Kafir  i-hashi  5.
“ horse,” — Nama  ha-n  c.  pi.)  ;
k'anni-qvL-a  (Lud.  b)  m.  pi.  o.
“ birds  ” (Nama  ani-p  m.  s., —
ani-s,  IKora  xanniis  Wuras,
f.  s.  “bu-d,” — Nama  ani-n  c,
pi-) ;

Jiam-qvi-a  (Lud.  a)  or  quam-qu-a
(Lud,  b)  m.  pi.  o.  “mouths,” —
llam-a  Krbnl.f  (IKora  i'^kcham-
m-a  Licht.,  Eastern  f gam-m-a
Sparrm.)  m.  s.  o.  “ mouth,”
(Nama  am-&  f.  s.,  am-Xi  f.

pi-);

quin-q\i-a  Lud.  b (IKora  f'geun-
ko-a  Licht.)  m.  pi.  o.  “entrails”
(Nama  jgui-ti  f.  pi.  or  Igui-n
c.  pi.)  ;

k?o-s  Leibn.  or  ko-s  Lud.  b
(Nama  jkd-s  Tind.  or  jgo-s
Krbnl.,  IKora  Cho-a  Licht.  or
fkoo-s  Wuras,  Eastern  t'go-B
Sparrm.)  f.  s.  “gud,  daughter;”
koho-s  Leibn.  (Nama  khobo-s)
f.  s.  “ maid-servant
quie-s  Leibn.  (Nama  khoi-s  or
koi-s,  IKora  kuee-a  Wur.)  f.  s.
“woman,  wife,” — h'qui  qui-a
Lud.  b (Nama  jkui  khoi-a)  f.  s.
“ one  woman

traqueo-ah.  Herbert  or  drako-a
Kronleinf  (IKora  kalahwee-a
Borch.,  Hill  Damara  tara-
khoi-a)  f s.  “woman”  (Eastern
trahdfi  [?]  Sparrm.  “ young
girl)  ;”


♦ This  form  may,  however,  be  masc.  sing,  obj.,  oun-a  = Nama
\hunu-\i-a.

t Words  given  to  the  Revd.  G.  Krbnleia  by  an  old  Hottentot  man  at
Genadendal,  in  November  1864.  He  died  the  following  day.


320


The  CUncord.


goie-B  Lud.  a or  hoo-B  Lud.  b
(Eastern  fgod-s  Sparrm.  or
Gu-b  Thunb.)  f.  s.  “ cow  ”
(Nama  Ugo-p  m.  s.  “ bull  ”) ;
g'OM-die  Lud.  a or  Aoe-die  Lud.
b (Kama  gw-ti)  f.  pi.  “ sheep  ”
(!Kora  ku-B  W.,  Nama  gu-B,
Eastern  t'gu-B  Sparrm.  f.  s., —
IKora  t'^guh-}3  Licht.  or  Am-p
Wuras  = Nama  gw-p  m.  s.,


Eastern  t’gw-ku  Sparrm.  =
Nama  gw-ku  m.  pi-, — '.Kora
hu-n-a  Wuras,  Eastern  Go-n-a
Thunb.  = Nama  gu-n-a  c.
pi.  0.)  ;

chau-n-a  Lud.  b (Nama  Ijkhau-
n-a)  com.  pi.  obj.  “lambs”
(Nama  ijMau-p  m.  s.,  jlkhau-B

f.  s.).


KEVIEW  OF  THE  DERIVATIVE  SUFFIXES  OF  THE  NOUNS.

558.  The  fewness  of  the  concord-indicating  derivative
suffixes  of  nouns  in  Hottentot,  and  the  close  resem-
blance which  their  forms  present  in  the  different  dialects,
enables  us  to  compress  a review  of  the  different  forms
into  one  page.  What  little  we  had  to  say  regarding  the
etymology,  force,  and  meaning  of  these  suffixes,  and  their
mutual  correspondences,  has  been  given  in  §§  424,  444,
447,  543 — 545,  551  & 553,  and  it  would,  therefore,  be
needless  to  repeat  it  here.  When  the  study  of  Hottentot
has  received  that  attention  which  the  position  of  this
language  merits,  this  chapter  of  South  African  Com-
parative Grammar  promises  to  be  particularly  rich  in
observations  on  nice  distinctions  which  will  be  of  great
importance  to  general  philology.


REVIEW  OF  THE  CONCORD-INDICATING  DERIVATIVE  SUFFIXES  OF  HOTTENTOT  NOUNS.


Review  of  the  Hottentot  Derivative  Suffixes  of  Nouns.  321


322


The  Concord.


It  would,  in  some  ways,  have  been  convenient  here,  to
give  a comparison  between  the  concord-indicating  signs  of
gender  in  Hottentot,  and  those  of  the  kindred  Sex-denoting
languages.  But,  in  many  of  the  latter  languages,  these
signs  of  gender  have  either  wholly  or  partly  disappeared
from  their  position  as  derivative  suffixes,  and  can  now
only  be  recognised  in  the  other  forms  of  concord ; and
this  comparison  will,  therefore,  be  more  appropriately
given  at  the  end  of  the  Second  Part.


*ACL  60L0M0N  AND  CO.,  STEAM  PRINTING  OFFICE,  CAPE  TOWN.


<-  V

..'Vi.  ■


V-


A


■i


' " ' '*'■'

•^'-  ■ >-  ■ ,r  . '’


I


■ ’>1
