‘ > ‘
‘ J _
7) ,*
‘ ae | te
Vey
, wy
’ ie i
’ ’ 7
. ,
‘
r
P e
ve
.
ST
‘ .
. , - . pA ‘
bs ; A 4 Ax +
* «* ~ 7 a“ .
.. , ‘ ~
e = 4 ° , » -
- ~ ° at = *
_ uty . r . oi
— =
“ — é - * a
. - ~~ - - - ‘al
bs ¢
™ " - ‘ ,
-_ - ; . ’ 7
- ‘|
. <- xs “A
n "
- , ‘
- -
" — ~ * -* *
- a - pA .
fs ~~ ae - .
“ ’ ~
- 4 . d
- = + < e 9
~~ . - . ” ».* p ae
a ~ ~ ~ ll? » ~ -
_ 7] "3 — . . N , . ‘ |
: . ~ - 2 po
. = .
- - - aa J M ‘a
" «
4 - = * =
* ~* « 4 ,.
‘ -
= - , a
7
>
' 4
: ° .
.
;
|
7.
>
, ,
“
. ;
; ; ‘
” . = ‘ 4
; ] : ‘
‘
_
‘ “
~ ‘
, :
, ;
; : . 4
’ :
’
;
.
. ' ’
4 e . i
’ ;
ta ’ “a
‘ ;
‘ ’
‘ ’
. ‘


;
- : \
é i ‘ s.)
'*, os
* " P 4 -
e ‘
; ‘ Vas Ps, (
;
mw «Of gk ’ , ‘
, P , 5
‘ ’ 5 , » * ‘
.Y ' ‘ .
, ‘
2 J ‘ .
é i " ")
. ,
-.
’
’ . i y .
“4 ; ; P
a '»
\ ¥ ;
| '
, ’ 8
1 , :
* 7 o
1
" ; . ‘
i ;


Original from
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN


Digitized by Google


3 /6oob-sn-pd#gesn ssadde/buo'isnsitTyleu'mMMM//:di1u / paztithtp-3a)booy ‘sal1eis paltug ey uT uTewWog IT}GNd
SPZELZ8OOSTOGE 'Apw//Z7@Z7/Jeu'a ypuey" py//:sdiiy / IW Tv:70 6O-7O-OZOZ UO eWoOYye 9 Jo ALTS4aATUN Je pa esouay


Google


THE MANTIS AND HIS FRIENDS


BUSHMAN FOLKLORE


Google


Original from
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN


Digitized by Google


3 /6oob-sn-pd#gesn ssadde/buo'isnsitTyleu'mMMM//:di1u / paztithtp-3a)booy ‘sal1eis paltug ey uT uTewWog IT}GNd
SPZELZ8OOSTOGE 'Apw//Z7@Z7/Jeu'a ypuey" py//:sdiiy / IW Tv:70 6O-7O-OZOZ UO eWoOYye 9 Jo ALTS4aATUN Je pa esouay


trated with many repredictio


t < oe 4 4


‘etn ¥ ¥ 2
4 A =
, < . ~ 4 2 >
‘ 3 ae
_ ¢ é ‘ +.
oy I
~s --f s . ,
ry > . :
A A 3
ae c . . \%
a4 = »
_ - é ’ <
"
‘ . >: mt
° ’ -
*


BLACKWELL “LPD., 1.0


<‘v
«


4


+


of Bashan. drasoing


¥


Original from
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN


Digitized by Google


2)6o006-sn-pd#esn ssaode/buo' sn4uiTyLey'MMM//:d11Uu / peZT1LTbTp-3a 6005 ‘sajie1s paltup aul uT uTewWog 2T)gGNd
SPZELZSOOSTOGE Apu //Z79Z/Jeu' a puey" py//:sdiiy / IW Tv:Z70 6O-PO-OZOZ UO eWOYe 49 Jo AJTS4eATU Je pa esauay


/3- 3503


INTRODUCTION.


The tales in this volume were all written down in the seventies by my father,
the late Dr. Bleek, and my aunt, the late Dr. Lucy Lloyd. They were dictated
by Bushmen in their own language, and many of them were translated at once
with the help of the narrators. Of the great number of stories collected then,
some were published by my aunt in 1910 in Specimens of Bushman Folklore, but
many are still left. Since her death I have been preparing some of these for
publication, and have chosen as a first instalment the tales in which the Mantis
or members of his family play a part. Some I have shortened by leaving out
wearisome repetition. This volume appears in English only, but I intend publishing
a small edition of the same tales in Bushman as soon as possible, so that students
of the language may compare the original with the translation.


The Mantis is the favourite hero of Bushman folklore. He is gifted with
supernatural powers, yet shows great foolishness. He is sometimes mischievous,
sometimes kind, at all times very human. His wife is the Dasse, also called
Kauru*, as the Mantis too has several other names. Of their children a Bushman
said: “I think that the Mantis’s children must have been three; for a little
daughter is here (showing the little finger), while the son killed by Baboons is here
(showing the ring finger), and the young Mantis is here (showing the middle
finger). Of the daughter we have no further mention. The tale of the son
killed by baboons and brought to life again by the Mantis is told in Specimens of
Bushman Folklore, p. 16. The young Mantis plays a part in the story of the
All-devourer, where his likeness to his father is commented on. :


Besides his own children the Mantis has an adopted daughter, the Porcupine,
who is really a child of the All-devourer; but fear of her own father has led her
to leave him and live with her adopted father. The Porcupine is married to
Kwammang-a*, a mythical person not identified with any animal, but seen in the
rainbow. In one tale the Mantis calls him ‘‘ my sister’s son.” His hut is near
the Mantis's hut. This strange couple have two children, young Kwammang-a,
who is brave and quiet like his father, and the young Ichneumon, who is a great
talker, always lecturing his grandfather the Mantis on his foolish doings. These
two go on contradicting each other through many pages of manuscript. The


——


* For the Bushman spelling see the Glossary at the end.


Google


Blue Crane is the Mantis’s sister; the mother of his pet springbok seems to be
another sister. All these were once men and women, we hear, people of the
early race. Now they are animals.


Although the Mantis has creative powers and can bring people to life again,
Bushmen did not worship him, yet they prayed to his creation, the Moon, and to
other heavenly bodies. He seems to me to be just a sort of dream Bushman ; and
the life he and his people live gives a very good picture of real Bushman family
life a century ago, though painted in fanciful tints.


The tales of the Mantis show no trace of the Bushman’s struggle for existence
in later times. Their narrators were all Colonial Bushmen, who lived on the rolling
plains south of the Orange River in the Prieska, Kenhardt and northern Calvinia
districts. | They had themselves seen their country invaded by white men for
permanent settlement, but not so the parents from whom they heard the stories.
These had lived the: care-free life of their forefathers, for in the first half of the
century the Kafirs had not penetrated west of the Fish River, nor had the white
man yet come north to stay; so wandering tribes of Hottentots or Bastards had
been their only foes in these parts. It seems to me significant that only two of
these stories mention domestic animals, the Crow's story, and the story of the
Mantis taking the Sheep of the Ticks, who are spoken of as *‘ black people,
people whom we do not visit.”


Our old Bushman, *‘ Dream,” remembered the days when his people tipped
their arrows with flint, when no article of Bushman household gear was made of
anything save hide or horn, wood or bone, stone or clay or eggshell. His home
was a hut of dried bushes or reed mats, sometimes only a circular screen of
bushes with the opening to leeward. Before the door was the fireplace, a mound
of ashes rising daily higher and sheltering the opening. The floor was scooped
out a little, making a sort of nest, in which the family slept, each curled up with
knees to breast under his kaross, which served as a cloak by day and a bed by night,
when it was drawn over both head and feet. A couple of clay pots and a big stone
or two sufhced for cooking. Stone knives were always handy,.and a brush of
proteles’ hair served as a soup spoon. A gemsbok’s stomach made a handy water
bag, and ostrich eggshells too were used for carrying and storing water. For
digging out the many bulbs known as edible, or the ants’ larve generally called
‘’ Bushman rice,’ a pointed stick was at hand, tipped with horn and weighted
with a round stone with a hole through the middle. Perhaps a primitive musical
instrument made of a bow and a tortoise-shell might be in some huts.


Google


Their dress was of skins. The men wore a three-cornered apron tightly
strapped on, the women two hanging ones, the smaller in front, the larger behind.
The kaross was tied round the shoulders or waist, or laid aside altogether, as the
weather made convenient. A couple of bags, long and short, were slung over
the shoulders. Perhaps a tortoise-shell powderbox filled with “‘ buchu”’ or a
hyena’s tail brush used as a handkerchief might be added. As ornaments they
wore chains of ostrich eggshell beads, or leather bangles. To complete their
outht cap and sandals were worn; the men had their bow and arrows, of which
they put a few into the long bag for a small hunt, or took the whole quiver full
for a long expedition. For the men were hunters only. The women would take
either a digging stick or a net of leather thongs filled with ostrich eggshells,
according as they were going out to gather roots or bring water.


The Colonial Bushman's property was the water. Each spring or pool in that
dry country had its particular owner and was handed down from father to son with
the regularity of an entailed estate. Many families owned more than one water,
had summer and winter residences, to which they resorted as the growth of the
field supplies or the movements of the game necessitated. | However, the owners
never lived near the spring, for that would prevent the game from using it. The
huts were a good way off, perhaps an hour's walk, and hidden by bushes. Their
position was frequently changed.


These circumstances have given rise to many misconceptions. Travellers
passing through the country, and seeing the Bushmen appear from nowhere and
disappear again, have often written that they had no fixed homes or property, and
were mere wanderers, erecting rude bush screens wherever they happened to be.
The writers would have been surprised to learn that they were themselves
trespassers and poachers in the Bushman landowner’s eyes, camping at his water
and shooting his buck, for each family had its own game reserve. If the white
man were a passing hunter and friendly, if he shared his bag with the Bushmen,
he was welcomed and could travel through the territory in peace; but when the
settlers came in, permanently occupying the land at the springs, and doing great
execution among the game, then the Bushmen retaliated by shooting the intruders
or killing their stock. Whereupon the white man, unaware of any unfriendly
behaviour on his part, unhesitatingly dubbed the Bushman an untamable savage
and a thief, and did his best to imprison or shoot him. Hence the war of
extermination, which has reduced the race of Colonial Bushmen to its present
vanishing figure.


Google


In 1910 and 1911 when I travelled through Prieska and Kenhardt districts,
I found just a handful of old people left here and there, some of them relatives of
our former men. From them and from the farmers whose parents had settled here
in the sixties, I received corroboration of what our Bushmen had told long before.
Since then I have travelled farther north, and have found other tribes of Bushmen
in Griqualand West and Gordonia, on the Nossop, in the Bechuanaland Protectorate,
at Lake Chrissie in the Transvaal and in the South West Protectorate.
In many ways their life is the same, they are hunters and collectors of wild food,
dressing in skins and living in bush huts. But each tribe speaks differently.
Those south of the 23rd degree all have dialects nearly related to the speech of the
Colonial Bushmen, but those beyond have totally different tongues. As to
folklore, the few tales I obtained were very poor, nothing to match the varied
and fanciful stories of our men. ‘The appearance and habits of the northern and
eastern tribes both tell of influence by other natives. The Bushmen of Gordonia
and Griqualand seem to be the most pure after the Colonial Bushmen. None
of the northern clans remember their people painting or carving stones, but the
Colonial Bushmen of fifty years ago knew all about it; indeed one of our men’s
father had worked in stone.


One point in the life of allo uthern Bushmen is the same. _—‘ They live in small
family groups and have no chiefs. The Colonial Bushman language has no word
for chief ; they sometimes used a Hottentot word to apply to white rulers, but
never to themselves. All old Bushmen tell me that chiefs and villages were
unknown im their country.

Three or four huts stand together. In one is the father, in others his married
children. At most eight or ten huts of connections were dotted about within a
radius of a few miles from the water, but this is an institution of later days. In
the tales of the Mantis the early way of living is shown. There is not one story
about a chief or a chief's daughter in all Bushman folklore known to me.
‘* Grandfather ”’ is the highest title of respect used. _I think travellers have often
misconstrued this respect paid to age into submission to a chief, and have called
some ‘ grandfather ’’ known to them the “‘ chief” or “‘ captain” of the tribe.
At most one might call him the “* head of the family.”

The Bushman habit of sharing his food equally with all his people present
likewise points to only small groups living together. A buck might be divided
among three or four families consisting of man, wife and a couple of children, but
could hardly be distributed among a village. That they do share their goods is


Google


well known to the border farmers, who have a saying: “* If there are four Bushmen
and one sheep's trotter, they must each have a bit.”

Possibly in the final struggle for existence which raged fiercely in some parts
of South Africa, Bushmen may have been driven to imitate the methods of their
opponents and group themselves under some noted fighter, but in happier days
we hear of no gatherings save for a dance and possibly a game drive, when several
family groups met for the occasion. Such scenes are found in the older Bushman
paintings. The newer ones sometimes show fights of a larger number of Bushmen
with Hottentots or Kafirs.

Dancing is the free Bushman’s delight. Even at Prieska, the very old men
started the dance of former days after a feast of meat. In the desert I have seen


several different dances. Men are the chief performers, the women form the band,


clapping their hands and singing. Occasionally some girl steps forward and joins
the dance. Courtship and the imitation of animals are the ideas expressed in
the dances.


They have no particular marriage foi, yet they are monogamous, and man
and wife generally remain faithful to each other till death. Sometimes the young
couple build their hut near the bridegroom's father’s, sometimes near the bride’s.
They seem to keep the family groups fairly even. They do not often have many
children.

The Bushman is a good lover and a good hater, very loyal and very revengeful.
He remains all his life a child, averse to work, fond of play, of painting, singing,
dancing, dressing up and acting, above all things fond of hearing and telling
stories.


DOROTHEA F. BLEEK.
Mowbray, 1923.


Google


-


Original from
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN


Digitized by Google


3 /6oob-sn-pd#gesn ssadde/buo'isnsitTyleu'mMMM//:di1u / paztithtp-3a)booy ‘sal1eis paltug ey uT uTewWog IT}GNd
SPZELZ8OOSTOGE 'Apw//Z7@Z7/Jeu'a ypuey" py//:sdiiy / IW Tv:70 6O-7O-OZOZ UO eWoOYye 9 Jo ALTS4aATUN Je pa esouay


CONTENTS.


PAGE
Introduction .. So we a as we v. to Ix.
The Mantis makes an Eland (Ist sicsiadl es we es s & se «
The Mantis makes an Eland (2nd version) . . . . . ... 5
How the Mantis gave the Bucks their Colours . . . . . . . #10
The Hartebeest and the Eland . . . . . . . . .) , 10
The Mantis and the Will-o-the -Wisp. . . . . . . . . 4B
A Visit to the Lion's House . . . . . . . 15
The Mantis and the Cat. . . . . . . 2... 9
The Mantis and the Proteles . . 2 2 we ws 2 2\
Foulmouth, the Blue Crane and the Girls we & «© & © «& & eo
The Blue Crane's Story . «© © wee eee 26
The Mantis and the Magic Bird . . . . . ~~... twsi(“wtstia tt
The Mantis takes away the Ticks Sheep . . . . . .. . 30
The Mantis and the All-devourer ee,
The Mantis and the Elephants ._. ee ee ee 4]
The Kwai-kwai, the Mantis and the Children Coe 4S
The Dasse’s Story and the Crow's Story. ke es se oe Ge 47
The Mantis and the Korotwiten . . . . . . . . .  . 50
Ku-te-gaua and the Mantis. . . . . . . . . ... 54
Why the Wildebeest has a light Tal . . . . . . . . . 58
The Lizard, the Mice and the Mantis . - . . . . ... 60
The Striped Mouse and the Beetle . . . . . . . . =. ~ 65
The Colours in the Ranbow . . . . . . . . 66
The Names of Places . ©. . . . . . . 2 DU. 67
Glossary of Bushman Names . . . . . .. 68


Google


Original from
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN


Digitized by Google


3 /6oob-sn-pd#gesn ssadde/buo'isnsitTyleu'mMMM//:di1u / paztithtp-3a)booy ‘sal1eis paltug ey uT uTewWog IT}GNd
SPZELZ8OOSTOGE 'Apw//Z7@Z7/Jeu'a ypuey" py//:sdiiy / IW Tv:70 6O-7O-OZOZ UO eWoOYye 9 Jo ALTS4aATUN Je pa esouay


THE MANTIS MAKES AN ELAND.
(First Version.)


The Mantis put Kwammang-a’s shoe into the water-pool. Then Kwammang-a
missed the shoe. He asked his wife about it. His wife said to him: “I do not
know.” The Porcupine was his wife.

Then the Mantis made an Eland out of Kwammang-a's shoe. The Eland
grew up eating the Mantis’s honey. Kwammang-a missed the shoe, but he was
silent.

The Mantis went out ; he went to cut honey with his knife. He gave it to the
Eland on a hollow stone, when he had called the Eland from the middle of the reeds
in which it stood. The Eland came out to eat, it went back again into the reeds
when it had finished eating.

The people did not know that it was an Eland to whom the Mantis was giving
honey, for the Mantis used to come and tell them that the honey was not fat.
When he came home, he kept saying that the honey was lean. Then Kwammang-a
said to the young Ichneumon: ‘*O Ichneumon, you must find out why Grand-
father does not bring honey home.” So the Ichneumon went with the Mantis.

Kwammang-a said: ‘*‘O Ichneumon, you must lie down to sleep and cover
your head with a kaross, you must slit the kaross and look through the hole. You
must lie as if sleeping, you must look.” The Ichneumon did so, because it was
Kwammang-a who spoke. The Ichneumon was a child. He lay down, he
pretended to sleep while he looked out of the hole in the kaross.

The Mantis put the honey into the water; he called the Eland, it was a big
Eland. Then the Eland came leaping out of the reeds, while the _Ichneumon was
lying there. The Mantis thought that the Ichneumon was looking with one eye.
The Eland came up and stood ; the Mantis moistened its hair and smoothed it with
the honey-water.

Then the Ichneumon jumped up. _ He said: ‘* Hi, stand! It is that strong
thing that comes to drink the honey-water.”” The Mantis drove the Eland away ;
it went into the reeds, it sat down. The Mantis took up the quiver, he slung it on,
he went away. He said: ‘‘O Ichneumon, let us go home!" They talked, he
said to the Ichneumon: ‘‘O Ichneumon, you are a fool.” The Ichneumon
said: ‘I am not a fool.”


Google


“iP:


G


ws G


©


1


3


'F


re


m


i fro


ee


itt


. ; 4 ;
* + 7. k s i’ «
. - nh, Be a ‘ ’* . “*
Setar % -*s "
a :
Ss ta 6 ‘ P é “4b ™
;* ‘2 :
Sa Pins Py sew t i ‘ i
- er: - ~~ “
= P Se ~* oe . . 7
~ - * - . = 2 ° J
--- - | T r = . ‘
: = < > WTignarra -
at < c : A is fe- ie re - _ . ~
a "EAE RS ye
. - = web ta ‘ I


The Mantis makes an Eland 3


The Ichneumon went and told Kwammang-a. ‘“O Kwammang-a, a strong
thing is there, that keeps eating the honey ; it is not small, it is big, it is dark, it
has gone into the reeds... Kwammangz-a said: “* My shoe it is, you must take
me to see it.”

The Mantis went out ; ‘he called the young [chneumon, the young Ichneumon
would not go with him. They were plotting together ; the Ichneumon whispered,
Kwammang-a also whispered, the Porcupine also whispered. And they went
out when the Mantis had gone. The Ichneumon said to Kwammang-a: “‘ O
Kwammang-a, you must go and cut honey, you must take the honey to the water,
you must call, while you are wetting the honey and pouring it out, then you will see.”

This Kwammang-a did. He put honey into the water, while he called the
Eland. The Ichneumon told him that the Mantis had said ‘* Kwammang-a’s shoe’
to it. He also called it his shoe. The Eland came leaping out of the reeds ; the
Ichneumon said: “ You must lie in wait for it.” The Eland ran up, it stood,
it drank the water. Kwammangz-a shot it, as it drank. It jumped up, it bounded
off, it went bounding away, for it felt it must go quite away to lie dying on the
ground.

Meanwhile the Mantis was getting honey, and the honey which he first
reached was dry. He wondered why the honey was like this that day, and he
suspected that the young Ichneumon had done this, that he had guided the people.
‘" For it seems as if blood is flowing, and that is why this honey is lean. It is
not always so, for the honey is usually fat. It seems as if danger has come upon
my home. Now I will once more seek honey, that I may find out, whether it is
true that danger has come.”

He went up to other honey, he cut it once more; that honey was also dry.
Then he picked up his quiver and slung it on, and said he would go and see for
himself, because he felt a foreboding in his body.

Then the Mantis went to the water. He called the Eland, it did not come.
Then he wept; tears fell from his eyes, because he did not see the Eland. He
rose up, he sought the Eland’s spoor, he saw blood, he wept again. He took his
kaross, he covered his head over, he returned home weeping. He went to lie
down while the sun was high, he was angry, angrily he lay down.

Kwammang-a went and called to Ki-ya-koe: ‘*‘ A mierkat is here, another
mierkat is here, another mierkat is also here, another mierkat is also here ; Ki-ya-koe
is here, Kwammangz-a is here.’ Then they went to the dead Eland. Kwammang-a
looked at it, he returned home, while Ki-ya-koe and the others cut up the Eland.


Google


4 The Mantis and His Friends


Then the Mantis rose up, he picked up the quiver, he ran along the Eland’s
spoor. And he ran out on a little bank and caught sight of the mierkats as they
stood cutting up the Eland. Then he took out an arrow, for he meant to fight the
Eland’s battle. He ran up to the people, he planted his foot firmly and shot at them,
but the arrow returned ; it passed over his head, he dodged it.

The Mierkats went on quietly cutting up, and feeding themselves with the
Eland’s meat which they were cooking, because they knew that these arrows would
not kill them. The Mantis called out: ‘ There is still an arrow in the quiver
with which I will shoot you; it will hit you.’ He ran forward, he shot, but the
arrow came back, it passed close to his head, and he saw that he had nearly killed
himself. Then he let the arrows be and ran up to the people meaning to strike
them with a knobkerry. But a Mierkat snatched the knobkerry out of the Mantis’s
hand and caught hold of him. He beat him, throwing him down on the Eland’s
horns.

Then the Mierkat told the Mantis to bring wood. He brought wood, they
lighted a fire. The Mantis gathered more wood; then he saw the Eland’s gall
onabush. The Mantis said he would prick the gall open, as it hung on the bush.
The gall said it would break and cover him with darkness. To this the Mantis
agreed. The Mantis pricked the Eland’s gall open. The gall said he should
spring into the darkness. So the Mantis sprang into the darkness, so that he did not
see the bushes. He kept getting into the bushes, because he could not see the
ground.

His thinking-strings quickly told him to take off his shoe and throw it up into
the sky, for the shoe to light up the earth for him. So he quickly snatched off
the shoe from his foot, with the dust on it, he quickly threw it up. He sat down,
he peered into the night.

Then he saw the Mierkats standing cutting up the Eland in the dark. He
rose up and went to them in the night. The Mierkats scolded him: ** The Mantis
has been playing tricks with the Eland’s gall. The sun has gone into the dark.’’

The Mantis said to them: ‘* You must hold a torch to light yourselves in
cutting up the Eland, but my shoe stands up there in the sky where | have thrown
it, to shine for me, so that I can see you as you stand. He went to pick up his
quiver in the night, he picked up the kaross in the night, he slung on his quiver
in the night, he went home im the night.

The Ichneumon asked him: ‘“‘O Mantis, was it really you who bewitched
the Eland’s gall, so that the sun went into the dark, while the moon shone? ”


Google


The Mantis makes an Eland a)


The Mantis said: “‘ The sun was shining brightly when I grew angry, because
the Mierkat had wrestled with me and beaten me with a stick. _I gathered wood,
but I was angry. I made a hole for the fire, but I was angry. _I put wood on the
fre, but I was angry. | placed stones on the wood, I gathered more wood and put
it on, I lighted the fire, but I was angry. The place was light because it was
midday, but I was angry, so I pricked open the Eland’s gall, because | wanted the
sun to go into the dark. Then the sun set behind the mountain ; darkness covered
the earth. Darkness covered us all, even the Mierkats, we were all in the dark.
Then I quickly thought about it, I quickly snatched off a shoe and spoke to it as |
threw it up. I said: ‘I am the Mantis, and this my shoe shall verily become
the moon which shines in the dark.’ ”

That is why the moon shines at night. That is why the moon is cold,
because it is a shoe, it is leather. It is red, because it has earth on it, the dust in
which the Mantis had walked.

The sun feels warm, because it is the sun's armpit. Under the sun people
drink, for they feel thirsty, so they drink. Under the moon they make a frre, they
also sleep, because the moon shines at night, it walks across the sky by night.
When the sun feels warm people shoot springbok, they hunt springbok. All
the ground is light, all places are light, all the people hunt.


THE MANTIS MAKES AN ELAND.
(Second Version.)


The Mantis once did as follows :—Kwammang-a had taken off a part of his
shoe and thrown it away, and the Mantis picked it up and went and soaked it in the
water, at a place where reeds stand. He went away, then came back again, came
up and looked. He turned away again, for he saw that the Eland was still small.

Again he came, he found the Eland’s spoor, where it had come out of the water
to graze. Then he went up to the water, while the Eland went seeking the grass
which it eats. He waited, sitting by the water ; he was upon the water's bank,
opposite the Eland’s assegai, and the Eland came to drink there. And he saw
the Eland as it came to drink. He said: ‘“ Kwammang-a’s shoe’s piece. And
the person walked up, when his father trilled to him. (He called, making his tongue
quiver, as Bushmen still do in springbok hunting.)


Google


6 The Mantis and His Friends


Then the Mantis went to some honey, he went to cut it. He came and put
the bag down near the water. He returned home. Then before the sun was
up he came back, came to pick up the bag. He approached while the Eland was
in the reeds. He called to it: ‘‘ Kwammang-a’s shoe's piece.” And the Eland
got up from the reeds, the Eland walked up to his father. His father put down
the bag of honey. He took out the honeycomb and laid it down. He kept picking
up pieces of it, he kept rubbing it on to the Eland’s ribs, while he splashed them
making them very nice.


; ELAND.


Copied by the lateG. W. Stow.


Then he went away and took the bag to seek more honey which he cut. And
he came back and laid the bag down near the water and returned home. Once
more he came and picked up the bag, once more he went up to that place and
called the Eland out of the water, saying: ‘“ Kwammang-a's shoe's piece. Then
the person stood shyly in the water; then he walked up to his father, for he had
grown. ‘Then his father wept, fondling him. He again worked making him nice
with honeycomb. Then he went away, while the Eland walked back into the
water, went to bask in the water.


Google


The Mantis makes an Eland 7


The Mantis did not come back for a time, and for three nights the Eland
grew, becoming like an ox. Then the Mantis went out early ; the sun rose, as he
walked up to the water. He called the Eland, and the Eland rose up and came forth,
and the ground resounded as he came. Then the Mantis sang for joy about the


Eland; he sang:
‘" Ah, a person 1s here!


‘* Kwammang-a’s shoé’s piece !
‘" My eldest son’s shoe's piece !
‘" Kwammang-a’s shoe's piece !
‘‘ My eldest son's shoe's piece!"


Meanwhile he rubbed the person down nicely, rubbed down the male Eland. Then
he went away and returned home.

Next morning he called the young Ichneumon, saying the young Ichneumon
should go with him, they would be only two; for he deceived the young
Ichneumon. And they went out and reached the water while the Eland was grazing.
They sat down in the shade of the bush by which the Eland’s assegai stood, where
he kept coming to take it.

The Mantis said : “‘ Young Ichneumon, go to sleep ! *’ for he meant to deceive
him. So the young Ichneumon lay down, as the Eland came to drink, because
the sun stood at noon, and was getting hot. Meanwhile the young I[chneumon
had covered up his head, because the Mantis wished him to cover it. But the
young Ichneumon did not sleep, he lay awake. Then the Eland walked away,


and the young Ichneumon said: ‘* Hi, stand, hi stand, stand!*’ And the Mantis
said: © What does my brother think he has seen yonder?’’ And the young
Ichneumon said: “A person is yonder, standing yonder.” And the Mantis


said: © You think it is magic ; but it is a very small thing, it is a bit of father’s shoe,
which he dropped. Magic it is not.” And they went home.

Then the young Ichneumon told his father Kwammang-a about it, and
Kwammang-a said the young Ichneumon must guide him and show him the Eland ;
he would see whether the Eland was so very handsome when the Mantis had rubbed
it down. Then the young [chneumon guided his father, while the Mantis was just
at another place, for he meant to go to the water later on. Meantime they went
up to the Eland at the water, and Kwammang-a looked at the Eland and he
knocked it down, while the Mantis was not there. He knocked the Eland down
and was cutting it up, before the Mantis came. So when the Mantis arrived, he
saw Kwammang-a and the others standing cutting up the Eland.


Google


8 The Mantis and His Friends


And the Mantis said : ‘‘ Why could you not first let me come? ’’ And he wept
for the Eland, he scolded Kwammang-a's people, because Kwammang-a had not
let him come first, and let him be the one to tell them to kill the Eland.


And Kwammangz-a said: ‘‘ Tell Grandfather to leave off! He must come
and gather wood for us, that we may eat, for this is meat.”


Then the Mantis came, he said he had wanted Kwammang-a to let him come
while the Eland was still alive, and not to have killed the Eland when he was not
looking. They might have left the Eland to kill until he was looking on, then he
would have told them to kill the Eland ; then his heart would have been comfortable,
for his heart did not feel satisfied about his Eland, whom he alone had made.


Then as he went to gather wood, he caught sight of a gall there; it was his
Eland's gall. And he said he would pierce the gall open, he would jump. And
the gall said: “‘ I will burst covering you in.” Then the young Ichneumon said :
‘" What are you looking at there, that you do not gather wood at that place.” Then
the Mantis left the gall, he brought wood and put it down. Then he again looked
for wood at the place where the gall had been. He went up to the gall, he again
said he would pierce the gall open, he would jump. The gall again said it would
burst, covering him in. He said he would jump, the gall must burst when he trod
on it, as he jumped.

The young Ichneumon scolded him again; he said: ‘* What can be yonder,
that you keep going to that place. You do not gather wood, for you keep going to
that bush. You are going to play tricks and not to gather wood.


And Kwammang-a said : “* You must make haste and let us go when you have
called Grandfather, for the gall lies there, Grandfather has seen it. So you must
make haste. For when Grandfather behaves like this about anything, he is not
acting straightly, for he is playing tricks with his thing. So you must manage
that we start, when you have called Grandfather, that we may leave the place
where the gall is.”

Then they packed up the meat into the net, while the Mantis untied his shoe,
he put the shoe into the bag. _‘I[t was an arrow bag which he had slung on next
the quiver. And they carried the things and went along homewards. And on the
way the Mantis said: *‘ This shoe-string has broken.” And the young Ichneumon
said: ‘‘ You must have put the shoe away. And the Mantis said: ‘‘ No, no,
the shoe must really be lying there, where we cut up the Eland. So I must turn
back and go to fetch the shoe.’ And the young Ichneumon said: ‘‘ You must have


Google


The Mantis makes an Eland 9


put the shoe in, you must feel inside the bag, feel in the middle of the bag, whether
you cannot find the shoe.”

And the Mantis felt in the bag, he kept feeling above the shoe. He said:
‘* See, the shoe is really not in it. I must go back and pick it up, for the shoe is
truly yonder.” The young Ichneumon said: ‘‘ We must go home, we really
must go home. And the Mantis said: ‘‘ You can go home, but I must really
go and get the shoe.’ Then Kwammang-a said: ‘‘ Let Grandfather be! Let
him turn back and do as he says... And the young Ichneumon said: “ O person,
I do wish the Mantis would for once listen when we speak.”” The Mantis said :
‘You always go on like this! I must really go and get the shoe.”

Then the Mantis turned back. He ran up to the gall, he reached it. Then
he pierced the gall, he made the gall burst. And the gall broke covering in his
head ; his eyes became big, he could not see. And he groped about feeling his
way. And he went groping along, groping along, groping, he found an ostrich
feather. He picked up the feather and sucked it and brushed off the gall from
his eyes with it. 7

Then he threw the feather up, he said: ‘* Thou must now lie up in the sky,
thou must henceforth be the Moon. Thou shalt shine at night. Thou shalt by
thy shining lighten the darkness for men, till the Sun rises to light up all things
for men. It is he under whom men hunt. For thou dost glow for men, while the
Sun shines for men. Under him men walk about, they go hunting, they return home.
Thou art the Moon, thou dost give light for men, then thou dost fall away, thou dost
return to life, when thou hast fallen away, thou dost give light to all people.”

That is what the Moon does : The Moon falls away and returns to life, and he
lights up all the flat places.


Google


10 The Mantis and His Friends


HOW THE MANTIS GAVE THE BUCKS THEIR COLOURS.


~The Gemsbok once ate liquid honey which is white. This is why he is
white. The Mantis once gave some of it to the Gemsbok.

The Hartebeest was the one to whom the Mantis once gave some of the comb
of young bees ; that is why the Hartebeest is red, because the comb of young bees
which he ate was red. So he became like the comb of young bees.

The Eland was the one to whom the Mantis once gave some wasps honey;
this is why he is dark, because he once ate wasps’ honey.

The Quagga was the one to whom the Mantis once gave some of the small
bees’ honey ; that is why he is dark, because he ate the small bees’ honey. So he
is dark.

The Springbok was the one who once ate the liquid from the young bees’
cells ; that is why he is red. The Mantis squeezed it out for him and he drank.
That is why he is red.

These little bees when chewed are white like milk, but they were still in their
cells which were red. The Springbok ate the squeezed-out liquid of the bees
and the cells together.


THE HARTEBEEST AND THE ELAND.


The Hartebeest and the Eland are things of the Mantis ; therefore they have
magic power.

The Mantis is used to go with the Hartebeest when he walks about. Our
parents used to ask us, Did we not see that the Hartebeest’s head resembled the
Mantis’s head ? It feels that it belongs to the Mantis: that is why its head resembles
his head. A woman who has a young child does not eat the Hartebeest, nor does
she spring over the Hartebeest’s head, for the Mantis would press down the hollow
place on her child's head, and the child would die, if she did so.

So our parents used to tell the women who had young children to cut out a
piece of the Hartebeest’s foot between the toes, to thread it upon a sinew and make
a charm and put it on the little child. For these are things upon which the
Mantis sits, and the Mantis would smell the thing's scent on the child and would
not press in its head.


Google


The Hartebeest and the Eland 11


Our parents used to say that the Mantis sits between the Eland’s horns.
When a man has shot an Eland with an arrow, he does not come home. __ He walks
about as if he were ill; people carry him away as if he were ill, for he wants the
Eland to act as he does. Therefore he does not come home, lest he come to a place
where the children are screaming. He goes to a place to windward, so that he
may not smell the food the people are cooking at home. For if the Eland were to
smell the scent of the food, it would arise and go away ; and it would smell the
food if the man who shot it also smelt it.


HARTEBEEST.
Copied from cave under precipice on farm Badtfontein, Orange River, O.F.S., by the late G. W. Stow.


The Mantis is accustomed to examine the Eland which is writhing in pain,
and to follow the spoor of the man who shot it, for he wishes to see what man it is.
He goes to the man’s home, he looks through the quivers, he examines the arrow
tips which seem to be bloody, he finds the arrow tip in a quiver, he says: © This
man shot the Eland.” Then he does not let the man sleep, but keeps pinching
him, to make him move, for he thinks the man will try to catch him. At another
time he sounds like a puffadder, because he wants the man to be frightened and
jump up, so that the Eland may also get up. _If he sees that the man is walking
about, he goes to tell the Eland about it, that the man who shot him is not lying
ill, but is jumping about.


Google


12 The Mantis and His Friends


The Mantis does not love us, if we kill an Eland. So he comes to pinch our
ear, because he wants us to exclaim ** Fff! I-1-1-id !"’ Then he goes to the Eland.
He goes and strikes the Eland’s horn, and the Eland arises, the Eland eats, because
it feels that it has quite come to life by means of the Mantis’s doings, although it
had nearly died, it had become stiff, because it was dying ; for the Eland had been
wounded with poison and could not eat.


Then the Mantis goes to the man who shot the Eland. People say he goes
to the man to try the man’s bowstring ; he tries whether the bowstring is taut and
not slack. Then he leaves the bowstring, he stands pinching the inside of the man’s
ear. He is not visible there, for people do not see him, he is plaguing the people.
The man who shot the Eland is the one whom he hurts, because he wants the man
to cry with pain, so that he may go and make the Eland come to life, that the Eland
may get up. __- For the Eland is quite stiff, because it feels it is going to die, because
poison is that which kills an Eland, the poison with which the man has shot it, which
comes wet off the shaft. Poison attacks a thing's arteries ; it takes hold of a thing’s
heart's arteries, it bites at a thing's heart, killing the thing.

People say that the Mantis first made the Eland; the Hartebeest was the one
whom he made after the death of his Eland. That is why he did not love the Eland
and the Hartebeest a little, he loved them dearly, for he made his heart of the Eland
and the Hartebeest.

_ The Gemsbok was the one whom he did not love so well, yet he was fond of
the Gemsbok. For there are Hares which we see when we shoot Gemsbok, and
those Hares do not stir, because they want us to kill them. We look at them because
they are his Hares. He wants us to kill the Hares, in order that the Gemsbok
may live. |

And the Gemsbok recovers, if we kill the Hare, because it feels that the Mantis
is the one whom we kill. _ He becomes a Hare, because he means us to kill him,
in order that the Gemsbok may recover, and he remembers that he once did so.
He made himself into a wounded Hartebeest, because he wanted the people to
cut him up.


Google


The Mantis and the Will-o'-the-Wisp 13


THE MANTIS AND THE WILL-O’-THE-WISP.


The Mantis caught sight of Will-o’-the-wisp walking about ; he asked where
Will-o'-the-wisp came from. Will-o’-the-wisp told him that he was hunting about.

While Will-o'-the-wisp was answering him, the Mantis put down his quiver,
he took out a knobkerry, he looked to see where Will-o’-the-wisp’s eyes were. He
looked him up and down, he walked all round him seeking his eyes. He asked
Will-o'-the-wisp where his eyes might be.

Will-o’-the-wisp said that his eyes were not anywhere, and the Mantis asked
him how he could walk about like a man who had eyes. Then the Mantis
threatened him and he dodged. And the Mantis said: ‘* See now, why did you
spring aside when [| threatened you? That looks as if you had eyes, you seem to
have seen that I meant to beat you.”

And the Mantis searched him again; again he looked him over, seeking his
eyes. And the Mantis told him, that he was really going to fight him. And he told
the Mantis that he might fight him if he wanted to do so. Then the Mantis
threatened him and Will-o’-the-wisp dodged him. And the Mantis told
Will-o’-the-wisp that he must have hidden his eyes, for how else could he dodge
like a man who had eyes? |

Then the Mantis struck at him, and he sprang aside stooping, and the Mantis
hit the ground, while Will-o’-the-wisp stood on one side. Then the Mantis asked
him whether he were a sorcerer, for he did not understand why he did not see his
eyes, and Will-o -the-wisp told him that he had no eyes, yet when he struck him
Will-o’-the-wisp dodged away from his stick. He acted like a man who had eyes.

Then Will-o’-the-wisp said: ‘* Now I will fight you,” and took up the knob-
kerry. The Mantis said: ‘* That was a lie you told just now, when you said your
eyes were not anywhere. Where are your eyes, with which you mean to fight


When Will-o'-the-wisp was about to hit him, the Mantis struck at Will-o -the-
wisp; then Will-o'-the-wisp struck him. The Mantis said: ‘* How 1s it that
you have hit my head, after telling me you had no eyes ? ”

Then the Mantis struck at him again, and he dodged away stooping, and the
Mantis hit the ground. And Will-o’-the-wisp hit the Mantis’s head and broke
it, and hit it again. And the Mantis sprang aside and ran away, because he felt
he could not bear it any longer. Then he called to the quiver and the shoes, that
his things should follow him home.


Google


14 The Mantis and His Friends


The things came to him at home, and Kwammang-a asked him: ‘ Whom
have you been fighting, who has broken your head like this?’’ And he
answered : °° Will-o'-the-wisp was the one whom I saw. _ It was he who did this
tome. I was looking for his eyes, I did not know where they could be. So I tried
to strike him and knock him down ; it was he who broke my head.”

And Kwammang-a told him that Will-o'-the-wisp’s eyes ought to be on his
feet between the great toe and the next. And the Mantis said he wanted to go back
and look for Will-o’-the-wisp again. And Kwammangz-a said: ‘“‘Why is it, that
whenever you meet any man, you want to fight him? First sleep a little;
afterwards you shall seek Will-o'-the-wisp and fight him, if you really want to
fight.” Then the Mantis asked: ‘‘ What am I to do?” And Kwammang-a
said: © Do you not know what you should do to Will-o -the-wisp, if you want to
fight him?" And he replied that he did not know how to fight Will-o'-the-wisp.

Kwammang-a then said: “* When you see him, you must threaten him and see
whether he dodges aside as he did before. Then you must look at his feet and you
will see the eyes peeping out between the toes. Then you must kick dust into his
eyes, and while he sits rubbing his eyes there, you must keep hitting his head.”’

And the Mantis went out in the morning and soon saw Will-o'-the-wisp and ran
up to him. Then he threw dust into the other's eyes, and while Will-o'-the-wisp
rubbed his eyes, the Mantis sprang up and beat his head and broke it. And
Will-o’-the-wisp said: ‘* Did not Kwammang-a tell you about me? Is not that
why you are breaking my head? "’ And the Mantis answered: ‘* You are lying,
I always knew about you. I meant to find out if you were really cunning: that
is why I allowed you to break my head. This time I get you. Therefore I shall
break your head. You seem to have thought you were really strong enough to
break my head, but I will conquer you. Then I will take your things to show to
Kwammang-a; for he would not believe me, if | merely told him that I had seen
you.

Will-o’-the-wisp replied: ‘* Go back, go and tell him how you have fought
me. You know Kwammangz-a told you about it, for you would not have beaten
me like this, if you had not known.” And the Mantis answered that he had
always known. The other day he had not dreamt well. ‘* That was how you
broke my head. For you would not have beaten me, thus, if I had not dreamt
badly.” Will-o'-the-wisp said: “‘ Why did you not fight me in the same manner
then, that you are fighting now? It looks as if you really did not know. For if
you had known, you would have beaten me last time we saw each other.”


Google


A Visit to the Lion's House 15


The Mantis answered that he had really known last time. It had happened
that he had dreamt a bad dream, therefore he had fought badly. That was not
his usual way of fighting. Will-o'-the-wisp said: “‘ Who was the person who
told you that I have eyes?" ‘* Nobody told me, for I always knew that you
had eyes.” And Will-o’-the-wisp answered: ‘* Kwammang-a told you how to
fight me. For I know that you are a stupid thing who would not have known
how to fight me.”

The Mantis said: ‘‘Am I a child that Kwammang-a should teach me? |
am not a child, that he should teach me, as if I were not clever. I ama grown-up
person who is also cunning, therefore I am clever.” Will-o’-the-wisp said :
‘* Somebody told you that my eyes are on my feet between the toes. You acted
as if someone had told you. __I saw that by your walk, when you came out of the
house. You did not walk in the same manner as you did the other time when we
met. It looked as if you were rejoicing because you thought you were going to beat
me. You did not go slowly, because you knew what you had to do to beat me.”


A VISIT TO THE LION’S HOUSE.


Kwammangz-a said: *‘O Ichneumon, let us go to the Lion's house, that they
may roast Quagga’s meat for us!" The Ichneumon said: ‘* We will do so.”
He agreed with him. The Mantis said: ‘* Let us do so.’ For the Mantis also
agreed.

The Ichneumon said: “‘O Mantis, sit down, for we are going to the Lion’s
house. Do stay here, for you will be afraid of the Lions.” The Mantis said :
‘“ But I want to walk with you, that we may go and speak to them, that I may talk
to my old friend.” The Ichneumon consented, he said: ‘* Yes, Grandfather,
we will do so.” So they went.

They came across the Lions’ spoor. The Ichneumon said: ‘* This is my
brothers’ spoor. One brother's spoor is here, the other brother's spoor is there.
My grandfather's spoor is here, my other grandfather’s spoor is there. They
are carrying Quagga'’s meat. Kwammangz-a said: ‘* Let us go on to the water.”
They did so. They went on following the Lions’ spoor. The Ichneumon said :
‘“ Quagga’s blood is here; they must be going laden. We shall eat Quagga’s
meat.”


Google


16 The Mantis and His Friends


They reached the water. A Lion rose up. The Ichneumon said: ** My
grandmother is getting up.. Kwammang-a said: ‘‘ The daughter is getting
up there, another old woman is getting up here, her head is white.’ A little Lion
said: “OQ White-head, Kwammang-a is coming along there, and the Ichneumon
comes with him.’

The Mantis said : *‘ O Ichneumon, put me into your bag!"" The Ichneumon
stopped and said: “I wanted you to stay at home, because you would be afraid
of the Lions.” The Mantis said to him: ‘* Quickly put me in, O Ichneumon,
quickly put me in, so that the Lions do not see me! You must put in my legs,
you must not tie up the mouth of the bag, for my head will stand above the bag’s
mouth. You must keep putting in meat for me to eat, while I am in the bag. i
shall also look out with my eye.” )

The Mantis spoke again and said: ‘* I know you want me to sit still." The
Ichneumon said: ‘*‘I certainly want you to do so.” The Mantis said: *‘O
Ichneumon, you must put the kaross over me.” The Ichneumon did so. The
Mantis said: ‘* You must put in an ostrich eggshell full of water for me to drink.”
The Ichneumon did so. The Mantis said: *‘ You must place the eggshell by my
head, so that I can drink.”” The eggshell was put close to the Mantis's head ;
the Mantis drank. |

Just then the little Lion came in among Kwammangz-a's people. The little
Lion caught sight of him. The little Lion sprang back crying; he went crying
to his mother, because the Mantis was whispering in the bag. He came back and
stood in front of Kwammang-a. He saw the Ichneumon's bag, he saw the
Mantis’s eye as the Mantis looked out from inside the bag. The Mantis kept
peeping out. He cried out again, springing back; he went crying to his mother.
His mother soothed him, he was still. He said: ‘“O mammy, take out for me
the little Hare, which is in the Ichneumon’s bag ! ”’

He came again to look at the Mantis. As he stood by Kwammangz-a's leg,
he saw the Mantis. The Mantis shut one eye and winked at him, he whispered :
‘*T should like to poke out your eye.” The little Lion ran away crying; he
went to his mother. His mother walked up, stamping as she came, because she was
angry. She stood upon the Mantis to crush him. She said: “* Boo, what is this
that is making the child cry, bringing me, the Lioness ? ”

Then the Mantis jumped out of the bag and got feathers ; he flew up into the
sky. The Ichneumon threw him up into the sky and he went along calling to the
Hartebeest-calfskin bag. He said, as he went up into the sky: ‘“‘O shoes, you


Google


Be ae wet, » Tam stil wet, JT must. first sae


ALVis isit to the Lions Howse. AE : i


3 ust cane 0 Hartebcest $ ‘children’ to. the ‘bag: you must ‘come, | i oO quiver. :
Esse must come. OO kaross, “you. must come! “The: vap: ‘must come} e


‘Then he went into the water. He sath: See see | y Our name is the Mantis. nee


What: man is equal to us 2" He was shouting when. he got out uf the water. He -


stood on the bank above 1 it ad said: O Hartebeest’ s children: ‘wait. for mel” Oe ?
shoes, wait for me! O stick, wait: lot ime! O bow, ‘wait for me! ‘Bowstring, ae
walt for me! ‘Kaross, wait for. moe! cers wait, for moet: Net, ¥ wait t for THe, «for: iu SE


‘ a a t? we 2. « > ay *¥.i-
ny . Sak << fos es. = ‘ “
. ‘ . < Pat y ate Te . >
. . t . rs LF . > r, . Tot oR s =? ‘ :
. . en Se” SLE KSEE. AERP Nee = rE Se AN — a
on . d . 4 hie Sor 7” . = . .- pase) 4
P ee “- i AD bus “ee : —- ; - + ’
Oy h8, Se Pa Ue VE gr ae ae “: 4 See OATH :
ar : v: hte 2% re oF ee eis : Sa
. : +5 m4 ae oe - => 2 == nt) te - -
<* - es ee | a . ,
, - <= = vy >, ~ ==> . . an
t i t ~ he a . ae & £ Sa Ee RACE. * a> » < >
a $ 2 z
ia, hy aa, f .
My v 4
ie . ‘ " ’
y ~ J “ a" f v-
4
* 4
’


‘| tie | shoe 3 BUST. Oe Bein a AATATINE. an oe x0 _aptnact THe LiONS.: |
el fom rook its Gratis ates maguire news F Caledan, 0 D. F. So fy the te cs w. - lone:


f AEE §


The: iirtebeea aki ‘ep said: * That: man. 1s, he: ‘vee left us, TOW he speaks). ie
thus,” The shoes said: ay “Tet: ‘Bs go. away and. leave hi, he can talk: to: us at” 2
another place, for he is mocking us, » he i is. deceiving u us." = The harass #8 id: We oS


Hesistiet


: will do so; we will really do’ Berne. |
The: Mantis’ said ¢ ‘ wes ee. ait: i Kine oO quiver, ie there °
aik lie here! Oo Bow. ie there! a 0) shoes, lie here OD. cap, sit there” ~ He =:


dried himself, he. walked forward, for the water had. washed: off his feathers. SMe «: 3 ie:
| picked uP the esses be ee it on. He took up the q quiver, he carried it it. : He tok es


We ~ = a > “ Ae Co
’ 3 _ ~<s. ——,* <. : / Po, = 5 - : i=. A. - . opti ys? OVALS at Ue
: SS ae = a = . ee al x ‘ ‘ > 2 . . 3 ‘ sty Cee * P ‘ $ on ee ass (yay at a
Se Ae z < ) fe fxs: a-oy . . e*. * - - 3 . w+ -% ‘ i iy 1% bye Ree A Pye at SpE PSY
» = 4 > => ts : 7 re oe, : . fc y . - “. ‘ eee teh Oe es Nesihep®
4 he oy. 4 “ ee —o,-* » : : 3 pda) " ‘ <ire 4 SE a dag er :
a Ze - 4% . = MR 54355 a 2 . -. : . ¥ . ; wn? we z Sey eee tptess id ty les?
Sot, : ere . x ‘<e- Se - . a . , SINS . : nas 75 . PROS RAT Sak PEA rein eet EY OD
5 ’ “> a - . : - - 9% S470 s Shae OY , Bee CM ee ER NON) gy Sy j
‘ =) ‘ a x - . er. S3*< : . — 7" 8 : .ae yt Re Al eo Te r :
iPS ir a . 2 er YS ) ; ~ oe. a = ‘ OTF ONM cohahan Cet eo ry ea as ASE |
> “ — -— = ——_— - — s & ~ > -
4 an J " J
; i ad “ ay
._ 3 . ° . 4 ‘ ‘ ' ; : ,= yl °°.


18 The Mantis and His Friends


up the bow, he put it under his arm. He sat down and put on his shoes. He
got up and took the stick and held it. He walked on, till he reached home.


He sat down and said: ‘‘O Dasse, we went to the Lion’s house; the Lion
slew Kwammang-a. He cheated the Dasse, he deceived her, because he is a
liar. He also said: *‘ The Lion has swallowed the Ichneumon.” So he cheated
the Dasse ; the Dasse was his wife, he lied to his wife. His wife assented : ** Yes,
my husband.” They both deceived the Porcupine. She believed them.


The Porcupine got up and went out. She saw Kwammangz-a's party coming
laden with Quagga’s meat. “‘ Is that not Kwammang-a's party that I see coming
there laden? ’’ She spoke standing. The Dasse got up and went out. “Is
that not Kwammang-a coming there laden?’ The Mantis went on telling lies.
The Dasse contradicted her husband. She said: “* You told a lie to me, so that
I told a lie to the Porcupine.’ The Mantis said: “* I thought Kwammang-a would
come carrying Quagga's meat.’ The Porcupine said: “ You sat there telling
lies.” :

The Ichneumon walked up to the hut. He sat down, for he wished to unload
the Quagga’s meat, because he wanted to talk. Kwammang-a walked up, he
unloaded the Quagga's meat, he sat down. He was silent, because he was
comfortable. He was angry with his grandfather, the Mantis. The Ichneumon
talked, while Kwammang-a kept silence.

The Ichneumon said: ** The Mantis truly asked me to hide him. Then
the little Lion thought he was a little Hare, his mother should take out the little
Hare for him.” ‘Thus the young Ichneumon sat talking. The Porcupine said :
‘* | was sure that grandfather was deceiving me. She was angry, therefore she
spoke like this to the young Ichneumon. The Mantis was angry, the Mantis
lay down.


Google


The Mantis and the Cat 19


THE MANTIS AND THE CAT.


The Mantis rose up on the morrow. He walked out, because he was angry.
He went wrathfully along. He met the Cat going along singing. The Cat sang
that the Lynx mocked at him, because he could not run as fast as the Lynx did.
Thus the Cat sang as he went. The Mantis ran to meet the Cat, as he came along.
The Mantis asked him: ‘*‘ What are you singing about?” The Cat answered :
‘ T am not singing about anything.”

The Mantis said: ** Your little head is trembling, you were singing about
something. The Cat said: ‘* Your eyes have warts on them. I will hit your
head, I will break it." The Mantis said: **‘O Cat, hit my head, I will hit -your
head !”’

The Cat struck at the Mantis’s head; the Mantis drew back. The Mantis
struck at the Cat's head ; the Cat drew back and hid his head in the ground. The
Mantis hit the Cat’s tail. The Cat got up and struck at the Mantis’s head. The
Mantis drew back and struck at the Cat’s head. The Cat drew back and hid his
head in the ground. The Mantis hit the Cat’s tail, because it was above the ground,
and the Cat's head was in the ground. The Cat hit the Mantis’s head and broke it.


The Mantis quickly got feathers, he flew away. He called to the Hartebeest-
skin bag: “‘O Hartebeest’s children, leave here, we must fly.” The Hartebeest-
skin bag said: “* Let us follow!’ The shoes said: *‘ We will really follow, for
the Mantis has said so.’ The quiver said: ‘“* We will do so!” The cap said:
‘“O kaross, let us follow!’ The bow said: ‘*O stick, we ought to follow, for
the Mantis says so. They ran off.


The Mantis flew along the sky ; he flew into the water, he splashed in the water,
he jumped out, he rejoiced: “* The Mantis has done this.” His things ran past
him at the water. The Mantis quickly called to them, he said: ‘* Lie down there
quickly, for yonder is our home and the Ichneumon would laugh at you; you must
lie down there quickly and I will carry you.”

The quiver said: “‘ The Mantis left us, we had to come home.” The shoes
said: © We really must lie down to wait for the Mantis.” The shoes did so, they
waited for the Mantis. The Mantis boasted: ‘* What man is our equal? Our
name is the Mantis!" He walked forward. He walked slowly up to the hut,
for he was limping; he sat down.


Google


20 The Mantis and His Friends


The Ichneumon said : ‘* Who has hit the Mantis’s head with a stick?’ The
Mantis said: “* It was the Cat who hit my head with a stick !"" The Ichneumon
said: “‘OQ Mantis, we always feint at the Cat’s head, the Cat hides his head in the
ground, we look to see where his head is, we strike, breaking it.’ The Mantis
said: “O Ichneumon, you must go on telling me about it, you must not go to
sleep. For day will soon break for me, and I want to go early and look about for
another Cat, that I may quickly break its head.”’

The day soon broke; the Ichneumon said: *‘O Mantis, do let me sleep !
You must find the spoor.”’ The Mantis ran out of the house, he ran to seek a Cat.
Again he saw the Cat come singing, and ran to meet him. The Cat stood still.
He feinted at the Cat’s head. The Cat quickly put his head into the ground,
thinking that the Mantis would strike his tail again. The Mantis saw his head
just above the ground ; he struck at it and hit it. The Mantis asked whether he
had meant to offer him his head.

The Cat rose up, the Cat said: “‘ The Ichneumon told you about it, that is
how you found my head.” The Mantis said: ‘* You are lying, I had forgotten.”
The Cat said: ‘* You had not forgotten, the Ichneumon told you.” The
Mantis said: ‘° That is not true; you stand there telling lies. It slipped my
memory, I had not really forgotten, but I did not think of it. I really am
cunning.

The Mantis feinted at his head once more. He again put his head into the
ground. The Mantis saw his head standing there and struck, hitting it. The
Mantis sprang away, he boasted: *‘ See, our name is the Mantis! What man is
equal to us?" The Cat rose up and said: “* The Ichneumon told you.” The
Mantis said: “‘ A lie has misled you. [I am the cunning one. The Ichneumon
did not tell me. _ had merely forgotten about you.” He went forward, he picked
up the quiver, he slung it on. He picked up the kaross, he wrapped it round him.
He picked up the bag, he slung it over his shoulder. He picked up the bow, he put
it under his arm. He picked up the shoes, he put them on. He picked up the
stick, he carried it. He returned home; he laid down the quiver, he laid down
the bow, he laid down the stick.

The Ichneumon asked him: ** Did you see the Cat?’ The Mantis said:
‘* | did see him.” The Ichneumon asked: “* What happened to you>?”’ The
Mantis said: ‘* Nothing happened to me,’ for he was boasting. He said: “* |
feinted at the old man, he hid his head in the ground, I saw it." The Ichneumon
said: ‘‘ Did you get him?” The Mantis said: ** I truly struck it, I hit it. The


Google


The Mantis and the Proteles 21


old man rose up and said you had told me, that was how I knew about him. _ |
told the old man that I had merely forgotten. The old man said that you had
certainly taught me. I told him, he was standing telling lies.”

The Ichneumon said: ‘‘O Mantis, you are foolish, you are deceitful. |
taught you; I, a child, taught you, a grown-up man. You are foolish, you are
cunning, you are deceitful.’ Thus they talked there. The womenfolk laughed


at them. The Ichneumon said: ‘* You agree with me; is not the Mantis


foolish and deceitful ? ”’


ES! A Re


THE MANTIS AND THE PROTELES.


Kwammang-a and his family were going to see other people, to visit
Kwammang-a's people. He was going to visit the Proteles, because she was his
Aunt. The Mantis said he would go with them. Kwammangz-a said: °° Child,
you must tell Grandfather, that we are going to see Aunt Proteles.’ The young
Ichneumon said: ““O my Grandfather, the Mantis! Father says we are going
to see Aunt Proteles, and her home is not near, therefore you should sit still.”
Then the Mantis said, he must be with Kwammang-a, he had to accompany
Kwammang-a wherever he went. And the young Ichneumon said: “* You must
sit still.” Then Kwammangz-a said: ** You will have to let Grandfather go with
us, for he will not listen.”

So the Mantis went with Kwammang-a. They went along, they reached the
home of the Proteles. Then Kwammang-a begged his Aunt, the Proteles, to give
him a little Proteles. She was inside the hole, as she usually is. So when the
Mantis came up to them and saw the Proteles spoor, he called out: ‘* Stop, stop,
Grandson ! Kwammang-a must think that a Proteles is here.” Then Kwammang-a
looked at the young Ichneumon, for he wanted him to tell the Mantis to be silent.
The young Ichneumon said: ‘“O my Grandfather, the Mantis! You always
go on like this, when you come to anyone's home.”

Then Kwammang-a laid down his things, he sat down. The Mantis said:
‘" Where are the people whose footmarks are here?"’’ Kwammangz-a said: ‘* O
my Aunt! Come out and give me one, that I may put it to roast for myself.”
Then the Mother Proteles came out, she sat in front of the hole, looking at the Mantis,
because she did not usually see him. Therefore she stared at him.


Google


22 The Mantis and His Friends


Then Kwammang-a said: ‘1 have begged you to give me one, that I may
rub off the dust, for you see I am white with dust.”” And the Mother Proteles
said: “OQ man, my children are not grown up yet, they are still little.” And
Kwammang-a said: ‘* Do you think I do not feel covered all over with dust, and
the dust burns." Then the Mother Proteles went in, and did not come out at
once, for she was thinking inside the hole, that she did not want to give achild. Then
she caught hold of a little Proteles and pulled it out, because it was a lean one. She
gave it to Kwammangz-a. |

Kwammang-a took hold of the little Proteles, he cut it open and laid it down.
He gathered firewood, and brought it. He dug out a hole for the fire, he put wood
into the hole, he put stones to heat on the wood, he lighted the fire with his
tinder-box ; he let it blaze up and singed the little Proteles. Then he took it out
and scraped it and skinned it and put it down. He went to the fire, he scratched
the coals aside, he put the little Proteles down to roast, he covered it up and made
a fire above it. Then he arose and sat down, for he sat waiting for the little Proteles
to roast. Then he got up and went to it, and rolled it out, and shook off the ashes
and put it to cool. Then he took it up, and cut it up and gave the heart to the
Mantis ; and they ate. They put away pieces of meat, for they felt that they must
keep some for the women who were hungry. They returned home.

The Mantis was greedy ; therefore he turned back to the Proteles. He went
up to her hole, he laid down his things, he gathered wood ; he scratched open the
ashes, he put bushes on the fire. He put stones to heat on the bushes, he lighted
the fire with his tinderbox, he made it blaze. When the fire had burnt up, he said :
‘*O my Aunt, come out, give me a little thing to cut up.”

The Proteles was inside and would not come out. The Mantis sat waiting
for her; he was alone, for Kwammang-a had gone home. He spoke again: *‘O
my Aunt, come out, give me a little thing to cut up, that I may rub off the dust
from myself.’ Then the Proteles stuck out her head while her body was inside ;
she sat looking at the Mantis. Then the Mantis sat looking, sat and sat and said :
‘“ Why are you staring at me, because | wanted you to give me a little thing with
which to wipe off the dust ?”’

The Proteles did not speak to him; she went in and took a little girl Proteles
and pulled her out. And the Proteles held her fast while she gave her to the Mantis.
For she thought, that when the Mantis seized the little Proteles, she would try to
catch the Mantis, while she kept hold of the little Proteles’ other arm. Then the
Proteles caught hold of the Mantis with one arm, she pulled the Mantis on to the


Google


—_ ——


Foulmouth, the Blue Crane and the Girls 23


fire, while she kept fast hold of the little Proteles. She knocked the Mantis down
on the fire which he had shewn her.

Then the Mantis said: ‘‘O blisters! Hartebeest’s children, you must go,’’
for he wished to fly out of the fire. Then he flew away, flew to water. He
descended when he saw the water was near. He alighted, he popped into the water,
he said: ‘*O blisters, O dear! That fire into which the Proteles mother put me
was hot.” And he came out of the water, he picked up the kaross, he threw it over
his shoulders ; he picked up the quiver, he slung it on. He went homewards,
he came along moaning, he said: “‘ Hng, hng, hng, hng,’’ because of the burns.
Moaning he found the hut.


Then Kwammang-a spoke: ‘* Child, tell Grandfather that I wanted him
to come quietly. For he seems to think, we are used to go back again to the Proteles ;
but when the Proteles has already given us a little one, we do not turn back. ‘For
the Proteles generally acts like this... Then the young Ichneumon said: *‘O my
Grandfather the Mantis, Father wants me to say, that he told you to come quietly,
for the Proteles generally acts like this to us.’


FOULMOUTH, THE BLUE CRANE AND THE GIRLS.


Foulmouth is a person; he was a man of the early race.

The Blue Crane was also a person of the early race. She was the Mantis’s
elder sister.

The girls were girls of the early race; the Blue Crane was with them. One
old woman used always to go out with the girls, while the other old women stayed
at home.

Foulmouth lay upon an umbrella-top tree. The girls went to sit in the shade
of the tree, for they wanted to sift ants’ eggs. They sat under the tree upon which
Foulmouth was lying. They sifted ants’ eggs until the Blue Crane came. She
was digging about for ants’ eggs; they had all been digging for ants’ eggs round
about. Then the Blue Crane joined them, she sat down.

Then Foulmouth hiccoughed, and the Blue Crane exclaimed: ‘‘ Humph,
humph! Abominable! What decayed thing can be smelling here?” The girls
were silent, because they saw Foulmouth up the tree.


Google


24 The Mantis and His Friends |
Foulmouth hiccoughed. The Blue Crane said: ‘‘ Abominable! What


can it be that smells so, that is not nice?’ The girls went on sifting ants’ eggs.
Some of them went away, the others were still sifting. They put away the ants
eggs in bags. Some of them left the tree. The Blue Crane said: *‘ Why do you
not wait for me?” ‘Then another girl who had been sitting there, went away ;
and a big girl who was still with the Blue Crane got up and went later while the
Blue Crane was still packing up her ants’ eggs. Foulmouth still lay there,
because the Blue Crane was still there.


WOMEN GOING OUT WITH DIGGING STICKS TO GATHER FOOD.
Copied from rocks on the farm Bitterfontein, near Mapayasberg, O.F.S., by the late G. W. Stow.


Then the Blue Crane went away, and Foulmouth climbed down the tree while
she was walking along. Then Foulmouth ran on past the Blue Crane. She
exclaimed : “‘QO Foulmouth, I am coming! I am coming! I am coming! I am
coming! Ehhh!" She fluttered along past Foulmouth. She covered the girl
with her own body, and Foulmouth stabbed her. She lay as if dying upon her back.
Foulmouth pulled out the spear and went on, while she lay there.

She arose behind Foulmouth’s back, she passed by: him, she exclaimed: *‘ O
Foulmouth, I am coming! I am coming! I am coming! I am coming! Ehhh!”
and she covered the girl. Foulmouth stabbed her back. She lay as if dying. He
pulled out the spear, he went on while she lay looking at him.


Google


Foulmouth, the Blue Crane and the Girls 25
She arose behind Foulmouth’s back, she exclaimed: ‘‘O Foulmouth! I


am coming! I am coming! I am coming! I am coming! Ehhh!”’ and she
spread her wings before the girl, while the girl ran on. The girl was not fleet,
because she was big. Then Foulmouth grew angry and cut her. He cut off
her shoulder and hurled it away ; he cut off the other shoulder and hurled it away.
He went on.

Her shoulders joined on again, she exclaimed: ‘*O Foulmouth! I am
coming! I am coming! I am coming! I am coming! Ehhh!” while she
spread her wings before the girl. Foulmouth stabbed her back; he cut off her
shoulder, he hurled it away, he cut off her head, he threw it away. He went on.

Her head joined on to her neck, she rose up, she exclaimed : “‘ O Foulmouth !
I am coming! I am coming! I am coming! I am coming! Ehhh!” while
she covered the girl. Foulmouth stabbed her, he quickly drew out the spear,
because the huts were near; he turned back.

The Blue Crane rose up, she walked after him, she exclaimed: ‘‘O
Foulmouth, stab my heart!"’ Foulmouth walked on, for he felt angry. The
Blue Crane said: **O Foulmouth, stab me! You seem to think I am not here.
Then give me the spear and I will stab you.’ Foulmouth snatched the spear
away, when the Blue Crane caught at it in order to stab him. He snatched the
spear away, and she turned back and went home, while he went away. He went
to the umbrella-top tree, from which he had come. |

Meanwhile the people at home saw them coming, saw those who came in front.
They called out to the children, for they had been crying about the children whom
Foulmouth had meant to kill. The people at home said: ‘‘ See there! Did
not Grandmother Blue Crane go with the children? Then she must be with
the children.”’


Google


26 The Mantis and His Friends


THE BLUE CRANE’S STORY.


The Blue Crane's friend was the Frog. The Frog was a person ; her husband
was a person; the Blue Crane was a person. They were people of the early
race.

The Frog's husband sat and sulked, because the Frog would not speak to him.
And as he sat there, the Beetle came flying; the Beetle flew past his nose, and he
jumped up, he ran away. ‘Then the Blue Crane also jumped up, she ran after
the Frog's husband to catch him. She went along snatching at him and he went
into a stone, a flat stone.


BLUE CRANE.
Copied from rocks in Pesulu’s Hoek, Genadeberg, O.F.S., by the late G. W. Stow.


The Blue Crane was searching for him, she went on and on, she found his
spoor, she followed it. She said: *‘ This is the place where I trod, I was trying
to catch my friend’s husband here. _I snatched, missing him, for he went in just
here.’ Then she went back and found her own footprints. She said: ‘* This
is the place along which I ran; I was trying to grab my friend’s husband here.”’
And she grew lean, while she was searching there. Grief made her grow lean ;
she became bones.

And the Lions heard her as she was searching there, two Lions: “Belt ”’
and “* Mat."* The Lions followed the sound to her, they saw her, they stole


*These lions are now stars, the pointers to the Southern Cross.


Google


The Blue Crane's Story 27


up to her. The Lions killed her and ate her. And ‘‘Mat” said: “O
‘ Belt,’ I do not want this person's bone to spring out of your mouth.” They
were eating the Blue Crane. The Blue Crane’s merrythought sprang out of
‘* Belt’s ’’ mouth and went and lay nearby. They tried to find it, but they could
not see it, so they went away. |

Then the Mantis sought the Blue Crane. He saw the Lions’ spoor. He
searched, and found the place where they had killed the Blue Crane. He went
along searching, till he caught sight of the merrythought lying there, for it was
big. He picked it up and went and put it into the water. The Mantis went home,
and stayed at the huts.

Then the Mantis came forth and went to look. The Blue Crane jumped up
and splashed into the water. So the Mantis turned back and went to the huts ;
he stayed there.

Once more he went out to look. As he came up, he saw the Blue Crane sitting
in the sun. She had grown. He turned back without startling her. While
the Blue Crane sat basking, he went to make things, clothes which he meant to
give to the Blue Crane, when she grew up.

And he went out again, and again saw the Blue Crane sitting in the sun.
And he turned back and left her in peace, for he wished her to sit quietly. He
did not startle her, he returned home.

Then he took the clothes, because he thought that the Blue Crane had grown
up ; she seemed to be a girl. He went out, he saw the Blue Crane sitting basking.
He put down the things and stole up to her. He caught hold of her; when she
tried to get into the water, he held her fast and rubbed her face with his
perspiration ; he made her smell his scent. He told the Blue Crane that he was
her brother. It was he, the ** Tinderbox,’ who was holding her; he was her
elder brother; she should leave off struggling and sit down.

Then the Blue Crane sat down. He covered her with a cap which he had
made for her, and with a kaross and a skin petticoat. The Blue Crane put on the
kaross and tied on the petticoat. Then he took the Blue Crane with him;
they returned home.


Google


28 The Mantis and His Friends


THE MANTIS AND THE MAGIC BIRD.


| The Mantis went out at daybreak. As he went he saw the Magic Bird sitting
on her eggs. He shot at her; the arrow returned; the Mantis dodged it and
said: ‘' Is this an Ostrich ? She does not run away.’

The Magic Bird said to the Mantis: ‘* You may take the little egg standing
outside there and drink it." The Mantis said to her: “* Is this an Ostrich >?”
He came to hoist her off the nest with a stick. He put the stick underneath her,
as she lay, he lifted her off, he pushed her down. She lay kicking, because the
Mantis had pushed her down.

The Mantis untied his net and laid it down ; he put in the Magic Bird's eggs,
he tied the net to the stick. He took another egg and set it down; he took a
stone and chipped it open. He took out a brush (used as a soupspoon), put it
into the opening of the shell and beat up the yolk. He put the brush to his mouth.
He pulled out his tongue with it and said: “* Is this an Ostrich? It is pulling out
my tongue. My tongue is sticking to the brush.”

He beat up the yolk again; the brush kept sticking to his hand. He said:
‘" [ do not even seem able to beat up nicely.” Once more he put the brush to his
mouth at this side; then the brush stuck quite fast and stood there, because his
tongue stuck fast to the brush ; it pulled at his tongue. He took the yolk, he was
silent, for the brush was in his mouth. He took an egg, he drank it ; the egg also
stuck fast. He lifted up the net, though the egg was sticking to his mouth. He
carried the eggs in the net. He returned home with an egg sticking to his mouth
and the net sticking fast behind his back.

The Ichneumon said to him: ‘“O Mantis, you must be carrying the Magic
Bird's eggs! We always go and take the Magic Bird's little outside eggs ; we sup
it, we go and find a real bird. The Magic Bird talks, an Ostrich does not talk, for
the Ostrich is afraid of us. The Magic Bird talks, because she is a different kind
of Ostrich, the kind of Ostrich which talks.”’

The Dasse said: ‘*O Mantis, you must now lie shivering outside there.”
The Mantis lay outside with his load; he had an egg in his mouth, he had the
quiver slung on; he lay across the stick, because the quiver strings had stuck fast
to his shoulders. He was silent, because the egg stood shutting his mouth, the brush
was in his mouth.

He dreamed as he lay ; he dreamt with his thinking strings (which were in his
throat), that day should quickly dawn for him, for his chest ached, his shoulders


Google


The Mantis and the Magic Bird 29


ached, his body was cold; his back, too, ached, his thighs were cold, his legs were
cold. Then day broke, after his wife had covered him up with the bed-skin. He


was cold, because he had not curled up, for he was still stretched out.


Then he went out early while the Ichneumon was still lying down, the Dasse
was still lying down. He walked along quickly. Then the net shook, the eggs
shook, the egg at his mouth shook, the brush shook in his mouth. The egg felt
as if it were falling ; the brush felt as if it were falling down.


He soon arrived where the Magic Bird lay. He poured out the eggs ; the egg
fell down from his mouth, the brush fell from his mouth. He picked up the
brush and put it into his bag. He walked quickly up to the little outside egg and
took it. He picked up a stone and struck the top of the egg, he cracked it, he
made a hole in it. He put in the brush, he beat it up, he‘supped it. He pulled
the brush out of his mouth and shook it. Once more he supped it, once more
he pulled out the brush and shook it, for he felt that his tongue was sticking to it.
Then he grew nervous. He hoped that the brush would not stick fast, so he supped,
whisking up the yolk. He put the brush away in the bag, he took the quiver and
slung it on, he took the bag and slung it on.


He walked away, he went up to a real Ostrich. The real Ostrich was lying
down; it ran away. He said to himself: “‘ A real Ostrich always acts like this,
it runs away. It lies among the little Driedoorn bushes. Its eggs are like this ;
they are white, they are beautiful."’ He took an egg and put it down. He took
a stone and chipped the egg; he opened it. He took out his brush, put it into
the yolk and beat it up in haste. He was beating it up with his finger-tips, lest
his hands should again stick fast to the brush-handle. Then he gently put the
tip of the brush to his mouth ; he pulled it away again and felt his tongue. He did
not want his tongue to stick fast again. He felt his hands again. He whisked
up the egg again and finished off the yolk.


He picked up his stick and rolled out an egg. He rolled it over, feeling it
and pushed it into the net. He rolled out another egg with the stick. _He laid
the stick down. His thoughts told him that he was used to take eggs with his hands.
He pushed out another egg touching it with his hand. _He felt that his hands were
not sticking fast.


He said to himself: ‘‘ Ah, I must have been mistaken (in thinking) that I
could not take hold of the eggs. I can go home quickly, before the sun sets and the
place grows cold, and I am chilled.”


Google


30 The Mantis and His Friends


Then he picked up the eggs, he loaded up quickly, he packed up the eggs in
haste. He picked up the stick quickly, for he wanted to spring quickly. He
tied up the net strings in haste, he quickly lifted it up. He picked up the quiver
and slung it on. He trotted quickly away, stopped, walked on, trotted again and
halted. He lay down, he walked on gently because the home was near.


THE MANTIS TAKES AWAY THE TICKS’ SHEEP.


The Mantis went to the Ticks’ house. They saw him; they said to each
other: “‘ What man comes yonder? ’’ Another said: ‘* The Mantis is coming
yonder. We will creep into the sheep's wool, that he may come to the house.
This little child must stay; he shall look after the pots on the fire; then the old
man will come up to the house, as he sits alone. Then you must hold knobkerries.
We will listen to him, when he comes up to the child. He will question the child,
because he will see that we are not there.”

They went into the sheep's wool. The Mantis walked up to the child.
‘* Am I like a fighting man, that the people have gone away in fear, although I am
quiet 2? Only a black child is here ; he is tasting this pot, while the others have gone,
leaving him sitting alone in the house. Hence the houses have no people.’

The people listened in the sheep's wool. The Mantis said: ‘* Let me now
lay my quiver down, and take out this fat and eat it, for the people have run away
in fear. As for this child I will first eat till I am satisfied, then I will knock him
down ; for he has no sense."

A Tick fell down. The Mantis saw him fall and asked him: *‘ Where have
you come from?" ‘The young man Tick was silent. He lifted the pot away
and put it nicely on the fire. His sister fell down; his elder brother fell down
and snatched the pot further away. Other Ticks fell down at other fires. The
other Ticks in the sheep's wool whispered together: ‘‘ You must fall down one
by one.” A big young man Tick slipped down beside the Mantis ; he sat holding
the Mantis by the kaross. His other brother slipped down on the other side of the
Mantis; he also trod, holding the Mantis down by the other side of the kaross.
Another Tick sounded *‘ vvvv ’’ as he dropped down, he rustled. Their father
was still above, an old Tick. He said to another : ‘* You must wait, you shall hold
the stick ready to strike, for many people are down below, sitting about on the


Google


The Mantis takes away the Tick’s Sheep 31


ground. They will beat him, when we knock him down, as he sits among the
people.”

The Mantis drew back; he said to himself: ‘* Let me move a little further
away. _—_ He pulled at the kaross which was fast to the ground. The old Tick
fell upon him and knocked him down. Another Tick fell upon the Mantis, he
beat the Mantis’s shoulders; he struck with the knobkerry. One Tick sprang
out here, on one side; he beat the Mantis’s side. Another Tick sprang down
upon the Mantis ; he beat the Mantis's other side, till the Mantis screamed. The
Mantis slipped out of the kaross. The Ticks rushed together and struck at him.
He called out, as the Ticks beat him away.

Going he called to the Hartebeest-skin bag; the kaross also came. The
quiver arose of itself and came. ‘The stick came, the bag came. He went away
first, his things followed him. He went flying into the water; he swam across,
he walked up the water's bank. He said to the Hartebeest’s children: ‘* Wait
for me over there, so that I can come to you slowly to carry you; for people have
beaten me sore, I must go home slowly.” He carried the Hartebeest’s children ;
he carried all the things ; he went home slowly.

The Ichneumon saw him; the Ichneumon said: ‘“‘ The Mantis comes
comes yonder, comes slowly ; the Ticks seem to have beaten him, as they are wont
to do, they are angry people. He remembered that he has wings; hence we see
him returning ; he will not sleep well to-night.”

The Mantis sat down, the Mantis said : ‘* The people to whom I went must
have been hidden, for I did not see them. They kept coming out from above,
they kept sliding down. They beat me, while the sheep were in the kraal.”’

The Ichneumon said to the Mantis: “* You went to the house to which people
do not go, at which they merely look in passing, when the sheep are in the kraal,
and go on to their own homes. For those people are black ; they are wont to beat
a man to death because of those sheep. They go into the sheep's wool and we
do not see them. They keep a lookout, they see a man first, while he is still far
off, they hide their bodies in the sheep's karosses hanging up. Then they keep
falling down, they beat a man from all sides.”’

The Mantis agreed with him : “* They did just so. One man knocked me down,
other people dropped down, they struck me. Then I did not pick up my stick
and strike back, but I rose up leaving the stick, for my things were still lying on a
bush. The quiver came after me to this water lying here, to which I came to wash


oft the blood, while my things followed me.’


Go gle


32 The Mantis and His Friends


The Ichneumon said: ‘* You are sitting shivering because you went into cold
water, when you had wounds. You might have died without our knowing. You
had to go into the water because of your tricks, which you went to play upon those
people whom you did not know. Nobody goes to them, because they drink blood,
they are black people, they are bloody-handed. Their houses are always black, be-
cause they are angry folk.”

The Mantis said to him: ‘‘O Ichneumon, you ought not to teach me, for I
am old. I feel as if I want to sit getting stories, those are what I went to hear.
You always scold me, but I think I really am the one to be angry. _I will no longer
sit talking, I will lie down, for my head aches. You must not say you do not sleep
well, for I really ache, I shall writhe in pain.” The Mantis lay down to sleep, he
covered his head up. The Ichneumon said: ** You always act like this.’’

The Mantis lies there; he moans; he dreams that all the Ticks’ houses arise
and come. The sheep rise up, the sheep come and stand in front of his house,
while the houses are at the sides of his houses, while the Ichneumon still sleeps
there. The Ichneumon shall see when he wakes, for the karosses are here, all the
things are here, the knobkerries with which those people beat him are here. Those
people shall soon feel the cold, though they are asleep. They shall sleep very
heavily; they shall feel as if they were wrapped up, although they are not, as they
lie in the cold. They shall feel as if they lay inside houses, they shall wake up and
miss them. And they will not see the spoor of the sheep, for the spoor will have
gone straight up, the kraal will have mounted upwards with the sheep in it.

Then they will first miss the fire, early, for the fire will have gone with the
houses, the pots will have entirely disappeared. Then those people will not cook,
for their knives will have gone; I shall be cutting up sheep with them, while they
are walking about in their bare flesh, and do not possess the things that-they did
possess. For they will have to drink blood, because they no longer have a fire
as they used to have. Real people will henceforth cook, while they walk entirely
in the dark; they will have to stand biting things’ bodies, they will have to drink
things’ blood and no longer eat cooked meat.

The Ichneumon awoke ; the Mantis said: ‘‘O Ichneumon, are you not awake
yet to look out at the thing that is bleating like a sheep outside? It seems to have
come to us early while we were asleep here. He lay there, he questioned the
Ichneumon while he still had his head covered. The Ichneumon got up and came
out, he saw the sheep, he said: “*O people, get up! Get up, and look at the sheep
which are standing in this kraal which my Grandfather the Mantis has brought.


Google


The Mantis takes away the Tick's Sheep 33


They are here and the houses have come with them. Look at these pots which he
has brought. Look at the Ticks’ karosses, in which we shall lie wrapped up.
Now I can keep warm from this cold, in which I have lain uncomfortably. The
knobkerries are here with which they beat my Grandfather, and I shall possess them,
so that I can beat the people. When my Grandfather the Mantis takes the old
fellow's knobkerries, I will take my fellow-children’s knobkerries, for they helped
their parents to strike my Grandfather the Mantis, when he was alone.”

The Dasse got up; she said to the Mantis: ‘‘O Mantis, why did you take
away the people's Sheep?’ The Mantis answered her as he lay: “’ It seemed
right to me, because those people attacked me ; they wanted to kill me in their anger.
Then I felt that I wished yonder angry folk should no longer warm themselves at
a fire, because they fought me at their fre. They shall now drink raw blood because
they lack a fire, they cannot make a fire; they cannot cook, they also cannot roast
meat to feed themselves. For they walk about in their flesh. In these pots here
the Flat Bushmen shall some day cook, because they shall have a fire. We who are
here shall then also be as the Ticks are. We shall eat different things, because
we too shall lack fire. You, the Ichneumon, shall then go to dwell in the hills with
your mother. She shall truly become a Porcupine, she shall live in a hole, while
Grandmother Dasse shall live in a mountain den, for her name is really * Dasse.’
I ‘shall have wings, I shall fly when I am green, I shall be a little green thing. You,
the [chneumon, shall eat honey, because you will be living on the hill. Then you
shall marry a She-Ichneumon.”’

The Porcupine called to Kwammang-a: ‘‘O Kwa! look at the sheep
standing here which the Mantis has brought. They are some which we need not
eat up, for the people did not see them go, that they might know where they went.
For the sheep mounted straight up as they stood in the kraal. The things mounted
up with the sheep. §_ The sheep came out of the sky, they stood ; the things also
came out of the sky and sat down, while the people slept there.”

The Ichneumon said: ‘*O Mantis! Now leave these people's things alone,
that they may still have houses.” The Mantis replied: ‘* Do you not see why |
thought it right? These people did bad deeds to me, because they wished me to
tremble with the pain of my skin. _ | wish that those people may themselves see
what I can do and recognise it. For they would not give me food that I might
return, when [ had eaten. Then I should not have done so to them, had I felt I
was returning comfortably. Now they must verily suck blood, for they altogether
lack a fire. They must walk about in their flesh which is black, because they cannot


E


Google


34 The Mantis and His Friends


find karosses. They shall altogether walk about at night with their naked bodies.
They must sit in the cold, because they have no houses. ‘They shall stand biting
the Hare's ears, to drink its blood. The old Tick shall always stand biting men’s
skins, he shall suck out blood, for he altogether lacks a knife. Their mouths are
what they shall suck blood with, when they have bitten through the skin. They
shall fill themselves with blood, they shall verily be blood-bellies. Therefore
they will go to stand biting the sheep. | Men will search the sheep's wool dividing
it, and throw them down on the ground and crush them, because they are sheep's


Ticks.”


THE MANTIS AND THE ALL-DEVOURER.
(Continuation of preceding tale.)


The Mantis said: ‘* Now I want you, the Ichneumon, to catch some fat sheep,
for father to cut up for us and hang up to dry near the house. For | do not feel
like cutting up, for I am still writhing with pain. The swelling must first be over,
then I can cut up; then I shall hang meat to dry at my house, because I want the
sheep's fat to be dry, that the women may render it ; so that we may moisten the dry
meat which we have been crunching, that quagga'’s meat which was white (with age)
and not tender. So now I| want you to cut up the old sheep, and let the young ones
wait a little; for we shall not finish these sheep, for they are many. | want the
Porcupine to go out to-morrow, when she has cooked and put aside the meat which
she has dried. The Man yonder shall come and eat with me of these sheep, because
I have counted them and see they are plentiful.”


The Porcupine said: *‘ Do you really want me to go to the Man who eats
bushes? He will come and swallow all the sheep, as they stand in the kraal. You
need not think that these bushes will be left, for we shall be swallowed with the sheep.
A Man who devours things he is ; he walks along eating up the bushes as he passes,
the bushes among which he walks.”

The Mantis said to her: ‘* You must go to your other father, the All-devourer,
that he may help me eat up these sheep, and drink this soup ; for I have poured away
some of the soup, because I feel that my heart is upset. Fat has taken hold of my
heart ; [ do not want to drink more soup. So I want the Old Man yonder to come ;


Google


The Mantis and the All-devourer 35


he shall drink up the soup and I can talk then, for I do not talk now. So do you
fill the sack there with cooked meat and take it, then he will come. Otherwise
he might refuse.”

The Porcupine said : ** People do not live with that Man, he is alone ; because
people cannot hand him food, for his tongue is like fire. He burns people's hands
with it. You need not think that we can hand food to him, for we shall have to
dodge away to the sheep opposite. The pots will be swallowed with the soup in
them. Those sheep will be swallowed up in the same way, for yonder Man always
does so. He does not often travel, because he feels the weight of his stomach
which is heavy. See, I, the Porcupine live with you, although he is my real father ;
because I think he might devour me, and you will not devour me. Nevertheless,
I will fetch him to-morrow, that he may come ; then you will see him yourself with
your own eyes.

The Porcupine went on the morrow; she carried cooked meat. She arrived
at her father’s, the All-devourer’s, she stood and took off the sack of meat. She said
to her father : “‘ Go! Cousin yonder invites you to come and eat the sheep yonder,
for his heart is troubling him. It is he who wants you to come. __I have told you,
now I will go on in front, for I do not walk fast.”’

She shook out the meat from the bag on to the bushes. The All-devourer
licked up the meat and the bushes with it, he gulped down the bushes too. The
Porcupine slung on the bag. She went forward quickly, she walked on giving
directions : “‘ You must climb up to that place from which I came, you will see the
sheep standing there.’ She felt she was going in fear of the All-devourer. She
was the first to reach the hut. .

The Mantis asked her: ‘‘ Where is father?’ The Porcupine answered
him: “* He is still on the way. Look at that bush standing up above, to see if a
shadow comes gliding from above. Watch for the bush to break off. Then you
shall look out for the shadow, when you see that the bushes up there have disappeared.
For his tongue will take away the bushes beforehand, while he is still approaching
behind the hill. Then his body will come up and the bushes will be finished off
up to us, when he arrives. We shall no longer sit hidden. Now I want the
Ichneumon to eat plenty, for of that meat he will never eat. For the Man comes
yonder, the bushes are finished, the’ sheep will likewise be swallowed up.”


The All-devourer followed the Porcupine’s spoor; as he went he ate up the
bushes. He climbed up, finishing off the bushes, while his shadow glided up to
the Mantis’s hut. It fell upon the Mantis. The Mantis looked at the sun, he


Google


36 The Mantis and His F en A


asked where the clouds were, for the sun seemed to be in clouds. The Porcupine
said to him: °* There are no clouds there, but I want the Ichneumon to go and
hide this pot away for me, for he truly feels the shadow of the Man coming yonder ;
it altogether shuts us in; the sun will seem to have set, when he reaches us. His
mouth sits black along there, it is not a shadow, it is what the trees go into.

The Mantis saw the All-devourer’s tongue. He asked the Porcupine: ‘* Is
Father holding fire in his hand, for a fire is waxing red yonder? "’ The Porcupine
answered him: “It is the Man coming there, whose tongue is red. _He is nigh,
therefore you see his tongue. We will get out of the way here. We will not
hand him anything ourselves, but put down something for him, for his tongue would
singe our hands if we held anything out to him. Therefore I want the Dasse to
hide the other pot that she may still have soup. For now she herself sees the
stomach, it truly extends to either side of us. We do not hear the wind, because
he comes ; the wind does not blow, for he always makes a shelter when he stands.
He does not sit down, he stands ; he will first eat up the things, for they are still
plentiful. He has put in a layer of bushes at the bottom of the stomach, he has
partly filled it, but he has not filled it up yet. Therefore he is still seeking food.
For he is a Man who fills himself to his trunk. _ If he looks round and finds no food,
he will swallow these folk; for they invited him to come to food which was not
enough.’

The All-devourer arrived, the Mantis placed food for him. The All-devourer
gulped it quickly down. The Mantis took soup and poured it into a bucket. The
All-devourer swallowed the bucket. A pot was still keeping warm. The Mantis
took meat which had been put away in a bag, he put it into a bucket ; he pushed
the bucket towards the All-devourer. The All-devourer put out his tongue, he
licked and scorched the Mantis’s hands. The Mantis pulled his arms quickly
away, he sprang aside knocking against the Dasse. The Dasse said: ‘* Why does
the Mantis spring aside from the Man whom he invited to come? The Porcupine
told him not to give anything with his hands, but to put meat for the All-devourer
on the bushes.” | 3

The Mantis took meat and put it in the pot. He said to the young Mantis :
‘*O Child, make a good fire for the pot ; my hands are burning keeping me sitting
where Grandfather scorched me. For you can feel his breath which is hot ; his
tongue feels like that, too.”

The Dasse said to him: ‘* You ought to ladle out sheep's meat and put it on
the bushes.” The Mantis did not hear, he sat spitting on his hands to cool them.


Google


The Mantis and the All-devourer 37


He ladled out another bucketful. He again pushed the bucket to the All-devourer.
The All-devourer licked his hands. He sprang aside, losing his balance, and
tumbled into the hut. He got up, he sat licking, cooling his hands. He said to
the Ichneumon: ‘‘O Ichneumon, give me meat to cook, for you see it is-as
Mother told us, the buckets seem to have vanished.’


The Ichneumon said to the Mantis: ‘* Mother told you that it would be like
this. You would not listen; you invited the big Cousin whom people know,
whom no one invites, because his tongue is like fire.”’

The Mantis called to the young Mantis: ** Go and fetch me the meat which
the Porcupine hid, for you see this bucket of meat has been devoured. You must
look at the stomach.”


The Mantis brought two buckets ; he ladled out meat. The Dasse nudged
him, he winked at her. He slung a bucket forward with meat in it, then he slung
_ another bucket forward along side of it. The All-devourer’s tongue licked his ear,
he tumbled into the hut. The Dasse spoke to him, he winked at her. She
said: © QO Mantis, leave off winking at me! You must feed Cousin, whom you
invited. You must give him plenty to eat, for the Porcupine told you that she
did not want to fetch him, because his tongue is always like this.”


The All-devourer gobbled up both buckets, he licked up the meat which was
on the bushes of the hut, he devoured it together with the bushes. The Mantis
said to the Ichneumon: ‘‘O Ichneumon, you must cook at that place, and bring
the meat which is on its bushes, for the buckets are all finished. _I will give the old
man a pot which is hot to swallow, for you see the bushes are swallowed up. |
shall no longer sit and cook in the bushes, when the wind blows.”


The All-devourer stepped backwards, he licked up Kwammang-a'’s home-
bushes, he devoured them quickly with the meat on them. The Mantis said to
the Ichneumon: ‘*O Ichneumon, quickly bring a sheep, you must cut up a sheep
quickly, for you see that the bushes have been swallowed with the meat.” .


The All-devourer asked for water. The Mantis lifted up a whole water-bag ;
he set it before him. The All-devourer's tongue took up the water-bag; he
swallowed it with the water in it. He licked up a thorn bush. The Mantis said
to the young Mantis: ‘* You see, we shall not eat; for that thorn bush has been
devoured, although it has thorns... The Mantis said to the Ichneumon: ‘*O
Ichneumon, fetch that water there which is in the water-bag, for you see this water-
bag has been swallowed. Grandfather turns his head seeking more water. He


Google


38 The Mantis and His Friends


himself has devoured the other things, he still seems likely to gobble up our beds.
I shall truly sit upon the ground, if Grandfather eats up all the things in my
hut.”

- The All-devourer licked up the Porcupine’s things, he swallowed them quickly.
The Mantis said to his son, the young Mantis: ‘* See, Sister’s things there have been
devoured, Sister sits there on a bare place. The sheep will soon be devoured.”

The All-devourer looked towards the sheep, his tongue took up all the sheep,
he swallowed them quickly, while they were still alive. The Mantis said: *‘ Have
not the sheep been quickly swallowed, before I had cut them up as I meant to do?
Alas, the bushes have vanished, swallowed up! We are sitting on a bare place.
Alas! Now I lack my things which I brought, that I might possess them.”

The Porcupine winked at the [chneumon. ‘*O Ichneumon, | tell you, your
younger brother must spring away. Father will be swallowed, if he goes on acting
bravely like this ; and Grandfather Mantis ts the one who talks, he will certainly
be swallowed.’ |

The All-devourer called his name, he who is a devourer of things whom the
Mantis called to come to him. He said to the Mantis: “‘O Mantis, bring out
the things to which you invited me, the real things which I, a devourer of things,
should eat.” He advanced, he burned the Mantis with his tongue.

The Mantis said: “* I who am the Mantis invited you who devour things
to my home. You came and finished off my things. You should not ask, seeking
the real food to which I invited you, for those sheep which you have devoured were
the food; there is no other food.”

The All-devourer quickly devoured the Mantis; the Mantis shut up. The
young Mantis sprang away, he took up the bow. The All-devourer looked towards
Kwammang-a. Young Kwammang-a sprang aside, he ran away. The Mantis
was quite silent, because he was in the stomach. The All-devourer stood opposite
Kwammang-a, he said that he was really going to swallow his daughter's husband.
Although he was handsome, he yet would swallow him, for he felt inclined to
swallow him. He advanced, he quickly swallowed his daughter's husband with the
bed on which he was sitting. His stomach hung almost down to the earth.

The Porcupine wept ; she stood sighing. The children came from afar. The
Porcupine asked the young Mantis: “* Are you a fierce man?" He was silent.
She asked him: ‘* Are you angry?” The young Mantis was silent, because he
felt angry. She also questioned her son, young Kwammang-a. She turned as


Google


The Mantis and the All-devourer 39


she sat, she heated a spear, she asked her son: ‘Are you angry? You must
remember that Grandfather's tongue resembles fire. I do not want you to flinch
if your heart is like father’s heart.” Young Kwammangz-a sat still; they agreed
to cut his Grandfather open.

She took the spear out of the fire, she drew it burning along her younger brother's
temple. The fire burnt his ear, he sat still. She reheated the spear, it became
red hot. She put the spear burning hot into her younger brother's nose. Tears
slowly gathered and stood in his eyes. She said to him: ‘* A mild person is this,
whose tears slowly gather.”

She heated the spear, she laid it burning hot to her son's earroot ; her son sat
still. She heated the spear again, she said to her son: ‘* Grandfather's tongue is
like this; I don’t want you to flinch from him, if your heart is like your father’s
heart.” She took out the spear when it was red, she put it into her son's nose ;
she looked at his eyes; they were dry. She said to herself: *‘ Yes, a fierce man 1s
this ; that one is a mild man. This one is fierce, he resembles his father. That
one is — he resembles his father the Mantis, he is a runaway. She said to her
son: © Remember, Grandfather's tongue is like this. You must sit firmly when
you go to Grandfather.’

The children went in wrath to their Grandfather, they approached him as he
lay in the sun. He arose, he stood up, he waited. Young Kwammangz-a said to
the other: ‘‘ Mother wished me to sit on one side of Grandfather, and you to sit
on his other side. Because you cut with the left hand like your father, you must
sit with your left arm outwards in which you hold the spear. __| will sit opposite
on this side, so that [ may have my right arm outside, in which I hold the
spear.”

The All-devourer scorched the young Mantis’s temple with his tongue. He
walked forward, he scorched with his tongue the root of his grandson, young
Kwammang-a's ear ; he said that this little child really seemed very angry. He
walked forward, he scorched the root of the young Mantis’s ear with his tongue ;
the young Mantis sat still. He went forward, he again scorched the young Mantis’s
other ear with his tongue. Young Kwammang-a looked hard at the other, he
signed to him to hold his spear fast, and he held his own well. The other held
his spear well, because he had said beforehand: ‘*‘ You must cut one side, while
I cut the other side; then we must run away, while the people pour out.”

He sprang forward, he cut ; and the other cut too; they ran away, while their
fathers poured forth; the sheep also poured forth, the buckets poured forth ; his


Google


40 The Mantis and His Friends


father sat on the bed; the pots poured forth; the things poured down. His
Grandfather doubled up and died.

The children said: “O bushes, we have cut you out! You shall truly become
bushes, you shall grow at your place, you shall be what you were before. The
place shall be right again and these sheep shall wander over it; they shall graze
over it and again return to the kraal, which shall be as it was before. For that
Man who now lies here, who ate up the bushes, shall utterly die and go away, that
the people may get dry bushes and be able to warm themselves.’ The young
Mantis spoke, he felt that he truly resembled his father, his speech resembled his
father's speech, it came true.

The Dasse gave the Mantis water; she said to him: ‘‘O Mantis, you must
only drink a little! "" The Mantis said: ‘* I am dying of thirst, I must drink up
the eggshellful.”” He gulped all the water down, he fell down. Kwammang-a
still waited. The Porcupine said to the Dasse : ‘* Take that long stick lying there ;
you must beat your husband on the shin-bone with it till he gets up, you must hold
his face fast and rub it.” The Dasse took up the long stick and hit the Mantis
on the shin; he started up quickly, he sat shivering. The Dasse reproved him :
‘“ T told you to drink only a little, because you would be like this, if you gulped
down all the water; but you would drink nearly killing yourself, so that you fell
down.”

The Porcupine gave Kwammang-a water ; she said to him: “‘OKwammang-a !
you must only drink a little, you must soon put the water down, when you have
just wet your mouth. You must sit down and wash yourself a little, for you have
just come out of the stomach in which you were. Then presently you can drink
plentifully, when you feel that your body is warm.’ Kwammangz-a drank a little,
he put down the water and did not gulp it all down. He washed himself, he drank,
and then he drank plentifully. |

His wife cooked meat for him which she had kept hidden away; for she had
told the Ichneumon to hide some for her, so that they could eat it, when the
children had dealt with the Man who was devouring them, and he lay dead. ‘“* We
must eat here, for he lies yonder, where the children have slain him. Then we will
travel away leaving him lying outside that hut. We will move away seeking a new
home, because the Man lies in front of this home; we will live in a different hut,
which we will make our home.”

They travelled away to a new home, and left the hut at which the Man who
had devoured the people was lying. At this new home they always lived in peace.


Google


A


The Mantis and the Elephants 41


THE MANTIS AND THE ELEPHANTS.


The Elephant carried off the little Springbok, while the Mantis was digging
in the hole; the little Springbok was sitting on the earth thrown out of the hole.
The Elephant picked up the little Springbok, she put it on her back, she walked
away carrying it.

The Mantis was digging out wild bees’ honey and throwing it to the little
Springbok. He said: “‘ Are you eating, as | am eating?’ The little Springbok
was silent and did not answer the Mantis. The Mantis said: ‘* What is the
matter that the child does not speak to me, when I ask it whether it is eating as |
too am eating?’ And he took out-more honey; he said: °* Are you eating, as
I am eating?’ ‘Then the Elephant calf said: ‘“Kurru!"’ And the Mantis
said : °° Listen! What is the matter? My child does not usually speak so that ©
I cannot understand it. Let me take out more honey and throw it out again, so
that I may hear whether it is my child speaking ; for I do not understand what this
child answers; I do not hear plainly. What can have happened to the child's
throat, to make it answer me like this; that is what I must find out. Therefore
I will throw up more honey.”

The Mantis threw it up out of the hole. ‘* Are you eating, as I am eating? ”
And the Elephant calf said: *‘ Kurru!’’ The Mantis listened in vain. ‘* Can
it be that earth has scraped the child's throat for me? Let me get out and see what
has happened to the child’s throat! "’ Then the Mantis got out of the hole; he
found the Elephant calf sitting covered up with earth, he said: ‘* It must have
been this person.” And he picked up the digging-stick, with which he had been
digging out the honey, he knocked it down with the digging-stone's stick. Then
he said: ‘* This person must have been sitting here, his ears look like a mat lying.
there. This was why I called without an answer.” And he killed the Elephant
calf.

When the Elephant calf lay dead, he wondered how it came to be sitting there ;
so he looked to see what could have brought it to that place. He caught sight of
the spoor of a troop of Elephants; he said: ‘* It must have been this troop which
has taken the child away from me. .And he turned back, he took up a quiver,
and he ran along the Elephant’s spoor, keeping to the line of march.

Then he said: “I think I will turn back and go home, in order to tell my
sister about the child, so that she may know ; otherwise she would be expecting me."


F


Google


Us ny ie Y Momsen Beebost sir, cose eNO & Semen


hte


a


‘i?


ed
Su.
‘


Me evptions havik of figbiog a trier af the |
eae the Kate te. Wy Stow. PRA eae


s
.
>
;
,
‘
‘
'
'
.
’
"
‘ ‘
. ate
A . y B «
4 : 7” “,
~ h .
¥ > wo a -
a ‘ 5 “sy
> , ,
- .


The Mantis and the Elephants 43


He went to his home and told his sister: ‘* The Elephants must have taken the
child from me, while I was digging in the hole.”” And his sister answered : “* Did
you not hear the Elephants, when they came and stood above you?’ He
answered: “‘I really did not hear, for I was digging in the hole. That is why
I did not hear the Elephants, because I really stayed in the hole.”

Then his sister said: ‘* I demand my child from you, for you seem to have
been lying asleep in the hole. That must have been why you did not hear the
Elephants, for it was a great herd, as you have been telling me, that came to stand
above you. And the Mantis answered: ‘‘ My sister, you must pack stamped
meat in a little bag for me, for | mean to follow and seek for the child at the place
to which the Elephants seem to have taken it.”

He spoke thus as he started, and he told his sister to watch the grass, whenever
the wind was blowing it. _ For the wind would blow the grass that way, (away from
home), as long as he was still going that way, so long would the wind blow that way,
bending the grass that way. When he was returning, then the wind would blow
the grass this way again (towards home), and the wind would be in the East;
then his sister would know that he had turned back, that his hands were upon the
child.
And he went away, when he had told his sister all this, and he found the
Elephants’ spoor and ran along it. He came out (on a hill) and saw the Elephants’
houses; and he caught sight of the little springbok standing playing among the
Elephants’ children. Then he rejoiced and said: *‘ My Kattau, my chum it is,
playing yonder among the Elephants’ children.”

Then the Elephants caught sight of him as he came over the hill, and the
Mother Elephant arose and rushed out. She picked up the little Springbok and
swallowed it. Then she sat down near the house to wait for the Mantis. And the
Mantis came up to her, he asked her for the little Springbok. The Elephant
answered that she had not got the little Springbok. Then the Mantis said that he
had just seen the little Springbok playing among the Elephants’ children, he had seen
the Elephant take the little Springbok and swallow it. The Elephant should give
his sister the child, for his sister had scolded him not a little about the child.

The Elephant said that he should not carry the child off, but the Mantis
answered that he meant to get the child out. She replied : ‘* How will you manage
to take the child out?’ The Mantis said: ** I will get into your mouth.” And
the Elephant replied that she would spit him out. Then the Mantis said he would
get in under her fingernail ; and the Elephant replied that she would pick him out.


Google


44 The Mantis and His Friends


Then the other Elephants closed in on the Mantis as he sat there talking, but
he got into her navel, and the other Elephants who were standing around stabbed
at him with their spears as he went in at the navel. Then the Mantis reached the
little Springbok in the Elephant’s inside and with a skin he slung it on his back in
her inside. The other Elephants stood round ready to stab him to death when
he should bring the little Springbok out. The Mantis cut the Elephant’s whole
inside to pieces, and while the Elephants were watching for him at the other
Elephant’s navel, where he had gone in, he came out at the Elephant’s trunk, came
out above her head carrying the little Springbok on his back, while the Elephant
fell down dead. Then an Elephant said: *‘ The Mantis has really come out there,
on our mate's head.”’ And they ran together, closing in on the Mantis, for they
meant to stab him to death.

Then the Mantis spoke as he flew away with the little Springbok ; he said :
‘“ Can you equal me? I am the Mantis, from whom you tried to steal his child,
whom you cannot rival; for he is an enchanter, from whom you tried to steal his
child.” And when he had thus spoken to the Elephants, he returned home.

Then his sister looked at the grass, and the grass was blowing this way and the
wind was in the east, and his sister said: ‘‘O people. look! Why is the grass
blowing this way? The wind is where the Mantis told me it would be, when he
turned back, when he was coming home. The things which he told me about
I have watched, and I have seen by them that he was still seeking the child. Now
it looks as if he were coming home, for it is now as he told me. The grass is waving
now, as he said it would do, and the wind too is blowing, as he said. This I have
seen as long as he was approaching, and now the wind becomes still, the grass
stands quite still, as he draws near. Therefore we must look out, as he told me
to do.”

And they saw him as he came carrying the little Springbok, and the Mother
Springbok said : “* The Mantis seems to be coming there.’ And she went rejoicing
to meet him. She unloosed the little Springbok and picked it up and kissed it,
while the Mantis went to the hut. He sat down, while the Mother Springbok
kissed the little Springbok and rejoiced over it.


Google


The Kwai-kwai Bird, the Mantis and the Children 45


THE KWAI-KWAI BIRD, THE MANTIS AND THE CHILDREN.


The Kwai-kwai bird was once a man. He put children into a net. Then
the children sang about him. The children with whom the Mantis had stayed
put him to burn, they sang about him ; they said :


‘“ Mother, mother,

’ The Kwai-kwai

‘“ Ts taking us to kill,

‘“ Tho’ we stayed at home !
‘" Mother, mother,

‘“ The Kwai-kwai

‘Is taking us to kill,

‘* Tho’ we stayed at home!”


Then Grandfather Mantis said : ** Call loudly, call, call loudly ! Call loudly,
call, call loudly!’ for he wished the children to sing loudly.

Then the children’s mothers said : ‘* You must listen, our little ones are calling
out! They sound as if the Kwai-kwai has come to them ; for they do not usually
call so; for they are generally still, as we walk up listening; they do not sing at
home. Moreover Grandfather Mantis's voice is calling; we hear it. He speaks
with a deep voice, while the children sing. The children speak with a small voice,
while Grandfather speaks with a deep voice. Therefore I think he is walking,
he is listening for us. __Let us return, let us see why the children are singing like this.
For the children sound as if Grandfather Kwai-kwai had come to them, that is
why they are shouting at home. We ought to go and listen to Grandfather Mantis :
for he is grown-up, he was to stay with the children. He is grown-up, we will
go and listen to what he is saying.”


* * * * * x


The Mantis felt that he had been dreaming, that the Kwai-kwai had come in
anger to the children. Therefore the Mantis told the people next day, that he had
dreamt that the Kwai-kwai had come and put the children into a net, while the
children were playing there. Therefore he, the Mantis, he who was grown-up,
would stay at home with the children; he who was wise would stay with the
children at home, for children are ignorant. And the Kwai-kwai would come to
the children, because they are ignorant, they have no sense. The Kwai-kwai


Google


46 The Mantis and His Friends


would come to roast them. Therefore he, the Mantis would stay at home, he
who knew. Therefore he would pull them out of the fire, he would put the Kwai-
kwai to burn in the fire.

Then he spoke to the children, he said: ‘* Children, roast the Kwai-kwai,
for it is merely a Kwai-kwai.”’ Then the children roasted the Kwai-kwai on hot
stones, that 1s how they roasted him.

And the Kwai-kwai screamed because of the burns, the fire’s burns. And
the Kwai-kwai said: ““Vvvvvvv, I ought always to look where the Mantis is.’

The Mantis said: *‘ I am the Mantis, I am here! You seem to have thought
you were as clever as | am. _ [I am the Mantis! It is I who am roasting you; |
am the one who is clever!”

Then he spoke to the children ; he said, the children must roast the Kwai-kwai,
and not stare when he put the Kwai-kwai to roast, for it was only a Kwai-kwai.
Then the children roasted the Kwai-kwai with him.

He told the children, he wanted them to know about the Kwai-kwai, for the
Kwai-kwai would have put them into the fire, a little one of them. But he, the
Mantis, he who was grown-up, stayed with the children, he did not let one of the
little children be burnt.

Yet his wife had often told him, that he was not like a grown-up person, but
as if he had no sense, because he used to get feathers and fly away when he saw
danger, that people seemed to be going to kill him. He used to go into the water
which is opposite the hut. Then he would walk out of the water, he would walk
up to the hut. |

_ And the young Ichneumon would cry on recognizing him, because he seemed
covered with wounds, as he walked out of the water ; that water into which he had
flown to bathe them in. And he would walk out of the water, when he had slung
on the quiver, he would walk up to the house. The young Ichneumon would cry
to see him.


The Dasse's Story and the Crow's Story 47


THE DASSE’S STORY AND THE CROW’S STORY.


Kwammangz-a once went visiting. They were two, he and the Mantis, and
they went to the Bees’ house, when the Dasses lived with the Bees.


Then a young Bee offered Kwammang-a his ostrich egg-shell, out of which
Kwammang-a drank; while a young Dasse offered the Mantis his ostrich egg-
shell, into which he had put dirty water. So the Mantis drank out of the Dasse’s
egg-shell. When he tasted the Dasse's dirty water, he cursed the young Dasse.


Then the Mother Dasse, who was on the hunting-ground, sneezed, and drops
of blood came from her nostrils. Therefore stones rolled. The stones’ said
‘“Vvvvvvv,. because stones which had stood fast were falling.


Then the young Bee spoke to his Grandfather Kwammang-a ; he said: “‘ You
should go to this gambro (a sort of cucumber) ; mother has made a hole init. You
get into it, for the Mantis was really with you, that man who has been teasing. There-
fore hard things are fallmg upon you; for the Mantis who has been teasing was
really with you.”


Then Kwammang-a arose, he went quietly along, and quietly reached the hole
in the gambro ; he went to sit in it, while the Mantis was outside, because he had
come later. He was covered up fast; the stones fell covering him up fast, while
Kwammangz-a lay loose.


The women (at home) said: *“‘ What can be the matter >? You ought to send
the ring-necked Crow, that it may go and see where the people are.” And the
ring-necked Crow went ; it had on its neck a little piece of fat which was very small.
It went and ate up the fat half-way and it turned back. And the little piece of
fat is that which sits white on its neck.


And the people again sent another ring-necked Crow, and they hung a piece
of fat round its neck. _It also went and ate up the fat and turned back again, because


it had finished the fat half-way.

Then the people hung a piece of fat round the neck of the pied Crow. Then
the pied Crow took the fat to the place at which Kwammang-a was. It reached
the place where Kwammang-a lay, at which he had fallen down. And it came
sailing along; it said: “‘ Ga, ga, does Kwammang-a go, when you go?”


Then Kwammang-a spoke, he said: “‘ You must go and tell Grandfather's
people to come and take me out, for | feel hungry, as I lie in here.”


Google


48 The Mantis and His Friends


The the pied Crow flew away and it still had on its neck the fat which the
people had hung there, which lay white against its neck. It took back the fat.
Then the people saw the fat, for it still had the fat round its neck. Thenceforth
the fat quite covered his neck with white, as he had brought it home. Thus the
part of the fat which was on its breast remained there always, while the piece that
was on its neck lay white upon the neck. Therefore we who are Bushmen say
‘* pied crow "' to it, for we think that white feathers are upon its neck, and they
lie white on that part of its neck, where the fat once lay.

The Elephant and the Giraffe and the Rhinoceros were those who went to take
out Kwammang-a's party; while Kauru also went, the Porcupine went. The
Mantis’s wife's other name is Kauru. They went to see where the men were,
whether it seemed as if the people would take out the men for them. That is what
they went to see.

They saw that stones had fallen, big stones had fallen. Then they thought
that the men could be got out, for the stones which had fallen were big. Kwam-
mang-a's face became visible while the Porcupine stood looking. Then the
Porcupine thought that Kwammang-a could be got out, for his face became visible,
when the people took off the stones which had been upon it. Then the Porcupine
stood watching for Kwammang-a's body to become visible. Then she saw that it
seemed as if the people would get him out, for his body became visible. Then the
Porcupine saw, as she stood, that Kwammang-a was taken out. Then the
Porcupine gave thanks, that the people had taken out Kwammang-a for her.

Kauru continued to stand looking, because she could not see the Mantis, for
the stones had shut in the Mantis. Therefore Kauru stood looking, because she
did not see him. Then, when she saw that the people meant to leave the Mantis,
she told the people to take the Mantis out for her, because he was her husband.
For the people wished to leave the Mantis lying quietly inside. Kauru was the
one who begged the people to take out the Mantis for her, because he was her
husband.

‘* The Mantis was like this (she said), he went about playing tricks when she
was not there. The people should take him out for her, for she had really spoken
to him, instructing him. She had said: * You must not play tricks when you are
with Kwammang-a.’. The Mantis had acted as if he had not heard, he kept
going to play tricks at strangers’ houses, although she had said: ‘° You must not
play tricks." He should look at the results of teasing as they lay upon him. For
it was he who had gone about teasing like a little child ; he resembled a little child


Google


The Dasse's Story and the Crow's Story 49


at play, as if he were not grown-up. He went playing tricks at strangers’ houses,
as 1f he did not think that he was with Kwammang-a. Therefore things were
lying on Kwammang-a, because of his pranks. He alone played tricks, while
Kwammang-a was quiet, for Kwammang-a felt that they were at strangers’ houses.
Therefore Kwammang-a was quiet, he merely spoke to get stories. These stories
were what he listened to, for the other people were those to whom he had gone to
talk, to get them. But this man was the one who had been teasing while Kwam-
mang-a was talking nicely there. Curse him, he did not talk with Kwammang-a,
he merely played with the little children like a little child. Then the children
were startled. Then he played tricks ; he told a story which was foul. Then the
other people were angry. Then things fell on Kwammang-a on account of him.”

Then the people took hold and uncovered the stones, and the people pulled
the Mantis out roughly, hurting him, because the people were angry with him,
because he had made this befall Kwammang-a. Therefore they pulled him out
roughly from the stones, when they felt that the fallen stones were keeping him fast
so that they hurt him; because they felt they were angry with him.

Then the Mantis complained about his skin, while the stones were hurting
his body. Then Kauru said: *“‘O people, I wanted you to treat the Mantis well
for me.” And the people took hold and laid these stones roughly aside and dragged
out the Mantis. Then the Mantis moaned about his skin, the Mantis screamed,
because his skin was really hurting him. Therefore he screamed about his skin,
because the stones had skinned him. So he screamed, after he had first moaned
about his skin; he screamed, because his skin was really hurting properly.

He limped home with the people, while Kwammang-a went comfortably along.
The Mantis was the one who went staggering along, it was he whose face the people
were anointing, as they went, to heal it, while he felt hungry. Therefore he
staggered as he walked, because he was hungry. Meanwhile the people walked
on anointing his face, for they wished his face to heal, that he might go quietly with
them and return home. So he went home.

Then his sister the Blue Crane cried, pitying him, because he was covered
with wounds. Therefore his sister cried, pitying him for his misfortune, that he,
the Mantis, had suffered misfortune, while the people were scolding him for his
doings. The people scolded him, because he did not listen to what the people
said to him. For the young Ichneumon had often spoken to him. _Kwammang-a
had spoken to the young Ichneumon, and the young Ichneumon had spoken to his


Grandfather the Mantis.


Google


50 The Mantis and His Friends


The young Ichneumon had said: “‘O my Grandfather, Father wished me to
tell you, you must not go playing tricks at strangers houses. That is what
Father said to me that | should tell you, but you would not let us speak to you about
it, but you went playing tricks at strangers houses. Therefore Father wished
me to speak to you and tell you, you should not go playing tricks at strangers’
houses. But you would not be silent that we might speak to you, and I feel, O my
Grandfather, you did not listen, for you went playing tricks there, as if you had not
heard. For if you had really seemed to hear, you would not have played tricks


there. You acted as if you had not heard ; you played tricks as if you had not
heard.”’


THE MANTIS AND THE KOROTWITEN.


The Korotwiten is a little bird; it is black; it has white feathers on its
shoulders. It was once a man; it was one of the Early Race. It flew, it walked,
because it felt it was a man.

The Mantis once, when he was out hunting, caught sight of the Korotwiten ©
hovering over one place. And the Korotwiten dropped down, he dived into a little
ant-hole, while the Mantis stood looking at him. And lo! he carried out the kaross
from another little ant-hole, while the Mantis kept looking at the place where he had
gone in. He verily carried out the kaross full of ‘“ Bushman rice ” (ants’ larve), at
a different place. And the Mantis turned his face towards the Korotwiten. Then
the Mantis went up to him, as he sat tying up the kaross nicely, the kaross of
Bushman rice.

The Mantis said: “‘ You must please anoint* me (with your perspiration),
for you can do this, but I have to dig Bushman rice out with a stick. Therefore
my hands are sore, because I dig out Bushman rice with a stick.”

Then the Korotwiten spoke, he said: ‘* You should go up to an ant heap,
the ant heap which is there, you should watch.’ And the Mantis said: ** You
can give me (the power) to see.”


ee mee ———


* One man anoints another, putting his hands under his armpits into the perspiration. And the other gets
it on to his face, where the first man anoints him, that he may become like the first man.


Google


~~


The Mantis and the Korotwiten 51


Then the Korotwiten rose up, he flew along, he went to hover in the air ; he
dived into a little ant-hole, while the Mantis stood looking. He verily carried
out a karossful of Bushman rice at another little ant-hole.

Then the Mantis said: ‘* We can verily do like this. I can cease being one
who digs Bushman rice with a stick.” Men dig out Bushman rice, when the
springbok are not there; women (generally) dig out Bushman rice.

Then the Mantis broke the bow across his foot, he snapped the arrow in two,
he tore up the quiver, he also struck (with a stone) and split the digging stone, he
struck and broke the digging stick, round which he had placed the digging stone
in order to dig Bushman rice. He felt that he resembled the Korotwiten, he
would enter a little ant-hole, when he had slung on a kaross, into which he meant
to scoop up Bushman rice.

Then he hovered and hovered in the air, he dived into a little ant-hole, and
he verily carried out a karossful of Bushman rice at another place. He then went
to sit down, while he held the karossful of Bushman rice fast, he said: ‘* Tell me,
why it 1s that we seem always to have been digging? Our hands were sore, because
we dug, while we might have done like this.”

And he again rose up and went to hover in the air ; he again dived into a little
ant-hole ; he verily carried out the kaross from a different ant-hole, that was where
he brought out the kaross. And he tied up the kaross, he turned aside to take
the Bushman rice to the water. And he went down; the Korotwiten was feeding
there, for the Korotwiten had gone down to the water first. So he reached the
water, while the Korotwiten was feeding there, and he went to feed there.

And the Korotwiten said: “I want first to see you at yonder ant-heap, and
you must afterwards remember that to-morrow you must give me a share of the
new Bushman rice, which you will cut to-morrow, that is what you will give me a
share of."

Then the Mantis said : “‘ How comes it that my brother did not say so before,
for I thought I was really scooping up for my sister's son Kwammang-a, I really
was gathering it for him.”

Then the Korotwiten said: ‘* You ought to give me a share, because it was
I who told you nicely about the Bushman rice. For you should remember that
time when you complained that the earth did not feel comfortable to you.”

Then the Mantis said: ‘1 used to know about it; we always used to act
thus, we went into the little ant-hole.”” The Mantis said so, he said that he had


always known.


Google


52 The Mantis and His Friends


Then the Korotwiten shut his mouth, and the Korotwiten said: “‘ You had
better go home, for I am also going to my home.’ And the Mantis said: “* I will
do the same as you.’ While the Mantis took up the bag of Bushman rice, he slung
iton. And the Korotwiten said: “‘ You must seek food at this place to-morrow,
and we will talk together, and will both go down to the water.” And the Mantis
returned, the Mantis reached home.

Then Kauru (his wife) said: “‘O dear ! where has the Mantis left the things
which he took with him just now? for he had a quiver just now, and a digging
stick’s stone. And the Mantis said: ‘* There was a man to whom I went up there,
he was entering little ant-holes ; he verily carried out a karossful of Bushman rice
at another place.”

Then the young Ichneumon said: “‘O Mantis, where did you leave the
things?’ Then the Mantis spoke, he told the young Ichneumon, he had broken
all the things to pieces.

Then Kwammang-a spoke, he said to the young Ichneumon: “‘ Child, tell
Grandfather it is the Korotwiten. When we see him, we keep still, we keep hold
of the things and do not break them up. For the Korotwiten always acts like this
when we look at him.”

And the Mantis said: ‘* Why does my sister's son, Kwammang-a, speak thus,
when he should know that this is a particularly nice man; he has asked me to go
out to him to-morrow, so that I may keep hovering and dive into a nice place
without its equal.’

Then Kwammang-a said: ‘* You can let Grandfather be, for Grandfather
does not seem to have placed food for the Korotwiten, and we always do so. For
we are accustomed, when he speaks nicely to us, to place food for him.”

Then the Mantis said: *‘ He did speak to me about it; I however thought
that he had plenty of Bushman rice.’ And Kwammang-a said: ‘* Child, tell
Grandfather, we always place food for the Korotwiten; then the ground is soft
for us. But the ground will always be hard, if we do not share with the
Korotwiten, then the Korotwiten is angry and the ground becomes hard for us.”’

Then the Mantis again went out early to meet the Korotwiten as he went along,
that they might get Bushman rice. He walked along.. The Korotwiten was up
early, hovering there. He dropped down, he dived into a little ant-hole, he
verily carried out the kaross at a little ant-hole there.

Then the Mantis went up to an ant-heap which he had seen. He kept
hovering there, he dived into a little ant-hole. He verily carried out the kaross


Google


The Mantis and the Korotwiten 58


at another little ant-hole, he carried the kaross to a bush, he put the kaross down.
He sat and tied the kaross up nicely, he went away. He walked up to another
ant-heap ; he again kept hovering there; he dived into a little ant-hole, he verily
carried out the kaross at another ant-hole. He went and put down the kaross.
He sat down, he sat and tied up the kaross nicely. Then he poured the Bushman
rice into a bag.


Thereupon he descended to the water, and the Korotwiten saw that he
descended to the water; the Korotwiten descended to the water. And the
Korotwiten walked up to the place at which the Korotwiten had laid down the bag.
The Korotwiten said : ‘* Now, I think you should do this, you should place food
before me.’ :


Then the Mantis said: ‘“‘ Oh listen to my brother! Why does my brother
speak so? Although he is full of Bushman rice, he speaks so.’


Then the Korotwiten said: ‘*O Man, you ought to share with me, for it was
you who asked me to speak nicely to you, when you did not feel happy. For you
were saying, why was it, that the ground did not feel pleasant to you.


Then the Mantis said: ‘* This person sounds as if he were tipsy (with
poison), for this is the Bushman rice of which I spoke, that I must go and put it to
dry.” And the Korotwiten said: ‘* Do so, and you will see to-morrow, that the
place will hurt you again. For you ought to act as if we had given to you.’


Then the Mantis did this, he went back, he returned to the people's home.
Then the young Ichneumon said: ‘“Oh! Oh! My Grandfather the Mantis’s
bag is full!’° Then Kwammangz-a spoke, he said: “‘ Just leave off; you shall
ask Grandfather, whether he did what I told him to do, whether Grandfather
shared with the Korotwiten?'’ And the Mantis said that he had not done so;
for he had thought that the Korotwiten’s bag was full.


And Kwammangz-a said: ‘* Child, speak to Grandfather and tell him, we are
wont to share with the Korotwiten ; even if the Korotwiten's bag is full, we share
with him. Otherwise he always gets angry, and the ground will not open.” Then
the Mantis said: ‘* The place is not one into which we could vanish,” _for he
had been diving into an ant-hole. Then Kwammang-a was quite silent, for
Kwammang-a felt that he meant to do so.


And the Mantis woke up early, he went out early to seek an ant-heap which
he had located. And he went along, he reached the ant-heap, he went to hover


Google


54 The Mantis and His Friends


above it. And he kept hovering there, he dropped down, he tried to dive in, he
plunged on to his brow. And he cried with the pain in his brow. _He got up again,
for he thought he did not seem to have entered the hole properly. He got up again,
he again hovered above, he dropped down, he again crashed on to the front of his
head, while blood flowed. And he got up, he crept home.

And the young [chneumon said: *‘Oh! Oh! who can have done this to
my Grandfather, the Mantis?" And the Mantis told him how he had himself
plunged on to his face, when he meant to enter the ant-hole.

Then Kwammang-a spoke, he said to the young Ichneumon: “ Child, tell
Grandfather I wanted him to share with the Korotwiten, for he seems to have
thought, that the earth would not be hard for us, if the Korotwiten were angry,
because we had not divided with him.”

Then the young Ichneumon spoke to the Mantis, he said: ‘* Father wishes
me to say, he told you to share with the Korotwiten, for the earth would be hard
for us, if the Korotwiten were angry.” So Kwammang-a felt, that he had thus
spoken to the young Ichneumon, and the young Ichneumon had told the Mantis,
while he was quite silent. Because he would not speak in haste, he had spoken
to the young Ichneumon; he was silent, quite silent.


KU-TE-GAUA AND THE MANTIS.


Ku-te-gaua used once to set fire to the lairs (of wildcats). Then he got into
the fire and brought out the wild cats, and those cats had no equals in beauty.

Ku-te-gaua would pick up a firebrand, he would walk up to a lair, he would
set fire to the lair, he would get into the fire, when the fire was burning, yet the fire
would feel cool and not feel hot, because it felt that he was the one who owned the
fire. Therefore the fire did not burn hin, the fire also did not scorch his apron ;
for he was clad in a catskin which was scorched like the west wind’s clouds, a black
catskin it was.

He was wont, when he had set fire to a lair, to say: ‘* Ku-te-gaua, n bagen,
bagen, gaua! Ku-te-gaua, n bagen, bagen, gaua!*’ Then he would spring
through the fire, and he would bring out the cats. He laid them down, he took
out a knife, he skinned them, he cleaned them ; he put earth on the skins.


Google


Ku-te-gaua and the Mantis 55


Then he picked up a firebrand, he walked on to another lair; he went and
set fire to it; he sang again: ‘*‘ Ku-te-gaua, n bagen, bagen, gaua. Ku-te-
gaua, n bagen, bagen, gaua!’’ He kept passing through the fire, he kept coming
out of the fire, while he was singing and he brought out cats, and there were no
cats as fine as these, which he took out of the fire. And he laid them down, he
skinned them, he cleaned them, he put earth on their skins, he took a firebrand,
he walked up to another lair. He again set fire to it, again he sang, again he
sprang into the fire; again he brought out cats; again he skinned them. He
collected them, collected the catskins; he rolled them up, he put them on his
shoulder, because he was going home. And he really went home, because the
sun was setting, because he was going to sleep.

And early (next morning) he took a firebrand, in order to seek lairs which he
had remarked ; these he sought. Then the Mantis came by, the Mantis caught
sight of him making a fire there, and the Mantis went right up to him. And just
as the Mantis came up looking, he jumped into the fire, and the Mantis said :
‘" Blisters, O blister him! What ho! What person can be doing this? He is
getting into the fire!” |

And just as the Mantis came up exclaiming, he dragged out cats unequalled
in beauty. And the Mantis said: ‘* I should like to know what these things can
be?" And the Mantis said: ‘* You really must give me the next cat, for you are
rich in catskins, you should give me the next cat.”

Then Ku-te-gaua said: “‘ If you go to the lair which stands yonder and set
fire to it, you will see.” Then the Mantis said: ‘* You might give me the next
cat, for this fire is scorching me."’ And Ku-te-gaua said : “‘ Ho there! Go back !
Go and light a fire, and you shall feel, whether the fire will scorch you.”

Then the Mantis took a firebrand, he went up to a lair. He set fire to the
lair, he said: “‘ Ku-te-gaua, n bagen, bagen, gaua. Ku-te-gaua, n bagen, bagen,
gaua!’ for he imitated Ku-te-gaua, because Ku-te-gaua had always said: ** Ku-
te-gaua, n bagen, bagen, gaua!*’ And he jumped into the fire, he dragged out
cats, he laid them down. He took a firebrand, he walked to another lair, again
he set it on fire, again he sang like Ku-te-gaua ; he jumped into the fire. Again
he dragged out cats, he laid them down.

Again he took a firebrand, because he was glad that the fire did not burn him ;
therefore he would not start skinning. He dragged out cats, he laid them down, he
took a firebrand, he walked to another lair, because he was glad; that was why
he would not start skinning. Then he dragged out cats, he laid them down; he


Google


36 The Mantis and His Friends


took a firebrand, because he was glad that the fire did not burn him, and that the

hire felt cool. Then he gathered up the cats, because he meant to skin them.
Then Ku-te-gaua came to him; Ku-te-gaua came to see what cats he had got.

Then Ku-te-gaua asked him for the cats which he himself saw. Ku-te-gaua asked


for some of them; he said: “* You must give me these two cats.” Then the
Mantis said: “ I cannot do so; these are the cats which I had planned to take to
Kwammang-a.


Then next day he came again and set fire to lairs and jumped into the fire.
He dragged out cats, he took them along, he laid them down. He took a firebrand,
he went to another lair, he set it on fire. Again he sprang into the fire, again he
dragged out cats, he laid them down; again he went to another lair. Then when
he felt that he had plenty of cats, he gathered them together, because he meant
to skin them.

Then Ku-te-gaua came to him; Ku-te-gaua saw that he was going to start
skinning. So Ku-te-gaua came up to him and said: ‘ You must give me of the
catskins lying here, a share of them ; for I let you off about yesterday's cats. These
cats are the ones of which you must give me part.” Then the Mantis replied :
‘* These cats are the ones of which I meant to make a kaross; for you can see that
my kaross is like this.” |

Then Ku-te-gaua said: ‘* You must give me a share of these cats. Then I
shall merely look at the new cats, whose lairs you will presently set on fire; at
them I shall merely look.’ For he would not beg from him again, because the
Mantis would have just given him some cats.

The Mantis said that he would not do so, for he had not yet made the kaross ;
for he had intended to make a kaross, and he had not made it. Then Ku-te-gaua
said: ‘‘ You shall give me these cats, a share of them; for you acted like this
about the cats for which I asked you before, you went on like this.’ And he ex-
claimed : ‘“You must give me these cats, a share of them.” Then the Mantis said :
‘* You really sound as if you meant to insist, although [| tell you that I have not got
a kaross."

Then Ku-te-gaua exclaimed: ‘‘O Man! You shall give me a share of these
cats, or else you will find out what the fire feels like ; because you act like this, while
we are wont to give to one another.. Then the Mantis told him, he had always
known how to go into a fire. Then Ku-te-gaua spoke and said: “* Wait, you
shall feel the fire to-morrow ; you seem to think fire cannot scorch you.. And the
Mantis said: ‘* That is false; you know the fire feels cool.”


Google


Ku-te-gaua and the Mantis o7


Then Ku-te-gaua said: ‘* Wait, you will see. © When you have taken these
cats away and gone to lie down, you will wake up early to-morrow, you will start
early’ and come to make fires, thinking you will enter the fire unharmed; but
those cats shall be burnt up, the fire shall burn you badly, when you try to enter
the fire.” Then the Mantis said: *‘ That one seems to want to deceive us."

Then he went away; he went to sleep. Early in the morning he took a
firebrand, he went early to lairs which he had remarked, he went to them early,
while Ku-te-gaua stayed at home, because he was angry with the Mantis ; that was
why he stayed at home. Then the Mantis set out, he reached a lair, he set fire
to the lair, he sang again ; as Ku-te-gaua had done, he sang of him. Then he sprang into
the fire, and he was scorched in the fire. He exclaimed : ‘* Hartebeest’s children, you
must go!” and he flew down, he popped into the water. And he exclaimed: ** Our
mate ! lie down in the old place. The person has done this! °*’ When he had said
this, he cried out: “‘O blisters! Oh dear! Oh dear! Oh dear! for he was
howling about the fire's blisters, for the fire hurt him. He said that he would not
set lairs on fire again, for the fire was burning him, as the fire had not done
yesterday. So he took up his things, he returned home.

Then the young Ichneumon exclaimed: ‘‘ Who has done this, has burnt my
Grandfather the Mantis?" Then the Mantis told the young Ichneumon, that
he had burnt himself by jumping into the fire, because the fire had felt cool the
day before, therefore he had jumped into the fire.

Then Kwammang-a spoke, he said to the young Ichneumon: “* Child!
Tell Grandfather, that Grandfather does not seem to have given Ku-te-gaua every
other cat. For we are wont to do so, when we want the fire to be quiet and feel
cool for us, that we may get quietly into the fire. For the fire always burns off our
skin, unless we give Ku-te-gaua every other cat, for Ku-te-gaua gets angry.
Therefore we are wont to give him every other cat.”

Then the Mantis replied, that he thought Ku-te-gaua was rich in catskins.
Then Kwammangz-a replied: *‘ We are wont to give to him, even if he is rich in
catskins. For then the fire is always quiet and feels cool to us, we get quietly into
the fire. But the fire always burns us, if we do not give him every other cat.”


Google


58 The Mantis and His Friends


WHY THE WILDEBEEST HAS A LIGHT TAIL.
The Black Wildebeest used once to do as follows : when the Longnosed Mice


were sticking up ostrich-feather brushes on the hunting-ground to drive the
Quaggas, he came up to a Mouse as it sat watching, he untied the Mouse's bow-
string and swallowed it, and he strung on his own entrails for the Mouse; he
blunted the Mouse's arrowheads. The Longnosed Mice were foolish people ;
he wished the Mouse to grasp and break the entrails when the Mouse tried to
shoot.

And he arose, he went to take a piece of (a certain) grass, he made a tail for
himself of this grass, he went in among the Quaggas. When the Mice startled the
Quaggas, and the Quaggas ran, and the Wildebeest ran in front of them, he came
looking as he ran, and he saw the Mouse's screen of bushes. He ran up to it, he
went and stamped on it, crushing the Mouse, as he trod it down. And the Quaggas
ran past and away, while the Mouse died. And he went and took out the piece
of grass and laid it down, because he was aman. Therefore he used to go and take
a piece of this grass (which is white when dry), and make his tail of it, whenever
he wanted to killa man. When he meant to kill people, he turned himself into
a Quagga (by means of this tail which was like theirs), as he wanted to kill
people.

And the Mice were driving the Quaggas again with feather brushes stuck in
the ground. He came to a Mouse, came to blunt the tips of the Mouse's arrow-
heads. He untied the Mouse's bowstring, he strung on his own entrails for the
Mouse. He arose, he went to take a piece of grass, he made himself a tail of this
grass. He ran on in front, looking as he ran, he saw the Mouse's screen of bushes,
he ran up to it. He reached the screen of bushes, he went and trampled on the
Mouse, trampled crushing the Mouse, while the Quaggas ran on to a place where
no man was, and the Mouse lay dead. He went and took out the piece of grass,
he laid it down.

Then the Mantis dreamt about it. He told the Striped Mouse that he was’
the one who should hunt at the place from which the Longnosed Mice did not
return ; the Longnosed Mice did not come home, they altogether remained away.
Therefore the Striped Mouse was the one who should hunt, he would not let the
Wildebeest remove the tips of all his arrowheads ; he must hide other arrowheads
and a bowstring.


Google


Why the Wildebeest has.a light Tail 59


So the Striped Mouse went out hunting with the Longnosed Mice. They
went and saw Quaggas, they put up ostrich-feather brushes-to drive the Quaggas.
The Wildebeest came up to the Striped Mouse; the Wildebeest came and took
off the tips of the Striped Mouse's arrowheads. He untied the Striped Mouse’s
bowstring ; he strung on his own entrails for the Mouse. He arose, he took a
piece of grass, he made himself a tail of the piece of grass. Meanwhile the Striped
Mouse took out a new bowstring, he untied and took off the entrails, he strung on
the new bowstring. He took out arrowheads which were in the bag, he mounted
them. (The arrowheads were fastened to wooden shafts, ready for mounting
on the reeds. They were in the arrows bag. The quivers are left at home,
bags are what they keep a few arrows in. When it rains, then they take the quiver).
He made a screen of bushes which was not small. That screen of bushes was
plainly visible. He made a little screen of bushes which was not visible, which the
Wildebeest did not see.

The Wildebeest ran on in front, he came looking as he ran, he saw the
(larger) screen of bushes there. He ran up to it, and the Striped Mouse shot him
right through the armpits. He snatched out the grass of which he had made
himself a tail, he hurled it away, he went and lay down to die, while the Striped
Mouse lay shooting the Quaggas, as the Quaggas ran past.

The Striped Mouse was a man. The Striped Mouse made his people of
the Longnosed Mice ; he was strong, because he was clever. But the Mantis was
the one who dreamt that that man had been killing the Longnosed Mice, and the
Longnosed Mice did not come home.


Google


60 The Mantis and His Friends


THE LIZARD, THE MICE AND THE MANTIS.


The *‘ Kogelman "’ Lizard once sat upon a “© Driedoorn”’ tree. He lay
singing on the thorntree. He sang :


‘" Oh, oh!

‘The Lizard lies on the thorntree.
‘* Oh, oh!

** The Lizard lies on the thorntree.”’


And his daughter heard a Longnosed Mouse come calling; he called, as he
followed a wounded springbok. His daughter said: ‘* Ho there! Leave off!
Listen to the thing which sounds like a man.’ And he said: “* You must look
out and tell me, if you see a man. And his daughter said: ‘* Leave off! Look
at the thing which resembles a man. ‘For a springbok is approaching, a man is
coming.”

And he said: ‘* Ho there! Come hither! Come and take out the bag for
daughter-in-law. For you can see the things which are singing in the hole; you
shall go in, you shall take out the bag for *daughter-in-law.’ And the Mouse
answered: ‘* Let me first drink. And he said: “‘ Drink from the water-bag
(a buck’s stomach) which is there.’ And the Mouse drank from a decayed
water-bag.

Then he said: “* You must do like this, you must go in quickly, you must
take out the bag for daughter-in-law.’ And the Mouse went in. And he said:
‘* You must come turning your head back in this manner, as we do; you must shut
your eyes, as you come out.” And the Mouse said: ‘* Turn the head back in
this manner, we do so. _He said: ** You must shut your eyes.. The Mouse
shut his eyes, while he took a stick, he stood waiting for the Mouse to come out.
And the Mouse came out. He struck ‘* dzap-p,’’ hitting the Mouse's face with
the stick. He dragged the Mouse away, he went and put away the stick. He went
to the springbok, he went and threw (a knobkerrie) killing the springbok. He
came dragging the springbok; he came to lay it down for his daughter-
in-law.

“By Bushmen, members of the family are often called by their relationship to the person addressed. It


would seem as if the Lizard’s daughter were the daughter-in-law of the Long-nosed Mouse. Possibly this
refers to her marrying the Striped Mouse, as below.


Google


The Lizard, the Mice and the Mantis 61


He climbed the thorntree, while his daughter cut up the springbok. His
daughter said: ‘* Will you not eat first and climb afterwards.” He said: **-Just
put down the food, for I am going to eat. Then he climbed up and he sang:


‘* Oh, oh!

‘* The Lizard lies on the thorntree.

‘* Oh, oh!

‘* The Lizard lies on the thorntree.

‘* Qh, oh!

‘* The Lizard was lying on the thorntree.’’


His daughter said: “‘ Leave off! Listen to the thing which sounds like a
man.” And he said: “* Look and tell me about it.” And his daughter looked ;
his daughter said: ‘“ A man is coming, a springbok is approaching.” And he
said: ‘‘Is he far? ’’ His daughter said: ‘* The man is coming near.” And
he said: .“* Tell him to come hither.” And his daughter said: ‘‘ Come hither,
for my father wishes you to come hither.” And the Mouse approached.


The Mouse came up to him as he got down out of the thorntree. And he
said : ** You shall go in, you shall take out the bag for daughter-in-law ; for you can
see the things which are singing in the hole. You shall take out the bag quickly
for daughter-in-law." And the Mouse went in. He said: *' We always turn
our heads back in this manner, we do so.’ And the Mouse said: ‘* Turn our
heads in this manner, we do so, while the Lizard stood above the mouth of the
hole ; he stood ready to strike. And the Mouse came out, he struck “‘ dzap-p,”
hitting the Mouse's face with a stick, knocking the Mouse down at the hole’s
mouth. And he dragged the Mouse out of the hole, he went and laid him down.
He went and put away the stick, he went after the springbok. He went and killed
a springbok, he came dragging the springbok; he brought the springbok to his
daughter, that his daughter might cut it up.

Then he climbed up the thorntree; he lay singing on the thorntree. He
came down, he ate. _He ate, he climbed up the thorntree again; he lay singing
on the thorntree. He sang:


‘* Oh, oh!

‘* The Lizard lies on the thorntree.
‘* Oh, oh!

‘" The Lizard lies on the thorntree.”


Google


62 The Mantis and His Friends


His daughter said: “‘ Leave off! Listen to the thing that sounds like a
man. And he said: “ You look and tell me.’ And his daughter said: “‘A
man is coming, a springbok is coming, while you are rejoicing there ; you are not
able to shut your mouth.” He said: ‘* Leave off! You tell him to come hither,
and not to pass by.. And the Girl said: ‘* Come hither, for my father wishes
you to come hither.” And the Mouse came up, the Mouse said: ‘* Let me
drink.” The Lizard said: ** Drink from the water-bag which is there.” And
the Mouse drank from a decayed water-bag.

The Lizard said: ‘* You must drink in haste, you must go in quickly, you
must take out the bag for daughter-in-law, for you can see the things which are
singing in the hole. You shall take out the bag for daughter-in-law.’ The
Mouse drank quickly, he went in quickly, for he felt afraid of the Lizard. Then
the Lizard said: ‘* We always turn our heads back in this manner ; we do so, while
we shut our eyes.” And the Mouse said: ‘* Turn our heads back in this manner,
wedoso. Meanwhile the Lizard went and took a stick, he came and stood waiting
at the hole’s mouth. And the Mouse came out; he knocked the Mouse down
at the hole’s mouth. He dragged the Mouse out, he laid it down, he went and put
his stick away. He went to the springbok, he went and shot a springbok, he came
dragging the springbok. He came and laid the springbok down for his daughter.
He climbed up the thorntree, while his daughter cut up the springbok.

Then the Mantis dreamt about it. He said early next morning that the Striped
Mouse must hunt at the place where the Longnosed Mice generally went hunting.
They had often not returned, when they went hunting there. And he had dreamt
that it was the Lizard who was killing the Longnosed Mice.

Therefore when the day broke, the Striped Mouse went hunting at the place
where the Longnosed Mice usually hunted. Then the Girl heard the Striped
Mouse come calling. She said: ‘* Leave off! Listen to the thing which sounds
like a man.” The Lizard said: *‘ Do you look and tell me, and I will quickly
call him to come hither.” His daughter said: “A man is coming, a springbok
is approaching.” He got down out of the thorntree, he said: “‘ Ho there, come
hither!" The Striped Mouse came looking about, the Striped Mouse glanced
away. The Lizard said: ‘Fool, fool, fool! He is looking there at a different
spot, while I call him. Ho there! Come hither!’ The Striped Mouse said :
** Wait a bit! I will go and kill a springbok, then I will come.”

The Lizard said: “‘ Ho there! Leave off! Come hither!’ His daughter
said: ‘*O father, you should let this man get food, for he alone has acted like this,


Google


—__. —_— _ ———$—_— aed el pe


The Lizard, the Mice and the Mantis 63


he smells different, he is not like the people who usually come. For you see, this
man goes when you call him.” The Lizard said: “It is untrue; I will soon
knock him down, for he lies.’’

The Striped Mouse went to kill a springbok. The Striped Mouse killed a
springbok; the Striped Mouse cut up the springbok, the Striped Mouse put in the
springbok leg, the Striped Mouse carried the springbok. The Striped Mouse
thus came carrying. He went past to the place where he had meant to lav the
springbok, he laid the springbok down just there.

The Lizard called the Striped Mouse; he said: “ You shall go in quickly,
you shall take out the bag for daughter-in-law.’ The Striped Mouse said : ** First
let me drink.’ ‘* First go in, you shall first take out the bag for daughter-in-law ;
you shall drink afterwards.’ The Striped Mouse said: “‘ I am going to drink,
for I am thirsty.” He said: ‘* Drink from this water-bag, you must go in
quickly.” The Striped Mouse went past the water-bag which was decayed;
the Striped Mouse looked past it, the Striped Mouse drank from a new water-bag.
The Striped Mouse arose, he tied up the water-bag.

The Lizard said: ““ Ho there! You seem to be taking your ease, while you
do not make haste ; you shall go in quickly, you shall take out the bag for daughter-
in-law.’ The Striped Mouse got up, he took meat, he sat eating. The Lizard
said: ‘* It looks as if you meant to eat till you are satisfied.” “The Striped Mouse
said: “Why? Why do you not tell me at leisure, why I should be the first to
goin? The Lizard said: “I want you to go in quickly to take out the bag
for daughter-in-law, and not to eat there.’ The Striped Mouse got up; he went
up to the hole; he said: “’ I will not go in, for you must go in.” ‘The Lizard
said: ‘* Leave off and go in quickly!’’ The Striped Mouse said: ‘I will not
go in, for you really ought to go in, you who know.’ ~The Lizard said: ‘* Go in,
goin! Why are you arguing with me about it, while you do not go in quickly.”
The Striped Mouse said: ** If I go in, you will see that I cannot get in, for I shall
stick fast, for the hole’s mouth is not big enough for me to enter.’ The Lizard
said: ‘‘ Go in, go in!”

The Striped Mouse shut his mouth. He walked forward, he came opposite
the hole’s mouth. He caught his shoulder blades there, he said: ‘* Look, look!
Go in for me while I look on, you who know the hole.’” The Lizard said: ‘* Get
away! You want to sit opposite mocking, while we go in this way, we do it this way.
You must stand and look on, you will see what we do, when we come out. You must
also listen to what we say as we come out. And the Lizard went in twisting about.


Google


64 The Mantis and His Friends


The Girl went, she went to fetch the stick. She came, she came to give the
stick to the Striped Mouse. She said: ‘* You will see your companions. This
stick is the one with which he hit your companions.” The Striped Mouse took the
stick; he stood holding it ready to strike, while the Lizard said: ‘‘ Tum your
heads back in this manner, we do so, turn your heads back in this manner, we do so ;
turn yout heads back in this manner.’’ He shut his eyes coming out, and the
Striped Mouse hit “*‘ dzap-p ,"’ knocking him down at the hole's mouth.

The Striped Mouse said: ‘* I am by myself killing to save my friends,’ while
the Longnosed Mice said : *‘ I am here, I am here ! ’’ and they lifted up their brushes,
they waved their brushes. (The brushes were made of hyena’s tails or grass on
sticks, they were used to keep the flies off). Then they took hold together, they
carried off the springbok, the flesh of which they were going to cut off and lay
down, that the Girl might dry it for them. They carried its flesh, they brought
it home; and the Striped Mouse walked beside the Girl, for he felt that he was
her husband.

And the Mantis spoke, as they came home over the hill by the house, when
the wives of the Longnosed Mice were meeting their husbands; he said: “* I
wanted you to see this, for you seemed to think I was cheating you, although I spoke
the truth. Therefore I wanted you to see these people coming with the Striped
Mouse, as I told you they would do, when they came, they and the Striped Mouse.
And | dreamt that the Girl did this ; the Striped Mouse walked beside her, as she
came with the Striped Mouse.”


The Striped Mouse and the Beetle 65


THE STRIPED MOUSE AND THE BEETLE.


The Longnosed Mice used to be people; they were not strong. Therefore
the Beetle killed them. Then the Mantis dreamt about him. The Mantis said
that the Striped Mouse was the one to seek food in that part of the riverbed ; for
he had dreamt that the Beetle was keeping along that part of the riverbed with the
Longnosed Mice.

Therefore the Striped Mouse got up early, the Striped Mouse went a little
way from the houses to that part of the riverbed, along which the Mantis said that
the Beetle was keeping. Then the wife of the Striped Mouse did this: when
the Striped Mouse was a little way off, she sat up above there, sat sunning herself,
because she was watching for her husband. Then she caught sight of the Beetle
coming. She said: ‘*O my husband, come out! You see, a man is coming.”
Then the Striped Mouse came out ; the Striped Mouse came out of a hole.

The Striped Mouse said: ‘* Why does the Beetle come just there? ’’ And
the Striped Mouse took out two knobkerries. Then the Beetle did as he was used
to do, when he came playing tricks upon the Longnosed Mice. The Beetle said :


‘* Get out of the way,
‘* The Beetle is throwing.’


And he threw “* habbu, pu, pu, pu, pu, pu,” hurling a stick, and the stick was
not small. (That is the sound made by the stick.)


Then the Striped Mouse said :


‘* The Beetle is throwing,
‘“ Get out of the way.’


The Striped Mouse threw, ‘‘xet, te te te te,’ letting fly back to the Beetle. And


the Beetle said :
‘“ Get out of the way,


‘* The Beetle is throwing.


The Beetle threw back, “‘ habbu, pu, pu, pu, pu.” Then the Striped Mouse


said :
‘* Get out of the way,


‘* The Beetle is throwing.”


Google


66 The Mantis and His Friends


6


And the striped Mouse threw, “ xet te te te, te, knocking the Beetle down. Then
the Striped Mouse said.: “‘ I am by myself, killing to save my friends.’


Then the Longnosed Mice came to life again, those whom the Beetle had killed.
They came to life. They kept saying: “I am here, I am here,” as they jumped
up. They picked up their brushes. Then they gathered together. Then the
Striped Mouse married another Mouse, while they followed the Striped Mouse.


THE COLOURS IN THE RAINBOW.


The Rainbow is yellow in that part which lies above ; the piece which seems
red lies below. For the Mantis, who 1s also yellow, lies above, and Kwammang-a
lies below. For the Mantis is the one whose part above 1s yellow, and that part
which lies below is red, while that part which is above is yellow.


It is the Rainbow. Men call it Kwammang-a. Therefore we who are
children say ‘* Kwammang-a "to it, because the grown-up people said Kwammang-a
to it. Therefore we say Kwammang-a to it. Then people say: *‘ The Rainbow
stands yonder and the rain will break.”


eee ee ee


Google


The Names of Places 67


THE NAMES OF PLACES.


The Bushmen say, it was the Mantis who once called the places names.

| hifhod is “‘ Rietfontein,'’ because it once had many reeds, while ||Xul/kumwe
is -- Modder River ’’; that name is what white men call it.

It was the Mantis who said: ** | hithoa ”’ and he also said ||Xulkkumwe. Then
he said: “*!Xabbu”’ to ** Zout Rivier.”


When Bushmen speak, they use many strange sounds. Some are made
by snapping the tongue against the palate, or the lips together. These are called
clicks. The unusual signs in the above piece represent different clicks or gutturals.
For convenience in reading these signs have been omitted from the names
occurring in the stories, but for any who may be interested I give below a glossary
of the correct names.

The special signs used are:

| Click made by softly withdrawing the tongue from pressure against the

front palate or teeth.

t Click made by smartly snapping the tongue back from pressure against the

front palate.

! Click made by smartly snapping the tongue back from pressure against the

highest part of the roof of the mouth.

| Click made by gently releasing the middle of tongue from pressure against

the back or side of the palate.

© Click made like a kiss.


The two gutturals used are :


X A sound like Afrikaans *‘ g ’’ or German *‘ ch”.
Y A croak, like a very explosive k.


Besides these we must note :
n A sound like ng in “* ring.”
2 under a word means that the vowel is spoken roughly and low.
"means an-arrest of breath between two letters.
over a vowel means that it is pronounced separately.
~ over a word means a nasal pronunciation.


#


Google


68


Glossary of Bushman Names


GLOSSARY OF BUSHMAN NAMES.


The Mantis

The Dasse, his wife
Her other name
Their daughter’s name
Their son's name


Their other son, the young Mantis


The Porcupine

Her husband

Their son, the [chneumon
Their son, young Kwammang-a
Ki-ya-koe

Will-o'-the-wisp

The Lion “ Belt ’’

The Lion ** Mat ”’

The Magic Bird

The All-devourer

Kattau, the little springbok
The Kwai-kwai bird
Ku-te-gaua

‘* Dream,’ the old Bushman


Name of the Colonial Bushman


Google


| kaggen

| huntulkatt!katten.
! kauru.

Ywe- |nan-||kaintu.
! gaunu-ts axau.

| kaggen- © pwa.

! xo.

| kwamman-a.

| mi.

| kwamman-a- © pwa.
| ki-ya-|lkoé.

! gwe!kweitentu.

! haué-ta-thou.

! gu. |

! kaken!kaka!kaui.
|! khwai-hemm.

! kattau.

! kwailkwai.

| ku-té-lgaud.

|| khabbo.


| xam-ka-!k’e.


Original from
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN


Digitized by Google


3 /6oob-sn-pd#gesn ssadde/buo'isnsitTyleu'mMMM//:di1u / paztithtp-3a)booy ‘sal1eis paltug ey uT uTewWog IT}GNd
SPZELZ8OOSTOGE 'Apw//Z7@Z7/Jeu'a ypuey" py//:sdiiy / IW Tv:70 6O-7O-OZOZ UO eWoOYye 9 Jo ALTS4aATUN Je pa esouay


Original from
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN


Digitized by Google


3 /6oob-sn-pd#gesn ssadde/buo'isnsitTyleu'mMMM//:di1u / paztithtp-3a)booy ‘sal1eis paltug ey uT uTewWog IT}GNd
SPZELZ8OOSTOGE 'Apw//Z7@Z7/Jeu'a ypuey" py//:sdiiy / IW Tv:70 6O-7O-OZOZ UO eWoOYye 9 Jo ALTS4aATUN Je pa esouay


Original from
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN


Digitized by Google


3 /6oob-sn-pd#gesn ssadde/buo'isnsitTyleu'mMMM//:di1u / paztithtp-3a)booy ‘sal1eis paltug ey uT uTewWog IT}GNd
SPZELZ8OOSTOGE 'Apw//Z7@Z7/Jeu'a ypuey" py//:sdiiy / IW Tv:70 6O-7O-OZOZ UO eWoOYye 9 Jo ALTS4aATUN Je pa esouay
