"N" Rays: A Collection of Papers Communicated to the Academy of Sciences (René Blondlot, 1905)
==============================================================================================
René Blondlot — "N" Rays, translated by Julien Garcin (London, 1905). Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (nraysacollectio00blongoog).

Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionThe Google "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



^ 




ntt^ 



"f 



FHVS-.- •-. 
Ci C- 






y ■' * X •■ 









t y 



w J -V w. 



3 



<< XT w 



N " RAYS 



i } 



RAYS 



papers communicated 
a:jemy of sciences 

Vl rr.S AND INSTSUCTIO.VS POS 
7/O.V OP PHOSPHOHESCENT 

■■■SSEENS 

m.ONDLOT 




' XS, GREEN, AND CO. 
FOSTER ROW, LONDON 
■^ORK AND BOMBAY 

1905 




GREEN, AND CO. 

. F.R ROW, LONDON 
\ND BOMBAY 






.* 



« 
■h t 



M 
* 



\ 



!.■•'■ 



I 



"N" RAYS 

A COLLECTION OF PAPERS COMMUNICATED 

TO THE ACADEMY OF SCIENCES 

WITH ADDITIONAL NOTES AND INSTRUCTIONS FOR 

THE CONSTRUCTION OP PHOSPHORESCENT 

SCREENS 



R.*- BLONDLOT 



TRANSLATED BV 

J. GARCIN 




LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO. 

39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON 

NEW YORK AND BOMBAY 

1905 

AU rigktt nurvid 






« 

^ 



s 



PRELIMINARY NOTICE 

The present volume contains the memoirs 
on the subject of " N " rays, communicated to 

a; the Academy of Sciences by Prof. R. Blondlot. 

k The papers have been reprinted exactly as 

r they were originally published in the Comptes 

Rendras of the Academy. The notes at the 
end were added later, with the object of throw- 

Î ing light on certain points which were obscure 

^ at the time the papers were communicated to 

the Academy. 

The title of the first memoir in this collec- 
tion, " On the Polarization of * X ' Rays," will 
hardly cause astonishment when it is realized 
that the study of the " X " rays led the author 
to recognize the existence of radiations of a 
totally different character. To these he gave 
the name of " N " rays. Before the distinction 
of these two kinds of radiation was made, 






viii PREUMINARY NOTICE 

some confusion was bound to arise between 
the phenomena appertaining to each. In 
particular, the preliminary researches which 
the author had made^ on the velocity of 
propagation of ** X " rays apply in reality 
not to " X " rays, but to " N " rays. He 
had found that the velocity of propagation 
was the same as that of Hertzian waves, 
and consequently of light. Since the pro- 
perties of " N " rays, taken in their entirety, 
do not leave any doubt that these rays are 
a variety of light, this determination of their 
velocity is now nothing more than a verifica- 
tion of an assured fact. Nevertheless, this 
verification seemed not altogether superfluous ; 
it proves at least that the experiments have 
been carried out with care. 

^ Comptes Rendus J t. cxxv. pp. 666, 721, 763. 



INTRODUCTION BY THE 
TRANSLATOR 

In writing this English version. of Blondlot's 
communications to the French Academy, the 
translator s constant endeavour has been to 
preserve that simplicity and straightforwardness 
which render the original a model of scientific 
exposition. That this object has been attained 
he will not venture to assert, but he hopes that, 
at any rate, the reader will be enabled to follow 
the successive stages of thought in the mind 
of the discoverer as he progresses from experi- 
ment to experiment in a hitherto unexplored 
domain. If this hope be fulfilled, the book will 
be welcome not only to those who desire to 
make acquaintance with ** N " rays, but also 
to all lovers of scientific research, as well as to 



X INTRODUCTION BY THE TRANSLATOR 

beginners who wish to attain to scientific 
methods. 

The translator has to thank sincerely 
Professor Reinold, who has been kind enough 
to revise the translation, and suggest several 
valuable improvements. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Preliminary Notice 

On THE Polarization of " X " Rays i 

On a New Species of Light 7 

On the Existence, in the Radiation emitted by 
an auer bltrner, of rays transmissible 
through Metals, Wood, etc 13 

On New Sources of Radiations transmissible 
THROUGH Metals, Wood, etc., and on New 
Actions produced by these Radiations ... 18 

On the Existence of Solar Radiations capable 
OF traversing Metals, Wood, etc 24 

On a New Action produced by " N ^ Rays, and 
ON Certain Facts connected with these 
Radiations 28 

On New Actions produced by " N " Rays ; Gene- 
ralization OF Phenomena already observed 34 

On the Storing of ** N » Rays by Certain Bodies 38 

On the Strengthening Action of a Beam of 
Light on the Eyes, when the Beam is ac- 
companied BY " N " Rays 43 

On the Property of emitting "N" Rays con- 
ferred ON Certain Bodies by Compression, 
and on the spontaneous and indefinite 
Emission of "N" Rays by Hardened Steel, 
Unannealed Glass, and other Bodies in a 
State of Strained Molecular Equilibrium 48 



• • 



XII TABLE OF CONTENTS 

rAGB 

On thb Dispersion of ^' N " Rays, and on their 

Wavb-Lbngth 53 

On THE Photographic Registering of the Action 

PRODUCED BY ^ N " RAYS ON A SMALL ELECTRIC 

Spark 6i 

On a New Species of " N " Rays 68 

On Peculiarities presented by the Action which 

^^N" Rays exercise upon a dimly lighted 

On the comparative Action of Heat and " N " 

Rays on Phosphorescence 74 

Complementary Notes 77 

Instructions for making Phosphorescent Screens 

SUITABLE FOR THE OBSERVATION OF " N ** RAYS 79 

How THE Action of "N** Rays ought to be 

OBSERVED 82 



"N" RAYS 



On the Polarization of '' X'' Rays (Feb. 2, 1903). 

Note I. 

Hitherto the attempts made to polarize "X " 
rays have remained fruitless. I asked myself 
whether " X " rays emitted by a focus tube are 
not polarized as soon as emitted. I was led to 
put to myself this question by considering that 
the conditions of asymmetry which should 
exist for the polarization of such rays are in 
this case exactly satisfied. For each ray is 
generated from a cathode ray, and the two rays 
define a plane ; thus, through each ray emitted 
by the tube a plane passes, [in which, or nor- 
mally to which, the ray may well have special 
properties, this being, in fact, an asymmetry 
characteristic of polarization. Now, if this 
polarization exists, how can the fact be ascer- 
tained ? It struck me that a small spark, such 

B 



2 «A^» RAYS 

as I used in my researches on the velocity of 
propagation of " X " rays, might perhaps in this 
case play the part of analyzer, inasmuch as the 
properties of a spark may be different in the 
direction of its length, which is also that of 
the electric force producing it, and in directions 
normal to its length. Starting from this, I 
arranged an apparatus as shown in the accom- 
panying diagram, so as to obtain a small 
spark during the emission of " X " rays. 

A focus tube is connected to an induction- 
coil by wires BH, B'H', covered with gutta- 
percha (Fig. i). Two other wires, also covered 
with gutta-percha. Aïe and A'k', terminate at A 
and A' in two loops, which surround BH and 
B'H' respectively ; a bit of glass tubing, not 
shown in the figure, keeps each loop separate 
from the wire which it surrounds. The wires 
AI, A' I are then twisted together, and their 
sharply pointed ends, c and r', are fixed 
opposite each other, at a very small distance, 
adjustable at will, so as to form a small spark- 
gap. By virtue of this disposition, the 
electrostatic influence exercised by the wires 
BH and B'H' on the loops A and A' produces 




Fig. I. 



\_Tofacep. 2. 



POLARIZATION OF '' X"* RAYS 3 

at each break of the current in the coil a small 
spark at the gap cd, at the same time as " X " 
rays are being emitted by the tube. Owing 
to the flexibility of wires, Alf, A'lV, the 
straight line cc\ along which the spark occurs, 
can be set in any direction we please. A 
sheet of aluminium foil, 40 cms. square, is 
interposed between the tube and the spark, 
so as to prevent any direct influence of the 
electrodes of the tube on cc\ 

In order to define easily the relative posi- 
tions of the tube and the spark C(^^ take three 
rectangular axes, of which one, O^, is vertical. 

Fix the focus tube so that its length, and, 
consequently, the pencil of cathode rays, coin- 
cides with OY, the anticathode being placed 
near the origin, and sending " X " rays in the 
positive direction of OX. 

Place the gap cd at a point on the positive 
side of OX, so that its direction is parallel to 
OY. The spark being properly regulated one 
observes that the " X " rays act upon it in such 
a way as to increase its luminosity, for the 
interposition of a sheet of lead or glass mani- 
festly diminishes the brightness. 



4 "iV" JRAVS 

Now, without altering the position of the 
gap, turn it so that it comes parallel to OZ, t.e. 
normal to the cathode rays. The influence of 
the "X" rays on the spark is then seen to 
disappear, and the interposition of a lead or 
glass plate causes no change in its brightness. 

" X " rays have therefore a plane of action, 
which is the one passing through each "X" 
ray and the cathode ray which gives rise to it. 
If the direction given to the spark-gap is inter- 
mediate between the two above mentioned, the 
action is seen to diminish from the horizontal 
position to the vertical. 

The following is another experiment, still 
more striking: if the spark is made to turn 
about OX, parallel to plane YOZ, the spark is 
seen to pass from a maximum brightness when 
horizontal to a minimum when vertical. These 
variations of brightness are similar to those 
observed when a pencil of polarized rays tra- 
verses a rotating Nicol's prism, the small spark 
playing the part of analyzer. The pencil of 
"X" rays presents the same asymmetry 
as a pencil of polarized light. According to 
Newton's definition, it has sides differing from 



POLARIZATION OF " A'» RAYS 5 

each other ; in other words, ît is polarized in 
the complete sense of the term. 

The phenomenon is easy to observe when 
the spark is well regulated ; this means that the 
spark must be very small and faint. 

If the focus tube is made to turn about its 
axis, which is parallel to the cathode rays, the 
observed phenomena do not change, so long as 
" X " rays reach the gap. The plane of action 
is thus independent of the orientation of the 
anticathode, being always the plane passing 
through the "X" rays and the generating 
cathodic rays. 

The spark being kept in this plane, and 
turned round from the position in which it is at 
right angles to the "X" rays to that in which 
it is parallel to them, we observe that the 
effect of the " X " rays on the brightness of the 
spark is a maximum in the first position, and 
diminishes to nothing in the second. 

Now, an " X " ray and its generating cathodic 
ray only determine a plane when their direc- 
tions are different. Again, amongst the emitted 
" X " rays, some are in a direction very nearly 
the same as that of the cathode rays, being 



6 "^" HAYS 

those which graze the cathode. One should 
expect these to be very incompletely polarized ; 
and, indeed the small spark enabled me to 
confirm this. 

I noted several important facts, which, how- 
ever, I will merely allude to in the present 
paper. Quartz and lump-sugar rotate the 
plane of polarization of " X " rays in the same 
sense as that of light. I obtained rotations 
of 40°. 

Secondary rays, styled " S " rays, are also 
polarized. Active substances rotate the plane 
of polarization of these rays in a sense contrary 
to that of light. I observed rotations of 18^ 
(note 2). 

It is extremely likely that magnetic rotation 
also exists for "X " rays as well as for " S " 
rays. One can also surmise that the properties 
of these rays, with reference to polarization, 
extend to tertiary rays, etc. I intend shortly 
to publish the results at which I have arrived 
concerning these different points. 



N£IV SPECIES OF LIGHT 



On a New Species of Light (MarcA 23, 1903). 

The radiations emitted by a focus tube are 
filtered through a sheet of aluminium foil or a 
screen of black paper, in order to eliminate the 
luminous rays which might accompany them. 
While studying these radiations by means of 
thek* action on a small spark, I discovered that 
they are plane-polarized as soon as emitted. I 
further proved that when these radiations tra- 
verse a plate of quartz in a direction at right 
angles to its axis, or a lump of sugar, their 
plane of action undergoes a rotation just like 
the plane of polarization of a pencil of light 
(see pp. 5 and 6). 

I then asked myself if a rotation could also 
be obtained by passing the radiations of the focus 
tube through a pile of Reusch mica sheets. I 
observed, in fact, a rotation of from 25° to 30° in 
the same direction as that of polarized light. 
This action of a pile of micas made me at once 
infer that a single sheet of mica must act, and 
that this action must be depolarization, or, rather, 
the production of elliptic polarization ; this is 



8 '' N^ RAYS 

indeed what occurs. The interposition of a 
sheet of mica, set so that its axis makes an 
angle of 45° with the plane of action of the 
radiations emitted by the tube, destroys their 
rectilinear polarization, for their action on a 
small spark remains sensibly the same, whatever 
be the direction of the spark-gap. If a second 
sheet of mica is interposed, identical with the 
first, so that the axes of the two sheets are 
perpendicular to each other, rectilinear polariza- 
tion is re-established. This result can also be 
obtained by the use of a Babinet's compen- 
sator. Consequently, we are dealing with elliptic 
polarization. 

Now, if the sheet of mica changes rectilinear 
into elliptic polarization, such a sheet must be 
doubly refractive for the radiations thus trans- 
formed. But if double refraction exists, a 
fortiori simple refraction must exist ; and I was 
thus led to examine whether, in spite of the 
fruitless attempts to discover the refraction of 
" X " rays, I could not obtain a deviation by a 
prism. I then arranged the following experi- 
ment : a focus tube sends through an aluminium 
screen a pencil of rays, limited by two vertical 



N£IV SPECIES OF LIGHT 9 

slits cut in two parallel sheets of lead, 3 mms. 
thick. The small spark is placed on one side 
of the pencil at such a distance that it cannot 
be reached, even by the penumbra; this is 
ascertained by proving that the interposition of 
a sheet of lead causes no diminution of its 
brightness. Now let us interpose in the pencil 
an equilateral quartz prism, with refractive edge 
on the side away from the spark. If the prism 
is properly set, the spark becomes much more 
brilliant ; when the prism is removed, the spark 
reverts to its former faintness. This pheno- 
menon is certainly due to fefraction, for if the 
setting of the prism is altered, or if the prism is 
replaced by a plate of quartz, no effect is ob- 
served. The experiment may also be carried out 
in a different manner : the pencil is first made 
to impinge directly on the spark, then it is de- 
viated by means of the prism, and the bright- 
ness of the spark wanes. If, now, the spark is 
moved laterally towards the base of the prism, 
it recovers its previous brightness, proving that 
the rays in question have been deviated in the 
same sense as rays of light. 

Refraction being thus proved, I at once . 



ïo "^" RAYS 

sought to concentrate the rays by means of a 
quartz lens. The experiment is unattended 
with difficulty. An image of the anticathode 
is obtained, extremely well-defined as to size 
and distance by a heightened glow of the small 
spark. 

The existence of refraction rendered that of 
regular reflection extremely probable ; as a 
matter of fact, regular reflection does take 
place. By means of a quartz lens, or a lens 
formed by a very thin horn envelope filled with 
turpentine, I produce a conjugate focus of the 
anticathode; then I intercept the emerging 
pencil by a sheet of polished glass, placed 
obliquely ; I then obtain a focus exactly sym- 
metrical, in respect to the plane of reflection, 
with the one which existed before the glass 
was interposed. With a plate of ground glass 
there is no regular reflection, but diffusion is 
observed. 

If one half of a lamina of mica is roughened, 
the polished half lets pass the radiations, and 
the other half stops them (note 3). 

This allows of the repetition of the refrac- 
. tion experiments under much more precise 



* ' ^ . 



NEW SPECIES OF LIGHT ii 

conditions, by the use of Newton's arrange- 
ment for obtaining a pure spectrum. 

From all that precedes, the fact results that 
the rays which I have thus studied are not 
Rôntgen rays, since these undergo neither 
refraction nor reflection. In fact, the little 
spark reveals a new species of radiations 
emitted by the focus tube, which traverse 
aluminium, black paper, wood, etc. These are 
plane-polarized from the moment of their 
emission, are susceptible of rotatory and 
elliptic polarization, are refracted, reflected, 
diffused, but produce neither fluorescence nor 
photographic action. 

I had expected to find that amongst these 
rays some existed whose refractive index for 
quartz is about 2 ; but probably quite a 
spectrum of such rays exists, for in the refraction 
experiments with a prism, the deviated pencil 
appears to cover a broad angle. The study of 
this dispersion remains to be pursued, as well 
as that of the wave-lengths of the rays. 

By progressively diminishing the intensity 
of the current actuating the induction-coil, one 
still gets these new rays, even when the tube 



12 ''N"" RAYS 

no longer produces any fluorescence, and is 
itself absolutely invisible in the dark. They 
are fainter, however, in this case. They can 
also be produced continuously by means of 
an electric machine giving a spark a few 
millimetres in length. 

At first I had attributed to Rôntgen rays 
the polarization which in reality belongs to the 
new rays, a confusion which it was impossible 
to avoid before having observed the refraction, 
and it was only after making this observation 
that I could with certainty conclude that I was 
not dealing with Rôntgen rays, but with a new 
species of light. 

It is interesting to collate these remarks 
with the view expressed by M. Henri Becquerel, 
that in certain of his experiments " manifesta- 
tions identical with those giving refraction and 
total reflection of light may have been pro- 
duced by luminous rays which had traversed 
aluminium" (see Comptes Rendus, t. xxxii., 
March 25, 1901, p. 739). 



TRANSMISSION THROUGH METALS, ETC. 13 



On the Existence, in the Rays emitted by an 
Aiur Burner, of Radiations which tra- 
verse metcUs, wood, etc. {May 1 1, 1903). 

A focus tube emits, as I have already 
proved (see p. 7), certain radiations sus- 
ceptible of traversing metals, black paper, 
wood, etc Amongst these, there are some 
for which the index of refraction of quartz 
is nearly 2. On the other hand, the index 
of quartz for the rays remaining from rock- 
salt, discovered by Professor Rubens, is 
2*1 8. This similarity of indices led me 
to think that the radiations observed in the 
emission of a focus tube would very likely 
be near neighbours of the rays discovered 
by Rubens, and that, consequently, they 
would be met with in the radiation emitted 
by an Auer burner, which is the source of 
such rays. I accordingly made the following 
experiment: an Auer burner is enclosed in 
a kind of lantern of sheet-iron, completely en- 
closed on all sides, with the exception of open- 
ings for the passage of air and combustion 



14 "-A^" I^AVS 

gases, which are so arranged that no light 
escapes ; a rectangular orifice, 4 cms. wide and 
6 '5 cms. high, cut in the iron at the same 
height as the incandescent mantle, is closed by a 
sheet of aluminium i mm. thick. The chimney 
of the Auer burner is of sheet-iron, and a slit 
2 mms. wide and 3*5 cms. high is cut in it, op- 
posite the mantle, so that the emerging lumin- 
ous pencil is directed on the aluminium sheet. 
Outside the lantern, and in front of this sheet, 
a double-convex quartz lens is placed, having 
12 cms. focal length for yellow light, behind 
which is a spark-gap of the kind already de- 
scribed, giving very small sparks. The spark 
is produced by a small induction-coil, provided 
with a rotating make and break device, which 
works with perfect regularity. 

The distance / of the lens from the slit being 
26*5 cms., one notes, by help of the spark, the 
existence of a focus of very great sharpness at a 
distance, /', of about 1 3 '9 cms. For at this point 
the spark exhibits a notably greater glow than 
at the neighbouring points, whether in front or 
behind, above or below, to the right or to the left. 
The distance of this focus from the lens can be 



TRANSMISSION THROUGH METALS, ETC. 1$ 

determined within 3 or 4 mms. The interposi- 
tion of a sheet of lead or glass 4 mms. thick 
causes this action to disappear. By varying the 
value of /, other values of /' are obtained, and 
substituting these values in the lens formula, 
the number 2 '93 is obtained for the refractive 
index, being the mean value derived from a 
series of determinations as concordant as the 
precision of such observations could entitle one 
to expect. Similar experiments, made with 
another quartz lens, having a focal length of 
33 cms. for yellow light, gave for the index the 
value 2*942. 

While pursuing these experiments, I ascer- 
tained the existence of three other species of 
radiations, for which the index of quartz has 
values 2 '62, 2 '436, 2*29 respectively. These 
indices are all greater than 2, which explains 
the following fact : if in the path of the rays 
emerging from the lens a quartz prism of 
30** refractive angle is placed, in such a way as 
to receive these rays in a direction sensibly 
normal to one of the refracting faces, no 
refracted pencil is obtained. 

The radiations from an Auer burner, 



i6 "^•' J^AVS 

transmitted through an aluminium sheet, are 
reflected by a polished plate of glass in con- 
formity with the laws of regular reflection, and 
are diffused by a plate of ground glass. 

These radiations traverse all the sub- 
stances whose transparency I tested, with the 
exception of rock-salt 3 mms. thick (note 4), 
platinum 4 mms. thick, and water. A slip of 
cigarette paper, which is completely trans- 
parent when dry, becomes absolutely opaque 
when wetted with water. Figs. 2 and 3 are 
reproductions of the impression made in four 
seconds on a sensitive plate, without any 
photographic apparatus, before and after 
wetting the sheet of paper interposed 
between the lens and the spark. The photo- 
engraving, produced from a paper print, shows 
that in the first case the spark is notably 
brighter. 

These photographic prints are produced by 
the spark influenced by the rays, and not by 
the rays themselves, these latter producing no 
appreciable photographic effect after an hour's 
exposure. 

Amongst the bodies which are traversed, I 



TRANSMISSION THROUGH METALS, ETC. 17 

may mentîon tînfoil, sheets of copper and brass 
o'2 mm. thick, a sheet of aluminium 0*4 mm. 
thick, a steel lamina 0*05 mm. thick, a silver 
leaf o*i mm. thick, a paper booklet, containing 
twenty-one gold leaves, a glass sheet, o*i mm. 
thick, a sheet of mica of 0*15 mm., a plate of 
Iceland spar of 0*4 mm., a block of paraffin of 
I cm., a beech board i cm., a plate of ebonite of 

1 mm., etc. Fluor spar is but slightly transparent 
with a thickness of 5 mms., similarly sulphur 

2 mms. thick^ and glass i mm. thick. These 
results I only give as a first indication, for when 
they were obtained, the co-existence of four 
different species of radiations, which may have 
very different properties, was not taken into 
account (note 5). 

It will be highly interesting to investigate 
whether other sources, and in particular the sun, 
do not emit analogous radiations to those we 
are dealing with in the present communication, 
and also whether the latter produces any calorific 
action (note 6). 

Now, ought these radiations in reality to be 
considered as akin to the large wave-length 
radiations discovered by Professor Rubens.^ 

c 



i8 "^"' RAYS 

Their common origin in the emission of an Auer 
burner is favourable to such a view, as is also 
the opacity of rock-salt and of water. But on 
the other hand, for Auer rays, the transparency 
of metals and other substances opaque to 
Rubens' rays constitute an apparently radical 
difference between the two sorts of radiations 
(note 7). 



On New Sources of Radiations capable of 
traversing Metals, Wood, etc., and on New 
Actions produced by these Radiations {May 

25i 1903). 

While investigating whether radiations 
analogous to those whose existence I recorded 
in the emission from an Auer burner (see p. 13) 
are not to be met also in other sources of light 
and heat, I established the following facts : 
the flame of an annular gas-burner emits such 
radiations; the chimney, however, should be 
removed, on account of the absorption of the 
rays by glass. A Bunsen burner scarcely 



NEW SOURCES OF RADIATIONS 19 

produces any. A piece of sheet-iron or 
silver, heated to dull redness by a Bunsen 
burner, placed behind them, gives off rays 
at about the same rate as an Auer burner. 

A plate of polished silver was arranged so 
that its plane made an angle of 45*" with the 
horizontal plane. This plate having been 
heated to cherry-red by a Bunsen burner, its 
upper face emitted rays analogous to those of 
an Auer burner. A horizontal pencil of these 
rays, after traversing two sheets of aluminium 
of o*3 mm. total thickness, sheets of black 
paper, etc., was concentrated by a quartz lens ; 
with the aid of the small spark, the existence of 
four focal regions was ascertained. I further 
found that the action on the spark was 
much more pronounced when the spark was 
arranged vertically — ^that is, in the plane of 
emission — than when it was normal to this 
plane. The new radiations emitted by the 
polished plate are therefore polarized, as 
are the light and heat emitted at the same 
time. The silver plate having been covered 
with lampblack, the intensity of emission in- 
creased, but the polarization disappeared. 



20 *'N** RAYS 

The foregoing leads one to think that the 
emission of radiations susceptible of traversing 
metals, etc., is an extremely general pheno- 
menon. First observed in the emission of a 
focus tube, it was also met in that of ordinary 
sources of light and heat For shortness, I will 
henceforward designate these rays by the name 
of " N " rays.' 

I would draw attention to the fact that 
these " N " rays comprise a very large variety 
of radiations ; for while those which issue from 
an Auer burner have refractive indices greater 
than 2, there are others, amongst those emitted 
by a Crookes' tube, whose index is inferior to 
1*52, for if a pencil of these rays is made to 
impinge on an equilateral quartz prism, parallel 
to the edges and normal to one of the faces, an 
emerging pencil is obtained which is very 
much spread out. 

Up to this time the only means of detect- 
ing the presence of " N " rays was by their 

* From the name of the town of Nancy, these re- 
searches having been made at the Nancy University. In 
conformity with a usage which has become established, I 
now employ the letter "N" instead of "n," which I had 
at first adopted. 



NEW SOURCES OF RADIATIONS 2X 

action on a small spark. I asked myself if 
the spark should in this case be considered as 
an electric phenomenon, or only as producing 
incandescence like a small gaseous mass. If 
this latter supposition were correct, the spark 
could be replaced by a flame. I then produced 
a quite small flame of gas at the extremity of 
a metal tube having a very small orifice. This 
flame was entirely blue. I ascertained that the 
flame could be used to reveal the presence of 
" N " rays just like the spark ; for when it 
receives these rays, it becomes whiter and 
brighter in just the same way. Its variations 
in glow allowed of four foci being found in a 
pencil which had passed through a quartz 
lens ; these foci are the same as those 
detected with the small spark. The small 
flame behaves therefore, in regard to " N " 
rays, just like the spark, save that it does 
not allow of the observation of polarization 
phenomena. 

In order to study more easily the variations 
in glow, whether of flame or spark, I examine 
them through a plate of ground glass, about 25 
or 30 mms, distant. In this way one obtains. 



22 "A^" J^AVS 

instead of a very small, brilliant point, a lumin- 
ous patch of about 2 cms. diameter, of much less 
luminosity, whose variations can be far better 
appreciated by the eye. 

The action of an incandescent body on a 
flame, or that of a flame on another flame, is 
certainly a common phenomenon. If it has re- 
mained unnoticed up to the present, it is 
because the light of the source prevented the 
observation of the variations in glow of the 
receiving flame. 

Quite recently I observed another effect of 
the " N " rays. It is true that these rays are 
unable to excite phosphorescence in bodies 
which can acquire this property under the 
action of light, but when such a body — calcium 
sulphide, for instance — has previously been ren- 
dered phosphorescent by exposure to sunlight, 
if it is then exposed to ** N " rays — for instance, 
to one of the foci produced by a quartz lens — the 
phosphorescent glow is observed to increase in 
a very marked fashion ; neither the production 
nor the cessation of this effect appear to be 
absolutely instantaneous. Of all the actions 
producing ** N " rays, this is the one which is 



NEW SOURCES OF RADIATIONS 23 

most easily observed. The experiment is an 
easy one to set up and to repeat. This property 
of " N " rays is analogous to that of the red 
and infra-red rays discovered by Edmond 
Becquerel. It is also analogous to the action 
of heat on phosphorescence. Nevertheless, I 
have not noticed as yet an increased rate of 
exhaustion of the phosphorescent capacity under 
the action of " N " rays (see p. 74). 

The kinship of " N " rays with known radia- 
tions of large wave-length seems a certain 
fact. As, on the other hand, the property 
possessed by these rays of traversing metals 
differentiates them from* all known radiations, 
it is very probable that they are comprised in 
the five octaves of the series of radiations, 
hitherto unexplored, between the Rubens rays 
and electro-magnetic oscillations of very small 
wave-length. This is what I propose to verify 
(note 8). 



24 "7\r» j^ys 



On the Existence of Solar Radiations capable 
of traversing Metals, Wood^ etc. {June 1 5, 

1903). 

I have recently proved that the majority of 
artificial sources of light and heat emit radia- 
tions which are able to traverse metals and a 
great number of bodies, opaque in regard to the 
spectral radiations hitherto known (see p. 18). 
It was desirable to ascertain whether radiations 
analogous to the former — which, for brevity, I 
call " N " rays — are also emitted by the sun. 

As I have shown, " N " rays act on phos- 
phorescent substances by heightening or stimu- 
lating the pre-existing phosphorescence, an 
action similar to that of red and infra-red rays 
discovered by Edmond Becquerel (see p. 74). 
I utilized this phenomenon to find out whether 
the sun sends us ** N " rays, 

A completely enclosed dark room has one 
window exposed to the sun. This is shut by 
interior, opaque panels of oak, 15 mms. thick. 
Behind one of these panels, at any distance — 
I metre, for instance — a thin glass tube is 



''N'' RAYS IN SOLAR RADIATION 25 

placed, containing a phosphorescent substance, 
say calcium sulphide, which has been pre- 
viously exposed for a short time to solar rays. 
If, now, on the path of the solar rays, which are 
supposed to reach the tube through the wood, 
a sheet of lead, or the hand simply, is inter- 
posed, even at a great distance from the tube, 
the phosphorescent glow is seen to diminish ; 
when the obstacle is removed, the glow re- 
appears. The extreme simplicity of this experi- 
ment will incite many persons, I hope, to 
repeat it The only precaution one need take 
is to operate with a feeble preliminary phos- 
phorescence (note 9). It is advantageous to 
arrange permanently a sheet of black paper, 
so that the interposition of the screen does not 
change the background on which the tube 
stands out. The variations in glow are especi- 
ally easy to catch near the contours of the 
luminous patch formed by the phosphorescent 
body on the dark background ; when the " N " 
rays are intercepted, these contours lose their 
sharpness, regaining the same when the screen 
is removed However, these variations in glow 
do not appear to be instantaneous. Interposing 



26 "^V^" J14YS 

between the shutter and the tube several sheets 
of aluminium, cardboard, or an oak board 
3 cms. thick, does not hinder the phenomenon ; 
any possibility of an action of radiated heat, as 
such, is consequently excluded. A thin film of 
water completely arrests the rays ; light clouds 
passing over the sun considerably diminish 
their action. 

The ** N " rays emitted by the sun can be 
concentrated by a quartz lens; by means of 
the phosphorescent substance, the existence of 
several foci is ascertained. I have not yet 
determined their positions with sufficient pre- 
cision to speak of them here. The " N ** rays 
of sunlight undergo regular reflection by a 
polished plate of glass, and are diffused by 
ground glass. 

The " N " rays issuing from the sun in- 
crease the glow of a small spark and a small, 
flame in the same manner as those emitted by 
a Crookes* tube, by a flame, or by an incan- 
descent body. These phenomena are easy to 
observe, especially if use is made of an inter- 
posed sheet of ground glass, as indicated by me 
in a preceding communication. The use of a 



"A^" RAYS IN SOLAR RADIATION 27 

small flame is by far the most convenient and 
precise of all processes for determining the 
position of the foci. Operating with the small 
spark is much harder, because the spark is 
rarely very regular. 

I feel bound to reproduce, textually, here a 
passage in a letter which M. Gustave le Bon 
has done me the honour of writing — 

'' M. Gustave le Bon had indicated, as far back as 
seven years ago, that flames emit, independently of 
the radio-active emanations since observed by him, 
radiations of large wave-length, capable of traversing 
metals, and to which he had given the name of black 
light ; but while assigning these a place intermediate 
between light and electricity, he had not exactly 
measured their wave-length, and the method he 
had employed to reveal their presence was very un- 
certain." 

The method referred to was the photo- 
graphic method. Personally, I have not been 
able to obtain any photographic effect of the 
rays I have studied (see p. 16). 



38 "A^" RAYS 



On a New Action produced by " N " rays^ and on 
Several Facts connected with these Radiations 
{July 20, 1903). 

The action of " N " rays on a small flame 
gave me the idea of trying whether they did not 
exercise an analogous action on a solid incan- 
descent body. For this purpose a platinum 
wire, about c i mm. diameter and 1 5 mms. long, 
was heated to dull redness by an electric 
current. A pencil of ** N ** rays, emitted by an 
Auer burner, was directed through wood and 
aluminium screens on this wire, and was con- 
centrated by a quartz lens. 

The wire was observed through a plate of 
ground glass, fixed to the same support as the 
wire itself, and about 3 cms. in front of it. On 
displacing the wire, several foci were found, just 
as with other processes employed to detect 
** N " rays. The wire being placed at one of 
these foci, the luminous patch on the ground 
glass is seen to diminish in brightness when 
a lead screen, or merely the hand, is interposed ; 
when the obstacle is removed, the light resumes 



NEW ACTION PRODUCED BY " N» RAYS 29 

Its former brightness. These actions do not 
appear instantaneous. 

I have generalized the former experiments 
by employing, instead of a wire heated by an 
electric current, a sheet of platinum o'l mm. 
thick, inclined at 45** on the horizontal plane, 
partially heated to a dark red by a small gas 
flame placed underneath. A horizontal pencil 
of ** N " rays, concentrated by a lens, was made 
to impinge on the under face of the sheet, so as 
to produce a focus at the heated spot ; on the 
upper face the incandescent patch was observed 
without interposing ground glass. The varia- 
tions in brightness are exactly analogous to 
those of the wire. When observing, through 
ground glass, the intensity of illumination of 
the bottom face of the sheet, due to the rays 
and the flame together, quite similar variations 
are found. Further, the same results are ob- 
tained if, instead of making the rays fall on the 
lower face, or the side on which the flame acts 
directly, they are directed upon the upper face. 

The different effects produced by " N " rays, 
viz. their action on a spark or flame, and on 
phosphorescent or incandescent bodies, would 



30 '' N"* RAYS 

lead to the supposition that they might also have 
a heating effect on the bodies subjected to their 
action. To test the matter experimentally, I 
installed a thermopile of Rubens* connected to 
an enclosed galvanometer. The action of " N " 
rays on this apparatus was absolutely nil, even 
in the most favorable conditions, though a candle 
placed 1 2 metres away from the thermopile gave 
a deflection of about 0*5 mm, on the scale. I 
conducted the experiment not only with " N " 
rays proceeding from an Auer burner, but also 
with those from the sun on the 3rd of July, 1 904, 
at midday. The rays were very intense, for 
when I placed in front of the thermopile a tube 
containing calcium sulphide, which had been 
feebly excited by exposure to the sun, its glow 
was greatly increased, but was diminished by 
the interposition of a lead screen or the hand. 
M. H. Rubens made the same observation, as 
he was kind enough to write me, his apparatus 
being much more sensitive even than mine. I 
nevertheless thought it useful to determine 
directly whether the incandescent platinum wire 
was not heated by the action of '* N " rays. 
To this end, I had recourse to the study of 



NEW ACTION PRODUCED BY "iV" RAVS 31 

its electric resistance. The current flowing 
through the wire is produced by five accumula- 
tors ; with the aid of high-resistance rheostats, 
the intensity is adjusted to make the platinum 
wire a dull red. The wire is stretched between 
two massive brass pliers, A and B, which are 
connected to the terminals of a capillary electro- 
meter ; on one of the connecting wires an 
adjustable electromotive force is inserted, 
obtained by shunting a portion of the circuit 
of an auxiliary battery. This electromotive force 
is regulated so that the electrometer is at zero. 
Every variation in resistance of the platinum 
wire produces a deviation of the electrometer. 
Now, with " N " rays playing on the wire, no 
deviation of the meniscus was observed. The 
interposition of a lead or wet-paper screen 
remained without effect on the electrometer, 
though the wire underwent the usual varia- 
tions in brightness. This certainly proves that 
" N " rays do not raise its temperature. I, 
moreover, assured myself that the method was 
sufficiently sensitive by the following experi- 
ments ; by means of a wire rheostat, an assis- 
tant varied the resistance of a circuit containing 



"A^" RAVS 

the platinum wire and the accumulators, and 
consequently the strength of the current, but 
not sufficiently for the observer to perceive a 
variation in the glow of the wire. In spite of 
this, the electrometer was deflected three divi- 
sions of the micrometer in the eye-piece. The 
following is another verification : raising the 
temperature of the wire one degree would 
alter its resistance in the ratio of about i '004 to 
one ; the difference of potential between A and 
B would alter in about the same ratio, since, 
the resistance external to the wire being very 
great, the current strength does not change. 
In my experiments this variation would deflect 
th^ electrometer by fifteen divisions. As abso- 
lutely no deviation occurred, and as, moreover, 
a quarter of a division could have been easily 
observed, the rise in temperature is certainly 
very inferior to A x i = ^ of a degree, and, 
consequently, quite insufficient to produce the 
observed increase in glow. It is thus super- 
abundantly established that the increase in 
glow produced by the rays is not due to a rise 
in temperature. 

In the experiments with a plate of platinum. 



NEW ACTION PRODUCED BY *'N» RAYS 33 

mentioned above, the increase in glow was 
apparent on the two faces of the sheet. Given 
that there is no rise in temperature, this seems 
paradoxical ; for since " N " rays do not go 
through platinum, it seemed as if the action 
should only appear on the side exposed to these 
rays. To reconcile these results, it was neces- 
sary to suppose that " N " rays, which do not 
traverse cold platinum, traverse it when incan- 
descent. I then reverted to the apparatus which 
was destined to show the action of " N " rays 
on a small flame, and behind the quartz lens 
I arranged a platinum sheet larger than the 
lens. The interposition of a lead screen be- 
tween the platinum and the source produced 
no effect on the small flame, which verifies the 
opacity of platinum. The plate being then 
heated to redness, interposing the screen was 
seen to diminish the glow of the small flame. 
" N '* rays issuing from an Auer burner traverse 
therefore incandescent platinum. 



34 "-AT» J^AVS 



On New Actions produced by "iV" rays — 
Generalization of the Phenomena already 
observed {November 2, 1903). 

When a pencil of "N" rays is directed 
either on a small spark, flame, or a phosphores- 
cent substance previously exposed to the sun*s 
rays, or, again, to a platinum plate heated to 
dull redness, the light emitted by these various 
sources is seen to increase in glow. In these 
experiments, one operates on sources emitting 
light spontaneously. I asked myself whether 
one could not generalize these experiments by 
using a body not emitting light itself, but 
reflecting that which reaches it from an ex- 
ternal source. I consequently carried out the 
following experiment : a slip of white paper, 
1 5 mms. long and 2 mms. broad, is fixed verti- 
cally to a wire holder; the room being made 
dark, the slip is dimly lighted by projecting 
laterally on it a pencil of light, emitted by a 
small flame shut up in a box, in which a vertical 
slit is pierced. 

On the other hand, the rays are produced 



IT 



NEW ACTIONS PRODUCED BY " N'' RAYS 35 

by the following contrivance : an Auer burner, 
provided with a sheet-iron chimney, in which a 
rectangular orifice, 60 mms. high and 25 mms. 
broad, has been cut, is enclosed in an iron 
lantern pierced with an opening placed in front 
of the chimney orifice, and stopped up by a 
plate of aluminium. In front of this window 
the small slip of paper is placed, illuminated 
in the manner indicated above. If, now, the 
rays are intercepted by interposing a sheet of 
lead or the hand, the small paper rectangle is 
seen to darken, and its contours to lose their 
sharpness ; the light diffused by the slip of 
paper is thus increased by the action of '* N " 
rays. 

The following idea then presented itself: 
the diffusion of light is a complex phenomenon, 
in which the elementary fact is regular reflection, 
and consequently there is reason for ascertain- 
ing experimentally whether the reflection of 
light is, or is not, modified by the action of 
" N " rays. For this purpose, a polished steel 
knitting-needle was fixed vertically in place of 
the slip of paper of the former experiment ; at 
the same time, in a box completely closed, with 



36 "i\^» JRAVS 

the exception of a vertical sHt cut at the same 
height as the Auer burner, and stopped up by 
transparent paper, a flame was disposed so as 
to light up the slit. By suitably placing the 
eye and the slit, the image of this latter is seen 
formed by reflection on the steel cylinder, and 
simultaneously the reflecting surface is receiv- 
ing the " N ** rays. It was then easy to observe 
that the action of these rays reinforces the 
image, for if they are intercepted, the image 
darkens, and turns to a reddish hue. I re* 
peated this experiment with the same success 
by' employing, instead of the knitting-needle, a 
plane mirror of bronze. 

The same result is again obtained by reflect- 
ing the light on the polished face of a block of 
quartz. However, when the " N " rays fall 
normally on the refracting face, their action on 
reflected light disappears, whatever be the 
incidence of this light, whether it be that their 
action becomes zero, or simply inappreciable. 
In order that the light reflected by the quartz 
may be reinforced by the " N " rays, it is not 
necessary that the rays should be directed 
towards the interior of the quartz ; the action 



NEW ACTIONS PRODUCED BY "N"* EAYS 37 

Still occurs when the " N " rays traverse the 
reflecting surface from the inside towards the 
outside. 

All these actions of " N " rays on light 
require an appreciable time-interval for appear- 
ing and disappearing. I was unable, although 
I varied the experiment in a great many ways, 
to observe any action of " N " rays on the 
refracted light. 

I will here make the following general 
remark concerning the observation of *' N *' 
rays. The aptitude for catching small varia- 
tions in luminous intensity is very different 
in different persons ; some see from the outset, 
and without any difficulty, the reinforcing action 
produced by " N " rays on the brightness of a 
small luminous source ; for others, these pheno- 
mena lie almost at the limit of what they are 
able to discern, and it is only after a certain 
amount of practice that they succeed in catch- 
ing them easily, and in observing them with 
complete certainty. The smallness of the effects 
and the delicacy of their observation must not 
deter us from a study which puts us in posses- 
sion of radiations hitherto unknown. I have 



38 ''N'' RAYS 

recently observed that the Auer burner can be 
advantageously replaced by the Nernst lamp, 
without a glass, this lamp giving more intense 
" N " rays. With a 200-watt lamp, the pheno- 
mena are marked enough to be, in my belief, 
easily visible to any one at the first trial. 



On the Storing-tip of *'JV" rays by Certain 
Bodies {November 9, 1903). 

In the course of my researches on "N" 
rays, I had occasion to note a very remarkable 
fact. The *' N " rays were produced by an 
Auer burner enclosed in a lantern, and after 
passing through one of the sides of the lantern, 
formed by a sheet of aluminium, were concen- 
trated by a quartz lens upon phosphorescent 
calcium sulphide,^ The Auer burner having 

^ This sulphide was tightly packed into a slit cut into a 

sheet of cardboard o'8 mm. thick ; the width of the slit was o'5 

nd its length 15 mm. After exposure to sunlight, a small, 

luminous source is thus obtained, which is very sensitive to 

« N » rays. 



STORING-UP OF "^V" RAYS 39 

been extinguished and removed the phos- 
phorescent glow, to my great surprise, remained 
almost as strong as ever, but was darkened by 
the interposition of lead, or wet paper, or the 
hand, between the lantern and the sulphide. 
Nothing was altered by the suppression of the 
Auer burner, except that the observed actions 
grew progressively weaker. At the end of 
twenty minutes they still existed, but were 
scarcely noticeable. 

Studying closely the circumstances of the 
phenomenon, I was not long in recognizing that 
the quartz lens had itself become a source of 
" N " rays ; for when this was removed, all 
action on the sulphide ceased, whereas if it was 
brought nearer the sulphide, even laterally, the 
latter would become more luminous. I then 
took a quartz plate 1 5 mms. thick, whose surface 
formed a square of 5 -cm. sides, and exposed this 
to the ** N " rays emitted by an Auer burner 
through two sheets of aluminium and some 
black paper. It became as active as the lens ; 
when brought nearer the sulphide, it seemed, 
according to Bichat's expression, aâ if a veil 
darkening it was being removed. A still more 



40 "A^" RAYS 

marked effect was obtained by interposing 
the quartz plate between the source and the 
sulphide, quite close to the latter. 

In^ these experiments, the secondary emis- 
sion by the quartz is added to the " N " rays 
directly emanating from the source. This 
secondary emission has, indeed, its origin in the 
whole mass of the quartz, and not at the surface 
only, for if several plates of quartz be succes- 
sively placed on top of each other, the effect 
is seen to increase with each added plate. Ice- 
land spar, fluor spar, barite, glass, etc., behave 
like quartz. The filament of a Nernst lamp 
remains active for several hours after the lamp 
is extinguished. 

A piece of gold, laterally brought near to 
the sulphide while it is being subjected to ** N " 
rays, increases its glow (note lo) ; lead, plati- 
num, silver, zinc, etc., produce the same effects. 
These actions persist after the extinction of 
" N " rays, as in the case of quartz. Neverthe- 
less, the property of secondary ray emission 
only permeates slowly through a metallic mciss. 
Thus, if one of the faces of a sheet of lead 
2 mms. thick has been exposed to " N " rays for 



STORING-UP OF "N"" RAYS 41 

several minutes, this face alone shows activity ; 
an exposure of several hours is necessary for 
the activity to reach the opposite face. 

Aluminium, wood, dry or wet paper, and 
paraffin do not enjoy the property of storing 
" N " rays. Calcium sulphide, on the other 
hand, does possess this property. When I 
put a few grams of sulphide in an envelope, 
and then exposed the envelope to " N " 
rays, I found that its proximity was sufficient 
to reinforce the phosphorescence of a small 
mass of previously excited sulphide. This 
property explains a constant peculiarity that 
I have previously set forth, viz. that the 
increase of phosphorescence under the action 
of " N " rays takes an appreciable time 
whether to appear or to disappear. For, 
thanks to the storing-up of the " N '* rays, the 
different parts of a mass of sulphide mutually 
reinforce their phosphorescence ; but since, on 
the one hand, this reinforcing is progressive, as 
I have directly proved, and since, on the other 
hand, the stored-up provision is not immediately 
exhausted, the result is that when " N " rays 
are made to fall on phosphorescent calcium 



42 "iV" RAYS 

sulphide, their effect must increase slowly, and 
that when they are suppressed, their effect can 
only disappear slowly.^ 

Pebbles picked up at about four o'clock p.m,, 
in a yard where they had been exposed to the 
sun, spontaneously emitted ** N " rays ; bringing 
them near a small mass of phosphorescent 
sulphide was sufficient to increase its luminosity. 
Fragments of calcareous stone, brick, etc., 
picked up in the same yard, produced analogous 
actions. 

The activity of all these bodies still persisted 
after four days, without any sensible diminution. 
It is, however, necessary for the manifestation 
of such actions that the surface of these bodies 
should be quite dry; for we know that the 
thinnest layer of moisture is sufficient to arrest 
** N " rays. Vegetable earth was found to be 
inactive, doubtless on account of its moisture ; 
pebbles taken from several centimetres under- 
neath the surface of the soil were inactive, 
even after being dried. 

* I repeat here that, as a rule, when experimenting with 
" N " rays, it is advantageous to replace the Auer burner by a 
Nemst lamp absorbing about 200 watts. 



STORING-UP OF "A^" RAYS 43 

The phenomena of the storing-up of ** N " 
rays, which are the object of the present note, 
ought naturally to be compared with those of 
phosphorescence; yet they present a quite 
distinct feature, as I intend to show shortly. 



On the Strengthening Action of a Beam of Light 
on the EyeSy when the Beam is accompanied 
by *W Bays {November 23, 1903). 

While studying the storing-up of " N " rays 
by different bodies, I had occasion to observe 
an unexpected phenomenon. My eyes were 
fixed on a small slip of paper, dimly lighted, 
distant about i metre from me ; a brick, one of 
whose faces had been sun-exposed, having been 
brought near laterally to the luminous pencil, 
with its sun-exposed face turned towards me, 
and a few decimetres distant from my eyes, I 
saw the slip assume a heightened glow ; when 
the brick was removed, or when its non-exposed 
face was turned towards me, the paper grew 



44 "AT» RAYS 

darker. To remove all possibility of illusion, 
I arranged permanently a box closed by a cover 
and wrapped in black paper ; in this completely 
enclosed box the brick was placed, and, in this 
manner, the dark background on which the slip 
stood out remained rigorously invariable, but 
the observed effect remained the same. The 
experiment can be varied in different ways. 
For instance, the laboratory shutters being 
almost closed, and the dial of the clock fixed to 
a wall which was just sufficiently lighted for the 
dial, at a distance of 4 metres, to be just per- 
ceived as a grey patch with no defined contour, 
if the observer, without changing his place, 
directs towards his eyes the ** N '* rays emitted 
by a previously exposed brick or pebble, he sees 
the dial whiten; he can trace distinctly its 
circular contour, and even succeed in seeing 
the hands. When the "N" rays are sup- 
pressed, the dial again grows dark. Neither 
the production nor the cessation of the 
phenomenon are instantaneous. 

As in these experiments the luminous object 
is placed very far away from the source of " N " 
rays, and as, on the other hand, in order that 



ACTION OF A BEAM OF LIGHT ON THE EYES 45 

the experiment may succeed, the rays must 
be directed, not towards the object, but towards 
the eye, there can be no question here of an 
increase in emission of a luminous body 
influenced by " N " rays, but indeed of a 
strengthening of the effect upon the eye, due to 
the "N" rays which are superposed on the 
luminous rays. 

This fact astonished me all the more because, 
since the slightest film of water arrests " N " 
rays, it seemed unlikely that they could pene- 
trate into the eye, whose humours contain more 
than 98*6 per cent of water (Lohmeyer). The 
small quantity of salt contained in these humours 
must have rendered them transparent to " N " 
rays. But, then, in all probability, salt water 
must itself be transparent. Experiment shows 
that this is the case, for while a sheet of 
wet paper completely arrests " N " rays, a vase 
of Bohemian glass, 4 cms. in diameter, filled with 
salt water and placed in their path, lets them 
pass without sensible weakening. A very small 
quantity of sodium chloride is sufficient to 
render water transparent. What is more, salt 
water is capable of storing-up '* N " rays, and 



46 "iV" RAYS 

in the above-described experiments the brick 
can be replaced by a vase of thin glass, filled 
with salt water, and previously exposed to the 
sun's rays; the effect is very marked. It is 
certainly due to the salt water, for the empty 
vase is without effect. This is a unique example 
of a phosphorescence phenomenon in a liquid 
body. It is true that the wave-lengths of " N *' 
rays are very different from those of luminous 
rays, as results from measurements which it is 
my intention to describe very soon. 

The eye of an ox, killed the day before, rid 
of its muscles and the tissues adhering to the 
sclerotic, proved to be transparent to ** N " rays 
in all directions, and became itself active by 
sun-exposure ; it is the storing-up of the " N " 
rays by the media of the eye which causes the 
retardation observed in the appearance and 
cessation of the phenomena which are the 
subject of the present note. 

Sea-water and the stones exposed to solar 
radiation store up " N " rays which they after- 
wards restore. Possibly these phenomena play 
some hitherto unperceived part in certain ter- 
restrial phenomena. Perhaps, also, '* N " rays 






ACTION OF A BEAM OF LIGHT ON THE EYES 47 

are not without influence on certain phenomena 
of animal and vegetable life. 

The following are further observations con- 
cerning the strengthening action of " N " rays 
on luminous rays. 

It is sufficient for the production of the 
phenomenon that the " N " rays reach the eye, 
no matter how, even laterally. This seems to 
indicate that the observer's eye behaves like an 
accumulator of ** N " rays, and that it is these 
rays accumulated in the media of the eye which 
act on the retina, jointly with luminous rays. 

It matters little whether in these experiments 
the rays are emitted by a body previously 
exposed to the sun, or are primary rays, pro- 
duced for instance by a Nemst lamp. 

Sodium hyposulphite, whether solid or 
dissolved in water, constitutes a powerful accu- 
mulator of *' N " rays. 



48 "A^" RAYS 



On the Property of emitting "iV" Rays, which is 
conferred on Certain Bodies by Compression, 
and on the Spontaneous and Indefinite Emis- 
sion of **N" Rays by Hardened Steel, 
unannealed Gla^s^ and other Bodies in a 
State of Strained Molecular Equilibrium 
(December 7, 1903). 

Professor A. Charpentîer kindly undertook 
to keep me informed with regard to the pro- 
gress of certain researches of a physiological 
nature which he is conducting in connection 
with " N " rays, unpublished researches which 
(note 11) promise highly interesting results. 
These experiments led me to the idea of exam- 
ining whether certain bodies did not acquire, by 
compression, the property of emitting " N " rays. 
For this purpose I compressed, by means of a 
carpenter's press, bits of wood, glass, rubber, 
etc., and I immediately observed that these 
bodies had in fact become, during the com- 
pression^ sources of ** N " rays ; brought near a 
mfiss of phosphorescent calcium sulphide, they 
increased its luminosity ; and they can also be 



PROPERTY OF EMITTING '*iV» RAYS 49 

used for repeating the experiments which show 
the strengthening of the action on the retina by 
light when " N " rays are acting simultaneously 
on the eye. 

These last experiments may be made in a 
very simple manner. The shutters of a room 
should be closed so as to leave just enough 
light for a white surface standing out on a dark 
background — for instance, the dial of a clock — 
to appear, before an observer 4 or 5 metres dis- 
tant, like a grey patch with ill-defined contours. 
If a cane stick placed before the eyes is bent, 
the grey surface is seen to whiten ; if the cane 
is allowed to straighten, the surface grows dark 
again. Instead of the cane, a slip of plate-glass 
can be used. This is bent either with the 
press employed in lectures for showing the 
doubly refractive property of glass acquired by 
flexure, or simply with the hands. With a 
suitable amount of light, which may be obtained 
after a few trials, these phenomena are easily 
visible. They are not instantaneous, as I have 
already explained. It is of the utmost import- 
ance that this retardation be taken into account 
when one wishes to study these phenomena; 

E 



so '' N"" RAYS 

to this may doubtless be ascribed the fact that 
they have remained so long undetected. 

I was then led to ask myself whether bodies 
which are themselves in a state of strained 
internal equilibrium would not emit " N *' 
rays. That they do so is indeed confirmed by 
experiment Rupert's drops, hardened steel, 
hammer-hardened brass, melted sulphur of 
crystalline structure, etc., are spontaneous and 
permanent sources of " N " rays. One can, for 
instance, repeat the experiments with the clock 
dial, employing, instead of a compressed body, 
a hardened steel tool, such as a chisel or file, or 
even a pocket-knife, without in any way bending 
or compressing them ; similarly, bringing near 
to a small mass of phosphorescent calcium 
sulphide a knife-blade or bit of unannealed 
glass is sufficient to increase the phosphor- 
escence. Non-hardened steel is without action ; 
a chisel which is successively hardened and 
softened in turn is active when hard and in- 
active when the temper is taken out of it. 
These actions traverse, without any notable 
weakening, a plate of aluminium i -5 cm. thick, 
an oak board 3 cms. thick, black paper, etc. 



PROPERTY OF EMITTING '' N'' RAYS 51 

The emission of " N " rays by tempered 
steel seems to last indefinitely. Some lathe- 
tools and a stamp for leather of the i8th 
century, which have been preserved in my 
family, and have certainly not been rehardened 
since the date of their manufacture, emit *' N " 
rays like freshly tempered steel. A knife, 
found in a Gallo-Roman tomb, situated in 
the district of Craincourt (Lorraine), and 
dating from the Merovingian epoch, as is 
attested by the objects found there (glass 
and earthenware jars, fibulae, belt-buckles, 
swords of the kind called scramasax, etc.), 
emits ** N " rays just like a modern knife. 
These rays originate exclusively from the blade ; 
a test with a file showed that the blade alone is 
tempered, and that the tailpiece intended to be 
fixed in a handle is not tempered. ^ 

The emission of " N " rays by this steel 
blade has thus persisted for more than twelve 
centuries, and does not appear to have abated. 

* The primitive Gauls do not appear to have known steel, for, 
from Polybius' account, their iron swords did not stab, and bent 
in combat at the very first blows. The knife alluded to here 
is of Gallo-Roman origin, and the Gallo-Romans had doubtless 
learnt from the Romans the art of making and tempering steel. 



52 "iV» RAYS 

The spontaneity and the indefinite duration 
of the emission by steel suggests the idea of 
assimilating it to the radiant properties of 
uranium, discovered by M, H. Becquerel, pro- 
perties which the bodies since discovered by 
M. and Mme. Curie, viz. radium, polonium, 
etc., exhibit with so much intensity. Never- 
theless, *' N " rays are certainly spectrum radi- 
ations ; they are emitted by the same sources 
as spectrum radiations; they are reflected 
and polarized, and possess well-defined wave- 
lengths, which I have measured. The energy 

which their emission represents is most likely 
borrowed from the potential energy correspond- 
ing to the strained state of tempered steel; 
this expenditure is doubtless very slight, since 
the effects of the " N " rays are likewise slight, 
which explains the apparently unlimited dura- 
tion of the emission. 

An iron plate, bent so as to impress on it a 
permanent deformation, emits " N " rays ; but 
the emission ceases after a few minutes. A 
block of aluminium, fresh-hammered, behaves 
in an analogous manner ; but the time of emis- 
sion is even shorter. In these two cases the 



PROPERTY OF EMITTING '' N"* RAYS 53 

State of molecular strain is transitory, as is also 
the emission of " N " rays. 

Torsion produces effects analogous to 
compression. 



On the Dispersion of " iV" Rays and on their 
Wave-length {Jantutry 18, 1904). 

To study the dispersion and the wave- 
lengths of " N " rays, I used methods quite 
similar to those employed for light. In order to 
avoid complications which might have resulted 
from the storing-up of " N " rays, I used ex- 
clusively prisms and lenses of aluminium, a 
substance which does not absorb their rays. 

The following is the method employed to 
study dispersion. The rays are produced by a 
Nernst lamp, enclosed in a lantern of sheet-iron, 
pierced with an opening, which is shut by 
aluminium foil ; the rays from the lamp which 
pass through this opening are sifted by a deal 
board 2 cms. thick, a second sheet of aluminium, 
and two leaves of black paper, so as to eliminate 



54 "AT" RAYS 

radiations foreign to " N " rays. In front of 
those screens, and at a distance of 1 4 cms. from 
the lamp filament, a large screen of wet card- 
board is arranged, in which a slit has been cut 
5 mms, wide and 3*5 cms. high, exactly opposite 
the lamp filament In this way I obtain a well- 
defined pencil of ** N " rays ; this pencil is 
received on an aluminium prism whose refrac- 
tive angle is 27** 15', placed so that one of its 
faces is normal to the incident pencil. 

It is, then, possible to prove that from the 
other refractive face of the prism several pencils 
of " N " rays, horizontally dispersed, emerge. 
For this purpose a slit i mm. broad and i cm. 
high, cut in a sheet of cardboard, is filled with 
calcium sulphide rendered phosphorescent ; by 
displacing this slit, the position of the dispersed 
pencils is determined without difficulty, and the 
deviations being known, their refractive indices 
are deduced. This is the method of Descartes. 
I thus established the existence of "N " radia- 
tions, whose indices are respectively i '04, 1*19, 
1-29, I '36, I '40, 1*48, 1*68, I '85. In order to 
measure with more exactness the first two in- 
dices, I made use of another aluminium prism 



DISPERSION OF "A^" RAYS 55 

havîng an angle of 60°. I again found for one 
of the indices the same value, i '04 ; and for the 
other, 1-15 instead of I'lp. 

In order to control the results obtained by 
the prisms, I determined the indices by produc- 
îi^g» by means of an aluminium lens, images 
of the lamp filament, and measuring their dis- 
tances from the lens. The lens, which is plano- 
convex, has a radius of curvature of 6*63 cms., 
and an aperture of 6*8 cms. The slit of the wet 
screen is widened so as to form a circular open- 
ing 6 cms. in diameter ; the lens is placed at a 
known distance {p cm.) from the incandescent 
filament, and by means of the phosphorescent 
sulphide, the position of the conjugate images 
of the filament is determined. The following 
table gives the values of the indices found, both 
with the prism and the lens : — 

Prisms. Lens. 



^rs' 


60^ 






> = 40 


/=30 


/=s3a 


I '85 








1-86 


l'ÇI 


I'9I 


r68 








1*67 


1-66 


167 


1-48 








1-50 


1-44 


1-48 


1*40 








I^42 


1*42 


1-43 


136 








1*36 


1*36 


1-37 


I'29 








1*36 


1*31 


» 


1*19 


ri5 






I '20 


» 


>» 


I'Q4 


1*04 






» 


}} 


n 



56 "AT" RAYS 

Here is another verification of these results : 
if for the fourth index the mean value i '42 is 
adopted, one works out that for an aluminium 
prism of 6o^ the incidence giving the minimum 
deviation is 45** 19', and that this deviation is 
30'' 38'; the observed deviation was 31** 10'. 
With the same incidence, the calculated devia- 
tion of the radiation, whose index is 1*67, is 
57** 42' ; the observed deviation was 56"* 30'. 

I now pass on to the determination of 
wave-lengths. 

By means of the above-described arrange- 
ment for studying dispersion by the prism of 
27° 15', refracted pencils are obtained, each of 
which is sensibly homogeneous. If we make 
the pencil we wish to study impinge on a second 
screen of wet cardboard, pierced with a slit i '5 
mm, wide, we can isolate a narrow portion of 
this pencil. 

On the other hand, a piece of aluminium 
foil is fixed to the moving radial • arm of a 
goniometer, so that its plane is normal to the 
arm ; in this foil a slit is cut only 0*07 mm. 
wide, and filled with phosphorescent calcium sul- 
phide ; the goniometer is arranged so that its 



DISPERSION OF "A^" RAYS 57 

axis is exactly underneath the slit of the second 
wet cardboard. By turning the arm, the path 
of the pencil is exactly marked out, and one can 
verify that it is quite unique, and is accom- 
panied by no lateral pencil, such as diffraction 
could eventually produce in the case of large 
wave-lengths. 

A grating is then placed in front of the slit 
of the second wet cardboard (for instance, a 
Brunner grating of 200 lines per mm.). If, now, 
the emerging pencil is explored by turning the 
arm which bears the phosphorescent sulphide, 
the existence of a system of diffraction fringes 
is confirmed, just as with light, only these 
fringes are much closer together, and are 
sensibly equidistant. This already indicates that 
** N " rays have much shorter wave-lengths 
than luminous radiations. 

The angular distance of the fringes, or what 
amounts to the same thing, the rotation of the 
arm corresponding to the passage of the phos- 
phorescent slit from one luminous fringe to 
the next, is very small. It is therefore 
determined by the method of reflection, with 
the aid of a divided scale and telescope, a 



58 "iV" RAYS 

plane-mirror being fixed to the arm. Moreover, 
one measures, not the distance between two 
consecutive fringes, but that between two sym- 
metrical fringes of a high order — for example, 
that between the tenth fringe on the right, 
and the tenth fringe on the left. From these 
measures of angle, and from the number 
of lines per millimetre of the grating, the 
wave-length can be deduced by the known 
formula. 

Each wave-length has been determined by 
three series of measures, effected with three 
gratings, having respectively 200, 100, and 50 
lines per millimetre. 

The following table exhibits the results of 
these measures : — 







Wave-lengths 


• 




Indices. 


900 lines 
per mm. 


Grating employed. 

xoo lines 
per mm* 


SO lines 


Probable values 
deduced from 
the preceding. 


1-04 


0*00813 


0*00795 


0*00839 


0*00815 


1*19 


0*0093 


0*0102 


o'oio6 


0*0099 


l'A 


0'0II7 


— 


— 


0*0117 


r68 


0*0146 


— 




0*0146 


vBS 


0*0176 


0*0171 


0*0184 


0*0176 



Being desirous of controlling these deter- 
minations by the use of a quite different method, 



DISPERSION OF '' N"" RAYS 59 

I had recourse to Newton's rings. These 
being produced, in yellow light, for instance, if 
one passes from one dark ring to the following, 
the variation of optical retardation in air is one 
wave-length of yellow light. If, now, with the 
same apparatus and the same incidence, rings 
are produced by means of ** N " rays, and the 
number of these rings comprised between two 
dark rings in yellow light is counted, we shall 
obtain the number of times which the wave- 
length of " N " rays is contained in the wave- 
length of yellow light This method, applied 
to rays of index i'04, gave the values 0*0085 
instead of o '0081 found by the gratings ; and 
for the index 1*85, the value 0*017 instead of 
CO 1 76. Though the ring method is inferior to 
the grating method, on account of the uncer- 
tainty attending the exact position of the dark 
rings in the experiment, an uncertainty which 
is due to the necessity of rendering these rings 
very wide, the concordance of the numbers 
obtained by the two methods constitutes a 
valuable control. 

In the tables given above I have retained all 
the decimals occurring in the calculation of the 



6o "iV" RAYS 

numbers deduced from observation. Although 
I cannot with certainty indicate the degree of 
approximation of the results, I believe, never- 
theless, that the relative errors do not exceed 
4 per cent 

The wave-lengths of " N " rays are much 
smaller than those of light This is contrary 
to what I had imagined for a moment, and con- 
trary to the determinations which M. Sagnac 
thought he had deduced from the position of 
the multiple images of a source, obtained with 
a quartz lens, images attributed by him to 
diffraction. I had previously observed that 
while polished mica lets **N" rays pass, 
roughened mica stops them, and also that 
whereas polished glass reflects them regularly, 
ground glass diffuses them. These facts were 
already an indication that " N " rays could not 
have large wave-lengths. If we desire to study 
the transparency of a body, we must take care 
that the surface is well polished. Thus I had 
at first classed rock-salt amongst opaque sub- 
stances, because the specimen I used, having 
been sawn from a large block, had remained 
unpolished ; in reality, rock-salt is transparent 



DISPERSION OF ''N"" RAYS 6i 

The radiations of very small wave-length, 
discovered by M. Schumann, are to a very 
great extent absorbed by air ; " N " rays are 
not This implies the existence of absorption 
bands between the ultra-violet spectrum and 
** N " rays. The wave-length of " N " rays 
increases with their refractive index, contrary 
to what occurs with luminous radiations. 

If the increase in brilliancy of a small 
luminous source by the action of '* N " rays is 
to be attributed to a transformation of these 
radiations into luminous radiations, this trans- 
formation is in conformity with Stokes' law. 



Registration by Photography of the Action 
produced by *' N'' Rays on a small Electric 
Spark (February 22, 1904). 

Though " N " rays have no intrinsic action 
on the photographic plate, it 1^ nevertheless 
possible to utilize photography to reveal their 
presence and study their action. This object 
is attained, as I showed as long ago as May 
ii> 1903, by making a small, luminous source 



62 "^^» RAVS 

act for a determined period on a sensitive plate, 
whilst this source is subjected to the action of 
" N " rays, and then repeating the experiment 
for the same interval of time and under the 
same conditions, save that the "N" rays 
are suppressed. The impression produced is 
notably more intense in the first case than in 
the second. As an example of the application 
of this method, I gave at the time two photo- 
engravings, whose comparison shows that 
water, even when used in very thin films, 
arrests " N " rays issuing from an Auer 
burner (see page i6). Since then I have 
extended the experiments to the registration 
of actions produced by ** N " rays from 
various sources, and I have perfected the pro- 
cess, as will be shown. 

A small, luminous spark is the most ap- 
propriate luminous source for this kind of 
investigation : for, on the one hand, it is very 
actinic, and, on the other, it can be maintained 
as long as necessary at the same intensity. 
Although it is impossible to obtain absolute 
steadiness of glow in the spark, since these 
variations are not produced systematically, 



N 



YN' 



D 




Fig. 4. 



B 



Ï. 



Yn 




Fig. 5. 



J> 



B 



\Tofacep. 63. 



REGISTRATION BY PHOTOGRAPHY 63 

their influence should disappear in the total 
impression received by the plate, even after 
a very short exposure. I contrived, besides, 
to eliminate even still more completely this 
cause of perturbation, by repeatedly alterna- 
ting the experiments, as I will proceed to 
show. 

Fig. 4 represents a horizontal section of 
the apparatus employed. AB is the photo- 
graphic plate, 1 3 cms. wide ; E is the spark 
enclosed in a cardboard box, FGHI, open 
only on the side facing the plate, and allowing 
the spark to act on one half, OB, of the plate 
only ; CD is a lead screen wrapped in wet 
paper, rigidly connected with the frame which 
holds the plate. The " N " rays, proceeding 
from any source, form a pencil, having the 
direction NN'. With this arrangement the 
** N " rays are arrested by the screen CD ; 
the spark, while it acts on half-plate OB, is 
sheltered from the rays. 

Now impart to the frame containing the 
plate a translation to the right equal to half its 
length (Fig. 5) ; the other half, AO, of the 
plate takes the place formerly occupied by 



64 "A^" RAYS 

OB; and thîs time the screen CD, carried 
along with the frame in this movement, is 
no longer interposed in the path of the rays. 
The half-plate AO therefore receives the 
action of the spark while subjected to the 
rays. 

This being understood, the experiment is 
as follows: first the plate is kept in the 
first of the above-indicated positions during 
five seconds, then in the second position also 
for five seconds ; it is then brought back to the 
first position, and the double operation just 
described is repeated several times. 

After an interval of time equal to an even 
multiple of five seconds — ^for instance, one 
hundred seconds^-each of the half-plates has 
been exposed to the spark for an equal period, 
only, while AO was exposed, " N " rays were 
in action, and while OB was exposed there 
were none. 

Thanks to an arrangement of guides and 
buffer-stops, the to-and-fro motion of the frame 
can be executed with perfect certainty and 
regularity, in spite of the darkness. A metro- 
nome is used to regulate the action. 



\- 



REGISTRATION BY PHOTOGRAPHY 65 

The spark is produced by a small induc- 
tion-coil, known as du Bm-ReymoncTs chariot 
apparatus; it strikes between two blunt points 
of platinum-iridium, carefully machined and 
polished. These are fixed to the two jaws of a 
pair of wooden pliers, which tend to close by 
elasticity, and are kept apart by a micrometer 
screw. At a distance of about 2 cms. from the 
spark, and facing the plate, a plate of ground 
glass is fixed. As I have previously mentioned, 
the light of the spark produces on this glass an 
extensive luminous patch, much easier to ob- 
serve than the naked spark, and giving on the 
photographic plate impressions of much more 
regular form. The regulating of the spark is 
the delicate part of the experiment. The 
induced current must first be adjusted, by 
modifying the primary current on the one 
hand, and the position of the secondary coil 
on the Qther, till the spark becomes very small. 
The points are washed in alcohol, then a slip of 
dry paper is drawn between them, for the 
purpose of drying and repolishing their surface ; 
then the micrometer screw is turned so as to 
make the spark as short as possible, yet without 

F 



66 "iV^" RAVS 

incurring any risk of the points touching by 
any chance vibration, which would make it 
disappear intermittently. By a methodical pro- 
cess of trial and error, which sometimes de- 
mands much time and patience, one succeeds 
in getting a spark both regular and very feeble ; 
it is then sensitive to the action of " N *' rays. 
If one directs on it a pencil of these radiations, 
proceeding from any source, one sees the patch 
on the ground glass increase in size and glow ; 
at the same time its central part becomes more 
luminous, appearing wrapped in a kind of nimbus. 
One can then proceed with the photographic 
experiment. I made about forty such ex- 
periments, employing in turn, as sources of 
" N " rays, a Nernst lamp, compressed wood, 
hardened steel, Rupert's drops, etc. I have 
varied the experiments in different ways — 
for example, by changing the side of the screen 
CD, by using a zinc screen transparent to " N " 
rays, etc. Several eminent physicists, who 
have been good enough to visit my laboratory, 
have witnessed them. Of these forty experi- 
ments, one was unsuccessful : the rays were 
produced by a Nernst lamp, and instead of 




Without " N " lajs. 




—The sltise and mosl of the spols in the figures do not exist in the 
original phott^raph, but are the resnlt of the inability of the 
photogravure process to reproduce images of this kind. 






w <- «. 



REGISTRATION BY PHOTOGRAPHY 67 

the expected unequal impressions, two sensibly 
identical images were obtained. I believe this 
failure, unique, be it remarked, to be due to 
an insufficient regulation of the spark, which, 
doubtless, was not sensitive. Fig. 6 is a 
photo-engraved reproduction of the prints 
obtained with and without ** N " rays issuing 
from a Nemst lamp. 

Fig. 7, similarly, shows the result of an 
experiment with " N ** rays, produced by two 
large files. 

Though the photogravures are far from 
rendering in a satisfactory manner the aspect 
of the originals, they nevertheless show the 
influence of " N " rays on a photographic 
impression. 

I give further (Figs. 8 and 9) the reproduc- 
tion of photographs, showing that " N " rays, 
issuing from a Crooke s tube, are polarized. 

These photographs date from the month 
of April, 1903. They were not obtained by 
the method of reiterated alternation of exposure, 
as this method is difficult to apply to this 
case ; but the experiments have been repeated 
a great number of times with the most minute 



68 "yV" RAYS 

precautions, and the constancy of the results 
is an absolute guarantee of their worth. 

From my communication of May ii, 1903, 
and from what precedes, it is clear that, from 
the beginning of my researches on " N " rays, 
I had succeeded in recording their action on the 
spark by an objective method. 



On a New Species o/^'N" Rays (February 29, 

1904). 

Observations made during a very complex 
experiment, which I owe to Dr. Th. Guidloz, 
led me to suspect the existence of a variety of 
" N " rays, which, instead of increasing, on the 
contrary, diminished the glow of a feeble lumi- 
nous source. I undertook to search for rays of 
this type amongst those emitted by a Nernst 
lamp. While previously studying the spec- 
trum of this emission, produced by an aluminium 
prism, I had not met with such radiations. I 
consequently thought that there were reasons 
for studying anew, and still more minutely, the 
feebly deviated part of the spectrum. On 



i.. 



3.. 



2.. 



i.. 



\ 



+ 



+ 



"4. 



+ \ 



4 5 


6 


2 


5 9 


Fig. 10. 






[I'ofacep. 69. 



mmm^^^tm^mit^mm^mKimiiim^mmmii^ 



NEW SPECIES OF "A^" RAYS 69 

exploring this region, by means of a narrow slit 
filled with phosphorescent calcium sulphide, I 
ascertained, without any difficulty, that, in 
certain azimuths, the glow of the spark 
diminished under the action of the rays, and 
increased, on the contrary, when they were 
intercepted by a wet screen. These were, in 
fact, the looked-for radiations ; I will call 
them " Ni " rays. 

Although the aluminium prism of 27"* 15' I 
used previously is suitable for these experi- 
ments, nevertheless, in order to increase the 
dispersion, I used an aluminium prism of 6o^ 
and afterwards another of 90**. With the help 
of the latter, I very carefully studied the feebly 
deviated part of the spectrum. The prism was 
arranged so that the angle of incidence was 20** ; 
for each radiation, the deviation was measured 
and the refractive index deduced; then the 
wave-length was determined by means of a 
Brunner grating of 200 lines to the millimetre, 
by the process already described (see p. 57). 
The following table gives the numbers which 
result from this study, and were used for 
constructing the diagram (Fig. 10), in which 



70 



"^» J^AVS 



the abscissae stand for the wave-lengths and 
the ordinates for the indices diminished by 
unity. 



Natnreof 
theimyi. 






Indices. 




Watre-lengths. 


N 
N 




>•• 
>•• 
•• 
• • • 


I'004 
1*0064 
1*0096 
1*011 




0003 
0*0048 
0*0056 
0*0067 


N 

N 




1 •• 

•• 
> •• 


1*0125 

1*029 

1*041 




0*0074 
0*0083 
0*0081 



Each of the divisions marked on the axis 
of abscissae corresponds to o'ooi, and each 
of the divisions marked on the ordinate axis 
corresponds to an excess over unity equal 

to C'OI. 

In spite of all the care with which the 
experiments were executed, the deviations are 
so small, and, consequently, the indices so near 
to unity, that the table and diagram can only 
be regarded as a preliminary indication of the 
behaviour of the dispersion in the very slightly 
deviated part of the spectrum. An important 
consequence arises from these measures, viz. 
points corresponding to " N " rays, and those 
corresponding to Nj rays, are all situate on the 



^m^^^mm^^mm^^tF^^'mmmm^mmc^m^^^'''^^ pi. ^W^'^nMHMBli^^iflipnqp 



NEIV SPECIES OF "iV" RAYS Ji 

same curve, wîthîn the limits of experimental 
error. The study of radiations still less 
refrangible than those I have dwelt on appeared 
to me impracticable. To avoid confusion, I 
was obliged to adopt a very large scale for the 
ordinates ; this is why I could not plot on the 
diagram the results of my former measure- 
ments of the more refrangible " N " rays {loc. 
cit.). These results give points situated on a 
branch of the curve, starting from the topmost 
point on the right, and rising almost vertically, 
with a feeble inclination, from bottom to top, 
and from right to left, and a slight convexity 
turned upwards. 

Certain sources seem to emit Ni rays ex- 
clusively, or, at least, these rays predominate 
in the emission. This is the case with copper 
and silver wire, and with hard-drawn platinum 
wire. M. Bichat has observed that ethylic 
ether, when brought to the state of forced 
extension, by the process discovered by M. 
Berthelot, emits Ni rays. When this state of 
strain ceases, whether spontaneously or under 
the action of a slight blow, the emission of Nj 
rays immediately disappears. 



72 "A^" RAYS 

Ni rays can be stored up like " N " rays. 
For instance, one need only bring a bit of 
stretched copper wire in proximity to a lump of 
quartz to make the quartz emit Ni rays for 
some time after. 



On Peculiarities presented by the Action 
exercised by "iV" Rays on a Dimly 
Lighted Surface {February 2, 1 904). 

Consider a phosphorescent screen, or, more 
generally, a dimly lighted surface. If this sur- 
face is viewed normally^ one notices that the 
action of " N " rays is to render it more lumin- 
ous ; if, on the contrary, the surface is viewed 
very obliquely, nearly tangentially^ the action 
of " N '* rays is to render it less luminous. In 
other words, the action of " N " rays in- 
creases the quantity of light normally emitted, 
while it diminishes the light emitted in a 
very oblique direction. If one looks at it in 
an intermediate position, no appreciable effect 
is observed. This explains the fact, observed 



WP 



PECULIARITIES OF ACTION OF '' N"^ RAYS 73 

in all " N " ray experiments, that only the 
observer placed exactly in front of the sensitive 
screen perceives the effect of these rays. It also 
shows how illusory it would be to try to make 
an audience witness these experiments : the 
effects perceived by different persons, depending 
as they do on their positions with regard to the 
screen, would certainly be contradictory or im- 
perceptible. The rays I have called Ni rays 
have an inverse action in all cases to that of 
" N " rays ; they diminish the light emitted 
normally, and increase the light emitted tan- 
gentially. M. Mace de Lepinay (see C R. t. 
cxxxviii. p. *JT, January 1 1, 1902) has found that 
sound vibrations increase the glow of a phos- 
phorescent screen as seen by an observer view- 
ing it normally. I have noticed that if the 
screen is viewed tangentially, the phosphor- 
escence is seen to decrease under the action of 
the sound-waves. The action of a magnetic 
field or of an electromotive force on a feebly 
luminous surface, discovered by M. C. Gutton 
(see C. R. t. cxxxviii. p. 268, February i, 
1904), presents the same particularities. 

To sum up, in all the above-mentioned 



74 "^^ IIAVS 

actions, the modification undergone by the 
luminous emission consist in a change in its 
distribution along the different directions com- 
prised between the |[normaI and the tangent 
plane to the luminous surface. 



On the Comparative Action of Heat and'' N'' 
Rays on Phosphorescence {March 14, 1904). 

I have recendy indicated that, whilst the 
action of " N " rays increases the quantity of 
light emitted by a phosphorescent screen in a 
normal direction, it diminishes the quantity of 
light emitted very obliquely (see the pre- 
ceding communication). As is well known, 
heat also acts on phosphorescence, whose 
brilliancy it temporarily increases. When in- 
vestigating whether this action of heat offered 
the same peculiarities as that of " N " rays, 
with regard to the direction of the emitted 
light, I found that, on the contrary, heat pro- 
duces an increase in brilliancy in all direc- 
tions comprised between the normal and the 



ACTION OF HEAT AND '^ N'^ RAYS 75 

tangent plane. Hence we are in a position 
to distinguish between the effects produced 
on phosphorescence by heat on the one hand, 
and by " N " rays, sound-waves, magnetic and 
electric fields on the other. 

The following is another case in which the 
effects are different. Take a rectangular card- 
board screen, 5 cms. high and 1 2 cms. long, for 
instance, coated very uniformly with calcium 
sulphide, and rendered very feebly phosphor- 
escent. If the temperature of a portion of 
the screen is raised, this part becomes more 
luminous than the rest. If, instead of this, 
we let fall on one half of the screen a pencil 
of ** N " rays, proceeding, for example, from a 
Nernst lamp, we find no sensible increase in 
its glow ; but if in front of this half-screen 
a small opaque object is placed, for instance, 
a small key or a bit of metal foil, cut off 
by daylight, this is seen to come out very 
strongly on the luminous background, while if 
it is placed on the half not receiving the " N " 
rays, its outline is vague and indeterminate, 
and seems even to disappear at times. By 
shifting slowly the object on the screen, its 



76 "A^" RAYS 

passage from one half-screen to the other is 
rendered visible by the change in the boldness 
of its outline. If instead of viewing the object 
normally, we observed it very obliquely, the 
phenomena are reversed. These are striking 
experiments. 



Complementary Notes. 

(i) As mentioned in the Preliminary Notice^ and as will be 
seen in the later communications, the properties attributed in the 
present paper to ** X " rays, belong not to these rays, but to a new 
kind of rays, to which I have given the name of " N " rays. 
The experiments are correct, and the rectification only applies 
to the nature of the rays which have been studied. 

(2) What I attributed then to "S" rays is, in reality, due 
to diffused ** N '' rays. The rotation of the plane of polarization 
of " N " rays by active substances is perhaps very great, since 
their wave-lengths are very small. It may be, then, that the 
angles I have observed are merely the remainders obtained by 
subtracting 360^ once or several times from the real rotations. 
For the same reason, the rotations in a contrary direction could 
be apparent only. Investigation on this point remains still to 
be carried out ; the operations should be conducted successively 
on each of the homogeneous pencils resulting from the dis- 
persion of a pencil of '* N '' rays by an aluminium prism. The 
existence of magnetic rotatory polarization has recently been 
shown by M. H. Bagard, whose investigations are still in 
progress. (C /?. t cxxxviii.) 

(3) Unpolished mica arrests a pencil of ^' N " rays ; these 
are not, however, absorbed, but only diffused, as in the case 
of light. 

(4) Rock-salt is in reality transparent. What had at first 
misled me was that the plate of salt I used, having been sawn 
out of a large block, had remained unpolished. In this state it 
was only translucent, whether for " N " rays or for light When 
polished with wet paper, it becomes transparent both for 
<<N'' rays and light ; when the polish disappears, it becomes 
translucent again. 



78 "A^" RAYS 

(5) As I state in the text, these* rough data on the trans- 
parency of different substances will have to be completed by 
new experiments methodically conducted. I have since found 
that copper continues to transmit *^ N " rays emitted by a Nemst 
lamp, even when used in thicknesses of 65 cms. ; that, similarly, 
glass is very transparent, etc M. Bichat has studied the trans- 
parency of various bodies ; in particular, he has ascertained 
that the opacity of a sheet of lead is due to the Êict that it is 
superficially covered with oxide and carbonate. Metallic lead 
lets pass certain of the *' N " radiations. (See C R. t cxxxviii. 
p. 548, February 29, 1904.) 

(6) See the communications of May 25 and June 15, 1903. 

(7) I have since found that, on the contrary, "N'' rays 
have much shorter wave-lengths than those of light (See my 
communication of January 18, 1904 (p. 53 of the present 
volume). ) 

(8) See note above (7). 

(9) The phosphorescence may be intense, provided it be not 
at its maximum. 

(10) The piece of gold must of course be also receiving the 
«N^rays. 

(i i) These researches have since been communicated to the 
Academy of Sciences. (See C R. t cxxxvii. p. 1049, December 

24, 1903.) 

(12) According to some experiments which I have made 

with an aluminium lens on rays issuing from a knife-blade, 

these should have very large indices. M. Charpentier has 

found that wet cardboard transmits these rays. These questions 

remain to be studied. 



Instructions for Making Phosphorescent Screens 
adapted for the Observation of " N " Rays 

(i) If one proposes only to ascertain the 
production of " N " rays in given circum- 
stances, a phosphorescent screen, made as 
follows, may be used with advantage : some 
powdered calcium sulphide is mixed with col- 
lodion, diluted with ether, so as to form a very 
thin paste ; then, with a water-colour brush, 
drops of this paste are painted on blackened 
cardboard, so as to produce stains several milli- 
metres in diameter, close to each other. The 
screen then presents the aspect of a spotted 
fabric. If, after being exposed to light, it is 
examined in a dark room, and in perfect silence, 
some of the spots will appear less luminous 
than the others. Usually, some will not seem 
to be sharply separated from their neighbours, 
but will form a sort of confused nebula less 
visible than the rest. Now, if one speaks aloud 



- * • " * 

4 



8o "AT» J^AVS 

or whistles, or if a knife, or a slightly bent stick, 
or the clenched fist, etc., be brought near to the 
cardboard, all the spots will become distinct 
and more luminous ; the nebula resolves itself. 
When the rays are suppressed, the screen 
resumes its former aspect 

(2) To obtain large, uniformly luminous 
screens, the process is similar to the one 
adopted for painting in Indian ink ; a coating 
of the mixture of sulphide and coUodium, made 
very thin by the addition of ether, is spread 
out as uniformly as possible with a water-colour 
brush. When this layer is dry, a second is 
applied, and so on until the screen appears 
uniformly luminous. The thinner the coatings, 
and the greater their number, the better the 
result. ^ 

(3) To measure the refractive indices and 
wave-lengths, I use very narrow slits filled 
with calcium sulphide. Two rectangular plates 
of aluminium are placed side by side on a small 
board, so that their edges are in contact. A 
little of the metal was previously filed off" one 
plate, so that when the plates were in position, 
a slit was formed between them 2 cms. long and 



PHOSPHORESCENT SCREEN 8i 

only about t^ mm. broad. A recess has 
first been made în the board, just where the 
slît lies, so that the latter is free on both sides. 
The two plates being first brought within a 
small distance of each other, some powdered 
calcium sulphide is packed in between them, 
after which they are pressed against each other, 
and maintained with screws, which keep them 
in contact with the board. The compressed 
sulphide remains in the slit, and is exposed to 
sunlight, after the excess has been removed. 
An extremely narrow phosphorescent slit is 
thus obtained. 



How the Action of N " Rays should be 

observed 

It is indispensable in these experiments to 
avoid all strain on the eye, all effort, whether 
visual or for eye accommodation, and in no 
way to try to fix the eye upon the luminous 
source, whose variations in glow one wishes to 
ascertain. On the contrary, one must, so to 
say, see the source without looking at it, and 
even direct one's glance vaguely in a neigh- 
bouring direction. The observer must play 
an absolutely passive part, under penalty of 
seeing nothing. Silence should be observed 
as much as possible. Any smoke, and es- 
pecially tobacco smoke, must be carefully 
avoided, as being liable to perturb or even 
entirely to mask the effect of the " N " 
rays. When viewing the screen or luminous 
object, no attempt at eye-accommodation 
should be made. In fact, the observer should 



HÔIV "iV" RAYS SHOULD BE OBSERVED 83 

accustom hîmself to look at the screen just 
as a painter, and in particular an " impres- 
sionist" painter, would look at a landscape. 
To attain this requires some practice, and is 
not an easy task. Some people, in fact, never 
succeed. 



THE END 



APR 2 6 1918 



PXIMTBD BY WfLUAM CLOWES AMD SONS, LIMITED LONDON AND BBCCLBS. 



A SELECT LIST OF BOOKS 



IN 



NATURAL AND PHYSICAL SCIENCE 
MATHEMATICS AND TECHNOLOGY 



PUBLISHED BY 



Messrs. LONGMANS, GREEN, & CO. 

LONDON: 39 PATERNOSTER ROW, E.G. 

NEW YORK: 91 & 93 FIFTH AVENUE. 
BOMBAY: 8 HORNBY ROAD. 



Advanced Science Manuals 

Algebra . - . - 
Agriculture 

Architecture - - - 
Astronomy 
Bacteriology - 

Biology - . . - 

Botany . - - - 

Building Construction - 

Calculus - - - - 

Chemistry - - - - 
Conic Sections - 



PAOB 

- 38 

- 9 

- 35 

- 14 

- 20 

- 33 

- 32 

- 34 

- 14 

- 10 

- 2 

- 10 



Dynamics 6 

Electricity 16 

Elementary Science Manuals - 38 

EflGINEERING I? 

Euclid 11 

Gardening 35 

Geology 22 

Geometry 11 

Health and Hygiene - - - 25 

Heat 13 

Hydrostatics 6 

Light 13 

Logarithms 10 

London Science Class- Books ■ - 40 
Longmans' Civil Engineering Series 18 
Machine Drawing and Design - 16 

Magnetism 16 

Manufactures 24 

Mechanics 6 

fljEDICINE AND SURGERY - - - 20 



PAOB 

Mensuration 8 

Metallurgy 19 

Mineralogy 19 

Mining 19 

Natural History and General 

Science 23 

Naval Architecture - - - 18 
Navigation - - - - - 20 

Optics 12 

Photography - - - - - 12 

Physics 5 

Physiography 22 

Physiology 32 

Practical Elementary Science 

Series 4P 

Proctor's (^. A.) Works- - - 21 

Sound 13 

Statics 6 

Steam, Oil, and Gas Engines, 

and Motors - - - - 15 

Strength of Materials - - - 17 

Surveying 8 

Technology 24 

Telegraphy 17 

Telephone 17 

Text-Books of Science - - - 37 
Thermodynamics - - - - 13 

Trigonometry 13 

TyndalVs (Johi^ Works - - 36 
Veterinary Medicine, etc. - - 31 
Workshop Appliances - - - 18 
Zoology - • • • • «22 



Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green^ <5f Co, 



CHEMISTRY. 

^Z?Z>yj/^iV:— AGRICULTURAL ANALYSIS. A Manual of Quanti- 
tative Anal^is for Students of Agriculture. By Frank T. Addyman, B.Sc. Lend., 
F.I.C. With 49 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 55. net. 

ARRHENIUS.—K TEXT-BOOK OF ELECTROCHEMISTRY. By 

SVANTB Arrhbnius, ProfessoT at the University of Stockholm. Translated from the 
German Edition by John McCrae, Ph.D. With 58 Illustrations. 8va, ^, 6d. net. 

COLEMAN AND ADD VMA JV,—FRACTICAL AGRICULTURAL 

CHEMISTRY. By J. Bernard Coleman, A.R.C.Sc., F.I.C, and Frank T. Addy- 
man, B.Sc. Lond., F.I.C. With 24 Illustrations. Crown Svo., u. 6d. net. 

CEOOITES.— SELECT METHODS IN CHEMICAL ANALYSIS, 

chiefly Inorganic. By Sir William Crookes, F.R.S., etc Third Edition. Rewritten 
and Enlarged. With 67 Woodcuts. Svo., au. net. 

FURNEA rar.— ELEMENTARY CHEMISTRY, Inorganic and Organic. 

By W. FURNEAUX, F.R,G.S., Lecturer on Chemistry, London School Board. With 
65 Illustrations and 155 Experiments. Crown 8vo., or. &/. 

GARRETT and HARDEN,— k^ ELEMENTARY COURSE OF 

PRACTICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY. By F. C. GARRETT, M.Sc. (Vict, et 
Dunelm.), Assistant Lecturer and Demonstrator in Chemistry, the Durham CoUege 
of Science, Newcastle-on-Tyne ; and Arthur Harden, M.Sc. (Vict.), Ph.D., 
Assistant Lecturer and Demonstrator in Chemistry, Manchester University. With 
19 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 3^. 

/^C^a— Works by W. JAGO, F.C.S., F.I.C 

INORGANIC CHEMISTRY, THEORETICAL. AND PRACTICAL; 

With an Introduction to the Principles of Chemical Analysis, Inorganic and Organic. 
With 63 Woodcuts and numerous Questions and Exercises. Fcp. 8v6., %s, 6d, 

AN INTRODUCTION TO PRACTICAL INORGANIC CHEMIS- 
TRY. Crown ÔVO.. I J. 6d, 

INORGANIC CHEMISTRY, THEORETICAL AND PRACTICAL. 

A Manual for Students in Advanced Classes of the Science and Art Department. 
With Plate of Spectra and 78 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo., 4^. 6d. 

R:LÔCR:ER,— FERMENTATION ORGANISMS : a Laboratory Hand- 
book. By Alb. Kl5cker. Translated by G. E. Allan, B.Sc., and J. H. Millar, 
F.I.C. With 146 Illustrations in the text. 8vo., 12J. net. 

MEZLOR, — HIGHER MATHEMATICS FOR STUDENTS OF 

CHEMISTRY AND PHYSICS. With Special Reference to Practical Work. By 
J. W. Mellor, D.Sc, late Senior Scholar, and 1851 Exhibition Scholar, New Zealand 
University ; Research Fellow, the Owens CoUege, Manchester. With 142 Diagrams 
8vo, I2S. 6d. net. 

MENDELÉEFF.— Works by D. MENDELEEFF, Professor of Chemis.^ 
try in the University of St. Petersburg. 

THE PRINCIPLES OF CHEMISTRY. Third English Edition. 

Translated from the Russian (Seventh Edition) by George Kamensky, A.R.S.M. 
of the Imperial Mint, St Petersburg ; and Edited by Thomas H. Pope, B.Sc., F.I.c' 
With no Diagrams and Illustrations, a vols. 8vo., 32^. net, 

AN ATTEMPT TOWARDS A CHEMICAL CONCEPTION OF 

THE ETHER. Translated from the Russian by George Kamènskv. A R &M 
8vo,, 9s, net, 



Scientific Works published by Longmansy Green^ <5r* Co, 



CHEfaiSTRY-Càntinuea. 

MEVEIi.—OVTLlNES OF THEORETICAL CHEMISTRY. By 

- LOTHAR Meyer, Professor of Chemistry in the University of Tubingen. Translated 
by Professors P. Phillips Bedson, D.Sc., and W. Carleton Williams, B.Sc. 
8vo., gs. 

MILLER, -INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF INORGANIC 

CHEMISTRY. By W. Allen Miller, M.D., LL.D. With 71 Illustrations. Fcp. 
8vo., 3J. td. 

MUIR.—K COURSE OF PRACTICAL CHEMISTRY. By M. M. P. 

Muir, M.A., Fellow and Praelector in Chemistry of Gonville and Gains College, 
Cambridge. (3 Parts.) 

Part I. Elementary. Crown 8vo., 4^. 6d. 

Part II. Intermediate. Crown 8vo., 4^. 6d. 

Part III. [In preparation, 

ATE WTH,— Works by G. S. NEWTH, F.I.C., F.C.S., Demonstrator 
in the Royal College of Science, London. 

CHEMICAL LECTURE EXPERIMENTS. With 230 Illustrations 

Crown 8vo. , 6s, 

CHEMICAL ANALYSIS, QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE. 

With 100 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 6s, 6d, 

A TEXT-BOOK OF INORGANIC CHEMISTRY. With 155 Illus- 

trations. Crown 8vo., 6s. 6d, 

ELEMENTARY PRACTICAL CHEMISTRY. With 108 Illus- 
trations and 354 Experiments. Crown 8vo., 2s. 6d, 

PERHriN.— QUALITATIVE CHEMICAL ANALYSIS (ORGANIC 

AND INORGANIC). By F. Mollwo Perkin, Ph.D., Head of the Chemistry 
Department, Borough Polytechnic Institute, London. With 9 Illustrations and 
Spectrum Plate. 8vo., y, 6d, 

PLIMMER. — TUE CHEMICAL CHANGES AND PRODUCTS 

RESULTING FROM FERMENTATIONS. By R. H. Aders Plimmer. 8vo., 
6s, net. 

^iSKA^(9ZZ> 5.— EXPERIMENTAL CHEMISTRY FOR JUNIOR 

STUDENTS. By J. Emerson Reynolds, M.D., F.R.S., Professor of Chemistry, 
University of Dublin. Fcp. 8vo., with numerous Woodcuts. 

Part I. Introductory. Fcp. 8vo., is, 6d. 

Part II. Non-Metals, with an Appendix on Systematic Testing for 

Acids. Fcp. 8vo., 2s. 6d, 

Part III. Metals, and Allied Bodies. Fcp. 8vo., 3J. 6d, 
Part IV. Carbon Compounds. Fcp. 8vo., 45. 

SHEJSrSTOJVE.— Works by W. A. SHENSTONE, F.R.S., Lecturer on 
Chemistry in Clifton College. 

THE METHODS OF GLASS-BLOWING AND OF WORKING 

SILICA IN THE OXY-GAS FLAME. For the Use of Physical and Chemical 
Students. With 43 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., aj. 6d, 

A PRACTICAL INTRODUCTION TO CHEMISTRY. Intended 

Intended to give a Practical acquaintance with the Elementary Facts and Principles 
of Chemistry. With 25 Illustrations. Crown 8vo. , ar. 



Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green, &* Co, 



CH EM I8TRY- ConHnued, 

SMITH AND IfÀLL.— THE TEACHING OF CHEMISTRY AND 

PHYSICS IN THE SECONDARY SCHOOL. By Alexander Smith, aSc, 
Ph.D., Associate Professor of Chemistry in the University of Chicago, and Edwin 
H. Hall, Ph.D., Professor of Physics in Harvard University. With 21 Woodcuts, 
Bibliographies, and Index. Crown 8vo., 6s, net. 

TEXT-BOOKS OF PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY. 
Edited by Sir William Ramsay, K.C.B., F.R.S 

THE PHASE RULE AND ITS APPLICATIONS. By Alex. 

FiNDLAY, M.A., Ph.D., D.Sc., Lecturer and Demonstrator in Chemistry, University of 
Birmingham. With 118 Figures in the Text, and an Introduction to Physical 
Chp:mistry by Sir Wm. Ramsay, K.C.B., F.R.S. Cr. 8vo. , 5J. 

AN INTRODUCTION TO PHYSICAL CHEMISTRY. Being a 

General Introduction to the Series. By Sir William Ramsay, K.C.B., F.R.S. 
Crown 8vo., is. net. 

ELECTRO-CHEMISTRY. Part I. General Theory. By R. A. LEH- 

feldt, D.Sc, Professor of Physics at the East London Technical College. Including 
a Chapter on the Relation of Chemical Constitution to Conductivity. By T. S. Moore, 
l^.A., B.Sc, Lecturer in the University of Birmingham. Crown 8vo., y. 

Part II. Applications to Electrolysis, Primary and Secondary Batteries, 

etc. \^ln preparation, 

CHEMICAL STATICS AND DYNAMICS, including the Theories 

of Chemical Change, Catalysis, and Explosions. By J. W. Mellor, D.Sc. (N.Z.), 
B. Sc. (Vict. ). Crown 8vo, , 'js. 6d. 

The following Volumes are also in preparation :■ 



STOICHIOMETRY. By Sydney Young, 

D.Sc, F.R.S. 
RELATIONS BETWEEN CHEMICAL 

CONSTITUTION AND PHYSICAL 

PROPERTIES. By Samuel Smiles, 

D.Sc 



SPECTROSCOPY. By I . C. C. Baly, 
F.I.C. 

THERMODYNAMICS. By F. G. Donnan, 
M.A.. Ph.D. 



THORNTON AND TjEARSON.—^OTES ON VOLUMETRIC AN- 
ALYSIS. By Arthur Thornton, M.A., and Marchant Pearson, B.A., Assistant 
Science Master, Bradford Grammar School. Medium 8vo., 2s. 

THORTE.— Works by T. E. THORPE, C.B., D.Sc. (Vict), Ph.D., 
F.R.S., Principal of the Government Laboratory, London. Assisted 
by Eminent Contributors. 
A DICTIONARY OF APPLIED CHEMISTRY. 3 vols. 8vo. 

Vols. I. and II., 42s. each. Vol. III., 63J. 

QUANTITATIVE CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. With 88 Woodcuts 

Fcp. 8vo., 4J. 6d. 

THORPE AND ilf^7/il?.— QUALITATIVE CHEMICAL ANALYSIS 

AND LABORATORY PRACTICE. By T. E. Thorpe, C.B., Ph.D., D.Sc, F.R.S., 
and M. M. Pattison Muir, M.A. With Plate of Spectra and 57 Illustrations. Fcp. 
8vo., 3J. dd, 

TILDEN— Works by WILLIAM A. TILDEN, D.Sc. London,; F.R.S., 
Professor of Chemistry in the Royal College of Science, South 
Kensington. 
A SHORT HISTORY OF THE PROGRESS OF SCIENTIFIC 

CHEMISTRY IN OUR OWN TIMES. Crown 8vo., sj. net. 

INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF CHEMICAL PHILO- 
SOPHY. The Principles of Theoretical and Systematic Chemistry. With 5 ^Illus- 
trations. Fcp. 8vo., 5J. With ANSWERS to Problems. Fcp. 8vo., 5J. 6d. 

PRACTICAL CHEMISTRY. The Principles of Qualitative Analysis. 

Fcp. 8vo., Ts. 6d. 



Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green^ &* Co. 



CH E M I8TR Y- ConHnued. 

WATTS DICTIONARY OF CHEMISTRY. Revised and entirely 

Rewritten by H. Forster Morley, M.A., D.Sc., Fellow of, and lately Assistant Pro- 
fessor of Chemistry in, University College, London; and M. M. Pattison Muir, 
M.A., F.R.S.E., Fellow, and Praelector in Chemistry, of Gonville and Caius College, 
Cambridge. Assisted by Eminent Contributors. 4 vols. 8vo., £^ net. 

WHITELEY.—y^ox\i% by R. LLOYD WHITELEY, F.I.C., Principal 
of the Municipal Science School, West Brorawich. 
CHEMICAL CALCULATIONS. With Explanatory Notes, Problems 

and Answers, specially adapted for use in Colleges and Science Schools. With a 
Preface by Professor F. Clowes, D.Sc. (Lond.), F.I.C. Crown 8vo., ay. 

ORGANIC CHEMISTRY: the Fatty Compounds. With 45 Illus- 
trations. Crown 8vo. , 3J. 6rf. 

PHYSICS, ETC- 

^/Z>6^6>6>Z>.— ELEMENTARY PHYSICS AND CHEMISTRY FOR 

THE USE OF SCHOOLS. (In Three Books.) By John Bidgood. B.Sc., Head- 
master of the Gateshead Secondary Day School. 

Book I. Elementary Physics. With 120 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 
Book II. Physics and Chemistry. With 122 Illustrations. Crown 

8vo., I J. td. 

Book III. Chemistry. With 108 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 2s, 
BLONDLOT—' N ' RAYS. A Collection of Papers communicated to 

the Academy of Sciences. With additional Notes and Instructions for the Construction 
of Phosphorescent Screens. By R. Blondlot. I'rofessor in the University of Nancy.^ 
Translated by J. Garcin. With Diagrams. Crown 8vo., 35. dd. net. 

^(?5^.— RESPONSE IN THE LIVING AND NON-LIVING. By 

jAGADis Chunder Bose, M.A. (Cantab.), D.Sc. (Lond.), Professor, Presidency 
College, Calcutta. With 117 Illustrations. 8vo., lor. 6<f. 

GANOT—'^ox^^ by PROFESSOR GANOT. Translated and Edited 

by E. Atkinson, Ph.D., F.C.S., and A. W. Reinold, M.A., F.R.S. 

ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON PHYSICS, Experimental and 

Applied. With 9 Coloured Plates and Maps, and 1048 Woodcuts, and Appendix of 
Problems and Examples with Answers. Crown 8vo. , 15J. 

NATURAL PHILOSOPHY FOR GENERAL READERS AND 

YOUNG PEOPLE. With 7 Plates, 632 Woodcuts, and an Appendix of Questions. 
Crown 8vo., ^5. 6d. 

GLAZEBROOK and SHA ^.—PRACTICAL PHYSICS. By R. T. 

Glazebrook, M.A., F.R.S., and W. N. Shaw, M.A. With 134 Illustrations. Fcp. 
8vo. , 7jr. dd. 

GUTHRIE. — l/lOlJEC\]LKR PHYSICS AND SOUND. By F. 

Guthrie, Ph,D. With 91 Diagrams. Fcp. 8vo., is, 6d. 

HELMHOLTZ.—?0?\Jl.KSi LECTURES ON SCIENTIFIC SUB- 
JECTS. By Hermann von Helmholtz. Translated by E. Atkinson, Ph.D., 
F.C.S., formerly Professor of Experimental Science, Staff College. With 68 Illustra- 
tions. 2 vols., crown 8vo., 3.^. 6d, each. 

Zœ^VZ>J?i?56^A^.— ELEMENTARY PHYSICS. By John Henderson, 

D.Sc. (Edin.), A.I.E.E., Physics Department, Borough Road Polytechnic. Crown 
8vo., 2J. 6d. 



Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green^ âf* Co, 



PHYSICS, ETC-Oontfnued. 

il/y^CZJE^A^.— EXERCISES IN NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. By 

Magnus Maclean, D.Sc., Professor of Electrical Engineering at the Glasgow and 
West of Scotland Technical Collie. Crown 8vo. , 41. 6d. 

M£V£J^.—TUE KINETIC THEORY OF GASES. Elementary 

Treatise, with Mathematical Appendices. By Dr. OsKAR Emil Meyer. 8vo., 15;. net. 

FAN 'TJEfOFF.-^TÎiE ARRANGEMENT OF ATOMS IN SPACE. 

By J. H. VAN 'tHoff. With a Preface by Johannes Wisucenus, Professor of 
of Chemistry at the University of Leipzig ; and an Appendix, ' Stereo-chemistry among 
Inorganic Substances,' by Alfred Werner, Professor of Chemistry at the University 
of Ziirich. Crown 8vo., 6s. 6d, 

IFATSOM— Works by W. WATSON, F.R.S., D.Sc, Assistant Professor 
of Physics at the Royal College of Science, London. 

ELEMENTARY PRACTICAL PHYSICS: a laboratory Manual 

for Use in Organised Science Schools. With 190 Illustrations and 193 Exercises. 
Crown 8vo. , 2J. 6d. 

A TEXT-BOOK OF PHYSICS. With 568 Diagrams and Illustra- 

tions, and a Collection of Examples and Questions with Answers. Large crown 
8vo., 10s. 6d. 

WA TTS. — AN INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF 

SPECTRUM ANALYSIS. By W. Marshall Watts, D.Sc. (Lond.), B.Sc. 
(Vict.), F.LC, Senior Physical Science Master in the Giggleswick School. With 
135 Illustrations and Coloured Plate. 8vo., lar. 6d. net. 

WORTHINGTON.—K FIRST COURSE OF PHYSICAL LABORA- 
TORY PRACTICE. Containing 264 Experiments. By A. M. Worthington, 
C.B., F.R.S. With Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 4J. &/. 

H^i?/^;^^.— ELEMENTARY PHYSICS. By Mark R. Wright, M.A., 

Professor of Normal Education, Durham College of Science. With 24a Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo. , is. 6d. 

MECHANICS, DYNAMICS, STATICS, HYDROSTATICS, ETC. 

BALL.— A CLASS-BOOK OF MECHANICS. By Sir R. S. Ball, 

LL.D. 89 Diagrams. Fcp. 8vo., is. 6d 

GOODEVE.—WoxVs by T. M. GOODEVE, M.A., formerly Professor 
of Mechanics at the Normal School of Science, and the Royal School 
of Mines. 

THE ELEMENTS OF MECHANISM. With 357 Illustrations. 

Crown 8vo. , 6s. 

PRINCIPLES OF MECHANICS. With 253 Illustrations and 

numerous Examples. Crown 8vo., 6s. 

A MANUAL OF MECHANICS: an Elementary Text-Book for 

Students of Applied Mechanics. With 138 Illustrations and Diagrams, "and i88 
Examples taken from the Science Department Examination Papers, with Answers. 
Fcp. 8vo., 2J. 6d. 

GOODMAN.— MECHA^IC^ APPLIED TO ENGINEERING. By 

John Goodman, Wh.Sch., M.I.C.E., M.I.M.E., Professor of Engineering in the Uni- 
versity of Leeds. With 714 Illustrations and numerous Examples. Crown 8vo. , 9J. net. 



Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green, or» Co. 



MECHANICS, DYNAMICS, STATICS, HYDROSTATICS, ETC.- Continued, 

GRIEVE. — UE^'^O^^ IN ELEMENTARY MECHANICS. By 

W. H. Grieve, late Engineer, R.N., Science Demonstrator for the London School 
Board, etc. 

Stage I. With 165 Illustrations and a large number of Examples. Fcp. 8vo., u. 6d, 

Stage 2. With 12a Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo. , is. 6d. 

Stage 3. With 103 Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo. , u. td. 

MAGJVC/S.— Works by SIR PHILIP MAGNUS, B.Sc, B.A. 

LESSONS IN ELEMENTARY MECHANICS. Introductory to the 

study of Physical Science. Designed for the Use of Schools, and of Candidates for 
the London Matriculation and other Examinations. With numerous Exercises, 
Examples, Examination Questions, and Solutions, etc., from 1870-1895. With 
Answers, and 131 Woodcuts. Fcp. 8vo., y. 6d, 
Key for the use of Teachers only, price 55. ^d. 

HYDROSTATICS AND PNEUMATICS. Fcp. 8vo., is, 6d. , or, 

with Answers, ay. The Worked Solutions of the Problems, 2j. 

jPC/ZZ^^.— MECHANICS : Theoretical, Applied, and Experimental. 

By W. W. F. PULLEN, Wh.Sch., M.I.M.E., A.M.I.C.E. With 318 Diagrams and 
numerous Examples. Crown 8vo., ^s. 6d. 

^d^^/A^^St^iV:— ELEMENTS OF DYNAMICS (Kinetics and Statics). 

With numerous Exercises. A Text-book for Junior Students. By the Rev. J. L. 
Robinson, M.A. Crown 8vo., 6s. 

SMITH,— Works by J. HAMBLIN SMITH, M.A. 
ELEMENTARY STATICS. Crown 8vo., 3^. 
ELEMENTARY HYDROSTATICS. Crown 8vo., 3J. 
KEY TO STATICS AND HYDROSTATICS. Crown 8vo., 6s. 

TARLETON.—A^ INTRODUCTION TO THE MATHEMATI- 
CAL THEORY OF ATTRACTION. By Francis A. Tarlkton, LL.D., Sc.D., 
Fellow of Trinity College, and Professor of Natural Philosophy in the University of 
Dublin. Crown 8vo., loj. 6d. 

TA YZOE.— Works by J. E. TAYLOR, M.A., B.Sc. (Lond.). 

THEORETICAL MECHANICS, including Hydrostatics and Pneuma- 
tics. With 175 Diagrams and Illustrations, and 522 Examination Questions and 
Answers. Crown 8vo. , zs. 6d. 

THEORETICAL MECHANICS— SOLIDS. With 163 Illustrations, 

120 Worked Examples and over 500 Examples from Examination Papers, etc. 
Crown 8vo. , 2J. 6d. 

THEORETICAL MECHANICS.— FLUIDS. With 122 Ilhistrations, 

numerous Worked Examples, and about 500 Examples from E>amination Papers, 
etc. Crown 8vo., zs. 6d. 

TI/ORNTOJSr, — THEORETICAL MECHANICS— SOLIDS. In- 
cluding Kinematics, Statics and Kinetics. By Arthur Thornton, M.A., F.R.A.S. 
With 200 Illustrations, 130 Worked Examples, and over 90c ^?(^mples from Rvamina- 
tion Papers, etc. Crown 8vo. , ^, 6d, 



8 Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green^ &* Co. 



MECHANICS, DYNAMICS, STATICS, HYDROSTATICS, ETC.- OonNnuea. 

TIV/S£>£N.— Works by the Rev. JOHN F. TWISDEN, M.A. 
PRACTICAL MECHANICS; an Elementary Introduction to their 

Study. With 855 Exercises, and 184 Figures and Diagrams. Crown Svo., los. 6d. 

THEORETICAL MECHANICS. With 172 Examples, numerous 

Exercises, and 154 Diagrams. Crown 8vo. , Ss. 6d. 

WILLIAMSON.— i^TViOïyVCnO^ TO THE MATHEMATI- 

CAL THEORY OF THE STRESS AND STRAIN OF ELASTIC SOLIDS. By 
Benjamin Williamson, D.Sc., F.R.S. Crown Svo., 5*. 

WILLIAMSON AND TARLETON. — K^ ELEMENTARY 

TREATISE ON DYNAMICS. Containing Applications to Thermodynamics, with 
numerous Examples. By Benjamin Williamson, D.Sc.. F.R.S., and Francis A. 
Tarleton, LL.D. Crown Svo., toj. 6rf. 

WORTHINGTON—XyYY^MMQ.^ OF ROTATION: an Elementary 

Introduction to Rigid Dynamics. By A. M. Worthington, C.B.. F.R.S. Crown 
Svo., 45. td, 

MENSURATION, SURVEYING, ETC. 

BRABANT.— TYiE ELEMENTS OF PLANE AND SOLID MENSU- 
RATION. With Copious Examples and Answers. By F. G. Brabant, M.A. 
Crown Svo., y. 6d. 

CNIFJSRS.— ELEMENTARY MENSURATION. By G. T. Chivers, 

Head Master of H.M. Dockyard School, Pembroke. With Answers to the Examples. 
Crown Svo , $s. 

GRIBBLE.—FRELIMINAKY SURVEY AND ESTIMATES. By 

Theodore Graham Gribble, Civil Engineer. Including Elementary Astronomy. 
Route Surveying, Tacheometry, Curve Ranging, Graphic Mensuration, Estimates, 
Hydrography and Instruments. With 133 Illustrations, Quantity Diagrams, and 
a Manual of the Slide-Rule. Fcp. Svo., 7s. 6d. 

NILE K— EXPLAN ATORY MENSURATION. By the Rev. Alfred 

HiLEY, M.A. With a Chapter on Land Surveying by the Rev. John Hunter, M.A. 
Containing numerous Examples, and embodying many of the Questions set in the Local 
Examination Papers. With Answers. lamo., 2J. td. 

T^^A^r^i?. — MENSURATION AND LAND SURVEYING. By 
the Rev. John Hunter, M.A. iSmo., \s. Key, ij. 

Z(?i9 6^i?. — MENSURATION FOR SENIOR STUDENTS. By 

Alfred Lodge, M.A., late Fereday Fellow of St John's College, Oxford; Professor 
of Pure Mathematics at the Royal Indian Engineering College, Cooper's Hill. With 
Answers. Crown Svo., 4^. M. 

LONGMANS' SCHOOL MENSURATION. By Alfred J. Pearce, 

B.A. (Inter.), Hons. Matric. (London), With numerous Diagrams. Crown 8vo. With 
or without Answers, 2j. dd. 



Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green^ &* Co. 



MENSURATION, SURVEYING, ETC. -Continued. 

LONGMANS' JUNIOR SCHOOL MENSURATION. To meet the 

Requii-ements of the Oxford and Cambridge Junior Local Examinations, the College 
of Preceptors, etc. By W. S. Beard, F.R.G.S., Head Master of Fareham Modern 
School. With Answers to Exercises and Examination Papers. Crown 8vo. , is. 

LUFTOJ\r.—A PRACTICAL TREATISE ON MINE SURVEYING. 

By Arnold Lupton, Mining Engineer, Certificated Colliery Manager, Surveyor, 
Member of the Institution of Civil Engineers, etc. With 216 Illustrations. Medium 
8vo., I2J. net. 

AŒSB/T.—FRACTICAL MENSURATION. By A. Nesbit. Illus- 
trated by 700 Practical Examples and 700 Woodcuts. i2mo., 3^. 6d, Key, y. 

SMITIf.— CIRCULAR SLIDE RULE. By G. L. Smith. Fcp. 

8vo,, IS. net. 



« • 
* 



ALGEBRA, ETC. 

Far other Books, see Longmans 6* Co.* s Catalogue of Educational and School Books. 



ANNALS OF MATHEMATICS. {Published under the Auspices 
OF Harvard University,) Issued Quarterly. 4to., 2j. net. 

CONSTABLE and JZ/ZZ^S.— ELEMENTARY ALGEBRA UP TO 
AND INCLUDING QUADRATIC EQUATIONS. By W. G. Constable, B.Sc., 
B.A., and J. Mills, B.A. Crown 8vo., 2J. With Answers, 2J. 6d, 

Also in Three Parts. Crown 8vo., cloth, limp, gd, each. Answers. Three Parts. 
Crown 8vo., paper covers, 6d. each. 

CRA C KNELL. — PRACTICAL MATHEMATICS. By A. G. 

Cracknkll, M.A., B.Sc., Sixth Wrangler, etc. With Answers to the Examples. 
Crown 8vo., y, 6d. 

LONGMANS' JUNIOR SCHOOL ALGEBRA. By William S. 

Beard, F.R O.S., Head Master of the Modern School, Fareham. Crown 8vo., is. 6d. 
With Answers, 2s. 

SMITIf.— Works by J. HAMBLIN SMITH, M.A. 

ELEMENTARY ALGEBRA. New Edition, with a large number 

of Additional Exercises. With or without Answers. Crown 8vo. , y. 6d. Answers 
separately, 6d. Key, Crown 8vo., 9J. 

*<j* The Original Edition of this Book is still on Sale, price 2s. 6d. 

EXERCISES IN ALGEBRA. With Answers. Fcap. 8vo., 2s. 6d. 

Copies may be had without the Answers. 

WELSFORD and MA Fa— ELEMENTARY ALGEBRA. By J. W. 

Welsford, M.A.. formerly Fellow of Gon ville and Caius College, Cambridge, and 
C. H. P. Mayo, M.A-, formerly Scholar of St. Peter's College, Cambridge; Assistant 
Masters at Harrow School. Crown 8vo., 3J. 6^., or with Answers, 45. 6rf. 



10 Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green^ &* Co. 

OONIO SECTIONS, ETC. 

CASEY.— \ TREATISE ON THE ANALYTICAL GEOMETRY 

OF THE POINT, LINE, CIRCLE, AND CONIC SECTIONS. By John Casey, 
LL.D., F. R.S. Crown 8vo.. i2.f. 

SALMON.— K TREATISE ON CONIC SECTIONS, containing an 

Account of some of the most Important Modern Algebraic and Geometric Methods. 
By G. Salmon, D.D., F.R.S. 8vo., lay. 

5ilf/r^— GEOMETRICAL CONIC SECTIONS. Ey J. Hamblin 

Smith, M.A. Crown 8vo., y. 6d, 



THE CALCULUS, LOGARITHMS, ETC. 

^^^iT^^.— GRAPHICAL CALCULUS. By Arthur H. Barker, 

B.A., B.Sc. With an Introduction by John Goodman, A.M.I.C.E. With 6i 
Diagrams. Crown Svo. , 45. 6d, 

MELLOI^. -^niOn^K MATHEMATICS FOR STUDENTS OF 

CHEMISTRY AND PHYSICS. With special reference to Practical Work. By 
J. W. Mellor, D.Sc., Research Fellow, The Owens College, Manchester. With 
142 Diagrams. Svo., izs. 6d. net. 

MURRAY,— V^ox\i^ by DANIEL ALEXANDER MURRAY, Ph.D. 

AN INTRODUCTORY COURSE IN DIFFERENTIAL EQUA- 
TIONS. Crown 8vo., 4J. 6d. 

A FIRST COURSE IN THE INFINITESIMAL CALCULUS. 

Crown 8vo. , js. 6d. 

aj?£A.—A^ ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON LOGARITHMS, 

EXPONENTIAL AND LOGARITHMIC SERIES, UNDETERMINED CO- 
EFFICIENTS, AND THE THEORY OF DETERMINANTS. By James J. 
O'Dea, M.A. Crown Svo., zs. 

7:47"^.— PRINCIPLES OF THE DIFFERENTIAL AND INTEGRAL 
CALCULUS. By Thomas Tate. i2mo., 4s. 6d. 

TA yZ(9i?.— Works by F. GLANVILLE TAYLOR. 

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE DIFFERENTIAL AND IN- 
TEGRAL CALCULUS AND DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS. Crown 8vo., 9s. 

AN INTRODUCTION TO THE PRACTICAL USE OF LOGA- 
RITHMS, WITH EXAMPLES IN MENSURATION. With Answers to 
Exercises. Crown Svo., u. 6d. 

WILLIAMSON.— ^ox\i% by BENJAMIN WILLIAMSON, D.Sc. 
AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON THE DIFFERENTIAL 

CALCULUS; containing the Theory of Plane Curves, with numerous Examples. 
Crown 8vo., ioj. td. 

AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON THE INTEGRAL CALCU- 

LUS ; containing Applications to Plane Curves and Surfaces, and also a Chapter on 
the Calculus of Variations, with numerous Examples. Crown 8vo., lor. td. 



Scientific Works published by Longmans, Green, <&* Co. ii 



GEOMETRY AND EUCLID. 

*^^* For other Works, see Longmans 6* Co.* s Catalogue of Educational and School Books. 

AZZMAJ\r.— GREEK GEOMETRY FROM THALES TO EUCLID. 

By G. J. Allman. 8vo., icxf. 6d. 

BARRELL,—E\JEM.E1^TAKY GEOMETRY. By Frank R. Barrell, 

M.A., B.Sc, Professor of Mathematics, University College, Bristol 
Section I. Part I. , being the subject-matter of Euclid, Book I. Crown 8vo. , i j. 

Section I. Part II., containing the subject-matter of Euclid, Book III. 1-34, and Book IV. 
4-9. Crown 8vo., is. 

Section I. complete. Crown Svo., ay. 

Section II., containing the remainder of Euclid, Books III. and IV., together with the subject- 
matter of Bool^ II. and VI. With explanation of Ratio and Proportion, Trigono- 
metric Ratios and Measurement of Circles. Crown 8vo. , i j. 6d. 

Sections I. and II. in one volume. Crown Svo., y. 6d. 

Section III., containing the subject-matter of Euclid, Book XT., together with a full treat- 
ment of volume and surface of the cylinder, cone, sphere, etc. Crown 8vo., u. 6d. 

Sections I., II. and III. complete in one volume. Crown Svo., 45. 6d. 

CASEY,— WoxVs by JOHN CASEY, LL.D., F.R.S. 

THE ELEMENTS OF EUCLID, BOOKS I.-VI. and Propositions, 

I.-XXT. of Book XL, and an Appendix of the Cylinder, Sphere, Cone, etc. With 
Copious Annotations and numerous Exercises. Fcp. Svo. , 4J. 6d. Key to Exercises. 
Fcp. Svo., 6s. 

A SEQUEL TO THE ELEMENTS OF EUCLID. Part I. Books 

I.-VI. With numerous Examples. Fcp. Svo., y. 6d. 

A TREATISE ON THE ANALYTICAL GEOMETRY OF THE 

POINT, LINE, CIRCLE AND CONIC SECTIONS. Containing an Account of 
its most recent Extension. Crown 8vo., i2j. 

HAMILTON. — EhEUE^T^ OF QUATERNIONS. By the late 
Sir William Rowan Hamilton, LL.D., M.R.I. A. Edited by Charles Jasper 
July, M.A., Fellow of Trinity College, Dublin. 2 vols. 4to. 21J. net each. 

LONGMANS' LIST OF APPARATUS FOR USE IN GEO- 
METRY, ETC. 

1. LONGMANS' ENGLISH AND METRIC RULER. Marked on one edge in Inches, 

Eighths, Tenths and Five-fifths. Marked on the other edge in Centimetres. Price id. net. 

2. LOW'S IMPROVED SET SQUARES. Designs A & B. 45° to 60°. 



O ,rt 



A I 45° 4 
A 2 45° 6" 

A3 45°6è" 



^ f B I 45° 4" each i/- net. A i 60° 4" ^ 
^or-^B2 4S°6" „ 1/3 „ A 2 60° 6" ^or- 
J lB3 45°8r M 2/- „ A3 6o°8rJ 



B I 60° 4" each i/- net. 
8260° 6" „ 1/3 ,, 
LB3 6o°8r M 2/- .. 



3. LOW'S IMPROVED PROTRACTORS (Celluloid). Protractor No. 2. 3" radius, 

marked in degrees, 6d. net. Protractor No. 3. 4" radius, marked in ^degrees, çûf. net. 

4. LOW'S ADJUSTABLE PROTRACTOR SET SQUARE, ^s. 6d. net. 

5. LONGMANS' BLACKBOARD ENGLISH AND METRIC RULE. One Metre; 

marked in decimetres, centimetres, inches, half-inches and quarter-inches, zs, (>d^ 



19 Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green, &* Co. 



GEOMETRY AND EVCUD-Càntinued, 

LO IV.— TEXT-BOOK ON PRACTICAL, SOLID, AND DESCRIP- 
TIVE GEOMETRY. By David Allan Low, Professor of Engineering, East London 
Technical College. Crown 8vo. 

Part I. With 114 Figures, 2s. Part II. With 64 Figures, y. 
THE DIAGRAM MEASURER. An Instrument for measuring the 

Areas of Irregular Figures and specially useful for determining the Mean Effective 
Pressiu^ from Indicator Diagrams from Steam, Gas and other Engines. Designed by 
D. A. Low. With Full Instructions for Use. is. net. 

MORRIS AND HUSBAND.— V'SiACTlC Ah PLANE AND SOLID 
GEOMETRY. By I. Hammond Morris and Joseph Husband. Fully Illustrated 
with Drawings. Crown 8vo., ay. 6d. 

MORRIS.— GEOMET-RICAL DRAWING FOR ART STUDENTS. 

Embracing Plane Geometry and its Applications, the Use of Scales, and the Plans and 
Elevations of Solids as required in Srôtion I. of Science Subjects. By I. Hammond 
Morris. Crown 8vo. , sj. 

^if/T^y.— ELEMENTS OF GEOMETRY. By J. Hamblin Smith, 

M.A. Containing Books i to 6. and portions of Books 11 and 12, of Euclid, with 
Exercises and Notes. Cr. 8vo., 3^. 6d. Key, crown 8vo., 8j. 6d. 

Books I and 2, limp cloth, is. 6d.y may be had separately. 
SROOJVER.— THE ELEMENTS OF GEOMETRICAL DRAWING : 

an Elementary Text-book on Practical Plane Geometry, including an Introduction to 
Solid Geometry. Written to include the requirements of the Sylb.bus of the Board of 
Education in Geometrical Drawing and for the use of Students preparing for the Military 
Entrance Examinations. By Henry J. Spooner, C.E., M.Inst.M.E. Cr. 8vo., y. 6d. 

WIZSON—GEOUETRICAL DRAWING. For the use of Candidates 

for Army Examinations, and i\s an Introduction to Mechanical Drawing. By W. N. 
Wilson, M.A. Parts I. and II. Crown 8vo., 4J. 6rf. each. 

^/A^7:ê:^.— ELEMENTARY GEOMETRICAL DRAWING. By 

S. H. Winter. Part I. Including Practical Plane Geometry, the Construction of Scales, 
the Use of the Sector, the Marquois Scales, and the Protractor. With 3 Plates and 
1000 Exercises and Examination Papers. Post 8vo. , 5^. 

OPTICSrPHOTOGRAPHY, ETC. 

ABNEY.—A TREATISE ON PHOTOGRAPHY. By Sir William de 

W1VELESLIE Abney, K.C.B., F.R.S., Principal Assistant Secretary of the Secondary 
Department of the Board of Education. With 134 Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo., 5^. 

DRUDE.— THE THEORY OF OPTICS. By Paul Drude, Professor 

of Physics at the University of Giessen. Translated from the German by C. Riborg 
Mann and Robert A. Millikan, Assistant Professors of Physics at the University of 
-Chicago. With no Diagrams. 8vo., 15J. net. 

GLAZEBROOK.—?H\^lCKL OPTICS. By R. T. Glazebrook, 

M.A., F.R.S., Principal of University College, Liverpool. With 183 Woodcuts of 
Apparatus, etc. Fcp. 8vo. , 6s, 

P^ANDERROEZ.— COLOR PROBLEMS : a Practical Manual for the 

Lay Student of Color. By Emily Noyes Vanderpoel. With 117 Plates in Color. 
Square 8vo. , 215. net. 

^^/6^^r.— OPTICAL PROJECTION : à Treatise on the Use of the 

Lantern in Exhibition and Scientific Demonstration. By Lewis Wright, Author of 
' Light : a Course of Experimental Optics '. With 232 Illustrations, Crown 8yo., 6;. 



Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green^ Ç^ Co, 13 

TRIGONOMETRY. 

CASEY.— h. TREATISE ON ELEMENTARY TRIGONOMETRY. 

By John Casey, LL.D., F.R.S., late Fellow of the Royal University of Ireland With 
numerous Examples and Questions for Examination. i2mo., 35. 

GOODWIN.— ?\.P^Y[^ AND SPHERICAL TRIGONOMETRY. By 

H. B. Goodwin, M.A. In Three Parts, comprising those portions of the subjects, 
theoretical and practical, which are required in the Final Examination for Rank of 
Lieutenant at Greenwich. 8vo. , 8j. (id. 

JONES. — TYLE BEGINNINGS OF TRIGONOMETRY. By A. 

Clement Jones, M.A., Ph.D., late Open Scholar and Senior Hulme Exhibitioner 
of Brasenose College, Oxford ; Senior Mathematical Master of Bradford Grammar 
School. Crown 8vo., 2J. 

J/^ Fa— ELEMENTARY TRIGONOMETRY. By C. -H. P. Mayo, 

M.A. , late Scholar of St. Peter's College, Cambridge; Assistant Master at Harrow 
School. With Examples and Answers. Crown 8vo. , y. 6d. 

^/l//7^. — ELEMENTARY TRIGONOMETRY. By J. Hamblin 

Smith, M.A. Crown 8vo., 4J. 6d. Key, js. 6d. 



SOUND, LIGHT, HEAT, AND THERMODYNAMICS. 

DEXTER.— ^UEME^TAKV PRACTICAL SOUND, LIGHT AND 

HEAT. . By Joseph S. Dexter, B.Sc. (Lond.), Physics Master, Technical Day 
School, The Polytechnic Institute, Regent Street. With 152 Illustrations. Crown 
8vo., 2J. 6d. 

EMTAGE.— LIGHT. By W. T. A. Emtage, M.A., Director of Public 

Instruction, Mauritius. With 232 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 6s. 

ffEZMBOZTZ. — ON THE SENSATIONS OF TONE AS A 

PHYSIOLOGICAL BASIS FOR THE THEORY OF MUSIC. By Hermann 
VON Helmholtz. Royal 8vo. , 28J. 

MAXWELL.— THEORY OF HEAT. By J. Clerk Maxwell, M.A., 

F.R.SS., L. and E. With Corrections and Additions by Lord Rayleigh. With 38 
Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo., 4s. 6d. 

PZ^iYCAT.— TREATISE ON THERMODYNAMICS. By Dr. Max 

Planck, Professor of Theoretical Physics in the University of Berlin. Translated, 
with the Author's sanction, by Alexander Ogg, M.A., B.Sc, Ph.D., late 1851 Ex- 
hibition Scholar, Aberdeen University; Assistant Master, Royal Naval Engineering 
College, Devonport. 8vo. , js. 6d. net. 

SMITH.— THE STUDY OF HEAT. By J. Hamblin Smith, M.A., 

of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. Crown 8vo. , y. 

TYNDALL.—'Noxks by JOHN TYNDALL, D.C.L., F.R.S. See p. 36. 

WORMELL.—K CLASS-BOOK OF THERMODYNAMICS. By 
Richard Wormell, B.Sc., M.A. Fcp. 8vo., u. 6rf. 

WEIGHT.— \Nox)iiS by MARK R. WRIGHT, M.A. 

SOUND, LIGHT, AND HEAT. With 160 Diagrams and Illus- 
trations. Crown 8vo. , 2J. 6d. 

ADVANCED HEAT. With 136 Diagrams and numerous Examples 

and Examination Papers. Crown 8vo. , 4;. 6d. 



14 Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green^ ^ Co, 



ARCHITECTURE, BUILDING CONSTRUCTION, ETC. 
ADVANCED BUILDING CONSTRUCTION. By the Author of 

' Rivingtons' Notes on Building Construction '. With 385 Illustrations. Crown 8vo. , 

^^iWV;— STYLE IN FURNITURE. By R. Davis Benn. With 

102 Plates by W. C. Baldock. 8vo., 21s. net. 

BOOKER. — 'EhYMY.WYK^Y PRACTICAL BUILDING CON- 
STRUCTION. Stage I. By F. W. Booker. With 727 Illustrations. Crown Svo., 
2j. 6d. 

B C/RREZZ. — BUILDING CONSTRUCTION. By Edward J. 

BuRRELL. Second Master of the People's Palace Technical School, London. With 
303 Working Drawings. Crown 8vo. , aj. 6d. 

GfVIZT.—AS ENCYCLOPEDIA OF ARCHITECTURE. By 

Joseph Gwilt, F.S.A. Revised (1888), with Alterations and Considerable Additions 
by Wyatt PapworTH. With 1700 Engravings. 8vo., 21 J. net. 

HAMZIN.—K TEXT-BOOK OF THE HISTORY OF ARCHITEC- 
TURE:. By A. D. F. Hamlin, A.M. With 229 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., ^s. 6d. 

PARKER AND l/NWIM— THE ART OF BUILDING A HOME : 

A CoUecnion of Lectures and Illustrations. By Barry Parker and Raymond 
Un WIN. With 68 Full-page Plates. 8vo., lor. 6d, net. 

RICIfARZ>S.--BRlCKLAYmG AND BRICKCUTTING. By H. W. 

Richards, Examiner in Brickwork and Masonry to the City and Guilds of London 
Institute, Head of Building Trades Department, Northern Polytechnic Institute, 
London, N. With over 200 Illustrations. 8vo., 3J. 6d, 

RO WE,— THE LIGHTING OF SCHOOLROOMS: a Manual for 

School Boards, Architects, Superintendents and Teachers. By Stuart H. Rowe, 
Ph.D. With 32 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., y. 6d. net. 

SEZ>DOJV,— BUILDER'S WORK AND THE BUILDING TRADES. 

By CoL H. C. Seddon, R.Ë. With numerous Illustrations. Medium 8vo., i6s. 

THOMAS.— THE VENTILATION, HEATING AND MANAGE- 
MENT OF CHURCHES AND PUBLIC BUILDINGS. By J. W. Thomas, 
F.I.C., F.C.S. With 25 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., zs. 6d. 

FAZDER.— BOOK OF TABLES, giving the Cubic Contents of from 

One to Thirty Pieces Deals, Battens and Scantlings of the Sizes usually imported or 
used in the Building Trades, together with an Appendix showing a large number of 
sizes, the Contents of which may be found by referring to the aforesaid Tables. By 
Thomas Valder. Oblong 4to., 6s. net. 

RIVINGTONS' COURSE OF BUILDING CONSTRUCTION. 

NOTES ON BUILDING CONSTRUCTION. Medium 8vo. 

Part I. With 695 Illustrations, loj. 6d. net. 

Part II. With 496 Illustrations, los. 6d. net. 

Part III. Materials. With 188 Illustrations, 185. net. 

Part IV. Calculations for Building Structures. With 551 Illustra- 
tions, 13J. net. 



ScienHfic Works published by Longmans^ Green^ b* Co, 15 



STEAM, OIL, AND GAS ENGINES, AND MOTORS. 

BALE.- A HAND-BOOK FOR STEAM USERS; being Rules for 

Engine Drivers and Boiler Attendants, with Notes on Steam Engine and Boiler 
Management and Steam Boiler Explosions. By M. Powis Bale, M.I.M.E., 
A.M.I.C.E. Fcp. 8vo., 2j. 6d. 

CLERK.— TYIE GAS AND OIL ENGINE. By Dugald Clerk, 

Member of the Institution of Civil Engineers, Fellow of the Chemical Society, Member 
of the Royal Institution, Fellow of the Institute of Patent Agents. With 228 Illus- 
trations. Svo., 15J. 

DIPLOCK.—K NEW SYSTEM OF HEAVY GOODS TRANSPORT 

ON COMMON ROADS. By Bramah Joseph Diplock. With 27 Illustrations and 
Diagrams. Medium Svo. , ds. 6d. net. 

FLETCHER.— ^^GIA^U AND AMERICAN STEAM CARRIAGES 

AND TRACTION ENGINES. By William Fletcher, M.Inst.Mech.E. With 
250 Illustrations. Svo., 15J. net. 

HOLMES.— THE STEAM ENGINE. By George C. V. Holmes, 

C.B., Chairman of the Board of Works, Dublin. With 212 Illustrations. Fop. Svo., 6s. 

LOW.— THE DIAGRAM MEASURER. An Instrument for measur- 
ing the Areas of Irregular Figures and specially useful for determining the Mean Effective 
Pressure from Indicator Diagrams from Steam, Gas and other Engines. Designed by 
D. A. Low, Professor of Engineering, East London Technical College, London. With 
Full Instructions for Use, is. net. 

NEILSON.— THE STEAM TURBINE. By Robert M. Neilson, 

Associate Member of the Institute of Mechanical Engineers, etc. With 28 Plates 
and 212 Illustrations in the Text. Svo., los. 6d, net. 

JVORR/S.—A. PRACTICAL TREATISE ON THE *OTTO' CYCLE 

GAS ENGINE. By William NoRRis, M.LMech.E. With 207 Illustrations. Svo.. 
los. 6d. 

RARSOJVS,— STEAM BOILERS : THEIR THEORY AND DESIGN. 

By H. DE B. Parsons, B.S., M.E., Consulting Engineer; Member of the American 
Society of Mechanical Engineers, American Society of Civil Engineers, etc. ; Professor 
of Steam Engineering, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. With 170 Illustrations. Svo., 
iQ?. 6d. net. 

RIPRER.— Works by WILLIAM RIPPER, Professor of Engineering in 
the Technical Department of University College, Sheffield. 
STEAM. With 185 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 2s. 6d. 
STEAM ENGINE THEORY AND PRACTICE. With 441 Illus- 

trations. Svo., gs. 

SENNETT AND ORAM.— THE MARINE STEAM ENGINE : A 

Treatise for Engineering Students, Young Engineers and Officers of the Royal Navy 
and Mercantile Marine. By the late Richard Sennett, Engineer-in-Chief of the 
Navy, etc. ; and Henry J. Oram, Deputy Engineer-in-Chief at the Admiralty, 
Engineer Rear Admhral in H.M. Fleet, etc. With 414 Diagrams. Svo., 21J. 

STROMEYER.—MA'BCi^E BOILER MANAGEMENT AND CON- 
STRUCTION. Being a Treatise on Boiler Troubles and Repairs, Corrosion, 
Fuels, and Heat, on the properties of Iron and Steel, on Boiler Mechanics, Work- 
shop Practices, and Boiler Design. By C. E. Stromeyer, Chief Engineer of the 
Manchester Steam Users* Association, Member of Council of the Institution of Naval 
Architects, etc. With 4sa Diagrams, etc. Svo., i2J. net. 

WHITE.— VETM^l. MOTORS AND MOTOR CARS: A Hand- 
book for Engineers, Designers and Draughtsmen. By T. Hyler White, A.M.I.M.E. 
With 44 Illustrations. Crown Svo., 4J. (id. net. 



1 6 Scientific Works published ày Longmans^ Green^ 6* Co. 



ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM. 

ARRffENIUS,—A TEXT-BOOK OF ELECTROCHEMISTRY. By 

SvANTK Arkhenuis, PTofessoT at the University of Stockholm. Translated from the 
German Edition by John McCbae, Pb.D. With 58 Illustrations. 8vo., çr. 6d. nee 

CARUS'WILSON.—^UECTKODY^AMIC^: the Direct- Current 
Motor. By Charles Ashley Carus- Wilson, M.A. Cantab. With 71 Diagrams, 
and a Series of Problems, with Answers. Crown Svo., 71. 6d, 

Ci/J/JZ/iV 6^.— ELECTRICITY TREATED EXPERIMENTALLY. 

By LiNNif<:us Cumming, M.A. With 243 Illustrations. Cr. Svo., 41. 6i. 

GORE.—TYŒ ART OF ELECTRO-METALLURGY, including all 

known Processes of Electro- Deposition. By G. Gore, LUD., F.R.S. With 56 Illus- 
trations. Fcp. Svo., 6s. 

HENDERSON.— WoxVs by JOHN HENDERSON, D.Sc, F.R.S.E. 
PRACTICAL ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM. With 157 

Illustrations and Diagrams. Crown Svo. , js. 6d. 

PRELIMINARY PRACTICAL MAGNETISM AND ELEC- 

TRICn Y. Crown Svo., is. 

///BBERT.—MAGN¥:nSM AND ITS ELEMENTARY MEASURE- 

MICNT. By W. Hibbkrt, F.I.C, A.M.I.E.E. With 55 Diagrams. Crown Svo., zj. 

/£:iY^/iV: — ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM. By Fleeming 

JENKIN, F.R.S., M.I.C.E. With 177 Illustrations. Fcp. Svo., y. 6d. 

/OUBER T.— ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON ELECTRICITY AND 
MAGNETISM. By G. Carey Foster, F.R.S. ; and Alfred W. Porter, B.Sc. 
Founded on Joubert's 'Traité Elémentaire d'Electricité'. With 374 Illustrations 
and Diagrams. Svo. , 105. 6d. net. 

/(? yC^.— EXAMPLES IN ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING. By 

Samuel Joyce, A.I.E.E. Crown Svo., 5s. 

/.ARDEN—KLKCTRICITY FOR PUBLIC SCHOOLS AND 

COLLEGES. By W. Larden, M.A. With 215 Illustrations, and a Series of 
Examination Questions ; with Answers. Crown Svo., dr. 

MERR/EIELjD. — MAGNETISM AND DEVIATION OF THE 

COMPASS. By John Merrifield, LL.D., F.R.A.S., iSmo.. as. 6d. 

PARR.— PRACTICAL ELECTRICAL TESTING IN PHYSICS AND 

ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING. By G. D. Aspinall Parr, Assoc. M.I.E.E. 
With 231 Illustrations. Svo. , Ss. 6d. 

PO KSi^i?.— Works by A. W. POYSER, M.A. 
MAGNETISM AND ELECTRICITY. With 235 Illustrations. 

Crown Svo. , 2J. td. 

ADVANCED ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM. With 317 

Illustrations. Crown Svo. , 4J. td. 

RHODES,— AN ELEMENTARY TREATISE ON ALTERNATING 

CURRENTS. By W. G. Rhodes, M.Sc. (Vict.), Consulting Engineer. With 
So Diagrams. Svo., 75. td, net. 

SLINGO AND BROOKER. — Y^otV^ by W. SLINGO and A. 
BROOKER. 
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERING FOR ELECTRIC LIGHT 

ARTISANS AND STUDENTS. With 3S3 Illustrations. Crown Svo., I2J. 

PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS IN ELEMENTARY ELEC- 
TRICITY AND MAGNETISM. With 9S Illustrations. Cr. Svo., 2J. 

TYNDALL.—^oxV^ by JOHN TYNDALL, D.C.L., F.R.S. See p. 36. 



Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green ^ ^ Co, 17 



TELEGRAPHY AND THE TELEPHONE. 

^6>/!Ar/jV5.— TELEPHONE LINES AND THEIR PROPERTIES. 

By William J. Hopkins, Professor of Physics in the Drexel Institute, Philadelphia. 
Crown 8vo., 6s. 

PREECE AND SIFEIVR/G NT.— TELEGRAPHY. By Sir W. 

H. Preeck. K.C.B., F.R.S., V.P.Inst., CE., etc.. Consulting Engineer and 
Electrician, Post Office Telegraphs; and Sir J. Sivewright, K.C.M.G., General 
Manager. South African Telegraphs. With 267 Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo., 6*. 

ENGINEERING, STRENGTH OF MATERIALS. ETC. 

Aj\rn£:jisoN.—TiiE strength of materials and struc- 

TU RES: the Strength of Materials as depending on their Quality and as ascertained 
by Testing Apparatus. By Sir J. Anderson, C.E., LL.D., F.R.S.E. With 66 Illus- 
trations. Fcp. 8vo., y. 6d. 

BARRY,— RAILWAY APPLIANCES: a Description of Details of 

Railway Construction subsequent to the completion of the Earthworks and Structures. 
By Sir John Wolfe Barry. K.C.B., F.R.S., M.I.C.E. With 218 Illustrations. 
Fcp. Svo., 4J. 6d. 

DIPLOCK,—A NEW SYSTEM OF HEAVY GOODS TRANSPORT 

ON COMMON ROADS. By Br ah am Joseph D^plock. With 27 Illustrations. 
Svo. , 6j. (>d. net. 

6^6>6^Z?J/.^^ -MECHANICS APPLIED TO ENGINEERING. By 

John Goodman, Wh.Sch., M.I.C.E., M.I.M.E., Professor of Engineering in the 
University of Leeds. With 714 Illustrations and numerous Examples. Crown Svo., 
9J. net. 

GREGORY,— A SHORT INTRODUCTION TO IHE THEORY 

OF ELECTROLYTIC DISSOCIATION. By J. C. GREGORY, B.Sc. (Lond.) 
A. I.e. Crown Svo., is. 6d. 

LOW,— A POCKET-BOOK FOR MECHANICAL ENGINEERS. 

By David Allan Low (Whitworth Scholar), M.I.Mech.E., Professor of Engineering, 
East London Technical College (People's Palace), London. With over 1000 Sjsecially 
prepared Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo. . gilt edges, rounded comers, js. 6d. 

PARKINSON, — LIGHT RAILWAY CONSTRUCTION. By 

Richard Marion Parkinson. Assoc. M. Inst. C.E. With 85 Diagrams. 8vo.. 
lof. 6d. net. 

5J//r/r.— GRAPHICS, or the Art of Calculation by Drawing Lines, 

applied especially to Mechanical Engineering. By Robert H. Smith, Professor of 
Engineering, Mason College. Birmingham. Part I. With separate Atlas of 29 Plates 
containing 97 Diagrams. 8vo. , ly. 

STONE Y— THE THEORY OF STRESSES IN GIRDERS AND 

SIMILAR STRUCTURES ; with Practical Observations on the Strength and other 
Properties of Materials. By Bindon B. Stonky, LL.D.. F.R.S., M.I.C.E. With 
S Plates and 143 Illust. in the Text. Royal 8vo., 36if. 

UNWIN— THE TESTING OF MATERIALS OF CONSTRUCTION. 

A Text-book for the Engineering Laboratory and a Collection of the Results of 
Experiment. By W. Cawthorne Unwin, F.R.S., B.Sc. With 5 Plates and 188 
Illustrations and Diagrams. 8vo., its. net. 

WARREN— E^GmEERmO CONSTRUCTION IN IRON, STEEL, 

AND TIMBER. By William Henry Warren, Challis Professor of Civil and 
Mechanical Engineering, University of Sydney. With 13 Folding Plates and 375 
Diagrams. Royal 8vo., i6r. net. 

WHEELER, — THE SEA COAST: Destruction, Littoral Drift, 

Protection. By W. H. Wheeler, M.Jnst. CE. With 38 Illustrations and Diagram. 
Medium 8vo., loj. 64, net- 



1 8 ScUnHfic Works fublished by Longmans^ Green^ b* Co, 






LONGMANS* CIVIL ENGINEERING SERIES. 
CIVIL ENGINEERING AS APPLIED TO CONSTRUCTION. 

By Lbvsson Francis Vernon-Harcourt, M.A., M.Inst.C.E. With 368 Illus- 
trations. Medium Svo., net 14J. 

CoMTBNTs.— MaterUla, PreUminary Works, Fouodations and Roads— Railway Bridge and Toonel 
Engimeriiur — Rivor and Canal Enginetrinc— Irrigation Worlcs— Dock Works and Maritime En- 
l^iMeriBg--SaniCary Engineering. 

NOTES ON DOCKS AND DOCK CONSTRUCTION. By C. 

COLSON, C.B., M,Iiist.C.E. With 365 Illustrations. Medium 8vo., 21 j. net. 

CALCULATIONS IN HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING: a Practical 

Text-Book for the use of Students, Draughtsmen and Engineers. By T. Claxton 
FiDLBR, M.InstC.E. \ 

Part I. Fluid Pressure and the Calculation of its Effects in Engineering 

Structures. With numerous Illustns. and Examples. 8vo., 6j. 6</. net. 

Part II. Calculations in Hydro- Kinetics. With numerous Illustrations 

and Examples. 8vo., yj. 6^. net. 

RAILWAY CONSTRUCTION. By W. H. Mills, M.LC.E., 

Engineer-in-Cbief of the Great Northern Railway of Ireland. With 516 Illustrations 
and Diagrams. 8vo., i&f. net. 

PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF HARBOUR CONSTRUCTION. 

By William Shield, F.R.S.E.. M.Inst.C.E. With 97 Illustrations. Medium Bvo., 
15J. net. 

TIDAL RIVERS: their (i) Hydraulics, (2) Improvement, (3) Navigation, 
By W, H. Wheeler, M.Inst. C E. With 75 Illustrations. Medium 8vo., ibs. net, 

NAVAL ARCHITECTURE. 

ATTWOOD.— Works by EDWARD L. ATTWOOD, M.Inst.N.A,, 
Member of the Royal Corps of Naval Construction. 

WAR SHIPS: A Text-book on the Construction, Protection, 

Stability, Turning, etc., of War Vessels. With numerous Diagrams. Mediiun 
8vo., 10s. 6d, net. 

TEXT-BOOK OF THEORETICAL NAVAL ARCHITECTURE: 

a Manual for Students of Science Classes and Draughtsmen Engaged in Shipbuilders' 
and Naval Architects* Drawing Offices. With 114 Diagrams. Crown 8vo., js. 6d. 

BOZMS. — FRACTICAL SHIPBUILDING: a Treatise on the 

Struc ural Design and Building of Modern Steel Ve-sels, the work of construction, 
from the making of the raw material to the equipped vessel, including subsequent 
up-keep and repairs. By A. Campbell Holms, Member of the Institution of Naval 
Architects, etc. In 2 vols. (Vol. I., Text, medium Bvo. ; Vol. XL, Diagrams and 
Illustrations, oblong 4to.), 48^. net. 

LOVETT.—A COMPLETE CLASS-BOOK OF NAVAL ARCHI- 

TECTURE, PRACTICAL, LAYING-OF, THEORETICAL. By W. J. Ixjveit. 
With numerous Illustrations, and nearly 2co worked out answers to recent Board of 
Education Examination Questions. 8vo , ys. 6d. net. 

IVA TSOJ\r.— NAVAl. ARCHITECTURE: A Manual of Laying off 

Iron, Steel and Composite Vessels. By Thomas H. Watson, Lecturer on Naval 
Architecture at the Durham College of Science, Newcastle-upon-Tyne. With numerous 
Illustrations. Royal 8vo., 15J. net. 



Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green^ ô* Co, 19^ 

WORKSHOP APPLIANCES, ETC. 

JSrO^TIfCOTT.— LATHES AND TURNING, Simple, Mechanical 

and Ornamental. By W. H. Northcott. With 338 Illustrations. 8vo. , i8f . 

T^^^i?.— MACHINE TOOLS AND WORKSHOP PRACTICE FOR 

ENGINEERING STUDENTS AND APPRENTICES. By Alfred Parr, 
Instructor in Fitting and Machine Shop and Forge, University College, Nottingham. 
With an Introduction by William Robinson, M.E., M.Inst.C.E. With 462 
Illustrations. Svo. , los. 6d. 

SHELLE K— WORKSHOP APPLIANCES, including Descriptions 

of some of the Grauging and Measuring Instruments. Hand-cutting Tools. Lathes, 
- Drilling. Planeing, and other Machine Tools used by Engineers. By C. P. B. Shellsy, 
M.I. CE. With an additional Chapter on Milling by R. R. Lister. With 333 Illus- 
trations. Fcp. Svo., 5J. 

MACHINE DRAWING AND DESIGN. 

DUNKERLEY.—M^Ç,Yi.hYk\%U.. By S. DUNKERLEY, M.Sc, 

Assoc. M.Inst.C.E., M.Inst.C.E., Professor of Applied Mechanics in the Royal Naval 
College, Greenwich. With numerous Diagrams. Svo. , 95. net. 

LONGMANS' LIST OF APPARATUS FOR USE IN GEOMETRY, 

ETC 

1. LONGMANS' ENGLISH AND METRIC RULER. Marked on one edge in Inches, 

Eighths, Tenths and Five-fifths. Marked on the other edge in Centimetres. Price 
\d, net. 

2. LOW'S IMPROVED SET SQUARES. Designs A & B. 45° to 60°. 

B I 60° 4" each i/- net. 



A I 45° 4" ^ fB I 45° 4" each i/- net. A i 60° 4" ^ /B i 60° 4" each i/- 
A 2 45° 6" Vor-^ B 2 45° 6" „ 1/3 „ A 2 60° 6" \ot\ B 2 60° 6" ., 1/3 
A 3 45° 6è" ) Ib 3 45° 8i" „ 2/- ,. A 3 60° 8^ J U 3 60° 8^' .. 2/- 






3. LOW'S IMPROVED PROTRACTORS (Celluloid). Protractor No. 2. 3" radius, 

marked in degrees, 6rf. net. Protractor No. 3. 4" radius, marked in ^-degrees, 9^. 
net. 

4. LOWS ADJUSTABLE PROTRACTOR SET SQUARE. 2J. 6rf. net. 

5. LONGMANS' BLACKBOARD ENGLISH AND METRIC RULE. One Metre; 

marked in decimetres, centimetres, inches, half-inches and quarter-inches. 2J. 6</. 
*^ A Detailed and Illustrated Prospectus will be sent on application, 

LO IV,— Works by DAVID ALLAN LOW, Professor of Engineering, 
East London Technical College (People's Palace). 

AN INTRODUCTION TO MACHINE DRAWING AND DESIGN. 

With 153 Illustrations and Diagrams. Crown 8vo., 2J. 6d. 

THE DIAGRAM MEASURER. An Instrument for measuring the 

Areas of Irregular Figures and specially useful for determining the Mean Effective 
Pressure from Indicator Diagrams from Steam, Gas and other Engines. Designed by 
D. A. Low. With Full Instructions for Use. is, net. 

LOW AND BE VIS,— A MANUAL OF MACHINE DRAWING AND 

DESIGN. By David Allan Low and Alfred William Bevis, M.I.Mech.E. 
With 700 Illustrations. 8vo. , 7J. 6<f . 

UNWIN.—THE ELEMENTS OF MACHINE DESIGN. By W. 

Cawthorne Un win, F.R.S. 
Part I. General Principles, Fastenings, and Transmissive Machinery. 

With 345 Diagrams, etc. Fcp. 8vo., 7s. 6d. 

Part IL Chiefly on Engine Details. With 259 Illustrations. Fcp. 

8va , 6j. 



iô Scientijic Works published by Longmans^ Green, 6^ Co. 



MINERALOGY, MINING, METALLURGY, ETC. 

B A UE RM AN.— \WorV% by HILARY BAUERMAN, F.G.S, 
SYSTEMATIC MINERALOGY.. With 373 Illustrations. Fcp. 

8vo. , 6s. 

. DESCRIPTIVE MINERALOGY. With 236 Illustrations. Fcp. 

8vo. , 6j* 

ÈREARLEY and IBBOTSON. — TH'E ANALYSIS OF STEEL- 
WORKS MATERIALS. By Harry Break ley and Fred Ibbotson, B.Sc. (Lond.). 
Demonstrator of Micrographie Analysis, University College, Sheffield. With 85 Illus- 
trations. 8vo., 14^^. net. 

GORE.— THE ART OF ELECTRO-METALLURGY. By G. Gore, 

LL.D., F.R.S. With 56 Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo.. 6s. 

IfOSirOLD.— ENGINEER'S VALUING ASSISTANT : being a prac- 
tical Treatise on the Valuation of Collieries and Other Mines, etc. By H. D. Hoskold. 
With an Introductory Note by the late Peter Gray. 8vo., 7s. 6d. net. 

HUNTINGTON AND MCMILLAN -MET KV^: their Properties and 

Treatment. By A. K. Huntington, Professor of Metallurgy in King's College, 
London, and W. Q. M'Millan, late Lecturer on Metallurgy in Mason's Collie, 
Birmingham. With 122 Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo., js. 6d, 

LC/PTON — Works by ARNOLD LUPTON, M.LC.E., F.G.S., etc. 
MINING. An Elementary Treatise on the Getting of Minerals. With 

a Geological Map of the British Isles, and 596 Diagrams and Illustrations. Crown 
8vo. , gs. net. 

A PRACTICAL TREATISE ON MINE SURVEYING. With 

209 Illustrations. 8vo., las. net. 

MACFARLANE. — LABORATORY NOTES ON PRACTICAL 

METALLURGY: being a Graduated Series of Exercises. Arranged by Walter 
Macfarlane, F.I.C. Crown Bvo., 2s. 6d. 

RJIEA£>.— METALLURGY. By E. L. Rhead, Lecturer on Metal- 
lurgy at the Municipal Technical School, Manchester. With 94 Illustrations. Fcp. 
Svo., y. 6d. 

RHEAD AND SEXTON— ASSK^YNG AND METALLURGICAL 

ANALYSIS for the use of Students, Chemists and Assayers. By E. L. Rhead, Lecturer 
on Metallurgy, Municipal School of Technology, Manchester ; and A. Humboldt 
Sexton, F.I.C, F.C.S., Professor of Metallurgy, Glasgow and West of Scotland 
Technical College. 8vo., lor. 6d. net. 

RUTLEY,—TY\.E STUDY OF ROCKS: an Elementary Text-book of 

Petrology. By F. Rutlky, F.G.S. With 6 Plates and 88 other Illustrations Fcp. 
8vo. , 4J. 6^. 

ASTRONOMY, NAVIGATION, ETC. 

4^^C>7'7'. — ELEMENTARY THEORY OF THE TIDES: the 

the Fundamental Theorems Demonstrated without Mathematics and the Influence on 
the Length of the Day Discussed. By T. K. Abbott, B.D., Felloe» and Tutor, Trinity 
College, Dublin. Crown 8vo. , 2j. 

BALL.— Works by Sir ROBERT S, BALL, LL.U., F.R.S. 

ELEMENTS OF ASTRONOMY. With 130 Figures and Diagrams. 

Fcp. 8vo. , 6s. 6d. 

A CLASS-BOOK OF ASTRONOMY. With 41 Diagrams. Fcp. 

8yo., IS. 6d. 



Scientific Works published by Longmans, Green, &* Co, 21 



ASTRONOMY, NAVIGATION. ETC. -Continued, 

G^/ZZ.— TEXT-BOOK ON NAVIGATION AND NAUTICAL AS- 
TRONOMY. By J. Gill, F.R.A.S. New Edition Augmented and Re-arranged by 
W. V. Merrifield, B.A. Medium 8vo., loj. 6d. net. 

.^^J?5CZœZ.— OUTLINES OF ASTRONOMY. By Sir John F. W. 

Herschel, Bart., K.H., etc. With 9 Plates and numerous Diagrams. 8vo., 12J. 

LAUGHTON.—A"^ INTRODUCTION TO THE PRACTICAL, 

AND THEORETICAL STUDY OF NAUTICAL SURVEYING. By John Knox 
Laughton, M.A., F.R.A.S. With 35 Diagrams. Crown 8vo., dr. 

MARTIN. — NAVIGATION AND NAUTICAL ASTRONOMY. 

Compiled by Staff Commander W. R. Martin, R.N. Royal 8vo., i8j. 

MERRIFIELD.'--^ TREATISE ON NAVIGATION. For the Use 

of Students. By J. Merrifield, LL.D.. F.R.A.S., F.M.S. With Charts and 
Diagrams. Crown 8vo. , 5J. 

/MJ?^^J?.— ELEMENTS OF ASTRONOMY. With Numerous Ex- 
amples and Examination Papers. By George W. Parker, M.A., of Trinity College, 
Dublin. With 84 Diagrams. 8vo. , sj. 6d. net. 

^5^^.— CELESTIAL OBJECTS FOR COMMON TELESCOPES, 

By the Rev. T. W. Webb, M.A., F.R.A.S. Fifth Edition. Revised and greatly 
Enlarged by the Rev. T. E. Espin. M.A., F.R.A.S. (Two Volumes.) Vol. 1., with 
Portrait and a Reminiscence of the Author, 2 Plates, and numerous Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo., 6s, Vol. II., with numerous Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 6s. 6d. 



WORKS BY RICHARD A. PROCTOR. 

THE MOON : Her Motions, Aspect, Scenery, and Physical Condition. 

With many Plates and Charts, Wood Engravings, and 2 Lunar Photographs. Crown 
8vo., y. 6d. 

OTHER WORLDS THAN OURS : the Plurality of Worlds Studied 

Under the flight of Recent Scientific Researches. With 14 Illustrations ; Map, Charts, 
etc. Crown 8vo. , 3^. 6d. 

OUR PLACE AMONG INFINITIES : a Series of Essays contrasting 

our Little Abode in Space and Time with the Infinities around us. Crown 8vo., y. 6d, 

MYTHS AND MARVELS OF ASTRONOMY. Crown 8vo., 3.?. 6d. 
LIGHT SCIENCE FOR LEISURE HOURS: Familiar Essays on 

Scientific Subjects, Natural Phenomena, etc. Crown 8vo., y. 6d. 

THE ORBS AROUND US; Essays on the Moon and Planets, 

Meteors and Comets, the Sun and Coloured Pairs of Suns. Crown 8vo. , y. 6d. 

THE EXPANSE OF HEAVEN: Essays on .the Wonders of the 

Firmament. Crown 8vo. , y. 6d. 

OTHER SUNS THAN OURS: a Series of Essays on Suns— Old, 

Young, and Dead. With other Science Gleanings. Two Essays on Whist, and Corre- 
spondence with Sir John Herschel. With 9 Star-Maps and Diagrams. Crown 8vo. , 
y. 6d. 

HALF-HOURS WITH THE TELESCOPE : a Popular Guide to the 

Use of the Telescope as a means of Amusement and Instruction. With 7 Plates. Fcp. 
8vo., 2J. 6d. 

OVER. 



2 a Scientific iVorks published by Lonf^mans^ Greerty &* Co, 



WORKS BY RICHARD A. PROCTOR— a>/f//»w#<f. 

NEW STAR ATLAS FOR THE LIBRARY, the School, and the 

Observatory, in Twelve Circular Maps (with Two Index-Plates). With an Introduction 
on the Study of the Stars. Illustrated by 9 Diagrams. Crown 8vo. , 55. 

THE SOUTHERN SKIES: a Plain and Easy Guide to the Con- 
stellations of the Southern Hemisphere. Showing in 12 Maps the position of the 
principal Star-Groups night after night throughout the year. With an Introduction 
and a separate Explanation of each Map. True for every Year. 4to., $s. 

HALF-HOURS WITH THE STARS : a Plain and Easy Guide to the 

Knowledge of the Constellations. Showing in 12 Maps the position of the principal 
Star-Groups night after night throughout the year. With Introduction and a separate 
Explanation of each Map. True for every Year. 4to., 3^. net. 

LARGER STAR ATLAS FOR OBSERVERS AND STUDENTS. 

In Twelve Circular Maps, showing 6000 Stars, 1500 Double Stars, Nebulae, etc. With 
3 Index-Plates. Folio. 15;. 

THE STARS IN THEIR SEASONS : an Easy Guide to a Knowledge 

of the Star-Groups. In 12 Large Maps. Imperial 8vo., 5^. 

ROUGH WAYS MADE SMOOTH. Familiar Essays on Scientific 

Subjects. Crown 8vo., y. 6d. 

PLEASANT WAYS IN SCIENCE. Crown 8vo., 31. 6d. 

NATURE STUDIES. By R. A. Proctor, Grant Allen, A. Wilson, 

T. Foster, and E. Clodd. Crown 8vo., y, 6d. 

LEISURE READINGS. By R. A. Proctor, E. Clodd, A Wilson, 

T. Foster, and A. C. Ranyard. Crown 8vo., y. 6d. 



PHYSIOGRAPHY AND GEOLOGY. 

^/J?Z>,— Works by CHARLES BIRD, B.A. 

ELEMENTARY GEOLOGY. With Geological Map of the British 

Isles, and 247 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., zs. 6d. 

ADVANCED GEOLOGY. A Manual for Students in Advanced 

Classes and for General Readers. With over 300 Illustrations, a Geological Map of 
the British Isles (coloured), ana a set of Questions for Examination. Crown 8vo., 
7J. 6d. 

GJ^££J\r,—?KYSlCAh GEOLOGY FOR STUDENTS AND GENE- 
RAL readers. By A. H. Green, M.A., F.G.S. With 236 Illustrations. 8vo., 
21J. 

MORGAN.— ^oxVs by ALEX. MORGAN, M.A., D.Sc, F.R.S.E. 
ELEMENTARY PHYSIOGRAPHY. Treated Experimentally. With 

4 Maps and 243 Diagrams. Crown 8vo. y 2s. 6d. 

ADVANCED PHYSIOGRAPHY. With 215 Illustrations Crown 

8vo., 4s. 6d. 

REABE.— THE EVOLUTION OF EARTH STRUCTURE: With 

a Theory of Geomorphic Changes. By T. Mellard Reade, F.G.S., F.R.I.B.A., 
A. M.I. CE., etc. With 41 Plates. 8vo., 21J. net. 

ROGERS.— K^ INTRODUCTION TO THE GEOLOGY OF CAPE 

COLONY. By A. W. Rogers, M.A., F.G.S. , Director of the Geological Survey 
of Cape Colony. With a Chapter on the Fossil Reptiles of the Karroo Formation by 
R. Broom, M.D., B.Sc, C.M.Z.S. Crown Svo., gs. net. 



Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green^ &» Co, 23 



PHYSIOGRAPHY AND GE.O\X}G}t-Coni*rtued, 

THORNTON,— ^oxV% by J. THORNTON, M.A. 

ELEMENTARY PRACTICAL PHYSIOGRAPHY. 
Part I. With 215 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., .2X. 6d. 
Part II. With 98 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 2s, 6d, 

ELEMENTARY PHYSIOGRAPHY : an Introduction to the Study 

of Nature. With 13 Maps and 295 Illustrations. With Appendix on Astronomical 
Instruments and Measurements. Crown 8vo., 2j. 6d. 

ADVANCED PHYSIOGRAPHY. With 1 1 Maps and 255 Illustrations. 

Crown 8vo., 45. 6d. 

NATURAL HISTORY AND GENERAL SCIENCE. 

FC/RN£AC/X,— Works by WILLIAM FURNEAUX, F.R.G.S. 

THE OUTDOOR WORLD; or, The Young Collector's Handbook, 

With 18 Plates, 16 of which are coloured, and 549 Illustrations in the Text. Crown 
8vo., 6s. net. 

LIFE IN PONDS AND STREAMS. With 8 Coloured Plates 

and 331 Illustrations in the Text. Crown 8vo. , 6s. net. 

BUTTERFLIES AND MOTHS (British). With 12 Coloured Plates 

and 241 Illustrations in the Text. Crown Bvo., 6s. net. 

THE SEA SHORE. With 8 Coloured Plates and 300 Illustrations in 

the Text. Crown 8vo. , 6s, net 

HUDSON— WotVs by W. H. HUDSON, C.M.Z.S. 

BRITISH BIRDS. With 8 Coloured Plates from Original Drawings 

by A. Thorburn, and 8 Plates and 100 Figures by C. E. LODGE, and 3 Illustrations 
from Photographs. Crown 8vo, , 6s. net. 

BIRDS AND MAN. Large Crown 8vo., 6s, net. 

iî/7ZZ-4/5.— Works by JOHN GUILLE MILLAIS, F.Z.S. 

THE NATURAL HISTORY OF THE BRITISH SURFACE- 
FEEDING DUCKS. With 6 Photogravures and 66 Plates (41 in colours) from 
Drawings by the Author, Archibald Thorburn, and from Photographs. Royal 
4to., £6 6s, net. 

THE MAMMALS OF GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND. 3 

vols. Quarto (13 in. by 12 in.), cloth, gilt edges. 
Volume I. With 18 Photogravures by the Author ; 31 Coloured Plates by the Author, 
Archibald Thorburn and G. E. Lodge ; and 63 Uncoloured Plates by the Author 
and from Photographs. £6 6s. net. 



* 



Only 1,025 copies printed for England and America. 



NANSEN—i:Yi^ NORWEGIAN NORTH POLAR EXPEDITION, 

1893-1896 : Scientific Results. Edited by Fridtjof Nanskn. 
Volume I. With 44 Plates and numerous Illustrations in the Text. Demy 410. , 40J. net. 
Volume II. With 2 Charts and 17 Plates. Demy 4to., 30^. net. 
Volume III. With 33 Plates. Demy 4to., 32J. net. 
Volume IV. With 33 Plates. Demy 410. , 21J. net. 

STANLEY.— K FAMILIAR HISTORY OF BIRDS. By E, Stanley, 

Stanley, D.D., formerly Bishop of Norwich. With 160 Illustrations. Cr. Bvo., 31. 6d, 



24 Scientific Works published by Longmans, Green, &* Co. 



MANUFACTURES, TECHNOLOGY, ETC. 

ASHLEY,— B^lTl^n INDUSTRIES: A Series of General Reviews 

for Business Men and Students. Edited by W. J. Ashley, M.A., Professor of Com- 
merce in the University of Birmingham. Crown 8vo., $s. 6d. net 

i^^ZZ.— JACQUARD WEAVING AND DESIGNING. By F. T. 

Bell. With 199 Diagrams. 8vo., i2j. net. 



^^(?^iV;— LABORATORY STUDIES FOR BREWING STUDENTS : 

a Systematic Course of Practical Work in the Scientific Principles underlying the Processes 
of Malting" and Brewing. By Adrian J. Brown, M.Sc., Director of the School of 
Brewing, and Professor of the Biology and Chemistry of Fermentation in the University 
of Birmingham, etc. With 36 Illustrations. 8vo., js. 6d. net. 



CROSS AND BE ^AN.— Works by C. F. CROSS and E J. BEVAN. 
CELLULOSE : an Outline of the Chemistry of the Structural Elements 

of Plants. With reference to their Natural History and Industrial Uses. (C. F. 
Cross, E. J. Bkvan and C. Beadle.) With 14 Plates. Crown 8vo., i2j. net. 

RESEARCHES ON CELLULOSE, 1895-1900. Crown 8vo., 6.f. net. 



rACKSON,—K TEXT-BOOK ON CERAMIC CALCULATIONS 

with Examples. By W. Jackson, A.R.C.S., Lecturer in Pottery and Porcelain Manu- 
facture for the Staffordshire Education Committee and the Hanley Education Committee. 
Crown 8vo., 3J. dd. net. 



MORRIS AND WILKINSON,— THE ELEMENTS OF COTTON 

SPINNING. By John Morris and F. Wilkinson. With a Preface by Sir B. A. 
DOBSON, C.E., M.I.M. E. With 169 Diagrams and Illustrations. Cr 8vo., js. 6rf. net. 



RICHARDS,— BKIC¥.LAYI^G AND BRICK-CUTTING. By H. W. 

Richards, Examiner in Brickwork and Masonry to the City and Guilds of London 
Institute, Head of Building Trades Department, Northern Polytechnic Institute, 
London, N. With over 200 Illustrations. Med. 8vo., y. 6d. 

TA VLOR,— COTTON WEAVING AND DESIGNING. B) John T. 

Taylor. With 373 Diagrams. Crown 8vo. , ys. 6d. net. 



ÎVA TTS,—AN INTRODUCTORY MANUAL FOR SUGAR GROW- 

ERS. By Francis Watts, F.C.S., F.I.C. With 20 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 6j. 



Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Gteen^ &* Co, 25 



HEALTH AND HYGIENE. 

^5^^ K— HEALTH IN THE NURSERY. By Henry Ashby, M.D., 

F.R.CP. With 25 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., y, net. 

BUCKTON. — HEALTH IN THE HOUSE. By Mrs. C M. 

BucKTON. With 41 Woodcuts and Diagrams. Crown 8vo., 2j. 

CORFIELD.—^YiY. LAWS OF HEALTH. By W. H. Cor field, 

M.A., M.D. Fcp. 8vo., u. 6</. 

F UR NE A UX. — ELEMENTARY PRACTICAL HYGIENE.— 

Section I. By William S. Furneaux. With 146 Illustrations. Cr. Svo., 2^. 6^. 

HOTTER AND FIRTH.— V^orks by J. L. NOTTER, M.A., M.D., and 
R. H. FIRTH, F.R.C.S. 

HYGIENE. With 95 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 3^. 6d, 

PRACTICAL DOMESTIC HYGIENE. With 83 Illustrations. 

Crown Svo., 2J. 6d. 

FOORE.— Works by GEORGE VIVIAN POORE, M.D. 

ESSAYS ON RURAL HYGIENE. With 12 Illustrations. Crown 

Svo., 6s. 6d. 

THE DWELLING-HOUSE. With 36 Illustrations. Crown Svo., 
COLONIAL AND CAMP SANITATION. With 11 Illustrations. 

Crown Svo., 2j. net. 

THE EARTH IN RELATION TO THE PRESERVATION AND 

DESTRUCTION OF CONTAGIA : being the Milroy Lectures delivered at the 
Royal College of Physicians in 1899, together with other Papers on Sanitation. 
With 13 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 5J. 

WILSON.— h MANUAL OF HEALTH-SCIENCE. By Andrew 

Wilson, F.R.S.E., F.L.S., etc. With 74 Illustrations. Crown Svo., 2J. 6rf. 



20 Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green^ &* Co. 



MEDICINE AND SURGERY. 

(And see PHYSIOLOGY, etc., page 32.) 

ÂSHBY AND WRIGHT. —T^^ DISEASES OF CHILDREN, 

MEDICAL AND SURGICAL. By Hknry Ashby, M.D., Lond., F.R.C.P., 
Physician to the General Hospital for Sick Children, Manchester ; and G. A. Wright, 
B.A., M.B. Oxon.. F.R.C.S., Eng., Assistant-Surgeon to the Manchester Royal In- 
firmary, and Surgeon to the Children's Hospital. Enlarged and Improved Edition. 
With 192 Illustrations. 8vo. , 25J. 

BAIN.—k TEXT-BOOK OF MEDICAL PRACTICE. By Various 

Contributors. Edited by William Bain, M.D., M.R.C.P. With 75 Illustrations. 
Royal 8vo. , 25J. net. 

BENNETT. — V^oxks by Sir WILLIAM BENNETT, K.C.V.O., 
F.R.C.S., Surgeon to St. George's Hospital; Member of the Board 
of Examiners, Royal College of Surgeons of England. 

CLINICAL LECTURES ON VARICOSE VEINS OF THE 

LOWER EXTREMITIES. With 3 Plates. 8vo., dr. 

ON VARICOCELE ; A PRACTICAL TREATISE. With 4 Tables 

and a Diagram. 8vo., y. 

CLINICAL LECTURES ON ABDOMINAL HERNIA: chiefly 

in relation to Treatment, including the Radical Cure. With 12 Diagrams in the 
Text. 8vo. , 8j. 6d, 

ON VARIX, ITS CAUSES AND TREATMENT, WITH ESPECIAL 

REFERENCE TO THROMBOSIS. 8vo., y. 6d. 

THE PRESENT POSITION OF THE TREATMENT OF 

SIMPLE FRACTURES OF THE LIMBS. 8vo., 2j. 6d. 

LECTURES ON THE USE OF MASSAGE AND EARLY PASSIVE 

MOVEMENTS IN RECENT FRACTURF^ AND OTHER COMMON 
SURGICAL INJURIES: The Treatment of Internal Derangements of the Knee 
Joint and Management of Stiff Joints. With 17 Illustrations. 8vo. , 6s. 

CABOT— K GUIDE TO THE CLINICAL EXAMINATION OF 

THE BLOOD FOR DIAGNOSTIC PURPOSES. By Richard C. Cabot, M.D., 
Physician to Out-patients, Massachusetts General Hospital. With 3 Coloured Plates 
and 28 Illustrations in the Text. 8vo., i6j. 

CARR, PICK, DO RAN, and DUNCAN— THE PRACTITIONER'S 

GUIDE. By J. Walter Carr, M.D. (Lond.), F.R.C.P. ; T. Pickering Pick, 
F.R.C.S. ; Alban H. G. Doran, F.R.C.S. ; Andrew Duncan, M.D., B.Sc. (Lond.), 
F.R.C.S., M.R.C.P. 8vo., 21 j. net. 

COATS.— h MANUAL OF PATHOLOGY. By Joseph Coats, 

M.D., late Professor of Pathology in the University of Glasgow. Fifth Edition. 
Revised throughout and Edited by Lewis R. Sutherland, M.D., Professor of 
Pathology, University of St. Andrews. With 729 Illustrations and 2 Coloured 
Plates. 8vo., 28J. net. 



Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green^ àf Co, ,27 



MEDICINE AND S\3fiOE.R\— Continued, 

CHEYNE AND BURGHARD^^K MANUAL OF SURGICAL 

TREATMENT. By W. Watson Cheyne, C.B.. M.B., F.R.C.S., F.R.S., Professor 
of Clinical Surgery in King's College, London, Surgeon to King's College Hospital, 
etc. ; and F. F. Burghard, M.D. and M.S. (Lond.), F.R.C.S., Teacher of Practical 
Surgery in King's College, London, Surgeon to King's College Hospital (Lond.), etc. 

Part L The Treatment of General Surgical Diseases, including In- 

Infiammation, Suppuration, Ulceration, Gangrene, Wounds and their Complications, 
Infective Diseases and Tumours ; the Administration of Anaesthetics. With 66 Illus- 
trations. Royal 8vo. , los. td. 

Part IL The Treatment of the Surgical Affections of the Tissues, 

including the Skin and Subcutaneous Tissues, the Nails, the Lymphatic Vessels 
and Glands, the Fasciae, Bursas, Muscles, Tendons and Tendon- sheaths, Nerves, 
Arteries and Veins. Deformities. With 141 Illustrations. Royal 8vo., 14J. 

Part III. The Treatment of the Surgical Affections of the Bones. 

Amputations. With 100 Illustrations. Royal 8vo., laj. 

Part IV. The Treatment of the Surgical Affections of the Joints (in- 
cluding Excisions) and the Spine. With 138 Illustrations. Royal 8vo. , 145. 

Part V. The Treatment of the Surgical Affections of the Head, Face, 

Jaws, Lips, Larnyx and Trachea ; and the Intrinsic Diseases of the Nose, Ear and 
Larynx, by H. Lambert Lack, M.D. (Lond.), F.R.C.S., Surgeon to the Hospital 
for Diseases of the Throat, Golden Square, and to the Throat and Ear Department, 
The Children's Hospital, Paddington Green. With 145 Illustrations. Royal 8vo., 
i8j. 

Part VI. Section I. The Treatment of the Surgical Affections of the 

Tongue and Floor of the Mouth, the Pharynx, Neck, CEsophagus, Stomach and 
Intestines. With 124 Illustrations. Royal 8vo., i8j. 

Section II. The Treatment of the Surgical Affections of the 

Rectum, Liver, Spleen, Pancreas, Throat, Breast and Genito-urinary Organs. With 
113 Illustrations. Royal 8vo., 2ij. 

COOKE.— \Vox\i^ by THOMAS COOKE, F.R.C.S. Eng., B.A., B.Sc, 
M.D., Paris. 

TABLETS OF ANATOMY. Being a Synopsis of Demonstrations 

given in the Westminster Hospital Medical School. Eleventh Edition in Three 
Parts, thoroughly brought up to date, and with over 700 Illustrations from all the 
best Sources, British and Foreign. Post 4to. 

Part I. The Bones. 71. dd, net. 
Part II. Limbs, Abdomen, Pelvis. \os, 6d, net. 
Part TIL Head and Neck, Thorax, Brain. loj. 6d. net. 
APHORISMS IN APPLIED ANATOMY AND OPERATIVE 

SURGERY. Including 100 Typical viva voce Questions on Surface Marking, etc. 
Crown 8vo., y, 6d. 

DAKIN,—K HANDBOOK OF MIDWIFERY. By William Radford 

Dakin, M.D., F.R.C.P., Obstetric Physician and Lecturer on Midwifery at St. George's 
Hospital, etc. With 394 Illustrations. Large crown 8vo., i8j. 



28 Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green, &* Co, 



MEDICINE AND BimOEBY -CùnHnued. 

DICiriJVSON^-^Works by W. HOWSHIP DICKINSON, M.D, Cantab., 
F.R.C.P. 

ON RENAL AND URINARY AFFECTIONS. With 12 Plates 

and 122 Woodcuts. Three Parts. 8vo., £$ 4s. 6d. 

THE TONGUE AS AN INDICATION OF DISEASE: being 

the Lumleian Lectures delivered March, 1888. 8vo., 71. 6d, 

OCCASIONAL PAPERS ON MEDICAL SUBJECTS, 185 5- 1896. 

8V0., I2J. 

ERICHSEN.—TUE SCIENCE AND ART OF SURGERY ; a Treatise 

on Surgical Injuries, Diseases, and Operations. By Sir John Eric Erichsen, Bart., 
F.R.S., LL.D. Edin., Hon. M.Ch. and F.R.C.S. Ireland. Illustrated by nearly 1000 
Engravings on Wood. 2 vols. Royal 8vo. , 485. 

FOWLER AND GODLEE.—THE DISEASES OF THE LUNGS. 

By JAMKS Kingston Fowler, M.A., M.D., F.R.C.P., Physician to the Middlesex 
Hospital and to the Hospital for Consumption and Diseases of the Chest, Brompton, 
etc. ; and Rickman John Godlee, Honorary Surgeon in Ordinary to His Majesty, 
M.S., F.R.C.S., Fellow and Professor of Clinical Surgery, University College, London, 
etc. With 160 Illustrations. 8vo., 25J. 

G A RROD.— Works by Sir ALFRED BARING GARROD, M.D., 
F.R.S., etc. 

A TREATISE ON GOUT AND RHEUMATIC GOUT ({IHEU- 

MATOID ARTHRITIS). With 6 Plates, comprising 21 Figures (14 Coloured), and 
27 Illustrations engraved on Wood. 8vo., 21 j. 

THE ESSENTIALS OF MATERIA MEDICA AND THERA- 
PEUTICS. Crown 8vo., 12s. 6d, 

GOADB K— THE MYCOLOGY OF THE MOUTH : a Text-Book 

of Oral Bacteria. By Kenneth W. Goadby, L.D.S. (Eng.), D.P.H. (Camb.), 
L.R.C.P., M.R.C.S., Bacteriologist and Lecturer on Bacteriology, National Dental 
Hospital, etc. With 82 Illustrations. 8vo., 8j. 6^. net. 

GOODS ALL AND J/yZ^^".— DISEASES OF THE ANUS AND 

RECTUM. By D. H. Goodsall, F.R.C.S., Senior Surgeon, Metropolitan Hospital ; 
Senior Surgeon, St. Mark's Hospital; and W. Ernest Miles, F.R.C.S., Assistant 
Surgeon to the Cancer Hospital, Surgeon (out-patients), to the Gordon Hospital, etc. 
(In Two Parts.) Part I. With 91 Illustrations. 8vo., 7J. (id. net. 

G/^^ y. — ANATOMY, DESCRIPTIVE AND SURGICAL. By 

Henry Gray, F.R.S., late Lecturer on Anatomy at St. George's Hospital Medical 
School The Fifteenth Edition Enlarged, edited by T. Pickering Pick, F.R.C.S., 
Consulting Surgeon to St. George's Hospital, etc., and by Robert Howden, M.A, 
M.B., CM., Professor of Anatomy in the University of Durham, etc. With 772 
Illustrations, a large proportion of which are Coloured, the Arteries being coloured 
red, the Veins blue, and the Nerves yellow. The attachments of the muscles to the 
bones, in the section on Osteology, are also shown in coloured outline. Royal 8vo., 
jflLS. net. 



Scientific Works published by Longmans, Green^ &* Co. 29 



MEDICINE AND SMROERY- Continued, 

HALLIBURTON,— V^Qx\i% by W. D. HALLIBURTON, M.D., F.R.S., 

Professor of Physiology in King's College, London. 

A TEXT-BOOK OF CHEMICAL PHYSIOLOGY AND PATHO- 
LOGY. With 104 Illustrations. 8vo., 28J. 

ESSENTIALS OF CHEMICAL PHYSIOLOGY. With 83 Illustra- 

tions. 8vo., 4f. 6d. net. 

HARE,—K COMMON HUMORAL FACTOR OF DISEASE. 

Being a Deductive Investigation into the Primary Causation, Meaning, Mechanism and 
Rational Treatment, Preventive and Curative, of the Paroxysmal Neurose (Migrains, 
Asthma, Epilepsy, etc.), Gout', High-blood Pressure, Circulatory, Renal and other 
Degenerations. By Francis Everard Hare, M.D., late Consulting Physician to 
the Brisbane General Hospital ; Visiting Physician to the Diamantina Hospital for 
Chronic Diseases, Brisbane. 

HILLIER,—TYiE PREVENTION OF CONSUMPTION. By Alfred 

H ILLIER, B.A., M.D., Secretary to the National Association for the Prevention of Con- 
sumption (England), Visiting Physician to the London Open- Air Sanatorium. Revised 
by Professor R. Koch. With 14 Illustrations. Crown Bvo., $5. net. 

L^TVG.— THE METHODICAL EXAMINATION OF THE EYE. 

Being Part I. of a Guide to the Practice of Ophthalmology for Students and Practi- 
tioners. By William Lang. F.RX.S. Eng., Surgeon to the Royal London Ophthalmic 
Hospital, Moorfields, etc. With 15 Illustrations. Crown Bvo., y. 6d. 

ZC^7?y?:— TEXT-BOOK OF FORENSIC MEDICINE AND TOXI- 
COLOGY. By Arthur P. Luff, M.D., B.Sc. (Lond.). Physician in Charge of Ont- 
Patients and Lectiu-er on Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology in St. Mary's Hospital. 
With 13 full-page Plates (i in colours) and 33 Illustrations in the Text. 2 vols. Crown 
8vo., 24J. 

PAGET,— Eûxitd by STEPHEN PAGET. 

SELECTED ESSAYS AND ADDRESSES. By Sir JAMES PAGET. 

8vo., I2J. 6d. net. 

MEMOIRS AND LETTERS OF SIR JAMES PAGET, Bart., 

. F.R.S., D.C.L., late Sergeant-Surgeon to Her Majesty Queen Victoria. With Portrait. 
8vo., 6s. net. 

RHILL/FS, — MATERIA MEDICA, PHARMACOLOGY AND 

THERAPEUTICS: Inorganic Substances. By Charles D. F. Phillips, M.D., 
LL.D., F.R.S. Edin., late Lecturer on Materia Medica and Therapeutics at the West- 
minster Hospital Medical School ; late Examiner in the U niversity of P^dinburgh. Bvo. , 21s. 

POOLE.— COOKERY FOR THE DIABETIC. By W. H. and 

Mrs. Poole. With Preface by Dr. Pavy. Fcap. Bvo. , 2J. 6d. 

PROBYN-WILLIAMS.—A PRACTICAL GUIDE TO THE Ad- 
ministration OF ANAESTHETICS. By R. J. Probyn-Williams, M.D., 
Anaesthetist and Instructor in Anaesthetics at the London Hospital ; Lecturer in 
Anaesthetics at the London Hospital Medical College, etc. With 34 Illustrations. 
Crown Bvo., 4J. 6d. net. 

ÇC7^7iV.— QUAIN'S (Sir Richard) DICTIONARY OF MEDICINE. 

By Various Writers. Third Edition. Edited by H. Montague Murray, M.D., 
F.R.C.P., Joint Lecturer on Medicine, Charing Cross Medical School, and Physician, 
Charing Cross Hospital ; assisted by John Harold, M.B., B.Ch. , B.A.O., Physician 
to St. John's and St. Elizabeth's Hospital ; and W. Cecil Bosanquet, M.A,, M.D., 
M.R.C.P., Assistant Physician to Charing Cross Hospital, etc. With 21 Plates (14 in 
Colour) and numerous Illustrations in the Text. Bvo., i\5, net, buckram \ or 3af, net, 
balf-moroccQ. 



30 Scientific Works pttblished by Longmans^ Green^ &* Co. 



MEDICINE AND S\3ROE,nY-OonHnued. 

QUA IN.— QU Ally's (JONES) ELEMENTS OF ANATOMY. The 

Tenth Edition. Edited by Edward Albert Schaper, F.R.S. , Professor of Physioloj^ 
in the University of Edinburgh ; and George Dancer Thane, Professor of Anatomy 
in University College, London. 

Vol. I.. Part I. EMBRYOLOGY. By Vol. IIL, Part IL THE NERVES, By 
E. A. Schafer, F.R.S. With 200 G. D. Thane. With loa Illustra- 

Illustrations. Royal 8vo. , 91. I tions. Royal 8vo., 91. 

Vol. I., Part II. GENERAL ANA- i „ ^,^ ^ ^„ ^„«. ^„^..,c ^r, 
TOMY OR HISTOLOGY. By E. A. I Vol. III., Part III. THE ORGANS OF 
SchXfer, F.R.S. With 491 Illustra- I THE SENSES. By E. A. SchAfer, 



tions. Royal 8vo. , 12s. 6d. 

Vol. II., Part I. OSTEOLOGY — 
ARTHROLOGY. By G. D. Thane. 
With 224 Illustrations. Royal Svo., 11s. 



F.R.S. With 178 Illustrations. Royal 
8vo., 91. 



Vol. III., Part IV. SPLANCHNO- 
LOGY. By E. A. Schafer, F.R.S., 

Vni ÎÎ Papt TT MYOTOGY *"^ JOHNSON SYMINGTON, M.D. 

""^'ÀNGEIOlÔgY. "By G^^a T^^han^: ! ^^f 337 Illustrations. Royal 8vo., 

With 199 Illustrations. Royal 8vo., 
i6j. 



Vol. III., Part I. THE SPINAL CORD 
AND BRAIN. By E. A. Schafer, 
F.R.S. With 139 Illustrations. Royal 
8vo., 12J. 6d, 



Appendix : SUPERFICIAL AND SUR- 
GICAL ANATOMY. By Professor 
G. D. Thane and Professor R. J. 
GODLEE, M.S. With 29 Illustrations. 
Royal 8vo., 6s, 6d. 



SCHAFER.-^ Works by E. A. SCHAFER, F.R.S., Professor of 
Physiology in the University of Edinburgh. 

THE ESSENTIALS OF HISTOLOGY: Descriptive and Practical. 

For the Use of Students. With 463 Illustrations. 8vo., gs. net. 

DIRECTIONS FOR CLASS WORK IN PRACTICAL PHYSIO- 

LOGY : Elementary Physiology of Muscle and Nerve and of the Vascular and 
Nervous Systems. With 48 Diagrams and 24 pages of plain paper at end for Notes. 
Svo., 3J. net. 



SMALE AND C6>Z K5J?.— DISEASES AND INJURIES OF THE 

TEETH, including Pathology and Treatment. By Morton Smale, M.R.C.S., L.S.A. , 
L.D.S., Dental Surgeon to St. Mary's Hospital, Dean of the School, Dental Hospital 
of London, etc. ; and J. F. Colyer, L.R.C.P., M.R.C.S., L.D.S., I>ental Surgeon to 
Charing Cross Hospital and to the Dental Hospital of London. Second Eidition, 
Revised and Enlarged by J. F. Colyer. With 640 Illustrations. Large crown Svo., 
21J. net. 



SMITH (Zr. 7^). — THE HANDBOOK FOR MIDWIVES. By 

Henry Fly Smith, B.A., M.B. Oxon., M.R.C.S. 41 Woodcuts. Crown Svo., 51. 



Scientific Works ptiblished by Longmans^ Green^ àf* Co, 31 



MEDICINE AND %MlMilEWi- Continued. 

STEVENSON.— ^OX^^l^"^ IN WAR: the Mechanism of their Pro- 
duction and their Treatment. By Surgeon-General W. F. Stevenson, C.B. (Army 
Medical Staft), B.A., M.B., M.Ch. Dublin University, Professor of Military Surgery, 
Royal Array Medical College, London. With 127 Illustrations. 8vo. , 15^. net. 

2MilPi?/iV:^if?.— INTRODUCTION TO CHEMICAL METHODS 

OF CLINICAL DIAGNOSIS. By Dr. H. Tappeiner, Professor of Pharmacology 
and Principal of the Pharmacological Institute of the University of Munich. Translated 
by Edmond J. McWeeney, M.A., M.D. (Royal Univ. of Ireland), L.R.C.P.I., etc. 
Crown 8vo., 35. dd. 

WALLER.— ^ox)l% by AUGUSTUS D. WALLER, M.D., Lecturer 
on Physiology at St. Mary's Hospital Medical School, London ; late 
External Examiner at the Victorian University. 

AN INTRODUCTION TO HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY. Third Edi- 

tion, Revised. With 314 Illustrations. 8vo., i8j. 

LECTURES ON PHYSIOLOGY. First Series. On Animal Electricity 

8vo., y. net. 



VETERINARY MEDICINE, ETC. 

FITZWYGRAM.—Y^O^^YJ^ AND STABLES. By Lieut.- General Sir 

F. FiTZWYGRAM, Bart. With 56 pages of Illustrations. Bvo., 3J. net. 

STEEL.— "WoiVs by JOHN HENRY STEEL, F.R.C.V.S., F.Z.S., 
A.V.D., late Professor of Veterinary Science and Principal of Bombay 
Veterinary College. 

A TREATISE ON THE DISEASES OF THE DOG; being a 

Manual of Canine Pathology. Especially adapted for the use of Veterinary 
Practitioners and Students. With 88 Illustrations. 8vo. , 10s. 6d. 

A TREATISE ON THE DISEASES OF THE OX; being a 

Manual of Bovine Pathology. Especially adapted for the use of Veterinary 
Practitioners and Students. With 2 Plates and 117 Woodcuts. 8vo., 15J. 

A TREATISE ON THE DISEASES OF THE SHEEP ; being a 

a Manual of Ovine Pathology for the use of Veterinary Practitioners and Students. 
With Coloured Plate and 99 Woodcuts. 8vo. , i2j. 

YOUATT—^oxVs by WILLIAM YOUATT. 

THE HORSE. With 52 Wood Engravings. 8vo., ^s. 6d 
THE DOG. With 33 Wood Engravings. 8vo., 6s. 



32 Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green, &* Co, 



PHYSIOLOGY, BIOLOGY, ZOOLOGY, ETC. 

(And see MEDICINE AND SURGERY, page 26.) 

ASBB y.—^NOTES ON PHYSIOLOGY FOR THE USE OF 

STUDENTS PREPARING FOR EXAMINATION. By Henry Ashby. M.D. 
Lond.. F.R.C.P., Physician to the General Hospital for Sick Children, Manchester. 
With 148 Illustrations. i8mo., 5;. 

BARNErr.—THE MAKING OF THE BODY : a Children's Book 

on Anatomy and Physiology. By Mrs. S. A. Barnktt. With 113 Illustrations. 
Crown Svo. , is. gd. 

BED DARD, — ELEMENTARY PRACTICAL ZOOLOGY. By 

Frank E. Beddard, M.A. Oxon. With 93 Illustrations. Crown Svo., ax. 6^. 

BIDGOOD,—K COURSE OF PRACTICAL ELEMENTARY BIO- 
LOGY. By John Bidgood, B.Sc. , F.L.S. With 226 Illustrations. Crown Svo. , 4J. 6d. 

^(95^.— RESPONSE IN THE LIVING AND NON-LIVING. By 

jAGADis Chunder Bose, M.A. (Cantab.), D.Sc. (I>ond.), Professor, Presidency 
College, Calcutta. With 117 Illustrations. Svo., lor. 6d. 

BRODIE.— THE ESSENTIALS OF EXPERIMENTAL PHYSIO- 
LOGY. For the Use of Students. By T. G. Brodie, M.D., Lecturer on Physiology. 
St. Thomas's Hospital Medical School. With 2 Plates and 177 Illustrations in the Text. 
Svo., 6s. 6d. 

CHAPMAN,— THE FORAMINIFERA : An Introduction to the Study 
of the Protozoa. By Frederick Chapman, A.L.S., F.R.M.S. With 14 Plates 
and 42 Illustrations in the Text. Svo., çf. net. 

Fl/RNEAUX.-^HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY, By W. Furneaux, 

F.R.G.S. With 218 Illustrations. Crown Svo., 2j. 6d. 

HUDSON AND GOSSE.—THE ROTIFERA, or * WHEEL- ANIMA- 

CULES'. By C. T. Hudson, LL.D., and P. H. Gosse, F.R.S. With 30 Coloured 
and 4 Uncoloured Plates. In 6 Parts. 4to. , 10s. 6d. each. Supplement 125. 6d. 
Complete in 2 vols., with Supplement, 4to., j[^ 4s. 

LLOYD.— THE TEACHING OF BIOLOGY IN THE SECONDARY 

SCHOOL. By Francis E. Lloyd, A.M. and Maurice A. Bigelow, Ph.D., Pro- 
fessors in Teachers College, Columbia University. Crown Svo., 6s. net. 

âfACAZISTER,— Works by ALEXANDER MACALISTER, M.D. 
AN INTRODUCTION TO THE SYSTEMATIC ZOOLOGY AND 

MORPHOLOGY OF VERTEBRATE ANIMALS. With 41 Diagrams. Svo., 10s. 6d. 

ZOOLOGY OF THE INVERTEBRATE ANIMALS. With 77 

Diagrams. Fcp. Svo., li. 6d. 

ZOOLOGY OF THE VERTEBRATE ANIMALS. With 59 Diagrams, 

Fcp. Svo., I J. 6d, 

AfACDOC/GAZ.— Works by DANIEL TREMBLY MACDOUGAL, 
Ph.D., Director of the Laboratories of the New York Botanical Garden. 

PRACTICAL TEXT- BOOK OF PLANT PHYSIOLOGY. With 159 

Illustrations. Svo., 7s. 6d, net. 

ELEMENTARY PLANT PHYSIOLOGY. With 108 Illustrations. 

Crown Svo., y. 



Scientific Works published by Longmans, Green, or* Co, 33 



PHYSIOLOGY, BIOLOGY, ZOOLOGY, ETC.- Ooniinuefi, 

MORGAN,— k^lUKL BIOLOGY : an Elementary Text-Book. By 

C. Lloyd Morgan, F.R.S. , Principal of University College, Bristol. With 103 Illustra- 
tions. Crown 8vo. , 8j. 6d. 

SCIf A jFER.— DIRECTIONS FOR CLASS WORK IN PRACTICAL 

PHYSIOLOGY : Elementary Physiology of Muscle and Nerve and of the Vascular and 
Nervous Systems. By E. A. SchAfer, LL.D., F.R.S., Professor of Physiology in the 
University of Edinburgh. With 48 Diagrams. Bvo., y. net. 

THORNTON— Works by JOHN THORNTON, M.A. 

HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY. With 284 Illustrations, some coloured. 

Crown 8vo., 6j. 

ELEMENTARY BIOLOGY, Descriptive and Experimental. With 

numerous Illustrations. Crown Bvo., y. 6d. 

ELEMENTARY PRACTICAL PHYSIOLOGY. With 178 Illustra- 
tions (6 of which are Coloured). Crown Bvo., y. 6d. 



BACTERIOLOGY. 

CURTIS.— THE ESSENTIALS OF PRACTICAL BACTERI- 
OLOGY : An Elementary Laboratory Book for Students and Practitioners. By H. J 
Curtis, B.S. and M.D. (Lond.), F.R.C.S. With 133 Illustrations. Bvo., 91. 

i:>Zr/iY6^J?^. — ELEMENTARY BACTERIOLOGY. By M. I 

Dhingra, M.D., CM. Edin., Diplomate in State Medicine, University of Cambridge, 
etc. With Coloured Frontispiece and 26 Illustrations in the Text. Crown Bvo., y. net. 

FRANKLAND. — MlCKO-ORGKiillSUS IN WATER. Together 

with an Account of the Bacteriological Methods involved in their Investigation. 
Specially designed for the use of those connected with the Sanitary Aspects of Water- 
Supply. By Percy Frankland, Ph.D., B.Sc. (Lond.), F.R.S., and Mrs. Percy 
Frankland. With 2 Plates and Numerous Diagrams. Bvo., i6j. net. 

FRANKLAND,— BACTERIA IN DAILY LIFE. By Mrs. Percy 

Frankland, F.R.M.S. Crown Bvo., $s. net. 
GOADBY,—TUE MYCOLOGY OF THE MOUTH: A Text-Book 

of Oral Bacteria. By Kenneth W. Goadby, L.D.S. Eng., etc. ; Bacteriologist and 
Lecturer on Bacteriology, National Dental Hospital, etc. With B2 Illustrations. 
Bvo., Bf. 6d. net. 

iTZÔ'CA'^J?.— FERMENTATION ORGANISMS : a Laboratory Hand- 
book. By Alb. Klocker, Translated by G. E. Allan, B.Sc., Lecturer in the University 
of Birmingham, and J. H. Millar, F.I.C, formerly Lecturer in the British School of 
Malting and Brewing, and Revised by the Author. With 146 Illustrations. Bva, 
i:ts. net. 

PLIMMER.—THE CPIEMICAL CHANGES AND PRODUCTS 

RESULTING FROM FERMENTATION. By R. H. Adkrs Plimmer, D.Sc., 
Lond., Grocers' Research Student, Jenner Institute of Preventive Medicine. Bvo., 
6s, net. 



34 Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green^ &* Co, 

BOTANY. 

A/TITEN. — EhEMEfiTARY TEXT-BOOK OF BOTANY. By 

Edith Aitken, late Scholar of Girton College. With 400 Diai^ms. Crown 8vo., 
4s, 6d. 

BENNETT and MURRA K— HANDBOOK OF CRYPTOGAMIC 

BOTANY. By Alfred W. Bennett, M.A., B.Sc., F.L.S., Lecturer on Botany at 
St. Thomas's Hospital ; and George Murray, F.L.S., Keeper of Botany, British 
Museum. With 378 Illustrations. Svo., 165. 

CROSS AND BEVAN—\Sox)l% by C. F. CROSS, E. J. BEVAN and 
C. BEADLE. 

CELLULOSE : an Outline of the Chemistry of the Structural Elements 

of Plants. With Reference to their Natural History and Industrial Uses. With 
14 Plates. Crown Svo., i2J. net. 

RESEARCHES ON CELLULOSE, 1895-1900. Cr. 8vo., 6j. net. 

EDMONDS. — ^oxV^ by HENRY EDMONDS, B.Sc, London. 
ELEMENTARY BOTANY. With 341 Illustrations. Cr. 8vo., 25. 6d. 
BOTANY FOR BEGINNERS. With 85 Illustrations. Fcp. Svo., 

IS. 6d, 

FARMER.— A PRACTICAL INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY 

OF BOTANY : Flowering Plants. By J. Bretland Farmer, D.Sc., F.R.S., M.A., 
Professor of Botany in the Royal College of Science, London. With 121 Illustrations. 
Crown Svo., ax. 6d. 

HENSLO IV.— SOUTH AFRICAN FLOWERING PLANTS: For 

the Use of Beginners, Students and Teachers. By the Rev. Professor G. Henslow, 
M.A., F.L.S., F.G.S., etc. With 112 Illustrations. Cr. Svo., 5s 

HOFFMANN- A\J?mE FLORA: for Tourists and Amateur Botanists. 
By Dr. Julius Hoffmann. Translated by E. S. Barton (Mrs. A. Gepp). With 
40 Plates, containing 250 Coloured Figures, from Water-Colour Sketches by Hermann 
Friese. With Text descriptive of the most widely distributed and attractive of Alpine 
Plants. Svo. , 7s. 6d. net. 

KITCHENER.— A YEAR'S BOTANY. Adapted to Home and School 

Use. By Frances A. Kitchener. With 195 Illustrations. Cr. Svo., $5, 

LINDLEY AND MOORE. — THE TREASURY OF BOTANY. 

Edited by J. Lindley, M.D., F.R.S., and T. Moore, F.L.S. With 20 Steel Plates 
and numerous Woodcuts. Two parts. Fcp. Svo., 12s. 

McNAB.— CLASS-BOOK OF BOTANY. By W. R. McNab. 

MORPHOLOGY AND PHYSIOLOGY. CLASSIFICATION OF PLANTS. With 
With 42 Diagrams. Fcp. Svo., is. 6d. iiS Diagrams. Fcp. Svo., is. 6d. 

SORA UER.—A POPULAR TREATISE ON THE PHYSIOLOGY 

OF PLANTS. By Dr. Paul Sorauer. Translated by F. E. Weiss, B.Sc., F.L.S. 
With 33 Illustrations. Svo., 9J. net. 

THOME AND ^^AWffrr.— STRUCTURAL AND PHYSIOLOGI- 
CAL BOTANY. By Otto Wilhelm Thome and by Alfred W. Bennett, 
B.Sc, F.L»S, With Coloured Map and 600 Woodcuts. Fcp. Svo., 6j, 



v< 



Scientific Works published by Longmans ^ Green ^ &* Co, 35 



BOTAHY-COfiiùiued. 

TC/BEC/F,— DISEASES OF PLANTS INDUCED BY CRYPTO- 

GAMIC PARASITES. Introduction to the Study of Pathogenic Fungi, Slime Fungi, 
Bacteria and Algae. By Dr. Karl Freihkrr von Tubeuf, Privatdocent in the 
University of Munich. English Edition by William G. Smith, B.Sc., Ph.D., Lecturer 
on Plant Physiology, University of Edinburgh. With 330 Illustrations. Royal 8vo. , 
1 8 J. net. 

WATTS.— A SCHOOL FLORA. For the use of Elementary Botanical 
Classes. By W. Marshall Watts, D.Sc. Lond. Crown 8vo., 2j. 6d. 



AGRICULTURE AND GARDENING. 

AjDZ>YMAJ\r.— AGRICULTURAL ANALYSIS. A Manual of Quanti- 
tative Analysis for Students of Agriculture. By Frank T. Addyman, B.Sc. (Lond.), 
F.I.C. With 49 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., ss. net. 

COLEMAN AND ADDYMAN.— ?RAC\\QAL AGRICULTURAL 
CHEMISTRY. By J. Bernard Coleman, A.R.C.Sc, F.I.C, and Frank T. 
Addyman, B.Sc. (Lond.), F.I.C. With 24 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., \s. 6d. net. 

IfAGGAJ^D.—WoTks by H. RIDER HAGGARD. 

A FARMER'S YEAR : being his Commonplace Book for 1898. With 

36 Illustrations by G. Leon Little and three others. Crown 8vo. , 7s. 6d. net. 

A GARDENER'S YEAR. With 26 Illustrations. 8vo., 12s. 6d. net. 
RURAL ENGLAND : being an Account of Agricultural and Social 

Researches carried out in the years 1901 and 1902. With 23 Agricultural Maps and 
75 Illustrations from Photographs. 2 vols. 8vo. , 365. net. 

/£J^VLL.— Works by GERTRUDE JEKYLL. 

HOME AND GARDEN : Notes and Thoughts, Practical and Critical, 

of a Worker in both. With 53 Illustrations from Photographs. 8vo. , loy. 6d. net. 

WOOD AND GARDEN : Notes and Thoughts, Practical and Critical, 

of a Working Amateur. With 71 Photographs. 8vo., 10s. 6d. net. 

WEATHERS.— A PRACTICAL GUIDE TO GARDEN PLANTS. 

Containing Descriptions of the Hardiest and most Beautiful Annuals and Biennials, 
Hardy Herbaceous and Bulbous Perennials, Hardy Water and Bog Plants, Flowering 
and Ornamental Trees and Shrubs, Conifers, Hardy Ferns, Hardy Bamboos and other 
Ornamental Grasses; and also the best kinds of Fruit and Vegetables that may be 
grown in the Open Air in the British Islands, with Full and Practical Instructions as to 
Culture and Propagation. By John Weathers, F.R.H.S., late Assistant Secretary 
to the Royal Horticultural Society, formerly of the Royal Gardens, Kew, etc. With 
163 Diagrams. 8vo., 21J. net. 

^-£^^.— Works by HENRY J. WEBB, Ph.D., B.Sc. (Lond.). 
ELEMENTARY AGRICULTURE. A Text-Book specially adapted 

to the requirements of the Board of Education, the Junior Examination of the koyal 
Agricultural Society, and oiher Elementary Examinations. With 34 Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo., 2J. dd. 

AGRICULTURE. A Manual for Advanced Science Students. With 

100 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 75. td. net. 



36 Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green, &* Co. 



WORKS BY JOHN TYNDALL, D.C.L, LL.D., F.R.S. 

LECTURES ON SOUND. With Frontispiece of Fog-Syren, and 203 

other Woodcuts and Diagrams in the Text. Crown 8vo., jos. 6d. 

HEAT, A MODE OF MOTION. With 125 Woodcuts and Diagrams. 

Crown 8vo. . I2i. 

LECTURES ON LIGHT DELIVERED IN THE UNITED STATES 

IN 1872 AND 1873. With Portrait, Lithographic Plate, and 59 Diagrams. Crown 
8vo., y. 

FRAGMENTS OF SCIENCE : a Series of Detached Essays, Addresses, 

and Reviews, a vols. Crown 8vo. , i6s. 

Vol. I. — The Coostitotion of Nature — Radiation — On Radiant Heat in Relation to the Colour and 
Chemical Constitution of Bodies — New Chemical Reactions produced hy Light — On Dust and 



Disease — Voyage to Algeria to observe the Eclirae — Niagara— The Parallel Roads of Glen 
Roy — Alpine Sculpture— Recent Experiments on Fog- Signals — On the Study of Physics — On 
Crystalline and Slaty Cleavage— On Para magnetic and Diamagnetic Forces — Ph)rsical Basis 
of Solar Chemistry — Elementary Magnetism — On Force — Contributions to Molecular Physics 
—Life and Letters of Faraday— The Copley Medallist of i^— The Copley Medallist of 1871 
— Death by Lightning — Science and the Spirits. 

Vol. II.— Reflections on Prayer and Natural Law— Miracles and Special Providences— On Prayer as 
a Form of Physical Energy — Vitality— Matter and Force — Scientific Materialism — An Address 
to Students — Scientific Use of the Imagination — The Belfast Address — Apology for the Belfast 
Address — The Rev. James Martineau and the Belfast Address — Fermentation, and its Bearings 
on Surgery and Medicine — Spontaneous Generation— Science and Man — Professor Virchow 
and Evolution — The Electric Light. 

NEW FRAGMENTS. Crown 8vo., los. 6d. 

Contents.— The Sabbath— Goethe's * Farbenlehre '—Atoms, Molecules, and Ether Waves— Count 
Rumford — Louis Pasteur, his Life and Labours — The Rainbow and its Congeners— Address delivered 
at the Birkbeck Institution on October as, 1884 — Thomas Young — Life in the Alps— About Common 
Water— Personal Recollections of Thomas Csrlsrle— On Unveiling the Statue of Thomas Carlyle— On 
the Origin, Propagation, and Prevention of Phthisis — Old Alpine Jottings — A Morning on Alp Lusgen. 

ESSAYS ON THE FLOATING MATTER OF THE AIR IN 

RELATION TO PUTREFACTION AND INFECTION. With 24 Woodcuts. 
Crown 8vo. , 75. 6d. 

RESEARCHES ON DIAMAGNETISM AND MAGNECRYSTALLIC 

ACTION; including the Question of Diamagnetic Polarity. Crown 8vo., lar. 

NOTES OF A COURSE OF NINE LECTURES ON LIGHT, 

delivered at the Royal Institution of Great Britain, 1869. Crown 8vo., is. 6d. 

NOTES OF A COURSE OF SEVEN LECTURES ON ELECTRI- 
CAL PHENOMENA AND THEORIES, delivered at the Royal Institution of Great 
Britain, 1870. Crown 8vo., is. 6d. 

LESSONS IN ELECTRICITY AT THE ROYAL INSTITUTION, 

1875-1876. With 58 Woodcuts and Diagrams. Crown 8vo. , ^. 6d. 

THE GLACIERS OF THE ALPS: being a Narrative of Excursions 

and Ascents. An Account of the Origin and Phenomena of Glaciers, and an Exposition 
of the Physical Principles to which they are related. With 7 Illustrations. Crown 
8vo., 6j. 6ûf. net. 

HOURS OF EXERCISE IN THE ALPS. With 7 Illustrations. 

Crown 8vo. , dr. 6d. net. 

FARADAY AS A DISCOVERER. Crown 8vo., 3^. 6d. 



Scientific Works published by Longmans^ Green, à* Co. 



37 



PHOTOGRAPHY. By Sir William de 
WiVELESLIE Abney, K.C.B., F.R.S. 
With 134 Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo., $s. 

THE STRENGTH OF MATERIALS AND 
STRUCTURES. By Sir J. Anderson, 
CE. With 66 Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo., 
y. 6d. 

RAILWAY APPLIANCES. By Sir John 
Wolfe Barry, K. C. B. , F. R. S. , M. I. C.E. 
With 218 Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo. , 4J. 6d. 

INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF 
INORGANIC CHEMISTRY. By 
William Allen Miller, M.D., LL.D., 
F.R.S. With 72 Illustrations, y. 6d. 

QUANTITATIVE CHEMICAL ANA- 
LYSIS. By T. E. Thorpe, C.B., F.R.S., 
Ph.D. With 88 Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo., 
4^. 6d. 

QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS AND LABO- 
RATORY PRACTICE. By T. E. 
Thorpe, C.B., Ph.D., F.R.S., and M. M. 
Pattison Muir, M.A. and F.R.S.E. 
With Plate of Spectra and 57 Illustrations. 
Fcp. 8vo. , y. 6d. 

INTRODUCTION TO THE STUDY OF 
CHEMICAL PHILOSOPHY. By 
William A. Tilden, D.Sc, London, 
F.R.S. With Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo., 
5J. With Answers to Problems. Fcp. 
8vo., 55. 6d, 

ELEMENTS OF ASTRONOMY. By Sir 
R. S. Ball, LL.D., F.R.S. With 130 
Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo. , 6s. 6d. 

SYSTEMATIC MINERALOGY. By Hilary 
Bauerman, F.G.S. With 373 Illus- 
trations. Fcp. 8vo. , 6s. 

DESCRIPTIVE MINERALOGY. By 
Hilary Bauerman, F.G.S. , etc. With 
236 Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo., 6s. 

METALS: THEIR PROPERTIES AND 
TREATMENT. By A. K. Huntington 
and W. G. McMillan. With 122 Illus- 
trations. Fcp. 8vo. , 75. 6d. 

THEORY OF HEAT. By J. Clerk Max- 
well, M.A., LL.D., Edin., F.R.SS., 
L. & E. With 38 Illustrations. Fcp. 
8vo., 4s. 6d. 

PRACTICAL PHYSICS. By R. T. Glaze- 
brook, M.A., F.R.S., and W. N. Shaw, 
M,A. With 134 Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo., 
75. 6d 



TEXT-BOOKS OF SCIENCE. 



PRELIMINARY SURVEY AND ESTI- 
MATES. By Theodore Graham 
Gribble, Civil Engineer. Including Ele- 
mentary Astronomy, Route Surveying, 
Tacheometry, Curve-ranging, Graphic 
Mensuration, Estimates, Hydrography 
and Instruments. With 133 Illustrations. 
Fcp. 8vo. , 75. 6d. 

ALGEBRA ANX> TRIGONOMETRY. By 
William Nathaniel Griffin, B.D. 
y. 6d. 

THE STEAM ENGINE. By George C. V. 
Holmes, C.B., Chairman of the Board of 
Works, Dublin. With 212 Illustrations. 
Fcp. 8vo., 6s. 

ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM. By 

Fleeming Jenkin, F.R.SS., L. & E. 

With 177 Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo., 3^. 6d. 
THE ARTOF ELECTRO-METALLURGY. 

By G. Gore. LL.D., F.R.S. With 56 

Illus. Fcp. 8vo., 6s. 

TELEGRAPHY. By Sir W. H. Preece, 
K.C.B., F.R.S., M.I.C.E., and Sir J. 
SiVE WRIGHT, M.A., K.C.M.G. With 267 
Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo., 6s. 

PHYSICAL OPTICS. By R. T. Glazeb- 
ROOK.M. A. ,F. R.S. With 183 Illustrations. 
Fcp. 8vo. , 6jr. 

TECHNICAL ARITHMETIC AND MEN- 
SU RATION. By Charles W. 
Merriefield, F.R.S. y. 6d. Key, by 
the Rev. JOHN Hunter, M.A. Fcp. 
8vo. , y. 6d. 

THE STUDY OF ROCKS. By Frank 
RUTLEY, F.G.S. With 6 Plates and 88 
Illustratipns. Fcp. 8vo., 4J. 6d. 

WORKSHOP APPLIANCES, including 
Descriptions of some of the Machine Tools 
used by Engineers. By C. P. B. Shelley, 
M.I. C.E. With 323 Illustrations. Fcp. 
8vo., y. 
ELEMENTS OF. MACHINE DESIGN. 
By W. Cawthorne Unwin, F.R.S., 
B.Sc., M.I. C.E. 

Part I. General Principles, Fastenings 
and Transmissive Machinery. With 
345 Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo., 75. 6d. 
Part II. Chiefly on Engine Details. 
With 259 Illustrations. Fcp. 8vo., 6s. 

STRUCTURAL AND PHYSIOLOGICAL 
CAL BOTANY. By Otto Wilhelm 
Thome, and A. W. Bennett, M.A., 
B.Sc., F.L.S. With 600 Illustrations. 
Fcp. 8vo., 6s. 

PLANE AND SOLID GEOMETRY. By 
H. W. Watson, M.A. Fcp. 8vo., y. 6d. 



38 



Scientific Works published by Longmans, Green, &* Co, 



ADVANCED SCIENCE MANUALS. 



BUILDING CONSTRUCTION. By the 
Author of • Rivington's Notes on Building 
Construction'. With 385 Illustrations 
and an Appendix of Examination 
Questions. Crown 8vo. , 4/. 6d, 



THEORETICAL *MECHANICS. Solids, 
including Kinematics, Statics, and 
Kinetics. By A. Thornton, M.A., 
F.R.A.S. With 220 Illustrations, 130 
Worked Examples, and over 900 Examples 
from Examination Papers, etc. Crown 
Svo. , \s. 6d. 



HEAT. By Mark R. Wright, Hon. Inter. 
B.Sc. (Lond.). With 136 Illustrations 
and numerous Examples and Examination 
Papers. Crown Svo. , 4s. 6d. 



LIGHT. By W. J. A. Emtage, M.A, With 
233 Illustrations. Cr. Svo., 6s. 

MAGNETISM AND ELECTRICITY. By 
Arthur William Poyser, M.A. With 
317 Illustrations. Crown Svo. , 45. 6d. 



INORGANIC CHEMISTRY, THEORETI- 
CAL AND PRACTICAL. By William 
J ago, F.C.S., F.I.C. With Plate of 
Spectra and 78 Woodcuts. Crown 8vo. , 
4s. 6d. 



GEOLOGY : a Manual for Students in Ad- 
vanced Classes and for General Readers. 
By Charles Bird, B.A. (Lond.). F.G.S. 
With over 300 Illustrations, a Geological 
Map of the British Isles (coloured), and 
a set of Questions for Examination. 
Crown 8vo., 7s. 6d. 

HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY: a Manual for 
Students in advanced Classes of the Science 
and Art Department. By John Thorn- 
ton, M.A. With 284 Illustrations, some 
of which are Coloured, and a set of 
Questions fcr Examination. Crown 8va, 
6s. 

PHYSIOGRAPHY. By John Thornton, 
M.A. With II Maps, 255 Illustrations, 
and Coloured Map of Ocean Deposits. 
Crown 8vo., 4s. 6d. 

AGRICULTURE. By Hknry J. Wkbb, 
Ph.D., B.Sc. With 100 Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo., js. 6d. net. 

HYGIENE. By J. Lane Notter, M.A., 
M.D., Professor of Hygiene in the Army 
Medical School, Netley, Colonel, Roysd 
Army Medical Corps ; and R. H. Firth, 
F.R.C.S., late Assistant Professor of 
Hygiene in the Army Medical School, 
Netley, Major, Royal Army Medical Corps. 
With 95 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., y. 
6d. 



ELEMENTARY SCIENCE MANUALS. 



PRACTICAL. PLANE, AND SOLID 
GEOMETRY. By I. H. Morris and 
Joseph Husband. Fully Illustrated with 
Drawings. Crown 8vo., 2s. 6d. 

GEOMETRICAL DRAWING FOR ART 
STUDENTS. Embracing Plane Geo- 
metry and its Applications, the Use of 
Scales, and the Plans and Elevations of 
Solids. By I. H. Morris. Crown 8vo., 

2J. 

TEXT-BOOK ON PRACTICAL, SOLID, 
OR DESCRIPTIVE GEOMETRY. By 
David Allan Low (Whitworth Scholar). 
Part I. Crown 8vo., 2J. Part II. Crown 
8vo. , 3^. 



AN INTRODUCTION TO MACHINE 
DRAWING AND DESIGN. By David 
Allan Low. With 153 Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo. , zs. 6d. 



BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND 
DRAWING. By Edward J. Burrell. 
With 308 Illustrations and Working 
Drawings. Crown 8vo., 2s. 6d. 



AN ELEMENTARY COURSE OF 
MATHEMATICS. Containing Arith- 
metic: Euclid (Book I., with Deductions 
and Exercises) ; and Algebra. Crown 
8vo. , ^. 6d. 



Scientific WorkÈ published by Longmans^ Green ^ 6*' Co, 



39 



ELEMENTARY SCIENCE Hi ^Xi\} MA- Continued, 



THEORETICAL MECHANICS. Including 
Hydrostatics and Pneumatics. By J. E. 
Taylor, M.A., B.Sc. With numerous 
Examples and Answers, and 175 Diagrams 
and Illustrations. Crown 8vo. , 2J. dd. 



THEORETICAL MECHANICS— SOLIDS. 
By J. E. Taylor, M.A., B.Sc. (Lond.). 
With 163 Illustrations, 120 Worked 
Examples, and over 500 Examples from 
Examination Papers, etc. Crown 8vo., 
25. td. 



THEORETICAL MECHANICS— FLUIDS. 
By J. E. Taylor, M.A., B.Sc. (Lond.). 
With 122 Illustrations, numerous Worked 
Examples, and about 500 Examples from 
Examination Papers, etc. Crown 8vo., 
2J. td. 



MANUAL OF MECHANICS. With 138 
Illustrations and Diagrams, and 188 
Examples taken from Examination 
Papers, with Answers. By T. M. GOOD- 
EVK, M.A. Crown 8vo., ar. td. 



SOUND, LIGHT, AND HEAT. Bjr Mark 
R. Wright, M.A. With 160 Diagrams 
and Illustrations. Crown 8vo., is. 6d. 



METALLURGY : an Elementary Text-Book. 
By E. L. Rhead. With 94 Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo., 3.^. 6d. 



PHYSICS. Alternative Course. By Mark 
R. Wright, M.A. With 242 Illustra- 
tions. Crown 8vo., 2J. 6d. 



MAGNETISM AND ELECTRICITY. By 
A. W. POYSER, M.A. With 235 Illustra- 
tions. Crown 8vo., 2J. 6d. 



PROBLEMS AND SOLUTIONS IN ELE- 
MENTARY ELECTRICITY AND 
MAGNETISM. By W. Slingo and 
A. Brooker. Embracing a Complete 
Set of Answers to the South Kensington 
Papers for the years 1885-1899, and a 
Series of Original Questions. With 67 
Origiaal Illustrations. Çro>vn 8vo., 2J. 



ELEMENTARY PHYSIOGRAPHY. By J. 
Thornton, M.A. With 13 Maps and 
295 Illustrations. With Appendix on 
Astronomical Instruments and Measure- 
ments. Crown 8vo., 2j. 6d, 

ORGANIC CHEMISTRY: the Fatty Com- 
pounds. By R. Lloyd Whitelky, 
F.I.C., F.C.S. With 45 Illustrations. 
Crown 8vo. , 3^. 6d, 

INORGANIC CHEMISTRY, THEO- 
RETICAL AND PRACTICAL. By 
William J ago, F.C.S., F.I.C With 
63 Illustrations and numerous Questions 
and Exercises. Fcp. 8vo., 2J. 6d. 

AN INTRODUCTION TO PRACTICAL 
INORGANIC CHEMISTRY. By 
William Jago, F.C.S. , F.I.C. Crown 
8vo., I J. 6d. 

PRACTICAL CHEMISTRY: the 
Principles of Qualitative Analysis. By 
William A. Tilden, D.Sc. Fcp 8vo., 
IS, 6d» 

ELEMENTARY INORGANIC CHE- 
MISTRY. By William Furnkaux, 
F. R. G. S. Crown 8vo. , 2j. 6d, 

ELEMENTARY GEOLOGY. By Charles 
Bird, B.A.. F.G.S. With Coloured 
Geological Map of the British Islands, 
and 247 Illustrations. Crown 8vo., 2J. 
6d. 

HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY. By William 
Furneaux, F.R.G.S. With 218 Illus 
trations. Crown 8vo., 2j. 6d, 

A COURSE OF PRACTICAL ELE- 
MENTARY biology. By J. Bidgood, 
B.Sc. With 226 Illustrations. Crown 
8vo., 4;. 6d. 

ELEMENTARY BOTANY, THEO- 
RETICAL AND PRACTICAL. By 
Henry Edmonds, B.Sc. With 342 
Illustrations. Crown 8vo., is, 6d. 

STEAM. By William Ripper, Member of 
the Institution of Civil Engineers. With 
185 Illustrations. Crovm 8vo. , 2s. 6d, 

AGRICULTURE. By Henry J. Webb, 
Ph.D. With 34 Illustrations. Crown 
8vo., 9s. 6d,
