Jakob Boehme (trans. John Sparrow), The Signature of All Things (Signatura Rerum) (1622)
==========================================================================
Boehme's Signatura Rerum — the doctrine of signatures, the language of nature, and the seven forms — in the classic 17th-century Sparrow translation. Boehme's most systematic metaphysical work. Text: Internet Archive; OCR artifacts lightly cleaned. Public Domain.

nels Coe 66 IILE


Class Book


_ General Theological Seminary Tee


CHELSEA SQUARE, NEw YORK


¿


vA


EVERYMAN’S LIBRARY
EDITED BY ERNEST RHYS


PHILOSOPHY
& THEOLOGY


BOEHME’S “SIGNATURA RERUM”
AND OTHER DISCOURSES
INTRODUCTION BY CLIFFORD BAX


THIS IS NO. 569 OF EVERY MANS
LIBRARY. THE PUBLISHERS WILL
BE PLEASED TO SEND FREELY TO ALL
APPLICANTS A LIST OF THE PUBLISHED
AND PROJECTED VOLUMES ARRANGED
UNDER THE FOLLOWING SECTIONS:


TRAVEL $ SCIENCE ẹẸ FICTION
THEOLOGY & PHILOSOPHY
HISTORY $ CLASSICAL
FOR YOUNG PEOPLE
ESSAYS ® ORATORY
POETRY & DRAMA
BIOGRAPHY
REFERENCE
ROMANCE


a
Wi


THE ORDINARY EDITION IS BOUND
IN CLOTH WITH GILT DESIGN AND
` COLOURED TOP. THERE IS ALSO A
LIBRARY EDITION IN REINFORCED CLOTH


-Lonpon: J. M. DENT & SONS Ltp.
New York: H. TPR. DURCONT CO


Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2025


~https://archive.org/details/owb_CO-CEY-112


== M E
FAN. EELNE
elo Q


\
E g,
HA tO
À i
Q © i


H ranas
* RN
: Y/N 9 By
Ñ d T OS
uf TAN
ANY
\ 2


FAG
Voss


`


Ss


cd
9


Z


A)
g Ñ fan. ;
Te ry 4 ys
$ a A
« > () Ox) $
th (hy D
BoC at a YY | S 1
ab y f S
ee a YAN
A


H
T


=
= ~<a TAN
n
AN


aN War,
BSB |
) ag


O


3 S
Lie. “De

> e\ So: >

v aa 5


A


AFA
GY


ra


<%


| ee BA C LI fs

i VE (=) 9 A g 2

\ : \ Yo a> (Lea
A ANE NYAN B,
I A Nei VAA OANA AWD, eK Po
CANVI res Zz) AN ANN


COY


ji i |


Ši By, VLL f
; he |
W A Lr AN A Q y
A A $
y v, oes aK A
|!
= ‘ al


Dy
———>


i ô WIO


UA PUBLISHED BYJ-M:DENT IW


| p ANII
A], & SONS ITP &IN NEWYORK Ff
B hg i A


7N
M
NN Le Up
\
PA


Nay


GON?
LENG W/o


97950


First [sSsUE OF THIS EDITION . 1912
REPRINTED $ $ A se O20


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN


INTRODUCTION


Trasumanar significa per verba
non st porta ; però Vesemplo basti
a cut esperienza grazia serba.


THERE are few figures in history more strange and beautiful
than that of Jacob Boehme. With a few exceptions the out-
_ ward events of his life were unremarkable. He was born in
21575 at the village Alt Seidenberg, two miles from Goerlitz
= in Germany and close to the Bohemian border. His parents
were poor, and in childhood he was put to mind their cattle.
It was in the solitude of the fields that he first beheld a vision,
and assuredly his contemplative spirit must have been well
nourished by the continual companionship of nature.

Physically he was not robust (though he never had a sick-
ness), and for this reason his parents, when he was fourteen,
apprenticed him to a shoemaker. Of his apprenticeship
nothing is recorded, I think, except a story about a mysterious
man who came once to the shop when the master was away,
and taking Jacob by both hands foretold to him the great
-~ work that he should accomplish.

In 1599, when he was four-and-twenty, he became a master
shoemaker, and in the same year he married the daughter
of a butcher. The girl developed into a capable considerate
woman, and they lived together happily until Boehme died.
They had four sons and probably two daughters, but his
children do not figure prominently in the story of his life.
Already he had been visited by a sudden illumination of mind,
and in 1600 he experienced the second of those marvellous
ecstasies that gave splendour to the whole of his after-life.
This, also, was followed by a third and still more brilliant
illumination that made clear and complete much that in his
previous visions had been obscure and unrelated.

The more dramatic portion of his life begins, however, with
the publication of his first book (about 1612). At first he
called it Morning-Glow, but at the suggestion of a friend he

1 The biographic substance of this introduction is principally drawn
from Dr. Hartmann’s rare volume, and from Professor Deussen’s Preface
to the magnificent edition of Boehme’s works which has just been produced


under the enthusiastic editorship of Mr. C. J. Barker.
vi


Vill Jacob Boehme


altered the title to that under which it has become world-
famous—A uvora.

Now although Lutheranism had severely shaken the old
orthodoxy, it had itself become, in Boehme’s time, an ortho-
doxy just as rigid. Quite naturally the book was read by the
pastor of Goerlitz, one Gregorius Richter. He was a man
intolerant, conceited, violent of temper, and obtuse of intellect.
He despised and feared the shoemaker. The book ruffled him
into a self-righteous passion, and hurrying to the City Council
he demanded that Boehme should be banished. The Council
was afraid to refuse, and Boehme (like nearly all the truth-
bringers) was exiled from his native town.

On the morrow, however, the Council convened again. Its
members were stirred by a fine shame when it was put to them
that they had banished a citizen of stainless reputation, and
one, indeed, who regularly attended church. They recalled
him at once, but on condition that he should write no books.

In the following year he changed his occupation. Literary
work had caused his business to decline, and having sold the
shop he journeyed to the larger cities of the neighbourhood
(such, for example, as Prague and Dresden) selling woollen
gloves; but after a while it was no longer possible for him to
disobey the inner command that he should give to men his
revelations, and in these last ten years he composed the unique
and shining books of which we have a selection in this volume.

Gregorius Richter, as we should expect, by no means left
him at peace. He was denounced from the pulpit and in his
own hearing. Scurrilous treatises were flung at him, treatises
full of personal abuse and ignoble sneers at his profession.
<“ His writing,” observed those who represented the Son of the
carpenter, “ smells overmuch of cobbler’s pitch;”’ and again
we read, “ Will ye have the words of. Jesus Christ or the words
of a shoemaker?’’ The shoemaker answered them gently
and with dignity, as when he declared, “ Not I, the I that I
am, knows these things, but God knows them in me.”

In 1624 his friend Abraham von Frankenburg republished a
selection of his writings under the title of The Way to Christ.
Its radiant beauty impelled the respect of many who belonged
to the orthodox church, and this very fact inflamed the
Tertullians of hisnative town. Again they banished him on the
charge of impiety, and even refused that he should say farewell
to his wife and sons. He went to Dresden. There already he
had found a friend in Dr. Hinkelmann. It is pleasant to


Introduction 1X


_ record that while he was at Dresden the emperor convened a
meeting of eminent divines, that Boehme was invited, and that
the depth and spirituality of his thought, together with the
charm and modesty with which he expressed it, were received
with admiration by many and with enthusiasm by the learned

_ doctors Gerhard and Meissner.

But at the end of the year (November 20, 1624) he died,
happily and in the presence of a loving and beloved son. He
had foretold the very hour of his death. So relentless were his
opponents in Goerlitz that, until the intervention of the

„powerful Count Hannibal von Drohna, they refused a burial

_ service, and the very priest who had attended him in death,

- being forced by the Council to make an oration, began by
declaring that he would rather walk twenty miles than praise

the gentle Boehme. The elaborate cross, too, which was put

_ upon his tomb was torn down in anger.

We are told by Frankenburg, his friend, that he was short

in stature, “worn and very plain,” with “grey eyes, that
lightened into a celestial blue, a low forehead, a thin beard,
and an aquiline nose.”

Now in the study of mysticism we soon find the essential
experience of all mystics to have been identical, and that
among them is no figure more representative than Jacob

_ Boehme: so that when we read this book we are like men
who from the vantage-point of one of its highest hills can see
below and around them the whole expanse of a beautiful and
unearthly island. If it allures us we shall then delight in
exploring its verdant valleys or spirit-peopled woods or quiet
starlit gardens, and all the mysterious birds and blossoms that
fly or flutter within them; but if it does not seem attractive

we can push off and sail for another country. By no true
philalethe can mysticism be honourably ignored. It is either

the noblest folly or the grandest achievement of man’s mind.

Alexander and Napoleon were ambitious, but their ambition
dwindles to insignificance when it is compared with that of
the mystic. The purpose of the mystic is the mightiest and
most solemn that can ever be, for the central aim of all
mysticism is to soar out of separate personality up to the very
consciousness of God.

-- So well, indeed, had Roman Catholicism taught those who
were religious the insignificance of the human soul that few
among the European mystics of the Middle Ages or the
Renaissance were so brilliantly conscious that they could cry


a Jacob Boehme


out boldly with Meister Eckhardt, “ I truly have need of God,
but God has need of me.” Often they shrank from the ultimate
experience, wholly worshipping God indeed, but retaining ever
a sense of separateness. „Their very humility was the final
veil of egotism which they dared not rend.

Jacob Boehme, the last of the great European mystics,
having imagined the Spirit which pervades the universe, knew
well how little was the stature of his human personality; but
he had realised that God was verily within him, and he spoke
with the uprightness of a divine being. Unflaggingly he
counsels men (as in The Supersensual Life) to turn away
from the worthless and separated self which hungers for honour
or for bodily comfort, in order that they should rediscover
within themselves “ what was before nature and creature.”
And he means by this phrase “ that light which lighteth every
man who cometh into the world.” It is here, he says, now
and always: we have but to extricate our consciousness from
all that is the effect of our time and place. We have but to
quiet our own thoughts and desires, and we shall hear at once
the harmonies of heaven.

The danger of such a doctrine is apparent. The true mystic
may safely follow his Inward Light, but the enchanted apples
are guarded by dragons and are only to be captured by the
strong. Many a self-styled mystic has wasted his life in
“waiting for the spark that never came: ” wasted, we say,
though surely not worse wasted than the thousands of lives
that, for all their activity, bring nothing to the soul. It is
something at least to have striven for the noblest of all ends.
We must choose either safety or romance, and mysticism is the
romance of religion; the mystic an explorer in the spiritual
world. He does not use the instruments of intellect. He
experiments. Perhaps, like the Persian Sufi poets, he thinks
of God as the Great Beloved, and then, directing all his power
of love to the most glorious idea that he is able to conceive,
he finds that his emotion like a river has carried him into a
state of soul in which he is vividly conscious of the Divine
Presence. In that state he beholds the visible world as it
were from within. He perceives the spiritual cause of all
these material effects. He understands the essential nature
of trees and flowers and mountains and the live creatures of
the world. No longer does he see men by those dim lights
that penetrate the dense and cloudy world of matter. He
sees them as angelic toilers bowed by the burden of their own


-


Introduction Xi


mundane selves. And he knows the insignificance of much
that we deem important, the deep value of much that we
count accessory, for having cleansed his vision of all personal
impediment he apprehends the true proportion of all the
elements that compose the universe. The vast realisations


that shine within him then are by their nature not easy to
_ express in common terms. Who that has loved could explain


Whey


his experience to one that had never loved? Only those
who are near can understand, and that is why so often the
words of mystics are obscure.

Sometimes the seer will attempt to explain his illumined


_ state, like St. John or Jalalu-d-din Rumi, by the use of brilliant


symbols adapted from the material world; sometimes, like


_ Plotinus or Boehme, by the use of the most abstract words in


Aar


-order that the mind may be led away from worldly associa-


tions: but all alike have looked upon one splendour. By
many ways they have travelled homeward to that ideal state
in which alone the unshackled soul has perfect freedom, and
in this book, assuredly, we are communing with one who, if
any among men has ever done so, broke free from the bonds
of personality and could look upon the universe with the eyes


“of God.


CLIFFORD BAX.


BIBLIOGRAPHY


Worxs.—Aurora, 1612; The Three Principles, 1619; The Threefold
Life of Man, 1620; Answers to the Forty Questions of the Soul, 1620;
Of the Incarnation of Christ, 1620; The Great Six Points, 1620; The
Heavenly and Earthly Mystery, 1620; Of the Last Times, 1620; De
Signatura Rerum, 1621; The Four Complexions, 1621; An Apology to
Balthazar Tylken, 1621; Considerations upon Isaias Stiefel’s Book, 1621;
Of True Repentance, 1622; Of True Resignation, 1622; Of Regeneration,
1622; A Book of Predestination and Election of God, 1623; A Com-
pendium of Repentance, 1623; Mysterium Magnum, 1623; A Table of
the Principles, 1624; Of the Supersensual Life, 1624; Of the Divine
Vision, 1624; Of the Two Testaments of Christ, 1624; A Discourse
between a Soul Hungry and Thirsty after the Fountain of Life and a Soul
Enlightened, 1624; An Apology against Gregory Richter, 1624; Of 177
Theosophic Questions, 1624; An Epitome of the Mysterium Magnum,
1624; The Holy Weeks, 1624; Of the Divine Revelation, 1624; Of the
Errors of the Sects of Ezekiel Metts and Isaias Stiefel, 1624; Of the Last
Judgment, 1624; Letters to Divers Persons, 1624. Several Treatises of
Jacob Boehme, 1661, and Remainder of Books written by Jacob Boehme,
1662, Englished by J. Sparrow (a re-issue of Sparrow’s translation is now
in progress, 1910-12, by C. J. Barker). First collected edition of Works,
Amsterdam, 1675; later editions, 6 vols., Leipzig, 1831-46; William Law’s
English edition, 4 vols., London, 1764-81 (the present volume follows the
text of Law’s edition).


BIOGRAPHIES.—Life of One Jacob Behmen, 1644; Memoirs of the Life,
Death, Burial and Wonderful Writings of ‘Jacob Behmen, by Francis
Okely, 1762; Works of Jacob Behmen, translated, with a Life of the
Author, by Wm. Law, 1764-72-81; His Life and’ Teaching, by H. L.
Martensen, oe Life and Doctrines, by F. Hartmann, 1891; An Appre-
ciation, by Dr. A. Whyte, 1894.


II.


VIII.


CONTE NeFS


SIGNATURA RERUM


. How that all whatever is spoken of God without the Know-


ledge of the Signature is dumb and without Understanding,
and that in the Mind of Man the Signature lies very exactly
composed, according to the Being of all Beings


Of the Opposition and Combat in the Essence of all Essences,
whereby the Ground of the Sympathy and Antipathy in
Nature may be seen, and also the Corruption and Cure of
each Thing .


. Of the great Mystery of all Beings


Of the Birth of the four Elements and Stars, in the metalline
and creaturely Property 4 5 A é


. Of the Sulphurean Death, and how the dead Body is revived


and replaced into its first Glory or Holiness


. How a Water and Oil is generated; and of the Difference of


the Water and Oil, and of the vegetable Life and Growth .


. How Adam (while he was in Paradise) and also Lucifer were


glorious Angels, and how they were corrupted and spoiled
through Imagination and Pride .


Of the Sulphurean Sude, or Seething of the Earth; how the
Vegetation proceeds from the Earth; and also the Differ-
ence of Sex, and various Kinds of Creatures; an open
Gate for the searching Philosopher .


. Of the Signature, shewing how the inward [Ens] signs the


outward


. Of the inward and outward Cure of Man . .


. Of the Process of Christ in his Suffering, Dying, and Rising


again: Of the Wonder of the Sixth Kingdom in the Mother
of all Beings; how the Consummatum Est was finished, and
how likewise, by way of Similitude, it is accomplished and
effected in the Grand Philosophic Work, or Universal
Tincture 2 .


xiii


PAGE


56


76


gt
108


129


xiv Jacob Boehme


CHAP.

XII. Of the Seventh Form in the Kingdom of the Mother; shewing
how the Seventh Kingdom, viz. the Solar Kingdom is again
opened and revived, set forth in the Similitude of Christ’s
Resurrection 5 ‘


XIII. Of the Enmity [contrary Will or annoying Distemper] of the
Spirit and Body, and of their Cure and Restoration .


XIV. Of the Wheel of Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt; of the Generation
of Good and Evil: how the one is changed into the other,
and how the one manifests its Property in the other, and
yet remains in the first Creation in the Wonder of God to
his own Manifestation and Glory .


XV. Of the Will of the great Mystery in Good and Evil; how a
good and evil Will originally arises, and how the one intro-
duces itself into the other . . 4 g


XVI. Of the Eternal Signature and Heavenly Joy; why all Things
were brought into Evil and Good; wherein the real Ground
of Election and Reprobation may be rightly understood


OF THE SUPERSENSUAL LiFE: Two Dialogues between a Scholar or
Disciple and his Master—


Dialogue I. . 4 . 3 . . z
Dialogue II. . 9 : . z ; . .


THE WAY FROM DARKNESS TO TRUE ILLUMINATION: A Discourse
between a Soul Hungry and Thirsty and a Soul Enlightened


PAGE


152


162


176


196


210


227
245


277


SIGNATURA RERUM;
THE
SIGNATURE OF ALL THINGS.
Shewing the Srcn and SIGNIFICATION of
The several Forms and Suaress in the CREATION;
AND WHAT THE


BEGINNING, RUIN, AND CURE OF
EVERYTHING IS.


IT PROCEEDS OUT OF


Eternity into Time, and again out of Time into
Eternity,


AND COMPRIZES ALL MYSTERIES,


B 569


PREFACE TO THE READER


=


Tuts book is a true mystical mirror of the highest wisdom.
The best treasure that a man can attain unto in this world is
true knowledge; even the knowledge of himself: For man is
the great mystery of God, the microcosm, or the complete
abridgment of the whole universe: He is the mirandum Dei
opus, God’s masterpiece, a living emblem and hieroglyphic of

< eternity and time; and therefore to know whence he is, and
what his temporal and eternal being and well-being are, ‘must
needs be that one necessary thing, to which all our chief study
should aim, and in comparison of which all the wealth of this
world is but dross, and a loss to us.

Hence Solomon, the wisest of the kings of Israel, says:
“ Happy is the man that findeth wisdom, and the man that
getteth understanding; for the merchandise of it is better than
the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof than fine gold;

` she is more precious than rubies, and all things that can be
desired are not to be compared unto her.”

This is that wisdom which dwells in nothing, and yet
possesses all things, and the humble resigned soul is its play-
fellow; this is the divine alloquy, the inspiration of the
Almighty, the breath of God, the holy unction, which sanctifies
the soul to be the temple of the Holy Ghost, which instructs it

_ aright in all things, and searches ra 240 rév Oeôv,! the depths
of God.

This is the precious pearl, whose beauty is more glorious, and
whose virtue more sovereign than the sun: It is a never-failing

comfort in all afflictions, a balsam for all sores, a panacea for all
diseases, a sure antidote against all poison, and death itself; it
is that joyful and assured companion and guide, which never
forsakes a man, but convoys him through this valley of misery
and death into the blessed paradise of perfect bliss.
_ If you ask, What is the way to attain to this wisdom? Behold!
Christ, who is the way, the truth, and the life, tells you plainly
in these words; ‘‘ If any man will come after me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross daily and follow me;’’? or as he
SmCor, i, 10; 2 Luketx. 23:


3


4 Jacob Boehme


says elsewhere, “ Unless you be born again, you cannot see the
kingdom of heaven: ” or as St. Paul says, “ If any man seemeth
to be wise in this world, let him become a fool that he may
be wise.” ?

Herein lies that simple childlike way to the highest wisdom,
which no sharp reason or worldly learning can reach unto; nay,
it is foolishness to reason, and therefore so few go the way to
find it: The proud sophisters and wiselings of this world have
always trampled it under foot with scorn and contempt, and
have called it enthusiasm, madness, melancholy, whimsy, fancy,
etc., but wisdom is justified of her children.

Indeed, every one is not fit for or capable of the knowledge
of the eternal and temporal nature in its mysterious operation,
neither is the proud covetous world worthy to receive a clear
manifestation of it; and therefore the only wise God (who
giveth wisdom to every one that asketh it aright of him) has
locked up the jewel in his blessed treasury, which none can open
but those that have the key; which is this, viz., “ Ask, and it
shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it shail
be opened unto you: ” The Father will give the Spirit to them
that ask him for it.

This is the true theosophic school wherein this author learned
the first rudiments and principles of wisdom, and to which we
must go if we would understand his deep writings: For we must
know that the sons of Hermes, who have commenced in the
high school of true magic and theosophy, have always spoken
their hidden wisdom in a mystery; and have so couched it under
shadows and figures, parables and similies, that none can
understand their obscure, yet clear writings, but those who
have had admittance into the same school, and have tasted of
the Feast of Pentecost.

And this does not seem at all strange to the children of
divine Mercury; for the mysteries of philosophy, divinity, and
theosophy must not be profaned, and laid open to the view of
the outward astral reason, which turns all to its selfish pride,
covetousness, envy, wrath, and cunning hypocrisy; and there-
fore a parabolical or magical phrase or dialect is the best and
plainest habit and dress that mysteries can have to travel in up
and down this wicked world: And thus parables have a double
and different respect and use; for as they conceal and hide
secrets from the rude and vulgar sort, who are not able or

TICOLE WVU, SY


w


Preface to the Reader is


" patient to bear anything but what suits with their common


conceits and opinions, so likewise they sweetly lead the mind
of the true searcher into the depths of wisdom’s council. They
are as the cloudy pillar of Moses; they have a dark part, and
they have a light part; they are dark to the Egyptians, the
-pharisaical sons of sophistry, but light to the true Israel, the


children of the mystery.


And therefore whoever will be nurtured and trained up by
Sophia, and learn to understand and speak the language of
wisdom, must be born again of and in the Word of Wisdom,
Christ Jesus, the Immortal Seed: The divine essence which


_God breathed into his paradisical soul must be revived, and


7 he must become one again with that which he was in God before


he was a creature, and then his Eternal Spirit may enter
into that which is within the veil, and see not only the literal,
but the moral, allegorical, and anagogical meaning of the wise


_ and their dark sayings: He then will be fit to enter, not only into
_ Solomon’s porch, the outer court of natural philosophy, sense
` and reason, but likewise into the inward court of holy and


spiritual exercises, in divine understanding and knowledge; and
so he may step into the most inward and holiest place of theo-
sophical mysteries, into which none are admitted to come, but
those who have received the high and holy unction.

I will now endeavour briefly to hint to the reader what this


_ book contains, though in it the spirit of wisdom cannot be


delineated with pen and ink, no more than a sound can be


_ painted, or the wind grasped in the hollow of the hand: But


know, that in it he deciphers and represents in a lively manner


_ the Signature of all Things, and gives you the contents of


eternity and time, and glances at all mysteries.
Herein the author sets forth fundamentally the birth, sym-


; pathy, and antipathy of all beings; how all beings originally


arise out of one eternal mystery, and how that same mystery
begets itself in itself from eternity to eternity; and likewise


how all things, which take their original out of this eternal


mystery, may be changed into evil, and again out of evil into
good; with a clear and manifest demonstration how man has
turned himself out of the good into the evil, and how his trans-
mutation is again out of the evil into the good: Moreover, herein
is declared the outward cure of the body; how the outward life
may be freed from sickness by its likeness or assimulate, and
be again introduced into its first essence; where also, by way


6 Jacob Boehme


of parable and similitude, the Philosopher’s Stone is with great
life described for the temporal cure; and along with it the holy
Corner Stone, Christ alone, for the everlasting cure, regeneration,
and perfect restitution of all the true, faithful, “eternal souls,
In a word, his intent is to let you know the inward power and
property by the outward sign; for nature has given marks and
notes to everything, whereby it may be known; and this is
the Language of Nature, which signifies for what everything is
good and profitable: And herein lies the mystery, or central
science of the high philosophical work in the true spagiric art,
which consummates the cure, not only for the body, but for
the soul.

But let the reader know that the sharp speculation of his
own reason will never pry into the depth of this book, but
rather bring him into a maze of doubtful notions, wherein he
will bewilder himself, and think the author’s phrase tedious
and strange; and therefore the understanding lies only in the
manifestation of that Spirit, which in the Day of Pentecost gave
forth the true sense and meaning of all languages in one: Now if
that Spirit rules and dwells in you, then you may understand this
author in the deepest ground, according to your creaturely con-
stellation, both in the eternal and temporal nature; but if not,
these things will be but as a relation of trifles and chimeras to
you. And therefore if you be of a saturnine property, dull and
dark, shut up in the house of Luna, soar not too high with your
censure and scorn, or with a critical speculation of your outward
reason, lest you fall indeed into the deep abyss of darkness;
but wait patiently, till the divine Sol shall shine again in your
dark and selfish Saturn, and give you some beams and glimpses
of his eternal light, and then your angry Mars will be changed
into pure love-zeal, and your prating, pharisaical and hypo-
critical Mercury into a meek, mild, and Christian speaking of
God’s works and wonders in the dispensation of his wisdom;
and your doubtful, unsettled Jupiter will be turned into a
plerophory, or most ‘full assurance of true joy and saving comfort
in your religion; your earthly Venus into heavenly love, and
your eclipsed mutable Luna into the pure, parece and crystal-
line streams of light, life, and glory.

But the proud scorner that will take no warning is of Lucifer’s
regiment, who saw the mystery of God’s kingdom to stand in
meekness, simplicity, and deep humility, and therefore out of
his pride would aspire to be above the divine love, and harmony


Preface to the Reader 7


a obedience to God’s will, and so fell into the abyss of the
_ dark world, into the outmost darkness of the first principle,
which we call Hell, where he and his legions are captives; from
which the Almighty God of Love deliver us.

I will end with the words of the author at the conclusion of
_ the book, where he says thus; “ I have faithfully, with all true
admonition, represented to the reader what the Lord of all
beings has given me; he may behold himself in this looking-
glass + within and without, and so he shall find what and who
he is: Every reader, be he good or bad, will find his profit and
benefit therein: It is a very clear gate of the great mystery of
all beings: By glosses, commentaries, curiosity and self-wit,
“none shall be able to reach or apprehend it in his own ground;
but it may very well meet and embrace the true seeker, and
create him much profit and joy; yea be helpful to him in all
natural things, provided he applies himself to it aright, and
seeks in the fear of God, seeing it is now a time of seeking; for
_a lily blossoms upon the mountains and valleys in all the ends
of the earth: ‘ He that seeketh findeth.’”’ And so I commend
the reader to the grace and love of Jesus Christ, in whom are
hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.

1 Mirror.


id the ae ep hae
RONS ROTA W TOCE


E


ae Ot


,
+


JACOB BOEHME


SIGNATURA RERUM
tae SIGNATURE OF “ALL THINGS


CHAPTER I


HOW THAT ALL WHATEVER IS SPOKEN OF GOD WITHOUT THE
KNOWLEDGE OF THE SIGNATURE IS DUMB AND WITHOUT
UNDERSTANDING; AND THAT IN THE MIND OF MAN THE
SIGNATURE LIES VERY EXACTLY COMPOSED ACCORDING TO
THE ESSENCE OF ALL ESSENCES 1


I1. ALL whatever is spoken, written, or taught of God, without
the knowledge of the signature is dumb and void of under-
standing; for it proceeds only from an historical conjecture,
from the mouth of another, wherein the spirit without knowledge
is dumb; but if the spirit opens to him the signature, then he
understands the speech of another; and further, he understands
how the spirit has manifested and revealed itself (out of the
essence through the principle) in the sound with the voice.
For though I see one to speak, teach, preach, and write of God,


_ and though I hear and read the same, yet this is not sufficient


for me to understand him; but if his sound and spirit out of


_his signature and similitude enter into my own similitude, and


imprint his similitude into mine, then I may understand him
really and fundamentally, be it either spoken or written, if he
has the hammer that can strike my bell.

2. By this we know, that all human properties proceed from
one; that they all have but one only root and mother; otherwise
one man could not understand another in the sound, for with
the sound or speech the form notes and imprints itself into the
similitude of another; a like tone or sound catches and moves


- another, and in the sound the spirit imprints its own similitude,


which it has conceived in the essence, and brought to form in
the principle.
1 Being of all beings.


9


10 Jacob Boehme


3. So that in the word may be understood in what the spirit
has conceived, either in good or evil; and with this signature
he enters into another man’s form, and awakens also in the
other such a form in the signature; so that both forms mutually
assimulate together in one form, and then there is one com-
prehension, one will, one spirit, and also one understanding.

4. And then secondly we understand, that the signature or
form is no spirit, but the receptacle, container, or cabinet of the
spirit, wherein it lies; for the signature stands in the essence,
and is as a lute that liest still, and is indeed a dumb thing that
is neither heard or understood; but if it be played upon, then
its form is understood, in what form and tune it stands, and
according to what note it is set. Thus likewise the signature
of nature in its form is a dumb essence; it is as a prepared
instrument of music, upon which the will’s spirit plays; what
strings he touches, they sound according to their property.

5. In the human mind the signature lies most artificially
composed, according to the essence of all essences; and man
wants nothing but the wise master that can strike his instru-
ment, which is the true spirit of the high might of eternity; if
that be quickened in man, that it stirs and acts in the centre
of the mind, then it plays on the instrument of the human form,
and even then the form is uttered? with the sound in the word:
As his instrument was set in the time of his incarnation,’ so it
sounds, and so is his knowledge; the inward manifests itself in
the sound of the word, for that is the mind’s natural knowledge
of itself.

6. Man has indeed all the forms of all the three worlds lying
in him; for he is a complete image of God, or of the Being of all
beings; only the order is placed in him at his incarnation; for
there are three work-masters in him which prepare his form [or
signature], viz. the threefold fiat, according to the three worlds;
and they are in contest about the form, and the form is figured
according to the contest; which of the masters holds the pre-
dominant rule, and obtains it in the essence, according to that
his instrument is tuned, and the other lie hid, and come behind
with their sound, as it plainly shews itself:

7. So soon as man is born into this world, his spirit plays upon
his instrument, so that his innate genuine form [or signature]
in good or evil is seen by his words and conversation; for as
his instrument sounds, accordingly the senses and thoughts


1 Or, formed itself; or originally put forth itself.
2 Proceeds from the mouth. 3 Or conception.


Signatura Rerum Il


proceed from the essence of the mind, and so the external spirit
of the will is carried in its behaviour, as is to be seen both in
men and beasts; that there is a great difference in the pro-


_ creation, that one brother and sister does not as the other.


8. Further we are to know, that though one fiat thus keeps
the upper hand, and figures the form according to itself, that
yet the other two give their sound, if their instrument be but
played upon; as it is seen that many a man, and also many a
beast, though it is very much inclined either to good or evil,
yet it is moved either to evil or good by a contrary tune, and
often lets its inbred signature [or figure] fall, when the contrary


-_ tune is played upon his hidden lute or form: As we see that an


evil man is often moved by a good man to repent of and cease
from his iniquity, when the good man touches and strikes his
hidden instrument with his meek and loving spirit.

g. And thus also it happens to the good man, that when the
wicked man strikes his hidden instrument with the spirit of his
wrath, that then the form of anger is stirred up also in the good
man, and the one is set against the other, that so one might be
the cure and healer of the other. For as the vital signature,
that is, as the form of life is figured in the time of the fiat at the
conception, even so is its natural spirit; for it takes its rise out
of the essence of all the three principles, and such a will it acts
and manifests out of its property.

to. But now the will may be broken; for when a stronger
comes, and raises his inward signature with his introduced sound
and will’s spirit, then its upper dominion loses the power, right,
and authority; which we see in the powerful influence of the sun,
how that by its strength it qualifies a bitter and sour fruit,
turning it into a sweetness and pleasantness; in like manner
how a good man corrupts among evil company, and also how
that a good herb cannot sufficiently shew its real genuine virtue
in a bad soil; for in the good man the hidden evil instrument
is awakened, and in the herb a contrary essence is received from
the earth; so that often the good is changed into an evil, and
the evil into a good.

11. And now observe, as it stands in the power and pre-
dominance of the quality, so it is signed and marked externally
in its outward form, signature, or figure; man in his speech,
will, and behaviour, also with the form of the members which
he has, and must use to that signature, his inward form is noted
in the form of his face;! and thus also is a beast, an herb, and

1 His look, or physiognomy.


I2 Jacob Boehme


the trees; everything as it is inwardly [in its innate virtue and
quality] so, it is outwardly signed; and though it falls out, that
often a thing is changed from evil into good, and from good into
evil, yet it has its external character, that the good or evil [that .
is, the change] may be known.

12. For man is known herein by his daily practice, also by
his course and discourse; for the upper instrument, which is
most strongly drawn, is always played upon: Thus also it is
with a beast that is wild, but when it is overawed and tamed,
and brought to another property, it does not easily shew its
first innate form, unless it be stirred up, and then it breaks forth,
and appears above all other forms.

13. Thus it is likewise with the herbs of the earth; if an herb
be transplanted out of a bad soil into a good; then it soon gets
a stronger body, and a more pleasant smell and power, and shews
the inward essence externally; and there is nothing that is
created or born in nature, but it also manifests its internal form
externally, for the internal continually labours or works itself
forth to manifestation: As we know it in the power and form
of this world, how the one only essence has manifested itself
with the external birth in the desire of the similitude, how it
has manifested itself in so many forms and shapes, which we
see and know in the stars and elements, likewise in the living
creatures, and also in the trees and herbs.

14. Therefore the greatest understanding lies in the signature,
wherein man (viz. the image of the greatest virtue) may not
only learn to know himself, but therein also he may learn to
know the essence of all essences; for by the external form of
all creatures, by their instigation, inclination and desire, also by
their sound, voice, and speech which they utter, the hidden
spirit is known; for nature has given to everything its language
according to its essence and form, for out of the essence the
language or sound arises, and the fiat of that essence forms the
quality of the essence in the voice or virtue which it sends forth,
to the animals in the sound, and to the essentials 1 in smell, virtue,
and form.

15. Everything has its mouth to manifestation; and this is
the language of nature, whence everything speaks out of its
property, and continually manifests, declares, and sets forth
itself for what it is good or profitable; for each thing manifests
its mother, which thus gives the essence and the will to the form.

1 Vegetables.


CHAPTER II


OF THE OPPOSITION AND COMBAT IN THE ESSENCE OF ALL
ESSENCES, WHEREBY THE GROUND OF THE ANTIPATHY AND
SYMPATHY IN NATURE MAY BE SEEN, AND ALSO THE COR-
RUPTION AND CURE OF EACH THING


_ 1. SEEING then there are so many and divers forms, that the
one always produces and affords out of its property a will
different in one from another, we herein understand the con-
trariety and combat in the Being of all beings, how that one
does oppose, poison, and kill another, that is, overcome its.
essence, and the spirit of the essence, and introduces it into
another form, whence sickness and pains arise, when one essence
destroys another.

2. And then we understand herein the cure, how the one
heals another, and brings it to health; and if this were not, there
were no nature, but an eternal stillness, and no will; for the
contrary will makes the motion, and the original of the seeking,
that the opposite sound seeks the rest, and yet in the seeking it
only elevates and more enkindles itself.

3. And we are to understand how the cure of each thing
consists in the assimulate; for in the assimulate arises the
satisfaction of the will, viz. its highest joy; for each thing
desires a will of its likeness, and by the contrary will it is dis-
comfited;! but if it obtains a will of its likeness, it rejoices in
the assimulate, and therein falls into rest, and the enmity is.
turned into joy.

4. For the eternal nature has produced nothing in its desire,
except a likeness out of itself; and if there were not an ever-
lasting mixing, there would be an eternal peace in nature, but
so nature would not be revealed and made manifest, in the
combat it becomes manifest; so that each thing elevates itself,
and would get out of the combat into the still rest, and so it
runs to and fro, and thereby only awakens and stirs up the
combat.

5. And we find clearly in the light of nature, that there is no-
better help and remedy for this opposition, and that it has no:

1 Made sick. ,
ES


14 Jacob Boehme


higher cure than the liberty, that is, the light of nature, which
is the desire of the spirit.

6. And then we find, that the essence cannot be better
remedied than with the assimulate; for the essence is a being,
and its desire is after being: Now every taste desires only its
like, and if it obtains it, then its hunger is satisfied, appeased
and eased, and it ceases to hunger, and rejoices in itself, whereby
the sickness falls into a rest in itself; for the hunger of the
contrariety ceases to work.

7. Seeing now that man’s life consists in three principles, viz.
in a threefold essence, and has also a threefold spirit out of the
property of each essence, viz. first, according to the eternal
nature, according to the fire’s property; and secondly, according
to the property of the eternal light and divine essentiality; and
thirdly, according to the property of the outward world: There-
upon we are to consider the property of this threefold spirit,
and also of this threefold essence and will; how each spirit with
its essence introduces itself into strife and sickness, and what
its cure and remedy is.

8. We understand that without nature there is an eternal
stillness and rest, viz. the Nothing; and then we understand
that an eternal will arises in the nothing, to introduce the
nothing into something, that the will might find, feel, and
behold itself.

g. For in the nothing the will would not be manifest to itself,
wherefore we know that the will seeks itself, and finds itself in
itself, and its seeking is a desire, and its finding is the essence of
the desire, wherein the will finds itself.

10. It finds nothing except only the property of the hunger,
which is itself, which it draws into itself, that is, draws itself into
itself, and finds itself in itself; and its attraction into itself
makes an overshadowing or darkness in it, which is not in the
liberty, viz. in the nothing; for the will of the liberty over-
shadows itself with the essence of the desire, for the desire makes
essence and not the will.

11. Now that the will must be in darkness is its contrariety,
and it conceives in itself another will to go out from the darkness
again into the liberty, viz. into the nothing, and yet it cannot
reach the liberty from without itself, for the desire goes out-
wards, and causes source and darkness; therefore the will
(understand the reconceived will) must enter inwards, and yet
there is no separation.

12. For in itself before the desire is the liberty, viz. the


NYA


Signatura Rerum I5


nothing, and the will may not be a nothing, for it desires to
manifest in the nothing; and yet no manifestation can be
effected, except only through the essence of the desire; and
the more the reconceived will desires manifestation, the more
strongly and eagerly the desire draws into itself, and makes in
itself three forms, viz. the desire, which is astringent, and makes
hardness, for it is an enclosing, when coldness arises, and the
attraction causes compunction,! and stirring in the hardness,
an enmity against the attracted hardness; the attraction is the
second form, and a cause of motion and life, and stirs itself
in the astringency and hardness, which the hardness, viz. the
enclosing,” cannot endure, and therefore it attracts more eagerly
to hold the compunction, and yet the compunction is thereby
only the stronger.

13. Thus the compunction willeth upwards, and whirls cross-
ways, and yet cannot effect it, for the hardness, viz. the desire
stays and detains it, and therefore it stands like a triangle, and
transverted orb, which (seeing it cannot remove from the place)
becomes wheeling, whence arises the mixture in the desire, viz.
the essence, or multiplicity of the desire; for the turning makes
a continual confusion and contrition, whence the anguish,
viz. the pain, the third form (or sting of sense) arises.

14. But seeing the desire, viz. the astringency becomes only
the more strong thereby (for from the stirring arises the wrath
and nature, viz. the motion), the first will to the desire is made
wholly austere and a hunger, for it is in a hard compunctive
dry essence, and also cannot get rid and quit of it, for itself


= makes the essence, and likewise possesses it, for thus it finds


l


\


itself now out of nothing in the something,® and the something


is yet its contrary will, for it is an unquietness, and the free-will
is a stillness.


15. This is now the original of enmity, that nature opposes
the free-will, and a thing is at enmity in itself; and here we
understand the centre of nature with three forms, in the original,
viz. in the first principle, it is Spirit; in the second it is Love,
and in the third principle Essence; and these three forms are
called in the third principle Sulphur, Mercury, and Sal.

16. Understand it thus: Sul is in the first principle the free-
will, or the lubet in the nothing to something, it is in the liberty
without nature; Phur is the desire of the free lubet, and makes
in itself, in the Phur, viz. in the desire, an essence, and this


1 Or sting. ; 2 Contraction, or constringency,
3 Love and anger, father and son.


16 Jacob Boehme


essence is austere by reason of the attraction, and introduces
itself into three forms (as is above mentioned) and so forward
into the fourth form, viz. into the fire; in the Phur the original
of the eternal and also external nature is understood, for the
hardness is a mother of the sharpness of all essences, and a
preserver of all essences; out of the Sul, viz. out of the lubet of
the liberty, the dark anguish becomes a shining light; and in
the third principle, viz. in the outward kingdom, Sul is the oil
of nature, wherein the life burns, and everything grows.

17. But now the Phur, viz. the desire, is not divided from
Sul; it is one word, one original also, and one essence, but it
severs itself into two properties, viz. into joy and sorrow, light
and darkness; for it makes two worlds, viz. a dark fire-world in
the austereness, and a light fire-world in the lubet of the liberty;
for the lubet of the liberty is the only cause that the fire shines,
for the original fire is dark and black, for in the shining of the
fire in the original the Deity is understood, and in the dark fire,
viz. in the anguish-source, the original of nature is understood,
and herein we do further understand the cure.

18. The source is the cure of the free lubet, viz. of the still
eternity; for the stillness finds itself alive therein, it brings itself
through the anguish-source into life, viz. into the kingdom of joy,
namely that the nothing is become an eternal life, and has found
itself, which cannot be in the stillness.

19. Secondly, we find that the Sul, viz. the lubet of the liberty,
is the curer of the desire, viz. of the anxious nature: for the
lustre of the liberty does again (from the enkindled fire out of
nature) shine in the dark anguish, and fills or satiates the
anguish with the liberty, whereby the wrath extinguishes, and
the turning orb stands still, and instead of the turning a sound
is caused in the essence.

20. This is now the form of the spiritual life, and of the
essential life; Sul is the original of the joyful life, and Phur is
the original of the essential life; the lubet is before and without
nature, which is the true Sul; and the spirit is made manifest
in nature, viz. through the source, and that in a twofold form,
viz. according to the lubet of the liberty in a source of joy,
and according to the anxious desire’s lubet; according to the
astringency, compunctive, bitter, and envious from the com-
punction, and according to the anguish of the wheel wholly
murderous and hateful; and each property dwells in itself, and
yet they are in one another; herein God’s love and anger are
understood, they dwell in each other; and the one apprehends


Signatura Rerum 17


not the other, and yet the one is the curer of the other; under-
_ stand through imagination, for the eternal is magical.

21. The second form in nature, in eternity is the Orb with
the compunctive bitter essences: for there arises the essence,
understand with the perturbation; for the nothing is still
without motion, but the perturbation makes the nothing active:
but in the third principle, viz. in the dominion in the essence, and
source of the outward world, the form is called Mercury, which
is opposite, odious, and poisonful, and the cause of life and
stirring, also the cause of the senses: Where one glance! may
conceive itself in the infinity, and then also immerse itself into

- it, where out of one only the abyssal, unsearchable, and infinite
“multiplicity may arise.

22. This form is the unquietness, and yet the seeker of rest;
and with its seeking it causes unquietness, it makes itself its
own enemy; its cure is twofold, for its desire is also twofold,
viz. according to the lubet of the liberty, according to the stillness
and meekness; and then also in the hunger according to the
rising of unquietness, and the finding of itself; the root desires
only joy with the first will, and yet it cannot obtain it, except
through the opposite source, for no joy can arise in the still
nothing; it must arise only through motion and elevation that
the nothing finds itself.

23. Now that which is found desires to enter again into the
will of the still nothing, that it may have peace and rest therein;
and the nothing is its cure; and the wrath and poison is the
remedy of the seeker and finder, that is their life which they
find, an example whereof we have in the poisonous gall, whence
in the life arises joy and sorrow, wherein we also understand a
twofold will, viz. one to the wrathful fire and anxious painful
life to the original of nature, and one to the light-life, viz. to

the joy of nature; this takes its original out of the eternal
nothing.

24. The first will’s cure is the lubet of the liberty, if it obtains
that, then it makes triumphant joy in itself; and the wrath in
the hungry desire is the curer and helper of the other will, viz.
the will of nature; and herein God’s love and anger are under-
stood, and also how evil and good are in the centre of each life,
and how no joy could arise without sorrow, and how one is the
curer of the other.

25. And here we understand the third will (which takes its
original out of both these, viz. out of such an essence, viz. out

1 Thought or sparkle of the will.
c 569 i


18 Jacob Boehme


of the mother), viz. the spirit, which has both these properties
in it, and is a son of the properties and also a lord of the same;
for in him consists the power, he may awaken which he pleases;
the properties lie in the essence, and are as a well-constituted
life, or as an instrument with many strings,! which stand still;
and the spirit, viz. the egress is the real life, he may play upon
the instrument as he pleases, in evil or good, according to love
or anger; and as he plays, and as the instrument sounds, so is
it received of its contra-tenor, viz. of the assimulate.

26. If the tune of love be played, viz. the liberty’s desire, then
is the sound received of the same liberty and love-lubet; for it
is its pleasing relish, and agreeable to its will’s desire; one
similar lubet takes another.

27. And thus likewise is it to be understood of the enmity
and contrary will; if the instrument be struck according to the
desire to nature, viz. in the wrath, anger, and bitter falsehood,
then the same contrary sound and wrathful desire receives it;
for it is of its property, and a satiating of its hunger, wherein we
understand the desire of the light, and also of the dark world;
a twofold source and property.

28. The desire of the liberty is meek, easy, and pleasant, and
it is called good;” and the desire to nature makes itself in itself
dark, dry, hungry, and wrathful, which is called God’s anger,
and the dark world, viz. the first principle; and the light world
is the second principle.

29. And we are to understand, that it is no divided essence,
but one holds the other hidden or closed up in it, and the one
is the beginning and cause of the other, also its healing and cure;
that which is awaked and stirred up, that gets dominion, and
manifests itself externally with its character, and makes a form
and signature according to its will in the external after itself.
A similitude whereof we see in an enraged man or beast; though
the outward man and beast are not in the inward world, yet the
outward nature has even the same forms; for it è arises originally
from the inward,‘ and stands upon the inward root.

30. The third form is the anxiousness which arises in nature
from the first and second form, and is the upholder or preserver
of the first and second; it is in itself the sharp fiat; and the |
second form has the Verbum, viz. the property to the word, and
it consists in three properties, and makes out of herself with the |
three the fourth, viz. the fire; in the external birth, viz. in the |
third principle, it is called Sal, or salt, according to its matter;

1 Or voices. * Or God. 3 Nature. 4 World.


Signatura Rerum ag


but in its spirit it has many forms; for it is the fire-root, the
great anguish, it arises betwixt and out of the astringency and
bitterness in the austere attraction; it is the essentiality of that
which is attracted, viz. the corporality, or comprehensibility ;
from Sulphur it is ‘of a brimstone nature, and from Mercury a
blaze or flash; it is in itself painful, viz. a sharpness of dying,
and that from the sharp attraction of the astringency: It has
a twofold fire, one cold, another hot; the cold arises from the
astringency, from the sharp attraction, and is a dark black fire;
and the hot arises from the driving forth the compunction + in
the anguish in the desire after the liberty, and the liberty is
Ws enkindler, and the raging compunction is the cold’s fire’s
awakener.?

31. These three forms are in one another as one, and yet they
are but one; but they sever themselves through the original
into many forms, and yet they have but one mother, viz. the
desiring will to manifestation, which is called the father of nature,
and of the Being of all beings.

32. Now we are to consider the hunger of the anxiety, or
the salt-spirit, and then also its satiating or fulfilling: The
anguish has in it two wills, from the original of the first will out
of the liberty to the manifestation of itself; viz. the first will is
to nature, and the other reconceived will is the son of the
first, which goes out of the manifestation again into itself into
the liberty; for it is become an eternal life in na ature, and yet
possesses not nature essentially, but dwells in itself, and pene-
trates nature as a transparent shining, and the first will goes
outwards,® for it is the desire of manifestation; it seeks itself
out of itself, and yet amasses the desire in itself; it desires to
educe the internal out of itself.

33. Thus it has two properties; with the seeking in itself
it makes the centre of nature: For it is like a poison, a will of
dreadful aspiring, like a lightning and thunder-clap; for this
desire desires only anguish, and to be horrible, to find itself in
itself, out of the nothing in the something; and the second
form ‘proceeds forth as a flagrat, or produces sound out of itself;
for it is not the desire of the first will to continue in the horrible
death, but only thus to educe itself out of the nothing, and to
find itself.

34. And we understand by the centre in itself, with the
aspiring wrathfulness, with the wrathful will to nature, the


1 Or sting of instigation. 2 Raiser, enkindler, or inflamer.
3 Or out of itself.


20 Jacob Boehme


dark world, and with the egress out of itself to manifestation,
the outward world; and with the second will out of the first,
which enters again into the liberty, we understand the light
world, or the kingdom of joy, or the true Deity.

35. The desire of the dark world is after the manifestation,
viz. after the outward world, to attract and draw the same
essentiality into it, and thereby to satisfy its wrathful hunger;
and the desire of the outward world is after the essence or life,
which arises from the pain and anguish.

36. Its desire in itself is the wonder of eternity, a mystery,
or mirror, or what is comprehended of the first will to nature.

37. The outward world’s desire is Sulphur, Mercury, and Sal;
for such an essence it is in itself, viz. a hunger after itself, and is
also its own satisfying; for Sul desires Phur, and Phur desires
Mercury, and both these desire Sal; for Sal is their son, which
they hatch in their desire, and afterwards becomes their habita-
tion, and also food.

38. Each desire desires only the essentiality of salt according
to its property; for salt is diverse; one part is sharpness of cold,
and one part sharpness of heat; also one part brimstone; and
one part salniter from Mercury.

39. These properties are in one another as one, but they sever
themselves, each dwelling in itself; for they are of a different
essence, and when one enters into another, then there is enmity,
and a flagrat. A similitude whereof we may apprehend in
thunder and lightning, which comes to pass when the great
Anguish, viz. the mother of all salts, understand the third form of
nature, impresses itself; which comes to pass from the aspect
of the sun, which stirs up the hot fire’s form, so that it is pene-
trative, as the property of the fire is; and when it reaches the
salniter, then it enkindles itself; and the salniter is in itself the
great flagrat in Mercury, viz. the flash, or compunction, which
enters into the coldness, so also into the cold sharpness of the
salt-spirit; this coldness is exceedingly dismayed at the flash of
the fire, and in a trice wraps or folds up itself in itself, whence
arises the thunder-clap (or the tempestuous flash, which gives
a stroke in the flagrat) and the flagrat goes downwards, for it
is heavy by reason of the coldness, and the sal-nitrous spirit is
light by reason of the fire, which [spirit] carries the thunder or
sound sideways, as is to be heard in tempests and thunder;
presently thereupon comes the wind or spirit out of all the four
forms one against another, for they are all four enkindled in
the penetrating flagrat; whereupon follows hail and rain; the


Signatura Rerum 2I


hail folds itself together in the coldness, in the property of the
cold salt-spirit; for the wrath attracts to itself, and turns the
water to ice, and the water arises from the meekness, viz. from
the desire of the light, for it is the essentiality of the meekness;
this the cold salt-spirit congeals into drops, and distils it upon
the earth, for before the congelation it is only as a mist, or
steam, or as a vapour, or damp.
_ 40. Thus we see this ground very exactly and properly in
thunder and lightning; for the flash, or lightning, or ethereal
blaze, goes always before, for it is the enkindled salniter; there-
upon follows the stroke in the flagrat of the coldness; as you
see, as soon as the stroke is given the astringent chamber is
opened, and a cool wind follows, and oftentimes whirling and
-wheeling; for the forms of nature are awakened, and are as a
turning wheel, and so they carry their spirit the wind.


CHAPTER III
OF THE GRAND MYSTERY OF ALL BEINGS


1. CourTEous reader, observe the meaning right; we under-
stand not by this description a beginning of the Deity, but we
shew you the manifestation of the Deity through nature; for
God is without beginning, and has an eternal beginning, and
an eternal end, which he is himself, and the nature of the inward
world is in the like essence from eternity.

2. We give you to understand this of the divine essence;
without nature God is a mystery,! understand in the nothing,
for without nature is the nothing, which is an eye of eternity,
an abyssal eye, that stands or sees in the nothing, for it is the
abyss; and this same eye is a will, understand a longing after
manifestation, to find the nothing; but now there is nothing
before the will, where it might find something, where it might
have a place to rest, therefore it enters into itself, and finds itself
through nature.

3. And we understand in the mystery without nature in the
first will two forms; one to nature, to the manifestation of the
wonder-eye; and the second form is produced out of the first,
which is a desire after virtue and power, and is the first will’s
son, its desire of joyfulness. And understand us thus; the
desire is egressive, and that which proceeds is the spirit of the
will and desire, for it is a moving, and the desire makes a form ?
in the spirit, viz. formings of the infinity of the mystery.

4. And this form [or likeness] is the eternal wisdom of the
Deity; and we understand herein the Trinity of the only Deity,
whose ground we must not know, how the first will arises in
the abyss from eternity, which is called Father; only we know
the eternal birth, and distinguish the Deity, viz. what purely
and merely concerns the Deity, or the good, from nature, and
shew you the arcanum of the greatest secret mystery; namely,
how the abyss, or the Deity, manifests itself with this eternal
generation; for God is a spirit, and as subtle as a thought or
will, and nature is his corporeal essence, understand the eternal
nature; and the outward nature of this visible comprehensible ?
world is a manifestation or external birth of the inward spirit

1 Mysterium. 2 Similitude, likeness, or signature. 3 Palpable.

22


Signatura Rerum 23


and essence in evil and good, that is, a representation, resem-
- blance, and typical similitude of the dark fire and light world.

B 5: And as we have shewn you concerning the original of
_ thunder and lightning with the tempestuous stroke; so likewise
the inward nature of the inward world is, and stands in the
generation: For the outward birth takes its original from the
inward; the inward birth is unapprehensible to ‘the creature,
but the outward is apprehensible to it; yet each property
apprehends its mother from whence it is brought forth.

6. As the soul comprehends the inward eternal nature, and
the spirit of the-soul, viz. the precious image according to God,
comprehends? the birth of the angelical light-world, and the
sidereal and elemental spirit comprehends the birth and pro- |
perty of the stars and elements; every eye sees into its mother '
from whence it was brought forth.

7. Therefore we will set down the generation of all essences |
out of all mothers and beginnings, how one generation proceeds
from another, and how one is the cause of another, and this we
will do from the eyesight of all the three mothers.

8. Let none account it impossible, seeing man is a likeness
according to and in God, an image of the Being of all beings;
and yet it stands not in the power of the creature, but in the
might of God; for the sight and science of all essences consist
alone in the clearest light.

9. We have made mention before how the external birth, viz.
the essence of this world, consists in three things, viz. in Sulphur,
Mercury, and Sal: Now we must set down and declare what it
is, seeing that all things arise from one original, and then how
its inward separation is effected, that out of one beginning
many beginnings are produced; this is now to be understood,
as is before mentioned, concerning the centre of all essences.

10. For Sulphur in the eternal beginning consists in two
forms, and so also in the outward beginning of this world: viz.
in the internal the first form, viz. the Sul consists ? in the eternal
liberty; it is the lubet of the eternal abyss, viz. a will or an
original to the desire; and the other original is the desire, which
is the first motion, viz. an hunger to the something; and in
this same hunger is the eternal beginning to the pregnant
nature,? and it is called Sulphur, viz. a conception of the liberty,
viz. of the good, and a conception or comprehension of the
desire, viz. of the austere attraction in the desire.


LOE apprehends, or conceives. 2 Or stands.
3 Or to the nature of the pregnatrix.


24 Jacob Boehme


II. Sul in the internal is God, and Phur is the nature; for
it makes a spirit of the nature of brimstone, as is to be seen
externally in the property of brimstone; for its substance is a
dry constringent matter, and is of a painful anxious fiery
property, forcing itself forth; it attracts eagerly and hardly into
itself, and parches up as a dry hunger, and its painful property
does eagerly and anxiously force itself forth: The cause and
original is this, because it stands in two beginnings, viz. in the
property of the desire, which is an attraction; and in the
property of the light or liberty, which is driving forth, or pressing
to the manifestation through the desire of nature.

12. The desire, viz. the attraction makes hardness, and is the
cause of the fire, and the lubet is a cause of the lustre or light
of the fire: Sul is light, and Phur makes fire, yet it cannot be
reduced alone in Sulphur to fire and light, but in Mercury, and
at last in Sal, which is the real body, but not of the brimstone,
but of the essence and water: And so understand, that in the
first desire, which arises in the lubet of the liberty, all things
are, and are made substantial and essential, from whence the
creation of this world is proceeded; and we find herein the
property of the earth, so likewise of all metals and stones, and
also of the astrum,! and the original of the elements, all out of
one only mother, which is the lubet and the desire, from whence
all things proceeded and still proceed.

13. For Mercury is generated in Sulphur: It is the severing,
viz. of light and darkness from one another, the breaking wheel,
and cause of the various division or multiplicity: it separates
the dark essentiality from the essentiality of the light, viz. the
metals from the gross, astringent, dark, stony, and earthly
property; for the property of the desire gives and makes dark
essence, and the property of the free lubet makes light essence,
viz. metals, and all of the same kind and resemblance.

14. Mercury has in the beginning of his birth three properties,
viz. the trembling in the austereness, and anguish from the hard
impressing of the astringent hard desire, and the expulsion of the
multiplicity, viz. the essential life; for the desire attracts very
hard to itself, and the attraction makes the motion, or sting of
trembling [or horrible compunction], and that which is im-
pressed is the anguish; but if the liberty be therein compre-
hended, it refuses it, and there arises the original of enmity, and
the severing, that one form separates from another, and a two-
fold will arises.


1 Stars.


Signatura Rerum 25


15. For the lubet of the liberty does again set its desire into the
stillness, viz. into the nothing, and forces again out of the dark-
ness of the desire’s austereness into itself, viz. into the liberty,
without the wrath of the enmity; and so it has only sharpened
itself in the austere impression in Mercury, that it is a moving
feeling life, and that its liberty is sharpened so that it becomes
a lustre, which i is, and causes a kingdom of joy in the liberty;
and so understand us, that the spirit’s dominion, viz. the spirit
and the essence + do thus separate.

16. The essence remains in the impression, and becomes
material; that is not God, but gold, or any other metal, accord-
ing to the property of the first conception in the Sulphur, or
stone, or earth, out of the desire’s own peculiar property, all
~ according to the first sude? or seething in Mercury; for no
metal can be generated without salniter, which is the flagrat in
Mercury; which also becomes material in the astringent impres-
sion, and divides itself in the separation, one part into brim-
stone, another into salniter, and a third into a salt sharpness;
whereas yet there cannot be any corporeal essence in all these,
but only the spirit of the essence; the essence proceeds wholly
out of the death through mortification, which is effected in the
great anguish of the impressure, where there is a dying source,
which is the mercurial life, where the salnitral flagrat arises as
an opening, displaying flash: For the liberty, viz. the property
of the eternal lubet, does there separate itself,3 and yet the
attracted essence out of the lubet of the liberty continues all
along in the comprehension of the attraction in the astringent
austere dark anguish: Now if the wrath enters so vehemently
into itself as to raise up the salnitral flagrat, then it apprehends
the essentiality of the free lubet in itself, from whence arises
the flagrat; for the wrath there apprehends the meekness, which
is even as if water were poured into fire, which gives a flagrat;
and then the wrath of the great anguish dies, and with the
flagrat the joy ascends, and the flagrat is out of mercury, or
out of the anguish of death, and becomes also material, but by
reason of the liberty it changes itself into white, which is salniter:
Now if the fire, viz. the horrible anxious sharpness, does again
come into it, then the salniter is dismayed, and gives a repulse; 4
for the first property [which was] before the death is again
enkindled with the brimstone spirit; a sufficient resemblance of


1 Or substance. 2 Boiling.
3 Or separates itself in itself. 4 Report, clash.


26 Jacob Boehme


which you have in gunpowder, which is the matter of these
properties.

17. Further, we are to know the dying with the enkindling of
the fire, all which is done in the flagrat; for it is a flagrat to
death, and to life; one part immerses itself into the property
of death, viz. into the wrath of the austere desire; and the
other part, which is from the lubet or love- essentiality, arises
up in the kingdom of joy: But seeing there happens also a
mortifying in the free materia (though it is no mortifying, but
a redeeming from the wrath, for the materia of the liberty will
be free from the wrath), thereupon this materia falls } down-
wards, which is water; and it is not of the property of the
wrath, but the wrath holds it captive in itself; but they are
separated from one another in the essence and source; the
wrath’s essence gives earth and stones, and the essence of the
liberty is water, which arises with the enkindling of the fire
through the mortification out of the meekness of the light.

18. But seeing this water does also separate itself in the
salnitral flagrat, and before the salniter was all mutually enwrapt
together, thereupon it obtains different properties in the separa-
tion, and there is a diversity of water; and this various diversity
of properties gives in each property also a bodily or corporeal
essence, all according to the first separation of mercury in
sulphur, for in the mortification in the salnitral flagrat two
things are effected and come forth, viz. a life, and a body of the
life; understand an essential, and a lifeless senseless body,
whose materia is mortified in the flagrat: Thus there is a
diversity of water, and a diversity of the life, and a diversity
of the body,” or of the materia; as each body is, so is also its
essential spirit.

19. Now we must consider this from the first original; as
(1) from the lubet of the liberty; and (2) from the desire to
nature, or the manifestation of the abyss.

20. First, in the salnitral flagrat there is produced through
the anxious mortification a sulphureous water from the anguish,
which affords a brimstone, as we plainly see, and all whatever
is of the like sort and resemblance.

21. Secondly, there is generated from the astringent, austere,
attractive property, which draws in to itself, a salt water; its
materia is salt; if it be again impressed through the fire or heat,
then it turns into salt; and all whatever is sharp and attractive,
be it either in herbs or trees, proceeds from thence; for there is


1 Sinks. 2 Corpus.


Signatura Rerum 27


as much diversity of brimstone and salt, as there is variety of
taste and fire to be found in all creatures, herbs, and trees; also
all whatever lives and grows has brimstone and salt; for the
saltish property attracts, and preserves the body;! and the
brimstone has in it the oil or light, wherein the free lubet to
[oe consists, whence the growth arises.

. Thirdly, there is brought forth through the salnitral
fear: out of the property of the bitter compunctive attraction,
in the first i impression in the spirit, an earthly property of water;
its materia is earth; for the same arises from the dark essentiality,
where the darkness impresses itself in the first desire, wherein
the darkness arises, as is before mentioned: Thus it begets out
of its property in the impression a mist, smoaky steam, or
vapour, which the flagrat in the salniter ‘apprehends, and its
essence is dismayed or dies, and falls downwards; this is the
materia of the earth, though the earth is not of one only
sort, but has in it all whatever became corporeal in the flagrat,
all which springs through the death of the earth, according
as it was wrapt and driven together in the creation into a lump,
as we plainly see.

23. Further, we are to consider of the highest arcanum, viz. of
the heavenly essentiality, and then of the precious stones and
metals, from whence they all take their rise and original; seeing
that all things come out of one mother, which is the lubet and
desire of eternity to its own manifestation.

24. Now concerning the incorruptible essence of corporality,
the same arises also in the first desire to nature, yet in the
impression of the free lubet, and goes all along through all the
forms even into the highest sharpness, where it retires again
into itself, as a life out of the fire: The eternal fire is magical,
and a spirit, and dies not; the liberty is its enkindler, but the
eternal nature is its sharpness; this same essence loses the
wrath’s property in the light; it is in the same fire as a dying,
yet there is no dying, but an entrance into another source, viz.
out of a painful desire into a love-desire; it yields also spirit
and essence from the fire-spirit, and the essence of meekness
from the light.

25. For that which dies to the fire, or sinks through death,
that is divine essence; and it is effected likewise through the
salnitral flagrat of the divine joyfulness, where the property
trembles in the joy of meekness, and immerses itself through
the death of the fire, which is called God’s anger, and quenches it,

1 Corpus.


28 Jacob Boehme


so that God dwells in a meek light; and the first property to
the enkindling of the light is fire, and wrath of the eternal
nature, and makes ! the dark world.

26. The properties of the first mother in the lubet and desire
do also divide themselves in the salnitral flagrat of joyfulness
into distinct parts, as is to be seen in this outward world; it
yields also water, but of a very sovereign essence, and it resembles
only a spirit of a pleasant lovely desire: This is the water of
which Christ told us that he would “give us to drink,” and
“ whosoever should drink the same, it should spring up in him
to a fountain of eternal life.”

27. It retains also in the flagrat of the disclosure the fiery
property which is called heaven, in which the wonders of the
divine kingdom of joy are known and manifest; and in the
watery property [it retains] the pleasant spring, or paradise;
for in the fiery [property] the eternal element arises, and it is
the real essence of the divine corporality, wherein consists all
whatever may be known in God, as is sufficiently and in order
cleared at large in our other writings of the Divine revelation,
treating of the Divine wisdom, and of the Divine eternal abyssal
birth : And now we will turn us to the essence of the outward
world, viz. to the manifestation of the eternal, viz. to metals,
herbs, and trees; so also to men and beasts.

28. We see that the metals have another manner of body
than the living creatures, or are otherwise than the earth and
stones are: Now reason asks, How is the original of everything,
seeing that in the beginning all arose out of one mother, and
yet the eternity has no temporal beginning? Here we must.
again consider the mother of the first pregnatrix, where, and
how one essence separates itself from another, viz. the inchoative
from the eternal, time from eternity, and yet they stand
mutually in each other, but are severed into two principles,
viz. into the kingdom of God, and of this world; and yet all is
God’s: But seeing Christ calls the devil “ a prince of this world,”
and we also are able to declare how far, and in what he is a
prince, and that this world is not his own,? but he is the poorest
creature in this world, and also not at all in this world; now
therefore look upon the first ground, upon the mother which
has thus generated all creatures.

29. So also as to the earth, stones, and all metals, the earth’s
property, consists in a spiritual Sulphur, Mercury, and Sal, and
all whatever has had beginning is arisen in and out of her

1 Gives, or affords. 2 Or propriety.


Signatura Rerum 29


impression, and inchoatively thereupon it came forth with the
first form of the mother, viz. with the astringent attraction,
through the fiat into a creatural being, and affords a diversity
of essence and spirit, according to the first property of the
separation.

30. As first, the high spirits, which were created out of the free
lubet in the desire, in the fire’s property, viz. out of the centre
of all essences, had in them the properties of both the eternal
worlds; but those which after their corporising [or being made
creaturely] remained with their desire in the property of the
free lubet, and introduced their will out of the fire into the
light, they became angels; and the other, which introduced
_ their desire again into the centre (viz. into the austere properties),
became devils, viz. outcasts from the free lubet out of the light,
as is mentioned in other writings.

31. Therefore the devils have neither the kingdom of God, nor
the kingdom of this world in possession; for in the beginning
of the creation this world was created out of both the mward
properties, whereupon the devil has now only the wrath’s part
in possession, the other profits him nothing; and thus he is in
the world, and also not in the world, for he has but one part
thereof in possession, from the other he is cast out.

32. After the creation of the highest spirits, God created this
visible world with the stars and elements as an external birth
out of the mother of all essences; all which proceeded out of the
eternal beginning, and took a temporal beginning: For here
we are to consider, that the eternal pregnatrix moved itself,
and enkindled its own form [or similitude], where then the one
became corporeal in the other; but afterwards God created the
earth, which we are thus to consider of.

33. The first desire to nature impresses itself, and introduces
itself with the impression into three forms, viz. into Sulphur,
Mercury, and Sal, and in the impression all become rising and
moving, which is not in the still nothing, and so forces itself
into the highest anguish, even to! the salnitral flagrat, where
then is the original of the fire: Thus the source whirls in itself,
as a boiling of water upon the fire: for the austere desire is
attractive, and the fiery is expulsive, which is a sulphur; and
the astringent attraction is a wrathful sting [or compunction],
viz. a contrition; and yet it is held by the austereness, that it
cannot move away, whereupon it is painful, and causes pain,
as if it were seething, which yet is only spirit without essence,

1 Or until.


30 Jacob Boehme


which comes to pass in Mercury, and is Mercury’s own
form.

34. And there is the separation of two wills, viz. one remains,
and is the very anxious essence, seeing it originally arises from
the desire; the other, which arises out of the lubet of the liberty,
retires back again into itself into the liberty, and yet there is
no parting or dividing from one another, but thus it goes one
with another all along through the enkindling of the fire through
the salnitral flagrat, where with the enkindling of the fire the
death is effected in the wrath of the fire, where the source dies,
and yet there is no death, but a likeness of death; and yet the
real, eternal, and temporal death is in that manner, even where
the liberty apprehends itself in itself, and the death or flagrat
falls down into the liberty as impotent, and freely resigns itself;
and the spirit, viz. the source (understand the very sharp, fiery,
anxious source), becomes material, and retains only an essential
working, like to an impotent desire; and in the enkindling of
the fire in the salnitral flagrat each property separates itself
in itself, and the whole materia is particularised, viz. to metals,
stones, and earth.

35. The highest metal,! as gold, arises from the liberty, which
is comprised all along in the flagrat in the astringent impression;
and it is not free from the materia of the rest, for all is com-
prised or wrapt up together; but seeing the liberty with the Sul,
or light’s property, is comprised or comprehended therein also,
thereupon Sul is expulsive to the manifestation of itself, as it is
the property of the liberty so to be: Hence it comes that metals
grow, and not the gross hard stones, which are too hard com-
prised in the impression out of the wrathful essentiality, and
have too little Sul in them.

36. But concerning the precious stones, with their radiant
lustre and great virtue, the same have their original in the flash
of the fire, where life and death separate; as when one part
by reason of the dark essentiality descends, and the other by
reason of the liberty ascends, and yet all is brought into essence
in the flagrat; so that the same flash or glance becomes also
material in the flagrat; and therefore they are hard, and of a
blinking glance, like an eye; for so also is the original of the eye
or sight in the womb,” when the life enkindles; all according to
the right of eternity.

37. And therefore they are of so great power, efficacy, and
virtue, in that they are so nigh to the Deity, and bear the

1 Or the highest or chiefest of the metals. 2 Body,


Signatura Rerum 31


incorporated names of the divine power in them; as also gold
is nigh to the divine essentiality, or heavenly corporality: If
man could open [or disclose] the dead body, and reduce it to a
flying} moving spirit, which only can be effected through the
divine motion, then it should be seen what it could be, which
- no reason believes or understands without divine sight [or
vision].

38. Further, we are also to consider of the other metals and
minerals, which in like manner do thus take their original; but
in the salnitral flagrat each property is separated; as we see
that the property of the fire and light is different, and all from
the first impression; where before the impression the lubet
and desire of the liberty stand mutually in each other, as a
chaos, a complexion of great wonders, where all colours, powers,
and virtues are contained in this only Cuaos, or wonder-eye;
which Cuaos is God himself, viz. the Being of all beings, who
thus manifests himself in particular beings with the eyes of
eternity; each materia is an essence according to the spirit from
whence it was generated; and if it be enkindled in the fire, it
yields likewise such a light as the spirit is in the essence.

39. And thus also we are to consider of the metals; what kind
of spirit each of them has, such a glance and lustre it yields,
and also such a body ? it has.

40. As the mind acts and moves the thoughts and senses from
the highest to the lowest, and comprehends and commands by
the thoughts from the highest to the lowest; so the eternal
mind has manifested itself from the highest majesty, even to
the lowest [meanest, or outermost thing], viz. to the greatest
darkness; and this world, with the sun, stars, and elements,
and with every creaturely being, is nothing else but a manifesta-
tion of the eternity of the eternal will and mind; and as it was
in the beginning, so it still stands in its seething and vegetation,
and so it still puts forward to light and darkness, to evil and
good. And all things consist in these first three forms, viz. in
Sulphur, Mercury, and Sal, as one degree in order after another;
for so likewise are the quires of the spirits, as also of the stars,
trees, herbs, and of all kinds whatever which have been, and are;
so also are the inward heavenly quires with their distinction.

1 Liquid. 2 Corpus. ê Boiling, growing, and waxing.


CHAPTER IV


OF THE BIRTH OF THE STARS, AND FOUR ELEMENTS IN
THE METALLINE AND CREATURELY PROPERTY


1. As it is before mentioned, all things proceed out of one
only mother, and separate themselves into two essences, accord-
ing to the right of eternity, viz. into a mortal and an immortal,
into life and death, into spirit and body; the spirit is the life,
and the body is the death, viz. a house of the spirit: As the
holy Trinity.stands in the birth, so also is the external birth:
There is likewise essence and spirit in heaven; a figure of which
we see in this outward world, where there are four elements,
and yet there is but one only element, which separates itself
into four properties, viz. into fire, air, water, and earth, as is
above mentioned.

2. For so we are to consider of the creation of this world,
that the whole essence of eternity has moved itself in the place 1
of this world, and the whole form was enkindled and stirred,
and that in the desire to manifestation; and there the genera-
tion divided itself in the flagrat of the enkindled fire into four
parts, viz. into fire, water, and earth, and the air is its moving
egressive? spirit; as is to be considered in Sulphur, which consists
in these four things.

3. In like manner also the astrum is thus generated out of
the first mother; and all put together is only one body, and it
all takes its rise from the inward spirit; as a hand or foot grows
forth from the inward centre, and has already its form in the
centre, viz. in the first operation, and so only grows into a form
as the spirit is.

4. The first mother of all things, viz. the lubet with the desire,
does especially introduce itself into seven forms, and yet
continues steadfast in three only, but manifests itself in seven
forms.3

5. The first form is astringent, viz. an austere attraction,
which is a cause of coldness and salt, and all corporality.


1 Loco. ? Outgoing, breathing.
? Or in a sevenfold form.


32


Signatura Rerum 33


6. The second form is the compunction,! viz. the drawing or
motion, and causes the feeling, also pricking, aking, tormenting;
the affection ? of bitterness, enmity and friendliness, joy and
- sorrow. x

7. The third form is the great anguish in the impression,
which causes two wills, viz. one to the fire, where the will of the
free lubet falls down to the wrath in the fire, and again goes
into itself, and makes a lustre in the fire’s sharpness.

8. Now the fourth form is the fire itself, viz. the first principle
in the life, with which the dark and light world do separate;
also in this flagrat all material separations are effected, and the
corporality and multiplication begin according to the property
of the first eternal mind, viz. according to the essentiality a
mortal [ens], and according to the free source a living [ens].

9. The fifth form is now the second desire, which is effected
after the separation, and that according to two properties; viz.
one according to the lubet of the liberty out of the light, which
is the highest love-desire; and the other according to the fire’s
lubet, which leads its life of its essence in the love in the light,
from whence the joyfulness and every true life arises.

10. The love gives essence; for it is expressive, and yielding,
viz. itself; for God gives himself to every essence; and the fire
is receptive; for it needs essence in its wrathful hunger, else it
extinguishes; and then the lustre of the light would go out,
and the desire of love would cease, for the fire makes the light
desiring, viz. of the joyfulness; for if the fire dies, the light
waxes dark, and love turns into anguish, as may be conceived
_ of in the devils.

11. The sixth form arises from the turning wheel before the
fire, where the multiplication of the essence arises out of the
property of Mercurius in the salnitral flagrat; with the en-
kindling of the fire one form is introduced into another; and
if now the love-desire penetrates all the forms, then all the
forms grow very desirous the one after the other, for the dear
lovely child Venus is in all.

12. Here begin the taste, smell, hearing, seeing, feeling, and
speaking; for the light opens another principle of another
source, and fills all; and here springs up the life in death, viz.
the love in the anger, and the light shines in the darkness; here
the bridegroom embraces his bride, and God himself resists his
anger, viz. the wrath of nature; and in this form all speeches,
understanding, and senses arise, and the true real life of all

1 Or sting. * Stirring up, or moving.
D 569


34 Jacob Boehme


creatures; so also the life in the vegetables, viz. trees and herbs,
in each thing according to its property.

13. The seventh form arises from all the other, and is the
body, mansion-house, or food of the other, and it is thus effected;
when the other forms taste each other in their mutual penetra-
tion in the love-desire, then in each form there is an hunger or
desire after the love, viz. after the light; now each hunger or
desire is reaching forth after the thing it desires, and eagerly
attracts the property of the thing desired; and thus out of two
one essence is made, viz. out of the hunger, and that which the
hunger desires; for this hunger does not stand in death, it does
not any more enclose itself up in death, unless it be too great,
and the imagination in the hunger be too great, and the hunger
cannot obtain that same thing, then it choaks; as many times
a child is so choaked or smothered in the mother’s womb, if this
form-be enkindled in another form to eat of some external thing,
whereupon the mother grows so ardent in longing, and if she
cannot get it, the child also cannot get it; now it choaks in the
hunger, or else a member is spoiled, from whence the hunger
arose.

14. The first hunger in the centre before the fire is a spiritual
hunger, which makes the dark world; and the hunger of the
free lubet makes the light world; both which are only spirit,
till they pass both together through the enkindling of the fire,
where then they are mortified to the spirit, and are a likeness
of the first spirit, viz. a manifestation of the incomprehensible
spirit, which is called God in love and anger, in a twofold
source: Thus each stands undivided in itself, viz. God in the
time, and the time in God, and the one is not the other, but
they come from one eternal original; thus the temporal spirit’s
hunger gives a temporal body, and the eternal spirit’s hunger
affords an eternal body, and are both mutually in each other,
and yet are distinct.!

15. The seven forms make them a body according to their
hunger out of their own property; therefore all whatever the
spirit has in all properties lies in the body.

16. Further we are to know, that there is a separation made
in the creation of this world; for this is to be seen in the sun
and stars; so likewise in all creatures; also in metals, stones,
and earths; for this same is the manifestation of God.

17. We see in the firmament seven planets, and in the earth
seven metals which are fixed, and also seven planets only which

1 The one is not the other.


Signatura Rerum oe


are fixed in their property; the rest are minerals, and so of the
stars: And as the planetary orb has its predominant stamp or
Influence, so is also the birth of each thing.

18. As the Deity, viz. the divine light, is the centre of all
life; so also in the manifestation of God, viz. in the figure, the
sun is the centre of all life; in the highest life the highest things
have taken their beginning, and so forward successively one
from another to the lowest: In every external thing there are
two properties; one from time, the other from eternity ; the
first property of time is manifest; and the other is hidden, yet
it sets forth a likeness after itself in each thing. ý

19. Whatever has its beginning out of the lubet of the liberty
stands with the root in an heavenly property, and with the
“body in an earthly; but the eternal stands in time, and
manifests itself with time.

20. Sulphur is on one part in the internal heavenly, and as
to the body earthly, yet puts forth an heavenly likeness according
to the eternal out of itself, which is fixed and stedfast; as is to
be seen in gold, and is much more to be understood in the
human body, if it were not corrupted in the desire in Mercury;
for the spiritual or heavenly man consists in Sulphur, and in
Mercury the corporeal, viz. the similitude of the divine [man];
so also the metalline property in Sulphur is the noblest, most
excellent, and highest, for it is the highest spirit.

21. Understand it thus: In the heavenly being there is also
a property of a seething, when the liberty is apprehended and
enkindled in the highest desire, wherein the joyfulness arises;
this is effected in the heavenly Sulphur, where it is made essential
in the heavenly Mercury, viz. in the eternal word, which is a
spiritual essence.

22. But if the same spirituality longs to manifest itself in a
similitude, both according to the property of the spirit, and
the essentiality too, according to the Trinity of the Deity,
according to the mortal and immortal essence, then that image
is represented in the stars and elements; and lastly it is set
forth in man, who isa lively image of the whole essence according
to the divine and outward world; also the inward and outward
worlds are represented with the metals in a mortal image, as a
resemblance and similitude of the living heavenly essentiality.

23. The beginning is in Sulphur; for Sul is the lubet of the
light, or the liberty, which longs to manifestation, and it cannot
otherwise be effected but through fire: In Phur arises the desire,

1 Boiling, or decoction.


36 Jacob Boehme


viz. an austere attraction, which makes the dark earthly pro-
perty, and the austereness of the spirit, viz. the fiery essence:
In this austereness arises Saturn, which is the thing impressed ;
and Mercury is the desire of the hunger, and the rager, raver,
and breaker; and Mars is the wrath in the hunger, a cause of
anger; these three are the property of Phur, viz. of the free
lubet’s desire.

24. The free lubet’s property begets the essence in the three
fore-mentioned forms, viz. in Saturn, Mercury, and Mars; for
it gives itself in to each property, and the property in the hunger
of Mercury makes it a corporeal form; but if the free lubet
turns also to an hunger in the austere desiring, then it makes


also three forms according to itself, viz. Jupiter, who is the |


understanding of the lubet; and Venus, which is the desire of


the lubet; and Luna, which is the body of the lubet; and |


according to the property of the light it makes Sol; all this is
spirit; but now in every spirit’s hunger there is also an essence,
both according to the mortal and immortal ens, a fixed, and
unfixed; a figure according to the heavenly, and a figure
according to the earthly [being, or property].

25. In the saturnine property the desire of the free lubet
makes (according to Saturn’s own property) lead, and according


to the watery [property] in Saturn, salt; and according to the |
mortal and earthly [property] in Saturn, stones, and earth, and |


all whatever is of that sort and semblance.


26. But according to the liberty, or according to the free |


desire’s own property (in that it yields up itself to Saturn, viz.
to the desire), it makes in Saturn gold, according to the desire of
the light, where the spirit and body separate; the spirit of its
desire is Sol, and the body is gold, understand, the golden body
is in Saturn according to the property of the free desire, and
not according to Saturn’s property; his property in himself is
lead, salt, and earth; but he keeps the golden child shut up in
himself as a black raven, not in his gray form, but in a darkish
cast: He is a great lord, but his dominion, by reason of the
golden child which he has in his bowels, stands not in his own
power: He is not father of the child, but Mercury is he which
forms} the child; but he puts his morning mantle upon it, that
he can have no joy with the golden child; he corporises the fair '
child; for he is its fiat or creator, and hides and covers it close :
under his mantle: He cannot give it the body from his own.
property, for it (understand the golden body) is the essence of '
1 Or fashions. `


Signatura Rerum a7.


the free desire in the highest degree of corporality in the fixed
_ death, where yet there is no death, but an enclosing, and in the
similitude a representation of the divine heavenly essentiality.

27. Mercurius is the master-workman? of this child, which

Saturn hides; when he gets it into his hunger, he casts off his
black cloak, and rejoices in it; but he is too malignant in his
fire-wrath,” he devours the child, and turns it wholly to his own
property: When he is most sharply hungry in the fire, then Sol
must be given him (it is his wife) that his hunger may be
appeased; and then when he is satisfied, he labours in the
materia of the child with his own hunger or fire and fills up
his sufficed desire out of Sol’s property, which he before had
eaten, and nourishes the child till it gets upon it all the four
elements with the constellation, and he grows exceeding pregnant
with the child, and then it belongs for is fit for] a strange fire,
and yet not strange, an earnest fire; and then the father gives
it the soul, viz. the fire-spirit; and its first mother, which
Mercury did eat down in its hunger, which was fixed and perfect,
[gives] the soul’s-spirit, viz. the light-life: Then the death 4
arises, and the child is born, and becomes afterwards its own,
and a child of the liberty, and cares no more for its work-
master: It is better than its father, but not better than its
mother, in whose seed it lay, before the father wrought in it;
it bruises the head of its father’s fiery essence, viz. of the serpent,
and passes freely through death in the fire: Dost thou under-
stand nothing here? Then thou art not born to the highest
knowledge of the spagirical science.

28. Further, we are to consider of the degrees, what the liberty,
viz. the eternal lubet, gives to the hunger of the other forms in
Sulphur, in the property of the other planets; the form of the
birth is as a turning wheel, which Mercury causes in the
Sulphur.

29. The birth of the highest degree turns round (viz. the
desire), for this world is round, so also the birth; when the
liberty has given its highest lubet (as a golden hunger) to Saturn,
and placed Mercury for work-master, then it betakes itself into
itself, into its desire, according to the property of meekness; for

_the first conception to the golden child is effected according to

1 Or faber.

2 In a strange fire, and yet not strange; when the cloak is laid aside,
it needs only its own fire.

3 Here must be its own fire only from within and from without.


4 And it is the tincture which tinctures the body.
5 Or rotation.


38 Jacob Boehme


the property of joyfulness; but this out of goodness and meek-
ness resigns itself to Luna; for it is a pleasant demission by
reason of the meekness, which Mercury apprehends and works
therein also; this body i is silver, and comes from the first im-
pression, where the yellow and white separate in the fire, viz.
the colours of the virtue; then Luna arises out of the yellow and
turns into white, by reason of the divine meekness; and because
its original is from Sol’s colour, therefore it has a perpetual
hunger after Sol, and receives the sun’s lustre into it, puts it on?
and shines with it.
30. Now as the superior is, so is likewise the inferior (namely
metals), therefore silver is the next degree to gold; and as gold
is generated, so is also silver: Venus clothes it, which Mercury
cannot endure, seeing he is the master-worker, and he gives his


garment also; ’ but the silver has neither the property of Venus)


nor Mercury, for it retains the property of its mother, viz. the
meckness in the liberty, and is hatched, as the gold by reason
of the sun: The moon has an heavenly property, but in reference
to its own proper form from the property of the desire, it is of.
a very earthly property, it is a cabinet and keeper of the earthly)
and heavenly essence: In like manner as the outward body of.
man, which before the Fall in Adam was comparable to silver, |
but when he died in the lubet then the earthly property only
lived in him, and therefore he continually hungers after Sol’s
glance [and glory] , he would fain take again his ‘splendour with
Luna from the sun, but he gets only an earthly lunar lustre,
wherein he acts and exercises pride, unless he be born again out
of Sol’s splendour, that is, out of God’s power in the heavenly
Mercurius; and so he becomes again the golden silver-child in
divine essentiality, only covered and clothed this life- time
with the earthly moon, that is, with earthly flesh.

31. Saturn also is the house of silver, he is likewise the cause
of the first conception, but he turns his desire only upon the
golden child, and leaves the silver its garment, and takes it into
his stony earthly property, and lets Mercury hatch it.

32. The desire of the free lubet is fixed and steadfast, as
concerning the property of the desire only, which brings its will
again from the body into the combat in the senses, and makes
Jupiter, that is on the orb? upwards under Saturn, under the
saturnine power; its metal is tin, and it is the third degree ;


for the lubet of the liberty in the desire proceeds forth into the |


desire of the austereness, and so it gives itself into the fiat.
1 Draws it to itself, 2 Wheel, or sphere.


Signatura Rerum 39


33. We must understand it thus; the lubet of the liberty
goes forth out of itself, as a plant, and makes one degree after
another in order, but Mercury makes the sphere, for he is the
work-master: And as the eternal birth is in itself in the heavenly
Mercury, viz. in the eternal word in the Father’s generation;
so likewise with the motion of the Father it came into a creaturely
being, and so proceeds in its order, as may be seen in the wheel of
the planets; for the order is just so placed as man is in his order.

34. First there is in him the true golden divine man, which
is the likeness of God: Next there is in him the man of heavenly
essentiality, viz. the inward holy body, generated from the fire
and light in the tincture, which is like to the pure silver if it
were not corrupted. Thirdly, there is in him the elemental man

from the pure element resembling Jupiter. Fourthly, the mer-

curial, which is the growing or paradisical [man]. Fifthly, the
martial, from the fire, viz. the soulish [man], according to the
Father’s property. Sixthly, the venerine [man], according to
the outward desire, and the water’s property. Seventhly, the
solar, according to the sun’s property, viz. according to the
outward world, as a seer and knower of the wonders of God:
And yet it is but the one only man; yet is both in the inward
_and outward world. Thus likewise is the similitude [or form]
of the seven metals; with one property according to the inward
_ world, and with another visible and palpable property according
to the outward world.

35. From Jupiter the sphere turns round, and out of the
separation Mercury proceeds forth with a broken metal, accord-
_ ing to his spirit’s property; externally quicksilver, and internally
he is a paradisical working; he is in his spiritual property the
distinguisher (or articulator) of the words, voices, and speeches.
It is written, “ God hath made all things by his word:”’ The
heavenly eternal Mercurius is his word, which the Father
| expresses in the enkindling of his light, and the expressed is his
wisdom; and the word is the worker, framer, and maker of the
formings in the expressed wisdom. Now what the inward
Mercurius does internally in God’s power, that likewise the
outward Mercurius effects in the outward power in the created
essence: He is God’s instrument, wherewith he works ex-
trinsically to death and to life; in each thing according to its
| property he builds, and breaks down.

36. According to Saturn’s property he builds, and according
to his own property he distinguishes and dissipates + the hardness

1 Attenuates, destroys.


40 Jacob Boehme


in Saturn, viz. the enclosed, and opens it to life: He opens the
colours, and makes forms and shapes, and carries in him an
heavenly, and also an earthly property; in the earthly he carries
out of the first desire to nature, viz. out of Saturn, Mars, viz.
the wrathfulness of the impression; for he is his soul, wherein
Mercury lives; he gives him the fiery essence, and stands under
Jupiter in the order upwards on the sphere; for he carries the
fire-spirit in Sulphur into all planets, and forms and gives to
each thing its source, and true spirit of life.

21. Mars in the first impression is the great anguish, and
causes the love-will of the liberty to separate from him; and
that which is separated is called God; and the anguish, or fire-
source, is called God’s anger, viz. the wrath of the eternal nature:
And as internally God’s love separates from God’s anger, that is,
from the wrathful property of the eternal nature, viz. heaven
from hell, God from the devil; so also it is effected in the birth
of the outward nature.

38. Love proceeds out of the wrath, and is an humility, or
submission: Thus likewise it came in the creation into order;
therefore Venus stands in the sphere on the line of Mars under
the sun, for so is the separation in nature; and so one proceeds
forth from another: Its metal is copper, the original whereof is
this, that the love is a desire, and desires only light and joy; for
the materia is made out of the desire’s property: But if the
love-desire shall come to be corporeal in the impression, then it
must resign itself to the wrathful fiat, viz. to the desire of Mars
in the fire, or in the fiery property; for the saturnine property
takes all into its might, and makes it corporeal.

39. Therefore the metal of Venus is so nearly related to gold,
by reason of her own property from the liberty, but Mars makes
it too wrathful; and because it separates itself out of Mars’s
fire, it retains a great part of the property of Mars in it.

40. Mars’s metal is iron, for he is the wrath in Sulphur, in
which the fire enkindles, and arises; his original with the
materia is in the austereness of the desire: copper separates
itself in the generation out of iron, for it arises from the will of
Venus, and they differ as body and soul; for Mars is the fire-
soul of Venus, and makes Venus corporeal; otherwise Venus,
as to her own property, gives only water in the mortification in
the salnitral flagrat; for her fire is only a pleasant shining,
smile, or love-fire, as she is alone void of other mixture; and
therefore she cannot produce any corporeal essence from her
own power and ability, which is hard and tough; she is only the


Signatura Rerum 41


mother? to her child without a creaturely soul; Mars is her soul,
and Saturn makes her body.

41. The spirit of Sol may tincture Mars and Venus, and change
them into the highest metalline perfection, viz. into gold; which
cannot so easily be effected in silver, unless it be reduced into
the first materia, where Saturn, Mars, and Mercury are together
in the Sulphur, and then it can be done: Venus receives its
toughness from Saturn, and its redness from Mars as the fire.

42. Now the desire of Venus is only eager, and longing after

Sol, as after her first mother, from whence she springs forth in
her birth in the first original; for the love comes forth originally
from God, and so it is likewise in the external birth in the figure:
The desire of Venus goes into Sol, into the sun, and receives in
‘its desire the property of the sun, and shines from Sol; she has
a very peculiar shining and lustre above all the planets and
stars, which she receives from her mother; and in her mother’s
power consists her joy, viz. the pleasant twinkling smiling aspect
which she has in her; she is in her own property (as she is purely
alone without the property of the other planets) a real daughter
of the sun (understand in Sulphur, where all is wrapt together),
therefore she stands next under the sun, as a child of the sun;
not that the sun did generate that star, for he is likewise created
with her, but in the Sulphur without the creation, merely in the
generation, it is so, both in the heavenly and earthly [being, or
principle].

43. For God the Father generates the love through his heart;
now the sun, by way of similitude, betokens his heart; for it is
a figure in the outward world according to the eternal heart of
God, which gives strength and virtue to every life and essence.

44. And understand it right; all things proceed from the
word and heart of God (which is the divine Sulphur) in the
birth of the Holy Trinity, and manifest themselves in and through
the proceeded (or egressed) essence, which is God’s wisdom;
and they again do eagerly force and press out of the egress, in
and towards his heart and power, and vehemently long after it,
as Paul saith, all creatures groan and pant with us to be
delivered from vanity.

45. So also does the outward essence in the outward birth of
metals, planets, stars, and creatures; each thing longs after its
centre, Viz. after its first mother, whence it proceeded, viz. after
the sun in Sulphur, for it is the ‘tincture of all essences: What-
ever the first desire with the impression in Saturn makes evil

1 Woman, wife.


42 Jacob Boehme


In the wrath of Mars, that the sun turns again into good. As
the divine sun tinctures the anger or wrath of God, so that the
wrathful property of God’s anger is changed into a joyfulness ;
so likewise the outward sun tinctures the outward Sulphur, viz.
Saturn and Mars, that there is a pleasant temperature, viz. a
growth, springing, and blooming in all metals and creatures;
therefore the sun is the centre, which reason will not believe;
understand, in the planetary orb, and in all vegetables and
animals,


CHAPTER V


OF THE SULPHUREAN DEATH, AND HOW THE DEAD BODY IS
REVIVED, AND REPLACED INTO ITS FIRST GLORY


1. ALL life and motion, with understanding, reason, and senses,
both in animals and vegetables, consist originally in Sulphur,
viz. in nature’s desire, and in the lubet’s desire of the liberty.

2. In nature’s desire arises the death and enclosing, and in ,
_ the desire of the liberty arises the opening and the life; for the
liberty’s desire tinctures the desire of the dark nature, so that
the wrathful mother foregoes her own right, and freely resigns
to the liberty’s desire, and so the life grows in death, for there
is no life without light; but if the light goes out in the essence
of the Sulphur, then it is an eternal death, which no man can
revive, unless God moves himself in the lubet-desire in the same
death; for death can receive no life into it, unless the first desire,
viz. the free lubet’s desire, manifests itself in the desire to nature,
wherein the enclosing and death are generated.

3. Therefore when man died in the Sulphur, none could have
made him alive again, unless the free lubet, viz. the desire to
the eternal life did again enter into his Phur, viz. into the birth
of the nature of the human property, and moved the enclosed
death, viz. the centre of nature, and gave itself again into the
centre, viz. into the soul-like property, and into the soul’s
essentiality and corporality; and this was so brought to pass.

4. We know that the right Sulphur is a generation of all
spirituality and corporality; so far as concerns its first original,
where it is heavenly, it is the generation of the essence of all
essences: For all, whatever eternity and time is in itself, has,
and is able to effect, lies in this birth: But now as to the kingdom
of this world it is earthly, viz. a figure of the eternal; for in it
the time and creature consist, and all whatever is visible and
invisible.

5. Now man, and every life also, as to the kingdom of this
world, was created and generated out of the outward Sulphur;
man out of the inward and outward [Sulphur], and the outward
creature only out of the outward; for man is an image and
likeness of God, and the other creatures are as a similitudg


43


44 Jacob Boehme


according to the figuration in the internal generation in God’s
wisdom, viz. in the expressed or procreated heavenly essence,
according to both eternal principles.

6. But now man was created good and perfect, according to
and out of all the three worlds, as an image of the Deity, in whom
God dwelled; and he was even that essence what God is,
according to eternity and time in all the three worlds; but he
was a creature with a beginning, as to the creature, and died
through the lubet! as to the heavenly and divine essence:
For the inward lubet, which was generated in the centre, viz.
in the fire, wherein stood the life in the divine essentiality,
that is, that which enkindled the essence of the divine meekness,
wherein the joyfulness or the angelical form consists; that
(I say) turned itself from the inward lubet of the liberty and
eternity into the time, viz. into the external birth, into the
planetary property, [it departed] out of the pure divine element
into the four elements: Thus the inward divine essentiality, or
inward corporality did no longer retain any leader or life: And
this was the death; for the soul’s fire proceeding from the
Father’s property turned itself away from the Son’s property,
in which alone the divine life consists.

7. Thus the property of the soul remained naked only with
its will in the outward Sulphur, and the inward disappeared,
and continued steadfast in the eternal unchangeableness,? as in
an eternal nothing, wherein there was no more any effecting [or
working efficacy to bring to pass].

8. Thus man with his outward body lived barely and merely
to the time; the precious gold of the heavenly corporality,
which tinctured the outward body, was disappeared, and so the
outward body stood barely and alone in the life of nature’s
desire, viz. in the soul’s fiery property; understand in the form
and property of Mars, viz. in the wrath of God, which is the
wrath in Sulphur, viz. the property of God’s anger and the
dark world: But seeing the outward body was created out of
the time, therefore the time, viz. the constellation with the four
elements, presently obtained the dominion in him; and the
divine property, viz. the desire of the Deity (which ruled and
tinctured time, so that there was a holy life in the creature out
of the time), was vanished; its own peculiar love in the divine
desire was turned to water, and it became blind and dead in the
will and desire of God; and the soul must help itself with the
sun’s light.


USES 2? Or immobility.


Signatura Rerum 45


g. But seeing that time has beginning and end, and the will
with the desire has given up itself to the temporal leader,
therefore the dominion of time destroys its own contrived spirit,
and so the body also dies and passes away; and this is that
which God said to Adam, that “ he should not eat of the tree, or
plant, of the knowledge of good and evil,” of both properties,
lest he died ;1 as it also came to pass, he died in the Sulphur; the
Sul in the kingdom of God, viz. the lubet of the divine liberty,
out of which the light of God shines, and in which the divine
Lied viz. the love-fire burns [disappeared and withdrew from
him].

to. Now there was no remedy for him, unless God’s desire
entered again into his dead Sulphur, that is, into his Sul, which
was dead, viz. into the dead [or mortified] essentiality, and
again enkindled it with the love-fire; which came to pass in
Christ: And there the heavenly body, wherein God’s light
shines, did again arise. But if this must be effected, then the
love-desire must again enter into the desire of the enkindled
anger, and quench and overcome the anger with the love; the
divine water must enter again into the soul’s burning fire, and
quench the wrathful death in the astringent fiat, viz. in the
desire to nature, that the love-desire, which desires God, might
be again enkindled in the soul.

11. For man’s happiness ? consists in this, that he has in him
a true desire è after God, for out of the desire springs forth the
love; that is, when the desire receives the meekness of God
into itself, then the desire immerses itself in the meekness, and
becomes essential; and this is the heavenly or divine essentiality,
or corporality; and therein the soul’s spirit (which lay shut up
in the anger, viz. in death) does again arise in the love of God;
for the love tinctures the death and darkness, that it is again
capable of the divine sunshine.

12. And as this is done in man, so likewise it is in the trans-
mutation of metals: The Sulphur is shut up in Saturn, viz. in
the death, and yet there is no death, but a vegetative life; and
the outward Mercury is the life thereof.4 Now if the metalline
body shall come to the highest perfection, then it must die unto
the external dominator,’ viz. to the elements, and come again
into such a Sulphur as it was, when as yet it had not the four
elements on it, but lay only in the element in unity.®


1 Or he should die. 2 Salvation.
3 An upright, full, and unfeigned desire.
4 Or therein. 5 Leader. 6 In one.


46 Jacob Boehme


13. But now none can reduce it into such a body, but he only
who has generated; he that has given it the four elements, he
alone can take them away; and he that at first made it cor-
poreal, he must bring it to himself, and transchange it in himself
into another body; and this is the Sulphur, which has Mercurius
as its chief faber in itself. He must again take it out of dark
Saturn’s bowels in the fiat, and introduce it into his own, and
with his own fire separate the four elements from it, and reduce
it into one; as God at the last day will in the enkindling of his
own fire separate the essence of the four elements from the pure
element, that the eternal corporality in the pure element may
arise 1 and spring forth: And as in the death of man the four
elements separate from the true man (who is the element of
God) and the heavenly body remains only in itself; so it goes
in the transmutation of metals.


PROCESS


14. The body lies shut up in a disesteemed form in Saturn,
not wholly in Saturn’s property, in a dark colour, marked with
Mercurius its father, and Sol its mother, clothed with Saturn,
and manifest with the life of Mars; but its mother is not out-
wardly manifest and known on it, unless its faber be enraged
with its own iniquity; which yet cannot be, unless an alienate
be applied, whereby its propriate is enraged; and then (if his
anger be set on a fire or fury) he becomes so very hungry and
thirsty, and yet can find no refreshment in itself; then it seizes
on its faber who has made it, and fights against its creator, as
the earthly wicked man does against God, so long till he devours
and consumes himself, as a fiery [pestilent] poison consumes the
body, unless you remedy, stay, and allay its hunger; yet there
is none that can still this horrible hunger, but God himself who
has made him; and if he assists not in due time, then the hunger
in the wrath consumes the body, and puts it into the eternal
darkness.

15. This hunger desires nothing but the mercy of God, that he
might be freed from the anguish of hell; but this he cannot
obtain of himself, for he is shut up in the anger of God; and
his dear mother, which nursed him in the beginning, is also
shut up in death: But if God shews his grace, and gives him
again of his love, then the anger is dismayed at the love;? and
this is a flagrat of great joy: For he again tastes the sweetness

1 Begin. Or in the divine love.


Signatura Rerum 47


of his dear mother, and then he knows full well that he has been
so vile and wicked, and repents of his iniquity, and will turn
and mortify the old Adam, and cast it away from him.

16. So the artist takes him presently away with the old
Adam from the strange anger, and lays him in a soft bed; for
the old Adam is sick, and will die; and then his own faber in
the old Adam is in the love of God,! which destroyed the anger,
and will make a young child, and rejoices in the child; and
the old Adam grows sick, and weak, wholly dark, and swarthish,
and dies; and the four elements go out? from him with their
colours: So the faber gives him even leave to go, and continually
labours on the new body, which shall arise from death; and
none sees his labour, for he works in the dark.
= 17. But the artist takes no care about the work, but gives
the faber his own food, till he sees that a vegetative life appears
in the dark death with a new colour out of the black; and then,
when the new man is ready, the artist comes, and brings the
soul, and gives it the faber; at which the faber is dismayed
that another life comes into him; and he puts the soul into
the new body, and it goes inwardly in the anger: Thus the new
man arises in great power and glory from death, and bruises
the head of the old serpent in the anger of God, and passes
through the anger, and the anger can do him no harm at all.


Whoe’er thou art, that to this work art born,
A chosen work thou hast, howe’er the world may scorn.


1 Or upon the love of God. 2 Depart. 3 Labour,


CHAPTER VI


HOW A WATER AND OIL ARE GENERATED, AND OF THE DIFFERENCE
OF THE WATER AND OIL, AND OF THE VEGETABLE LIFE AND
GROWTH


1. Att life, growth, and instigation consist in two things, viz.
in the lubet, and then in the desire; the lubet is a free will, and
as a nothing in comparison to nature; but the desire is as a
hunger: In the desire arises the moving spirit, viz. the natural,
and in the lubet the supernatural, which yet is nature’s,1 but not
out of its own property, but out of [or from] the property of the
desire.

2. The desire is the instigation of the essence, viz. an hunger,
and the lubet is the hunger’s essence,” which it takes into itself;
for the desire is only an hungry will, and it is the natural spirit
in its forms; but the lubet is out of the liberty: For God is
without desire as concerning his own essence, inasmuch as he
is called God; for he needs nothing. All is his, and he himself
is all.

3. But he has a lubet-will, and he himself is the will, to
manifest himself in the lubet; yet in the lubet which is free,
without affection, no manifestation can be effected, for it is void
of desire; it is as if it were nothing in respect of nature, and
yet it is all; but not according to the desire, viz. according to
nature, but according to the satisfying of nature it is the
satisfying of the hungry desire, viz. of nature; it freely and
willingly gives itself into the hunger of nature; ‘for itis a spirit
without essence and desire, wholly free as a nothing; but the
desire makes it essential [or materialises] in itself, and that
according to two properties, viz. one according to the eternal
liberty, which is free from the source; and the other according
to the desire, which gives a vegetative life, viz. a growing, or
a giving forth of itself.

4. The free essence is, and gives an oil, and the desire’s
property gives a life of the oil; the oil is a light, and the desire’s
property gives to the light the essence, viz. the fiery property,
so that the light shines, as is to be seen in the fire and light,

1 Of or RREN to nature. 2 Being, materia, or food.


48


Signatura Rerum 49


and the free lubet remains yet a free will in itself, but gives its
meekness, viz. a free resignation into the desire, that it comes
to essence and lustre: Its will is only good, it has no other
desire but only to be good, meek, and pleasant; there is also
no other possibility therein; for itt is as a nothing, wherein no
disturbance or source can be, but it is the meekness itself.
_ 5. But seeing it cannot be a nothing, by reason that it is a
cause and beginning of the desire, therefore it gives itself freely,
as the sunshine freely gives itself into every property; and the
desire conceives [or takes] this free lubet, viz. the lustre or
shining of the abyss of eternity into itself, and makes it in itself
into essence according to its property; so much property as is
‘In the desire, so much also there is of essence: And we are to
consider, that when the free lubet gives in itself into the hunger
of the desire, that the desire then makes out of the free lubet’s
property a similitude according to the liberty, which is as if it
were nothing, and yet is; this is a water and oil.

6. But seeing the desire, that is, the hunger, is filled with the
free lubet, it makes its own property in the essence of the
liberty also into essence; its essence is water, and the essence of
the free lubet is an oil. Thus a twofold property arises in one
only spirit, viz. a fiery [property] according to the property of
the desire, and a joyful or lucid property according to the
liberty.

7. The fiery gives ? in its essence, viz. in its water a sharpness
from the austere desire, which is saltish, or a salt; and from
the fiery anguish a brimstone, from whence in the impression
and creation of the world, are made stones, earth, and metals;
so also the elements and stars, all according to the forms in the
desire; and the oleous property gives its meekness, viz. a love-
lubet, wherein the fiery is impressed with the desire, and makes
corporality: And the oleous gives itself out in its meekness,
and makes the vegetable life, viz. a springing and growing in
the fiery impression, whereinto the fire must give its essence
and instigation, viz. the vehement compunction è in the attrac-
tion of the desire, which is the separator in the corporality, viz.
the distinguisher, carver, and cause of the essence and multi-
plicity [or variety].

8. Philosophers have called this form Mercurius, from the
anxious inciting sphere, which is the cause of all life and motion,
and a faber in the oily and watery property.

3 1 Understand the free will.
2 Affords, produces, or makes. 3 Or raging sting.
E 569


50 Jacob Boehme


o. Thus we are to search and find out the great mystery, how
there is an oil, brimstone, and salt in everything, and how they
arise; for God has made all things out of nothing, and that
same nothing is himself, viz. a love-lubet dwelling in itself,
wherein there is no affection: But now the love-lubet would not
be manifest, if it remained one in the stillness without essence,
and there would be no joy or moving therein, but an eternal
stillness.

ro. But seeing? he introduces himself into essence through
the desire, his eternal stillness becomes an essence and working
power, and that with two properties, viz. in an oil, in which the
working power is a good spirit according to the property of the
love-lubet, which resists the desire’s wrath in the brimstone,
salt, and poisonful Mercury, and appeases and heals his poisonful
hunger with the pleasant meekness; that which Mercury destroys
with the raging sphere ? of his own property, that the lubet of
the love-oil does again heal: And thus there is good and evil in
each life, and yet there is no evil in anything, unless the good,
viz. the love-oil famishes in its own lubet, which falls out in the
forms of the impression of the hunger of the desire.

1x. That is, if the hunger-spirit does in its own forms too
much impress itself [long, or imagine] after itself, and too
eagerly hunger after its own manifestation, it cannot take the
free lubet, which appeases its hunger, into itself; for nature’s
property must be sincerely bent and inclined to the free lubet’s
property, viz. to God’s love-ens, and wholly direct its hunger
after love; and then the hunger receives the love into itself,
and makes the same essential in itself, and is no longer a
famished dark hunger, which rages in itself, and raves as a
poisonful Mercury; but the hunger becomes a love- desire,
which is called God’s nature, and the hungry fiery [desire] is
called God’s anger; and in the outward nature it is called a
fire, but in the inward world’s property, where the desire does
act with energy in the property of the free lubet, this desire is
called the divine desire, wherein the fiery love burns, and from
whence the joyfulness proceeds; for the free lubet does there-
fore give itself into the austere desire, that it may bring forth
a fiery love, viz. a joyfulness, which ‘could not be in the still
lubet; for where there is a stillness there is no joy, or motion.

12. Now the free lubet, viz. God’s property, manifests itself
through the fiery property, and the fiery property makes the
free lubet’s essence, viz. the oil which arises in the impression

1 Or when. ? Or furious wheel.


Signatura Rerum 5I


_of the desire into a light or lustre; for the austere desire gives.
the anxious darting flash, viz. a sulphureous spirit, and the


meekness of the oil gives its love into it, and dispels that which’


- was drawn into it, viz. the darkness, and manifests the eternal:
_ liberty, viz. the nothing, and this is now the seeing. |


13. For when the fire-splendour tastes the sweetness of the
light, then the fire’s desire reaches after the meekness, and the
meekness of the free lubet is as a nothing wholly incompre-
hensible: Now the hunger of the desire comprehends its own
essence and devours it, and makes it to nothing; this is the
darkness, which is the hunger’s essence, which the fiery hunger
devours through the property of the light, or free lubet: As we


_see, that as soon as the light shines it deprives the darkness of
its power; therefore God is a Lord over all beings, for he is the


eternal Power and Light: A similitude whereof we see in the sun,
that it is lord of the darkness and of all essences, and rules
whatever grows, lives, and moves in this world.

14. Further, we are to consider of the manifold salts, how
they take their rise in the original, and separate into many
properties. In the original of the impression, viz. in the verbum
fiat, a twofold salt does arise: The first is spiritual, and gives
the sharpness in the essence of the free lubet; it is a severising,
or a sharpness of the powers: The other salt is the sharpness of
the impression, according to the property of the astringent
austerity which is the anguish in the impression, that is, brim-
stone, and the essential property is water.

15. The water is the senseless mortal property of the salt;
and the sulphureous, which is from the anguish, is the property
of the quick salt; for it has the sting of motion, viz. the Mercury
in it, which makes life’s form, and yet the brimstone is not the
salt, but it is the anguish in the impression, which also comes
to be corporeal.

16. The salt is the sharpness in brimstone as to the astringency;
the salt causes the anguish to be corporeal; and so salt dwells
in the brimstone, and is the brimstone’s sharpness, and pre-
serves the brimstone in the corporeal essence, and also the spirit
of the brimstone, that it falls not to dust: The salt impresses
the powers of the anguish, and the impressed life is the mer-
curial life; the same is the life of the anguish, viz. of the brim-
stone, and separates the materia according to the forms to
nature, and the materia of the free lubet into two essences, viz.
into a watery and oily, and then into a corporeal.

17. The corporeal is twofold; both according to the darkness


52 Jacob Boehme


and the light: According to the property of the austere desire
it makes in the watery [property] a sand, or stony nature, from
whence the stones have their original; understand out of the
sulphureous, viz. out of the brimstone’s water.

18. The other property, as to! the mortification in the salnitral.
flagrat, is the common running water; the other corporeal
[water] is the metalline body from the free lubet’s property in
the impressed form; and from the watery property (where the
brimstone is in the water) it produces trees, herbs, and all
whatever grows in the earthly property, viz. in the mortified or
dead substantiality, which yet has a life without sense,? viz. a
vegetative.

19. The oily property is also twofold according to the impres-
sion; viz. one part forces again into the liberty to be free from
the wrath of the impression, which is the good spirit, viz. the
light in the oil; the other part yields itself into the anguish of
the brimstone, and remains in the corporality, and unites and
applies itself in each thing, according to the salt-property of the
thing; as in a fiery salt, it is fiery; in a bitter salt, it is bitter;
in an astringent, astringent, etc.

20. The first property according to the light is sweet in all
things, and the other property of the oil is according to the form,
viz. the taste of the thing, let it be either sweet, sour, astringent,
sharp, or bitter, or how it will; as it is to be found out and
known in herbs: In some it is a bitter poison, and in some again
a healing of the poison ; but if the poisonful property be broken by
Mercury in the oil of meekness, then the love of the light inclines
itself also into the oil, for the original of both is from one will, but
it is altered in the impression: As the devil, when he was an
angel, changed himself into a poisonous devilish property, and
Adam out of an heavenly into an earthly [property].

21. Whatever grows, lives, and moves in this world, consists
in Sulphur, and Mercury is the life in Sulphur, and the salt is
the corporeal being of Mercury’s hunger, though the body is
manifold; according as the property of the brimstone and salt
is, according to the same property is also the ingrafted oil, which
springs up all along in the power; for the oil makes the power
[or virtual influence] in each thing. In the oil of the impression,
viz. in the impressed oil, is the other oil, viz. the spiritual, which
gives us light, but it has another principle; it receives no other
source into it but the lubet of love; it is divine essentiality:
Therefore God’s own essence is nigh unto all things, but not

1 According to, or after. * Dumb.


Z


Signatura Rerum 53


f


essentially in all things; it has another principle, and yet
inclines itself to all things; as far as the thing has anything of

the divine property in it, it recelves virtue from the divine
property, be it either a vegetable or animal; for there are herbs
and trees, and also creatures to be found, in which something
of the divine power is couched, with which i in the magical cure
the false magic, viz. the corrupt evil oil can be resisted, and
changed into a good oil.

22. All sharpness of taste is salt, let it be whatever it will in this
world, nothing excepted; and all smell proceeds from the brim-
stone, and Mercury is the distinguisher in all motion [or affec-
tion], both in the smell, power, and taste; but I understand by
-my Mercury the sphere of the birth of all essences, as is before

“mentioned; not a dead Mercury, but a living one, viz. the
strongest, according to the property of the dry poison, etc.

23. Now it behoves the artist and physician to know these
things, else he cannot cure any sickness or disease, unless he
hits on it by chance, if he knows not wherewith the oil is
poisoned in the body, and what kind of hunger Mercury has in
the sickness, and after what he hungers; for if he may obtain 1
the salt according to the property of his hunger (after which he
is desirous) with such an oil as he fain would have, then is the
sickness over very soon; for he turns his oil again into the
property of the love of the light, whereupon the life begins again
to shine bright.

24. For every disease in the body is nothing else but a cor-
ruption or poisoning of the oil, from which the life’s-light burns
or shines; for when the light of the life shines or burns clear in
the oil, it expels and drives away all poisonful influences and

operations, as the day expels the night.

25. For if the oil, out of which the life burns, be infected [or

inflamed] with a poisonful Mercury or salt, let it be done either
from the constellation, or salt of meat, viz. from a contrary
source, whereby a loathing [or nauseous detestation] arises in
the oil, which the oil would always spew out, which Mercury
helps; then Mercury eagerly troubles and perplexes itself in
the sulphureous fire more and more, and continually labours
to drive forth the abominate, but does only inflame itself in
itself in this austere endeavour, and more and more enkindles
its inward form, whereupon the oil grows more dark and poison-
ful, until at last the oil becomes wholly waterish and earthly,
and then the light, and also the fire, extinguishes, and Mercury
1 Can but get.


54 Jacob Boehme


with the sulphureous spirit departs from it, as when a candle
is put out; thus Mercury passes out with the sulphureous spirit
in death’s baneful steam,! until he also be famished; for a time
he may help himself in the sidereal body, which passes along
with it; but when Mercury in the spirit of the great world has
consumed and starved its property, then is the temporal life
wholly gone; for as soon as the light of the vital oil extinguishes,
the elemental body falls down into putrefaction, viz. into the
fiat, from whence it came to be; and then this time ends in the
creature, which is the death, dying, or departure; and from
thence there is no deliverance or return, unless the heavenly
divine Mercury does once more move itself in him, which yet
cannot be, except there has been a good property of the oil in
him, viz. from the divine essentiality: In this property, which
is capable of the divine essentiality, the light does only enkindle
itself again.

26. For the divine essentiality, or this heavenly Mercury,
changes the dead oil again into his, and becomes its life; for the
outward Mercury, which has ruled the life, returns not again,
it has only been for a time a mirror of the eternal, but he is
changed into another source; for being suffocated, he passes
again into the mystery, from whence he at first proceeded in the
creation of the world, and the body also goes into the same
mystery.

27. Thus it remains, and belongs yet to another motion of
the Deity, viz. to a separating, where the evil, wherein the death
was, shall be separated from the good, and the verbum fiat shall
restore and bring forth that which has fallen into it in death.

28. The physician is to know, that in the strongest Mercury,
which is most poisonful, the highest tincture lies, but not in
Mercury’s own property, which must be broken;? for his own
property, even from the centre, is the anxious poisonful life:
But he has another property in him, viz. an oil from the light,
whereby he is so strong and potent, which is his food and preserva-
tion; if this may be separated from him, it becomes a tincturing
and mighty enkindling of all obscured lives, viz. of all diseases
and sicknesses; for in this oil lies the joyful life, and it is an
hunger after life, viz. that it might enkindle the weak, and lift
it up on high.

29. In a toad, viper, or adder, or the like poisonful beasts,
worms, or insects, the highest tincture is to be found, if they
are reduced into an oily substance, and the wrath of Mercury

1 Sting. 2 Or taken from him.


Signatura Rerum 55


separated from them; for all life, both external and internal,
consists in poison and light, as we understand, that the wrath
and anger-fire of God is a cause of the divine joyfulness: The
like also we are to know is externally; for all life that is void
of the poisonful Mercury is mort, and an abominate, and
accounted as dead.

30. Now Mercury is an enkindler of the fire, and every moving
life consists in the fire; and though some creatures dwell in the
water, yet fire is their life, viz. the poison-gall, wherein Mercury
manages the life; but the water in the gall is a poison, wherein
an oil is hid, in which the life in Mercury does burn and shine;
of which thou hast a similitude: If in a creature there be a
-~ strong poisonful Mercury, of a dry quality, that creature is
strong, bold, courageous, and potent, which has also a clear
oil in it; for the fiery property of the Mercury consumes the
waterish, but if its fat be enkindled, it yields a clear light;
much more would it be, if the watery property were separated
from the oleous.


1 Or loathsomeness.


CHAPTER VII


HOW ADAM IN PARADISE, AND HOW LUCIFER WAS A FAIR ANGEL,
AND HOW THEY WERE CORRUPTED AND SPOILED THROUGH
IMAGINATION AND PRIDE


PROCESS


1. WE will give an occasion of consideration to the earnest
searcher and seeker, and if he apprehends our meaning he shall
indeed be able to find the noble philosopher’s stone, but so that
he be chosen thereto by God, and his life also stands in the
heavenly Mercury, otherwise we are a mystery to him; and we
will represent it to him in similitudes, in the most manifest,
and yet mystical manner.

2, When Adam was created in paradise, the heavenly Mercury
did then lead him; his life burned in a pure oil, therefore his
eyes were heavenly ; and his understanding did excel nature, for
his light shined in the oil of the divine essentiality; the external
waterish property was not manifest in his oil; he was :liastrich,
that is, angelical, and became in the Fall cogastrish, that is, the
watery nature in the mortal property was manifest in his cil,
and penetrated, so that the mercury in him became an anxious
poison, which before in his oil was an exaltation of joyfulness.

3. For the salnitral flagrat in the impression in the coldness,
viz. according to the saturnine property, was thereby elevated,
and got the dominion, as a cold poison, which arises in the
impression of death, from whence the darkness was generated in
the oil, and Adam died to the divine light; to which the devil
persuaded+ him by ? the serpent, that is, by the essence and
property of the serpent; for the kingdom of wrath, and also the
outward kingdom was manifest in the serpent; for it was more
subtle than any beast of the field, and this subtlety Eve desired;
for the serpent persuaded her that her eyes should be opened,
and she should be as God, and know good and evil.

4. Which also was the will of the devil, that he would know
evil: And in the enkindling to the knowledge in Mercury he
became corrupt and dark; for he entered with the imagination,

1 Or ted: 2 Or through,
56


ZA
“ey
a


Signatura Rerum cy,


according to his condition, knowledge, and desire, into the fiery
byss; and Adam, according to his knowledge and desire, went
into the cold byss into the impression, into the procreated
watery property in the salniter, where both kingdoms stand
separated: He desired to prove and taste the watery mercury,
in which is the mortal poison; and Lucifer [desired] the fiery
Mercury, which gives strength and might; from whence his pride
arose, viz. out of the fiery Mercury: But both, viz. Lucifer,
and also Adam, lost the oil of the meekness of the divine
essentiality.

5. Now we are to consider of the serpent, which deceived
Adam with its craft; how it was, and what its subtlety was
after which Adam and Eve did imagine; why they did eat of
the forbidden tree which was evil and good, and how they did
eat death thereby; and what their salvation and restoration is
naturally and properly; what evil and good are, what the
property of the eternal life, and then the property of eternal
death is; what the cure is, whereby the sickness introduced by
Adam, and its death, may be healed, and restored both to the
temporal and eternal life.

6. Let the reader attend to the sense and meaning; for we
have not the ability to give this into his hands; that only
belongs to God; but the gates shall stand open for him, if he
will enter in; if not, flattery } avails him not.

7. The devil was a fair angel, and the serpent the subtle beast,
and man the likeness of the Deity; now all three were corrupted ?
by imagination and pride, and got the curse of God for their false
lust [or cunning].

8. All whatever is eternal proceeds originally from one ground,
as angels and souls; but the serpent is not out of the eternal
ground, but out of the beginning, as we have before given you
to understand, how with the enkindling of the fire in the salnitral
flagrat two kingdoms separate, viz. eternity and time; and
how the eternity dwells in the time, but yet only in itself; but
yet so nigh to the time, as fire and light which are in one another,
and yet make two kingdoms; or as darkness and light dwell
in each other, and the one is not the other. The like we are to
consider of the inchoative poisonful mercury in the devil, and
in man, and in the serpent also; how an oil corrupts, and yet
the essence or being of God is not hereby at all corrupted, but
enters into itself, viz. into the nothing; and the creaturely
mercury, which arises, or is begotten with the beginning of the

1 Or the riddle. 2 Spoiled, undone.


58 Jacob Boehme


creature in the creature, goes out of itself,1 that is, out of the
eternal into time, viz. into the beginning of the creature; it
desires its own self, that is, the beginning; and will be its own,
or of a selfish property, and forsakes the eternity, into which it
should be wholly confined, and resigned with its desire, and
bring its hunger thereinto; and then its poison-source would
not be manifest.

9. For whatever hungers after the eternal nothing, viz. after
the quiet meek liberty of God, that is not manifest to itself,
but it is manifest in the still liberty, viz. in God; for as the
hunger is, such is also the essence in the hunger; each hunger
or desire makes itself an essence according to the property of
the hunger or desire.

ro. Thus the devil makes [or causes] in himself his darkness;
for he went with his desire into himself, into the property of the
centre to the desire, and forsook the eternity, viz. the nothing,
that is, the lubet of love; so that he enkindled himself in his
poisonful mercury, that is, in the forms to life in himself, and
became an anxious fire-source in the darkness; as wood that is
burnt to a coal, which only glows, and has no more any true
light in it, also no oil or water; so it went with him. Now in
his own property, viz. in his life’s forms, there springs forth
nothing but a stinging envious property, where one form hates
and annoys the other, and yet they so beget each other.

II. And so was the serpent likewise, yet not by its own
aspiring haughtiness; but when God said; Let all sorts of beasts
come forth, each according to his property [or kind], then
came forth beasts out of every property of nature, as it was
manifest in the separation, when God moved himself to the
creation; for the devil would domineer over the love and meek-
ness of God, and put his desire also into the anger,” that is, into
the austere might, where the poison-life arises, viz. into the fiat
of the wrathful property, out of which form are proceeded vipers,
serpents, toads, and other venomous worms; not that the devil
has made them, that he cannot; only as the desire was in the
impression of the fiat, such also was the creature in the evil and
good.

12. For in the impression of the fiat, in the original of the
outward Mercury, viz. of the life, which is manifest to itself
internally, was the separation, where God and the world
separate, viz. God inwardly, the world outwardly,’ as:a simili-


1 Or outwards. 2 Or set his desire upon the anger.
* Text, into himself. 4 Out of itself.


Signatura Rerum 59


tude of the abyss, or a looking-glass of eternity; even there the
inward wrath, “from whence God i is called an angry zealous God,
and a consuming fire, manifested itself externally in figures, as
in a similitude of the inward birth in the centre; like as the
eternal lubet, which he is-himself, stirs up [awakens] and causes
the desire to the nature of the eternal manifestation, and gives
in itself into the desire, and turns the wrath of the desire into
joyfulness.

13. Thus it is also with the serpent’s craft:1 In the highest
Mercury is the highest sharpest proof of all things; the more
poisonful a thing is, the more sharply it proves a thing; for the
sharpest ? taste and smell consists in the great poison, viz. in a
dying source. ,

14. And the eternal light is generated? out of the Father’s
sharpness, that it attains the shining, and goes forth with its
own source through the sharpness out of the anguish-source
again into the liberty, viz. into the nothing, where the light,
by reason of the fire’s-source and property, becomes also a
desire, which is the desire of the divine love and joyfulness; in
which desire Mercurius, the eternal word, or the understanding
of eternity, or deity, is rightly considered and named: And this
efflux from the fire (understand from the eternal magical spiritual
fire) is a procreation, viz. of the word of the power, colours, and
virtue: And this desire of the same mercury, or word, does also
modelise* the power into its own desire, and makes it essential;
which is the meekness and the love, which quenches the wrath
of the Eternal Father, viz. of the eternal nature’s desire with
love, and changes it into joyfulness, where the name of God
has its original from eternity. This immassed essentiality
causes ® two properties, viz.: one oleous, which is heavenly
essence, a cause of the shining of the light; and also a powerful
[property] from the motion of the eternal impression, or desire
of the Father after the birth of the Son; from whence the divine
air (as the power through the shining of the light) proceeds forth
out of this love-fire, which is the Spirit of God.

15. In like manner know this, that the eternal love (under-
stand the essence, viz. the heavenly essentiality) has given
itself forth into the creation with the verbum fiat, to set ® the
Father’s anger, viz. the form of the eternal nature, into the
highest joyfulness, and to set forth the likeness of the eternal


1 Or wit, or subtlety. 7 ouers keenest.
3 Or begets itself. Or form, or immass.
5 Affords, yields, produces. 6 Bring, turn, or sublime.


60 Jacob Boehme


generation; and where the nature of the wrath was most
elevated through the fiat, there also the desire did most incline
itself towards the liberty, to be free from the wrath, and to
bring it into the kingdom of joy,! from whence the great and
deep knowledge is arisen, and also the most precious and >
highest tincture; understand the desire of the wrathful hunger
received that into itself after which it hungered,” viz. the liberty;
for all things were created good in the beginning; also the devil
was good while he was an angel; so also the serpent [was good
in its creation before the curse].

16. But seeing the devil went into the highest fire’s desire,
God departed from him, as a light that is put out, or extin-
guished in a candle; and afterwards he lived according to his
own. desire.

17. But seeing he knew that there was such a tincture in the
serpent, and the serpent being created out of the beginning of
time, therefore he insinuated 3 with his desire into the serpent,
and took possession of the serpent’s tincture, and wrought forth
his desire through the serpent against man, to introduce him to
long after the serpent’s property: For the serpent’s tincture was
from both originals, viz. out of the deadly mercury from the
dying in the fire, viz. from the coldness in the impression; and
then also from the wrathful [fiery property in the impression].
The cold impression is earthly, which arises from the wrath,
viz. from the dying in the wrath, in the impression; and the
fiery [impression] arises from the quick poison of mercury, in
which property the spirit’s life consists.

18. Thus Adam and Eve were infected with the devil’s desire
through the serpent, viz. through the earthly, deadly property
of the serpent; and also [through] the wrathful poisonful living
property of God’s wrath according to the devil’s own property;
and was inflamed in his divine oil, that is, in the heavenly
essentiality.

19. Even then the divine light, which shined out of the divine
body of the heavenly essentiality, was extinct to him; for the
curse seized upon the soul. Now God’s cursing is a with-
drawing ,* viz. the divine power, which was in the body, departed
into its own principle; and his holy oil (wherein the power of
God dwelt, and had made a kingdom of joy, viz. the paradise)
became a poison.

20. For the earthly part according to the mortifying of the


1 Or joyfulness. ? Or receives that which it hungers after.
$ Crept. * Or is a banishing.


Signatura Rerum 6I


water, viz. the cogastrish property, was manifest; and forthwith
mercury, viz. the coldness in the death’s property, got the
dominion, whereas before he was as it were swallowed up in
the divine power: Thus Adam died unto God, and lived to
death; here it was necessary that God should regenerate him;
and therefore the serpent was cursed, because it had served,
and willingly obeyed the devil.

21. Thus we understand what lies hid in the greatest anguish,
viz. in the strongest mercury, viz. an oil, which cures and
tinctures all diseases; but the cold poison, viz. the death’s
source must be done away, and put into a fiery [property] which
is desirous of the light; for God created all things good in the
beginning, but through his cursing or withdrawing the evil came
in: For when God’s love-desire dwelt in the outward world’s-
source, and penetrated it, as the sun the water, or the fire an
iron, then the outward world was a paradise, and the divine
essence sprang forth and budded through the earthly, the eternal
life through the mortal; but when God cursed it for man’s sake,
the mortal [life] was manifest in man, and also in the fruit
of which man should eat, which property before was only
manifest in the “ tree of the knowledge of good and evil,” on
which Adam and his wife were tempted, whether their desire
| would enter into the eternity, viz. into God’s essence, or into the
essence of time, into the living or mortal oil, in which source
the soul’s spirit would live, that is, burn.

22. Thus by God’s curse, or withdrawing, the heavenly body
was shut up, and the anger-source set open, and so [the heavenly
body] lies still shut up: But seeing man by the eternal mercury,
that is, by the word of divine power, was in one part formed out
of eternity into body and soul, none could disclose ? the poison-
death, and destroy the mortal mercury, and change it again into
the light’s-source, viz. into the source of the divine joyfulness,
but only the very divine Mercury, viz. the power and the word
of life itself: For the serpent’s poisonful earthly property was
manifest and stirred up in man; therefore when God’s word
did pity the corruption of man, and did again embrace him,*
he said, ‘‘ The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent’s
head,” and thou (understand the serpent’s poison or fire) shalt
sting him in the heel.

23. Herein now lies the philosopher’s stone, [to know] how
the seed of the woman bruises the serpent’s head, which is done
in the spirit and essence temporally and eternally; the sting of

1 Part or property. 2 Open, or exclude. 3 Or took his part.


62 Jacob Boehme


the serpent is God’s anger-fire, and the woman’s seed is God’s
love-fire, which must be again awakened, and illustrate! the
anger, and deprive the wrath of its might, and put it into the
divine joyfulness, and then the dead soul, which lay immersed in
God’s curse, does arise: When the poisonful Mercury, which
resembles God’s anger, is tinctured with love, then the death’s
anguish in Mercury is changed into the highest joyfulness and
desire of love, which does again make a love-essence in itself,
viz. an heavenly body out of the earthly: When Mercury is
changed into an heavenly source, it desires no longer [or more]
the earthly mortal life; [it desires] not the four elements, but
only the one, wherein the four are contained, as it were swal-
lowed up; as the light holds the darkness swallowed up in itself,
and yet the darkness is in it, but not manifest in the light; as
God dwells in time, and the time comprehends him not, unless
it be translated and wrapped up into eternity, that the divine
light does again shine in its source, and then the time is manifest
with its wonders ? in the eternity.

24. In this manner also is the process of the wise men with
the precious stone: There is no nearer consideration of the same
than to consider [and know] how the eternal word, viz. the
heavenly divine Mercury in the divine power, is become man,
and has slain death, and the anger in man, viz. changed the
Mercury into the divine joyfulness, whereby the human Mercury,
which before lay shut up in God’s anger, viz. in the source of
death, does with its new enkindled desire, which now is called
faith in the Holy Ghost, attract divine essentiality, viz. Christ’s
body to itself, and sets itself in divine power and light above
the anger of God, and the poison of the serpent, and bruise the
head of the anger, viz. the poison of death with the life of divine
joyfulness: That is, the anger was master, but in the light it
became a servant, which now must be a cause of the joyfulness,
as it is most plain, clear, and manifestly made known and shewn
to us in the mercurial life.

25. Now observe the process, and meditate on it, ye dear
children of wisdom, and then you shall have enough temporally
and eternally ; 3 do not as Babel does, which amuses and comforts
itself with the philosopher’s stone, and boasts of it, but keeps only
a gross mason’s stone shut up in poison and death, instead of
the precious philosopher’s stone:* What is it for Babel to have
the stone, when it lies wholly shut up in Babel? It is as if a


1 Shine through, irradiate. 2 Or works and effects.
3 Here and for ever. 4 Or noble stone of the wise men,


Signatura Rerum 63


lord bestowed a country upon me, which indeed was mine, but
I could not take possession of it, and remained still a poor man
notwithstanding, and yet I boasted of the dominion, and so
had the name, and not the power: Even thus it goes with Babel
about the precious stone of the new-birth in Christ Jesus.

26. In the sweet name, Jesus Christ, the whole process is
contained, what, and how the new-birth is out of death into
life, which is very clearly understood in the language of nature:
For the name Jesus is the property of the free lubet of eternity,
which yields itself into the pregnant centre, viz. into the Father’s
property, and figures itself in the centre in the Father’s property,
viz. in the Father’s fire, to a word of eternal power.

27. Understand, the Father, viz. the Father’s fiery forms, do
figure [shape] this divine voice essentially in itself in the lubet
of the liberty; that is, the Father’s fiery property makes itself

in the divine essence of the eternal love to a mercury of joy-
fulness; for the Father’s property is the fire-source, and the Son’s,
viz. the eternal lubet’s property, is the love-source; and yet
also there would be no desire of love, if the Father’s fire did
not enkindle it, and make it movable, viz. desirous; from the
fire arises the desire.

28. The Father of all essences begets this holy desire through
his fire-source, which is now his heart of love, which gives in
his fire the shining lustre and splendour; even there the wrath
in the fire’s property dies from eternity to eternity, and is.
changed into a love-desire.

29. Thus observe it; the free lubet’s property is here in the
fire’s property called Christ, which signifies in the language of
nature a potent champion, depriving the wrath of its power, a
shining of the light in the darkness, a transmutation, where the
love-lubet rules over the fire-lubet, viz. over the wrath, the light
over the darkness: Here the seed of the woman (understand of
the free lubet, in which there is no source) bruises the head
of the wrath of the eternal nature, viz. of the eternal desire; for
the fire’s property is rightly called the head, for it is the cause
of the eternal life; and the liberty, viz. the free lubet, or the
nothing, is rightly called the woman ; for in the nothing, viz.
in the liberty of all source,” consists the birth of the Holy Trinity
of the Deity.

30. Now the fire gives life, and the free lubet gives essence
into the life, and in the essence is the birth, where the Father,
viz. the eternal ground, begets his essence, viz. his heart out


1 One that breaks through irresistibly. 2 Or void of all source.


64 Jacob Boehme


of the abyss in himself, that is, out of the abyss in himself into
abyss; the Son is! the Father’s byss: Thus the Father remains
in himself, as touching his own property only, the byss of the
eternal nature; and the Son remains in the Father, the byss of
the power and kingdom of joy; a resemblance whereof you see -
in the fire and light: And thus the Son tinctures the Father
with the liberty, viz. with the nothing; and the Father tinctures
(the Son) the nothing, that there is an eternal life therein, and
no more a nothing, but a sound or voice of the manifestation of
the eternity.

31. Thus, dear philosophers, observe here the ground how
you should tincture; seek not the Son without the Father to
tincture therewith: It must be one body;? the serpent-bruiser
lies therein beforehand; for the seed of the woman has not
bruised the serpent’s head without the humanity, but in the
humanity: The source of the divine lubet (understand of the
love) manifested itself through a resurrection® in the human
essence, and became manifest in the human life, and tinctured
the wrath of death with the blood of the divine tincture, and
there the wrath of death was changed into a source of divine
love and joyfulness: Thus the love bruised the head of the
anger and the oleous poison in Mercury, and deprived the wrath
of its dominion, and sublimed the wrath into the highest joyful-
ness; even there the anger, and the astringent cold death, were
made open shew of 4 in a fiery love: Then it was said, “ Death,
where is thy sting? Hell, where is thy victory? God be
thanked who has given us victory.”

32. Now it behoves the wise seeker to consider the whole
process with the humanity of Christ from his opening in the
womb of his mother Mary, even to his resurrection and ascen-
sion; and so he may well find the Feast of Pentecost with the
joyful spirit, wherewith he may tincture, cure, and heal what-
ever is broken and destroyed: We declare it in the ground of
truth, as we have highly known it; for the rose in the time of
the lily shall blossom in May when the winter is past, for
blindness to the wicked, and for light to the seeing.

33. God be for ever praised, who has granted us eyes to see
through the poisonful heart of the basilisk, and see the day of
restitution of all whatever Adam lost.


1 Or becomes. 2 Corpus.

3 Or awakening, or stirring itself up.

4 Or victoriously triumphed over.

® Or the blooming spring of the paradisical new-birth in man.


Signatura Rerum 65


34. Now we will come to the process of Christ, and go with
him out of eternity into time, and out of time into eternity,
and bring again the wonders of time into eternity, and openly
set forth the pearl, for honour unto Christ, and scorn to the
devil; he that sleeps is blind, but he that wakes sees what the
May 1 brings.

35. Christ said, “ Seek, and you shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened unto you: ” You know that Christ signifies in
a parable concerning the wounded Samaritan, that he fell among
murtherers, who beat him and wounded him, and pulled off
his clothes, and went away, and left him half dead, till the
Samaritan came, and took pity on him, dressed him, and poured


-_ oil into his wounds, and brought him into the inn: This is a


manifest and lively representation of the corruption of man in
paradise, and also of the corruption of the earth in the curse of
God, when paradise departed from it.

36. Now wilt thou be a magus? Then thou must become
the Samaritan, otherwise thou canst not heal the wounded and
decayed; for the body which thou must heal is half dead, and
sorely wounded; also its right garment is torn off, so that it is
very hard for thee to know the man whom thou wilt heal, unless
thou hast the eyes and will of the Samaritan, and seekest nothing
else thereby but to restore the loss of the wounded.

37. Now consider! The eternal word manifested itself in
Adam with divine living essentiality, with the heavenly Mercury,
but when the soul’s-fire in Adam, by the infection of the devil,
poisoned the will’s spirit in Adam, and introduced it through
the property of the serpent into earthly deadly lust, then the
heavenly Mercury of the heavenly essence withdrew, that is,
the soul’s will departed from it with its desire, and introduced
its hunger into the earthly mortal essence, viz. into the property
of the cold Mercury, which had made stones and earth. Adam’s
spirit would prove this [Mercury], and have the knowledge in
evil and good, and so this Mercury of the four elements imme-
diately drew him into its poison, and effectually wrought in him,
and robbed him of the divine property, stung, and wounded
him with heat and cold, and made him half dead, and stripped
him of his angelical rayment, viz. the garment in the pure
element, where the heavenly source penetrates the four elements,
and tinctured them in Adam’s body: Then he needed no other
garment, for heat and cold were as it were swallowed up in him;
as the day holds the night swallowed up in itself, and yet the


1 Or pleasant spring.
F 569


66 Jacob Boehme


night dwells in the day, but it is not manifest: Thus it went
with man when the property and source of the night seized on
him, then it domineered in him; and thus it went also with the
earth when God cursed it.

38. Now wilt thou be a magus? Then thou must understand
how to change the night again into the day; for the source of
the night, viz. of the darkness, is the anguish-source of death;
and the source of the day, viz. of the light, is the life, and the
lustre in the life; now Christ has again enkindled this shining
in the humanity, and quickened man again in himself: Now
if thou wilt tincture, then thou must change that which is shut
up, and closed in the death of the night again into the day, for
the day is the tincture, and yet the day and night lie in each
other as one essence.

39. Now says reason, How may I begin to do it? Look
upon the process, how God began with the humanity, when he
would tincture the same.

40. Christ came into this world in the shut-up human form,
and brought into the enclosed fortress of death the tincture of
life, viz. the Deity; he came into the world as a pilgrim in our
poor form; he became ours, that he might tincture us in himself:
But what did he do? Did he live in joy? Did he behave and
carry himself as a lord? No; he entered into death, and died,
and put away the night’s-source in him through us: But how
did he do it? He assumed the essence of our soul and body
unto the divine essence, and quickened our essence with the
divine, that our essence entered again with its will and desire into
the divine essence, and then the heavenly fiat was moved again
in the humanity; for the humanity inclined itself again into the
liberty, viz. into the free lubet of the Deity.

41. This being done, the man Christ was tempted forty days,
so long as the first Adam was alone in paradise, and was
tempted: Then the outward earthly food was taken from him,
and the humanity must eat with its desire of God’s essence;
there was represented unto him all whatever the first Adam had
amused himself in, and whereinto he imagined, and wherein he
was captivated, as in the death of the night. This the devil,
being a prince of this world, now represented unto him in the
property of death, as he had represented it to Adam through
the serpent, whereon Adam and his wife did amuse themselves,
and entered thereinto with the imagination.

42, Now behold! What did Christ do when he was to undergo

1 Or what shall I first do to effect it?


Signatura Rerum 67


-the combat of this trial, when the human essence was to enter
again with its desire into the Deity, and eat of God’s bread,
that is, of the divine essentiality? He went to Jordan, and was
baptized of John. With what? With the water in Jordan,
and with the water in the word of life, viz. the divine essence,
which must tincture our mortal essence in the outward humanity
of Christ, from whence the divine hunger arose in the human
essence, that he desired to eat of God’s bread: Therefore the
Spirit of God took him and carried him into the wilderness, and
there the Father’s property in the wrath did oppose him through
the prince in the wrath; and there God’s bread, and also the
_ bread of God’s anger according to the death’s desire, was
- tendered to him; now it was tried, whether the soul, which was
generated and created out of the Father’s property, would after
this tincturation of baptism enter again into the love-desire,
viz. into the nothing out of all source.

43. What is hereby intimated to the magus? A mystery is
hinted to him: If he will do wonders with Christ, and tincture
the corrupt body to the new-birth, he must first be baptized,
and then he gets an hunger after God’s bread, and this hunger
has in it the verbum fiat, viz. the archeus 1 to the new genera-
tion, that is, the Mercury: But I do not speak here of a priest’s
baptism; the artist must understand it magically; God and
man must first come together ere thou baptizest, as it came to
pass in Christ: The Deity first entered into the humanity, but
the humanity could not presently comprehend it, till it was
quickened through baptism, and the hunger, viz. the dead
Mercury in the human essence, was again stirred up in the
heavenly part.

44. And here began again the human eating; viz. the Mercury
received again divine property and will; and then the inward
Mercury (understand man’s property) did eat in the taste of the
divine word of God’s essence: And the four elemental pro-
perties did eat of the night’s property so long, till the human
Mercury sublimed its life, and changed the four elements into
one: And the life tinctured death, which was done on the cross:
Then the four elements departed from him; that is, he died to
time, viz. to the night, that is, to the four elements, and arose
in the pure element, and lived to eternity.

45. The magus must keep and observe this process also with
his alchymy. Dost thou ask how? I will not put it into thy
mouth by reason of the wicked, who is not worthy of it: Observe

1 Work-master, or faber.


68 Jacob Boehme


only the baptism, that thou baptizest the dead Mercury, which
lies in the heavenly essentiality, enclosed and shut up in im-
potency with its own baptism, [and mark] of what essence he is
in a thing;! but thou must have this divine water, and also
the earthly; for the earthly Mercury cannot else receive the
divine [Being] except the divine Mercury receives of its power,
whereupon it stirs and hungers: Then the heavenly [Mercury]
seeks, but yet finds not divine essence about it for its food;
thereupon it brings its will through the desire of death into
itself, viz. into the verbum fiat, which has made and produced it,
and sets its hunger upon the same; whereupon the divine
essence inclines itself to it, and will become joyfulness in him;
even then arises the beginning of the new body out of the divine
essentiality, which the desire nourishes and brings up; and when
the new life is born, viz. the day, then the four elements die:
And then the new body is shut up in the dark death, and on
the third day it rises again from death; for the night is swallowed
up in the grave, and the morning rises.

46. If thou didst understand this, then hadst thou the pearl:
But my intent and purpose is otherwise; I will shew thee Christ
along with it, and also this pearl; therefore none shall find it
but he that loves Christ.

47. Thou sayest, Tell me the baptism? and I have already
told it thee. Every hunger is a desire after its property; now
if thou givest again the property of death to the hunger of death,
then death encreases; but if thou givest him heavenly property,
then death receives it not, for hell is against heaven; therefore
thou must give death and the anger of God to death, and in this
anger give him heavenly essence, viz. the baptism, and so the
baptism will swallow up the death into itself, and then the
anger dies in the death through the baptism, but not presently;
thou must first keep the process of Christ, and suffer the baptized
to preach, that is, appear in his divine form and colours; ex-
ceedingly persecute and plague him, and give him no rest; for
so the right Mercury becomes working and active; and when
he has shewn all his wonders through the old Adam, then thou
must cast the old and new man into God’s great anger, and slay
the old man, ventilate him, and hang him naked ? on the cross,
and again take him thence, and lay him into the putrefaction,
viz. into the grave.

48. And then Christ will arise from death, and appear; but


1 Or whose essence is in everything.
“Or openly. Text, in the air.


Signatura Rerum 69


only his own know him: He walks about in heavenly form, and
sometimes in his own [form which he had here] until the Feast
of Pentecost, for now here is tried in him the highest perfection,
whether he will persist in the angel’s form, and eat only of the
divine essence; and then comes the Holy Ghost, and proceeds
with his power out of the whole corpus, viz. out of the body and
soul, which then tinctures the dead and broken being; as it
may be seen in the Day of Pentecost, where Saint Peter tinctured
three thousand souls at once with his heavenly Mercury, and
delivered them out of death.

49. Dear seekers, herein lies the pearl; had you the universal,
then you could also tincture as Saint Peter did, but your
covetous death withholds you and shuts you up; for you seek
only covetousness and temporal honour in the pleasure of the
flesh, to generate yourselves in the night’s property; therefore
the pearl hides itself from you; yet the day shall again appear
when the wrathful anger of God is fulfilled, satisfied and
appeased in the blood of the saints, and turned to a love-life;
and the time is near.


PROCESS


50. Every creature keeps in its generation and propagation
to its own kind; the male to the female, and the female to the
male: Now God said to Adam and Eve after the Fail, “ The
seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent’s head;”’ he said
not [the seed] of the man: Herein lies the baptism of nature:
The male has the fire-spirit, and the female the water-spirit to
the tincture; now the Mercury is a fire-life, and makes himself a
body according to his hunger and desire; now the chief of the
work is in the beginning to give the fire-hunger a love-virgin
out of its kind for its consort, that so his wrathful hunger may
be changed into a love, and then they sleep together in their
own marriage bed: Now the devil is an enemy of this wedlock,
who soon comes with a strange desire, and tempts these married
people, but dares not lay an hand of violence on them, but only
afflicts and plagues them with a false strange desire; now if they
yield their desire to his will, and his desire overcomes them,
then they become enemies to one another, and bring forth a false
child; for Christ said, “ An evil tree bringeth forth evil fruits,
and a good tree good fruits.”

51. Therefore the artist must beware, and keep himself from
such anger, and yet must prepare a cross for this married couple;


TO Jacob Boehme


for he is their foe and friend, that so they both in their marriage
bed of love might lift up their desire to God, and so with their
desire God’s essence may be pregnant in their desire, and then
in their copulation they shall beget such a child, which they +
(understand the mother, viz. the female) shall nourish in their
belly, till it be ripe.

52. In the meantime let the mother take heed she bear no
love to any other besides her consort, and also not imagine after
strange things, else she will imprint a spot or mark on the child;
she must continue simply in one love, till the child be perfect as
to its body, which comes to pass in the fourth month; yet
according as the parents are of one or other property, so strife
and contrariety will arise in the essence in the child, when the
child is to receive its soul’s life.

53. But when the essence is in its wresting combat, the artist
must assist the soulish, viz. the fiery property, till the soul’s
spirit attains its life, then he appears in the woman’s form and
lustre: Now the artist supposes that he has the child that is born,
but there belongs a further time to it, till the soul grows strong,
and then it appears and shews itself in its red and white coat.

54. But there is yet a wonderful process behind; when the
soul’s life is born, then the new soul casts away the vegetable
life of the parents (which is propagated and inherited to the
body from the parents’ vegztia, wherein the body of the child
congealed ? and grew till the time of the soul), and the life of the
four elements dies, and the life in the one element arises; the |
child is hidden in the dark death, and the artist supposes “it to
be dead, but he must have patience till the child be born.


THE PECULIAR PROCESS IN THE SHAPING OF THE MAGICAL
CHILD


55. The course of Christ upon the earth is a real type how the
new child is nourished in the mother’s womb after its conception,
as is before mentioned, and attains a vegetable life, and grows
up to the time of its right soul’s and spirit’s life; and how the
child arises from the parents’ essence; and how in ‘the enkindling
of its right, viz. of its own life, it casts away the parents’ vegitta
and working ; ; and how anew plant, viz. anew peculiar operation,
does now arise according to the new enkindled spirit’s property,
whereby the child is more noble than its parents, understand as
to its outward life.


1 Or she shall. 2 Curdled.


Wii


Signatura Rerum 71


56. But perhaps some rude clownish sophister might meet
with this treatise, and draw a strange understanding from it, in
that I write of a soul in the vegetative life; but let him know
that we do not understand the image of God, which was formed
into a likeness according to God [to be] in metals, stones, and
herbs; but we understand the magical soul, how the eternity,
viz. the Deity, imprints and pourtrays itself into its likeness,
according to the model of its wisdom in all things, and how God
fills all in all; we understand the summum bonum, the good
treasure which lies hidden in the outward world’s essence as a
paradise.

57. When Christ in his childhood grew up in human and


divine property till he was twelve years old, he went with his


mother Mary to the feast at Jerusalem, and went into the Temple
among the Scribes, asked them, and hearkened to them, and
gave answer to the questions of the teachers; but when his
parents returned home, supposing him to be among the company,
he remained purposely behind among the doctors, and followed
not the intent of his parents, but the divine will, till they came
back again, and sought him; and then his mother said to him,
“ My son, why hast thou dealt so with us? Lo! thy father and
I have been seeking thee sorrowing. Then he said unto them,
How is it that you have sought me? wist ye not that I must
be about my Father’s business? And he went home with them,
and was subject unto them.”

58. In this figure we have the type of the wills of the inward
and outward world, how they are in one another, and against
one another, and yet are but one: Even as in Christ there were
two kingdoms manifest; one which was wrought unto God’s
will, and broke the outward world’s will of its parents, in that
Christ tarried behind contrary to the will of his parents, at
which they were troubled, which the divine will in Christ knew
well enough; and the other kingdom, viz. of his parents’ will,
broke the divine will, that he went home with them, and was
obedient to them according to their will.

59. This figure shews the magus, that he shall find two wills
in his purpose, which he thinks to carry on; one will not be
obedient and subject unto him, viz. the divine will; and yet if
its own peculiar external will shall rightly apply itself thereunto,
and only seek the dear child Jesus with Mary, with desire and
earnest sorrow, and not earthly pleasure of the flesh, then the
divine will will be obedient to him, and go home with him, and
be used according to his good pleasure.


72 Jacob Boehme


6o. Secondly, it shews him the twofold working and will in
all things; and if he will be a magus, and according to his will
turn the will and essence of the good property out of the inward
into the outward, then he must be first capable of the inward,
viz. of the divine will, otherwise he cannot change the inward
will into the outward; as Christ was not obedient to the external
will of his mother till she sought him with grief and sorrow of
heart, and turned her will into God’s will, and wrestled in his
compassion with God’s will, as Jacob the whole night, till the
Lord blessed him, and God said unto him, Thou hast wrestled
with God and man, and hast overcome, or got the victory.

61. Also let the magus know, that he need not go about to
implant the right will to perfection from without into his
purpose; it is already in all things; only he must introduce a
divine desirous will according to the thing’s property into that
thing which he takes in hand, which wrestles with the divine
will as Jacob, and blesses the will introduced to God’s will, that
the divine will yields itself freely into the hunger, or inclines
itself to the desire, and makes the imperfect will (which earnestly
presses into his compassion) perfect, and then it is rightly said,
Thou hast wrestled with God, and hast overcome; then thy
purpose obtains a transformed body, which is heavenly and
earthly.

62. Observe it! It is the first beginning to baptism, and so
you are fit and prepared to the baptism, and not otherwise, else
you baptize only with the water of the outward world; but the
true magus baptizes with the outward and inward water: If he
has a right divine desire in him, then God’s will in his baptism is
the first glimmering tinder in Mercury, so that the life enkindles
death, viz. the Mercury shut up in death, and he gets divine
desire; even then Mercury begins to hunger after divine
essence, and does his first miracle, and turns the water into wine,
as Christ did after his baptism: This is the first tincturation
in the dead corpus in the power of baptism, that the vegitta,
or working energetical life, obtains another property, viz. an
hunger of love, wherewith she embraces her bridegroom, viz.
the fire-source, that he is enkindled in her love, and changes his
cold deadly wrath and will into a fiery love-will: Then the
mortal water turns into wine (a sharpness of a fire and water-
taste), out of which at last comes an oil to another baptism,
after the manner and disposition of the artist, viz. according as
he intends and begins; after the magus has joined the virgin
and young man together, then Christ, viz. the bridegroom,


| Signatura Rerum vie


‘is led with his bride into the desert, and tempted of the
devil.

63. Here is the trial whereby the artist is proved by God
what he seeks with his baptism; for here is the proof in paradise


_ to try whether the bridegroom be not too bad; for the virgin
_ casts her love upon him, and invites him; if he receives it with


desire, and gives his will thereinto, then she gives him her heart


and will wholly: This 1s the heavenly tincture, which gives itself


into the enkindled anger of God (viz. into the curse of the earth
when God cursed it), that i is, into the Mercury enclosed in death,
which is the bridegroom, for the seed of the woman, viz. the
_ heavenly tincture, must bruise the head of the serpent, viz. the


7poisonful Mercury, in the property of death, and change his


poison into wine, and then the virgin receives the seed of the
bridegroom, and not before.

64. The desert is the earthly outward body, where Mercury is
tempted; when the devil appears to Mercury, and plagues him,
and assaults him in his fiery essence, then must the virgin come
to help him, and give him her love: Now if the Mercury eats of
the virgin-like love, that is, of God’s bread, then he may stand
before the devil; and at last the angels come to him, and serve
him; the illuminated magus will well understand what is meant
by the devil.

65. Hereby let the magus in the temptation (seeing the whole


- marriage stands in the devil’s temptation) have a careful eye


upon his purpose; and if the angels do not appear in forty days’
space, then is his purpose in vain; therefore let him look, that
he suffer not too fierce a devil to tempt, and also not too weak,
lest Mercury become light, and desire to continue in his own
- poisonful death’s property, and devour the baptism as a wolf,


_and the old one remains.


66. As soon as he espies the forms of angels, let him bring
Christ out of the desert, and let the bridegroom eat again his
own food, and dismiss the devil, that he may no longer plague
him, and then Christ will do many wonders and signs, at which
the artist will wonder and rejoice: Then he has nothing to do,
the bride is in the bridegroom, they are already married,’ he
need only make their bed ready, they will warm it well enough
themselves; the bridegroom embraces the bride, and the bride
the bridegroom; and this is their food and pastime till they
beget a child.

67. But if the artist will needs be so diligent as to warm the

1 Or in wedlock.


74 Jacob Boehme


married couple’s bed, then let him have a care he do not anger
and enrage them in their love; what he begins he must go on-
with; only the bridegroom is wonderful: He has continually
. two wills, viz. an earthly hunger after God’s anger, and an
hunger after his bride; therefore he must always have his own
earthly food given him, but not into his belly, but magically,
that so he may satisfy only his own will’s-hunger; his food is
his mother that begets him, as it is before mentioned.

68. In brief, the whole work which men speak so much and
wonderfully of consists in two things, in an heavenly and in an
earthly; the heavenly must make the earthly in it to an
heavenly: The eternity must make time in it to eternity: The
artist seeks paradise; if he finds it, he has the great treasure
upon the earth: But one dead man does not raise another; the
artist must be living, if he will say to the mountain, Arise, and
cast thyself into the sea.

69. When the incarnation of the child begins, then first of all
Saturn takes it, and then it is dark and disesteemed, and is
contemned and derided, that such a mystery should lie hid in
such a mean form; there Christ walks in a poor simple form
upon the earth, as a pilgrim, and has not so much room and
propriety in Saturn as to lay his head: He goes as a stranger, as
if he were not there at home.

Jo. After this the moon takes it, and then the heavenly and
earthly properties are mixed, and the vegetative life arises,
and then the artist rejoices; but he is yet in danger.

71. After the moon Jupiter takes it, who makes an under-
standing in Mercury, viz. a pleasant habitation, and gives him
its good will; and in Jupiter his enclosed life, viz. Mercury is
quickened, who takes it with its orb, and forces it into the
highest anguish: And then Mars apprehends it, and gives the
fire-soul to Mercury; and in the flagrat of Mars the highest life
enkindles itself, and separates itself into two essences, viz. out
of the love into a body, and out of the fire into a spirit; then
the life-of love in the fiery flagrat sinks downwards, and appears
beautiful, but it is Venus, a woman: Then the artist supposes
that he has the treasure, but the hungry Mercury devours Venus,
and the child turns to a black raven; then Mars afflicts Mercury
in himself, till he grows faint, and yields himself to death: Then
the four elements depart from him, and the sun receives the
child into its property, and sets it forth in a virgin-like body in
the pure element; for in the property of Mars the light is

1 Blended.


Signatura Rerum a5


enkindled, and the right life is born, and stands in the pure
element; no anger nor death can destroy it.

Ta: It seems strange in the eyes of reason, that God has kept
such a process with the restoring of man in Christ, that he
appeared in such a poor disesteemed form in the human pro-
perty, and was reviled, mocked, scorned, scourged, crucified
and slain; and that he was buried, and rose again out of the
grave, and walked forty days upon the earth before he entered
into his invisible kingdom. Reason is so blind, that it under-
stands nothing of the eternal birth, it knows nothing of paradise,
how Adam was in paradise, and how he fell, and what the curse
of the earth is: If it understood this, the whole process were
manifest to it: As the eternal birth is in itself, so is also the
process with the restoration after the Fall, and so likewise is the
process of the wise men with their philosopher’s stone, there is
not the least tittle of difference betwixt them; for all things
` originally arise out of the eternal birth, and all must have one
restoration in one and the same manner.

73- Therefore if the magus will seek paradise in the curse of
the earth, and find it, then must he first walk in the person of
Christ; God must be manifest in him, understand in the internal
man, that he may have the magical sight: He must deal with
his purpose as the world did with Christ, and then he may find
paradise, wherein is no death.

74. But if he be not in this birth of restoration, and walks not
himself in the way wherein Christ walked upon the earth, if he
steps not forth into the will and spirit of Christ, then let him
give over and leave off his seeking; he finds nothing but death,
and the curse of God. [I tell him plainly and faithfully, for the
pearl of which I write is paradisical, which God does not cast
before swine, but gives it to his children for their play and
delight.

75. And though much might be mentioned here, that even
reason might obtain open eyes, yet it is not to be done; for the
wicked would grow worse, and more full of pride; therefore
seeing he is not worthy of paradise, and also cannot enter there-
into, no heavenly jewel shall be given him: And therefore God
hides it, and permits him to whom he reveals it, to speak of it
no otherwise than magically ; therefore no one attains it, unless
he himself be a magus in Christ, unless paradise be manifest in
his internal man; and then he may find, if he be born to it, and
chosen by God.


CHAPTER VIII


OF THE FIERY SULPHUREOUS SEETHING OF THE EARTH, AND
HOW THE GROWTH IS IN THE EARTH; ALSO OF THE SEPARA-
TION OF THE SEVERAL KINDS OF CREATURES: AN OPEN GATE
FOR THE WISE SEEKERS


1. Let the reader but consider what before is written con-
cerning the centre of the generation of all essences, and then he
may easily proceed here: All whatever is corporeal, let it be
either spirit or body, consists in a sulphureous property; the
spirit in such a spiritual property, and the body out of the spirit
in such a corporeal property.

2. For all things are risen from the eternal spirit, as a likeness
of the eternal; the invisible essence, which is God and the
eternity, has in its own desire introduced itself into a visible
essence, and manifested itself in a time, so that he is as a life
in the time, and the time is in him as it were dead; 1 as a master
that makes his work with an instrument, and the instrument is
mute to the master, and yet it is the making, the master only
guides it; even so are all things confined into limit, measure, and
weight, according to the eternal generation; and they run on
in their operation and generation according to the right and
property of eternity.

3. And God has appointed over this great work only one
master and protector, which can alone manage the work, which
is his officer,” viz. the soul of the great world, wherein all things
lie; [and] he has appointed a type of its likeness as the reason
over this officer, which represents to the officer what he is to
do and make; and this is the understanding, viz. God’s own
dominion wherewith he rules the officer: Now the understanding
shews to the officer what the property of each thing is, how the
separation and degrees proceed from each other; for all things
are contained? in the sulphureous body, and Mercury is Sul-
phur’s life, and the salt is the impression, that preserves the
body * from falling to ashes, so that the spirit is known in a
palpable essence.


1 Dumb, senseless, mute. 2 Governor.
siie: 4 Corpus.
76


Signatura Rerum Te


4. The property of Mercury is in Sulphur, as the boiling of a
water; Sulphur is the water wherein Mercury seethes, and pro-
duces continually two forms out of the water; viz. one oleous,

living, from the liberty of the divine power’s property; and one
mortal from the dissolution in the fire in the salnitral flagrat.

5. The oily is in stones and metals, herbs, treés, beasts, and
men; and the mortal [property] is in the earth, in the water,
in the fire and air; likewise the oleous property is in these four
forms (viz. in the earth, water, fire, and air) as a spirit or life,
and these four properties are as a dead body, in which the oil is
a light or life, from whence the desire, viz. the growth, arises as
a springing out of the dead property, which is the vegetative
life, a springing, budding, and growing out of death.

6. But now the oily property could not be a life, if it were not
in the anguish of death; the anguish makes it to pullulate or
move, in that its will is to fly from, and press out of the anguish,
and forces itself eagerly forwards, from whence the growth
arises: Thus must death be a cause of the life, that the life may
be stirring [or active], and therefore Mercury is the true moving
life.

7. In the mortal property he is evil, and is called the life of
death, of hell, and the anger of God; and in the oily property
he is good, from the efficacy of the meekness and liberty of
God; and he is the officer’s faber, whereby the officer distin-
guishes the degrees in the vegetative life, [separating] the living
[being] from the mortal, the heavenly essentiality from the dead
or earthly, and appoints it into two kingdoms; viz. the good
in the oleous [property] into a heavenly [being], viz. into a light,
and the mortal [part] into the darkness.

8. These two kingdoms are in continual combat one with
another, and there is an incessant wrestling in them; as water
boiling on the fire; each boils in its property, viz. the oily in

joy and meekness, and the mortal in the anguish of darkness,
and yet one is the cause of the other: The light is the death, and
deadly destruction of the darkness, viz. of the anguish; for in
the light the anguish has no strength, but it changes it into the
exultation of joyfulness, and the cause of joy, else there would
be no joy; for the meekness is like a stillness, but the source of
anguish sublimes it, and turns into a pleasant laughter: So also
the anguish, viz. the darkness, is the death and destruction of
the oily property; for if it gets the upper hand in the oleous
property, it takes possession of the corpus,! and turns the oil
1 Or body.


78 Jacob Boehme


into a poisonful source, viz. into a dark spirit, or body wholly
earthly, as Adam was when he imagined into the evil.

g. And yet we do not acknowledge that the oleous property
takes any poison-source into itself; but Mercury, viz. the fire-
life, insinuates itself into the anguish, and poisons the essence
of time, which the outward Mercury itself makes in its own
desire, that is, he departs from the inward oleous essence, and
then the internal [being] remains immoveable in itself, and the
essence and spirit of time do separate from the essence and spirit
of eternity, and yet there is no parting [or dividing], but both
principles remain in one essence; whereas there are two essences,
but the one comprehends not the other, as eternity does not
comprehend time: For thus also Adam and Eve died; the soul’s
Mercury departed with its imagination from the essence of
eternity into the essence of time, viz. into the anguish-source,
and then the essence of eternity lost its leader, which Christ
restored again by the divine word, or Mercury; so that the
essence of eternity, which in Adam was forsaken by the soul’s
Mercury, obtained the life again.

to. And thus we know that the essence of eternity lies hid in
the anxious Mercury, as in the fortress of death; and our
writing and teaching are to shew how a man may bring the
poisonful Mercury with its desire so far, as to enter with its
desire again into the essence of eternity, viz. into the enclosed,
and reassume the essence of eternity for a body, and with the
same tincture the essence of time, and reconcile them in one,
that the whole corpus of the inward and outward world may be
only one, that so there may be only one will in the spirit, viz. a
love-hunger; and this hunger does then make to itself only one
essence, and then every spirit eats of its [own] essence or body,
so that afterwards no evil will can arise any more therein.

11. Thus we understand, that joy and sorrow, love and
enmity, do originally arise through imagination and longing;
for in the inclination [or earnest desire] towards God, viz. the
free love, the kingdom of joy arises in the midst of the anguish
of death; and if the desire departs out of the free love into the
anguish of death, viz. into the source of darkness, then is the
desire filled with the source of death, and so Mercury works
effectually in the source of death.

12. Thus we declare with a true ground, that there is nothing
so bad, but there lies a good therein, but the badness is not
capable of the good; also there lies in the most poisonful
Mercury, the greatest pearl and jewel; if his poisonful will may


Signatura Rerum 79


be introduced into the same, then he himself manifests the
pearl; for he changes himself; as is to be seen in the earth,
where Mercury seeks its pearl, and turns it in the ore? to gold,
and to other metals, according as the Sulphur is in each place.

13. For there is a continual combat? in the earth; the
eternity travels with longing through time to be free from
vanity, and in its longing it gives itself to Mercury, as to its life
and faber; and when Mercury obtains it in his hunger, he
becomes joyful, and makes this free lubet corporeal in him, and
there arises gold and silver, together with other metals and good
herbs, all according to the powerful efficacy of each place; As
the boiling + is in each place, so likewise is the metal, all according
to the property of the seven forms of nature; that form which
is chief in a place, according to the same property grows a metal,
also herbs and trees.

14. Here the physicians must observe, that they learn dis-
tinctly to know what kind of property is the strongest in each
thing with which they would cure; if they do not know it, they
will oftentimes give their patients death: Also they must know,
that they are to understand, and very exactly know the property
of the patient, which of the properties among the seven forms
of nature is the Mercury in Sulphur; for such a salt he also
makes: Now if the physician gives him a contrary salt, Mercury
is only thereby the more vehemently enraged, and made more
venomous; but if he may obtain his own salt according to his
own property (after which he hungers) then he® rejoices, and
readily quits the poison-source in the fire of Mars. But the
right physician has another cure, he first brings his Mercury
with which he will cure out of death’s anguish into the liberty:
He may well cure,® the other is dangerous and uncertain; if
he happens to cure, it is by chance, and very inconstant, and
cannot cure any disease fundamentally; for the outward Mer-
cury is shut up, it can reach no further than into the four
_ elements, into the mortal essence; it is able to do nothing in the
sidereal body: But if it be turned and introduced into the love,
as is before mentioned, then it touches’ the very root and
ground, and renews it even to the divine power in the second
principle.

15. We have an excellent resemblance of this in the blooming
earth on the herbs; for in the earth Mercury is earthly and

1 Or if his poison-will be brought into the moving spirit of love.


2 Gross stone. 3 Wrestling. 4 Or seething. $ The Mercury.
6 Or such a physician has true skill to cure. 7 Or seizes on.


80 Jacob Boehme


venomous; but when the sun tinctures him, then he reaches
after the sun’s power, after its light, and brings it into his
hungry fiery Mars-desire, into his salt, viz. into his corporeal
essence, viz. into Sulphur, which is his mother, and wheels it
about with its rotation in the essence, as if he also boiled; and
then the liberty, viz. the highest power, reaches after its pro-
perty, viz. after the solar property, and apprehends Mercury
also along with it.

16. Now when Mercury tastes the heavenly Being in itself,
it grows exceeding desirous after the power of love, and draws
the same into its desire, whereupon it changes itself, and its salt,
so also its mother, the Sulphur, into a pleasant source; and now
if the liberty be so introduced into a moving life with Mercury,
then it is very full of joy, and springs up in its joy, as a light
from the fire, and puts forth through the Sulphur-spirit in the
salt: Thus is the growing of the root, and from thence the root
gets such a pleasant smell and taste; for in the original the salt’s
sharpness in the first impression from Saturn is a sharpness of
death’s anguish, and here it is turned to a pleasant power; for
all taste in herbs is salt.

17. Thus understand us further about the root in the earth;
when the inward power of the liberty in Mercury’s property,
which now is changed, does thus force itself forth to the mani-
festation of the Deity, then the sun’s power does eagerly press
towards the divine power, and inclines itself with great desire
to the highest heavenly tincture, and draws it with its desire to
it; viz. out of the earthly body into a solar: Thus the sun draws
the power out of the root in the earth, and the joyful Mercury
ascends up along with it, and continually draws the sun’s power
from above into itself, and from beneath it draws its mother
viz. the Sulphur, to itself: And here all the seven forms of
nature arise in joyfulness in the combat, each will be uppermost:
for so it is in the taste, viz. in the generation of nature; and
what form in nature gets to be the chiefest, according to the
same taste is the salt in Sulphur, and such an herb grows out oi
the earth, let it be what it will; though now everything springs
from its mother, yet all things have so taken their original, anc
do still take it; for just so is the right of eternity.

18. Now we are to consider of the stalk: When the herb o:
sprig looks out of the earth, it comes up at first below with <
white form, then further more upwards with a brownish [colour]
and above with a green colour: This is now its signature
[shewing] what kind of form is internally in the essence, in th


Signatura Rerum 8I


source; the white colour of the branch? is from the liberty of
the love-lubet, and the brown is the earthly [property] from
-Saturn’s impression, and from the wrath of Mars; and the
green, which opens itself above, is Mercury’s in the form of
Jupiter and Venus.

19. For Jupiter is power, and Venus is love-desire, which
hasten towards the sun, as towards their likeness; and the
heaven, which is created out of the midst of the water, puts
upon them its blue and green-coloured garment according to the
stars’ might; for the spirit of the stars receives the new child
also, and gives him its spirit and body, and rejoices therein:
Now the forms are in contest? and Mercury is the faber and
separator; Saturn impresses, and Jupiter is the pleasant power
in sulphur; Mars is the fire-source, viz. the might in sulphur;
Venus is the water, viz. the sweet desire; Mercury is the life,
Luna the body, and Sol the heart, viz. the centre to which all
forms tend and press.

20. Thus the outward sun presses into the sun in the herb;
and the inward sun presses into the outward, and there is a
mere pleasing relish and delight of one essence in another;
Saturn makes four, Jupiter makes a pleasant taste, Mars makes
bitter, by reason of his anxious nature, Venus makes sweet,
Mercury distinguishes the taste, Luna takes it into her sack and
hatches it; for she is of an earthly and heavenly property, and
she gives it the menstruum wherein the tincture lies.

21. Thus there is an instigation in the taste; each form
hastens to the sweet water and the sun; Jupiter is pleasant,
and ascends up aloft with the love-desire in the sweet source-
water, wherein Mars rages, and thinks himself to be master in
the house, seeing that he rules the fire-spirit in sulphur, at which
Mercury is dismayed, that Mars does so disquiet him, and Saturn
makes the flagrat corporeal according to his austere impression,
and these are the knots upon the stalk; and the flagrat is
salnitral, according to the third form of nature in the first
impression to the spirit-life, viz. in the anguish-form, from
whence the sulphur takes its original, and in the flagrat Mercury
goes up in the salniter on the sides, and takes Venus also into
it, viz. the love-desire, from whence grow twigs and branches
on the stalk, trunk, or body, be they either herbs, trees, or
shrubs; and each branch [or sprig] is then like to the whole


3
plant. A f i
22. But the sun continually by little and little deprives Mars
1 Shoot, or twig. 2 Or in their wrestling combat. 3 Or growth.


G 559


82 Jacob Boehme


of his force, whereupon the salniter extinguishes, and Mars loses
his bitter property; then Jupiter and Venus wholly yield them-
selves to the sun in the moon’s cabinet,! and the outward sun
takes full possession of the inward; understand the inward sun
is a Sulphur in Mercury, and is of the divine power’s property,
from the liberty of God, which imprints itself on all things, and
gives life and power to all things. Now when that is done, that
Jupiter and Venus have given themselves to the power of the
sun, then Jupiter forces no more upwards, but Mars and Mercury
do continually more and more wind up the stalk from the earth
on high; Jupiter stays still above in the inward and outward
sun’s power, and there is the pleasant conjunction ; with time and
eternity, there the eternity beholds itself in an image? in the
time.

23. And paradise springs up [or opens], for the Sulphur and
the salt in the Sulphur are here transmuted in the paradise, and
the paradisical joy puts itself forth in the smell and taste.
This is now the head or knob of the blossoms, wherein the corn
grows; the lovely smell is in one part paradisical, viz. from the
divine power, from the liberty;. and on the other part earthly,
according to the outward sun, and the outward world.

24. The heavenly property sets forth its signature with fair
colours of the leaves on the blossoms; and the earthly [repre-
sents its signature] by the green leaves [or sprigs] about the
blossom; but seeing this kingdom of the outward world is only
a time (in which the curse is), and Adam could not stand in
paradise, the paradisical property soon passes away with its
signature, and changes itself into the corn which grows in the
blossom; therein the property of the inward and outward sun,
viz. of the inward and outward power, is couched, each property
in its principle; for God has cursed the earth, and therefore let
none think that the outward is divine, only the divine power
penetrates and tinctures the outward [being]; for God said,
“ The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent’s head: ” This
is now effected after the curse in all things which approach near
the Deity, wherein Mercury is a poison; there God bruises its
head with the inward and outward sun, and takes away the
poisonful might in the anger.

25. O that you would but learn to understand, dear sirs and
brethren, wherewith you are to cure; not with the angry
Mercury, which in many an herb is an evil poison-source, but
with the inward Mercury: If you would be called doctors and


1 Bag, or sack. 2 Type, or resemblance.


; Signatura Rerum 83


Masters, then you ought also to know how you may change the
outward Mercury in the Sulphur into love, that he may be de-
livered from the anguish-source, and brought into a joyfulness,
viz. that the earthly [being] be turned into an heavenly, the
death into life; this is your doctorship in the right meaning,
and not by the officer of reason only.

26. God has placed man above the officer, and ordained him in
the understanding to his own dominion: He has ability to change
nature, and to turn the evil into good, provided that first he has
changed himself, otherwise he cannot; so long as he is dead in
the understanding, so long he is the servant and slave of the
officer; but when he is made alive in God, then the officer is his
servant.

27. Ye haughty caps, let it be told you; pride, and your own
honour, and the earthly lust of the flesh, lies in your way, so
that you are not masters in the mysteries, but blind children;
you will not lay your hands upon the coals, but you take money
from the poor and distressed, and give that to many an one
which had been far better he had never bought, for which you
must give a severe and strict account.

28. Thus it is likewise with the sulphurean seething in the
earth with the metals, the power? is stronger in metals than in
the herbs, the tincture is more heavenly than earthly, if the
artist affords it his help, then it changes itself, viz. the earthly
into an heavenly, which notwithstanding comes to pass in many
places without the artist’s ingenuity; as we see, how Mercury
in sulphur apprehends the heavenly tincture in its boiling,
whereby he changes his made essence (which he makes in the
sulphur) into gold and silver by the power and efficacy of the
tincture, understand, by that part of the heavenly property;
for out of the earth, or out of the mortified property in the
salniter, no gold can be made, for there is no fixedness therein.

29. Now we are thus to consider of this process of the boiling
in the Sulphur in the earth: Where the earth is in any place
sulphureous in the saturnine property, wherein the sun bears
chief rule, there is such a boiling; the outward sun hungers after
the inward, which dwells in its own principle in the centre in
sulphur, and sets its desire upon time; for the time, viz. the
creature, longs after eternity, viz. after the liberty, to be freed
from vanity; as the Scripture says, that “all creatures do
earnestly long with us to be freed from vanity.”

30. Even here the liberty gives itself into the solar property

1 Virtue, or efficacy.


84 Jacob Boehme


into the time, and when Mercury tastes it, he becomes joyful,
and turns his wheel in the joy; then Saturn impresses the meek-
ness; and Mars, which arises in the mercurial wheel in the
impression, gives the fire-soul thereinto, so that there is a driving
forth and growth; for the liberty puts itself forth in Mercury’s
property, and Mercury continually separates Saturn and Mars
from it; for he will have a fair and pure child to his joy; he
suffers Venus to remain on the child, for she is in property akin
to the child: copper is nighest to gold by reason of the materia,
it wants only the tincture; Mars holds him too hard in posses-
sion; if he may be got out, then it is gold, which the artist does
well understand.

31. After Venus Mars is akin to gold; for he has swallowed
up Venus in his wrath, and uses her for his body, else in his own
peculiar property he has no corporeal essence, for he is only
wrath, which consumes: He makes him a body out of the water
of Venus, which he devours, and Saturn makes it corporeal to
him; therefore he does so defile his iron with rust, and that is
his property, viz. to be a devourer of his body; but Venus is
pleasant, and makes a growing in him, he devours again what-
ever Venus’s property makes in him; for Venus is the food of
Mars in the saturnine property; therefore the artist is to con-
sider what lies in Mars; if he has only the solar tincture, he needs
nothing else thereto, that he may but deprive Mars of his force,
for Mars has his toughness from Venus.

32. Mars in his own peculiar property is only spalt, and causes
hardness, as the fire does; but Saturn is the impressure of all
things; Venus needs only the tincture, and then she is perfect;
but the artist must rightly understand where the possibility lies,
viz. in Sulphur, where Saturn has the Sulphur in his belly, and
Mercury shews its colour, there he is in the will, but cannot, for
Saturn holds him too fast imprisoned; but if the artist gives him
his helping hand, that he may but advance his wheel, and give
him his mother’s food, which she has hid in the centre, then he
grows strong, and casts Saturn away, and manifests the child:
For so it is also in the earth, where Mercury is quick in his mother,
viz. in the Sulphur, that he is not withheld, that he may only
reach Venus in his hunger for food, the sun will soon shine forth,
for she beams forth in Venus’s meekness: He dresses [or seethes]
his food with his own fire, he needs no artist thereto; which the
artist must well observe, for he has his Mars in himself.

33. Now as the boiling is in the earth, so also it is above the

1 Or mind.


Signatura Rerum 85


“earth; when the fruit grows out of the earth, it is first sharp
[astringent] and bitter, also sour and unpleasant, as the apple
-upon the tree is so; for Saturn has at first the dominion, he
attracts it together, and Mercury forms it, and Mars gives the
fire to Mercury, which Saturn receives into his cold property,
Venus gives the sap, and Luna takes all into her body, for she
is mother, and receives the seed of all the planets into her
menstruum, and hatches it; Jupiter gives power thereinto, and
Sol is king therein, but at the first Sol is weak; for the materia
is too earthly and cold. Now the whole essence in its boiling
lies in the body + of Sulphur; and in the Sulphur the salnitral
flagrat makes a salt in Mars’s wheel according to each property;
‘for the Sulphur turns into salt, that is, into taste; and in the
same taste there is an oil hid in the centre in the sulphureous
property, which [oil] arises from the free love-lubet, viz. out of
eternity, and manifests itself with an external essence in the
time, which is the manifestation of God.

34. Now in this same oil is the hunger or love-desire after the
essence of time, viz. after the manifestation of the Deity; this
desire reaches in the essence of time after its property, viz. after
the sun, and the sun’s property reaches after the oil in the centre
of the fruit, and fervently longs after it, and gives itself freely
into the fruit, and sucks the virtue into itself, and gives it forth
in its joy into the austere property of the fruit, and meekens
and sweetens all with the love, which it receives in the centre in
the oil of the liberty: Thus a fruit, which at first is sour and
sharp, becomes very pleasant and sweet, that a man may eat
it; and even thus is the ripening of all fruits.

35. Now by the signature in the external you may see the
inward form; for the forms in the salt, viz. in the power, shew
themselves externally.

36. There are commonly four colours, as white, yellow, red,
and green: Now according to what colour the fruit (as an apple)
is most signed, accordingly is the taste also in the salt; as white
with a clear thin skin somewhat inclining to dark gives sweetness,
which is of Venus property; if the sweet taste be strong and
powerful, then Jupiter is potent therein; but if it be weak and
fulsom, then the moon is strong therein; but if it be hard, and
of a brownish colour, then Mars is strong therein; but if the
white colour be of a grayish-brown, then Saturn is strong therein:

Venus makes ? a white colour, Mars red, and bitter in the taste;
Mars makes Venus’s colour light, Mercury gives a mixt colour,
1 Or womb. 2 Gives, or yields.


86 Jacob Boehme


and opens the green in Mars; Jupiter inclines to blue, Saturn
to black, almost gray; the sun makes the yellow colour, and
gives the right sweetness in the salt, and casts forth the pleasant
smell, which takes its rise from Sulphur; Saturn makes astringent
[sharp] and sour; and each property represents itself externally,
as it is internally in the dominion, so also by the form [or signa-
ture] of the leaf, or branches.

37. Every root, as it is in the earth, may be known by the
signature for what it is good or profitable, even such a form also
has the earth, and it is discerned in the leaves and stalks which
planet is lord in the property, much more in the flower; for of
what taste the herb and root is, even such an hunger is in it,
and such a cure lies therein, for it has sucha salt. The physician
must know what kind of sickness is risen in the body, and in
what salt the loathing is risen in Mercury, that so he may not
administer a further loathing [and nausea] to his patient; for
if he gives him the herb, in whose property Mercury has before
received a loathing, then he ministers poison to him; so that
the poison in the loathing of the body does exceedingly inflame
itself in Mercury, unless he burns that herb to ashes, and gives
it him; then the poison of the loathing loses its might; for these
ashes are a death to the poison of the living Mercury.

38. This we find very effectually in the magic; this also the
physician must know, that all sicknesses arise from the loathing
in the form of nature: As when one form in the life is superior,
if then a contrary thing quite opposite to its property be by
force introduced into it, let it be either from the stars, or from
the elements, or from the seven forms of life, then it deprives
this superior [or chiefest| form (which is the leader and ruler of
the life) of its strength and power in its salt; then the Mercury
of this superior form begins effectually to work, that is, to
hunger and loath; and if he gets not his own peculiar property,
understand the bodily form, which is chief in the body among
the seven properties or forms, then he enkindles himself in his
own poison-source according to his vital! property, and does so
forcibly strive so long, till he becomes fiery, and then he awakes _
his own Mars, and his own Saturn, which impress him, and
consume the flesh of the body in the poison-fire, and wholly
consume the oil of light; even then the life’s light goes out, and
it is past recovery.

39. But if the form of life, wherein ? Mercury is inflamed in
the loathing è in the anguish and poison-source, may obtain

1 Or life’s, 2 Or whereby. 3 Or nausea.


Signatura Rerum 87


that property into its hunger, of which the spirit and body is
chief, then he obtains his own natural food, of which he lives,
and does again rejoice, and puts away the nauseate, and then
the nauseate dissipates [or dissolves] and is spewed out; but
the physician must have a care, whether or no that thing which
he will administer to his patient be in its property strong also
in the same essence, from whence the nauseate is risen in the
body.

40. As for example; A jovial man receives a nauseate [or
loathing] from the lunar property; now if the physician knew
that he had so gotten his nauseate, and prepared him a jovial
cure according to the hunger of his own spirit or mercury, this
now would be right; but if the moon’s property be strong in the
salt which he would administer for the nauseate, then he gives
him a nauseate; but if the jovial cure be free from the moon,
then the jovial Mercury receives its own food with great desire,
and quits the nauseate: And thus it is likewise with diseases
which arise in the salniter, viz. from fear or frightening; thereto
belongs also such a flagrat as the first was, and then there is a
present cure, or such an herb, wherein the salniter lies in such a
property as it lies in that man.

41. I know, and it is shewn me, that the sophister will cavil
at me, because I write, that the divine power is in the fruit, that
God’s power does appropriate” itself into the generation of
nature: But hear, my dear friend, become seeing, I ask thee,
How was paradise in this world? Was it also manifest in
nature? Was it also in the fruit? Was it in the world, or
without the world? Did paradise stand in God’s power, or in
the elements? Was the power of God manifest in the world, or
hidden? Or what is the curse of the earth, and the putting of
Adam and Eve out of paradise? Then tell me, Does not God
dwell also in time? Is not God all in all? It is written, “ Am
not I he who filleth all things? ” Also, “ Thine is the kingdom,
the power, and glory, from eternity to eternity.” $

42. Here consider thyself, and leave me uncensured: I do not
say, that the nature is God, much less the fruit proceeding from
the earth; but I say, God gives power to every life, be it good
or bad, to each thing according to its desire, for he himself is
All; and yet he is not called God according to every being, but
according to the light wherewith he dwells in himself and shines
with his power through all his beings; He gives in his power to
all his beings and works, and each thing receives his power

1 Or loathing. 2 Unite, or give in.


88 Jacob Boehme


according to its property; one takes darkness, the other light ;
each hunger desires its property, and yet the whole essence [or
being] is all God’ s, be it evil or good, for from him and through
him are all things, what is not of his love, that is of his anger.
Paradise is yet in the world, but man is not therein, unless he
be born again of God; then as to that new regeneration he is
therein, and not with the Adam of the four elements. O that
we would but once learn to know ourselves, and even under-
stand it by the created essence [or being].

43. Lo! in Saturn there lies gold shut up in a very disesteemed
and contemptible form and manner, which indeed resembles no
metal; and though it be cast into the fire and melted, yet a man
shall have nothing, but a contemptible matter void of any form
of virtue, till the artist takes it in hand, and uses the right
process about it, and then it is manifest what was therein.

44. So likewise God dwells in all things, and the thing knows
nothing of God; he likewise is not manifest to the thing, and
yet it receives power from him, but it receives the power accord-
ing to its property from him, either from his love, or from his
wrath; and from which it receives, so it has its signature?
externally; and the good is also in it, but as it were wholly
shut up [or hidden] to the iniquity [or evil]; an example of
which you have in bushes, and other thorny and pricking briars,
out of which notwithstanding a fair well-smelling blossom grows;
and there lie two properties therein, viz. a pleasant and un-
pleasant; which overcomes, that shapes [forms or marks] the
fruit.

45. Thus also it is with man; he was created a fair blossom
and fruit of paradise, but the devil raised up in him his thorny
property by the serpent, understand the centre, the property
of the wrathful nature, which in his paradisical source was not
manifest in him; but when his hunger entered into the thorny
false property of the serpent, viz. into death, then the property
of death, and the false serpent in the devil’s desire, pressed into
his hunger, and filled soul and body, so that the hunger of the
false serpent began effectually to work in him, and death awaked
in him, and then paradise hid itself in him: For paradise entered
into itself, and the poison of the serpent in death’s property
dwelt also in itself; here was now the enmity; then said God
to him, “ The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent! s head,
and thou shalt sting the heel with death’s poison.’

46. Understand the paradisical image which is shut up, and


1 Or so it is signed, or marked.


Signatura Rerum 89


captivated in the wrathful death, in which the word of the Deity,

viz. the divine Mercury, ruled and wrought, did disappear; as.
the gold is disappeared in Saturn, so that nothing is seen but a
contemptible matter, till the right artist sets upon it, and again
awakens the Mercury in the inclosed gold, and then the dead
inclosed body of the gold does again revive in Saturn; for
Mercury is its life, who must be introduced into it again, and
then the dead body of the gold appears} and overcomes the
gross Saturn, wherein it lay shut up, and changes its mean
contemptible old body into a fair glorious golden body.

47. Thus likewise it is with man; he lies now shut up after
his fall in a gross, deformed, bestial dead image; he is not like
an angel, much less like unto paradise; he is as the gross ore
in Saturn, wherein the gold is couched and shut up; his para-
disical image is in him as if it were not, and it is also not manifest,
the outward body is a stinking carcass, while it yet lives in the
poison: He is a bad thorny bush, from whence notwithstanding
fair rose-buds may bloom forth, and grow out of the thorns, and
manifest that which lies hidden, and shut up in the wrathful
poisonful Mercury, till the artist who has made him takes him
in hand, and brings the living Mercury into his gold or para-
disical image disappeared and shut up in death; so that the
inclosed image, which was created out of the divine meekness.
and love-essentiality, may again bud and spring forth in the
divine Mercury, viz. in the word of the Deity, which entered into
the humanity shut up [and closed in the death and curse].

48. And then the divine mercury changes the wrathful Mer-
cury into its property, and Christ is born, who bruises the head
of the serpent, viz. of the poison and death in the anger of God,
understand the might of wrathful death; and a new man arises
in holiness and righteousness, which lives before God, [and his
divine image] appears and puts forth its lustre as the hidden
gold out of the earthly property: And hereby it is clearly
signified to the artist chosen of God how he shall seek; no
otherwise than as he has sought and found himself in the
property of the pure gold; and so likewise is this process, and
not a whit otherwise; for man and the earth with its secrets lie
shut up in the like [or same] curse and death, and need one and
the same restitution.

49. But we tell the seeker, and sincerely and faithfully warn
him as he loves his temporal and eternal welfare, that he do not
first set upon this way to try the earth, and restore that which

1 Or puts itself forth. Text, glances forth.


go Jacob Boehme


is shut up [in death], unless he himself be before born again
through the divine mercury out of the curse and death, and has
the full knowledge of the divine regeneration,’ else all that he
does is to no purpose, no learning [or studying] avails; for that
which he seeks lies shut in the curse, in death, in the anger of
God: If he will make it alive, and bring it into its first life, then
that life must be before manifest in him, and then he may say
to the mountain, “ Get thee hence, and be cast into the sea;”’
and to the fig-tree, “ No fruit grow on thee henceforth;”’ and it
shall come to pass; for if the divine mercury lives, and is
manifest in the spirit, then when the spirit of the soul’s will
imagines into anything, Mercury also goes along with it in the
imagination, and enkindles the Mercury fast apprehended in
death, viz. the similitude of God, or the manifestation, with
which the living God has made himself manifest.

50. I know and see, that the mocker in the devil’s vizard will
yet bring my writing into a misapprehension, and make me
more dark and doubtful, because I write of the inward and
outward Mercury, and understand by the inward the word of
God, or the divine voice, viz. the manifestation of the eternity
of the abyss; and by the outward [mercury] I understand the
officer in nature, viz. the instrument, which the inward, living,
powerful word, or divine voice uses, wherewith it forms ê and
works. Now the sophister will falsely interpret it, and say, that
I mix them both together, making no difference, and hold 3 nature
for God, as Babel has already done to me: But I bid him view
my words well, and learn to understand them right; for I speak
sometimes from the heavenly Mercury, and see that only, and
then presently I name the instrument of the heavenly, therefore
let him have regard to the sense: I write not heathenishly, but
theosophically, from a higher ground than the outward faber 4
is, and then also from the same.


1 Or has the new-birth in perfect knowledge.
2 Or makes, $ Or take. 4 Archeus, or separator,


CHAPTER IX


OF THE SIGNATURE, SHEWING HOW THE INTERNAL SIGNS
THE EXTERNAL


1. THE whole outward visible world with all its being is a
signature, or figure of the inward spiritual world; whatever is
internally, and however its operation is, so likewise it has its
character externally; like as the spirit of each creature sets
forth and manifests the internal form of its birth by its body,
so does the Eternal Being also.

2. The Being of all beings is a wrestling power; for the
kingdom of God consists in power, and also the outward world,
and it stands especially in seven properties or forms, where the
one causes and makes the other, and none of them is the first or
last, but it is the eternal band; therefore God has appointed six
days for man to work, and the seventh day is the perfection
wherein the six do rest; it is the centre to which the desire of
the six days tend; therefore God calls it the Sabbath or resting-
day, for therein the six forms of the working power rest: It is
the divine sound 1 in the power, or the kingdom of joy, wherein
all the other forms are manifest; for it is the formed world, or
divine corporality, by which all things are generated and come
forth to a being.”

3. This formed world has manifested itself with the motion of
all forms with this visible world, as with a visible likeness, so
that the spiritual being might be manifest in a corporeal com-
prehensive essence; as the desire of the inward forms has made
itself external, and the internal being is in the external; the
internal holds the external before it as a glass, wherein it beholds
itself in the property of the generation of all forms; the external
is its signature.

4. Thus everything which is generated out of the internal has
its signature; the superior form, which is chief in the spirit of
the working in the power, does most especially sign the body,
and the other forms hang to it; as it is to be seen in all living
creatures, in the shape and form of the body, and in the be-
haviour and deportment, also in the sound, voice, and speech;

1 Voice, or harmony. 2 Or essence.


gt


92 Jacob Boehme


and likewise in trees and herbs, in stones and metals; all
according as the wrestling is in the power of the spirit, so is the
figure of the body represented, and so likewise is its will, so long
as it so boils in the life-spirit.

5. But if the artist takes it in hand with the true Mercury,
then he may turn the weakest form to be uppermost, and the
strongest undermost, and then the spirit obtains another will,
according to the most superior form; that which before must
be servant becomes now lord and master in the seven forms;
as Christ said to the sick, “ Arise, thy faith hath made thee
whole,” and they arose: And thus likewise it is here, each form
hungers after the centre, and the centre is the voice of life, viz.
the Mercury, the same is the faber or former of the power; if
this voice gives itself into the hunger of the meanest form in
the strong combat ? then it lifts up its property (understand the
property of that form), and thus its desire or faith has saved it;
for in the desire Mercury lifts up [or sublimes] itself; and thus
it was in Christ’s patients.

6. Sickness had taken possession of them, and the poison of
death had gotten the upper hand in Mercury; but now the form
of life in the centre did set its hunger as a famished and mean |
property after the liberty to be freed from the abomination;
but seeing the Mercury was revived in Christ the divine pro-
perty, therefore the weak hunger entered into Christ’s strong
hunger after the salvation of man, and so the weak hunger
received the strong in the power; and then the divine voice in
Christ said, “ Arise, lift up thyself, thy faith” (that is, thy
desire which thou hast introduced into me) “hath saved thee.”

7. Thus the life prevails over the death, the good over evil; and
on the contrary, the evil over the good, as came to pass in
Lucifer and Adam, and still daily comes to pass: And thus
everything is signed; that form which is chief receives the taste,
and also the sound in Mercury, and figures ? the body after its
property; the other forms hang to it as co-helpers, and also
give their signature thereto, but very weakly.

8. There are especially seven forms in nature, both in the
eternal and external nature; for the external proceed from the
eternal: The ancient philosophers have given names to the
seven planets according to the seven forms of nature; but they
have understood thereby another thing, not only the seven stars,
but the sevenfold properties in the generation of all essences:
There is not anything in the Being of all beings, but it has the

1 Text, wrestling power. 2 Or shapes.


Signatura Rerum 93


seven properties in it; for they are the wheel of the centre, the
cause of Sulphur, in which Mercury makes the boiling in the
anguish-source.

9. The seven forms are these; viz. the desire of the impression
is called Saturn, into which the free lubet of eternity gives itself;
this in the impression is called Jupiter, by reason of its pleasant
commendable virtue; for the saturnine power encloses and
makes hard, cold, and dark, and causes the Sulphur, viz. the
vital spirit, understand the moving vital spirit, viz. the natural;
and the free lubet makes the impression to long to be freed from
the dark astringent hardness, and it is very rightly called
Jupiter, being a desire of the understanding? which opens the
darkness, and manifests another will therein.

to. In these two properties is pourtrayed and exactly de-
ciphered God’s kingdom, viz. the original, and also the kingdom
of God’s anger, viz. the dark abyss, which is a cause of the
motion in Saturn, viz. in the impression; the impression, viz.
Saturn, makes the nothing, viz. the free lubet movable and
sensible, and also opposite, for it causes it to be essence; and
Jupiter is the sensible power proceeding from the free lubet to
manifestation out of the nothing into something, in the impres-
sion of Saturn; and they are two properties in the manifestation
of God according to love and anger, viz. a model of the eternal
form, and are as a wrestling combat, viz. an opposite desire
against each other; one makes good, the other evil, and yet it
is all good; only if we will speak of the anguish-source, and then
also of the joyful source, then we must distinguish, that the
cause of each source may be understood.

11. The third form is called Mars, which is the fiery property
in the impression of Saturn, where the impression introduces
itself into great anguish, viz. into a great hunger; it is the pain-
fulness, or the cause of feeling, also the cause of the fire and
consuming, also of enmity and malignity; but in Jupiter, viz.
in the free lubet, in the nothing, it causes the fiery love-desire,
that the liberty, viz. the nothing, is desirous, and introduces
itself into sensibility, viz. into the kingdom of joy: In the
darkness it is a devil, viz. God’s wrath, and in the light it is an
angel of joy, understand such a property; for when this source
became dark in Lucifer, he was called a devil, but while he was
in the light he was an angel; and thus also it is to be understood
in man.

12. The fourth property or form is called Sol, viz. the light of


1 Or original.


94 Jacob Boehme


nature, which has its original in the liberty, viz. in the nothing,
but without splendour, and gives itself in with the lubet into
the desire of the impression of Saturn, even to the wrathful or
fiery property of Mars; and there the free lubet, which has
sharpened itself in the impression, in the property of Mars,
in the consuming anguish, and in the hardness of Saturn, dis-
plays, or powerfully puts itself forth in Jupiter, as a sharpness
of the liberty, and an original of the nothing, and also of the
sense;? and the effluence? from the heat and anguish of Mars,
and from Saturn’s hardness is the shining of the light in nature,
which gives the understanding in Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars,
viz. a spirit, which knows what itself is in its properties, which
hinders or prevails against the wrath, and brings it out of the
anguish, out of the property of Mars, into Jupiter’s, viz. out of
the anguish into a love-desire.

13. In these four forms the spirit’s birth consists, viz. the true
spirit both in the inward and outward being, viz. the spirit of
power in the essence; and the essence or corporality of this
spirit is Sulphur.

14. Ye rabbies and masters! that you could but understand,
how faithfully that is given and revealed to you, which your
predecessors have intended and aimed at, wherein you have
been a long time blind, the cause of which is your pride: This
God, the most high understanding, sets before you by mean,
and heretofore ungrounded instruments, which he himself has
gtounded, if you would yet once see, and escape the tormenting
source.

15. The fifth form is Venus, the beginning of all corporality,
viz. of the water, which arises in the desire of Jupiter and Mars,
viz. in the love-desire, out of the liberty, and out of nature, viz.
out of the impression’s desire in Saturn, in Mars, in the great
anguish, to be freed from the anguish: And it carries two forms
in the desire of its property, viz. a fiery from Mars, and a watery
[property] from Jupiter, understand an heavenly and earthly
desire; the heavenly arises from the heavenly impression of the
union Tor free effluence] of the Deity in nature to its own mani-
festation; and the earthly arises from the impression of the
darkness in Mars, viz. in the wrathful fire’s property; therefore
the essence of this desire consists in two things, viz. in the
water, from the original of the liberty, and in Sulphur from the
original of nature according to the impression.

16. The outward similitude of the heavenly [Being] is water

1 Perception, or sensation. 2 Or breathing forth.


Signatura Rerum 95


and oil; understand, according to the sun it is water, and
according to Jupiter it is oil, and according to the hard impres-
sion of Saturn after the heavenly Being according to Mars, it is
copper, and according to Sol gold, and | according to the earthly
impression, according to the property of the darkness, it is in
Sulphur grit, gravel and sand; according to the property of Mars
a cause of all stones; for all stones are Sulphur from the powerful
predominance of Saturn and Mars in the property of Venus
according to the dark impression, understand according to the
earthly part.

17. O ye dear wise men! if you did but know what lies in
Venus, you would not so sumptuously adorn your roofs: The
potentate often loses his life for the servant’s sake, and he puts
the master upon his roof, therefore he is blind; this his false
Venus-desire causes in him, that he forms it in Saturn and Mars,
and brings it forth in Sol; if he formed his Venus-desire in
Jupiter, then he might rule over the fiery Mars which lies in
Venus, and has put his coat upon Venus in Sulphur.

18. Thus Mars clothes all his servants which love him and
Saturn with his garment, that they only find the copper of
Venus, and not its gold in the copper; the spirit of the seeker
enters into Sol, viz. into pride, and supposes that he has Venus,
but he has Saturn, viz. covetousness; if he went forth in the
water, viz. in the resigned humility of Venus, the stone of the
wise men would be revealed to him.

19. The sixth form is Mercury, viz. the life and separation, or
the form in the love, and in the anguish: In Saturn and Mars,
on the one part he is earthly according to the hard impression,
where his motion and hunger is a pricking, adverse, and (accord-
ing to the fire) a bitter pain and woe; and according to the water
in the earthly Sulphur, viz. in the mortification, a poison-source.

20. And according to the other part, according to the lubet of
the liberty, he is the pleasant property of joy in Jupiter and
Venus, also of springing and growing; and according to the
impression of the heavenly Saturn, and according to Mars in
the love-desire, he is the sound in the spirit, understand, the
separator of the sound, viz. of the tone; also of all pronuncia-
tions of speeches, and all the several cries and notes; all what-
ever sounds is distinguished by his might; Venus and Saturn
carry his lute, and he is the lutanist, he strikes} upon Venus
and Saturn, and Mars gives him the sound from the fire; and
thus Jupiter rejoices in Sol.

1 Or plays.


96 Jacob Boehme


21. Here lies the pearl, dear brethren: Mercury makes the
understanding in Jupiter, for he separates the thoughts, and
makes them act and move; he takes the infinity of the thoughts
into his desire, and makes them essential; this he does in
Sulphur, and his essence is the manifold power of the smell and
taste, and Saturn gives his sharpness thereinto, so that it is salt.

22. But I understand here the virtual salt in the vegetable life:
Saturn makes the common salt in the water: He ? is an heavenly
and an earthly labourer, and labours in each form according to
the property of the form; as it is written, ‘‘ With the holy thou
art holy, and with the perverse thou art perverse.” In the holy
angels the heavenly Mercury is holy and divine, and in the
devils he is the poison and wrath of the eternal nature according
to the dark impression’s property, and so on through all things,
as the property of each thing is, so is its Mercury, viz. its life;
in the angels he is the hymn of God’s praise, and in the devils
he is the cursing and awakening of the opposite will of the bitter
poisonful enmity.

23. Thus likewise it is to be understood in men and all
creatures, in all whatever lives and moves; for the outward
Mercury is the outward word in the outward world: He ° is the
outward verbum, and Saturn with the impression is his fiat,
which makes his word corporeal; and in the inward kingdom of
the divine power he is the eternal word of the Father, whereby
he has made all things in the outward [principle], understand,
with the instrument of the outward Mercury.

24. The outward Mercury is the temporal word, the expressed
word; and the inward [Mercury] is the eternal word, the speak-
ing word; the inward word dwells in the outward, and makes
through the outward all outward things; and with the inward,
inward things: The inward Mercury is the life of the Deity, and
all divine creatures; and the outward Mercury is the life of the
outward world, and all external corporality in men and beasts,
in vegetables and animals, and makes a peculiar principle, viz.
a likeness of the divine world; and this is the manifestation of
the divine wisdom.

25. The seventh form is called Luna, the amassed essence:
What Mercury has comprised in Sulphur, that is a corporeal or
substantial hunger of all forms; the property of all the six forms
lies therein, and it is as a corporeal being of all the rest; this
property is as a wife of all the other forms; for the other forms
do all cast their desire through Sol into Luna; for in Sol they

1 Or distinguishes the senses. 2 Viz. the Mercury. 3 Viz. Mercury.


Signatura Rerum 97


are spiritual, and in Luna corporeal: Therefore the moon
assumes to it the sunshine, and shines from the sun; whatever
the sun is, and makes in the spirit-life in itself, the same Luna is
and makes corporeal in itself.

26. It is heavenly and earthly, and rules the vegetative life;
it has the menstruum, viz. the matrix of Venus in it; all what-
ever is corporeal does congeal! in its property; Saturn is its fiat,
and Mercury is its husband, which impregnates it, and Mars is its
vegetable soul, and the sun is its centre in the hunger, and yet
not wholly in the property; for it receives only the white colour
from the sun, not the yellow, or the red, viz. the majestic;
therefore in its property lies silver in metals, and in the property
of Sol gold; but seeing Sol is a spirit without essence, thereupon
Saturn holds the sun’s corporeal essence in himself to lodge in;
for he is the fiat of the sun; he keeps it shut up in his dark
cabinet, and does only preserve and keep it; for it is not his
own essence, till the sun sends him his faber Mercury, to whom
he gives it, and to none else.

27. Observe this, ye wise men! It is no fiction or fallacy;
let the artist but understand us right; he must bring the jewel
shut up in Saturn into the mother of generation, viz. into
Sulphur, and take the faber, and divide all forms, and separate
the variety of hungers, which the faber himself does, when the
artist brings the work into the first mother, viz. into Sulphur:
But he must first baptize the froward child with the philosophical
baptism, lest he makes a bastard of Sol; and then let him lead
him into the desert, and try whether Mercury will eat manna in
the desert after the baptism; or whether he will make bread of
stones; or whether he will aspire aloft as an haughty spirit,
and precipitate himself from the Temple; or whether he will
worship Saturn, in whom the devil sits hidden: This the artist
must observe; whether Mercury, the wicked poisonful child,
receives the baptism; whether he can feed of God’s bread or no.

28. Tf he now does eat, and stands out in the temptation, then
will the angels appear to him after forty days, and then let him
go out of the desert, and eat his own food; and so the artist is
ready and fit for his work; if not, then let him by all means leave
it, and as yet account himself unworthy of it.

29. He must have the understanding of the generation of
nature; else all his labour and pains are to no purpose, except
the grace of the Most High has bestowed upon him some par-
ticular, that so he is able to tincture Venus and Mars, which is

1Thicken, or curdle,


3


H 569


98 Jacob Boehme


the shortest [and most ready way], if God shews him such an
herb wherein the tincture lies.

30. The lunar body of metals lies in the seething of the earth,
in Sulphur and Mercury, covered internally with the coat of
Venus, and clothed externally with the cloak of Saturn, as we
see plainly, and is a degree more external than the solar body:
Next after Luna, Jupiter’s body is also a degree more external;
but Venus is a sly bird, she has also the inward solar body; she
takes the coat of Mars upon her, and hides herself in Saturn’s
cabinet; but she is manifest, and not hidden.

31. Next Venus Mars is likewise a degree more external, and
nearer to earthliness; and next Mars Mercury’s body is a
particula of all the rest; on one part most nigh to the earthly
corporality, and on the other part nearest the heavenly; and
next Mercury Luna is on the earthly part wholly earthly, and
on the heavenly part wholly heavenly; it carries an earthly and
heavenly face towards all things;! to the evil it is evil, and to
the good it is good; to a pleasant creature it gives its best in
the taste, and to a bad creature it gives the curse of the corrupted
earth.

32. Now in all this, as the property of each thing is internally,
so it has externally its signature, both in animals and vegetables ;
and this you shall see in an herb, so likewise in trees and beasts,
and in men also.

33. If the saturnine property be predominant, and chief in a
thing, then it is of a black, greyish colour, hard and spare, sharp,
sour, or salt in taste; it gets a long lean body,? grey in the eyes?
of a dark blue, of a very slender body, but of a hard touch,
though the property of Saturn is very seldom alone master in a
thing; for he soon awakens Mars with his hard impression, who
makes his property bending and crooked, full of knots, and
hinders the body from growing high, but is full of branches and
rugged, as is to be seen in oak-shrubs, and the like trees.

34. But if Venus be next to Saturn ¢ in any place in the sude
or seething of the earth, then the sude in the Sulphur of Saturn
causes a tall strong body; for it gives its sweetness into Saturn’s
impression, whereby Saturn becomes strong and lusty, and if
Venus be not hindered by Mars, it grows a great, tall, slender
tree, herb, beast, or man, or whatever it be.

35. But if Jupiter be next to him in the property of Venus,

1 It gives a cursing or a blessing aspect.


2? Stalk, or blossom. 3 Or of whitish buds in vegetables. `
4 In conjunction with Saturn.


Signatura Rerum 99


so that Jupiter is stronger in Saturn than Venus, and Mars under


Venus, then it falls out to be a very excellent fair body, full of
virtue and power, also of a good taste; its eyes are blue, and
somewhat whitish, of a meek property, but very potent: If it
falls out that Mercury is between Venus and Jupiter, and Mars
undermost, then is this property in Saturn graduated in the
highest degree with all power and virtue, in words and works,
with great understanding.

36. If it be in herbs, then they are long, of a middle-sized
stature or stalk, of a very curious form, fair blossoms, white, or
blue; but if the sun also casts the influence of his property into
it, then does its colour by reason of the sun incline to yellow;
and if Mars hinders not, then is the universal very sovereign in
the thing, be it either a man, or other creature, or an herb of
the earth: This let the magus well observe, it withstands all
malignity, and false influences and assaults from the spirits,
whatever they be, so far as a man himself is not false and
wicked, and inclines not his desire to the devil, as Adam did, in
whom also the universal was wholly complete.

37. With these herbs a man may cure, and heal without any
art of the artist; but they are rarely and seldom found, yea not
one among many sees them, for they are nigh to paradise: The
curse of God hides the eyesight of the wicked, that it does not
see, although they should stand before his eyes: Yet in such a
conjunction of the planets they are manifest, and may not be
hidden; therefore there lies a great secret in many an herb and
beast, if the artist knew it, and had the true skill to use it; the
whole magia lies therein: But I am bidden to be silent by reason
of the wicked, who is not worthy of it, and is justly plagued
with the plague with which he plagues other honest people, and
tumbles himself in the mire.

38. But if Mars in his property be next Saturn, and Mercury
casts an opposite aspect, and the power of Venus be under Mars,
and Jupiter under the property of Venus, then out of this
property all is corrupted and poisoned; a poisonful herb, tree,
beast, or whatever it be; if it falls into the corrupt human
property, then it is fitted and prone to evil, but if the moon
brings its powerful influence thereinto, then is the false magia
ready in the lunar menstruum, and witchcraft is manifest, of
which I must here also be silent, and will only shew the signature.

39. In an herb, if the blossom be somewhat reddish, and
wreathed, or streaked, and inclined to white by the red, then is
the power of Venus there, which makes resistance therein; but


100 Jacob Boehme


if it be only reddish, and of dark wriths or streaks, with a rough
peel or skin on the stalk, branch, and leaf, then does the basilisk
lodge there.

40. For Mars makes it rugged, and Mercury is poisonful
therein, which gives a streaked colour, and Mars the red, and.
Saturn the dark, which is a pestilence in the lunar menstruum ;
but to the artist it is an herb against the pestilence, if he takes
the poison from Mercury, and gives him Venus and Jupiter for
food, then Mars brings forth the vegetable soul in Sol, and turns
his wrathful fire into a love-fire, which the artist must know, if
he will be called a doctor.

41. This property likewise signs the living creatures both in
their voice and visage; it gives a gross, dull sound, somewhat
inclining to a shrill voice by reason of Mars, soothing, flattering,
and very false, lying, commonly red pimples [or streams] in the
eyes, or blinking, and rolling unsteady eyes: In herbs this
property likewise yields a taste very loathsome, from whence in
man’s life, viz. in Mercury, if it takes it down, a stirring boiling
poison arises, which darkens and obscures the life.

42. The physician must have a care of the herbs of this
property; they are not to be taken into the body, but they are
poisonful, of what name soever they be; for there often happens
such a conjunction of the planets, which sometimes so prepares
an herb, which is good if it be subject to Saturn and Mars: So
likewise it falls out sometimes, that an evil herb, by reason of a
good conjunction, if in its beginning it stands in the menstruum,
may be freed from the malignity, which is to be known by the
signature; therefore the physician, who understands the signa-
ture, may best of all gather the herbs himself.

43. But if Mars be next Saturn, and Mercury very weak, and
Jupiter also under Mars in the property, and Venus casts an
opposite aspect or dissent with its desire, then it is good; for
Jupiter and Venus change the wrath of Mars into joy, which
produces hot wholesome sovereign herbs, which are to be used
in all hot diseases and hurts; the herb is rough, and somewhat
prickly the leaves on the branches; so likewise the stalk is fine
and thin, according to the nature of Venus, but the virtue and
power is of Mars and Jupiter, well mixed and tempered, com-
monly with brownish blossoms forcing forth in the property,
and that because Mars is strong therein with his wrath; but
seeing his wrath is changed by Jupiter and Venus into a pleasant
property, the wrath becomes a desire of joy.

44. The physician must not give Saturn without Mars in hot


Signatura Rerum IOI


diseases, not cold without heat, else he enkindles Mars in the
wrath, and stirs! up Mercury in the hard impression in the
property of death; Mars belongs to the cure of every Mars-like
sickness, which is of heat, and pricking pangs: But let the
physician know, that he must first correct and qualify Mars,
which he intends to administer, with Jupiter and Venus, that
the wrath of Mars may be changed into joy, and then he will
also change the sickness in the body into joy; cold is quite
contrary to ıt.

45. If the physician administers Saturn only and by itself to
a martial disease or hurt, then Mars is dismayed with death, and
falls down with his force and strength into death’s property; and
now seeing he is the fire in the body, the life’s fire becomes
thereupon deadly in the elemental property; for he soon
awakens Mercury in the property of cold: But yet the physician
must have a care that he administers not in an hot disease the
raw undigested hot Mars, in which Mercury is wholly inflamed
and burning; for he enkindles the fire more vehemently in the
body; he must first mollify Mars and Mercury, and. put them
into joy,” and then it is night and good.

46. The hotter an herb is, the better it is hereunto; yet its
wrathful fire must be changed into love, and then he can also
change the wrath in the body into joy; all according as the
property of the disease is, that the disease be able to bear it;
for to a weak fire in the body, which is tired and languished by
reason of the heat, and rather inclines to cold, viz. to the poison
of Mercury, where the life is in danger, there belongs a cure with
a fine subtle heat, wherein Venus is strong, and Mars very tender
and mild by reason of the power of Venus; Jupiter need not be
strong there, lest he make Mars and Mercury too strong, so that

the weak life, before it is quickened and refreshed, is over-
whelmed, and brought into the mercurial poison.

47. An herb in this aforesaid property grows not high, it is
somewhat rough in the touch; the rougher it is, the stronger is

Mars therein; it is better to be used outwardly to wounds and
sores, than inwardly: The fine and subtle part is to be taken
into the body, and is expulsive; the more subtle it is, the nigher
it is to the life in the body, which the physician may very well

_know by its salt; for no rough wild property is to be taken into
the body, unless the body be inflamed with a sudden poison,

where the life also is fresh and strong, then a vehement resistance
must be used; yet Mercury and Mars must not be administered
1 Text, that he stirs. 2 Sublime them.


102 Jacob Boehme


in the wrath, but in their strongest power, Mars in the greatest
heat, but before changed into joy; and then he also changes
Mercury according to himself: Jupiter belongs to the transmuta-
tion of wrathful Mars, but he must be first introduced into Sol’s
property, and then he is rightly fit for it.

48. Every living creature, according to its kind in the fore-
going property, is friendly and pleasant, if you deal friendly and
gently with it; but if it be dealt roughly with, then Mercury is
stirred up in the poison-property, for Mars soon boils up, and
gets aloft in the bitter property, and then the anger springs forth;
for the ground of all malignity lies therein; but if it be not
stirred up, then it is not manifest; as a great sickness which lies
in the body, but while the same is hid, and not enkindled, it is
not manifest and apparent.

49. But if Mercury be next Saturn in the property, and next
him the moon, and Venus and Jupiter beneath, and also weak,
then let Mars stand where he will, yet all is earthly; for Mercury
is held in the austere impression in the cold property, viz. in
death’s form, and his Sulphur is earthly; if Mars comes near to
it, then it is poisonful also, but if Venus makes an opposition
therein, then the poison is resisted, yet it is but earthly; it gives
a greenish colour from the power of Venus.

50. But if Venus be next Saturn in the property, and the
moon not opposed by Mars, and Jupiter likewise goes in his own
power, then all is pleasant [and lovely under that property or
constellation]; the herbs are slender, single, and soft in touch,
of white blossoms, unless Mercury brings in a mixt colour from
the power of the sun, viz. from Mars half red, and from Jupiter
bluish, and it is weak in the property, and of little use in physic,
yet not hurtful: In the creature it gives a pleasant, courteous,
humble life, with no deep reason [reach or capacity], but if
Mars comes thereunto, the creature is small, or thin, of a white,
weak, and effeminate nature.

51. There are three special salts which may be used to cure,
which belong to the vegetable life, viz. Jupiter, Mars, and
Mercury; these are the working life, in which the sun is the
right spirit which makes these salts operative.t

52. The salt or power of Jupiter is of a pleasant good smell
and taste from the inward original [of the property] of the
liberty of the divine essence, and from the external [principle or |
original] of the property of the sun and Venus, but yet it is not
alone of itself of sufficient power in nature; for the outward

1 Working, powerful, or virtual.


Signatura Rerum 103


nature consists in fire and anguish, viz. in poison, and Jupiter's
power! is opposed to the fiery poison life, which makes a tem-
perature in the poisonful nature, viz. a desire of meekness out
of the enmity.

53. The salt of Mars is fiery, bitter, and austere, and the
mercurial salt is anxious and raging, like a poison, inclined both
to heat and cold; for it is the life in Sulphur, and unites [or
assimilates] itself, according to each thing’s property; for if it
comes into Jupiter’s salt, it causes joy and great power; but if
it comes into Mars’s salt, it makes bitter pangs, stitches, achings,
and woe; but if it comes into Saturn’s earthly salt, it makes
swellings, anguish, and death, if it be not hindered by Jupiter
and Venus: Venus and Jupiter are opposite to Mars and

fercury, that so they might temper them both; and without
the power of Mars and Mercury there would be no life in Jupiter,
Venus, and Sol, but only a stillness; “ therefore the worst is as
profitable as the best,” and the one is the cause of the other.

54. But the physician is to heed and mind what he takes in
hand, lest he inflame the mercurial poison more and more in his
patient, or introduce it into another adverse source: He ought
indeed to use the martial and mercurial salt for his cure, but he
must first reconcile Mars and Mercury with Venus and Jupiter,
that so both these angry adversaries may resign their will into
Jupiter’s will, so that Jupiter, Mars, and Mercury may all three
obtain one will in the power, and then the cure is right, and the
sun of life will again enkindle itself in this union and agreement,
and also temper the nauseate of the disease in the contrariety
in the salt of the disease, and turn Mercury’s poison, and the
bitter fire of Mars iato a pleasant Jupiter.

55. This is now to be understood only concerning the vegetable
soul, viz. concerning the outward man, which lives in the four
elements, and concerning the sensible and feeling property.

56. Reason likewise is to be cured with its likeness; for as
reason may be brought by words into a sensible sickness and
disease, so that reason may vex, fret, and torment itself, and
at last fall into an heavy sad sickness and death; so also it may
be cured with the application of the same thing [with its own
assimilate].

57. As for example: An honest man falls into great debts,
care, trouble and distress, which does even afflict him nigh to
death; but if a good friend comes and pays his debt for him,
then is the cure soon effected with its likeness: Even thus it is

1 The jovial virtue.


104 Jacob Boehme


in all things; from whence the disease is risen, even such a like
cure is requisite for the restoring its health; and thus it is
likewise in the mental soul.

58. The soul of the poor sinner is poisoned in the anger of
God, and the Mercury (understand the eternal Mercury in the
eternal nature) is inflamed in the soul’s property in the fiery
Mars of God’s anger, which does now burn in the eternal Saturn,
viz. in the horrible impression of darkness, and feels the sting of
the poisonful angry Mars; his Venus is imprisoned in the house
of misery, his water is dried up, his Jupiter of understanding is
brought into the greatest folly, his sun is quenched, and his
moon turned to dark night.

59. Now he cannot be cured and remedied any other way, but
with the likeness; he must again appease the mental Mercury;
he must take Venus, understand the love of God, and introduce
it into his poisonful Mercury and Mars, and tincture the Mercury
in the soul again with love, and then his sun will again shine in
the soul, and his Jupiter will rejoice.

60. Now if thou sayest that thou canst not, and that thou
art too strongly captivated; I say also, that I cannot; for it
lies not in my willing, running, and toiling, but it lies in the
compassion of God; for I cannot by my own strength and
ability overcome the wrathful anger of God which is enkindled
in me; but seeing his dear heart has freely given itself again out
of love, and in love, into the humanity, viz. into the poisonful
enkindled Mercury in the soul, and tinctured the soul, viz. the
poison-source of the eternal nature in the eternal Father’s
nature’s property; therefore I will cast my will into his tincture,
and I will go with my will out of the enkindled poison-source,
out of the evil Mercury in God’s anger into his death, and with
my corrupted will I will die with him in his death, and become a
nothing in him, and then he must be my life.

61. For if my will is a nothing, then he is in me what he
pleases, and then I know not myself any more, but him; and
if he will that I shall be something, then let him effect it; but if
he wills it not, then I am dead in him, and he lives in me as he
pleases, and so then if I be a nothing, then I am at the end, in
the essence out of which my father Adam was created; for out
of nothing God has created all things.

62. The nothing is the highest good, for there is no turba
therein, and so nothing can touch [or annoy] my soul; for I am
a nothing to myself, but I am God’s, who knows what I am; I
know it not, neither shall [or ought] I to know it.


Signatura Rerum 105


63. And thus is the cure of my soul’s sickness; he that will
adventure it with me shall find by experience what God will
make of him: As for example; I here write, and I also do not
do it; for I, as I, know nothing, and have also not learned or
studied it; so then I do it not, but God does it in me as he
pleases.

64. I am not known to myself, but I know to him what and
how he pleases: Thus I live not to myself, but to him; and thus
we are in Christ only one, as a tree in many boughs and branches,
and he begets and brings forth the fruit in every branch as he
pleases, and thus I have brought his life into mine, so that I am
atoned with him in his love; for his will in Christ is entered into
the humanity in me, and now my will in me enters into his
humanity; and thus his living Mercury, that is, his word, viz.
the speaking Mercury, tinctures my wrathful evil Mercury, and
transforms it into his. And thus my Mars is become a love-fire
of God, and his Mercury speaks through mine, as through his
instrument, what he pleases; and thus my Jupiter lives in the
divine joy, and I know it not; the true sun shines to me, and
I see it not; for I live not to myself, I see not to myself, and I
know not to myself: I am a thing, and I know not what; for
God knows what I am; and so now I tend and run to and fro
as a thing, in which the spirit drives [or actuates] me as he
pleases; and thus I live according to my inward will, which yet
is not mine.

65. But yet I find in me another life, which I am, not accord-
ing to the resignation [or self-denial], but according to the
creature of this world, viz. according to the similitude of
eternity; this life does yet stand in poison and strife, and shall
yet be turned to nothing, and then I am wholly perfect: Now
in this same life, wherein yet I find my selfhood, is sin and death,
and these likewise shall be brought to nothing: In that life,
which God is in me, I hate? sin and death; and according to
that life which yet is in my selfhood, I hate the nothing, viz.
the Deity: Thus one life fights against the other, and there is
a continual contest in me; but seeing Christ is born again in me,
and lives in my nothingness, therefore Christ will, according to
his promise made in paradise, bruise the head of the serpent,
viz. of my selfhood, and mortify the evil man in myself, so that
he himself may truly live [in me].

66. But what shall Christ do with the evil man? Shall he
cast him away? No. For he is in heaven, and does thereby

1 Or I am an enemy to.


106 Jacob Boehme


accomplish and effect his wonders in this world, which stands
in the curse: Now each labours in its own [vineyard]; the
outward man labours in the cursed world, which is evil and
good in the wonders of God, viz. in the mirror of glory, which
yet shall be revealed in him; and the inward man is not its
own, but God’s instrument, with whom God makes what he
pleases, till the outward with its wonders in the mirror shall
also be manifest in God; and even then is God all in all, and he
alone in his wisdom and deeds of wonder and nothing else
besides; and this is the beginning and the end, eternity and
time.

67. Now understand it right; to the outward man there
belongs a cure from the outward, viz. from the outward will of
God, who has made himself external with this visible world;
and for the inward man there is a cure from the inward world,
in which God is all in all; only one, not many, one in all, and
all in one: But if the inward penetrates the outward, and
illustrates it with its sunshine, and the outward receives the
sunshine of the inward, then it is tinctured, cured, and healed
by the inward, and the inward illustrates it, as the sun shines
through the water, or as the fire sets the iron quite through of
a light glee; here now needs no other cure.

68. But seeing the devil in the wrath of the eternal nature
opposes the soul, as an enemy of the soul, and continually casts
his poisonful imagination at the soul to tempt and try it, and
the anger or wrath of the eternal nature is manifest in the
outward man, which Adam awakened and stirred up; thereupon
this wrath is oftentimes stirred up by the devil and his servants,
that it effectually works and burns in the outward body, and
even then the inward love-fire goes out in the outward man, as
a red-hot iron is quenched in the water; yet not so soon in the
internal, but in the external [man], unless the outward man
continues lying in the mire! of sin; so that the soul, which had
given itself into the nothing, viz. into the liberty, into the life
of God, does enter again with its desire into the outward sinful
man, then it loses the inward sun; for it goes again out of the
nothing into the something, viz. into the source.

69. Thus the outward body must then have an outward cure;
and though the inward man yet lives in God, yet whereas the
soul has imagined into the outward wrath, so that the divine
tincturation is no longer in the outward man, the outward
Mercury, viz. the expressed ? word, must have a tincturation

1 Or water. 2 Outspoken.


Signatura Rerum 107


from the outward expressed love and light, unless the will-spirit
of the soul does wholly re-enter into the inward hidden man,
and be again transmuted;+ and then the cure may be again
introduced into the outward man, being the thorough-shining
love of God in the light,? which is exceeding precious.

70. But now this herb is rarely to be found upon the earth;
for men eat only of the forbidden tree; therefore the poison of
the serpent does so spring up in them in the wrath of the eternal
and external nature, so that they must also have an external
cure for their serpent’s poison in the outward Mercury.

71. It is indeed possible for a man to live without sickness,
but he must bring the divine tincturation from the inward man
through the outward, which is very difficult [to do] in the world;
for the outward man lives among the thorns of God’s wrath,
which gall and sting him on every side, and blow up the wrath
of God, so that it burns in the outward man, and then the
tincturation of God’s love may not continue there: It is indeed
there, but not in the outward enkindled abominations, but it
dwells in itself, like as the light dwells in the darkness, and the
darkness comprehends it not, also knows nothing of it; but
when the light is manifest in the darkness, then is the night
changed into day.

72. Thus it is likewise with man; of what light man lives, of
that also comes his cure; if he lives in the outward world, then
the outward goodness and love, viz. the outward Jupiter and
Venus with the sun must be his cure, or he remains in the angry
Mars, and in the poisonful Mercury, in the earthly moon cap-
tivated in the impression of Saturn, viz. in the earthly Sulphur;
which however is made manifest, and awakened in the outward
man by Adam, for whose sake the outward man must die,
putrify, and so enter again into the nothing, viz. into the end,
or as I might better say and signify it, into the beginning of the
creation, into the essence, out of which it went and departed
with Adam.

1 Transformed.


2 The transforming light of God in the dark soul, such as shined in
Enoch, Elijah, Paul, etc.


CHAPTER X
OF THE INWARD AND OUTWARD CURE OF MAN


1. Let the lover of God understand us right; we do not go
upon an historical heathenish conjecture, nor only upon the
light of the outward nature; both suns shine to us. Under-
stand us right, and see how God has cured man when the poison
of the serpent and devil held him imprisoned in death, and how
he yet still cures the poor soul captivated in God’s anger; the
like process also must the physician keep in curing the outward
body.

2. The divine light and love were extinguished in Adam,
because he imagined into the serpent’s property, viz. into evil
and good, so that the poison of death began effectually to work
in Mercury, and the source of anger was inflamed in the eternal
Mars, and the dark impression of the eternal nature’s property
took possession of him: His body became earth in the dark
impression in the poison of the enkindled Mercury, and was an
enmity against God: he was utterly undone, and there was no
remedy for him by any creature, neither in heaven, nor in this
world; the wrathful death captivated him in soul and body.

3. Now how did God do to cure him and tincture him again?
Did he take a strange thing thereunto? No, he took the like-
ness, and cured him with that which was corrupted in him, viz.
with the divine Mercury, and with the divine Venus, and with
the divine Jupiter; understand; in man was the expressed
word, which I call the eternal Mercury in man; for it is the true
ruling acting life; it was inspired or in-spoken into man’s image
(which God created out of his essence into an image according
to God) as into a creaturely image, which was the soul with the
property of all the three worlds, viz. with the world of light and
understanding, which is God; and with the fire-world, which
is the eternal nature of the Father of all beings; and with the
light, love-world, which is heavenly corporality; for in the love-
desire is the essence, viz. the corporality.

4. The desire of love is spirit, and is the heart of God, viz.
the right divine understanding: In the love-essence Mercury is
God’s word, and in the fiery nature he is the wrath of God, the

108


Signatura Rerum 109


original of all mobility and enmity, also of strength and omni-
potence; the fiery property makes the light, viz. the liberty,
desirous; so that the nothing is a desire, and this desire is the
love of God, which Adam extinguished in him: For he imagined
after evil and good, that is, after earthliness; the earthliness
came forth into a being both out of the wrath, and out of the
love-being, and that through God’s motion, that the wonders
of the abyss and byss might be made manifest, that good and
evil might be made known and manifest: And this Adam, being
the image of God, should not do, for God had created him to his
image: He should have tinctured the fire-world and outward
world with the word of love, that so none of them should be
manifest in him, like as the day holds the night swallowed up
in itself.

5. But by false imagination he has awakened and manifested
the dark and poisonful mercurial fire-world in him, so that his
bodily essence of the dark impression is fallen to the evil part
in the poisonful mercurial property, and the soul is become
manifest in the eternal nature in the Father’s fire-property, viz.
in the poisonful hateful Mercury; according to which God calls
him an “ angry and zealous God,” and “ a consuming fire.”

6. Now to help and restore this again, viz. the image of God,
God must take the right cure, and even the same which man
was in his innocence: But how did he effect it? Behold, O man,
behold and see, open thy understanding; thou art called.

7. He introduced the holy Mercury in the flame, viz. in the
fiery love with the desire of the divine essentiality, or after the
divine essentiality again (which desire makes divine corporality
in itself) into the expressed word, viz. into the mercurial fire-
soul (understand, into the soul’s essence in the womb of Mary),
and became again that same image of God: He tinctured the
poison, viz. the wrath of the Father of all essences, with the
love-fire: He took only that same Mercury which he had
breathed into Adam for an image, and formed into a creature:
He took only that same property, yet not in the fire’s property,
but in the burning love: He did with the love introduce again
the light of the eternal sun into the human property, that he
might tincture the wrath of the enkindled Mercury in the human
property, and inflame it with love, that the human Jupiter, viz.
the divine understanding, might again appear and be manifest.

8. Ye physicians, if you here understand nothing, then you
are captivated in the poison of the devil: Behold, I pray, the
right cure, with which the enkindled Mercury in man’s life is to


110 Jacob Boehme


be remedied; it must be a Mercury again, but first enkindled
in Venus and Jupiter; it must have the sun’s property, which
it attains to by Jupiter and Venus: As God deals with us poor
men, so must the outward poisonful sick Mercury be tinctured -
with such an external cure; not with the dark impression of
Saturn, with cold (unless it be first sweetly appeased and
qualified with Jupiter and Venus, that the sun does again shine
in Saturn), but with meek love; this is his right physic, whereby
the death is changed into life; yet this is only a common manual
cure, which the vulgar may learn.

g. But it behoves the doctor, if he will be called a doctor,
to study the whole process, how God has restored the wnzversal
in man; which is fully clear and manifest in the person of Christ,
from his entrance into the humanity, even to his ascension,
and sending of the Holy Ghost.

to. Let him follow this entire process, and then he may find
the universal, provided he be born again of God; but the selfish
pleasure, worldly glory, covetousness and pride lie in the way.
Dear doctors, I must tell you, the coals are too black, you defile
your white hands therewith; the true unfeigned self-denying
humility before God and man does not relish with you; therefore
you are blind: I do not tell you this, but the spirit of wonders
in its manifestation.

11. But we will give direction to the desirous seeker, who
would fain see if he knew the way fitly to attain his intent; for
the time is at hand, where Moses is called from the sheep to be a
shepherd of the Lord, which shall shortly be manifest, notwith-
standing all the raging and raving of the devil: Let not the
dear and worthy Christendom think, seeing now it seems as if
she should go to wrack and ruin, that it is utterly undone; No:
the Spirit of the Lord of Hosts has out of his love planted a new .
branch in the human property, which shall root out the thorns
of the devil, and make known his child Jesus to all nations,
tongues and speeches, and that in the morning of the eternal day.

12. Dear brethren, behold, I pray, the right cure: What did
God with us when we lay sick in death? Did he quite cast
away the created image, understand the outward part, viz. the
outward corrupt man, and make wholly another new man? No.
He did it not: For though he introduced divine property into
our humanity, yet he did not therefore cast away our humanity,
but brought it into the way or process to the new-birth.

13. What did he? : He suffered the outward humanity, viz.
the outward water, understand the essentiality of Venus, which


Signatura Rerum III


was shut up in the wrath of death, to be baptized with the water
of the eternal essence, and with the Holy Ghost, that the incen-
tive of the outward essentiality shut up in death might again
glow, as a fire that falls into tinder: Afterwards he withdrew
his outward food from the outward body, and brought it into
the desert, and let it hunger, and then the spark enkindled from
the fire of God must imagine into God,! and eat manna of divine
essentiality forty days, of which Israel was a type in the wilder-
ness of Sinai with their manna: The essence of eternity must
overcome the essence of time, therefore it is called a temptation
of the devil; for the devil as a prince in the wrath of God did
there tempt the outward humanity, and represented all that to
it wherein Adam fell, and became disobedient to God.

14. There now it was tried whether the image of God would
stand, seeing internally there was God’s love-fire, and externally
the baptism of the water of eternal life: Here the soul was
tempted, whether it would be a king, and an angelical throne
instead of the fallen angel, and possess the elected throne of
God in the royal office, from which Lucifer was taken, and thrust
into the darkness, viz. into the throne of poison and death; but
seeing he stood (in that the soul did resign and submit its will
alone into God’s love-fire, and desired no earthly food, nor the
earthly kingdom good and evil for outward dominion) the
process to the universal, viz. to the restoration of all that which
Adam had lost, did further proceed and go on: He turned water
into wine.

15. Ye physicians, observe this, it concerns you in your
process, you must also go the same way to work: He healed the
sick ; so you must likewise make the form in your poisonful
Mercury whole and sound by the power of the philosophical

_ baptism: He made the dead alive again, the dumb to speak,
the deaf to hear, the blind to see, and cleansed the lepers; all
this must go before, that all the forms in Mercury may be pure,
sound, and living, which Mercury himself does make after the
baptism and temptation; as the living speaking Mercury did
this in the person of Christ; the artist cannot do it, only there
must be faith; for Christ also testifies, that he could not do
many wonders at Capernaum, only heal a few diseased; for the
faith of those at Capernaum would not enter into the divine
Mercury of Christ.

16. So that we see there, that the person of Christ, viz. the


1 Put its desire, hunger, and imagination into the nothing, the highest
good or omnipotence, and eat of God’s bread.


iy Jacob Boehme


creature, could not work the wonders in its own power, but the
Mercury, viz. the living, speaking word in him; for the person
did cry and call into God, viz. into the speaking word, and set
its desire thereinto; as we may see in the Mount of Olives where
he prayed, that he sweat drops of blood; and by Lazarus, when
he would raise him up, he said, “ Father, hear me; but I know
that thou always hearest me; yet because of those that stand
by, I say it, that they may believe that thou workest by me.”

17. Thus the artist must not arrogate anything to himself, the
Mercury does itself, after the philosophical baptism, work these
wonders before it manifests the universal; for all the seven
forms of nature must be crystallised and purified, if the universal
shall be revealed; and each form carries a peculiar process when
it is to be brought out of the property of the wrath, and entered
into the pure and clear life; and it must transmute itself into
the crystalline sea which stands before the throne of the ancient
in the Revelation, and change itself into paradise; for the
universal is paradisical; and Christ also came for that reason
into our humanity, that he might again open or make manifest
the universal, viz. the paradise, again in man: The speaking
word in Christ wrought wonders through all the seven properties
or forms, through the expressed word in the humanity, before
the whole universal was manifest in the body of the human
property, and the body glorified.

18. Even thus it is in the philosophical work, when the
Mercury shut up in death receives into it the baptism of its
refreshment in love, then all the seven forms manifest them-
selves in this property, as it came to pass in the process of Christ
in his miracles, but as yet they are not perfect in the operation
of the manifestation of their properties.

19. The universal is not yet there, till all seven give their will
into one, and forsake their property in the wrath, and depart
from it with their will, and take into them the love’s property:
They must take in the will of the nothing, that their will be a
nothing, and then it can subsist in the wrath of the fire, and
there is no further turba therein; for so long as the desire of the
wrath is in the form, it is adverse and opposite to the second
form, and inflames the second form with its wrathful property,
that is, it strikes the signature of the second, and awakens it in
the wrath, and then the voice or sound of the second enkindles
the first form’s property in Mercury, and so no form can attain
to any perfection, that it might enter into love.

1 Or other forms,


Signatura Rerum 113


20. Therefore the artist can effect nothing, unless he gives a
meat to the forms, which they all desire, and love to eat, wherein
there is no turba: Now the properties cannot eat, seeing their
mouth is frozen up in the impression of Saturn; the artist must
first open their mouth, and make them alive in their zeal, that
all the forms may be hungry, and then if there be manna, they
all eat together of it, and so the precious grain of mustard-seed
is sown.

21. Now when Mercury does thus awake from the death of the
impression of Saturn, and gets manna into the mouth of his
property of the poisonful death’s source, then arises the flagrat
of the kingdom of joy, for it is as a light which is enkindled in
the darkness, for the joy or love springs up in the midst of the
anger: Now if Mercury apprehends the glimpse or aspect of the
love in Mars, then the love dismays the wrath, and it is as a
transmutation, but it is not fixed and steadfast; and as soon as
this comes to pass, the angelical properties appear in view.


THE PROCESS IN THE TEMPTATION


22. Jesus was led by the Spirit into the wilderness, and the
devil came to him, and tempted him. When the soul of Christ
did hunger, the devil said to Jesus, Open the centre in the
stones, that is, the impressed Mercury, and make thee bread,
eat the substance of the soul’s property: What, wilt thou eat
of nothing, viz. of the speaking word? Eat of the expressed
word, viz. of the property of good and evil, and then thou art
lord in both; this also was Adam’s bit, wherein he did eat death:
Then said Christ Jesus, “ Man liveth not by bread alone, but by
every word which proceedeth from the mouth of God.”

23. Mark! Whence had the person of Christ the will, that he
would not eat with the soul’s hunger of the bread which could
have been made of stones, which he could well have performed?
Or how had it been, if the hunger of the human property had
after the unction of baptism eaten in the temptation of the
Mercury in the impression of death, viz. of the Sulphur of the
expressed word, in which was the anger, and from whence the
love was fled, as it is so in the earthly property?

24. Observe! The will and desire to eat of the speaking word
came into the soul’s property from the motion of the Deity:
When the same had moved itself in the soulish essence, shut up
in death in Mary his mother in her essence or seed, and intro-
duced the aspect of the eye of God in the love into the dead

J 569


114 Jacob Boehme


soul’s essence, and had manifested the love in death, then one
divine property desired the other; and the desire of the bodily —
hunger to eat of God’s bread or essence came from the baptism:
When the water of the body, which in the impression of the
substance was enclosed in death, did taste the water of eternal
life in the Holy Spirit, viz. the Holy Spirit’s corporality or
essentiality in the baptism, then the incentive of the divine
hunger of the ardent desire after God’s essence did arise in the
flesh, as a divine hunger, a glimmering or shining incentive of
divine property.

25. Now the man Christ must hereupon be tempted in body
and soul, of which he would eat; on one part the expressed
word of love and anger was represented before body and soul,
in which the devil would be lord and master, and rule therein
omnipotently; and on the other part the speaking word in the
love-property was only represented to the soul and body.

26. Here now began the combat which Adam should have
undergone in paradise; for on one side God’s love-desire, which
had manifested itself in the soul, did eagerly attempt the soulish
and bodily property, and introduced its desire into the soul’s
property, that the soul should eat of it, and give the body
manna thereof; and on the other side the devil in God’s wrath-
ful property did assault in the soul’s property, and brought his
imagination into the property of the first principle, viz. into the
centre of the dark world, which is the soul’s fire-life.

27. Here was the contest about the image of God, whether it
would live in God’s love or anger, in the fire or light; for the
property of the soul, as to its fire-life, was the Father’s according
to the fire-world; and seeing the soul in Adam had quenched
the light-world, the light-world was again incorporated with the
name Jesus, which came to pass in the conception of Mary.

28. Now it was here tried in the temptation of which property
man would live; whether of the Father’s in the fire, or of the
Son’s in the light of love: Here the whole property of Christ’s
person was tempted: The devil said, as he had also said to
Adam, Eat of the evil and good: Hast thou not bread? Then

make bread of stones: Why dost thou hunger so long in thy
own property? Then said the divine desire, “ Man liveth not
of bread alone, but of every word of God.”

29. Thus the property of the fiery soul resigned itself with its
desire into the love, viz. into the speaking word’s property, and
the fiery desire did eat manna in the love-desire. O ye philo-
sophers! observe it well; when this was done, the love trans-


Signatura Rerum DES


muted the fiery property into its love-property; here the Father
gave the fire-soul to the Son, understand the fiery property of
the expressed Mercury to the speaking Mercury in the light;
for Christ also said so afterwards, “ Father, the men were thine,
and thou hast given them me, and I give unto them eternal life.”

30. Here God’s love gave the eternal love-life to the corrupted
humanity; the love did wholly give itself in unto the fire-wrath,
and transmuted the wrath of the soul into a triumphant joyful
love; but if the soul’s and body’s property had obeyed the
devil in God’s wrath, and made bread of the enclosed Mercury,
and eaten thereof, then had the will entered again into its self-
hood, and could not have been transmuted.

31. But seeing it entered into resignation, into the speaking
word of God, and was willing to be and do whatever that pleased,
then the will went from its selfhood, through the wrathful death
of God’s anger, viz. from the expressed word, which the devil
had poisoned with his imagination, quite through the property
of the wrath, and sprang forth afresh with a new love-desire in
God; here the will was paradise, viz. a divine love budding in
death.

32. Thus now the love-will being set in opposition to the
poisonful Mercury of the soul’s property in the anger of God,
then came the devil, and said, Thou art the king, who hast
overcome, come and shew thyself in thy miracles and deeds of
wonder; and he brought him upon the pinnacle of the Temple,
and said, “ Fall down, that men may see it; for it is written,
He hath given his angels charge over thee, that they should
bear thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a
stone.” Here the devil would fain that he should use again the
fire’s might, viz. the soul’s selfhood in its own fiery property,
and depart out of the resignation into an arrogation of self in
its own fire-will, as he had done, and also Adam, when he went
with the desire in his own might into evil and good, and would
have his eyes open in evil and good, as Moses writes thereof,
that the serpent did persuade them to it.

33. Here came the fine adorned beast again, and tempted the
second Adam also; for God gave him leave, seeing he said the
fire’s matrix had drawn him, he could not stand: Here now that
should be tried; for he was an angel also, as well as the human
soul, which he had seduced: But the human property in body
and soul in the person of Christ had once cast itself into the
resignation out of its selfhood into God’s mercy, and stood still
in the resignation, viz. in the divine will, and would not cast


116 Jacob Boehme


himself down, or do anything but what God alone did by it, and
said to the devil, “ It is written, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord
thy God;”’ which is as much as if he had said, A creature of
God shall will nor do nothing but what God wills and does by it:
There must be no other god besides the only one to rule and will,
the creature must go and do as the will-spirit of God leads it;
it must be God’s instrument, with which he works, and does
only what he pleases.

34. In this proof Adam did not stand; for he went from the
resignation into an arrogation of self, into an own self-will, and
would try evil and good, love and anger, and prove how evil
and good tasted. Here, dear man, was the trying state before
the tree of temptation in paradise, and that was fulfilled which
the first Adam could not, and would not do in divine obedience
in resignation.

35. When the devil saw that in this also he had no success,
that the humanity would not give way to depart out of the
resignation, out of God’s will, he carried the humanity upon a
high mountain, and shewed it all the riches of the world, all
whatever does live and move in the expressed word, all the
dominions and might in the outward nature, over which he calls
himself a prince, but has only the one part in the wrath of death
in possession, and said to it (understand to the human property),
“Tf thou fallest down and worshippest me, I will give thee all
this.”

36. The humanity should again depart out of resignation into
a desire of propriety, and desire to possess something of its own
in arrogation of self in the cursed property, evil and good; this
had been a dainty dish and delight to the devil; then had he
remained king, and his lies had been truth: In this Adam also
was corrupted, and entered into selfish propriety, and desired
worldly dominion and covetousness (which may be seen in Cain),
which is the heart of the poisonful Mercury, viz. its hunger’s
desire, which makes itself essence according to the property of
its hunger, not manna, but earth; as we may see in the wild
earth, what he has made in the enkindling, or motion of the
Father in his fire’s property, in which inflammation (viz. in the
poisonful wrath of the expressed Mercury) the devil thought to
be a prince, and is so in the same property in the wicked, and also
in the government of the world in the wrath; but God holds
him captive with the water and light of the third principle, so
that he is not prince in the dominion of the expressed word, but
the judge’s executioner; he must look where turba magna is


Signatura Rerum L7


enkindled in the wrath, and there he is busy as far as turba
magna goes in the wrath, further his courage is cooled.

37. He would give the humanity of Christ this whole dominion
to rule in, and above all in the essence of all things, as a mighty
god, which notwithstanding he only possesses in the part of the
turba in the wrath of God, and has it not in his full dominion:
He should but set his desire thereinto, and introduce his will
into him, and he would bring his Mercury of the creature into the
greatest omnipotence, that he should be a lord over good and
evil, and have all things at command, to do therewith as he
pleased, for so Adam had fooled it.

38. His Mercury went with the desire into the impression,
whence cold and heat arise, and imagined thereinto, and so the
property of the cold and hot fire did presently boil up in the
Mercury of the creature; and so also the outward heat and cold
did soon pierce into the enkindled Mercury of the human
property, so that the body now suffers pain from the heat and
cold, which property before (when it stood in the free-will of
God in the resignation) was not manifest; and thus evil and good
did rule and domineer in Adam.

39. For the centre of wrath, viz. the dark world’s property,
was manifest in him, in a poisonful death’s property, as the
Mercury in man is yet to this day so poisonful, and of a venomous
source; whereas indeed he is changed in the vital! light into a
solar property, but yet the poison and property of death hangs
to it, and it is his root; as we plainly see, that as soon as the
ready instrument of his martial fiery property’s signature or
form is a little struck or played upon, that his evil poisonful
fiery property comes forth, and shews itself, and inflames the
body, that it even trembles and shakes for the very poison of
wrath, and will ever enter into the enkindled poison-source in
him who has awakened and enkindled the same, and assimilate
in his malice with the malignant fomenter’s malice, and wrestle
in the poisonful property’s right; and then must the body set
to its strength as a servant, and accomplish the poison’s will,
and wrangle and contest with his adversary, and beat him, or
be beaten by him; let it be either by hand-blows, or words;
it is all in this property and desire of this poisonful Mercury.

40. From hence arises all war and contention, namely, from
the dominion of God’s anger in the corrupt and enkindled
Mercury of the expressed word, which does so act its delight and
sport in the poisonful wrath’s and dark world’s property in man.

1 Or life’s light.


118 Jacob Boehme


41. Therefore the warrior is a servant of God’s anger: He is
the axe wherewith the angry husbandman cuts up his thorns
and briars from off his ground: He is the chief worker and
accomplisher of the wrathful anger of God: God’s anger accord-
ing to his fire’s property will have it so, and not his love; and
he that suffers himself to be made use of thereunto, he serves
the anger of God according to the dark and fire-world’s desire
and property, which in the heavy fall of Adam has manifested
itself in the human property, and brought man, viz. the angelical
image, into an half-devilish vizard and likeness; in which
property and image of his will in the expressed creaturely
Mercury or vital word he cannot inherit God’s kingdom, but
must be born anew in his Mercury and will, with and in Christ,
in God’s love, viz. in the holy speaking Mercury and word of
life, that a new obedient will wholly resigned into God’s love
may proceed from his creaturely Mercury, which neither wills
or acts anything but what the will of the speaking divine
Mercury wills, who in his selfhood, and selfish arrogation in his
own will, is as dead, that he may be the instrument of the great
God, whereby he should act, work, and do how and what he
pleases: And then is God all in all in him, his will and deed,
and he is a branch in the great tree which draws sap, power, and
life from the tree of God, and grows and lives in him, and brings
forth his fruit; then is the Mercury of the human life a pro-
created or expressed fruit, which grows upon the paradise-tree
of God, and gives forth its note and sound, and strikes the
signature in the speaking word of God, viz. God’s harp and lute,
in his praise, for which end man is created, not that he should
necessarily play upon the instrument of anger and death accord-
ing to the devil’s will.

42. The devil has given himself to be such a lutanist who
contrives and helps to act and drive on the play in the wrath,
viz. in the darkness: He is the instrument and actor in the
wrath of the eternal nature, which has its effects and achieve-
ments with him and in him} as its instrument: The like also
must the wicked man do, as Saint Paul speaks thereof; “ The
holy man is unto God a sweet savour unto life, and the wicked
a sweet savour unto death.” All whatever does live and move
must enter? into the glory of God; one works in his love, the
other in his anger: All is generated and created in the infinite
being to the manifestation of the infinite great God; out of all
the properties of evil and good, creatures were brought forth

1 And all his legions of evil spirits. 2 Agree, or make for.


Signatura Rerum 11g


by the will of the speaking word; for the property of the dark-
ness and the fire was as well in the speaking as the property of
the light; and therefore there are evil and good creatures.

43. But the angels and men were spoken forth in the image
of God’s love; they ought not to speak and incline their will
into the fire and dark world, and introduce their desire thereinto ;
also not at all will to be their own, but continue steadfast in the
resignation in the speaking will of God, as a form of the speaking
will, and bear no inclination to anything, but only to the
speaking ; in which figure they stand as an image or platform.
of the expressing, as a spoken word, wherewith the speaking
word beholds itself in its own likeness, whereby it there manifests
the eternal knowledge of the eternal mind, and sets the Spirit’s
will into a form,! and plays therewith.

44. As a limner that pourtrays his own image, and does
thereby behold what he is, and how his form and features are;
or as a musician composes a curious lesson or song, and so plays
and melodises with his life, and will of life, viz. with the sound
of his own life’s Mercury, in the tune of the song, or upon some
musical instrument, as it is agreeable to his life’s Mercury,
wherewith his vital Mercury does rejoice and delight itself.

45. Thus likewise God created us to his love-consort? to his
joy and glory, whereby he exalts his speaking eternal word,
or plays in the same with us as with his instrument.

46. Therefore, when this melodious instrument was broken in
its sound by the wrathful might of his anger, that is, when man’s
image would play in its own might both in evil and good, in love
and anger, viz. in its own self-will, and would not yield itself to
be used to what the speaking word had created it, and departed
out of resignation into an arrogation of self, and would play as
itself pleased, now good, then bad, then this instrument was
against the love of God, in which no voice, breath, or smallest
degree of anger is manifest or can be, as in the light of the fire
no pain of the fire is manifest.

47. For the will of the human Mercury went out from the
will of the divine speaking word into its own self-will: Thus it
fell into the centre of the pregnatress of all essences, viz. into the
anguish, poison, and death, where God’s anger, viz. the speaking
in the wrath, took possession of it.

Here now was our distress, we were forlorn,
Opprest in wrathful death, and woeful scorn;


If God had not restored us again,
We should have still been rowling in death’s plain.


1 Image, or likeness. 2 Melody, harmony, delight, or play.


120 Jacob Boehme


48. Thus, dear reader, it is clearly set before you wherein
Christ was tempted; namely, whether the soul, and the whole
man, viz. the image of the speaking word (after that God had
introduced the spark of his love again into the human property,
and freely given itself again with the love into it), would now
again enter into its first place, and be God’s melodious instru-
ment in his love, or not; or whether it would be a selfish
arrogator in its own will, and do what its own speaking would
bring forth in the enkindled Mercury of its life; whether it
would suffer God’s will to strike the signature upon its instru-
ment, or the anger of God to strike it, as before came to pass
[viz. in the first Adam].

49. Here it was tried: Therefore said the devil, viz. the
organist in God’s anger, to Christ, that he should fall down and
worship him, and then he would give him all dominion, power,
and glory; he should and might do what he pleased, he should
live and delight in his own self-will; he should only give the
devil his will, and forego resignation, and depart out of God’s
mercy and love-will: And if this had come to pass, then had the
fair instrument been once again broken, and the human melody
in God’s love and deeds of wonder had ended; but Christ said,
“ Get thee hence, Satan: It is written, Thou shalt worship the
Lord thy God, and serve him only. Then the devil left him,
and the angels came and ministered unto him.”


THE MAGICAL PROCESS


50. Herein (as it is already mentioned at large) the magus
must well consider his purpose and intent; not desiring with
the covetousness of the devil to possess the earthly kingdom,
also not to fly [or cast himself down] from the Temple, much
less to work out his intent from the stones; he must think that
he is God’s minister and servant, not a selfish lord, of whom
becomes a fool: If he will help the poor captive shut up in the
anger of God out of the bands of darkness, wherein he is swal-
lowed up in the curse of the earth, and deliver him from the
anger of God, then he must think and well observe how God
with his entrance [viz. into the humanity] hath redeemed him;
he must very exactly and intimately consider the temptation of
Christ, not blindly grope after it with outward manual art, and
think with himself, I have a dead stone before me; it neither
knows or feels anything, I must by force set upon it, that I may
compel it, and take its jewel, which it has hidden in it.


Signatura Rerum 121


51. He that does so is a fool, and goes on in his own self-will,
and is altogether unfit for the work; let him not meddle with it;
we desire faithfully to admonish him, that if he will seek aright,
then let him consider the process of Christ, how God has again
regenerated the universal shut up in death in the human
property.

52. For God did not take man as he lay closed up in death,
and cast him into a furnace, and melted him in the wrath, as the
false magus does; but he gave his love first into his human
essence, and baptized the humanity; afterwards he brought him
into the wilderness, and set the devil opposite to him, not into
him; he let him first fast and hunger forty days, and gave no
outward food to the humanity: He must eat of his life’s Mer-
cury, that God might see whether the humanity would bring its
desire into God; and when the humanity introduced its desire
into the Deity, and received the manna, then he let the devil
set upon the humanity, who introduced all his subtlety and
desires into the humanity, and tempted him: Dost thou not
understand anything here? What shall I say more to thee?
If thou art a beast, then I give thee not my pearl; it belongs to
God’s children.

53. God must become man, man must become God; heaven
must become one thing with the earth, the earth must be turned
to heaven: If you will make heaven out of the earth, then give
the earth the heaven’s food, that the earth may obtain the will
of heaven, that the will of the wrathful Mercury may give itself
in unto the will of the heavenly Mercury.

54. But what wilt thou do? Wilt thou introduce the poison-
ful Mercury (which has only a death’s will in itself) into the
temptation, as the false magus does? Will you send one devil
to another, and make an angel of him? In deed and in truth
I must needs laugh at such folly: If thou wilt keep a corrupt
black devil, how dost thou think to turn the earth by the devil
to heaven? Is not God the creator of all beings? Thou must
eat of God’s bread, if thou wilt transmute ! thy body out of the
earthly property into the heavenly.

55. Christ said, “ He that eateth not the flesh of the Son of
Man hath no part in him:” And he says further, “ He that
shall drink of the water that I shall give, it shall spring up in
him to a fountain of eternal life.” Here lies the pearl of the
new-birth: It is not enough to play the sophister; the grain
of wheat brings forth no fruit, unless it falls into the earth; all

1 Or change.


122 Jacob Boehme


whatever will bring forth fruit must enter into its mother from
whence it came first to be.

56. The mother of all beings is Sulphur, Mercury is her life,
Mars her sense, Venus her love, Jupiter her understanding,
Luna her corporeal essence, Saturn her husband: You must
reconcile or lovingly betroth the man with the woman; for the
man is angry, yet give him his dear spouse into his arms; but
see that the spouse be a virgin, wholly chaste and pure; for
“the woman’s seed shall break the serpent’s head,” viz. the
man’s. anger: The virgin must be in real love, without any
falsehood or unfaithfulness, a virgin which never touched any
man in anger according to his manhood; for the pure Deity
does so espouse itself in clear love with the humanity, even as
Mary said, “ Be it unto me as thou hast spoken, for I am the
Lord’s handmaid;”’ and so the humanity assumed the Deity,
and also the Deity the humanity.

57. The chaste virgin’ signifies in the philosophic work the
clear Deity, the humanity is Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt, both
heavenly and earthly; the heavenly property is disappeared,
and asa nothing; the deadly property in the wrath is stirred up,
and lives to the anger, and in the properties of the anger; the
humanity, both in Adam and in Christ, was tempted. Dost
thou ask, wherewith? With the like opposite in the wrath,
even with such a devil as had all these properties in him, as a
potent prince [in all the properties of the anger].

58. The properties in Sulphur were tempted with the likeness
of the Sulphur; in the Sulphur, or from the sulphureous property,
the temptation did come and arise, and its forms are! three, as
one in the impression, which the philosophers call Saturn, which
the human spirit or will should open in the property of Venus,
and therewith satiate or feed its hunger, viz. the fire; the other
property was, that he should live in his own awakened and
opened Venus out of Saturn’s property, and aspire in self-
will.

59. The third property was, he should introduce his will
through the awakened love-desire again into the centre, viz.
into the sulphurean mother, which arises in the impression in
the anguish: And this he would not do, but the first Adam did
it; and therefore God when he would help him tempted him in
the Sulphur, viz. in the first mother to the humanity, and suffered
a wrathful devil, which was enkindled in the Sulphur, to tempt
him with his enkindled malignity and malice in the Sulphur:

1 Or were.


Signatura Rerum iW


Dost thou not understand this? What then shall I say more
to thee?

60. Sulphur is the womb whereinto we must enter, if we would
be new born. Nicodemus said well; ‘‘ How can one being old
enter into his mother’s womb, and be born again?” But Christ
said, “ Except you be converted, and become as children, you
cannot see the kingdom of heaven.” The self-will must enter
again into the first mother which brought it forth, viz. into the
Sulphur, by the will understand Mercury.

61. But now who will persuade it to do so? For it is become
a selfish thing, and must enter again into the mother, and
become nothing; this seemed a strange and wonderful thing to
Nicodemus, but the Lord said to him, “ The wind bloweth where
it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but thou knowest
not from whence it cometh, or whither it goeth; even so is
every one that is born of God.” Behold, who persuaded the
will of Christ in his humanity, to enter again with the will into
the filiation or adoption, as it were in the mother’s womb, and
eat nothing forty days, and would also [eat] nothing, but
remained in full steadfast resignation in the mother? Did not
the Deity do it, which was entered into the humanity?

62. Thus likewise it goes in the philosophic work, therefore
let the artist well observe, and rightly understand us: He must
seek the evil stubborn child (which is fled from the mother, and
entered into the centre, and would be a selfish thing) in Saturn;
for the wrath of God has shut him up with its impression in
the chamber of death.

63. Not that he has made him to Saturn, but he holds him
shut up in the saturnine death; the same he must again take
and bring into the mother’s womb, and then send the angel with
a message to Mary, and tell her, “ She shall bring forth a son,
whose name shall be called Jesus: ”” And if the mother shall
yield her consent thereunto, and receive the name Jesus, then
the new humanity shall begin in the mother, with the new child
in the old apostate captivated in the anger of God, and the
name Jesus will first give in itself to the dead child which lay
captivated in Saturn, and eagerly draw the will of the evil dead
child to itself: This is the fair bride, which shews her crown of
pearl to her apostate bridegroom; he should but again receive
her, and she would again give him her love. Now if the apostate
youth shut up in death does again receive her, then is the artist
well prepared, and counted worthy by God to finish his purpose:
Now will the bride love the bridegroom, and a virgin bring forth


124 Jacob Boehme


a son, at which all the world will wonder; the virgin shall
embrace the man; but he is a man, and not a woman, and has
the virgin’s heart.

64. Now he must be tempted, whether or no he will live in
virgin-like chastity, and in full resignation of his will to God,
for he must be a valiant champion, and destroy the devil’s
fortress + of prey (which he has in his mother) in seven kingdoms;
then let the devil set his mother’s house on fire with his wrath,
and tempt him, he will now well enough defend himself with
Christ against the devil.

65. This being done, the young man with his virgin-like heart
will wholly give himself up to the mother, when the tempter
comes and assaults him, and the mother will wholly swallow him
up into herself through the devil’s wrath: He gives himself
forth wholly out of his own will into the nothing. Now, thinks
the artist with himself, I have lost all; for he thinks that he
has lost heaven; for he seeks nothing, and does not consider
that a virgin has now brought forth: But let him have patience;
that which is impossible to the artist, that is possible to nature;
after the night it is day; when the tempter has finished all his
temptations, then comes the sign [or appearance] of the angels;
then the devil which has tempted him must depart.

66. Let the artist well observe this, and pack away the devil,
and suffer the young man with his virgin-like heart to lie in
his bed, and eat his former food, for he is now become a physician
of his sisters” in his mother’s house; he will do great wonders
in all the seven kingdoms of his mother (which are the seven
forms of life) as Christ has done.

67. In Saturn he will raise the dead, understand, he will
awaken the dead essence which held him captive in his former
prison; for he shall turn [or make] the earth to heaven: Even
as the virgin has raised up his will out of the anger in the love,
and made him a wonder-worker; so must he also awaken with
his will, which is united to the virgin’s heart, the form or signa-
ture in his mother’s womb, whence she has brought forth him
and all her children, and enkindle it with the virgin’s and his
love-desire: This is effected and done in the Sulphur of Saturn
in the young man’s own personal property, and in his mother;
for before the espousing of the virgin the heavenly essence of
the young man lies shut up in death: For when God cursed the
earth, then the heavenly paradisical body disappeared, and the
impression of Saturn took it in possession, till the restitution,

1 Royal fort, fort rampant. 2 Or kindred. $ Text, bodily.


Signatura Rerum 125


where God shall restore that which is hidden, that paradise does
again spring forth afresh in the expressed word, or that the
artist does open the same in a part t by God’s permission.

68. In the second kingdom of the mother, viz. in Luna, he
shall also do wonders; for Jesus fed with five barley loaves five
thousand people; this is the working in the essentiality or
corporality. He turned water to wine: These and the like do)
all belong to the lunar property, where the champion with his.
virgin opens paradise, and feeds the body, where nothing is,
where the outward Mercury has not laboured and wrought:
Thus the forms? in the lunar property open themselves as if
they are paradisical, even then the artist thinks I am nigh unto
it; but he is yet far off from the end.

69. In the third kingdom of the mother, viz. in Jupiter, Christ
did make the babes and ignorant, of a very weak and mean
capacity, knowing and understanding, viz. of poor fishermen,
carpenters, and the like mechanics, he made apostles, and the
most understanding men of all; and also of poor, disrespected,
vilified people, as of women, and simple ones, he made faithful,
devout, dear, godly children, who apprehended in themselves
the universal without any art.

70. Thus likewise it goes in the philosophic work; the
essentiality which lies disappeared in death, where the Mercury
is wholly earthly, cold, and impotent, does now arise in power,
as if the whole being and essence were become a new life, at
which the artist wonders, and marvels what it is, or how it
happens, and yet does also exceedingly rejoice that he sees the
divine power to spring forth before his eyes in a half dead
essence, and that in the curse of God: He sees all the four
elements, each apart, and sees how the wisdom of God repre-
sents 3 itself therein, as an harmony of joy, and sees all colours,
and the rainbow upon which Christ sits in judgment in the
expressed Mercury.

71. The nature of this splendour arises out of the impression
of Saturn; the good Jupiter gives himself forth to be seen in
such a manner, as God will change the world, and transform it
again into paradise; for this is the understanding in the ex-
pressed word, even as Christ has made the foolish, rude, ignorant
people truly wise and knowing in divine, real, heavenly jovial
understanding and knowledge.

72. In the fourth kingdom of the mother of all beings, which


1 By degrees. 2 Or signatures.
3 Speculates, or beholds.


126 Jacob Boehme


is the mercurial in the wheel? of the nature of life, Christ made
“ the deaf to hear, the dumb to speak, and cleansed the lepers ”
from the poison of Mercury: All apoplexies, the French or
poisonful pox and sores arise from the saturnine water in
Mercury, which [water] is called phlegma, all which Christ healed
in the form or signature of the young man and virgin; for the
eternal virginity had espoused itself with the young man, viz.
with the humanity.

73. This comes to pass also in the philosophic work: The
artist will see how the heaven separates itself from the earth,
and how the heaven does again sink into the earth, and changes
the earth into a heavenly colour; he will see how Mercury
purifies the matter, and how the purified colours will appear in
antimony in their property, and how the wonder proceeds.

74. In the fifth kingdom of the mother of all beings, Christ
expelled the devils out of the possessed, and healed the deaf in
this form and property.

75. This likewise the artist will see in the philosophic work,
how Jupiter in Mercury will drive up a black twinkling fiery
vapour out of the matter, which sticks on like soot; for it is a
hunger of the poison in Mercury, and is very rightly compared
to the devil, for it is of his property.

76. In the sixth kingdom of the mother of all beings, viz. in the
wheel of life, called Venus, Christ loved his brethren and sisters
according to the humanity, and washed his disciples’ feet, and
loved them even to the deepest exinanition, and gave his life
into the wrath’s property even to death for them, and mani-
fested himself among them that he was Christ: And when they
perceived that the king was come that should deprive self-will
of its might and dominion, and destroy the devil’s kingdom;
then they cried out, and said, “ We have no king but Cesar; ”
they took him in the dark night into their power, bound him,
and brought him before their council,? mocked him, whipped
him, and beat him, stripped him of clothes, and hung him on
the cross.

77. This also the artist will see very powerfully in the philo-
sophic work; for as soon as the dark fiery stream, viz, the
material devil goes from the matter, then virgin Venus appears
in her virginity very glorious and "beautiful: for it betokens
Christ’s love, who did so humble himself, and manifested his
love in our humanity; then the artist thinks that he has the
philosophic child, then he has now the fine morsel: But he

1 Orb, rotation, or course. 2 Or judgment-seat.


Signatura Rerum 127


dances with the Jews, who thought, when they had taken
Christ, Now we have him, we will keep him well enough. Thus
he aiso thinks, it is finished, and receives the child; and when
he beholds it in the trial, then he has Venus, a woman, and not
the virgin with the tincture of the fire and light, and is deceived
by the woman.!

78. Now observe right, What do the properties, viz. Saturn,
Mars, and Mercury, when they see the child, viz. the champion
in royal colour, and find that he manages no external dominion
and royalty with power and authority as they do, but will only
rule with love in their poisonful fire-might? They will not
suffer him.

79. For Saturn signifies the worldly dominion, and Mercury .
the spiritual dominion, viz. the Pharisees,? and Mars signifies
the devil; these three would not endure Christ among them;.
for he said that he was a king of love, and the Son of God, and
was come to deliver his people from sin: Then thought the
devil, sure this rhimes not well, thou wilt lose thy kingdom: And
the worldly magistrate thought, Is this a king, and God’s Son?
Then he will take away our might; this does not at all like us:
And the mercurial priests thought; This man is too mean for us,
we will have a Messiah who may bring us to worldly dominion,
and make us to be high and rich in the world, that we may
alone possess the honour of the world; we will not receive him,
he is too poor for us; we might so lose the favour and respect of
the worldly magistrate, and should be much damaged; we will
rather abide in our power, respect, and authority, and abandon
this beggarly king with his love-kingdom: In like manner as
yet to this day they are so minded, and serve his messengers so
whom he sends.

80. Thus likewise it goes in the philosophic work, when Venus
manifests herself with love, viz. in her own property in the three
wrathful forms, viz. in Saturn, Mars, and Mercury; they can
by no means endure it, for it is wholly against their austere,
dark, fiery might, but especially against the poison of Mercury,
they flash and lighten against Venus, and shoot their rays, viz.
the mercurial poisonful rays upon her, as the Pharisees did upon
Christ. In the meanwhile, Jupiter and Luna hold with Venus,
and give their power to Venus; for Venus does here stand forth
in the power of Jupiter; at this the Pharisees laugh, and think
with themselves, We are wise enough already, what need we


1 Or lets the woman deceive him.
2 Qr priests who call themselves the ministers of Christ, but are not.


128 Jacob Boehme


knowledge and understanding? We will have might and
honour; and Luna signifies the multitude of laymen who stuck
to Christ, while it went well with him; so does Luna in the
philosophic work to Venus in her lustre, so long as Saturn,
Mercury, and Mars do not meddle with and assault her; but
when the power of wrath comes, then Luna changes her will,
viz. the colour, and looks, arises, and cries also with the rest the
crucifige : This the artist will see, if he be chosen and accounted
worthy of God for the work.


CHAPTER XI


OF THE PROCESS OF CHRIST IN HIS SUFFERING, DEATH, AND
RESURRECTION: OF THE WONDER OF THE SIXTH KINGDOM
IN THE MOTHER OF ALL BEINGS: HOW THE ‘“‘ CONSUMMATUM
EST ” WAS FINISHED, AND HOW LIKEWISE IT IS SYMBOLICALLY
ACCOMPLISHED IN THE PHILOSOPHIC WORK


1. THIS now is thus to be considered; We are to know, that
the essence of this world, together with man, consists in two
properties, viz. in fire and light, that is, in love and anger: Now
the fire is twofold, and the light is also twofold, viz. a cold fire
from the impression, and an hot fire from the power of Mercury in
Sulphur; and so likewise there is a cold light from the cold fire,
and a warming light from the hot fire; the cold light is false,
and the hot light is good; not that it is false in its property,
only in the impression, in the cold Sulphur; in the sharpness of
the wrath it turns to a false desire, viz. to a ‘alse love, which is
contrary to the meekness; for its desire is Saturn and Mars.

2. It puts forth its sun (understand its lustre of life) in Mars,
and the warming light (which also receives its fiery sharpness in
the impression in Sulphur from Mars) brings its desire again into
the liberty, viz. through the dying in the fire, through the
anguish: It wholly and freely gives itself forth in the dying of
the fire, and forsakes the property of the wrath.

3. And so it becomes a general joy, and not its own only, even
like the sun that gives forth its shining lustre universally: The
sunshine is neither hot nor cold; only Mercury in the spirit of
the great world makes in Mars and Saturn’s property a heat
therein; for the sun enkindles their desire, upon which they grow
so very hungry, eager, desirous, and operative, that even a fire
is found to be in the light, which heat is not of the light’s own
property, but of the soul of the great world, which does so
sharpen the pleasant light in its splendor, that it is unsufferable
to the eye.

4. And we are highly to consider and know, that if another
fire-desire, which is not like to the outward life in Mercury, would
rule in the austere wrath of the outward nature, that then it

1 It freely loses itself in the nothing,


K 569 129


130 Jacob Boehme


would be an enmity contrary to the austere, cold, bitter, and
fiery dominion and life, and that they would exalt [or exasperate]
their wrath, eagerly desiring to be rid of it: Even as it so came
to pass when the divine love-desire did manifest itself with its
great meekness to the false, cold, proud, and austere fire-desire
of the Saturnalians, Martialists, and especially of the false
Mercurialites: It was a great opposition and enmity to them,
that love should rule in the death of poison, and dwell therein,
this they could not, nor would not endure; for heaven was
come into hell, and would overcome the hell with love, and take
away its might; as it is to be seen in the person of Christ; he
loved them, and did them all manner of good, and healed their
plagues [or diseases], but in that he was not arisen from their
wrathful might, and that he said he was descended from above,
and was God’s Son; this was unsavoury to the cold, hot fire’s
might, that he should rule with love over them.

5. Even thus it goes in the philosophic work; when the
wrathful forms of the earthliness, viz. the outward Saturn,
Mars, and Mercury, see the heavenly champion with the virgin’s
property among them, and perceive that he has far another
desire than they, then they are angry in themselves; for the
love-desire, when it casts a glimpse on the fire-flagrat, awakes
their fire-flagrat, and then the wrath proceeds forth from the
anxiety into love; from whence arises a death’s flagrat in the
love; but seeing there can be no death therein, the love con-
descends in the fire-flagrat, and gives forth [or diffuses] itself
into their desire, and leaves its essence; so that in their desire
they reach after its property in the death’s flagrat; this is a
poison to death, and a pestilence to hell; and in this property +
death was deprived of its power in the humanity; for Christ,
when he shed his heavenly blood in the flagrat of death, and
left it in death, the wrath of God was driven to retain the
heavenly love-essence in itself: Even there the fire-desire in the
enkindled humanity was changed into a love-desire, and out of
the anguish of death proceeded? a joy and strength of divine
power.

6. But I will hereby give the well-wisher fundamentally to
understand how it went with Christ, and how in like manner
it goes with his philosophic work; both have wholly one process.
Christ overcame the wrath of death in the human property, and
changed the anger of the Father into love in the human pro-
perty; the philosopher likewise has even such a will, he wills

1 Manner, or condition. 2 Was born, or begotten.


Signatura Rerum © 131


to turn the wrathful earth to heaven, and change the poisonful
Mercury into love; therefore observe us here right; we will not
write here parabolically, but wholly clear as the sunshine.

7- God would change the humanity (after it was become
earthly, and had awakened the poisonful Mercury in the love-
property, which [poisonful Mercury] had devoured the love, and
changed it into itself) again into the divine heavenly property,
and make heaven of the human earth, of the four elements only
one in one desire, and change the wrath of God in the human
property into love.

8. Now his anger was a might of the fire and wrath, and was
inflamed in man, and therefore there must be right earnestness
to withstand the same, and change it again into love: The love
must enter into the anger, and wholly give itself in unto the
wrath; it would not be enough that God should remain in
heaven, and only look upon the humanity with love; it could
not be, that the anger and wrath should thereby yield up its
might and strength, and freely give itself unto the love: As the
fire is not made better by the light, it still holds its wrath
notwithstanding in itself; but when a meek essence (as water)
comes into the fire, then the fire goes out.

9. Even so heavenly divine essentiality (understand heavenly
water, which the tincture of the fire and light changes into
blood) must enter into the wrathful fire of God, and become
the fire’s food, so that the fire of God might burn from another
essence; for water could not have done it; the fire does not
burn in the water, but the meek oleous property of the fire and
light in the essence of divine meekness in the love-desire, that
did effect it.

to. The human fire-life consists in the blood, and therein
rules the wrath of God; now another blood, which was born out
of God’s love-essence, must enter into the angry human blood;
they must go both together into the death of the wrath, and the
wrath of God must be drowned in the divine blood, and therefore
the outward humanity in Christ must die, that it might not any
more live in the wrath’s property, but that the heavenly blood’s
Mercury, viz. the speaking word, might alone live in the outward
humanity, and solely rule in peculiar divine power in the out-
ward and inward humanity; that the self might cease in the
humanity, and God’s Spirit might be all in all, and the self only
his instrument, whereby he makes what he pleases; that (I say)
the self-hood might be solely God’s instrument, and wholly in
resignation; for God has not created man to be his own lord,


132 Jacob Boehme


but his servant: He will have angels under obedience, and not
devils in their own fire-might.

tr. Now when his love would give itself into death, and
deprive death of its might, then the two worlds, viz. the Father’s.
fire-world, with the outward visible world, and also the divine
love-world with the divine heavenly essentiality, that is, with
heavenly flesh and blood, and also with corrupted flesh and
blood, were formed into one person. God became man, and
made man to God: The seed of the woman, viz. of the heavenly
virginity, which disappeared in Adam, and also the corrupted
man’s seed in the anger, viz. Mary’s seed, were formed into one
person, which was Christ; and the seed of the woman, viz. of
the virgin of God, understand the heavenly essentiality, should
bruise the head of the serpent, understand, the wrath of God in
the corrupted man; the head is the might of God’s anger; the
divine man, understand the divine property, should change the
earthly into itself, and turn the earth to heaven.

12. Now when the person was born, heaven stood in the earth
of man. Now the incarnation could not have done it alone,
there must be yet after this another earnestness; for as long
as Christ walked on the earth, the humanity which was from
Mary’s property was not almighty, but the humanity from God
[was omnipotent], they were set opposite one against the other
in two principles, yet not shut up, but both manifest in each
other, the love against the anger, and the anger against the love.

13. Here now was the trial of the combat one with another,
from whence also proceeded the temptation of Christ; and
when the divine world overcame, then the great wonders broke
forth through the outward human world; but all this could not
accomplish it, there must yet be a greater earnestness, the
human property, viz. the expressed word, was yet stirring in -
the inflameable anger: The human Sulphur must be changed
into the heavenly, viz. into the heavenly part; and thereupon
the human self, viz. the expressed Mercury was astonished, when
upon the Mount of Olives the heavenly world in the love wrestles
with the anger in the human world, viz. with the self-hood, so
that the person of Christ did sweat bloody sweat; even there
the one was dismayed at the other, the love at the horrible
death, whereinto it should and must wholly yield and give in
itself with the divine essentiality, and be swallowed up by the
anger; and the anger [was dismayed] at its death, in that it
must lose its might in the love.

14. Hence the whole person of Christ said, “ Father, if it be


Signatura Rerum 1:33


possible, let this cup pass from me; yet not as I will, but thy
will be done.” The love-world in Christ said, “ Can it not be
but that I must drink down the cup of thy anger? Then thy
will be done.” And the anger said, “ If it be possible, let this
cup of love pass from me,” that I may revenge myself, and rage
in the wrath of man for the sake of his disobedience; as God
said to Moses, who stood in the spirit of Christ as a type of
Christ before God, “ Let me alone that I may devour this dis-
obedient people: ” But the name Jesus, which had incorporated
itself in paradise with the promise of the woman’s seed in the
aim of the human and divine covenant, would not suffer him;
for the humility of the name Jesus has always interposed against
the wrath of the Father, against his fire’s property, that his fire
might not enkindle the half-poisonful Mercury in man, except
only sometimes when Israel walked wholly in the wrath and
disobedience; as is to be seen by Corah, Dathan, and Abiram,
and by Elias.

15. So it was here on the Mount of Olives, the anger would
live in the fire’s might in man, and the name Jesus put itself into
the anger; and here there was no other remedy, but that the
name Jesus in divine love and heavenly essentiality must wholly
resign up itself to be devoured by the anger: The Son must be,
and was obedient to the angry Father, even to “ the death of
the cross; ” as the Scripture says.

16. The dear love-humility and meekness suffered itself to be
“ scorned, mocked, spit upon,” and judged by the anger; that
is, the Jews must execute the justice of God; for by man’s
self-action sin was committed, and by man’s self-action death
and sin must be blotted out. Adam had introduced his will into
the poison of the outward Mercury; so must Christ, viz. the love,
freely give up its will also into the same poisonful Mercury.
Adam did eat of the evil tree, Christ must eat of God’s anger;
and as it went inwardly in the spirit, so likewise outwardly in
the flesh; and so also it goes in the philosophic work.

17. Mercury in the philosophic work denotes the Pharisees,
he will not endure the love-child: When he sees it, he gives it
trembling and anguish, and Venus also stands dismayed at the
poison of the angry Mercury; they are in one another as if
sweat did drop from them, as the artist shall see.

18. Mars says, I am the lord of fire in the body, Saturn is my
strength, and Mercury is my life, I will have none of this love, I
will devour it in my wrath; this denotes the devil in the anger
of God; and seeing he cannot do it, he raises up Saturn, viz.


134 Jacob Boehme


the impression, which signifies the worldly magistracy, and
reaches therewith after Venus, and yet cannot get her into him,
for she is to him a poison to death: This Mercury also can much
less endure, for the love took away his dominion; as the high
priests thought that Christ would take away their government,
because he said that he was God’s Son.

19. Thus Mercury is vexed at the child Venus, for Venus has
wholly discovered herself, and freely given up herself; they may
do now what they please, she will go even into the dragon’s
mouth, he shall only but open his jaws; and this Mars in
Mercury does not understand, but they take the fair child,
and shoot their venomous darts against it, and bind it with
Saturn’s might in their wicked bands, as the artist will see how
they surround the colour of Venus.

20, Mars brings it first to Mercury, seeing he is the life, as
before the high priest, who must examine and prove the fair
child; but he hates it, he cannot reach into the heart after its
love-will, he only judges it externally, because it is not of his
property, that it stands forth with such a form as the Mercury
himself, and yet has another power, virtue and will.

21. But seeing there is another Mercury which lives in its love
in the child Venus, therefore he cannot kill it, but brings it to
Saturn, as the Jews brought Christ from Caiaphas to Pilate,
who signifies Saturn, who also takes the child: But seeing he is
a lord of the impression, viz. of the darkness, therefore he cares
not at all for the property of the child, but for the dominion only;
he seizes on the child with the dark impression, and strips it of its
fair Venus garment; and when Luna with the white splendour
of the sun sees this, then she hides herself; as the disciples of
Christ fled, and the enraged [rude] multitude also, who did highly
presume to stand by him in the cross and persecution, but in
the earnestness they fly; for Luna is inconstant, she has not
Sol’s heart in the love-flame; and Saturn with his thorny im-
pression puts the Sulphur upon the child, viz. the mother of all
beings with the purple-coloured raiment of her own peculiar
property, in which the wrath of Mars is contained and harboured.

22. When Mars, viz. the devil’s crew, and Mercury also, viz.
the self-pride of life, see that Venus has her royal garment on,
understand the purple robe of Saturn and Mercury in Sol’s
colour mingled with fiery Mars, and adorned in Mercury’s
sulphur-colour in the open blaze as a shining lustre, for so is the
materia according to the colour of the venereal property, which

1 In the heat of his trial.


Signatura Rerum rote


the artist must well observe, he then will clearly see as it is
mentioned.

23. When Mars, Mercury, and Luna also see this, then they
cry Crucifige, away with him, he is a false king in our garment;
he is a man as we are, and will be God, that is, they cast their
poisonful desire through the purple garment upon the child, and
so the artist will see that the child will appear in his own form,
as if it were full of streaks from the poisonful rays of Mercury
and Mars, which they lay upon the child through the impression
of Saturn; as Pilate whipped Jesus: The artist will see the
prickly crown of thorns standing very sharp with its point upon
the property of the child; also he will see that Venus does not
at all move herself, but stands still, and suffers herself to be so
done unto.

24. Further we are to understand, how that Adam had taken

-on him a cold false love, and therewith so shewed himself before
God as if he were in peculiar dominion and will, and moreover
God’s child, whereas he did but mock God therewith; for so the
love-desire appears when it is captivated in the impression of
death.

25. Thus must the second Adam Christ take all this upon
him, and enter into the same ignominy and scorn, and be
clothed with a purple garment as a king of this world, and be
mocked therein; for Adam had put on the purple garment of
the outward world’s self-might in the splendour of the property
of self; and here it was made open shew of before the anger of
God: And the white garment which Herod put upon Christ to
mock him in signifies, and is the cold false love as a cloak of
falsehood, wherein man pranks up as if he were an angel, and
so puts upon himself Christ’s purple mantle with his white robe,
and covers himself with Christ’s pure snow-white garment, viz.
with his suffering and death, and yet holds and harbours the
man of falsehood, viz. the false love under a vail.

26. Now Christ must set forth this figure, and it was repre-
sented on his body; for he should overcome and stay the man
of falsehood which lay in the human property, and so it was
fully presented before God. Christ must be termed and reviled
for such an one as Adam was; the innocent must take the blame
upon him.

27. And thus it goes in the philosophic work, when the curse
of God’s anger which is in the earth is to be changed into love;
for seeing Mercury sets the child of love before Saturn, and
Saturn cannot, and may not try it, therefore he puts upon it the


136 Jacob Boehme


purple-coloured garment with stripes underneath, and sends it
before Sol’s splendor, which glimmers in Mars, and the sun puts
upon it its white colour, viz. the lunar, and then the purple
colour vanishes, and the child stands in the lunar white simple
colour, very despicable without lustre: The sun would fain see
this child shew forth its golden colour, for it perceives there is a
solar virtue in the child, therefore it gives it the white colour
from the property of the eternal liberty; the child should but
give the power of the fire’s centre thereunto, viz. the divine
might, and then it would be like the sun, and would be a lord over
the Sulphur of Mars and Mercury, yet only a lord over the out- »
ward world’s essence, a governor in the wrath, as Sol is the like.

28. But Christ said to Pilate, “ My kingdom is not of this
world,” and would not answer Herod anything in this white
raiment when he put it on him, nor in the purple robe; for the
purple robe and the white raiment also were both false, and
were put upon him to disgrace and mock him, because Adam
had put them on, and proudly pranked up therein with falsehood ;
Christ might not do any sign therein before Herod, though he
desired it. Hereby the shame of man, who was an image of
God, and yet had made himself a false king, was represented
before God’s face; as the poor sinner confesses, and sets forth
his abominations before God, when he sets upon abstinence and
repentance.

29. Thus Christ represented to his Father the abominations
[or sins] of man in this false garment, and stood before him as
an ignominy, and confessed the sins of man to his Father in the
stead and place of all men: And when his Father beheld him
through his imagination in this garment, he would have none of
this robe; therefore Pilate must pull it off from him again, and
set him before the Jews in his own form; but they cry, “ Away,
away with him, he must be put to death;” for so his Father
would, that he should give himself up to death in his wrath,
and drown the same.

30. And Pilate condemned him to death, for he would not
acknowledge him for a king: So it also goes in the philosophic
work, Saturn will not receive the child, for it is not of his
property; and Mars and Mercury likewise will not have it in
its property: But what do they do? The child is among them,
they would fain be rid of it, but yet cannot: They grow angry
and enraged, as the Jews against Jesus, and take the child into
their arms, viz. into their false poisonful angry desire, and

1 Text, hold.


Signatura Rerum Ta.


will murther it, and quite sting and pierce through the materia
of the child with their sharp, fiery, and poisonful rays, viz. with
three sharp nails.

31. One whereof is Saturn, viz. the impression of the dark
world, denoting the wrath of the dark world. The other is Mars,
which signifies the devil, viz. the serpent’s property in the anger
of God. The third is Mercury, which signifies the false life, viz.
how the wrath of God is enkindled in the expressed word in the
human property.

32. These three nails pierce through the property of the child.
Thus Venus, viz. the essence of love wholly yields itself to the
three murtherers, and wholly foregoes its jovial life as if it died;
and the mercurial life of the human property, understand the
child’s power, falls also to the three murtherers in its mother’s
house, viz. into the corporeal essence, wherein the young man
received his virgin, wherein God became man.

33. Now when the heavenly body, and also the earthly, do
thus yield unto these three murtherers, then appears the image
of John and Mary by the cross as a type; for the young man’s
life, and also the virgin’s in the young man, has freely sur-
rendered, and given forth itself: And now the two properties,
viz. the divine and human, divide themselves in the form of
each power, which the artist may see if he has the eyes and
understanding thereunto.

34. And here, when Saturn with his impression and dark
sharpness, and Mars with his wrath, and Mercury with his
poison-life do powerfully enter into the property of Venus, then
the wrath forces itself into the love, and the love into the wrath
essentially mixed, as assimilating one with the other: Here the
wrathful death is dismayed at the love, so that in dying he falls
into impotence [or a swoon], for it loses the might of the wrath;
and the love is, and stands also in the source of the wrath in
death’s flagrat as impotent [or in a swoon], and gives itself forth
wholly into the flagrat [or stroke] of death, and even then the
heavenly essence, viz. the heavenly blood flows forth from it
into the property of the third principle, viz. of the young man.
Here the virgin gives her pearl to the young man for a propriety,
and God and man become one.

35. For the virgin’s blood out of the divine essentiality does
here now drown with its love-essence the young man’s blood,
viz. the self-hood, and the three murtherers surrender their life
in the blood of the virgin, and then the red glee from the fire,
and also the white from the life of the champion arise up


138 Jacob Boehme


together, viz. from the wrath the life, and from the love the
meekness: and both, viz. the life of the anger, and the life of
the love, ascend together as one only life; for in death they
become one: The death dies away in the love, and becomes in
the love the life of the divine kingdom of joy; for it is not a
dying, but a free surrendering of its power, might, and will, a
transmutation; the virgin’s blood changes the human, dead as
to God, into an heavenly [blood], the life of the young man dies,
and the life of the Deity remains fixed and steadfast, for it stands
in its property in the nothing.

36. And here, thou dear seeker, when thou seest the crimson-
coloured blood of the young man arise out of death with the
virgin’s white blood, then know that thou hast the arcanum of
the whole world, and a treasure in this valley of misery, which
surpasses the value of gold; take it and esteem it more excellent
and sovereign than that which shall again arise from death: If
thou beest born of God, then thou wilt understand what I mean.

37. For this is the type of Christ, [shewing] how Christ has
drowned sin, and the enkindled anger of God in the human
property; it is not only an offering, for then Moses had accom-
plished it; it is not a bare verbal forgiveness, as Babel teaches:
No. The human will must from all its powers enter into this
death, into this blood, viz. into the highest tincture.

38. The purple robe which Christ wore could not do it; the
white hypocritical pharisaical priest’s coat could also not effect
it, no flattery or demure hypocrisy avails here; no comfortings,
soothings, or giving God good words are effectual here; the
crafty malignant man must be mortified in Christ’s blood, he
must be drowned in the virgin’s blood: The seed of the woman
must bruise the head of the serpent; the will must wholly
disclaim and depart from its selfish property, and become as an
ignorant child, and wholly enter into God’s mercy, into the
virgin-like blood of Christ, that sin and the poisoned Mercury
may be drowned in its Mars, that the white lion may arise; for
the lion which now appears in the white colour, in crimson red,
is the Mercury of life, viz. the expressed word, viz. the soul, which
before was a wrathful devil in its self-hood, ruling and domineer-
ing in the anger of God in the three forms of the poison-source,
viz. in Saturn, Mars, and Mercury: Now it is the white scarlet-
coloured lion from the house of David and Israel, fulfilled in
the covenant of promise.

39. N.B.—But that we may give satisfaction to the well-
wisher, we will further shew him the whole ground even to the


Signatura Rerum 139


resurrection of Christ: When the Jews had hung Jesus upon
the cross, and he had shed his human and heavenly divine blood,
and drowned the turba in the human [blood], then Jesus said,
“ Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.”

40. When Jesus had broken death in the humanity, and took
away self, he did not then wholly cast away the human property,
wherein death and the anger of God were, but then he did first
truly assume it; understand, he even then did truly take the
outward kingdom into the inward; for the outward kingdom was
begotten as a wonder out of the eternal wisdom in the speaking
word, and spoken forth into a form, as a manifestation of the
Deity in love and anger, in good and evil: So that Jesus would
not that the outward type of the wonders in the likeness of God
should perish [or quite vanish], but the wrath which had over-
powered the love in man should be forgiven, that is, it should
be given into the nothing, viz. into the liberty, that it might not
be manifest in its own self-property; it must be servant, and
only a cause of the fiery love and divine joyfulness; nothing
should perish [or be lost] in man, for God had created him to his
image.

41. Thus let the philosopher observe, that when the three
murtherers, viz. Saturn, Mars, and Mercury, sink! in the crimson-
coloured blood of the lion, they do not perish; but they are
pardoned, that is, their wrath is changed into a love-desire, viz.
out of Venus into Sol; for when the fiery desire enters into the
watery desire, then a shining, viz. a glorious splendour, arises
from and in the fire; for Venus is white, and the fire-desire
is red.

42. Here now it is changed into one colour, which is yellow,
that is, white and red both in one colour, which is the majestical
[lustre]; for when Mercury is changed into the power of joy,
then arises the multiplication; he changes his mother, wherein he
lay shut up in death, into Sol; he makes the earthly heavenly in
one property, as the virgin was: For here the virgin loses her
name, for she has given her love and pearl to the champion,
who is now called here the white lion, as the Scripture speaks
of the lion of the house of Israel and David, who should
demolish the devil’s kingdom, and destroy hell, that is, break
the anger of God, and change it into love.

43. This champion or lion is no man or woman, but he is
both; the tincture of the fire and light must come into one, viz.
of the essence which is Venus, and of the spirit which is Mars in

1 Are drowned,


140 Jacob Boehme


Mercury; the Father’s love and anger must become one thing,
and then this one thing is called the kingdom of joy; so long as
it is separated, there is in the thing only anguish and torment,
and mere desire; but when it burns i in one will, it is a joy ful
proceeding forth from itself: And this egressive property is
called the Holy Ghost, viz. the life of the Deity.

44. Therefore know that the virgin’s and young man’s blood
must be both shed together, that the fire-lion might die; which
was manifest in the human property, that the love of the virgin
might change his wrath in her dear love-blood into her property,
and obtain the soul from the young man; for in Adam the virgin
disappeared, for the soul departed out of its love-will out of
the resignation into its own, and became disobedient to God.

45. Here the virgin does again take the soul into herself, and
gives it her crown of pearl, as to a noble champion, and calls him
in his own name the white lion or champion. O ye children
of men, observe it, I beseech you; open the gates of the world in
your heart; Open them wide that the King of Glory may come
in, even the great champion in battle, who hath deprived death
of its might, and destroyed the hell in God’s anger, and made of
the world paradise.

46. O ye wise seekers, how does the Lord open his windows!
Why do you sleep in the desire of much increase [in your
covetousness], which is multiplied in the wrath? Do but enter
only into the divine resignation; you may partake of that which
the powers of heaven are able to afford: If you do but forsake
your selfishness, then the earth shall become heaven to you,
says the spirit of wonders; but you shall not obtain it in your
wicked ways and covetous doings.

47. And when Jesus through the shedding of his blood had
given the wrath of God in man to the love, that the Father had
received the love in the human property into the wrath; then
the kingdom of the devil in the wrath, and the kingdom of love
did immediately part asunder; they were divided: And this
figure did hang with Christ on the cross, viz. the wicked mocker
at the left hand, who reviled Jesus, and was not capable of his
blood-shedding; and the other at the right hand, who was
converted from his sins to Jesus, and said, “ Lord, remember
me when thou comest into thy kingdom;” to whom Jesus
answered, “ Verily, to-day thou shalt | be with me in paradise.”

48. Thus we are rightly to consider, that when the wrath of
God is drowned in the blood of Christ, so that it changes its

might into love, that even then paradise is again open; for


Signatura Rerum 141


when Jesus had tinctured the human blood which was cor-
rupted in sin with the virgin’s blood in the love, then the virgin
received the manhood, viz. the self-hood, into her virgin’s love.
This was the paradise, and an habitation of God, with and in
man, where God dwells in the humanity, and is all in all in ity

49. Thus it falls out also in the philosophic work, when Mars
and Mercury die according to the property of the dark i impres-
sion of Saturn, then Venus takes them into her love-blood, and
Venus gives her love into the poisonful fire-desire: She wholly
gives herself in unto the fire of Mars in Mercury, and she yields
herself fully to be their own; but seeing Mars and Mercury
become impotent (as to the might of the fire and poison) in the
love, the love and anger thereupon change themselves into one
essence, into one desire; and here, when the fire, viz. the fire-
desire, gives in its desire to the love; then saith the love,
“To-day thou shalt be with me out of thy fire-anguish in
paradise,” viz. in joy, that is, thou shalt be changed in me: And
here Venus gets the soul in the philosophic work, so that Mars
and Mercury become her soul, and the strife ceases; for the
enmity is appeased and quelled: And thus the child subsists in
the fire immoveably without any change; for Mars does not
at all annoy it, and so likewise Mercury and Saturn hurt it not,
for they are in the child at the end of nature, where there is no
turba any more.

50. Mercury is pure in Saturn, he has no more poison, whereby
to make soil [or rust] in the water, viz. in the salt of Saturn:
And let the philosopher and divine also well observe this, that
in paradise there is a perfect life without any shadow of change,
also without any false evil desire, and a continual day, where
the paradisical man is clear as a transparent glass, in whom the
divine sun shines through and through, as gold that is thoroughly
bright | and pure, without any spot or foulness.

51. “ And when Jesus knew that all was finished, he seeth his
mother and John his disciple standing by under the cross, and
saith unto his mother, Woman, lo! this is thy son; and to the
disciple, Behold thy mother, and forthwith the disciple took
her unto his own home.”

52. This is an excellent type, how Christ has forsaken this
world, viz. the human self-hood, and is again gone to the
Father; for he saw his mother according to this world, and his
disciple, viz. his uncle, according to the outward humanity from
his mother’s side, and yet said to his mother, “ Woman, behold,

‘there is thy son,” I am no more thy son according to my out-


142 Jacob Boehme


ward humanity; it is changed into God’s Son, and is no longer |
of the world, but it lives to God; But seeing thou art to be yet
in the world, take John, who is not yet changed, to be thy
guardian; and thou John take thy mother; and he presently
took her to himself. 3

53. This is the type of the Christian Church upon earth: For
we the poor children of Eve are not presently wholly changéd
according to the outward man; but we must also pass into
death, and putrify, that the wrath also in the flesh may rot and
putrify, and the spirit might rest in the death of Christ till the
general resurrection and transmutation of the outward man;
in which the earth of man shall be transformed into heaven,
and the mirror [or type] of the wonders shall appear
therein.

54. Thus he commanded his disciple to take care of his
mother: His mother is the Christian Church upon earth, wherein
the children of God are begotten according to the spirit, whom
he should take care for, and guide and lead them, till the number
of the humanity out of the flesh shall be accomplished, and then
the spiritual body shall arise, and shall be proved in Christ’s
death, in his entrance into the anger, where he changed the anger
into love; and the kingdom with the source of darkness shall be
separated from it.

55. But in this life-time, though the spirit be changed ! in the
divine power, and the spirit be baptized with the virgin’s
baptism, and puts on the image of Christ internally, viz. Venus’s
body in the love; yet Adam is not capable of it till he also enters
into the transmutation of Christ, which comes to pass in death
[or in the dying to this mortal life].

56. But in the meanwhile, John, as the teacher of Christ in
Christ’s stead, must provide for the outward mother according
to the outward man, and feed and teach the lambs of Christ with
Christ’s spirit: And it exactly shews us how the outward man
is not God’s mother; for Christ separates himself from his out-
ward mother, and gives her to John; he has put on ? the eternal
mother, viz. the Father of the eternal birth, and therefore they
do very ill that honour and worship the outward mother of Christ
for God’s mother.

57. The whole true Christendom is Christ’s mother, which
bears Christ in her: And John, viz. the servants of Christ are
her nurses, which take care for the mother of Christ as John did;
he presently received the mother of Christ and provided for her,


1 Transformed. 2 Taken, or received,


Signatura Rerum 143


as her son, and not as her lord; for Christ said to him, “ Behold,
she is thy mother: ” So should all the disciples and teachers of
Christ do, and take care of the poor Christendom, as sons, with
great humility towards the mother, provide for, and cherish her
with diligence and circumspection, and serve her with all discreet
modesty, courtesy, and humility; feed and comfort her with
the spirit of Christ, not as the priests in Babel do, who ride over
her as wealthy, rich, domineering masters, and will be lords over
the mother, and only seek honours, and to fatten their bellies
in pleasure, and live in strife and contention: These, one with
the other, of what name or title soever they be, are not all
Johannites, but they are the poisonful mercurial Pharisees, in
whom there is nothing but mere anguish, vexation, pain, and
torment, where one property does continually torment, envy,
and hate the other, and hold it out for false; and yet they are
all only out of one root, and have all only one will, except that
one colour does not glister as the other.

58. For Saturn is not as Jupiter; Jupiter is not as Mars;
Mars, viz. the fire-spirit, is not as the light of the sun; and the
sun is not as Venus with her meek water-source; and Venus is
not as Mercury with his sound; for she is meek and still, and
Mercury sounds and sets up his note; and Mercury also is not
as Luna, which as a simple body does give body to all the rest
for manifestation; one is far otherwise than another, and has
not one property and will; and yet they are in the centre of the
essence, viz. in Luna and Saturn, in the property of the soul and
body, all of them one and the same lump. Thus the partial
sectarian Mercurialites, and Baal’s servants, are divided in these
properties; they are the Pharisees which judge and condemn
Jesus in his members.

59. They wrangle and contend only about the church, and
yet none will take care of the poor forsaken mother of Christ:
They are mad in their martial and mercurial contest,! and are
not Johannites, they enter not in Christ’s spirit at the door of
Christ into the sheepfold; they are wolves, lions, and bears, yea
foxes and fearful hares, who fly from and forsake the mother;
their rise and original is out of Babel, where they continually
contend, wrangle, grin, and bite one another for the letter.
Every one will be lord and master over the letter, and transpose
and place it as he pleases, only for the honour, applause, and
pleasure of this world: They consider not that the mother is a


1 In war for their proud unrighteous mammon, and in bitter strife about
their outward worship of Christ.


144 Jacob Boehme


widow, and that Christ has left and ordained them that they
should be such curates for her as John.

60. O thou dear mother of Christendom, let these wolves,
bears, and lions go, and shelter themselves where they please,
regard no longer these evil beasts; take the John, the disciple
of Christ, who teaches the love and humility.

61. O thou dear and worthy mother, art thou not only one?
Why dost thou suffer the lions to rend and tear thee in pieces?
Christ is thy husband, all these are strangers and hirelings, unless
they walk in thy filial love, and humble themselves towards the
mother, and provide for her as ministers, else they be all wolves,
bears, and tearing lions; though there were many thousands of
them, yet one is not at all better than another, unless he comes
forth in the line of John, and takes care of Christ’s mother,
and provides for the mother with earnestness in Christ’s spirit:
Which if he has not, he is not then called of Christ to be a
guardian or curate to the mother; but he is a Mercurialite, a
Pharisee, such as Christ called the seed of serpents, and genera-
tion of vipers, who crucify Jesus in his members.

62. And thus the philosopher must consider of, and well
observe Christ’s mother, whom he recommended to John to
take care of: He must likewise be a John, and know that his
business is about the mother, and that his work in this world
is not wholly t heavenly: He will not so manifest paradise, that
God will appear, and be manifest face to face in his work: No,
he remains in the mother, yet he obtains the universal in the
mother; for the mother of Christ obtained it also, for it was
said to her, “ Thou art the blessed among all women.”

63. So likewise the philosopher reaches to the blessing in this
valley of misery, that he is able to bless his corrupt body, that is,
tincture it and free it from sickness, even to the limit of the
highest constellation according to Saturn; and therefore let him
take heed of covetousness, for so he introduces the turba.

64. By the type of John and the mother of Christ, he is to
know, that the kingdom of God and the kingdom of this world
are two in his work, and that God’s kingdom lies shut up in the
mother, viz. in his work, of which he must take care; and be a
minister thereunto, and not a lord of the mother, but an alms-
giver, and not a gatherer of treasure and wealth, not a covetous
muck-worm; also none shall attain to it, or understand our
meaning, that will not be a guardian of the mother: The Most
High has laid a bar before the foolish understanding,” that it is


1 Altogether. * Understanding of folly.


Signatura Rerum 145


blind, till it be weary with seeking; I speak in the ground of
truth.

65. And when Jesus had commended his mother to John,
he again turned his desire into the mother of the human pro-
perty, and said, “I thirst;” he thirsted after the members of
_ human property, and desired the salvation of mankind, viz. the
health of his members, understand of his children, which should
be begotten in him; and the Jews gave his humanity gall and
vinegar to drink; and when he tasted it, he would not drink it.

66. Here is again the outward type, shewing how it went
inwardly: The name Jesus, viz. the love of God which was entered
into the humanity, and had espoused itself thereunto, did thirst
in the love-desire after the corrupt humanity, and would fain
taste the pure water of the humanity in itself; but the wrathful
anger of God, which was enkindled in the human property, gave
itself in with the human property to the thirst of the love-desire:
And when the love-desire tasted of it, it would not drink it, but
sunk down into it as wholly resigned, or freely yielded up, and
did unite and very essentially incline itself into the anger of God
as a full and perfect obedience, and as fully and freely given over
as a peculiar propriety thereinto.

67. This was now the flagrat of the wrath, that the love should
so come into it; whereupon the earth trembled, and the rocks
clave asunder; for so the death was dismayed at the life: And
here the awakened wrath’s property did separate itself into the
centre, viz. into the first principle, into the fire-root; and now
from the centre there proceeded forth the hunger to the new-
birth in the human property; of the hunger unto death was
made a hunger to life; for the love tinctured the anger, that the
fire-desire to the dark impression became a desire of life.

68. Understand it here right; God the Father, who gave his
dear heart into the humanity to help mankind, did now thirst
after the humanity, viz. after his heart or word of power; and
the Deity in the humanity, viz. the heart of the Father, did thirst
after the Father; and the love or the essence of the light did
thirst after the fire’s essence: For the fire’s, or soul’s essence in
Adam was departed out of the love-essentiality (wherein the
paradise did consist) into a selfishness, and was become dis-
obedient to God; and thereupon the essence, life, and being of
the light and love died in its growing, that is, it withered as to
the vegetative life, or heavenly growth, blooming, and sense of
the paradisical source, and awaked and arose to the earthly
world.

L 569


I 46 Jacob Boehme


69. Here the Father brought the soul, which was entered into
his wrath, and had manifested itself in his anger, again into the
love, viz. into the disappeared paradisical image: And here the
dark world was dismayed in death’s flagrat at the fire-flagrat,
which arose up in love in the death as a joyful flagrat; which
joy-flagrat entered into the dead bodies of those who had hope
in Israel (who did hope upon the Messiah) as a sound of the
power of God, and awakened them from death.

70, This flagrat rent in twain the veil in the Temple, viz. the
veil of Moses, which hung before the clear face of God, so that
man could not see God, and therefore he must serve him with
an offering, and type of this final discovery, in which God did
manifest himself again in the humanity: This flagrat broke the
type in the offerings and sacrifices, and manifested the clear face
of God, and united the human time with eternity.

71. All whatever the Jews did outwardly to Christ, the same
was a type of the inward, viz. how it went between God and the
humanity, viz. between the eternity and time: The Jews gave
Jesus gall and vinegar in his thirst, both these properties are a
Mercury in the Sulphur of Saturn, viz. in the impression; this
is even the type and full resemblance of the soul’s property, as
it is in itself alone void of the other love-properties.

72. God gave this property of the soul again into his love,
the death into the life, the disappeared love-essence (which the
word of God had assumed to itself in the essence and seed of
Mary, and quickened to life) into the anger’s property, into the
soul’s essence, viz. into the centre of the fire and dark world;
whereupon the soul-like fire and dark world became an exceeding
triumphant joyful paradisical life: And here the champion up-
braided death and hell, viz. the dark world in the soul, and said,
“Death! where is thy sting ” now in man? “Hell! where is
now thy victory” in the wrath of the poison-source in the
expressed word or Mercury? All is now dead: O death, I am
to thee a death; Hell! I am to thee a conqueror; thou must
serve me for the kingdom of joy: Thou shalt be my servant and
minister to the kingdom of joy; thou shalt enkindle the flames
of love with thy wrath, and be a cause of the spring in
paradise.

73. Thus we give the philosopher to understand our sense and
deep ground in nature, who desires to seek and open the dis-
appeared essence of the earth, which lies shut up in death, viz.
in the curse of God: The veil of Moses hangs also before him,
and a very right earnestness is requisite to rend the veil in


Signatura Rerum 147


_ twain, that he may be able to see the face of nature, otherwise
_ he is not fitted for it.

74. And as it went in the humanity of Christ, betwixt God’s
love and anger, and both were transformed into one; so likewise
it is in his work of nature, the poisonful Mercury in the Sulphur
_ of Mars and Saturn gives its lunar menstruum, viz. the greatest
poison of the dark source into Venus’s property; when Venus
thirsts after the fire of love, then Mercury gives his poison into
the thirst of Venus, and Venus’s thirst gives itself wholly to the
poison, as if it died; it wholly yields up its desiring life, where-
upon arises the great darkness in the philosophic work: For the
materia becomes as black as a raven, for Venus has resigned its
life, from whence the glance [or splendour] arises, as it is to be
seen by Christ, that the sun lost its light, and there was a great
darkness contrary to the common course of nature.

75. For when the inward sun gave in itself unto the anger,
viz. into the darkness of God; then the outward sun, which
receives its power and lustre from the inward, as a glass or
resemblance of the inward, could not shine; for its root from
whence it shines was entered into the darkness in the place of
this world, and would turn the darkness in the curse of God
into light, viz. it would make the place of this world again
paradise.

76. Thus likewise the sun of the outward world, which is a
figure of the inward all-essential sun, must stand still with its
splendour in the darkness, from the sixth hour unto the ninth,
which is even the time of Adam’s sleep when he entered with
the desire into the centre of the eternal nature, viz. into the
birth, where the love and anger part themselves into two centres,
and would prove the cold and hot fire, which took him, and did
powerfully work in him. Here are three hours according to the
ternary, and in the grave three days according to the time,
viz. according to the humanity.

77. When Adam was in the image of God, and was neither
man nor woman, but both; he stood forty days in paradise
without wavering, and when he fell he stood even till the third
day, viz. forty hours in the sleep, even till God did make or
build the woman out of him. Thus Israel must be tempted
forty days on Mount Sinai, whether they would live in the
obedience of God under the wonders and mighty acts; and when
it could not be, God gave them the law of his covenant as a
mirror of that which was promised in the covenant; therefore


1 Or number three.


148 Jacob Boehme


the temptation of the body was upon them forty years, that the
body must eat manna to try whether man could be remedied:
And when the body [or outward person] could not stand, then
Joshua brought them through the water with the covenant of
the type, where Israel must serve with sacrifices in the covenant
in the type of the final accomplishment, till the time of restitu-
tion came in: And then the valiant champion in battle stood
forty days in the wilderness in the temptation, and stood out
the first trial of Adam in paradise; and the three hours of
darkness on the cross are the three hours of temptation of Christ,
when the devil tempted him: And again the forty hours of
Christ in the grave are the forty days of Adam in paradise, and
the forty days of Moses upon the Mount; and the forty years
in the wilderness, and the forty days after the resurrection before
the ascension, are even one and the same: And now when the
champion had stood out Adam’s trial, the soul was tempted
forty days in the human property, whether it would eat of God’s
word, and live in full resigned obedience in the will of God,
and be a true image, likeness, and similitude of the divine power
in the unsearchable eternity, according to the Trinity of the
Deity.

78. In the like manner let the philosopher observe, that the
essence of time does also stand in such a property, for man was
created out of the essence of time into an image, as an extract
of all essences, a complete image and likeness according to time
and eternity, ruling and standing in the time and in the eternity
as an instrument of the great infinite God, with whom, by and
with his Spirit, he would make and do what he pleased.

79. Now man is the instrument of God, with [or by] whom
he manifests his hiddenness both in his own human property,
viz. in the essence and image of God; and then also through
man, as with the instrument in the mother of all beings, as in
the grand mystery, viz. in the soul of the great world.

80. Man has power so far as he goes, as an instrument of God
in divine obedience, as his Spirit guides and leads him, that he
can introduce the earth which stands in the curse of God into the
benediction, and make of death’s-anguish the highest triumphant
joy in the outward pregnant mother; but he himself does it not,
only his will labours with the understanding therein, and con-
joins the compacta,” which belong together, as life and death
which stand opposite to one another: These he must join
together, and bring them into one by such an art as time and

1 Mirror, resemblance. 2 Things to be compacted.


Signatura Rerum 149


eternity are united by and in the man Christ, and by him all


those which give their will thereinto.
81. He will see in his work all whatever God did in the
humanity; when he brought it again into the universal, viz. into


_ paradise, he will see how the wrath devours and swallows up the


fair Venus into his pricking thorny essence, and how Venus does
fully yield in herself; and how the wrath also dies away in
Venus, and becomes wholly dark and black as a coal; for death
and life lie together both in death, viz. in the obedience of God:
They both hold still to him, and suffer the Spirit of God to make
of and with them what it pleases, who introduces them again into
the eternal will of God to which he at first created them: And
thus the essence stands again in the beginning in the order as
God created it: It must only stand in its impression, in the


‘verbum fiat, viz. in the divine making, till the day of God’s


separation, when God will change the time again into the
eternity.

82. And when Jesus had drank the cup and tasted the vinegar
mixed with gall in the outward [man], and inwardly in the love-
property, viz. in the virgin, the wrathful anger of God; then said
the whole man Christ, “ My God, my God, why hast thou for-
saken me?” For God’s speaking word stood still now in the
human property, and the new-born essentiality which was dead
in Adam, and was again quickened in Christ, cried with the same,
“My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” For the
anger of God was by the soul’s property entered into the image
of the divine essentiality, and had devoured the image of God.

83. Here now the image in the creature of the soul cried,
“My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” For the
human image which disappeared in Adam, and was again
revived in Christ’s incarnation, should bruise the head of God’s
anger in the fire-soul, and change its fire-might into Sol: 1 And
now the speaking word of God did here forsake it, and it fell
into the soul’s wrath, where it felt God’s anger; for the speaking
word did so bring it through the anger into death, and out of
the death again into the solar life, understand into the eternal sun.

84. Like as the candle dies in the fire, and out of that death
the light and power proceed, viz. the great painless life; so out
of Christ’s dying and death the eternal divine sun should and
must arise in the human property; but the selfishness of the
human property, viz. the soul’s own self-will to live in the fire’s
might must here die and be drowned in the image of love, and

1 Text, the sun.


150 Jacob Boehme


the image of love must also resign and give itself in unto the
wrath of death, that so all might fall down into death, and
arise in God’s will and mercy through death in the paradisial
source in the resignation, that God’s Spirit might be all in all.
Hell’s eye must see through the love, as the light shines out of
the fire, and the fire from the darkness, and the darkness takes
its original from the eternal desire.

85. And as Adam changed the likeness of God into the dark
death’s form, so God did again change the likeness through his
fire-wrath out of death into the light; he drew forth the likeness
again out of death, as a blossom grows from the harsh? earth.

86. Thus it goes likewise in the philosophic work; Venus is
forsaken. when she receives the three wrathful properties into
herself in wrath; their wrath, viz. the death devours her life,
whereupon she loses the colour, and yet becomes a death to the
three forms in the wrath, for she drowns death with love. Thus
the life is made a death to death, viz. to the wrath, and now
they both lie in the will of the eternal nature, viz. in the verbum
fiat, which proceeds ? with them the divine way, in manner as it
proceeded forth into essence in the beginning of the creation:
For in the beginning paradise, viz. the universal was manifest,
and the love shined through the death or anger. Even so it
must be again, Venus must become the eye or sight in the
wrath, and then of Saturn, Mars, and Mercury there will be a
Jupiter: Mars becomes sun, and Saturn moon, and so Mars
shines with the sun out of Saturn in Luna from Venus’s eye,
and all seven are only one: Thus the strife has an end, and all
is accomplished till the resurrection of the body.

87. And when Jesus had drank the cup, and said, “ My God,
why hast thou forsaken me?” then he said, “ All is finished,”
understand the work of man’s redemption; and he said further,
“Father, into thy hands I commit my spirit, and bowed his
head, and gave up the ghost.” Here the whole life of Christ
resigned itself into the Father’s desire, viz. into the will of the
eternal nature, and fully gave in the will of his self-hood, viz.
his creaturely will again into the centre, viz. into the first mother,
from whence the soul-like creature was produced, that is, into
the grand mystery of eternity: The seli-will must again enter
into nature’s end, so that the selfishness may wholly die, that
God’s eternal will and spirit may be and do only all in all in the
humanity, and that the creature might afterwards be alone his
instrument, wherein he might do and work according to his

1 Or wild. 2 Goes out,


Signatura Rerum rig


good pleasure: And thus God the Father has in Christ’s death
and entrance into our humanity again received our self-hood
into his will; and that this might be, he first tinctured the
humanity with the Deity, that the humanity might be a pleasant
sweet savour and offering to him in his power, for before death
lay before it.

88. Here the love destroyed death, and opened the fast seal,
that the will might again enter into that which it was before
[it was] the creature; and so we all must follow him upon the
path which he has made open for us; none can see God, unless
God become first man in him, which is brought to pass in faith’s
desire, and even then the corrupt will (which is apprehended in
the death and anger of God, and which blooms in the earthly
essence, and brings forth fruit unto death) be wholly mortified,
and fall into the free resignation, into the will and mercy of God:
And then the own will is with and in Christ at nature’s end in
the grand mystery of God, viz. in God’s hands. God’s hands
are the eternal desire, or the eternal will, which is unchangeable;
thus the creaturely self-will dies; it enters wholly into the
nothing, that it might no more live to itself, but to God.

89. Thus it falls out also in the philosophic work; when the
artist has first seen great wonders, which the creaturely and
natural will has wrought in the power [of] Venus, insomuch that
he supposes that he is nigh thereunto; even then nature does
first die in his work, and becomes a dark night unto him; the
property and power of all the forms must give forth themselves
from their centre, and fall upon nature’s end; all do freely
yield over themselves as one dead essence, and there is no
longer any effectual working therein, all is divided in the crown
into the thousandth number, and then it is again in the mystery
as nature’s end as it was before it came into the creaturely being;
understand, the essential desire, viz. the expressed Mercury,
must again come unto the end of its selfishness, and resign itself
into the speaking word.

90. The corporal essence remains in the centre of the four
elements till the judgment of God, which now at death stands
in the centre of Sol, viz. in the compaction of Venus and Mercury,
which compaction at death falls wholly into one [thing], viz.
into one power of Jupiter, that is, into the centre of the liberty ;
for here the desire to cold and heat goes out, all earthly will and
desire of the properties dies, and there is no more any hunger
after the earthly, or death’s property.


1 Into the sole power and virtue of Jupiter,


CHAPTER XII


OF THE SEVENTH FORM IN THE KINGDOM OF THE MOTHER; HOW
THE SEVENTH KINGDOM, VIZ. THE KINGDOM OF THE SUN, IS
AGAIN OPENED AND MADE ALIVE; SET FORTH IN PARABLE,
OR BY WAY OF SIMILITUDE OF CHRIST’S RESURRECTION


1. WE are not to think that when Christ died the natural
death in the human property, that he died as to his creaturely
soult much less as to the Deity; also he did not disappear or
die in the heavenly essentiality and in the heavenly tincture:
This cannot be; only the will and dominion of self, viz. of the
outward world, which domineered in man unto the own will and
own powers of the selfish creature (wherein man was disobedient
to God), he gave that wholly into the Father’s hands, viz. into
the end of nature, into the Father’s great mystery; not that it
should be dead, but that God’s Spirit might alone be the life
thereof, that the divine dominion might be in Christ’s person,
that the Eternal Father might rule and reign with his Eternal
Spirit in his image; and therefore God has determined to keep
the last judgment by this Jesus.

2. Now the creature of Christ does it not alone, but God in
his image through the creature in the dominion of his Eternal
Spirit of all the three principles, which is the life and dominion
of every being, in each thing according to its property.

3. And understand us right, when Christ died on the cross,
the name Jesus did not also die, which destroyed death, and
tinctured the expressed word, viz. the form of the Deity (or the
formed word), viz. the soul with love: No, it cannot be, the
eternity does not die, only the spoken word, which stands again
in the desire of the speaking, viz. in the fiat, which changes itself
in its own speaking, viz. in the self-desire, and brings its own
sound into another form and source than the speaking word had
spoken it, and set it forth with the verbum fiat into a form,
signature, and will; as Lucifer with his royal throne, and Adam
also did, when they both departed out of resignation into self-
hood; the instrument would be master.

4. The outward working sensitive life wherein the anger of

1 Soulish creature.
152


’
l


Signatura Rerum 153


God was set on fire did wholly die away, not that it should be
a nothing, but it fell into the nothing, viz. into God’s will, into
God’s working and feeling, quite from the will of the outward
world, which is evil and good, so that it might no longer live to
the world, viz. to the astrum in the walm, the boiling or seething


_ power of the four elements; but to the Eternal Father’s nature


in the walm of the pure divine element the life of the outward
world died.

5. Thus the true human life fell immediately again into that
place from whence Adam had brought it, viz. into paradise, upon
which Christ said to the thief, ‘‘ To-day thou shalt be with me
in paradise;” it fell into Adam’s death, whereby he died to
paradise, and sprang up in Adam’s death as a new creature out
of the old, like as the branch springs from the corn: And this it
did from the might and power of the speaking word, which of
grace was entered with living essentiality into the disappeared
heavenly essentiality of man, and had freely given itself into
the centre of the soul-like nature, and also into the wrath of the
anger and death in the flesh, and changed the anger into love,
and tinctured the corrupt blood in the anger with the love.

6. The divine tincture tinctured the human; the divine sun
entered into the human; the divine sun entered into Adam’s
night, viz. into Adam’s sleep; God’s sun with the name Jesus
entered with Adam’s soul and humanity in Christ’s person into
death, understand into Adam’s sleep.

7. When Christ died, then Adam died also to his self-hood
in Christ’s death; the name Jesus was in Christ the serpent-
destroyer in Adam’s humanity; Christ entered into the image
of the first Adam, so that the first Adam in the humanity of
Christ became the same Christ, and serpent-destroyer, indeed
not in the same creature, but in the same soul’s and body’s
property.

8. The first Adam fell into sleep, viz. into the impotence of
the divine world, and died in the death of death; the second
Adam entered into the death of death; and took ‘the death of
death captive in himself, viz. in the humanity of Adam: He
was a death to death, and brought forth the life out of death
into the eternal liberty: He arose in the divine omnipotence
in the essence of the first Adam: God’s Spirit in the speaking
eternal word brought forth Adam out of death in Christ’s
humanity. Adam arose in Christ’s humanity, and all the
children of Adam, which are partakers of Christ’s kingdom, arise
in Christ; all in Christ’s flesh and blood, soul and spirit, but


154 Jacob Boehme


every one in his creature which he has had here, and mortified
in Christ’s death.

o. Every one is a particular twig; but there is only one tree,
which is Christ in Adam, and Adam in Christ, only one, not two;
only one Christ in all Christians; so that I may say, “ If I be
dead in Christ to the world, I am the same Christ, viz. a branch
on the same tree.”

r0. But seeing that I in the outward man do yet live in my
self-hood, therefore I must also die with the outward man in
Christ’s death, and arise and live in him. Now therefore I live
with the will of faith in the mind in Christ, and am a Christian
in the will of the mind in the desire of faith, and receive Christ
with his humanity into my will, and cast my will into his death;
and thus my inward man is also dead in Christ’s death, and lives
no longer to self-hood; but I am resigned in him, and lie buried
in his death: But seeing he is risen in God’s will, I also live in
his resurrection in him; but my earthliness in its selfish property
lives to the earthly world, until it also dies quite to self-hood,
and enters into the resignation and putrefaction, and then
Christ will awaken it through my inward man, which now lives
in him.

rz. Like as he is risen from the dead, even so shall I, who
shall die to the earthliness in him, viz. in my first father Adam,
in the name Jesus as a Christian in Christ; my twig, withered
in sin on the tree, shall obtain strength and sap in the name
Jesus to life. I shall and must spring forth afresh with my
humanity in him as in my stem who is become a heart and power
in my father Adam, and bring forth fruit to the praise of God.

12. My will-spirit, which now is in Christ’s humanity, and
lives in Christ’s Spirit, that shall in Christ’s power give sap to
the dry tree, that it shall again arise at the last day in the sound
of the trumpet of the divine breath in Christ’s voice, which also
is my voice in his breath, and spring afresh in the tree Christ,
viz. in paradise: The paradise shall be in me; all whatever God
has and is shall appear in me as a form and image of the divine
world’s being; all colours, powers, and virtues of his eternal
wisdom shall be manifest in me, and on me, as on his likeness:
I shall be the manifestation of the spiritual divine world, and
an instrument of God’s Spirit, wherein he makes melody with
himself, with this voice, which I myself am, as with his signature:
I shall be his instrument, and organ of his expressed word and
voice; and not only I, but all my fellow-members in the glorious
tuned instrument of God: We are all strings in se joyful


| Signatura Rerum 155


consort; the spirit of his mouth strikes the tune and note on
- our strings.
13. And therefore God became man, that he might again
_ repair his glorious instrument which he had made for his praise,
which perished as to him, and would not sound according to the
desire of his joy and love, and introduce again the true love-
sound into the strings: He has introduced the voice which
sounds in his presence > again into us, viz. into his instrument, he
is become that which I am, and has made me that which he is,
so that I may say, that I am in my resignation in him his
trumpet, and the sound of his instrument and divine voice, at
which now I rejoice in all my fellow-strings and voices, which
with me are tuned and set as an eternal work, to the praise and
glory of God.

14. Thus know ye now my fellow-voices in the praise of God,
that I sound with my string played upon in the spirit upon and in
your note, and thus sing I to you; that whatever Jesus has done
through the Christ, viz. through his and my humanity, the same
he does yet to-day in me and in all my fellow-members. He
died to my self-hood in his death, and I also die to my self-hood
in his death: He is given up to his resignation in God his Father,
and God his Father has raised him up with the spirit of his
mouth in him, and set him forth for the royal image according
to the Holy Trinity, through and with whom God will judge all
things in the place of this world.

15. Thus God also has awakened in him my spirit and soul
through his spirit in the great name Jesus in Christ, so that I
in my resignation in him need not to die, for he died in me and
for me; his death, in that he is risen from death, is become my
eternal life, so that now I live in his death, as one dying; and
yet there is no more any death in him, but thus I die to myself
and sin in him, seeing that my desire and will presses forth from
my self-hood into it, so that I die daily to myself, till once I
shall obtain the limit of my self-hood, and my self-hood with
the earthly will and desire does wholly die to its selfishness;
then shall my self-hood, and all whatever is in me which seeks
and loves itself, fall into the death of Christ, viz. into the first
mother, from whence God created me, and my self-hood shall
become a nothing; and even then my self-hood lies in Christ’s
death in the resignation as an instrument of God, who then will
make it his instrument as he pleases.

16. But seeing now my soul and spirit lives in his resurrection,

1 Breath, air, tune.


156 Jacob Boehme


and his voice [air or breath] is in me, according to the resignation
in him, as St. Paul says, ‘‘ Our conversation is in heaven, from
whence we wait for the Saviour Jesus Christ;” therefore also
his voice, which is in me in that I am [or live] no longer to my
self-hood, but he alone [is and lives in me], shall raise up my
dead body, which I resign to him, and bring it into his first
image, to which he created it.

17. Thus now I live in God, and my self-hood does not know
it, for it lives not in God, but in itself (God is indeed in it, but
it does not apprehend him), and hides the pearl which I am in
Christ; not I, but he in his humanity in my creature in himself:
And thus I speak and write of the great mystery of all beings,
not that I have apprehended it in my self-hood, but he strikes
my signature in my desire, which presses into him, as he pleases.

18. I am known to myself, but not in my self-hood, but in
his mirror which of grace he has put into me, thereby to allure
my self-hood to him, viz. into the resignation; and so likewise,
dear brethren, it shall again be represented to you out of his
glass} which he has set forth through my capacity in him, as
his instrument.

rg. Thus it goes also in the philosophic work; Sulphur,
Mercury, and Sal are entered by the curse of God into their
self-hood, viz. into a self-working and living; all does now work
in the curse and anger of God according to the property of the
first principle; if God had not placed the sun as a nature-god
of the outward visible world therein, which tinctures every
working life, even everything which grows and moves, all would
be in the dark death’s impression, viz. in the abyss of hell.

20, Now if anything shall be freed from this self-hood, viz.
from the wrathful death, and be again brought into the universal,
viz. into the highest perfection, then it must die wholly to its
self-hood, and enter into the stillness, viz. into the death of
the resignation at nature’s end: Mars must wholly lose the
might of the fire and wrath, and Mercury also his poison-life;
Saturn must be a death to himself, insomuch that the artist
sees nothing but the great darkness, and even then the light
appears in the resignation; for St. John says, “The light
shineth in the darkness, and the darkness apprehended it not; ”
that is, in its self-hood, viz. in its own will and working it cannot
apprehend it; but in the resignation the nothing, viz. the liberty
of God shines in it.

21. For the nothing manifests itself in its lubet out of the

1 Mirror.


Signatura Rerum 157


liberty in the darkness of death; for the nothing will not be a
nothing, and also cannot be a nothing, and likewise it cannot
otherwise manifest itself, but according to the property of the
free lubet, which is now fixed [or steadfast], and in it also as a
nothing, for there is no turba therein; the self-will and hunger
is dead, and in the nothing, and the lubet of the eternal liberty
is its life: Now seeing that the highest being has once moved
itself, and come into a visible comprehensible essence, it does
again figure [or form] that same essence, which departs from its
self- hood, and enters into the nothing, into such a being [or
essence] as it was before the times of the world: But seeing the
verbum fiat stands yet to this day creating of the corporal
essence, it does again make a fixed perfect essence; as the like
is brought to pass in the philosophic work, where a new life
arises out of death, as God does raise us up in himself in Christ,
if we die to self-hood, and wholly resign up ourselves to him.

22. And thus when the expressed Mercury in the Sulphur of
Saturn resigns its self-hood into Venus, then the verbum fiat
changes it again into such an essence according to the lubet of
the liberty; the death arises in a new body out of the darkness
of death, in a white fair colour, but as an hidden lustre, wherein
the colour is not rightly and distinctly known, till it dissolves
itself, and the materia becomes desiring; then the sun arises in
the centre, and Saturn in the property of Jupiter and Venus in
all the seven forms (that is in the verbum fiat) as a new creation,
and the desire of all the seven forms tend to Sol’s lustre, viz. to
the white and red colour from the fire and light, which is the
majestical [colour, lustre, or glory].

23. CHRIST after his resurrection walked forty days in the
mystery of all the three principles at once, in the property of
the first Adam after his creation before his sleep, and before his
Eve was formed, and appeared to his disciples in his property
which he had here from the outward world, and did eat with
them, and shewed them his assumed humanity, and that he
had in no wise wholly put it off.

24. Even so let the artist understand us, that in the philo-
sophic work the first matter does not wholly pass away or
vanish, but it enters into the death of the life of its wrathful
property, and dies in the curse of God, but rises again in its
former being, which it had before the curse of God: The curse
only is destroyed therein, and the first life does again rise up
therein, and therefore it is fixed, and subsists in the fire, for it

1 Or conversed.


158 Jacob Boehme


is dead to the dominion of the four elements, and lives in the
fifth essence; not that it has that same life, but it stands still
therein; yet the spirit of the new-born essence is a vegetative
life with its growing therein; its lustre stands therein, it shews
the first Adam in innocence, who stood likewise in such per-
fection.

25. And as Christ tinctured our corrupt humanity, in which
Mercury was turned to poison, with the heavenly blood of the
eternal divine virginity and essentiality, whereby the human
self-hood died in the poison, and the resigned life did again
arise; so the poisonful mercurial, martial, and saturnine will
and desire die in the blood of Venus in the philosophic work,
and both enter together into death, and arise both together in
one love, in one will.

26. Therefore let the artist observe the tincture; it is more
noble and precious for man’s use in this valley of misery than
the body which arises in the tincture; for the spirit is the life;
the body is only a figure of the life, and the blood is a mansion
of the spirit.

27. The artist must well observe this; in the blood of the
young man, when his pearl! gives itself to the three murtherers,
that it also sheds its blood in and with the young man’s, then
the champion stands in hell, and disclaims the human self-hood:
Then the white lion appears upon his crimson-coloured beast;
even there lies the cure of sickness, and the death of death.

28. The body is dissolved in the blood of love in the death
out of the earthly into an heavenly [property]. The tincture
gives itself into the new body; and afterwards, when the body
rises in Sol’s splendour, it also forsakes its will; it resigns itself
wholly into the body’s essence, and becomes its beauty, splendour,
and colour, which the artist can never separate; for they are
together in the fifth essence, viz. in the mystery of the verbum
fiat, and belong to God’s motion of the final day of separation;
in this time to his own manifestation unto his honour, and deeds
of wonder; but after this time to the crystalline world in the
glassy sea before the ancient in the Apocalypse.


A BRIEF SUMMARY OF THE PHILOSOPHIC WORK


29. Our meaning might seem very difficult to the reader, in
that we go so far about and shew Christ all along therein; at
which let no man wonder, we do not seek gold, or any temporal

1 Or virgin.


Signatura Rerum 159


goods thereby, and drive man into vain curiosities; we speak
only with the children whom God has chosen thereunto; for the
_ time is born, where that which is lost shall be again found; yea
not only the universal for the body of this world, but also for
the soul.

30. The process is very short in both, and it is only of one
property which is thus: The tree, understand the life, is divided
into seven forms; now the curse of God is come into the seven
forms, so that they are in strife and enmity, and one form annoys
the other, and can never agree unless they all seven enter into
death, and die to the self-will. Now this cannot be, unless a
_death comes into them, which breaks all their will, and be a
death to them; as the deity in Christ was a death to the human
self-hood, and the seven forms in the human life; thus it is here
also: The human will was changed in Christ into the eternal
sun, viz. into the resignation in God; so must all the forms in
the philosophic work be changed into one, viz. into Sol: Seven
must become one, and yet remain in seven, but in one desire,
where each form desires the other in love, and then there is no
more any strife and contest.

31. Therefore let the artist but consider how he may give
death to the death with the pure life, and how he may awaken
the dead and disappeared life, which is heavenly, and lies hidden
and captivated in the curse, so that it may again receive the
fire-soul; and if he does but bring it so far, it works of itself.1

32. When the virgin again receives her bridegroom, who has
been faithless, then he is prepared and fitted to the work; other-
wise he is no way at all fitted; but all is in vain and to no
purpose [which he attempts]. There is not any possibility for
the heavenly image according to God’s likeness in man to be
otherwise helped and restored after that the fire-soul had
entered into its self-hood, unless the Spirit of God introduced
itself into the disappeared image, viz. into the heavenly essen-
tiality, and gave itself in with the image awakened in it into
the soul’s fire, viz. into the wrath of death, and be a death to
death, viz. to the wrathful anger of God, that it might be
drowned in the love, in the blood of the heavenly essentiality ;
and though there could be no parting nor dying, yet there was a
dying of the wrath, so that the wrath was changed into a joy
and love.

33. Thus the artist’s work is exactly and throughout no
otherwise: For man was created out of all beings, out of the

1 It makes itself, or it has its own faber in itself.


160 Jacob Boehme


|
heaven and earth; but when he became wholly earthly, and the ~
curse seized on him, the curse also came over the earthly being, |
from whence man was made: Thus the heaven was shut up from
man, and the heaven also was shut up in the earth, as metals,
trees, and herbs, in the food of man, and whatever belonged to
his ornament and delight.

34. The soul of the earth, viz. the property of the fire of the
first principle is entered into its self-hood, viz. into God’s anger;
now the heaven is hidden in it; therefore the artist must in his
work reduce the soul in the curse and the heaven again into
one: He must introduce the soul again into heaven, or else
there is no possibility: Now he cannot bring the soul in its
iniquity into heaven, for it will not, and therefore he must bring
the heaven into the soul, and wholly give in the heaven to the
soul, that the soul may eat of heaven, whether she will or no;
the heaven must be as death! in the soul, so that the soul cannot
get rid of it, how angry soever she be, and vehemently rages
against it, till she be overcome in her wrath, and enters with the
desire into heaven, viz. into the disappeared essence, and wills to
murther it, as the Jews did Christ; and if she so enters into the
heavenly essence, then the image ‘of the heavenly essence falls
into the jaws of the murtherer.

35. Thus when the heavenly essence gives its desire to the
murtherer, the murtherer is dismayed at the dear love-life, and
arises in the flagrat in the heavenly essentiality; thus the dis-
appeared essence does again receive the fire flagrat into itself,
and wholly unites itself with the fire-life; and so the fire must
burn in love and meekness, and forego °? its right in the centre,
as the light which shines from the fire; thus and no otherwise
the heavenly essence obtains its life; and asa fire does thoroughly
heat an iron that it appears as if it were mere fire, and it is so,
but the iron does still retain its substance; so the disappeared
essence, viz. the heaven is manifest in the poisonful mercurial
and martial fire-soul, and makes of seven wills only one, and yet
seven remain, but the enmity ceases.

36. This is an universal, which also changes the enmity 3 or
malignity of all diseases in the human body into one will [into
unity]; so that the raging and raving, viz. the seven forms of life
in their enmity become unanimous; and then the hunger of the
disease ceases, and the process to ‘the universal is as has been
already mentioned. It is not my intention to mention a clear
declaration thereof; it is clear enough; he that will not seek

1 Or as dead. 2 Or leave. 3 Contrariety.


Signatura Rerum 161


thereby a new man born in God, and apply himself diligently
thereto, let him not meddle with my writings.

37. I have not written anything for such a seeker, and also
he shall not be able to apprehend our meaning fundamentally,
though he strives never so much about it, unless he enters into
the resignation in Christ; there he may apprehend the spirit of
the universal, otherwise all is to no purpose; and we faithfully
warn the curious critic not to amuse himself, for he will not
effect anything in this way, unless he himself enters thereinto,
and then it will be shewn him without much seeking; for the
way is child-like [plain and easy].


M 599


CHAPTER XIII


OF THE ENMITY! OF THE SPIRIT AND OF THE BODY, AND OF |


THEIR CURE AND REMEDY


I. EVERYTHING is in itself a senseless, and as a dead thing or


being; it is only a manifestation of the spirit, which is in the


body: The spirit is signed with the body; ? whatever the spirit |
is in itself in an incomprehensible [imperceptible] operation, the |


same is the body in the comprehensible and visible working.
There is one form of the seven forms of nature superior and
chief; the other hang to it, and give their signs also, according
as each of them is strong in the essence; and as the forms stand


in their order in each thing, so they sign the body of every thing -


and creature in its generation [or kind]: This is the manifesta-
tion of the divine wisdom in the expressed word of love and
anger.

2. There is not anything but it has its soul in it according to
its property, and the soul is a kernel to another body: Whatever


lives and grows has its seed in it; God has comprehended all |


things in his word, and spoken them forth into a form, as the
will had formed ® itself in the desire, the expressed word is a
platform of the speaking, and has again the speaking in it; this
same speaking is a seed to another image according to the first,
for both work, viz. the speaking, and the spoken [word].

3. The speaking works in itself, viz. in the eternity, and the
spoken also in itself, viz. in the time; the speaking is the master,
and the spoken is the instrument; the speaking makes the
nature of eternity, and the spoken makes the nature of time;
each makes in its comprehension two properties, viz. light and
darkness, wherein the element of all beings consists, which in the
expressed word operates itself into four elements, but in the
speaking word there is but one: The element in itself is neither
hot nor cold, also neither dry nor moist; but it is a lubet, viz. a
desiring will, wherein the divine wisdom makes the different 4


1 Contrary will, contrariety.. * Or signs and marks itself in the body.
3 Or comprehended, or conceived. 4 Colours of distinction.


162


Signatura Rerum 163


and various colours; all according to the desire’s property, in
which? there is neither number nor end: But in the four
elements there is number and end; for with the expressing (in
that they are become self-full) they have taken a beginning, and
have formed themselves into a model or platform of a time,
which runneth as a watch-work; it forms, frames, and destroys.

4. This watch-work consists of seven forms, or properties (as
is before mentioned), which make in themselves a threefold
spirit, viz. a vegetative, sensitive, and rational: The vegetative
consists in the four elements; the sensitive in the seven forms
of nature, and the reasoning power in the constellation; but
the understanding proceeds only from God, for it rises out of the
eternal nature; all life whatever, which has its limit in the
expressed word, consists in Sal, Sulphur, and Mercury; for
therein consist the seven properties of every life of this world;
and also the spirit of vegetation, sensation, and reason.

5. Sulphur is the mother of all spirituality and corporality;
Mercury manages the dominion therein; and Sal is the house of
its habitation, which Mercury itself makes in Sulphur: Reason
arises in the oil of the Sulphur, whereinto the constellation gives
its desire, viz. the essence of its property, from whence imme-
diately the senses and thoughts arise; but the understanding
proceeds from the oil of the element, viz. in the free lubet in the
speaking Mercury.

6. Now then, seeing it is very necessary for us poor children
of Eve to know from whence the disease and enmity of our life
arise, and what that is in us which makes us our own enemies,
and vex, perplex, and plague us in ourselves; much more neces-
sary it is to know the cure, whereby we may cure ourselves in
our self-hood, and bring ourselves into the limit of rest.”

7. This we will delineate and declare, if there be any one that
has a mind to enter upon it, and truly prove and try it; and
we will set forth from whence evil and good arise originally, and
how they arise, and give occasion to the understanding searcher
to seek: And we will shew how the will to evil and good arises,
and how the evil is the death of the good, and on the contrary
the good the death of the evil.

8. When we consider what the mercurial life is, then we find
that it consists in Sulphur; for Sulphur is a dry hunger after
matter, which makes an austere impression, and in its austere
impression it has the fire, and also in its impression the oil, from
whence the life burns. Now the impression makes coldness, and

1 Element. 2 Into the desired end or perfection of rest.


164 Jacob Boehme


its compunction or attraction makes heat, so that! now there is a
cold fire and an hot fire in one thing; the cold makes in itself
hardness and darkness, and the heat makes in itself the light,
and yet there could be no light, if the oil in the Sulphur did not
die in hot anguish, as the candle in the fire.

9. Now there is a twofold dying in Sulphur, from whence also


a twofold life is generated; First, the impression or desire does |
draw in, contract, enclose, make hard, cold, thick; and the


hardness, viz. the enclosed, causes a death in the enclosed being,


and yet in that spirit there is no death, but a pricking, raging, |


and anxious cold fire-life, which is generated with the impression, |


and is the life of the darkness.

ro. Secondly, in the same anguish, in the austere desire, the
hot fire is generated, which consumes the substance, which the
coldness, viz. the impression of the desire to nature makes:
Thus there remains in the fire the contention betwixt the cold


and heat; the cold will have its life according to its property, |
and in that it strives for life, it enkindles the heat in its impres- |


sion, and immediately the heat deprives the cold of its might,
and consumes the cold substance, and then also the fire-spirit


cannot subsist; for unless it has substance it goes out, therefore |
it must continually, and without intermission, die in itself in
the fiery anxious desire: So long as it has the cold’s substance to |
live upon, its life arises, and yet it is nothing but a constant |
dying and consuming, and in its devouring is the greatest hunger |
after substance; this same [hunger] passes forth through and |


with the devouring out of the dying of the fire, and dwells in
the nothing, yet it may not be a nothing, and also it cannot be
a nothing, therefore it draws the fire again into itself; for its
own desire is bent towards its mother: But seeing it is once dead
to the fire-source, it cannot die any more in the fire of the heat
or cold, but it continually proceeds forth from the fire, and the
fire draws it again continually into itself, and so it is the life of
the fire; and this is the air, which in the fire is rightly called
wind, by reason of the strength and force; and in that which is
proceeded forth? it is properly called air, by reason of its life
of meekness.

Ir. And in the dying of the fire we are to understand the oil,
whence the fire receives its shining light, in which the true life is
understood; for that which proceeds forth in the fire-death with
the desire to be delivered and freed from the fire-source, that is


1 Thus now.
? In the outward principle in the expressed formed word.


Signatura Rerum 165


a desire of meekness, and takes its original in the first will to
nature, in which the eternal nothing brings itself with its lubet
into a desire.

12. This lubet brings forth itself through the cold and hot
death (through both the dyings) again into the liberty, viz. into
the NoTHINnG; and so it is manifested in the austere impression
through the fire, and brought into a principle, and yet it is not
either of the fire or of the cold, but so is its manifestation.

13. But seeing the eternal lubet to nature introduces itself
with nature into a desire; thereupon this desire cannot die
either in the cold or heat, for it takes its origin neither in the
_ heat or cold, but in the nothing; and so it is, after it proceeds
- from the dying in the fire, again desiring, namely of its own
property, and impresses itself, for in the fire it has taken the
impression.

14. Now it cannot conceive anything in its impression but an
essence according to its desire, which is now water; understand
according to the dark impression’s property it is water, and
according to the fire it is oil; and that which in the cold impres-
sion is wholly enclosed in the hardness, as a conception according
to the wrath’s property, is earth.

15. Thus the wrathful fiery desire draws continually the same
air, water, and oil into itself, and devours it, and so the fire-
wrath is changed in the air, and oil, and water, into a shining
light; for the nothing desires nothing else but power and lustre,
and so it makes itself manifest, and brings itself into essence:
And the spirit which proceeds forth out of the fire burning in
the oil, viz. in the light from the fire and light, gives reason and
understanding; for it has originally taken its rise in the nothing,
and was the desire to nature; and has brought itself through all
the properties of nature, through heat and cold, through the
dying in the fire through the light, and dwells again in the
nothing.

16. It is a prover and knower of all the properties, for it is
generated through all, and proceeded forth from all; it is as a
NOTHING, and yet has all things, and passes through heat and
cold, and yet none of them apprehend it; as we see that the
life of the creature dwells in heat and cold, and yet the right
life is neither hot nor cold.

17. Now therefore understand us right: This birth in the
eternity is spiritual, but in the time it is material; for I cannot
say of God that he is darkness and fire, much less air, water, or
earth; but in his eternal desire he has so formed himself with


166 Jacob Boehme


the time in the place of this world into such an essence, which
he formed in the speaking Mercury according to the properties
of the will, and brought with the expressed word into such a
formation according to the properties of the desire in the eternal
nature, viz. in the verbum fiat.

18. Now the expressed word, viz. the eternal nature’s property
is understood in Sulphur, for ‘therein is the sevenfold wheel of
the birth, which in the spirit, viz. in the first conception to
nature, is a constellation, and divides itself out of the constella-
tion in its own peculiar birth into seven properties, and out of
the seven properties into four elements.

19. This constellation is a chaos, wherein all things lie, but
hidden; and it is the first body, but spiritual; and the sevenfold
wheel is the first explication [or working forth] of the chaos,
and makes the second body, viz. the reason; the second manifests
the first, and it is also a spiritual body; the third body is
elementary, a cabinet of both the first, and is a visible tangible
body.

20. The first body, viz. the chaos, or the first constellation,
seeing it is spiritual, is the word expressed out of the eternal
conception; the same has again its speaking in itself, which is
the mercurial wheel in the Sulphur with the seven forms, which
speaks forth again from itself the four elements.

21. Thus the one proceeds forth from the other; the first
before the chaos is the lubet of eternity in the abyss, which takes
in itself a will to its own manifestation; this is all God; and the
will conceives in itself a desire in the lubet; this is the chaos,
or first astrum,! wherein consists the eternal nature, which with
the desire to nature introduces itself into seven forms, as is
before mentioned, and so manifests the chaos, viz. the eternal
hidden wisdom of God; and with the desire in the mercurial
wheel the element is formed, being a spiritual body of the
mercurial life.

22. Now all this is twofold, viz. the desire makes in itself in
its impression the darkness, wherein is the strong might of the
enkindling of nature, and it is painful; and the free lubet to the
desire makes in itself through the enkindling of the desire light
and pleasing motion; the light is the power and lustre, and the
element is its body, or essence; whereas yet it is only spiritual:
Thus the fire-desire is a joyfulness i in the free lubet, and in the
darkness it is an aching painful source.

23. Out of this whole essence man was created to the image

1 Constellation.


Signatura. Rerum 167


of God, and understand us right, he stood after and in the
creation in the dominion of the element; the mercurial wheel t
in Sulphur stood in the light, and in the free lubet of eternity;
but he departed further with his desire into the four elements,
viz. into the centre of darkness, from whence heat and cold arise.

24. His desire in the beginning was bent [inclined] into the
liberty of God, viz. into the element, where he was resigned in
God; and then God’s love-will ruled him with the free lubet’s
property, but he departed out of the free lubet of God, out of
the resignation into a self-will, which he forged in the centre to
nature, from whence the pain and torture arise, viz. heat and
cold, so also astringency, sour bitterness, and all the properties
of the dark impression.

25. Even there he fell into the eternal death, viz. into the
dying source, in which the mercurial life in the Sulphur rules in
the poison, where one form in the mercurial sphere does envy,
hate, annoy, and destroy the other, where there is meer anguish,
aching, tormenting, and enmity; for the free lubet was quenched
in him, wherein the holy element, viz. the divine body consists,
and there arose in the same pure element the four elements of
the outward source; there the image of God was cursed, which is
nothing else but that God’s love-will, which ruled in the image
of his likeness, withdrew from man, and so man fell into the
dominion of nature: And seeing the four elements have a
temporal beginning and end, and must again enter into the end,
therefore also the human body, which is now become wholly
earthly in the four elements, must fall again into the four
elements, and be destroyed therein: And therefore now we
are to consider of his cure and restoration, how he may again be
delivered from death, and be again introduced with the body
into the pure element, and with the spirit into the dominion of
God’s will.

26. Now there is no other remedy but that he with the spirit
which arises in the chaos, and was inspired by God’s will-spirit
into the created image, does again depart out of his self-hood,
viz. out of his natural will, and resign himself up fully and freely
into the first will, which in the beginning formed him into an
image: He must wholly die to his self-hood in himself in the
death of the dark impression (as far as he lives therein to his
own will in the self-desire of the outward life of the four elements)
and cast himself with total resignation into God’s will, viz. into
God’s mercy, that he may no longer live and will to himself, but

1 Sphere,


168 Jacob Boehme


to God, viz. to the first will of God, which created him in its
image, whereby God manifested himself in an image; and so he
is with the first astrum, viz. with the chaos of the soul, again in
the same comprehension wherein God created him to his i image.

27. But seeing the self-hood, viz. the self-will, strives against
this, and will in no wise die to its self-hood (understand the will
of the outward world, which is from the outward stars and four
elements), therefore God’s food must be given to the inward will
of the spirit to eat of, that it may live without need and hunger
as to the outward being, that it may continually mortify and
break the will of the earthly self-hood, till the earthliness, viz.
the earthly body, does freely unloose or dissolve itself in death,
and also enter again into the mother, from whence it was created,
and forsake its self-hood, that the pure body of the element (in
which the true life in God’s will-spirit does again enkindle the
soul in the resigned will) and the disappeared body from the
pure element may become a mansion of the soul, viz. a paradisical
budding [or bloomy renovation in the eternal spring-time of
paradise].

28. And that the own will of the soul might be able to do this,
viz. that it might break itself off from its self-hood, and willingly
enter into the death of its self-hood, and become a nothing in its
self-hood, the free will of God, viz. the eternal lubet to the
chaos of the soul, which is the eternal Mercury in the power of
the majesty, is again entered into the disappeared image of God
proceeded from the pure element, viz. into the virgin-like life,
and draws the will of the soul to itself, and gives it again out of
love and grace the heavenly corporality of the pure element for
food, and the water in that element in the tincture of the fire
and light, viz. of the eternal life, for drink: And it has incor-
porated itself in the humanity, and freely tenders itself to all
souls with full desire: That soul which dies to its self-hood, and
brings its hunger again into God’s mercy, may enjoy this food,
whereby it again becomes the first creature in God’s love.”

29. Now we are to consider how the poor soul captivated in
God’s anger, being void of the heavenly food, lives in mere
anguish, and distress, and restless pain; as the outward earthly
body in its properties lives in its hunger in mere anguish, distress,
and oppressing pain, unless the soul with the pure element does
so overpower and keep it under, that it does not fully domineer


1 Or in which the soul in the resigned will does again enkindle by its
desire the true life in God’s will-spirit, viz. in the eternal light or liberty,
4 Such a creature as it was at first, before it fell,


Signatura Rerum 169


in its own dominion of the outward astrum and four elements
in the poisonful mercurial wheel, according to the dark impres-
sion, by reason of the influence of the element: If the universal
does withstand it, then it may stand in quiet rest, but yet no
longer than the inward penetrates the outward [body], and
tinctures it: There is in the four elements no perfection, till the
body is changed again into the pure element; therefore it must
enter again into that from whence the four elements arise.

30. Now in this time of the four elements there is mere pain
and vexation;! the soul amuses itself on the outward astrum,
which forces into it, from whence its false imagination arises,
and the body stirs up the poisonful mercurial wheel, from whence
sickness and pains befall it; therefore the soul must be cured
with the inward perfection, viz. by the speaking word, wherein
it stands in God’s hand, which alone is able to tincture the soul,
and bring it into rest: The outward body must be tinctured and
healed with the expressed Mercury; and if the outward Mercury
does also stand in the curse as a poison-wheel, then he must be
tinctured with his own light in his mother in the body [or womb]
of Sulphur: Mercury’s own will and hunger must be broken,
that the envious odious hunger may become a love desire.

31. And now to know how this may be brought to pass, we
must consider the generation in Sulphur, from whence joy and
sorrow do arise; for the poisonful Mercury may not otherwise
be resisted, and also nothing can resist it, but its own mother
which brings it forth, in whose womb it is couched: As nothing
can resist the cold but the heat only, and yet the heat is the
cold’s son; so also the poisonful Mercury must be resisted with
its own child, which he himself generates in his mother’s womb
out of heat and cold out of himself.

32. As the love proceeding from the heart of the Father,
which is his Son, withstands the anger of the Father, whereby
the Father is merciful; so likewise it is in the expressed word
or Mercury.

33. Now understand it thus: I do not mean that the cold
poison of Mercury should be, or could be resisted with the
enkindled heat; no, but if the cold poison be enkindled, then
the remedy must be from the same likeness; but it must be
first freed from the coldness, viz. from the enflamed cold wrath,
and brought into meekness, and then it does also still and
appease the hunger of the cold’s desire in the disease of the
body: For if enkindled heat be administered to the enkindled


2 Source.


170 Jacob Boehme


cold, then the cold is dismayed at the heat, and falls into a
swound, viz. into death’s property; and so the heat becomes
in this death’s property a poison-life, viz. an anxious sting; and
the mercurial wheel runs into sadness, viz. into sickness, or a
crazy dotage, wherein all joy is forgotten.

34. For if the life shall subsist in its own right, then the heat
and cold must stand in equality, that so they may accord one
with another, and no enmity or disaffection * be at all in any of
them; the one must not exceed or over-top the other, but they
must stand in one will; for the enkindled cold desires no heat,
but only likeness: Every hunger desires only likeness for its
food, but if the hunger be too strongly enkindled in the cold,
such a cure is not to be given it which is so enkindled; indeed
it must be in as high a degree in the cold; but the violent force
must be first taken away from it; so that it may be only as the
mother which generates it, not according to the enkindled poison-
source, but according to the mother’s joy; and so the sickness,
viz. the poison in the anguish, will be likewise changed into such
a joy, and so the life receives again its first property.

35. The raw opposite body does not belong to the cure, but
its oil, which must be mollified with its own love, understand
with a meek essence, which also belongs to the same property;
for the seven forms of nature are only one in the centre: There-
fore that oil must be brought so far in the wheel, till it enters
into its highest love-desire, and then it is rightly fit for cure;
for there is nothing so evil but it has a good in it, and that very
good resists its evil [or poisonful malignity].

36. Thus also in the same sickness it may withstand the
enkindled wrath in the body; for if the cold poison be enkindled
in the body, then its good falls into faintness; è and if it cannot
obtain the likeness of its essence for its help, it remains in
faintness; and then the enkindled wrath also does immediately
consume itself, and falls also into faintness; and so the natural
death is in both, and the moving life in the body ceases; but if
it attains the likeness, 4 then it gathers strength again, and the
enkindled hunger of the disease must cease.

37. In like manner also we are to consider of the heat, which
needs no cold property, but the likeness; yet it must be first
freed from the wrath of the same likeness, and brought into
its own highest joy and good, so that this likeness does not
effectually ë operate either in heat or cold, but in its own love-


? Equal essence, 2 Or departure. 3 Into a swoon, or impotency,
2 Or assimulate. Or vehemently, by force,


Signatura Rerum Taya


desire, viz. in its best relish, and so it will bring the heat in the
body into such a desire: All corruptions in the body proceed
from the cold; if the brimstone be too vehemently enkindled
by the heat, then the right and property of the cold dies, and
enters into sorrow.

38. Mercury is the moving? life in all, and his mother is
Sulphur; now the life and death lie in Sulphur, viz. in the
wrestling mercurial wheel. In the Sulphur there is fire, light,
and darkness; the impression causes darkness, coldness, and
hardness, and also great anguish: and from the impression of
the attraction Mercury takes his rise, and he is the sting of the
attraction, viz..the motion or disquietude, and arises in the
great anguish of the impression, where coldness, viz. a dark cold,
fire, by reason of the hardness, arises in the impression; and in
the sting of anguish, viz. in the disquietude, an hot fire arises. |

39. Now Mercury is the wheel of motion, and a stirring up of
the cold and heat; and in this placeit is only a painful aching
source in heat and cold, viz. a cold and hot fiery poison-anguish,
and forces forward as a wheel, and yet it is a cause of joy, and
all life and motion; but if it shall be freed from the anguish, and
introduced into the joy, then it must be brought forth through
death.

40. Now every sickness and malady is a death’s property; for
Mercury has too much enkindled and enflamed himself either
in heat or cold, whereby the essence or flesh, which he has
attracted to himself in his desire, viz. in his mother in the
Sulphur, is burnt, whereby the earthliness arises both in the
water and flesh: Even as the matter of the earth and stones,
viz. the grossness of the same, is nothing else but a burnt
Sulphur, and water in Mercury is his property, where the salniter
in the flagrat of the mercurial wheel, from whence the manifold
salts arise, is burnt [or too vehemently enflamed], from whence
come the stink and evil taste.

41. Otherwise if the Mercury did so effectually operate therein
in the oil of Sulphur, that he might be brought through the
death of the impression from the heat and cold, then the earth
would be again in paradise, and the joy-desire would again
spring [or bloom afresh] through the anguish of the cold’s
impression: And this is the cause that God laid the curse upon
the earth; for the mercurial wheel was deprived of its good
(viz. the love-desire, which arises in the eternal liberty, and
manifests itself with this mercurial wheel through cold and heat,

1 Stirring, active.


|


172 Jacob Boehme


and proceeds forth through the fire, and makes a shining of the
light) and the curse was brought thereinto, which is a with-
drawing of the love-desire.

42. Now this Mercury, being a life in the Sulphur of its
mother, stands in the curse, viz. in the anguish of heat and cold,
and makes in his flagrat, or salnitral walm, continually salts,
according to such property as he is in each place, and as he is
enkindled in each body; these salts are only the taste in the
seven properties.

43. Now if the Mercury be too vehemently enkindled in the
cold, then he makes in the salnitral flagrat in his mother in the
Sulphur a cold hard impressive salt, from whence melancholy,
darkness, and sadness arise in the life of Sulphur; for observe
what salt is in each thing, such a lustre of the fire, and such a
vital shining from the fire is also therein; but if Mercury be
enkindled in immoderate heat, he then burns up the cold essence,
and makes raging pains and achings according to the impression,
and according to the sting’s property, from whence arises in the
Sulphur great heat and inflammation; he dries up and consumes
the water, so that the desire’s hunger or sting has then no food
to satisfy its wrathful hunger, upon which he rages and tears in
the salt, as it is the poison’s property [so to do], from whence the
painful distemper in the flesh arises.

44. But if he obtains the likeness again in the property as he
stands in the centre of his mother, viz. in the Sulphur, under-
stand as she has generated him in the beginning, viz. as he at
first came forth to the natural life in both tinctures of man and
woman, understand in the child where his life did enkindle, then
he is freed from all anguish, and enters again into the likeness
of the heat and cold; and though the strife arises in many even
from the very womb, yet the combat is first raised up after
the beginning of the life: In the life’s beginning the life enters
into its highest joy; for the gates of the three principles are
opened in equal accord; but the strife soon begins about the
conquest between the darkness and light.

45. But now we are to consider what is to be done to Mercury,
if he be enkindled } either in heat or cold, whereby he raises up
sickness and pains: Now it were very good that men had the
right cure; but alas! it will remain hidden and covered by
reason of the curse of the earth, and the abominations and sins
of men, because they awaken this poison in Mercury with their
immoderate bestiality.”

1 Enraged. 2 With their bestial lustful excess or disorder.


Signatura Rerum 173


46. Yet the poor captive has need of deliverance; and though
men have not the high universal, which reaches the centre, and
brings the wheel of life into its first property, yet men must
take from the mercurial walm 1 of the earth its fruits thereunto,
seeing the body is also become earthly: A man must accord (or
assimulate) one likeness with another, one salt with another,
according as the inflammation is in the salt of the body: For
observe, in what property the brimstone is enkindled, either in
heat or cold, in melancholy or falling sickness (whether the
brimstone be burnt too in the body and putrified, or whether it
be yet fresh and burning), even such an herb, such a brimstone
belongs to the cure, lest the heat or cold be terrified in the
salniter, where the salt arises, by a strange might which comes
into it, and generates a mort? salt, and sets open more and
more the house of sadness: But it is not sufficient and powerful
enough in its wild nature and property as it grows out of the
walm ? of the earth; it is not able to master the root of the
enkindled Mercury in the brimstone, but it does more vehemently
enkindle it in such a source and property.

47. That which thou desirest should happen to the body, the
same must first happen to that which shall cure the body: To
the cure of a foul sickness there belongs a foul brimstone, and
so to a cold or hot sickness the like is to be understood; for
look in what degree of the fire or cold Mercury is enkindled, and
in what form among the seven properties of nature; that is,
what salt soever among the seven salts is enkindled, such a salt
belongs to the cure: For sickness is nothing else but an hunger;
now the hunger desires nothing else but its likeness; but now
the property of that life, which in its beginning of its rise stood
in joy, is the root; and the sickness is its immoderate enkindling,
whereby the order [or temperature] is broken and divided:
Thus the root desires in its hunger the likeness, but the inflamma-
tion has taken it away; now the inflammation is stronger than
the root, therefore the hunger of the inflammation must be
appeased, and that which itself is must be administered to it.

48. But as God cured us with his love, and restored to us the
salvation of the soul, when we had enkindled the same in the
poisonful Mercury of his anger; in like manner also this likeness
must be first cured and circulated in the mercurial wheel, and
freed from the heat and cold; indeed not taken away from
them (this cannot be, and it were also unprofitable), but it must
be brought into his highest joy, and then it will make such a

1 Seething. 2 Mortifying. 5 Seething.


174 Jacob Boehme


property in the body in the Mercury of the brimstone and salt;
for the root of life does again quicken itself therein, and lifts up
the first desire, so that now the hunger vanishes in the fall of
the inflammation.

49. Now it behoves the physician to know how he may deal
with the medicaments in the likeness, so that he does not enrage
them, and bring them into another property; for in their
property they are even as a man’s life is: He must take care
that they remain in their degree, as they are originally brought
forth in their mother; for nothing can come higher than it is
in the centre of its original according to the hiddenness; but
if it shall come higher, then it must assume another property
to itself; and so it is not in its own degree, and has not its
proper virtue, but an improper one; which indeed may very
well be, but it has lost its nature-right, wherein it stands in joy,
and is not able to effect any proper operation in the assimulate
of its own nature.

50. Therefore there is nothing better than to let everything
remain in its innate genuine virtue; only its wrath must be
changed into its own joy, that so its own virtue according to the
good part may be advanced into its dominion, and then in the
likeness it is powerful enough in all sicknesses without any other
mixture: For the original in the life desires no other multi-
plicity, but only its likeness, that it may stand, live, and burn
in its own power and property.

51. The power of the Most High has given to all things (to
every one according to its property) a fixed perfection; for
“ all was very good,” as Moses says, but with the curse the turba
is introduced, so that the properties stand in the strife of
Mercury; yet in each property, in every herb, or whatever is, in
whatever grows or arises out of the walm t of the four elements,
there is a fixity hidden; for all things which are in the four
elements are originally sprung forth out of the eternal element,
in which there is no strife, neither heat nor cold, but all things
were in equal weight of all the properties in a love-play, as it is
so now in paradise; and the same [paradise] sprung forth in
the beginning of this world before the curse through the earth:
Thus it is also yet hidden in all things, and may be opened by
understanding and art, so that the first virtue may overcome
the enflamed malignity.

52. Though we men have not full power to do it in self-might,
yet it may be done in God’s permission, who has again turned

1 Seething.


Signatura Rerum 175


his mercy towards us,! and again opened paradise and its com-
prehension in man: Hath God given us power to become his
children, and to rule over the world? Why then not over the
curse of the earth? Let none hold it for impossible; there is
required only a divine understanding and knowledge thereunto,
which shall blossom in the time of the lily, and not in Babel, for
whom we also have not written.


1 Or put his mercy into us.


CHAPTER XIV


OF THE WHEEL OF SULPHUR, MERCURY, AND SALT; OF THE
GENERATION OF GOOD AND EVIL; SHEWING HOW THE ONE
IS CHANGED INTO THE OTHER, AND HOW ONE MANIFESTS ITS
PROPERTY IN THE OTHER, AND YET BOTH REMAIN IN THE
FIRST CREATION IN THE WONDER OF GOD TO HIS OWN
MANIFESTATION AND GLORY


1, THIS is an open gate of the foregoing description: Every
one says, ‘‘ Shew me the way to the manifestation of the good.”
Hear and observe well, dear reason; thou must thyself be the
way, the understanding must be born in thee, otherwise I cannot
shew it thee; thou must enter into it, so that the understanding
of the work in its practic art, wherein I deal not, may be opened
to thee; I write only in the spirit of contemplation; how the
generation of good and evil is, and open the fountain: He
shall draw the water whom God has appointed thereunto; I will
here only describe the wheel of life as it is? in itself.

2. When I speak of Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt, I speak of
one only thing, be it either spiritual or corporeal; all created
things are that one thing, but the properties in the generation
of this only thing make a difference [or give various gradual
distinctions]; for when I name a man, or lion, bear, wolf, hare,
or any other beast; yea also a root, herb, tree, or whatever may
be named, it is the same only thing.

3. All whatever is corporeal is the same being; the herbs and
trees, and also the animals, but each thing in its difference of
the first beginning: According as the property in the verbum
fiat has imprinted itself in each thing, so is that kind in its
propagation, and all things stand in the seed and procreation;
and there is not anything but has a fixity in it, be it either
hidden or manifest, for all shall stand to the glory of God.

4. Whatever is risen from the eternal fixity, as angels and the
souls of men, remains indestructible in its fixt being; but what-
ever is risen in the unfixt being, viz. with the motion of time,
that does again enter into the first motion from whence it has
taken its original, and is a map of its form which it had here,

1 Or what it is.


176


Signatura Rerum 177


like a picture, or as an image in a glass without life; for so it
was from eternity before the times of this world, which the Most
High has introduced into an image, into the comprehensible
natural life in time, to behold the great wonders of his wisdom
in a creaturely being, as we plainly see.

5. Now we are to consider the only mother, how the same
is in her property, from whence the innumerable multiplicity
arises, and has continually risen; and how she generates life
and death, evil and good; and how all things may be brought
into their first [ens], viz. into the place where they originally
arise, to which the death, or the dying, is the greatest mystery.

6. For nothing, which is departed out of its first order, as the
mother brought it forth, can go back again, and enter with its
assumed order into its root, unless it dies again with its assumed
order in its mother; and even then it is again in the end, and in
the place whence it was created, and so it stands again in the
verbum fiat, viz. in the bound of its order in the expressed word,
and may enter again into that which it was in the beginning
before it was corporeal; and there it is good, for it stands again
in that from whence it proceeded.

7. Now therefore we are to consider the beginnings of all
things, for we cannot say that this world was made out of some-
thing, it was only and barely a desire out of the free lubet, that
the abyss, viz. the highest good or being, viz. the eternal will,
would behold itself in the lubet as in a glass; therefore the
eternal will has conceived the lubet, and brought it into a desire,
wnich has impressed itself, and figurised, and corporised itself
both to a body and spirit according to the same impression’s
property, according as the impression has introduced itself into
forms, whereby the possibilities [or powers] are risen in the
impression as a nature.

8. This impression is the only mother of the manifestation of
the mystery, and it is called nature and essence, for it manifests
what has been from eternity in the eternal will; yet we are to
conceive that there was in eternity a nature in the eternal will,
as an eternal mind in the will; but it was only a spirit in the
will, and the essence of its ability was not made manifest, but
only in the looking-glass of the will, which is the eternal
wisdom, wherein all things which are in this world were known
in two centres, viz. according to the fire and light, and then
according to the darkness and essence; all which came with the
motion of the eternal will through the desire in the will into

N 569 1 Mirror,


178 Jacob Boehme


a manifest mystery, and so introduced itself into a manifest
possibility. j

9. This is now the essence expressed or made manifest out of
eternity into a time, and consists in the fore-mentioned forms
in Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt, where the one is not divided or
parted asunder from the other: It is one eternal essence, and
shapes ! itself into the properties of the desire according to the
possibility of the manifestation; and we are to understand that
one property is not, nor cannot be without the other; they are
altogether the same only possibility: And now we will speak of
their differences, viz. how this only possibility introduces itself
into good and evil, viz. into still peace and constant unquietness.

ro. We find seven especial properties in nature, whereby this
only mother works all things, which are these, viz. First, the
desire, which is astringent, cold, hard, and dark. Secondly,
bitter, which is the sting of the astringent hard enclosure; ? this
is the cause of all motion and life. Thirdly, the anguish, by
reason of the raging in the impression, where the impressed
hardness falls into a tearing anguish and pain by reason of the
sting.

1r. Fourthly, the fire, where the eternal will in this anxious
desire introduces itself into an anxious darting flash [or twinkling
lightening], viz. into strength and devouring of the darkness,
with which the hardness is again consumed, and introduced into
a corporeal moving spirit.

12. Fifthly, the egress? of the free will out of the darkness
and out of the fire, and dwelling in itself, where the free will has
received the lustre, so that it enlightens and shines as a light
out of the fire, and the potent desire of the free will, which it has
sharpened in the fire (in that it is dead in the fire to the essence
of the darkness of the first form, and consumed) does now in
the light’s desire draw into itself the essence from the dying of
the fire, according to its hunger, which is now water; and in
the lustre it is a tincture from the fire and light, viz. a love-
desire, or a beauty of colours;* and here all colours arise; as
we have fully set it down in our other books, but especially
in the Threefold Life of Man.

13. Sixthly, the voice or sound, which in the first form is only
a noise from the hardness, and is dead or mortified as to that
[hardness] in the fire, and yet in the fifth form, in the love-desire,
viz. in the pleasant property, it is again received as a clear


1 Or figures. 2 Or attraction.
3 The flowing, or proceeding forth. 4 Or fair complexion.


Signatura Rerum 179


sound out of the dying of the fire in the lustre of the light in
the tincture, wherein all the five senses, viz. Hearing, Seeing,
Feeling, Smelling, and Tasting, arise in the tincture of the light
from the fire.

14. Seventhly, the menstruum, or the seed of all these forms
which the desire impresses into a comprehensive body or
essence wherein all lies; whatever the six forms are spiritually,
that the seventh is essentially.

15. Thus these are the seven forms of the mother of all
beings, from whence all whatever is in this world is generated;
and moreover the Most High has, according to this mother,
introduced and created such properties as this mother is in her
wrestling forms (understand, as she brings herself with the
wrestling into properties) into a wheel,! which is as a mind of the
mother, from whence she continually creates and works; and
these are the stars with the planetary orb according to the
platform of the eternal astrum, which is only a spirit, and the
eternal mind in the wisdom of God, viz. the eternal nature, from
whence the eternal spirits are proceeded and entered into a
creaturely being.

16. And moreover the Most High has introduced the property
of this wheel in the motion, as a life into the four officers, which
manage the dominion in the pregnant mother; and these are
the four elements to which the wheel of the mind, viz. the
astrum affords will and desire; so that this whole being is but
one only thing, and yet is so proportioned [or composed] as a
mind ofa man: Even as he is in soul and body, so also is this only
essence; for it? was created out of this whole essence into an
image according to eternity and time; out of eternity according
to the soul, and out of time according to the outward essence,
as a similitude and image of eternity and time, both according
to the eternal will and mind and its essence, and also according
to the mind of time and its essence: And therefore now we are
rightly to consider of the sulphurean wheel of all essences, how
the properties introduce themselves into good and evil, and
again bring themselves out of good and evil.

17. The impression or desire, viz. the first form to nature,
which is called, and is also the fiat, receives the desire’s property
according to the property of all the seven forms into itself, and
impresses them, so that out of the nothing proceeds forth an
essence according to the properties of the will: Now its own
property, seeing it is only a desire, and impresses itself, is dark,

1 Orb, or rotation. 2 Or he.


“180 Jacob Boehme


and causes hardness, viz. a strong pulsation, which is a cause
of the tone or sound, which becomes yet more hard in the fire,
viz. in the fourth form, where then the grossness dies away,
and it is received again in the fifth form, viz. in the love-desire;
and again it proceeds forth in its own property in the love-
desire, and makes the sixth form, viz. the sound, voice, or tone
out of the fire and water.

18. Now this tone or sound, which is called Mercury, arises
in the first form, viz. in the impression, by reason of the will
and attractive desire; for the attraction makes the motions and
the compunction in the hardness, which we distinguish, and call
the second form, but it is a son of the first, and in the first.

19. This second form or property is the raging, stinging, and
bitter pain; for the first is astringent, and the second is drawing,
viz. the desire into an essence; this same essence is the property
of the first? and the attraction makes therein the second
property, viz. a bitter stinging which the hardness cannot
endure; for it would be still, and thereupon it does more
vehemently impress itself to withhold the sting, and yet the
sting does thereby only grow the greater: Now the hardness,
viz. the astringency draws inwards, and the sting from the hard-
ness ë upwards: Hence arises the first enmity and opposition;
for the two forms, which yet are but one, make themselves their
own enemies; and yet if this were not, there would not be any
essence, neither body nor spirit, also no manifestation of the
eternity of the abyss.

20. But now seeing the bitter sting cannot ascend, and the
hardness also cannot hold or enclose it, they fall into a turning
or breaking through like a wheel, which runs into itself as an
horrible essence, where both properties are known only as one,
and yet each remains in itself unaltered, and produce the third
property between both, viz. the great anguish; out of which
the will, understand the fixt will to nature, desires to go forth
again into the liberty, viz. into the nothing, into the eternal rest;
for here it has thus found itself, and manifested itself, and yet
there is no separating or departing: and this anxious form is the
mother of Sulphur, for the sting makes it* painful, and the
hardness impresses it, that it is as a dying source, and yet it is
the true original to life.

21. It has two properties in itself, viz. according to the

1 Or noise. 2 Or the first property.


3 Or the sting in the hardness, viz. the hardness itself.
4 Understand the mother of Sulphur.


Signatura Rerum 181


impression or desire it is dark and hard; and according to the
desire of the will, which wills to be free from the anguish, and
enters again into the liberty, it is spiritual and light; and the
sting breaks in pieces its conceived essence which the astringent
desire conceives in itself, so that its essence is hard and
spalt, and wholly darting as a flash of lightning from the
darkness, and from the desire of the light, understand to the
liberty.

22. Now these three forms are in one essence as a raging
spirit; and the desire impresses these properties, so that an
essence is made according to their property, viz. according to the
astringent dark desire, viz. according to the first original: There
is an earthly essence, out of which in the beginning of the great
motion the earth was made, and according to the bitter raging
spirit there is the instigation in the essence, viz. a poison, and it
also imprints [or impresses] itself in the essence, from whence
the earthliness is so wholly loathsome and bitter; and the third
form, viz. the anguish gives a fiery property thereinto; and yet
here there cannot be as yet any essence, but it is only a spiritual
essence, and the mother to the essence.t

23. The fourth form in this essence is the fire, which as to
one part takes its original out of the dark hard impression, viz.
from the hardness, and from the raging sting in the anguish,
which is the cold black fire, and the pain of the great anguish;
and as to the other part it takes its original in the will’s spirit to
nature, which goes again out of this hard dark coldness into
itself, viz. into the liberty without the nature of the austere
motion, and enkindles the liberty, viz. the eternal lubet to the
desire of nature, with its sharpness, which it has conceived in
the impression, whereby it is a moving and stirring lustre: For
the liberty is neither dark nor light; but by reason of the
motion it is light, for its lubet brings itself into the desire to
light, that it may be manifest in the light and lustre; and yet it
cannot be otherwise brought to pass but through darkness, so
that the light might be made known and manifest, and the
eternal mind might find and manifest itself; for a will is only one
thing and essence, but through the multiplicity its form is made
manifest, that it is infinite, and a mere wonder, of which we
speak with a babe’s tongue, being only as a little spark out of
these great infinite wonders.

24. Now understand us thus; the liberty is, and stands in
the darkness (and inclining to the dark desire after the desire


1 Prima materia.


182 Jacob Boehme


of the light), it attains with the eternal will the darkness; and
the darkness reaches after the light of the liberty, and cannot
attain it; for it encloses itself with the desire in itself, and makes
itself darkness in itself; and out of both these, viz. out of the
dark impression, and out of the desire of the light or liberty
towards the impression, there is a twinkling [or darting] flash
in the impression, viz. the original of the fire; for the liberty
shines in the impression, but the impression in the anguish
comprehends it into itself, and so it is now asa flash: But seeing
the liberty is incomprehensible, and as a nothing, and moreover
without and before the impression, and abyssal,? therefore the
impression cannot conceive or hold it; but it gives itself into the
liberty, and the liberty devours its dark property and essence,
and rules with the assumed mobility in the darkness, unappre-
hensible to the darkness.

25. Thus understand us right: There is in the fire a devouring;
the sharpness of the fire is from the austere impression of the
coldness and bitterness, from the anguish; and the devouring is
from the liberty, which makes out of the something again a
nothing according to its property.

26. And understand us very exactly and well: The liberty
will not be a nothing, for therefore the lubet of the liberty intro-
duces itself into nature and essence, that it might be manifest
in power, wonder, and being; it likewise assumes to itself
through the sharpness in the cold and dark impression the
properties, that it might manifest the power of the liberty: For
it consumes the dark essence in the fire, and proceeds forth out
of the fire, out of the anguish of the impression, with the spiritual
properties in the light; as you see, that the outward light so
shines forth out of the fire, and has not the source and pain of
the fire in it, but only the property; the light manifests the
properties of the darkness, and that only in itself; the dark-
ness remains in itself dark, and the light continues in itself
light.

27. The liberty (which is called God) is the cause of the light;
and the impression of the desire is the cause of the darkness
and painful source: Now herein understand two eternal begin-
nings, viz. two principles, one in the liberty in the light, the other
in the impression in the pain and source of the darkness, each
dwelling in itself.


_ + Or opposite to the dark desire, or dark impression, which is after the
light’s desire.
? Or without any ground.


Signatura Rerum 183


28. And understand us farther concerning their opening
essence and will, how nature is introduced into seven properties;
for we speak not of a beginning, for there is none in eternity;
but thus the eternal generation is from eternity to eternity in
itself; and this same eternal generation has according to the
property of eternity through its own desire and motion intro-
duced itself with this visible world (as with a likeness of the
eternal spirit into such a creaturely being which is a type or
platform of the eternal being) into a time, of which we will speak
afterwards, and shew what the creature is, namely a similitude
of the operation of eternity, and how it has also this same
working temporally in itself.

29. Now concerning the fire understand us thus: The fire is
the principle of every life; to the darkness it gives essence and
source, else there would be no sensibility in the darkness, also
no spirit, but mere hardness, a hard, sharp, bitter, galling sting,
as it is really so in the eternal darkness; but so far as the hot
fire may be obtained, the dark compunctive property stands
in the aspiring covetous greediness like to a horrible madness,
that it may be known what wisdom and folly is.

30. Now the fire gives also desire, source, and properties to
the light, viz. to the liberty; yet know this, the liberty, viz. the
nothing, has no essence in itself, but the impression of the
austere desire makes the first essence, which the will-spirit of
the liberty (which has manifested itself through the nature of
the desire) receives into itself, and brings it forth through the
fire, where the grossness, viz. the rawness, does then die in the
fire.

31. Understand it thus: When the flash of fire reaches the
dark essentiality, then it becomes a great flagrat, where the
cold fire is dismayed, and does as it were die, falls into a swoon,”
and sinks down: And this flagrat is effected in the enkindling of
the fire in the essence of the anguish, which has two properties
in it; viz. the one goes downwards into the death’s property,
being a mortification of the cold fire, from whence the water
arises, and according to the grossness è the earth is risen; and
the other part ascends in the will of the liberty, in the lubet, as
a flagrat of joyfulness; and this same essence is also mortified
in the flagrat in the fire, understand the cold fire’s property, and
gives also a water-source, understand such a property.

32. Now the flash, when it is enkindled by the liberty, and by
the cold fire, makes in its rising a cross with the comprehension


1 Or reached. 2 Becomes impotent. 3 The caput mortuum.


184 Jacob Boehme


of all properties; for here arises the spirit in the essence, and it
stands thus:


If thou hast here understanding, thou needest ask no more;
it is eternity and time, God in love and anger, moreover heaven
and hell. .
33. The lower part, which is thus marked ©, is the first
principle, and is the eternal nature in the anger, viz. the kingdom
of darkness dwelling in itself; and the upper part, with this


figure ie is the salniter: The upper cross above the circle is the


kingdom of glory, which proceeds forth in the flagrat of joy, in
the will of the free lubet in itself out of the fire in the lustre
of the light into the power of the liberty; and this spiritual
water, which also arises in the flagrat of joy, is the corporality,
or essentiality, in which the lustre from the fire and light makes
a tincture, viz. a budding and growing, and a manifestation of
colours from the fire and light.

34. And this form of separation between the living and the
dead essentiality is the fifth form, and is called the love-desire;
its original is from the liberty, which in the fire has introduced
itself into a desire, viz. out of the lubet of the liberty into the
fair and fiery elevation of joy, being a flame of love, which also
imprints in its love-desire the property of that which it has
conceived in the will of the eternal mind, which brings itself
through the fire’s sharpness again into itself, viz. into the first
properties, which arise in the first impression, viz. from the
motion and stirring; and the joyfulness arises out of the anguish:
For this is joy, that the will to nature is delivered and freed
from the dark anguish, for else there would be no knowledge of
what joy was, if there was not a painful source; and in its love-
desire it conceives the first properties in the first impression,
which divide themselves in this desire into five forms; viz. from
the fire-flash into seeing, for the water of love reaches the lustre
of the tincture, wherein the sight consists; and from the hardness,
viz. from the penetration of the sting in the hardness, into
hearing, so that in this same nothing, viz. in the liberty, there is
a sound, which the tincture catches, and brings it forth in the
water of the desire: and from the raging sting into feeling, so
that one property feels another; for if all properties were only
one, there would be no seeing, hearing, or feeling, also no under-
standing: And from the assimulation, that one property arises
in the other, but with another property, comes the taste; and


Signatura Rerum 185


from the egressive spirit of the properties (in that the egress of
each property enters into the other) arises the smell.

35- Now these five forms do all of them together make in the
love-desire, viz. in the fifth form, the sixth, that is, the sound or
voice, as a manifestation of all the forms in the spirit’s property,
which the fiery light’s desire encloses with the spiritual water
as one only essence, which is now the fiery will’s own essence,
which has brought itself forth in the light, wherein it works and
makes the seventh form, as an habitation of the sixth, from
whence the essence and dominion of this world were generated,
and introduced into a form according to the right of the eternal
birth.

36. Now understand us right; we do not hereby understand
a beginning of the Deity, but the manifestation of the Deity:
The Deity is herein known and manifested in Trinity; the Deity
is the eternal liberty without all nature, viz. the eternal abyss;
but thus it brings itself into byss for its own manifestation,
eternal wisdom, and deeds of wonder.

37. The Eternal Father is manifested in the fire, and the Son
in the light of the fire, and the Holy Spirit in the power of the
life and motion proceeding from the fire in the light of the
kingdom of joy, being the egressive power in the love-flame; we
speak only by parts of the universal as a creature.”

38. The Deity is wholly everywhere all in all; but he is only
called God according to the light of love, and according to the
proceeding spirit of joy; but according to the dark impression
he is called God’s anger and the dark world; and according to
the eternal fire-spirit he is called a consuming fire.

39. We give you only to understand the Being of all beings,
whose original in itself is only one eternal essence; but with its
own manifestation it comes into many beings, to its own honour
and glory; and now we will shew you what the creature’s life
and dominion is in this all-essential Being.

40. Now therefore understand us right what we mean by these
three words, Sulphur, Mercury, and Sal: In the eternity all is
spirit; but when God moved himself with the eternal nature,
wherein his own manifestation consists, he produced out of the
spiritual essence a palpable and manifest essence, and introduced
it into a creaturely being according to the eternal properties,
which also consists of spirit and essence, according to the right 3
[or law] of eternity.


1 Law, or appointment. 2 Or in a creaturely manner.
8 Or genuine property.


186 Jacob Boehme


41. And now I will speak of the outward kingdom, viz. of the
third principle or beginning; for in this world there is also light
and darkness in each other as in the eternity: God has given
this world a sun, as a nature-god of the outward powers, but he |
rules therein as Lord; the outward [kingdom] is only his prepared
work, which he rules and makes with the assimulate, as a master
makes his work with an instrument.

42. Sulphur is in the outward world, viz. in the mystery of
the great God’s manifestation, the first mother of the creatures;
for it arises out of darkness, fire, and light; it is on one part,
according to the dark impression, astringent, bitter, and anxious;
and on the other part, towards the Deity, as a similitude of the
Deity, it is fire, light, and water, which in the fire separates itself
into two forms, viz. according to the mortification into water,
and according to the life into oil, in which the true life of all
the creatures of the outward world consists.

43. Mercury is the wheel of motion in the Sulphur; he is on
one part according to the dark impression the stinging rager,
and the great unquietness, and separates itself also in the fire
in its mother, viz. in the Sulphur, into two properties, viz. into
a twofold water; for in the mortification of the fire all is turned
to water, understand into a living pleasant water according
to the light, which produces silver in the brimstone, viz. in the
seventh property of nature, which is the powerful body, and in
the fire its water is quicksilver, and in the astringency, viz. in
the anguish of the darkness, it is a rust or smoke; therefore if its
outward water-body be cast into the fire, understand [that body]
which it receives in Sulphur from the watery property, then it
does evaporate, for in the fire every property separates itself
again into the first essence, from whence it came originally,
where all things were only a spirit.

44. And then secondly it separates itself according to the
water of the dark impression into a poison-source, which yet
cannot be understood to be a water, but only a corporeal essence
of the spirit; for as the spirit’s property is, so is also its water;
and even so it is in the fire-flagrat.

45. Further understand us in the fiery flagrat concerning the
salniter, from whence the manifold salts and powers arise; for
all the properties of the spirit are become corporeal in the great
motion of the essence of all essences, and entered into a visible
and comprehensible being: This flagrat is effected in the
enkindling of the fire; and in the mortification of the fire it

1 Or fly from thence as a smoke.


Signatura Rerum > 187


impresses into itself from the water’s original a water, according
to the property of the flagrat, which yet is rather fire than
water, but its mortal essence is water according to the property
of the flagrat; it is the comprisal of all properties, it brings
forth in its comprehension, viz. in the fiery flagrat all proper-
ties in itself, and apprehends the property of the light in its
powers, and also the property of the dark impression in its
powers, and makes all fiery; one part according to the coldness,
and one part according to the heat; but the most part accord-
ing to the endless Mercury, which is the life of all essences in
evil and good, in light and darkness.

46. This salniter is the mother of all salts in vegetables and
animals, viz. in herbs and trees and everything; he is in all
things, which give a taste and smell, the first root according to
each thing’s property; in the good (which grow in the love-
desire in the oil of brimstone) he is good, powerful, and pleasant;
and in the evil he is evil in the anguish of brimstone; and in
the darkness he is the eternal horror and despair, continually
desiring in the flagrat to aspire above the gates in the fire, from
whence arises the will of all devils, and of all pride, to ascend
above the humility of the love-desire; and in the fire is the trial
of his essence, as we see how he clashes and consumes himself in
the flash as a sudden thought.

47. For its essence arises not in the essence of eternity, also it
cannot inherit it, but in the enkindling of the temporal fire, yet
it is perceived in the eternal spirit by reason of the elevation of
the joy; but according to the essence of mortification, viz.
according to the salt of the fire it subsists in the fire: For this
property arises out of the first desire, viz. in the essence of the
first impression, which property the philosophers call Saturn,
therefore the salt is manifold: All sharpness in the taste is salt,
the good taste arises out of the oleous salt, and so also the smell,
which is the egressive spirit in which the tincture appears as a
lustre [or fair complexion] of colours.

48. Thus understand us right; the salniter in the fire-flagrat
is the separation of the properties, where death and life separate
themselves, viz. the life which enters with the love-desire into
an essence and dominion; and then the life which in the flagrat
of death, according to the property of the cold, sinks down in
the mortification of the flagrat as an impotency, and gives
weight; and according to the subtility it gives water, and
according to the grossness of the austereness earth; and accord-
ing to Sulphur and Mercury, sand and stones; and according to


188 Jacob Boehme


the subtility in Sulphur and Mercury, understand according to
the water of the same, it makes flesh, and according to the
anxious darkness a smoke or rust; but according to the oleous
property, viz. according to the love-desire, a sweet spiritual
essence; and according to the spirit a pleasant smell; and
according to the moving of the fire and light the [one] element;
and from the lustre in the fire-flagrat with aspect of the light
the precious tincture, which tinctures all oily salts, from whence
the pleasant taste and smell arise.

49. The salnitral flagrat is the sude? in the essence, from
whence the growth and pullulation arise, that there is a growing
in the impression of the essence; the salt is the preservation, or
upholding of the essence, so that a thing subsists in a body or
comprehension; it holds the Sulphur and Mercury, else they
would part from each other in the fire-flagrat.

50. All things consist of Sulphur, Mercury, and Salt: In the
salnitral flagrat the element separates itself into four properties,
viz. into Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, which in itself is none of
these, but only a moving and gentle walming} not as the air, but
as a moving of the will in the body, a cause of life in the essence;
for as the eternal Spirit of God proceeds from the Father, who is
a spirit from the fire and light, and is the motion and life of the
eternity; so likewise the air proceeds forth continually out of
all the properties in the salnitral flagrat in the fire, from the
anguish in Sulphur in the forcing mercurial wheel, as an im-
petuous aspiring motion; it is a son of all the properties, and
also the life of the same; the fire of all the forms affords it, and
also receives it again for its life; the water is its body, wherein it
makes the seething in the salniter, and the earth is its power,
wherein it enkindles its strength and fire-soul.

51. There is but one only element, and that unfolds itself in
the salnitral flagrat into four parts, viz. with the enkindling it
gives.a consuming fire of the darkness, and its essence; and in
the flagrat of the dying of the cold and the darkness it parts
itself into essences, viz. according to the subtility into water,
and according to the grossness into earth; and then according
to the motion in the flagrat’s walming into air, which does most
resemble the element, but not wholly essentially; for the [one]
element is neither hot nor cold, also not forcing or compulsive,
but gently moving.

1 Seething-


Signatura Rerum 189


OF THE DESIRE OF THE PROPERTIES


52. Every property keeps its own desire; for a property is
nothing else but an hunger, and the hunger forms itself into such
an essence as itself is, and in the salnitral sude it gives such a
spirit into the four elements; for the original of the sude is in
the element, from whence four elements proceed in this flagrat.

53. Each body stands in the inward motion ! in the element,
and in the growth and life in the four elements; but every
creature has not the true life of the element, but only the high
spirits, as angels and souls of men, which stand in the first
principle; in them the element is incitable: In the life of the
third principle it stands still, and is as a hand of God, where he
holds and governs the four elements as an exit, or instrument
with which he works and builds.

54. Now every property of nature does in its hunger take its
food out of the four elements; as the hunger is, so it takes a
property out of the elements; for the four elements are the body
of the properties, and each spirit eats of its own body.

55. First, there are the sulphurean properties according to the
first and second impression, viz. according to the dark, astringent,
and anxious impression; and then according to the love-impres-
sion in the light, viz. according to evil and good.

56. The dark hunger desires essence according to its property,
viz. earthly things, all whatever resembles the earth; and the
bitter hunger desires bitter raging, stinging, and pain; it receives
into itself such an essence (as the poison-source) out of the
elements: And the hunger of anguish desires anxious hunger,
viz. the anguish in the brimstone; also the melancholy [takes]
the desire to die, and continual sadness; and the fire-flash
receives into it anger, aspiring, ambition, pride, a desiring to
destroy all, and make it subject to it, a desire to domineer in
and above all, to consume all, and to be peculiar; and it takes
the bitterness from whence the flash arises to envy and hatred,
and the astringency to covetousness, and the fire to anger and
indignation.

57. Here is the true desire of God’s anger and all devils, and
of all whatever is against God and love; and this hunger draws
such an essence into self; as it is to be known and searched
out in the creatures, and also in the herbs.

58. Now the fire-flash is the end of the first desire, viz. of the

1 Or as to its inward motion.


190 Jacob Boehme


dark nature, and in the fire the dying of the first hunger and
will begins; for the fire consumes all grossness of the first forms,
and casts them into death; and here is the separation of both
wills, viz. the one which enters back again into the property of
death, and is a will in the life of the dark desire; as the devils
have done, who would domineer in the fire-flash in the salnitral
sude over time and eternity; but they were driven back by the
Spirit of God, and spewed forth out of the love-desire as an
abomination: And thus also it happens here to the wicked soul
of man, upon which the election follows. Here is the [aim] or
scope of the election of grace, of which the Scripture speaks,
that God knows his; and here the eternal lubet of God’s liberty
apprehends the will-spirit, which is arisen in the dark centre,
and brings it through the dying in the fire into the element.

59. In the salnitral flagrat lies the possibility backwards and
forwards; if the will of the desire goes back, then it is as to the
kingdom of this world [earthly], and as to the kingdom of the
eternal world it is in God’s anger, and cannot see God unless it
be converted, and enters into the dying in the fire, and wholly
dies to its selfness, and enters into the resignation of the eternal
will in the salnitral flagrat into the element, viz. into the
heavenly essentiality and corporality, so that the hunger may
eat of the pure element; and then it has further no other desire;
for it is in the fire dead to the austere dark hunger, which is evil;
thus from the dying in the fire arises the light, for here the
liberty is enkindled, that it becomes also an hunger, and a desire;
this is now a love-desire, a love-hunger.

60. In the outward world it is the light of the sun in the four
elements; and it is the bestial love-desire, viz. after the sul-
phurean body and essence, from whence the copulation and
multiplication arise, viz. the vegetative life; and from the
Mercury in the salniter (in which the sensible life is) therein the
astrum gives the reason in the animals from the properties of the
salniter.

61. For the whole astrum is nothing else but a salniter in the
verbum fiat in the motion of the Being of all beings in the fiery
flagrat, comprehended in the properties of the salts, wherein all
the powers of the element stand as an external birth, which
continually boil? in the four elements as a salnitral salt, and
introduce their property in their desire in the four elements
into the essence of bodies, as is to be seen in trees, herbs, grass,
and all growing things.

1 Or seethe.


Signatura Rerum 191


62. Thus understand us farther concerning the second centre,
which is manifest in the dying of the fire in the light, whereby
the abyss of God’s liberty introduces itself into the byss of
nature, both with the inward world in the kingdom of heaven
in the eternity; and then also with the outward kingdom in the
time.

63. Now all this has also the properties of the desire, and
takes its original from the first principle, viz. from the first
centre, and there is yet no right dying in the fire; the dark
essence only dies, and the will-spirit goes forth with the eternal
will to nature again out of the fiery death in the light; it is only
a transmutation of the spirit, so that an hunger arises out of the
liberty, and this hunger is a love-desire; as to the soul of man
it draws essence from the element of God, viz. in the divine
salniter it [takes] the divine salts or powers into itself; and as
to the outward world’s desire it draws the oil out of the Sulphur
into itself, in which [oil] the outward life burns; and so it is
likewise in the vegetables and metals, and other things.

64. The sun makes the outward transmutation, and the
divine light in the soul’s property makes the inward; according
as each thing stands in its degree, so does its hunger reach a
property: those which are in the time [receive a property] from
the time, and those in eternity likewise out of eternity: The
hunger which proceeds from eternity eats of the eternity, and
that which is of the time eats of the time. The true life of all
creatures eats of the spiritual Mercury, viz. of the sixth form,
where all salts are essentially; the spirit eats of the five senses,
for they are the spirit’s corporality; and the body, viz. the
vegetable life, eats of the essence of the Sulphur and Salt; for
Christ says in like manner, “ Man liveth not by bread only, but
by every word which proceedeth out of the mouth of God.”

65. Now the sixth form of nature is the expressed spiritual
word; and the speaking word therein is the eternal word: In
the first impression in the darkness it is the word of God’s anger;
and in the outward world it is the poisonful Mercury, viz. a
cause of all life and stirring, of all tones and sounds; now every
property eats of its likeness in its degree; the hunger of time
[eats] of time, and the hunger of eternity [eats] of eternity,
both the spirit of Mercury and the spirit of Sulphur; whereas
yet there are not two [spirits] but only two properties; all what-
ever does only take its original in one principle, as the creatures
of the outward world, they have only one region, but a twofold
inclination from the good and evil; but whatever takes its.


192 Jacob Boehme


original out of two principles, as man, he has also a twofold food
and dominion, viz. from the dark centre, and from the outward
centre; but if ‘he dies to his self- hood, and brings his hunger into
God’s kingdom, then he may eat of the divine Mercury, viz. of
the five divine senses with the soul, and of the element in the
divine essence; and yet the outward man apprehends not in this
life-time the divine essence corporeally, but only through the
imagination, where the inward body penetrates the outward; as
the sun shines through the water, and yet the water continues
still water, for here lies our fall in Adam.

66. The element did wholly penetrate the four elements, and
it was wholly one in man, but in the curse the element separated
from the soul, so that the poor soul now lives only in the vessel
of the four elements, unless it again enters in the death of its
earthly will into the divine desire, and springs forth in the
element.

67. Thus also the outward body is in the curse, and eats of the
cursed earth’s property, viz. only of the earthly salniter, where
one hunger of the earthly properties continually opposes another;
for the curse is a loathsome abominate in all salts, and from
thence it comes that a constant contrariety arises in the outward
body; for one hunger of the properties receives [or catches] from
the other the abominate: ! Now to help the body that it may be
freed from the abominate, it must take the assimulate of the
lothing abominate, which is risen in the body as a sude or
seething, and introduce it into the dying of the fire, and bring it
out in the love-desire from the curse of the vanity; now this is
no otherwise effected, but as the true life dies to the dark vanity.

68. The abominate of the outward life arises from a property
of the salt which is contrary to the oil of the life: Thus the
abominate does forthwith enkindle itself in the four elements,
and begins to seethe in the salniter as a strange life: This strange
life does at last darken and destroy the first true life, if it be not
resisted; and it can have no better help than with the assimulate
of the introduced abominate, which the life has taken into itself;
therefore that must be done to the cure, which is to be done to the
life, that it might be freed from the abominate.

69. The cure must be freed from the same abominate, which
it has received in the four elements from the like false insinua-
tion [influence, or impression], it must be brought into the death
of the four elements, and its spirit must also be tinctured in the
fifth form with the Venus desire, viz. with a pleasant essence,

1 Nauseate, abomination.


Signatura Rerum 193


that the spiritual Mercury may arise in Jupiter’s property;
understand, the cure must first die to its sickness in all the four
elements; it must be introduced into the putrefaction of all the
four elements; in the fire it dies to its earthliness, and in the
putrefaction to the water’s earthliness, and in the air’s putrefac-
tion to the abominate and earthliness of the air; and then it
must be brought into Venus, and from Venus into Jupiter, and
then the sun will arise in the love-desire, and with this the
abominate in the body may be resisted.

70. All other cures, which are administered raw and un-
digested 1 (as when one takes cold, and will resist heat, and so
likewise heat to resist cold), are only an opposite fiery flagrat,
whereby indeed the enkindled fire ceases from its powerful work-
ing, but the flagrat enters into death’s anguish, and the root
of the abominate becomes a poisonful Mercury unless the heat
and cold are before tempered with Venus and Jupiter, and then
indeed it is an appeasing of the abominate in the salnitral sude;
but the root of the abominate remains still, unless the life be
strong, and mightily brings forth its desire out of the abominate.
This the physicians must well observe, that the raw herbs do
not reach the root, where the abominate is arisen in the centre in
the property of the life’s form; they reach only the four elements,
and give some easement, but the abominate remains still in the
root as an hidden sickness.

71. The like is also to be understood concerning the astrum,
which has its sude in the outward body as a peculiar body in
the four elements; if the cure may be freed from the abominate
of the four elements, then the astrum falls also into the good
part, and introduces its desire thereinto, and so the body is also
freed from the abominate of the astrum; for the Scripture says,
that “ the whole creature ? longeth together with us to be freed
from the vanity: ”’ Now the curse of the earth, wherein the
astrum injects its desire, is the vanity; and if it tastes a pure
life in itself, then it also rejoices therein, and casts forth the
abominate.

72. Every abominate ? of the oily life arises from the inward
Mercury in the inward Sulphur; for sin also does hence take its
original, that the poisonful Mercury (which is a cause of the life)
does in the fire-flash in the original of the salniter, in retiring
backwards, introduce itself again into self-hood, for even there
is the original of the poison-life.

1 Unregenerated. 2 Or all creatures.


3 3 Nauseate, or loathsomeness.
/Q 509


194 Jacob Boehme


73. Every life which will be without spot, must die in the
will-spirit to nature in the fire of the abominate to the first
impression of the wrath, and must give itself forth, in the will-
spirit to nature, as a resigned will through the mortification in
the light of love: Let it be either heavenly or earthly it must
hold that process, or else it comes not to the highest perfection
in its degree; for man could not be helped unless the love-centre
of the love-desire did enter again into the humanity, and bring
forth the own life, viz. the human self, through the mortification
into itself: This is an exact type or resemblance, that whatsoever
will be freed from the abominate, viz. from the curse, the same
must die to the four elements in the abominate, and bring forth
its degree through the mortification of the fire in the light.

74. Thus likewise is the salnitral sude in the earth, from
whence metals, good herbs and trees grow; each property is
desirous of the assimulate; and if it can reach the assimulate
in Sulphur, and Mercury in the love, then it brings forth itself
higher than it is in its degree; as the eternal liberty with its
lubet introduces the eternal nature through the mortification
into desire, and thereby brings itself forth higher, viz. in power
and majesty; the like is to be considered in all things; for all
things arise out of one only being; the same is a mystery of all
beings, and a manifestation of the abyss in byss.

75. All things are generated out of the grand mystery, and
proceed out of one degree into another: Now whatever goes
forwards in its degree, the same receives no abominate, let it be
either in vegetables or animals; but whatever enters in itself
into its self-hood, viz. into its own lubet, the same receives, in
passing through the degrees, the abominate; for each form of
nature out of è the mystery receives of its property in its hunger,
and therein it is not annoyed or molested, for it is of their
property.

76. But if the will enters back again into the birth of the other
properties, then it receives the lust, and the lust makes an
hunger, and the hunger receives strange essence into itself:
Here now is the abominate and turba born; for this will is
entered contrary to the course of nature into a strange essence,
which is not of its property; this strange essence domineers now
in the strange will, and overcomes the will; now the will must
either cast it out, or else it will itself be cast out by the strange
essence; and seeing this also cannot be, thereupon arises anger
and enmity,


1 Entire. 2 Or proceeding from. 3 Text, spew out.


Signatura Rerum 195


77- For the properties run to their centre of the first impres-
sion, and seek the strength and might of the fire, from whence
arises the heat and cold in the body, and they are in one another
as enemies, whereby the first mother is stirred up in her most
wrathful malice and malignity according to the austere impres-
sion, and then begins the contest for the conquest, and that
property which maintains and keeps its power and prevalence,
casts the other into death’s property, viz. into the devoration,
into the house of misery.


CHAPTER XV.


CONCERNING THE WILL OF THE GREAT MYSTERY IN GOOD AND
EVIL, SHEWING FROM WHENCE A GOOD AND EVIL WILL ARISES,
AND HOW ONE INTRODUCES ITSELF INTO THE OTHER


1. Every property takes its original from the first, viz. from
the first impression or desire to nature, viz. out of the grand
mystery, and brings forth itself out of itself, as the air proceeds
out of the fire, and all whatever proceeds forward in one will is
uncontrollable, for it gives itself to no property; it dwells even
from the first original only in itself, and goes forth in one will;
and this is the true way of eternity, wherein there is no cor-
ruptibility if a thing remains in its own peculiar property, for
the great mystery is from eternity: Now if the form of the same
proceeds forth, and manifests itself out of itself, then this form
stands with the root in the mystery of eternity; but if the form
brings itself forth into another lust, so that two properties must
dwell in one, then from thence arises the enmity and abominate;
for there has been from eternity only the one element in motion,!
and the free lubet of eternity, which proceeded forth with its
motion from the great mystery of eternity as a spirit, which
spirit is God’s.

2. But when the great mystery did once move itself, and
introduced the free lubet into the desire of the essence, then in
the desire the strife began; for there arose in the desire out of
the element, which bears only one will, four elements, viz. mani-
fold desires and wills, which rule in one only body, where now
there is contrariety and strife; as heat against cold, fire against
water, air against earth, each is the death and destruction of
the other; so that the creature which stands in this dominion is
nothing else but a continual dying and a strife; it is an enmity
and contrary will in itself, and cannot be remedied unless it
enters again into one will, which also cannot be brought to pass,
unless the multiplicity of the wills be destroyed, and wholly die
to the desire, from whence the four elements arise; so that the
will does again become that which it was from eternity: Herein
we men do know what we are in the dominion of the four elements,

1 Or working property.
196


Signatura Rerum 197


nothing else but a strife and a contrary will, a self-envying,! a
desire of the abominate, a lust of death.

3. For the lust which arises out of the desire must die; if the
will (which proceeded out of the great mystery of eternity, which
the Spirit of God breathed into the image of man, viz. into the
likeness) will be freed from the abominate and contrary will,
then the desire of the four elements must die, and the will must
enter again into the one only element, it must again receive the
right of eternity, and act and go forth in one element, in manner
also as God created him, whom he himself has opposed, and
brought himself into the dominion of the four elements, in which
he has inherited death, and also the strife in the forms of life,
from whence arises his sickness, loathing, and enmity: For all
whatever lives in God’s will, that is not risen in the self-will, or
if it be risen therein, it is again dead to the own [or selfish] desire.

4. Every will which enters into its self-hood, and seeks the
ground of its life’s form, the same breaks itself off from the great
mystery, and enters into a self-fulness, it will be its own [or of
its own selfish jurisdiction], and so it is contrary to the first
mystery, for the same is alone all: And this child is accounted
evil, for it strives in disobedience against its own mother which
has brought it forth; but if the child does again introduce its
will and desire into that, from whence it is generated and risen
originally, then it is wholly one with the same, and cannot be
annoyed by anything; for it enters into the nothing, viz. into
the essence, from whence it proceeded.

5. Thus, O man! understand what thou art to do; behold
thyself in thyself, what thou art, whether or no thou standest
in the resignation of thy mother (out of which thou wert
generated and created in the beginning), whether thou art
inclined with the same will; if not, then know that thou art a
rebellious, stubborn, disobedient child, and hast made thyself
thine own enemy, in that thou art entered into self-desire and
will, and hast made thyself thy own self-ful possession, so that
thou canst not dwell in the first mother, but in thyself: For thy
will is entered into self-hood; and all that does vex, plague, and
annoy thee, is only thy self-hood; thou makest thyself thy own
enemy, and bringest thyself into self-destruction or death.

6. Now if thou wilt get again out of death, then thou must
wholly forsake thy own self-desire, which has introduced itself
into strange essence, and become in self-hood, and the self-desire,
as a nothing, so that thou dost no longer will or desire to thyself,


1 Our own enemies.


198 Jacob Boehme


but wholly and fully introduce thy desire again with the resigna-
tion into the eternal, viz. into God’s will, that the same will may
be thy will and desire.

7: Without this there is nothing but misery and death, a
continual dying and perishing; for hence arises the election of
grace. If the human will (which is departed out of the unity
of eternity, and entered into a self-fulness, viz. into a selfish lust
and desire) does again break itself off from self-hood, and enter
into the mortification of self-will, and introduce its desire again
only into the first mother, then the first mother does again
choose it to be its child, and makes it again one with the only
will of eternity: But that [will or person] which continues in
self-hood, he continues in the eternal dying, viz. in an eternal
selfish enmity; and this also is only called sin, because that it
is an enmity against God, in that the creature will be at its
self-ful command and government.

8. Thus in its self-hood, viz. in a dominion full of contention
and strife, it cannot either will or do anything that is good; and
as it does impose, awaken, and powerfully stir up to its self
nothing else but the dying and death, so likewise it can do
nothing else to its fellow-members; for hence also arises the
falsehood [or lyes], that the creature denies the union with [or
in| the will of God, and sets his self-hood in the place; so that it
goes forth from the unity into desires and self-lusts: If it did but
truly know that all beings were its mothers, which brought it
forth, and did not hold the mother’s substance for its own, but
for common, then the covetousness, envy, strife, and contrary
will and enmity would not arise; from which the anger, viz. the
fire of destruction does arise.

g. All sins arise from self; for the self-hood forces itself with
the desire into its self- fulness ; it makes itself covetousness and
envy, it draws in its own desire strange essence into itself, and
makes the possessor of the strange essence also an enemy against
itself, so that sin is wrought with sin, vileness with vileness, and
all run confusedly in and among one another, as a mere abomina-
tion before the eternal mother.

to. In like manner also we are to consider of the regenerate
will, which goes out of its selfishness or self-hood again into the
resignation: the same becomes also an enemy and an abominate
to self-hood; as sickness is an enemy to health, and on the
contrary, health an enemy to sickness: Thus the resigned will,
and also the self-will are a continual enmity, and an incessant
lasting war and combat.


Signatura Rerum 199


tr. Self-will seeks only what serves to its self-hood; and the
resigned will is not at all careful, but brings its desire only into
its eternal mother, that it might be one with her: It will be a
nothing, that the mother might be alone all in it. Self-will says
to the resigned will, Thou art foolish, in that thou givest thyself
to death, and yet mightest well live gloriously in me; but the
resigned will says, Thou art my abomination, pain, and enmity,
and bringest me out of eternity into a time only into perplexity
and misery; thou plaguest me a while, and then thou givest my
body to the earth, and the soul to hell.

12. True real resignation is the mortification of the abominate
against God; he that wholly forsakes his self-hood, and gives
himself up with mind and desire, senses and will, into God’s
mercy, into the dying of Jesus Christ, he is dead to the earthly
world with the will, and is a twofold man; where the abominate
works only in itself to death, but the resigned will lives in
Christ’s death, and rises up continually in Christ’s resurrection in
God: And though the self-desire sins, which indeed can do nothing
else but sin, yet the resigned will lives not in sin, for it is mortified
to the desire of sin, and lives through Christ in God in the land
of the living; but self-hood lives in the land of death, viz. in
the continual dying, in the continual enmity against God.

13. The earthly man is the curse of God, and is an abominate
before God’s holiness; he can do nothing else but seek his self-
hood, for he is in the wrath of God: And though he does some-
thing that is good, yet he does it not from his own self-will, but
the will resigned in God compels him that he must do what his
self would not willingly do: And now if he does it, he does it as
an instrument of the resigned will, not from his own desire, but
from God’s will, which guides the resigned will in the desire as
an instrument.

14. Therefore now whoever will see the kingdom of God, and
attain thereunto, he must educe [or bring forth] his soul out of
self-hood, out of the earthly desire, as the physician brings forth
the cure of the disease from the painful [tormenting] desire, and
introduces it into a love-desire; and then the cure also brings
forth the sickness in the body out of the painful desire, and sets
it into a love-desire: Sickness becomes the servant of the physic;
and so likewise the evil earthly will, when the soul’s will is cured,
is the resigned will’s servant.

15. The elemental and siderial man must only be the instru-
ment wherewith man’s soul labours in the resigned will; for
thereto God has also created it; but the soul has made and set


200 Jacob Boehme


up itself in Adam for lord and master, and is entered into his
prison, and given its will thereto; but if it will be acknow-
ledged for God’s child, then it must again die to the same, and be
wholly mortified to the earthly self-hood and desire in God’s
will in Christ’s death, and be wholly regenerated anew in God’s
will, and deprive the earthly will in self-hood of its power, and
rule over it, and guide it in subjection and command, as a master
does his instrument, and then self-hood loses the power and
prevalence, and the lust of self-hood arises as a continual longing ;
self-hood does then continually long after the forms of its own
life, viz. after self-glory, and after earthly abundance, also after
envy and anger, whether it may be able to attain that abundance;
and also after the cunning lyes of falsehood: These are the vital
forms of the earthly self-hood.

16. But the resigned will does as a potent champion continually
bruise the head of this serpent, and says, “ Thou art arisen from
the devil, and God’s anger, I will have none of thee, thou art
an abomination before God.” And though the resigned will is
sometimes captivated with false lust, when it overwhelms and
overpowers it with the devil’s desire and insinuation of its
imagination, yet the resigned will does forthwith cry to the word 1
of God, that God’s will does again bring it out of the abomina-
tion of death.

17. The resigned will has no rest here in this cottage, but
must always be in combat, for it is lodged in a false house: It
is indeed in itself in God’s hand; but, without itself it is in the
jaws and throat of the abyss of God’s anger in the kingdom of
devils, which continually pass up and down with it, and desire
to try and tempt the soul, viz. the centre.

18. In like manner also the good angels stand by him in the
resigned will, viz. in the divine desire, and defend him from the
poisonful imagination of the devil; they keep off the fiery darts
of the wicked one, as St. Peter says.

19. For all do work and desire in man, God’s love and anger:
He stands while he is in this tabernacle in the gate either to go
out or in: Both eternal principles are stirring in him; to which
the soul’s will gives itself, of that it is received, and thereto it is
chosen; he is drawn of both, and if the will of the soul remains
in self-hood, then he is in the hand of God’s anger.

20. But if he departs out of his self-hood, and forsakes his
own damnation, and continually casts himself only into God’s
mercy, viz. into the suffering and death of Christ, and into his

1 Voice or breath.


Signatura Rerum 201


resurrection and restoration, and wills nothing of himself, but
what God wills in him, and by him, then the will is dead to the
life and desire of God’s anger; for it has no own life, but lies
in the death of self-hood and the desire of the devil; and the
anger of God cannot reach him; for he is as a nothing, and yet
is in God, and lives in the divine essence wholly, but not to him-
self, but to his first mother of eternity: He is again in the limit
or place where he was before he was a creature, and in the will
wherein God created him, and is an instrument in the voice of
God, upon which only the will-spirit of God does strike, to its
honour and deeds of wonder.

21. All self-ful seeking and searching in self-hood is a vain
thing; self-will apprehends nothing of God, for it is not in God,
but without God in its self-hood; but the resigned will appre-
hends it; for it does not do it, but the spirit in whom it stands
still, whose instrument it is, he manifests himself in the divine
voice in it as much as he pleases: And though it may apprehend
much in self-hood by searching and learning (which is not wholly
to no purpose), yet its apprehension is only without in the
expressed word, viz. in a form of the letter; and it understands
nothing of the form of the expressed word, how the same is in its
ground; for it is only born in the form from without, and not
in the power of the universal pregnatress, whose ground has
neither beginning, comprehension, or end.

22. Now that he is born from within out of the speaking
voice of God in God’s will-spirit, he goes in the byss and abyss
everywhere free, and is bound to no form; for he goes not in
self-hood, but the eternal will guides him as its instrument,
according as it pleases God: -but he that is born only in the
letter, he is born in the form of the expressed word, and goes
on in self-hood, and is a self-ful voice; for he seeks what he
pleases, and contends about the form, and leaves the spirit which
has made the form.

23. Such a doctor Babel is; it contends, wrangles, and rages
about the form of the word, and continually introduces the self-
ful spirit and understanding in the form, and cries out, Here is
the Church of Christ; and it is only a self-ful voice, understand-
ing nothing of the spirit of the form which is incomprehensible,
and strikes upon its prepared instrument without limit and
measure as it pleases. For conjecture, opinion, or the self-ful
own imagination, which arises in the expressed voice [or literal
outward word], is not God’s word; but that which arises in God’s
Spirit in the wholly resigned will in divine power in the eternal


202 Jacob Boehme


speaking word, that takes its original out of God’s voice, and
makes the form in the heart, viz. a divine desire, whereby the
soul’s will is drawn into God.

24. He is a shepherd, and teacher of Christ, who enters in
through the door of Christ, that is, who speaks and teaches by
Christ’s spirit; without this there is only the form, viz. the
history? that was once brought to pass, and that a man need
only accept of it, and comfort himself therewith: but this will
remains without, for it will be a child of an assumed grace, and
not wholly die to its self-hood in the grace, and become a child
of grace in the resigned will.

25. All whatever teaches of Christ’s satisfaction, and com-
forting oneself with Christ’s suffering, if it teaches not also the
true ground how a man must wholly die to self-hood in the
death, and give himself up in the resigned will wholly into the
obedience of God, as a new child of a new will, the same is
without, and not in the speaking voice of God, viz. in Christ’s
door.

26. No flattering or comforting avails anything, but to die to
the false will and desire in Christ’s death, and to arise in the
wholly resigned will in Christ’s resurrection in him, and con-
tinually mortify the earthly self-hood, and quench the evil which
the earthly will introduces into the imagination, as an evil fire
which would fain continually burn.

27. Comforting and setting the suffering of Christ in the
forefront is not the true faith; no, no, it is only without, and
not within: But a converted will, which enters into sorrow for
its earthly iniquity, and will have none of it any more; and yet
finds that it is kept back by the self-ful earthly lust, and with his
converted will departs sincerely out of this abomination and
false desire into God’s mercy, and casts himself with great
anxious [earnest] desire into Christ’s obedience, suffering, and
death, and in the converted will wholly dies to the earthly lust
in Christ’s death, which will not depart out of Christ’s death,
and continually cries Abba, loving Father! take thy dear Son’s
obedience for me; let me only in his death live in his obedience
in thee; let me die in him, that I may be nothing in myself, but
live and be in his will, in his humanity in thee; receive me, but
wholly in his resurrection, and not in my unworthiness; but
receive me in him; let me be dead in him, and give me his life,
that I may be thy obedient son in him, that his suffering and
death may be mine, that I may be before the same Christ in

1 That Christ once died and suffered for us, etc.


Signatura Rerum 203


him who has deprived death of its might, viz. a branch or twig of
his life.

28. Thus, and no otherwise, is the true Christian faith; it is
not only a comforting, but an incessant desire; the desife obtains
the suffering of Christ, which [desire] would continually fain be
obedient, if it knew but how it should behave itself before him,
which continually does fall down before him, and dives itself
into the deepest humility before him; it suffers and does all
things readily, only that it might but receive grace; it is willing
to take the cross of Christ upon itself, and regards not all the
scorn of all the world in its self-hood, but continually presses
forward into Christ’s love-desire: This desire does only grow out
of Christ’s death, and out of his resurrection in God, and brings
forth fruit in patience which is hidden in God, of which the
earthly man knows nothing, for it finds itself in its self-
hood.

29. A true Christian is a continual champion, and walks
wholly in the will and desire in Christ’s person, as he hath
walked up and down upon the earth. Christ, when he was upon
the earth, desired to overcome death, and bring the human
self-hood in true resignation into divine obedience: And this
likewise a right Christian desires to do; he desires continually
to die to the iniquity of death and wrath, and give himself up
to obedience, and to arise and live in Christ’s obedience in
God.

30. Therefore, dear brethren, take heed of putting on Christ’s
purple mantle without a resigned will; the poor sinner without
sorrow for his sins, and conversion of his will, does only take it
in scorn to Christ: Keep you from that doctrine which teaches
of self-ful abilities, and of the works of justification.

31. A true Christian is himself the great and anxious work
which continually desires to work! in God’s will, and forces
against the self-ful lusts of self-hood, and wills continually so to
do, and yet is many times hindered by self-hood: He breaks
self-hood, as a vessel, wherein he lies captive, and buds forth
continually in God’s will-spirit, with his desire resigned in God
(as a fair blossom springs out of the earth), and works in and
with God, what God pleases.

32. Therefore let the true Christendom know, and deeply lay
to heart, what is now told and spoken to her, viz. that she depart
from the false conjecture [or opinion] of comforting, without
conversion of the will; it is only an outward [expressed] form

1 Or works desire.


204 Jacob Boehme


of the new-birth; a Christian must be one spirit with Christ, and
have! Christ’s will and life in him; the form does not renew
him, neither comforting, or giving good words does at all help
or avail, but a mortifying of the evil inbred will, which is God’s
child, and born out of Christ’s death, no other will attains
Christ’s inheritance; my much knowing doth not also do it;
the herdsman in the field is as near to it as the doctor; no wit
or subtle art in disputation about the way of God does help or
avail anything thereto, it is only a let and hinderance; the true
will enters into the love of God and his children; it seeks no
form, but falls down before its creator, and desires the death of
its false self-hood; it seeks the work of love towards all men; it
will not flourish in the world’s scorn, but in its God; its whole
life is a mere repentance, and a continual sorrow for the evil
which cleaves to it: It seeks no glory or applause to shew itself,
but lives in humility: It acknowledges itself always as un-
worthy and simple; its true Christianity is always hidden in its
self-hood. He says, “I am in my self-hood an unprofitable
servant, and have not as yet begun to do or work repentance
right.” He is always in the beginning to work repentance, and
would always fain reach the gates of the sweet grace; he labours
for that purpose as a woman in travail labours to bring forth,
and knows not how it fares with him; the Lord hides his face
from him, that his working may be great towards him: He sows
in anguish and tears, and knows not his fruit, for it is hidden
in God; as a painful traveller goes a long way, aiming at his
wished-for journey’s end, so also he runs after the far mark of
his rest, and finds it not; unless his pearl does appear to him
in its beauty, and embraces him in its love: If it again departs
from his self-hood, then arises sighing and sorrowing again with
continual desire; and one day calls another, the day the night,
and the night the morning; and yet there is no place of rest in
the earthly self-hood, but only in the fair solar lustre of his
precious pearl; when the sun arises to him in the darkness,
then the night departs, and all sorrow and anguish fly
away.

33. Therefore, dear brethren, learn to take heed and beware
of contention, where men contend about the literal form: A
true Christian has nothing to contend for, for he dies to his
reason’s desire; he desires only God’s knowledge in his love and
grace, and lets all go which contends and strives about the form,
for Christ’s spirit must make the form in himself; the outward


1 Bear, or carry.


Signatura Rerum 205


form is only a guide: God must become man, or else man
becomes not God.

34. Therefore a Christian is the most simple [or plainest] man
upon the earth, as Isaiah says, ““ Who is so simple as my ser-
vant?” All heathens desire self-hood, and tear and devour one
another for the authority and honours: But a true Christian
desires to die to them; he seeks not his own, but Christ’s
honour. All whatever contends about self-hood, viz. about the
self-ful honour and pleasure of this life, the same is heathenish,
and far worse than heathenish; yea like the devil, who departed
from God into self-fulness: Let it cover itself with Christ’s
mantle as much as ever it will, yet the man of false self-hood is
lodged under it; if he will be a Christian, then he must quite
die to self-hood, that the same may only hang to him from
without as a garment of this world, wherein he is a stranger
and pilgrim, and always consider and think that he is but a
servant in his high office, and serves God therein as a servant,
and not be his own lord and master.

35. All whatever does lord itself without God’s call and
appointment, the same is from the devil, and serves the devil in
his own power and form: Defend and flatter thyself as much as
thou wilt, it does not avail before God; thy own heart accuses
thee that thou art a false branch; thy nobility and highness do
not at all avail or help thee in the sight of God, if thou dost not
thereby drive in God’s order; thy office is not thine, but God’s;
if thou walkest falsely therein, then thy own judgement is upon
thee, and condemns thee to death; thou art a servant; and
though thou art a king, yet thou servest, and must enter with
the poorest into the new birth, or else thou shalt not see
God.

36. All self-ful assumed [or arrogated] laws and authority,
wherewith the poor are vexed and oppressed, do all come from
self-hood, whose original is in the expressed form, which has
with the form introduced itself into a self-hood, and brought
itself out quite from God: Whatever does not serve in a servant’s
office before God, the same is all false, let it be either high or
low, learned or unlearned: We are altogether servants of the
great God; nothing brings itself into a self-fulness, unless it be
born in God’s anger in the impression of nature: And though a
Christian possesses an own-hood, which is not false, yet he is
only but a servant therein, viz. a distributer for his Master, a
steward and overseer of his Master’s work: He deals for his
Master therein, and not for his self-hood only; all whatever he


206 Jacob Boehme


plots and devises to bring into self-hood, and brings it, that he
brings into the anxious cabinet of covetousness, envy, and
self-ful pleasure of the flesh, viz. into a vessel that is separated
from God, viz. into the impression of nature, and steals from
his Lord and Master who has set him up for a ‘steward; he is a
sacrilegious person,! let him excuse himself, and pretend what
he pleases.

37. A true Christian acknowledges himself for a servant of
God, to whom it is given in charge to deal right with God’s
works. He is not his own, for he is also not at home in this
earthly work of this tabernacle: Let him seek, search, plant and
build, traffic and trade; and whatever else he does, he must
always know that he does it to God, and shall give an account
thereof, and that he is a stranger and servant in this work, and
serves his Master; and not at all look upon the course of his fore-
fathers who have walked therein in the pleasure of the earthly
life; whoever does so is far from the kingdom of God, and can
with no conscience and ground call himself [or think himself
to be] a Christian; for he stands only in the form of Christianity,
and not in the spirit of Christ; the form shall be destroyed, and
cease with time, but the spirit remains steadfast for ever.

38. A true Christian is in the spirit a Christian, and in
continual exercise to bring forth its own form, not only with
words in sound and shew, but in the power of the work, as a
visible palpable form, not weening, conjecturing, and giving
good words out of the self-ful self- hood, and yet remaining in
self-hood; but a dying to self-hood, and a growing forth in the
will of God in the love-self-hood as a servant of God in God’s
deeds of wonder; a helping to strike his instrument in God’s
will, and be a true sounding string in God’s harmonious concert;
a continual making word in God’s voice, viz. in the verbum fiat,
which makes and works in and with God what God makes, forms,
and works, as an instrument of God.

39. Therefore, O thou dear Christendom, behold thyself,
whether thou workest in the working word of God in his will, or
whether thou standest only in the form of Christendom, and
workest thy own self-fulness in falsehood: Thou wilt find, how
thou art become an abomiation before the Most High, and
thy casting forth ? from the Most High out of this form (which
thou in thy self-hood hast introduced into his expressed form)
shall presently follow; and that because thou coverest thyself
with the true form, and art a false child therein: Therefore thou

1Text, a pilferer from God and his substance. 2? Spewing out.


Signatura Rerum 2,07


art sought, and found with a false veil [or covering] in thy own
form.

40. And as thou hast brought thyself into a false self-ful form
under the true form, so thou shalt also destroy thyself, whereto
the heaven helps thee, which thou hast a long time served in
obedience, and from this there is no withholding; thy work is
found to be in the turba, which shall well satisfy and satiate itself
in destroying, as thou hast built up thyself in thy apostate false-
hood in thy own form under the name of the true form, and hast
played the hypocrite before God with the shew and ostentation
of holiness, and only served the earthly man: But the servant
of the Lord shall be sought and found; the Lord feeds his lambs
in his own form, and brings them into his pasture; all the
haughty and wealthy of the world shall find by experience what
judgment the Lord will bring upon the face of all the earth, and
all wicked hope shall be destroyed; for the day of the harvest
draws near: “A terror from the Lord shaketh the earth, and
his voice soundeth in all the ends of the earth;” and the star
of his wonders arises, no one hinders it, for it is concluded of in
the counsel of the watchmen in the gates of the deep.

41. Therefore let every one seek and find himself; for the
time of visitation is at hand, that he may be found in his love;
for the turba has found all false lust in it, and the Most High
worker of all essences manifests the turba; and then all false
lust or imagination becomes manifest, and each thing enters
into its eternal keeper, for all things are generated out of
imagination: So also it shall receive its property in the imagina-
tion, and every imagination + reaps its own work which it has
wrought; for to that end all things have appeared, that the
eternity might be manifest in a time: With deeds of wonder it
brought itself into the form of time, and with deeds of wonder it
carries itself forth again out of the time into its first place.

42. All things enter again into that from whence they pro-
ceeded; but they keep their own form and model, as they have
introduced themselves in the expressed word; and everything
shall also be received of its likeness, and the end is always; ?
and as all things generate themselves in the expressed word, so
also they are signed in their inward form, which also signs the
outward.

43. The self-ful will makes a form according to its innate
nature; but a form is made in the resigned will according to
the platform or model of eternity, as it was known in the glass

1 Lubet or longing desire. 2 Or, this is always the end.


208 Jacob Boehme


of God’s eternal wisdom before the times of this world; so the
eternal will figures and forms it into a model of its likeness to
the honour and wonderful acts of God; for all whatever goes
on in its self-hood, the same forms itself; but what resigns itself
freely, that is formed of the free will: Now no self-ful form with
its own self-will can inherit the only Eternal Being; for where
there are two wills in one, there is enmity.

44. Seeing then God is one only God, then all whatever will
live in him must be like his will and word: As a concert of
music must be tuned into one harmony, though there be many
strings, and manifold voices and sounds therein; so must the
true human harmony be tuned with all voices into a love
melody, and that will-spirit which is not tuned unto the only
concert in the divine voice, the same is cast forth out of this
tune, and brought into its self-ful tune, viz. into its true fellow-
voices of its own likeness; for every likeness shall receive its
own.

45. Has any been here an evil spirit? Then he shall be
introduced into the root of his likeness; for every hunger
receives its like into itself; now the whole manifestation of
eternity with this time is nothing else but an hunger and genera-
tion; as the hunger is, so is also the essence of its satiating; for
with the hunger the creature took its beginning, and with the
hunger it enters into its eternal [being].

46. In the hunger the spirit with the body is generated, and
in the same hunger it goes into its eternal being, unless it breaks
its first hunger, and brings itself into another by mortification,
else all is at its end as soon as it is born; but death is the only
means whereby the spirit may enter into another source and
form: If it dies to its self-hood, and breaks its will in death,
then a new twig springs forth out of the same, but not according
to the first will, but according to the eternal will; for if a thing
enters into its nothing, then it falls again to the creator, who
makes that thing as it was known in the eternal will, before it
was created to a creature; there it is in the right aim or limit
of eternity, and has no turba, for it is in nature’s end.

47. Whatever runs on in nature torments itself, but that which
attains nature’s end, the same is in rest without source, and yet
works, but only in one desire: All whatever makes anguish and
strife in nature, that makes mere joy in God; for the whole host
of heaven is set and tuned into one harmony; each angelical
kingdom into a peculiar instrument, but all mutually composed
together into one music, viz. into the only love-voice of God:


Signatura Rerum 209


Every string of this melody exalts and rejoices the other; and
it is only a mere ravishing lovely and delightful hearing, tasting,
feeling, smelling, and seeing: Whatever God is in himself, that
the creature is also in its desire in him; a God-angel, and a
God-man, God all in all, and without him nothing else. As it
was before the times of this world in his eternal harmony [or
voice], so also it continues in the creaturely voice in him in his
eternity; and this is the beginning and the end of all things.


Pp 569


CHAPTER XVI


CONCERNING THE ETERNAL SIGNATURE AND HEAVENLY JOY;
WHY ALL THINGS WERE BROUGHT INTO EVIL AND GOOD


1. THE creation of the whole creation is nothing else but a
manifestation of the all-essential, unsearchable God; all what-
ever he is in his eternal unbeginning generation and dominion,
of that is also the creation, but not in the omnipotence and
power, but like an apple which grows upon the tree, which is not
the tree itself, but grows from the power of the tree: Even so
all things are sprung forth out of the divine desire, and created
into an essence, where in the beginning there was no such
essence present, but only that same mystery of the eternal
generation, in which there has been an eternal perfection.

2. For God has not brought forth the creation, that he should
be thereby perfect, but for his own manifestation, viz. for the
great joy and glory; not that this joy first began with the
creation, no, for it was from eternity in the great mystery, yet
only as a spiritual melody and sport in itself.

3. The creation is the same sport out of himself, viz. a platform
or instrument of the Eternal Spirit, with which he melodises:
and it is even as a great harmony of manifold instruments which
are all tuned into one harmony; for the eternal word, or divine
sound or voice, which is a spirit, has introduced itself with the
generation of the great mystery into formings, viz. into an
expressed word or sound: And as the joyful melody is in itself
in the spirit of the eternal generation, so likewise is the instru-
ment, viz. the expressed form in itself, which the living eternal
voice guides, and strikes with his own eternal will-spirit, that it
sounds and melodises; as an organ of divers and various sounds
or notes is moved with one only air, so that each note, yea every
pipe has its peculiar tune, and yet there is but one manner of
air or breath in all notes, which sounds in each note or pipe
according as the instrument or organ is made.

4. Thus in the eternity there is only one spirit in the whole
work of the divine manifestation, which is the manifestator in
the expressed voice and also in the speaking voice of God, which

210


Signatura Rerum 211


is the life of the grand mystery, and of all that is generated from
thence; he is the manifestator of all the works of God.

Ei All the angelical kingdoms are as a prepared work, viz.
a manifestation of the eternal sound of the voice of God, and
are as a particularity out of the great mystery, and yet are only
one in the divine eternal speaking word, sound, or voice of God;
for one only spirit rules them; each angelical prince is a property
out of the voice of God, and bears the creat name of God; as we
have a type and figure of it in the stars of the firmament, and
in the kingdoms and dominions upon the earth among all
generations, where every lord bears his high title, respective
name and office: So likewise do the stars in the firmament,
which are altogether one only dominion in power under them,
where the great stars bear the name and the office of the forms
in the mystery of the seven properties, and the other after them,
as a particularity of houses or divisions, where every one is a
peculiar harmony or operation, like a kingdom, and yet all
proceeds in one harmony; like a clock-work, which is entirely
composed in itself, and all the pieces work mutually together
in one; and yet the great fixed stars keep their peculiar property
in the essence of operation, especially the seven planets according
to the seven properties of nature, as an under pregnatress of the
eternal mystery, or as an instrument of the spirit out of the
eternal mystery.

6. This birth of the astrum begets in the four elements, viz.
in its body or essence, joy and sorrow, and all is very good in
itself; only the alteration of the creature proceeds from the
lustful imagination, whereby the creature elevates the wrath of
the fire in the properties, and brings them forth out of the
likeness of their accord: Nothing is evil which remains in the
equal accord; for that which the worst causes and makes with
its coming forth out of the accord, that likewise the best makes
in the equal accord; that which there makes sorrow, that makes
also in the likeness joy; therefore no creature can blame its
creator, as if he made it evil; all was very exceeding good;
but with its own elevation and departure out of the likeness it
becomes evil, and brings itself out of the form [or property] of
the love and joy, intoa ‘painful tormenting form and property.

7. King Lucifer stood in the beginning of his creation in
highest joyfulness, but he departed from the likeness, and put
himself forth out of the accord [or heavenly concert] into the
cold, dark, fiery generation, out of which the hot fiery generation
arises; he forsook his order, and went out of the harmony,


212 Jacob Boehme


wherein God created him; he would be lord over all, and so he
entered into the austere fire’s domination, and is now an instru-
ment in the austere fire’s might, upon which also the all-essential
spirit strikes and sounds upon his instrument, but it sounds only
according to the wrathful fire’s property: as the harmony, viz.
the life’s-form is in each thing, so is also the sound or tone of the
eternal voice therein; in the holy [it is] holy, in the perverse it
is perverse: All things must praise the Creator of all beings;
the devils praise him in the might of wrath, and the angels and
men praise him in the might of love.

8. The Being of all beings is but one only Being, but in its
generation it separates itself into two principles, viz. into light
and darkness, into joy and sorrow, into evil and good, into love
and anger, into fire and light, and out of these two eternal
beginnings [or principles] into the third beginning, viz. into the
creation, to its own love-play and melody, according to the
property of both eternal desires.

g. Thus each thing goes into its harmony, and is guided [or
driven] by one only spirit, which is in each thing according to
the property of the thing; and this is the clock [or watch-work]
of the great mystery of eternity in each principle according to
the property of the principle, and then according to the innate
form of the composed instrument of the same creatures, even
in all these beginnings [or principles].

I0. Death is the bound-mark of all whatever is temporal,
whereby the evil may be destroyed; but that which arises out
of the eternal beginnings, and in its harmony and life’s-form
enters into another figure, that departs out of God’s harmony,
out of the true order wherein God created it, and is cast out of
the same harmony into its likeness, as a dissonant discording
melody or sound in the great excellent well-tuned harmony; for
it is an opposite contrary thing, and bears another tone, sound,
and will, and so it is introduced into its likeness; and therefore
hell is given to the devil for his house and habitation, because he
introduced his life’s-form into the anger of God, and into the
fiery wrath of the eternal nature, so that now he is the instru-
ment in the eternal fire of God, and the anger-spirit strikes his
instrument, and yet it must stand to the honour and admiration
of God, and be the sport and play in the desire and property of
the wrathful anger.

11. The anger and wrath of God are now his joy, not as if he
feared, sorrowed, and lived in impotency; no, but in great
strength and fiery might, as a potent king and lord, yet only


Signatura Rerum 209


in the same property of which he himself is, viz. in the first
principle in the dark world.

12. The like also we are to know concerning the angelical
world, viz. the second principle, where God’s light and glorious
beauty shine in every being [or thing], and the divine voice or
sound rises up in all creatures in great joyfulness; where the
spirit proceeding from the divine voice makes a joyfulness, and
an incessant continual love-desire in those creatures, and in all
the divine angelical beings: As there is an anguish-source and
trembling in the painful fire, so in like manner there is a trembling
joyfulness in the light and love-fire, viz. a great elevation of the
voice of God, which makes in the angels and in the like creatures,
as the souls of men, a great manifestation of the divine joy-
fulness.

13. The voice [or breath] of God continually and eternally
brings forth its joy through the creature, as through an instru-
ment; the creature is the manifestation of the voice of God:
What God is in the eternal generation of his eternal word out of
the great mystery of the Father’s property, that the creature is
in the image as a joyful harmony, wherewith the Eternal Spirit
plays or melodises.

14. All properties of the great eternal mystery of the pregna-
tress of all beings are manifest in the holy angelical and humane
creatures; and we are not to think thereof, as if the creatures
only stood still and rejoiced at the glory of God, and admired
only in joy; not, but it is as the Eternal Spirit of God works
from eternity to eternity in the great mystery of the divine
generation, and continually manifests the infinite and number-
less wisdom of God; even as the earth brings forth always fair
blossoms, herbs, and trees, so also metals and all manner of
beings, and puts them forth sometimes more sovereign, powerful,
and fair, than at other times; and as one arises in the essence,
another falls down, and there is an incessant lasting enjoyment
and labour.

15. Thus likewise is the eternal generation of the holy
mystery in great power and reprocreation [or paradisical pullula-
tion] where one divine fruit of the great love-desire stands with
another in the divine essence; and all is as a continual love-
combat or wrestling delight; a blooming of fair colours, and a
pleasant ravishing smell of the divine Mercury, according to the
divine nature’s property, a continual good taste of love from
the divine desire.

16. Of all whatever this world is an earthly type and


214 Jacob Boehme


resemblance, that is in the divine kingdom in great perfection
in the spiritual essence; not only spirit, as a will, or thought,
but essence, corporeal essence, sap and power; but as incom-
prehensible in reference to the outward world: For this visible
world was generated and created out of the same spiritual
essence in which the pure element is; and also out of the dark
essence in the mystery of the wrath (being the original of the
eternal manifest essence from whence the properties arise) as
an out-spoken breath out of the Being of all beings: Not that
it was made of the eternal essence, but out of the breathing
forth or [expression] of the eternal essence; out of love and
anger, out of evil and good, as a peculiar generation of a peculiar
principle in the hand of the Eternal Spirit.

17. Therefore all whatever is in this world is a type and figure
of the angelical world: not that the evil, which is alike manifest
with the good in this world, is also manifest in heaven; no, they
are separated into two principles; in heaven all is good which
is evil in hell; whatever is anguish and torment in hell, that is
good and a joy in heaven; for there all stands in the light’s
source; and in hell all stands in the wrath in the dark
source.

18. Hell, viz. the dark world has also its generation of fruits;
and there is even such an essence and dominion in them as in
heaven, but in nature and manner of the wrathful property;
for the fiery property makes all evil in the darkness, and in the
light it makes all things good; and in sum, all is wholly one in
both eternal worlds; but light and darkness separates them, so
that they stand as an eternal enmity opposite one to another,
to the end that it may be known what is evil or good, joy or
sorrow, love or anger: There is only a distinction between the
love-desire of the light, and the anger-desire of the darkness.

19. In the original of the eternal nature, in the Father’s
property in the great mystery of all beings, it is wholly one: for
the same only fire is even in the angelical world, but in another
source, viz. a love-fire, which is a poison, and a fire of anger to
the devils, and to hell; for the love-fire is a death, mortification,
and an enmity of the anger-fire; it deprives the wrath of its
might, and this the wrath wills not, and it also cannot be; for
if there were no wrath, there would be no fire, and also no light:
If the eternal wrath were not, the eternal joy also would not be;
in the light the wrath is changed into joy; the wrathful fire’s
essence is mortified as to the darkness in the wrathful fire, and
out of the same dying the light and love-fire arise; as the light


-


Signatura Rerum 205


burns forth from the candle, and yet in the candle the fire and
light are but one thing.

20. Thus also the great mystery of all beings is in the eternity
in itself only one thing, but in its explication and manifestation
it goes from eternity to eternity into two essences, viz. into evil
and good; what is evil to one thing, that is good to another.
Hell is evil to the angels, for they were not created thereunto;
but it is good to the hellish creatures : So also heaven is evil to
the hellish creatures, for it is their poison and death, an eternal
dying, and an eternal captivity.

21. Therefore there is an eternal enmity, and God is only
called God according to the light of his love; he is indeed
himself all, but according to the darkness he saith, “I am an
angry jealous God, and a consuming fire.”

22. Every creature must remain in its place wherein it was
apprehended in its creation and formed into an image, and not
depart out of that same harmony, or else it becomes an enemy
of the Being of all beings.

23. And thus hell is even an enemy of the devil, for he is a
strange guest therein, viz. a perjured fiend cast out of heaven:
he will be lord in that wherein he was not created; the whole
creation accuses him for a false perjured apostate spirit, which
is departed from his order; yea even the nature in the wrath is
his enemy though he be of the same property; yet he is a
stranger, and will be lord, though he has lost his kingdom, and
is only an inmate in the wrath of God; he that was too rich, is
now become too poor; he had all when he stood in humility,
and now he has nothing, and is moreover captivated in the gulf:
this is his shame, that he is a king, and yet has fooled away his
kingdom in pride; the royal creature remains, but the dominion
is taken away; of a king he is become an executioner; what
God’s anger apprehends, there he is a judge, viz. an officer of
God’s anger, yet he must do what his Lord and Master wills.

24. This reason most ignorantly gainsays, and says, “‘ God is
omnipotent, and omniscient, he has made it: Even he hath
done with his work as he hath pleased, who will contend with
the Most High? ” Yes, dear reason, now thou thinkest thou
hittest it right; but first learn the A B C in the great mystery:
All whatever is risen out of the eternal will, viz. out of the great
eternal mystery of all beings (as angels and the souls of men
are), stands in equal weight + in evil and good in the free will as
God himself; that desire which powerfully and predominantly


1 Counterpoised.


216 Jacob Boehme


works in the creature, and quite overtops the other, of that
property the creature is. As a candle puts forth out of itself
a fire, and out of the fire the wind, which wind the fire draws
again into itself, and yet gives it forth again; and when this
spirit is gone forth from the fire and light, then it is free from
the fire and light; what property it again receives, of that it is:
The first mystery wherein the creature consists is the all-
essential mystery, and the other in the forth-going spirit is its
propriety, and a self-ful will. Has not every angel its own
peculiar spirit, which is generated out of its own mystery, which
has its original out of eternity? Why will this spirit be a
tempter of God, and tempt the mystery, which immediately
captivates it in the wrath, as happened to Lucifer? It has the
drawing to God’s wrath and to God’s love in it; why does not
the spirit (which is generated out of both) which is the similitude
of the Spirit of God, continue in its place in obedience, as a
child before the mother in humility?

25. Thou sayst it cannot; It is not so:1 Every spirit stands
in the place where it was created in equal weight, and has its
free will; it is a spirit with the all-essential Eternal Spirit, and
may take to itself a lubet in the all-essential Eternal Spirit as it
wills, either in God’s love or anger; whereinto it introduces its
longing imagination, the essence and property of that it receives
in the great mystery of all beings.

26. In God the birth is manifest in love and anger; why not
also in the creature which is created out of God’s essence and
will, out of his voice and breath into an image? What property
[or note] of the voice the creature awakes in itself, the same
sounds in, and rules the creature: God’s will to the creature was
only one, viz. a general manifestation of the spirit, as each
[creature] was apprehended in the property of the eternal
mystery; yet, Lucifer was apprehended in the good angelical
property, which plainly testifies that he was an angel in heaven;
but his own incorporised will-spirit forced itself into the wrathful
mother, to awaken the same in it, and thereby to be a lord over
every created being. Now the will-spirit is free, it is the eternal
original, let it do what it will.

27. Therefore we are to know this, and it is no otherwise, that
the will-spirit which takes its original out of love and anger, out
of both eternal principles, has given itself into the wrath, whereby
the wrath has powerfully got the upper hand and dominion, and
put itself out of the equal harmony into a dissonance or discord,

1 Or, This is spoken without any ground or foundation.


Signatura Rerum es Ve


and so he must be driven into his likeness; this is his fall, and
so it is also the fall of all evil men.

28. Now self-reason alledges the Scripture, where it is written,
“ Many are called, but few are chosen:” Also, “ I have loved
Jacob and hated Esau;” also, “ Hath not a potter power to
make of one lump [of earth] what he pleaseth? ” Isay the same
also, “ That many are called, but few are chosen;” for they
will not; they give their free will into God’s anger, where they
are even apprehended, and so are chosen to be “ children of
wrath; ” whereas they were all called in Adam into paradise,
and in Christ into the regeneration; but they would not, the
free will would not, it exalted itself into the wrath of God which
apprehended it, and so they were not chosen children; for
God’s love chooses only its likeness, and so likewise God’s anger;
yet the gate of the regeneration stands open to the wicked,
whom the anger of God has apprehended. Man has the death
in him, whereby he may die to the evil; but the devil has not,
for he was created to the highest perfection.

29. Thus it is also with Jacob and Esau: In Jacob the line of
Christ got the upper hand in the wrestling wheel; and in Esau
the fall of Adam; now Christ was therefore promised into the
humanity, that he might heal the fall of Adam, and redeem
Esau, which was captivated in the wrath, from the wrath;
Jacob denotes Christ; and Esau Adam; now Christ is to
redeem Adam from death and wrath, wherein he was captivated:
But did Esau continue tin sin? That I know not; the Scripture
also does not declare it; the blessing belonged to Esau, that is,
to Adam, but he fooled it away in the Fall, and so the blessing
fell upon Jacob, that is upon Christ, who should bless Adam
and Esau, so that the kingdom and blessing might be given of
free grace again to Adam and Esau; though he was appre-
hended in the curse, yet the door of grace stood open in Jacob,
that is, in Christ; therefore Jacob said afterward, that is Christ,
when he was entered into Adam’s soul and flesh, “ Come unto
me all ye that are weary and heavy laden with your sins, and
I will refresh you:”’ Also, “I am come to call the sinner to
repentance; ”’ not Jacob, who needs it not, but Esau, who needs
it; and when he (viz. Esau) is come, then says Christ, “ There
is more joy in heaven for him, than for ninety-nine righteous
ones, which need no repentance;” [viz. for one Esau that
repents] there is more joy than for ninety-nine Jacobs, who in
the centre of the life’s original are apprehended in the line of

HOrndie;


218 Jacob Boehme


Christ: There is more joy for one poor sinner, whom the anger

has apprehended in the centre of God’s wrath in the life’s

original, and chosen to condemnation, if he brings the sins of

death again into the mortification or death of sin, than for-
ninety-nine righteous ones that need no repentance.

30. But who are the righteous, for we are all become sinners
in Adam? Answer, They are those whom the line of Christ in
the humanity apprehends in the life’s rise [or at the first point
of opening of life in them], not that they cannot fall as Adam,
but that they are apprehended in Christ’s will-spirit in the
wrestling wheel, where love and anger are counterpoised, and
chosen to life; as happened to Jacob, so also to Isaac, and Abel:
But this line should be the preacher and teacher of Cain, Ishmael,
and Esau, and exhort them to repentance, and to turn out of
the anger: And this line did give itself into the anger which
was enkindled in Adam, Cain, Ishmael, and destroyed the devil’s
sting with love, that Cain, Ishmael, and Esau had an open gate
to grace; if they would but turn and die in Jacob, that is, if they
would enter into Christ’s death, and die to sin in Abel, Isaac,
and Jacob, and Christ, then they should be received into the
election of grace.

31. Jacob took Esau’s place in the blessing: Why did that
come to pass? In Jacob was the promised seed of Abraham
and Adam; from this line the blessing should come upon the
sinful Adam and Esau; Jacob must be filled with God’s blessing,
that he might bless the first-born of angry Adam and Esau; for
the blessing, that is, Christ must be born in our flesh and soul,
that the seed of the woman might bruise the head of the serpent.

32. The anger must be drowned and appeased in the humanity ;
an offering did not do it, but this resigning into the wrath, that
the love might drown the wrath. Jacob in Christ must drown
Esau in the love-power in his blood, that Esau might also become
a Jacob in Christ: But Esau was not willing to receive his
brother Jacob, and contended about the first birth; t that is,
Adam in sin will not, cannot receive [or accept of] Christ, he
shall and must die to the sinful flesh and will.

33. Therefore Esau has ever fought against Jacob; for Jacob
should drown him in Christ in his blood; this the evil Adam in
Esau would not have, he would live in his self-hood, therefore he
strove with the earthly Adam against Jacob; but when Jacob
met him with his gifts, that is, when Christ came with his free
love-gift into the humanity, then Esau fell upon his brother

1 Or birthright.


Signatura Rerum 219


Jacob’s neck and wept; for when Christ entered into the
humanity, Adam wept in Esau, and repented him of his sins
and evil intent, that he would kill Jacob: For when God’s love
in the humanity entered into God’s anger, the angry Father
bewailed our sins and misery, and Jacob with his humility drove
forth mournful tears out of his brother Esau; that is, the love
in the humanity brought forth the great compassion out of
and through the angry Father; so that the angry Father in the
midst of his enkindled wrath in the humanity did set open a
gate of mercy for Adam and all his children; for his love broke
the anger, which [love] put itself into death, and made an open
gate for poor sinners in the death to his grace.

34. Now it is commanded the poor sinner, whom the anger
has chosen to the condemnation of eternal death, that he enter
into this same death, and die in Christ’s death to sin, and then
Christ drowns it in his blood, and chuses him again to be God’s
child.

35- Here is the calling: Christ calls us into his death, into
his dying; this the sinner will not have: Here is now strife in
the sinner between the seed of the woman and the seed of the
serpent; which now overcomes, that conceives the child: Now
the free will may reach to which it pleases; both gates stand
open to him. Many who are in Christ’s line are also brought
through imagination and lust, as Adam was, into iniquity; they
are indeed called, but they persevere not in the election, for
the election is set upon him who departs from sin; he is elected
that dies to sin in Christ’s death, and rises in Christ’s resurrec-
tion, who receives God in Christ, not only in the mouth, but in
divine desire in the will and new-birth, as a new fiery generation:
Knowledge apprehends it not, only the earnest desire and
breaking of the sinful will, that apprehends it.

36. Thus there is no sufficient ground in the election of grace
as reason holds it forth: Adam is chosen in Christ; but that
many a twig withers on the tree, is not the tree’s fault, for it
withdraws its sap from no twig, only the twig gives forth itself
too eagerly with the desire; it runs on in self-will, viz. it is taken
by the inflammation of the sun and the fire, before it can draw
sap again in its mother, and refresh itself.

37. Thus also man perishes among the evil company in evil
vain ways: God offers him his grace that he should repent; but
evil company and the devil lead him in wicked ways, till he be
even too hard captivated in the anger; and then it goes very
hardly with him; he indeed was called, but he is evil; God


220 Jacob Boehme


chuses only children: Seeing he is evil, the choice passes over
him; but if he again reforms and amends, the eternal choice
[or election] does again receive him.

38. Thus says the Scripture, ‘‘ Many are called;”’ but when
the choice in Christ’s suffering and death comes upon them, then
they are not capable of the same, by reason of the self-ful evil
will which they had before embraced, and so they are not the
elected, but evil children; and here it is then rightly said, “ We
have piped unto you, but you have not danced; we have
mourned unto you, and ye have not lamented unto us:1 O
Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy children
together, as a hen gathereth her chickens under her wings, and
thou wouldest not:” It is not said, “ thou couldest not,” but
“thou wouldest not;”’ and while they remain in the iniquity
of sin, they also cannot: God will not cast his pearl before swine;
but to the children which draw near to him he gives the pearl
and his bread.

39. Therefore whoever blames God, despises his mercy, which
he has introduced into the humanity, and brings the judgement
headlong upon his body and soul.

40. Thus I have truly warned the reader, and set before his
eyes what the Lord of all beings has given me: He may behold
himself in this looking-glass both within and without, and find
what and who he is: Every reader shall find his profit therein,
be he either good or evil: It is a very clear gate of the mystery
of all beings. With glosses and self-wit none shall apprehend
it in its own ground; but it may well embrace the real seeker,
and create him much profit and joy, and even be helpful to him
in all natural things, provided he applies himself right, and
seeks’ it in the fear of God, seeing it is now a time of seeking;
for a lily blossoms upon the mountains and valleys in all the
ends of the earth: He that seeketh findeth. Amen.


1 Text, comforted us.


HALLELUJAH


POSTSCRIPT BY THE TRANSLATOR


THE preceding book is a brief signature, or character of natural
and divine knowledge. But it will seem strange and simple to
the proud self-conceited sophisters, the wiselings of pedantic
reason, who will carp and cavil at anything but what dances to
their pipe, or agrees with their conceits. But their censures are
not to be valued; and their letter-learned mock productions of
science are to be pitied, being only the courted shadows of their
own amused fancy. Such as these being captivated in the
mystery of Babel, wonder only after their beast Mammon, upon
which they ride in pride, and scorn anything but what pleases
and flatters them in their admired works of covetous iniquity,
gilded over with seeming holiness, But the Babylonish structure
of their turba-magna-performances will fall, when it has attained
the highest limit of its constellation, and no wit of man shall
be able to prop it up. In the meantime the Antichrist in Babel
will rage and tyrannise, and execute the sentence of wrath, or
his own dismal doom, upon himself.

But not to transgress by too large a digression from the intent
of this postscript; the principal design of it is to explain some
words which are used in the translation, as


FLAGRAT, LUBET, SOURCE, SUDE


FLAGRAT


The word in the German is Schra’ck, which signifies properly
a fright, sudden astonishment, or dismay. In the other books
it is translated terror, or crack, but I have put it flagrat, from
the Latin word flagro, though I mean not by it only a burning,
but even the powerful opening of the life or death of the en-
kindling of the fire in nature. For the fire is the dividing bound-
mark, in which the life of both principles is opened and separated ;
the life of the first is the dying death in the darkness, and the
life of the second is the living life in the light. You may per-
ceive a resemblance of this flagrat in thunder and lightening,
as also in gunpowder, and the like. Take for instance divers
sulphureous salnitral minerals exactly mixed, now their powers

221


222 Jacob Boehme


are as I may say contracted, or shut up in the astringent dark
desire or death; but touch them rightly with the true fire, and
you will see how they will soon open, disclose, and flash forth,
and will even display and stream themselves forth into divers
properties, colours, and virtues. It is even the bursting forth
of the ardent desire in nature. It is, as I may term it, the
magical fire-breath, whereby the powers either of light or dark-
ness are dismayed. In short, it is the pregnant echo of the
sound of eternity everywhere speaking, working, and opening
itself in love or anger, in each thing according to its will and
desire: In some it is the horrible flagrat to death; and in others
it is the pleasant triumphant flagrat to life.


LUBET


The word in the Dutch is lust, which signifies a longing desire
or will to a thing; also a delight, or contented joy; sometimes
imagination and lust. But because our word lust is commonly
used in the worst sense (a longing after evil and vanity) and
would not properly agree to, or fully express the German word |
lust in all places, I have generally translated it lubet, from the
Latin word lubitum, whereby is meant the divine beneplacitum,
or good pleasure. By it is understood the origin to a desire in
the eternal nothing, or pregnant magic, God’s free well-liking to
the desire of the manifestation of nature and creature, without
which all had been an eternal stillness in the nothing. This
lubet in man is the moving will to good or evil, light or darkness,
love or anger,


SOURCE


By this are meant the first original qualities or properties of
both the inward principles, as they break forth in the sude of
the fire in the flagrat of love or anger in nature or creature.
For in the darkness the love-ens, or paradisical light, is shut
up in death, and causes an austere dark source, pain, horror,
torment, or disquietude; and so it is the radical property of the
contentious elements and stars in the curse of God: And in the
light the life of love breaks forth, and swallows up this wrathful
source of darkness and death, and turns it into joy or a divine
source. So that by source is understood the original quality,
property, or qualification of evil, darkness, anger, sorrow,
cursing, damnation, death, hell; or the contrary to these in


Signatura Rerum 223


their divine source, or essential working property; both accord-
ing to time and eternity.


SUDE


The word sude is German, and signifies a boiling or seething.
It is the stirring of the seven properties in nature, arising from
the assimulation or essential co-influence of the outward and
inward Sol in Sulphur, from whence the blooming vegetation of |
the earth proceeds; also the generation of metals and minerals
lies therein.


These are some uncommon words which are used in rendering
this book into English. Words are vehicula rerum, they are
formed to express things, not bare sounds, or empty airs. Now
he who rightly understands the ground of the cabala and magia,
and knows how the language of nature speaks in every tongue,
might well translate this author. But the bare letter of his
writings, though ever so exactly translated, will not give the
understanding of them, but the spirit of regeneration in Christ,
in whom the fulness of the Deity dwells corporeally.


N.B.—There is ONE CHARACTER by which God has charac-
terised both himself, and all the creatures, and shewn that his
presence is in all things; yet so that each creature has its
wonder, either of the heavenly or of the earthly mystery. This
peculiar mark, shape, and figure, that it may appear as a peculiar


is the in the sphere and mercurial wheel of nature, which


goes through all the three principles, and in the third through
all the kingdoms of minerals, vegetables, and animals, through
heaven and earth; the wonderful depth of which is shewn in
this book to the enquirer after the divine mysteries.


Mealy Uaw á
E UOO à
: fx h HG Aa bye ih a
ELT A es
dir. £ a TE


“ido |? we Di
La


?
AD Gage


EAT
Coty.
5 s


Ee =
5 a


As allie ty
wy p.


A DIALOGUE


BETWEEN


A SCHOLAR AND HIS MASTER


CONCERNING


THE SUPERSENSUAL LIFE


SHEWING


How the Soul may attain to Divine Hearing and Vision, and
what its Childship in the Natural and Supernatural Life is;
and how it passeth out of Nature into God, and out of
God into Nature and Self again; also what its Salvation
and Perdition are.


Q 569


T Cor 117S Go), Woy, Ie, T2 L3 Tell NISA


“ We speak the hidden mystical wisdom of God, which God ordained
before the world unto our glory: Which none of the princes of this world
knew: For had they known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of
glory. But, as it is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither
hath it entered into the heart of man to conceive the things which God
hath prepared for them that love him. But God hath revealed them unto
us by his Spirit: For the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things
of God. For what man knoweth the things of a man, save the spirit of
a man which is in him? Even so the things of God knoweth no man, but
the Spirit of God. Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but
the spirit which is of God; that we might know the things that are freely
given us of God. Which things also we speak, not in the words which
man’s wisdom teacheth, but which the Holy Ghost teacheth; comparing
spiritual things with spiritual. But the natural man receiveth not the
things of the Spirit of God: For they are foolishness unto him; neither
can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. But he that
is spiritual judgeth, or discerneth all things.


OF THE SUPERSENSUAL LIFE


OR


THE LIFE WHICH IS ABOVE SENSE


IN


A DIALoGvuE between a Scholar or Disciple and his Master


DIALOGUE I


DISCIPLE. MASTER


THE disciple said to his master: Sir, how may I come to the
supersensual life, so that I may see God, and may hear God
speak?

The master answered and said: Son, when thou canst throw
thyself into THAT, where no creature dwelleth, though it be but
for a moment, then thou hearest what God speaketh.

Disciple. Is that where no creature dwelleth near at hand;
or is it afar off?

Master. It isinthee. And if thou canst, my son, for a while
but cease from all thy thinking and willing, then thou shalt hear
the unspeakable words of God.

Disciple. How can I hear him speak, when I stand still from
thinking and willing?

Master. When thou standest still from the thinking of self,
and the willing of self; “‘ When both thy intellect and will are
quiet, and passive to the impressions of the Eternal Word and
Spirit; and when thy soul is winged up, and above that which
is temporal, the outward senses, and the imagination being
locked up by holy abstraction,” then the eternal hearing, seeing,
and speaking will be revealed in thee; and so God heareth “ and
seeth through thee,” being now the organ of his Spirit; and
so God speaketh in thee, and whispereth to thy spirit, and thy
spirit heareth his voice. Blessed art thou therefore if that thou
canst stand still from self-thinking and self-willing, and canst
stop the wheel of thy imagination and senses; forasmuch as
hereby thou mayest arrive at length to see the great salvation
of God, being made capable of all manner of divine sensations
and heavenly communications. Since it is nought indeed but

227


228 Jacob Boehme


thine own hearing and willing that do hinder thee, so that thou
dost not see and hear God.

Disciple. But wherewith shall I hear and see God, forasmuch
as he is above nature and creature?

Master. Son, when thou art quiet and silent, then art thou as
God was before nature and creature; thou art that which God
then was; thou art that whereof he made thy nature and
creature: Then thou hearest and seest even with that where-
with God himself saw and heard in thee, before ever thine own
willing or thine own seeing began.

Disciple. What now hinders or keeps me back, so that I
cannot come to that, wherewith God is to be seen and heard?

Master. Nothing truly but thine own willing, hearing, and
seeing do keep thee back from it, and do hinder thee from coming
to this supersensual state. And it is because thou strivest so
against that, out of which thou thyself art descended and
derived, that thou thus breakest thyself off, with thine own
willing, from God’s willing, and with thine own seeing from
God’s seeing. In as much as in thine own seeing thou dost see
in thine own willing only, and with thine own understanding
thou dost understand but in and according to this thine own
willing, as the same stands divided from the divine will. This
thy willing moreover stops thy hearing, and maketh thee deaf
towards God, through thy own thinking upon terrestrial things,
and thy attending to that which is without thee; and so it
brings thee into a ground, where thou art laid hold on and
captivated in nature. And having brought thee hither, it over-
shadows thee with that which thou willest; it binds thee with
thine own chains, and it keeps thee in thine own dark prison
which thou makest for thyself; so that thou canst not go out
thence, or come to that state which is supernatural and super-
sensual.

Disciple. But being I am in nature, and thus bound, as with
my own chains, and by my own natural will; pray be so kind,
sir, as to tell me, how I may come through nature into the
supersensual and supernatural ground, without the destroying
of nature?

Master. Three things are requisite in order to this. The first
is, Thou must resign up thy will to God; and must sink thyself
down to the dust in his mercy. The second is, Thou must hate
thy own will, and forbear from doing that to which thy own
will doth drive thee. The third is, Thou must bow thy soul
under the cross, heartily submitting thyself to it, that thou


Of the Supersensual Life 229


mayest be able to bear the temptations of nature and creature.
And if thou dost thus, know that God will speak into thee, and
will bring thy resigned will into himself, in the supernatural
ground; and then thou shalt hear, my son, what the Lord
speaketh in thee.

Disciple. This is a hard saying, master; for I must forsake
the world, and my life too, if I should do thus.

Master. Be not discouraged hereat. If thou forsakest the
world, then thou comest into that out of which the world is
made; and if thou losest thy life, then thy life is in that for
whose sake thou forsakest it. Thy life is in God, from whence
it came into the body; and as thou comest to have thine own
power faint and weak and dying, the power of God will then
work in thee and through thee.

Disciple. Nevertheless as God hath created man in and for
the natural life, to rule over all creatures on earth, and to be a
lord over all things in this world, it seems not to be at all un-
reasonable, that man should therefore possess this world and
the things therein for his own.

Master. If thou rulest over all creatures but outwardly, there
cannot be much in that. But if thou hast a mind to possess all
things, and to be a lord indeed over all things in this world,
there is quite another method to be taken by thee.

Disciple. Pray, how is that? And what method must I take,
whereby to arrive at this sovereignty?

Master. Thou must learn to distinguish well betwixt the
thing, and that which only is an image thereof; betwixt that
sovereignty which is substantial, and in the inward ground or
nature, and that which is imaginary, and in an outward form, or
semblance; betwixt that which is properly angelical, and that
which is no more than bestial. If thou rulest now over the
creatures externally only, and not from the right internal ground
of thy renewed nature; then thy will and ruling is verily in a
bestial kind or manner, and thine at best is but a sort of imaginary
and transitory government, being void of that which is sub-
stantial and permanent, the which only thou art to desire and
press after. Thus by thy outwardly lording it over the creatures,
it is most easy for thee to lose the substance and the reality, while
thou hast nought remaining but the image or shadow only of thy
first and original lordship; wherein thou art made capable to be
again invested, if thou beest but wise, and takest thy investiture
from the supreme lord in the right course and manner. Whereas
by thy willing and ruling thus after a bestial manner, thou


230 Jacob Boehme


bringest also thy desire into a bestial essence, by which means
thou becomest infected and captivated therein, and gettest
therewith a bestial nature and condition of life. But if thou
shalt have put off the bestial and ferine nature, and if thou hast
left the imaginary life, and quitted the low imaged condition of
it; then art thou come into the super-imaginariness, and into
the intellectual life, which is a state of living above images,
figures, and shadows: and so thou rulest over all creatures, being
re-united with thine original, in that very ground or source, out
of which they were and are created; and henceforth nothing on
earth can hurt thee. For thou art like all things; and nothing
is unlike thee.

Disciple. O loving master, pray teach me how I may come
the shortest way to be like unto all things.

Master. With all my heart. Do but think on the words of
our Lord Jesus Christ, when he said, “ Except ye be converted,
and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom
of heaven.” There is no shorter way than this; neither can
there be a better way found. Verily, Jesus saith unto thee,
Unless thou turn and become as a child, hanging upon him for
all things, thou shalt not see the kingdom of God. This do, and
nothing shall hurt thee; for thou shalt be at friendship with
all the things that are, as thou dependest on the author and
fountain of them, and becomest like him, by such dependence,
and by the union of thy will with his will. But mark what I
have further to say; and be not thou startled at it, though it
may seem hard for thee at first to conceive. If thou wilt be like
all things, thou must forsake all things; thou must turn thy
desire away from them all, and not desire or hanker after any
of them; thou must not extend thy will to possess that for thy
own, or as thine own, which is something, whatsoever that
something be. For as soon as ever thou takest something into
thy desire, and receivest it into thee for thine own, or in pro-
priety, then this very something (of what nature soever it is) is
the same with thyself; and this worketh with thee in thy will,
and thou art thence bound to protect it, and to take care of it,
even as of thy own being. But if thou dost receive nothing into
thy desire, then thou art free from all things, and rulest over all
things at once, as a prince of God. For thou hast received
nothing for thine own, and art nothing to all things; and all
things are as nothing to thee. Thou art as a child, which
understands not what a thing is; and though thou dost perhaps
understand it, yet thou understandest it without mixing with it,


Of the Supersensual Life 231


and without sensibly affecting or touching thy perception, even
in that manner wherein God doth rule and see all things; he
comprehending all, and yet nothing comprehending him.
Disciple. Ah! how shall I arrive at this heavenly under-
standing, at this sight of all things in God, at this pure and
naked knowledge which is abstracted from the senses; at this
light above nature and creature; and at this participation of
the divine wisdom which oversees all things, and governs through
all intellectual beings? For, alas, I am touched every moment
by the things which are about me; and overshadowed by the
clouds and fumes which rise up ‘out of the earth. I desire
therefore to be taught, if possible, how I may attain such a state
and condition as no creature may be able to touch me to hurt
me; and how my mind, being purged from sensible objects and
things, may be prepared for the entrance and habitation of the
divine wisdom in me? |
Master. Thou desirest that I would teach thee how thou art
to attain it; and I will direct thee to our master, from whom
I have been taught it, that thou mayest learn it thyself from
him, who alone teacheth the heart. Hear thou him. Wouldest
thou arrive at this; wouldest thou remain untouched by
sensibles; wouldest thou behold light in the very light of God,
and see all things thereby; then consider the words of Christ,
who is that light, and who is the truth. O consider now his
words, who said, “ Without me ye can do nothing ” (John xix. 5),
and defer not to apply thyself unto him, who is the strength
of thy salvation, and the power of thy life; and with whom
thou canst do all things, by the faith which he worketh in thee.
But unless thou wholly givest thyself up to the life of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and resignest thy will wholly to him, and desirest
nothing and willest nothing without him, thou shalt never come
to such a rest as no creature can disturb. Think what thou
pleasest, and be never so much delighted in the activity of thine
own reason, thou shalt find that in thine own power, and without
such a total surrender to God, and to the life of God, thou canst
never arrive at such a rest as this, or the true quiet of the soul,
wherein no creature can molest thee, or so much as touch thee.
Which when thou shalt, by grace, have attained to, then with
thy body thou art in the world, as in the properties of outward
nature; and with thy reason, under the cross of our Lord Jesus
Christ; but with thy will thou walkest in heaven, and art at
the end from whence all creatures are proceeded forth, and to
which they return again. And then thou canst in this END,


232 Jacob Boehme


which is the same with the BEcrInntnG, behold all things out-
wardly with reason, and inwardly with the mind; and so mayest
thou rule in all things and over all things, with Christ; unto
whom all power is given both in heaven and on earth.

Disciple. O master, the creatures which live in me do withhold
me, that I cannot so wholly yield and give up myself as I
willingly would. What am I to do in this case?

Master. Let not this trouble thee. Doth thy will go forth
from the creatures? Then the creatures are forsaken in thee.
They are in the world; and thy body, which is in the world, is
with the creatures. But spiritually thou walkest with God, and
conversest in heaven; being in thy mind redeemed from earth,
and separated from creatures, to live the life of God. And if
thy will thus leaveth the creatures, and goeth forth from them,
even as the spirit goeth forth from the body at death; then are
the creatures dead in it, and do live only in the body in the
world. Since if thy will do not bring itself into them, they
cannot bring themselves into it, neither can they by any means
touch the soul. And hence St. Paul saith, “ Our conversation
is in heaven; ” and also, “ Ye are the temple of God, and the
Spirit of God dwelleth in you.” So then true Christians are the
very temples of the Holy Ghost, who dwelleth in them; that is,
the Holy Ghost dwelleth in the will, and the creature dwelleth
in the body.

Disciple. If now the Holy Spirit doth dwell in the will of the
mind, how ought I to keep myself so that he depart not from
me again?

Master. Mark, my son, the words of our Lord Jesus Christ;
“If ye abide in my words, then my words abide in you.” If
thou abidest with thy will in the words of Christ; then his
word and spirit abideth in thee, and all shall be done for thee
that thou canst ask of him. But if thy will goeth into the
creature, then thou hast broken off thereby thyself from him:
And then thou canst not any otherwise keep thyself but by
abiding continually in the most resigned humility, and by enter-
ing into a constant course of penitence, wherein thou wilt be
always grieved at thine own creaturely will, and that creatures
do live still in thee, that is, in thy bodily appetite. If thou
dost thus, thou standest in a daily dying from the creatures,
and in a daily ascending into heaven in thy will; which will is
also the will of thy Heavenly Father.

Disciple. O my loving master, pray teach me how I may come
to such a constant course of holy penitence, and to such a daily


Of the Supersensual Life 233


dying from all creaturely objects; for how can I abide con-
tinually in repentance?

Master. When thou leavest that which loveth thee, and lovest
that which hateth thee; then thou mayest abide continually in
repentance.

Disciple. What is it that I must thus leave?

Master. All things that love and entertain thee, because thy
will loves and entertains them: All things that please and feed
thee, because thy will feeds and cherishes them:. All creatures
in flesh and blood; in a word, all visibles and sensibles, by which
either the imagination or sensitive appetite in men are delighted
and refreshed. These the will of thy mind, or thy supreme part
must leave and forsake; and must even account them all its
enemies. This is the leaving of what loves thee. And the
loving of what hates thee, is the embracing the reproach of the
world. Thou must learn then to love the cross of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and for his sake to be pleased with the reproach of
the world which hates thee and derides thee; and let this be
thy daily exercise of penitence to be crucified to the world, and
the world to thee. And so thou shalt have continual cause to
hate thyself in the creature, and to seek the eternal rest which is
in Christ. To which rest thou having thus attained, thy will
may therein safely rest and repose itself, according as thy Lord
Christ hath said: In me ye may have rest, but in the world
ye shall have anxiety: In me ye may have peace, but in the
world ye shall have tribulation.

Disciple. How shall I be now able to subsist in this anxiety
and tribulation arising from the world, so as not to lose the
eternal peace, or not enter into this rest? And how may I
recover myself in such a temptation as this is, by not sinking
under the world, but rising above it by a life that is truly
heavenly and supersensual ?

Master. If thou dost once every hour throw thyself by faith
beyond all creatures, beyond and above all sensual perception
and apprehension, yea, above discourse and reasoning, into the
abyssal mercy of God, into the sufferings of our Lord, and into
the fellowship of his interceding, and yieldest thyself fully and
absolutely thereinto; then thou shalt receive power from above
to rule over death, and the devil, and to subdue hell and the
world under thee: And then thou mayest subsist in all tempta-
tions, and be the brighter for them.

Disciple. Blessed is the man that arriveth to such a state as
this. But, alas! poor man that I am, how is this possible as to


234 Jacob Boehme


me? And what, O my master, would become of me, if I should
ever attain with my mind to that, where no creature is? Must
I not cry out, “ I am undone!”

Master. Son, why art thou so dispirited? Be of good heart
still; for thou mayest certainly yet attain to it. Do but
believe, and all things are made possible to thee. If it were that
thy will, O thou of little courage, could break off itself for one
hour, or even but for one half hour, from all creatures, and
plunge itself into that where no creature is, or can be; presently
it would be penetrated and clothed upon with the supreme
splendour of the divine glory, would taste in itself the most
sweet love of Jesus, the sweetness whereof no tongue can
express, and would find in itself the unspeakable words of our
Lord concerning his great mercy. Thy spirit would then feel
in itself the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ to be very pleasing to
it; and would thereupon love the cross more than the honours
and goods of the world.

Disciple. This for the soul would be exceeding well indeed:
But what would then become of the body, seeing that it must
of necessity live in the creature?

Master. The body would by this means be put into the
imitation of our Lord Christ, and of his body: It would stand in
the communion of that most blessed body, which was the true
temple of the Deity; and in the participation of all its gracious
effects, virtues, and influences. It would live in the creature
not of choice, but only as it is “ made subject unto vanity,” and
in the world, as it is placed therein by the ordination of the
Creator, for its cultivation and higher advancement; and as
groaning to be delivered out of it in God’s time and manner, for
its perfection and resuscitation in eternal liberty and glory, like
unto the glorified body of our Lord and his risen saints.

Disciple. But the body being in its present constitution, so
“made subject to vanity,’ and living in a vain image and
creaturely shadow, according to the life of the undergraduated
creatures or brutes, whose breath goeth downwards to the earth;
I am still very much afraid thereof, lest it should continue to
depress the mind which is lifted up to God, by hanging as a
dead weight thereto; and go on to amuse and perplex the same,
as formerly, with dreams and trifles, by letting in the objects
from without, in order to draw me down into the world and the
hurry thereof; whereas I would fain maintain my conversation
in heaven, even while I am living in the world. What therefore
must I do with this body, that I may be able to keep up so


Of the Supersensual Life 235


desirable a conversation; and not to be under any subjection to
it any longer?

Master. There is no other way for thee that I know, but to
present the body whereof thou complainest (which is the beast
to be sacrificed) “ a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto
God:” And this shall be thy “ rational service,” whereby this
thy body will be put, as thou desirest, into the imitation of Jesus
Christ, who said, his kingdom was not of this world. Be not
thou then conformed to it, but be transformed by the renewing
of thy mind; which renewed mind is to have dominion over
the body, that so thou mayest prove, both in body and mind,
what is the perfect will of God, and accordingly perform the
same with and by his grace operating in thee. Whereupon the
body, or the animal life would, being thus offered up, begin to
die, both from without and from within. From without, that
is, from the vanity and evil customs and fashions of the world:
It would be an utter enemy to all the pomps thereof, and to all
the gaudery, pageantry, pride, ambition, and haughtiness therein.
From within, it would die as to all the lusts and appetites of the
flesh, and would get a mind and will wholly new, for its govern-
ment and management; being now made subject to the spirit,
which would continually be directed to God, and so consequently
that which is subject to it. And thus thy very body is become
the temple of God and of his Spirit, in imitation of thy Lord’s
body.

Disciple. But the world would hate it and despise it for so
doing; seeing it must hereby contradict the world, and must
live and act quite otherwise than the world doth. This is most
certain. And how can this then be taken?

Master. It would not take that as any harm done to it, but
would rather rejoice that it is become worthy to be like unto
the image of our Lord Jesus Christ, being transformed from
that of the world: And it would be most willing to bear that
cross after our Lord; merely that our Lord might bestow upon
it the influence of his sweet and precious love.

Disciple. I do not doubt but in some this may be even so.
Nevertheless for my own part, I am in a straight betwixt two,
not feeling yet enough of that blessed influence upon me. O
how willingly should my body bear that, could this be safely
depended upon by me, according to what is urged! Wherefore
pardon me, loving sir, in this one thing, if my impatience doth
still further demand “ what would become of it, if the anger of
God from within, and the wicked world also from without, should


236 Jacob Boehme


at once assault it, as the same really happened to our Lord
Christ? ”

Master. Be that unto it, even as unto our Lord Christ, when
he was reproached, reviled, and crucified by the world; and
when the anger of God so fiercely assaulted him for our sake.
Now what did he under this most terrible assault both from
without and from within? Why: He commended his soul into
the hands of his Father, and so departed from the anguish of
this world into the eternal joy. Do thou likewise; and his
death shall be thy life.

Disciple. Be it unto me as unto the Lord Christ; and unto
my body as unto his; which into his hands I have commended,
and for the sake of his name do offer up, according to his
revealed will. Nevertheless I am desirous to know what would
become of my body in its pressing forth from the anguish of
this miserable world into the power of the heavenly kingdom.

Master. It would get forth from the reproach and contradic-
tion of the world, by a conformity to the passion of Jesus Christ; |
and from the sorrows and pains in the flesh, which are only the
effects of some sensible impression of things without, by a quiet
introversion of the spirit, and secret communion with the Deity
manifesting itself for that end. It would penetrate into itself;
it would sink into the great love of God; it would be sustained
and refreshed by the most sweet name JESUS; and it would see
and find within itself a new world springing forth as through
the anger of God, into the love and joy eternal. And then should
a man wrap his soul in this, even in the great love of God, and
clothe himself therewith as with a garment; and should account
thence all things alike; because in the creature he finds nothing
that can give him without God the least satisfaction; and
because also nothing of harm can touch him more, while he
remains in this love, the which indeed is stronger than all
things, and makes a man hence invulnerable both from within
and without, by taking out the sting and poison of the creatures,
and destroying the power of death. And whether the body be
in hell or on earth, all is alike to him; for whether it be there or
here, his mind is still in the greatest love of God; which is no
less than to say, that he is in heaven.

Disciple. But how would a man’s body be maintained in the
world; or how would he be able to maintain those that are his,
if he should by such a conversation incur the displeasure of all
the world?

Master. Such a man gets greater favours than the world is


Of the Supersensual Life 227


able to bestow upon him. He hath God for his friend; he hath
all his angels for his friends: In all dangers and necessities these
protect and relieve him; so that he need fear no manner of evil;
no creature can hurt him. God is his helper; and that is
sufficient. Also God is his blessing in everything: And though
sometimes it may seem as if God would not bless him, yet is
this but for a trial to him, and for the attraction of the divine
love; to the end he may more fervently pray to God, and
commit all his ways unto him.

Disciple. He loses, however, by this all his good friends; and
there will be none to help him in his necessity.

Master. Nay, but he gets the hearts of all his good friends into
his possession, and loses none but his enemies, who before loved
his vanity and wickedness.

Disciple. How is it that he can get his good friends into his
possession ?

Master. He gets the very hearts and souls of all those that
belong to our Lord Jesus to be his brethren, and the members
of his own very life. For all the children of God are but ONE
in Christ, which one is Christ in all: And therefore he gets them
all to be his fellow members in the body of Christ, whence they
have all the same heavenly goods in common; and all live in
one and the same love of God, as the branches of a tree in
one and the same root, and spring all from one and the same
source of life in them. So that he can have no want of spiritual
friends and relations, who are all rooted with him together in
the love which is from above; who are all of the same blood
and kindred in Christ Jesus; and who are cherished all by the
same quickening sap and spirit diffusing itself through them
universally from the one true vine, which is the tree of life and
love. These are friends worth having; and though here they
may be unknown to him, will abide his friends beyond death,
to all eternity. But neither can he want even outward natural
friends, as our Lord Christ when on earth did not want such
also. For though indeed the high-priests and potentates of the
world could not have a love to him, because they belonged not
to him, neither stood in any kind of relation to him, as being
not of this world; yet those loved him who were capable of his
love, and receptive of his words. So in like manner, those who
love truth and righteousness will love that man, and will
associate themselves unto him, yea, though they may perhaps
be outwardly at some distance or seeming disagreement, from
the situation of their worldly affairs, or out of some certain


238 Jacob Boehme


respects; yet in their hearts they cannot but cleave to him,
For though they be not yet actually incorporated into one body
with him, yet they cannot resist being of one mind with him,
and being united in affection, for the great regard they bear to
the truth, which shines forth in his words and in his life. By
which they are made either his declared or his secret friends;
and he doth so get their hearts, as they will be delighted above
all things in his company, for the sake thereof, and will court his |
friendship, and will come unto him by stealth, if openly they
dare not, for the benefit of his conversation and advice; even
as Nicodemus did unto Christ, who came to him by night, and
in his heart loved Jesus for the truth’s sake, though outwardly
he feared the world. And thus thou shalt have many friends
that are not known to thee; and some known to thee, who may
not appear so before the world.

Disciple. Nevertheless it is very grievous to be generally
despised of the world, and to be trampled upon by men as the
very offscouring thereof.

Master. That which now seems so hard and heavy to thee,
thou wilt yet hereafter be most of all in love with. |

Disciple. How can it be that I should ever love that which |
hates me? |

Master. Though thou lovest the earthly wisdom now, yet |
when thou shalt be clothed upon with the heavenly wisdom,
then thou wilt see that all the wisdom of the world is folly; and
wilt see also that the world hates not so much thee, as thine
enemy, which is the mortal life. And when thou thyself shalt
come to hate the will thereof, by means of an habitual separation
of thy mind from the world, then thou also wilt begin to love
that despising of the mortal life, and the reproach of the world
for Christ’s sake. And so shalt thou be able to stand under
every temptation, and to hold out to the end by the means
hereof in a course of life above the world, and above sense. In
this course thou wilt hate thyself; and thou wilt also love
thyself; I say, love thyself, and that even more than ever thou
didst yet.

Disciple. But how can these two subsist together, that a
person should both love and hate himself?

Master. In loving thyself, thou lovest not thyself as thine |
own; but as given thee from the love of God thou lovest the
divine ground in thee: By which and in which thou lovest
the divine wisdom, the divine goodness, the divine beauty;
thou lovest also by it God’s works of wonders; and in this


Of the Supersensual Life 239


ground thou lovest likewise thy brethren. But in hating thy-
self, thou hatest only that which is thine own, and wherein the
evil sticks close to thee. And this thou dost, that so thou mayest
wholly destroy that which thou callest thine; as when thou
sayest I or Mysetr do this, or do that. All which is wrong, and
a downright mistake in thee; for nothing canst thou properly
call thine but the evil self, neither canst thou do anything of
thyself that is to be accounted of. This self therefore thou
must labour wholly to destroy in thee, that so thou mayest
become a ground wholly divine. There is, there can be no
selfishness in love; they are opposite to each other. Love, that
is, divine love (of which only we are now discoursing), hates all
Ecorrty, hates all that which we call I, or Inoop; hates all such
restrictions and confinements, even all that springs from a con-
tracted spirit, or this evil self-hood, because it is an hateful and
deadly thing. And it is impossible that these two should stand
together, or subsist in one person; the one driving out the other
by a necessity of nature. For love possesses heaven, and dwells
in itself, which is dwelling in heaven; but that which is called I,
this vile self-hood possesses the world and worldly things; and
dwells also in itself, which is dwelling in hell, because this is the
very root of hell itself: And therefore as heaven rules the
world, and as eternity rules time, even so ought love to rule the
natural temporal life; for no other method is there, neither can
there be of attaining to that life which is supernatural and
eternal, and which thou so much desirest to be led into.

Disciple. Loving master, I am well content that this love
should rule in me over the natural life, that so I may attain to
that which is supernatural and supersensual; but pray tell me
now, why must love and hatred, friend and foe thus be together ?
Would not love alone be better? Wherefore, I say, are love
and trouble thus joined?

Master. If love dwelt not in trouble, it could have nothing to
love: But its substance which it loves, namely, the poor soul,
being in trouble and pain, it hath thence cause to love its own
substance, and to deliver it from pain; that so itself may by it
be again beloved. Neither could any one know what love is,
if there were no hatred; or what friendship is, if there were no
foe to contend with: Or in one word, if love had not something
which it might love, and manifest the virtue and power of love, by
working out deliverance to the beloved from all pain and trouble.

Disciple. Pray what is the virtue, the power, the height and
the greatness of love?


24.0 Jacob Boehme


Master. The virtue of love is NoTHING and ALL, or that nothing
visible out of which all things proceed; its power is through all
things; its height is as high as God; its greatness is as great as
God. Its virtue is the principle of all principles; its power
supports the heavens and upholds the earth; its height is
higher than the highest heavens; and its greatness is even
greater than the very manifestation of the Godhead in the
glorious light of the divine essence, as being infinitely capable
of greater and greater manifestations in all eternity. What can
Isay more? Love is higher than the highest. Love is greater
than the greatest. Yea, it is in a certain sense greater than
God; while yet in the highest sense of all, God is Love, and
love is God. Love being the highest principle, is the virtue
of all virtues; from whence they flow forth. Love being the
greatest majesty, is the power of all powers, from whence they
severally operate: And it is the holy magical root, or ghostly


power from whence all the wonders of God have been wrought |


by the hands of his elect servants, in all their generations suc- _


cessively. Whosoever finds it, finds nothing and all things.


Disciple. Dear master, pray tell me but how I may under-


stand this.
Master. First then, in that I said, “ its virtue is nothing,” or
that nothing which is the beginning of all things, thou must


understand it thus: When thou art gone forth wholly from the |


creature, and from that which is visible, and art become nothing
to all that is nature and creature, then thou art in that Eternal
One, which is God himself: And then thou shalt perceive and
feel in thy interiour, the highest virtue of love. But in that I
said, “ Its power is through all things,” this is that which thou
perceivest and findest in thy own soul and body experimentally,
whenever this great love is enkindled within thee; seeing that
it will burn more than the fire can do, as it did in the prophets
of old, and afterwards in the apostles, when God conversed with
them bodily, and when his Spirit descended upon them in the
oratory of Zion. Thou shalt then see also in all the works of
God, how love hath poured forth itself into all things, and
penetrateth all things, and is the most inward and most outward


ground in all things: Inwardly in the virtue and power of


everything; and outwardly in the figure and form thereof.

And in that I said, “Its height is as high as God;” thou
mayest understand this in thyself; forasmuch as it brings thee
to be as high as God himself is, by being united to God: As may
be seen by our beloved Lord Christ in our humanity. Which


Of the Supersensual Life 241


humanity love hath brought up into the highest throne, above
all angelical principalities and powers, into the very power of
the Deity itself.

But in that I also said, “ Its greatness is as great as God,”
thou art hereby to understand that there is a certain greatness
and latitude of heart in love, which is inexpressible; for it
enlarges the soul as wide as the whole creation of God. And
this shall be truly experienced by thee, beyond all words, when
the throne of love shall be set up in thy heart.

Moreover in that I said, “ Its virtue is the principle of all
principles,” hereby it is given thee to understand, that love is
the principiating cause of all created beings, both spiritual and
corporeal, by virtue whereof the second causes do move and act
occasionally according to certain eternal laws from the beginning
implanted in the very constitution of things thus originated.
This virtue which is in love, is the very life and energy of all the
principles of nature, superiour and inferiour: It reaches to all
worlds, and to all manner of beings in them contained, they
being the workmanship of divine love; and is the first mover,
and first moveable both in heaven above and in the earth
beneath, and in the water under the earth. And hence there is
given to it the name of the Lucid Aleph, or Alpha; by which is
expressed the beginning of the alphabet of nature, and of the
book of creation and providence, or the divine archetypal book,
in which is the light of wisdom, and the source of all lights and
forms.

And in that I said, “ Its power supports the heavens; ” by
this thou wilt come to understand that as the heavens, visible
and invisible, are originated from this great principle, so are they
likewise necessarily sustained by it; and that therefore if this
should be but never so little withdrawn, all the lights, glories,
beauties, and forms of the heavenly worlds, would presently
sink into darkness and chaos.

And whereas I further said, “ that it upholds the earth; ”
this will appear to thee no less evident than the former, and thou
shalt perceive it in thyself by daily and hourly experience;
forasmuch as the earth without it, even thy own earth also (that
is, thy body), would certainly be without form and void. By
the power thereof the earth hath been thus long upheld, not-
withstanding a foreign usurped power introduced by the folly of
sin: And should this but once fail or recede, there could no
longer be either vegetation or animation upon it; yea, the very
pillars of it be overthrown quite, and the band of union, which

R 569


242 Jacob Boehme


is that of attraction or magnetism, called the centripetal power,
being broken and dissolved, all must thence run into the utmost
disorder, and falling away as into shivers, would be dispersed
as loose dust before the wind.

But in that I said, “ Its height is higher than the highest
heavens;”’ this thou mayest also understand within thyself:
For shouldest thou ascend in spirit through all the orders of
angels and heavenly powers, yet the power of love still is un-
deniably superiour to them all. And as the throne of God, who
sits upon the heaven of heavens, is higher than the highest of
them, even so must love also be, which fills them all, and com-
prehends them all.

And whereas I said of the greatness of love, that it is “ greater
than the very manifestation of the Godhead in the light of the
divine essence;”’ that is also true: For love enters even into
that where the Godhead is not manifested in this glorious light,
and where God may be said not to dwell. And entering there-
into, love begins to manifest to the soul the light of the Godhead;
and thus is the darkness broken through, and the wonders of the
new creation successively manifested.

Thus shalt thou be brought to understand really and funda-
mentally, what is the virtue and power of love, and what the
height and greatness thereof is; how that it is indeed the
“ virtue of all virtues,” though it be invisible, and as a nothing
in appearance, inasmuch as it is the worker of all things, and a
powerful vital energy passing through all virtues and powers
natural and supernatural; and the power of all powers, nothing
being able to let or obstruct the omnipotence of love, or to resist
its invincible penetrating might, which passes through the whole
creation of God, inspecting and governing all things.

And in that I said, “ It is higher than the highest, and greater
than the greatest; thou mayest hereby perceive as in a
glimpse, the supreme height and greatness of omnipotent love,
which infinitely transcends all that human sense and reason can
reach to. The highest archangels and the greatest powers of
heaven, are in comparison of it but as dwarfs. Nothing can be
conceived higher and greater in God himself, by the very highest
and greatest of his creatures. There is such an infinity in it, as
comprehends and surpasses all the divine attributes.

But in that it was also said, “Its greatness is greater than
God;” that likewise is very true in the sense wherein it was
spoken: For love, as I before observed, can there enter where
God dwelleth not, since the Most High God dwelleth not in


Of the Supersensual Life 243


darkness, but in the light; the hellish darkness being put under
his feet. Thus for instance, when our beloved Lord Christ was
in hell, hell was not the mansion of God or of Christ; hell was
not God, neither was it with God, nor could it be at all with him;
hell stood in the darkness and anxiety of nature, and no light
of the divine majesty did there enter: God was not there; for
he is not in the darkness, or in the anguish; but love was there;
and love destroyed death and conquered hell. So also when
thou art in anguish or trouble, which is hell within, God is not
the anguish or trouble; neither is he in the anguish or trouble;
but his love is there, and brings thee out of the anguish and
trouble into God, leading thee into the light and joy of his
presence. When God hides himself in thee, love is still there,
and makes him manifest in thee. Such is the inconceiveable
greatness and largeness of love; which will hence appear to thee
as great as God above nature, and greater than God in nature, or
as considered in his manifestative glory.

Lastly, whereas I also said, “ Whosoever finds it, finds nothing
and all things;” that is also certain and true. But how finds
he nothing? Why, I will tell thee how. He that findeth it,
findeth a supernatural supersensual abyss, which hath no ground
or byss to stand on, and where there is no place to dwell in; and
he findeth also nothing is like unto it, and therefore it may fitly
be compared to nothing; for it is deeper than anything, and is
as nothing with respect to all things, forasmuch as it is not
comprehensible by any of them. And because it is nothing
respectively, it is therefore free from all things; and is that only
good, which a man cannot express or utter what it is; there
being nothing to which it may be compared, to express it by.

But in that I lastly said, “ Whosoever finds it, finds all
things;”’ there is nothing can be more true than this assertion.
It hath been the beginning of all things; and it ruleth all things.
It is also the end of all things; and will thence comprehend all
things within its circle. All things are from it, and in it, and
by it. If thou findest it, thou comest into that ground from
whence all things are proceeded, and wherein they subsist; and
thou art in it a Krnc over all the works of God.


Here the disciple was exceedingly ravished with what his
master had so wonderfully and surprisingly declared, and
returned his most humble and hearty thanks for that light,
which he had been an instrument of conveying to him. But
being desirous to hear further concerning these high matters,


244 Jacob Boehme


and to know somewhat more particularly, he requested him,
that he would give him leave to wait on him the next day again;
and that he would then be pleased to shew him how and where
he might find this which was so much beyond all price and value,
and whereabout the seat and abode of it might be in human
nature; with the entire process of the discovery and bringing it-
forth to light.

The master said to him: This then we will discourse about
at our next conference, as God shall reveal the same to us by
his SPIRIT, which is a searcher of all things. And if thou dost
remember well what I answered thee in the beginning, thou
shalt soon come thereby to understand that hidden mystical
wisdom of God, which none of the wise men of the world know;
and where the Mine thereof is to be found in thee, shall be given
thee from above to discern. Be silent therefore in thy spirit, .
and watch unto prayer; that when we meet again to-morrow
in the love of Christ, thy mind may be disposed for finding that
noble pearl, which to the world appears nothing, but which to
the children of wisdom is all things.


DIALOGUE II


ARGUMENT


HEREIN is described and set forth the manner of passing the gulf which
divides betwixt the two principles or states of heaven and hell: And it
is particularly shewn how this transaction is carried on in the soul; what
the partition wall therein is, which separates from God.

What the breaking down "of this partition wall, and how effected; what
the centre of light is, and the pressing into that centre is; what the
light of God and the light of nature are; how they are operative in their
several spheres, and how to be kept from interfering with each other; with
some account of the two wills and their contraposition in the fallen state;
of the magical wheel of the will, and how the motion thereof may be
regulated; of the eye in the midst thereof, what the right eye is to the
soul, and what the left is, but especially what the single eye is, and in what
manner it is to be obtained; of purification from the contagion of matter;
of the destruction of evil, and of the very annihilation of it, by the sub-
sidence of the will from its own something into nothing; of the naked and
magical faith, and the attraction thereby of a certain divine substantiality
and vestment; how all consists in the will, and proceeds but from one
point ; where that point is placed, and how it may be found out; and
which is both the safest and nearest way to attain to the high supersensual
state, and the internal kingdom of Christ, according to the true heavenly
magia or wisdom.


DISCIPLE. MASTER.


Tue disciple being very earnest to be more fully instructed how
he might arrive at the supersensual life; and how, having found
all things, he might come to be a king over all God’s works;
came again to his master the next morning, having watched the
night in prayer, that he might be disposed to receive and
apprehend the instructions that should be given him by a
divine irradiation upon his mind. And the disciple after a little
space of silence, bowed himself, and thus brake forth:
Disciple. O my master! my master! I have now endeavoured
to recollect my soul in the presence of God, and to cast myself
into that deep where no creature doth nor can dwell; that I
might hear the voice of my Lord speaking in me; and be
initiated into that high life, whereof I heard yesterday such
great and amazing things pronounced. But, alas! I neither
hear nor see as I should: There is still such a partition wall in
' me which beats back the heavenly sounds in their passage, and
obstructs the entrance of that light by which alone divine
objects are discoverable, as till this be broken down, I can have


' 245


246 Jacob Boehme


but small hopes, yea, even none at all, of arriving at those
glorious attainments which you pressed me to, or of entering
into that where no creature dwells, and which you call nothing
and all things. Wherefore be so kind as to inform me what is
required on my part, that this partition which hinders may be
broken or removed.

Master. This partition is the creaturely will in thee: And this
can be broken by nothing but by the grace of self-denial, which
is the entrance into the true following of Christ; and totally
removed by nothing but a perfect conformity with the divine
will.

Disciple. But how shall I be able to break this creaturely will
which is in me, and is at enmity with the divine will? Or, what
shall I do to follow Christ in so difficult a path, and not to faint
in a continual course of self-denial and resignation to the will
of God?

Master. This is not to be done by thyself; but by the light
and grace of God received into thy soul, which will, if thou
gainsay not, break the darkness that is in thee, and melt down
thine own will, which worketh in the darkness and corruption
of nature, and bring it into the obedience of Christ, whereby
the partition of the creaturely self is removed from betwixt
God and thee.

Disciple. I know that I cannot do it of myself: But I would
fain learn, how I must receive this divine light and grace into
me, which is to do it for me, if I hinder it not my own self.
What is then required of me in order to admit this breaker of
the partition, and to promote the attainment of the ends of such
admission ?

Master. There is nothing more required of thee at first, than
not to resist this grace, which is manifested in thee; and nothing
in the whole process of thy work, but to be obedient and passive
to the light of God shining through the darkness of thy creaturely
being, which comprehendeth it not, as reaching no higher than
the light of nature.

Disciple. But is it not for me to attain, if I can, both the light
of God, and the light of the outward nature too: And to make
use of them both for the ordering my life wisely and prudently?

Master. It is right, I confess, so to do. And it is indeed a
treasure above all earthly treasures, to be possessed of the light
of God and nature, operating in their spheres; and to have both
the eye of time and eternity at once open together, and yet not
to interfere with each other,


Of the Supersensual Life 247


Disciple: This is a great satisfaction to me to hear; having
been very uneasy about it for some time. But how this can
be without interfering with each other, there is the difficulty:
Wherefore fain would I know, if it were lawful, the boundaries
of the one and the other; and how both the divine and the
natural light may in their several spheres respectively act and
operate, for the manifestation of the mysteries of God and
nature, and for the conduct of my outward and inward life?

Master. That each of these may be preserved distinct in their
several spheres, without confounding things heavenly and things
earthly, or breaking the golden chain of wisdom, it will be
necessary, my child, in the first place to wait for and attend the
supernatural and divine light, as that superiour light appointed
to govern the day, rising in the true east, which is the centre
of paradise; and in great might breaking forth as out of the
darkness within thee, through a pillar of fire and thunder-clouds,
and thereby also reflecting upon the inferiour light of nature a
sort of image of itself, whereby only it can be kept in its due
subordination; that which is below being made subservient to
that which is above; and that which is without to that which
is within. Thus there will be no danger of interfering; but all
will go right, and everything abide in its proper sphere.

Disciple. Therefore without reason or the light of nature be
sanctified in my soul, and illuminated by this superiour light, as
from the central east of the holy light-world, by the eternal and
intellectual sun; I perceive there will be always some confusion,
and I shall never be able to manage aright either what con-
cerneth time or eternity: But I must always be at a loss, or
break the links of wisdom’s chain.

Master. It is even so as thou hast said. All is confusion, if
thou hast no more but the dim light of nature, or unsanctified
and unregenerated reason to guide thee by; and if only the eye
of time be opened in thee, which cannot pierce beyond its own
limit. Wherefore seek the fountain of light, waiting in the deep
ground of thy soul for the rising there of the sun of righteousness,
whereby the light of nature in thee, with the properties thereof,
will be made to shine seven times brighter than ordinary. For
it shall receive the stamp, image, and impression of the super-
sensual and supernatural; so that the sensual and rational life
will hence be brought into the most perfect order and harmony.

Disciple. But how am I to wait for the rising of this glorious
sun, and how am I to seek in the centre, this fountain of light,
which may enlighten me throughout, and bring all my pro-


248 Jacob Boehme


perties into perfect harmony? I am in nature, as I said before;
and which way shall I pass through nature, and the light thereof,
so that I may come into that supernatural and supersensual
ground, whence this true light, which is the light of minds, doth
arise; and this, without the destruction of my nature, or
quenching the light of it, which is my—reason?

Master. Cease but from thine own activity, steadfastly fixing
thine eye upon one point, and with a strong purpose relying
upon the promised grace of God in Christ, to bring thee out of
thy darkness into his marvellous light. For this end gather in
all thy thoughts, and by faith press into the centre, laying hold
upon the word of God, which is infallible, and which hath called
thee. Be thou then obedient to this call; and be silent before
the Lord, sitting alone with him in thy inmost and most hidden
cell, thy mind being centrally united in itself, and attending his
will in the patience of hope. So shall thy light break forth as
the morning; and after the redness thereof is passed, the sum
himself, which thou waitest for, shall arise unto thee, and under
his most healing wings thou shalt greatly rejoice; ascending and
descending in his bright and salutiferous beams. Behold this
is the true supersensual ground of life.

Disciple. I believe it indeed to be even so. But will not this
destroy nature? Will not the light of nature in me be extin-
guished by this greater light? Or, must not the outward life
hence perish, with the earthly body which I carry?

Master. By no means at all. It is true, the evil nature will
be destroyed by it; but by the destruction thereof you can be
no loser, but very much a gainer. The eternal band of nature
is the same afterward as before; and the properties are the same.
So that nature hereby is only advanced and meliorated; and
the light thereof, or human reason, by being kept within its due
bounds, and regulated by a superiour light, is only made useful.

Disciple. Pray therefore let me know how this inferiour light
ought to be used by me; how it is to be kept within its due `
bounds; and after what manner the superiour light doth
regulate it and ennoble it.

Master. Know then, my beloved son, that if thou wilt keep
the light of nature within its own proper bounds, and make use
thereof in just subordination to the light of God; thou must
consider that there are in thy soul two wills, an inferiour will,
which is for driving thee to things without and below; and a
superiour will, which is for drawing to things within and above.
These two wills are now set together, as it were back to back,


Of the Supersensual Life 249


and in a direct contrariety to each other; but in the beginning
it was not so. For this contraposition of the soul in these two
is no more than the effect of the fallen state; since before that
they were placed one under the other, that is, the superiour will
above, as the lord, and the inferiour below, as the subject. And
thus it ought to have continued. Thou must also further
consider, that answering to these two wills there are likewise
two eyes in the soul, whereby they are severally directed;
forasmuch as these eyes are not united in one single view, but
look quite contrary ways at once. They are in a like manner
set one against the other, without a common medium to join
them. And hence, so long as this double-sightedness doth
remain, it is impossible there should be any agreement in the
determination of this or that will. This is very plain: And it
sheweth the necessity that this malady, arising from the dis-
union of the rays of vision, be some way remedied and redressed,
in order to a true discernment in the mind. Both these eyes
therefore must be made to unite by a concentration of rays;
there being nothing more dangerous than for the mind to abide
thus in the duplicity, and not to seek to arrive at the unity.
Thou perceivest, I know, that thou hast two wills in thee, one
set against the other, the superiour and the inferiour; and that
thou hast also two eyes within, one against another; whereof
the one eye may be called the right eye, and the other the left
eye. Thou perceivest, too, doubtless, that it is according to
the right eye that the wheel of the superiour will is moved; and
that it is according to the motion of the left eye that the
contrary wheel in the lower is turned about.

Disciple. I perceive this, sir, to be very true; and this it is
which causeth a continual combat in me, and createth to me
greater anxiety than I am able to express. Nor am I unac-
quainted with the disease of my own soul, which you have so
clearly declared. Alas! I perceive and lament this malady,
which so miserably disturbeth my sight; whence I feel such
irregular and convulsive motions drawing me on this side and
that side. The spirit seeth not as the flesh seeth; neither doth,
or can the flesh see, as the spirit seeth. Hence the spirit willeth
against the flesh; and the flesh willeth against the spirit in me.
This hath been my hard case. And how shall it be remedied?
O how may I arrive at the unity of will, and how come into the
unity of vision!

Master. Mark now what I say: The right eye looketh forward
in thee into eternity, The left eye looketh backward in thee


250 Jacob Boehme


into time. If now thou sufferest thyself to be always looking
into nature, and the things of time, and to be leading the will,
and to be seeking somewhat for itself in the desire, it will be
impossible for thee ever to arrive at the unity, which thou
wishest for. Remember this; and be upon thy watch. Give
not thy mind leave to enter into, nor to fill itself with, that
which is without thee; neither look thou backward upon thyself;
but quit thyself, and look forward upon Christ. Let not thy
left eye deceive thee, by making continually one representation
after another, and stirring up thereby an earnest longing in the
self-propriety; but let thy right eye command back this left,
and attract it to thee, so that it may not gad abroad into the
wonders and delights of nature. Yea, it is better to pluck it
quite out, and to cast it from thee, than to suffer it to proceed
forth without restraint into nature, and to follow its own lusts:
However, there is for this no necessity, since both eyes may
become very useful, if ordered aright; and both the divine and
natural light may in the soul subsist together, and be of mutual
service to each other. But never shalt thou arrive at the unity
of vision or uniformity of will, but by entering fully into the will
of our Saviour Christ, and therein bringing the eye of time into
the eye of eternity; and then descending by means of this
united through the light of God into the light of nature.

Disciple. So then if I can but enter into the will of my Lord,
and abide therein, I am safe, and may both attain to the light
of God in the spirit of my soul, and see with the eye of God, that
is, the eye of eternity in the eternal ground of my will; and
may also at the same time enjoy the light of this world never-
theless; not degrading, but adorning the light of nature; and
beholding as with the eye of eternity things eternal, so with the
eye of nature things natural, and both contemplating therein
the wonders of God, and sustaining also thereby the life of my
outward vehicle or body.

Master. It is very right. Thou hast well understood; and
thou desirest now to enter into the will of God, and to abide
therein as in the supersensual ground of light and life, where
thou mayest in his light behold both time and eternity, and
bring all the wonders created of God for the exteriour into the
interiour life, and so eternally rejoice in them to the glory of
Christ; the partition of thy creaturely will being broken down,
and the eye of thy spirit simplified in and through the eye of
God manifesting itself in the centre of thy life. Let this be so
now; for it is God’s will.


Of the Supersensual Life Doi


Disciple. But it is very hard to be always looking forwards
into eternity; and consequently to attain to this single eye,
and simplicity of divine vision. The entrance of a soul naked
into the will of God, shutting out all imaginations and desires,
and breaking down the strong partition which you mention, is
indeed somewhat very terrible and shocking to human nature,
as in its present state. O what shall I do, that I may reach this
which I so much long for?

Master. My son, let not the eye of nature with the will of the
wonders depart from that eye which is introverted into the
divine liberty, and into the eternal light of the holy majesty:
But let it draw to thee those wonders by union with that
heavenly internal eye, which are externally wrought out and
manifested in visible nature. For while thou art in the world,
-and hast an honest employment, thou art certainly by the order
of providence obliged to labour in it, and to finish the work
given thee, according to thy best ability, without repining in
the least; seeking out and manifesting for God’s glory, the
wonders of nature and art. Since let the nature be what it will,
it is all the work and art of God: And let the art also be what
it will, it is still God’s work; and his art, rather than any art or
cunning of man. And all both in art and nature serveth but
abundantly to manifest the wonderful works of God; that he
for all, and in all, may be glorified. Yea, all serveth, if thou
knowest rightly how to use them, but to recollect thee more
inwards, and to draw thy spirit into that majestic light, wherein
the original patterns and forms of things visible are to be seen.
Keep therefore in the centre, and stir not out from the presence
of God revealed within thy soul; let the world and the devil
make never so great a noise and bustle to draw thee out, mind
them not; they cannot hurt thee. It is permitted to the eye
of thy reason to seek food, and to thy hands, by their labour,
to get food for the terrestrial body: But then this eye ought
not with its desire to enter into the food prepared, which would
be covetousness; but must in resignation simply bring it before
the eye of God in thy spirit, and then thou must seek to place
it close to this very eye, without letting it go. Mark this lesson
well.

Let the hands or the head be at labour, thy heart ought
nevertheless to rest in God. God is a Spirit; dwell in the Spirit,
work in the Spirit, pray in the Spirit, and do everything in the
Spirit; for remember thou also art a spirit, and thereby created
in the image of God: Therefore see thou attract not in thy desire


Zee Jacob Boehme


matter unto thee, but as much as possible abstract thyself from
all matter whatever; and so, standing in the centre, present
thyself as a naked spirit before God, in simplicity and purity;
and be sure thy spirit draw in nothing but spirit.

Thou wilt yet be greatly enticed to draw matter, and to gather
that which the world calls substance, thereby to have somewhat
visible to trust to: But by no means consent to the tempter,
nor yield to the lustings of thy flesh against the spirit. For in
so doing thou wilt infallibly obscure the divine light in thee;
thy spirit will stick in the dark covetous root, and from the fiery
source of thy soul will it blaze out in pride and anger; thy will
shall be chained in earthliness, and shall sink through the
anguish into darkness and materiality; and never shalt thou be
able to reach the still liberty, or to stand before the majesty of
God. Since this is opening a door for him who reigneth in the
corruption of matter, possibly the devil may roar at thee for this
refusal; because nothing can vex him worse than such a silent
abstraction of the soul, and introversion thereof to the point of
rest from all that is worldly and circumferential: But regard
him not; neither admit the least dust of that matter into thee
which he may pretend any claim to. It will be all darkness to
thee, as much matter as is drawn in by the desire of thy will:
It will darken God’s majesty to thee; and will close the seeing
eye, by hiding from thee the light of his beloved countenance.
This the serpent longeth to do; but in vain, except thou per-
mittest thy imagination, upon his suggestion, to receive in the
alluring matter; else he can never get in. Behold then, if thou
desirest to see God’s light in thy soul, and be divinely illuminated
and conducted, this is the short way that thou art to take; not
to let the eye of thy spirit enter into matter, or fill itself with
anything whatever, either in heaven or earth; but to let it
enter by a naked faith into the light of the majesty; and so
receive by pure love the light of God, and attract the divine
power into itself, putting on the divine body, and growing up
in it to the full maturity of the humanity of Christ.

Disciple. As I said before, so I say again, this is very hard. I
conceive indeed well enough that my spirit ought to be free from
the contagion of matter, and wholly empty, that it may admit
into it the Spirit of God. Also, that this Spirit will not enter,
but where the will entereth into nothing, and resigneth itself
up in the nakedness of faith, and in the purity of love, to its
conduct; feeding magically upon the word of God, and clothing
itself thereby with a divine substantiality. But, alas, how hard


Of the Supersensual Life one


is it for the will to sink into nothing, to attract nothing, to
Imagine nothing!

Master. Let it be granted that it isso. Is it not surely worth
thy while, and all that thou canst ever do?

Disciple. It is so, I must needs confess.

Master. But perhaps it may not be so hard as at first it
appeareth to be; make but the trial, and be in earnest. What
is there required of thee but to stand still, and see the salvation
of thy God? And couldst thou desire anything less? Where is
the hardship in this? Thou hast nothing to care for, nothing
to desire in this life, nothing to imagine or attract: Thou
needest only cast thy care upon God, who careth for thee, and
leave him to dispose of thee according to his good will and
pleasure, even as if thou hadst no will at all in thee. For he
knoweth what is best; and if thou canst but trust him, he will
most certainly do better for thee, than if thou wert left to thine
own choice.

Disciple. This I most firmly believe.

Master. If thou believest, then go and do accordingly. All
is in the will, as I have shewn thee. When the will imagineth
after somewhat, then entereth it into that somewhat, and this
somewhat taketh presently the will into itself, and overcloudeth
it, so as it can have no light, but must dwell in darkness, unless
it return back out of that somewhat into nothing. But when
the will imagineth or lusteth after nothing, then it entereth into
nothing, where it receiveth the will of God into itself, and so
dwelleth in light, and worketh all its works in it.

Disciple. I am now satisfied that the main cause of any one’s
spiritual blindness, is his letting his will into somewhat, or into
that which he hath wrought, of what nature soever it be, good
or evil, and his setting his heart and affections upon the work
of his own hands or brain; and that when the earthly body
perisheth, then the soul must be imprisoned in that very thing
which it shall have received and let in; and if the light of God
be not in it, being deprived of the light of this world, it cannot
but be found in a dark prison.

Master. This is a very precious gate of knowledge; I am glad
thou takest it into such consideration. The understanding of
the whole Scripture is contained in it; and all that hath been
written from the beginning of the world to this day, may be
found herein, by him that having entered with his will into
nothing, hath there found all things, by finding God; from
whom, and to whom, and in whom are all things. By this means


254 Jacob Boehme


thou shalt come to hear and see God; and after this earthly life
is ended, to see with the eye of eternity all the wonders of God
and of nature, and more particularly those which shall be
wrought by thee in the flesh, or all that the Spirit of God shall
have given thee to labour out for thyself and thy neighbour, or
all that the eye of reason enlightened from above, may at any
time have manifested to thee. Delay not therefore to enter in
by this gate, which if thou seest in the spirit, as some highly
favoured souls have seen it, thou seest in the supersensual ground
all that God is, and can do; thou seest also therewith, as one
hath said who was taken thereinto, through heaven, hell, and
earth; and through the essence of all essences. Whosoever
findeth it, hath found all that he can desire. Here is the virtue
and power of the love of God displayed. Here is the height and
depth; here is the breadth and length thereof manifested, as
fully as ever the capacity of thy soul can contain. By this thou
shalt come into that ground out of which all things are originated,
and in which they subsist; and in it thou shalt reign over all
God’s works, as a prince of God.

Disctple. Pray tell me, dear master, where dwelleth it in man?

Master. Where man dwelleth not; there hath it its seat in
man.

Disctple. Where is that in a man, where man dwelleth not
in himself?

Master. It is the resigned ground of a soul, to which nothing
cleaveth.

Disciple. Where is the ground in any soul, to which there will
nothing stick? Or, where is that which abideth and dwelleth
not in something?

Master. It is the centre of rest and motion in the resigned will
of a truly contrite spirit, which is crucified to the world. This
centre of the will is impenetrable consequently to the world, the
devil, and hell: Nothing in all the world can enter into it, or
adhere to it, though never so many devils should be in the
confederacy against it; because the will is dead with Christ unto
the world, but quickened with him in the centre thereof, after
his blessed image. Here it is where man dwelleth not; and
where no self abideth, or can abide.

Disciple. O where is this naked ground of the soul void of all
self? And how shall I come at the hidden centre where God
dwelleth, and not man? Tell me plainly, loving sir, where it is,
and how it is to be found of me, and entered into?

Master. There where the soul hath slain its own will, and


y


Of the Supersensual Life 255


willeth no more anything as from itself, but only as God willeth,
and as his Spirit moveth upon the soul, shall this appear: Where
the love of self is banished, there dwelleth the love of God. For
so much of the soul’s own will as is dead unto itself, even so
much room hath the will of God, which is his love, taken up in
that soul. The reason whereof is this: Where its own will did
before sit, there is now nothing; and where nothing is, there
it is that the love of God worketh alone.

Disciple. But how shall I comprehend it?

Master. If thou goest about to comprehend it, then it will
fly away from thee; but if thou dost surrender thyself wholly
up to it, then it will abide with thee, and become the life of thy
life, and be natural to thee.

Disciple. And how can this be without dying, or the whole
destruction of my will?

Master. Upon this entire surrender and yielding up of thy
will, the love of God in thee becometh the life of thy nature; it
killeth thee not, but quickeneth thee, who art now dead to
thyself in thine own will, according to its proper life, even the
life of God. And then thou livest, yet not to thy own will; but
thou livest to its will; forasmuch as thy will is henceforth
become its will. So then it is no longer thy will, but the will of
God; no longer the love of thyself, but the love of God, which
moveth and operateth in thee; and then, being thus compre-
hended in it, thou art dead indeed as to thyself, but art alive
unto God. So being dead thou livest, or rather God liveth in
thee by his Spirit; and his love is made to thee life from the
dead. Never couldst thou, with all thy seeking, have com-
prehended it; but it hath apprehended thee. Much less couldst
thou have comprehended it: But now it hath comprehended
thee; and so the treasure of treasures is found.

Disciple. How is it that so few souls do find it, when yet all
would be glad enough to have it?

Master. They all seek it in somewhat, and so they find it not:
For where there is somewhat for the soul to adhere to, there the
soul findeth but that somewhat only, and taketh up its rest
therein, until she seeth that it is to be found in nothing, and
goeth out of the somewhat into nothing, even into that nothing
out of which all things may be made. The soul here saith, “ I
have nothing, for I am utterly naked and stripped of everything:
I can do nothing; for I have no manner of power, but am as
water poured out: I am nothing; for all that I am is no more
than an image of being, and only God is to me I am; and so


256 Jacob Boehme


sitting down in my own nothingness, I give glory to the Eternal
Being, and will nothing of myself, that so God may will all in
me, being unto me my God and all things.” Herein now it is
that so very few find this most precious treasure in the soul,
though every one would so fain have it; and might also have it,
were it not for this somewhat in every one which letteth.

Disciple. But if the love should proffer itself to a soul, could
not that soul find it, nor lay hold on it, without going for it into
nothing?

Master. No verily. Men seek and find not, because they seek
it not in the naked ground where it lieth; but in something or
other where it never will be, neither can be. They seek it in |
their own will, and they find it not. They seek it in their self- |
desire, and they meet not with it. They look for it in an image, |
or in an opinion, or in affection, or a natural devotion and |
fervour, and they lose the substance by thus hunting after a |
shadow. They search for it in something sensible or imaginary, |
in somewhat which they may have a more peculiar natural
inclination for, and adhesion to; and so they miss of what they |
seek, for want of diving into the supersensual and supernatural
ground where the treasure is hid. Now, should the love
graciously condescend to proffer itself to such as these, and even |
to present itself evidently before the eye of their spirit, yet
would it find no place in them at all, neither could it be held by
them, or remain with them.

_ Disciple. Why not, if the love should be willing and ready to
offer itself, and to stay with them.

Master. Because the imaginariness which is in their own will
hath set up itself in the place thereof: And so this imaginariness
would have the love in it; but the love fleeth away, for it is
its prison. The love may offer itself; but it cannot abide
where the self-desire attracteth or imagineth. That will which
attracteth nothing, and to which nothing adhereth, is only
capable of receiving it; for it dwelleth only in nothing, as I said,
and therefore they find it not.

Disciple. If it dwell only in nothing, what is now the office:
of it in nothing?

Master. The office of the love here is to penetrate incessantly '
into something; and if it penetrate into, and find a place in,
something which is standing still and at rest, then its business;
is to take possession thereof. And when it hath there taken)
possession, then it rejoiceth therein with its flaming love-fire, ,
even as the sun doth in the visible world. And then the office :


Of the Supersensual Life 257


of it is without intermission to enkindle a fire in this something,
which may burn it up; and then with the flames thereof exceed-
ingly to enflame itself, and raise the heat of the love-fire by it,
even seven degrees higher.

Disciple. O loving master, how shall I understand this?

Master. If it but once kindle a fire within thee, my son, thou
shalt then certainly feel how it consumeth all that which it
toucheth; thou shalt feel it in the burning up thyself, and
swiftly devouring all egoity, or that which thou callest I and Me,
as standing in a separate root, and divided from the Deity, the
fountain of thy being. And when this enkindling is made in
thee, then the love doth so exceedingly rejoice in thy fire, as
thou wouldst not for all the world be out of it; yea, wouldst
rather suffer thyself to be killed, than to enter into thy some-
thing again. This fire now must grow hotter and hotter, till it
shall have perfected its office with respect to thee, and therefore
wilt not give over, till it come to the seventh degree. Its flame
hence also will be so very great, that it will never leave thee,
though it should even cost thee thy temporal life; but it would
go with thee in its sweet loving fire into death; and if thou
wentest also into hell, it would break hell in pieces also for thy
sake. Nothing is more certain than this; for it is stronger than
death and hell.

Disciple. Enough, my dearest master, I can no longer endure
that anything should divert me from it. But how shall I find
the nearest way to it?

Master. Where the way is hardest, there go thou; and what
the world casteth away, that take thou up. What the world
doth, that do thou not; but in all things walk thou contrary to
the world. So thou comest the nearest way to that which thou
art seeking.

Disciple. If I should in all things walk contrary to other
people, I must needs be in a very unquiet and sad state; and the
world would not fail to account me for a madman.

Master. I bid thee not, child, to do harm to any one, thereby
to create to thyself any misery or unquietness. This is not
what I mean by walking contrary in everything to the world.
But because the world, as the world, loveth only deceit and
vanity, and walketh in false and treacherous ways; thence, if
thou hast a mind to act a clean contrary part to the ways
thereof, without any exception or reserve whatsoever, walk thou
only in the right way, which is called the way of light, as that
of the world is properly the way of darkness. For the right

s 569


258 Jacob Boehme


way, even the path of light, is contrary to all the ways of the
world.

But whereas thou art afraid of creating to thyself hereby
trouble and inquietude, that indeed will be so according to the
flesh. In the world thou must have trouble; and thy flesh will
not fail to be unquiet, and to give thee occasion of continual
repentance. Nevertheless in this very anxiety of soul, arising
either from the world or the flesh, the love doth most willingly
enkindle itself, and its cheering and conquering fire is but made
to blaze forth with greater strength for the destruction of that
evil. And whereas thou dost also say, that the world will for
this esteem thee mad; it is true the world will be apt enough to
censure thee for a madman in walking contrary to it: And thou
art not to be surprised if the children thereof laugh at thee,
calling thee silly fool. For the way to the love of God is folly
to the world, but is wisdom to the children of God. Hence,
whenever the world perceiveth this holy fire of love in God’s
children, it concludeth immediately that they are turned fools, —
and are besides themselves. But to the children of God, that —
which is despised of the world is the greatest treasure; yea, so
great a treasure it is, as no life can express, nor tongue so much |
as name what this enflaming, all-conquering love of God is. It |
is brighter than the sun; it is sweeter than anything that is.
called sweet; it is stronger than all strength; it is more nutri- |
mental than food; more cheering to the heart than wine, and
more pleasant than all the joy and pleasantness of this world.
Whosoever obtaineth it, is richer than any monarch on earth;
and he who getteth it, is nobler than any emperor can be, and
more potent and absolute than all power and authority.


OF HEAVEN AND HELL


A DIALOGUE BETWEEN JUNIUS A SCHOLAR AND
THEOPHORUS HIS MASTER


THE scholar asked his master, saying; Whither goeth the soul
when the body dieth?

His master answered him; There is no necessity for it to go
any whither.

What not! said the inquisitive Junius: Must not the soul
leave the body at death, and go either to heaven or hell?

It needs no going forth, replyed the venerable Theophorus:
Only the outward mortal life with the body shall separate
themselves from the soul. The soul hath heaven and hell within
itself before, according as it is written, “ The kingdom of God
cometh not with observation, neither shall they say, Lo here! or
Lothere! For behold the kingdom of God is within you.” And
which soever of the two, that is, either heaven or hell is mani-
fested in it, in that the soul standeth.

Here Junius said to his master; This is hard to understand.
Doth it not enter into heaven or hell, as a man entereth into an
house; or as one goeth through an hole or casement, into an
unknown place; so goeth it not into another world?

The master spake and said; No. There is verily no such kind
of entering in; forasmuch as heaven and hell are everywhere,
being universally co-extended.

How is that possible? said the scholar. What, can heaven
and hell be here present, where we are now sitting? And if
one of them might, can you make me believe that ever both
should be here together?

Then spoke the master in this manner: I have said that
heaven is everywhere present; and it is true. For God is in
heaven; and God is everywhere. I have said also, that hell
must be in like manner everywhere; and that is also true. For
the wicked one, who is the devil, is in hell; and the whole world,
as the apostle hath taught us, lieth in the wicked one, or the
evil one; which is as much as to say, not only that the devil is
in the world, but also that the world is in the devil; and if in


259


260 Jacob Boehme


the devil, then in hell too, because he is there. So hell therefore
is everywhere, as well as heaven; which is the thing that was to
be proved.

The scholar, startled hereat, said, Pray make me to understand
this. |
To whom the master: Understand then what heaven is: It
is but the turning in of the will into the love of God. Where-
soever thou findest God manifesting himself in love, there thou
findest heaven, without travelling for it so much as one foot.
And by this understand also what hell is, and where it is. I say
unto thee, it is but the turning in of the will into the wrath of
God. Wheresoever the anger of God doth more or less manifest
itself, there certainly is more or less of hell, in whatsoever place
it be. So that it is but the turning in of thy will either into
his love, or into his anger; and thou art accordingly either in
heaven or in hell. Mark it well. And this now cometh to pass
in this present life, whereof St. Paul speaking, saith, “ Our
conversation is in heaven.” And the Lord Christ saith also;

“ My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me,
and I give them the eternal life; and none shall pluck them out —
of my hand.” Observe, he saith not, I will give them, after
this life is ended; but I give them, that is, now in the time of
this life. And what else is this gift of Christ to his followers —
but an eternity of life; which for certain, can be nowhere but
in heaven. And also if Christ be certainly in heaven, and they
who follow him in the regeneration are in his hand, then are
they where he is, and so cannot be out of heaven: Yea, more-
over none shall be able to pluck them out of heaven, because it
is he who holdeth them there, and they are in his hand which
nothing can resist. All therefore doth consist in the turning in,
or entering of the will into heaven, by hearing the voice of
Christ, and both knowing him, and following him. And so on
the contrary it is also: Understandest thou this?

His scholar said to him; I think, in part, I do. But how
cometh this entering of the will into heaven to pass?

The master answered him; This then I will endeavour to
satisfy thee in; but thou must be very attentive to what I shall
say unto thee. Know then, my son, that when the ground of
the will yieldeth up itself to God, then it sinketh out of its own —
self, and out of and beyond all ground and place, that is or can
be imagined, into a certain unknown deep, where God only is
manifest, and where he only worketh and willeth. And then it
becometh nothing to itself, as to its own working and willing;


Of the Supersensual Life 261


and so God worketh and willeth in it. And God dwells in this
resigned will; by which the soul is sanctified, and so fitted to
come into divine rest. Now in this case when the body breaketh,
the soul is so thoroughly penetrated all over with the divine love,
and so thoroughly illuminated with the divine light, even as a
glowing hot iron is by the fire, by which being penetrated
throughout, it loseth its darkness, and becometh bright and
shining. Now this is the hand of Christ, where God’s love
thoroughly inhabiteth the soul, and is in it a shining light, and
a new glorious life. And then the soul is in heaven, and is a
temple of the Holy Ghost, and is itself the very heaven of God,
~ wherein he dwelleth. Lo, this is the entering of the will into
heaven; and thus it cometh to pass.

Be pleased, sir, to proceed, said the scholar, and let me know
how it fareth on the other side.

The master said: The godly soul, you see, is in the hand of
Christ, that is in heaven, as he himself hath told us; and in what
manner this cometh to be so, you have also heard. But the
ungodly soul is not willing in this life-time to come into the
divine resignation of its will, or to enter into the will of God;
but goeth on still in its own lust and desire, in vanity and false-
hood, and so entereth into the will of the devil. It receiveth
thereupon into itself nothing but wickedness; nothing but
lying, pride, covetousness, envy, and wrath; and thereinto it
giveth up its will and whole desire. This is the vanity of the
will; and this same vanity or vain shadow must also in like
manner be manifested in the soul, which hath yielded up itself
to be its servant; and must work therein, even as the love of God
worketh in the regenerated will, and penetrate it all over, as
fire doth iron.

And it is not possible for this soul to come into the rest of
God; because God’s anger is manifested in it, and worketh in
it. Now when the body is parted from this soul, then beginneth
the eternal melancholy and despair; because it now findeth that
it is become altogether vanity, even a vanity most vexatious to
itself, and a distracting fury, and a self-tormenting abomination.
Now it perceiveth itself disappointed of everything which it had
before fancied, and blind, and naked, and wounded, and hungry,
and thirsty; without the least prospect of being ever relieved,
or obtaining so much as one drop of the water of eternal life.
And it feeleth itself to be a mere devil to itself, and its own vile
executioner and tormentor; and is affrighted at its own ugly
dark form, appearing as a most hideous and monstrous worm,


262 Jacob Boehme


and fain would flee from itself, if it could, but it cannot, being
fast bound with the chains of the dark nature, whereinto it had
sunk itself when in the flesh. And so not having learned nor
accustomed itself to sink down into the divine grace, and being
also strongly possessed with the idea of God, as an angry and
jealous God, the poor soul is both afraid and ‘ashamed to bring
its will into God, by which deliverance might possibly come to
it. The soul is afraid to do it, as fearing to be consumed by so
doing, under the apprehension of the Deity as a mere devouring
fire. The soul is also ashamed to do it, as being confounded at
its own nakedness and monstrosity; and therefore would, if it
were possible, hide itself from the majesty of God, and cover its
abominable form from his most holy eye, though by casting
itself still deeper into the darkness, wherefore then it will not
enter into God; nay, it cannot enter with its false will; yea,
though it should strive to enter, yet can it not enter into the
love, because of the will which hath reigned in it. For such a
soul is thereby captivated in the wrath; yea, is itself but mere
wrath, having by its false desire, which it had awakened in itself,
comprehended and shut up itself therewith, and so transformed
itself into the nature and property thereof.

And since also the light of God doth not shine in it, nor the
love of God incline it, the soul is moreover a great darkness, and
is withal an anxious fire-source, carrying about an hell within
itself, and not being able to discern the least glimpse of the
light of God, or to feel the least spark of his love. Thus it
dwelleth in itself as in hell, and needeth no entering into hell at
all, or being carried thither; for in what place soever it may be,
so long as it is in itself, it is in the hell. And though it should
travel far, and cast itself many hundred thousand leagues from
its present place, to be out of hell; yet still would it remain in
the hellish source and darkness.

If this be so, how then cometh it, said the aes to Theo-
phorus, that an heavenly soul doth not in the time of this life
perfectly perceive the heavenly light and joy; and the soul
which is without God in the world, doth not also here feel hell,
as well as hereafter? Why should they not both be perceived
and felt as well in this life as in the next, seeing that both of
them are in man, and one of them (as you have shewed) worketh
in every man?

To whom Theophorus presently returneth this answer: The
kingdom of heaven is in the saints operative and manifestative
of itself by faith. They who carry God within them, and live


Of the Supersensual Life 263


by his Spirit, find the kingdom of God in their faith; and they
feel the love of God in their faith, by which the will hath given
up itself into God, and is made Godlike. In a word, all is
transacted within them by faith, which is to them the evidence
of the eternal invisibles, and a great manifestation in their spirit
of this divine kingdom, which is within them. But their natural
life is nevertheless encompassed with flesh and blood; and this
standing in a contrariety thereto, and being placed through the
Fall in the principle of God’s anger, and environed about with the
world, which by no means can be reconciled to faith, these
faithful souls cannot but be very much exposed to attacks from
this world, wherein they are sojourners; neither can they be
insensible of their being thus compassed about with flesh and
blood, and with this world’s vain lust, which ceaseth not con-
tinually to penetrate the outward mortal life, and to tempt them
manifold ways, even as it did Christ. Whence the world on one
side, and the devil on the other, not without the curse of God’s
anger in flesh and blood, do thoroughly penetrate and sift the
life; whereby it cometh to pass that the soul is often in anxiety
when these three are all set upon it together, and when hell thus
assaulteth the life, and would manifest itself in the soul. But
the soul hereupon sinketh down into the hope of the grace of
God, and standeth like a beautiful rose in the midst of thorns,
until the kingdom of this world shall fall from it in the death
of the body: And then the soul first becometh truly manifest
in the love of God, and in his kingdom, which is the kingdom of
love; having henceforth nothing more to hinder it. But during
this life she must walk with Christ in this world; and then Christ
delivereth her out of her own hell, by penetrating her with his
love throughout, and standing by her in hell, and even changing
her hell into heaven.

But in that thou moreover sayest, why do not the souls which
are without God feel hell in this world? I answer: They bear
it about with them in their wicked consciences, but they know it
not; because the world hath put out their eyes, and its deadly
cup hath cast them likewise into a sleep, a most fatal sleep.
Notwithstanding which it must be owned that the wicked do
frequently feel hell within them during the time of this mortal
life, though they may not apprehend that it is hell, because
of the earthly vanity which cleaveth unto them from without,
and the sensible pleasures and amusements wherewith they are
intoxicated. And moreover it is to be noted, that the outward
life in every such one hath yet the light of the outward nature,


264. Jacob Boehme


which ruleth in that life; and so the pain of hell cannot, so long
as that hath the rule, be revealed. But when the body dieth
or breaketh away, so as the soul cannot any longer enjoy such
temporal pleasure and delight, nor the light of this outward
world, which is wholly thereupon extinguished as to it; then
the soul stands in an eternal hunger and thirst after such vanities
as it was here in love withal, but yet can reach nothing but that
false will, which it had impressed in itself while in the body; and
wherein it had abounded to its great loss. And now whereas
it had too much of its will in this life, and yet was not contented
therewith, it hath after this separation by death, as little of it;
which createth in it an everlasting thirst after that which it
can henceforth never obtain more, and causeth it to be in a
perpetual anxious lust after vanity, according to its former
impression, and in a continual rage of hunger after those sorts
of wickedness and lewdness whereinto it was immersed, being
in the flesh. Fain would it do more evil still, but that it hath ©
not either wherein or wherewith to effect the same, left it; and
therefore it doth perform this only in itself. Allis now internally —
transacted, as if it were outward; and so the ungodly is tor-
mented by those furies which are in his own mind, and begotten
upon himself by himself. For he is verily become his own devil —
and tormentor; and that by which he sinned here, when the
shadow of this world is passed away, abideth still with him in
the impression, and is made his prison and his hell. But this
hellish hunger and thirst cannot be fully manifested in the soul,
till the body which ministered to the soul what it lusted after,
and with which the soul was so bewitched, as to doat thereupon,
and pursue all its cravings, be stripped off from it.

I perceive then, said Junius to his master, that the soul
having played the wanton with the body in all voluptuousness,
and served the lusts thereof during this life, retaineth still the
very same inclinations and affections which it had before, then
when it hath no opportunity nor capacity to satisfy them longer;
and that when this cannot be, there is then hell opened in that
soul, which had been shut up in it before, by means of the
outward life in the body, and of the light of this world. Do I
rightly understand?

Theophorus said, It is very rightly understood by you. Goon. —

On the other hand (said he) I clearly perceive by what I have |
heard, that heaven cannot but be in a loving soul, which is
possessed of God, and hath subdued thereby the body to the
obedience of the spirit in all things, and perfectly immersed


Of the Supersensual Life 265


itself into the will and love of God. And when the body dieth,
and this soul is hence redeemed from the earth, it is now evident
to me, that the life of God which was hidden in it, will display
itself gloriously, and heaven consequently be then manifested.
But notwithstanding, if there be not also a local heaven besides,
and a local hell, I am still at a loss where to place no small part
of the creation, if not the greatest. For where must all the
intellectual inhabitants of it abide?

In their own principle, answered the master, whether it be
of light or of darkness. For every created intellectual being
remaineth in its deeds and essences, in its wonders and pro-
_ pērties, in its life and image; and therein it beholdeth and
feeleth God, as who is everywhere, whether it be in the love, or
in the wrath.

If it be in the love of God, then beholdeth it God accordingly,
and feeleth him as he is love. But if it hath captivated itself in
the wrath of God, then it cannot behold God otherwise than
in the wrathful nature, nor perceive him otherwise than as an
incensed and vindictive spirit. All places are alike to it, if it
be in God’s love; and if it be not there, every place is hell alike.
What place can bound a thought? Or what needeth any under-
standing spirit to be kept here or there, in order to its happiness
or misery? Verily, wheresoever it is, it is in the abyssal world,
where there is neither end nor limit. And whither, I pray,
should it go? since though it should go a thousand miles off,
or a thousand time ten thousand miles, and this ten thousand
times over, beyond the bounds of the universe, and into the
imaginary spaces above the stars, yet it were then still in the
very same point from whence it went out. For God is the place
of spirit; if it may be lawful to attribute to him such a name,
to the which body hath a relation: And in God there is no
limit; both near and afar off is here all one; and be it in his
love, or be it in his anger, the abyssal will of the spirit is alto-
gether unconfined. It is swift as thought, passing through all
things; it is magical, and nothing corporeal or from without
can let it; it dwelleth in its wonders, and they are its house.

Thus it is with every intellectual, whether of the order of
angels, or of human souls; and you need not fear but there will
be room enough for them all, be they ever so many; and such
also as shall best suit them, even according to their election and
determination; and which may thence very well be called his
own place.

At which, said the scholar; I remember, indeed, that it is


266 Jacob Boehme


written concerning the great traitor, that he went after death
to his own place.

The master here said: The same is true of every soul, when
it departeth this mortal life: And it is true in like manner of
every angel, or spirit whatsoever; which is necessarily deter-
mined by its own choice. As God is everywhere, so also the
angels are everywhere; but each one in its own principle, and
in its own property, or (if you had rather) in its own place.
The same essence of God, which is as a place to spirits, is con-
fessed to be everywhere; but the appropriation, or participation
hereof is different to every one, according as each hath attracted
magically in the earnestness of the will. The same divine
essence which is with the angels of God above, is with us also
below: And the same divine nature which is with us, is likewise
with them; but after different manners and in different degrees,
communicated and participated.

And what I have said here of the divine, is no less to be
considered by you in the participation of the diabolical essence
and nature, which is the power of darkness, as to the manifold
modes, degrees, and appropriations thereof in the false will.
In this world there is strife between them: But when this world
hath reached in any one the limit, then the principle catcheth
that which is its own; and so the soul receiveth companions
accordingly, that is, either angels or devils.

To whom the scholar again: Heaven and hell then being in us
at strife in the time of this life, and God himself being also thus
near unto us, where can angels and devils dwell?

And the master answered him thus: Where thou dost not
dwell as to thy self-hood, and to thine own will, there the holy
angels dwell with thee, and everywhere all over round about
thee. Remember this well. On the contrary, where thou
dwellest as to thyself, in self-seeking, and self-will, there to be
sure the devils will be with thee, and will take up their abode
with thee, and dwell all over thee, and round about thee every-
where. Which God in his mercy prevent.

I understand not this, said the scholar, so perfectly well as I
could wish. Be pleased to make it a little more clear to me.

The master then spake: Mark well what I am going to say.
Where the will of God in anything willeth, there is God mani-
fested; and in this very manifestation of God, the angels do
dwell. But where God in any creature willeth not with the will
of that creature, there God is not manifested to it, neither can
he be; but dwelleth in himself, without the co-operation thereof,


Of the Supersensual Life 267


and subjection to him in humility. There God is an unmani-
fested God to the creature: So the angels dwell not with such
an one; for wherever they dwell, there is the glory of God; and
they make his glory. What then dwelleth in such a creature as
this? God dwelleth not therein; the angels dwell not therein;
God willeth not therein, the angels also will not therein. The
case is evidently this, in that soul or creature its own will is
without God’s will, and there the devil dwelleth; and with him
all whatever is without God, and without Christ. This is the
truth; lay it to heart.

The Scholar. It is possible I may ask several impertinent

“questions; but I beseech you, good sir, to have patience with
me, and to pity my ignorance, if I ask what may appear to you
perhaps ridiculous, or may not be at all fit for me to expect an
answer to. For I have several questions still to propound to
you; but I am ashamed of my own thoughts in this matter.

The Master. Be plain with me, and propose whatever is upon
your mind; yea, be not ashamed even to appear ridiculous, so
that by querying you may but become wiser.

The scholar thanked his master for this liberty, and said:
How far then are heaven and hell asunder?

To whom he answered thus: As far as day and night; or as
far as something and nothing. They are in one another, and
yet they are at the greatest distance one from the other. Nay,
the one of them is as nothing to the other; and yet notwith-
standing they cause joy and grief to one another. Heaven is
throughout the whole world, and it is also without the world over
all, even everywhere that is, or that can be but so much as
imagined. It filleth all, it is within all, it is without all, it
encompasseth all; without division, without place; working by
a divine manifestation, and flowing forth universally, but not
going in the least out of itself. For only in itself it worketh, and
is revealed, being one, and undivided in all. It appeareth only
through the manifestation of God; and never but in itself only:
And in that being which cometh into it, or in that wherein it
is manifested; there also it is that God is manifested. Because
heaven is nothing else but a manifestation or revelation of the
Eternal One, wherein all the working and willing is in quiet love.

So in like manner hell also is through the whole world, and
dwelleth and worketh but in itself, and in that wherein the
foundation of hell is manifested, namely, in self-hood, and in
the false will. The visible world hath both in it; and there is
no place but heaven and hell may be found or revealed in it.


268 Jacob Boehme


Now man as to his temporal life, is only of the visible world; —
and therefore during the time of this life, he seeth not the
spiritual world. For the outward world with its substance, is a
cover to the spiritual world, even as the body is to the soul.
But when the outward man dieth, then the spiritual world, as
to the soul, which hath now its covering taken away, is mani-
fested either in the eternal light with the holy angels, or in the
eternal darkness, with the devils.

The scholar further queried: What is an angel, or a human
soul, that they can be thus manifested either in God’s love or
anger, either in light or darkness?

To whom Theophorus answered: They come from one and
the self-same original: They are little branches of the divine
wisdom, of the divine will, sprung from the divine word, and
made objects of the divine love. They are out of the ground of
eternity, whence light and darkness do spring: Darkness, which
consisteth in the receiving of self-desire; and light, which con-
sisteth in willing the same thing with God. For in the con-
formity of the will with God’s will, is heaven; and wheresoever
there is this willing with God, there the love of God is un-
doubtedly in the working, and his light will not fail to manifest
itself. But in the self-attraction of the soul’s desire, or in the
reception of self into the willing of any spirit, angelical or
human, the will of God worketh difficultly, and is to that soul or
spirit nought but darkness; out of which, notwithstanding, the
light may be manifested. And this darkness is the hell of that
spirit wherein it is. For heaven and hell are nought else but a
manifestation of the divine will either in light or darkness,
according to the properties of the spiritual world.?


WHAT THE BODY OF MAN IS; AND WHY THE SOUL IS CAPABLE
OF RECEIVING GOOD AND EVIL


Scholar. What then is the body of man?

Master. It is the visible world; an image and quintessence,
or compound of all that the world is; and the visible world is a
manifestation of the inward spiritual world, come out of the
eternal light, and out of the eternal darkness, out of the spiritual
compaction or connection; and it is also an image or figure of
eternity, whereby eternity hath made itself visible; where self-

1 From the beginning of the Supersensual Life to the reference of this
note, was found among the papers of the later editor, in the handwriting
of the truely pious and learned Mr. Law, who has so enlarged and elucidated


it (as the reader may see by comparing it with the original) that probably
he intended it for a separate publication.


Of the Supersensual Life 269


will and resigned will, viz. evil and good, work one with the
other.

Such a substance is the outward man. For God created man
of the outward world, and breathed into him the inward spiritual
world for a soul and an intelligent life; and therefore in the
things of the outward world man can receive and work evil and
good.


OF THE DESTRUCTION OF THE WORLD; OF MAN’S BODY, IN AND
AFTER THE RESURRECTION; WHERE HEAVEN AND HELL
SHALL BE; OF THE LAST JUDGEMENT; AND WHEREFORE
THE STRIFE IN THE CREATURE MUST BE


Scholar. What shall be after this world, when all things
perish and come to an end?

Master. The material substance only ceaseth; viz. the four
elements, the sun, moon, and stars. And then the inward world
will be wholly visible and manifest. But whatsoever hath been
wrought by the will or spirit of man in this world’s time, whether
evil or good. I say, every such work shall there separate itself
in a spiritual manner, either into the eternal light, or into
the eternal darkness. For that which is born from each will
penetrateth and passeth again into that which is like itself.
And there the darkness is called hell, and is an eternal forgetting
of all good; and the light is called the kingdom of God, and is
an eternal joy in and to the saints, who continually glorify and
praise God, for having delivered them from the torment of evil.

The last judgement is a kindling of the fire both of God’s love
and anger, in which the matter of every substance perisheth,
and each fire shall attract into itself its own, that is, the substance
that is like itself: Thus God’s fire of love will draw into it what-
soever is born in the love of God, or love-principle, in which also
it shall burn after the manner of love, and yield itself into that
substance. But the torment will draw into itself what is
wrought in the anger of God in darkness, and consume the false
substance; and then there will remain only the painful aching
_ will in its own proper nature, image, and figure.

Scholar. With what matter and form shall the human body
rise?

Master. It is sown a natural gross and elementary body,
which in this life-time is like the outward elements; yet in this
gross body there is a subtle power and virtue. As in the earth
also there is a subtle good virtue, which is like the sun, and is
one and the same with the sun; which also in the beginning of


ZO Jacob Boehme


a ee


time did spring and proceed out of the divine power and virtue,
from whence all the good virtue of the body is likewise derived. `
This good virtue of the mortal body shall come again and live
for ever in a kind of transparent chrystalline material property, |
in spiritual flesh and blood; as shall return also the good virtue of |
the earth, for the earth likewise shall become chrystalline, and
the divine light shine in everything that hath a being, essence,
or substance. And as the gross earth shall perish and never |
return, so also the gross flesh of man shall perish and not live |
for ever. But all things must appear before the judgement, |
and in the judgement be separated by the fire; yea, both the
earth, and also the ashes of the human body. For when God |
shall once move the spiritual world, every spirit shall attract its _
spiritual substance to itself. A good spirit and soul shall draw »
to itself its good substance, and an evil one its evil substance.
But we must here understand by substance, such a material |
power and virtue, the essence of which is mere virtue, like a


material tincture (such a thing as hath all figures, colours, and |
virtues in it, and is at the same time transparent), the grossness ~
whereof is perished in all things.

Scholar. Shall we not rise again with our visible bodies, and |
live in them for ever? See The Forty Questions of the Soulg
quest. XXI. ver. I2.

Master. When the visible world perisheth, then all that hathel
come out of it, and hath been external, shall perish with it.
There shall remain of the world only the heavenly chrystalline
nature and form, and of man also only the spiritual earth; for
man shall be then wholly lke the spiritual world, which as
yet is hidden.

Scholar. Shall there be husband and wife, or children or
kindred, in the heavenly life, or shall one associate with another,
as they do in this life?

Master. Why art thou so fleshly-minded? There will be
neither husband nor wife, but all will be like the angels of God,
viz. masculine virgins. There will be neither son nor daughter,
brother nor sister, but all of one stock and kindred. For all are
but one in Christ, as a tree and its branches are one, though
distinct as creatures; but God is all in all. Indeed, there will
be spiritual knowledge of what every one hath been, and done,
but no possessing or enjoying, or desire of possessing earthly
things, or enjoying fleshly relations any more.

Scholar. Shall they all have that eternal joy and glorification
alike?


Of the Supersensual Life 271


_ Master. The Scripture saith, “ Such as the people is, such is
their God.” And in another place, “ With the holy thou art
holy, and with the perverse thou art perverse.” And St. Paul
saith, “ In the resurrection one shall differ from another in
glory, as do the sun, moon, and stars.” Therefore know, that
the blessed shall indeed all enjoy the divine working in and
upon them; but their virtue, and illumination or glory, shall
be very different, according as they have been endued in this
life with different measures and degrees of power and virtue in
their painful working. For the painful working of the creature
in this life-time is the opening and begetting of divine power, by
which that power is made moveable and operative. Now those
who have wrought with Christ in this life-time, and not in the
lust of the flesh, shall have great power and transcendent
glorification in and upon them. But others, who have only
expected, and relied upon, an imputed satisfaction, and in the
meanwhile have served their belly-god, and yet at last have
turned, and obtained grace; those, I say, shall not attain to
so high a degree of power and illumination. So that there will
be as great a difference of degrees between them, as is between
the sun, moon, and stars; or between the flowers of the field
in their varieties of beauty, power, and virtue.

Scholar. How shall the world be judged, and by whom?

Master. Jesus Christ, that “ word of God which became man,”
shall by the power of his divine stirring or motion separate from
himself all that belongeth not to him, and shall wholly manifest
his kingdom in the place or space where this world now is; for
the separating motion worketh all over the universe, through
all at once.

Scholar. Whither shall the devils and all the damned be
thrown, when the place of this world is become the kingdom
of Christ, and such as shall be glorified? Shall they be cast
out of the place of this world? Or shall Christ have, and
manifest his dominion, out of the sphere or place of this
world?

Master. Hell shall remain in the place or sphere of this world
everywhere, but hidden to the kingdom of heaven, as the night
is hidden in and to the day. “ The light shall shine for ever
in the darkness, but the darkness can never comprehend, or
reach it.” And the light is the kingdom of Christ; but the
darkness is hell, wherein the devils and the wicked dwell; and
thus they shall be suppressed by the kingdom of Christ, and
made his footstool, viz. a reproach.


pes


272 Jacob Boehme


Scholar. How shall all people and nations be brought to |
judgement? |
Master. The eternal word of God, out of which every spiritual |
creaturely life hath proceeded, will move itself at that hour, |
according to love and anger, in every life which is come out of |
the eternity, and will draw every creature before the judgement
of Christ, to be sentenced by this motion of the world. The life
will then be manifested in all its works, and every soul shall see
and feel its judgement and sentence in itself. For the judge-
ment is, indeed, immediately at the departure of the body, mani-
fested in and to every soul: And the last judgement is but a
return of the spiritual body, and a separation of the world, when |
the evil shall be separated from the good, in the substance of
the world, and of the human body, and everything enter into
its eternal receptacle. And thus is it a manifestation of the
mystery of God in every substance and life. |

Scholar. How will the sentence be pronounced? |

Master. Here consider the words of Christ. “ He will say tal |
those on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit |
the kmgdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world. |
For I was hungry, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye |
gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in; naked, and |
ye clothed me. I was sick, ‘and ye visited me, in prison, and
ye came unto me. |

“Then shall they answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we
thee hungry, thirsty, a stranger, naked, sick, or in prison, and
ministered thus unto thee?

“ Then shall the King answer and say unto them; Inasmuch
as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren,
ye have done it unto me.

“ And unto the wicked on his left hand he will say, Depart
from me, ye cursed, mto everlasting fire, prepared for the devil
and his angels. For I was hungry, thirsty, a stranger, naked,
sick, and in prison, and ye ministered not unto me.

“ And they shall also answer him, and say, When did we see
thee thus, and ministered not unto thee?

“ And he will answer them, Verily I say unto you, inasmuch
as ye have not done it unto one of the least of these, ye did it
not to me.

“ And these shall depart into everlasting punishment, but the
righteous into life eternal.”

Scholar. Loving master, pray tell me why Christ saith, “ What
you have done to the least of these, you have done to me; and


Of the Supersensual Life 25


vhat you have not done to them, neither have you done it to
ne.” And how doth a man this so, as that he doth it to Christ
umself!

Master. Christ dwelleth really and essentially in the faith of
hose that wholly yield up themselves to him, and giveth them
us flesh for food, and his blood for drink; and thus possesseth
he ground of their faith, according to the interior or inward
man. And a Christian is called a branch of the vine Christ, and
2 Christian, because Christ dwelleth spiritually in him; therefore
whatsoever good any shall do to such a Christian in his bodily
zecessities, it is done to Christ himself, who dwelleth in him.
For such a Christian is not his own, but is wholly resigned to
Christ, and become his peculiar possession, and consequently the
sood deed is done to Christ himself. Therefore also, whosoever
shall withhold their help from such a needy Christian, and
forbear to serve him in his necessity, they thrust Christ away
from themselves, and despise him in his members. When a
900r person that belongeth thus to Christ, asketh anything of
thee, and thou deniest it him in his necessity, thou deniest it to
Christ himself. And whatsoever hurt any shall do to such a
christian, they do it to Christ himself. When any mock, scorn,
revile, reject, or thrust away such a one, they do all that to
christ; but he that receiveth him, giveth him meat and drink,
or apparel, and assisteth him in his necessities, doth it likewise
to Christ, and to a fellow-member of his own body. Nay, he
doth it to himself if he be a Christian; for we are all one in
Christ, as a tree and its branches are.

Scholar. How then will those subsist in the day of that fierce
judgement, who afflict and vex the poor and distressed, and
Jeprive them of their very sweat; necessitating and constraining
them by force to submit to their wills, and trampling upon them
as their footstools, only that they themselves may live in pomp
and power, and spend the fruits of this poor people’s sweat and
abour in voluptuousness, pride, and vanity?

- Master. Christ suffereth in the persecution of his members.
Therefore all the wrong that such hard exactors do to the poor
wretches under their control, is done to Christ himself; and
alleth under his severe sentence and judgement: And besides
hat, they help the devil to augment his kingdom; for by such
yppression of the poor they draw them off from Christ, and make
hem seek unlawful ways to fill their bellies. Nay, they work
or, and with the devil himself, doing the very same thing which
ve doth; who, without intermission, opposeth the kingdom of
T 569


274. Jacob Boehme


Christ, which consisteth only in love. All these oppressors, if
they do not turn with their whole hearts to Christ, and minister
to, or serve him, must go into hell-fire, which is fed and kept
alive by nothing else but such mere self, as that which they have
exercised over the poor here.

Scholar. But how will it fare with those, and how will they
be able to stand that severe trial, who in this time do so fiercely
contend about the kingdom of Christ, and slander, revile, and
persecute one another for their religion, as they do?

Master. All such have not yet known Christ; and they are
but as a type or figure of heaven and hell, striving with each
other for the victory.

All rising, swelling pride, which contendeth about opinions, is
an image of self. And whosoever hath not faith and humility,
nor liveth in the spirit of Christ, which is love, is only armed
with the anger of God, and helpeth forward the victory of the
imaginary self, that is, the kingdom of darkness, and the anger
of God. For at the day of judgement all self shall be given to
the darkness, as shall also all the unprofitable contentions of
men; in which they seek not after love, but merely after their
imaginary self, that they may exalt themselves by exalting and
establishing their opinions; stirring up princes to wars for the
sake of the same, and by that means occasioning the desolation
of whole countries of people. All such things belong to the
judgement, which will separate the false from the true; and
then all images or opinions shall cease, and all the children of
God shall dwell for ever in the love of Christ, and that in them.

All whosoever in this time of strife, namely, from the Fall
to the Resurrection, are not zealous in the spirit of Christ, and
desirous to promote peace and love, but seek and strive for
themselves only, are of the devil, and belong to the pit of dark-
ness, and must consequently be separated from Christ, For in
heaven all serve God their Creator in humble love.

Scholar. Wherefore then doth God suffer such strife and con-
tention to be in this time?

Master. The life itself standeth in strife, that it may be made
manifest, sensible, and palpable, and that the wisdom may be
made separable and known.

The strife also constituteth the eternal joy of the victory. —
For there will arise great praise and thanksgiving in the saints
from the experimental sense and knowledge that Christ in them
hath overcome darkness, and all the self of nature, and that
they are at length totally delivered from the strife; at which


Of the Supersensual Life 276


they shall rejoice eternally, when they shall know how the
wicked are recompenced. And therefore God suffereth all souls
to stand in a free-will, that the eternal dominion both of love
and anger, of light and of darkness, may be made manifest and
known; and that every life might cause and find its own
sentence in itself. For that which is now a strife and pain to
the saints in their wretched warfare here, shall in the end be
turned into great joy to them; and that which hath been a joy
and pleasure to ungodly persons in this world, shall afterwards
be turned into eternal torment and shame to them. Therefore
the joy of the saints must arise to them out of death, as the light
ariseth out of a candle by the destruction and consumption of
it in its fire; that so the life may be freed from the painfulness
of nature, and possess another world.

And as the light hath quite another property than the fire
hath, for it giveth and yieldeth itself forth; whereas the fire
draweth in and consumeth itself; so the holy life of meekness
springeth forth through the death of self-will, and then God’s
will of love only ruleth, and doth all in all. For thus the
Eternal One hath attained feeling and separability, and brought
itself forth again with the feeling, through death in great joyful-
ness; that there might be an eternal delight in the infinite unity,
and an eternal cause of joy; and therefore that which was before
painfulness, must now be the ground and cause of this motion
or stirring to the manifestation of all things. And herein lieth
the mystery of the hidden wisdom of God.

“Every one that asketh receiveth, every one that seeketh
findeth; and to every one that knocketh it shall be opened.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and
the communion of the Holy Ghost, be with us all. Amen.”


Heb. xii. 22, 23,24:

“Thank ye the Lord, for ye are now come to Mount Zion, to
the city of the living God, to the heavenly Jerusalem, to the
innumerable company of angels, and to the general assembly
and church of the first born, who are written in heaven.

“ And to God the Judge of all; and to the spirits of just men
made perfect; and to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant.

“ And to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better things
than that of Abel. Amen.

“ Praise, glory, and thanksgiving; honour, wisdom and power,
be unto him that sitteth on the throne, to our God, and the
Lamb for ever and ever. Amen.”


. —
I W 42154 A S
ETA WE hile E oa Ve Co Or
7 ray = A TURS TA we oii ne Meni


Das


ee Fé i a è =
owe Ny Katou, | r kiina ME € SEPA 4 T j
u a mie A av Ae fy P? ty yeah 6, it a
Lage a A f ssi i ay


<0)
“ss
‘=


X bie Ae -— ve: Ty E À rU t A tA vi aie

y A EEDA 7 — ` X C eae Al a i wg 2 ie
co A à AAOS Ti AN ke Ce an nls
oS a ‘Th Rt BAG A
Be a visit ang


p A ‘ad nts ee


A DISCOURSE


BETWEEN


A SOUL HUNGRY AND THIRSTY


AFTER


THE FOUNTAIN OF LIFE, THE SWEET
LOVE OF JESUS CHRIST,


AND


A SOUL ENLIGHTENED.


SHEWING


Which Way one Soul should seek after and comfort another,
and bring it by Means of its Knowledge into the Paths of
Christ’s Pilgrimage, and faithfully warn it of the thorny
Way of the World, which leadeth the fallen Soul that
naturally walketh therein, into the Abyss or Pit of Hell.


Composed by a Soul that loveth all who are the Children of
Jesus Christ under the Cross.


Arrat Of


THE WAY FROM DARKNESS TO TRUE
ILLUMINATION


THERE was a poor soul that had wandered out of paradise, and
come into the kingdom of this world; where the devil met with
it, and said to it, “ Whither dost thou go, thou soul that art
half blind? ”

The Soul said: I would see and speculate into the creatures
of the world, which the Creator hath made.

The Devil said : How wilt thou see and speculate into them,
when thou canst not know their essence and property? Thou
wilt look upon their outside only, as upon a graven image, and
canst not know them throughly.

The Soul said: How may I come to know their essence and
property?

The Devil said: Thine eyes would be opened to see them
throughly, if thou didst but eat of that from whence the
creatures themselves are come to be good and evil. Thou
wouldst then be as God himself is, and know what the creature is.

The Soul said: I am now a noble and holy creature; but if
I should do so, the Creator hath said, that I should die.

The Devil said: No, thou shouldst not die at all; but thy
eyes would be opened, and thou wouldst be as God himself, and
be master of good and evil. Also, thou shouldst be mighty,
powerful, and very great, as I am; all the subtilty that is in the
creatures would be made known to thee.

The Soul said: If I had the knowledge of nature and of the
creatures, I would then rule the whole world as I listed.

The Devil said : The whole ground of that knowledge lieth in
thee. Do but turn thy will and desire from God or goodness
into nature and the creatures, and then there will arise in thee
a lust to taste; and so thou mayest eat of the Tree of Knowledge
of Good and Evil, and by that means come to know all things.

The Soul said : Well then, I will eat of the Tree of Knowledge
of Good and Evil, that I may rule all things by my own power;
and be of myself a lord on earth, and do what I will, as God
himself doth.

The Devil said: I am the prince of this world; and if thou


' 279


280 Jacob Boehme


wouldst rule on earth, thou must turn thy lust towards my |
image, or desire to be like me, that thou mayest get the cunning, |
wit, reason, and subtilty, that my image hath. |

Thus did the devil present to the soul the Vulcan in the |
Mercury (the power that is in the fiery root of the creature), that |
is, the fiery wheel of essence or substance, in the form of a |
serpent. Upon which, |

The Soul said: Behold, this is the power which can do all
things.—What must I do to get it?

The Devil said: Thou thyself art also such a fiery Mercury.
If thou dost break thy will off from God, and bring it into this
power and skill, then thy hidden ground will be manifested in
thee, and thou mayest work in the same manner. But thou
must eat of that fruit, wherein each of the four elements in itself
ruleth over the other, and is in strife; the heat striving against
the cold, and the cold against the heat; and so all the properties
of nature work feelingly. And then thou wilt instantly be as
the fiery wheel is, and so bring all things into thine own power,
and possess them as thine own.


The Soul did so, and what happened thereupon


Now when the soul broke its will thus off from God, and
brought it into the Mercury, or the fiery will (which is the root
of life and power), there presently arose in it a lust to eat of the
Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil; and the soul did eat
thereof. Which as soon as it had done, Vulcan (or the artificer
in the fire) instantly kindled the fiery wheel of its substance,
and thereupon all the properties of nature awoke in the soul and
exercised each its own lust and desire.

First arose the lust of pride; a desire to be great, mighty,
and powerful; to bring all things under subjection to it, and
so to be lord itself without control; despising all humility
and equality, as esteeming itself the only prudent, witty, and
cunning one, and accounting everything folly that is not accord-
ing to its own humour and liking.

Secondly arose the lust of covetousness; a desire of getting,
which would draw all things to itself, into its own possession.
For when the lust of pride had turned away the will from God,
then the life of the soul would not trust God any further, but
would take care for itself; and therefore brought its desire into
the creatures, viz. into the earth, metals, trees, and other
creatures. Thus the kindled fiery life became hungry and
covetous, when it had broken itself off from the unity, love, and


|
|


Discourse Between Two Souls 281


meekness of God, and attracted to itself the four elements and
their essence, and brought itself into the condition of the beasts;
and so the life became dark, empty, and wrathful; and the
heavenly virtues and colours went out, like a candle extinguished.

Thirdly, there awoke in this fiery life the stinging thorny lust
of envy; a hellish poison, a property which all devils have, and
a torment which makes the life a mere enmity to God, and to
all creatures. Which envy raged furiously in the desire of
covetousness, as a venomous sting doth in the body. Envy
cannot endure, but hateth and would hurt or destroy that which
covetousness cannot draw to itself, by which hellish passion the

noble love of the soul is smothered.

Fourthly, there awoke in this fiery life a torment like fire, viz.
anger; which would murther and remove out of the way all who
would not be subject to pride. Thus the ground and foundation
of hell, which is called the anger of God, was wholly manifested
in this soul. Whereby it lost the fair paradise of God and the
kingdom of heaven, and became such a worm as the fiery serpent
was, which the devil presented to it in his own image and like-
ness. And so the soul began to rule on earth in a bestial manner,
and did all things according to the will of the devil; living in
mere pride, covetousness, envy, and anger, having no longer any
true love towards God. But there arose in the stead thereof an
evil bestial love of filthy lechery, wantonness, and vanity, and
there was no purity left in the heart; for the soul had forsaken
paradise, and taken the earth into its possession. Its mind
was wholly bent upon cunning knowledge, subtilty, and getting
together a multitude of earthly things. No righteousness nor
virtue remained in it at all; but whatsoever evil and wrong it
committed, it covered all cunningly and subtilly under the cloak
of its power and authority by law, and called it by the name of
right and justice, and accounted it good.


The Devil came to the Soul


Upon this the devil drew near to the soul, and brought it on
from one vice to another, for he had taken it captive in his
essence, and set joy and pleasure before it therein, saying thus
to it: Behold, now thou art powerful, mighty, and noble,
endeavour to be greater, richer, and more powerful still. Dis-
play thy knowledge, wit, and subtilty, that every one may fear
thee, and stand in awe of thee, and that thou mayest be
respected, and get a great name in the world.


282 Jacob Boehme


The Soul did so


The soul did as the devil counselled it, and yet knew not that
its counsellor was the devil; but thought it was guided by its
own knowledge, wit, and understanding, and that it did very
well and right all the while.


Jesus Christ met with the Soul


The soul going on in this course of life, our dear and loving
Lord Jesus Christ, who was come into this world with the love
and wrath of God, to destroy the works of the devil, and to
execute judgement upon all ungodly deeds, on a time met with
it, and spake by a strong power, viz. by his passion and death,
into it, and destroyed the works of the devil in it, and discovered
to it the way to his grace, and shone upon it with his mercy,
calling it to return and repent; and promising that he would |
then deliver it from that monstrous deformed shape or image
which it had gotten, and bring it into paradise again.


How Christ wrought in the Soul


Now when the spark of the love of God, or the divine light, |
was accordingly manifested in the soul, it presently saw itself
with its will and works to be in hell, in the wrath of God, and |
found that it was a misshapen ugly monster in the divine
presence and the kingdom of heaven; at which it was so
afirighted, that it fell into the greatest anguish possible, for the
judgement of God was manifested in it. |


What Christ said


Upon this the Lord Christ spake into it with the voice of his
grace, and said, “ Repent and forsake vanity, and thou shalt
attain my grace.”

What the Soul said


Then the soul in its ugly misshapen image, with the defiled
coat of vanity, went before God, and entreated for grace and
the pardon of its sins, and came to be strongly persuaded in
itself, that the satisfaction and atonement of our Lord Jesus
Christ did belong to it. But the evil properties of the serpent,
formed in the astral spirit, or reason of the outward man, would |
not suffer the will of the soul to come before God, but brought
their lusts and inclinations thereinto. For those evil properties
would not die to their own lusts, nor leave the world, for they
were come out of the world, and therefore they feared the


Discourse Between Two Souls 283


reproach of it, in case they should forsake their worldly honour
and glory.

But the poor soul turned its countenance towards God, and
desired grace from him, even that he would bestow his love
upon it.


The Devil came to tt again


But when the devil saw that the soul thus prayed to God, and
would enter into repentance, he drew near to it, and thrust the
inclinations of the earthly properties into its prayers, and dis-
turbed its good thoughts and desires which pressed forward
‘towards God, and drew them back again to earthly things that
they might have no access to him.


The Soul sighed


The central will of the sou] indeed sighed after God, but the
thoughts arising in the mind that it should penetrate into him,
were distracted, scattered, and destroyed, so that they could not
reach the power of God. At which the poor soul was still more
affrighted, and began to pray more earnestly. But the devil
with his desire took hold of the mercurial kindled fiery wheel
of life, and awakened the evil properties, so that evil or false
inclinations arose in the soul, and went into that thing wherein
they had taken most pleasure and delight before.

The poor soul would very fain go forward to God with its will,
and therefore used all its endeavours; but its thoughts con-
tinually fled away from God into earthly things, and would not
go to him.

Upon this the soul sighed and bewailed itself to God; but
was as if it were quite forsaken by him, and cast out from his
presence. It could not get so much as one look of grace, but
was in mere anguish, fear, and terror, and dreaded every
moment that the wrath and severe judgement of God would be
manifested in it, and that the devil would take hold of it and
have it. And thereupon fell into such great heaviness and
sorrow, that it became weary of all the temporal things, which
before were its chief joy and happiness.

The earthly natural will indeed desired those things still, but
the soul would willingly leave them altogether, and desired to
die to all temporal lust and joy whatsoever, and longed only
after its first native country, from whence it originally came.
But found itself to be far from thence, in great distress and want,


284 Jacob Boehme


and knew not what to do, yet resolved to enter into itself, and `


try to pray more earnestly.


The Devil’s Opposition


But the devil opposed it, and withheld it so that it could not
bring itself into any greater fervency of repentance.

He awakened the earthly lusts in its heart, that they might
still keep their evil nature and false right therein, and set them
at variance with the new-born will and desire of the soul. For
they would not die to their own will and light, but would still
maintain their temporal pleasures, and so kept the poor soul
captive in their evil desires, that it could not stir, though it
sighed and longed never so much after the grace of God. For
whensoever it prayed, or offered to press forward towards God,
then the lusts of the flesh swallowed up the rays and ejaculations
that went forth from it, and brought them away from God into
earthly thoughts, that it might not partake of divine strength.
Which caused the poor soul to think itself forsaken of God, not
knowing that he was so near it, and did thus attract it. Also
the devil got access to it, and entered into the fiery Mercury, or
fiery wheel of its life, and mingled his desires with the earthly
lusts of the flesh, and tempted the poor soul; saying to it in
the earthly thoughts, “ Why dost thou pray? Dost thou think


that God knoweth thee or regardeth thee? Consider but what |


thoughts thou hast in his presence; are they not altogether evil?
Thou hast no faith or belief in God at all; how then should he
hear thee? He heareth thee not, leave off; why wilt thou
needlessly torment and vex thyself? Thou hast time enough to
repent at leisure. Wilt thou be mad? Do but look upon the
world, I pray thee, a little; doth it not live in jollity and mirth?
yet it will be saved well enough for all that. Hath not Christ
paid the ransom and satisfied for all men? Thou needest only
persuade and comfort thyself that it is done for thee, and then
thou shalt be saved. Thou canst not possibly in this world
come to any feeling of God; therefore leave off, and take care
for thy body, and look after temporal glory. What dost thou
suppose will become of thee, if thou turn to be so stupid and


melancholy? Thou wilt be the scorn of everybody, and they |
will laugh at thy folly; and so thou wilt spend thy days in |
mere sorrow and heaviness, which is pleasing neither to God |


nor nature. I pray thee, look upon the beauty of the world;
for God hath created and placed thee in it, to be a lord over all
creatures, and to rule them. Gather store of temporal goods


Discourse Between Two Souls 285


beforehand, that thou mayest not be beholden to the world, or
stand in need hereafter. And when old age cometh, or that
thou growest near thy end, then prepare thyself for repentance.
God will save thee, and receive thee into the heavenly mansions
then. There is no need of such ado in vexing, bewailing, and
stirring up thyself, as thou makest.”


The Condition of the Soul


In these and the like thoughts the soul was ensnared by the
devil, and brought into the lusts of the flesh, and earthly desires;
and so bound as it were with fetters and strong chains, that it did
not know what to do. It looked back a little into the world
and the pleasures thereof, but still felt in itself a hunger after
divine grace, and would always rather enter into repentance, and
favour with God. For the hand of God had touched and bruised
it, and therefore it could rest nowhere; but always sighed in
itself after sorrow for the sins it had committed, and would fain
be rid of them. Yet could not get true repentance, or even the
knowledge of sin, though it had a mighty hunger and longing
desire after such penitential sorrow.

The soul being thus heavy and sad, and finding no remedy
or rest, began to cast about where it might find a fit place to
perform true repentance in, where it might be free from business,
cares, and the hinderances of the world; and also by what means
it might win the favour of God. And at length purposed to
betake itself to some private solitary place, and give over all
worldly employments and temporal things; and hoped, that by
being bountiful and pitiful to the poor, it should obtain God’s
mercy. Thus did it devise all kinds of ways to get rest, and
gain the love, favour, and grace of God again. But all would
not do; for its worldly business still followed it in the lusts of
the flesh, and it was ensnared in the net of the devil now, as
well as before, and could not attain rest. And though for a
little while it was somewhat cheered with earthly things, yet
presently it fell to be as sad and heavy again, as it was before.
The truth was, it felt the awakened wrath of God in itself, but
knew not how that came to pass, nor what it ailed. For many
times great trouble and terror fell upon it, which made it com-
fortless, sick, and faint with very fear; so mightily did the first
bruising it with the ray or influence of the stirring of grace work
upon it. And yet it knew not that Christ was in the wrath and
severe justice of God, and fought therein with Satan that spirit
of error, which was incorporated in soul and body; nor under-


286 Jacob Boehme


stood that the hunger and desire to turn and repent came from —
Christ himself, by which it was drawn in this manner; neither
did it know what hindered that it could not yet attain to divine
feeling. It knew not that itself was a monster, and did bear
the image of the serpent, in which the devil had such power and
access to it, and had confounded all its good desires, thoughts, |
and motions, and brought them away from God and goodness;

concerning which Christ himself said, “‘ The devil snatcheth the

word out of their hearts, lest they should believe and be saved.” |


An enlightened and regenerate Soul met the distressed Soul


By the providence of God, an enlightened and regenerate
soul met this poor afflicted and distressed soul, and said, “ What
ailest thou, thou distressed soul, that thou art so restless and
troubled? ”


The distressed Soul answered


The Creator hath hid his countenance from me, so that I
cannot come to his rest; therefore I am thus troubled, and
know not what I shall do to get his loving-kindness again.
For great cliffs and rocks lie in my way to his grace, so that I
cannot come to him. Though I sigh and long after him never
so much, yet Iam kept back, that I cannot partake of his pewer, |
virtue, and strength. |


The enlightened Soul said


Thou bearest the monstrous shape of the devil, and art
clothed therewith; in which, being his own property or principle,
he hath access or power of entrance into thee, and thereby
keepeth thy will from penetrating into God. For if thy will
might penetrate into God, it would be anointed with the highest
power and strength of God, in the resurrection of our Lord Jesus
Christ; and that unction would break in pieces the monster
which thou carriest about thee; and thy first image of paradise
would revive in the centre; which would destroy the devil’s
power therein, and thou wouldst become an angel again. And
because the devil envieth thee this happiness, he holdeth thee
captive in his desire in the lusts of the flesh; from which if thou |
art not delivered, thou wilt be separated from God, and canst |
never enter into our society. |


The distressed Soul terrified


At this speech the poor distressed soul was so terrified and
amazed, that it could not speak one word more. When it found


Discourse Between Two Souls 287


that it stood in the form and condition of the serpent, which
separated it from God; and that the devil was so nigh it in
that condition, who injected evil thoughts into the will of the
soul, and had so much power over it thereby, that it was near
damnation, and sticking fast in the abyss or bottomless pit of
hell, in the anger of God; it would have even despaired of divine
mercy; but that the power, virtue, and strength of the first
stirring of the grace of God, which had before bruised the soul,
upheld and preserved it from total despair. But still it wrestled
in itself between hope and doubt; whatsoever hope built up,
that doubt threw down again. And thus was it agitated with
such continual disquiet, that at last the world and all the glory
thereof became loathsome to it, neither would it enjoy worldly
pleasures any more; and yet for all this, could it not come to
rest.


The enlightened Soul came again, and spoke to the troubled Soul


On a time the enlightened soul came again to this soul, and
finding it still in so great trouble, anguish, and grief of mind,
said to it:

What dost thou? Wilt thou destroy thyself in thy anguish
and sorrow? Why dost torment thyself in thy own power
and will, who art but a worm, seeing thy torment increaseth
thereby more and more? Yea, if thou shouldst sink thyself
down to the bottom of the sea, or couldst fly to the uttermost
coasts of the morning, or raise thyself above the stars, yet thou
wouldst not be released. For the more thou grievest, tormentest,
and troublest thyself, the more painful thy nature will be; and
yet thou wilt not be able to come to rest. For thy power is
quite lost; and as a dry stick burnt to a coal cannot grow green
and spring afresh by its own power, nor get sap to flourish again
with other trees and plants; so neither canst thou reach the
place of God by thy own power and strength, and transform
thyself into that angelical image which thou hadst at first.
For in respect to God thou art withered and dry, like a dead
plant that hath lost its sap and strength, and so art become a
dry tormenting hunger. Thy properties are like heat and cold,
which continually strive one against the other, and can never
unite,

The distressed Soul said


What then shall I do to bud forth again, and recover the first
ife, wherein I was at rest before I became an image?


288 Jacob Boehme


The enlightened Soul said l


Thou shalt do nothing at all but forsake thy own will, viz.


that which thou callest I, or thyself. By which means all thy
evil properties will grow weak, faint, and ready to die; and then
thou wilt sink down again into that one thing, from which
thou art originally sprung. For now thou liest captive in the


creatures; but if thy will forsaketh them, the creatures, with —


their evil inclinations, will die in thee, which at present stay and


hinder thee, that thou canst not come to God. But if thou |


takest this course, thy God will meet thee with his infinite love,
which he hath manifested in Christ Jesus in the humanity, or
human nature. And that will impart sap, life, and vigour to
thee; whereby thou mayest bud, spring, flourish again, and
rejoice in the living God, as a branch growing on his true vine.
And so thou wilt at length recover the image of God, and be
delivered from the image or condition of the serpent: Then
shalt thou come to be my brother, and have fellowship with the
angels.
The poor Soul said


How can I forsake my will, so that the creatures which lodge
therein may die, seeing I must be in the world, and also have
need of it as long as I live?


The enlightened Soul said


Now thou hast worldly power and riches, which thou possessest
as thy own, to do what thou wilt with, and regardest not how ©
thou gettest or usest the same; employing them in the service ~


and indulgence of thy carnal and vain desires. Nay, though
thou seest the poor and needy wretch, who wanteth thy help,


and is thy brother, yet thou helpest him not, but layest heavy.


burdens upon him, by requiring more of him than his abilities
will bear, or his necessities afford; and oppressest him, by
forcing him to spend his labour and sweat for thee, and the
gratification of thy voluptuous will. Thou art moreover proud,
and insultest over him, and behavest roughly and sternly to


him, exalting thyself above him, and making small account of |


him in respect of thyself. Then that poor oppressed brother of
thine cometh, and complaineth with sighs towards God, that he
cannot reap the benefit of his labour and pains, but is forced
by thee to live in misery. By which sighings and groanings of
his he raiseth up the wrath of God in thee; which maketh thy
flame and unquietness still the greater. These are the creatures


Discourse Between Two Souls 289


which thou art in love with, and hast broken thyself off from
God for their sakes, and brought thy love into them, or them
into thy love, so that they live therein. Thou nourishest and
keepest them by continually receiving them into thy desire, for
they live in and by thy receiving them into thy mind; because
thou thereby bringest the lust of thy life into them. They are
but unclean, filthy, and evil births, and issues of the bestial
nature, which yet, by thy receiving them in thy lust or desire,
have gotten an image, and formed themselves in thee. And
that image is a beast with four heads: First, Pride. Secondly,
Covetousness. Thirdly, Envy. Fourthly, Anger. And in
_these four properties the foundation of hell consisteth, which
thou carriest in thee and about thee. It is imprinted and
engraven in thee, and thou art wholly taken captive thereby.
For these properties live in thy natural life; and thereby thou
art severed from God, neither canst thou ever come to him,
unless thou so forsake these evil creatures that they may die
in thee.

But since thou desirest me to tell thee how to forsake thy own
perverse creaturely will, that the creatures might die, and that
yet thou mightest live with them in the world. I must assure
thee that there is but one way to do it, which is narrow and
straight, and will be very hard and irksome to thee at the
beginning, but afterwards thou wilt walk in it cheerfully.

Thou must seriously consider, that in the course of this worldly
life thou walkest in the anger of God and in the foundation of
hell; and that this is not thy true native country; but that a
Christian should, and must live in Christ, and in his walking
truely follow him; and that he cannot be a Christian, unless the
spirit and power of Christ so live in him, that he becometh wholly
subject to it. Now seeing the kingdom of Christ is not of this
world, but in heaven, therefore thou must always be in a con-
tinual ascension towards heaven, if thou wilt follow Christ;
though thy body must dwell among the creatures and use them.

The narrow way to which perpetual ascension into heaven
and imitation of Christ is this: Thou must despair of all thy
own power and strength, for in and by thy own power thou
canst not reach the gates of God; and firmly purpose and
resolve wholly to give thyself up to the mercy of God, and to
sink down with thy whole mind and reason into the passion and
death of our Lord Jesus Christ, always desiring to persevere in
the same, and to die from all thy creatures therein. Also thou
must resolve to watch and guard thy mind, thoughts, and

u 569


290 Jacob Boehme


inclinations that they admit no evil into them, neither must
thou suffer thyself to be held fast by temporal honour or profit.
Thou must resolve likewise to put away from thee all un-
righteousness, and whatsoever else may hinder the freedom of
thy motion and progress. Thy will must be wholly pure, and
fixed in a firm resolution never to return to its old idols any
more, but that thou wilt that very instant leave them, and
separate thy mind from them, and enter into the sincere way of
truth and righteousness, according to the plain and full doctrine
of Christ. And as thou dost thus purposeto forsake the enemies of
thine own inward nature, so thou must also forgive all thy out-
ward enemies, and resolve to meet them with thy love; that there
may be left no creature, person, or thing at all able to take hold
of thy will and captivate it; but that it may be sincere, and
purged from all creatures. Nay further; if it should be required,
thou must be willing and ready to forsake all thy temporal
honour and profit for Christ’s sake, and regard nothing that is
earthly so as to set thy heart and affections upon it; but esteem
thyself in whatsoever state, degree, and condition thou art, as
to worldly rank or riches, to be but a servant of God and of
thy fellow-Christians; or as a steward in the office wherein thy
Lord hath placed thee. All arrogance and self-exaltation must
be humbled, brought low, and so annihilated that nothing of
thine own or of any other creature may stay in thy will to bring
thy thoughts or imagination to be set upon it.

Thou must also firmly impress it on thy mind, that thou shalt
certainly partake of the promised grace in the merit of Jesus
Christ, viz. of his outflowing love, which indeed is already in
thee, and which will deliver thee from thy creatures, and
enlighten thy will, and kindle it with the flame of love, whereby
thou shalt have victory over the devil. Not as if thou couldst
will or do anything in thine own strength, but only enter into
the suffering and resurrection of Jesus Christ, and take them to
thyself, and with them assault and break in pieces the kingdom
of the devil in thee, and mortify thy creatures. Thou must
resolve to enter into this way this very hour, and never to depart
from it, but willingly to submit thyself to God in all thy
endeavours and doings, that he may do with thee what he
pleaseth.

When thy will is thus prepared and resolved, it hath then
broken through its own creatures, and is sincere in the presence
of God, and clothed with the merits of Jesus Christ. It may -
then freely go to the Father with the Prodigal Son, and fall down


Discourse Between Two Souls = 291


in his presence and pour forth its prayers; and putting forth all
its strength in this divine work, confess its sins and disobedience;
and how far it hath departed from God. This must be done
not with bare words, but with all its strength, which indeed
amounteth only to a strong purpose and resolution; for the soul
of itself hath no strength or power to effect any good work.

Now when thou art thus ready, and that thy Heavenly Father
shall see thy coming and returning to him in such repentance
and humility, he will inwardly speak to thee, and say in thee,
“ Behold, this is my son which I had lost, he was dead and is
- alive again.” And he will come to meet thee in thy mind with
— the grace and love of Jesus Christ, and embrace thee with the
beams of his love, and kiss thee with his Spirit and strength;
and then thou shalt receive grace to pour out thy confession
before him, and to pray powerfully. This indeed is the right
place where thou must wrestle in the light of his countenance.
And if thou standest resolutely here, and shrinkest not back,
thou shalt see or feel great wonders. For thou shalt find Christ
in thee assaulting hell, and crushing thy beasts in pieces, and
that a great tumult and misery will arise in thee; also thy secret
undiscovered sins will then first awake, and labour to separate
thee from God, and to keep thee back. Thus shalt thou truely
find and feel how death and life fight one against the other, and
shalt understand by what passeth within thyself, what heaven
and hell are. At all which be not moved, but stand firm and
shrink not; for at length all thy creatures will grow faint, weak,
and ready to die; and then thy will shall wax stronger, and
be able to subdue and keep down the evil inclinations. So shall
thy will and mind ascend into heaven every day, and thy
creatures gradually dieaway. Thou wilt get a mind wholly new,
and begin to be a new creature, and getting rid of the bestial
deformity, recover the divine image. Thus shalt thou be
delivered from thy present anguish, and return to thy original
rest.


The poor Soul’s Practice


Then the poor soul began to practise this course with such
earnestness, that it conceived it should get the victory presently ;
but it found that the gates of heaven were shut against it in its
own strength and power, and it was, as it were, rejected and
forsaken by God, and received not so much as one look or
glimpse of grace from him. Upon which it said to itself, “ Surely
thou hast not sincerely submitted thyself to God. Desire


292 Jacob Boehme


nothing at all of him, but only submit thyself to his judgement |
and condemnation, that he may kill thy evil inclinations. Sink —
down into him beyond the limits of nature and creature, and ~
submit thyself to him, that he may do with thee what he will, —
for thou art not worthy to speak to him.” Accordingly the soul
took a resolution to sink down, and to forsake its own will; and
when it had done so, there fell upon it presently the greatest —
repentance that could be for the sins it had committed; and it
bewailed bitterly its ugly shape, and was truely and deeply sorry
that the evil creatures did dwell in it. And because of its
sorrow it could not speak one word more in the presence of God,
but in its repentance did consider the bitter passion and death
of Jesus Christ, viz. what great anguish and torment he had
suffered for its sake, in order to deliver it out of its anguish,
and change it into the image of God. In which consideration
it wholly sunk down, and did nothing but complain of its
ignorance and negligence, and that it had not been thankful —
to its Redeemer, nor once considered the great love he had ~
shewn to it, but had idly spent its time, and not at all regarded
how it might come to partake of his purchased and proffered
grace; but instead thereof had formed in itself the images and
figures of earthly things, with the vain lusts and pleasures of the
world. Whereby it had gotten such bestial inclinations, that
now it must lie captive in great misery, and for very shame
dared not lift up its eyes to God, who hid the light of his coun- |
tenance from it, and would not so much as look upon it. And
as it was thus sighing and crying, it was drawn into the abyss
or pit of horror, and laid it as it were at the gates of hell, there
to perish. Upon which the poor troubled soul was, as it were,
bereft of sense, and wholly forsaken, so that it in a manner forgot
all its doings, and would willingly yield itself to death, and cease ©
to be a creature. Accordingly it did yield itself to death, and
desired nothing else but to die and perish in the death of its
Redeemer Jesus Christ, who had suffered such torments and
death for its sake. And in this perishing it began to sigh and
pray in itself very inwardly to the divine goodness, and to sink
down into the mere mercy of God.

Upon this there suddenly appeared unto it the amiable coun-
tenance of the love of God, which penetrated through it as a great
light, and made it exceedingly joyful. It then began to pray
aright, and to thank the Most High for such grace, and to rejoice
abundantly, that it was delivered from the death and anguish of
hell. Now it tasted of the sweetness of God, and of his promised


Discourse Between Two Souls 293


truth; and now all the evil spirits which had harassed it before,
and kept it back from the grace, love, and inward presence of
God, were forced to depart from it. The “ wedding of the
Lamb ” was now kept and solemnised, that is, the noble Sophia
espoused or betrothed herself to the soul; and the seal-ring of
Christ’s victory was impressed into its essence, and it was
received to be a child and heir of God again.

When this was done, the soul became very joyful, and began
to work in this new power, and to celebrate with praise the
wonders of God, and thought thenceforth to walk continually
in the same light, strength, and joy. But it was soon assaulted ;
from without, by the shame and reproach of the world, and from
within, by great temptation, so that it began to doubt whether
its ground was truely from God, and whether it had really
partaken of his grace. For the accuser Satan went to it, and
would fain lead it out of this course, and make it doubtful
whether it was the true way; whispering thus to it inwardly,
“This happy change in thy spirit is not from God, but only
from thine own imagination.” Also the divine light retired in
the soul, and shone but in the inward ground, as fire raked up
in embers, so that reason was perplexed, and thought itself
forsaken, and the soul knew not what had happened to itself,
nor whether it had really and truely tasted of the heavenly gift
or not. Yet it could not leave off struggling; for the burning
fire of love was sown in it, which had raised in it a vehement
and continual hunger and thirst after the divine sweetness. So
at length it began to pray aright, and to humble itself in the
presence of God, and to examine and try its evil inclinations and
thoughts, and to put them away. By which means the will of
reason was broken, and the evil inclinations inherent in it were
killed, and extirpated more and more. This process was very
severe and painful to the nature of the body, for it made it faint
and weak, as if it had been very sick; and yet it was no natural
sickness that it had, but only the melancholy of its earthly
nature, feeling and lamenting the destruction of its evil lusts.
= Now when the earthly reason found itself thus forsaken, and
the poor soul saw that it was despised outwardly, and derided
by the world, because it would walk no longer in the way of
wickedness and vanity; and also that it was inwardly assaulted
by the accuser Satan, who mocked it, and continually set before
it the beauty, riches, and glory of the world, and called it a fool
for not embracing them; it began to think and say thus within
itself: “ O eternal God! What shall I now do to come to rest? ”


294 Jacob Boehme


The enlightened Soul met it again, and spoke to it


While it was in this consideration, the enlightened soul met
with it again, and said, “ What ailest thou, my brother, that
thou art so heavy and sad? ”


The distressed Soul said


I have followed thy counsel, and thereby attained a ray, or
emanation of the divine sweetness, but it is gone from me again,
and I am now deserted. Moreover I have outwardly very great
trials and afflictions in the world; for all my good friends forsake
and scorn me; and am also inwardly assaulted with anguish,
and doubt, and know not what to do.


The enlightened Soul said


Now I like thee very well; for now our beloved Lord Jesus
Christ is performing that pilgrimage or process on earth with
thee and in thee, which he did himself when he was in this
world, who was continually reviled, despised, and evil spoken of,
and had nothing of his own in it; and now thou bearest his mark
or badge. But do not wonder at it, or think it strange; for it
must be so, in order that thou mayest be tried, refined, and
purified. In this anguish and distress thou wilt necessarily
hunger and cry after deliverance; and by such hunger and
prayer thou wilt attract grace to thee both from within and
from without. For thou must grow from above and from
beneath to be the image of God again. Just as a young plant
is agitated by the wind, and must stand its ground in heat and
cold, drawing strength and virtue to it from above and from
beneath by that agitation, and must endure many a tempest,
and undergo much danger before it can come to be a tree, and
bring forth fruit. For through that agitation the virtue of the
sun moveth in the plant, whereby its wild properties come to be
penetrated and tinctured with the solar virtue, and grow thereby.

And this is the time wherein thou must play the part of a
valiant soldier in the spirit of Christ, and co-operate thyself
therewith. For now the Eternal Father by his fiery power
begetteth his son in thee, who changeth the fire of the Father,
namely, the first principle, or wrathful property of the soul,
into the flame of love, so that out of fire and light (viz. wrath
and love) there cometh to be one essence, being, or substance,
which is the true temple of God. And now thou shalt bud forth
out of the vine Christ, in the vineyard of God, and bring forth


Discourse Between Two Souls 29 y


fruit in thy life, and by assisting and instructing others, shew
forth thy love in abundance, as a good tree. -For paradise must
thus spring up again in thee, through the wrath of God, and hell
be changed into heaven in thee. Therefore be not dismayed
at the temptations of the devil, who seeketh and striveth for
the kingdom which he once had in thee; but, having now lost
it, must be confounded, and depart from thee. And he covereth
thee outwardly with the shame and reproach of the world, that
his own shame may not be known, and that thou mayest be
hidden to the world. For with thy new birth or regenerated
‘nature thou art in the divine harmony in heaven. Be patient,
therefore, and wait upon the Lord; and whatsoever shall befall
thee, take it all from his hands, as intended by him for thy
highest good. And so the enlightened soul departed from it.


The distressed Soul’s Course


The distressed soul began its course now under the patient
suffering of Christ, and depending solely upon the strength and
power of God in it, entered into hope. Thenceforth it grew
stronger every day, and its evil inclinations died more and more
in it. So that it arrived at length to a high state or degree ot
grace; and the gates of the divine revelation, and the kingdom
of heaven, were opened to, and manifested in it.

And thus the soul through repentance, faith, and prayer,
returned to its original and true rest, and became a right and
beloved child of God again; to which may he of his infinite
mercy help us all. Amen.


Mane At THE
LE PRESS ETCHWORTH
Ute IN GREAT BRITAIN


a er TENDA


ey aan aes, Be g-
f C DP n


ght


$7


.
i fs
;
Da
ns
Prg
vd y A
i A -
eo
i i fs
< eS
+ > ro
r Mi
“ T
A =
ca


tag


AYA AIN THY. MOST: NEEDY
\\ \TO-GO BY: THY:SIDE__


E


P24 ¢. 42 eer re
Bs 6337, |


out


o

Enrere op erreren ory renner

Sars e EE PEEN r V eet
oes
