Henry Boguet, An Examen of Witches (1929)
=============================================
Henry Boguet (1550-1619), chief judge of Saint-Claude. An Examen of Witches (Discours des sorciers, 1602) — drawn from witch trials in Burgundy, with procedure for judges; translated by E. Allen Ashwin, edited by Montague Summers (London: John Rodker, 1929). The 1929 translation entered US public domain 2025-01-01. Text: Wikisource scan of the 1929 edition; raw OCR with 1929 typography noise retained. Public Domain.

lliSBllKIllfeiilb
y 1 w II*
^niiillji
^:^'3§ifc
pfi |U|!
f< ‘If
AN EXAMEN
OF WITCHES
[D I SCOURS
i SORCIERS]
’ AN EXAMEN
OFWITCHES__
DRAWN from various trials^
of many of this sect in the district of
SAINT oYAN DEjoux commonly VU)
known as s a i n t c l a u d e in the
county of BURGUNDY including the
procedure necessary to a judge in trials
jor witchcraft '
, \)y
chief Judge in the said county trans­
lated by E. ALLEN ASH WIN ' edited by
THE REV, MONTAGUE SUMMERS
JOHN RODKER / 1929
Edition Limited to 1275 copies.
This copy is number
25n2Szi
PRINTED
GREAT
BRITAIN
RICHARD CLAY & SONS, LTD.
B V N G A Y
Suffolk
EDITOR’S PREFACE
as Henry Boguet
himself points out in the
Preface to his Discours des
Sorciers, he has freely used the ample
assistance of such authorities in the
matter of witchcraft as Sprenger
and Kramer; the celebrated Jean
Bodin; Nicolas Remy of the supreme
judicial court of Nancy; Peter
Binsfeld, Bishop Suffragan of Traves;
Paul Grilland; Bartolomeo de Spina;
Thyraeus; Leonard Vair; his many
citations from the Malleus Male­
ficarum the Demonomame^ the D(t~
monolatreia^ Raemond’s VAntichrist,
and other encyclopaedic manuals,
must in no wise be taken as impairing
either the interest or the originality
of his own most remarkable and
memorable work. Indeed it may be
said that throughout the whole vast
library of demonology, after the
great Malleus Maleficarum, there is
lthough,
EDITOR’S
PREFACE
perhaps no treatise more authorita­
tive, and certainly no treatise more
revelatory of the human side of trials
for witchcraft and of the psychology
of those involved in such trials than
the Discours des Sorciers [An 'Examen
oj IVitches') of Henry Boguet,
“Grand Juge de St. Claude, au
Comte de Bourgogne.” Boguet’s
appeal to authority is but to confirm
his own long and infinitely patient ex­
perience. “I have founded the follow­
ing Examen upon certain trials which
I have myself conducted, during the
last two years, of several members of
this sect, whom I have seen and heard
and probed as carefully as I possibly
could in order to draw the truth from
them.” There is not a chapter of the
Examen which does not bear witness
to this; not a page, scarcely a para­
graph that is not indicative of the
most scrupulous inquiry, the most
particular research, the minutest in­
terrogations, all informed by a just
if tempered zeal and the nicest
conscientiousness, by candour, dig­
EDITOR'S
PREFACE
nity, and most jealous loyalty to the
truth. And so, although Bodin,
Nicolas Remy, De Lancre had all
written more copiously and were all
three famous names, senators of no
mean eminence and proved sagacity,
it was the code of Henry Boguet,
“The Manner of Procedure of a
Judge in a Case of Witchcraft,”—
“a book precious as gold,” it has been
called—which was actually adopted
in general practice by most local
Parliaments and puisne courts, and
that without any reflection upon or
intended criticism of the digests and
pandects compiled by most learned
and most honourable legists and
justiciaries, but because Boguet had
in his seventy Articles codified the
statutes and rulings, the methods and
the regulations, most concisely, most
clearly, and with the greater felicity.
Of the life of Henry Boguet, unfor­
tunately very little is known. A
native of Pierre-Court, which is a
bailiwick of Gray in Franche-Comt^,
he was born about the middle of the
EDITOR’S
PREFACE
sixteenth century, being descended
from a good old stock of which
several branches had long settled in
the Dolonais district. From his writ­
ings it is clear that he was carefully
and well educated, for he was widely
read both in classical authors, especi­
ally the poets, and in the great
historians. His bent, however, for
the law was not long in discovering
itself, and owing to his severe con­
centration upon the canonists and
doctors, added to his acute and
logical genius, he soon attained, by
study and natural ability, high emin­
ence in the legal profession. The
modest piety and reverent orthodoxy
of the rising advocate joined to a
polished eloquence, could not fail to
attract the notice of Ferdinand de
Rye, Prince of the Holy Roman
Empire, who had been appointed by
Sixtus V to the Archbishopric of
Besan^on, in which Cathedral he was
enthroned 13 November, 1587, and,
owing to the favour of this magni­
ficent prelate, Boguet was instituted
EDITOR’S
PREFACE
Chief Justice of the whole district of
Saint-Claude.
The city of Saint-Claude derives its
name from S. Claudius, Abbot of
Condat, whose life has been the sub­
ject of much controversy. Dom
Benoit, Hisioire de I' abbaye et de la
terre de S. Claude (Montreuil-surMer, 1890), tells us that the Saint
had been Bishop of Besangon before
being abbot; that he ruled his
monastery for fifty-five years, and
died in 694. The Abbey of Condat,
which was founded between 425 and
430 by the hermits S. Romanus and
S. Lupicinus, who had withdrawn
into the desert where Saint-Claude
now stands, became one of the most
distinguished houses in Christen­
dom. Originally the town which
arose around the cloisters was known
as S. Oyan de Joux from S. Eugendus (Oyan or Oyand), a disciple of
the two holy founders. S. Eugendus
died I January, 510, at Condat, and
his tomb was long a place of pilgrim­
age. When, however, the body of
EDITOR’S
PREFACE
S. Claudius, which had been con­
cealed at the time of the Saracen
invasion, was discovered in 1260,
visited in 1272 by Peter of Tarentaise (Blessed Innocent V), and
borne in solemn procession through­
out Burgundy before being brought
back to the Shrine at Condat, the
abbey and town formerly known as
St. Oyan were thenceforward more
generally called Saint-Claude, al­
though actually the name Saint Oyan
de Joux lingered until the seventeenth
century.
As was natural, Henry Boguet had a
very particular devotion to the great
patron of the district, S. Claudius,
and prominent among his published
works is a life of the Saint, Vie de
Saint Claude^
This was re­
issued in 1607; and in 1627 at
Lyons, C. Rigaud et Cobert
printed what is termed the Second
Edition of this most edifying study:
“Les Actions de la vie et de la mort
de Saint Claude avec des miracles et
indulgences conc^ddes aux Confreres
EDITOR’S
PREFACE
de son nom, ensemble quelques
memoires des terres et ville de Saint
Oyan de Joux, des abbes d’icelles . . .
plus a este adjouste le miracle faict
au regard de deux hosties consacrees
au lieu de Favernay . . . le 25 may,
1608.” It will not escape notice that
in Chapter V of his E^xamen Boguet
fervently apostrophizes the glorious
Saint Claude in a strain of glowing
devotion, and declares his intention
of writing an entire volume which
shall celebrate the virtues, triumphs
and honour of the Saint, and record
the miracles daily wrought at his
hallowed tomb. In an excess of
criminal madness at the end of the
eighteenth century the atrocious
revolutionaries dared to profane the
ancient shrine, and in March 1794
the body of Saint Claude, which had
been venerated for so many hundreds
of years by kings and prelates, by
humble priest and simple artisan, by
nobles and peasants, by pilgrims of
every rank, high and low, and from
every country, near and far, was
EDITOR’S
PREFACE
sacrilegiously torn from its restingplace beneath the High Altar and
burned to ashes in a mighty pyre.
A second work by Boguet which was
highly esteemed was an exhaustive
treatise upon the Burgundian code:
“/« Consuetudines generales Comitatus
Burgundiae obseruationes . . . authore
Henrico Boguet. Lugduni, J. Pille-
hotte, 4to. 1604.” These Commen­
taries long held their place as a legal
text-book and a standard manual of
reference. A second edition was pub­
lished, octavo, at Besan^on in 1725.
But the book by which Henry
Boguet is now generally known,
although, curiously enough, as we
shall have occasion to see a little later,
it has become a volume of the very
last rarity, is the famous Discours des
Sorciers; An Dxamen oj Witches.
The bibliography of the Discours des
Sorciers is extremely intricate and
difficult, so that the date of the first
edition has not been exactly fixed
even by such painstaking and emin­
ent bibliographers as Albert Caillet,
EDITOR’S
PREFACE
or Yve-Plessis in his Bibliographie
Franfaise de la Sorcellerie. We are,
perhaps, fairly safe if we assign the
editio princeps to Lyons, 1590,
although the issue by Rigaud, Lyons,
8vo, 1590, is termed “3me Edition.”
It should be noted that this impres­
sion of 1590 must have differed in
many particulars from the treatise
as it subsequently appeared, since the
editions of 1602, 1603, and later
commence with the bewitching of
Loyse Maillat in June, 1598. In
1590 examples from the trials could
not have been given. There is a
Lyons edition, 8vo, 1602, “Par Jean
Pillehotte, a I’enseigne du nom de
lesvs,” and this would seem to be the
first edition of the treatise as we now
actually have it. In the following
year, 1603, the same publishers
issued the “Seconde Edition augmentee & enrichie par I’autheur de
plusiers autres procez, Histoires &
Chapitres,” Lyons. This was “Acheud
d’imprimer le xix Nouembre 1603,”
and a “Privilege du Roy” expressly
EDITOR’S
PREFACE
forbids under strict penalties any
other publisher save “lean Pille—
hotte, marchand Libraire de Lyon,”
to print or to sell any copy (save
those of Pillehotte’s printing) for a
term of ten years. This patent was
“Donne a Fontaine-Bleau, le xxj
d’Octobre, 1603,” and signed by
Henry IV in Council. It had been
granted owing to the fact that
in 1603 the Discours des Sorciers
appeared both at Paris (D. Binet,
Seconde edition) and at Rouen (Martin
le Mesgissier). In spite of the pro­
hibition the Discours was printed in
duodecimo at Rouen twice during
the year 1606, in the spring by Jean
Osmont, and in the autumn by R. de
Beauvais. At Lyons Pillehotte pub­
lished new octavo editions in 1605
and 1607. At Lyons, again, Pierre
Rigaud issued a “Seconde edition”
in 1608, 3 volumes; and a “Troisi^me edition” in 1610, “trois parties
en un tome”; both octavo. The last
issue seems to have been that of
Pillehotte, 8vo, Lyons, 1611.
EDITOR’S
PREFACE
When the Discours des Sorciers
appeared it was prefaced in print by
the approval and formal approbations
of Doctors and Theologians not a
few. No less a person than Pfere
Coyssard, an influential member of
the Society of Jesus and Rector of the
Jesuit College at Besangon, vouched
that the work contained nothing con­
trary to the Catholic Faith or hurtful
to the soundest morality. Jean •
Dorothee signed the Imprimatur.
De La Barre, Professor of Theology
at the University of Dole, unre­
servedly praised and recommended
the book “auquel je n’ay rien treuud
contraire a la Religion Catholique &
Romaine, ny aux bonnes moeurs,
ains plustost rempli de plusiers belles
doctrines”; whilst two celebrated
religious, most skilled theologians
and canonists, Jean Le Comte, Prior
of the old Augustinian convent at
Lyons, and Amed^e Besson, O.S.A.,
wrote that the Discours was an excel­
lent treatise very necessary for the
times, and finally the Vicar-General,
EDITOR’S
PREFACE
Chalom, became lavish in his bene­
dictions. Ushered into the world
under such eminent auspices, dedi­
cated to so august a prelate as the
Archbishop of Besangon and to his
all-powerful nephew, Francois de
Rye, Dean of the Cathedral Chapter,
it is hardly to be wondered at that
Boguet’s volume was at once accepted
as an ultimate authority, whilst the
book was straightway eulogized both
in prose by the faculties of the
Universities of Dole and Lyons, and
in verse by poets such as Jacques
Michalet and Jean Heraudel. The
learned Daniel Romanet, a doctor in
theology and assessor of the High
Court of Salins, who was known for
his devotion to Notre-Dame-Libdratries, addressed Boguet in the
following sonnet:
L’impie abjurement, les ofFrandes, les
voeux;
Les danses, les baisers, les viandes
fardees.
Les poudres, les onguents, les
greles debanddes.
e;ditor’s preface
Les Sabbats, les transports, les
fascinements d’yeux:
Les charmes, les poisons, les couplements hideux.
Les souffles pestilents, les ocillades
dardees.
Les bluetans flambeaux, les paroles
gardees.
Les caracteres vains, les meurtres
malhereux:
Les transmutations, les faits lycantropiques.
Les airs empoissones, les spectres
Plutoniques,
Les meurtriers touchements, la
rage des esprits.
Entres aux corps humains, et bref ce
qu’en la terre
Le Demon pent fournir pour nous
dresser la guerre
Sont traces par Boguet en ces
doctes escrits.
The style of Boguet is nervous and
concise; he is vivid and graphic in
his details; keenly logical in his
arguments; elegant in his expression;
without prolixity, without peri-
XTiii
EDITOR’S
PREFACE
phrasis. Above all, his work is in­
formed by the most patent and
admirable sincerity. Perhaps one of
the features which will most strangely
strike the modern reader is his fre­
quent appeal to and constant citation
of classical examples and Latin
authors. It cannot escape remark that
he quotes repeatedly from Vergil,
Horace, Ovid, Lucan, Pliny, Apuleius, and many more, often thus
clinching a conclusion or driving
home a syllogism in a way which to
some readers now may appear a little
too literary, even a little baroque.
Yet a very strong case might be made
out for such a line of thought and
phrasing, but it must suffice to say
that this stylistic mannerism, which
in no way affects the solidity and
essential truth either of his inquiry
or his ratiocination, is a direct legacy
from the Renaissance, that Renaissance which loved to subject theme
to a formal purism of Vergilian
Latinity. And so in his Hymnus ad
Diuum Stephanum Cardinal Bembo
EDITOR’S
PREFACE
wrote of Our Lord as “Magnanimus
Hero,” and of Our Lady
quern Candida partu
Caelicolum regi tecto sub paupere
Nympha,
Non ullam Uenerem, nullos experta
hymenaeos,
Ediderat . . .
Jerome Vida, the pious Bishop of
Cremona, in his Christiad when
speaking of the Transfiguration
nearly echoes the /Eneid:
Uerus et aspectu patuit Deus.
After the Last Supper Holy Mass is
thus described:
Hunc semper ritum memores, arisque
sacramus
Sinceram cererem, et dulcem de uite
liquorem,
Pro ueterum tauris, pecudum pro
pinguibus extis.
Ipse, sacerdotum uerbis eductus ab
astris,
Frugibus insinuat sese regnator
Olympi.
EDITOR’S
PREFACE
At any cost the Vergilian tradition
must be preserved and accordingly
there could be no keener shaft to
wing an argument than an apt quo­
tation from some classical source.
We must not then be surprised to
find that Boguet continually appeals
to Roman story and repeatedly cites
the Latin poets, although to us such
allusion may seem far from germane
to the matter in hand.
Henry Boguet, honoured and re­
spected by all, died in 1619.
It has been said that the Discours des
Sorcters in spite of its popularity, in
spite of its wide and continued use,
in spite of no less than a dozen
known editions—and it is plain that
several issueshavecompletely vanished
—has become a book of the last
rarity, and the explanation of this is
sufficiently remarkable. It appears
that certain wealthy members of
Boguet’s family were of an exceed­
ingly sceptical and hostile turn of
mind. These persons united in a
cabal, and pooling no small part of
EDITOR’S
PREFACE
their several fortunes, they expended
their utmost resources in buying up
each impression of the Discours des
Sorciers as it came from the Press.
They then promptly consigned the
copies to the flames. Owing to this
deplorable mania, which they keenly
pursued long after the death of the
author, but a few exemplars remained
in circulation, and the Discours is now
actually one of the scarcest of the
witchcraft manuals.
These insensate folk carried their hate
even further, and did not hesitate to
spread the most scandalous and oppro­
brious stories concerning their dead
relative. So bitter was their animo­
sity, so malevolent proved their
designs, that it is almost to be sus­
pected that they were themselves of
that horrid craft and company which
he had prosecuted with such lively
energy. They actually rumoured
that Henry Boguet had been a sor­
cerer, but secretly, and thus they
explained his knowledge of the dark
mysteries of that demoniacal society.
EDITOR’S
PREFACE
It was further bruited in after years
that he had been finally unmasked
and sent to the stake as a warlock of
long continuance. In England the
case of Matthew Hopkins is hardly
parallel. It will be remembered that
this notorious “Witchfinder general”
was popularly supposed to have stolen
Satan’s bead-roll at some Sabbat, and
the vulgar legend went abroad that
he was “swum as a wizard and went
over the water like a cork.” But we
know that all this is utterly untrue.
Hopkins died “peacibly, after a long
sicknesse of a Consumption” at his
old home in Manningtree, Essex, and
was buried at Mistley, 12 August,
1647. On the other hand, far from
impertinent is the instance of the
lying legends which grew up around
the name of that great and noble
judge Nicolas Remy of Lorraine,
whose Dtxmonolatrice Libri Tres^ the
fruit of the rich experience of fifteen
years, was published at Lyons in
1595. Remy died at Nancy in 1600,
and his enemies so vilely bespattered
EDITOR’S
PREFACE
xxiii
his reputation that the idlest and most
preposterous stories concerning him
won credence. We find these
repeated in such compilations as
Alexandre Erdan’s La France Mysti­
que, second edition, Amsterdam,
1858, Vol. I, p. 133, xl, where we
are told of Remy; “Ce miserable
parla tant et si ardemment du demon,
qu’il finit par en perdre la tete; il
alia, un beau jour, se d^noncer luimeme comme sorcier, et il jut brule
publiquement.” These are the lies and
malice of the Pharisees of old, and
such accusations have received a
divine answer; “If Satan cast out
Satan, he is divided against himself;
how then shall his kingdom stand?”
In the Discours des Sorciers, which
has never before been translated from
the French into any other tongue, we
have a piece of altogether exceptional
interest, one of the most valuable
documents in the whole library of
demonology. There is no doubt from
the evidence that Boguet had to deal
with a particularly noxious, well-
organized, and essentially dangerous
coven, and there is every indication
that he did his work with a thorough­
ness and a practicality which alone
could efficiently cope with so alarm­
ing and ominous a situation. It is a
question whether in the background,
behind those who were brought to
trial, may not have lurked personages
and influences justice could not, or at
least did not, reach. When we con­
sider the zeal of Bodin, of Henry
Boguet, Nicolas Remy, and Pierre
de Lancre, we must always remember
the difficulties and hazards these
brave men had to face. Already had
the seeds of anarchy and revolution
been widely sown. The wizard Troiseschelles openly boasted to King
Charles IX that within the French
coasts there were some thirty thou­
sand witches, and, as Boguet him­
self writes, there was hardly a
country which was not “infested with
this miserable and damnable ver­
min.” Their contest with the evil
thing was hard and long; it was a
EDITOR’S
PREFACE
struggle of which they could not
hope to see the end; and yet they
persevered, strengthened and sus­
tained by the knowledge that their
honour and their palm lay as much
perhaps in the fight as in the victory.
Montague Summers.
In Festo B.M.F, vulgo della Medaglia
miracolosa.
m^m^mmm
mmmmmmmmmmmm
mmmmm^
To MONSEIGNEUR,
MONSEIGNEUR
most Illustrious and Most
Reverend Archbishop of BesanQon, Monsieur FerdinanddeRye^
Prince of the Holy Roman Fmpircy Abbot of Saint Oyan de
Joux commonly known as Saint
Claude^ CherlieUy etc.
ONSEIGNEUR,
It is to you that the credit is
due for the partial purging of
your land of Saint Claude from
witches, that vermin which had
long been multiplying and
would have infected many disxxvii
xxviii
tricts, but for the care you have
taken to extirpate them. Mes­
sieurs your brethren, those three
Bolts of Mars, have waged war
upon the enemies of their Prin­
ces: but you have fought the
deadliest enemies of Heaven
that the world knows. So that
just as their glory must live for
ever by reason of their great and
warlike exploits, so also can
your glory never pass away by
reason of your so pious care.
Accordingly I have set down a
little treatise concerning that
which has been done with regard
to this miserable sect of people,
in order that all may know
the zeal with which you have
striven to bring them to the
payment of their last debts;
and I dedicate it to you as to
the author, after God, of the
good which has resulted, very
humbly entreating you to ac­
cept it with an indulgent eye,
even as it has pleased you
always to honour with your
favour him who offers it to you
and will ever remain,
MONSEIGNEUR,
Your very humble servant,
Henry Boguet.
- f '■ • ^
f [-------
To MONSIEUR,
MONSIEUR
THE VICAR-GENERAL OF
BESANQON, MONSIEUR
FRANCOIS DE RYE,
ABBOT OF ACEY,
PRESEIGNE,
onsieur, I no longer mar­
vel that there have jormerly
been VDitches veho have said
that^ ij" as many oy them veere men as
there veere women, and ij they had a
great Lord as their leader, they would
be strong enough to make war upon a
King. For I have no doubt but that
this would in such a case be easy Jor
them, and that they would even over­
come their enemies. I do not mean that
they would do so by means oj their
xxxii
spells and charms, although iioe read
that this isoas done by Oddo, the great
pirate and sea-rover, in Denmark, and
by the Huns ’who by their magic arts
dejeated Sigisbert, King oj Soissons, in
the time oj Chilperic, not to mention
Haakon, Prince oJ Nor’way, 'who
jought his enemies 'with storms of hail.
But I mean that they could raise an
army equal to that oJ Xerxes, although
that 'was oJ eighteen hundred thousand
men. Por ij it be true that Troiseschelles, one oj the best injormed of
their sect, declared in the time of
Charles IX that there 'were in France
alone three hundred thousand or, as
some read, thirty thousand 'witches, at
'what Jigure can 'we estimate the num­
ber of those 'which could be found in
all the dijfferent countries of the 'world ?
And must 'we not belicue that since that
time they have increased by more than
half ? For my part 1 have no doubt of
it: for if "we but look around among our
(ywn neighbours, 'we shall find them all
injested ’with this miserable and damn­
able ’vermin. Germany is almost entirely
occupied ’with building fires Jor them,
S’witzerland has been compelled to ’wipe
out many oj her ’villages on their ac­
count. Travellers in Lorraine may see
thousands and thousands oj the stakes
to ’which ’witches are bound. We in
Burgundy are no more exempt than
other lands’, jor in many parts oj our
country ’we see that the execution oj
’witches is a common occurrence. Re­
turning again to our neighbours, Sa’voy
has not escaped this pest; jor e’very day
she sends us a countless number oj per­
sons possessed oj demons ’which, on being
exorcised, say that they ha’ve been sent
by ’witches into the bodies oj these poor
’Wretches: moreo’ver, most oj the ’witches
’whom ’we have burned here came origin­
ally jrom Savoy. And ’what shall ’we
say oj France ? It is difficult to believe
that she is purged oj ’witches, consider­
ing the great number ’which she had in
the time oj Trois-eschelles. I say nothing
xxxiv
oj other more remote lands. It^o, no;
there are ’witches by the thousand every■where, multiplying upon the earth even
as ’worms in a garden. And this is a
shame to the Magistrates ’whose duty
it is to punish pelons and criminals; jor
ij ’we had no more than the direct com­
mand oj God to put them to death as
being His bitterest enemies, ’why should
•we endure them any longer and thus
disobey the Majesty oj the Most High ?
In this "we do even ’worse than the
’witches themselves; jor disobedience is
likened to Idolatry and Witchcraft by
Samuel, speaking to Saul. And Saul
found this to be true, to his o’wn great
damage; for, because he did not slay
all the Amalekites and their cattle as
he had been commanded, God ’was angry
’with him and caused him to be defeated
and killed, ’with his sons, by the Philis­
tines. Therefore ’we ought ’well to
search our conscience, and fear lest it
should happen to us as it did to Saul
jor that one disobedience. I pass over
the fact that God at various times
threatened cities and villages voith de­
struction for this crimey and that He
has sometimes brought them to utter
ruin Jor the same crime of rcitchcrajt.
I say nothing, too, of the fact that the
only delight of iseitches is to do ill, and
that they gloat over the sickness and
death of persons and cattle. This is but
another reason vchy ive should naturally
be incited to punish them, provided that
there is any humanity in us and if, to
speak more strongly, ive are at all
vDorthy of the name of man. For even
the most irrational beasts do not suffer
amongst them those vohich league and
conspire together against the rest, as
vce know from experience. Nature or,
to speak more correctly, the Author of
nature, naturally impresses this com­
mon duty on our minds; for otherwise
the world could not continue. For these
reasons, therefore, it is necessary that
everybody should bear a hand in so good
a work, and especially those in authority.
XXXTl
so that iioe may shov) ourselves to be
nohat isoe were created to be^ namely.,
men and reasonable beings, and that we
bring not upon us the destroying anger
and indignation oj the Living God. I
know that there have before this been
those who have not been able to believe
that what is said oj witches is true', but
in these present days they are beginning
to believe it, owing to a special grace
oj God, who has opened their eyes,
which had been blinded by Satan that
by this means he might, as he has done,
increase his kingdom. These men, I say,
are now busy in hunting down witches,
so that not long ago they caused some to
be put to death. And I take this as a
sign that in a short time Satan and all
his subjects will be overcome, and
witches will no longer boast that they
are able to make war upon a King, as
they have done before now. I would
have them to know that, ij ejfect could
be given to my wish, the earth would be
immediately cleared oJ them', Jor I
xxxvii
would that they should all be united in
one single body, so that they might all
be burned at once in a single fire. In the
same way a certain ILmperor wished,
but wished wrongly, that all the Romans
might have but a single head, so that
he might slay them with one blow.
Meanwhile I shall use every endeavour
to make war upon them, both by bring­
ing them to Justice, and by my humble
writings, as I now do with this Treatise
which I ofier again to the public under
your name. Monsieur, always presup­
posing that Monseigneur your Uncle,
to whom 1 dedicated it in the first place,
will agree that during his absence you
should take his place in this new edition,
and that on your own part you will be
pleased to accept my ofier as coming
Jrom one who has already devoted himselj entirely to you and desires ever to
be known,
MONSIEU R,
as your very humble servant,
Henry Bogvet-
AUTHOR’S PREFACE
T is astonishing that there should
still be found to-day people who
do not believe that there are
witches. For my part I suspect that
the truth is that such people really
believe in their hearts, but will not
admit it; for the Pagans have a lesson
for them in this matter; they are
refuted by the Canon and Civil Laws;
Holy Scripture gives them the lie;
the voluntary and repeated confes­
sions of witches prove them wrong;
and the sentences passed in various
places against the accused must shut
their mouths. I am not sure that I
dare not go so far as to say that it
seems more likely than not that such
people are of the witches’ party: in
any case, I have no doubt this is true
of some of them; and that the rest
are unwilling to admit the existence
of witches because, perhaps, they are
descended from them and, in defence
xxxix
AUTHOR’S
PREFACE
of their ancestors, would have men
firmly believe that there are no
witches in the world. Yet this is not
a matter of such small moment as
many people think; for it is a cause
of the frequent immunity of witches,
greatly to the mischief of the public
and to the prejudice of the honour
of God, which we should in all things
have as our object, not allowing Satan
to enlarge his kingdom further, as
he does by means of the damnable
plots of these his subjects.
Now I do not gainsay that the stories
told of witches are very strange; for
there is matter for much wonder in
the form taken by Satan when he
accosts them; their transvection to
the Sabbat is astounding; we can but
marvel at their oblations, their dances,
their obscene kisses, their feasts, and
their carnal couplings with their
Master; it is beyond comprehension
how they cause hail and tempests to
spoil the fruits of the earth, and again
how they cause the death of a man
or the sickness of an animal; it would
AUTHOR’S
PREFACE
seem impossible for a witch to trans­
port the corn from one field to
another, and milk from the udder of
one cow to that of another; it is
beyond knowledge how they con­
trive to send demons and evil spirits
into a man’s body, or how they
change themselves into wolves. In
short, the deeds of witches have been
considered as supernatural and mirac­
ulous, and therefore have men been
unable to credit them.
But what then; Do we not know how
great is the knowledge and experi­
ence of demons? It is certain that
they have a deep knowledge of all
things. For there is no Theologian c/. criiiani,
who can interpret the Holy Scripture
better than they; there is no Lawyer
with a profounder knowledge of
Testaments, Contracts and Actions;
there is no physician or philosopher
who better understands the composi­
tion of the human body, and the
virtue of the Heavens, the Stars,
Birds, and Fishes, of trees and herbs
and metals and stones. Furthermore,
AUTHOR'S
PREFACE
since they are of the same nature as
the Angels, all bodies must obey them
in respect of local motion. Again, do
we not know how great is the power
which God in express words has
given them upon earth. The Book
of Job teaches us this so plainly that
there is no need of other proofs; for
God even says that there is no power
upon earth which may be compared
with that of Behemoth.
And if such be the power of Satan,
why should he not be able to per­
form the works which we have men­
tioned? I will even say that it is all
the easier for him to do so, in that
all these works are due to natural
causes. For the demons never work
except through second and natural
causes, although the speed and cun­
ning which they employ make their
actions appear to be miracles; where­
as miracles can never be ascribed to
them, since these belong to God only,
as the Psalmist says: “He alone doeth
great marvels.”
At other times Satan has worked
AUTHOR’S
PREFACE
xliii
purely by means of illusion, by
troubling and confusing man’s eyes
or fantasy. This is so in the case of
Lycanthropes, and of those who be­
lieve that they see such creatures.
Yet even this he contrives by natural
means. So much for Satan in par­
ticular.
As for witches, although they cannot
do such marvels as Satan, yet with
his help they do terrible and shock­
ing things. For they learn from him
to compound a poison which they
secretly pour into the broth of their
enemy, who after tasting this poison
sickens and languishes or suddenly
dies, according to the might and
virtue of the poison he has received:
they strike people with headaches,
pains in the feet and belly, with
leprosy, epilepsy, swelling, and other
such ills: guided by Satan they enter
a man’s house by night and cut his
throat in his bed: they run about the
fields and rocks in the form of wolves
and so kill now a beast and now a
child: in short they have ten thousand
AUTHOR’S
PREFACE
ways of harming men, beasts, and
the fruits of the earth, with the help
of the Devil.
For the most part the witch has only
the intent to harm, whilst Satan
actually performs that which he
would have done. We have many
proofs of this, as when a witch
touches someone with his hand or a
wand, or melts a waxen image, or
utters certain words, with the intent
to cause the death or sickness of such
a person. For neither the touch, nor
the waxen image, nor the words are
effective in anything save as a symbol
of the pact formed by the witch with
Satan; and it is Satan who, in this
case, in some secret manner causes
the death or sickness. It may be that
he could not do this but for the
wicked intent and wish of the witch;
just as the body can do nothing with­
out the soul, and the soul of itself can
do nothing regarding the actions
which belong to the body. And here­
in the witch is as guilty as if he had
himself committed the deed, in ac­
AUTHOR’S
PREFACE
cordance with the provisions of the
Common Law which considers the
author of a crime equally worthy of
punishment as the man who actually
commits it. And from this it will
appear that the stories told of witches
are no fable.
But to make this still clearer, I have
founded the following Examen upon
certain trials which I have myself
conducted, during the last two years,
of several members of this sect, whom
I have seen and heard and probed as
carefully as I possibly could in order
to draw the truth from them. And
although I have been at pains to be
brief, I think that I have touched
upon the chief points of my subject,
as may be seen from a glance at the
list of the chapter headings.
At the end of this Examen, I have
added a short instruction for Judges
who find themselves in the same case,
since they must not conduct them­
selves in such trials as they do in
those of other crimes. In this I have
had the assistance of the works of the
AUTHOR’S
PREFACE
Inquisitors, of Bodin, Remy, Binsfeld, and others; but my chief help
has been my own experience and
my own observations of this damn­
able sect of people, who are the more
difficult to convict in that they have
always as their advocate that cunning
Satan, who has the hardihood even
to help and advise theni when the
Judge is speaking to them and ques­
tioning them.
And if anyone takes exception to
my having disclosed the names of the
witches who were accused, I answer
that, since their trials have been
accomplished, this does not seem to
me to matter much; for their names
can always be found by going to the
registers. Further, it is better that
their names should be known, so that
men may be on their guard not only
against them, but also against their
children, who usually follow their
manner of life, and to protect them­
selves either change their names or
their place of abode. In short I am
in this respect but imitating the ex-
AUTHOR’S
PREFACE
xlvil
ample of most who have written
before me. And although I have
never in this book departed from the
strictest standards of moderation, I
would yet have it plainly known that
I am a sworn enemy to witches, and
that I shall never spare them, for
their execrable abominations, and for
the countless numbers of them which
are seen to increase every day so
that it seems that we are now in the
time of Antichrist, since, among the
signs that are given of his arrival,
this is one of the chief, namely, that
witchcraft shall then be rife through­
out the world.
And truly it would be well that
special Judges were appointed to cut
off this Hydra’s heads effectively so
that they may not grow again. For
the Ordinaries are so busy with their
normal duties that they cannot give
to witches the time they would like
to give, and which such a matter
requires. But let us come to our
Examen.
The VARIOUS CHAPTERS
COMPRISING THE PRESENT
EXAMEN
oyse Maillat, eight years old, is possessed
OF FIVE DEVILS AND LATER DELIVERED OF THEM,
AND FrAN^OISE SeCRETAIN MADE PRISONER FOR
CASTING THE SPELL.
CHAP. I
THE MEANS BY WHICH THE TRUTHWAS
DRAWNFROM
FrAN^OISE SeCRETAIN
PRINCIPAL
POINTS
THECONFESSION
Fran^oise Secretain
THE reasons for IMPRISONING
FrAN^OISE SeCRE-
WHETHER IT BE POSSIBLE FOR ONE TO SEND DEMONS
INTO THE BODY OF ANOTHER
WHETHER ONE WITCH CAN HARM ANOTHER
OF THE BODIES OF SPIRITS AND DEVILS
THE MEANS WHEREBY SATAN WINS US TO HIM
OF THE witch’s RENUNCIATION OF GOD, BAPTISM AND
CHRISM
OF THE VOICE OF DEMONS
OF THE COPULATION
OFTHE DEVIL WITH MALE AND
FEMALE WITCHES
WHETHER SUCH COPULATION EXISTS IN THE IMAGINA­
TION ONLY
CHAPTERS
VARIOUS
WHETHER THE COPULATION OF SATAN WITH A WITCH
CAN BRING TO BIRTH A LIVING BEING
OF THE TRANSVECTION OF WITCHES TO THE SABBAT XIV
HOW AND IN WHAT FASHION WITCHES ARE CONVEYED
TO THE SABBAT
WITCHES SOMETIMES GO ON FOOT TO THE SABBAT
WHETHER WITCHES GO IN SPIRIT TO THE SABBAT
THE SABBAT IS GENERALLY HELD AT NIGHT
XVIII
OF THE DAY OF THE SABBAT
OF THE PLACE OF THE SABBAT
OF WHAT HAPPENS AT THE SABBAT, AND OF THE BURN­
DANCES,
OF THE DEVIL WITH
WITCHES,
CANDLES,
COPULATION
KISS,
FEASTS, THE ACCOUNTS RENDERED BY THEM TO HIM,
THE BEATING OF WATER TO
PRODUCE HAIL, THE
MASS WHICH IS SAID BY THEM, AND HOW SATAN
CONSUMES
HIMSELF
FLAMESAND
BURNS
ASHES
WHETHER WITCHES CAN PRODUCE HAIL
OF THE POWDER USED BY WITCHES
XXIII
OF THE UNGUENTS AND OINTMENTS USED BY WITCHES
WHETHER WITCHES
KILL BY THEIR
BLOWINGS AND
THEIR BREATHS
WHETHER WITCHES AFFLICT WITH WORDS
WHETHER WITCHES AFFLICT WITH LOOKING
XXVII
HOW WITCHES AFFLICT WITH THE HAND
XXVIII
HOW WITCHES AFFLICT WITH A WAND
OF THE IMAGES USED BY WITCHES
VARIOUS
HOW MIDWIVES,
CHAPTERS
THEY ARE WITCHES,
CHILDREN THEY DELIVER
PARTICULARLY
WITCHES
AFFLICT
PEOPLE
XXXII
HOW WITCHES AFFLICT THE HERDS
WITCHES
XXXIII
FRUITS
EARTH
XXXIV
WHETHER WITCHES ARE ABLE TO HEAL
DEMONS MUST ON
SaTAN
THAT FOR THE CURE OF MALADIES
AND HIS
NO ACCOUNT BE APPEALED TO,
God ONLY
XXXVI
WHETHER IT IS PERMITTED TO MENACE A WITCH IN
ORDER TO HEAL OR WARD OFF HARM
XXXVII
THAT HE WHO IS BEWITCHED CAN AVAIL HIMSELF OF
XXXVIII
PHYSICIANS
THE ROSARIES USED BY WITCHES GENERALLY LACK THE
Cross, but in
Cross
any case the
is always
IMPERFECT IN SOME PARTICULAR
XXXIX
WITCHES ARE UNABLE TO SHED TEARS IN THE PRESENCE
OF THE JUDGE
THE EYES OF WITCHES ARE CONTINUALLY BENT UPON
GROUND
PRESENCE
JUDGE
WITCHES WHEN THEY RENOUNCE THE DEVIL SPIT THREE
TIMES UPON THE GROUND
WITCHES
SHAVED
THEIR
XLIII
CHANGED
THE MARKS BORNE BY WITCHES
Satan
CLOTHES
often
kills witches
they are
PRISON, OR ELSE HE INSPIRES THEM TO KILL THEM­
SELVES.
SOMETIMES HE REVEALS WHAT WILL HAPPEN
TO THEM AT THEIR DEATHS
VARIOUS
CHAPTERS
Satan companies with
his witches when
THEY ARE IN PRISON AND EVEN ASSISTS THEM IN THE
PRESENCE OF THE JUDGE
OF THE METAMORPHOSIS OF MEN INTO BEASTS, AND
ESPECIALLY OF LYCANTHROPES OR LOUPS-GAROUX
XLVI I
THAT WITCHES GENERALLY CONSECRATE THEIR CHILD­
Satan ; and of the pain suffered by
GrOZ-JaCQUES and certain OTHER SORCERERS
REN TO
XLVIII
Guillaume Vuillermoz known as le
BaILLU. of his CONFRONTATION WITH PlERRE
HIS SON, AND THE CAUSES OF HIS CONDEMNATION
WHETHER ONE ACCUSED OF WITCHCRAFT AND DYING
IN PRISON MAY BE BURIED IN CONSECRATED SOIL
THE CAUSES AND REASONS OF THE SENTENCE CONDEMN­
Clauda Gaillard
OF Pierre Vuillermoz and of Christofle of
THE village of ArANTHON, AND HOW THEY WERE
TREATED LENIENTLY ON ACCOUNT OF THEIR YOUTH
AND FOR CERTAIN OTHER REASONS
RoLLANDE
POSSESSED
VeRNOIS AND
DEMONS
PRISON,
HOW SHE WAS
DELIVERANCE
AGAINST THOSE WHO MOCK AT THE EXORCISMS AND
CONJURATIONS OF OUR PRIESTS
OF THE POWER AND VIRTUE
OF THE CROSS AGAINST
DEMONS AND THEIR SUBJECTS
OF THE MIGHT AND VIRTUE OF HOLY WATER AGAINST
DEMONS
OF THE PERFUMES USED BY PRIESTS IN THEIR CON­
JURATIONS
VARIOUS
CHAPTERS
AGAINST THOSE WHO ASSERT THAT
MERELY TO
FEAR THE
CROSS,
SaTAN
PRETENDS
HOLY WATER
EXORCISM ; AND THAT IN REALITY HE CARES NOT
LVIII
CONTINUATION OF THE REPLIES
OF RoLLANDE DU
VeRNOIS; AND OF HER CONDEMNATION
WHETHER THE EuCHARIST MAY BE ADMINISTERED TO
ONE ACCUSED OF WITCHCRAFT
IF ONE ACCUSED OF WITCHCRAFT BE BUT FOUND GUILTY
OF ASSISTING AT THE SaBBAT, EVEN THOUGH HE HAS
DONE NO OTHER ILL, THE SECULAR JUDGE MAY PASS
SENTENCE OF DEATH UPON HIM
MANNER OF PROCEDURE OF A JUDGE IN
WITCHCRAFT
A CASE OF
AN EXAMEN OF
WITCHES
DRAWN from various trials of
many of this sect in the district of
SAINT OYAN DE joux commonly
known as saint claude in the
county of burgundy including the
procedure necessary to a judge in trials
for witchcraft
Chapter I
Loyse M.aillat^ Eight Tears Old^ is Pos­
sessed of Five Devils and later de­
livered of them^ and Fran^oise
Secretain made Prisoner
for Casting the Spell
N Saturday the fifth of June in the
year 159^ Loyse, the eight-years-old
daughter of Claude Maillat and
Humberte of Coyrieres in Perche,
was struck helpless in all her limbs so that she
AN EXAMEN
had to go on all-fours; also she kept twisting her
mouth about in a very strange manner. She
continued thus afflicted for a number of days,
until on the tQth of July her father and mother,
judging from her appearance that she was pos­
sessed, took her to the Church of Our Saviour
to be exorcised. There were then found five
devils, whose names were Wolf, Cat, Dog,
Jolly and Griffon; and when the priest asked the
girl who had cast the spell on her, she answered
that it was Fran^oise Secretain, whom she
pointed out from among all those who were
present at her exorcism. But as for that day, the
devils did not go out of her.
But when the girl had been taken back to her
parents’ house, she begged them to pray God for
her, assuring them that if they fell to their
prayers she would quickly be delivered. Accord­
ingly they did so at the approach of night, and
as soon as her father and mother had done pray­
ing the girl told them that two of the devils
were dead, and that if they persevered with their
devotions they would kill the remaining ones
also. Her father and mother were anxious for
their daughter’s health and did not cease praying
all night. The next morning at dawn the girl
was worse than usual and kept foaming at the
mouth; but at last she was thrown to the ground
and the devils came out of her mouth in the
shape of balls as big as the fist and red as fire,
except the Cat, which was black. The two
which the girl thought to be dead came out last
and with less violence than the three others; for
they had given up the struggle from the first,
and for this reason the girl had thought they
were dead. When all these devils had come out.
OF WITCHES
th^ danced three or four times round the fire
and then vanished; and from that time the girl
began to recover her health.
For the rest:—Late on the fourth of June
b ranfoise Secretain had come to the house of
Loyse Maillat’s parents and had asked for lodg­
ing for that night. In the absence of her hus­
band, Humberte had at first refused, but had in
the end been forced by Fran^oise’s insistence to
give her lodging. When she had been received
into the house, and Humberte had gone out to
attend to her cattle, Fran^oise went up to Loyse
and two of her younger sisters as they were
warming themselves by the fire, gave Loyse a
crust of bread resembling dung and made her
eat it, strictly forbidding her to speak of it, or
she would kill her and eat her (those were her
words); and on the next day the girl was found
to be possessed. Her mother bore witness to her
refusal to give Fran^oise lodging, her father and
mother together gave evidence of their daugh­
ter s malady, and this was confirmed by the girl,
who gave evidence as to all the rest; and al­
though she was so young she was so unshakable
in her testimony that she compelled belief just
as if she had been thirty or forty years old.
The Judge, being fully convinced as to what had
happened, had Franfoise Secretain seized and
put into prison.
AN EXAMEN
Chapter
The Means by which the Truth was drawn from
Fran(oise Secretain.
Or three days of her imprisonment F ranfoise
Secretain refused to confess anything, saying
that she was innocent of the crime of which she
was accused and that they did her great wrong
to detain her. To look at her, you would have
thought she was the best woman in the world;
for she was always talking of God, of the Virgin
Mary, and of the Holy Saints of Paradise, and
she had in her hand a long rosary which she
pretended to say without interruption. But the
truth is that the Cross of this rosary was defec­
tive, and it will be seen that this fact furnished
evidence against her.
Further, it was observed that during her ex­
amination, although she strove her utmost to do
so, she could not shed a single tear. For this
reason she was more closely imprisoned, and cer­
tain threats were used to her. The following
day she was pressed to tell the truth, but with­
out success. Accordingly it was decided to shave
off her hair and change her garments, and to
search her to see if she were marked in any way.
She was therefore stripped, but no mark was
found; and when they came to cut the hair of
her head she submitted with the utmost con­
fidence. But no sooner was her hair cut than
she grew perturbed and trembled all over her
body, and at once confessed, adding to her first
OF WITCHES
confessions from day to day. I shall set down
only the principal points of her confession, fol­
lowing my undertaking to be brief.
Chapter
The Principal Points in the Confession of
Franfoise Secretain.
that she had wished five devils on
Loyse Maillat.
Second, that she had long since given herself to
the Devil, who at that time had the likeness of a
big black man.
Third, that the Devil had four or five times
known her carnally, in the form sometimes of a
dog, sometimes of a cat, and sometimes of a
fowl; and that his semen was very cold.
Fourth, that she had countless times been to the
Sabbat and assembly of witches near the village
of Coyrieres in a place called Combes by the
water; and that she went there on a white staff
which she placed between her legs.
Fifth, that at the Sabbat she had danced, and
had beaten water to cause hail.
Sixth, that she and Groz-Jacques Bocquet had
caused Loys Monneret to die by making her eat
a piece of bread which they had dusted with a
powder given to them by the Devil.
Seventh, that she had caused several cows to die,
and that she did so by touching them with her
hand or with a wand while saying certain words.
Irst,
AN EXAMEN
Chapter
The Reasons for Imprisoning Fran^oise
Secretain.
Bove I have set down the principal points
of Fran^oise Secretain’s confession: she was
further accused by Groz-Jacques of having
changed herself into a wolf, but she would never
speak openly of this matter. Before I examine
each of these points, I must say that at first
there was some doubt as to whether there was
sufficient cause to seize and imprison this
woman, on the ground that she should not be
arrested on the strength of an accusation from a
little girl that she had wished five devils on her;
1.1, deminorib. for it was Considered that children are unstable
D. late per
jn J light-headed, and that it needs little to percaw. 7.
suade them to say anything, r urther, it was
I. fin. de preConsidered that no person should be lightly taken
ia«. C.
jjp ^hen it is a question of his life or his honour;
and that in a criminal process justice demands
that the proofs should be clearer than daylight.
However, the contrary view prevailed, and the
accused was apprehended for several reasons:
first, that there was evidence of witchcraft;
second, that although the girl was only eight
years old, her depositions were so very precise
and never varied; third, that the mother sub­
stantiated the fact that Fran^oise had lodged at
their house after having been at first refused;
fourth, that the father and mother said that they
had never had any quarrel with Fran<;oise;
fifth, that during her affliction the girl had
OF WITCHES
always declared that it was no one but that
woman who had bewitched her; sixth, that it
was a question of the most abominable of all
crimes, one which is usually committed at night
and alwys in secret, and that therefore it did
not call for such positive proof as would be re­
quired in the case of any other crime. For all Mascard. post
the Doctors agree that less absolute proof is
required in the case of grave, horrible and secret du>
crimes. It was further considered that they were
seq., ml. q.
not asked to condemn the accused under the
provisions of the said law, but only to commit jacob. ie Sell.
ler to prison so that she could more easily be
brought to trial if the evidence should warrant
such a course. Finally, it was reflected that a num'^qz."’
witch has the power to send devils into a person’s
body, and that therefore the accusation against
Fran^oise Secretain was a possible one; namely,
that she had wished five devils on Loyse Maillat.
For all these reasons, therefore, this woman was
thrown into prison.
But they had not been able (as has since been
the practice) to discover much against her before­
hand; for they feared that she might make her
escape if she were warned. And indeed the more
recent usage in such cases is not altogether safe;
and if Jt must be followed because no other
course is possible, the witnesses must be sworn
not to reveal their depositions, otherwise there is
a danger that the matter may become known
before all the information has been laid, and the
accused may take to flight. But in this case the
success of the event proved that F ran^oise Secre­
tain had been deservedly imprisoned.
The secret judgement of God may be seen in
this, when it is considered that numberless
AN EXAMEN
witches have been discovered and brought to
their just punishment by means of a child: and
in this the glory of God is made manifest, so
that we may well say here, with His Royal
Prophet: “Out of the mouth of babes and suck­
lings Thou hast ordained strength because of
Thine enemies, that Thou mightest still the
enemy and the avenger.” In the following Ex­
amen we shall see that several other children
have been the instrument by which not a few
have been creditably judged guilty of this crime;
and that one even, no more than twelve years
old, convicted his own father of it, so unassailably that the matter was thought no less strange
than pitiable. But let us return to the points of
Frangoise Secretain’s confession.
Chapter V.
Whether it he Possible for One to send
Demons into the Body of Another.
confessed in the first
place that she had wished five devils on Loyse
Maillat; and in the first chapter we have told of
the means she used to this end. But it is no easy
matter to determine whether a person has the
power to send demons into the body of another:
there are those who have considered it not to be
possible, and it is even said that formerly some
maintained this opinion before Pope Paul IV.
The whole truth is that this thing is possible
Ran(Joise Secretain
W ier^ de
praestig. Ill,
Bodin.
OF WITCHES
with the permission of God; for we read that St.
Paul sent Satan into the body of the Corinthian I Cor. 5.
fornicator, and into Hymenaeus and Alexander 1 Tim. I.
the heretics. And David says in Psalm 78 that
God “cast upon them the fierceness of His anger,
wrath and indignation and trouble, by sending
evil angels among them;” a passage which Jean
Benedict!, the Franciscan Theologian, quotes in
his account of Perrenette Pinay in proof of my
contention. Thyraeus is also of this opinion in /. 16. 7
IV. 50. 12.
his treatise on Demoniacs.
There is no lack of examples. Simon Magus IV. 58. 8 Sfg
frequently caused those to be possessed who
called him Sorcerer; Theodoret tells of a young
girl who was possessed by means of the spells and
enchantments of a sorcerer, though he adds that Sect. 13.
the Devil betrayed the sorcerer and revealed the in Macedonia.
whole secret of the matter; Jacques Bocquet
wished upon Rollande du Vernois two devils, of
whom one was named Cat and the other Devil;
and in this case Jacques confirmed the state­
ment which had previously been made by Rol­
lande. This woman was put in prison in the
year 1598 under a charge of witchcraft, and
after a long imprisonment was in the end burned.
Later we shall speak of her fully, as her case
deserves. Perrenette Pinay was found to be pos­ Cf. Benedict,
sessed by six devils, after having eaten at the
instigation of a witch an apple and a piece of
beef; another witch sent three devils into the
body of Catherine Pontet in the year 1554. The Cf. Girard
Grudius.
Jews of Rome caused eighty girls and women to
Bodin^
be possessed by the Devil; and in the year 1552
the nuns of the Convent of Kendiorp were also Demonom,
tormented in this manner by means of their Marg. I.
cook; Caron in his “Antichrist Unmasked” nar-
De abdit. rer.
caus. lib. 2.
ANEXAMEN
rates that Catherine Boyraionne sent a number
of demons into one Magdelaine, a woman of
about twenty-two; and that another old woman
cast a devil into one Marie; in each case the
devils entered into the possessed by means of
some nuts which they ate. Fernel also tells of a
man who was thirsty and, for want of water, ate
an apple, whereon he was at once possessed by a
devil. But of what use is it to linger over siich
examples? Every day in our own town we con­
tinually meet with large numbers of persons who,
for the most part, impute their possession to cer­
tain Vaudois or sorcerers. The truth is con­
fessed by the devils themselves, being wrung
from them by the might and virtue of exorcisms,
and of the glorious body of St. Claude, who,
being descended from the Counts Palatine of
Salins, after having governed the Archbishopric
of Besan^on, came to this place to live the life of
a hermit until his death in the year 650. By this
he gained such favour with Heaven that from
that time his body may be seen laid out whole
upon the altar of the church in the eternal tri­
umph of countless miracles which are performed
upon those who resort to him; and demoniacs
especially are every moment being healed by his
prayers and intercessions.
O Blessed Soul! Here I could willingly fill
several volumes with your praises, but I wait for
another time when I shall have leisure to re­
count, with your help, your life and works. Do
but lend me your hand now, that I may bring to
a conclusion this little work in which I again
take up the fight against the greatest enemies of
God in this world; for I must now return to my
subject. It is remarkable that as we have in this
OF WITCHES
place those who are possessed just as they exist
elsewhere, the devils who inhabit foreigners (of
whom we have just spoken) have sometimes in­
formed us how our own people have been pos­
sessed, very particularly explaining the methods
used by witches to attain such a result, both as
regards the seasons, and the food which they
have caused them to eat; and of this fact we have
already had several proofs and indications. For
it is likely that God in His justice permits this,
that such persons may be got rid of from the
world, and punished according to their evil
deserts.
As a further confirmation of my contention, I
add that when witches are angry, they threaten
those who have moved their anger that they will
send devils into their bodies. Fran^oise Secretain
acted in this manner towards several children
whom she wished to take by force to the Sabbat,
and namely towards a twelve-year-old girl
named Christofle of the village of Aranthon.
Loyse Maillat also stated that when this Fran9oise forced her to eat the piece of bread by
means of which she was afterwards possessed,
she threatened to wish evil spirits upon her.
And what is even stranger is that, if the witch
has several devils under his control, he must find
a lodging and employment for them all; for
otherwise, according to Caron, he is in danger of
his life.
Now the means usually employed by a witch to
possess his victims with a devil is to offer them
some sort of food; and I have remarked that he
most often uses apples. In this Satan continually
rehearses the means by which he tempted Adam
and Eve in the earthly Paradise. And in this
AN EXAMEN
connection I cannot pass over what happened at
Annecy in Savoy in the year 1585. On the edge
of the Hash Bridge there was seen for two hours
an apple from which came so great and confused
a noise that people were afraid to pass by there,
although it was a much-used way. Everybody
ran to see this thing, though no one dared to go
near to it; until, as is always the case, at last one
man more bold than the rest took a long stick
and knocked the apple into the Thiou, a canal
from the lake of Annecy which passes under the
bridge; and after that nothing more was heard.
It cannot be doubted that this apple was full of
devils, and that a witch had been foiled in an
attempt to give it to someone.
I have noticed also that demoniacs for the most
part confess that the evil attacks them when they
eat something; and from this it may be supposed
that there is gluttony on their part; a sin abomin­
able to God, who does not wish us to abuse the
good things which it pleases Him to give us, or
that instead of blessing and praising Him for His
mercies, we should take the food He sends us
immoderately or without remembering Him or
thanking Him for it.
Let us learn, then, when we are about to eat
and drink, to think of Him who is the author of
all, and to bless our food with the sacred sign of
the Cross as we have been taught by the Holy
S. JeromeJ
Fathers, who held the Cross in such reverence
efist, ad Eusto. that they said it delivered us from devils and made
‘Tertullian^ de
them flee from before us; for the necessity of
coro. milit. ;
et alii.
using this sign before we eat is such that St.
Gregory writes of a Nun who, in eating a let­
tuce, swallowed the devil with the lettuce be­
cause she had not made the sign of the Cross.
OF WITCHES
But we shall speak more fully of the Cross in
another place.
A point very worthy of examination here is how
the Devil enters into the body of an innocent
child who has committed no sin, as happened in
the case of Loyse Maillat. This comes of the Thyr. in
permission of God; for we see also that the Demmom. II.
witch has power over the health and life of children even to the extent of killing them in their
mothers’ wombs, as we shall show later. There
must have been many innocent children among Exoi. n.
the first-born of Egypt; yet God put them all to
the edge of the sword, even as He also caused
the death of the child adulterously born to David II Sam. 12.
and Bathsheba.
There is no doubt that the sins of the fathers are
in some part the reason for this affliction; for the
Holy Scriptures say that God punishes the chil- Exod. 20.
dren for the sins of their parents, unto the third
and fourth generation of them that hate Him;
and elsewhere God threatened to punish the li Sam. 2.
Kings in their children, and this also has hapHpened since those times. For some have had
their sceptres taken from them, and others have
been led into a miserable captivity.
Sometimes again God allows Innocents to be
possessed and afflicted, not for any sin, but that
His justice and His works may thereby shine the
more gloriously. We have an excellent example
of this in St. John’s account of the man who was
born blind, speaking of whom Jesus Christ said: John 9.
“Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents:
but that the works of God should be made mani­
fest in Him.” And Loyse Maillat, at eight years
old, was possessed of five devils; but what ensued
from this ? It led to the discovery of countless
AN EXAMEN
witches who have been punished as the gravity
of their crimes deserved; and in this has God’s
justice been made manifest.
It may further be said that, when the injured
Canon i. de
Calumnia.
person is innocent the crime is all the greater;
Canones cum
for the severity of the punishment is regulated
illoTum^ de
by the quality of the party injured, and the
sentent.^ excommunic.
greater the enormity of the crime, the greater
atroXy de
punishment it deserves; and therefore, that Hell
injuria, in
Institutio.
may be increased for witches, God permits them
S. 7bom, I. 2. to harm and to possess children. I know that the
y. 73. art.
Theologians distinguish five causes for the afflic­
tion of men by devils, but I leave such argument
to them; for I would not enquire too closely into
the judgements of God, and shall always content
myself to believe that the great Master of the
Universe does nothing without good reason,
since St. Paul speaks of “The depth of the riches
Rom. It.
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God.”
Chapter VI.
If^hether One JVitch can Harm Another.
E have said that Groz-Jacques sent two
devils into the body of the witch Rollande; and out of this arises the question wheth
one witch can harm another, to which I propose
to devote a few words. It appears that the answer
must be in the affirmative for several reasons,
chiefly because, just as there are grades in the
angelic Hierarchy, so among devils there is a sort
OF WITCHES
of disordered order, which I would rather call a
Cacarchy, whereby some are more potent than
others. This may be verified by several passages peter
of Holy Scripture; for in Job, speaking of Behe- Lombard,
moth, it is said; “He is a king over all the children of pride.” And in another place Beelzebub
is called the Prince of the Devils; for the Jews job^i.
reproached Jesus Christ because he cast out devils Mattb. 12.
by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils. But,
5more than this, our Lord clearly shows in St.
Matthew that all devils have not the same power
or might, in these words: “If Satan cast out
Satan, he is divided against himself.”
Our exorcists are well aware of this; for they v. Flagell.
sometimes command Lucifer and the other more Damon.
potent devils to torment those which are inferior
4to them, when the latter prove stubborn in re­
fusing to come out of the bodies of those whom
they have possessed.
If, then, it be true that one devil is more potent st. August.,
than another, as we have just shown, and as the Cass.,
Theologians are agreed, it follows that it will be
easy for one witch to harm another, provided feld. de conthat he has control over a more powerful devil fession. malefic.,
than that other; for a witch’s power is governed
by that oi the devil which is his familiar.
Let us take some examples to confirm this state­
ment. Sprenger tells that an old witch caused a Mall. Malefic.
younger witch to die, that she might heal a IL 2'^"Bishop who had been stricken sick by the young
witch. Nider writes that in Germany when a Formic. 3.
. man is bewitched, he goes to an old witch, who
ipours molten lead into water until, with the help
of the Devil, an image is formed of the lead; on
which the old woman asks the sick man in which
part of the body he wishes her to torture the
AN EXAMEN
witch who has cast the spell on him; and if he
agrees to her harming the witch, she takes a
knife and strikes the image with it; and at the
same instant the witch receives as many blows as
were given to the image. I remember also that,
when Antoine Tornier was confronted with
Jaquema Paget, Jaquema accused her of having
threatened her several times, and even of having
often said that she would prevent her cows from
yielding milk, although her own cows should
yield abundantly. In this manner, therefore, it
appears that one witch can harm another.
Chapter VII.
Of the Bodies of Spirits and Devils.
Ran^oise Secretain confessed in the second
I Sam. 28.
place that she had formerly given herself to
the Devil, and that the Devil at that time had
the appearance of a big black man. It is very
certain that both good and bad spirits can make
themselves a body from the elements; and this
should not seem strange, if it is considered that
the vapours which rise from the earth very often
seem to us to take the form of men or animals.
But these spirits, after the manner of a skilled
painter, give whatever colour or form they please
to the bodies which they make themselves. The
spirit which foretold his defeat and death to Saul
had the exact likeness of Samuel, who had been
dead for some years. Ezekiel was transported to
OF WITCHES
Azotus by an Angel who had the lips of a man, szei. 8.
whose face was the colour of amber, and from
the loins downward he had the appearance of
fire. The Angel who accompanied the young Toi. 5.
Tobias in his journey to Gabael had the form of
a young man, as also had the two Angels who Gen. 19.
visited Lot. We read in the Book of Maccabees ii Macc. 3.
that, when Heliodorus was sent by his Prince to
despoil the Temple of Jerusalem, there appeared
unto him a horse with a terrible rider, together
with two other young men excellent in beauty,
who surrounded him and scourged him so that
his friends were constrained to run to the High
Priest, Onias, and to beg him to intercede for
him. And when-Joshua entered into the prom­
ised land, he saw standing in a field an Angel in Josh. 5.
the form of a man, with his sword drawn, who
told him that he had been sent to guide and con­
duct the army of the children of Israel. Augustus
Caesar, when he was about to proclaim himself
Emperor and Lord of the whole world, saw a
vision in the air of a Virgin holding a little child
in her arms, and for this reason he abandoned his
enterprise: similarly Attila, the King of the
Huns, departed from Italy, which he had deter­
mined to ruin and lay entirely waste, because he
saw standing on each side of Pope Leo I two
old men with flaming swords who threatened
him with death if he should advance any further:
it is said that these two old men were St. Peter
and St. Paul, who have always been the true
Tutelary Saints of Rome and Italy.
But I am particularly concerned with Satan, who tl Cor. 2
also adopts what shape he pleases, sometimes that
of a man, sometimes that of a beast, and some­
times even he transforms himself into an Angel
AN EXAMEN
of Light. When he tried to tempt Jesus Christ
and carried Him to the pinnacle of the Temple
Anon, tract. 3.
mountain, he had the
ad^b, Thyr.
appearance of a man. When he addressed himde loc. infest.
gglf to F ranijoise Secretain, Jacques Bocquet,
part Z. C. zb
ciauda Jamprost, and several others of whom we
S’, w 4.
shall speak later, it was under the shape of a man
point. Richer
that he gained them. Of the same form was the
‘ima'e^cap
demon which appeared to Brutus when he was
loXV7.’
about to pass out of Asia, and that which apPlutarch, Brut, peared to Cassius after the defeat of Mark AnFaler. Max.
tony’s army, which openly said that he was a
devil. The devils which came out of the Idol of
the Moon, which St. Jude broke in pieces, had
the appearance of Ethiopians. Cynops, who cast
himself into the sea at the prayers of St. John
the Evangelist, was accompanied by three devils
in the form of men newly raised from the dead.
Satyrs, Fauns and Sylvans are nothing but devils
bearing some resemblance to men.
Sometimes the Evil One takes the form of a
woman, as we are taught in the stories of the
lives of St. Anthony and St. Jerome, among
Plutarch, Dion. Others; and the two demons which appeared to
Plin. epist. 27.
Dion were in the form of wornen, as also seems
lib. 7.
to have been that which Curtius Rufus saw as
he was walking late one day along a gallery. In
Hector Boece.
Boethius also we have the story of a very beauti8.
ful young man who was burdened with a Succu­
bus devil with a very fair face. What we know
of Succubi is proof enough that the Devil often
assumes the form of a woman, and that he chiefly
does so at the Sabbat, as is evidenced by the words
ofThievenne, of Jacquema Paget, and of several
other witches.
We have said that the Devil sometimes assumes
Spin, de Stri-
giA. c. 15.
OF WITCHES
the shape of a beast; and this we learn from St.
Athanasius, who tells us in his Life of St.
Anthony that the demons appeared to that holy
man in the shape of Bulls, Wolves, Vipers, Scor­
pions, Leopards, Bears and horrible Dragons.
Also George Gandillon confessed that, when the Rich. Discours
Devil appeared to them the first time, he had images, c.
the form of a large horned Ram. At the Sabbat,
too, he most often appears as a ram or a goat.
Fran^oise Secretain confessed that he had lain
with her four or five times, and that he was then
in the form either of a dog or a cat or a fowl.
Agrippa was followed by a black dog which was Paul. Jovi. in
no other than a devil in disguise, as was clearly
seen at his master’s death; for being taken ill at
an inn at Lyons, and finding himself at the
point of death, he took from the dog a collar
which it was wearing, all covered with certain
characters, saying: “Begone, evil beast which
have brought me to perdition.” Upon this the
dog threw itself into the Saone, and has never
since been seen. The Devil which St. Philip cast Abdias, Bishop
out of the Idol of Death was in the form of a “/Babylon.
Dragon: and the seven devils which so tormented
the passers-by, and were made to vanish by St.
Andrew, were transformed into dogs. Thevet,
again, tells us that in America they have a demon
whom they call Agnan, which, like Proteus,
appears now in one shape and now in another.
And why should we not believe that the Dove
and the Bull of Mahomet were no more than
devils in that shape, just as it was with Agrippa’s
Nevertheless, although Satan may take what
shape he pleases, when he wishes to entice any­
one into his net he most often appears to him in
AN EXAMEN
the form of a man; and I suppose that he does
this so that he may not frighten him whom he
approaches, or cause him to be amazed, as he
would if he were to speak to him in the shape
of a ram or a goat or any other beast. And in
this we may see how very busy is this mortal
enemy of the human race. But whenever he
assumes the form of a man, he is, however,
always black, as all witches bear witness. And
for my part I hold that there are two principal
reasons for this; first, that he who is the Father
Epbes. 6.
and Ruler of darkness may not be able to dis­
Mattb. 8.
guise himself so well that he may not always be
known for what he is; secondly, as a proof that
his study is only to do evil; for evil, as Pythagoras said, is symbolised by black. This is what
Tamburlaine the Great had in mind when, while
he was besieging a town, he set up black tents on
the third day as a sign that he would put all the
inhabitants to fire and the sword if they did not
surrender. And long before him, the Greeks
Omd, Fast. 5.
regarded it as a bad omen if, in drawing lots, one
of the lots were black.
Furthermore, Satan does not always create tor
Alexander ab
himself a body out of air, water or earth, but very
Alexandre,
Genial. III. 12. often enters into a beast. We see this in St.
Mark, where the Devil whose name was Legion
MarA 5.
prayed Jesus Christ to send him and his companions into the bodies of certain swine, and
obtained his request. And, if we may believe
Lib. de
Psellus, there are even demons which live under
Dcemonibus.
the earth, and sometimes enter into the body of
a swine or other beast, not in order to harm it,
but because the cold underneath the earth is so
extreme that they cannot endure it, and, being
equally unable to endure the rays of the sun, they
OF WITCHES
are compelled to seek shelter and lodging in the
bodies of beasts.
The Devil has also sometimes borrowed the body
of a man who has been hanged; and this he does
chiefly when he wishes to associate with a witch.
It is for this reason, according to Cardan, that de subtil, lib.
witches are usually ugly and stinking.
Chapter VIII.
The Means Whereby Satan Wins Us to Him.
Atan goes even further: for when heappears
to us in the manner we have described, he in­
vites us to give ourselves to him. This is how he
acted in the case of F ran^oise Secretain, accord­
ing to her own admission; and other witches say
the same, and even that the Wicked One is so
cunning that he knows how to choose the times
and occasion most favourable to his designs. For
he takes men when they are alone and in despair
or misery because of hunger or some disaster
which has befallen them. Eve was alone when Genes. 3.
she was seduced. Thievenne Paget was watching
her cows in a field and lost one; and as she was
sorrowing for this, Satan approached her and
won her. It was the same with George Gandillon, who was irritated because he could not drive
certain oxen. His father, Pierre Gandillon, was
angry because his scythe did not cut so well as
those of his companions, and wished himself to
the Devil; whereupon Satan immediately ap-
an examen
peared to him and won his soul. Jacques Bocquet, F ran^oise Secretain, Clauda Jamprost,
Antoine Gandillon and several others abandoned
themselves to him because of their misery and
poverty.
Furthermore, he makes fair promises, for to
some he offers riches, assuring them that they
will never lack for anything; to the vengeful he
suggests the means to avenge themselves on their
enemies; others he persuades that he will advance
them in honour and rank; in short he so well
suits himself to the character and humour of each
one that he captures them at his will.
Yet it must be confessed that the fault lies wholly
with the witch, for when he accosts them, Satari
openly declares to them that he is the Devil, and
makes them renounce God, Chrism and Bap­
tism; and therefore such persons place themselves
beyond forgiveness. For is there any man so
foolish as not to know that the Devil is our mor­
tal enemy, and that he desires nothing but the
destruction of the human race ? I have seen a
deaf and dumb girl who, when she was angry,
made an ugly grimace and pointed two fingers in
the form of horns at those who had angered her,
as if she wished to threaten them with the Devil;
and this makes me think that she, and such as
she are well aware of his taking the form of a
horned beast. Besides, who is ignorant that there
is a God, and that He is above all the might of
Satan? Even the Pagans are agreed that this
truth is loudly proclaimed by Nature. Why,
then do we not turn to Him when we are
temp’ted by the Devil, instead of yielding our­
selves to the promises of our sworn enemy?
Finally, if there were nothing else to be con­
OF WITCHES
sidered, are not witches condemned by the very
nature of the rewards which they expect from
Satan ?
I have touched upon this point here to refute the
opinion of those who try to excuse the greater
number of witches on the ground that they are
simple and ignorant. For it is clear that they are
guilty of an offence against natural principles, of
a crime which is severely and inexorably vindi­
cated by the law. I may add that the infinite Can. qui ea 28.
goodness of God towards them does but render
them the more guilty; for He does not allow ‘^ocanti‘/'c.
them to be taken by surprise. They know who
it is with whom they are treating, they have time
for deliberation as to whether or not they shall
yield; it even appears that God takes no very
strict count of their first renunciation of Him, of
Chrism and of Baptism, as having been made in
too great haste and without thought. Therefore
the Devil in his subtlety and cunning makes
them repeat their abnegation two or three times,
and causes them to say that they do so with a
willing heart. It is therefore apparent that they
willingly cast themselves into Satan’s net. But
let us examine in more detail the witches’ renun­
ciation of God, Baptism and Chrism.
AN EXAMEN
ChapterIX.
Of the twitch's Renunciation of God,
Baptism and Chrism.
S the brave soldier disarms his enemy so that
he may become his prisoner, having nothing
with which to defend himself; so, when Satan
wishes to become our master, he makes us re­
nounce God, Baptism and Chrism, because these
are the weapons with which we can guard and
defend ourselves against him, and the Evil One
well knows this.
For, considering God in general, did not Satan
Job I.
say to Him, speaking of Job: “Doth Job fear
God for nought ? Hast thou not made an hedge
about him, and about his house, and about all
that he hath on every side?” And the Royal
Prophet says; “He that dwelleth in the secret
place of the Most High shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty.” And St. Paul, writing
Rom. k
to the Romans, says; “If God be for us, who
can be against us?” And notably it has been
observed several times that, when one has pro•0. Grillan.
nounced the name of God or of Jesus Christ in
the witches’ assembly, everything has at once
vanished, both devils and persons and meats.
Bodin,
As for Baptism, it sets us out of Satan’s power
Demonom. 11. and is, as it were, a protection against all future
4ambushes and attacks. But here I must say that
Concii. Trid.
g^-hemer causes the witch to renounce not
Swsw 4Baptism which he received in the
Bodin, ibid,
name of the Holy and Undivided Trinity, but
OF WIT CHE S
makes him also be rebaptised in the name of the
Devil and take another name. It would seem
that he does this in order that the witch should
be thereby persuaded that his first Baptism is
wholly annulled, and that it can be of no more
service to him.
For many witches, after they have fallen into Remy^ lib. 3.
the hands of justice, ask to be rebaptised: cer­ DetMwl.
c. 6.
tainly Clauda Coirieres, Christofle of Aranthon,
Pierre Vuillermoz, and several others have made
such a request.
Of Chrism we may say much the same as of
Baptism, that it is a sovereign antidote against
the power of the Devil: and this is confirmed by
the statements of witches, who say that, when
they have transformed themselves into wolves
and wish to kill and eat children, they cannot
touch that part which has been anointed with the
Holy Chrism. This I know from the confes­
sions of Jacques Bocquet, Clauda Jamprost and
Thievenne Paget. The Chrism is of such worth
and virtue that St. Cyril the Bishop speaks of it
in these words: “Just as the bread in the Euchar­
ist is no longer bread but the Body ofJesus Christ
after the words have been pronounced, so also
this Holy Unguent can no longer be called a
simple or common ointment after it has been
consecrated, but is a gift of grace which brings
to us and gives us the presence of Jesus Christ
and of the Holy Spirit, that is to say. His
Divinity.” And according to Pope Fabian this
Holy Unguent was instituted by Jesus Christ Antichrist^
c- 39after He had supped with His disciples.
But the Devil exacts even more conditions; for
sometimes he forbids those who give themselves
to him to say the Apostles’ Creed. He did so in
an examen
the case of Pierre Bourgot, who confessed that
the Devil required him to kiss his left hand,
whi^ t^s black, death-like, and quite cold’
revealed that Satan com­
manded her to pray to him night and morning
before she set about any other work, and that
afterwards she might go to church and pray as
much as she pleased.
Chapter X.
Of the
de Damon.
nee of Demons.
matters we have discussed in the last
X two chapters lead me to speak of the manner
of speech used by demons. For since they are
purely spiritual, it would seem that they are in­
capable of speech, which is formed by the lungs
the palate, the tongue and the teeth, which are
lacking in a spirit. Yet it is certain that demons
do in some manner speak; for we see every day
now they answer through the mouths of de­
moniacs. When Rollande du Vernois was pos­
sessed, her two devils so exactly imitated her own
utterance at times, that we thought it was she
who was speaking and answering us. But it has
been observed that generally the Devil cannot
control his voice so well as to imitate the human
voice in such a way that it cannot be distin­
guished; for his voice is either harsh, or thin and
penetrating, or like that of a man speaking in a
tub. Psellus explains that the Devil speaks in this
OF WITCHES
manner so that, by not being clearly heard, he
can the better disguise his subtleties and lies.
Another reason is that it is impossible for art to
imitate nature so closely but that there is always
some difference between the two. And here it
may be mentioned that, when George Gandillon
was asked whether Satan spoke distinctly when
he tempted him to give himself to the Devil, he
answered that he did not, and that he could with
difficulty understand what he said.
Now it is easy for the Devil to speak by the
mouth of a demoniac, for then he uses the teeth,
tongue and lungs of the possessed, j ust as he uses
his other members in whatever manner he
wishes; for he grimaces with the mouth, and
uses the hands to push away the Cross and Holy
Water, as I have seen in the case of Rollande du
Vernois and several others who were possessed.
This leads me to believe that, when the Devil
enters into the body of a dog or a goat or a bird
or any other animal, he can counterfeit the voice
of a man, as he has several times done according
to the statement of many witches. The first time
he spoke to Rollande du Vernois, and to Pierre
and George Gandillon, he was in the shape of a
black ram; and it is known that he usually
assumes this shape at the Sabbat when he speaks
to his people, inciting them to evil either by soft
words or by threats. This will not seem strange
to any who have read the story of Balaam’s ass,
or who have seen jays and parrots counterfeit
human speech so well that it seemed as if a man
was speaking. The parrot given to Augustus,
which he valued so greatly, is an example. I pass
over the lamb which in human speech foretold
good fortune to Egypt in the reign of Bochorus,
AN EXAMEN
and the ox which said to him who goaded it in
ploughing that mankind would fail sooner than
the crops; neither shall I pause over the dog and
the serpent which spoke when Tarquinius Super­
bus was driven from Rome; and the rook which,
some time before the death of the Emperor
Domitian, prophesied in Greek great good to the
Roman Republic; and the two oxen and the
cock who spoke in the consulship of Quintus
Fulgds. lib.
Fabius Maximus and Marcus Lepidus. All of
*• 4these are mentioned by Fulgosus.
But it is far more difficult to believe that Satan
can speak through the shameful parts of a
woman, or when the person’s mouth is shut, or
when the tongue is thrust six inches out of the
mouth; or that he can speak when he has no
body at all, or one formed only of air. Yet this
is known to happen; for we read that she who
gave answer in the Delphic Oracle spoke through
the lower and shameful parts, as did also a
woman in Rhodige, an Italian town mentioned
by Coelius Rhodiginus in his disquisitions.
However, this thing is caused in a natural
manner, just as if the voice were formed by an
agitation and vibration of air; and it follows that
Satan can in this way create a voice, seeing that
he is well able to form a body out of air. The
echo gives us an example of this, when we see
valleys and hollow places reply articulately to the
human voice so exactly that it seems as if those
places were imitating our speech; and from this
it is easy to understand that the human voice
may be quite well counterfeited without the use
of lungs, tongue or teeth.
Lib. 2. de
Therefore Vair is right when he says that
incant. c. 12. demons can counterfeit sounds like the human
OFWITCHES
voice, and therewith express their meaning, and
that although they have neither teeth nor tongue
nor lungs, which are the instruments by which
the voice is formed, they can yet present an arti­
ficial appearance of these organs, and by this
means and by certain sounds they counterfeit
some semblance of a voice which they cause to
reach the ears of their hearers. So says Vair.
Chapter
Of the Copulation of the De’vil with Male
and Female Witches.
He third point in Fran^oise Secretain’s con­
fession was that she had had carnal relations
with Satan. Clauda Jamprost, Jacquema Paget,
Antoine Tornier, Antoine Gandillon, Clauda
Janguillaume, Thievenne Paget, Rollande du
Vernois, Janne Platet and Clauda Paget con­
fessed the same thing; and it has been revealed in
the examinations of witches that they all have
this connexion with Satan. The Devil uses them
so because he knows that women love carnal
pleasures, and he means to bind them to his
allegianceby such agreeable provocations. More­
over, there is nothing which makes a woman
more subject and loyal to a man than that he
should abuse her body.
And since male witches are addicted no less than
female to this pleasure, the Devil also appears as
a woman to satisfy them. This he does chiefly
AN EXAMEN
at the Sabbat, according to the reports of the
father and son, George and Pierre Gandillon,
and of those women whom I have several times
named, who all agree in saying that in their
assemblies there are many demons, of whom
some take the form of women for the men, and
others that of men for the women. These demons
are called Incubi and Succubi. And it is no new
thing for Satan to draw us to him by these means;
for we read that, in order to tempt St. Anthony,
St. Jerome and other devout persons, who passed
their life in the solitude of the desert, he
commonly appeared to them in the form of a
courtesan.
There is also another reason for the coupling of
the Devil with a witch, which is that the sin
may thereby become the more grievous. For if
God abominates the coupling of an infidel with
a Christian, how much more shall He detest that
of a man with the Devil? Moreover, by this
means man’s natural semen is wasted, with the
result that the love between man and wife is
often turned to hatred, than which no worse
a misfortune could happen to the state of
matrimony.
OF WITCHES
Chapter XII.
Whether such Copulation Exists in the
Imagination Only.
Ut since there are some who maintain that
the coupling of which we have just spoken
exists in the imagination only, it will be well to
say something here on this subject. For some
treat the matter with derision, some are doubtful
about it, and others firmly believe it to be a fact.
St. Augustine appears to be among these last, as de civitate
also St. Thomas Aquinas and several other later
23learned authorities. But the witches’ confessions
which I have had make me think that there is
truth in this matter; for they have all admitted
that they have coupled with the Devil, and that
his semen was very cold; and this is confirmed by
the reports of Paul Grilland and the Inquisitors
of the Faith. Jacquema Paget added that she had
several times taken in her hand the member of
the Demon which lay with her, and that it was
as cold as ice and a good finger’s length, but not
so thick as that of a man, Thievenne Paget and
Antoine Tornier also added that the members of
their demons were as long and big as one of their
fingers; and Thievenne Paget said, moreover,
that when Satan coupled with her she had as
much pain as a woman in travail. Fran^oise
Secretain said that, whilst she was in the act, she
felt something burning in her stomach; and
nearly all witches affirm that this coupling is by
no means pleasurable to them, both because of
Bodin^
Demmom. lib,
3. c. 6.
AN EXAMEN
Satan’s ugliness and deformity, and because of
the physical pain which it causes them, as we
have just said.
The ugliness and deformity lies in the fact that
Satan couples with witches sometimes in the
form of a black man, sometimes in that of some
animal, as a dog or a cat or a ram. With Thievenne Paget and Antoine Tornier he lay in the
form of a black man; and when he coupled with
Jacquema Paget and Antoine Gandillon he took
the shape of a black ram with horns: Fran^oise
Secretain confessed that her demon appeared
sometimes as a dog, sometimes as a cat, and
sometimes as a fowl when he wished to have
carnal intercourse with her. For all these rea­
sons I am convinced that there is real and actual
copulation between a witch and a demon; for
what is there to prevent the Devil, when he has
taken the form of an animal, from coition with
a witch? In Toulouse and Paris women have
been known to make sexual abuse of a natural
dog; and it seems to me quite to the point to refer
here to the legends of Pasiphae and other such
women.
Another matter that I must mention, which is
as strange as it is true, concerns one Antide Colas
of Betoncourt in the district of Baume. She was
imprisoned at that place for witchcraft, and it
was found when visiting her that she had a hole
beneath her navel, quite contrary to nature. This
hole was examined on the eleventh of July, 159^5
by Master Nicolas Milliere of Regnaucourt,
Chirurgeon, who thrust his probe deeply into it
in the presence of his servant, and of Antoinette
Mongin, Jannette Bolet and Claudine Menestrey, who were required to be there as witnesses;
OF WITCHES
and then the witch confessed that her Devil,
whom she called Lizabet, had sexual connexion
with her through this hole, and her husband
through the natural hole; but afterwards, when
she was taken by order of the Court to the
prison of Dole, and they wished to examine this
hole, it was found to be closed up, and there
remained nothing but a scar. This woman was
burned alive on the twentieth of February, 1599.
But who would believe that Satan even lies with
witches in prison? Yet this woman of whom we
have just told confessed that he did so; as also
did Thievenne Paget, who said that the Devil
had lain with her three times while she was in
prison.
When Satan means to lie with a witch in the
form of a man, he takes to himself the body of
some man who has been hanged. But even if he
has only a body formed from the air, there is
still nothing to prevent him from intercourse
with a witch; for in that case he makes the body
of air so dense that it is palpable (for air is, of
itself, palpable), and consequently capable of co­
ition with, and even defloration of a woman.
And why should not this be easy for him, seeing
that he is powerful enough to overthrow a town
or a city or a kingdom? And as for his semen, he
has but too plentiful a supply, even were there
no other source of it, in that which he receives
when he acts as a Succubus.
And therefore I thoroughly believe all that has Vair^ de
been written of Fauns, Satyrs and woodland
//. 13gods, which were no more than demons, and
were inordinately lustful and lascivious. Also I
think that we may consider under this head the PHnyi VII. 2.
stories we are told of the wantonnesses of Numa,
an examen
and of the nymph Egeria, and of several others
whom the poets have particularly mentioned.
Similarly we find in the West Indies that their
gods, which they call Cocoto, lay with women
and had sexual intercourse with them; unless it
was really certain lickerish men who abused
them, as Decius Mundus, a Roman knight,
whose story Josephus tells in his Antiquiues
did to Paulina under pretence of being the Lrod
But to return to Fran^oise Secretain, it is a
strange thing that Satan lay with her in the
shape of a fowl. I am of opinion that she meant
to say a gander instead of a fowl, for that is a
Paracel, de
Malefic, c. 15. form which Satan often takes, and therefore we
have the proverb that Satan has feet like a goose.
Yet it would be as easy for him to take the shape
of a fowl as that of a gander. For we know that
he has at different times assumed the shape ot a
dog for the same purpose, and we have two re­
markable examples of this: one of a dog, said to
Jfier.
be a demon, which used to lift up the robes of
the nuns in a convent of the diocese of Cologne
Bodin,
Demononi,
in order to abuse them; the other, of certain
III. 6.
dogs found on the beds of the nuns of a convent
on Mount Hesse in Germany.
OF WITCHES
Chapter XII I.
Whether the Copulation of Satan with a
Witch can bring to Birth a Living Being.
T is a matter of far greater doubt whether a
living being can be born from the coupling of
the Devil with a witch. I remember that, when
Antoine Tornier and Antoine Gandillon were
asked whether they were not afraid of becoming
pregnant by the Devil, one answered that she
was too old, and the other that God would not
permit it. I have read, too, that Satan has some­
times asked a witch whether she wished to be­
come pregnant by him, and that the witch has
said that she did not wish it. It seems then that
it is possible for issue to come of this coupling;
and also there are many examples of such an oc­
currence, besides the proof which may be drawn
from the Book of Genesis, where it is said that Genes. 6.
the Sons of God lay with the daughters of men,
and that there sprang from them a race of giants, Antigu.
a passage which Josephus understands literally. 3As for examples, we have the English Merlin,
who was said to have been born from the union
ofa demon with a woman: the Huns and the men
of Cyprus are also said to spring from certain
witches who had intercourse with the Devil; it
is also said that Luther was born from the coup- g
ling of the Devil with his mother Marguerite:
passing over what has been written of Plato,
Servius Tullius, and of Florine and Ermeline, we
an examen
read of women who have lain down to Satan and
given birth to hideous and terrible monsters, as
did the woman mentioned by Bodin in his Demoib. 2. C. V.
nomania. Wier, again, says that the Germans
maintain that from this diabolical copulation are
born children that are puny and yet heavier than
other children, that they milk three nurses dry
without growing fat, cry when they are touched,
laugh when any misfortune overtakes the house,
and never live beyond seven years.
If it be asked how such couplings can lead to
procreation, I must refer to the opinion of St.
Thomas Aquinas that Satan makes use of the
male semen which he receives when acting as a
Succubus; or that he so skilfully shoots it into the
womb that, on meeting with the female ova,
some result must necessarily follow; and even
that this semen is kept in its original warmth by
the Devil, who has but too many devices with
which to harm and abuse the human race.
We know that there are many monsters born in
the sea from the union of two fishes of different
species; and that some even are found which reParacel. in
semble men, which are said by some naturalists
‘‘‘ and doctors to be procreated from the semen of a
mail; and therefore they advise us to bury
the dead, whether men or women, so as to guard
against such mischances. Then why should we
think it strange that some issue should be born of
the Devil and a witch, if their copulation is after
De confess.
the manner we have described ? Binsfeld, Sufconfragan of Treves, accepts the possibility of it, bec!hj. 5.
agreement with several learned authorities
whom he quotes.
I may further add that it is the more easy to be­
lieve in such procreation, because even a virgin
OF WITCHES
can conceive when the man’s semen has been
merely spent round about the natural place, with­
out any loss of her virginity: this is vouched for Nmm. consil.
by Navarro as being the opinion of St. Thomas. 3-.’‘?’”-43I have read also that, being rubbed by the herb
called Nepeta, the cat conceives, and that this
herb can supply the lack of a male.
Nevertheless, although all these reasons have
some weight, I prefer to follow the opinion of Agrippa.
those who believe that no issue can result from
such connexions. For everyone knows that the
abounding vitality and heat of the whole body is
the cause of procreation: I mean the natural heat
of a man. It is therefore impossible that an acci­
dental heat, or one that is acquired merely by
artifice, can be competent to produce such a re­
sult. Now this natural vitality and heat is lacking
in a demon, as is also the heart which is its source;
and I shall never believe that the Devil, after
having borrowed a man’s semen, can preserve its
first heat, considering that it has to be carried to
another place, and that semen becomes cold as
soon as it is ejaculated from its ducts. Besides,
all witches agree that the semen they receive
from the Devil is as cold as ice. And further, can
we think that God, who is jealous of His honour
and is glorified in His works, would be willing to
endow with life and a soul the fruit proceeding
from so abominable a copulation ?
I go even further, and maintain that nothing will
be born if the witch has coupled with a ram, a
cat, a dog, or any other animal, by reason of the
disproportion between them: that if the contrary Bodin,
were true, there would not only be the case of Demonom.
the two women burned, one at Toulouse and the
other at Paris, who were brought to bed by the
AN EXAMEN
natural dogs which had connexion with them;
but the world would, if this thing were possible,
be filled with the fruits of such couplings. For it
was not only yesterday that such things were
practised : the law of God long since punished
Levit, i8 (S’ 20.
with death the man and the beast who had sinned
together. Therefore I conclude that if, because
of the disproportion between man and a brute
beast, no issue can come of any copulation be­
tween them, much less can there be any issue
from the coupling of Satan with a witch, whether
Satan take the body of a hanged man, or whether
he make himself a body out of the elements.
This may seem to refute what we have said about
sea monsters which are born from two fishes of
different species; but there is great similarity be­
tween two such animals, in spite of the difference
in their species; and there are parallel cases on
land, where we know that a mule is born from an
ass and a mare, and the Basilisk from a cock and
a toad.
As for the Merman, it is difficult to believe that
he is generated from the semen of a dead man, or
that the corpse of a dead man is able to secrete
semen competent for procreation. There can be
no doubt that the Merman is generated of two
fishes, and that Nature, which delights in variety,
gives him the form of a man is the upper parts:
in the same way on land she has brought forth
animals which resemble man, such as the mon­
key, and the Brazilian beast called the sloth,
which is about the size of a fox, and is 1 ike^ a
Raemondy
woman about the face and hair, except for its
Antichrist^
much misshapen muzzle.
C. 32With the leave of such eminent men, for whom
I have the very highest respect and honour, I
OF WITCHES
shall contradict the opinion of St. Thomas and
Navarro; for how can their opinion be main­
tained, when all philosophers and naturalists
agree that no generation is possible without the
conjunction of the male and female seed? This
argument will hold equally for that which has
been said about cats, and for the stories that are
told about Spanish mares being caused to con­
ceive simply by a breath of wind in a certain
place.
With regard to the monstrosities to which wo­
men give birth, these may be said to proceed
either from a superfluity and excess of generative
matter; or possibly from the force of imagina­
tion, which operates as a sort of seal stamping the
image of a mother’s fancy on the child she has
conceived in her womb. Or perhaps we should
rather believe that God, whose judgments are
inscrutable, in this manner punishes mothers who
abandon themselves to unnatural and abomin­
able copulations. For we are not bound to be­
lieve the stories of Merlin, the Huns, the men of
Cyprus, and others having sprung from demons;
such stories are sometimes written by historians,
but most often merely upon hearsay, and without
corroboration of the truth.
It is said that Rhea, the mother of Romulus and
Remus, was made pregnant by the God Mars;
and Olympias, the mother of Alexander, by Ju­
piter in the form of a swan; but who is to believe
that? Why should we not rather believe that
these women used the Gods as a screen to cover
their incests and adulteries? And therefore I
maintain that the widow of whom Bodin speaks
was made pregnant by a natural man, and not
by a demon; and that God permitted her to give
AN EXAMEN
birth to a monster as a punishment for the un­
lawful and abominable fornication of which she
was guilty in order to satisfy her wanton and
unbridled appetite.
We have now but to explain the passage in
Genesis where it says that “The sons of God lay
with the daughters of men.” But why should we
pause over this, seeing how many learned men
have interpreted it ? There is no doubt that the
sons of God are those who find favour with the
living God; for in another place they are even
called Gods by the Royal Prophet, just as certain
names which are given to God may be applied to
Finally, since carnal desire is necessary only to
those who need to supply a successor to continue
their kind, and since Angels and demons are not
subject to death, it follows that spirits are im­
mune from the flames of love, and that they are
without those members in which sensual desire
is generated, namely, the lower parts of mankind.
Chapter XIV.
Of the Transvection of IVitches to the Sabbat.
He fourth point in Franfoise Secretain’s
confession was that she had countless times
been to the Sabbat; and this leads me to speak of
Vlric. Molit;
the transvection of witches. There are those who
flatly denied the possibility of such a thing;
‘and the Council of Aquileia even decreed that it
OF WITCHES
was heresy to believe that witches are conveyed wier, de
from one place to another in the manner they faestig. ni.
allege: Navarro, in fact, reckoned such a belief ^can. efiscof.
to be a mortal sin.
26. q. 5.
Nevertheless I have always been well persuaded Mall. Malefic,
of the contrary opinion, both because of the
authority of those who have maintained this Demenom.
view, and by reason of the confession of nearly M. 3.
all witches that they have been conveyed to the
Sabbat. There have even been cases of persons Crilland, de
who were not witches, but have, following the Sortlleg. ni.
example of and at the instigation of witches,
Dialog 4
rubbed themselves with a certain ointment, and Bodin, ibid.
of farmers, who have been transported to as much
as a hundred or two hundred leagues from their
homes, so that they have had great difficulty in
finding their way back again.
But I will come to what I have learned of this
matter. Fran^oise Secretain said that, to go to
the Sabbat, she placed a white staff between her
legs and uttered certain words, and that she was
then conveyed through the air to the witches’
assembly. Rollande du Vernois confessed that
she went there on a great black ram which carried
her through the air so quickly that she was un­
conscious of the passage. Thievenne Paget said
that the first time the Devil appeared to her, it
was in full daylight in the form of a big black
man, and that when she had given herself to him
he embraced her and raised her in the air and
conveyed her to the house in the field of Longchamois where he had carnal intercourse with
her, and that he then brought her back to the
place from where he had taken her. This field
was the place where the witches of Longchamois
and Orcieres held their Sabbat. Antide Colas
AN EXAMEN
said that the night Satan appeared to her as a
gigantic man, black-bearded and clothed in black,
he carried her to the Sabbat; and that at other
times he used to come and take her on his back,
and carried her like a cold wind, gripping her by
the hair. It would take too long to write down
all that other witches have said on this subject.
But a fact which even more strongly inclines me
to believe in the transvection of witches is that
Jesus Christ Himself was carried by the Devil to
the pinnacle of the temple of Jerusalem, and then
to the top of a mountain; for if this could happen
to our Lord, why should it not happen to witches ?
transportations of St. Philip, EzeEzek. 8.
kiel, Habakkuk, Elijah, Enoch, St. Antide ArchPhilostr. Vair, bishop of Besan^on, St. Ambrose, Pythagoras, the
Philosopher of Tyana, and countless others. But
gib. c. 5I cannot omit Simon Magus, who, in tlehance ot
St. Peter, undertook to fly from the Capitol to
the Aventine Hill, and was carried through the
air with the help of Satan. It is true that at the
end he fell and broke his legs; and this was by
divine ordinance that God might be glorified in
St. Peter. Similarly He was purposely glorified
Exoi. Tin Moses, when his rod was turned into a serpent
and devoured those of Pharaoh’s magicians. For
it is in this manner that God raises up His enemies
to cast them down, to their great confusion and
His own honour.
Wier ie
Neither shall I forget that, when the sons of
fraeitig. II. 29 France were hostages in Spain, there appeared a
German magician who promised to convey these
Princes home through the air, but that they
would not trust themselves to him. For it was
to be feared that, when the royal children were
passing over some sea, the same fate might over­
OF WITCHES
take them as overtook Daedalus, after whom an
arm of the sea was named because he lost his life
in falling into it.
And as for the Council of Aquileia, those who
admit the transvection of witches have sufficiently
refuted its opinion. With regard to Navarro, it
seems that he would entirely deny the existence
of the Sabbat; but no one can rightly uphold such
a denial, since there is nothing more certain than
that witches assemble together; for otherwise
they could not so perfectly agree in their reports
of their Sabbats, even allowing for the fact that
there are several Sabbats, held in different places.
For we see that they all are unanimous in their
accounts of the offerings of candles, the lewd
kisses, the dances, the obscene couplings, the
banquets, and the beating of water, which take
place at their assemblies; and these are every­
where conducted in the same manner, since the
Devil is always true to his nature, which is ever
no more or less than that of an ape.
Again, how can we contradict those who have
found themselves at the Sabbat, although they
are not witches? Pierre Vuillermoz, Christofle
of Aranthon in Savoy, the brothers Claude,
Charloz, and Perrenette Molard have confessed
that they were conveyed to the Sabbat near
Coirieres at a place called es Combes, and that
there they had seen done all that we have just
said: yet the eldest of them could not have been
more than ten years old. I mention their age to
prove that they were not witches, and to show
that the Devil had no power or authority to cause
them to dream of these kisses and offerings and
such matters. Finally, Antoine Tornier and
Jacquema Paget have recorded that once, when
AN EXAMEN
they were coming home from gleaning and were
passing along the field of Longchamois, they saw
that the Sabbat was being held in that place, and
set down their bundles and went and did as the
others, and then took up their bundles and re­
turned to their homes. I can hardly think that
anyone will maintain that these two women were
at that time asleep, and that it was only in their
fancy and imagination that they went to the
Sabbat.
Chapter XV.
How and in what Fashion Witches are
Conveyed to the Sabbat.
Rancjoise Secretain was carried there upon
a white staff; Rollande du Vernois on a big
black ram which she rode horsewise. Satan was
in the form of a black man when he bore Thievenne Paget and Antide Colas to the Sabbat:
others go there sometimes on a goat, sometimes
Paracel, de
Malefic, c. i6. on a horse, and sometimes on a broom, and
Bodin.
generally leave their house by the chimney.
Demonon.
Some rub themselves first with a certain oint­
II. 3Retny^
ment, and others use none. There are also some
Demonol. 1. 14.
who are not witches, but after anointing them­
selves do not fail to fly up through the chimney
and to be carried away as if they were witches.
Nevertheless it must not be thought that it is
this ointment which causes their transvection;
for we shall show later that neither ointment nor
words nor symbols are, of themselves, of any use
OF WITCHES
to witches. Those, therefore, of whom we have
spoken are transported by the just permission of
God, who in this manner punishes them for their
too great curiosity.
There are some also who go to the Sabbat with­
out either beast or staff to carry them; and again
it should be known that a beast or a staff is of no
more use than the ointment, but that it is the
Devil, who of his own power, is as a wind which Paracel, de
bears them along, just as a whirlwind uproots
even the highest trees, and carried them two or lyier, de
three leagues away from the place where they fraestig. II. 29.
grew. Even men have been known to be trans- Plutarch,
ported in this manner, as was Romulus, who,
whilst he was among the Senators in the Field of
Mars near the Goat’s Pool, was lifted up into the
air by a whirlwind and never returned. Again,
Antide Colas said that when the Devil came to
take her in her bed to carry her to the Sabbat, he
was like a cold wind which took her by the head.
Chapter XV I.
Witches Sometimes go on Foot to the Sabbat.
Et witches sometimes go on foot to the
Sabbat, and this usually happens when the
place of their assembly is not very distant from
their homes. Pierre Gandillon, George Gandillon his son, and his daughter Antoine Gan­
dillon went in this way to the Sabbat to a place
called ds Fontenailles, about two arquebus shots
AN EXAMEN
distant from Nezan, which was their native place
and home. Clauda Jamprost, Clauda Janguillaume and Jacquema Paget of Orcieres also went
on foot to the Sabbat in the field of Longchamois,
about a quarter of a league from Orcieres. GrozJacques went by the same means to a Sabbat at
Longchamois and another at a place called es
Combes, near Coirieres, where also Pierre
Vuillermoz of Aranthon, the brothers Claude
Charloz, and Perrenette Molard went in like
manner on foot. Pierre Vuillermoz added that,
to get there, he had to pass a little stream. Jeanne
Platet and Clauda Paget went to a place called
au Mont; and I have read that many other places
have thus been reached on foot. But there is no
doubt that these witches were sometimes carried
by the Devil to the Sabbat, as were those of
whom we spoke in the last chapter; for they
have themselves confessed it.
Chapter XVII.
Whether Witches go in Spirit to the Sabbat.
Here are others who maintain that for the
most part it is only in spirit that witchy go
Oe»io«sm.
tQ tjie Sabbat; and they substantiate th
by examples taken from certain witches, who
after having remained in their houses as dead for
the space of two or three hours have confessed
that they were at that time at the Sabbat in spirit,
and have given an exact account of all that took
OF WITCHES
place there. In this connexion, Groz-Jacques
said that it was quite possible to go to the Sabbat
in spirit only; but Clauda Coirieres said that, if
her spirit had been to the Sabbat, she knew no­
thing about it. One Holy Thursday night
George Gandillon lay in his bed for three hours
as if he were dead, and then suddenly came to
himself; and he has since had to be burned in
this place, together with his father and one of his
sisters. Some little time ago there was a man of
the village of Unau in the district of Orgelet,
who brought his wife to this place and accused
her of being a witch, saying among other things
that when they were in bed together one Thurs­
day night he noticed that his wife was absolutely
still without even breathing; whereupon he be­
gan to shake her, but could not waken her, and
became so frightened that he tried to get up to call
his neighbours; but try as he might, he could not
move from his bed, and he seemed to be caught
fast by the legs, and was not even able to cry out.
This lasted for two or three hours until the cock
crew; and then his wife suddenly awoke, and
when he asked her what was amiss, she answered
that she was so tired from the work she had done
the day before that she was weighed down with
sleep and had felt nothing of what her husband
had done to her. The man then supposed that
she had been to the Sabbat, for he had already
had some suspicion of her because the cattle of
some of their neighbours, whom she had
threatened, had been dying.
Indeed it appears very probable that this woman
had been in spirit to the Sabbat. For first, the
seizure of which we have told came to her on a
Thursday night, which is the customary night
AN EXAMEN
for the Sabbat. Secondly, when the cock crew
she awoke suddenly; now the Sabbat is held by
night and lasts until the cock crows but after it
has crowed everything vanishes. Thirdly, the
excuse she gave clearly proves that there was
deceit on her part; for who has ever known a
man to be so tired from his labour and toil that
he could not easily be awakened ? George Gandillon used the same excuse when he was asked
why he had not beeri awakened even when he
was frequently and violently shaken. Fourthly,
it is obvious that there was devil’s work, since the
husband was as it were caught by the legs, and
unable to cry out. And finally, the Magistrates
of Unau who adjudicated for the husband stated
that the woman was descended from parents who
had already been suspected of witchcraft.
So much, then, for the contention that
witches go to the Sabbat in spirit and soul only;
a view which is in agreement with what Pliny
wrote; “We have found it stated of Hermontinus
of Clazomense that the soul used often to leave
his body and go wandering here and there and
bring back news of things that could only be
known to such as were present to witness them,
all the time leaving the body in a state resembling
death, until his enemies, called the Cantarides,
burned the body and so took awa^^from the re­
turning soul its casing, as it were.’
But everyone will form his own opinion of this
matter. For my part I have never been able to
believe that such a thing is in any way possible;
for if it is true that when the soul is separated
from the body, death must necessarily follow,
how can it be possible for a witch, after having
been in spirit to the Sabbat, to return to life by
OFWITCHES
the help of the Devil ? This cannot be except by Ps. 135.
a miracle, which belongs only to God and not S. Thom.
to Satan, who only works by secondary and sortileg\o‘ i
natural causes and therefore has no power to Richer^ des
raise the dead to life. For although one of the images, c. 38.
poets has written that Erichtho, a witch of
Thessaly, brought to life a dead soldier who
foretold to Sextus Pompeius the success of the
Pharsalian war, this must not be believed as the
truth; it was the Devil who had entered into the
dead man’s body and spoke through his mouth;
or perhaps made use of some fantastic body as he
did when Saul consulted the witch of Endor to
summon the spirit of Samuel, that he might know
whether he should give battle to the Philistines
or postpone it to some other time.
I am aware also that it is written that at Rome
Apollonius of Tyana raised from the dead a girl
on the day of her wedding; but who shall say
that this philosopher, who had no other object
but to glorify himself, did not first cause the bride
to fall into a sleep so deep that she seemed to be
dead and that when the strength of the drug had
been spent and the girl awoke, he gave out that
it was he who had brought her to life ?
I for my part stoutly maintain that in every case
where it has been a plain question of raising the
dead, witches have proved utterly powerless. We
read of such as Simon Magus, Eunomianus
and Polychronius Monothelita, who laboured
to bring certain dead men to life, and lost their
whole repute in the attempt. Certain heretics
also have meddled in this matter, such as Luther,
as Cochlaeus tells us in his Life of him; but what
are we to think when such men have effected the
converse of what they set out to do? For we
ANEXAMEN
read that, in pretending to bring living men to
life, they have caused the death of the men; and
as examples of this we may quote Calvin, of
whom Jerome Bolsecque speaks in his Life; and
another Minister from the borders of Poland
and Hungary, whom Alanus Copus mentions in
the sixth book of his Dialogues, and, later,
Cardinal Bellarmine in his Controversies. In
this manner also Cyril the Patriarch of the Arians
rendered one blind who was but pretending to be
blind. But indeed how should heretics have
power to raise the dead to life, seeing that the
Prophets of Baal could not bring fire down from
Heaven, and Mani could not heal the sick
King’s son, and Luther was brought into great
danger when he wished to cast out jhe Devil
from the body of a woman that was his disciple ?
Grilland, de
I prefer, then, to say that sometimes witches are
Sortileg.
present at the Sabbat, and sometimes they are
not; and that when they are so present they go
there both in body and in spirit, and that Satan
then places a fantom in their likeness so that a
husband very often embraces an illusion instead
of his wife, in just the same way that the poets
pretend that Ixion embraced a cloud instead of
Juno. Sometimes again Satan at that time makes
himself a Succubus with whom the husband lies
as if it were his wife. There can be no doubt
that there are times when witches go to the
Sabbat both in body and spirit without Satan
putting any fantom in their place; but in such
Remy,
case the Devil induces so profound a sleep in
Demonol. c. 4. those of the house, with mandragora or some
other narcotic draught, that they cannot be
awakened by any noise soever, and the husband,
who has seen his wife come to bed before he
OF WITCHES
went to sleep, will think in the morning that she
has not moved throughout the night, even
though she has, in fact, been to the Sabbat for as
long as two or three hours.
As for those witches who remain unconscious
and as it were dead, it is probable that Satan sends
them to sleep as he does those of whom we have
just spoken, and reveals to them in their sleep
what happens at the Sabbat so vividly that they c. episcapi 26.
think they have been there; and therefore they 5.
c • ■' Sptna ae
can give a marvellously accurate account or it. strigib. c. 14.
But I hold that this never happens except to such Binsfeld, de
as have previously attended in person the witches’
assembly, and have already enlisted beneath 7,
Satan’s standard.
Chapter XVIII.
The Sabbat is Generally Held at Night.
Secretain added that she used
always to go to the Sabbat at about mid­
night ; and Jacques Bocquet, Rollande du Vernois,
Clauda Jamprost, Thievenne and Jacquema Pa­
get, Antoine Tornier, Pierre Gandillon, George
Gandillon, Antoine Gandillon—in fact all the
other witches who have come into my hands have
said the same. And it is no new or strange mat­
ter that Satan should hold his assemblies by night;
for Jesus Christ tells us that the evil-doer hates the
light; and in another place it is said that Satan is Ephes. 6.
the ruler of darkness: moreover we find that he
Rancoise
AN EXAMEN
works chiefly by night, as when he slew the first­
born of Egypt and the cattle at the stroke of midExod. II.
night. Again, the Evil One has clearly shown
that he delights in darkness, for he has ever
wished that anything which is offered to him
should be black, as we are told by Ovid and
.Fasti,Alexander ab Alexandro.
That which is white
Genial. III. 12. is, on the Contrary, pleasing to God, according to
Delegib. I.
Cicero; for white is symbolical of openness,
cleanness, innocence, humbleness and chastity,
Rfv. 3.
and therefore it is written in the Apocalypse that
he that overcometh shall be clothed in white
raiment. In this connexion I shall mention that
a little before peace was concluded between
Louis XI, King of France, and the King of
England on the 26th of August, 14755 at PicChaf. 77.
quigny, it is reported by Philippe de Commines
in his History that a white pigeon came and
rested on the English King’s tent.
It is probable also that Satan assembles witches
at night so that they may not be recognised; and
for the same reason they dance, at their assemGrilland, de
blies, back to back, and are now for the most part
masked, as has been confirmed by Clauda Paget,
who was called la Foulet.
But always it is a condition of these devilish
assemblies at night, that as soon as the cock crows
everything disappears. This I know from the
statements of those whom I have mentioned, and
especially of Clauda Jamguillaume, Antoine
Tornier and Jacquema Paget, who said that they
had spent hardly any time at the Sabbat because
the cock crew as soon as they arrived. Some have
thought that the sound of the cock is deadly to
Satan, just as it is feared by lions; and in truth, if
the Devil is afraid of a naked sword, he may well
OFWITCHES
be afraid also of the crowing of a cock. But I am
rather of opinion that God, being merciful,
wishes by this means to draw to repentance those
poor deluded ones who have renounced Him like
St. Peter, who understood his sin when the cock
had crowed thrice; and therefore this bird has
remained as a warning to Bishops and Pastors to
do their duty.
But let us speak now of the day of the Sabbat.
Chapter XIX.
Of the Day of the Sabbat.
Was formerly of the opinion that the Sabbat
is held only on a Thursday night, since all the
witches that I have examined have so reported it.
But I have since read that some of the same sect
have confessed that they have met together,
sometimes on Monday night, sometimes on F riday or Wednesday or Sunday night; and there­
fore I have concluded that there is no fixed day
for the Sabbat, but that witches go to it when­
ever they are so commanded by Satan. And here
I shall add that, in this connexion, Antide Colas
confessed that for a period of about seven years
she had been to the Sabbat at each of the great
Festivals of the year, as at Christmas, Easter, the
Fete-Dieu and such days; and that the last time
she had been there one Easter evening in the
Valley of Saint Marie, where there were about
forty persons assembled; and she said also that on
ANEXAMEN
the night of the preceding Christmas she had
been there between the midnight Mass and the
first Mass of the day. This is how the wicked one
celebrates his assemblies on Holy Days, and se­
duces the creatures of God from His service.
Chapter
Of the Place of the Sabbat.
OME have observed that the Sabbat is always
held in some conspicuous place, marked by
trees or a Cross; but for my part I do not know
what to say about this. For the witches of Longchamois used to meet in a meadow on the high­
road to Saint Claude, with the ruins of a house in
sight; while those of Coirieres held their Sabbat
by the village of Coirieres near the water, in a
place called es Combes, where there are no roads
at all. Pierre Gandillon, George Gandillon and
Antoine Gandillon met at a place called es
Fontenelles near the village of Nezan, which is a
conspicuous enough place; and Jacquema Paget
and Antoine Tornier said that the witches of
Mouille held their Sabbat in the courtyard of the
Priory of that place. So it will be seen that it is
useless to consider too much of the place where
witches hold their Sabbats and assemblies. For
witches have no trouble in finding the place since
Satan guides and conveys them to it. Yet I shall
say that, according to Antoine Gandillon’s state­
ment, there must be water in that place; for when
OF WITCHES
she was asked if she had been at la Georgiere, she
answered that the Sabbat was not held there be­
cause there was no water. And I think that the
reason for this is that, in order to cause it to hail,
witches usually beat water with their wands; and,
when there is no water, they make a hole in the
ground and piss in it, and beat their piss.
Chapter XXI.
Of what Happens at the Sabbat, and of the Burn­
ing of Candles, the Kiss, the Dances, the
Copulation of the Devil with Witches, the
Feasts, the Accounts Rendered by Them to
Him, the Beating of Water to produce Hail,
the Mass which is said by Them, and how
Satan Consumes Himself in Flames and
Burns to Ashes.
fifth point in Fran^oise Secretain’s
confession is that she had danced at the
Sabbat, and had beaten water to produce hail. I
have no doubt that she did many other things,
but witches never confess more than half of what
they have done. But since I have learned from
others nearly everything that is done at the
Sabbat, I propose to set it down here in writing,
since the occasion offers.
The witches, then, being assembled in their Sodin,
Synagogue, first worship Satan, who appears to
them now in the shape of a big black man and
now as a goat; and to do him the greater homage
(HI) IBM E-
AN EXAMEN
they offer him candles, which burn with a blue
flame; then they kiss him on the shameful parts
behind. Some kiss him on the shoulder; and at
other times he holds up a black image which he
requires the witches to kiss, according to Antide
Colas, who said that, on kissing it, they offered a
candle or burning torch. Jeanne Platet and
Clauda Paget said that the Devil gave them these
candles, and that after they had offered them they
did not know what became of them.
Following this, they dance; and this they do in a
Caron, Antiring back to back. Clauda Jamprost and Franchrist, I.
foise Secretain have reported that the lame show
TJeffTTj
more eagerness for these dances than do the
DemowZ. I. 17. Qj-jjgj-g. fgj. (hey said that the lame urged on the
others to leap and dance. Now they dance in
this manner back to back so that they may not
be recognised; but in these days they make use
of a different device for the same purpose, which
is to mask themselves, according to the confes­
sions of Clauda Paget, named la Foulet. There
are also demons which join in these dances in the
shape of goats or rams, as we learn from many
witches besides those we have just mentioned;
and particularly Antoine Tornier observed that,
when she danced, a black ram held her up by the
hands with his feet, which were, as she said, very
hairy, that is to say, rough and rude.
They are not without pipes at these revels, for
there are those whose duty it is to provide the
dance music. Most often Satan plays upon the
flute, and at other times the witches are content
to sing with their voices; but they sing at hap­
hazard and in such confusion that one cannot
hear the other. Sometimes, but rarely, they dance
in couples and at other times one here and
OF WITCHES
another there, and always in confusion; for their
dances are such as those of the fairies, which are
truly devils in bodily form who had power no
long time since.
After the dancing the witches begin to couple
with each other; and in this matter the son does
not spare his mother, nor the brother his sister, nor
the father his daughter; but incest is commonly
practised. The Persians also believed that, to be
a competent and complete witch and magician,
a person must be born of a mother by her son.
Of son by mother is a witch conceived,
Catul. XC.
If the foul Persian creed may be believed.
I may safely leave to the imagination the ques­
tion whether or not every other kind of lechery
known to the world is practised at the Sabbat:
what is even more remarkable is that Satan be­
comes an Incubus for the women and a Succubus
for the men. This is a fact to which George and
Antoine Gandillon have testified and, before
them, Antoine Tornier, Jacquema Paget and
several others.
These incests and lecheries bring to my mind the
practices of the Euchites and Gnostics. They
used to meet together on Good F riday evening
with certain women, who were their sisters and
aunts and cousins, and had carnal connexion with
them. Nine months later, they again met at the
same place and, taking the children that had been
born of these incestuous couplings, they cut
them about all over their bodies and collected
their blood in phials, and afterwards burned the
bodies. They then mixed the blood with ashes
and made a sauce, with which they seasoned their
food and drink.
Levit. z.
Mark 9.
Remy,
Demonol.
AN EXAMEN
After having abandoned themselves to such foul
fleshly pleasures the witches fall to feasting and
banqueting. In their banquets they have various
kinds of meats, which differ according to the
locality and the rank of those who are assembled.
In our own district the table was covered with
butter, cheese and flesh; Clauda Jamguillaume,
Jacquema Paget and some others said that there
was a great cauldron on the fire from which they
all helped themselves to meat. Their drink is
sometimes wine and sometimes water: Antoine
Tornier said that she drank wine from a wooden
cup, but the others mentioned nothing but water.
But there is never any salt; for salt is a symbol of
immortality, and is held in bitter abhorrence by
the Devil. Moreover, God commanded that salt
should be mingled with every sacrifice or obla­
tion which is offered to Him; and therefore it is
used in Baptism, which is a sovereign antidote
against the power of the Devil. It may also be
said that, since salt is symbolical of wisdom, God
in His hidden purpose does not allow it to be
used at the Sabbat, so that the witches may know
that all that they do is sheer folly.
Some have written that in the same way they
never use bread; but Christofle of the village of
Aranthon has testified to the contrary, saying
that she had eaten bread, meat and cheese at the
Sabbat.
But all witches are agreed that there is no taste
at all in the dishes of which they eat at the
Sabbat, and that the meat is nothing but horse­
flesh. And nearly all declare that when they leave
the table they are as hungry as when they went
to it. Antide Colas said that the food was cold;
Clauda Vuillat, of the village of Mirebeau, that
OF WITCHES
they ate nothing but wind at the Sabbat; Christofle of Aranthon that it seemed to her as if she
had eaten nothing. All this shows how the Devil
is always a deceiver, since he feeds his own people
with wind instead of solid meat, as if they were
chameleons. I have read that two Counts who
were sorcerers followed his example, and treated
their guests in such a way that they always came
hungry away from their feasts; but Numa Pompilius and Pasetes had already acted in the same
manner. But it must always be believed that, in
most cases, those who eat at the Sabbat know
very well what they are about.
Having finished the banquet, they render to
Satan an account of what they have done since
the last assembly; and those are the most welcome
who have caused the death of the most persons
and cattle, who have cast the most spells of ill­
ness, and spoiled the most fruit—in short, those
who have done the most mischief and wicked­
ness. Others, who have behaved rather more
humanely, are hissed and derided by all, are set
apart to one side, and are generally beaten and ill
treated by their master; and from this arises the
proverb that is common among them—“Do the
worst you can, and the Devil will not know what
to demand of you.”
At this point Satan forms a league with his
followers against Heaven, and plots the ruin
of the human race. He makes these wretched
creatures repeat their renunciation of God,
Chrism and Baptism, and renew the solemn oath
they have taken never to speak of God, the Vir­
gin Mary, or the Saints except in the way of
mockery and derision: he makes them abandon
their share in Paradise and promise that they will,
AN EXAMEN
on the contrary, for ever hold to him as their sole
master and be always faithful to him. He then
urges them to do all the harm that they can, to
afflict their neighbours with illnesses, to kill their
cattle, and to avenge themselves upon their
enemies, saying to them : “Avenge yourselves,
or you shall die.” Also he makes them promise
to waste and spoil the fruits of the earth, and
gives them a certain powder or ointment for that
purpose—or so, at least, he persuades them to
believe. Also he makes them take a solemn oath
not to lay information against each other, and not
to reveal anything that is done amongst them.
This was part of the confession of Jacquema
Paget, and the reason that she would say nothing
against Antoine Tornier; and Judges should pay
nemtwwZ. I. i8. gj-gat attention to this point.
Sixthly, the witches produce hail; but I shall ex­
plain later how this is done.
Sometimes, again, they say Mass at the Sabbat.
But I cannot write without horror of the manner
Raemond,
in which it is Celebrated; for he who is to say the
c. 7. ofgce is clothed in a black cope with no cross upon
it, and after putting the water in the chalice he
turns his back to the altar, and then elevates, in
place of the Host, a round of turnip coloured
black; and then all the witches cry aloud: “Mas­
ter, help us.” And to make Holy Water, the
Devil pisses in a hole in the ground, and the
worshippers are then sprinkled with his urine by
the celebrant with a black asperge.
Finally, Satan takes the form of a goat, consumes
himself in flames, and burns to ashes which the
Badin,
witches collect and secrete for use in the perDenumam. II. 4. f^rmance of their execrable and abominable
designs.
OF WITCHES
Before ending this chapter I should like to point Matth. 4.
out how Satan in every way apes the living God.
For to what purpose does he cause himself to be
worshipped, if not to imitate Him ? And are not
his dances modelled upon those of the ancient
Hebrews, who used to leap as a sign of eagerness
whenever they offered anything to God or sang
His praises ? For thus did David when he played n Sam. 6.
upon the harp before the Ark of the Old Testa­
ment. And further, may we not suppose that this
cursed Serpent consumes and burns himself to
ashes at the Sabbat in imitation of what Jesus Mattb. 26.
Christ did at the Last Supper which He prepared
for His disciples, when He gave them His body "
to eat and His blood to drink? I pass over the
abominable sacrifice which they make; for the
hair stands up on my head when I think of it.
And indeed I should not have mentioned this
matter at all were it not that I hold that we can
draw from it a strong argument to uphold the
reality of the body and blood of J esus Christ at the
Holy Sacrament of the Altar; for if we were in
error concerning this, the Devil would never
have troubled to bring pollution upon the Mass,
but would have allowed us to slip further and
further into a perpetual idolatry. He acts in
the same way with regard to the Holy Relics
which we venerate and adore; for in mockery of
them he causes his disciples to kiss his most
shameful parts.
But, that we may not wander from our subject,
let us now consider whether witches can pro­
duce hail.
AN EXAMEN
Chapter XXII.
IVhether Witches can Produce Hail.
Bocquet, Fran^oise Secretain,
Clauda Jamguillaume, Clauda Jamprost,
Thievenne Paget, Antoine Tornier, Pierre
Gandillon, George Gandillon, Antoine Gandillon, Christofle of the village of Aranthon, and
several others have confessed that they produced
hail at the Sabhat for the purpose of ruining the
fruits of the earth. To do this they beat water
with a wand, as they said, and then threw into
the air or into the water a certain powder which
Satan had given them, and this caused a cloud to
arise which afterwards turned to hail and fell on
the land according to the witches’ wish. So we
may conclude that such persons do produce hail.
This conclusion is substantiated by what we read
of a certain Haakon, Prince of Norway, who
fought his enemies with hailstones: of the
Brachmanes, who could cause the weather to be
either fair or rainy: of one Julian, who caused it
Vair^ de
Incant. II. 14- to rain and brought relief to Mark Antony’s
Roman army suffering from thirst: of certain
Demonol. HI.
priest
sorcerers who did the like for the French
they were beseiged by the Spanish in a
Bodin.,
Demonom. II. town in the Kingdom of Naples: of a King
Henry of Sweden and Finland who had control
of the winds, so that the Finns used to sell them
Olaus^ III. 4. to merchants. And there was also that pirate of
the seas, Oddo, who passed over the water with­
out any ship, and destroyed and sank his enemies’
Acques
OF WITCHES
ships beneath the waves by means of the storms
which he raised with his charms and witchcraft.
I pass by the report that was spread to the effect
that the Norse Princes of Denmark, Sweden and
Norway sent to Queen Elizabeth of England two Florimond de
sorcerers
by their magic
arts caused1 squalls
° rtrt
Antichrist^ c.
to arise which, in the year 1500, scattered in one 26.
moment that great Spanish Armada the like of
which had never been seen before.
The Romans also had certain priests who were
charged with the raising and allaying of thunder
and lightning; and their laws on this matter are
to be found among those of the Twelve Tablets.
Now I have no doubt that Satan can produce
hail; yet there are those who maintain that, when
the Devil foresees the approach of a storm, he Hodin,
deceives witches into the belief that it is they
who cause it; while others have written that paracel. de
Satan keeps hail clouds in certain caverns which Malefic, c. 4.
are, as it were, his magazines, and that he
brings them thence when he is invoked by his
disciples. But granting that this last be true, as
I well believe it may be, it does not therefore
follow that all hailstorms are caused by Satan.
For hail is caused naturally by a mingling of
vapours and exhalations raised into the middle
region of the air. But these matters, like all
other natural phenomena, are at Satan’s com­
mandment. This we fully learn from the Book
of Job, where it is said that when the Devil had
received from God power to afflict and injure
Job, the lightning fell at once from Heaven and
struck his flocks, the winds immediately arose
and smote down his houses and overwhelmed his
sons; in short, the Heavens so rose against him by
Satan’s contrivance that in one moment he lost
Exod, 8.
Fair, de
Incant. II. i
AN EXAMEN
all his wealth, although he was the richest man
in the East.
It will not be inappropriate to quote here in con­
firmation of our contention the frogs and ser­
pents of Pharaoh’s magicians; for there is no
doubt that those animals were created by an apt
application of active to passive principles; this
being the opinion of St. Thomas, which is based
on logical argument, since it is a fact that frogs
are generated by corruption, and there is no
reason why a rotten rod or wand should not be
turned into a serpent; for certain naturalists have
observed that the same result comes from a
woman’s hair hidden in a dung-heap.
There need be no difficulty in the fact that these
matters of which we have spoken were done in an
Instant, for Satan and the demons perform all
their actions with such speed that they seem
miraculous. And when it is considered that
Nature can be assisted and helped forward by
Art, it will not seem strange that Satan can ac­
complish in a moment that which naturally in­
volves the passage of a considerable time; for it
must be remembered that the Alchemists also, if
we may believe them, can by a turn of the hand
create gold, although in the process of Nature
this takes a thousand years.
Again, it is easy to understand that the hail falls
j ust where the witches wish; for Satan’s power in
the air is so great that he can dispose the cloud
just where he wishes. Nevertheless, God does
not always permit this to happen, as I know from
the testimony of Rollande du Vernois, Fran9oise Secretain and other witches, who said that
they had often wished it to hall upon the fruits of
certain villages, but that the hail had fallen upon
O F WIT CHE S
rocks and high mountains without doing any
damage.
Some witches also are poor, and have no wish for
hail, through fear that it may cause a famine and
that they will die; and therefore they contend at
the Sabbat with those who are rich. There was
one burned in this country who witnessed to the
truth of this, saying that when the rich wished to
cause hail and the poor opposed them, they had
to throw dice to see which party should prevail.
Antide Colas of Betoncourt also confessed that
the poor are often at difference with the rich at
the Sabbat over the question of destroying the
crops; and she said that on one occasion the poor
had defeated the rich in the Valley of Saint
Marie, where the Devil, in the shape of a big
black man, made them dance round a sheaf of
corn turned upside down with the ears towards
the ground.
But I have often marvelled at one thing which
Satan does to witches when they assemble to pro­
duce hail ;—he requires them to give him of
their hair. I do not know whether he may be
amorous of women’s hair; but I may say that
there are Theologians who have maintained that
the bad angels are amorous of women’s hair, and Paracel, de
the Suffragan of Treves even says that the Incu- -'^'’^'’/^- c- 7bus devils attach themselves chiefly to women Binsfeld, de
who have beautiful hair; and it is contended that
St. Paul had this in mind when he wrote to the
Corinthians that woman should go with her head I Cor. 11.
covered because of the Angels.
Yet I prefer to believe that witches give their
hair to Satan as pledges of their contract with
him. But the Evil One does not waste this hair;
for he cuts it up small and mingles it with the
ANEXAMEN
exhalations from which he forms hail; and there­
fore it is that we ordinarily find little hairs in this
hail. It may also be that the Devil uses these
hairs to weave the spells and charms which we see
cast upon those who are possessed.
Furthermore, it appears from what we have said
in this chapter that neither the beating of water
nor the powder which they throw in is of any
avail to witches in producing hail; for it is rather
probable that all this is only a symbol of their
pact with Satan. Yet it might be possible for
this powder to possess some virtue or property by
which it could raise up storms. For we know by
experiment that saltpetre mixed with alum en­
genders clouds and causes thunder and lightning
in the air; and Democritus said that if you took
Paracel, de
the head and gullet of the Sancus, a fish that is
Malefic, c. 5. found in Egypt, and burned them with oak wood,
Mattioli m
QJ. Jf
roasted its liver on a red tile, it caused
Dioscor. I, 60. .
It to thunder and rain.
Chapter
XXIII.
Of the Powder Used hy Witches,
He sixth and seventh points of Framboise
Secretain’s confession were that she had
caused the death of Loys Monneretand of several
cows; and this brings me to speak of the calamities
occasioned by witches. For they afflict persons,
cattle and the fruits of the earth; but since the
means they use for such purposes are innumer­
OF WITCHES
able and for the most part unknown, I shall con­
fine myself to treating of the more obvious of
them.
And first there is the powder which they use.
This is sometimes black, sometimes white or of
an ashen colour, and sometimes of some other
colour. They use it when they produce hail, as
we saw in the last chapter; and they also use it
against persons or cattle, to kill them or make
them ill. When Jacques Bocquet and Fran^oise
Secretain wished to kill Loys Monneret they
made her eat a crust of bread dusted with a white
powder which their master had given them.
When Thievenne Paget wanted to be revenged
on Claude Roy she mixed the powder in a cheese
which she made him eat, and he died immedi­
ately afterwards. Michel Udon and Pierre Burgot confessed that their masters, who were
named Moyset and Guillemin, gave them an
ashen powder with which they rubbed their left
arms and hands, and that by this means they
killed every animal that they touched.
There are others who bury some of this powder
under the threshold of a door or in some other
place, and those who pass over that spot are
taken ill. This is what Groz-Jacques did to a
man of Mi-joux, of whom we shall speak later.
Some have thought that the powder thus given
to witches is veritable poison, and others have not
held this opinion. But my own belief is that both
these opinions may be right. For since the Devil
has knowledge of the properties of every herb, it
is easy for him to compound a poison and give it
to his disciples to cause, by this means, the death
or illness of a person or beast. And it is likely that
the bread which Loys Monneret ate was
AN EXAMEN
poisoned. On the other hand, I believe that the
powder in the cheese which Claude Roy ate was
not poison; for several persons ate of the same
cheese, but none was ill except Claude: more­
over, when Thievenne Paget was questioned on
this matter, she said that she had been quite cer­
tain that the cheese would harm no one except
Claude Roy, since it was her Intention to kill him
only. In such a case, then, it is Satan who
secretly procures death or illness; and this he
does by invisibly mingling some venomous juice
with the food of those whom the witch wishes to
injure.
I shall quote two examples to make this more
evident. When Jacques Bocquet was beaten by
the man of Mi-joux and proposed to revenge
himself for the wrong which he thought had been
done him, he put some powder under the thres­
hold of a shed where the man kept seven calves,
five of which belonged to him, and the other two
to one of his neighbours. The seven calves, on
returning from the fields, passed over the thres­
hold, and the five which belonged to the man
died at once, while the other two remained
healthy and unharmed.
Early one morning Antoine Tornier threw some
powder into the fountain of Orcieres, wishing by
this means to kill the cattle of Big Claude Fon­
taine; and she commanded her son Antoine
David not to water his cattle before those of Big
Claude had drunk. Her son, forgetting what his
mother had said, or not thinking about the spell
she had cast, watered his cattle first, became blind
after a few days and remained so till his death;
while neither Big Claude’s cattle nor those of
others which drank at the fountain after Antoine
OFWITCHES
David took the least hurt. Now if the powder
which Antoine Tornier threw into the fountain
of Orcieres had been poison, there is no doubt
that all the cattle which drank there would have
died at once. Similarly it is certain that all seven
of the calves which the man of Mi-joux kept in
his shed would have died if the powder which
Groz-Jacques buried under the threshold had
been poisonous. But we should further consider
that it was impossible for this last powder, being
buried as we have said, to have the power to
penetrate through the earthand reach theanimals
so as to harm them.
Chapter
XXIV.
Of the Unguents and Ointments Used by britches.
Here are unguents and ointments which
witches make, if they have not already been
given to them by Satan; and of these there
are several kinds. An Italian author, in his Porta, ii. 26.
“ Natural Magic,” has described the composi­
tion of some of them; but these ointments are for
the most part inade of the fat of little children
whom the Devil has instigated witches to mur­
der. The witches anoint themselves with it when
they go to the Sabbat, or when they change
themselves into wolves; but I do not see that
these ointments can have any other effect in such
cases than to deaden and stupefy the witches’
senses so that Satan may the more easily have his Dan. Dialog. 4.
will of them. At other times also the Evil Spirit
mixes with it some ingredient which causes deep
such as mandragora or the Memphite
stone and such things, as it happened to the old
women of whom Giovanni Battista Porta speaks,
who after being rubbed with a certain ointment
fell to the earth as dead. Cardan adds that the
ointment made from little children first sends
these old hags to sleep, and afterwards makes
them dream marvellous dreams.
This fat also helped Fran^ois Gaillard of Longchamois to escape from prison, when we had
him in custody in the year 1600 for the murder
of a German stranger. Clauda Coirieres was a
prisoner for witchcraft at the same time, and had
a grease with which she rubbed Francois Gail­
lard’s hands; whereupon the latter at once went
out by a window and jumped on to a rod
stretched along the windows, on which it was
impossible to set foot except by the help of the
devilish arts; from there he climbed on to the
roof and, after having climbed down, fled to the
chateau of Esprel, two leagues from Saint Claude,
where he was retaken. But he has since con­
fessed that as he was fleeing he went at a quite in­
credible speed, and that on escaping from the
prison he seemed to be without any feeling; and
he added that he had never felt the least tired un­
til, to be rid of the grease with which his hands
were anointed, he washed them in the snow
which was plentiful at that time.
I am well aware that many will find this matter
strange for several reasons, but chiefly because it
is thought that Satan has no power over those
who are cast into prison. But let them read what
I have set down in Chapter 46, and then they
will easily be persuaded of the contrary.
Dioscor. r. 115. sleep,
c. 3,6.
De subtil, lib.
AN EXAMEN
OF WITCHES
Another use to which witches put the grease of
which we are speaking is to cause the death, or at
least the illness, of men and beasts. Christofle of
the village of Aranthon confessed that GrozJacques and Fran^oise Secretain made her rub a
certain ointment on the hinder parts of a cow,
and that the cow died the next day. And we read
that in the year 1536 there were at Casale,
town in the Marquisate of Saluzzo, forty men^'"^”',
and women who smeared the door latches with^^”"’""”'
some ointment, as a result of which several
people died. A rumour has reached us here that
the same thing happened a year ago at Geneva;
and this is no new experience to those of that
city, for they suffered in the same way in the
year 1536, when the ointment with which the
doors were smeared caused so great a plague in
the city that the greater part of the inhabitants
died of it. But we need not go so far afield, for
let us take what happened in this town of Saint
Claude in the year 1564. There was a man of
Orgelet, whom I shall not name, who put the
plague in twenty-five houses by cunningly
smearing with a grease, which he carried in a box,
some spoons which belonged to the masters of the
houses; but in another box he carried an antidote
which he used every morning to protect and
guard himself against the evil which he brought
to others. He was executed for it at Annecy,
where he confessed, among other things, what
I have just said, and especially repented of hav­
ing caused the death of the mistress of his own
house. I have the story from the Sieur Millet,
who was then Syndic and Magistrate at Saint
Claude and witnessed his trial. There can, then,
be no doubt that such ointments are actual poison.
AN EXAMEN
But in connexion with the statement we have
just made, that witches sometimes cause the
plague by means of their ointments, I shall add
that they most usually poison and infect the air
and the water. We have seen how Antoine Tornier meant to poison the fountain of Orcieres so as
Ritil. ad Feme’,, to kill Big Claude Fontaine and his cattle. The
^caus^U "z
great plague described by Thucydides, which so
miserably afflicted Greece, was caused, according
to Aratus, by the Peloponnesians poisoning several
Fulgos. IX. II. wells in the district of the Piraeus. And when
the son of Philip the Fair was reigning in France
there were several lepers in the countries of
Languedoc and Dauphine, who surreptitiously
bathed in the springs and so infected them that
in a short time all the people of those countries
were stained with the same disease; and there­
fore those first lepers were burned alive.
IF. i8.
And as for the air, Nicephorus Calixtus re­
counts that the Persian magicians, in order to
bring our religion into bad repute, caused an
evil and disgusting stench to emanate from the
de Divinat.
place where Christians were. And St. Augustine
says: “Sorcerers have the power to transmit
diseases, and to corrupt and infect the air.”
In either case it is easy for them to achieve their
object. For what can be easier than to poison
the water supply? And if the air is sometimes
corrupted by the odour from a dung-heap so as
to cause a plague throughout a whole district,
why should we not believe that witches can in­
fect it by the heavy and loathsome stenches
which they draw from a poison that they know
how to compose with the help of their master?
We read, in fact, that after the soldiers of Mar­
cus Avidius Cassius, Mark Antony’s lieutenant.
OF WITCHES
had opened a chest found in the temple of Apollo Cari. de
at Selancia, a town of Babylon, the air which
came from it was so poisonous that it wasted the
whole country with the pestilence; and being
brought from there to Greece, and from Greece
to Rome, it provoked such a plague that almost
a third of the human race died of it.
While I am treating of this subject, I wish to
set down the strange story of one of the so-called
Reformed Religion, who was executed at Nyon
not fifteen months ago. This man was returning
from Berne in a state of despair because his only
brother had caused him to lose the greater part of
his goods in a lawsuit. The Devil appeared to
him in the shape of a big black man, and said to
him that, if he would give himself to him, he
would cause him not only to recover his goods,
but also to gain possession of all his brother’s
goods, and told him how to proceed so as to
secure such a result. “ Here is a box,” he said,
“in which there is some grease. Take it, and go
to your brother, and beg him to settle matters
with you in return for a sum of money. Invite
him to dinner, and mix some of this grease in his
broth, and you will see him die in a few days.
As he has two sons, you will be appointed their
guardian. You will send the older to school, and
keep the younger in your house and in like man­
ner make him eat of this grease, and he will die
like his father. Then you will bring back the
elder son and do to him as you did the younger;
and so you will be left master of all their goods as
well as of your own, for they will leave no nearer
kin than yourself to succeed them.” The poor
man, hearing this speech and knowing that he
who spoke to him was the Devil (for he had so
AN EXAMEN
declared himself}, refused to take the box or to
give himself to him. The Devil pressed him, and
said to him for the last time: “See, here is the
box. When you have done what I have told you,
you will dedicate yourself to me.” And he
placed the box on a stone and disappeared. The
poor man was for a long time troubled in spirit,
but in the end he took the box, and then followed
Satan’s advice so well that in less than a year he
caused the death of his brother and his two
nephews, and so succeeded to all their property.
But he did not long enjoy his wealth, for Satan
played him a trick after his own heart. He at
once began to urge him to dedicate himself to
him; and as the man had no wish to do so, he so
tormented and beat him that his cries reached the
ears of his neighbours, and then those of the
Judge. He was then seized and, after he had
confessed, was executed. This story teaches us
among other things how the Devil provides his
disciples with greases and ointments to cause the
death of people. This was also confessed by
Jeanne Platet, otherwise known as la Berche;
for she said that, in order to kill persons and
beasts, she touched them with her hand, which
she had previously anointed with a grease given
her by her master. And why should we not give
credit to this, seeing that the Barbarians of old
used to poison their arrows with toxicum and the
Napellus, as we may read in the work of Pietro
Andrea Mattioli.
OF WITCHES
Chapter
If^hether Witches Kill by their Blowings and their
Breaths.
hirdly, witches cause death and affliction
by their blowings and their breath; and
Clauda Gaillard, called la Fribolette, will serve
as witness to the truth of this. For meeting
Clauda Perrier in the church of Ebouchoux, she
breathed upon her, and the woman was at once
stricken with an illness and was made impotent
and died after having lingered for a year in
poverty and weakness. And again, because
Marie Perrier had once refused her alms, she
blew strongly upon her so that Marie fell to the
earth and, being with difficulty raised up, was
ill for some days, until her nephew Pierre Perrier Mall. Malefic.
threatened the witch. Sprenger also recounts ’• “•
that a witch of the diocese of Constance breathed
upon a man and so afflicted him with leprosy all
over his body that he died soon after ; he has
many other examples of this sort of thing, to
which the reader may refer. Now there are Dan. Point 4.
some who think that, when witches do this sort
of offence, they have in their mouth some evil
drug or root by the strength and reek of which
they cast the spell. And in my opinion this is
possible, and I do not think it needful to linger
over Bodin’s argument that the witches would,
in that case, be the first to die; for they have the
antidote and countercharm to protect them
VI. 5.
ANEXAMEN
against their drugs and poisons, as was the case
with Mithridates, who, because of the precau­
tionary drugs which he had before taken, could
not find any poison that would kill him; and the
King Nicomedes also used an antidote whenever
he went to any place where he suspected poison;
and this countercharm has been described by
Mattioli in his notes upon Dioscorides.
And certainly it is necessary that they who com­
pound the poisons should have drugs to protect
themselves from them. Here I may recount
what Nicolas Nicole says of a certain Duke who
knew the use of a poison so subtle that, if it were
thrown on burning coals, the smoke of it would
kill all who were in the room except himself,
who was protected by a certain antidote which
he took beforehand. And we spoke in the last
chapter of a man of Orgelet who carried two
boxes, one filled with an ointment with which
he spread the plague, the other of an antidote
which he used every morning to safeguard him­
self against the malady: this story serves as a
corroboration of my contention.
Nevertheless I hold that in most cases witches
have no drug or herbs in their mouths, but that
Satan alone causes the death or sickness in the
secret manner which we have before described.
OF WITCHES
Chapter
XXVI.
Whether Witches Afflict with Words.
witches cause harm and mis- Raemmi,
chief by their words. A Jew named Zam- ^"tubrut, 26.
bares by uttering certain words made a bull fall
stark dead at the feet of St. Sylvester in the time
of Constantine the Great. Nider tells that he
saw a witch who, by pronouncing a single word,
caused people to die suddenly; and he tells also
that he likewise saw another who, with one word
made her neighbour’s chin turn upside down.
When Fran^oise Secretain wished to kill certain
beasts, she struck them with a wand, saying
these words; “I touch thee to kill thee,”etc. I
have seen many other witches who did likewise.
Moreover, we find in Homer that Circe changed
the companions of Ulysses into swine by the
power of words.
ourthly,
Circe did with her chants accursed and strange
The wretched comrades of Ulysses change.
And Aristophanes writes that the witches of
Thessaly performed marvellous things by their
words;
Vile witches can with magic utterance
Free wretched souls of all the ills that chance;
Or charm the remnants of their wits away
From those who dote on loving all the day;
Or stay a river in its onward flowing
So as to set its waters backward going.
ANEXAMEN
And Ovid, in his “Amores”:
Charms change corn to grass and make it die;
By charms are running springs and fountains dry.
By charms mast falls from oaks, from vines
grapes fall.
And fruit from trees when there’s no wind at all.
Why might not then my sinews be enchanted.
And I grow faint as with some spirit haunted ?
And Vergil says:
Poisonous snakes burst at a witch’s chant.
And Lucan:
With no more venom than a magic song
They turn man’s sounder judgment out head­
long.
Eel. Elii. -j-j
Touching this matter the Romans made a
law: “That he who hath bewitched the fruits of
the earth shall be punished; and that it shall not
be lawful for any person soever to remove the
corn from one man’s field to another by enchant­
ment.” We know the verses which make it
impossible to churn butter; and for those who
“tie the points”(causing sexual impotence and
frigidity) Vergil says:
Three strands of divers colours, in three knots
Knot them; and say: “Here bind I Venus’
fetters.”
The Canon also allows that witches can cause
26. y. 5. Jnjm-y by their mere words.
But now are we to account for the fact that
even when they praise and compliment you, they
injure you? Yet this is no new thing; for there
Nee mirtim. 8.
OF WITCHES
were formerly in Africa and Italy certain families
which, by praising people, caused them to die,
thereby proving themselves altogether devilish.
Yet other strange matters do they accomplish by
their uttered spells. To go to the Sabbat, they
place a staff between their legs and say these
words: l-Khite staff. Hack staff, etc. The Ephe­
sians, by means of certain magic words which
they used, brought all their undertakings to a
successful issue. Pythagoras enchanted the eagle •
with his words. It was by the force of her words
that Medea seized the moon from the sky and
brought it down to the earth. The great
magician Mahomet did likewise, and put the
moon in his sleeve: at least he himself wrote that El-pburkan.
he did so.
Yet, in spite of all this, who will believe that
mere words have the power to hurt? For my
part I am of opinion that they are no more than
a symbol of the pact between the witch and
Satan; for it is certain that words have no other
purpose than to denote the thing for which they
were ordained and to express the passions of the
soul and the affections of the spirit. Besides, if
words had the power to kill, they would do so
when uttered by anyone who was not a witch.
And again, of what possible effect could be the
strange unknown words used by witches: such
as Gaber siloc fandu, which they say when they
wish to prevent a chicken, whose head has been
pierced with a knife, from dying? Or Malaton
malatas dinor, which they use to prevent one
from shooting with an arquebus? There are
countless others which I purposely omit. I have
the same opinion of the numbers and characters
which have been only too curiously quoted by
AN EXAMEN
certain authors, even by Paracelsus in his
Celestial Medicine, who, as well as Pico,
Prince of Mirandola, is to be censured for saying
that barbaric and meaningless words have more
magic power than those which are understood.
For in such cases it is Satan who secretly causes
death or casts the evil spell. And if we find it
written that Medea and Mahomet brought the
moon down from the sky, we must not take
this for the truth; but rather we should think
that these witches cast a glamour over peoples’
eyes and made them see what was not. For
Satan and his witches are wont to act in this way,
as we have remarked in another place.
Chapter XXVII.
Whether Witches Afflict with Looking.
ifthly, witches cause injury by their look­
ing. Sprenger observes that little children are
II. I. c. 12.
more liable to be hurt in this way than are
people; and he adds further that witches, by
merely looking at them, can corrupt and soften
the hearts of their judges. Cattle also are
subject to this evil;
Verg. Eclog.
Some evil eye has witched my lambs.
It is so also with the crops and trees. And this
should not seem strange, seeing that there were
formerly families in Africa which caused death
by their looking. And we read the same of cer­
OF WITCHES
tain tribes about Pontus, Scythia, Transylvania, Fair, de
and Muscovy. Again, Philostratus in his life of
II- 9Apollonius mentions a certain Saturnius
Ephesus who, by his mere looking, killed all
those at whom he looked. Further, we read that
the witch Eriphile looked at a beast, and that
soon afterwards some evil came to the beast. And
the proverb which the Italians keep to this day.
Di gratia non gli diate mal d'ockio, shows that
the same practice was rife in Italy. Similarly
there are animals which kill by their looking,
such as the Basilisk, and the serpent Catoblepas
which lives about the spring Nlgris in Ethiopia,
which many believe to be the source of the Nile.
There are other animals which, by looking at a
man, take away his speech; such as the wolf.
Moeris was first beheld by wolves.
Notwithstanding this, I have never believed
that witches had the power to cause injury by
their looking. For whence should such power
come to them? Either it must be born with
them, or it must be acquired by art. Now the
former alternative is impossible; for it cannot be
that God, who created man to be a civilised
animal, would have endowed him with a deadly
power to kill those with whom he consorted. I
could almost brand such a belief as a detestable
impiety, seeing how strictly the Law of God
punishes a murderer. Also it should be con­
sidered that, if witches were born with this
power of killing, all indifferently at whom they
looked would die; but this is not the case.
And if this power is acquired by art, I should like
to be shown of what nature it is in witches;
whether it consists in some poison emanating
Verg. Eclog.
AN EXAMEN
from them, or whether it is due to something
else. But how would they not themselves be
hurt by the poison which they emanated? Or
how comes it that the force of the poison dwells
in their eyes only, and that it hurts only the
enemies of the witches, and not all sorts of people
indifferently ? Nothing is more certain than
that, in such cases, it is Satan who kills or causes
'•yuryAnd if there have been families in Africa and
Italy and Scythia and elsewhere which claimed
to be able to kill by their looking, who can doubt
that such people were witches and that Satan
performed the murders which they wished to
commit? We should think the same of the
shepherd who bewitched the lambs in Vergil,
and of those who injure the crops and the trees
by looking at them.
Touching their effect on a Judge, I may well
believe that a witch can, by looking at him,
soften his heart by causing him to feel pity and
compassion for her misery. For since the eyes
are the messengers of the soul, they tell the Judge
the inner torments and perplexity which the
witch suffers. But I cannot be persuaded that a
Judge can be corrupted by this means, for the
eyes have no power to bribe. And of this I am
the more assured, since it has been proved that
a witch can in no way injure the Officers of
Justice; for Justice comes directly from God,
and can by no means be confounded.
Passing to the matter of the Basilisk and the ser­
pent Catoblepas, I shall say that the most
learned scholars hold what has been written of
them to be a fable. And Mattioli has asked how
it has been possible to examine these serpents
OF WITCHES
without dying, seeing that they are very small, Fair, ie
and that Catoblepas stands with half its body i^cant. II. 9.
upright the better to Infect the air and those who Ditacor. VI. 55.
look at it from near by? For this purpose it
would be necessary to have the power to charm
them, as did the witch of the town of Thene in
Thessaly whom Aristotle mentions.
And even if that which is reported of these
animals were true, we should have no warrant to
draw a parallel between them and mankind. The
Basilisk and the Catoblepas were born with such
poison as to be able to kill with their looking,
just as we know that serpents kill with their
teeth, and scorpions with their tails. They are
animals which God has placed in the world to
punish men, for He avenges Himself in count­
less ways. But man is not born in the same
manner. And as for wolves, there are those who
flatly deny what has been said of them; and in Scal.RiDla
any case we should hold the same opinion of Fernel. II.
them as of the Basilisk, the Catoblepas, the
Scorpion and the Serpent. Yet I shall always
rather believe that the fright which a man
experiences on suddenly seeing a wolf freezes his
limbs and nerves so that his voice becomes a
hoarse whisper. Cardan says that there is some- De
thing inimical to man in the eyes of a wolf, which <8.
prevents his breathing, and therefore his speech.
AN EXAMEN
Chapter XXVIII.
How Witches Afflict with the Hand.
IXTHLY, witches cause hurt and injury by a
touch of the hand. I have seen a witch cast
an evil spell upon a man by pulling him three
times by his coat. Another time, on passing a
herd of cattle, she struck a calf on the flank with
her hand and the calf died a few days later; and
when they came to skin it they had great diffi­
culty in separating the hide from the flesh at the
place where it had been touched, and also they
found the imprint of a hand marked upon the
same place.
Jeanne Platet confessed that, in order to cause
the death of persons or cattle, she used to rub her
hands with an ointment given her by the Devil.
Similarly Michel Udon and Pierre Burgot con­
fessed that they rubbed their left arms and hands
with a certain powdered ash, and that when they
then touched an animal they caused it to die.
Moreover, the Inquisitors have written that if
a Judge lets himself be touched on the bare arm
and hand by the witch, he thereby becomes her
advocate.
But whatever may be said, I do not believe that
the witch can cause injury simply by her hand;
but that if he who has been touched becomes ill,
it is undoubtedly Satan who strikes the blow.
And when a witch anoints his hand, it may still
be that Satan plays his part in the work: or else
OF WITCHES
the ointment may be veritable poison which on
being applied to the skin penetrates it and passes
into the inner parts of the person or beast, which
is thus killed or made ill by the witch. For
doctors write that poisons and venom need not
necessarily be taken through the mouth, but can /rw, de
be applied externally; and this can be seen any praestig. ill.
day in the foam of a rabid dog, for if it falls upon
a wound or any place from which the skin has
dt Subbeen rubbed off, it generally causes death. The
herb Scilla is similarly injurious when rubbed
against the skin: and if a man hold Cantharides
in his hand it constrains him to piss blood.
The difficulty lies in the question whether the
witch can protect himself from the poison of the
ointment with which he anoints himself But if
the reader will refer to Chapter 25 he will find
that this may easily be done. Similarly, in
Chapters 27 and 37 he will find the answer to
what I have said concerning Officers of Justice.
Chapter
XXIX.
How IHitches Afflict with a Wand.
eventhly, witches cause injury by striking
with a wand. Fran^oise Secretain and Thievenne Paget confessed that they had killed
several animals, both cows and horses, by striking
them with a wand and uttering certain words.
Cardan also tells that he saw at Pavia a witch who
caused a child to die by gently touching its back
AN EXAMEN
with a rod. But it seems to me that there is no
difference between this touching with a wand
and the touch with the hand of which we have
just spoken.
Chapter
Of the Images Used by Witches.
I. multi de
malefic. C. &
^GrUland^de'
Sortileg. j. 5.
num. 9.
Amor. III. 6.
Boot. lib. II.
witches make use of cerwaxen images, which they melt and
P'erce, and so cause their enemies to pine away
even as the images waste away. And this agrees
with what has been written of Meleager, who
was burned commensurately with the burning of
the fatal brand by the witch Althea. And we
have Ovid as our authority that Medea used this
practice.
TTUrthermore,
P tain
The waxen likeness of her absent foes
She pierced and injured with a hundred blows.
Wier, de
And again;
■braestie. IV. 9.
Images of wax with magic art
She made, and killed them, piercing to the heart.
Duffus, King of Scotland, was in this manner
afflicted for a long time, until the witches who
were melting his image were found in the town
of Forres in Moravia. It is believed that
Charles IX of France, in whose reign the slaying
of Huguenots on St. Bartholomew took place,
died through the means of such an image. Many
OF WITCHES
similar stories are told. One witch will even £odin,
harm another by means of a certain image made
from molten lead, as is often found in Germany,
as I have remarked elsewhere. They make
images, too, so as to hang their companions by
the hair. There are other images made in order
to gain the love of a woman. Most of these
images are mentioned by Plato in the eleventh
book of his “ Laws.” Our own witches for the
most part have their images baptised. But who
will doubt that it is Satan alone who works in
these cases ? for it is not possible for a witch, by
means of his images, to kill a man who is two
hundred leagues distant from him.
Similarly it is Satan who operated in the case of
the execrable witch who on Good Friday
pierced the Crucifix with his arrows, and was
thus enabled to kill every day three men, pro­
vided that he had seen and recognised them.
Later we shall see that these wretches generally
use images when they wish to perform an act
of healing.
The thing would be easier to believe if they sent
some gift; for if the gift were poisoned it could
injure its recipient, as did the shirt which Medea
sent to Jason’s new wife, Creusa: for as soon as
Creusa had put on this shirt her body began to
burn all over so that she died. Hercules burned
in the same manner. I have in our prison a
woman charged with almost the same thing; for
she gave a neighbouring woman a shirt as a gift,
and as soon as the woman put it on she began to
feel ill.
AN EXAMEN
Chapter XXXI.
How JHidwives, if they are Witches, Kill the
Children they Deliver.
T N the ninth place, those midwives and wise
Bodin,
women who are witches are in the habit of
offering to Satan the little children which they
deliver, and then of killing them, before they
have been baptised, by thrusting a large pin into
their brains. There have been those who have
sprenger, II.
Confessed to having killed more than forty
'• ’3children in this way.
They do even worse; for they kill them while
they are yet in their mothers’ wombs. This
practice is common to all witches, as we find in
Nider, who writes that one named Stadlin in the
Diocese of Lausanne confessed that he had killed
seven children in their mothers’ womb by means
of an animal which he had buried under the
threshold of the house. Parent witches do not
spare even their own children; for we read of a
Bodin,
Baron of Rays who, after having confessed to the
Cfwomm. II. 5. niurder of eight children, added that he wished to
kill in its mother’s womb the ninth, which was
his own son, and to sacrifice it to the Devil.
I do not doubt that this is done at the suggestion
of the Devil; for he generally demands their
children from parents who are witches, as he did
from Groz-Jacques, from whom he demanded
one of his daughters. Pierre Vuillermoz also
OFWITCHES
deposed that, when he was only eight years old,
his father Guillaume Vuillermoz took him to
the Sabbat. Claude and Clauda Charloz and
Perrenette Molard likewise said that when they
were very young they were taken to the Sabbat
by Clauda Gindre, their maternal grandmother.
It is probable that these children had been
dedicated to Satan by Guillaume Vuillermoz
and Clauda Gindre; yet it is true that they have
not been convicted of any act of witchcraft.
Here I cannot refrain from reprimanding par­
ents who, through waiting for suitable god­
parents, leave their children so long unbaptised.
For it is evident from what I have said in what
danger these children are until they have received
this Holy Sacrament; seeing that, if through the
ministry of a witch they die before baptism, they
are eternally deprived of the sight and glory of
God, which is the greatest joy with which the
souls of the blessed are rewarded.
Finally, witches change themselves into wolves,
and in this shape kill and eat both men and
beasts. But of this I shall more fittingly speak
elsewhere.
Chapter XXXII.
By what Ills Witches Particularly Afflict People.
Et us now examine by what ills witches
afflict mankind particularly. I maintain that
they afflict people with all kinds of ills of the
stomach and the head and the feet, with cholic,
AN EXAMEN
paralysis, apoplexy, leprosy, epilepsy, dropsy,
strangury, etc. And this they do easily with the
help of Satan, who secretly causes persons to
swallow certain poisons and drugs; or perhaps
the witches themselves mix them with their food
and drink. And according to the composition of
Sprenger^ II,
the poison it will spread over the whole body or
I. I.
attack only one member; for, says Cardan, there
de Subtil,
are poisons which do not cause death, but con­
tinually attack one of the victims’ members.
Again, according to Theophrastus, the poison
may take two, three, or six months to prepare,
Mattioli,
fref. to Book 6 and the illness of him who is bewitched will con­
of Diosc.
tinue for a longer or shorter time according to the
time taken to collect the ingredients of the drug.
Witches very frequently dry up the milk of
nurses, apparently by making them swallow a
certain powder which they throw in their broth,
Dan. ibid.
unless it is Satan himself who plays this trick.
Bodin,
Jannette Gresson, wife of Jean Liegeard des
Demonom. 11^. Granges, who was burned at Dole some thirty
5years ago, in this way deprived of her milk, al­
though it was very abundant, Clauda, the widow
of the late Etienne Goguel, and Nicole
Clauderey of Mossans.
They also cause a man’s virile member to dis­
appear and be concealed, and then to reappear at
their own pleasure. This is widely practised in
Germany.
ier, de
At times also they prevent carnal copulation be­
Praestig, Ill.
tween
a man and a woman by relaxing the nerves
and depriving the member of rigidity; at other
Sprenger, II.
times they prevent procreation by turning aside
Can. Si per
or blocking up theseminal ducts so that the semen
sortilegias, 33. does not reach the generative cells. And they
?• 8hold a married couple thus bound for as long as it
Dan, the yd
point.
OF WITCHES
pleases them, sowing ten thousand other seeds of
discord between them besides. And this binding
spell of impotence is no new thing; for St.
Augustine and the Canons speak of it, and,
before them, Vergil:
Three strands of divers colours, in three knots
Knot them; and say: “Here bind I Venus’
fetters.”
And Ovid:
Is not my body languishing with poison ?
And elsewhere:
Why might not then my sinews be enchanted.
And I grow faint as with some spirit haunted ?
This practice is to-day more common than ever.
For even children meddle with charms for tying
the points—a thing which deserves exemplary
punishment; for, rightly understood, such charms
are of no avail, since it is Satan who is working
in such a case, relying merely upon the witch’s
consent.
Furthermore, witches cause him whom they
have bewitched to void, sometimes from the
mouth and sometimes from the bottom parts,
needles, hairs, iron tools, stones and papers.
There are several examples of this; for I myself
have seen an infinite number of such articles,
among other things stones and balls and locks of
hair and pigs’ bristles. But I will content myself
with a single example which I have from a
gentleman of this country who may be believed.
Some time ago one of his sons, a boy of fifteen or
sixteen, voided by the penis five or six paper notes
and some peas. The notes were covered with
HI- 7-
AN EXAMEN
Strange characters and the peas were wrapped in
hair. The boy told his father that his school­
master was in the habit of stretching himself
upon his body, placing his mouth on the boy’s
mouth, which he made him open, and muttering
into it I know not what words. It appears from
this that the pupil had been bewitched by his
master.
Nevertheless the more curious will be in some
perplexity as to whether these matters are
imaginary or not. For some have maintained
that they are not natural articles which appear in
Wier, de
such shapes; while others have said that Satan
fraestig. 111. brings these things from elsewhere. Cardan
Grilland de
writes that all this is a mere glamour and illusion.
Sortileg. q. 3.
Yet I would have it known that the peas and the
««m. 28.
notes of which we have spoken are still in existgo.
ence, although it is eight years since the thing
happened; and this serves to refute the dictum of
Paul Grilland, who holds that the matters which
come from the bodies of those who are be­
witched melt and dissolve in a short time.
I will go further, and say that I believe that these
matters most often do really proceed from the
bodies of the bewitched, even if they are stones,
balls of hair, or other such things. For if it is
Mattieli,
true that stones and gravel grow naturally in the
Owfcor. Itb. bladder and kidneys from heavy and sluggish
51 «/<’■)•
humours, and in the course of time are baked
and hardened by the heat of the body; and if the
retention of the urine is a sufficient cause of the
growth of the stone; why should we find it
strange for a stone to be engendered in the body
of a bewitched person through the agency of
Satan, seeing that the Evil One can cause not
only retention of urine but as many humours and
OF WITCHES
fevers of the body as he pleases ? And as for the
balls of hair, the Devil causes the victim to swal­
low these hairs separately; and then, since he can
insinuate himself into all parts of the body, he
makes with them such balls and tresses inside the
body.
But with regard to other matters which the body
is not capable of receiving, such as knives, iron
tools, and nails, I have no doubt that the Devil
brings them from elsewhere and mingles them
with that which the bewitched person vomits or
voids, so skilfully that it appears to us that they
come from the person’s body.
These matters are also found on bed mattresses,
or elsewhere in some corner of the house, or
under the threshold of the door. Some say that
these are charms, sortileges, or magic spells, and
will not be satisfied until they are found, holding
that until then the illness or devil will not leave
the bewitched person. But although I would not
deny that it is well done to search for such
matters, and chiefly to purge the sick man of
them, yet I confidently assert that it is super­
stition to believe that the patient cannot be
healed if they are not found. And I prove this by
the example of St. Hilarion, who, having a pos­
sessed girl in hand, would not allow anyone to
remove the blade which a young man had, at the
suggestion of Satan, buried under the threshold
of a door, although the Devil cried out that he
would not depart until this blade was removed;
and yet the girl did not fail to be delivered.
I would add here that it is a great sign that the
person is bewitched when he thus voids iron
tools, stones, hairs and other such matters. So
is it also when a person languishes to death. For
AN EXAMEN
v/e. see that those who are bewitched pine and
waste away little by little, remaining in such a
state for a long time before they die. Such was
the case with Clauda Perrier, Mathieu Andrey
and several others, as we have remarked else­
where. Yet I would not conclude from that that
witches do not sometimes cause men to die sud­
denly; but I speak of what usually happens.
Paul Grillandy Finally, witches are the more to be feared in that
de Soriileg. q.
they come by night and find people in their
3. nu. & q. houses or their beds, being guided by their
8. I.
Master, who opens and shuts doors for them so
Demonol, I, 4. secretly that it may not be guarded against, and
Binsfeldy t. 4.
for the most part even makes them invisible.
q, 8., de Male­
fic. C,
Chapter XXXIII.
How Witches Afflict the Herds.
Hat we have said in the foregoing chap­
ters principally concerns mankind; but
we must to some extent treat in particular of
Cattle, the Crops, and the Fruits of the earth.
Let us start, then, with Cattle
Witches have many and various ways of injuring
cattle, and these methods are in some part the
same as those of which we have already spoken.
For with a powder, an ointment, a glance of the
eye, a word, a touch with the hand or a wand,
they will make the beast ill or cause it to die; and
of this we have recounted several examples in
Chapters 23, 24 and the following chapters.
OF WITCHES
At other times they deprive the animal of milk;
and this they do with the help of Satan by giving
it certain noxious herbs to eat, which dry up and
keep back its milk. Or else, at the moment when
the animal begins to give milk, Satan takes it
from its teat. Also they cause the milk of one
cow to go into the udder of another, as it is said.
Clauda Vernier, known as la Montagne, wife of
Pierre Vernier, known as Billet des Granges,
who was burned at Dole about thirty years ago,
confessed that she used to cause the milk of her
neighbour’s cows to flow in this way into the
udders of her own. And this is why Antoine
Tornier, when she was threatening Jacquema
Paget, said that her cows were yielding twice as
much milk as her own. But we can only believe
that in this case Satan, in the manner we have
said, causes one of the cows to lose its milk, and
on the contrary causes that of the other to in­
crease twofold by the means of certain beneficial
herbs which he gives it to eat, such as Cytisus
and other such. Or else he takes the milk from
one cow, and when the other is being milked he
comes with his milk, which he pours so skilfully
into the pail that it appears to come from the
second cow’s teats.
For such is commonly his practice in the matter
of wine according to Sprenger, who says that
once the bottles of a witch, which were empty,
became full of wine in a moment; for it is likely
that Satan had taken that wine from some cellar
to fill the bottles with it.
Here I must recount a strange and devilish
remedy used by Christine, the chambermaid of
Theodore Lopers, Vicar of the Hospital of
Kreveld, when three of her cows had lost their
ANEXAMEN
milk. She sent them in front of the house of the
woman whom she suspected of having caused the
loss of their milk, having first bidden them to go
in the name of, etc.; and when they were in
front of the house they remained there for some
time lowing continually, and then came back
with their milk restored.
Now there is one sign, among others, by which it
mav be known whether an animal has been be­
witched, namely, when it dies in a state of frenzy.
This is what happened to a hen belonging to
Rollande du Vernois: for this woman had two
hens, and one day she refused Groz-Jacques
Bocquet an egg; whereupon Groz-Jacques,
meaning to kill her hens, threw them some
crumbs of bread which he had dusted with
a powder; and when they had eaten them,
the two hens at once died. But one of them,
before dying, threw itself to the ground and
leaped and climbed against the walls in such
a way that it was thought to be mad. The
same thing happened to several horses which
Antoine Tornier and Clauda Coirieres had be­
witched. Vegece also says that a bewi tched an imal
issad and heavy, and that it grows thin and falls ill
if it be not helped by natural remedies.
OF WITCHES
Chapter XXXIV.
How Witches do Hurt to the Fruits of the Earth.
Itches also do hurt to the fruits of the
earth in several ways. For they raise
hailstorms and tempests to ruin them when
they have ripened, as we have already said.
Secondly, with the help of Satan they cause can- St. Augusti.
kerworms, rats and other vermin to waste and
devour the fruit: such vermin being either
created by Satan or brought from elsewhere; for & q. 9. em­
it is certain that devils can bring animals to4gether wherever they please.
Thirdly, at the prayer of witches Satan procures
the loss and waste of the two principal causes of
the fertilisation of the soil and its preservation in
its natural condition, namely, moisture and heat.
Lastly, it is said that witches, with the help of
their Master, strip the fruit from one field and
cause it to be transferred to another. The Ger­
mans Hoppo and Stadlin, according to Sprenger, ii. 1.15.
boasted of having done this. And Pliny records XVUI. 6.
that Caius Furius was formerly brought to trial
for the same reason. Vergil himself saw it
practised:
I saw the crops pass over from one field
To another.
And long before him the law of the Twelve
Tables punished such witches with death: Let
him who hath bewitched the fruits of the earth be
^clog. 8.
ANEXAMEN
put to death; neither shall it he lawful for a man
to transfer the corn from one field to another. It
is my opinion that this is done, not by Satan
transporting the corn from one field to another,
but by his changing the fields themselves. For it
Vair, ie
is the opinion of the Theologians that the devils
Incaut. Ill- I- are able to move all inferior bodies; and therefore
it cannot be any more difficult for Satan to trans­
port a field from one place to another than it is
for him to remove a mountain or a rock. For we
read that there are whole lands and countries
which have been transported from their place by
the agency of the Devil and his magic, so that
rocks which were facing to the north have in an
AnticMst, c.
instant been turned towards the south. This I
26, n. 2.
take from Florimond de Raemond.
Chapter
XXXV.
Whether Witches are jihle to Heal.
E have treated of the hurts which witches
do to man and beast. Let us now consider
whether they are able also to heal. It appears
they are able, since we have many examples to
prove it. The Emperor Hadrian was by witch­
craft cured of a dropsy into which he had fallen,
as Dion relates in his Life. We read that Apol­
lonius of Tyana gave sight to the blind and made
the lame to walk, and that he delivered the town
of Ephesus from a great pestilence which was
afflicting it. Marie Perrier was restored to
OFWITCHES
health after her nephew Pierre Perrier had
threatened Clauda Gaillard, who was suspected
of having cast the spell upon her. Jacques Bocquet, one of the great witches of his time, told
Fran^oise Secretain that she would heal Loyse
Maillat, into whose body she had sent five devils,
if she gave her some bread which she had had
from Loyse’s house and had kept for three days.
I have seen another woman who healed several
kinds of sickness by her prayers; but I noticed
that all these prayers were full of superstition
and impiety. For example, if a horse had been
stung, she would say certain words in the form of
a prayer, and would plant in the ground a nail
which she would not draw out again; but what
virtue could there be in a nail so planted ? I find
that the Romans, who were as superstitious as Vair, de
any nation in the world, when they wished to
1- 4drive away the plague used to fix a nail into a
stone on the right-hand side of the temple of
Jupiter, and that they did the same as a remedy
against charms and when any faction arose be­
tween the citizens. There are also others who, Wier, de
in order to prevail over their enemies in battle,
9drive a nail into a tree.
When this woman of whom I speak wished to
still a storm or tempest, she first came out of her
house muttering I know not what between her
teeth, and then went forward little by little,
never taking the least step backward; for, she
said, she must not do so on pain of her life. Then
she gave to some poor person a just alms, that is
to say, as much bread as the poor person could
eat at one meal; and to Satan she gave the largest
pine in the neighbouring forest. In thus sacrific­
ing to Satan she did neither more nor less than
AN EXAMEN
the ancients, who used to sacrifice to him in the
name of Hercules Canopianus in order to rid
themselves of lice, and in the name of Acor
Cyrenaicus to free themselves of flies, and in the
name of Apollo Parnopianus that they might not
be plagued with rats. The Romans also used to
sacrifice to Fever, and the Indians to the Evil
Spirit, so that they might not be invisible and
harmful to them.
When this woman said the prayer for the foaling
of horses, she raised herself upon her right hand
and usually turned herself towards the church.
And when she came to heal certain cows, before
saying her prayer she used to ask the owner of
the animals for bread and salt; but she never
made the cows eat of either the bread or the salt.
She used to practise countless other similar
prayers.
A neighbour of mine was cured in this super­
stitious manner by an old woman who was sus­
pected of being a witch. He was in his cradle
taken with a very strange illness; for he had the
hiccups so badly that at each spasm (and these
were almost continuous) he could be heard at a
distance of twenty-five or thirty paces, and also
his eyes were so bleared and covered with wax
that he could hardly see. They had recourse to
doctors, but without any avail; and so it was
thought that the sickness was due to witchcraft.
They then consulted the old woman of whom I
spoke, because she had previously used certain
threats to the child’s father, and so prevailed upon
her with their words that she promised to heal
the child. She had herself shut in a room alone
with him, after having asked for a tile, a salt-cat,
and a blanket. They watched what she did
OFWITCHES
through a window which gave on to the room;
and she warmed the salt-cat and the tile, and then
took the child from the cradle into her arms and
completely covered herself and it with the blan­
ket so that no part of their bodies could be seen,
and remained so for half an hour; then she arose
and recalled those whom she had caused to leave
the room, and the child was healed from that
time. It is likely that the old woman, when she
was under the blanket, used certain other words
and ceremonies which she did not wish to be
seen.
Now all these superstitions make me believe that
when witches heal it is entirely due to the help of
Satan. Among other indications that this is the
true opinion is the fact that it is necessary to be­
lieve firmly that the witch will cure you, or you
will never recover your health; for it is always
necessary for the sick man to have complete
faith in his doctor. Do we not see many who
have no trust at all in their doctor, and yet they
do not fail to regain their health ?
I do not deny that it is a great help to the sick that
he should have faith in his doctor. For Galen Riol, ad
and Avicenna said that the doctor who cured t'^rnel. de
most sick men was he in whom they felt most
faith. But such faith is not a necessary condition
in medicine; yet in a case of witchcraft all the
witch’s brews and remedies are useless without
it. This point has, in my opinion, been brought Metho.'II. i
out by the physician Auger Ferrier better than
anyone else in the following words: “If it so hap­
pen that the sick man has no faith in the sorcerer,
but considers the remedy to be ridiculous; or if he
is prevented from having such faith by the by­
standers who in his presence make mock of the
AN EXAMEN
remedy; the sorcerer will accomplish nothing,
because there is present a spirit at enmity to that
of which he is persuaded. For the cause of the
healing lies in the virtue of the trusting spirit
being in agreement with that of the patient. So
says Auger Ferrier.
Again, witches make use of characters and
words when they heal, and yet nothing can be
more certain than that such words and characters
have no healing property. For who will main­
tain that the letters P and A are good for the
malady of the eyes? Who will believe that the
words Abracadabra Abracadabra^ etc. drive away
the fever ? Who will assert that the verses Gas­
par fert myrrham^cic. preserve the patient from
the falling sickness? Who will believe that the
verse which Caesar pronounced had the power
to prevent his bed from being overset? Or that
Ulysses was cured of his bloody flux by s^ing
certain words? It enrages me to speak of the
other obscure and barbaric words which these
people use for the scrofula, for dislocated bones,
for the bite of a mad dog, for the toothache and
the gout. For they claim to cure all sorts of ills
by their words and characters. This may be seen
from the case of Paracelsus, who should have
made himself the richest man in Europe; but per­
haps he took no payment in money. For that is
the common practice of witches, who are con­
tent to receive as payment the soul of him who
consults them for their Master, from whom they
have learned this trick, so that by this means the
number of those who have recourse to their
remedies may be increased. No, no;
It is but vain to think that words can cure
The aches and pains our mortal frames endure.
OF WITCHES
In this matter Pericles showed his wisdom. For
on recovering from a sickness and being asked if
his malady had been great, he answered: “You
may judge how great it was from the fact that it
took half my sense from me: for if I had been in
my right mind, I would never have allowed them
to tie round my neck these charms which you see
hanging there.” And indeed I think that this
Captain was more in the right than Galen and
the Platonists who put so much faith in charms
and amulets, which were condemned by even the
Emperor Caracalla and derided by Lucian in his
“ Dialogue of the Philosophers.”
In the same class I consider the numbers ob­
served by witches in their healing. For they i-. Cmdl. Trii.
make the sick man fast for so many days, or offer
so many candles, or say so many Paternosters;
and if he fail in but one point he will never be Ant. in celeb.
healed. For in Magic it is a maxim that if a man ”””■ ^ub.fin.
fails in the smallest possible point, he can derive
no benefit at all.
Furthermore, witches in their healing some­
times make use of matters which are contrary
to God and Nature; as the Chaldeans did in the
case of a gladiator whom they caused to be killed
and then gave his blood to drink to Faustina, the
wife of the Emperor Marcus Aurelius, so that
she might lose the love which she bore to that
gladiator. Democritus also prescribed as the cure
for the dropsy, that a man’s throat should be cut
and his blood given to the patient to drink while
it was still warm; or else that he should be given
certain forbidden and unlawful matters to eat.
Apollonius of Tyana, to cleanse the town of
Ephesus from the plague, caused an old man to be abUt. rer.
stoned by the people. To pass to the Master of <;«««• 13-
Wier, de
fraestig. I. 6.
Caes. lib. 6.
Suet. Claud.
ffier, ibid.
Plin. V. 36.
ANEXAMEN
witches, the Oracle of Delphi once replied to
the lonians, who were seeking some remedy
against the plague, that they must sacrifice every
year before the altar of Diana a beautiful youth
for one Melanippus, and a maiden for one Come­
thone whom Melanippus had raped in the temple
of Diana; and the lonians did so thereafter.
Another Oracle told the Emperor Hadrian that
he would never bring his charms to a successful
issue until he found a man who would voluntarily
sacrifice himself; and Antinous, his chief favour­
ite, freely gave himself up to die. All this con­
forms with the religion, or rather irreligion, of
the Gauls, who according to the teaching of their
Druids believed that a man’s life could only be
redeemed by the life of another man, and therefore they did not scruple, when they were
seriously ill, to sacrifice men as victims, so that
they might recover their health. This practice
was forbidden to them under Augustus. Later,
Constantine the Great made a most humane use
of this custom; for when he was tortured with
a leprosy which was the despair of his physicians,
there were certain Greeks who advised him to
make a bath of the blood of several newly-killed
children; but this good Emperor would never
agree to this, but on the contrary had himself and
one of his sons baptised by the Pope St. Sylvester,
and was immediately healed by this sacred bath.
Eor the rest, it should not appear strange that
Satan causes men to be sacrificed in order to cure
a person. For in every case he acts in the sarne
way, as we read of Creon’s son, of Iphigeneia,
and Quintus Curtius. The Thracians also and
the Carthaginians, and the tribes of Brittany,
used to sacrifice men under the pretext of secur­
OF WITCHES
ing good fortune. The Cymlri had nuns with
white hair and white robes who, in time of war, Strab. VII.
used to cut the throat of one of their prisoners of
war over a cauldron, and then poured the blood
into a tankard, and as it dripped they foretold
what was to happen; while others opened his
belly and, after examining his entrails, announced
that their people would gain the victory. And
the people of Temistitan, before the Spaniards
conquered that town, used to immolate more
than 2000 persons every year, and all of them in­
nocent of any crime; but what is even more
strange is that they had two chief idols of an
enormous size, which they renewed each year, on vigener. Coma certain day, made of a flour composed from
every vegetable and seed which can be used for
human purposes, and mixed with the blood of
those whom they had immolated. Julian the
Apostate, in order to know the future, delighted
in cutting people’s throats; so that after his death Niceph. X. 35.
they found the bodies of several of those whom he
had murdered in his wells and cisterns and drains;
and in another town, after having performed
horrible sacrifices to the Devil, he had a woman
hanged by her hair, after he had first had her cut
open while she was alive.
Again, consider how Satan caused the mother
of Vitellius to die. Through the mouth of
Aurinia he gave this Emperor to understand that
he would have a long and secure reign if he sur­
vived his mother. Vitellius believed this, and
hastened his mother’s end. But I am weary of
these bloody examples: let us continue after our
former method, and consider less violent matters
than those of which we have just spoken, by
which none the less we may conclude that it is
AN EXAMEN
Satan, and not the witches, who effects such
. cures.
Witches claim to heal by means of a messenger,
that is to say, by contriving that the messenger
shall take the medicine prepared for his master.
Dioscor. yj. 4fi. The hermit of whom Mattioli speaks acted in
this manner. He asked the messenger if he would
take a medicine for his master; and when the
messenger said that he would, he made him take
off his right shoe and place his bare foot upon the
ground, and then took a knife and with the point
traced the form of the messenger’s foot all round,
and then told him to raise his foot. Then with
the same knife he scratched within the tracing
of the foot the following words: Caro Caruse^
etc. After this, always with the same knife, he
raked up the earth where the words had been
scratched until there remained no trace of a
letter, and cast the earth into a little earthen pot
filled with water. After it had remained for
some time in the pot, he strained it through the
messenger’s shirt and gave it to him to drink,
after having made the sign of the Cross; and by
this means the patient was cured without any
further mystery. Mattioli adds that he who used
this cure was his friend, and that he had seen him
use it several times, and that he had even assured
him that this cure was the greatest secret of those
who boast that they are of the race of St. Paul.
The following examples are similar. When a
man is wounded, his doublet is fetched from a
distance and a plaster is applied to the opening of
it, and the patient is made to drink clear water,
and is immediately healed. And if a man is
wounded by the Tareronde, they take its tail and
apply it to an oak, which withers and dies, and
O F WITCHES
by this means the patient is cured. But who can
doubt that in such cases it is the Devil who heals,
just as he does mischief and hurt by means of the
images of which we have treated above ?
I wish also to mention certain more ridiculous
matters, which nevertheless go to prove the same
conclusion. In order to cure the falling sickness,
witches would have a man use the powder from
the skull of a robber who had been hanged. This
is an altogether detestable practice. And when
they wish to cure someone of sexual impotence,
they make him piss, etc. Or else they make him
go into a forest and look at the nest of a pie, etc.
Also, in such a case, they make him who has been
prevented from lying with his wife piss through
the wedding ring, etc. Again, when a man is in
doubt whether he is a victim of witchcraft, they
send him to take bread and salt in the house of
the suspected witch; as if the bread and salt thus
taken without the witch’s knowledge had the
power to heal him. I was forgetting to say that
sometimes in their cures they make use of the
brain of a cat or a raven’s head, which are true
poisons.
In the cases which we are considering, therefore,
it is Satan who effects the cure. And he does so
by making use of second and natural causes, and
the methods used by physicians. For, as the
learned Cardinal Bellarmine says, when a sick- Bodin,
ness is naturally curable the Devil can bring Demonom. 111.
remedies to the sick man. Or else it is merely a
noi.^Eccl.
case of the Devil ceasing to do ill, as Tertullian
says, speaking of the blind and the lame whom
the Emperor Vespasian caused to see and walk. In Apolog. c. 22.
according to Suetonius; “The Devil insinuates
himself into the eyes of the blind and the legs of
AN EXAMEN
the lame so that they may not use these members,
in order that, when he ceases to torment them,
he may appear to heal them.”
Nevertheless there is always this evil in cures
effected by witches, or rather by the Devil; the
cure is only effective for a limited time, or else it
is necessary for the sickness to be transferred to
someone else; and sometimes we find both these
conditions operating at the same time.
The first point is proved in the case of those who
have their wounds charmed away; for this only
lasts for a time. I knew a French gentleman
who, because he had had some wounds received
in battle charmed away, thought that he was
entirely healed; but three years later, after mak­
ing a slight effort in spurring his horse, the
wounds opened again and he died.
The second point can be proved by the example
of Mumol, Grand Master of France, whose life
the witches saved by causing the death of the
grandson of King Childebert. Several similar
Demonom. 111. examples may be found in Bodin. But it has
been noticed that in such cases Satan never loses
by the exchange; for if the witch wishes to heal
an old man, he will wish the sickness upon a
younger man; or if the person bewitched is of
low rank, he will transfer the spell to one who is
of higher rank and quality. At other times the
witch, having failed to give the sickness to some­
one else, has himself had to suffer the pain of it;
Ibid.
this happened to the scholar of whom Bodin
speaks, who wished to cause the death of a child
who was still at the breast, so as to heal its father.
For as he ran after the nurse who had run away
with the child on learning of the plot formed by
the witch and the father, and was crossing the
OF WITCHES
threshold of the room where the sick man was,
he fell stark dead. In nearly the same way the
Devil caused the death of Jeanne Platet, whom
we held in our prisons not long since. This
woman was accused of having sent devils into the
body of a girl named Guillauma Blondan; Guillauma’s parents importuned the witch to cure the
girl, and she at last consented, and told the girl
that she must keep a nine days’ fast, during which
she must every day go to stool; and that she, on
her own part, would observe the same novena,
which was to be begun on a Friday. The girl
obeyed and kept her novena; but it happened that
on the night of the last day the witch died in
prison; but nevertheless the girl was shortly
afterwards healed, having voided by the back
passage several little animals in the form of
lizards, as the witch had told her. Also she
vomited through her mouth a deal of green
matter in which was found a piece of coal as big
as a nut; and then there were found two little
holes going right through the floor of the room.
The witch confessed when she died.
Yet I maintain that such matters are entirely
concerned with the pact formed between the
witch and Satan. For I know for a fact that a
witch who wishes to heal a person sometimes
casts the spell upon a beast, as was done in the
case of a man named Mathieu Andrey of the
village of Pierrecourt. For when he could find
no cure for the sickness which was consuming
him, he at last consulted a passer-by, who asked
him if he was willing that his sickness should be
cast upon a cock which he had in his house. The
patient agreed, whereupon the stranger had the
cock buried in Mathieu’s garden, and he was
AN EXAMEN
healed. But not for long, for two or three years
later he fell ill again and died.
This example will serve as a proof of the last
point on which we touched, namely, that a
witch’s cure is sometimes only temporary, and
also is conditional upon the ailment being trans­
ferred to another creature.
I shall here set down one more example to show
that when witches wish to heal a person they
often cast the spell upon a beast. I know a man
who, at the age of ten or twelve, became as it were
frenzied. It was at once believed that he had
been bewitched by a man who was suspected be­
cause he had threatened the father that he would
harm him in that which he loved best. One day
it happened that the father’s husbandman was
passing with a hen in his hands before the house
of the suspected man, who asked him where he
was going. The husbandman answered that he
was going to see his master’s son, who was sick;
and the other replied that he was very sorry for
it, but that he had the means of healing him, and
told the husbandman that, on arriving at his
master’s house, he must put the hen he was carry­
ing on the ground, and that if the boy killed it he
would be cured; but that they were to take great
care not to eat this hen. When the husbandman
reached his master’s house he did as he had been
told, and put the hen on the ground. The hen
went straight up to the sick boy, who took it by
the neck and killed it, and was immediately
cured. Who, then, can doubt that the spell was
cast upon this hen r
OF WITCHES
Chapter XXXV I.
That for the Cure of these Maladies Satan and
his Demons must on no Account be Appealed
to, but God Only.
T is obvious from what we have said in the
last chapter that the methods used by witches
in their cures are by no means certain, nor the
cure itself when it is accomplished. And from
this I would conclude that it is best for us not
to consult them when we are sick, even if it is
they who have cast the sickness upon us. More­ Navarr. in
over, it is not lawful for us to do so, seeing that Manua, r. ii.
num. 29.
we are strictly forbidden by Holy Scripture to Deut. 18.
have recourse to Satan or his demons, whatever Levit. 20.
advice or help they may promise us. The Canon C. 2. de sortileg.
Law excommunicates us in such case; and the C. admoneant
civil Law has made similar provision by the 26 q. 7. I.
famil.
penalties which it imposes on those who have cateres
Ercis. I. item
recourse to such people, thus righteously amend­ apud Labeonem
ing the constitution of the Emperor Constantine, si quis astrode injur.
which permitted the use of magic for a good logus
I. nullus aruspurpose, such as to heal the sick or to still tem­ pex I. nemo de
pests. And yet this Emperor was in some sort to malefic. C. 1.
be excused, for when he drew up his constitution eorum
malefic. C.
he was still plunged in paganism and did not
know that, according to St. Paul, we must never Rom. 3.
do evil that good may come of it.
Experience has proved also that they who have
consulted the Devil and his demons have never
prospered. Ochozias, King of Israel, being sick
AN EXAMEN
from a fall, had recourse to Beelzebub, for which
Elias foretold his death; “What,” said the
prophet, “is there no God in Israel? And be­
cause thou hast nevertheless taken counsel with
Beelzebub, thou shalt therefore die.” And so it
happened to him immediately afterwards. The
Emperor Heliogabalus, while consulting a
necromancer, was cruelly murdered and dragged
through the sewers with his mother. Pompey
wished to enlist the support of certain witches
against Caesar, and lost both the victory and his
life. The same happened to Ariovistus: and
within living memory one of the great Kings of
Christendom lost his reason through having conBodin,
suited a necromancer in order to know the issue
Demmom. II. 3. of his fortunes. Similarly Sanchez d’Avila, being
wounded by a horse’s kick, neglected the chirurgeon’s art and relied upon the treatment of a
soldier who practised certain benedictions; and.
Lib. IO.
according to the history of Portugal, died for his
superstition. When Adrian VI held the Papal
See, a Greek named Demetrio Spartiano allayed
a very severe plague which ravaged the city of
Rome by unlawful and superstitious means; for
having cut off half the right horn of a wild bull
which the people had given up to him, and after
placing certain charms in its right ear, he at once
made it so tame that, after throwing a thread
over its whole horn, he led it about wherever he
liked, till he brought it to the Coliseum, where
he immolated it; and at once the plague began
to abate. But soon afterwards the Bourbon army
sacked Rome, which was justly permitted by
Antichrist, c.
God because, as Florimond de Raemond says,
the Romans in seeking a remedy for the plague
««»». 6.
which afflicted them rather put their faith in
OF WITCHES
Satan and one of his witches, against the wish of
the Pope, who in no way desired to allow this
magician and conjurer to exercise his art.
But how can it be that the wrath of God is not
kindled against those who have recourse to
witches, since it is His will that they should not
be left to live on the earth ? “Thou shall not Exod. 22,
permit a witch to live,” He says in Exodus; and
elsewhere certain men are expressly commanded
to stone the Pythoness woman. Even the Per­
sians, who were superstitious enough, used to
crush their witches’ heads between two stones.
It was therefore well said by St. John Chrysos- Homil. 8. sup.
tom that it is better to die than to seek the help
of the Devil or witches to be cured: “It is better
for a Christian man to die than to redeem his
life by means of witchcraft and sorcery.” It was
for this reason that St. Hilarion would not per- S. Jerome, in
mit anyone to remove a strip of leather which a
Htlano.
young man had, at the suggestion of Satan,
placed under the house door of a girl whom he
loved; although Satan had entered into the girl’s
body and said that he would not leave it until
the strip was removed: nevertheless the girl did
not fail to be delivered by the prayers of St.
Hilarion. The case of Rollande du Vernois was
similar: she was possessed of two demons which
Groz-Jacques had sent into her body, and asked
that Groz-Jacques should be sent for, making
signs that the demons would then depart from
her; but I was in no mind to send for this man,
but called in the Priest who conjured her dili­
gently and pursued his exorcisms; and this was
done in such a manner that the demons left
Rollande. I hold that it was not she who asked
for Groz-Jacques, but the demon, who wished
AN EXAMEN
one spell of witchcraft to be driven away by
means of another. In this matter we may learn
a lesson from the Roman Senate; for in the time
of Marius it refused to use the services of a witch
named Martha, although she promised victory,
as we read in Dio Cassius,
In such cases, then, we must have recourse to
God alone, following the advice which Elias
gave to King Ochozias, whether we wish to
prevent a misfortune or to be delivered from
one. “He who is helped by the Almighty,” says
David, “shall ever abide in the protection of
God, etc.” And Satan reproached God because
He kept Job in His protection, so that he could
not harm him: “Doth Job fear God for nought ?”
he said. “Hast not thou made an hedge about
him, and about his house, and about all that he
hath on every side ?”
But words there are with power to ease.
And our chief sufferings appease.
Matth. 15.
Luke 9.
Mark 2.
It is the prayers which we offer to God that are
our protection from the Evil Spirit and his
snares. Jesus Christ drove the Devil from the
Canaanite woman’s daughter at the prayer of her
mother: He delivered the lunatic from the devil
which tormented him at the prayer of the
demoniac’s father: He healed Miriam the sister
of Moses of the leprosy at her brother’s prayer.
Therefore it is God alone, as He Himself says
in Isaiah, who sends life and death, health and
sickness, and there is no salvation save in Him.
OF WITCHES
Chapter XXXVII.
Whether it is Permitted to Menace a Witch in
order to Heal or Ward Off Harm.
aware that there are those who are
agreed that it is not lawful to have recourse
to witches in order to induce them by prayers
and fair words to effect a cure; for they hold
that this shows an abject and humble spirit^ and
has some appearance of adoration; and they add
that St. Paul very expressly forbids us to have
communication with the Devil: “I would not
that ye have intercourse with devils.” But they
maintain that it is permissible if a man approaches
the witch with force and threats; and they even
assert that there is no better method than that to
compel a witch to remove the spell which she
has cast. We have noted an example of this in the
case of Clauda Gaillard, who struck Marie
Perrier ill by breathing in her face; and yet, as
soon as she was threatened by Pierre Perrier, the
evil at once left Marie. But I would not say
that this practice is common to-day; yet indeed
it seems to have some sound base if one con­
siders that he who threatens a witch does so in a
disdainful spirit and, as it were, commanding
the witch.
Yet I doubt whether this latter method may be
any more conscientiously used than the former;
for in each case a man gives the witch the occa­
sion to consult Satan for a remedy, and this is
AN EXAMEN
directly against the law of God, as we have more
fully argued elsewhere in the preceding chapter.
Yet I will concede that, in order to ward off an
evil, there is no offence in a man’s bearing him­
self proudly and fiercely towards witches, so that
these may fear them who behave towards them
in such a manner, and may feel some dread for
those who command them and might harm
them. The Emperor Frederic Barbarossa made
this clear to the Arab sorcerer who was sent by
the Milanese to poison him; for when he was
caught, and was threatening to kill the Emperor
by his words if he did not let him go, the Em­
peror caused the man himself to be punished
with death as he deserved.
But the best example of this is provided by the
Officers and Ministers of Justice; for all are
agreed that no witch, however wicked, can do
Bodin,
harm to their persons. I may add that Satan
Demonom. Ill himself holds them in fear and dread. I know
lewy. Demonol. this from the depositions of Rollande du Vernois.
/, 2.'
This woman was possessed of two devils, and
yet was suspected of witchcraft. When I
approached the guard-room to hear her state­
ment she was tormented more violently than
usual, and said that her devils felt my approach
and for that reason tormented her in that
manner.
Herein there is certainly a secret judgement of
God, who will not permit the wicked, such as
are witches, to have power over the persons of
Judges, so that justice, which, as King Joram
said, is of Him, shall be executed.
11.1. II.
Yet I have read in Sprenger that a witch who
was about to be thrown on to the fire said to the
gaoler that she would pay him, and blew into his
OF WITCHES
face, and struck him with leprosy all over his
body so that he died after a few days. This
gaoler was perhaps not performing his duty
well.
It is not out of place to say here that there are
many who, to ward off spells and enchantments, pUn. xiJl. 4.
make use of date stones, and the stone called Dioscer. 113.
alum, feathers. Squills, Moly, St. John’s wort,
madwort, the root or the remale Satyrion, rue, Dioscor. ill.
the herb called Our Lady’s gloves, the root of ’’925the herb called Baaras of which Josephus speaks
in the “Jewish War.” But it is very difficult
to believe that these stones and roots, which are
corporeal matters, can have any power against
the Devil, who is purely spiritual; and it is more
probable that they can only operate in the
manner which we shall explain in Chapter 57.
Yet it may be that we should believe that God,
the more to manifest the glory of His Majesty,
consents to combat and overcome the Devil by
means of the least of His creatures. For He
acted so in the case of Pharaoh’s magicians, who
easily in imitation of Moses made frogs and
serpents and dragons, and turned the water into
blood; but when they tried to make flies they
were powerless and ashamed.
The people of the West Indies behaved very
abominably on this account when the Spaniards
came to their country. For as a protection
against charms they wore round their necks an
image of Pederasty, a Sodomite and his Ingle—
matters which a Christian cannot hear spoken
of without loss to his sense of shame and
modesty.
AN EXAMEN
Chapter XXXVIII.
That He Who is Bewitched can Avail Himself of
Physicians.
E have said above that he who is bewitched must have recourse to God alone, and
not to Satan or his demons, but I would not therefore infer that the patient may not consult with
physicians for his cure. For in availing himself
of medicine he makes use of a means granted to
us by the Almighty with an honourable title to
preserve and recover our health; and besides, the
Majesty of God is far more gloriously manifested
in effecting such work by means of His creatures
than if He were to do it Himself.
I cannot, moreover, agree with Philo Judaeus
and others who maintain that a man whose sickness is due to witchcraft cannot be healed by
physicians. For we have shown that witches
afflict persons with all sorts of sickness, such as
Cf. chap. 32.
cholic, paralysis, apoplexy, epilepsy, etc., which
proceed from putrefaction or some other natural
cause, and can be cured naturally according to
the science of medicine: so that there is nothing
to prevent physicians from healing such
maladies.
Even stranger things have been known; for
certain bewitched persons have, with the help of
physicians, voided needles, iron tools, stones,
hairs, and other such matters. This was so in the
case of the gentleman’s son whom we mentioned
OF WITCHES
in Chapter 32; and Wier, too, recounts several
examples of it.
I make no doubt that certain witches have
boasted that no physician could remove the spell
of witchcraft cast by them; but what of that?
Must we believe them? The Devil puts this
claim in their mouths so that we may give
honour to a witch rather than have recourse to
medicine.
And if the maladies of which we have spoken
continue for a long time and appear to be incur­
able, this comes of the obstructions caused by
Satan, who sometimes renews the causes of the
sickness and sometimes, in his own subtle and
occult manner, contrives that the sickness shall
be outside the physicians’ knowledge.
But let us come to the other points which con­
cern Fran^oise Secretain.
Chapter
XXXIX.
The Rosaries Used by Witches generally lack the
Cross; but in any Case the Cross is always
Imperfect in some Particular.
Hen this woman was examined the first
time, it was noted that there was no Cross
on her rosary, and that she did not shed a single
tear although she tried her hardest to weep.
Now all the authorities agree that the presump- See the
tion is heavily against those who are accused
witchcraft when they cannot shed tears.
AN EXAMEN
I would not draw quite so definite a conclusion
from the fact of their rosary being without a
Cross; yet I will say that this must tell strongly
against them. For the Cross is one of the chief
flails of Satan, as is fully witnessed by the
S. Greg. 1.3, memorable example of Julian the Apostate,
Dialog, c. 7.
who, having met with several devils in the
temple of an idol, and having made the sign of
the Cross, caused all the devils to disappear at
once. Everybody knows that, although this
unhappy Emperor held the Christians in deadly
hatred and was good for nothing, yet he drove
away devils with the Cross; for so powerful is
this sign against demons that they could not
conceal their fear of it from Julian. For they
reproached him that, although he was but an
empty vessel, yet he was sealed with the sign of
the Cross.
We read also of certain persons who have come
unexpectedly or out of curiosity into the assembly
of witches, and have made the sign of the Cross;
and that then everything, devils and viands and
witches, have vanished. I shall leave what I
Cbaf. 55.
have to say concerning the Cross until later. It
is enough to say here that nearly all the rosaries
of those who have been executed in this place
have been examined and have been found to be
without a Cross, or at least to be defective in
some detail of the Cross, as in one of the arms or
some other particular. Such were the rosaries
of Groz-Jacques Bocquet, Clauda Jamprost,
Clauda Jamguillaume, and many others.
Art. 40.
OF WITCHES
ChapterXL.
If^itches are Unable to Shed Tears in the Presence
of the fudge.
us return to the presumption taken BoHn,
against those accused of witchcraft when Oemmom. IV.
they cannot shed tears. I have read of a woman
who confessed that witches can shed only three
tears from the right eye. And it is a fact that
the learned Doctors hold this to be one of the
strongest presumptive evidences of witchcraft
that there are. But I wish to recount my own
experience in this matter. All the witches that
I have examined in my capacity of Judge have
never been able to shed tears in my presence, or
if they have shed them it has been so slightly as
not to be noticed. I say this although I have
seen them who appeared to weep, but I have no
doubt that it was only pretence; and even if their
tears were not feigned, I am at least quite certain
that it was with the greatest difficulty that they
were called up. I am led to this opinion by the
great effort which the accused make to weep,
and the scarcity of tears which they are then
able to shed.
But if I spoke particularly to them, they wept as
copiously and plentifully as possible. The same
happened when they had confessed; but then
their tears seemed lighter and happier than
before, as if they had been rid of a heavy
burden.
AN EXAMEN
In conclusion, it is probable that the reason for
sprenger. III.
Art. 39
the inability of witches to shed tears is that tears
are chiefly proper to penitents for washing and
cleansing their sins. For tears, as St. Bernard
says, penetrate to Heaven and soften the wrath
of God Almighty; and therefore they cannot be
welcome to the Enemy of our salvation, who
consequently prevents them as much as he can.
Similarly, Satan holds bells in extreme detestation; for by their ringing the people are warned
to prepare to observe their duty and pray to God.
Also they drive away storms and tempests.
And whenever you ask witches why it is that
they cannot shed tears, they answer that it is
impossible for them to weep because their hearts
have been so hardened and straitened by being
accused of so detestable a crime as witchcraft. I
discuss in another place how much weight a
Judge should give to this plea.
Chapter XL I.
The Eyes of lEitches are Continually Bent upon
the Ground when in the Presence of the
Judge.
T was further noted that, when Fran^oise
Secretain was being examined, she always kept
her eyes bent upon the ground so that the Judge
had great difficulty in making her look him in
the face. I find that this is usual with witches,
and have noticed it in many who have been
Bodin,
Demonom. IT.
OFWITCHES
burned: therefore this also is an indication of the
guilt of the accused.
v. Art. 35.
It is said that the reason why they thus bend
their eyes upon the ground is that they are
ashamed to look the Judge in the face because of
the enormity to their crime. But I rather incline
to the belief that they are then consulting with
Satan as to the answers they shall give to the
questions put to them by the Judge; for at the
same time as they look upon the ground, they
mutter I know not what between their teeth;
and when they are asked what they are doing,
they answer that they are saying their pater­
nosters.
But it is not only at such times that witches look
upon the ground; for if you watch them in their
chambers and their prisons you will generally
find them stretched out face downwards. This
was their custom in the time of Apuleius, who
recounts that they said their prayers in holes in
the ground. We read that Moses, Joshua, Elias
and the other Prophets used to turn their faces
towards the ground when they would appease
the wrath of God: and it may be that this is why
Satan, who always tries to ape God, wishes his
witches to pray to him in this manner.
AN EXAMEN
Chapter XLII.
IKitches when they Renounce the Devil Spit
Three Tinies upon the Ground.
Secretain did another thing.
When, at various times, she renounced the
Devil, she spat three times upon the ground.
This was also done by Groz-Jacques, Antoine
Tornier, Jacquema Paget, Clauda Jamguillaume,
Pierre Gandillon and several others. I used to
think that this was a sign of the pact between the
witch and Satan, and that this spitting signified
that the witch was not willingly renouncing
Satan; but I have since found that it was a
Vair, de
custom amongst the Ancients to spit three
Incant. IV. i8. times in their bosom to ward off spells and
charms. Wherefore Theocritus writes;
Rancoise
He shall spit three times in my bosom.
And Ovid:
Each of you spits in his bosom.
And this superstition has been handed down to
us, so that these persons who spit thus three
times on renouncing Satan still retain the cus­
tom. For when they are asked the reason for
this spitting, they answer that they have always
heard that if you spit three times upon the
ground when you renounce Satan, the Evil One
cannot harm you in any way. Nevertheless I
prefer to retain my former opinion; for witches
OF WITCHES
spit in this manner also in certain similar cir­
cumstances, as when they heal the king’s evil,
and at the elevation of the Host at the Mass, as
we learn from the Inquisitors.
Chapter XLIII.
Witches must le Shaved and their Clothes
Changed.
T remains for us to consider two other points
concerning this witch: first, why her hair
was cut; and secondly, why she was stripped to
see if there was any mark upon her.
As for the first, it has always been the custom
to take this precaution against witches, and to
shave off all their hair when they fall into the
hands of justice, in order to draw the truth from
them more easily. The Emperor Domitian did Philost. vita
Aetnig,
so to the Philosopher of Tyana, and several after Afollo.
Demon. III. 9.
him have done the same with advantage. There
have even been witches who have begged the
Judge to have their hair cut, saying that other­
wise it would be impossible for them to confess
the truth.
Now this is because witches have drugs which
procure taciturnity, which is otherwise called
v. Marsil. in
the Spell of Silence, which they hide in their pract.
d. nunc
hair; and as long as they carry them they will vivendum nu.
never confess; and they feel no pain when they 52- .
Bodin^
are tortured, when it is chiefly necessary to Demonom.
shave them. And since they frequently conceal
Remy,
AN EXAMEN
these spells in their clothing, for this reason they
are required to change their clothes.
Yet there are those who have condemned this
practice as superstitious; but for my part I see
no harm in it. For although the Spell of Silence
is in itself of no profit to witches, yet it is a fact
that they themselves firmly believe it to be so;
and this it is which causes them to lose all
feeling, in exactly the same sort as we find that
some men die and others are cured, merely
through their lively expectation of death or of
health. Ovid writes;
I have seen a dying man revived by hope.
De occult.
fhtloso. c. 6.
This presentiment or imagination was the cause
of the death of a priest named Jean de Jean at
the time when Strozzi was defeated with his
army of Terceres in the Isle of S. Michel. For
this priest, being the Marechai de Camp’s
chaplain, and finding himself aboard the galleon
S. Matthieu, driven back to the last line of
defence, died without being hurt at all through
sheer terror and fear induced by the sight of the
fires thrown by the French and the sound of the
cannon, as I learn from the history of Portugal.
Again, Paracelsus says that it is imagination
alone which causes the plague, or a man’s
bravery or cowardice. And therefore, in my
opinion, it is permissible to shave the hair of
witches and to change their clothes, in order to
deprive them of the firm faith which they have
in this spell which may be hidden in their hair
or their clothing.
Another reason which persuades me that there
is no harm in this practice is that it is certain
that witches, when they are shaved, are much
O F W I T C II E S
tenderer and more susceptible to pain than those
who are not shaved.
There have been cases of more cunning witches
who have swallowed drugs to deaden their
senses. And this is an easy matter for them to
do, for even salt dissolved in clear water is
unhappily productive of this result. Criminals
nowadays are so well aware of this ruse that
torture has become almost useless as a means of
wresting the truth from them; and therefore it
is necessary to keep a strict watch upon the
gaolers, since it is usually they who procure such
drugs for their prisoners in the hope of reaping
some profit thereby.
There are others who use Characters and
Prayers, and even certain verses and passages of
Holy Scripture which I care not to quote here,
seeing that they mingle with them the milk of
the Holy Virgin Mary, making God as it were
the author of their impunity for their witch­
crafts; God, I say, who only commands us to
punish the wicked, and to whom the sacrifice
which the Magistrate and Justice make of such
persons is pleasant and agreeable. But there can
be no doubt that such witches also swallow
drugs to deaden their senses, just as do those of
whom we have J ust spoken. For we have shown Chap. 26.
elsewhere that no words or characters are of
any virtue as spells or charms.
I hold also that it is no more permissible to use
such words, as some do, to cause the accused to
confess when he is at the torture, than it is to
use them for any other purpose. The reader is
referred to my Instruction to Judges.
AN EXAMEN
Chapter XL IV.
The Marks Borne hy IT'itches.
Et us pass on to the other point. Fran^oise
Dan. the ^th
point.
Secretain was stripped, that it might be
known whether she had any mark upon her.
For all witches have a mark some on the
shoulder, some on the eyelid, some on the
tongue or the lip, and others on the shameful
parts; in short it is said that there is no witch
who is not marked in some part of her body.
Satan marks them thus to show them that they
are in the future to become his slaves; for we
read that slaves are usually branded, as is chiefly
the case in Spain and Barbary, where they are
branded on the face: and at all times Princes
and Captains have had certain signs by which
they could know their own subjects and soldiers.
It is then but reasonable that Antichrist also
should mark his own with a distinct sign by
which he may know them.
Further, I would say that just as Jesus Christ
wished the faithful to be distinguished by the
venerable sign of the Cross, so this Ape of God
has imitated this by marking his subjects with
some sign and character.
Raemond in his “Antichrist” says that he has
seen witches who recognised each other by
some little spot in the eye, and that Troiseschelles was especially proficient in this. I do
not doubt this; for it has been remarked that
OFWITCHES
witches usually have two pupils in one of their
eyes, just as the Tibians of Pontus had a double
pupil in one eye and the image of a horse in the
other, and could bewitch by their looking, as it
is said that every woman can who has a double
pupil.
Now the mark of a witch is generally some sort Bodin,
of blemish or hare’s foot, or some such thing. Demmom. ir.
There was one who had a face of the size of a
farthing, from the centre of which extended ^hri”'part'i
several threads of hair to the circumference.
Yet the place where they bear these marks is so
insensitive that they do not shrink even if they
are probed to the bone in that place.
But they are very difficult to find, because they
are very inconspicuous; and also the Devil most
often effaces them as soon as the witch has fallen
into the hands of Justice, as he did to George
Gandillon, who showed me where the Devil
had touched him on the left shoulder, which is
the place where he usually touches witches.
Caron the physician writes that when he and his ibid.
colleagues were once searching for the mark upon
a witch named la Boyraionne, Satan, who was
possessing a young girl by means of this woman,
told them the place where it was, mocking them
for not having been able to find it.
Yet there are witches who say that they have
never been marked. Among such was GrozJacques, who, on dying contrite, assured me of
this. Therefore I hold that there are witches
who are not marked; and I am of opinion that
Satan marks only those of whose loyalty he is a
little doubtful. And in this he does neither more
nor less than those who lend money; for if they
trust their debtor they are content with his
AN EXAMEN
word; but if not, they tie him strictly down in
writing. We have read, also, of witches who
have given the Devil schedules written and
Demonom. III. signed in their own blood, as did the Advocate
2of Paris of whom Bodin speaks.
Therefore I conclude that they are wrong who
are so scrupulous as to be unwilling to condemn
a witch to death unless a mark can be found, as
is the practice in a certain Republic which I
shall not name. For what, then, would be the
point of what we have just said, namely, that
the Devil most often removes the mark from a
witch as soon as he is made a prisoner?
Finally, these marks are of great importance in
dealing with witchcraft; for they constitute an
extremely strong presumptive evidence of guilt,
so much so that, when they are joined to other
indications, it is lawful to proceed to an immedi­
ate condemnation.
Chapter XLV.
Satan often Kills If^itches when they are in Prison,
or else he Inspires them to Kill Themselves.
Sometimes he Reveals what will Happen to
them at their Deaths.
O much for Frangoise Secretain. I am sure
that all will agree that she was worthy of
death, and of a witch’s death by burning. But
this she forestalled; for when we were on the
point of pronouncing her sentence, she was found
dead in prison.
OF WITCHES
In Other instances witches have strangled them­
selves, and it seems that they have done so at
the instigation of Satan. For, fearing lest
witches, in dying at the hands of Justice, should
be induced to repent, he either kills them or
impels them to kill themselves, so that they may
not escape him. In this manner he urged
Antide Colas to hurl herself out of a window,
or to hang herself from a window four days after
she had been incarcerated at the Chateau de
Betoncourt, appearing to her in the shape of a
big black man. And I have no doubt that the
Devil suffocated Fran^oise Secretain; for she
had reported to us that they had tried four or
five times to burn her in prison, to the extent of
thrusting fire down her throat.
I must add that, when she was questioned about
these threatened burnings, she always answered
that they might do what they would with her,
but that they would never burn her. It may be
that Satan had revealed to her that she would die
in prison; for I have read of the same in the case
of a witch of Bievres. This woman said to her Bodin,
Judge that he would play her a scurvy trick; Demonom. IV.
and before her sentence was pronounced she
told him that he would cause her to be burned
alive. The Judge sentenced her to be first
strangled and then burned; but owing to a mis­
take on the part of the executioner, she was
burned alive. When Clauda Jamguillaume who
was executed in this place, was at the stake ready
to be burned alive, she also said to the execu­
tioner that she knew that he would serve her ill
and cause her to die slowly. And so it hap­
pened; for she broke loose and jumped out of
the fire three times, so that in order to control
AN EXAMEN
her the executioner was forced to stun her. I
remember also that, when sentence of death had
been passed on Antoine Gandillon, she re­
peatedly entreated us not to let her die a slow
death; and orders were accordingly given to the
executioner, and yet she died more hardly than
six others who were executed with her, among
whom were her father and brother. It is
obvious then that this foreknowledge of witches
comes of the Devil. Nevertheless these last two
died penitent. What then? It may be that
Satan revealed to them that they would die a
slow death with a view to bringing them to
despair at the prospect of the pain they would
have to suffer.
We read of another witch named Ascletario,
who, although he was not a prisoner, told the
Emperor Domitian that he would be eaten by
dogs; and this happened to him although the
Emperor had caused him to be put to death, for
he was accidentally eaten by dogs after his death.
Chapter XLVI.
Thai Satan companies with his Witches when they
are in Prison and even Assists them in the
Presence of the fudge.
Ow because there are those who believe
that, once witches are made prisoners and
are fallen into the hands of Justice, the Devil
deserts them and assists them no more, I wish to
OF WITCHES
rid them of this opinion by what I shall here
shortly set forth.
The examples I have quoted in the last chapter
are entirely relevant to this point. For in them
we see that for one thing Fran^oise Secretain
confessed that they tried five or six times to
burn her in prison, to the extent of thrusting
fire down her throat; and although she did not
assert that it was the Devil who made this
attempt, it is impossible for us to suppose that it
was anyone else. Again, we read that four days
after Antide Colas was imprisoned at Betoncourt the Devil appeared to her in the shape of a
big black man and incited her to throw herself
from a window or to hang herself from it; and
for this reason. For here I may add that he then
lay with her and abode with her for about an
hour, being all the time quite cold; and since
she would in no respect follow his evil advice he
tormented her throughout her whole body and
caused her to shiver, and stung her on the left
side as he had already done before, and also on
the right arm.
I cannot omit to record that when the Devil
was urging her to hang herself, there was a
Voice which counselled her not to do so and
showed her that, by hanging herself, she would
dishonour her parents, and that it would be
better for her to die another death. It is to be
supposed that this was the voice of her good
Angel, who wished to prevent her from hanging
herself^ so that by dying at the hands of Justice
she might come to repentance; as she did.
Another time, on the first and second days of
her imprisonment at the Chateau of Betoncourt, there appeared to her a little white dog
AN EXAMEN
which advised her to let herself be ducked, telling
her that she would sink to the bottom of the
water unless anything prevented her; and that if
they wanted to hang her she should permit it,
because the rope would break and she would fall
on her feet without hurting herself; and soon
afterwards he beat her all over, on the head and
arms and shoulders and other parts, and stung
her in the left side when he wished to go away.
A witch of S. Preuve removed the fetters from
her arms in the presence of the Judge, a feat
which, says Bodin, was humanly impossible.
DeitDmon. 111. Apollonius of Tyana did the same at Rome in
sight of all his fellow-prisoners; and he did much
more. For when, in the reign of Nero, he was
shown the text of his accusation, which was held
in the hands of Tigellinus, nothing was found
written on the scroll; and another time, being
accused before the Emperor Domitian, he van­
ished, and was seen the same day at Pozzuoli.
Thievenne Paget, who was burned in this place,
confessed that the Devil had three times carnally
known her in prison: a thing which I should
never have believed if this confession had not
been made before me, and if others as well as she
had not confessed the same thing, especially that
Antide Colas of whom we have spoken.
Clauda Coirieres, who was likewise burned in
this place for witchcraft, gave an ointment to
Francois Gaillard, who was detained in prison
with her on a charge of murder; and when F ran9ois had smeared his hands with this ointment,
he escaped from prison as by a miracle: I have
touched upon this matter elsewhere.
But what stronger confirmation of our conten­
tion could we wish than that which happens
OF WITCHES
when the Judge examines witches? For at that
time the Devil assists them and advises them
what to answer, as they themselves have con­
fessed. Also at this time they always keep their
eyes bent upon the ground, and continually
mutter I know not what between their teeth,
so that the Judge has difficulty in making them
answer and look him in the face.
Now whatever may be the truth of this matter,
it will not appear very strange to those who have
studied the story of Job. For there we read that
when God was assembled with His Angels
(which are called the Sons of God), Satan also
came, and God asked him from whence he had
come. And he answered that he came from
going to and fro in the earth, etc. Now if the
Proud Spirit dared to present himself at the
assembly of God and His Angels, why should he
not be found in a prison to assist his own fol­
lowers, even though the Judge be present?
For these reasons it seems to me that, in a case
of which Bodin speaks, the liberation of theDemomm. U. 5.
prisoner by the Judge was no necessary con­
comitant of what followed. The witch rubbed
some ointment upon herself, fell down as if she
were dead and without any feeling, and five
hours later recovered consciousness and arose
and related many matters of different places,
which were afterwards verified. For she could
have done as much even if she had not been
liberated. And I am the more persuaded of this
by the fact that, although the Judge liberated
her, he did not allow her to go far away, so that
she was all the time rather in the hands of
Justice than actually free and out of prison.
It is obvious, therefore, that Satan frequents
AN EXAMEN
witches in prison. And therefore they should be
carefully watched and often visited, so as to
prevent such a meeting as far as it is possible,
and to obviate the inconveniences and mis­
fortunes which may result from it.
Yet I must say that although we have shown
that witches and other prisoners sometimes
escape from prison through the magic arts of the
Devil, it is nevertheless known that they have all
been quickly recaptured. So it was in the case of
Apollonius of Tyana, and of Francois Gaillard,
of whom we have spoken. And this comes of
the just permission of God, who wills not that
they who are worthy of death should escape
from the hands of Justice.
Chapter XLVII.
Of the Metamorphosis of Men into Beasts, and
Especially of Lycanthropes or Loups-garoux.
He same method of procedure which was
used in the case of Fran^oise Secretain was
followed in those of Jacques Bocquet, Clauda
Jamprost, Clauda Jamguillaume, Thievenne
Paget and Clauda Gaillard. Jacques Bocquet,
otherwise known as Groz-Jacques, came from
Savoy, and was apprehended on the accusation
of Fran^oise Secretain. Clauda Jamprost was
from Orcleres, and was accused by GrozJacques. Clauda Jamguillaume and Thievenne
Paget were also from Orcieres, and were
OF WITCHES
accused by Groz-Jacques and Clauda Jamprost.
Clauda Gaillard was from Ebouchoux, and was
imprisoned as the result of information arising
from the preceding trials.
The first four of these confessed that they had
turned themselves into wolves and that, in this
shape, they had killed several children, namely, a
child of Anathoile Cochet of Longchamois, one
of Thievent Bondieu known as the rebel of
Orcieres, four or five years old; another of big
Claude Godard, and another of Claude the son
of Antoine Gindre. Finally, they confessed
that in the year 1597 *^^^7
the neigh­
bourhood of Longchamois two children of
Claude Bault, a boy and a girl, who were gather­
ing strawberries; that they killed the girl, and
the boy saved himself by running away. They
confessed also that they had eaten part of the
children which we have mentioned, but that
they never touched the right side. These mur­
ders were verified both by the evidence of the
parents, and by that of several others in the
villages of Longchamois and Orcieres, who de­
posed that all these children had been caught
and eaten by wolves at such a time and such a
place.
Clauda Jamguillaume added that she had nearly
killed two other children, and that with the
intent to do so she had hidden behind a hut in
the mountains for about an hour, but had been
prevented by a dog, which she killed in spite;
but that nevertheless she contrived to wound one
of the children in the thigh.
Jeanne Perrin also gave evidence that Clauda
Gaillard had turned herself into a wolf, and had
attacked her in that shape in a wood called
Sigeb.
AN EXAMEN
Froidecombe. It was therefore very con­
venient that all these witches should have been
tried together, since they had all turned them­
selves into wolves. Pierre Gandillon and his
son George Gandillon would also have been
tried with them, but that they were hurried too
quickly to their execution; for these last two
also confessed that they had turned themselves
into wolves. Yet the son averred that he had
never meddled with any children, but that, in
company with his aunt Perrenette Gandillon,
he had only killed certain goats, among them
one belonging to his father, which, as he said,
they had done by mistake.
All these witches confessed besides that they had
many times been to the Sabbat, that there they
had copulated, danced, eaten and made their
ointment; and also that they had caused the
death of countless persons and beasts. But since
we have dealt in detail with these last matters
in their proper place, I shall here confine myself
to the consideration of the first of them, namely,
lycanthropy and the metamorphosis of men into
beasts.
There is much disputing as to whether it is
possible for men to be changed into beasts, some
affirming the possibility, whilst others deny it;
and there are ample grounds for both views. For
we have many examples of the fact. The family
of Antaeus in Arcadia used to become wolves at
a certain season of the year. After Demenetus
Parrasius had tasted the entrails of a child, he
was changed into a wolf. Baianus, the son of a
certain Simeon who was a chieftain of the Bul­
garians, used to change himself into a wolf when
he wished, as did Moeris, of whom Vergil speaks:
OF WITCHES
Moeris I often saw changed to a wolf
And prowling in the woods.
Edog. 8.
Ovid reports that Lycaon did the same;
He was amazed, and howled in loneliness,
Nor could he speak as he was wont to do.
Job Fincel relates that he saw a Lycanthrope Lib- ”■
at Padua. Herodotus tells that the inhabitants
of a district in Scythia used to turn into wolves; a fhysidanofa
and this is also common among the peoples of Duke of fEurtthe North. When the Romans were trying to
prevent Hannibal from crossing the Alps, a raging of
wolf came amongst their army, rent those whom
it met, and finally escaped without being hurt.
In the year 1042 the people of Constantinople
were much embarrassed by the appearance of
more than 150 wolves at the same time. And in
1148 in the land of Geneva there was seen a
wolf of unusual size, which killed thirty persons
of both sexes and various ages. Who, then, can
doubt but that these wolves were Lycanthropes ?
Again, there are the three wolves which were
seen on the i8th of July, 1603, in the district
of Douvres and Jeurre about half an hour after a
hailstorm had very strangely ruined all the fruit
of that country. These wolves had no tails; and,
moreover, as they ran through herds of cows
and goats they touched none of them except one
little kid, which one of them carried a little
distance away without doing it any harm at all.
It is apparent from this that these were not
natural wolves, but were rather witches who
had helped to cause the hailstorm, and had come
to witness the damage which they had caused.
AN EXAMEN
Also there was one which was larger than the
others, and always went in front; and GrozJacques Bocquet, Thievenne Paget, la Michollette and several others said that, when they ran
about in the shape of wolves, Satan used also to
assume the form of a wolf and led and guided
them.
The people of this country ought to know as
much as any others about were-wolves; for they
have always been known here. In the year 1521
three witches were executed:—Michael Udon
of Plane, which is a little village near Poligny;
Philibert Montot; and one called Gros Pierre.
These men confessed that they had changed
themselves into wolves and in that form had
killed and eaten several people. While he was in
the shape of a wolf, Michael Udon was wounded
by a gentleman, who followed and found him in
his hut where his wife was bathing his wound;
but he had then resumed the form of a man.
There have for a long time been pictures of
these three witches in the Church of the Jaco­
bins at Poligny. And in 1573 Gilles Garnier
also confessed that he had made himself into a
wolf, and in that form had killed and eaten
several children, and was burned alive at Dole
by order of the Court. Here it will be relevant
to recount what happened in the year 1588 in a
village about two leagues from Apchon in the
highlands of Auvergne. One evening a gentle­
man, standing at the window of his chateau, saw
a huntsman whom he knew passing by, and
asked him to bring him some of his bag on his
return. As the huntsman went his way along a
valley, he was attacked by a large wolf and dis­
charged his arquebus at it without hurting it.
OF WITCHES
He was therefore compelled to grapple with the
wolf, and caught it by the ears; but at length,
growing weary, he let go of the wolf, drew back
and took his big hunting knife, and with it cut
off one of the wolf’s paws, which he put in his
pouch after the wolf had run away. He then
returned to the gentleman’s chateau, in sight of
which he had fought the wolf. The gentleman
asked him to give him part of his bag; and the
huntsman, wishing to do so and intending to take
the paw from his pouch, drew from it a hand
wearing a gold ring on one of the fingers, which
the gentleman recognised as belonging to his
wife. This caused him to entertain an evil sus­
picion of her; and going into the kitchen, he
found his wife nursing her arm in her apron,
which he took away, and found that her hand
had been cut off. Thereupon the gentleman
seized hold of her; but immediately, and as soon
as she had been confronted with her hand, she
confessed that it was no other than she who, in
the form of a wolf, had attacked the hunter; and
she was afterwards burned at Ryon. This was
told me by one who may be believed, who went
that way fifteen days after this thing had hap­
pened. So much for men being changed into the
shape of wolves.
But they are sometimes also changed into the
shapes of other animals. For we read that Circe
changed the companions of Ulysses into swine;
Circe did with her chants accursed and strange
The wretched comrades of Ulysses change.
And Lucian and Apuleius confessed that they
were formerly changed into asses. It is probable
that this is what happened to certain pilgrims
De Civit.
XVIII. 17.
VII. II.
Bodin.
Cf. Bart, de
Spin, de Strig.
e. t<).
ANEXAMEN
who were crossing the Alps, according to the
evidence of St. Augustine: as also to an English­
man who, says Guillaume Archbishop of Tyre,
was thus metamorphosed by a witch of Cyprus
while kneeling in a church; and to another men­
tioned by Vincent of Beauvais in his “Mirror,”
and by Baptista Fulgosus, who after he had been
dipped in water returned to his former shape.
Others also have held that the ass which Belon
in his “Observations” says that he saw in Cairo
in Egypt was none other than a transformed
Others have been changed into cats. In our own
time one named Charcot of the bailiwick of Gez
was attacked by night in a wood by a number of
cats; but when he made the sign of the Cross
they all vanished. And more recently a horse­
man was passing by the Chateau de Joux and
saw several cats up a tree; he approached and
discharged a carbine which he was carrying,
thereby causing a ring with several keys attached
to it to fall from the tree. These he took to the
village, and when he asked for dinner at the inn,
neither the hostess nor the keys of the cellar
could be found. He showed the bunch of keys
which he was carrying, and the host recognised
them as his wife’s, who meanwhile came up,
wounded in the right hip. Her husband seized
her, and she confessed that she had just come
from the Sabbat, where she had lost her keys
after having been wounded in the hip by a shot
from a carbine.
The Inquisitors also tell that in their time there
were seen three large cats near the town of
Strasbourg, which afterwards resumed the shape
of women.
OF WITCHES
At other times men have been seen in the shape
of a horse. Prasstantius took the form of a horse; Fuig. VIII. 2.
and an Egyptian’s wife cured by St. Macharius
that of a mare.
Again, there have been those who have been
accused of changing themselves into hares, as
was Pierre Gandillon, who was burned alive in
this place.
But even if we had no other proof than the
history of Nabuchodonosor, that would suffice Dan. 4.
for us to believe that the metamorphosis of a
man into a beast is possible. For it is said that
this Prince was changed into an ox, and lived
for seven years like a beast, eating straw.
The fact of transformation can again be proved
from the example of Lot’s wife, who was turned Gen. 19.
into a pillar of salt which was still to be seen in
’7the time of Josephus, as he himself testifies in /. ,g.
his “Antiquities.” It is again instanced in the
transmutation of all sorts of herbs and plants into
various kinds of worms and serpents, which are
all endowed with their appropriate forms and
qualities, as we read in Cardan. Also we observe De Subtil.
that if a woman’s hair be hidden in dung, it is XVIII.
changed to a serpent, as also is a rotten rod or
wand. And in the town of Darien, a Province Ibid.
of the New World, drops of water are in summer
turned to little green frogs.
Nevertheless it has always been my opinion that
Lycanthropy is an illusion, and that the meta­
morphosis of a man into a beast is impossible.
For it would necessitate one of two things;—
either the man who is changed into a beast must
keep his soul and power of reason, or he must
lose this at the moment of metamorphosis. Now
the first point cannot be admitted, since it is
AN EXAMEN
impossible for the body of a brute beast to con­
tain a reasoning soul. We know by experience
that the wisdom or folly of a man is governed by
the temperature of his brain, and that those with
small heads are not usually very wise: then how
can we believe that a soul gifted with reason can
make its lodging in the head of a wolf or an ass
Gen. I.
or a cat or a horse or a hare ? Besides, it is said
in Genesis that man was created in the image
and likeness of God, and this principally refers to
the soul; and would it not be unspeakably absurd
to maintain that so beautiful and holy a likeness
should inhabit the body of a beast ? Therefore I
think that Homer was in error when, speaking
of the companions of Ulysses who were changed
into swine by Circe, he says that they had the
hair, head and body of swine, but that their
reason remained intact.
But if, on the other hand, a man loses his reason­
ing soul when he is metamorphosed, how is it
possible for him to recover it, and for it to return
into him when he resumes the shape of a man ?
Cf. Richard,
If this were possible we should have to admit
Dtscoursdes
that the Devil can perform miracles, if we grant
Afirac es, c. 38,
truth of the maxim of the Philosophers, that
“That which is lost can never be recovered.”
But then I ask. Where does Satan put the soul
when it is separated from its body? Does he
cause it to wander in the air, or does he shut it
up somewhere until the Lycanthrope has re­
sumed his human shape? Certainly I cannot
think that God permits him who has sworn our
utter ruin to play such tricks with us. Aristotle
was far nearer the truth when he said that the
soul no more leaves its body than a pilot leaves
his ship. In conclusion I believe that the trans­
OF WITCHES
mutation of a man into a beast in the manner St. August.
we speak of is so much the less possible in that
the truth is that He alone to whom creation ^onfe^.’malef.,
belongs can change the forms of things. And it 3. dub. frindp.
would be a shameful thing for man, to whom all fottpr<xclud.
the beasts of the earth are subject, to be clothed p"al'‘s
in the form of a beast. For the Law has so much
respect for the human face, since it was formed
in the likeness of celestial beauty, that it has not
permitted it to be disfigured even by branding or
otherwise as a punishment for any crime. A C. Episopi 26.
Council has even pronounced those to be in- ?• 5fidels who believe in Lycanthropy and the meta­
morphosis of a man into a beast.
As for Nabuchodonosor, he was never changed St. Jerome,
into an ox; but he thought he was so changed, ^ptpha.^and
and therefore went with the brute beasts and ^mud by^Binslived as they did. This is very clearly shown by Jeld, d. 3. dub.
the words of the Holy Scripture, which are
3repeated three times in the same chapter -.Dan. 4.
“Thou shalt eat grass as oxen." But even if we
were to admit that this Prince was truly changed
into an ox, it would not follow from that that
witches have the power, with the help of Satan,
to change themselves into wolves. For as to the
former case, we must say with the magicians of
Pharaoh: “This is the finger of God.” In the Exod. 8.
same light I would regard what I have said of
Lot’s wife.
As for the herbs, and drops of water, and
woman’s hair which are changed into worms and
serpents and frogs, this comes about through
corruption and putrefaction, by which imperfect
animals are engendered; but this does not apply
in the case of Lycanth ropes.
There have been those who have flatly conL
Chaf. 17.
AN EXAMEN
tradicted the changing of a man into a beast,
holding that the Lycanthrope did its work in
the spirit only, whilst its body lay lifeless behind
some bush. But there is no more truth in this
than in the former opinion; for if it be true that,
when the soul is separated from the body, death
must necessarily ensue, how is it possible for
Satan to bring the witch back to life, seeing that
to do so is possible with God only, as we have
fully shown elsewhere ?
My own opinion is that Satan sometimes leaves
the witch asleep behind a bush, and himself goes
and performs that which the witch has in mind
to do, giving himself the appearance of a wolf;
but that he so confuses the witch’s imagination
that he believes he has really been a wolf and
has run about and killed men and beasts. He
acts in just the same way as when he causes
witches to believe firmly that they have been to
the Sabbat, although they have really been lying
in their beds; and it is likely that the ointment
with which they rub themselves only serves to
deaden their senses so that they do not awake
for a long time. And when it happens that they
find themselves wounded, it is Satan who immedi­
ately transfers to them the blow which he has
received in his assumed body.
Notwithstanding, I maintain that for the most
part it is the witch himself who runs about slay­
ing: not that he is metamorphosed into a wolf,
but that it appears to him that he is so. And this
comes from the Devil confusing the four
Humours of which he is composed, so that he
represents whatever he will to his fantasy and
imagination. This will be easier to believe when
it is considered that there are natural maladies of
OF WITCHES
such a nature that they cause the sick to believe
that they are cocks, or pigs, or oxen. And here I
shall set down what Cardan relates of Andre de Subtil, lib.
Osiander of Nuremberg, a man well versed in
theology. This man was in his youth afflicted
with a quartan fever; and when it attacked him,
he thought that he was in a forest and that many
serpents and other savage beasts attacked him;
and there was no means of persuading him that
he was only imagining this, and that he was all
the time in his father’s house. And whenever
his father came to him, he always came back to
his senses and recognised the house, the room and
his friends; but when his father went away again,
he again fell into his former sickness and imagin­
ings, which continued for as long as the fever
lasted. It is in the same way that those who are
feverish, having their palates out of order, cannot
correctly discriminate between different dishes.
And when people see the witch in this shape, and
think that it is really a wolf, the fact is that the
Devil befogs and deceives their sight so that they
think they see what is not; for such fascination
is commonly used by the Devil and his demons,
as we know from several examples. Simon
Magus told the Emperor Nero that he might cut
off his head, and he would come to life again on
the third day; but he substituted a sheep, which
they beheaded thinking that it was he. He also
so troubled the eyes of St. Clement and several Clem, de
other holy persons that they mistook Simon for recogn. hb.
Faustinian. Again, there was once brought to
St. Macharius a young woman whom everybody
took to be a mare. About twelve years ago at
Uzelle, which is a village in the department of
Baume in our country, a certain man’s house
AN EXAMEN
appeared to be all on fire, so that all the inhabit­
ants ran to extinguish it as they usually do in such
cases; but after about an hour they saw the house
standing whole and quite undamaged; and this
happened on three separate occasions, and was
contrived by a certain chambermaid, as I was
told by Monsieur Jean Cretenet, the Lord of
Thalenay, a Canon of the Metropolitan Church
of Besanfon, who was himself present on one of
these occasions. I also know of this from the
report of the trial sent to me by the Lord Ayme
Morel of Besan^on. Consider also our card
manipulators. I have seen an Italian Count
named 1’Escot, who practised this marvellously;
he would put a ten of spades in your hand, and
you would always end by finding that it was the
king of hearts, or some other different card.
Those in whose presence he did these tricks were
men of wit who were very careful to make sure
whether it was only a matter of sleight of hand.
There is no doubt but that he cast some glamour
over their eyes; for he also turned his back to
them and muttered I know not what between
his teeth when he did these sleight-of-hand
tricks.
But why should we find anything very strange in
this fascination by which Satan makes a man
appear like a wolf to us? For, among other
naturalists, Albert, Cardan and Giovanni Bat­
tista Porta of Naples have taught us how to
cause men’s heads to seem like those of horses
and asses and other animals, and their snouts like
a dog’s. They even have means to make men
appear like angels. And therefore I am the less
surprised at the formulas which they also give for
causing a house to appear silvery, luminous.
OF WITCHES
green, full of serpents, and to assume other ter­
rible forms. This is consonant with what we
have just said of the house at Uzelle.
The following examples also are pertinent to our
subject with regard to the last point which we
have just touched upon.
About three years ago Benoist Bidel of Naizan,
a lad of fifteen or sixteen, climbed a tree to pick
some fruit, leaving his younger sister at the foot
of the tree. The girl was then attacked by a wolf
without a tail; whereupon the brother quickly
climbed down from the tree. The wolf then left
the girl and turned to the boy, and took from him
a knife which he was carrying, and wounded him
in the neck with it. People ran to the boy’s
assistance, and led him into his father’s house,
where he died of his wounds in a few days. But
before he died he declared that the wolfwhich had
wounded him had its two forefeet like a man’s
hands covered on the top with hair. They knew
then that it was Perrenette Gandillon who had
killed him; for she tried to make her escape
after striking the blow, and was killed by the
peasants.
Similarly Jeanne Perrin deposed that while she
was going through a wood with Clauda Gaillard,
Clauda said to her that she had received more
alms than she; and then she went behind a bush,
and Jeanne saw come from it a wolf without a
tail, which pranced round her and so frightened
her that she let fall her alms and ran away, after
having protected herself with the sign of the
Cross; and she added that this wolf had toes on
its hind feet like a human being. There is a
strong presumption that this wolf was no other
than Clauda Gaillard; for she afterwards told
AN EXAMEN
Jeanne that the wolf which attacked her would
not have done her any harm. And as for the
hands and the toes which were recognised by
Benoist Bidel and Jeanne Perrin, are they not
evidence that Perrenette Gandillon and Clauda
Gaillard were not really transformed into
wolves ? We may say the same of the wife of the
gentleman of Auvergne, of whom we wrote
above, whose hand was found in the hunter’s
pouch instead of a paw. This agrees also with
what Job Fincel says of his Lycanthrope of
Padua, namely, that, when its paws were cut off,
the man was found with his hands and feet cut
The confessions of Jacques Bocquet, Fran^oise
Secretain, Clauda Jamguillaume, Clauda Jamprost, Thievenne Paget, Pierre Gandillon and
George Gandillon are very relevant to our argu­
ment; for they said that, in order to turn them­
selves into wolves, they first rubbed themselves
with an ointment, and then Satan clothed them
in a wolf’s skin which completely covered them,
and that they then went on all-fours and ran
about the country chasing now a person and now
an animal according to the guidance of their
appetite. They confessed also that they tired
themselves with running. I remember once
asking Clauda Jamprost how she was so well able
to follow the others, even when they had to climb
up rocks, seeing that she was both old and lame;
and she answered me that she was borne along
by Satan. But this in no way renders them
immune from fatigue. For they who are carried
by the Devil to the Sabbat say that when they
Remy,
arrive there, or when they return to their
OemowZ. 1. 24. houses, they are quite weary and fatigued.
OF WITCHES
In company with the Lord Claude Meynier, our
Recorder, I have seen those I have named go on
all-fours in a room just as they did when they
were in the fields; but they said that it was im­
possible for them to turn themselves into wolves,
since they had no more ointment, and they had
lost the power of doing so by being imprisoned.
I have further noted that they were all scratched
on the face and hands and legs; and that Pierre
Gandillon was so much disfigured in this way
that he bore hardly any resemblance to a man,
and struck with horror those who looked at him.
Finally, the clothes of the children which they
have killed and eaten have been found in the
fields quite whole and without a single tear; so
that there was every appearance of the children
having been undressed by human hands.
Who now can doubt but that these witches
themselves ran about and committed the acts
and murders of which we have spoken.? For
what was the cause of the fatigue which they
experienced? If they had been sleeping behind
some bush, how did they become fatigued ? What
caused the scratches on their persons, if it was
not the thorns and bushes through which they
ran in their pursuit of man and animals ? Again,
is it not the work of human hands to unclothe a
child in the manner we have described ? I say
nothing of their confessions, which are all in
agreement with one another.
I am well aware that there are those who cannot
believe that witches eat human flesh. But such
people ought to consider that from all time there
have been tribes which use this practice, even
if they were not were-wolves, and that they have
therefore been called Anthropophagi; and that
AN EXAMEN
it is even said that there are still a great number
of them in Brazil and the lands of the New
World, whose chief boast is to have eaten many
of their enemies. Witches go even further; for
they take down the corpses from gibbets in
order to eat their flesh. Lucan says:
She gnaws the rope through with her witch’s
teeth,
She drags the gibbet down, unhangs the
corpse.
And then in cruel banqueting tears out
The stomach’s entrails and the marrow bones.
Horace also gives us sufficient evidence that
witches are hungry for human flesh:
Ars poet.
Cf. Bodin,
PemoBow. IV.
From the bloated body of an aged witch
They cut a child which was not yet quite dead.
And Apuleius in the “Golden Ass” says that
there were witches in Thessaly who used to
search everywhere for dead bodies, so that if a
corpse was not carefully guarded it would be
found all gnawed about the nose and cheeks and
mouth and several other parts. Not long ago at
Nancy in Lorraine the corpse of one who had
been tortured was left in the road outside the
town; and it was found that during the night a
thigh and a leg had been cut off from the body.
There were many various opinions concerning
this event; but for my part I maintain that only a
witch did this deed; for on the same night there
was seen a spectre hovering about the body,
which so frightened a passer-by that, although he
put his hand to his sword, he was compelled to
run away into the town.
Fulgosus also mentions a villager who was
WITCHES
burned alive because she had killed several
children and salted them to keep as food for
herself.
I am only puzzled by the fact that our witches
said that they could not eat the head or the right
side of those whom they killed, Groz-Jacques
stated that he could not touch the head, by reason
of the Holy Chrism with which it is anointed;
and Clauda Jamguillaume said that they did not
touch the right side because the sign of the Cross
is made with the right hand. But I do not know
that these are sufficient reasons, although they
are largely substantiated by the strength and
power which lies in the Cross and the Holy
Chrism, of which we shall hereafter speak more
fully.
And if anyone ask with what instrument witches,
when appearing to be wolves, effect the death of
those whom they kill, I shall answer that they
have only too many contrivances for this pur­
pose. For sometimes they use knives and swords,
as did Perrenette Gandillon, who killed Benoist
Bidel with his own knife; and therefore he who
painted the three were-wolves of Poligny repre­
sented them as each carrying a knife in its right
paw. At other times they drag their victims
through rocks and stones, and so kill them.
Clauda Jamprost, Clauda Jamguillaume and
Thievenne Paget confessed that they did this.
I make no doubt also that, for the most part, they
strangle them.
For the rest, Jacques Bocquet and Pierre
Gandillon said that, when they wished to turn
into wolves, they rubbed themselves with an
ointment given them by the Devil. Michel Udon,
Gros Pierre and others confessed the same.
AN EXAMEN
They said also that, when they wished to resume
their former shape, they rolled in the dew or
washed themselves with water. This agrees with
Sprenger’s statement that a man who has been
changed into a beast loses that shape when he
is bathed in running water. Again, the man
mentioned by Vincent of Beauvais, who was
changed into an ass, resumed his human shape
when he was dipped in the water. Apuleius gives
another method for restoring a man from the
shape of an ass, which is to eat fresh roses or else
anise and laurel leaves together with, spring
water. Pierre Burgot similarly said that, to lose
his wolf’s shape, he rubbed himself with certain
herbs. But since, as we have shown, the meta­
morphosis of a man into a beast is for countless
reasons a very controversial subject, we must not
pay much attention to these remedies. More­
over, I believe that most often witches who think
that they are wolves neither wash nor anoint
themselves in order to resume their natural shape.
I had nearly omitted to say that were-wolves
couple with natural wolves according to the con­
fessions of Michel Udon and Gros Pierre, who
said that they had as much pleasure in the act as
if they had been embracing their wives.
So much have I thought good to set down con­
cerning Lycanthropes or were-wolves. Yet I
should be sorry to leave this subject without re­
primanding those who would excuse them and
cast the blame for all that they do upon Satan, as
if they were entirely innocent. For it is apparent
from what I have said that it is the witches
themselves who run about and kill people; so
that we may here apply the Proverb which says:
“Man is a wolf to man.” And even if they were
OF WITCHES
guilty in nothing but their damnable intention,
they should still be thought worthy of death, see­
ing that the law takes cognisanceof the intention L. i. ie
even in matters which are not very serious,
although nothing has actually resulted from such
intention. I may add that such people never
have this intention, except those who have first
renounced God and Heaven.
Chapter XLVIII.
That IVitches generally Consecrate their Children
to Satan; and of the Pain Suffered by Grozfacques and Certain Other Sorcerers.
Roz-Jacques confessed also that Satan had
demanded one of his daughters from him,
but that he had been unwilling to surrender her.
But I am of a contrary opinion; for it is the Psal. 106.
custom of witches to dedicate their children to it
Satan, as is proved by many examples.
Pierre Vuillermoz, the son of Guillaume Vuillermoz, said that his father had twice taken him to
the Sabbat near the village of Coirieres when
he was only ten years old, and that he con­
tinually urged him to give himself to Satan. The
brothers Claude, Charloz and Perrenette Mollard likewise said that Clauda Gindre, their
maternal grandmother, had taken them to the
Sabbat when they were of very tender age. It is
probable that Guillaume Vuillermoz and Clauda
Gindre had vowed their children to Satan: yet
these children had only to be frightened at the
Psal. io6.
AN EXAMEN
sight and hearing of the Devil to cause them not
to give themselves to him. I surmise that this
was owing to the fact that they had not yet
reached the age of puberty. For Satan pursues
only those who have passed the age of twelve or
fourteen; since in his cunning and guile he knows
full well that an agreement made with those who
are younger than this cannot be binding, seeing
that such have no judgement or discretion.
Clauda Gindre was the mother of Guillaume
Vuillermoz, so that it is probable that she had
also debauched her son. Pierre Gandillon de­
bauched his children George and Antoine Gan­
dillon, and took them to the Sabbat.
From this it is apparent that the common saying
is true, namely, that it needs but one witch to
pollute a whole family. And so it happened that
there were formerly whole families in Africa
and Italy which could kill people by looking at
them or complimenting them, and that the race
of Antasus in Arcadia used to turn into wolves,
and afterwards resume their human shape.
But an even stranger matter is that there are
fathers who, to please the Devil, have mur­
dered their own children, as Manasses, King of
Judah, who sacrificed his children to Satan,
who in return promised to make him powerful.
Medea also sacrificed two of her own children
in order to cause the death of Glauce, daughter
of King Creon. This has apparently happened in
many other instances; so that David in one place
complains, saying: “They sacrificed their sons
and their daughters unto devils.” And again:
“And shed innocent blood, even the blood of
their sons and of their daughters, whom they
sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan.”
OF WITCHES
There are even those who have not spared them
even in their mother’s womb, as the Baron de
Rays.
Therefore I am not much surprised that strangers
should have done the like, as did Stadlin, who
confessed that he had killed seven children in
their mother’s womb; and the Emperor Maxentius, who used to have mothers ripped open all
alive and their offspring taken away to be sacri­
ficed to Satan and to form the material for the
making of his virgin parchments.
He opened up the wombs of wretched Baptis.
mothers. ...
To have their fruits to sacrifice to devils.
It is not without cause then, to return to my
argument, that it is taken as a great presumption
of guilt against the accused if his father and
mother, or one of them, are witches. Some have Bodin,
maintained that this is an infallible rule; and Demonom. IF.
there seems much to be said for such a view, considering the great number of instances of parents
who have destroyed their children in this way,
and the fact that Satan’s one object is the rum
of the whole human race in order that he may
thus increase his kingdom. And therefore he
urges those witches who have no children to
debauch their neighbours and bring them into
his net, as we have seen in the cases of GrozJacques, Grosse Fran^oise, the husband of la
Micholette and several others.
Groz-Jacques was in the end burned alive, and
died contrite and penitent. Clauda Jamguillaume, Thievenne Paget and Clauda Gaillard
accompanied him in death; but the last of these
would never confess anything, and proved so
AN EXAMEN
obstinate that it was with difficulty that she
was persuaded to call upon God for mercy. We
have spoken of her already, and shall later treat
of the reasons for her condemnation.
I must not forget the methods used to draw the
truth from Thievenne Paget. After she had
remained in prison for about three months with­
out confessing at all, she was lodged in a cell next
to that of Groz-Jacques, who was one of her
accusers. But they spoke to Groz-Jacques first,
and he promised to do his utmost to induce her
to confess. And he fulfilled his promise; for after
Thievenne had been but one night next to him
she confessed, and stood so well to her confession
that, by order of the Judge, a man was sent in to
her the next day, and told her that he had been
to the Sabbat with her, and told her particulars of
it which he took from the confession of GrozJacques and that of the other witches who had
accused her. This is a practice which I recom­
mend Judges to follow sometimes, but not always
for reasons which I have hinted elsewhere.
As for Clauda Jamprost, she was executed some
time before the others, being burned alive. She
repented, and died very bravely.
OF WITCHES
Chapter XL I X.
Of Guillaume Kuillermo'z known as le Baillu.
Of his Confrontation with Pierre his Son,
and the Causes of his Condemnation.
He next trial was that of Guillaume Vuil-
lermoz known as le Baillu, who had been
committed to prison on the accusation of GrozJacques, Fran^oise Secretain and Rollande du
Vernois. Christofle of Aranthon also asserted
that she had seen him at the Sabbat, and also his
son Pierre Vuillermoz maintained that he had
taken him to the witches’ assembly. He would
never, however, confess: yet we would not have
failed to condemn him, if he had not anticipated
his sentence by dying in prison. The following
were the reasons upon which we based his
conviction.
I. The accusation of five of his accomplices.
2. The common report, attested by twentythree witnesses, that he was a witch.
3. The fact that Clauda Gindre, his mother,
was also suspect. This was deposed by the same
witnesses, and was not denied by himself, or by
one of his brothers who has since undergone
torture at Dole.
4. The fact that he was never seen to shed a
single tear, however much he endeavoured to
weep before the Judge.
5. That he had himself volunteered to be
examined, so that we might see whether he had
any mark upon him.
AN EXAMEN
6. The execrable imprecations which he com­
monly used in his answers.
7. His confrontations with his son Pierre Vuillermoz, which I will here set down in writing.
Since this man remained stubborn in his replies,
and when confronted with Groz-Jacques, F ran9oise Secretain, Rollande du Vernois and Christofle of Aranthon, it was decided to confront
him with his son, who was only twelve years old.
When the boy had changed his coat in the
prison, he was brought before his father, and the
father was asked if he knew him. The man
answered that he did not; whereupon the boy
was brought nearer and was directed to speak,
and said to his father that he knew him well.
The man continued to deny it, and told the boy
that he had changed his clothes. The boy was
then stripped, but the father still had difficulty in
recognising him. He was then asked if it was
long since he had seen his son, and he answered
that it was only four months, and that he had
seen him on the very day of his arrest. The boy
was then made to speak to him again; and at
last, after having considered with himself for a
long time, the father recognised him and said
that it was his son Pierre. After this the son was
asked whether his father had ever taken him to
the Sabbat near the village of Coirieres; and the
boy answered that he had, adding that all that
he had told us was true. At this the father began
to rage and shout and utter such words as: “Ah,
my son, you will ruin us both,” and he suddenly
threw himself face downward on to the ground,
so that it was thought that he had killed himself.
Yet he recovered, and declared that he had never
been to the Sabbat, and still less had he taken his
OF WITCHES
son there; but his words were always mingled
with certain execrable imprecations, and at times
he made as if to tear his lips and face with his
nails. The son persisted in his statements, and
calmly gave particulars of the time, place and
manner of his being taken to the Sabbat by his
father, who, he added, had promised him that
they would thereby become rich, although he
himself knew well that this was false. So much
for the first confrontation of le Baillu with his
Afterwards the son was questioned separately as
to whether he had not been suborned to say what
he had said in front of his father; and he was re­
monstrated with, and given to understand that he
would be the cause of his father being burned
alive; he was even threatened with the lash. But
he remained absolutely unshaken, and never
varied in his statement. Therefore, a few days
later, he was again brought before his father, to
whom he maintained, as before, that he had twice
taken him to the Sabbat near the village of Colrieres. The father denied this with his customary
oaths. The boy added that, when at the Sabbat,
his father had urged him to give himself to the
Devil, but that he had refused to do so.
It was a strange and harrowing experience to
witness these confrontations. For the father was
emaciated through his imprisonment, he had
fetters on his hands and feet, he wailed and
shouted and threw himself to the ground. I
remember too that, when he became calmer, he
sometimes spoke kindly to his son, saying that
whatever he did he would always own him as
his child. And all the time the son never
trembled in any way, but seemed as one insen-
AN EXAMEN
sible, so that it appeared that Nature had fur­
nished him with weapons against herself, seeing
that his own blood was in a way to bring to an
ignominious death the man who had given him
life. But assuredly I believe that in this was
manifested a just and secret judgement of God,
who would not allow so detestable a crime as
witchcraft to remain hidden and not be brought
c. privilegium to light. Also it is reasonable to believe that the
II. q. 3. C. cum son ^.;is not at that time pierced by the pangs of
accessissent de
because his father had openly leagued
himself against God and Nature.
From this I would conclude that, in a case of
witchcraft, it is right to admit the evidence of a
son against his father and of a father against his
son; and still more that kindred may testify one
L. parentee de against the Other, although their evidence against
testib. C.
other persons may rightly be inadmissible.
Another reason which I would add is that the
father usually makes his son, and the mother her
daughter, a witch; the brother so initiates his
sister, and the aunt her niece or nephew. And
they always commit their crimes and a.bominations in the night and in secret, so that it is only
their own kindred who are able to give evidence
against them. In such cases effect must be given
to the law which admits the evidence of those
who are otherwise inadmissible as witnesses,
D.D. in d. L. when the crime has been committed at night.
parentes^
And further, if, in a case of treason against man,
C. ziergentis de a Son may bear witness against his father, and a
bteret.t.
father against his son, why should not this be
de malefic,
crime of witchcraft, which is
treason against both God and man in the highest
degree? In olden times God commanded the
Levites to take up arms and kill, each his own
OF WITCHES
brother and his kindred, because they had wor­
shipped the golden calf. In short, if this practice
were not allowed, this crime would for the most
part remain unpunished, than which no greater
misfortune could happen to the world, since God
has so expressly commanded us to put witches to
death.
Chapter L.
Whether one Accused of Witchcraft and Dying in
Prison may he Buried in Consecrated Soil.
Ince le Baillu died in prison there was some
argument concerning his burial; for it seemed
that he ought not to be buried in consecrated
ground in view of the crime with which he was
charged. However, the contrary opinion was fol­
lowed as being more humane and equitable.
Also it is in conformity with the law, which
holds that the accused shall not be considered as
guilty until he has actually been sentenced and
the sentence has been confirmed. This holds
good to the extent that, if the accused has lodged
an appeal to a higher Court, he shall not be con­
sidered as guilty during the hearing of his appeal.
Therefore, if a man be convicted of larceny, or L.furtUn
any other crime which involves disgrace, and has ftndf. debts
appealed against his conviction, he shall not be fam.
held to be guilty until his appeal has been dis­
allowed and his sentence confirmed. Similarly, l. qui a latronithe law upholds the validity of the will of a man
who has lodged an appeal against a capital sentence, if he dies during the hearing of the appeal.
an exAME N
I go further, and say that this condition should
hold good not only in the case of one who has
been convicted by witnesses, but also in that of
one who has been convicted by his own con­
fession, provided that he is penitent in the manner
C. placuit,
set forth in the Canon Law. For if he had lived,
23- ?• 5he might have proved that his confession was
L. defuncto de falsely made. Furthermore, the law intends that
public, judic.
(jjg crime shall be nullified by the death of the
criminal.
It is another matter if the accused wilfully and
deliberately kills himself in prison; for then he
must be entirely denied the rites of burial. In
C. placuit, &c. this country it is even the custom to drag such a
I. de ternea.
hurdle through the town to the place of
execution, where his body is either burned or
hanged according to the gravity of his crime. I
have seen this done to a schoolmaster who had
hanged himself in prison; for by order of the
Court his body was dragged on a hurdle through
the town to the Tartre and there hanged on a
Jul. Clar. lib. gibbet. The same practice is observed in several
5. ^fin. q. 51. other places, although some hold that it is con’ ’7to jhe law, seeing that, as they say, it is not
permissible to carry out an execution upon a dead
body. But I maintain that our practice is defen­
sible, because it is found by experience that the
fear of being disgraced after death has deterred
many from committing a crime. There is a
notable example of this in Plutarch, where he tells
of the Milesian virgins who could not be pre­
vented from strangling themselves until an edict
was published to the effect that any who hanged
themselves in the future would be stripped naked
after their death in the sight of all. Certainly it
cannot be but that this practice must strike terror
OF WITCHES
into the hearts of those who contemplate a similar
crime.
I do not wish to enter here into the question
whether the body of a witch who has been put to
death may be demanded by his relatives or others
for the purpose of burial; for the matter is of
itself evident. There is no doubt that we must
refuse such a request. For if it is not allowed in a l. i. de cadacase of high treason, why should it be allowed in /’“"'wra case of witchcraft? For witchcraft is treason
against both God and man, and is the most
execrable crime that can possibly be imagined.
This request may certainly be granted in cases of
lesser crimes; and in this country particularly it
is so, where the Court is accustomed piously to
grant the body, of one who has died penitent, to
the Brothers of the Cross, whose zealous care it c. quasitum 13.
is to vie with each other in taking such corpses ?•
C'Zar.
from the gallows and burying them in consecrated ground in the most honourable manner Navar. cmsil.
possible. And this is in accordance with the pro4- 5visions of the Canon Law.
’' 5'
ChapterLI.
The Causes and Reasons of the Sentence Con­
demning Clauda Gaillard.
He condemnation of Clauda Gaillard was
founded on the same reasons as that of Le
. Baillu.
I. It was popularly rumoured that she was a
witch.
EXAMEN
2. She was never seen to shed a single tear, how­
ever much she tried to weep.
3. In her answers she commonly used execrable
imprecations.
4. Like le Baillu, she convicted herself before
she was accused. For when she was asked, among
other things, whether Humbert Guichon was
married, she replied that he was, and that his
wife was named Marie Perrier; and she imme­
diately added of her own accord that she had
never harmed that woman; and all the tirne that
was the woman whom she had made sick by
breathing on her face.
5. She was convicted on being brought face to
face with Christofle of Aranthon; for when she
and another were brought into the room where
the Officers were, Christofle recognised her and
firmly declared that she had seen her, together
with other women whom she named, at the Sab­
bat near the village of Coirieres.
Also there were many discrepancies in her
answers.
Finally, she was charged with several acts of
witchcraft, and with having caused Marie Perrier
and Clauda Perrier to fall sick by breathing upon
their faces; also with having caused the death of
six goats belonging to Pierre Perrier, and with
having made one of Jean Perrier’s mares sick,
and with having afterwards cured it; and also
with having changed herself into a wolf. It is
true that in the case of most of these charges there
was only one witness against her; but aS they were
all agreed in accusing her of witchcraft, and were
all either kindred or connexions of hers, their
evidence was considered as sufficient.
OF WITCHES
Chapter LIL
Of Pierre Puillermoz and of Christofle of the Pil­
lage ofdiranthon, and how they were Treated
Leniently on Account of their Touth and for
Certain Other Reasons.
Come now to Pierre Vuillermoz, son of le
Baillu, and Christofle of the village of Aranthon, whom I can only name so, because she
never knew the name of her father and mother,
except that her mother was called Jeanne. These
two were both put into prison: Christofle on the
accusation of Groz-Jacques, and because she had
spread the report that she had been taken by
Groz-Jacques and Fran^oise Secretain to the
Sabbat near the village of Coirieres; and Pierre
Vuillermoz on the accusation of Christofle, and
because he also affirmed on all sides that he had
been twice taken by his father to the Sabbat near
the village of Coirieres. Pierre was twelve years
old when he was put in prison, and Christofle
fourteen; but it was two years since either of
them had been to the Sabbat.
Further, Pierre Vuillermoz had never been
dedicated to the Devil, and it did not appear that
he had committed any act of witchcraft; and
although he confessed that, the last time his father
had taken him to the Sabbat, he had urged him
to give himself to Satan, he said that he had never
consented to do so; and he added that he had been
so frightened at seeing the Evil One and at hear-
EXAMEN
ing him speak, that for that reason he had never
consented to go to the Sabbat again.
As for Christofle, she admitted that she had been
given to the Devil, and that she had killed a cow
at Coirieres at the instigation of Groz-Jacques
and Grosse Fran^oise, who had given her a
certain ointment with which she had rubbed the
cow on the behind.
Christofle made a full confession; but Pierre
Vuillermoz was three days in prison without any
statement being drawn from him. Yet he was in
the end released, the procurator being ordered to
approach his nearest of kin with a view to having
him catechised and instructed in our Catholic
Apostolic Roman faith, and on condition that
they undertook to prove that they were carrying
out their duty within the next three months.
This boy was treated thus leniently because he
seemed to be innocent. For although he had been
to the Sabbat, he was not therefore guilty, since
he did not know where he was going when he
was being taken there; also he was taken by his
father, whom he dared not disobey. But his
innocence was even more clearly shown by the
fact that, when his father urged him to give him­
self to Satan, he would not do so, and would not
again go to the Sabbat.
Christofle of Aranthon was banished from the
land of Saint Oyan; and she was further com­
manded to be present at the execution of GrozJacques, Clauda Jamguillaume, Clauda Gaillard
and Thievenne Paget, so that she might be afraid
to continue in the service of Satan, and that the
gravity of the punishment which she saw them
suffer might be the occasion of her changing her
life. They gave her three weeks in which to
OF WITCHES
leave the country, and ordered the procurator in
the meantime to have her catechised and in­
structed.
I have no doubt that a stricter Judge would have
condemned her to death. For besides her con­
fession that she had been to the Sabbat and had
given herself to the Devil, it also appeared that
she had killed a cow by witchcraft, so that she
was to be reckoned as a witch, and was therefore
deserving of death. Another very pregnant
reason is that, once a person has been entangled
in Satan’s coils, he can never escape from them;
for this is proved by the fact that no witch has Barth, de Spin,
ever been known to change her life, so that it is q. de Strigib.
C. IO.
but waste time to show any mercy to witches, Remy,
and by doing so they are even given the chance to Daemonol. II,
commit ten thousand atrocities which would not 2.
Cf. Art. 63.
have happened if justice had been done to them.
And although Christofle was of tender age, yet
that is no excuse; for in cases of serious and
atrocious crime little count is taken of the
criminal’s age,unless it be to mitigate the sentence
in some degree. And consequently it has been Bodin,
known for children of not more than fifteen years Demonom. IV,
5to be punished with death in accordance with the L.
excipiuntur
law, which is strict in this matter.
ad Syllania.
Yet for several reasons it was judged better to L. si arrogati
confine this girl’s punishment to banishment. de 7utel. D,
Chiefly because she, as it were, anticipated justice
in that, when Groz-Jacques and Grosse Fran- Cf, Bodin,
?oise were put in prison, she immediately spread ibid.
the report that she had been taken by them to the
Sabbat; and because she freely confessed as soon
as she was in the hands ofJustice, and accused her
accomplices, and asked to be instructed in our
Holy Faith. And under such circumstances a
EXAMEN
witch’s punishment should be mitigated, especi­
ally when she is of tender age, as was Christofle,
who had not yet reached the age of puberty
C. illud 15 q. I. when she was at the Sabbat. For the law itself
& ibiglos.
excuses those who are not at the age of puberty,
^ejureiur^D.”' provided that they are incapable of fraud. This
is in agreement with the words of Lucan;
Lib. g.
But we forgive him for his tender age.
Boiin,
Demmom.
And the prompt confession of this girl, and the
simplicity of her answers, clearly showed that
there was no malice in her.
She might well have been sentenced to the lash.
But it was considered that this would irritate her
rather than induce her to mend her ways. For
since witches never leave the service of Satan for
any punishment that is given them, except that of
death, it is certain that, when they are released,
that mortal Enemy of the human race urges them
to avenge themselves and to do worse than before. Of this we have many examples, but I
take only that of Jeanne Harvillier. This
woman, while still very young, was given the
lash at Verbery for witchcraft; but she did not
desist for that, but always continued in her wick­
edness until, thirty years later, she was burned
alive at Ribemond. But it need be no matter of
surprise that witches are not corrected by being
scourged, or by any such punishment; for the
Devil torments them far more than this, and even
beats them to death, without their being able to
abandon him, as we read in Sprenger, who tells
that he condemned several witches who were
cruelly beaten by the Devil if they did not do his
commandments, and that they had no rest until
they did so. Also Antide Colas confessed that
OF WITCHES
the Devil urged her, while she was in prison, to
throw herself from a window, or to hang herself
from it; and because she would not, he beat her
cruelly on the body.
And this is why it seems that one should not
compromise when dealing with a witch, but
should either treat them leniently, or else con­
demn them to death. This agrees with the advice Lib. 9.
which, as Livy says, an old Samnite captain gave
his soldiers as to how they should treat the
Romans.
For my part I shall always maintain that, on the
least pretext, they should be put to death; even if
there were no other reason for this than the one
which I have often mentioned, namely, that
they never change their manner of living.
Nevertheless it is possible that there may be such
grounds for excusing them that it would be
wrong to proceed to a sentence of death against
them. But that must be left to the discretion of
the Judge.
Chapter
LIII.
Of Rollande du Fernois and how she was Pos­
sessed of Demons in Prison, and of her
Deliverance.
Et us come now to Rollande du Vernois,
whom we have mentioned several times.
This woman was from the village of Cheyserie
in Savoy and lived at the place of the Croya in the
AN EXAMEN
country of Saint Oyan de Joux. She was about
thirty-five years old, and was put in prison on the
accusation of Jacques Bocquet and Fran?oise
Secretain. I propose to write a full account of
the proceedings taken against her; for they are
worth recording, particularly because, whilst a
prisoner, she was possessed of two demons, and
was delivered of them in prison.
After she was placed in prison, the Judge at once
had her brought up for examination; and she was
first asked whether she knew Jacques Bocquet
andFran^oise Secretain, to which she replied in
the affirmative, making, the while, as if to weep,
and crying that she was not what she was accused
of being, and that she had not been to the Sab­
bat; yet without shedding a single tear. She
confessed also that she had said to the sergeants
that she was not marked, but that Groz-Jacques
and Fran^oise Secretain were, and that she had
heard tell to that effect.
She was at once confronted with Groz-Jacques
and Fran^oise Secretain, who affirmed to her
that they had seen her three or four times at the
Sabbat near Coirieres; and this she denied, using
execrable imprecations and many threats, even
to the Judge.
She was then narrowly confined in prison, but
after one day and night she told the gaoler that
she had resolved to tell the truth if they would
take her from that cell and bring her where she
could warm herself. The Judge, who had mean­
time arrived, promised to take her to the fire
himself, if she would confess the truth. To
this she agreed, and thereupon confessed that she
had been to the Sabbat near Coirieres once.
While she was warming herself they asked her
OF WITCHES
if she had been to the Sabbat, and she answered
that she had been there once near Coirieres.
Afterwards, they asked her what she did there;
but to this question she remained dumb and
unable to give any other answer than that she
was prevented from telling the truth by the evil
spirit which was possessing her, and which she
felt like a big lump in her stomach, showing with
her hand the place where she felt the pain. She
then fell to the ground and began to bark like a
dog at the Judge, rolling her eyes in her head with
a frightful and horrifying look. From this it was
concluded that she was possessed; and this was
confirmed by two priests who were fetched to
her, to whom she declared with great difficulty
that the evil spirit was preventing her from tell­
ing the truth. Soon afterwards she returned to
her senses and, in reply to the questions put to
her, confessed:
1. That it was about six months since she had
been to the Sabbat.
2. That she had been taken there one Thursday
evening by Groz-Jacques.
3. That the Devil at that time appeared at the
Sabbat as a big black cat.
4. That all those who were at the Sabbat went
and kissed this big black cat on the rump.
They went on to ask her who this big black cat
was; and she answered that it was the Devil; and
upon that the evil spirit again began to torment
her more than before, so that it was a long time
before she could with difficulty pronounce the
Holy Name of Jesus.
In the morning the demon left her again, and
she confessed:
EXAMEN
1. 7'hat when she was at the Sabbat she had
given herself to the Devil.
2. That she had first renounced God, the
Chrism and Baptism.
3. That Satan had carnally known her twice in
the place of the Croya; and she at once added that
the Devil did not wish her to tell the truth.
She was again asked if it were a fact that the
Devil had had carnal knowledge of her; and she
answered that he had, and that his semen was
cold. But no sooner had she made this answer
than the evil spirit renewed his attacks and closed
her mouth, so that not a single word could be
got from her, and to certain questions which were
repeated to her she made signs with her head and
two fingers that Satan had twice known her car­
nally, and then began to yelp and yowl like a dog,
upon which they let her be.
The next day she confessed and said;
1. That she had been present when they were
making the ointment at the Sabbat, but that she
had not helped to make it.
2. That she had seen Clauda Coirieres and
several others at the Sabbat.
3. That Groz-Jacques had afflicted her with the
demons by which she was possessed, and that
they came from an apple that Groz-Jacques had
given her to eat.
4. That she had never before been to the Sabbat.
That was all that could be got from her at that
time, for the evil spirit again began to torment
her with such violence that it was decided that
it would be best to have her exorcised. And this
was done on the following day.
The priest, then, being ready first gave the pos­
OF WITCHES
sessed woman the Holy Virgin Mary for her
advocate, and then proceeded with his exorcisms.
First he conjured the demon to tell him his
name: the demon proved to be obstinate in answer­
ing this, but on being pressed said that he was
called Cat. He was then asked if he was alone,
to which he replied that he was not, but that
there were two of them, and that his com­
panion was called Devil, and that they had been
sent into Rollande’s body by Groz-Jacques. The
priest continued his exorcisms, and commanded
the demons to come out. The Devil answered
that their hour was not yet come, and that they
still had a long time. And here began a great
struggle between the priest and Satan. The priest
made use of prayers and conjurations, and the
Devil defended himself with blasphemy and
mockery, and pretended that he took no notice
of the minister of God. It was strange to see how
the Evil One made use of the body and limbs of
the possessed woman; for sometimes she squinted
at the priest frowningly, sometimes she shook her
head at him, sometimes she made grimaces at
him and twisted her mouth, mocking at him.
But chiefly I wondered at the strength of the
poor creature’s arms and hands; for if they tried
to get her to kiss the Cross, she held her hands
out to prevent anyone from approaching her
with such vigour that no one could come near
her; and if they tried to get her to take the
Cross in her hands to sign herself with it, she
was at once deprived of all use in her arms and
hands, so that she could not even take hold of
it. From which it was judged that the Cross is
indeed a flail of the Devil.
It was the same when they tried to sprinkle her
EX AM EN
with Holy Water; for she put every conceivable
obstacle in the way of her receiving a single drop
of it, sometimes putting her hands in front of her,
and sometimes bowing her face to the ground.
But it was an extraordinary sight when she was
made to drink some of it; for it took two or three
men to get her mouth open, and as soon as she
had swallowed one drop the demon barked like a
dog and cried, “You are burning me, you are
burning me.” And he said that if they con­
tinued to make him drink it, he had already had
more than enough; and he even threatened to
torment the woman all the more, the more they
sprinkled her or made her drink Holy W^ater.
And so he did; for at times he made her so weary
and worn out that she could hardly breathe, and
at other times she was as one dead.
The priest repeated his exorcisms and conjura­
tions, and commanded the demons to come out
and to depart into the lowest Hell; but the Devil
answered that he would not come out, for his
hour was not come. The priest again pressed
him; and the Devil at last said that he was very
near, but that his companion was still very low,
and at this the possessed woman put her hand on
her belly, and with her hand followed some
object up as far as her throat, which in the end
appeared as a lump in her throat. The demon
then said that he was very near, yet that his hour
was not come. Meanwhile night was approach­
ing, so that it was necessary to go away and
leave the possessed in the protection of God.
Nevertheless, one of the demons, namely Devil,
did not fail to leave her at about seven or eight
o’clock in the evening and came out of her mouth
like a black slug, which crept about the ground a
OF WITCHES
little and then disappeared, as Rollande stated
the next morning.
There remained the other demon, namely. Cat.
This one caused the possessed woman to be
dumb for three whole days, so that during that
time there was no means of drawing any infor­
mation from her. He was also much more
troublesome than the other, and therefore more
labour was required in his case. The priest began
his conjurations with a good heart: he asked in
the Latin tongue what was his name, but it was
difficult to elicit an answer. He persisted, still in
Latin; and at last he replied with the word
“Cat.” He was questioned concerning his com­
panion, and became stubborn about answering;
but on being pressed said that he had already
come out and was gone to hell. He was told that
he must follow him, but answered that his hour
was not come. The priest redoubled his exor­
cisms, using the Cross and Holy Water against
the miserable spirit; and the possessed woman
behaved just as she had on the first day, looking
terrible and twisting her mouth and making
horrible grimaces, and shaking her head in
mockery she threw herself to the ground, so
that at times it took four or five men to hold
But it was terrible to hear the demon crying
and barking when the priest came to pronounce
the Holy Name of Jesus, or invoked the aid of
the Blessed Virgin Mary, or brought the Cross
near to the demoniac, or sprinkled her with Holy
Water or made her drink it. For at times he
said that they were burning him, and at times
that they had given him enough Holy Water,
and that if they sprinkled him with any more he
AN EXAMEN
would never come out, but would torment the
body of Rollande all the more.
The priest then conjured him to come out, but
he replied that he would not and that his hour
was not come; and then he tormented the pos­
sessed more violently, at times using gloating
words: “I have well tormented this body,” or “I
am very close.” At these words Rollande’s
throat was seen to swell as before, so that it was
thought that the demon was just about to come
out. But he never did, saying that his hour was
not come and that he would not come out.
Finding him so obstinate, the priest prepared a
fire, upon which he cast certain perfumes, and
then wrote his name on a paper which he imme­
diately burned. At this the demon howled and
barked furiously, so that our hair stood on end to
hear him, and to see Rollande so exhausted that
she could hardly draw her breath.
At this moment Rollande made a gesture with
her hand and eyes in the direction of the room in
which Groz-Jacques was confined, and then to­
wards the windows which looked out on to the
road. When she was asked what she meant by
this sign, she could only answer, “Groz-Jacques.”
For the demon made her dumb. I saw at once
that she wanted Groz-Jacques brought in, think­
ing that, since it was he who had sent the demons
into her, he might, if he were brought near her,
rid her of her demon. And when she was asked
if that was not what she meant, she signed that
it was. Nevertheless, she was warned that, for
the reasons which I have shown elsewhere, it
was not good to seek the help of Groz-Jacques.
Therefore the priest continued his exorcisms.
Being pressed, the demon said that he would come
OF WITCHES
out on condition that he was given something.
He was asked what he wanted, and said that he
wanted bread and cheese. The possessed was
then given Blessed Bread, without having been
told that it was Blessed. She put it in her mouth,
but immediately spat it out again. All the time
the demon clamoured to be given something,
using the Savoyard words quaque ran. Yet he
was given nothing, except Holy Water by force;
and since night was approaching, we withdrew.
Nevertheless, two or three hours after we had
left the possessed woman, the demon came out
of her in the same manner as the other one.
I must not omit to say that, once when I went
to see this woman while she was possessed by the
latter demon which made her dumb, she put her
hand to her mouth in such a way that it was
easily seen that she wanted something. And
when I asked her what she wanted, she answered
in her own language by this single word, Passe,
which means milk. I then asked if it was she
herself who wanted the milk, and she signed
that it was not she, but the demon. From this I
recognised the cunning and astuteness of the
Devil, who always tries to get us to give him
something; and therefore he usually persuades
the person he is possessing that he is hungry,
as he did in the case we are speaking of, and in
that of Loyse Maillat. All demoniacs bear
witness to this fact.
AN EXAMEN
Chapter
Against those who Mock at the Exorcisms and
Conjurations of our Priests.
Cf. Richer,
T T Ere I Cannot but marvel at those who
X mock at the exorcisms and conjurations used
What reason
can they have? Did not Jesus Christ cast out
devils when He was upon earth? The New
Testament gives us countless examples of it; but
I will be content to quote the case of him who
Mark 5.
had a legion of devils, of whom St. Mark writes
in his Gospel. Besides, do we not know that
Matth. 17.
Jesus Christ gave the same power to men? “Ye
shall know them that believe on Me by this sign,
that they shall cast out devils in My name.”
And again; “This sort goeth not out save by
prayer and fasting.”
Acts 16.
It was thus that St. Paul delivered a certain
damsel possessed with a spirit of divination from
the devil which tormented her; and in another
Acts 19.
place it is said that God wrought special miracles
by the hands of St. Paul, so that from his body
were brought unto the sick handkerchiefs or
aprons, and the diseases departed from them, and
St. Gregor, i.
the evil spirits went out of them. After the
I. Dial. c. IO. Apostles, holy men did likewise. We read that
in viMD^Hil- St. Fortunatus and St. Hilarion used by their
ario.
prayers to cast devils out of men, and that the
latter cast out two hundred in the Isle of Cyprus.
The like is told of St. Bernard, St. Martin,
St. Gall and many other holy men. Then why
c. 33.
OF WITCHES
should not our priests do the same ? The hand
of God is as powerful now as it was in days of
I say further that the devils themselves have
made use of conjurations. For one of them
speaking to Jesus Christ, in the Gospel of St. Mark 5.
Mark, said; I adjure Thee by the living God
that Thou torment me not”; and in fact he
obtained his request, which was that he and his
companions should not be sent out of the country
of the Gadarenes. But the countless examples of
those who are daily delivered in the sight of all,
and of whom I have elsewhere made mention,
should suffice to shut the mouths of these
atheists and heretics; to whom I would further
point out that the ceremonies of our priests are
holy and religious, and shall put before them a
thing which happened not far from here some
eight years ago, which should quite put them to
confusion.
The son of a Huguenot gentleman was pos­
sessed of a devil, and they brought the local
minister to conjure it. But this minister had no
power against devils, as was at once recognised
by the father; who, being more anxious for his
son s health than strict in the observance of his
own religion, secretly sent for a Catholic priest,
who used the accustomed exorcisms of the
Roman Church with such sincerity that the
possessed was soon delivered. I would name the
gentleman if I were not afraid of his being
arreted by the Governors of the Canton to
which he is subject. It is enough to say that I
have this story from a most reliable source; and
that I do not marvel that the minister of whom we
have spoken could not cast out the devil from the
Acis 16.
AN EXAMEN
body of the possessed, for no minister has ever
had that power, any more than we read that any
heretic has ever performed a miracle. I refer the
reader to what I have said in Chapter 17.
But to resume the thread of our argument; is it
not in the name of Jesus Christ that our priests
conjure the evil spirits to depart? Did not St.
Paul do the same? “I command thee,” he said,
“in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of
her”; and he came out the same hour.
And as for the Cross and the Holy Water which
the priests use, are not these the flails of the
Devil ?
Chapter L V.
Of the Power and Pirtue of the Cross against
Demons and their Subjects.
Greg. Tuto. in
vit. pair, c, 7.
Vincent^ III.
Lib. I.
contr.
bares.
s to the Cross, history tells us that a certain
Gregory, Bishop of Langres, and one Albinus. Bishop of Anjou, used to drive devils from
the bodies of the possessed by this sign. It was
the same weapon that the hermits of times past
and other Saints used to fight devils. So did St.
Antony and St. Margaret; and with the sign
of the Cross St. Justina drove away the two
demons sent to her by St. Cyprian, when he was
yet addicted to sorcery, to attempt her virginity.
Similarly Epiphanius tells that a Christian lady
at the Baths of Gadara in Judaea freed herself by
means of this healing sign from the enchant­
OF WITCHES
ments of those who were persecuting her. We
read also of several who, when they have found
themselves either by accident or out of curiosity
at the Sabbat, have made the sign of the Cross,
whereupon everything, devils, dishes and per­
sons, has vanished.
But let us take the far stranger example of Julian
the Apostate. This renegade met one day in a
temple of idols with several devils who were
conspiring for the ruin of the whole human race.
He was frightened by the sight of such an
assernbly and, in imitation of the Christians, made
the sign of the Cross; thereupon all the devils
at once vanished, saying of Julian that he was an
empty vessel, but that he was protected by the
sign of the Cross with which he had armed
himself.
A similar thing happened about forty years ago
when the Bernese held the bailiwick of Gex under
a certain Charcot, who was of the so-called
reformed religion. This man was attacked one
night in the Wood of Rat by a number of cats,
against which he defended himself with a sword;
but finding that his sword was no protection, he
made the sign of the Cross, upon which all the
cats vanished. The Bailiff, a Bernese named
Augustin de Lutherno, hearing of this sent for
Charcot, who confirmed the story which had
been told to him; and the Bailiff then said to him
that, if he found the sign of the Cross of such
benefit, he ought always to make use of it in the
future. I have this story from the Lord of
Pongny, a gentleman of the land of Gex, and a
man of honour.
Only nine months ago Antoine Gentil of the
country of Vaux, also a Bernese subject and of
an examen
the same religion as Charcot, in the same way
drove off the Devil with the sign of the Cross.
He was taking a large quantity of cheeses by
water to Lyons, and they were submerged by a
storm which suddenly arose. In despair over this
loss, Gentil wandered about until, as he was
passing a wood, he met a big black man who
said that, if he would give himself to him he
would recover his cheeses for him and make him
rich again. Gentil asked him who he was, and
he answered that he was the Devil. Thereupon
Gentil made the sign of the Cross, and the big
black man at once disappeared. Afterwards,
when he was asked why he had made the sign
of the Cross, seeing that he was a Huguenot and
that there is nothing which the heretics more
hate than the Cross, he answered that in a case
of necessity it was good to use all possible means
of protection. I know this from those who went
with him to Lyons. There was also one Joseph
who, although not a Christian, cast out devils
from those who were possessed by means of
the Cross; and this caused him to embrace
Christianity.
In short demons can never bear the sign of the
Cross without trembling all over. Besides those
which I have just related, we have a good in­
stance of this in Caron’s “Antichrist Un­
masked,” which I shall here quote. “When the
matter was thus confirmed” (he is speaking of a
child who was found to be possessed), “I went one
day into the house where the child was; and on
my entry, there came up to me a Huguenot girl
about eighteen years old holding a little silver
Cross, who signed to me to take notice of what
she would do. The child was all bunched up in
OF WITCHES
bed, with his nose pressed against his knees, well
covered up and with his back to us, so that it
was impossible for him to see us; and the Hugue­
not girl began to apply the Cross to his shoulders.
Upon this the child suddenly twisted and
stretched himself out, grimacing and crying out
against us. Then he put himself back into the
bed as he was before. I then took the Cross; but
I could never come within two fingers’ breadth
of the possessed but that he immediately rose up
and twisted himself about as before. I tried
several times on that and the following days.”
So says Caron; but this is no more strange than
that which I saw happen in the case of Rollande chaf. 53.
du Vernois, which I have already related.
Further, witches never have a Cross on their
rosaries, or if they have, it is defective; and, as I
have before remarked, he who says the Mass at
the Sabbat has no Cross on his cope. Witches
always have great difficulty also in making the
sign of the Cross; this was the case with Antide
Colas, chiefly when she was in church. And if
they are carefully watched when they sign them­
selves, it will be seen that they never make the
complete sign of the Cross, and that they are
hardly able to place their right hand in the posi­
tion we are accustomed to use when we make the
sign of the Cross. This need not appear strange,
when we consider that the Devil makes them
swear and vow very solemnly to put no faith Mall, malef.
in the Cross, but rather to trample it always
underfoot, as we are told by Sprenger, By such
behaviour they act in direct opposition to the
Edicts of the Emperors Theodosius and Valen- “«“;• «"» .
tinian, which forbade under heavy penalty anyone even to carve or paint the Cross on the Sahata Christ.
EXAMEN
ground, saying that it was the sign of the
Saviour, so that no one should walk upon it or
soil it.
It can therefore easily be understood that the
Devil holds the Cross in great abhorrence. So
true is this that the first artifice which he uses is
to have the Crosses destroyed, as they have been
in several places in the New World, and especi­
ally in the realm of Quabacondono, who for­
bade his subjects to wear the Cross on pain of
death; and he was not even content to banish it
from his land, but wished his Edicts to have effect
on the sea also, so that the people were com­
pelled to destroy the Crosses on the banderoles of
their ships. Antichrist also brands his subjects
with his mark upon the brow or the hand, so that
none may make the sign of the Cross on his brow.
A dog, seeing the stick with which it has been
beaten, at once cries out and runs away: in the
same fashion the Devil fears the power of the
Cross, which he well felt when Jesus Christ
felled him to the ground with it; so that, on
seeing it, he quickly takes to flight. Further, it
is obvious that the Cross has this power not only
ex opere operantis, but also ex opere operate, as the
Theologians say; since even when it is used by
heretics, the Devil is put to flight by them.
And for this reason the Holy Fathers, knowing
very well that this sign is one of the greatest
flails of the Devil, exhort us to protect ourselves
with it in all our actions so that Satan may never
have any power against us. I shall quote the
words of Tertullian, one of the most ancient
St. Greg, lib. i. ofthe Fathers. Hesays: “We sign ourselves with
Dial. c. 3.
the Cross on the forehead at every step, at every
5/. Jerome in
Ep, ad Eustoch. coming in and going out, when we rise up, at the
bum. vel in
silic. vel in
marmor. aut
insadp. aut
OF WITCHES
bath, at the table, in public, in our chamber, on TertulL de
sitting down, in short to whatever side we turn
mtUt.
and wherever we go we shall sign ourselves with
this sign.” St. Gregory, St. Jerome, St. John De Inc^n.
Chrysostom, St. Cyril and Theodoret teach us
the same. St. Athanasius also has written that
at the sign of the Cross all magic arts vanish,
and witchcraft is without virtue or power; “Let
him who wishes to prove this hereafter make the
sign of the Cross and invoke the name of Jesus
Christ when the demons are doing their utmost
to impose upon his belief with their impostures
and deceits and magic miracles, and he will see
how, merely through fear of this sign and this
Name, the Demons will flee away, their magic
answers will be silenced, and their sorceries
numbed and dead.” Origen says as much in one In Exod. c. 15.
homil. 6.
place.
Finally, Constantine the Great (for I wish to Eusei. in vita
finish this chapter with him), having proved in Constant.
warfare how great was the power and virtue of
this Sign, had the following words inscribed on
a Cross which he caused to be set up in Rome to
the right of his statue: “This is the Sign of
Salvation.”
EXAMEN
Chapter LVI.
Of the Might and P'irtue of Holy Water against
Demons.
Oly Water was in part instituted for driv­
Can. aquam de
consecr. dtst. 3.
Cf. Thyr. de
loc. infest.
Part I. c. I.
loan. Diac, in
vita D. Greg.
IV- <)3-
ing away evil spirits; and experience proves
that it is effective in this. For why is it that
demons whine and bark like dogs when we sprin­
kle the bodies of those whom they possess ? Why
do they so often cry out that “they are burning,
they are burning,” if it be not that they feel this
Water to be one of the greatest scourges that is
used against them?
Again, why do they also flee away when we
sprinkle the place which they have been haunt­
ing? This happened at Camon in Germany,
where a spirit began to trouble the people with­
out at all showing himself at first, by throwing
stones at them and beating upon the doors of the
houses. But soon after he showed himself in the
form of a man and did ten thousand mischiefs.
Yet, when the place was sprinkled with Holy
Water by certain priests sent by the Archbishop
of Mayence, the spirit at once disappeared and
never returned. The same thing happened in
another place mentioned in the Life of St.
Gregory, where the Evil Spirit in the form of a
bull ran after the herds and the shepherds; and
the place could not be rid of him until it had in
the same way been sprinkled with Holy Water.
OF WITCHES
St. Martin also used Holy Water to cast a demon
out of one who was possessed. What Caron re­
lates in his “Antichrist Unmasked” makes it Marg.
clear that the demons have no love for this
Water. F or he says that he himself made several
demoniacs sit down at his table, and gave orders
for their wine to be diluted with Holy Water.
But they could never be taken off their guard or
be induced to swallow a single drop, but shud­
dered when they carried the glass to their mouth:
yet they had no difficulty in drinking wine
diluted with ordinary water. We have sufficient
proof in what we have already told concerning
Rollande du Vernois. For what reason, then, is
it that the Devil forbids witches to take Holy
Water, as he did in the case of Pierre Burgot
among others, if it is not because he knows that
it has power to frustrate his designs and magical
endeavours, and because he abhors it, since it
turns to fire and burns him?
Chapter LVII.
Of the Perfumes Used by Priests in their
Conjurations.
T remains for us to show that it is not out of
place for our priests to use perfumes in their
exorcisms; and this will be very easy. I will
readily admit that perfume has no direct virtue
against the Evil Spirit, since he has no body and
EXAMEN
consequently no sense of smell: yet it must be
granted me that this wicked Serpent is very glad
to find in the bodies of men humours which the
more dispose them to be tormented by him, the
chief of these being the melancholy humour,
which is of its nature apt to be heavy and sad;
and therefore we find that those of a melancholy
humour are more often possessed by a devil than
are other men.
Card, de
Now it is Certain that there are perfumes which
lib. 16. consume and correct these humours, for even
^raestig.V.<i. Sulphur works in a very subtle manner to that
effect; and therefore I conclude that the Devil
will be more easily cast out of a demoniac’s body
if it be purged of the humours of which we have
just spoken, than if it be still charged with them.
I am strengthened in this belief by the fact that
Holy Scripture teaches us that the Evil Spirit is
more glad to be in one body than another, as we
Mark 5.
see in St. Mark, where the devils, being com­
manded by Jesus Christ to come out of a man’s
body, asked to be sent into some swine. It fol­
lows, therefore, that the perfumes of our priests
must not be decried, since they are, in some
manner, of use against devils. This is even better
shown by the example of the youth Tobias, who
drove away the Devil with a perfume which he
composed from the heart and liver of a fish. It is
true that he accompanied this with prayers and
fasting; but do not our priests the same? There
is no doubt, also, that perfumes which are hal­
lowed by the Word of God are of greater virtue
against the Devil than such as are used in their
own natural state; and therefore Origen, speakHomil. 20 <■«
ing of perfumes and incense, says that the sanctiJo^fication by the Word of God, with Holy Prayer
OF WITCHES
and the help of the Angels, is the reason for per­
fume and incense driving out demons.
But who will contradict me when I say that God
endows these perfumes with a supernatural
power against demons and their works, seeing
that we have already mentioned certain stones
and herbs which drive away all spells and en­
chantments ? For that He may the more mani­
fest His Majesty, God wishes to fight and over­
come demons by means of these insignificant
things, just as He put Pharaoh’s magicians to
shame when they tried to create flies; for although
they, as well as Moses, had made frogs and ser­
pents and dragons, yet they could not succeed in
making these small and minute little creatures.
Chapter LVIII.
Against those who Assert that Satan Pretends
merely to Fear the Cross, Holy Water and
Exorcism; and that in Reality he Cares not.
urther, we may laugh at those who say that
the Devil does not really fear Exorcisms or
the Cross or Holy Water, but only pretends to
fear them. For if it be true that this Enemy of
the human race seeks nothing but our total ruin,
how can we believe that he would willingly leave
the body of a man whom he wishes to torment
and lead to perdition ? Why does he not remain
always in him, to make him drown himself or
hurl himself down? Why, again, when Jesus
EXAMEN
Christ was about to cast him out of a man whom
he was possessing, did he use these words;
Mark I.
“What have we to do with Thee, Thou Jesus
of Nazareth ? Art Thou come to destroy us ? I
know Thee who Thou art, the Holy One of
God” ? We must infer from these v/ords that it
sorely vexed the Evil One to leave the body
which he was possessing.
CZ>a/>. 55.
Again, we have seen how the devils fled at the
sign of the Cross made by Julian the Apostate;
and who can say that this flight was merely
simulated ? If it were, we could only conclude
that the devils wished by this means to invite
Julian to return to Christianity and again wor­
ship the Cross; and that they left men’s bodies
Ibid.
when Joseph made the sign of the Cross, in
order to draw him to Christianity. It would fol­
low also that the cats, which were no other than
devils and witches, who fled when Charcot made
the sign of the Cross, did so to persuade this
member of the so-called reformed religion to
range himself under the standard of the Roman
Church, which has the Cross as its chief emblem
of salvation. To argue similarly from the case of
Antoine Gentil, of whom we spoke in the
Chapter on the Cross, would be to draw an
Cf. Thyr. de
absurd Conclusion, as certain Theologians say.
loc. infest, far. No, no; it is impiety to deny the might and
3. c. 68. n. 12. yirtue of the Cross and Holy Water and Exorcisms. For even the most irrational beasts obey
them, as may be seen from St. Thomas, who
holds that it is lawful to conjure them, since
they are troubled by Satan in order to bring
In manual, c.
harm to men. This view is upheld also by
27.«. 13.
Navarro.
It should not be a matter of wonder that we
OFWITCHES
have said that the throat of Rollande du Vernois
was seen to swell before the departure of her
demons, and that the demons came out of her
mouth in the form of slugs; for there is nothing
abnormal in either of these points. As to the
first, the Devil usually gives some sign of his
departure from a person’s body, and it has been Thyr. de
noted that the commonest of these signs is for
P"the place by which he means to come out to
become swollen and big beyond measure. This
in vita
happened to the demoniac whom St. Catherine Cath '.
of Siena delivered, when the demon raised
horrible tumours in the sufferer’s throat.
And as to the second point, demons have often
been seen to leave the bodies of possessed persons
in the form of some animal, such as flies, spiders, Thyr. de
ants, lizards and other such beasts. Palladius Damon, p. 3.
even tells that he saw a devil once come out of^’
a young man in the shape of a dragon seven««. 8.
cubits long.
Sect. 25 in uita
But let US return to the history of Rollande.
Chapter LIX.
Continuation of the Replies of Rollande du Ver­
nois; and of her Condemnation.
Hen this woman was delivered of her
demons, and was again examined, she
gave the following answers:
I. She confirmed her first and second confes­
sions, except in the matter of having been caro
EXAMEN
nally known by the Devil; for this she retracted.
2. She added that, when she was at the Sabbat,
she had offered candles to the Devil, and to­
gether with the rest had kissed him on the hinder
parts.
3. That she had helped to cause the last hail­
storm which fell in the district of Moussieres.
4. That, besides Groz-Jacques and Fran^oise
Secretain, she had also seen at the Sabbat Clauda
Coirieres, Guillaume Vuillermoz known as le
Baillu, and a brother of his.
5. That she had been to the Sabbat only three
weeks before she was put in prison.
She was again examined on the 3rd of Novem­
ber; and after having repeated her first, second
and third statements, confessed further;
1. That the Devil, in the form of a black cat
with horns, appeared to her at the place of the
Croya on the same night that she went to the
Sabbat, which was about six months before she
was put in prison.
2. That after a long struggle she gave herself to
Satan, and renounced God, Chrism and Baptism.
3. That she then at once went on foot to the
Sabbat near the village of Coirieres, with GrozJacques and Fran^oise Secretain.
4. That when she went to the Sabbat she was
already possessed.
5. That she had only been there once.
Upon this it was pointed out to her that she was
mistaken in saying that she had only once been
to the Sabbat, since it was apparent from her
answers that she had been there twice. For first
she had confessed that she had been there three
weeks before her imprisonment, and then that
OF WITCHES
about six months before she was put in prison
the Devil had appeared to her at the place of the
Croya in the form of a cat, and that she had
been to the Sabbat the same night. She answered
that she had not properly understood the ques­
tion on this last point, and that she thought
she had been asked whether she had long been
possessed before she was put in prison. Yet the
question had been put to her very clearly.
Some days later she was again examined; and
after repeating her first, second, third and fourth
statements, said;
1. That she knew Pierre Vuillermoz, le Baillu’s
son, and Christofle of Aranthon, but that she had
never seen them at the Sabbat.
2. That she had several times quarrelled with
Perrenette, the wife of Claude Panisset; and that
in the course of these Perrenette had reproached
her with a rumour that she was a Vaudoise;
saying that if she were certain of this she would
have nothing to do with her, but that she could
not believe it.
3. That more than three years before her im­
prisonment all the villagers of Prel had re­
proached her with being a Vaudoise and a witch,
but that she did not know the reason for this.
4. That she had several times helped Clauda
Coirieres to gather her hemp.
5. That when the Devil appeared to her in the
form of a black cat at the place of the Croya,
she had been of perfectly sound mind, and not at
all troubled.
6. That before her imprisonment she did not
know that she was possessed; but only felt that
there was something which moved in her belly.
ANEXAMEN
and that her sight troubled her at times, and
that she sometimes had words with her sister
Jeanne; but that this only happened intermit­
tently, and not continuously.
7. That she went to the Sabbat with GrozJacques and Fran^oise Secretain, and that she
met them near the place where the Sabbat was
held.
8. That, when he appeared to her, the Devil
told her where the Sabbat was held.
9. That she did not know by what means she
went there.
After these confessions, she was confronted with
Pierre Vuillermoz and Christofle of Aranthon,
who stoutly maintained that they had seen her
at the Sabbat near Coirieres twice, and two years
before her imprisonment. But she denied all
this.
Upon this the Judge ordered her to undergo
torture in order to draw the truth from her con­
cerning certain points. She then lodged an
appeal; but the Court declared this null and
void, together with the order for her torture;
and by a fresh and just sentence condemned the
appellant to be led by the executor of High
Justice to the Tartre, and there to be tied to a
stake and burned. This was carried out on the
seventh of September in the year 1600.
But as they took her from the prison, the air
at once became darkened by very dense clouds,
which burst into such abundant and furious rain
that it was with great difficulty that the fire
could be lit to burn her. It is probable that this
sudden rain was caused by Satan, who may have
given Rollande an assurance that she would not
be burned, or at least that she would not feel the
OF WITCHES
flames and the heat of the fire. For he usually
makes this promise to witches, so as to keep
them in the coils of his net, and that they may
lose the opportunity to repent. So it happened
to this witch, for she died obstinate; and when
she was exhorted to repent and turn to the
immense mercy of God, she only answered that
she had a good master.
In my opinion the principal reasons for her con­
demnation were these;
1. That it was evident, both from her replies
and from her confrontation with Fran^oise
Secretain and Pierre Vuillermoz and Christofle
of Aranthon, that she had given herself to the
Devil, and had been to the Sabbat long before
she was possessed. Moreover, this was also
affirmed by Groz-Jacques, in whose word the
more faith was put because, dying contrite and
repentant, he had prayed the Officers to do
justice upon her, saying that if they let her
escape she would spoil all.
2. Her consorting and familiarity with GrozJacques and Clauda Coirieres, who had been
burned a few days before for the crime of witch­
craft.
3. The discrepancies found in her answers.
4. The common rumour which had long been
against her, which she herself admitted, saying
that all the people of Prel had accused her three
years before her imprisonment of being a Vaudoise and a witch.
5. That she had never shed any tears, although
she had often tried her hardest to weep.
6. That those whom she had accused of having
been to the Sabbat with her were all suspected
AN EXAMEN
of the crime of witchcraft, so that some of them
had been burned, some tortured, and others had
died in prison.
7. Finally, many things were noticed about her
which could not be simply attributed to a de­
moniac. Namely, that she shed no tears; that
she had been carnally known by the Devil; and
lastly, that she had been to the Sabbat and had
there caused it to hail. All these are deeds that
cannot be attributed to mere possession by a
devil.
For these reasons little notice was taken of her
plea as an excuse that she was possessed when
she went to the Sabbat, and that if she had con­
fessed anything which told against her, it was
not she who confessed, but the demons which
possessed her, speaking through her mouth. For
this was clearly proved to be false by what we
have just said.
And although she retracted certain points, that
could not be held to be of any consequence; for,
as we have shown elsewhere, not too much re­
liance is to be set upon a witch’s first confession.
Moreover, she did not make it apparent that
there was any mistake in her confessions.
One thing I shall add concerning this woman.
It has been a matter of wonder that she should
have been possessed when she was already a
witch ; for there are those who have held that
witches are not easily possessed by demons. This
point is fully argued by Thyraeus in his “Treatise
upon Demoniacs.”
OF WITCHES
Chapter LX.
Whether the Eucharist may be Administered to
One Accused oj Witchcraft.
Have thought good to add here two ques­
tions very useful and necessary for the subject
of which we are treating. First, whether the
Eucharist may be administered to one accused
of witchcraft. Second, whether, when the per­
son accused of witchcraft be but found guilty of
having been at the Sabbat, without being charged
with any act of witchcraft, the Judge may pass
sentence of death upon him. These two ques­
tions I shall briefly discuss in two chapters.
As for the first question, I will admit that it
applies equally in the case of those who are
charged with any crime, other than witchcraft,
which involves a sentence of death.
Although the difficulty seems to be resolved by c. qutasitum
the Canon, which provides that, when the con- ‘I- q- zdemned has confessed his sins and is contrite and
penitent, the Eucharist should be given to him,
nevertheless we read in Gaguin that the con­
trary was observed in the year 1475, in the time
of King Louis the Eleventh, in the case of Louis
of Luxemburg, Constable of France, to whom
the Eucharist was denied after his sentence had
been pronounced.
Also it is the custom in Spain and France not to
administer the Eucharist to the condemned on
the same day of their sentence, but to do so on
Consil. 16 de
penitent.
remiss, lib. 5.
J. consil. 16. r.
z. 12.
EXAMEN
the foregoing days. Navarro testifies to this
custom; and he also is of opinion that the
Eucharist may be administered in the morning,
one hour before the sentence is passed.
But whatever may be advanced in respect of
other crimes, I for my part maintain that, in the
crime of witchcraft, the Eucharist should never
be given to the accused, for fear lest he should
abuse it. For it is noted that witches normally
abuse the Eucharist, as did those of whom Pontanus speaks, who, to help the F rench besieged
by the Spaniards in the town of Sessa Aurunca
in the Kingdom of Naples, dragged the Cross
through the streets with a thousand insults and
blasphemies, and threw it into the sea, and after­
wards gave a consecrated Host to an ass, which
they buried alive under the church door. Frois­
sart also tells in his History of a certain man of
Soissons who had a toad baptised, and after­
wards made it eat a consecrated Host. The In­
quisitors likewise relate that a witch confessed
to having received the consecrated Host in her
handkerchief instead of swallowing It, and that
she shut It up in a pot where she was feeding
a toad, and mixed all with other powders which
the Devil gave her, and then put this mixture
under the threshold of a sheep pen after saying
certain words, in order to cause the sheep to die.
Even a certain great King of Christendom
abused It formerly through the agency of a
necromancer. For he cut off the head of a first­
born child of ten years, and placed the head
upon a consecrated Host to know his future
fate; and the head answered in these words;
Vim patior. The King died mad.
And within recent memory Antide Colas of
OF WITCHES
Betoncourt in the County of Burgundy, who
was burned at Dole on the twentieth of Feb­
ruary, 1599, confessed that the Devil had com­
manded her to bring him the Host when It was
administered to her, and that at the previous
Easter she had with great difficulty received It,
being unable to swallow It without great pain;
for a voice said to her in the form of a vision
that she might not swallow It, and that she must
take great care not to swallow It.
In short this cursed vermin ordinarily make use
of the Host in their acts of witchcraft, as was
also admitted by several of those who were
accused at Paris by the Blind Man of the
Fifteen-twenties, named Honorat, in the time
of King Charles IX.
I cannot omit mention of President Gentil, who
was found in possession of the Host by the
executioner who hanged him at Montfaucon, as
Bodin tells in his “Demonomania.”
ly. 5.
Another reason why the Eucharist must be re­
fused to one who is accused of witchcraft is that
this Sacrament is of such reverence, so holy and
so deeply august, that, according to Navarro, so de CtmsU. 16.
high a mystery must not be communicated to
one who is going to execution for his sins. And
why should It be given to a witch, who tramples
It underfoot and never speaks of It except in
mockery and derision; seeing that such a one
renders himself unworthy of the benefit of the
law, which acts justly towards him, according to
the Jurisconsult,
Besides, consideration should be given to the
disadvantages which might follow. For it is
possible that, at the instigation of Satan, the
witch may spue It on to the ground, or behave
AN EXAMEN
in some such way with It; and this, I think, is
the reason why in the primitive Church the
S. Denis^ Hier.: Holy and Sacred Communion was never ad­
Tbead, de sacr.
ministered to demoniacs, as we learn from St.
Synax.
Denis and St. Theodore.
I am well aware that no one will oppose me in
my contention when the accused has not yet
confessed. But I make no doubt that there are
some who will hold the contrary view in a case
where the accused has confessed, even after the
sentence has been pronounced and some hours
before it has been confirmed, basing their opinion
on the Canon above quoted. Yet I maintain
that in neither case must the Host be ad­
ministered. For the reasons already adduced,
this is clearly just in the first case. As to the
second. Judges know well enough how witches
usually behave at their examination; for some­
times they confess and sometimes deny, now
they say one thing and now another, and they
generally contradict themselves two or three
times in one day. They have even been known
to retract when going to the fire, although they
have repeated their confession countless times,
and have previously shown every mark of re­
pentance. This was so a few days ago in the
case of Clauda Paget, known as la Foulet.
And indeed I do not find this very strange, seeing
that the Devil is ever about them to prevent
them from confessing. And therefore it is very
difficult to place any reliance upon a witch’s
penitence, having regard also to the fact that it
has been noted that they seldom or never leave
the service of Satan, as we have said elsewhere.
It is sufficiently clear, therefore, that the Sacred
Host must not be given to witches, either before
WITCHES
or after their condemnation or confession, in
order to avoid the danger spoken of by St. Paul,
who says that he who receives and eats the Body
of Jesus Christ unworthily, eateth his own
damnation.
And if it be objected that a witch’s confession
may sometimes be sincere, I answer that it is
necessary to follow the safest and more usual
course; and that in such a case the good-will and L- nam. ad ea
intentions of the accused will suffice for him,
just as the Theologians assure us that it does in
the case of those who die at sea or elsewhere
where the Sacrament cannot be obtained.
As for the Canon above quoted, I say that it
does not apply to witches, but to those guilty of
other crimes, where there is no fear of the
Eucharist being abused, and where none of the
calamities of which we have spoken can ensue.
Chapter LX I.
If One Accused of IVitchcraft be but Found Guilty
of Assisting at the Sabbat, even though he
has done no other III, the Secular Judge may
Pass Sentence of Death upon Him.
He second question is this: whether, when
he who is accused of witchcraft is found
guilty only of having been to the Sabbat, with­
out being charged with any act of witchcraft,
the Secular Judge may pass sentence of death
upon him. I discussed the former question be-
ANEXAMEN
cause once, in my absence, the Holy Commun­
ion had been given to some who were detained
in our prisons for this crime, so that I supposed
that the same may have been done elsewhere.
And now I deal with this second question be­
cause I know of Judges and Advocates so
scrupulous that, when it appears that the accused
has only been to the Sabbat, without having
worked any witchcraft, they would send him
back to the Ecclesiastical Court without sen­
tencing him to death.
Abbas, c. i.
But I am of quite another mind. For since, as
SortUe'^' sul
Doctors, both Canonical and legal, are
ciaruf'referens agreed, the Crime of witchcraft is equally the
Nunium de
concem of the Ecclesiastical and the Secular
‘tan"mlib'*‘^\ Courts, it follows that the trials of witches can
hareAs num. 25.
Conducted by the Secular Judge even in the
first place, as Julius Clarus says. This pro­
cedure is observed in France just as it is in this
country, as I have noted in my Instruction.
Moreover, it cannot be denied that he who is
present at the Sabbat, and dances there, and
makes the customary offerings, is a witch, even
though there is no evidence that he has prac­
tised witchcraft; for he could not be at the
Sabbat but for his pact and intimacy with the
Devil.
It remains, therefore, to discuss whether such a
witch ought to be punished with death. I main­
tain that he should, and it is easy for me to
support this view with several particular reasons,
Deut. 18.
without delaying over the general provisions in
Totatit. de
this matter made by the Law of God and the
'^£matic. c. Constitutions of the Emperors. But I speak of
those who have confessed that they have formed
a pact with the Devil, and have afterwards been
OF WITCHES
to the Sabbat, even if it is only once; or of those
who, without confessing to the pact, admit that
they have been twice or oftener to the witches’
assembly. There are also those who have at
times found themselves accidentally, or out of
curiosity, at the Sabbat: such must be judged
quite differently. For some are free from guilt
or deceit, and some are quite innocent: yet I
think that even these last are deserving of some
punishment, or at least some fine, seeing that
their curiosity has evil consequences or, as the
Jurisconsult says, is an evil example. It must
always be understood that what I have said con­
cerning such persons is conditional upon their
having in no way acquiesced in the deeds of
Satan or his subjects. But as for those who have
confessed that they have formed a pact with
Satan and have been to the Sabbat afterwards,
or those who have been to the Sabbat twice,
without confessing to the pact, there is no doubt
that they all deserve death. I see no distinction
between these last. For it is certain that those
who go more than once to the Sabbat must have
entered into some agreement with Satan,
whether it be expressed or tacit, and that they
conduct themselves in the same way as the other
witches; for the Devil compels them to do so,
even if they do not at once do it of their own
volition. This is quite clearly apparent from
the daily trials of witches. Furthermore, the Cmar. c.
repetition of such acts is a clear proof
consent on the part or those who commit pinei. i. 2. de
them.
rescind, vendiPassing, then, to my reasons, I say in the first“‘'’^^‘’''g3-‘^plac:;j;^hat the pact of which we have just spoken
is enough to condemn a witch to death, if it be
EXAMEN
considered that God expressly forbids us on pain
of death to hold any communication with Satan
or his subjects. But let us see of what this pact
consists. The witch renounces God, Chrism,
Baptism, and his part in Paradise: he gives him­
self to Satan and takes him for his sole master,
and swears to him never to speak of God or the
Virgin Mary or the Saints of Heaven, except in
mockery and derision. What does all this prove
but his Idolatry, his Apostasy, his Paganism,
and his Atheism? And these are all crimes
worthy of death, even in the case of one who,
at his Baptism and for long after, has made a
profession of Christianity. I say that the first
pact of the witch with Satan shows his Idolatry,
because he turns from the Creator to the crea­
ture; his Apostasy, because he bankrupts himself
of his first and true religion and his first Baptism
to hurl himself into a sea of superstitions; his
Paganism, because he undertakes to serve and
worship devils as true Gods; his Atheism, be­
cause the first three crimes easily lead to Athe­
ism, especially the last, which is to serve and
worship many devils as gods, since Polytheism is
the same thing as Atheism.
Let us again set forth more particularly how a
witch who makes this pact with Satan is worthy
of death.
He renounces and deserts God, to turn to the
Devil: a crime which God punishes with death,
Deut. 13 & 18. so that He commands us not to spare the false
prophets who turn the people from Him.
The witch further promises not to speak of God
save in mockery and derision. And yet God
Levit. 24.
wills that he who has pronounced His Name in
mockery or has blasphemed It shall be stoned;
Levit. 20.
Deut. i8.
OF WITCHES
and the constitutions of the Emperors likewise
punish this crime with death.
Again, let us consider what happens after the
formation of this pact. Satan, binding those
who have thus leagued with him, makes them
go to the Sabbat where they worship the Devil, /« auth. ut nm
who sometimes appears as a man, sometimes as
cmtr.
a goat; and they offer him candles, and kiss him,
some on the shoulder, some on the shameful
parts. Now who does not know that this crime
is altogether abominable and worthy of death in
the sight of God? For in Jeremiah He swears c. 32.
that He will punish with fire and the sword the
town which has sacrificed to Baal and other
strange gods. And in another place He com- Exod. 20.
mands that he who worships any other God but Deut. 13. 27.
Him shall be put to death. This was indeed put
into practice against the children of Israel; for Exod. 32.
at one time there died about twenty-three thou­
sand who had worshipped the Golden Calf, and
at another time twenty-four thousand who had Num. 25.
sacrificed to Baal-phegor.
Again, when at the Sabbat, witches eat and feast
with Satan. This is another crime worthy of
death, since it is a capital crime merely to associ­
ate with Satan, as we have shown already. This
may be more clearly proved by the example of
the prophet spoken of in the Book of Kings, 7 Kings 13.
who was slain by a lion for having eaten and
drunk in Samaria against the commandment of
Finally, witches couple with Satan, who be­
comes a man for the women, and a woman for
the men; and he usually couples with the women
in the form of some beast, such as a goat or some
such animal. This is a third crime no less
Exod. 34.
Deut. 7.
Num. 25.
Levit. 2Q.
Deut. 23.
Cam mulier
IS. q. I.
Pap. tit. J.
arrest, i. lib.
EXAMEN
worthy of death than the other two; seeing that
God so abhors the copulation of the faithful
with an infidel that He put to death twenty-four
thousand Israelites because they had fornicated
with the daughters of Moab; and greatly praised
Phinees and rewarded him. But what are we to
think when the Devil, in the form of a goat or
some other beast, couples with witches, as there
is no doubt that he does at the Sabbat? Is not
this act worthy of death ? The Law of God is
very clear, which says that not only the man,
but the beast too shall be put to death. This is
also in accordance with what Boere and Papon
say on the subject.
These, therefore, are my reasons for maintain­
ing that those whom we have described in this
chapter are worthy of death, and that they can
be so punished by the Secular Judge without any
need to refer them back to their Ecclesiastical
Judge.
And if it is objected that, when the accused
does not confess to the pact or the adoration or
the banquets and couplings, he cannot be con­
demned for these actions, provided that there is
no accomplice who accuses him of them: I
answer that I have already said all that need be
said with reference to the pact; and as for the
adorations and banquets and couplings, we must
admit them as soon as we have admitted the fact
that the accused has been to the Sabbat two or
three times.
Further, in all trials of witches it is made clear
that, at their first, or at least their second, visit
to the Sabbat they worship Satan and feast and
couple with him. This is amply proved by what
I have already written in several chapters. For
OF WITCHES
the Evil One most often has carnal relations with
the women the first time he approaches them;
as it happened to Thievenne Paget, Antide
Colas and others whom we have mentioned.
It stands to reason that, in such trials, we are
chiefly faced with matters done secretly and at
night, which are not capable of proof save
through the mouths of those who have been
present at the Sabbat. And therefore, according
to common law, in the case of such a horrible
and secret crime a less absolute proof is sufficient. Qua de re per
Moreover, it is necessary to assume that
usual crime has been committed, and to act^™^^^'’
accordingly.
eic., ml. 3.
Further, I dare to say that it is probable that £. Nam ad ea
those of whom we are speaking have beaten the
water together with the others at the Sabbat in
order to cause it to hail, and have like them
taken the powder and the ointment which
Satan gives them to use for causing the death of
persons and cattle, or for making them ill; and
I cannot doubt that they do so. For it is certain
that Satan, who only seeks their ruin and that
of the whole human race, continually urges and
incites them to do evil; and this the witches all
unanimously confess.
■^■^♦^•^•4*'4*'4**t**^'^'4*'T"4*’4*'4*'^
THE MANNER OF PRO­
CEDURE OF A JUDGE IN
A CASE OF WITCHCRAFT
By HENRY
Judge
BOGUET
District
of Dolc, Chief
of Saint
de Joux
To Monsieur Daniel Romanet,
Advocate to the See of Salins
Article I.
Judge in this country can by Pap. arrest.
himself conduct the trial of witches
3when there is definite evidence of the cf.imbert.
fact: this was decreed by the Court on hb. instit.
the 28th September, 1598. This is also the
practice to-day in b rance.
Bodin^
Demonom, IV.
Article II.
Witchcraft is a crime apart, both on account of
its enormity, and because it is usually committed
at night and always secretly. Therefore the trial
EXAMEN
of this crime must be conducted in an extra­
ordinary manner; and the usual legalities and
ordinary procedure cannot be strictly observed.
Article III.
The Judge must decide whether the presumptions and conjectures are enough to warrant his
^Inquisitio. nu.
Committing the accused to prison; for we can
give no certain rule as to this. Yet I shall always
c/ar. hb. F. q. maintain that a person should always be im4°- »“■ V
prisoned on the accusation of even only a single
accomplice. For it has been noted that witches
who have confessed have as a rule never laid
information against any who were not of their
brotherhood, or at least were not deeply susDecmfes!.
pccted. In fact Binsfeld, Suffragan of Treves,
maleic, memhr. wrote that of a hundred witches he hardly
2. cmdus. I.
found one who made a false accusation against
another.
Bodin,
The same applies when the person is accused by
Oewowom. IV. common rumour; for this is almost infallible in
the matter of witchcraft.
jacoi. ie Bel.
vis. insua
Article IV.
cf. cbafs. 23,
24, & Art. 31.
Those whose duty it is to arrest the accused
must make careful search lest he have any oint­
ments or powders about him; for they use such
drugs in their witchcraft.
They must also take particular notice of the
prisoner’s countenance, and especially of what
he shall say. For when he is surprised, many
words may escape from him which are direct
OF WITCHES
evidence against him; as “may he die but he is
not one of those people,” that “he is not marked,”
that he “wishes to be re-baptised,” etc. And
the prudent Judge will base his examination
upon this.
Article V.
There are some who, when they seize a witch, Remy,
are accustomed to prevent him from touching Demmul. ill.
the ground, thinking that thus it will be easier
to draw the truth from him. But I do not like
this manner of acting, holding that it is super­
stitious. Yet Sprenger defends it, but on such ill. g.
grounds that there is no need to reply to him.
Article VI.
The same author warns the Judge to take care iii. 15,
that the witch does not touch him on the bare
chaps. 27,
hands or arms or look at him before he looks at
the witch; so that the witch may not by this
means corrupt him. But I hold that this also is
full of superstition; for neither the hand nor the
look of a witch has in itself any virtue to cause
such an effect; and further, it is certain that such
people have no power to harm the Officers of
Justice, as I have shown elsewhere.
Chap.
Article VII.
The Judge should bring the accused up for Bodin,
examination as soon as he is made prisoner. For
when a witch is arrested, Satan, momentarily ’’
Cf.ehap.il.
AN EXAMEN
at least, forsakes him, and he is so surprised that
he is altogether confused; so that it is easier at
such time to draw the truth from him than if
he is left for some days in his prison without
being seen; for in that case his master will not
fail to advise him. None knows this better than
do the Judges. For all witches confess that
Satan assists them even when they are being
questioned. Further, it has been noted that ^hey
always bend their eyes upon the ground and
mutter I know not what, when the Judge is
speaking to them; and this leads us to believe
that they are then consulting with the Devil
that he may advise them how to answer.
Article VIII.
sprenger, 111.6
Psal. 95.
II Kings 23-
iX/T iV
Cf.chap^ii.
Sprenger and Bodin have given instructions as
what questions the Judge should put, and
reference may be made to their works. But I
add that the Judge must question the
accused without interruption and strongly press
him, always with gentle words; that if the
accused refuses to answer one question, he must
pass on to another, and afterwards go back to
the former one, and must repeat the same questions again and again. The accused will then,
if he be guilty, be very easily trapped into
contradicting himself.
Article IX.
The Judge must also ask the accused whether
he has any children, whether they are dead, and
OF WITCHES
if SO of what sickness they died. For it has been
noted that witches ordinarily dedicate their
children to the Devil, or else kill them in their
mother’s womb or as soon as they are born.
AR T I C L E
The Judge must take careful note of the cf.Arts. 35,
accused’s countenance during his examination, 3^, etc.
and whether he sheds any tears, or looks down
at the ground, or mutters to himself, or uses
blasphemy ^nd Imprecations. For all these are
presumptive indications against him, as we shall
say later.
Article XI.
And because the witch is generally ashamed to Bodin,
confess his abominations before many people, Oemonom. IF.
and because also he is frightened when he sees ’’
his answers being set down in writing; there­
fore it is best for the Judge to remain alone with
the accused, concealing his Clerk and other
Assessors.
ArticleXII,
If the prisoner is accused by his accomplices, cf. chap. 48,
they should at once be brought face to face. The
reason for this is that there is nothing which so
confounds a witch as to see before his eyes one
who has been his companion at the Sabbat, even
if the accomplice remains constant and loyal to
him. Sometimes it has even been found effective
to employ a stranger who is not a witch for this
confrontation.
EXAMEN
Article
XIII.
The accused must be repeatedly brought up for
examination.
Article
Chaf. 43.
Some Judges, finding that they can get no con­
fession from the accused, cause him to be stripped
and shaved all over. This custom is not imper­
tinent, by reason of the spells for maintaining
silence which they conceal about them. I have
treated of this more fully elsewhere.
Article
There are others who make use of the ducking
stool. But I doubt whether this practice does
not serve rather to tempt God than to prove
C. Mennam.
anything against the witch who is ducked. For
C. consuluisti Satan may let a guilty one sink to the bottom,
or an innocent one float on the water, so that
C.jin. de
purg, canon.
he may cause an innocent man to be put to
Binsfeldy de
death wrongfully and so protect the guilty. Also,
confess.
Malefic. 2. sub the ducking stool is condemned by the Canons;
3. dub. princip. as is also the ordeal by red-hot iron, so that the
fbyr. de
TM,..t.
Suffragan of Treves even says that it is sin to
Damon. I. 19.
'' practise it.
Article
It is quite another matter to examine the accused
all over his body to see if there is any mark
upon him. For this is permitted and lawful.
OF WITCHES
since all witches are ordinarily marked. But it cf. chap. 44.
is necessary to have a very expert chirurgeon,
for these marks are difficult to find.
XVII.
Article
If the Judge can draw no confession from the
accused, he must confine him in a very narrow
and dark cell; for it has been proved that the
hardship of prison very often impels witches to
confess, especially when they are young.
Article
XVIII.
It is good also to bring in someone who shall say Bodin,
that he is imprisoned for the same crime, so that D^monom.
every lawful means may be used to induce the
witch to confess the truth.
Article
For it has sometimes even proved profitable to cj. chap\i.
lodge the witch near him who has accused him,
as was done in the case of Thievenne Paget.
But I shall never advise the Judge to adopt this
course except as a last resource, and when he is
very sure of the accomplices; for witches have
often been known to corrupt their accusers and
to cause them to retract their confessions.
Article
Judges have been known to extract the truth
from witches by means of a promise of im-
Clar. lib, 5. §
fin, q. 55. num.
Psal. 14.
Prov. 6.
Sap. I.
SccZ. J.
De confess,
malef. 3. dub.
princip. post
pralttd.
AN EXAMEN
punity, yet have not failed to put them to death
afterwards. This practice is used by many to­
day, and it seems to be approved by the common
opinion of the Doctors of Civil Law. Yet I
feel great doubt as to the morality of this; for it
is unlawful for us to deceive our neighbour in
any way by a lie; neither ought we ever to do
evil that good may come of it, as St. Paul says.
This practice is also condemned by the Theolo­
gians, and fully refuted by Binsfeld where he
replies to Bodin.
Article XXI.
Navarre in
manua, c. 25.
D. Phom. 2. 2.
q. 7X. art. 3.
Navarr. d.c.
25. num. 28.
But above all the Advocate of the accused must
particularly beware against doing as one did
whom I know. This man cunningly got the
truth from a witch, and then revealed it to the
Judge; the Judge then confronted the witch
with the Advocate, and the witch confessed. It
is beyond doubt that it is unlawful for the
Advocate to reveal matters which are prejudicial
to his client. This is so incontestably true that
the Theologians hold that he who acts in such
a way is guilty of mortal sin if his revelation is
notably prejudicial to his client. The Advocate
may certainly decline to continue the defence;
but, according to the opinion of St. Thomas,
approved by Navarro, he must not discover
anything which might injure his client.
Article XXII.
The Judge must avoid torture as much as
possible; for, besides the spells for maintaining
WITCHES
silence which witches bear about them, they cf. chap. 43.
have other charms which prevent them from
feeling any pain. This secret is known also to
nearly all other criminals, so that to-day torture
has become almost without effect. And with
particular reference to witches, Sprenger writes
‘3' sub fin.
that it is as difficult to apply torture to a witch
as it is to exorcise a demoniac.
Article XXIII,
I have said that witches and other criminals use
certain charms against torture; but I do not
mean to include with these the passages and Cf. chap. 43.
verses of Holy Scripture which they for the most
part use. For it is impious to believe that such
passages help them to endure the pain of torture,
seeing that God cannot be made responsible for
their impunity for their witchcraft.
Article XXIV.
Moreover, the Judge must reject as superstitious
the practice used by some in the hope of extract­
ing the truth from those who are exposed to
torture. For they whisper certain words in their Inpract.
ear. Marsilius speaks of this, and, as he says, V"”’t
has practised it.
Article XXV.
L. nemo C. de
audi.
In this crime it is lawful to expose the accused Episcop.
L. provincia um
to torture on a Holy Day, even if the day be C. defer. Clar.
ifin.q. 64.
Sacred in honour of God.
AN EXAMEN
Article XXVI.
Bins, de conmemi^st^'^nn-
dus. I.
If the Judge is forced to have recourse to torConsider well whether there are
grounds enough for doing so, having regard to
the indications, conjectures and presumptions
against the accused. For no sure rule can be
given for this matter because of the variety of
deeds and persons involved in this sort of charge.
Yet I shall set down some of the commonest of
these.
Article XXVII.
In the first place, a confession made out of Court
sufficient reason for resorting to torture
pTesump. lib. 1. ^g^^ust one accused of witchcraft. Y'his rule is
num. 14. observed with regard to other crimes also.
Bins, ad i. 4. We must even go further, according to the
Mas^opinion of J ulius Clarus, in the case of a prisoner
probat. conclus.
^as recanted his confession made out of
349. num. 6. Court, for otherwise no confession made out of
Ijair 'itt
Court would be of any effect.
practic. in 7.
But this has particular reference to the crime
indie, ciar.
of witchcraft, seeing that it is a crime in a class
q. 2t. num. by itself, which is Very difficult to bring home
Boer, decisio
against the accused.
90. num. 4.
The same must be said of a case where the
num.t\v' a'^cused has confessed before an incompetent
Glos. I. cap. 5.
L. nonfatetur
de confess.
tit. d. q. num
Yet, if the Confession has been made in error,
accused offers to rectify the error, the
torture should be postponed, and the accused
granted a hearing: Ob id quodfateri non videatur,
qui errat.
OF WITCHES
Article
XXVIII.
Secondly, a witch’s confession is warrant enough ciar. ^fin. q.
for the employment of torture against his accom8.
plice, if such confession is substantiated by some
Other presumption or indication.
And although the common opinion of the Cairer. pract.
Doctors is that in this case the accomplice is not
to be accredited, if he should not abide by his
confession under torture; yet this rule is not
observed in this country, any more than it is in
3- 4- 5many other places. And this seems to me to be
very reasonable; for what need is there again to
extort by torture a confession which has been
voluntarily made without it, seeing that a
voluntary confession is always of greater weight Navarr.
than one which is forced by torture ? Qua etiam Consi. i. de
dicitur probatio minus legitima.
Article
XXIX.
Thirdly, the familiarity and association of the
infract.
accused with a witch is enough to warrant the Z2'cbAii\
same procedure, if it is substantiated by some de priEsump.
other evidence or indication. This rule is
’^5founded upon Holy Scripture, which declares MobaT'coLlus
that Good brings good, and Evil evil.
Psal. I J.
Prov. 13.
Clar. § fin. q.
A.v.Tic-Li. XXX.
21. num. qpq.
Menoch. d. q.%.
fourthly, the afore-mentioned threats, if they num. 59. 60.
are followed by any effect, are enough to justify
the resort to torture.
^indL.
AN EXAMEN
Article XXX I.
Stus, aJ I. si
de malefic. C.
CJ. chafs. 2^,
24, iSf Art. 4.
Fifthly, if the accused be found in possession of
certain powders or unguents, it warrants his
torture; especially if he can give no satisfactory
account of such powders or unguents. For it is
notorious that witches ordinarily use such drugs
in their witchcraft.
Article XXXII.
Sixthly, common rumour, combined with other
indications, is also sufficient. It does not seem
to me necessary in this case to particularise the
circumstances requisite for the verification of a
common rumour with regard to other crimes;
for the crime of witchcraft is one which is called
exceptional, and one which is very difficult of
proof. Else common rumour would never be
of any account; for it is so difficult to prove that
even lawyers themselves, when produced as wit­
§ Jin. q. 6. nu. nesses, have found themselves at a loss to give
reasonable evidence, as Clarus has said.
And therefore we require some indications in
pract. §
support of the common rumour, to supply the
diligenter num.
want of such circumstances; for otherwise only
Gandi. de
a common rumour duly verified would be
malef. tit. de
enough to warrant torture, as some have thought.
queast. num. 39.
Clar. § Jin. q.
21. num. I.
Cairer. in
pract. in 2..
Indic.
Menocb. de
■prasumpt. lih.
I. y. 89. num.
Bodin.^
Demonom. IJ'.
August ad
Ang. in •verb.
Jama publica
num. 41.
Marsil in d.
Diligenter nu.
Article XXXIII.
Seventhly, lyingand discrepancies at the examina­
tion, supported by other evidence and indica­
tions, serve also as grounds enough for torture.
OF WITCHES
Article
XXXIV.
Finally, when there are a mass of indications Lancet de
such as the Doctors call “light indications,” that of^c. presto.
provides sufficient warrant for proceeding to
the torture; Jyam qua non prosunt stngula multa Bins. memi. z.
juvant.
(iios. 1.2. sub
A. a TIC 1.1. XXXV.
si. C. de eden.
go. 1. Instrumenta de
probat. C.
These light indications are:
Bodin,
1. If the accused generally turns his eyes to the
ground during his examination.
cf. Cap. 41,
There are some who would count it the same if
the accused has a frightened look, basing their
opinion on those who hold that it is possible to 53draw from the repulsiveness of a man’s face an
indication against him sufficient to expose him
to the torture.
Cairer. in 29.
Article
XXXVI.
2. If the parents of the accused were witches, cf. dap. 48.
For I hold this to be only a light indication;
although Bodin considers it as an infallible rule IV. 4.
that the son must be a witch if his father or
mother was one. But it has often been known
that a bad father may have good children, and
that conversely a good father may have bad
children. And therefore Homer has said in his Lib. 2.
“Odyssey” that “Few sons are like their fathers.”
AN EXAMEN
Article XXXVI I.
If the accuscd has a mark upon him.
Dan. point 4.
Bod. IV.
Bins, ad
de malefic. C.
Cf. chap. 44.
Sim. in com.
cath. tnsM. 8.
fa^t^M^ b
de'pras‘tZf. I.
accused is prone uneasily to fall into a
trembling rage and blaspheme and use
Other execrations: Cum sit enim timida nequitia
dat testimonium condemnationis, as Aristotle says.
And Cicero says on this subject: Magna est vis
q. i^. nu. 71.
Sap. 17.
Cic. pro Milo,
A S.T 1 C L E XX XV 1 I 1.
conscienties, ut nec timeant, qui nihil commiserunt,
et paenam semper ante oculos versari putent, qui
peccaverunt.
Article XXXIX.
Cf. chap. 44..
ly. 4.
5- If the accused makes as though to weep, and
yet sheds no tears; or even if he only sheds a
very few. Yet Bodin again writes that this is
one of the strongest presumptive indications
that the Inquisitors and Paul Grilland have
noted against witches.
Article XL.
Cf. chap. 39.
6. If the accused has no Cross on his rosary; or
if the Cross is defective in some particular.
OF WITCHES
Article XL I.
accused has at times been reproached Marsil i>i
with being a witch, and has let the reproach pract. § dilipass unanswered, without seeking redress by
law or otherwise.
Article XLII.
Menoch. de
■pree^
sump. 1. q. 19.
nu. 12Q.
If he asks to be re-baptised, For since the Bins, ad l. dn.
Uevil requires witches to renounce their bap- de malefic. C.'
tism, and causes them to be baptised in his name
therefore when they fall into the hands ofJustice
they ask to be re-baptised. We have remarked
upon this in another place.
Article XLII I.
If the accused confesses under torture, he must Clar. § jin. q.
be made to repeat his confessions some time later, 64. num. 40.41
say twenty-four hours, and in another place Marsil. in I. i.
§ Diz'us Severus
than that of torture. But it is very necessary to num.
6. de
take care that^ one of his accomplices does not qu£sst.
speak to him in the meanwhile, lest he should
corrupt him. Also it is well not to leave him Bod. IV. 4.
alone, for fear lest the Devil may likewise come
to advise him.
Article XLIV.
Bart. I. unius
§ reve. de q.
Blanc, de
Indic, num.
If he recants, he must be again exposed to the ’Imtwa mm.
torture. This the Judge may do three times, 34but no more.
21. mm. 36.
EXAMEN
Article XLV.
And then if the accused continues to persist in
his denials, he must be released. But there is
great doubt whether he may be fully and abso­
lutely released, or only subject to being again
called for trial.
dectsio.
The Common opinion of the Doctors on this
163. num. 15. question as it affects other crimes is that if all
C/. Clar. d.^.
indications against the accused are entirely
62'. nu.
I purged, then he must be fully and absolutely
64. nu. 38.
discharged; but if they are not, his discharge
must be conditional upon his being liable for
recall.
But I shall always hold that one accused of
witchcraft must never be unconditionally dis­
charged, whatever torture he may have suffered,
if there remains the slightest indication against
Cf.chaf.
For, as we have seen, he who has once
given himself to the Devil cannot easily with­
draw from his clutches: so that, after having been
detained by Justice, he will be even busier in
evil-doing.
Article XLVI.
In any case, if the indications were very strong
and almost beyond doubt, the Judge could pro­
ceed to sentence the accused notwithstanding
Clar. d.g. 64. the fact that he had suffered torture; but he
#«. 38.
should not then sentence him to the usual
Pa/., hi. 24. punishment of witches, but to something extraordinary, such as banishment, etc. This practice
is observed in some countries in the case of other
crimes.
OF WITCHES
Article XLVII.
Further, if the accused ratifies outside the place
of torture the confession which he has made
there, the Judge shall at once discharge him, not
so much as a reproach to the witnesses who may
have testified against him as because he may re­
cant his confession. For he may prove that his
confession is false, and in that case he must be
freely and absolutely discharged. This is a prac- ciar. ^fin. 9.
tice followed in many Provinces, not only in 64'B«-44-®’
respect of confessions made under torture, but
also of those made voluntarily without torture,
as we have said elsewhere.
Article XLVII I.
But if the accused cannot prove that his con­
fession was false, then the Judge must proceed to
pass sentence upon him, even if he afterwards
commutes it.
I am speaking of a confession made under torture
or at least in Court, for a confession made out of
Court can only be confirmed by torture. Yet
Bodin maintains that both sorts of confession are
equally sufficient ground for passing to a con­
demnation for this crime; but such an opinion is L. certum contoo harsh, for we are very apt at times to say
si quis
things against ourselves out of Court which are
not true. Also neither the civil nor the criminal fess. § Jin. q. 55.
law reckons such a confession as a complete
L. qui sentenProot
tiam de peen,
C. Clar. ^fin.
q, 6^. nu. I.
EXAMEN
Article XLIX.
With regard to a confession made in Court but
not under torture, it is certain that according to
precedent it must be considered as sufficient
proof for proceeding to condemnation, such be­
ing the common opinion of our Doctors.
Notwithstanding, the Judge must not fail to dis­
charge the prisoner for the reasons already
Art. 47.
mentioned.
But the confession must be supported by some
other indications; for a confession is not by itself
enough. Si quis ultra fateatur, non semper ei
L. si quit
ultra de quasi. fides habenda est, nonnunquam enim aut metu aut
D. L. non
aliqua de causa in se confitentury says the law; and
tantum de
in another place it says, volens mori non auditur.
afipellatiu.
I have said that the confession must be supported
by other indications; but I do not mean that
there must be a clear case of the death of some
person or animal, or of the prisoner having been
to the Sabbat; for, as we have several times
shown, witches work only at night and in secret,
and a clear proof of such deeds is, as the Juriscon­
Bod. IF. 5.
sult somewhere says, impossible.
The following are examples of the kind of indica­
tions which I mean; if the accused is presumed
or suspected or generally believed to be a witch;
and it seems to me that the indications we have
zq, 28,
mentioned before are more than sufficient in
such a case.
Quid Pap. q.
339lacob. de Bell.
vis. inpractic.
tit. de quasi.
nu. gq.
Clar. ^jin. q.
65. nu. 2.
Article L.
Also it is not necessary for the prisoner’s con­
fession to be made spontaneously in Court, or to
be repeated or reiterated.
OF WITCHES
Article LI.
When the accused retracts his first confession
this must always be regarded with suspicion; for cf.^rt.7.
it is known that the Devil instructs witches in
prison and very often causes them to recant their
first confessions. This has been well pointed out
by Bodin; and I have had several experiences ^^■3of it.
Article LI I.
Similarly the accused must be condemned when
he is lawfully convicted by a sufficient number of
witnesses. And in this crime all sorts of people £od. ir. 2.
are admitted
as. witnesses,
even accomplices., jets. 2. memo.
. ’ . .
1 here is reason in this, since it is an exceptional eonclus. i.
crime, in which equally guilty accomplices pro- Glos. I. Jin. de
vide the proof of each other’s guilt. Besides, the
crime or witchcraft is for the most part com- testibus.
mitted at night and always in secret. Therefore
who is better fitted than the witches themselves
to give evidence concerning the Sabbats and noc­
turnal assemblies of witches? For it is certain
that men of good life never attend the Sabbat,
except by accident.
Sod. ly. 2.
Si«s. de confess. 2. b.
In consequence of this a son is admitted as wit- condus. i.
ness against his father, and the father against the fjfaren^tes de
Article LIII.
son, in this crime; and similarly other relatives testibus. C.
and connexions may testify against each other: d3D. ^^d.l.
all such witnesses are disallowed by the law
m cases of other crimes, except that of high /. jul. majest.
treason.
AN EXAMEN
Article LIV.
C. infidei.
c. accusatm §
vero 06 heret,
i„ 6.
Mai. mal^,
III. 4-
FOF the Same reason infamous and notorious
characters
legally
give evidence in a case of
o j o
Witchcraft.
Article LV.
AfaZ. malef.
Even personal enemies are admitted, unless there
is mortal hatred between them and the accused.
Bod. IF. 2.
Article LVI.
C/. chap. 48.
Bod. IV. 2.
Innoc. Co qualiter de accus.
Glos, 1. ob
carmen § Jin. de
testib. D.
In this crime the Judge must not even reject the
evidence of children who have not yet reached
the age of puberty. For it is known that witches
usually take their children to the Sabbat, how­
ever young they may be, as well as their neigh­
bours’ children; and they have been known to
take them for the very reason that they are too
young. But how can they avoid doing so,
since they vow and dedicate them to the Devil
while they are yet in their mother’s womb?
Therefore these children must be heard in evi­
dence, seeing that the crime is hidden and secret,
and that there is no one who can better witness
to it than those who have been at the Sabbat.
Article
LVI I.
For the same reasons witnesses to this crime are
admissible, even if there is only one witness as to
each particular point in the accusation, provided
OF WITCHES
that all the witnesses agree as to the general
charge of witchcraft. This applies also to other
excepted crimes.
Article LVIII.
We have said that accomplices may give evidence
against each other which may lead to a convic­
tion. This is true provided that two other con­
ditions are fulfilled. The first of these is, that the
accomplice who brings the accusation must die
in contrition and penitence: for it is unlikely
that, dying so, they will bring a false accusation
against another and so damn themselves miser­
ably. This is the argument used by Hyppolitus
1, fin. ad
de Marsilius in his 109th Counsel, where hesays;
“Those on the point of death are then more than a 'uiito^'&
at any other time afraid to lie and offend the intellecto nu.
Divine Majesty.” In this connexion the famous 33-39-»«/•
. . T» 1 1 ' 1
ii « •
,1 aimmendi nu.
jurist Barthole also says: A witness who would 41. sub. fin. de
not otherwise be believed, may be believed when jurejur.
he is near to death.” Binsfeld also has words
very pertinent to this matter, namely, that not De confess.
one witch in a hundred will bring a false accusamembr.
tion against another. This I know also from my
own experience.
The second condition is that there should be a
sufficient number of accomplices as witnesses.
For since, because of their crimes, they are not
entirely unexceptionable witnesses, it follows that
this defect must be supplied by a number greater
than the usual, which is only two. But Bodin, lb'. 2.
who agrees with this view, does not define the I. ubi numerus
number of witnesses, but seems to leave it to the testsbus.
discretion of the Judge. This is a reasonable
3* § qtta
argumenta de
testib.
ANEXAMEN
attitude to take, and is based upon the teaching
of the Roman jurist Callistratus. Yet I would
always stipulate for four witnesses in these cases,
that two may count as one, and four as two, in
conformity with the statutes of Venice and of
those that prevail throughout all the East, which
provide that the evidence of two women shall be
equivalent to that of one man, and that of four
women to that of two men.
Article LIX.
And when there is not this sufficient number of
accomplices to give evidence, then the Judge can­
not proceed to a condemnatory sentence unless
there is also some very strong presumption against
the prisoner, such as those which are sufficient to
warrant application of torture, which we have
already enumerated.
Article
The other proofs which are sufficient to lead to
the condemnation of one accused of witchcraft
may be seen in Book IV, chaper 2, of Bodin’s
“Demonomania,” and in Binsfeld.
Article LX I.
There are times when the only course is to re­
lease the accused from prison. Such is the case
when he has been detained for a very long time,
and there is not enough evidence to justify either
O F WIT CHES
an acquittal or a sentence of death; for there
may be evidence of great weight, yet not such as
can lead to a conviction. Meanwhile further
inquiries must be made into the question of the
guilt of the accused; and in this matter much is
left to the discretion of the Judge.
Article LXII.
Now the usual penalty for witches is that they Bod. ir. 5.
shall be burned, but there is some doubt as to
whether they should be burned alive, or whether
they should first be strangled. Both these views
are upheld by various Doctors.
The second seems to be the more reasonable Lib. 2. varia.
course to take, so that the criminal need not be
"“• 9brought to despair because of the harshness of his
punishment. This is approved by Diego Covarruvias and several others, who say that such is
the custom throughout all Christendom.
Nevertheless I know that the practice in this
country is not so with regard to those who turn
themselves into wolves and in that shape kill
people; for such are burned alive, and the Court
has many times passed this sentence.
Article LXII I.
Yet the usual penalty for witches is not always
put into execution. For in the case of a child
who has not reached the age of puberty it should,
according to Bodin, only be sentenced to the lash.
Binsfeld goes further, and says that sentence of de minorib.
EXAMEN
death should never be passed upon a child of less
than sixteen years of age.
But I am entirely of the contrary opinion; for I
maintain that not only a child witch who has
reached the age of puberty, but even one who has
not, should be sentenced to death, if it is proved
that he has acted out of malice. Yet I would not
in such a case employ the usual penalty for
witches, but some gentler means, such as hang­
Tiraq. de peen, ing, etc. My reasons for this view are, first the
can. 40.
ly enormity of the crime, which is the most
et seq.
16. c. parvulos abominable of all crimes that can be imagined.
I. 4.
For the atrocity of this crime is the reason why
the ordinary provisions of the law are not applic­
able to it; and therefore in the case of atrocious
crimes children are often put to death for their
fathers, without any regard being had to their
Qua de re in I. ignorance; and sometimes even brute beasts are
quisquis ad.
put to death, just as if they were rational crea­
I. fid. majest. tures. I need not mention the usual practice
with regard to the children of those who are con­
victed of high treason.
Secondly, we have seen that he who has once
been caught in Satan’s net can never, except with
Cf. chap. 52.
the greatest difficulty, escape from it. And
therefore I conclude that it is better to condemn
child witches to death than to let them continue
confess,
malefic, in
to live in contempt of God and to the danger of
princip. 5.
public. I am quite aware that Binsfeld does
prceluid. ad
not support this view, saying that God always
Rom. 5. Spin,
q. de Strigib.
holds out His arms to receivea criminal in mercy.
c. 2.
But what we have already said about witches has
Remy.,
Demonol. III. been proved by experience, and comes about, I
believe, through a secret Judgement of God.
3^<2 Syllamia. D. Thirdly, I base my opinion on the law Excipiuntur, which punishes with death a child below the
Bins, ad I. 5.
q. I. sub. 5.
objectio. de
tnalejic.
C. confers,
auth. si captivi cum gios,
de episcop. aud.
O F WIT CHE S
age of puberty for not having cried when its
master was killed. In accordance with this law
many children of less than twelve years of age Boi. IV. 5
have been sentenced to death.
Finally, I have the memorable authority of Holy
Scripture; for forty-two children of the city of
Bethel were devoured by two bears because they Kings 2.
mocked Elisha. For if God was so angered by
the insult to His prophet, how must His wrath
be kindled when He is Himself despised and out­
raged and denied, seeing that He is j ealous of His
honour! I much misdoubt that He does not
visit it upon the Judges whom He appoints to
avenge the wrongs done to Him here below.
Article LXIV.
But if the father has compelled his young son to
go to the Sabbat and to give himself to the Devil,
then I should judge the son worthy of the lash or
of banishment. For when a person is compelled l- sei & si
unius § usi.
to obey in the commission of an atrocious crime, juss.
de injur.
the penalty may excusably be mitigated.
I. ad ea
I am unwilling to say that, in such case, they de reg. jur
late iiraq. de
deserve the usual penalty for witchcraft, because, peen.
caus. 34.
since they were compelled to go to the Sabbat nu. I, 2j 3.
and to renounce God, there was no free will on
their part; and this excuses them from the usual
penalty for witchcraft.
But it must not therefore be concluded that they
must not suffer some other extraordinary pen­
alty; for we must consider that it is forbidden to
renounce God under any coercion whatever. Mattb. IO. I. 3.
§ sed ex S.
Also the matter involves evil consequences and,
as Callistratus says, ma/i exempli. And in such
c. de Siccar. I.
de peen. D.
AN EXAMEN
Cases the law punishes the guilty party not only
banishment and confiscation of his goods,
but even sometimes with death, although there
may have been no malice on his part.
Article L X V.
What I have said in the last Article is applicable
Sabbat but once
twice at the most. But if he has been there
repeatedly, then he is worthy of being punished
repetition shows a consent
se summ. 7rin. ^tid evil intent on the part of the child, even if he
&fide. Cathol. is not yet capable of ill-doing.
Arg. I. Balista
beU.'&Ls7'
mulier ad s. c.
Felleian. Jas.
Article L X V I.
/. lllud ad I.
aquil. D.
Everard in loco
a simile.
A daughter must be judged in the same way as a
son, as also must a servant who in this case obeys
his master’s order. For the same reasons apply
in all these cases.
Article LXVII.
It is Well to note again that, in the crime of
witchcraft, it is lawful at times to proceed to a
Clar. § fin. q.
condemnation on the strength of those indubit20. num. 6. able indications and conjectures, neither more or
less, which are applicable to other atrocious
Bins, de conCrimes committed in secret.
'^dub. ’priKip}'
although there are some who hold that, in
post pralud.
case, the penalty should be an extraordinary
Condus. -p.
one, such as the lash or banishment, yet I should
Brun, de Indic.
p««. i.j.4.
OF WITCHES
not scruple to sentence the accused to death; not
the usual death of witches, but some milder
form; for such is the practice in cases of murder Clar. § assasinand heresy, which are less horrible crimes than turn nu. 6. §
heeres. nu. 29.
witchcraft.
iterum § fin,
q. 20. nu, 7.
Article LXVIII.
The Judge ought of right to be present with the
Clerk at a witch’s execution, that he may know
whether he recants anything of what he has
before said concerning his accomplices, and
whether he accuses any fresh ones, and also
whether he dies contrite and penitent. For an Art. 54.
accusation or confession made in such circum­
stances is of great moment, as we have shown
elsewhere.
For witches do not lightly accuse their accom­
plices, since, as we have already said, the Devil Chap. 21.
makes them swear a solemn oath to that effect
at the Sabbat; and therefore it is well that the
Judge should, when questioning them, refer fre­
quently to this oath during the trial; for by this
means he will more easily bring them to reason.
Article LXIX.
A puisne Judge may not grant to anybody at all
cadav.
the body of a witch who has been executed, that puintor. D.
it may be buried in consecrated soil. Neither do ciar. lib. 5.
I think that the Supreme Court would ever §.#«• 100.
grant this, considering the enormity of the crime.
And even in the case of other atrocious crimes it
is customary to expose to view the bodies of
Deut. 21.
AN EXAMEN
OF WITCHES
those who have been executed, to serve as an
example and warning to others. Yet this seems
to be contrary to the law of Moses in Deuteronomy.
Article L X X.
Cbap. 50.
But if the witch dies in prison before sentence has
been pronounced upon him, he should be buried in
consecrated soil even if hehas confessed, provided
always that he died penitent and contrite
and gave clear proof of such a state of
mind. We have dealt more fully
with this point in another place
NOTES
NOTES
S. Oyan or Oyand is S. Eugendus (Augendus). Title-page.
S. Eugendus was born circa 449 at Izernore,
Ain, Franche-Comt6, and died i January, 510, de ‘Joux.
at Condat. At the age of seven he was entrusted
by his father, who had become a priest, to the
care of S. Romanus and S. Lupicinus of the
monastery of Condat in the French Jura, and
thenceforth he never left the enclosure. He
led a life of great sanctity and austerity. About
496 he was elected to follow Minausius as
Abbot. Immediately after his death his eminent
holiness was attested by miracles, and his suc­
cessor, S. Viventiolus, built a church over his
tomb, which soon became a celebrated place of
pilgrimage. A town arose and was named
after the Saint, S. Oyan de Joux. But when
S. Claude, Bishop of Besan^on, resigned his
diocese and retiring to Condat died in 694 (or
696) as Abbot of the monastery, the number of
pilgrims who visited his shrine became so great,
particularly after the solemn translation of the
body of the Saint, which having been concealed
from the Saracen invaders in 1260 was brought
back to Condat with great pomp twelve years
later, that the abbey and the town began to be
more generally known as Saint-Claude, and this
name has to-day quite superseded the other.
However, the old Saint Oyan de Joux lingered
until the seventeenth century
NOTES
Title-page. This procedure or “Instruction,” which was for
The pro- many decades the authoritative code used in the
cedure.
prosecution of witches, first appears in the
Second Edition, Rouen, 1603; the Second
Edition, Lyons, 1603; and Second Edition,
Paris, 1603. It will be noticed that all three
issues from the several cities are in each case
described as “Seconde edition.”
Page xxwi. This prelate, who was born of a distinguished
Ferdinand house in 1556, was in 1585 preconized by
de Fye.
Sixtus V to succeed Bishop Antoine II in the
see of Besan^on. Unfortunately Francois de
Grammont had been elected by the Chapter, and
although their choice was at once nullified, it was
not until 13 November, 1587, that Ferdinand
de Rye was enthroned in his Cathedral. The
following year, on 24 September, being the feast
of Our Lady of Ransom, the King of Spain
appointed him titular Abbot of S. Claude.
This was solemnly ratified by Clement VIII.
Bishop Ferdinand died at Fraisans 20 August,
1636, at the age of eighty.
Page xxxi. ThenephewofBishopFerdinand,andsincei6i8
Franfois
Bishop-Coadjutor with right of succession. He
de Rye.
held the see barely eight months, dying 17 April,
1637, aged seventy-one.
Page xxxii “One Oddoy a DanOy a mighty Pirat, was so well
Oddo.
learned in Magick, that he would wander at Sea
without a Ship, and oft-times drowned his
Enemies ships, by raising Tempests with his
Charms. Wherefore, that he might not fight at
Sea with Pirats, he was wont, by Witchcraft, to
raise and exasperate the Winds and Waves to
NOTES
destroy them.” Olaus Magnus, A Compendious
History of the Goths. Translated by J. Streater.
London. 1658. Book III, c. 17 (p. 49}.
“Filimer, rex Gothorum . . . qui et terras Page xxxii.
Scythicas cum sua gente introisse superius a Huns.
nobis dictus est, reperit in populo suo quasdam
magas mulieres, quas patrio sermone Haliurunas
is ipse cognominat, easque habens suspectas,
de medio sui proturbat, longeque ab exercitu
suo fugatas in solitudinem, coegit errare. Quas
spiritus immundi per eremum uagantes dum
uidissent, et earum in complexibus in coitu miscuissent, genus hoc ferocissimum edidere. . . .
Tali ergo Hunni stirpe creati, Gothorum finibus
aduenere. Jordanes, De Getarum siue Gothorum
origine, xxiv, ed. C. A. Closs, Stuttgart, 1861
(PP- 93-9+)Olaus Magnus, Book III, c. 18 (London, 1658, Page xxxii.
p. 49). ‘‘‘‘Haguinus, King of Norway., when he Haakon.
was to fight against the Danes, he raised a storm
by Witchcraft, and so beat upon the Enemies
heads, with Hail-stones of an unusual greatness,
that their Eyes were hurt as with arrows from
the Clouds, and they could not see, the Elements
fighting more against them, than the Enemy.”
The land forces of Xerxes, says Herodotus (vii, Page xxxii.
6i, sqq.), contained forty-six nations. Upon his Xerxes.
march he received further accessions of strength,
and when he reached Thermopylae the land and
sea forces amounted to 2,641,610 fighting men.
This does not include the attendants, the slaves,
the crews of the provision ships, and others,
which according to the reckoning of Herodotus
NOTES
exceeded in numbers the actual warriors. Even
if it be supposed that the tally was equal, the
total figure of the army of Xerxes at Ther­
mopylae is 5,283,220; It must be remembered
that his forces were the result of a maximum of
effort throughout a vast empire, and that pro­
visions had been stored for three years before all
along the line of march.
Page xxxii. See The Geography of TTitchcraft by Montague
TrotsSummers, c. v, pp. 398-9 and 426. Bodin,
eschelles.
Demonomanie, IV, 5 (ed. Lyons, 1593, P- 5O9)j
has; “Trois-eschelles dist au Roy Charles IX,
qu’il y en alloit plus de trois cens mille [Sorciers]
en ce Royaume.” Charles IX reigned 1560-74.
Page xxxi’tj. 1 Kings
1 Samuelf
22-23: “And
Saul.
Samuel said; Doth the Lord desire holocausts
and victims, and not rather that the voice of the
Lord should be obeyed.? For obedience is
better than sacrifices; and to hearken rather than
to offer the fat of rams. Because it is like the
sin of witchcraft, to rebel: and like the crime of
idolatry, to refuse to obey.”
Page xxxv. P.g. Leviticus, xx, 6: “The soul that shall go
God. . .
aside after magicians, and soothsayers, and shall
threatened, commit fornication with them, I will set my
face against that soul, and destroy it out of the
midst of its people.” Ibid, xx, 27; “A man, or
woman, in whom there is a pythonical or divin­
ing spirit, dying let them die; they shall stone
them; their blood be upon them.” Malachias,
iii, 5: “And I will come to you in judgement,
and will be a speedy witness against sorcerers.
NOTES
and adulterers, and false swearers.” II Paralipomenon {A.I^., II Chronicles)^ xxxiii, 6, of
Manasses: “ And he made his sons to pass
through the fire in the valley of Benennom: he
observed dreams, followed divinations, gave
himself up to magic arts, had with him magicians
and enchanters: and he wrought many evils
before the Lord, to provoke him to anger.”
Suetonius, Caligula, xxx: “Insensus turbae Page
fauenti aduersus studium suum exclamauit: xxxvii.
Utinam populus Romanus unam ceruicem Emperor.
haberet.” The phrase is often said to be Nero’s,
but Seneca and Dio Cassius agree with Suetonius
in attributing it to Caligula, Dio, lix: Kai ttotc
TTavn TO) Srifio) aTreiXaiv etTzev: eWe era av)(eva
eigeTe. Seneca, De Ira,m. ic^-. “Qui optabat,
ut populus Romanus unam ceruicem haberet, ut
scelera sua tot locis, ac temporibus diducta, in
unum ictum, et unum diem cogeret.”
The authority of the Malleus Maleficarum dis- Preface,
tinctly proves that a “belief that there are such xxxix.
beings as witches is so essential a part of the People who
Catholic faith that obstinately to maintain the do not beopposite opinion savours of heresy.” Part I, lieve that
Question i.
there are
witches.
Pauli Grillandi Castellionis, Tractatus duo Preface, xli.
de Sortilegiis et Lamiis. Lyons, 1533;
Grilland.
Frankfort, 1590; and other editions.
Prejace,
xlii.
Psalm Ixxxv, 9: Quoniam magnus es tu, et The
faciens mirabilia: tu es Deus solus.
Psalmist.
Preface,
xlvi.
The In­
quisition.
Preface,
xlvi.
Bodin.
NOTES
I.e. Malleus Maleficarum.
Jean Bodin, 1530-96- The famous De la
Demonomanie des Sorciers, first issued in 1580,
Paris, was several times reprinted, the last edition
being Rouen, 1604. There are Latin (i59o)j
German (i581), and Italian (1587) translations.
Of Bodin’s Le fleau des demons et sorcters there
are editions 1616 and 1626.
Preface,
xlvi.
Remy.
Nicolas Remy, i554-o 1600. His Damonolatreia appeared in 1595 (Lyons), and was very
frequently reprinted. One of the latest, if not the
last, edition is Hamburg, 1698. There is a
German translation of i59^- Another transla­
tion was printed at Hamburg in 1693. For a
full account of Remy see the Introduction to
the English translation of Deemonolatreia in the
present series.
Preface,
xlvi.
Binsfeld.
Peter Binsfeld, one of the most important
names in the history of witchcraft, was born
c. 1540, and died 1603. His Tractatus de Confessionibus Maleficarum, Treves, 15^9, which
ran into many editions, is regarded as of high
authoritv. For fuller details see the Introduc­
tion to the translation of the Tractatus in this
series.
Page 8.
Royal
Prophet.
Psalm viii, 3: “Ex ore infantium et lactentium
Page 8.
Paul IP.
perfecisti laudem propter inimicos tuos, ut
destruas inimicum et ultorem.” Quoted by Our
Lord, 5. Matthewy xxi, 16.
Giovanni Pietro Caraffa, born 28 June, 1476elected 23 May, 1555; died 18 August, 1559.
NOTES
1 Corinthians^ v, 1-5. “Omnino auditur inter Page 9.
uos fornicatio, et talis fornicatio qualis nec inter "S'. Paul.
gentes, ita ut uxorem patris sui aliquis habeat.
Et uos inflati estis: et non magis luctum habuistis
ut tollatur de medio uestrum qui hoc opus fecit.
Ego quidem absens corpore, praesens autem
spiritu, iam iudicaui ut praesens, eum, qui sic
operatus est. In nomine Domini nostri Iesu
Christi, congregatis uobis et meo spiritu, cum
uirtute Domini nostri Iesu, Tradere huiusmodi satanae in interitum carnis, ut spiritus
saluus sit in die Domini nostri Iesu Christi.”
And I Timothy, i, 20: “Hymenaeus, et Alexan­
der: quos tradidi satanae, ut discant non blasphemare.”
Ixxvii. (A.V. 78) 49: “Misit in eos iram in- Page ().
dignationis suae: indignationem et iram, et Psalm.
tribulationem: immissiones per angelos malos.”
Jean Benedict!, the celebrated Franciscan Page 9.
theologian of the sixteenth century, belonged to Benedict!.
the Observantine Province of Tours and Poitiers.
He arose to high olEce, being commissary­
general of the French and visitor of many
Italian provinces. His Somme des pechez et le
remede d'iceux, first published at Lyons in 1584,
was many times reprinted. La triomphante
-jictoire de la Pierge Marie sur sept Esprits
malins, finalment chassis du corps d'une femme
dan I'EgUse des Cordeliers de Lyon, Lyons, 1611,
relates the case of Perrenette Pinay, who was
exorcized and freed from a most grievous
demoniac possession.
Peter Thyraeus, S.J., of Neuss, was Professor of Page 9.
Theology at Mainz. The important work to Thyraus.
NOTES
which reference is here made is his Daemoniaci,
hoc est de oisessis a spiritibus Daemoniorum hominibus, Cologne, 1594. There are reprints, Lyons,
1603; Cologne, 1604; and Lyons, 1626.
Simon
Magus.
Peter Thyrasus, Daemoniaci, Pars I, c. xvi, 199,
writes: “Refert Anastasius Nicaenus, quaestione
23, Simonem Magum eos, qui ipsum praestigiatorem dicerent, Daemonibus subiecisse.”
Page 9.
Eighty
girls and
uuomen.
This affair, which caused a great sensation,
commenced in the reign of Julius III, con­
tinued during the short pontificate of Marcellus
11 (9-30 April, 1555), and was prolonged until
the days of Paul IV. The possessed were
exorcized by a Benedictine monk belonging to
the household of Cardinal Pierre de Gondi,
Bishop of Paris, and it is recorded that the
demons proved particularly stubborn and
obstinate, so powerful Were the Hebrew sorcerers
at work.
Page ().
Cook.
The woman’s name was Elsa Kamer. Both she
and her mother, a notorious witch of long con­
tinuance, were executed.
Page t).
Caron.
Loys Charondas Le Caron, born at Paris 1530;
died 1617.
Page IO.
Fernel.
Jean Fernel, “le Galien moderne,” born at
Clermont-en-Beauvoisis (or at Montdidier) in
1497. He was the Chief Physician to Henry II
and Diane de Poitiers. Dr. Sauecrotte thus
describes Fernel: “Il etait professeur eloquent,
ecrivain non moins elegant que disert, artiste en
Part d’exposer et d’enchainer avec lucidite les
doctrines qu’il conciliait.”
NOTES
The shrine of St. Claude was visited by many Page 10.
pilgrims of the highest rank, such as Philip the St. Claude.
Bold, Duke of Burgundy, who went there in
1369, 1376 and 1382: Philip the Good in 1422,
1442 and 1443; Charles the Rash in 1461;
Louis XI in 1456 and 1482; Blessed Amadeus,
Duke of Savoy, in 1471. In 1500 Anne of
Brittany, wife of Louis XII, made a pilgrimage
of thanksgiving to the shrine in gratitude for the
birth of her daughter Claude. Unhappily in
March, 1794, the sacred body of St. Claude was
burned by order of the revolutionaries.
Dialogues, 1. iv.
S. Gregory.
Daemontacty II, c. 32: “In huius Capitis ingressu Page 13.
B. Hieronymi, superior! Capite allatam const!- Thyraus.
tuimus sententiam. Quae causa est, inquit, ut
saepebimuli trimuliue,et ubera materna lactantes
a daemonic corripiantur? Inuisibilia haec inscrutabili altissimi Dei iudicio sunt relinquenda.”
S. Gregory the Great (Hom. xxxiv. in Euangel.)
says: “We know on the authority of Scripture Hierarchy.
that there are nine Choirs of Angels: Angels,
Archangels, Virtues, Powers, Principalities,
Dominations, Thrones, Cherubim and Sera­
phim.” S. Thomas {Summa, I, Q. cviii), follow­
ing S. Dionysius, De Caelesti Hierarchia, vi and
vii, divides the Angels into three hierarchies,
each of which comprises three orders.
Page 15.
Cacarchy.
KaKapgyj..
Page 15.
The “Master of the Sentences,” c. 11 oo-r. Peter
1160-64. Hi® famous Book of Sentences was Lombard.
NOTES
written n45-51. In a long series of questions
the author covers practically the whole body of
theological doctrine, writing it in one system­
atized whole.
Page 15.
Thyraus.
Daemoniaci^ 1,12, says: “Cum igitur ex bonorum
Angelorum numero et classibus spiritus nequam
deciderint, etiam inter ipsos aliquis erit ordo, et
procul dubio is ipsus, qui antequam ad suas
miserias prolapsi sunt, fuit.”
Page 15.
Behemoth,
Bodin in his Demonomanie, I, i, says: “Il semble
que Dieu a cree ce grand Satan au commence­
ment du monde, que I’escripture appelle Behe­
moth, et Leviathan; car I’escripture saincte dit.
Is prima rerum origine a Deo conditus est.”
Job, xl and xli.
Page 15.
This famous work is by Girolamo Menghi,
Flagellum a Capuchin of Valmontone. It first appeared
Daemonum. Venice, 1599, and was reprinted as late as 1708.
Flagellum Daemonum, exorcismos terribiles, potentissimos et efficaces . . . in malignos spiritus . ; .
complectens . . . Accessit postremo pars secunda
quae Fustis daemonum inscribitur.
Page 15.
Binsfeld.
De Confessionibus Maleficorum. III. Decima
Conclusio. “Magi uirtute diabolica possunt
aliquando Daemones cogere, et e suis sedibus
expellere.”
Page 15.
Nider.
John Nider, O.P., born in Swabia, 1380; died
at Colmar, 13 August, 1438. As a theologian
he adheres closely to S. Thomas. His Formicarius, an encyclopaedic treatise, which may be
dated 1435-37, was first printed about 1500.
NOTES
There are many subsequent editions. Strass­
burg, 1517; Paris, 1519; Douai, 1602; Helm­
stadt, 1692. The last Book, V, deals with witch­
craft and sorcery, and is continually cited by
the demonologists as of the first authority.
Chapter vii. The prophet writes; “The spirit Page 16.
lifted me up between the earth and the heaven, E-zekiel.
and brought me in the vision of God into Jeru­
salem.” Here he beheld the secret sorceries of
the seventy men of the ancients of the house of
Israel who were worshipping with incense the
frescoed animals and creeping things
jiegyptiano. He was also shown the women who
wept and wailed for Adonis in the north porch
of the temple. The rites of Adonis, moreover,
were Intimately connected with the practices
of the Kedeshim. Boguet is mistaken in saying
that Ezechiel was transported to Azotus (Ash­
dod), and he is perhaps thinking of S. Philip
diaconus, who was carried away to Azotus after
the baptism of the Ethiopian eunuch. Acts viii,
Tobias was accompanied by the Archangel Page ly.
S. Raphael.
Tobias.
The appearances of Angels in the Old Testa- Page 17.
ment often present points of some complexity Two Angels
with reference to the personality of the Being who visited
who was manifested. The earlier Fathers tell Lot.
us that on certain occasions Almighty God Him­
self appeared, as in the bush to Moses, and on
Mt. Sinai, whilst Tertullian saw some fore­
shadowing—as it were—of the Incarnation,
and many of the Eastern Fathers follow the
NOTES
same line of thought. It would seem that the
three Angels who visited Abraham were an
actual Theophany, for the narrative implies
that the Supreme Being remained when the two
departed. Yet it is probable that two Angels
visited Lot. The whole incident is one of extra­
ordinary difficulty. Vandenbroeck, Dissertatio
Theologica de Theophaniis sub Ueteri Testamento, Louvain, 1851, may be consulted with
profit.
Augustus
Casar.
An account of the many and very early legends
that make Augustus Caesar one of the “prophets
of Christ” may be found in Graf, Roma nella
memoria e nelle immaginazioni del Medio Evo,
Turin, 1882, I, ix. 308, 331.
Page I "J.
Pope Leo.
Page 18.
Spina.
Pope S. Leo 1,440-61.
Bartolomeo Spina, O.P., whose Quaestio de
strigihus et lamiis, Venice, 1523, was widely
esteemed and often reprinted. This celebrated
theologian was born at Pisa about 1475, and
rose to high honours in his Order. In July
1542 he was made Master of the Sacred Palace
by Paul III. He died at Rome in 1546.
Page 18.
Pliny.
Lib. VII. Ep. 27: “Ego ut esse credam, in
primis eo ducor, quod audio accidisse Curtio
Rufo. Tenuis adhuc et obscurus obtinenti
Africam comes haeserat: inclinato die spatiabatur in porticu : offertur ei mulieris figura
humana grandior pulchriorque: perterrito,
Africam se, futurorum praenuntiam, dixit:
iturum enim Romam, honoresque gesturum, atque
etiam cum summo imperio in eandem prouinciam
NOTES
reuersurum, ibique moriturum. Facta sunt
omnia. Praeterea accident! Carthaginem, egredientique nauem, eadem figura in litore occurrisse narratur.”
Hector Boece, chronicler, and one of the foun- Page 18.
ders of Aberdeen University, 1465-1536. The Boethius.
impetus he gave to historical studies at Aber­
deen was of lasting effect. His works are highly
esteemed.
Scotorum Historiae, VIII.—I have used the
first edition, 1526, where this story and other
similar adventures may be read, folios cliv-v.
“In Gareotha regione, uico quatuordeum uix
passuu millibus ab Aberdonia, adolesces multa
formositate, coram Aberdonen antistite questus
est palam, sese a demone Succuba (vt dicunt)
gratissima omniu que uidisset forma, multo antea
menses infestatum eande occlusis foribus noctu
ad si ingredi blanditiis, in sui amplexus copellere.
Dubia luce abiri sine strepitu poene, nullo se
posse modo quu plures attentasset a tata, acta
turpi uesania liberari. lubet cotinus optimus
episcopus adolescete, alio se coferre, & vt
Christiana religioe magis laudatis, ieiuniis &
oronibus plus solito accomodaret uim; fore vt
piis operibus inceto, uictus cacodemon tade terga
esset datums. Euenit adolesceti salubre cosiliu
religiose exequuto, paucos post dies vti ueneradus
antistes erat pfatus.”
The story is found in Paulus Jovius, Elogia Page 19.
Doctorum Uirorum, c. lOl. See my History of Agrippa.
Witchcraft, p. 103. Weyer, De Magis Infamibus,
V. 11 and 12, relates the circumstance. Opera
omnia, 1670, pp. iio-ii; “Silentio inuolui
NOTES
diutius . . . non patiar quod in diuersis aliquot
scriptoribus legerim, diabolum forma canis ad
extremum Agrippae halitum comitem ipsi
fuisse, et postea nescio quibus modis euanuisse.
. . . Canem hunc nigrum mediocris staturae,
Gallico nomine Monsieur (quod Dominum
sonat) nuncupatum noui ego ... at uere
naturalis erat canis masculus . . . causam
autem huic falsae opinion! dedisse opinor, partim
quod canem hunc pueriliter nimis amaret (ut
sunt quorundam hominum mores) oscularetur
plerumque, aliquando et a latere hunc sibi
admoueret in mensa.”
Page 19,
jibdias.
A collection of “Acts of the Apostles” which
was formed, probably by a monk, in the Frankish
Church in the sixth century by a mistake con­
cerning the authorship was under the title
Historia Certaminis Apostolorum ascribed to
Abdias, who is said to have been a disciple of the
Apostles and first Bishop of Babylon. The
nucleus of this collection was formed by the
Latin Passiones of those Apostles concerning
whom there were no Gnostic or semi-Gnostic
legenda^ that is, SS. James Major and Minor,
Philip, Bartholomew, Simon, and Jude. Amongst
many accretions there is a very early tradition
to be found, and it is believed historical truth.
Page 19.
Agnan.
“Ou Agnian, demon qui tourmente les Americains par des apparitions et des mechancetes.
Il se montre surtout au Bresil et chez les Topinamboux. Il parait sous toutes sortes de formes,
de fa^on que ceux qui veulent le voir peuvent
le rencontrer partout.” Collin de Plancy,
Dictionnaire Infernal (6me ed.), Paris, 1863.
NOTES
It is very commonly held that this colour. Page 20.
especially in certain circumstances, is unlucky. Black.
Cf. Heywood, The Fair Maid of the West^ 4to,
1631. Part I, Act IV, scene 2:
Besse. Then first, you said your ship was trim
and gay:
He have her pitcht all ore, no spot of white.
No colour to be scene, no saile but blacke.
No flag but sable.
Goodlache.
Twill be ominous.
And bode disaster fortune.
Besse.
He ha’ it so.
Goodlache. Why then she shall be pitcht blacke
as the devil.
Besse. She shall be call’d The Negro.
“Daemones . . . impetum in animalia non- Page 20.
nulla faciunt . . . quia mirum in modum Psellus.
animali calore capiantur. Nam cum in profundissimis locis uersentur, quae frigida extreme
siccaque sunt, sit ut multum frigiditatis sibi contrahant, qua quidem contract! atque afflict!,
humidum at animalem calorem appetunt, quo ut
potiantur, in bruta quoque animalia insiliunt,
et in balnea concauaque loca penetrant. Ignis
enim solisque calorem, quia urit et exsiccat,
auersantur: animalem uero, tanquam humiditati temperatum, libenter amplexantur, maximeque hominum, congruum quidem ilium et
temperatum.” Michaelis Pselli, De Operatione
daemonum Dialogus, Latin translation by Petus
Morellus, Paris, 1615, pp. 52 and 55.
Sorcerers could often be distinguished by their Page 21.
foul and fetid odour. In the patois of the Cardan.
Pyrenees wizards were commonly known as
NOTES
poudou'es and witches poudoueros, both words
being derived from putere, which signifies to
have an evil smell. See my History of If^itchcraft,
pp. 44-45.
Page 24.
Renunciation.
For this abjuration of the Catholic Faith as
noted by Francesco-Maria Guazzo in his
authoritative Compendium Maleficarum, see my
History of Witchcraft, c. iii, pp. 81-82.
Page 24.
Bodin.
In his Demonomanie, II, c. iv, Bodin says: “Les
plus detestables Sorciers, sont ceux, qui renoncent Dieu, et son service.” Lambert Daneau
(English translation,
Dialogue of Witches)
writes: “He commaundeth them to forswere
God theyr creator and all his power, promising
perpetually to obey and worship him, who then
standeth in their presence.” De Lancre, Tableau
de ITnconstance des Mauvais Anges, Livre II,
Discours i (ed. Paris, 1612, p. 74}, tells us that
a neophyte was told it was necessary “qu’il
renonce & renie son Sauueur, la Vierge Marie,
les saincts & sainctes de Paradis, son baptesme,
le sainct chresme, le ciel & la Terre, & particulierement son pere confesseur, ses pere & mere,
parrain & marraine, & autres parens.”
Page 0.^.
Remy, Desmonolatreia, III, vi: “Non desunt &
Rebaptised, qui se iterum Sacramento initial! expiari postulent, rati se ea ratione in Christi familiam rursus
cooptari posse.” It may be worth remarking
that the Sacrament of Baptism cannot, of course,
be repeated. The Sacrament validly adminis­
tered impresses an ineffaceable character on the
soul, which the Tridentine Fathers call a
spiritual and indelible mark—S. Thomas treats
NOTES
of the nature of this indelible seal in the Summa,
III. Q. Ixiii, a. 2.
This is actually a mixture of oil of olives and Page
balsam, blessed by a bishop in an especial manner, Chrism.
and used in the administration of certain Sacra­
ments, particularly Confirmation (as also Baptism
and Holy Orders).
S. Cyril of Jerusalem, c. 315-86.
It is held by great theologians such as S. Thomas, Page 25.
Summa, III. Q. Ixxii, a. 4, and Suarez,
Con- Jesus
fessione, D. jpcxiii, and is indeed humanly cer- Christ.
tain that chrism was immediately instituted by
Our Lord Himself.
Pope S. Fabian, 236-50.
Page 25.
Fabian.
A Belgian witch, Digna Robert, in 1565, said Page lb.
that the devil “etait froid dans tous ses membres.”
At the North Berwick Sabbat in 1590, “he
caused all the company to com and kiss his ers
quhilk they said was cauld lyk yce.” In 1661 a
Forfar witch “Katheren Porter confesseth that
the divill tooke hir by the hand, that his hand was
cold.” In 1662 Isabel Rutherford “confesst
that ye was at ane meeting at Turfhills, where
Sathan took you by the hand and said ‘welcome
Isabel,’ and said that his hand was cold.” Mar­
garet Litster of the same coven spoke of “Sattan
having grey clothes and his hand cold.” In 1697
Thomas Lindsay, a boy, gave witness that “Jean
Fulton his Grand-Mother awaked him one
Night out of his Bed, and caused him to take a
Black Grimm Gentleman (as she called him) by
the Hand; which he felt to be cold.”
NOTES
Page 26. The demon who presided at the meetings or
Of the
synagogues of the Vaudois spoke “uoce rauca.”
voice of
J. Friedrich, La Pauderye^ Munich, 1898, p.
demons.
188. Remy, Damonolatreia.^ I, viii, says of
demons: “nec adeo feliciter humanam uocem
imitantur, quin ficta, ementitaque audientibus
facile appareat. Nicolaea Ganatia, Eua Hesoletia, lana Nigra Armacuriana, ac pluraque aliae
uocem illis esse aiunt, qualem emittunt, qui os
in dolium, aut testam rimosam insertum habent.”
Page 2"J. In the case of Guillaume Edeline, who was
Black ram. condemned in 1453, “Confessa ledit sire Guil­
laume, de sa bonne et franche voulente, avoir
fait hommage audit ennemy en I’espece et
semblance d’ung mouton, en le baisant par le
fondement au signe de reverence et d’hommage.”
De Lancre tells us that the witch Silvain Nevil-
lon, when on his trial at Orleans, in 1614, “dit
qu’il a veu le Diable en plusieurs famous, tantost
comme vn bouc, ores comme vn gros mouton.”
Page 28.
Fulgosus.
Baptista Fregoso, an Italian writer of the
fifteenth century.
Page 28.
Rook.
This is from Suetonius, Domitian., xxiii: “Ante
paucos quam occideretur menses, cornix in
Capitolio locuta est, earai TrdvTa KaXais. Nec
defuit qui ostentum sic interpretaretur:
Nuper Tarpeio quae sedit culmine cornix,
Est bene, non potuit dicere: dixit, Erit.
Page 28. Lodovico Ricchieri, the famous Italian philoloCcelius
gist, surnamed Rhodiginus from Rovigo
Rhodiginus.{Rhodigium'), where he was born about 1450,
and where he died in 1525. His Antiquarum
NOTES
lectionum, lib. xvi, was published at Venice,
folio, 1516; Paris, folio, 1517. A more com­
plete edition, comprising thirty books, was
issued under the care of Camillo Ricchieri and
Goretti at Bale, folio, 1550. I have used the
folio Geneva edition of 1620.
Leonardo Vairo (or Vair^, born at Benevento, Page 28.
of Spanish descent, c. 1540; Bishop of Pozzuoli, Pair.
where he died in 1603. His De Fascino., Libri
III, Paris, 1583; Venetiis apud Aldum, 1589,
is a work of singular erudition.
A phallic orgy was an essential part of the Sab- Page 29.
bat. At the nocturnal synagogues of the Vaudois Of the
the presiding demon—or he who filled the copulation
devil’s office—took aside the neophyte, “trahiti^zA^
ad partem in nemore receptam, ut earn suo Devil.
modo amplexetur et cognoscat carnaliter, cui ex
malicia dicit, quod iaceat super terram in facie
ad duas manus et pedes, et quod el aliter non
potest copulari, et in quacumque forma fruitur
presidens, tacto primo per receptam membro
presidentis, quod sepius frigidum et molle
indicat, ut sepius totum corpus. Primo immittit
in portam naturalem et relinquit sperma corruptum et croceum susceptum in pollucione
nocturna aut alias, secundo in locum egestionis,
et ita inordinate abutitur.” Upon her return
to the company, “ recepta transit ante refectionem in copulam carnalem alicuius hominis.”
After a banquet the torches are extinguished and
“quisque suam ad partem trahit et carnaliter
cognoscit. Nonnunquam uero excessus indicibiles commictuntur in commutacionibus mulierum, iussu presidentis, de transitu de muliere in
NOTES
mulierem et de uiro in uirum; de abusu contra
naturam mulierum inuicem, et similiter uirorum
inter se; aut mulieris cum uiro extra uas debitum
et ad partem aliam. . . . Uir uero cum dyabola
aut mulier cum daemone nullam experitur
delectacionem, sed ex timore et obediencia consentit in copulam. ... In secunda autem congregacione ipsamulier recepta cognoscitur carnaliter a demone familiari ac sollicitatore, modo
quo prius a presidente, et non amplius a demone
in aliis congregacionibus sequentibus, nisi cum
propter paucitatem uirorum ad complenduni
copulas (quum ut plurimum plures sunt ibi
mulieres, quam uiri) demones in copulis sup­
plent uices uirorum, sicuti interdum, sed raro,
uti pauciores sunt mulieres, supplecio fit per
dyabolas, et ita sepius in aliis congregacionibus,
preter duas primas congregaciones, in quorum
prima in reditu a presidente, post receptionem
ad congregacionem, cognoscitur a dyabola; est
tamen reperire, sed raro, quod uir aliquis semper
habet dyabolam in copula, et est signum rnaxime nequicia in eo, et similiter aliqua mulier
semper in omnibus congregacionibus habet
uirum uel demonem.” J. Friedrich, La Lauderye, Munich, 1898, pp. 188-89. De Lancre,
Tableau de I’Iiiconstance^ III, Discours V, says:
“Or cette operation de luxure n’est commise
OU pratiquee par eux pour plaisir qu’ils y prenent,
parce que comme simples Esprits, ils ne peuuent
prendre aucune joye ny plaisir des choses
sensibles. Mais ils le font seulement pour faire
choir I’homme dans le precipice dans lequel ils
sont, qui est la disgrace de Dieu tres-haut & trespuissant.” He also records definite confessions;
“lohannes d’Aguerre, diet que le Diable en
NOTES
forme de bouc auoit son membre au derriere &
cognoissoit les femmes en agitent & poussant
auec iceluy contre leur deuant. Marie de Marigrane aagee de quinze ans habitante de Biarrix
diet, Qu’elle a veu souuent le Diable s’accoupler
auec vne infinite de femmes qu’elle nomme par
nom & surnom: & que sa coutume est de cognoistre les belles pardeuant & les laides tout au
rebours.” It is certain from the detailed and
overwhelming evidence of all countries that the
copulation of the Devil or the Grand-Master
of the Sabbat with the witches was no morbid
hallucination but an actual and achieved fact.
As the Platonist Dr. Henry More says: “Witches
confessing, so frequently as they do, that the
Devil lies with them, and withal complaining
of his tedious and offensive coldness^ it is a shrewd
presumption that he doth lie with them indeed,
and that it is not a meet Dream." The Salmanticenses in the authoritative Theologia Moralls,
Tr. xxi. c. II, p. IO, nn. i8o, i8i, lay down:
“Some deny this, believing it impossible that
demons should perform the carnal act with
human beings. None the less the opposite
opinion is most certain, and must be followed.”
The coldness of the Devil and the repeated Page 31.
assertion at the trials that his semen was nip- Cold.
ping and gelid would seem to point to the use
upon occasion of an artificial penis. “In many
of the cases of debauchery at Sabbats so freely
and fully confessed by the witches, their partners
were undoubtedly the males who were present;
the Grand Master, Officer, or President of the
Assembly, exercising the right to select first for
his own pleasures such women as he chose. . . .
NOTES
Yet when we sift the evidence, detailed and
exact, of the trials, we find there foul and hideous
mysteries of lust which neither human inter­
course nor the employ of a mechanical property
can explain. Howbeit, the theologians and the
inquisitors are fully aware what unspeakable
horror lurks in the blackness beyond.” See my
History of lf^itchcraft.,c. iii,pp. 97—loi. Mother
Bush of Barton in 1649 said that the Devil who
visited her as a young black man “was colder
than man, and heavier, and could not performe
nature as man.” In 1662 Isobel Gowdie and
Janet Breadheid of Auldearne described the
Devil as “a meikle, blak, roch man, werie cold;
and I fand his nature als cold within me as
spring-well-water.” “He is abler for us that
way than any man can be,” said Isobel, “onlie
he was heavie lyk a malt-sek; a hudg nature,
verie cold, as yce.”
A good
finger's
length.
“Margueritte fille de Sare aagee de seize a
dixsept ans, depose que le Diable, soit qu’il ayt la
forme d’homme, ou qu’il soit en forme de Bouc,
a tousiours vn membre de mulet, ayant chosy
en imitation celuy de cet animal comme le
mieux pourueu; Qu’il I’a long & gros comme le
bras; que quand il veut cognoistre quelque fille
on femme au sabbat comme il faict presque a
chasque assemblee, il faict paroistre quelque
forme de lict de foye, sur lequel 11 faict semblant
de les coucher, qu’elles n’y prenent poinct de
desplaisir, comme ont diet ces premieres: Et que
iamais il ne paroist au sabbat en quelque action
que ce soit, qu’il n’ait tousiours son instrumet
dehors, de cette belle forme & mesure: Tout
rebours de ce que diet Boguet, que celles de son
NOTES
pais ne luy ont veu guiere plus long que le doigt
& gros simplement i proportion: Si bien que
les sorcieres de Labourt sont mieux seruies de
Satan que celles de la Franche Comite.” De
Lancre, TableaudeI’lncomtance^ III, Discours v.
“Marie de Marigrane fille de Biarrix aagee Ae.Page 31.
quinze ans diet, Qu’il semble que ce Mauveais Woman In
Demon ayt son membre my-party, moitie
travail.
fer, moitie de chair tout de son long, & de mesme
les genitoires, & depose I’auoir veu en cette forme
plusieurs fois au sabbat: & outre ce I’auoir ouy
dire a des femmes que Satan auoit cognues:
Qu’il faict crier comme des femmes qui sont en
mal d’enfant: & qu’il tient tousiours son membre
dehors.
“Petry de Linarse diet, Que le Diable a le
membre faict de come, ou pour le molns il en a
I’apparence: e’est pourquoy il faict tant crier les
femmes.” Ibid. Francis Hutchinson in his
Historical Essay Concerning Witchcraft., Second
edition, London, 1720 (pp. 42-43}, tells us
that in 1594 Jeanne Bosdeau, a witch of Bor­
deaux, confessed that on the Eve of S. John
(23 June} she accompanied an Italian necro­
mancer who had debauched her long before to a
field, where, after he had conjured from a black
book, “there appeared a great Black Goat with
a Candle between his Horns. . . . He had
carnal Knowledge of her, which was with great
Pain.”
A Scotch witch confessed that “the Devil galve Page 32.
hir his markis; and went away from her in the yi dog or
liknes of ane blak doug.” (Pitcairn, III, p. 601.} a cat.
Also: “He wold haw carnail dealing with us in
NOTES
the shap of a deir, or in any vther shap, now and
then. Somtym he void be lyk a stirk, a bull, a
deir, a rae, or a dowg, etc. and haw dealling
with us” (ibid.y III, pp. 611, 613). Margaret
Hamilton was thus indicted; “Yow . . . had
carnall cowpulatiown with the devil in the lyknes
of ane man, bot he removed from yow in the
lyknes of ane black dowg.” Bodin, Detnonomanie. III, 6, relates, “il aduint au Monastere
du Mont de Hesse en Allemaigne, que les Religieuses furent daemoniaques: & voiot on sur
leurs licts des chiens qui attendoient impudiquement celles qui estoient suspectes d’en auoir
abuse, & commis le peche qu’ils appellent le
peche muet.” Peccatum Mutum is the name
given by Gregorio Lopez, O.P., Bishop of
Basilia, to sodomy, because he says it is so shock­
ing to honest ears that it is wrong to speak of it.
And Ludovico Maria Sinistrari is of opinion
that sodomia perfecta may be committed be­
tween women, not in all cases, but in some. He
is inclined to believe that Philaenis first prac­
tised this lewdness. And in the work commonly
attributed to Aloisia Sigaea, Colloquium II,
may be read: “Philaenis uero, quod huic uoluptati indulgeret perditissime, inuenisse credita
est; et usu suo, quae scilicet magni nominis erat,
inauditae ad suam aetatem, uoluptati usum
feminis puellisque apud suos suasisse.”
Havelock Ellis, Studies in the Psychology of
A natural Sex^ Vol. V, Erotic Symbolism, iv, speaking of
congress between women and animals says,
“When among women in civilisation animal
perversions appear, the animals is nearly
always a pet dog.” Several cases are dis­
NOTES
cussed, and there is reference to other authori­
ties (Bloch, Beitrage zur jietiologie der Psychopathia Sexualis; Maschka; Irving Rosse) who
state that these conjunctions are not an infre­
quent exhibition given by prostitutes in certain
brothels. Mantegazza, Gli Amori degli Uomini,
may be further consulted on the subject.
Ovid, De Arte Amandi, I, 280-96, 323-26:
Forte sub umbrosis nemorosae uallibus Idae
Candidus armenti gloria taurus erat;
Signatus tenui media inter cornua nigro.
Una fuit labes; cetera lactis erant.
Ilium Gnosiadesque Cydoneaeque iuuencae
Optarunt tergo sustinuisse suo.
Pasiphae fieri gaudebat adultera tauri:
Inuida formosas oderat ilia boues. . . .
Et modo se Europen fieri, modo postulat Io:
Altera quod bos est; altera uecta boue.
Hanc tamen impleuit uacca deceptus acerna
Dux gregis: et partu proditus auctor erat.
Page 32.
Pasiphae.
See Sinistrari, Demoniality (Fortune Press, 1927) Page 33.
where these questions are most learnedly dis- Fauns,
cussed in detail.
There is a French translation of Vair’s De Page 33.
incantationihus. Trots livres des charmes, sorce- Pair.
lages, ov enchantemens. . . . Faits en latin par
Leonard Pair et mis en Franfois par lulian
Bardon, Angeuin. Paris, 1583, 8vo.
Called by Pliny, Historia Naturalis, vii, 2, Page 33.
“pernicissimum animal.”
Satyrs.
NOTES
Page 34
Egeria.
Ovid, Fasti, III, 275-6 has:
Egeria est, quae praebet aquas, Dea grata
Camoenis.
Illa Numae coniunx consiliumque fuit.
And Juvenal, III, 12-13, writes;
Hie, ubi nocturnae Numa constituebat amicae
Nunc sacri fontis nemus . . .
Upon this Grangaeus glosses; “Numa Pompilius,
maximus ille Romanorum idololatra, nocturnum connubium et colloquium se habere simulabat cum jEgeria nympha, religionis causa.”
Upon constituebat Dorleans has a note; “Legendum puto, nocturna Numa constertebat arnica.
Id est, ubi cum arnica Egeria simul dormiebat.”
Page 35.
Pregnant
by him.
In 1652, during their trial at Maidstone, “Anne
Ashby, Anne Martyn, and one other of their
Associates, pleaded that they were with child
pregnant, but confessed it was not by any man,
but by the Divell.”
Prodigious and Tragicall History of the Arraign­
ment, Tryall. Confession, and Condemnation of six
Witches at Maidstone in Kent, at the Assizes
there held in fuly, Fryday 30, this present year,
1652. London, 1652.
Merlin.
Boece, Scotorum Historiae, folio 1526, VIII,
says: “Constans turn fama erat, Merlinu incubi,
ac nobilis Britanici sanguinis foeminae cocubitu, pgnatu, magicis carminibus malos demones
ad colloquia excire: & ex his que futura essent
cognoscere.”
There is an old romance of Merlin; Sensuyt
le pmier volume de Merlin. Qui est le premier
liure de la Table ronde, Avec plusiers choses
NOTES
moult recreatiue. P. le Noir, Paris, 1528. Here
the demons, alarmed at the number of men who
have escaped them since the Birth of Our Lord,
hold a council of war and resolve to send to the
world one of their company to engender upon
some virgin a child. He shall be their vicegerent
upon earth, and {salua reuerentia} according to
their schemes endeavour to counteract the
Redemption. The fiend deputed to this work
obtains admittance into the house of a wealthy
Briton, and true to his nature slays his host,
seducing two of the three daughters. The
youngest resists, but whilst in an enchanted sleep
IS swived by the devil. Witless of what has
occurred she confesses to a holy hermit, Blaise,
who protects her. She gives birth to Merlin,
who is instantly baptized by Blaise, and thus
the devil’s designs are frustrated. Cf. James
Huneker’s tale, ylntichrist; Visionaries, 1905.
One may compare Machiavelli’s Belphegor, and
the Oriental Saga of the angels Harut and Marut,
in the commentators on (^Sura, ii, 96) the
Qu’ran. In the Chronicle of Philippe Moustres,
Bishop of Tournai, a diabolical origin is attri­
buted to Eleonora of Aquitaine, who espoused
Louis-le-Jeune, King of France, and afterwards
was wedded to Henry II of England. J. Brompton {Hist. Franc., XIII, 215) has preserved a
similar legend, and in the Livre de Badouin
(p. 13) Comtesse Jeanne de Flandre is supposed
to be a daughter of the evil spirit. See Reiffenberg. Introduction to the Chronicle of Philippe
de Moustres, p. Ixviii.
With regard to Merlin onemay consultZ)z> Sagen
von Merlin ... by San Marte (A. Schulz),
Halle, 8vo. 1853; and Slavianskia Shazania 0
NOTES
Solomenye i Kitrovrase i Zapadnya legendy o
Morolfe i Merline, by A. Vesselovsky, S. Peters­
burg, 1872.
William Rowley’s The Birth of Merlin, or the
Childe hath found his Father^ not printed until
1662, and once ascribed to Shakespeare, is a
curious medley of farce and romance, awkward,
but not wholly destitute of poetry. Herein the
Devil appears as Merlin’s father. He has got
Joan Go-Too’t, the Clown’s sister, with child,
and Merlin is born amid thunder and lightning.
But Merlin, rebuking his father, who dubs him
“Traitor to hell!” as
“ an inferior lustful Incubus,
Taking advantage of the wanton Flesh,”
encloses him in a rock, and conveys his mother
to a secure retreat.
An ancient authority is the Chronica of John
Nauclerus, volumen secundum, generatio xv.
“Inuentus est turn adolescens dictus Merlinus,
cuius mater confessa est se a spiritu in specie
hominis concepisse, hoc est, per incubum. hie
Merlinus Ambrosius est dictus natus ex filia regis
Demetae, quae monada erat.” The marginal
note has “Merlinus ab incubo daemone con­
ceptus,” p. 559, folio, Cologne, 1579.
P(>g‘ 35Luther.
Luther’s mother was Margaret, a peasant
woman of Eisleben. The story of his alleged
generation is related by Malvenda in c. vi of his
De Antichristo with title, Martinus Lutherus
creditus a quibusdam uerus Antichristus.
“Ex incubo daemonio genitum baud leuibus
futilibusque coniecturis deprehensum est a
plerisque, vt Coclaeus refert” (p. 71). See the
NOTES
Historia loannis Cochlaei de Actis et Scriptis
Martini Lutheri, Paris, 1565.
Johann Cochlaeus, properly Dobeneck, and
named Cochlaeus from his native place, Wendelstein, near Schwabach, was born 1479; and died
II January, 1552, at Breslau. After a brilliant
career as a student and professor of theology, he
was ordained at Rome in 1518, and was shortly
to make his mark as an active opponent of the
Lutheran movement. With indomitable ardour
he poured forth pamphlet after pamphlet, and
although it is hardly to be expected that every­
thing from his pen has the same value, the bulk
of his work is an excellent refutation of the con­
temporary anarchy and looseness of thought.
His editions of ecclesiastical writers, and such
historical studies as Historiae Hussitarum, XII
Libri (1549), ^’’e of permanent value, as also is
his sound criticism of Luther and the new tenets.
Diogenes Laertius has the following: Plato ii; Page 35.
ZTreuaiTTTTO? S’ ev toi ernypafftopevo) UXaroivos Plato.
TreptSeiTTvoj /rat KXeapyo? €v Tip flXarcDvos
eyKiopiip Kat, Ava^iXaiSri^ ev Tip SevTepip Trepi
<l>iXoao^it)v tfxialv iLs ’Aift’^vr/aiv Xoyos, ibpalav
oSaar ttiv UepiKnovrjv ^ul^eudaL tov ’ApiuTtova
Kai piT] eTTiTvyyaveiv Travopievov ts Trj? jSta?
iSctv TT/v toG 'AttoXXcovos oi/jiv, oOev Kadapav
ydpiov ij)vXa^ai euis Trjs aTTOKV^aeiDS. Ka'i yiveTai nXaTiov, 0)9 iftrjaiv ’ATroXX68a)pos eii gpoviKois, oySoT) Kai oySorjKouTp ’OXvpimdSi, GapyrjXiibvos e^Sopip- Kad’
AyXioi tov ’.^TrdAAoJva
yeveadai t/taai. S. Jerome says: Aduersus
louinianum, I, 42; “Speusippus quoque sororis
Platonis filius, et Clearchus in laude Platonis,
et Anaxilides in secundo libro Philosophiae,
NOTES
Perictionem matrem Platonis, phantasmate
Apollinis oppressam ferunt, et sapientiae principem non aliter arbitrabantur nisi de partu
uirginis editum.” Migne, Patres Latini, Vol.
XXIII, c. 273.
P^ge .35Servius
Tullius.
Of whose miraculous begetting Dionysius of
Halicarnassus, Antiquitatum IV, 2, writes at
length: 0epeTat 8e tis ev rais emxvspiois dvaypaijsais Kai erepog inrep Trjs yeveaecos aiirov
Xoyos, em rd p,vdu)8e9 e^aipcvv Ta Trepi avTov, ov
ev TToXXais 'PcvpiaiKaLS laropiais eiSpop.ei’, ei
Oeois re Kai daipxxji XeyeaOai ifsiXov, roiovro^
Tis, aTTo Ttjs earias rdiv ^aaiXeliov, eif> ■Ijs dXXas
re 'Pcvpuiioi avureXoSaw lepovpyias, Kai ras aTTO
TUtv deiTTVuiv aTrapxds dyi^ovaiv, VTrep toS TTvpos
dvaaxeiv Xeyovaiv aiSotov dv8p6s. Tovto de
dedaaadai TTjv 'OKpujiav TrpiS'rrjv <f>epovaav tous
eivDOdra'; ireXavovs em to TTvp, Kai avTiKa TTpos
Toiis ^aaiXeis eXdovaav eiTseiv, tov piev ovv
Tapywiov aKovaai/Ta Te Kai pieTa TavTa iSoura
TO Tepas eV OavpaTi yeveadai, TTjv Se TamKuAiSa
Ta t’ dXXa aoifsTjv ovaav Kai dr) Kai to, piavTiKa
ouSevd? yeipov TvppTjvidv eiriOTaiJievrjv enreiv
Trpds avTov, oti yews drrd Tijs eoTias Trjs ^001Xeiov TTeTTpcoTai yeveadai KpeiTTOv ij KaTO. Tqv
diidpioTreiav (jsvaiv, eK Trjs piixde>'<^S Tip ifidapiaTi
yvvaiKOS. Tad’ avTO. Kai tuiv dXXiov TepaToiTKomov dTTOc/rrjvapieviov, Sd^at Tip ^aaiXei tt/v
’OKpiaiav, p TTpcoTr] eifidvr] to Tepas, eis opiiXiav
avTip aweXdeiu Kai pieTa tovto ttjv yvvaiKa
Koapnqaap.evrju, ots edos eoTi Koapieiadai Tas
yapiovpievas, KaTaKXeiaOrjvai piovrjv ets tov oikov,
ev m TO Tepas wi/sdr]. Mix^evTOS Si] tivos avTrj
deuiv rj daipiovoiv, Kai pieTa tt/v pi^iv difiaviaOevTos, eiTe ’HijraiaTov, Kadarrep oiovrai Tives,
NOTES
ctre rov Kar' oIkLo-v ’^piuos, eyKvp.ova yeveadai
Kai Te)(elv top TvAAtop ev rots KaOTjKovai
Xpovois. Pliny, xxxvi, 27, has; “Tradunt . . .
ita Seruium Tullium natum, qui regno successit.
Inde et in regia cubanti puero caput arsisse
uisum, creditumque Laris familiaris filium.”
Vaisette, Histoire de Languedoc (p. 29)^ records
2^that in 1'2.’]^ the Inquisitor Hugues de Baniols Terrible
condemned to death a witch of many years’ monsters.
continuance, Angele de la Barthe, who con­
fessed to having had connexion with a demon
from which intercourse she brought forth a
monster whom she nourished with the flesh of
infants, slain by her or dug up from their
graves in lonely churchyards.
This detail is discussed at some length by Page 2^Semen.
Sinistrari in his Demoniality.
De Confessionibus Maleficorum, Prior quaestionis P^S^ 3^pars; 5 Conclusio: Malefici uel maleficae rem Binsfeld.
ueneream habent cum Daemone. This learned
author holds that there is actually copulation
between witches and demons, as indeed is proved
by what S. Augustine says. De Ciuitate Dei, V,
23. This is further maintained by a vast num­
ber of Popes, doctors and theologians; by S.
Isidore; S. Thomas; S. Bonaventura; Dionysius
the Carthusian; William of Paris; Martin of
Arles; Alphonso de Castro; the authors of the
Malleus Maleficarum; Innocent VIII; Cardinal
Cajetan; Bartolomeo de Spina; Bartolomeo de
Medina; Nider; Molitor; Grilland; Thomas
Erastus; Bodin; and very many more.
37Bodin.
NOTES
Demonomanie, III, 6; “Il se trouua en vn
monastere vn chien qu’on disoit estre unDaemon,
qui leuoit les robbes des Religieuses pour en
abuser. Ce n’estoit point vn Daemon, comme
ie croy; mais vn chien naturel. Il se trouua a
Toulouse vne femme qui en abusoit en ceste
sorte; Et le chien deuant tout le monde la
vouloit forcer. Elie confessa la verity, & fut
bruslee. Il y en eut vne autre qui fut amenee
prisonniere Paris Pan mil cinq cens quarante,
conuaincue de mesme cas.”
39Olympias.
Page 40.
The Sons
of God.
Alexander was said to be the son of Jupiter
Hammon (Quintus Curtius, IV, 7), who visited
his mother Olympias, so Plutarch tells us
{Alexander, II), as a snake or dragon. When
Boguet writes of a swan he is thinking rather of
Leda.
This passage has been much discussed by the
exegetes, and one may profitably consult the
commentary in loco of the learned Sinistrari, who
in his Demoniality^ XXXII—XXXIV (transla­
tion by the present writer. Fortune Press, 1927)
says; “We also read in the Bible, Genesis, chap. 6,
verse 4, that giants were born when the sons of
God went in to the daughters of men; this is the
actual text. Now, those giants were men of
great stature, says Baruch., chap. 3, verse 26, and
far superior to other men. Not only were they
distinguished by their huge size, but also by their
physical power, their rapine and their tyranny.
Through their misdeeds the giants, according to
Cornelius a Lapide, in his Commentary on Genesis,
were the primary and principal cause of the
Flood. Some contend that by Sons of God are
NOTES
meant the sons of Seth, and by daughters of men
the daughters of Cain, because the former prac­
tised piety, religion and every other virtue, whilst
the descendants of Cain were quite the reverse;
but, with all due deference to S. John Chrysos­
tom, S. Cyril, S. Theodore of Studium, Abbot
Rupert of Deutz, S. Hilary and others who are
of that opinion, it must be conceded that it
hardly agrees with the obvious meaning of the
text. Scripture says, in fact, that of the con­
junction of the Sons of God and the daughters
of men were born men of huge bodily size;
consequently, those giants were not previously
in existence, and if their birth was the result of
that conjunction, it cannot be ascribed to the
intercourse of the sons of Seth with the daughters
of Cain, who, being themselves of ordinary
stature, could but procreate children of ordinary
stature. Therefore, if the intercourse in ques­
tion gave birth to beings of huge stature, the
reason is that it was not the common connexion
between man and woman, but the operation of
Incubi who, from their nature, may very well
be styled Sons of God. Such is the opinion of
the Platonist Philosophers and of Francesco
Giorgio the Venetian; nor is it discrepant from
that of Josephus the Historian, Philo Judaeus,
S. Justin Martyr, Clement of Alexandria, Tertullian, and Hugh of S. Victor, who look upon
Incubi as corporeal Angels who have fallen into
the sin of lewdness with women. Indeed, as
shall be shown hereafter, though seemingly dis­
tinct, those two opinions are but one and the
same.
“If, therefore, these Incubi, as is so commonly
held, have begotten giants by means of sperm
NOTES
taken from man, it is impossible, as aforesaid,
that of that sperm should have been born any but
men of approximately the same size as he from
whom it came; for it would be in vain for the
Demon, when acting the part of a Succubus, to
draw from man an unwonted quantity of prolific
liquor in order to procreate therefrom children
of higher stature; quantity is irrelevant since all
depends, as we have said, upon the vitality of
that liquor, not upon its quantity. We are
bound, therefore, to infer that giants are born of
another sperm than man’s, and that, conse­
quently, the Incubus, for the purpose of genera­
tion, uses a semen which is not man’s. But what,
then, are we to say with regard to this ?
“Subject to correction by our Holy Mother
Church, and as a mere expression of private
opinion, I say that the Incubus, when having
intercourse with women, begets the human
foetus from his own seed.”
“Some wicked women, reverting to Satan and
Page 40.
Council of seduced by the illusions and phantasms of demons,
believe and profess that they ride at night with
Aquileia.
Diana on certain beasts with an innumerable
multitude of women, passing over immense
distances. It were well if they alone perished in
their infidelity and did not draw so many along
with them. For innumerable multitudes, de­
ceived by this false opinion, believe all this to
be true, and thus relapse into pagan errors. . . .
It is to be taught to all that he who believes such
things has lost his faith, and he who is not of the
true faith is not of God, but of the devil.” This
early proclamation came to be attributed to the
NOTES
Council of Ancyra, 314, but this is an error. It
is, however, found in the work of Regino of
Priim, who died 917, and it was embodied in the
canonical collections of Burchard, Ivo, and
Gratian. It must be emphasized that it has no
force, and it remains merely as an unauthoritative expression of opinion.
A Doctor of Roman and Canon law, who, at Page 40.
the instance of the Archduke Sigismund of the Ulrich
Tyrol, wrote his De Lamiis et phitonicis (^pytho- Molitor,
nicis) mulieribus in some sort as an answer to, or
a commentary upon, the Malleus Maleficarum.
The first edition of the De Lamiis is Cologne,
1489. Molitor teaches that there are witches
who make a pact with Satan, and that death is
the penalty for this abomination, but he is
sceptical as to the possibility of witches travelling
many miles at night, and he attributes their trans­
port by the devil to imagination wrought upon
by the evil one. Weyer, De Lamiis, III, 12,
explicitly says; “Falsum arte magica homines
deferri per aerem,” and he quotes with approval
(ii) the conclusion of Ponzibius, that these
aerial transvections are fantasy. The matter,
none the less, cannot be so easily settled and the
weight of authority is against Molitor, Ponzi­
bius, Weyer, and their followers.
The authors of the Malleus Maleficarum con- Page 41.
elude “that it is found that some witches are Malleus.
transported only in imagination, but that it is
also found in the writings of the Doctors that
many have been bodily transported.” (Part II,
Qn. I, Ch. 3, ad finem; translation by present
NOTES
writer; John Rodker, 1928). This is the ortho­
dox view and cannot he disbelieved without great
rashness, for, as S. Augustine says, to deny so
general a consensus of Fathers and Doctors were
the height of impudence. This view is main­
tained by Bodin; Remy; Grilland; Vincenzo
Dodo of Pavia (who very aptly rebukes Samuel
de Cassinis of Milan); Bernard of Como, O.P.;
Francesco Maria Guazzo; Silvester Prierias,
O.P; Bartolomeo de Spino, O.P.; Arnaldus
Albertini, Bishop of Patti; Francesco di Vittoria,
Professor of Theology at Salamanca; the great
Binsfeld; Crespet; Anania; Sisto of Siena;
Bernard Basin; Martin Delrio, S.J. {Disquisitionum Magicarum, 11, xvi. De nocturnis sagarum
conuentihus
an uera sit earum translatio de
loco ad locum?)', even by the Calvinist Lambert
Daneau, and many more. We cannot gainsay
the common opinion of theologians that witches
may fly through the air at night to their Sabbats,
and it has been ratified by the famous jurist of the
Roman Curia, Francesco Pegna, who in his
Commentaries lays down that this opinion is
“most certainly true, that it is indeed proven by
many sound reasons and most apparent signs, by
actual fact and experiment.” Opinio uerissima,
multis quidem rationibus et euidentibus signis atque
experimentis comprobata. {Directorium Inquisitorum F. Nicolai Eymerici, Ordinis Praedicatorum Cum Commendariis Francisci Peniae,
Venice, 1595. Quaestio XLIII: Comment.
XLIII, 343.)
Page 44.
How . . .
witches
are con­
For a full discussion of this point see my History
veyed to
of Witchcraft^ c. iv, “The Sabbat,” pp. 118the Sabbat.
NOTES
Weyer, De Lamiis, III, xvii, treats at length of Pe^ge 44.
these flying ointments under the rubric: De Ointment,
naturalilus pharmacis somniferis, quilus interdum
illuduntur Lamiae, de earum item unguentis,
quihusdam plantis soporiferis,mentemque impense
turhantibus. He gives these formulae for the pre­
paration of these unguents, (i) Hemlock, water
of aconite, poplar leaves, and soot. (2) Cowbane,
sweet flag, cinquefoil, bat’s blood, deadly night­
shade, and oil. (3) Fat of babes, juices of cow­
bane, aconite, cinquefoil, deadly nightshade,
and soot.
Debrio, Disquisitionum Magicarum, II, xvi, says
that the chief ingredient of the ointment is the Neither
fat of children whom the witches slay for this ointment
purpose. The ointment is actually of no effect nor svords
per se., and the devil can (and often will) trans­ ... of any
port the witches to the Sabbat without any use use.
of unguent or potions. But he will have them
anoint themselves for various reasons, namely,
in order that any of his followers who are fearful
may pluck up courage and rely on this empty
thing; that often their senses are addled by the
potency of the drugs, and therefore they can the
better endure his horrible embraces and connex­
ions; and again, they use this ointment to mock
the holy Chrism which is employed in the
Sacraments.
The authors of the Malleus Maleficarum have Pnge 46.
given particular attention to this point. Part II, .ds Dead.
Qn. I, Ch. 3; “And since the public report of
this sort of transvection is continually being
spread even among the common people, it is
unnecessary to add further proofs of it here. But
NOTES
we hope that this will suffice to refute those who
either deny altogether that there are such transvections, or try to maintain that they are only
imaginary or phantastical. And, indeed, it
would be a matter of small importance if such
men were left in their error, were it not that
this error tends to the damage of the Faith. For
notice that, not content with that error, they
do not fear to maintain and publish others also,
to the increase of witches and the detriment of
the Faith. For they assert that all the witch­
craft which is truly and actually ascribed to
witches as instruments of the devil, is only so
ascribed in imagination and illusion, as if they
were really harmless, just as their transvection
is only phantastic. And for this reason many
witches remain unpunished, to the great dis­
praise of the Creator, and to their own most
heavy increase.
“The arguments on which they base their
fallacy cannot be conceded. For first they
advance the chapter of the Canon (^Episcopt, 26,
q. 5) where it is said that witches are only trans­
ported in imagination; but who is so foolish as to
conclude from this that they cannot also be
bodily transported ? Similarly at the end of that
chapter it is set down that whoever believes that
a man can be changed for the better or the worse,
or can be transformed into another shape, is to be
thought worse than an infidel or a pagan; but
who could conclude from this that men cannot be
transformed into beasts by a glamour, or that
they cannot be changed from health to sickness
and from better to worse ? They who so scratch
at the surface of the words of the Canon hold
an opinion which is contrary to that of all the
NOTES
Holy Doctors, and, indeed, against the teaching
of Holy Scripture.
“For the contrary opinion is abundantly proved
by what has been written in various places in the
First Part of this treatise; and it is necessary to
study the inner meaning of the words of the
Canon. And this was examined in the First Ques­
tion of the First Part of the treatise, in refuting
the second of three errors which are there con­
demned, and where it is said that four things
are to be preached to the people. For they are
transported both bodily and phantastically, as is
proved by their own confessions, not only of
those who have been burned, but also of others
who have returned to penitence and the Faith.
“Among such there was the woman in the town
of Brisac, whom we asked whether they could
be transported only in imagination, or actually
in the body; and she answered that it was
possible in both ways. For if they do not wish
to be bodily transferred, but want to know all
that is being done in a meeting of their com­
panions, then they observe the following pro­
cedure. In the name of all the devils they lie
down to sleep on their left side; and then a sort of
bluish vapour comes from their mouth, through
which they can clearly see what is happening.
But if they wish to be bodily transported, they
must observe the method which has been told.
“Besides, even if that Canon be understood in
its bare meaning without any explanation, who
is so dense as to maintain on that account that
all their witchcraft and injuries are phantastic
and imaginary, when the contrary is evident to
the senses of everybody? Especiallysince there are
many species of superstition, namely, fourteen;
NOTES
among which the species of witches holds the
highest degree in spells and injuries, and the
species of Pythonesses, to which they can be
reduced, which is only able to be transported in
imagination, holds the lowest degree.
“And we do not concede that their error can
be substantiated by the Legends of S. Germain
and certain others. For it was possible for the
, devils to lie down themselves by the side of the
sleeping husbands, during the time when a
watch was being kept on the wives, just as if
they were sleeping with their husbands. And we
do not say that this was done for any reverence
felt for the Saint; but the case is put, that the
opposite of what is set down in the Legend may
not be believed to be impossible.”
Page 47. There is an accumulation of evidence to show
that the Sabbat was held every night of the week
Thursday, save Saturday and Sunday. Leger Rivasseau
confessed that the Sabbat commenced at mid­
night, that the assembly generally met at cross­
roads, “le plus souuent la nuict du Mercredy ou
du Vendredy. Que le Diable chercoit la nuict
la plus orageuse qu’il pouuoit, affin que les vens
& les orages portasset plus loing & plus impetueusement leurs poudres.” De Lancre, LTncou­
stance . . ., Livre II, Discours iv. In England
it was stated that the “Solemn appointments, and
meetings . . . are ordinarily on Tuesday or
Wednesday night”;
Pleasant Treatise of
Witches, London, 1673. Matthew Hopkins,
The Discovery of Witches, 1647,
witches of Manningtree and the local covens
“every six weeks in the night (being always on
the Friday night) had their meeting close by his
NOTES
house, and had their severall solemne sacrifices
there offered to the Devill.” In certain districts
of the Basses-Pyrenees, Monday, Wednesday,
and Friday were chosen, (De Lancre, Tableau
de rinconstance des Mauvais anges, Paris, 1612,
p. 62). Saturday was always and everywhere
particularly avoided as being the day sacred to
the Immaculate Mother of God.
De Lancre, Tableau de I’lnconstance, Livre II, Page 48
Discours v,writes at length; “Du Coq, & s’il est IThen the
vray ce qu’on diet, que tout aussi tost qu’il est cock crew.
entendu au Sabbat, il dissipe par son chant, &
faict esuanouir toute I’assemblee.” “Le Coq
se oyt par foises sabbats sonnant la retraicte
aux sorciers, & fait qu’^ vn instant tout disparoist.” But Satan can teach the sorcerers a
secret which will prevent the cock from crowing,
or at any rate will retard his clarion. “Les
sorciers s^auent coniurer les Coqs, & leur interdise le chat.” This, however, can only last for a
little while, as the charm is an affair of half-anhour at most.
Neither the Devil nor the witches his servants Page 49.
can raise the dead. Delrio, Disquisitiones Magi- No power
cae., II, Q. xxix. Sect. I, discusses “An diabolus to raise
possit facere ut homo vere resurgat,” and the dead.
decides “Non potest facere ut homo a mortuis
resurgat.” But a demon may enter the corpse
of some notoriously evil person and energize
the dead body so that it will walk and have the
appearance of life. The ethnic fables of Plato,
Pliny, Apuleius, Philostratus and others concern­
ing the raising of the dead are dealt with very
fully by Delrio.
NOTES
Page 49. Lucan, Pharsalia, VI, 570-830.
One of the
poets.
£^jj commentary upon the Witch of
P^’S^ 49- Endor, see my History of Witchcraft, Ch. v.
Saul.
“The Witch in Holy Writ,” particularly pp.
176-81. That Samuel did actually appear is
the opinion of S. Ambrose and S. Augustine,
which should be maintained. This is also
favoured by S. Jerome, who, however, has not
definitely pronounced.
49- Philostratus, De Vita Apollonii, IV, 45, relates
Apollonius, that Apollonius raised a girl of consular family
to life when she was being carried on the bier
through the streets of Rome to her grave. But
even the writer suggests that life was not really
extinct and obviously doubts the seeming
miracle.
Page 49.
Simon
Magus.
A relation of the pseudo-miracles of Simon
Magus will be found in the Clementines, particularly Homilies, II, 32, and Recognitions, II, 9.
Jerome-Hermes Bolsec died at Lyons, circa
Jerome
1584. Originally a Catholic, he separated from
Bolsecque. the Church about 1545, but even from a Pro­
testant point of view he did not appear suffi­
ciently orthodox, and he led an unquiet migra­
tory life. Eventually, however, he recanted his
errors and was reconciled. He then published
a life of Calvin, Histoire de la vie, des moeurs
... de Jean Calvin, Lyons and Paris, 1577;
Latin translation, Cologne, 1580; German
translation, 1581; edited by L. F. Chastel, 1875.
NOTES
According to a doubtful tradition he failed to Page 50.
cure the daughter of Bahram I. It is certain Mani.
that in 276-77 this monarch caused Mani to
be crucified, had the corpse flayed, the skin
stuffed and hung up at the city gates of Babylon
in order to terrify the followers of this Persian
dualist, whose sect he harried with relentless
severities.
Damonolatreia II, c. iv, has as rubric: Perdifficiliter uiiari posse quas ueneficae hominthus Remy,
struunt insidias: quod de node in obseratas,
clausasque domos ignota specie, ac forma illabantur:
ardissimo somno decumbentes diris suis artibus
obruant. .
Page 52.
the Lemuria:
Ovid.
Terque manus puras fontana proluit unda;
Uertitur, et nigras accipit ore fabas.
Auersusque iacit: sed dum iacit, Haec ego mitto;
His, inquit, redimo meque meosque fabis.
Hoc nouies dicit, nec respicit. Umbra putatur
Colligere, et nullo terga uidente sequi.
De Legibus, II, 18: “Color autem albus praeci- Page
Cicero.
pue decorus deo est.”
The back to back dance was a favourite piece of Page ^1.
choreography at the Sabbat, and there are very Back to
many references to this. De Lancre, Tableau back.
de I'lnconstance, III, Discours iii, in describing
the witches’ dances, says: “La troisieme est
aussi le dos tourne, mais se tenant tous en long, &
sans se deprendre des mains, ils s’approchent de
si pres qu’ils se touchent, & se rencontrent dos
h. dos. un homme avec une femme: & a certaine
NOTES
cadance ils se choquent & frapent impudement
cul contre cut” Hutchinson, J/ Historical Essay
Concerning Witchcraft, Second edition, 1720
(p. 43), gives a confession of Jeanne Bosdeau
(1594): “The black Goat carried a lighted
Candle in his Fundament, and all the Witches
had Candles which they lighted at his, and
danced in a Circle Back to Back.” There are in
the trials many allusions to the masks which
were worn at these assemblies. Thus in 1613
Barbe de Moyemont said that at the Sabbat
“elle a veu dancer les assistans en nombre de
sept i huict personnes, partie desquelles elle ne
cognoissoit a cause des masques hideux qu’elles
auoient de noire.”
Page 52.
Sword.
This was the sword wrought of unalloyed steel
with a copper handle fashioned like a crucifix.
Mystical signs were engraved thereon, and it was
consecrated at noon on a Sunday in the full rays
of the hottest sun. It was heated in a fire of
cypress and laurel, cooled with the blood of a
snake, polished and then swathed in silk and
bound with garlands of vervain, laid aside for use
in the magic rites. The sword was often used
in necromantic ceremonials.
Page 53.
Of the
De Lancre, Tableau de I'Inconstance, Livre II,
Discours i, points out that in earlier times the
Devil appointed a Monday on which to hold the
Sabbat, but that later he preferred the night
between Wednesday and Thursday, or that
between Friday and Saturday. It became
common also to hold a general Sabbat about the
time of the high Christian festivals in evil
mockery of these holy solemnities. So the
NOTES
Scotch witches of Kinross (1662) met on S.
Andrew’s Day, 30 November; and in many parts
of Europe when the Feast of S. George is solemn­
ized with high honour and holiday, Satan held
an assembly on the night of the 22-23 April.
For a full discussion of the locality of various Page 54.
Sabbats see my History of IPitchcrafty ch. iv, Qf the
pp. 113-17. The ordinary Sabbat was generally Place.
held in some remote and ill-omened spot near
the town or village where the witches dwelt,
sometimes in a house belonging to one of that
crew. Dr. Fian and his associates (1591) were
wont to forgather at the haunted church of
North Berwick. In some countries certain
spots acquired an infamous repute, as, for
example, the Blocksburg or Brocken in the Hartz
Mountains; Benevento in Italy; MalkingTower
in Lancashire; Mohra and Elfdale where the
Swedish witches met (1670); and many more of
lesser note.
The congruity and similarity of the accounts Page 55.
given by witches in all countries of the Sabbat First
demand the most careful consideration. As might worship.
be expected, certain details differ in several
localities, but the end of the ritual, the worship
of Satan, is the same. The account of the
Sabbat given by the witches who confessed to
Boguet may be compared with the accounts
gleaned by Sprenger and Kramer, De Lancre,
Guazzo, Bodin, Remy, Binsfeld, and all demonologists. In Guernsey, 1617, Isabel Becquet
went to Rocquaine Castle, “the usual place
where the Devil kept his Sabbath . . . then
immediately the Devil made her kneel down
NOTES
... he then made her express detestation of
the Eternal in these words; I renounce God the
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost;
and then caused her to worship and invoke him­
self.” To the witches the Fiend was god incar­
nate manifesting himself for the worship of his
followers. As Lambert Daneau says in his A
Dialogue of IPitches, English translation, 1575:
“The Diuell comaundeth them that they shall
acknowledge him for their god, cal vpo him,
pray to him, and trust in him. Then doe they
all repeate the othe which they haue geuen vnto
him; in acknowledging him to be their God.”
This appearance was one of the most usual
forms in France at the Sabbat, and there are very
many examples to be found. Thus Guazzo,
Compendium Maleficarum, I, 13, says: “Ibi
Daemon est conuentus praeses, in solio sedet
forma terrifica ut plurimum Hirci.” And Elich
in his Daemonomagia, Quaest. 10, has; “Solent
ad conuentum Lamiae adorare Daemonem,
Synagogae praesidem & rectorem in solio considentem, immutatum in Hircum horridum.”
Page 56.
Candles.
The lighting of candles was not only to illumin­
ate the orgy held under cover of darkness, but
also a ritual observance in parody of the candles
at Holy Mass. De Lancre, Tableau de ITnconstance. II, Discours i, says that the Devil
appeared as a black goat, “qu’il a seulement
trois comes, & qu’il a quelque espece de lumiere
en celle du milieu, de laquelle il a accoustume
au sabbat d’esclairer & donner du feu & de la
lumiere, mesme k ces Sorcieres qui tiennent
quelques chandelles alumees aux ceremonies de
la Messe qu’ils veulent contrefaire.”
Goat.
NOTES
There are continual references to the osculum Page 56.
obscaenum, or osculum infame, which formed one Kiss.
of the chief acts of homage of the witch. Guazzo
notes: “As a sign of homage witches kiss the
devil’s fundament.” Ludwig Elich, in his
Daemonomagia, Quaestio 10, writes: “Then as a
token of their homage—with reverence be it
spoken—they kiss the fundament of the devil.”
One of the charges brought against Walter
Langton, Bishop of Lichfield and Coventry
(1296-1322), was that he had paid “homage to
the Devil by kissing his posterior.” Guillaume
Edeline, a doctor of the Sorbonne, who was
executed for sorcery in 1453, “had done homage
to the aforesaid Satan, who appeared in the shape
of a ram, by kissing his buttocks in token of
reverence and homage.” In Shadwell’s play.
The Lancashire Witches, produced at Dorset
Garden, London, in the autumn (probably
September) of 1681, 4to, 1682, at the end of
the Second Act we have: “The Scaene Sir
Edward’s Cellar: Enter all the Witches, and the
Devil in the form of a Buck-Goat after.
Demdike. Lo here our little Master’s come.
Let each of us salute his Bum. jlll kiss
the Devil’s Arse.
Shadwell, in his “Notes upon the Second Act,”
quotes several demonologists for this circum­
stance.
One of the charges repeatedly brought against
the Knights Templars during the lengthy pro­
cess of their examinations and trials, *307-14,
was that of the kissing the posteriors of the pre­
ceptors by the juniors, but this has nothing to do
NOTES
with sorcery, since it is to be connected with the
homosexual practices of the Order.
Page 56.
Pipes.
Various musical instruments to accompany the
dances were played at the Sabbats. De Lancre,
De rinconstance. III, 3, says of the witches:
“Elies dancent au son du petit tabourin & de la
fluste & par fois auec ce long instrument qu’ils
posent sur le sol, puis I’allongeant iusqu’ aupres
de la ceinture, ils le batent auec vn petit baston:
parfois auec vn violon. Mais ce ne sont les seuls
instruments du sabbat, car nous avons apprins
de plusieurs qu’on y oyt toute sorte d’instrumens.” Gellis Duncan of the North Berwick
coven, who attempted the life of King James VI
and I, was famous for her performances “on ane
trump,” whilst the witches danced “endlang”
round the haunted old kirk-yard “to the number
of sevin scoir of persounes.” Elizabeth Styles
(or Style) of Stoke Tryster in Somerset, when
examined in January and February 1664 by the
justice, confessed that the gang met on a lonely
common where appeared a man in black to
whom they did obeisance. “The Man in black
sometimes playes on a Pipe or Cittern and
the company dance.” Sadductsmus Triumphatus,
1681, Pt. II, p. 141.
Page Sy.
Catullus.
XC. Nascatur magus ex Gelli matrisque nefando
Coniugio, et discat Persicum aruspiclum.
Nam magus ex matre et gnato nascatur oportet
Si uera est Persarum impia religio.
Gnatus ut accepto ueneretur carmine diuos.
Omentum in flamma pingue liquefaciens.
Strabo (735) writes: Tovs 8e Mdyovs ov OdtrTovaiv, dAA’ OLCDvo^pdiTovs edim' Tovrots 8e
Kai fi'TjTpdm awepgeadm TrdTptov vevop-tarai.
NOTES
These heretics were known under various names; Page S'].
Messalians, Adelphians, Lampetians, Enthu- Buchites.
siasts. They arose about 360, and in 431 the
third General Council of Ephesus utterly banned
the Asceticus., “that filthy book of this heresy.”
In Armenia they were condemned for their
lewdness in the fifth century, and their very name
signified obscenity. After they had actually
ceased to exist as Euchites or Messalians they
revived under the name of Bogomiles. One of
their tenets was that divine honours must be
paid to the Devil, who is further to be propi­
tiated by means of every outrage against the
Saviour of mankind. This is, of course, modern
Satanism.
De Lancre says that sometimes the banquets at Page 58.
the Sabbat are of rare dainties, sometimes the Feasting.
witches are served with orts and offal. The wine,
Guazzo tells us, is usually like black and clotted
blood poured out in some foul and filthy vessel.
But he continues that sometimes there is no lack
of cheer at the tables, “save that they furnish
neither bread nor salt.” Remy agrees with this,
Daemonolatreia, I, 16, for the witches confessed
that at their revels “Nullarum fere rerum
copiam illic deesse, praeterquam sails & panis.”
These details, however, differed widely. See my
History of Witchcraft.^ ch. iv, “The Sabbat,” pp.
143-45“Sometimes, at their solemn assemblies, the Devil Page ^c).
commands that each tell what wickedness he Render.
hath committed, and according to the heinous- an account.
ness and detestableness of it, he is honoured and
respected with a general applause. Those, on
NOTES
the contrary, that have done no evil are beaten
and punished.”—A Pleasant Treatise of ITitches.
Page 6o.
Mass.
The “Black Mass” of the witches and the
Satanists has many variants; the hellish ritual,
the vestments, the very shape of the host widely
differ at several times and in several countries.
See my History of Witchcraft, ch. v, “The Sab­
bat,” pp. 145-57. Joanny Bricaud’s La Messe
Noire ancienne et moderne (1924) may also be
consulted. The celebrant is stated by Boguet to
have worn a black cope. The abbe Guibourg
was arrayed in an ample cope or a chasuble of
white silk embroidered with silver and black
fir cones; Gaufridi (1611) confessed that the
priest who said the Devil’s mass at the Sabbat
donned a violet planeta; at Orleans in the seven­
teenth century a phainolion of murky red, dark
and ominous, was often assumed; to-day at the
liturgy of Satanists the vestments are generally
those of the ordinary ecclesiastical shape or form,
but the chasuble though rich is of some garish
and unusual colour and embroidered with malefic
or obscene emblems.
Page 60.
A round.
Madeleine Bavent saw the ordinary wafers used,
only coloured red; sometimes they were black
and triangular, stamped with a hideous design.
It may be noted that very often by the grace of
God the Mass of the Satanists is irrite and vain,
since there are defectus materiae, et panis et
uini.
Page 60.
Goat .'. .
burns to
ashes.
This Satanic illusion was largely effected to
encourage the witches not to fear the flames of
execution. Accordingly we find this glamour
NOTES
mentioned in France and Germany, where the
stake was the penalty of witchcraft, but not in
England, where the punishment was the gallows.
Bodin, Demonomanie^ II, iv, gives details of a
trial at Poitiers in 1574 where the witches con­
fessed they have been at the Sabbat, “ et la se
trouuoit vn grand bouc noir, qui parloit comme
vne personne aux assistans, & dansoient a
I’entour du Bouc; puis vn chacun luy baisoit
le derriere auec vne chandelle ardente; & cela
faict, le bouc se consommoit en feu, & de la
cedre chacun en prenoit pour faire mourir le
boeuf OU vache,” etc. In 1603 a Belgian
witch, Claire Goessen, was at a Sabbat when
“elle a, comme tons les assistans, baise un bouc
a I’endroit de sa queue, lequel bouc fut ensuite
brule et ses cendres distribuies et emportees par
les convives.” The ashes were utilized in
various potent charms, especially to harm herds
and blast crops. Miss Murray, The Witch-Cult
in Western Europe, in connexion with this burn­
ing of the goat, has idly advanced a ridiculous
theory to link it with the “Sacrifice of the God,”
a divine victim, but this preposterous nonsense
cannot be for a moment maintained.
Upon this point, which is dealt with in detail by Page 62.
nearly all demonologists, consult the Malleus Hail.
Maleficarum, Part II, Qu. i. Ch. 15 (transla­
tion, John Rodker, 1928, p. 147), of witches:
How they Raise and Stir up Hailstorms and
Tempests, and cause Lightning to Blast both Men
and Beasts.
De Lancre, Tableau de ITnconstance, II, Dis- Page 69.
cours i, says: “Les liures & les Inquisiteurs dis^t, Ointments.
NOTES
que les sorciers composent & font ces onguens
OU graisses, ou que le Diable les leur donne:
Que la plus part se font auec de la graisse de
petit enfant que Satan faict occire a des sorcieres.
Mais ils tiennent que ces onguents ne peuuent
seruir en ce cas h. autre effect, que pour assoupir
les sens des sorciers, afin que Satan iouisse mieux
son aise d’eux.” Weyer, De Lamiis, III, 17,
writes; “D? naturalihus pharmaci somniferis,
quilus interdum illuduntur Lamiae, de earum
Item unguentis,
quilusdam plantis soporiferis,
mentemque impense turbantibusIn his opinion
the ointments of witches are toxic, producing
excitement and delirium, or narcotic, awakening
evil dreams. “Lamiarum quoque unguentum
propemodum simile tradit Hieronymus Carda­
nus, post cuius inunctionem mirabilia uideri
apparet.”
“Albertus Magnus in j^igypto etiam nasci
Page 70.
Memphite. lapidem tradit, et Dioscorides, qui Memphites
nuncupatur, a Memphi, magnitudine calculi,
pinguis et uersicolor; quo contrito, et cum aqua
uinoque epoto, stupor omnium sensuum inducatur, ut nullum omnino dolorem sentias.”
Page 71.
Smearing
with a
grease.
Various outbreaks of the plague in Italy during
the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries were said
to be largely caused by sorcerers who at the
instigation of the Devil smeared walls and doors
with purulent matter, the poison of which fear­
fully increased the mortality. The Great Plague
of Milan, 1629-30, is known as “La Peste
degli Untori,” and an old distich which had
prophesied that in 1630 the Devil would en­
deavour to poison all Milan was widely quoted
NOTES
and believed. Hundreds of these untori were
arrested and summarily put to death. See
Ripamonte, De Peste Mediolani^ and my Geo­
graphy of Witchcraft, pp. 559-62.
The celebrated general of the Achaeans; 271— Page "jx.
213 B.c. He wrote Commentaries^ being a his- Jratus.
tory of his own times down to 220 B.c., which
are highly commended by Polybius, II, 40.
Philip IV of France, died at Fontainebleau, Page 72.
29 November, 1314. He was succeeded by his Philip the
eldest son, Louis X, le Hutin, who died at Fair.
Vincennes 5 June, 1316. Then followed his
brother, the second son of Philip IV, Philip V,
le Long. It was in this reign that the lepers
were slain. He died at Longchamps, 3 January,
Callistus Xanthopulus Nicephorus was born in Page ~2.
the latter part of the thirteenth century and died Nicephorus.
about 1350. His Ecclesiastical History has been
edited by Duchene, 2 vols., folio, Paris, 1630.
Vergil, Eclogue VIII, 70, has “Carminibus Page 77.
Circe socios mutauit Ulixi,” but the touch with Circe.
her wand is emphasized in the Odyssey, X,
avTap eTTel SaiKcv re km eKmov, avriK erreiTa
pdfScp TrcTrXrjyvca, Kara avc/>eouriv eepyw.
ol 8e avd)v pev e)(ov KecjjaXds, fcovqv re rplgas
Kai 8epas, avrdp voCj yv epTreSos, d)S rd irdpos
TTep.
77Thessaly.
NOTES
Thessaly was the legendary home of witchcraft,
so that Thessala, a Thessalian woman, came
almost to mean an enchantress.
Page 78.
Ovid.
The lines Boguet paraphrases are from the
Amoves., I, vii:
Num mea Thessalico languent deuota ueneno
Corpora? num misero carmen et herba
nocent? . . .
Carmine laesa Ceres sterilem uanescit in
herbam:
Deficiunt laesae carmine fontis aquae,
Ilicibus glandes, cantataque uitibus uua
Decidit; et nullo poma mouente fluunt.
Quid uetat et neruos magicas torpere per artes ?
Page 78.
Pergtl.
Eclogue VIII, 70-71:
Carminibus Circe socios mutauit Ulixi;
Frigidus in pratis cantando rumpitur anguis.
Page 78.
Lucan.
Page 78.
Tergil.
Pharsalia, VI, 452-gi.
Page 79.
A staff.
See my History of lEitchcraft, ch. iv, “The
Sabbat,” pp. 121-24.
Eclogue VIII, 77-78 :
Necte tribus nodis ternos, Amarylli, colores;
Necte, Amarylli, modo et “Ueneris” die “uincula necto.”
Page yg.
Al Forkan is one of the names of the Koran,
El-phurkan. being derived from the verb faraka, to divide or
distinguish, and chapter xxv of the Koran is
also known as “Al Forkan.”
Pa^e 80.
Mirandola. Giovanni Pico della Mirandola, 1463-94.
NOTES
Eclogue III, 103 :
Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos.
“Suivant les anciens le Basilic etait un reptile ne Page 81.
d’un oeuf de coq (beaucoup de gens croient Basilisk.
encore aux oeufs du coq). Son regard feudroyait
a moins qu’on ne I’eut aper^u le premier.”—
Rion, Erreurs, Prejuges populaires, 1869.
KaraipXeift or KaTcii^XeTriov, i.e. that looks down. Page 81.
“Apud Hesperios TEthiopas fons est Nigris, ut Catoblepas.
plerique existimauere Nili caput. . . . luxta
hunc fera appellatur catoblepas, modica alioquin, ceterisque membris iners, caput tantum
praegraue aegre ferens; id deiectum semper in
terram; alias internecio human! generis, omnibus
qui oculos eius uidere confestim exspirantibus.
Eadem et basilisci serpentis est uis.”—Pliny,
Historia Naturalis, VIII, xxxii, xxxxiii.
Vergil, Eclogue IX, 53-54 :
uox quoque Moerim
iam fugit ipsa; lupi Moerim uidere priores.
Page'^tS
Moeris.
For an account of the baleful glances of sor­
cerers see Malleus Maleficarum^ Part I; Q. 2,
pp. 12-13 (translation), John Rodker, 1928.
To fashion mommets of wax and melt these at Page 86.
a fire or pierce them with pins in order to Waxen
afflict the individual in whose likeness they are images.
moulded is one of the oldest and most general of
malign spells. See my Geography of Witchcraft.,
pp. 10, II, 81-84, 104.
NOTES
Page 86.
Medea.
Heroides, VI, 91-2:
Page 86.
Duffus.
At the end of the seventh century certain hags
of Forres in Murray attempted to kill King
Duffus by melting his image made of wax. See
my Geography of hPitchcraft, ch. i, pp. 12-13.
Deuouet absentes: simulacraque cerea figit,
Et miserum tenues in iecur urget acus.
And Amoves, III, 7 (Boguet gives reference III,
6, as the elegy Somnium was restored as number
5 by Daniel Heinsius}:
Sagaue Poenicea defixit nomina cera,
Et medium tenues in iecur egit acus ?
Page 86.
“Et Pan M.D.LXXIIII au proces imprime,
Charles IX. qui fut fait h. vn certain Gentil-homme, qui fut
decapite Paris, 11 fut trouue saisy d’vn image de
cire ayant la teste & le coeur perce auec d’autres
caracteres qui fut (pent estre) I’vne des princi­
pal es causes de sa mort.” Bodin, Demonomanie,
II, 8. Charles IX died 30 May, 1574.
Page 87.
Plato.
“Mais Platon en I’vnziesme liure des loix,
confirme ce discours des images de cire que
font les sorcieres, & ne faut s’esbahir commet
cela fut sgeu.” Bodin, Demonomanie, II, 8.
Page 87.
Medea.
In the tragedy of Euripides the Messenger cries
to Medea;
TTeTrAoi 8e Actztoi, aS)v r^Kvasv
AeTTT)}!/ eSaTZTov (rdpKa Trjs 8va8alp,ovos.
Page 88.
Xill the
children
Malleus Maleficarum., Part II, Qn. i, ch. 13.
How IPitch Midwives commit most Horrid
Crimes when they either Kill Children or Offer
them to Devils in most Accursed Wise.
NOTES
Formicarius, c. III. Malleus Maleficarum, Part Page 88.
II, Qn. I, ch. 6 (translation; John Rodker, Stadlin.
1928, p. 118). Stadlin buried a serpent under
the threshold of the outer door of the house.
See my Geography of U^itchcraft, ch. v, pp. 389— Page 88.
96; also the Bibliography (p. 342), History of Baron of
I'Pitchcraft.
Rays.
Malleus Maleficarum^ Part II, Qn. i, ch. 7: Page go.
How, as it were, they Deprive Man of his Firile Firile
Member.
member.
Daemonolatreia^ II, 4: “Perdifficiliter uitari Page 94.
posse quas ueneficae hominibus struunt insidias: Remy,
quod de nocte in obseratas, clausasque domos,
ignota specie ac forma illabantur: arctissimo
somno decumbentes diris suis artibus obruant.”
Commentarius in titulum codicis Lib. IX de Page gy.
Maleficis et Mathematicis, Quaestio IV, dis- Binsfeld.
cusses: “An malefici possint inducere pluuias,
tempestates, grandines, et similia meteorologica,
quibus fructibus aut seminibus noceant, ut d.L.
significat ?” The affirmative is demonstrated by
authority, by philosophical reasoning, and by
example.
Hoppo and Stadlin were two notorious witches Page 97.
of the school of one Staufer who lived at Berne, Sprenger.
a sorcerer mentioned by Nider in his Formi­
carius. Malleus Maleficarum (translation, p. 148,
Part II, Qn. i, ch. 15).
Pliny, Historia Naturalis, XVIII, 6, relates Caius
that Caius Furius Cresinus, whose lands were Furius
NOTES
far richer in crops and fruit than those of any
of his neighbours, was by them accused of witch­
craft and the employment of spells, since, as
they said, by these horrid arts his tilth was preg­
nant whilst their fields languished and were dry.
Appearing on the appointed day before Spurius
Albinus, who was to judge the cause, Furius
displayed his mattocks and hoes, his sharp spades,
his heavy ploughshares as well as the sleek oxen
that drew them, together with his sturdy sons
and Amazonian daughters. “These,” cried he,
“are my only spells, for I cannot show you my
sleepless nights, my vigils, my early wakings, the
sweat of my brow.” So he was dismissed with
much honour and praise.
Page Bi­
Vergil.
Eclogue VIII, 98—99 ;
Page 97.
Tuielve
tables.
Pliny, Historia Naturalis, XXVIII, 4: “Non
et legum ipsarum in duodecim tabulis uerba
sunt? ‘Qui fruges excantasset.’ Et alibi, ‘Qui
malum carmen incantasset.’ ”
Moerim, saepe animas imis excire sepulcris
atque satas alio uidi traducere messes.
Page 98. For his miracles see the Life by Philostratus,
Apollonius. III, 39; for the staying of the plague at Ephesus,
idem, VIII, 7.
Page 102. This magical word, is said to be formed from
Abracada­ Abrasax or Abraxas, the name given by Gnostics
to the Supreme Deity. Julius Africanus says
that the word is efficacious in its pronunciation,
and Serenus Sammonicus advises its use as a
spell to cure asthma.
NOTES
Gaspar fert myrrham, thus Balthazar, Melchior Page 102.
aurum.
Gaspar.
“Damnati sunt et qui remedia quartanis ter- Page 103
tianisque collo annexa gestarent.” Aelius Spar- Caracalla.
tianus, Antoninus Caracalla, V. Salmasius
glosses: “Plena sunt monumenta Graecorum
et Latinorum huiusmodi remediis.” S. John
Chrysostom in his Eighth Homily on the Epistle
to the Colossians very sternly reproves the wear­
ing of such periapts and amulets.
This is related in the life of Marcus Aurelius by Page 103.
Julius Capitolinus, xix. The soothsayers advised Marcus
the Empress Faustina to bathe
^uctiv in the Aurelius.
blood of the gladiator of whom she was en­
amoured, “atque ita cum uiro concumberet.
Quod quum esset factum, solutum quidem
amorem, natum uero Commodum, gladiatorem
esse non principem.”
See the Life by Philostratus, VIII, 7. The old Page 103
man was supposed to be the genius of the Apollonius.
pestilence who had assumed that form.
De Praestigiis Daemonum, I, 7: “De human! Page 104.
sanguinis uictima, a diabolo inuenta, celebrataque Wier.
in populo Dei, apud Graecos, et Romanos, et
alios. Item de diuinatione ex mactatorum
hominum uisceribus.”
The essay by John Addington Symonds, Page 104.
Antinous, collected in Sketches and Studies in Antinous.
Italy and Greece, Third Series (1898}, should
be consulted. See also my Geography of Witch­
craft, ch. I, pp. 39-41.
NOTES
Page 104. Suetonius, Tib. Claudius Caesar.^ XXV, has:
“Druidarum religionem apud Gallos dirae
Druids.
immanitatis, et tantum ciuibus sub Augusto
interdictam, penitus aboleuit.” Upon which
Joannes Schildius glosses; “Cruore captiuo
adolere aras, et hominum fibris consulere Deos,
fas habebant. Tacitus. Plura de d.v6pooTToOvala,
Druidum. Caesar, De Bello Gallico, Commentario sexto, et Strabo, Geogr. Lib. IV.” Vossius
on Penitus aboleuit adds: “Abolere penitus
uoluit, non potuit.”
Page 104. The legends introduced into the Cita beati
Constan­
Sylvestri l^Liber pontificalis., ed. Duchesne, Intro­
tine.
duction, cix, sqq.}, to the effect that Constantine
the Great, being attacked by leprosy, was told
by the pagan priests that the only cure was a
bath of children’s blood, and that numbers of
innocents were actually brought by his soldiers
to be sacrificed for this purpose, when he de­
clared he would rather suffer than consent to
such barbarities, but the very same night SS.
Peter and Paul in a vision bade him seek bap­
tism at the hands of Pope S. Sylvester I, where­
upon he came clean and whole from the sacra­
mental font, are now very generally disputed.
The Uita beati Sylvestri appears in the Constitutio Sylvestri., and has been preserved in Greek,
Syriac and Latin. Pope S. Sylvester I died in
December, 335, and his feast, 31 December, is
doubtless the day of his burial, since the Despositio
Episcoporum was compiled barely a year after his
decease.
Page 104
The story as told by Sophocles relates that
the son of Creon, Haemon, who loves Antigone,
NOTES
kills himself by her side when she slays herself
in the subterranean cave to which she is doomed
by her father. Hyginus, Falularum Liber, Ixxii,
gives different details, and according to this
author Haemon first stabbed Antigone and then
himself. The legend of the sacrifice of Iphigenia
is told with varying details by many authors.
The most usual story is that she was sacrificed
because of the calm which detained the Greek
fleet anxious to sail against Troy at Aulis. It
was believed that Artemis substituted a stag for
the maiden, who afterwards served the goddess
in the temple in the Tauric Chersonesus. See
S. Augustine, De Ciuitate Dei, XVIII, 18.
There can be little doubt that the myth arose
from the custom of human victims being offered
in localities such as Sparta, Brauron and Megara,
all closely connected with some form of the story.
Quintus Curtius, rather Mettus or Mettius
Curtius, was a noble youth of Rome, who
when a chasm appeared in the forum in 362 b.c.
and the soothsayers announced that it could only
be filled by throwing into it the city’s greatest
treasure, in full armour mounted his gallant
steed and leaped into the abyss, which closed
over him. Varro tells us that the spot was
blasted by lightning in 445 B.c. and was enclosed
by Curtius, one of the consuls for that year,
whence the legend had its origin.
Both Theodoret, Historia Ecclesiastica, III, 'll-, Page 105.
and S. Gregory of Nanzianus, Orationes, IV, 92, Julian,
accuse Julian of having immolated youths and
children during his secret celebrations, particu­
larly when he instituted the Mithraic rites at
Charres.
NOTES
Page 105. This is related by Suetonius, UitelliuSy xiv, where
Pitellius.
he tells us that the Emperor received the pre­
diction from a certain German seeress, “uatici-
nante Chatta muliere, cui uelut oraculo acquiescebat.” Tacitus, Germania^ viii, mentions one
Veleda as being a noted prophetess among the
Germans in the time of Vespasian, whilst a
little before the sibyl Aurinia was much revered
and regarded.
Page 107.
JPedding
ring.
This remedy is referred to by many writers, and
in Thomas Shadwell’s The Lancashire IPitches
(acted in 1681; 4to, 1682), Act III, when Sir
Jelfery complains of a certain frigidity, “last
night, when I would have been kind to my Wife,
she bewitcht me, I found it so,” Tegue O’Divelly advises: “Maak shome waater through de
Ring of a Wedding . . . and dou wilt be sound
agen: gra.”
Page 107.
Bodin.
De la Demonomanie des Sorders, III, 2, has the
rubric: “Si les Sorciers peuvent asseurer la
sante des hommes alaigres & donner guerison
aux malades.”
Page 107. Blessed Robert Bellarmine, S.J., 1542—1621, in
Bellarmine. his De notis Ecclesiae.
Page 107,
Pespasian.
The account of the poor man who was blind
and another who was lame presenting themselves
before the tribunal of Vespasian and imploring
him to heal them, declaring that the god Serapis
had appeared to them in a dream and admonished
them to seek the Emperor, who would restore
them to health, is to be found in Suetonius,
Uespasianus., vii. The historian says that Ves­
pasian hesitated, but at length made the essay
NOTES
and both the blind and lame were healed.
Tacitus gives an even fuller account of the
miracles of Vespasian, and particularly empha­
sizes these two cures, adding: “Utrumque, qui
interfuere, nunc quoque memorant, postquam
nullum mendacio pretium.” Historiarum, Liber
IV, 81. Hume in his Essay on Miracles selects
this incident as an example of successful im­
posture, but he has been completely answered by
Paley in his Evidences of Christianity. The com­
mentators on Suetonius and Paley agree that
the affair was a juggle between the Egyptian
priests, the patients and, perhaps, the Emperor.
If this were not the case it may well be, as
Tertullian thought and Boguet well suggests,
a diabolic counterfeit. Spartianus in his life of
Hadrian relates how that Emperor also healed
a blind man.
“Neither let there be found among you anyone Page ill.
that shall expiate his son or daughter, making Deuterothem to pass through the fire: or that consulteth nomy^
soothsayers, or observeth dreams and omens, xviii, 10,
neither let there be any wizard. Nor charmer, n.
nor any one that consulteth pythonic spirits, or
fortune tellers, or that seeketh truth from the
dead.” Leviticus^ xx, 6: “The soul that shall
go aside after magicians, and soothsayers, and
shall commit fornication with them, I will set
my face against that soul, and destroy it out of
the midst of its people.”
White magic, as it is termed.
Page 111
magic.
“And not rather (as we are slandered, and as Page 111.
some affirm that we say) let us do evil, that there Romans,
may come good? whose damnation is just.”
pi, 8.
Page 111.
Ochozias.
NOTES
Kingsi
Il Kingsi.
Page 112.
Heliogahalus.
Concerning whose death Aelius Lampridius
writes: “Post hoc in eum impetus factus est,
atque in latrina ad quam confugerat occisus.
Tractus deinde per publicum, additaque iniuria
cadaueri est, ut id in cloacam milites mitterent.
. . . Occisa est cum eo et mater Semiamira
probrosissima mulier et digna filio.” Bodin,
Demonomanie., II, 3, writes: “Aussi lisons nous
en Dion & Xeipheilin que I’Empereur Heliogabale des plus detestables hommes du monde
en vsoit souuent & fist comparoir pas Necro­
mantic son pere & Commode I’Empereur
ausquels il demanda conseil de son estat: mais
il fut tue auec sa mere cruellement & traine aux
cloaques auec sa mere.”
Page 114.
Martha.
Plutarch is his Life of Marius (translated North)
says: “He ever carried a Syrian woman in a
litter about with him called Martha, with great
reverence, whom they said had the spirit of
prophecy in her: and that he even did sacrifice
unto the gods by her order, and at such time as
she willed him to do it. . . . She was always at
Marius’ sacrifices, apparelled in a gown of
purple in grain, clasped to her with clasps, and
held a spear in her hand wound all about with
nosegays, and garlands of flowers tied on with
laces. This manner of gest made many doubt
whether Marius showed this woman openly,
believing indeed that she had the spirit of
prophecy: or else that knowing the contrary
he made as though he did believe it, to help her
feigning.”
NOTES
Psalm XC, I. “He who dwelleth . .
Page 114.
He who
“Spranger & Nider qui en ont faict brusler ,7 helped.
vne infinite, demeurent d’accord que les Sorciers
Page 116.
ne peuuent nuire aucunement aux officiers de
Officers.
lustice, fussent ils les plus mechans du monde.”
Bodin, Demonomanie., Ill, 4. King James in
his Daemonologie, Edinburgh, 1597,
similar
arguments to show that the bond-slaves of
Satan cannot harm accredited officers of justice
who are to take them, and that the authorities
who prosecute these wretches must not fear
their craft any more than a captain in the field
is alarmed at “the small clack of a Pistolet” or
“the rummishing shot of a cannon.”
Malleus Maleficarum^ II, Qn. I, Ch. ii. Page 116.
ad finem. Translated by Montague Summers, Sprenger.
John Rodker, 1928, p. 137.
Odyssey^ ILy 302-306:
Page 117.
".Qs apa tfxavT^aas Trope <f>dp[ji.aKov 'Apyei(j>6vTrjs,
eK yatrig epvaas, Kai pcoi (fvoLV avroS eSec^ev.
pl^T] pbev p,e\av eoKe, yaXaKTi Se etKcAov d.v6os'
pcdiXv 8e p-ip KoAeovoi deoP goXeTrov Se r
dpvacreiv
dvSpdcri ye dirrirocai' 0€oi Se re Travra Swavrai.
The author of the seventy-ninth Carmen of
the Priapeia has a rationalistic explanation:
Hine legitur radix de qua flos aureus exit:
Quern cum moly uocat, mentula moly fuit.
A name given to various kinds of Orchis. The Page 117.
Latin “Satyrion,” a plant exciting sexual Satyrion.
appetite, is sometimes translated as “ragwort”
NOTES
(^Senecio Jacohaa}. Pliny makes mention of it,
Historia Naturalise LX 11, lO; and Caelius
Aurelianus, III, has: '"Satyriasis est uehemens
ueneris appetentia. Uocatur autem ab herbae
uirtute quam Satyrion uocant.” So Quartilia
in Petronius has a drink prepared from this
aphrodisiac. In Italy there was, and perhaps is,
a famous aphrodisiac named Satirione. See
Machiavelli, La CUziae iv, 2.
Page 117. Of Ancient Mexico, Bernal Diaz del Castillo
Pederasty, {circa 1498-1570}, the Spanish historian whose
Perdadera Historia de la conquista de Nueua
Espana was written in 1568, says; “Erant
quasi omnes sodomia commaculati, et adolescentes multi, muliebriter uestiti, ibant publice,
cibum quaerentes ab isto diabolico et abominabili
labore.”
/’(7^#I2I.
Tears.
Debrio, Disquisitiones Magkae^
ix, says:
“Hoc enim ipsum pro certissimo signo ex fide
dignorum antiqua relatione, ac propria experientia docente, adeo compertum est, quod
etlamsi ad lachrymandum coniuratoribus hortetur et compellatur, si malefica exstitit, hoc
ipsum scilicet lachrymas emittere, non potest:
dabit quidem flebiles uoces, et ex sputo genas
et oculos linire ac si fleret, attentabit; super quo
a circumstantibus caute aduertendum erit.”
Page 122.
Tells.
There exist some rough but apt lines which are
quoted in the gloss of the Corpus luris to
describe the functions of bells;
Laudo Deum uerum, plebem uoco, congrego
clerum,
defunctos ploro, nimbum fugo, festa decoro.
NOTES
Or, in another form:
Funera plango, fulmina frango, sabbata pango,
Excito lentos, dissipo uentos, paco cruentos.
Bodin, Demonomanie, IV, 4, marks as a presump- Page 122.
tionofguilt: “lacontenancedu Sorcier, quibaisse Eyes. . .
ordinairement la veue contre terre, & n’ose bent upon
regarder en face.”
the ground.
Idyll VI, 39:
Page 124.
w? p,ri pcLUKavdat Se, rpls els ep.ov emvaa
koXttov.
The charm was broken by spitting thrice.
Diogenianus, Prov. IV, 82, has a reference to
this line: els koXttov TTTvei, em rajy PaaKaivop.evct)i>. OeoKpiTos. One may compare Juvenal,
VII, 111-12:
Tunc immensa caui spirant mendacia folles
Conspuiturque sinus.
Upon which the old Scholiast glosses: “Propter
fascinum uerborum ter sibi in sinu spuunt, et
uidentur fascinum arcere.”
See the Malleus Maleficarum, Part III, Qn. 15. Page 125.
It is there laid down: “The third precaution Shaved.
to be observed in this tenth action is that the
hair should be shaved from every part of the
body. The reason for this is the same as for
stripping her of her clothes, which we have
already mentioned; for in order to preserve their
power of silence they are in the habit of hiding
some superstitious object in their clothes or in
their hair, or even in the most secret parts of
their bodies which must not be named.”
NOTES
Witches were also shaved in order that the
Devil’s mark might be discovered upon their
bodies. This mark or Stigma, as Delrio terms
it, “is given to them, as is alledg’d,,by a Nip in
any part of the Body, and it is blew.
Page 125. Ludovico Maria Sinistrari in his Demoniality
Mark.
writes; “The Devil imprints on them some
mark, especially on those whose constancy he
suspects. That mark, moreover, is not always
of the same shape or figure: sometimes it is the
likeness of a hare, sometimes a toad s foot,
sometimes a spider, a puppy, a dormouse It is
imprinted on the most hidden parts of the body:
with men, under the eyelids, or it may be under
the armpits, or on the lips, on the shoulder,
the fundament, or somewhere else; with
women, it is usually on the breast or the privy
parts. Now, the stamp which imprints,those
marks is none other but the Devil’s claw.”
130- Bodin, Demonomanie, III, 2; “Un certain
AdUocat de Paris, que ie ne veux nommer, qui
fut defere I’an mil cinq cens septate vn, & de
faict il confessa qu’estant malade I’extremite,
il se donna au Diable pour guarir, & luy mesme
escriuit & signa la sedule de son sang.”
Schedules-
Page I 30.
Satan
often kills
iuitches.
See the Malleus Maleficarum, Part III, Qn. 13,
translated by Montague Summers (John Rodker, 1928): “And some also are disOnguished
by the fact that, after they have admitted their
crimes, they try to commit suicide by strangling
or hanging themselves. And they are induced
to do this by the Enemy, lest they should obtain
pardon from God through sacramental con­
fession.” See further the note on this passage.
NOTES
The judge in question was “M. Adam Martin, Page 131.
Baillif de Bieures.”
'Judge.
This is related by Suetonius, T. Flauius Page 132.
Domitianus, XV.
Ascletario.
See my Geography of JP'itchcraft, pp, 22-26. Page 138.
The whole question of lycanthropy is discussed hVlives.
in the Malleus Maleficarum^ at length by De
Lancre, Bodin, and most demonologists. Hertz,
Der IPeruiolf, may be consulted, and I have a
forthcoming volume, The IPerewolf. S. Augus­
tine, De Ciuitate Dei.^ XVIII, 18, does not
allow that evil powers and black magic can
actually transform a man, but demons directly or
mediately through a witch can and do cast
a glamour so that to himself and to all who
behold him a man may seem to be a wolf and
be informed with all the savagery and appetites
of the wolf nature. Indeed it is recorded that
some lycanthropists have coupled with female
wolves and have declared that this coitus was
to them more natural and more pleasurable
than connexion with a woman. S. Augustine
says: “Nor can the devils create anything
(whatever shows of theirs produce these doubts),
but only cast a changed shape over that which
God has made, altering only in show. Nor do I
think the devil can form any soul or body into
bestial or brutal members, and essences: but
they have an unspeakable way of transporting
man’s phantasy in a bodily shape, unto other
senses . . .” Ludwig Elich, in his Daemonomagia^ xii, says that the devil wraps the man into
the form of a wolf composed of thickly con­
densed air, which seems a very possible explana­
tion of the phenomenon. It may be noted that
NOTES
Boguet closely follows Bodin, Demonomanie, 11,
6: “De la lycanthropie & si les esprits peuuent
changer les hommes en bestes.”
138. The legend said that at the festival of the
Wolf-god Zeus Lycaeus, which was held every
nine years on the W^olf-mountain in Arcadia,
a man chosen by lot was stripped naked, his
clothes being hung on an oak, and that then he
ate of the entrails of animals mingled with
human bowels. After this he swam across a
lake, and on the further side was transformed
into a wolf. If for nine years he refrained from
tasting human flesh he could at the end of that
time recover his former shape. S. Augustine,
De Ciuitate
XVIII, 17, quotes from
Varro. See also Pliny, Historia Naturalis^ VIII,
xxxiv, 22. There are references in Plato,
Republic, VIII, DE.; Polybius, VII, 13;
Pausanias, VI, viii, 2; VIII, li, 3-6, and other
authors.
Jntaus.
138- Sigebert of Gembloux, the famous Benedictine
historian, born circa 1035; died 5 November,
1112. His most celebrated work. Chronica siue
Chronographia, was immensely popular, and
very numerous MSS. copies exist.
Sigebert.
Page 138.
Pergtl.
Eclogue VIII, 97-98, speaking of magic herbs;
Page 139.
Ovid.
Metamorphoseon I, 232-33, of Lycaon:
Territus ille fugit; nactusque silentia ruris
pjjg ggQ
lupum fieri et se condere siluis
Moerim . . . uidi.
Exululat, frustraque loqui conatur.
NOTES
Job Fincel, Wunderzeichen,
If^arhaffitge Page 139.
Beschreibung und griindlich 'uerzeicnus schreck- Fincel.
licher Wunderzeichen und Geschichten die ’uon
, . . MDXFII bis auff . . . MDLFl geschechen und ergangen sind^ noch der Jarzal . . .
Jhena,
Hence the account is quoted
by Weyer, De Maleficio Xffectis, IV, 23, and
Burton, Anatomy of Melancholy^ Part I, Sect, i,
Mem. I, Subs. 4, makes reference to this
passage: “Wierus tells a story of such a one at
Padua, 15415 that would not believe to the
contrary, but that he was a wolf.” Simon
Goulart also records the circumstance in his
Histoires admirables . . .,1606. The book was
translated into English, 1607, by E. Grimeston,
and here Webster found a hint for the com­
plexion of Duke Ferdinand’s madness in The
Dutchesse of Malfy., V, 2, where the Doctor
says:
two nights since
One met the duke, ’bout midnight in a lane
Behind St. Markes church, with the leg of a man
Upon his shoulder; and he howl’d fearefully:
Said he was a woolffe: onely the difference
Was, a woolffes skinne was hairy on the outside.
His on the in-side: bad them take their swords.
Rip up his flesh, and trie.
The sexual power of a wolf was popularly Page 13g.
supposed to lie in his tail, and accordingly, when No tails.
during the old harvest rituals the corn-spirit was
imagined as a wolf, particular attention was paid
to his tail. In East Prussia, if a wolf were seen
running through a field, the peasants took
particular note whether he carried his tail high
or dragged it on the ground. In the latter case
NOTES
they covered him with blessings and would
even set out food for him, since he was fertilizing
their fields and promised a rich tilth. In the
former case aridity was threatened and they
would curse and even try to kill him. A wolf
without a tail was sexually considered excep­
tionally unlucky and malign.
Page 140, Dominicans, so called from their convent
hard by the church of St. Jacques at Paris.
^acolins.
Page 140.
Gilles
Garnier.
For an account of this notorious werewolf of
Lyons who, being convicted of the “abominable
crimes of lycanthropy and witchcraft,” was
burned alive 18 January, 1573, see my
Geography of If^itchcraft., ch. I, pp. 23—24; and
ch. V, pp. 399-400.
Page 142. Vincent of Beauvais, the celebrated encyclo­
paedist. The most generally accepted dates
Pincent.
assigned for his birth and death are respectively
1190 and 1264. It is thought that he was a
member of the Dominican Order. The title
of Vincent’s great work is Speculum maius.,
which contains 80 books and 9885 chapters.
Page 142. Bodin, Demonomanie, II, 6: “Belon en ses
Bdon.
obseruations imprimees a Paris, escript qu’il a
veu en Egypte aux faux-bourgs de la ville du
Cayre vn basteleur qui auoit vn asne auec
lequel il discouroit, & parloit du meilleur sens
qu’il eust: Et I’asne par gestes & signes sa
voix faisoit cognoistre, qu’il entendoit fort bien
ce qu’on disoit.”
Page 142.
Bartolomeo Quaestio de Strigihus-. xix; “Experientiae
de Spina. apparentis conuersionis strigum in catos.”
NOTES
Malleus Maleficarum^ Part II, Qn, i, chap. 9.
TA? In­
in Somersetshire there was a belief, still per- quisitors.
sisting in certain parts, that a hare might be a
witch under that form. To my own knowledge
when a hare has been seen in a field a farmer
and his men will turn out to hunt the animal
away lest it should bring ill-luck to, or cast a
spell upon, the stock and cattle. Julian Cox, an
old witch who was tried at the Taunton
Summer Assizes in 1663 and executed, was
commonly said to have been seen in the shape
of a hare, evidence which was admitted by the
court. James Device, one of the Lancashire
coven of 1613, confessed that the Devil had
appeared to him as a hare.
“Omnia subiecisti sub pedibus eius, oues et Page 145.
boues universas: insuper et pecora campi.”
Psalm
Andreas Osiander, 1498-1552, was for many p
years a preacher and pastor at St. Lornzkirche,
Nuremberg, in which town he published his
Harmony.
Pharsalia, VI, 543-46, of Erichto:
laqueum, nodosque nocenteis
Page 152
Lucan.
Ore suo rupit: pendentia corpora carpsit
Abrasitque cruces; percussaque uiscera nimbis
Uulsit et incoctas admisso sole medullas.
Ars Poetica 338—40:
Page 1^2.
ficta uoluptatis causa sint proxima ueris,
Horace
ne quodcumque uelit poscat sibi fabula credi,
neu pransae Lamiae uiuum puerum extrahat
aluo.
Page 152.
j^puleius.
NOTES
Metamorphoses, II, 21-30, the relation of
Thelyphron.
Lex Cornelia (Sullae), de sicariis et ueneficis.
See the Institutes of Justinian, IV, xviii, 5.
Stccar.
Page 155- (Douay, 105). “Et immolauerunt filios suos et
Psalm 106. filias suas daemoniis.”
Cf Josias: “And he
Ir. Ktngs, defiled Topheth, which is in the valley of the
xxm. IO. son of Ennom; that no man should consecrate
there his son or his daughter through fire to
Moloch.”
Page 156.
Manasses,
II Paralipomenon, xxiii, 6: “He made his sons
to pass through the fire in the valley of Benennom; he observed dreams, followed divinations,
gave himself up to magic arts, had with him
magicians, and enchanters: and he wrought
many evils before the Lord, to provoke him to
anger.”
^age 157.
Stadlin.
Malleus Maleficarum, Part II, Qn. i, ch. vi.
“Moreover, Nider [in his Formicarius^ tells of
a wizard named Stadlin, who was taken in the
diocese of Lausanne, and confessed that in a
certain house where a man and his wife were
living he had by his witchcraft successively
killed in the woman’s womb seven children, so
that for many years the woman always mis­
carried.”
M. Aurelius Valerius Maxentius, Roman
Maxentius. Emperor, a.d. 306-312. See Zosimus, H,
9-18; and the Annales, xii, 33, and xiii, i, of
NOTES
Joannes Zonaras. All authorities agree in
representing Maxentius as a monster of lust
and cruelty. Zosimus especially notes that he
was superstitious to the last degree and wholly
given to magical crafts. Many emperors, Commodus, Caracalla, Julian the Apostate, and
others, were much addicted to the offering of
human sacrifices, and these victims were
immolated for the sake of extisficium, the
examination of human entrails in order thereby
to divine the future. Of Maxentius Eusebius
precisely says that he indulged the same horrid
passion; veoyvStv UTrXayyyfi. ^pet/xuv 8iepevvopevov.
Blessed Baptista Mantuanus (or Spagnoli), the Page
famous Renaissance poet, was born at Mantua Mantuanus.
17 April, 1447, where also he died 22 March,
1516. Whilst yet young he joined the Carme­
lite Order, of which he is one of the glories.
He was beatified by Leo XIII in 1890 and his
feast is kept in the Order on 23 March. His
Opera omnia were collected at Bologna in 1502,
and as he excelled in every form of Latin verse,
representative selections may be found from his
vast store in most of the Delitiae and other
treasuries of the later Latinists.
IV, 4. “Des Presomptions Page 157.
contre les Sorciers.” “Les autres indices sont, Bodin.
la contenance du Sorcier, qui baisse ordinairement la veue contre terre, & n’ose regarder en
face, les variations aux interrogatoires & sur
tout si le sorcier est descendu de pere ou mere,
sorciers. Car c’est un argumet bien grand auec
le bruit commun, d’autant que le plus aggreable
Demonomanie,
NOTES
sacrifice que le Diable desire de telles gens, est
de vouer & dedier leurs enfans son seruice, si
tost qu’ils sont nez.”
Poge^ 162
Levites.
Upon the occasion of the idolatrous worship of
the golden calf, Mosessaid: “If any man be on
the Lord’s side let him join with me. And all
the sons of Levi gathered themselves together
unto him; And he said to them: Thus saith the
Lord God of Israel: Put every man his sword
upon his thigh: go, and return from gate to
gate through the midst of the camp, and let
every man kill his brother, and friend, and
neighbour. And the sons of Levi did according
to the words of Moses, and there were slain that
day about three and twenty thousand men.”
Exodusy xxxii, 26-28.
Page 169. Remy, Daemonolatreia, III, 12, emphasizes
Remy.
the stubborn malice of witchcraft: “Inueter-
atum hoc malum est, & plerumque ab ipsa iam
adolescentia admissum & contractum. . . .
Diserta atqueaperta Domini uox est: Uirsiue
mulier, in quibus Pythonicus, uel diuinationis
fuerit spiritus, morte moriantur: {Leuiticus.,
xx); ... Ecce ut nullo nec aetatis, nec sexus
discrimine, ac delectu supplicium est in eos
dluina lege costitutum; qui eiusmodi uetitas,
illicitasque artes exercent.”
Page 169. Demonomanie, IV, 5: “Car si la loy condamne
Bodin.
a mort I’enfant qui n’a pas atteint la puberte
pour n’auoir pas crie quand on tuoit son maistre,
& n’auoir pas declare les meurtriers, comme
en cas pared fut pendu & estrangle vn ieune
enfant aage d’onze ans, qui auoit tue d’vn coup
NOTES
de pierre vne fille, & I’auoit cachee . , . Si
plus forte raison doit I’enfant Sorcier, qui a
attaint la puberte estre mis a mort, s’il n’a
declard les assemblees auec les Diabies, mesmement estat preuenu, & qu’il soit conuaincu,
ne voulant rien con fesser.”
Pharsalia, IX, 1087-88;
sed parcimus annis,
donamusque nefas.
Page 170.
Lucan.
The important trial of Jeanne Harvillier v/3sPage 170.
the occasion of Bodin’s writing his famous Bodin.
treatise. The Preface of the Demonomanie
commences: “Le iugement qui a este conclud
contre vne Sorciere, auquel ie fus appelle le
dernier iour d’Auril, mil cinq cens septante
& huict, m’a donne occasion di mettre la main
la plume, pour esclairir le subiect des Sorciers
qui semble a toutes personnes estrange merueilles, & a plusiers incroyable. La Sorciere que
i’ay diet s’appelloit leanne Haruillier, natifue
de Verbery pres Compeigne, accusee d’auoir
fait mourir plusieurs hommes & bestes, comme
elle confessa sans question, ny torture, combien
que de prime face elle eust denie opiniatrement,
& varie plusieurs fois. Elle confessa aussi que
sa mere des I’aage de douze ans I’auoit presentee
au Diable, en guise d’vn grand homme noir.
. . . Et que des lors elle renon^a Dieu, &
promit seruir au diable. Et qu’au mesme
instant elle eut copulation charnellement auec
le Diable, continuant depuis I’aage de douze
ans, iusques h cinquante, ou enuiron qu’elle fut
prise. ... Il fut trouue que trente ans au
parauat, elle auoit eu le foiiet pour le mesme
NOTES
crime, & sa mere codamnee a estre bruslee viue,
par arrest de la Cour de Parlement, confirmatif
de la sentence du luge de Sells. . . . Ceux
qui assisterent au iugement, estoyet bien d’aduis
qu’elle auoit bien merite la mort: mais sur la
forme & genre de mort, il y en eut quelqu’vn
plus doux, & d’vn naturel plus pitoyable, qui
estoit d’aduis qu’il suffisoit de la faire pendre.
Les autres apres auoir examine les crimes
detestables & les peines establies par les loix
Diuines & humaines, . . . furet d’auis qu’elle
deuoit estre codanee a estre bruslee viues: ce
qui fut arreste, & la sentence, dont il n’y eut
point d’appel, executee le dernier iourd’Auril a
la poursuyte de Maistre Claude Dofay, Procureur du Roy Ribemont.”
Page 180. Bishop of Todi; 14 October, 537. S. Gregory
St. Forthe Great speaks with admiration of the extratunatm.
ordinary powers of this Saint in delivering the
possessed and expelling demons. Dialogues., I,
X. Also Acta Sanctorum (Bollandists), October,
Vol. VI, p. 520 sqq.
Page 180. A disciple of S. Antony the Great. He was a
hermit of the most extreme sanctity and
Hilarion. austerity. His feast is kept 21 October. The
Breviary lection for that day tells us: “Innu-
merabiles daemones in multis orbis terrae
partibus ex hominum corporibus eiecit.”
Page 180. S. Bernard of Menthon, founder of the St.
Bernard Alpine hospice, was so famous for his
Bernard, exorcisms and victories over Satan that he is
represented on a public seal with the demon
bound IPecueil ... de sphragistique. Vol. IV,
NOTES
p. 85. Cf. Blavignac, Histoire de I'architecture
sacree . . . p. 294). In art he often appears
with the demon tied by his stole. Feast Day,
15 June. He died in 1008. Acta Sanctorum^
June, Vol. II, p. 1077.
Bishop of Tours, born circa 316; died at Page 180.
Candes, Touraine, 397. Feast Day 11 Novem- St. Martin.
ber. S. Martin is one of the most famous
thaumaturges of the world, and his cult was very
popular throughout the centuries. Numbers of
the possessed were delivered from demons at his
tomb, and his relics were constantly honoured
by pilgrimages from all countries. France has
ever held him one of her greatest Saints.
S. Martin of Vertou is also greatly honoured
as a scourge of devils and liberator of the
possessed. He exorcized the daughter of a King
of Spain (one account says of an English
nobleman), and the old prose records;
Liberata
Et saluata
Principis est filia;
Ursus cedit
Et obedit
Remota saeuitia.
An Irishman by birth, he was one of the Page 180.
twelve disciples who accompanied S. Colum- S. Gall.
banus to Gaul. When his master went on to
Italy in 612, S. Gall remained as a hermit in
Switzerland, where he died about 646. Im­
mediately God revealed the sanctity of His
servant by countless miracles, and a chapel was
erected upon the spot which had been his
NOTES
retreat. In time this became the famous Abbey
of S. Gall, for many centuries one of the noblest
Benedictine houses in Europe. The Feast
Day of S. Gall is 16 October. S. Gall delivered
from the demon by which she was possessed
Fridiburga, the daughter of Cunzo, and
betrothed of Sigebert, King of the Franks.
Page 180.
Other holy
Vast numbers of names might be given, such as
Pope S. Linus; S. Gregory the Wonder­
worker; S. Zeno of Verona; S. Ubald of
Gubbio; S. Geminianus of Modena; S. Allyre
of Clermont; S. Parthenius; S. Silvin; S. John
the Thaumaturge, Bishop of Polybota; S.
Hidulphus of Treves; S. Die; S. Exsuperius,
first Bishop of Bayeux; S. Januarius; S.
Hubert; S. Giles; S. Nicolas the Great;
S. Nicolas of Tolentino; S. Ouen; S. Lanfranc; S. Elpidius of Atelia; S. Melanins;
S. Mathurin; S. Aubin of Angers; S. Paternian
of Vannes; S. Herve; S. Samson; S. Frobert;
S. Cyriacus; S. Albert the Carmelite; S.
Theodore the Solitary; S. Eleutherius; S.
Antoninus of Sorrento; S. Eustasius the Abbot;
S. Venant; S. Dele; S. Theotonius, Canon
Regular; S. Philip of Argiro; S. Hugh of
Lincoln; S. Norbert; S. Francis of Assisi;
S. Antony of Padua; S. John of the Cross;
S. Ignatius Loyola; S. Francis Xavier; S.
John Baptist Vianney; S. Hermann Joseph;
S. Dominic; S. Antony the Great; S. Gerard
Majella, C.SS.R.; S. Bertrand of Comminges;
S. Mary Magdalene; S. Marina; S. Dympna;
S. Catherine of Siena; S. Colomba of Rieti;
cum multis allis.
NOTES
St. Gregory, Bishop of Langres, who ruled that Page 182.
see 509-39, is locally much venerated. It was Gregory.
he who transferred the relics of S. Benignus.
Saint Aubin (Albinus), Bishop of Angers from Page 182.
529 to 549, was a native of Vannes. See Alhinus.
Lobineau, Pies des Saints de la Bretagne
(1836), I, p. 123.
Eremite, or the Great. In art, as in the famous Page 182.
picture by Salvator Rosa, he is often seen chasing St. Antony.
away the nightmare demons with a Cross.
Virgin and Martyr. She usually appears tramp- Page 182.
ling the demoniac dragon under her feet and St. Marholding up the Cross in her hand, since when^ar^Z.
Satan appeared to her in a terrible bestial form
she put him to flight by the power of the
crucifix. She is so depicted in a Gothic sculpture,
Henry VII’s Chapel; and in a picture by Lucas
van Leyden.
The history of S. Justina and S. Cyprian, the Page 182.
converted magician, is well known. Feast Day St.
of the two Martyrs, 26 September.
justina.
Malleus Maleficarum., Part II, Qn. i, ch. 2: Page 183.
“The witches met together and, by their art. The Cross.
summoned a devil in the form of a man, to
whom the novice was compelled to swear to
deny the Christian religion, never to adore the
Eucharist, and to tread the Cross underfoot
whenever she could do so secretly.” Guazzo in
the Compendium Maleficarum tells us that at
the reception into that horrid company witches
are required to “cast upon the ground and
NOTES
trample under their feet in the mire the Cross,
Holy Medals, Agnus Dei, should they possess
such or carry them on their persons.” In the
La-Bas of Huysmans it is said of “Le Chanoine
Docre” a composite figure, “Sa rage du sacrilege
est telle qu’il s’est fait tatouer sous la plante des
pieds rimage de la Croix, afin de pouvoir
toujours marcher sur le Sauveur” (IX).
Page 185. Born circa 346; Roman Emperor of the East,
Theodosius. 378-95- Valentinian II, Roman Emperor,
375—92, was, although at that time only some
four or five years old, proclaimed Augustus
by the army upon the death of his father,
Valentinian I. When Valentinian II was
expelled from Italy by Maximus, Theodosius
defeated this latter and restored the Emperor
to his Western authority in 391. Valentinian
was murdered 15 May, 392, by Arbogastes.
Page 187. The passage is from the De humanitate Uerbi
St. Atha- et corporalis euis praesentia. Peter Thyraeus,
nasius.
De Spirituum Apparitionibus, I, xvi, 420,
writes; “Ueniat, inquit Athanasius, qui istorum
dictorum experimentum capere uelit, (uidelicet,
solo signo crucis daemones fugari) et in ipsis
praestigiis daemonum et imposturis uaticiniorum
et in miraculis Magiae, utatur signo Crucis
ab ipsis deriso nomenque Christi inuocet; et
uidebit, quomodo eius rei metu daemones
fugiant, uaticinia conquiescant, Magiae et ueneficia iaceant.”
Page 189.
Perfumes,
Sinistrari. Demoniality, Ixviii-Ixxvi, has dealt at
length with this point, which he treats in a very
masterly and skilful way.
NOTES
This is related in the “Legend,” the biography Page 193.
of S. Catherine, which was completed in 1395 St.
by Blessed Raimondo delle Vigne, of Capua, Catherine.
her confessor. An Italian translation of the
“Legend” is included in the first volume of
Gigli’s L'ofere della serafica Santa Caterina da
Siena, Siena and Lucca, 1707-54.
Born in Galatia, 368; died probably before 431. Page 193.
The identity of the author of the Historia Palladius.
Lausiaca and of the Bishop of Helenopolis, once
disputed, is now generally accepted. He passed
nine years among the monks, some of whom
were hermits, some living in communities, who
inhabited the Nitrian desert. During this
period he learned the traditions of their great
founders, S. Antony, S. Paul, S. Pachomius,
S. Pambo, and the rest. The Historia Lausiaca
is a history of the monks of Egypt and Palestine
in the form of short biographies and many
anecdotes. The best modern edition is that by
Abbot Butler in two volumes, Cambridge,
1898 and 1904.
Communion may be given to those possessed. Page 199.
Thyraeus, De Daemoniacis, II, 365, says: Eucharist.
“An forte ab Altaris Sacramento arcendi sunt
daemoniaci? Non sunt. Patrum pro ipsis est
sententia. Eis, inquit Crassianus, teste Diuo
Thoma, qui ab immundis uexantur Spiritibus,
communionem sacrosanctam a senioribus nostris
nunquam inuenimus interdictam.”
Robert Gaguin, Trinitarian, 1425-1502. Pi&Page 199.
was employed on various important businesses Gaguin.
during the reigns of Louis XI and Charles
NOTES
VIII, and among the works he has left his
historical tractates are considered particularly
valuable.
Louis of
Luxem­
bourg.
Page 200.
Pontanus.
Count of St. Pol, was delivered up by Charles
of Burgundy to Louis XI. Condemned as a
traitor, he was executed at Paris, 19 December,
1475De Bello Neapolltano., V. “Nefarium ad sacrum,
Magicaque ad maleficia concursum est. Quod
in summis miseriis, ultimaque aquarum penuria
perditissimis a sacerdotibus commentum esset,
dum impie agendo, Dei simul iras et aeris
turbationem ac tempestates exciunt. Inuenti
enim ex oppidanis atque obsessis sunt, qui
nocturnis in tenebris, deceptis castrorum uigiliis
per asperrimas rupes furtim profecti ad litus
trahentes secum imaginem affix! ad crucem
Christi, maledictis illam prius ac diro persecuti carmine, post in mare execrabundi
immerserint, coelo, mari, terrisque tempestatem
imprecati. Quo etiam tempore sacerdotes quidam mortalium omnium scelestissimi, dum
satisfacere profanis militum artibus student,
ritum nefarium secuti, quo, ut dictum est, in
huiusmodi necessitatibus elici hymbres putantur,
asipo pro aedis foribus constitute, tanquam agent!
animani cecinere funestum carmen. Post diuina
Eucharistia in illius os palatumque iniecta
conclamatum asinum funereis cantibus uiuum
tandem ibidem pro tempi! foribus humauere.
Hie uero uix dum perfecto sacro obnubescere
aer, ac mare agitari uentis cum coepisset,
diesque medius offundi tenebris. ...” A
terrible storm with much rain followed. Pon-
NOTES
tani Opera Omnia, Basileae, 1538, II, pp.
574-75Malleus Maleficarum. Part II, Qn. 1. ch. 5. Page 200.
See the translation by Montague Summers; Inquisitors.
John Rodker, 1928; pp. 116-17.
The reference is to Charles IX, born 1550; Page 200.
reigned 1560, died 30 May, 1574. He was King.
greatly suspect of encouraging sorcerers and of
consulting with necromancers and witches.
Bodin, Demonomanie, IV, 5: “La superstition Page 201.
est bien plus grande de porter . . . I’hostie Gentil.
consacree en sa pochette. Comme faisoit le
President Gentil, qui fut trouue saisi d’vne
Hostie par le bourreau, qui le pendit k Montfaucon.”
Bodin, Demonomanie, IV, 5, says: “Fay Page 201.
monstre qu’il y a crime de leze Maiestd diuine. Mockery
fouillant les Sacremens ou prieres sacrees de and
charmes diaboliques.” This is one of the most derision.
frequent and most horrible crimes practised by
witches, for as there can be nothing more
agreeable to their master than the profenation
of the Body of the Lord, these witches use all
their cunning to devise ways and means to
secure the Host in order that they may abuse
and befoul It in every hideous sort. Innumer­
able examples might be cited from the trials
throughout the centuries. Even at the present
day Satanists will pay considerable sums of
money to those who, feigning devoutly to go
to Holy Communion, retain God’s Body in
their mouths and presently spitting It forth into
NOTES
some handkerchief or cloth bear It away to sell
for their thirty pieces of silver. Tabernacles
are also broken open and the Contents filched.
These scandals occur even now. From time to
time gangs of Host-stealers are detected and
broken up, as in 1855, when a society of these
sacrilegious miscreants which carried on its
horrid operations at Paris was traced and
stamped out mainly owing to the effects of the
Archbishop of Paris, Marie-DominiqueAuguste Siborn, who it is significant to note
was assassinated 3 January, 1857, by a renegade
priest named Verger. In 1874 and 1878 similar
organizations of professional Host-stealers were
suppressed in Paris, but there is evidence that
the same activities are even now being pursued
in London, and in other English cities, as well
as in France, Italy, America, and indeed many
countries beside.
Page 2Q().
Deutero­
nomy, xtit,
Page 206.
Lewticus,
xxiv, 16.
“If there rise in the midst of thee a prophet or
one that saith he hath dreamed a dream, and he
foretell a sign and a wonder. And that come to
pass which he spoke, and he say to thee: Let
us go and follow strange gods, which thou
knowest not, and let us serve them: Thou
shalt not hear the words of that prophet or
dreamer: for the Lord your God trieth you,
that it may appear whether you love him with
all your heart, and with all your soul, or not. . ..
And that prophet or forger of dreams shall be
slain.”
“He that blasphemeth the name of the Lord,
dying let him die: all the multitude shall stone
him, whether he be a native or a stranger. He
that blasphemeth the name of the Lord, dying
let him die.”
NOTES
“ The Chaldeans that fight against this city shall Page 20'j.
come and set it on fire, and burn it, with the Jeremiah,
houses upon whose roof they offered sacrifices xxxii, 2g.
to Baal, and pound out drink offerings to strange
gods, to provoke me to wrath.”
Page 207.
“Thou shalt not have strange gods before me.” E>todus,
XX, 3.
After the worship of the gold calf the sons of Page 207.
Levi were commanded to kill the idolaters. Exodus,
“ and then were slain that day about three and xxxii, 28.
twenty thousand men.”
“And Israel was initiated to Beelphegor: upon Page 207.
which the Lord being angry . . . Moses said Numbers,
to the judges of Israel; Let every man kill his xxv, 3, 5,9.
neighbours, that have been initiated to Beel­
phegor. . . . And there were slain four and
twenty thousand men.”
The prophet sent from Juda to Bethel to Page 207.
denounce Jeroboam was bidden, “Thou shalt III Kings
not eat bread nor drink water,” . . . but being {A.E. 1
deceived by an old prophet of Bethel, “he ate Kings'),
bread and drank water in his house. . . . And xiii.
when he was gone, a lion found him in the way
and killed him.”
Where all society with the Chanaanites, and Page 208.
especially intermarriages, are strictly forbidden. Exodus,
xxxiv.
No league nor fellowship to be made with the p™ 208
Chanaanites. “Thou shalt make no league with
them, nor show mercy to them: Neither shalt
thou make marriages with them. Thou shalt
not give thy daughter to his son, nor take his
daughter for thy son.”
Page 208.
Numbers,
NOTES
The people fall into fornication and idolatry,
being initiated to Beelphegor. Four-andtwenty thousand are slain. Zambri, a prince
of the tribe of Simeon, boldly has connexion in
the brothel house with Cozbi, the daughter of
a prince among the Madianites, whereupon
Phinees, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron,
takes a dagger “and thrust both of them
through together, to wit, the man and the
woman, in the genital parts.” Phinees is highly
praised and blessed.
Page 208. “He that shall copulate with any beast or
Leviticus, cattle, dying let him die; the beast also shall ye
XX, 15, 16. kill. The woman that shall lie under any
beast, shall be killed together with the same;
their blood be upon them.”
Page 208.
Deutero­
“ Cursed be he that lieth with any beast; and
nomy,
all the people shall say; Amen.”
xxvii, 21.
Page 211. These Instructions, which do not appear in
Procedure. every edition of the Discours des Borders, were
long held as supremely authoritative, and they
were used as the official hand-book and directory
in trials of this kind by many local Parliaments
and other courts of justice. They should be
compared in detail with the Third Part of the
Malleus Maleficarum; “The Third Part relat­
ing to the Judicial Proceedings in both the
Ecclesiastical and Civil Courts against Witches
and indeed all Heretics; Containing xxxv
Questions in which is Most Clearly Set Out
the Formal Rules for Initiating a Process of
Justice, How it should be conducted, and the
Method of Pronouncing Sentence.”