ON THE CONSTITUTION OF ATOMS AND MOLECULES (PARTS I-III)
Niels Bohr (1885-1962)
Philosophical Magazine, Series 6, Vol. 26 (1913): Part I, pp. 1-25 (July); Part II, pp. 476-502 (September); Part III, pp. 857-875 (November).
Source scan: Internet Archive, identifier londonedinburg6261913lond (The London, Edinburgh and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and Journal of Science, 6th ser. vol. 26, July-Dec 1913).
Prepared for the Tower of Babel library: the three 1913 papers extracted from the journal volume; scan artifacts trimmed and whitespace normalized per the VIEW TEXT standard. Public domain.

PART I

By N. Bour, Dr. phil. Copenhagen*. . ~«

Introduction.

i order to explain the results of experiments on scattering
of a rays by matter Prof. Rutherfordt has given a
theory of the structure of atoms. According to this theory,
the atoms consist of a positively charged nucleus surrounded
by a system of electrons kept together by attractive forces
from the nucleus; the total negative charge of the electrons
is equal to the positive charge of the nucleus. Further, ihe
nucleus is assumed to be the seat of the essential part of
the mass of the atom, and to have linear dimensions ex-
ceedingly small compared with the linear dimensions of the
whole atom. The number of electrons in an atom is deduced
to be approximately equal to half the atomic weight. Great
interest is to be attributed to this atom-model ; for, as
Rutherford has shown, the assumption of the existence of
nuclei, as those in question, seems to be necessary in order
to account for the results of the experiments on large angle
scattering of the 2 raysf.

In an attempt to explain some of the properties of matter
on the basis of this atom-model we meet, however, with
difficulties of a serious nature arising from the apparent

* Communicated by Prof. E. Rutherford, ¥.R.S.

+ E. Rutherford, Phil. Mag. xxi. p. 669 (1911),
t See also Geiger and Marsden, Phil. Mag. April 1913.

Phil, Mag. 8. 6. Vol. 26. No. 151. July 1913, B

2 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

instability of the system of electrons: difficulties purposely
avoided in atom-models previously considered, for instance,
in the one proposed by Sir J. J. Thomson*. According to
the theory of the latter the atom consists of a sphere of
uniform positive electrification, inside which the electrons
move in circular orbits.

The principal difference between the atom-models proposed
by Thomson and Rutherford consists in the circumstance
that the forces acting on the electrons in the atom-model of
Thomson allow of certain configurations and motions of the
electrons for which the system is in a stable equilibrium ;
such configurations, however, apparently do not exist for
the second atom-model. The nature of the difference in
question will perhaps be most clearly seen by noticing that
among the quantities characterizing the first atom a quantity
appears—the radius of the positive sphere—of dimensions
of a length and of the same order of magnitude as the linear
extension of the atom, while such a length does not appear
among the quantities characterizing the second atom, viz.
the charges and masses of the electrons and the positive
nucleus; nor can it be determined solely by help of the
latter quantities.

The way of considering a problem of this kind has, how-
ever, undergone essential alterations in recent years owing
to the development of the theory of the energy radiation,
and the direct affirmation of the new assumptions introduced
in this theory, found by experiments on very different phe-
nomena such as specific heats, photoelectric effect, Rontgen-
rays, &c. The result of the discussion of these questions
seems to be a general acknowledgment of the inadequacy of
the classical electrodynamics in describing the behaviour of
systems of atomic sizet. Whatever the alteration in the
laws of motion of the electrons may be, it seems necessary
to introduce in the laws in question a quantity foreign to
the classical electrodynamics, 7. e. Planck’s constant, or as it
often is called the elementary quantum of action. By the
introduction of this quantity the question of the stable con-
figuration of the electrons in the atoms is essentially changed,
as this constant is of such dimensions and magnitude that it,
together with the mass and charge of the particles, can
determine a length of the order of magnitude required.

This paper is an attempt to show that the application of
the above ideas to Rutherford’s atom-model affords a basis

* J.J. Thomson, Phil. Mag. vii. p. 237 (1904).
+ See f. inst., ‘'fhéorie du ravonnement et les quanta,’ Rapports de
la réunion & Bruxelles, Nov. 1911. Paris, 1912.

of Atoms and Molecules. 3

for a theory of the constitution of atoms. It will further
be shown that from this theory we are led to a theory of the
constitution of molecules.

In the present first part of the paper the mechanism of
the binding of electrons by a positive nucleus is discussed in
relation to Planck’s theory. It will be shown that it is
possible from the point of view taken to account in a simple
way for the law of the line spectrum of hydrogen. Further,
reasons are given for a principal hypothesis on which the
considerations contained in the following parts are based.

T wish here to express my thanks to Prof. Rutherford for
his kind and encouraging interest in this work.

Part 1.—Brnpine oF ELecrrons By Posttive Nucuet.

§ 1. General Considerations.

The inadequacy of the classical electrodynamics in ac-
counting for the properties of atoms from an atom-model as
Rutherford’s, will appear very clearly if we consider a simple
system consisting ot a positively charged nucleus of very
small dimensions and an electron describing closed °orbits
around it. For simplicity, let us assume that the mass of
the electron is negligibly small in comparison with that of
the nucleus, and further, that the velocity of the electron is
small compared with that of light.

Let us at first assume that there is no energy radiation.
In this case the electron will describe stationary elliptical
orbits. The frequency of revolution » and the major-axis
of the orbit 2a will depend on the amount of energy W
which must be transferred to the system in order to remove
the electron to an infinitely great distance apart from the
nucleus. Denoting the charge of the electron and of the
nucleus by —e and EH respectively and the mass of the electron
by m, we thus get

= 3
w= NV? SLM oy 2 2a ay
7 eHAm W

Further, it can easily be shown that the mean value of the
kinetic energy of the electron taken for a whole revolution
is equal to W. We see that if the value of W is not given,
there will be no values of » and a characteristic for the
system in question.

Let us now, however, take the effect of the energy radia-
tion into account, calculated in the ordinary way from the
acceleration of the electron. In this case the electron will

Biz

4 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

no longer describe stationary orbits. W will continuously
increase, and the electron will approach the nucleus de-
scribing orbits of smaller and smaller dimensions, and with
greater and greater frequency ; the electron on the average
gaining in kinetic energy at the same time as the whole
system loses energy. This process will go on until the
dimensions of the orbit are of the same order of magni-
tude as the dimensions of the electron or those of the nucleus.
A simple calculation shows that the energy radiated out
during the process considered will be enormously great
compared with that radiated out by ordinary molecular
processes. )

Tt is obvious that the behaviour of such a system will be
very different from that of an atomic system occurring in
nature. In the first place, the actual atoms in their per-
manent state seem to have absolutely fixed dimensions and
frequencies. Further, if we consider any molecular process,
the result seems always to be that after a certain amount of
energy characteristic for the systems in question is radiated
out, the systems will again settle down in a stable state of
equilibrium, in which the distances apart of the particles are
of the same order of magnitude as before the process.

Now the essential point in Planck’s theory of radiation is
that the energy radiation from an atomic system does not
take place in the continuous way assumed in the ordinary
electrodynamics, but that it, on the contrary, takes place in
distinctly separated emissions, the amount of energy radiated
out from an atomic vibrator of frequency v in a single
emission being equal to thy, where 7 is an entire number,
and h is a universal constant™.

Returning to the simple case of an electron and a positive
nucleus considered above, let us assume that the electron at
the beginning of the interaction with the nucleus was ata
great distance apart from the nucleus, and had no sensible
velocity relative to the latter. Let us further assume that
the electron after the interaction has taken place has
settled down in a stationary orbit around the nucleus. We
shall, for reasons referred to later, assume that the orbit in
question is circular ; this assumption will, however, make no
alteration in the calculations for systems containing only a
single electron.

Let us now assume that, during the binding of the electron,
a homogeneous radiation is emitted of a frequency v, equal
to half the frequency of revolution of the electron in its final

# See f. inst., M. Planck, dn. d. Phys. xxxi. p. 758 (1910) ; xxxvi.
». 642 (1912); Verh. deutsch. Phys. Ges. 1911, p. 138.

of Atoms and Molecules. 5.

orbit ; then, from Planck’s theory, we might expect that the
amount of energy emitted by the process considered is equal
to thy, where h is Planck’s constant and 7 an entire number.
If we assume that the radiation emitted is homogeneous, the
second assumption concerning the frequency of the radiation
suggests itself, since the frequency of revolution of the
electron at the beginning of the emission is 0. The question,
however, of the rigorous validity of both assumptions, and
also of the application made of Planck’s theory, will be more
closely discussed in § 3.

y oO

Putting W=the = CNSR AR INN a RN Go

2

we get by help of the formula (1)

Ww In? me? KH? p Atr?me? K? Th? (3)
— SS OLS a ere C
Th? cel bd ada 27r?me Hi

If in these expressions we give 7 different values, we get
a series of values for W, w, and a corresponding to a series
of configurations of the system. According to the above
considerations, we are led to assume that these configurations
will correspond to states of the system in which there is
no radiation of energy; states which consequently will be
stationary as long as the system is not disturbed from out-
side. We see that the value of W is greatest if 7 has its
smallest value 1. This case will theretore correspond to
the most stable state of the system, 2. e. will correspond to
the binding of the electron for the breaking up of which the
greatest amount of energy is required.

Putting in the above expressions T=1 and H=e, and
introducing the experimental values

e

e=4-7.10-, © = 5:31.10", h=6'5.10-%,

nv
we get

aril SOs" Cm.,) | @==- 672. jib oe : a cnr Volts
sec. e

We see that these values are of the same order of magni-
tude as the linear dimensions of the atoms, the optical
frequencies, and the ionization-potentials.

The general importance of Planck’s theory for the dis-
cussion of the behaviour of atomic systems was originally
pointed out by EHinstein*. The considerations ot Einstein

* A. Einstein, Ann. d. Phys. xvii. p. 152 (1905); xx. p. 199 (1906) ;
xxi. p. 180 (1907).

6 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

have been developed and applied on a number of different
phenomena, especially by Stark, Nernst, and Sommerfield.
The agreement as to the order of magnitude between values
observed for the frequencies and dimensions of the atoms,
and values for these quantities calculated by considerations
similar to those given above, has been the subject of much
discussion. It was first pointed out by Haas*, in an attempt
to explain the meaning and the value of Planck’ s constant
on the basis of J. J. Thomson’s atom-model, by help of the
linear dimensions and frequency of an hydrogen atom.

Systems of the kind considered in this paper, in which the
forces between the particles vary inversely as the square of
the distance, are discussed in relation to Planck’s theory
by J. W. Nicholson}. In a series of papers this author
has shown that it seems to be possible to aceount for lines of
hitherto unknown origin in the spectra of the stellar nebulze
and that of the solar corona, by assuming the presence in these
bodies of certain hypothetical elements of exactly indicated
constitution. The atoms of these elements are supposed to
consist simply of a ring of a few electrons surrounding a
positive nucleus of negligibly small dimensions. ‘The ratios
between the frequencies corresponding to the lines in question
are compared with the ratios between the frequencies corre-
sponding to different modes of vibration of the ring of
electrons. Nicholson has obtained a relation to Planck’s
theory showing that the ratios between the wave-length of
different sets of lines of the coronal spectrum can be accounted
for with great accuracy by assuming that the ratio between
the energy of the system and the frequency of rotation of the
ring is equal to an entire multiple of Planck’sconstant. The
quantity Nicholson refers to as the energy is equal to twice
the quantity which we have denoted above by W. In the
latest paper cited Nicholson has found it necessary to give
the theory a more complicated form, still, however, repre-
senting the ratio of energy to frequency by a simple function
of whole numbers.

The excellent agreement between the calculated and
observed values of the ratios between the wave-lengths in
question seems a strong argument 1 in favour of the validity
of the foundation of Nicholson’s calculations. Serious

* A. Ii, Haas, Jahrb. d. Rad. u. Fil. vii. p. 261 (1910). See further,
A. Schidlof, Ann. d. Phys. xxxv. p. 90 (1911); E. Wertheimer, Phys.
Leitschr. xil, p. 409 (1911), Verh. deutsch. Phys. Ges. 1912, p. 481; F. A.
Lindemann, Verh. dewtsch. Phys. Ges. 1911, pp. 482, 1107; F. Haber,
Verh. deutsch. Phys. Ges. 1911, p. 1117.

+ J. W. Nicholson, Month. Not. Roy. Astr. Soc. lxxii. pp. 49, 139,
677, 693, 729 (1912).

of Atoms and Molecules. 7

objections, however, may be raised against the theory. These
objections are intimately connected with the problem of the
homogeneity of the radiation emitted. In Nicholson’s cal-
culations the frequency of lines in a line-spectrum is identified
with the frequency of vibration of a mechanical system in a
distinctly indicated state of equilibrium. As a relation from
Planck’s theory is used, we might expect that the radiation
is sent out in quanta; but systems like those considered, in
which the frequency is a function of the energy, cannot emit
a finite amount of a homogeneous radiation; for, as soon as the
emission of radiation is started, the energy and also the
frequency of the system are altered. Further, according to
the calculation of Nicholson, the systems are unstable for
some modes of vibration. Apart from such objections— which
may be only formal (see p. 23)—it must be remarked, that
the theory in the form given does not seem to be able to
account for the well-known laws of Balmer and Rydberg
connecting the frequencies of the lines in the line-spectra
of the ordinary elements.

It will now be attempted to show that the difficulties in ~
question disappear if we consider the problems from the
point of view taken in this paper. Before proceeding it may
be useful to restate briefly the ideas characterizing the calcu-
lations on p. 5. The principal assumptions used are :

(1) That the dynamical equilibrium of the systems in the
stationary states can be discussed by help of the
ordinary mechanics, while the passing of the systems
between ditferent stationary states cannot be treated
on that basis.

(2) That the latter process is followed by the emission
of a homogeneous radiation, for which the relation
between the frequency and the amount of energy
emitted is the one given by Planck’s theory.

The first assumption seems to present itself; for it is
known that the ordinary mechanics cannot have an absolute
validity, but will only hold in caleulations of certain mean
values of the motion of the electrons. On the other hand,
in the calculations of the dynamical equilibrium in a stationary
state in which there is no relative displacement of the
particles, we need not distinguish between the actual
motions and their mean yalues. ‘The second assumption is
in obvious contrast to the ordinary ideas of electrodynamics,
but appears to be necessary in order to account for experi-
mental facts.

In the calculations on page 5 we have further made use

8 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

of the more special assumptions, viz. that the different
stationary states correspond to the emission of a different
number of Planck’s energy-quanta, and that the frequency of
the radiation emitted during the passing of the system from
a state in which no energy is yet radiated out to one of the
stationary states, is equal to half the frequency of revolution
of the electron in the latter state. We can, however (see
§ 3), also arrive at the expressions (3) for the stationary
states by using assumptions of somewhat different form.
We shall, therefore, postpone the discussion of the special
assumptions, and first show how by the help of the above
principal assumptions, and of the expressions (8) for the
stationary states, we can account for the line-spectrum of

hydrogen.

§ 2. Emission of Line-spectra.

Spectrum of Hydrogen.—General evidence indicates that
an atom of hydrogen consists simply of a single electron
rotating round a positive nucleus of charge e*. The re-
formation of a hydrogen atom, when the electron has been
removed to great distances away from the nucleus—e. g. by
the effect of electrical discharge in a vacuum ‘tube—will
accordingly correspond to the binding of an electron by a
positive nucleus considered on p. 5. If in (3) we put H=e,
we get for the total amount of energy radiated out by the
formation of one of the stationary states,

2ar*me?*
h2q? *

W-=

The amount of energy emitted by the passing of the
system from a state corresponding to t=7, to one corre-
sponding to T=7., is consequently

Daeimneny Ls.
Wr as ope (= — =)
If now we suppose that the radiation in question is homo-
geneous, and that the amount of energy emitted is equal to

hy, where v is the frequency of the radiation, we get
W,, = W,, = hy,

* See f. inst. N. Bohr, Phil. Mag. xxv. p. 24 (1913). The conclusion
drawn in the paper cited is strongly supported by the fact that hydrogen,
in the experiments on positive rays of Sir J. J. Thomson, is the only
element which never occurs with a positive charge corresponding to the
loss of more than one electron (comp. Phil. Mag. xxiv. p. 672 (1912)).

of Atoms and Molecules. 9

and from this
Qnr-met (1 1
=— —— Se eras > a ° ° . . )
‘ h? (5 = i

We see that this expression accounts for the law connecting
the lines in the spectrum of hydrogen. If we put 7,=2 and
let 7; vary, we get the ordinary Balmer series. If we put
T2=3, we get the series in the ultra-red observed by Paschen*
and previously suspected by Ritz. If we put 7,=1 and
T2=4, 5,.., we get series respectively in the extreme ultra-
violet and the extreme ultra-red, which are not observed, but
the existence of which may be expected.

The agreement in question is quantitative as well as
qualitative. Putting :

e=47. 10-2, < =5°31. 10", and h=6:5.10-%,
we get

on’ met

h?

The observed value for the factor outside the bracket in the
formula (4) is

= d hred |

3:290. 10”.

The agreement between the theoretical and observed values
is inside the uncertainty due to experimental errors in the
constants entering in the expression for the theoretical value.
We shall in § 3 return to consider the possible importance
of the agreement in question.

ft may be remarked that the fact, that it has not been
possible to observe more than 12 lines of the Balmer series
in experiments with vacuum tubes, while 33 lines are ob-
served in the spectra of some celestial bodies, is Just what we
should expect from the above theory. According to the
equation (3) the diameter of the orbit of the electron in
the different stationary states is proportional to 77. For
7=12 the diameter is equal to 1°6.107&cm., or equal to
the mean distance between the molecules in a gas at a
pressure of about 7 mm. mercury; for T=33 the diameter
is equal to 1°2.10~* cm., corresponding to the mean distance
of the molecules at a pressure of about 0°02 mm. mercury.
According to the theory the necessary condition for the
appearance of a great number of lines is therefore a very
small density of the gas; for simultaneously to obtain an

* F. Paschen, Aun. d. Phys, xxvii. p. 565 (1908).

10 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

intensity sufficient for observation the space filled with the
gas must be very great. If the theory is right, we may
therefore never expect to be able in experiments with vacuum
tubes to observe the lines corresponding to high numbers of
the Balmer series of the emission spectrum of hydrogen; it
might, however, be possible to observe the lines by investi-
gation of the absor ption spectrum of this gas (see § 4).

It will be observed that we in the above way do not
obtain other series of lines, generally ascribed to hydrogen ;
for instance, the series first observed by Pickering* in the
spectrum of the star ¢ Puppis, and the set of series recently
found by Fowlert by experiments with vacuum tubes
containing a mixture of hydrogen and helium. We shall,
however, see that, by help of the above theory, we can
account naturally for these series of lines if we ascribe them
to helium.

A neutral atom of the latter element consists, according to
Rutherford’s theory, of a positive nucleus of charge 2e and
two electrons. Now considering the binding of a single
electron by a helium nucleus, we get, putting H=2e in the
expressions (3) on page 5, and proceeding in exactly the same
way as above,

ey ae II 1 ) 2a me | a

ie (PG)

If we in this formula put t2=1 or 72-=2, we get series of
lines in the extreme ultra-violet. If we put 7,=3, and let
T™ vary, we get a series which includes 2 of the series
observed by Fowler, and denoted by him as the first and
second principal series of the hydrogen spectrum. If we put
T,=4, we get the series observed by Pickering in the
spectrum of ¢€ Puppis. Every second of the lines in this
series is identical with a line in the Balmer series of
the hydrogen spectrum; the presence of hydrogen in the
star in question may therefore account for the fact that
these lines are of a greater intensity than the rest of the
lines in the series. The series is also observed in the expe-
riments of Fowler, and denoted in his paper as the Sharp
series of the hydrogen spectrum. If we finally in the above
formula put 7,=5, 6,.. , we get series, the strong lines of
which are to be expected i in the ultra-red.

The reason why the spectrum considered is not observed in

aac WT

* E.C. Pickering, Astrophys. J. iv. p. 869 (1896); v. p. 92 (1897).
+ A. Fowler, Month. Not. Roy. Astr. Soc. Ixxiii. Dec. 1912.

of Atoms and Molecules. 11

ordinary helium tubes may be that in such tubes the ionization
of helium is not so complete as in the star considered or in the
experiments of Fowler, where a strong discharge was sent
through a mixture of hy drogen and helium. The condition
for the appearance of the spectrum is, according to the above
theory, that helium atoms are present in a state in which
they have lost both their electrons. Now we must assume
that the amount of energy to be used in removing the second
electron from a helium atom is much greater than that to be
used in removing the first. Further, it is known from expe-
riments on positive rays, that hydrogen atoms can acquire a
negative charge ; therefore the presence of hydrogen in the
experiments of Fowler may effect that more electrons are
removed from some of the helium atoms than would be the
case if only helium were present.

Spectra of other substances.—In case of systems containing
more electrons we must—in conformity with the result of
experiments—expect more complicated laws for the line-
spectra than those considered. I shall try to show that the
peint of view taken above allows, at any rate, a certain
understanding of the laws observed.

According to Rydberg’s theory—with the generalization
given by Ritz *—the frequency corresponding to the lines of
. the spectrum of an element can be expressed by

v=F (7) —F (7),
where 7, and 7, are entire numbers, and f,, Fo, F3,.... are

functions of 7 which approximately are equal to (t7+4,)”

K
ay aa
outside the bracket in the formula (4) for the spectrum of
hydrogen. ‘The different series appear if we put 7, or 7, equal
to a fixed number and let the other vary.

The circumstance that the frequency can be written as a
difference between two functions of entire numbers suggests
an origin of the lines in the spectra in question similar to
the one we have assumed for hydrogen; 27. e. that the lines
correspond to a radiation emitted during the passing of the
system between two different stationary states. For systems
containing more than one electron the detailed discussion
may be very complicated, as there will be many different
configurations of the electrons which can be taken into con-
sideration as stationary states. This may account for the
different sets of series in the line ede emitted from the

# W. Ritz, Phys. Zeitschr. 1x. p. 521 (1908).

K is a universal constant, equal to the factor

12 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

substances in question. Here I shall only try to show how,
by help of the theory, it ean be simply explained that the
constant K entering in Rydberg’s formula is the same for all
substances.

Let us assume that the spectrum in question corresponds to
the radiation emitted during the binding of an electron; and
Jet us further assume that. ihe system including the alee on
considered is neutral. The force on the electron, when at
a great distance apart from the nucleus and the electrons
previously bound, will be very nearly the same as in the above

case of the binding of an electron by a hydrogen nucleus.
The energy corresponding to one of the stationary states will
therefore for 7 great be very nearly equal to that given by
the expression (3) on p. 5,if we put H=e. For 7 great we
consequently get

him? EG) hm a: en)
in conformity with Rydberg’s theory.

§ 3. General Considerations continued.

We shall now return to the discussion (see p. 7) of the
special assumptions used in deducing the expressions (3) on
p. 5 for the stationary states of a system consisting of an
electron rotating round a nucleus.

For one, we have assumed that the different stationary
states correspond to an emission of a different number of
energy-quanta. Considering systems in which the frequency
is a function of the energy, this assumption, however, may
be regarded as improbable for as soon as one quantum is sent
out the frequency is altered. We shall now see that we can
leave the assumption used and still retain the equation (2)
on p. 5, and thereby the formal analogy with Planck’s
theory.

Firstly, it will be observed that it has not been necessary,
in order to account for the law of the spectra by help of the
expressions (3) for the stationary states, to assume that in any

case a radiation is sent out corresponding to more than a
single energy-quantum, hy. Further information on the
frequency of the radiation may be obtained by comparing
calculations of the energy radiation in the region of slow
vibrations based on the above assumptions with calculations
based on the ordinary mechanics. As is known, calculations

on the latter basis are in agreement with experiments on the
energy radiation in the named region.

Let us assume that the ratio between the total amount of

of Atoms and Molecules. 13

energy emitted and the frequency of revolution of the
electron for the different stationary states is given by
the equation W=/(7T). hw, instead of by the equation (2).
Proceeding in the same way as above, we get in this case

instead of (3)

> 1°me" i: a’ me" Ki?

TGA ee GTS Pas

2h? f(r)’ 2 A(T)
Assuming as above that the amount of energy emitted
during the passing of the system from a state corresponding
to T=7, to one for which T=7, is equal to hv, we get instead

of (4)
a a-me-k ( 1 oe ele )
2h? PG) ivf2ta)

We see that in order to get an expression of the same form
as the Balmer series we must put jr) er:

In order to determine ¢ let us now consider the passing of
the system between two successive stationary states corre-
sponding to 7=N and r=N—1; introducing f(r) =cT, we
get for the frequency of the radiation emitted

_wmeH? 2N—1
27h? *N*(N—1)?

For the frequency of revolution of the electron before and
after the emission we have

ame? Kh? ] ame Hi?
eae OeEeNe ONL 2313(N — (dys

Tf N is great the ratio eee the frequency before and
after the emission will be very near equal to 1; and according
to the ordinary electrodynamics we should iererate expect
that the ratio between the frequency of radiation and the
frequency of revolution also is very nearly equal to 1. This

condition will only be satisfiedif c=}. Putting f(r) =3 , We,

however, again arrive at the equation (2) and consequently
‘at the expression (3) for the stationary states.

If we consider the passing of the system between two states
corresponding to t=N and t=N—n, where n is small
compared with N, we ot with the same approximation as

above, putting f(T) = 7

¥Y=2Q).

14 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

The possibility of an emission of a radiation of such a
frequency may also be interpreted from analogy with the
ordinary electrodynamics, as an electron rotating round a
nucleus in an elliptical orbit will emit a radiation which
according to Fourier’s theorem can be resolved into homo-
geneous components, the frequencies of which are na, if @ is
the frequency of revolution of the electron.

We are thus led to assume that the interpretation of the
equation (2) is not that the different stationary states cor-
respond to an emission of different numbers of energy-quanta,
but that the frequency of the energy emitted during the
passing of the system from a state in which no energy is yet
radiated ont to one of the different stationary states, is equal

to different multiples of = where w is the frequency of revo-

lution of the electron in the state considered. From this
assumption we get exactly the same expressions as before for
the stationary states, and from these by help of the principal
assumptions on p. 7 the same expression for the law of the
hydrogen spectrum. Consequently we may regard our pre-
liminary considerations on p. 5 only as a simple form of
representing the results of the theory.

Before we leave the discussion of this question, we shall for
a moment return to the question of the significance of the
agreement between the observed and calculated values of
the constant entering in the expressions (4) for the Balmer
series of the hydrogen spectrum. From the above con-
sideration it will follow that, taking the starting-point in the
form of the law of the hydrogen spectrum and assuming that
the different lines correspond to a homogeneous radiation
emitted during the passing between different stationary
states, we shall arrive at exactly the same expression for the
constant in question as that given by (4), if we only assume
(1) that the radiation is sent out in quanta jv, and (2) that
the frequency of the radiation emitted during the passing of
the system between successive stationary states will coincide
with the frequency of revolution of the electron in the region
of slow vibrations.

As all the assumptions used in this latter way of repre-
senting the theory are of what we may call a qualitative
character, we are justified in expecting—if the whole way of
considering is a sound one—an absolute agreement between
the values calculated and observed for the constant in question,
and not only an approximate agreement. The formula (4)
may therefore be of value in the discussion of the results
of experimental determinations of the constants e, m, and h.

of Atoms and Molecules. 5

While there obviously can be no question of a mechanical
foundation of the calculations given in this paper, it is, how-
ever, possible to give a very simple interpretation of the result
of the calculation on p. 5 by help of symbols taken from the
ordinary mechanics., Denoting the angular momentum of
the electron round the nucleus by M, we have immediately

: ib mate
for a circular orbit 7M= oO where w is the frequency of

revolution and T the kinetic energy of the electron; for a
circular orbit we farther have T= W (see p. 3) and from (2),
p. 5, we consequently get

M = TM),

ppere My= -=1-04x 10-”,

If we therefore assume that the orbit of the electron in
the stationary states is circular, the result of the calculation
on p. 5 can be expressed by the simple condition: that the
angular momentum of the electron round the nucleus in a
stationary state of the system is equal to an entire multiple
of a universal value, independent of the charge on the
nucleus. The possible importance of the angular momentum
in the discussion of atomic systems in relation to Planck’s
theory is emphasized by Nicholson*. °

The great number of different stationary states we do not
observe except by investigation of the emission and absorption
of radiation. In most of the other physical phenomena,
however, we only observe the atoms of the matter in a single
distinct state, 7. e. the state of the atoms at low temperature.
From the preceding considerations we are immediately led
to the assumption that the “ permanent” state is the one
among the stationary states during the formation of which
the greatest amount of energy is emitted. According to the

equation (3) on p. 5, this state is the one which corresponds
to T=1.

§ 4. Absorption of Radiation.

In order to account for Kirebhoff’s law it is necessary to
introduce assumptions on the mechanism of absorption of
radiation which correspond to those we have used considering
the emission. Thus we must assume that a system consisting
of a nucleus and an electron rotating round it under certain
circumstances can absorb a radiation of a frequency equal to
the frequency of the homogeneous radiation emitted during

* J. W. Nicholson, loc. cit. p. 679.

16 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

the passing of the system between different stationary states.
Let us consider the radiation emitted during the passing of
the system between two stationary states A, and Ay, corre-
sponding to values for t equal to 7, and T,, 7, > T2. As the
necessary condition for an emission of the radiation in question
was the presence of systems in the state A,, we must assume
that the necessary condition for an absorption of the radiation
is the presence of systemis in the state A).

These considerations seem to be in conformity with expe-
riments on absorption in gases. In hydrogen gas at ordinary
conditions for instance there is no absorption of a radiation of
a frequency corresponding to the line-spectrum of this gas ;
such an absorption is only observed in hydrogen gas in
a luminous state. This is what’we should expect according
to the above. We have on p. 9 assumed that the radiation
in question was emitted during the passing of the systems

between stationary states corresponding to 772. ‘The state

of the atoms in hydrogen gas at ordinary conditions should,
however, correspond to r=1; furthermore, hydrogen atoms
at ordinary conditions combine into molecules, 7. e. into
systems in which the electrons have frequencies different
from those in the atoms (see Part III.). From the circum-
stance that certain substances in a non-luminous state, as,
for instance, sodium vapour, absorb radiation corresponding
to lines in the line-spectra of the substances, we may, on the
other hand, conclude that the lines in question are emitted
during the passing of the system between two states, one of
which is the permanent state.

How much the above considerations differ from an inter-
pretation based on the ordinary electrodynamics is perhaps
most clearly shown by the fact that we have been forced to
assume that a system of electrons will absorb a radiation of a
frequency different from the frequency of vibration of the
electrons calculated in the ordinary way. It may in this
connexion be of interest to mention a generalization of the
considerations to which we are led by experiments on the
photo-electric effect, and which may be able to throw some
light on the problem in question. Let us consider a state of
the system in which the electron is free, z.e. in which the
electron possesses kinetic energy sufficient to remove to infinite
distances from the nucleus. If we assume that the motion of
the electron is governed by the ordinary mechanics and that
there is no (sensible) energy radiation, the total energy of
the system—as in the above considered stationary states—
will be constant, Further, there will be perfect continuity
between the two kinds of states, as the difference between

z

f

of Atoms and Molecules. 17

frequency and dimensions of the systems in successive
stationary states will diminish without limit if 7 increases.
In the following considerations we shall for the sake of
brevity refer to the two kinds of states in question as
“mechanical” states; by this notation only emphasizing
the assumption that the motion of the electron in both cases
can be accounted for by the ordinary mechanics.

Tracing the analogy between the two kinds of mechanical
states, we might now expect the possibility of an absorption
of radiation, not only corresponding to the passing of the
system between two different stationary states, but also
corresponding to the passing between one of the stationary
states and a state in which the electron is free ; and asabove,
we might expect that the frequency of this radiation was de-
termined by the equation H=/v, where E is the difference
between the total energy of the system in the two states.
As it will be seen, such an absorption of radiation is just
what is observed in experiments on ionization by ultra-violet
light and by Rontgen rays. Obviously, we get in this way
the same expression for the kinetic energy of an electron
ejected from an atom by photo-electric effect as that deduced
by Einstein *, 2. e. T=hv— W, where T is the kinetic energy
of the electron ejected, and W the total amount of energy
emitted during the original binding of the electron.

The above considerations may further account for the
result of some experiments of R. W. Wood f on absorption
of light by sodium vapour. In these experiments, an
absorption corresponding to a very great number of lines in
the principal series of the sodium spectrum is observed, and
in addition a continuous absorption which begins at the head
of the series and extends to the extreme ultra-violet. This
is exactly what we should expect according to the analogy in
question, and, as we shall see, a closer consideration of the
above experiments allows us to trace the analogy still
further. As mentioned on p. 9 the radii of the orbits of
the electrons will for stationary states corresponding to high
values for t be very great compared with ordinary atomic
dimensions. ‘This circumstance was used as an explanation
of the non-appearance in experiments with vacuum-tubes of
lines corresponding to the higher numbers in the Balmer
series of the hydrogen spectrum. This is also in conformity
with experiments on the emission spectrum of sodium ; in
the principal series of the emission spectrum of this substance

* A, Einstein, Ann. d, Phys. xvii, p. 146 (1905).
+ R. W. Wood, Physical Optics, p. 518 (1911).
Phil. Mag. 8. 6. Vol. 26. No. 151. July 1913. C

18 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

rather few lines are observed. Now in Wood’s experiments
the pressure was not very low, and the states corresponding
to high values for 7 could therefore not appear ; yet in the
absorption spectrum about 50 lines were detected. In the
experiments in question we consequently observe an absorption
of radiation which is not accompanied by a complete transition
between two different stationary states. - According to the
present theory we inust assume that this absorption is followed
by an emission of energy during which the systems pass back
to the original stationary state. If there are no collisions
between the different systems this energy will be emitted as
a radiation of the same frequency as that absorbed, and there
will be no true absorption but only a scattering of the original
radiation ; a true absorption will not occur unless the energy
in question is transformed by coilisions into kinetic energy “of
free particles. In analogy we may now from the above expe-
riments conclude that a bound electron—also in cases in which
there is no lonization—will have an absorbing (scattering)
influence on a homogeneous radiation, as soon as the fre-
quency of the radiation is greater than W/h, where W is the
total amount of energy emitted during the binding of the
electron. This would be highly in favour of a theory of
absorption as the one sketched above, as there can in such a
case be no question of a coincidence of the fr equency of the
radiation and a characteristic frequency of vibration of the
electron. It will further be seen that the assumption, that
there will be an absorption (scattering) of any radiation
corresponding to a transition between two different me-
chanical states, is in perfect analogy with the assumption
generally used that a free electron will have an absorbing
(scattering) influence on light of any frequency. Corre-
sponding considerations will hold for the emission of radiation.
In analogy to the assumption used in this paper that the
emission of line-spectra is due to the re-formation of atoms
after one or more of the lightly bound electrons are removed,
we may assume that the homogeneous Rontgen radiation is
emitted during the settling down of the systems after one of
the firmly bound electrons escapes, e.g. by impact of cathode
particles *. In the next part of this paper, dealing with the
constitution of atoms, we shall consider the question more
closely and try to show that a calculation based on this
assumption 1s in quantitative agreement with the results of
experiments : here we shall only mention briefly a problem
with which we meet in such a calculation.

* Compare J. J. Thomson, Phil. Mag. xxii. p. 456 (1912).

of Atoms and Molecules. 19.

Experiments on the phenomena of X-rays suggest that not
only the emission and absorption of radiation cannot be
treated by the help of the ordinary electrodynamics, but not
even the result of a collision between two electrons of which
the one is bound in anatom. This is perhaps most clearly
shown by some very instructive calculations on the. energy
ot B-particles emitted from radioactive substances recently
published by Rutherford*. These calculations strongly
suggest that an electron of great velocity in passing through
an atom and colliding with the electrons bound will loose
energy in distinct finite quanta. As is immediately seen,
this is very different from what we might expect if the result
of the collisions was governed by the usual mechanical laws.
The failure of the classical mechanics in such a problem
might also be expected beforehand from the absence of any-
thing like equipartition of kinetic energy between free
electrons and electrons bound in atoms. From the point of
view of the “mechanical” states we see, however, that the
following assumption—which is in accord with the above
analogy—might be able to account for the result of Ruther-
ford’s calculation and for the absence of equipartition of
kinetic energy : two colliding electrons, bound or free, will,
after the collision as well as before, be in mechanical states.
Obviously, the introduction of such an assumption would not
make any alteration necessary in the classical treatment of a
collision between two free particles. But, considering a col-
lision between a free and a bound electron, it would follow,
that the bound electron by the collision could not acquire a
less amount of energy than the difference in energy corre-
sponding to successive stationary states, and consequently
that the free electron which collides with it could not lose a
less amount.

Tie preliminary and hypothetical character of the above
considerations needs not to be emphasized. The intention,
however, has been to show that the sketched generalization
of the theory of the stationary states possibly. may afford a
simple basis of representing a number of experimental facts
which cannot be explained by help of the ordinary electro-
dynamics, and that the assumptions used do not seem to be
inconsistent with experiments on phenomena for which a
satisfactory explanation has been given by the classical
dynamics and the wave theory of light.

* E, Rutherford, Phil, Mag. xxiv. pp. 453 & 893 (1912).
1M” a

20 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

§ 5. The permanent State of an Atomic System.

We shall now return to the main object of this paper—the
discussion of the “ permanent” state of a system consisting
of nuclei and bound electrons. For a system consisting of a
nucleus and an electron rotating round it, this state is,
according to the above, determined by the condition that the
angular momentum of the electron round the nucleus is

a h
equa O Om

On the theory of this paper the only neutral atom which
contains a single electron is the hydrogen atom. The per-
manent state of this atom should correspond to the values of
a and w calculated on p. 5. Unfortunately, however, we
know very little of the behaviour of hydrogen atoms on
account of the small dissociation of hydrogen molecules at
ordinary temperatures. In order to get a closer comparison
with experiments, it is necessary to- consider more complicated
systems.

Considering systems in which more electrons are bound by
a positive nucleus, a configuration of the electrons which
presents itself as a permanent state is one in which the
electrons are arranged in a ring round the nucleus. In the
discussion of this problem on the basis of the ordinary
electrodynamics, we meet—apart from the question of the
energy radiation—with new difficulties due to the question
of the stability of the ring. Disregarding for a moment this
latter difficulty, we shall first consider the dimensions and
frequency of the systems in relation to Planck’s theory of
radiation.

Let us consider a ring consisting of n electrons rotating
round a nucleus of charge H, the electrons being arranged
at equal angular intervals around the circumference of a
circle of radius a.

The total potential energy of the system consisting of the
electrons and the nucleus is

where

For the radial force exerted on an electron by the nucleus
and the other electrons we get

ae GS Sas e

nda a {

iD — esn) e

of Atoms and Molecules. Fi

Denoting the kinetic energy of an electron by T and
neglecting the electromagnetic forces due to the motion of
the electrons (see Part II.), we get, putting the centrifugal
force on an electron equal to the radial force,

2b e
=

-a a

(EK = esn) ~
or

T =~ (B—es,).

oe De
F'rom this we get for the frequency of revolution

eke e(Hi—es,)

20 ma?

The total amount of energy W necessary transferred to the
system in order to remove the electrons to infinite distances
apart from the nucleus and from each other is

— (E—~esx) = nT,
equal to the total kinetic energy of the electrons.

We see that the only difference in the above formula and
those holding for the motion of a single electron in a circular
orbit round a nucleus is the exchange of E for H~es,. It is
also immediately seen that corresponding to the motion of an
electron in an elliptical orbit round a nucleus, there will bea
motion of the n electrons in which each rotates in an ellip-
tical orbit with the nucleus in the focus, and the n electrons
at any moment are situated at equal angular intervals on a
circle with the nucleus as the centre. The major axis and
frequency of the orbit of the single electrons will for this
motion be given by the expressions (1) on p. 3 if we
replace E by H—es, and W by un Let us now suppose

7

W=—P-—nrl=

that the system of x electrons rotating in a ring rounda
nucleus is formed in a way analogous to the one assumed for
a single electron rotating round a nucleus. It will thus be
assumed that the electrons, before the binding by the nucleus,
were at a great distance apart from the latter and possessed
no sensible velocities, and aiso that during the binding a
homogeneous radiation is emitted. Asin the case of a single
electron, we have here that the total amount of energy emitted
during the formation of the system is equal to the final kinetic

energy of the electrons. If we now suppose that during the

22 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

formation of the system the electrons at any moment are
situated at equal angular intervals on the circumference of a

circle with the nucleus in the centre, from analogy with
the considerations on p- 5 we are here led to assume the

existence of a series of stationary configurations in which

e ° e @ iS!
the kinetic energy per electron is equal to th =, where 7 is
ro) : 2 ?

an entire number,  Planck’s constant, and » ihe frequency
of revolution. The configuration in which the greatest
amount of energy is emitted is, as before, the one in which
T=1. This configuration we shall assume to be the permanent
state of the system if the electrons in this state are arranged
in a single ring. As for the case of a single electron we get
that the angular momentum of each of the electrons is equal

h ee

to Fon It may be remarked that instead of considering the
a e

single electrons we might have considered the ring as an

entity. This would, however, lead to the same result, for in
this case the frequency of revolution » will be replaced by
the frequency nw of the radiation from the whole ring ealeu-
lated from the ordinary electrodynamics, and T by the total
kinetic energy nT.

There may be many other stationary states corresponding
to other ways of forming the system. Theassumption of the
existence of such states seems necessary in order to account
for the line-spectra of systems containing more than one
electron (p. 11); it is also suggested by the theory of
Nicholson mentioned on p. 6, to which we shall return in
a moment. The consideration of the spectra, however, gives,
as far as I can see, no indication of the existence of stationary
states in which all the electrons are arranged in a ring and
which correspond to greater values for the total energy
emitted than the one we above have assumed to be the
permanent state.

Further, there may be stationary configurations of a
system of x electrons and a nucleus of charge Hi in which all
the electrons are notarranged ina single ring. The question,
however, of the existence of such stationary configurations is
not essential for our determination of the permanent state, as
long as we assume that the electrons in this state of the
system arearranged ina singlering. Systems corresponding
to more complicated configurations will be discussed on

. 24,
Using the relation T=h; we get, by help of the above
2

expressions for T and w, values for a and @ corresponding to

of Atoms and Molecules. | 23

the permanent state of the system which only differ from
those given by the equations (3) on p. 5, by exchange of
EK for H—esz.

The question of stability of a ring of electrons rotating
round a positive charge is discussed in great detail by Sir J.
J. Thomson *, An adaption of Thomson’s analysis for the
ease here considered of a ring rotating round a nucleus of
negligibly small linear dimensions is given by Nichclson f.
‘The investigation of the problem in question naturally divides
in two parts: one concerning the stability for displacements
of the electrons in the plane of the ring; one concerning
displacements perpendicular to this plane. As Nicholsou’s
ealeulations show, the answer to the question of stability
differs very much in the two cases in question. While the
ring for the latter displacements in general is stable if the
number of electrons is not great ; the ring is in no case
considered by Nicholson stable for displacements of the first
kind.

According, however, to the point of view taken in this
paper, the question of stability for displacements of the
electrons in the plane of the ring is most intimately connected
with the question of the mechanism of the binding of the
electrons, and like the latter cannot be treated on the basis of
the ordinary dynamics. The hypothesis of which we shall
make use in the following is that the stability of a ring of
electrons rotating round a nucleus is secured through “the
above condition of the universal constancy of the angular
momentum, together with the further condition that the
configuration of the particles is the one by the formation of
which the greatest amount of energy is emitted. As will be
shown, this | hypothesis is, concerning the question of stability
for a displacement of the electrons perpendicular to the plane
of the ring, equivalent to that used in ordinary mechanical
calculations.

Returning to the theory of Nicholson on the origin of
lines observed in the spectrum of the solar corona, we shall
now see that the difficulties mentioned on p. 7 may be only
formal. In the first place, from the point of view considered
above the objection as to the instability of the systems for
displacements of the electrons in the plane of the ring may
not be valid. Further, the objection as to the emission of the
radiation in quanta will not have reference to the calculations
in question, if we assume that in the coronal spectrum we are
not dealing with a true emission but only with a scattering of
radiation. Jhis assumption seems probable if we consider

* Loc. cit. + Loe. cit.

24 On the Constitution of Atoms and Molecules.

the conditions in the celestial body in question; for on
account of the enormous rarefaction of the matter there may
be comparatively few collisions to disturb the stationary
states and to cause a true emission of light corresponding to
the transition between different stationary states; on the other
hand there will in the solar corona be intense illumination of
light of all frequencies which may excite the natural vibrations
of the systems in the different stationary states. If the above
assumption is correct, we immediately understand the entirely
different form for the laws connecting the lines discussed by
Nicholson and those connecting the ordinary line-spectra
considered in this paper.

Proceeding to consider systems of a more complicated
constitution, we shall make use of the following theorem,
which can be very simply proved :—

“In every system consisting of electrons and positive
nuclei, in which the nuclei are at rest and the electrons move
in circular orbits with a velocity small compared with the
velocity of light, the kinetic energy will be numerically equal
to half the petential energy.”

By help of this theorem we get—as in the previous cases
of a single electron or of a ring rotating round a nucleus—
that the totalamount of energy emitted, by the formation of
the systems froma configuration in which the distances apart
of the particles are infinitely great and in which the particles |
have no velocities relative to each other, is equal to the
kinetic energy of the electrons in the final configuration.

in analogy with the case of a single ring we are here led
to assume that corresponding to any configuration of equili-
brium a series of geometrically similar, stationary con-
figurations of the system will exist in which the kinetic
energy of every electron is equal to the frequency of revo-

lution multiplied by sh where 7 is an entire number and h

Planck’s constant. In any such series of stationary con-
figurations the one corresponding to the greatest amount of
energy emitted will be the one in which 7 for every electron
is equal to 1. Considering that the ratio of kinetic energy
to frequency for a particle rotating in a circular orbit is
equal to 7 times the angular momentum round the centre of
the orbit, we are therefore led to the following simple
generalization of the hypotheses mentioned on pp. 15 and 22.

“In any molecular system consisting of positive nucler and
electrons in which the nuclei are at rest relative to each other
and the electrons move in circular orbits, the angular momentum

Formation of Molecules of the Elements. 25
of every electron round the centre of its orbit will in the

permanent state of the system be equal to sty where h is
Planck’s constant” *. aan

In analogy with the considerations on p. 23, we shall
assume that a configuration satisfying this condition is stable
if the total energy of the svstem is less than in any neigh-
bouring configuration satisfying the same condition of the
angular momentum of the electrons.

As mentioned in the introduction, the above hypothesis will
be used in a following communication as a basis fora theory of
the constitution of atoms and molecules. It will be shown
that it leads to results which seem to be in conformity with
experiments on a number of different phenomena.

The foundation of the hypothesis has been sovght entirely
in its relation with Planck’s theory of radiation ; by help of
considerations given later it will be attempted to throw
some further light on the foundation of it from another
point of view.

April 5, 1913.


============================================================

PART II. SYSTEMS CONTAINING ONLY A SINGLE NUCLEUS

By N. Bour, Dr. phil. Copenhagen *.

Part I].—SyYsTEMS CONTAINING ONLY A SINGLE NUCLEUS f.
§ 1. General Assumptions.

Re WING the theory of Rutherford, we shall assume

that the atoms of the elements consist of a positively
charged nucleus surrounded by a cluster of electrons. The
nucleus is the seat of the essential part of the mass of the
atom, and has linear dimensions exceedingly small compared
with the distances apart of the electrons in the surrounding
cluster.

As in the previous paper, we shall assume that the cluster
of electrons is formed by the successive binding by the
nucleus of electrons initially nearly at rest, energy at the
same time being radiated away. This will go on until, when
the total negative charge on the bound electrons is numeri-
cally equal to the positive charge on the nucleus, the system
will be neutral and no longer able to exert sensible forces on
electrons at distances from the nucleus great in comparison
with the dimensions of the orbits of the bound electrons.
We may regard the formation of helium from @ rays as an

* Communicated by Prof. EH. Rutherford, F.R.8.
+ Part I. was published in Phil. Mag. xxvi. p. 1 (1918).

of Atoms and Molecules. A477

observed example of a process of this kind, an @ particle on
this view being identical with the nucleus of a helium atom.

On account of the small dimensions of the nucleus, its
internal structure will not be of sensible influence on the
constitution of the cluster of electrons, and consequently
will have no effect on the ordinary physical and chemical
properties of the atom. ‘The latter properties on this theory
will depend entirely on the total charge and mass of the
nucleus ; the internal structure of the nucleus will be of
influence only on the phenomena of radioactivity.

From the result of experiments on lJarge-angle scattering
of a-rays, Rutherford* found an electric charge on the
nucleus corresponding per atom to a number of electrons
approximately equal to half the atomic weight. This result
seems to be in agreement with the number of electrons per
atom calculated from experiments on scattering of Rontgen
radiation t. The total experimental evidence supports the
hypothesis f that the actual number of electrons in a neutral
atom with a few exceptions is equal to the number which
indicates the position of the corresponding element in the
series of elements arranged in order of increasing atomic
weight. For example on this view, the atom of oxygen
which is the eighth element of the series has eight electrons
and a nucleus carrying eight unit charges.

We shall assume that the electrons are arranged at equal
angular intervals in coaxial rings rotating round the nucleus.
In order to determine the frequency and dimensions of the
rings we shall use the main hypothesis of the first paper,
viz.: that in the permanent state of an atom the angular
momentum of every electron round the centre of its orbit is

equal to the universal value oe where h is Planck’s constant.
| 7

We shall take as a condition of stability, that the total
energy of the system in the configuration in question is less
than in any neighbouring configuration satisfying the same
condition of the angular momentum of the electrons.

If the charge on the nucleus and the number of electrons
in the different rings is known, the condition in regard to
the angular momentum of the electrons will, as shown in
§ 2, completely determine the configuration of the system,
2. é., the frequency of revolution and the linear dimensions of
the rings. Corresponding to different distributions of the

* Comp. also Geiger and Marsden, Phil. Mac. xxv. p. 604 (1913).

+ Comp. C. G. Barkla, Phil. Mag. xxi. p. 648 (1911).
~ Comp. A. v. d. Broek, Phys. Zeitschr. xiv. p. 32 (1918).

Pint, Mag. S26. Wol26. No. 153. Sept. 1913, 2) IK

478 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

electrons in the rings, however, there will, in general, be
more than one configuration which will satisfy the condition
of the angular momentum together with the condition of
stability. 3

In §3 and § 4 it will be shown that, on the general view
of the formation of the atoms, we are led to indications of
the arrangement of the electrons in the rings which are con-
sistent with those suggested by the chemical properties of
the corresponding element. |

In § 5 it will be shown that it is possible from the theory
to calculate the minimum velocity of cathode rays necessary
to produce the characteristic Réntgen radiation from the
element, and that this is in approximate agreement with the
experimental values.

In $6 the phenomena of radioactivity will be briefly con-
sidered in relation to the theory.

§ 2. Conjiguration and Stability of the Systems.

Let us consider an electron of charge e and mass m which
moves in a circular orbit of radius @ with a velocity v small
compared with the velocity of light. Let us denote the

2
radial force acting on the electrons by F; F will in
general be dependent on a. The condition of dynamical
equilibrium gives

Introducing the condition of universal constancy of the
angular momentum of the electron, we have

h
mva= —.

Qa
From these two conditions we now get

h? De sak ORE eee
a= Tee ab and v= nies 3 eine Ka)

and for the frequency of revolution consequently

Ane*m a9

O= ga Bit so

If F is known, the dimensions and frequency of the corre-
sponding orbit are simply determined by (1) and(2). Fora

of Atoms and Molecules. A479

ring of n electrons rotating round a nucleus of charge Ne
we have (comp. Part I., p. 20)
s=n—1

sor
F=N—s,, where s,= ; > cosec am

s$=1

The values for s, from n=1 to n=16 are given in the table
on p. 482.

For systems consisting of nuclei and electrons in which
the first are at rest and the latter move in circular orbits
with a velocity small compared with the velocity of light,
‘we have shown (see Part I., p. 24) that the total kinetic
energy of the electrons is equal to the total amount of energy
emitted during the formation of the system from an original
configuration in which all the particles are at rest and at
infinite distances from each other. Denoting this amount of
energy by W, we consequently get

i 9) ae? 4
oP NS ie oe, OD

Ly I?

Puiting in (1), (2), and (3) e=47. Hila =5-31. 1017,
and h=6'5 . 10-2" we get
ooo lOnth oH 21 10k) o= 672). aia

(4)

-and

W=20 . 10-MSF,

In neglecting the magnetic forces due to the motion of
the electrons we have in Part I. assumed that the velocities
of the particles are small compared with the velocity of light.
‘The above calculations show that for this to hold, F must be
small compared with 150. As will be seen, the latter con-
dition will be satisfied for all the electrons in the atoms of
-elements of low atomic weight and for a greater part of the
electrons contained in the atoms of the other elements.

If the velocity of the electrons is not small compared with
‘the velocity of light, the constancy of the angular momentum
no longer involves a constant ratio between the energy and
the frequency of revolution. Without introducing new
assumptions, we cannot therefore in this case determine the
‘configuration of the systems on the basis of the considera-
tions in Part I. Considerations given later suggest, how-
-ever, that the constancy of the angular momentum is the
principal condition. Applying this condition for velocities

2K 2

480 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

not small compared with the velocity of light, we get the
same expression for vas that given by (1), while the quantity

m in the expressions for a and @ is replaced by

m
: Eb
and in the expression for W by J U—v'/e*)

C vw
2 Slay) ay

As stated in Part I., a calculation based on the ordinary
mechanics gives the result, that a ring cf electrons rotating
round a positive nucleus in general is unstable for displace-
ments of the electrons in the plane of the ring. In order to
escape from this difficulty, we have assumed that the ordinary
principles of mechanics cannot be used in the discussion of
the problem in question, any more than in the discussion of
the connected problem of the mechanism of binding of elec-
trons. We have also assumed that the stability for such
displacements is secured through the introduction of the
hypothesis of the universal constancy of the angular momen-.
tum of the electrons.

As is easily shown, the latter assumption is included in the
condition of stability in § 1. Consider a ring of electrons.
rotating round a nucleus, and assume that the system is in
dynamical equilibrium and that the radius of the ring is ap,.
the velocity of the electrons v), the total kinetic energy T,,.
and the potential energy P,. As shown in Part I. (p. 21).
we have Pp=—2Ty. Next consider a configuration of the
system in which the electrons, under influence of extraneous.
forces, rotate with the same angular momentum round the:
ee ina ring of radius a=ada. In this case we have.

IPs aE and on account of a uniformity of the angular
iamhantin v= : ~ U0 and T= — ai, Using the relation
ao

Pyo>=— 21), we ae
1 et 1)?
Bede, ee be oa (1-<).

We see that the total energy of the new confieimangn is.
greater than in the original. According to the condition of
stability in §1 the system is consequently stable for the
displacement considered. In this connexion, it may be re-

marked that in Part I. we have assumed that the frequency
of radiation emitted or absorbed by the systems cannot be
determined from the frequencies of vibration of the electrons.
in the plane of the orbits, calculated by help of the ordinary

of Atoms and Molecules. 481

mechanics. We have, on the contrary, assumed that the
frequency of the radiation is determined by the condition
hv=K, where v is the frequency, h Planck’s constant, and H
the difference in energy corresponding to two different
“stationary ” states of the system.

In considering the stability of a ring of electrons rotating
round a nucleus for displacements of the electrons perpen-
dicular to the plane of the ring, imagine a configuration
of the system in which the electrons are displaced by
621, 02,.... OZ, respectively, and suppose that the electrons,
under influence of extraneous forces, rotate in circular orbits
parallel to the original plane with the same radii and the
same angular momentum round the axis of the system as
before. The kinetic energy is unaltered by the displacement,
and neglecting powers of the quantities 6z,,.... 62, higher
than the second, the increase of the potential energy of the
system is given by

5 N2 (62)? ie >> Jeosec! 9)

e
oe n
where a is the radius of the ring, Ne the charge on the
nucleus, and n the number of electrons. According to the
condition of stability in § 1 the system is stable for the dis-
placements considered, if the above expression is positive for
arbitrary values of 62,,....62,. By a simple calculation it
can be shown that the latter condition is equivalent to the
condition

(6z,—62,)?,

N > Pn,o Tain my ° ° . c ° @ (5)

where m denotes the whole number (smaller than x) for
which

: s=n- 1 '

Die 8 ra cos 2h cosec ="
has its smallest value. This condition is identical with the
condition of stability for displacements of the electrons per-
pendicular to the plane of the ring, deduced by help of
ordinary mechanical considerations *.

A suggestive illustration is obtained by imagining that
the displacements considered are produced by the effect of
extraneous forces acting on the electrons in a direction
parallel to the axis of the ring. If the displacements are
produced infinitely slowly the motion of the electrons will
at any moment be parallel to the original plane of the ring,
and the angular momentum of each of the electrons round

* Comp. J. W. Nicholson, Month, Not. Roy. Astr. Soc. 72. p.52(1912).

482 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

the centre of its orbit will obviously be equal to its original
value ; the increase in the potential energy of the system
will be equal to the work done by the extraneous forces
during the displacements. From such considerations we are
led to assume that the ordinary mechanics can be used in
calculating the vibrations of the electrons perpendicular to
the plane of the ring—contrary to the case of vibrations in
the plane of the ring. This assumption is supported by the
apparent agreement with observations obtained by Nichol-
son in his theory of the origin of lines in the spectra of the
solar corona and stellar nebule (see Part I. pp. 6 & 23).
In addition it will be shown later that the assumption seems
to be in agreement with experiments on dispersion.

The following table gives the values of s, and p, .—Pn m

from n= to n=16:

ms Sy On, 0 mens m ; dts So ioe rae m
HN a ee deca aa ae 0 0) 9 3'328 13°14

TANIA ND ie ok 5 0:25 0:25 Ll 3°863 18:13
Dien ya 0:577 0:58 it 4-416 23°60

eee nek ee Ooi 1:41 12 4-984. 30°80

Sa eR en Saba WB7 7 2°43 13 5°565 38°57

CR eb lara 5) 1828 4°25 14 6:159 48°38

TM arate so: 2°305 6°35 15 6-764 58°83
oe at 2-805 9°56 16 7379 71°65

We see from the table that the number of electrons which
can rotate in a single ring round a nucleus of charge Ne
increases only very slowly for increasing N ; for N=20 the
maximum value is n=10; for N=40, n=13; forsNeaet
n=15. We see, further, that a ring of m electrons cannot
rotate in a single ring round a nucleus of charge ne unless
Wie.

In the above we have supposed that the electrons
move under the influence of a stationary radial force and
that their orbits are exactly circular. The first condition
will not be satisfied if we consider a system containing
several rings of electrons which rotate with different fre-
quencies. If, however, the distance between the rings is not
small in comparison with their radii, and if the ratio between
their frequencies is not near to unity, the deviation from
circular orbits may be very small and the motion of the
electrons to a close approximation may be identical with
that obtained on the assumption that the charge on the
electrons is uniformly distributed along the circumference of
the rings. If the ratio between the radii of the rings is not.

of Atoms and Molecules. 483

near to unity, the conditions of stability obtained on this
assumption may also be considered aé sufficient.

We have assumed in §1 that the electrons in the atoms
rotate in coaxial rings. The calculation indicates that only
in the case of systems containing a great number of electrons
will the planes of the rings separate ; in the case of systems
containing a moderate number of electrons, all the rings will
be situated in a single plane through the nucleus. For the
sake of brevity, we shall therefore here only consider the
latter case.

Let us consider an electric charge Ei uniformly distributed
along the circumference of a circle of radius a.

At a point distant z from the plane of the ring, and at a
distance rv from the axis of the ring, the electrostatic potential

is given by
ds

I 7
ee
Te ays (@ sr 2 2ar cosa) *

. . ° = dk e
Putting in this expression z=0 and — =tan?, and using
the notation a

a
es ds
» Vv (1—sin? @ cos? Sy

Soe (

we get for the radial force exerted on an electron in a point
in the plane of the ring

where
Q(2) = = sin a(K (24) cot aK'(2a)).

The corresponding force perpendicular to the plane of the
ring at a distance r from the centre of the ring and ata
small distance 6z from its plane is given by

OU Eeéz

where
R(a) = ~ sin’ a(K (22) + tan (22)K'(22)) ;
A short table of the functions Q(«) and R(a) is given

on p. 485.
Next consider a system consisting of a number of concentric

A484. Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

rings of electrons which rotate in the same plane round a

nucleus of charge Ne. Let the radii of the rings be ay, ag,....,

and the number of electrons on the different rings 7,

Mop) ots 'abie ok Bu ; ‘

Putting er = tan? (a,,,), we get for the radial force acting
Ss 2 \

é

on an electron in the rth ring —;F,, where
a

ah —N— Shee 0 Oe, ) ;

the summation is to be taken over all the rings except the
one considered.

If we know the distribution of the electrons in the
different rings, from the relation (1) on p. 478, we can, by
help of the above, determine a,, a.,.... The calculation
can be made by successive approximations, starting from a
set of values for the e’s, and trom them calculating the F’s,
and then redetermining the «’s by the relation (1) which

gives r = - =tan’ (2,,,), amd so on.

As in the case cf a single ring it is supposed that the
systems are stable for displacements of the electrons in the
plane of their orbits. Ina calculation such as that on p. 480,
the interaction of the rings ought strictly to be taken into
account. This interaction will involve that the quantities F
are not constant, as for a single ring rotating round a nucleus,
but will vary with the radii of the rings ; the variation in F,
however, if the ratio between the radii of the rings is not
very near to unity, will be too small to be of influence on
the result of the calculation.

Considering the stability of the systems for a displacement
of the electrons perpendicular to the plane of the rings, it is
necessary to distinguish between displacements in which the
centres of gravity of the electrons in the single rings are
unaltered, and displacements in which all the electrons
inside the same ring are displaced in the same direction.
The condition of stability for the first kind of displacements
is given by the condition (5) on p. 481, if for every ring we
replace N by a quantity G, determined by the condition

4 |
that = 7 G;02 is equal to the component perpendicular to the
plane of the ring of the force—due to the nucleus and the
electrons in the other rings—acting on one of the electrons
if it has received a small displacement 6z. Using the same
notation as above, we get

G,=N—3n,R(a,, s).

of Atoms and Molecules. 485

If all the electrons in one of the rings are displaced in the
same direction by help of extraneous for ces, the displace-
ment will produce corresponding displacements of the
electrons in the other rings ; and this interaction will be of
influence on the stability. For example, consider a system
of m concentric rings rotating in a plane round a nucleus of
charge Ne, and let us assume that the electrons in the
different rings are displaced perpendicular to the plane by

821, d2y,.... O&m respectively. With the above notation the
increase in the. aan a of a system is given by

a Nn . (82)? — {532, oe “Rw, ibe tee.
The condition of stability is that ‘this expression is positive
for arbitrary values of 62z,....62,. This condition can be
worked out simply in the usual way. It is not of sensible
influence compared with the condition of stability for the
displacements considered above, except in cases where the
system contains several rings of few electrons.
The following Table, containing the values of Q(a) and
R(a) for every fifth degree from oP eS 70°, gives an
estimate of the order of magnitude of these functions :—

ot. | tan? e. Q(a). | R(@).

O00 Le 0132 0-001 0002
One ora he OI 0005 | O-Ol1
BOM ay | 0333 | 0021 | 0048
Poa eee 0-490 0-080 0-217
Aig ete 0-704 0373 1549
Ae vane be uae OO On mis Bois! (agree
BOP te. | aaee 1708 | 4-488
Hone sank | 2-040 1-233 1:839
GUase 3-000 1-093 1-301
Gnas Bs 4-599 1-037 1115
Oat se | 7-548 1013 | 1-041

tan? a indicates the ratio between the radii of the rings
( tan’ (er) a The values of Q(«) show that unless the

ratio of the radii of the rings is nearly unity the effect of
outer rings on the dimensions of inner rin 198 is very small,
and that the corresponding effect of inner rings on outer is

486 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

to neutralize approximately the effect of a part of the charge
on the nucleus corresponding to the number of electrons on
the ring. The values of R(«) show that the effect of outer
rings on the stability of inner—though greater than the
effect on the dimensions—is small, but that unless the ratio
between the radii is very great, the effect: of inner rings on
the Stability: of outer is considerably greater than to neutralize
a corresponding part of the charge of the nucleus.

The maximum number of electrons which the innermost
ring can contain without being unstable is approximately
equal to that calculated on p. 482 for a single ring rotating
round a nucleus. Jor the outer rings, however, we get
considerably smaller numbers than those determined by the
condition (5) if we replace Ne by the total charge on the
nucleus and on the electrons of inner rings.

If a system of rings rotating round a nucleus in a single.
plane is stable for small displacements of the electrons
perpendicular to this plane, there will in general be no stable:
configurations of the rings, satisfying the condition of the
constancy of the angular momentum of the electrons, in
which all the rings are not situated in the plane. An
exception occurs in the special case of two rings containing
equal numbers of electrons; in this case there may be a
stable configuration in which the two rings have equal radii
and rotate in parallel planes at equal distances from the
nucleus, the electrons in the one ring being situated just
opposite the intervals between the electrons in the other
ring. The latter configuration, however, is unstable if the
configuration i in which all the electrons in the two rings are:

arranged i in a single ring is stable.

§ 3. Constitution of Atoms containing very few Electrons.

As stated in § 1, the condition of the universal constancy
of the angular momentum of the electrons, together with
the condition of stabilitv, is in most cases not sufficient to
determine completely the constitution of the s system. On
the general view of formation of atoms, however, and by
making use of the knowledge of the properties of the
corresponding elements, it will be attempted, in this section
and the next, to obtain indications of what configurations of
the electrons may be expected to occur in the atoms. In
these considerations we shall assume that the number of
electrons in the atom is equal to the number which indicates
the position of the corresponding element in the series of
elements arranged in order of increasing atomic weight.

of Atoms and Molecules. 487

Exceptions to this rule will be supposed to occur only at
such places in the series where deviation from the periodic
law of the chemical properties of the elements are observed.
In order to show clearly the principles used we shall first
consider with some detail those atoms containing very few
electrons.

For sake of brevity we shall, by the symbol N(m, n,.....),
refer to a plane system of rings of electrons rotating round
a nucleus of charge Ne, satisfying the condition of the
angular momentum of the electrons with the approximation
used in § 2. 7, m,... are the numbers of electrons in the
rings, starting from inside. By aj, a,... and @,, @o,...
we shall denote the radii and frequency of the rings taken
in the same order. The total amount of energy W emitted

by the formation of the system shall simply be denoted by
WIN, mm, .--)]-

iNheeaaly Hydrogen.

In Part I. we have considered the binding of an electron
by a positive nucleus of charge e, and have shown that it is
possible to account for the Balmer spectrum of hydrogen
on the assumption of the existence of a series of stationary
states in which the angular momentum of the electron round

/
the nucleus is equal to entire multiples of the value = , where

his Planck’s constant. The formula found for the frequencies
of the spectrum was

Qar2e*m ( 1 i )
i — i

3 2 2
h Ton Fi

where 7, and 7, are entire numbers. Introducing the values
for e, m, and h used on p. 479, we get for the factor before
the bracket 3°1.10%*; the value observed for the constant
in the Balmer spectrum is 3°290 . 10”.

* This value is that calculated in the first part of the paper. Using the
values e=4-78.10~ 7° (see R. A. Millikan, Brit. Assoc. Rep. 1912, p. 410),

— =5'31 . 10" (see P. Gmelin, Ann. d. Phys. xxviii. p. 1086 (1909) and
A. H. Bucherer, Ann. d. Phys. xxvii. p. 597 (1912)), and - = 7-27. 101°

(calculated by Planck’s theory from the experiments of E. Warburg,
G. Leithauser, EK. Hupka, and C. Miller, Ann. d.Phys. xl. p. 611 (1913))
2Q77e*m

we get 73

=5°26 . 10" in very elose agreement with observations.

488 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

For the permanent state of a neutral hydrogen atom we
get from the formula (1) and (2) in § 2, putting F=1,

Rat Os ee iy! Ame'm a
D2 4
= = Se lor

These values are of the order of magnitude to be expected.
For we get 0:043, which corresponds to 13 volts; the

value for the ionizing potential of a hydrogen atom, caleu-
lated by Sir J. J. Thomson from experiments on positive
rays, is 11 volts*. No other definite data, however, are
available for hydrogen atoms. For sake of brevity, we shall
in the following denote the values for a, w, and W corre-
sponding to the configuration 1(1) by a, wp) and Wo.

At distances from the nucleus, great in comparison with
a, the system 1(1) will not exert sensible forces on free
electrons. Since, however, the configuration :

12) a=1:38 a, e=0:563 0, W=1:13 Wo

corresponds to a greater value for W than the configuration
1(1), we may expect that a hydrogen atom under certain
conditions can acquire a negative charge. This is in agree-
ment with experiments on positive rays. Since W[1(3)] is
only 0°54, a hydrogen atom cannot be expected to be able to
acquire a double negative charge.

iN 2s Flelium.
As shown in Part I., using the same assumptions as for
hydrogen, we must expect that during the binding of an
electron by a nucleus of charge 2e, a spectrum is emitted,

expressed by
Semen, el 1
Mies eee @ OnE 0!) ’
3) G)

This spectrum ineludes the spectrum observed by Pickering
in the star € Puppis and the spectra recently observed by
Fowler in experiments with vacuum tubes filled with a
mixture of hydrogen and helium. These spectra are generally
ascribed to hydrogen. |

For the permanent state of a positively charged helium
atom, we get

2(1) a=ta, w=4a, W=4W,.
* J. J. Thomson, Phil. Mag. xxiv. p. 218 (1912).

—

of Atoms and Molecules. A489

At distances from the nucleus great compared with the
radius of the bound electron, the system 2(1) will, to a close
approximation, act on an electron as a simple nucleus of
charge e. For a system consisting of two electrons and a
nucleus of charge 2e, we may therefore assume the existence
of a series of stationary states in which the clectron most
lightly bound moves approximately in the same way as the
electron in the stationary states of a hydrogen atom. Such
an assumption has already been used in Part I. in an attempt
to explain the appearance of Rydberg’s constant in the
formula for the line-spectrum of any element. We can,
however, hardly assume the existence of a stable configur-
ation in which the two electrons have the same angular
momentum round the nucleus and move in different or bits,
the one outside the other. In such a configuration the
electrons would be so near to each other that the deviations
from circular orbits would be very great. For the permanent
state of a neutral helium atom, we shall therefore adopt the.
configuration

22). ,a=(o¢ka,,. o=3060,,... W=6'13 W,:
Since
W[2@)] — W[2q)] = 2°13 Wo,

we see that both electrons in a neutral helium atom are more
firmly bound than the electron in a hydrogen atom. Using
the values on p. 488, we get

Lise wo 27 volts and 213-9 =66 | 105

these ise are of the same order of magnitude as the value
observed for the ionization potential in ‘helium, 20°5 volt *

and the value for the frequency of the ultra-violet. ab-
sorption in helium determined by experiments on dispersion

9 i eit:

The Sieqaeiiey in question may be regarded as corre-
sponding to vibrations in the plane of the ring (see p. 480).
The frequency of vibration of the whole ring perpendicular
to the plane, calculated in the ordinary way (see p. 482), is

* J. Franck u. G. Hertz, Verh. d. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. xv. p. 34 (1913).

+ C.and M. Cuthbertson, Proc. Roy. Soc. A. Ixxxiv. p. 13(1910). (In
a previous paper (Phil. Mag. Jan. 1913) the author took fie values for
the refractive index in helium, given by M. and C. Cuthbertson, as
corresponding to atmospheric pressure; these values, however, refer to
double atmospheric pressure. Cons equently the value there given for the

number of electrons in a helium atom calculated from Drude’s theory has
to be divided by 2.)

490 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

given by v=3'27@ . The fact that the latter frequency
is great compared with that, observed might explain that
the number of electrons in a helium atom, calculated by help
of Drude’s theory from the experiments on dispersion, is
only about two-thirds of the number to be expected. (Using

Chiat: :
— = 5:31 . 10” the value calculated is 1-2.).
M7
Fora configuration of a helium nucleus and three electrons,
we get

2(3) a=0°703a, w=2:020, W=6:07 Wy.

Since W for this configuration is smaller than for the con-
figuration 2(2), the theory indicates that a helium atom
cannot acquire a negative charge. This is in agreement
with experimental evidence, which shows that helium atoms
have no “affinity ” for free electrons *.

In a later paper it will be shown that the theory offers a
‘simple explanation of the marked difference in the tendency
of hydrogen and helium atoms to combine into molecules.

N=3. Lithium.

In analogy with the cases of hydrogen and helium we
must expect that. during the binding of an electron by a
nucleus of charge 3e, a spectrum is emitted, given by

Qar?me*

ke ee
heat (@) a
3 lu :

On account of the great energy to be spent in removing all
the electrons bound in a lithium atom (see below) the
spectrum considered can only be expected to be observed in
extraordinary cases.

In a recent note Nicholsont has drawn attention to the
fact that in the spectra of certain stars, which show the
Pickering spectrum with special brightness, some lines occur
‘the frequencies of which to a close approximation can be
expressed by the formula

1 1
—=K ———
Ela Gam)
where K is the same constant as in the Balmer spectrum of

hydrogen. From analogy with the Balmer- and Pickering-

spectra, Nicholson has suggested that the lines in question
‘are due to hydrogen.

* See J. Franck, Verh. d. Deutsch. Phys. Ges. xii. p. 613 (1910).
+t J. W. Nicholson, Month. Not, Roy. Astr. Soe. lxxiii. p. 882 (1918).

of Atoms and Molecules. AQT

It is seen that the lines discussed by Nicholson are given
by the above formula if we put 7,=6. The tines in question
correspond to 7;= 10,13, and 14; if we for 7,=6 put 7;=9, 12
and 15, we get lines coinciding with lines of the ordinary
Balmer-spectrum of hydrogen. If we in the above formula
put T=1, 2, and 3, we get series of lines in the ultra-violet.
If we put 7,=4 we get only a single line in visible spectrum,
viz.: for t;=5 which gives v=6°662.10™, or a wave-length
A=4503 . 10-8 em. closely coinciding with the wave-length
4504 .10-§ em. of one of the lines of unknown origin in the
table quoted by Nicholson. In this table, however, no lines
-oceur corresponding to T2=9.

For the permanent state of a lithium atom with two
positive charges we get a configuration

3 (1) a=4a, a= Ia, W=9W,-

The probability of a permanent configuration in which
two electrons move in different orbits around each other
must for lithium be considered still less probable than for
helium, as the ratio between the radii of the orbits would be
still nearer to unity. For a lithium atom with a single
positive charge we shall, therefore, adopt the configuration:

3 (2) a=0*364 a, a= 7"°50',, W=15:13 W,.

Since W[3 (2)]—W([3(1)|=6°13 Wo, we see that the
first two electrons in a lithium atom are very strongly bound
compared with the electron in a hydrogen atom; they are
still more rigidly bound than the electrons in a helium
atom.

From a consideration of the chemical properties we should
expect the following configuration for the electrons in a
neutral lithium atom :

3 (2,1 a,=0°362 ag (0 ee @ 09 W
(2,1) ala, waOTlba,  W=1602 Wo
This configuration may be considered as highly probable

also from a dynamical point of view. The deviation of the

outermost electron from a circular orbit will be very small,
partly on account of the great values of the ratio between
the radii, and of the ratio between the frequencies of the
orbits of the inner and outer electrons, partly also on account
of the symmetrical arrangement of the inner electrons.
Accordingly, it appears probable that the three electrons

4992 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

will not arrange themselves in a single ring and form the
system :

3 (3) a=0°413 ao, w=)'87 wo, W=17 00

although W for this configuration is greater than for
3 (2, 1)

Since W[3(,1)]—W[3@)] =0°89 Wo, we see that the
outer electron in the configuration 3 (2,1) is bound even more
lightly than the electron in a hydrogen atom. The dif-
ference in the firmness of the binding corresponds to a
difference of 1:4 volts in the ionization potential. A marked
difference between the electron in hydrogen and the outer-
most electron in lithium lies also in the greater tendency of
the latter electron te leave the plane of the orbits. The
quantity G considered in § 2, which gives a kind of measure
for the stability for displacements perpendicular to this plane,
is thus for the outer electron in hthium only 0°55, while for
hydrogen itis 1. This may have a bearing on the explana-
tion of the apparent tendency of lthium atoms to take a
positive charge in chemical combinations with other
elements.

For a possible negatively charged lithium atom we may
expect the configuration :

LAP BOY Cl w= 7°64 wy

$22) yaisi6a  620-436a, | = oes

It should be remarked that we have no detailed knowledge
of the properties in the atomic state, either for lithium or
hydrogen, or for most of the elements considered below.

N=4. Beryllium.

For reasons analogous to those considered for helium and
lithium we may for the formation of a neutral beryllium atom
assume the following stages :

A (1) a=0°25 ao w=16 wp W 16 vi

4 (2) a=0°267 ao @=14:06@ W=2813 Wo,

4°01) ~ a,=0°263 a5 w@,=14°46 w, © pee

a=0°605 ay @,== 2°74 a W=31'65 Wo,

0-969 ie
OS an aloe © oe
although the configurations :
4 (3) a=0°292 ay wo=11l7l@a  W=35'14 W,,
4 (4) a=0°329 ay w= 9260, W=37-04 Wo,

a, p—

of Atoms and Molecules. 493

correspond to less values for the total energy than the con-
figurations 4 (2,1) and 4 (2, 2).

From analogy we get further for the configuration of a
possible negatively charged atom,

aj=0 263 Ao @,=1451 Wy
4 (2,3) dy =0°803 ay @,= 1°59 a

Comparing the outer ring of the atom considered with the
ring of a helium atom, we see that the presence of the inner
ring of two electrons in the beryllium atom markedly changes
the properties of the outer ring; partly because the outer
electrons in the configuration adopted for a neutral beryllium
atom are more lightly bound than the electrons in a helium
atom, and partly because the quantity G, which for helium
is equal to 2, for the outer ring in the configuration 4 (2,2)
is only equal to 1°12.

Since W/{4(2,3)|—W[4@,2)]=0°05 Wo, the beryllium
atom will further have a definite, although very small affinity
for free electrons.

W = 33°66 Wo.

§ 4. Atoms containing greater numbers of electrons.

From the examples discussed in the former section it will
appear that the problem of the arrangement of the electrons
in the atoms is intimately connected with the question of the
confluence of two rings of electrons rotating round a nucleus
outside each other, and satisfying the condition of the
universal constancy of the angular momentum. Apart from
the necessary conditions of stability for displacements of the
electrons perpendicular to the plane of the orbits, the present
theory gives very little information on this problem. It
seems, however, possible by the help of simple considerations
to throw some light on the question.

Let us consider two rings rotating round a nucleus in a
single plane, the one outside the other. Let us assume that
the electrons in the one ring act upon the electrons in the
other as if the electric charge were uniformly distributed
along the circumference of the ring, and that the rings with
this approximation satisfy the condition of the angular
momentum of the electrons and of stability for displacements
perpendicular to their plane.

Now suppose that, by help of suitable imaginary extra-
neous forces acting parallel to the axis of the rings, we pull
the inner ring slowly to one side. During this process, on
account of the repulsion from the inner ring, the outer will
move to the opposite side of the original plane of the rings.

iil. Mage eae. Nol. 20. NO. loe. Sept, 19s, 12 Vi

494 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

During the displacements of the rings the angular momentum
of the electrons round the axis of the system will remain
constant, and the diameter of the inner ring will increase
while that of the outer will diminish. At the beginning of
the displacement the magnitude of the extraneous forces to
be applied to the original j inner ring will increase but there-
after decrease, and at a certain distance between the plane
of the rings the system will be in a configuration of equili-
brium. This equilibrium, however, will not be stable. If
we let the rings slowly return they will either reach their
original position, or they will arrive at a position in which
the ring, which originally was the outer, is now the inner,
and vice versa.

If the charge of the electrons were uniformly distributed
along the circumference of the rings, we could by the
process considered at most obtain an interchange of the
rings, but obviously not a junction of them. ‘Taking, how-
ever, the discrete distribution of the electrons into account,
it can be shown that, in the special case when the number
of electrons on the two rings are equal, and when the rings
rotate in the same direction, the rings will unite by the
process, provided that the final configuration is stable. In
this case the radii and the frequencies of the rings will be
equal in the unstable configuration of equilibrium mentioned
above. In reaching this configuration the electrons in the
one ring will further be situated just opposite the intervals
between the electrons in the other, since such an arrange-
ment will correspond to the smallest total energy. If now
we let the rings return to their original plane, the electrons
in the one ring will pass into the intervals between the
electrons in the other, and form a single ring. Obviously
the ring thus formed will satisfy the same condition of the
angular momentum of the electrons as the original rings.

If the two rings contain unequal numbers of electrons the
system will during a process such as that considered behave
very differ ently, and, contrary to the former case, we cannot.
expect that the rings will dow together, if by help of extraneous
forces acting parallel to the axis of the system they are
displaced slowly from their original plane. It may in this
connexion be noticed that the characteristic for the dis-
placements considered is not the special assumption about
the extraneous forces, but only the invariance cf the angular
momentum of the electrons round the centre of the rings ;
displacements of this kind take in the present theory a
similar position to arbitrary displacements in the ordinary

mechanics.

of Atoms and Molecules. A95

The above considerations may be taken as an indication
that there is a greater tendency for the confluence of two
rings when each contains the same number of electrons.
Considering the successive binding of electrons by a positive
nucleus, we conclude from this that, unless the charge on
the nucleus is very great, rings of electrons will only join
together .if they contain equal numbers of electrons ; and
that accordingly the numbers of electrons on inner rings
will only be 2, 4, 8,.... If the charge of the nucleus is
very great the rings of electrons first bound, if few in
number, will be very close together, and we must expect
that the configuration will be very unstable, and that a
gradual interchange of electrons between the rings will be
greatly facilitated.

This assumption in regard to the number of electrons in
the rings is strongly supported by the fact that the chemical
properties of the ‘elements of low atomic weight vary with a
period of 8. Further, it follows that the number of électrons
on the outermost ring ‘will always be odd or even, according
as the total number of electrons in the atom is odd or even.
This has a suggestive relation to the fact that the valency of
an element of low atomic weight always is odd or even
according as the number of the element in the periodic
series is odd or even.

For the atoms of the elements considered in the former
section we have assumed that the two electrons first bound
are arranged in a single ring, and, further, that the two next

electrons are arranged in another ring. If N24 the con-
figuration N (4) will correspond to a smaller value for the
total energy than the configuration N (2,2). The greater the
value of N the closer will the ratio between the radii of
the rings in the configuration N (2,2) approach unity, and
the greater will be the energy emitted by an eventual con-
fluence of the rings. The particular member of the series
of the elements for which the four innermost electrons will
be arranged for the first time in a single ring cannot be
determined from the theory. From a consideration of the
chemical properties we can hardly expect that it will have
taken place before boron (N=5) or carbon (N=6), on
account of the observed trivalency and tetravalency respec-
tively of these elements ; on the other hand, the periodic
system of the elements strongly suggests that already i in neon
(N=10) an inner ring of eight electrons will occur. Unless

N 214 the Stems son N (4,4) corresponds to a smaller value.

for the total energy than the configuration Nig); already
2L2

496 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

for NZ10 the latter configuration, however, will be stable
for displacements of the electrons perpendicular to the plane
of their orbits. A ring of 16 electrons will not be stable
unless N is very great; but in such a case the simple
considerations mentioned above do not apply.

The confluence of two rings of equal number of electrons,
which rotate round a nucleus ot charge Ne outside a ring of
n electrons already bound, must be expected to take place
more easily than the confluence of two similar rings rotating
round a nucleus of charge (N—n)e; for the stability of the
rings for a displacement perpendicular to their plane will
(see § 2) be smaller in the first than in the latter case. This
tendency for stability to decrease for displacements perpen-
dicular to the plane of the ring will be especially marked for
the outer rings of electrons of a neutral atom. In the latter
case we must expect the confluence of rings to be greatly
facilitated, and in certain cases it may even happen that the
number of electrons in the outer ring may be greater than
in the next, and that the outer ring may show deviations
from the assumption of 1, 2,4, 8 electrons in the rings,
e. g. the configurations 5 (2,3) and 6 (2,4) instead of the con-
figurations 5 (2,2,1) and 6 (2,2,2). We shall here not discuss
further the intricate question of the arrangement of the
electrons in the outer ring. In the scheme given below the
number of electrons in this ring is arbitrarily put equal to
the normal valency of the corresponding element ; 2. e. for
electronegative and electropositive elements respectively the
number of hydrogen atoms and twice the number of oxygen
atoms with which one atom of the element combines.

Such an arrangement of the outer electrons is suggested
by considerations of atomic volumes. As is well known, the
atomic volume of the elements is a periodic function of the
atomic weights. If arranged in the usual way according to
the periodic system, the elements inside the same column
have approximately the same atomic volume, while this
volume changes considerably from one column to another,
being greatest for columns corresponding to the smallest
valency 1 and smallest for the greatest valency 4. An
approximate estimate of the radius of the outer ring of a
neutral atom can be obtained by assuming that the total
force due to the nucleus and the inner electrons is equal to
that from a nucleus of charge ne, where n is the number of
electrons in the ring. Putting F=n—s, in the equation (1)
on p. 478, and denoting the value ot a for n=1 by ap, we
get for n= 2, a—001a; for n—3, a—0Ala, > am@enen
n = 4, a=0°33a. Accordingly the arrangement chosen

Ve ree ee a
i es

of Atoms and Molecules. A97

for the electrons will involve a variation in the dimensions
of the outer ring similar to the variation in the atomic
volumes of the corresponding elements. It must, however,
be borne in mind that the experimental determinations of
atomic volumes in most cases are deduced from consideration
of molecules rather than atoms.

From the above we are led to the followin @ possible scheme
for the arrangement of the electrons in light atoms:—

1) 9 (4, 4,1) 17 (8,4, 4, 1)

2 (2) 10 (8, 2) 18 (8,8, 2)

32,1) 11 (8, 2,1) 19 (8, 8, 2, 1)

4 (2,2) L7G, 92) 20 (8, 8, 2, 2)

5 (2,8) 13 (8, 2, 3) | 21 (8,8, 2,3)
~—~©6 2,4) 14 (8, 2, 4) 22 (8, 8, 2,4)

7 (4,3) 15 (8, 4, 3) 23 (8,8, 4, 3)

8 (4, 2, 2) 16 (8, 4, 2, 2) 24 (8, 8, 4, 2, 2)

Without any fuller discussion it seems not unlikely that
this constitution of the atoms will correspond to properties of
the elements similar with those observed.

In the first place there will be a marked periodicity with
a period of 8. Further, the binding of the outer electrons
in every horizontal series of the above scheme will become
weaker with increasing number of electrons per atom, corre-
sponding to the observed increase of the electropositive
character for an increase of atomic weight of the elements
in every single group of the. periodic system. A corre-
sponding agreement holds for the variation of the atomic
volumes.

Tn the case of atoms of higher atomic weight the simple
assumptions used do not apply. A few indications, however,
are suggested from consideration of the variations in the
chemical properties of the elements. At the end of the 3rd
period of 8 elements we meet with the iron-group. This
group takes a particular position in the system of the
elements, since it is the first time that elements of neigh-
bouring atomic weights show similar chemical properties.
This circumstance indicates that the configuratious of the
electrons in the elements of this group differ only in
the arrangement of the inner electrons. The fact that the
period in the chemical properties of the elements after
the iron-group is no longer 8, but 18, suggests that elements
of higher atomic weight contain a recurrent configuration
of 18 electrons in the innermost rings. The deviation from

498 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

2, 4, 8216 may be due to a gradual interchange of electrons
bhimean the rings, such as is indicated on p. "495. Since a
ring of 18 electrons will not be stable the electrons may be
arranged in two parallel rings (see p. 486). Such a con-
fiouration of the inner electrons will act upon the outer
electrons in very nearly the same way as a nucleus of
charge (N—18)e. It might therefore be possible that
with increase of N another configuration of the same type
will be formed outside the first, such as is suggested by the
presence of a second period of 18 elements.

On the same lines, the presence of the group of the rare
earths indicates that for still greater values of N another
gradual alteration of the innermost rings will take place.

co)
Since, however, for elements of higher atomic weight than

those of this group, the laws connecting the variation of the
chemical properties with the atomic weight are similar to
those between the elements of low atomic weight, we may
conclude that the configuration of the innermost electrons
will be again repeated. The theory, however, is not
sufficiently complete to give a definite answer to such
problems.

§ 5. Characteristic Réntgen Radiation.

According to the theory of emission of radiation given in
Part I., the ordinary line-spectrum of an element is emitted
during the reformation of an atom when one or more of the
electrons in the outer rings are removed. In analogy it may
be supposed that the characteristic Réntgen radiation is sent
out during the settling down of the system if electrons in
inner rings are removed by some agency, e.g. by impact
of cathode particles. This view of the origin of the
characteristic Réntgen radiation has been proposed by
Sir J. J. Thomson*.

Without any special assumption in regard to the constitu-
tion of the radiation, we can from this view determine the
minimum velocity of the cathode rays necessary to produce
the characteristic Réntgen radiation of a special type by
calculating the energy necessary to remove one of the

electrons from the different rings. Even if we knew the
numbers of electrons in the rings, a rigorous calculation of
this minimum energy might still be complicated, and the
result largely dependent on the assumptions used; for, as
mentioned in Part I., p. 19, the calculation cannot be per-
formed entirely on the basis of the ordinary mechanics. We
can, however, obtain very simply an approximate comparison

* Comp. J. J. Thomson, Phil. Mae. xxiii. p. 456 (1912).

of Atoms and Molecules. 499

with experiments if we consider the innermost ring and as a
first approximation neglect the repulsion from the electrons
in comparison with ae attraction of the nucleus. Let us
consider a simple system consisting of a bound electron
rotating in a circular orbit round a positive nucleus of
charge Ne. From the expressions (1) on p. 478 we get for
the velocity of the electron, putting F=N,
2 tre?

Oran ene AN=a2o), HORN.

The total energy to be transferred to the system in order
to remove the electron to an infinite distance from the
nucleus is equal to the kinetic energy of the bound electron.
If, therefore, the electron is removed to a great distance
from the nucleus by impact of another rapidly moving elec-
tron, the smallest ‘kinetic ener gy possessed by the latter
whoo at a great distance from the nucleus must necessarily
be equal to the kinetic energy of the bound electron before
the collision. The velocity of the free electron therefore
must be at least equal to v.

According to Whiddington’s experiments * the velocity of
cathode rays just able to produce the characteristic Rontgen
radiation of the so-called K-type—the hardest type of radia-
tion observed—from an element of atomic weight A is for
elements from Al to Se approximately equal to A.10° cm./sec.

As seen this is equal to the above calculated value for v, if

we put ca

Since we have anne approximate agreement with
experiment by ascribing the characteristic Rénteen radia-
tion of the K-type to the innermost ring, it is to be expected
that no harder type of characteristic radiation wlil exist.
This is strongly indicated by observations of the penetrating
power of y raysT

It is worthy of remark that the theory gives not only
nearly the right value for the energy required to remove an
electron from the outer ring, but also the energy required
to remove an electron from the innermost ring. The
approximate agreement between the calculated and experi-
mental values is all the more striking when it is recalled
that the energies required in the two cases for an element of
atomic weight 70 differ by a ratio of 1000.

In connexion with this it should be emphasized that the

* R. Whiddineton, Proc. Roy. Soc. A. Ixxxv. p. 323 (1911).
+ Comp. E. Rutherford, Phil. Mag. xxiv. p. 453 (1912).

500 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

remarkable homogeneity of the characteristic Rontgen
radiation— indicated by experiments on absorption of the
rays, as well as by the interference observed in recent
experiments on diffraction of Réntgen rays in crystals—is
in agreement with the main assumption used in Part I. (see
p. 7) in considering the emission of line-spectra, viz. that the
radiation emitted during the passing of the systems between
different stationary states is homogeneous.

Putting in (4) F=N, we get for the diameter of the

i
7 ye aS > od os — __ —8 7
innermost ring approximately 2a = N° 10-* em: ~ Wier

N = 100 this gives 2a = 107" cm., a value which is very
small in comparison with ordinary atomic dimensions but
still very great compared with the dimensions to be expected
for the nucleus. According to Rutherford’s calculation the
dimensions of the latter are of the same order of magnitude as
Oo em:

§ 6. Radioactive Phenomena.

According to the present theory the cluster of electrons
surrounding the nucleus is formed with emission of energy,
and the configuration is determined by the condition that
the energy emitted is amaximum. The stability involved by
these assumptions seems to be in agreement with the general
properties of matter. It is, however, in striking opposition
to the phenomena of radioactivity, and according to the
theory the origin of the latter phenomena may therefore be
sought elsewhere than in the electronic distribution round
the nucleus.

A necessary consequence of Rutherford’s theory of the
structure of atoms is that the «particles have their origin
in the nucleus. On the present theory it seems also neces-
sary that the nucleus is the seat of the expulsion of the
high-speed §-particles. In the first place, the spontaneous
expulsion of a @-particle from the cluster of electrons sur-
rounding the nucleus would be something quite foreign to
the assumed properties of the system. Further, the expul-
sion of an a-particle can hardly be expected to produce a
lasting effect on the stability of the cluster of electrons. The
effect of the expulsion will be of two different kinds. Partly
the particle may collide with the bound electrons during its
passing through the atom. This effect will be analogous to
that produced by bombardment of atoms of other substances
by a-rays and cannot be expected to give rise to a subsequent
expulsion of @-rays. Partly the expulsion of the particle

of Atoms and Molecules. DOL

will involve an alteration in the configuration of the bound
electrons, since the charge remaining on the nucleus is
different from the original. In order to consider the latter
effect let us regard a single ring of electrons rotating round
a nucleus of charge Ne, and let us assume that an a-particle
is expelled from the nucleus in a direction perpendicular
to the plane of the ring. The expulsion of the particle
will obviously not produce any alteration in the angular
momentum of the electrons; and if the velocity of the
a-particle is small compared with the velocity of the elec-
trons—as it will be if we consider inner rings of an atom of
high atomic weight—the ring during the expulsion will
expand continuously, and after the expulsion will take the
position claimed by the theory for a stable ring rotating
round a nucleus of charge (N—2)e. The consideration of
this simple case strongly indicates that the expulsion of an
a-particle will not have a lasting effect on the stability of the
internal rings of electrons in the residual atom.

The question of the origin of @-particles may also be con-
sidered from another point of view, based on a consideration
of the chemical and physical properties of the radioactive
substances. As is well known, several of these substances
have very similar chemical properties and have hitherto
resisted every attempt to separate them by chemical means.
There is also some evidence that the substances in question
show the same line-spectrum*. It has been suggested by
several writers that the substances are different only in
radio-active properties and atomic weight but identical in all
other physical and chemical respects. According to the
theory, this would mean that the charge on the nucleus, as
well as the configuration of the surrounding electrons, was
identical in some of the elements, the only difference being
the mass and the internal constitution of the nucleus. From
the considerations of § 4 this assumption is already strongly
suggested by the fact that the number of radioactive sub-
stances is greater than the number of places at our disposal
in the periodic system. If, however, the assumption is
right, the fact that two apparently identical elements emit
8-particles of different velocities, shows that the @-rays as
well as the a-rays have their origin in the nucleus.

This view of the origin of a- and @-particles explains very
simply the way in which the change in the chemical pro-
perties of the radioactive substances is connected with the

* See A. S. Russell and R. Rossi, Proc. Roy. Soc. A. Ixxxvil. p. 478
(1912).

502 Mr. R. V. Southwell on the

nature of the particles emitted. The results of experiments
are expressed ia the two rules * :—

1. Whenever an «-particle is expelled the group in the
periodic system to which the resultant product belongs is two
units less than that to which the parent body belongs.

2. Whenever a §-particle is expelled the group of the
resultant body is 1 unit greater than that of the parent.

As will be seen this is exactly what is to be expected
according to the considerations of § 4.

In escaping from the nucleus, the B-rays may be expected
to collide with the bound electrons in the inner rings. This
will give rise to an emission of a characteristic radiation of
the same type as the characteristic Rontgen radiation emitted
trom elements of lower atomic weight by impact of cathode-
rays. ‘The assumption that the emission of y-rays is due to
collisions of B-rays with bound electrons is proposed by
Rutherford f in order to account for the numerous groups
of homogeneous B-rays expelled from certain radioactive
substances.

In the present paper it has been attempted to show that
the application of Planck’s theory of radiation to Ruther-
ford’s atom-model through the introduction of the hypothesis
of the universal constancy of the angular momentum of the
bound electrons, leads to results which seem to be in agreement
with experiments.

In a later paper the theory will be applied to systems
containing more than one nucleus.


============================================================

PART III. SYSTEMS CONTAINING SEVERAL NUCLEI

By N. Bour, Dr. phil., Copenhagen *.

Part JJJ].—SyYstTEms CONTAINING SEVERAL NUCLEI fT.

§ 1. Preliminary.
AC eae to Rutherford’s theory of the structure of

atoms, the difference between an atom of an element
and a molecule of a chemical combination is that the first
consists of a cluster of electrons surrounding a single
positive nucleus of exceedingly small dimensions and of a
mass great in comparison with that of the electrons, while
the latter contains at least two nuclei at distances from each
other comparable with the distances apart of the electrons in
the surrounding cluster.
The leading idea used in the former papers was that the
atoms were formed through the successive binding by the
nucleus of a number of electrons initially nearly at rest.

* Communicated by Prof. E. Rutherford, F.R.S.
+ Part I. and Part Il. were published in Phil. Mag. xxvi. p.1 & p. 476
(1913).

858 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

Such a conception, however, cannot be utilized in con-
sidering the formation of a system containing more than a
single nucleus ; for in the latter case there will be nothing
to keep the nuclei together during the binding of the
electrons. In this connexion it may be noticed that while a
single nucleus carrying a large positive charge is able to
bind a small number of electrons, on the contrary, two nuclei
highly charged obviously cannot be kept together by the
help of a few electrons. We must therefore assume that
configurations containing several nuclei are formed by the
interaction of systems—each cont: ining a single nucleus—
which already have bound a number of electrons.

§ 2 deals with the configuration and stability of a system
already formed. We shall consider only the simple case of a
system consisting of two nuclei and of a ring of electrons
rotating round the line connecting them; the result of the
calculation, however, gives indication of what configurations
are to be expected in more complicated cases. As in the
former papers, we shall assume that the conditions of
equilibrium can be deduced by help cf the ordinary mechanics.
In determining the absolute dimensions and the stability of
the systems, however, we shall use the main hypothesis of
Part I. Accor ding to this , the angular momentum of every
electron round the centre of its orbit is equal to a universal
value = where A is Planck’s constant; further, the

=

stability is determined by the condition that the total energy
of the system is less than in any neighbouring configvration
satisfying the same condition of the angular monentnnn of
the slechame:

In § 3 the configuration to be expected for a hydrogen
molecule is qeeecredn in some detail.

§ 4 deals with the mode of formation of the systems. A
simple method of procedure is indicated, by which it is
possible to follow, step by step, the sumunaten of two atoms
to form a molecule. The conneuration, obtained will be
shown to satisfy the conditions usedin § 2. The part played
in the considerations by the angular momentum of the
ae strongly supports the validity of the main hypo-
thesis

§ 5 contains a few indications of the configurations to be
expected for systems containing a greater number of
electrous.

of Atoms and Molecules. 899

§ 2. Configurations and Stability of the Systems.

Let us consider a system consisting of two positive nuclei
of equal charges and a ring of electrons rotating round the
line connecting them. Let the number of electrons in the
ring be n, the charge of an electron —e, and the charge on
each nucleus Ne. As can be simply shown, the system will
be in equilibrium if the nuclei are the same distance apart
from the plane of the ring and if the ratio between the
diameter of the ring 2a and the distance apart of the nuclei

2b is given by
TREN 2 oe,
p=a((¥)'-1) Sk sid, Ate ORE

provided that the frequency of revolution o is of a magnitude
such that for each of the electrons the centrifugal force
balances the radial force due to the attraction of the nuclei
and the repulsion of the other electrons. Denoting this

2
e its ;
force by es we get from the condition of the universal

constancy of the angular momentum of the electrons, as
shown in Part II. p. 478,
h2 Anetm
=_,- Ff « —=—,— #%. .. 2
Aqe?m ut 8 he : (2)
The total energy necessary to remove all the charged particles
to infinite distances from each other is equal to the total
kinetic energy of the electrons and is given by

Varro!
Be ee ER ee ah EBD

N?(/4n\? .\E |
r=5 ((q) -1) See A'S en IS)

ieee Sar
$= al COSEC ar. 3
veal 17

a

where

a table of s, is given in Part II. on p. 482.

To test the stability of the system we have to consider
displacements of the orbits of the electrons relative to the
nuclei, and also displacements of the latter relative to each
other.

A calculation based on the ordinary mechanics gives that

860 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

the systems are unstable for displacements of the electrons in
the plane of the ring. As for the systems considered in
Part II., we shall, however, assume that the ordinary
principles of mechanics cannot be used in discussing the
problem in question, and that the stability of the systems for
the displacements considered is secured through the in-
troduction of the hypothesis of the universal constancy of
the angular momentum of the electrons. This assumption is
included in the condition of stability stated in § 1. It should
be noticed that in Part IL. the quantity was taken as a
constant, while for the systems considered here, I’, for fixed
positions of the nuclei, varies with the radius of the ring. A
simple calculation, however, similar to that given in Part I.
on p. 480, shows that the increase in the total energy of the
system for a variation of the radius of the ring from a to
a+6a, neglecting powers of da greater than the second, is

given by
F\ /éa\?
roan(n BE)
s(P +7) 11+ 5 :
where T is the total kinetic energy and P the potential energy
of the system. Since for fixed positions of the nuclei F
increases for increasing a (F=0 for a=0; F=2N—-s, for
a=), the term dependent on the variation of F will be

positive, and the system will consequently be stable for the

displacement in question. |
From considerations exactly corresponding to those given
in Part II. on p. 481, we get for the condition’of stability for
displacements of the electrons perpendicular to the plane of
the ring
G> Pro Dajiny 0 te ee

where Pn,o—Pn,m has the same signification as in Part IL.,
2
and = G8e denotes the component, perpendicular to the

plane of the ring, of the force due to the nuclei, which acts
upon one of the electrons in the ring when it has suffered a
small displacement 6z perpendicular to the plane of the
ring. As for the systems considered in Part II., the dis-
placements can be imagined to be produced by the effect of
extraneous forces acting upon the electrons in direction
parallel to the axis of the system.

For a system of two nuclei each of charge Ne and with a
ring of n electrons, we find

,__ N?((An\? 2/4 ree ONG Ns:
G=5-((y)) -1) (1 3(z) Me >

of Atoms and Molecules. 861

By help of this expression and using the table for pn,o—Pn, m
given on p. 482 in Part IT., it can be simply shown that the
system in question will not be stable unless N=1 and n equal
to 2 or 3. ;

In considering the stability of the systems for a displace-
ment of the nuclei relative to each other, we shall assume
that the motions of the nuclei are so slow that the state of
motion of the electrons at any moment will not differ sensibly
from that calculated on the assumption that the nuclei are
at rest. This assumption is permissible on acount of the
great mass of the nuclei compared with that of the electrons,
which involves that the vibrations resulting from a displace-
ment of the nuclei are very slow compared with those due to
a displacement of the electrons. For a system consisting of
a ring of electrons and two nuclei of equal charge, we shall
thus assume that the electrons at any moment during the
displacement of the nuclei move in circular orbits in the
plane of symmetry of the latter.

Let us now imagine that, by help of extraneous forces
acting on the nuclei, we slowly vary the distance between
them. During the displacement the radius of the ring of
electrons will vary in consequence of the alteration of
the radial force due to the attraction of the nuclei.
During this variation the angular momentum of each of
the electrons round the line connecting the nuclei will
remain constant. If the distance apart of the nuclei
increases, the radius of the ring will obviously also increase ;
the radius, however, wil! increase at a slower rate than the
distance between the nuclei. For example, imagine a dis-
placement in which the distance as well as the radius are
both increased to « times their original value. In the new
configuration the radial force acting on an electron from the

i oo OS teeatid : he
nuclei and the other electrons is 2 times that in the original

configuration. From the constancy of the angular mo-
mentum of the electrons during the displacement, it further
follows that the velocity of the electrons in the new con-

ais ; ; eens
figuration 1s — times, and the centrifugal force -; times that
a a

in the original. Consequently, the radial force is greater
than the centrifugal force.

On account of the distance between the nuclei increasing
faster than the radius of the ring, the attraction on one of the
nuclei due to the ring will be greater than the repulsion from
the other nucleus. ‘lhe work done during the disp'acement
by the extraneous forces acting on the nuclei will therefore

~

862 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

be positive, and the system will be stable for the displace-
ment. Obviously the same result will hold in the case of
the distance between the nuclei diminishing. It may be
noticed that in the above considerations we have not made
use of any new assumption on the dynamics of the electrons,
but have only used the principle of the invariance of the
angular momentum, which is common both for the ordinary
mec remies and for the main hypothesis Oi IL

For a system consisting of a ring of electrons and two
nuclei of unequal charge, the investigation of the stability is
more complicated. As before, we find that the systems are
always stable for displacements of the electrons in the plane
of the ring ; also an expression corresponding to (4) will hold
for the condition of stability for displacements perpendicular
to the plane of the ring. This condition, however, will not
be sufficient to secure the stability of the system. For a dis-
placement of the electrons perpendicular to the plane of the
ring, the variation of the radial force due to the nuclei will
be of the same order of magnitude as the displacement ;
therefore, in the new configuration the radial force will not
be in equilibrium with the centrifugal force, and, if the
radius of the orbits is varied until the radial equilibrium is
restored, the energy of the system will decrease. This
circumstance must be taken into account in applying the
condition of stability of § 1. Similar complications arise in
the calculation of stability for displacements of the nuclei.
For a variation of the distance apart of the nuclei not only
will the radius of the ring vary but also the ratio in which
the plane of the ring divides the line connecting the nuclei.
As a consequence, the full discussion of the general case is

rather lengthy; an approximate numerical calculation,

however, shows that the systems, as in the former case, wil
be unstable unless the char ges on ‘the nuclei are sinall and the
ring contains very few electrons.

The above considerations suggest configurations of systems,
consisting of two positive nuclei and a number of electrons,
which are consistent with the arrangement of the electrons
to be expected in inolecules of chemical combinations. If we
thus consider a neutral system containing two nuclei with

great charges, it follows that in a stable configuration the
greater part of the electrons must be arranged around each
nucleus approximately as if the other nucleus were absent ;
and that only a few of the outer electrons will be arranged
differently rotating in a ring round the line connecting the
nuclei, The latter ring, which keeps the system together,

represents the chemical . * bond.”

ail

of Atoms and Molecules. 863

A first rough approximation of the possible configuration
of such a ring can be obtained by considering simple systems
consisting of a single ring rotating round the line connecting
two nuclei of minute dimensions. A detailed discussion,
however, of the configuration of systems containing a
greater number of electrons, taking the effect of inner rings
into account, involves elaborate numerical calculations. Apart
from a few indications given in 95, we shall in this paper
confine ourselves to systems containing very few electrons.

§ 3. Systems containing few Electrons. The Hydrogen
Molecule.

Among the systems considered in $2 and found to be
stable the system formed of a ring of two electrons and of
two nuclei of charge e is of special interest, as it, according
to the theory, may be expected to represent a neutral
hydrogen molecule.

Denoting the radius of the ring by a and the distanees
apart of the nuclei from the plane of the ring by b, we get
from (1), putting N=1 and n=2,

1

b= eit

from (4) we further get

pa 3V3=1 _ 1049.
-h
From (2) and (3) we get, denoting as in Part IT. the values
of a, @, and W fora system consisting of a single electron
rotating round a nucleus of charge e (a hydrogen atom) by
Ay, @os and W ee

a=0-95 ag; oa=1°'10 aw, W220 WW.

Since W>2W,, it follows that two hydrogen atoms
combine into 2 molecule with emission of energy. Putting
W,=2°0.107" erg (comp. Part II. p. 488) and N=6-2 102
where N is the Hae of molecules in a gram- miaiaeule, we
get for the energy emitted during the fosmanion of a gram-
molecule of hydrogen from hydrogen atoms (W—2W,)N
== 25). LO which corresponds to 6°0.10* cal. This value
3 of the right order of magnitude; it is, however, con-
siderably less than the value 13. 10* cal. found by Langmuir *
by measuring the heat conduction through the gas from an
incandescent wire in hydrogen. On account of the indirect

* I. Langmuir, Journ. Amer. Chem. Soc. xxxiy. p. 860 (1912).

~

S64 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

method employed it seems difficult to estimate the accuracy
to be ascribed to the latter value. In order to bring the
theoretical value in agreement with Langmuir’s value, the
magnitude of the angular momentum of the electrons should
be only : 2/3 of that adopted ; this seems, however, difficult to
reconcile with the agreement obtained on other points.

From (6) we get G= ae =0°325. For the frequency of

vibration of the whole ring in the direction parallel to the
axis of the system we get

yawn /G ae — (ol, sare) oO" Lisa.

We haveassumed in Part I. and Part II. that the frequency
of radiation absorbed by the system and corresponding to
vibrations of the electrons in the plane of the ring cannot be
calculated from the ordinary mechanics, but is determined
by the relation hy=E, where fA is Planck’s constant, and H
the difference in energy between two different stationary
states of the system. Since we have seen in § 2 that a con-
figuration consisting of two nuclei and a single electron
rotating round the line between them is unstable, we may
assume that the removing of one of the electrons will lead to
the breaking up of the molecule into a single nucleus and a
hydrogen atom. If we consider the latter state as one of
the stationary states in question we get

B= W —Wo=120W,. and yee Ms —3'1,. OMA tees
The value for the frequency of the ultra-violet absorption
line in hydrogen calculated from experiments on dispersion
is v=3°5.10” 1/sec.* Further, a calculation from such expe-
riments based on Drude’s theory givesa value near two for
the number of electrons in a hydrogen molecule. The latter
resuit might have connexion with the fact that the frequencies
caleulated above for the radiation absorbed corresponding to
vibrations parallel and perpendicular to the plane of the ring
are nearly equal. As mentioned in Part I1., the number of
electrons in a helium atom calculated from ‘experiments on
dispersion is only about 2/3 of the number of electrons to be
expected in the atom, viz. two. For a helium atom, as for a
hydrogen molecule, the frequency determined by the relation
v.h=H agrees closely with the frequency observed from
dispersion ; in the helium system, however, the frequency

* C. and M. Cuthbertson, Proc. Roy. Soc. lxxxili. p. 151 (1910).

of Atoms and Molecules. 865

corresponding to vibrations perpendicular to the plane of
the ring is more than three times as great as the frequency
in question, and consequently of negligible influence on the
dispersion.

In order to determine the frequency of vibration of the
system corresponding to displacement of the nuclei relative
to each other, let us consider a configuration in which the
radius of the ring is equal to y, and the distance apart of
the nuclei 22. The radial force acting on one of the
electrons and due to the attraction from the nuclei and the
repulsion from the other electron is

2e7y e

ee ey
Let us now consider a slow displacement of the system

during which the radial force balances the centrifugal force
due to the rotation of the electrons, and the angular momen-

9°

2
tum of the latter remains constant. Putting R = < I’, we

have seen on p. 859 that the radius of the ring is inversely
proportional to F. Therefore, during the displacement con-
sidered, Ry?’ remains constant. This gives by differentiation
(8y? + 32y?a? — (2+ 9?)?)dy —24ay4dx = 0.

Introducing «= and y=a, we get

d

ea EP ad
aan DL aad

The force acting on one of the nuclei due to the attraction
from the ring and the repulsion from the other nucleus is

me 2a e
(x + yy? 4 x?

For «=6b, y=a this force is equal to 0.
Corresponding to a small displacement of the system for

which e=a+6z we get, using the above value for oy and

ep da
putting Q = a Noe

For the frequency of vibration corresponding to the dis-
placement in question we get, denoting the mass of one of

Phil. Mag. 8. 6. Vol. 26. No. 155. Nov. 1913. 3N-

——

866 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution
the nuclei by M,

mM m

V = ie = 1320y ve

Putting ie = 1835 and w, = 6°2. 10”, we get
Pa OSM Oe

This frequency is of the same order of magnitude as that
calculated by LHinstein’s theory from the variation of the
specific heat of hydrogen gas with temperature*. On
the other hand, no absorption of radiation in hydrogen
gas corresponding to this frequency is observed. This is,
however, just what we should expect on account of the
symmetrical structure of the system and the great ratio
between the frequencies corresponding to displacements of
the electrons and of the nuclei. The complete absence of
infra-red absorption in hydrogen gas might be considered as
a strong argument in support of a constitution of a hydrogen
molecule like that adopted here, compared with model-
molecules in which the chemical bond is assumed to have its
origin in an opposite charge of the entering atoms.

As will be shown in § 5, the frequency calculated above
can be used to estimate the frequency of vibration of more

complicated systems for which an infra-red absorption is

observed.

The configuration of two nuclei of charge e and a ring of
three electrons rotating between them will, as mentioned in
§ 2, also be stable for displacements of the electrons perpen-
dicular to the plane of the ring. A calculation gives

= 0-486, G=0°623, and F =0:879;

and further,
a=11l4a, w= 0°77, W =2:32W,.

Since W is greater than for the system consisting of two
nuclei and two electrons, the system in question may be con-
sidered as repr esenting a negatively charged hydrogen
molecule. Proof of the existence of such a system has been
obtained by Sir J. J. Thomson in his experiments on positive

rays.

A system consisting of two nuclei of charge ¢ and a single

* See N. Bjerrum, Zeitsehi. f. Hlektrochem. xvii. p. 731 (1911);

xvii. p. 101 (1912).
+ J. J. Thomson, Phil. Maw. xxly. p, 253 (1912).

aie ee
aa | a or,

of Atoms and Molecules. 867

electron rotating in a circular orbit round the line connecting
the nuclei, is unstable for a displacement of the -electron
perpendicular to its orbit, since in the configuration of
equilibrium G<0. The explanation of the appearance of
positively charged hydrogen molecules in experiments on
positive rays may therefore at first sight be considered as a
serious difficulty for the present theory. A possible ex-
planation, however, might be sought in the special conditions
under which the systems are observed. We are probably
dealing in such a case not with the formation of a stationary
system by a regular interaction of systems containing single
nuclei (see the next section), but rather with a delay in the
breaking up of a configuration brought about by the sudden
removal of one of the electrons by impact of a single particle.

Another stable configuration containing a few electrons is
one consisting of a ring of three electrons and two nuclei of
charges e and 2e. A numerical calculation gives

by = 1446,
a :

be

= Ve Sey,

where a is the radius of the ring and 6; and 0, the distances
apart of the nuclei from the plane of the ring. By help of
(2) and (3) we further get

a=0'644a, w= 2:41, W=7:22W),

where is the frequency of revolution and W the total
energy necessary to remove the particles to infinite distances
from each other. In spite of the fact that W is greater than
the sum of the values of W for a hydrogen and a helinm
atom (W,+6°L3W,; comp. Part II. p. 489), the configuration
in question cannot, as will be shown in the next section, be
considered to represent a possible molecule of hydrogen and
helium.

The vibration of the system corresponding to a displace-
ment of the nuclei relative to each other shows features
different from the system considered above of two nuclei of
charge e and two electrons. If, for example, the distance
between the nuclei is increased, the ring of electrons will
approach the nucleus of charge 2e. Consequently, the

vibration must be expected to be connected with an absorption

of radiation.
§ 4. Formation of the Systems.

_ As mentioned in § 1, we cannot assume that systems con-
taining more than one nucleus are formed by successive
binding of electrons, such as we have assumed for the

aN 2

868 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

systems considered in Part II. We must assume that the
systems are formed by the interaction of others, containing
single nuclei, which already have bound electrons. We
shall now consider this problem more closely, starting with
the simplest possible case, viz., the combination of two
hydrogen atoms to form a molecule.

Consider two hydrogen atoms at a distance apart great in
comparison with the linear dimensions of the orbits of the
electrons, and imagine that by help of extraneous forces
acting on the nuclei, we make these approach each other ;
the displacements, however, being so slow that the dynamical
equilibrium of the electrons tor every position of the nuclei
is the same as if the latter were at rest.

Suppose that the electrons originally rotate in parallel
planes perpendicular to the straight line connecting the
nuclei, and that the direction of rotation is the same and
the difference in phase equal to half a revolution. During
the approach of the nuclei, the direction of the planes of
the orbits of the electrons and the difference in phase wil!
be unaltered. The planes of the orbits, however, will at the
beginning of the process approach each other at a higher
rate than do the nuclei. By the continued displacement
of the latter the planes of the orbits of the electrons will
approach each other more and more, until finally for a
certain distance apart of the nuclei the planes will coineide,
the electrons being arranged in a single ring rotating in the
plane of symmetry of the nuclei. During the further ap-
proach of the nuclei the ratio between the diameter of the
ring of electrons and the distance apart of the nuclei will
increase, and the system will pass through a configuration
in which it will be in equilibrium without the application
of extraneous forces on the nuclei.

By help of a calculation similar to that indicated in § 2,
it can be simply shown that at any moment during this
process the configuration of the electrons is stable for a
displacement perpendicular to the plane of the orbits. In
addition, during the whole operation the angular momentum
of each of the electrons round the line connecting the nuclei
will remain constant, and the configuration of equilibrium
obtained will therefore be identical with the one adopted
in § 3 for a hydrogen molecule. As there shown, the con-
figuration will correspond to a smaller value for the total
energy than the one corresponding to two isolated atoms.
During the process, the forces between the particles of the
system will therefore have done work against the extraneous
forces acting on the nuclei; this fact may be expressed by

of Atoms and Molecules. 869

saying that the atoms have “attracted” each other during
the combination. A closer calculation shows that for any
distange apart of the nuclei greater than that corresponding
to the configuration of equilibrium, the forces acting on the
nuclei, due to the particles of the system, will be in such a
direction as to diminish the distance between the nuclei ;
while for any smaller distance the ferces will have the
opposite direction.

By means of these considerations, a possible process is
indicated for the combination of two hydrogen atoms to
form a molecule. This operation can be followed step by
step without introducing any new assumption on the
dynamics of the electrons, and leads to the same con-
figuration adopted in § 3 for a hydrogen molecule. It may
be recalled that the latter configuration was deduced directly
by help of the principal hypothesis of the universal constancy
ot the angular momentum of the electrons. ‘These con-
siderations also offer an explanation of the ‘‘ affinity ” of two
atoms. It may be remarked that the assumption in regard
to the slowness of the motion of the nuclei relative to those
of the electrons is satisfied to a high degree of approximation
in a collision between two atoms of a gas at ordinary tem-
peratures. In assuming a special arrangement of the
electrons at the beginning of the process, very little infor-
mation, however, is obtained by this method on the chance
of combination due to an arbitrary collision between two
atoms,

Another way in which a neutral hydrogen molecule may be
formed is by the combination of a positively and a negatively
charged atom. According to the theory a positively charged
hydrogen atom is simply a nucleus of vanishing dimensions
and of charge e, while a negatively charged atom is a system
consisting of a nucleus surrounded by a ring of two electrons.
As shown in Part II., the latter system may be considered
as possible, since the energy emitted by the formation of it
is greater than the corresponding energy for a neutral
hydrogen atom. Let us now imagine that, by a slow dis-
placement of the nuclei, as before, a negatively and a
positively charged atom combine. We must assume that,
when the nuclei have approached a distance equal to that in
the configuration adopted for a hydrogen molecule, the
electrons will be arranged in the same way, since this is the
only stable configuration for this distance in which the
angular momentum of the electrons has the value prescribed
by the theory. The state of motion of the electrons will,
however, not vary in a continuous way with the displacement

$70 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

of the nuclei as in the combination of two neutral atoms.
For a certain distance apart of the nuclei the configuration
of the electrons will be unstable and suddenly change by a
finite amount ; this is immediately deduced from the fact
that the motion of the electrons by the combination of two
neutral hydrogen atoms considered above, passes through an
uninterrupted series of stable configurations. The work
done by the system against the extraneous forces acting on
the nuclei will therefore, in the case of the combination of a
negatively and a positively charged atom, not be equal to the
difference in energy between the original and the final con-
figuration ; but in passing through the unstable configurations
a radiation of energy must be emitted, corresponding to that
emitted during the binding of electrons by a single nucleus
and considered in Parts I. and II.

On the above view, it follows that in the breaking up of a
hydrogen molecule by slowly increasing the distance apart
of the nuclei, we obtain two neutral hydrogen atoms and not
a positively anda negatively charged one. ‘This is in agree-

ment with deductions drawn from experiments on positive »

rays *.

‘Next imagine that instead of two hydrogen atoms we con-
sider two helium atoms, 7. e. systems consisting of a nucleus
of charge 2e surrounded by a ring of two electrons, and go
through a similar process to that considered on p. 868.
Assume that the helium atoms at the beginning of the
operation are orientated relatively to each other like the
hydrogen atoms, but with the exception that the phases of
the electrons in the helium atoms ditter by one quarter of a
revolution instead of one half revolution as in the case of
hydrogen. By the displacement of the nuclei, the planes of
the rings of electrons will, as in the former case, approach
each other at a higher rate than the nuclei, and for a certain
position of the latter the planes will coincide. During the
further approach of the nuclei, the electrons will be arranged
at equal angular intervals ina single ring. As in the former
case, it can be shown that at any moment during this operation
the system will be stable for a displacement of the electrons
perpendicular to the plane of the rings. Contrarv, however,
to what took place in the case of hydrogen, the extraneous
forces to be applied to the nuclei in order to keep the system
in equilibrium will always be in a direction to diminish the
distance apart of the nuciei, and the system will never pass
through a configuration of equilibrium ; the helium atoms

* Comp. J. J. Thomson, Phil. Mag. xxiv. p. 248 (1912).

of Atoms and Molecules. 871

will, during the process, “repel” each other. The con-
sideration offers an explanation of the refusal of helium
atoms to combine into molecules by a close approach of the
atoms.

Instead of two hydrogen or two helium atoms, next con-
sider a hydrogen and a helium atom, and let us slowly
approach the nuclei to each other in a similar way. In this
case, contrary to the former cases, the electrons will have no
tendency to flow together in a single ring. On account of
the great difference in the radii of the orbits of the electrons
in hydrogen and helium, the electron of the hydrogen atom
must be expected to rotate always outside the helium ring,
and if the nuclei are brought very close together. the con-
figuration of the electrons will coincide with that adopted in
Part II. for a lithium atom. Fur ther, the extraneous forces
to be applied to the nuclei during the process will be in such
a direction as to diminish the distance apart. In this way,
therefore, we cannot obtain a combination of the atoms.

The Shiite configuration considered in § 3, consisting of a
ring of three electrons and two nuclei of charge e and 2e,
cannot be expected to be formed by such a process, unless
the ring of electrons were bound originally by one of the
nuclei. Neither a hydrogen nor a helium nucleus will,
however, be able to bind a ring of three electrons, since such
a configuration would correspond to a greater total energy
than the one in which the nucleus has bound two electrons
(comp. Part IL. pp. 488 and 490). As mentioned in § 3, such
a configuration cannot therefore be considered as representing
a possible combination of hydrogen and helium, in spite of
the fact that the value of W is greater than the sum of the
values of W for a hydrogen and a helium atom. As we
shall see in the next section, the configuration may, however,
give indications of the possible structure of the molecules of
a certain class of chemical combinations.

§ 5. S ystems containing a greater number of Electrons.

From the considerations of the former section we are led
to indications of the configuration of the electrons in systems
containing a greater number of electrons, consistent with
those obtained in § 2.

Let us imagine that, ina similar way to that considered
on p. 868 for two hydrogen atoms, we make two atoms con-
taining a large number of electrons approach each other.
During the beginning of the process the effect on the con-
figuration of the inner rings will be very small compared
with the effect on the electrons in the outer rings, and the

872 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

final result will mainly depend on the number of electrons in
these rings. If, for example, the outer ring in both atoms
contains only one electron, we may expect that during the
approach these two electrons will form a single ring as in the
case of hydrogen. By a further approach of the nuclei, the
system will arrive at a state of equilibrium before the distance
apart of the nuclei is comparable with the radii of the inner
rings of electrons. If the distance be decreased still further,
the repulsion of the nuclei will predominate and tend to
prevent an approach of the systems.

In this way we are led to a possible configuration of a
molecule of a combination of two monovalent substances—
such as HCl—in which the ring of electrons representing
the chemical bond is arranged in a similar way to that
assumed for a hydrogen molecule. Since, however, as in
the case of hydrogen, the energy emitted by a combination
of the atoms is only a small part of the kinetic energy of the
outer electrons, we may expect that small differences in the
configuration of the ring, due to the presence of inner rings
of electrons in the atoms, will be of great influence on the
heat of combination and consequently on the affinity of the
substances. As mentioned in §2,a detailed discussion of
these questions involves elaborate numerical calculations.
We may, however, make an approximate comparison of the
theory with experiment, by considering the frequency of
vibration of the two atoms in the molecule relative to each
other. In §3, p. 866, we have calculated this frequency for a
hydrogen molecule. Since now the binding of the atoms is
assumed to be similar to that in hydrogen, the frequency of
another molecule can be simply calculated if we know the
ratio of the mass of the nuclei to be that of a hydrogen
nucleus. Denoting the frequency of a hydrogen molecule
by v) and the atomic weights of the substances entering in
the combination in question by A, and A, respectively, we
get for the frequency |

If the two atoms are identical the molecule will be exactly
symmetrical, and we cannot expect an absorption of radiation
corresponding to the frequency in question (comp. p. 866).
For HCl gas an infra-red absorption band corresponding to a
frequency of about 85.10% is observed*. Putting in the
above formula A;=1 and A,=35 and using the value for vp

* See H. Kayser, Handb. d, Spectr. iii. p. 366 (1905).

of Atoms and Molecules. 873

on p. 866, we get y=13°7.108. Onaccount of the approxi-
mation introduced the agreement may be considered as
satisfactory.

The molecules in question may also be formed by the
combination of a positively and a negatively charged atom.
As in the case of hydrogen, however, we shall expect to obtain
two neutral atoms by the breaking up of the molecule. There
may be another type of molecule, for which this does not hold,
viz., molecules which are formed in a manner analogous to
the system consisting of a ring of three electrons and two
nuclei of charges e and 2e, mentioned in the former section.
As we have seen, the necessary condition for the formation
of a configuration of this kind is that one of the atoms in the
molecule is abie to bind three electrons in the outer ring.
According to the theory, this condition is not satisfied for a
hydrogen or a helium atom, but is foranoxygen atom. With
the symbols used in Part II. the configuration suggested for
the oxygen atom was given by 8 (4,2,2). From a calculation,
as that indicated in Part II., we get for this configuration
W =228'07 W.,, while for the contiguration 8 (4,2,3) we get
W =228:18 Wy. Since the latter value for W is greater
than the first, the configuration 8 (4,2,3) may be considered
as possible and as representing an oxygen atom with a single
negative charge. If nowa hydrogen nucleus approaches the
system 8 (4,2,3) we may expect a stable configuration to be
formed in which the outer electrons will be arranged approxi-
mately as in the system mentioned above. In a breaking
up of this configuration the ring of three electrons will
remain with the oxygen atom.

Such considerations suggest a possible configuration for a
water molecule, consisting of an oxygen nucleus surrounded
by a small ring of 4 electrons and 2 hydrogen nuclei situated
on the axis of the ring at equal distances apart from the first
nucleus and kept in equilibrium by help of two rings of
greater radius each containing three electrons; the latter
rotate in parallel planes round the axis of the system, and are
situated relatively to each other so that the electrons in the
one ring are placed just opposite the interval between the
electrons in the other. If we imagine that such a system is
broken up by slowly removing the hydrogen nuclei we should
obtain two positively charged hydrogen atoms and an oxygen
atom with a double negative charge, in which the outermost
electrons will be arranged in two rings of three electrons
each, rotating in parallel planes. The assumption of such
a configuration for a water molecule offers a possible
explanation of the great absorption of water for rays in the

874 Dr. N. Bohr on the Constitution

infra-red and for the high value of its specific inductive
capacity.

In the preceding we have only considered systems which
possess an axis of symmetry around which the electrons are
assumed to rotate in circular orbits. In systems such as the
molecule CH, we cannot, however, assume the existence of
an axis of symmetry, and consequently we must in such cases
omit the assumption of exactly circular orbits. ‘The con-
figuration suggested by the theory for a molecule of CH, is
of the ordinary tetrahedron type; the carbon nucleus sur-
rounded by a very small ring of two electrons being situated
in the centre, and a hydrogen nucleus in every corner. The
chemical bonds are represented by 4 rings of 2 electrons each
rotating round the lines connecting the centre an the
corners. The closer discussion of such questions, however, is
far out of the range of the present theory.

Concluding remarks.’

In the present paper an attempt has been made to develop
a theory of the constitution of atoms and molecules on the
basis of the ideas introduced by Planck in order to account
for the radiation from a black body, and the theory of the
structure of atoms proposed by Rutherford in order to
explain the scattering of «particles by matter.

Planck’s theory deals with the emission and absorption of
radiation from an atomic vibrator of a constant frequency,
independent of the amount of energy possessed by the system
in the moment considered. The assumption of such vibrators,
however, involves the assumption of quasi-elastic forces and
is inconsistent with Rutherford’s theory, according to which
all the forces between the particles of an atomic system vary
inversely as the square of the distance apart. In order to
apply the main results obtained by Planck it is therefore
necessary to introduce new assumptions as to the emission
and absorption of radiation by an atomic system.

The main assumptions used in the present paper are :—

1. That energy radiation is not emitted (or absorbed) in
the continuous way assumed in the ordinary electrodynamics,
but only during the passing of the systems between different
“* stationary 7’ states.

2. That the dynamical equilibrium of the systems in the
stationary staies is governed by the ordinary laws of
mechanics, while these laws do not hold for the passing of

the systems between the different stationary states.

of Atoms and Molecules. 875

3. That the radiation emitted during the transition of a
system between two stationary states is homogeneous, and
that the relation between the frequency » and the total
amount of energy emitted HE is given by H=hy, where h is
Planck’s constant.

4, That the different stationary states of a simple svstem
consisting of an electron rotating round a positive nucleus
are determined by the condition that the ratio between the
total energy, emitted during the formation of the configura-
tion, and the frequency of revolution of the electron is an

h :
entire multiple of - Assuming that the orbit of the

electron is circular, this assumption is equivalent with the
assumption that the angular momentum of the electron round

the nucleus is equal to an entire multiple of cn

5. That the “ permanent ”’ state of any atomic system—~. ¢.,
the state in which the energy emitted is maximum—is
determined by the condition that the angular momentum of

every electron round the centre of its orbit is equal to Ta

It is shown that, applying these assumptions to Rutherford’s
atom model, it is possible to account for the laws of Balmer
and Rydberg connecting the frequency of the different lines
in the line-spectrum of an element. Further, outlines are
given of a theory of the constitution of the atoms of the
elements and of the formation of molecules of chemical
combinations, which on several points is shown to be in
approximate agreement with experiments.

The intimate connexion between the present theory and
modern theories of the radiation from a black body and of
specific heat is evident ; again, since on the ordinary electro-
dynamics the magnetic moment due to an electron rotating
in a circular orbit is proportional to the angular momentum,
we shall expect a close relation to the theory of magnetons
proposed by Weiss. The development of a detailed theory of
heat radiation and of magnetism on the basis of the present
theory claims, however, the introduction of additional as-
sumptions about the behaviour of bound electrons in an
electromagnetic field. The writer hopes to return to these
questions later.
