The Bolender Draft (20 October 1969): USAF draft memo on UFO reporting after Blue Book
Brig. Gen. C. H. Bolender, USAF (Deputy Director of Development), 1969

US Government work — public domain. Draft (not the final memo) stating that reports of UFOs which could affect national security would continue to be handled under JANAP 146 / the 4602d AISS system after Blue Book’s end. Complete text.
Transcription source: nicap.org transcription

================================================================

The Bolender
 Draft (Not Memo), Oct 20, 1969
 Distribution:
 nicapresearch, SHG, NCP


 Our thanks to Barry Greenwood for the
 clean version of this draft. Our thanks also to Gildas
 Bourdais for the first copy of the 3-page document. That
 reproduction was poor but readable and was a copy made
 from FUFOR's "U.S. Government Documents" package. The
 text version presented below was provided by Brad
 Sparks. Robert Todd obtained the release of the Bolender
 document in Jan 1979. The implications from this
 memo, issued just before the shutdown of Project Blue
 Book, is clear, and is found on page 2: " reports
 of unidentified flying objects which could affect
 national security are made in accordance with JANAP 146
 or Air

 Force Manual 55-11 , and are not part of the Blue
 Book system." Although this comment has been made before
 in BB memos going back to 1958-9, this is the document
 often cited.

 The Bolender Memo (document not memo) states that "in
 1966 the Air Force Office of Scientific Research
 contracted to have the University of Colorado conduct an
 independent scientific investigation of unidentified
 flying objects. This study, directed by Dr. Edward
 U. Condon and made available as the "Scientific Study of
 Unidentified Flying Objects," serves as a basis for
 evaluating the Air Force investigative effort.
 After an extensive study of this report as well as the
 review of the report by a panel of the National Academy
 of Sciences, past studies, Project Blue Book operations
 and other inputs, the Office of Aerospace Research
 concluded, and we agree, that the continuation of
 Project Blue Book cannot be justified, either on the
 ground of national security or in the interest of
 science." The flawed study was fully exposed in a May
 14, 1968, LOOK Magazine article, Flying
Saucer

 Fiasco , by John G. Fuller.

 (Brad Sparks: There were 16 Attachments to the Bolender
 Memo and Bob Todd spent years trying to get the AF to
 find and release them, but the AF totally stonewalled
 him. Several of the 16 Attachments are already
 known separately and have been released long before, but
 several are unknown and not released, several more are
 not described well enough to identify.)

 The

 Bolender Draft

 OFFICE ACTION SIGNATURE
 (Surname and Grade)
 1 [AFRDDG ? Draft ? Espey ?] 6
 AFCC Coord [illegible]
 2 AFRDC Appr Bolender
 [?] 7 SAFRD Coord
 [illegible]
 3 SAFOI Coord
 Hogan
 8 SAFCS Sig
 4 SAFLL Coord Graves
 [?] 9
 5 AFCCS Appr
 [illegible] 10
 --------------------------------------------------------------------------
 SURNAME OF ACTION OFFICER AND GRADE
 SYMBOL PHONE TYPIST'S INIT.SUSPENSE DATE

 Major
 Espey
AFRDDG

 52181 vc


 --------------------------------------------------------------------------
 SUBJECT

 DATE

 Unidentified Flying Objects
 (UFO)
20

 OCT 1969
 --------------------------------------------------------------------------
 SUMMARY
 1. For more than twenty years the Air Force
 has had the responsibility
 within the Department of Defense for the
 investigation of unidentified
 flying objects (UFOs) (Atch 2). As stated in
 Project Blue Book, this
 investigative program has two objectives:

 a. To determine whether UFOs
 pose a threat to the security of the
 United States: and

 b. To determine whether UFOs
 exhibit any unique scientific information
 or advanced technology which could contribute to
 scientific or technical
 research (Atch 3).

 Procedures for Project Blue Book reporting are
 defined in Air Force
 Regulation 80-17. This regulation requires
 the Commander of an Air Force
 base to provide a UFO investigative capability and
 for Air Force Systems
 Command to continue Project Blue Book (Atch
 4). In response to this
 regulation most Commanders have appointed a UFO
 investigating officer,
 usually as an additional duty. Project Blue
 Book has two officers, one
 NCO and one civilian assigned on a full-time
 basis. In addition, Dr. A.
 J. Hynek served as a scientific consultant until 1
 July 1969.

 2. In 1966 the Air Force Office of Scientific
 Research contracted to have
 the University of Colorado conduct an independent
 scientific investigation
 of unidentified flying objects. This study,
 directed by Dr. Edward U.
 Condon and made available as the "Scientific Study
 of Unidentified Flying
 Objects," serves as a basis for evaluating the Air
 Force investigative
 effort (Atch 5). After an extensive study of
 this report as well as the
 review of the report by a panel of the National
 Academy of Sciences, past
 studies, Project Blue Book operations and other
 inputs, the Office of
 Aerospace Research concluded, and we agree, that
 the continuation of
 Project Blue Book cannot be justified, either on
 the ground of national
 security or in the interest of science (Atch 6).

 3. The general conclusion of the Scientific
 Study of Unidentified Flying
 Objects is that "nothing has come from the study of
 UFOs in the past 21
 years that has added to scientific
 knowledge." As to what the federal
 government should do with the UFO reports it
 receives from the general
 public, the authors add that they are "inclined to
 think that nothing
 should be done with them in the expectation that
 they are going to
 contribute to the advance of science." A
 panel of the National Academy
 of Sciences concurred in these views, and the Air
 Force has found no
 reason to question this

 --------------------------------------------------------------------------

 Subject: 1969 BOLENDER MEMO PG. 2


 conclusion. For example, it has been the Air
 Force experience that although a
 significant portion of the Air Force's
 environmental research program is
 concerned with natural phenomena that could be
 associated with unidentified
 flying objects (Atch 7), Project Blue Book reports
 have not added any
 useful data to these research efforts (Atch
 6). Thus, we concur with the
 University of Colorado recommendation "that only so
 much attention to the
 subject should be given as the Department of
 Defense deems to be necessary
 strictly from a defense point of view."

 4. As early as 1953, the Robertson Panel
 concluded "that the evidence
 presented on Unidentified Flying Objects shows no
 indication that these
 phenomena constitute a direct physical threat to
 national security" (Atch
 9). In spite of this finding, the Air Force
 continued to maintain a
 special reporting system. There is still,
 however, no evidence that
 Project Blue Book reports have served any
 intelligence function (Atch 8).
 Moreover, reports of unidentified flying objects
 which could affect
 national security are made in accordance with JANAP
 146 or Air Force
 Manual 55-11, and are not part of the Blue Book
 system (Atch 10). The
 Air Force experience therefore confirms the
 impression of the University
 of Colorado researchers "that the defense function
 could be performed
 withing the framework established for intelligence
 and surveillance
 operations without the continuance of a special
 unit such as Project
 Blue Book."

 5. The conclusion which follows is that
 Project Blue Book does not merit
 future expenditures of resources.
 Accordingly, we recommend that it be
 terminated and that the actions which follow from
 this decision, such as
 cancelling Air Force Regulation 80-17 and not
 renewing the consultant
 contract, be initiated. Termination of
 Project Blue Book would have no
 adverse effect on Air Force operations or research
 programs. It would
 free manpower for useful purposes, eliminate the
 need for a scientific
 consultant and relieve base commanders of a minor
 responsibility and an
 administrative burden.

 6. Termination of Project Blue Book would
 leave no official federal
 office to receive reports of UFOs. However,
 as already stated, reports
 of UFOs which could affect national security would
 continue to be handled
 through the standard Air Force procedures designed
 for this purpose.
 Presumably, local police departments respond to
 reports which fall within
 their responsibilities. Similarly, as to
 scientific research, the
 Colorado researchers conclude that, although they
 do not see "any
 fruitful lines of advance from the study of UFO
 reports, we believe that
 any scientist with adequate training and
 credentials who does come up
 with a clearly defined, specific proposal for study
 should be supported."
 We see no reason why the normal channels and
 criteria for the funding of
 scientific research should not be adequate for
 UFO-related research.

 7. Some feel that a central reporting center
 should be established, and a
 proposal has been made to establish a Rare
 Atmospheric Phenomena Reporting
 Center (Atch 11 and 12). Because the problem
 affects a number of
 agencies, this center might be under the auspices
 of the Federal Council
 on Science and Technology. However, in the
 light of the University of
 Colorado recommendation

 -----------------------------------------------------------------------------


 Subject: 1969 BOLENDER MEMO PG. 3


 that the federal government should not set up a
 major new agency for the
 scientific study of UFOs, we do not favor this
 suggestion and feel that
 UFO reports should be left to normal scientific and
 defense channels.
 If such a center is established, it should not
 perform an investigative
 function and should be initiated only on a trial
 basis for a specified
 lifetime.

 8. Project Blue Book has accumulated records
 on over 13,000 sighting
 cases. During his study, Dr. Condon expressed
 concern about the possible
 loss of these records and their relative
 inaccessibility at Wright-
 Patterson Air Force Base. He was assured by
 Secretary Brown that we would
 look into the feasibility and desirability of
 relocating the files in the
 Washington area and that no action would be taken
 until the Colorado
 report was released (Atch 13). If Project
 Blue Book is terminated, the
 records should be transferred to an appropriate
 archive and preserved for
 historical value and to prevent charges that the
 Air Force is concealing
 facts.

 9. To receive the candor and cooperation
 essential to the successful
 investigation of UFOs, the Air Force adopted a
 practice of confidentiality;
 witnesses were assured that their names would not
 be used without their
 permission (Atch 14). Therefore, access to
 these records and the
 publications [illegible] access must be carefully
 reviewed and
 controlled. SAFOI feels that an Air Force
 controlled archive away from
 the Washington, D.C. area is the most appropriate
 storage facility.
 Considering the existence of local, privately
 sponsored UFO investigative
 organizations, the ready availability of these
 records in the Washington
 area would result in an inordinate workload in
 clearing investigators,
 providing documentation, and reviewing and clearing
 manuscripts.
 Therefore, the Air University was queried about the
 possibility of
 storing these documents at the Air Force Archives
 (Atch 15). Air Force
 Air University will accept these records providing:

 a. SAFOI will answer all
 requests about Blue Book, and not require AU
 research to answer such queries.

 b. SAFOI will rigidly limit the
 right of access to recognized,
 legitimate researchers, and

 c. SAFOI will screen
 researcher's notes to insure that
 "confidentiality" is maintained (Atch 16).

 10. Project Blue Book should be terminated,
 and Blue Book records should
 be transferred to the USAF Archives at Air
 University. The attached
 memorandum would initiate these actions.

 RECOMMENDATION

 11. That the memorandum be signed.


 3 /s/ C.H. Bolender
 C. H. BOLENDER, Brig Gen,
 USAF 16 Atch
 Deputy Director of
 Development
(Listed

 on Separate Page)
 DCS/Research & Development
