The Life of St. Francis of Assisi (Bonaventure (Miss Lockhart, trans.), 1915)
======================================================================
Bonaventure's Legenda Maior — the official Franciscan Life of St. Francis (c. 1260), in the 1915 English translation by Miss Lockhart. The Seraphic Doctor's mystical hagiography; the medieval biography par excellence. Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1915 edition (https://archive.org/details/lifeofstfranciso00bona).

THE LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI


or


ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.
F194


“LEGENDA SANTA FRANCISCI” OF ST. BONAVENTURE.


MISS LOCKHART,
Author of ‘‘ The Life of St. Teresa,” etc.


EDITED, WITH A PREFACE, BY HIS GRACE THE


CARDINAL-ARCHBISHOP OF WESTMINSTER.


SEVENTH EDITION


R. & T. WASHBOURNE, LTD
PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON


AND AT MANCHESTER, BIRMINGHAM, AND GLASGOW
1915 All rights reserved


DK 4700
Fae ’ 2
3-49 &

r


PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.


4. ?) Zi u a


PE Ea) HE life of a Saint, written by a Saint, as the life
a of St. Paul of the Cross written by his com-
fete} panion, the Blessed Strambi, speaks to the
heart with a vital power which no work of merely
natural genius can command. It has a twofold operation
of the Spirit of God with it, both in the subject and in
the writer. Such is, in an eminent degree, the Life of
S St. Francis, by St. eneveornses he life of the Seraphic

Patriarch written by the Seraphic Doctor. Among un-
inspired books there are few that breathe more sensibly
H the love of God. There is a light and a sweetness
® about it which is not of this world. The anecdote of St.
Le Thomas visiting St. Bonaventure’s cell, and finding him


OV. "OO 76


in ecstasy, is too well known to need recital. St. Bona-
venture was then writing the Life of St. Francis, and it
was on these very pages that he was intent when St.
Thomas drew back from the door, saying, “ Let us leave
a Saint to work for a Saint.” It is in this same spirit
of love and reverence that we ought to read this book.


> Henry Epwarp,
Archbishop of Westminster.


Feast of the Immaculate Conception,
1867. ‘


PROLOGUE.


pew


these our latter days in His faithful and devout

sie} servant Francis, and hath been manifested
Peioich him to all those who are truly humble and
lovers of holy poverty; who, honouring and devoutly
adoring the superabundance of the divine mercy,
which was so bountifully poured forth upon him, have
been taught by his example to forsake all impiety and»
worldly desires, to conform their lives to the life of
Christ, and with intense and burning desire to thirst
after the hope of heavenly beatitude, or so graciously
_ did God look upon this truly poor and contrite man,
that He not only raised the poor and needy from the
vile dust of worldly conversation, but also set him to be
a light to the faithful, making him to become a true
professor, leader, and herald of evangelical perfection,
that, bearing witness to the light, he might prepare
before the Lord a way of light and. peace in the hearts
of the faithful. For, shining like a morning star in
the midst of a dark cloud, he enlightened by the bright
rays of his pure doctrine and holy life those who lay in


6 PROLOGUE.


darkness and in the shadow of death, and thus guided
them onwards by his bright shining to the perfect day.
And like the glorious rainbow set in the darkness of the
clouds, he came forth as the angel of true peace and the
sign of the covenant between God and man, bringing
_@lad tidings of peace and salvation: being sent by God,
like the Precursor of Christ, to prepare in the desert of
this world the highway of holy poverty, and by word and
_ example to preach penance to men, Thus prevented by
the gifts of heavenly grace, enriched with the merits of
invincible virtue, filled with the spirit of prophecy, and
ordained to the angelic office of declaring good tidings,
burning with seraphic fire, and raised above all human
«/Ahings in the fiery chariot of divine love, it may be
reasonably affirmed from the clear testimony of His
whole life that he came in the spirit and power of Elias.

We may also say that he was truly shadowed forth by
that other friend of Christ, the Apostle and Evangelist
St. John, under the similitude of the angel whom he
saw ascending from the east with the sign of the living
God. Under this figure we may assuredly discern
Francis, the servant, herald, and messenger of God, the
beloved of Christ, the pattern for our imitation, the
wonder of the world, if we carefully observe and mark
the excellency of his marvellous sanctity, by which,
during his life, he imitated the purity of the Angels, so
that he may be set forth as an example to all the perfect
followers of Christ.

And we are not only moved firmly to believe this, and
confidently to affirm it by that office which he exercised
in his own person, inviting all men to tears and penance,
clothing himself in sackcloth, girding himself with a
cord, shaving his head, and signing, with the salutary


\


PROLOGUE, i!


sion of the Cross, the foreheads of those who mourned
over their offences against God, even as the Angel was
wont to mark the foreheads of men with the mysterious
' character of Tau: we recognise him, indeed, by the’
habit which he wore, bearing the outward semblance of
_ the Cross, but far more certainly by the seal of the like-
ness of the living God, even of Jesus Christ crucified,
which was impressed upon his body, neither by natural
power, nor artificial contrivance, but by the marvellous
efficacy of the Spirit of the living God.

I know myself, then, to be most unworthy and un-
equal to describe the life of this most venerable man,
thus set forth for the imitation of the faithful; nor
should I ever have attempted such a task, but for my
ardent love for my brethren ; being moved thereto by the
urgent request of our General Chapter, and no less by |
the devotion which I am bound to bear to this our holy
Father, by whose merits and invocation I was (as I well
remember), while yet a child, delivered from the jaws of
death. Were I then to be silent in his praise, I should
fear justly to incur the charge of ingratitude. Good
reason, indeed, have I to undertake this labour, that so,
in return for the bodily and spiritual life preserved to
me by God for the sake of his merits and virtues, I, on
my part, may preserve as best I may (albeit imperfectly),
the acts, words, and virtues of his life, which are scat-
tered and dispersed in divers places, and so gather them
together, that they may not perish with the lives of
those who lived and conversed with him on earth.

Having, therefore, to set forth the life of so holy a
man, that I might obtain certain knowledge of all things
relating to it, I went to the place where he was born,
and learned, from many who had been familiar with him


8 PROLOGUE.


whilst he was yet on earth, the manner of his life and
conversation, and of his departure out of this world. I
examined all these things with great diligence, and con-
ferred thereupon with some who, having been his chief
disciples, had full knowledge of his marvellous sanctity,
and who are worthy of all credit for their approved
virtue and perfect knowledge of the truth. Now, in de-
scribing all these things, and the sublime and wonderful
deeds which God was pleased to work by this His
servant, I have judged it fitting to avoid all curious
ornaments of style and vain eloquence of words—
believing that the devotion of the reader will be en-
kindled rather by a pure and simple idiom than by an
ornamental phraseology. Neither have I been careful,
in weaving the web of my story, to follow the order of
time; but, to avoid the confusion of subjects which
might thence arise, I have rather studied to follow such
an order as would string together facts of the same
class and kind, although they may have taken place at
different times. The beginning, therefore, and course
of this life, and finally the end of it, shall be related in
fifteen chapters, the contents of Stick, for greater clear-
ness and distinctness, are set down below.
I, Of the manner of life of St. Francis whilst he
yet wore the secular habit.
II, Of the perfect Conversion of St. Francis to God
and how he restored three churches.
III. Of the institution of the Order, and the appro-
bation of the rule of St. Francis.
IV. Of the increase of his Order, and of the con-
* firmation of the rule, already approved.
VY. Of the Austerity of his life, and how all
creatures gave him joy and consolation,


PROLOGUE, i)


VI. Of his Humility and Obedience, and how the
Divine Majesty granted all his prayers.
VII. Of his love of Poverty, and the wonderful pro-_
vision made for all his wants by God.
VIII. Of his tender Piety, and how even creatures
devoid of reason were obedient to his will.
IX. Of the fervour of his Charity, and of his desire
of Martyrdom.
X. Of his fervour and diligence in Prayer.
XI. Of his knowledge of Holy Scripture, and of his
spirit of Prophecy.
XII. Of the efficacy of his Preaching and of his gift
| of Healing.
XIII. Of the sacred Stigmata.
XIV. Of his Patience, and of his Death.
XV. Of his Canonization and Translation.
Lastty. Of the Miracles wrought after his departure
from this world.


(4DVERTISEMENT.}


WORKS
OF


THE SERAPHIC FATHER
ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI,


TRANSLATED BY
A RELIGIOUS OF THE ORDER.
New Edition, 3s.


LIFE OF
ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI


I a eS


CHAPTER I.


OF THE MANNER OF LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS WHILST HE YET
WORE THE SECULAR HABIT.


e\N the city of Assisi there dwelt a man named
}| Francis, whose memory is in benediction ; for


f2c>28} God in His mercy, preventing him with His
oR blessing, vouchsafed to deliver him from the
perils of this present life and filled him abundantly with
the gifts of His heavenly grace. For although he was
brought up in his youth among the vain children of
worldly men in the vanities of the world, and was
employed by his father, as soon as he had acquired some
knowledge of letters, in the pursuit of worldly gain;
yet, by the continual present help of God, he never
suffered himself to be carried away, like the lawless
youths around him, by sensual pleasure, albeit he was
of a gay and joyous spirit; nor, although dwelling among
covetous traders, was he intent upon gain, nor did he
set. his heart and hopes on money. For in the soul of
this young man there dwelt, by the gift of God, a certain


12 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI,


innate and natural love of the poor of Christ, which,
_ growing up with him from his earliest childhood, filled
his heart with such benignity that, in obedience to the
words of the Gospel, he resolved within himself to give
_o every one who should ask of him, and especially if the
petitions were made in the Name of God. Now it
happened one day, when Francis was wholly engrossed
by the tumult of worldly business, that a poor man
asked an alms of him; contrary to his usual custom he
passed him unheeded, and went on his way. But
speedily recollecting himself, he ran after the poor man,
charitably relieved his wants, and made a solemn
promise to God that, from that day forth, he would
never refuse an alms to any that should ask it of him
for the love of God. And this promise he faithfully
kept till the day of his death, meriting thereby an
abundant increase of the grace and love of God. So
that he was wont to say, after he had perfectly put on
Christ, that even while he still wore the secular habit,
he could never hear words expressing the love of God
without his heart being deeply moved and affected.
And certain it is, that in the sweetness and mildness of
his bearing, the gentleness of his manners, his patience
and docility—far beyond the ordinary custom of men,
the munificence of his bounty, exceeding even the extent
of his means, —in all these things shone forth the beauty
of this young man’s soul, clearly betokening the abundant
outpouring of the divine blessing reserved for him in days
to come.

A certain man of great simplicity dwelt in those days
at Assisi, who, by virtue of knowledge divinely infused,
whenever he met Francis in the street, would take off
his mantle, and spread it upon the ground before him,


(


HIS MANNER OF LIFE IN THE WORLD. 13


declaring that he did so because he was a man worthy
of all honour and reverence, who should shortly perform
great works and marvellous deeds, and was, therefore,
to be highly honoured and _ praised by all faithful
Christians.

But Francis as yet knew not, neither understood,
the great purposes of God towards him; for being by the
will of his father engrossed by external affairs, and also
by reason of the original corruption of our nature drawn

down and depressed by earthly things, he had not
learned to contemplate heavenly mysteries, neither did
he yet know the sweetness of divine consolation. And,
forasmuch as the Lord is wont, by afflictions and tribula-
tions, to open the ears of the spirit, so, by the right
hand of the Most High, he was suddenly changed, his
body being afflicted with long and severe sufferings, that —
so his soul might be prepared to receive the unction of
the Holy Ghost. Now, when he had recovered his
bodily health, going forth one day, as was his wont, in
apparel suited to his state, he met a certain soldier of
honour and courage, but poor and vilely clad; of whose
poverty, feeling a tender and sorrowful compassion, he
took off his new clothes and gave them to the poor man-
at-arms, thus at once fulfilling two offices of piety, by
covering the shame of a noble cavalier and relieving a
poor man’s penury.

— On the following night, when he was asleep, the divine
~ mercy showed him a spacious and beautiful palace filled
with arms and military ensigns, all marked with the
Cross of Christ, to make known to him that his charit-
able deed done to the poor soldier for the love of the
great King of heaven should receive an unspeakable
reward. And when he asked for whom all these things


14 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


were reserved, a divine voice answered him that they
were for him and for his soldiers.

When Francis awoke, early in the morning, not tes
yet accustomed to understand and interpret divine
mysteries, nor through visible signs to ascend to in-
visible truths, he thought that this strange vision
betokened some great earthly prosperity. Therefore,
being still ignorant of the Divine Will, he determined
to go into Apulia, there to enter the household of a
certain Count of great magnificence and liberality, who
dwelt in that country, hoping in his service to acquire
military honour and renown, according to what he sup-
posed to be the meaning of the vision. When he had
travelled for some days together, he came to a certain
city, when the Lord spoke to him in the night with the
familiar voice of a friend, saying, “ Francis, who can do
most for thee—the Lord or the servant, the rich man or
the poor?” And when Francis replied that the Lord
and the rich man could do more for him than the poor,
‘‘ Wherefore, then,” said the voice, ‘‘ dost thou leave
the Lord for the servant, and the God of infinite riches
for a poor mortal?’ Then said Francis, ‘‘ Lord, what
wilt Thou have me to do?’ And the Lord answered :
‘‘ Return home; for the vision which thou hast seen
prefigured a spiritual work which thou shalt bring to
pass, not by human counsel, but by divine disposition.”
So, when the day dawned, Francis set forth in great
haste towards Assisi, full of joy and confidence; and
from that time he awaited in obedience the revelation
of the Will of God, and withdrawing from the tumult of
worldly affairs, he most devoutly besought the divine
clemency to vouchsafe to make manifest to him all that


he was to do, And so, by the practice of frequent


HIS MANNER OF LIFE IN THE WORLD. 15


prayer, the vehement flame of heavenly desires increased
daily within him, and already, for the love of his


celestial country, he despised all earthly things, as if
they existed not; for he knew that he had found the


hidden treasure, and like a prudent merchant he con-


sidered within himself how to sell all that he had to


make it his own. But he knew not yet how he was to


purchase it, nor what he was to give for it; only it
seemed to be made known to him that the spiritual
“merchant must begin with the contempt of the world,


and that the soldier of Christ must begin by victory over
himself,


Now, as he was riding one day over the plain of Assisi
he met a leper, whose sudden appearance filled him


with fear and horror; but forthwith calling to mind
the resolution which he had made to follow after per-


fection, and remembering that if he would be a soldier
of Christ he must first overcome himself, he dismounted
from his horse and went to meet the leper, that he
might embrace him: and when the poor man stretched
out his hand to receive an alms, he kissed it and filled it
with money. Having again mounted his horse, he looked
around him over the wide and open plain, but nowhere
could he see the leper; upon which, being filled with
wonder and joy, he began devoutly to give thanks to
God, purposing within himself to proceed to still
greater things than this.

He sought continually for wild and solitary places,
where, with tears and unutterable groans, he poured


forth long and fervent prayers, until at last our Lord


was pleased to hear him; for being one day engaged
in fervent prayer, according to his custom, in a lonely
place, he became wholly absorbed in God, when Jesus


we


16 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


Christ appeared to him under the form of a Crucifix, at
which sight his whole soul seemed to melt away; and
so deeply was the memory of Christ’s Passion impressed
on his heart, that it pierced even to the marrow of his
bones. From that hour, whenever he thought upon the
Passion of Christ, he could scarcely restrain his tears
and sighs; for he then understood (as he made known
to some of his familiar friends not long before his death)
that these words of the Gospel were addressed to him :
“Tf thou wilt come after Me, deny thyself, and take up
thy cross and follow Me.” And from that day forth
he clothed himself with the spirit of poverty, the sense
of humility, and the affection of interior piety. And
inasmuch as heretofore he had greatly abhorred the
company of lepers, and could not endure even the
distant sight of them, now—for the love of Christ
crucified, who, according to the Prophet’s words, was
despised as a leper—he, in contempt of himself, sought
out and served lepers with great humility and piety, and
aided them in all their necessities. For he often visited
them in their houses, giving them bountiful alms, and
with affectionate compassion he would kiss their hands
and their faces; and he desired to bestow upon poor
beggars not only his money, but even himself; often-
times taking off his own clothes to cover them, tearing
or cutting them in pieces for them when he had nothing
else to give. With the greatest reverence and piety he
was wont to supply the necessities of poor priests,
especially by providing them with ornaments for the
altar, that so he might at the same time bear his part
in the divine worship and provide for the needs of the
ministers of God. About this time, he was visiting
with great reverence and devotion the holy temple of


rz)


surrounding the church door; and partly induced by /
the love of poverty, partly by the delight which he took
in the exercise of works of mercy, he gave—his- own
clothes to the one who seemed most destitute; and
putting on the poor man’s rags, he remained there all
day amidst these poor people, in marvellous joy and
gladness of heart, that so despising the glory of the
world he might attain to evangelical perfection. He
laboured with all diligence at the mortification of the
flesh, that thus the Cross of Christ, which he bore in-
wardly in his heart, might be impressed also outwardly
on his body. And all these things were done by Francis,
this servant of God, before he had taken the religious
habit, or separated himself from the conversation of the
world,


CHAPTER IL


PERFECT CONVERSION OF ST. FRANCIS TO GOD; HE
REBUILDS THREE CHURCHES.


zy] HROUGHOUT all the time of which we have
(Ys " hitherto spoken, this great servant of God had
ei] neither master nor teacher to guide or instruct
ine save only Christ our Lord, who, in addition to the
gifts already bestowed upon him, was pleased now to
visit him with the sweet consolations of His divine
grace. For having gone one day into the fields, the
better to contemplate and meditate upon heavenly
things, he came to the church of St. Damian, which,
from its great antiquity, was fast falling into decay,


18 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


and, by the inspiration of the Spirit of God, he went in
thither to pray. As he lay prostrate before a Crucifix
he was filled with great spiritual consolation, and gazing
with tearful eyes upon the holy Cross of the Lord, he
heard with his bodily ears a voice from the Crucifix,
which said thrice to him: “Francis, go and build up
My house, which, as thou seest, is falling into ruin.”
Then Francis, trembling, and full of fear, being in the
church alone, wondered at the sound of that marvellous
voice, and as his heart received the meaning and power
of the divine words he fell into a great ecstasy. When
he had recovered his senses, and came to himself, he -
prepared to obey, and set himself at once to fulfil the
command which he had received to repair the material
church, although the principal intention of these words
referred to that Church which Christ has purchased and
built up with His precious Blood, as the Holy Spirit
afterwards revealed to him, and as he afterwards made
known to the friars.

He arose, therefore, and fortifying himself with the
sign of the Cross, he took out of his house a number of
pieces of cloth, with which he went in all haste to the, —
city of Foligno, where he sold all the merchandise which
he had brought with him, and the horse also which had
carried it, and so the hapee merchant returned to Assisi,
and reverently entering the church which had been —
committed to his care, he found there a poor priest, to
whom, with due reverence, he offered all his goods for _
the repair of that church, and for the necessities and
use of the poor, humbly beseeching him to suffer him to
dwell with him there for awhile.

The priest was well content that he should remain
there, but for fear of his father and mother he refused


HIS PERFECT CONVERSION. 19


the proffered money. Francis, however, who cared not
for anything that might befall him, threw down all the
money on a ledge of a window, as if it had been so
much dust, and so left it in contempt. :

Now when the servant of God had dwelt some days
with this priest, his father, coming to hear of it, hastened
in great anger tothe church. Francis being yet a novice
in the service of Christ, hearing the loud threats of his
persecutors, and expecting their approach, resolved to
give place to wrath, and hid himself for some days in a
very secret place, beseeching the Lord continually, with
‘many tears, to deliver his soul from the hands of those
who persecuted him, that so he might accomplish the
pious design with which He had inspired him, Then,
being filled with exceeding joy, he began to reproach
himself with his fearfulness and faintness of heart, and.
leaving his retreat, and casting away all fear, he made
his way to Assisi, where, when the citizens saw him,
pale and meagre in countenance, and changed in mind
and character, many of them judged that he was out of
his senses, and began to throw stones and mud at him
and to cry after him as a madman. But the good
servant of God, unmoved by all these insults, went on

his way as if he heard them not. These cries soon
reached the ears of his father, who ran to the spot, not


to deliver him, but rather to oppress him more cruelly:


for seizing him without mercy, he dragged him to
his house, reproaching and tormenting him with words,
blows and bonds. But he who had now become more
prompt and valiant in the service of his Lord, called to
mind those words of the Gospel: “Blessed are they
who are persecuted for justice’ sake, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven.”
2—2


—-20 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


* Not long afterwards his father was compelled by the
affairs of his merchandise to leave Assisi, when his
mother, disapproving her husband’s treatment of Francis,
and seeing that there was no hope of shaking the in-
vincible constancy of her son, freed him from his bonds
and gave him liberty to go whithersoever he would.
And so, returning thanks to Almighty God, he returned
to St. Damian’s.

When his father came home and found that he was
gone, he severely reproved his wife, and went in great
anger to seek him, being minded, if he could not bring
him home, to drive him altogether out of the country. ~
But Francis, in the strength of God, went forth of his |
own accord to meet his furious father, declaring that he
feared neither his blows nor his chains, and protesting |
that he was ready to bear every suffering which might
await him for the Name of Christ.

The father, seeing that his son could not be moved
from his purpose, turned his thoughts next to the


recovery of his money. Having found this at last ©


lying, as has been said, on a window-sill, his anger was
in some measure appeased by the recovery of the
money, which satisfied the thirst of his avarice.

And now his father according to the flesh, having ~
despoiled him of his money, brought this son (no —
longer his, but the child of divine grace) before the
Bishop of Assisi, to compel him to renounce in his


hands all his inheritance, and whatsoever he had re- ~
ceived from him, which this true lover of poverty was —
most ready and willing to do. As soon, therefore, as he ©


came into the Bishop’s presence, without a moment’s
delay, neither waiting for his father’s demand nor utter- |
ing @ word himself, he laid aside all his clothes, and —


HIS PERFECT CONVERSION. 21


gave them back to his father, Then it was seen, that
under his fair and costly garments the holy man wore a
hard and rough hair-shirt. With marvellous fervour hé
then turned to his father, and spoke thus to him in
the presence of all: “ Until this hour I have called thee
my father on earth; from henceforth, I may say con-
fidently, my Father Who art m heaven, in Whose
hands I have laid up all my treasures, all my trust, and
all my hope.”

When the Bishop, who was a man of great virtue
and piety, heard this, he marvelled at the exceeding
fervour of the holy man of God, and rising from his
seat, he embraced him with many tears, covering him
with his mantle, and he commanded his servants to
bring some garment wherewith to clothe him. There
was brought to him a poor mantle, belonging to a
certain labourer of the Bishop, which Francis received
with exceeding joy; and with a piece of chalk, which he
found lying there, he made the sign of the Cross upon
it, as a garment well befitting a poor half-naked man,
crucified to the world.

And thus did this most faithful servant of the great
King of heaven and earth strip himself of all things,
that so he might follow the Lord, Whom he so truly
loved, Who died naked on the Cross for him; and thus
did he arm himself with the sign of the Cross, commit-
ting his soul to that sacred wood of our salvation, to
escape thereby from the fearful shipwreck of the world.

From that day forth this great despiser of the world,
being freed from all the bonds of worldly cupidity, went
forth from the city to a secret and solitary place, where,
alone and in silence, he waited the revelation of the
Divine Will. .


22 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI,


Now it came to pass, that as Francis, the servant of
God, was singing the praises of the Lord with great joy
and gladness, certain robbers fell upon him and fiercely
questioned him, asking him who he was. And when
he answered them in truly prophetic words: “I am
the herald of the great King of heaven,” the robbers
fell upon him with great fury, and having loaded him
with blows, they cast him into a ditch filled with snow,
saying: “ Lie there, thou herald of nothing, who callest
thyself the herald of God.” When they had departed,
Francis arose, and, full of exceeding joy, went through
the forest, singing with a loud voice the praises of his
Creator; and having come to a neighbouring monastery,
he there asked an alms as a poor man, and as such he
received it, for it was given to him as to a vile and un-
known person.

From thence he came to Gubbio, where he was recog-
nised by one of his own friends, who received him into
his house, and gave him a poor old tunic, with which he


clothed himself, as in deed ane in truth the poor servant
of God.


Afterwards, in his deep love of humility, he went «


among the lepers and remained with them, serving
them diligently for the love of God. He washed their
feet, bound up their wounds, pressing out the corrupt
matter, and then washing and cleansing them. And
having done this he kissed their wounds with great and
marvellous devotion, as-one who in brief space was to
become an evangelical physician, and true healer of
souls. Nay, such power was bestowed upon him by the
Lord, that he obtained a wonderful gift to cure, not
corporal only, but spiritual diseases. And amongst
many such marvellous deeds we will relate one, the fame
whereof was spread throughout all that country.


eit pil ata a td eee


HIS PERFECT CONVERSION. 23


There was a certain man at Spoleto who was tor
mented and consumed by a malignant disease, which _
had eaten away his mouth and jaw, nor could any
remedy be found for it. It so befell, that he went to
Rome to beseech the Prince of the Apostles and many
other Saints by their merits to obtain for him favour
from God. On his return from his pilgrimage, he
happened to meet with the man of God. And desiring,
for the great devotion which he bore him, to kiss
his feet, the humble Francis, who could not suffer it,
kissed his diseased and loathsome mouth. Now, no
sooner had this true servant of God and of the lepers
with such marvellous pity touched that horrible wound
with his holy mouth, than the disease utterly disap-
peared, and the sick man recovered his health.

Assuredly I know not which of these two things is
most, worthy of admiration, the profound humility of
that kiss, or the marvellous power which wrought so
stupendous a miracle.

Francis, being thus established in the humility of
Christ, called to mind the obedience laid upon him by
the voice from the Crucifix, to rebuild the church of St.
Damian; and being perfect in his obedience, he re-
turned to Assisi, that, if in no other way, he might by
begging obtain means to fulfil the divine command.
And therefore despising for the love of the poor crucified
Jesus the shame of going to beg of those amongst whom
he had once lived in honour and wealth, he, moreover,
laid heavy burdens upon his body, already wasted with
fasting, carrying great stones on his own shoulders for
the building of the church.

When he had rebuilt the aforesaid church by the help
of the Lord and the devotion of his fellow-citizens, who


24 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


largely assisted him—lest, having finished this labour, o
he should begin to grow slothful, he set to work to
repair the church of St. Peter, a little farther from the
city, for the special devotion which, in the sincere purity
of his faith, he bore to the Prince of the Apostles.
When St. Peter’s church was finished, he came to a
place called Portiuncula, where was a church built in
ancient times to the honour of the Blessed Virgin
Mother of God, and under her invocation, but which »
had been deserted, and which, for want of care, was now
falling into decay. The holy man, beholding it thus
desolate, resolved, out of his fervent devotion to the
Queen of the world, to remain there, in order to repair
and restore it. And while he abode there, he received
frequent angelical visitations in accordance with the
name of the church, which was St. Mary of the Angels.
Here, therefore, he resolved to remain, because of his
reverence to the Angels, and, above all, because of the
exceeding love which he bore to the Mother of Christ.
This place was loved by the holy man above all places
in the world, for here, in great humility, he began his
spiritual life; here he grew in virtue; here he attained
his happy and perfect end; and this, at the hour of his
death, he commended to his brethren as a spot most
dear to the Blessed Virgin. It was at this place that a
certain very devout friar beheld a vision well worthy to
be related; he saw a multitude of men, who were all
blind, kneeling round this church, with their faces
and hands raised to heaven, and with many tears crying
to God to have mercy on them. And behold there
appeared a great glory in heaven shining over them all,
which gave light and salvation to each. This is the
place in which, by divine revelation, St. Francis insti-


————eieaenssonnenaneann


HIS PERFECT CONVERSION. 25 x


_ tuted the Order of the Friars Minor. For, by the direc-


tion of Divine Providence, by which the servant of
Christ was guided in all things, he built three material’
churches before he began to preach the Gospel, and
instituted that Order, that thus, not only he might
ascend from things sensible to things intellectual, from
the less to the greater, but also that the visible work
might mysteriously prefigure that which was hereafter
to be brought to pass. For after the similitude of the
three churches repaired by the holy man, according to
the rule and doctrine revealed to him, so was the
Church of Christ restored by the victories of three kinds
of spiritual warriors, as we see fulfilled at this day.


CHAPTER III.


OF THE INSTITUTION OF THE ORDER, AND THE APPROBA-
TION OF THE RULE OF ST. FRANCIS.


ie RANCIS, the servant of God, abode thus for
“yi, some time in the church of the Virgin Mother

zi=ais} Of God, pouring forth continual prayers to her
a5 had conceived the Word, full of grace and truth,
that she would vouchsafe to be his advocate ; and now, by
the merits of that Mother of Mercy, he paboctred and
brought forth the spirit of evangelical truth. For, as he
was one day devoutly hearing the Mass of the Apostles,
the Gospel was read wherein is contained the Mission of
Christ to His Apostles, and the rule of evangelical life
which He gave them when he sent them out to preach ;
bidding them take neither gold, nor silver, nor money in


26 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


their purse; nor to carry a scrip; nor to have two
tunics, nor shoes, nor staff.

Now when this true lover of Apostolical poverty heard
these words, he was filled with inconceivable joy.
“This,” he said within himself, “is what I above all
things desire. That is what my whole heart craves.”
And so saying, he cast off the shoes from his feet, laid
aside the staff which he bore, and throwing away his
purse and all that he possessed, he clad himself in a
single tunic, and, instead of the belt which he wore, he
girded himself with a cord, casting away all worldly
cares, and giving his whole heart to carry out the
command which he had heard, and to shape his life in
all things according to the strict rule of Apostolical
poverty. From this day forward the man of God began,
by divine inspiration, to strive after evangelical perfec-
tion, and to invite all men to holy penance. And
because there was no vanity or levity in his words, but
they were grave and efficacious, and full of the power of
the Holy Ghost, they pierced even to the depths of men’s
hearts, filling all that heard him with great amazement.
And in all his discourses he proclaimed peace, saluting
_ the people at the beginning of all his sermons with these
words: “God give you His peace;” having learned
this salutation (as he afterwards declared) by divine
revelation.

And so, according to his prophetic words (being filled
also with the prophetical spirit), he proclaimed peace, he
preached peace, and by his salutary admonitions he
reconciled to Him, Who is the true Peace, many who,
being at enmity with Christ, were far from the way of
salvation.

Many having become thus acquainted with the truth


THE INSTITUTION OF THE ORDER. 27


and simplicity of the holy man’s teaching, and with the
sanctity of his life, began, after his example, to follow
after penance; and, forsaking all earthly things, they-.
assumed his habit, and became companions of his life.
The first of these was a holy man named Bernard, ~
who, having been made a partaker of the divine
vocation, deserves to be called the first-born son of this
holy Father, by priority of time, and no less by pre-
eminence of sanctity.
_ This man, then, having heard of the sanctity of
Francis, the servant of Christ, and desiring, after his
example, perfectly to despise the world, asked counsel
of him how he should carry his purpose into effect,
which, when the servant of God had heard, he was
filled with spiritual consolation at the words of this his
first-born son. ‘ This counsel,” said he, “must be asked
of God.” ‘Therefore early in the morning they entered
the church of St. Nicolas, and having prayed to God,
Francis, who was most devout to the Most Holy Trinity,
thrice opened the book of the Gospels, beseeching our
Lord that, by three several testimonies, He would be
pleased to confirm the holy purpose of Bernard. The
first time he opened the book they came upon this
passage: “If thou wilt be perfect, go and sell all that
thou hast and give to the poor.” The second time they
read: ‘* Take nothing for your journey.” And the
third time: “He who will come after Me, let him deny
himself, and take up his cross and follow Me.” “This,”
said the holy man, “is our life and our rule, and the
life and the rule of all those who would join our com-
pany; if, then, thou wilt be perfect, go and do what
thou hast heard.” Not long afterwards, five others
having been called by the same Spirit, the number of


28 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


the sons of St. Francis amounted to six, amongst whom
he who held the third place was the holy Father
Giles, a man assuredly full of God, and worthy of
all remembrance ; for he became afterwards illustrious
by the exercise of many sublime virtues, even as the
_ servant of God had foretold of him; so that, although
he was simple and unlearned, he was, nevertheless,
exalted to a sublime degree of heavenly contem-
plation ; for being for a long space of time continually
intent upon heavenly things, he was by frequent
ecstasies so rapt in God (as I have often seen with mine
own eyes) that he might be rather said to live amongst
men the life of an Angel than of a man.

About the same time, the Lord vouchsafed a very re-
markable vision to a certain priest named Sylvester, of
the city of Assisi, a man of pious, holy life. When he
beheld the manner of life led by Francis and his friars,
viewing it only with the eyes of human prudence, he
felt an abhorrence of it; and lest he should be led astray
by rash judgment, the following vision was vouchsafed
to him by our Lord. He saw in a dream the whole city
of Assisi encompassed by a great and terrible dragon,
which threatened the whole place with destruction.

Then, from the mouth of Francis, there seemed to ©
issue a great cross of gold, the top of which touched
heaven, and the two arms of which stretched to the
extremities of the world. Before its brightness the ter-
rible dragon fled away. Having seen this vision three
times, he judged it to be a divine oracle, and related it
in order to the holy man and his friars; and not long -
afterwards he left the world, and followed the footsteps
of Christ so closely as to prove by his life in religion
the truth of this vision which he had seen in the world


THE INSTITUTION OF THE ORDER. 29


When Francis, the man of God, heard of this vision,
he was not lifted up with pride and vain-glory, but ac-
knowledging the goodness of God in all His benefits, he
was filled with fresh courage to withstand the arts of the
old serpent, and to preach the glory of the Cross of Christ.

Now, having withdrawn one day to a certain solitary
place, to mourn over his past life in bitterness of heart,
he was filled by the Holy Ghost with extraordinary
gladness, being assured of the full remission of all his
sins. Being thus rapt in ecstasy, and, as it were,
absorbed in a marvellous light of contemplation, his
mind was opened to see what should befall him and his
sons in days to come. Then, returning to his brethren,
he said: “Be comforted, my dearest children, and
rejoice in the Lord, and be not troubled because you
are so few, nor affrighted by reason of your simplicity,
for the Lord has truly shown me that God will make
us increase to a great multitude, and will pour forth the
grace of His benediction upon us.”

At the same time another good man entered the re-
ligion of Francis, so that his blessed family now num.
bered seven. Then the holy Father called all his sons
to him, and having spoken many things to them con-
cerning the kingdom of God, the denial of their own
will, and the mortification of the flesh, he made known
to them his purpose of sending them into the four
quarters of the world; for now the poor and barren
simplicity of the holy Father having brought forth these
seven sons, he desired that, with the voice of penance,
they should bring forth the whole company of the faith-
ful to Christ his Lord. “Go,” said our sweet Father
to his children, “ proclaim peace to men, preach penance
for the remission of sins. Be patient in tribulation,


30 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


watchful in prayer, strong in labour, moderate in speech,
grave in conversation, thankful for benefits; for if you
shall observe all these things, an eternal kingdom is
prepared for you.’ And when they heard these words
they prostrated themselves humbly before the servant
of God, receiving with gladness of heart the command
of holy obedience. And after this he said singly to
each, “Cast thy care upon the Lord, and He will nourish
thee.” And these words he was accustomed to say
to every brother to whom he gave an obedience. Then,
knowing that he was given as an example to others, and
that he should first do that which he taught them to do,
he went with one companion towards one part of the
world; sending the other six, two and two, into the
three other parts; thus dividing the world after the
manner of a Cross.

After a little time, this loving Father desired to have
his children with him again, and being unable to assemble
them himself, he prayed to Him Who gathers together
the dispersed of Israel, to bring them all together in one
place. And so it came to pass that, without human
vocation, the divine clemency brought them marvellously
in an incredibly short space of time into the place where
he was; and now four other good and holy men were
added to their number, which thus amounted to twelve.

The servant of Christ, seeing that the number of his
friars was gradually increasing, wrote for himself and
for them a rule and form of life, laying as its immovable
foundation the observance of the holy Gospel, and add-
ing a few other things which he thought necessary for
uniformity of life. Desiring that the things which he
had written should be approved by the supreme Pontiff,
he determined (depending only on the divine directiou)


THE INSTITUTION OF THE ORDER. Bt


to go with his simple company to the Throne of the
Apostle. God beheld from heaven the desire of His
servant, and lest the souls of his companions should be
affrighted by the consideration of their own simplicity,
He strengthened the heart of the holy man by the
following vision. It seemed to him that he was travel-
ling along a certain road, by the side of which there grew
a lofty tree, to which he drew near, and us he stood
under its shadow, marvelling at its height, he was
suddenly lifted up by the divine power, until he touched
the top of the tree, which bowed itself towards him.
Now the man of God understood, by the Divine Spirit
Who dwelt in him, that this vision signified the con-
descension of the sublime dignity of the Apostolic See
to his desire; and so, being full of spiritual joy, he
comforted his brethren in the Lord, and set forth with
them on his journey.

When they were come to the Roman Court, and
brought into the presence of the Sovereign Pontiff, the
Vicar of Christ was walking on a terrace of the Lateran,
in deep and serious meditation, and seeing the servant
of Christ to be an unknown stranger, he indignantly
~ repulsed him. 3

Francis retired with all humility, and on the follow-
ing night the Sovereign Pontiff received a revelation from
God. He saw a palm-tree gradually grow up at his feet
until it reached a goodly stature, and as he gazed upon
it, wondering what the vision might mean, a divine
illumination impressed on the mind of the Vicar of
Christ that this palm-tree signified the poor man whom
he had driven that day from his presence.

The next morning, therefore, he sent his servants
through the city to seek for this poor man, whom they


32 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI,


found in the hospital of St. Antony, hard bythe Lateran
Palace. When he was brought into the presence of the
Sovereign Pontiff, Francis made known his desire, pray-
ing humbly and earnestly for the approbation of his rule.
Our Lord, Innocent III., who was then the Vicar of
Christ, and a man illustrious for his wisdom, admiring
the purity and simplicity of heart which he beheld in
the man of God, his great constancy of purpose, and
the exceeding fervour of his holy will, lovingly em-
braced Christ’s poor man, being ready, with all willing-
ness, to grant his pious petition. Yet he delayed to do
so for awhile, because it seemed to some of the cardinals
that the rule was a novelty, and beyond human strength
to observe.

_- Now, there was among the cardinals a venerable man
named John of St. Paul, Bishop of Sabina, a lover of all
sanctity, and the benefactor of the poor of Christ. He,
being enlightened by the Holy Ghost, spoke thus to the
Sovereign Pontiff and to his brethren: “If we refuse
this poor man’s petition, as a novelty too hard to be ob-
served, whereas he only begs for the confirmation of the
evangelical way of life, let us take heed lest we offend
against the Gospel of Christ. For, if any man shall
say that the observance and the vow of evangelical
perfection contain anything irrational or impossible to
be observed, he is convicted of blasphemy against Christ,
the Author of the Gospel.” When the successor of the
Apostle Peter had heard these words, he said: ‘My
son, pray to Christ, our Lord, that He would make
known His Will to us by thy mouth, for, when we
shall have more certain knowledge, we shall be able with
greater security to fulfil thy pious desires.” The servant
of Almighty God betook himself, therefore, to devout


THE INSTITUTION OF THE ORDER. 33


prayer, that he might be directed what to say to the
Holy Father, and that the Holy Father might be moved
favourably to receive his words. He came, then, again
to the Vicar of Christ, and spoke to him the following
parable: “ There was,” said Francis, “a rich and mighty
king, who took to wife a poor but very beautiful woman,
in whom he greatly delighted, and by whom he had
children who bore the image of their father, and whom,
by God’s command, the king brought up in his own
palace, and fed at his royal table.” And he added this
interpretation: “There is no fear,” said he, “that the
children and heirs of the Eternal King should perish
with hunger, who by the power of the Holy Ghost have
been born of a poor mother, and bear the image of Christ
the King, being born by the spirit of poverty, in a re-
ligion of poverty. If, therefore, the King of heaven has
promised His followers an eternal kingdom, how much
rather will He provide them with those things which He
is wont to impart indifferently to the evil and the good ?”
Now, when the Vicar of Christ had diligently attended
to this parable and its interpretation, he marvelled
oreatly, and acknowledged that, without doubt, Christ
had spoken by the mouth of that man.

Another vision which was vouchsafed to him about
this time, concerning the things which St. Francis was
to accomplish, confirmed the revelation which he had
now received from the Holy Ghost. He saw ina dream
the Lateran Basilica, now falling into ruin, supported
by the shoulders of a poor, despised, and feeble man.
“Truly,” said he, “ this is he who by his works and his
teaching shall sustain the Church of Christ.” Hence,
he was filled with a great and special devotion and love
for the servant of God. He granted all his petitions,

3


34 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


and promised to grant him still greater things. He
approved the rule, gave him a mission to preach
penance, and granted to all the lay brothers in the
company of the servant of God to wear a tonsure
smaller than that worn by priests, and freely to preach
the Word of God.


CHAPTER IV.


OF THE INCREASE OF HIS ORDER, AND OF THE CON-
FIRMATION OF THE RULE ALREADY APPROVED.


fc FTER these things, Francis, being full of faith
raeN| in divine grace, and the approbation of the


pikes} Apostolic See, went his way to the Valley of
CRA there to preach the Gospel, and to fulfil the
evangelical precepts, And on his way he conferred with
his companions as to how they should perfectly observe
the rule which they had received, walking before God in
all holiness and justice, that so they might make con-
tinual progress themselves, and give good example to
others. And as they discoursed at length upon these

matters, they perceived not that the time of their col-
lation was passed. And so, being weary with their long
journey, and faint with hunger, they came to a solitary
place, where there were no means of obtaining necessary
food ; but the Providence of God was present with them. |
For a man suddenly appeared before them, carrying a —
loaf in his hand, which he gave to Christ’s poor men,
and immediately disappeared ; so that they knew not
whence he came, nor whither he went. The poor friars, —


THE INCREASE OF HIS ORDER, 35


therefore, knowing by this sign that God’s help would
never fail them so long as they should be in company
with the holy man, were strengthened rather by the gift
of the divine bounty than by the corporal food, and
were, moreover, filled with divine consolation, so that
they made a firm and irrevocable resolution that
neither for hunger nor suffering of any kind would they
break the promise they had plighted to holy poverty.
Having made this firm resolve, they returned into the
Valley of Spoleto, considering within themselves whether
they should live amongst men, or retire to some soli-
tary place. But Francis, the servant of Christ, trusting
not to his own industry to discover the Will of God,
sought for it by intense and earnest prayer. And it
was made known to him by divine revelation that he
was sent by God to win back to Christ the souls which
the devil was seeking to carry away. He therefore de-
termined to live not only for himself but for the good
of all; being moved thereto by the example of Him
Who vouchsafed to die for all. Therefore the man of
God gathered his companions together, and dwelt with
them in a deserted hut, near the city of Assisi, in which,
according to the rule of holy poverty, they lived in much
labour and necessity, caring rather to satisfy themselves
with the bread of tears than with delicate food. Here
they passed their time in continual prayer, and that
rather mental than vocal, for they had no ecclesiastical
books from which they might chant their canonical hours.
But instead of such books they contemplated the Cross
of Christ continually, day and night, after the example
of their Father, and being instructed by the discourses
which he addressed to them continually concerning the
Cross of Christ. For when the brethren asked him
3—2


i


36 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


to teach them to pray, he said: “ When you pray, say
the Pater Noster, and We adore Thee, O Christ, in all
Thy churches which are vn all the world, and we bless
Thee because by Thy holy Cross Thou hast redeemed the
world.” He taught them also that they should praise
God in all things and by all creatures, and that they
should pay especial honours to priests, and that they
should hold the truth of the faith according to what
the holy Roman Church holds and teaches, and firmly
believe and simply confess it.

The friars observed their holy Father’s teaching in all
things; and, whenever they saw a church~or a Cross,
though it were a long way off, they humbly prostrated
themselves, and said the form of prayer which he had
given them. Now, while the brethren abode in the place
aforesaid, the holy man went on a certain Saturday into
the city of Assisi, for he was to preach on the Sunday .
morning, as was his custom, in the Cathedral Church,
And being thus absent in body from his children, and
engaged in devout prayer to God (as was his custom
throughout the night), in a certain hut in the canons’
garden, about midnight, whilst some of the brethren
were asleep, and others watching in prayer, a chariot of
fire, of marvellous splendour, was seen to enter the door,
and thrice to pass hither and thither through the house ;
and over the chariot was seen a globe of dazzling light,
like to the glory of the sun, which turned the night into
day. The watchers were amazed, the sleepers aroused
and affrighted; for that light illuminated the spirit no
less than the body, and by its marvellous power the
conscience of each was laid bare to his brethren. Now
all, with one consent, understood (each beholding the
heart of the other) that their holy Father, being absent


THE INCREASE OF HIS ORDER, LOT


in body, was present in spirit, and was thus divinely
manifested to them, transfigured into that form of
heavenly light, burning with the fire of celestial virtue,
that they, as true Israelites, might follow after him, who,
like another Elias, was made by God both the chariot
and the charioteer. They believed also that He had
opened the eyes of these simple men, at the prayer of
Francis, to see the wonderful works of God, as He
opened the eyes of the sons of the prophets to behold
the mountain full of horsemen and fiery chariots around
Elias. Now, when the holy man returned to his
brethren, he began to discover the secrets of their con-
sciences, and comforted them concerning this marvellous
vision, foretelling also many things which should come
to pass for the good of his Order. And as he thus
revealed to them many things transcending human
knowledge, the brethren knew that the Spirit of the
Lord rested in all His plenitude upon His servant
Francis, and that they would be most assuredly safe and
blessed in following his life and teaching. After these
things, Francis, the pastor of this little flock, under the
guidance of divine grace, led his twelve brethren to St.
Mary of the Portiuncula, that the Order of the Friars
Minor, which had been born there by the merits of the
Mother of God, might there also by her aid receive its
increase. And while he abode there, he went about all
the cities and towns preaching the Gospel, not with the
words of human wisdom, but in the power of the Spirit,
‘ announcing the kingdom of God. And, beholding him
as a man of another world, having his eyes and his heart
always fixed on heaven, many were drawn to follow him
thither. And thenceforward Christ’s vine began to —
bring forth the sweet flowers of the Lord, and abundant


38 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


fruits of sweetness, honour, and virtue. And by the
fervour of his preaching, many of both sexes, who served
God in conjugal purity, were enkindled to ask for a rule
of life from the holy man, and to bind themselves by
new bonds of penance, who, living after this manner,
received from the servant of God the name of Brethren
and Sisters of the Third Order of Penance, This state
and order admitted all manner of persons, laymen and
clerics, virgins and married persons, men and women;
and God has testified His acceptance of the same by
many miracles wrought by its members. Many virgins
were also called to a life of perpetual chastity, amongst
whom was Clare, that virgin most dear to God, the first
flower amongst them all, who, like a sweet spring
blossom, diffused a fragrant odour around her, and
shone like a brilliant star in the Church of God. She
who is now glorified in heaven, and worthily venerated
by the Church on earth, was the daughter in Christ of
the holy Father Francis, the poor servant of God, and
the mother of the Poor Ladies (now called Poor Clares).

Many being thus not only pierced with compunction,
but inflamed with a desire for the perfection of Christ,
followed in the footsteps of Francis, despising all the
vanities of the world, so that the number of his followers,
marvellously increasing from day to day, soon reached
the limits of the world: for holy poverty, which they
took with them as their only procuratrix, made them
prompt in obedience, strong to labour, and swift of foot.
And because they possessed nothing earthly, and feared
to lose nothing earthly, they were secure in all places;
troubled by no fears, distracted by no cares, they lived
without trouble of mind, waited without solicitude for
the coming day, or the night’s lodging. Many suffer-


THE INCREASE OF HIS ORDER. 39


ings and insults were inflicted upon them in divers parts
of the world, as on men unknown, vile, and of no ac-
count; but the love of the Gospel of Christ had given
them so much patience, that they sought rather to be
where they might endure persecution in the body, than
where (their sanctity being known) they might receive
honour and favour from the world. And from this their
penury they reaped exceeding abundance, according to
the counsel of the wise man, who chose less rather than
more,

Now it came to pass that some of the brethren went
into an infidel country, and a certain Saracen, moved
with pity, offered them money to buy necessary food ;
and when they refused it, the man marvelled greatly,
seeing how poor they were. But when he understood
that, having become poor for the love of God, they re-
fused to possess anything, he was so moved with admi-
ration that he offered to minister to them, and to provide
for all their necessities, so long as he should have any-
thing in his possession. Oh, inestimable value of"
poverty! by whose marvellous power the fierceness of
this barbarian was turned into such sweet compassion.
Shameful and horrible is it to see a Christian man
trample upon that precious pearl, which was thus vene-
rated even by a Saracen.

About this time, a certain religious man, of the Order
of the Crucified Friars, Moricus by name—who had been >
languishing for a long time in a hospital near Assisi,”
under a grievous sickness, and was now judged by the
physicians to be nigh to death—sent a messenger to the
holy man, to beseech him earnestly to intercede for him
with the Lord. And the holy Father, benignly consent-
ing to his request, took some pieces of bread, and


40 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


having steeped them in the oil which burned before an
image of the Blessed Virgin, sent it by the hands of his
friars to the sick man, saying, “Take this medicine to
our dear brother, Moricus, that, by the power of Christ,
he may not only fully recover his health, but may be
strengthened to become a valiant warrior, and stedfastly
cleave to ourarmy.” No sooner, then, had the sick man
tasted the antidote prepared for him by the inspiration
of the Holy Ghost, than he arose, having obtained from
God such perfect health and vigour both of mind and
body, that he soon afterwards entered the religion of the
holy man, wearing only a single tunic, under which, for
along time, he wore a shirt of mail. He fed continually
upon uncooked herbs, vegetables, and fruit—for a long
space of time tasting neither bread nor wine; and yet he
preserved his health and strength under the hardships of
this way of life.

The merits and virtues of these little ones of Christ
thus daily increasing, the odour of their good report was
spread throughout all that country, and many were
drawn to the presence of the holy Father from divers
parts of the world ; amongst whom came a certain man,
ingenious in the composition of secular verses, who had
been crowned by the Emperor, and was hence called
king of poesy. He came to seek the holy man who
despised all earthly things, and he found him in the city
of San Severino, preaching in a monastery, the hand of
God being upon him. And as he preached, it seemed |
that the Cross of Christ was traced upon his body by two
flaming swords, placed over each other in the form of a
Cross, one of which reached from his head to his feet,
and the other across his breast from one hand to the
other. Now the minstrel knew not the countenance of


THE INCREASE OF HIS ORDER, 41


the servant of Christ, but by that miracle he recognised
him at once, and determined to change his life; for,
being pierced by the power of his words, and, as it were,
transfixed by the sword of the Spirit which issued from
his mouth, he cast away all the pomps and vanities of
the world and embraced the profession of the blessed
father. Wherefore the holy man, seeing that he was
converted from the perturbations of the world to the
perfect peace of Christ, gave him the name of Brother
Pacificus. This man, being afterwards filled with all
sanctity before he was made Minister-General in France
(he was the first to fill that office), was counted worthy,
on another occasion, to see the great sign of the Cross,
in a distinct variety of colours, adorn the forehead of St.
Francis. For the holy man had a great veneration for
that sacred sign, often discoursed in its praise, and
always inscribed it upon all the letters which he wrote
with his own hand; as if it had been all his care
(according to the words of the prophet) to sign with
that sign of Taw the foreheads of all those who, in weep-
ing and mourning, are truly converted to Christ.

In process of time, the number of the friars being
oreatly multiplied, their watchful pastor assembled them
all in general chapter in the holy place of St. Mary of
the Portiuncula; that by divine distribution, each
should receive his portion from obedience, according to
their poverty. Now, although there was a want there of
things necessary to life, and although more than five
thousand friars were gathered together at one time in
that place, nevertheless, by the divine clemency, there
was food sufficient for all, and they were all full of cor-
poral health and spiritual joy. But as to the provincial
chapter, although he could not be present with them in


42 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


the body, yet by his solicitude for their good government,
his earnest prayers and effectual benediction, he was
always present with them in spirit; and oftentimes also,
by the marvellous power of God, he even appeared
visibly among them. For when the illustrious preacher
and glorious Confessor, Antony, who is now with Christ,
was preaching to the brethren in the chapel at Arles on
the title upon the Cross—“ Jesus of Nazareth, the King
of the Jews ”—a certain friar of approved virtue named
Monaldus, casting his eyes by divine inspiration upon
the door of the chapter-house, beheld, with his bodily
eyes, the blessed Francis raised in the air, blessing the
brethren, with his hands outstretched in the form of a
Cross. And the brethren were at the same time filled
with such true and unwonted consolation, that they were
assured, by the testimony of the Spirit, that the holy
man was truly present with them. And not long after-
wards this truth was certified, not only by these evident
signs, but by the words of the holy Father himself.
And it is surely to be believed that the power of Almighty
God, by which the holy Bishop St. Ambrose was
present at the burial of the glorious St. Martin, to do
honour to that holy Pontiff, also caused His servant
Francis to be present at the preaching of His true herald
Antony, that he might thus bear testimony to the truth
of his words, especially concerning the Cross of Christ,
of which he was the true minister and standard-bearer,

Now, seeing that the Order and form of life already
approved by Pope Innocent was greatly enlarged and
increased, Francis desired, in obedience to the divine
revelation, to procure its perpetual confirmation from
his successor, Honorius. It seemed to him one night,
in a vision, that he was gathering from the ground some


THE INCREASE OF HIS ORDER. 43.


very small morsels of bread; and, as he was about to
distribute them amongst a number of friars who were
famishing round him, and doubting how he could dis-
tribute such small pieces, fearing lest they should fall
from his hands, a voice from heaven said to him,
“ Francis, make one Host of all these pieces, and give to
as many as desire to receive.” And when he had done
this, all those who received that Host without devotion,
or despised the offered Gift, were immediately struck
with leprosy, and so visibly distinguished from the rest,
In the morning, the holy man related the vision to his
companions, grieving that he could not understand the
mystery signified thereby. On the following day, as he
persevered in prayer, he again heard the same voice
from heaven: “Francis,” it said, “the crumbs of bread
which thou didst see last night are the words of the
Gospel, the Host is the rule, the leprosy is sin.” Then
he set himself to bring into a shorter form the words of
the Gospel, which at that time were scattered somewhat
diffusely through the rule, which was now to be con-
firmed according to the vision which he had seen. He
took with him two friars as his companions; and being
guided by the Holy Ghost, he went to a mountain,
where he fasted upon bread and water; and there he
caused the rule to be written, according to what the
Divine Spirit suggested to him while he prayed. And
this rule, when he came-down from the mountain, he
committed to the keeping of his Vicar, who, after a few
days had elapsed, declared that he had carelessly lost
it. Once more, therefore, the holy man returned to
that solitary place, and there he re-wrote the rule as at
the first, as he had received the words from the mouth
of God. And by the above-named Pope Honorius, in


44 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI,


the eighth year of his Pontificate, it was confirmed ; and
to enforce on the brethren the more fervent obsarruten


—~ of that rule;he was accustomed to say that there was


therein nothing of his own industry or device, but that
he wrote all things as they were revealed to him by God.

That this truth might be certified by the testimony of
God, not many days afterwards the Stigmata of the Lord
Jesus were impressed upon his body by the finger of the
living God—the bull, as it were, of Christ, the Supreme
Pontiff, in confirmation of the rule, and in commenda-
tion of its Author, as, after the narration of his virtues,
shall be related in its place.


CHAPTER V.


OF THE AUSTERITY OF HIS LIFE, AND HOW ALL CREATURES
GAVE HIM JOY AND CONSOLATION,


A OW when Francis, the servant of God, saw that

many were excited and encouraged by his ex-

zie ample to take up the Cross of Christ, and to
olige him as a brave leader of Christ’s army, he him-
self grew still more fervent in his endeavour to attain
the palm of victory by the practice of every sublime
virtue. And considering those words of the Apostle,
“They who are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with its
concupiscences,” to clothe his body in the strong armour
of the Cross, he began to exercise such severe discipline
over all his sensual appetites, that he hardly took such
food as was necessary for the support of nature. For he »
said that it was hard to satisfy the necessities of the


HIS AUSTERITY. 45


body without indulging the inclinations of the senses.
Therefore he rarely ate any food which had been cooked
with fire; and when he did so, he mixed so much water
therewith as to render it insipid. And what shall I say
of his drinking ?—for he would hardly allow himself cold
water enough to slake the burning thirst with which he
was oftentimes tormented.

He continually discovered new ways of exercising
abstinence, increasing daily in its exercise; and even
when he had attained the summit of perfection he still
endeavoured, as if only a beginner, to punish, by fresh
macerations, the rebellion of the flesh. Nevertheless,
when he went abroad, he conformed himself (according
to the words of the Gospel) to the manner of life of those
with whom he abode, eating what was set before him; but
when he returned home, he resumed the practice of his
rule of rigid abstinence. So that, being austere to him-
self, and gentle to his neighbour, and thus subject in all
things to the Gospel of Christ, he gave edification in all


things, whether by eating or abstaining. The bare earth ...


was the ordinary bed of his wearied body, and he often
slept sitting, leaning his head against a stone, or a block
of wood, and being covered only with one poor tunic.
Thus he served the Lord in cold and nakedness.

Being once asked how, in that poor clothing, he could
endure the severity of the winter’s cold, he made answer,
in fervour of spirit, “If we burn within with a fervent
desire for our heavenly country, easy it is to endure this


exterior cold.” He abhorred soft and delicate clothing


and loved that which was coarse and rough, saying that
our Lord praised John the Baptist for wearing such. If
a tunic were given him somewhat softer than usual, he
would make the inside rough with little cords ; for he


46 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


said that, according to the word of truth, soft raiment is
to be sought for in the palaces of princes ; and that ex-
perience assuredly teaches that the devils are afraid of
rough clothing, but are encouraged to tempt those who
indulge in softness and delicacy. One night, accord-
ingly, when, on account of a pain in his head and eyes, a
feather pillow had been placed under his head, the devil
entered into it, and troubled him in many ways, even till
the hour of matins, hindering from prayer, until he
called his companion, and begged him to carry the pillow,
and the devil with it, far from the cell. No sooner had
the brother gone out with the pillow than he lost all
the power and use of his limbs, until, at the prayer of
the holy Father, who saw it in spirit, his wonted strength
of mind and body was fully restored to him.

Now the holy man Francis watched most diligently
over himself, becoming ever more and more rigid in his
care of the purity both of the interior and exterior man;
for which cause, in the beginning of his conversion, he
would often plunge in winter-time into a pit of ice and
snow, that he might more perfectly subdue his domestic
enemy, and preserve the white garment of his purity
from the fire of temptation. For he said that it was
beyond comparison easier for a spiritual man to endure
the utmost extremity of cold in his body, than the
slightest spark of sinful passion in his soul. As he
was one night praying in his cell, at the hermitage of
~ Sartiano, the old enemy called him thrice, saying:
“Francis, Francis, Francis !” And when Francis asked
him what he sought, he answered, deceitfully: “There
is no sinner in the world, who, if he be converted, shall
not obtain pardon of God. But he who shall destroy him-
self by excessive penance shall obtain no mercy for all


HIS AUSTERITY. 47


eternity.” The man of God knew by revelation the
deceit of the enemy, who thus sought to deluce him into
tepidity, as was proved by the event. ;

For, by the breath of that infernal enemy, which is


wont to kindle the fire of concupiscence, he was assailed _


by aviolent temptation. Then this holy lover of chastity,
laying aside his habit, began to discipline himself se-
verely with his cord, saying: ‘‘ Brother Ass, thus dost
thou deserve to be treated, thus to be beaten. Thou
art unworthy to wear the religious habit, the sign of
purity. Go thy way, then, whither thou wilt, for thus
shalt thou go.” And then in marvellous fervour of spirit
he -left his cell, and went out into the garden and
plunged into a heap of snow which had just then fallen.
Having done this, he gathered the snow in his hands
and made seven heaps, which setting before him, he
thus discoursed with his interior man: “ Behold,” said
he, “ this largest heap is thy wife; these four are thy
two sons and thy two daughters; the other two are thy
servant and thine handmaid; and for all these thou art
bound to provide. Make haste, then, and provide
- clothing for them, lest they perish with cold. But if
the solicitude for so many trouble thee, then be thou
solicitous to serve one Lord alone.” Then the tempter,
being vanquished, departed, and the holy man returned
victorious to his cell; and by the intensity of that ex-
ternal cold, to which he had subjected himself, the in-
terior fire of temptation was so perfectly extinguished,
that from that moment he never felt it in the slightest
degree. Now a certain friar who was watching in
prayer, beheld all these things by the clear light of the
moon, And when the man of God knew what he had
seen, he made known to him the temptation which he had


48 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI


endured, forbidding him, so long as he should live, to
make known what he had seen to any living man.

And he not only taught the brethren thus to mortify
the flesh, and to bridle its inclinations, but to keep a
most careful watch over all the exterior senses, by which
death finds an entrance to the soul. He bade them
carefully to avoid all needless intercourse and familiarity
with women, which is an occasion of ruin to many;
affirming that the weak are ruined thereby, and the
strongest in spirit made weak. And he was wont to say
that, for any but a man of the most approved virtue, it
was as easy (in words of the Holy Scripture) to walk in
the midst of fire without being burnt, as thus to converse


~. without receiving injury thereby. So faithfully did he


turn away his eyes lest they should behold vanity, that,
as he once said to one of his companions, he hardly knew
any woman by sight. So dangerous did he account it to
give admission to any images which might rekindle the
quenched fire of temptation, or stain the purity of the
soul. He affirmed that it was a frivolous thing to con-
verse with women, except in the confessional, or to give
them some short instruction, profitable to their salvation
and suitable to religious modesty. ‘‘ For what,” said he,
‘“‘has a religious to do with women, unless it be when
they piously ask him to give them counsel how to do
penance, or to follow a life of greater perfection ?
Where there is too great security, there is less watchful-
ness against the enemy; and if the devil can take
hold of aman by a single hair, he will soon make it
grow into a beam.” He taught them above all things
to avoid idleness, as the sink of all evil thoughts, show-
ing by his own example how to tame the lazy and re-
bellious flesh by continual disciplines and useful labours.


HIS AUSTERITY, 49


Hence he called his body Brother Ass, saying thatit was -


to be laden with heavy burthens, beaten with mary
stripes, and fed with poor and scanty food. If he saw
any one wandering about idle, and eating the fruit of
other men’s labour, he called him Brother Fly, because
doing no good himself, he went about spoiling the good
done by others, becoming thus vile and hateful to all.
Therefore, he often said : ‘‘ 1 would have my brethren to
labour and strive, and not to give place by idleness to
unlawful thoughts or idle words.”

According to the Gospel precept, he would have the
brethren to observe silence—that is, to carefully abstain
at all times from evil words, seeing that they must give
account thereof at the day of judgment; and if he found
some brother to be given to foolish talking, he severely
reproved him, affirming that modest taciturnity is no
slight virtue, but the guardian of purity of heart; and
that life and death are said to be in the power of the
tongue, not so much with reference to the taste as to the
speech. But although he sought with all his power to
lead the brethren to austerity of life, he was not pleased
with an indiscreet austerity, devoid of the bowels of
compassion, and of the salt of discretion. For when,
on a certain night, one of the brethren, from excessive
abstinence was so pinched with hunger that he could
find no rest, the good shepherd, hearing of the imminent
peril of his sheep, brought bread; and lest he should be
ashamed to eat it, he began first to eat before him, thus
sweetly inviting him to eat. And the brother, over-
coming his shame, took the bread, rejoicing that, by the
wise consideration of his pastor, he was delivered from
that bodily danger, and receiving at the same time no
small edification from the holy man’s example. The


50 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


next morning the man of God called the brethren to-
gether, and made known to them what had happened
in the night, adding the following admonition: “Take
example, my brethren, not from the food eaten, but
from the charity which caused it to be eaten.” And
he exhorted them to follow discretion, which is the
charioteer of all the virtues; not that discretion which
is taught by the prudence of the flesh, but that which
Christ has taught us in His most sacred life, which is
the example of all perfection. And because it is im-
possible for a man still encompassed with the infirmities
of the flesh so perfectly to follow that spotless and cruci-
fied Lamb as never to contract any pollution by the way,
therefore he strongly enforced upon them this truth, that
whosoever would attain to a life of perfection must cleanse
his conscience daily with abundance of tears. And al-
though he had attained a marvellous purity of mind and
body, he ceased not—regardless of the danger to his
bodily health—to purify his mental sight by continual
tears. Now, by this continual weeping he brought ona
grievous malady in his eyes, and the physicians would
have persuaded. him to restrain his tears; but the holy
man replied, “ It is not fitting, Brother Physician, that
for the love of that light which we have here below, in
common with the flies, we should shut out the least ray
of the eternal light which visits us from above; for the
soul has not received the light for the. sake of the body,
but the body for the sake ‘i the soul. (I would, there-
fore, choose rather to lose the light of the body than to
repress those tears by which the interior eyes are puri- |
fied, that so they may see God, lest I should thus quench |
the spirit of devotion.” Haris been often counselled
by the physicians, and also earnestly besought by the


HIS AUSTERITY. / 51


brethren to suffer the application of a cautery for the
relief of his eyes, the man of God humbly assented, see-
ing that the remedy would be at once salutary and pain-
ful. The surgeon was therefore sent for, who placed the
iron instrument in the fire. The servant consoled his
shuddering body, as if it had been a friend, saying to the
fire: “ Oh, brother fire, the Most High has created thee
glorious, mighty, beautiful, and useful above all other
creatures. Be thou propitious and healthful to me at
this hour. I beseech the great Lord, Who created thee,
so sweetly to temper thy heat that I may be able to
endure it.” | When he had finished his prayer he made
the sign of the Cross upon the red iron, and firmly
waited its application. Then was the seething iron
driven deep into the tender flesh, making a deep gash
from the ear to the eyebrow. When he was asked con-
cerning the pain caused by the fire, the holy man made
answer: \“ Praise the Most High, my brethren, for I tell
‘you truly that I have neither felt heat nor suffered from
the burning iron ;’ and, turning to the surgeon, he said :
“Tf the flesh is not sufficiently burnt, burn it again.”
And the surgeon, when he beheld the might of the spirit
in the weakness of the flesh, marvelled greatly, and ex-
tolled that divine miracle, saying: “I tell you, brothers,
I have seen wonders to-day.” The man of God had at- -
tained to such a degree of purity that his flesh was sub-
ject to his spirit, and his spirit to God in a wonderful
|harmony and agreement, and all creatures were thus in
| marvellous subjection to his will and command, who was
| himself the faithful servant of the Creator,
| Another time, when the servant of God was labouring
‘under a grievous sickness, at the hermitage of St, Urban,
feeling that nature was sinking, he asked for a cup of


4—2


52 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


wine, and when they told him that there was no wine
there to give him, he commanded them to bring him
water, which he blessed with the sign of the Cross.
Then that which had been pure water was changed at
once into excellent wine, and what the poverty of that
desert place could not afford was obtained by the purity
of the holy man. No sooner had he tasted it as wine
than his strength was suddenly restored; so that the
change of the water into wine, and the renovation of
his lost strength thereby, bore twofold testimony that
he had perfectly laid aside the old man, and clothed
himself with the new.

And not only did creatures obey the will of the ser-
vant of God, but the Providence of the Creator conde-
scended also to his good pleasure. For it happened once
that, being weak and worn in body by many infirmities,
which came upon him at one time, he desired to excite —
himself to spiritual joy and consolation by hearing some
instrument of music, which the decorum of religion
would not permit him to ask for at the hand of man,
and lo! a great company of Angels surrounded him to
fulfil his desire. As he was watching one night, and
meditating upon the Lord, he suddenly heard the sound
of a harp of wonderful harmony and most sweet melody.
He saw no one, but the sound seemed to come nearer, |
and then was heard again afar off, showing that the
players were passing backwards and forwards. His
spirit, being all absorbed in God, was so filled with the
sweetness of that harmony that he seemed to be already
in another world. This was not hidden from some of
the friars who were most familiar with him, who often
perceived, by most certain indications and manifest
signs, that he was visited by the Lord with such fre-


HIS AUSTERITY. 53


quent and exceeding consolations as could not be con-
cealed. | ms

Another time, as the holy man was preaching between
Lombardy and the March of Treviso, he was overtaken
by night, with a friar as his companion, on the banks of
the river Po; and the road being full of many and great
dangers, as well from the darkness as from the river, and
the waters which overflowed therefrom, his companion
said to the holy man: “ Father, pray that we may be
delivered from the present danger.” The man of God
made answer with great confidence, “God is powerful
if it shall please His most sweet mercy, He will dispel
the darkness, and bestow upon us the blessing of light.”
He had hardly said these words, when, behold, by the
divine power, so bright a light began to shine around
them, that while to all others the night was dark as
before, they not only saw the path before them, but a
wide tract of country around! Led, therefore, by this
light, by which they were corporally directed and spirit-
ually comforted, they travelled on for a long distance
unto the hospice whither they went, singing praises to
God the while. Consider what was the purity and virtue
of this man, at whose command fire tempered its fierce-
ness, water changed its taste, Angels came to soothe him
with their melody, and a light from heaven shone forth
for his guidance! thus proving that the whole frame-
work of the universe does homage and service to him
who thus purifies and sanctifies his senses.


54 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI,


CHAPTER VI.


OF HIS HUMILITY AND OBEDIENCE, AND HOW THE DIVINE
MAJESTY GRANTED ALL HIS PRAYERS.


ea—aiHE man of God was filled to overflowing with
6 22| humility, which is the glory and the guardian
= of all other virtues. In his own estimation he
was a grievous sinner, though he was in truth the mirror
and the glory of all sanctity. Upon this foundation he
studied to build up himself; having laid, as a wise
architect, that foundation which he had learnt from
Christ. He was wont to say that the Son of God had
descended from the bosom of His Father to our lowli-
ness, that so by His example, as well as by His words,
He, our Lord and Master, might teach us humility; and
therefore, as the true disciple of Christ, he sought to
abase himself, both in his own eyes and in the eyes of
others, remembering the words of our Divine Master :
“That which is highly esteemed among men is hateful *
in the sight of God.” And he had these words con-
tinually in his mouth: “ What a man is in the eyes of -
God, so much he is, and no more.” He held it, there-
fore, to be a folly to be elated by the favours of the world,
and thus he rejoiced in contempt, and was troubled at
praise. He loved rather to meet with one who blamed —
him than with one who praised him, knowing that re-
proof leads to amendment, while praises excite to sin,
And because the people often extolled his sanctity, he
commanded certain of the brethren that, contrariwise, —
they should revile him, and address to him words of ©
contempt; and when a brother (though against his will)


HIS HUMILITY. 55


called him a villain, an hireling, a useless person, with a
joyful heart and countenance he made answer: “ May
the Lord bless thee, my dearest son, for thou speakest
truly, and such words it befits the son of Peter Bernar-
done to hear.” And that he might make himself con-


temptible to all, he was not ashamed when preaching to -


manifest his defects before all the people.

It happened once that, being grievously sick, he
relaxed somewhat of the rigour of his abstinence for the
recovery of his health. No sooner had he recovered his
bodily strength than, filled with self-contempt, he deter-
mined to take shame to his body. “It is not fitting,”
he said, “ that the people should account me a mortified
man, while I secretly indulge my body.” He rose,
therefore, being inflamed with the spirit of holy humility,


and having called together the people into the market- ©


place of Assisi, together with many friars whom he
brought with him, he entered into the principal church,


and having placed a cord round his neck, he commanded-—~


them to drag him, half-naked, to a stone on which con-
demned malefactors were wont to be placed. And
mounting upon this stone, although he was suffering
from ague and excessive weakness, and the weather was
intensely cold, he preached with great force and energy
to the people there assembled, affirming that he in no-
wise deserved to be honoured by them as a spiritual
man, but rather to be despised by all, as one carnal and
gluttonous. All the assembly marvelled greatly at so
strange.a spectacle ; and well knowing his austerity, they
were pierced with compunction, and exclaimed that such
humility was rather to be admired than within the reach
of imitation. And although, indeed, such an act may
rather be called a miracle than an example, nevertheless,


56 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


it was a true lesson of perfect humility, by which every
one who would follow Christ is tanght to despise the
testimony of the world’s transitory praise, and to repress
the pride of vain boasting, and confute the falsehood of
dissimulation.

Many such things he did, that he might appear out-
wardly a vile vessel of dishonour, possessing within the
true spirit of sanctification. He studied to conceal the
gifts of the Lord in the secret of his breast, lest, turning
to his glory, they might become the occasion of his ruin,
When he heard himself praised and blessed by many, he
would often say: “I may yet have sons and daughters ;
you cannot safely praise me. No man is to be praised
whose end is uncertain.” This, to those who praised
him ; and to himself: “Francis, if a robber had received
such graces as thou hast received, he would be far more
erateful than thou.” And he often said to the brethren:
“No man ought wickedly to pride himself upon such
things as a sinner can do, A sinner,” he said, “‘ can
fast, pray, weep, mortify his flesh; this only he cannot
do—be faithful to his Lord. In this, then, we may
glory—if we give Him the glory which is due to Him, if
we serve Him faithfully, if we ascribe all His gifts to
Him.” Now this evangelical merchant, that he might
make the greater profit, and spend every moment of his
life in laying up merit, ever chose to be a subject rather—
than a superior: to obey rather than to command,
Therefore, laying aside his office of Minister-General, he
desired to be under the Guardian, that he might in all
things obey his will. \For he declared that, so ieee:
is the fruit of holy obedience, that to those who place
their neck beneath its yoke, no place and no time shall
be without its profit. Therefore, he was accustomed to


HIS HUMILITY. 57


promise obedience to the friar who went with him as his


companion ; which promise he was most careful to fulfil.
He said one day to the brethren: “ Amongst many gifts
which our Lord in His goodness has bestowed upon
me, He has granted me this grace—to obey with the
same readiness a novice who had been but an hour in
religion, were he set over me as my superior, as the most
ancient and discreet amongst the brethren.”

“The subject,” he was wont to say, “should look
upon his prelate not as a man, but as the representative
of Him for Whose love he is subject to him. For the
more contemptible is he who commands, the more pleas-
ing to God is the humility of him who obeys.”

Being once asked who could be counted truly obedient,
he brought forward the example of a dead body.
“Take,” he said, “an inanimate corpse, and place it
where thou wilt. Thou wilt see that it will not resist
thee in any wise. It will not murmur at the place thou
givest it, nor cry out if thou leavest it there. If thou
shalt place it on a throne, it will not look upwards, but
always downwards. If thou clothe it in purple, it will
but look the paler. Thus,” said he, “is it with the
truly obedient man. If he be removed, he considers not
_ wherefore; he cares not where he is placed, nor asks to
be transferred to another office. If he be exalted, he
preserves his accustomed humility ; and accounts him-
self the more unworthy the greater honour he receives.”

Another day, he said to his companion: “I shall
never account myself a friar minor until I attain to the
state which I shall now describe to thee. Suppose Iam
a prelate set over the brethren, and I go to the chapter
to preach and admonish them, and at the end of my dis-
course they tell me that I am not fit to be over them;


‘.


58 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


_. that I do. not know how to speak ; that I am illiterate,
foolish, and simple. Suppose that I am then cast out
with shame, amidst the derision of all. I tell thee that

-unless I endure these things with an even countenance,

an even gladness of heart, and an even sanctity of pur-
pose, am no friar minor.” And he added: “In the
loss of dignity, in the absence of praise, in humble sub-
jection, there is great profit to the soul. Why, therefore,
when time has been given us to profit withal, do we seek
rather for peril than for profit 2”
_ From humility, therefore, Francis desired that his
friars should be called minors, and that the prelates of
his Order should bear the name of minister, both to
fulfil the words of the Gospel, which they had promised
to observe ; and also that his disciples might learn by
the very name they bear that they have come to the
school of the humble Jesus to learn humility. For the
Master of humility, Jesus Christ, that He might form
His disciples to perfect humility, said: “ Whosoever will
be greatest among you let him be your minister, and
whosoever will be the first among you he shall be your
servant.’ Therefore, when the man of God was asked
by the Cardinal of Ostia, the protector and chief promoter
of the Order of Friars Minor, who was afterwards raised,
according to the prediction of the holy man, to the
supreme Pontificate under the name of Gregory the
Ninth,—when he was asked by this great man to consent
to the promotion of his brethren to ecclesiastical digni-
ties, he made answer thus: “My Lord, my friars have
been called mznors that they might not presume to be-
come majors. If thou wilt have them to bear fruit in
the Church of God, keep and preserve them in this their
state and vocation, and never suffer them to rise to none
siastical prelatures.”


HIS HUMILITY. 59


And inasmuch as he preferred humility to honours,
both in himself and in others, God, Who loves the
humble, judged him worthy of the highest honour, as
was shown by a heavenly vision vouchsafed to a very
devout and holy friar. For this friar, being in company
with the holy man, entered with him into a certain
deserted church, and there, as he was praying fervently,
he fell into an ecstasy, and amid many thrones in heaven
he saw one more glorious than all the rest, adorned with
precious stones of most glorious brightness. And mar-
velling at the surpassing brightness of that throne, he
began anxiously to consider within himself who should
be found worthy to fill it. Then he heard a voice saying
to him: “This was the throne of one of the fallen
angels, and now it is reserved for the humble Francis.”
When the friar had recovered from his ecstasy, he went
forth from the church, following the blessed man, as was
his wont. And as they went on their way conversing,
according to their custom, of God, the friar (remembering
his vision) bethought him to ask the man of God what
he thought of himself. To which Christ’s humble ser-
vant made reply: “I think myself to be the greatest of —
sinners,”’ And when the brother answered that he could
not with a safe conscience say or think such a thing, he
added: “If Christ had shown to the most wicked man
on earth such mercy as He has shown to me, I believe
assuredly that that man would have been far more grate-
ful to God than I have been,” By this wonderful
aumility the brother was confirmed im the truth of the
vision which he had seen, knowing by the testimony of
the holy Gospel that the humble shall be exalted to that
excellent glory from which the proud shall be cast down.

Another time, when Francis was praying in a certain


60 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


deserted church, in the province of Massa, near Mount
Casale, he was enlightened in spirit to know that some
sacred relics were there concealed. Grieving that they
had been so long defrauded of their due honour, he com-
manded his brethren to remove them; but being com-
pelled by some urgent cause to leave the place, the sons
forgot their Father’s command, and lost the merit of
obedience. One day when the holy Mass was about to
be celebrated, on removing the first covering of the altar,
they found some beautiful and fragrant bones, which they
recognised to be the relics of the saints, brought thither
not by the hand of man but by the power of God. The
man of God, returning soon afterwards, inquired whether
they had fulfilled his command concerning the relics.
The brethren humbly confessed their neglect of obedience,
and obtained pardon, together with penance, for their
fault. Then said the holy man: “Blessed be the Lord
my God, Who Himself hath done that which you ought
to have done.” Consider diligently the care which
Divine Providence takes of our ashes, and behold how
excellent in the eyes of God was the virtue of the humble
Francis. For when man cared not to fulfil his com-
and, God was obedient to his desire.

' Coming on a certain day to Imola, he humbly besought
the Bishop of that city to give him permission to call the
people together to hear him preach. But the Bishop
answered roughly : “It is sufficient, friar, that I preach
to my people myself.” And the humble Francis bowed
his head and went his way. But after the short space
of an hour he came back again. When the Bishop,
with some displeasure, inquired what he came again to
ask, he made answer, in all humility of heart and speech:
“My Lord, if a father sends his son out at one door,


HIS HUMILITY. | 61


there is nothing left for him but to return by another.”
Then the Bishop, being vanquished by this humility,
embraced him with a joyful countenance, saying, “ Thou
and all thy brethren shall have a general license to
preach ce aaa my diocese, as the reward of thy holy
humility.”

It came to pass that he went to Arezzo ab a time when
that city, being torn by intestine wars and seditions, was
even nigh to itsruin. As he lodged in a suburb outside
the walls, he saw a multitude of demons rejoicing over
the city, and instigating the angry citizens to destroy
each other. In order to disperse these seditious powers
of the air, he sent as his herald Brother Sylvester, a man
simple as a dove, saying to him: “Go to the gates of
the city, and there, in the Name of Almighty God, com-
mand the demons by virtue of holy obedience, that with-
out delay they depart from that place.” The obedient
friar, having heard these words, set forth to fulfil the
command; and singing the praises of the Lord as he
went, he soon stood before the city gates, and cried with


a loud voice: “In the Name of Almighty God, and by


the command of His servant Francis, I bid you all,
infernal demons, to depart far from hence.” No sooner
had he spoken than the tumult in the city was appeased,
and all the citizens, in great tranquillity, began to revise
the statutes and regulations of the city, that so they
might be duly observed. Thus the fierce pride of the
demons, which had enslaved the miserable city, was
overcome by the wisdom of the poor, and the humility of
Francis restored it to peace and safety. Jor the great
virtue of humble obedience obtained the mastery over
those mutinous and rebellious spirits, bringing down and
humbling their fierce pride, and putting their evil will


62 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


utterly to flight. 'The demons of pride ever fly from the
sublime virtue of humility; unless, for its more careful
custody and preservation, the divine clemency permi{*
them to tempt and trouble the humble, as the Apostle
Paul writes of himself, and as Francis proved by his owr
experience.
~~~ Cardinal Leo, of Sante Croce, having once prayed him
to remain with him awhile at Rome, Francis humbly ©
“onsented to his desire, for the reverence and love which
he bore so great a man. On the first night, as he
desired to take some rest after his prayers, the demons
arose in great fury against the Soldier of Christ, and
having severely beaten him, they left him as it were half
dead. When they were gone, Francis called his com-
panion, who came to him at once, and to him the holy
man related what had happened, adding: ‘I believe,
brother, that the demons, who can do nothing but by
the disposition of Divine Providence, have beaten me
now so cruelly, because it is not well that I should abide
in the courts of princes. My brethren, who dwell in
poor places, will perhaps think when they see me living
with Cardinals, that I am meddling in worldly matters,
or seeking after honours, or enjoying delicacies. There-
fore I judge it far better that he who is to give an ex-
ample to others should fly from courts, and dwell humbly
among the humble in humble places, that he may be
able to strengthen those who sutter poverty and are ill at
ease, seeing that he endures the same things himself.”
The next morning, therefore, he offered his humble
excuses to the Cardinal, and took his leave with the ~
brethren.
And as the holy man greatly abhorred pride, which is
the origin of all evils, and disobedience, her most evil


HIS HUMILITY. 63


daughter, he never failed to accept and commend the
humility of penitents. It happened once that a certain
friar was brought before him, who had committed some
little fault against the rule of obedience, that he might be
corrected by the discipline of his justice. The holy man
perceiving, by evident signs, that this brother was really
and deeply contrite, was moved by his love of humility
to pardon him. Nevertheless, that the facility of the
pardon might not give occasion to others to sin, he com-
manded that the friar’s cowl should be taken from him
and cast into the fire, that all might learn how great and
signal a punishment is due to disobedience. When the
cowl had remained for some time in the midst of the fire,

he commanded it to be drawn forth from the flames, and
restored tothe brother, now humbly penitent, Marvellous
to relate, when the cowl was taken out of the midst of the

flames, it bore upon it no vestige of fire. And thus, by one
and the same miracle, God commended the virtue of the

holy man and the humility of the patient. Worthy, there-

fore, of all men to be followed is the humility of Francis,

which even in his earthly life raised him to such dignity,

inclined God to his desires, changed the affections of men,

bowed the proud demons to his will, and bridled the

voracity of fire at the mere sign of his pleasure.

Humility it is which exalts its possessors, and while it

shows reverence to all men, is honoured by all men in

return.


64 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


CHAPTER VII.


OF HIS LOVE OF POVERTY, AND THE WONDERFUL PRO-
VISION MADE FOR ALL HIS WANTS BY GOD.


4] MIDST the other graces which Francis received
I4ee"| from the bountiful giver of all good gifts, he
2 merited by a special prerogative to increase con-
cimily in the treasure of simplicity by the love of most
deep poverty. For the holy man considering this
poverty to have been ever the familiar and beloved com-
panion of the Son of God, and seeing that it was now
cast out by all the world, so bound himself to it in per- |
petual espousals, that he forsook for it not only his
father and mother, but also distributed all things what-
soever which he had in his power to give. No man
was ever so covetous of gold as he of poverty, nor
did any man ever so carefully guard a treasure as he
this pearl of the Gospel. Nothing gave him so much
offence as to see anything in the brethren not wholly in
accordance with poverty. Certain it is, that from his
entrance into religion, even unto his death, he contented
himself with a single tunic and cord. He frequently
called to mind, with many tears, the poverty of Jesus
Christ and His Mother; and affirmed that to be the
queen of virtues, which shone so gloriously in the King
of kings, and in the Queen His Mother. Therefore when
his brethren once asked him in conclave, by which
virtue we become dearest to Christ, he, as if opening to
them the secret of his heart, replied: “ Know, my
brethren, that poverty is the special way to salvation;
for it is the food of humility, and the root of perfection,


HIS LOVE OF POVERTY. 65


whose fruits, although hidden, are manifold. This is
the treasure of which we read in Gospel, which was
hidden in the field; to buy which a man should sell all
that he hath, and in comparison with which all that can
be given for its purchase is to be accounted as nothing.
And he who would attain to this height of perfection
must lay aside not only worldly prudence, but even all
knowledge of letters, that thus stripped of all things he
may come to see what is the power of the Lord, and cast
himself naked into the arms of the Crucified. Neither
does he perfectly renounce the world who keeps a place
for the indulgence of his own senses in the secret of his
heart.” And many times when he spoke to his brethren of
poverty he would quote these words of the Gospel: “The
foxes have holes, and the birds of the air nests; but the
Son of Man hath not where to lay His Head.” There-
fore, he taught the brethren that, after the manner of the
poor, they should build for themselves poor little huts,
and that they should not look upon even these as their
own, but dwell in them as pilgrims in the houses of
others. For he said that it was the manner of pilgrims to
dwell under the roof of other men, longing for the day
when they should peacefully return to their own country.
He would sometimes command that houses already built
should be pulled down, or that the friars should remove
from them, if he saw anything therein which savoured of
proprietorship, or that seemed too sumptuous to befit
evangelical poverty ; for this he said was the foundatior
of the Order, which, if it were first laid, the whole re-
ligious structure would rest upon it, being strengthened —
by its strength; whereas, if the foundation fail, the
whole edifice comes to ruin. :

He taught also, as he had learned by revelation, that

5


66 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


the beginning of holy religion must be the fulfilment of
these words of the Gospel: “Go and sell all that thou
hast, and give to the poor.” Therefore, he would admit
none to the Order except such as would strip themselves
of all things, retaining nothing for themselves, as well in
obedience to the words of the Holy Gospel, as to avoid
the danger and scandal which the reservation of worldly
goods would occasion to the soul. Therefore, when a
certain man, in the March of Ancona, asked to be
received into the Order, the true Patriarch of the poor
replied: “If thou wilt become one of the poor of Christ,
distribute thy goods to the poor.” The man went his
way,and being led astray by carnal affection, he left his
property to his kindred, and not to the poor. When the
holy man heard thereof he severely rebuked him, saying:
“Go thy way, Brother Fly, for thou hast in no wise
gone forth from thy kindred and from thy father’s house.
Thou hast given thy goods to thy family, and hast
defrauded the poor; thou art not worthy to be a follower
of holy poverty. Thou hast begun with the flesh, and
hast sought to raise a spiritual building upon a ruinous
foundation.” Then this carnal man returned home, and
reclaiming his goods, which he would not give up to the
poor, he quickly forsook his holy purpose.

Another time there was such poverty at St. Mary of
the Portiuncula, that there was not wherewithal to supply
the necessary wants of the brethren who came thither.
Wherefore the Vicar of the man of God came to him,
beseeching him that on account of the poverty of the
brethren he would give permission to all the novices on
their entrance to keep somewhat of their property, that
so the brethren might have something to fall back upon
in time of need. To whom the holy man replied, being


HIS LOVE OF POVERTY. 67


enlightened with knowledge from on high: “ God forbid,
beloved brother, that for any man whomsoever we should
thus sin against the rule. I would rather have thee
strip the altar of the glorious Virgin, should necessity so
require, than infringe in the slightest degree the vow of
poverty, and the due observance of the Gospel precept.
For rather would the Blessed Virgin see her altar
unadorned, and the counsel of the Holy Gospel perfectly
observed, than that her altar should be ornamented, and
the counsel of her Son set at nought.”

Another day, as the man of God was passing with his
companion by the city of Bari, in Apulia, he found a
heavy purse on the way, which was all swollen as if full
of money. His companion showed the purse to the poor
man of Christ, and earnestly besought him to let him
take it from the ground, and distribute the money among
the poor. The man of God refused, affirming that there
was some diabolical delusion connected with that purse,
and that the brother would persuade him to do a sinful
action and not a good work, by taking the property of
another to give away. So they left that place, and
hastened forward on their way. But the friar could not
be appeased, being deluded by a vain show of pity, and
continued to urge the holy man, as if he cared not to
relieve the misery of the poor. Then Francis, in his
meekness, agreed to return to the place, not to fulfil the
will of the brother, but to detect the fraud of the devil.
Having returned to the place with the friar and a certain
young man who was travelling that way, and having first
prayed to God, he commanded his companion to take up
the purse. The brother did so trembling, being struck ©
with sudden terror at the diabolical presence; but in
obedience to the holy man’s command he overcame his

5—2


68 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


fear, and stretched out his hand to the purse. When,
behold, a great’ serpent issued therefrom, and immedi-
ately vanishing, together with it, revealed the diabolical
deception to the brother. The delusion of the cunning
adversary being thus made known, the holy man said to
his companion: “ Money, my brother, is to the servants
of God nothing else but the devil and a venomous
serpent.’”

Soon afterwards a marvellous thing befell the holy
man, who had gone for some urgent cause to the city of
Siena. On the plain which is between Campiglia and
Santo Quirico he met three women, in appearance
poor, and in stature, age, and countenance exactly re-
sembling one another. They saluted him after this
singular manner : “ Welcome!” they said, “to the Lady
Poverty.” And when the true lover of poverty heard
this he was filled with unspeakable joy, seeing that there -
was no salutation so dear to him as this which he had
now heard. The women suddenly disappeared, and the
brethren in his company observing the marvellous simi- -
larity between them, the manner of their salutation, and —
the strange suddenness of their disappearance, con-
sidered (not without reason) that some great mystery
was hereby signified concerning the holy man. It would
seem, indeed, that by these women, so poor, and so like
one another, who met him and saluted him after so sin-
gular a fashion, and so suddenly disappeared, was signi- —
fied the beauty of evangelical perfection, which consists —
in chastity, poverty, and obedience, all which shone
forth in the holy man in equal beauty and glory, although
he glorified in the privilege of poverty rather than in any
other thing, being wont to call it, now his mother, now
his spouse, now his lady. In this he desired to surpass _


‘HIS LOVE OF POVERTY, : 69


all others, because by this he had learnt to account him-
self inferior to all others. And if he sometimes met
with some one who in exterior habit seemed poorer than
himself, he would immediately reprove himself, and
excite himself to do the like, as if in the continual battle
which he waged for his lady, Poverty, he feared to be
overcome. One day he meta poor man on the road, and
looking upon his misery he was pierced to the heart, and
said in a lamentable voice to his companion: / “The
poverty of this man makes me greatly ashamed, because,
whereas we have chosen poverty in exchange for great
riches, he shines forth therein far more brightly than
we. 9

_ For the love of holy poverty, this servant of Almighty
- /God loved far better to live upon the alms which he
/ begged from door to door than upon that which was
freely offered to him. And when he was sometimes


~“invited by some great person to dine with him, knowing ~~


that he should, as a mark of honour, be made to sit
down at an abundant table, he went first to ask for
broken pieces of bread at the neighbouring houses, and
thus, in the wealth of poverty, he sat down to eat. Now
it happened one day that he was invited by the Cardinal
of Ostia, who had an exceeding affection for this poor
man of Christ, and when the bishop complained that it
was against his honour, when he was bidden to eat at
his table, that he should go about asking for alms, the
servant of God replied: “My lord, by thus acting I
have greatly honoured thee, inasmuch as I have honoured
a Lord greater than thou. For the Lord delighteth in
poverty, and more than all in that beggary which is
embraced for Christ. Nor will I lay aside that regal
dignity which our Lord Jesus Christ assumed when He


70 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


became poor that He might enrich us by His poverty,
and so make the poor in spirit to be kings and heirs of
the kingdom of heaven. I will not lay it aside, I say,
for the gift of all the false riches which, for a short space,
are granted to thee.” He would oftentimes exhort the
brethren to ask for alms in words such as these—“ Go,”
said he, ‘‘ for the Friars Minor have been given in these
last days to the world, that the elect, by their means,
may obtain the praise of the Great Judge, and hear
these most sweet words: ‘Inasmuch as you have done
it unto one of the least of these My brethren, you have
done it unto Me.’” And he said that it was a joyful
thing to beg under the name of a Friar Minor, seeing
that it is the very name used by the mouth of the
Master of evangelical truth when He spoke of the re-
ward of the just. It was his practice, when opportunity
offered, to go begging on the principal Feasts, saying
that in holy poverty the prophet’s words are fulfilled :
‘ Man shall eat the Bread of Angels ; for that assuredly,”
said he, “is the Bread of Angels which is asked for the
love of God, and, by the suggestion of Angels, is given
by the charity of those at whose doors it is begged by
holy poverty.” Therefore, when he once passed the holy
day of Easter in a distant hermitage, so far from the
dwellings of men that it was not possible to go forth to
beg, in memory of Him Who appeared on that dayin the
/ form of a pilgrim to the disciples going to Emmaus, he
' asked alms of his own brethren as a poor pilgrim; which,
when he had humbly received, he admonished them in
many holy words that, passing through the desert of this
world as pilgrims, and strangers, and true Hebrews, they
should celebrate, in continual poverty of spirit, the true
Pasch of the Lord, that is, the passage from this world


HIS LOVE OF POVERTY, 71


tothe Father. And,since inasking alms he was moved not
by covetousness but by liberty of spirit, God, the Father
of the poor, ever extended a special care over him,

It happened once that the servant of God was griev-
ously sick in the city of Norsia, and being brought back
to Assisi by messengers sent from the city, on account
of the great devotion that was borne him there, they
who carried the holy man came to a poor little town
named Sarziano; and it being the hour of dinner, and
all being hungry, they went to buy some food, and, find-
ing nothing, they returned empty-handed. “Then,” said
the holy man, “you have found nothing, because you
trust more in your flies than in the Lord,’—for by flies
he was wont to signify money; “return, therefore,” said
he, “to the houses you have already visited, and humbly
ask for alms, offering the love of God in return. Nor
do you account this in your false judgment to be a
vile thing, for, after sin committed, God, the great alms-
giver, grants to all, both worthy and unworthy, all things
needful as an alms.” Then, laying aside their false
shame, they went and asked for alms, and more was )
freely given to them for the love of God than by the’
money they had been able to procure. For the hearts
of the poor men who dwelt in that place being pierced
by the divine inspiration, they offered not their posses-

sions only, but themselves; and thus it befell, that the
necessity which by money could not be relieved, the rich
and abundant poverty of Francis supplied.

At the time when he lay sick at the hermitage near
Rieti, a certain physician was accustomed frequently to
visit and attend him, And as Christ’s poor man was
unable to make him a due return for his labours, the
most bountiful God—lest he should lack a present re-


72 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


muneration—rewarded his pious service (in the place of
his poor patient) by this extraordinary favour. The-
house of this physician, which he had built anew with the
fruit of his labours, was threatened with approaching ruin
by a fissure in the wall, which reached from the top to the
bottom of the house, so that it seemed impossible for
human art or industry to prevent its fall, But he, trust-
ing wholly in the merits of the holy man, asked his com-
panion, with great faith and devotion, to give him some-
thing which the hands of the man of God had touched.
Therefore, having with much importunity and many
prayers obtained a small piece of his hair, he placed it
in the fissure ; and the next morning he found the aper-
ture so solidly closed, that it was impossible either to
extract the hair or to perceive the slightest vestige of
the crack. And so it was, that he who sedulously minis-
tered to the bodily infirmities of the servant of God was
preserved from his own peril and the ruin of his house.

Another time, when the man of God wished to go to
a certain desert place, that he might give himself the
more freely to contemplation, being very weak, he rode
upon an ass belonging to a poor man. It being a hot
summer’s day, the poor man, as he followed the servant
of Christ, became weary with the long way and the steep
ascent, and beginning to faint with fatigue and burning
thirst, he called after the Saint: “ Behold,” he said, “I
shall die of thirst unless I can find a little water at
once to refresh me.” Then without delay the man of
God got off the ass, and kneeling down with his hands
stretched out to heaven, he ceased not to pray till he
knew that he was heard. Having finished his prayer,
he said to the man: “Hasten to yonder rock, and there
shalt thou find living water, which Christ the merciful


al


HIS LOVE OF POVERTY, 73


hath even now brought forth therefrom that thou
mayest drink.” Oh! marvellous goodness of God, Who
thus easily inclines to the prayer of His servants! The
thirsty man drank of the water drawn from the hard
rock by the power of prayer. Never was flowing water
in that place before ; neither, however diligently sought
for, could it ever be found there afterwards.

How, by the merits of His poor servant, Christ multi-

plied food on the sea, shall be noted hereafter in its place;
suffice it here to say that, by a small alms which had been
given to him, he preserved many mariners from famine
and the danger of death for many days together.
_ Whence it may be seen, that this servant of Almighty
God was made like unto Moses in bringing water out of
the rock, and to Eliseus in the multiplication of food.
Therefore, let the poor man of Christ lay aside all dis-
trust. For if the poverty of Francis was so abundantly
sufficient to supply by its wonderful power the wants of
all those who in any way assisted him, so that they wanted
neither food nor drink, nor house, when all supply of
money and all natural power and faculties failed them,
much more shall they deserve to receive those things
_which the order of Divine Providence is accustomed to
grant indifferently to all men. If,I say, the dryrock at the
voice of the poor gave forth abundant water for the need
of that poor thirsty man, never will our Lord deny any-
thing to those who have left all things for the Author of
all things.


74. LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISL


CHAPTER VIII.


OF HIS TENDER PIETY, AND HOW EVEN CREATURES DEVOID
OF REASON WERE OBEDIENT TO stn WILL,


profitable for all fiides, had so filled and pent

ixiek} trated the heart of Francis, the servant of God,
that he was seen to be wholly subject to its dominion.
He was thereby raised to God by devotion, transformed
into Christ by compassion, brought near by condescen-
sion to his neighbour; and by the love which he bore
all creatures he attracted them to himself, even as Adam
in his state of innocency.

And as he was thus tenderly affectionate to all, so
especially when he saw souls redeemed by the precious
Blood of Christ Jesus to be defiled by any stain of sin,
he mourned over them with such tenderness of commis-
eration, as if like a mother he were daily bringing them
forth to Christ. And this was the principal cause of his
veneration for all the ministers of the Word of God, as
for those who raise up seed for Christ, their deceased
Brother, crucified for sinners, and with pious solicitude
rear and govern the children whom they bring forth to
Him. And this office of mercy he affirmed to be the
more acceptable to the Father of Mercies if fulfilled with
perfect charity; and therefore he laboured after this in
his own person, rather by example than by words, rather
by the language of tears than by the eloquence of speech.
For he said that that preacher 1 is worthy to be bewailed
with many tears who is devoid of true piety, or who in
his preaching seeks not the salvation of souls, but his


HIS TENDER PIETY. 75


own praise, or who destroys by the depravity of his life
what he builds up by the truth of his doctrine. And he
said that the brother is to be preferred, who, being
simple and slow of speech, excites others to good by the
force of his good example, and he gave this explanation
of the verse: “The barren hath borne many children,’
“The barren,” he said, “is a poor little friar, who has
no Office to bring forth children in the Church; but he
shall bring forth many in the last judgment, for they
who are now converted to Christ by his secret prayers
shall then be ascribed by the Judge to his glory.” “‘He
who hath borne many children hath become weak;
that is, the vain and loquacious preacher who rejoices
now in many children, begotten (as he believes) by his
own virtue, shall then acknowledge that he has no part
in them.”

Francis, therefore, desiring with his whole heart the
salvation of souls, and being full of most fervent zeal for
their conversion, was wont to say that he was perfumed
with sweet odours, and, as it were, anointed with precious
ointment, when he heard that, by the sweet odour of his
brethren’s sanctity diffused throughout the world, many
were brought into the way of truth. And when he
heard such tidings he rejoiced in spirit, and poured forth
most abundant blessings upon those brethren who, by
word or deed, brought sinners to the love of Christ.
But they who by their evil deeds dishonour holy religion,
incurred the most heavy sentence of his malediction.
“ By Thee,” said he, “Most Holy Lord, by the whole
heavenly court, and by me, Thy little one, let them be
accursed, who by their evil example confound and
destroy that which, by the holy brethren of this Order,
Thou hast built_up, and ceasest not still to build.”


76 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI


And he was oftentimes so oppressed with sadness at the
scandal thus given to the little ones of Christ, that it
seemed he would have even sunk under it, had he not
been supported by the consolation of the divine mercy.
As he was one day greatly troubled on this account, and
was praying with an anxious heart to the Father of
mercies for his children, he received this answer from
the Lord: “Why art thou troubled, poor little one, as
if I had in such wise set thee as a pastor over Mine
Order, that thou shouldst forget that I am its chief
Master? I have chosen thee, a simple man, for this
office, that whatsoever I shall work in thee may be
ascribed not to thee, but to divine grace. I have called,
I will preserve, I will feed these my sheep; and if some
be cut off, I will bring others into their place; and if
they be not yet born, I will bring them into being; and
by whatever attacks this poor religion shall be assailed,
by My help it shall be preserved, and shall abide for
ever.”
Francis abhorred detraction, as a vice most hostile to
the fountain of grace and piety; he compared it to the
bite of a most venomous and horrible serpent, account-
ing it to be most hateful to our good and gracious God,
and affirming that detraction feeds upon the blood of
souls, which it slays with the sword of the tongue.
Hearing a friar once lessening the good fame of another,
he turned to his Vicar, and said: “ Arise, search dili-
gently, and if thou shouldst find the accused brother
innocent, let the accuser be severely corrected in the
sight of all.” He was wont to say that he who deprived
his brother of his good fame should be deprived of his
habit, nor should he venture to raise his eyes to the
Lord until to the best of his power he had restored


HIS TENDER PIETY. Ct


that which he had taken from him, ‘“ Detraction,” he
said, ‘is so much greater a sin than theft, as the law_of
Christ, which is fulfilled by charity, bids us seek after the
health of the soul rather than of the body.” Yet with
exceeding tenderness of compassion did he minister to
all bodily sufferings, whether penury, or want of any
kind, sweetly commending the sufferer to Christ. Mercy,
indeed, was born with him, but it received a two-fold in-
crease by the infused charity of Christ, for truly his soul
melted within him at the sight of poverty and sickness ;
and the comfort which his hand was unable to bestow,
he gave by the affection of his heart.

It happened once that a certain poor man begged of
him importunately, and was answered roughly by one of
the brothers. When the pious lover of the poor heard
it, he commanded the friar to lay aside his habit, and
cast himself at the poor man’s feet, acknowledging his
fault, and begging him to pardon and pray for him.
When he had humbly obeyed, our sweet Father said to
him: “ My brother, when thou seest a poor man, behold
in him a mirror of the Lord, and of His poor Mother.
In the sick, in like manner, consider that He bore our
_ sicknesses.”

Thus in all the poor this model of Christian poverty
beheld the image of Christ, and so when he had received
as an alms thinys necessary for the body, he not only
liberally bestowed them upon any poor man whom he
met on the way, but accounted that he was thus restoring
to him what was rightfully his own. It happened once
that he met a poor man, as he was returning from Siena
wearing, by reason of sickness, a cloak over his habit.
Beholding with a pitiful eye the misery of this poor man,
“Tt is fitting,” said he to his companion, “that we


78 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISL


should restore this cloak to this poor man, for it is his,
and I accepted it only until I should find someone
poorer than myself”’ But his companion, considering
the necessity of the compassionate Father, pertinaciously
objected to his relieving others and neglecting himself.
But he answered : “I should be accounted a thief by the
great Almsgiver were I to withhold that which I wear
from him who has greater need of it than I.” There-
fore, he was accustomed to ask permission of those
who relieved his corporal necessities, to give away that
which he received from them to any he should meet with ~
in any greater need than himself. He spared nothing,
neither cloak, nor tunic, nor books, nor even the orna-
ments of the altar, but ould give all these things to the
poor to fulfil the office of mercy. Oftentimes when he~
met a poor man on the way, laden with a heavy burden,
he would take it on his own weak shoulders and carry it
for him. |

‘The Consideration of the common origin of all crea-
tures filled him with overflowing tenderness for all;
and he called them all his brothers and sisters, baciae
they had all one origin with himself. But he bore the
sweetest and strongest affection to those whose natural
qualities set forth the sweet meekness of Christ, and
by which He is therefore signified in Holy Scripture.
He would frequently redeem lambs which were being
led to the slaughter, in memory of that most meek Lamb
Who, to redeem sinners, vouchsafed to be led forth to die.
It happened once, when the servant of God abode at the
Monastery of St. Verecundo, in the diocese of Gubbio,
that a sheep brought forth her lamb in the night. A
ferocious sow, which was in the place, destroyed that
innocent life with her ravenous jaws. When the loving


HIS TENDER PIETY. 79


Father heard of it, he was moved with compassion,
and in memory of the Lamb without spot, he began to
lament over the death of the little creature before them
all, saying: “ Woe is me, brother lamb, innocent ani-
mal representing Christ to men; accursed be that evil
beast which slew thee ; let neither man nor beast eat of
- its flesh for ever.” Marvellous to say, the cruel sow at
once fell sick, and after three days paid the penalty of
her evil deed by her own death. Being cast into the
convent ditch, her body long remained there, dried up
like a piece of wood. See, then, what chastisement
shall befall the wickedness of men, if the ferocity of a |
beast was punished by so evil a death. Consider how
marvellous was the piety, and how overflowing the sweet-
ness of the servant of God, which caused even brute
natures to pay him all the homage in their power. As
he was passing through the plains round the city of
Siena, he met with a large flock of sheep, which, when
he saluted them benignly (as was his custom), all left
their pasture, and ran to him, raising their heads and
fixing their eyes upon him. And so gladsomely did they
frolic round him that the friars and shepherds mar-
velled, beholding not only the lambs, but even the rams,
exulting in his presence.

At another time, at St. Mary of the Portiuncula, a
sheep was brought to the man of God which, because of
the innocency and loving simplicity betokened by these
creatures, he gladly received. The holy man taught the
sheep that it should always praise God, and give no
offence to the brethren; and the sheep, as if it hada
sense of the piety of the man of God, carefully observed
all his commandments. For when it heard the brethren
singing in the choir, it would go into the church, and,


80 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


unbidden, bend its knees, bleating, before the altar of
the Virgin Mother of the Lamb, And when the most
sacred Body of Christ was elevated in the holy Mass it
would bend its knees ; thus, by the reverence of a dumb
animal, rebuking the irreverence of the undevout, and
exciting the devout to greater veneration for the Sacra-
ment of Christ.

Another time he kept a little lamb with him in the
city of Rome, in reverence of the most meek Lamb of
God, which he committed to the care of a noble lady,
Jacoba di Settesolii And the lamb, as if it had been ©
trained in spiritual things by the holy man, would go
with the lady to church, remain there with all reverence,
and return with her as her inseparable companion. If
the lady was late in rising in the morning, the lamb
would come and push her with its little horns, and excite
her by its bleatings, signs, and gestures to hasten to the
church. Therefore, this lamb, the disciple of Francis,
and so great a master of devotion, was kept by the lady
as a marvellous and precious iG

Another time, when the man of God was at Grecio, a,
live hare was brought to him, which, although it was
placed upon the ground, that it might escape if it would,
at the call of the loving Father leaped of its own accord
into his bosom. And he, pressing it to him with tender
affection, admonished it with motherly compassion not to
let itself be taken again, and then set it free. But al-
though it was many times placed upon the ground, that
it might depart, it still returned into the Father’s bosom,
as if it had some hidden sense of the pitifulness of his
heart; at last, by his command, it was carried safely by
the brethren to a solitary place.

In like manner, a rabbit which was caught in an island


HIS TENDER PIETY. 81


on the Lake of Perugia, and brought to the man of God,
while it fled from all others, committed itself fearlessly
to his hands, and nestled in his bosom.

As he was passing by the Lake of Rieti, near the her-
mitage of Grecio, a fisherman, out of devotion, brought
to him a water-fowl, which, having willingly accepted, he
opened his hands to let it fly away, but it would not de-
part ; then raising his eyes to heaven, he remained for a
long time in prayer, and coming to himself (as it were),
after the space of more than an hour, he sweetly reiter-~
ated his command that, giving praise to the Lord, it
should depart. Then, receiving his holy benediction,
it flew joyfully away.

In the same lake was found a great fish, which was

brought to him alive. After his custom, he called it by
the name of brother, and put it back again into the
water, near the boat in which he was. But the fish
gambolled in the water before the man of God, and,
as if attracted by the love of him, would by no means
depart from the boat, until he sent it away with his
blessing,

Another day, as he was walking with a certain friar
near the Lagunes of Venice, he saw a great multitude of
birds sitting upon the branches of a tree, and singing
aloud. Then he said to his companion, “Our sisters,
the birds, praise their Creator; let us therefore go into
the midst of them, and sing the Canonical Hours to the
Lord.” And when they went into the midst of them,
the birds departed not from their place. But because,
for the noise they made, the friars could not hear each
other as they said the Hours, the holy man said to the
birds: “ My sisters, the birds, cease your singing until

we have fulfilled our duty in praising God.” And the
6


82 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


birds hushed their singing at once, and remained silent
until the Office was fully said, and they received per-
mission from the man of God to resume their song.
No sooner had he given them leave, than they began to
sing after their wonted manner, on a fig-tree, near the
cell of the man of God.

At St. Mary of the Angels, a grasshopper was con-
tinually chirping, which, by its song, excited the servant
of God to praise the Lord; for he had learnt, even in
the most insignificant creatures, to admire the wonderful
works of the Creator. One day he called the grasshopper
to him, which, as if it had been divinely admonished to
obey, perched at once upon his hand. And he said to
it, ‘Sing, my sister grasshopper; rejoice and praise the
Lord thy Creator.’ And the creature began at once to
chirp, and ceased not until, at the command of the
Father, it sprang back again to its own place. Thus
_ for eight days together it remained on that same branch,
daily coming to the holy man at his command, and de-
parting again when he sent itaway. At length the man
of God said to his companions: “ Let us give leave to
our sister grasshopper to depart, for she hath now
sufficiently cheered us by her song, and for these eight
days past hath excited us to praise our God.” And
immediately it departed, nor did it ever appear there
again, as if it dared not in any wise transgress his com-
mand.

When he was sick at Siena, a certain nobleman sent
him a live pheasant which had been just caught. No
sooner did it see and hear the holy man, than go lov-
ingly did it cleave to him, that it could not bear to be
separated from him, For although it was often taken out
of the cloister by the brethren into a vineyard hard by, —


HIS TENDER PIETY, «83


that it might go whithersoever it would, it always flew
back to the Father, as if it had been fed by him all the
days of its life. Being afterwards given to a certain
man, who, out of devotion, came often to visit the holy
man, as if sorrowful at being taken away from that piti-
ful Father, the bird refused to eat. It was brought back
again to the servant of God, and as soon as it saw
him it gave signs of great joy, and began to eat with
avicity.

When he came to the hermitage at Alvernia, to keep
Lent in honour of the Archangel Michael, many different
kinds of birds came flying round his cell with sweet
songs and glad gestures, as if they rejoiced at his coming,
and would invite that pious Father to remain amongst
them. And when he saw it, he said to his companion:
“ T perceive, brother, that it is the Will of God that we
should abide here awhile, seeing that our sisters, the
birds, thus rejoice at our presence.”

Now, while he abode there, a falcon, which had her
nest in that place, made a loving friendship with him.
For, by her cry, she gave notice to the holy man every
night of the hour at which he was wont to rise to say
the Divine Office. The great care which this bird took to
wake him was most pleasing to the man of God, because
it freed him from all danger of sloth and negligence.
But when the servant of Christ was sick, and weaker
than was his wont, the falcon spared his infirmity, and
ealled him later than usual; for, as if she had been ad-
monished by God, she awoke him with a gentle call at
the break of day. And, assuredly, there seemed to be a
divine presage, both in the exultation of the manifold
_ kind of birds and in the cry of this falcon, of the sublime
dignity to which the devoted servant and worshipper of
6—2


84. LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISL


God was soon to be raised on the wings of contempla-
tion by the apparition of the Seraph.

While the holy man dwelt, at another time, at the
hermitage of Grecio, the inhabitants of that place were
troubled with many and divers evils, for a great multitude
of ravenous wolves devoured not only beasts, but men,
and the hail also yearly destroyed their corn and vines.
When, therefore, the herald of the Holy Gospel was
preaching to these afflicted men, he said to them, “I
bid you believe, to the honour and glory of Almighty
God, that all these plagues shall depart from you, and
the Lord will look upon you, and will multiply your
temporal goods, if you will believe my words and have
mercy upon yourselves, and (having made a good confes-
sion) bring forth worthy fruits of penance. And again
I declare to you that if, being ungrateful to God for
His mercies, you return to your evil ways, your wounds
shall open again, your punishment shall be twofold,
and the wrath of God shall wax hotter against you than
before.” From that hour they began to do penance, in
obedience to the holy man, and the cruel plagues which
had molested them ceased, neither wolves nor hail troub-
ling them again. And what is still more marvellous,
when the hail fell on the neighbouring fields, it stopped
when it approached their boundaries, or fell upon other
places. The hail having thus ceased, the wolves also
kept the promise made by the servant of God, and ven-
tured no more to rage against those men who no longer
impiously rebelled against the laws of the merciful God.
It behoves us, therefore, piously to venerate the piety of ©
that blessed man, by whose marvellous sweetness and |
power ferocious beasts were quelled, wild animals tamed, —
and the nature of brutes, rebellious to man since his —


THE FERVOUR OF HIS CHARITY. _ 85


fall, was sweetly inclined to his obedience. For this
virtue of piety it is which, uniting all things together,
is profitable to all things, having the promise of this life
and of that which is to come.


CHAPTER IX.


OF THE FERVOUR OF HIS CHARITY, AND OF HIS DESIRE
OF MARTYRDOM.


Melos O can express the fervent charity which burnt
i} in the heart of Francis, the friend of the Bride-


Aecaa} groom? For he seemed to be absorbed, as a
tive coal in the furnace, in the flame of divinelove, As
soon as he heard the love of the Lord spoken of, he was
moved, excited and inflamed, as if the chords of his
heart within vibrated to the sound without. And he
was wont to say that to offer this love of our heart as an
alms was a noble prodigality, and that they were to be
accounted most foolish who valued it less than money ;
for that the priceless worth of divine love was a sufficient
purchase-money for the kingdom of heaven, and that He
who has so greatly loved us is greatly to be loved in
return. Therefore, to excite himself by all things to
divine love, he rejoiced in all the works of the Lord’s
hands, and, by the glory and beauty of that mirror, he
arose to the principle and cause of them all. In all
things fair he beheld Him Who is most fair, and by His
footsteps in created things he found the way to his
Beloved, making a ladder of all things by which to
ascend to Him Whois to be desired above them all. With


86 —sOIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


unspeakable devotion he enjoyed that fountain of good-
ness, flowing forth through all creatures as in so many
streams; and perceiving a celestial harmony in the
virtuous deeds offered in concert with them to God, after
the manner of the prophet David, he sweetly exhorted
them all to praise the Lord. He desired for the
exceeding ardour of his love, to be wholly transformed
into Christ Jesus, Whom he laid, as a bundle of myrrh,
on his heart. Out of special devotion to Him, he was
accustomed to retire into a solitary and desert place, and
there to abide, from the feast of Epiphany through the
forty days which Christ spent in the desert. There he
remained shut up in his cell, praising God without inter-
mission, in continual prayer and the utmost severity of
abstinence. And as his love to Christ was so fervent, -
so graciously was it returned by his Beloved that, as
the servant of God once revealed to his familiar com-
panion, his Saviour seemed to be almost continually
present before his eyes. His burning love for the
Sacrament of our Lord’s Body seemed to consume the
very marrow of his bones, as he wondered within him-
self which most to admire—the condescension of that
charity, or the charity of that condescension of our
Lord. He communicated often, and so devoutly as to
move others to devotion; and, by the sweetness of
that Immaculate Lamb, he was, as it were, spiritually
inebriated, and frequently rapt in ecstasy. He bore
unspeakable love to the Mother of our Lord Jesus
Christ, because by her the Lord of Majesty became our
Brother, and through her we have obtained mercy. In |
her, next to Christ, he placed his confidence: he took
her for his advocate, and in her honour he was accustomed |
to fast devoutly, from the feast of the Apostles Peter —


THE FERVOUR OF HIS CHARITY. 87


and Paul until the festival of the Assumption. He was
likewise bound to the Angelical Spirits by an insepar-
able bond of affection, because by them the souls of the
elect are enkindled and raised to God by a marvellous
fire of love; and therefore, in devotion to them, he fasted
forty days, from the feast of the Assumption of the
glorious Virgin, giving himself, for that time, wholly
to prayer. To the Blessed Michael the Archangel he
had a more special devotion ; and he honoured him with
peculiar love, because to him was committed the office
of presenting souls to God. And this devotion came
from his fervent zeal for the salvation of all the elect.
When he remembered all the Saints, whom he was wont
to call stones enkindled through and through with the
fire of divine love, he was all inflamed with heavenly
charity ; and he honoured with the highest degree of
reverence and love the holy Apostles, and chiefly St.
Peter and St. Paul, because of the love and reverence
which they bore to Christ, and he dedicated a special
Lent to the Lord in their honour,

Now, this poor man of Christ had but two pieces of
money—to wit, his body and his soul —which in his
liberal charity he could bestow upon others, and of these
he made a continual offering for the love of Christ; for
by his rigorous fasting, during almost the whole course
of his life, he sacrificed his body to God ; and likewise
his spirit by the ardour of its desires; offering the
holocaust in the outer court, and at the same time burn-
ing incense and most sweet odours on the altar within.
And while the excessive devotion of his charity raised
him to high and sublime things, so in his loving benig-
nity he communicated himself to all those who were par-
takers of the same grace and nature with himself; for it is


88 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


no marvel that he who, in the natural piety of his heart,
accounted himself to be the fellow and the brother of all
creatures, was drawn, by the charity of Christ, to a still
closer union and brotherhood with them, when adorned
with the likeness of his Creator and Redeemer, He
would not have accounted himself to be the friend of
Christ if he had been wanting in care for those souls who
had been-redeemed by His Blood. He was wont to say
that nothing was to be preferred to the salvation of souls,
and this he proved chiefly by the fact that the only be-
gotten Son of God had vouchsafed to die upon the Cross
for their redemption. This, therefore, was ever the
object of his most fervent prayers; of this he continually
discoursed in his sermons, and commended it by the
force of his example. When he was sometimes reproved
for his excessive austerity of life, he would reply that he
was set forth as an example to others; and, indeed, his
innocent flesh, which was ever willingly subject to the
spirit, needed not the scourge for any offence of its own;
yet, as an example to others, he loaded it with the bur-
den of penance, leading a hard and austere life for their
sake ; for he said: “Though I should speak with the
tongue of men and of angels, and have not charity, nor
show to my neighbour an example of virtue, I should be
- of little service to him, and none to myself.” And with
this burning fire of charity he sought to imitate the
glorious triumph of the martyrs in the inextinguishable
flame of their love, and the invincible courage of their
spirit ; so that, in the perfect charity which casteth out
fear, he offered himself to the Lord as a living sacrifice
in the fire of martyrdom, thus to requite Him Who died
for us, and to excite others to His divine love, :

In the sixth year after his conversion, being thus all


THE FERVOUR OF HIS CHARITY. 89


on fire with the desire of martyrdom, he determined
to pass into Syria, to preach the Christian faith and
penance to the Saracens and other infidels there.
Having entered a ship in order to accomplish his desire,
he was forced by contrary winds to land in the country
of Sclavonia. Having remained there for some time,
unable to find any ship to carry him whither he desired
to go, he besought certain mariners who were bound for
Ancona to carry him thither for the love of God, which
they refusing, because he had not wherewithal to support
himself during the voyage, the holy man, trusting fully
in the goodness of God, secretly entered the ship with
his companion, and hid himself there. Forthwith there
came a messenger from God to the aid of His poor ser-
vant, bringing him the necessary food for his voyage;
and calling one of the sailors, who greatly feared God,
he said to him: “ Keep these things faithfully for the
two poor friars who are hidden in this ship, and when
the time of need shall come, supply them charitably
therewith.” When the ship had left the harbour, the
sailors being prevented by contrary winds from touching
at any port, their provisions were exhausted, and nothing
remained but that which had been given in alms to the
poor friars ; and that which was very small in quantity
increased in such measure by the power of God, that it
sufficed for the necessities of the whole crew, who were
kept at sea by stress of weather, and tempest-tossed for
many days before they arrived at the harbour of Ancona.
Then the sailors, seeing that by the merits of the servant
_ of God they had passed through so many perils of death,
having felt the terror of the tempest, and seeing the
wonderful works of the Saint in the depths of the sea,
gave thanks to Almighty God, Who shows Himself ever


90 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


wonderful and loving in His servants and His friends.
Having disembarked, he began to traverse the country,
sowing the seed of salvation and gathering an abundant
harvest. .

But because his heart yearned after the fruit of
martyrdom, desiring above all things a precious death
for Christ, he took the road to Morocco, that he might
preach the Gospel of Christ to the Miramolin and all
his people, thinking thus to attain the palm for which he
so fervently longed; and so was he carried forward by
that desire, that, weak as he was in body, he far out-
stripped his companion in speed ; and thus in haste and,
as it were, in ecstasy of spirit, he seemed to fly rather
than walk. But no sooner had he arrived in Spain than
by the divine disposal, which reserved him for greater
things, there fell upon him so grievous a sickness that
he was unable to proceed according to his desire. The
man of God, knowing, therefore, that his life in the
flesh was necessary to the children whom he had brought
forth in the spirit, although he accounted death to be
a gain to himself, returned to feed the flock committed
to his care. —

But being urged in the spirit to martyrdom by the
intense ardour of his charity, he sought a third time to
spread the faith in the Holy Trinity by the shedding of
his blood, and endeavoured again to make his way to
the land of the infidels. In the thirteenth year after
his conversion he went into Syria, and boldly exposed
himself to many dangers to gain admittance to the
Sultan of Babylon. At that time so implacable a war-
fare was raging between the Christians and the Saracens,
the armies of both nations being encamped over against —
each other, that it was impossible to pass from one to


THE FERVOUR OF HIS CHARITY. 91


the other without peril of death. For the Sultan had
made a cruel decree, that whoever should bring him the
head of a Christian should receive a gold bezant as his
reward. But Francis, the valiant soldier of Christ,
hoping shortly to attain the end which he had set before
him, determined to undertake the adventure, not terri-
fied by the fear, but rather excited by the desire, of
death. Having, then, prayed to the Lord, and being
strengthened: by Him, he sang with great confidence
those words of the prophet, “Though I should walk: in
the midst of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for-’
Thou art with me.” He took with him, therefore, as
his companion, a brother named Illuminatus—a man,
indeed, of virtue and illumination—and on their way
they met two sheep, which, when the holy man saw, he
said to his companion, “ My brother, trust in the Lord,
for in us is fulfilled those words of the Gospel, ‘ Behold
I send you forth as sheep in the midst of wolves.’”
When they had gone a little farther, they met with a
band of Saracens who, quickly falling upon them, like
wolves upon a flock of sheep, cruelly seized and bound
the servants of God, dealing fiercely and contemptuously
with them, and with many vile words and hard blows
carried them along in cruel bonds. Lastly, having in
many ways afflicted and oppressed them, they were by
the divine disposal, and according to the holy man’s
desire, brought into the presence of the Sultan. And
being questioned by that prince whence and for what
purpose they had come, by whom they had been sent,
-and by what means they had come thither, Francis, the
servant of God, made answer with a heart void of fear,
that they had been sent, not by man, but by the Most
High God, to show to him and his people the way of


92 LIFR OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASNINI.


salvation, and make known to them the truth of the
Gospel. And truly with such constancy of mind, such
fortitude of soul, and such fervour of spirit did he preach
to that Sultan One God in Three Persons, and Jesus
Christ the Saviour of all men, that in him was gloriously
fulfilled that promise of the Gospel: “I will give to you
a mouth and wisdom, which none of your adversaries
shall be able to resist or contradict.” The Sultan,
therefore, admiring the courage and fervour of spirit
which he beheld in the man of God, listened to him
willingly, and earnestly besought him to remain with
him. But the servant of Christ, being enlightened from
on high, answered him thus: “If thou and thy people
will be converted to Christ, for His love I will willingly
abide with thee. But if thou art doubtful whether or
not to forsake the law of Mahomed for the faith of Christ,
command a great fire to be lighted, and I will go into it
with thy priests, that it may be known which faith
should be held to be the most certain and the most
holy.” To whom the Sultan made answer: “I do not
believe that any of my priests would be willing to expose
himself to the fire, or to endure any manner of torment
in defence of his faith.” For he had just seen one of the
most aged amongst his priests, and of greatest credit and
authority, depart from his presence at the words which
Francis had spoken. Then said the holy man: “ If thou
wilt promise me for thyself and thy people that thou
wilt embrace the worship of Christ if I come forth
unharmed, I will enter the fire alone. And if I shall be
burnt, let it be imputed to my sins, But if the Divine
Power shall protect me, then let all of you acknowledge
Christ to be the Power and Wisdom of God, the true
God and the Lord and Saviour of all men.” But the


THE FERVOUR OF HIS CHARITY, 93 -


Sultan answered that he dared not accept this challenge,
because he feared a sedition of the people. Nevertheless
he offered him many precious gifts, which the man of
God, who coveted not worldly things, but sought only
the salvation of souls, despised as so much dust. The
Sultan, beholding in this holy man so perfect a contempt
of all worldly things, was moved to admiration, and
conceived a still greater veneration for him. And
although he would not, or perhaps dared not, embrace
the Christian faith, yet he devoutly besought the servant
of Christ that he would receive the aforesaid gifts for
his salvation, and either distribute them amongst the
poor of Christ, or employ them in the building of
churches. But he, who ever avoided the burden of
money, and saw no root of true piety in the Sultan’s
soul, would by no means consent to his desire. Seeing,
also, that he made no progress in the conversion of this -
people, nor could attain his desire of martyrdom, being
admonished by divine revelation, he returned into the
region of the faithful; the clemency of God thus ordain-
ing most mercifully and marvellously, to the greater
advance of the holy man in virtue, that this friend of
Christ should seek death with all his power, and yet be
unable to find it; that he should not want the merit of
the martyrdom of the will, and yet should be preserved
hereafter to receive the singular privilege of the Stigmata.
And so it was that the fire of divine love was kindled
more and more perfectly in his heart, till it was mightily
manifested in his flesh. Oh, truly blessed man, who, if
his flesh felt not the tyrant’s steel, wanted not the likeness
of the Lamb that was slain! Oh, truly and fully blessed,
I say, who, if his life perished not under the sword of
persecution, yet missed not the palm of martyrdom !


94 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


CHAPTER X.


OF HIS FERVOUR AND DILIGENCE IN PRAYER.


E=—a)HE servant of Christ, knowing that he was in
6 2241 his body a pilgrim and an exile from the Lord,
fatts| had already become, for the charity of Christ,
shelly insensible to the desire of earthly or exterior
things, lest he should remain without the consolation of
true love ; and so, praying without intermission, he en-
deavoured to keep his spirit in the continual presence of
God. And great, assuredly, was his consolation in
prayer, while he contemplated the whole circle of the .
mansions of the angels, with whom he was already a
fellow-citizen, and with fervent desires sought his Be-
loved, from whom he was only divided by the wall of the
flesh. And this prayer was also a great help to him in
all his works, wherein he distrusted his own endeavours ;
“and trusting wholly in prayer, rested all his thoughts
upon the Lord. He affirmed that a religious man ought
to desire above every other gift the grace of prayer;
_and believing that without it no progress can be made in
the service of God, he laboured, by every means in his
power, to excite his brethren to its exercise. Whether
walking or sitting, at home or abroad, labouring or
resting, he was ever intent on prayer, so that he seemed
to have dedicated to it not only his heart and his body,
and all that was in him, but also his work and his time.
Neither was he ever accustomed negligently to pass over
any spiritual visitation; but when it was offered to
him he followed it, and as long as it was vouchsafed |
him by the Lord he enjoyed its sweetness: for if, when


HIS FERVOUR AND DILIGENCE IN PRAYER. 95


journeying in intense thought, he felt some good and
divine inspiration, laying aside other thoughts, he
dwelt upon this, turning the new inspiration to account
so that he received not that grace in vain. He was
often raised to such a height of contemplation as to be
carried out of himself; and experiencing something be-
yond human sense, he became unconscious of what
passed around him,

Passing through the town of Santo Sepulchro, a very
populous place, riding upon an ass, because of the weak-
ness of his body, he was surrounded by a great crowd,
who gathered round him from devotion, Being pressed
by the people on every side, he seemed to feel nothing
any more than if he had been an inanimate corpse; he
took no notice of anything around him, nor was he
conscious of anything that was done; so that when he
came to a hospital for poor lepers, which was on the
other side of the town, as if awaking from his heavenly
contemplations, he inquired anxiously whether they
were near Santo Sepulchro. For his mind, always intent
on the glories of heaven, felt not the variation of places
or times, or the presence of persons. And that this
happened frequently is attested by the experience of
many of his companions.

And having learnt in prayer that the desired presence
of the Holy Ghost is enjoyed with greatest familiarity
at a distance from the noise and distractions of the world,
he sought out solitary places, making his nightly prayer
in lonely and deserted churches. Here he often endured
most horrible conflicts with the demons, who sensibly
attacked him, endeavouring to disturb him in his prayer.
But he, armed with celestial weapons, the more vehe-
mently he was attacked by his enemies, had recourse


96 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


the more fervently and earnestly to prayer, saying to the

Lord: “ Protect me under the shadow of Thy wings from
the face of the wicked who afflict me.” And then to the
demons : “ Do your worst, malignant and false spirits,
for you can do nothing but what you are permitted to
do by God; and I am ready to suffer with all joy what-
soever His divine goodness has decreed for me.” And
the proud demons, unable to endure this constancy of.
mind, retired in confusion. The man of God, remain-
ing tranquil in his solitude, made the woods resound ~
with his sighs, and bathed them with his tears. He
beat his breast, and discoursed familiarly with his Lord.
Here he made answer to Him as a judge, besought
Him as a father, conversed with Him as a friend; and
here he was often heard by the brethren, who piously
observed him, imploring the divine clemency for sinners
with great sighs and tears, and crying with a loud voice,
as if the Passion of the Lord had been presented before
his eyes ; here he was seen praying all night long, with
his arms extended in the form of a cross, his whole body
being raised from the ground, and surrounded by a
luminous cloud, so that the marvellous light which
shone forth from his body bore glorious testimony to
his wonderful illumination of mind. Here again, as was
proved by manifest signs, all the uncertain and hidden


things of the divine wisdom were revealed to him,


which he divulged not to others, unless when the charity
of Christ urged, and the profit of his neighbour required —
it. For he was wont to say that it is easy to lose


_ for a little price a thing so precious that no price can


ee,


purchase it, and thus to provoke the giver not to give it
to us again,
When he returned from his private prayers, by Bind


HIS FERVOUR AND DILIGENCE IN PRAYER, 97


he was changed, as it were, into another man, he strove
earnestly to conform himself to the manner of his com-
panions, lest he should show outwardly that which he
had experienced within, and thus lose the interior re-
ward by exposing it to the air of man’s admiration,
When he received any visitation from the Lord in pub-
lic, he endeavoured to turn away the attention of the
bystanders, lest the familiarity vouchsafed to him by his
divine Spouse should be made known to the world.
When he was in prayer with the brethren, he carefully
avoided sighs, groans, or any exterior signs of emotion,
whether because he loved secrecy, or because he was in-
teriorly absorbed in the presence of God. He would
often say to the brethren: “ When a servant of God re-
ceives any divine inspiration in prayer, he ought to say,
‘This consolation, O Lord, Thou hast sent from heaven
to me, a most unworthy sinner, and I commit it to Thy
care, for I know that I should be but a thief of Thy
treasure.’ And when he returns to prayer, he ought to
bear himself as a little one and a sinner, as if he had
received no new grace from God.”

It happened one day when the holy man was at the
Portiuncula, the Bishop of Assisi came, as was his
custom, to visit him; and when he came to the place
passed on, with greater confidence than was befitting, to
the cell where the servant of Christ was praying. He
knocked at the door, and had no sooner put in his head
than he beheld the holy man at prayer, and was imme-
diately struck with terror; his hair stood on end, and all
his limbs seemed to stiffen, so that he even lost the use
of his speech, and was suddenly and forcibly driven
backwards by the divine power to a great distance
from the cell, The Bishop in amazement went to the


7


98 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


brethren in such haste as he was able, and God having
restored the use of his speech, his first word was to
confess his fault.

Another time the Abbot of the Monastery of St.
Justin, of the diocese of Perugia, met theservantof Christ.
As soon as he saw him, the devout Abbot dismounted
in haste, that he might do reverence to the man of God,
and confer with him concerning the salvation of souls.
After this sweet conference, the Abbot took his leave,
humbly beseeching Francis to pray for him. The man
dear to God replied, “I will willingly pray for thee.”
A little while after the Abbot’s departure, the faithful
Francis said to his companion: “ Wait awhile, brother,
until I fulfil the promise which I have made.” Now,
while he was praying, the Abbot suddenly felt an un-
usual fervour and sweetness in his spirit, so that he
was wrapped in ecstasy of mind, and wholly dissolved
in God. When he came to himself, he recognised the
power of the prayer of St. Francis. From that moment
he conceived an increased love for the Order, and related
the fact as a miracle to many persons.

The holy man was accustomed to recite the Canonical
Hours with the greatest reverence and devotion. For
although he suffered from weakness of the eyes, the
stomach, the spleen, and the liver, yet while he said the
Office he would never lean against the wall, but always
stood erect and bare-headed, without wandering of the
eye or any other interruption. And when he was travel-
ling he always stopped to say the Office, nor did he ever
omit this holy and devout custom, however inclement
the weather or abundant the rain. For he said: “If
quiet is needed to eat the bread of the body, which, with
what it eats, shall become the food of worms, with how


|


HIS FERVOUR AND DILIGENCE IN PRAYER. 99


far greater peace and tranquillity ought the soul to
receive the nourishment of its life!”

He accounted it a great offence if, at the time of prayer,
he was distracted by any vain fancies. If any such
thing befell him, he failed not immediately to expiate it
by confession. And by this continual watchfulness it
happened that he was rarely troubled by flies of this kind.
It happened one Lent that he had made a certain vessel,
in order to occupy his time, so that not the slightest
portion of it might be lost. Ashe was saying Tierce this
work came into his memory, and distracted his mind for
amoment. In fervour of spirit, he took the little vessel,
and cast it into the fire, saying, “I will sacrifice to
the Lord that which has hindered His sacrifice.” He
recited the Psalms with such intention of mind and
spirit, as if he had God present with him; and whenever
the Name of the Lord occurred in them, it seemed to
leave a sensible sweetness on his lips. In order that
the Name of the Lord, not only in thought, but in
speech or writing, should be fitly honoured, he persuaded
the brethren, whenever they found any written papers,
to lay them up carefully in some fitting place, lest per-
haps the sacred Name therein contained might be trodden
under foot. Whenever he spoke or heard the Name of


Jesus, the joy which filled him interiorly was manifestly
seen in his exterior, even as if he tasted some sweet


savour, or some harmonious sound filled his ear.
It happened in the third year before his death, that
in order to excite the inhabitants of Grecio to commemor-


ate the nativity of the Infant Jesus with great devotion,
he determined to keep it with all possible solemnity ;
'and lest he should be accused of lightness or novelty,
_he asked and obtained the permission of the sovereign


7—2


100 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


Pontiff. Then he prepared a manger, and brought hay,
and an ox and an ass to the place appointed. The
brethren were summoned, the people ran together, the
forest resounded with their voices, and that venerable
night was made glorious by many and brilliant lights
and sonorous psalms of praise. The man of God stood
before the manger, full of devotion and piety, bathed in
tears and radiant with joy; many Masses were said
before it, and the Holy Gospel was chanted by Francis,
the Levite of Christ. Then he preached to the people
around of the nativity of the poor King; and being
unable to utter his Name for the bodictont of his
love, he called Him the Babe of Bethlehem. A certain
valiant and veracious soldier, Master John of Grecio,
who, for the love of Christ, had left the warfare of
this world, and become a dear friend of the holy man,
affirmed that he beheld an Infant marvellously beautiful
sleeping in that manger, Whom the blessed Father
Francis embraced with both his arms, as if he would
awake Him from sleep. This vision of the devout
soldier is credible, not only by reason of the sanctity of
him that saw it, but by reason of the miracles which after-
_ wards confirmed its truth. For the example of Francis,
if it be considered by the world, is doubtless sufficient
to excite all hearts which are negligent in the faith of
Christ; and the hay of that manger, being preserved by
the people, miraculously cured all diseases of cattle, and
many other pestilences ; God thus in all things glorifying
His servant, and witnessing to the great efficacy of his
holy prayers by manifest prodigies and miracles,


HIS KNOWLEDGE OF HOLY SORIPTURE. 101


CHAPTER XI,


OF HIS KNOWLEDGE OF HOLY SCRIPTURE, AND OF HIS
SPIRIT OF PROPHECY,


prayer, together with the continual practice of
Weetnms} all virtues, had already brought the holy man
to such serenity of mind that, although he had no know-
ledge of the Scriptures by banat teaching, nevertheless,
being illuminated by the splendour of the eternal light,
he investigated with marvellous acuteness of mind all
the most profound secrets of the sacred writings, because
his understanding, being purified from every stain,
penetrated the most hidden things of the holy mysteries ;
and where theological science enters not, but remains
without, thither entered the affection of the lover of God.
He read continually the sacred books, and what had
once entered his mind he retained firmly in his memory.
For he received not in vain with the ear of mental
attention, that which he continually dwelt upon with
tender devotion. Being once asked by the brethren
whether it was his pleasure that learned men who entered
his Order should apply themselves to the study of the
Holy Scriptures, he replied, “‘ Assuredly it pleases me
that while they follow the example of Christ, of whom
we read that He gave Himself more to prayer than to
reading, they should not, on that account, neglect the
study of prayer. Nevertheless, 1 would not have them
study in order to know how they ought to speak, but
in order that they may do the things which they hear,
and when they have done them, that they may set them


102 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


before others. I would,” said he, “have my friars to be
disciples of the Gospel, and so to increase in the know-
ledge of the truth, that they may grow, at the same time,
in purity and simplicity, so that they may not separate
from the wisdom of the serpent the simplicity of the
dove, which our Divine Master joined together with His
blessed mouth.” When he was at Siena, he was asked
by a pious man, a doctor in theology, some questions of
great difficulty; and he opened the secrets of the divine
wisdom with so much clearness, that this learned man
marvelled greatly. He afterwards said that truly the
theology of that holy Father rose like a soaring eagle -
upon the two wings of purity and contemplation, whereas,
said he, “ our science grovels like a serpent in the dust.”
For although he was rude in speech, he was, never-
theless, so full of holy wisdom that he could solve all
doubtful questions, and disclose all hidden mysteries,
Nor is it surprising that the holy man had received from
God the understanding of the Holy Scriptures, seeing
that, imitating Christ in His life and His works, he
bore engraven upon his heart the image of that Divine
Teacher by Whom they were dictated.

So fully did he possess the spirit of prophecy, that he
foretold things to come, and beheld the secrets of hearts,
and knew things absent as if they were present, and
showed himself in a marvellous manner to those that
were afar off. For at the time that the Christian hosts
were besieging the city of Damietta, the holy man was
there, not armed with the armour of this world, but
with the weapons of faith. The day appointed for
a battle having arrived, and the Christians preparing for —
the conflict, the servant of God, when he heard of it,
began to weep bitterly, and said to his companion, “If


HIS KNOWLEDGE OF HOLY SCRIPTURE, 103


these fight to-day, the Lord hath revealed to me that
our Christians shall not prevail; but if I tell them so,
I shall be accounted a fool, and if I keep silence, my
conscience will reproach me. What thinkest thou that
I ought to do?” And his companion made answer:
“ Brother, trouble not thyself because of the judgments
of men, for it will not be the first time that thou hast
been accounted a fool; discharge thy conscience, there-
fore, and fear God rather than men.” When he had
heard these words, the messenger of Christ went forth
and spoke to the Christians a salutary admonition,
forbidding them to fight, and foretelling their overthrow ;
but when the soldiers heard his words they mocked at
them, accounting them to be vain fables, and so hard-
ened their hearts that they would in nowise desist from
their purpose. They engaged in a battle with the enemy,
and after a severe conflict the whole Christian chivalry
was put to flight, receiving shame and contempt instead
of victory ; and so great was the slaughter and the over-
throw, that the Christians lost about six thousand men,
either made prisoners or slain. Whereby it plainly ap-
peared that the wisdom of the poor Francis was not to
be despised, inasmuch as the soul of the just man sees
and declares the truth more plainly than seven watch-
men set upon their tower.

At another time, after his return from beyond the sea,
he went to Celano to preach, and a certain soldier be-
sought him with great devotion that he would eat with
him. When the holy man came into the soldier’s house
all the family rejoiced greatly to receive this poor one of
the Lord. And before he began to eat, according to his
custom, the holy man offered his usual prayers and praises
to God, with his eyes raised to heaven, When he had


104 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSIST,


finished his prayer, he familiarly called his kind host
aside, and said to him: “Behold, my host and brother,
in compliance with thy prayers I have come to eatin thy |
house. But now attend to that which I say to thee, for
thou shalt no more eat here, but elsewhere. Therefore,
confess thy sins with truly penitent contrition; let no-
thing remain in thee unrevealed by true confession, for
the Lord will requite thee to-day for the kindness with
which thou hast received His poor servant.” The good
man believed these holy words, and disclosing all his
sins in confession to the companion of St. Francis, he set
all his house in order, making himself ready for death,
and preparing himself for it to the best of his power.
_ They then sat down to table, and the others began to
eat, but the spirit of the host immediately departed,
according to the words of the man of God, which fore- .
told his sudden death. And so it came to pass that by
the merit of his hospitality, he who, in the words of
truth, had received a prophet, received also a prophet’s
reward ; for by the prophetical warning of the holy man
this devout soldier was provided against sudden death,
inasmuch as, fortified by the arms of penance, he escaped
eternal damnation, and entered the kingdom of heaven.

When the holy man was lying sick at Rieti, a certain
prebendary, named Gedeon, a vain and worldly man, was .
attacked by a grievous sickness; and causing himself to
_be carried in his bed to the holy man, he and all those
present besought him with tears to make the sign of
the Cross over him. But the holy man-replied: “Thou
hast lived until now according to the desires of the flesh,
nor hast thou ever feared the judgments of God; where-
fore, then, wouldst thou have me sign thee with the
sign of the Cross? Nevertheless, because of the devout


HIS KNOWLEDGE OF HOLY SCRIPTURE. 105


prayers of these who intercede for thee, I will sign thee
with the Cross in the Name of the Lord. But know
this, that if, after thou shalt be delivered, thou return
to thy evil ways, thou shalt suffer far greater torments
than these.” He signed him, therefore, with the Cross :
and immediately he, whose limbs had been all con-
tracted, arose in perfect health, and breaking forth into
the praises of God, he cried: “I am free ;” and at the
same instant his bones seemed to crack, as when dry
wood is broken by the hand, and that sound was heard
by all present. But after a short time had passed, he
forgot God, and returned again to his sins, When
supping one evening at the house of a certain canon,
where he was to sleep that night, the roof of the house
suddenly fell in; and all the rest who were within it
having escaped, that miserable man remained there
alone, and was killed on the spot. Thus, by the just
judgment of God, a worse evil than the first befell that
wicked man, by reason of his ingratitude and contempt
of God; whence we may learn to be thankful for pardon
once received, for the guilt is twofold of sin committed
after a fresh benefit has been bestowed.

Another time, a certain noble lady, who was very
devout to God, came to the holy man to lay before him a
trouble under which she was suffering, and to ask him
fora remedy. She had a husband, who was exceedingly
eruel, and who hindered her in the service of Christ; and
therefore she besought the holy man to pray for her, that
God, of His clemency, would soften her husband’s heart.
“Go in peace,” said the man of God; “for in a short
time thou shalt receive consolation from thy husband.”
And he added: “Tell him from God and from me that
now is the time of mercy ; soon it shall be the time of


106 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


justice.” The lady, having received his blessing, re-
turned home, and gave her message to her husband.
Then the Holy Spirit fell upon him, and made him
a new man, so that he answered her mildly, “ Lady, let
us serve the Lord, and save our souls.” And so, by
persuasion of his holy wife, they both led for many
years a life of celibacy ; and then, on the same day, they
departed together to the Lord.

Marvellous, assuredly, was the prophetical power in the
holy man, by which he restored strength to dry and
withered limbs, and infused piety into the hardest hearts ;
and no Jess marvellous was the illumination of his spirit,
by which he foresaw future events, and penetrated the
secrets of the conscience, having, like another Eliseus,
received a double portion of the spirit of Elias. -For
having predicted at Siena, to a certain friend of his,
things which were to happen to him hereafter, that
learned man, of whom we have spoken before, who often
conferred with him concerning the Holy Scriptures, and
who had heard of this prediction, asked the holy Father
whether he had indeed foretold these things before they
happened. He not only affirmed that he had so spoken,
but at the same time predicted the end of him who was
now inquiring concerning what had happened to another ;
and, to impress the prediction more deeply on his heart,
he revealed to him a secret scruple of conscience of
which that learned man had never spoken to anyone, —
leading him to lay it fully open, and then explaining it
‘and giving him loving counsel thereupon, to his great
edification and amazement. In confirmation of all these
things aforesaid, we may add that this religious ended
his life exactly as the servant of Christ had foretold.

At the time when he had just returned from beyond


HIS KNOWLEDGE OF HOLY SCRIPTURE. # 107


seas, having with him, as his companion, Brother
Leonard of Assisi, being overcome with weariness, he
rode for awhile on an ass; and as his companion, who
was algo exceedingly weary, followed him, he began to
say within himself (being overcome by human weakness),
“His parents were no equals of mine, and behold he is
riding, and I am leading his ass on foot.” .

As this thought passed through the mind of Brother |
Leonard, the holy man immediately dismounted from
the ass and said, “It is not fitting, brother, that I
should ride and thou shouldst walk, because thou wast
nobler and mightier in the world than I.” When the
brother heard this, he was full of shame and wonder,
and coming to himself, he threw himself at the feet of
the holy man and plainly acknowledged his fault, asking
pardon for it.

There was a certain friar, very devout to God and to
Francis, the servant of Christ, who frequently thought
within himself how worthy of divine favour was the
holy man, by whom he was also affectionately and
familiarly beloved, while he was possessed by the thought
that he was himself a castaway, and excluded from the
_ number of the elect. Being frequently, therefore, assailed
_ by this thought, he greatly desired the familiarity of the
servant of God. Yet he revealed to none the secret of
_ his heart, till the holy man, calling this friar to him one
day, began thus sweetly to speak to him: “ My son,
suffer not thyself to be troubled by such thoughts as
these, for I hold thee most dear, and number thee among
those I love best, and freely bestow upon thee my fami-
liarity and friendship.” The brother, in astonishment,
‘became still more devout to the holy Father than he was
before, and not only increased in his love to him, but


108 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


was enriched by the grace of the Holy Spirit with many
and wonderful gifts.

Being one day shut up in his cell on the mountain of
Alvernia, one of the holy Father's companions greatly
desired some short note on the Word of God, written by
his hand. For he firmly believed that thereby he should
be set free from a grievous temptation, not of the flesh,
but of the spirit, under which he was now suffering
severely, or at least be able more easily to endure it,
Being then molested with this desire, he was greatly
troubled in mind, because he was ashamed to reveal his
thoughts to the holy and reverend Father. But although
he would not tell it to him, it was revealed to him by the
Spirit of God ; therefore he commanded the said friar to |
bring him ink and paper, and thereupon he wrote with
his own hand certain praises of the Lord, according to
his brother’s desire, and then gave it to him with his
blessing, saying: “Take this paper and keep it diligently,
even to the day of thy death.” The brother took the
desired gift, and immediately that temptation departed
from him. He kept the writing, which remains until
this day, and by it have many marvellous things been
wrought in testimony of the power of St. Francis.

There was another friar who appeared outwardly to be
a man of great sanctity and exemplary life, yet of great
singularity. He spent all his time in prayer, and ob-
served silence so strictly that he would not even confess
in words, but only by signs. It happened that the holy
Father Francis came to see this brother, and to speak
concerning him with the other friars. When they all
praised and extolled him, the man of God replied: “ Be
silent, brethren, and praise not to me the diabolical
delusion under which he labours. For know, in truth,


HIS KNOWLEDGE OF HOLY SCRIPTURE. 109


that this is a diabolical temptation and a fraudulent
deception.” The brethren thought these words very
severe, accounting it impossible that any fraud or delu-
sion should be mixed with what they accounted so per-
fect. But not many days passed before the said friar left
the Order, when it plainly appeared with what clearness
and interior penetration the man of God had pierced to
the very secrets of his heart. In the same way he fore-
_ saw the ruin of many who appeared likely to persevere ;
and, on the contrary, predicted with assured certainty
the conversion of many sinners to Christ, so that it ap-
peared that he was very near to the contemplation of that
clear mirror of Divine and Eternal Truth, Whose marvel-
lous splendour lighted up for him those things from
which he was far distant in the body, so that he discerned
them with his mental eye as if they were actually present.

His vicar one day holding chapter in his place, while
he was praying in his cell, he was, as it were, a mediator
between his brethren and God. For it happened that
one of the brethren, making an idle excuse for some
error which he had committed, would not submit to holy
discipline, which the holy man beholding in spirit, he
called one of the friars to him, and said: “I have seen
the devil sitting on the shoulders of that disobedient
friar, who, under the guidance of such a rider, thus
holding him tight by the neck, turns hither and thither
whithersoever he guides him. But I have prayed to
God for the brother, and the devil departs in confusion.
Go, therefore, and say to that friar that he submit his
neck at once to the yoke of holy obedience.” And the
brother, being admonished by the messenger, imme-
diately returned to God, and fell humbly at the feet of
the vicar.


110 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


It happened at another time, that two, friars came
from distant parts to the hermitage of Grecio, to see the
man of God and receive his benediction, which they had
long greatly desired. They came, therefore, and found
him not, for he had just returned from the monastery to
his cell, so they were going desolate away. And behold,
as they were departing, the holy man, who had no human
means of knowing either their coming or their departure,
contrary to his usual custom, came forth from his cell and
called after them and blessed them, according to their
desire, in the Name of Christ, with the sign of the Cross.

Another day, two brethren came together from a place
called Lavora, the elder of whom gave some scandal to
the younger. And when they came to the holy man, he
asked the younger how his companion had borne him-
self on the way. When he replied, “ Very well,’—
“Take heed, brother,” said he, “lest thou tell alie under
the semblance of humility, for I know what I know:
but wait awhile and thou shalt see.” The brother was
greatly astonished how he came thus to know absent
things by the spirit. But not many days afterwards
_ he who had given scandal to the other departed in con-
tempt of religion, having neither asked pardon of the
Father, nor submitted himself to the correction of due
discipline. So that in the ruin of this one man two
things were made manifest—the divine justice, and the
prophetical spirit of St. Francis. And that, by the divine
power, he showed himself present to the absent is mani-
fest by what has been already said. Be it remembered
also, that when absent he appeared to the brethren
transfigured in a fiery chariot, and at the Chapter of
Arles presented himself in the form of a Cross. And
this was done, we may believe, by the divine disposal,


HIS KNOWLEDGE OF HOLY SCRIPTURE. 111


in order that by the marvellous apparition of his bodily
presence might be plainly manifested the presence of,
his spirit, with the light of Eternal Wisdom, light being
the swiftest of all things that move, and by its pureness
and clearness infusing itself into holy souls in all nations
of the world, thus making them the friends and the
prophets of God. The Heavenly Teacher is wont to
manifest His mysteries to simple and humble men, as
he showed in David, the most excellent of all the prophets;
and afterwards in Peter, the prince of all the Apostles ;
and lastly in Francis, the poor little servant of Christ.
For they, being simple, and ignorant of human learning,
were made by the Holy Spirit illustrious for their
erudition, The shepherd was taken from feeding his
flock to lead the people of God out of Egypt ; the fisher-
man was called to fill the net of the Church with a
multitude of believers ; the merchant, to sell and scatter
all things for Christ, that he might buy the pearl of
evangelical perfection.


CHAPTER XII.


OF THE EFFICACY OF HIS PREACHING, AND OF HIS GIFf
OF HEALING.


| RS RANCIS, the true servant and minister of Christ,

<7], in order that he might perform all his works,
253) with the greatest fidelity and perfection,
exercised himself chiefly in those virtues which he knew
by the teaching of the Holy Spirit to be most pleasing
_toGod. Now, it happened that he was once seized with


s


113 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI. |


great anguish of mind from a doubt as to what he ought
to do, which, after spending many days in prayer, he
laid before some of the brethren in whom he most con-
fided: “ Which, my brethren,” he said, “do you account
most praiseworthy, which do you advise me to do—to
give myself wholly to prayer, or to go about preaching
the Gospel ? for I, being a poor sinful man, and unskilled
in preaching, have received the gift of prayer, rather than
of speech. In prayer, again, is great gain and accumu-
lation of graces ; in preaching, the distribution of what-
ever gifts we have received from heaven. In prayer is
the purification of the interior affections, and union with
One True and Supreme God, together with an increase
of all virtues. In preaching, the feet of the spiritual
man are defiled with dust; therewith comes distraction
concerning many things and great relaxation of discipline,
In prayer we speak with God, and listen to Him, and,
as if leading an angelic life, we converse with angels.
But in preaching we must condescend to men in many
things; and living among them as men, we must think,
see, speak, and hear as men. On the other hand, this
one thing would seem to outweigh all the rest before
God, viz., that the Only Begotten Son of God, Who is the
Supreme Wisdom, descended from the bosom of the .
Father for the salvation of souls, that He might teach the
world by His example, and speak the word of salvation
to men whom He redeemed with the price of His sacred
Blood, washing them therewith in the laver of Baptism, ©
and nourishing them therewith in the Chalice of Salva-
tion, reserving to Himself nothing, but pouring forth all
liberally for our salvation. And therefore we ought to
do according to the example of those things which we
have seen in Him, as in a high mountain set forth before -


~


THE EFFICACY OF HIS PREACHING. 113


us, so that it seems to me more pleasing to God that I
should lay aside my quiet, and go forth to labour.”

Now, for many days together he pondered over these
things with the brethren, and yet was unable to perceive
certainly which of these two things he should do, and
which would be most acceptable to Christ. For although
he knew wonderful things by the spirit of prophecy, yet
he was unable of himself clearly to resolve this question,
God in His wisdom thus providing that the merit of
preaching should be more plainly manifested by a divine
revelation, and the humility of the servant of Christ
might be at the same time preserved. It was ever his
chief care to inquire in what way and by what means
God might be most perfectly served according to His
divine good pleasure. This was the sum of his philo-
sophy, this his chief desire as long as he lived, to seek
from the learned and the simple, the perfect and the
imperfect, the little and the great, whatsoever might
enable him to attain to the sublimest perfection of virtue.
Calling, therefore, two of the brethren, he sent them to
Brother Sylvester, who once beheld a Cross issuing from
his mouth, and who now devoted himself to prayer in a
mountain near Assisi, beseeching him that he would
inquire the Divine Will concerning this thing, and make
it known to him from the Lord. He asked the same
thing of the holy virgin Clare, begging that she would
cause some of the purest and simplest of her sisters to
join with her in prayer, that so they might learn the
Will of the Lord. The venerable priest and the virgin
consecrated to God gave an answer in wonderful accord-
ance, saying that it was revealed to them from on high
_ to be the good pleasure of God that the servant of Christ
should go forth to preach. The two brethren returning
8


114 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


and making known the Will of God, as they had heard
it, he immediately girded himself, and without any delay
went forth on his way. He hastened with such fervour
to fulfil the divine command, as if the hand of God
upon him had endued him with strength from on High.

When he drew near to Bevagna, he came to a place
where a great multitude of birds of different kinds were
assembled together, which, when they saw the holy man,
came swiftly to the place, and saluted him as if they
had the use of reason. They all turned towards him
and welcomed him ; those which were on the trees bowed
their heads in an unaccustomed manner, and all looked
earnestly at him, until he went to them and seriously
admonished them to listen to the word of the Lord,
saying : “Oh, my brother birds, you are bound greatly to
praise your Creator, Who has clothed you with feathers,
and given you wings wherewith to fly; Who has given
you the pure air for your dwelling-place, and governs
and cares for you without any care of your own.” While
he spoke these and other such words to them, the birds
rejoiced in a marvellous manner, swelling their throats,
spreading their wings, opening their beaks, and looking -
at him with great attention, And he, with marvellous
fervour of spirit, passing through the midst of them,
covered them with his tunic, neither did any one of
them move from his place until the man of God had
made the sign of the Cross and dismissed them with his
blessing, when they all at once flew away. And all
these things were seen by his companions, who were
waiting for him on the road. When this pure and simple
man returned to them, he began to accuse himself of
negligence, because he had never before preached to the
birds.


THE EFFICACY OF HIS PREACHING. 115


Afterwards, as he was preaching in the neighbouring
places, he came to a city called Alviano, where the
people were gathered together, and there he silenced
the swallows, who made their nests in that place, be-
cause for the great noise they made he could hardly be
heard. Then the man of God said to them in the
hearing of all: ‘My sisters, the swallows, it is now.
time that I also should speak, for you have spoken more
than enough, Listen to the word of God, and keep
silence until the preaching is ended.” Then, as if they
were capable of understanding, the swallows kept silence,
and uttered not a sound until the sermon was ended.
All who beheld this, being filled with wonder, glorified
God. The fame of this miracle, being spread far and
wide, greatly increased the reverence and faith borne to
the man of God.

In the city of Paris there was a certain scholar of very
good dispositions, who, with some of his companions, was
diligently pursuing his studies. Being one day greatly
troubled by the vexatious garrulity of a swallow, he said
to his companions: “This must be one of the swallows
which molested the holy man Francis while he was
preaching, and would not desist until he had imposed
silence upon them.” Then turning to the swallow, he
said confidently : “I command thee, in the name of
Francis, the servant of God, to come to me, and I will
quickly quiet thee.” When the bird heard the name of
Francis, as if it had been taught by the man of God,
it was quiet at once, and came and placed itself in the
scholar’s hands, who in great amazement set it at liberty,
and was troubled no more by its clamour.

At another time, when the servant of God was preach-
ing at Gaeta, on the sea-shore, a multitude of people

8—2


116 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


pressed upon him that they might touch him. The
servant of Christ, who held such popular applause in
abhorrence, entered alone a little boat which was close
to the shore. And the boat, as if it had been a reason-
able creature, was carried by an interior motion away
from the shore, all who beheld it wondering, seeing that
there was no one to row it. Having been carried some
distance into the deep sea, it stopped, and remained im-
movable, while the holy man preached to the multitude
who were waiting on the shore. Having heard the
sermon and seen the miracle, the multitude received his
blessing and retired, troubled him no more, and then
the boat returned of itself to the land. Who could have
been so obstinate and hardened in mind as to despise
the preaching of Francis, by whose marvellous power it
came to pass that not only irrational creatures, but inani-
mate substances, obeyed his words, as if they had been
endowed with a soul!

Certain it is that with Francis, the servant of God,
whithersoever he went there was ever present that Spirit
of the Lord, Who had sent him forth; and the power
and wisdom of Christ were with him, making him to
abound in words of true and wholesome doctrine, and
glorifying him with mighty miracies. For his word was
as a burning fire, penetrating the inmost heart, and filling
the minds of men with admiration, inasmuch as he
sought after no ornaments of human invention, but
showed forth only the divine inspiration and doctrine, —

Having to preach on a certain day before the Pope —
and the cardinals, at the suggestion of the Cardinal of
Ostia he learned a sermon by heart, which he had very
carefully prepared ; when he was about to speak it for
their edification he wholly forgot everything he had to


THE EFFICACY OF HIS PREACHING. 117


_
——


say, so that he could not utter a word, He related with
true humility what had befallen him, and then, having
invoked the aid of the Holy Spirit, he began at once to
move the hearts of these great men to compunction with
such fluency of powerful and efficacious words, as plainly
showed that not he, but the Spirit of the Lord, was
speaking. And because he had first impressed upon his
own mind by his works what he endeavoured to impress
upon others by his words, fearing reproof from no man,
he preached the truth with great confidence. He was
not accustomed to handle the sins of man delicately, but
pierced them with the sword of the Spirit, nor did he
spare their sinful lives, but rebuked them sharply and
boldly. He spoke to great and small with equal con-
gtancy of mind, and with a like joyfulness of spirit,
whether to many or to few; people of every age and sex
came forth to see this man, newly given to the world by
God, to look upon him and to listen tohis words, And
so he went forth through divers regions, boldly preaching
the Gospel, the Lord working with him and confirming
his word by signs following. And in the power of His
Name, Francis, the herald of the truth, cast forth devils,
healed the sick, and, what is more, by the efficacy of his
word softened the most hardened hearts and brought
them to penance, restoring at the same time the health
of the body and the soul, as is shown by many of his
works which we will notice, as a proof of what we have
said.

In the city of Tuscanella he lodged with a certain
soldier, who had devoutly besought him to do so. ‘This
soldier had an only son, whose limbs had been con-
tracted from his birth. At the father’s earnest request,
the holy man raised him up with his hand, and thus, in


118 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


the presence of all, restored him to health, so that all
the members of his body were strengthened, and the
child immediately began to walk, leaping and praising
God.

In the city of Narni, at the desire of the Bishop, he
made the sign of the Cross upon a paralytic who had
lost the use of his limbs, and restored him to perfect
health.

In the diocese of Rieti, a boy, whose body had for
four years been swollen to such a degree that he could
not see his legs, was brought by his mother, with many
tears, to the holy man, and was immediately cured by
the touch of his sacred hands.

In the city of Orti there was a boy so dreadfully
distorted that he had his head between his feet, and
many of his bones were broken. At the prayer of his
parents the Blessed Francis signed him with the sign of
the Cross, and immediately he was able to extend his
limbs, and was delivered from his infirmity.

A woman in the city of Gubbio had both her ranas
contracted and withered, so that she was unable to use
them. When the holy man had made the sign of the
Cross over her, in the Name of the Lord, she recovered
such perfect health that, like Simon’s mother-in-law,
who was healed by our Lord, she arose and prepared
food for the use of the holy man and the poor.

In the city of Bevagna he thrice anointed a blind
maiden with his spittle, in the Name of the Holy Trinity,
and thus restored her sight. |

A blind woman in the city of Narni recovered her
sight when the holy man signed her with the sign of the
Cross.

In Bologna there was a boy, one of whose eyes was


THE EFFICACY OF HIS PREACHING. 119


so darkened by a spot that he could see nothing, nor
could any remedy effect his cure. When the servant_of
God had made the sign of the Cross over him from head
to foot, he so perfectly recovered his sight that he soon
after entered the Order of Friars Minor, and declared
that he saw better with the eye which had been blind
than with the other.

In the city of St. Emignano the servant of God was
entertained by a devout man, whose wife was vexed by a
devil. After he had prayed, he commanded the spirit
by virtue of holy obedience to depart, and by the divine
power so instantly cast him out, as plainly to manifest
that the perversity of the demon cannot resist the power
of holy obedience.

In the city of Castello a furious and malignant spirit,
who had entered into a woman, having received an obedi-
ence from the holy man, departed in great wrath, leaving
the woman whom he had possessed free both in body
and mind,

One of the friars was possessed with so dreadful a
sickness that by many it was affirmed to be rather the
effect of diabolical art and malice than of natural in-
firmity. For he often threw himself at full length on
the ground, and wallowed foaming; sometimes all the
members of his body were contracted, sometimes dis-
tended, sometimes turned and twisted; now they would
became rigid and hard, at other times his whole body
would become stiff and distended, and he would rise with
his feet upwards into the air, and fall down again in a
horrible manner. Seeing therefore this unhappy man
thus miserably and hopelessly tormented, the servant of
Christ, being full of compassion, sent him a mouthful of
bread which he was accustomed to eat, which the sick


120 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


man had no sooner tasted than he received such strength
that from that day forward he was never again troubled
by his infirmity.

In the country of Arezzo a woman had been long
labouring in childbirth, and was near to death, nor did
any hope of life remain, save in the mercy of God. It
- happened that the servant of God was then passing
through those parts, and from a weakness of body being
compelled to ride, the horse upon which he had ridden
was brought into the town where the woman lay sick.
The men of the place, when they saw the horse upon
which the holy man had ridden, took off the bridle and
laid it upon the woman, and at its miraculous touch she
was freed from all peril, and brought forth her child in
safety.

A certain man of Pieve, full of piety and the fear of
God, kept a cord by him which the holy Father had
worn. A great multitude of men and women being
attacked in the city by various diseases, he went from
house to house where the sick lay, and dipping the cord
in water, made the sick to drink thereof, by which means
a great many were healed. Many sick persons, also,
having eaten pieces of bread which had been touched by
the man of God, were by the operation of the divine
power speedily restored to health.

The herald of Christ being thus glorified by these and
many other miracles, men listened to the things which
he said in his preaching, as if an angel of the Lord
were speaking to them, And forasmuch as he excelled
in the possession of all virtues—in the spirit of pro- |
phecy ; in the power of miracles ; in the gift of preaching
given him from heaven; in the obedience rendered him
by creatures without reason; in the mighty change of


THE SACRED STIGMATA, 121


hearts at the hearing of his word; in the learning (be-
yond all human teaching to bestow) imparted to him by
the Holy Ghost; in the authority to preach committed
to him by divine revelation, by the Supreme Pontiff; in
the rule wherein his manner of preaching was expressed,
confirmed by the Vicar of Christ; finally, by the royal
signet impressed upon his body—by all these tenfold
witnesses, the venerable office, authentic doctrine, and
wonderful sanctity of Francis, the herald of Christ, are
undoubtedly proved, and he is set forth as the true
messenger of God, declaring the Gospel of Christ,


CHAPTER XIII,


OF THE SACRED STIGMATA,


never to rest from good works, but pabhor like
rs the heavenly spirits on Jacob’s ladder, to be
, Baie ascending to God or descending to his neighbour.
And he so prudently divided the time allotted him here
for merit, that he spent the one part of it in labours
for the good of his neighbour, and devoted the other to
tranquil contemplation. Therefore, after descending to
labour for the salvation of men, according to the exigency
of time and place, he would leave behind him the tumult -
of the multitude, and retiring into some secret place
where he might wait freely upon God, he would en-
deavour to purify his spirit from any dust which might
have adhered to it in his conversation with men. Two
years, therefore, before he gave up his spirit to God,


Ma
122 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI


he was led by Divine Providence, after manifold labours,
intoa mountainous place, which is called Mount Alvernia.
Having there begun his fast, according to his wonted
custom of keeping a Lent in honour of St. Michael the
Archangel, being filled more abundantly than usual
with divine sweetness by the contemplation of heavenly
things, and enkindled by a more fervent desire of the
things of God, he began to experience the gifts of the
divine visitation more perfectly and abundantly than
ever before. His spirit rose on high, not curiously to
scrutinize the Divine Majesty, and so to be overwhelmed
with its glory, but as a faithful and prudent servant
seeking out the good pleasure of God, to which with
the utmost ardour.of love he desired to conform himself.
It was infused, therefore, into his mind by divine in-
spiration that it should be revealed to him by Christ, on
opening the Book of the Gospels, what in him, or from
him, should be most acceptable to God. Having first
prayed with great devotion, he therefore took the holy
Book of the Gospels from the altar, and caused his
companion, a devout and holy man, to open it thrice in
the name of the Holy Trinity. Seeing that the book
opened each time at the Passion of our Lord, the man
of God understood that, as he had imitated Christ in the
actions of his life, so, before he should depart from this
world, he was to be conformed to Him likewise in the
> sufferings and pains of His Passion. And although, by
the great austerity of his past life and his continual
bearing of the Cross of Christ, he had become very feeble
in body, yet was he not terrified, but prepared himself
with good courage to endure the martyrdom set before
him. For there grew in him an invincible fire of the
~ love of his good Jesus, even a flame of burning charity,


THE SACRED STIGMATA. 123


which many waters could not quench. Being thus raised
to God by the ardour of seraphical love, and wholly
transformed by the sweetness of compassion into Him,
Who, of His exceeding charity, was pleased to be crucified
for us; early in the morning of the Feast of the Exalta-
tion of the Holy Cross, as he was praying in a secret
and solitary place on the mountain, he beheld a seraph,
having six wings, all on fire, descending to him from
the height of heaven. And as he flew with great swift-
ness towards the man of God, there appeared between
the wings the form of One crucified, having His hands
and feet stretched out and fixed to the Cross. Two wings
rose above the head, two were stretched forth in flight,
and two veiled the whole body. When he beheld this,
he marvelled greatly, and his heart was filled with
mingled joy and sorrow. For he rejoiced at the gracious
aspect with which Christ, under the form of the Seraph,
looked upon him; yet to behold Him thus fastened to
the Cross pierced his soul like a sword of compassion
_ and grief. He wondered greatly at the appearance of so
new and marvellous a vision, knowing that the infirmity
of the Passion could in no wise agree with the immor-
tality of the seraphical spirit. Lastly, he understood,
by the revelation of the Lord, that this vision had been
presented to his eyes by Divine Providence, that the
friend of Christ might know that he was to be trans-
formed into Christ crucified, not by the martyrdom of
the flesh, but by the fire of the spirit. The vision, dis-
appearing, left behind it a marvellous fire in his heart,
and a no less wonderful sign impressed on his flesh.
For there began immediately to appear in his hands and
in his feet the appearance of nails, as he had now seen
them in the vision of the Crucified. His hands and his


124 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


feet appeared pierced through the midst with nails, the
heads of the nails being seen in the insides of the hands
and the upper part of the feet, and the points on the
reverse side. The heads of the nails in the hands and
feet were round and black, and the points somewhat
long and bent, as if they had been turned back, On
the right side, as if it had been pierced by a lance, was
the mark of a red wound, from which the sacred blood
often flowed, and stained his tunic. The servant of God,
seeing the Stigmata thus deeply impressed on his flesh,
so that he could not conceal them from his familiar
companions, and yet fearing to discover the secret of the
Lord, was in great trouble and perplexity whether he
should declare or conceal what he had seen. He there-
fore called some of the brethren, and in general terms
proposed his doubt to them, and asked their counsel.
Then a certain friar, IJ/wminatus, both by grace and by
name, knowing that the holy man had seen some mar-
vellous vision which had thus amazed him, answered:
“ Brother, not only for thine own sake, but for the sake
of others, thou knowest the divine mysteries are made
known to thee. And therefore it seems to me that thou
shouldst fear to conceal this which thou hast received
for the benefit of many, lest thou shouldst be con-
demned for hiding the talent committed to thy care.”-
At these words, the holy man was so greatly moved,
that though he was accustomed to say on these occasions,
“Secretum meum mihi”—My secret is to myself—he
now related with great fear all the order of the aforesaid
vision, adding that He Who had appeared to him had
said to him other things, which he must never, so long
as he should live, reveal to any man. And it is to be
believed that these discourses were secret things spoken ~


THE SACRED STIGMATA, 125


to him by that sacred Seraph, who so marvellously
appeared to him on the Cross, and which, perhaps, it was
not lawful to utter to men. When the lover of Christ
had been transformed by his true love into his own
image, having fulfilled the forty days which he had thus
spent in solitude before the feast of the Archangel
Michael, this angelical man, Francis, descended from
the mount, bearing with him the image of the Crucified,
engraven, not on tables of wood nor stone by the hand
of the artificer, but written on his members of flesh by
the finger of the living God. And because it is written
that it is good to conceal the secret of the king, therefore
this man, who was conscious of so royal a secret, en-
deavoured to conceal its sacred signs from the eyes of all
men. - But inasmuch as God is wont for His own glory
to reveal the great things which He works, the Lord
Himself, who had secretly impressed these tokens, openly
manifested many miracles by their power, that the
hidden and miraculous virtue of these Stigmata might
be clearly made known by many signs.

In the country of Rieti, a grievous pestilence broke —
out, which cruelly consumed both sheep and cattle, and
for which no remedy could be found. But a certain
man who feared God was warned by a vision at night,
that he should go with all speed to the hermitage of the
friars, and ask for the water in which Francis, the
servant of God, who then abode there, had washed his
hands and feet, and that he should sprinkle this water
upon the animals. He arose, therefore, in the morning
and came to the place, and having secretly obtained
some of this water from the companions of the holy man,
he sprinkled it over the diseased cattle and sheep.
Marvellous to relate, no sooner had a drop of this water


126 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


touched the sick animals, as they lay on the ground,
than they immediately recovered their strength, and, as
if they had felt no sickness, they hastened to pasture.
Around the aforesaid mountain of Alvernia, before the
holy man dwelt there, by reason of the clouds which
arose from the mountain,a violent tempest of destructive
hail was accustomed to destroy all the fruit; but after
that blessed apparition the hail ceased, to the great
amazement of the inhabitants of the place, the unwonted —
serenity of the sky thus manifesting the excellence of that
celestial vision in which the Stigmata were impressed.
Once, on a winter’s day, by reason of the weakness
of his body and the steep and difficult path, he was riding
upon an ass belonging to a poor man, and was compelled
to take shelter for the night under a rock, to avoid the
snow which had fallen and was falling heavily in those
parts. For, being delayed by these impediments, he
could not reach the place of his destination. Now, the
Saint, hearing that the poor man to whom the ass be-
longed was lamenting himself bitterly and trembling
with cold, changing now to one place, now to another,
because, being lightly and poorly clothed, he could find
no relief from the bitter cold, Francis, all on fire with
divine love, stretched forth his hand and touched him,
when, marvellous to say, the touch of that sacred hand
which had received the fire of the seraphical sign
banished all sense of cold, so that the poor man waxed
warm both within and without, as if he had felt the
power of a burning fiery furnace; so that, being com-
forted in body and mind, he lay down to rest, and slept
sweetly amid the rocks and snow, as he himself after-
wards affirmed. Certain it is, therefore, by all these
tokens, that these Sacred Stigmata were impressed by


THE SACRED STIGMATA. 127


the power of Him Who, by the agency of the Seraph,
' purified, illuminated, and inflamed; inasmuch as the
said Stigmata, purifying the air without from pestilence,
delivered and healed the beasts, and with marvellous
efficacy calmed the tempest and warmed frozen bodies,
as came to pass also after his death, which we shall
hereafter notice. Therefore, although he sought with
diligent care to conceal the treasure which he had found
in the field, yet it could not be hid, nor could he prevent
the Stigmata in his hands and feet from being seen,
although he kept his hands almost always covered, and
from that time forward always wore shoes on his feet.
During his lifetime many of his brethren saw these
Stigmata clearly, who, although for their great sanctity
_ they were men worthy of all credit, yet to remove all
doubt they affirmed what they had seen on oath. Several
of the cardinals, who lived with great familiarity with
the holy man, saw them also, and composed hymns and
antiphons in honour of the Sacred Stigmata, thus by
their words as well as by their writings giving testi-
mony to this truth. The Supreme Pontiff, Alexander,
also, when preaching to the people, in the presence of
many of the friars, of whom I was one, affirmed that, in
the lifetime of the Saint, he had seen the Sacred Stig-
mata with his own eyes. At his death they were seen
by more than fifty brethren together, and also by Clare,
that virgin most devoted to God, with many of her
Sisters and an innumerable company of seculars, who, as
will be seen hereafter, kissed them with great devotion
and touched them with her hands, to ascertain the
truth of the miracle, and the wound in the side also,
which during his lifetime he concealed so carefully that
no one ever saw or could see it, except by stealth. A


—_


128 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSIST,


brother who ministered to him with great care once in-
duced him, with pious craft, to take off his tunic, that he
might brush it, and then, looking attentively, he saw the
wound, which he contrived hastily to touch with his three
fingers, and thus ascertained its figure and size, not only
by sight, but also by touch. By the same artifice another
friar, who was his Vicar at the time, also saw it. Another
friar, of great simplicity, who was his companion, was
once rubbing his shoulders to relieve a pain which he
suffered there, and accidentally touched the sacred
wound, thereby causing him exceeding pain. From
that time forward he wore his inner garment in such
wise as to conceal the wound in the side. But the
brothers who washed it, and from time to time brushed
his tunic, found them stained with blood, and thus came
to know with positive certainty the existence of thé
sacred wound, which after his death they plainly saw,
contemplating and venerating it with many other
witnesses.

Go forth, therefore, O valiant servant of Christ, for
thus bearing the arms and insignia of thine invincible
Leader Himself, thou shalt overcome every adversary.
Bear the standard of the Most High King, the sight
of which animates every warrior of the divine army.
Bear the seal of the Supreme Pontiff, Christ, stamped
undeniably and authentically upon all thy words and
deeds, so that they may be accepted duly by all meur¢
and even because of this Stigmata of the Lord Jesus
which thou bearest in thy body, let no man dare to ©
trouble thee, but rather let every servant of Christ bear
thee tender and devoted affection. For by these most
certain signs, not by two or three witnesses only, but by
a superabundance of proofs, that seal is made plain to all


THE SACRED STIGMATA, : 129


men (God having made it visible in thee and by thee, so
as to take away every veil or shadow of excuse), that they
may believe and be established in faith, and by faith
may be raised to hope and enkindled with charity. For
now is truly fulfilled that first vision of thine, viz., that,
being chosen by the mercy of Christ to be His captain,
thou wast to be armed with celestial weapons, and
signed with the sign of the Cross. Now, the vision which
thou didst behold in the beginning of thy conversion,
that vision of the Crucified which pierced thee as with a
sword of compassion, and the voice which thou heardest
from the Cross as from the high throne and secret mercy-
seat of Christ, bidding thee be conformed to the image of
the Crucified, are shown to be undoubted truths. Now
may it be surely and firmly believed that what Sylvester
beheld soon after thy conversion was no fantastical
imagination, but a celestial revelation, for he beheld a
Cross marvellously issuing from thy mouth; and the
holy Br. Pacificus also beheld two blades crossing thy
body in the form of a Cross; and, moreover (as has
been said before), that angelic man, Monardos, when
St. Anthony was preaching on the title of the Cross,
beheld thee raised in the air in the form of the Cross,
Again, that which was shown to thee near the end of thy
life, even the similitude of that lofty Seraph bearing the
humble image of the Crucified which enkindled thee
within and signed thee without, shows thee to be, as it
were, another angel descending from the East, and
having the sign of the living God. This, I say, gives
strength and credibility to all the things before said,
and receives from them a testimony to its truth. For
behold these six apparitions of the Cross of Christ, thus
marvellously shown according to the order of divers
9


130 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


times, in thee and concerning thee, are, as it were, six
steps to the seventh, to which thou hast now attained,
and where thou dost now repose. For the Cross of
Christ, which at the beginning of thy conversion was.
proposed to thee, which was received by thee, and ever _
throughout the whole course of thy life was faithfully
carried by thee, both in thine own person and as an ex-
ample to others, has proved to the clearest demonstration
that thou hast attained to the summit of evangelical
perfection, so that no truly devout man can deny the
wisdom of Christ, shown forth in thy body of dust, and
no truly faithful man may deny, no truly humble man
may despise, that which has been impressed upon thee
by the divine power as most worthy to be received and
accepted by all men, ©


CHAPTER XIV.
OF HIS PATIENCE, AND OF HIS DEATH.


7 RANOIS, being thus crucified with Christ, both
»7y]| in the flesh and in the spirit, not only burned
ss} with seraphic love towards God, but thirsted
; with Christ crucified for the salvation of a multitude of
souls. Now, it came to pass, as he could not walk on foot
because of the nails which were in his feet, he was obliged
to be carried through the cities and other places whither
he wished to go, that he might thus encourage others to
carry the Cross of Christ. For he was wont to say to
his brethren: “Let us begin, at last, my brethren, to
serve the Lord our God, for hitherto we have done but


HIS PATIENCE, AND HIS DEATH. 131


little.” He burned also with an ardent desire to return
to the first steps of his humility, that, as at the begin-
ning, he might serve the lepers, and excite his weak
body, now broken by continual labours, to its former
toils, And he proposed, by the help and guidance of
Christ, to do great things; and while his members
seemed weary and feeble, being strong and fervent in
spirit, he hoped to wage a fresh warfare against the
enemy, and to attain a glorious triumph. For there is
no place for languor or sloth where the stimulus of love
is ever urging to greater things. And such was the
harmony between his spirit and his flesh, and such the
obedience of the flesh to the spirit, that in his efforts to
obtain perfect and complete sanctity, the flesh not only
made no resistance to the spirit, but even aided and pre-
vented it. Now that the holy man might increase his
chain of merits, which are ever made perfect by patience,
he began to suffer from so many infirmities, that there
was scarcely one of his members but was tormented by
immense pain and suffering. At last, by reason of these
various long and continued infirmities, his flesh was
consumed, and there remained but the skin attached to
his bones. Yet, although his body was thus afflicted
with grievous torments, he never called them by the
name of pains, but spoke of them as his sisters. Once
being more grievously tormented than usual, a certain
simple brother said to him: “ Brother, pray to God
that He would deal more gently with thee, for it seems
to me that His hand is heavier upon thee than is meet.”
Which, when the holy man heard, he cried with great
abhorrence: “ But that I know the purity of thy sim-
plicity, I should from henceforth abhor thy company,
- for that thou hast dared to find fault with the divine
9—2


132 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


judgments which are executed upon me.” And although
he was all broken by the long endurance of his suffer-
ings, he cast himself upon the ground, all his weak
bones being shattered by the fall. And kissing the
ground, he said : “T thank Thee, O Lord, my God, for
these my pains, and-I beseech Thee, O Lord, to increase
them a hundredfold, for this shall be most acceptable
to me, that Thou spare not to afflict me with suffering,
because the fulfilment of Thy Holy Will is to me an
overflowing consolation.” He seemed to the brethren
like another Job, the fortitude of his mind increasing
with the suffering of his body. A long time beforehand
he predicted the day of his death, and when the time of
that transit drew near, he said to the brethren that he
must shortly lay aside the tabernacle of his body, as it
had been revealed to him by Christ. Two years, then,
after the impression of the Sacred Stigmata, that is, in
the twentieth year after his conversion, he was attacked
by many infirmities; and as a rock struck,.and tried by
many blows, or as a true stone, which was to be -built
into the edifice of the heavenly Jerusalem, or as some
fair work which, by the force of the hammer of many
tribulations, was to be brought to a perfect form, he
ordered the brethren to carry him to St. Mary of the
Portiuncula, that where he had received the spirit of
grace he might give up the spirit of life. Having, there-
fore, been brought thither, and desiring to give a true
proof to all men that he had no longer anything in
common with the world in that grievous and painful
sickness, he laid aside his habit, and laid himself pros-
trate on the bare earth, that in the last hour in which
the enemy would attack him with all his fury he might
wrestle naked with his naked adversary. Lying thus on


HIS PATIENCE, AND HIS DEATH. 133


the earth, with his face raised according to his custom
to heaven, and intent upon its glory, with his left hand
he covered the wound on his right side, and said to his
brethren : “I have done my part ; may Christ teach you
to do yours!” And all his holy companions wept, for
they were filled with great compassion. One among
them, whom the man of God called his guardian, know-
ing his wish by divine inspiration, arose and brought a
tunic and a cord, and offering them to the poor man of
Christ, he said: “TI bring thee these as to one who has
made himself poor for the love of God; receive them by
the command of holy obedience.” Then did the holy
man rejoice with great gladness of heart, when he saw
that he had kept faith with his lady, poverty, even to
the end ; and raising his hands to heaven, he gave thanks
to Christ, his Lord, that, being delivered from every
burden, he was free to go to Him. And all these things
he did out of his zeal for poverty, so that he would not
have even a habit but what was lent him by another.
For in all things, assuredly, he desired to be conformed
to Christ crucified, Who hung naked upon the Cross, in
poverty and pain. And therefore, as at the beginning
of his conversion, he cast. off his garment before the
‘Bishop, so at the end of his life he desired to depart
naked out of this world. And he commanded the
brethren who were around him, in virtue of charity and
obedience, that when they should perceive that he was
dead, they would leave him thus upon the ground for so
long a space of time as it would take a man to walk
gently fora mile. Oh! most truly Christian man, con-
formed living to the life of Christ, and dying to the
dying of Christ, studying in death to be perfectly con-
formed to the death of Christ, and found worthy to be
adorned with His express similitude !


134 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


The hour of his departure being at hand, he com-
manded all the brethren who were in that place to be
called to him, and comforted them with consoling words
concerning his death, exhorting them with fatherly
affection to the divine love. He spoke to them at length
concerning patience, poverty, and faithful obedience to
the Holy Roman Church, preferring the Holy Gospel to
all other laws and institutions. And as all the brethren
surrounded him, he extended his hands over them in
the form of a cross, crossing his arms in the form of
that sign which he had ever loved; and so he blessed
all the brethren, whether present or absent, in the Name
and in the power of the Crucified. Then he added:
‘‘ Farewell, my children, abide in the fear of the Lord,
and ever persevere therein. And when any temptation
or trouble approaches you say: Blessed are they who
persevere im those things which they have begun. And
now I go to God, to Whose grace | commend you all.”

When he had finished these loving admonitions, this _
man, most dear to God, commanded that the Book of
the Gospels should be brought to him, and that the place
of the Gospel of St. John should be read to him which
begins with these words: Ante diem festum pasche.
And then, as best he could, he broke forth into that
verse of the psalm, Voce mea ad Dominum clamani,
voce mea ad Dominum deprecatus sum, and so con-
tinued repeating the psalm until he came to the verse,
Me exspectant justi, donec retribuas mihi. All these
mysteries being then accomplished in him, his most
holy soul being set free and absorbed in the abyss
of the divine glory, the blessed man slept in the Lord.
One of his brethren and disciples saw that blessed soul
ander the appearance of a glorious star, borne upwards
by a white cloud, and so carried as upon many waters,


HIS PATIENCE, AND HIS DEATH. 135


straight to heaven; and that glorious cloud betokened
the sublime purity of sanctity and the fulness of
heavenly wisdom and abundant grace, by which the holy
man had merited an entrance into that palace of light
and peace, where for all eternity he reposes in Christ.

At that time Br. Augustine, a holy and just man, was
minister of the Friars at Lavoro: he being at the point
of death, and having for a long time lost the use of
speech, exclaimed suddenly, in the hearing of all who
stood around: “ Wait for me, Father, wait for me; Iam
coming with thee.” When the Friars, in great amaze-
ment, asked him to whom he thus spoke, he replied
promptly, “See you not our Father Francis, who is going
up to heaven?’ And having said this, his soul imme-
diately departed from his body, and he followed his
most holy Father.

At the same time the Bishop or Assisi was making a
devout pilgrimage to the church of St. Michael, on
Mount Gargano, To him the Blessed Francis appeared
on the very night of his departure, saying: “ Behold, I
leave the world and go to heaven.” When the Bishop
arose in the morning he related to his companions what
-he had seen, and. having made strict inquiry on his
return to Assisi, he discovered certainly that, at the
very hour revealed to him by the vision, the Blessed
Father had departed from this world.

Certain birds which love the light, and have a great
horror of darkness, at the hour of the holy man’s transit
from earth, which was the time at which twilight is
wont to set in, came in great multitudes over the roof
of the house, and flew round and round it joyfully fora
long time together, giving clear and joyous testimony to.
the glory of the Saint who had been wont to invite
them to sing the praises of God. |


—


136 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


CHAPTER XV.


OF HIS CANONIZATION AND TRANSLATION.


E==3\HUS Francis, the servant and friend of the Most
25! High, the’ founder and leader of -the Friars
total! Minor, the professor of poverty, the model of

penance, the preacher of truth, the mirror of sanctity,

the example of all-evangelical perfection; being prevented
by-grace from on: high, ascended from the base to the
summit of perfection.

This marvellous man, whom God glorified in his

- mortal life, turning his poverty to exceeding great riches,
exalting his humility, turning. his mortification to life,
his simplicity to prudence, making him conspicuous for
all good works, havang been made glorious in life by the

‘power of the Lord, became beyond comparison more
glorious in death. For when the holy man had departed
from this-life, and his sacred spirit had. entered its
eternal house, there to drink abundantly from the foun-
tain of glory, certain: wonderful tokens of its future
glory were left on his. body, that the most sacred flesh
which, having been crucified with sin, had already passed
into a new creature, and, by a singular privilege, bore
the image of Christ, might by a new miracle show. forth
the glory of the resurrection. For now were discerned
in those blessed members the nails which, by the divine
power, had been marvellously fashioned out of his own
flesh, so that, being pressed on either side, they moved to
the other. In his body was found also an open-wound in
the side, made by no human hand, like to the wound
which our Redeemer bore for us, and from which issued


HIS CANONIZATION AND TRANSLATION, 137


forth the sacraments of redemption and regeneration.
The appearance of the nails was black like iron; the
wound in his side was red and rounded, after the appear-
ance of a beautiful rose, All the rest of his body, which
_ had been dark by nature, and became darker by reason
of his infirmities, was now of a marvellous whiteness,
and so dazzling as to show forth the brightness of the
second state of glory. His limbs seemed, to those who
touched them so soft and supple as to appear like the
limbs of a young child, thus figuring the innocence with
which he was adorned. Now, beholding the black nails
in that white flesh, and the wound in the side ruddy as
a rose in spring, it is no marvel that all who saw them
were filled with wonder and admiration. The sons wept
for the loss of so, beloved a father, and yet were filled
with unspeakable gladness when they kissed the seals
of the King of Heaven; the novelty of the miracle
changed their tears into joy, and the understanding re-
mained in amazement at the sight. So unwonted and
wonderful a sight was, to all who beheld it, a. confirma-
tion of faith, and an incitement to love to those who
heard of it ; it afforded matter of admiration, and excited
a desire to. behold it. As soon, therefore, .as the de-
parture of the holy Father was heard of, and the fame
of the miracle was spread. abroad, all the people ran to-
gether to see with their own eyes what might remove
every doubt from their minds, and satisfy the love of
their hearts. Many of the citizens of Assisi were
admitted to see and kiss the Sacred Stigmata. Among
these was a certain soldier, a learned and prudent man,
named. Jerome, held in high estimation in the city, who,
doubting of the Sacred Stigmata, and being incredulous
like another Thomas, more boldly and eagerly than the


138 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


rest moved the nails in the presence of his fellow-citizens,
and touched with his own hands the hands and feet of
the holy man; and while he thus touched these palpable
signs of the wounds of Christ, his heart was healed and
freed from every wound of doubt. And he having thus
received such certain knowledge of the truth, became
a most effectual witness of the same, and confirmed it
by oath on the Holy Gospels.

Now, all the brethren and children of the holy Father
who had been called to witness his departure, with the
great multitude of people who were come together on the
night in which Christ’s glorious confessor departed to
Him, passed the night in the praises of God, so that it
seemed not to be the requiem for the departed, but the
rejoicing of angels. When the morning dawned, the
whole multitude took branches of trees, and with many
tapers and torches, and with hymns and canticles, they
bore the sacred body to the city of Assisi. And passing
by the church of St. Damian, where that noble virgin,
Clare, now glorious in heaven, abode with the virgins
her sisters, the holy body, adorned with celestial jewels,
remained there awhile, till those holy virgins could see
and kiss them. Then with great joy they came to the
_¢ity, and laid the precious treasure which they had
brought with them with all reverence in the church of
St. George. For in that place, when he was yet a child,
he had learnt the first. beginning of letters; there he had
begun to preach; and lastly, in that same spot he found
his first: resting-place. |

The venerable Father passed away from the wreck of.
this world in the year of our Lord’s Incarnation, 1226,
on the 4th of October, on the evening of Saturday, and
he was buried on Sunday. The sacred and blessed body,


HIS GANONIZATION AND TRANSLATION. 139


glorified by divine grace, began at once to work mani-
fold and great miracles, that the excellence of his sanctity, ©
which during his life in the flesh had been made known
to the world by the example of true and perfect justice,
whereby he had directed and reformed the manners of.
men, now that he was reigning with Christ, was proved
by the miracles wrought by the divine power in con-
firmation of the faith by which he was believed to be in
heaven.

These glorious miracles, having become known in
divers parts of the world, and the great benefits attained
by his merits having excited great multitudes of men to
greater devotion to our Lord Jesus Christ, and deeper
reverence for His Saint, the sound both of these words
and works came to the ears of the Sovereign Pontiff,
Gregory IX. The Holy Pontiff, knowing his marvellous
sanctity by certain and undoubted testimony, not only of
the miracles wrought by him since his death, but also
by his own manifold experience of his holy life when he
saw and conversed with him on earth, doubted not that
he had been glorified by the Lord in heaven. To co-
operate, therefore, with Christ, Whose Vicar he was, he
determined with pious counsel and holy consideration
to pay to the holy man that veneration and honour of
which he knew him to be most worthy. And in order
to add greater certainty to the glorification of this most
holy man, he caused all the miracles wrought by him
and related by others to be examined by those members
of the College of Cardinals who were least, favourable to
the undertaking. These having diligently investigated
and approved all the matters laid before them, he deter-
mined, with the consent of all the cardinals and prelates
then present, to proceed to the canonization; and.


140 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI


coming himself in person to the city of Assisi in the
year of our Lord’s Incarnation, 1228, on Sunday, the 6th
of July, with many ceremonies and great solemnity,
which it would be too long here to narrate, he inscribed
the Blessed Father in the catalogue of the Saints.

In the year of our Lord 1230, all the Friars of the
Order being assembled in general chapter at Assisi, that
body, consecrated to the. Lord, was transferred to the
church erected to his honour on the 21st of May.
While the sacred treasure, signed with the signet of the
Most High King, was being carried from one place to
another, he, whose effigy was impressed upon it, was
pleased that, by its health-giving ardour, the affections of
many of the faithful should he drawn to follow after
Christ ; and most worthy was this of him who while in
life was so dear to God, who by the grace of contempla-
tion had been transported like Enoch into Paradise, and
by the zeal of his charity had been carried like Elias
to heaven in a chariot of fire. Even his blessed bones,
which, having been transplanted from this barren earth,
began to flourish among the heavenly flowers of the
celestial garden, gave forth a sweet and marvellous
odour of sanctity, from the place where they were
found ; and certain it is that as, when he was in life,
this blessed man was illustrious and renowned by many
marvellous tokens of virtue and sanctity, so, from the
day of his death to the present hour, he has been glori-
fied in divers parts of the world by manifold prodigies
and miracles ;'so that, through the divine power, by his
merits help is afforded to the blind, the deaf, the dumb,
the lame, the dropsical, the paralytic, the possessed, the
lepers, and to those who are tempest-tossed or languish
in captivity. He relieves all infirmities, necessities, and


MIRACLES AFTER HIS DEATH. 141


perils. Nay, by the marvellous resurrection of many
from the dead is made known to the faithful the power
of his merits, and the glorious might of the Most High,
Who is marvellous in His saints, to Whom be honour and
glory for ever and ever. Amen,


OF CERTAIN MIRACLES WROUGHT AFTER
HIS DEATH.


First: By the power of the Sacred Stigmata.


E=rSs|0 the honour of Almighty God, and to the glory
hat: wae, of our Blessed Father Francis, we will now
esau} relate, on the authority of approved writings,
certain miracles wrought by him after his glorification
in heaven. And we have thought well to begin with
those in which the mystery of the Cross of Jesus was
shown forth and its glory renewed. For the new man,
Francis, manifested his renewal when, by a singular
privilege never before granted to anyone, the Sacred
Stigmata were impressed upon his flesh, and he appeared
adorned with those glorious signs, being conformed in
the body of this death to the Body.-of the Crucified.
Whereof, if any human tongue should attempt to. speak,
it would fail to praise it worthily. For, assuredly, all
the thoughts of that man of God, whether in public or
in private, were devoted to the Cross of the Lord. And
in order that the sign of that holy Cross, impressed on
his heart in the very beginning of his conversion, should
also mark his body exteriorly, being wholly devoted


142 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI,


thereto, he took the habit of penance, bearing thus -
outwardly the image of the Cross, that, as his spirit
within was clothed with his crucified Lord, so should
his body also be invested with the armour of the Cross,
that so his army should fight for the Lord under the
same sign by which God Himself overcame all the
powers of the air. But from the beginning of that
time when he began the warfare of the Cross, many of
its mysteries began to manifest themselves around him,
as will plainly appear to anyone who deeply considers
the whole course of his life, where it is seen by the
sevenfold apparition of the Cross of the Lord, that he
was transformed by an exceeding and ecstatic love, in
every thought, act and affection, into the image of the
Crucified. Meet, therefore, it was, that the clemency of
the Supreme and Eternal King of Heaven, Who conde-
scends beyond all human belief to those who love
Him, should impress upon him the outward insignia of
His Cross, which he already bore in his body, that he
who exceeded all other men in his marvellous love of
the Cross should be made also a marvellous testimony
of the glory of the Cross. For the undeniable confirma-
tion of this stupendous miracle, we have not only the
testimony of witnesses in every way credible, who had
palpable and visible evidence thereof, but it has been
attested also by wonderful visions and miracles which
occurred after his death, and which are sufficient to
banish every shadow of doubt from the minds of men.
As a proof of this, Pope Gregory LX. (to whom the holy
man had foretold, long before it came to pass, that he
should be raised to the chair of the Apostle), before
he inscribed in the catalogue of the Saints this standard-
bearer of the Cross, felt some doubt and hesitation of


MIRACLES AFTER HIS DEATH. 143


mind with regard to the wound in the side. Ona certain
night, then, as the Pontiff was afterwards wont to relate
with many tears, the Blessed Francis appeared to him
in a dream, and with an unwonted severity in his
countenance, reproving him for the doubt which lurked
in his heart, raised his right arm, discovered the wound,
and commanded that a vessel should be brought to
receive the blood which issued from his side. The
Supreme Pontiff, still in vision, brought him the vessel,
which seemed to be filled even to the brim with the
blood which flowed from his side. From that day
forward he felt such great devotion and fervent zeal for
the honour of that miracle, that he could never endure
to hear any doubt, or denial, or proud contradiction of
the truth of those glorious Stigmata, but severely
reproved anyone who ventured thus to speak.

A certain Friar of the Order of St. Francis, who bore
the office of a preacher, and had a great reputation for
virtue, at first believed firmly in the truth of these Sacred
Stigmata. But afterwards he desired (out of a feeling
of human pride) to inquire concerning the grounds of
this miracle, and he began to be troubled by a certam
doubtful scruple concerning it. And this doubt gaining
ground upon him, he continued for many days together
to sustain a great conflict within himself. To this Friar,

~+8 he was sleeping one night, the Blessed Francis ap-
peared, with his feet all covered with mire, and with a
certain humble severity and patient displeasure on his
countenance. “And what,” said he, ‘‘are these con-
flicts and vile doubts within thee? Behold my hands
and my feet.” ‘Then the Friar saw the pierced hands,
but the Stigmata in the feet he could not see, because
of the mire which covered them.. “ Remove,” said the


|
144 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


Saint, “the mire from my feet, and you shall see the
place of the nails.” Then he devoutly took hold of the
feet, and it seemed that, as he washed away the mire, he
touched the place of the nails with his hands. And
when he awoke his face was bathed with tears, and
thus, with abundance of weeping and a public confes-
sion, he endeavoured to cleanse those first thoughts and
affections, which he now saw to be evil and defiled.
There was a certain matron in the city of Rome,
noble both in birth and life, who had chosen St. Francis
for her advocate, and had his picture in a private oratory,
where she prayed to her Father in secret. One day,
when she was in prayer, and gazing on the picture of the
Saint, she saw that it had not the Sacred Stigmata, at
which she began greatly to wonder and to grieve. Yet
it was no marvel that the picture had not what was
omitted by the painter. Having anxiously considered
for many days what was the cause of this omission, she
suddenly beheld those wonderful signs appear in the
picture,as they are ordinarily depicted. In great astonish-
ment, she called trembling to one of her daughters,
whom she had devoted to God, and asked her whether
she remembered that this picture had hitherto been with-
out the Stigmata. The daughter affirmed it, and declared
upon oath that it had been until now without the Sacred
Stigmata, and that she now saw them there for the first
time. But because the human mind, often by its own.
heaviness, helps us to fall, and makes that which is true
to seem doubtful, an injurious doubt immediately entered
the heart of the lady, and she thought that perhaps the
Stigmata had been thus painted from the beginning.
But lest the first miracle should be despised, the power
of God now added a second, .for the Stigmata im-


MIRACLES AFTER HIS DEATH. 145


mediately disappeared, leaving the portrait devoid of
them, so that the second miracle was a proof of the first.

It happened in the city of Llerda, in Catalonia, that a
good man, named John, who was very devout to St.
Francis, had to pass through a street, in which certain
men were lying in wait to kill him, not for any enmity
that they bore him, but because of his likeness to another
whom they hated, and who was then in his company.
One of them sprang forth from the ambush, and believing
him to be his enemy, wounded him with so many dagger-
strokes as to leave him without hope of life. For the
first stroke had almost cut off his shoulder and one of his
arms, and another inflicted such a wound on his breast
that the blood which issued from it extinguished six
candles all burning together. The poor man’s cure was
considered impossible by all the physicians, for the
wounds began to putrefy, and gave forth such an intoler-
able odour that his own wife could scarcely endure it.
All human remedies being hopeless, the good man had
recourse to the Blessed Father St. Francis, and that with
the greater devotion because, at the moment when he
was wounded, he had invoked his protection and that of
the blessed virgin Clare. And, behold, as the sufferer
lay alone on his bed, frequently calling on the name of
Francis, and repeating it with many cries, one stood by
him in the habit of a Friar Minor, who, as it seemed to
him, came in by a window, and calling him by his name,
said, “ Because thou hast trusted in me, behold, the
Lord will deliver thee.” And when the sick man asked
him who he was, he answered, ‘I am Francis.” And
immediately drawing near to him, he loosened all the
bandages and ligatures from his wounds, and seemed to
anoint them with ointment. No sooner did the poor

10


146 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


man feel the sweet touch of those sacred hands, which,
by the power of the Saviour’s Stigmata, had the virtue of
healing, than all the corruption departed from the
wounds, and the flesh was restored, so that at the same
time the wounds were closed, and the sick man restored
to perfect health. And when this was done the Blessed
Father departed. The wounded man, feeling himself
made whole, immediately began to praise God with
great joy, and to thank the Blessed Francis. He
then called his wife, who came with all haste, and
seeing him standing upon his feet whom she verily
thought to have buried on the morrow, being filled
with incredible amazement, she roused the whole
neighbourhood with her cries. Her friends came run-
ning together, and believing the wounded man to be
delirious, endeavoured to force him to return to his bed;
but he resisted them, affirming and showing that he was
perfectly cured, insomuch that all who beheld him were
astonished, and could scarcely believe but what they saw
was a dream and a phantom ; he whom they had beheld
covered with frightful wounds, already putrefying and
corrupt, now standing before them full of health and
gladness. Then he who had been made whole spoke
thus to them: “ Fear not, nor disbelieve that which
you see with your own eyes; for St. Francis has but
just now departed ; he touched me with his sacred hands
and perfectly healed my wounds.” Now, the fame of
this miracle being spread abroad, all men were filled
with wonder and gladness; and with loud praises they
extolled Francis, the standard-bearer of Christ. And
fitting it was that our Blessed Father St. Francis, being
dead according to the flesh, and alive with Christ, by the
wonderful manifestation of his presence and the sweet


MIRACLES AFTER HIS DEATH. 147


touch of his sacred hands, should restore health to that
man wounded even to death, seeing that he also bore in
his own body His Stigmata Who, by His merciful death
and marvellous resurrection, healed, by the virtue of His
wounds, the whole human race which had been wounded
and left half dead.

In Potenza, a city of Apulia, there lived a certain
clerk, named Roger, an honourable man and a Canon of
the Cathedral Church. He having been long suffering
under a severe sickness, went into that church to pray,
where was a picture of the Blessed Francis, representing
the glorious Stigmata. As he looked upon it, he began
to doubt concerning that sublime miracle, as if it were
something strange and impossible. As he was inwardly
wounded by these idle thoughts, he felt himself severely
wounded in his left hand under his glove, and at the
same time heard a noise, like the whizzing of an arrow
from a bow. He immediately took off his glove, desir-
ing to see with his eyes what had already been impressed
upon the senses of touch and hearing. His hand having
been previously unwounded, he now saw in the midst of
the palm a wound which seemed to proceed from an
arrow-stroke, and so intense was the burning pain, that
he felt as if he must faint, Marvellous to say, there
was no vestige of a hole in the glove, so that the secrecy
of the wound in the heart corresponded with the secrecy
of the wound inflicted as his penalty. For two whole
days together he cried out with the intensity of the pain,
and confessed to all around him the incredulity which
had lurked in his heart. And he confessed and solemnly
professed his belief in the Sacred Stigmata of St. Francis, _
every shadow of doubt having departed from him. And
thus he suppliantly besought the Saint of God to help

~10—2


148 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI,


him by virtue of his Sacred Stigmata; pouring forth
many heartfelt prayers, mingled with torrents of tears.
Wonderful to say, having cast away his incredulity, the
healing of his body followed that of his mind. All the
pain vanished, the burning was cooled, no vestige of
the wound remained ; and so it was that, by the clemency
and providence of God, the hidden sickness of the mind
was cured by the visible cautery of the flesh, and as
soon as the mind was healed the flesh also was made
whole. That man became most humble and devout to
God, and a loving and faithful servant to the Order of
Friars Minor. This wonderful miracle was affirmed by
many upon oath, and authenticated by the Bishop’s seal,
so that the knowledge of it has come down to us.

' There is, therefore, no room for doubt concerning the
Sacred Stigmata; neither, because God is good, should
the eye of any man be evil with regard to this thing, as
if it befitted not the Eternal Goodness to bestow such
gifts upon men. For if, by that seraphical love, many
members came to be united to Christ, their Head, so
that, arrayed in that armour, they might show them-
selves worthy of Him and of His gifts, and thereafter be
exalted to a like glory with Him in heaven, there is no
man of sound mind but must see that this redeunds to |
the glory of Christ alone.


Of many Dead who were Raised to Life.


Sajq|N Mount Marcano, a place near Benevento, a
| certain woman, who had a special devotion

22 to St. Francis, went the way of all flesh. Now,
all the clergy of that place being assembled round the


THE DEAD RAISED TO LIFE. 149


corpse to keep the accustomed vigils, and say the usual
psalms and prayers, suddenly that woman rose on her
feet, in presence of them all, on the bier where she lay,
and calling to her one of the priests present, who was
her godfather: “ Father,” she said, “I wish to confess.
As soon as I was dead, I was to be sent to a dreadful
dungeon, because I had never confessed a certain sin
which I will now make known tothee. But St. Francis,
whom I had ever devoutly served, having prayed for me,
I have been suffered to return to the body, that, having
revealed that sin, I may be made worthy of eternal
life. And here, before your eyes, as soon as I shall
have disclosed it, I shall depart to my promised rest.”
She made her confession, therefore, trembling, to the
priest, and having received absolution, quietly lay down
on the bier, and slept peacefully in the Lord.

At Parmaco, in Apulia, there was a maiden of tender
age, the most beloved child of her father and mother,
who was brought to death by a grievous sickness; her
parents having no longer any hope of succession, ac-
counted themselves to be dead in her death. All their
relations and friends came together, weeping, to that
sorrowful burial; the unhappy mother lay so over-
_ whelmed with unspeakable grief and sadness, that she
took no heed of anything which passed around her.
Meanwhile St. Francis, accompanied by a single Friar,
vouchsafed to appear to her, and consoled the desolate
woman, who was very devout to him, with compassionate
words, saying: “ Weep no more; for the quenched light
of thy candlestick, for which now thou weepest, is re-
stored to thee by my intercession.” At these words the
woman immediately arose, and declaring to all what the
Saint had said to her, she forbade them to bury the


150 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


corpse, but calling upon St. Francis with lively faith,
she took her dead daughter’s hand, and raised her up
alive and well, in the presence of all who stood wondering
round her.

The Friars at Nocera once asked a man, named Peter,
to lend them his cart, of which they stood in need; but
he answered them with abuse instead of giving them the
help they needed, and in answer to the alms asked in
honour of St. Francis, he blasphemed his holy name. But
he soon repented of his folly, being struck with a divine
fear lest the vengeance of God should fall upon him, as
speedily came to pass. For his only son fell sick at that
time, and not long afterwards died. The miserable
father cast himself on the ground, and ceased not to
call, with many tears, upon Francis, the Saint of God,
crying: “It is I who have sinned, I who have spoken
wickedly ; punish me, therefore, in my own person,
Oh, Saint of God! restore to me, now penitent, him
whom thou hast taken from me, because I blasphemed
thee. I restore and give myself wholly to thee, and
devote myself for ever to thy service, for I will con-
tinually offer to Christ, for the glory of thy name, a
devout sacrifice of praise.” At these words, wonderful
to relate, the boy arose, and forbade his -father to weep,
saying that, having been already dead, by the intercession
of the Blessed Francis he had been restored to life.

There was a boy, hardly seven years old, the son of a
notary at Rome, who, desiring to follow his mother when
she was going to the church of St. Mark, was compelled
by her to remain at home; in his boyish eagerness he
threw himself out of a window into the street, and was
killed on the spot by the fall. The mother, who was
not yet far from the house, heard the noise of the fall,


THE DEAD RAISED TO LIFE. 151


and fearing for the safety of her beloved child, returned
in all haste; finding that he had been thus suddenly and
miserably taken from her, she began to strike herself
with her own hands, and with mournful cries excited all
the neighbours to lament with her. A certain Friar
Minor, named Ralph, who had come thither to preach,
then drew near to the child, and being full of faith spoke
thus to the father: “ Believest thou that Francis, the
Saint of God, is able to raise thy son from the dead by
the love which he ever bore to Christ, Who was crucified
to restore life to men? The father replied that he
firmly believed it, and faithfully promised to devote
himself for ever to the service of that Saint of God, if,
by his merits, he should be found worthy to receive so
great a favour. Then the Friar, together with his com-
panion, prostrated himself in prayer, exhorting and
encouraging all present to pray also. When they had
thus prayed, the child began to open his eyes and raise
his arms ; then he rose upon his feet in the presence of
them all, and being well and strong, he began to walk,
having been restored by the marvellous power of the
Saint both to life and health.

In the city of Capua, a little boy was playing upon
_ the banks of the river with many others, and unex-
pectedly falling into the water, was carried away by the
force of the torrent, and buried beneath the sand. At
the cries of all the other children, who were playing with
him on the bank, a great multitude of people quickly
assembled together. Then they began to cry, and
suppliantly and devoutly to invoke the merits of the
Blessed Francis, praying him to have regard to the faith
of the child’s parents, who were very devout to him, and to
deliver their son from death. A certain man who was


152 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


known to be a good swimmer, hearing from afar these
cries, which rose to heaven, searched the river to find
the child’s body, and at last, calling upon the name and
help of St. Francis, came to a place where the sand had
formed a kind of sepulchre round the body of the dead
child, whom he drew forth and carried out of the water,
grieving much to see that he was dead. Then all the
people gathered round to see the dead child, weeping
and crying, “Oh, St. Francis, restore the child to his
father.’ Then suddenly the boy, to the joy and wonder
of all, arose alive and well, and begged to be taken to
the church of St. Francis, that he might devoutly return
thanks to him by whose power he knew that he had been
miraculously restored to life.

In the city of Sepa, in a place called Colonna, a house
suddenly fell upon a poor young man and killed him.
Many men and women ran together from every part at
the noise of the fall, and having cleared away the stones
and wood, they at last found the unhappy youth dead,
and brought him to his sorrowful mother, who broke
forth into bitter tears and exclaimed, “ Oh, St. Francis,
St. Francis, give me back my child!” and not she alone,
but all who were present, besought the aid of the blessed
Saint. But finding the young man still without speech
or sense, they laid him upon a bier, intending to bury
him on the following day. The mother, nevertheless,
having great faith in the Lord by the merit of His
Saint, made a vow to cover the altar of St. Francis with
a new pall if he would restore her son to life. And
behold, about midnight, the boy began to revive, his
limbs recovered their heat; and being alive, well,
and strong, he began to give thanks and praises to God
and to the Blessed Francis, calling upon the clergy and


THE DEAD RAISED TO LIFE. 153


the people who came together to join with him in
praise and thanksgiving. j

There was another young man, called Geraldino, of
Ragusa, who, in the time of the vintage, as he came out
of the vineyard, went to fill the vessels of wine from the
great tun which was under the winepress, when some
great stones, which were suddenly loosened, fell upon
his head and crushed it, wounding him to death. The
father, having heard the noise, ran to the place, and —
despairing of the safety of his son, approached no
nearer to him, but left him as he found him, under the
stones. The other vintagers, running together in all
haste when they heard the feeble cry of the son, were
filled, like the father, with great sorrow, and drew the
young man, already dead, from beneath the ruin. But
the father, prostrate at the feet of Jesus Christ, humbly
besought Him, by the merits of St. Francis, to vouchsafe
to restore to him his only son ; and uttering prayer upon
prayer, he promised to perform many works of charity,
and to visit the sepulchre of the holy man, together with
his son, if he would raise him from the dead. Suddenly
the young man, whose body was all broken and crushed,
being restored to life and perfect health, arose full of
joy in the presence of them all, and reproving those who
were weeping over him, affirmed that by the prayers of
St. Francis he had been restored to life.

The Saint raised also another dead man in Germany,
whereof the Blessed Father, Pope Gregory, certified the
Friars of the Order, and congratulated them greatly by his
apostolical letters at the time of the translation of the
body of the Saint, when they came together to that
translation, and to the general Chapter. The manner
of that miracle I do not relate, because, in truth, I know


154 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


it not, believing the testimony of the Holy Father to be
more worthy of credit than any other affirmation. that
could be made,


~


Of many whom he Delivered from the Danger of
Death.


ria N the neighbourhood of the city of Rome there
¥| wasa certain nobleman, named Ridolpho, whose

S223} wife was very devout to God, and he often re-
ooivea the Friars Minor, not only from the virtue of
hospitality, but out of reverence and love for the Blessed
Francis. It happened one night that the warder of the
castle, who watched on its highest tower, had laid down
to rest upon a heap of wood, which, becoming loose, began -
to fall, and thus the poor man fell with it, first upon the
palace roof, and thence to the ground. The noise of
the fall awakened the whole family, and at the news of
the warder’s accident, the lord of the castle, with his
lady and the Friars, came in haste to the spot; but he
_who had fallen from so great a height was in so deep a
sleep that he was not awakened, either by the noise of
the wood which continued to fall or by the loud cries of
the family, who came together to the spot. At last,
being awakened by those who pushed and pulled him,
he began to lament and complain that he had been
awakened from a sweet and quiet sleep, declaring that he
had been sleeping most sweetly in the arms of the Blessed
Francis. But when they showed him from how great a
height he had fallen to the ground, seeing that he was at
the bottom of the tower, at the top of which he had laid
down, he was astonished at what had happened to him


DELIVERANCES FROM DANGER OF DEATH. 155


while he was wholly unconscious of it ; and he promised,
in the presence ofall, to do penance to the honour of
God and St. Francis. ;

In a city called Pofo, in Campagna, a Priest, named
Thomas, wished to rebuild a mill which belonged to the
church, and passing heedlessly along the edge of the
canal, where the water was very deep, he suddenly and
unexpectedly fell into it, and got entangled in the wheel
which turned the mill; and thus, being fastened to the
wood, he was turned round and round, the water falling
with great impetuosity upon his face, so that he had not
breath to cry, but he invoked St. Francis in his heart,
and remaining thus for a long time stretched upon the
wheel, his companions despaired of his life, when they
saw the wheel going round with great violence, and the
poor Priest, struggling and panting, plunged thus
miserably in the water. And, behold, a Friar Minor,
clothed in a white tunic, and girded with a cord, drew
him very gently out of the water by the arm, saying,
“T am Francis, whom thou hast invoked.” The Priest,
seeing himself thus delivered, was filled with wonder,
and wishing to kiss the feet of his deliverer, sought
anxiously for him on every side, saying to his com-
_ panions, “Where is he? whither went the Saint?’

Then these men cast themselves trembling upon the
ground, praising the glorious works of the great God,
and the merits and virtues of His humble servant
Francis.

A certain young man of Borgo-a-Celano went into the
meadows to mow the grass. In those meadows was an
ancient well, covered with grass, which had so concealed
its mouth that it was hidden from all passers-by, the
depth of it being about four paces. The mowers coming


156 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


together from different parts, one of them accidentally
fell into the well, While his body was buried therein,
he raised his heart and mind on high to ask the aid of
the Blessed Francis, and as he was falling, cried out
with faith and confidence, “St. Francis, help me!” The
others, who were seeking him hither and thither, and
could nowhere find him, began to lament over him with
cries and tears. Having at last discovered that he had
fallen into the well, they returned weeping to Borgo, to
tell what had befallen him, and toask help. Returning
to the place with a great multitude, they let down a rope
into the well, and saw the young man sitting upon the
water, having suffered no injury therefrom. When he
was drawn forth from the well, he said to all the by-
standers, “As soon as I fell, I called for aid to the
Blessed Francis, who, as I was falling to the bottom,
suddenly lifted me up with his hand, nor did he ever
leave me until, together with you, he had drawn me out
of the well.” —

In the Church of St. Francis, in the city of Assisi, the
Bishop of Ostia, who was afterwards Pope Alexander,
was preaching before the Roman Court, when a large
and heavy stone, which had been inadvertently left over
the high marble pulpit, suddenly fell upon the head ofa
lady who was listening to the sermon. All who were
present, supposing that her head was broken, and that
she was already dead, covered her with a mantle which
she had about her, that she might be carried forth to
burial at the end of the sermon. But she had faithfully
commended herself to the Blessed Francis, at the foot of
whose altar she lay. And no sooner was the sermon
ended, than the lady rose in presence of them all, in
such perfect health that not the slightest sign of injury


™~
DELIVERANCES FROM DANGER OF DEATH. 157


was visible. And what is more marvellous still, having
for many years before suffered almost continually from
intense pain in the head, she was from that day forward
perfectly freed from that infirmity, as she herself after-
wards testified.

In the city of Corneto, a bell was to be founded for
the Friars Minor; certain devout men came to see it,
and among them a boy of eight years old, named Bar-
tholomew, was bringing refreshments to the Friars who
were labouring at the work. Suddenly, a violent wind
arose which shook the roof, and lifted the door frum its
hinges; it was very large and heavy, and fell with such
violence upon the boy that, as all believed, he was crushed
beneath its weight; it so entirely covered him that no
part of his body was visible. All who were present ran
to the spot, invoking the power of the blessed right hand
of St. Francis. But the father, whose limbs had become
cold and rigid with grief, being unable to move, offered
his son with loud cries and prayers to St. Francis. The
heavy weight was at last raised from the body of the
child, and, behold, he who was supposed to be dead ap-
peared all smiling, as if he had just awoke from sleep,
and bearing no mark of injury. When he had attained
his fourteenth year, he joined the Order of Friars Minor,
and became a learned and famous preacher.

The men of the city of Lantino had cut a great stone
from a mountain, which was to be placed under the
altar in the church of St. Francis, then about to be con-
secrated ; about forty men were employed to place the
said stone upon a cart, and having several times endea-
voured to do so with all their strength, the stone fell
upon one of them, who was buried beneath it. Not
knowing what to do, and being all confounded in mind,


158 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


the greater number departed in despair; ten alone re-
mained, who lamentably called upon St. Francis, praying
him that he would not suffer anyone to perish thus
horribly in his service; at last they took courage, and
raised the stone with so much ease, that no one doubted
the presence of the power of St. Francis, and the man
arose alive and sound in all his limbs; and, moreover,
having been before short-sighted, he recovered the
full and clear use of his eyes, so that all might know
how mighty are the merits of St. Francis in the most
desperate cases.

A similar thing happened near San Severino, in the
Marches of Ancona. A number of men were drawing an
immense stone, brought from Constantinople, for the
church of St. Francis. The stone suddenly fell upon
one of them; and while the rest believed that he was
not only dead, but crushed to pieces, by the help of the
Blessed Francis, who raised the stone, the man arose
safe and well.

Bartholomew, a citizen of Gaeta, had laboured much
to build a church in honour of St. Francis, when a beam,
which had been insecurely fastened, fell and grievously
hurt him. Feeling that his head was broken, and that
he was nigh unto death, he, being a devout and pious
man, besought one of the Friars to bring him the Most
Holy Sacrament. The Friar, fearing that there would
not be time, because his death was so near at hand, said
to him, in the words of St. Augustine: “ Believe, and
thow hast eaten.” On the following night St. Francis
appeared to him, in company with eleven Friars, bearing
a lamb in his bosom; and standing by the bed, he called
him by his name: “ Bartholomew,” he said, “fear not,
for the enemy can do nothing against thee. He has


DELIVERANCES FROM DANGER OF DEATH. 159


sought to hinder thee in my service, but behold the
Lamb for Whom thou didst ask, Whom by reason of thy
good desire thou hast received, and by Whose power thou
shalt likewise obtain the healing both of thy body and
thy soul.” And then, laying his hand upon the wounds,
he commanded him to return on the morrow to the work
he had begun. ‘Then, in the morning, he rose very
early, and showing himself to those who had left him
for dead, they were filled with wonder and admiration
to behold him full of joy and health, and were excited
_ by his example, and by the sight of the miracle, to great
love and reverence for the Blessed Father.

A man of Ceperano, named Nicolas, fell one day into
the hands of some cruel enemies, who inflicted many
terrible wounds upon him, and then left him at the point
of death. As soon as he felt himself wounded, Nicolas
began to cry with a loud voice, ‘‘ St. Francis, help me!
St. Francis, aid me!’ and these cries were heard by
many who were at too great a distance to be able to help
him. He was brought to his house, all bathed in his
own blood, yet he confidently affirmed that he should not
die of those wounds, and that he then felt no pain from
them, for that St. Francis had helped him, and had ob-
tained for him from the Lord time to do penance for his
sins, And the truth of his words was confirmed by what
came to pass. For when the blood was washed away,
the man, contrary to all human expectation, was found
free from injury.

The son of a nobleman at Geminiano was suffering
under a grievous and hopeless malady, which had re-
duced him to extreme misery. A stream of blood flowed
continually from his eyes, such as is wont to issue from
the opening of a vein in the arm; and all other indica-


—


160 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


tions of approaching death appearing, he lay devoid of
power, sense, or motion, so that he was believed by all to
be in his agony. The parents and friends, according to
custom, gathered together weeping, and discoursed con-
cerning his burial; but his father, having faith in the
Lord, hastened to the church of St. Francis, which was
near to the place, and placing a cord round his neck,
humbly prostrated himself upon the ground, and with
many prayers, tears, and sighs besought St. Francis to
be his advocate with Christ. No sooner had the father
returned home, than his weeping was turned to joy, for
he found his son restored to perfect health.

A similar miracle was wrought by the Lord, through
the merits of the Saint, on a maiden in a town called
Thamarit, not far from Ancona, in Catalonia, who,
being near to death from the extremity of her sickness,
was restored to perfect health when her parents devoutly
invoked the Blessed Francis.

A certain clerk at Vico-Albo, named Matthew, having
drunk of some poisonous drink, lost the use of his
speech, and seemed at the last extremity. <A priest
came to hear his confession, but he could not utter a
single word. But having humbly raised his heart to
Christ, he besought Him, by the merits of the Blessed
Francis, to deliver him from the jaws of death. Im-
mediately, being strengthened by the Lord, he pro-
nounced the name of St. Francis with faithful devotion,
and having rejected the poison in the presence of many
witnesses, he returned thanks to his deliverer,


MANY DELIVERED FROM SHIPWRECK 161


Of many who were Delivered from Shipwreck.”


= ERTAIN mariners were in great danger by sea,
4, about ten miles from the port of Baruti, and,

= the tempest waxing fiercer and fiercer, they
began to fear for their lives, and cast anchor in the sea.
But the sea rose higher still by the fury of the wind and
the storm, so that the ropes were broken, and they were
left without an anchor, wandering in an uncertain and
unequal course over the waves. At last, by the Divine
Will, the sea was calmed, and they endeavoured with
ull their power to recover the anchor, the ropes of which
they saw floating on the sea. Unable to do this by their
own strength, they invoked the aid of many Saints, and,
worn out with toil and labour, they were unable, in the
course of a whole day, to recover asingle anchor. Now
there was one of the sailors, named Perfetto (Perfect),
but in his manner of life very imperfect, who said in
derision to his companions: “See, you have been
calling all the Saints to aid, and, as you see, not one of
them helps us. Let us ask this Francis, who is a new
Saint; perhaps he will dive into the water and recover
our lost anchors.” They all agreed to the advice of
Perfetto, not in jest, but truly and faithfully, and,
reproving his impious words, they turned of their own
accord to the Saint, and in a moment, without any
human help, they saw the anchors floating upon the
water, as if the nature of iron had been changed into
the lightness of wood.

A certain pilgrim, reduced to great weakness of body
by the effects of a severe fever, was brought in a ship
from the parts beyond the sea. He had a special affec-

. 11


162 LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


tion and devotion to St. Francis, whom he had chosen as
his advocate with the Heavenly King. Not being yet
perfectly free from his sickness, he was tormented by
a burning thirst, and there being no water in the ship,
he began to cry aloud: “Go with all confidence and
bring me a cup, for St. Francis has filled my little
barrel.” Marvellous to say they found the barrel filled
with water, which had before been perfectly empty.
Another day, a tempest arose, and filled the ship with
waves, so that, by reason of the violence of the storm,
all on board began to fear shipwreck, when the sick man
arose suddenly and cried throughout the ship; “ Arise,
all of you, and go and meet the Blessed Francis; be-
hold, he is coming to salute us!’ And crying thus
with a loud voice and many tears, he fell on his face
and adored him. And immediately, at the vision of
the Saint, the sick man recovered his health, and the
sea was calmed.

Brother James, of Rieti, was passing a streamlet in a
little boat; when it approached the land, and his com.
panions had disembarked, he was about to follow them,
but the little bark being accidentally overturned, the
brother fell into the water. The brethren on the shore
besought the Blessed Francis, with many tears, to deliver
hisson. And the Friar at the bottom of the river, being
unable to cry with his mouth, called upon his merciful
Father as best he could in his heart. And, behold, by
the present aid of the Blessed Father, he walked as on
dry land, in the bottom of the stream, and taking hold
of the sunken boat, he brought it with him to the shore.
Wonderful to say, his garments were not wet, nor was
there a drop of water on his tunic.

Another Friar, named Bonaventure, was rowing with


MANY DELIVERED FROM SHIPWRECK. 163


two other brothers on a certain lake, when the boat,
being broken by the force of the current, sank with
himself and his companions to the bottom. When,
from this lake of misery, they called with confidence on
their merciful Father Francis, the boat, full of water,
rose to the surface, and, by the guidance of the Saint,
reached the harbour in safety.

Thus also another Friar of Escolo, who had fallen into
a river, was delivered by the merits of St. Francis,

Several men and women in a like peril on the Lake |
of Rieti, by the invocation of the name of St. Francis,
escaped the danger of shipwreck.

Some mariners of Ancona, being attacked by a dan-
gerous tempest, were in danger of being swallowed up
by the waves. When, despairing of life, they devoutly
invoked the aid of St. Francis, a great light appeared
over the sea, and with that light there was granted ta
them, by the divine mercy, a great calm, as if the holy
man by his marvellous power could command the winds
and the sea. Now it is not possible, I think, to relate,
if I would, all the wonders by which our Blessed Father
has been glorified, and is now glorified, in the deep. Nor
is it any marvel that to him, who already reigns in
heaven, is given power to command the waters, seeing
that all living creatures served him while he was yet in
this mortal life.


(29


164 . LIFE OF ST, FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


Of many that were Delivered from Chains and
Dungeons.


ree happened in Romagna that a certain Greek,
1 s| a servant toa great person in that country, was
s=e=ts} falsely accused of theft, and immediately im-
ee by the lord of the country in a dark dungeon
and strongly bound. But the lady of the house in
which he served, moved with compassion for the poor
servant, whom she fully believed to be innocent of any
crime, earnestly and constantly besought her lord and
husband to set him free. Then, being unable to move
the hard obstinacy of her husband, the lady had recourse
to St. Francis, and devoutly recommending the innocent
man to the mercy of the Saint, she made a vow for his
deliverance. Then the protector of the miserable man,
with great compassion, visited the innocent prisoner in
his dungeon. He loosed his bands, opened the prison
door, and taking him by the hand, he led him forth, say-
ing, “I am he to whom thy mistress devoutly commended
thee.” Then the poor man, being seized with great fear,
and seeking for some pathway down the precipice upon
which he stood, suddenly found himself, by the power
of his deliverer, on the plain below. Then he returned
to his mistress, and relating the miracle in order to her,
inflamed the heart of the devout lady to a still more
fervent love of Christ, and greater reverence for His
servant Francis.
There was a poor man at Massa, who owed a certain
sum of money to a knight of San Pietra, and being
unable in his poverty to pay it when the said knight


suddenly demanded it of him, he humbly besought —


co ae. . ee


MANY DELIVERED FROM DUNGEONS. 165


him to have mercy on him, and, for the love of St.
Francis, to grant him a little delay. But the proud
knight despised the prayers of the poor man, and set
at nought the love of the Saint, as if it were a vain
thing. And thus in his obstinacy he answered him,
“TI will confine thee in so close a prison, and in so
remote a place, that neither Francis nor anyone else
shall be able to help thee ;’ and he was as good as his
word, for he found a dark dungeon, into which he
cast the poor man strongly bound. Soon afterwards
St. Francis came, and throwing open the dungeon, and
breaking his fetters, he brought the poor man safe home
to his own house. Thus the might of St. Francis over-
came the haughty knight, and delivered the prisoner
from his captivity, and the pride of the obstinate soldier
was changed by the marvellous miracle into meekness,

Albert of Arezzo, having been detained in cruel bonds
for some debts which were unjustly demanded of him,
devoutly commended his innocence to St. Francis, whom
he held in veneration above all the saints, having a special
affection also to the Order of Friars Minor. His creditor
said to him, with words of blasphemy, that neither
Francis nor God should deliver him out of his hands,
On the vigil of St. Francis, the prisoner had eaten
nothing, having, for the love of the Saint, given his
portion of food toa poor man; and as he was watching
on the following night, St. Francis appeared to him. On
his entrance, the chains immediately fell from his hands
and the fetters from his feet. The doors opened of their
own accord, and the poor man, being set free, returned
to his home. From that day he kept the vow which he
had now made, fasting always on the vigil of St. Francis ;
and the wax-taper, which he was accustomed to offer him


166 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


every year, he thenceforward, in token of the increase
of his devotion, increased by the weight of an ounce.
When Pope Gregory IX. was sitting in the chair of
St. Peter, a certain man named Peter, of the city of
Alesia, on an accusation of heresy, was carried to Rome,
and, by command of the same Pontiff, was given
in custody to the Bishop of Tivoli. He, having been
charged to keep him in safety, under penalty of the
loss of his bishopric, bound him with heavy chains, and
imprisoned him in a dark dungeon, from which there
was no possible means of escape, giving him food and
drink by measure and weight. This man began to call
with many prayers and tears upon St. Francis, the vigil
of whose Feast was close at hand, beseeching him to
have mercy upon him. And because, by the purity of
faith, all error of heretical pravity had been driven from
his heart when he turned to Francis, the faithful servant
of Christ, he was made worthy by his merits to be heard
by the Lord. For, about twilight on the vigil of his
Feast, St. Francis mercifully appeared to him in his
prison, and, calling him by his name, commanded him
immediately to arise. He, being full of fear, asked who
it was that spoke to him, and was told that it was the
Blessed Francis. Then, by the power of the presence of
the holy man, he beheld the fetters fall broken from his
feet, and the doors of the prison were unlocked without
anyone to open them, so that he could go forth unbound
and free; nevertheless, being full of wonder, he durst
not go forth, but calling at the doors, affrighted all the
jailers. Then they made known to the bishop that he
had been set free from all bonds, and when the devout
prelate understood the matter in order, he came to the
prison, and seeing the power of God thus manifest, he
acknowledged it, and adored the Lord. Some of the


MANY DELIVERED FROM DUNGEONS. 167


chains were brought: to the Pope and the cardinals, who,
beholding what had been done, blessed God in wender
and admiration.

Guido-lotto, of San Geminiano, was falsely accused
of having poisoned a certain man, and of intending by
the same means to destroy his son and all his family.
Being apprehended by the magistrate of the place, he
was loaded with heavy chains and shut up in a tower.
But knowing his own innocence, and having confidence
in the Lord, he committed the defence of his cause to
St. Francis. The magistrate casting in his mind by
what manner of torments he might draw from him the
confession of his crime, and by what punishment, when
he should have confessed it, he would put him to death,
the prisoner, on the night before he was to be led forth
to torture, was visited by the presence of St. Francis,
and surrounded by a great glory even until the morning,
so that, being filled with great joy and confidence, he
felt sure of his deliverance. In the morning they who
were to torture him came and brought him forth from
the prison, and put him to the torture, loading him
with many heavy chains to increase his pains. He was
many times raised from the earth and cast down again,
that, by torture succeeding torture, he might be the
sooner brought to confess his crime. But the spirit of
innocence shone brightly in his face, nor did he seem to
experience any pain. Then a great fire was lighted under
him, over which he was hung by the feet, with his head
downwards, yet not a hair of his head was singed.
Lastly, he was covered with boiling oil, which was
poured over his body, and he overcame all these tor-
ments by the power of that patron to whom he had com-
mitted his defence, and so he was set free, and departed
safe and sound,


168 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


Of many Women who were Delivered from the
Danger of Childbirth.


eo] CERTAIN Countess in Sclavonia, illustrious
| for her birth, and an imitator of the virtues of
mares! St. Francis, was full of devotion towards him,
ane of great piety and charity towards his whole Order:
Having come once upon a time to the hour of her
delivery, she endured such terrible and grievous pains,
that it seemed as if the birth of the child must be the
death of the mother. It seemed that the child could
not obtain its life but by the sacrifice of the life of the
mother, and thatthe hour of her delivery must be the
hour of her death. Being in such peril, a thought came
into her mind of the fame, the virtue, and the glory of
St. Francis, which so excited her faith and inflamed her
devotion, that she turned to him, the effectual and faith-
ful friend, the consolation of the devout, and the refuge
of the afflicted. “St. Francis,” she said, “all my bones
supplicate thy mercy, and with my heart I vow to
thee what with my lips I cannot express.”” Oh! mar-
vellous and speedy effect of piety! The end of her
speech was the end also of her sorrow, and the
beginning of her labour was the end thereof; for her
pains immediately ceased, and she brought forth her
child in safety. Nor was she forgetful of her vow, or
_unfaithful to her promise. For she built a fair church
in honour of the Saint, and gave it to the Friars of his
Order,

There was a woman in the neighbourhood of Rome,
named Beatrice, who had borne for four days a dead child
within her womb, and was suffering the agonies of death.


| DELIVERANCE FROM DANGER OF CHILDBIRTH. 169


That which was already dead was bringing the mother to
death. The physicians tried their art in vain, but all
human remedy seemed fruitless, so that the curse of
Eve had fallen with unwonted severity upon the head of
this unhappy woman, who, having become the sepulchre
of her child, was fast hastening to herown, At last she
commended herself with great devotion to the Friars
Minor, beseeching them with full faith to send her some
relic of St. Francis. By the Will of God they found a
piece of cord, with which the Saint had girded himself,
which was no sooner laid upon the woman than she was
delivered of the dead child which had brought her nigh
to death, and restored to her former health.

Guiliana, the wife of a nobleman of Como, was full of
sorrow at the death of her children, and wept continually
over her unhappy case, because all the children whom
with great sorrow she had brought forth, in a short
space of time, with no less sorrow, she saw carried forth
to their grave. Being now within five months of het
delivery, because of the misfortune which had befallen
her other children she was more solicitous concerning
the death of her expected infant than concerning its birth;
therefore she faithfully besought the Blessed Father St.
Francis for the life of her unborn child. And behold, as
she was asleep one night, a woman appeared to her
bearing a beautiful child in her arms, which with a
joyful countenance she presented to her, And when she
refused to receive it, fearing lest she should forthwith
lose it again, the woman said to her: “Take it, and fear
not, for St. Francis, who has had pity on thy sorrow,
hath sent it to thee; the child shall live and gladden
thee by its health.” Then the lady awoke, and under-
stood by this vision from heaven that the aid of St.


170 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


~


Francis would be present with her, and being filled with
great joy, she began to pray more intensely and fervently
for the child which had been promised her. When the
time came that she should bring forth, the lady gave
birth to a boy, who, by his infantine strength and beauty,
seemed to have received the food of life by the merits of
St. Francis; and thus were his parents excited to a still
greater devotion towards Christ and His Saint.

A similar grace was bestowed by the holy Father in
the city of Tivoli, A woman there, who had already
many daughters, having a great desire for a son, began
to offer prayers and vows to St. Francis. By his merits,
the woman who had prayed for one son only, gave birth
to two.

A woman at Viterbo, who was near her delivery,
seemed nearer still to her death, being tormented with
every kind of sorrow and pain to which women are
subject at such times. When nature seemed sinking
under them, and every art of medicine had been tried in
vain, the woman called upon the name of St. Francis,
and was forthwith safely delivered. Having obtained her
desire, she forgot the benefit received, and instead of
paying due honour to the Saint, she began to work on
his Festival, when, behold! her right arm, which she
had stretched forth to labour, remained withered and
stiff. When she tried to draw it towards her with the
other, that also, by a similar punishment, was dried up.
The woman, being seized with fear from on high, renewed
her vow, and by the merits of the merciful and humble
Saint, to whom she again commended herself, she
recovered the use of her limbs, which by her contempt
and ingratitude she had lost.

Another woman, from the neighbourhood of Arezzo,


DELIVERANCE FROM DANGER OF CHILDBIRTH. 171


had been seven days in the perils of childbirth; she had
already turned black, and being given over by all, she
devoted herself to St. Francis, and began to invoke his
aid in death. She had no sooner done so than she fell
asleep, and in a dream beheld St. Francis, who spoke to
her most sweetly, asking her whether she knew him, and
whether she could say the Salve Regina in honour of the
glorious Virgin. When she replied that she knew it,
“Begin,” said the Saint, “the sacred Antiphon, and
before thou hast finished it thou shalt bring forth in
safety.” At these words the woman awoke, and began
with great fear to say the Salve Regina, and when she
came to those words, “ Illos twos misericordes oculos,”’
and made mention of the Fruit of that virginal womb,
she was immediately delivered from all her pains, and
brought forth a beautiful infant, giving thanks to the
Queen of Mercy, who, by the merits of the Blessed
Francis, had vouchsafed to have compassion on her,


Of many Blind who were Restored to Sight.


Bares|N the Convent of the Friars Minor, at Naples,
| there was a certain Friar named Robert, who


f22~23} had been many years blind, and there had lately
grown over his eyes a superfluity of flesh, which hindered
the motion and use of the eyelids. Now, many foreign
Friars came to this place, being brought together ous
divers parts by the will of the Blessed Father St. Francis,
that the miracle might thus take place in the presence of
many ; and thus was the brother healed. One night the
said Brother Robert was lying in his bed sick unto


172 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


death, and his soul had been already commended to God,
when, behold! he saw the Blessed Father before him,
with three Friars full of sanctity, and these were St.
Anthony, Br. Augustine, and Br. James, of Assisi, who,
as they had so perfectly followed him during life, now
bore him company after death. Then St. Francis,
taking a knife, began to cut away that superfluous flesh,
and restored to him his lost sight, raising him also from
death to life. Then he said to him: “My son, Friar
Robert, the grace which I have bestowed upon thee is a
token to these brethren who are going into distant
countries, that I will always go before them and direct
their steps—therefore, let them depart in gladness, and
perform with a willing mind the obedience imposed
upon them.”

At Thebes, in Romagna, a blind woman, having fasted
on bread and water on the vigil of St. Francis, was led
by her husband on the morning of the Feast to the
church of the Friars Minor. And when the Mass was
celebrated, at the elevation of the Body of Christ, she saw
It clearly, and most devoutly adored It, crying witha
loud voice: “ Thanks be to God and His Saint, for I see
the Body of Christ.” All those who were present turned —
to see whence that joyful voice proceeded, and when the
Mass was ended, the woman returned to her house,
rejoicing in spirit and with the sight of her eyes, And
she rejoiced not only because she had received her bodily
sight, but because, by the merits of St. Francis and by
the aid of holy faith, she had beheld that stupendous
Sacrament which is the light of the living soul.

At a place called Poffo, in Campagna, there was a boy
of fourteen, who, by a sudden infirmity, entirely lost
the use of his left eye, and the intensity of the pain so


MANY BLIND RESTORED TO SIGHT. 178


removed the eye out of its place that, the nerves being
relaxed by a finger’s length, it hung for a whole week
down the cheek, being almost entirely dried up. There
remained no other remedy but to cut it off, and the phy-
sicians being hopeless of a cure, he turned with all his
mind to ask the assistance of St. Francis. Nor did that
prompt helper of the miserable delay to grant the prayer
of his suppliant, for, by his marvellous power, he restored
the withered eye to its place and to its former strength,
illuminating it with the longed-for light of day.

In the same province, at a place called Magno, a heavy
piece of wood fell from a great height, and struck the
head of a certain Priest, blinding him in the left eye.
As he lay on the ground, he began to invoke St. Francis,
saying: “ Help me, most holy Father, so that I may be
able to go to thy Festival, as I have promised thy Friars ;”
for it was the vigil of the Saint, and when he had said
this, he immediately arose safe and sound, and began
to praise God, rejoicing with all around, who had been
lamenting his misfortune, and were now filled with joy
and wonder. He went to the Feast and related to all the
power and mercy which he had experienced.

Another man of Mount Gorgano, who was labouring
in his vineyard, injured his eye as he was cutting a piece -
of wood, dividing it so that the half of it hung out of the
socket. Despairing of all human aid, he made a vow to
St. Francis always to fast before his Feast if he would
help him now. The Saint immediately restored the eye
to its proper place, and restored also its lost sight, so
that not a vestige of the injury remained.

The son of a nobleman, who was born blind, received
his sight by the merits of St. Francis, and from this cause
received the name of Illuminato. When he grew up, in


174 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


thanksgiving for the benefit received, he took the habit
of St. Francis, and made such progress in the life of grace
and holiness that he showed himself to be truly a child
of light, and by the merits of the holy Father he ended
his life by a still holier death.

At Zacanto, near Anagna, there was a soldier, named
Gerard, who had altogether lost his sight. It happened
once that two Friars Minor, from distant parts, came to
lodge with him; and having been devoutly received and
kindly treated, out of reverence for St. Francis, they
thanked God and their host, and went their way to a
convent of Friars not far from that place. One night
St. Francis appeared to one of these Friars in a dream,
saying: “Arise, and goquickly with thy companion to the
house of our host, who received Christ and me in your
persons, for I wish to requite him for his good offices.
He became blind because of his sins, which he cared not
to purge by confession.” When the Father had said
this he disappeared, and the Friar immediately arose with
his companion to fulfil the commandment laid upon him.
And when they came to the house of the hospitable man,
they related to him in order the vision which one of
them had seen, which, when he had heard, he marvelled
ereatly ; and acknowledging that to be true which they
said, and being contrite even to tears, he willingly made
his confession. Being thus corrected and renewed, and
restored to sight in the interior man, he forthwith re-
covered his exterior sight; and the fame of that miracle
being spread abroad through all the country round, ex-
cited many not only to reverence for the Saint, but also
to humble confession of their sins, and to loving hospi-
tality to the poor.


DELIVERANCE FROM DIVERS INFIRMITIES. 175


Of many who were Delivered from Divers Infirmities,.


7c l a place called Pieve, there was a poor beggar-
A%~| boy whohad been deaf and dumb from his birth,

cs3| and whose tongue was so short that those who
See his mouth thought that it must have been
even cut off. A certain man, named Mark, received him
into his house for the love of God: and he, finding him-
self so well off there, continued to abide with him. One
day, when the man was supping with his wife (the child
being with them), he said to his wife: “I should as- -
suredly hold it to be a great miracle if the Blessed Francis
would restore this child’s hearing and speech ;” adding,
“T vow to God that if St. Francis will do this, for the
love of him, I will support this child as long as he lives.”
Marvellous to say, the tongue immediately began to grow
and the child spoke, saying: “Glory be to God, and to
St. Francis.”

Brother James, of Iseo, when he was a child in his
father’s house, sustained a grievous bodily injury. But
by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost, although so feeble
in health, he entered very young into the Order of St.
Francis, disclosing to none the infirmity under which he
laboured. Now it happened that when the body of St.
Francis was transported to the place where the precious
treasure of his sacred bones was to be preserved, the said
Friar was present at the festival of the translation, desir-
ing to do due honour to his glorious Father. He ap-
proached the sepulchre in which the sacred body lay,
and embraced it in the fervour of his devotion, when he
immediately felt himself restored to health, and from
that moment was set free from his infirmity.


176 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI


By the mercy of God and the merits of St. Francis, the
same marvellous cure was vouchsafed to many others,
among whom were Br. Bartolo of Gubbio, Br, Angelo of
Toli, a Priest of Stichiano, named Nicholas, John of Fora,
a certain man from Pisa, another from Ciperna, Peter of
Sicily, and another from Spello, in the neighbourhood of
Assisi.

There was a woman in the Maremma who had been for
five years out of her mind, being also both blind and
deaf; she would often tear her clothes with her teeth
and throw herself into the water or the fire, and became
at last subject to dreadful attacks of epilepsy. Now it
happened by the disposal of the divine mercy, that one
night a divine light shone around her, and in a dream
she saw St. Francis seated upon a lofty throne, before
whom she prostrated herself, imploring him to restore
her to health. But he seeming not yet to hear her —
prayers, the woman made a vow, for the love of God
and of His Saints,to give alms to whomsoever should ask
of her as long as she should have anything to give. The
Saint at once accepted the offer, which was the same he
himself had once made to the Lord, and making the sign —
of the Cross over her, he restored her to perfect health.

It is also known for a truth that St. Francis mercifully
delivered from the same infirmity a maiden of Norsia,
and the son of a certain nobleman, and many others.

Peter of Foligno was on his way to visit the church
of St. Michael, but, as he was making the pilgrimage
_with little reverence, it happened that, as he was drink-
ing at a certain fountain, he was suddenly possessed by
the devil, by whom for three years he was miserably
tormented, using horrible language, and being terrible
to look upon. Having at times lucid intervals, he made


DELIVERANCE FROM DIVERS INFIRMITIES. Li


use of one of them to go to the sepulchre of the merciful
Father to ask his help, for he had heard that it was
efficacious against the powers of the air; and no sooner
had he touched the sepulchre with his hand than he was
delivered from the power of the devil who tormented
him.

In like manner the mercy of St. Francis was shown to
a woman of Narni, who was likewise possessed, and to
many others, whose sufferings and cures it were too long
to relate. |

There was a man called Buono, of the city of Fano,
paralytic and a leper, who was carried by his parents to
the church of St. Francis, where he was perfectly healed
of both diseases. .

Another young man called Atto, of San Severino, who
had been struck with leprosy, made a vow to the Saint,
and having been carried to his sepulchre, was by his
merits perfectly healed. The Saint had a special power
in the healing of this disease, because, in his love of
piety and humility, he had ever willingly and humbly
served the lepers.

A certain noble lady named Rogarda, in the diocese of
Soria, had been subject for twenty-three years to an issue
of blood, and having suffered much from many physicians,
seemed, from the extremity of her pains, to be at the
point of death; and if the blood stopped flowing for a
time, her body swelled in a most frightful manner.
Now, it happened one day that she heard a boy singing
in the Latin tongue the miracles which God had wrought
by the Blessed Father St. Francis, and being moved with
sorrow she burst into tears, and began to say with great
faith : “ Oh, Blessed Father St. Francis, who art glorified
by so many miracles, if thou wilt vouchsafe to deliver me

12


178 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


from this disease, it will bring thee a great increase of
glory, for thou hast never wrought such a miracle as
this.” What more shall I say? She had no sooner
spoken these words than, by the merits of the Blessed
Francis, she felt that she was healed. Her son also,
whose name was Mark, had an arm contracted, and when
he had made a vow to St. Francis, it was perfectly
restored.

A woman of Sicily, who had laboured for seven years
under an issue of blood, was made whole by the Stan-
dard-bearer of Christ.

In the city of Rome there was a woman named
Praseda, well known for her piety and holiness of life.
From her earliest youth she had shut herself up for the
love of Christ, her Spouse, for the space of forty years,
in a narrow cell near to the church of St. Francis, whence
she desired to obtain from him a signal grace. For
having got upon the window-sill of her cell for some
necessary purpose, she was taken with a strange giddi-
ness, and fell, breaking her leg in two places, and
dislocating her shoulder. Then our most benign Father
appeared to her, clothed in dazzling raiment of light,
and began thus sweetly to speak to her: “ Arise,” he
said, “blessed daughter, arise and fear not.’’ And
taking her by the hand he raised her up, and immedi-
ately disappeared. Then she, seeking hither and thither,
throughout her cell, thought she had seen a vision,
until, at her cries, a light was brought to her, and she
felt that she was perfectly cured by Francis, the servant
of God, and related in order all that had happened to
her.


THE FESTIVAL OF THE SAINT NOT OBSERVED. 179


g


Of some who observed not the Saints Festival, and
paid him not due Honour. .


sq)N a place called Simo, in the neighbourhood of
| Pavia, there was a Priest called Reginald, who
ay} ~©=was very devout to St. Francis, and exhorted his
Btechian acs to keep his Feast with great solemnity.
But one of the people, being ignorant of the virtues of
the Saint, set at nought the Priest’s command. He
went out into the field to cut wood, and as he prepared
to work he heard a voice saying to him three times:
“Tt is a Feast: it is not lawful to work.” But neither
the command of the Priest nor the words of the divine
oracle could restrain his rashness ; therefore, the divine
power and the glory of the Saint were shown forth by a
miraculous punishment. For as he held with one hand
the wood which he was about to cut, and in the other the
hatchet which was to cut it, by the divine power both
hands were so firmly attached to what they held that he
could neither open his hands nor stretch out his fingers,
Being then in great astonishment, and knowing not
what to do, he went thus to the church, whither many
accompanied him to see the marvellous prodigy. Pros-
trating himself, therefore, with all humility before the
altar, according to the direction of the Priest, who was
present (for many Priests had come thither to celebrate
the Feast), he humbly made a threefold vow to St.
Francis, corresponding to the three voices which he had
heard: i. That he would always devoutly celebrate his
Festival. ii. That on the day of his Festival he would
always visit that church in which he now was. ii
12—2


180 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


That he would make a pilgrimage in person to the body
of the Saint. Wonderful to relate, no sooner had he
made one vow, than he was able to move one of his
fingers; at the second, another; and at the third, a
third ; and then the whole hand, and afterwards the other
hand; while the great multitude of people who were
gathered together were devoutly imploring mercy from
the Saint. The man, being thus restored to his former
health, of his own accord laid the tools of which he had
made use before the altar of the Saint, where they may
be seen to this day ; and all the people praised God and
extolled the great power of the Saint, who was so mighty
to smite and to heal. And many miracles wrought there
and in many neighbouring places testify to the glory of
the Saint in heaven, and that his Feast should be
devoutly celebrated by all men upon earth.

In the city of Como, on the Feast of St. Francis, a
woman, setting about to spin, stretched her hands out to
the distaff, and took the spindle in her fingers, when her
hands became quite stiff, and she was seized with a
violent pain in her fingers ; when, recognising the power
of the Saint in her punishment, she went with great
compunction of heart to the Friars, And while the
devout sons were praying for her recovery, by the
clemency of the holy Father she was made perfectly
whole. Nor did any pain or scar remain on her hands,
except a slight mark, as of a burn, in memory of the
miracle,

In like manner another woman in the Campagna, a
second in a place called Oleto, and another at Pilci, who
had despised the Saint’s Festival, were miraculously
punished for their error, and on their repentance, by the
merits of St, Francis, were miraculously healed.


THE FESTIVAL OF THE SAINT NOT OBSERVED. 181


A certain soldier at Borgo profanely spoke evil of the
works and miracles of St. Francis, abused the pilgrims
who came to visit his sepulchre, and publicly reproached
the friars with foolish words. Now, it happened one
day that, when he was thus assailing the honour of the
Saint, he added to his other sins this detestable blas-
phemy: “If it be true,” he said, “that this Francis is
a Saint, let me now die, and if he be not a Saint I shall
remain uninjured.” The anger of God was not slow to
inflict a due punishment upon a prayer thus made in
sin, for not long afterwards, as this blasphemer was in-
sulting one of his nephews, the young man drew his
sword and pierced him to the heart: and thus on that
same day died this miserable slave of hell and son of
darkness, that others might learn that the marvellous
works of St. Francis are not to be blasphemously assailed,
but devoutly honoured.

A certain judge, named Alexander, having with a
venomous tongue sought to lessen the devotion to St.
Francis, was, by the judgment of God, deprived of the
use of his tongue, and remained speechless for six years
together. He, being tormented in the member which
had sinned, was moved to great penance, and sorrowed
oreatly that he had spoken against the miracles of the
Saint. Therefore the anger of the merciful Saint was
appeased, and being reconciled to the penitent judge, who
humbly asked his aid, he restored to him his speech;
and thenceforward the tongue which had been full of
curses was consecrated to the honour of the Saint, from
whom he had received this discipline, and at the same
time the grace of devotion,


182 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


Of many Miracles of Various Kinds.


=m\T Galialo was a woman named Mary, who was
| most devout to our Lord and to St. Francis. It

=| happened that on one summer’s day she left

a house in search of necessary food, and the heat being
very great, she began to faint with thirst ; being unable
to find anything to drink, for she was alone on a barren
mountain, she fell upon the ground half dead, and began
fervently and piously to call upon her advocate, St.
Francis. The devout woman persevered long in her
humble prayer, and being overcome with weariness, heat,
and thirst, she fell asleep, when, behold! St. Francis
appeared to her, and, calling her by her name, said to
her: “Arise, and drink this water, which God gives to
thee and to many others.” At these words the wuman
arose from sleep, no little comforted, and taking a stone
which lay near, she broke it, and hollowed out the earth
’ therewith; and then boring with a stick, she came to
living water, which at first appearing but a little stream,
by the divine power grew to an abundant fountain. The
woman drank thereof, and when she had quenched her
thirst, she washed her eyes therewith, which, having
been long dimmed by a weakness of sight, now received
new light and strength. Then the woman ran to her
house and made known the stupendous miracle, to the
glory of St. Francis. Many came from all parts for the
fame of this miracle, and learned by experience the
marvellous virtue of this water; for everyone who
touched it, if he had first confessed his sins, was delivered
thereby from whatsoever disease he had. And even to


MIRACLES OF VARIOUS KINDS. 183


this day this fountain may be seen; and an oratory has
been built in that place in honour of St. Francis.

At St. Jacondo, in Spain, a cherry-tree, belonging to a
worthy man, had withered; and the Saint, against all
hope, restored it to its pristine life, causing it to bring
forth leaves, flowers, and fruit.

All the vineyards in the neighbourhood of Vilesi were
delivered by his marvellous help from the worms and
vermin which preyed upon them.

A Priest, near Valencia, whose granaries were every
year emptied by the moths and other vermin, fervently
implored the help of the Saint, who entirely freed him
from this plague.

The lands of a nobleman in Apulia having been com-
mended to his care, he preserved them entirely from the
grubs which infested all the neighbouring fields,

There was a certain man named Martin, who, having
led his cattle to pasture, at some distance from his house,
the leg of one of them was so grievously broken that it
seemed past remedy. Desiring to bind up the leg and
set it, and having no bandage for the purpose, he went
back to his house to find one, committing his ox, in the
meantime, to the care and custody of St. Francis, be-
seeching him with great confidence that he would not
suffer it to be devoured by the wolves during his absence.
The next morning he returned early to his ox, bringing
the butcher with him, and found it quietly grazing, so
perfectly restored to health that he could not discern the
broken leg from the others. And so he returned thanks
to the Good Shepherd who had so lovingly cared for and
cured his beast.

This humble Saint is wont to succour all those who
call upon him in any necessity, however trifling it may


184 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI.


be. For he restored to a man of Amiterno a horse which
had been stolen from him; and toa woman of Interduco,
who had let fall a basin upon the ground, and broken it
into many pieces, he restored it whole. He also made
whole a ploughshare belonging to a man named Mark,
at Olmo, which had been broken in pieces.

In the diocese of Subina there was an old woman,
eighty years of age, whose daughter died, leaving a child
at the breast. This poor old woman was full of trouble,
and knew not whither to turn, for she had no milk, nor
could she find any woman to give suck to the child.
The infant was wasting away, when one night, being
abandoned by all human aid, she turned, full of tears, to
St. Francis, imploring his aid, when the lover of inno-
cence suddenly stood before her, and said to her: “ Oh,
woman, I am Francis, whom, with so many tears, thou
hast invoked. Place the child’s mouth at thy breast,
for the Lord will give thee milk in abundance.’”’ The.
old woman did according to the command of the Saint,
and forthwith the breasts of a woman of eighty were
filled with great abundance of milk. The marvellous
gift of the Saint was soon made known abroad, and
many, both men and women, came together to the sight,
nor could the tongue deny that to which the eye bore
witness, so that all were moved to praise God with
marvellous and loving devotion for the power of His
Saint. 3

In Spoleto a man and his wife had one only son, over
whom they mourned continually as the misfortune of
their house. For his arms were attached to his neck,
his knees joined to his breast, and his feet to his thighs,
so that he seemed rather like a brute monster than a
human being. The mother, in the greatness of her


MIRACLES OF VARIOUS KINDS. 185


affliction, turned with continual weeping to Christ, and
invoked the aid of St. Francis, that he would be pleased
to help her in her misery and shame. One night when
she had fallen into a deep sleep for very sorrow, St.
Francis appeared to her, and, comforting her with sweet
words, he bade her carry her child to a place hard by,
which was dedicated to his name, and there to bathe him
in the water of the well, so should he recover perfect
health in the Name of the Lord. But she neglecting
to fulfil the command of the Saint, he appeared to her
a second time, and repeated the same. Then he ap-
peared to her again the third time, and led the woman
with her child to the gate of the aforesaid place, guiding
them himself; and certain noble matrons, who were
going thither from devotion, hearing from this woman
of the vision she had seen, went with her to the friars
and presented the child to them, and when they came to
the well the noblest of the company bathed it therein
with their own hands, when the limbs immediately
returned to their place, the child was made whole, and
the greatness of the miracle filled all men with amaze-
ment,

At Chora in the diocese of Ostia, there was a man
whose leg was so diseased that he could neither walk
nor move. Being in great anguish, and despairing of
all human aid, he began one night to lament himself
to St. Francis, as if he had been present, crying: ‘‘ St.
Francis, help me! remember the devout service I have
ever rendered thee, for I have made thee ride upon mine
ass, I have kissed thy holy hands and feet, and was
always most devout and loving to thee, and now by the
grievous pain of this leg 1am nigh unto death.” Moved
by his complaints, St. Francis appeared to him, in com-


186 LIFE OF ST. FRANCIS OF ASSISI,


pany with one of his friars, and being mindful of the
benefits received from the poor man, and grateful for
his devotion, he told him that he had come at his desire,
and had brought aremedy to healhim. Then he touched
the place of the disease with a little rod, shaped like
the letter Tau, and the ulcer broke, and he was restored
to perfect health. What is more marvellous still, he
left upon the healed wound the sacred sign of Taw
impressed as a memorial of this great miracle. For
with this sign St. Francis was wont to sign his letters,
which in his charity he wrote to anyone.

And now, behold, as the mind is distracted by the
variety of the divers miracles related in this history of
the glorious St. Francis, it seems that not without a
divine purpose, nor without the consent and will of the
glorious Standard-bearer, we come to speak of that holy
sign Jaw. For we may consider that as to him, when
he followed Christ militant on earth, it was by the cross _
that he merited salvation, so now that he triumphs, with
Christ is the Cross, the faithful witness of his honour.
For this great and marvellous mystery of the Cross, in
whose sublime depths are hidden infinite graces and all
the treasures of the wisdom and knowledge of God, this
mystery which is hidden from the wise and prudent of
this world, was to this simple man of Christ so plainly
revealed that all his life long he ever followed the foot-
steps of that Cross, nor did he ever enjoy any sweetness
but in the Cross, nor preach any glory but of the Cross:
so that from the very beginning of his conversion he
could say with the Apostle: “God forbid that I should
glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ ;” and
no less truly could he add in his after-life: “Those who
shall follow this rule shall have peace and mercy :” and


MIRACLES OF VARIOUS KINDS, 187


lastly, in the end, he could say most truly: “I bear in
my body the Stigmata of the Lord Jesus.” And let it
be our daily desire to hear from him: “The grace of
our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit, brethren.
Amen.”

Triumph and glory, therefore, now securely, in the
glory of the Cross, O glorious Standard-bearer of Christ ;
for, beginning from the Cross, thou didst go onward
according to the rule of the Cross; and being made
perfect by the Cross, the faithful have learnt what is thy
glory in heaven by the testimony of the Cross.

Securely let them follow thee who have come out of
Egypt, who have passed through the sea divided by the
rod of Christ’s Cross, and who, going forward through the
desert, are carried by the marvellous power of that same
holy Cross through the Jordan of our mortality to the
Promised Land of the Living. Whither may Jesus
Christ, the true Leader and Saviour of His people, bring
us all by the merits of His servant Francis! To the
praise and glory of Him Who liveth and reigneth, Three
Persous in One God, for ever and ever. Amen,


THE END,
