Issue and Sale of Bonds: Report on the Rothschild-Morgan Bond Contract (1895) (U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means, 1895)
================================================================================================================================================
Congressional Serial Set, Issue 3346 — House Report No. 1824, 53d Congress, 3d Session: 'Issue and Sale of Bonds,' ordered printed 13 February 1895, reporting the joint resolution with the Rothschild-Morgan syndicate contract. Public domain (U.S. government document).

53D ConGREsS, ) HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES. ie a 
3a Session. No. 1824. 


ISSUE AND SALE OF BONDS. 


FEBRUARY 13, 1895.—Committed to the Committee of the Whole House on the state 
of the Union and ordered to be printed. 


Mr. WILSON, of West Virginia, from the Committee on Ways and 
Means, submitted the following 


REPORT: 


[To accompany H. Res. 275.) 


The Committee on Ways and Means, to whom was referred the mes- 
sage of the President of the United States communicated to Congress 
on the 8th day of February, having had the same under consideration, 
herewith report a joint resolution authorizing the Secretary of the 
Treasury to issue, sell, and. dispose of bonds of the United States to 
an amount not exceeding $65,116,275, bearing interest at a rate not 
exceeding 3 per cent per annum, principal and interest payable in gold 
coin of the present standard of weight and fineness, said bonds to be 
made payable not more than thirty years after date. 

The message of the President, which is herewith appended, commu- 
nicates to the House the condition of the reserve of gould in the Treas- 
ury available for the redemption of the Government’s legal-tender notes 
and the maintenance of the parity of its coin circulation, and the rea- 
sons which compel at the present time an issue of bonds to replenish 
and maintain that reserve; also the general terms of a contract, made 
under authority of section 3700 of the Revised Statutes, for the pur- 
chase and delivery to the Treasury of a sum slightly in excess of 
$65,000,000 of gold coin, to be added to the stock in the Treasury, 
which amounts to only $42,217,081.95 at the present time. 

The committee have had the benefit of a conference with the Secre- 
tary of the Treasury, who exhibited to them the original contract 
entered into by himself on the 8th day of February and explained its 
details to them. A full and complete copy of said contract is hereto 
added. From a reading of this paper it will be seen that the arrange- 
ment of the Secretary with the parties to this contract effects the pur- 
chase of 3,500,000 ounces of standard gold coin of the United States 
(amounting to 865,116,275), at least one-half of which shall be obtained 
in and shipped from Europe. 

For this gold coin he has contracted to issue to the parties furnish- 
ing it, under authority of the act for the resumption of specie payments, 
approved January 14, 1875, 4 per cent thirty-year coin -bonds of the 
United States, at a price which realizes to them interest at the rate of 
3% per cent. But the Secretary of the Treasury has reserved the right, 
if authority be given him by Oongress, to substitute at par any bonds 
of the United States bearing 3 per cent: interest, of which the principal 
and interest shall be specifically payable in United States gold coin of 
the present weight and fineness, said substitution, however, to be 
made within ten days from the date of the contract. 


2 ISSUE AND 8ALE OF BONDS. 


It is the object of the joint resolution herewith reported to give te 
the Secretary of the Treasury authority to substitute such bonds tothe 
amount of the contract. 

The saving to be effected to the Government, as set forth in the 
President’s message, will be $539,159 per year for every year the 3 per 
cent bonds run, and of the amount of $16,174,770 should they run thirty 
years. As itis not believed by the committee that the issue of bonds 
specifically payable in gold will impose any additional burden or lia 
bility upon the Government than if t ey are made payable in coin, 
under its pledge and policy to preserve the parity of the coins in the 
two metals, the saving of this large amount becomes a matter of sub- 
stantial moment and advantage to the Government; and as the parties 
to take the bonds are under contract to furnish gold coin for them it 
seems no hardship on the Government to contract to pay them back in 
the same coin that they furnish to it. 


APPENDIX, 
PRESIDENTS MESSAGE. 


To the Congress of the United States: 


Since my recent communication to the Congress, calling attention to our financial 
condition and suggesting legislation which I deemed essential to our national wel- 
fare and a anni the anxiety and apprehension then existing in business circles have 
continued. 

As 4 precaution, therefore, against the failure of timely legislative aid through 
Congressional action, cautious-preparations have been pending to employ to the best 
possible advantage, in default of better means, such executive authority ae may, 
without additional legislation, be exercised for the purpose of reenforcing and main- 
tuining in our Treasury an adequate and safe gold reserve. 

In the judgment of those especially charged with this responsibility, the business 
situation is so critical and the legislative situation is so unpromising, with the omis- 
sion thus far on the part of Congress to beneficially enlarge the powers of the Sec- 
retary of the Treasury in the premises, as to enjoin immediate execative action with 
the facilities now at hand. 

Therefore, in pursuance of section 3700 of the Revised Statutes, the details of an 
arrangement have this day been concluded with parties abundantly able to fulfill 
their undertaking, whereby bonds of the United States, authorized under the act of 
July 14, 1875, payable in coin thirty years after their date, with interest at the rate 
of 4 ie cent per annum, to the amount of a little less than $62,400,000, are to be 
issued for the purchase of gold coin, amounting to a sum slightly in excess of 
$65,000,000, to be delivered to the Treasury of the United States, which sum, added 
to the gold now held in our reserve, will so restore such reserve as to make it amount 
to something more than $100,000,000. Such a premium is to be allowed to the Gov- 
erument upon the bonds as to fix the rate of interest upon the amount of gold real- 
ized at 33 per cent perannum. At least one-half of the gold to be obtained is to be 
supplied from abroad, which is a very important and favorable feature of the trans- 
action. 

The privilege is especially reserved to the Government to substitute at par, within 
ten Ri from this date, in lieu of the 4 per cent coin bonds, other bonds in terms 
payable in gold and bearing only 3 per cent interest, if the issue of the same should 
in the meantime be authorized by the Congress. 

The arrangement thus completed, which, after careful inquiry, appears in present 
circumstances and considering all the objects desired to be the best attainable, 
develops such a difference in the estimation of investors between bonds made pay- 
able in coin and those specifically made payable in gold in favor of the latter as is 
represented by three-fourths of a cent in annual interest. In the agreement just 
concluded the annual saving in interest to the Government, if 3 pe# cent gold bonds 
should be substituted for 4 per cent coin bonds under the privilege reserved, would 
peer amounting in thirty years, or at the maturity of the coin bonds, to 

’ ’ . 

Of course there never should be a doubt in any quarter ae to the gas J dea in 

gold of the bonds of the Government which are made payable in coin. Therefore 


ISSUE AND SALE OF BONDS. 3 


the discrimination, in the judgment of investors, between our bond obligations pay- 
able in coin and those specifically made payable in gold is very significant. It is 
hardly necessary to suggest that, whatever may be our views on the subject, the sen- 
timents or preferences of those with whom we must negotiate in disposing of our 
bonds for gold are not subject to our dictation. 

I have only to add that in my opinion the transaction herein detailed for the infor- 
mation of the Congress promises better results than the efforts previously made in the 
direction of effectively adding to our gold reserve through the sale of bonds; and I 
believe it will tend, as far as such action can in present circumstances, to meet the 
determination expressed in the law repealing the silver-purchasing clause of the act 
of July 14, 1890, and that, in the language of such repealing act, the arrangement 
made will aid our efforts to ‘‘insure the maintenance of the parity in value of the 
coins of the the two metals and the equal power of every dollar at all times in the 
markets and in the payment of debts.” 

GROVER CLEVELAND. 

EXECUTIVE MANSION, February 8, 1895. 


CONTRACT. 


This agreement entered into this eighth day of February, 1895, between the Sec- 
retary of the Treasury of the United States, of the first part, and Messrs. August 
Belmont and Company, of New York, on behalf of Messrs. N. M. Rothschild and Sons, 
of London, England, and themselves, and Messrs. J. P. Morgan and Company, of 
New York, on behalf of Messrs. J. 8. Morgan and Company, of London, and them- 
selves, parties of the second part. 

Witnesseth: Whereas it is provided by the Revised Statutes of the United States 
(section 3700) that the Secretary of the Treasury may purchase coin with any of 
the bonds or notes of the United States authorized by law, at such rates and upon 
such terms as he may deem most advantageous to the public interests; and the Sec- 
retary of the Treasury now deems that an emergency exists in which the public 
interests require that, as hereinafter provided, coin shall be purchased with the 
bonds of the United States, of the description hereinafter mentioned, authorized to 
be issued under the act entitled ‘An act to provide for the resumption of specie 
payments,” approved January 14, 1875, being bonds of the United States described 
in an Act of Congress a eh July 14, 1870, entitled ‘“‘An act to authorize the 
refunding of the national debt.” 

Now, therefore, the said parties of the second part hereby agree to sell and deliver 
to the United States three million five hundred thousand ounces of standard gold 
coin of the United States, at the rate of $17.80441 per ounce, payable in United 
States four per cent thirty-year coupon or registered bonds, said bonds to be dated 
February 1, 1895, and payable at the pleasure of the United States after thirty years 
from date, issued under the acts of Congress of July 14, 1870, January 20, 1871, and 
Haina 14, 1875, bearing interest at the rate of four per cent per annum, payable 

uarterly. 

: First.—Such purchase and sale of gold coin being made on the following condi- 
tions: 

(1) At least one-half of all coin deliverable hereinunder shall be obtained in and 
shipped from Europe, but the shipments shall not be required toexceed three hundred 
ne ounces per month, unless the parties of the second part shall consent 
thereto. 

(2) All deliveries shall be made at any of the subtreasuries or at any other legal 
depository of the United States. 

(3) All gold coins delivered shall be received on the basis of twenty-tive and eight- 
tenths grains of standard gold per dollar, if within limit of tolerance. 

(4) Bonds delivered under this contract are tu be delivered free of accrued inter- 
est, which is to be assuined and paid by the parties of the second part at the time 
of their delivery to them. 

Second. —Should the Secretary of the Treasury desire to offer or sell any bonds of 
the United States on or before the first day of October, 1895, he shall first offer the 
same to the parties of the second pa but thereafter he shall be free from every 
such obligation to the parties of the second part. 

Third.—The Secretary of the Treasnry hereby reserves the right, within ten days 
from the date hereof, in case he shall receive authority from Congress therefor, to 
substitute any bonds of the United States, bearing three per cent interest, of which 
the principal and interest shall be specifically payable in United States gold coin 
of the present weight and fineness for the bonds herein alluded to; such three per 
cent bonds to be accepted by the parties of the second part at par, i.e.: at $18.60465 
per ounce of standard gold. 


4 ISSUE AND SALE OF BONDS. 


Fourth.—No bonds shall be delivered to the parties of the second part, or either of 
them, except in payment for coin from time to time received hereunder; whereupon 
the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States shall and will deliver the bonds 
as herein provided, at such places as shall be designated by the parties of the second 

art. Any expense of delivery out of the United States shall be assumed and paid 
by the parties of the second part. 

Fifth.—In consideration of the purchase of such coin, the parties of the second 

art, and their associates hereunder, assume and will bear all the expense and inev- 
itable loss of ea solv from Europe hereunder; and, as far as lies in their power, 
will exert all financial influence and will make all legitimate efforts to protect the 
Treasury of the United States against the withdrawals of gold pending the complete 
performance of this contract. 

In witness whereof the parties hereto have hereunto set their hands in five parts 
this 8th day of February, 1895. 

J. G. CARLISLE, 
Secretary of the Treasury. 


AUGUST BELMONT & Co., 
On behalf of Messrs. N. M. Rothschild § Sons, London, and themselves. 


J.P. MoRGAN & Co., 
east On behalf of Messrs. J. S. Morgan §- Co., London, and themselves. 
st: 


W. E. Currvis. 
FRANCIS LYNDE STETSON 


VIEWS OF THE MINORITY. 


Owing to the limited time allowed for preparing a report, it being 
necessary to file the report within a few hours after the bill was agreed 
upon, the undersigned dissenting members of the committee are pre- 
cluded from presenting their views with that elaboration which the 
importance of the subject would otherwise justify; but they beg to 
state briefly the most important reason which lead them to disapprove 
of the measure recommended by the majority of the committee. 

First. The issue of bonds of any kind is only needed to replenish the 
gold reserve, and the gold reserve only needs replenishing because 
the Secretary of the Treasury redeems United States notes and Treas- 
ury notes in the kind of coins selected by the note holder. The note 
holder has no legal right to choose the coin in which the obligation shall be 
redeemed, but has been permitted to exercise that right by a policy 
inaugurated by the Treasury Department at or soon after the date of 
the resumption of specie payment. The opinion of the Secretary of the 
Treasury, Mr. Carlisle, recently given is clear upon this point. On the 
21st of January, 1895, a statement was made before the House Com- 
mittee on Appropriations by Secretary Carlisle, in a printed report of 
which will be found the following question and answer: 

Mr. SIBLEY. I would like to ask you (perhaps not entirely connected with the 
matter under discussion) what objection there could be to having the option of 
redeeming either in silver or gold lie with the Treasury instead of the note holderf 

Secre CaRLISLE. If that policy had been adopted at the beginning of resump- 
tion—and I am not saying this for the purpose of criticising the action of any of my 
piovcceees or anybody else—but if the policy of reserving to the Government, at the 

ginning of resumption, the option of redeeming in gold or silver all its paper pre- 
sented, I believe it would have worked beneficially, and there would have nD no 
trouble growing out of it, but the Secretaries of the Treasury from the beginning of 
resumption have pursued a policy of redeeming in gold or silver, at the option of 
the holder of the paper, and if any Secretary had rwards attempted to see 
that policy and force ailver upon & man who wanted gold, or gold upon a man who 
wanted silver, and especially if he had made that attempt at such a critical period 
as we have had in the last two years, my judgment is it would have been very dis- 
astrous. There is a vast difference between establishing a policy at the noganits 
and reversing a policy after it has been long established, and especially r the 
situation has been changed. 


No one contends that the executive department of the Government 
can bind the Government or pledge its faith and credit by the adoption 
of such a policy. Toso hold would be to assert that the Executive can 
make and repeal laws without the concurrence of the Senate and House 
of Representatives. Believing that the Secretary of the Treasury has 
now by law the right to redeem legal-tender notes by the payment of 
either gold or silver coin, whichever is most convenient for the Govern- 
ment, and believing that the exercise of this discretion by the Secretary 
of the Treasury is absolately necessary to protect the Government from 
organized and unorganized raids upon the coin reserve, we are not will- 

§ 


6 ISSUE AND SALE OF BONDS. 


ing to indorse, directly or by implication, the administrative policy 
which has precipitated the present financial conditions. Neither are 
we willing, by authorizing bonds for the purchase of gold, to pledge 
the Government to a policy which discriminates against silver as a 
standard money and recognizes gold as the only money ot ultimate 
redemption. So longas the note holder is allowed to choose the coin in 
which he is to be paid, so long will it be futile to attempt to maintain a 
gold reserve. 

Recent experience shows that gold secured by the issue of bonds is 
at once drawn out by those who are interested in having more bonds 
issued, and thus the public debt is increased to the detriment of the 
taxpayer and for the benefit only of those who desire a safe invest. 
ment for surplus funds. We do not believe that any real advantage 
will be gained by securing the gold abroad. 

It is urged that a change of policy at this time will cause embarrass- 
ment. If that be true the blame must be borne by those who first 
inaugurated the policy and by those who have adhered to it in spite of 
the clear intent and letter of the law. We have only to consider 
whether it is wiser to resume an exercise of rights preserved by exist- 
ing laws or to aggravate our present difficulties by delaying relief and 
entering upon new experiments. We have no hesitation in declaring 
it as our conviction that there is no remedy permanent in character or 
promising in results except an immediate exercise by the Secretary of 
the Treasury of the right to redeem United States notes and Treasury 
notes in standard silver coin whenever it is more convenient for the 
Government to do so, and we further believe that the greatest dangers 
which can possibly attend such a course are infinitely less than the 
evils which are certain to follow an adherence to the present policy. 

Second. If we were willing to authorize the issue of bonds at this 
time to purchase gold, we would still be opposed to bonds payable 
specifically in gold, because an issue of such bonds would either pledge 
the Government to the redemption of all obligations in gold or make a 
discrimination against coin obligations now outstanding. There is no 
question that the issue of gold bonds now would at once be followed 
by a demand for an act making existing bonds payable in gold, and it. 
would be urged that it would be disastrous to depart from the policy 
of gold bonds when once inaugurated, just as it is now urged that it 
will be «lisastrous for the Government to resume a discretion which has 
been temporarily surrendered to the noteholder. 

It is impossible to overestimate the evil influence which would be 
exerted by the issue of gold bonds by the Government, because such 
action would naturally and necessarily encourage, if not actually com- 
pel the issue of gold bonds by all public and private corporations and 
the making of gold contracts by individuals generally. Such an 
increased strain upon gold would manifest itself in a further rise in 
the purchasing power of the dollar and in a further and distressing 
addition to the load of debt now borne by the people. 

Third. If we were in favor of an issue of gold bonds we would still 
be opposed to the issue of bonds running for thirty years. According 
to the terms of the contract the bond purchasers agree to accept 3 per 
cent gold bonds without mentioning the date of payment, but it can 
not be doubted that the purchasers will insist upon a thirty-year bond 
: Zeer is given to the Secretary of the Treasury to issue such a 

ond. 

Fourth. If we were willing to authorize the issue of thirty-year gold 
bonds we would still be opposed to recognizing or ratifying a contract 


ISSUE AND SALE OF BONDS. q 


as harsh in its terms and as imperious in its demands as the contract 
insisted upon by the bond purchasers. 

Fifth. If we were willing to approve of such a contract under ordi- 
nary circumstances we would still be opposed to approving it when 
made by a sovereign government with foreign financiers under circum- 
stances which suggest a desire upon the part of the subjects of another 
country to purchase a change in the fihancial policy of this nation for a 
sum stated. 

These are some of the reasons which lead us to withhold our support 
from the measure recommended by a majority of the committee, and 
they are, in our judgment, sufficient to justify our dissent. If furthe 
reasons were necessary they might be found in the fact that the con- 
tract provides for the sale of coin bonds at about 1043, which would sel) 
in the market at about 119; in the fact that the contract agrees to sel) 
thirty-year gold bonds, drawing 3 per cent interest, for less than the 
Government three months ago sold twelve-year coin bonds, and in the 
additional fact that foreign investors are by the contract given a pref- 
erence over American investors in the purchase of any bonds which 
may be issued before next October, and are also given a preference 
how over the American investors who but a short time ago stood ready 
to purchase more bonds than were then offered. 


WILLIAM J. BRYAN. 
JUSTIN R. WHITING. 


Mr. MOMILLIN and Mr. WHEELER, of Alabama, while dissenting 
from the majority of the committee, reserve an expression of their 
views until they have an opportunity to present them more at length 
upon the floor of the House. 


o
