Pyramid Facts and Fancies (Bonwick, 1877)
=========================================
James Bonwick — Pyramid Facts and Fancies (London, 1877), public domain. The Victorian survey of every pyramid theory then current, pro and con. Scan via Internet Archive (pyramidfactsand00bonwgoog). Raw OCR, not proofread.


PYRAMID FACTS MD FANCIES.


BY THE SA^IE AUTHOIl.


The Tasmanian Lily. With Frontispiece. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price bs.

Mike Howe, the Bushranger of Van Diemen's
Land. With Frontispiece. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5«.

Preparing for Early Publication :

The Religion and Learning of the Ancient
Eg^yptians.


C. Kegan Paul & Co., London.


PYRAMID FACTS


AND FANCIES,


BY


JAMES BONWICK, F.R.G.S.

AUTHOR OP " THE TASMANIAN LILY,"
"the discovery and SETTLEMENT OP PORT PHILLIP," ETC.


. JAN 'F7rt .


LoNDOX:
i C. Keg AN Paul & Co., 1, Paternosteb, Square.

1877.
/in I "


f- 'n


R. CLAT, SONS, AMD TAYLOR,
BREAD STREET HILL, QUEEN VICTORIA STREET.


[2^ J^hts of Translation and of Reproduction art reserved.}


PREFACE.


Long interested as I had been in the Great Pyramid,
the reading of recent pyramid literature in the free and
sunny land of Australia quickened ray desire to explore
the building itself. A sojourn by the Nile, and subsequent
study, led me to use my pen.

With so many books on Egypt already published, the
only apology for my authorship is that no small work of
condensed information upon pyramids has yet appeared.

To Prof. Piazzi Smyth belongs the honour of popularis-
ing the pyramid. Although failing to receive his theories,
I respect his learning, reverence his motives, and am
grateful for his labours. The French savans have been
particularly interested in the pyramids, and have written
so well as to become leading authorities.

The question of " Why was it built ? '* has been here
answered in nearly fifty difierent reported teachings from
the rocky tomb. The divergence of opinion, while ex-
citing a smile, illustrates the marvellous suggestiveness of
the grand old edifice. The writer has no special ideas of
his own to propound, but simply claims the merit of col-
lecting intelligence for those whose time and opportunities
will not warrant research.


VI PREFACE.

A second work, as a necessary sequel to this, is in course
of preparation. It will treat of "The Religion and
Learning of the Ancient Egyptians." The symbolism of
faith 6000 years ago cannot be unimportant to thoughtful
persons now. The investigation of opinions existing at
so remote a period may throw a light upon some views
entertained in this day.

James Bonwick.

Vale of Healthy Hawpsteady Londoriy
Aug, 28, 1877.


CONTENTS.


"What is the Great Pyramid 1

The Trench

The Causeway

How it was built

The Steps ...

The Size ...

The Casing

The Top ...

The Name ...

The Opening

The Passages

The Well ...

The Gallery

The Queen's Chamber

The King's Chamber

The Sarcophagus

The Chambers of Construction

The Inscriptions

The Subterranean Chamber . . .

The Blocking up

When was the Pyramid built 1
Who built the Great Pyramid]
Smaller Pyramids op Gizeh
Other Egyptian Pyramids
Other Monumental Tombs
Obelisks
The Sphinx
Why was the Pyramid built]

1. Barrier against Desert Sands

2. Satan's Seat

3. Imitation of Noah's Ark

4. Filtering Reservoirs
6. To please the Women

6. The Queen of Sheba's Gifts ...

7. Joseph's Granaries


PAGE
1

7
7
9
10
12
14
18
20
22
25
29
31
34
35
39
45
46
50
53

61
70

80

87

96

100

105

110

110
111
111
111
111
\VL


Vlll CONTENTS.

PAGB

8. Display of RoyaJ Despotism ... ... ... 113

9. Preservation of Learning from Deluge ... ... 114

10. Tomb of the King ... ... ... ... 119

11. Standard of Weights and Measures ... ... ... 126

ASTRONOMICAL TEACHING.

1 2. Astronomical Observatory ... ... ... ... 144

13. Tells its own Latitude ... ... ... ... 145

14. Its own Age ... ... ... ... ... 146

15. Circumference of the Earth ... ... ... 149

16. Tme Shape of the Earth ... ... ... ... 152

17. Density of the Earth ... ... ... ... 153

18. Distance of the Sun ... ... ... ... 154

19. Days in a Year ... ... ... ... ... 155

20. Law of Gravitation ... ... ... ... 158

21. Time of Descent to Sun ... ... ... ... 158

22. Planetary Distances ... ... ... ... 159

23. Rise of a Polar Star ... ... ... ... 160

24. The Equinoxes ... ... ... ... 165

25. Precession of the Equinoxes ... .. ... 166

26. Connection with Sirius ... ... ... ... 168

RELIGIOUS TEACHING.

27. Unity of God ... ... ... ... ... 170

28. Divine Origination of Measure ... ... .. 171

29. Inspiration for certain teaching ... ... ... 173

30. Memorial of the Deluge ... ... ... ... 175

31. The Sabbath ... ... ... ... ... 176

32. Model for Mosaic Institutions ... ... ... 177

33. A Messianic Monument ... ... ... ... 178

34. Type of Christ and His Church ... ... ... 181

35. The Millennium ... ... ... ... ... 182

SCIENTIFIC AND MYSTIC TEACHING.

36. Rise and Fall of Land in Egypt ... ... ... 192

37- Illustrate Geometric Truth ... ... ... ... 197

38. Proportion of Diameter and Circumference ... ... 197

39. Quadrature of the Circle ... ... ... ... 199

40. Part of Pyramidal System ... ... ... ... 202

41. Agreement with Causeway ... ... ... ... 209

42. Typify the Generative Principle ... ... ... 210

43. Emblem of Sun and Fire ... ... ... ... 211

44. Egyptian Religious Rites ... ... ... ... 216

45. Mysteries of Life ... ... ... ... ... 218

46. A Masonic Hall ... ... ... ... ... 219

47. Merelationa to Mystics ... ... ... ... 221


PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID?

Every one knows that tlie Great Pyramid has a square base
and four triangular faces or sides, though not coming quite to a
point at the top. Julius Solinus teUs the world that "the
pyramids are sharp-pointed towers in Egypt, exceeding aU height
which may be made by man." Ammianus Marcellinus echoes
the same idea, saying, "the pyramids are towers erected
altogether exceeding the height which may be made by man.
In the bottom they are broadest, ending in sharp points at the
top, which figure is, therefore, by geometricians called pyramidal."
Propertius talked of their leading up to the stars.

While astonishing the ancients by its. vast dimensions, the
pyramid failed to excite much interest further in the minds of
Greek and Eoman writers. Some modems are hardly astonished at
it any way. Major Furlong merely calculates that it would now
cost a million of pounds to build. M. Grobert, artillery officer
under Bonaparte in Egypt, could not understand the fuss a few
Mavans made about it. In his official report, he says, " Travellers


2 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

have not entertained their readers about these pyramids. Their
construction is rude and not very remarkable/' Denon, who
brought out, under JSTapoleon Bonaparte's patronage, the most
magnificent work ever published on Egypt, was just sufl&ciently
interested in the subject to acknowledge in his book, "We
had only two hours to be at the pyramids."

Yet there are others who look upon the edifice as an echo
of the Past, Every stone in the fabric has a weird look. The
very outline seems to melt into the blue sky against which it
reposes. On it, around it, and within it, the spiritual eye sees
forms not now of earth. The ear is supematuraUy quickened,
and the heart pulses in sympathy with the men that were, and
are. It is not the object of undefined dread, but of nameless
soul attraction. To such enthusiasts the pyramid is alive, and
they wait anxiously for expected revelations from it.

Those there have been, and still are, who regard that building
as suggesting what it did to the Cambridge Christian Advocate,
Mr. Hardwick : — " There if ever," says he, " we may hope to
find the master-clue which is to guide us through the intricacies
of primaeval history, reveal afresh the hopes and fears which
then were struggling in the human bosom, and resolve for us, it
may be, many an arduous problem which concerns the origin,
the early wanderings, and the final destiny of man."

For the present we have to dismiss romance and sentiment,
and discuss the material question of the pyramid itself.

Strong as it is-r-the embodiment of strength — it is not everlast-
ing. The elements may prove to be kinder than man. The almost
cloudless skies of Egypt have smiled upon the ruins of the old
land, as if cherishing the remains of what the destroying hand
of man has spared. As contending sects in the primitive days


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYEAMID? 3

of Christendom not only destroyed life, but the books of the
opposite party, so rising dynasties of Egypt have sought
revenge in the destruction of edifices erected by their adver-
saries. Every change of religion has meant the mutilation of
art symbols. The god dethroned spiritually beheld his very
name removed from monuments.

It has been the habit to abuse the Turk for the ruin of ruins
in Egypt. History does not substantiate the charge. The
cultored Semitic race, the Saracens, are more open to the reproof.
Turkish pashas have ruled since Western European travellers
visited the Nile ; and not until the days of Mehemet Ali, of
the European Albanian race, were these devastations known to
any great extent. Mr. Gliddon declares that " until 1820 little
injury had been done to the ruins." And this Vandalism has
followed the presumed law of progress. The crushing of these
glorious trophies of ancient civilisation has been in accordance
with Western Ideas, Money was to be made. Money must be
made. Money can be made by the breaking up of temples,
and the using of their stones for sugar factories. And the
progressive and much-extolled pasha broke up the temples and
raised the sugar-houses.

In the sad lament of Mr. Gliddon, and his appeal to the
really civilised for moral help against the barbarian, we read
that three temples went to build the the factory of Esn^, a part
of Dendera temple for a saltpetre factory, the temple of Abydos
for a bridge, the temple of Latou for a quay, and that the very
chambers of the Nilometer were invaded. The temple of
Syene then disappeared. The sixty-six steps which remained of
tiie noble staircase of Elephantine were then missed. The foot
of the great pyramid was a quarry for this Albanian u.tilitA2t\d.\i.
5 ^ ^


4 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

*' Twenty years ago," said Mr. Gliddon in 1842, that neighbour-
hood "abounded in legends and tablets, supplying many
vacuums in history ; scarcely one remainsJ^

The very pyramid itself stood in danger. Mehemet Ali, in
1835, proposed to level it, for the sake of the blocks of stone.
He only desisted from the undertaking on learning that it would
be cheaper to quarry in the hill nearer Cairo. An Arab, about
the year 1100, bitterly lamented that " vile and unhappy men "
had broken some of the stones of the pyramids, making, as he
expressed it, "all see baseness and their sordid cupidity."
M. E6nan may well thus cry out in alarm, " The work of Cheops
runs now greater dangers than it has encountered for 6000
years I

A donkey ride of half an hour, or less, from that palace of
comfort, " Shepheard's Hotel," brings one to the Nile bank at Old
Cairo, Fostat, or Babylon. Tradition says that the great
Sesostris, whoever he was, brought captives from Babylon to
settle there, or bmld the city. It is a little beyond the inter-
esting suburb of Boulaq, where the indefatigable and intel-
ligent Mariette Bey has established his wonderful Egyptian
Museum, tillbetter quarters, long since promised, can be provided,

Cairo is one of the most delightful of residences, with a
climate most enjoyable and healthful during the greater part
of the year. In spite of certain oriental squalor, clinging to
oriental romances everywhere, it is a city of palaces and luxury.
The European element has long dominated in its architecture
and customs, though these are mostly French, as they are
Italian in Alexandria. Money can there procure every Parisian
indulgence, and gratify every sensual desire. The place is fast
becoming popular with the English, vho are more admired


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 5

by the natives than other foreigners, because reputed more
liberal in payment and more true to promise. Again and again
has the writer heard the wish expressed that the English, and
not the Kbedive, ruled in the land.

Egypt under the English would recover its lost dominion.
Li India we have learned, at last, and to some appreciable
extent, how to govern native races. The Turks in 400 years .
made small progress in the work. "We have had but 200 years
to learn the lesson, and have, according to some, made little
advance. While condemning the Turk for despising the simple
fellah of Egypt, the wily Greek, and the stolid Bulgarian, it is
not for us to throw the stone while our Christian and educated
countrymen in India call high-class Brahmins and other refined
Hindoos by the contemptuous name of Niggers, It marks no
more conciliatory policy.

Perhaps there is not a people anywhere more hopeful than
the Egyptian. He is industrious, he loves the soil, he is patient,
he is teachable, he is intelligent, and he is grateful for kindness.
More than all, he has the blood of a noble ancestry. He is the
offspring of a wonderful, though by-gone, civilisation. The
oppression of foreigners for 2500 years has failed to crush his
spirit, which seems as merry, buoyant, and free as the 5000
years old pictures display it to have been.

Professedly Mahometan, but never bigoted, they accepted the

*

faith of Mahomet when conquered by Saracens from Arabia, as
they submitted to bow to the Cross when commanded by Chris-
tian authorities. Passive obedience has been the distinguishing
trait of the Egyptians from the earliest of times. Who can tell
what changes for the better will come from the government of
the energetic, seK-willed, self-impressing, progressive En^lialasx^^sA


6 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

What a future for Africa to contemplate, should Egypt be our
colony in the north, as the Cape in the south )

But dismounting from the Pegasus of imagination, let us
look at the pyramid in the most prosaic light.

It is of stone, — granite, marble, and limestone. The granite
and marble are for the lining of passages and chambers. The
main structure is of nummulitic limestone. This is generally
called of Eocene tertiary age. There was an ancient period when
a vast deep sea received an immense deposit, during untold
thousands, or hundreds of thousands of years. It consisted of
sandy debris of older rocks, with limestone concretions ; life,
coralline and molluscous, existed in those warm waters^
Gathering lime homes of various kinds, the animals took them
to their graves in the oozy mud, and Time bound the whole
as stone, and brought up the sea bottom to be a home for new-
bom men, from the pillars of Hercules to beyond the Indus.
The empires of Babylon, Persia, Greece, Kome, of the Saracen,
the Turk, the Moor, the Crusader, and the Pope have rested on
this rock of history. The Babe of Bethlehem slept on it;
the pyramid of Gizeh was bmlt of it.

The fossil life of the stone is marvellous, millions of tene-
ments of beings are therein crowded to a cubic inch or so.
Some of the larger concretions puzzled Herodotus. He settled
it that they were the petrified date-stones of the workmen.
He was equally right in his testimony that outside was a record
of the expenditure of 1,600 talents for onions, &c., provided for
the workmen. But both stories are susceptible of another in-
terpretation. The granite, doubtless, comes from Elephantine
and Syene on the Upper Nile ; as the alabaster from the Khalil
mountains, towards the Ked Sea. The pyramid stones contain


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 7

0'95 carbonate of lime, 0*04 of alumina, and '01 of oxide of
iron. The Libyan hill on which the bmlding stands is of that
stone.

THE TRENCH.

In front of the pyramid is a singular trench, which seems to
have escaped the observation of most travellers. Dr. Richard-
son, in 1816, first drew attention to it, saying, " There is a
broad deep trench cut in the rock at the middle of the east
front of the large pyramid, and running parallel with it. It is
rather broader than a carriage road; it descends toward the
middle from each end, and resembles a carriage entrance to and
from a pond. It is half full of sand, and is entered on the east
side by a channel like a canal for the conveyance of water."
He adds, "I am disposed to consider this is the channel by
which the water of the Nile entered the pyramid."

Mr. Agnew describes two trenches, north and south, and both
parallel to the pyramid. He notices a third hollow, pointing
to the causeway, and extending foi 198 feet. The other two
were equal to it in length. Sir Edmund Beckett, in his
valuable architectural work of 1876, speaks of trenches in the
rock of the pyramid at an angle of 51° 50' ; as he says,
" apparently as models for the slopes on so large a scale as to
avoid the risk of error." He thinks the men would find out
the slope of the face, " and work stones by a template, setting
them by a longer template or level with a plumbline to it."

THE CAUSEWAY.

Herodotus has a long story about the causeway, or raised
road, by which stones, ready prepared, as in the caa^ ol \3cl^


8 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

Jerusalem temple, could he brought from the river to the site ;
the hase level being 140 feet above the upper cubit of the
NUometer at Kouda, or Ehodda, that is, about 130 feet above
the valley of the Nile. This was said to have occupied ten years
in the construction, and to have been faced or cased with stone,
and adorned with hieroglyphics. It was five stadia long.
What was a stadium 1 Some say 600 feet ; a French authority
gives 610 feet ; Mr. Agnewsays 603. This would make it over
3,000 feet long.

Diodorus wrote that it had disappeared in lus day. It is
only another proof of Greek inaccuracy. Professing to see, he
gave only what he heard. Mr. John Greaves, Oxford Professor
of Astronomy in 1637, believed the Greek historian, and did
not look; contenting himself with, "there is nothing now
remaining." Norden, the Dane, was there just a hundred years
after, and noticed what he called the bridge ; " There remains
still a sufficiently considerable part of that admirable bridge to
form a just idea of its whole structure, and of the use they
made of it. There are likewise at the end of the third pyramid
some remains of another bridge."

Pococke saw and described its ruins. An earlier foreigner
gives an account of the remnant of this causeway^ which he
traced toward the Nile for 1,500 feet, when it was lost in the
alluvium. But while he, too, observed traces of one leading to
the third pyramid, he says nothing of one to the second.
Eichardson, when noting it, deemed that it was the road con-
structed by Saladin when he stripped the outer covering of the
pyramid for his bmldings in Cairo. Modem authorities con-
clude that it may be traced E.N.E. of the pyramid for 1,200
leet Agnew expresses this opinion : — " I believe this great


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 9

causeway led up to the eastern side of the great pyramid, and
terminated in front, at 159 feet from the base, or at the
eastern range of the circle describable about the base."

HOW IT WAS BUILT.

One reputed architect has informed the world that the whole
was constructed of pise. Water, by elaborate machinery, was
led up to the required heights to mix with the sand, &c., to set
in blocks of the needed size, and formed themselves tier by
tier in the moulds. Mr. Perring thought scaffoldings were
employed. Sir Gardner Wilkinson refers to the cutting away
of the projecting angles, when they "smoothed the face of
them to a flat inclined surface as they descended.'' This will
meet the difficulty of its being finished downward.

Herodotus, the enigmatical historian, rather than the simple
one, had before given this story. Dr. Lepsius, the German
scholar, has his way of looking at it. " At the commencement
of each reign," says he, "the rock-chamber destined for the
monarch's grave was excavated, and one course of masonry
erected upon it. If the king died in the first year of his reign,
a casing was put upon it, and a pyramid formed ; but if the
king did not die, another course of stone was added above, and
two of the same height and thickness on each side ; thus, in
process of time, the building assumed the form of a series of
regular steps. These were cased over with stones, all the angles
filled up, and stones placed for steps. Then, as Herodotus long
ago informed us, the pyramid was finished from the top
downwards, by all the edges being cut away, and a perfect
triangle left."

Mr. Melville, the mystic, author of Veritas, has his view


10 PYRAMID FACrrS AND PANCIB8.

of the transaction ; saying, " Herodotus tells us the pyramids
were finished downwards, and unquestionably they were.
Books, learned books, as the writers fancy, have lately been
published to explain this passage. Large blocks of stone
have been supposed to have been lifted to their places, and
then cut as required, and the debris thrown to the base. Oh,
folly ! "

This is the story of the Greek : — " Having finished the first
tier, they elevated the stones to the second by the aid of
machinery constructed of short pieces of wood; from the
second, by a similar machine, they were raised to the third, and
so on to the summit. Thus there were as many machines as
there were courses in the structure of the pyramids, though
there might have been only one, which, being easily manage-
able, could be raised from one layer to the next in succession ;
both modes were mentioned to me, and I know not which of
them deserves most credit."

Sir H. James, of the Ordnance Department, thinks the work-
ing rule of construction was by two poles, one horizontal, ten
feet long, and the other vertical, of nine feet ; as, " the inclina-
tion of each edge of the pyramid is what engineers call ten to
nine." But Sir Edmund Beckett, as an architect, demurs ;
remarking, " I do not at all agree with him that the builders
worked by any such inconvenient rule as that— carrying up
diagonally, slanting standards at the comers, and making the
courses ' lineable by eye with them, however easy it may sound

theoretically." .

THE STEPS.

He who has once been hauled up by the three muscular,
^Dod-tempered, but bakshish-loving so-called Arabs, but really


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 11

Egyptian fellahs, will not forget the steps. The ascent is hy
the north-east angle, where the stones are sufficiently knocked
about to give a better tread.

Herodotus wrote nearly 2300 years ago : — " This pyramid
was built in the form of steps." He adds that some call them
little altars. When he tells us that one of these stones is
thirty feet, we stare. He may mean cubic feet, as he calls the
least of them that size. M. Grobert declares they vary from

1 foot 5 inches to 4 feet in length. He noticed a gradation.
The first tier gave him an average of 3 feet 10 J inches ; the
second, 3 feet 6^ inches ; the third, 3 feet 1^ inch ; then, 2 feet
1 1 inches ; 2 feet 8 inches ; 2 feet 3 inches. Mr. Perring, the
accurate surveyor, gives the average of these courses at from

2 feet 2 inches to 4 feet 10 inches. About the largest stone
is one 9 feet long and 6^ broad. Mr. Eergusson the architect has
the average at 30 inches. The stones diminish as they approach
the top.

One authority gives an elevation of 223 inches for the fifth
course of masonry; 869 for the twenty-fifth; 1686 for the
fiftieth; 3052 for the hundredth; and 5830 for the total
vertical height. The Queen's chamber is said to be on the
twenty-fifth course ; and the King's on the fiftieth course.

The number of steps has been a most unnecessary puzzle.
Pococke, there in 1743, notes the difference from 207, Greaves's
number, to 260, the number of Albert Lewenstein. But he
goes on to say, " as Mallet, who also was very exact, counted
208, it is possible the number of the steps is 207 or 208, though
I counted them 212." Thevenot, in 1655, made 208 ; Denon,
in 1799, 208 ; while Lewenstein, or Lewenstainius found 260 ;
Yausleb, iH 1664, 255 ; Sandys, in 1610, 255. Bellonius^Qt2.^Q\


12 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

Lucas, 243; Johannes HeKricus, 230; and Grimino, 210. Siccard,
in 1711, counted 220 ; Davidson, in 1763, 206 ; Beckett, 210 ;
Grobert, in 1798, 205, with three crumbled ones, or 208. Fergus-
son has the number 203 ; while M. Dufeu has 202, the last two
being in the centre of the upper platform. Prosper Alpinus,
in 1591, could only count 125. The majority give 208.

The mortar, or cement, varies according to the work. Where
used for passages or casing, it was of pure lime. But Perring,
to whom we are so indebted for his work in 1837, found the
ordinary mortar to be an odd mixture of pounded bricks, gravel,
crushed granite chippings, and Nile mud. Sometimes it proved
nothing but a simple grout, or liquid mortar, of sand and
gravel only.

One architectural estimate of the time to rear the pyramid is
as follows : allowing fifteen miles for carriage, and 300 days
a year of ten hours a day for labour, the time for quarrying,
elevating, and finishing would be 164 years. Herodotus, whose
words need sometimes an interpreter, talks of 100,000 men and
twenty years ; that is, we may say, 10,000 men, as many as
could work at it, for 200 years.

SIZE.

According to Perring, the original quantity of masonry was
89,000,000 of cubic feet, or 6,848,000 tons. As far as is known,
the passages and chambers make but one-sixteen-hundredth part
of the block. He states the present base is 12 acres, 3 roods,
3 poles; the former, with the casing, was 13 acres, 1 rood,
22 poles. The Egyptians had a great dislike to visitors prying
about the place, particularly with a measure in their hands.
A sheik once drew M. Grobert aside, and said, " It is useless


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID ? 13

to give yourself so much trouble, there is no silver down in
there ; I swear it by Allah and my faith."

The height of the pyramid has been widely estimated.
Herodotus made it equal to the length. Bryant, in 1807,
wrote : " It seems at first to have been 500 feet in perpendicular
height." Thevenot gave 520; Greaves, in his "Pyramido-
graphia," 499; Perring, 450J; Yausleb, 662; Perry, 687;
Lucas, 729 ; Niebuhr, 440 ; GemeUi, 520 ; Denon, 448. In
the last-named, the Erench architect employed to measure in
1799, was M. Le P^re, aided by Colonel Coutelle, of the
Engineers. Fergusson states the present height to be 456, and
Colonel Howard Yyse, 450|. The inclined height, says the
last authority, is 568^. The vertical height, says M. Dufeu,
was never greater than it is now.

The base is practically a square. Herodotus gave the length
eight plethra or 800 feet, the same as the height. But that
height must have been the side of the triangle up. Tran-
scribers may cause authors to err. Thus, he is said to have
declared the third pyramid " wanting 20 feet on each side of
three plethra." It should have read plus twenty. Diodorus
appears to make the size 700 by 600 feet; Strabo, 652 by
600; Thevenot, 704 by 682. Pliny gave the size, 708;
Grobert, 745f ; Perring, 746 now, but once 764 ; Colonel
Howard Yyse accepts Perring's calculation. Sir Edmund
Beckett speaks of a difference of 4 feet in 761 "between the
measure made by highly competent persons." He deems the
761 of Sir H. James as " the best measure to adopt." This
includes the casing stones at the base. The Eoyal Engineers,
on their return £rom the Sinai survey, got these results : east side,
9,129*5 inches; north, 9,127*5 inches; west, 9121 inches \


14 PYRAMID PACTS AND FANCIES.

south, 9,140*5 ; yielding an average of 760f feet. Mr. Piazzi
Smyth has chosen a mean calculation of 763*81 feet.

The comer socket was found in 1797. The French dug down
through the ruhbish at the north-east angle. This encastremerU
or large hollow socket worked in the rocks, yet quite uninjured,
received the comer stone. It is an irregular square, three and
a half metres by three. At the north-west comer the other socket
has been discovered. The measure between, 232*747 metres, or
763*63 feet, was the base line. But Colonel Yyse's grand
discovery, in 1837, of a couple of the casing stones on the
parent rock, enabled us to get the more modem estimate of
correctness, 764 feet. These marble blocks were of exquisite
workmanship and truth of outline.

The angle of inclination in these two casing stones was first
given at 51° 50'. Prof. Piazzi Smyth, assuming it 51° 51' 14-3",
and the base line 763*81, obtained as the result for the perpen-
dicular height 486*2567.

The orientation, or eastward aspect, is nearly perfect ; offering
a great contrast to the edifices of Thebes, &c., where the face is
any way. In fact Mr. Fergusson goes so far as to say that the
builders of Thebes had " no notion of orientation." It is not
5' out of the Hne ; Mr. Piazzi Smyth maked the error but
4' 35". An earthquake, it has been conjectured, may have even
caused this slight error. The angles of the sockets of the great
pyramid have been given at 0, for south-east, H- '1 for north-east,
+ 1 for south-west, and H- 0*636 for nortfi-west.

THE CASING OE COTEEING.
Upon this subject, as upon about all subjects connected with
the pyramid, there has been a difference of opinion. While


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 15

some mamtain it was absolutely covered with a marble, or satin,
dress, and others that it was but partially concealed by this
stone drapery, not a few hold that it has never been covered
at aU.

A pavement has, however, been noted at the foot. Though
not rectangular, it is finely fitted, for all the pyramid work was
beautifully done. It is not of uniform width round, varying
from twelve to thirty-three feet. The thickness is a foot and
three quarters. Under the pavement was seen a fissure, filled
up with small stones.

Herodotus, our earliest authority, claims an entire marble
covering for the pyramid, and states that the stones were
skilfully connected, none being less than thirty feet, the top
being first completed. This was declared to have been carried
off by Salah-^Deen, the Saladin of history, of the time of our
Richard the First, for the adornment of his new city and citadel
at Cairo. The magnificent Mosque of Hassan, one of the most
remarkably beautiful religious edifices in the world, so impressive
of pious sentiment, is said to have been constructed of this
marble.

M. Jomard recognised the story of the revetement or covering,
and Grobert discussed the retention by notches or grooves.
Maillet, a very frequent visitor, writing in 1692, believed the
building had been closed; saying, '^I concluded that the
pyramid had been really covered and lined." Pococke, in 1743,
has thus named the subject : — ^* It is thought that this, as well
as the other pyramids, was cased with a finer stone on the
outside, because it is said that not only the mortar has been seen
in which the stones were fixed, but also some pieces of white
marble sticking to the mortar, which they think were lett^ q>ti


16 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

their taking away the stone for some other nse." Still, the
worthy traveller was puzzled to think how such smooth
covering could he clamhered over ; for, he adds, " Pliny men-
tions a very extraordinary thing with regard to these pyramids,
and that is, that some men were so very adroit that they could
go up to the top of them."

The second pyramid has certainly a cap of marble left, and
that has been ascended by the athletic and nimble Gizeh Arabs.
The third pyramid was covered with granite, so toughly put
together that Melic-aliziz, in 1196, could not succeed in stealing
it. But Mehemet Ali did get some of the marble casing of a
Dashoor pyramid. Belzoni found p'art of the coat of the
smallest of the Gizeh structures beneath the rubbish.

The stones found by Col. Howard Yyse were both casing ones.
The joints were as thin as paper. The block was of trapezoid
form ; the base being 8 feet 3 inches, the perpendicular side 4 feet
1 1 inches ; the top 4 feet 3 inches ; and the slanting side,
6 feet 3 inches. The material came from the quarry of Mokattan,
beyond Cairo, and is commonly known as smne-stoney or stink-
stone, from the odour proceeding from this marble when struck ;
but few fossils have been detected. Perring observed the
smell at the time of discovery. Broken in fragments, for relics,
where are now these stones 1

Count Caviglia, the pyramid enthusiast, picked up pieces of
the casing on the eastern side in the dSbris. Mr. Agnew found
sundry pieces among broken stones on the western sides.
"The discovery of these portions of the lubricated face of
the great pyramid," he observes, " must remove any doubt of
its having been finished, could such doubt ever exist.'' He
regards the thing as settled, that the passages were effectually


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 17

blocked, and the outside was covered ; it was intended that the
pyramid should be closed for ever.

Sir Edmund Beckett points out another object served by the
casing. "The lowest course of casing stones," he remarks,
" had a square or upright plinth as high as the pavement, which
was laid for a considerable width all round the building, and
such was the precision of the building, that this pavement was
varied in thickness at the rate of about an inch in 100 feet,
to make it absolutely level, which the rock was not."

But M. Dufeu doubts the story of the revetement. He could
not deny that Colonel Yyse had found two casing stones, though
these were, said he, " a debris of a valence put round it to guard
it from the ravages of time," and not ascending any height.
He quotes from M. Letronne, that "the first, perhaps also
the second, step of the lining formed a sort of valence, like
the pedestals of obelisks." He knew that his countryman,
Jomard, had pronounced with Herodotus, but for all that, Dufeu
declares, "in spite of the report of Herodotus, the historians
of antiquity, and the opinion of the remarkable savant (Jomard)
just cited, the great pyramid has never been covered.**

He is not wanting in arguments. Such a casing would destroy
the teaching of the 202 steps, so important to the learned
Frenchman's scientific theory, that is elsewhere described. It
would have been absurd for Saladin to pull off such a casing,
when he could get the same kind of stone at one-tenth the
distance from Cairo. Before he could use such marble prisms,
so uniform in size, a vast amount of cutting would be required
for actual use, and a great waste be incurred. To save trouble
and carriage, such alteration would have doubtless been made
on the spot, and " Where," cries he, " do you detect the dehrxA


18 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

of the marble ? " The mere hauling down of the slabs would
induce fractures, leaving fragments, which are not now to be
discovered. Most of the debris of the pyramid is at the southern
and western sides, most exposed to weather, and consists of
particles of the stone steps, brought down by wind and rain
besides sand blown up from the desert. Furthermore, he
paturally asked why the supposed Saracenic spoiler, in his
anxiety for marble casing, did not take it from the more
convenient little pyramids, but pass them by to attack the more
formidable building 1

THE TOP.

It is a glorious view from the upper platform over the level
but continuous garden of the Kile. One looks down upon the
plain where Bonaparte's squares repelled the charge of the
Mameluke horsemen, and which glorious feat was witnessed, not
by forty centuries, but by sixty. The mysterious desert and the
Libyan hills stretch northward, southward, and westward.
The site of Memphis and the marvellous old pyramids of
Saqqarah are before one. There lie the tombs of the sacred
bulls; and around the pyramid are the graves of kings, nobles,
priests, and ladies of the Ancient Empire, 5000, 6000, or more,
years ago. Quiet thoughts on the pyramid are suggestive ones.

When Thevenot was there he counted " twelve lovely large
stones." Greaves, the astronomer, wrote : — " The top of this
pyramid is covered, not with one or three massy stones, as some
have imagined, but nine, besides two which are wanting at
the angles." Another describes it " surrounded with thirteen
^eat stones, two of which do not now appear.'*


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 19

The top has been generally estimated at 30 feet. Dr. Elchardson
has this statement : — *^ Arrived at the summit we found it ample
and spacious ; a square, from 25 feet to 30 feet a side, con-
sisting of long square blocks of stone, with the upper surface
coarse and uneven, as are the usual surfaces of stones in the
courses of a building. We perceived a thin cement of lime be.
tween the different courses of stones, but there was no appear-
ance of any cement having been placed upon the upper surface
of the highest course.** The conclusion was that it had never
been higher. Mr. Agnew said : — " The platform was not in-
tended to form part of the pyramidal portion of the monu-
ment." But Dufeu and others regard the platform as the real
top, which was never covered, though it may have had a column
or cippe to serve as an imaginary apex.

The Eev. T. Gabb, 1808, who had no doubt of its being
originally pointed, as were all the other pyramids, was a little
troubled to account for this being stripped of the top while others
retained theirs in safety. "2^or do I doubt," quoth he, "but
the apex was severed from it by the impetuosity of the waters
(at the Flood) while in their unabated rapidity, and thus left
the flat, which has furnished various conjectures." Others that
letained their caps, when the Flood carried off the top of the
great pyramid, were, thinks he, " erected nearer to the time of
the Deluge, it^ may be even a thousand years after the great
one."

Having now taken a survey of the exterior, the consultation
of authorities concerning the interior will next engage attention.

Although some reference elsewhere has been made to the
name of the building, it may not be out of place to say something
here upon


20 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.


THE NAMK


Murtadi, as an Arab, thinks the Arabic hirha, plural harabi,
is probably corrupted into pyramis. But Pococke and Sacy call
hirha a temple, Thevenot says the Turks call it FJiaraon
Daglary, and the Arabs Dgehel Fharacm^ meaning Pharaoh's
hills, Abenesi and others thought the first syllable of the word
was only the masculine article in Egyptian. The word el Harm
or ancient, is an Arabic derivation. Abdullatiff writes : — " Galen-
speaks in one place of the pyramids, and he derives their name
from a word which signifies the decrepit state of old age."
According to Galen himself, " we call him who is in the third
epoch of old age liaramy and those who love to search etymology
say this word, which is given him, is derived from that of the
pyramids (ahram), into which they ought soon to take their
place."

On this the Professor of Arabic in Paris, 130 years ago,
M. Vattier, had this observation : — " The pyramids are expressed
in the Arabian tongue by two names, Birha, which I have
used in several places, and Earam, Haram, in the Arabian,
signifies an old structure." Macrizi speaks of Ahram, the
pyramid. D'Herbelot observes, " Ehram or Eheram, Arabic
plural of Ilerem, which signifies old age, this plural, joined to
the article, makes Alehram, and signifies, in particular, the
pyramids of Egypt, because of their great antiquity." Michaelis
would give the same. A Kram, according to others, is the local
name now given to the pyramids ; El-JIaram is said to be a
corruption of Fi-Haram.

Silvestre de Sacy says : — " This name {Haram) signifies the
Ao/y place, the edifice consecrated in a particular manner^ it may


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 21

he to some divinity , or some religious usage. It is very possible
that the Egyptians might have written 'HRAM, without any
vowel after the aspirated consonant, as they write even now 'HE A,
face, &c., and it is not surprising that the Greeks may have
supposed that aspiration too hard for them." He sees, however,
some objection : — " The first is that the root HRM! is not
found in modern Egyptian. That objection does not appear
strong to me. We know bub very imperfectly the Coptic
language, and above all the dialect of Said."

Jablonski takes up Pliny's ray definition of the obelisk, saying
— " The Egyptians then gave the name of pyramids to the
obelisks, because they had a sort of resemblance to the rays of
the sun ; afterwards they carried that name to more considerable
edifices, which one properly names pyramids^ because that,
nowithstanding that their distinction was different, they pre-
served some relation to the figure of the solar rays." Elsewhere
he notices the Coptic words pird-mona, splendoicr of the ^un,
Lacroze gets pi-re-mi as the splendour of the sun, Ammien
^larcellion, or Marcellinus, says : — " It got the name because it
ends in a cone, imitating in that the fire." But as De Sacy
properly adds, " That only offers the first part of the word, pyrf
Adler and Rossi find it in pi-rama, height^ or a raised monu-
ment Silvestre de Sacy, citing this opinion, tells us that " This
etymology possesses faith and simplicity, and the most strikingly
sensible application to the pyramids." Wahl sees the Coptic
root ramaSf rich. Wilkins reads pouro, king, and mici, hirth, be-
cause intended for royal families. Lacroze has for interpretation,
" the inhabitant or possessor of the elevation." Kircher finds
a meaning in hero ; adding, " the piromes were then statues of
the kings and priests, which were raised as a witness of the


22 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

superiority of their strength, and of their heroic actions." Dufeu
has pi-re-mit, to mean the tenth part of measures or numhers.
Volney gives the definition of cave of the dead, " In ancient
Greek," says he, "the u was pronounced oo ; we should there-
fore say poor amis. Fooramis is not Greek, but Egyptian."
He thinks pour or hour is prison or sepulchre, and amit is of the
dead. Others, from the Greek puros, wheat, and metron, mea-
sure, may have imagined the story of Joseph's granaries. As
a Coptic word it may mean a measure of ten. Prof. Smyth has
the authority of the editor of the Hebrew Christian Witness
for "considering the word Matzayhhah in Isa. xix. 19 to
mean a pyramid^ The same word is translated pillar there,
and in Gen. xxviii 19.

THE OPENING.

Whether absolutely cased or not, the pyramid was practically
shut up, according to popular account, until about the year
830, when the Caliph Mamoun found an opening. For this story
we are indebted to Arabian sources, which are slightly doubtful.
The truth is generally somewhere, though nearly overwhelmed
by imaginative details.

One of the well-known versions is about Al- Mamoun, Caliph
of Babylon, gaining access to the interior. "When he got to the
king's chamber, we are informed that he saw there a hollow
stone (the Sarcophagus), in which lay the statue of a man. But
the statue inclosed a body, whose breastplate of gold was
briUiantly set with jewels. A sword of inestimable value lay
upon the corpse. At the head shone, with the light of day, a
carbuncle as large as an ^%%, We have also a tale about one
3fe]ec-Alaziz5-Othman-ben-You80uf, who made so desperate an


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID ? 23

attempt to break into the third pyramid, that eight months
were spent in the work of destruction. It would be difficult
to determine if they succeeded in moving a single stone.

Then we are informed by one Arab that Caliph Abdal-Ia
Mamoun, the opener of the great pyramid, was the son of
Haroun-al Raschid, of the "Arabian ^Nights Entertainments,"
and the contemporary of Charlemagne.

That which appears probable is, that the Saracens began on
the north side, as reported by tradition to have been that by
which the Romans had once entered ; but that, while the latter,
and any other previous visitors, had been content with the
descending passage to the subterranean chamber, the former
were the first to penetrate by the gallery to the king's chamber.
One of the Arab stories of the opening is thus related by Ibn
Abd Al Hokm :—

** After that Al-Mamon the caliph entered Egypt, and saw
the pyramids. He desired to know what was written within,
and therefore would have them opened. They told him it
could not possibly be done. He replied, * I will have it
certainly done.' And that hole was opened for him, which
stands open to this day, with fire and vinegar. Two smiths
prepared and sharpened the iron and engines which they forced
in ; and there was a great expense in the opening of it. The
thickness of the wall was found to be 20 cubits ; and when
they came to the end of the wall behind the place they ha^.
dug, there was a pot of green emeralds. In it were a thousand
dinars very weighty ; every dinar was an ounce of our ounces.
They wondered at it, but knew not the meaning of it. Then
Al-Mamon said, * Cast up the accounts. How much has been
spent in making the entrance 1 ' They cast it up, and lo \ \\. H^^a


24 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

the same sum which they found ; it neither exceeded, nor was
defective."

On the other hand, Macrizi declares that the Caliph Mamoun
was only forty-nine days in Egypt altogether ; a time utterly short
of that required hy the Arah stories. Denys, the old traveller
of the tweKth century, would surely have mentioned some
facts of the wonders of the interior, had they reached him at
Cairo. He does narrate something ; for, said he, " We looked
in at an opening which was made in one of the edifices, and
which is 50 cuhits deep." His idea of a cubit may be seen
from his giving the height of the pyramid 250 cubits, and the
base 500. De Sacy is justified in saying that " he could not
have neglected to make mention of a discovery so important,
and which would have refuted completely the fable of the
granaries of Joseph ; " an opinion cherished at that period. He
concludes that " the opening of the Great Pyramid is more ancient
than the journey of Mamoun in Egypt."

Whoever forced an entrance failed to strike the right spot,
though a way to the Descending Passage was obtained by the
removal of obstructing stones. The present entrance is 4:7^ feet
above the base, and by the fifteenth or sixteenth step. One may
ride up to it on the vast mass of rubbish in front. It is there the
visitor is met by the sheik and his tribe, when a treaty is made
as to charges for attendants. The standing tariff is about four
shillings for each man, and two men are the minimum for a per-
son, while a larger douceur is expected by the venerable chief.

When Sandys was there, in 1610, the difficulties of an entrance
were greater than at present. It is now as it then was, *^ full of
rubbidge." But we have no stories in this day of men going in,
and coming up again some thirty miles off.


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 25

His experience at the entrance is thus detailed : — " In this our
Janizaries discharged their harquebuses, lest some shuld haue
skulkt within to haue done us mischiefe, and guarded the
mouth whilst we entred, for feare of the wilde Arabs."

THE PASSAGES.

Although the entrance was supposed to have been made by a
Mahometan Caliph, this singular passage occurs in Strabo : " On
high, as it were, in the midst between the sides, there is a stone
which may be removed, which being taken out there is a
shelving entrance leading to the tomb." He is careful in an-
other place to add, "This entrance was kept secret." When
Greaves came to this shelving passage, in 1637, there was no
ready access. " We hire Moors," wrote he, " to open the passage,
and to remove the sand, before we can enter into the pyramid."
The travellers are now too numerous, and their bakshish is too
acceptable, to have the sand difficulty ; though they have, like
Belon, of Mans, in 1554, to enter it with candles, and go " after
the manner of serpents."

It is no easy walking or groping, though one has not to con-
tend, as Greaves had, " with many large and ugly bats, a foot
long." The descent is pretty steep, and the way is both narrow
and low. The width is 41 or 42 inches, and the height 47
inches. After proceeding downward for 63 feet, the groper
changes his posture for the Ascending Passage, at a similar
slope for 124 feet; but which is about the same size as the
other, though Jomard has it 43 inches wide, and Caviglia, 42.
At its summit there are two passages : — one, the horizontal, 109
feet long, 41 inches wide, 43 or 44 high, kada \^ ^ik'^^ ^\sl&^\^^


26 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

Chamber ; but the other, still ascending in the slope, is the cele-
brated Grand Gallery. A yellowish-looking marble lines the
passages. The term Syringe, of Greek derivation, has been used
by foreigners to express levels or narrow subterranean passages.
The passage to the south from the Subterranean Chamber is
52 feet long, 2 J broad, 2\ high.

The angle of the passage has originated much discussion.
While M. Jomard makes it 25° 55', Col. Howard Vyse
and Perring have 26° 41'. Prof. Smyth caUs it 26° 18'.
As the angle of the inclination of the pyramid to the horizon
is about 51° 50', Mr. Fergusson, the architectural authority,
concluded that the angle of the passage was intended to have been
about one half of this. The half of 51° 50' would be 25° 55'.
He further says, " The angles are not the same in any two pyra-
mids, though erected within a few years of one another, and, in
the twenty that were measured by Col. Vyse, they vary from
22° 35' to 34° 5'." WhUe some observers of the Great Pyramid
have jumped to the idea that the angle of the side was 40°,
others ran it up to 60°. The double of Mr. Smyth's 26° 18'
would give 52° 36'.

Why this particular angle of 26° or 26° 18' should have been
adopted for the passages has aroused much interest. The
astronomical arguments of Mr. Piazzi Smyth and others will be
considered in another part of this work. But that inclination is
called by Sir Henry James " the angle of repose." Mr. Fergusson
writes, " The angle of the passage was the limit of rest at which
heavy bodies could be moved, while obtaining tbe necessary
strength where they opened at the outside, and the necessary
difficulty for protection inside, without trenching on impossi-
bilitjr.^* It was said that the blocking-stones of the passage,


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 27

hereafter to be described, could be easily slid along the floor at
that angle. But, then, it has been shrewdly remarked that the
descending passage, along which these portcullis stones were
not required to slide, is at the same angle as the ascending
one.

Mr. Agnew, for reasons mentioned elsewhere, concludes that
the intention of the builders was to have it 26° 33' 54". " Other
passages," he thinks, " with the same inclination, may probably
exist, leading in a zigzag direction to upper rooms on the levels
of the other inscribed squares of the figure."

A remarkable incident in passage history is noted by the able
French traveller, Maillet, French Consul, who spent sixteen
years in Egypt, made forty visits thither, and was the earliest of
the modem pyramid enthusiasts, being quoted with high respect
by our traveller Pococke in 1743. M. Maillet speaks thus : "a
discovery which I have made in the upper part of the passage of
118 feet, which leads there. It is that the stones which com-
pose it are split across in- all the length of the passage" He con-
jectures that an earthquake caused it.

Greaves made what he supposed a discovery. " On the east
side of this room (Queen's Chamber)," said he, " in the middle
of it, there seems to have been a passage leading to some other
place. Whether this way the priests went into the hollow of
the huge Sphinx, as Strabo and Pliny term it, or into any other
private retirement, I cannot determine; and it may be, too,
this served for no such purpose, but rather as a theca or nichiOy
as the Italians speak, wherein some idol might be placed."

The Descending Entrance-Passage proceeds in one straight
course toward the Subterranean Chamber, and is, according to
Mr. Perring, 320 feet 10 inches long ; ongvnaiiy, '^\iwa. \Jti<2k


28 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

entrance was in order, it must have been about 343. When the
second and successful attempt was made to force an entrance,
the Caliph's workmen struck this passage near its junction with
the first Ascending Passage, meeting with the granite portcuUis
difficulty there. While the real entrance is 48 feet from the
base, the Saracens, in 820, made a hole about 20 feet above the
base, driving horizontally, and thus met the bottom of the
Descending Passage. Owing to the loss of 23 feet from the roof
of the entrance, the Descending Passage is now but 63 feet to
the junction with the Ascending one.

The Upper or Ascending Passage, at the angle 26^^18', or, more
accurately it is said, 26° 17' 38", is 125 feet long. Perring
puts it at 124 feet 4 inches long, 3 feet 11 inches broad, and 3
feet 5 J inches high. One gropes along that with the same
difficulty as in the first. Mr. Waynman Dixon, C. E., a
recent and careful observer, discovered that the masonry of
this Ascending Passage is strengthened at intervals by the
" insertion of collars, or huge plates of stone, through the middle
of each of which the passage is made to pass by a perforation of
its own size."

Arrived at a landing or platform, two passages appear. One
is the Grand Gallery, a continuation of the ascending slope, and
at the same angle, though not of the like height, width, and
length. The other is the Horizontal Passage, nearly as long as
the Ascending, and leading directly to the Queen's Chamber.
Perring has the following measurement of it : — from the lower
end of the Gallery to the low passage, 16 feet 7 inches; thence
to the step, 92 feet ; from the step to the Queen's Chamber, 17
feet 11 inches; or a total length of 109 feet 11 inches. The
breadth he calculated at 3 feet b\ inches ; the height, at 3 feet


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 29

10 inches before the step in the passage, and 5 feet 8 inches
after that spot.

The passage to the Subterranean Chamber is direct from the
entrance to where it strikes the bottom of the well, when it
turns horizontal, instead of the angle 26°, for several feet.
After passing through the Subterranean Eoom, another passage
is seen at the farther end, going horizontally to the south, or
opposite side from the entrance. It is 52 feet 9 inches long, 2
feet 7 inches wide, and only 2 feet 5 inches high. M. Jomard,
in 1799, was confused, he tells us, with "the passages, oblique,
horizontal, sharply-bended, of different dimensions."

THE WELL.

This is off from the landing-place of the Ascending Passage,
from which one ascends the Grand Gallery.

Pliny describes " a well of 86 cubits in' depth," which com-
municated with the waters of the Nile. Herodotus had spoken
of the Nile being turned in to where the monarch's tomb lay,
and the well was supposed to lead down to it. B^lon, in 1554,
spoke of it as that " which is now, as it were, filled with stones."
Thevenot, a little after, wrote thus : "A well 123 feet deep,
but such as have descended into it found nothing but sand, and
a multitude of bats, which are ready to eat a man up."

Our Sandys, 1610, like Thevenot, was content to stay at the
top. " Others have written," says he, " that at the bottom there
is a spacious pit, 80 and 6 cubits deep, filled at the overflow by
concealed conduits ; and, in the midst, a little island, and on
that a tomb containing the body of Cheops, King of Egypt, and
the builder of this Pyramis, which with th^ \iX\i\\x "WOsv ^


30 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

greater afl&nity. For since I have been told by one out of his
own experience that, in the uttermost depth, there is a large square
place (though without water) into which he was led by another
entry opening to the south, known but to few (that now open
being shut by some order), and entered at this place where we
feared to descend."

M. de Breves, who wrote in 1605, has this addition : *^ At the
bottom of this descent is a space to the left hand, from which
another descent proceeds, which goes very much lower under
the pyramid, bat the entrance of it is walled up." Greaves,
1637, indicates the position thus : "This narrow passage lieth
level, not rising with an acclivity, as doth the pavement below and
roof above of both these galleries. At the end of it is the well.*'
He goes on to say, " The diameter of it exceeds three feet, the
sides are lined with white marble, and the descent into it is by
fastening the hands and feet in little open spaces, cut in the
sides within, opposite, and answerable to one another, in a per-
pendicular." He did not descend, only remarking, "By my
measure, sounding it with a line, it conteines twenty feet in
depth," M. Maillet, 1692, thought tha well was "to facilitate
the retreat of the workmen, after they had distributed, for the
closing of the interior passages, all the stones •which were shut
up in the Gallery, each according to its destination." Richard-

• son, in 1816, reminds his readers that it "is now found to be
a secret passage of 150 feet long, and about 3 feet wide, furn-
ished with niches on three sides for the hands and feet, by
which to ascend to the upper chambers in the pyramid."

Count Caviglia, to whom the pyramid-admiring public are so
much indebted, made an exploration with Mr. Consul Salt, in

181 T. He found the central chamber named by Sandys. The


"WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 31

shaft, as Bunsen terms it, descends perpendicularly for 26 feet.
It then slants down 32^ feet to the Grotto^ which chamber is in
a bed of gravel in the midst of the Gizeh rock, and is 17 feet in
extent. Another slope of 133 feet leads down to the known
bottom, which is dry. Mr. Perring makes the total length 191 J
feet. French authorities make it 20 7f feet, of which 145J^ are
in the solid rock. At a depth of 148|^ feet below the base of
the pyramid, it T7ould be, it is said, 10 feet below high water of
the Nile, and 16 above low water. From the bottom of the
well it is 24 feet to the Subterranean Chamber.

THE GALLERY.

This is, next to the King's Chamber, the most interesting part
of the Great Pyramid, and its measurements have given plenty
of employment to theorists. We must acknowledge, with gratis
tude, the zeal with which Prof. Piazzi Smyth has sought for in-
formation concerning it.

The old English astronomer, John Greaves, was much im-
pressed by the Gallery : ^' Not inferiour," says he, " either in
respect to the curiosity of art, or richness of materials, to the
most sumptuous and magnificent buildings." He may well
characterize it as " the labour of an exquisite hand." He noticed
the ^ ..nd roof of seven overlapping courses of stone, and the
two stone banks, ramps, or benches, running both sides the full
length of the Gallery. He calls them "banks of sleek and
polished stone; each of these hath one foot 717 of 1000 parts
of a foot in breadth, and as much in depth." The path between
he found to be 3/^o feet wide, giving 6iVo^ ^"^^t for the
full breadth. In alluding to the ramps, Sir li. B^c^^\»\» ^«^^\ —


32 PYRAMID FACTS AIW) FANCIES.

" The channel clearly was for something heavy to slide down
between them," alluding to the stones to block up the passages.
The shrewd Mr. Greaves took note of the perpendicular cut-
ting in the ramps, each cutting opposite to one on the other
ramp ; " intended," thought he, " no question, for some other end
than ornament." Sir H. James, as well as the architect Beckett,
wrote of them, alluding to the blocking design by means of
them, thinking that the blocking stones were kept at the foot of
the deep step at the top of the Gallery, and slid down over
planks. " The portcuUis stones," he says, " are 2 cubits wide,
and 48 inches high, to fit their ultimate place exactly; and
the channel between the ramps is just over 2 cubits, and
the ramps themselves just under a cubit, leaving about 7
inches on each side as clearance for the stones to slide down
easily." Perring makes the ramps 2 feet high, 20 J inches
broad, and 41 J inches passage between the ramps. The holes
are 26 in number on one ramp and 28 on the other, two being
* beyond. The cutting is vertical, and not at right angles to the
Gallery.

The step-holes in the floor are alluded to in Montfaucon,
from M. le Brun, of the seventeenth century, who observed : —
" The stone bench 2 J feet high, and proportionately broad, which
they hold fast by in going up, to which the holes that are made
in the pavements at almost every step contribute not a little,
though coarsely made, and without observing exactly the dis-
tances between them ; without these holes for to take footing,
it would be impossible to go up to the top, nor is it without a
great deal of difficulty that one can get there with this assist-
ance." These cuttings, for travellers' convenience, are, of course,
roughly hewn, Pococke mentioned them in 1743.


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 33

As to the length of the gallery, Greaves wrote : — " From the
weU below to this partition above is an hundred, fifty and f oure
feet." Among the estimated lengths, in inches, are the foUow-
ing: — Richardson, 1440; Jomard, 1461; Maillet, 1488; Cou-
telle, 1595; Caviglia, 1824; Greaves, 1848; and Thevenot,
1944. The careful Perring measured 150 feet 10 inches to the
step, and 5 feet 2 inches thence to the passages to Eing's
Chamber, making it 156 feet, or 1872 inches. This step at the
head of the Gallery is 7^ feet high. An Arab received the
writer off from the top of it in his arms.

The height of the Gallery may be considered 27 feet 6 inches,
or ^30 inches. It has been called 270 inches by Shaw, 300 by
Maillet, 312 by Greaves, 336 by Vyse, 360 by Caviglia, and 350
by Piazzi Smyth, who thus gets seven times the ordinary height
of the other passages. The angle of ascent is 26*^ with Greaves,
27° with WUkinson and CouteUe, 26° 18' by Yyse, and 26° 17'
35" by a subsequent calculator.

The stair-like roof, as Mr. Fergusson says, is 28 feet high,
and assumes the form of inverted stairs, till it contracts so much
at the top that no pressure can hurt it. M. Grobert rather
derides the plan, saying, "If the Egyptians had been more
learned in the art of construction, they could have covered by a
voute en berceau the ascending GaUery, which would have occa-
sioned less work, less expense, and more solidity." It is quite
likely they knew better than the Frenchman what they wanted,
and how best to accomplish their object. M. MaiUefs inter-
pretation is seen under the heading of "Blocked up." There
are 36 inclined stones to form the roof.


34 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

THE QUEEN'S CHAMBER

Mr. Greaves said, " Leaving the well, and going on straight
upon a levell, the distance of fifteen feet, we entred another
square passage. This leadeth into an arched vault, or little
chamber; which, by reason it was of a grave-like smell, and halfe
full of rubbage, occasioned my lesser stay. This chamber stands
east and west, the length of it is lesse than twenty feet, the
breadth about seventeen, and the height lesse than fifteen. The
walls are entire, and plastered over with lime; the roofe is
covered with large smooth stones, not lying flat, but shelving,
and meeting above in a kind of Arch, or rather an Angle."

Norden, in 1 737, saw it " half filled with stones." Maillet had
before remarked the forcible entry, and that *' stones broken,
and drawn from that place, still fill now almost all the capacity
of the chamber." He noticed the roof was " made like an ass's
back." He refers to the niche on the east side, three feet in the
wall, " and of the height of eight upon three feet," the space
sufficient for the queen's coffin. Richardson, sixty years ago,
spoke of it in the north-east corner, and like the queen's closet,
or dressing-room. Both were empty, and not lined with granite.
This niche is not in the middle of the wall. One describes it as
15 feet high, and two cubits broad, gradually contracted by short
offsets, from 65 inches wide at the bottom to 25*3 at the top.

Two channels there looked like the air-holes of the other
Chamber, but were sealed up. When broken through, the space
was horizontal for 7 feet, and then turned north and south
at the angle 32°. They might have been for acoustic purposes.
Mr. Waynman Dixon tested them by smoke, which was not to
he detected outside. A rounded granite ball, supposed a Mina


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID ? 35

weight, being 8825 grains, was taken from the northern channel.
Some speak of the Chamber as seven-sided. From the base
of the pyramid to the floor of this room is 67 feet 4 inches.
The area is 18f by 17 feet. The height is from 14 feet 9 inches
to 20 feet 3 inches. The Queen's Chamber is more beneath the
top of the Gallery than under the King's Apartment.


THE KING'S CHAMBER

The Gallery contracts suddenly at the upper end, and does
not lead at once into the King's Chamber. There is first a small
low passage, -then the Ante-chamber, and another short passage.
There is a low granite doorway, and one has to creep beneath
the unfallen portcullis or "granite leaf;" another low doorway
must be passed before the Chamber is gained. The portcullis,
which was intended for closing purposes, is described as a flat
stone " found sticking up," which " had never been let down."
The distance, says Perring, to the King's Chamber, including
the portcullis' space, is 22 feet 1 inch. The height of the pas-
sage part is 3 feet 8 inches ; the two passages comprehend an
extent together of about a dozen feet, five on one side and seven
on the other. The sides of the Ante-chamber and passages are of
granite.

The Ante-chamher, or Anti-closet of Mr. Greaves, is fitted on
each side with four grooves for the reception of portcuUi or flat
stones, to be let down to block up the way to the King's Boom
from the Gallery. Mr. Smyth made the size 115 pyramid
inches. The height is about 14J feet. As he writes, "On
either side are opposite sets of broad hollow grooves ; three being
very broad ones, and one moderately bToad, t\LQ \aX.\fcT, "Oass^^v.^


36 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

a part of its height is occupied hy a granite hlock or plate,
which hangs suspended in it, and underneath which every one
must pass."

Greaves wrote thus : " This inner Anti-closet is separated
from the former by a stone of red speckled marble, which hangs
into two mortices (like the leaf of a sluice) between two walls,
more than three feet above the pavement, and wanting two of
the roof. Out of this closet we enter another square hole, over
which are five lines, cut parallel and perpendicular." A boss
has been noticed upon this leaf or portcullis. Each groove has a
semi-circular top. A French authority makes the whole side to
be 9 feet 10 inches long ; the width of the groove filled by the
portcullis is about 20 inches. Three portculli were thus pro-
vided for. '^L Jomard, nearly eighty years since, thought these
three singular travees had no analogy with anything he knew.
The height of the portcullis, according to Perring, is 12 feet 5
inches. Mr. Waynman Dixon found a bronze hook near there;
it may have belonged to some treasure-seeker of old.

Looking at the Ante-chamber, M. Maillet thought of the first
invaders, and exclaimed, " How many difficulties would they
not have had to surmount in order to conquer the King's
Chamber 1 It was," he added, "the last refuge of the architect."
In his day the relics of the struggle were to be seen. He
observed the fragments of the stones broken by the workmen, now
removed to make the way smooth for the bakshwh bestowing
Englishmen. One great stone, 6 feet by 4, lay before him.
His further remarks are noticed in the " Blocking " article.

In Aristotle we read : " Now, as with admiration we behold

the tops of the pyramids, but that which is as much more under-

gzound opposite to it we are ignorant of ; I speak what I have


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 37

received from the priests." Yet Strabo had heard of a cell
being there.

The King^s Chamber is, in spite of the spoliations, a beautiful
granite-walled apartment. Noble slabs of granite, 20 feet high,
and admirably joined, line the sides. The roof is flat. There is
no furniture but the ever-mysterious Coffer or Sarcoiyliagus.
Pietro della Yalle, in 1615, said, "The pyramid was,* perhaps,
constructed for several persons ; but I have found no tomb in
one or the other (chambers)." Sandys wrote admiringly of it,
saying, " A goodly chamber twenty f oote wide and forty in
length ; the rooffe of a maruelous height ; and the stones so
great, that eight floores it, eight rooffes it, eight flagge the ends,
and sixteene the sides, aU of well wrought Theban marble"
(granite).

The story by Mr. Greaves, the Oxford Professor, is too im-
portant to omit. He passed through the Anti-closet, crept
through "another square hole, over which are five lines cut
parallel and perpendicular," and stood "at the north end of a
very sumptuous and well-proportioned room." The rest of his
account is as follows : — " This rich and spacious chamber, in
which art may seem to have contended with nature, the curious
work being not inferiour to the rich materials, stands as it were
in the heart and centre of the pyramid, equidistant from all the
sides, and almost in the midst between the basis and the top.
The floor, the sides, the roof of it, are all made of vast but
exquisite tables of Theban marble (granite). From the top of it
descending to the bottome, there arc six changes of stone. Of
these, there are nine which cover the roofe ; two of them are
lesse by halfe in breadth then the rest, the one at the east end,
the other at the west."


38 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

Again he writes : " From the top to the bottom of this
chamber are six ranges of stone, all of which being respectively
sized to an equal height, very gracefully, in one and the same
altitude all round the room. The stones which cover this place
are of a strange and stupendous length, like so many huge beams
lying flat and traversing the room, and withal supporting that
infinite mass and weight of the Pyramid above/* He truly
caUs it " a glorious room."

He gives the length of the chamber 34^^^ feet ; the breadth>
^^Tinny^ the height, 19^ feet. Perring reckoned it 34 feet 3
inches long, 17 feet 1 inch broad, and 19 feet 1 inch high.
Prom the base of the pyramid to the floor of the chamber it is
138 feet 9 inches. It is beyond the centre, from the entrance
side, by 16 feet 3 inches. While the temperature of the pit or
well was found by Coutelle to be 25°, that of the chamber was
22°. He noticed, in 1799, a thick bed of dung on the floor.
He speaks of an echo in the opening repeating six times. Dr.
Eichardson supposed that by removing one of the granite slabs
at the side an access might be gained to other chambers.

The Air-Chamhera of the chamber are two rectangular holes
at the side; which, says Mariette Bey, "may be like the
rectangular hole in the partition of the principal chapel of the
tomb, or mastaba, which communicated to the deposit of images
(of the departed), and before which, it is believed, prayers were
said, and incense burnt." But though the very outlet has been
found outside, the hole being closed showed that no air could
reach the chamber. Sir E. Beckett thought they were " for the
benefit of the mummy of the king, or the breathing of the
imdertakers and masons."

Norden -said ; " They appear to me vent holes to give air to


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYEAMID ? 39

the chamber." Greaves thought them "receptacles for the
burning of lamps." The north channel is 233 feet long, with
an angle of 33°. One is 9 inches by 6, and the other 9 by 9.
One passes to the north or right side of the pyramid, and the
other to the south. Perring notes that they are 3 feet from the
floor. One, 8 inches by 6, #uns to the north 233 feet; the
other southward, 174 J feet long, 8f inches broad, and 9 J inches
high. The north channel bears the angle of 33° 42', and the
south 46°.

THE SAECOPHAGUS OE COFFEE.

This is the most interesting portion of the most interesting
monument in the world. The suggestive views concerning it are
stated under the heading of " Why was the Pyramid built ? "

This lidless box or trough stands toward the further end of
the King's Chamber, but rather to the right on entering. It is
of porphyry stone, of extraordinary hardness and closeness of
composition, ringing like phonolite when struck. In capacity it
is, according to the corrections of Prof. Smyth, 77*806 inches
long, 26*599 broad, and 34*298 deep ; or a cubical measurement
of 70,982*4 inches. The thickness of the sides is 6^ inches;
and of the bottom, 7^ inches. The outside length, says Bel-
lonius, is 144 inches; Villamont, 102; Jomard, 90*592; Vyse,
90J ; CavigUa, 90 ; WHkinson, 88.

M. Jomard and others have asserted that it was too small for
a sarcophagus. But, as Mr. Kenrick pointed out, it is 6 J feet
long; and, as an average Egyptian was not above 5 J feet in
height, there would be a foot space left for the cartonnage, or
mummy case, &c. Prof. Greaves quaintly remarked, "A narrow
space, yet largo enough to conteine a most i^otent «bTL^ ^^^^.^xsl


40 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

Monarch, being dead, to whom, living, all -^gypt was too
streight and narrow a circuit.''

The material has been called marble, granite, porphyry. They
who see the association of the Pyramid with Scripture afi&rm
that it is porphyry from Mount Sinai. The Syene granite is
unlike it. Mr. Greaves was told by a Venetian, that he had
seen at Sinai a similar stone to the sarcophagus, black and wliite,
and red speckled. Similar porphyry is known in that neighbour-
hood. The quarries were worked at the period of pyramid
building, as the cartouche inscriptions of King Khufu, the
builder, have been discovered on the rocks near Wady Maghara.

As the vessel is too large to have been brought in after the
formation of the intervening passages, it must have been lowered
to its place before the roof was closed.

No lid was ever mentioned, although Bunsen declares he has
'* no doubt a king was entombed there." But Perring delineates
the catchpin holes for a lid ; and says : " There are not any
remains of the lid, which was, however, fitted on in the same
manner as those of the other pyramids." Maillet saw none ia
1692 ; but he writes : " This chest had its covering, as one may
remark by the fashion of its edges ; but it has been broken in
removing it, and there remain no vestiges of it." Jomard
observes, "The lid, if there ever existed any, as that is very
probable, has disappeared."

Prof. Smyth has these statements : " The western side of the
coffer is, through almost its whole length, rather lower than the
other three, and these have grooves inside, or the remains of
grooves once cut into them, about an inch or two below their
summits, and on a level with the western edge ; in fact, to admit
a sliding sarcophagus cover or lid ; and there are the remains of


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 41

three fixing pin holes on the "westem side, for fastening such
cover into its place."

Bryant, the advocate of the Arkite theory a hundred years
since, had no idea of a cofl&n lid. " It is indeed said," observed
he, " that a stone coffin is still to be seen in the centre room of
the chief pyramid ; and its shape and dimensions have been
accurately taken. It is easy to give a name, and to assign a use,
to anything which comes under our inspection ; but the truth is
not determined by our surmises. There is not an instance, I
believe, upon record, of any Egyptian being entombed in this
manner. The whole practice of the country seems to have been
entirely different. I make no doubt but this stone trough was
a reservoir for water, which, by means of the well, they drew
from the iNTile."

It is placed exactly north and south. The eastern side is
double the distance of the westem. The floor is perfectly level,
and is 138f feet above the base of the Pyramid, which is said to
be the same distance, 138f feet, above high water of the Nile.
Behind the sarcophagus are traces of some excavation, eight feet
by two.

The record of early visitors to this memorable and venerable
object will be interesting to the reader.

The early Arabian authors are most positive about the box
being used as a tomb. The most celebrated of these is Ibn Abd
AI Hakm. He narrated the incidents connected with the break-
ing open of the pyramid, by orders of the Caliph Mamoon. Dr.
Rieu, of the British Museum, a competent authority, tells us that
" the statement relating to Al Mamoon's discovery could hardly
rest on a better authority than that of Ibn Abd Al Hakm ; for
not only was he a contemporary writer, haviiv^ ^\si)^ ^ Qf^^


42 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

Cairo, a, h. 269, that is, 38 years after Al Mamoon's death,
hut he is certainly quoted hy later writers, as an historian of the
highest authority."

Yet not only he, hut, according to CoL Vyse, a numher of
other Arabian authors, allude to the discovery of a body with
golden armour in the Sarcophagus of the King's Chamber. Al-
Eaisi says he saw the case from which the body had been taken
standing at the Cairo palace-door, in the year a.h. 511 ; that is,
in 1133. The same thing was observed by Abou Szalt and
others. Dr. Sprenger adds, " The Arabian authors have given
the same account of the pyramids, with little or no variation,
for above a thousand years."

This is Ibn Abd Al Hakm's report : " Toward the top a
chamber, with a hollow stone (the coffer), in which there was
a statue like a man, and within it a man, upon whom was a
breastplate of gold set with jewels ; upon this breastplate was a
sword of inestimable price, and at his head a carbuncle of the
bigness of an egg, shining like the light of day ; and upon him
were characters writ with a pen, which no man understood^

B^lon, in 1554, described the chamber: — "Six steps long
and four steps wide" — "in which," said he, " we found a coffer of
black marble, made of a single piece, like a box, — which is
without a lid." Thevenot, the other early French traveller, saw
there " an empty tomb, that sounds like a bell, 3 feet 4 inches
high, 3 feet 1 inch wide, and 7 feet 2 inches long. It is like
porphyry, well polished, and very beautiful. It is thought to
have been built by that Pharaoh that was drowned in the Ked
Sea." Sandys, in 1610, has a somewhat similar account: —
" Athwhart the roome at the upper end there standeth a tombe ;
uncouered, empty, and aU of one stone; breast high, seuen


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 43

feete in length, & not f oure in breadth, and sounding like a
bell."

Norden afterwards described it as " a long um, or, to speak
more properly, a sarcophagus of stone, which has merely the
figure of a parallelopiped, without any ornament besides. All
that can be said of it is, that this piece is well hollowed out,
and that it sounds like a bell when you strike it with a key."
He dignifies the material by the name of " granite marble." Le
Brun, of the 17th century, writes : — " This stone, which is above
five inches thick, is extraordinary hard, and resembles porphyry.
It is polished like glass."

Prof. Greaves, with his accurately divided ten feet rule, is so
exact and truthful, that one turns with great satisfaction to his
report : —

" Within this glorious roome (the King's Chamber), for so I
may justly call it, as within some consecrated oratory, stands
the monument of Cheops, or Chemmis, of one peece of marble,
hollow within, uncovered at the top, and sounding like a bell."
Quoting then from Diodorus — " * Although (saith hee) these
Kings intended these for their Sepulehers, yet it hapened that
neither of them were buried there . . For the people being ex-
asperated against them, by reason of the toilsomnesse of these
works, and for their cruelty and oppression, threatened to teare
in pieces their dead bodies, and with ignominy to throw them out
of their Sepulchers, whereupon both of them, dying, commanded
their friends privately to bury them in another place.^ This
monument, in respect of the nature and quality of the stone, is
of the same with which the whole roome is lined ; as, by break-
ing a little fragment of it, I plainly discovered, being a speckled
kind of marble, with black and white and led spo\a, «a \\. ^^'ife


44 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

equally mixed, whicli some writers call Thebaic marble, though
I conceive it to be that sort of porphyry which Pliny calls
Leucostictos, The figure of this tombe without is like an
Altar, or, more nearly to expresse it, like two cubes finely set
together, and hollowed within; it is cut smooth and plain,
without any sculpture and ingraving, or any relevy and im-
bossements."

After stating that Bellonius made the length 12 feet," and De
Breves 9 feet, he gives his own exterior measurement. The
depth and breadth were 3 feet 3f inches. The hollow part
within was, said he, 6 i^^o feet on the west side, 2 ^^^ on the
north, and 2i*^o% ^ depth.

Maillet, for sixteen years French Consul in Egypt, whose
accurate survey so deeply interested Mr. Pococke, our traveller,
calls this " a box of granite marble." After speaking of its size,
he says, " It has been so placed, 'from being shut in from above ;
and if it remains yet to our days in its entirety, it is because it
cannot be drawn from the place it occupies without breaking,
and the debris would be of no use. It is without doubt this
chest which contained the body of the king, enclosed in two or
three caskets of precious wood, following the custom which was
practised with regard to the great."

It is most important to note that Maillet, at the close of the
seventeenth century, with Nor den and others of the eighteenth,
speak of the Sarcophagus as entire, 'Not until Europeans,
especially English and American ladies and gentlemen, began to
stream thither, did the Vandalism' of destruction commence. It
was not sufficient to hew off masses from the exterior, but this
precious monument, which no Turk had presumed to defile or
injure, began to experience the usual fate of relics, at the hands


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 45

of relic-worshippers and relic-thieves. Dr. Richardson, in 1816,
was the first to observe the change. " A small fragment," said
he, " has been broken off one of the comers."

With the exception of that small fragment, the noble coffer
was safe sixty years ago. They who look upon it now, chipped
and knocked about so cruelly, may well blush for Western
civilisation. The writer himself was coolly asked by one of his
Arab followers if he would like a piece broken off. With no
one responsible for its preservation, and with the native expecta-
tion of a franc for a fractured piece, who can wonder at the
gradual diminution, and ultimate total destruction, of this most
wonderful and mystical box.

THE CHAMBEES OF COJS'STRUCTION.


Immediately over the King's"] Chamber, and built so as to
relieve it of pressure, are five chambers, called after Mr. Davison,
the Duke of Wellington, Lord iN'elson, Lady Arbuthnot, and
CoL Campbell. The nearest was found by Mr. Davison, in 1763.
Col. Vyse discovered the rest in 1837. A small hole, towards
the ceiling at the upper end of the Grand GraUery, led Caviglia,
by a forced passage, to the chamber above. The rooms are
divided by granite, polished on the roof or upper surface, not the
floor. The fifth, or Campbell's Chamber, has a roof of two
sloping blocks. It has eight beautifully wrought stones. The
passage leading to Davison's room is 24f feet long.

The sizes of these chambers, as ascertained by Mr. Perring,
are pretty similar. All of them have smooth roofs and rough
floors. From the floor of the King's Apartment to the top of the
highest chamber of construction is 69^ feet, Da.N\aoT^^ C^axcL-


46 PYRAMID FACTS AND FAKCIES.

ber is 38 feet 4 inches by 17 feet 1 inch, and from 2 feet 6
inches to 3 feet 6 inches in height, the floor being so uneven.
Wellington has the three measurements of 38 feet 6 inches, 17
feet 2 inches, and 2 feet 2 to 3 feet 8 inches ; Nelson, 38 feet
9 inches, 16 feet 8 inches, and 2 feet to 4 feet 10 inches;
Arbuthnot, 37 feet 4 inches, 16 feet 4 inches, and 1 foot 4
inches to 4 feet 5 inches ; Campbell, 37 feet 10 inches, 20 feet
6 inches, and 5 feet 10 inches to 8 feet 7 inches high.

A piece of iron, found in the masonry by Col. Howard Vyse,
is now in the British Museum. It may have been brought from
the iron mines of the Wady Maghara, near Sinai.

mSCEIPTIONS OF THE PYRAMID.

Herodotus was told a tale which he told again, about an
account being written on the pyramid of the cost of provisions
to the workmen. For radishes, garlic, and onions, the expend-
iture had been 1600 talents of silver. There is a double meaning
under these words and the numbers. Somebody has suggested
that degrees, minutes, and seconds may have been intended.
The Greek, if he understood, shed no light upon the subject,
though he added, " If this were really the case, how much more
was probably spent in iron tools, and in bread, and in clothing
for the workmen ! "

Vausleb, in 1673, wrote about the pyramids, " I saw upon
some of them some hieroglyphic characters, but I had not time
to write them out." Norden, the Dane, sixty years after him,
failed to see anything of the sort, and was surprised. " If I
conjecture," said he, " that the pyramids, even the latest, have
been raised hetore they had the use of hieroglyphics, I do not


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 47

assert it without foundation. Who can persuade himself that
the Egyptians would have left such superb monuments without
the least hieroglyphical inscription 1 they who were profuse of
hieroglyphics upon all the edifices of any consideration."

This remark was followed up by Dr. Templeman, 1792,
thus : — " Why might not the same thing have happened to
other hieroglyphics that were originally inscribed on the
pyramids'? And, therefore, the argument is not conclusive to
prove that the pyramids were antecedents to hieroglyphics.
Herodotus mentions several inscriptions that he saw on the
pyramids, but they have vanished long since." The worthy
doctor might have known that the climate of Egypt is favourable
to the preservation of monuments, and that the inscriptions are
usually so deeply engraved upon almost ever-enduring stone, that
little or no change can be detected after being in use for at
least four or five thousand years.

Then this question seems to rest upon the casing question.
Had the pyramid been covered with granite or marble, such
inscriptions mentioned by Herodotus would have been upon it,
and disappeared with the casing itself.

But why do we see no writing upon the pyramids which
retain the casing 1 Richardson would not interpret the Greek
historian literally. " The small part of the coating," he observes,
" which remains on the second pyramid has no hieroglyphics.
The larger pyramids at Aboukir, Sakkarah, and Dakschour, are
all coated, but have no hieroglyphics; and I am humbly of
opinion that the Pyramid of Cheops, or that of Mycerinus, had
none either."

As the pyramid was to be but a tomb, the ancient Egyptians
treated it as they did the Sepulchral Chamber ol \Itkfe ort^Mi^rj


48 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

burial ; they left it silent. It was in the upper chamber, open
to friends, that the hieroglyphics and pictures abounded, as it
was there religious service for the dead was often performed.
The temples which once, as it seems, stood in front of the
pyramids, and were used for the worship of the heroes of the
edifices, had, doubtless, their usual inscriptions and adornments.
The pyramid was closed, securely closed, and had no tale to tell
to passers-by.

At the same time, Herodotus is not alone in his story. It
must be allowed that no Roman and Greek historian mentions
the letters. But our Maundeville has something to say about
the supposed Granary of Joseph. He wrote thus in 1330 : —
" and aboven the Gemeres withouten, ben (are) many Scriptures
of dyverse languages."

Others about that time have similar narratives. In 1336,
Baldensel said he saw a number of inscriptions. There was one
in Latin, six lines in extent. Ludolf, the pilgrim, 550 years
ago, gave the world a copy of a Latin discourse on one of the
two larger pyramids. He distinctly relates the finding of Greek,
Latin, and " unknown character " inscriptions, and that upon
all the four sides. The Arab authors, who enter more into par-
ticulars, speak after the same fashion ; so much so, that Lord
Lindsay exclaims, " All the early Arab writers bear witness to
the existence of these inscriptions." Abd'allatif, in the thir-
teenth century, added to this information. " These stones,"
said he, " are covered with writing in that ancient character, of
which no one now knows the value. These inscriptions are so
numerous that if one could copy upon paper those only which
may be seen upon the surface of these two pyramids one would
JSIJ more than 6000 pages."


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 49

* This is plain testimony from personal observation, and goes a
long way in support of the theory of the casing. Still, Orientals
have a vision far more acute than Europeans, and listen with
less critical ears than ours.

At one time it was boldly avowed that no writing was to be
seen within or without But Colonel Howard Vyse, in 1837,
found quite a number of hieroglyphics in the Chambers of
Construction over the King's Chamber. These rooms were
made simply to take the bearing off the roof of the royal apart-
ment, and were not held too sacred for pollution. Perring, in his
magnificent work, gives several plates of these inscriptions. He
found them on the east and west ends of Wellington Chamber ;
the west of Nelson's, the south, west, and north sides of
Arbuthnot's ; and the east, west, north, and south sides of
Campbell's. They are in red paint.

Among these were the quarry marks of King Khufu, or
Cheops, such as we recognise in tombs. Two royal names are
thus distinguished. One name is phonetic The Baroness
Minutoli, in her charming letters, relates that her husband, in
1826, saw over several doorways, in the Great Pyramid of
Saqqarah, decided hieroglyphics ; " not hitherto remarked," she
truly said, " in the other pyramids." Dr. Lepsius saw the hiero-
glyphics over the doorways, and detected their extreme antiquity,
older than the quarry marks of the Great Pyramid ; for, says he,
" The encircling line for the king's name is put after the letters
expressing it, instead of round them ; and a square, instead of
oval, banner, or title, is employed." He was a German savant,
not a Vandal, yet he cut off this precious writing and carried
it away to Europe.


50 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.


THE SUBTERKANEAN CHAMBER.

According to the theory of the pyramid being a tomb, thiar
apartment would correspond to the Sepulchral Chamber at the
termination of the pit or well attached to an ordinary Mastaba*:
In all pyramids, the coffin was put below the surface, as in
all tombs. We have reason, therefore, to assume that the
Great Pyramid was no exception to the practice, and that in this
Subterranean Chamber, if anywhere, the corpse of the monarch
would have been interred. The unfinished state of the apart-
ment, and the absence of any signs of a tomb, do not inyalidat^
the argument.

Ibn Abd Al Kohm, in his account of the opening of the pyrar
mid, has this singular statement : — " Within they found a square
well. In the square of it there were doors. Every door opened
into a house (vault), in which there were dead bodies wrapped in
linen."

When Caviglia forced his way to this chamber, sixty years
ago, he discovered that some one had been there before him. On
the blackened roof, he saw Greek and Roman characters inscribed.
While Diodorus is silent, Herodotus declared, "Some secret
vaults are hewn in the rock under the pyramid." But though
the ancients managed to get into this chamber, " they did not
seem," one says, " to have discovered the secret of the othe!r
chambers." Sir Edmund Beckett, who maintains that the box
or trough in the King's Room was really the sarcophagus, con-
siders that the approach to the Subterranean Chamber was made
easy in order to mislead persons seeking for Cheop's tomb.

There are two ways of access : one by the pit or well, and


•WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 51

the other from the outer air by an inclined passage, the continu-
ation of that descended in the first instance by all travellers. The
room is reached after 300 feet of regular descent, when the per-
son finds he is 100 feet below the base of the pyramid, and under
the centre of it.

Dr. Hichardson arrived there immediately after the discovery,
tod has left this account of his adventures after leaving thd
King's Chamber : —

" We retraced our steps, and reached the orifice that led us
from the entrance passage ; here we turned to the right, and kept
descending by the same smooth passage to survey the interest^
ing discoveries of Captain Caviglia, in which he was liberally as-
sisted, in pecuniary matters, by Mr. Salt and Mr. Briggs. Having
descended about 200 feet, we came to the bottom of the well;
which terminates on a level with the bottom of the passage, and
seems merely a niche in its side. Having descended for about 2S
feet farther, we came to the end of the inclined passage ; from
this point we could see distinctly up into the open air ; it looks
directly towards the north, aind at night the Polar star is dis-i
tinctly seen. The passage, proceeding onward from this, is cut
out in the rock, and is quite horizontal for 28 feet ; it ends
in a large chamber, 66 feet long and 27 wide, and between 12
and 14 feet high, and which is supposed to be exactly under
the centre of the pyramid. The chamber does not appear to
have been completely finished ; there is a bench of the solid rock
still remaining at the west end of it, high on each side, and low
in the middle."

The workmen superintending the closing of the King's Cham-
ber, Antechamber, Grand Gallery, and Ascending Passage, could,
after letting slip the apparatus which lowexed Mi^ s,\,otl^^^^^^«s\s^


52 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCTES. •

the well to the Subterranean Chamber. Then, having secured the
well exit, to prevent the possibility of one discovering the ascent,
they could easily retreat up the one slope of 300 feet to the en-
trance of the pyramid. All that then remained to be done was
to block up the first Descending Passage, and secure the opening.

The chamber, by Perring*s measure, is 46 by 27 feet. He
estimated the roof to be 90 feet 8 inches from the base of the
pyramid. It has a flat roof, but an irregular floor. The height
may average 11 1 feet. Eichardson says of the passage leading
to it, that it is " lined on all the four sides by finely-polished
slabs of large-grained red granite of Assouan." That place is 500
miles oK

Many believe that other chambers and passages exist, to be
reached from the Subterranean Chamber. Eichardson has thought
of this, saying, " The stones are remarkably well cut and well
fitted to each other, and probably cover the orifices of other
passages into other chambers in the pyramid. Those at present
known are all on the west of this general passage; that is, in the
north-west quarter of the pyramid."

After aU, we fail to get any light upon the strange story by
Herodotus, that Cheops was buried on an island below the
pyramid, and that water from the Nile surrounded his tomb.
Mr. Ramsey, the companion of Lord Lindsay there in 1837,
writes : " It is a pity no one thinks of looking for any probable
entrance to the chamber in which Herodotus says the king is
buried, in a sarcophagus isolated from the rest by the water of
the Nile, which enters and flows round it. The level of the
Nile is 130 feet below the foundation; the angle of descent
alwavs used here is known."

Mr, Agnew has, as usual, something of weight to add upon


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 53

this question. " I believe," says he, " there must be, to the
Great Pyramid, another entrance, on a level with its base ; but,
perhaps, on the eastern side, if not on the northern. If, from
this point, the passages be found to descend at the same angle
as the other, it would touch the circumference of the larger or
outer circle, from whence a communication could be found lead*
ing directly below the centre of the pyramid. This point, — ^in
parts 331*3698, or about 159 feet below the pyramid base line,
— ^would be 15 feet above low water mark, and 9 or 10 feet
below high water of the Nile in these times. Here, if any-
where, will be found the chamber of the sarcophagus, resting on
the island round which the sacred water circulated; "where
Cheops himself is said to lie." But whoever occupied this
central place of honour below-ground may not have been the
only sleeper beneath the mighty mass."

An attempt, in 1837, by sinking below the floor of the
chamber, revealed nothing of interest. The descent was 36 feet.
But, with Prof. Piazzi Smyth, we cannot but wonder that while
money can easily be found for almost any mad project, a few
thousands of pounds to explore the noblest and most suggestive
of monuments cannot be obtained.


THE BLOCKIISraUP OF THE PYKAMID.

Assuredly one of the most wonderful of the wonderful stories
to be told of the pyramid is that a bmlding of such constructive
design, so full of teaching in it, should have been carefully and
eflfectually closed after its completion. Here, apparently, the
wisdom of the Egyptians was at fault.

Strabo said that the entrance was kept secret in. 1va& d»:^. ^<^


54 PYRAMID FACTS A^^> FAXCIBS.

Greek or Boman writer recardfl anything of the interior, except-
ing floating traditions, or the reports of Egyptian priests to
Herodotns, &c. Arab writers alone tell the tale of the forced
entrance, and they dwell upon the difficulties encountered. Had
not the passages themselves, including the Grand Crallery, been
blocked up with huge stones, the Caliph woold have had no
obstacle to surmount after once striking the first or Descending
Passage.

All writers admit the existence of the so-called Pobtcullis.
This granite stone, prepared and fixed for descent at the proper
time, so as to bar a passage, is found in several positions of the
interior. The one at the foot of the first passage was too for>
midable for the invaders, who cut through the softer stones
beneath, and so made a detour to gain the Ascending Passage,
rather than hew any longer at a granite block which they had,
in the course of their excavations, heard fall down, when they
had got nearly 100 feet from the entrance.

The Portcullis is about 8 to 10 feet each way, and weighing
from 50 to 70 tons. Some one calls that at the bottom of the
Ascending Passage only 13 tons. Perring says the lower end of
the upper passage was filled with granite blocks for 14 feet
The Portcullis was of a rectangular form, held in suspension at
the side, but fitted, at a signal, to faU and block up the passage.

Fergusson informs us that " they generally slide in grooves in
the wall, to which they fit exactly." Furthermore, he reports : —
" These were fitted into chambers prepared during the construo-
tion of the building, but raised into the upper parts, and, being
lowered after the body was deposited, closed the entrance."

Not only were these shapely stones of granite here and there
swrmg, as it were, ready for their destined work of concealment^


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 65

but it is now determined that the old builders had other arrange-
ments by which this stoppage was effected. Not content with
the giant Portcullis of granite, a large number of marble blocks
were prepared in the building, at the time of construction, and
not after the passages were formed, for the sole purpose of
being dropped, according to pre-determined plans, and so ef-
fectually, as it was thought, keeping the interior sacred from
the eye and foot of intrusion.

The men of EJiufu little dreamed that hereafter the desert
tribes would bring the overwhelming force of a new and burn-
ing faith, the strength of an irresistless tide of conquest, which
should shiver to fragments the massive doorways of these secret
ways.

What proof is there of this blocking ?

In our days, we pass along the passages, up the Grand Gallery,
and enter the Royal Chambers, without the presence of these
stony impedimenta. When Norden was there, in 1732, he ob-
served more than we can do now. He recognised the blocking
of the first passage, saying, "It is there (at the bottom) we dis-
cover clearly the manner in which th^ first passage has been
closed up, by means of three rough pieces of oriental marhle^
which join so well the sides of the passage that one has a diffi-
culty to introduce within the joints the point of a knife."

Of course he naturally, though erroneously, supposed that
these huge stones were introduced after the passages were com-
pleted, and brought down one and up another of them. In
this he was considerably puzzled. " It is pretended," he says,
" that all these passages have been closed and filled up with great
square stones which had been introduced thither after the whole
-work was finished. This, at least, is certain, that tb& ^^s^^^^o^^


56 PYRAMID FACTS AND FAXCIES.

of the second passage has been stopped; for we sHU see two
great square pieces of marble, which cut off the conunmiication
between this and the first passage. But, to say the trath, it is
not large enough at the entrance for a man easilj to pass, and
still less for introducing so great a quantity of large tiones as
were necessary for stopping tip the other passages,^

Here we perceive that, 150 years ago, there was a very decided
belief in Egypt that all the passages had been thus closed with
large stones. Arab tradition records the immense trouble the
workmen had to burst through these, the mutinous spirit of the
men exposed to such toil and danger, and the increased deter-
mination of the sovereign to proceed, as he felt confident that
such vast ingenuity and labour expended in the blocking must
have been for the concealment of enormous treasure.

The Danish traveller was equally struck with the precautions
adopted to preserve the integrity of the King's Chamber, which
enclosed the sacred deposit of the coffer or sarcophagus. In the
antechamber to the king's apartment he reported an important
witness, saying, '^ It has on each side an incision made in the
stone, probably in order to introduce these stones which were
designed to close up the entrance of the chamber."

Caviglia could have told more had his attention been directed
to the point. But Perring, who alludes to the lower part of the
Ascending Passage being filled with granite blocks for 14 feet,
affirms his conviction of the probability that all the passages were
once so filled. Bunsen, too, held such an opinion.

But it is to M. Maillet we are most indebted for attention to
this interesting subject. His long-continued and frequent ob-
servations were collected by Mr. Pococke, in 1743, and given in
Mb huge lolioe of travels. Let us read the Frenchman's report.


"WHAT 18 THE GREAT FSniAMID ? 67

It must have been regarded as authentic when our countryman
wrote, " For the particulars of the inside of the pyramid, I refer
to Maillet's account, which I have added at the latter end of
this volume.** But Pococke's book is not the only source of this
information.

M. Maillet tries to account for the presence of stones three or
four feet thick employed to block up the passages.

The visitor would be ready to acknowledge the force of his
remark that " In the whole length of this passage they (the in-
vading workmen of the Caliph) were obliged to use violent
means to break the stones with which it was filled up ; which so
defaced all the sides of the passages that, whereas it was at first
square, it became almost round." We can even now almost detect
here and there the smooth marble surface of the original side.
"All the passages," he continues, "have been filled up; the Gallery
had a magazine of stones necessary for the closing of these pass-
ages." These must have been placed there before the finishing,
as it was " impossible, after the pyramid was finished, to make
any stone enter into that Grallery of a thickness necessary to block
the passage from the inside and outside."

He perceived " the design of the architect in that long groove
which exists at the bottom of the Gallery." The first passage,
called by Maillet the canal exterieur, was once " filled with pro-
portioned stones," subsequently drawn with much labour.
Then "the stone which responded to the angle of the two
passages was raised." Two hundred and twenty feet were thus
blocked up.

Eecalling the hard struggle of the Saracens to enter, he says :
**They had reason to think that, besides the great number of
stones which filled up this passage, there might b^ %Q>isi^ ^SSc^iss.


58 PTRAMID FACTS ASD FANCIES.-

place aboTe, where there might be still nune stones ready to
slide down and fill up this passage as faai as they endeavonied
to dear it This was an additional labour which the architect
bad proposed for those who should attempt to penetrate into the
centre of the pyramid." The workmen, after breaking through
the soccessive stony barriers, felt that at any moment some port-
collis might drop down from some secret retreat and enclose
them alive in the tomb.

SQs observations npon the blocking of the Grallery are of
especial interest He caUs attention to the two raised steps^
benches, or ramps. *^ I have already mentioned," says Maillet,
*^ that in the benches on each side of the passage in the Grallery,
which is 124 feet long, tiiere had been made holes or mortices,
cot down perpendicularly, 1 foot long, 6 inches broad, and 8 inches
deep. These mortices were directly opposite to each other, and
^x>ntinued the whole length of the benches, at the distance of 2^
feet from one another. These holes were left when they built
the Ciallery, in order to fix into each of them a piece of timber a
foot square, and 3 or 4 feet long ; these timbers and joints made
a scaffold to put the stones on that were necessary to stop up all
the passages that were to be filled up in the inside of the
pyramid, as well as this Grallery, 124 feet in length."

" These joints," he proceeds, " were likewise shaped at the
npper end, so as to be fixed into the mortices of long beams of
wood laid on them, to support planks 6 feet 6 inches long, and
6 inches thick, made very smooth, on which courses of stones
were laid. The benches, as I have said before, being 2^ feet
from the bottom of the Gallery, I suppose the scaffold was set 3
feet above tiiem ; so that from the bottom to the sca£&>ld there
was a height of 5^ feet for the workmen to pass backwards and


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 59

forwards." He goes on to say, " Perhaps in the body of the
pyramid there are other passages stopped np, and not yet dis-
covered ; because in the Gallery there might have been placed
four'or five more courses of stone, if there was occasion."

In another work one may read these words of M. Maillet :
" In the benches next the walls there are, at the distance of
every 2| feet, holes 1 foot long, 6 inches broad, and 8 inches deep,
cut perpendicularly. The sides of the Gallery rise above these
benches 25 feet, twelve of which are exactly perpendicular, at
which height it projects 3 inches, and 3 feet higher 3 inches
more ; then 3 feet higher it sets out again 3 inches ; and 3
feet higher there is a fourth projection of 3 inches, from which,
to the ceiling of the Gallery, which is flat, is 4 feet more ; the
ceiling being about the same breadth as the passage between the
benches ; that is, about 3 feet 3 inches. This height was
necessary to the architect in order to place the stones intended to
Jill up the passages" " Even then," as he adds, " it required
13| feet of stone to fill up the passage that led to the Koyal
Chamber, even with the void space at the upper end of
the Gallery which they took down from the scaffold to the
floor."

But how were the stones brought down from the scaffold?
The ingenious Frenchman has a plan to meet the difficulty,
saying : " It is supposed that, in order to facilitate the perform-
ance of this work, there was fixed in the floor of the Gallery,
over against the stones on the scaffold, a strong machine of iron
and substantial pulleys, by the help of which the workmen,
standing on the floor, could by ropes take down the stones from
the scaffold one after another, and bring them to the very floor."

M. Maillet knew that the great attraction of the whole edifio.*^


60 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANaES.

lay in tbe King's Chamber, and that near that extra care would
be taken to prevent its violation. Whatever treasure lay
therein, or whatever were the secrets buried, the design of the
builders, strange as it may appear, was for ever, as they expected
and hoped, to conceal them from kings and subjects, from priests
and laity. He tracks the breakers-in up to this point in the
following manner : —

* " They found the passage extended further, and was 3 feet 3
inches wide, and well stopped up. It is probable that the last
stone was so well fixed as to cost them great labour to remove
it; which appears by a piece of the upper stone which was
broken off, in order, no doubt, to have a better hold on the
lower one, which stopped up the passage. This being removed
with great labour, they took out another with the same difficulty;
when those two were taken away there appeared a void space
7 1 feet long ; and, being desirous to clear the way further, they
found a third stone, that could not be got out, being every way
larger than the hole that it stopped up. This was the last
artifice of the architect to deceive any persons that might get
so far, and to prevent their looking any more after the private
chamber, which is but twelve paces from this place, in which lay
the body of the king, and where they would have found the
treasure, if any had been deposited with him. Still, this did
not discourage the workmen nor deceive them, for they set
about breaking the stone, which they must have done with much
labour; it was 6 feet long, 4 feet broad, and perhaps 5 or
6 feet high. There was a void space here of 15 feet high, which
at the height of 8 feet enlarged itself above 4 feet toward the
Gallery, and corresponded to an opening of the passage 18 inches
broad, which was 2 feet from the great stone.** — ^^* After having


WHAT IS THE GREAT PYRAMID? 61

cut away the great stone from the place where it was fixed
they came at length to the last stone at the entrance of the
chamber."

Conscious, as he was, that some might smile at his proposition,
he closed thus : — " What I have said in relation to the closing
up of the passages of the pyramid and the use of the Gallery
will, perhaps, appear new, and bold enough for some critics to
call a chimera." There were the stones, most certainly. What
was wanted was an explanation of the method of closing;
and M. Maillet, in 1692, called his own "a probable
system."

The views of Sir H. James, head of the Ordnance Survey, of
Sir Edmund Beckett, and of several others, are confirmatory of
M. Maillet's conclusions. The portcullis stones were just the
size to slide down, as they suppose, on planks to fill the other
passages, leaving room for the workmen to pass on the ramps.
" The width of the ramps," says one of them, " and, therefore,
of the whole Gallery, was wanted for the men to pass by these
stones when lying there ; and there are besides a series of up-
right holes in them, evidently for posts, but what the posts
were for is not so clear, as the men could easily guide the
stones down without them."

Every evidence confirms the idea that the pyramid, on com-
pletion, was not intended as a place of visitation or of reference,
seeing that it was immediately blocked up.

WHEN WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT ?

This is not an easy question to solve. We now discover his-
tory to be so full of myths that the difi^c\xlt\fi^ oi VQN^\A^NI\sstsL


62 PYRAMID PACT'S AND FANCIES.

into the past become sensibly increased. The early chronicles'
of nations are regarded with suspicion. Though we cease ta
laugh at them, as formerly was done, we are puzzled to interpret
what appears on the surface a collection of absurd fables.
Egyptian history is not free from false constructions.

Our system of dates did not prevail in olden times. The
" year of our Lord " is but some 1 200 years old. The Egyptians
reckoned eyents according to the reign of the sovereign. This
ancient system is maintained still in England with official docu-'
ments, as in proclamations and acts of parliament. So long as
we keep the list of rulers correctly, time can be fairly estimated.
But when, as with Egyptian dynastiiss, disputes as to authenticity
arise, dates are in utter confusion. Elsewhere reference will be(
made to this philosophical inquiry.

Of course there is one safe mode of reckoning — by asfcro^
nomical observation. The heliacal rise of the star Sirius, the
dogw3tar, gave the Egyptians the cycle of 1460 years. Any
mention of this in the chronicles of a king will give a starting-
point in the order of time, though failing to show which cycle
of 1460 years is indicated. The year 1322 B.a was one of these
epochs. In 1876 M. Chabas discovered the mention of the heliacal
rising of Sirius in the ninth reign of King Menkeres, builder of
the third pyramid of Gizeh. Was this 1460 years, or twice that
number, before 1322 B.C. 1 Was he living 2782 b.o., or 4242 B.O.?

No one supposes the Great Pyramid the oldest structure of its
kind in Egypt. Sir Edmund Beckett, the German Dr. Lepsius,
Mr. H. C. Agnew, and others, are persuaded that the second
pyramid is older than the first. While the latter was built by
a king of the fourth dynasty, Mr. Birch, of the British Museum,
the best English Egyptologist, states that the pyramid of Mey-


WHEN WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 63

douin was erected by one of the second dynasty. Tliis false
pyramid, as it is called, at El-Wasta, is esteemed much older
than the Gizeh structures. Tombs of the second dynasty are
recognised by Dr. Birch, of the British Museum. The painted
statues of the third dynasty were found by Mariette Bey in th©

»

Necropolis about the false pyramid of El-Wasta. The present
inquiry is limited to the date of the Great Pyramid.

Whatever the age, one thing is clear, that the people wera
then highly civilised. As Hekekyan Bey remarks, " Had they
been merely an agricultural people they could not have disposed
of superfluous wealth and labour in prosecuting with such con-
stancy undertakings which were unremunerative." It is equally
certain that, as the Rev. Mr. Zincke says, " they had already
had a long existence." Some writers thought that, because the
Great Pyramid had been raised in the fourth dynasty, only a little
time had elapsed since the beginning of the race. The queen's
chaplain judiciously observes on this : " Men could not pass in-
200 years from the flrst essays in cutting stone to the grandest
stone structure, and in nicety of workmanship one of the most
perfect instances of stone joinery that has ever been erected.
Some of the pyramids themselves, and many of the tombs, are
older than the pyramids of Gizeh. A pyramid has been built
in the Faioum as far back as the first dynasty of aU." Mr.

•

Kenrick speaks thus of the tombs one sees at the foot of the
Great Pyramid : " Their walls are covered with paintings and
hieroglyphical inscriptions, which give us as clear an insight
into the manners and opinions of the Egyptians under the fourth
dynasty as those of Thebes under the eighteenth and nineteenth."
We must be prepared, then, to run back a long way, not only
for the date of the pyramid, but for the risft ol e\\\i\»e^A»\3LVa


64 FTRAMID FACTS AND FANCTES.

Egypt. Schliemann's exploration of the site of Troy illustrates
the question. He passed through 52 feet of dShris to the rock,
tracing the separate existence of four cities. He shows that the
most recent was founded 700 years before our era, and has been
destroyed above a thousand years. For historical Troy he claims
a date far higher than previously acknowledged. Yet, beneath
that he found the remains of a people wholly different from the
Homeric Trojans, and yet so long in being that, while the
dSbris of the Greek city fills up six feet, the nameless town relics
are scattered through nineteen feet of depth.

An attempt to gauge the age of the pyramid has been made
by means of the supposed chronology of the Bible. But as that
has not been settled by theologians themselves, within thousands
of years, the laity have little help from clerical labours. Mr.
Gliddon tried to make a comparison with the era of the Deluge;
but he gave up in utter despair when he ascertained that Jewish
and Christian writers gave no less than 300 different dates for
that event. Yet many object to Her Majesty's chaplain assert-
ing that the early Scriptures were 'Ho teach to the Israelites
religion, and not to teach history to us."

It is not surprising, therefore, that authorities differ about the
age of the pyramid. Sayuti, the Arabian historian, was driven
beyond the Deluge for its origin, because he could get no reliable
information for it this side of the Flood. To show the disagree-
ment, a few dates may be given. While Norden, the old Danish
traveller, put it before Memphis was founded, Volney is content
to make it 160 years younger than Solomon's temple, or 860 b.o.
Because Homer is silent about it, Goguet declares it was raised
since the Trojan war. While M. Jomard attributes it to King
Venephes, the fourth of the first dynasty, John Greaves, the


WHEN WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 65

Oxford professor, in the time of Charles I., supposes it huilt
about the twentieth dynasty. Kenrick proves that " some of the
adjacent tombs contain the shields of kings of the third dynasty.',
Sir Gardener Wilkinson writes : " The age of the pyramids them-
selves is acknowledged by Memphis being abeady called * the land
of the pyramid ' in the reigns of Suphis, Papi, and Osirtasen,
of the fourth, fifth, and twelfth dynasties." M. Eenan finds the
monuments of Thebes " more modern by 3000 years."

Among precise dates others may be cited ; as that of Osbum,
2300 B.C.; Nolan, 2123 to 2171 b.c; Wilkinson, 2200 to
2500 B.C.; Fergusson, 2600 to 3900 b.c; Lesueur, 4000 to
5400 b.o ; Bunsen, 3892 b.c. Among those who have further
studied history, Dufeu has dates from 4833 to 4923 b.c. Mr.
Zincko writes : *^ We know with equal certainty that they (the
pyramids) were built between five and six thousand years ago."
Prof. Owen, no mean scientific authority, and no impetuous
assertor, assigns " the period of 6109 years from the present
date (1875) to the second monarch of the fourth dynasty."
Mariette Bey, the founder of the Cairo Museum, and one of the
most fortunate of explorers among ruins, puts the fourth dynasty,
the era of the pyramids of Gizeh, between 3951 and 4235 b.c.
One thing is entirely clear, that the pyramids had ceased to be
fashionable at the time of the Hycsos.

In another work, the Lists of Dynasties as given by
Manetho, the Egyptian historian, will be fully discussed. It is
sufficient here to state, amidst the disputations, that the Lists are
not quite decided. Gliddon is severe, if just, when he says,
" Josephus, Eusebius, and Julius Africanus difier so much from
each other in the several portions of Manetho's history, of which
they present the extracts, that, in their time, either great errora


66 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

had crept into the then existing copies^ of Manetho, or one or
more of them were corrupted by design ; especially in the in-
stance of Eusebius, who evidently suppressed some parts, and
mutilated others, to make Manetho, by a pious fraud, conform to
his own peculiar and contracted system of cosmogony." Many
now can endorse these strictures upon the^ wily Greek Bishop of
Caesarea, who lived in an age of pious frauds, opposing sects,
and mutual persecutions.

M. Eoug6, sensible of chronological difficulties, endeavours to
lead our minds up to an approximate date, in a review of what
took place in Egypt before the Chris tain era. " If we come to
remember," says he, " that the generations which constructed
them are separated from our vulgar era, at first, by the eighteen
ages of the second Egyptian empire, then by the time of the
Asiatic invasion, and afterwards by several numerous and
powerful dynasties, which have leffc us monuments of their
passage, the old age of the pyramids, although not able to be
calculated exactly, will lose nothing of its majesty in the eyes of
the historian."

It is now generally conceded that we have a certain date for
the end of the twentieth dynasty ; viz. 1300 B.C. Most Egypt-
ologists agree that there are astronomical data for assuming the
eighteenth century before Christ as the time of the kings of the
eighteenth dynasty. Rouge believes he has full authority for
putting the twelfth dynasty at 3000 B.C. It is a long and un-
certain clamber thence to Menes of the first dynasty. He was
assumed by Josephus, oh no recognised data, to live 1300 years
before Solomon. Auguste Mariette Bey places him 5000 b.c.
Hekekyan Bey says, "The three largest pyramids of Gizeh
being geographical monuments, these retrospective measures on


WHEN WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 67

the column of Sothic periods were dated to the close of the
sixtieth year of the Sothic period ; " this gave 839. M. Dufeu
finds the first pyramid date " 789 Nife years after Menes
began to reign.'' Mr. 'Gladstone, in his Juventus Mundi, is
satisfied with the high numbers, saying, " Modern Egyptology
adopts in general the chronological computations of the priest
Manetho, as sufficiently corroborated by the deciphered records
of the country."

It is easy to pooh-pooh the first eighteen dynasties for which
we have to find a place. But we have monuments belonging to
kings of most of them, and can read the hieroglyphics they
bear. M. Deveria tells his readers that " the first five names of
the fourth dynasty are certain." Thus, the era of the Great
Pyramid is brought more palpably before us. Without, how-
ever, any positive declaration, it may be assumed that English
and French Egyptologists are pretty well agreed that the
Great Pyramid was erected about 6000 years ago.

Prof. Piazzi Smyth, of Edinburgh, has, however, come for-
ward with certain highly interesting religious speculations
respecting the pyramid, which have intensified the popularity of
the subject; and, though the great majority of literary and
scientific authorities, here and on the continent, are opposed to
his theories, he has put forth astronomical arguments for a date
of erection which demand thoughtful attention.

He assumes that the Great Pyramid was built 2170 years
before Christ. He finds the passage at such an angle, that an
observer looking through it 2170 b. a would observe the Polar
star (not our present one, but a Draconis) below the Pole on the
meridian at the equinox. Taking that as a remarkable fact, he
assumes that the passage was finished at tbat ^^etVo^. "S.^ ^'s^<^'a»


68 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

the authority of Sir John Herschel to substantiate his position.

As it is now known that the pyramid was closed absohitely
immediately upon completion, Prof. Wackerbartb, of TJpsal,
takes up his fellow-professor thus : — " This hypothesis is liable
to the objection that, the mouth of the passage being walled up,
it is not easy to conceive how a star could be observed through
it." But this is a fallacious argument ; for it may be equally
said that, as the cofifer or sarcophagus and the King's Chamber
were to be for ever shut ofif from gaze, they had no special mean-
ing in their wonderful measurements. To the question, " What
was the use of the passages ] " one replies, " The answer is, no
use at all, but there they are as a matter of fact ; and it is no
more improbable that the principal passage was designed with a
view to recording its date by the Pole star than that an external
shape should have been selected because it satisfied certain
mathematical conditions, in themselves of still less use than the
recording of a date."

Mr. Smyth has a perfect right to assume a date, and then
establish arguments to support it. It was natural that he, as an
astronomer, should seek an astronomical origin. Eut is his
discovery of a Polar star then looking down that passage, and in
conjunction with the movement of the Pleiades in the opposite
side of ihe Pole on the meridian, any more than a happy coin-
cidence % Because a Draconis was so situated in relation to the
passage 2170 B.C., does it necessarily follow that that was the era
of construction] Is there anything to prevent Mr. Smyth, or
any other man, from selecting another date, earlier or later, which
should suit the passing of another Polar star on the meridian 1
Could we not obtain as many ages as we could discover such
astronomical coincidences'?


WHEN WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 69

As to the weight of Sir Joha Herschers authority, it now ap-
pears that the worthy man is not responsible for the theory. The
Rev. Dr. Nolan naively informs us that, "at the request of
Colonel Vyse, Sir J. Herschel calculated the place of the star
which was Polar at the time when, according to the reduced
chronology^ the pyramids were erected." That is, the date was
assumed when an interesting heavenly coincidence fitted it. But
against the assumed 2170 B.C. there is the Weight of Egyptolo-
gists' arguments for a more extended period. As Mr. Smyth is
an advocate for supposed Biblical chronology, he must surely
find it difficult to account for so vast a progress in government,
the arts, and material prosperity, during 178 years, the interval
between the Deluge and the erection of the pyramid.

As Koah is stated to have lived 350 years after the Flood, he
must have died 172 years after the building of the Great Pyramid,
according to the professor and his school of thought. If it be
said that men who lived so long added largely to the population,
and that, in 180 years, milUons could have proceeded from the
loins of Koah, it is somewhat remarkable that Holy Scripture
shall make Adam 130 at the birth of Seth, Methuselah 187
at the birth of Lamech, and give Noah but three sons in 500
years. Surely the disciples of Mr. Smyth have more reverence
for Bible dates than to content themselves with so remote an age
as 2170 B.C. While the Hebrew Text gives 352 years from the
Deluge to Terah, the Vatican LXX. makes the time 11 72 years.
They who do not pledge themselves to Usher's chronology,
for the Deluge or the Creation, find no difficulty in realising for
the era of the Great Pyramid an additional two thousand years. ^


70 PYRAMID PACTS AND FANCIES.


WHO BUILT THE GREAT PYRAMID?

The Greeks, who were the talebearers of antiquity, are not
always to he relied upon. Not content with telling what they
were told, or giving an enlarged version of the same, they too
often constructed a pretty story from their own fertile imagina-
tions. The Arabs, as an oriental people, are too fanciful in
their narratives. Sober-minded, matter-of-fact Englishmen are
quite modern travellers and historians. The question of author-
ities, therefore, as to the authorship of the pyramid is a puzzling
one.

When men looked up at the stupendous building, so dwarfing
the structures of their own age, it was quite natural that they
should attribute its origin to the giants that lived before the
Flood ; or, at any rate, to the intellectual giants of that remote
period.

An Arab tradition states that Gian ben Gian, the distinguished
pre-Adamite Monarch of the World, reared it. Firouzabadi was
assured that the Adamites very early procured its erection.
The Eev. T. Gabb, in 1806, declared it "the production of those
immediate descendants of Seth and the Faitbf ul who adhered to
tbem." He meets one supposed difficulty thus : — ** Surely,"
says he, " the immediate descendants of Seth and Enos were of
larger stature than we are." In that way he saw how they
could lift stones which other men must needs lift " by jacks.^*
The very sands at its base made the good man exclaim, " This
pyramid must have been erected by the Antediluvians ; and the
universal Deluge, called Noah's Flood, and the description of it
in Holy Writ, will account, in a satisfactory manner, for the


WHO BUILT THE GREAT PYRAMID ? 71

lodgment of sands on thjs surface of the extensi7e rock." He
adds, "These sands, on the subsidmg of the waters, were pro-
bably very near the summit of the pyramid."

Josephus rehearses the tradition of the Shemites going to
Siriad, or Egypt, and erecting there two monuments, one of
brick and one of stone, on which they inscribed astronomical
discoveries ; and one of these must, it is said, be the pyramid,
Mr. John Taylor, the celebrated writer on " The Great Pyramid,
Who built it 1 and Why was it built 1 " says, " To Noah we must
ascribe the original idea, the presiding mind, and the benevolent
purpose. He who built the ark was of all men the most com-
petent to direct the building of the Great Pyramid."

But honest John Greaves, who visited Egypt in 1637, gather-
ing fable and fact in his travels, gives this excellent story from
an Arabic book, which he translated : —

"The writer of the book, entitled Morat Alzeman, ,writes:
* They differ concerning him that built the pyramids. Sows say
Joseph, some say Nimrod, some Dalukah the queen, and some that
the Egyptians built them before the Floud, for they foresaw that
it would be, and they carried thither their treasures, but it pro-
fited them nothing. In another lilace he tels us from the Copt-
ites {or Egyptians) that these two greater pyramids, and the
lesser, which is coloured, are Sepulchers. In the East pyramid
is King Saurid, in the West pyramid his prother Hougib, and in
the coloured pyramid FazfaHnoim, the sonne of Hougib. The
Sabieans relate that one of them is the sepulcher of Shiit
{that is, Sefh), and the second sepulcher of Sab, the sonne of
Hermes, from whom they are called Sabceans, They goe in pil-
grimage thither, and sacrifice at them a coclce and a black calfe,
and offer up incense,^


72 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

" Ibn Abd Alkokm, another Arabian, discoursing of this Argu-
ment, confesses that he could not find amongst the learned men
in JEyypt, any certaine relation concerning them. Wherefore
what 18 more reasonable (saith he) then that the pyramids were
built before the Floud ? For if they had been built after, there
would have been some memory of them amongst men ; at last he
concludes. The greatest part of chronologers affirmed that he which
built the pyramids was Saurid ibn Salhouk, the King of Egypt,
who was before the Floud 300 yeares. And this opinion he con-
firmes out of the books of the ^Egyptians ; To which he addes,
The Coptites mention in their books, tJiat upon them is an in-
scription ingraven ; the exposition of it in Arabicke is this ; * /
Saurid, the king, built the Pyramids in such and such a time,
and finished them in six yeares; he that comss after me, and sayes
he is equall to me, let him destroy them in six hundred yeares ; and
yet it is knowne that it is easier to phicke down then to build ; and
when I had finished them, I covered them with Sxttin, and let
him cover them with slats.* The same relation I found in severall
others of them."

Josephus, full of the glorification of his people, and having
the average oriental disregard of strict veracity, and nearly the
average oriental power of constructive invention, inclines to the
erection by his forefathers. ".The Egyptians," he says, " inhumanly
treated the Israelites, and wore them down in various labours, for
they ordered them to divert the course of the river (Nile) into
many ditches, and to build walls, and raise mounds, by which
to confine the inundations of the river ; and, moreover, vexed
our nation in constructing foolish pyramids." Mr. Yeates sus-
pects they had nothing to do at Gizeh, but may have made brick
ones elsewhere. JS^orden, the Danish traveller, in 1737, has simi-


WHO BUILT THE GREAT PYRAMID? 73

lar doulDts, since the Bible spoke of "bricks, and not of stone
structures there. " As to what concerns the works on which the
Israelites were employed in Egypt/' he writes, " I admit that
I have not been able to find any remains of bricks burnt in the
fire." Calmet supposed Moses and Aaron were foremen of the
works. Melchizedek is another of the reported builders.

It appears from Herodotus, whose tales are often mystifying
enough, that, though Cheops and his brother erected the
pyramids, " no Egyptian will mention their names ; but they
always attribute their pyramids to one Philition (Philitis), a
shepherd, who kept his cattle in those parts." We are further
told that this man left Egypt with a following of 240,000 men,
and proceeded to the foundation of Jerusalem. Upon thisj it is
concluded by some that the monuments were erected by the
shepherd race. Lord Lindsay says, " There is much reason to
believe that they were built by the royal shepherds of Egypt,
who afterwards became the Philistines." Mr. Sharpe, the
Egyptologist, observes, " The curious remark of Herodotus, that
they were ccdled by the name of the shepherd Philitis, is not of
Bufl&cient weight against the foregoing reasons to lead us to the
conclusion that they were built by the above-mentioned Philis-
tine shepherds." But others have discovered, by arguments
convincing to themselves, that this Philitis was none other than
the Biblical Melchizedek, seeing that he was King of Salem,
that is, of Jerusalem, founded by Philitis.

The shepherd story brings to mind the Hindoo narrative of
some early race of India, the Pali, who were a shepherd people,
ancestors of the present aboriginal Bheels, succeeding once
in conquering Egypt. Their stronghold, Aharis, is, in Sanscrit,
a shepherd ; Goshena, in Sanscrit, is the land 0/ slieplievda.


80 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

Tracey, R. X., advance in the theory, and proclaim the very
Saviour Himself the huilder.

These are the Captain's words in a recent work : " We may
from Scripture show that our Lord, as Melchisedek, had to do
with the Great Pyramid, as the Great Architect thereof ; for
God, speaking to Job out of the whirlwind, demands of him
(Job xxxviii. 18), * Hist thou perceived the breadth of the
earth ] Declare if thou knowest it all.' This implies that none
but God Himself could know it, consequently, none could have
been the architect of the Great Pyramid but one who knew the
counsels of the Almighty ; and toho could this he hut our Lord
Jesus Christ ? " He further affirms : — " The first appearance of
our Lord as Melchisedek, King of Salem, leads me to believe
that all His appearances from Babel to Abraham were as Mel-
chisedek." Elsewhere he writes, " Melchisedek was really our
Lord."

SMALLER PYRAMIDS OF GIZEH.

Though the Great Pyramid has been the main object of
enquiry, some reference to its neighbours will not be out of
place.

The plateau of Gizeh, high above the region inundated by the
Nile, was selected for a burial-ground in the earliest times of
Egyptian history. The pyramids there are but lofty, royal
tombs amidst a vast number of sepulchres. Eut that which
excites astonishment is that we should have such noble archi-
tectural monuments remaining, appropriated as memorials to
deceased princes, priests, and women, with nothing left to mark
even the site of towns inhabited by them when living.

The pyramids there are surrounded by graves, not a few of


SMALLER PYRAMIDS. 81

which are older than the oldest of these pyramids. The Great is
called the Firaty because the chief in size and interest. The
second is not much its inferior. The third is considerably less,
though the most perfect and beautiful. Then come six other
structures, of far less extent. Norden, 150 years ago, wrote :
" There are four of them that deserve the greatest attention of
the curious, though we see seven or eight others in the neigh-
bourhood."

Most of the smaller ones are eastward of the Great Pyramid.
Thevenot said, " Before each of the pyramids are the marks of
certain buildings, which to some seem to have been so many
temples." They were, however, but small pyramids. Doubtless
some pyramids have totally disappeared. Before each, as is
believed, a temple formerly stood, in which religious rites were
performed for the deceased king.

The Ninth Pyramid is supposed to have once stood 101 feet
in height, though now but 80. The length is 160. It possesses
a subterranean chamber \2\ feet long, 9 J wide, and 8 J high.

The Eighth Pyramid, to the east of the great one, which it
resembles in its work, has been thought the tomb of Cheops*
daughter. Its height, once 111, is now 55 feet. The original
length was 172 J feet. The funeral chamber is 12f by 10 J feet.

The Seventh Pyramid, according to Mr. F. S. Perring, C. E.,
had the area of the eighth. It is now but a mound of sand 45
feet high. The chamber is declared llf by 9f, with an ante-
room, 13 feet 10 inches, by 5 feet 10.

The Sixth is south of the third. It had formerly a base of
102 J feet, and height of 69|. There is a passage 47f feet long,
leading to a chamber 26 feet long by 11 feet 4 inches broad.

The Fifth is cased with Mokattam marble. It was o^wa^YCk


88 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

years ago, described its ruins as covering a great space. Bakoui,
of the fifteenth century, was wonderstruck at them. Furer, in
1565, spoke of two gigantic statues there, 20 feet high, with
many stone animals. Eadziwil, 1583, mentions a figure 20
cubits long lying on the ground. Abulfedu was delighted with
the freshness of the colours. But Memphis has now scarcely a
ruin to be recognised.

The Necropolis of Saqqarah, whose tombs extend four or five
miles, was the City of the Dead for Memphis. In the midst of
these sepulchres rose some pyramids. In Pococke's Travels,
1743, eleven of them are marked down. Jomard gives sketches
of some, and marks the differences among them. Denon, 1799,
talks of there being thirty; and adds, "one finds traces of a
great number of others." Inside the truncated one to the south
were found chambers with niches, as in the Third Pyramid of
GizeL

The age of Saqqarah is greater than that of GizeL We read
that Ouenephes, fifth king of the first dynasty, built pyramids
at Cochome, supposed to be SaqqaraL The Serapeum, or burial-
place of the sacred Apis bulls, is at Saqqarah, and was discovered
in 1861.

The Great Pyramid of Saqqarah, or Pyramid of Degrees,
though allowed to be " exceptional " by Mr. Fergusson, is fancied
by him " an imitation of the old form of mausolea by some king
of a far more modern date." But his doubtful mind is seen in
another place, where he writes that it is " of a date eitJier an-
t&i'ior or posterior to these" (other pyramids). Though an
architect, he does not profess to be an Egyptologist. But Dr.
Birch, a real authority, says clearly that "it is the oldest
Egyptian monument hitherto found." Maxiette Bey is positive


OTHER EGYPTIAN PYRAMIDS. 89

that it belongs to the first dynasty. He attributes it to the
fourth king of the first dynasty.

It has six steps, or degrees. The material is stone and rubble.
In size it corresponds with the Third Pyramid of Gizeh. From
north to south it is 351 feet; east to west, 394. The height is
200 J feet. The angle of the face is 72° 36'. Each story is said
to be " not built in horizontal courses, but a pyramidal nucleus
of rubble is inclosed by a series of inclined walls, about 9 feet
thick, eleven in number on each side of the central mass, with
an additional one on the north and south sides. These walls
are composed of rudely-squared stones, set to the angle of the
face."

Baron Minutoli, of Genoa, had the honour of revealing the
interior, in 1824. Of his interesting collection, the greater part
was lost in shipwreck; a few things were purchased f^ the
Berlin Museum. His wife has left us some interesting details
of lus work. Among these is the account of the many passages,
corridors, and chambers, "in the walls of which," says she,
" were encrusted convex pieces of porcelain, of various colours,
which, when seen by torch-light, must have a pretty effect.
There are also hieroglyphics above several doors, a circumstance
which has not hitherto been remarked in the other pyramids.
The largest of these chambers, the walls of which were blackened
by the smoke of the torches, contained, instead of a sarcophagus,
a small sanctuary, formed of several blocks of stones." The
vitrified bluish-green porcelain slabs lining the chamber are like
Dutch tiles.

Mr. Vyse found the horizontal passage below level, and a pit
leading to the Subterranean Chamber. This passage is 120 feet
long, and conducts to the pit. There are, bo'we^^si, toos. ^scl-


do PTEAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

trances. The main passage is 176 feet long. The Great Cham-
ber, 77 feet in height, is in the centre of the pyramid, and is 24
feet by 23 in size. This sepulchral chamber contained no sar-
cophagus. One writes thus of it : — " Immediately under the
centre of the pyramid there is an excavation 77 feet in depth,
24 by 23 in width, entirely in the rock. Its upper part was
originally covered by a ceiling of wood."

In the granite floor was seen a small chamber 10 feet by 5^,
with its entrance closed by a huge granite stone, weighing four
or five tons. This may have been a treasury, or was once used as
an oracle, says somebody. There are two smaller rooms, one
being 20 J x 5 x 6 J feet ; and the other, 18 J x 5 x 6J feet. Baron
Minutoli found a skull gilded over, and two gilt soles of feet.

The most northern pyramid of Egypt is Abouroash, five miles
north-west of Gizeh. But it is properly described as "very
much degraded, and contains nothing of importance." There
is also a very-much-ruined pyramid a little south of Gizeh.

In general, the Egyptian pyramids may be said to be in a
line from the north-east. There are, says Mr. Casey, thirty-eight
pyramids on the western* side of the Nile, between lat. 29° 59'
and 29° 26' ; or, in about thirty miles. There are twenty-five in
a line of twenty-five miles.

A couple of miles north of the Saqqarah ten pyramids, and
seven or eight miles south-east of Gizeh, are the pyramids of
Abousir. Herodotus tells us that an inscription upon the
celebrated brick pyramid said, " Do not disparage me by com-
paring me with the stone pyramids. I am as superior to them
as Amoun is to the gods." The bricks are of excellent quality,
16 inches long, 8 broad, and 5 thick.


OTHER EGYPTIAN PYRAMIDS. 91

The North Pyramid of Abousir, called Sahuraa, is 257 feet long,
and 163 high, bearing the angle of 51° 42' 35^ Its chamber
is 11^ feet long, and 12^ high. It i& bmlt on the sand. The
Great Pyramid of Abousir was 359f feet long, and 228 high ;
but is now 325 long, and 164 higL The passage leading to
the Sepulchral Chamber is 104 feet in length. Wood has been
found there quite sound, though brittle. In the British Museum
is the branch of a tree taken out of the masonry. One, de-
scribed as 80 feet above the soil, had formerly an elevation of 215.
The fourth and fifth pyramids appear not to have been finished.

The Central Pyramid of Abousir had once a base of 274 feet,
and a height of 171; it stretches now 213 feet long, and is 107
high. The passage was ascertained to be 63 feet long, 5 wide,
and 6 high. The fourth monarch of the fifth dynasty is said to
have been buried in the Middle Pyramid, and the fifth king in
another. The seventh was interred in the neighbourhood.
Both the second and third of the fifth dynasty are also supposed
to have been buried at Abousir. Snefru-nub-Ea found his last
home there.

Dashoor, in the neighbourhood of Saqqarah, Abousir, and
Memphis, boasts of five pyramids. They are much dilapidated.
The north brick one is said to have been built by King Sasychis,
the early legislator, the eleventh of the Memphite sovereigns.
One, half the height of the Gizeh Pyramid, has a slope of 54°,
but is finished off at the angle of 45°. While the North one
shows a length of 326J feet, it formerly had 342J. The South
is of stone, with a base of 320 feet. The Large Pyramid has 198
steps. There are 68 forming a height of 184 feet, at the angle
54° ; and 130 smaller stones in a height of 250 feet, at 45°.
The base is 600 feet.


92 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCTES.

The Pyramid of Lisht is nine miles south of Dashoor.

Mbtdoun Pyramid, twelve miles south of Lisht, is half way
from Cairo to Beni-souef. In its Necropolis were discovered
the much-admired statues of Ra-hotep and his wife Nefer-t, of
the time of Snefrou, last of the third dynasty. Meydoun
Pyramid was, doubtless, the tomb of Snefrou, the predecessor
of Khufu or Cheops. But Dr. Birch gives it even higher
antiquity, assigning it to Nefer-Ra-ra, the last but one of the
second dynasty !

Meydoun has more the appearance of a tower than a pyramid.
Its slanting walls, of several terraces, have gained for it by the
Arabs the name of the False or Dying Pyramid. It is a
diminishing cube, with a similar cube on the top. Though
situated on a low plain, it is out of the reach of inundations*
The angle is 74°. For 120 feet upward, nothing but rubbish
is seen. But 100 feet higher a platform is gained. A third
elevation follows. Some one writes, " Two smaller towers rise
from its summit, in the manner in which it is supposed Assyrian
pyramids were usually constructed."

It has been conjectured that there were successive stages, 40
feet each, while the steps were filled up afterwards. Some think
it has never been completed, though begun in degrees. In the
Necropolis of Meydoun, Mariette Bey found the painted statues
of the third dynasty, described as the "oldest specimens of
Egyptian art" Dr. Birch refers the Meydoun statues of El
Wasta Necropolis to the age of the third dynasty.

Incidentally we drop upon quite a number of the names of

pyramids upon the ancient monuments. On steles we read of

those of Asse-nefer, of Ea-tet-ke'-nefer, of Pepi of the sixth

dynasty, of Meri-en-ra of the sixth, of Ra-nefer-re men-ankh of


OTHER EGYPTIAN PYRAMIDS. 93

the sixth, of Ea-tep-ke-nefer, of Man-nefer, of Pepi-men-nefer,
of Ea-meri-en scha-nefer of the sixth dynasty, of Amenu of the
eleventh dynasty, &c. But where are these pyramids 1

In the Faycmmj says Mr. Zincke, are some " as far back as
the first dynasty of alL" Denon speaks of one there, Hilahoun,
— " The most ruinous of all the pyramids I have seen, is also that
built with the least magnificence. Its construction is composed
of masses of calcareous stones, which serve as a nest for a heap
of unbaked brick." In the Fayoum are ruins of very massive
masonry, with the remains of a pyramid at the south-east comer,
having a slope of 67°.

This is the neighbourhood of Lake Moeris, the artificial basin
of water, formerly, as one has reported, 30 miles, and another
190 miles, round. Herodotus says there were two large pyramids
rising out of the lake, above 500 feet in height. He says the
height above the surface equalled that beneath it. The total,
100 orgyes, or a stadium, was 600 Babylonian feet. Moeris is
said — so reports John Greaves — ^to have erected " one for himself,
and the other for his wife, placing upon them two marble statues,
sitting on a throne, imagining by these works he should propa-
gate to posterity an immortal memory of his worth." Elsewhere
we learn that the two were erected for Amenemha III., and his
sister.

The Labyrinth was near these. It contained 3600 rooms in
two stories. Lepsius, who explored its ruins, writes, '* We have
obtained an entry into a chamber covered with piles of rubbish
that lay before the pyramid, and here we also found the name
of Amenemha several times. The builder and possessor of the
pyramid is therefore determined." This Pyramid of the
Labyrinth was 240 feet high. It rose iiom \\i^ xo^, %sA^^^


96 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

" Two groups of pyramids stand near Djebel-Birkel, in Nubia ;
one contains only a few pyramids. None of these pyramids are
above 80 feet bigb, and they are comparatively smaller at the
base than the Egyptian pyramids, and more tapering. Only a
few of these pyramids had sculptures, which were softer and
more voluptuous than the Egyptian style admits. I think the
majority of the pyramids of Noar to be the most ancient of all
the Ethiopian monuments now extant. They are not so taper as
the pyramids of Birkel, and consequently more nearly resembling
the Egyptian. The remains of more than forty may be distin^
guished, but only sixteen of them are in tolerable preservation."
Of one it is said, *^ The form of this singular structure differs
entirely from those which surround it ; and it appears to have
consisted of several stories, of various degrees of steepness. The
entire height of this truncated pyramid, as it now stands, is
nearly 100 feet, and its circumference about four times that
extent."

If the Nubian were the older, the conclusion would be that
civilisation and the pyramid-building art descended the Nile;
but the strength of opinion inclines to the belief that Nubia was
a colony of Egypt, and civilised by the men of Thebes and
Memphis.

OTHER MONUMENTAL TOMBS.

The Mexican Pyramids, or Teocallis, were erected, according
to the theory of some, by a particular masonic body, known as
pyramid builders, the remains of whose labours are to be seen
from China, by India, Persia, Egypt, Barbary, and across America,
to the South Sea Isles.
There is a plain in Mexico called Micoatl, the Path of the


OTHER MONUMENTAL TOMBS. 97

Deady where hundreds of teocallis are seen, and which served as
burying-places. They are truncated pyramids. Their tops
served as altars, and human victims were often hurled down the
steps of the edifice. Not unfrequently a temple or priest's
building stood at the top.

Like as in the pyramids of Egypt, the sepulchral chamber was
subterranean, and was usually entered from the exterior by a
short vertical descent, and a long horizontal passage. They
were, therefore, both tombs and temples. At times they served
as forts, or as royal palaces. They existed long before the ar-
rival of the Aztecs, with whom the Spaniards came in con-
tact. Their ornamentation has been despoiled by the con-
querors.

The Teocalli of Cholula, upon a plain 6000 feet high, has a
base twice the size of the Great Pyramid of Egypt. It is 1589
feet long, and is 180 high, being built of unburnt bricks. An
image to a god formerly stood on the summit. The pyramids of
Teotihuacan, on the plain of Otumba, are twenty-five miles north-
east of the city of Mexico. There are hundreds of small ones
round a larger. The central part is made of clay and small stones,
and the outer wall is of basaltic stone. On one was formerly
an image of the sun, covered with plates of gold, which were
stripped ofif by Cortez. This edifice was 682 feet base, and 180
high. The Pyramid of the Moon, near it, was 36 feet shorter.
The Pyramid of Papantla, near the Gulf of Mexico, has six or
seven stories. Three staircases lead outside to the top. Yucatan
has several pyramids, which are very ancient. Oaxaca has a
symbolical spiral tower of nine stages.

Peru has its pyramids. That of Pachacamac has a base of
500 by 400 feet, with a height of 250. Biick Y^^asN.^'ta y^q^^^N*


98 PYKAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

from the uppennost wall. The temple of Tiaguanico is a stone-
terraced pyramid.

The Mound Builders of Ohio, &c., were of long past ages.
Their vast edifices are the only memorials of their existence.
One near the Mississippi is 420 feet long, and 390 broad at the
base, while the top is 120 by 100.

India has pyramids in the Peaks of Menu. The pyramidal
entrances of pagodas resemble the propylaea of temples in Egypt.
The pagoda of Tanjore rises 200 feet ; and the shrine of Jugger-
naut 350. Near Ellora, so famous for its sculptured caves, there
are three pyramidal edifices without sculptures. North Ceylon
possesses some in the form of truncated pyramids. Java has a
seven-terraced pyramid on a mound. It is called Bora Bodu
temple, and is 620 feet at the base, and 100 high. The
Javanese temple of Suku has three stories.

Nineveh and Babylon had their pyramids. The Tower of
Babel, or the Tower of Nimrod, is thus described by Mark
Gregory, who saw it in 1712. "Tis a tower exactly square;
that is, having four sides, equal, in form of an obelisk or pyra-
mid." It had nine flat cubes. Eaised then 162 feet, it seemed
to lack a third of its height. He says, " It wanted the ninth
story for its completion, and terminated with a round flat of 54
feet diameter, having an aperture or hole of 9 feet, being the
window of the temple, as above, in the middle ; and it con-
tinues so to this day." Alas ! since his day it has undergone
strange changes.

Herodotus describes it as " four square, and each side being

two furlongs in length. In the midst of this holy place there

is a solid tower of the thickness and height of a furlong." Dr.

Smith's History states that "the axis of the building, or line


OTHER MONUMENTAL TOMBS. 99

joining the centres of the stages, was inclined to the horizon ; and
if we imagine the building enclosed by lines joining the coiTe-
sponding corners of the steps, the figure so formed would be an
oblique pyramid." M. Ernest Pillon says that six of the eight
stories have gone, and that the two left can be seen at a distance
of six miles. The base he calls 194 metres, or about 640 feet.
The bricks were of pure white clay, stamped with characters
before burning ; bitumen was also used.

The Mujelibe, once supposed the Tower of Belus, was found
by Mr. Eich of brick, 200 yards on the north, 219 south, 182
east, and 136 west. The highest part left was 141 feet. Its
circumference, 2111 feet, was nearly that of Babel or Birs Nim-
roud, 2286. He reckoned the latter 235 feet in height, and the
side of the square, 571 J feet.

China, in its pagodas and its nine-storied temples, has
pyramidal structures. Some have been found in Tartary, and
even Southern Siberia.

The Pacific Islands bear the same impress of pyramid
builders, who worked there when the area of land was far more
extensive than at present. Ancient stone buildings of this
shape appear in Hawaii, and other islands of the North Pacific.
The Pyramid of Atehuru, in Polynesia, is of stone, 270 feet
long, 94 wide, 50 high, with a flat top. The Moral, or temple
of Maeva, is 120 feet square; and that of Oberea is 267 long,
87 broad, and 44 high. On Easter Island, now isolated and unin-
habited, in the South Pacific, where enormous images of stone
testify to a very advanced civilisation, and, therefore, much greater
expanse of land, there is seen an immense mound of earth 384
by 324 feet, with a platform of cut stone 80 feet long, 12 broad ^
8 thick.


100 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

The following account of the curious pyramids on the tomb of
the Etruscan king, Porsenna, is by Varro: "He was buried
outside Clusiam city, in which place he left a monument of
square stone. Each side of it was 300 feet broad, and 50 high.
Upon this square there stood five pyramids, four in the corners
and one iu the middle. In the base they were 75 feet broad,
and 150 high. They were pointed in such a manner that at the
top there is a brass circle and covering for them all, from which
there hang bells, fastened to chains. These being moved by the
wind give a sound afar ofif, as at Dodona it has formerly been.
Upon this circle there are four other pyramids, each of them 100
feet high ; above which, on a plain, there are five pyramids."
There were, therefore, three tiers of pyramids.

Only mere fragments remain to illustrate the civilisation of
the past. But for a few monuments we should perceive no relics
of races long passed from the earth. Because Egypt has material
to show the existence of a high development of progress in the
arts some seven thousand years ago, it is not to be assumed
that all other lands were then in darkness.

OBELISKS.

The removal of the so-called Cleopatra's Needle to our own
shores gives the obelisk a new interest. Geometrically allied
to the pyramid, it is fitting that a reference be made to it here.
The mathematical, scientific, and symbolical account cannot
be discussed on the present occasion.

The avenues of obelisks leading to the temples of the Middle

and New Empires, and the frequency of their use as memorial

stones, would, at first, seem to imply their sole employment in

those epochs. The researches oi Egyptologists have brought out


OBELISKS. 101

the fact that they were not uncommon under the Ancient
Empire itself. While the one standing at Heliopolis is proved
to belong to the very remote twelfth dynasty, or nearly 5000
years, others were far older ; as Mr. John Wilson says : " This
form of a monument, which plays so conspicuous a part iii
the l^ew Empire, is thus thrown back some dynasties further
into the Old Empire than even the obelisk at Heliopolis." Dr.
Lepsius found one in a cemetery of the seventh dynasty at
Gizeh. Each pyramid appears to have formerly had an obelisk
in front, as a sort of satellite.

Easily thrown down and destroyed by political or religious
fanatics, and, from being so graceful an ornament, easily re-
moved to the distant home of conquerors or dilettanti, it is not
surprising that but seven are found now standing in Egypt; viz.,
four at Thebes, one at Philse, one at Alexandria, and one at
Heliopolis. England has four, France has two, Florence has
two, Constantinople has two, but Eome has twelve. Twelve
were recently counted lying down in the Nile valley. It is
said that, as no pyramids have been found on the east side of
the Nile, so no obelisks are to be beheld on the other bank.
It is, moreover, singular that the proportions of Nebuchad-
nezzar's image, — probably a gilded obelisk, — namely, 60 to 6,
should have characterised at least some of the obelisks. Thus,
there was said to have been one 60 cubits high, and 6 broad,
as in Babylon. Pococke saw one near Medinet-el-Faioum, that
was 43 feet high, and 4 feet 2 inches broad on the northern face.

Herodotus mentions a fine obelisk 100 cubits high. Eeckon-
ing a Babylonian cubit at 8*43 inches, this may have been the
Citoria, so admired by tourists in Eome, which was brought by
Augustus, and is 71 feet 5 inches. That im^^ Vj '^'b%«^^cs».»


102 FYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

120 cabits, will correspond to the tall monument before St.
Peter's Church, 83 feet 2 inches ; and nearly to that now in
Paris, 81 feet. The magnificent one at the Lateran is 150
cubits, or 105 feet 7 inches. The Flaminian, introduced by
Augustus, is 73 feet. The one at St. Peter's, strictly speaking,
is 77-18 feet in the shaft, 883 in the base, and 5*91 in the
pyramidal top. These parts in the Lateran one are respectively,
97-5, 9*716, and 6*77; and in the Flaminian, of the Piazza del
Popolo, 73 feet, 7*83, and 4*83.

Cleopatra's Needle has a shaft of only 57J feet. Just before
last Christmas, when the writer saw it, this fine relic of the
past was in a most disgusting and noisome condition. In 1801,
our soldiers and seamen in Egypt, havmg vanquished the French
there, were delighted with the proposal to carry ofif the Alex-
andrian obelisk as a trophy, and gave up a day's pay to meet
the expected charges. But the General arrested the movement.
In 1819, Mehemet Ali made a present of it to our Prince
Regent ; the calculated cost of removal delayed the sending for
it. The White Elephant was subsequently offered to, and de-
clined by, the Crystal Palace managers. Cleopatra did not
order the construction of the obelisk called after her name ; she
merely brought it from Heliopolis, where it had adorned the
Temple of the Sun, and placed it, as a compliment to the
Roman, in the Csesarem of Alexandria.

Although more or less associated with idolatrous emblems, it
may not be held necessary to perform for our London visitor a
ceremony deemed essential for a fellow-obelisk removed to
Rome. This one was solemnly exorcised by Pope Sixtus V.,
that no malignant god of Egypt retain supernatural hold upon
tJio stone, or blight the Christian beholder.


OBELISKS. 103

The appellation of Needle is an old one, and very appropriate.
We have Abenesi's remarks on these edifices : " The priests of
Egypt erected these elevated stones in the form of needles, and
of a round figure ; they engraved there, in mystical characters,
the secrets of their philosophy, and called them the altars of
their goda."

The one at Heliopolis is, like almost all others, of red granite,
from the quarries of Syene, on the Nile. The town of He-
liopolis, so celebrated for its ancient Temple of the Sun, in
which, mist probably, the father-in-law of Joseph ofl&ciated as
high-priesl of the god, was in ruins even in Strabo's day.
Herodotus speaks of two fine obelisks there. Abd-al-Latif saw
there two, tiough one had fallen and was broken in two parts ;
he calls tbm, in his Arabic narrative, FUaradhUs needles.
Pococke mace the solitary stranger in the waste 67 J feet high,
6 feet on tb north and south base, and 6 feet 4 inches on the
east and wes. An Arab traveller, in 1190, saw a pyramid of
copper on th€ summit; that is now wanting.

It is traced by Mariette Bey, as far back as to Ammanemes
n., 3300 B.o..or over 5000 years ago. Others had attributed it
to Osirtasen, o the twelfth dynasty, near the same epoch. This
was above 100 years before the visit of Abraham to Egypt,
and long be fort the days of the Hycsos, or shepherd kings. It
is dedicated tothe departed mother of the sovereign, "chief
Bard of the Sui" The writer, when standing by this splendid
memorial, noticd that most of the deeply-cut grooves of hiero-
glyphics were fied with the mud-cells of a kind of fly. The
obelisks of the )ruids, rugged and silent, were sometimes of
enormous size; tat at Locmariaker is said to weigh 2 GO tons.
Near Heliopol. is the traditional \xa% b^n^^^Jtv. n^V^^^ ^^^^


104 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

Joseph, Mary, and the babe found shelter in the flight to Egypt.
Without sufficient faith to reverence it, one cannot but he in-
terested in any relic of superstition. There are, however,
awkward facts to be faced before assuming the air of a wor-
shipper. The living sycamore tree now seen in the garden of
Heliopolis, and kissed by Christian devotees from miny lands,
was known to be dead and down in 1672.

There is another variation of the story. The tree was the
relic of the Garden of Balsam, or balm of GQead, fhe plants of
which were sent by the Queen of Sheba to King Sobmon, and
one afterwards obtained from Jerusalem and carriec to Egypt
by the piotis Cleopatra ! Out of the grove but one tiee remained
when Bakoui was there in 1403. Peter Martyr s^ "not the
slightest trace" of it in 1403 ; nor did Baumgarten. One tree is
said to have recovered (being too profitable an iurestment for
priests), and was mentioned by Leo Africanus, in 1>26. Sandys
had it pointed out to him in 1610. However, iij an excessive
inundation of the Nile, during 1615, the tree ^in perished.
But, as it was the identical one in the opening of which the
Virgin Mary had concealed herself and child froj the pursuers,
it could not but be immortal, or subject to resiirection. Ifc is
still to be seen, and is still adored.

Those who are curious about such matters will earn, in another
work, how the Virgin Mother of the gods in ai^ient Egypt was
hidden in the Divine sjcamore. She is still tibe seen on the
painted walls, and in old papyri, seated amiA the foliage of
the holy tree. Eeligious traditions never diefbut re-appear in
new dress from time to time.


THE SPHINX, 105


THE SPHINX.


Although sphinxes were common in Egypt (and not absent
from India), were associated with temples, were called Andro-
sphinx, with human head, Creosphinx, with ram's head, and
Hieraco-sphijiXy with hawk's head, our present object is the con-
sideration of the Great Sphinx, next the Great Pyramid.

Pliny was told it was the tomb of Amosis, who expelled the
Hycsos. Others of the ancients contended that it held the
mummy of Ehodope, the rosy-cheeked friend of several Pharaohs.
Its mutilated state, say Arab writers, arose from a fanatical
sheik, about the year 1379, who broke the nose of the idol in
his zeal for Allah, Abd'allatif wrote, hundreds of years ago,
" We see upon the figure a reddish tint and a red varnish. Its
mouth has the imprint of grace and beauty." Mr. W. Hamilton,
F.RS., recently asserted that it had once been painted. As to
the mouth, its grace and beauty fled when civilised visitors
began chipping it away for relics.

Thevenot, the old traveller, recorded a tradition about it, as
De Breves has done since. " Authors," he tells us, " report -
that this Sphinx, as soon as the sun was up, gave responses to
anything it was consulted about, and such as go to the pyramid
say that the priests conveyed themselves into it (the Sphinx)
by the well found in the pyramid, but without any probability,
as by search is found; for neither is there any passage dis-
cernible in the well, nor is] the image hollow. The conjecture,
therefore, of the Arabian author seems reasonable, who tells us,
that to express the fertility occasioned by the overflowing of the
Nile, the Egyptians built this great statue."

Pococke, the Epglish traveller, has left some detaAia Q>i TSkS^j^ss^as*-


106 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

ment, stating, " The lower part of the neck, or the beginning
of the breast, is 33 feet wide ; and it is 20 feet from the fore-
part of the neck to the back, and thence to the hole in the back
it is 75 feet, the hole being 5 feet long, from which to the tail, if
I mistake not, it is 30 feet." This somewhat exceeds Pliny's
account, which was that it is 113 feet long. The head only
appears above the sand at present. A picture in Harris's
Voyages, about 1705, gives far more of the head than can now
be distinguished. The wings, as they are called, behind the
ears, are very distinct, as well as the eyes, ears, and chin.
Grobert) in 1798, regrets that "the Sphinx is actually very
disfigured." Denon then described it thus : " The expression
of the head is gentle, gracious, and tranquil ; the character of
it is African. But the mouth, of which the lips are thick, has
a softness in the movement, and a fineness of execution truly
admirable; it is flesh and life." Maillet, 180 years ago, saw
the broken nose and red paint, and expressed his belief that
" this idol was formerly covered by a temple." Dr. Temple-
man, 1792, thought that "the t^in^/s were probably added to
the Sphinx, as emblematical of the fuga temporum,''

Regarded as a female head with the body of a lion, the Sphinx
was supposed to represent the constellations Leo and Virgo,
Others saw in the smiling face the attractions of vice, and the"
after penalty of the claws of the lion. These pretty fancies were
dispelled by the discovery of fragments of a beard. Mr. Piazzi
Smyth says, "It is a man's face, and had once a huge stone
beard." When, through Count Caviglia and Mr. Consul Salt,
the sand was cleared away in front, a part of this beard was
found fallen between the paws of the lion figure. This clear-
ance was an expensive work in 1817. The Arabs made such


THE SPHINX. 107

extensive chippings for talismans that the sand had to be
restored quickly to the level.

The French, in 1798, uncovered the back only, but Caviglia
revealed the existence of a small temple between the outstretched
paws. The height of the Sphinx was found 63 feet, accord-
ing to one, but 70 is given by Mr. Perring. The length is
variously given, up to 177 feet. The whole had been excavated
out of the solid rock, except a part of the back and the fore-
paws, which are seen cased with hewn stone. The features,
doubtless, resembled the king by whom it was erected ; as other
Andro-sphinxes can, in many cases, be identified by comparison
with existing statues. The remains of the royal cap, with the
mystic urseus or serpent ornament, may be detected on this one.
The boring with iron rods by Colonel Vyse has proved that no
hollow exists.

The temple between the paws is clearly of comparatively
modern structure. Dr. Eichardson reports that in its front '^ was
a granite altar with four horns, one of which remained, and the
marks of fire from the burning of mcense were visible upon it"
A granite slab, 14 feet by 7, is placed against the breast of the
Sphinx, bearing the cartouche of the Theban king, Thothmes IV.
The eighteenth dynasty is represented in a votive inscription
on the miniature temple. A number of other tablets are about the
paws in various languages, Greek, and even Latin. Dr. Eichard-
son considered none of them older than the second century.
One is a record that a column had been erected near there to the
Emperor Nero, who had been present at the temple rites, and
had worshipped the sun. One of the Greek legends has been
thus rendered by Dr. Young : —


108 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

" Thy form stupendous here the gods have placed,

Sparing each spot of harvest-bearing land ;

And with this mighty work of art have graced

A rocky isle encumbered once with sand ;
Kot that fierce Sphinx which Thebes erewhile laid waste,

But great Latona's servant, mild and bland ;
Watching that prince beloved who fills the throne
Of Egypt's plain, and calls the Nile his own :
That heavenly monarch who his foes defies ;
Like Yulcan powerful, and like Pallas wise."

"Without entering here upon the religious aspect of the Sphinx
question, to be treated of elsewhere, one may naturally enquire
■whether it can have any reference to the pyramids. Mr. Piazzi
Smyth declares that, in relation to them, " it lies in a different
direction from the great causeway of ancient approach." As
Herodotus never so much as mentions its existence, we get no
light from him. The ancient Egyptians were too fond of enigmas
to leave us any expression of opinion on it.

Situated in front of the Second Pyramid, it was conjectured
that its age might date from the builder. King Cephren. Mariette
Bey found the name of that monarch on the stele or tablet of
Thebes : " in a line," says he, " which further on is almost
entirely broken away; a portion of his iVame->S/n*eZ6?, unfortunately
quite isolated, has been still preserved, therefore undoubtedly it
had some sort of reference to the builders of the pyramid which
is situated behind it." Then, again, Cheops, of the Great Pyramid,
has been supposed the author of the Sphinx, though once Dr.
Birch imagined it not so old. The discovery of a precious tablet
has removed the doubt, and led the distinguished French Curator
to say, "The Great Sphinx of the pyramids, after being attributed
to Thoutmes IV., then to Chephren, is here cited as anterior to
Cheops himself, since it figures as one of the monuments which
that prince restored."


THE SPHINX. 109

Among the triumphs of hieroglyphical reading few can be
placed equal to that connected with this wonderful tablet, dug out
of a wall, which was found at the foot of the southernmost of the
three small pyramids of Gizeh. As M. Auguste Mariette proudly
says, " Now we know, by a stone in the Boulaq Museum, that
the Sphinx existed already when Cheops, second king of the
fourth dynasty, ordered the restoration, of which this stone has
for its object the consecration of memory." We are the more
confounded at such remote antiquity, and are almost disposed to
regard the Sj^hinx with that awe which leads the Arabs now to
recognise it as Ahou el Hdl, the Father of Terrors,

Although belonging to the forthcoming or religious part of
our subject, something must here be said about the curious
so-called " Temple of the Sphinx." Not even the pyramid itself
excites more interest and wonder than this edifice recently dis-
covered in the sands near the Sphinx. " It is," according to the
learned Eenan, "absolutely different from those known else-
where." Whether temple or tomb, "not an ornament, not a
sculpture, not a letter," appeared about it. The statue of King
Cephren, with some other figures and tablets, rescued from
the well of the building, were evidently thrust down there by
the priests in some national struggle or disaster, without con-
nection with the purposes of its erection. One has well charac-
terised the structure as having "a beauty of repose, and an
elegance of simplicity."

Mariette Bey inclines to the opinion that it is the most ancient
known sepulchre in the world. In exterior and interior there is
a resemblance to the mastaha of tombs. Its form being that of
a cross disposes others more readily to believe it a temple, that
being the shape of the oldest known religio\ia ^d\£LVi^\si>iJaa^<3^^


110 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

There can be but little doubt that the so-called temple of the
SphinX; and it may be the Sphinx itself^ can claim the age of
six thousand years.

WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT]

Sir Walter Scott, commonly supposed a man of taste and
cultured imagination, spoke of the pyramid as " disagreeable in
form, and senseless in utility/' A certain writer once remarked
of these monuments, " They are nothing at all but heaps of
stones." A prosaic Yankee thus recorded his sentiments : " A
pyramid is nothing but dollars. — ^We have got the pyramids in
our pockets, and can set them up any day we please."

On the other hand, we have Mr. Gliddon saying, "What
monuments on earth have given rise to more fables, speculations,
errors, and misconceptions?" This, at any rate, proves the
interest they have excited in the minds of men. It is only in
our own day that literature and science, not less than poetry and
religion, have been directed thither with perfect enthusiasm.
To no one man are we so much indebted for the popular feeling
in favour of the Great Pyramid, as to Prof. Piazzi Smyth. By
making it truly holy ground, by demonstrating, to the satisfac-
tion of many, the divine authorship of the institution, he has
surrounded it with a halo it never wore before.

The views entertained as to the object of the erection will now
be mentioned.

1. BARRIERS AGAINST THE DESERT SANDS.
This opinion was expressed by M. Pialin de Persigny in
1845, who spoke of "the destination and permanent utility of
the pyramids of Egypt and Nubia against the sandy irruptions
of the desert"


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? Ill

2. SATAK'S SEAT.

Sir Thomas Browne, who flourished in the Elizabethan age,
declares that " these dark caves and mummy repositories are
Satan's abodes."

3. IMITATION OF NOAH'S ARK OR TOWER OF BABEL.

Mr. Thomas Yeates, in 1833, wrote, "The Great Pyramid
soon followed the Tower of Babel, and had the same common
origin." Again, " Whether it was not a copy of the original
Tower of Babel] And, moreover, whether the dimensions of
these structures were not originally taken from the Ark of Noah 1 "
Elsewhere he has it : " The measures of the Great Pyramid at
the base do so approximate to the measures of the Ark of Noah
in ancient cubit measure, that I cannot scruple, however novel
the idea, to draw a comparison. The form of the Ark was
quadrangular, and consisted of equal sides or parallelograms, of
which, the measures of one is given in three numbers, 300, 50,
and 30 cubits." He assures us that it was made for floating only ;
and that its four sides were each of three stories to accommodate
the large number of persons required to look after so many
animals for a whole year.

4. FILTERING RESERVOIRS.

A Swedish philosopher gave it as his opinion that pyramids
were simply contrivances for purifying the water of the muddy
Nile, which would pass through their passages.

5. TO PLEASE THE WOMEN.

Mr. Gable informs his readers that, as pyramids have no
access, " it appears not that the founders of them had any such
laudable design of transmitting to posterity scientific si^eQ.\ss>L<«ia>"


112 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

as some ha4 supposed ; " hence they appear to have been
erected for no geometrical purpose." Having, however, ascer-
tained (how, he says not) that they were raised by those, " who,
after their intermarriages with the daughters of men, became,
not only degenerate despisera of useful knowledge, but altogether
abandoned to luxury," — it is not surprising that he should have
found out that it was to please these women, who requested the
sons of God to employ their leisure after that fashion.

6. THE QUEEN OF SHEBA'S GIFTS.

Orientals may be excused telling romantic tales of this
romantic lady traveller ; but Mr. Wathen, in 1842, said that
" the offerings of the Queen of Sheba are now beheld in the in-
destructible masses of the pyramids."

7. JOSEPH'S GRANARIES.

Benjamin of Toledo, the travelled Jew of the Middle Ages,
advanced this opinion, which he had gathered in the East.
Vossius heard somehow that the Pharaoh had " magazined " a
great quantity of wheat there. The Monk Fidelis says the
same. An American writer, in 1876, must have astonished and
shocked some folks, by his bold assertion, learnt somewhere
or somehow, that " according to the hypothesis of Prof. Piazza
Smyth, the object of the Great Pyramid was to convert it into a
granary in time of famine " (!).

Maundeville, about 1330, got the complete story. **The
Gemares of Joseph," says he, " that he lete make, for to kepe
the greynes for the peril of the dere zeros. Thei ben (are) made
of ston, full welle made of masonnes craft, of the whiche two ben
merveyllouse grete and hye, and to these ne ben not so gret; and
every Gerner iafch a zate (gate) for to entre withinne, a lytille


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 113

highe fro the Erthe, for the lond is wasted and fallen sithe the
Gemers were made. And withinne thei ben alle fulle of ser-
pentes. And aboven the Gerners withouten ben many Scriptures
of dy verse languages. And sum men seyn (say) that thei ben
sepultures of grete lordes that weren sometyme ; but that is not
trewe ; for alle the comoun rymour and speche is of alle the peple
there, both fer and nere, that thei ben the Gemers of Joseph.
And so fynden thei in here Scriptures and in here cronycles.
On that other partie, zif thei weren sepultures thei sholden not
ben voyd withinne. For yee may well knowe that tombes and
sepultures ne ben not made of such gretnesse, ne of such
highnesse."

8. DISPLAY OF ROYAL DESPOTISM.

Aristotle, while admitting this motive, considered the priests
had persuaded the king to undertake the work, in order to find
employment for the idle. Pliny deemed it proper for a great
conqueror to keep his captives busy. Greaves, the Oxford Pro-
fessor, 250 years ago, goes into the question. " But why," he
say-», "the Egyptian kings should have been at so vast an
expense in the building of these pyramids is an enquiry of a
higher nature. Aristotle makes them to have been the workes of
tyranny ; and Pliny conjectures that they built them partly out
of ostentation, and partly out of state polic}'', by keeping the
people in employment, to divert them from mutinies and rebel-
lions." Sandys thought it was "for feare lest such infinite
wealth should corrupt their successors, and dangerous idlenesse
beget in the subject a desire for innovation." He gives a rude
translation from Lucian : —

" When high pyramides do grace
The ghosts of Ptoloniies le^d. i«yi^^?^


114 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

Mariette Bey is indignant at this supposition, exclaiming,
"They are not monuments of the vain ostentation of kings."
Hekekyan Bey shrewdly remarks: "It is well known that a
tyrant scarcely ever completes a work left unfinished by his pre-
decessor. It is evident that these pyramids were national under-
takings; their plan and execution were decided after mature
deliberation ; laws were passed, and revenues provided, to carry
out the public decision by the executive authorities." M. Dufeu
adds his affirmation, that, "far from being the works of the pride
and despotism of Pharaohic kings, they are, on the contrary,
testimonies of their exalted wisdom, and of the profound know-
ledge of their colleges of priests."

The Eev. K B. Zincke has a practical suggestion. " In those
days," says he, " labour could not be bottled up." Egypt was
so fertile, and men's wants were then so few, that surplus labour
was available, and much food, from taxes in kind, accumulated
in royal hands. Although the pyramid was of no earthly use,
" still," thought he, " it was of as mu<-.h benefit to the man who
built it as leaving the surplus labour and food he had at his dis-
posal, and the valuables he had in his treasury uaused would be."

9. PRESERVATION OF LEARNING FROM THE
EXPECTED DELUGE.

It having been revealed by the antediluvian astrologers that a
great flood was coming, the pyramid was built to preserve the
memory of then-existing learning. "We are indebted to Arabian
authors for this interesting tradition, which has several variations.
Firouzabadi was not very clear upon the subject. He speaks
of the erection "by Edris, to preserve there the sciences, and
prevent thcii destruction by the Deluge; or by Sinan ben-almo-


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 115

schalsbal, or by the first men, when informed by observation of
the stars of the coming Deluge ; or to preserve medicines, magic,
and talismans."

Murtadi is another authority. He wrote in 992, at Tihe in
Arabia, or in the year of our Lord 1584, says one. The work
was translated iu 1672. This is the story : —

" There was a king named Saurid, the son of Sahaloc, 300
years before the Deluge, who dreamed one night that he saw
the earth overturned with its inhabitants, the men cast down
on their faces, the stars falling out of the heavens, and striking
one against the other, and making horrid and dreadful cries
as they fell. He thereupon awoke much troubled, and related
not his dream to anybody, and was satisfied in himself that
some great accident would happen in the world. A year after
he dreamed again that he saw the fixed stars come down to the
earth in the form of white birds, which carried men away, and
cast them between two great mountains, which almost joined to-
gether and covered them; and then the bright, shining stars
became dark and were eclipsed. He thereupon awaked, and
extremely astonished, and entered into the Temple of the Sun,
and beset himself to bathe his cheeks and to weep. Next morn-
ing he ordered all the princes of the priests, and magicians of
all the provinces of Egypt, to meet together ; which they did to
the number of 130 priests and soothsayers, with whom he went
and related to them his dream, which they found very important
and of great consequence, and the interpretation they gave of
it was that some very great accident would happen in the
world.

" Among others, the priest Acliilion, who was the greatest of
all, and resided chiefly in the king's Court, «d"ii\iJ!ax\a\a\^^ssi.\ —


116 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

* Sir, your dream is admirable, and I myself saw another about
a year since whicli f lightened me very much, and which I have
not revealed to any one.' * Tell me vrhat it was,' said the king.

* I dreamt,' said the priest, ' that I was with your Majesty on the
top of the mountain of fire, which is in the midst of Emsos, and
that I saw the heaven sink down below its ordinary situation, so
that it was near the crown of our heads, covering and surround-
ing us, like a great basin turned upside down ; that the stars
were intermingled among men in diverse figures ; that the people
implored your Majesty's succour, and ran to you in multitudes
as their refuge ; that you lifted up your hands above your head,
and endeavoured to thrust back the heaven, and keep it from
coming down so low ; and that I, seeing what your Majesty did,
did also the same. While we were in that posture, extremely
affrighted, methought we saw a certain part of heaven opening,
and a bright light coming out of it; that afterwards the sun rose
out of tlie same place, and we began to implore his assistance ;
whereupon he said thus to us : " The heaven will return to its
ordinary situation when I shall have performed three hundred
courses." I thereupon awaked extremely affrighted.'

" The priest having thus spoken, the king commanded them
to take the height of the stars, and to consider what accident
they portended. Whereupon they declared that they promised
first the Deluge, and after that fire. Then he commanded pyra-
mids should be built, that they might remove and secure in them
what was of most esteem in their treasuries, with the bodies of
the kings, and their wealth, and the aromatic roots which served
them, and that they should write their wisdom upon them, that
the violence of the water might not destroy it."
This 18 a version of the story of Shem engraving the learning


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 117

of the old world upon two pillars — Jacliin and Boaz, Pillars of
Hercules.

Ibn Abd Alhokm is the chronicler of a tradition, also, of a
like import with that retailed by Murtadi. The translation is
an old one. The Arabian historian thus discourses : —

" The greatest part of chronologers agree that he which built
the pyramids was Saurid Ibn Salhouk, King of Egypt, who
lived 300 years before the Flood. The occasion of this was be-
cause he saw in his sleep that the whole earth was turned over,
with the inhabitants of it, the men lying upon their faces, and
the stars fdlling down and striking one another with a terrible
noise ; and being troubled with this, he concealed it. Then, after
this, he saw the fixed stars falling to the earth, in the similitude
of white fowl, and they snatched up men and carried them be-
tween two great mountains, and these mountains closed upon
them, and the shining stars were made dark. And he awoke
with great fear, and assembled the chief priests of all the pro-
vinces of Egypt, 130 priests, the chief of them being Almamon.
He related the whole matter to them, and they took the altitude
of the stars, and made their prognostications, and they foretold a
deluge. The king said, * Will it come to our country 1 ' They
answered, 'Yes, and will destroy it.' And there remained a
certain number of years to come, and he commanded in the mean
space to build the pyramids, and that a vault (or cistern) should
be made, into which the river Nile should enter, whence it
should run into the countries of the west, and into the land
Al-Said.

" And he filled them (the pyramids) with talismans, and with
strange things, and with riches and treasures, and the like. He
engraved in them all things that were told him. b'j -v^a^Txi^'^^^^'


118 FTRAHID FACTS AND FANCIES.

also, all profouQd sciences. The names of alakakirs, the uses
and hurts of them, the science of astrology and of arithmetic, of
geometry and physic. All these may be interpreted by him who
knows their characters and language. After he had given orders
for this building, they cut out great columns and wonderful
stones. They fetched massy stones from the Ethiopians, and made
with them the foundations of the three pyramids, fastening them
together with lead and iron. (1) They built the gates of them
40 cubits under-ground, and they made the height of the pyra-
mids 100 royal cubits, which are 500 of ours in these times. He
also made each side of the pyramids 100 royal cubits. In the
beginning of this building was a fortunate horoscope. After that
he had finished it he covered it with coloured satin (marble) from
the top to the bottom, and he appointed a solemn festival, at
which were present all the inhabitants of his kingdom. Then
he built in the Western Pyramid thirty treasuries, filled with
store of riches and utensils, and with signatures made with
precious stones, and with instruments of iron, and vessels of
earth, and with a mes which rots not, and with glass that might
be bent and yet not broken, and with strange spells, and with
several kinds of alkakirs (query alkalis), single and double, and
with deadly poisons, and with other things besides. He made,
also, in the East Pyramid divers celestial spheres and stars, and
what they severally operate in their aspects ; and perfumes which
are to be used to them, and the books which treat of these matters.
** He put, also, in the Coloured Pyramid (the third) the com-
mentaries of the priests in chests of block marble, and with every
priest a book, in which were the wonders of his profescion, and
of his actions, and of his nature, and what was done in his time,
aii(J what is, and what shall be, from the beginning of time to


WHY WAS raE PYRAMID BUILT? 119

the end of it. He placed in every pyramid a treasurer. The
treasurer of the Westerly Pyramid was a statue of marble stone,
standing upright with a lance, and upon his head a serpent
writhed. He that came near it, and stood still, the serpent bit
him of one side, and writhed round about his throat and killed
him, and then returned to his place. He made the treasurer
of the East Pyramid an idol of black agate, his eyes open and
shining, sitting upon a throne with a lance. When any looked
upon him he heard on one side of him a voice which took away
his senses, so that he fell prostrate upon his face, and ceased not
till he died. He made the treasurer of the Coloured Pyramid
a statue of stone called Albut, sitting. He which looked toward
it was drawn by the statue till he stuck to it, and could not be
separated from it till such time as he died."

So much for the Arab yarn of the pyramids before the Flood.

10. TOMB OF THE KING.

Herodotus, describing the building of the pyramid by Philitis,
says that "Cheops ordered Philitis to prepare him a tomb."
But many, seeing the pit there, and erroneously thinking it a
well, ask with Mr. Yeates, " What have the dead to do with
wells of water 1 Water is not for the dead, but the living."
A Syrian writer, of the ninth century, observed, " They are
not granaries of Joseph, as some say, but mausoleums erected
upon the tombs of ancient kings." The Rev. Mr. Zincke, who
positively asserts that " every pyramid in Egypt was intended
for a tomb," is of the conviction that the very word m^ans a
mound or calm ; he therefore talks of the Aryans who " built
the cairn of Gizeh." Servius is clearly of that mind when he
writes, " With the ancients, noble men were b\ii\ssL ^>ls5cisst.


120 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

under mountains or in mountains, "whence the custom came
that over the dead either pyramids were made or huge cairns
erected."

Professional architects generally take the tomb side. Thus
Mr. Fergusson decides upon it, and Mr. Guilt says the
pyramids are "sepulchral monuments, whether or not the
bodies of the monarchs were ever deposited in them." We
have remaining on a tablet the prayer of a certain priest, Ahra,
that his son would make his name live again, whilst he reposed
in his pyramid, or tomb. Chevalier Bunsen, who paid such
attention to Egyptian antiquities, has no doubt but that all
pyramids were "exclusively gigantic covers of rocky tombs."
The word of M. Maillet is justified, that, " with regard to the
design they had of securing their bodies from any insult, they
could not have contrived more certain means for succeeding in it."

Mariette Bey, who for explorative ardour rivals the energetic
Belzoni himself, is an advocate for the tomb theory. This is
his language : " With regard to the nse to which the pyramids
were destined, it is to do violence to all that we know of Egypt,
to all that archaeology teaches us of the monumental customs
of that country, to see them any other thing than tombs."
Again, " tombs, massive, full, everywhere siopped, even in
their passages, most carefully, without windows, without doors,
without exterior opening." He alludes to the care taken to
throw seekers off the scent. He compares tombs with pyramids,
showing the devices in both sorts to deceive attempting violaters
of mummy-homes.

An account of an Egyptian tomb is necessary to enable the
reader to form a judgment upon the question.


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 121

In case some should suppose the tombs remaining there to be

of more modem date than the Giant Pyramids, it must be borne

in mind that Mariette Bey has distinctly laid it down that

every pyramid is in the middle of a cemetery. And M. Chabas

writes of the Necropolis of Gizeh, with its vast collection of

massive tombs : " A certain number of these tombs have been

constructed at the same time as the Great Pyramid, and finished

before that colossal monument." Lepsius got what he calls an

official almanac of the Court of the Eangs Cheops and Cephren,

the tombs giving so many names of their officers. Our own

Dr. Birch adds this striking testimony: "The tombs around

the Great Pyramid are those of the princes and other members

of the family or time of Khufu" (builder of tliat pyramid).

M. Grobert affirms, " I believe these grottoes more ancient than

even the pyramids." Lepsius opened a hundred of them, and

was satisfied of this assumed antiquity. Mariette Bey has been

able to show that the funeral fields of both Gizeh and Saq-

qarah were absolutely closed as early as the time of Teta, king

of I he sixth dynasty, a hundred years or so after the building of*

the Great Pyramid. He has unearthed the splendid tomb of a

grandson of Snefrou, king of the third djnasty, besides several

Mastabas of the age of Snefrou, and declares that the period of

some " ascends even to the predecessors of the founders of the

Great Pyramid." Renan adds, " The tombs, so numerous in the

sands of Sakkara and at the foot of the pyramids, are all dated

from the first six dynai^ties.'*

If all the above statements are not arguments enough to prove
that tombs exist which are at least as old as the pyramid, we
are now assured by such an authority as Lepsius,' the ^\s»l v>^


122 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

German Egyptologists, that there are at least sixty inedited
tombs at Gizeh and Saqqarah, which are of the first dyimsty —
or far more than 6000 years old.

What; then, is an ancient Egyptian tomb ?

There are three parts essentially dLflTerent. First there is the
Mastaha, or exterior chapel ; then, the pit near it ; and, below,
the subterranean chamber for the corpse. The body was taken
down the pit into the tomb proper, and laid in the sarcophagus
there. The pit was then effectually closed up and all com-
munication cut off.

There are whole streets of stone tombs, the funeral chapels of
which only are to be seen. Though of stone, Mr. Eergusson
says they show "evident symptoms of having been borrowed
from a wooden original" He styles these Mastabas "truncated
pyramids." One has been discovered 400 feet long. One to
the west of the valley is 320 feet. Bat in the earliest tombs
the chamber is so small that few can stand in it. The plan has
the form of a cross. Many tombs later than the fourth dynasty
'possess more than one chamber, with more careful orientation.
Though yellow brick tombs prevailed during the first four
dynasties, the fifth has none but stone ones. The Mastabas, in
general appearance, are like unfinished pyramids, but only in
the inclined sides.

The Mastabas of Gizeh are more uniform and symmetrical
than those near Memphis. "They are ranged like a chess-
board," says M. Auguste Mariette, "with their squares uniformly
elongated towards the north." Generally 8 yards high, there
are many of them 50 yards long by 25 yards wide. In the sixth
djnaaty the roof is vaulted. The entrance is from the east.


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 123

The pit is never round. Though mostly in the middle of the
great axis of the Mastaha, there is no connection with the upper
chapel. To reach the orifice, in many cases, one has to mount
to the platform of the Mastaha.

Dr. Lepsius gives an interesting account of a tomb-discovery.
He explored first the Mastaha, a noble apartment 70 feet long,
14 wide, and 15 high. On the walls, as usual, there was the
written and pictorial history of the individual buried beneath.
The tomb, which was on the west side of the Great Pyramid,
proved to belong to Prince Merhet, of the- time of Cheops.
The learned gentleman writes : " It is more than probable that
Merhet was a son of Chufa " (Cheops). He is styled " Super-
intendent of buildings " to that monarch. " One may, therefore,*'
says he, ** conjecture that he himself superintended the building of
the largest pyramid^ Lepsius descended, after much difficulty,
the heretofore closed-up pit, and found at a depth of sixty feet
the hypogeum, or sepulchre chamber, and the sarcophagus, or real
tomb.

A wonderful discovery awaited him. After being un-
molested since the interment, 6000 years ago, the relics of the
mighty dead were revealed. It was, doubtless, with feelings of
pride and gratification that he afterwards wrote, " I have care-
fully preserved the venerable remains of the skull of the ancieut
prince of the House of Cheops, which I found in his mortuary
chamber."

The sarcophagus contained the coffin. The earliest coffin, or
mummy-case, that ever reached England was described by Dr.
Perry, 1743. He who has seen the richly-carved alabaster
sarcophagus of the nineteenth dynasty, in Sir JoilcccL %<2sR>s^vi'^


124 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

Museum, Lincoln's Inn, especially if favoured with a descripiion
from the lips of the octogenarian librarian and curator, Mr.
Bonomi, of hieroglyphic artistic renown, will have a high con-
ception of the symbolic religion of the ancient Egyptians. But
the observer of the more ancient funeral repositories would have
more simplicity of style before him. One of the twelfth dynasty,
an era of great' advancement and high culture, is described by
M. Eouge as " cut with great precision, but is only adorned by
a simple hieroglyphical legend," naming the individual and his
occupation. But ascending still higher, to the age of the pyrsr
mids, and regarding the sarcophagus of the monarch who raised
the Third Pyramid of Gizeh, we recognise good workmanship,
but no fanciful adornment. The learned Frenchman writes i —
** That of the King Menkeres (fourth dynaijty) presents the ap-
pearance of a little edifice. It was not decorated hy any figure :
simple architectural lines, disposed with infinite taste, alone
compose its ornamentation."

There is no space to devote to a discourse on ancient tombs,
or attention would have been drawn to the highly interesting
explorations of Dr. Schliemann at Troy and Mycenae. The
tombs of Atreus and of King Alyattes are well known to
readers ; the platform of the latter, at Sardis, is even now 3700
feet round. Tumuli exist in Asia of enormous proportions.
One in Afghanistan has a boundary of 1800 feet. The Topes
of India are suggestive. The mound-builders of America have
left one monument in Illinois which is 2000 feet in circum-
ference. The Galgals of Brittany, and the one-chambered or
severil-chambered Barrows of Britain, are also massive and
gigantic memorials of the dead. The Teocalli of Mexico were
equally devoted to purposes of burial.


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 125

The 80-called Temple of the Sphinx, near the pyramid, has
been looked on simply as a tomb; and, if so, is the most
ancient, and one of the most costly and magnificent in the
world. Mariette Bey thus speaks of it : — " The exterior ap-
pearance is, we must declare, rather that of a tomb. Further,
the monument can present itself to the visitor as a Mastaba,
hardly greater than those which one finds, for example, at Abousir
and at Saqqarah. In the interior, the chamber shows six super-
posed niches, which have the air of having been constructed, as
those of the Third Pyramid, and of the Mastabat-el-Faroun, to
receive mummies."

Turning now to the Great Pyramid, what do we notice —
apart from certain peculiarities — ^but the same arrangements for
the burial of a body as occur in an ordinary ancient tomb] The
simplicity, spoken of in connection with the sarcophagus of the
builder of the Third Pyramid, is apparent in the First. The
King's Chamber, with its so-called sarcophagus, was no more
the mortuary chamber than the Mastaba of the tomb. The
real buiial-room was below the surface, and at the end of a pit.
That pit is to be seen inside the Great Pyramid, and that
mortuary space is extant as the Subterranean Chamber. That
the latter was found without an occupant proves no more than
the tenantless tombs.

But it will be asked, what answers to tbe Mastaba — the
Chapel 1 Inside that open and accessible place, with a doorway
in the east, apparent to any passer-by, the friends of the deceased
could assemble for the anniversary rites. There, too, they could
read the story of the departed. Where is the parallel of this in
the Great Pyramid 1

Only two chambers, called the King's wi^ ^(^ ^>Qj5i^\i«»^\k«M^


126 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

been revealed. There is reason to think others are still hidden.
But they, in their naked aspect, with no sculptured memorial and
no painting, though partaking of the simplicity of the last home
of King Menkeres, were never designed for observation, could
never have been entered by friends and relatives, but were
from the first most careftdly blocked up and secreted. The
temples once standing before each pyramid served as chapels.

11. A STANDARD OF WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.

This is, perhaps, the most important and practical issue from
pyramid enquiry. One question is— does the building indicate
any special standard) The other question follows — does that
measure proceed from a scientific basis ?

Opinions upon the state of ancient learning range between
absurd depreciation and unreasonable exaltation. Still there can
be no question but that the tendency of modem thought is to
value increasingly the results of ancient study. But we, as
Europeans, have so prided ourselves upon our mathematical skill,
and the approximate perfection of our methods of calculation, as
to suppose it highly improbable, to say the least, that men who
lived in Egypt 6000 years before Newton and Laplace could
know more than the rudiments.

Yet, what says M. Gosselin in his Systematic and Positive
Geography of the Ancients ? It is this : " The itinerary measures
of the ancients are more exact than is thought. In comparing
them with the plan of the earth, as it is known to us, it is often
difficult, sometimes even impossible, to decide if the errors,
which are fancied to be observed in these itineraries, ought to
be rejected upon the report of the ancients rather than upon the
imperfection of our actual knowledge."


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 127

But M. A. Dufeu, the learned author of Decouverte de Vage et
de la vhitahle destination des Quaire Pyramides de Gizehy prin-
cipalement de la Grande Pyramide, has these weighty remarks :
" An extreme precision, a thing at which the mind stands truly
confounded, appears to have presided at the operations and
geodesic calculations of the ancient Egyptians ; and it seems that
modern science has not yet been able to rise to that height to
which that ever-memorable people had already arrived." The
testimony of this French savant is thus confirmatory of the sup-
posed extravagant estimate of Prof. Piazzi Smyth, if not recog-
nising with him a special inspiration.

Although the Edinburgh Professor is credited with the
fatherhood of the idea that the pyramid contains a standard of
measure, it will be seen that he has but accepted the theory of
those before him. Yet he has done much. By the exercise of
mathematical skill he has developed the theory ; and by the
energy and enthusiasm of his appeals to the public he has given
it an interest and a popularity never realised before.

But that which has intensified the interest is the excitation of
the marvellous in man by the announcement that this said
standard was an ordinance from heaven — a gift from God,
By briDging the religious faculty into the arena of discussion, a
vast increase of force has been acquired. Argue as philosophers
will upon materialism, they are confronted with the practical
reply, from all the ages, of the intuitive in humanity. There is
a something at the back of all that cannot be accounted for by
the rude logic of facts. There is in man a perception, however
obscure and ill-defined, of spiritual existence, that sometimes
comes with such power as to sweep away all dykes of reason and


128


PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.


philosophy, and stir to the very depths the hearts of nations as
of individuals. The mass are, and p^.rhaps ever will be, governed
more or less by a feeling of the supernaturaL The alliance,
therefore, of religion with the pyramid idea of measurement at
once lifted the theory from the field of abstract, scientific enquiry
into the domain of sympathetic belief. So long as Hindoo and
European ca=^uists squabbled over free-will, the doctrine never
got beyond the schools; it was quite otherwise when it sharpened
the sword of the Saracens, and nerved the arm of Cromwell's
Ironsides.

But let us, for the pre^^ent, put a'tide the supernatural prop of
the theory, and take a prosaic view of the pyramid stanlard of
measure.

When Prof. Greaves, 240 years ago, took his ten-feet rule,
accurately divided into thousandths of a foot, and liid it upon
the hoary monument by the Nile, he was not a little astonished
at the result.

On his return to the Oxford Observatory be published a series
of letters. The work — " printe 1 by G. S iwbridge, at the Three
riower-de-Luces, in Little Bi'itaiii" — wa? entitled, Orujlne a/ii
Antiquity of our Eaylisli weights and measures discovered by
their near agreement with sw^h standards that are now found in
one of the Egyptian Pyramides.

In his preface to the Skilful Reader, he says : " The
standards in this pyramid, so nearly agreeing with our perfect
English measures, and with those of the antient Persians,
Greeks, and Eomans, deserve the consideration of the learned, as
being in all likely hood introductory to the discovery of other
matters oi greater importance."


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 129

' In agreement with the spirit of those Puritan times, not less
than our own, he deals largely with Scripture, and discusses
Hebrew cubits, baths, &c. He concludes that the pyramid
cubit was 31*875 inches, or 21 J inches.

Naturally he was most attracted toward the sarcophagus, or
tomb as he calls it, seeing there a resemblance to the Jewish
laver. The Bible represents several lavers before the altar of the
second temple ; but, though Josephus speaks of the first laver
being a hemisphere, the Old Testament adds no confirmatory
testimony. Mr. Greaves has these observations on the coffer :
" We shall find that every dimension of the tomb's cavity is the
axis of a sphere, within whose hemisphere such an inscribed
polygone is a standard for some antient measure of capacity ; for
which cause I conjecture that this figure of a vessel in old times
was well known, and seems to be the same with that of the
laver, in which the priests of those days were used to wash."

Sir Isaac Newton, both as a mathematician and a religious
man, took much interest in the Oxford astronomer's speculations.

He wrote a work in Latin upon " The sacred cubit of the Jews,
and the cubits of the several nations ; in which, from the dimen-
sions of the greatest Egyptian P} ramid, as taken by Mr. John
Greaves, the ancient cubit of Memphis is determined."

He was much struck with the fact that, among other convinc-
ing measurements, the banks or benches in the Grand Gallery
were 1*717 feet broad, and 1*717 feet deep; "that is," says he,
" in breadth and depth one cubit. Who will, therefore, imagine
that so many dimensions, not at all depending upon each other,
should correspond by mere chance with the length of the cubit
assigned by us ) " But he clearly inclines to a beU&l '^W^\£&


130 PYRAMID FACTS AND FA^JCIES.

20J inch cubit was preceded by one of greater length, which
may have approximated to 25 inches.

M. Pancton distinctly deserves the honour of the astronomical
idea of Egyptian measurement. In 1780 he found th^ base, 8754
inches, was a five-hundredth portion of a degree of meridian.
"Well might M. de Tlsle declare that theory of his learned friend
to be " one of the principal labours of the human mind."

M. Jomard, in Egypt during 1798 — 9, comes next in order
of time. He was amazed to find the sarcophagus so nearly
agree with the newly-declared French mktre, and suspected
that the former system was based upon astronomical data like
the new one. He boldly avowed that " no one can any longer
affirm that the idea of invariable measures belongs only to the
modems." He even goes so far as to say, " The history of the
sciences demonstrates that the modems have made several of
these measures with much less precision than the ancients."
This is exactly the principle contended for by Mr. Piazzi Smyth,
who holds the ancient Egyptian mode was more philosophically
correct than that of the French metric system.

The French savant of 1799 laid down the principle that the
sarcophagus did reveal a system of measures. And although his
rule was not correct, he hit upon the cubit idea; "sacred," he
says, " and the object of worship with the Egyptian people."
From the box he leams that " the cube root of a quantity com-
posed of one forty-eighth of the solid resulting from the three
exterior dimensions which had been given by the art of the
workmen, and of the twelfth part of the solid contents of its
interior, is equal to the Nilometrie cuMt."

He thus upheld the dignity of the sarcophagus : —


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 131

** Can it be compared to the sarcophagi of these royal tombs,
and has it ever had their destination ? This same vessel, — was
it a tomb, an image, or was it even a sort of particular vase,
having no other object than to receive the mummy of a prince 1
To admit the supposition that such may have been really en-
closed there, would it not be to abandon the witness of Herodo-
tus, who said in formal and positive terms that the place of the
king's sepulchre was in an island formed by a canal, and exe-
cuted in the subterranean passages dug in the rock of the pyra-
mid? And has not Diodorus declared that each of the two
kings who built the Great Pyramids was buried there, and that
their bodies were put in secret places 1 It is, then, not at all
proved that the pretended King's Chamber had ever enclosed the
body."

The Eev. Thomas Gabb, in 1806, gave some interesting tales
about the pyramids, and clearly forestalled the present advocates
of the measurement theory. He remarks, however, " the very
incongruities discovered in dimensions recorded by Vitruvius,
Pliny, and Herodotus, in the acceptation of any of the monu-
mental feet, had long since convinced me these authors must
have made their calculations by a foot-measure very dijfferent
from those of the Greek foot published in our tables." He con-
cludes the Egyptian foot, or cubit of Herodotus, to be 8*7553
inches, nearly 8f .

He contends for the Cenfesm standard of measure. The box
was " never intended," he thinks, " for a sepulchral monument,"
as it indicates one-hundredth part of the base of the pyramid.
" The founder of this surprising pile," says he, " whoever he may
have been, caused that excavated chest to be depo&ltAd.^\^<^\<^S^>


132 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

stands, and whence it could not be taken away, as a perpetual
criterion whereby, without actual measurement, the exact size
of the base might always be known."

Further, he writes, " Copies of which standard chest were, no
doubt, dispersed over Egypt and its dependencies; and that
brought by Lord Cavan from Alexandria, measured without the
astragals at the ends, is the same in length as that in the pyramidy
as declared to me by Mr. Hay, of Portsea, who measured it on
board the vessel while it remained in Portsmouth harbour." This
was 10 Egyptian feet, like the coffer, or 10x8"7553 inches. He
held that a cubit was 2 J pyramid feet, or 1'824 feet A degree
near the equator would thus be 500,000 pyramid feet.

Count Caviglia, who took up his abode for a time in Davison's
uncomfortable chamber, dwelt more upon the mystical than the
mathematical exponents of the pyramid.

* Mr. Wild, C. E., of Zurich, published in 1850 some marvellous
results of his calculations. He assumes that not the Great Pyra-
mid alone, but the other pyramids of Gizeh, in relation, not only
indicate a standard measure, which he assumes to be the Mem-
phis one of 20, not 25 inches, but that that cubit has definite
reference to astronomical data. His work appeart-d as a letter to
Lord Brou(];ham.

To Mr. John Taylor, of Govrer Street, London, are we most
deeply indebted. His work of 1856 — The Great Pyramid:
why was it huilt, and loho built it ? — set Mr. Piazzi Smyth to
work, and provoked the subsequent interesting discussion. He
brought out old revelations, and made known new. He con-
tended for the cubit of 25 inches as the sacred one, and as being
a ten-millionth, part of the earth's semi-polar axis.


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 133

^ He repeats the language of Greaves and Jomard, saying, " The
porphyry coffer in the King's Chamber in the Great Pyramid
was intended to be a standard measure of capacity and weight
for all nations." English measures were founded thereon, as the
coffer held fjur quarters of our corn-table. " When," said he,
" we find in so complicated a series of figures as that which the
measures of the Great Pyramid and of the earth require for
their expres>5ion, round numbers present themselves, or such as
leave no remainders, we may be sure that we have arrived at
primitive measures." Thus he points out that a pyramid inch,
which is 1 "00099 English, will be exactly one five hundred
millionth part of the axis of the earth. A cubit he puts at
25 inches. The Kamac cubit and the coffer, he sajs, " are irre-
sistible proofs of an identity of measure existing from 3000 to
4000 years ago."

But while he shows that the cube root of the contents of the
coffer is the length of the Karnac cubit, he puzzles us with the
afl&rmation that the cubit before the Flood was 24*90 inches,
but 25 inches after that event ; and yet that both were inspired !
He accounts for this most satisfactorily to himself, though
perhaps not so conclusively to men of science, by assuming
that the Deluge exercised so disastrous an effect upon the world
— though geologists fail to discover a single material evidence
of that Flood at all— that the diameter is less by nearly thirty-
seven miles than it was before the ark of !Noah was seen to rest
upon Mount Ararat.

Hekekyan Bey, in 1863, declared that the "king's stone," as
he calls it, was *' deposited by the Arions in the sanctuary of
the First Pyramid, as a record of their standard metric \xifta.-


134 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

Btire." Prof. Piazzi Smyth brouglit to the enquiry unquestioned
scientific ability, singular tenacity, tremendous energy, exalted
enthusiasm, and orthodox piety. The combination is a singularly
rare one, and at once placed him as leader of a devoted, in-
telligent, and numerous party. "We may judge of the strength
of his convictions, or his haughty defiance of objectors, from the
fact that he publicly renounced his fellowship with the Royal
Society when that learned body faUed to recognise his theory.

Still, all who love the old pyramid will not only thank Mr.
Smyth for the light he has shone on their path, but highly
esteem the man so loyally attached to their common centre of
interest.

Mr. Smyth seeks to enforce the arguments of Mr. Taylor. He
identifies pyramid measures with Bible ones, and is pleased to
find that these " still preserve some very recognisable traces."
He contends that the Great Pyramid is unlike others ; they are
Epimethean and thriftless, while that is Promethean^ of heaven-
bom origin. Instead of being a tomb, it is but the covering of
a standard for measure. Such a constructed vespel as the coffer,
filled with water, kept at uniform temperature by solid walls
and efficient ventilation, must be a reliable one for weight as
well as measure.

As a standard, the coffer must be for inspection and reference.
Copies of it, exposed to mischances of all sorts, must need checks,
and require to be brought to the original and tested by it.
There is no sense in having a standard, especially a Divinely-
authorised standard, without it could be seen from time to time,
and made available for the purpose of correcting ordinary weights
and measures. The concealment, absolute and total conceal-


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 135

ment of it, would be an anomaly, an absurdity. Rulers could
establish metrical systems without reference to it, or in ignorance
of it. The very intention of revelation is conveyed in the term
revelation. That which cannot be revealed, even if existent,
could hardly be termed a revelation.

Mr. Piazzi Smyth is so conscious of this that he dwells upon
it. " The King's Chamber," he tells his readers, " was ven-
tilated in the most admirable manner by the * air-channels ' dis-
covered by Colonel Howard Vyse ; evidently so that men might
come from time to time and look on and deal with that open
granite trough^ and live, and not die"

He is perfectly right. If it were really intended, by special
inspiration or not, as a standard, then it must be accessible.
But what are the facts 1 Simply, and he himself aflSrms the same
in another place, that immediately upon the completion of the
pyramid the King's Chamber was blocked up so securely that
not till force was applied by the Caliph, in 820, was it ever
entered again.

What, then, is the natural deduction 1 Is it not that, though
measurements of the pyramid-coffer were agreeable to what was
then a recognised standard, and symbolically represented re-
cognised ideas, yet the coffer itself was not intended by its con-
structors as a reference-standard.

But it is time that we look more closely into the measurements
more or less affected by the lines in the pyramid.

Those found by Greaves, and described by Newton, are
termed by the Edinburgh Professor " the profane measures of
the Egyptian people ; " inasmuch as they dealt with other
calculations than those regarded as Divine, like the sacred
cubit of 25 iuches. Yet Newton refers to a ** pto^t ^si^ ^^xol-


136 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

cipal cubit" of the Israelites. After various trials he gets
something between 24 and 26 inches, but does not decide upon
anything. He notes a cubit received through Mersennus and a
knight of St. Michaers, supposed to be a Jewish secret, and
which was 2 4 91 inches. He thus clearly distinguishes two
sorts of cubits.

By another interesting method the 25, or its double mea-
sure, is obtained. The transverse height of the passage is 44 8
inches ; but at the angle of 26° 18' this becomes the vertical
height, 50 inches. " Thus," says the professor, " a measure in
which the Egyptian workmen could see nothing more than some
of their profane cubits and palms, is converted by means of that
angle into another indication of the great linear standard of
the pyramid, or the one ten-millionth of the earth's axis of
rotation."

The cubit question, though dry enough, has its points of in-
terest. Mr. Smyth says that Moses adopts the sacred or 25 inch
cubit, while the profane Egyptian, in that day, was less. He
says that " we may with perfect safety and hierologist support
regard the length of 20*7 inches as the veritable hereditary
measure of the Egyptians." How, then, did Moses get the
other 1 He believes, from the pyramid. " In the Great Pyra-
mid," he says, " we have found enshrined and sealed up, from
those pre-Abrahamic to these latter days, that identical sacred
measure-space of the Jews."

As he states elsewhere that the building " had remained sealed
in all its more important divisions from the date of its found-
ation up to an advanced period of the Christian dispensation,"
Moses could never have looked at the coffer. But, as an ad-
mitted Egjptian priest, and married to the daughter of the high-


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 137

priest of the sun, at the temple of On or Heliopolis, he may
have heen admitted to a knowledge of some of the mysteries of
Egypt. If so, no adept can charge him with having puhlished
the secrets, though Mr. Smyth helieves he retained in the ark
the secret of measure. Anyhow, he nowhere reveals that secret,
any more than others, though, like the Egyptians, typifying
ideas by numbere and things.

Some have supposed that Moses got his knowledge when he
fled to — what had been for ages before the sacred mount of the
Arab race — Sinai. There, from some venerable priest, he may
have got the sacred cubit. The desert men. Divinely inspired
to conquer Egypt, and to build a pyramid for the standard mea-
sure, according to Mr. Piazzi Smyth, retreated afterwards to their
Arabian wilderness, and, doubtless, carried there some of the old
teaching.

After all, it may be asked, why take 25 as a sacred cubit 1
Messrs. Taylor and Smyth contend for 5 being the test num-
ber of the pyramid. Five squared makes the required number.
Out of a variety of different measurements, Mr. Smyth professes
to take a mean of 9 ; yet that is not his 25*07, but 25*29.
Taylor's cubit was presumed to be the ten-millionth of the radius
of the earth, and 25*025. Sir John Herschel recognises such a
cubit as probably existing among the Jews.

But, however pretty the theory, is it according to facts ] Can
the cubit of 25*025 be found in the pyramid? If not,
it is in vain we speak of the 25 pyramid inches' cubit being
one ten-millionth part of the polar semi-axis. Sir Edmund
Beckett, among the first of British architects who has given
some attention to pyramid matters^ distinctly says that Ms.


138 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

Smyth's 25 inch cabit is not to be found in the buildiog. Here
are his conclusions : —

" It is not worth while to say more of those theories here than
to mention the unlucky fact that neither the Jewish sacred cubit
of 25 inches, which is the imaginary basis of them all, nor any
multiple of it, is to be found in a single ooe of all Mr. Smyth's
multitude of measurements, except two evidently accidental
multiples of it in the diagonals of two of the four corner sockets
in the rock, which are not square, and could never have been
seen again after the pyramid was built if the superstructure had
not been broken up and stolen, which was probably the last
thing that Cheops or his architect expected. The idea that a
building was designated to perpetuate a measure which it
exhihits absolutely nowhere!^*

His conclusion is emphatic : — " I reject altogether the idea
of recording standard measures by hiding them with the utmost
ingenuity."

Sir Henry James, the Director of the Ordnance Survey, and
supposed to understand measurement, objects to the unscientific
way Mr. Smyth has conducted his calculations, by first assuming
a theory, and then dragging in figures to accommodate it. He
complains that his averages have been incorrectly made. The
Professor has certainly acknowledged certain errors. While
Vyse made 9168, why did he take 9142 for his base ? especially
after Mr. Inglis of Glasgow had, for the first time, laid bare the
four corner sockets, getting 9120, 9114, 9102, and 9102. Sir
H. James, accepting 9168, finds the 360 Derabs, or Egyptian
land cubits, go into it 25*488 times ; therefore he concludes that
" the measures for the base of the Great Pyramid were set out
on the ground with the Derah or cubit of 25*488 inches. This


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 139

dijffers from Mr. Taylor's 25*025, and Sir Isaac Newton's
20-699.

As to the exact relation between this cubit — changed at times
by the professor himself — and the earth's axis, it is rather
curious that while the professor took the polar measure, and
Mr. Taylor that for lat. 30°, both gentlemen agree in their
round numbers.

Sir James T. Simpson is sharp upon the professor, styling his
theory fit " only for old women and womanish men." He makes
merry about the number five. As to the polar axis story, he
shows his calculation of a page of Mr. Smyth's book, which is
just one eighty-millionth part of the polar axis, &c. But banter
is not argument ; neither is there logic in the funny but hardly
proper way in which he thus refers to the coffer : —

" In short, to use the words of Prof. Smyth, * that wonder
within a wonder of the Great Pyramid, viz., the porphyry coffer,'
— that * chief mystery and boon to the human race wLich the
Great Pyramid was able to enshrine,' — * this vessel of exquisite
meaning,' and of * far-reaching characteristics,' — mathematically
formed under alleged Divine inspiration as a measure of capacity
(and, according to M. Jomard, probably of length also) for all
men and all nations, for all time, — ^and particularly for these
latter profane days, — is, in simple truth, nothing more and
nothing less than an old and somewhat misshapen stpne coffin."
Sir James was neither a mathematician nor a poet.

Still, he has some reason to say, "The coffer, though an
alleged actual standard of capacity measure, has yet been found
difficult or impossible to measure." After the professor's quoting
25 for a measure, he finishes by adding another of his own. In
1864 he had the capacity 70,970 English, or 70,^<^^ ^-s^\!^\J^


140 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

inches. In 1867 he advanced to 71,250. Mr. Taylor had
71,328, the cube of the cubit of Karnac.

While, however, Sir Edmund Beckett shows the inconsistency
and inapplicability of Mr. Smyth's 25 inch cubit standard, he
admits the teaching qualities of the sarcophagus, though believ-
ing it indicated another cubit. " At the same time," says he,
"the pyramid and the famous marble coffer in the King's
Chamber (which was doubtless, also, Cheops' coffin, until his
body was "resurectionised" by the thieves who first broke into
the pyramid) do contain clear indications of having been
designed in very careful proportions, and by means of another
* rule,' or cubit, of which definite multiples appear everywhere,
unlike Mr. Smyth's imaginary cubit, nowhere, with an astro-
nomical indication of its date, which satisfied no less an astronomer
than Sir John HerscheL"

The mystical philosopher, the Chevalier de B., wrathfuUy
exclaims, " And so the huge sarcophagus of the mighty temple
of Cheops, in which Initiates were designed to be typically born
again of water and of the spirit, becomes a corn-measurer in the
eyes of the great British mathematicians." Dr. Birch, our chief
Egyptologist, is quite opposed to the standard measure argument.

M. Dufeu views the professor's theory as very imaginary, and
adds, " Each of these authors, pre-occupied with his own system,
has rejected all those of his predecessors in order to give advan-
tage to his own." Yet he, too, has his theory, and his cubit too.
"The sarcophagus," says M. Dufeu, "was the standard of the
national measures of Egypt ; that is to say, of the Nilometric
cubit." The latter is nearly 20§ inches.

He thus lays it down : — " We have combined together the


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 141

three exterior dimensions and tlie three interior, and we have
arrived at a result very certainly as unforeseen as unhoped for ;
that is to say, to discover in that double and marvellous com-
bination of exterior and interior dimensions of the monolith
together, the standard of the Nilometnc cubit of 360 noctas."

By his system of calculation he reduces everything to noctas.
A cubit is divided into six palms ; the palm into four dactyles ;
and the dactyle into fifteen noctas. There are thus 360 noctas
to the cubit, or about 17^-^ to an inch. He proceeds on the
system of tens. Thus he multiplies the box length, 7 3027 feet
by 100, making 730*27 feet for the base. That he takes as a
stadium, 500 to a degree of earth's surface.

He distinctly pays that " almost all the monuments of Egypt
are material, and consequently destined to preserve some ancient
measure." This is perfectly true, as could easily be proved, and
is another indication that the pyramid was not intended as the
one standard of measure, though marking what was a standard
at the time.

His Nilonietric cubit is what Sir Edmund Beckett points out
in the mean of 20 73 inches, though the coffer to him is " no
exact multiple of a cubit in any of its dimensions." He deems
it contained the measure of " the cube of a double cubit of about
41-46." The hilf of that is the cubit of 2073 inches. The
double Karnac cubit, ho says, was between 41*398 and 41*472.
That is assumed by Mr. Taylor a Jewish measure, while Ezra's
cubit, he believes, is the royal or Memphis cubit. The measures
of 2 Chron. iii. 3 are different from the thirty cubits of 1 Kings
vi. 2 ; he suppos -s those thirty equal to the 120 others.

The variety of cubits is very confusing. M. Jomard gives in
metres the following : — cubit of Megyaa, ot ^\la\aa\«t vA^^icka^^jw


142 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

Island, 0-5385; Pykbelady, or country cubit, 0*5773; Black
cabit of Caliph, 0-5196; Eoyal Arab, 0-6157; Roman, 0-4434;
Hebrew, 0*5541 ; Kilometer, or !N'ew Greek, 0*5390 ; Constan-
tinople, or Cairo, 0*674 ; Elephanta, 0*527 ; Royal Babylonian,
0*5131; cubit of Herodotus, Samos, Moses, Ezekiel, Babylon,
&c., 0*4618, or 17 inches. Sir Gardner Wilkinson refers to cubits
from 24 to 32 digits. The Talmudlsts had a cubit for the propor-
tions of the human body, 25*61 ; but, to the steps of the inner
court, 24*74. The supposed secret cubit was 24*91. The Harris
cubit of Thebes is 20*65 inches. Perring's cubit of the pyramid is
20*628 inches. Wilkinson gives one at 20*5786. The Baby-
lonian, afterwards Jewish, has been rated at 20*886 and 20*676.
In the British Museum may be seen the double cubit of Kamac,
found enclosed between two stones. Though 3250 years old, the
wood is not decayed. The length is 41*46 inches. Mr. Taylor
declares that the cube root of the contents of the sarcophagus will
give the length of the Kamac cubit. The shorter Greek cubit
was only 18*24 inches. The Memphis cubit, recently found, is
said by Drovetti to be 522 millemetres, or an eighth more than
the ancient cubit. Jomard is of opinion that the ancient
Egyptian was twice lengthened in ancient times 3 digits, and by
a palm or 4 digits in modern times. Sir H James found the
Derah still in use as the cubit of Egypt, being 25*488 inches.
Roubniac Couder, on Ancient Metrology, declares that Fer-
gusson's statement of tlie Jewish cubits being respectively 15, 18,
and 21 inches, is contrary to Scripture.

There is a similar difficulty about the stadium. The Olym-

plum is put at 606*9 feet. Mr. Wilson has a stadium of 281

ft^ei; from 600 Greek feet. But Mr. Fergusson says, " The Eng-


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 143

lish is to the Greek or Egyptian foot as 75 is to 76 exactly."
He thinks, though Herodotus gave the bas^ at 800 feet, that
" the side of the pyramid was intended to be an even number of
600 cubits." Jomard. has the Egyptian foot to be 11 inches, 4
lines, 46 parts. A thousand Egyptian feet would make ten plethra.
Wilson makes the Grecian foot 12*0875 inches. The stadium is
calculated at 100 orgyia, one of which was supposed to be the
space between outstretched hands, or 6 feet. Greaves rates the
great stadium at 700 feet. The Egyptian stadium is said to be
327*27 feet. Herodotus calls the side 8 plethra; a plethron is a
sixth of a stadium. There are measures evidently of 500 and
600 stadia to a degree, though Jomard regards the last as
applicable to the oblique height of the pyramid.

Prof. Smyth, while highly extolling the pyramid cubit as of
Divine inspiration, is very severe upon the French metric system.
He condemns it on philosophical grounds, as it is based upon the
proportion to a quadrant of the earth's surface, which is not so
true, as he supposes, as the pyramidal, on the semi-axis principle.
But he more strongly condemns it as infidd, because it was
established in 1796, when the French were said, most absurdly
and erroneously, to have been a nation of atheists, inasmuch as
they objected to the rule of priests and kings. The French
metre is 39*37 inches. Mr. Petrie compares the more simple
pyramidal measure of one ten-millionth of the earth's radius
with the French standard of a ten-millionth of a curved terres-
trial quadrant. The standard of weight is dependent on that of
measure. Prof. Smyth found that a pyramid pint weighed a
pound at 68** ; and that 5 pyramid cubic inches weighed a pound.

Many thoughtful persons are ready to acknowledge that in


144 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

the pyramid a standard of weights and measures can be identi-
fied, though a difference of opinion may exist as to the relative
amount ; but they are unable to see that the pyramid was con-
structed with the express view of maintaining and of exhibiting
that standard.

Attention must now be drawn to the supposed direct astrono-
mical teaching of the pyramid.

12. AN ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATORY.

As the Tower of Babel was in olden times believed to have

been erected for the purpose of observing the heavens, so have

pyramids been thought to have been raised with a similar

intention. The tops, it was said, would have been admirable

platforms ; while the long passages, pointing, as they all did,
toward the pole, would have made admirable day-telescopes.

Norden, the Dane, two centuries ago, saw one fatal objection
to the theory. He remarks, " The top of the Second Pyramid,
still covered with granite marble, cut so smoothly that no one
can ascend it, decides absolutely that the pyramids were not
built to serve as observatories." Volney, too, was shrewd
enough to detect another objection ; saying, " because it could
not have been necessary to erect eleven observatories so near
each other as the eleven pyramids of different sizes which may
be seen from Djiza."

Plato's suggestion mast therefore be set aside. So clever a
people as the Chaldean priests would be hardly likely to build
a tower on the low plain, either for safety from another Deluge
or for elevation towards the skies, when they had ranges of
mountains bounding their valley promising so much better sites.
As to the passages of the pyramids furnishing telescopic con-


WHY WAS THE PYKAMID BUILT? 145

veniences, that accommodation could not have lasted longer than
the time necessary for the workmen to go in and out, when not
only were the passages blocked up, but the very entrance was so
well concealed that no tradition existed to point out the locality.

M. Jomard, when with Bonaparte in Egypt, could not help
exclaiming, " It is very remarkable that the openings of pyramids
are all to the north." The passage seemed fitted for an observa-
tory, as "it formed a true tube," said he, "at the mouth of
which it would be possible, I presume, to see the stars during
the day." He was satisfied that " one could at the lower point
see the circumpolar stars pass the meridian, and observe exactly
the instant of that passage." But M. Dufeu remarked on the
idea, " that could have been but a secondary destination."

Prof. Piazzi Smyth fears " that astronomers must dismiss that
favourite and frequently-published notion of their own shop,
from the desires of their hearts ; for," adds he, " seeing that
the passage was closed immediately after the building of it by
a large stone portcullis, raisable only with immense difficulty,
and on some few special occasions, its opportunities for observa-
tion would certainly have been far too rare to satisfy the prac-
tical needs of a working observatory."

13. ITS OWN LATITUDE.

Mr. Wild, C. E., of Zurich, said that the pyramid proclaimed
the latitude of the place.

First, he found the entrance was 30 cubits above the base.
His cubit is the ordinary one, about 20J inches. This indicates
the latitude 30° iN". Then he takes the pyramidal isosceles
triangular side, and sees in 30° half the angle of the apex of a
true isosceles. Afterwards, he gets another 30^ fronLllMLOcA^Vks^


146 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

it is half the central angle of a regular hexagon. The six angles
meeting at the centre are equal to four right angles, or 360° ;
one sixth of that would be 60°, and the half, 30°. Eegardrng
the hexagonal principle for the pyramid of Gizeh, he discovers
the heptagonal for the temples of Thebes. The central angle of
a heptagon is 51° 25' 42", and the half is 25° 42' 51". He
places the latitude of Thebes at 25° 43'.

Piof. Smyth assures us that " the Great Pyramid is as happy in
its unique situation as in its extraordinarily exact construction."
At the angle of 26° 18' for the passage, he requires for the
observation of the Polar star 2170 b. o. the latitude of 30°; or
rather, 29° 59' 59*2". Then he approximately obtains the
latitude another way. The angle of the north air-channel is,
he says, 33° 42', while that of the passage is 26° 18'; a mean
between these numbers gives nearly 30°.

14. ITS OWN AGE.

In the astronomical argument, it is affirmed by Mr. Smyth
and others that the fact that such a conjunction as the then
Polar star and the Pleiades being seen, or to be seen, along the
line of the pas?=age, at the angle 26° 18', 2170 B.C., proves the
buiLHiTg or finishing of the pyramid to have been at that very
date.

But other singular coincidences arise to support that era.
The Rev. F. R A. Glover, M. A., thus comments on the subject :
" There is a mark of special providence within the pyramid,
made 2170 b.c., which is responded to by a corresponding mark
in a series of chronological passages, at the distance of 2170
inches, on a scale of an inch of space measuring a year of time ;


WHY WAS THE PYKAMID BUILT? 147

"which testifies, in a hard geometrical, irrefutahle manner, in con-
currence with an astronomical date, cos mically developed, to the
fact, that at the time of the Advent in the year One of the
Christian era, was meant to he there, and thereby indicated 2170
years before by the builder of the Great Pyramid, or whoever
inspired the building of that work."

Mr. Casey, in Philitis, has a further description. After saying
that the first Ascending Passage represents the Mosaic dis-
pensation of 985 inches from the Dispersion to Moses, and
1542 thence to the Advent, he traces back 2170 inches to a
little distance down inside of the slanting entrance passage, and
shows the rectangular joints of the great stones forming the
sloping walls are made nearly vertical in two successive instances
only. " Then," says he, " the two strikingly visible separations
of continuity in the walls are followed by a thin, fine, but ex-
quisitely true line, ruled at six inches behind the last of these
separations, and in that line is contained the position answering
to 2170 B.O."

The mark was a line ruled on the stone from top to bottom
of the passage wall at ri^^ht angles to its floor. But what was
wanted was ''the distance from the nearest joint to the drawn
line." This was ascertained to be 2170| one side, and 2170|-
on the other, in pyramid inches. " This testimony," adds Mr.
Casey, "satisfies me, and fills me with thankfulness and joy."

But M. Dufeu has another calculation, founded on a new
set of historico-mathematical princij)les, connected with the lists
of kings by Manetho, by which he concludes that the pyramid
was built at the beginning of the Sot hie period. lie finds the
height of the hypogeum, he says, from the soil of Iha ^^-^rcck?^


148 PYRAMID. FACTS AND FANCIES.

to the roof to be 2920 noctas — two Sothic periods of 1460
years. As one Sothic age was 1322 B.C., the addition of 2920
would give 4242 b.c.

His analysis of Manetho's list, and its identification with
chronology, would be out of place here. But he draws thence
a conclusion, to be read in his Quatre Pyramides de Glzeh, that
the 202 steps of the pyramid indicate the age of the building,
as the number is referable to the so-called chronological height
of the royal buUder. The height of the pyramid he calls 262
cubits. From this he substracts 60 for the age of Menes, the
first kmg, and gets 20-2.

The height of the King's Chamber he discovers to be one-
fifth of the chronological height of the builder in the lists : —
" demonstrating that the pyramid had been erected 808 years
after the rise of Menes, first king, founder of the Egyptian
dynasties, and, consequently, by the Cheops of Herodotus,
Kufu of the Monuments, Souphis of Manetho, whose elevation
was precisely placed, after the royal lists of this chronographic
priest, 808 years after that of Menes." This would bring
it to the time indicated by Rouge and Mariette Bey, over
4000 B.C.

Dufeu declares there is " perfect accord existing between the
indications of the lists of Manetho and the length of the
syringe of the hypogeum, the number of the steps, and the
vertical height of the Great Pyramid, the height of its chambers,
called the King's or the sarcophagus, and the heights of the
chambers called Sepulchral of the three other pyramids."

The overwhelming difficulties in the way of the reception of
2170 B.C., and the historical agreements with 4242 b.c., will


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 149

incline many readers to prefer M. Ditfeu*s coincidences to the
coincidences relied on by Mr. Smyth.

15. THE CIRCUMFERENCE OF THE EARTH.

" The Pyramid of Cheops," writes the author of Tlte Solar
System of the Ancients^ "may be regarded as a teocalli, or ter-
raced pyramid, having the contents equal one half the circum-
ference of the earth." By a reduction to units, he shows that
five cubes of ten times the inclined side would produce the
amount of the diameter of our orbit

"The Pyramid of Cheops," he says again, "might be called
the Pyramid of the Sun, as it denotes the time of descent from
the earth to the* sun. The number of steps accord with the
number of half diameters of the sun, which equal the half
diameter of the earth's orbit, and the pyramid itself equals the
half circumference of the earth." He adds, " Possibly the race
that constructed the pyramid might have found a difficulty in
agreeing as to the comparative diameters of the earth, sun, and orbit
of the earth, and so left the pyramid truncated or incomplete."

Of course, 360 times the length of a degree will give the cir-
cumference of the earth. " But," says Dufeu, " the length of the
side or base of the Great Pyramid represented the stadium of
500 to the degree, and, consequently, the degree of the great
circle." At 600 stadia to the degree he obtains the slant height
of the pyramid. Thus, a degree, according to Jomard, is
110,827-68 metres. A six-hundredth part of that is 184*712
metres; but the slant height, being 184-722 metres, is very
close to it.

Mr. Gliddon was no mystic in 1843, when he sud, "Whether the
Great Pyramid be 454 feet high, or 474, ia to'v^a ^Ta^XX.^^^'lvcL-


150 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

difference." To us more modern readers it matters a good deal. M.
Dufeu attached importance to the height. He once wrote how,
hy the reckoning of 500 to a degree, " we have heen able to dis-
cover the geodesic marks of the monument, and determine even,
in suspecting it, the height given to its apex, or imaginary geo-
metrical summit, or to the half-column (cippe) placed upon the
platform crowning the pyramid, in order to give to this the ver-
tical and mathematical height necessary that it might be a pre-
cious geodesic standard."

It is in this vertical height that he gets the standard of the
measure of the earth.

Mr. John Taylor finds the height of the pyramid to be a^ o^o6 6
of the earth's circumference. Dividing 270,299 by 314157,
and multiplying the result by the height of the pyramid in
pyramid inche?i, 5825, he obtains 500,176,400 inches. Now,
according to Piazzi Smyth, " the equatorial axis of the earth " is
"somewhere between 502,000,000, and 503,000,000." The
Edinburgh astronomer gets a mean result of 500,490,700 from
the pyramid's measure; and he assumes the polar axis at
500,495,000 inches.

Mr. Taylor says that a band encircling the earth of the
breadth of the base of the Great Pyramid will contain
100,000,000,000 square feet. Taking a twelfth of the length
in pyramid inches, 762*5, and multiplying by 3*14159, he divides
the result with 100,000,000,000, and realises 500,946,700 inches.

" It is probable," he thinks, " that a deeply-iucised lino was
carved at the commencement, representing, in the first instance,
the length of five royal spans, or 51,840 Englit^h inches, as the
standard for the measure of the diameter ; and in the second,


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 151

the length of 150 pyramid inches, or 163,635 English inches, as
the standard for the measure of the circumference."

Eef erring to 1600 talents for onions, &c., in Herodotus, the
mystical Mr. Taylor says, "In the case of the circumference of
the present earth, as also in the diameter of the former earth,
the figures which Herodotus saw, and which the interpreter made
vocal to him, were those which, when applied to a well-known
measure of space with which the founders of the pyramid were
familiar, will exactly express both of these numbers, amounting
to the numerical power of the Arabian figures ; amounting, in the
former instance, to 48,000,000 royal spans, or 497,664,000 Eng-
lish inches; and the latter, to 1,440,000,000 pyramid inches, or
1,570,896,000 English inches."

. Believing in the universal and destructive Deluge, and an
earth changed by that Deluge in size, he says, " The founders
would naturally desire to preserve a memorial of that earth which
had been destroyed, that it might be compared with the new
earth, from which they perceived it to differ."

On the other hand, we have Dufeu coming to a somewhat
similar result on the assumption that the pyramid indicates 500
measures to the degree. Upon his system of tenths, he multi-
plies by 100 the length of the sarcophagus. This brings
730-27 feet. Multiplying by 500, he gets 365,1345036 aa
the measure of a degree. That multiplied by 360 gives
131,448,421*2960 as the equatorial circumference of the globe;
Laplace stating that as 131,456,276*4778 shows the pyramid
correct within 7854 feet. Some, again, take 100 times the
coffer — 730*27 feet, and multiply by 180,000 stadia to realise
131,448,421-296.


152 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

.A Frencli writer remarks that " it is not by chance that the
Egyptian foot equals 360,000 to a degree." He considers that
"it is thus certain that these measures have been drawn from
the dimensions of the earth, and that they are derived from
them, following the sexagesimal progression." Dufeu sees " in
the vertical height of the Great Pyramid the standard of two of
the great itinerary measures of the earth."

16. THE TRUE SHAPE OF THE EARTH.

We modems are aware that this home of ours is not a regular
globe, seeing that it is an oblate spheroid, with a bulging out at
the equator, or flattening at the poles.

Hekekyan Bey, who is so full of the wonders of the pyramid
as to say, " This Siriadic monument masonifies information which
would fill volumes," has seen how it can express this polarity
difference.

"The square root," he writes, "of the three-fifths of the dif-
ference between the length of the side of the rock platform, and
twice the measure deducted from it to obtain the length of a
side of the first course of masonry on the platform, gives the
measure of the proportion of the polar compression to the equa-
torial diameter."

These he finds to be 302*2 to 301-2. In this way he gets
the equatorial axis 8,752,847,053-3 noctas, and the polar
8,723,890,885-9.

Dufeu, in his system of calculation, obtains for the imaginary
height of the pyramid 692*0937. This, says he, is one-hundredth
part of the flattening of the earth at the pole, or one two-hun-
dredih oi the difference of the diameter at the equator and the


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 153

axis of rotation. Though Laplace declares for 68,671*123, yet
the mean of modern measures for this flattening is 69,209-8708.
But it will be seen that the pyramid measure very nearly ap-
proaches the last as 100 x 6920987 produces 65,209-87.

This height is thus obtained. He does not believe the pyramid
ever higher than the present platform of 202 steps, or 450 feet
10 inches. He supposes a cippe, pole, or column of 6*827 metres
to represent the imaginary apex. Thus he concludes the eleva-
tion above the lowest level of the Eed Sea to be 692*1785 feet.
M. Jomard originally suggested the cippe top. The platform
base is now about 150 feet above the level of the desert.

17. THE DENSITY OF THE EARTH.

Citing a passage in Isaiah, upon "weighing the mountains in
scales," Mr. Piazzi Smyth thinks he detects the mean density of
the earth " to have been introduced into the capacity and weight
measures of the pyramid at a time when it was an utter impos-
sibility to men ;" that is, he supposes it pleased the Most High to
reveal what astronomers have only recently discovered by science.

He fiuds the coffer contents to be 70,970*2 inches, and the
coffer weight of water at 68° to be 17,905*500 gallons. Thence
he gets by a division of these two quantities the approximate
density of 5*672.

Mr. William Petrie has ascertained that the mass of the pyra-
mid is to the earth as 1 to 10 ^^^^ He estimates the weight of
the pyramid at 5,273,834 pyramid ton««, and that of the earth
5,271,900,000,000,000,000,000. Eeckoning the mean density
of the earth at 5*7 times water, he regards the earth as exactly
a thousand billions times the weight of the pyramid.

Mr. St. John Day, after noting that the exUticyt ^\ssi^\s&NKsvs&


154 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

of tlie sarcophagus or coffer are twice tliose of the interior, pro-
ceeds to demonstrate that, taking the internal cubical measure-
ment at 71,250 inches, if we divide 71,250 by the recognised
mean density of the earth, 5*7, we obtain in the result, 12,500,
the weight of the ciffer of water at the temperature of 68°. He
realises the coffer contents, 71,250, by multiplying the cube of
50 pyramid inches by the density, 5*7, and dividing the whole
by 10. The weight of the pyramid is declared to be y^- ^ ^ ^ of .
the weight of the globe.

Sir Edmund Beckett ridicules the attempt to make the
pyramid teU this density tale, especially as its advocates have
" the figures wrong, according to all the received measures, from
!N'ewton's to the present day."

18. THE DISTANCE OF THE SUN.

A very simple law has been found for this calculation. It is
to multiply the height of the pyramid by the ninth power of the
number 10.

The steps of the building establish the relation of ten and
nine; so much so, that it was thought two polos, of 10 and 9
feet respectively, were set up at right angles, for guidance to the
workmen.

As the height bears a definite relation to the base, the one as
radius, the other as circumference, the accurate measurement
of the base will give the proper ideal height. Mr. Piazzi
Smyth makes the latter 5819 inches of our own times. But Mr.
Wm. Petrie estimates 5835 as nearer the truth.

The distance of the sun, by the ninth power of 10 multiplied
b7 5819, will be about 91,840,000 miles; but by 6835 inch-


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 155

heiglit, 92,093,000. Currently, the distance has been reckoned
95,000,000. More recent calculations have placed it some three
millions less. The pyramid measurement, therefore, is more
correct according to modern data.

. The sun^s distance is estimated at one thousand million times
the height of the pyramid.

19. THE DAYS IN A YEAR.

Some curious calculations are brought out by Prof. Smyth,
Captain Tracey, Mr. Petrie, Mr. Yeates, and others, upon the
number of days in the year.

Mr. Thomas Yeates, in 1833, started the view, "whether or
not the Great Pyramid of Ghizeeh was designed as a monument
of the discovery of the Egyptian year." Again, he says, " The
measure of the pyramid will be found to agree with the number
of days in the solar year. Moreover, admitting my exposition
of the ark of Israel to be correct, then will its measures of
length and breadth be found to correspond in cubits with the
number of days in the lunar year, viz., 354."

As mentioned elsewhere, Mr. Yeates identified the pyramid
with Noah's ark. " The form of the ark," he said, " was quadran-
gular, and consisted of four equal sides, or parallelograms, of
which the measure of one is given in three numbers — 300, 50,
and 30 cubits." Again, " The four sides include four rectangular
parts of one dimension in length and breadth ; and the whole
equal a square of 350 cubits, inside measure, and four more for
the outside, making in all 354 cubits, or about 737| feet (25
inches to a cubit). Compare this with the measure of the Great
Pyramid."


156 PYRAMID FACTS AKD FANCIES.

Mr. Wm. Petrie shows that the side of the pyramid irill
equal 365*3 multiplied hj the cnbit of 25*025 British inches^
Assuming the ancient yertical height as 5313 inches, he would
multiply that som hj the ninth power of 10, to realise the
radius vector. He finds the number of days to go a round
namber of times into the circumference of the earth's orbit.
The latter is taken at 36,525,430,000,000; and the former,
365-25636. Bat that circumference is associated with the per-
pendicular 5813; being thus produced — 5813 x 10^ x twice
3141 6 = 36,528,430,000,000.

Pro£ Hamilton L. Smith of Xew York, according to Mr.
Piazza Smyth, taking "one length and two breadths of the
King's Chamljer for radius in a trigonometrical computation with
the peculiar passage angle 26** 18' 10", the resulting sine, or
length of the vertical side of the triangle, where the above ra-
dius is hypotheneuse, brings out exactly the year-day number,
365*242, &c." He also shows that the height of the niche in the
Queen's Chamber, taken as 182*62, multiplied by 2 will give
365*24 solar days. He finds this height of the niche, if
taken as 185 multiplied by 3 14 16, and then by 10, will
bring 5812, the height of the pyramid; but taken as 182*62,
multiplied by 10 and divided by 2, the base, 9131, is ob-
tained.

Capt. Tracey, R. N., has some pretty mathematical results
from the Ante chamber to the King's Chamber. The length of
116*26 inches he notes to be partly of granite, partly of lime-
stone. The granite portion is 103 033 in pyramid inches, which
are about a thousandth part larger than the British. Taking
JOB foT the side of a square, he gets the area of a circle whose


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 157

diameter is 116-26. This amount multiplied by 3-14159, the
proportion of circumference and diameter, brings out the days
365-24.

The King's Chamber is 412*132 pyramid inches long. With
that as a diameter, the circle would equal a square whose side
was 365-242 j and this, in' sacred cubits, is the length of the
socket side of the pyramid.

Professor Smyth takes the 26 holes in the ramps of the gallery
for days, and the 14 roof over4appings for months, to get 364
days to the year. He then leads us to the Ante-chamber and the
four grooves, one of which only holds the portcullis. Except-
ing, therefore, one year in four, we have to add but one day to
364 ; in leap year, two days must be added. He observes, too,
that the groove filled by the portcullis is of less width than the
other grooves ; and so concludes that less than one day in four
must be added, as the year is not quite 365J days in length.

Another curious coincidence is pointed out by him. There is
a great step by the upper end of the gallery, which is 90 J inches.
That, says he, ** which increased for the ruling angle of the
place, goes close to 366 times into the circumference of the pyra-
mid, eminently reminding, therefore, of the days contained in a
year."

But Mr. Petrie discovered that the base of the ppamid divided
by 365-242 would equal the ten-millionth part of the' earth^s
radiiLs. Sir Henry James got the base 764 from 360 derahs,
or cubits, of 25-488 inches for days. Mr. Wild, C. E., deter-
mines that the relation of the Second and Third Pyramids brings
out similar results.


158 PYRAxMID FACTS AND FANCIES.


20. THE LAW OF GRAVITATION.

The author of the Solar System of the Ancients^ informs us
that " the pyramid, like the obelisk, still points to the heavens as
an enduring record of the laws of gravitation, though it has
ceased to be intelligible for countless ages." He remarks, in
another place, *^ The Pyramid represents the variation of the time,
and the pagoda the variation of the velocity."

As the Great Pyramid is the present subject of enquiry,
the obelisk teaching must be deferred for another publication. It
will then be satisfactorily seen that the obelisk is one of the
most perfect mathematical puzzles ever constructed. It stands
the test of modern scale of descent by gravitating force, and
elucidates the principle exactly. It is a masonified lecture on
conic sections. It illustrates the fact that the most recondite
theories of geometry and natural science were practically made
use of in Egypt 5000 or 6000 years ago.

The pyramiil, not less than the obelisk, which it resembles,
can thus answer the enigma of gravitation, generally supposed to
have been discovered by Sir Isaac Newton through the accident
of an apple falling from a tree.

21. TIME OF DESCENT TO THE MOON AND SUN.

The number of steps to the pyramid, calculated at 219, has
served Mr. Wilson with another curious astronomical coincidence,
or teaching.

" The Pyramid of Cheops," says he, " will represent the time
of descent from the earth to the moon through 219 semi-diameters
oi the moon, as well as the time of descent from the earth to


"WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 159

the sun, through 219 semi-diameters of the sun. The bases of
the pyramids will in both cases be in the centre or orbit of the
earth ; but, in the descent to the sun, the apex of the external
pyramid will be in the centre of the sun; and in the descent to
the moon the apex of the external pyramid will be in the centre
of the moon. The axis. of the external pyramid is supposed to
be divided into 219 equal parts, or 219 semi-diameters."

Again, he writes, — " We suppose the Pyramid of Cheops might
have been dedicated to the sun, because it represented the semi-
diameter of the sun and the semi-diameter of the earth's orbit,
as well as the time of descent from the earth to the sun ; but
now it appears that this pyramid will also represent the semi-
diameter of the moon, and the semi-diameter of the earth's orbit,
as well as the time of descent from the eaith to the moon. So
the Pyramid of Cheops might have been dedicated to both the
sun and moon."

He also writes : — " The Pyramid of Cheops indicates the half-
circumference of the earth and the half-diameter of the earth's
orbit. Its towering summit may be supposed to reach the
heavens, and the pyramid itself to represent the law at the time
of a body gravij;ating from the earth to the sun. The solid
hyperbolic temple of Shoemadoo of Pegu represents the law
of velocity corresponding to this law of the time."

22. PLANETARY DISTANCES.

Mr. John Wilson also reads the distances of planets in the
pyramids. His calculation is by what he calls units; thus, the
side of the pyramid, 760 feet, he calls 648 units; and the
height, 405 units. Each unit is about 14*074 inchea.


160 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

The dislance of the moon, he explains, will be thus obtained.
Twenty times the cabe of the side will be five times the distance
of the moon. Of course, the amounts must be reduced into
units. The cube of the side of the base (648^) would give a
quarter the moon's distance. Four times the cube of the
pyramid, or the cubes of the four sides, gives the distance (rf the
moon. Ten times sixty cubes, or 600 cubes of the pyramid,
gives the distance of Mercury ; that of Saturn will be twenty-five
times as much, or 15,000 cubes. The cube of twice the side
(1296^) will be the diameter of the moon's orbit. Twenty-five
cubes of the perimeter yields the distance of the earth from the
sun ; which is as many cubes of the side of the base as the side
contains Babylonian feet. This is 1600, the number of talents
Herodotus says he saw recorded outside.

The sarcophagus is, according to Mr. "Wilson, very suggestive.
Ten times the breadth raised to the ninth power gives the
distance of Neptune ; and the depth raised to the ninth power,
the distance of Jupiter. Half the square of the length to the
ninth power gives that of Mars. Five cubes of 300 multiplied
by the length is the diameter of Mercury's orbit. Two cubes
of 200 multiplied by the contents of the inside gives 280 times
the distance of the moon, Le. the distance of Yenus.

The Grand Gallery he regards as of the hyperbolic order.

If these coincidences appear to be far-fetched, others are open
to the same charge.

23. THE RISE OF A POLAR STAR.

Among the interesting discoveries in connection with the
pjramid is that by looking through the passage to the northern


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 161

heavens, 2170 B.a, an observer would there distinguish the then
Polar star, Alpha Draconis, crossing the meridian helow the
Pole, and by Pleiades crossing it above.

Prof. Smyth thus puts the case : — " At that precise moment,
when the Pole star, with the temporary distance of 3° 42' from
the pole, was crossing the meridian helow the pole, at the same
moment, or in that one year alone of all known years, the bright
central star of the Pleiades cluster, separately symbolised in the
Grand GaUery, was also on the meridian, but above the pole ;
and not only near the equator, but on the very same meridian
as Precession then assigned to the Equinox." He adds, — " The
combination of all these several events, or phenomena, could
only have occurred, according to the precessional calculations of
modern astronomy, at or close to the year 2170 b.c."

All must admit this a singular coincidence, like that of the
conjunction of planets at the birth of the Saviour. " But what
of that 1 " the reader may ask. It is inferred that the Divine
skill, which ordered the arrangements of the King's Chamber,
dictated the angle of that passage by which, at the epoch of
construction, such a remarkable astronomical occurrence could
be observed.

Our own Polar star was then, by the Precession of the
Equinoxes, far distant from the North Pole of the heavens, as
a Draconis now is. The latter was at its nearest station
2800 B.C. Mr. Smyth admits that " there was a former epoch,
viz., 3400 B.C., when the Polar star was also at that foundation
distance of 3° 42' from the pole, but with totally opposite
accompaniments."

Sir John Herschel declared : " A passage may be said to ha.^^


162 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES,

directly poiated at a Draconis, at its inferior cnlmination, at
which moment its altitude above the horizon of Gizeh (lat. 30°)
would have been 27° 9'." But, as elsewhere named, a date was
first given to the astronomer. The Rev. Dr. Nolan says : " At
the request of Col. Yyse, Sir J. Herschel calculated the place
of the star which was Polar at the time when, according to tJie
reduced chronology y the pyramids were erected."

Mr. Gliddon, the distinguished American Egyptologist, has a
version of the matter. He relates that the tables prepared by
Yyse and Perring in 1838 were submitted to Sir John, who
wrote as follows : — " No other astronomical relation can be
drawn from the tables containing the angles and dimensions of
the passages ; for, although they all point within ^vq degrees of
the Pole of the Heavens, they differ too much, and too irregu-
larly, to admit of any conclusions." Again: "The exterior
angles of the building are remarkably uniform ; but the angle
62° is not connected with any astronomical fact."

The American was very decided upon the astronomical ques-
tion. In 1842 he denied the fact of pyramid observations.
** First," says he, "by their extraordinary variety and numi)er;
and secondly, in Ethiopia, by their fron-ts facing all points of
the compass, from N.E. to S.E. Thirdly, in Egypt, from the
measurements made in 1839 by Mr. Perring, which demonstrate
that the inclinations of the pa«ssiges, as well as the relative
position of each pyramid, vary so as to destroy all conformity
to mathematical or astronomical purposes. These proofs against
their astronomical utility are independent of the voluminous
evidence to be gleaned from history, and from a glance at the
monuments themselves, their localities and associations, which


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 163

declare their sepulchral origin. If^ as Sir John Herschel ob-
serves, the inclined passage into the largest pyramid of Gheezeh
was made at an angle to correspond to a Draconis, this pyramid
must have been built about the year 2123 e.g., which alone
would suffice to upset Usher^s epoch of the Deluge, 2348 b.c."

Some think the professor too dogmatic in his assertion about
angles and dates. Why, it is asked, does he select 26® 18' for
the passage, which others state to be 26° 41' 1 "Why should he
light upon 2170 b.c. when others give no such precise date?
When Col. Vyse, by actual measurement, made an angle 61° 50'
51*62'', Mr. Taylor, to suit his theory, preferred to adopt 51®
51' 14'3", and Mr. Smyth another angle.

Mr. Agnew, in 1838, gave mathematical reasons for the angle
being different. "The real angle of the dip," he writes, "or
the angle intended to he given to it, was 26° 33' 64", being
the inclination of a line from the middle of one side to the
opposite comer, or the angle formed by the hypothenuse of a
right-angled triangle with the greater of the two sides containing
the right angle, these latter being to each other as 2 to 1." He
thinks that " other passages with the same inclination may pro-
bably exist, leading in a zigzag direction to upper rooms on the
levels of the other inscribed squares of the figure."

Sixty years ago Dr. Richardson said, " The supposition that
this passage was intended as an astronomical instrument for
measuring side-real time is scarcely tenable. Pyramids are
prodigiously expensive and unmanageable machines; and the
passage being so carefully sealed at the entrance precluded all
possibility of using it as such. Besides, there being so many
pyramids, all of them with passages looking to the north, and


164 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

descendiog nearly with the same angle of incliDation, thoy were
probably intended to answer some other purpose than that of
looking at the Polar star.'*

Mr. Fergusson the architect lays it down that ''all these
theories have failed, for a variety of reasons it is needless now to
discuss ; but, among others, it may be mentioned that the angles
are not the same in any two pyramids, though erected within a
few years of one another, and in the twenty that were measured
by Col. Vyse they vary from 22° 35' to 34° 5^. The angle of
the inclination of the pyramid to the horizon is more constant,
varying only from 51° 10' to 62° 32', and in the Gizeh pyramids
it would appear that the angle of the passage was intended to
have been about one half of this."

Our own Nestor of Egyptologists, Dr. Birch, has this state-
ment : — " It has been supposed that they were built to record
an arc of the meridian, the earth's diameter, the revealed unit of
measure, the exact rise of the old Polar story a Draconis, and
other points of cosmic or mathematical knowledge. These ideas
do not appear to have entered into the minds of the con-
structors of the pyramids, who employed measures for their
symmetrical construction."

In a letter the writer received from a distinguished scientist
and officiid astronomer are these words : — " Astronomers do
not as a rule agree with Piazzi Smyth's deductions and condiir
sions, Ilis matters of fact are of course not disputed, and many
of his discoveries are, I think, rather looked upon as curious and
interesting coincidences, than as establishing his theories."


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 165

24 THE EQUINOXES.

It is an old classical notion that the pyramid, at certain times,
never throws a shadow. There was a pretty general impression
that it was erected as a true chronometer by marking solar
changes. Plato, in this sense, called it the dial. Other con-
trivances were known that indicated these astronomical effects.
The well at Syene reflected in its waters the image of the sun at
the summer solstice. The equinoctial and solstitial points were
in the vety early times correctly observed.

The pyramid on the north side was in shadow from the
autumnal to the vernal equinox, but light from the vernal to
the autumnal at midday. It, therefore, followed that those who
stood at the centre of the north base, at the equinox, would see
the sun resting on the apex of the pyramid.

The orientation of the pyramid being so nearly perfect, having
for its error, says Sir Edmund Beckett, but 5', or one foot in its
base line of 761, enables the structure to act as a gnomon. I
may have been more exact once, there being some evidence of a
twist, as from an earthquake. M. Def vignoles remarks that this
orientation " could have served for the Egyptians to determine
the time of the equinoxes, when the sun begins to enlighten the
northern face, or when he ceased to shine there." This would
only occur when the years of equinoxes suited the sun*s rising.

Mr. Stewart, of America, has some observations : — " It foUows
from these dimensions, and the latitude under which this pyramid
is erected, that fourteen days before the spring equinox, the pre-
cise period at which the Persians celebrated the revival of nature,
the sun would cease to cast a shade at midday, and ^a>Ql^ \>l<5>\.


166 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

again cast it until fourteen days after the autumnal equinox.
Then the day, or the sun, would be found in the parallel or
circle of southern declension, which answers to 5° 15'; this
would happen twice a year — once before the spring, and once
after the fall, equinox. The sun would then appear exactly at
midday upon the summit of this pyramid.**

25. PRECESSION OF THE EQUINOXES.

The ancient year of the gods, 25,920 years, is one of many
signs that Sir Isaac Nfewton's supposed discovery was known
long before. Prof. Eobinson says, "It is now very certain that
the precession of the equinoxes was known to the astronomers
of India many ages before Hipparchus. The Egyptians, also,
had a knowledge of something equivalent to this, for they had
discovered that the Dog-star was no longer the faithful fore-
warner of the Nile, and they combined him with the star Fomal-
haset in their mystical calendar."

The very fact of their having both solar and sidereal time
would show a consciousness of moveable equinoxes.

Hekekyan Bey gives 50 34" as the record of the annual re-
cession, showing the excess of time over 365 days in the tropical
and sidereal years. He takes 29° 57' 30" for the latitude.

But Mr. Casey, in the PMlUiSy a really valuable little pam-
phlet, points out that the pyramid itself declares the cycle of the
precession, and that nearer to the modern acceptation than even
the Asiatic great circle of 25,920 years. He declares that the
two diagonals of the base of the pyramid, estimated in pyramid
inches, measure 25,827. That number in years will be about the
time the stars take to recover their several positions in relation
to our pole.


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 167

Mr. Wild, C. E., nearly thirty years ago, had a pretty calcu-
lation of his own to prove the Great Pyramid a true chronometer,
or time-measurer, and a dial in a higher sense than Plato meant
"when he applied that title to it.

As is well known, the entrance passage is not in the centre of
the north side of the pyramid. Mr. "Wild, who makes use of a
cubit — the Memphis one — quite different to that employed by
Prof. Smyth, assumes the eastern side from the entrance to be
210 cubits, and the western 238. The difference, 28 cubits, he
discovers to be the exact distance, 0*4758'', indicated by Maedler
as the annual diminution of the obliquity of the ecliptic.

As the entrance is 14 cubits eastward of the middle of the north
face, he finds that " during the half of the year in which the sun
lights the northern side of the pyramid (intended as a chrono-
meter) the tropic retrogrades 14 cubits ; that is, exactly the same
distance as the entrance of the Great Pyramid is removed east-
ward from the middle of the northern face."

More singular, — "In 210 years the tropic retrogades 100",
exactly in the same number of years as the eastern portion of
the base contains cubits." That is, taking Maedler's rate of
0-4758" for the year. " Then," says he, " in 600 years the tropic
retrogrades 238"; that is, as many seconds as the western portion
contains cubits."

Again, — " According to the above-mentioned operations, the
proportion between the base and height of the pyramid is as 16
to 10. The tropic retrogrades in sixteen years the full length of
the base, and in ten years the full height of the Great Pyramid ;
for the length of the base is 16 x 28 = 448 cubits, and the height
is 10 X 28 = 280 cubits."


168 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

It is an equally remarkable coincidence that 25,000 times the
annual diminution of 0-4758", or 3° 18' 15", if added to what
he recognises as the inclination of the entrance passage, 26** 41',
would give the latitude of the pyramid, 29° 5^ 15". The
difference between the inclination of 26° 41' and that of the
Ascending Passage, 26° 18', is 23'. This amount represents 2900
years obliquity, or nearly one-ninth of the cycle of precession.

This very convenient pyramid gives astronomical results of
as striking and as perfect a character for Mr. Wild with
20 inch cubits as for Prof. Smyth with 25 inch ones.

26. CONNECTION WITH SIRIUS, THE DOG-STAR.

Several writers, including Arabian philosophers, have fancied
some " mystic correlation," to use the words of M. Dufeu, " be-
tween the design and age of the pyramid and the revolutions of
Sirius, the judge-god of the dead."

In the present work the religious question can but be glanced
at. Sirius was kuown as Sothis by the Egyptians, whence the
so-called Sothic year, or revolution of 1460 years. Hermes, god
of wisdom, says Champollion, was Sirius, or Sothis. Hermes is
Thoth, or Anubis, the deity presiding over the dead, and yet
being the originator of learning. Popular tradition among the
Arabs, revived among certain mystical Christian writers of our
own day, indicates Seth as the builder of the pyramid. Seth, in
this case, is probably Sothis, or Sirius.

No star was so venerated in Egypt as Sirius, associated, as it
was, with the time of the annual overflow of the Nile, which the
rising of the star foreshadowed. The hieroglyphic for Sirius is,
oddly enough, the triangular face of a pyramid. Dufeu and


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 169

others suppose that the pyramid may have been dedicated to this
venerated star or period. Proclus relates the belief in Alex-
andria that the pyramid was used for observations of Sirius.

Murtadi, 1584, says that the magical priest Saiouph made his
abode, at the time of the Deluge, in the pyramid ; " which,"
says he, " was a temple of the stars, where there was a figure of
the sun, and one of the moon, both of which spoke." He men-
tions the great grandson of Noah, Bardesi, who, as priest, " ap-
plied himself to the worship of the stars." He adds, " It is
reported that he made the great laws, built the pyramids, and set
up for idols the figures of the stars."

M. Dufeu finds the total height from the soil of the syringe
to the roof to be 2920 noctas, or twice the Sothic period of
1460 years. "We consider that," says he, "a proof that the
Great Pyramid had been dedicated to this memorable Sothic
period, or rather to Sothis, the star justly venerated in Egypt.
One sees by that that the hypogeum takes its point of departure
from the beginning of the revolution of Sothis anterior to the
sixty years before the coming of Menes, the same as Manetho
takes his point of departure from the initial point of that same
revolution of Sothis, in attributing to Cerpheres a Sothic height
of 839 years, or chronological nocta«?, at the moment when he
founded the subterranean construction of the Great Pyramid."

Having come to the close of the interesting lessons of an
astronomical kind, communicated by the Great Pyramid, we dis-
cover that the measurements are assumed to have some direct
and important relation to religious subjects. Keference will
therefore be made to some of these ideas.


170 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

27. THE UNITY OF GOD.

Prof, Smyth, in Our Inheritance in the Great Pyi'amid, thus
writes : " The Great Pyramid, a pre-historic and entirely pre-
Mosaic monument, had remained sealed in all its more import-
ant divisions, from the date of its foundation up to an advanced
period of the Christian dispensation ; and was then found, on
being opened and examined, entirely free from that accursed
thing which formed the leprosy of the East in ancient days —
idolatry."

No hieroglyphics occur on the sarcophagus. This fact he
declares to be *' that astonishing isolation, not only from other
pyramids, but from everything of Egyptian intentions, such, as
now appears to be, and to have been from the beginning, the
attribute of the pyramids."

He contrasts it thus with the Sphinx ; " That monster, an idol
in itself, with a wig and painted cheeks, and symptoms typify-
ing the lowest mental organisation, positively reeks with idolatry
throughout its substance ; for, when the fragments, or component
masses, of its colossal stone beard were discovered in the sand-
excavation of 1817, it was perceived that all its internally join-
ing surfaces of the blocks had been figured, full of the * im-
pure ' Egyptian gods."

It is unfortunate for the professor's theory that " impure "
hieroglyphics were found in the pyramid, even the quarry marks
of the two kings ; and these, as in all cartouches of kings, are
idolatrous emblems — the serpent and birds of Egyptian worship.
In a subsequent work it will be shown that gods, and not the
God, were the objects of adoration, even before the age of the
pymmidi.


WHTf WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 171

28. DIVINE ORIGINATION OF MEASURE.

The assumption of some writers is, that a correct standard
being of inestimable value, and it being faithfully exhibited by
the pyramid, none could have originated such a scheme of
weights and measures therein but Deity Himself.

There has been a time in the history of every race when
nothing could occur beyond the comprehension of ignorance
that was not attributed to the direct interposition of local
divinities. In every language, perhaps, thunder is Grod's voice.
An aerolite, or a lightning flash, was sent direct from the hand of
the thunderer.

It was natural for the rude peasant Egyptians in the days of
the pyramid to believe that their god Thoth had revealed a
system of measures, a mode of building, or a style of writing, to
their priests, but it is hardly according to modern habits of
thought to see a necessity for Divine inspiration in such matters.
Can there be more occasion for the Edinburgh professor to bring
down the Deitj' for the regulation of the size of the sarcophagus
in the pyramid, than for the President of the Eoyal Academy
to require special inspiration from Jehovah for the earliest
known, and yet most beautifully chiselled, sculpture of a pre-
pyramid age 1

It is the architect Fergusson who says, "It has been even
asserted that God revealed to Cheops a variety of interesting
astronomical information, and commanded him to build these
facts into the Great Pyramid in British inches."

There is no mistake in the language of the advocates of in-
ppiration. Prof. Piazzi Smyth says, " That metrology at large
was a subject not beneath the dignity of Divine att^x^^NRTEi.VsL'^^


172 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

earlier ages of the world, appears sufficiently (*?) from the follow-
ing commands issued by Divine revelation, in subsequent times,
to the particular people, in these words ; viz., " Thou shalt have
a perfect and just weight," &c.

Again he says, " Philitis, in the Greek of Herodotus, but
Melchisedek, as we believe, in Hebrew, controlled the Egyptian
king of the time to use the organised but peaceful bands of his
subjects in the erection of this prophetic building, whose in-
spired design they understood not." He gives his reason,
"touching the even earth immensurability of these measures
having been a problem entirely beyond the power of men either
of the pyramid day, or of any other day 4000 years therefrom —
unless they had received the aid of Divine inspiration from on high,**

Elsewhere something may be said to show the high degree of
civilisation attained in pre-pyramid timos, and the extreme pro-
bability that not only was the masonified pyramid-learning, so
admirably illustrated by Prof. Smyth, to a great degree lost very
soon after the death of Cheops, owing to disturbing invasions,
but that the knowledge of the arts suffered a most serious check.
In those ante-printing, and even ante-writing, epochs, it was
easy for certain kinds of intelligence to be absolutely and for
ever extinguished. The higher secrets of wisdom were confided
to but very few, and were never committed to letters.

Mr. John Taylor, the professor's teacher upon this religious
aspect of the pyramid, somewhat identifies Noah with the
building. He being the preacher of righteousness, " nothing
could more illustrate," he says, " this character of a preacher of
righteousness after the Flood than that he should be the first
to publish a system of weights and measures for the use of all
mankind; based upon the measure of the world."


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT P 173

29. INSPIRATION FOR CERTAIN TEACHING.

This, though a modem conception, is becoming a very popular
one in certain circles of religious people. On that account it is
to be treated with respectful attention. Pious convictions, and
views supposed to be derived from, and sustained by, the Holy
Scriptures, are not to be rejected with sneers, though judged
ever so unreasonable. Some minds are more susceptible of the
marvellous than others. Many believe they add to the glory of
the Deity in the multiplication of instances of His direct inter-
position. There are those who style this anthropomorphism, and
reject the pagan-like contrivance of bringing the Divinity too
freqneutly and needlessly from the clouds.

Prof. Piazzi Smyth has been the most prominent advocate of
the Divine origin and purpose of the Great Pyramid. In the
present work only a glance can be given at his important
theory. He finds, as he thinks, certain scientific truths of high
interest, and some dearly-cherished religious dogmas, conveyed
in the measurements and architecture of the building. He
cannot conceive of this masonified intelligence otherwise than
from God Himself. He calls it the " Temple of Inspiration ; "
and quotes 1 Chron. xxviiL 19, "The Lord made me under-
stand in writing." He lays it down as a fixed principle, " If
intention did really preside on the occasion, it could only have
been the result of Divine inspiration imparted to certain men."

Mr. Pergusson, while admitting it as " the most perfect and
gigantic specimen of masonry that the world has yet seen,"
seems to doubt the necessity of inspiration, saying, " There is no
reason whatever to suppose that the progress of art in Egypt
differed essentially from that elsewhere." There ai^ tJaLQ!?sRk^V^


174 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

see more beauty, fiaish, and skill ia the Third Pyramid than the
first. The Great Pyramid was clearly constructed upon the
model of previously existing ones, though with some peculiar-
ities of its own. One system of teaching runs through all the
pyramidal structures, whether of Egypt, India, or America,
pointing to one thought.

Prof. Hamilton Smith — ^like many who regard the ancients as
fools — is so amazed at the scientific revelations of the pyramid,
and, it may be added, pyramids, jis to feel himself on the horns
of a dilemma. He must either, he says, admit that in those
long-past ages men knew as much as we do now, or that super-
natural inspiration was granted to certain men, who were,
whether they themselves understood the meaning of their own
acts or not, to build an enormous edifice only to perpetuate this
knowledge.

If it required the genius of some few men in the nineteenth
century to reveal this thing — which is, however, doubted by the
great mass of scientists now — of what practical use was the
lesson at all ] The pyramid was absolutely closed upon com
pletion. The ignorant and the heathen were thus deprived of
the benefit of this inspired teaching. And we, too, though
believing in God, and uu'lerstanding the astronomical lessons of
the pyramid apart from its school, would have been still left in
absolute ignorance of this mysterious and wonderful teaching
upon religion and science had not a certain Mahometan ruler of
Egypt, some thousand years ago, actuated by avarice, employed
hundreds of men to force a way into the building.

After all, we may say with Sir James Simpson, " In relation
to the Gieat Pyramid, as to other matters, we may be sure that


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 175

God does not teach by the medium of miracle anything that the
unaided intellect of man can find out."

30. THE MEMORIAL OF THE DELUGE.

Prof. Smyth has pointed out that the passage, with its angle
of 26° 18', looked toward the Noiih Pole 2170 b.c., when the
then Polar star was crossing the meridian. But, ho observes
that when that body crossed below the pole, the mouth of the
Waterpot of Aquarius was crossing the meridian above the
pole.

The event called the Deluge, always associated with Aquarius,
and necessarily so, as the mystics affirm, is thus strongly fixed
upon the Egyptian mind by such a constructive memorial of
the passage of the constellation. Mr. Smyth, who recognises
no mere celestial Deluge, and no partial terrestrial one, but an
absolute and universal drowning of the whole globe, says that
it " destroyed all pre-existing monuments." He evidently be-
lieves, like other mystics, that the Deluge had some mysterious
connection with the ascendancy of Aquarius. He speaks of
Aquarius being the " prominent constellation " at what he styles
the "awful moment for man," when Draco was in the as-
cendant.

He is perfectly satisfied, by pyramid measurement, that the
time of the Deluge would " be as surely very near 2800 B.C. as
the date of the Great Pyramid building is close to 2170 b.c."
In this estimate he adds 450 years to the commonly received
Biblical chronology. He has as much right to give a date
to the Deluge as the 300 known authorities had for their
several 300 periods for that occurrence. If, too, h\a ^isXssoJkSs^^OTL


176 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

for the pyramid building bo 2170 B.C., he must needs get a
great deal more time, between that date and the Deluge, than
what Usher and others afford him, in which to have enough
population, progress, and weallh for the construction of the
pyramid in Egypt.

31. THE SABBATH.

Those who contend for the antediluvian, or ante-Mosaic,
origin of the Divine institution of the Sabbath, suppose they
have confirmation of their opinion from the imagined Sabbatical
teaching of what some regard as a Divinely-inspired building.

The roof of the Gallery is seen to have seven overlappings—
a suggestive lesson. The Queen's Chamber has seven si^es;
that is, the four walls, the floor, and the double roof. Again,
the height of the Great Gallery is pronounced seven times that
of the ordinary passages. At the angle of 26° 18' the latter's
transverse height of 44*8 inches becomes 50 vertical, and this
is a seventh of 350, the vertical height of the Gallery.

" For what purpose," asks Mr. Piazzi Smyth, " is the Grand
Gallery holding up so notably to view seven of the said
standards 1 "

The seven standards of length he would conclude to mean
standards of time. Tlie small passage represents the unit day,
and the Gallery is the week. His conclusions are : — " That
violent and apparently unmeaning contrast of heights has the
noblest of reasons, viz., the typifying of the sacred division of
time ; and we see here, again, that in time, as well as in space,
the Great Pyramid embodies an idea which was entirely un-
known to, or totally disobeyed by, the Egyptians."


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT P 177

The Sabbath idea of time was fully recognised, however, by
Egyptians and Chaldeans. The name of Sunday points to the
fact, recognised by ancient Peruvians as well as ancient Egyptians.
The number seven was, in Egypt, especially dedicated to Sinus,
and was regarded as a sacred number. In the chapter on the
blocking of the Gallery, reasons are given by Mr. Agnew why
the roof was lofty. It is needless to point out to readers that
the seven planets — the Sun, Moon, Mercury, Venus, Mars,
Jupiter, and Saturn, objects of veneration in extreme antiquity
— were associated with the division of time in weeks. The very
word Sabbath is said by Mr. George Smith to be of Assyrian
origin. But it is well for man, apart from Biblical sanction,
that in Nineveh, Babylon, Egypt, and Peru, the necessity of one
day's rest in seven was so distinctly laid down by the priest-
hood.

32. MODEL FOR MOSAIC INSTITUTIONS.

Those who maintain, as one expresses it, that not '' all the
revelations of God to man have been transcribed into the Bible,"
and who declare that ** the pyramid revelation is not a rival of
the Bible but an impregnable out-work to defend the sacred
citadel of Bible inspiration," see no difficulty in making Moses
go to the pyramid for many things he afterwards incorporated
into the Mosaic institutions.

Mr. Piazzi Smyth, among his many bold statements, has the
following : — " Moses, having once received into his care the
sacred cubit, took additional precautions for multiplying its
copies and derivations, so successfully preserved by his country-
men through fifty generations ; that sacred cubit being, in fact
of length, as already proved, the unique smaller li3;i%><di ^\ax^^^6s.^


178 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

of the Great Pyramid." But where did Mr. Smyth learn that
Moses received the sacred cuhit ? and where is it taught that he
multiplied its copies ) Was not the pyramid closed long before
his time, so that he could not get access to this standard 1

Mr. Drach, F.RA.S., asks, "Were the Mosaic tabernacle
measures connected with the pyramid coffer as a metric stand-
ard^] " He concludes they were so. He sho ws that the ark, mercy-
seat, and bumt-offeriag altar were constructed after that scale.

But it is further assumed, that Aaron's rod was laid up in the
ark as the standard cubit ; that Solomon's layer was the same
as the pyramid coffer ; that the molten sea was a multiple of
five ; that the stone tablets of the ark were metric copies of the
coffer, &c. One compares the two thus : — " The King's stone
standard of the universal metric system deposited in the ark
chamber of a S aphis pyramid." The ark itself was of that measure.

It is not wonderful that somebody else should still further
mark the derivation of the Mosaic institutes from the Egyptians
by saying, *' The ark, also, contained an authentic copy of the
hermetic books."

33. A MESSIANIC MONUMENT.

Although Mr. Piazzi Smyth and others had developed to
so extraordinary an extent the religious aspects of the pyra-
mid, and had affirmed so^strongly that it was built by direct in-
spiration from the Most High, yet Mr. Casey, of Carlow, author
of Philitis, wrote five years ago thus to his leader, Mr. Smyth :
" Unless the Great Pyramid can be shown to be Messianic, as
well as fraught with superhuman scienc<e and design, its saciisd
chdm is a thing with no blood in it."


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 179

It is an old saying that the demand will provoke a supply.
The desire for the Messianic procured from this very peculiar,
and this every-theory-satisfying, pyramid some very conclusive
Messianic token. Some writers assert that figures can be made
to prove anything. But the lines of the pyramid are quite as
accommodating. A miraculous origin being supposed, there
were no difiiculties in the multiplication of miracles. While the
written Word was dark and obscure, the pyramid was light and
clear. Isaiah, the glorious prophet, had but the dim sense of a
coming One, though some commentators doubt whether he
understood what he revealed. But the heathen builders of
Egypt, ages before Moses and the Scriptures, knew all about it,
and were able, by Divine counsel, to masonify even particulars
of the life of Jesus in Palestine. (! !)

Coincidences are often remarkable, though not convincing.
The story is told of the late Archbishop Whately, that one of
his clergymen came to him in great exercise of mind about some
novel application of the mystical number, 666. In the course
of his enthusiastic appeal he observed His Grace, apparently in-
different to the harangue, scribbling on some paper. The curate
rose hastily to say " Good day 1 " offended at this inattention.

The old man quietly turned to him and said, " Mr. , I

was listening to your remarks, and testing them by some calcu-
lations. You read such a person's name by the dreaded title of
666. I have been looking at your own name, and discover the
alarming fact that it bears the number of the beast."

Captain Tracey published his Pillar of Witness, a Scriptural
View of the Great Pyramid , dedicated to Mr. George Casey, and
entering upon this theme.


180 PYRAMID PACTS AND PANCIE8.

The mysterious line in the Grand Gallery, measured off in
pyramid inches, is made to tell some extraordinary things. Bat
Mr. Menzies unfolds the Messianic mission of the pyramid in
these words : —

" From the north beginning of the Great Gallery floor there,
in southward procession, begin the years of the Saviour's earthly
life, expressed at the rate of a pyramid inch to a year. Three-
and-thirty inch years, therefore, bring us right over against the
mouth of the well, the type of His death and His glorious re-
surrection too ; while the long, lofty Grand Gallery shows the
dominating rule in the world of the blessed religion which He
has established thereby, overspanned above by the thirty-six
stones of His months of ministry on earth, and defined by the
floor-length in inches as to its exact period."

A writer in The NatMs Glory Leader, a periodical de-
voted to millennial subjects, carries out the Messianic charactei
of the pyramid, perhaps, beyond others of the same schooL
Coincidences help him to come to such conclusions. Speaking
in the 53rd of Isaiah style respecting the pyramid, he says : —

''Its countenance is more marred than that of any other
building, or remnant of a building, that, to my knowledge, is in
existence. Assuming it to be true that the pyramid really is a
Messianic structure, what a startling parallel is presented unto
us !, * His visage was so marred more than any man.* The side
{query left side) of the huge structure being perforated by force
ere the secret of the interior could be ascertained. The spear
thrust into the side of Jesus by the soldiers is apparently a strict
parallel as to what was essential to be done, in order that tibe
secrets of eternity might become visible unto man. The out-


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 181

pouring of blood and water, which was necessary to complete
the supplying of the means of gaining the secrets of eternity,
appear all to have its parallel in the perforation of the pyramid
by that down-rush of rubble which had been left in the Ascend-
ing Passage." (!)

' With all due respect for the pious intentions of such Mes-
sianic interpreters, with their happy coincidences, some persons
will suspect that the notion leans rather toward the fancies than
the/ac^5 of the pyramid.

34. A TYPE OF CHRIST AND HIS CHURCH.

Among other /awcte^ affording gratification to the pious mind
of Mr. Piazzi Smyth is that the Great Pyramid typifies the
union of the visible Church in the invisible Head.

He quotes Paul's words, Eph. il 19, "in whom all the
building fitly framed together,'' as applicable to the case. All
Christians were to be so united. But one thing was needed to
complete the structure, and bind all in one indissoluble body.
This was the comer-stone.

This five-sided, five-angled stone, for the top of the pyramid,
he imagines must have been prepared a long while before the
completion of the building ; and, being often in the way of the
workmen, who were then not more refined and scrupulous per-
haps in their language than now, they abused it. In fact, it
was the rock of offence. Yet this, which the builders despised,
became the head stone of the comer, being thus a type of
Christ, the rejected of men.

The prophetical character of the type is maintained in the
lejoicings over the fixing of this stone, " wlule> " ^& ^Ss^'^ ^^'^k-


182 FYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

feasor puts it, *' the Hycsos kings and royal brethren greeted the
completion of this most peculiar and nobly-destined temple with
the faultless cry of * Grace, grace unto it 1 ' "

35. THE SECOIH) COMING OF CHRIST AND THE

MILLENNIUM.

To some persons it may seem strange that the pyramid should
have been erected for such an object as to prophesy the millen-
nium. The discovery is certainly a very modem one. The
Rev. F. R. A. Glover declares it " a sign given 4040 years ago ;
first seen in a.d. 1865 ; first understood in the autumn of
1 872-73."

A clergyman describes the pyramid as " a link between the
dispensation of Noah and the close of the fifth dispensation."
" The use of it^" says he, " is to be a sign and a witness unto
the Lord of Hosts " of the cessation of the ages of oppression, of
war, and injustice, in order to signalise and to aid the approach
of the millennial dispensation." He, with Prof. Smyth, sees in
it the Hebrew prophet's " altar in the midst of Egypt, even a
pillar in the border thereof, which shall be for a sign and a
witness unto the Lord of Hosts in the midst of Egypt"

Undoubtedly the prophetical character of the pyramid is the
most distinguished claim yet assumed for it, even in this age of
the revival of symbolism, the era of Ritualism. It is the
marked and remarkable evidence of that strange yearning of
modem life — sick of its materialism and of old dogmas — for
idealising objects. It is not mere sentimentalism, but something
more profound and earnest in feeling. Some think it a part of
the revolt against creed, and the sign of a weariness 'of the
authority ol mere Scripture texts. Others deem it a dissatisfac-


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUTLT? 183

tion with the demands of the Church, and a desire to find else-
where a foundation and a guide. Heaven and earth are being
ransacked for something that will satisfy the souL

As men have now become so clever as to acquire a knowledge
of scientific facts, such as the size of the earth and its distance
from the sun, facts revealed by God to the builders of the
pyranid, and by them set to measure therein, Prof. Piazzi Smyth
sees auother of the signs of the approaching millennium. " May
not these be symptoms," he asks, " that the stormy beginning of
the first end is nigh at hand, the present dispensation nearly
concluded, and a new one with more exalted ends and of a wider
significance not far from commencing 1 "

This approaching fate of the world was once only to be read
in the Book of Daniel ; it is now to be learnt more distinctly
from that marvellous tell-tale, the Pyramid,

M. Maillet, nearly 200 years ago, noted a crack or line, as
if from an earthquake, the whole length of the Gallery.
It is there where the mysteries have been just revealed. Thus
it is written : — " The Grand Gallery, the mightiest feature of
the interior of the Great Pyramid, and the direct issue upwards
and continuously of the Hebrew passage, i, e, of the separation
of the Hebrews as a peculiar people to God, indicates the
Christian dispensation and its history at the rate of, as before, a
pyramid inch to a year, beginning at the north wall with the
birth of Christ, and proceeding thence up the inclined floor of
the Grand Gallery southward."

The professor thus finds, in 1542 inches, the date of the
Exodus, 630 inches from the mark to indicate the ^ate of the
erection of the pyramid, 2170 b.o. M ^5^ yc^^d.^^ Ixs^^^'^'^sj^


184 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

gets the Dispersion, and at 2790 b.o. the Deluge, though the
last is placed in our Bibles at 2348 B.C.

From the north end, starting at the Dispersion, 2527 Ba,
one may reach, says Mr. Casey, " the symbol of the bottomless
pit, a chamber deep in the rock." £ut Mr. Smyth speaks of
" where it begins on the north end with the date of the birth of
the Saviour of mankind." Starting at that point, and going
up the Grallery, he traverses about 156 feet or 1872 irches.
But he calculates by Herschers geometrical-cubit inch, vhich
he styles the pyramid inch, which very slightly diflfers from our
own, being one thousandth part longer, or 1*001 inch.

He gets to the upper or southern end of the Grallery, betveen
the 1881 and 1882 inch marks. This he assumes to mark the
date of the millennium I

" Here," he exclaims, " in all its solidity and overhanging
imminence, is the southern wall, or practical termination of the
Grand Gallery. Whatever, therefore, that feature symbolises
terminates there too ; viz., in 1881-2 a.d." He is writing to the
periodical. Life from the Dead,

In that date he gains the beginning of the end, the opening
of the millennial age. But the f tdl glories of that period are not
to be experienced till fifty-three years after. The reason for that
will appear. The reader is aware that a small, low passage leads
from the Grand Gallery to the ante-chamber of King's Chamber.
Mr. Smyth thus proceeds : —

"That floor-line, so far from ceasing at the south wall of the
Gallery, passes onward from thence through a narrow opening,
but on the very same level, to further spaces and further times,
ei2 Bering first of all a very low passage-way leading directly


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 185

south. Only 53 inches long is this passage, while it is at the
same time lower in height than any pyramid passage yet passed
through from the very beginning. Wherefore, if the oppressions
of idolatry, and the primitive force of war, in the early history
of man were symbolised by the cramped-up attitude of any
human being in passing through the very first, or pre-Abrahamic
passage, which is only 47 inches in transverse, and 53 in
vertical height, what shall be represented by the 44 inches only
of this small, and last, or post-grand gallery passage 1 Can it bo
anything else than the unexampled days of future trouble which
the Saviour Himself announced should immediately precede
this second, but which mast as certainly succeed the dispensation
of His first, coming 1 "

That is, though 1881-2 will be the date of the millennium,
1934-5 will be the year of the absolute descent of Christ upon
earth again; but the last fifty-three years will be of great
sorrow.

The saints are, however, to be saved these fifty-three years of
dire calamity. A way for their escape is made. They are to be
caught up to heaven first. And where is this to be symbolised
in the pyramid *? The key, as usual, fits the lock precisely. The
reader has learned before that over the King's Chamber is the
rude Construction Chamber, known as Davison's. To this Caviglia
found an approach from a curious hole in the Gallery, accessible
only by a ladder. It is to this the professor alludes below : —

"Where the Grand Gallery terminates at the 1881-2 south-
em end, and a distressingly low passage begins, testifying, pro-
bably, to times of difficulty and oppression to follow, there is a
very peculiar mode of escape or exit from the upper (oit \^aas.^h^


186 FT&AMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

ceiling) comer of that southern or 1881-2 end of the Grand
Gallery. "No less than a small concealed passage-way, far over
the heads of all travellers below, and leading to a sort of sanc-
tuary over the ceiling of the King's Chamber, the final end
of all the historical series of chambers and passages in the
building.

" It (the sanctuary above the King's Chamber) is not a place
for living human beings, or any walking bodies, the floor being
all up and down in huge knobs of granite, and the height too
small; but the ceiling of it is exquisitely smooth and true,
in polished red granite, and of the same length and breadth as
the ceiling of the King's Chamber below.

" There is nothing known in theories of the Great Pyramid
that can pretend to explain that strange exit from the upper
comer of the Grand Gallery, 28 feet above its floor, and that
one sort of sanctuary which it leads to being left thus accessible to
winged beings by the builder ; but the sacred theory may point
to it as typical of the carrying up to above the clouds of the
saints, just before the troubles of Anti-Christ begin."

All this may be a prophecy of Mr. Piazzi Smyth, and not come
from the pyramid. It is a remarkable coincidence that the
Gallery should be thus 1881-2 pyramid inches long, when some
recent calculators of the millennium, dating Daniel's supposed
1260 years from the Hegira of Mahomet in 621-2, got that
number.

But the date of the millennium is found to vary in each age.
During the first century the event was daily and confidently
expected, as we learn from the Epistles. The millennium was
looked for subsequently whenever there were wars and rumours


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 187

of ware. The year 1000, the year 1260, passed. People lost
the millennial expectation. If Daniel's mystical language, time,
time, and half-time, be interpreted to mean 360 years, twice
360, and half of 360, 1260 years are obtained. The question of
addition to that amount has long agitated controversialists. As
each particular century has fancied its own near the time, the
nineteenth century must needs add enough to bring up the 1260
to that epoch. For a time, 600 was the secret number, and
many confidently thought 1860 would bring Napoleon as the
Anti-Christ Then, as Mahomet, the supposed false prophet,
fled from Mecca in 622, or, as some say, 632, those numbers
furnished new data. When, then, Mr. Smjrth gets the length
of the Gallery, about 1881 inches, he has but to assume the one
end for the birth of Christ to gain his required date.

It is true that no interpretation from Daniel had found the
said fifty-three years of affliction, though there is a reference to
seventy-five. The worthy professor, apparently for the time
losing sight of his own fifty-three years, has a happy way of
arranging for the seventy-five. He turns thus to Daniel : —

"The difference between the two periods, 1260 and 1335, is
sufficient not only to carry the explorer through that passage
and into the far larger proportions of the ante-chamber beyond,
but into that part of it where the construction, in exquisite red
granite, begins both in floor, walls, and ceiling." — " In a more
precise and particular degree the difference of 1335 and 1260,
or 75, will pJace humanity just so far within the ante-chamber
as to come vertically imder that chamber's most remarkable
"granite leaf" (the Portcullis^ whose unique position there,
lower than the ceiling, and yet far above the floor, would aeeisL


188 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCTES.

to be typical, if of anything known or proclaimed, of the " New
Jerusalem descending from on high."

Assuredly, for the builders so to adapt their measurements, as
to chronicle the exact time of the " New Jerusalem descending
from on high" — always supposing such descent to become literally
a fact — would with most persons definitively settle the question
of the Divine inspiration of the pyramid.

£ut the measurements which are so agreeable to the theory
of Mr. Smyth are equally favourable to the very dissimilar
theories of Messrs. Dufeu, Hekekyan Bey, Agnew, Wild, and
Wilson. Each claims the adaptability for himself, ignoring the
smiles of the pyramid upon others. That each person should
realise especial gratification from the realisation of his "fancies"
is no certain argument for their truth.

It is not for us to pronounce any of these well-demonstrated
theories doubtful, for it may be an illustration of the doctrine
that there is "not one infallibility, but several infallibilities.*'
After all, too, this may be only an instance of what is recorded
about truth being many-sided.

The millennial teaching of the pyramid is dwelt upon by Mr.
Harrison Oxley, who sees that " the fashion and the measure-
ment were sacred and heavenly, and, therefore. Divine." The
prophetical character of the building is thus described : —

" It is the altar and the pillar foretold by the prophet (Isa.
xix. 19, 20), but also Hhe temple of God' to be measured as
given to the beloved disciple in Eevelation (Rev. xi 1, 2).
Moreover, it must be a temple that should be in existence long
after several of the great events in the Christian dispensation had
transpired. Where are we to look for this temple t It must not


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 189

be an idolatrous or heathen temple ; such temples belong to
Satan, and not to God. They have no measure, according to the
rule of God's Word. * The temple of God ' to be measured was
not at Jerusalem, because it was doomed to falL" The temple
must be that set in the border of Egypt.

He proceeds : — " The Great Pyramid has been measured, and
it comes forth as a witness and a sign. It is a witness to Moses
and the prophets, to Christ and the apostles, therefore to the
truth of Divine revelation, therefore to the Lord of Hosts." — "It
is found not to be a profane, but a sacred building; not of human
origin, but Divine. By its locality it answers to the altar and
pillar of the Lord of Hosts, spoken of by the prophet Isaiah, to
appear in the latter days. By its measurement it corresponds
to the temple of God and the altar recorded by the beloved
disciple in Eevelation."

The pyramid is said to be a sacred edifice, because it was
built by Divine inspiration, and it bears the record of piety in
being, unlike temples, without idolatrous emblems.

That this may be an error of judgment is apparent from the
fact that the Great Pyramid, like all other pyramids, is situated
in the midst of a Necropolis, abounding with idolatrous emblems,
containing tombs of officers belonging to the Court of Cheops, the
very builder himself, and all such tombs having addresses to
heathen deities. In the pyramid itself the quarry marks of the
king's name are distinctly idolatrous emblems. The same per-
sons whose names are therein inscribed are elsewhere spoken
of in tablets as being worshippers of false gods, and the con-
structors of idols of gold, &c., for the adornment of a temple.
It is simply a delusion^ therefore, to speak of the ^yt^\cijc^\^\si%


190 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

a witness of religious truth, although coincidences favour a
theory.

Mr. James Simpson still further extends the millennial idea,
dwelling upon the Jewish parallelism. '^ Counting in natural
years," he says, "Israel will hold her seventieth jubilee in a.d.
2000 ; but, counting in prophetic years, 1950. Or, according to
the former, her great jubilee will extend from a.d. 1931 to 2000
inclusive; but, according to the latter, from 1882 to 1950
inclusive. Thus the Great Pyramid date, 1881-2, turns up again,
and with a more distinctly defined meaning, by using the un-
doubtedly Scriptural number 360." He adds, "And although
the forty-nine years from 1881 to 1930 may thus partake of the
character of a Great Sabbath to Israel, the period following, or
from 1931 to 2000, will be the true jubilee."

This will fit in with the Zoroastrian doctrine laid down in
Persia hundreds of years before Daniel. According to the
ancient Persians, the regeneration of the world would take place
in 2000, when the serpent Azis-Dahaka is to be chained a
thousand years. The same was believed by the ancient Chal-
deans, Egyptians, Odin-worshippers, and Druids. The chained
serpent is found in the four divisions of the world. One may
see it on the sarcophagus of the Soane Museum in Lincoln's Inn
Pields. But it may be assumed by some that these millennial
myths, so widely found, originated from the Inspired Pyramid.
Is it not strange that while the heathen nations cherjshed the
hope of this millennium, the Jews were left in so much dark-
ness about it by Moses, David, and the prophets 1

A singular pyramid controversy has sprung up about the
Millennial date of 1881-2. Those who had received the conjee-


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 191

tured Divine indication of the Grand Gallery, and had heen
quietly looking forward to some four years of peace hefore the
stirring catastrophe, have heen somewhat disturbed by an an-
nouncement that chronology is at fault, and that this year is
absolutely 1881, and not 1877.

J But tins is no novel discovery. Every book of chronology is
seen, in a most curious way, to show that our $aviour was bom
in the year 4, though we reckon our year of the Lord four years
before. Mystics have no difficulty about the matter. They
can even comprehend how the year may have ten months and
yet twelve. But to common-sense eyes there does seem a
puzzle.

One Mr. Clark anxiously asks " whether the mistake of four
years announced really could have been made in astronomical
time and still remain uncorrected % " Prof. Piazzi Smyth, ap-
pealed to, replies that " they do not, as astronomers, and by dint
of accurate astronomical science, pretend to know anything of
the date of Christ*s birth, they merely take the existing mode
of reckoning of years among all the civilised nations. Then, in
his letter to the Life from the Dead, the Scotch astronomer cau-
tiously writes, " It may be that it is a part of the Divine pur-
poses that this particular point of chronology shall not be fully
cleared up until the time of the end itself arises."

The error is supposed to be owing to the monk Dionysius
Exequus, to whom we are indebted for the " year of the Lord."
In 527, he calculated according to 4713 of the Julian period,
supposed to be four years out. It is difficult to correct the
monk after 1350 years, especially when mysticism manufactured
dates, without reference to real events. But Mr. CockbutiL-


192 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

Muir is positive the monk was correct, and he can prove it by
the pyramid,

A Mr. Chapman writes : — " Dr. Hales (the chronologist) says
the difference of opinion respecting the precise period of the
birth of Christ arises from the fact that this era was not used
until so many centuries had elapsed that it was almost impos-
sible with any accuracy to fix the date." Canon Farrar, in his
Li/e of Christ, considers this year 1881, and not 1877. If he
and the pyramid are to be beUeved, the nullennium may be ex-
pected within a few months.

Having discussed both the astronomical and religious teaching
of the pyramid, other scientific and mystical instruction may
now be indicated.

36. THE RISE AND FALL OF LAND IN EGYPT.

So dependent were the people upon the inundation of the
Mle that everything connected therewith was invested with
supreme importance. The heliacal rising of Sirius, the Dog-star,
indicating the approaching elevation of the river, occasioned
that star, or the deity it represented, to become an object of
worship.

As may readily be imagined, the elevation or depression of
the soil of the country, in relation to the surface of the Nile
itself, or the level of the Mediterranean and Red Seas, would
be most carefully and constantly observed. Upon that depended
the spread of the water annually over the fields, filling canals and
reservoirs. The excess of overflow may be as unwelcome as the
diminution of supply. All parts of the world, as geologists


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 193

now inform us, are in a more or less disturbed state, rising or
falling. The learned priests of Egypt were aware of this fact
seven thousand or more years ago, when they constructed the first
canals and reservoirs, and rescued the valley of the Nile from
alternate drought and marshy desolation.

M. Hekekyan Bey, C. K, of Constantinople ancl Cairo, has
paid much attention to this subject in his remarkable work of
1863 on TJie Chronology of the Slriadic Monuments, The chief
of these monuments are pyramids and obelisks. Only a glance
at the question can be spared, but intelligent readers are directed
to the volume for complete information.

He considers that the constructors of all pyramids, obelisks,
sphinxes, and temples regulated their elevation, at the epoch of
erection, to the level of the adjoining seas. At any subsequent
period the wise priests could, by means of instruments long
lost to view, ascertain from the relation borne by the Eed Sea,
at a fixed spot, or by the Mediterranean, to the platform or ideal
apex of the Great Pyramid, whether the country were in an
a-?cendant or descendant condition. Upon the settlement of
this question, adequate measures would be taken with canals
and embankments to prevent any evil consequences from a
change, or provide for any prospective difference of level. There
is reason to believe that in the valley of the Indus and the
valley of the Ganges, if not even that of the Oxus, similar
measures were adopted by the professing priests, but real scien-
tific professors, of the past.

^*The hypogeum of the First Pyramid," writes Hekekyan
"Bey, " was fixed 5' to the west, and about 2' to the south, of the
Niloscope station (lat 30° 1' 7"). It was situated on the itv^^^


194 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

bank of the river, and had the limestone rock of the Mokattam
for its solid foundation. The reason why that spot was chosen
la most important. TVhile the van of the annual torrents of the
Nile habitually reached the Memphis and HeliopolLs parallels in
the period of the summer solstice, the secular amplitude of the
torrents in the maximum state of development, or. the difference
between the lowest ebb and the highest flood-levels of the river,
measured exactly fifteen standard Nile cubits in the parallel of the
observatory, and the Osjirtasic ordinate of the river in the same
parallel, or the vertical supposed to connect the lowest secular
ebb of the Erythraean Sea (the Eed Sea) during the autumnal
equinoxes at Clysma (port near Suez) and the secular maximum
flood-level of the Nile in the Niloscopic i)arallel, measured forty-
two cubits and a half of the Suthis scale."

In another place he points out changes which have oc-
curred.

" The summit of the First Pyramid was {in the design) elevated
118-140 noctas above the high Nile level, in B.C. 4863, the date
of its hi«lrymatisation ; it is now 111*588 noctas above the same
hydraulic level, and will be submerged, with the subsidence of
the crust of the earth on which it is solidly founded, in 111*41
noctas of time, or Nile years, before any of its geometrical
records can have time to be destroyed by the action of the
elements, and, remaining preserved in the bowels of the earth,
will again emerge to light in a state as perfect as that of the
diminutive sea-:shell now foutid embedded in the summits of
high mountain ranges, and will in ]3roper time reveal to the
human race the s^uence of their constructors, and teach them
useful lessons for their guidance, and, should they have icst-


WnY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 195

gotten it, teach them the existence of a Great Maker of the
makers of these curious monuments.'*

M. Dufeu, the author of that exhaustive hook of learning the
Quatre Pyramides de Gizeh, declares that " the most important
among the principal and numerous distinctions of the Great
Pyramid " is " to establish and preserve eternally the perfect
knowledge of the hydraulic level of the Nile and the valley^ in
relation to the loioest level of the Red Sea"

He divides the results ohtained hy " this precious monument "
into two categories: — *' 1. Chronolojijues^chronologico-astrono-
miques et historiques. 2. Hydraulico-geologiques, geodesiques et
geographiques." The present suhject, affecting hydraulics, would
come under the last head. He admits the suppositious enquiry,
hut wisely remarks, " It is often hy hypothesis that we arrive at
certainty."

After referring to the very interesting and suggestive subject
of Manetho*s anonymous dynasties, as contrasted with those in
which the names of kings were given, he writes as follows : —

"The coincidence of these anonymous dynasties with the
epochs of two movements of elevation, the most approved of
which Egypt has heen the theatre, had struck us, and made us
think that perhaps they signified the epochs of geological
rising, which in that case would authorise the non-anonymous
dynasties as indicating the periods of depression, may he, of
sinking of the soil; now, having applied this system to the
movement, which appears simultaneous to us, the elevation
which has raised at first the level of the Nile, at the second
cataract, to seven metres above the highest actual waters, under
the twelfth and thirteenth dynasties, awd aX. Wi^ e^ci^ ^\ '"Oas^


196 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANaES.

Exodus divided the Red Sea from the Bitter Lakes, and taking
for the base of our calculations the normal measure of sinking
as of elevation of the soil of the Nile valley, represented by the
length of the Nilometric cubit divided in 360 parts, or metric
noctas, equivalent to those crises in 360 years, we have almost
acquired the certainty that our idea was just and our opinion
well founded. But this certainty becomes complete when, apply-
ing the same system in an inverse sense, that is to say, the
measures of the depression of the soil indicated by the non-
anonymous dynasties to the result of the survey made in 1837
by Perring, we have found the same measure as he between the
base of the Great Pyramid and the Nile at its level."

It should be understood that in geodesic formula the Nile-
metric cubit has the value of a degree ; but, employed numeric-
allv, the value of a nocta.

In this he finds a confirmation of " the sinking of the soil,
at least in the locality of the pyramids, and an approach between
the base of the monument and the lowest level of the Eed Sea,
since the time of the construction of the Great Pyramid down
to our own day." And thus does he put the matter simply : —

" The Egyptian wise men, to whom were confided the destinies
of the country, had connected the hydraulic levels of the river
with difTerent plans or sections of the vertical height of the
pyramid, giving to it, from the base to the summit, an elevation
which, added to that of the ordinarv level and the maximum of
the increase of the current, above the level of the sea, might de-
termine the constant height of these two hydraulic levels, by a
connection with that of the maritime level taken as place of
comparison, and made them serve thus as an eternal hydrauh'c


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 197

and geological si^n f or the operations of surveying — operations
indispensable for the regulation of the annual alluviums of the
Nile in its bed and in its valley."

37. TO ILLUSTRATE GEOMETRIC TRUTH.

The square and the triangle, with their several properties, to-
gether with the relation of diameter and circumference, as well
as the correspondence of the radius of a circle and the side of
a square, are all well brought before the intelligent eye in the
pyramid.

Mr. H. C. Agnew, in a work published 1838, says, "The
pyramids of Egypt appear in general to have been emblems of
the sacred sphere and its great circle exhibited in the most
convenient architectural form. The chief objects of these build-
ings being to serve for sepulchral monuments, the Egyptians
sought in the appropriate figure of the pyramid to perpetuate at
the same time a portion of their geometrical science."

This gentleman was, perhaps, the first to point out an inter-
esting mathematical discovery. " The Third Pyramid," said he,
" was the spirit of this holy circle^ since it defined the square
-equal to it in perimeter and in area by showing the difference
between their sides and the diameter of the cii'cleJ*

38. TO SHOW THE PROPORTION OF DIAMETER AND

CIRCUMFERENCE.

Mr. John Taylor, in The Great Pyramid: why was it
built ? lays down the proposition that the vertical height is to
the double of its base as the diameter is to the circumference of
a circle. This question is dependent on the angle made by the
fieice of the pyramid with its base.


198 PYRAMID FACTS AXD FANCIES.

The slope angle baa been more accurately determined nnea
Ibe discovery of tbe casing-atones by Col. Vyse in 1837. Mr.
Taylor ppeaks of 51^ 49' 46", and Mr. Smyth of 51^ 5V 14^,
That slope with a certain base establishes tbe so-called Bho
theory (w), the prf»po?tinn of diaiLeter to circumference, 3*14159.
Archimedes made it 3*14286. The Hindoos' Vija Gantta, of
3927 to 1250, brings out 3 1416. On this Mr. Taylor remarka,
*' The Hindoo proportion is identical with that, so far as its
numbers go, which was expressed in EDglisb inches when the
pyramids were founded." While the real amount is 3-1415927,
he obtains 3*141792 from the pyramid. He thinks no other
pyramid has so true a ridation.

Tne Queen's Chamber has a niche. This, 185 inches, mul-
tiplied by 10 and then by 314159, yields 5812, the vertical
height of the pyramid. The wall of the chamber,^ 182*62
pyramid inches, multiplied by 100 and divided by 2, will
show 9131 for the side of the pyramid in pyramid inches.

P*rof. Piazzi Smyth utilises the Itho theory in connection
with the King's Chamber, to get the length of a cubit, saying,
" On being simply computed according to the modem determina-
tion of the value of x, and length of the year, and comes out
from the local measure of 412*545 Eriti&h inches to be 25*0250
+ Briti-ih inches."

Although an ingenious discovery, and admitted by Sir John
Herschel, this latter distinguished man adds, " We are not en-
titled to conclude that they (the Eg^'ptians) were aware of this
coinciilence (3*14159), and intended to embody both results in
their building."

Sir Edmund Beckett calls attention to the assumed 11 to 7


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 199

theory; that, with the slope of 51° 51' 14", the width is to the
height as the length of a quadrant is to its radius. He does
not think with Mr. Smyth and others that this was a primary
motive of construction, "though," says he, "they did use it
for fixing the size, probably taking it approximately from the
slopes."

He shows that with the angle at 51° 50' the height is a mean
proportional between the length down the middle of each slope
and half the width of the base. The 51° he esteems "about
the slope at which mounds of earth will stand naturally." He
points out another singular coincidence. The diagonal angle at
the top, 96°, or four times 24°, would equal that of the four
sectors of a quindecagoii. (Euclid, iv. 10, 11, 16.)

The parallelism is exhibited in the coffer, whose height is to
the two adjacent sides as the diameter is to the circumference.

Captain Tracey, taking for the radius of a circle the height of
the pyramid, 232*52 cubits, pyramid measure, finds the diameter
bear the same proportion to the periphery of a square whose
fiide^is 365*243, the length of the base in cubits, or days in a
year, as 1 is to 3*1416. With 412*132, the length of the King's
Chamber in inches, as the diameter, the circle would equal a
square whose side, 365*242, in cubits, measures the base of the
pyramid.

" Never have any monuments," says M. Dufeu, " exercised
the sagacity of the learned as the pyramids of Gizeh."

39. TO MASONIFY THE QUADRATURE OF THE CIRCLE.

Mr. H. C. Agnew conceives that^ one purpose of the erection
was to masonify approximately the relation of square and <i\3t<iAA.


200 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

" Here we find," writes he, " the quadrature of the cirde
exemplified in a curious manner, with all practicable approach
and correctness, by the Egyptians." He, however, admits that
'* its arithmetical solution is known now to be impossible ;
the geometrical solution, in all probability, is so likewise ; but
whether the Egyptian priests were of this opinion I cannot
venture to say."

Only a few quotations can be given from his publication, just
sufficient to indicate his object : —

" If a square described about a circle be conceived to be drawn
up from the centre in the form of a pyramid, having the perpen-
dicular equal to the radius of a circle, and ' the superficies of the

■

square be supposed to adjust itself equally among the planes of
the four isosceles triangles of the faces of the pyramid, each face
of such pyramid will, of course, be equal in area to one quarter
of the square, or equal to the square of the radius ; and the new
square formed by the four lines of the bases of the triangles of
the faces of the pyramid will be equal in perimeter to the circum-
ference of the circle, with an error in excess of about one part in
fourteen himdred."

" In the original diagram we find the proportion of five to
four very dominant ; the diameter of the circle is five, and that
of the great square four, and thence, of course, the perpen-
dicular of the pyramid is to half its base as five to four."

"If the tangent be to the radius as five to four the angle is
51° 20' 25", and this being so very near the result of my observa-
tions, I am justified in concluding that the perpendicular of the
Great Pyramid was to half its base as five to four, or to its base
as hve to eight,"


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 201

"Two perpendiculars, being radii of circles, are together
equal to the sum of the perimeters of the bases."

He was particularly emphatic in his observations forty years
ago upon the superiority of the Third Pyramid. Its true angle
is affirmed to be 51° 51' 14", and this, adds he, would be " a per-
fection which neither of the two great pyramids separately pos-
sessed ; namely, that its perpendicular was the radius of a circle,
the circumference of which was equal to the square of its base.**

He concludes with this statement : — " The Tliird Pyramid ap-
pears to be an emanation (if I may so say) from the first great
principle of the system, the circle of origin, of which it is the
spirit or essence."

Hekekyan Bey of Constantinople holds a similar high con-
ception of the Third Pyramid, saying, " Of the Siriadic monu-
ments erected in the land of Egypt, hers was considered to be
the richest in scientific records, and the most perfect ; it was,
also, the most beautiful from its high ornamentation, being of a
ruddy complexion, from its exterior casing of polished granite."

Sir Henry James brings out a similar result to that shown by
Mr. Taylor first. He speaks of a pyramid rising at the corners
nine to ten as a tt pyramid, and its height being equal to the radius
of a circle whose circumference is very approximately equal to
the length of the four sides of the base." The height 486 x 2
X 3-1416 = 3053-6. But four times the length, 764, = 3056.

A curious thing is noted respecting the floor of the Ante-
chamber. The granite part is, according to Mr. Casey, 10303
pyramid inches, and the limestone 116*26 inches. Taking the
first as the side of a square, and the last as the diameter of a circle,
the areas of the two figures will be about equaL Tbs ^vd^ ^1


202 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

the base, 9131 inches, is obtained by 11626 x 3-1416 x 5 x 5.
Also, 116'26 X 50 courses from the base to the Ante-chamber
= 5813, the apex height of the pyramid; but, 103*03 x 50 =
5 1 5 1*65. Taking this as the side of the square, the area will equal
that of a triangle of the shape and size of the pyramid's vertical
meridian section, and to a circle having the height of the pyra-
mid for its diameter.

Captain Tracey, taking the length of the coffer in pyramid
inches, 412*132, as the diameter, finds the circle to equal a
square whose side is the base of the pyramid in cubits; but
412*132 as the square side will bring an equal circle area with
the radius of the height of the pyramid, 232*52 cubits. The
pyramid inches inside the King's Chamber equal, to the thou-
sandth part, the sacred cubits outside. The diameter of a circle
with 232*52 for a radius is to the periphery of a square whose
Bide is 365*242 as 1 is to 3*1416.

40. A PART OF A GREAT PYRAMIDAL SYSTEM.

Instead of being isolated in its grandeur and peculiarities, Mr.
Agnew believes the three larger pyramids were associated by
construction in one geometrical plan. Prof. Smyth and others
have remarked upon the difference of angle made by the face
with the plane of the base ; and, noting certain mathematical
data along with the angle of the Great Pyramid, have concluded
that edifice to have a special distinction. But Mr. H. C. Agnew,
after giving the angle of the first, 51° 20' 1", of the second
52° 25' 51", and of the third, 51° 51', calls the last "the most
perfect geometrical figure."

"If," says he, "the deductions of the following pages be


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BXJILT ? 203

admitted, we must arrive at the remarkable conclusion that the
three great pyramids of Gizeh were component parts of one
immense system"

He proceeds, " How must our wonder be increased when we
find that all were planned at once ! that before a stone of the
great causeway was laid the precise proportions of the Second
and Third Pyramids, as well as of the First, were unalterably
determined by the necessary effect of the rule which fixed the
length and breadth of the causeway itself ! " He adds, " I
believe the works of the Second Pyramid were begun long
before the First Pyramid was completed, and the Third had
probably risen high above the ground before the summit of the
second was carried to a point."

This is not the place to elaborate his principle, but there is
much to draw us toward it. The Egyptians were a supremely
geometrical people. In their national edifices the learned rulers
were not governed by a simple idea of beauty, nor of ordinary
practical utility with beauty. We, in our day, would raise a
museum, a gallery of arts, a House of Parliament, or a cathedral,
adapted for the specific object intended to be carried out, com-
bining with that as much architectural elegance as particular
tastes suggest, though mainly derived from the adoption of the
style of some older building. We should contemplate nothing
further. There would be no design of incorporating any
symbolism, leave alone the introduction of mathematical and
scientific truths.

But we are well assured, on the contrary, that philosophical
minds presided at national constructions beside the Kile some
five or six thousand years ago. These were not raised mscaV^


204 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

to excite the wonder of the ignorant, or please the imagination
of the refined. They were not for the petty gratification of the
builder, or the adornment of his own age. A purpose, distinct
and important, was before the mind. There was something to
be remembered, something to be taught. A truism was to be
perpetuated in a form more enduring than letters, more faithful
in its teaching than words. We are gradually arriving at the
conviction that these wise master-masons worked upon a plan,
philosophical and true, and in a way that emulated the eternity
of the truth itself.

Apart from being an illustration of the learning of the
Egyptians, there are reasons which make Mr. Agnew*s theory
at least feasible.

It is in harmony with the building mind of the Egyptians,
who had a system of thought, and were working toward it. The
identity of construction seems apparent in the family likeness
of the Gizeh group, not noticed elsewhere, in their relative
positions, and in the formation of the one causeway described
by Herodotus, the remains of which we behold. Though this
theory injures the overruling supremacy of the Great Pyramid
believed in by some others, it is a pleasing recognition of the
far-seeing, truth-telling, science-following qualities of the ancient
Egyptians.

But Mr. John James Wild, in his celebrated letter to Lord
Brougham in 1850, was perhaps the first to recognise the
scientific relation of one pyramid to the other, in the group at
Gizeh. Whatever priority there be in the First Pyramid, he is
of opinion that all are related in one harmonious whole. His
conclusion is thus stated: "There exists a certain proportion


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 205

between the elevations of the bases of the three great pyramids
of Gizeh which proves anew that science has presided at the
erection of these monuments."

His calculations are based upon the cubit of Sir Isaac Newton
and Mr. Greaves, or cubit of Memphis, and not that of Messrs.
Taylor and Smyth.

He contends that the Second and the Third Pyramids exhibit
the law of the retrogradation of the ascendant node of the
equator in the ecliptic.

The entrance of the Second Pyramid is 25^ cubits to the east
of the centre. Taking the Memphis cubit, now in Paris, — found
^y Vyse and Perring to be, according to the French measure-
ment, 522 millem^tres, and divided in twenty-eight equal parts,
— Mr. Wild ascertains that in twenty-five and a half days the
ascendant node retrogrades 206 cubits on the equator ; this 206
is exactly the length of the Third Pyramid. Dividing 206
by 28, and then multiplying by the annual diminution, as given
by Maedler, 0*4758, the result is 3*5" for the equator indication
But 3*5", or 206 cubits, would be the base of the Third Pyramid.

Now the base of the second is double that of the third.
This, as is seen, was designed by the builders at one period. If
the one is 206, the other is 412 cubits base. But the centre is
25| from the entrance, therefore one side would be 180 J and
the other 231 J. The difierence is 51. Mr. Wild then says,
"In fifty-one days the ascendant node retrogrades 412 cubits."
But this will be twice 35'', the length of the Third Pyramid,
or 7", which is the exact base of the Second.

The yearly retrogradation will bo 365;| divided by 51, and
that amount multiplied by 7". The product ia 5Ci*V^^^ . '^^^


206 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

ascend int node, therefore, completes its course of retrogression in
25,852 years, or 360° divided by 50*13". Astronomers, who are
not agreed as to the precession of the equinoxes, rate it between
50-1" and 50-2", or from 25,817 to 25,888 years. TheEgyp-
tians, in the pyramids of Gizeh, struck between those dates, or
not far from the Hindoo year of the gods, 25,920 years.

Again, the Second and Third Pyramids conjointly perpetuate
the duration of the tropical year. The base of the Third Pyramid
is 41' 7" above the base of the Great Pyramid, while that of
the second is 33' 2" above it. The difference is 8' 5", equal to
4*9 cubits. This added to the elevation of the second above the
Nile, 100, equals 104*9. Add this result to the elevation of the
Third, 128 cubits, and we have 232*9. The maximum of the
tropical year is ^65 ^\^^'^^, In forty years there are 14600 Hi*
days. Upon this he writes, "In forty years there remain a
number of intercalary days which is equal to the number of
cubits contained in the elevation of the summit of the Third
Pyramid above the level of the Nile (232*9), divided by the
number of cubits contained in the elevation of the Second
Pyramid above the level of the same (24), namely, H*^ == 9 ^f^,
or 9 Ho intercalary days."

Suppose the civil year equal to 365 days, twenty-four years
present 8760 days. The same number (8760) in seconds is
equal to 146' or 2° 26'; and if this be taken from the latitude 30®
we obtain 27° 24'. This, according to Perring, is the inclination
of the interior passage of the Third Pyramid. It had previously
been shown that in 500 years the tropics retrograded 238 seconds.
But this is the number of cubits on the western side of the
entrance of the Gteat Pytamid, If 238', or 3<> 58', be taken


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 207

from 30° the result is 26° 2', the angle of inclination of the
entrance passage of the Third Pyramid.

Mr. Wild has another remarkable parallel, or coincidence^ as
some may prefer to call it.

As before mentioned, the base of the Second Pyramid is T^
and of the third 3 '5". The square of the Second Pyramid's
base is 49". If the centre of the base of this pyramid be taken
for the centre of a circle, and a regular polygon of forty-nine
sides be inscribed therein, the central angle of the polygon will
be 7° 20' 48^^. This doubled is 14° 41' 37^^, which equals
^6x7 'y *^^s ^^y s*ys ^®> " equal to the number of degrees of the
circumference of a circle, divided by the product of the numbers
of meridian seconds contained in the bases of the Second and
Thu-d Pyramids."

Again, he goes on to say, "According to Colonel Howard
Vyse, the base of the Third Pyramid is 8' 5" above the base of
the Second, and that of the Second is 33' 2" above the base of
the Great Pyramid. Now the proportion between the elevation
of the base of the Second Pyramid above the base of the Great,
and the elevation of the base of the Third Pyramid above the
base of the Second, is equal to the proportion between the
radius and the sinus of 14° 41' 37^5- = 33' 2" to 8' 5"; that is,
equal to the proportion between the radius and sinus of the
double of the central angle of a polygon which has as many
sides as the square of the base of the Second Pyramid contains
square seconds, namely 49."

The eighteen years' lunar period is also obtained by relation of
Gizeh pyramids.

The base of the Second is T^ which squai^cSi «aA \EL^i^^A^^^s^


208 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

5, the pyramid number, yields 245". Subtracting this from the
latitude 30° we have 25° 55' — the inclination of the inteiioi
passage of the Second Pyramid. The inclination of the lower
entrance of the Second is 22° 15', which taken from. 30^, leaves
7° 45', or 465'. But 465 years will be 25 lunar cycles, of
18|- each. Again, the base of the most southern of the three
pyramids to the east of the great one is 93 cubits; making, in
years, 5 lunar cycles.

Once more. He says that "the base of the three pyramids south
of the Third are lower than the base of the Third, 16' 18'^. Con-
sequently, the bases of the three pyramids are lower than the
base of the Second Pyramid as many feet as the base of the
Third is above the base of the Second. The levels of the bases
of the Third and the three pyramids, therefore, form two
tangents of a circle of which the radius is equal to the sinus of
the double central angle of the above-mentioned polygon. When
each side of the heptagon contains twice 28 cubits, namely,
twice the amount of cubits of the retrogradation of the tropic
during one year, the circumference of the circle inscribed in the
heptagon measures 365^§ cubits, or as many cubits as one year
contains days."

Lastly : — The entrance of the Second Pyramid is 24 cubits
above the base, and the top is 267. The entrance above the
Nile is 100 + 24. " If we add," says Mr. Wild, " the 100 cubits
of elevation of the base of the Second Pyramid above the level
of the Nile to the 412 cubits contained in this base, we obtain
100 + 412 = 512 = 2^ cubits. Now 512 years contain as many
intercalary days as there are cubits in the elevation of the en-
trance of the Second Pyramid above the level of the Nile,


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 209

namely 124. Consequently, 512 years contain (512 x 365) + 124
= 187,004 days. As before mentioned, the summit of the
Second Pyramid is 367, which equals 365 + 2, cuhits above the
level of the Nile. The civil year, taken at 365 days, leaves a
surplus of two intercalary days after a lapse of ^jV/" = "Voo^ + i*
= 83^ years. But in 2^, 128, years, or in as many years as the
vertical height of the Third Pyramid contains cubits, there
remains as many intercalary days as the fourth part of the eleva-
tion of the entrance of the Second Pyramid above the level of
the Nile contains cubits, namely, ^^ or 31 intercalary days."
He thus obtains, in 128 years, (128 x 365) + 31 = 46,751 days.
The average length of a tropical year is ascertained by these two
pyramids, and by the Memphis cubit, to be 365^^^ days.

By another calculation, founded upon the three pyramids
south of the Third Pyramid, he obtains the result of 365^|.

The author of the Solar System of the Ancients^ as well as M.
Dufeu, and other writers, confirm the opinion of Mr. Wild, that
the pyramids of Gizeh were constructed upon one plan, and
that they form a truly family group.

41. AGREEMENT WITH THE CAUSEWAY.

According to Mr. Agnew's mathematical plan, "the Great
Causeway was in length equal to the circumference of the chief
circle, or parent of the whole scheme, that of which the First
Pyramid was radius, and of which the square of the base
of the Second Pyramid was the inscriptible square. The
Causeway was the circumference rolled out, as it wera"
- If the perpendicular of the pyramid be 480 feet, the circum-
ference of the circle would be 3016. EstimsAiii^ «b «k\a.^c^»s£L %i^


210 PTRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

603 feet, he obtains 3015 for the length of the five stadia of
Herodotus, given as the extent of the Causeway.

" I believe," says Mr. Agnew, " this Great Causeway led up to
the eastern side of the Great Pyramid, and terminated in front
at 159 feet from the base, or at the eastern verge of the circle
descriptible about the base."

The width of the Causeway was 62 Greek feet. Upon this
he remarks that if the radius of the inner circle, 1000, be sub-
tracted from that of the outer, 1131-3698, half the difference
between the two rings would be about 62| ; this nearly cor-
responds with the width of the Causeway.

42. TO TYPIFY THE GENERATIVE PRINCIPLE.

There has been a time in the history of the world when a
Babel confusion existed through the contention of two parties :
one holding the masculine arigin of being, and the other the
feminine. Certain nations, as the Phoenicians, Greeks, &c.,
favoured the latter in their forms of worship ; in Peru, Britain,
&c., it was the former. India has for ages been the scene of this
religious strife. The enormous popularity of Siva proclaims the
triumph at last of the masculine principle there.

The pyramid is said to typify the same thing as the conical
stone worshipped in so many lands, and from the remotest
period. The revolution of a pyramid describes a cone. The
cone represents the Phallic theory of creation.

A mystic, the Chevalier de B , thus connects the astro-
nomical and Phallic ideas : — " Its apex represents the Phallus,
the sign ever deemed throughout the East the symbol of Deity,
or the creative ;pnnciple, TiiA ^eaci«ii\. qI "Ocia wua. upon its apex


WHY WAJS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 211

at the two solemn epochs of the year (equinoxes), which signify
life eternal, and death through the ever-constant adverse piin-
ciple of evil, completes the series of allegorical ideas which this
building was designed to celebrate."

But he suggestively reminds us that while the number one
shows the masculine principle, and three the feminine, four
illustrates the harmony of both. ** Its base," says he, " is the
perfect square, which symbolises in its four comers the sacred
number four, the union 6f the masculine and feminine prin-
ciples." The scholar is reminded of the speaking numbers of
Pythagoras and of the Cabbala.

In the above sense it is held that the pyramid is the most
simple and suggestive type of creative force, and the conjunction
of both active and passive agencies in the operatioDS of Divine
mind on mattejr. This is a large question, but must bo
abruptly closed.

43. EMBLEM OP THE SUN OR SACRED FIRE.

The shape of the pyramids has suggested that of tongues oj
fire. To Jablonski it appeared as sunbeams streaming down
from a point. Mr. Wild, of Zurich, calls attention to the tra-
dition that they were erected to the sun. Mr. Yeates truly
remarks that they are a just imitation of fire. Syncellus in-
forms us that Venephres built the pyramids of Co-chone.
Bryant finds Co-chone to mean the house of Chon, the sun;
" which," says he, " seems to betray the purpose for which the
chief pyramid was erected ; for it was undoubtedly nothing else
but a monument to the deity whose name it bore." As it had
been called Domus Opis Serpentis, the learned man remaika^


212 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

" It was the name of the pyramid erected to the sun, the Ophite
deity of Egypt, worshipped under the symbol of a serpent."

Arab writers are of this opinion. Soyuti, who died 911 a. H.,
says that the Sabaeans, or fire-worshippers, " in performing pil-
grimages to the pyramids sacrificed hens and black calves."
He quotes Menardi to prove that Hermes, the son of Seth, in-
troduced Sabaeanism, inculcating the necessity of such pil-
grimages. Makrizi, 845 a.h., quotes Ibrahim Alwatwati and
others upon the sun subject. Al Akbari confirms the tradition.
Col. Chesney declares that there are pyramids in Syria to which
pilgrimages are still made. Sprenger quotes the story of the
model of a pyramid being the object of adoration among the
Calmuks.

The religious significance of the pyramid is alluded to by the
old English astronomer, Greaves. He thinks the Egyptians
may have " intended to represent some of their gods." " For,"
he adds, " anciently both theye and some others of the Gentiles
by columnes and obeliskes did so. Whereas a pyramid is but a
greater kinde of obeliske."

An extract from Pierius is given by Mr. Greaves : —

" By a pyramid the ancient Egyptians expressed the nature of
things, and that informed substance receiving all forms. Because,
as a pyramid, having its beginning from a point on the top, is
by degrees dilated on all parts, so the nature of all things pro-
ceeding from one fountain and beginning, which is indivisible,
namely, from God, the chief workmaster, afterwards receives
several forms, and is diffused into various kinds and species, all
which it conjoins to that beginning and point, from whence every-
thing issues and flows. There may be also given another


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 213

reason for tliis, taken from astronomy, for the Egyptians were
excellent astronomers, even the inventors of it. These will have
each sign of the zodiac to be a kind of pyramid, the base of
which shall be in the heaven, and the point of it shall be in the
centre of the earth. Seeing, therefore, in these pyramids all
things were made, and that the coming of the sun, which is, as
it were, a point in respect of these signs, is the cause of the pro-
duction of natural things, and its departure the cause of their
corruption, it seems very fitly that by a pyramid, Nature, the
parent of all things, may be expressed. Also, the same Egyptians,
under the form of a pyramid, shadowed forth the soul of man,
making huge pyramids the magnificent sepulchres of their kings
and heroes, to testify that the soul was still existent, notwith-
standing the body was dissolved and corrupted, the which shall
generate and produce another body for itself, when it should seem
good to the Eirst Agent (that is, the circle of 36,000 years being
transacted). Like as a pyramid, as is well known to geome-
tricians, the top of it standing fixed, and the base being
moved about, describes a circle, and the whole body of it a cone,
so that the circle expresses that space of years, and the cone
that body which in that space is produced. For it was the
opinion of the Egyptians that in the revolution of 36,000 years
all things should be restored to their former estate. Plato wit-
nesses that he received it from them ; who seems, also, in his
Timceus to attest this thing, that is, that our soul has the form
of a pyramid, which (soul), according to the same Plato, is of a
fiery nature, and adheres to the body as a pyramid does to its
base, as a fire does to the fueL"

M. Eoug6, last year, said, "The Great PytaccLvda ^^^a S^c^a


214 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

tombs of kings, but their exact orientation leads ns to suppose
that they were put in relation with the worship of the sun.
Our Votive Pyramids confirm these characters. The principal
personage is usually figured in adoration, the face turned toward
the south ; at his left were the formulas of invocation to the
rising sun, and at the right were analogous formulas of invocation
to the setting sun."

From Mr. Stewart, of America, we have further remarks. He
notes the appearance of the sun about the time of the equinoxes.
Twice a year the pyramid would have no shadow. " The sun,"
says he, " would then appear exactly at midday upon the
summit of this pyramid; there his majestic disk would
appear, fcyr some moments, placed upon this immense pedestal,
and seem to rest upon it, while his worshippers, on their knees
at its base, extending their view along the inclined plane of the
northern front, would contemplate the great Osiris, as well
when he descended into the darkness of the tomb as when he
arose triumphant. The same might be said of the full moon of
the equinoxes, when it takes place in this parallel. It would
seem that the Egyptians, always grand in their conceptions, had
executed a project (the boldest that was ever imagined) of giving
a pedestal to the sun £^nd moon, or to Osiris and Isis. The tomb
of Osiris was covered with shade nearly six months, after which
light surrounded it entirely at midday, as soon as he, returning
from hellf regained his empire in passing into the luminous
atmosphere. Then he had returned to Isis, and to the god of
spring, Orus, who had at length conquered the genius of dark-
ness and of winter. "What a sublime idea ! " *

Mr. Fellows, author of Mysteries of Freemasonry, takes a


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 215

masonic view of the pyramid, giving it a solar worship origin ;
or, rather, demonstrating it to have reference to apparent solar
movements as well as to solar myths. He calls the pyramid " a
pedestal to the sun and moon, or to Osiris and Isis, at midday
for the one, and at midnight for the other, when they arrived at
that part of the heavens near to which passes the line which
separates the northern from the southern hemisphere, the empire
of good from that of eviL They wished that the shade should
disappear from all the fronts of the pyramid at midday, during
the whole time that the sun sojourned in the luminous atmo-
sphere, and that the northern front should be again covered with
shade when Osiris (the sun) descended into the tomb, or lidl.
The tomb of Osiris was covered with shade nearly six months."
As to the fourteen days before one equinox, and after another,
Mr. Fellows cites the tradition of masonic Jews, that Hiram's
body lay fourteen days in the grave before it was found by
Solomon,

The orientation of the pyramid has been held to be a strong
confirmation of the solar idea. Mr. Piazzi Smyth puts it at
only 4' 35" of error from true east and west. Sir Edmund
Beckett quotes it 5', or one foot in 761 feet. But he adds, " It
is not quite certain that the ground has not received some slight
subsequent twist from below, for the Second Pyramid has exactly
the same direction, and, what is more, the whole of the King's
Chamber has received a tilt towards one comer, so that the axis
of the room is no longer quite vertical."

Even Rollin, in the unenquiring age in which he lived, is so
struck with this orientation as to say, " This seems to prove, also,
that these immense buildings were never intended e^<i.\»&\:^^


216 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

for burial-places, but conjointly for experiment and historical
record."

44. FOR EGYPTIAN RELIGIOUS RITES.

Two opposite views have been entertained on the pyramid.
While some have imagined its devotion to secret ceremonies in
connection with the old faith, others behold in it the negation
of beliel Dr. Richardson, the traveller, once exclaimed, " II
the temples and tombs are to be considered as remnants of
Egyptian idolatry, the pyramids may be regarded as remnants of
infidelity." Bishop Eussell, the author of an instructive work
on Egypt, thought that '* it seems reasonable to suppose that all
these turnings, apartments, and secrets in architecture were in-
tended for some nobler purpose, and that the Deity rather, which
was typified in the outward form of this pile, was to be
worshipped within.*' Norden, in 1737, wrote, "The Egyptian
religion was the principal cause of the production of the
pyramids."

An older visitor by a century, John Greaves, left this record :
" The true reason depends upon higher and more waighty con-
siderations, though I acknowledge those alleaged by Pliny might
be secondary motives. And this sprang from the theology of
the Egyptians, who, as Servius shewes in his comment, beleeved
that as long as the body endured so long the soule continued
with it." A still older English rambler, Sandys, had these re-
flections when there : " Eor as a pyramis, beginning at a point,
by little and little delateth into all parts, so nature, proceediiig
from one individual portion (even God, the Sovereign Essence),
received diversity of forms, uniting all in the Supreme Head,


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 217

from 'whence all excellencies issue." Even Mariette Bey, uvhile
opposing the theory of some, affirming that " the pyramids were
not monuments of the vain ostentation of kings," sees a reli-
gious aspect in the erection ; concluding, " they are the impossible
obstacles to overturn, and the gigantic proofs of a consoling
dogma." He refers to immortality,

Mr. Yeates is another viewing the edifice associated with
religion, regarding it as an altar. "The summit of the Great
Pyramid," says he, "which is by report about sixteen feet
square, admits the supposition that here was the high altar,
either for sacrifice on any great occasions ; or for their chief idol,
thereupon placed in former ages." Elsewhere he has it, " Thus
does the outward form and appearances of these edifices, duly
considered, present to us some idea of the altars and temples of
the first ages after the Flood." The tops of Mexican pyramids
were certainly used for worship and sacrifices. Bryant, in his
great work on mythology, has a similar conception, saying,
"They were designed for high altars and temples, and they
were constructed in honour of the Deity." He combats the
assertion of Herodotus that they were tombs, adding this mean
opinion of ancient writers ; " they spoke by guess, and I have
shown by many instances how usual it was for the Grecians to
mistake temples for tombs. K not so," he exclaims, " what
occasion was there for a well 1 "

All this bears upon the Arab tradition, recorded by several
writers, that their ancestors used to make pilgrimages to the
pyramids, and offer incense to them, sacrificing a black calf.
But the religious aspect of the pyramid question cannot be
further entered into here.


218 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

45. TO CELEBRATE THE MYSTERIES OF LIFE.

All the ancient Pagan mysteries are connected with a sacred
yase, a holy bath, a baptismal font, in which the initiated, in
a nude state, were completely immersed, and from which they
were raised to newness of life. This idea of the regenerating
influence of that holy water prevailed alike in the further east
and the further west, from the Himalayas across the old con-
tinents to Mexico and Peru, or over the Pacific islands. It has
literally ginlled the eartL We observe it alike in the most
ancient as well as most modem forms of heathenism.

According to Prof. Piazzi Smyth the pyramid was erected to
preserve the coffer or sarcophagus. According to mystics of
various orders a similar opinion has been entertained. Some
contend it was to keep inviolate this symbol of generative life.
It was the cauldron of Ceridwen of the British druids, whence
secrets were learned by special and Divine inspiration. It was
at once the tomb and the portal to immortality. In a country
where, and in an epoch when, certainly, eternity and eternal
life occupied more of the popular thought than in any other
clime or time, this precious sign of death and life would be
watched over with most jealous care.

Recently, a remarkable American work. Art MagiCy has given
a pyramid interpretation. The author speaks of the marvellous
box as " a sarcophagus for living men, for those initiates who were
there taught the solemn problems of life and death, and through
the instrumentahty of that very coffer attained to that glorious
birth of the spirit — that second birth so significantly described."
He adds these words, understood in various senses ^r— ^' Slain by


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT P 219

fj Tiolence and laid in the colBPer, with him is destroyed the Mas-
ter's Wordy on which the huilding of the Great Temple depends."

It is no wonder that he regards it as " the key-stone of the lost
art, which interprets the grand science of living as a Masonic
Lodge."

"For ages," says he, "the Great Pyramid has heen this
rejected stone. The world has not known it, and the builders
of science have thrown it away amidst the rubbish of speculative
possibilities." Such a man may well term it " a veritable lodge
of ancient freemasonry." For this freemasonry Mr. Piazzi Smyth
has unnecessarily spoken in terms of contemptuous pity, saying,
"Freemasonry, notwithstanding all its boasting, seemed to lead
no nearer to a knowledge of the objects and ideas of the coffer than
anything connected with the idolatrous religion of the ancient
Ei^yptians."

It was with profound meaning that the anonymous mystic
said that " the huge problem of scientific discoveries, the mystic,
lidless, wholly unomamented, uninscribed coffer, in the midst of
the vast unomamented, uninscribed chamber, was not intended
as a model for all generations of succeeding com and seeds-
men, but as a sarcophagus for living men.'*

Some few thoughtful readers will ponder over these words.
There is honey to be got from the lion's mouth, and more than
Samson have found it there.

46. A MASONIC HALL.

This view has had many supporters, because the Egyptians

were supposed the fathers of freemasonry — the teachings of

Fhre, the solar deity, mason, or raiser of living temples. The

pyramid, and prominently the great one, might reasonably


220 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCTES.

have been, with its secret passages, its dark solitudes, its
mysterious chambers, regarded as a fitting place for initiation into
those sacred mysteries, which were the forerunners of the
Eleusinian, &c. All the symbols of the craft are there, and were
there, and in the land of Egypt, thousands of years before the
masonic temple of Jerusalem was reared by Solomon. It is not
wonderful, therefore, that masonic writers, particularly conti-
nental and American ones, should have been more drawn to the
pyramid than to the Jachin and Boaz of the King of Israel,
associated, on Biblical authority, with the two great centres of
ancient mysticism, Phoenicia and Egypt.

The Rev. George Oliver, the chief of modem English masonic
authors, and a clergyman of the Church of England, must have
startled the timid with his idea of the pyramids. " They were,
doubtless, erected soon after the Dispersion," he says, "as copies
of the great Phallic tower, built by Nimrod ; and as the latter
was designed for initiation, so, also, were the former." Surely
some Christian masons would object to a Phallic origin of their
craft. But this distinguished masonic authority goes further
into the pyramid meaning. He distinctly affirms : " They were
intended to contain the apparatus of initiation into the myste-
ries, and it is highly probable that they were exclusively
devoted to this important purpose.**

As it is intended, hereafter, to treat on Egyptian freemasonry
and religion, it is sufficient here to state that one practical diffi-
culty opposes Mr. Oliver's notion of a pyramid being a masonic
halL It is this : — we have clear proofs that immediately upon
the finishing of the building every apartment was closed, every
passage filled with massive blocks of stone, and the outer


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT? 221

entrance effectually concealed. "No such pyramid, therefore,
could have been an ark of initiation. Neither could it have been,
as Bishop Eussell and others have thought, a temple for service.
There is a sense, however, wherein it may be said that the
pyramid was a masonic edifice, constructed for masonic pur-
poses. But these purposes were higher and nobler than those at
present occupying the attention of the Order.

47. SPECIAL REVELATIONS TO MYSTICS.

In a general way it may be said that the pyramid has special
revelations of a mysterious character. The ordinary man of fair
education and common sense would, as a rule, see nothing more
mysterious in it than in the Royal Exchange. It would for him
have nothing special to tell of an outside character. He might,
perhaps, marvel at the stupidity of wasting so much time and
money on so practically useless a building. In the whole he
would recognise a tomb, and nothing more. It would suggest
as much to him as " the primrose by the river's brink " to Words-
worth's countryman.

It may be further said that such a man, if looking into this
little volume, might possibly have a pitying sneer or smile for
the reader of what would appear to him such baseless mathemat-
ical and scientific calculations, as connected with the pyramid.
He would naturally look upon Dufeu, Hekekyan Bey, Agnew,
Piazzi Smyth, John Taylor, Wild, John Wilson, and the like,
as sheer dreamers.

One must rejoice, nevertheless, that there are those who look
beneath the surface of things, and dig for hidden treasure. In
spite of the pooh-poohings of men who are ever preachinj^^\i«v5^


222 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIES.

"Facts — plain facts, sir," there really are strange revelations
from the pyramid which are recognised by thoughtful, sober
citizens of the world. An increasing number are beginning to
ask, with the Kosicrucian : —

" Is it reasonable to conclude, at a period when knowledge
was at the highest, and when human powers were, in comparison
with ours at the present time, prodigious, tbat all these inde-
scribable physical elBPorts, such gigantic achievements as those of
the Egyptians, were devoted to a mistake? that the myriads
of the Kile were fools, labouring in the dark ? "

But there is another class, more truly mystic than any we
have mentioned, whose notions, if revealed privately to the
expounders of millennial markings in the pyramid, would extort
derision and contumely, but who are nevertheless worthy of a
word in a book on the " "Why 1 " of the pyramid.

Still, as these mystics write not for the public, have no
mission to fulfil for the public, and care not one straw for the
public, it seems hardly worth while to say anything about them
to the public.

It has been the writer's good fortune to come across the path
of one or two such persons. Perhaps other men, in a pilgrimage
of sixty years, who have good faith in their fellow-creatures*
intelligence, and sympathy with honest, earnest aspirations,
encounter some who seem but to live on the confines of this
everyday world of ours. The dreamers are seen to have some
method in their supposed madness, and some reason in their wild
imaginings. In these cases, an incoherent speech testifies to the
dread of ridicule, the consciousness of being misunderstood, or
the conviction that the truth is too sacred for utterance.


WHY WAS THE PYRAMID BUILT P 223

M. Caviglia, "bom in Malta, dying in Paris at the age of
seventy-four, in 1845, buried with his Bible beside him, was one
of these mystics, and so passionately devoted to pyramid study
that for some time he lived in an apartment — Mr. Fiazzi
Smyth's symbol of heaven — over the King's Chamber.

Lord Lindsay met him at Gizeh, admired and honoured him.
He was, as he himself expressed it, " tout d, fait pyramidale,**
His lordship wrote, "We are told that in Ceylon there are
insects that take the shape and colour of the branch or leaf they
feed upon; Caviglia seems to partake of their nature, he is
really assimilating to a pyramid." This was not said in ridicule.
He described him as " happy with his pyramid, his mysticism,
and his Bible." Even then, at sixty-six years of age, he had,
we are told, "reared a pyramid of the most extraordinary
mysticism — astrology, magnetism, magic (his favourite studies),
its corner-stones ; while on each face of the airy vision he sees
inscribed, in letters of light, invisible to all but himself, eluci-
datory texts of Scripture."

Mr. Eamsay has this account : — " He has strange, imearthly
ideas, which seem to open up to you, as he says them, whole
vistas of unheard-of ground, which close up again as suddenly,
so that one can hardly know what his theories are. He says, it
would be highly dangerous to communicate them, and looks
mystical"

One who knew something about Lost Secrets wrote thus of
him : — " By studying the remains of Pagan antiquity in the only
way they can be profitably studied, namely, through the medium
of the occult sciences, Caviglia had discovered the long-lost secret
of the pyramids. And with the discovery of ths cfei3LU'^\£c^^\fcT^


224 PYRAMID FACTS AND FANCIE8.

of Egyptian paganism the great central truth of Cliristianitj,
historically considered, had revealed itself to him."

One who studied such questions for half a century, and who
lately left this Babel of ours for the " dimlynshadowed shore," told
the writer that there were untold secrets of value in the Great
Pyramid, and that the pyramid builders possessed the secret of
all philosophical mysticism on the basis of astronomical fact.

There is something in the pyramid ; and men who see what
others cannot, would not, see, if derided for their second sight,
may yet be proved to have a vision true and clear.

The enthusiastic French savant, M. Dufeu, proudly affirms
that ''not a stone has been set, not a dimension has been
determined, which may not have its reason why, and concurred
to establish scientific formulae to represent, and etemallj to pre-
serve, the previous knowledge acquired by the immortal archi-
tects who erected these colossal masses."

He, like some others, while maintaining that *' only a part of
the veil has been raised which hid the high destination of
pyramids," can indulge glowing expectations of new revelations.

** Who knows," cries he, " what treasure may yet burst forth
from the secular flanks of these great constructions, whose incon-
testable utility and importance will be no more denied by any
one. 'New discoveries, encircling with a fresh aureola the head
of the eminent learned of a pre-historic epoch, will impose on
us an addition to our admiration of their vast genius."


THE END.


I, Paiernoster Square, London,


A LIST OF

C. KEGAN PAUL AND CO.'S
PUBLICATIONS.


ABBEY (Henry).

Ballads of Good Deeds,
and Other Verses. Fcap. 8vo.
Cloth gilt, price ss.

ABDULLA (Hakayit).

Autobiography of a Malay

Munshi. Translated by J. T.
Thomson, F.R.G. S. With Photo-
lithograph Page of Abdulla's MS.
Post 8vo. Cloth, price 12s.

ADAMS (A. L.), M.A., M.B.,
F.R.S.f Jr .G.S.

Field and Forest Rambles
of a Naturalist in New Bruns-
>vick. With Notes and Observations
on the Natural History of Eastern
' Canada. Illustrated. 8vo. Cloth,
price 14;.

ADAMS (F. O.), F.R.G.S.

The History of Japan. From

the Earliest Period to the Present
Time. New Edition, revised. 2
volumes. With Maps and Plans.
Demy 8vo. Cloth, pnce 21s. each.

ADAMS (W. D.,Jun.).

Lyrics of Love, from Shake-
speare to Tennyson. Selected and
arranged by. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth extra,
gilt edges, price 3^ . 6d.

ADAMS (John), M.A.

St. Malo's Quest, and
other Poems. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, 5^ .

ADON.

Through Storm & Sunshine.

Illustrated by M. E. Edwards,
A. T. H. Paterson, and the Author.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price js. 6d,

A. K. n. B.

A Scotch Communion Sun-
day, to which are added Certain
Discourses from a University City.
Bv the Author of " The Recreations
of a Country Parson." Second
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5^.


ALLEN (Rev. R.), M.A.

Abraham ; his Life, Times,
and Travels, 3,800 years ago. Se-
cond Edition. With Map. Post
8vo. Cloth, price 6s.

ALLEN (Grant), B.A.
Physiological Esthetics.

Crown 8vo. 9* .

AMOS (Prof. Sheldon).

Science of Law. Second
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price

Volume X. of The International
Scientific Series.

ANDERSON (Rev. C), M.A.

New Readings of Old
Parables. Demy8vo. Cloth, price
4J. 6d.

Church Thought and
Church Work. Edited by. Second
Edition. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price
7^ . 6d.

Words and Works in a
London Parish. Edited by.
Second Edition. Demy 8vo. Cloth,
price 6s.

The Curate of Shyre. Se-
cond Edition. 8vo. Qoth, price
7*. 6d.

ANDERSON (Col. R. P.).
Victories and Defeats. An

Attempt to explain the Causes which
have led to them. An Officer's
Mantial. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price
14;.

ANDERSON (R. C), C.E.

Tables for Facilitating the
Calculation of every Detail in
connection >vith Earthen and
Masonry Dams. Royal8vo. Cloth,
price £^^s.


2


A List of


ANSON (Lieut.-Col. The Hon.
A.),V.C., M.P.

The Abolition of Purchase
and the Army Regulation Bill of
1871. Crovm 8vo. Sewed, price ix.

Army Reserves and Militia

Reforms. Crown 8vo. Sewed,
price zx.

Story of the Supersessions.

Crown Svo. Sewed, price td.

ARCHER (Thomas).

About my Father's
Business. Work amidst the Sick,
the Sad, and the Sorrowing. Crown
Svo. Cloth, price 5X.

ARGYLE (Duke of).

Speeches on the Second
Reading of the Church Patron-
age (Scotland) Bill in the House of
Lords, June 2, 1874; and Earl of
Camperdown's Amendment, Tune 9,
1874^ placing the Election of
M misters in the hands of Ratepayers.
Crown 8vo. Sewed, price ix.

Army of the North German
Confederation.

A Brief Description of its Organi-
2ation, of the Different Branches
of the Service and their rdle in War,
of its Mode of Fighting, &c., &c.
Translated from the Corrected Edi-
tion, by permission of the Author, by
Colonel Edward Newdigate. Demy
8vo. Cloth, price 5X.

ASHTON (J.).
Rough Notes of a Visit to
Belgium, Sedan, and Paris, in

September, 1870-71. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 3x. 6a.

Aunt Mary's Bran Pie.

By the author of *' St. Olave's.
Illustrated.


Aurora.

A Volume of Verse
Cloth, price 5X.


Cloth, price 3x. 6d.

Fcap. 8vo.


AYRTON (T. C).
A Scotch Wooing. 2 vols.

Crown 8vo. Cloth
BAGEHOT (Walter).
Some Articles on the De-
preciation of Silver, and Topics
connected with it. Deniy8vo. Price
5*.


BAGEHOT (Walter).
Physics and Politics; or,

Thoughts on the Application of the
Principles of "Natural Selecdon**
and "^Inheritance" to Political So-
ciety. Third Edition. Crown 8va
Cloth, price 4J.

Volume II. of The Intematioiial
Scientific Series.

The English Constitution.

A New Edition, Revised and
Corrected, with an Introductory
Dissertation on Recent Changes and
Events. Crown 8vo. Cloth, prkc
7*. 6d.

Lombard Street. A
Description of the Money Market.
Sixth Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 7x. 6d.

BAIN (Alexander^ LL.D.
Mind and Body: the Theories
of their relation. Fifth Edition.
Crown 8vo. Clotlvprice 4*.

Volume IV. of The International
Scientific Series.

^^^^^INrCapt.J. H.), P.Z.S.,
Bengal Staff Corps.

The Large and Small Game
of Bengal and the North-W^est-
ern Provinces of India. 4to. With
numerous Illustrations. Cloth, price
21X.

BANKS (Mrs. G. L.).
God's Providence House.

New Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 3J. 6d.

BARING (T. C), M.A., M.P.

Pindar in English Rhyme.

Being an Attempt to render the
Epinikian Odes with the principal
remaining Fragments of Pindar into
English Rhymed Verse. SmaU
Quarto. Cloth, price 7*.
BARLEE (Ellen).
Locked Out : a Tale of the

Strike. With a Frontispiece. Royal
i6mo. Cloth, price \s. 6d.

BAUR (Ferdinand), Dr. Ph..
Professor in Maulbronn.
A Philological Introduction
to Greek and Latin for Students.
Translated and adapted from the
German of. By C. Kegan Paul,
M.A. Oxon., and the Rev. E. D
Stone, M.A., late Fellow of King's
College, Cambridge, and Assistant
Master at Eton. Crown Svo. Cloth,
price 6s.


C, Kegan Paul dr* Co,^s Publications,


BAYNES (Rev. Canon R. H.),
M.A.

Home Songs for Quiet

Hours. Third Edition. Fcap. 8vo.
Cloth extra, price 3*. 6d.

This may also be had handsomely
bound in morocco with£^lt edges.

BECKER (Bernard H.).

The Scientific Societies of
London. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5*.

BENNETT (Dr. W. C).
Baby May. Home Poems

and Ballads. With Frontispiece.
Crown 8vo. Cloth elegant, price 6r.

Baby May and Home
Poems. Fcap. Svo. Sewed in
Coloured Wrapper, price ix.

Narrative Poems & Ballads.

Fcap. 8vo. Sewed in Coloured Wrap-
per, price xs.

Songs for Sailors. Dedicated

by Special Request to H. R. H. the
Duke of Edinburgh. With Steel
Portrait and Illustrations. Crown
Svo. Cloth, price 3*. dd.

An Edition in Illustrated Paper
Covers, price ix.

Songs of a Song Writer.

Crown 8vo. Cloth, price ts.

B£NNI£(Rev. J. N.), M.A.
The Eternal Life. Sermons

preached during the last twelve years.
Crown Svo. Cloth, price ts.

BERNARD (Bayle).

Samuel Lover, the Life and
Unpublished "Works of. In 2
vols. With a Steel Portrait Post
Svo. Cloth, price 2 if.

BERNSTEIN (Prof.).
The Five Senses of Man.

With 91 Illustrations. Second
Edition. Crown Svo. Cloth,
price s*.

Volume XXI. of The International
Scientific Series.


BETHAM - EDWARDS (Miss
M.).

Kitty. With a Frontispiece.

Crown Svo. Cloth, price dy.

BISCOE (A. C).
The Earls of Middleton,

Lords of Clermont and of Fetter-
cairn, and the Middleton Family.
Crown Svo. Cloth, price xos. 6d.

BISSET (A.)
History of the Struggle for
Parliamentary Government in
England. 2 vols. Demy Svo.
Cloth, price 24;.

BLANC (H.), M.D.
Cholera : How to Avoid and
Treat it. Popular and Practical
Notes. Crown Svo. Cloth, price
4^ . 6d.

BLASERNA (Prof. Pietro).
The Theory of Sound in its
Relation to Music. With numer-
ous Illustrations. Crown Svo. Cloth,
price ss.

Volume XXII. of The International
Scientific Series.

Blue Roses ; or, Helen Mali-
nofska's Marriage. By the Author
of"V€ra." 2 vols. Third Edition.
Cloth, gilt tops, I2J.

BLU ME (Major W.).
The Operations of the
German Armies in France, from
Sedan to the end of the war of 1870-
71. With Map. From the Journals
of the Head-quarters Staff. Trans-
lated by the late E. M. Jones, Maj.
20th Foot, Prof, of Mil. Hist., Sand-
hurst. Demy Svo. Cloth, price 9*.

BOGUSLAWSKI (Capt. A. von).
Tactical Deductions from
the >Var of 1870-71. Translated
by Colonel Sir Lumley Graham,
Bart., late iSth (Royal Irish) Regi-
ment. Third Edition, Revised and
Corrected. Demy Svo. Cloth, price
js.

BONWICK (J.), F.R.G.S.
The Tasmanian Lily. With

Frontispiece. Crown Svo. Cloth
price $s.

Mike Howe,the Bushranger
of Van Diemen's Land. With
Frontispiece. Crown Svo. Cloth,
price 5J.


A List of


BOSWELL (R. B.), M.A., Oxon.

Metrical Translations from
the Greek and Latin Poets, and
other Poems. Crown 8vo. Qoth,
price 5f .

BOWEN (H. C), M.A., Head
Master of the Grocers' Company's
Middle Class School at Hackney.

Studies in English, for the

use of Modem Schools. Small Crown
8vo. Cloth, price \t. dd,

BOWRING (L.), C.S.I.
Eastern Experiences.

Illustrated with Maps and Diagrams.
Demy 8vo. Cloth, price i6*.

Autobioeraphical Recollections
of Sir John Bowring. With
Memoir by Lewin B. Bowring.
Demy 8vo. Price 14*.

BRADLEY (F. H.).

Ethical Studies. Critical
Essays in Moral Philosophy. Large
post 8vo. Cloth, price ^.

Mr. Sidgwick's Hedonism :

an Examination of the Main Argu-
ment of "The Methods of Ethics."
Demy 8vo., sewed, price 2j. dd.

Brave Men's Footsteps.

By the Editor of " Men who have
Risen." A Book of Example and
Anecdote for Young People. With
Four Illustrations by C. Doyle.
Third Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 3J. (>d.

BRIALMONT (Col. A.).
Hasty Intrenchments.

Translated by Lieut. Charles A.
Empson, R.A. With Nine Plates.
Demy 8vo. Cloth, price 6*.

BROOKE (Rev. J. M. S.), M. A.

Heart, be Still. A Sermon
preached in Holy Trinity Church,
Southall. Imperial 32mo. Sewed,
price dd.


BROOKE (Rev. S. A.), M. A.,

Chaplain in Ordinary to Her Majesty
the Queen, and Minister of Bedfoid
Chapel, Bloomsbury.

The Late Rev. F. W. Ro-
bertson, M.A., Life and Letters

of. Edited by.

I. Uniform with the Sermons,
a vols. With Steel Portrait. Price
7*. bd.

II. Library Edition. 8vo. I^^th
Two Steel Portraits. Price ia».

III. A Popular Edition, in z voL
8vo. Price 6*.

Theology in the English
Poets. — CowpER, Coleridge,
Wordsworth, and Burns. Thini
Edition. Post 8vo. Qoth, price 9*.

Christ in Modem Life.
Ninth Edition. Crown 8vo. Qoth,
price 7*. dd.

Sermons. First Series. Ninth
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price t$.

Sermons. Second Series.
Third Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 7*.

Frederick Denison Maurice:

The Life and Work of. A Memorial
Sermon. Crown 8vo. Sewed, price u.

BROOKE (W. G.), M. A.

The Public Worship

Regulation Act. With a Classified
Statement of its Provisions, Notes,
and Index. Third Edition, revised
and corrected. Crown 8va Cloth,
price 3*. bd.

Six Privy Council Judg-
ments— 1850-1873. Annouted by.
Third Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 9f .

BROUN (J. A.).

Magnetic Observations at
Trevandrum and Aufi^ustia
Malley. Vol. I. 4to. Cloth,

price 63X.

The Report from above, sepanttely
sewed, price «w.


C Kegan Paul &* Co.^s Publications,


BROWN (Rev. J. Baldwin), B.A.

The Higher Life. Its Reality,
Experience, and Destiny. Fourth
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price

Doctrine of Annihilation
in the Light of the Gospel
of Love. Five Discourses. Second
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
zs. 6d.

BROWN Q. Croumbie), LL.D.
Reboisement in France ; or.

Records of the Replanting of the
Alps, the Cevennes, and the Pyre-
nees with Trees, Herbage, and Bush.
Demy 8vo. Cloth, price izs. 6d.

The Hydrology of Southern
Africa. Demy Bvo. Cloth, price
zos. 6d.

BROWNE (Rev. M. E.)

Until the Day Dawn. Four
Advent Lectures. Crown 8 vo. Cloth,
price 2f . 6d.

BRYANT (W. C.)

Poems. Red-line Edition.
With 24 Illustrations and Portrait of
the Author. Crown 8vo. Cloth extra,
price 7*. 6d.

A Cheaper Edition, with Frontis-
piece. Small crown 8vo. Cloth, price
3X. td.

BUCHANAN (Robert).
Poetical Works. Collected

Edition, in 3 vols., with Portrait.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s. each.

Master- Spirits. Post 8vo.

Cloth, price lof. 6d.

BULKELEY (Rev. H. J.).
Walled in, and other Poems.

Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5*.
BUNNETT(F. E.).

Linked at Last. Crown 8vo.
Cloth.

BURTON (Mrs. Richard).

The Inner Life of Syria,
Palestine, and the Holy Land.
With Maps, Photographs, and
Coloured Plates. 2 vols. Second
Edition. Demy 8va Cloth, price
a4x.


CADELL(Mrs. H. M.).

Ida Craven : A Novel. 2
vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.

CALDERON.
Calderon's Dramas : The

Wonder- Working Magician — Life is
a Dream — ^The Purgatory of St.
Patrick. Translated by Denis
Florence^ MacCarthy. Post 8vo.
Cloth, price 10s.

CARLISLE (A. D.), B. A.
Round the World in 1870.

A Volume of Travels, with Maps.
New and Cheaper Edition. Demy
8vo. Cloth, price 6s.

CARNE (Miss E. T.).

The Realm of Truth. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5J. 6d.

CARPENTER (E.).

Narcissus and other
Poems. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price
5*-

CARPENTER (W. B.), LL.D.,
M.D., F.R.S., &c.

The Principles of Mental
Physiology. With their Applica-
tions to the Training and Discipline
of the Mind, and 3ie Study of its
Morbid Conditions. Illustrated.
Fourth Edition. 8vo. Cloth, price
X2r.

CARR (Lisle).

Judith Gwjmne. 3 vols.
Second Edition. Crown 8vo. Qoth.

CHAPMAN (Hon. Mrs. E. W.).
A Constant Heart. A Story.

2 vols. Cloth, gilt tops, price rac.

CHRISTOPHERSON (The late
Rev. Henry), M.A.

Sermons. With an Intro-
duction by John Rae, LL.D., F.S.A
First Series. Crown 8vo. Qoth,
price 7f . 6d.

Sermons. With an Intro-
duction by John Rae, LL.D., F.S.A.
Second Series. Crown 8vx>. Qoth,
price 6f.


A List of


CLAYTON (Cecil).

Effie's Game; How She
Lost and How She Won. A

NoveL 2 vols. Clotli.

CLERK (Mrs. Godfrey).

'Iiam en Nds. Historical
Tales and Anecdotes of the Times
of the Early Khalifahs. Translated
from the Arabic Originals. Illus-
trated with Historical and Explana-
tory Notes. Crown 8va Cloth, price
7*-

CLERY (C), Capt.
Minor Tactics. With 26

Maps and Plans. Third and revised
Edition. DemySvo. Cloth, price idr.

LODD (Edw^ard), P.R.A.S.

The Childhood of the
World : a Simple Account of Man
in Early Times. Third Edition.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 3J.

A Special Edition for Schools.
Price I*.

The Childhood of Reli-

l^ons. Including a Simple Account
of the Birth and Growth of Myths
and Legends. Third Thousand.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price ^r.

COLERIDGE (Sara).

Pretty Lessons in Verse
for Good Children, with some
Lessons in Latin, in Easy Rhyme.
A New Edition. Illustrated, reap.
8vo. Cloth, price 3X. td,

Phantasmion. A Fairy Tale.

With an Introductory Preface by the
Right Hon. Lord Coleridge, of
Ottery St. Mary. A New Edition.
Illustrated. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 7f. td.

Memoir and Letters of Sara

Coleridge. Edited by her Daughter.
With Index. 2 vols. With Two
Portraits. Third Edition, Revised
and Corrected. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 24J.

Cheap Edition. With one Portrait
Cloth, price 7f . dd.


COLLINS (Mortimer).
The Princess Clarice. A

Story di 1871. 2 vols. Qoth.

Squire Silchester's Whim.

3 vols. Cloth.

Miranda. A Midsmnmer
Madness. 3 vols. Cloth.

Inn of Strange Meetings,
and other Poems. Crown 8va
Cloth, price 5J.

The Secret of Long Life.

Dedicated by special permission to
Lord St. Leonards. Fourth Edition.
Large crown 8vo. Cloth, price 51.

COLLINS (Rev. R.), M.A.
Missionary Enterprise in

the East. With special reference
to the Syrian Christians of Malabar,
and the results of modem Missions.
With Four Illustrations. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price dr.

CONGREVE (Richard), M.A.,
Human Catholicism. Two

Sermons delivered at the Positivist
School on the Festival of Humanity,
87 and 88, January x, 1875 and 1876.
Demy 8va Sewed, price m.

CONWAY (Moncure D.).
Republican Superstitions.

Illustrated by the Political History
of the United States. Including a
Correspondence with M. Louis Blanc.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price sr.

CONYERS (Ansley).

Chesterleigh. 3 vols. Crown
8vo. Cloth.

COOKE (M. C), M.A., LL.D.

Fungi; their Nature, Influ-
ences, Uses, &c. Edited by the Rev.
M. J. Berkeley, M.A-, F.L.S.
With Illustrations. Second Edition.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5*.

Volume XIV. of The International
Scientific Series.


C Kegan Paul &» Co,^s Publicattons,


COOKE (Prof. J. p.), of the Har-
vard XJniversity.

The New Chemistry. With

31 Illustrations. Third Edition.
Crown 8vo. Cloth^rice 5*.

Volume IX. of The International
Scientific Series.

Scientific Culture. Crown

8vo. Cloth, price is,

COOPER (T. T.), F.R.G.S.
The Mishmee Hills: an

Account of a Journey made in an
Attempt to Penetrate Thibet from
Assam, to open New ^ Routes for
Commerce. Second Edition. With
Four Illustrations and Map. Post
8vo. Cloth, price 10s. 6d.

Comhill Library of Fiction
(The). Crown Svo. Cloth, price
31. 6d. per volume.

Half-a- Dozen Daughters. By
J. Masterman.

The House of Raby. By Mrs. G.
Hooper.

A Fight for Life. By Moy
Thomas.

Robin Gray. By Charles Gibbon.
One of Two ; or, The Left-
Handed Bride. By J. Hain Fris-
well.

God's Providence House. By
Mrs. G. L. Banks.
For Lack of Gold. By Charles
Gibbon.

Abel Drake's Wife. By John
Saunders.
Hirell. By John Satmders.

CORY (Lieut. Col. Arthur).

The Eastern Menace; or,
Shadow^s of Coming Events.
Crown Svo. Cloth, price 5*.


Cosmos.

A Poem.


Fcap. Svo. Cloth, price


COTTON (R. T.).

Mr. Carington. A Tale of
Love and Conspiracy. 3 vols. Crown
Svo. Cloth.


CRESSWELL (Mrs. G.).

The King's Banner. Dramd

in Four Acts. Five Illustrations.
4to. Cloth, price 10s. 6d.

CROMPTON (Henry).
Industrial Conciliation.

Fcap. Svo. Cloth, price 2S. 6d,

CUMMINS (H. I.), M. A.
Parochial Charities of the

City of London. Sewed, price is.

CURWEN (Henry).
Sorrow and Song: Studies

of Literary Struggle. Henry Murger
— Novalis — Alexander Pet5fi — Hon-
ot6 de Balzac — Edgar Allan Poe
— Andr€ Chdnier. 2 vols. Crown
Svo. Cloth, price 15J.

DANCE (Rev. C. D.).
Recollections of Four Years

in Venezuela. With Three Illus-
trations and a Map. Crown Svo.
Cloth, price 7s. 6d.

D'ANVERS (N. R.).
The Suez Canal: Letters

and Documents descriptive of its
Rise and Progress in 1S54-S6. By
Ferdinand de Lesseps. Translated
by. Demy Svo. Cloth, price los. 6d.

Little Minnie's Troubles.
An Every-day Chronicle. With Four
Illustrations by W. H. Hughes.
Fcap. Cloth, price 3; . 6d,

DAVIDSON (Rev. Samuel), D.D.,
LLD.

The New Testament, trans-
lated from the Latest Greek
Text of Tischendorf. A new and
thoroughly revised Edition. Post
Svo. Cloth, price los. 6d.

Canon of the Bible : Its

Formation, History, and Fluctua-
tions. Second Edition. Small crown
Svo. Cloth, price 5^.


8


A List of


DAVIES (G. Christopher).
Mountain, Meadow, and

Mere: a Series of Outdoor Sketches
of Sport, Scenery, Adventures, and
Natural History. With Sixteen Il-
lustrations by Bosworth W. Har-
court Crown 8va Qoth, price dr.

Rambles and Adventures
of Our School Field Club. With
Four Illustrations. Crown 8vo.
Qoth, price 5/.

DAVIES (Rev. J. L.), M.A.
Theology and Morality.

Essays on Questions of Belief and
Practice. Crown 8va Cloth, price
7*. (id.

DAWSON (George), M.A.
Prayers, with a Discourse

on Prayer. Edited by his Wife.
T^ird Edition. Crown 8vo. Price 6*.

DB KERKADEC (Vicomtesse
Bolange).

A Chequered Life, being
Memoirs of the Vicomtesse de Leo-
ville Meilhan. ^ Edited by. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price ^s. 6d.

DE L'HOSTE (Col. E. P.).

The Desert Pastor, Jean
Jarousseau. Translated from the
' French of Eugfcne Pelletan. With a
Frontispiece. New Edition. Fcap.
8vo. Cloth, price y. 6d.

DE RBDCLIPPE (Viscount
Stratford), P.C., K.G., G.C.B.

Why am I a Christian ?
Fifth Edition. Crown 8vo. Qoth,
price 3«.

DE TOCQUEVILLE (A.).

Correspondence and Con-
versations of, with Nassau Wil-
liam Senior, from 1834 to 1859.
Edited by M. C. M. Simpson. 2
vols. Post 8vo. Cloth, price 2z«.

DE VERE (Aubrey).
Alexander the Great. A

Dramatic Poem. Small crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 5«.

The Infant Bridal, and
Other Poems. A New and En-
larged Edition. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth,
price 7S. 6d»


DE VERE (Aubrey)— coHfmu^d:

The Legends of St. Patrick,
and Other Poems. Small crown
8vo Cloth, price 5J.

St. Thomas of Canterbury.

A Dramatic Poem. Large fcap. 8va
Qoth, price 5X.

Antar and Zara : an Eastern
Romance. Ikisfail, and other
Poems, Meditative and LyricaL
Fcap. 8vo. Price dr.

The Fall of Rora, the
Search after Proserpine, and
other Poems, Meditative and LyricaL
Fcap. 8vo. Price 6x.

DE WILLE (E.).

Under a Cloud ; or, Johan-
nes Olaf. A Novel Translated by
F. E. BunnitL 3 vols. Crown 8vo.
Qoth.

DENNIS U.X
English Sonnets. Collected
and Arranged. Elegantly bound.
Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price y. 6d.

DOBSON (Austin).

Vignettes in Rhyme and
Vers de Soci^t^. Third Edition.
Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price ss.

Proverbs in Porcelain. By

the Author of" Vignettes in Rhyme."
Crown 8vo. 6s.

DOWDEN (Edvirard), LL.D.

Shakspere : a Critical Study
of his Mind and Art. Second Edition.
Post 8vo. Cloth, price zzr.

Poems. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth,

price 5*.
DOWNTON (Rev. H.), M.A.

Hymns and Verses. Ori-

final and Translated. Small crovm
vo. Cloth, price 3^ . 6d.

DRAPER (J. W.}, M.D., LL.D..

Professor in the University oi New
York.

History of the Conflict be-
tween Religion and Science.
Ninth Edition. Crown 8va Cloth,
price 5^.

Volume XII I. of The IntematioDal
Scientific Series.


C, Kegan Paul &* Co.*s Publications.


DREW (Rev. G. S.). M.A.

Scripture Lands in con-
nection Avith their History.
Second Edition. 8vo. Cloth, price
\os. 6d.

Nazareth : Its Life and

Lessons. Third Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5s.

The Divine Kingdom on
Earth as it is in Heaven. 8vo.
Cloth, price los. 6d.

The Son of Man : His Life

and Ministry. Crown Svo. Cloth,
price 7*. 6d.

DREWRY(G. O.), M.D.

The Common-Sense
Management of the Stomach.
Third Edition. Fcap. Svo. Cloth,
price zs. 6d.

DREWRY (G. O.), M.D., and
BARTLETT (H. C), Ph.D.,
F.C.S.

Cup and Platter : or, Notes

on Food and its Effects. Small Svo.
Cloth, price 2S. 6d.

DRUMMOND (Miss).

Tripps Buildings. A Study
from Life, with Frontispiece. Small
crown Svo. Cloth, price 3*. 6d.

DU RAND (Lady).

Imitations from the Ger-
man of Spitta and Terstegen.
Fcap. Svo. Cloth, price 4J.

DU VERNOIS (Col. von Verdy).

Studies in leading Troops.

An authorized and accurate Trans-
lation by Lieutenant H. J. T.
Hildyard, 71st Foot. Parts I. and
IL Demy Svo. Cloth, price 7s.

EDEN (Frederick).

The Nile without a
Dragoman. Second Edition.
Crown Svo. Cloth, price 7*. 6d.

EDWARDS (Rev. Basil).

Minor Chords; Or, Songs
for the Suffering: a Volume of
Verse. Fcap. Svo. Cloth, price
3*. 6d. ; paper, price 2*. 6d.

EILOART (Mrs.).

Lady Moretoun's Daughter.

3 vols. Crown Svo. Cloth.


ELLIOTT (Ebenezer), The Com
La>v Rhymer.

Poems. Edited by his son,
the Rev. Edwin Elliott, of St. John's,
Antigua. 2 vols. Crown Svo. Cloth,
price iSr.

ENGLISH CLERGYMAN.

An Essay on the Rule of
Faith and Creed of Athanasius.
Shall the Rubric preceding the
Creed be removed from the Prayer-
book? Sewed. Svo. Price w.

Epic of Hades (The). Book IL

By a New Writer. Author of
•• Songs of Two Worids." Fcap. Svo.
Cloth, price 5 J.

Books I. and III. Fcap. Svo. Cloth,
price y. 6d. Complete in One Vol.
Fcap. Svo. Cloth, price 7*. 6d.

Eros Agonistes.

Poems. By E. B. D. Fcap. Svo.
Cloth, price 3^. 6d.

Essays on the Endowment
of Research.
By Various Writers.

List of Contributors.
Mark Pattison, B. D.
James S. Cotton, B. A.
Charles E. Appleton, D. O L.
Archibald H. Sayce, M.A.
Henry Clifton Sorby, F. R. S.
Thomas K. Cheyne, M. A.
W. T. Thiselton Dyer, M. A.
Henry Nettleship, M. A.

Square crown octavo. Cloth,
price lof. 6d.

EVANS (Mark).

The Story of our Father's

Love, told to Children; being a
New and Enlarged Edition of
Theology for Children. With Four
Illustrations. Fcap. Svo. Cloth,
price 3*. 6d.

A Book of Common Prayer
and Worship for Household
Use, compiled exclusively from the
Holy Scriptures. Fcap. Svo. Cloth^
price zs. 6d.

EYRE (Maj.-Gen. Sir V.), C.B.,
K.C.S.L, &c.

Lays of a Knight-Errant
in many Lands. Square croM'n
Svo. With Six Illustrations. Cloth,
price 7*. 6d.


A2


lO


A List of


FAITHFULL (Mrs. Francis G.>.
Love Me, or Love Me Not.

3 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.
PARQUHARSON (M.).

I. Elsie Dinsmore. Crown

8va Cloth, price 3*. (mL

II. Elsie's Girlhood. Crown
8vo. Qoth, price y. td.

III. Elsie's Holidajrs at
Roselands. Crown 8vo.

Qoth, price y. td.

YP^VYCE. (Mens. J.).

The Government of the
National Defence. From the 30th
Tune to the «st October, 1870.
fraiislated by H. Clark. Demy 8vo.
Cloth, price 10*. dd,

FENN (G. M.).

A Little World. A Novel,

in 3 vols.
FERRIS (Henry Weybridg^e).
Poems. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth,

price 5f .
FISHER (Alice).
His Queen. 3 vols. Crown

8vo. Cloth.
FOOTMAN (Rev. H.), M. A
From Home and Back ; or.

Some Aspects of Sin as seen in the
Light of the Parable of the ProdigaL
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5*.

FOTHERGILL (Jessie).

Aldyth : A Novel. 2 vols.
Crown 8vo. Qoth, 21*.

Healey. A Romance. 3 vols.

Crown 8vo. Cloth.

FOWLE (Rev. T. W.), M. A

The Reconciliation of Re-
ligion and Science. Being Essays
on Immortality, Inspiration, Mira-
cles, and the Being of Christ. Demy
8vo. Cloth, price lor. td.

FOX-BOURNE (H. R.).

The Life of John Locke,
1633 — 1704. 2 vols. Demy 8vo.
Cloth, pri(ft 2&r.


FRASBR (Donald).

Exchange Tables of Ster-
ling and Indian Rupee Curren-
cy, upon a new and extended system,
embracing Values from One Far-
thing to One Hundred Thousand
Pounds, and at Ratc^ progressing, in
Sixteenths of a Penny, from ix. 9</. to
ax. yi. per Rupee. Royal 8vo.
Cloth, pnce zox. oa.

FRERE(SirH. BarUe E.),G.C.B.,
G. C.S.I.

The Threatened Famine in
Bengal : How it may be Met, and
the Reciurence of Famines in India
Prevented. Being No. i of " Occa-
sional Notes on Indian Affairs."
With 3 Maps. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
prices/.

FRISWELL (J. Hain).

The Better Self. Essays for
Home Life. , Oown 8vo. Cloth,
price 6x.

One of Tv^o ; or, The Left-
Handed Bride. With a Frontis-
piece. Crown 8vo. Qoth, price
3X. &/.

GARDNER (H.X

Sunflowers. A Book of
Verses. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price 5*.

GARDNER (J.), M.D.

Longevity : The Means of
Prolonging Life after Middle
Age. Fourth Edition, revised and
enlarged. Small crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 4x.

GARRETT (E.).

By Still Waiers. A Story

for Quiet Hours. With Seven Illus-
trations. Crown 8vo. Qoth, price 6f .

GEIKIE (Cunningham), D.D.

The Life and Words of

Christ. With Map. Two vols. 4ta
bevelled boards, price 3ar.

GIBBON (Charles).

For Lack of Gold. With a
Frontispiece. Crown 8vo. Illustrated
Boards, price 2X.

Robin Gray. With a Fron-
tispiece. Crown 8va Illustrated
boards, price -zs.


C Kegan Paul 6^ Co.^s Publications^


II


GILBERT (Mrs.).
Autobiography and other
Memorials. Edited by Josiah
Gilbert. Second Edition, in 2 vols.
With 2 Steel Portraits and several
Wood Engravings. PostSvo. Cloth,
price 24J.

GILL (Rev. W. W.), B.A.

M}rths and Songs from the
South PacifiCi With a Preface by
F. Max Muller, M.A., Professor of
Comparative Philology at Oxford.
Post 8vo. Cloth, price 9;.

GODKIN (James).

The Religious History of
Ireland : Primitive, Papal, and
Protestant. Including the Evange-
lical Missions, Catholic Agitations,
and Church Progress of the last half
Century. 8vo. Cloth, price 12^.

GODWIN (WilliamX

William Godwin: His
Friends and Contemporaries.
With Portraits and Facsimiles of the
handwriting of Godwin and his Wife.
By C. Kegan Paul. 2 vols. Demy
8vo. Cloth, price 28^.

The Genius of Christianity
Unveiled. Being Essays never
before published. Edited, with a
Preface, by C Kegan Paul. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price ^s. 6d.

GOETZB (Capt. A. von).

Operations of the German
Engineers during the War of
1870- 1871. Published by Authority,
and in accordance with Official Docu-
ments. Translated from the German
by Colonel G. Graham, V.C., C.B.,
R.E. With 6 large Maps. Demy
8vo. Cloth, price 21s.

GOLDIE (Lieut. M. H. G.)

Hebe : a Tale. Fcap. 8vo.
Qoth, price 5*.

GOODENOUGH (Commodore J.
G.), R.N.,C.B.,C.M.G.

Journals of, during his Last
Command as Senior Officer on^ the
Australian Station, 18^3-1875. Edited,
with a Memoir, by his Widow. With
Maps, Woodcuts, and Steel En-
graved Portrait. Second Edition.
Square post 8vo. Cloth, price 14&


GOODMAN CW.).

Cuba, the Pearl of the
Antilles. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
•js. 6d.

GOULD (Rev. S. Baring), M.A.
The Vicar of Morwenstow:

a Memoir of the Rev. R. S. Hawker.
With Portrait. Third Edition, re-
vised. Square post 8 vo. Cloth, lof. 6</.

GRANVILLE (A. B.), M.D..
F.R.S.,&c.

Autobiography of A. B.
Granville, F. R. S., etc. Edited,
with a brief account of the concluding
years of his life, by his youngest
Daughter, Paulina B. Granville. 2
vols. With a Portrait. Second Edi-
tion. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price 32*.

GRAY (Mrs. RussellX
Lisette's Venture. A Novel.

2 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.

GREENWOOD (J.), *' The Ama-
teur Casual."

In Strange Company; or,
The Note Book of a Roving Corre-
spondent. Second Edition. Crown
8vo. Qoth, price 6s.

GREY (John), of Dilston.
John Grey (of Dilston) :

Memoirs. By Josephine E. Butler.
New and Revised Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 3J. 6d.

GRIFFITH (Rev. T.), A.M.

Studies of the Divine Mas-
ter. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price 12*.


GRIFFITHS (Capt- Arthur).

Memorials of Millbank,and
Chapters in Prison History.
With Illustrations by R. Goff and
the Author. 2 vols. Post8vo. Cloth,
price 21S,

The Queen's Shilling. A
Novel. 2 vob. Cloth.


12


A List of


GRIM LEY (Rev. H. N.), M.A.,

Professor of Mathematics in the
University College of Wales, and
Chaplain of Tremadoc Church.

Tremadoc Sermons, chiefly
on the Spiritual Body, the Unseen
World, and the Divine Humanity.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 7*. td.

GRUNER(M. L).
Studies of Blast Furnace

Phenomena. Translated by L. D.
B. Gordon, F.R.S.E., F.G.S. Demy
8vo. Cloth, price ^s. 6d.

GURNEY(Rev. Archer).
Words of Faith and Cheer.

A Mission of Instruction and Sugges-
tion. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 6s.

First Principles in Church

and State. Demy 8vo. Sewed,
price \s. td.

HAECKEL (Prof. Ernst).
The History of Creation.

Translation revised by Professor E.
Ray Lankester, M.A., F.R.S. With
Coloured Plates and Genealogical
Trees of the various groups of both
plants and animals. 2 vols. Second
Sedition. Post 8vo. Cloth, price 32*.

HARCOURT (Capt. A. F. P.).
The Shakespeare Argosy.

Containing much of the wealth of
Shakespeare's Wisdom and Wit,
alphabetically arranged and classi-
fied. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price ts.

HARRISON (Lieut. -Col. R).

The Officer's Memoran-
dum Book for Peace and War.

Oblong 32mo. roan, elastic band and
pencil, price 2J. td. \ russia, 5J.

HAWEIS (Rev. H. R.), M.A.
Current Coin. Materialism —

The Devil — Crime — Drunkenness —
Pauperism — Emotion — R ecreation —
The Sabbath. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 6j.

Speech in Season. Third
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price

Thoughts for the Times.

Ninth Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price ^s. 6d.


HAWEIS (Rev. H. ^.)-continued.
Unsectarian Family

Prayers, for Morning and Evening
for a Week, with short selected
passages from the Bible. Square
crown 8vo. Cloth, price 35. 6d.

HAWTHORNE (Julian).

Bressant. A Romance. 2
vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.

Idolatry. A Romance. 2 vols.

Crown 8vo. Cloth.

HAWTHORNE (Nathaniel).

Septimius. A Romance.
Second Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price Qj.

HAYMAN (H.), D.D., late Head
Master of Rugby School.

Rugby School Sermons.

With an Introductory Essay on the
Indwelling of the Holy Spirit.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 7*. td.

Heathergate.

A Story of Scottish Life and Cha-
racter. By a New Author. 2 vols.
Crown 8vo. Cloth.

HELLWALD (Baron F. von).
The Russians in Central
Asia. A Critical Examination,
down to the present time, of the
Geography and History of Central
Asia. Translated by Lieut. -CoL
Theodore Wirgman, LL.B. Large
post 8vo. With Map. Cloth,
price 1 2 J.

HELVIG (Capt. H.).

The Operations of the Ba-
varian Army Corps. Translated
by Captain G. S. Schwabc. With
\ ive large Maj^. In 2 vols. Demy
8vo. Cloth, price 24J.

HINTON (James).
The Place of the Physician.

To which is added Essays on the
Law of Human Life, and on thb
Relation between Organic and
Inorganic Worlds. Second Edi-
tion. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 3J. 6</.

Physiology for Practical

Use. By various Writers. With

fo Illustrations. 2 vols. Second
idition. Crown Svo. Cloth, price
I2J. td.


C Kegan Paul 6^ Co,^s Publications,


13


HINTON (James)-<^«//««^</;

An Atlas of Diseases of the
Membrana Tympani. With De-
scriptive Text. PostSvo. Price ;^6df.

The Questions of Aural
Surgery. With Illustrations. 2 vols.
Post 8vo. Cloth, price X2S. 6d.

H. J. C.
The Art of Furnishing.

A Popular Treatise on the Principles
of Furnishing, based on the Laws of
Conunon Sense, Requirement, and
Picturesque Effect. Small crown
8vo. Cloth, price y. 6d,

HOCKLEY (W. B.).
Tales of the Zenana; or,

A Nuwab's Leisure Hours. By the
Author of " Pandurang Hari." With
a Preface by Lord Stanley of Alder-
ley. 2 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 21^.

Pandurang Hari; or, Me-
moirs of a Hindoo. A Tale of
Mahratta Life sixty years ago. With
a Preface by Su: H. Bartle E.
Frere, G.C.S.I.^&c 2 vols. Crown
Svo. Cloth, price 2z^.

HOFPBAUER (Capt.).

The German Artillery in
the Battles near Metz. Based
on the official reports of the German
Artillery. Translated by Capt. E.
O. HoUist. With Map and Plans.
Demy Svo. Cloth, price 21*.

Hogan, M.P.

A Novel. 3 vols. Crown Svo. Qoth.

HOLMES (E. G. A.).

Poems. Fcap. Svo. Cloth,
price 5^ .

HOLROYD (Major W. R. M.)

Tas-hil ul Kalam ; or,
Hindustani made Easy. Crown Svo.
Cloth, price 5*.

HOOPER (Mary).

Little Dinners: How to
Serve them with Elegance and
Economy. Twelfth Edition.

Crown Svo. Cloth, price 5*.


HOOPER {VLasy)— continued.

Cookery for Invalids, Per-
sons of Delicate Digestion, and
Children. Crown Svo. Cloth, price
3f. 6d.

HOOPER (Mrs. G.).

The House of Raby. With

a Frontispiece. Crown 8va Cloth,
price 3f . 6d,

HOPKINS (M.).
The Port of Refuge; or,

Counsel and Aid to Shipmasters in
Difficulty, Doubt, or Distress. Crown
Svo. Second and Revised Edition.
Cloth, price 6s.

HORNE (William), M.A.
Reason and Revelation :

an Examination into the Nature and
Contents of Scripture Revelation, as
compared with other Forms of Truth.
Demy Svo. Cloth, price zar.

HOWARD (Mary M.).

Beatrice Aylmer, and other
Tales. Crown Svo. Cloth, price 6s.

HOWARD (Rev. G. B.).

An Old Legend of St.
Paul's. Fcap. Svo. Cloth, price
4^. 6d.

HOWELL (James).

A Tale of the Sea, Son-
nets, and other Poems. Fcap.
Svo. Cloth, price 5*.

HUGHES (AUison).
Penelope and other Poems.

Fcap. Svo. Cloth, price ^. 6d.

HULL (Edmund C. P.).

The European in India.

With a Medical Guide for Anglo-
Indians. By R. R. S. Mair, M.D.,
F.R.C.S.E. Second Edition, Revised
and Corrected. Post Svo. Cloth,
price dr.

HUMPHREY (Rev. W.).

Mr. Fitzjames Stephen and
Cardinal Bellarmine. Demy Svo.
Sewed, price is.


14


A List of


HUTTON (Jamei).

Missionary Life in the
Southern Seas. With Illustrations.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 7*. td.

IGNOTUS.
Culmshire Folk. A Novel.

New and Cheaper Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price dr.

INCHBOLD (J- W.).

Annus Amoris. Sonnets.
Foolscap 8vo. Cloth, price 4^. 6</.

INGELOW (Jean).
The Little Wonder-horn.

A Second Series of " Stories Told to
a Child." With Fifteen Illustrations.
Square 24mo. Cloth, price 35. (>d.

Off the Skelligs. (Her First
Romance.) 4 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.

Indian Bishoprics. By an

Indian Churchman. Demy 8vo.» dd.

International Scientific
Series (The).

I. The Forms of Water in
Clouds and Rivers, Ice and
Glaciers. By J. Tyndall, LL.D.,
F.R.S. With 25 Illustrations. Sixth
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5*.

II Physics and Politics ; or.
Thoughts on the Application of the
Principles of " Natural Selection "
and "Inheritance" to Political So-
ciety. By Walter Bagehot. Third
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 4; .

III. Foods. By Edward Smith,
M.D., LL.B., F.R.S. With nu-
merous Illustrations. Fourth Edition.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5*.

IV. Mind and Body : The Theo-
ries of their Relation. By Alexander
Bain, LL.D. W^'^^ 1^°"^ Illustra-
tions. Fifth Edition. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price \s.

V. The Study of Sociolo^.
By Herbert Spencer. Sixth Edition.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5*.

VI. On the Conservation of
Energy. By Balfour Stewart, M. A.,
LL. D. , F. R. S. With 14 Illustrations.
Third Edition. Crown 8va Cloth,
price 5*.


International Scientific
Series (The) — continued,

VII. Animal Locomotion ; or.
Walking, Swimming, and Flying.
By J. B. Pettiarew, M.D., F.R.S.,
etc. With 130 Illustradons. Secood
Edition. Crown 8va Cloth, price 51.

VIII. Responsibility in Mental
Disease. By Henry Maudsley,
M.D. Second Edition. Crown 8va
Cloth, price 5f .

IX. The New Chemistry. By
Professor J. P. Cooke, of the Har-
vard Unixersity. ^ With 31 Illustra-
tions. Third Edition. Crown Svo.
Cloth, price 5f.

X. The Science of Lav7. By
Professor Sheldon Amos. Second
Edition. Crown Sva Cloth, price 5«.

XL Animal Mechanism. A
Treatise on Terrestrial and Aerial
Locomotion. By Professor £. J.
Marey. With 1x7 Illustrations.
Second Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 9r*

XII. The Doctrine of* Descent
and Danvinism. By Professor Os-
car Schmidt (Strasburg UniversityX
With 36 Illustrations. Third Edi-
tion. Crown Svo. Cloth, price 5^.

XIII. The History of the Con-
flict betiveen Religion and Sci-
ence. By J. W. Draper, M.D.,
LL.D. Ninth Edition. Crown
Svo. Qoth, price 5*.

XIV. Fungi ; their Nature, In-
fluences, Uses, &c. By M. C
Cooke, M.A., LL.D. Edited by
the Rev. M. J. Berkeley, M.A.,
F.L.S. With numerous Illustrations.
Second Edition. Crown Svo. Qoth,
price 5*.

XV. The Chemical Effects of
Light and Photography. By Dr.
Hermann Vogel (Polytechnic Aca-
demy of Berlin). Translation tho-
roughly revised. With loo Illustra-
tions. Third Edition. Crown 8va
Cloth, price 5*.

XVI. The Life and Growth of
Language. By William Dwight
Whitney, Professor of Sanskrit and
Comparative Philology in Yale Col-
lege, New Haven. Second Edition.
Crown 8va Cloth, prica


C. Kegan Paul &• Co.'s Publications.


International Scienlil

Series (The) — contintad.
XVII. Money and the Meet


Profss.


- of Physics


mo-lilhoEiaphy. Sicand Edilion,
Crowu tlvo. Doth, price 5*.
XIX. Animal Parasitca and
MeHmates. Bv Monsieur Vai
ofAeUniveisiij

""" ilh Sj lllui


tAdons. Second Edition.
8vo. Ciolh, price ji.
XX. Fermentation. By Profess
Sdlutzenberger, Director of II
Chemical OiboTalory al the So
bonoe. WiLhiSIiluairalioni. Seccc
Edition. C[0»d 8vo. Cloih.prices


. Wilh gi lllusi
:diiioD. Crown S


XXII. The Thi


KXII. The Theory o(
ita Relation to M^isii


Prof, A.C.Rai.sav,LI,D.,F.R.S.
Eanh Sculplun: Hills, Valleni,
Mountains, Plains. Rii-ers. Lakes ;
how they were Produced, and bow
they have been Destroyed.
Prof. J. RosBNTHAL. General Phy-

P. Bhrt (Professor of Physiology,
ParisJ. FoTuis of Life and olAet


Prof. CoBP


M.A.,


JACKSON (T. C),

Modern Gothic Architec-
ture. Crown Svo. Cloth, price 51.

JACOB (HMJ.-Oen. Sir O. Le
Grand), KX.S.I., C.B.
Western India Before and
during the Mutinies, i^ctuiet
drawn fium life. Second Edition.


iTO. Qoth, price 51.
Forthioming Volumes.


F.R.S.E. Mind in the Lower

Sir John Lubbock, Bart,, F.R.S.
On Ants and Bees.


JENKINS (E.) and RAYMOND
U-), Eaqa.
A Legal Handbook for

ingOwDcra. Second' Edition Re-
vised. Crown Svo. Ooth, price 6(.

JENKINS (Rev. R. C), M.A.
The Privilege of Peter and

the Cl^ms of the Roman Church
confronted with the Scripturs, tlie
Councils, and the Tesriiuony of the
Popes themselvet. Pcap.Svo. Cloth,
Krice 3£. W.

JENNINGS (Mrs. Vau[haii).
Rabel ; Her Life and Let-
tera. With a Portrait from the
Painling hy DafGnget, Square past
Svo. Cloti, price 7r. 6J:


i6


A List of


JEVONS (W. Stanley), M.A.,
F.R.S.

Money and the Mechanism
of Exchange. Second Eklition.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5/.

VolumeXVII. of The International
Scientific Series.

JONES (Lucy).

Puddings and Sweets. Being

Three Hundred and Sixtjr-Five
Receipts s^>proved by Experience.
Crown 8vo., price ax. (id.

KAUPMANN (Rev. M.), B.A.

Socialism : Its Nature, its
Dangers, and its Remedies con-
sidered. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
^s. bd.

KEATINGE (Mrs.).

Honor Blake : The Story of
a Plain Woman, a vols. Crown
Syo. Cloth.

KER (David).

The Boy Slave in Bokhara.

A Tale of Central Asia. WithlUus-
tratimis. Crown Svo. Cloth, price ^r .

The Wild Horseman of
the Pampas. ^ Illustrated. Crown
Svo. Cloth, price 5X.

KING (Alice).

A Cluster of Lives. Crown
8va Cloth, price ^s. 6d.

KING (Mrs. Hamilton).
The Disciples. A New

Poem. Third Edition, with some
Notes. Crown Sva Cloth, price
js. 6d.

Aspromonte, and other
Poems. Second Edition. Fcap.
Svo. Cloth, price 4s. 6d.

KINGSFORD(Rev. F.W.),M.A.,

Vicar of St. Thomas's, Stamford Hill ;
late Chaplain H. £. I. C. (Bengal
Presidency).

Hartham Conferences; or,

Discussions upon some of the Religi-
ous Topics of the Day. " Audi alte-
ram partem." Crown Svo. Cloth,
price 3x. 6d,


KINGSLEY (Charles), M.A.
Letters and Memories of

his Life. Edited fay his Wifb.
With 2 Steel engraved Portraits and
numerous Illustrations on Wood, and
a Facsimile of his Handwriting.
Eighth Edition. 3 vols.» demy Svo.
Cloth, price 36^.

KNIGHT (A. F. C).
Poems. Fcap 8vo. Cloth,

price s*-
LACORDAIRE (Rev. Pfere).
Life : Conferences delivered
at Toulouse. A New and Cheaper
Edition. Crown Svo. Cloth, pnce
3X. 6d.

Lady of Lipari (The).
A Poem in Three Cantos. Fcap.
Svo. Cloth, price 5^ .

LAMBERT (Cowley), P.R.G.S.
A Trip to Cashmere and

Ladik. With numerous Illustra-
tions. Crown Svo. Cloth, js. 6d,

LAURIE (J. S.).

Educational Course of
Secular School Books for India :

The First Hindustani
Reader. Stiff linen wn4>per, price 6</.

The Second Hindustani

Reader. Stifflinenwrapper,price6</.

The Oriental (English)
Reader. Book I., i)rice 6d. ; II.,
price j^d. ; III., price gd. ; IV.,
price IS.

Geography of India ; with

Ma^ and Historical Appendix,
tracing the Growth of the British
Empire in Hindustan. Fcap. Svo.
Cloth, price IS. 6d.

LAYMANN (Capt.).
The Frontal Attack of
Infantry. Trsmslated by Colonel
Edward Newdigate. Crown Svo.
Cloth, price as. 6d.

L. D. S.
Letters from China and

[apan. With Illustrated Title-page,
^rown Svo. Cloth, price 7*. 6a.

LEANDER (Richard).
Fantastic Stories. Trans-
lated from the German by Paulina
B. Granville. With Ei^ht full-page
Illustrations by M. E. Fraser-Tytler.
Crown Svo. Cloth, pnce 5X.


Ci


C, Kegan Paul 6^ Co.^s Publications,


17


LEATHES (Rev. S.)» M.A.
The Gospel Its Own Wit-
ness. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price s*.

LEE (Rev. F. G.), D.C.L.
The Other World; or,

Glimpses of the Supernatural. 2 vols.
^ A New Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 15J.

LEE (Holme).
Her Title of Honour. A

Book for Girls. New Edition. With
a Frontispiece. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5^.

LENOIR (J.).

Fayoum; or, Artists in Egvpt.
A Tour with M. G^rome and others.
With 13 Illustrations. A New and
Cheaper Edition. Crown Bvo. Cloth,
price 3*. (>d.

LEWIS (Mary A.).
A Rat with Three Tales.

With Four Illustrations by Catherine
F. Frere. Cloth, price 5J.

LISTADO (J. T.).
Civil Service.

3 vols. Crown 8vo.


A Novel.
Cloth.


LOCKER (P.).

London Lyrics. A New and
Revised Edition, with Additions and
a Portrait of the Author. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, elegant, price 7*. (>d.

LOMMEL (Dr. E.).
The Nature of Light : With

a General Account of Physical Optics.
Second Edition. With 188 Illustra-
tions and a Table of Spectra in
Chromo-lithc^fraphy. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price w.

Volume XVIII. of The Interna-
tional Scientific Series.

LORIMER (Peter), D.D.
John Knox and the Church

ofEnjgfland; His Work in her Pulpit,
and his Influence upon her Liturgy,
Articles, and Parties. Demy 8vo.
Cloth, price I2J.

LOTHIAN (Roxburghe).

Dante and Beatrice from
1283 to lago. A Romance. 2 vols.
Post 8vo. Cloth, price 24;.


LOVEL (Edward).
The Owl's Nest in the City:

A Story. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price
lof . td.

LOVER (Samuel), R.H.A.
The Life of Samuel Lover,

R. H. A. ; Artistic, Literary, and
Musical. With Selections from his
Unpublished Papers and Correspon-
dence. By Bayle Bernard. 2 vols.
With a Portrait. Post 8vo. Cloth,
price 2ZJ.

LOWER (M. A.), M.A., P.S.A.

Wayside Notes in Scandi-
navia. Being Notes of Travel in
the North of Europe. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 9*.

LUCAS (Alice).

Translations from the
Works of German Poets of the
i8th and 19th Centuries. Fcap.
8vo. Cloth, price 5*.

LYONS (R. T.), Surg.-Maj. Ben-
gal Army.

A Treatise on Relapsing
Fever. Post8vo. Cloth, price 7*. 6</.

MACAU LAY (J.), M.A., M.D.,
Edin.

The Truth about Ireland:

Tours of Observation in 1872 and
1875. With Remarks on Irish Public
Questions. Being a Second Edition
of " Ireland in 1872," with a New
and Supplementary Rreface. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 3J. td.

MAC CLINTOCK (L.).

Sir Spangle and the Dingy

Hen. Illustrated. Square crown
8vo.* price 2j. td,

MAC DONALD (Q.).

Malcolm. With Portrait of
the Author engraved on Steel. Crown
8vo. Price ds.

St. George and St. Michael.

3 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.

MACLACHLAN (A. N. C), M.A.

William Augustus, Duke
of Cumberland : being a Sketch of
his Military Life and Character,
chiefly as exhibited in the General
Orders of His Royal Highness,
1745 — 1747. With Illustrations. Post
8vo. Cloth, price 15^.


i8


A List of


if AC KENNA (S. J.).
Plucky Fellows. A Book
iot Boy\, ^Mth Sue insstiadoos.
Secood Edition. OoimSvo. Ooch,
price y. td.

At School with an Old

Dragoon, ^^'ith Six Ulastjadoos.
S«»ad Edidon. Cro«rn Svo. Cloch,
price 5X.

if AIR (R. S.), if .D., P.R.C.S.E.
The Medical Guide for
Anglo-Indians. Beii^ a Compen-
dium of Advice to Europeans ^ in
India, relating to the Preservation
and R^nlation of Health. With a
Sapplement on the Management of
Children in India. Crown Svq. Limp
doch, price yt. 6d.

if ANNING (His Eminence Car-
dinal).

Essays on Religion and

Literature. By various Writers.
Third Series. Demy 8vo. Ck^ch,
price zor. 6d.

The Independence of the

Holy See, with an Appendix con-
taining the Papal Allocution and a
transl^on. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price

if AREY (E. J.).
Animal Mechanics. A

Treatise on Terrestrial and Aerial
Locomotion. With X17 Illustrations.
Stcond Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5*.

Volume XI. of The International
Scientific Scries.

MARKEWITCH (B.).

The Neglected Question.

Translated from the Russian, by the
Princess Ourousoff, and dedicated by
Express Permission to Her Imperial
and Royal Highness Marie Alexan-
drovna, the Duchess of Edinbtirgh.
2 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 14J.

if ARRIOTT (Mj^.-Gen. W. P.),
C.S.I.
A Grammar of Political

Economy. Crown Svo. Qoth,
price ts.

if ARSHALL (H.).

The Story of Sir Edward's
Wife. A Novel. Crown Svo. Cloth,
price 10s. 6d,


MASTERMAN (J-)-
Half-a-dozen Daughters.

With a Frootispieoe.
Ckxh, price 3f. 6d.


Crown 8vo.


ifAUDSEY (Dr. H.).

Responsibility in Mental
Disease. §ec»Dd Editioo. Crown
8to. Cloth, price 5^.

Votnme VIII. of The Interoatiooal
Scientific


if AUGHAN (W. C).
The Alps of Arabia; or,

Travcb through Egypt, Sinai, Ara-
bia, and the Holy Land. With Man.
Second Edition. Demy Svo. Qoth,
price ST.

MAURICE (C. E.).

Lives of English Popular
Leaders. No. i.— Stephen Lamg-
Tox. Crown Svo. Cloth, price js.6d.
No. 2. — ^TvLEB, Ball, and Old-
castle. Crown Svo. QoCh, {vice
js. 6d.

Mazzini (Joseph).

A Memoir. By E. A. V. Two
Photographic Portraits. Second
Edition. Crown Svo. Qoch, {vice
5*.

if EDLEY(Lieat.-Col. J. G.),R.B.

An Autumn Tour in the
United States and Canada.
Crown Svo. Qoth, price sr.

MENZIES (Sutherland).

Memoirs of Distinguished
Women. 2 vols. Post Svo. Qoth,
price lor. 6d,

MICKLETHWAITE (J. T.),
F.S.A.

Modem Parish Churches :

Their Plan, Design, and Furniture.
Crown Svo. Cloth, price "js. 6d,

MILNE (James).
Tables of Exchange for the

Conversion of Sterling Money into
Indian and Ceylon Currency, at
Rates from is. Sd. to ar. 3a. per
Rupee. Second Edition. Demy
Svo. Qoth, price £2 as.


C, Kegan Paul &* CoJs Publications,


19


MIRUS (M^.-Gen. von).

Cavalry Field Duty. Trans-
lated by Major Frank S. Russell,
14th (King's) Hussars. Crown 8vo.
Cloth limp, price 7^ . td,

MIVART (St. George), F.R.S.
Contemporary Evolution :

An Essay on some recent Social
Chanees. Post 8vo. Cloth, price
^s. 6a.

MOCKLER (E.).

A Grammar of the Baloo-

chee Language, as it is spoken in
Makran (Ancient Gedrosia), in the
Persia-Arabic and Roman characters.
Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price 5*.

MOORE (Rev. D.), M.A.
Christ and His Church.

By the Author of " The Age and the
Gospel," &c. Crown Svo. Cloth,
price y, 6d.

MOORE (Rev. T.).

Sermonettes : on Synony-
mous Texts, taken from the Bible
and Book of Common Prayer, for
the Study, Family Reading, and
Private Devotion. Small crown Svo.
Cloth, price 4^. 6d.

MORELL (J. R.).

Euclid Simplified in Me-
thod and Language. Being a
Manual of Geometry. Compiled from
the most important French Works,
approved by the University of Paris
and the Mmister of Public Instruc-
tion. Fcap. Svo. Cloth, price 2* . 6d.

MORICE (Rev. F. D.), M.A.

The Olympian and Pjrthian
Odes of Pindar. A New Transla-
tion in English Verse. Crown Svo.
Cloth, price js. 6d.

MORLEY (Susan).
Aileen Ferrers. A Novel.

s vols. Crown Svo. Cloth.

Throstlethwaite. A Novel.
3 vols. Crown Svo. Cloth.

MORSE (E. S.), Ph.D.
First Book of Zoology.

With numerous Illustrations. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5; .


MOSTYN (Sydney).

Perplexity. A Novel. 3 vols.
Crown Svo. Cloth.

MUSGRAVE (Anthony).

Studies in Political Eco-
nomy. Crown Svo. Cloth, price ts.

My Sister Rosalind.

A Novel. By the Author of ** Chris •
tiana North," and ** Under the
Limes." 2 vols. Cloth.

NAAKE (J. T.).
Slavonic Fairy Tales.

From Russian, Servian, Polish, and
Bohemian Sources. Witii Four Illus-
trations. Crown Svo. Cloth, price 5^.

NEWMAN (J. H.), D.D.

Characteristics from the
Writings of. Being Selections
from his various Works. Arranged
with the Author's personal approval.
Third Edition. With Portrait.
Crown Svo. Cloth, price 6s.

%* A Portrait of the Rev. Dr. J. H.
Newman, mounted for framing, can
be had, price 2s. 6d.

NEW WRITER (A).
Songs of Two Worlds.

By a New Writer. Third Series.
Second Edition. Fcap. Svo. Cloth,
price 5*.

The Epic of Hades. Second
Edition. Fcap. Svo. Cloth, price
7^ . 6d.

NOBLE (J. A.).

The Pelican Papers.

Reminiscences and Remains of a
Dweller in the Wilderness. Crown
Svo. Cloth, price 6; .

NORMAN PEOPLE (The).
The Norman People, and

their Existing Descendants in the
British Dominions and the United
States of America. Demy Svo.
Cloth, price 2if.

NORRIS (Rev. Alfred).

The Inner and Outer Life
Poems. Fcap. Svo. Cloth, price 6s.

Northern Question (The) ;

Or, Russia's Policy in Turkey un-
masked. Demy Svo. Sewed, pnce zj.


20


AUstof


NOTREGE (John), A.M.
The Spiritual Function of
a Presbyter in the Church of
England. Crown 8va Qoch, red
edges, price y. 6</.

Oriental Sporting Magazine
(The).

A Reprint of die first 5 Volumes,
in 2 Volumes. Demy Sva Cloth,
price 28f .

Our Increasing Military Dif-
ficulty, and one Wav of Meeting it.
Demy 8vo. StitchetC price w.

PAGE (Capt. S. P.).

Discipline and Drill. Cheaper
Exiition. Crown 8va Price zx.

PANDURANG HARI;
Or, Memoirs of a Hindoo.

With an Introductory Preface by Sir
H. Baitle E. Frere, G.CS.I., CB.
Crown 8vo. Price 6».

PARKER Joseph), D.D.
The Paraclete: An Essay

on the Personality and Ministry of
the Holy Ghost, with some reference
to current discussions. Second Edi-
tion. Demy Svo. Qoth, price i2x.

PARR (Harriet).
Echoes of a Famous Year.

Crown Svo. Qoth, price &r. 6d.

PAUL (C. Kegan).
Goethe's Faust.

Translation in Rime.
Qoth, price 6f .

William Godwin : His
Priends and Contemporaries.

With Portraits and Facsimiles of the
Handwriting of Godwin and his
Wife. 2 vols. Square post Svo.
Qoth, price aSf.

The Genius of Christianity

Unveiled. Being Essays by William
Godwin never before published.
Eldited, with a Preface, by C
K^an PauL Crown Sva Cloth,
price ^s. 6d.

PAYNE (John).

Songs of Life and Death.
Crown Svo Cloth, price st.


A New

Crown Svo.


Education.


PAYNE (Prof.).
Lectures on

Price 6</. each.

I. Pestalozzi : die Inflnence of His
Principles and Practice.

II. FrObd and the Kiadexgsaten
System. Second Edition.

IIL The Science and Art of Educa-
tion.

IV. The True Foundation of Scienoe
Teaching.

A Visit to German Schools :
Elementary Schools in Ger-
many. Notes of a Professional Tour
to inspect some of the Kindergartens,
Primary Schools, PuUic Gtris
Schools, and Schools for Technical
Instruction in Hamburgh, Berlin,
Dresden, Weimar, Gotha, Eisenach,
- in the autumn of 1874. With Critical
Discussions of the General Principles
and Practice of Kindergartens and
other Schemes of Elementary £dn>
cation. Crown Svo. Cloth, price

PEACOCKE (Georgiana).
Ra3rs from the Southern

Cross : Poems. Crown Svo. With
Sixteen Full-page Illustrations
by the Rev. P. Walsh. Qoth elegant,
price lor. 6d.

PELLETAN (E.).

The Desert Pastor, Jean

Jarousseao. Translated fitmi the
French. By Colonel E. P. De
L'Hoste. With a Fronti^iece. New
Edition. Fc^>. Sva Cloth, price

PENNELL (H. Cholmondeley).
Pegasus Resaddled. By

the Author of " Puck on Pegasus,"
&c. &c With Ten Full-page lUus-
trations by George Du Alaurier.
Fcap. 4to. Clom el^ant, price
12s. 6d.

PEN RICE (Maj. J.), B.A.

A Dictionary and Glossary

of the Ko-ran. With c^ious Cyram-
matical References and Explanations
of the Text. 4to. Qoth, price 2U.

PERCEVAL (Rev. P.).

Tamil Proverbs, with their

English Translation. Containing
upwards of Six Thousand Proverb®.
Tliird Edition. Demy Svo. Sewed,
price 9r.


C, Kegan Paul 6r» C6,h Publications,


21


PERRY (Rev. S. J.), F.R.S.

Notes of a Voyage to Ker-
guelen Island, to observe the
Transit of Venus. DemySvo. Sewed,
price 2J.

PESCHEL (Dr. Oscar).

The Races of Man and

their Geographical Distribution.
Large crown 8vo. Cloth, price 9J.

PETTIGREW (J. Bell), M.D.,
F.R.S.

Animal Locomotion ; or,

Walking, Swimming, ^nd Flying^.
With 130 Illustrations. Second Edi-
tion. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5J.

Volume VII. of The International
Scientific Series.

PFEIFFER (Emily).

Glan Alarch: His Silence
and Song. A Poem. Crown 8vo.,
price ds.

PIGGOT (J.), F.S.A., F.R.G.S.

Persia — Ancient and Mo-
dern. Post Svo. Cloth, price xos. td.

POUSHKIN (A. S.).
Russian Romance.

Translated from the Tales of Belkin,
etc. By Mrs. J. Buchan Telfer {nie
Mouravieff). Crown Svo. Cloth,
price ^s. td.

POWER (H.).

Our Invalids : How shall
we Employ and Amuse Them ?
Fcap. Svo. Cloth, price 2J. dd,

POWLETT (Lieut. N.), R.A.

Eastern Legends and
Stories in English Verse. Crown
Svo. Cloth, price 5J.

PRESBYTER. '
Unfoldings of Christian

Hope. An Essay showing that the
Doctrine contained in the Damna-
tory Clauses of the Creed commonly
called Athanasian is unscriptural.
Small crown Svo. Cloth, price 4^. dd,

PRICE (Prof. Bonamy).

Currency and Banking.
Crown Svo. Cloth, price (a.


PROCTOR (Richard A.), B.A.
Our Place among Infinities.

A Series of Essays contrasting our
little abode in space and time with
the Infinities around us. To which
are added Essays on "Astrology,"
and " The Jewish Sabbath." Second
Edition. Crown Svo. Cloth, price

The Expanse of Heaven.

A Series of Essays on the Wonders
of the Firmament. With a Frontis-
piece. Second Edition. Crown Svo.
Cloth, price ts.

PUBLIC SCHOOLBOY.

The Volunteer, the Militia-
man, and the Regular Soldier.
Crown Svo. Cloth, price 5*.

RANKING (B. M.).

Streams from Hidden
Sources. Crown Svo. Cloth, price
ts.

REANEY (Mrs. G. S.).

Waking and Working ; or,
from Girlhood to Womanhood.
With a Frontispiece. Crown Svo.
Cloth, price 5J.

Sunbeam ^Villie, and other

Stories. Three Illustrations. Royal
i6mo. Cloth, price \s. 6d.

Reginald Bramble.

A Cynic of the Nineteenth Century.
An Autobiography. Crown Svo.
Cloth, price 10s. 6d.

RHOADES (James).

Timoleon. A Dramatic Poem.
Fcap. Svo. Cloth, price 5s.

RIBOT (Prof. Th.).

Contemporary English Psy-
chology. Second Edition. A Re-
vised and Corrected Translation from
the latest French Edition. Large
post Svo. Cloth, price 9*.

Heredity : A Psychological
Study on its Phenomena, its Laws,
its Causes, and its Consequences.
Large crown Svo. Cloth, price gs.


22


A List of


RINK (Chevalier Dr. Henry).
Qreenland : Its People and

its Products. By the Chevalier
Dr. Henry Rink, President of the
Greenland Board of Trade. With
sixteen Illustrations, drawn by the
Eskimo, and a Map. Edited by Dr.
Robert Brown. Crown 8vo. Price
xof. dd.

ROBERTSON (The Late Rev.
F. W.), M.A., of Brighton.

Notes on Genesis. Crown

8vo., price 5J.

New attd Cheaper Editions : —

The Late Rev. F. W.
Robertson, M.A., Life and Let-
ters of. Edited by the Rev. Stop-
ford Brooke, M.A., Chaplain in Or-
dinary to the Queen.

I. 2 vols., uniform with the Ser-
mons. With Steel Portrait. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 7^. 6d.

II. Library Edition, in Demy Bvo.,
*rith Two Steel Portraits. Cloth,
price I2S.

III. A Popular Edition, in i vol.
Crown Bvo. Cloth, price 6s.

Sermons. Four Series. Small
crown 8vo. Cloth, price 3*. 6d. each.

Expository Lectures on
St. Paul's Epistles to the Co-
rinthians. A New Edition. Small
crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5*.

Lectures and Addresses,

with other literary remains. A New
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5J.

An Analysis of Mr. Tenny-
son's ** In Memoriam." (Dedi-
cated by Permission to the Poet-
Laureate.) Fcap. 8vo. Cloth, price 2s.

The Education of the

Human Race. Translated from
the German of Gotthold Ephraim
Lessing. Fcap. Bvo. Cloth, price
zs. 6d.

The above JVorks can also be had
bound in half -morocco.

*#* A Portrait of the late Rev. F. W.
Robertson, mounted for framing, can
be had, price zr . dcL


ROSS (Mrs. E.), ("Nelsie Brook").

Daddy's Pet. A Sketch
from Humble Life. With Six Illus-
trations. Royal i6mo. Cloth, price
If.

RUSSELL (E. R.).

Irving as Hamlet. Second

Edition. Demy 8vo. Sewed, price

IX.

RUSSELL (Major Prank S.).
Russian ^Vars with Turkey.

With Two Maps. Crown 8 vo., price

RUSSELL (W. C).

Memoirs of Mrs. Laetitia
Boothby. Crown Bvo. Cloth, price
7*. dd.

SADLER (S. W.), R.N.

The African Cruiser. A

Midshipman's Adventures on the
^yest Coast. With Three Illustra-
tions. Second Edition. Crown Bvo.
Cloth, price 3*. (td.

SAMAROW (G.).
For Sceptre and Crown. A

Romance of the Present Time.
Translated by Fanny Wormald. 2
vols. Crown Bvo. Cloth, price 15*.

SAUNDERS (Katherine).
The High Mills. A Novel.

3 vols. Crown Bvo. Cloth.

Gideon's Rock, and other
Stories. Crown Bvo. Cloth, price 6f .

Joan M erry weather,and other
Stories. Crown Bvo. Cloth, price 6*.

Margaret and Elizabeth.

A Story of the Sea. Crown Svo.
Cloth, price 6f .

SAUNDERS (John).
Israel Mort, Overman :

a Story of the Mine. Crown Svo.
Price df .

Hirell. With Frontispiece.
Crown Bvo. Cloth, price 3*. dd.

Cheap Edition. With Frontis-
piece, price 2J.

Abel Drake's Wife. With

Frontispiece. Crown Bvo. Cloth,
price 3J. td.

Cheap Edition. With Frontis-
piece, price stf.


C Kegan Paul 6^ Co,h Publications,


23


SCHELL (Maj. von).

The Operations of the
First Army under Gen. Von
Goeben. Translated by Col. C. H.
von Wright. Four Maps. Demy
8vo. Cloth, price 9*.

The Operations of the
First Army under Gen. Von
Steinmetz. Translated by Captain
E. O. Hollist. Demy 8vo. Cloth,
price lof. 6d.

8CHERFF (Maj. W. von).

Studies in the New In-
fantry Tactics. Parts I. and II.
Translated from the German by
Colonel Lumley Graham. Demy
8vo. Cloth, price 7*. 6d.

SCHMIDT (Prof. Oscar).

The Doctrine of Descent
and Danvinism. With 26 Illus-
trations. Third Edition. Crown
Svo. Cloth, price m.

Volume XII. of The International
Scientific Series.

SCHUTZENBERGER(Prof.F.).

Fermentation. With Nu-
merous Illustrations. Crown Svo.
Cloth, price KS.

Volume XX. of The International
Scientific Series.

SCOTT (Patrick).

The Dream and the Deed,

and other Poems. Fcap. Svo. Cloth,
price 5f.

SCOTT (W. T.).
Antiquities of an Essex

Parish ; or. Pages from the History
of Great Dunmow. Crown Svo.
Cloth, price 5J. Sewed, 4^.

SCOTT (Robert H.).

^Veather Charts and Storm
AVamings. Illustrated. Crown
Svo. Cloth, price 3J. 6d.

Seeking his Fortune, and
other Stories. With Four Illustra-
tions. Crown Svo. Cloth, price 3jr. 6^.


SENIOR (N. W.).
Alexis De Tocqueville.

Correspondence and Conversations
with Nassau W. Senior, from 1833
t6 1859. Edited by M. C. M. Simp-
son. 2 vols. Large post Svo. Cloth,
price a I J.

Journals Kept in France
and Italy. From 1848 to 1852.
With a Sketch of the Revolution of
1848. Edited by his Daughter, M.
C. M. Simpson. 2 vols. Post Svo.
Cloth, price 24?.

Seven Autumn Leaves from

Fairyland. Illustrated with Nine
Etchmgs. Square crown Svo. Cloth,
price 3*. 6d.

SEYD (Ernest), F.S.S.

The Fall in the Price of
Silver. Its Causes, its Consequen-
ces, and their Possible Avoidance,
with Special Reference to India.
Demy 8vo. Sewed, price zj. 6d,

SHADWELL (Maj. -Gen.), C.B.

Mountain Warfare. Illus-
trated by the Campaign of 1799 in
Switzerland. Being a Translation
of the Swiss Narrative compiled from
the Works of the Archduke Charles,

^omini, and others. Also of Notes
y General H. Dufour on the Cam-
paign of the Valtelline in 1635. With
Appendix, Maps, and Introductory
Remarks. Demy Svo. Cloth, price
16s.

SHELDON (Philip).

^Voman's a Riddle; or, Baby
Warmstrey. A Novel. 3 vols. Crown
Svo. Cloth.

SHELLEY (Lady).

Shelley Memorials from
Authentic Sources. With (now
first printed) an Essay on Christian-
ity by Percy B^rsshe Shelley. With
Portrait. Third Edition. Crown
Svo. Cloth, price 5*.

SHERMAN (Gen. W. T.).

Memoirs of General W.
T. Sherman, Commander of the
Federal Forces in the American Civil
War. By Himself. 2 vols. With
Map. Demy Svo Cloth, price 24J.
Copyright English Edition^


24


A List of


SHILLITO (Rev. Joseph).

^Vomanhood : its Duties,
Temptations, and Privileges. A Book
for Voung Women. Crown 8vo.
Price 3*. td,

SHIPLEY (Rev. Orby), M.A.

Church Tracts, or Studies
in Modem Problems. By various
Writers. 2 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5J. each.

SHUTE (Richard), M.A.
A Discourse on Truth.

Post 8vo. Cloth.

SMEDLEY (M. B.).

Boarding-out and Pauper
Schools for Girls. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 3*. td.

SMITH (Edward), M.D., LL.B.,
F.R.S.

Health and Disease, as In-
fluenced by the Daily, Seasonal, and
other Cyclical Changes in the Human
System. A New Edition. Post 8vo.
Cloth, price ^s. td.

Foods. Profusely Illustrated.
Fourth Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5J.

Volume III. of The International
Scientific Series.

Practical Dietary for
Families, Schools, and the La-
bouring Classes. A New Edition.
Post 8vo. Cloth, price 3^. td.

Tubercular Consumption
in its Early and Remediable
Stages. Second Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price ds.

SMITH (Hubert).

Tent Life with English
Gipsies in Norway. With Five
full-page Engravings and Thirty-one
smaller Illustrations by Whymper
and others, and Map of the Country
showing Routes. Third Edition.
Revised and Corrected. Post 8vo.
Cloth, price 2 1 J.

Some Time in Ireland.

A Recollection. Crown 8vo. Qoth,
price 7*. td.


Songs for Music.

By Four Friends. Square crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5*.
Containing songs by Reginald A.
Gattv, Stephen H.^ Gatty, Greville
J. Chester, and Juliana Ewing.

SPENCER (Herbert).

The Study of Sociology.

Fifth Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price 5f .

Volume V. of The International
Scientific Series.

SPICER (H.).
Otho's Death Wager. A

Dark Page of History Illustrated.
In Five Acts. Fcap. 8vo. Cloth,
price 5*.

STEVENSON (Rev. VT. F.).
Hymns for the Church and

Home. Selected and Edited by the
Rev. W. Fleming Stevenson.

The most complete Hymn Book
published.

The Hymn Book consists of Three
Parts : — I. For Public Worship.—
II. For Family and Private Worsnip.
—III. For Children.

%* Published in various forms and
prices^ the latter rating front %d.
to 6s. Lists and full particulars
will be furnished on application to
the Publishers.

STEWART (Prof. Balfour), M.A.,
LL.D., F.R.S.

On the Conservation of

Energy. Third Edition. With
Fourteen Engravings. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 5^.

Volume VI. of The International
Scientific Series.

STONEH^WER (Agnes).

Monacella : A L^end of
North Wales. A Poem. Fcap. 8vo.
Cloth, price 3*. dd.

STRETTON (Hesba). Author of
"Jessica's First Prayer."

Michael Lorio's Cross and

other Stories. With Two Illustra-
tions. Royal x6mo. Cloth, price
\s. 6d.

The Storm of Life. With

Ten Illustrations. Sixteenth Thou-
sand. Royal i6mo. Cloth,price ix. 6^21


C Kegan Paul 6^ Coh Publications,


25


STRETTON (Hesh&)-<onitnued.
The Crew of the Dolphin.

Illustrated. Twelfth Thousand.
Royal i6mo. Cloth, price is. 6d.

Cassy. Thirty-second Thou-
sand. With Six Illustrations. Royal
z6mo. Cloth, price is. 6d.

Tiae King's Servants.

Thirty-eighth Thousand. With Eight
Illustrations. Royal x6mo. Cloth,
price IS. 6d.

Lost Gip. Fifty-second Thou-
sand. With Six Illustrations. Royal
z6mo. Cloth, price is. 6d.

\* Also a handsomely bound Edi-
tiont with Twelve Illustrations,
Price 2S. 6d.

David Lloyd's Last Will.

With Four Illustrations. Royal
x6mo., price 2S. 6d.

The Wonderful Life.

Eleventh Thousand. Fcap. 8vo.
Cloth, price or. 6d.

A Night and a Day. With

Frontispiece. Eighth Thousand.
Royal i6mo. Limp cloth, price 6d,

Friends till Death. With

Illustrations and Frontispiece.
Twentieth Thousand. Royal i6mo.
Cloth, price IS. 6d,; limp cloth,
price 6a.

Two Christmas Stories.

With Frontispiece. Fifteenth Thou-
sand. Roysd z6mo. Limp cloth,
price 6d.

Michel Lorio's Cross, and
Left Alone. With Frontispiece.
Twelfth Thousand. Royal x6mo.
Limp cloth, price 6d.

Old Transome. With
Frontispiece. Twelfth Thousand.
Royal i6mo. Limp cloth, price 6d.
V Taken from "The King's
Servants."

The Worth of a Baby, and
how Apple-Tree Court was
w^on. With Frontispiece. Fifteenth
Thousand. Royal x6mo. Limp
doth, price 6d.

Hester Morley's Promise.

3 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.

The Doctor's Dilemma.
3 vols. Crown 8vo. Cloth.


STUBBS (Lieut.-Colonel F. W.)

The Regiment of Bengal
Artillery. The History of its
Organization, Equipment, and War
Services. Compiled from Published
Works, Official Records, and various
Private Sources. With numerous
Maps and Illustrations. Two Vols.
Demy 8vo. Cloth, price 32*.

STUMM (Lieut. Hugo), German
Military Attach^ to the Khivan Ex-
pedition.

Russia's advance East-
ward. Based on the Official Reports
of. Translated by Capt. C. E. H.
Vincent. With Map. Crown Svo.
Cloth, price 6s.

SULLY (James), M.A.
Sensation and Intuition.

Demy Svo. Cloth, price 10s. 6d.

Pessimism : a History and
a Criticism. Demy Svo. Price 14s.

Sunnyland Stories.

By the Author of "Aunt Mary's Bran
Pie." Illustrated, Small Svo. Qoth,
price 3J. 6d.

Sweet Silvery Sayings of
Shakespeare. Crown Svo. cloth
gilt, price 7*. 6d.

SYME (David).

Outlines of an Industrial
Science. Crown Svo. Cloth, price
6s,

Tales of the Zenana.

Bv the Author of " Pandurang
Hari." 2 vols. Crown Svo. Cloth,
price 21s.

TAYLOR (Rev. J. W. A.), M.A.

Poems. Fcap. Svo. Cloth,
price 5s.

TAYLOR (Sir H.).

Edwin the Fair and Isaac

Comnenus. A New Edition.
Fcap. Svo. Cloth, price y. 6d.

A Sicilian Summer and

other Poems. A New Edition.
Fcap. Svo. Cloth, price 3^-. 6d.

Philip Van Artevelde. A
Dramatic Poem. A New Edition.
Fcap. Svo. Cloth, price 5J.


26


A List of


TAYLOR (Col. Meadows), C.8.I.,
M.R.I.A.

The Confessions of a Thug.

Crown 8vo. Qoth, price dr.

Tara : a Mahratta Tale.
Crown 8vo. Qoth, price (a,

TELFER (T. Buchan), P.R.Q.S.,
Commandfer R.N.

The Crimea and Trans-
Caucasia. With numerous Illus-
trations and Maps. 2 vols. Royal
8vo. Medium Svo. Cloth, price 36;^.

TENNYSON (Alfred).

Harold. A Drama. Crown
Svo. Cloth, price ts.

Queen Mary. A Drama.
New Edition. Crown Svo^ Cloth,
price ts.

TENNYSON (Alfred).

Cabinet Edition. 12 Volumes. Each
with Frontispiece. Fcap. Svo. Cloth,
price IS. td. each.

Cabinet Edition. 12 vols. Com-
plete in handsome Ornamental Case.

TENNYSON (Alfred).

Author's Edition. Complete in 6
Volumes. Post Svo. Cloth gilt ; or
half-morocco. Roxburgh style.

Vol. I. Early Poems, and

English Idylls. Price 6f. ; Rox-
burgh, 7*. 6tf.

Vol. II. Locksley Hall,
Lucretius, and other Poems.
Price ts. ; Roxburgh, 7;. (>d.

Vol. III. The Idylls of

the King {Complete). Price 7*. 6d.\
Roxburgh, gs.

Vol. IV. The Princess,
and Maud. Price dr.; Roxbiu^h,
7^ . 6d.

Vol. v. Enoch Arden,
and In Memonam. Price 6s. ;
Roxburgh, 7*. 6d.

Vol. VI. 'Dx^.vci^s{preparing),


TENNYSON (Alfred).

The Imperial Library Edi-
tion. In 7 vok. Demy Svo. Cloth,
price xos. 6d, each; in Roxburghe
binding, Z2x. 6d.

Pocket Volume Edition.

i^ vols. In neat case. Ditto, ditto.
£xtra cloth gilt, in case.

The Illustrated Edition, i

voL Large Svo. Gilt extra, price 25^.

Original Editions.

Poems. Small Svo. Cloth,
price 6s.

Maud, and other Poems.
Small Svo. Cloth, price jf. 6d,

The Princess. Small Svo.

Cloth, price 3^. 6d.

Idylls of the King. Small

Svo. Cloth, price 5*.

Idylls of the King. Com-
plete. Small Svo. Cloth, price 6s.

The Holy Qrail, and other
Poems. Small Svo. Cloth, price
4^. 6d.

Qareth and L3mette. Small

Svo. Cloth, price 3^.

Enoch Arden, &c. Small
Svo. Cloth, price 3; . 6d.

Selections from the above

Works. Super royal i6mo. Ooth,
price 3f . 6d. Cloth gilt extra, price 4^.

Songs froip the above
Works .^ Super royal z6mo. Qoth
extra, price 3; . 6d,

In Memoriam. Small Svo.

Cloth, price 4^.

Tennyson for the Young and

for Recitation. Specially arranged.
Fcap. Svo. Price u. 6d,


C Kegan Paul 6^ Co,^s Publications.


27


Tennyson's Idylls of the

Kingf, and other Poems. Illustrated
by Julia Margaret Cameron. 2 vols.
Folio. Half-bound morocco, cloth
sides, price £(> 6s. each.

THOMAS (Moy).

A Fight for Life. With
Frontispiece. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price y. 6d.


Thomasina.


A NoveL
Cloth.


3 vols. Crown 8vo.


THOMPSON (Alice C).
Preludes. A Volume of

Poems. Illustrated by Elizabeth
Thompson (Painter of "The Roll
Call "% 8vo. Cloth, price 7*. 6d.

THOMPSON (Rev. A. S.).

Home Words for Wan-
derers. A Volume of Sermons.
Crown Svo. Cloth, price 6s.

Thoughts in Verse.

Small Crown Svo. Cloth, price is. 6d.

THRINQ (Rev. Godfrey), B.A.

Hymns and Sacred Lyrics.
Fcap. Svo. Cloth, price 5J.

TODD (Herbert), M.A.

Arvan ; or, The Story of the
Sword. A Poem. Crown Svo. Cloth,
price 7*. 6d.

TODHUNTER (Dr. J.)
Laurella; and other Poems.

Crown Svo. Cloth, price 6; . 6d,

TRAHERNE (Mrs. A.).

The Romantic Annals of

a Naval Family. A New and

Cheaper ^ Edition. Crown Svo.
Cloth, price 5f .

TRAVERS (Mar.).

The Spinsters of Blatch-
ington. A NoveL 3 vols. Crown
8va Cloth.


TRAVERS {Mat.)— continued.

Waiting for Tidings. By

the Author of "White and Black."
3 vols, crown Svo.

TREMENHEERE (Lieut.-Qen.
C. W.)

Missions in India : the

System of Education in Government
and Mission Schools contrasted.
Demy Svo. Sewed, price 2s,

TURNER (Rev. C. Tennyson).

Sonnets, L3aics, and Trans-
lations. Crown Svo. Cloth, price
4^. 6d.

TYNDALLGohn),L.L.D.,F.R.S.

The Forms of ^Vater in
Clouds and Rivers, Ice and
and Glaciers. With Twenty-five
Illustrations. Sixth Edition. Crown
Svo. Cloth, price w.

Volume I.^ of The International
Scientific Series.

UMBRA OXONIENSIS.

Results of the expostu-
lation of the Right Honourable
W. E. Gladstone, in their
Relation to the Unity of Roman
Catholicism. Large fcap. Svo. Cloth,
price 5s.

UPTON (Richard D,), Capt.
Newmarket and Arabia.

An Examination of the Descent of
Racers and Coursers. With Pedi-
grees and Frontispiece. Post Svo.
Cloth, price gs.

VAMBERY (Prof. A.).

Bokhara : Its History and
Conquest. Second Edition. Demy
Svo. Cloth, price i&y.

VAN BENEDEN (Mons.).
Animal Parasites and

Messmates. With Sq Illustrations.
Second Edition. Clou, price 5s.

Volume XIX. of The International
Scientific Series.


28


A List of


VANESSA.

By the Author of ** Thomasina,"
&c. ^ A Novel. 2 vols. Second
Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth.

VINCENT (Capt. C. E. H.).

Elementary Military
Qeography, Reconnoitring,

and Sketching. Compiled for
Non - Commissioned Officers and
Soldiers of all Arms. Sauare
crown 8vo. Cloth, price u. 6a.

VOGEL (Dr. Hermann).

The Chemical effects of
Light and Photography, in their
application to Art, Science, and
Industry. The translation thoroughly
revised. With loo Illustrations, in-
cluding some beautiful si)ecimens of
Photography. Third Edition. Crown
8vo. Cloth, price 5J.

Volume XV. of The International
Scientific Series.

VYNER (Lady Mary).
Every day a Portion.

Adapted from the Bible and the
Prayer Book, for the Private Devo-
tions of those living in Widowhood.
Collected and edited by Lady Mary
Vyner. Square crown Svo. Cloth
extra, price 5^.

Waiting for Tidings.

By the Author of " White and
Black." 3 vols. Crown Svo. Cloth.

WARTENSLEBEN (Count H.
von).

The Operations of the
South Army in January and
Februaiy, 1871. Compiled from
the Official War Documents of the
Head-quarters of the Southern Army.
Translated by Colonel C. H. von
Wright. With Maps. Demy Svo.
Cloth, price dr.

The Operations of the
First Anny under Gen. von
Manteuffel. Translated by Colonel
C. H. von Wright. Uniform with
the above. Demy 8vo. Cloth, price
9*-


WAY (A.), M.A.

The Odes of Horace Liter-
ally Translated in Metre. Fcap.
Svo. Cloth, price ax.

WEDMORE (P.).

Two Girls. 2 vols. Crown
Sva Cloth.

What 'tis to Love. By the

Author of "Flora Adair," "The
Value of Fostertown." 3 vols, crown
Svo.

WELLS (Capt. John C), R.N.

Spitzbergen — The Gate-
way to the Polynia ; or, A Voyage
to Spitzbergen. With numerous Il-
lustrations by Whymper and others,
and Map. New and Cheaper Edi-
tion. Demy Svo. Cloth, price ts.

WETMORE(W. S.X
Commercial Telegraphic

Code. Second Edition. Post 4to.
Boards, price \u.

What 'tis to Love.

By the Author of " Flora Adair,"
" The Value of Fosterstown. " 3 vols.
Crown Sva Cloth.

WHITAKER (Florence).

Christy's Inheritance. A
London Story. Illustrated. Royal
x6mo. Cloth, price xs. 6d.

WHITE (A. D.), LL.D.

Warfare of Science. With
Prefatory Note by Professor TyndalL
Crown Svo. Cloth, price 3^. 6d.

WHITE (Capt F. B. P.).

The Substantive Seniority
Army List — Majors and Cap-
tains. Svo. Sewed, price or. 6d.

WHITNEY (Prof. W. D.). of Yale
College, New Haven.

The Life and Growth of
Language. Second Edition. Crown
Svo. Cloth, price 5X. Copyright
Edition.

Volume XVI. of The International
Scientific Series.


C, Kegan Paul &* Co.'s Publications.


29


WHITNEY (Prof. W. D.), of Yale
College, New Haven — continued.

Essentials of English
Qrammar for the Use of Schools.
Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 3J. 6^.

WHITTLE (J. L.), A.M.

Catholicism and the Vati-
can. With a Narrative of the Old
Catholic Congress at Munich.
Second Edition. Crown 8vo. Cloth,
price \s. td.

WICKHAM (Capt. E. H., R.A.)

Influence of Firearms upon
Tactics :^ Historical and Critical
Investigations. By an Officer of
Superior Rank (in the German
Army). Translated by Captain £.
H. Wickham, R.A. Demy 8vo.
Cloth, price 7f . td,

WILBERFORCE (H. W.).

The Church and the Em-
pires. Historical Periods. Pre-
ceded by a Memoir of the Author
by John Henry Newman, D.D. of
the Oratory. With Portrait. Post
Svo. Cloth, price xos. 6d.

WILKINSON (T. L.).
Short Lectures on the Land

Lawrs. Delivered before the Work-
ing Men's College. Crown Svo.
Lunp Cloth, price zs.

WILLIAMS (A. Lukyn).
Famines in India ; their

Causes and Possible Prevention.
The Essay for the Le Bas Prize, 1875.
Demy Svo. Cloth, price 5*.

WILLIAMS (Rowland), D.D.

Life and Letters of, with Ex-
tracts from his Note- Books. Edited
by Mrs. Rowland Williams. With
a Photographic Portrait. 2 vols.
Large post Svo. Cloth, price 2\s.

Psalms, Litanies, Coun-
sels and Collects for Devout
Persons. Edited by his Widow.
New and Popular Editioo. Crown
Sv*. Cloth, price y. 6d.


WILLIS (R., M.D.)
Servetus and Calvin : a

Study of an Important Epoch in the
Early History of the Reformation.
Svo. Cloth, price 16s,

WILLOUGHBY (The Hon.
Mrs.).

On the North Wind —
Thistledov^n. A Volume of Poems.
Elegantly bound. Small crown Svo.
Cloth, price js. 6d.

WILSON (H. Schatz).
Studies and Romances.

Crown Svo. Cloth, price 7*. 6d.

WILSON (Lieut -Col. C. T.).

James the Second and the
Duke of Berwick. Demy Svo.
Cloth, price I2S. 6d,

WINTERBOTHAM (Rev. R.).
M.A., B.Sc.

Sermons and Expositions.
Cr»wn Svo. Cloth, price 7*. 6d.

WOINOVITS (Capt. I.).
Austrian Cavalry Exercise.

Translated by Captain W. S. Cooke.
Crown Svo. Cloth, price 7X.

WOOD (C. F.).

A Yachting Cruise in the""
South Seas. With Six Photo-
graphic Illustrations. Demy Svo.
Cloth, price 7*. 6d.

WRIGHT (Rev. David). M.A.

Man and Animals : A Ser-
mon. Crown Svo. Stitched in
wrapper, price is.

WRIGHT (Rev. David), M.A.

Waiting for the Light, and
other Sermons. Crown Svo. Cloth,
price 6s.

WYLD(R. S.), F.R.S.E.

The Physics and the Philo-
sophy of the Senses ; or. The

Mental and the Physical in their
Mutual Relation. Illustrated by
several Plates. Demy Svo. Cloth,
price i6«.


30


C Kegan Paul 6r* Co.^s Publications,


YONQE (C. D.x

History of
Revolution of
Ooth, price 6f .


the English

1688. Crown 8vo.


YORKE (Stephen).
Cleveden. A Novel. 2 vols.

Crown 8vo. Cloth.

YOU MANS (Eliza A).

An Essay on the Culture
of the Observing Powers of
Children, especially in connection
with the Study of Botany. Edited,
with Notes and a Supplement, by
Joseph Payne, F. C. P., Author of
Lectures on the Science and Art of
Education," &c. Crown 8 vo. Clcdi,
price 3f . dd.


YOU MANS (Eliza K.y-caniinued.

First Book of Botany.

Designed to Cultivate the Observii^
Powers of Children. With 300 En-
{[ravings. New and Enlarged Edi-
tion. Crown 8vo. Cloth, price 5c

YOUMANS (Edward L.), M.D.
A Class Book of Chemistry,

on_ the Basis of the New System.
With 200 Illustrations. Crown 8vo.
Cloth, price 5r.

ZIMMERN (H.).
Stories in Precious Stones.

With Six Illustrations. Third Edi-
tion. Crown 8va Cloth, price 5f.


THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.

A Monthly Review^ edited by James Knowles, price 2s, 6d»

The FIRST VOLUME of THE NINETEENTH CENTURY,
price i^.t contains contributions by the following writers :


Mr. Tennyson.

Rt. Hon. W. E. Gladstone, M.P.

Lord Stratford de Redclifife.

Cardinal Manninfi;.

The Duke of Argyll.

Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol.

Professor Huxley.

Lord Selbome.

The Dean of St. Paul's.

Sir James Fitzjames Stephen.

Mr. Matthew Arnold.

Mr. J. A. Froude.

Sir John Lubbock, M.P.

Mr. Grant Duff, M.P.

Sir Thomas Watson.

Rt. Hon. Lyon Playfair, M.P.

Canon Carter.

Rev. Dr. Martineau.

,, J. Baldwin Brown.

,, J. Guiness Rogers.

,. A. H. Mackonochie.


Mr. Frederick Harrison.

Dr. Carpenter.

Mr. W. Crookes.

Rt. Hon. James Stansfeld, M.P.

Lady Pollock.

Mr. Frederick Myers.

Professor Croom Robertson.

„ Clifford.
Mr. Arthur Arnold.
,, James Spedding.
„ W. R. S. Ralston.
„ E. D. J. Wilson.
C. A. Fyffe.
Edward Dicey.
Thomas Brassey, M.P.
John Fowler,
Henry Irving.
„ Edgar Bownng.
Sir Julius Vogel.
Mr. R. H. Hutton.
Dr. Ward


»*
**


t»


ANNOUNCEMENTS.


THE HISTORY OF THE EVOLUTION OF MAN.

By Professor E. Haeckel, Author of " The History of Creation." Translated
by Professor Van Rhyn. 3 vols., profusely illustrated.

LECTURES ON THE LAWS OF HEALTH. By Pro-
fessor CORFIELD, M.D.

INTERNATIONAL LAW, OR RULES REGU-
LATING THE INTERCOURSE OF STATES IN PEACE
AND WAR. By H. W. Halleck, A.M., Author of "Elements of
Military Art and Science," '* Mining Laws of ^ain and Mexico," &c.
Edited, with copious Notes and Additions, by Sir Sherston Baker,
Barrister-at-Law. 2 vols. Demy 8vo.

TRAVELS IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF BRUCE IN
ALGERIA AND TUNIS. Illustrated by Facsimiles of his Original
Drawings. By Lieut.-Col. R. L Playfair, H. B. M.'s Consul-General in
Algeria.

WALKS IN FLORENCE. By Susan and Joanna Horner.

A new and thoroughly revised edition in 2 vols. Crown 8vo. With illus-
trations.

SERMONS. Third Series. By the Rev. Stopford A. Brooke,

M.A., Chaplain in Ordinary to Her Majesty the Queen, and Minister at
Bedford Chapel, Bloomsbury. Crown 8vo. Cloth.

ALL SAINTS' DAY AND OTHER SERMONS. By

the late Charles Kingslev. Edited by his wife.

SERMONS. By the late George Dawson, M.A. Selected and

edited by his wife. Crown 8vo.

SALVATOR MUNDI: Expository Lectures by the Rev.
Samuel Cox. Crown 8vo.

NEW READINGS AND RENDERINGS OF SHAKE-
SPEARE'S TRAGEDIES. By H. Halford Vaughan. Demy 8vo.
Cloth.

lONE. A Poem, in four Parts. Bv the Author of ** Shadows
of Coming Events." Foolscap Svo. Qoth, price 5; .


32 Announcements.


1^


A NEW METRICAL TRANSLATION OF THE ADA-
MEMNON OP iBSCHYLUS. With an Introductory Essay by E. D.

A. MORSHRAD.

A COLLECTED EDITION OF THE POETICAL AND
PROSE WORKS OF SIR HENRY TAYLOR. In 5 vols. Crown

LIFE AND LETTERS OF JAMES HINTON. Edited
by Ellice Hopkins. Crown 8va

CHILDREN'S TOYS ; A Series of Lectures on the Lessons

taught by them. Crown 8vo. With illustrations.

THE TENNYSON BIRTHDAY BOOK. Edited by Emily

Shakspear. Crown x6mo.

A HISTORY OF THE FENIAN CONSPIRACY. In 2

vob. Post 8vo.

EVERY DAY MEALS, being Economical and Wholesome
Recipes for Breakfast, Lunch, and Supper. By Miss Hooper, Author of
" Little Dinners." Crown Bvo. 5^.

TACTICAL EXAMPLES. By Hugo Helvig. Translated
from the German by Sir Lumlby Graham. With Diagrams. VoL z. :
The Battalion.

DUTIES OF THE GENERAL STAFF. By Schellen-

DORF. Translated from the German by Lieut. Hare. Vol. z.

MARGARET CHETWYND. A Novel. By Susan Morley,

Author of " Aileen Ferrers," " Throstlethwaite," &c. 3 vols. Crown 8vo.

A PAIR OF BLUE EYES. By Thomas Hardy, Author of

" Far from the Madding Crowd." New Edition. Crown 8vo. cloth, price 6f .


LONDON :

C. KEGAN PAUL AND CO.

{Successors to the Publishing Department of

Henry S. King and Co.),

I, PATERNOSTER SQUARE.


4.


V


