AN INVESTIGATION OF THE LAWS OF THOUGHT, ON WHICH ARE FOUNDED THE MATHEMATICAL THEORIES OF LOGIC AND PROBABILITIES
George Boole (1815-1864). London: Walton and Maberly, 1854.
Source scan: Internet Archive, identifier aninvestigation00boolgoog.
Prepared for the Tower of Babel library: scan artifacts trimmed and whitespace normalized per the VIEW TEXT standard. Public domain.

AN INVESTIGATION

I

ov

THE LAWS OF THOUGHT,

ON WHICH AKB VOUNDBD

THE MATHEMATICAL THEORIES OF LOGI^

AND PROBABILITIES.

II Y

GEORGE BOOLE, L L. D

. Of MATUUlATIf* n mCKIOI'* « OUJI'*K. rr*BK.

LONDON:
WALTON AND MABERLY,

CrrEK OOWEB-STBEET. A X 1» IVY-LA.VE. P ATBtlTOST I. ».E« *

CAMBRIDOC- MACMILLAX AND 00.

^/- .

t fx .- .1 S-OHfr /ST

riAUVAfl'J CCU£bE lIBRAinf
/b 60 .cy'^ O^X^V^L. /9

-/ . ^

DUBLIN:

':|Ptintetl at t(e QnitersitQ ^rcss,

BY M. II. OILU

r-. '■> :\

^ ^

TO

JOHN RYALL, LL. D..

VICE-PRESIDENT AND PROFESSOR OF GREEK

IN QITEEN'S COLLEGE CORK.

THIS WORK IS INSCRIBED

IN TESTIMONY OF FRIENDSHIP AND ESTEEM

PREFACE.

^T^HE following work is not a republication of a former trea-
-^ tise by the Author, entitled, ** The Mathematical Analysis
of Logic." Its earlier portion is indeed devoted to the same
object, and it begins by establishing the same system of funda-
mental laws, but its methods are more general, and its range of
applications fiur wider. It exhibits the results, matured by some
years of study and reflection, of a principle of investigation re-
lating to the intellectual operations, the previous exposition of
which was written within a few weeks after its idea had been
cooocired*

That portion of this work which relates to Logic presupposes
in its reader a knowledge of the most important terms of the
science, as usually treated, and of its general object. On these
points there is no better guide than Archbishop Whately*s
*^ Elements of Logic," or Mr. Thomson's ** Outlines of the Laws
of Thought.'* To the finrmer of these treatises, the present re-
rival of attention to this class of studies seems in a great measure
doe. Some acquaintance with the principles of Algebra is also
requisite, but it is not necessary that this application should have
been carried beyond the solution of simple equations. For the
study of those chapters which relate to the theory of probabilities,
a aonewhat larger knowledge of Algebra is required, and espe-

•

IV PREFACE.

cially of the doctrme of Elimination, and of the solution of Equa-
tions containing more than one unknown quantity. Preliminary
information upon the subject-matter will be found in the special
treatises on Probabilities in " Lardner's Cabinet Cyclopaedia,"
and the " Library of Useful Knowledge," the former of these by
Professor De Morgan, the latter by Sir John Lubbock ; and in
an interesting series of Letters translated from the French of
M. Quetelet. Other references will be given in the work. On a
first perusal the reader may omit at his discretion, Chapters x.,
XIV., and xix., together with any of the applications which he
may deem uninviting or irrelevant.

Li different parts of the work, and espedally in the notes to
the concluding chapter, will be found references to various writers,
ancient and modem, chiefly designed to illustrate a certain view of
the history of philosophy. With respect to these, the Author
thinks it proper to add, that he has in no instance given a cita-
tion which he has not believed upon careful examination to be
supported either by parallel authorities, or by the general tenor
of the work from which it was taken. While he would gladly
"have avoided the introduction of anything which might by pos-
sibility be construed into the parade of learning, he felt it to be
due both to his subject and to the truth, that the statements in
the text should be accompanied by the means of verification.
And if now, in bringing to its close a labour, of the extent of
which few persons will be able to judge from its apparent fruits,
he may be permitted to speak for a single moment of the feelings
with which he has pursued, and with which he now lays aside,
his task, he would say, that he never doubted that it was worthy of
his best efforts ; that he felt that whatever of truth it might bring
to light was not a private or arbitrary thing, not dependent, as to
its essence, upon any human opinion. He was fully aware that
learned and able men midntained opinions upon the subject of

HKRFACE. V

Logic directly opposed to the views upon which the entire argu-
ment and procedure of hid work rested. While he believed those
opinions to be erroneous, he was conscious that his own views
might inaensibly be war|>ed by an influence of another kind. He
felt in an especial manner the danger of that intellectual bias which
long attention to a particular as|)ect of truth tends to produce.
But be trusts that out of thin conflict of opinions the same truth
will bat emerge the more free irom any personal admixture ; that
itA different parts will be seen in their just proportion ; and that
none of them will eventually l)e too highly valued or too lightly
regarded because of the prejudices which may attach to the
mere form of its exposition.

To his valued friend, the Rev. George Stephens Dickson,
of Lincoln, the Author desires to record his obligations for much
kind assistance in the revision of this work, and for some impor-
tant suggestions.

5. GamviLUi-PLACC, Cork,
Xov. 30a, 1853.

CONTENTS.

- CHAPTER I.

Paoi.

Nattkx AifD Dmionofthib Work, 1

CHAPTER n.
>uijtn AXD THKis Laws, 24

CHAPTER IIL
Dkxivation or thx Laws, 89

CHAPTER IV.
Di\iiiio!f or Propositions, 62

CHAPTER V.
l'Rt.\ciPues OP Stmboucal Reasoning, 6<>

CHAPTER VI.
Or IsrrmRrmsTATiON, MO

CHAPTER Vn.
(»r EUMINATION 90

CHAPTER Vin.
Or Rrdcctioji, lU

CHAPTER IX.
MKfSOB* or ABBunrunosr, \^

IV CONTENTS.

Paok.

CHAPTER X.

Conditions of a Perfect Method, 1 50

CHAPTER XI.
Of Secondary Propositions, 1 59

CHAPTER Xn.
Methods IN Secondary Propositions, 177

CHAPTER Xm.
Clarke and Spinoza, 185

CHAPTER XIV.
ExABCPLE OF Analysis, 219

CHAPTER XV.
Or THE Aristotelian Logic, 226

CHAPTER XVI.
Of THE Theory of Probabilities, 243

CHAPTER XVn.
General Method in Probabilities, 253

CHAPTER XVm.
Elebientary Illustrations, 276

CHAPTER XIX. *

Of Statistical Conditions, 295

CHAPTER XX.
Problems on Causes, 320

CHAPTER XXI.

Probability of Judgments, 376

CHAPTER XXn.

Constitution of the Intellect, 399

AN INVESTIGATION

or

THE LAWS OF THOUGHT.

CHAPTER L

NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WOBK.

I . 'T^HE design of the following treatise is to investigate the
-^ fundamental laws of those operations of the niind by which
reasoning is performed; to give expression to them in the symboli-
cal language of a Calculus, and upon this foundation to establish the
sdenoe of Logic and construct its method ; to make that method
itself the basis of a general method for the application of the nu^
thematical doctrine of Probabilities ; and, finally, to collect from
the various elements of truth brought to view in the course of
these inquiries some probable intimations concerning the nature
and constitution of the human mind.

2. That this design is not altogether a novel one it is almost
needless to remark, and it is well known that to its two main
practical divisions of Logic and ProlNibilitics a very consideraMe
share of the attention of philosophers hat* been directed. In its
ancient and scholastic form, indeed, the subject of Logic stands
ahnost exclusively associated with the great name of Aristotle.
As it was presented to ancient Greece in the partly technical,
partly metaphysical diM|uisitions of the Organon, such, with
seafcdy any essential change, it has continued to the present
day. The stream of original inquiry has rather been dL\tc(t\»^
quettiaag ofgeoenl philosophy, wHkVi, \Viou^ vWj

2 NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK. [cHAP. I.

have arisen among the disputes of the logicians, have outgrown
their origin, and given to successive ages of speculation their pe-
culiar bent and character. The eras of Porphyry and Proclus,
of Anselm and Abelard, of Sadius, and of Descartes, together
with the final protests of Bacon and Locke, rise up before the
mind as examples of the remoter influences of the study upon the
course of human thought, partly in suggesting topics fertile of
discussion, partly in provoking remonstrance against its own un-
due pretensions. The history of the theory of Probabilities, on
the other hand, has presented &r more of that character of steady
growth which belongs to science. In its origin the early genius
of Pascal, — in its maturer stages of development the most recon-
dite of all the mathematical speculations of Laplace, — were direct-
ed to its improvement ; to omit here the mention of other names
scarcely less distinguished than these. As the study of Logic has
been remarkable for the kindred questions of Metaphysics to
which it has given occasion, so that of Probabilities also has been
remarkable for the impulse which it has bestowed upon the
higher departments of mathematical science. Each of these sub-
jects has, moreover, been justly regarded as having relation to a
speculative as well as to a practical end. To enable us to deduce
correct inferences fix)m given premises is not the only object of
Logic ; nor is it the sole claim of the theory of Probabilities that
it teaches us how to establish the business of life assurance on a
secure basis ; and how to condense whatever is valuable in the
records of innumerable observations in astronomy, in physics, or
in that field of social inquiry which is fast assuming a character
of great importance. Both these studies have also an interest
of another kind, derived from the light which they shed upon
the intellectual powers. They instruct us concerning the mode
in which language and number serve as instrumental aids to the
processes of reasoning; they reveal to us in some degree the
connexion between different powers of our common intellect ;
they set before us what, in the two domains of demonstrative and
of probable knowledge, are the essential standards of truth and
correctness, — standards not derived from without, but deei)ly
founded in the constitution of the human faculties. These ends
of speculation yield neither in interest nor in dignity, nor yet, it

CHAP. I.] NATUBB AND DB8ION OF THIS WORK. 3

may be added, in importanoe, to the practical objects, with the
pimuit of which they have been historically assodated. To un-
ibid the secr et laws and relations of those high faculties of
tbou^l by which all beyond the merely perceptive knowledge
jif the world and of ourselves is attained or matured, is an object
which does not stand in need of commendation to a rational
mind*

3. But although certain parts of the design of this work have
been entertained by others, its general conception, its method,
and, to a considerable extent, its results, are believed to be ori-
ginal. For this reason I shall offer, in the present chiqpter, some
preparatory statements and explanations, in order that the real
aim uf this treatise may be understood, and the treatment of its
subject fiuulitated.

It is dcugned, in the first place, to investigate the fundamen-
tal laws uf those operations of the mind by which reasoning is
peribrmed. It is unnecessary to enter here into any argument to
prove that the operations of the mind are in a certain real sense
subject to laws, and that a science of the mind b therefore possible.
If these are questions which admit of doubt, that doubt is not
to be met by an endeavour to settle the point of dispute d priori^
but by directing the attention of the objector to the evidence of
actual laws, by referring lum to an actual science. And thus the
lolution of that doubt would belong not to the introduction to
this treatise, but to the treatise itself. Let the assumption be
granted, that a science of the intellectual powers is possible, and
let us for a moment consider how the knowledge of it is to be
obtained.

4. Lake all other sciences, that of the intellectual operations
most primarily rest upon observation, — the subject of such ob-
servation being the very o{)erations and processes of which we
desire to determine the laws. But while the necessity of a foun-
dation in experience is thus a condition cx>mmon to all sciences,
there are some special differences l)etwcen the modes in which
this principle becomes available for the determination of general
trnths when the subject of inquiry is the mind, and when the
•abfeet is eztcmal nature. To these it is necessary to direct

b2

4 NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK. [CHAP. I.

The general laws of Nature are not, for the most part, imme-
diate objects of perception. They are either inductive inferences
from a large body of facts, the common truth in which they ex-
press, or, in their origin at least, physical hypotheses of a causal
nature serving to explain phaenomena with undeviating precision,
and to enable us to predict new combinations of them. They
are in all cases, and in the strictest sense of the term, "probable
.^N>y "conclusions, approaching, indeed, ever and ever nearer to ccr-
'•' ' v^tainty, as they receive more and more of the confirmation of ex-
perience. But of the character of probability, in the strict and
proper sense of that term, they are never wholly divested. On the
/'other hand, the knowledge of the laws of the mind does not require
^ I as its basis any extensive collection of observations. The general
\ truth is seen in the particular instance, and it is not confirmed
\]by the repetition of instances. We may illustrate this position
by an obvious example. It may be a question whether that for-
mula of reasoning, which is called the dictum of Aristotle, de omni
et nulla, expresses a primary law of human reasoning or not ; but
it is no question that it expresses a general truth in Logic. Now
that truth is made manifest in all its generality by reflection
upon a single instance of its application. And this is both an
evidence that the particular principle or formula in question is
founded upon some general law or laws of the mind, and an illus-
tration of the doctrine that the perception of such general truths
is not derived from an induction from many instances, but is in-
volved in the clear apprehension of a single instance. In con-
nexion with this truth is seen the not less important one that
our knowledge of the laws upon which the science of the intellec-
tual powers rests, whatever may be its extent or its deficiency, is
not probable knowledge. For we not only see in the particular
example the general truth, but we see it also as a certain truth, —
a truth, our confidence in which will not continue to increase
with increasing experience of its practical verifications.

5. But if the general truths of Logic are of such a nature that
when presented to the mind they at once command assent,
wherein consists the difficulty of constructing the Science of
Logic ? Not, it may be answered, in collecting the materials of
knowledge, but in discriminating their nature, and determining

CHAP. I.] NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WOBK. 5

their mutual place and relation. All sciences consist of general
truths, but of those truths some only are primary and fundamen-
tal, others are secondary and derived. The laws of elliptic mo-
tion, discovered by Kepler, arc general truths in astronomy, but
they are not its fundamental truths. And it is so also in the
purely mathematical sciences. An almost boundless diversity of
theorems, which are known, and an infinite possibility of others,
as yet unknown, rest together upon the foundation of a few sim-
ile axioms ; and yet these are all general truths. It may be
added, that they are truths which to an intelligence sufficiently
refined would shine forth in their own unborrowed light, with-
out the need of those connecting links of thought, those steps
of wearisome and often [Miinful deduction, by which the know-
ledge of them is actually acquired. Let us define as fundamental
tho«e laws and princifJes from which all other general truths of
•cience may be deduced, and into which they may all be again
rcsfilved. Shall we then err in regarding that as the true science
of Lcigic which, laying down certain elementary laws, confinned
by the very testimony of the mind, permits us thence to deduce,
by uniform proceraeH, the entire chain of it8 secondar}- conse-
quences, and furnishes, for its practical applications, methods of
[lerfcct generality ? Let it be considered whether in any science,
viewed either as a system of truth or as the foundation of a prac-
tical art, there can properly be any other test of the completeness
and the fundamental character of its laws, than the completeness
of it« system of derived truths, and the generality of the methods
which it serves to establi^ih. Other questions may indeed pre-
lent themselves. Convenience, prescription, individual prefe-
rpDce, may urge their claims and deserve attention. But aa
r»|iecta the question of what constitutes science in itif abc«tnict
integrity, I apiirchend that no other consiilcrations tlian the
above are pro{ierly of any value.

6. It is designed, in the next place, to give expression in this
tmtu<c to the fundamental laws of reasoning in the t<yml>(>lieal
language of a Calculus. Upon this head it will suflSee to nay, tlmt
tkuw laws are such as to suggest this mode of expresi*ion, and
to give to it a peculiar and exclusive fitness for the ends in view.

6 n ATUBI AND DB8IGN OF THIS WORK. [CHAP. I.

There is not only a dose analogy between the operations of the
mind in general reasoning and its operations in the particular
science of Algebra, but there is to a considerable extent an exact
agreement in the laws by which the two classes of operations are
conducted. Of course the laws must in both cases be determined
independently ; any formal agreement between them can only be
established a posteriori by actual comparison. To borrow the
notation of the science of Number, and then assume that in its
new application the laws by which its use is governed will remain
['unchanged, would be mere hypothesis. There exist, indeed,
': certain general principles founded in the very nature of language,
j by which the use of symbols, which are but the elements of
! scientific language, is determined. To a certain extent these
1^ elements are arbitrary. Their interpretation is purely conven-
tional : we are permitted to employ them in whatever sense we
please. But this permission is limited by two indispensable con-
ditions, — first, that fix)m the sense once conventionally established
we never, in the same process of reasoning, depart; secondly,
tiiat the laws by which the process is conducted be founded ex-
clusively upon the above fixed sense or meaning of the symbols
employed. In accordance with these principles, any agreement
which may be established between the laws of the symbols of
Logic and those of Algebra can but issue in an agreement of pro-
cesses. The two provinces of interpretation remain apart and
independent, each subject to its own laws and conditions.

Now the actual investigations of the following pages exhibit
Logic, in its practical aspect, as a system of processes carried on
by the aid of symbols having a definite interpretation, and sub-
ject to laws founded upon that interpretation alone. But at the
same time they exhibit those laws as identical in form with the
laws of the general symbols of algebra, with this single addition,
viz., that the sjnnbols of Logic are further subject to a special
law (Chap. II.), to which the symbols of quantity, as such, are
not subject. Upon the nature and the evidence of this law it is not
purposed here to dwell. These questions will be fully discussed
in a future page. But as constituting the essential ground of
difference between those forms of inference with which Logic is

CHAF. I.] NATURE AVD DI8ION OF THIS WOBK. 7

oooTorMUit, and those which present themselves in the particular
science of Number, the law in question is deserving of more
than a passing notice. It may be said that it lies at the very v
fimndation of general reasoning, — that it governs those intelleo-
tuai acts of conception or of imagination which are preliminary to
the (Hocesses of logical deduction, and that it gives to the pro- ^
cesses themselves much of their actual form and expression. It
may hence be affirmed that this law constitutes the germ or semi-
nal principle, of which every approximation to a general method
m Logic is the more or less perfect development.

7. The prindple has already been laid down (5) that the
snflkiency and truly fundamental character of any assumed sys-
tem of laws in the sdence of Logic must partly be seen in the
perfection of the methods to which they conduct us. It remains,
then, to consider what the requirements of a general method in
Logic are, and how far they are fulfilled in the system of the pre-
sent woric.

Logic is conversant with two lands of relations, — relations
imoog things, and relations among facts. But as fiicts are ex-
pressed by propositions, the latter s{)ecies of relation may, at
least for the purposes of Logic, be resolved into a relation among
propositions. The assertion that the fact or event ^ is an inva-
riable consequent of the Act or event B may, to this extent at
kast, be regarded as equivalent to the assertion, that the truth
of the proposition affirming the occurrence of the event B always
implies the truth of the proportion affirming the occurrence of
the event A* Listead, then, of saying that Logic is conversant
with relations among things and relations among facts, we are
permitted to say that it is concerned with relations among things
and relataons among {H^positions. Of the former kind of relations
we have an example in the proposition — ^^ All men arc mortal ;"
of the latter kind in the proposition — ^* If the sun is totally
eclipsed, the stars will become visible." The one expresm;s a re-
lation between ^* men*' and ^* mortal beings," the other between
the elementary propositions — *^The sun is totally eclipsed;*'
^ The stars will become visible.*' Among such relations I sup-
pose to be included those which affirm or deny existence with
raipeci to things, and those which affirm or deny truth with re^

8 NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK. [cHAP. I.

spect to propodtions. Now let those things or those propositions

among which relation is expressed be termed the elements of

the propositions by which such relation is ezjoressed. Froceed-

> ing from this definition, we may then 8S,y ths^me premises of any

\ logical argument express jriv^it relations among certain elements,

' and that the conclusion must express an implied relationj among

those elements, or among a part of them, i. e. a relation^implied

by or inferentially involved in the premises.

8. Now this being premised, the requirements of a general
method in Logic seem to be the following : —

1st. As the conclusion must express a relation among the
whole or among a part of the elements involved in the premises,
it is requisite that we should possess the means of eliminating
those elements which we desire not to appear in the conclusion,
and of determining the whole amount of relation implied by the
premises among the elements which we wish to retain. Those
elements which do not present themselves in the conclusion are,
in the language of the common Lo^c, called middle terms ; and
the species of elimination exemplified in treatises on Logic consists
in deducing from two propositions, containing a common element
or middle term, a conclusion connecting the two remaining terms.
But the problem of elimination, as contemplated in this work,
possesses a much wider scope. It proposes not merely the elimi-
nation of one middle term from two propositions, but the elimi-
nation generally of middle terms from propositions, without
regard to the number of either of them, or to the nature of their
connexion. To this object neither the processes of Logic nor
those of Algebra, in their actual state, present any strict parallel.
In the latter science the problem of elimination is known to be
limited in the following manner : — From two equations we can
eliminate one symbol of quantity ; from three equations two
symbols ; and, generally, from n equations n - 1 symbols. But
though this condition, necessary in Algebra, seems to prevail in
the existing Logic also, it has no essential place in Logic as a
science. There, no relation whatever can be proved to prevail
between the number of terms to be eliminated and the number
of propositions from which the elimination is to be effected.
From the equation representing a single proposition, any num-

CHAP. I.] NATUBI AND DB8ION OF THIS WORK. 9

ber of i-jmbolB repmenting tenns or elements in Logic may be
eliminmtcd ; and from any number of equations representing pro-
positions, one or any other number of symbols of this kind may
be eliminated in a similar manner. For such elimination there
exists one general process applicable to all cases. This is one of
the many remarkable consequences of that distinguishing law of
the nyinbols of Logic, to which attention has been already
directed.

2ndly. It should be within the province of a general method
in Logic to express the final relation among the elements of the
conclusion by any admissible kind of pA>position, or in any se-
lected order of terms. Among varieties of kind we may reckon
those which logicians have designated by the terms categorical,
hypothetical, disjunctive, &c. To a choice or selection in the
order of the terms, we may refer whaU>oever b dependent ui>on
the appearance of ixurticular elements in the subject or in the
predicate, in the antecedent or in the conseciuent, of that propo-
•ition which forms the ** conclusion." But wuving the language
of the schools, let us ccmsider what really distinct si)ecies of
problems may present themselves to our notice. We have seen
that the elements of the final or inferred relation may cither be
tkiMffs or propositions. Suppose the former case ; then it might
be required to deduce from the premises a definition i»r description
oTfouie one thing, or 4ass of things, constituting an element of
the conclusion in terms of the other things involved in it. Or
we might form the conception of some thing or class of thingss
involving nu»re than one tif the elements of the conclunion, and
require its exprciision in tenns of the other elements. Again,
ni[ipu«e tlie elements retiuned in the conclutiion to be propo-
ritions, we might desire to ascertain such |)oints as the following,
viz., Whc*ther, in virtue of the prciiusoxi, any <}f thos^c pro|H>-
Htiiins taken ningly, are true or faltfc?— Whether iiarticular
eumbinations of them are true orfiilm.*? — Whether, ai^uming a
larticular pro|KMition to be true, any conse(|ueni-e0 will ftilluw,
iod if »u, what a»iise<[uences, with rei«|icct to the other pni|K>-
fitioos? — Whether any |iarticular ci»iidition being ai«i«uni(-d with
reference to certain of the propositions any con«ie<|ueucots and
what ounsequcnoes, will follow with rcs|icct to the olliem ? and

10 haturb and design of this work. [chap. I.

80 oiu I say that these are general questions, which it should
fall within the scope or province of a general method in Logic to
solve. Perhaps we might include them all imder this one state-
ment of the final problem of practical Logic. Given a set of
premises expressing relations among certain elements, whetiier
things or propositions : required explicitiy the whole relation
consequent among any of those elements imder any proposed
conditions, and in any proposed form. That this problem, under
all its aspects, is resolvable, will hereafter appear. But it is not
for the sake of noticing this &ct, that the above inquiry into the
nature and the functioncf of a general method in Logic has been
introduced. It is necessary that the reader should apprehend
what are the specific ends of the investigation upon which we
are enterinfC) as well as tiie principles which are to iniide us to
theatta^entofthem.

9. Possibly it may here be said tiiat the Logic oT Aristotie,
in its rules of syllogism and conversion, sets forth tiie elementary
processes of which all reasoning consists, and that beyond these
there is neither scope nor occasion for a general method. I have
no desire to point out the defects of the common Logic, nor do I
wish to refer to it any further than is necessary, in order to place
in its true light the nature of the present treatise. With this
end alone in view, I would remark : — 1st. That syllogism, con-
version, &c, are not the ultimate procfeses of Logic. It will
be shown in this treatise that they are founded upon, and are re-
solvable into, ulterior and moro simple processes which constitute
the real elements of method in Logic. Nor is it true in fact that
all inference is reducible to the particular forms of syllogism and
conversion. — Vide Chap. xv. 2ndly. If all inference were re-
ducible to these two processes (and it has been maintained that
it is reducible to syllogism alone), there would still exist the
same necessity for a general method. For it would still be re-
quisite to determine in what order the processes should succeed
each dther, as well as their particular nature, in order that the
desired relation should be obtained. By the desired relation I
mean that full relation which, in virtue of the premises, connects
any elements selected out of the premises at will, and which,
moreover, expresses that relation in aay desired form and order.

CHAP. I.] NATUBI AMD DESIGN OF THIS WORK. 1 1

If we nmy judge from the mathematical sciciiceB, which are the
nest perfect examples of method known, this directive function
of Method constitutes its chief office and distinction. The fun*
damental processes of arithmetic, for instance, are in themselves
but the elements of a possible sdence. To assign their nature is
the first business of its method, but to arrange their succession
is its subsequent and higher function. In the more complex
examples of logical deduction, and especially in those which form
a basis for the solution of difficult questions in the theory of
Probabilities, the aid of a directive method, such as a Calculus
alooe can supply, is indispensable.

10. Whence it is that, the ultimate l§w?_Qf Logic are mathe-
matical in their form; why they are,. e xcept^ in a single point,
ifally^ wi^l^ ^ fae go|^jryJ lawn nf MHiphffT r and why in that par-
ticular point they differ ; — are questions upon which it might not
be very remote firom presumption to endeavour to pronounce a
pontive judgment. Probably they lie beyond the reach of our
Hnuted fiu^ties. It may, perhaps, be permitted to the mind to
sttttin a knowledge of the laws to which it is itself subject, with-
out its bong also given to it to understand their ground and
origin, or even, except in a very limited degree, to comprehend
their fitness for their end, as compared with other and conceivable
fystems of law. Such knowledge is, indeed, unnecessary for the
cods of sdence, which properly concerns itself with what is, and
leeks not for grounds of preference or reasons of appointment.
These considerations furnish a sufficient answer to all protests
•gainst the exhibition of Logic in the form of a Calculus. It is
not because we choose to assign to it such a mode of manifes-
tation, but because the ultimate laws of thought render that mode
le, and prescribe its charscter, and forbid, as it would
the perfect manifestation of the Mricncc in any other form,
that such a mode demands adoption. It is to be remembered
that it is the business of science not to create laws, but to discover
them. We do not originate the constitution of our own minds,
greatly as it may be in our power to modify their character.
And as the laws of the human intellect do not depend uix>n our
will, so the foma of the setenoe, of which they constitute the ba-
in all easantaal regards independent of individual ch»i«x*

12 NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK. [CHAP. I.

11. Beside the general statement of the prindples of the
above method, this treatise will exhibit its application to the
analysis of a considerable variety of propositions, and of trains of
propositions constituting the premises of demonstrative argu-
ments. These examples have been selected j&om various writers,
they differ greatly in complexity, and they embrace a wide range
of subjects. Though in this particular respect it may appear to
some that too great a latitude of choice has been exercised, I do
not deem it necessary to offer any apology upon this account.
That Lo^c, as a science, is susceptible of very wide applications
is admitted ; but it is equally certidn that its ultimate forms and
processes are mathematical. Any objection d priori which may
therefore be supposed to lie against the adoption of such forms
and processes in the discussion of a problem of morals or of ge-
neral philosophy must be founded upon misapprehension or false
analogy. It is not of the essence of mathematics to be conversant
with the ideas of number and quantity. Whether as a general
habit of mind it would be desirable to apply symbolical processes
to moral argument, is another question. Possibly, as I have
elsewhere observed,* the perfection of the method of Logic may
be chiefly valuable as an evidence of the speculative truth of its
principles. To supersede the employment of common reasoning,
or to subject it to the rigour of technical forms, would be the last
desire of one who knows the value of that intellectual toil and
warfare which imparts to the mind an athletic vigour, and teiiches
it to contend with difficulties, and to rely upon itself in emer-
gencies. Nevertheless, cases may arise in which the value of a
scientific procedure, even in those things which fall confessedly
imder the ordinary dominion of the reason, may be felt and ac-
knowledged. Some examples of this kind will be found in the
present work.

12. The general doctrine and method of Logic above ex-
plained form also the basis ofa theory and corresponding method
of Probabilities. Accordingly, the development of such a theory
and method, upon the above principles, will constitute a distinct
object of the present treatise. Of the nature of this application
it may be desirable to give here some account, more especially as

* Mathematical Analysis of Logic London : G. Bell. 1847.

CHAP. I.] NATUBI AND DB8IGN OF THIS WORK. 13

r^gmrdii the character of the solutions to which it leads. In con-
nexion with this object some further detidl will be requisite con-
cerning the forms in which the results of the logical analysis are
pffeacnted.

The ground of this necessity of a prior method in Lo^c, as
the batfis of a theory of Probabilities, may be stated in a few
words. Before we can determine the mode in which the expected
firequency of occurrence of a particular event is dependent upon <
the known frequency of occurrence of any other events, we must be
aoquuntcd with the mutual dependence of the events themselves.
Speaking technically, wo must be able to express the event
whose probability is sought, as a function of the events whose
probabilities are given. Now this explicit determination belongs
in all instances to the department of Logic. Probability, how-
ever, in its mathematical acceptation, admits of numerical mea-
surement. Hence the subject of Probabilities belongs equally to
the icience of Number and to that of Logic. In recognising the
eo-ordinate existence of both these elements, the present treatise
diflert from all previous ones ; and as this difference not only
aflects the question of the possibility of the solution of problems
in a large number of instances, but also introduces new and im-
portant elements into the solutions obtained, I deem it necessary
to state here, at some length, the peculiar consequences of the
theory developed in the following pages.

13. The measure of the probability of an event is usually
defined wm a fraction, of which the numerator represents the num-
ber of cases favourable to the event, and the denominator the
whole number of cases favourable and unfavourable; all cases
being supposed equally likely to happen. That definition is
adopted in the present work. At the eanie time it ii« shown that
there is another aspect of the subject (t(hi»rtly to l)e referred to)
wharh might ef|ually be regarded as fundamental, and which
would actually lead t<» the eome system of methods and conclu-
Hfffis. It may be ailded, that so far as the received ^conclusions
of the theory of Probabilities extend, and ih> far a» thev are i*on-
Mqocncea of its fundamental definitions, they do not diifer from
the rcMilts (supposed to be equally correct in inference) of the
■efhod of this work.

14 NATURB AND DB8IGN OF THIS WOBK. [CHAP. I.

Again, mlthough questions in the theory of Probabilities
present themselves under various aspects, and may be variously
modified by algebraical and other conditions, there seems to be
one general type to which all such questions, or so much of each
of them as truly belongs to the theory of Probabilities, may be
referred. Considered with reference to the data and the qwtgin
tum^ that type may be described as follows : — Ist. The data are
the probabilities of one or more given events, each probability
being either that of the absolute fulfilment of the event to which
it relates, or the probabiHty of its fulfihnent under given sup-
posed conditions. 2ndly. The qtuentumj or object sought, is the
probability of the fulfilment, absolutely or conditionally, of some
other event differing in expression from those in the data, but
more or less Involving the same elements. As concerns the data,
they are either causally ffiveUf — as when the probability of a par-
ticular throw of a die b deduced from a knowledge of the consti-
tution of the piece, — or they are derived from observation of
repeated instances of the success or failure of events. In the
latter case the probability of an event may be defined as the
limit toward which the ratio of the favourable to the whole num-
ber of observed cases approaches (the uniformity of nature being
presupposed) as the observations are indefinitely continued.
Lastly, as concerns the nature or relation of the events in ques-
tion, an important distinction remsdns. Those events are either
simple or compound. By a compound event is meant one of
which the expression in language, or the conception in thought,
depends upon the expression or the conception of other events,
which, in relation to it, may be regarded as simple events. To
say " it rains,** or to say " it thunders," is to express the occur-
rence of a simple event; but to say '*it rains and thunders,*' or
to say *^ it either rains or thunders," is to express that of a com-
pound event. For the expression of that event depends upon
the elementary expressions, " it rains," " it thunders." The cri-
terion of simple events is not, therefore, any supposed simplicity
in their nature. It is founded solely on the mode of their ex-
pression in language or conception in thought.

14. Now one general problem, which the existing theory of
ProbabiUties enables us to solve, is the following, viz. : — Given

CHAP. I.] NATURI AND DI8IGH OF THIS WOBK. 10

le events : required the probability of
i given compound event, i. e. of mn event compounded in a given
Banner out of the ^ven simple events. The problem can also
be solved when the compound event, whose probability is re-
quired, b subjected to given conditions, i. e. to conditions de-
pendent also in a given manner on the given simple events.
Beside this general p^blem, there exist also particular problems
of which the principle of solution is known. Various questions
rdating to causes and effects can be solved by known methods
under the particular hypothesis that the causes are mutually ex-
dusive, but i^parently not otherwise. Beyond this it is not
dear that any advance has been made toward the solution of
what may be regarded as the general problem of the science, viz.:
Given the probabilities of any events, simple or compound, con-
ditioiied or unconditioned : required the probability of any other
ercnt equally arbitrary in expression and conception. In the
statement of this question it is not even postulated that the
erents whose probabilities are given, and the one whose proba-
bility is sought, should involve some common elements, because
it is the office of a method to determine whether the data of a
problem are sufficient for the end in view, and to indicate, when
they are not so, wherein the deficiency consists.

ThiK problem, in the most unrestricted form of its statement,
ii resolvable by the method of the present treatise ; or, to speak
Bore precisely, its theoretical solution is completely given, and
rts practical s<dution is brought to depend only upon processes
purely mathematical, such as the resolution and analysis of equi^
tioos. The order and character of the general solution may be
thus descrilied.

15. In the first place it is always possible, by the preliminary
Brtbod of the Calculus of Logic, to czpre«s the event whoso
probability is sought as a logical function of the events whoso
probabilities are given. The result is of the following character :
Suppose that X repreM*nts the event whose pn»bability is sought,
if« A, C\ &c, the events whose probal>ilities arc given, those
evcata being either simple or compound. Then the whole rela-
tkiB of the event X to the e^'ents A^ B, C, &c. is deduced in the
of what mathematicianB term a developsmemi^ consisting, in

16 NATURE AND DBSIGN OF THIS WORK. [CHAP. I.

the most general case, of four distinct classes of terms. Bj the
first class are expressed those combinations of the events A^ B, C,
which both necessarily accompany and necessarily indicate the
occurrence of the event X; by the second class, those combinsr
tions which necessarily accompany, but do not necessarily imply,
the occurrence of the event X ; by the third class, those combi-
nations whose occurrence in connexion with the event X is im-
possible, but not otherwise impossible; by the fourth class,
those combinations whose occurrence is impossible under any cir-
cumstances. I shall not dwell upon this statement of the result
of the logical analysis of the problem, further than to remark
that the elements which it presents are precisely those by which
the expectation of the event X^ as dependent upon our know-
ledge of the events At By C, is, or alone can be, affected. General
reasoning would verify this conclusion ; but general reasoning
would not usually avail to disentangle the complicated web of
events and circumstances from which the solution above de-
scribed must be evolved. The attainment of this object consti-
tutes the first step towards the complete solution of the question
proposed. It is to be noted that thus far the process of solution
is logical, i. e. conducted by symbols of logical significance, and
resulting in an equation interpretable into Vk proposition. Let this
result be termed ihQ final logical equation.

The second step of the process deserves attentive remark.
From the final logical equation to which the previous step has
conducted us, are deduced, by inspection, a series of algebraic
equations implicitly involving the complete solution of the pro-
blem proposed. Of the mode in which this transition is effected
let it suffice to say, that there exists a definite relation between
the laws by which the probabilities of events are expressed as
algebraic functions of the probabilities of other events upon which
they depend, and the laws by which the logical connexion of
the events is itself expressed. This relation, like the other co-
incidences of formal law which have been referred to, is not
founded upon hypothesis, but is made known to us by observation
(1. 4), and reflection. If, however, its reality were assumed d priori
as the basis of the very definition of Probability, strict deduction
would thence lead us to the received numerical definition as a

CHAP. I.] NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK. 17

oonsequenoe. The Theory of Probabilities stands, as
it has already been remarked (1. 12), in equally close relation to
Logic and to Arithmetic ; and it is indifferent, so &r as results
are concerned, whether we regard it as sprin^g out of the lat«
ter of these sciences, or as founded in the mutual relations which
connect the two together.

16. There are some circumstances, interesting perhaps to the
mathematician, attending the general solutions deduced by the
tbove method, which it may be desirable to notice.

1st. As the method is independent of the number and the
nature of the data, it continues to be applicable when the latter
sre insufficient to render determinate the value sought. When
Nich is the case, the final expression of the solution will contain
terms with arbitrary constant coefficients. To such terms tliere
will correspond terms in the final logical equation (I. 15), the
interpretation of which will inform us what new data are rc-
qoisiie in order to determine the values of those constants, and
thus render the numerical solution complete. If such data are
not to be obtained, we can still, by ^ving to the constants their
limiting values and 1, determine the limits within which the
probability sought must lie independently of all further expe-
rience. When the event whose probability is sought is quite in-
dependent of tho(«e whose pmbabilities are given, the limits thus
obtained for its value will be and 1, as it is evident that they
ought to be, and the inteq)rctation of the constants will only
lead to a re-statement of the original problem.

2odly. The expression of the final solution will in all cases
involve a particular element of ({uantity, determinable by the so-
lution of an algebraic equation. Now w^hen that equation is of
to elevated degree, a difficulty may seem to arise as to the se-
lection of the proper root. There are, indeed, cases in which
both the elements given and the element sought arc so obviously
restricted by necessary conditions that no choice remains. But
in complex instances the discovery of such conditions, by un-
•Msteil force of reasoning, would be hoiieless. A distinct me-
ibod is requisite for this end, — a method which might not
inappropriately be termed the Calculus of Statistical Ctmilitions.
Into the nature of this method I shall not here further enter

c

18 NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK. [cHAP. I.

than to say, that, like the previous method, it is based upon the
employment of the ^' final logical equation," and that it definitely
assigns, 1st, the conditions which must be fidfilled among the
numerical elements of the data, in order that the problem may
be real, i. e. derived firom a possible experience ; 2ndly, the nu-
merical limits, within which the probability sought must have
been confined, if, instead of being determined by theory, it had
been deduced directly by observation firom the same system of
phaenomena from which the data were derived. It is clear that
these limits will be actual limits of the probability sought.
Now, on supposing the data subject to the conditions above as-
signed to them, it appears in every instance which I have exa-
mined that there exists one root, and only one root, of the final
algebraic equation which is subject to the required limitations.
Every source of ambiguity is thus removed. It would even seem
that new truths relating to the theory of algebraic equations
are thus incidentally brought to light. It is remarkable that
the special element of quantity, to which the previous discussion
relates, depends only upon the data^ and not at all upon the
qucBsftttm of the problem proposed. Hence the solution of each
particidar problem unties the knot of difficidty for a system of
problems, viz., for that system of problems which is marked by
the possession of common data, independently of the nature of
their qtuBsita. This circumstance is important whenever from a
particular system of data it is required to deduce a series of con-
nected conclusions. And it further gives to the solutions of
particular problems that character of relationship, derived from
their dependence upon a central and fundamental unity, which
not unfrequently marks the application of general methods.

17* But though the above considerations, with others of a
like nature, justify the assertion that the method of this treatise,
for the solution of questions in the theory of Probabilities, is a
general method, it does not thence follow that we are relieved in
all cases from the necessity of recourse to hypothetical grounds.
It has been observed that a solution may consist entirely of tenns
affected by arbitrary constant coefiicients, — may, in fact, be
wholly indefinite. The application of the method of this work to
some of the most impoi:tant questions within its range would —

CUAP. 1.] NATURE AND DB8ION OF THIS WORK. 19

were tlie data of ezpericnoe alone employed — present results of
this character. To obtain a definite solution it b necessary ^ in
fuch cases, to have recourse to hypotheses possessing more or less
of independent probability, but incapable of exact verification.
Generally speaking, such hjrpotheses will differ from the imme-
diate rcsultn of experience in partaking of a logical rather than of a
numerical character ; in prescribing the conditions under wliich
phenomena occur, rather than assigning the relative frequency
of their occurrence. This drcumstance is, however, unimportant.
Whatever their nature may be, the hypotheses assumed must
thenceforth be r^arded as belonging to the actual data, although
tending, as is obvious, to give to the solution itself somewhat of
a hypothetical character. With this understanding as to the
posnble sources of the data actually employed, the method w
perfectly general, but for the correctness of the hy|K>thetical cle-
menttf introduced it is of course no more responsible than for the
eorrectness of the numerical data derived from experience.

In illustration of these remarks we may observe that the
theory of the reduction of astronomical observations* rests, in
part, upon hjrpothetical grounds. It assumes certidn positions
as to the nature of error, the equal probabilities of its occurrence
m the fimn of excess or defect, &c., without which it would l)c
impossible to obtain any definite conclusions from a system of
eonflicting obeer\'ations. But granting such positions as tlie
above, the residue of the investigation falls strictly within the
prorinee of the theory of Probabilities. Similar oltscnations
apply to the important problem which proposes to deduce from
tiie records of the majorities of a deliberative assembly the mean
probability of correct judgment in one of its membera. II' the
■wthod of this treatise be applied to the mere numerical cLitu,
the solution obtained is of that wholly indefinite kind al>ove dc-
Kribod. And to show in a more eminent degree the insufticiency
oTthofie data by themselves, the interpretation of the arbitrary
(I. 16) which appear in the solution, merely |inHluce.<i

• TIm Aotbor dtftifiis to Cmt thU tabjcct dther in a leparaU work or in «
lhtv» A p p f di f In the prttent trcaiiM b* avoicU the uic of the integral

c2

20 NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK. [cHAP. I.

a re-statement of the ori^nal problem. Admitting^ however,
the hypothesis of the independent formation of opinion in the
individual mind, either absolutely, as in the speculations of
Laplace and Poisson, or under limitations imposed by the actual
data, as will be seen in this treatise. Chap, xxi., the problem as-
sumes a far more definite character. It will be manifest that the
ulterior value of the theory of Probabilities must depend very
much upon the correct formation of such mediate hypotheses,
where the purely experimental data arc insufficient for definite
solution, and where that further experience indicated by the in-
terpretation of the final logical equation is unattidnable. Upon
the other hand, an undue readiness to form hypotheses in sub-
jects which from their very nature are placed beyond human
ken, must re-act upon the credit of the theory of Probabilities,
and tend to throw doubt in the general mind over its most legi-
timate conclusions.

18. It would, perhaps, be premature to speculate here upon
the question whether the methods of abstract science are likely at
any future day to render service in the investigation of social
problems at all commensurate with those which they have ren-
dered in various departments of physical inquiry. An attempt
to resolve this question upon pure d priori grounds of reasoning
would be very likely to mislead us. For example, the conside-
ration of human free-agency would seem at first sight to preclude
the idea that the movements of the social system shoidd ever ma-
nifest that character of orderly evolution which we are prepared
to expect under the reign of a physical necessity. Yet already
do the researches of* the statist reveal to us facts at variance with
such an anticijmtion. Thus the records of crime and pauperism
present a degree of regularity unknown in regions in which the
disturbing influence of human wants and passions is unfelt. On
the other hand, the distemperature of seasons, the eruption of
volcanoes, the spread of blight in the vegetable, or of epidemic
maladies in the animal kingdom, things apparently or chiefly the
product of natural causes, refuse to be submitted to regular and
apprehensible laws. " Fickle as the wind," is a proverbial ex-
pression. Reflection ui)on these points teaches us in some degree
to correct our earlier judgments. We learn that we are not io

CHAP. I.] NATCRB AND DBSIOM OF THIS WORK. 21

expect, under the dominion of nece^ty, an order perceptible to
hummn observation, unless the pkj of its producing causes is
piifficicntlj simple ; nor, on the other hand, to deem that free
agency in the individual is inconsistent with regularity in the
motions of the system of which he forms a component unit.
Human freedom stands out as an apparent fiict of our conscious-
ness, while it is also, I conceive, a highly probable deduction of
uialogy (Chap, xxii.) from the nature of that portion of the
mind whose scientific constitution we are able to investigate.
But whether acce{>tcd as a fact reposing on consciousness, or as
a conclusion sanctioned by the reason, it must be so inteq>rctod
Sri not to conflict with an established result of obsen'ation, viz. :
that phamomcna, in the production of which large masses of men
arc concerned, do actually exhibit a very remarkable degree of
regularity, enabling us to collect in each succeeding age the ele-
ments uf^on which the estimate of its state and progress, so fiir
u manifested in outward results, must depend. There is thus no
sound objection d priori agmnst the {Possibility of that sjiecies of
data which is rc<|uu(ite for the ex|>erimcntal foundation of a
eciencc of social statistics. Again, whatever other object this
trcatim: may accomplish, it is presumed that it will leave no
doubt as to the existence of a system of abstract principles and of
methods founded upon those principles, by wliich any collective
body of Micial data may be made to peld, in an explicit fonn,
whatever information they implicitly involve. There may, where
ibc data are exceedingly complex, be very great difficulty in ob-
, taining thit« information,— difficidty due not to any imi>orfiH*tion
uf the theory, but to the lalK>rious cluiracter of the analytical
prucesM*<« to which it i)oints. It is (|uite conceivable that in many
lAstancrs that diflioulty nuy be such as only united effort could
overr«nne. But that we posM.'ss theoretically in all i^asc8, and
prit*tically, so far as the reciuiitite labour of calculation may be
«up|ilied« the nieaiio <»f evolving from statistical records the seeds
ufgi-neral tniths which lie buried amid the maiv of figures, is a
|mtiuo which may, I conceive, with |H'rfei*t safety be affinned.

19. Hut beyond these general |H«itions I do not venture to
speak is terms of assurance. Whether the results which might
be expected from the ap|>lication of scientific methods to siat«-

22 NATURE AND DESIGN OF THIS WORK. [CHAP. I.

lical records, over and above those the discovery of which re-
quires no such aid, would so far compensate for the labour in-
volved as to render it worth while to institute such investigations
upon a proper scale of magnitude, is a point which could, per-
haps, only be determined by experience. It is to be desired,
and it might without great presUmption be expected, that in
this, as in other instances, the abstract doctrines of sdence should
minister to more than intellectual gratification. Nor, viewing
the apparent order in which the sciences have been evolved, and
have successively contributed their aid to the service of mankind,
does it seem very improbable that a day may arrive in which si-
milar aid may accrue firom departments of the field of knowledge
yet more intimately allied with the elements of human welfiure.
Let the speculations of this treatise, however, rest at present
simply upon their claim to be regarded as true.

20. I design, in the last place, to endeavour to educe firom
the scientific results of the previous inquiries some general inti-
mations respecting the nature and constitution of the human
mind. Into the grounds of the possibility of this species of in-
ference it is not necessary to enj^r here. One or two general
observations may serve to indicate the track which I shall endea-
vour to follow. It cannot but be admitted that our views of
the science of Logic must materially influence, perhaps mainly
determine, our opinions upon the nature of the intellectual facul-
ties. For example, the question whether reasoning consists
merely in the application of certain first or necessary truths,
with which the mind has been originally imprinted, or whether
the mind is itself a seat of law, whose operation is as manifest
and as conclusive in the particular as in the general formula, or
whether, as some not undistinguished writers seem to maintain,
all reasoning is of particulars ; this question, I say, is one which
not merely affects the science of Logic, but also concerns the for-
mation of just views of the constitution of the intellectual facul-
ties. Again, if it is concluded that the mind is by original
constitution a seat of law, the question of the nature of its sub-
jection to this law, — whether, for instance, it is an obedience
founded upon necessity, like that which sustains the revolutions
nf the heavens, and preserves the order of Nature, — or whether

CHAP. 1.] NATURI AUD DBSIOM OF THIS WORK. 23

it u a itubjection of some quite distinct kind, is also a matter of
deep si^eculative interest. Further, if the mind is truly deter-
mined to be a subject of kw, and if its kws also are truly assigned,
the question of their probable or necessary influence upon the
course of human thought in different ages b one invested with
great importance, and well deserving a patient investigation, as
matter both of philosophy and of history. These and other
questions I propose, however imperfectly, to discuss in the con-
cluding portion of the present work* They belong, perhaps, to
the domain of probable or conjectural, rather than to that of po-
sitive, knowledge* But it may happen that where there is not
sufficient warrant for the certainties of sdence, there may be
grounds of analogy adequate for the suggestion of highly pro-
tttble opinions. It has seemed to me better that this discussion
ihould be entirely reserved for the sequel of the main business of
this treatise, — which b the investigation of scientific truths and
laws. Ex|)erience sufficiently instructs us that the proper order
of advancement in all inquiries after truth is to proceed from the
known to the unknown* There are parts, eveli of the philosophy
and constitution of the human mind, which have been ]>laced
fully within the reach of our investigation. To make a due ac-
quaintance with those portions of our nature the basis of all en-
deavours to penetmte amid the shadows and uncertainties of that
cuojectural realm which lies beyond and above them, is the
course most accordant with the limitations of our present con-
dition.

24 8ION8 AND THBIR LAWS. [CHAP. II.

CHAPTER 11.

OF SIGNS IN GENERAL, AND OF THE SIGNS APPROPRIATE TO THE
SCIENCE OF LOGIC IN PARJ^ICULAR ; ALSO OF THE LAW S TO WHICH
THAT CLASS OF SIGNS MM^vSeC^

1* npHAT Language is an instrument of human reason, and
-^ not merely a medium for the expression of thought, is a
truth generally admitted. It is proposed in this chapter to in-
quire what it is that renders Language thus subservient to the
most important of our intellectual faculties. Li the various
steps of this inquiry we shall be led to consider the constitution
of Language, considered as a system adapted to an end or pur-
pose ; to investigate its elements ; to seek to determine their mu-
tual relation and dependence ; and to inquire in what manner they
contribute to the attainment of the end to which, as co-ordinate
parts of a system, they have respect.

Li proceeding to these inquiries, it will not be necessary to
enter into the discussion of that famous question of the schools,
. . whether Language is to be regarded as an essential instrument
of reasoning, or whether, on the other hand, it is possible for us
to reason without its aid. I suppose this question to be beside
the design of the present treatise, for the following reason, viz.,
that it is the business of Science to investigate laws ; and that,
whether we regard signs as the representatives of things and of
their relations, or as the representatives of the conceptions and
operations of the human intellect, in studying the lawe of signs,
we are in effect studying the manifested laws of reasoning. If
there exists a difference between the two inquiries, it is one which
does not affect the scientific expressions of formal law, which are
the object of investigation in the present stage of this work, but
relates only to the mode in which those results are presented to
the mental regard. For though in investigating the laws of signs,
a posteriori, the immediate subject of examination is Language,
with the rules which govern its use ; while in making the internal

CHAP, tl.] SIGNS AMD THEIR LAWS. 25

processes of thought the direct object of inquiry, we appeal in a
more immediate way to our personal consciousness, — it will be
fuund that in both cases the results obtained are formally cqui-
%-aleDt. Nor could we easily conceive, that the unnumbered
tongues and dialects of the earth should have {Yrescrved throu^
a long succession of ages so much that is common and universal,
were we not assured of the existence of some deep foundation of
their agreement in the laws of the mind itself.

2. The elements of which all language consists are signs or
(nrmbols. Words are signs. Sometimes they are said to repre-
sent things ; sometimes the operations by which the mind com-
bines together the simple notions of things into complex concep-
tiuDs ; sometimes they express the relations of action, passion, or
mere quality, which wc perceive to exist among the objects of our
experience ; sometimes the emotions of the perceiving mind. But
words, although in this and in other ways they fulfil the office of
rigns, or representative symbols, are not the only signs which we
are capable of employing. Arbitrary marks, which speak only to
the eye, and arbitrary sounds or actions, which address themselves
to scwne other sense, are equally of the nature of signs, provided
that their representative office is defined and understood. In the
mathematical sciences, letters, and the symbols +,-,«, &c^ are
as signs, although the term *^ sign" is applied to the latter
of symbols, which represent operations or relations, rather
tian to the former, which represent the elements of number and
qoaotity. As the real imfxirt of a sign does not in any way de-
pend npon its particular form or expression, so neither do the
kws which determine its use. In the present treatise, however,
it is with written signs tliat we have to do, and it is with reference
to these exclusively that the tenu ** sign*' will be employed. The
Ofcotial properties of signs are enumerated in the following dc-

■aitioD.

Zlf^iiitfofi.— A sign is an arbitrary mark, having a fixed in-
tcqvetatjon, and susceptible of combination with other signs ui
nlgectiun to fixed laws de^wndent u^xju their nuitual intcqirc-

Sb Let us cotisiJer the particulars involved in the above dc-

26 SIGNS AND THEIR LAWS. [cHAP. II.

(L) In the first place, a sign is an arbitrary mark. It is
clearly indifferent what particular word or token we associate
with a given idea, provided that the association once made is
permanent. The Romans expressed by the word ^^ civitas" what
we designate by the word <^ state." But both they and we
might equally well have employed any other word to represent
the same conception. Nothing, indeed, in the nature of Language
would prevent us from using a mere letter in the same sense.
Were this done, the laws according to which that letter would
require to be used would be essentially the same with the laws
which govern the use of '^ civitas" in the Latin, and of ^^ state"
in the English language, so fiur at least as the use of those words
is regulated by any general principles common to all languages
alike.

(2.) In the second place, it is necessary that each sign should
possess, within the limits of the same discourse or process of
reasoning, a fixed interpretation. The necessity of this condi-
tion is obvious, and seems to be founded in the very nature of the
subject. There exbts, however, a 'dispute as to the precise nature
of the representative office of words or sjmibols used as names in
the processes of reasoning. By some it is maintained, that they
represent the conceptions of the mind alone ; by others, that they
represent things. The question is not of great importance here,
as its decision cannot affect the laws according to which signs
are employed. I apprehend, however, that the general answer
to this and such like questions is, that in the processes of reason-
ing, signs stand in the place and fulfil the office of the concep-
tions and operations of the mind ; but that as those conceptions
and operations represent things, and the connexions and relations
of things, so signs represent things with their connexions and re-
lations ; and lastly, that as signs stand in the place of the con-
ceptions and operations of the mind, they are subject to the laws
of those conceptions and operations. This view will be more
fully elucidated in the next chapter ; but it here serves to explain
the third of those particulars involved in the definition of a sign,
viz., its subjection to fixed laws of combination depending upon
the nature of its interpretation.

4. The analysis and classification of those signs by which the

CHAF. 11.] 8ION8 AND THBIR LAWS. 27

upa«tiaii8 of reaaoning are conducted will be conaidered in the
fiiUowing Propueition :

Proposition I.

All As operations of Languagt^ as an instrument (freasoninffj
mof be conducted by a system of signs composed of the following els-
wients^ viz. :

Itt Literal symbolsy as x^ y, ^e.^ representing things as subjects
9four coneeptums.

Snd. Signsof operation^ as -^9-^ x^ standing for those operations
of the mind by tehich the conceptions of things are combined or re-
ideed so as to form new conceptions involving the same elements.

3rd. The sign of identity^ -.

And these symbols of Logic are in their use subject to definite
Im, partly agrteing with and partly differing from the laws of the
wrresponding symbols in the science of Algebra,

Let it be a0i(uiucd as a criterion of the true elements of ra-
tiunal dLicourse, that they should be susceptible of combination
in the simplest forms and by the simplest laws, and thus com-
bining should generate all other known and conceivable forms of
lufruage ; and adopting this principle, let the following classifi-
atioii be conttdered.

CLASS I.

5. Appellative or descriptive signs^ expressing either the name
•fa thimg^ or some quality or circumstance belonging to it.

To this class we may obviously refer the substantive proper
or cnminQii, and the a^ective. These may indeed be regarded as
ilMiiiiig only in this respect, that the former expresses the sub-
Huitive existence of the individual thing or things to which it
ftfert ; the latter implies that existence. If we attach to the
sdjectiTe the universally understood subject ** Iwing" or ** thuig/'
it beoomes virtuaUy a substantive, and may for all the essential
poiiKMes of reasoning be repkced by the substantive. Whether
or not, in every particukir of the mental regard, it is the same
ting to say, «« Water is a fluid thing,*' as to say, '* Water is
nd;** it isal least equivalent in the expression of the processes

28 SIGNS AND THEIR LAWS. [cHAP. II.

It is clear also, that to the above class we must refer any sign
which may conventionally be used to express some circumstance
or relation, the detailed exposition of which would involve the
use of many signs. The epithets of poetic diction are very fre-
quently of this kind. They are usually compounded adjectives,
singly fulfilling the office of a many- worded description. Homer^s
*^ deep-eddying ocean" embodies a virtual description in the single
word /3a0uSci/f|c« And conventionally any other description ad-
dressed either to the imagination or to the intellect might equally
be represented by a single sign, the use of which would in all es-
sential points be subject to the same laws as the use of the ad-
jective " good" or " great." Combined with the subject " thing,"
such a sign would virtually become a substantive ; and by a single
substantive the combined meaning both of thing and quality
might be expressed.

6. Now, as it has been defined that a sign is an arbitrary
mark, it is permissible to replace all signs of the species above
described by letters. Let us then agree to represent the class 6f
individuals to which a particidar name or description is appli-
cable, by a single letter, as x. If the name is " men," for instance,
let X represent " all men," or the class " men." By a class is
usually meant a collection of individuals, to each of which a
particular name or description may be applied ; but in this work
the meaning of the term will be extended so as to include the
case in which but a single individual exists, answering to the
required name or description, as well as the cases denoted by
the terms " nothing" and " universe," which as " classes
should be understood to comprise respectively " no beings,
" all beings." Again, if an adjective, as " good," is employed
as a term of description, let us represent by a letter, as y, all
things to which the description ** good" is applicable, i. e. " all
good things," or the class "good things." Let it further be
.agreed, that by the combination xy shall be represented that
class of things to which the names or descriptions represented by
z and y are simultaneously applicable. Thus, if x alone stands
^or " white things," and y for " sheep," let xy stand for " white
sheep ;" and in like manner, if z stand for " homed things," and
X and y retain their previous interpretations, let zxy represent

CIAP. II.] SIGNS AND THBIR LAWS. 29

'* horned white shoep," i. e. that collection of things to which
the name ** sheep," and the descriptions ** white** and ** horned"
are together applicable.

Let us now consider the laws to which the symbols x^y^ &c.,
used in the above sense, are subject.

7. First, it is evident, that according to the above combina-
tions, the order in which two symbols are written is indiiFerent
The expressions xy and yx equally represent that class of things
to the several members of which the names or descriptions x and
jf are together applicable. Hence we have,

xyyx. (1)

In the case of jt representing white things, and y sheep, cither
of the members of this equation wiU represent the class of ^* white
iheep." There may be a diiference as to the order in which the
conception is formed, but there is none as to the individual things
vhich are comprehended under it. In like manner, if x represent
^ estuaries," and y ^* rivers," the expressions xy and yx will in-
differently represent *^ rivers that are estuaries," or ** estiuuies
that are rivers," the combination in tlib case being in onlinaiy
language that of two substantives, instead ofthat of a substantive
and an adjective as in the previous instance. Let there be a
thinl symbol, as z, representing that class of things to which the
term '* navigable" is applicable, and any one of the following
expressions,

^^y> ^yx^ jy^f &c.»

will represent the class of ** luvigable rivers that are estuaries."

If one of the descriptive tenns should have some implied nv
imnce to another, it is only necessary to include that reference
expressly in \U stated meaning, in onler to render the almvo
remarks still applicable. Thus, if j* represent ^^wise" and y
^ aiunscllor," we sliall have to define whether x implies windom
in the absolute sen!«o, or only the wiinloni of counsel. With such
definition the law xy - yx continues to l)e valid.

We art jHTmitted^ therefore^ to employ the tymlfoU x, y, :, Scc^ in
Ike place of the mtlfMantittft adjectittM^ and descrijtiire phntsrs nthject
is iMe rule of inierpretation^ thai arty expremon w tr/iiVA enrral of
Aete mfmboU art written topttktr shall represmi all the object* or i m/i-

30 SIGNS AND THEIR LAWS. [CHAP. II.

viduah to which their several meanings are together appUcaUef and
to the law that the order in which the symbols succeed each other is
indifferent

As the rule of interpretation has been sufficiently exempli-
fied, I shall deem it unnecessary always to express the subject
^Hhings" in defining the interpretation of a symbol used for an
> adjective. When I say, let x represent " good," it will be un-
, ^^?^'der8tood that x only represents " good" when a subject for that
^ quality is supplied by another symbol, and that, used alone, its in-
terpretation will be " good things."

8. Concerning the law above determined, the following ob-
servations, which will also be more or less appropriate to certain
other laws to be deduced hereafter, may be added.

First, I woidd remark, that this law is a law of thought, and
not, properly speaking, a law of things. Difference in the order
of the qualities or attributes of an object, apart from all ques-
tions of causation, is a difference in conception merely. The law
(1) expresses as a general truth, that the same thing may be con-
ceived in different ways, and states the nature of that difference ;
and it does no more than this.
' Secondly, As a law of thought, it is actually developed in a
I law of Language, the product and the instrument of thought.
Though the tendency of prose writing is toward uniformity,
yet even there the order of sequence of adjectives absolute in
their meaning, and applied to the same subject, is indifferent,
but poetic diction borrows much of its rich diversity from the
extension of the same lawful freedom to the substantive also.
The language of Milton is peculiarly distinguished by this spe-
cies of variety. Not only does the substantive often precede the
adjectives by which it is qualified, but it is frequently placed in
their midst. In the first few lines of the invocation to Light,
we meet with such examples as the following :

" Offspring of heaven first-horn.'^'*

" The rising world of waters dark and deep.^^

" Bright effluence of bright essence increate^

Now these inverted forms are not simply the fruits of a poetic
license. They are the natural expressions of a freedom sane-

• 11.] 8IOM8 AND THEIR LAWS. 31

tioned by the intimate laws of thought, but for reasons of conve-
nience not exercised in the ordinary use of language.

Thirdly, The law expressed by (1) may be characterized by
saying that the literal symbols x, y, Zy are commutative^ like the
symbols of Algebra. In saying this, it b not affirmed that the]
proceas of multiplication in Algebra, of which the fundamental |
law is expressed by the equation

possesses in itself any analogy with that process of logical com-
liination which xy has been made to rcpreiient above ; but only
that if the arithmetical and the logical process are expressed in
the same manner, their symbolical expressions will be subject to
the same formal law. The evidence of that subjection is in the
two cases quite distinct.

9. As the combination of two literal symbols in the form xy
expresses the whole of that class of objects to which the names
or qualities represented by x and y are together applicable, it
follows that if the two symbols have exactly the same significa-
tion, their combination expresses no more than either of the
symbols taken alone would do. In such case we should there-
fixe have

xy ^x.

As y is, however, supposed to have the same meaning as 7, we
nay refJaoe it in the above equation by x, and we thus get

XX = X.

Now in common Algebra the combination xx ii« more briefly re-
presented by x*. Let us adopt the soinc principle of notation
hoe ; for the mode of expressing a particular succession of mental
opeimtions is a thing in itself quite m arbitrary ns the mode of
cipressing a single idea or operation (II. 3). In accordance with
tbis notation, then, the aliove etiuation assumes the fonn

■

X' - X, (2)

and is, in fact, the expression of a second general law (»f those
lyaibob by which names, qualities, or descriptions, are symlHtli-
adlynpesrated.

32 SIGNS AND THEIR LAWS^jT [CHAP. II.

The reader must bear in mind that although the symbols x
and y in the examples previously formed received significations
distinct firom each other, nothing prevents us firom attributing to
them precisely the same signification. It is evident that the
more nearly their actual significations approach to each other,
the more nearly does the class of things denoted by the combi-
nation xy approach to identity with the class denoted by or, as
well as with that denoted by y. The case supposed in the de-
monstration of the equation (2) is that of absolute identity of
meaning. The law which it expresses is practically exemplified
in language. To say ^^good, good," in relation to any subject,
though a cumbrous and useless pleonasm, b the same as to say
"good." Thus "good, good" men, is equivalent to "good"
men. Such repetitions of words are indeed sometimes employed
to heighten a quality or strengthen an affirmation. But this
effect is merely secondary and conventional ; it is not founded in
the intrinsic relations of language and thought. Most of the
operations wliich we observe in nature, or perform ourselves, are
of such a kind that their effect is augmented by repetition, and
this circumstance prepares us to expect the same thing in lan-
guage, and even to use repetition when we design to speak with
emphasis. But neither in strict reasoning nor in exact discourse
is there any just ground for such a practice.

10. We pass now to the consideration of another class of the
signs of speech, and of the laws connected with their use.

CLASS II.

11. Signs of those mental operations whereby we collect parts
into a wholcy or separate a whole into its parts.

We are not only capable of entertaining the conceptions of
objects, as characterized by names, qualities, or circumstances,
applicable to each individual of the group under consideraticni,
but also of forming the aggregate conception of a group of objects
consisting of partial groups, each of which is separately named
or described. For this purpose we use the conjunctions "and,"
"or," &c. "Trees and minerals," "barren mountiuns, or fer-
tile vales,'' arc examples of this kind. In strictness, the words

CHAP. II.] flIGNS AND THEIR LAWS. 33

**tnd," ** or," intcq)08ed between the terms descriptive of two or
more classes of objects, imply that those classes are quite distinct,
$0 that no member of one is found in another. In this and in
ill other re8i)ects the words ** and" ** or" are analogous with the
Hgn 4 in algebra, and their laws are identical. Thus the ex-
prei*«»ion ^* men and women" is, conventional meanings set aside,
niuivalcnt with the expression ** women and men." Let x repre-
lent *• men," y, "women ;" and let + stand for " and'* and " or,"
then we have

X + y = y + J-, (3)

an equation which would equally hold true if jr and y represented
MumbtTM^ and + were the sign of arithmetical addition.

I>et the symbol z stand for the adjective " £uroi>ean," then
MDoe it i^ in effect, the name thing to say " European men and
women," u» to say *^ Eun^pean men and Eun)[>ean women," we
have

z(jr + I/) -^ zx -^ zy. (4)

And this er^uation also would be equally tnic were x, y, and z
PTmbols of number, and were the juxta[X)>«ition of two literal
lymhols to represent their algebraic product, just as in the logical
ligDification previously given, it represents the class of objects to
which both the epithets conjoined belong.

The above arc the laws which govern the use of the sign
*, here used to denote the pot*itive operation of aggregating
parts into a whole. But the very idea of an operation effecting
•ome positive change seems to suggest to us the idea of an op|K>-
nte r>r negative operation, having the oftect (if undoing wliat the
ibrmer one has done. Thus we cannot conceive it possible to
mllect parts into a whole, and not C4)nreive it also possible to
•qMuate a part from a whole. This operation we express in
eoounon language by the sign except^ as, "All ni<*n except
^Isiatics," ** All states except those which arc monurcliical."
Here it is implied that the things excejited form a iMU-t of the
things from which they are excepted. As we have expressed
the operation of aggregation by the sign s so we may c*xpress
tke MgBtiTe operation above descrilied by - minus. Thus if r
be taken to represent men, and y, Asiatics, i. e. Asiatic men,

D

34 SIGNS AND THEIR LAWS. [CHAP. IT.

then the conception of " All men except Asiatics" will l>c ex-
pressed by ar - y- And if we represent by ^, " states," and by
y the descriptive property " having a monarchical form," then
the conception of " All states except those which are monarchi-
cal" will be expressed by ,v - xy.

As it is indifferent for all the essential purposes of reasoning
whether w^e express excepted cases first or last in the order of
speech, it is also indifferent in what order we write any series of
terms, some of which are affected by the sign -. Thus we have,
as in the common algebra,

•'^ - y = - y + •^- (5)

Still representing by x the class " men," and by y " Asiatics,"
let z represent the adjective " white." Now to apply the adjec-
tive " white" to the collection of men expressed by the phrase
" Men except Asiatics," is the same as to say, " White men,
except white Asiatics." Ilencc we have

-(^-y) = --^--y- (6)

This is also in accordance with the laws of ordinary algebra.

The equations (4) and (6) may be considered as exemplifica-
tion of a single genend law, which may be stated by saying, thttt
the literal symbols^ x^ y, r, §*c. are distributive hi their operatiim*
The general fact which that law expresses is this, viz- : — If any
quality or circumstance is ascribed to all the members of a group,
formed either by aggregation or exclusion of |>artial groups, th^
resulting conception is the same as if the quality or circumstanoe
were first ascribed to each moiuber of the partial groups, and dllpf'
aggregation or exclusion effected afterwards. That which is
ascribed to the membei's of the whole is ascribed to the inemberB
of all its parts, howsoever those parts are connected together.

CLASS III.

12. Signs by which relation is expressed^ and by which we
form propositions.

Though all verbs may with propriety be referred to this class,
it is sufficient for the purposes of Logic to ccmsider it as includ*
ing only the substantive verl) is or are, since every other verb

CHAP. II.] SIGNS AND THBIR LAWS. 35

iiMiy be resolved into this element, and one of the signs included
nnder Class i. For as those signs arc used to express quality or
drcumstaiice of every kind, they may be employed to express
the active or passive relation of the subject of the verb, considered
with reference either to past, to present, or to future time.
Thus the IVoposition, ** Csesar conquered the Gauls," may be
rpsolved into **' C»sar is he who conquered the Grauls." The
ground of this analysis I conceive to be the following : — Unless
we understand what is meant by having conquered tlio Gauls,
i. o. by the expression ** One who conquered the Gauls," we
cannt>t understand the sentence in question. It is, therefore,
truly an element of that sentence ; another element is ** Ca»ar,"
and there is yet another required, the copula ti, to show the
cnoDcxion of these two. I do not, however, affirm that there is
DO other mode than the above (»f contemplating the relation ex-
pre«i«ed by the proposition, ** Csesar conquered the Gauls ;* ' but
only tl&at the analysis here given is a correct one for the (Mirticu-
lar pf>int of view which has been taken, and that it suffices for
the purposes of logical deduction. It may lie remarked that the
passive and future participles of the Greek language imply the
existence of the principle which has been asserttnl, viz. : that the
sign is or are may be regardcfd as an element of every personal
verb.

13. The above sign, is or are^ may be expressed by the sym-
bol •«• The laws, or as would usually be said, the axioms which
the svmbol intniduccs, are next to be considered.

Let us take the Proposition, ^* The stars are the suns and the
planets,** and let us represent stars by x, suns by y, and planets
bv r ; we have then

x«y t r. (7)

Now if it l>e true that the stars are the suns and the planets, it
will follow that the i^tars, except the planets, are suns. This
would give the CMjuation

X - r = 3(, (8)

which miiiit therefore be a de<Iuctiou from (7). Thus a terfu r
bccD remoi'ctl from one side of au e(\\iaUi^m \o \W Q'Ctwx Vj

D-i

28 SIGNS AND THEIR LAWS. [CUAP. II.

It is clear also, that to the above class we must refer any sign
which may conventionally be used to express some circumstance
or relation, the detailed exposition of which would involve the
use of many signs. The epithets of poetic diction are very fre-
quently of this kind. They are usually compounded adjectives,
singly fulfilling the office of a many-worded description. Homer^s
" deep-eddying ocean" embodies a virtual description in the single
word /3a0uSii/i)c« And conventionally any other description ad-
dressed either to the imagination or to the intellect might equally
be represented by a single sign, the use of which would in all es-
sential points be subject to the same laws as the use of the ad-
jective " good" or " great." Combined with the subject " thing,"
such a sign would virtually become a substantive ; and by a single
substantive the combined meaning both of thing and quality
might be expressed.

6. Now, as it has been defined that a sign is an arbitrary
mark, it is permissible to replace all signs of the species above
described by letters. Let us then agree to represent the class (»f
individuals to which a particular name or description is appli-
cable, by a single letter, as x. If the name is '^ men," for instance,
let X represent " all men," or the class " men." By a class is
usually meant a collection of individuals, to each of which a
j)articular name or description may be applied ; but in this work
the meaning of the term will be extended so as to include the
case in which but a single individual exists, answering to the
required name or description, as well as the cases denoted by
the terms " nothing" and " universe," which as " classes'
should be understood to comprise respectively " no beings,
" all beings." Again, if an adjective, as " good," is employed
as a term of description, let us represent by a letter, as y, all
things to which the description *'good" is applicable, i.e. "all
good things," or the class "good things." Let it further be
* '' . /agreed, that by the combination xy shall be represented that
*' / class of things to wliich the names or descriptions represented by
X and y are sinmltaneously applicable. Thus, if x alone stands
^or " white tilings," and y for " sheep," let xy stand for " white
sheep ;" and in like manner, if z stand for " homed things," and
X and y retain their previous interpretations, let zxy represent

CVAP. II.] SION8 AND THBIR LAWS. 29

** horned white sheep,'* i- e. that collection of things to which
the name <* sheep," and the descriptions ** white** and *^ homed'*
are together applicable.

Let us now consider the laws to which the symbols x^y^ &c.,
used in the above sense, arc subject.

7. First, it is evident, that according to the above combina-
tions, the order in which two symbols are written is indifferent.
The expressions xy and yx equally represent that class of things
to the several members of which the names or descriptions x and
y are together applicable. Hence we have,

xy^yx. (1)

In the case of x representing white things, and y sheep, either

of the members of this equation will represent the class of '^ white

sheep.'* There may be a difference as to tlic order in which the

conception is formed, but there is none as to the individual things

which are comprehended under it. In like manner, if jr represent

** estuaries," and y *^ rivers," the expressions xy and yx will in-

diflerently represent ** rivers that are estuaries," or ** estuaries

that arc rivers," the combination in this case being in onlinary

language that of two substantives, instead of that of a substantive

tnd an adjective as in the previous instance. Let there Ixs a

third symbol, as z, representing that class of things to which the

term ** navigable" is applicable, and any one of the following

expreasions,

zxy, zyx, xyz, &c.,

will represent the class of ** navigable rivers that are estuaries."

If one of the descriptive terms should have some implied re-
ference to another, it is only ncccMar}- to include that reference
expressly in \U stated meaning, in order to render the al>ove
remarks still applicable. Thus, if x represent "wise" and y
** counsellor," we shall have to define whether x implies wi<<dom
in the absolute sen.<«e, or only the wi^loni of counsel. With such
definition the law xy » yx continues to lie valid.

We are ptTmUted^ therefore^ to employ the fymltoU x, y, z, tS'^., in
ike plaet of the mt^stantivef^ adjective^ and dejtcrijtiire phrates md^jeci
Is iki rmU of inierpretaticH^ that any expremon in tr/iiVA sefrrat of
$hi$€ symbols are fcrUien tayetker skall represent all the olijecU or t n</i -

30 SIGNS AND THBIR LAWS. [CHAP. II.

viduah to which their several meanings are together applicable^ and
to the law thai the order in which the symbols succeed each oilier is
indifferenL

As the rule of interpretation has been sufficiently exempli-
fied, I shall deem it unnecessary always to express the subject
'Hhings'' in defining the interpretation of a symbol used for an
/^ ^ adjective. When I say, let x represent " good," it will be un-
r '- ?^-derstood that a only represents " good" when a subject for that
^' quality is supplied by another symbol, and that, used alone, its in-
terpretation will be " good things."

8. Concerning the law above determined, the following ob-
servations, which will also be more or less appropriate to certain
other laws to be deduced hereafler, may be added.

First, I would remark, that this law is a law of thought, and
not, properly speaking, a law of things. Difference in the order
of the qualities or attributes of an object, apart from all ques-
tions of causation, is a difierence in conception merely. The law
(1) expresses as a general truth, that the same thing may be con-
ceived in dificrent ways, and states the nature of that difierence ;
and it does no more than this.
/ Secondly, As a law of thought, it is actually developed in a
I law of Language, the product and the instrument of thought.
Though the tendency of prose writing is toward uniformity,
yet even there the order of sequence of adjectives absolute in
their meaning, and applied to the same subject, is indifferent,
but poetic diction borrows much of its rich diversity from the
extension of the same lawful freedom to the substantive also.
The language of Milton is peculiarly distinguished by this spe-
cies of variety. Not only does the substantive often precede the
adjectives by which it is qualified, but it is frequently placed in
their midst. In the first few lines of the invocation to Light,
we meet with such examples as the following :

" Offspring of heaven first-born,'^'*

*' The rising world of waters dark and deep.^^

" Bright effluence of bright essence increatey

Now these inverted forms are not simply the fruits of a poetic
license. They are the natural expressions of a freedom sane-

CHAP. II.] 8IOM8 AND THBIR LAWS. 31

tioned by the intiuuite laws of thought, but for rensons of convc-
Bienoe not cxcrdflcd in the ordmary use of hmguogc.

Thirdly, The law expresBed by (1) may be characterized by
Mying that the literal symbols x, y, z, are contmutative, like the
ifmboU of Algebra. In saying this, it is not affirmed that the)
prooesa of multiplication in Algebra, of which the fundamental I
kw 18 expressed by the equation

poMCSscs in itself any analogy with that process of lo^cal OHn-
Unation which xy has been made to rcpreticnt above ; but only
that if the arithmetical and the logical process are expressed in
the same manner, their symbolical expressions will be subject to
the same formal law. The evidence of that subjection is in the
two caa»es quite distinct.

9. As the combination of two literal symbols in the form ly
expresses the whole of that class of objects to which the names
or qualities represented by x and y are together applicable, it
follows that if the two symbols have exactly the same significa-
tiuB, their combination expresses no more than either of the
fymbda taken alone would do. In such case we should there-
Sore have

ajf -«.

As jf is, however, supposed to have the same meaning as r, we
refdaoe it in the above eqimtion by x , and we thus get

XX = X.

in common Algebra the combination xx in more briefly re-
presented by z'. Let us ailopt the s:une principle of notation
kerc ; for the mode of exprctising a [tarticular 8uccei«t«ion of mental
operations ii« a thing in itself quite ns arbitrary a^ the moile of
cxpreMng a single idea or operation (II. 3). In accordance with
this notation, then, the aliovc e(|uation astjiunie^ the form

■

x'-x, (2)

sad lis in fiict, the exjireMiion of a second general law of thoM*
•jmbcJs by which names, qualities, or descriptioni*, are symlK^U-
cdly Ripiesented.

40 DERIVATION OF THE LAWS. [cHAP. III.

onefomi of expression ; the sceptic, if true to his principles, ano-
ther. They who regard the phsenomena with which we are con-
cerned in this inquiry as the mere successive states of the thinking
subject devoid of any causal connexion, and they who refer them
to the operations of an active intelligence, would, if consistent,
equally differ in their modes of statement. Like difference would
also result from a difference of classification of the mental faculties.
Now the principle which I would here assert, as affording us the
only ground of confidence and stability amid so much of seeming
and of real diversity, is the following, viz., that if the laws in ques-
tion are really deduced from observation, they have a real existence
as laws of the himian mind, independently of any metaphysical
theory which may seem to be involved in the mode of their state-
ment. They contain an element of truth which no ulterior cri-
ticism upon the nature, or even upon the reality, of the mind's
operations, can essentially affect. Let it even be granted that
the mind is but a succession of states of consciousness, a series
of fleeting impressions uncaused from without or from vdthin,
emerging out of nothing, and returning into nothing again, —
the last refinement of the sceptic intellect, — still, as laws of suc-
cession, or at least of a past succession, the results to which obser-
vation had led would remain true. They would require to be
interpreted into a language from whose vocabulary all such terms
as cause and effect, operation and subject, substance and attri-
bute, had been banished ; but they would still be valid as scien-
tific truths.

Moreover, as any statement of the laws of thought, founded
upon actual observation, must thus contain scientific elements
which arc independent of metaphysical theories of the nature of
the mind, the practical application of such elements to the con-
struction of a system or method of reasoning must also be inde-
pendent of metaphysical distinctions. For it is upon the scien-
tific elements involved in the statement of the laws, that any
practical application will rest, just as the practical conclusions of
physical astronomy are independent of any theory of the cause
of gravitation, but rest only on the knowledge of its phaeno-
menal effects. And, therefore, as respects both the determi-

CHAP. III.] DERIVATION OF THB LAWS. 41

nation of the law8 of thought, and the practical use of thciu
when diM!ovcred, wc arc, for all really scientific endd, uncon-
cerned with the truth or fi&behood of any metaphyseal specula-
tiun« whatever.

3. The course which it appears to me to be expedient, under
these circumstances, to adopt, is to avail myself as far as possible
of the language of common discourse, without regard to any
theory of the nature and powers of the mind which it may be
thought to embody. For instance, it is agreeable to common
usage to say that we converse with each other by the communi-
cation of ideas, or conceptions, such communication being the
oOkc of words ; and that with reference to any {)articular ideas or
conceptions presented to it, the mind possesses certain powers or
faculties by which the mental regard maybe fixed ui)on some ide&n,
to the exclusion of others, or by which the given conceptions or
idca« may, in various ways, be combined together. To those
fiKultieti or powers different names, as Attention, Simple Appre-
hension, Conception or Imagination, Abstraction, &c., have been
given, — names which have not only furnished the titles of distinct
divisions of the philosophy of the human mind, but passed into
the common language of men. Whenever, then, occasion shall
occur to use these terms, I shall do so without implying thereby
that I accept the theory that the mind possesses such and such
powers and fkculdes as distinct elements of its activity. Nor is
it indeed necessary to inquire whether such powers of the under-
itanding have a distinct existence or not. We may merge these
different titles under the one generic name of Operations of the
human mind, define these operations so far as is necessary for the
purpotfcs of this work, and then seek to express their ultimate Uws.
Such will be the general order of the course which I shall pur-
toe, though reference will occasionally be made to the names which
cumnKm agreement has assigned to the |Nirticular states or o|>e-
ntions of the mind which mav tall under our notice.

It will be most convenient to distribule the more definite re-
sults of the following investigation into distinct Profiositions.

42 DERIVATION OF THB LAWS. [CHAP. III.

Proposition I.

4. To deduce t/ie laws of t/ie symbols of Logic from a consule-
ration of those operations of the mind which are implied in the strict
iise of language as an instrument of reasoning.

In every discourse, whether of the mind conversing with its
own thoughts, or of the individual in his intercourse with others,
there is an assumed or expressed limit within which the subjects of
its operation are confined. The most imfettered discourse is that
in which the words we use are understood in the widest possible
application, aud for them the limits of discourse are co-extensive
with those of the universe itself. But more usually we confine our-
selves to a less spacious field. Sometimes, in discoursing of men
we imply (without expressing the limitation) that it is of men
only imder certain circumstances and conditions that we speak,
as of civilized men, or of men in the vigour of life, or of men
under some other condition or relation. Now, whatever may be
the extent of the field within which all the objects of our dis-
course are found, that field may properly be termed the universe
of discourse.

5. Furthermore, this universe of discourse is in the strictest
sense the ultimate subject of the discourse. The office of any name
or descriptive term employed under the limitations supposed is not
to raise in the mind the conception of all the beings or objects to
which that name or description is applicable, but only of those
which exist within the supposed universe of discourse. If that
imivcrse of discourse is the actual universe of things, which it
always is when our words are taken in their real and literal sense,
then by men we mean all men that exist ; but if the universe of
discourse is limited by any antecedent implied understanding,
then it is of men under the limitation thus introduced that we
speak. It is in both cases the business of the word men to direct
a certain operation of the mind, by which, from the proper uni-
verse of discourse, we select or fix upon the individuals signified.

6. Exactly of the same kind is the mental operation implied
by the use of an adjective. Let, for instance, the universe of dis-

coursc he the actual Universe. Then, as the word men directs

CHAP. III.] DBRIVATION OF THE LAWS. 43

u» to ffclect mentally from that Universe all the beings to which
the term **men*' is applicable; so the adjective ^'good," in the
C4»mbination ** good men," directs us still further to select men-
tally from the class of men all those who possess the further
quality '^good;** and. if another adjective were prefixed to the
rumbination ^* good men/' it would direct a further operation of
the same nature, havmg reference to that further quality which
it might be chosen to express.

It i^ important to notice carefully the real nature of the ope-
ration here described, for it is conceivable, that it might have
been different firom what it is. Were the adjective simply attri-
Imiire in its character, it would seem, that when a {Murticular set
of beings is designated by men, the prefixing of the adjective
food would direct us to attach mentally to all those beings the
quality of goodness. But this is not the real office of the ad-
jective. The operation which we reaUy perform is one of le-
kdiam according to a prescribed principle or idea. To what fii-
culties of the mind such an operation would be referred, acconling
to the received classification of its powers, it is not important to
inquire, but I sup{K>se that it would be considered as dependent
upon the two faculties of Conception or Imagination, and Atten-
tion. To the one of these faculties mig&t be referred the fonna-
tion of the general conception ; to the other the fixing of the
mental regard upon those individuals within the prescribed uni-
verse of discourse which answer to the conception. If, however,
ss seems not improbable, the power of Attention is nothing more
than the powcrof continuing t)ie exercise of any other fiiculty of the
mind, we might properly regard the whole of the mental process
above described as refcrrible to the mental faculty of Imagination
or Conception, the first step of the process being the conceptiim
of the Universe itself, and each succeeding step limiting in a de-
finite manner the conception thus formed. Adopting this view, I
rhall describe each such 8tei>, or any definite combination of such
steps, as a dejinite act of conception. Ami the use of this term I
4iaU extend so as to include in its meaning not only the ctmcepticm
<»r classes of objects represented by particular names or simple
attributes of quality, but also the aimbination oC wucVv ^c\tu(«^
ID mav amnncr consistent with the ^wcrs «iA \vBfii\V%x>0CA

44 DBUIVATION OF THE LAWS. [CHAP. lit.

of the human mind ; indeed, any intellectual operation short
of that which is involved in the structure of a sentence or propo-
sition. The general laws to which such operations of the mind
are subject are now to be considered.

7. Now it will be shown that the laws which in the preced-
ing chapter have been determined a posteriori from the consti-
tution of language, for the use of the literal symbols of Logic,
are in reality the laws of that definite mental operation which
has just been described. We commence our discourse witJi a
certain imderstanding as to the limits of its subject, i. e. as to
the limits of its Universe. Every name, every term of descrip-
tion that we employ, dir^ ts him whom we address to the per-
formance of a certain mental oper ation upon t hn-t Ri\bj^t' And
thus is thought communicated. But as each name or descripti ve
term is in tliis view but the representative oi'an intellectual ope-
ration, that operation being also prior in the order ot' nature, it
is clear that the laws of the name or symbol must be of a deri\'a-
tive character, — must, in fact, originate in those of the operation
which they represent. That the laws of the symboj^and of the
mental process are identic^ in expression will now be shown.

8. Let us then suppose that the universe of om: d iscourse is
the actual universe, so that words are to be used in the full ex-
tent of their meaning, and let us consider the two mental opera-
tions implied by the words "white" and "men." The word
" men" implies the operation of selecting in thought from its

^ subject, the universe, all men ; and the resulting conception,
tnen^ becomes the subject of the next operation. The operation
implied by the word " white" is that of selecting from its subject,
"men," all of that cla^s which are white. The final resulting
conception is that of " wliite men." Now it is perfectly appa-
rent that if the operations above described had been performed
in a converse order, the result would have been the same. Whe-
ther w^e begin by forming the conception of " wew," and then
by a second intellectual act limit that conception to " white
men," or whether we begin by forming the conception of " white
objects," and then limit it to such of that class as arc " men," is
|)erfectly indifferent so far as the result is concerned. It is ob-
vious that the order of the mental processes would be equally

CHAP. III.] DBRIVATION OF THE LAWS. 45

indifferent if for the words "white" and "men" we substituted
any other descriptive or appellative terms whatever, provided
only that their meaning was fixed and absolute. And thus the
indifference of the order of two successive acts of the faculty of
Conception, the one of which furnishes the subject upon which
the other is supposed to operate, is a general condition of the
exercise of that faculty. It is a law of the mi nd, and it is the
real origin of that law of the literal symbols of Logic which con-
stitutes its formal expression (1) Chap. ii.

9. It is equally clear that the mental operation above de-
scribed is of such a nature that its effect is not altered by repe-
tition. Suppose that by a definite act of conception the attention
has been fixed upon men, and that by another exercise of the
same faculty we limit it to those of the race who are white.
Then any fiirther repetition of the latter mental act, by which
the attention is limited to white objects, does not in any way
modify the conception arrived at, viz., that of white men. This
is also an example of a general law of the mind, and it has its
formal expression in the law ((2) Chap, ii.) of the literal symbols.

10. Again, it is manifest that from the conceptions of two
distinct classes of things we can form the conception of that col-
lection of things which the two classes taken together compose ;
and it is obviously indifferent in what order of position or of
priority those classes are presented to the mental view. This is
another general law of the mind, and its expression is found in
(3) Chap. II.

11. It is not necessary to pursue this course of inquiry and
comparison. Sufficient illustration has been given to render ma-
nifest the two following positions, viz. :

First, That the operations of the mind, by which, in the
exercise of its power of imagination or conception, it combines
and modifies the simple ideas of things or qualities, not less than
those operations of the reason which are exercised upon truths
and propositions, arc jsubject to general laws.

Secondly, That those laws are mathematical in their form,
and that they are actually developed in the essential laws of
human language. Wherefore the laws of the symbols of Logic

46 DERIVATION OF THE LAWS. [CHAF. III.

are deduclble from a consideration of the operations of the mind
in reasoning.

12. The remainder of this chapter will be occupied with
questions relating to that law of thought whose expression is
ai* = X (II. 9), a law which, as has been implied (II. 15), forms
the characteristic distinction of the operations of the mind in its
ordinary discourse and reasoning, as compared with its operations
when occupied with the general algebra of quantity. An im-
portant part of the following inquiry will consist in proving that
the symbols and 1 occupy a place, and are susceptible of an
interpretation, among the s3rmboIs of Logic ; and it may first be
necessary to show how particular symbols, such as the above,
may with propriety and advantage be employed in the represen-
tation of distinct systems of thought.

The ground of this propriety cannot consist in any commu-
nity of interpretation. For in systems of thought so truly
distinct as those of Logic and Arithmetic (I use the latter term
in its widest sense as the science of Number), there is, properly
speaking, no community of subject. The one of them is conver-
sant with the very conceptions of things, the other takes account
solely of their numerical relations. But inasmuch as the forms
and methods of any system of reasoning depend immediately upon
the laws to which the symbols are subject, and only mediately,
through the above link of connexion, upon their interpretation,
there may be both propriety and advantage in employing the
same symbols in diflferent systems of thought, provided that such
interpretations can be assigned to them as shall render their for-
mal laws identical, and their use consistent. The ground of that
employment will not then be community of interpretation, but
the community of the formal la^vs, to which in their respective
systems they are subject. Nor must that community of formal
laws be established upon any other ground than that of a careful
observation and comparison of those results which are seen to
flow independently from the interpretations of the systems under
consideration.

These observations will explain the process of inquiry adopted
in the following Proposition. The literal symbols of Logic are

CHAP. 111.] DBRIVATION OF THB LAWS. 47

univerailly subject to the law whose expression is x* <= r. Of
the Mvuilwls of Number there are two only, and- 1, which sa-
tisfy this law. But each of these symbols is also subject to a law
peculiar to itself in the system of numerical magnitude, and this
•uggci«ts the inquiry, what interpretations must be given to the
literal symbols of Logic, in order that the same [peculiar nn^l
tbnnal laws may be realized in the logical system also.

Proposition II.

13. To determine the logical value and sif/ni/icance of the
iymlndt and 1 .

The symbol 0, as used in Algebra, satisfies the following for-
mal law,

Oxy = 0, or Oy«0, (I)

whatever nvnther y may represent. That this formal Uw may ho
obeyed in the r^yc^tem of I^gic, we must a:«;ii«;n to the syniliol
fu<*h an interpretation that the class represented by Oy may l»o
identical with tlie cIa:*^ represciiteil by 0, whatever the class //
mav be. A little consideration will show that tliis condition is

m

ntisfied if the syml^)l represent Nothing. In acconlance with
a previous definition, we may tenn Nothing a class. In fact.
Nothing and Universe are the two limits of class extension, lor
they are the limits of the possible interpretations of general
names, none of which can roLite to fewer individuals than are
eompritfed in Nothing, or to more than are con)prise<l in the
L'niveree. Now whatever the class u mav l>e, the individuals
which arc common to it and tt» the class '* Nothing*' an* identi-
cal with those comprised in the class '^Nothing,** for they an*
none. And thus by assigning to the interpretation Nothing,
ike law ( 1 ) is satisfied ; and it is not otherwise Mitistied C4»nsis-
tently with tlie perfectly general character of tlie class y.

Scoundly, The symbol I satisfies in the system (»f NumU'r
the following law, viz.«

1 ' y y^ or ly = y,

whatever number y may re]»resent. Anti this fornml eipiatiun
bang aaaumed as eipially valid in the system of this work, in

48 DERIVATION OF THE LAWS. [CHAP. III.

which 1 and y represent classes, it appears that the sjonbol 1

must represent such a class that all the individuals which are

found in any proposed class y are also all the individuals \y that

are common to that class y and the class represented by 1. A

i little consideration will here show that the class represented bj 1

1 must be " the Universe," since this is the only class in which

r^ ,i^ are found all the individuals that exist in any class. Hence the

■ respective interpretations of the symbols and 1 in the system

. I of Logic are Nothing and Universe,

14. As with the idea of any class of objects as "men," there
is suggested to the mind the idea of the contrary class of beings
which are not men ; and as the whole Universe is made up of
these two classes together, since of every individual which it
comprehends we may affirm either that it is a man, or that it is
not a man, it becomes important to inquire how such contrary
names are to be expressed. Such is the object of the following
Proposition.

Proposition III.

If X represent any class of objects^ then %ciU 1- x represent the
contrary or supplementary class of objects^ i. e. the class including
all objects which are not compreliended in the class x.

For greater distinctness of conception let x represent the class
men^ and let us express, according to the last Proposition, the
Universe by 1 ; now if from the conception of the Universe, as
consisting of " men" and " not-mcn," we exclude the conception
of " men," the resulting conception is that of the contrary class,
" not-men." Hence the class " not-men" will be represented by
I - X. And, in general, whatever class of objects is represented
by the symbol a;, the contrary class will be expressed by 1 - jr.

15. Although the following Proposition belongs in strictness
to a future chapter of this work, devoted to the subject of
maxims or necessary truths, yet, on account of the great impor-
tance of that law of thought to which it relates, it has been
thought proper to introduce it here.

CHAP. III.] DERIVATION OF THE LAWS. 49

Proposition IV.

That axiom of mHaphyticians which is termed the principle of
eimiradiction^ and which affirms that it is impossible for any being to
possess a quality, and at the same time not to possess it^isa conse*
yitemee of the fundamental law of thought, whose expression is x^^x.

Let us write this equmtion in the form

X - x« « 0,
whence we have

«(l-«)-0; (1)

both these transfomiatioiis being justified by the axiomatic Liws
of combination and traiisix>8ition (II. 13). Liet us, for simplicity
of conception, give to the symbol x the particular interpretation
of mem^ then 1 - x will represent the dass of <^ not-men"
(Prop. III.) Now the formal product of the expressions of two
fhnrtcw represents that class of individuals which is common to
them both (11. 6). Hence x(l - x) will represent the clam
whose members are at once ** men/' and ^^ not men," and the
equation (1) thus express the principle, that a class whose mem'-
hers are at the same time men and not men does not exist. In
other words, that it is impossible for the same individual to be at
the same time a man and not a man. Now let the meaning of
the symbol x be extended from the representing of ** men,'* to
that of any class of beings characterized by the possession of any
quality whatever; and the equation (1) will then express that it
is tmposHible for a being to possess a quality and not to possess
that quality at the same time. But this is identically that
^principle of contradiction" which Aristotle has described as the
fimdaniental axiom of all philoctophy. *^ It is imi>osi>ibIc that the
Mme quality should both bcKmg and not belong to the minie
thing. . . Tills is the uio:!it certain of all principlort. . . Wherefore
they who demonstrate n*fcT to this as an ultimate opinion. For
it is by nature the source of all the other axioint>.*'*

* Ti yip mirrh ifta vwapx**^ ^t *oi /iif vwapx**'^ oCvraroy r^ avr^Koi carik

«fry wdrrmtf.^MiimpkffU€m, III. 3.

K

50 DERIVATION OF THB LAWS. [CHAP. III.

The above interpretation has been introduced not on account
of its immediate value in the present system, but as an illustration
of a significant fact in the philosophy of the intellectual powers,
viz., that what has been commonly regarded as the fundamental
axiom of metaphysics is but the consequence of a law of thought,
mathematical in its form. I desire to direct attention also to tiie
circumstance that the equation (1) in which that fundamental
law of thought is expressed is an equation of the second degree.*
Without speculating at all in this chapter upon the question,
whether that circiunstance is necessary in its own nature, we
may venture to assert that if it had not existed, the whole pro-
cedure of the understanding would have been different from what
(it is. Thus it is a consequence of the &ct that pie fundamental
equation of thought is of the second degree, that we perform the
operation of analysis and classification, by division into pairs of

* Should it here be said that the existence of the equation x^=r. x necessitates
also the existence of the equation x^ = x, which is of the third degree, and then
inquired whether that equation does not indicate a process of trichotomy ; the
answer is, that the equation x^ = jr is not interpretable in the system of logic.
For writing it in either of the forms

A'lr! ■' V/ x(l-x)(l + x) =0. (2)

J ^r- y ^ x(l-x)(-l-x) = 0, (3)

we see that its interpretation, if possible at all, must involve that of the factor
1 + X, or of the factor — 1 — x. The former is not interpretable, because we
cannot conceive of the addition of any class x to the universe 1 ; the latter is not
interpretable, because the symbol - 1 is not subject to the law x (1 — x) = 0, to
which all class symbols arc subject. Hence the equation r* = x admits of no in-
terpretation analogous to that of the equation x> = x. Were the former equation,
however, true independently of the latter, i. e. were that act of the mind which
is denoted by the symbol x, such that its second repetition should reproduce the
result of a single operation, but not its first or mere repetition, it is presumable
that we should be able to interpret one of the forms (2), (3), which under the
actual conditions of thought we cannot do. There exist operations, known to
the mathematician, the law of which may be adequately expressed by the equa-
tion x3=x. But they are of a nature altogether foreign to the province of
general reasoning.

In saying that it is conceivable that the law of thought might have been dif-
ferent from what it is, I mean only that we can frame such an hypothesis, and
study its consequences. The possibility of doing this involves no such doctrine
as that the actual law of human reason is the product either of chance or of arbi-
trary will.

t. >*-*■

CHAP. III.] DERIVATION OF THE LAWS. 51

oppoates, or, as it is technically said, hjjHchotonu^ Now if the
equation in question had been of the third degree, still admitting
of interpretation as such, the mental division must have been
threefold in character, and we must have proceeded by a species
of trichotomy^ the real i^ature of which it is impossible for us,
with our existing Acuities, adequately to conceive, but the laws
of which we might stiU investigate as an object of intellectual
speculation.

16. The law of thought expressed by the equation (1) will,
for reasons which are made apparent by the above discussion, be
oocasioiially referred to as the '< kw of duality.**

B 2

52 DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS. [cHAP. !▼«

CHAPTER IV.

OF THE DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS INTO THE TWO CLASSES OF
*' PRIMART** AND " SECONDARY ;" OF THE CHARACTERISTIC PRO-
PERTIES OF THOSE CLASSES, AND OF THE LAWS OF THE EXPRES-
SION OF PRIMARY PROPOSITIONS.

!• ^T^HE laws of those mental operations which are concerned
-^ in the processes of Conception or Ima^nation having
been investigated, and the corresponding laws of ihe symbols
by which they are represented explained, we are led to consider
the practical application of the results obtained : first, in ihe
expression of the complex terms of propositions ; secondly, in
the expression of propositions ; and lastly, in the construction of
a general method of deductive analysis. In the present chapter
we shall be chiefly concerned with the first of these objects* as
an introduction to which it is necessary to establish the following
Proposition :

Proposition I.

All logical propositions may be considered as belonging to one
or the other of two great classes^ to which the respective names of
** Primary^ or " Concrete Propositions^ and ** Secondary^ or " Ab-
stract Propositions^ may be given.

Every assertion that we make may be referred to one or the
other of the two following kinds. Either it expresses a relation
among things^ or it expresses, or is equivalent to the expression of,
a relation among propositions. An assertion respecting the pro-
perties of things, or the phasnomena which they manifest, or the
drcumstances in which they are placed, is, properly speaking, the
assertion of a relation among things. To say that ^^ snow is
white," is for the ends of logic equivalent to saying, that " snow
is a white thing." An assertion respecting facts or events, their
mutual connexion and dependence, is, for the same ends, generally
equivalent to the assertion, that such and such propositions oon-

CHAP. IV.] DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS. 53

oerning those events have a eertun relation to each other as
mpects their mutual truth or falsehood. The former class of
propositions, relating to thing$^ I call ^* Primary ;" the latter class,
relating to proposition$j I call *^ Secondary.'* The distinction is
ID practice nearly but not quite co-extensive with the common
logical distinction of propositions as categorical or hypothetical.

For instance, the propositions, **The sun shines,'* <*The earth
is warmed,*' are primary ; the proposition, " If the sun shines
the earth is ¥rarmed,*' is secondary. To say, ** The sun shines,"
is to say, ** The sun is that which shines,'* and it expresses a re-
lation between two classes of things, viz., ** the sun" and ^* things
which shine." The secondary proposition, however, given above,
expresses a relation of dei)cndcnce between the two primary propo-
sitions, *' The sun shines," and ** The earth is warmed.** I do not
hereby affirm that the relation between these propositions is, like
that which exists between the facts which they express, a rela-
tion of causality, but only that the relation among the propo-
sitions so implies, and is so implied by, the relation among the
frets, that it may for the ends of logic be used as a fit repre-
sentative of that relation.

2. If instead of the proposition, '* The sun shines," we say,
** It IS true that the sun shines," we then si)eak not directly of
things, but of a proposition concerning tilings, viz., of the pro-
position, ** The sun shines." And, therefore, the proposition in
which we thus speak is a secondary one. Every primary pro-
position may thud give rise to a occondary proiK)sition, viz., to
that secondary proiK)sition which asserts its truth, or declares its
fidsehood.

It will usually happen, that the {Mirticles (/*, either^ or^ will
indjcate that a proposition is secondary ; but they do not neces-
■rily imply that such is the case. The proi>osition, " Animals
tre cither rational or irrational," is priinar}'. It cannot lie re-
solved into ** Either animals are rational or iininmls are ira-
tiunal," and it does not therefore express* a relation of dt*pendem*e
between the two proiH>sitioiis connected together in the latter
fCsjunctive sentence. The particles, ciVArr, or, are in fact no
triUriam of the nature of proiiositions, although it happens that
thtjr an moie frequently found in secondary propositions* Evet^

64 DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS. [CHAP. IT.

the conjunction t/may be found in primary propositions. <* Men
are, if wise, then temperate," is an example of the kind* It
cannot be resolved into ^* K all men are wise, then all men are
temperate."

3. As it is not my design to discuss the merits or defects of
the ordinary division of propositions, I shall simply remark here,
that the principle upon which the present classification is founded
is dear and definite in its application, that it involves a real
and fundamental distinction in propositions, and that it is of
essential importance to the development of a general metiiod of
reasoning. Nor does the &ct that a primary proposition may
be put into a form in which it becomes secondary at all conflict
witii the views here maintained. For in the case thus supposed,
it is not of the things connected together in the primary propo-
sition that any direct account is taken, but only of the propo-
sition itself considered as true or s^ false.

4. In the expression both of primary and of secondary propo-
sitions, the same symbols, subject, as it will appear, to the same
laws, will be employed in this work. The difference between
the two cases is a difference not of form but of interpretation*
In both cases the actual relation which it is the object of the
proposition to express will be denoted by the sign -. In the
expression of primary propositions, the members tiius connected
will usually represent the " terms" of a proposition, or, as they
are more particularly designated, its subject and predicate.

Proposition II.

5. To deduce a general method^ founded upon the enumeration of
possible varietieSyfor the expression of any class or collection ofthingSf
which may constitute a ** term^ of a Primary Proposition.

First, 1£ the class or collection of things to be expressed is
defined only by names or qualities common to all the individuals
of which it consists, its expression will consist of a single term,
in which the symbols expressive of those names or qualities will
be combined vrithout any connecting sign, as if by the alge-
braic process of multiplication. Thus, if a represent opaque
substances, y polished substances, z stones, we shall have.

CHAP. IV.] DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS. 55

jtyz ■ opoque {loluhed stones ;

jEy ( 1 - z) « oiNiquc iiolishcd substances which arc not stones;
x(l - y){\ - z)» oiHique substances which arc not polished,
and arc not stones ;

and so on for any other combination. Let it be observed, that
each of these expresnions satbfies the same hiw of duality, as the
individual symbols which it contdns. Thus,

xyz X xyz'^xyzi

^y(\ -r) X jry(l -z) »«y(l -z);

and so on. Any such term as the above we shall designate as
a ** class term/* because it expresses a class of things by means
of the conunon properties or names of the individual members of
fuch class.

Secondly, If we speak of a collection of tilings, diiferent
portions of which arc defined by dittereiit proi)crties, names, or
attributes, the cxprciwions for thoste different {K>rtions must be
separately fonncd, and then connccteil by the sign + . But if
the collection of which we desire to e*pcak has been formed by
exchuling from some wider collection a defined i)ortiou oi* its
members, the sign - must be prefixed to the symbolical expres-
sion of the excluded portion. Ke:*i)ecting the use of tlici*e xym-
bols some further obser>'ations may be added.

6. Speaking generally, the symbol + is the e(]uivalent of the
conjunctions ^'and,*' *^or,'* and the symbol -, the CHjuividcnt of
the pre|>osition *' except." Of the conjunctions *' and" and ** or,"
the fiirmcr is usually employed when the collection to be dc-
•crilicd Cirms the subject, the latter when it fonns the preilicate,
of a prn|K>sition. *^ The scholar and the man of the world de-
sire happinesi*," may be taken as an illu:>tration of one (»f these
cases. ^^Thinj^s posso^ding utility are either productive of plea-
rurc or preventive of {Hun,** may exemplify the other. Now
whenever an exprest^ion involving these |)articles presents itj>elf
in a priiiuir}' proiKj^ition, it becomes very important to know
whether the gn>uiis or classes si*parated in thought by them are
intended to be quite distinct from each other and mutually ex-
don vc, or not. Does the expression, ** Scholars and men of the
world*" inclnde or exclude those who are both ? Does the cx-

m

1

•-♦^

+^

06 DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS. [cHAP. IV.

presslon, *^ Either productive of pleasure or preventive of pain,"
include or exclude things which possess both these qualities ? I
apprehend that in strictness of meaning the conjunctions ^^ and,"
^^or," do possess the power of separation or exclusion here re-
ferred to; that the formula, "All ar's are either y's or jjt's,"
rigorously interpreted, means, " All a?'8 are either y's, but not jjr's,"
or, " z's but not y's." But it must at the same time be admitted,
that the " jus et norma loqu endi" seems rather to favour an oppo-
site interpretation. The expression, " Either y's or «'s," would
generally be imderstood to include things that are y'& and z^s at
the same time, together with things which come under the one,
but not the other. Remembering, however, that the symbol +
does possess the separating power which has been the subject of
discussion, we must resolve any disjunctive expression which may
come before us into elements really separated in thought, and
then connect their respective expressions by the symbol +.

And thus, according to the meaning implied, the expression,
** Things which are either ^'s or y's," will have two different sym-
bolical equivalents. If we mean, " Things which are a;'s, but
not y's, or y's, but not ^'s," the expression will be

the symbol a standing for a?'s, y for y s. If, however, we mean,
** Things which are either or's, or, if not ^'s, then y's," the ex-
pression will be

a + y (I - a).

This expression supposes the admissibility of things which are
both or's and ^'s at the same tiine. It might more fully be ex-
pressed in the form

an/ + x(l-y)+y(l-a);

but this expression, on addition of the two first terms, only re-
produces the former one.

Let it be observed that the expressions above ^ven satisfy
the fundamental law of duality (III. 16). Thus we have

{ 0? ( I - y) + y ( I - ^) j » = ^ ( 1 - y) + y ( 1 - ^) ,
[x + y(l- a)]^ = ^ + y(l - «?).

^t will be seen hereafter, that this is but a particular manifesta-

CRAP. IT.] DIVISION Of PROPOSITIONS. 57

tion of a general law of expressions representing ** classes or
ooUectioiis of things.'*

7. The results of these investigations may be embodied in
the following rule of expression.

RuLi. — Express simple names or qualities by the symbols x^ y, z»
4"^^ iheir contraries by I- x^ ^ ~ y> ^ ~ '> 4^-/ classes of things
defined by common names or qualities^ by connecting the correspond^
ing symbols as in multiplication ; collections of tilings^ consisting of
portions different from eadi other, by connecting the expressions of
those portions by the sign + . In particular , let tlu expression^ '* Either
x*s orys^ beexpressed &y 4?(1 - y) + y (1 - *), urhen the classes de-
moted by X and y are exclusive; by x -^ y(l- x) when they are not
exclusive. Similarly let the expression, ^^ Either x «, or ys, or zs^ be
expressed by X {\ -y) (1 - r) + y (1 - *) (1 - z) + z (1 - «) (1 - y),
trA/n the classes denoted by x, y, and z, are designed to be mutually
exclusive, lyx-^y{l -x)-\-z{l-x) (1-y), when they are not meant
to be exclusive^ and so on.

8. On this rule of expression is fbimdcd the converse rule of
interpretation. Both thc^e will be exemplified with, perhaps,
suflBcient fulness in the following instances. Omitting for bre-
vity the universal subject ** things," or '^ beings,** let us assume

X >= hard, y - elastic, z ■ metals ;

and we shall have the following results :

•• Non-elastic metals,** will be expressed by r (1 - y) ;
** Elastic substances with non-elastic metals,** by y + ; ( 1 - y ) ;

** Hard substances, except mctalis" ^y iU
** Metallic substances, except those which are neitncr hard nor
dai-tic,** byz-j(l-jr)(l-y),orbyr|l.(l-4r) (l-y)j,
vide (6), Chap. II.

In the hwt example, what we had really to express was ** Metals,
excqit not hard, not elastic, metak.** Conjunctions um^'d lie-
twccn adjectives are usually superfluous, and, therefore, must
Bot be expressed symbolically.

Thua, ** Metals hard and elastic,'* is equivalent to ** Hard

tie metals,** and expressed by xy:»

Takit next the exfircssion, ^« Hard substances, exoevt ihoM

58 DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS. [CHAQ. IV.

which are metallic and non-elastic, and those which are elastic
and non-metallic." Here the word those means hard substances,
so that the expression really means, Hard substofices except hard
substances^ metallic^ non-elastic^ and hard substances non-metalliCy
elastic^ the word except extending to both the classes which
follow it. The complete expression is

X" {xz(\-i/) + xi/{l-z)];
or, a - az {I- y) - xy (I - z),

9. The preceding Proposition, with the different illustrations
which have been ^ven of it, is a necessary preliminary to the
following one, which will complete the design of the present
chapter.

Proposition III.

To deduce from an examination of their possible varieties a gene-
ral method for the expression of Primary or Concrete Propositions.

A primary proposition, in the most general sense, consists of
two terms, between which a relation is asserted to exist. These
terms are not necessarily single-worded names, but may represent
any collection of objects, such as we have been engaged in consi-
dering in the previous sections. The mode of expressing those
terms is, therefore, comprehended in the general precepts above
given, and it only remains to discover how the relations between
the terms are to be expressed. This will evidently depend upon
the nature of the relation, and more particularly upon the ques-
tion whether, in that relation, the terms are imderstood to be
universal or particular, i. e. whether we speak of the whole of
that collection of objects to which a term refers, or indefinitely of
the whole or of a part of it, the usual signification of the prefix,
" some."

Suppose that we wish to express a relation of identity be-
tween the two classes, " Fixed Stars" and " Suns," i. e. to
ex})rci?s that *^ All fixed stars are suns," and ^^ All suns are fixed
stars." Here, if a; stand for fixed stars, and y for suns, we shall
have

for the equation required.

CHAP. irJ] DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS. 59

In the proposition, *^ All fixed stars arc suns/' the term *^ all
fixed stars'* would be called tiic subject^ and ** suns" the predi"
cate. Suppose tliat wc extend the meaning of the terms subject
and predicate in the fi>llowing manner. By subject let us mean
the fir»t terra of any affinnative proposition, i. e. the term which
precedes the copula is or are ; and by predicate let us agree to
mean the second term, i. e. the one which follows the copuhi ;
and let us admit Uie assumption that either of these may be uni-
ver^d or |Mirticular, 8o tliat, in cither case, the whole class may
be implied, or only a part of it. Then we shall have the follow-
ing Rule for cases such as the one in the last example: —

10. Rule. — When both Subject and Predicate of a Proposition
are unitersal^form the separate expressions for them^ and connect them
ly the sign a.

This case will usually present itself in the expression of the
definitions of science, or of subjects treated after the manner of
pure science. Mr. Senior's definition ol' wealth affords a good
example of this kind, viz. :

** Wealth consists of things transferable, limited in supply,
and cither productive of pleasure or preventive of [tain.**

Before proceeding to express this definition symbolically, it
must be remarked that the conjunction and is superfluous.
Wealth is really defined by its ijosses^ion of three proi)erties or
qualities, not by itet comiKisitiou out of three clactMcs or ajllcctions
of objects. Onutting then the conjunction a/u/, let us make

10 >= wealth.

t ^ thingH transferable.

s -= limited in supply.

p m pniductive of pleanUVe.

r B preventive of |Niin.

Now it is plain from the nature of the riubjcct, that the cx«
prcMiun, ^* Kithcr pHnluctive of pleasure or pri'ventive ofimin,*'
in the alMive definition, iti meant toU* eiiuivaleut to ^^ lliiiier pn»-
doctive of pleasure; or, if not productive of pU^asuro, preventive
cif pun.** Thus the class of things which the alwvc cxpn^Hnion,
taken aluoc, would define, would consist of all things productive

60 DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS. [CHAP. IV.

of pleasure, together with all things not productive of pleasure,
but preventive of pain, and its symbolical expression would be

p + (l --p)r.

If then we attach to this expression placed in brackets to denote
that both its terms are referred to, the symbols s and t limiting
its application to things ** transferable** and ^^ limited in supply,"
we obtain the following symbolical equivalent for the original
definition, viz. :

w^8t{p-^r{l-p)]. (1)

If the expression, " Either productive of pleasure or preventive of
pain/' were intended to point out merely those things which are
productive of pleasure without being preventive of pain,/? (1 - r),
or preventive of pain, without being productive of pleasure,
r (I - p) (exclusion being made of those things which are both
productive of pleasure and preventive of pain), the expression in
symbols of the definition would be

to^st{pil-r) + r(l-p)]. (2)

All this agrees with what has before been more generally stated.
The reader may be curious to inquire what effect would be
produced if we literally translated the expression, " Things pro-
ductive of pleasure or preventive of pain," by /? + r, making the
symbolical equation of the definition to be

to = st(j) + r). (3)

The answer is, that this expression would be equivalent to (2),
with the additional implication that the classes of things denoted
by stp and str are quite distinct, so that of things transferable
and limited in supply there exist none in the universe which are
at the same time both productive of pleasure and preventive of
pain. How the full import of any equation may be determined
: will be explained hereafter. What has been s£dd may show that be-
fore attempting to translate our data into the rigorous language
jof symbols, it is above all things necessary to ascertain the m-
[tended import of the words we are using. But this necessity
cannot be regarded as an evil by those who value correctness of

CHAP, nr.] DIVISIOH Of PROPOSITIONS. 61

tbonglit, and regard the right employment of language as both
ita instrument and its saf^uard.

11. Let us consider next the case in which the predicate of
the proposition is particular, e. g. " All men are mortal."

In this ca«e it is dear that our meaning is, ** All men are
some mortal beings," and we must seek the expression of the
predicate, ** some mortal beings.'* Represent then by v, a class
indefinite in every respect but this, viz., that some of its members
are mortal beings, and let x stand for *^ mortal beings,** then will
rx represent ** some mortal beings." Hence if jf represent men^
the equation sought will be

From such considerations we derive the following Rule, for
expressing an affirmative universal proposition whose predicate
is particular:

RcLB. — ExprtM as before the eubjeei and the predicate^ atUuh
to the latter the indefinite etftrUjoLy^ and equate the expreseions.

It is obvious that r is a symbol of the same kind as x^ y, &c.,
and that it is subject to the general law,

»■ - r, or » (1 - r) fc 0.

Thus, to express the proposition, ^^ The planets are either
primary or secondary,'* we should, according to the rule, proceed
thus:

Let X represent planets (the subject) ;
y e primary bodies ;
s - secondary bodies ;

then, asraming the conjunction **• or** to separate absolutely the
dasa of ** primary** from that of ^* secondary** IkmIics, so far as
they enter into our consideration in the proiKMition given, we
find for the equation of the proposition

*-r|y(l-r) + r(l-y)|. (4)

It may he worth while to notice, that in tliis case the literal
ttanslation of the premises into the fonn

x-r(y + z) (5)

62 DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS* [cHAP. IV.

would be exactly equivalent, v being an indefinite class symbol.
The form (4) is, however, the better, as tiie expression

y(l-z) + z(l-y)

consists of terms representing classes quite distinct fi*om each
other, and satisfies the fundamental law of duality.

If we take the proposition, " The heavenly bodies are either
suns, or planets, or comets," representing these classes of things
by ti7, Xj y^ r, respectively, its expression, on the supposition that
none of the heavenly bodies belong at once to two of the divi-
sions above mentioned, vnll be

tr = t;{a?(l - y) (1 - z) + y (1 - ;r) (1 -z) + z(I -^) (I -y)).

If, however, it were meant to be implied that the heavenly
bodies were either suns, or, if not suns, planets, or, if neither suns
nor planets, fixed stars, a meaning which does not exclude the
supposition of some of them belonging at once to two or to all
three of the divisions of sims, planets, and fixed stars, — the ex-
pression required would be

tt? = r {a: +y (1 - ^).+ z{\- x) (1 -y)). (6)

The above examples belong to the class of descriptions, not
definitions. Indeed the predicates of propositions are usually
particular. When this is not the case, cither the predicate is a
singular term, or we employ, instead of the copula " is" or " are,"
some form of connexion, which implies that the predicate is to be
taken universally.

12. Consider next the case of universal negative propositions,
e. g. " No men are perfect beings."

Now it is manifest that in this case we do not speak of a class
termed *'no men," and assert of this class that all its members
are " perfect beings." But we virtually make an assertion about
all men* to the effect that they are " not-perfect beings.^^ Thus
the true meaning of the proposition is this :

" All men (subject) are (copula) not perfect (predicate) ;"
whence, if y represent " men," and x "perfect beings," we shaU
liave

y = r(l -.r).

*\(.

CHAP. IT.] DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS. 63

and similarly in any other case. Thus we have the following
Kule:

Rule. — To exprew any proposition of the form ^^ No x*8 are
y *r convert it into Ou form ** AIL x$ are noHfs^ and then proceed
a* in tlie previous case.

13. Consider, lastly, the case in which the subject of the
propotfition is {nrticular, c. g. *^ Some men are not wise." Here,
as ha« lK^cn remarked, the negative not may properly be referred^
ccrtiunly, at lea^t, fur the ends of Logic, to the predicate wise ;
for wc do not mean to sny that it is not true that ** Some men
are wise," but we intend to predicate of ** some men" a want of
wiikdinn. The requisite form of the given proposition is, there-
fore, " Some men are not^wise." Putting, then, y for " men,**
X for ** wise," i. e. ** wise beings," and introducing r as the sym-
bol of a class indefinite in all respects but tliis, that it contuns
scnnc individuals of the class to whose expression it is prefixed,
wc have

ry - r(l - x). cf ^

14. We may comprise all that we have determined in the
following general Bule :

GSVEEAL RULE FOR THE STMBOUCIL EXPRE88IOH OF PRIMARY

PROPOSITIONS.

lit. If the proposition is afirmative^ form the expression of the
siijedt and that of the predicate. ShoiJd either of them be particular^
attach to it the indefinite symbol r, and then equate t/u resulting eX"
pftssicms*

2ndly. If the preposition is negative^ express first its true mean-
M^ by attaching the negative particle to the predicate^ then proceed as
above.

One or two additional examples may suffice for illustration.

Ex. — ** No men are placed in exalted stations, and free from
eoTifius r^ards."

Let p rcprcnent ** men," x, ** placed in exalted stations,*' ;,
^^free ftmn envious regards."

Now the expression of the class descrilied as *« placed in

»

64 DIVISION OF PROPOSITIONS. [CHAP. IT.

exalted station/' and " free from envious regards," is xz. Hence
the contrary class, i. e. they to whom this description does not
apply, will be represented by 1 - xz^ and to this class all men
are referred. Hence we have

y = i?(l - xz).

Kthe proposition thus expressed had been placed in the equiva-
lent form, ** Men in exalted stations are not free from envious
regards," its expression would have been

yx»v{\- z).

It will hereafler appear that this expression is really equivalent
to the previous one, on the particular hypothesis involved, viz.,
that V is an indefinite class symbol.

Ex. — *' No men are heroes but those who unite self-denial to
courage."

Let X e " men," y = " heroes," r « " those who practise self-
denial," tr, " those who possess courage."

The assertion really is, that *< men who do not possess cou-
rage and practise self-denial are not heroes."

Hence we have

a: (1 - zw) = r (1 - y)

for the equation required.

15. In closing this Chapter it may be interesting to compare
together the great leading types of propositions symbolically ex-
pressed. K we agree to represent by X and Y the symbolical
expressions of the " terms," or things related, those types will

be

X =t;r,

X = Y,

vX =rr.

In the first, the predicate only is particular ; in the second, both
terms are universal ; in the third, both are particular. Some mi-
nor forms are really included under these. Thus, if Y= 0, the

second form becomes

X-O;

and if IT = 1 it becomes

X=l;

CHAP. IT.] DIVISION OP PROPOSITIONS. 65

both which ferms admit of interpretation. It is further to be
noticed, that the expreBsions X and F, if founded upon a suffi*
ciently careful analysis of the meaning of the *< terms" of the
proposition, will satisfy the. fundamental law of duality which
requires that we have

Jt*- JC or X(\' JQ-O,

y* - y or y(i - y) - 0.

V

66 PRINCIPLBS OF SYMBOLICAL RBA80NIN0. [CHAP. ▼".

CHAPTER V.

OF THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF SYMBOLICAL REASONING, AND
OF THE EXPANSION OR DEVELOPMENT OF EXPRESSIONS INYOLV-
INQ LOGICAL SYMBOLS.

I. T^HE previous chapters of this work have been devoted to
-^ the investigation of the fundamental laws of the opera-
tions of the mind in reasoning ; of their development in the
laws of the sjnoibols of Logic ; and of the principles of expression,
by which that species of propositions called primary may be repre-
sented in the language of symbols. These inquiries have been
in the strictest sense preliminary. They form an indispensable
introduction to one of the chief objects of this treatise — the con-
struction of a system or method of Logic upon the basis of an
exact summary of the fundamental laws of thought. There are
certain considerations touching the nature of this end, and the
means of its attainment, to which I deem it necessary here to
direct attention.

2. I would remark in the first place that the generality of a
method in Logic must very much depend upon the generality of
its elementary processes and laws. We have, for instance, in the
previous sections of this work investigated, among other things,
the laws of that logical process of addition which is symbolized
by the sign +. Now those laws have been determined from the
study of instances, in all of which it has been a necessary condi-
tion, that the classes or things added together in thought should
be mutually exclusive. The expression x + y seems indeed un-
interprctable, unless it be assiuned that the things represented
by X and the things represented by y are entirely separate ;
that they embrace no individuals in common. And conditions
analogous to this have been involved in those acts of conception
from the study of which the laws of the other symbolical opera-
tions have been ascertained. The question tlien ari:?os, whether

CHAP. ▼•] PEINC1PLE8 OP SYMBOLICAL RBA80N1N0. 67

it is necessary to restrict the application of these symbolical laws
•nd processes by the same conditions of interpretability under
which tlie knowledge of them was obtained. If such restriction
is necessary, it is manifest that no such thing as a general
method in Logic is possible. On the other hand, if such restrict
tjon is unnecessary, in what light are we to contemplate pro-
cesses which appear to be uninteqiretable in that sphere of thought
which they are designed to aid ? These questions do not belong
to the science of Logic alone. They are equally pertinent to every
develo{ied form of human reasoning which is based upon the
employment of a symbolical language.

3. I would obser>'c in the second place, that this apparent
fiulure of correspondency between process and interpretation does
not manifest itself in the ordinary applications of human rea-
son. For no operations are there performed of which the mean-
bg and the application arc not seen ; and to most minds it does
not suflkc that merely formal reasoning should connect their
premises and their conclusions ; but every step of the connecting
train, every mediate result which is established in the course of
demonstration, must be intelligible also. And without doubt,
this is both an actual condition and an important safeguard, in
the reasonings and discourses of common life.

There arc perhap many who would be disixMcd to extend
the same principle to the general use of symbolical language as
in instrument of reasoning. It might be argued, that as the
laws or axioms which govern the use of symbols are established
npoD an investigation of those cases only in which interpretation
is possible, we have no right to extend their application to other
cases in which interpretation is iniiio8sil)le or doubtful, even
though (as should be admitted) such application is employed in
the intermediate steps of demonstration only. Were tliis ob-
jection conclusive, it must be acknowledged that slight ad-
vantage would accrue frum the use of a symltolical method in
Logic. Perha|M that advantage would be confined to the mecha-
nical gain of employing short and cuuvenicnt symbols in the
plaoe of more cumbrous ones. But the objection itself is fnlla-
Whatever our a priori anticiiwtions might be, it is an .
le fikct that the validity of a conclusion arrived at ^

f2

68 PRINCIPLES OF SYMBOLICAL REASONING. [CHAP. T.

by any symbolical process of reasoning, does not depend upon
our ability to interpret the formal results which have presented
/ themselves in the different stages of the investigation. There
exist, in fact, certain general principles relating to the use of
symbolical methods, which, as pertaining to the particular sub-
ject of Logic, I shall first state, and I shall then offer some re-
marks upon the nature and upon the grounds of their claim to
acceptance.

4. The conditions of valid reasoning, by the idd of symbols,
are —

1st, That a fixed interpretation be assigned to the symbols
employed in the expression of the data; and that the laws of the
combination of those symbols be correctly determined from that
interpretation.

2nd, That the formal processes of solution or demonstration
be conducted throughout in obedience to all the laws deter-
mined as above, without regard to the question of the interpreta-
bility of the particular results obtwied.

3rd, That the final result be interpretable in form, and that
it be actually interpreted in accordance with that system of in-
terpretation which has been employed in the expression of the
data. Concerning these principles, the following observations
may be made.

5. The necessity of a fixed interpretation of the symbols has
already been 'suflSciently dwelt upon (II. 3). The necessity that
the fixed result should be in such a form as to admit of that in-
terpretation being applied, is founded on the obvious principle,
that the use of symbols is a means towards an end, that end
being the knowledge of some intelligible fact or truth. And
that this end may be attained, the final result which expresses
the symbolical conclusion must be in an interpretable form. It
is, however, in connexion with the second of the above general
principles or conditions (V. 4), that the greatest diflBculty is
likely to be felt, and upon this point a few additional words are
necessary.

I would then remark, that the principle in question may be
considered as resting upon a general law of the mind, the know-
ledge of which is not given to us <i priori^ i. e. antecedently to

CHAP, v.] PRINCIPLES OF SYMBOLICAL REASONING. 69

experience, but is derived, like the knowledge of the other laws
of the miud, from the clear manifestation of the general principle
in the ]iarticular instance. A single example of reasoning, in
which symbols are employed in obedience to laws founded u|M)n
their interpretation, but without any sustained reference to that
interpretation, the chain of demonstration conducting us through
intermediate steps which are not interpretable, to a final result
which is interpretable, seems not only to establish the validity of
the particular application, but to make known to us the general
law manifested therein. No accumulation of instances can pro-
perly add weight to such evidence. It may furnish us with clearer
conceptions of that common element of truth uiM)n which the ai>-
plication of the principle depends, and tK> prepare the way for its
reception. It may, where the immediate force of the evidence is
not felt, («erve as a verification, dpo$teriari^ of the practical vali-
dity of the principle in question. But this does not affect the posi*
tion afllirmed, viz., that the general principle must be eeen in the
|«rtjcular iudtance, — i*een to be general in application as well as
true in the d]Kx:ial example. The employment of the uninteqirc-
table symbol ^ - 1, in the intenncdiate processed of trigonometr}*,
furnishes an illustration of what has been said. I apprehend that
there is no mode of explaining tliat application which doeis not
covertly assume the very principle in question. Hut that prin- '
ciple, though not, as I conceive, warranted by formal rea;«oning
Liued u{K>n other grounds, t<eems to deserve a place among those
axiomatic tnithi« which constitute, in some r«onde, the foumbtion
uf the |M)t(i«iljility of general knowledge, and which may pn»|KTly
be regarded as ex[iresiiion8 of the miud'ts own lawc* and coni^ti-
tution.

6. The following is the mode in which the princi|)lo alxive
ftatcd will lie applied in the pn^xent work. It hoi* l»eon neen^
that any system of proiN^nitions may l»e expres^Mxl by (Mpiations
involving symbol:* jr, v* r, which, whenever interpretation ii* |iot*-
nble, are sul>ject to laws identical in form with the laws of a syii.
ten <if quantitative symbols, susceptible only of the values and
I (II. 15). But as the formal processes of rraMmingde|>cnd only
ttpoo tlui Uw^ of the symlK>K and not u|K>n the nature of their

we arc {wrmitted to treat the abo\e symbulii

70 PRINCIPLES OF SYMBOLICAL REASONING. [CHAP.T

a, t/j Zj as if they were quantitative symbols of the tind abore
described. We may in fact lay aside the logical interpretation oj

I the symbols in the given equation ; convert them into quantitative sym»
boU^ susceptible only of Hie values and 1 ; perform upon them as suA
\att the requisite processes of solution ; and finally restore to them their
logical interpretation. And this is the mode of procedure which
will actually be adopted, though it will be deemed unnecessary
tb restate in every instance the nature of the transformation em^

'. ployed. The processes to which the symbols a^ y^ z^ r^arded
as quantitative and of the species above described, are subject, are

\ not limited by those conditions of thought to which they would,
if performed upon purely logical symbols, be subject, and a-fisst-
dom of operation is given to us in the use of them, without
whic^, the inquiry afler a general method in Logic would be a
hopeless quest.

Now the above system of processes would conduct us to no
intelligible result, unless the final equations resulting therefix>m
were in a form which should render their interpretation, after
restoring to the symbols their logical significance, possible.
There exists, however, a general method of reducing equations
to such a form, and the remainder of this chapter will be devoted
to its consideration. I shall say little concerning the way in
which the method renders interpretation possible, — this point
being reserved for the next chapter, — but shall chiefly confine
myself here to the mere process employed, which may be cha-
racterized as a process of " development." As introductory to
the nature of this process, it may be proper first to make a few
observations.

7. Suppose that we are considering any class of things with
reference to this question, viz., the relation in which its members
stand as to the possession or the want of a certain property x. As
every individual in the proposed class either possesses or does
not possess the property in question, we may divide the class
into two portions, the former consisting of those individuals
which possess, the latter of those which do not possess, the pro-
perty. This possibility of dividing in thought the whole class
into two constituent portions, is antecedent to all knowledge of
le constitution of the class derived from any other source; of

^%.

CHAP. ▼•] PE1JIC1PLI8 OF SYMBOLICAL RBASONUiO. 7 1

knowledge the effS^ct can only be to inform u»j more or
lew preciflely, to what fmrther conditions the portions of the class
which possess and which do not possess the given property are
subject. Suppose, then, such knowledge is to the following effect,
Tix., that the members of that portion which possess the property
X, possess also a certain property fi, and that these conditions
onited are a sufficient definition of them. We may then repre-
sent that portion of the original class by the expression ux (II. 6).
If, further, we obtain information that the members of the ori-
ginal dass which do not possess the proiierty «, are subject to a
V, and are thus defined, it is dear, that those members
be represented by the cx[)ression v{\ ^x). Hence the dass
in its totality will be represented by

m'hich may be considered as a general developed form for the
expression of any class of objects considered vrith reference to
tlie possession or the want of a given property x.

The general form thus established upon purely logical
grounds may also be deduced from distinct considerations of
formal law, applicable to the symbols x, y, ^, equally in their
logical and in their quantitative interpretation already referred to
(V.6).

8. De/buiiom. — Any algebraic expression involving a sym-
bol X is tcnned a function of x, and may be represented under
the abbreviated general form /(x). Any expression involving
two symbols, x and y, L§ similarly termed a function of x and y ,
nnd may be represented under the general fonu /(x, y), and so
on for any other case.

Thus the form /(«) woukl indifferently represent any of tho

1 +«

following functions, \iz.j x, 1 -x, , &c. ; and/(x,y) would

1 — X

X *^ t/

equally represent any of the forms x + y, x - 2y, —^ &c.

l)n the same principles of notation, if in any function /(x),

we change x into 1, the result will be expressed by the form

/(I) ; if in the same function we change x into 0, tho result will

be t xyn m oi by the form /(O). Thus, iiV(x) rei»rcseut Uic

72 PRINCIPLES OF SYMBOLICAL REASONING. [CHAP.Y.

function — -- > /(O will represent — - , and / (0) iriU repre-
sent-.
a

9. Definition. — Any function /(x), in which 4? is a logical
symbol, or a symbol of quantity susceptible only of the yalues
and 1, is said to be developed, when it is reduced to the form
ax + b(l- x)j a and b being so determined as to make the result
equivalent to the function from which it was derived.

This definition assumes, that it is possible to represent any
function /(a?) in the form supposed. The assumption is vindi-
cated in the following Proposition.

Proposition I.

10. To develop any function /(a) in which a is a logical symbol.

By the principle which has been asserted in this chapter, it
is lawful to treat « as a quantitative symbol, susceptible only of
the values and 1.

Assume then,

f{x) = flw: + i (1 - a:),

and making ^ = 1, we have

/(!) = «•
Again, in the same equation making ^ <= 0, we have

/(O) = b.

Hence the values of a and b are determined, and substituting
them in the first equation, we have

/(«)=/(l)x+/(0)(l-ar); (1)

as the development sought.* The second member of the equa-

* To some it may be interesting to remark, that the development of /(x)
obtained in this chapter, strictly holds, in the logical system, the place of the
expansion of/(x) in ascending powers of x in the system of ordinary algebra.
Thus it may be obtiuned by introducing into the expression of Taylor's well-
known theorem, yiz. :

/(*)=/(0) +/(0)* +/"(<>) i^+/"(o)nl:3. *c- (1)

the condition x (1 - x) = 0, whence we find x* = x, r* = x, &c, and

• «

CBAP. ▼•] PRIWCIPLES OF SYMBOLICAL RBASOWINO. 73

tion adequately represents the function /(x), whatever the form
of that function may be. For x regarded as a quantitative sym-
bol admits only of the values and 1, and for each of these
values the development

/(l)x+/(0)(l-,).

assumes the same value as the function /(j?).

As an illustration, let it be required to develop the function

- — ^. Here, when x-> 1, we find/(l) ■» ^, and when « ■» 0,

we find/(0) « y , or 1. Hence the expression required is

1+^2

- -4: + I - x;

W2r 3

and this equation is satisfied for each of the values of which the
symbol x is susceptible.

Proposition II.

To expand or develop a ftmctiom involving any number of logical
tymboU.

Let us begin with the case in which there are two symbols,
X and y, and let us represent the function to be developed by

First, considering /(a:, y) as a function of x alone, and ez-
I^nding it by the general theorem (1), we have

/(*.y)-/(i.y)*+/(0.y)(i-«); (2)

/(,) =/(0) + {/ (0) +-C^ + /^^^ + 4c. ) X. (2)

Bat aakiag in (1), ' = 1. we g«t

/(I) -/(O) */(0) ^-CM +/^ ^ 4c. i

/ (0) +-^ - »c. =/(I) -/(O).

(S) bccMtM, on •BbttitotioB,

/(')-/(«) +l/(l)-/(0)|jt.
-/(«)» +/(0) (>-').

i* fwnloa. Thia deaMMtratioo in ra|iponng/(s} to b« flr*«lo|i.bk- in
.faMMdivg power* ofx it I«m gmcnl than the fl*e ia tb* lest.

74 PRINCIPLES OF SYMBOLICAL REASONING. [cHAP. V.

wherein /(I, y) represents what the proposed function beoomefl,
when in it for x we write 1, and/ (0, y) what the said function
becomes, when in it for x we write 0.

Now, taking the coefficient/ (1> y)) and regarding it as a func-
tion of y, and expanding it accordingly, we have

/(I. y) -/(I, i)y +/(i, 0) (1 - y), (3)

wherein /(1, 1) represents what /(I, y) becomes when y is made
equal to 1, and /(I9 0) what /(I, y) becomes when y is made
equal to 0.

In like manner, the coefficient /(O, y) gives by expansion,

/(o, y) =/(0, 1) y +/(0, 0) (1 - y). ' (4)

Substitute in (2) for /(I, y), /(O, y), their values given in (3)
and (4), and we have

fix, y) =/(l, 1) xy +/(1, 0) X (1 - y) +/(0, 1) Q.-x)y

+/(0, 0) (1 - x) (1 - y), (6)

for the expansion required. Here /(I, I) represents whatyi(jF, y)

becomes when we make therein ^=l,y=l;/(l,0) represents

what /(.r, y) becomes when we make therein ^ » 1, y » 0, and

so on for the rest.

1 - ^
Thus, if/(^, y) represent the function , we find

/(M) = ^. /(i,o) = ^ = o, /(0,l) = i, /(0,0) = I,

whence the expansion of the given function is

- a^ + Oo? ( 1 - y) + - ( 1 - ^) y + ( 1 - 0?) ( I - y).

It will in the next chapter be seen that the forms - and -, the

former of which is known to mathematicians as the symbol of in-
determinate quantity, admit, in such expressions as the above, of
a very important lo^cal interpretation.

Suppose, in the next place, that we have three symbols in
the function to be expanded, which we may represent under the
iieueral form/Or, y, z). Proceeding as before, we get

CRAP, v.] PBorciPiin or symbolical bbasomino. 75

/(«.y. ')-/(i.WO«i'«+/(>.t.o)*y(i -*)+/(».o. >)*0 -y)*

+ /(l,0,0)#(l-y) (l-z)+/(0. 1, I) (1 -«)y*
+ /(0,I,0)(l-«)y(l-z)+/(0,0,l)(I-«)(l-y)«
+ /(0,0,0)(l-*)(l-,)(l-*),

in which /(I, 1, 1) represents what the function y(jr, y, z) be-
comes when we make therein j? -> 1, y *■ !» ;? ■* 1, and so on for
the rest.

1 1. It b now easy to see the general law which determines
the expansion of any proposed function, and to reduce the me-
thod of effecting the expansion to a rule. But before proceeding
to the expression of such a rule, it wiU be convenient to premise
the following observations : —

Each form of expansion that we have obtained consists of cer-
tain termff, into which the symbols x, y, &c. enter, multiplied by
cueflicicnts, into which those symbols do not enter. Thus the
exi«nsion o{/(x) consbts of two terms, x and 1 - x, multiplied
by the coeflScientsy*(l) and/(0) rcs[)ectively. And the expan-
sion of/(jp, p) consists of the four tcnns xy* ^ (1 - y)i (1 - «)y>
and (I -x), (1 - y), multiplied by the coefficients /(1, 1),/(1,0),
/{Oj l),/(0, 0), respectively. The terms jt, 1 - x, in the former
case, and the terms xy, x(l - y), &c., in the latter, we nhall call
the catutituents of the ex[Minsion. It is evident that they are in
fi>rm independent of the form of the function to be ex|Mmded.
Of the constituent xy, x and y are termed xYte factors.

The general rule of development will therefore consist of two
parts the first of which will relate to the formation of the caniti^
tmemis of the expansion, the second to the deteniiination of their
R^pective coefficients. It is as follows :

1st. To expand any function of the symbols x, y, r. — Form a
scries of constituents in the following manner : Let the firnt con-
stituent be the product of the symbols ; cluinge in tliis product
any symbol z into 1 - r, foi* the second constituent. Then in
both these change any other symbol y into 1 - y, for two more
cunKUtuents. Then in the four constituents thus obtaineil cluinge
any other symbol x into 1 - x, for four new constituents, and so
OB imtil the number of posi>ible changes is exhausted.

ladly. To find the coefficient of any constiiueni. — li* t liat con-

^ 76 PRINCIPLBS OF SYMBOLICAL RBASONING. [CHAP. V.

stituent involves a? as a factor, change in the original function x
into 1 ; but if it involves 1 - ^ as a factor, change in the original
function x into 0. Apply the same rule with reference to the
symbols y, z, &c. : the final calculated value of the function thus
transformed will be the coefficient sought.

The sum of the constituents, multiplied each by its respective
coefficient, will be the expansion required.

12. It is worthy of observation, that a fimction may be de-
veloped with reference to symbols which it does not explicitly
contain. Thus if, proceeding according to the rule, we seek to
develop the fimction \-Xj with reference to the symbols x and
y, we have,

When a: = 1 and y « 1 the given fimction = 0.
a; = 1 „ y = „ „ =0.

a; = „ y = 1 „ „ =1.

aj-O „ y = „ „ =1.

Whence the development is

1 -a; = ay + a:(l -y) + (I -^)y + (1 -a:) (1 -y);

and this is a true development. The addition of the terms ( 1 - x)y
and (I - a;) (1 - y) produces the function 1 - a:.

The symbol 1 thus developed according to the rule, with re-
spect to the symbol a?, gives

a; + 1 - a;.

Developed with respect to x and y, it gives

a;y + a?(l-y) + (l-a?)y + (I -a:) (1-y).

Similarly developed with respect to any set of symbols, it pro-
duces a series consisting of all possible constituents of those
symbols.

13. A few additional remarks concerning the nature of the
general expansions may with propriety be added. Let us take,
for illustration, the general theorem (5), which presents the type
of development for functions of two logical symbols.

In the first place, that theorem is perfectly true a^jj^ intel-
ligible when X and y are quantitative symbols of the species con-
sidered in this chapter, whatever algebraic form may be assigned
to the function /(a;, y), and it may therefore be intelligibly eto-

CHAP, v.] PRINCIPLES OP 8TMBOLICAL RBASONINO. 77

plojed in mny utage of tho process of analysis intcrmodiate be-
twcen the change of interpretation of the symbols firom the
logical to the quantitatiye system above referred to, and the final
restoration of the logical interpretation.

Secondly. The theorem is perfectly true and intelligible when
X and y are logical symbols, provided that the form of the fmio>
tion/(x, y) \» such as to represent a class or collection of things^
in which case the second member is always logically interpretablc.
For instance, if/(7, y ) represent the function 1 - j? 4 xyj we ob-
tain on applying the theorem

I -« + ay-xy^^Oar(l-y) + (l-«)y + (l -«)(1 -y),
= xy + (l-j:)y + (l-ar)(l-y),

and this result is intelligible and true.

Thus we may regard the theorem as true and intelligible for
quantitative symbols of the species above described, ahrays ; for
logical symbols, always when interpretable. Whensoever there-
ture it is empl(»yed in this work it must be understood tliat the
symlMiIs X, y are quantitative and of the particular s[)ecics referred
til, if the expansion obtmniHl is not interpretablc.

But though the expansion is not always ininiediatcly inter-
pretablc, it always conducts us at once to results which are in-
tcqiretable. Thus the expression a; - y gives on development
the form

«(i -y)-y(i-a?)^

which is not generally interpretablc. We cannot take, in thought,
fnim the class of things which are x's and not y's, the class of
things which are y*s and not x*s, because the latter class is not
contained in the former. But if the fonn x - y presentetl itself
as the first member (»f an equation, of which the second nieuiber
was 0, we should have on development

'(i-y)-y(i-')-o.

Now it will be shown in the next chapter that the alwivc equa-
tion, X and y being reganled as quantitative and of the species
detcribed, b resolvable at once into the two equations

x(l-y)-0, y(l-x)-0,
aad ibme equations are directly intcq>retalilo in liOgic when hi-

78 PRINCIPLES OF SYMBOLICAL RBASONINO. [CHAP

gioal interpretations are assigned to the symbols x and y. And
it may be remarked, that though /uTic^um^ do not necessarily be-
come interpretable upon development, yet equatioM are always
reducible by this process to interpretable forms.

14. The following Proposition establishes some important
properties of constituents. In its enunciation the symbol t is
employed to represent indifferently any constituent of an expan-
sion. Thus if the expansion is that of a function of two symbols
X and y, t represents any of the four forms ^y, « (1 - y), (1 - x)y^
and (1 - ^) (1 - y). Where it is necessary to represent the con-
stituents of an expansion by single symbols, and yet to distinguish
them from each other, the distinction will be marked by suffixes.
Thus ^1 might be employed to represent xy^ U to represent x(l -y)»
and so on.

Proposition III.

Any single constituent to/an expansion satisfies tlie law ofduor

lity whose expression is

^(1-0 = 0.

The product of any two distinct constituents of an expansion is equal
to 0, and the sum of all the constituents is equal to 1.

1st. Consider the particular constituent xy. We have

xy X xy ^ x'y'.

But x'^ = 0?, y' = y, by the fundamental law of class symbols ;
hence

xy xxy-^ xy.

Or representing xy by t,

t X t = tj

or ^(1-0 = 0.

Similarly the constituent a? ( 1 - y) satisfies the same law. For we
have

x' = Xj (1 -y)»= 1 -y,

.-. {x(l-y))« = a?(l-y), or ^(1-0 = 0.

Now every factor of every constituent is either of the form x or
of the form \ -x. Hence the square of each factor is equal to that

CHAP* ▼•] PRINCIPLB8 OF SYMBOLICAL RBA80NIN0. 79

fiictor, and therefore the square of the product of the factors, i. e.
of the constituent, is equal to the constituent; wherefore t rcpro-
sGOting any constituent, we have

V^ty or ^(1-0 -0.

Sndly. The product of any two constituents is 0. This is
evident from the general law of the symbols expressed by the
equation jr (1 - «) « ; for whatever constituents in the same ex-
pansion we take, there will be at least one ftctor x in the one, to
which will oorrespond a fiu^r 1 - « in the other.

Srdly. The sum of all the constituents of an expansion is
unity. This is evident from addition of the two constituents x
and I • X, or of the four constituents, xy^ x{l~ y), (1 - :r)y,
(I - jr) (I -y). But it is also, and more generally, proved by
expanding 1 in terms of any set of symbols (V. 1 2). The consd-
tocnts in this case are formed as usual, and all the coefficients
are unitv.

15* With the above Proposition we may connect the fbU
lowing.

Proposition IV.

If V repre i ent the ium of any series of constituetite^ the separate
caefieiesiU o/which are 1, then is the condition satisfied^

Let iiytf'tnhe the constituents in question, then

F-/| + «,... + £..

Squaring both sides, and observing that ti* « <i, ti ^ - 0, &c., we
have

f^ - /i + /,... + ^, ;

r(i - n - 0.

^** — ^ —

80 OF INTERPRETATION. [CHAF* VI.

CHAPTER VI.

OF THE GENERAL INTERPRETATION OF LOGICAL EQUATIONS, AHB
THE RESULTING ANALYSIS OF PROPOSITIONS. ALSO, OF THE
CONDITION OF INTERPRETABILITT OF LOGICAL FUNCTIONS.

1. TT has been observed that the complete expannon of any
-^ function by the general rule demonstrated in the last
chapter, involves two distinct sets of elements, viz., the consti-
tuents of the expansion, and their coefficients. I propose in
the present chapter to inquire, first, into the interpretation of
constituents, and afterwards into the mode in which that inter-
pretation is modified by the coefficients with which they are
connected.

The terms " logical equation," " logical function/' &c., will
be employed generally to denote any equation or function in-
volving the symbols ^, y, &c., which may present itself either
in the expression of a system of premises, or in the train of sym-
bolical results which intervenes between the premises and the
conclusion. If that function or equation is in a form not imme-
diately interpretable in Logic, the symbols ^, y, &c., must be re-
garded as quantitative symbols of the species described in previous
chapters (II. 15), (V. 6), as satisfying the law,

a? (1 - J?) = 0.

By the problem, then, of the interpretation of any such logical
function or equation, is meant the reduction of it to a form in
which, when logical values are assigned to the symbols ^, y, &c.,
it shall become interpretable, together with the resulting inter-
pretation. These conventional definitions are in accordance with
the general principles for the conducting of the method of this
treatise, kdd down in the previous chapter.

CHAP. TI.] OF INTIRPRBTATION. 8 1

Proposition I.

2. 7^ cofuiUumti of the expatuion of any function of the logi-
ro/ mfmbol$ x, y, ifc,^ art irUerpretable^ and represent the eeteral
exciumve divuions of the universe of discottrset formed by thepredica*
tion and denial in every possible voay of the (fualities denoted by the
eymhols x, y, S^.

For greater diBtinctnefls of conception, let it be supposed that
the function expanded involves two symbols x and y, with re-
ference to which the expansion has been effected* We have then
the following constituents, viz. :

xy, Jt(l-y), (l-*)y, (l-«)(l-y).

Of these it is evident, tliat the 6rst ry represents that class
of objects which at the same time possess both the elementary
qualities expressed by x and y, and that the second x{\ - y) re-
presents the class possessing the property x, but not the {)n){wrty
y. In like manner the third constituent represents the class of
obfecta which possess the property represented by y, but not
that represented by x\ and the fourth constituent (1- jr) (1 - y),
represents that class of objects, the members of which possess nei-
ther of the qualities in question*

Thus the constituents in the case just considered represent
aO the four classes of objects which can be described by affirma-
tioii and denial of the properties expressed by x and y. Those
elaases are distinct from each other. No member of one ii^ a mem-
ber of another, ibr each class iK>si«esscs some property or (quality
eootnuy to a property or quality possessed by any other class.
Again, these rlannm together make up the universe, for there is
no ol]jeet which may not be described by the presence or the
absence of a proposed quality, and thus each individual thing in
the umrerae may be referred to some one or other of the four
made by the possible C4)mbination of the two given
r and y, and their contraries.

The remarks which have here been made with reference to the
eoQslituents of/ (x, y) arc perfectly general in character. The
Its cl* any expansion represent classes — those classes

o

82 OF INTERPRETATION. [CHAP.TI.

are mutually distinct, through the possession of contrary qualities,
and they together make up the universe of discourse.

3. These properties of constituents have their expression in
the theorems demonstrated in the conclusion of the last chapter*
and might thence have been deduced. From the fact that every
constituent satisfies the fundamental law of the individual sym-
bols, it might have been conjectured that each constituent would
represent a class. From the fact that the product of any two
constituents of an expansion vanishes, it might have been con-
cluded that the classes they represent are mutually exclusive.
Lastly, from the fact that the sum of the constituents of an ex-
pansion is unity, it might have been inferred, that the classes
which they represent, together make up the universe.

4. Upon the laws of constituents and the mode of their in-
terpretation above determined, are founded the analysis and the
interpretation of logical equations. That all such equations ad-
mit of interpretation by the theorem of development has already
been stated. I propose here to investigate the forms of possible
solution which thus present themselves in the conclusion of a
tnun of reasoning, and to show how those forms arise. Although,
properly speaking, they are but manifestations of a single funda^
mental type or principle of expression, it will conduce to clearness
of apprcliension if the minor varieties which they exhibit are
presented separately to the mind.

The forms, which are three in number, are as follows :

FORM I.

5. The form we shall first consider arises when any logical
equation V- is developed, and the result, after resolution into
its component equations, is to be inteq)reted. The function is sup-
posed to involve the logical symbols or, y,&c., in combinations which
are not fractional. Fiuctional combinations indeed only arise in
the class of problems which will be considered when we come to
speak of the third of the forms of solution above referred to.

Proposition II.

To interpret the logical equation V= 0.
For simplicity let us suppose that V involves but two sym-

CHAP. TI.] OP INTIRPRITAf lOir. 83

bob, X and y, and let us represent the development of the given
equation by

«y 4 &r(l . y) + (?(1 - *) y + d(l - «) (1 - y) . 0; (I)

a, 6» c, and d being definite numerical constants.

Now, suppose that any coefficient, as a, does not vanish.
Then multiplying each side of the equation by the constituent «y,
to which that coefficient is attached, we have

oxy = 0,

wlienre, a8 a does not vanish,

and this result is quite independent of the nature of the other co-
efficients of the expansion. Its interpretation, on assigning to
jr and y their logical significance, is *^ No individuals belonging at
once to the class i^ppresented by x, and the class represented by y,
exist/*

But if the coefficient a does vanish, the term axy docs not
appear in the development ( I ), and, therefore, the equation jry •
cannot thence be deduced.

In like manner, if the coefficient b docs not vanish, we have

which admits of the interpretation, ** There are no individuals
which at the same time belong to the class x, and do not belong
to the class y.'*

Either of the above interpretations may, however, as will sub-
sequently be shown, l)e exhibited in a diifercnt form.

The sum of the distinct interpretations thus obtained from
the several terms of the expansion whose coefficients) do not
vanish, will constitute the complete inteq)rctation of the equation
F « 0. The analysis is esDcntially independent of the number
of logical symbols involved in the function K, and the object of
the proposition will, therefore, in all instances, be attamed by the
IbUowing Rule: —

RuLi.— Z>tfcie/op tk^t/unetioH K, and equate to ereiy cofuti-
tmimi wkom foefinent doe$ not vanitk. The inierprHation of theM
fvnifts oolUeiivefy will constitute the inlerfiretalUm of the tfiten

g2

84 OF INTBRPRBTATIOK. [CHAP.TI.

6. Let US take as an example the definition of <^ clean beasts,^
laid down in the Jewish law, viz., ^^ Clean beasts are thoee
which both divide the hoof and chew the cud," and let us assume

X = clean beasts ;

y = beasts dividing the hoof;

z = beasts chewing the cud.

Then the given proposition will be represented by the equation

which we shall reduce to the form

0? - y-j = 0,

and seek that form of interpretation to which the present method
leads. Fully developing the first member, we have

xf/z + xy {\ - z) + x{l - y)z -{■ a{\ " y) {\ - z)
-{l-x)yz^O{l-x)y{\-zyO{Ux){l^y)z^O(\-x){Uy){i'-z).

Whence the terms, whose coefficients do not vanish, give

xy(l-z) = 0, zz(\-y) = Oy rc(l-y)(l-z) = 0, (l-j-)yr = 0.

These equations express a denial of the existence of certain classes
of objects, viz. :

Ist. Of bejists which are clean, and divide the hoof, but do
not chew the cud.

2nd. Of beasts which are clean, and chew the cud, but do not
divide the hoof.

3rd. Of beasts which are clean, and neither divide the hoof
nor chew the cud. '

4th. Of beasts which divide the hoof, and chew the cud, and
are not clean.

Now all these several denials are really involved in the origi-
nal proposition. And conversely, if these denials be granted,
the original proposition will follow as a necessary consequence.
They are, in fact, the separate elements of that proposition.
Every primary proposition can thus be resolved into a series of
deniab of the existence of certain defined classes of things, and
naay, from that system of denials, be itself reconstructed. It
might here be asked, how it is possible to make an assertive pro-

CHAP. VI.] OF INTBRPRBTATION. 8.5

|ioeitkm out of a aeries of denials or negations ? From what
souroe is the iMwitive element derived ? I answer, that the mind
assumes the existence of a universe not d priori as a fact inde-
pendent of experience, but either d posteriori as a deduction
fnmi experience, or hypothttically as a foundation of the possi-
bility of assertive reasoning. Thus from the Proposition, *^ There
are no men who are not fallible," which is a negation or denial of
the existence of **' infallible men," it may l>e inferred either hypo-
thetically, ^* All men (if men exist) are fallible," or absolutely,
(experience having assured us of the existence of the race), ** All
men are fallible."

The form in which conclusions are exhibited bv the method
of this Pro{N)aition may be termed the form of ^^ Single or Con-
joint Denial."

FORM II.

7. As the previous form was derived from the development
and inteqtretation of an e<iuation whose second member is 0, the
pros4*nt fonn, which is supplementary to it, will be derived fn)iu
the development and interpretation of an e<[uation whose second
nit*mlK.T is I. It is, however, readily suggested by the analysis
of the previous Proposition.

Thus in the example last discussed we deduceil from tlie
ii|uation

the conjoint denial of the existence <»f the claHi^es representetl by
the constituents

xy(l-r), xr(l-y), x(\-y)(\--z). (l--r)yr,

wboife oieflicients were not e<pml to 0. It follows lien(*e that
the remaining ainstituents represent rlas!«es which make up the
universe. Hence we sliuU have

i,r-(l-z)y(l-r)^(I-x)(l-y)rMl--r)(l-v)(l-r) = l.

This is equivalent to the afliniiation that nil cxii^ting things ho-
lung to sonit* one or other of the following clasi^cs^ viz. :

Ist* Clean Iwasts li«»th dividing; the h(N»r and chewing the

86 OF INTBRPRBTATION. [cHAP. VI.

2nd. Unclean beasts dividing the hoof, but not chevnBg the
cud.

3rd. Unclean beasts chewing the cud, but not dividing the
hoof.

4th. Things which are neither clean beasts, nor chewen of
the cud, nor dividers of the hoof.

This form of conclusion may be termed the form of ^^ Single
or Disjunctive Affirmation," — single when but one constituent
appears in the final equation ; disjunctive when, as above, more
constituents than one are there found.

Any equation, F= 0, wherein F satisfies the law of duality,
may also be made to yield this form of interpretation by reducing
it to the form 1 ~ F= 1, and developing the first member. The
case, however, is really included in the next general form. Both
the previous forms are of slight importance compared with the
following one.

FORM III.

8. In the two preceding cases the functions to be developed
were equated to and to 1 respectively. In the present case I
shall suppose the corresponding function equated to any logical
symbol w. We are then to endeavour to interpret the equation
V ^Wy /^ being a function of the logical symbols jr, y, z, &c. In
the first place, however, I deem it necessary to show how the
equation V=w^ or, as it will usually present itself, m? = ^, arises.

Let us resume the definition of '* clean beasts," employed in
the previous examples, viz., " Clean beasts are those which both
divide the hoof and chew the cud," and suppose it required to de-
termine the relation in which " beasts chewing the cud" stand to
"clean beasts" and "beasts dividing the hoof." The equation
expressing the given proposition is

and our object will be accomplished if we can determine z as an
interprctable function of x and y.

Now treating x, y, 2: as symbols of quantity subject to a pe-
culiar law, we may deduce from the above equation, by solution,

X

4m ^ •

y

CHAP. ▼■•] OF IVTBEPRBTATION. 87

But this equation is not at present in an interpretablc form. If
we can reduce it to such a form it will furnish the relation
required.

On developing the second member of the above equation, we
have

r.iy+ix(l-y) + 0(l-x)y + ?(l-«)(l-y),

and it will be shown hereafter (Prop. 3) that this admits of the
IbUowing interpretation :

** Beasts which chew the cud consist of all clean beasts
(which also divide the hoof), together with an indefinite re-
maindfr (some, none, or all) of unclean beasts which do not di-
vide the hoof."*

9. Now the abov« is a particular example of a problem of the
utmost generality in Logic, and which may thus be stated : —
^* (liven any logical equation connecting tlic 8ynilK>k x, y, ;, tr,
required an interpretable expression for the relation of the class
represented by lo to the classes represented by the other symbols
*, y, r, &c."

The solution of this problem consists in all cases in deter-
mining, irom the equation given^ the expression of the above
^ynilKiI IT, in terms of the other symbols, and rendering that ex-
pression interpretable by development. Now the equation given
is always of the first dq^ree with respect to each of the symbols
involved. The required expression for w can thereibrc always
be found. In fact, if we develop the given ec^uation, whatever
its form may be with respect to it, we obtain an equation of the

form

Eir+ /;(1 -ir)-0, (1)

E and E licing functions of the remaining syuiboli*. From the
above we have

Therefore

mA ex|ianding thi* M^cond luomlier by the rule of de\dopment, it
will only remain to intcqin^l the result in logic by the next
poposnion.

88 OF INTERPRETATION. [CHAP. VI.

If the fraction -= — = has common factors in its numerator

E - E

and denominator, we are not permitted to reject them, unless they
are mere numerical constants. For the symbols x, y, &c«, re-
garded as quantitative, may admit of such values and 1 as to
cause the common factors to become equal to 0, in which case
the algebraic rule of reduction fails. This is the case contem-
plated in our remarks on the failure of the algebraic axiom of
division (II. 14). To express the solution in the form (2), and
without attempting to perform any unauthorized reductions, to
interpret the result by the theorem of development, is a course
strictly in accordance with the general principles of this treatise.
If the relation of the class expressed by 1 - ti? to the other
classes, a:, y, &c. is required, we deduce frota (1)9 in like maimer

as above,

E

1 -w

E^E'

to the interpretation of which also the method of the following
Proposition is applicable :

Proposition III.

10. To determine the interpretation of any logical equation of
the form w= V^ in which w is a class symbol^ and V a function of
other class symbols quite unlimited in its form.

Let the second member of the above equation be fidly ex-
panded. Each coefficient of the result will belong to some one
of the four classes, which, with their respective interpretations,
we proceed to discuss.

1st. Let the coefficient be 1. As this is the symbol of the
universe, and as the product of any two class symbols represents
those individuals which are found in both classes, any constituent
which has unity for its coefficient must be interpreted without
limitation, i. e. the whole of the class which it represents is
implied.

2nd. Let the coefficient be 0. As in Logic, equally with
Arithmetic, this is the symbol of Nothing, no part of the daas

CBAT* TJU] OF IMTBRPRITATION. 89

represented by the constituent to which it is prefixed must be

3rd. Let the coeflSdent be of the form -. Now, as in Arith-
metic, the symbol - represents an indefinite number^ except when

otherwise determined by some special circumstance, analogy
would suggest that in the system of thb work the same symbol
should represent an indefinite class. That this is its true mean-
ing will be made dear finom the following example :

Let us take the Proposition, ** Men not mortal do not exist ;'*
represent this Proposition by symbols; and seek, in obedience to
the laws to which those symbols have been proved to be subject,
a reverse definition of ** mortal beings," in terms of ** men."

Now if we represent ** men" by y, and ** mortal bdngs" by x,
the Proposition, ** Men who are not mortah* do not exist," will
be expressed by the equation

y(l-x) = 0,

from which we are to seek the value of x. Now the above equa-
tion gives

y - yjr - 0, or yx - y.

Were this an ordinaiy algebraic equation, we should, in the next
place, divide both udes of it by y. But it has been remarked in
Chap. II. that the operadon of division cannot he performed with
the symbols with wUch we are now engaged. Our resource, then,
is to express the operation, and develop the result by the method
of the preceding diapter. We have, then, first,

y

sad, expanding the second member as directed,

Xoy + -(l -y).

Hus implies that mortals (x) consist of all men (y), together
with Siidi * remainder of beings which are not men (I - y), as

«iD be iadioated by the coefficient -. Now let us inquire what

90 OF INTERPRETATION. [CHAP. VI.

remainder of ^* not men" is implied by the premiss. It mi^t
happen that the remainder included all the beings who are not
men, or it might include only some of them, and not others, or it
might include none, and any one of these assumptions would be
in perfect accordance with our premiss. In other words, whether
those beings which are not men are all, or some, or none, of them
mortal, the truth of the premiss which virtually asserts that all
men are mortal, will be equally unaffected, and therefore the

expression - here indicates that a/2, same, or none of the class to

whose expression it is affixed must be taken.

Although the above determination of the HignTficance of the

symbol - is founded only upon the examination of a particular

case, yet the principle involved in the demonstration is general,
and there are no circumstances under which the symbol can pre-
sent itself to which the same mode of analysis is imqyplicable.

We may properly term - an indefinite class symbol, and may, if

convenience should require, replace it by an imcompounded sym-
bol V, subject to the fundamental law, r (1 - v) = 0.

4th. It may happen that the coefficient of a constituent in an
expansion does not belong to any of the previous cases. To as-
certain its true interpretation when this happens, it will be ne-
cessary to premise the following theorem :

11. Theorem. — If a /unction V, intended to represent any

class or collection of objects, w, be expanded^ and if the numerical

coefficient^ a, of any constituent in its development^ do not satisfy

the law/

a(l - a) = 0,

then the constituent in question must be made equal to 0.

To prove the theorem generally, let us represent theeacptti-
sion given, imdor the form

IC = Oiti + flj^ + fla^s + &c., (1)

in which ^i, t2j ^si &c* represent the constituents, and ai, 02, a,, Ac

the coefficients ; let us also suppose that ai and a, do not satisfy

the law

oi (1 - fli) = 0, «a {l- a,) ^0;

€'

CBAP. ▼!•] OF INTBRPRBTATION. 91

but tluit the other coeflBcients are snbject to the law in qaestioo,

•o thmt we hare

Of' " Of, dbc

Now multiply each tide of the equation (1) by itself. The re-
mit will be

w - a,' ti + a,« d + Ac (2)

This if erident from the fiict that it must represent the develop-
ment of the equation

but it may also be proTed by actually squaring (1), and observing
that we have

V-d, V'W. /i<i-0,&c.

by the properUes of constituents. Now subtracting (2) from (1),
we have

Or, a,(l - ai)ti + 0^(1 - a,)*, « 0.

Multiply the last equation by ^i ; then since ^i ti • 0» we have

Oi (1 - Oi) ti * 0» whence ti « 0.
In like manner multiplying the same equation by d, we have

0^(1 - a,)d « 0, whence d * 0.

Thus it may be shown generally that any constituent whose
coefficient is not subject to the same fundamental kw as the sym-
bob themselves must be separately equated to 0. The usual

fanonder which auchooeflicicntooccnp is 1. Thi. » the .Ige-

braic symbol of infinity. Now the nearer any number approaches
to infinity (aUowing such an expression), the more does it depart
from the condition of satisfying the fundamental law above re-
fbred to.

The symbol -, whose interpretation was previously dis-

coMed, does not necessarily disobey the kw we are here consi-
derin^ lor it admits of the numerical values and 1 intUflerently .
Its aeUpl interpretation, however, as an indefinite class symbol,
I cooeave, except upon the ground of anaHogs^ \^ Aft-

92 OF INTERPRETATION. [CHAP, VI*

duccd from itd arithmetical properties, but must be eetabliahed
experimentally.

12. We may now collect the results to which we have been
led, into the following siunmary :

Ist. The symbol 1, as the coefficient of a term in a develop-
ment, indicates that the whole of the class which that constituent
represents, is to be taken.

2nd. The coefficient indicates that none of the class are to
be taken.

3rd. The symbol - indicates that a perfectly indefinite poi^

tion of the class, i. e. some^ none, or all of its members are to be
taken.

4th. Any other symbol as a coefficient indicates that the
constituent to which it is prefixed must be equated to 0.

It follows hence that if the solution of a problem, obtained
by development, be of the form

w^A^OB + ^C + ^D,

that solution may be resolved into the two following equations,

viz.,

ID = A + vCy (3)

Z) = 0, (4)

V being an indefinite class symbol. The interpretation of (3)
shows what elements enter, or may enter, into the composition
of w?, tlie class of things whose definition is required ; and the
interpretation of (4) shows what relations exist among the de-
ments of the original problem, in perfect independence of w.

Such arc tlie canons of interi)retation. It may be added, that
they arc universal in their application, and that their use is
always unembarrassed by exception or failure.

13. Corollary, — If Fbe an independently interpretable lo^-
cal function, it will satisfy the symbolical law, ^(1 - ^) ■= 0.

By an independently interpretable logical function, I mean
one which is interpretable, without presupposing any relation
among the things represented by the symbols which it involves.
Thus a:(l - y) is indei>endently interpretable, but ar-y.k not so.

CHAP. ▼!.] OF INTIEPRITATION. 93

The Utter function presuppoees, aa a condition of its interpreta-
tion, that the class represented hj y is wholly contained in the
class represented hj x ; the former function does not imply any
such requirement.

Now if Fis independently interpretable, and if tr represent
the collection of individuab which it contwis, the equation
IT - F will hold true without entailing as a consequence the va-
nishing of any of the constituents in the development of V\
since such vanishing of constituents would imply relations among
the classes of things denoted by the symbols in V. Hence the
development of V vrill be of the form

Gxtx ■¥ att% -v &c.

the coefficients iii, at, £c. all satisfying the condition

fli ( 1 - fli) - 0, «! (1 - fli) « 0, &c.

Hence by the reasoning of Prop. 4, Chap. v. the function /' will

be subject to the law

r(l - K) - 0.

This result, though evident d priori from the fact that V is 8U|>-
pcwed to represent a claims or collection of things, is thun tKK^n to
ftJIow also from the propcrtie8 of the constituents of which it in
composed. The condition K(l - J') = may be termed *Mhc
condition of interpretability of logical functions.**

14. The general form of solutions, or logical conclusions de-
vdoped in the last Proposition, may be designated as a *^ Kelation
between terms.** I use, as before, the word *^ terms** to d^n<»te
the parts of a proposition, whether simple or complex, which arc
eoonecied by the copula ** is** or ** are.'* The classes of thing.^ nv
p rese u ted by the individual symbols may be called the elements
of the propontion.

15. Ex. 1. — Resuming the definition of ** clean beasts,**
( VL6), required a description of ** unclean beasts.**

Here, at before, x standing for ** clean bcastis** y for ^' lienj^ts
dividing the hoof,** t for *^ beasts chewing the cud,** we have

«-y^; (5)

1 - !• - 1 - yr ;
JaiwIipiBg tlie jaeond member.

94 OF INTBRPRBTATION. [cKAP. Vl.

l-«-y(l-^)+^(l.y) + (l.y)(l.«);

which is interpretable into the following Proposition: Undean
beasts are all which divide the hoof without chewing the cud^ all
which chew the cud witliout dividing the hoof and aU which neither
divide the hoof nor chew the cud.

Ex. 2. — The same definition being given^ required a descrip-
tion of beasts which do not divide the hoof.

From the equation a - yzwe have

therefore, , z- x

and developing the second member,

l-y = 4?^ + -jr-x(l-2:) + (l-4?)-J + ^ (1 - x) (1 - z).

Here, according to the Rule, the term whose coefficient^ is -^7-,
must be separately equated to 0, whence we have

1 - y = (1 - a?) ^: + t? (1 - a?) (1 - £:),

a? (1 - ^) = ;

whereof the first equation gives by interpretation the Proposition :
Beasts which do not divide the hoof consist ofaU unclean beasts which
chew the cud, and an indefinite remainder (some, none, or all) cf tm-
clean beasts which do not chew the cud.

The second equation gives the Proposition : There are no clean
beasts which do not chew the cud. This is one of the independent
relations above referred to. We sought the direct relation of
<< Beasts not dividing the hoof," to ^^ Clean beasts and beasts
which chew the cud." It happens, however, that independently
of any relation to beasts not dividing the hoof, there exists, in
virtue of the premiss, a separate relation between clean beasts
and beasts which chew the cud. This relation b also necessarily
given by the process.

Ex. 3. — Let us take the following definition, viz. : " Respon-
sible beings are all rational beings who are either free to act, or

CBAF. ▼!•] or IMTBEFRBTATIOV. 95

hftTe Toluiitarily aaorifioed their fireedom," and apply to it the
prooeding analysia.

Let X stand for responsible beings,
y ,9 rational beings.
i j^ those who are free to act,
w „ those who have voluntarily sacrificed their

freedom of action.

In the expression of this definition I shall assume, that the
two alternatives which it presents, viz. : ** Rational beings free
to act,'* and ** Rational beings whose fireedom of action has been
voluntarily sacrificed/' are mutually exclusive, so that no indivi-
duals are found at once in both these divisions. This will per-
mit us to interpret the proposition literally into the language of

symbols, as follows :

ar - yz + yir. (6)

Let us first determine hence the relation of ^^ rational beings*' to
responsible beings, beings firee to act» and beings whose freedom
of action has been voluntarily abjured. Perhaps this object will
be better stated by raying, that we desire to express the relation
among the elements of the premiss in such a form as will enable
us to determine how far rationality may be inferred irom res|K>n-
sibility, freedom of action, a voluntary sacrifice of freedom, and
their contraries.

From (6) we have

Z4 IT

and developing the second member, but rejecting terms whose
cocffidenta are 0,

y«-jmr + «(I -•p) + *(1 --?)tr + -x(l -«)(1 -it)

+ J(l-»)(l-x)(l-ir),

wfaenee, equating to the terms whose coefficients are - and -,

we have

y-xz(l-ir) + nr(l-c) + r(l-x)(Uc)(l- ir); (7)

xzw - ; <^ti^\

96 OF INTBRPRBTATION. [CHAP. TI.

a?(l-2)(l-tt?) = 0; (9)

whence by interpretation —

Direct Conclusion. — Rational beings are all responsible beings
wlio are either free to act, not having voluntarily sacrificed their free-
doTOy or not free to act, having voluntarily sacrificed their freedom^
together with an indefinite remainder {some, none, or all) of beings
not responsible, not free, and not having voluntarily sacrificed tlieir
freedom.

First Independent Relation. — No responsible beings are at
the same time free to act, and in the condition of having voluntarily
sacrificed their freedom.

Second. — No responsible beings are not free to act, and at the
same lime in the condition of not having sacrificed their freedom.

The independent relations above determined may, however,
be put in another and more convenient form. Thus (8) gives

ani? = - = 2: + - (1 - z), on development ;

or, xw -V {\ " z)\ (10)

and in like manner (9) ^ves

a;(l-„) = jA„0^ + 0(l-^);

or, x{\-w)-vz\ (11)

and (10) and (11) interpreted give the following Propositions :

1st. Responsible beings who have voluntarily sacrificed their free^
dom are not free.

2nd. Responsible beings who have not voluntarily sacrificed their
freedom are free.

These, however, are merely different forms of the relations
before determined.

16. In examining these results, the reader must bear in mind,
that the sole province of a method of inference or analysis, is to
determine those relations which are necessitated by the connexion
of the terms in the original proposition. Accordingly, in esti-
mating the completeness with which this object is effected, we
have nothing whatever to do with those other relations which

CHAP. ▼!•] OP IMTimPRBTATION. 97

my be suggested to our minds by the meoiim^ of the terms
employed, as distinct from their expressed connexion. Thus it
seems obvious to remark, that ** They who have voluntarily sa-
crificed their fi-eedom are not free," this being a relation implied
in the very meaning of the terms* And hence it might appear^
that the first of the two independent relations assigned by the me-
thod is on the one hand needlessly limited, and on the other hand
superfluous. However, if regard be had merely to the connexion
of the terms in the original premiss, it will be seen that the re-
lation in question is not liable to either of these charges. The
solution, as expressed in the direct conclusion and the indepen-
dent relations, conjointly, is perfectly complete, without being
in any way superfluous.

If we wish to take into account the implidt relation above
referred to, viz., *^ They who have voluntarily sacrificed their
freedom are not free," we can do so by making this a distinct
proposition, the proper expression of which would be

IT ■» r(l - z).

This equation we should have to employ together with that
expressive of the original premiss. The mode in which such an
examination must be conducted will appear when we enter upon
the theory §r systems of propositions in a future chapter. The
sole difference of result to which the analysis leads is, that the
first of the independent relations deduced above is supenjicdcd.

17. Ex. 4. — Assuming the same definition as in Example S9
let it be required to obtain a description of irrational persons.

We have

l-y-l-

r + If - X
; -f 10

- ^ z«p + zi (1 - «•) + *(1 - 5) tr - 1 1 (1 - «) (1 - If)

•(l-x)«c + (l-x).-(l-if)+(l-x)(l-c)w+2(l_x)(l-.-)(l-«.)

-(I-x)n»-»(l-x)?(l-tf)»(l-x)(l-c)if+r(l-x)(l-c)(l-if)
-(l-x)«*(l-x)(l-i)ic + r(l-x)(l-z)(l-ir),

«ith ssw-0, x(l-z)(l-tr)mO.

H

98 OF INTBBPRBTATION. [CHAP. ▼!•

The independent relations here given are the same as we
before arrived at, as they evidentiy ought to be, since whatever
relations prevail independentij of the existence of a given class
of objects y^ prevail independentij also of the existence of the con-
trary class 1 - y.

The direct solution afforded by the first equation is : — Irror
tional persons consist of all irresponsible beings voho are either free to
actf or fiave voluntarily sacrificed their liberty ^ and are not free to
act ; together with an indefinite remainder of irresponsihle beings
who have not sacrificed their liberty^ and are not free to acL

18. The propositions analyzed in this chapter have been of
that species called definitions. I have discussed none of whidi
the second or predicate term is particular, and of which the ge-
neral type is y== vX^ Yand X being functions of the logical
symbols x, y, z, &c., and v an indefinite class symbol. The ana-
lysis of such propositions is greatly &cilitated (tiiough the step
is not an essential one) by the elimination of the symbol v, and
this process depends upon the method of the next chapter^ I
postpone also the consideration of another important problem
necessary to complete the theory of single propositions, but of
which the analysis really depends upon the method of the reduc-
tion of systems of propositions to be developed in iffuture page
of this work.

CHAP. Til.] or BLUflNATION. 99

CHAPTER VII.

ON BUMIVATIOH.

1. TN the examides diflcossed in the last chapter, all the ele-
-^ mentflofthe original premiM re-appeared in the condusioiiy
only in a different order, and with a different connexion. But it
more uanally happens in common reasoning, and espedally when
we hare more than one premiss, that some of the elements are
required not to appear in the conclusion. Such elements, or, as
they are commonly called, ** middle terms,** may be conmdered
as introduced into the original propositions only for the sake of
that eonnexion which they assist to establish among the other
elements, which are alone designed to enter into the expression of
the conclusion.

2. Respecting such intermediate elements, or middle terms,
some erroneous notions prevail. It is a general opinion, to which,
however, the examples contuned in the last chapter furnish a con-
tmdiction, that inference consists peculiarly in the elimination of
such terms, and that the elementary type of this process is exhi*
bited in the elimination of one middle term from two premises, so as
to produce a single resulting conclusion into which that term does
not enter. Hence it is commonly held, that sylloffitm is the basis,
or else the common type, of all inference, which may thus, how-
ever complex its form and structure, be resolved into a scries of
syllogisms. The propriety of this view will be considered in a
subsequent chapter. At present I wish to direct attcntiun to an
important, but hitherto unnoticed, point of difference between
the system of Logic, as expressed by symbols, and that of com-
mon algebra, with reference to the subject of elimination. In
the algebraic system we are able to eliminate one symbol from
two equations, two symbols from three equations, and generally
■ - I qrmbols from n equations. There thus exists a deffnite
ooonexion between the number of independent equations given,

hS

100 OF ELIMINATION. [CHAP. YII.

and the number of symbols of quantity which it is possible to
eliminate from them. But it is otherwise with the system of
Logic. No fixed connexion there prevails between the num-
ber of equations given representing propositions or premises,
and the number of typical symbols of which the elimination
can be effected. From a single equation an indefinite num-
ber of such symbols may be eliminated. On the other hand,
from an indefinite number of equations, a single class symbol
only may be eliminated. We may affirm, that in this peculiar
system, the problem of elimination is resolvable under all drcum-
stances alike* This is a consequence of that remarkable law of
duality to which the sjrmbols of Logic are subject. To the equa-
tions furnished by the premises ^ven, there is added another
equation or system of equations drawn from the fundamental
/ laws of thought itself, and supplying the necessary means for the
I solution of the problem in question. Of the many consequences
I which flow from the law of duality, this is perhaps the most
xdeserving of attention.

3. As in Algebra it oflen happens, that the elimination of
symbols from a given system of equations conducts to a mere
identity in the form = 0, no independent relations connecting
the symbols which remain ; so in the system of Logic, a like re-
sult, admitting of a similar interpretation, may present itself.
Such a circumstance does not detract from the generality of
the principle before stated. The object of the method upon
which we are about to enter is to eliminate any number of sym-
bols from any number of logical equations, and to exhibit in the
result the actual relations which remain. Now it may be, that
no such residual relations exist. In such a case the truth of the
method is shown by its leading us to a merely identical propo-
sition.

4. The notation adopted in the following Propositions is
similar to that of the last chapter. By / (x) is meant any ex-
pression involving the logical sjrmbol a:, with or without other
logical symbols. By /(I) is meant what /(a;) becomes when x
is therein changed into 1 ; by /(O) what the same function be-
comes when X is changed into 0.

CHAP. Til.] OP BLIMINATION. 101

Proposition I.

5. !//{*) ^0 be any logieal equaHan inoolving the, elau$ymbol
X, wiik or without other doss eymboU^ then will the equation

/(I) /(O) -

be true% independently of the interpretation ofx ; and it will be the
complete result of the elimination of x from the ahoee equation.

In other worde, the elimination of x from any given equation^

/( jr ) >0, will be effected by eucceeeivdy changing in that equation x into

1, and X into 0, and multiplying the two resulting equations together.

Similarly the complete result of the elimination of any doss sym-
bols^ X, y, Sfc^from any equation of the form F- 0, will be obtained
by completely expanding the first member of that equation in eon-
etititents of the given symbols^ and multiplying together all the coejfi'
dents of those constituents^ and equating the product to 0.

I>cveIo[nng the first member of the equation /(x) - 0, we
have (V. 10),

/(l)x4/(0)(I-x)-0;

ur, l/(l)-/(0))x+/(0)-0. (1)

/(O)

••'7(0) -/(I)'

f(0)-f{iy

Substitute these expresoons for x and 1 - x in the fundamental

equation

«(l-«)-0,
■ad there resolta <

/(0)/(l) Q.

■ l/(0)-/(i)l* ' ^^ ,*i^V^

or. /(l)/(0)-0, v"* (2)

the fiMrm required.

6. It ia seen in this [Ht)cess, that the eHmination is really effected
between the giren equation /(x) « and tha naiTenallj true
afwtion X ( 1 - x) - 0, ezprasing A- ^logical

ijMtiilsb fa ImJeA Theniead I

102 OF BLIMINATIOH. [CHAP.TIl.

than one premiss or equation, in order to render possible the eli-
mination of a term, the necessary law of thought virtually sup-
plying the other premiss or equation. And though the demon-
stration of this conclusion may be exhibited in other forms, yet
the same element furnished by the mind itself will still be vir-
tually present. Thus we might proceed as follows :
Multiply (1) by 0?, and we have

/(I) « = 0, (3)

and let us seek by the forms of ordinary algebra to eliminate x
firom this equation and (1).

Kow if we have two algebraic equations of the form

oa? + ft = 0,
ax-h i'=0;

it is well known that the result of the elimination of « is

a6'-a'6 = 0. (4)

But comparing the above pair of equations with (1) and (3)
respectively, we find

«=/(!) -/(o), 6-/(0);

a'=/(l) 6'=0;

'which, substituted in (4), give

/(l)/(0) = 0,

as before. In this form of the demonstration, the fundamental
equation rr(l - rr) = 0, makes its appearance in the derivation of
(3) firom (1).

7. I shall add yet another form of the demonstration, par-
taking of a half logical character, and which may set the demon-
stration of this important theorem in a clearer light.

We have as before

/(l)a:+/(0)(l-*) = 0.
Multiply this equation first by x, and secondly by 1 - «, we get

/(1)« = 0, /(0)(l-x) = 0.
From these we have by solution and development,

CHAP. VII.] or SLIM IHATION. 103

/(I) « - « - (1 . «), on developmeiit,
X

/(O) • -« .

^^ ^ l-»

The direct interpretation of these equations is —

lot. Whatever individuals are included in the class repre-
sented by/(l), are not-ar*s.

Snd. Whatever individuals are included in the class repre-
sented b7/(0), are x's.

Whence hj common logic, there are no individuals at once
in the class /(I) and in the class /(O), i.e. there are no indivi-
duals in the dass/(l)/(0). Hence, ^^

/(l)/(0).0. (6)

Or it would suiRcc to multiply together the developed equa-
tions, whence the result would immediately follow.

8. The theorem (5) furnishes us with the following Rule :

TO EUMINATB ANT STMBOL FROM A PROPOSED EQUATION.

Rule. — TIkstemuofthe equation having been brought^ by trans'
poeitum if neceeeary, to tkefird side^ give to the symlnJ euecfseivelg
the roluen 1 and 0, and multiply the resulting equations together.

The first part of the I'roposition is now proved.

9. Consider in the next place the general equation

/(j?,y)-0;

the fint member of which represenU any function of x, y, and
other sjrmbols.

By what has been diown, the result of the elimination of y
fiiXB this aquation will bo

/(x, l)/(x,0).0;

for such is the form to which we are conducted by successively
changing in the given equation y into 1, and y into 0, and multi-
plying the results together.

Again, if in the result obtained we change succesitivcly x into
U and X into 0, and multiply the results together, we have

/(1, 1)/(1, 0)/(0, l)/(0, 0) - ; (6>

■■ the inal result of eliminatbn.

104 OF ELIMINATION. [CHAP. YII.

But the four &ctor8 of the first member of this equation are
the four coefficients of the complete expanrion of /(or, y)j the
first member of the original equation ; whence the second part of
the Proposition is manifest.

EXAMPLES.

10. Ex. 1. — Having ^ven the Proposition, << All men are
mortal/' and its symbolical expression, in the equation,

in which y represents <* men/* and x ^^ mortab/' it is required to
eliminate the indefinite class symbol Vy and to interpret the
result.

Here bringing the terms to the first side, we have

y - war = 0.
When t; = 1 this becomes

y-x = 0;

and when t; » it becomes

and these two equations multiplied together, give

y - yar = 0,
or y(l-a:) = 0,

it being observed that y' = y.

^The above equation is the required result of elimination, and
its interpretation is. Men who are not mortal do not exists — an
obvious conclusion.

Kfrom the equation last obtained we seek a description of
beings who are not mortal, we have

y

• • X ^ X "■" ""•

y

Whence, by expansion, l-^ = j:(l-y)> which interpreted gives,
They who are not mortal are not men. This is an example of

CHAP. Til.] OF BLIMINATIOV. 105

what m the oommon logic is called oonvenion by contrapofliUoiiy
or negative oonyenion.^

Ex. 3. — Taking the Propoeition, ** No men are perfect," as
represented by the equation

y-i7(l-x).

wherdn y represents ^^ men," and x ^* perfect beings," it is re-
quired to eliminate v, and find from the result a dcscripUon both
of perfect being $ and of imperfect beings. We have

y-„(l -x)-.0.

Whence, by the rule of elimination,

{y-(l-x))xy.O,

or y-y(l-«)-o,

or y« « ;

which is interpreted by the Proposition, Perfect men do not exist.
From the above equation we have

a:«---(l-y)by development ;

whence, by interpretation. No perfect beings are men. Simi-

which, on interpretation, gives. Imperfect beings are all men with
an indefinite remainder ofbeingSj which are not men.

II. It will generally be the most convenient course, in the
treatment of propositions, to eliminate first the indefinite class
symbol o, wherever it occurs in the corresponding equations*
This will only modify their form, without impairing their signifi-
canoe. Let us apply this process to one of the examples of
Chap. IV. For the Proposition, ** No men are placed in exalted
stations and firee frx>m envious regards," we found the expression

y-r(l-xz),

and lor the equivalent Proposition, ** Men in exalted stations an
not free from envious regards," the expression

irx-o(l-z);

* Wbaleijr't Uglc» Book IL chop. u. toe. 4.

106 OF BLIMIMATION. [CHAP. VU.

and it was observed that these equations, v being «n indefioite

class symbol, were themselves equivalent. To prove this, it is

only necessaiy to eliminate fiom each the symbol v. The first

equation is

y - v(l - xz) = 0,

whence, first making v ^l^ and then v « 0, and multiplying the
results, we have

(y-1 +a?r)y = 0,

or yxz = 0.

Now the second of the given equations becomes on transpoBitioii

yx - v(l - z)^ 0;
whence {yx - 1 + z) yar = 0,

or yxz =» 0,

as before. The reader will easily interpret the result.

12. Ex.3. — Ah a subject for the general method of this
chapter, \7e will resume Mr. Senior's definition of wealth, viz. :
" Wei»lth consists of things trrnsfcrable, limited in supply, and
either p oductire of pleasure or preventive of pain." We shall
consider this definition, agreeably to a former remark, as including
all things which possess at once both the qualities expressed in
the last port ol the definition, upon which assumption we have,
as our representative equation,

w = st [pr +^(1 - r) + r(l -^)),
or w^ 8t{p-\-r{\-p)]^

wherein

w stands for wealth.

s „ things limited in supply.

t „ things transferable.

p „ things productive of pleasure.

r „ things preventive of pain.

From the above equation we can eliminate any symbols that
we do not desire to take into account, and express the result by
solution and development, according to any proposed arrange-
ment of subject and predicate.

Let us first consider what the expression for t&, wealth, would

aup. m.'] OY BuiinrATiov. 107

be if the dement r, refisrring to prevention of pain, were eluni-

natecL Now bringing the terms of the equation to the first tide,

we get

10 - j< (p + r - ;p) - 0.

Making r - 1, the first member becomes w ^ st^ and making
r « it becomes to - «(p ; whence we have hj the Rule,

(io-*<)(io-jfr)-0, (7)

or IT - wstp - test + i<p - ; (8)

whence stp

to - ^ •

st-^stp-l*
the developnient of the second member of which equation gives

•o.jfp + ?i<(l.p). (9)

Whence we have the omclusion, — Wealth camiits of all thnig$
UmUed m supply ^ transferable^ and productive ofpUasurey and an
miffbdte remainder of things limited m supply, transferabUy and
nai productive ofpleasure* This is sufficienUj obvious*

Let it be remarked that it is not necessary to perform the
multiplication indicated in (7)t and reduce that equation to the
Ibnn (8), in order to determine the expression of to in terms of
the other symbols. The process of development may in all cases
be made to supersede that of multiplication. Thus if we de-
velop (7) in terms of to, we find

(1 - St) (l''Sip)w + sip(l - lo) - 0,

stp^{\-st){i-stpy

and tUs equation developed will give, as before,

wmstp-^^st{l-p).

13. S u ppose next that we seek a
insopplyyas dependent upon their rektion to wealth, transferable-
Msi^ snd tendoicy to prodooe pleasure, omitliBg all reference to
As fg9i«lisB of pain.

108 OF BLIMINATION. [CHAP. VII.

From equation (8), which is the result of the diminalioii of
r from the original equation, we have

to - s (wt + wip - (p) = ;

whence ^ to

tct + wtp - tp

= wtp + wt (1 'p) + '^w{l-t)p + -^w(\- t) (1 -p)

+ 0(l-u;)^ + 5(i-u;)<(l-p) + 5(l-ii;)(1.0l^

+ J(l-u;)(l-0O-p).

We will first give the direct interpretation of the above solution,
term by term ; afterwards we shall offer some general remarks
which it suggests ; and, finally, show how the expression of the
conclusion may be somewhat abbreviated.

First, then, the direct interpretation is. Things limited in
supply consist of All wealth tfxmsferable and productive o/pleature
— all wealth trafisferablet and not productive ofpleagare^ — an indefi-
nite amount of what is not wealth, but is either transferable^ and not
productive ofpteasure^ or intransferable and productive of pleasure,
or neither transferable nor productive of pleasure.

To which the terms whose coefficients are - pernut us to add
the following independent relations, viz. :

Ist. Wealth that is iniransferahUy and productive of pleaturef
does not exist

2ndly. Wealth that is intransferable ^ and not productive ofpUa^
sure, does not exist.

14. Respecting this solution I suppose the following remarks
are likely to be made.

First, it may be said, that in the expression above obtained
for " things limited in supply," the term " All wealth transfer-
able," &c., is in part redundant ; since all wealth is (as implied
in the original proposition, and directly asserted in the indepenr
dent relations) necessarily transferable.

I answer, that although in ordinary speech we should not

CHAP. VII.] OF BLIMIMATIOM. 109

deem it neoessaiy to add to *^ wealth" the epithet <* transferable,"
if another part of our reasoning had led us to express the con-
clusion, that there is no wealth which is not transferable, yet it
pertains to the perfection of this method that it in all cases fully
defines the objects represented by each term of the conclusion,
by staling the relation they bear to each quality or element of dis-
tinction that we have chosen to employ. This is necessary in order
to keep the different parts of the solution really distinct and in-
dependent, and actually prevents redundancy* Suppose that the
pair of terms we have been considering had not contuncd the
word ** transferable," and had unitedly been ** All wealth," we
ouuld then logically resolve the single term ** All wealth" into
the two terms **A11 wealth transferable," and **A11 wealth
intransferable." But the latter term is shown to disappear by
the ** independent relations." Hence it forms no part of the de-
scription required, and is therefore redundant. The remaining
term agrees with the conclusion actually obtiuned.

Solutions in which there cannot, by logical divisions, be pro-
duced any superfluous or redundant terms, may be termed pure
solutiams. Such are all the solutions obtained by the method of
development and elimination above explained. It is proper to
notice, that if the common algebraic method of elimination were
adopted in the cai«es in which that method b possible in the prc-
fcnt system, we should not be able to depend upon the purity of
the solutions obtained. Its want of generality would not be its
only defect.

15. In the second place, it will be remarked, that the con-
clusion contains two terms, the aggregate significance of which
would be more conveniently expressed by a single term. Instead
of ** All wealth productive of pleasure, and transferable," and
** All wealth not productive of pleasure, and transferable," wc
might simply say, ** All wealth transferable." This remark is
quite just. But it must be noticed that whenever any such sim-
pUficacions are {lo^sible, they are immediately suggested by the
form of the equation we have to interpret ; and if that equation
be reduced to its simplest form, then the inteq>rctation to which
it eooducta will be in its simplest form also, llius in the original
•olotioo the terms wtp and ir^( 1 - p)^ which have unity for their

110 OF BLIMINATION. [cHAP. VIL

coefficient^ giye, on addition, wt; the terms w(l -t)p and
tr(l "t) (1 -p), which have jr for thdr coefficient give tr(l-^;
and the terms (1 -to) (I- t)p and (1 - to) (1 -t) (1 ~p), which
have 7 for their coefficient, give (1 - u') (1 - t). Whence the
complete solution is

s^wt^^{l-w)(l-t) + ^(l^w)t{\-p),

Ynih the independent relation,

to (1 - ^) = 0, or W'jrL

The interpretation would now stand tiius : —

let. Things limited in supply consist of all wealth transferable ^
trith an indefinite remainder of what is not wealth and not transfer-
ablet <^ of transferable articles which are not wealthy and are not
productive ofpleastare.

2nd. All wealth is transferable.

This is the sunplest form under which the general conclusion,
with its attendant condition, can be put*

16. When it is required to eliminate two or more symbols
from a proposed equation we can either employ (6) Prop. I., or
eliminate them in succession, the order of the process being in-
different. From the equation

w = st(^p ■¥ r " pr)j

we have eliminated r, and found the result,

w - wst - wstp + stp = 0.

Suppose that it had been required to eliminate botii r and ^, then
taking the above as the first step of the process, it remains to
eliminate fix)m the last equation t. Now when t^l the first
member of that equation becomes

w - tDS - wsp + flp,

and when / « the same member becomes w. Whence we have

w{w - ws - wsp + sp) = 0,

or w - ws = Oj

for the required result of elimination.

CHAF. Til.] OF BLDflMATIOM. Ill

If finom tbe bst result we determine lo, we liaye

1 -*

whence ^^ All wealth is limited in supply.** As p does not enter
bto the equfttaon, it b evident thst the above is true, irrespec-
tively of any relation which the elements of the conclusion bear
to the quality ** pitnluctive of pleasure/'

Becuming the original equation, let it be required to elimi-
nate s and t. We have

W" si{p -k- r ~ pr).

Inst^ead, however, of separately eliminating s and / according to
the Rule, it will 8u£Bce to treat «/ as a single symbol, seeing that
it satisfies the fundamental law of the symbols by the equation

St (1 - St) - 0.

Pladng, therefore, the given equation under the form

w-stip-k-r- pr) « ;

and TniH*Tg st successively equal to 1 and to 0, and taking the
product of the results, we have

(lo - p - r + pr) tr « 0,
or w -wp- ter -k- wpr « 0,

for the result sought.

As a particular illustration, let it be required to deduce an
ezpresnon for ** things productive of pleasure'* (p), in terms of
** wealth** (it), and *^ things preventive of pain'* (r).

We have, on solving the equation,

- ?irr + ir(l - r)+ 5(1 - •r)r + J (1 - it) (1 - r)

0,

-••0 -O + qIw + o^* -")•

WhcBoe the fbUowing ooocliuion : — Tlkiaga pndmetive of plea-

112 OF ELIMINATION. [CHAP. VII.

sure arcy all wealth not preventive ofpain^ an indefinite anunmt
of wealth that is preventive ofpairij and an indefinite anumnt of
what is not wealth.

From the same equation we get

w(l -r)

1-/1=1-

tr(l-r) tr(l-ry
which developed, gives

ii^O -/?) = -trr + -(1 - tr).r + - (1 -tr). (1 - r)

--uT + -(l.ir).

Whence, Things not productive of pleasure are evther wealthy pre"
ventive of pain, or what is not wealth.

Equally easy would be the discussion of any similar case.

17. In the last example of elimination, we have eliminated
the compound symbol st from the given equation, by treating it
as a single symbol. The same method is applicable to any com-
bination of symbols which satisfies the fundamental law of indi-
vidual symbols. Thus the expression p -¥ r - pr will, on bemg
multiplied by itself, reproduce itself, so that if we represent
p-\-r-pr by a single symbol as y, we shall have the fundamen-
tal law obeyed, the equation

y = y», or y (1 - y) = 0,

being satisfied. For the rule of elimination for symbols is founded
upon the supposition that each individual symb(A is subject to
that law ; and hence the elimination of any function or combina-
tion of such symbols from an equation, may be effected by a sin-
gle operation, whenever that law is satisfied by the function.

Though the forms of interpretation adopted in this and the
previous chapter show, perhaps better than any others, the di-
rect significance of the symbols 1 and -, modes of expression

more agreeable to those of common discourse may, with equal
truth and propriety, be employed. Thus the equation (9) may
be interpreted in the following manner : Wealth is either limited
in supply y transferable^ and productive ofpleasure, or limited in sup^

CHAP. VII.] OF £LIMINATION. 113

plff^ tramferabU^ and not productive of pleasure. And reversely,
Whaiever u limUed in supply, transferable^ and productive of plea-
sure^ is wealth. Reverse interpretatioiis, similar to the above, are
always furnished when the final development introduces terms
having unity as a coefficieut.

18. NoTB.— The fundamental equation /(l)/(0) » 0, ex-
prearing the result of the elimination of the symbol x from any
equation /(x) » 0, admits of a remarkable interpretation.

It is to be remembered, that by the equation /(x) - is im-
plied some proposition in which the individuals represented by
the class x, suppose ** men," are referred to, together, it may be,
with other individuab ; and it is our object to ascertain whether
there is implied in the proposition any relation among the other
individuals, independently of those found in the class men. Now
the equation /( 1 ) « expresses what the original proposition J
would become if men made up the universe, and the equation
/(O) « expresses what that ori^nal proportion would become
if men ceased to exist, wherefore the equation /(l)/(0) » cx-
p r ca s ca what in virtue of the original proposition would bo
equally true on either assumption, i. e. cc^ually true whether
^ nen** were ** all things" or *^ nothing." Wherefore the theo-
rem expresses that what is equally true, whether a given class of
oijects embraces the whole universe or disappears from existenecy j
is independent of that class ditty ether, and vice vcrs&. Herein
we see another example of the inteqirctation of foniial results,
immediately deduced from the mathematical bws of thought, into
geneiml axioms of philosophy .

114 OF REDUCTION. [CHAP. YIII.

CHAPTER VIII.

ON THE REDUCTION OF SYSTEMS OF PROPOSITIONS.

1. TN the preceding chapters we have determined sufficiently
^ for the most essential purposes the theory of single pri-
mary propositions, or, to speak more accurately, of primacy pro-
positions expressed by a single equation. And we have estab-
lished upon that theory an adequate method. We have shown
how any element involved in the given system of equations may
be eliminated, and the relation which connects the remaining
elements deduced in any proposed form, whether of denial, of af-
firmation, or of the more usual relation of subject and predicate.
It remains that we proceed to the consideration of systems of
propositions, and institute with respect to them a similar series
of investigations. We are to inquire whether it is possible firom
the equations by which a system of propositions is expressed to
eliminate, ad libitum, any number of the symbols involved ; to
deduce by interpretation of the result the whole of the relations
implied among the remaining symbols ; and to determine in par-
ticular the expression of any single element, or of any inter-
pretablc combination of elements, in terms of the other elements,
so as to present the conclusion in any admissible form that may
be required. These questions will be answered by showing that it
is possible to reduce any system of equations, or any of the equa-
tions involved in a system, to an equivalent single Equation, to
which the methods of the previous chapters may be immediately
applied. It will be seen also, that in this reduction is involved
an important extension of the theory of single propositions, which
in the previous discussion of the subject we were compelled to
forego. This circumstance is not peculiar in its nature. There
are many special departments of science which cannot be com-
pletely surveyed from within, but require to be studied also from
an external point of view, and to be regarded in connexion ¥iith

BAP. VIII.] or RBDUCTIOM. 1 16

ther and kindred subjccta, in order that their full proportions
my be understood.

Thid chapter will exhibit two distinct modes of reducing
rvtems of equations to equivalent single equations. The first
r these rests upon the employment of arbitrary constant multi-
licrs. It is a method 8u£Bcicntly simple in theory, but it has the
lounvenience of rendering the subsequent processes of elimina-
on and development, when they occur, somewhat tedious. It was,
owever, the method of reduction first discovered, and partly on
lis account, and partly on account of its simplicity, it has been
bought proper to retain it. The second method does not r^
aire the introduction of arbitrary constants, and is in nearly
II respects preferable to the preceding one. It will, therefore^
cnermlly be adopted in the subsequent investigations of this
ron.

2. We proceed to the consideration of the first method.

Proposition I.

Amf nfsiem of logical eqtmtions may be reduced to a nngU eqttiva*
mi equation^ by multiplying each equation after the fir^t by a dis»
wui arbitrary constant quantity ^ and adding all tlie reeults, including
\efir$t equation^ together.

By Prop. 2, Chap, vi., the interpretation of any single
quation, f{x^y ..) « is obtained by equating to those con-
tituents of the development of the firi«t inembor, whoHc co-
ifficients do not vanish. And hence, if there l>e given two equa-
ioDiS /(r, y . .) « 0, and F(x, y . .) » 0, their unite<l imimrt will be
ontained in the Kystem (»f rc:4ults formed by cquiiting to all
hoKC constituents which thus present themselves in both, or in
ather, of the given equations <levelo{)e4l according to the Uuleof
Jliap. VI. Thus let it be supi>osed, that we have the two equations

Jry-2r.O, (1)

' - y - ; (2)

rhe development of the first gives

-xy-2x{\ -y) = :

xy«0, x(l-y) = 0. (3)

1 2

116 OF REDUCTION. [CHAP.TIII.

The development of the second equation gives

whence, a: (1 - y) = 0, y (1 - x) = 0. (4)

The constituents whose coefficients do not vanish in both deve-
lopments are ary, a? (1 - y), and (1 - x) y, and these would to-
gether give the system

xy = 0, aj(l-y) = 0, (l-aj)y = 0; (5)

which is equivalent to the two systems given by the developments
separately, seeing that in those systems the equation ar (1 - y) =
is repeated. Confining ourselves to the case of binary systems
of equations, it remains then to determine a single equation,
which on development shall yield the same constituents with
coefficients which do not vanish, as the given equations produce.
Now if we represent by

the ^ven equations, F, and Vz being functions of the lo^cal sym-
bols X, y, Zj &c. ; then the single equation

V, + cV, = 0, (6)

c being an arbitrary constant quantity, will accomplish the re-
quired object. For let At represent any term in the full de-
velopment Vi wherein ^ is a constituent and A its numerical
coefficient, and let Bt represent the corresponding term in the
full development of ^2, then will the corresponding term in the
development of (6) be

{A + cB) t.

The coefficient of t vanishes if A and B both vanish, but not
otherwise. For if we assume that A and B do not both vanish,
and at the same time make

A + ci? = 0, (7)

the following cases alone can present themselves.

1st. That A vanishes and B does not vanish. In this case
the above equation becomes

CHAP.YIII.] OF RBDDCnOM. 117

and requires that e « 0. But this contradicts the hjrpothceds that
c is an arbitrary constant.

Snd. That B vanishes and A does not vanish. This assump-
tion reduces (7) to

by which the assumption is itself viokted.

3rd. That neither A nor B vanishes. The equation (7) then

gives

-A

which is a definite value, and, therefore, conflicts with the hy-
pothcsL* that c is arbitrary.

Hence the coefficient .1 + cB vanishes when A and B both
vaniffh, but not otherwise. Therefore, the sama constituents
will appear in the development of (6), with coefficients wluch do
not vanish, as in the equations F| s 0, F, = 0, singly or together.
And the equation F| + cF, = 0, wIU be equivalent to the sys-
tem r, = 0, r, = 0.

By similar reasoning it appears, that the general system of

equations

r, == 0, l\ - 0, I', = 0, &c. ;

may be replaced by the single equation

Ti + 0^5 + c l\ + &c. = 0,

c c\ &c., being arbitrary constanti*. The equation thus formed
may lie treated in all rcsfiects as the ordinary logical equations
of the previous chapten>. The arbitrary constants Ci , Ci, &c., are
nut Itjgical symbols. They do not i^atisfy the law,

Ci(l-c,)r=0, c,(l r,)-0.

But their introduction is justified by that general principle which
has been stated in (II. 15) and (V. (>), and exemplified in nearly
all our sub0e<|uent investigations, viz., that ecpiations involving
the symbols of Ijogic may Iks treated in all reH])ccts as if those
symbols were sjnnliols of quantity, subject to the special law
.r (I - jr) « 0, until in the final stage of solution they assume a
form interprctable m that system of thought with which Logic
is ooovcnant.

118 OF REDUCTION. [CHAP.Tni.

3. The following example will aeirve to illustiate tlie above
method. ^

Ex. 1. — Suppose that an analysis of the properties of a parti-
cular class of substances has led to the following general condu-
sions, viz. :

1st. That wherever the properties A and B are combined,
dther the property Cj or the property D, is present also ; but
they are not jointly present.

2nd. That wherever the properties B and C are combined,
the properties A and JD are either both present with them, or
both absent.

3rd. That wherever the properties A and B are both absent,
the properties C and D are both absent also ; and vice versdy where
the properties C and B are both absent, A and B are both absent
also.

Let it then be required from the above to determine what
may be concluded in any particular instance from the presence of
the property A with respect to the presence or absence of the
properties B and C, paying no regard to the property D,

Represent the property Ahja;
„ the property Bhj y;
5, the property Chj z;
„ the property B by «?.

Then the symbolical expression of the premises will be

xy = v [w (I- z) + z (1 - w)} ;
yz = v [xw + (1- a?) (1 - w)]i
. (l-«)(l-y) = (l-z)(l-«;).

From the first two of these equations, separately eliminating the
indefinite class symbol r, we have

yz [\ - xw - {1 - x){\ - w)) = 0.
Now if we observe that by development

1 - w (1 - z) - z (1 - w) = u?r + (1 - M?) (1 - r),
and

1 - aw - (1 - x){ 1 - u?) = X (1 - w) + tr (1 - «),

CHAP. VIII.] OF RSDUCnON. 119

tod in theso cxpremoDS replace, for simplicity,

1 - « by 3F, 1 - y by ^, &c.,
we shidl have from the three last equations,

ay (trz + irz) - 0; (1)

yz (xw + xw) = ; (2)

iy -*&? ; (3)

and firom this system we must eliminate tr.

Blultiplying the second of the above equations by e, and the
third by ^, and adding the results to the first, we have

xy (tez + wz) + eyz {xw + xw) + c^(xy - w^ - 0,

When IT is made equal to 1, and therefore w to 0, the first mem-
ber of the above equation becomes

xyz + exyz + (fxy.

And when in the same member w is made and ir « 1, it be-
comes

xyz t exyz + cfxy - ez.

Hence the result of the elimination of u? may be expressed in the
form

(xyz + cxpz + exy) {xyz + exyz + exy - cz) ■» ; (4)

and from this equation « is to be determined.

Were we now to proceed as in former instances, we should
multiply together the fiictors in the first member of the above
equation ; but it may be well to show that such a course is not
at all necessary* Let us develop the first member of (4) with
refi-rcncc to x, the symbol whose expression is sought, we find

yz (yz -^cyz-cz)* -^ {cyz + ey) (cy - <^z) (1 - «) - 0;
or, cyzx + (cyz + ify) (ey - ^i) (1 - x) - ;

whence we find,

^ (cyz-^ ey) (ey - (fz) ,
'(eyz + ey) (dy ^ ifz) - eyz'

awl developing the second member with respect to y and x,

120 OF REDUCTION. [CHAP. YIII.

"^'^ a: = (l-y)z+^y(l-z) + J-(l-y)(l-;r);

a: = (l-y)z + -(l-z);

the interpretation of which is, Wherever the property A is present,
there either C is present and B absent^ or C is absent. And in«
versely, Wherever the property C is present^ and the property B
absent, there the property A is present.

These results may be much more readily obtained by the
method next to be explained. It is, however, satisfiustory to
possess different modes, serving for mutual verificaticHi, of ar-
/ riving at the same conclusion.

4. We proceed to the second method.

Proposition IL

If any equationsy Vi =0, F3 = 0, Sfc, are sucli tliat the devdop"
merits of Hieir first members co7isist only of constituents with positive
coejjicients, those eqvutions may be combined together into a single
equivalent equation by addition.

For, as before, let At represent any term in the development
of the function Fi, Bt the corresponding term in the develop-
ment of F2, and 80 on. Then will the corresponding term in the
development 0/ the equation

^1+ F, + &c. = 0, (1)

formed by the adiUtion of the several given equations, be

(^ + 2? + &c.) t.

But as by hypothesis the coefficients A, B, &c. are none of them
negative, the aggregate coefficient A + B, &c. in the derived
equation will only vanish when the separate coefficients A, B, &a
vanish together. Hence the same constituents will appear in the
development of the equation (1) as in the several equations
Vi = 0, F2 = 0, &c, of the original.system taken collectively, and
therefore the interpretation of the equation (1) >vill be equiva-

CHAP. VIII.] OF RBOUCTION. 121

lent to the collective interpretatioiifl of the sevend equations from
which it is derived.

Proposition IIL

5. If Vx^ 0, r, - 0, 8fe. represent any 9y$iem ofequaiumB^ the
terms of which have by transposition been brought to the first side^
then the combined interpretation of the system will be invohed in the
single equation^

formed by adding together the squares of the given equations.

For let any equation of the system, as Fi ■ 0, produce on de-
velopment an equation

aJi + a^ti -¥ &c. « 0,

in which ti^ l„ &c. are constituents, and ai, as, &c thdr corres-
ponding coefficients. Then the equation F|* « will produce
on development an equation

ai*/i + a,'/, + &c. « 0,

as may be proved either from the law of the development or by
squaring the function aJi + a,/„ &c. in subjection to the con-
ditions

/i»«/,, /a'-^i, M,-0,

assigned in Prop. 3, Chap. v. Hence the constituents which
ap|icar in tlie cxiKin/ion of the equation I'l' » 0, are the same
witli tlio:«e wliich api)car in the cxi)an:«ion of the equation K| • 0,
and they liavc [Kx^itivc coefficients. And the same remark ap-
plies to the equations T, = 0, &c. Whence, by the last Propo-
rtion, the equation

will be cqui^-alent in interpretation to the system of equations

r, = 0, K,= 0, &c.

Corollary. — Any equation, !'» 0, (»f which the first member
almdy satisfies the condition

P- \\ or K(l- n-0»

122 OF RBDUCTION. [CHAP. VUI.

does not need (as it would remain unaflfected by) the porooesa of
squaring. Such equations are, indeed, immediately deydcqiaUe
into a series of constituents, with coefficients equal to 1, Chap. v.
Prop. 4.

Proposition IV.

6. Whenever the equations of a system have by the above pro^
cess of squaring^ or by any other process^ been reduced to a form
such that all the constituents exhibited in their devdopmeni have
positive coefficients^ any derived equations obtained by elimination
win possess the same character^ and may be combined with the
other equations by addition*

Suppose that we have to eliminate a symbol x fix>m any
equation l^= 0, which is such that none of the constituents, m
the full development of its first member, have negative coefficients.
That expansion may be written in the form

V,x+ Fo(l-a:) = 0,

Vi and Fo being each of the form

ait\ + 03 fj . • + afffij

in which f i ^3 . . tn are constituents of the other symbols, and
ai 1X3 . . On in each case positive or vanishing quantities. The re-
sult of elimination is

and as the coefficients in Vi and Kj are none of them negative,
there can be no negative coefficients in the product F, F,.
Hence the equation Fi F3 = may be added to any other equa-
tion, the coefficients of whose constituents are positive, and the
resulting equation will combine the full significance of those
from which it was obtained.

Proposition V.

7. To deduce from the premous Propositions a practicalrule or
method for the reduction of systems of equations expressing propo-
sitions in Logic.

We have by the previous investigations established the fol-
lowing points, viz. :

CHAP. VIII.] OF REDUCTION. 123

l8t. That any equations wbicb are of the form* K« 0, F
tisfying the Inndamcntal law of duality ^(1 - K) « 0, may be
combined together by simple addition.

2ndly. That any other equations of the form Vm o may be
reduced, by the process of squaring, to a form in which the same
principle of combination by mere addition is applicable.

It remains then only to determine what equations m the ac-
tual expression of propositions belong to the former, and what to
the latter, class.

Now the general types of propositions have been set forth in
the conclusion of Chap. iv. The division of propositions which
they repre^nt is as follows :

l«t. Propositions, of which the subject b universal, tod the
predicate (xulicular.

The symbolical type (IV. 15) is

X and y satLsfying the law of duality. Eliminating v, we have

A'(l-Y)-0, (1)

and this wiU be found also to satisfy the same law. No further
roduction by the process of squaring is needed.

2nd. l^ropositions of which both terms are universal, and of
which the symbolical type is

X. y,

A' and Y separately satisfying the law of duality. Writing the
equation in the form X - F - 0, and squaring, we have

x-8xy+ y-o,

or X(l- y)+ y(l- X)-0. (8)

The first member of this equation satisfies the law of duality, aa
is evident from its very form.

We may arrive at the same equation in a different manner.
The equation

X- y

if equivalent to the two equations

XmvY, y-rX,

124 OF REDUCTION. [CBAP. VUi.

(for to affinn'that X*b are identical with Y^s is to affirm both that
All X*a are ys, and that All Ya are X*a). Now these equa-
tions giye, on elimination of v,

X(l- r) = 0, Y(1-X) = 0,

which added, produce (2).

3rd. Propositions of which both terms are particular. The
form of such propositions is

but V is not quite arbitrary, and therefore must not be eliminated.
For V is the representative ofsomcy which, though it may include
in its meaning ally does not include none. We must therefore
transpose the second member to the first side, and square the
resulting equation according to the rule.
The result will obviously be

vX(\ - Y) + vY(l-X)^0.

The above conclusions it may be convenient to embody in a
Bule, which will serve for constant future direction.

^•- ^ 8. ^ULE. — The equations being so expressed as diat the terms X
and Yin Hie following typical forms obey the law of duality^ clumge
Hie equations

X ^vYintoX{l- y) = 0,

X= YintoX{l-Y) + Y{l-'X)^0.

vX = vYinto vX{l^Y) + vY(l - Z) = 0.

Any equation which is given in the fomi X = will not need transform
motion^ and any equation which presents itself in the form X^X
may be replaced by \- X = Oy as appears from the second of the
above transformations.

When the equations of the system have thus been reduced,
any of them, as well as any equations derived fi-om them by the
process of elimination, may be combined by addition.

9. Note. — It has been seen in Chapter iv. that in literally
translating the terms of a proposition, without attending to its
real meaning, into the language of symbols, we may produce
equations in which the tenns X and Y do not obey the law of
duality. The equation w; = «^ (p + r), given in (3) Prop. 3 of

CBAP.TIII.] OF REDUCTION. 136

the chapter referred to, is of this kind. Such equationsy how-
ever* ms it has been seen, have a meaning. Should it, for cu-
fiosity, or for any other motive, be determined to employ thenif
it will be best to reduce them by the Rule (VI. 5).

10. Ex. 2. — Let us take the following Propositions of Ele-
mentary Geometry :

Ist. Similar figures consist of all whose corresponding angles
arc equal, and whose corresponding sides arc propordonal.

2nd. Triangles whose corresponding angles are equal have
their corresponding sides proportional, and vice vend.

To represent these premises, let us make

i ■ dmilar.

t ■ triangles.

q • having corresponding angles equal.

r • having corresponding sides proportional.

Then the premises are expressed by the following equations :

i-yr, (1)

tq = tr. (2)

Reducing by the Rule, or, wliich amounts to the same thing,
bringing the terms of these equations to the first side, squaring
each equation, and then adding, we have

i + qr- 2qrM -^ iq + ir ^ 2tqr - 0. (3)

Let it be required to deduce a description of disitimilar figures
ibrmed out of the elements expressed by the terms, triangleMy
having corresponding angles equal, having corresponding sides

We have from (3),

tq ■¥ qr -^ rt - 2iqr
'" 2qr^~\ '

qr^iq^rt^2tqr-^\
• * ' 27r - 1 ^^'

And fully developing the second member, we find

I -f-(Wyr + »j(l-r) + 2/r(l-7) + /(l-7)(l-r)

4 0(1 - l)gr + (1 - /) 7(1 - r) + (1 . O'^Cl " V)

+ (i-00-?)(i-0. (5)

126 OF REDUCTION. [CHAP. ¥111.

In the above development two of the terms have the coeffident
2, these must be equated to by the Bule, then those terms
whose coefficients are being rejected, we have

l-*=<(l-})(l-r) + (l-<)?(l-r) + (l-Or(l-?)

+ (l-0(l-?)(l-r); (6)

<j(l-r)-0; (7)

<r(l-9) = 0; (8)

the direct interpretation of which is

1st. Dissimilar Jigures consist of all triangles which have not their
corresponding angles equal and sides proportional^ and of all figures
not being triangles which have either their angles equals and sides not
proportional^ or their corresponding sides proportional^ and angles
not equal, or neither their corresponding angles equal nor Carres'
ponding sides proportional.

2nd. There are no triangles whose corresponding angles care equals
and sides not proportionaL

3rd. JTiere are no triangles whose corresponding sides are pro*
portional and angles not equal.

11. Such are the immediate interpretations of the final equar
tion. It is seen, in accordance with the general theory, that in
deducing a description of a particular class of objects, viz., dis-
similar figures, in terms of certam other elements of the original
premises, we obtain also the independent relations which exist
among those elements in virtue of the same premises. And that
this is not superfluous information, even as respects the imme-
diate object of inquiry, may easily be shown. For example, the
independent relations may always be made use of to reduce, if it
be thought desirable, to a briefer form, the expression of that re-
lation which is directiy sought. Thus if we write (7) in the

form

= /y(l-r),

and add it to (6), we get, since

til-q)(l-r) + tq{l-r) = t(l-r),

I - s ^ t(l - r) + (I - t)q (1 - r) + (I - t)r (I - q)

+ (1-0(1 -?)(l-r),

CHAP. Tni.] OP RBDUCnON. 1S7

which, on interpretation, would give fcxr the first term of the de-
scription of diHHJmilar figures, <* Triangles whose corresponding
Bidei» arc not proportional," instead of the fuller description origi-
nally obtained. A r^ard to convenience must always determine
the propriety of such reduction.

1 2. A reduction which is always advantageous (VII. 16) con-
tiste in collecting the terms of the immediate description sought,
as of the second member of (5) or (6), into as few groups as
posablc. Thus the third and fourth terms of the second mem-
ber of (6) produce by addition the single term (1 - 1) (1 - q).
If this reduction be combined with the last, we have

the interpretation of which is

IKstimUar figures consist of all triangles vahass eorre^inrnding
sides are not proportionaly and all figures not being triangles which
have either their corresponding angles unequal^ or their corresponding
angles equals but sides not proportional*

The fulness of the general solution is therefore not a super-
fluity. While it ^ves us all the information that we seek, it
provider us also with the means of expressing that information
in the mode that is most advantageous.

13. Another observation, illustrative of a principle which has
already been stated, remains to l>e made. Two of the terms in
the full development of 1 - 1 in (5) have 2 for their coefficients,

instead of-. It will hereafter be shown that this circumstance

indicates that the two premiss were not independent. To verify
thiA, let us rc8ume the equations of the premises in their reduced
forms, viz.,

j(l-yr)4 ^(l-*)-0,

/^(l-r) +/r(l -9) = 0.

Xow if the first members of these equations have any common
constituents, they will apfiear on multifjying the equations to-
gether. If we do this we obtain

stq{l - r)^ str{l -7)-0.

128 OF RBDUCTION. [CHAP. VIII.

Whence there will result

8tq(l - r) = 0, 8tr(l - y) = 0,

these bemg equations which are deducible from either of the
primitive ones. Their interpretations are—

Similar triangles which have their correspofiding angles equal
Iiave their corresponding sides proportional.

Similar triangles which Jiave their corresponding sides propor-
tional have their corresponding angles equal.

And these conclusions are equally deducible frx)m either pre-
miss singly. In this respect, according to the definitions laid
down, the premises are not independent.

14. Let us, in conclusion, resume the problem discussed in
illustration of the first method of this chapter, and endeavour to
ascertain, by the present method, what may be concluded from
the presence of the property C, with reference to the properties
A and B.

We found on eliminating the symbols v the following equa-
tions, viz. :

xy (wz + wz) = 0, (1)

yz (xw + xtv) = 0; (2)

xy = wz. (3)

From these we arc to eliminate w and determine z. Now (1)
and (2) already satisfy the condition V(l- F) = 0. The third
equation gives, on bringing the terms to the first side, and
squaring

xy (1 - iJbz) -^ wl:(l - xy) - 0. (4)

Adding (1) (2) and (4) together, we have

xy(wz-\- wz)-\-yz(xw-\^iXi) + xy{l - wz) + wz{l - xy) = 0.
Eliminating u?, we get

(xyz + yzx + ^) [xyz + yzx + xyz + i(l - xy)) = 0.

Now, on multiplying the terms in the second factor by those in
the first successively, ob8er\dng that

XX = 0, yy = 0, zz = 0,

CHAP. VIII.] OP RBDUCnON. 1S9

nearly all (ILsappear, and we have only left

xyz + xyz - ; (5)

whence

z -

xy -¥ ry

0.0.
-Oay+-ay + gxy + Oxy

. 0-

furnuhing the interpretation. Wherever the property C it founds
eiihrr the profperty A or the property B wiU be found with it^ but
mot both of them together*

From the equation (5) we may readily deduce the result ar-
rived at in the previous investigation by the method of arbitrary
constant multipliers, as well as any other proposed forms of the
reUtion between jr, y, and z; e. g. If the property B is absent^
either A and C will be jointly preeent^ or Cwill be absent. And
conversely. If A and C are jointly present^ B will be absent*
The converse part of this conclusion is founded on the presence
of a term xz with unity for its coefficient in the developed value
oty.

ISO METHODS OF ABBRBTIATION. [CHAP. IX.

CHAPTER IX.

ON CERTAIN METHODS OF ABBREVIATION.

I . npHOUGH the three fundamental methods of development,
-^ elimmation, and reduction, established and illustrated in
the previous chapters, are sufficient for all the practical ends of
Lo^c, yet there are certain cases in which they admit, and espe*
cially the method of elimination, of being simplified in an im-
portant degree ; and to these I wish to direct attention in the
present chapter. I shall first demonstrate some propositions in
which the principles of the above methods of abbreviation are
contained, and I shall afterwards apply them to particular ex-
amples.

Let us designate as class terms any terms which satisfy the
fundamental law F (1 - F) » 0. Such terms will individually
be constituents ; but, when occurring together, will not, as do
the terms of a development, necessarily involve the same symbols
in each. Thus ax + boot/ + cyz may be described as an expression
consisting of three class terms, rr, xt/y and yzy multiplied by the
coefficients a, 6, c respectively. The principle applied in the two
following Propositions, and which, in some instances, greatly
abbreviates the process of elimination, is that of the rejection of
superfluous class terms; those being regarded as superfluous
which do not add to the constituents of the final result.

•

Proposition I.

2. From any equation, V^ 0, in which V consists of a series of
class terms having positive coefficients^ we are permitted to reject any
term which contains another term as a f actor ^ and to change every
positive coeffi^cient to unity.

For the significance of this series of positive terms depends
only upon the number and nature of the constituents of its final
expansion, i. e. of its expansion with reference to all the symboli

CHAP. IXJ] METHODS OF ABBIIBVIATION. 131'

which it bvolves, and not at all upon the actual values of the
coefficients (VI. 5). Now let x be any term of the series, and
jy any otlicr term having x as a factor. The expansion of z with
reference to the symbols'^ and y will be

and the expansion of the sum of the terms x and xy will be

2xy + x(l -y).

But by what has been said, these expressions occurring in the
fimt memlier of an cciuation, of which the second member is 0,
and uf which all the coefficients of the first member are positive,
are equivalent ; since there must exist simply the two constituents
jy and x ( I - y) in the final expansion, whence will simply arise
the resulting equations

Tjf - 0, X (1 - y) - 0.

And, therefore, the aggregate of terms x + xy may be replaced by
the single term x.

Tlie same reasoning applies to all the cases contemplated in
the Pniposition. Thus, if the term x is reiteated, the aggregate
2x may be replaced by x, because under the circumstances the
ecjuation x « umst apjicar in the final reduction.

Proposition II.

3. Whenrrcr in tlte process ofeliminaiian we have to multiply
tffgHher bto factors^ each ctmsistinff solely of positive terms^ satisfying
Ute fundamental law if logical symMs^ it is permitted to reject from
Ifotk ftftors any common tenn^ or from either factor any term which
isdirinhle hy a term in the other factor ; prodded alicays^ that the
rejected term beanlded to t/ie proifuct of the restdting factors.

In the enimciation of this Prop(*siti«)n, the wonl *' divisible"
is a term of convenience, u.*!**! in the algebraic sense, in which xy
And x(l - y) are said to I>e divi:iible by x.

To render more clwir the imiK>rt of thisPn>pi>sition, let it be
Nippoted that the factors to be midtiplied together are x -f y -^ ;
and X 4- yv -f t It is then as^terted, that from these two fiu*tora
w« may rejeet the tcnn x, and that from the secoiid factor wo
mf iqeet the lenn ywi providi*d that those terms be ti» 4

k2

132 METHODS OF ABBREVIATION. [CHAP. IZ.

to the final product. Thus, the resulting fiictors being y -^z

ajid f, if to their product yt •¥ zt we add the terms x and yv,

we have

X ■\- yw ^ yt + zty

as an expression equivalent to the product of the given ftctors
X + y + z and x + yw ■\- t; equivalent namely in the process of
elimination.

Let us consider, first, the case in which the two factors have
a common term a;, and let us represent the factors by the expres-
sions X + P, X ■¥ Qy supposing P in the one case and Q in the
other to be the sum of the positive terms additional to x.

Now,

(a? + P) (x + Q) = a; + a:P + «<? + PQ. (1)

But the process of elimination consists in multiplying certain
factors together, and equating the result to 0. Either then the
second member of the above equation is to be equated to 0, or it
is a factor of some expression which is to be equated to 0.

If the former alternative be taken, then, by the last Propo-
sition, we are permitted to reject the terms xP andxQ, inasmuch
as they are positive terms having another term rr as a factor.
The resulting expression is

x + PQ,

which is what we should obtsdn by rejecting x from both factors,
and adding it to the product of the factors which remain.

Taking the second alternative, the only mode in which the
second member of (1) can affect the final result of elimination
must depend upon the number and nature of its constituents,
both which elements are unaffected by the rejection of the terms
xP and xQ. For that development of a; includes all possible con-
stituents of which a; is a factor.

Consider finally the case in which one of the factors contains
a term, as xy^ divisible by a term, x, in the other factor.

Let X ■¥ P and xy + Q be the factors. Now

(x + P; (ay + Q) = xy -^ xQ + xyP + PQ.

But by the reasoning of the last Proposition, the t^rm acyP may be
rejected as containing another positive term a:^ as a factor, whence
we have

CHAP. IX.] MBTH0D8 OF ABBREVIATION. 133

ay + xQ + PQ
- ay + (x + P) Q.

But this expresses the rejection of the term ay from the' second
(actor, and its transference to the final product. Wherefore the
ProiK>sition is manifest.

PaoposmoN III.

\. If the any symbol which is retained in the filial result of the
elimination of any other symbols from any system of equations^ the re-
suU of such elimination may be expressed in the form

Et-^ B{l-t)mO,

in which E is formed by maiiny in the proposed system < » I , and eli'
tninattHy the same other symbols ; and E by making in the proposed
system f • 0, and eUminating the same other symbols.

For let ^ (^) • represent the final result of elimination.
Expanding this equation, we have

# (1) ^ + ^ (0) (1-0-0.

Now by whatever process we deduce the function ^ (f) from the
proposed system of equations, by the some process should we de-
duce ^ (1), if in those e<[uations t were changed into I ; and by
the same pn)ce88 should we deduce ^ (0), if in the same equations
t were changed into 0. Whence the truth of the profiositiou is

5. Of the three propositions last proved, it may be remarked,
that though quite unessential to the strict development or appli-
Cftdoii of the general theory, they yet accomplish important ends
of a practical nature. By Prop. 1 wo can simplify the results
of addition ; by Prop. 2 we can simplify those of multiplication ;
and by Prop. 3 we can break up any tedious process of elimi-
nation into two distinct processes, which will in general be of a
much less complex character. This method will be very fre-
quently adopted, when the final object of in<[uir}* is the determi-
nation of tho ^-alue of ^ in terms of the other symbols wliich rcnmin
after the elimination is performed.

6. Ex. 1. — Aristotle, in the Nicomachean Ethics, Book ii.
Cap. 3, having determined that actions are virtuous, not as pos-

m themselves % certam character, but as im^pB^^^nt^

134 METHODS OF ABBRBYIATION. [CHAP. IX.

tiun condition of mind in him who performs them, viz., that he
perform them knowingly, and with deliberate preference, and for
their own sakes, and upon fixed principles of conduct, proceeds
in the two following chapters to consider the question, whether
virtue is to be referred to the genus of Passions, or Faculties, or
Habits, together with some other connected points. He grounds
his investigation upon the following premises, firom which, also,
he deduces the general doctrine and definition of moral virtue, of
which the remainder of the treatise forms an exposition.

PREBnSBS.

1. Virtue is either a passion (iradoc)) or a faculty (Svi/o^ic),
or a habit (l$£c)-

2. Passions are not things according to which we are prused
or blamed, or in which we exercise deliberate preference.

3. Faculties are not things according to which we are praised
or blamed, and which are accompanied by deliberate preference.

. 4. Virtue is something according to which we are praised
or blamed, and which is accompanied by deliberate preference.

5. Whatever art or science makes its work to be in a good
state avoids extremes, and keeps the mean in view relative to
human nature (to filaov . . . ir/ooc ijfiac).

6. Virtue is more exact and excellent than any art or science.
This is an argument d fortiori. If science and true art shun

defect and extravagance alike, much more does virtue pursue the
undeviating line of moderation. If they cause their work to be
in a good state, much more reason have ^ we to say that Virtue
causeth her peculiar work to be " in a good state." Let the
final premiss be thus interj)reted. Let us also pretermit all re-
ference to praise or blame, since the mention of these in the pre-
mises accompanies only the mention of deliberate preference, and
this is an eleinent which we purpose to retain. We may then
assume as our representative symbols—

V = virtue.

p B passions.

/ = faculties.

h = habits.

d ^ things accompanied by deliberate preference.

CBAP. IX.] MBTHOD6 OF ABBRBVUTIOH. 135

y m ilungB cftuang their work to be in a good atate.
M« things keeping the mean in view rektive to human
nature.

Using, then, ; as an indefinite class symbol, our prenuses will be
expressed by the following equations :

r-y|jKl-/)(l-A)+/(l-f)(l-A) + A(l-;,)(l-/)).

f'q(\-d).

y»qm.

And separately eliminating finom these the symbols 9,

•i»-/'(»-/)o-*)-/(i-j»)o-A)-*(i-p)(i-/:J-o.(i)

pd mO. (2)

/d - 0. (3)

c(l-<0-0. (4)

^(l-m)-O. (5)

r(l-y)-0. (6)

We iImII fiiBt eUnunate from (2), (3), and (4) tlie symbol </, and
Umdetennine e in relation to |>,/^ and A. Now the addition of
(2), (3), and (4) give*

(p +/)</ + e(l-d)-0.

From whieli, AHmmftring d in the ordinaiy way, we find

(p+/)e-0. (7)

Adding this to (1), and detemuning «, we find

'"'p*/*i-p{i-/){i-h)-j\i-p){i-h)-h{i-/ni-py

Whence by development,

"-jAO-ZXi-f;-

The interpretation of this equation is : Virhie is a kiMi, and not
mfmeuMf or a pastum.

136 METHODS OF ABBRBTIATIOl^. [cHAP. IS.

Next, we will eliminate/, p, and g firom tiie original system
of equations, and then determine v in relation to A, <^ and m.
We will in this case eliminate p and/ together. On addition of
(1), (2), and (3), we get

Ml-p(l-/)(l-A)-/a-p)0-A)-*0-P)(l-/))

+ /Mf +/i«0.

Developing this with reference to p and/, we have

(r + 2rf)/i/+(wA + rf)/>(l-/)+(»A + rf)(l-p)/

+ t,(l-A)(l-p)(l./).0-

Whence the result of elimination will be

(v + 2d) {vh + d) (t'A + ^^(y - A) « 0.

Now v + 2dBV + d4-d, which by Prop. I. is reducible to v + d.
The product of this and the second factor is

(» + d) (rA + d),

which by Prop. II. reduces to

d + v (vK) or vh + d.

In like manner, this result, multiplied by the third factor, gives
simply vh + d. Lastly, this multiplied by the fourth &ctor,
t; (1 - A), gives, as the final equation,

wd(l - A) = 0. (8)

It remains to eliminate^ from (5) and (6). The result is

t;(l-m) = 0. (9)

Finally, the equations (4), (8), and (9) give on addition

t;(l -d) + t>d(l - A) + i;(l -wi) = 0,

from which we have

V =

And the development of this result gives

r = - Adm,

of which the interpretation is, — Virtue is a habit accompanied by

CHAP. IX.] MBTHODS OP ABBRBVIATIOK. 137

deliberaU preference^ and keeping in view the mean relative to
kwman nature*

Properly speaking, this b not a definidon, but a description
of virtue. It is a//, howeveri that can be correctly inferred from
the premises. Aristotle specially connects with it the necessity
of prudencey to determine the safe and middle line of action ; and
there is no doubt that the ancient theories of virtue generally
partook more of an intellectual character than those (the theory
of utility excepted) which have most prevuled in modem days.
\lrtue was regarded as consisting in the right state and habit of
the whole nund, rather than in the single supremacy of con-
science or the moral faculty. And to some extent those theories
were undoubtedly right. For though unqualified obedience to
the dictates of conscience is an essential element of virtuous con-
duct, yet the conformity of those dictates with those unchanging
principles of rectitude (alwvta iUaia) which are founded in, or
which rather are themselves the foundation of the constitution of
things, is another element. And generally this conformity, in
any high degree at least, is inconsistent with a state of ignorance
and mental hebetude. Reverting to the particular theory of
Aristotle, it will probably appear to most that it is of too ne-
gative a character, and that the shunning of extremes does not
afford a sufficient scope for the expenditure of the nobler energies
of our being. Aristotle seems to have been imperfectly conscious
of this defect of his system, when in the opening of his seventh
book he spoke of an ** heroic virtue*'* rising above the measure
of human nature.

7. I have already remarked (VIII. 1) that the theory of sin-
gle equations or profiositions comprehends questions which can-
not be fully answered, except in connexion with the theory of
systems of equations. This remark is exemplified when it is
{Jtoposed to determine from a given single ec^iiation the relation,
not of some single elementary dass, but of some compound class,
involving in its expression more than one element, in terms of
the remaining elements. The following particular example, and
the soooeeding general problem, are of tliis nature.

• nvr Mp 4|Mk i^riv iif«Uf V rtpm cm fiiav.— Nic. Etm. Book vIL

138 MKTHODS OF ABBRBVIATION. [CHAF* IX.

Ex. 2. — Let US resume the symbolical expreedom of the defi-
nition of wealth employed in Chap, vii., viz.,

wherein, as before,

to ^ wealth,

s « things limited in supply,

t B things transferable,

p a things productive of pleasure,

r a things preventive of pain;

and suppose it required to determine hence the relation of things^
transferable and productive of pleasure, to the other elements of
the definition, viz., wealth, things limited in supply, and things
preventive of pain.

The expression for things transferable and productive of plea-
sure is tp. Let us represent this by a new symbol ]/. We have
then the equations

w^8t[p + r(l'-p)]j

from which, if we eliminate t and p^ we may determine y as a
function of u?, s, and r. The result interpreted will give the re-
lation sought.

Bringing the terms of these equations to the first side, we

have

w^8tp'Str(\-p) = 0.

y-tp = 0. W

And adding the squares of these equations together,

W'^stp + str (1 -p) - 2w8tp - 2w8tr (1 -p) -^y-^-tp-- 2ytp^0. (4)

Developing the first member with respect to t and p, in order to
eliminate those symbols, we have

{w-\^ 8 - 2w8 + 1 - y) ^ + (it + *r - 2w8r + y) ^ (1 -p)

+ (to + y) (1 - Oi? + (w> + y) (1 - (1 - />) ; (5)

and the result of the elimination of / and p will be obtuned by
equating to the product of the four coefficients of

tp, t{\ -p), (1 - t)p, and (1 - (1 - py

GHAP.IZ.] METHODS or ABBRIVIATIOV. 139

Or, by Prop. 3, the result of the elimination of i and p from the
above equation will be of the form

wherdn £ is the result obtwned by changing in the given equa-
tion y into 1, and then eliminating i and p ; and IT the result
obtained by changing in the same equation y into 0, and then
eliminating i nndp. And the mode in each case of eliminating i
and p la to multiply together the coefficients of the four con-
stituents ^9 i(l-p)9 &c.

If we make y » 1, the coefficients become—

1st. ir(l-*) + «(l -tr).

2nd. 1 -f IT (1 - «r) -f « (1 - it) r, equivalent to 1 by Prop. I.

3rd and 4th. 1 + tr, equi\'alent to 1 by Prop. I.

Hence the value of E will be

ir(l -*) + *(1 -it).

Again, in (5) making y *■ 0, we have for the coefficients —

l8t. 1 -I- tr (1 - «) -I- « (1 - tr), equivalent to 1.

2nd. tr (I - *r) + *r (1 - tc).

3rd and 4th. w.

The product of these coefficients gives

ir-t©(l-*r).

The equation from which y is to be determined, therefore, is

|ir (1 - #) + f (I - tr)) y + tr (I - #r) (1 - y) - 0,

w(\ -sr)

•'•'^■w(l-fr)-tr(r-#)-*(l-tr)'

and expanding the second member,
y--ir«r+ip#(l-r) + -ir(l-*)r+gi£;{l-#)(l-r)

+ 0(l-ir)#r + 0(l-.ir)#(l-r)+?(l-ir) (1 - *) r

+ ?(l.ir)(l-.)(l-r);
redudog

140 METHODS OF ABBREVIATION. [cHAP. IX.

y = «r« (1 - r) + - t£?«r + -(1 - w) (1 - #), (6)

withti?(l-«) = 0. (7)

The interpretation of which is —

Ist. Things transferable Q^nd productive of pleasure consist of
all wealth {limited in supply and) not preventive of pain j an inde-
finite amount of wealth {limited in supply and) preventive ofpain^
and an indefinite amount of what is not wealth and not limited in
supply.

2nd. All wealth is limited in supply.

I have in the above solution written in parentheses that part
of the full description which is implied bj the accompanying in-
dependent relation (7).

8. The following problem is of a more general nature, and
will furnish an easy practical rule for problems such as the last.

General Problem.

Given any equation connecting the symbols x^y . .w^z. .

Required to determine the logical expression of.any'jclass ex-
pressed in any way by the symbols x, y . . in terms of the remaining
symbols^ Wy Zy &c.

Let us confine ourselves to the case in which there are but
two symbols, Xy y, and two symbols, w, z, a. case sufficient to de-
termine the general Kule.

Let F= be the given equation, and let ^ (a?, y) represent
the class whose expression is to be determined.

Assume t = ^p {Xy y)^ then, from the above two equations, x
and y are to be eliminated.

Now the equation F= may be expanded in the form

Axy + Bx{\^y)+ C{\ - x)y + D{\ - x) (\ -y) = 0, (1)

Ay By Cy and D being functions of the symbols w and z.

Again, as {Xy y) represents a class or collection of things, it
must consist of a constituent, or scries of constituents, whose co-
efficients are 1.

CHAP. IX.] MBTH0D8 OF ABBREVIATION. 141

li\lierefore if the full development of ^ (x, y) be repreeented
in the form

ary^bxi} - y) + <?(1 -x)y + rf(l - x) (1 - y),

the cocfBcientfi a^b^ Cy d must each be 1 or 0.

Now reducing the equation I » ^ (x, y) by transpoution and
aquaring, to the form

and expanding with reference to x and y, we get

t/(l.a) + a(l -0)^+ {r(l-6) + 6(l-OI «(1 ' V)

+ |/(l-r) + r(l-0)O-*)y
+ (/(l-cO + rf{l-0) (l-x)(l-y) = 0;

whence, adding tins to (1), we have

|if + /(l-a) + a(l-/))ay

4 {fi + /(l -6) + 6(1 - 0) x(l -y) + &c. = 0.

Let the recruit of the elimination of x and y be of the form

i;/ + ir(i-o-o,

then E will, by what has been said, be the reduced* product of
what the coefficients of the above expansion become when / - U
and E the product of the same factors 8imiku*Iy reduced by the
condition / « 0.

Hence E will be the reduced product

{A + 1 -ii)(fi^l-6)(C+l-c)(Z)+l-rf).

Considering any factor of this expression, as ^1 4 1 - a, we see
that when a ° 1 it becomes A^ and when a » it becomes 1 4 ^1,
which reduces by Prop. 1. to 1. Hence we may infer that E will
lie the product of the coefficients of those constituents in the de-
velopment of F whose coefficients in the development of ^ (x,y)
are 1.

Moreover E will be the reduced product

{A 4 tf) (/^ 4 6) (C 4 c) (D^d).

Considering any one of these factors, as .1 4 a, we see tliat this
bwomes A when a • 0, and reduces to 1 when a « 1 ; and so on
tar the others. Hence E will be the product of the coefficients

142 MBTHODS OF ABBRBYIATION. [CHAF. IX.

of those constituents in the development of|C whose ooeffidents
in the development ^ (x, y) are 0. dewing these cases togeiher,
we may establish the following Rule :

9. To deduce from a logical equation the rdation of any class
expressed by a given combination of the symbols x^ y, ^c, to the
classes represented by any other symbols involved in the given
equation.

Rule. — Expand the given equation with reference to the sym-
bols Xy y. Then form the equation

Et + E{\ -0 = 0,

in which E is the product of the coefficients of all those constituents
in the above development^ whose coefficients in the expression qfthe
given class are 1, and E the product of the coefficients of those conr
stituents of the development whose coefficients in the expression of the
given class are 0. The value oft deduced from the above equation
by solution' and interpretation will be the expression required.

Note. — Although in the demonstration of this Rule. V is sup-
posed to consist solely of positive terms^ it may easily be shown that
this condition is unnecessary^ and the Ride general j and that no pre-
paration of the given equation is really required.

10. Ex. 3. — The same definition of wealth being given as in

Example 2, required an expression for things transferable^ but not

productive ofpleasure^ ' (1 " P)^ ^^ terms of the other elements

represented by «?, «, and r.

The equation

w - sip - sir (1 - /)) e 0,

gives, when squared,

ti? + *</> + str (1 - jo) - 2wstp - 2wstr (1 - p) = ;

and developing the first member with respect to t and jp,

(w^-s- 2ws) ^ + (w7 + 5r - 2wsr) t {\-p) + w(l'-t)p

+ w;(I-^) (l-p)«0.

The coefficients of which it b best to exhibit as in the following

equation ;

{u?(l-*)+*(l-tr))jfp+{M7(l-*r) + «r(l-u^)l.<(l-p) + t(;0dQip

+ w7(i-00-*)-o.

CHAP. IX*] mnnioiM op abbriviation. 143

Let dieiiinctioiil(l*/i) to be detennined, be repreaented by z ;
then the full development of z in respect of I and /1 18

z - /p + I (1 -/>) + (1 - P + (1 - /) (1 ^p).

Henoe, by the last problem, we have

£z+£'(l-z)-0;

where £ - tr(l - ir)+ #r(l - tr);

-C- {t0 (1 - «) -I- « (1 - tr) j x^xwrnwil-s);

.-. (ip (1 - *r) + #r (1 - tf)) z + tr (I - «) (1 - z) - 0.
Hence,

2uwr - tiw - «r

11

- - irir + ir# (1 - r) + - tr (1 - f) r + - tr (1 - #) (1 - r),

+ 0(1- it) «• + ?(!« tt.),(l.r)+J(l- IT) (l.*)r

+ ?(l-tr)(l.,)(l-r).

^' ^ - 5 tc#r + ? ( 1 - it) . ( 1 - r) + ? ( 1 - IT) ( I - *) ,

with tr (1 - «) - 0.

Hence, TTiings trtms/erabU and not productive of pleasure are
eiiher wealth {limited in supply afid preventive of pain); or things
which are not wealthy but limited in supply and not preventive of
pom ; or things which are not wealthy and are unlimited tn supply.

The following resnlu, deduced in a similar manner, will be
CMily verified :

Things limited im supply and productive of pleasure which are
mst wealthy — are vUransferahle.

Wealth that is not productive of pleasure is transferable^ limited
m supply^ and preventive of pain*

Things limited in supply which are either wealthy or are pro*
dmctive of pUtumre^ but not both^ — <xre either transferable and pre^
remtive ofpain^ or intransferable.

11. Vwm the domain of natural history a large number of
cmioiia cnmpkB might be selected. I do not, however, con*

144 METHODS OP ABBREVIATION* [CHAP. IX.

ceive that such applications would possess any independent var
lue. They would, for instance, throw no light upon the trae
principles of classification in the science of zoology. For the
discovery of these, some basis of positive knowledge is requisite^ —
some acquaintance with organic structure, with teleological adap-
tation ; and this is a species of knowledge which can only be de-
rived from the use of external means of observation and analysis.
Taking, however, any collection of propositions in natural his-
tory, a great number of lo^cal problems present themselves,
without regard to the system of classification adopt-ed. Perhaps
in forming such examples, it is better to avoid, as superfluous,
the mention of that property of a class or species which is im-
mediately suggested by its name, e. g. the ring-structure in the
annelida, a class of animals including the earth-iyprm and the
leech.

Ex. 4. — 1. The annelida are sofl-bodied, and either naked or
enclosed in a tube.

2. The annelida consist of all invertebrate animals having
red blood in a double system of circulating vessels.

Assume a = annelida ;

s = soft-bodied animals ;

n = naked ;

t = enclosed in a tube ;

i = invertebrate ;

r = having red blood, &c.

Then the propositions given will be expressed by the equations

a = t?« {n (1 - + ^ (1 - ^)) 5 (1)

a = ir; (2)

to which we may add the implied condition,

rU=0, (3)

On eliminating r, and reducing the system to a single equation,
we have

a { 1 - 5n (1 - -«« (1 - w)) + a (1 - ir) + tr (1 - a)-¥nt=^ 0. (4)

Suppose that we wish to obtain the relation in which soft-
bodied animals enclosed in tubes are placed (by virtue of the

CBAP. IX.] METHODS OF ABBBBVIATION. 145

premises) with respect to the following elements, viz., the pos-
session of red blood, of an external covering, and of a vertebral
column. ^ ' ' *

We must first eliminate a. The result is

ir (l-sfi(l -^)-«/(l-ii)j + ii/-0.

Then (IX. 9) developing with respect to $ and /, and reducing
the first coeflSdcnt by Prop. 1, we have

fi^+tr(l-fi)#(l-|) + (ir + n)(l-«)/+ir(l-^)(l-/)-0. (5)

Hence, if «/ -> tr, we find

ntr -> ir (1 - n) x (ir + n) x ir (1 - ip) « ;

or, wir + ir (I - n) (1 - tr) «= ;

ir(\-n)

.'. tr

tr ( 1 - n) - n

-Oini + ir(l -») + Oi(l-r)»+ ?, (1 - r) (1 - n)
. 0(1-0 m^ 5(l-0''(i-»)^0(l-i)(l-r)ii

"^^ ti^-tr(l.»)4?,(l-r)(l-ii) + J(l.,)(l-ii).

Hence, soft-hodied animals enclosed in tubes consist of all
imeertebrate animals haring red blood and not naked^ and an in-
definite remainder of invertebrate animals not having red blood and
not makedj and ofvertAratt animals urhirh arc not naked.

And in an exactly similar manner, the following reduced equa-
tions, the interpretation of which is left to the reader, have been
deduced from the development (5).

.(i-0-»>«+ J ••(»-«) + J (1-0

(«-') <-J(>-0''(l-») + ?(l-r)(I-i.)

0-00 0-J'(l-'-)» J(> '>

146 METHODS OF ABBREVIATION. [cHAP. IX.

In none of the above examples has it been my object to ex-
hibit in any special manner the power of the method. That,
1 conceive, can only be fully displayed in connexion with the
mathematical theory of probabilities. I would, however, suggest
to any who may be desirous of forming a correct opinion upon
this point, that they examine by the rules of ordinary logic the
following problem, before inspecting its solution ; remembering
at the same time, that whatever complexity it possesses might
be multiplied indefinitely, with no other effect than to render its
solution by the method of this work more operose, but not less
certainly attainable.

Ex. 5. Let the observation of a class of natural productions
be supposed to have led to the following general results.

1st, That in whichsoever of these productions the properties
A and C are missing, the property E is found, together with one
of the properties B and Z>, but not with both.

2nd, That wherever the properties A and D are found while
E is missing, the properties B and C will either both be found,
or both be missing.

3rd, That wherever the property A is found in conjunction
with cither B or E^ or both of them, there either the property
C or the property D will be found, but not both of them. And
conversely, wherever the property C or /) is found singly, there
the property A will be found in conjunction with either B or Ej
or both of them.

Let it then be required to ascertain, first, what in any parti-
cular instance may be concluded irom the ascertained presence of
the property -A, with reference to the properties J5, 6\ and D;
also whether any relations exist independently among the pro-
perties B^ C, and i>. Secondly, what may be concluded in like
manner respecting the property B^ and the properties Ay C,
and I).

It will be observed, that in each of the three data, the informa-
tion conveyed respecting the properties A , jB, C, and Z>, is com-
plicated with another element, JS, about which we desire to say
nothing in our conclusion. It will hence be refjuisite to eliminate
the symbol representing the proi)erty E from the system of equa-
tions, by which the ^ven propositions will be expressed.

CHAP. IS.] MBTHODS OF ABBRiyiATIOV. 147

Let UB represent the property Ahy x^B by y, (7 by z, D by
r, E by o. The data are

"S- yt?(y*5 + tc^); (I)

vxwmq(yz'^ifz); (2)

ay + xpy " toz + z5; (3)

X standing for 1 - x, &c., and q being an indefinite class symbol.
Eliminating q separately from the first and second equations,
and adding the results to the third equation reduced by (5),
Chap. VIII., we get

xF(l -ryio-vtry)-!- 5rw(y?+2!y) + (ay + apry)(i«s+ wz)

4 (irf + zw) (1 - xy - xvy) « 0. (4)

From this equation v must be eliminated, and the value of x
determined from the result. For effecting this object* it will
be convenient to employ the method of Prop. 3 of the present
chapter.

Let then the result of elimination be represented by the
equation

To find E make x - 1 in the first member of (4), we find

vw (yz-¥ zy) + (y + vy) (wz + irx) + (irz + zw) vy.
EBmiiiating r, we have

(wZ'¥wz) {w(jfz-¥zy)^y(wZ'¥ irz) + y(irx + rir)j;

which, on actual multiplication, in accordance with the conditions
WW mOf zz» Of &C.9 gives

E^wz'¥ywz.

Next* to find IT make x-0 in (4), we have

J(l - vyw - vyw) 4 irx + zw.
wfaenee, i^l w'fnt '^g Vf and reducing the result by Propositions

1 and S, we find

Emwx-¥zw-¥ywz;

andt therefore, finally we have

(ipx + yiai)«4(iPX+r5+f5i)i-0; (5)

upoiD wliieli

148 MBTHODS OF ABBREVIATION. [CHAP. IX.

wz + ziB-\-ytdz
wz + zw-^ ywz-toz-ywz *

wherefore, by development,

x=0yzw+y2w + yzw+ Oyzib

+ Oyzw+yzw'^yzw-¥yz'd;

or, collecting the terms in vertical columns,

x^zld-^zw + yzlB; (6)

the interpretation of which is —

In whatever substances the property A is founds there will also
be found either the property C or the property Z), but not both^ or
else the properties B^ C, and J9, will all be wanting. And con-
versely, where either the property C or the property D isfiund
singly, or the properties jB, C, and />, are together missing^ there
the property A will be found.

It also appears that there is no independent relation among
the properties B, C, and Z>.

Secondly, we are to find y. Now developing (5) with respect
to that symbol,

(xwz + xwz + xwz-^ xzw)y -i^ (xwz -{■ xwz -^ xzw + xz'id)ytz 0;

whence, proceeding as before,

y = xwz + - {xwz + xwz + xzw), (7)

zzw = ;

(8)

xzw = 0;

(9)

xzJB = ;

(10)

From (10) reduced by solution to the form

•

we have the independent relation, — If the property A is absent

and C present J D is present. Again, by addition and solution (8)

and (9) give

„ 0«

xz^xz^^^w.

Whence we have for the general solution and the remaining in-
dependent relation :

CHAP. IX.] METHODS OF ABBRBVIATIOM. 149

Ist. ^ the property B be preaeiU in one of the productumsjaiher
the properties A J (7, and D^ are all abeenij or some one alone of them
is absent. And conyenely, if they are aO absent it may be con-
cluded thai the property A is present (7).

2iid. ^A and C are both present or both absentj D will be ab-
sent^ qmie independenily qfthe presence or absence qfB (8) and (9).

I have not attempted to verify these conolusumB.

150 CONDITIONS OF A FBRFBCT HBTHOD. [CHAP.X«

CHAPTER X.

OF THE CONDITIONS OF A PERFECT METHOD.

1 . T^HE subject of Primary Propositions has been discussed at
•^ length, and we are about to enter upon the consideration
of Secondary Propositions. The interval of transition between
these two great divisions of the science of Lo^c may afford a fit
occasion for us to pause, and while reviewing some of the past
steps of our progress, to inquire what it is that in a subject like
that with which we have been occupied constitutes perfection of
method. I do not here speak of that perfection only which con-
sists in power, but of that also which is founded in the conception
of what is fit and beautiful. It is probable that a careful analysis
of this question would conduct us to some such conclusion as the
following, viz., that a perfect method should not only be an effi-
cient one, as respects the accomplishment of the objects for which
it is designed, but should in all its parts and processes manifest
a certain unity and harmony. This conception would be most
fully realized if even the very forms of the method were sugges-
tive of the fundamental principles, and if possible of the one fun-
damental principle, upon which they are founded. In applying
these considerations to the science of Reasoning, it may be well
to extend our view beyond the mere analytical processes,ivand to
inquire what is best as respects not only the mode or form of
deduction, but also the system of data or premises from which
the deduction is to be made.

2. As respects mere power, there is no doubt that the first
of the methods developed in Chapter viii, is, within its proper
sphere, a perfect one. The introduction of arbitrary constants
makes us independent of the forms of the premises, as well as of
any conditions among the equations by which they are repre-
sented. But it seems to introduce a foreign element, and while
it is a more laborious, it is also a less elegant form of solution
than the second method of reduction demonstrated in the

CHAP. X.] CONDITIONS OF A PBRFBCT MBTHOD. 151

i-hapter. There are, however, oonditions under which tlie latter
iiietluid atwumes a more perfect form than it otherwise Ix^rs. To
make the one fundamental condition expressed by the equation

r(l -ar)«0,

the universal type of form, would give a unity of character to
both processes and results, which would not else be attainable.
Were brevity or convenience the only valuable quality of a me-
thod, no advantage would flow from the adoption of such a prin-
cii>le. For to im|X)se uiM)n every step of a solution the character
above described, would involve in some instances no slight la-
bour of preliminary reduction. But it is still interesting to know
that this can be dune, and it is even of 8ome importance to be
acquainted with the conditions under which such a form of solu-
tiim would si>ontaneou8ly present itself. Some of these pmnts
will be considered in the present chapter.

«

Proposition I.

3. To reduce any equation among loyical $ymboU to the form
V'^Oyim which V satisfies the law of duality^

V(\ - V) - 0.

It is shown in Chap. v. Prop. 4, that the above condition is
satisfied whenever V is the sum of a series of constituents. And
it is evident from Prop. 2, Chap. vi. that all equations are e(|ui-
valent which, when reduced by trans]>osition to the fonn T^ U,
produce, by development of the first member, the same series of
ouotftituents with coeflScients which do not vanish ; the particular
nuinerical values of those coefficients being immaterial.

llmee the object of this Proposition may always he accom--
plished hy hringim/ all the terms of an e*puition to the first side^
fully expandiny that member^ and chanying in the result all the rr»-
rffirii-nis which do not vanish into unity^ tsctj^tsuch as harr alnady
thai value.

But as the deveIo|micnt of functions contwning many >ym-
bob coodncU us to cxpresswns wmm ^ir great

152 CONDITIONS OF A PERFECT METHOD. [CHAP. X.

length, it is desirable to show how, in the only cases which do
practically offer themselves to our notice, this source of com-
plexity may be avoided.

The great primary forms of equations have already been dis-
cussed in Chapter viii. They are —

X = t;Y,

X^ Y,

vX^vY.

Whenever the conditions Jf (1 - X) = 0, Y (1 - Y) « 0, are
satisfied, we have seen that the two first of the above equations
conduct us to the forms

X(1-Y) = 0, (1)

X{\-Y) + Y{\-X) = Qi (2)

and iinder the same circumstaoces it may be shown that the last
of them gives

r|X(l- Y)+ Y(1-X))=0; (3)

all which results obviously satisfy, in their first members, the

condition

V{1 - K) = 0.

Now as the above are the forms and conditions under which the
equations of a logical system properly expressed do actually pre-
sent themselves, it is always possible to reduce them by the
above method into subjection to the law required. Though,
however, the separate equations may thus satisfy the law, their
equivalent sum (VIII. 4) may not do so, and it remains to
show how upon it also the requisite condition may be imposed.

Let us then represent the equation formed by adding the
several reduced equations of the system together, in the form

V + V + v\ &c. = 0, (4)

this equation being singly equivalent to the system from which
it was obtained. We suppose v, v\ v\ &c. to be class terms
(IX. 1) satisfying the conditions

v(l-r) = 0, v(\ -r') = 0, &c.
Now the full interpretation of (4) would be found by deve-

CHAP. X.] CONDITIONS OF A PBRFBCT METHOD. 153

kiping the first member with respect to all the elementary symbols
X, jr, &c. which it contains, and equating to all the constituents
whose codBcients do not vanish ; in other words, all the consti-
tuents which are found in either v, t/, v'', &c* But those consti-
tuents consist of — 1st, such as are found in v; 2nd, such as are
not found in o, but are found in t/; 3rd, such as are neither found
in r nor t/, but are found in o% and so on. Hence they ¥dll be
' such as are found in the expression

r + (l-r)t/ + (l - r)(l -»')»•' + &c^ (5)

an expression in which no constituents are repeated, and which
obviously satisfies the kw V{\ - F) « 0.
Thus if we had the expression

(1 - /) + r + (1 - z) + tzwj

in which the terms 1-1, 1 - z are bracketed to indicate that they
are to be taken as single class terms, we should, in accordance
with (5), reduce it to an expression satisfying the condition
/'(I - K) • 0, by multiplying all the terms after the first by /,
then all after the second by \ -v; lastly, the term which remains
after the third by z ; the result being

(l- ^+^ + /(l -r) (1-r) + /(I -'V)zw. (6)

4. All logical equations then are reducible to the form K- 0,
r satisfying the I$w of duality. But it would obviously be a
higher degree of perfection if equations always presented thcm-
fdves in such a form, without preparation of any kind, and not
only exhibited this form in their original statement, but retained
it imimpaired after those additions which are necessary in order
to radooe systems of equations to single equivalent forms. That
they do not spontaneously present this feature is not properly
attributable to defect of method, but is a consequence of tlie fact
that our premises are not always complete, and accurate, and in-
dependent. They are not complete when they involve material
(as distinguished from formal) relations, which are not expressed.
They are not accurate when they unply relations which are not
htenJed. But setting aside these points, with which, in the
instance, we are less concerned, let it be considered in
they may fiul of being independent.

154 CONDITIONS OF A PERFECT METHOD. [CHAP. X.

5. A system of propositions may be termed independent,
when it is not possible to deduce from any portion of the system
a conclusion dedudble £rom any other portion of it. Supposing
the equations representing those propositions all reduced to the
form

r-o.

then the above condition implies that no constituent which can
be made to appear in the development of a particular function V
of the system, can be made to appear in the development of any
other function V of the same system. When this condition is
not satisfied, the equations of the system are not independent.
This may happen in various cases. Let all the equations satisfy
in their first members the law of duality, then if there appears a
positive term x in the expansion of one equation, and a term xy
in that of another, the equations are not independent, for the
term x is further developable into xy-¥x{\-y)j and the equaticm

xy =

is thus involved in both the equations of the system. Again, let
a term xy appear in one equation, and a term xz in another.
Both these may be developed so as to give the common consti-
tuent xyz. And other cases may easily be imagined in which
premises which appear at first sight to be quite independent arc
not really so. Whenever equations of the form V= are thus
not truly independent, though individually they may satisfy the
law of duality,

F(l - V) = 0,

the equivalent equation obtained by adding them together will
not satisfy that condition, miless sufficient reductions by the me-
thod of the present chapter have been performed. When, on
the other hand, the equations of a system both satisfy the above
law, and are indet)endent of each other, their sum will also sar
tisfy the same law. I have dwelt upon these points at greater
length than would otherwise have been necessary, because it ap-
l)ear8 to nic to be important to endeavoiu* to fonn to ourselves,
and to keep before us in all our investigations, the pattern of an
ideal perfection, — the object and the guide of future efforts. In

CHAP. X.] CONDITIONS OF A PBRFBCT MBTHOD. 109

the present class of inquiries the chief um of imiirovcment of me-
thod should be to fiudlitate, as fio* as is consistent with brevity,
the transformation of equations, so as to make the fundamental
condition above adverted to universal.

In connexion with this subject the following Propositions are
deiterving of attention.

Proposition II.

ff the first member of any eqtuttwn F -> satisfy the conditioH
K(l - V) B 0, and if the expression of any symbol t of that equa-
tion he determined as a developed function of the other symbols^ the

coefficients of the expansion can only assume the firms 1, 0, -, -.

For if the equation be expanded with reference to t^ we ob-
tain as the result,

Et^B{\-t), (1)

E and E being what V becomes when / is successively changed

therein into 1 and 0. Hence E and E wQl themselves satisfy

the conditions

£•(1 - -F) = 0, E{\ - IT) = 0. (2)

Now (1) gives

E

the second member of which is to be expanded as a function of
the remaining symbols. It is evident that the only numerical
values which fand ^can receive in the calculation of the co-
efficients will be 1 and 0. The following cases alone can there-
fore arise:

E 1
1st. E ^ \^ £=1, then -r= — p»-.

E ' L

E
2nd. E^U -P-0, thenj^r^-l.

3rd. E o 0, E =« 1, then -^ " ,, = 0.

E
4th. E^Oj £* « 0, then i,r — n. " «•

Whence the truth of the Pn>iK>sition is manifest.

156 CONDITIONS OF A PERFECT METHOD. [cHAP. X.

6. It may be remarked that the forms 1, 0, and — appear in
the solution of equations independently of any reference to the

condition V(\ - F) = 0. But it is not so with the coefficient -.

The terms to which this coefficient is attached when the above
condition is satisfied may receive any other value except the

three values 1, 0, and -, when that condition is not satisfied. It

is permitted, and it would conduce to uniformity, to change any
coefficient of a development not presenting itself in any of the

four forms referred to in tins Proposition into -, regaining this

^Mc^ as the symbol proper to indicate that the ooofficiisat to which it is
attached should be equated to 0. This course I shall frequently
adopt.

Proposition III.

7. The restdt of the dimination of any symbols ar, y, Sfc.fram

an equation F=0, of which the first member identically satisfies

the law ofduality,

F(l - F) = 0,

may be obtained by developing the given equation with reference to
the other symbols^ and equating to the sum of those constituents
whose coefficients in the expansion are equal to unity.

Suppose that the given equation F= involves but three
symbols, x^ y^ and ty of which x and y are to be eUminated. Let
the development of the equation, with respect to ^, be

^^ + jB(i-o = o, (1)

A and B being free from the symbol t.

By Chap. ix. Prop. 3, the result of the elimination of x and y
from the given equation will be of the form

Et^ E{\ -t)^{i, (2)

in which E is the result obtained by eliminating the symbols x
and y from the equation A -{^^ E the result obtained by elimi-
nating from the equation jB = 0.

CHAP. X.] CONDITIONS OF A PBRFBCT METHOD. 107

Now A and B must satisfy the condidon

.l(l-i4) = 0, B(1-jB)-0.

IleDce A (confining ourselves for the present to this coefficient)
will cither be or 1, or a constituent, or the sum of a part of the
constituents which involTC the sjinbols x and y. If j1 » it is
evident that J? » ; if ^ is a single constituent, or the sum of a
part of the constituents involving x and y, E will be 0. For the
/itil development of ^, with respect to x and y, will contain terms
with vanishing coefficients, and E is the product of aU the co-
efficients. Hence when A -l^ Eia equal to A^ but in other cases
E is equal to 0. Similarly, when B ^\y Eis equal to B^ but in
other cases E vanishes. Hence the expression (2) will consist of
that part, if any there be, of (1) in which the coefficients A^ B
arc unity. And this reasoning is general. Suppose, for instance,
that V involved the symbols x, y, z, ^ and that it were required
to eliminate x and y. Then if the development of T, with re-
ference to z and ^, were

zi + xz{\ ^f)^y(\^ r)i + (I - 5) (1 - 0.

the result sought would be

zt^{l-z){\-i)«0,

this being that portion of the development of which the co-
efficients are unity.

Hence, if from any system of equations we deduce a single
equivalent equation K a 0, V satisfying the condition

the ordinary processes of elimination may be entirely dit*peni«o<l ^
with, and the single process of develupment made to supply
their place.

8. It may be that there is no practical advantage in the nie-
tliod thus pointed out, but it possesses a theoretical unity and
completeness which render it deserving of regard, and I shall ac*-
cordingly devote a future chapter (XIV.) to its illustratiun. The
progress of applied mathematics has presented other and signal
examples of the reduction of systems of problems or equation.'* to
the dominion of some central but pervading hiw.

158 CbNDITIONS OF A PERFECT METHOD. [CHAP. X.

9. It is seen from what precedes that there is one dass of
propositions to which all the special appliances of the above me-
thods of preparation are unnecessary. It is that which is cha-
racterized by the following conditions :

First, That the propositions are of the ordinary Und, implied
by the use of the copula is or arSf the predicates being particular.

Secondly, That the terms of the proposition are intelligible
without the supposition of any understood rektion among the
elements which enter into the expression of those terms.

Thirdly, That the propositions are independent.

We may, if such speculation is not altogether vain, permit
ourselves to conjecture that these are the conditions which would
be obeyed in the employment of language as an instrument of
expression and of thought, by unerring beings, declaring simply
what they mean, without suppression on the one hand, and with-
out repetition on the other. Considered both in their relation
to the idea of a perfect language, and in their relation to the pro-
cesses of an exact method, these conditions are equally worthy
of the attention of the student.

CHAP. XI.] OF SBCONDART PROPOSITIONS. 159

CHAPTER XL

OP SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS, AND OF THB PRINCIPLES OF Til BIR

SYMBOLICAL EXPRESSION.

!• ^T^HE doctrine has already been established in Chap, iy.,
-^ that eYcrj logical proposition may be referred to one or
the other of two great classes, viz., Primary Propositions and
Secondary Propositions. The former of these classes has been
discussed in the preceding chapters of this work, and we are now
led to the consideration of Secondary Propositions, i. e. of Propo-
sitions concerning, or relating to, other propositions r^pordcd as
true cfT ialse. The inYestigation upon which wc are entering will,
in its general order and progress, resemble that which we have al-
ready conducted. The two inquiries differ as to the subjects of
thought which they recognise, not as to the formal and scientific
laws which they reveal, or the methods or processes which are
fonnded upon those laws. Probability would in some measure fa-
vour the expectation of such a result. It consists with all that we
know of the uniformity of Nature, and all that we believe of the im-
mutable constancy of the Author of Nature, to suppose, that in the
mind, which has been endowed with such high capabilities, not
only for converse with surroumling scenes, but for the knowledge
of itself, and for reflection upon the laws of its own constitution,
there should exist a harmony and uniformity not lees real than
that which the study of the phjrsical sciences makes known to us.
Anticipations such as this are never to be made the primary rule
of our inquiries, nor are they in any degree to divert us from
those labours of patient research by which we ascertain what is
the actual constitution of things within the particular province
•ufamitted to investigation. But when the grounds of re^iem-
blanoe have been properly and independently determined, it is
not inconsistent, even with purely scientific ends, to make that
nsscmblanoe a subject of meditation, to tnioo its extent, and to
the intimations of truth, yet undiscovereil, which it tiwy

160 OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS. [CHAP.XI.

seem to us to convey. The necessity of a final appeal to &ct is
not thus set aside, nor is the use of analogy extended beyond its
proper sphere, — the suggestion of relations which independent
inquiry must either verify or cause to be rejected.

2. Secondary Propositions are those which concern or relate to
Propositions considered as true or false. The relations ot things
we express by primary propositions. But we are able to make
Propositions themselves also the subject of thought, and to ex-
press our judgments concerning them. The expression of any
such judgment constitutes a secondary proposition. There essts
no proposition whatever of which a competent degree of know-
ledge would not enable us to make one or the other of these two
assertions, viz., either that the proposition is true, or that it is
false ; and each of these assertions is a secondary proposition. '^ It
is true that the sim shines ;*' ^^ It is not true that the planets
shine by their own light ;" are examples of this kind. In the
former example the Proposition ^^ The sim shines," b asserted to
be true. In the latter, the Proposition, " The planets shine by
their o^vn light," is asserted to be false. Secondary propositioiiB
also include all judgments by which we express a relation or de-
pendence among propositions. To this class or division we may
refer conditional propositions, as, "If the sun shine the day wiU
be fair." Also most disjunctive propositions, as, " Either the sun
will shine, or the enterprise will be postponed." In the former
example we express the dependence of the truth of the Propo-
sition, " The day will be fair," upon the truth of the Proposition,
" The sun will shine." In the latter we express a relation between
the two Propositions, " The sun will shine," " The enterprise will
be postponed," implying that the truth of the one excludes the
truth of the other. To the same class of secondary propositions we
must also refer all those propositions which assert the simultaneous
truth or falsehood of propositions, as, " It is not true both that
' the sun will shine' and that ' the journey will be postponed.' "
The elements of distinction which we have noticed may even be
blended together in the same secondary proposition. It may in-
volve both the disjunctive element expressed by either^ or^ and
the conditional element expressed by if; in addition to which,
the connected propositions may themselves be of a compound

CHAP* XI.] OF 8BC0NDART PROPOSITIONS. I6l

chyrmctcr. If*^ the sun shine," and ^^ leisure pennit/' then either
'^ the enterprise shall be commenced,'* or ** some preliminary
step shall be taken." In this example a number of propositions
are connected together, not arbitrarily and unmeaningly, but in
■uch a manner as to express a definite connexion between them, — a
connexion having reference to their respective truth or falsehood.
This combination, therefore, according to our definition, forms
a Secondary ProiK>eition.

The theory of Secondary Proix>sitions is deserving of at-
tentive study, as well on account of its varied applications, as
for that close and harmonious analogy, already referred to, wliich
it sustains with the theory of Primary Proposition?. Upon each
of thci« points I desire to offer a few further observations.

3. I would in the first place remark, that it is in the form of
secondary propositions, at least as often as inthatof primary pro-
positions, that the reasonings of ordinary life are exhibited. The
discourses, too, of the moralist and the metaphysician arc perha[)A
less often concerning things and their qualities, than concerning
principles and hypotheses, concerning truths and the mutual con-
nexion and relation of truths. The conclusions which our narrow
experience suggests in relation to the great questions of morals and
society yet unsolved, manifest, in more ways than one, the limi-
tations of their human origin ; and though the existence of uni-
veml principles is not to be questioned, the partial formulas
which comprise our knowledge of their application arc subject
lo conditions, and exceptions, and fiiilurc. Thus, in those de-
partments of inquir}' which, from the nature of their subject-
matter, should be the most interesting of all, much of our actual
knowledge is hypothetical. That there has been a strong ten-
dency to the ailoption of the same fonns of thought in writers
on speculative philoKophy, will hereafter appear. Hence the in-
troduction of a general method for the discussion of hypothetical
and the other varieties of secondary propositions, will open to us
a more interesting field of applications than we liave before met
with.

4. The discussion of the theory of Secomlary Propositions in
in the next place intere:(tiii}(, from the close and remarkable ana-
logy which it bears with the theory of Primary Propositions. It

M

162 OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS. [cHAP. XI.

will appear, that the formal laws to which theoperatioiis of the m^
are subject, are identical in expression in both cases. The mathe-
matical processes which are founded on those laws are, therefore,
identical also. Thus the methods which have been investigated
in the former portion of this work will continue to be available
in the new applications to which we are about to proceed. But
fwhile the laws and processes of the method remain unchanged,
I the rule of interpretation must be adapted to new conditions.
: Instead of classes of things, we shall have to substitute propo-
^ sitiohs, and for the relations of classes and individuals, we shall
have to consider the connexions of propositions or of events.
j Still, between the two systems, however differing in purport and
I interpretation, there will be seen to exist a pervading harmonious
/ relation, an analogy which, while it serves to &cilitate the con*
! quest of every yet remaining difficulty, is of itself an interesting
I subject of study, and a conclusive proof of that unity of cha-
\ racter which marks the constitution of the human &culties.

Proposition I.

5. To investigate the nature of the connexion of Secondary Pro-
positions with the idea of Time.

. It 18 necesfiiary, in entering upon this inquiry, to state clearly
the nature of the analogy which connects Secondary with Primary
Propositions.

Primary Proppsitions express relations among things, viewed
as component parts of a universe within the limits of which,
whether coextensive with the limits of the actual universe or
not, the matter of our discourse is confined. The r elations ex-
pressed are essentially substantive. Some, or all, or none, of the
members of a given class, are also members of another class.
The subjects to wliich primary propositions refer — the relations
among those subjects which they express — are all of the above
character.

But in treating of secondary propositions, wc find ourselves con-
cerned with another class both of subjects and relations. For the
subjects with which we have to do are themselves propositions, so
that the question may be asked, — Can we regard these subjects

CHAP. II.] OF 8BCONDARY PROPOSITIONS. 163

sbo as tkinffif and refer them, by analogy with the previous
caae, to a universe of their own ? Again, the relations among
these subject propositions are reladons of coexistent truth or
fiJsehood, not of substantive equivalence. We do not say, when
expressing the connexion of two distinct propositions, that the
one is the other, but use some such forms of speech as the fol-
lowing, according to the meaning which we desire to convey;
^Either the proposition X is true, or the proposition Y is true ;"
** If the proposition X is true, the proposition Y is true ;" ^* The
propositions X and Y ore jointly true ;*' and so on.

Now, in considering any such relations as the above, we are
not called upon to inquire into the whole extent of their possible
meaning (for this might involve us in metaphysical questions of
causation, which are beyond the proper limits of science) ; but it
suffices to ascertun some meaning which they undoubtedly pos-
sess, and which is adequate for the purposes of logical deduction.
Let us take, as an instance for examination, the conditional pro-
position, ** If the proposition X is true, the proposition Y is
true.** An undoubted meaning of this proposition is, that the
time in which the proposition X is true, is time in which the pro-
position Y is true. This indeed is only a relation of coexistence,
and may or may not exhaust the meaning of the projiosition, but
it is a relation really involved in the statement of the proposition,
and further, it suffices for all the purposes of logical inference.

The language of common life sanctions this view of the es-
sentiaLoonnexion of secondary propositions with the notion of
time. Thus we limit the application of a priniar}* pmposition by
the word ** some,'* but tluit of a secondary proposition by the
word ** sometimes.'* To say, ** Sometimes injustice triumphs,**
is equivalent to asserting that there are times in which the pro-
position ** Injustice now triumphs," is a true pn)]>o>tition. There
are indeed propositions, the truth of which is not thus limited to
particular periods or conjunctures ; propositions which are true
throughout all time, and have received the appellation of ** eter-
nal truths." The distinction must he familiar to every reader of
Pkto and Aristotle, by the latter of whom, especially, it is em-
ployed to denote the contrast between the abstract verities of
sdenoe, such as the pn>positions of geometry which are always

m2

164 OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS. [CHAP. XI.

true, and those eontingent or phsenomenal relations of things
which are sometimes true and sometimes false. But the forms of
language in which both kinds of propositions are expressed ma-
nifest a common dependence upon the idea of time ; in the one
case as limited to some finite duration, in the other as stretched
out to eternity.

6. It may indeed be said, that in ordinary reasoning we are
often quite imconscious of this notion of time involved in the very
language we are using. But the remark, however just, only
serves to show that we. commonly reason by the aid of words
and the forms of a well-constructed language, without attending
to the ulterior groimds upon which those very forms have been
established. The course of the present investigation will afford an
illustration of the very same principle. I shall avail myself of
the notion of time in order to determine the laws of the expression
of secondary propositions, as well as the laws of combination of
the symbols by which they are expressed. But when those
laws and those forms are once determined, this notion of time
(essential, as I believe it to be, to the above end) may practically
be dispensed with. We may then pass from the forms of com-
mon language to the closely analogous forms of the symbolical
instrument of thought here developed, and use its processes, and
interpret its results, without any conscious recognition of the idea
of time whatever.

Proposition II.

7. To establish a system of notation for the expression of
Secondary Propositions^ and to show that the symbols which it
involves are sid)J€ct to the same laws of combination as the corres^
ponding symbols employed in the expression of Primary Propo-
sitions.

Let us employ the capital letters X, F, Z, to denote the ele-
mentary propositions concerning which we desire to make some
assertion touching their truth or falsehood, or among which we
seek to express some relation in the form of a secondary propo-
sition. And let us employ the corresponding small letters Xy y, r,
considered as expressive of mental operations, in the following

CHAP* SI.] OP SBCONDART PROPOSITIONS. 165

sense, vix. : Let x represent an act of the mind by which we fix
our regard upon that portion of time for which the proposition X
is true ; and let this meaning be understood when it is asserted
that X denotes the time for which the proposition X is true. Let
us further employ the connecting signs •» , -, -, &c, in the fol-
lowing sense, viz. : Let x -k-y denote the aggregate of those ]>or-
tions of time for which the propositions X and Fare respectively
true, those times being entirely separated from each other. Si-
milarly let X - y denote that remainder of time which is left when
we take away from the portion of time for which X is true, that
(by supi>osition) included portion for which Fis true. Also, let
xmy denote that the time for which the proposition X is true,
b identical with the time for which the proposition Y\a true.
We shall term x the representative symbol of the proposition X, &c.
From the above definitions it will follow, that we shall

always have

X + y « y + ar,

for cither member will denote the same aggregate of time.

Let us further represent by xy the performance in succession
of the two operations re[»resented by y and jr, i. e. the whole
mental o]>eration which consists of the following elements, viz.,
Irt, The mental selection of that portion of time for which the
proposition Y is true. 2ndly, The mental selection, out of that
pttrtion of time, of such portion as it contiuns of the time in
which the proposition X is true, — the result of these successive
procesees being the fixing of the mental regard upon the whole
of that portion of time for which the propositions X and Fare
both true.

From this dcfinitii>n it will follow, that we shall always have

xy^yx. (1)

F(»r whether we select mentally, first tluit portion of time for
which tlie proixtsition F iit true, then out of the result that con-
tained {portion for which X is true; or first, that portion of time
fur which the pro])osition A" is true, then out of the result that
ODOtained portion of it for which the proposition F is true ; we
•hall arrive at the same final result, viz., that portion of time for
which the propositions X and F are both true.

166 OF SBCONDART PROPOSITIONS. [CHAP. XI.

By continumg this method of reasoning it may be established,
that the laws of combination of the symbols x, y, Zy &q^ in the
species of interpretation here assigned to them, are identical in
expression with the laws of combination of the same symbols, in
the interpretation assigned to them in the first part of this
treatise. The reason of this final identity is iq)parent. For in
both cases it is the same iaculty, or the same combination of &r
culties, of which we study the operations ; operations, the essen-
tial character of which is unaffected, whether we suppose them to
be engaged upon that universe of things in which all existence
is contdned, or upon that whole of time in which all events are
realized, and to some part, at least, of which all assertions,
truths, and propositions, refer.

Thus, in addition to the laws above stated, we shall have by
(4), Chap. II., the law whose expression is

iT (y + 2r) « ay + xz ; (2)

and more particularly the fundamental law of duality (2) Chap, ii.,
whose expression is

ir» t= j;, or, a; (1 - x) = ; (3)

a law, which while it serves to distinguish the system of thought
in Logic fi'om the system of thought in the science of quantity,
gives to the processes of the former a completeness and a gene-
rality which they could not otherwise possess.

8. Again, as this law (3) (as well as the other laws) is satis-
fied by the symbols and 1, we are led, as before, to inquire
whether those symbols do not admit of interpretation in the pre-
sent system of thought. The same course of reasoning which we
before pursued shows that they do, and warrants us in the two
following positions, viz. :

Ist, That in the expression of secondary propositions, re-
presents nothing in reference to the element of time.

2nd, That in the same system 1 represents the universe, or
whole of time, to which the discoiu*8e is supposed in any manner
to relate.

As in primary propositions the universe of discourse is some-
times limited to a small portion of the actual universe of things,
and is sometimes co-extensive with that universe ; so in secon-

CHAP. XI.] OF 8BC0NDARY PROP08ITIOM8. 167

darj propomtions, the universe of (Uscoune may be limited to a
single day or to the passing moment, or it may comprise the
whole duration of time. It may, in the most literal sense, be
** eternal." Indeed, unless there is some linutation expressed or
implied in the nature of the discourse, the proper interpretation
of the symbol 1 in secondary propositions is *^ eternity ;'* even as
its proper interpretation in the primary system is the actually
existent universe.

9. Instead of appropriating the symbols x, y, z, to the repre-
sentation of the truths of proportions, we might with equal pro-
priety ^)ply them to represent the occurrence of events. In &ct^
the occurrence of an event both implies, and is implied by, the
truth of a proposition, viz., of the proposition which asserts the
occurrence of the event. The one signification of the symbol x
necessarily involves the other. It will greatly conduce to con-
venience to be able to employ our symbols in either of these
really equivalent interpretations which the circumstances of a
problem may suggest to us as most desirable ; and of this liberty
I shall avail myself whenever occasion requires. In problems of
pure Logic I shall consider the symbols x, y^ &c. as representing
elementary propositions, among which relation is expressed in
the premises. In the mathematical theory of probabilities, which,
as befixe intimated (1. 13), rests upon a basis of Logic, and
which it is designed to treat in a subsequent portion of this work,
I shall employ the same symbols to denote the simple events,
whose implied or required frequency of occurrence it counts
among its elements.

Proposition III.

10. To deduce general Rules fir the exprestum of Seamdary
PropnsitumM.

In the various inquiries arising out of this Proposition, fulness
of deuioDtttratiun will be the Icm necessary, because of the exact
analogy which they bear with similar inquiries already completed
with reference to primary propositions. We shall first consider
the expressbn of terms ; secondly, that of the propositions by
which they are conne c ted.

168 OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS. [CHAF. XI

As 1 denotes the whole duration of time, and x that portion
of it for which the proposition X is true, \ - x will denote that
portion of time for which the proposition X is false.

Again, as ocy denotes that portion of time for which the pro-
positions X and Y are both true, we shall, by combining this and
the previous observation, be led to the following interpretations,
viz.:

The expression x(\ -j/) will represent the time during which
the proposition X is true, and the proposition Y false. The ex-
pression (\ -x) (I -y) will represent the time during which the
propositions X and Y are simultaneously false.

The expression x(l - y) + y{\ - x) will express the time
during which either X is true or Y true, but not both ; for that
time is the sum of the times in which they are singly and exclu-
sively true. The expression xy ■}■ (I - x) (I - y) will express the
time during which X and Y are either both true or both filse.

If another symbol z presents itself, the same principles remain
applicable. Thus xyz denotes the time in which the propositions
X, y, and Z are simultaneously true ; (1 - x) (1 -y) (1 - z) the
time in which they are simultaneously false ; and the sum of
these expressions would denote the time in which they are either
true or false together.

The general principles of interpretation involved in the above
examples do not need any further illustrations or more explicit
statement.

11. The laws of the expression of propositions may now be
exhibited and studied in the distinct cases in which they present
themselves. There is, however, one principle of fundamental
importance to which I wish in the first place to direct attention.
Although the principles of expression which have been laid down
are perfectly general, and enable us to limit our assertions of the
truth or falsehood of propositions to any particular portions of
that whole of time (whether it be an unlimited eternity, or a pe-
riod whose beginning and whose end are definitely fixed, or the
passing moment) which constitutes the imi verse of our discourse,
yet, in the actual procedure of human reasoning, such limitation
is not commonly employed. When we assert that a proposition
is true, we generally mean that it is true throughout the whole

CHAP. XI.] OF 8BCONDARY PROPOSITIONS. 169

durmtion of the time to which our discourse refers ; and when dif-
ferent aiwertions of the unconditional truth or falsehood of propo-
sitions are jointly made as the premises of a logical demonstration,
it L> to the same universe of time that those assertions are re«
ferrcd, and not to particular and limited parts of it. In that
necestfiary matter which is the object or field of the exact sciences
ever}' assertion of a truth may be the assertion of an ^^ eternal
truth." In reasoning upon transient phaenomena (as of some
social conjuncture) each assertion may be qualified by an imme-
diate reference to the present time, ** Now." But in both cases,
unless there is a distinct expression to the contrary, it is to the
same period of duradon that each separate proposition relates.
The cases which then arise for our consideration are the fol-
lowing:

1st. To ejcpress the Proposition^ " The propotition X is true.**

We arc here required to expn^s that within those limits of
time to which the matter of our discourse is confined the propo-
rtion X i» true. Now the time for which the proposition ^V is
true is denoted by x, and the extent of time to wliich our dis-
course refers is represented by 1. Ilence we have

x=l (4)

as the expression required.

2ikL To express the Propositianj ** The proposition X is
falser

We are here to express that within the limits of time to which

our discourse rektes, the proposition A' is false ; or that within

tbofte limits there is no porti(»n of time for which it is true. Now

the {lortion of time for which it is true is x. Ilence the retpiired

equation will be

X = 0. (5)

Thi« result might also l>e obtained by eqiuting to the whole du-
ration of time 1, the express^ion for the time during which the
proposition -Y is fidse, viz., 1 - J. This gives

l-x=l,

whence x • 0.

3nl. To express the disjunctive Propositiom^ ** Either the pro^

170 OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS. [CHAP. XI.

position X is true or the proposition Y is trues** i^ Aeui^ thereby
implied that the said propositions are mutually exclusive^ that is to
say, that one only of them is true.

The time for which either the proposition X is tme or the
proposition Y is true, but not both, is represented bj the ex-
pression a: (1 - y) + y (1 - x). Hence we have

aj(i-y) + y(i -«)-!» (6)

for the equation required.

If in the above Proposition the particles either j or^ are sup-
posed not to possess an absolutely disjunctive power, so that the
possibility of the simultaneous truth of the propositions X and Y
is not excluded, we must add to the first member of the above
equations the term xy. We shall thus have

ay + a:(l-y) + (l-ar)y=l,
or « + (1 - «)y = 1. ^ '

4th. To express the conditional Proposition^ " If the propo-
sition Y is truey the proposition X is true J*

Since whenever the proposition Y is true, the proposition X
is true, it is necessary and sufficient here to express, that the time
in which the proposition Y is true is time in which the propo-
sition X is true ; that is to say, that it is some indefinite portion
of the whole time in which the proposition X is true. Now the
time in which the proposition Y is true is y, and the whole time
in which the proposition X is true is x. Let w be a symbol of
time indefinite, then will vx represent an indefinite portion of the
whole time x. Accordingly, we shall have

y = vx

as the expression of the proposition given.

12. When v is thus regarded as a symbol of time indefinite,
vx may be understood to represent the whole, or an indefinite
part, or no part, of the whole time x ; for any one of these mean-
ings may be realized by a particular determination of the arbitrary
symbol v. Thus, if w be determined to represent a time in which
the whole time x is included, vx will represent the whole time x.
If V be determined to represent a time, some part of which is in-

CRAP. XI.] OF •ICONDART PROPOIITIONI. 171

duded in the time x^ but which does not fill up the measure of
thmt time, vx will represent a part of the time x. If, lastly, v is
determined to represent a time, of which no part is common with
any part of the time or, vx will assume the value 0, and will be
equi\'alent to ** no time," or ** never."

Now it IB to be observed that the proposition, *^ If F is true,
X is true," contains no assertion of the truth of either of the
propositions X and Y» It may equally consist with the suppo-
sition that the truth of the proposition F is a condition indi»>
pensable to the truth of the proposition X, in which case wo
shall have o « 1 ; or with the supposition that although Y ex-
presses a condition which, when realized, assures us of the truth
of X^ yet X may be true without implying the fulfilment of that
conditicm, in which case v denotes a time, some part of which is
contained in the whole time x\ or, lastly, with the supposition
that the proposition Y is not true at all, in which case v repre-
sents some time, no part of which is conunon with any part of
the time x. All these cases are involved in the general suppo-
ntion that r is a symbol of time indefinite.

5th. To express a proposition in which the conditional and the
disjunctive characters both exist.

The general form of a conditional proposition is, ** If F is
tme, X IB true," and its expression is, by the last section, y « vx.
We may properly, in analogy with the usage which has been es-
talilished in primary proiiositions, designate Y and X as the
trrms of the conditional pru|>osition into wliich they enter ; and
we may further adopt the language of the ordinary Logic, which
dci^ignates the term )*, to which the (Mirticle i/iA attached, the
^* antecedent*' of the proinxfition, and the term X the ** conse-
quent."

Now instcml of the tennis as in the above case, being simple
propusitioni*, let each or either of them be a disjunctive [tropo-
ftitiou involving difierent tenns connci'tod by tlie [larticles either^
or, as in the following illustrative examples, in which «V, }', iT,
dc denote ifimple propositions.

Ii«t. If either X is true or Y is true, then Z is true.
2iid. If JIT is true, then cither }" is true or Z true.

172 OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS. [CHAP. XI.

3rd. If either X is true or Y is true, then either Z and W
are both true, or they are both false.

It is evident that in the above cases the relation of the ante-
cedent to the consequent is not affected by the dr^umstance that
one of those terms or both are of a disjunctive character. Ac-
cordingly it is only necessary to obtain, in conformity with the
principles already established, the proper expressions for the ante-
cedent and the consequent, to affect the latter with the indefinite
symbol v, and to equate the results. Thus for the propositioiu
above stated we shall have the respective equations,

1st. x{\ -y) + {\-x)y ^ vz.

2nd. x = v[y{l-^z)-^ z{\-y)]. ^

3rd. x{\-y) + y{\-x) - v^zw + {l -^) (1 -«?)). t •
The rule here exemplified is of general application, v >' "*

Cases in which the disjunctive and the conditional elements
enter in a manner different from |he above into the expression of
a compound proposition, are conceivable^ but I am not awar^ that
they are ever presented to us by the natural exigencies of human
reason, and I shall therefore refrain from any discussion of them.
No serious difficulty will arise from this omission, as the genend
principles which have formed the basis of the above applications
are perfectly general, and a slight effort of thought will adapt
them to any imaginable case.

13. In the laws of expression above stated those of interpre-
tation are implicitly involved. The equation

x= 1

must be understood to express that the proposition X is true ;

the equation

x = 0,

that the proposition X is false. The equation

will express that the propositions X and Y are both true toge-
ther ; and the equation

xy^O

that they are not both together true.

CHAF.Zl.] OF SECONDARY PROPOSfTIONS. 173

In like manner the equations

will respectively assert the truth and the falsehood of the disjunc-
tive Proposition, <* Either X b true or Y \a true." The equa-
tions

y-r(l -x)

will respectively express the Propositions, " If the proposition T
L» true, the proposition X la true." **If the proposition Y is
true, the proposition X is false."

Examples will frequently present themselves, in the suc-
ceeding chapters of this work, of a case in which some terms of a
(Murticular member of an equation arc affected by the indefinite
symbol r, and others not so affected. The following instance
will serve for illustration. Supix>se that we have

|f « xz + rx(l - z).

Here it is implied that the time for which the proposition Y is
true consists of all the time for which X and Z arc together true,
tofrethcr with an indefinite portion of the time for which X is
true and Z false. From this it may be seen, 1st, Tliat if I'is
true either X and /fare together true, or X is true and Z false ;
2ntlly, If A" and Z arc together true, Y is true. The hitter of
the^ may lie called the reverse interpretation, and it consists in
taking the antecinlent out of the second member, and the conse-
quent fn>m the first meiul>er of the equation. The existence of
a term in the seomd member, whose coefficient is unity, renders
thu hitter mtide of inteq)retation possible. The general principle
which it involves* may be thut» stated :

1 4 . Pr I n CI r l e . — - 1 wy cniuttitumt term or terms in a purticuhtr
member of an eiiuiitum whieh hare for their eiH'jffirient ttnity^ may
ft taken as the anttredmt of a projMsition^ ofwhivh all the terms
im thr other member form the coiuet/nent.

Thus the e<iuation

y-xz+rx(l-z)+ (l~x)(l-.-)
would liave the following interpretations :

174 ' OF SECONDARY PBOPOSITIONS* [CHAP. XI.

Direct Interpretation. — Iftheproposiium Tis trut, thm
either X and Z are true^ or X is true and Z Jalsey or X and Z
are both false.

Reverse Interpretation. — If either X and Z are true^ or
X and Z arefalse^ Y is true.

The aggregate of these partial interpretations wiU express
the whole significance of the equation given.

15. We may here call attention again to the remark, that
although thel idea of time appears to be an essential element in
the theory of the interpretation of secondary propositions, it may
practically be neglected as soon as the laws of expression and of
interpretation are definitely established. The forms to which
those laws give rise seem, indeed, to correspond with the forms of
a perfect language. Let us imagine any known or existing hm*
guage freed from idioms and divested of superfluity, and let ns
express in that language any given proposition in a manner the
most simple and literal, — the most in accordance with those
principles of pure and universal thought upon which all languages
are founded, of which all bear the manifestation, but from which
all have more or less departed. The transition from such a lan-
guage to the notation of analysis would consist of no more than
the substitution of one set of signs for another, without essential
change either of form or character. For the elements, whether
things or propositions, among which relation is expressed, we
should substitute letters; for the disjunctive conjunction we
should write + ; for the connecting copula or sign of relation, we
should write =. This analogy I need not pursue. Its reaKty
and completeness will be made more apparent from the study of
those forms of expression which will present themselves in sub-
sequent applications of the present theory, viewed in more imme-
diate comparison with that imperfect yet noble instrument of
thought — the English language.

16. Upon the general analogy between the theory of Primary
and that of Secondary Propositions, I am desirous of adding a
few remarks before dismissing the subject of the present chapter.

We might undoubtedly have established the theory of Pri-
mary Propositions upon the simple notion of space, in the same

CHAP. XI.] OF •BCONDABT PBOPOSITIOKS. 170

wmy 00 that of seoondaiy propoations has been established upon
the notion of time. Perhaps, had this been done, the analogy
which we are contemplating would have been in somewhat closer
accordance with the view of those who regard space and time
as merely ** forms of the human understanding," conditions of
knowledge imposed by the very constitution of the mind upon
all that is submitted to its apprehension. But this view, while
on the one hand it is incapable of demonstration, on the other
hand ties us down to the rec<^ition of ** place," ro irov, as an
essential cat^ory of existence. The question, indeed, whether
it IB so or not, lies, I apprehend, beyond the reach of our faculties;
but it may be, and I conceive has been, established, that the
formal processes of reasoning in primary propositions do not re-
qoire, as an essential condition, the manifestation in space of the
tilings about which we reason ; that they would remain appli-
cable, with equal strictness of demonstration, to forms of exis-
tence, if such there be, which lie beyond the realm of sensible
extension. It is a fact, perhaps, in some degree analogous to this,
that we are able in many known examples in geometry and dy-
namics, to exhibit the formal analysis of problems founded upon
some intellectual conception of siMce different from that which is
presented to us by the senses, or which can be realized by the
imagination.* I conceive, therefore, that the idea of space is not

b prtMoUd to iu in perception, nt poeteteing tlie tliree diaeniioot
nChftfc, brtndth, and depth. Bnt in n large olaea of probleoM relating to the
prapvtiet of enrTtd torfaoet, the rolatioai ef solid bodiee aronnd azea, the tI-
hraliooa of elastic media, &e., thb limitation appears in the analytical inTeetl-
gnliea to be of an arbitrary character, and if attention were paid to the processes
ef tolatioo alone, no reason coald be discorered whj spaee shonld not esist in
fonr 9r in anj greater nnmber of dimensions. The intellertnal procedore in
tJM imaginar J world that suggested can be appreliended bj the clearest light of
analogj.

The existence of space in three dimensions, and the Tiewt thereupon of the
religions and philosophical mind of aotiqnit j, are thns set forth by Aristotle ;-.
lf«7iSoc ih rh ^r if Ir, ypa^/tii^ r6 t iwl ivo ivivf^er, r^ f iwi rpim ed^*
K«4 vopd rmvra ovg (ertp mXXo /iiyiABc, ^id r^ rpcd wirrm tWm cot rh rpic
'orrf. KdSavfp yap fast cal el Ilir^yopfiiM, ri vdr cot rd virra rote rptelp
m^^^rtmiL. Tf Xieni ykp m fiieoi^ Kai ipx*i ^vr dptS^i^r ixH ror roe vorr^*
rovTo li T^v rl^ tputlo^. Ati vnpd rqc f i''«t«*c «<Xff^ri( mmittft ro^ievc iciiVfc*
u vpecrdc d7«#ritac XP^/«<^ ^^^ ^^•^^ rf ^^^¥ rovr^.—lM Cmia, 1.

(

(

176 OF SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS. [CHAP.XI.

essential to the development of a theory of primary propodtions,
but am disposed, though desiring to speak with diffidence upon
a question of such extreme difficulty, to thmk that the idea of
time is essential to the establishment of a theory of secondary
propositions. There seem to be grounds for thinking, that
without any change in those faculties which are concerned m
reasoning i the manifestation of space to the human mind might
have been difierent from what it is, but not (at least the same)
grounds for supposing that the manifestation of time could have
been otherwise than we perceive it to be. Dismissing, however,
these speculations as possibly not altogether free from presump-
tion, let it be affirmed that the real ground upon which the
symbol 1 represents in primary propositions the universe of
things, and not the space they occupy, is, that the sign of
identity = connecting the members of the corresponding equa-
tions, implies that the things which tliey represent are identical,
not simply that they are found in the same portion of space.
Let it in like manner be affirmed, that the reason why the symbol
1 in secondary propositions represents, not the universe of events,
but the eternity in whose successive moments and periods they
are evolved, is, that the same sign of identity connecting the
logical members of the corresponding equations implies, not that
the events which those members represent arc identical, but that
the times of their occurrence are the same. These reasons appear
' to me to be decisive of the immediate question of interpretation. In
a former treatise on this subject (Mathematical Analysis of Lo^c,
p. 49), following the theory of Wallis respecting the Reduction
of Hypothetical Propositions, I was led to interpret the symbol 1
in secondary propositions as the universe of" cases" or " conjunc-
tures of circumstances ;" but tliisvicw involves the necessity of a
definition of what is meant by a " case," or " conjuncture of
circumstances ;" and it is certain, that whatever is involved in
the term beyond the notion of time is alien to the objects, and
restrictive of the processes, of formal Logic.

• . ,.

'K v>.7VT^ J

CHAP. XII.] MBTHOD8 IN 8BC0NDABT PROPOSITIOHS. 177

CHAPTER XII.

OP THS METHODS AMD PROCBSSBS TO BB ADOPTBD IH TUB TRBAT-

MBMT OF 8BCOHDART PE0PO8ITIOM8.

1. XT has appeared from previous researches (XI. 7) that the
-^ laws of combination of the literal symbols of Logic are the
same, whether those symbols are employed in the expression of
primary or in that of secondary propositions, the sole existing
difference between the two cases being a difference of interpret
talion. It has also been established (V. 6), that whenever dis-
tinct systems of thought and interpretation are connected with
the same system of formal laws, i. e., of laws relating to the com-
bination and use of symbols, the attendant processes, intermediate
between the expression of the primary conditions of a problem
and the interpretation of its symbolical soludon, are the same in
both. Hence, as between the systems of thought manifested in
the two ibnns of primary and of secondary propositions, this com-
munity of formal law exists, the processes which have been es-
tablished and illustrated in our discussion of the former class of
firopotttions will, without any modiBcation, be applicable to the
latter.

2. Thus the laws of the two fundamental processes of climi-
Datioo and development are the same in the system of secondary
an in the system of primary pniposi lions. Again, it has been
teen (Chap. vi. Prop. 2) how, in primary propositions, the inter-
pretation of any proposed equation devoid of fractional forms
may be effected by developing it into a series of constituents, and
equating to ever}' constituent whose coefficient does not vanish.
To the e(|uations of secondary propositions the same method is
applicalile, and the interpreted result to which it finally conducts
us i«s as in the former case (VI. 6), a system of co-cxii>tent denials.
But while in the former case the force of those denials is ex-
pended upon the existence of certain classes of things, in the
latter it relates to the truth of certain combinations of the ele-

178 MBTHODS IN 8BC0VDARY PROPOSITIONS. [CHAP. XII.

mentaiy propositions involved in the terms of the given prenuses.
And as in primary propositions it was seen that the system of
denials admitted of conversion into various other forms of propo-
sitions (VI. 7)9 &c., such conversion will be found to be possible
here also, the sole difference consisting not in the forms of the
equations, but in the nature of their interpretation.

3. Moreover, as in primary propositions, we can find the ex-
pression of any element entering into a system of equations, in
terms of the remaining elements (YI. 10), or of any selected
number of the remaining elements, and interpret that expression
into a logical inference, the same object can be aooomplished by
the same means, difference of interpretation alone excepted, in
the system of secondary propositions. The elimination of those
elements which we desire to banish firom the final solution, the
reduction of the system to a single equation, the algebraic solu-
tion and the mode of its development into an interpretable fonn,
differ in no respect firom the corresponding steps in the discoasion
of primary propositions.

To remove, however, any possible difficulty, it may be de-
sirable to collect under a general Bule the different cases which
present themselves in the treatment of secondary propositions.

Rule. — Express symbolically the given propositions (XI. 11).

Eliminate separately from each equation in which it isjbvndthe
indefinite symbol v (VII. 5).

Eliminate the remaining symbols which it is desired to banish
from the final solution : always before elimination reducing to a
single equation those equations in which the symbol or symbols to
be eliminated are found (VIII. 7). Collect the resulting equa-
tions into a single equation 1^= 0.

Then proceed according to the particular form in which it is
desired to express the final relation^ as —

Ist. If in the form of a denial^ or system of denials^ develop the
function F, and equate to alt those constituents whose coefficients
do not vanish.

2ndly. ffin the form of a disjunctive propositiony equate to 1
the sum of those constituents whose coffiecients vanish.

3rdly. j[fin the form of a conditional proposition having a sim-

CHAP. Xn*] MITHODS IW 8ICONDART PROPOfllTIOHS. 179

pU tlememi^ as x or I - x^ fir tit aniecedenif determme the alge^
braie expreuiom of thai eUwieni^ and develop that expression.

4thl7. ^m ihs form of a condiiional proposition having a
eamposmd expression^ at xy, jiy + (1 --x) (1 -y), ^.^for Us ante^
eedeni^ eqmaie thai expression to a new symbol tj and determine t
as a developed fimdion of the symbols which are to appear m the
eonseqmenif either by ordinary methods or by the special method
(IX- 9).

fitUy. Interpret the results by (XI. 13, 14).

(fit only be desired to ascertain whether a particular eUmen*
iary proposition x is true orfolscj we must eliminate all the sym^
bolsbui X ; thenthe equation x» 1 will indicate that the proposition
is truCf X « that it isfolse^ 0-0 thai the premises are insufficient
to determine whether it is true orfoUse,

4. Ex.1. — The following prediction Is made the subject of a
curious discussion in Cicero's fragmentary treatise, De Fato : —
** Si quis (Fabius) natus est oriente Canicula, is in man non mo-
rietur.** I shall apply to it the method of this chapter. Lict y
represent the proposition, *^ Fabius was bom at the rising of the
dogstar ;** x the propontion, *^ Fabius will die in the sea.**
In saying that x represents the proposition, ** Fabius, &C.,** it is
only meant that x is a symbol so appropriated (XI. 7) to the
above proposition, that the equation x » 1 declares, and the equa-
tion X " denies, the truth of that proposition. The equation
we have to discuss will be

y.r(l-x). (1)

And, first, let it be required to reduce the given proposition to a
nc^jFAtion or system of negations (XII. 3). We have, on trans-
position,

y-r(l -x)oO.

Eliminating r,

y !y - (1 - ')) - 0.
or, r-y(i-*)-o,

or, yx - 0. (2)

The intcrprctatiuD of thia re»ult is :— ** It is not true that Fabius
was born at the rising of the dogstar, and will die in the aca."

n2

180 METHODS IN SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS. [CHAP* XII.

Cicero terms this form of proposition, ^^Conjunctio ex repog-
nantibus ;*' and he remarks that Chrysippus thought in this way
to evade the difficulty which he imagined to exist in contingent
assertions respecting the future : ^^ Hoc loco Chrysippus SBstuans
fidli sperat Chaldseos ca&terosque divinos, neque eos usuros esse
conjunctionibus ut ita sua percepta pronuntient : Si quis natus
est oriente Canicul^ is in mari non morietur ; sed potius ita dicant:
Non et natus est quis oriente CaniculU, et in mari morietur.
O licentiam jocularem I . . . . Multa genera sunt enuntiandi, nee
uUum distortius quam hoc quo Chrysippus sperat Chaldseos con-
tentos Stoicorum caus4 fore." — Cic^ De Faio^ 7, 8.

5. To reduce the given proposition to a disjunctive form.
The constituents not entering into the first member of (2) are

x{\-y),{l-x)y, (l-x)(l-y).

Whence we have

y (I - x) + x{\ - y) + (1 - 4?) (1 -y) - 1. (3)

The interpretation of which is : — Either Fabius was bom at the
rising of the dogstar^ and will not perish in the sea'; or he was not
horn at the rising of the dogstar^ and will perish in the sea ; or he
was not bom at the rising of the dogstar^ and will not perish in
the sea.

In cases like the above, however, in which there exist consti-
tuents differing from each other only by a single factor, it is, as
we have seen (VII. 15), most convenient to collect such consti-
tuents into a single term. If we thus connect the first and third
terms of (3), we have

(l-y)a:+l-j:=l;

and if we similarly connect the second and third, we have

y(l-^)+ l-y=l.

These forms of the equation severally give the interpretations —

Either Fabius was not bom tmder the dogstar^ and will die in
the sea^ or he will not die in the sea.

Either Fabius was bom tmder the dogstar^ and will not die in
the seaj or he was not bom tmder the dogstar.

CRAP. Xll.] MITH0D6 IN 8IC01IDART PROP06ITIOH8. 181

It 18 evident that these interpretationB are strictly equivalent
to the former one.

Let us ascertain, in the form of a conditional proposition, the
consequences which flow from the hypotheos, that *^ Fabius will
perish in the sea."

In the equation (2), which expresses the result of the elimi-
nation of o from the original equation, we must seek to determine
X as a function of y.

We have

x«-«Oy-i-T(l-|f)on ezpanoon,

or, ® /I \

the interpretation of which is, — IfFabiiu shall die im ike sea^ he
was mot bom at the rismg of the dogstar.

These examples serve in some measure to illustrate the con-
nesdon which has been established in the previous sections be-
tween primary and secondary proposidons, a connexion of which
the two distinguishing features are identity of process and analogy
of interpretation.

6« Ex. 2. — There is a remarkable argument in the second
book of the Republic of Plato, the design of which is to prove
the immutalnlity of the Divine Nature. It is a very fine example
both of the careful induction from familiar instances by which
Plato arrives at general principles, and of the clear and connected
logic by which he deduces from them the particular inferences
which it is his object to cstabluilL The alignment is contained
m the following dialogue :

** Must not that which departs from its proper form bo
changed either by itiself or by another thing ? Necessarily so.
Are not things which are in the best state least changed and dis-
turbed, as the body by meats and drinks, and labours, and every
ffpcciei* of fdant by heats and winds, and such like affections ? Is
not the healthiest and strongest the least changed ? Assuredly.
And does not any trouble from without least disturb and change
that soul which is strongest and wisest? And as to all made
vessels, and f urni t u res, and garments, aooording to the attn^

182 MBTHODS IN SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS. [CHAP. XII.

principle, are not those which are well wrought, and in a good
condition, least changed by time and other acddents ? Even so.
And whatever is in a right state, either by nature or by art, or
by both these, admits of the smallest change from any other
thing. So it seems. But God and things divine are in every
sense in the best state. Assuredly. In this way, then, God
should least of all bear many forms ? Least, indeed, of all.
Again, should He transform and change Himself? Manifestly He
must do so, if He is changed at all. Changes He then Himself to
that which is more good and fair, or to that which is worse and
baser ? Necessarily to the worse, if he be changed. For nevet
shall we say ^at God is indigent of beauty or of virtue. You
speak most rightly, said I, and the matter being so, seems it to
you, O Adimantus, that God or man willingly makes himself in
any sense worse ? Impossible, said he. Impossible, then, it is,
said I, that a god should wish to change himself; but ever bdng
fidrest and best, each of them ever remains absolutely in the same
form."

The premises of the above argument are the following :

1 St. If the Deity suffers change, He is changed either by Him-
self or by another.

2nd. If He is in the best state, He is not changed by another.

3rd. The Deity is in the best state.

4th. If the Deity is changed by Himself, He is changed to a
worse state.

5th. If He acts willingly, He is not changed to a worse state.

6th. The Deity acts willingly.

Let us express the elements of these premises as follows :

Let X represent the proposition, *' The Deity suffers change."
y, He is changed by Himself,
z. He is changed by another.
^, He is in the best state.
^, He is changed to a worse state.
Wj He acts willingly.

Then the premises expressed in symbolical language yield, after
elimination of the indefinite class symbols v, the following equa-
tions:

CBAP. XII.] MtTBODS IN dCOHDABY PBOPOSITIOIIS. I8S

a3rr + *(l-y)(l-z)-0, (1)

*z - 0, (2)

* - 1, (3)

y(i-<)-o, (4)

tet m 0, (5)

Iff - 1. (6)

Betumng x, I shall eUminate in saooeaaion z, «, y, f, umI w (tliia
bong the order in which thoae Bymbols occur in the above ^8-
tcm), and interpret the suoceauTe results.
Eliminating z Scorn (1) and (2), we get

x»(l-y)-0. * (7)

Eliminating $ from (3) and (7),

x(I-y)-0. (8)

Eliminating y from (4) and (8),

x(l-0-0. (9)

Eliminating t from (5) and (9)9

xwmO. (10)

EHminating w from ^6) and (10),

x-0. (11)

Tbeee equations, be^pnning with (8), give the following
reralta:

From (8) we have ' - ^y* therefinne, If tlU Deiif tuffin^
dungt^ He is changed by Htmsetf,

From (9), ' * j: ^ If the Deity iuffnrs change^ He is changed
to a wane etaie.

From(lO), x - - (1 - io). J[f the Deity wnffere dumge^ He

does not act willingly.

From (11), Th€ Deity does not suffer change. Thia is Plato's
result.

Now I'have befive remarked, that the order of eliminarion
is indifferent. Let us in the present case seek to verify this hot
by eliminating the thme symbds in a reverse order, beginning
with w. The resohing equatioas are.

184 METHODS IN SECONDARY PROPOSITIONS. [CHAP. XII.

^«0, y«0, ar(l-r) = 0, r » 0, x = 0;

yielding the follo\nng interpretations :

God is not changed to a worse state.

He is not changed by Himseff,

If He suffers change j He is changed by another.

He is not changed by another.

He is not changed.

We thus reach by a different route the same conclusion.

Though as an exhibition of the power of the method, the
above examples are of slight value, they serve as well as more
complicated inrflKnces would do, to illustrate its nature and cha-
racter.

7. It may be remarked, as a final instance of analogy between
the system of primary and that of secondary propositions, that
in the latter system also the fundamental equation,

JF (1 - 3?) = 0,

admits of interpretation. It expresses the axiom, A propo sition

cannot at. the. same time bfi true and false. Liet this be compared

with the corresponding interpretation (III. 15). Solved under

the form

\-x

by development, it furnishes the respective axioms : "A thing is
what it is:" " If a proposition is true, it is true :" forms of what has
been termed " The principle of identity." Upon the nature and
the value of these axioms the most opposite opinions have been
entertained. Some have regarded them as the very pith and mar-
row of philosophy. Locke devoted to them a chapter, headed,
*' On Trifling Propositions." * In both these views there seems
to have been a mixture of truth and error. Regarded as sup-
planting experience, or as furnishing materials for the vain and
wordy janglings of the schools, such propositions are worse than
trifling. Viewed, on the other hand, as intimately allied with
the very laws and conditions of thought, they rise into at least a

speculative importance.

- ■ i II, a ■

* Essay on the Haman Understanding, Book IV. Chap. TiiL

CHAP. XIII.] CLARKE AND SPINOZA. 185

CHAPTER XIII.

AHALTSI8 OF A PORTION OF DR. SAMUEL CLARKB's ** DBM0N8TRA-
TIOH OF TUS BKINO AND ATTRIBUTES OF GOD," AND OF A
PORTION OF THE *' BTHICA OEDINB GBOMBTRICO DEMON-
STRATA** OF SPINOXA.

1. 'T^HE general order which, in the investigations of the foU
-^ lowing chapter, I design to pursue, is the following. I
shall examine what are the actual premises involved in the de-
monstrations of some of the general propositions of the above
treatises, whether those premises be expressed or implied. By
the actual premises I mean whatever propositions are assumed
in the course of the argument, without being proved, and are
employed as parts of the foundation upon which the final conclu-
sion id built. The premises thus determined, I shall express in
the language of symbols, and I shall then deduce from them by
the*methods develo])ed in the previous chaptereof this work, the
most important inferences which they involve, in addition to the
particular inferences actually drawn by the authors. I shall in
•omc instances modify the premises by the omission of some iiict
or principle which is contained in them, or by the addition or
substitution of some new proposition, and shall determine how
by such change the ultimate conclusions are affected. In the
pursuit of these objects it will not devolve upon me to in(|uire,
except incidentally, how fiir the metaphysical principles laid down
in these celebrated productions are worthy of confidence, but
only to ascertain wlmt concluifions may justly be drawn from
given premises ; and in doing this, to exemplify the |)criect li-
berty which we poMcss as concerns both the choice and the
order of the elements of the final or concluding pn>]MMiti(»uis \iz.,
as to determining what elementary pro{io«itions src true or fuliic^
and what are true or false under given restrictions, or in given
eombinations.

S. The cfaiof practical diflfeulty of this inquiry will oonaist.

1 86 CLABKB AND SPINOZA. [CHAP. XIII.

not in the application of the method to the premises onoe deter-
mined, but in ascertaining what the premises are. In what are
regarded as the most rigorous examples of reasoning applied to
metaphysical questions, it will occasionally be found that different
trains of thought are blended together ; that particular but essen-
tial parts of the demonstration are given parenthetically, or out
of the main course of the argument; that the meaning of a pre-
miss may be in some degree ambiguous ; and, not unfirequently,
that arguments, viewed by the strict laws of formal reasoning,
are incorrect or inconclusive. The difficulty of determining and
distinctly exhibiting the true premises of a demonstration may,
in such cases, be very considerable. But it is a difficulty wluch
must be overcome by all who would ascertwi whether a parti-
cular conclusion is proved or not, whatever form they may be
prepared or disposed to give to the ulterior process of reasoning.
It is a difficulty, therefore, which is not peculiar to the method
of this work, though it manifests itself more distinctly in con-
nexion with this method than with any other. So intimate, in-
deed, is this connexion, that it is impossible, employing the me-
thod of this treatise, to form even a conjecture as to the validity
of a conclusion, without a distinct apprehension and exact state-
ment of all the premises upon which it rests. In the more usual
course of procedure, nothing is, however, more common than to
examine some of the steps of a train of argument, and thence to
form a vague general impression of the scope of the whole, with-
out any such preliminary and thorough analysis of the premisee
which it involves.

The necessity of a rigorous determination of the real pre-
mises of a demonstration ought not to be regarded as an evil;
especially as, when that task is accomplished, every source of
doubt or ambiguity is removed. In employing the method of
this treatise, the order in which premises are arranged, the mode
of connexion which they exhibit, with every similar circumstance,
may be esteemed a matter of indifference, and the process of
inference is conducted with a precision which might almost be
termed mechanical.

3. The '^ Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of
God," consists of a series of propositions or theorems, each

CBAP. ZIII.] CLARKB AHD 8PIN02A. 187

of them proved by means of prembea resolvable, for the most
part, into two distinot claflses, viz., fiu^ts of observation, such
as the existence of a material world, the phaenomenon of mo-
tion, &c^ and h]rtK>thetical prindples, the authority and uni-
versality of which are supposed to be recognised d priori. It is,
of course, upon the truth of the latter, assuming the correctness
of the reasoning, that the validity of the demonstration really de-
pends. But whatever may be thought of its claims in this re-
spect, it is unquestionable that, as an intellectual performance, its
merits are very high. Though the trains of argument of which
it consists are not in general very clearly arranged, they are al-
most always specimens of correct Logic, and they exhibit a
subtlety of apprehension and a force of reasoning which have
seldom been equalled, never perhaps surpassed. We see in them
the consummation of those intellectual efforts which were awi^
kened in the realm of metaphysical inquiry, at a period when the
dominion of hypothetical principles was less questioned than it
now is, and when the rigorous demonstrations of the newly risen
school of mathematical physics seemed to have furnished a model
for their direction. They appear to me for this reason (not to
mention the dignity of the subject of which they treat) to be
deserving of high consideration ; and I do not deem it a vain
or superfluous task to expend upon some of them a careful
analysis.

4. The Ethics of Benedict Spinoza is a treatise, the object
of which IB to prove the identity of Ood and the univene, and
to establish, upon this doctrine, a system of morals and of philo-
•o|diy. The analysis of its main argument is extremely difficult,
owing not to the complexity of the separate propositions which it
involves, but to the use of vague definitions, and of axioms which,
through a like defect of clearness, it is perplexing to detennino
whether we ought to accept or to reject. While the reasoning of
Dr. 2jamuel Clarke is in part verbal, that of Spinoza issomamuch
greater degree ; and perhaps this is the reason why, to some
minds, it has appeared to possess a formal cogency, to which in
n«lity it possesses no just claim. These pomts will, however,
be oomndflred in the proper pbce.

1 88 CLARKE AiND SPINOZA. [CHAP. XIII.

clarkb's DBMOMSTRATION.

Proposition I. «

5. " Something has existed from eternity**

The proof is as follows : —

^^ For since something now is, 'tis manifest that sometlung
always was. Otherwise the things that now are must have risen
out of nothing, absolutely and without cause. Which is a
plun contradiction in terms. For to say a thing is produced,
and yet that there is no cause at all of that production, is to say
that something is effected when it is effected by nothing, that is,
at the same time when it b not effected at all. Whatever exists
has a cause of its existence, either in the necessity of its own
nature, and thus it must have been of itself eternal : or in the
will of some other being, and then that other being must, at least
in the order of nature and causality, have existed before it.**

Let us now proceed to analyze the above demonstration. Its
first sentence is Resolvable into the following propositions:

Ist. Something is.

2nd. If something is, cither something always wxu, or the
things that now are must have risen out of nothing.

The next portion of the demonstration consists of a proof
that the second of the above alternatives, viz., " The things that
now are have risen out of nothing," is impossible, and it may
formally be resolved as follows :

3rd. If the tilings that now are have risen out of nothing,
something has been effected, and at the same time that some-
thing has been effected by nothing.

4th. If that something has been effected by nothing, it has
not been effected at all.

The second portion of this argument appears to be a mere
assumption of the point to be proved, or an attempt to make that
point clearer by a different verbal statement.

The third and last portion of the demonstration contains a dis-
tinct proof of the truth of either the original proposition to be
proved, viz., " Something always was," or the point proved in
the second part of the demonstration, viz., the untenable nature

CHAP. XUI.] CLARKB AMD SPINOZA. 189

of the bypotheas, that ** the things that now are have risen out
of nothing." It is resolvable as follows : —

5th. If something is, either it exists by the necessity of its
own nature, or it esists by the will of another being.

6th. If it exists by the necessity of its own nature, something
always was.

7th. If it exists by the will of another being, then the pro-
position, that the things which exist have arisen out of nothing,
is fidse.

The last proposition is not expressed in the same form in the
text of Dr. Clarke ; but his expressed conclusion of the prior ex-
istence of another Being is clearly meant as equivalent to a de-
nial of the proposition that the things which now are have risen
out of nothing.

It i^pears, therefore, that the demonstration consists of two
£stinct trains of argiuncnt : one of those trains comprising what
I have designated as the ^ri^ and second parts of the demonstra-
tion ; the other comprising the^ri^ and third parts. Let us con-
sider the latter train.

The premises are : —

1st. Something is.

2nd. If something is, either something always was, or the
things that now are have risen out of nothing.

3rd. If something is, either it exists in the necessity of its
own nature, or it exists by the will of another being.

4th. If it exists in the necessity of its own nature, something
always was.

5th. If it exists by the will of another being, then the hy-
pothesis, that the things which now are have risen out of nothing,
is fiJse.

We must now express symbolically the above proporition.

Let X - Something is.

y - Something always was.

z - The things which now are have risen from

nothing,
p • It exists in the necessity of its own nature

(L e. the sometkmg spoken of above).
9 - It exists by the will of another Bmng.

190 CLABKB AND SPINOZA. [CRA^. XOl.

It must be understood, that by the expnssioiiy Let x •>
^^ Somethmg is," is meant no more than that m is the lepre-
sentatiye symbol of that proposition (XI. 7), the equatioiis
X = 1, a: » 0, respectively declaring its truth and its filsehood.

The equations of the premises are ;— •

Ist. x^l;

2nd. x = V {y(l-z) + r(l-y));

3rd. « = v(p(l-y) + y(l-p));

4th. p^vy;

5th. q ^ V {I - z);

and on~ eliminating the several indefinite symbols v, we have

l-ar = 0; (1)

a:{yz + (l-y)(l-r))«0; (2)

^{w + (i-p)0-y))-o; (3)

p(l-y)'0; (4)

qz = 0. (5)

6. First, I shall examine whether any conclusions are dedn-
cible from the above, concerning the truth or falsity of the
single propositions represented by the symbols y, r, /?, y, viz., of
the propositions, " Something always was ;" " The things whicli
now are have risen from nothing;" " The something which ib
exists by the necessity of its own nature ;" " The something
whicli is exists by the will of another being."

For this purpose we must separately eliminate all the symbols
but y, all these but z, &c. The resulting equation will deter-
mine whether any such separate relations exist.

To eliminate x from (1), (2), and (3), it is only necessary to
substitute in (2) and (3) the value of a; derived from (1). We
find as the results,

yz + (l-y)(l-z) = 0. (6)

pq-^{l-p){l-q)-0. (7)

To eliminate p we have from (4) and (7), by addition,

pH-y)+pq^(l-p)il-g) = 0; (8)

whence we find,

(l-y)(l-y) = 0. (9)

CHAP* Zltl.] CLABKB AMD SPIVOZA. 191

To dimiiMita q from (5) and (9), we have

yz+(l.y)(l-y).0;

whence we find

«(l-y)-0. (10)

There now remiun but the two equationB (6) and (10), which,

on addition, ^ve

yz + 1 - jf - 0.

Eliminating from this equation z^ we have

l-y-O, or, y-1. (11)

Kliminating from the same equation y, we hare

z - 0. (12)

The interpretation of (1 1) is

Scmethinff always was.
The interpretation of (12) is

The things which are have not risen from nothing.

Next resuming the system (6), (7)9 with the two equations
(4), (5), let us determine the two equations invohing p and q
respectively.

To eliminate y we have from (4) and (6),

P(i-y)-^y^ + (i-y)(i-^)-(0);

whence (p + 1 - 5) z = 0, or, pz - 0. (13)

To eliminate z from (5) and (13), we have

f 2 + pz - ;
whence we get,

0-0.

There remains then but the equation (7), from which climi-
nating y, we have • for the final equation, in p.

Hence there is no condusion derivable from the premises af-
firming the simple truth or fitlsehood of the proposition^ ** The
something which is exists in the necessity of its own nature** And a»«
00 eliminating p, there is the same result, • 0, fi)r the ultimate
equation in 7, it also fiiUows, that there is no conclusion deducible
from the premises as to the simple truth orfiUsehood qfthe propo-
sMom, « The something which is exists bf the wiU of another Iking r

192 CLARKE AND SPINOZA. [gHAP. Xni.

Of relations connecting more than one of the proportions re-
presented by the elementary symbols, it is needless to confiider
any but that which is denoted by the equation (7) connecting
p and q^ inasmuch as the propositions represented by the renuun-
ing symbols are absolutely true or false independently of any con-
nexion of the kind here spoken of. The interpretation of (7)9
placed under the form

p(l-y) + y(l-/?)=: 1, is,

The something which is, either exists in the necessity of its
own nature^ or by the will of another being.

I have exhibited the details of the above analysis with a,
perhaps, needless fulness and prolixity, because in the examples
which will follow, I propose rather to indicate the steps by
which results are obt^ncd, than to incur the danger of a weari-
some frequency of repetition. The conclusions which have re-
sulted from the above application of the method are easily verified
by ordinary reasoning.

The reader will have no difficulty in applying the method
to the other train of premises involved in Dr. Clarke's first Pro-
position, and deducing from them the two first of the conclusions
to which the above analysis has led.

Proposition II.

7. Some one unchangeable and independent Being has existed
from eteimitg.

The premises from which the above proposition is proved
are the following :

Ist. Something has always existed.

2nd. If something has always existed, either there has existed
some one unchangeable and independent being, or the whole of
existing things has been comprehended in a succession of change-
able and dependent beings.

3rd. If the universe has consisted of a succession of change-
able and dependent beings, cither that series has had a cause from
without, or it has had a cause from within.

4th. It has not had a cause from without (because it includes,
by hypothesis, all things that exist).

CBAF. ZIIL] CLABKS AMD SPIlfOZA. 193

ff til. It has not had a oaose from within (beoauae no part is
neessaary, and if no part is necessary, the whole cannot be ne-

Omitting, merely for brevity, the subsi^ary proofs contained
in the parentheses of the fourth and fifth prenuss, we may repre-
sent the premises as follows :

Let X « Something has always existed.

y « There has existed some one unchangeable and in-
dependent being.
z m There has existed a succession of changeable and

dependent beings.
p m That series has had a cause from without
q « That series has had a cause from within.

Then we have the following system of equations, vix. :

1st. X - 1 ;

2nd. «-r{y(l-«) + a;(l -y));

3rd. « - » (p (I - 9) + (1 -p) y) ;
4th. p^O;
6th. qmO:

which, on the separate elinunation of the indefinite symbols o,

gives

l-«.0; (1)

*|y^ + (l-»)(l-^))-0; (2)

^1/^ + 0-/^)0-7)1-0; (3)

p-O; (4)

y - 0. (fi)

The elimination from the above system off, /», 7, and y, con*

ducts to the equation

r-0.

And the elimination of jc, />, 7, and z, conducts in a similar man-
ner to the equation

y-l.

Of which equadons the respective interpretations are :

1st. 71l€ wkok ofexUtmg tkmgM has not been comprehended

01 a emoeeuion 0/ changeable and dependent betnge.

2nd* TTkere has existed iome one unchangeable and independent

being.

194 CLARKE AND SPINOZA. [CHAP. XIII.

The latter of these is the propQ3ition which Dr. Clarke proves.
As, by the above analysis, all the propositions represented by the
literal symbols x^ y, z, p, q, are determined as absolutely true or
false, it is needless to inquire into the existence of any further re-
lations connecting those propositions together.

Another proof is ^ven of Prop, ii., which for brevity I pass
over. It may be observed, that the " impossibility of infinite
succession," the proof of which forms a part of Clarke's argu-
ment, has commonly been assumed as a fundamental principle of
metaphysics, and extended to other questions than that of causa-
tion. Aristotle applies it to establish the necessity of first prin-
ciples of demonstration;* the necessity of an end (the good), in
human actions, &c.t There is, perhaps, no principle more fi»-
quently referred to in his writings. By the schoolmen it was
similarly applied to prove the impossibility of an infinite subor-
dination of genera and species, and hence the necessary existence
of universals. Apparently the impossibility of our forming a
definite and complete conception of an infinite series, i. e. of
comprehending it as a whole, has been confounded with a logical
inconsistency, or contradiction in the idea itself.

8. The analysis of the follo\ving argimient depends upon the
theory of Primary Propositions.

Proposition III.
That unchangeable and independent Being miist lye self-existenU

The premises arc : —

1 . Every being must cither have come into existence out of
nothing, or it must have been produced by some, external cause,
or it must be self-existent.

2. No being has come into existence out of nothing.

3. The unchangeable and independent Being has not been
produced by an external cause.

For the symbolical expression of the above, let us assume.

• Metaphysics, III. 4 ; Anal. Post. I. 19, et seg*
t Nic. Ethics, Book I. Cap. ii.

CHAP. XIII.] CLARKB AND flPIlfOZA. 195

X m Beings which have arisen out of nothing.

y m Beings which have been produced by an external

cause.
z - Beings which are self^xistent.
w m The unchangeable and independent Bdng.

Then we have

'(1 - y) (1 - ^) + y (1 - ^) (1 - *) + ^(1 - ^) (I - y) - U (0

X . 0, (2)

ir-r(l-y), (3)

from the last of which eliminating v,

•cy - 0. (4)

Whenever, as above, the value of a symbol is given as or 1, it
u best eliminated by simple substitution. Thus the eliminadon
of X gives

y(l-z) + z(l.y)-l; (5)

or, y^ + (i -y)(l-^)-0. (6)

Now adding (4) and (6), and eliminating y, we get

ir(l -z)- 0,

the interpretation of which is, — The wuchangeabU and indepm-
d€ni being U necessarily self^xisHng,

Of (5), in its actual form, the interpretation is, — Every being
has eiiher been produced by an external causey or it is self^iisteni.

9. In Dr. Samuel Clarke*s observations on the above propo-
sition occurs a remarkable argument, designed to prove that the
material world is not the self-existent being above spoken of.
The passage to which I refer is the following :

** If matter be supposed to exist necessarily, then in that ne-
cessary existence there is either included the power of gravitation,
or not. If not, then in a world merely material, and in which no
intelligent being presides, there never could have been any mo-
tioo ; because motion, as has been already shown, and is now
granted in the question, is not necessary of itself. But if the

o2

196 CLARKE AND SPINOZA. [cHAP. XIII.

power of gravitation be included in the pretended necesaary ex-
istence of matter: then, it following necessarily that there must
be a vacuum (as the incomparable Sir Isaac Newton has abun-
dantly demonstrated that there must, if gravitation be an uni-
versal quality or affection of matter), it follows likewise, that
matter is not a necessary being. For if a vacuum actually be,
then it is plainly more than possible for matter not to be." —
(pp. 25, 26).

It will, upon attentive examination, be found that the actual
premises involved in the above demonstration are the following :

Ist. If matter is a necessary being, either the property of gra-
vitation is necessarily present, or it is necessarily absent.

2nd. If gravitation is necessarily absent, and the world is not
subject to any presiding Intelligence, motion does not exist.

3rd. Kthe property of gravitation is necessarily present, the
existence of a vacuum is necessary.

4th. If the existence of a vacuum is necessary, matter is not a
necessary being.

5th. If matter is a necessary being, 'the world is not subject
to a presiding Intelligence.

6th. Motion exists.

Of the above premises the first four are expressed in the de-
monstration ; the fifth is implied in the connexion of its first and
second sentences ; and the sixth expresses a fact, which the au-
thor does not appear to have thought it necessary to state, but
which is obviously a part of the ground of his reasoning. Let us
represent the elementary propositions in the following manner :

Let X = Matter is a necessary being.

y = Gravitation is necessarily present.

t = Gravitation is necessarily absent.

z = The world is merely material, and not subject to

any presiding Intelligence.
w = Motion exists,
r = A vacuum is necessary.

Then the system of premises will be represented by the following
equations, in which q is employed as the symbol of time indefi-
nite;

CHAP. Xtll.] CLARKB AND SPINOZA. 197

tzm y(l - w).

y - qv.

V - ^(1 - x).
X « jr.

From which, if we eliminate the symbob 7, we have the foUow-
iDg system, viz. :

^|y<+(i-y)0-0)-o. (1)

ta£7 « 0. (2)

y(\-v)^0. (3)

vx « 0. (4)

x(l-z)-0. (5)

1 - IT = 0. (6)

Now if from these equations we eliminate tr, 0, z, y, and i^ we

obtain the equation

x« 0,

which expresses the proposition, Matter u no/ a necessary being.
This is Dr. Ciarke*s conclusion. If we endeavour to eliminate
any other set of five symbols (except the set o, <?, y, ^ and x,
which would give if = 1 ), we obtain a result of the form 0*0.
It hence appears that there are no otl^er conclusions expressive of
the abttilute trutli or falsehood 0/ any ofAe elementary propositions
designated by single symlH>ls,

Of conclusions expressed by equations involving two symbols,
there exists but the following, viz. : — If the world is merely mate^
rial, and ftot subject to a presiding Intelligence^ gravitation is not
necessarily absent. This conclusion is expressed by the equation

tz - 0, whence z - y (1 - f).

If in the above analysis we suppress the concluding premiss, ex-
prcHsing the fact of the existence of motion, and leave the hypo-
thetical principles which are embodied in the remaining premises
untiiucbed, some remarkable conclusions follow. To these I
ifhall direct attention in the following chapter.

1 0. Of the remainder of Dr. Clarke's argument I shall briefly
state the substance and connexion, dwelling only on certain por-

198 CLARKB AND SPINOZA. [cHAP. XIH.

tions of it which are of a more complex character than the others,
and afford better illustrations of the method of this work.

In Prop. iv. it is shown that the substance or essence of the
self-existent being is incomprehensible. The tenor of the reasoiir
ing employed is, that we are ignorant of the essential nature of
all other things, — much more, then, of the essence of the self-
existent being.

In Prop. v. it is contended that *^ though the substance or
essence of the self-existent being is itself absolutely incompre-
hensible to us, yet many of the essential attributes of his nature
are strictly demonstrable, as well as his existence."

In Prop. VI. it is argued that "the self-existent being must
of necessity be infinite and omnipresent ;" and it is contended
that his infinity must be " an infinity of fiilness as well as of
immensity." The ground upon which the demonstration pro-
ceeds is, that an absolute necessity of existence must be inde-
pendent of time, place, and circumstance, fi*ee from limitation,
and therefore excludmg aQ unperfection. And hence it is in-
ferred that the self-existent being must be « a most sunple, mi-
changeable, incorruptible being, without parts, figure, motion,
or any other such properties as we find in matter."

The premises actually employed may be exhibited as follows :

1 . If a finite being is self-existent, it is a contradiction to
suppose it not to exist.

2. A finite being may, without contradiction, be absent fix)m
one place.

3. That which may without contradiction be absent from one
place may without contradiction be absent from all places.

4. That which may without contradiction be absent fi*om all
places may without contradiction be supposed not to exist.

Let us assume
X = Finite beings.
y = Things self-existent.

z = Thiugs which it is a contradiction to suppose not to exist.
w - Things which may be absent ^vithout contradiction firom

one place.
t = Things which without contradiction may be absent firom

every place.

CHAP. XIII.] CLARKB AND SPINOZA. 199

We have on expresamg the above, and eliminating the indefinite

eymbok,

ary(l-z)-0. (1)

ar(l -«?) -0. (2)

w(l-0 -0. (3)

te - 0. (4)

Eliminating in succes^n t^ to, and z, we get

•• y - 5 (1 - *);

the interpretation of which is, — Whatever is selfexisieni is rVi-

In Prop. VII. it is argued that the self-existent being must of
necessity be One. The order of the proof is, that the self-exis-
tent being is *' necessarily existent," that *^ necessity absolute in
itiMdf b simple and uniform, and without any possible dificrence
or variety,** that all *^ variety or dificrence of existence*' implies
dependence ; and hence that *^ whatever exists necessarily is the
one simple essence of the self-existent being."

The conclusion is also made to fiow fix)m the following pre-
miji«es: —

1 . If there are two or more necessary and independent beings,
cither of them may be supposed to exist alone.

2. If either may be supposed to exist alone, it is not a contra-
diction to suppose the other not to exist.

.3. If it is not a contradiction to suppose this, there are not
two necessary and independent beings.

Let u^ represent the elementary propositions as follows : —

T ^ there exist two necessary independent beings.

t/ <= cither may be supposed to exist alone.

r « it is not a contradiction to supiKMC the other not to exist.

Wc have then, on proceeding as before,

x(l-y)-0. (I)

•/ 0-:)' 0. (2)

:x = 0. (3)

200 CLARKB AND SPINOZA. [cHAP. XUI.

Eliminating y and z, we have

Whence, There do not exist two necessary and independent beings,

1 1 . To the premises upon which the two previous propositions
rest, it is well known that Bishop Butler, who at the time of the
publication of the ^* Demonstration/' was a student in a non^
conformist academy, made objection in some celebrated letters,
which, together with Dr. Clarke's replies to them, are usoallj
appended to editions of the work. The real question at issue is
the validity \)f the principle, that " whatsoever is absolutdy ne-
cessary at all is absolutely necessary in every part of space, and
in every point of duration,'' — a principle assumed in Dr. Clarke's
reasoning, and explicitly stated in his reply to Butler's first let-
ter. In his second communication Butler says : <* I do not con-
ceive that the idea of ubiquity is contained in the idea of sel^
existence, or directly follows from ity any otherwise than as what-
ever exists must exist somewhere" That is to say, necessary
existence implies existence in some part of space, but not in
every part. It does not appear that Dr. Clarke was ever able to
dispose effectually of this objection. The whole of the corres-
pondence is extremely curious and interesting. The objections
of Butler are precisely those which would occur to an acute mind
impressed with the conviction, that upon the sifting of first prin-
ciples, rather than upon any mechanical dexterity of reasoning,
the successful investigation of truth mainly depends. And the
replies of Dr. Clarke, although they cannot be admitted as satis-
factory, evince, in a remarkable degree, that peculiar intellectual
power which is manifest in the work fi*om which the discussion
arose.

12. In Prop. VIII. it is argued that the self-existent and ori-
ginal cause of all things must be an Intelligent Being.

The main argument adduced in support of this proposition is,
that as the cause is more excellent than the effect, the self-
existent being, as the cause and original of all things, must con-
tain in itself the perfections of all things ; and that Intelligence
is one of the perfections manifested in a part of the creation. It
is further argued that this perfection is not a modification of

CHAP. XIII.] CLARKB AMD 8PIK0ZA. 201

figure, divinbility, or any of the known properties of nmtter ;
for theee are not perfections, but KmUatumt. To this is added
the d posteriori argument from the manifestation of design in the
frame of the universe.

There is appended, however, a distinct argument for the
existence of an intelligent self-existent bdng, founded upon the
phsmomenal existence of motion in the universe. I shall briefly
exhibit this proof, and shall ^pply to it the method of the present
treatise.

The argument, omitting unimportant explanations, is as fol-
lows: —

** 'Tis evident there is some such a thing as motion in the
world ; which either began at some time or other, or was eternal.
If it began in time, then the question is granted that the first
cause is an intelligent being. . • . On the contrary, if motion was
eternal, either it was eternally caused by some eternal intelligent
being, or it must of itself be necessary and self-existent, or else,
without any necessity in its own nature, and without any external
necessary cause, it must have existed from eternity by an endless
successive communication. I£ motion was eternally caused by
some eternal intelligent bdng, this also is granting the question
as to the present dispute. I£ it was of itself necessary and self-
existent, then it follows that it must be a contradiction in terms
to suppose any matter to be at rest. And yet, at the same time,
because the determination of this self-existent motion must be
every way at once, the effect of it would be nothmg else but a
perpetual rest. . . . But if it be said that motion, without any ne-
cessity in its own nature, and without any external necessary
cause, has existed from eternity merely by an endless successive
oommunicati(m, as Spinoza inconsistenUy enough seems to assert,
this I have before shown (in the proof of the second general
pcopontion of this discourse) to be a plain contradiction. It re-
mains, therefore, that motion must of necessity be originally
cassed by sometlung that is intelligent."

The premises of the above argument may be thus dispoaed :

I. If motion began in time, the first cause is an intelligent
bcsBg.

202 CLARKB AND SPINOZA. [CUAP. XUI.

2. If motion has existed fix)m eternity, either it has been
eternally caused by some eternal intelligent being, or it is self-
existent, or it must have existed by endless successive communi-
cation.

3. If motion has been eternally caused by an eternal intelli-
gent being, the first cause is an intelligent being.

4. Kit is self-existent, matter is at rest and not at rest.

5. That motion has existed by endless successive communi-
cation, and that at the same time it is not self-existent, and has
not been eternally caused by some eternal intelligent being, is
false.

To express these propositions, let us assume —

X = Motion began in time (and therefore)
I - x = Motion has existed firom eternity.
y = The first cause is an intelligent being.
p s Motion has been eternally caused by some eternal intelli-
gent being.
q - Motion is self-existent.

r = Motion has existed by endless successive communication.
s = Matter is at rest.

The equations of the premises then are —

X = vy.
\-x = v (/>(! -?)(1 -r) + y (1 -p) (1 -r) + 7:(1 -p)(l - j)).
p = vi/.

q ^ vs (I - s^ = 0.
r(l-y)(l-/>) = 0.

Since, by the fourth equation, 5' = 0, we obtain, on substituting
for q its value in the remaining equations, the system

. x = vyy 1 - a; = t? {/>(1 -r) + r(l -/>)),
/? = uy, r(l-/?) = 0,

fi*om which eliminating the indefinite symbols r, we have the
final reduced system,

a;(l-y) = 0, (1)

(l-x){pr + {\-p)(\-r)}=0, , (2)

;,(l-y) = 0. (3)

r(\-p) = 0. (4)

CBAP. XIII.] CLARKB AND 8P1NOZA. 203

We ihall fint seek the value of y, the symbol involyed in Dr.
Clarke's conclusion. First, eliminating x firom (1) and (2), we
have

0-y){p-+0-?)0-''))-o- (6)

Next, to eliminate r fix)m (4) and (5), we have

ril-p) + (1 -y) |pr + (l -/»)(! -r)| - 0,

.-. |l-p + (l-y)p)x(l-y)(l-,)-0;
wneooe

O-yXi-p)-©. (6)

Lastly, eliminating p fix)m (3) and (6), we have

1-y-o,

.-. If - 1,

which expresses the required conclusion, Tkejlrtt cause is an
bUeUigeni being.

Let us now examine what other conclusions are deducible
from the premises.

If we substitute the value just found for y in the equations
(1), (2), (3), (4), they are reduced to the following pair of equa-
tions, viz.,

(l-x)|pr + (l-p)(l-r))-0, r(l-,»)-0. (7)

Eliminating from these equations :r, we have

r (1 -p) - 0, whence r « cp,

which expresses the concluuon, J[fmoiian has existed by endless
twressive rommunicatianj it has been eternally caused by an eter-
nal inielliyent being.

Again eliminating, from the given pair, r, we have

(I-x)(l-p)-0.
or, 1 - X « tp,

which expresses the conclusion, J(f motion has existed /ram eier^
miy^ it has been eternally caused by some eternal inielligeni being.

LasUy, from the same original pair eliminating /i, wc get

(l-x)r-O,
which, solved in the form

l-jr-r(l-r).

2 04 CLARKB AND SFIKOZA. [cHAP. XUI.

gives the conclusion, 1^ motion has existed from eternity^ it has mot
existed by an endless successive communication.

Solved under the form

r = vxy

the above equation leads to the equivalent conclusion, J[fmotum
exists by an endless successive communication^ it began m time.

13. Now it will appear to the reader that the first and last of
the above four conclusions are inconsistent with each other. The
two consequences drawn fi*om the hypothesis that motion exists
by an endless successive communication, viz., 1st, that it has
been eternally caused by an eternal intelligent being ; 2]:idly, that
it began in time, — are plainly at variance. Nevertheless, they aie
both rigorous deductions from the original premises. The oppo-
sition between them is not of a logical^ but of what is technically
termed a material^ character. This opposition might, howev^,
have been formally stated in the premises. We might hare
added to them a formal proposition, asserting that <^ whatever is
eternally caused by an eternal intelligent being, does not begin in
time/' Had this been done, no such opposition as now appears
in our conclusions could have presented itself. Formal logic
can only take account of relations which are formally expressed
(VI. 16) ; and it may thus, in particular instances, become ne-
cessary to express, in a formal manner, some connexion among
the premises which, without actual statement, is involved in the
very meaning of the language employed.

To illustrate what has been said, let us add to the equations

(2) and (4) the equation

px = 0,

which expresses the condition above adverted to. We have

(1 -x) [pr-^ (1-J») (1-r)} + r{l-p)+px^ 0. (8)

Eliminating p from this, we find simply

r = 0,

which expresses the proposition. Motion does not exist by an end-
less successive communication. If now we substitute for r its value
in (8), we have

(1 - .t) (I - /^) + joo; =» 0, or, 1 - a; = jo;

CHAP. XIII.] CLABKB AND SPINOZA. 205

whence we have the interpretation, If motion has existed from
eternity^ it has been eternally caused by an eternal inielliffent being ;
together with the converse of that proposition.

In Prop. IX. it is argued, that ^^ the self-existent and ori^nal
cause of all things is not a necessary agent, but a being endued
with liberty and choice." The proof is based mainly upon his
possession of intelligence, and upon the existence of final causes,
implying design and choice. To the objection that the supreme
cause operates by necessity for the production of what is best, it
is replied, that this is a necessity of fitness and wisdom, and not
of nature.

14. In Prop. X. it is argued, that ** the self-existent being,
the supreme cause of all things, must of necessity have infinite
power." The ground of the demonstration is, that as *^ all the
powers of all things are derived firom him, nothing can make any
difficulty or resistance to the execution of his will." It is de-
fined that the infinite power of the self-existent being does not
extend to the <* making of a thing which implies a contradiction,"
or the doing of that <^ which would imply imperfection (whether
natural or moral) in the being to whom such power is ascribed,"
but that it does extend to the creation of matter, and of an im-
material, co^tative substance, endued with a power of be^nning
motion, and with a liberty of will or choice. Upon this doctrine
of liberty it is contended that we are able to ^ve a satisfiu^ry
answer to <^that ancient and great question, voOev to icaicov,
what is the cause and original of evil ?" The argument on this
head I shall briefly exhibit.

" All that we call evil is either an evil of imperfection, as the
want of certain fiu^ulties or excellencies which other creature
have ; or natural evil, as pain, death, and the like ; or moral evil,
as all kinds of vice. The first of these is not properly an evil ;
for every power, faculty, or perfection, which any creature enjoys,
being the firee gift of God, . . it is plain the want of any certain
feculty or perfection in any kind of creatures, which never be-
longed to their nature^ is no more an evil to them, than their
never having been created or brought into being at all could pro-
perly have been called an evil. The second kind of evil, which
we call natural evil, is either a necessary consequence of the

206 CLARKB AND SPINOZA. [CHAP. XIII.

former, as death to a creature on whose nature immortality was
never conferred ; and then it b no more properly an evil than the
former. Or else it is counterpoised on the whole with as great
or greater good, as the afflictions and sufferings of good men,
and then also it b not properly an evil ; or ehpj lastly, it is a
pimishment, and then it is a necessary consequence of the third
and last kind of evil, viz., moral evil. And this arises wholly
from the abuse of liberty which God gave to His creatures for
other purposes, and which it was reasonable and fit to give them
for the perfection and order of the whole creation. Only they,
contrary to God's intention and command, have abused what was
necessary to the perfection of the whole» to the corruption and
depravation of themselves. And thus all sorts of evils have en-
tered into the world without any diminution to the infinite good-
ness of the Creator and Governor thereof." — ^p. 11 2.

The mdn premises of the above argiunent may be thus
stated:

1st. All reputed evil is either evil of imperfection, or natural
evil, or moral evU.

2nd. Evil of imperfection is not absolute evil.

3rd. Natural evil is either a consequence of evil of imperfec-
tion, or it is compensated with greater good, or it is a conse-
quence of moral evil.

4th. That which is either a consequence of evil of imperfec-
tion, or is compensated with greater good, is not absolute evil.

5th. All absolute evils are included in reputed evils.

To express these premises let us assume —

w = reputed evil.

X = evil of imperfection.

y = natural evil.

z = moral evil.

p = consequence of evil of imperfection.

q = compensated ^vith greater good.

r = consequence of moral evil.

t = absolute evil.

Then, regarding the premises as Primary Propositions, of which

CHAP. XIII.] CLABKX AND SPINOZA. S07

aU the predicates are particular, and the conjonctioiis eiiker^ cr^
as absolutely disjunctive, we have the following equations :

»-p(x(l-y)(l-2)+y(l-a:)(l-«) + z(l-x)(l-y))

x-p(I -0-
f'v\p(l-g)(l-r) + q(l-p){l-r) + ril-p){l-q)]

p{i-q) + q(l-p)-vil-t).

i « VWm

From which, if we separately eliminate the symbol v, we have
•P||.x(l-|f)(l-z)-y(l-ar)(l-z)-z(l.x)(l.|f))-0,(l)

«< - 0, (2)

5{l-;>(l-9)(l-r)-y(i-p)(l-r)-r(l-p)(l-y)).0,(3)

|/i(l-y) + y(l.p))/.0, (4)

/(l-t«?)-0. (5)

Let it be required, first, to find what conclusion the premises
warrant us in forming respecting absolute evils, as concerns their
dependence upon moral evils, and the consequences of moral
evils.

For this purpose we must determine / in terms of z and r.
The symbols tr, x^ y^p^ q must therefore be eliminated. The
process is easy, as any set of the equations is reducible to a single
equation by addition.

FJiminating w from (1) and (6), we have

Ml-x(l-y)(l-z)-y(l-x)(l-z).z(l.x)(l.y)).0.(6)
The cUnunation of p from (3) and (4) ^ves

y7r + yy< + y<(l-r)(l-7)-0. (7)

The elimination off from this gires

y/(l - r) - 0. (8)

The cUmination of x between (2) and (6) giTCs

/jyc + (l-y)(I-z))=0. (9)

The elimination of y from (8) and (9) gives

/(I - z) (I - r) - 0.
ii« ia the only relation existing between the elements /, r, and r.

208 CLARKE AND SPINOZA. [CHAP. ZIII.

We hence get

t "

(l-z)(l-r)
= jzr + ?z(l-r) + ?(l-z)r+0(l-*)(l-r)

the interpretation of which is, Absolute evil is either moral ern^ m
it iSf if not moral evil^ a consequence of moral evil.

Any of the results obtained in the process of the above solu-
tion famish us with interpretations. Thus firom (8) we miglit
deduce

whence, Absolute evils are either natural evils^ which are the canr
sequences of moral evils, or they are not natural evils at all.

A variety of other conclusions may be deduced firom the ^ven
equations in reply to questions which may be arbitrarily pro-
posed. Of such I shall give a few examples, without exhibiting
the intermediate processes of solution.

Quest. 1. — Can any relation be deduced from the premises
connecting the following elements, viz. : absolute evils, conse-
quences of evils of imperfection, evils compensated with greater
good?

Ans. — No relation exists. If we eliminate all the symbols but
Zj p, 5', the result is = 0.

Quest. 2. — Is any relation implied between absolute evils,
evils of imperfection, and consequences of evils of imperfection.

Ans. — The final relation between x, /, and p is

xt ■{■ pt :=^ 0;
whence

^ = -^ = J(l-p)(l-x).

Therefore, Absolute evils are neither evils of imperfection, nor amr
sequences of evils of imperfection.

CHAP. Xlll.] CLARKE AND SPINOZA. 209

({ucitt. 3. — Required the relation of natural evils to evils of
imiKrrfoction and evils compensated with greater good.
We find

Therefore, Natural evils are either ecnsetjuences of evils o/imper-
fedion which are not cofnpeMated with greater good^ or they are not
eoneeipiencee of evils of imperfection at all.

Quest. 4. — In what relation do those natural evils which are
not moral evils stand to absolute evils and the consequences of
moral evils ?

If y ( 1 - r) « jr, we find, afler elimination,

/*(!- r) = 0;
0,,,

••"=/(r--7)-'o''-^o<*-'>-

Therefore, Natural evils, tchich are not moral evils, are either ab/to-
lute evils, trhich are the couse^piences of moral evilsf or they are not
absolute evils at all.

The following concluMons have been deduced in a similar
manner. Tlie subject of each conclusion will show of what par-
ticular things a de:u;ription was retiuired, and the predicate will
show what elements it was designed to involve : —

Abmdut^! evils, which are not consequences of moral evils ^ are
moral and not natural evils,

A bsolnte evils which are not moral evils are natural erilSf which
are the eonnetiuences of moral evils.

Natural evils which are not comequawes of nwral evils are not
absfHute evils.

I^Aiftly, let us f«eek a deiK!ription of evils which are not abso-
lute, expressed in tenns of natural and moral evils.
We obtain as the final equation,

Tlie direct interpretation of this equation is a neceHttarv tnitli,
but the reverse inteqiretation is remurkuble. Knls tr/itc/i are l*o(h

p

210 CLARKB AND SFIMOZA. [CHAP. XUI.

natural and moral, and evils which are neither natural nor moral,
are not absolute evUs.

This conclusion, though it may not express a truth, is cer-
tainly involved in the given premises, ss formally stated.

15. Let us take from the same argument a somewhat fuller
system of premises, and let us in those premises suppose that the
particles, either^ or, are not absolutely disjunctive, so that in the
meaning of the expression, ^^ either evil of imperfection, or na-
tural evil, or moral evil," we include whatever possesses one or
more of these qualities.

Let the premises be —

1. All evil (w) is either evil of imperfection (x), or natural
evil (y), or moral evil (r).

2. Evil of imperfection (x) is not absolute evil (/).

3. Natural evil (y) is either a consequence of evil of imper-
fection (p), or it is compensated with greater good (y), or it is a
consequence of moral evil (r).

4. Whatever is a consequence of evil of imperfection (p) is
not absolute evil (t).

5. AVhatever is compensated with greater good (q) is not
absolute evil (t).

6. Moral evil (z) is a consequence of the abuse of liberty («).

7. That which is a consequence of moral evil (r) is a conse-
quence of the abuse of liberty (m).

8. Absolute evils are included in reputed evils.

The premises expressed in the usual way give, after the elimi-
nation of the indefinite symbols u, the following equations :

tt{l-x)(l-y){l-z) = 0, (1)

xt = 0, (2)

y(l-p)(l-9)(l-r) = 0, (3)

pt = 0, (4)

qt = 0, (5)

2{l-u) = 0, (6)

r(l-ti) = 0, (7)

t{l-w)=0. (8)

Each of these equations satisfies the condition V(l - F) ^ 0.

CHAP. XIII.] CLARKE AND SPINOZA. 211

The following results are easily deduced*-i*

Natural evil is either absolute etrily wkidi is a consequence of nuh
ral eril^ or it is not absolute evil at all.

All evils are either absolute evUs, which are consequences of the
abuse ofUbertyy or they are not aftsolule evils.

Natural evils are either evils of imperfection^ ukidi are not ab*
solute evils J or they are not evils of impcffection at alL

Absolute evils are either natural evils^ trAicA are consequences of
the abuse ofliberty^ or they are not natural evils^ and at the same
time not evils of imperfection.

Consequences of the abuse of liberty include all natural evils
which are absolute evils, and are not evils of imperfection, with an
indefinite remainder of natural evils which are not absolute^ and of
evils which are not natural.

16. These examples will suffice for illustration. The reader
can easily supply others if they are needed. We proceed now to
examine the most essential portions of tho demonstration of
Spinosa.

DEFINITIONS.

1 . By a cause of itself (causa sui)^ I understand that of which
the e^^sencc involves existence, or that c»f which the nature can-
not be conceived except as existing.

2. That thing is said to l)e finite or bounded in it^ own kind
(in sun genere Jinita) which may be lK)unded by another thing of
the same kind ; c. g. Body is said to be finite, because we can
always conceive of another body greater than a given one. So
thought U bounded by other thought. But l>ody is not t^ounded
by thought, nor thought by l>ody.

.1. By 8ul>stance, I undemtand that which is in itself (fit «r),
and Lx conceived by it<«elf {per se conripitur\ i. e., tliat whose
conception doe^ not require to be formed from the conception of
another thing.

4. By attribute, I understand that which the btellcct per-
ceives in substance, as constituting its very essence.

5. By m<Mle, I understand the afloctions of substance, or that
which is in another thing, by which thing also it is conceived.

6. By God, I understand the Being absolutely infinite, that

p2

212 CLARKE AND SPINOZA. [cHAP. XIII.

is the substance consisting of infinite attributes, each of which
expresses an eternal and infinite essence.

Eocplanation. — I say absolutely infinite, not infinite in its
own kind. For to whatever is only infinite in its own kind we
may deny the possession of (some) infinite attributes. But when
a thing is absolutely infinite, whatsoever expresses essence and
involves no negation belongs to its essence.

7. That thing is tennedyrcc, which exists by the sole neces-
sity of its own nature, and is determined to action by itself alone ;
necessary y or rather constrained, which is determined by another
thing to existence and action, in a certain and determinate man-
ner.

8. By eternity, I understand existence itself, in so fiur as it is
conceived necessarily to follow firom the sole definition of the
eternal thing.

Explanation. — For such existence, as an eternal truth, is con-
ceived as the essence of the thing, and therefore cannot be ex-
plained by mere duration or time, though the latter should be
conceived as without beginning and without end.

AXIOMS.

1 . All things which exist are either in themselves {in se) or
in another thing.

2. That which cannot be conceived by another thing ought
to be conceived by itself.

3. From a given determinate cause the effect necessarily fol-
lows, and, contrariwise, if no determinate cause be granted, it is
impossible that an effect should follow.

4. The knowledge of the effect depends upon, and involves,
the knowledge of the cause.

5. Things which have nothing in common cannot be under-
stood by means of each other ; or the conception of the one does
not involve the conception of the other.

6. A true idea ought to agree with its own object. {Idea
vera debet cum sua ideato convenire.)

7. Whatever can be conceived as non-existing does not in-
volve existence in its essence.

CHAP. XIII.] CLARKB AND SPINOZA. 313

Uther definitioiis are implied, and other axioms are virtually
aMumed, in some of the demonstrations. Thus, in Prop, i.,
** Substance is prior in nature to its afiections," the proof of
which consists in a mere reference to Dels. 3 and 5, there seems
to be an assumption of the following axiom, viz., ** That by which
a thing is conceived is prior in nature to the thing conceived."
Again, in the demonstration of Prop. v. the converse of this
axiom is assumed to be true. Many other examples of the same
kind occur. It is impossible, therefore, by the mere processes of
Logic, to deduce the whole of the conclusions of the first book of
the Ethics from the axioms and definitions which are prefixed to
it. and which are given above. In the brief analysis which will
follow, I shall endeavour to present in their proper order what
appear to me to be the real premises, whether formally stated or
implietl, and shall show in what manner they involve the conclu-
sions to which Spinoza was led.

17. I conceive, then, that in the course of his demonstration,
Spinoza effects several jiarallel divisions of the universe of {km-
frible cxi^ttcnce, as,

li(t. Into things which arc in themselves, x, and things which
are in M>me other thing, j; whence, as these classes of thing toge-
ther make up the universe, we have

x f 2^ « 1 ; (Ax. I.)
or, X - 1 - a'.

2nd. Into things which are conceived by themselves, y, and

things which are conceived through some other tilings y;

whence

y = I - y. (Ax. II.)

3nl. Into tfubstance, ;, and modes, /; whence

z = I - y. (Def. III. V.)
4th. Into things free,/, and things ncoossarv,/; whence

/-!-/. (Def. VII.)

3th. Into things which are causes and sdfi^^toit, r, and
tilings cauMHl by some other thing, e; whence

e « 1 ~ r. (Def. I. Ax. vii.)

214 CLARKB AND SPINOZA. [CRAP. XIII.

And his reasoning proceeds upon the expressed or asmnned
principle, that these divisions are not only parallel, but equiva-
lent. Thus in Def. iii., Substance is made equivalent with that
which is conceived by itself; whence

Again, Ax. iv., as it is actually applied by Spinoza, estab-
lishes the identity of cause with that by which a thing is con-
ceived; whence

Again, in Def. vii., things free are identified with things
self-existent; whence

Lastly, in Def. v., mode is made identical with that which is
in another thing ; whence 2^ » o^, and therefore,

z = a?.

All these results may be collected together into the foUowiog
series of equations, viz. :

aj = y = z=/=e= l-a:'= l-y= 1 -/ = 1 - z = 1 -(?'.

And any two members of this series connected together by the

sign of equality express a conclusion, whether drawn by Spinoza

or not, which is a legitimate consequence of his system. Thus

the equation

2: = 1 - e',

expresses the sixth proposition of his system, viz.. One substance
cannot be produced by another. Similarly the equation

z = tf,

expresses his seventh proposition, viz., " It pertains to the nature
of substance to exist." This train of deduction it is unnecessary
to pursue. Spinoza applies it chiefly to the deduction accordlDg
to his views of the properties of the Divine Natiu'e, having first
endeavoured to prove that the only substance is God. In the
steps of this process, there appear to me to exist some fallacies,
dependent chiefly upon the ambiguous use of words, to which it
wjU he necessary here to direct attention.

CHAP. XUl.] CLARKB AND 8PIMOZA. 315

18. In Prop* V. it is endeayoured to show, that ^ There caimot
exist two or more substances of the same nature or attribute.'*
The proof is virtually as follows : If there are more substances
than one, they are distinguished either by attributes or modes ;
if by attributes, then there is only one substance of the same at-
tribute ; if by modes, then, laying aside these as non-essential,
there remains no real ground of distinction. Hence there exists
but one substance of the same attribute. The assumptions here
involved are inconsbtent with those which are found in other
parts of the treatise. Thus substance, Def. iv., is apprehended
by the intellect through the means of attribute. By Def. vi. it
may have many attributes. One substance may, therefore, con-
teivabfy be distingubhed from another by a difference in some of
its attributes, while others remiun the same.

In Prop. VIII. it is attempted to show that, All substance
is necessarily infinite. The proof is as follows. There ex-
ists but one substance, of one attribute. Prop. v. ; and it per-
tains to its nature to exist. Prop. vii. It will, therefore, be of its
nature to exist cither as finite or infinite. But not as finite, for,
by Def. ii. it would require to be lK)unded by another substance
of the same nature, which also ought to exbt necessarily^ Prop.
VII. Therefore, there would be two substances of the same
attribute, which is absurd. Prop. v. Substance, therefore, is
infinite.

In this demonstration the word *' finite'* is confounded with
the cxpretwion, ^* Finite in its own kind,** Def. ii. It is thus as-
fiuuiod that nothing can be finite, unless it is bounded by another
thin^ of the same kind. This is not consistent with the ordi-
nary meaning of the term. Spinoxa*8 use of the term finite
tends to make space the only form of sulMtancc, and all existing
things but affections of space, and this, I think, is really one of
the ultuunte fimndations of his system.

'ilie first Kholium applied to the above Proposition is re-
markable. I give it in the original words * ** Quum finitum esse
revora *«it ex {lorte negatio, et infinitum absoluta affirmatio exi»-
tentia) alicujus natune, sequitur ergo ex sola Prop. vii. omnem
suijstantiam debere esse infinitam." Now this is in reality an
aMcrtion of the principle affirmed by Clariiiey and oontrovcrted by

;

216 CLARKE AND SPINOZA. [CHAP. XIII.

Butler (XIII. 11), that necessary existence implies existence
in every part of space. Probably this principle will be found to
lie at the basis of every attempt to demonstrate, d priori^ the
existence of an Infinite Being.

From the general properties of substance above stated, and
the definition of God as the substance consisting of infinite at-
tributes, the peculiar doctrines of Spinoza relating to the Divine
Nature necessarily follow. As substance is self-existent, firee^
causal in its very nature, the thing in which other things are,
and by which they are conceived ; the same properties are also
asserted of the Deity. He is self-existent, Prop. xi. ; indivi-
sible. Prop. XIII. ; the only substance. Prop. xiv. ; the Being in
which all things are, and by which all things are conceived,
Prop. XV.; free, Prop, xvii.; the immanent cause of all things,
Prop, xviii. The proof that God is the only substance is drawn
from Def. vi., which is interpreted into a declaration that '* God
is the Being absolutely infinite, of whom no attribute which ex-
presses the essence of substance can be denied." Every con-
ceivable attribute being thus assigned by definition to Him, and
it being dctennined in Prop. v. that there cannot exist two sub-
stances of the same attribute, it follows that God is the only
substance.

Though the '* Ethics" of Spinoza, like a large portion of his
other writings, is presented in the geometrical ibrm, it does not
afford a good praxis for the symbolical method of this work.
Of course every train of reasoning admits, when its ultimate
premises are truly determined, of being treated by that method ;
but in the present instance, such treatment scarcely differs, ex-
cept in the use of letters for words, from the processes employed
in the original demonstrations. Reasoning which consists so
largely of a play upon terms defined as equivalent, is not often
met with ; and it is rather on account of the interest attaching to
the subject, than of the merits of the demonstrations, highly as
by some they are esteemed, that I have devoted a few pages
here to their exposition.

19. It is not possible, I think, to rise from the perusal of the
argmnents of Clarke and Spinoza without a deep conviction of the
fa iiWty of all endeavours to establish , entirely a priori^ the existence

CHAP. XIII.] CLARKI AND 8PINOZA. 217

of an Infinite Being, His attributes, and His relation to the uni-
vense. The fundamental prindpleof all such speculations, viz., that
whatever we can cleariy conceive, must exist, fails to accomplish
it« end, even when its truth is admitted. For how shall the finite
comprehend the infinite ? Yet must the possibility of such con-
ception be granted, and in something more than the sense of
a mere withdrawal of the limits of phasnomenal existence, before
any solid ground can l)e established for the knowledge, d priori^
of things infinite and eternal. Spinoza's afllirmation of the re-
ality of such knowledge is plain and explicit : ** Mens humana
adcquatilm habet cognitionem astemae et infinite essentia Dei'*
(Prop. XLviL, Part 2nd). Let this be com|)ared with Prop,
xxxiv.. Part 2nd: ** Omnis idea quae in nobis est abtfoluta
sive adfl^quata et perfccta, vera est ;" and with Axiom vi., Part
1st, ^ Idea vera debet cum suo ideato con venire." Moreover, this
I'peciei* of knowledge is made the essential con^jititucnt of all other
knowledge : *^ De natura rationis est res sub quadam a'temitatis
i(|)Ocie |>en:i|>ere" (Prop, xliv., Cor. ii., Part 2nd). Were it
said, that there is a tendency in the human mind to rise in am-
templation from the {Kirtioular towanls the universal, from the
finite towards the infinite, from the transient towards the eternal ;
and that thi.<« tendency suggests to us, with high probability, the
existence of more tlian sense perceives or understanding conipre-
hendii ; the statement might l)e accepted as true for at least a
a large nunilKT of minds. There is, however, a class of s|>ecu-
lations, the character of which must be explained in part by
reference to other causes, — impatience of probable or limited
knowlc<1ge, S4) often all that we can really attain to; a desire for
abjHilute certainty where intimations suflScicnt to mark out before
us the [mtli of duty, but not to satisfy the demands of the sih^cu-
lative intellect, liavc alone been granted to us ; perhaps, tots
dissatisfaction with the present scene of things. With the
umlue predominance of these motives, the more sober procedure
of analogy an<l probable induction falls into neglect. Yet the lat-
ter l«, iN^yond all <|uestion, the course most adapted to our pre>
M>nt condition. To infer the existence of an intelligent cause
from the teeming evidences of surrounding design, to rise to the
coooqition of a moral Governor of the world, from the stud^ ^C

218 GLARKB AND SPINOZA. [CHAP.UII.

the constitution and the moral proyisions of our own nature ; —
these, though but the feeble steps of an understanding limited
in its faculties and its materials of knowledge, are of more avail
than the ambitious attempt to arrive at a certainty unattainable
on the groimd of natural religion. And as these were the most
andent, so are they still the most solid foundations, Bevelation
being set apart, of the belief that the course of this world is not
abandoned to chance and inexorable &te.

CHAP. XIT.] KXAMPLK OP AKALT818. 219

CHAPTER XIV.

KXAKPLB OP THB AVALT8I8 OP A 8T8TBM OP BQUATIOVS BT THB
MBTHOD OP RBDUCTIOV TO A SIHOLB BaVIYALBVT BQUATIOV
V • 0, WHBRBIV V 8ATI8PIB8 THB COVOITIOV F (1 - F) • 0.

1* X ET 118 take the remarkable 878teiii of premifles employed
•^^ in the previous Chapter, to prove that *' Matter is not a
necessary being;*' and suppressing the 6th premiss, viz.. Motion
cwts,— examine some of the consequences which flow from the
reuuuning premises. This is in reality to accept as true Dr.
Clarke's hypothetical principles ; but to suppose ourselves igno-
norant of the fact of the existence of motion. Instances may
occur in which such a selection of a portion of the premises of
an argument may lead to interesting consequences, though it is
with other views that the present example has been resumed. The
premises actually employed will be —

1 . If matter is a necessary being, either the property of gravi-
tation is necessarily present, or it is necessarily absent.

2. If gmWtation is necessarily absent, and the world is not
subject to any presiding intelligence, motion does not exist.

3. If gravitation is necessarily present, a vacuum is necessary.

4. If a vacuum is necessary, matter is not a necessary being.

5. If mutter is a necessary being, the world is not subject
to a pre.-*iding intelligence.

If, as before, we represent the elementary proportions by the
following notation, viz. :

X - Matter is a necessary bdng.

y - Gravitation is necessarily present.

ifB Motion exbts.

/ - Gravitation is necessarily absent

z - The world is merely material, and not subject to a

presiding intelligence,
r ■* A vacuum is necossary.

220 EXAMPLE OF ANALYSIS. [cHAP. XIV.

We shall on expression of the premises and elimination of the
indefinite class symbols (7), obtain the following system of equa-
tions :

xyt + xyt = 0,

tzw = 0,

yr = 0,

vx - 0,

xz - 0;

in which for brevity y stands for 1 - y, < for 1 - #, and so on ; whence,

also, 1 - ^= ^, 1 - y = y, &c.

As the first members of these equations involve only positive
terms, we can form a single equation by adding them together
(VIII. Prop. 2), viz. :

xyt + ayf + yv + vx + xz •¥ tzw = 0,

and it remains to reduce the first member so as to cause it to
satisfy the condition V (I - V) = 0.

For this purpose we will first obtain its development with
reference to the symbols x and y. The result is —

{t + v + v + z + tztc) 3cy+{t + v + z-\- tzw) xy
+ (v + tzv)) xy + tzwxy - 0.

And our object vnll be accomplished by reducing the foiur coeffi-
cient's of the development to equivalent forms, themselves satis-
fying the condition required.

Now the first coefficient is, since v + i? = 1,

1 + ^ + z + tzw^

which reduces to unity (IX. Prop. 1).
The second coefficient is

^ + t? 4- z + tzw ;

and its reduced form (X. 3) is

^ + ^v + tv'z + tvzw*

The third coefficient, v + tzw^ reduces by the same method
to V + tzwv\ and the last coefficient tzw needs no reduction.
Hence the development becomes

CHAP. XIV.] SXAMPLB OP ANALYSIS. 321

i3f + (7 + f» + ivz + Ipzw) ay + (r + tzwo) 5y + izwxy - 0; ( I )

and this b the form of reduction sought.

2. Now according to the principle asserted in Prop, in.,
Chap. X., the whole relation connecting any particular set of the
srmbols in the above equation may be deduced by developing
that equation with reference to the particular symbols in question,
and retaining in the result only those constituents whose coef-
ficients are unity. Thus, if x and y are the symbols chosen, we
are immediately conducted to the equation

whence we have

with the interpretation. If gratniation u necessarily present^ mai-
ter is not a necessary being.

Let us next seek the relation between x and w. Developing
( 1 ) with respect to those symbols, we get

iy ^ ty + try + tvzy -»► trzy) rw + (y + ty -¥ try + tvzy) rir

4 (tjy + tzvy -^ izy) xw + vylw " 0.

The coefficient of xir, and it alone, reduces to unity. For

trzy 4 trzy = /ry, and try -f try - ty^ and ly-^ty^ y, and lastly,
y ^ y " 1. This is always tlie mode in which such reductions
take place. Hence wo get

TWm 0,

.-. ir--(l-x),

of which the inteqtrctation is, If motion exists^ matter is not a ne^
ffs^iry h'iiUf.

If, in like manner, we develop (1) with resiHHrt to x and r,

we get the efpiation

xF« 0,

with the interpretation. If matter is a necessary heing^ the worlJ
is merely material^ ami withimt a premdimg intell^i

222 BXAMPLB OF ANALYSIS. [CHAP. XIV.

This, indeedi is only the fifth premiss r^iodooed, but it
shows that there is no other relation connecting the two elementB
which it involves.

K we seek the whole relation connecting the elements x, Wj
and jfj we find, on developing (1) with reference to those sym-
bols, and proceeding as before,

xy + xwy a 0.

Suppose it required to determine hence the consequences of the
hypothesis, ** Motion does not exist,'* relatively to the questicms
of the necessity of matter, and the necessary presence of gravitsr
tion. We find

ay

.-. l-M?=-==-ay + ay + -x;
xy

or, 1 - to = a^ + - X, with ay = 0.

The direct interpretation of the first equation is, If motion does
not existy either matter is a necessary being ^ and gravitation is not
necessarily present^ or matter is not a necessary being.

The reverse interpretation is, If matter is a necessary being,
and gravitation not necessary, motion does not exist.

In exactly the same mode, if we sought the full relation be-
tween X, z, and tr, we should find

xzw + xz = 0.

From this we may deduce

z = xw + r ar, with xw = 0.

Therefore, If the world is merely material j and not subject to
any presiding intelligence, either mattei* is a necessary being, and
motion does not exist, or matter is not a necessary being.

Also, reversely, If matter is a necessary being, and there is no
such thing as motion, the world is merely material,

3. We might, of course, extend the same method to the de-

CHAP. Xnr.] BXAlfPLB OF ANALYSIS. 223

termination of the consequences of any complex hjrpothesis u,
such as, " The world is merely material, and without any pre-
siding intelligence (z), but motion exists" (w)j with reference to
any other elements of doubt or speculation involved in the origi-
nal premises, such as, '^ Matter isa necessary being" (x), *' Gra-
yitation is a necessary quality of matter," (y). We should, for
this purpose, connect with the general equation (1) a new
equation,

reduce the system thus formed to a single equation, F^ 0, in
which V satisfies the condition V(l - F} a 0, and proceed as
above to determine the relation between ti, a;, and j^, and finally u
as a developed function of x and y. But it is very much better
to adopt the methods of Chapters viii. and ex. I shall here
simply indicate a few results, with the leading steps of their de-
duction, and leave their verification to the reader's choice.

In the problem last mentioned we find, as the relation con-
necting x^ Pj tr, and z,

xw + xwy + xwyz = 0.

And if we write u "^^^ and then eliminate the symbols x and y
by the general problem. Chap, ix., we find

xu + xyu « 0,

whence 1 ^ , -

tt = ^ay+Oay + -x;

wherefore - .^, ^

wz ^j-x with ay = 0.

Hence, ](fthe world is merdy material^ and without a presiding
inteUiyencey and at the same time motion exists^ matter is not a ne-
cessary being.

Now it has before been shown that tf motion exists^ matter is
not a necessary being, so that the above conclusion tells us even
less than we had before ascertuned to be (inferentially) true.
Nevertheless, that conclusion is the proper and complete answer
to the question which was proposed, which was, to determine
simply the consequences of a certain complex hypothesis.

224 EXAMPLE OF ANALYSIS. [CHAP. XIV.

4. It would thus be easy, even from the limited system of
premises before us, to deduce a great variety of additional infe-
rences, involving, in the conditions which are given, any pro-
posed combinations of the elementary propositions. If the con-
dition is one which is inconsistent with the premises, the fact
will be indicated by the form of the solution. The value which
the method will assign to the combination of symbols expressive
of the proposed condition will be 0. If, on the other hand, the
fulfilment of the condition in question imposes no restriction upon
the propositions among which relation is sought, so that every
combination of those propositions is equally possible, — ^the &ct
will also be indicated by the form of the solution. Examples
of each of these cases are subjoined.

If in the ordinary way we seek the consequences which would
flow from the condition that matter is a necessary being^ and at
the same time that motion exists^ as affecting the Propositions,
The world is merely material^ and without a presiding inteUigencCy
and. Gravitation is necessarily present^ we shall obtain the equa-
tion

xw = 0,

which indicates that the condition proposed is inconsistent with
the premises, and therefore cannot be fulfilled.

If we seek the consequences which would flow from the con-
dition that Matter is not a necessary bdng^ and at the same time
that Motion does exists with reference to the same elements as
above, viz., the absence of a presiding intelligence^ and the neces-
sity of gravitation^ — we obtain the following result,

{\''X)w = ~yz^ ^y (1 -z) + - (1 - y) z + ^ (1 - y) (1 - r),

which might literally be interpreted as follows :

If matter is not a necessary beitig^ and motion exists, then
either the tvorld is merely material and without a presiding intel-
ligence, and gravitation is necessary, or one of these tico restdts fol-
lows without the other, or they both fail of being true. Wherefore
of the four possible combinations, of which some one is true of
necessity, and of which of necessity one only can be true, it is

CHAP. XIT.] KXAMPLK OP ANALYSIS. 9S5

mflinned that any one may be tme. Such a result is a trnism —
a mere ntceuary truth. Still it contains the only answer which
can be given to the question proposed.

I do not deem it necessary to vindicate against the charge of
laborious trifling these applications. It may be requiute to en-
ter with some fulness into details useless in themselves, in order
to establish confidence in general principles and methods. Whoi
this end shall have been accomplished in the subject of the pre-
sent inquiiy, let all that has contributed to its attunment, but
has afterwards been found superfluous, be forgotten.

226 ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC. [CHAP. XT*

CHAPTER XV.

THE ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC AND ITS MODERN EXTENSIONS, EX-
AMINED BY THE METHOD OF THIS TREATISE.

1. npHE logical system of Aristotle, modified in its detailsy
•^ but unchanged in its essential features, occupies [so im-
portant a place in academical education, that some account of its
nature, and some brief discussion of the leading problems which
it presents, seem to be called for in the present work. It is, I
trust, in no narrow or harshly critical spirit that I approach this
task. My object, indeed, la not to institute any direct compa-
rison between the time-honoured system of the schools and that
of the present treatise; but, setting truth above all other con-
siderations, to endeavour to exhibit the real nature of the ancient
doctrine, and to remove one or two prevailing misapprehensioiis
respecting its extent and sufficiency.

That which may be regarded as essential in the spirit and
procedure of the Aristotelian, and of all cognate systems of Logic,
is the attempted classification of the allowable forms of inference,
and the distinct reference of those forms, collectively or indivi-
dually, to some general principle of an axiomatic nature, such as
the " dictum of Aristotle :" Whatsoever is affirmed or denied of
the genus may in the same sense be affirmed or denied of any
species included under that genus. Concerning such general
principles it may, I think, be observed, that they either state di-
rectly, but in an abstract form, the argument which they are
supposed to elucidate, and, so stating that argument, affirm its
validity ; or involve in their expression technical terms which,
after definition, conduct us again to the same point, viz.,
the abstract statement of the supposed allowable forms of in-
ference. The idea of classification is thus a pervading element
in those systems. Furthermore, they exhibit Logic as resolvable
into two great branches, the one of which is occupied with the
treatment of categorical, the other with that of hypothetical or

CHAP. XT.] AB18TOTKLIAH LOGIC. SS7

oooditionil propoeitioDfl. The distinctioii is nearly identical with
that of primary and secondary propositions in the present work.
The discussion of the theory of cat^^rical propositions is, in all
the ordinary treatises of Lo^c, much more full and elaborate than,
that of hypothetical propositions, and is occupied partly with
ancient scholastic distinctions, partly with the canons of deduo-
tive inference. To the latter q>plication only is it necessary to
direct attention here.

2. Categorical propositions are classed under the four fol-
lowing heads, vix. :

TYPB.

1st. Universal affirmatiye Proportions : All Ps are X's.
2nd. Universal negative „ No F*s are X*s.

3rd. Particular affirmative „ Some Vb are X*s.

4th. Particular negative „ Some F*s are not X's.

To these forms, four others have recently been added, so as
to constitute m the whole eight forms (see the next article) sus-
ceptible, however, of reduction to six, and subject to relations
which have been discussed with great fulness and ability by Pro-
fessor De Morgan, in his Formal Logic. A scheme somewhat
different from the above has been given to the world by Sir W.
Hamilton, and is made the basis of a method of syllogistic ui-
ference, which is spoken of with very high respect by aathontiea
on the subject of Logic*

The processes of Formal Logic, in reUtion to the above •y^*^^
of propositions, arc described as of two kinds, via-, ** Conversion
and " Syllogism.- By Conversion is meant the expression of
any proposition of the above kind in an equivalent form, but witli
a reversed order of terms. By Syllogism is meant the deductioa
from two such propositions having a common term, wnetner
subject or predicate, of some third proposition infcrentially ir
volved in the two, and forming the *• conclusion.' *^ •• ■'^'
tainotl by most writers on Logic, that these prcioeaars, and
cording to some, the single process of Syllogi«o*» lurnisn o
univerwU types of reasoning, and that it is the burineai of th€3
mind, in any train of demonstration, to conform liMMi whetho*

• TlMNBMNi*ii (>«llittM oTth* Uvs omoi«M» ^ m.

228 ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC. [CHAP. XY.

consciously or unconsdouslj, to the particular modek of the pro-
cesses which have been classified in the writings of logicians.

3. The course which I design to pursue is to show how
these processes of Syllogism and Conversion may be conducted
in the most general manner upon the principles of the present
treatise, and, viewing them thus in relation to a system of Logic,
the foundations of which, it is conceived, have been laid in the
ultunate laws of thought, to seek to determine their true pkce
and essential character.

The expressions of the eight fundamental types of proposi-
tion in the language of symbols are as follows :

1.

All Fs are X\

y = vx.

2.

No Y's are X\

y = »(!-«).

3.

Some Y's are X's,

uy «= wa?.

4.

Some ys are not-X's,

wy = r(l - x).

5.

AUnot-Y'sareX's, •

1 - y s= i?a?.

(I)

6.

No not- Y's are X's,

l-y=Sr(l-a;).

7.

Some not- Y's are X*8,

t?(l -y) = vx.

8- Some not- Y's are not-X's, t? (1 -y) = t? (I - x).

In referring to these forms, it will be convenient to apply, in
a sense shortly to be explained, the epithets of logical quantity,
"universal" and " particular," and of quality, "aflSrmative" and
" negative," to the terms of propositions, and not to the propo-
sitions themselves. We shall thus consider the term " All Y's,"
as universal-affirmative ; the term ** Y's," or " Some Y's," as
particular-affirmative ; the term " All not- Y's," as universal-ne-
gative ; the term " Some not- Y's," as particular-negative. The
expression " No Y's," is not properly a term of a proposition, for
the true meaning of the proposition, " No Y's are X's," is "All
Y's are not-X's." The subject of that proposition is, therefore,
universal-affirmative, the predicate particular-negative. That
there is a real distinction between the conceptions of " men" and
" not men" is manifest. This distinction is all that I contem-
plate when applying as above the designations of affirmative and
negative, without, however, insisting upon the etymological pro-
priety of the application to the terms of propositions. The
designations positive and privative would have been more ap-

GBAP. XT.] ARI8TOTILIAK LOGIC. 299

proprmte, bnt tlie finrmer term is already employed in a fixed
Benfle in other parts of this work.

4. From the symbolical forms above g^ven the laws of con-
version immediately follow. Thus firom the equation

reprcsentmg the proposition, ^* All JTs are X's,** we deduce, on

eliminating v,

y(l-x)-0,

which gives by solutbn with reference to 1 - a^

l-,-«(l_y);

the interpretatbn of which is.

All not-Z's are not- Y*b.

This is an example of what is called ** negative conversion.**
In like manner, the equation

representing the proposition, *^ No Y*b are X%** gives

* " 5 (» - y)»

the interpretation of which is, *^ No X's are Ps.** This is an
example of what is termed simple conversion ; though it is in re-
ality of the same kind as the conversion exhibited in the previous
example. All the examples of converrion which have been noticed
by logicians arc cither of the above kind, or of that which con-
sists in tlic mere transposition of the terms of a proposition, with-
out altering their quality, as when we change

ry t» rx, representing. Some I'^s are X's,
into

vx « o|f , representing. Some X's are Ps;

or they involve a combination of those pr ocesses with some auxi-
liary process of limitation, as when firom the equation

y • tx, representing. All Ps are X*^

we deduce on multiplication by o,

vy - rx, representing, Some F*s are X\
and hence

rx - ty, representing. Some X*§ are Y*w.

230 ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC. [CHAP. X¥.

In this example, the process of limitation precedes that of
transposition.

From these instances it is seen that convernon b a partica-
lar application of a much more general process in Logic, of which
many examples have been ^ven in this work. That process has
for its object the determination of any element in any propositioni
however complex, as a lo^cal function of the remaining elements.
Instead of confining our attention to the subject and predicate,
r^arded as simple terms, we can take any element or any
combination of elements entering into either of them; make that
element, or that combination, the ^^ subject" of a new proportion ;
and determine what its predicate shall be, in accordance with the
data afforded to us. It may be remarked, that even the simple
forms of propositions enumerated above afford some ground for
the application of such a method, beyond what the received laws
of conversion appear to recognise. Thus the equation

y-vXy representing. All Y*^9xeX%

gives us, in addition to the proposition before deduced, the three
following :

Ist. y (1 - a;) s 0. There are no Ps that ai:e not-X's.

2nd. 1 -y = - a; + (1 -a;). Things that are not- Y*a include all

things that are not-X's, and an
indefinite remsunder of things
that are X's.

3rd. * = y + j: (1 - y). Things that areX's include all things

that are F's, and an indefinite
remainder of things that are not-
Ps.

These conclusions, it is true, merely place the ^ven propo-
sition in other and equivalent forms, — but such and no more is
the office of the received mode of " negative conversion."

Furthermore, these processes of conversion are not elemen-
tary, but they are combinations of processes more simple than
they, more immediately dependent upon the ultimate laws and
axioms which govern the use of the symbolical instrument of

CBAF. XT.] ARUrrOTBUAM LOGIC. 881

reMoning. This remark is equally applicable to the case of
Syllogism, which we proceed next to consider.

5. The nature of syllo^sm b best seen in the particular in-
stance. Suppose that we have the propoations,

AU X's are rs.
All Fs are Z*s.

From these we may deduce the condunon,

AU X*8 are Z*s.

lis is a syllogistic inference. The terms X and Z are called
the extremes, and Y is called the middle term. The function
of the syllogism generally may now be defined. Given two pro-
positions of the kind whose species are tabuUted in (1), and in-
Tolviiig one middle or common term F, which is connected in
one of the propositions with an extreme X, in the other witii an
extreme Z; required the relation connecting the extremes X and
Z. The term Y may appear in its affirmative fonn, as, All Y\
Some i'^s ; or in its negative form, as. All not- Ps, Son^e not-
Y's ; in either proposition, without regard to the particular form
which it assumes in the other.

Nothing is easier than in particular instances to resolve the
Syllogism by the metiiod of this treatise. Its resolution is, in-
deed, a particular application of the process for the reduction of
systems of propositions. Taking the examples above given,
we have.

*m

vy.

r-

i4;

«r

1 tn/Zf

AUX'

sareZ^s.

whence by substitution,
which is interpreted into

Or, proceedmg rigorously in accordance with the
loped in (VIII. 7)9 we deduce

*(l-y)-0. |f(l-z)-0.

Adding these equations, and eliminating y, we hi

232 ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC. [CHAP. XI.

whence x^-Zj or, All X*8 are Z*8.

And in the same way may any other case be treated.

6. Quitting, however, the consideration of spedal examples,
let US examine the general forms to which all syllo^sm may be
reduced.

Proposition I.
To deduce the general rules of SyllogUm.

By the general rules of Syllogism, I here mean the rules appli-
cable to premises admitting of every variety both of quantity
and of quality in their subjects and predicates, except the com-
bination of two universal terms in the same proposition. The
admissible forms of propositions are therefore those of wUcha
tabular view is ^ven in (1).

Let X and y be the elements or things entering into the first
premiss, Z and Y those involved in the second. Two cases, fun-
damentally different in character, will then present themselves.
The terms involving Y will either be of Uke or of unlike quatityj
those terms being regarded as of like quality when they both
speak of " F's," or both of" Not- Y's," as of unlike quality when
one of them speaks of " Y's," and the other of " Not- F's." Any
psdr of premises, in which the former condition is satisfied, may
be represented by the equations

vx = t?y, (I)

wz = wy ; (2)

for we can employ the symbol y to represent either " All F's,"
or " All not- Y's," since the interpretation of the symbol is purely
conventional. If we employ y in the sense of "All not-Y*8,"
then \-y will represent "All Y's," and no other change will
be introduced. An equal freedom is permitted with respect
to the symbols x and z, so that the equations (1) and (2) may,
by properly assigning the interpretations of x, y, and z, be made
to represent all varieties in the combination of premises depen-
dent upon the qtmlity of the respective terms. Again, by as-
suming proper interpretations to the symbols ti^ t/, ti?, «/, in diose
equations, all varieties with reference to quantity may also be

CHAP. XV.] ARISTOTBLIAM LOGIC SSS

repreflented. Thus, if we take V" 1» and repreaent hytf tL daaa
indefinite, the equation (1) will represent a universal proposition
according to the ordinary sense of that term, i. e., a propomtioii
with universal subject and particular predicate. We may, in
fiurt, give to subject and predicate in either premiss whatever
quantities (using this term in the scholastic sense) we please, ex-
cept that by hypothesis, they must not both be universal. The
system (1), (2), represents, therefore, with perfect generality,
the possible combinations of premises which have like middle
terms.

7. That our analyris may be as general as the equations to
wUch it is applied, let us, by the method of tlus work, elimi-
nate y from (1) and (2), and seek the expresnons for x, 1 - x, and
tar, in terms of x and of the symbols «, v\ v, u/. The above will
include all the possible forms of the subject of the conclusion.
The form o (1 - x) is excluded, inasmuch as we cannot from the
interpretation ox - Some JT's, g^ven in the premises, interpret
r(l -x)asSomenot-JlC's. The symbol r, when used in the sense
of *< some," applies to that term only with which it is connected
in the premises.

The results of the analysis are as follows :

X - [WICIC/+ J|n/(l-tr)(l-ti/>+wXl-«')(*-«0+(»-«Xl-^^^

+ ?{rt/(l.T')+l-r)(l-z), (L)

l-x-[r(l-r')(iw' + (l-ir)(l-ir'))+r(l-ir)w
4 ?|pf<(l-ic)(l-ttO + ««<(l-»)(l -«') + (! -r)(l-ir))]x

^[r(l -«.)«/ + ? {n/(l-icO+ I -r)](l.x), (II.)

«r-|Wi«D+^nT'(l-ir)(l-iiO)r+?(l-io')(l-x). (UI.)

Each of these expresrions involves in its second member two
terms, of one of which x is a factor, of the other 1 - x. But
syUogintic inference does not, as a matter of form, admit of con-
I1B17 clswws in its conclusion, as of Z*s and not-Z*s together.

234 ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC. [CHAP. XT.

We musty therefore, in order to determine the roles of that
species of inference, ascertain under what conditions the second
members of any of our equations are reducible to a single term.
The amplest form is (HI-)) ^^'^ i^ is reducible to a single
term if tc;' » 1. The equation then becomes

vx = wW, • (3)

the first member is identical witii the extreme in the first pre-
miss; the second is of the same quantity and quality as the extreme
in the second premiss. For since ti/ » 1, the second memb^ of
(2), involving the middle term y, is universal ; therefore, by the
hypothesis, the first member b particular, and therefore, the se-
cond member of (3), involving the same symbol tc in its coeffi-
cient, is particular also. Hence we deduce the following law.

Condition of Inference. — One middle term, at least, uni-
versal.

Bulb of Inference. — Equate the extremes.

From an analysis of the equations (I.) and (II.), it will further
appear, that the above is the only condition of syllo^stic in-
ference when the middle terms are of like quality. Thus the
second member of (I.) reduces to a single term, if tr' = 1 and
v=l; and the second member of (II.) reduces to a single term,
ifM?'=l, v=l, 1^ = 1. In each of these cases, it is necessary that
1^' = 1, the solely sufficient condition before assigned.

Consider, secondly, the case in which the middle terms are
of unlike quality. The premises may then be represented un-
der the forms

vx = v'y, (4)

wz = t^'(l -y) ; (5)

and if, as before, we eliminate y, and determine the expressions

of X, 1 - ar, and vx, we get

«

x= [yv (I - w) 10^ + - (to«)'(l-w) + (l-r)(l-w')(l-tc)

+ «'(l-w)(l-to'))]«

..._, .

+ [wV + J {(1 - ») (1 -rO + »'(1 - to^)] (l-z). (IV.)

CHAP. X?.] ARIfTOTSLIAV LOGIC. 9S5

I - X- [wwv + »(1- r') (I - it) + ^ (iw'(l -r)

+ (l-r)(l-r')(l-tD) + f/(l-w)(l-«0)]«

+ [r(l.r') + ^|t<(l.K,') + (l.t,)(l.r'))](l.z). (V.)

nr * {w (1 -ir)«< + 5 w/(l - id) (I - nO) «

+ l^»' + 5 w (I - iiO) (1 - «)• (VI.)

Now the aeoond member of (VX) reduces to a eiiigle term rd»-
thrdj t0 2, if v^ 1, giving

wc- |wV + ?w'(l-tD')) (l-z);

tlie aeoond member of which ia opposite, both in qoantitj and
quality, to the corresponding extreme, tez, in the second premiss.
For since v • 1, ti^z is universaL But the fictor vtf indicates
that the term to which it is attached is particubur, since by hypo-
thesis V and t/ are not both equal to 1. Hence we deduce the
following law of inference in the case of like middle terms :

First Condition or Infbrincb. — At Uast one umversal

Be LI OF iNriRRNCR* — Change the qmamiitp emd qwUiiy ^f
ikai extmmej and equate the remU to the other extreme,

M(»^eover, the second member of (V.) reduces to a angle term
iff/- 1, u/- 1 ; it then gives

. . ,
I - « - {mo + jr (1 - v) v) z.

Now since v'- 1, u/m l, the middle terms of the premises are
both universal, therefore the extremes t«r, wz^ are particular.
But in the conclusion the extreme involving x is oppoate, both
in quantity and quality, to the extreme f» in the first premiss,
while the extreme involving z agrees both in quantity and qua-
Ety with the ocMrrespondiiig extreme ws in the second premiss.
HcDoe the following general law :

236 ARISTOTBLIAN LOGIC. [CHAP. XV.

Second Condition of Inferencb. — Two tmioertal middk
terms*

KuLE of Inference. — Change the quantity and quoHijf of
either extreme^ and equate the result to the other extreme toi-
changed.

There are in the case of unlike middle terms no other condi-
tions or rules of syllogistic inference than the above. Thus the
equation (IV.), though reducible to the form of a syllogistic con-
clusion, when w-\ and v ^ 1, does not thereby establish atiew
conation of inference; since, by what has preceded, the single
condiuon t; «= I, or to = I, would suffice.

8. rThe following examples will sufficiently illustrate the ge-
neral r^les of syllogism above given :

i 1. All Y% are -Ts.

All Z's are F s.

This belongs to Case 1. All Y% is the universal middle term.
The extremes equated give as the conclusion

All Z's are JTs ;

the universal term, All Z's, becoming the subject ; the particular
term (some) X's, the predicate.

. 2. All X's are Fs.
No Z's are Fs.

The proper expression of these premises is

All X's are Fs.

All Z% are not- Fs.

They belong to Case 2, and satisfy the first condition of inference.
The middle term, Y's, in the first premiss, is particular-affirma-
tive ; that in the second premiss, not- ys, particular-negative.
If we take All ^'s as the universal extreme, and change its
quantity and quality according to the rule, we obtain the term
Some not-Z's, and this equated with the other extreme, All X^

gives,

All X^s are not-Z's, i. e., No X's are Z's.

If we commence with the other universal extreme, and proceed
similarly, we obtain the equivalent result,

No Z's are -STs.

CHAP. XT.] AR18TOTBLIAN LOGIC. S37

3. An Fs are JTs.
All not- Tb are Z*0.

Here ako the middle temiB are unlike in quality. The premises
therefore belong to Case 2, and there being two universal middle
terms, the second condition of inference is satisfied. Ifhj the
rule we change the quantity and quality of the first extreme,
(some) X\ we obtain All not-X*s, which, equated with the
other extreme, gives

All not-X's are Z*s.

The reverse order of procedure would give the equivalent result,

All not-Z*s are JTs.

The conclusions of the two last examples would not be recog-
nised as valid in the schoUstic system of Logic, which virtually
requires that the subject of a proposition should be aflirmative.
They are, however, perfectly Intimate in themselves, and the
rules by which they are determined form undoubtedly the most
general canons of syllogistic inference. The process of investi-
gation by which they are deduced will probably appear to be of
needless complexity ; and it is certain that they might have been
obtained with greater facility, and without the ud of any sym-
bolical instrument whatever. It was, however, my object to
conduct the investigation in the most general manner, and by an
tnalysis thoroughly exhaustive. With this end in view, the
brevity or prolixity of the method employed is a matter of indif-
ference. Indeed the analysis is not properly that of the syllogism,
but of a much more general combination of propositions ; for we
ire permitted to assign to the symbols v, t/, ir, w\ any class-in-
teqiretations that we please. To illustrate this remark, I will
apply the solution (I.) to the following imaginary case :

Suppose that a number of pieces of doth striped with diffo*
rent ccilours were submitted to inspection, and that the two fol-
lowing observations were made upon them :

Ui. That every piece striped with white and green was also

•triped with black and yellow, and vke versa.

2nd. That every piece striped with rod and orange was also

airiped with Uue and yellow, and vke tertd.

238 - ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC. [CHAP. XT.

Suppose it then required to determine how the pieces marked
with green stood affected with reference to the colours white,
black, red, orange, and blue.

Here if we assume v = white, x = green, v' « black, y « yeDow,
w = red, z s orange, u/ » blue, the expression of our premises wiQ
be

vx = vpf

wz= wy,

agreeing with the system (1) (2). The equation (I.) then leads
to the following conclusion :

Pieces striped with green are either striped with orange,
white, black, red, and blue, together, all pieces possessing which
character are included in those striped with green ; or they are
striped with orange, white, and black, but not with red or blue;
or they are striped with orange, red, and blue, but not with white
or black ; or they are striped with orange, but not with white or
red ; or they are striped with white and black, but not withhhd
or orange ; or they are striped neither with white nor orange.

Considering the nature of this conclusion, neither the sjin-
bolical expression (I.) by which it is conveyed, nor the analyos
by which that expression is deduced, can be considered as need-
lessly complex.

9. The form in which the doctrine of syllogism has been
presented in this chapter affords ground for an important obser-
vation. We have seen that in each of its two great divisions the
entire discussion is reducible, so far, at least, as concerns the de-
termination of rules and methods, to the analysis of a pair of
equations, viz., of the system (1), (2), when the premises have
like middle terms, and of the system (4), (5), when the middle
terms are unlike. Moreover, that analysis has been actuafly
conducted by a method founded upon certain general laws de-
duced immediately from the constitution of language. Chap. Hm
confirmed by the study of the operations of the human mind,
Chap. III., and proved to be applicable to the analysis of all sys-
tems of equations whatever, by which propositions, or combina-
tions of propositions, can be represented. Chap. viii. Here, then,
we have the means of definitely resolving the question, whether
syllogism is indeed the fundamental type of reasoning, — ^whether

CHAP. ZV.] ARIBTOTILIAN LOGIC. 239

the study of its laws is co-extensive with the study of deductive
logic. For if it be so, some indication of the fact must be given
in the systems of equations upon the analysis of which we have
been engaged. It cannot be conceived that syllogism should be
the one essential process of reasoning, and yet the manifestation
of that process present nothing indicative of this high quality of
pre-eminence. No sign, however, appears that the discusuon of
all systems of equations expressing propositions is involved in
that of the particular system examined in this chapter. And yet
writers on LfOgic have been all but unanimous in their assertion,
not merely of the supremacy, but of the universal sufficiency of
'syllogistic inference in deductive reasoning. The language of
Archbishop Whately, always clear and definite, and on the sub-
ject of L#ogio entitled to peculiar attention, is very express on
this point. ^^ For Logic,*' he says, ^^ which is, as it were, the
Gram mar of jleasoning , does not bring forward the regular Syl-
logism as a distinct mode of argumaUation^ designed to be stdtsti*
imied for any other mode ; but as the form to which ail correct
reasoning may be ultimately reduced."* And Mr. Mill, in a
chapter of his System of Logic, entitled, << Of Ratiocination or
Syllogism," having enumerated the ordinary forms of syllogism,
observes, '* All valid ratiocination, all reasoning by which from
general propositions previously admitted, other propositions,
equally or less general, are inferred, may be exhibited in some of
the above forms." And again : ^^ We are therefore at liberty,
in conformity with the general opinion of logicians, to consider
the two elementary forms of the first figure as the universal ty[ics
of all correct ratiocination." In accordance with these views it
has been contended that the science of Logic enjoys an immunity
firom those conditions of imperfection and of progress to which
all other sciences are subject ;t and its origin finom the travail of
one mighty mind of old has, by a somewhat daring metaphor,
beco compared to the mythological birth of Pkllas.

'As Syllogism b a spedes of elimination, the question before
us manifestly resolves itself into the two following ones: — 1st.
Whether all elimination is reducible to Syllogism ; Sndly. Whe-

• BImmbU of Lofk. ^ U^ alatksdlUoa.
t laftrodaoUoB to K«at*k •«Lofik **

240 ARISTOTELIAN LOGIC. [CRAP. XY.

ther deductive reasoning can with propriety be regarded as ood>
sisting only of elimination. I believe, upon careful examinatioD,
the true answer to the former question to be, that it is always
theoretically possible so to resolve and combine proportions that
elimination may subsequently be effected by the syllogistic ca-
nons, but that the process of reduction would in many instances
be constrained and unnatural, and would involve operations
which are not syllogistic. To the second question I reply, that
reasoning cannot, except by an arbitrary restriction of its mean-
ing, be confined to the process of elimination. No definition can
suffice which makes it less than the aggregate of the methods
which are foimded upon the laws of thought, as exercised upon
propositions ; and among those methods, the process of eliminar
tion, eminently important as it is, occupies only a place.

Much of the error, as I cannot but regard it, which prevails
respecting the nature of the Syllogbm and the extent of its
office, seems to be founded in a disposition to r^ard all those
truths in Logic as primary which possess the character of sim-
plicity and intuitive certainty, without inquiring into the relation
which they sustain to other truths in the Science, or to general
methods in the Art, of Reasoning. Aristotle's dictum de omm et
nulla is a self-evident principle, but It is not found among those
ultimate laws of the reasoning faculty to which all other laws,
however plain and self-evident, admit of being traced, and firom
which they may in strictest order of scientific evolution be de-
duced. For though of every science the fundamental truths are
usually the most simple of apprehension, yet is not that sim-
plicity the criterion by which their title to be regarded as fundi^
mental must be judged. This must be sought for in the nature
and extent of the structure which they are capable of supporting.
Taking this view, Leibnitz appears to me to have judged cor-
rectly when he assigned to the " principle of contradiction*' a
fundamental place in Logic ;* for we have seen the consequences
of that law of thought of which it is the axiomatic expression
(III. 15). But enough has been said upon the nature of deduc-
tive inference and upon its constitutive elements. The subject of

* Nouvcaux Essais sar rentendement humain. Liv. it. cap. 2. Theodic^
Pt. I. sec. 44.

CHAP. XT.] AR18TOTILIAK LOGIC. 841

inductioh may probably receive some attention in another part of
this work.

10. It ha0 been remarked in this chapter that the ordinary
treatment of hypothetical, is much more defective than that of
categoricalt propositions. What is commonly termed the hypo-
thetical syllogism appears, indeed, to be no syUopsm at all.
Let the argument —

If A IbB, C\bD,
But AibB,
Therefore C is A
be put in the form —

If the proposition X is true, Y is true.

But X is true.
Therefore Y is true ;

wherein by X is meant the proportion A is B^ and by y, the
proposition C\b D, It is then seen that the premises contain
only two terms or elements, while a syllogism essentially involves
three. The following would be a genuine hypothetical syllogism :

If X is true, Y is true ;
If y is true, Z is true ;
/. If A' is true, Z is true.

After the discussion of secondary propositions in a former
part of this work, it is evident that the forms of hypothetical
ivUogism must present, in every respect, an exact counterpart to
those of categorical syllogism. Particular Propodtions, such as,
** Sometimes if X b true, y is true,** may be introduced, and the
eonditions and rules of inference deduced in this chapter for ca-
tegorical syllogisms may, without abatement, be interpreted to
meet the corresponding cases in hypotheticals.

1 1 . To what final conclusions are we then led respecting the
nature and extent of the scholastic logic? I think to the following :
that it is not a science, Imt a collection of scientific truths, too
incomplete to form a system of themselves, and not sufiliciently
fundamental to serve as the foundation upon which a perfect
system may rest. It does not, however, foUow, that because the
logic of the schools has been invested with attributea to which it

242 ARIS1X>TBLIAN LOGIC. [cHAP. XV.

has no just claim, it is therefore undeserving of regard. A sys-
tem which has been associated with the very growth of language,
which has left its stamp upon the greatest questions and the
most famous demonstrations of philosophy, cannot be altogether
unworthy of attention. Memory, too, and usage, it most be ad-
mitted, have much to do*.' with the intellectual processes ; and
there are certain of the canons of the ancient logic which have
become almost inwoven in the very texture of thought in cultured
minds. But whether the mnemonic forms, in which the particu-
lar rules of conversion and syllogism have been exhibited, possess
any real utility, — whether the very skill which they are supposed
to impart might not, with greater advantage to the mental
powers, be acquired by the unassisted efforts of a mind left toita
own resources, — are questions which it might still be not un-
profitable to examine. As concerns the particular results de-
duced in this chapter, it is to be observed, that they are mAdj
designed to aid the inquiry concerning the nature of the ordinary
or scholastic logic, and its relation to a more perfect theory of
deductive reasoning.

CHAP. XVI.] OP TBI TBIOIT OP PBOBABILITIIS. 848

CHAPTER XVI.

0« THB THBOBT OF PBOBABIUTIBS.

1. T)EFORE the expiimtion of anoUiar jobt joat two centuries
-^^ will have rolled awmy since PmcbI solved the first known
question in the theory of Ph>babilities, and hudf in its solution,
the foundations of a science possessing no common share of the
attraction which belongs to the more abstract of mathematical
speculations. The problem which the Chevalier de Merc, a re-
puted gamester, proposed to the recluse of Port Royal (not yet
withdrawn from the interests of science* by the more distracting
eontempktion of the *^ greatness and the misery of man'*), wba
the first of a long series of problems, destined to call into exis-
tence new methods in mathematical analysis, and to render va-
luable service in the practical concerns of life. Nor does the in-
terest of the subject centre merely in its mathematical connexion,
or its associations of utility. The attention is repaid which is
devoted to the theory of Probabilities as au independent object
of speculation, — to the fundamental modes in which it has been
ooocctved, — to the great secondary principles which, as in the
contemporaneous science of Mechanics, have gradually been an-
nexed to it, — and, lastly, to the estimate of the measure of per^
fection wliich Ium been actually attained. I speak here of that
perfidction which consists in unity of conception and harmcmy of
p ro c es s es . Some of these pmnts it is designed very briefly to
consider in the present chapter.

2. A distinguished writerf has thus stated the fundamental
definitions of the science :

• 8«« in particaUr a letter addrcsMd by Paieal to PerouU. wIn> Iia4 Milleilfd
Ut AUmtioQ to a MmthesAtiral problea (Port RojaU ptf M.dt SftlaU Bo«iro)i
«bo variom paMaftt ia tho ooUoctMi of Fra gana ti pabliiktH by U» Proapor
Faof^ro.

t Poitaoa, Rocbarebct «ltf la Probability 4m Ji

b2

244 OF THE THEORY OF PROBABILITIES. [CHAP. XTL

" The probability of an event is the reason we have to believe
that it has taken place, or that it will take place."

^^ The measure of the probability of an event is the ratio of
the number of cases favourable to that event, to the total num-
ber of cases favourable or contrary, and all equally posdble"
(equally likely to happen).

From these definitions it follows that the word probahiltty^ in
its mathematical acceptation, has reference to the state of our
knowledge of the circumstances under which an event may hap-
pen or fail. With the degree of information which we poss&s
concerning the circumstances of an event, the reason we have to
think that it will occur, or, to use a single term, our expectation of
it, will vary. Probability is expectation founded upon partial
knowledge. A perfect acquaintance with all the circumstances
affecting the occurrence of an event would change expectation
into certainty, and leave neither room nor demand for a theory
of probabilities.

3. Though our expectation of an event grows stronger witk
the increase of the ratio of the number of the known cases fih
vourable to its occurrence to the whole number of equally pos-
sible cases, favourable or unfavourable, it would be unphilosophical
to affirm that the strength of that expectation, viewed as an
emotion of the mind, is capable of being referred to any numerical
standard. The man of sanguine temi>erament builds high hopes
where the timid despair, and the irresolute are lost in doubt.
As subjects of scientific inquiry, there is some analogy between
opinion and sensation. The thermometer and the carefully pre-
pared photographic plate indicate, not the intensity of the soi-
sations of heat and light, but certain physical circumstances
which accompany the production of those sensations. So also
the theory of probabilities contemplates the numerical measure
of the circumstances upon which expectation is founded ; and this
object embraces the whole range of its legitimate applications.
The rules which we employ in life-assurance, and in the other
statistical applications of the theory of prolmbilities, are altogether
independent of the mental phsenomena of expectation. They are
founded upon the assumption that the future will bear a resem-

CHAP. XTI.] OF THI THBOBT OF PB0BABILITIB8. 249

blance to the past ; that under the same drcumstanoes the same
event will tend to recur with a definite numerical frequency ; not
upon any attempt to submit to calculadon the strength of human
hopes and fears.

Now experience actually testifies that events of a given species
do, under given drcumstances, tend to recur Mrith definite fre-
quency, whether their true causes be known to us or unknown.
Of course this tendency is, in general, only manifested when the
area of observation is sufiiciently large. The judidal records of
a great nation, its registries of births and deaths, in relation to
age and sex, &c., present a remarkable uniformity from year to
year. In a given language, or family of languages, the same
sounds, and successions of sounds, and, if it be a written lan-
guage, the same characters and successions of characters recur
with determinate frequency. The key to the rude Qgham in-
scriptions, found in various parts of Ireland, and in which no
distinction of words could at first be traced, was, by a strict ap-
plication of this prindple, recovered.* The same method, it is
understood, has been appliedf to the deciphering of the cuneiform
records recently disentombed from the ruins of Nineveh by the
enterprise of Mr. Layard.

4. Let us endeavour from the above statements and dcfini-*
tions to form a conception of the leg^Umate object of the theory
of Probabilities.

Probability, it has been said, consists in the expectation
founded upon a particular kind of knowledge, viz., the know-
ledge of the relative frequency of occurrence of events. Hence
the probabilities of events, or of combinations of events, whether
deduced firom a knowledge of the particular constitution of
things under which they happen, or derived from the long-con-
tinued observation of a past series of their occurrences and fai-
lures, constitute, in all cases, our data. The probability of some

• TW dUeovery U due to the Ret. Chmrl«t Qfavm, ProTestor of Mitheiitkt
{■ tko rnivortity of I>oiaiii._rt^ ProoMdingt of the Royal Iridi AtmAtmj.
Feb. U, 104a ProfMMT QrmvM inforoM m tbat W hat Ttrlftcd tbo priMiplo
by iiBMtrartiBg teqanoo tabli for all ibo EvopcM iMgMgos.

t By ibo iMraed OHnUUtt, Dr. Edward Hlaoks.

246 OP THB THBORY OF PROBABILITIBS. [CHAP. XVL

connected event, or combination of events, oonstitateB the cor-
responding qiuBsitumj or object sought. Now in the most gene-
ral, yet strict meaning of the term ^^event,*' every combinadcm
of events constitutes also an event. The simultaneous occur-
rence of two or more events, or the occurrence of an eveift under
given conditions, or in any conceivable connexion with other
events, is still an event. Uring the term in this liberty of aj^fili-
cation, the object of the theory of probabilitieB might be thus
defined. Griven the probabilities of any events, of whatever
kind, to find the probability of some other event connected with
them.

5. Events may be distinguished as simple or compound, the
latter term being applied to such events as consist in a combina-
tion of simple events (I. 13). In this manner we might define it
as the practical end of the theory imder consideratacm to deter-
mine the probability of some event, simple or compound, fitmi
the given probabilities of other events, simple or compound,
with which, by the terms of its definition, it stands oonneeted*

Thus if it is known firom the constitution of a die that there

is a probability, measured by the fi*action ^, that the result of

any particular throw will be an ace, and if it is required to deter-
mine the probability that there shall occur one ace, and only one,
in two successive throws, we may state the problem in the order
of its data and its qtuBsituniy as follows :

First Datum. — Probability of the event that the first throw

will give an ace = -.

Second Datum. — Probability of the event that the second

throw will give an ace = -•

o

QUiESiTUM. — Probability of the event that either the first

throw will give an ace, and the second not an ace ; or the first

will not give an ace, and the second will give one.

Here the two data are the probabilities of simple events de-
fined as the first throw ^ving an ace, and the second throw
giving an ace. The qusesitum is the probability of a compound
event, — a certain disjunctive combination of the simple events

CHAP. XVI.] OP THB THBOBT OP PBOB4B1L1TIB8. 247

involved or implied in the data. Probably it will generally hap-
pen, when the numerical oonditiona of a problem are capable of
being deduced, as above, from the constitution of things under
which they exist, that the data will be the probabilities of simple
events, and the quesitum the probability of a compaynd event
dependent upon the said simple events. Such b the case with a
class of problems which has occupied perhaps an undue share of
the attention of those who have studied the theory of probabilities,
viz., games of chance and skill, in the former of which some
physical drcumstance, aa the constitution of a die, determines
the probability of each possible step of the game, its issue being
some definite coknbination of those steps ; while in the latter, the
relative dexterity of the players, supposed to be known d prwri^
equally determines the same element. But where, as in statisti-
cal problems, the elements of our knowledge are drawn, not from
the study of the constituticm of things, but from the registered
observations of Nature or of human society, there is no reason
why the data which such olMervations afford should be the pro*
babilities of simple events. On the contrary, the occurrence of
events or conditions in marked combinations (indicative of some
secret connexion of a causal character) suggests to us the pro-
priety of making such concurrencevpi^table for future instruc-
tion by a numerical record of their frequenqr. Now the data
which observations of this kind afford are the probabilities of
compound events. The solution, by some general method, of
problems in which such data are involved, is thus not only essen-
tial to the perfect development of the theory of prot)abilities, but
also a perhaps necessary condition of its application to a large
and practically important class of inquiries.

6. Before we proceed to estimate to what extent known me-
thods may be applied to the solution of problems such as the
above, it will be advantageous to notice, that there is another
fumi under which all questions in the theory of probabilities may
be viewed ; and this fonn consists in subntituting for events the
pro|MJsitions which a<isort that those events have occurred, or
will occur ; and viewing the element of numerical probability as
having reference to the truth of those ftrapa s ii wm^ not to the or-

248 OF THE THEORY OF PR0BABIUTIB8. [CHAP. XTI.

currence of the events concerning which they make assertion.
Thus, instead of considering the numerical fraction p as ex-
pressing the probability of the occurrence of an event £, let it
be viewed as representing the probability of, the truth of the
proposition X^ which asserts that the evejut E will occur. Si-
milarly, instead of any probability, ^, /being considered as re-
ferring to some compound event, such as the concurrence of the
events E and J*, let it represent the probability of the trutii of
the proposition which asserts that E and F will joinUy occur;
and in like manner, let the transformation be made from disjunc-
tive and hypothetical combinations of events to disjunctive and
conditional propositions. Though the new application thus as-
signed to probability is a necessary concomitant of the old one,
its adoption will be attended with a practical advantage drawn
from the circumstance that we have already discussed the theory
of propositions, have defined their principal varieties, and estab-
lished methods for determining, in every case, the amount and
character of their mutual dependence. Upon this, or upon some
equivalent basis, any general theory of probabilities must rest
I do not say that other considerations may not in certain cases of
applied theory be requisite. The data may prove insufiScient for
definite solution, and this defect it may be thought necessary to
supply by hypothesis. Or, where the statement of large num-
bers is involved, difficulties may arise after the solution, from this
source, for which special methods of treatment are required.
But in every instance, some form of the general problem as above
stated (Art. 4) is involved, and in the dbcussion of that problem
the proper and peculiar work of the theory consists. I desire it
to be observed, that to this object the investigations of the fol-
lo>\Hing chapters are mainly devoted. It is not intended to enter,
except incidentally, upon questions involving supplementary hy-
potheses, because it is of primary importance, even with reference
to such questions (I. 17), that a general method, founded upon
a solid and sufficient basis of theory, be first established.

7. The following is a summary, chiefly taken from Laplace, of
the principles which have been applied to the solution of questions
of probability. They are consequences of its fundamental defini-

CHAP. XTI.] OF THB TBBOBT OF PBOBABILITIBS. S49

tions mlrcady stated, and may be regarded as indicating the degree
in which it hat been found possible to render those definitions
avaikble.

Pbinciplb 1st. If p be the probability of the occurrence of
any event, \ -p will be the probability of its non-occurrence.

2nd. The probability of the concurrence of two independent
events is the product of the probabilities of those events.

3rd. The probability of the concurrence of two deiiendent
events is equal to the product of the probability of one of them
by the probability that if that event occur, the other will happen
also.

4th. The probability that if an event, £, take place, an event,
Ff will also take place, is equal to the probability of the concur-
rence of the events E and F, divided by the probability of the
occurrence ofE.

5th. The probability of the occurrence of one or the other of
two events which cannot concur is equal to the sum of their se-
parate probabilities.

6th. If an observed event can only result from some one of ii
different causes which arc d priori e<(ually probable, the prol>a-
bility of any one of the causes is a fraction whose numerator is the
probability of the event, on the hyi)othesis of the existence of that
cause, and whose denominator is the sum of the similar proba-
bilities relative to all the causes.

7th. The probability of a future event is the sum of the pro-
ducts formed by multiplying the probability of each cause by
the probability that if that cause exist, the said future event
will take place.

8. Respecting the extent and the reUtive sufficiency of these
principles, the following observations may be made.

1st. It is always possible, by the due combination of these
principles, to express the probability of a compound event, de-
pendent in any manner upon independent simple events whose
distinct probabilities are given. A very large proiNirtion of the
problems which have been actually solved are of this kind, and
the difficulty attending their solution has not arisen from the in-
safficiency of the indications furnished by the theory of pniba-
bilitiea, but from the need of an analysis which should render

260 OF THB THEORY OF PBOBABILITIB8« [CHAP. X¥l.

those indications available when functions of large numbers, or
series consisting of many and complicated terms, are thereby in-
troduced. It may, therefore, be fully conceded, that all pro-
blems having for their data the probabilities of independent
simple events fall within the scope of received methods.

2ndly. Certain of the principles above enumerated, and espe-
cially the sixth and seventh, do not presuppose that all the data
are the probabilities of simple events. In their peculiar iqpplica-
tion to questions of causation, they do, however, assume, that the
causes of which they take account are mutually exclusive, so
that no combination of them in the production of an effect is
possible. If, as before explained, we transfer the numerical pro-
babilities from the events with which they are connected to the
propositions by which those events are expressed, the most ge-
neral problem to which the aforesaid prindples are applicable
may be stated in the following order of dc^ and qtuBsita.

DATA.

1st. The probabilities of the n conditional propositions :
If the cause Ai exist, the event EyhUI follow ;

55 ^2 55 -^ 55

55 An 99 -E • 99

2nd. The condition that the antecedents of those propositioiw
arc mutually conflicting.

REQUIREMENTS.

The probability of the truth of the proposition which declares
the occurrence of the event E; also, when that proposition w
known to be true, the probabilities of truth of the several pro-
positions which affirm the respective occurrences of the causes

Here it is seen, that the data are the probabilities ofasenes
of compound events, expressed by conditional propositions. But
the system is obviously a very limited and particular one. For
the antecedents of the propositions are subject to the condition of
being mutually exclusive, and there is but one consequent, die
event -E, in the whole system. It does not follow, from our

CHAP. XVI.] OF THE THBORT OF PROBABILITIBf . 861

alnlity to discuss such a system as the above, that we are able to
resolve problems whose data are the probabilities of any system
of conditional propositions ; fiu* less that we can resolve problems
whose data are the probabilities of any system of propositiom
whatever. And, viewing the subject in its material rather /
than its formal aspect, it is evident, that the hypothesis otexdm-
sire causation is one which b not often realized in the actual |
world, the phsenomena of which seem to be, usually, the products (
of complex causes, the amount and character of whose co-opera-
tion is unknown. Such is, without doubt, the case in nearly all ^
departments of natural or social inquiry in which the doctrine of (
probabiUties holds out any new promise of useful applications. ^

9. To the above principles we may add another, which has
been stated in the folio wmg terms by the Savilian Professor of ^
Astronomy in the University of Oxford.* y

** IMnciple 8. If there be any number of mutually ezclunve
hypotheses, Ai, A„ A„ • • of which the probabilities relative to a
particular state of information are pi, pi, p,, . . and if new infor-
mation be given which changes the probabilities of some of them,
suppose of Am.i ftnd all that fellow, without having otherwise
any refirence to the rest ; then the probabilities of these hitter
have the same ratios to one another, after the new information,
that thoy had before, that is,

P I : p'l : p'« • . • : p'« - Pi : Pi : Pi . . : p»»

where the accented letters denote the values after the new infor-
mation has l>cen ai^quircd.'*

Thiit principle is ap[)arcntly of a more fundamental character
than the moot of those before cnwnerated, and i)crha|)s it might, as
hai« l)ocn nuggestc^l by Professor Donkin, be rcganlcd ao axio-
matic. It i«ocms indeed to be founded in the very definition of
the HH'atturc of pn»bability, as ** the ratio of the number of cases
favoumhle to an event to the total number of cartes favourable or
contrary, and all equally jiotfsible." For, adopting this definition,
it is evident tliat in whatever proiK>rtion the number of e<|ually

• On reruin Qwctiou nlating to t^TlMory of ProbaUlitiM; by W. F.
Doakin. M. A.. F. R. 8.. &€. PbilcwophirftI Msffaiiw, May. IS&I.

252 OF THE THEORY OF PROBABILITIES. [CHAP. XVi.

possible cases is diminished, while the number of favourable cases
mruuna unaltered, in exactly the same proportion wiU the pro-
babilities of any events to which these cases have reference be
increased. And as the new hypothesis, viz., the diminution of
the number of possible cases without affecting the number of
them which are &vourable to the events in question, increases
the probabilities of those events in a constant ratio, the relative
measures of those probabilities remain unaltered. If the principle
we are considering be then, as it appears to be, inseparably in-
volved in the very definition of probability, it can scarcely, of
itselfy conduct us further than the attentive study of the defini-
tion would alone do, in the solution of problems. From these
considerations it appears to be doubtful whether, without some
lud of a different kind from any that has yet offered itself to our
notice, any considerable advance, either in the theory of proba-
bilities as a branch of speculative knowledge, or in the practical
solution of its problems can be hoped for. And the establish-
ment, solely upon the basis of any such collection of principles as
the above, of a method universally applicable to the solution of
problems, without regard either to the number or to the nature
of the propositions involved in the expression of their data,
seems to be impossible. For the attainment of such an object
other elements are needed, the consideration ofwhich will occupy
the next chapter.

CHAP. XTII.] OlMBRAL METHOD IN PR0BABILITIB8. 25S

CHAPTER XVII.

DBMONSTRATION OF A GBNBRAL MBTHOD FOR THB SOLUTION OF
PROBLBM8 IN TUB THBORY OF PROBABILITIBS.

1. TT has been defined (XVI. 2), that <<the measure of the
-^ probability of an event is the ratio of the number of cases
fiivourable to that event, to the total number of cases &vourable
or unfavourable, and all equally possible." In the following in-
vestigations the term probability will be used in the above sense
of ^* measure of probability."

From the above definition we may deduce the following con-
clusions.

I. >Vlien it is certain that an event will occur, the probability
of that event, in the a))ove mathematical sense, is 1. For the
cases which are favourable to the event, and the cases which are
poasible, are in this instance the same.

Hence, also, ifp be the probability that an event x will happen,
I - p will be the probability that the said event will not happen.
To deduce this result directly from the definition, let m be the
number of cases favourable to the event x, n the number of cases
possible, then M-m is the number of cases unfiivourablo to the
event x. Hence, by definition,

— » probability that x will happen.

• probability that x will not happen.

But w - w , iw ,

— ^ al- — ■ 1-p.
II n "^

II. The probability of the concurrence of any two events is
the product of the probability of either of those events by the
proboliility that if thai event occur, the other will occur also.

Let M be the number of cases fiivourable to the happening
of the first event, and ii the number of equally posrible cases uih
frvourable to it ; then the probability of the first event ia, by defini-

264 G8NBRAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIB8. [CHAP. XYIf.

tn

tion, • Of the m cases favourable to the first event, let /

m + n

cases be favourable to the conjunction of the first and second

events, then, by definition, — is the probability that if the first

event happen, the second also will happen. Multiplying these
fiactions together, we have

*

m I I

X — =

171 + n m m + It

But the resulting fraction has for its numerator the nam-

° m + n

ber of cases favourable to the conjunction of events, and for its
denominator, the number m + n of possible cases. Therefore,
it represents the probability of the joint occurrence of the two
events.

Hence, ifp be the probability of any event a:, and q the pro-
bability that if X occur y will occur, the probiability of the con-
junction xy will be pq*

III. The probability that if an event x occur, the event y will
occur, is a fraction whose numerator is the probability of thdr
joint occurrence, and denominator the probability of the occur-
rence of the event x.

This is an immediate consequence of Principle 2nd.

IV. The probability of the occurrence of some one of a series
of exclusive events is equal to the sum of their separate proba-
bilities.

For let n be the number of possible cases ; mi the number of
those cases favourable to the first event ; m^ the number of cases
favourable to the second, &c. Then the separate probabilities of

the events are — , — , &c. Again, as the events are exclusive,

n n °

none of the cases favourable to one of them is favourable to

another; and, therefore, the number of cases favourable to some

one of the series will be mi + wij . . , and the probability of some

one of the series happening will be — ^ 2-LLl. But this is the

sum of the previous fmctions, ~, ~, &c. Whence the prin-
[>le is manifest.

CHAP. XVII.] OUntRAL MITHOD IN PROBABILmXS. SSS

2. DiFiNiTioN. — Two events are aaid to be independent
when the probability of the hi4)pening of either of them is
unaffected by our expectation of the occurrence or fiulure of
the other.

From this definition, combined with Principle II., we have
the following conclusion :

V. The probability of the concurrence of two independent
events is equal to the product of the separate probabilities of
those events.

For if p bo the probability of an event or, q that of an eventy
regarded as quite independent of x, then is q iJso the probability
that if X occur y will occur. Hence, by Principle II., pq is the
probability of the concurrence of x and y.

Under the same circumstances, the probability that x will
occur and y not occur will be //(I -q). For p b the probability
that X will occur, and \ -q the probability that y will not occur.
In like manner (1 - Z?) (1 - 7) will be the probability that both
the events fail of occurring.

3. There exists yet another principle, different in kind from
the atiove, but necessary to the subsequent investigations of this
chapter, before proceeding to the explicit statement of which I
imn to make one or two preliminary obflervataons.

I would, in the first place, remark that the distinction be-
tween simple and compound events is not one founded in the
nature of events themselves, but upon the mode or connexion in
which they are presented to the mind. How many separate par-
ticulars, for instance^ are implied in the terms ** To be in health,**
** To prosper," &c., each of which might still bo regarded as
expressing a *^ simple event'* ? The prescriptive usages of Lan-
guage, which have assigned to particubu* combinations of events
sngle and definite appellations, and have left unnumbered other
oombinations to be expressed by corresponding combinations of
distinct terms or phrases, is essentially arbitrary. When, then,
we designate as simple events tho^ie which are expressed by a
tingle verb, or by what grammarians term a simple sentence, we
do not thereby imply any real simplicity in the events thcni-
telves, but use the term solely with reference to grammatical
expression.

256 GENERAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIES. [CHAF. XVII.

4. Now if this distinction of events, as simple or compound, is
not founded in their real nature, but rests upon the accidents of
language, it cannot affect the question of their mutual depend-
ence or independence. If my knowledge of two simple events is
confined to this particular fact, viz., that the probability of the
occurrence of one of them is p, and that of the other q ; then I re-
gard the events as independent, and thereupon affirm that the
probability of their joint occurrence is pq. But the ground of
this affirmation is not that the events are simple ones, but that
the data afford no information whatever concerning any connexion
or dependence between them. When the probabilities of events
are given, but all information respecting their dependence with-
held, the mind regards them as independent. And this mode of
thought is equally correct whether the events, judged according
to actual expression, are simple or compound, i. e., whether each
of them is expressed by a single verb or by a combination of
verbs.

5. Let it, however, be supposed that, together with the pro-
babilities of certain events, we possess some definite information
respecting their possible combinations. For example, let it be
known that certain combinations are excluded from happening,
and therefore that the remaining combinations alone are possible.
Then still is the same general principle applicable. The mode
in which we avail ourselves of this information in the calculation
of the probability of any conceivable issue of events depends not
upon the nature of the events whose probabilities and whose
limits of possible connexion are given. It matters not whether
they are simple or compound. It is indifferent from what source,
or by what methods, the knowledge of their probabilities and of
their connecting relations has been derived. We must regard
the events as independent of any connexion beside that of which
we have information, deeming it of no consequence whether such inr
formation has been explicitly conveyed to us in the data^ or thence
deduced by logical inference. And this leads us to the statement
of the general principle in question, viz. :

VI. The events whose probabilities are given are to be re-
garded as independent of any connexion but such as is either
expressed, or necessarily implied, in the data; and the mode in

CHAP* Xni.] OBNBftAL MBTHOD IH PROBABILimS. S67

which our knowledge of that oonnezion is to be employed is in-
dependent of the nature of the source from which such know-
ledge has been derived.

The practical importance of the above principle condsts
in the circumstance, that whatever may be the nature of the
events whose probabilities are given, — whatever the nature of
the event whose probability is sought, we are always able, by an
application of the Calculus of Logic, to determine the expression
of the latter event as a definite combination of the former events^
and definitely to asngn the whole of the implied relations con-
necting the former events Mrith each other. In other words, we •
can determine what that combination of the given events is whose
probability is required, and what combinations of them are alone
possible. It follows then from the above prindple, that we can
reason upon those events as if they were simple events, whose
conditions of posmble combination had been directly given by
experience, and of which the probability of some definite combi-
nation is sought. The possibility of a general method in proba-
bilities depends upon this reduction.

6. As the investigations upon which we are about to enter
are based upon the employment of the Calculus of Logic, it is
necessary to explain certain terms and modes of expression which
are dmved from this application.

By the event x, I mean that event of which the propontion

which aflirms the occurrence is symbolically expressed by the

equation

X- 1.

By the event f (x, y, z, . •), I mean that event of which the
oocurrcnoc la expressed by the equation

f ('»y»^>-0 - 1-

Such an event may be termed a compound event, in relation to
the simple events x, y, ;, which its conception involves. Thus,
if X represent the event ** It rains,** y the event ** It thunders,**
the separate occurrences of those events being expressed by the
loeical equatbns

thcB will x(l - y) -i- y(l - x) repretent the eroit or atate of

268 OBNBRAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIIS* [CHAP. Z?II«

things denoted by the Propoaitionf << It dther nuns or thnnden,
but not both ;" the expression of that state of things bdng

If for brevity we represent the function ^ (xy y, z, • •), used in
the above acceptation by F, it is evident (VI. 13) that the law
of duality

r(i-r)-o,

will be identically satisfied.

The simple events Xy y, z will be said to be <* conditioned"
when they are not free to occur in every possible combination;
in other words, when some comjpound event depending upon
them is precluded from occurring. Thus the events denoted by
the propositions, " It rains," " It thunders," are " conditioned''
if the event denoted by the proposition, ^^ It thunders, but does
not ram," is excluded fi-om happening, so that the range of pos-
sible is less than the range of conceivable combination. Smple
unconditioned events are by definition independent.

Any compoimd event is similarly said to be conditioned if it
is assumed that it can only occur under a certain condition, thai
is, in combination with some other event constituting, by its pre-
sence, that condition.

7. We shall proceed in the natural order of thought, from
simple and unconditioned, to compound and conditioned events.

Proposition I.

Ist. If Py q^ T are the respective probabilities of any unant'
ditioned simple events a:, y, z^ the probability of any compound
event V will Z»e [FT], this function \\^ being formed by changingj
in the function F, the symbols x, y, z into /?, (/, r, Sfc.

2ndly. Under the same circumstances^ the probability that if
the event V occur y any other event V mil also occuTy will be

r vv^

TTT^ y wherein [^VV^ denotes the result obtained by muUiplymg

together the logical functions V and V'y and changing in the resuU
^i !/> ^y 5'c. iiito py qy r, §-c.

Let us confine our attention in the first place to the poe-

CHAP. XTIk] OBNIEAL MSTHOD IN PEOBABILITIBS. S59

•iUe combinations ofthe two aiinplceyontsyx and y, of which the
respective probabilities are p and g. The primary combinations
of thoec events (V. 1 1), and their corresponding probabilities, are
■8 follows:

BVBNTS. PROBABILmiS.

jy, Conemrence of x and y, pq.

*(l-y), Oocmrcnce of X without y, /^(1-j).

(1 - x)y, Occurrence of y without x, (1 - /^) y.

(1 - x) (I - y), Conjoint fidlure of x and y, (1 -p) (I - q).

We see that in these cases the probability of the compound event
represented by a constituent is the same function o£ p and g as
the logical expression of that event b of x and y ; and it ia obvious
that tUs remark applies, whatever may be the number of the
simple events whose probalnlities are given, and wh(Me jami er-
istemre or failure is involved in the compound event of which we
seek the probability.

Consider, in the second place, any disjunctive combination of
the aliove constituents. The compound event, expressed in or-
dinary language as the occurrence of *^ cither the event x without
the event y, or the event y without the event x,*' is symbolically
expressed in the form x(I - y) + y (I - x), and its probability,
determined by Principles iv. and ▼•) b /^ (1 - f ) + 7 (1 - p). The
kttcr of these expressions is the same function of p and q as the
former is of x and y. And it is obvious that this is also a par-
Ucular illustration of a general rule. The events which are ex-
pressed by any two or more constituents are mutually exclusive.
The only possible combination of them is a disjunctive one, ex-
pressed in ordinary language by the conjunetioii ar^ in the lan-
guage of symlwlical logic by the sign -¥* Now the probability of
the occurrence of some one out of a set of mutually exclusive
events is the sum of th^ separate probabilities, and is expressed
by connecting the expressions for those separate probabilities by
the sign 4. Thus the law above exemplified is seen to beyrucroA
The probability of any unconditioned event V will be found by
changing in V the symbols x, y, x, • • into p%q^r^ ••

8. Again, by Principle in., the probability that if the e%-ent
V oocur, the event K* will oocur with it, is exproasod by a fi«o-

s2

260 GENERAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIES. [CHAP. XTlh

tion whose numerator is the probability of the joint oocmTenoe
of Fand Vf and denominator the probability of the occorrenoe

of r.

Now the expression of that event, or state of things, which id
constituted by the joint occurrence of the events Fand F', will
be formed by multiplying together the expressions Fand P^ ac-
cording to the rules of the Calculus of Logic ; since whatever
constituents are found in both Fand V will appear in the pro-
duct, and no others. Again, by what has just been shown, the
probability of the event represented by that product will be de-
termined by changing therein or, y, z into p, q^r^ .. Hence the
numerator sought will be what [FF] by definition represents.
And the denominator will be [F], wherefore

Probability that if F occur, V will occur with it = p-^-* .

9. For example, if the probabilities of the simple events
x^ tfi z are /?, 7, r respectively, and it is required to find the pro-
bability that if either x or y occur, then either y or z wiU occur,
we have for the logical expressions of the antecedent and conse-
quent —

Ist. Either x or y occurs, a? (1 - y) + y (1 - x).

2nd. Either y or z occurs, y (1 - z) + z (1 - y).

If now we multiply these two expressions together according to
the rules of the Calculus of Lo^c, we shall have for the expres-
sion of the concurrence of antecedent and consequent,

a:z(l-y)+y(l-a;) (1-^).

Changing in this result jr, y, z into />, </, r, and similarly trans-
forming the expression of the antecedent, we find for the proba-
bility sought the value

pr(l-q) + q{\ -p){l-r)
/?(l-y) + ?(!-/>)

The special function of the calculus, in a case like the above, is
to supply the office of the reason in determining what are the
conjunctures involved at once in the consequent and the ante-
cedent. But the advantage of this application is almost entirely

CHAP. XTII.] OINIRAL METHOD IH PROBABILITIBS. 261

prospective, aod will be made manifest in a subsequent propo-
sition.

Proposition II.

10. li is known thai the jNrobabilitiet of certain eimpU evenU
x, jf, Zy • • are f^ 9, r, • • retpecUody when a certain condition V is
satisfied; Vbeing inexpreuion a Junction ofxy y^ z^.. Required
the absolute probabilities qf the events x, jf, ;s, • • , that is^ the
probabilities o/their respective occurrence independently of the eon-
diiion V.

^tp\ 7^9 r\ &c., be the probabilities required, i. e. the pro-
babilities of the events x, y, ;s, • • , regarded not only as simple,
but as independent events. Then by Prop. i. the probabilities
that these events mil occur when the condition K, represented
by the logical equation F- 1, is satisfied, are

[xT] [yF] [xT]
PT' '[V] ' [K]'"^*'

m which [x V] denotes the result obtuned by multiplying V by
X, according to the rules of the Calculus of Logic, and changing
in the result a y, x, into p , q\ r , &c But the above condi-
tioned probabilities are by hypothesis equal to p, f, r, .. re-
spectively. Hence we have,

JVY '^ "HT ^' IF]' '^'**-'

firom which system of equations equal in number to the quanti-
ties /^, ^, r^, • • , the values of those quantities may be deter-
mined.

Now a: F consists simply of those constituents in Fof which
X is a factor. Lict this sum be represented by F„ and in like
manner let y F be represented by F^, &o. Our equations then
assume the form

5-^-P. ^-?.4c; (I)

where [FJ denotes the results obtuned by c h angin g m F, the
symbok x, y, z^ dxx, into j^' q/r/&c.

To render the "y»^*»g of the genend ^blem and the prin<»

262 OBKBRAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIB8. [CBAP. XYII.

■

dple of its eolation more evident, let us take tlie fbUowing ex-
ample. Suppose that in the drawing of balls from an nm
attention had only been paid to those cases in which the balls
drawn were either of a particular colour, *< white,'' or of a par-
ticular composition, *< marble," or were marked by botii tiiese
characters, no record having been kept of those cases in which a
ball tiiat was neither white nor of marble had been drawn. Let
it then have been found, that whenever* the supposed ccmdition
was satisfied, there was aprobabilitypthata white ball wotdd be
drawn, and a probability ; that a marble ball would be drawn : and
fix>m these data alone let it be required to find the probabilitj
that in the next drawing, witiiout reference at all to the ocvndi-
tion above mentioned, a white ball will be drawn ; also the pro-
bability that a marble ball will be drawn*

Here if a: represent the drawing of a white ball, y that of a.
marble ball, the condition Fwill be represented by the lo^cal

function

xy + x(l - y) + (I - x) y.
Hence we have

If^x » ay + «(1 - y) « ar, Fi, =» ay + (1 - a:) y =y ;
whence

and the final equations of the problem are

p^ I

from which we find

, p-f y "1 , P +?-l

9 P

It is seen that/?' and y'are respectively proportional top and
y, as by Professor Donkin's principle they ought to be. The
solution of this class of problems might indeed, by a direct appli-
cation of that principle, be obtained.

To meet a possible objection, I here remark, that the above
reasoning does not require that the drawings of a white and a
marble ball should be independent, in virtue of the physical con-
stitution of the balls. The assumption of their independence i0
indeed involved in the solution, but it does not rest upon UBJ

CBAP. XTU.] OBNBEAL MBTBOO IN PROBABlUTtBS. S68

prior tmnimption m to the nature of the bails, and their relationa,
or freedom fifooi relations, of form, oolour, structure, &e. It is
founded upon our total ignorance of all these things. Probabi-
lity always has reference to the state of our achial knowledge,
and its numerical value varies with varying information.

PaoposmoN III.

11. To deUrmine in anff questum of probabUUiti ike logical
coMnexiarnqfthequiBsiiumunth the data; thai u, to aaign the eveni
whose probabUUjf is sought^ as a logical fwictiom of the event whose
probabilities are given*

Let St Tf «&c., represent any compound events whose pro-
babilities are given, S and T being in expression known' func-
tions of the symbols x, y, 2, iSfcc., representing simple events.
Similarly let IV represent any event whose probability is sought,
tV being also a known function of x, jf, x, &c. As S, T, . . fF
must satisfy the fundamental law of duality, we arc permitted
to replace them by single logical symbols, «, ^, . • w. Assume
then

These, by the definition of iS^ T, • • JF, will be a series of
logical ec^uations connecting the symbobi, t^.w^ with the sym-
bols X, y, X . •

By the methods of the Calculus of Logic we can eliminate
from the above system any of the symbols x, y, x, • • , repre-
senting events wliotfc probabilities arc not given, and detemune
ar as a dcvel()[)cd function off, f, &c., and of such of the syiubdla
X, y, X, &c., if any such there be, as correspond to events whose
probabilities are given. The result will be of the form

where Ay li^ C, and D comprise among them all the possible
consiitueiUs wliich can be fonned from the symboln «, /, i^c, i. c.
from all the symbols representing events whoso probabilities are
given.

• The above will evidently be the complete expression of the
zehtion sou^t For it fully detemunes the event fK, repro-

264 GBNIRAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIBS. [CHAP. XVII.

sented by the single symbol to, as a fimction or comlmiation of
the events similarly denoted by the symbols «, t^ Ac., and it as-
signs by the laws of the Calculus of Logic the conditioQ

as connecting the events 8^ tj &c., among themselves. We may,
therefore, by Principle vi., regard s, t^ &c., as simple events, of
virhich the combination u?, and the condition with which it is as-
sociated /), are definitely determined.

Uniformity in the logical processes of reduction being de-
sirable, I shall here state the order which will generally be pur-
sued.

12. By (Vm. 8), the primitive equations are redudble to

the forms

#(l-5) + /S(l-*) = 0;

^(l-r)+r(l-0-0; (1)

u,(l-Tr)+TF(l-w)-0;

under which they can be added together without impuring tiieir
significance. We can then eliminate the symbols Xy y, z, either
separately or together. If the latter course is chosen, it is ne-
cessary, after adding together the equations of tlie system, to
develop the result with reference to all the symbols to be elimi-
nated, and equate to the product of all the coefficients of the
constituents (VII. 9).

As w is the symbol whose expression is sought, we may also,
by Prop. III. Chap, ix., express the result of elimination in the
form

Ew + E^l - «?) = 0.

E and E being successively determined by making in the
general system (1), w = 1 and m? = 0, and eliminating the symbols
Xy y, z, . . Thus the single equations from which E and jFare
to be respectively determined become

* ( 1 - 5) + 5 ( 1 - *) + ^ ( 1 - T) + !r( 1 - . . + 1 - W^ = ;
*(l-5) + 5(l-*) + ^(l«r)+ ^^(1-0+ ^=0.

From these it only remains to eliminate a?, y, Zy &c., and to de-
termine w by subsequent development;

CBAP. XTIl.] OBMBEAL MBTHOD IN PEOBABILITIBS. 865

In the process of elimination we may, if needful, avail our-
selves of the simplifications of Props, i. and ii. Chap. ix.

13. Should the data, beside informing us of the probabilities
of events, further assign among them any explicit connexion, such
connexion must be logically expressed, and the equation or equa-
tions thus formed be introduced into the general system.

Proposition IV.

14. Given the prcbabiUtiet <ffany gffetem ef events ; to deter^
wume by a general method the canseqnent or derived probabiUtff of
oMjf other event.

As in the last Proposition, let Sj T^ &c., be the events whose
probabilities are given, IT the event whose probability is sought,
these being known functions of a^ y, z, &c. Let us represent the
data as follows :

Probability of 5 - p ;

Probability of r- y ; ^^^

and so on, p, 7, Ac., being known numerical values. If then
we represent the compound event Shy s^ T by ^, and \V by ir,
we find by the last proposition^

w-il + Ofi + Jc+J/); (2)

j4, Bf Cy and D bong functions of «, /, &c Moreover the data
(1) are transformed into

Prob. * - p, Prob. / - 9, &o. (3)

Now the equation (2) is resolvable into the system

9 being an indefinite chss symbol (VI. 12). But since by the
properties of constituents (V. Prop. 111.), we have

il + i?+C+Z>- 1,

the second equation of the above sjrstem may be exprasiod in the
fbnn

266 OINBRAL METHOD IN PBOBABILITniS. [cHAP. XVII.

If we represent the fimction A ■¥ B + ChjVf the syBtem (4)

becomes

w-A + qC; (6)

Fc, 1. (6)

Let us for a moment consider this result. Since V is the sum
of a series of constitaents of s, t, <Sx^., it represents the compound
event in which the simple events involved are those denoted by
Sj tj &c. Hence (6) shows that the events denoted bj s, t^ &c.,
and whose probabilities^ are p, q^ <S:c., have such probabilities not
as independent events^ but as events subject to a certain condition
V. Equation (5) expresses to as a similarly conditioned coinU-
nation of the same events.

Now by Principle vi. the mode in which this knowledge of tlie
connexion of events has been obtained does not influence the mode
in which, when obtained, it is to be employed. We must reason
upon it as if experience had presented to us the events s, t^ <&c.,
as simple events, &ee to enter into every combination, but pos-
sessing, when actually subject to the condition Vj the probabili-
ties Pi q, &c., respectively.

Let then p\ 5^, . . , be the corresponding probabilities of such
events, when the restriction V is removed. Then by Prop. 11.
of the present chapter, these quantities will be determined by the
system of equations,

and by Prop. I. the probability of the event w under the same
condition V will be

Prob. w = ^^F^; (8)

wherein V, denotes the sum of those constituents in F of which s
is a iactor, and [ FJ what that sum becomes when *, ^, . . , are
changed into y, q\ - • 9 respectively. The constant c represents
the probability of the indefinite event q; it is, therefore, arbitrary,
and admits of any value from to 1 .

Now it will be observed, that the values of//, q\ &c., are de-
termined from (7) only in order that they may be substituted in
(8^^ so as to render Prob. lo a function of known quantities, Pf ?)

CBAP. Xm.] GBltXRAL MBTHOD III PBOBABILITIM. MT

Ac It b obvioiu, therefore, thttt bsteed of the letters p^ ^, Ac,
we might employ any others as «, ^ Ae^ in the same qmmtiiotiot
aooeptatioiis. This particular step would simply involTe a ehange
of meaning of the symbols «, I, Ac — ^thdr ceasing to be loffieal^
and becoming ymoMiiiative. The systems (T) and (8) would then

become

V V '

-f^Ih -p-yf4«M (9)

Rob. w - ^?-^. (10)

In employing these, it is only necessary to detenmne from (9)

8y f, Ac, regarded as quantitatiye symbols, in terms of ;», 7, Ac,

and substitute the resulting values in (10). It is evident, that

#, r, Ac, inasmuch as they represent probabilities^ will be poutive

proper fractions.

The system (9) may be more symmetrically expressed in the

fixrm

V V

i.'-If..-r. (11)

Or we may express both (9) and (10) together in the symin^
tiical system

wherein u represents Prob. w.

15. It remains to interpret the constant c assumed to rcpre*
sent the probability of the indefinite event 7. Now the logical
equation

interpreted in the reverse order, implies that if either the event
A take place, or the event C in connexion with the event 7, the
event tr will take place, and not otherwise Hence // reprciients
that oomlition under which, if the event C take place, the went
tr will take place. But the probability of 9 Li r. Hence, thcrc-
Ibre, c - probability that if the event C take place the event w
will take place. *

Wherefore by Principle 11^

Probability of concurrence of 6^ and ir
"" " PhiUibiUty of C •

268 OlftNBRAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIB8. [CHAP. XVII.

We may hence determine the nature of that new experience
firom which the actual vfdue of c maj be obtained* For if we
substitute in C for «, t^ &c., their original expressions as func-
tions of the simple events x^ y, z, <S:c., we shall form the ex*
pression of that event whose probability constitutes the denomi-
nator of the above value of c ; and if we multiply that expresdon
by the original expression of w, we shall form the expression of
that event whose probability constitutes the numerator of c^ and
the ratio of the frequency of this event to that of the firmer one^ d^
terminedby new observations^ will give the value of c. Let it be
remarked here, that the constant c does not necessarily make its
appearance in the solution of a problem. It is only when the
data are insufficient to render determinate the probability sought,
that this arbitrary element presents itself, and in this case it is
seen that the final logical equation (2) or (5) informs us how it
is to be determined.

Kthat new experience by which c may be determined can-
not be obtained, we can still, by assigning to c its limiting values
and 1, determine the limits of the probability of w. These
are

A
Minor limit of Prob. m? = rp .

Superior limit = — p— .

Between these limits, it is certain that the probability sought
must lie independently of all new experience which does not ab-
solutely contradict the past.

If the expression of the event C consists of many constituents,
the logical value of w being of the form

we can, instead of employing their aggregate as above, present
the final solution in the form

„ , A -k- CiCi + C2C2 + &c.
Prob. to = r= .

CHAP. XTII.] GINIRAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIIS. M8

Here Ci ■ probability that if the event Ci occur, the event w will
occur, and so on for the others. Convenience must decide which
form is to be preferred.

16. The above is the complete theoretical solution of the
problem proposed. It may be added, that it is applicable equally
to the case in which any of the eventa mentioned in its original
statement arc conditioned. Thus, if one of the data is the proba-
bility />, that if the event x occur the event y will occur ; the
probability of the occurrence of x not being given, we must as-
sume Prob. X - r (an arbitrary constant), then Prob. xy ■• cp, and
these two conditions must be introduced into the data, and em-
ployed according to the previous method. Again, if it is sought
to determine the probability that if an event x occur an event y
will occur, the solution will assume the form

Ti_u Li. l^t)b. xu

the numerator and denominator of which must be separately de-
termined by the previous general method.

n. We are enabled by the results of these investigations to
establish a general rule for the solution of questions m probabi-
lities.

Gbniral Rolb.

C ASB I. — fVhen all the evenU are wKondiiumed.

Form the symbolical expreeuons of the events whose proba-
bilities are given or sought.

E>iuate such of those expressions as relate to compound events
to a new series of symbols, «, /, &c., which symbols regard as re-
presenting the events, no longer as compound but simple, to
whose expressions they have been equated.

Eliminate from the equations thus formed all the logical sym-
bols, except those which express events, «, ^, &c., whose respective
probabilities p, q, &c. are given, or the event w whose probability
b sought, and determine ir as a developed function of «, ^ &c

in theibrm

1^

270 OBNERAL METHOD IN PROBABIUTIBS. [CHAP. XYIL

Let J. + J3 + C » Vy and let F« repreeent the ^gpegaj^ of
those coDBtituents in F which contain « aa a ftctor, Ft of those
which contain ^ as a &ctor, and thus for all the symbok whose
probabilities arc given.

Then, passing from Logic to Algebra, form the equations

M-^. 0)

Prob. to - — ^— , (2)

from (1) determine s^ f, &c. as frmctions oi p^ q, &c^ and sub-
stitute their values in (2). The result will express the solution
required.

Or form the sjrmmetrical system of equations

V. V, A^cC V

7"7 s~'T w

where u represents the probability sought.

If c appear in the solution, its interpretation will be

Prob. Cw
^" Prob.£?'

and this interpretation indicates the nature of the experience
which is necessary for its discovery.

Cask II. — Wlien same of the events are conditioned.

If there be given the probability p that if the event X occur,
the event Y will occur, and if the probability of the antecedent
X be not given, resolve the proposition into the two following,
viz.:

Probability of -X = c,

Probability of -Xy = cp.

If the quacsltum be the probability that if the event fT occur,
the event Z will occur, determine separately, by the previous
case, the terms of the fraction

Prob. WZ
Prob. W '

and the fraction itself will express the probability sought.

CHAP. Xm.] O^^nBRAL BRTHOD IN PROBABILITIBS. S71

It is undentood in this case that X, Y, IF, Z may be any
compound OYenta whataoever. The ezpresnons X, Y and JVZ
represent the produota of the symbolical exprosuons of X and Y
and of fV and Z, formed according to the rules of the Calculus of
Logia

The determination of the single constant e may in certttn
cases be resolved into, or replaced by, the determination of aseriea
of arbitrary constants Ci, Cf . according to convenience, as pre*
viously ezphdned.

18. It has been stated (1. 12) that there exist two distinct de-
finitions, or modes of conception, upon which the theory of pro-
babilities may be made to depend, one of them bebg connected
more immediately with Number, the other more directly with
Logic. Wc have now considered the consequences which flow
from the numerical definition, and have shown how it conducts
us to a point in which the necessity of a connexion with Logic
obviously suggests itself. We have seen to some extent what
is the nature of that connexion ; and further, in what manner the
peculiar {irocesiies of Logic, and the more fiimiliar ones of quanti-
tative Algebra, arc involved in the same general method of solu-
tion, each of these so accomplishing its own object that the two
processes may be regarded as supplementary to each other. It
remains to institute the reverse order of investigation, and, setting
eat from a definition of probability in which the logical relation
is more immediately involved, to show how the numerical defini-
tion would thence arise, and how the same general method,
equally dependent uinm both elements, would finally, but by a
dtflercnt order of procedure, be established.

That between the symbolical expresi«ions of the logical cal-
culus and thiwc of Algebra there exists a close analogy, is a fad
to which attention has frequently been directed in the course of
the present treatise. It might even be said that they possess a
oommunity of forms, and, to a very considerable degree* a com- V
munity of laws. With a single exception in the latter respect,
their diiference is only one of interfMretation. Thus the same
expression admits of a logical or of a quantitative interpretation,
acccHrding to the particular meaning which we attach to the sym-

272 GENERAL METHOD IN PROBABILITIBS. [CHAP. XTH.

bols it Involves. The expression zy represents, nndef the former
condition, a concurrence of the events denoted bj x and y ; under
the latter, the product of the numbers or quantities denoted by x
and y. And thus every expression denoting an event, simple or
compoimd, admits, under another system of interpretation, of a
meaning purely quantitative. Here then arises the questioD,
whether there exists any principle of transition, in accordaoce
with which the logical and the numerical interpretations of the
same symbolical expression shall have an intelligible connexion.
And to this question the follo\nng considerations afford an
answer.

19. Let it be granted that there exists such a feeling as ex-
pectation, a feeling of which the object is the occurrence of events,
and which admits of differing degrees of intensity. Let it also
be granted that this feeling of expectation accompanies our
knowledge of the drcumstances under which events are produced,
and that it varies with the degree and kind of that knowledge.
Then, without assuming, or tacitly implying, that the intensity
of the feeling of expectation, viewed as a mental emotion, admits
of precise numerical measurement, it is perfectly legitimate to
inquire into the possibility of a mode of numerical estimation
which shall, at least, satisfy these following conditions, viz., that
the nimaerical value which it assigns shall increase when the
known circumstances of an event are felt to justify a stronger
expectation, shall diminish when they demand a weaker expec-
tation, and shall remain constant when they obviously require an
equal degree of expectation.

Now these conditions at least will be satisfied, if we assume
the fundamental principle of expectation to be this, viz., that the
laws for the expression of expectation, viewed as a numerical
element, shall be the same as the laws for the expression of the
expected event viewed as a logical element. Thus if (x, y, z) re-
present any unconditional event compounded in any manner of
the events x, y, z, let the same expression (ar, y, 2), according
to the above principle, denote the expectation of that event;
a;, y, z representing no longer the simple events involved, but
the expectations of those events.

CHAP. XTII.] GINKRAL MBTHOD III PSOBABIUTIBS. S73

For, in the first place, it U evident that, under this hypothesis,
the proliability of the occurrence of some one of a set of mutually
exclusive events will be equal to the sum of the separate proba-
bilities of those events. Thus if the alternation in question con-
sist of n mutually exclusive events whose expresdons are

the expression of that alternation will be

the literal symbols x, y, z being logical, and relating to the sim«
pic events of which the three alternatives are compounded :
and, by hypothesis, the expression of the probability that some
one of those alternatives will occur is

jr, jf, z here denoting the probabilities of the above simple events.
Now this expression increases, caieris paribus^ with the increase
of the number of the alternatives which are involved, and di-
minishes with the diminution of their number ; which is agree-
able to the condition stated.

Furthermore, if we set out from the above hypothetical defi-
nition of the measure of probability, we shall be conducted,
cither by necessary inference or by successive stciis of suggestion,
which might i)crhaps be termed necessary^ to the received nu-
merical definition. We are at once led to recognise unity ( 1 )
as the pro{)er numerical measure of certainty. For it is certain
that any event x or its contrar}* I - x will occur. The expres-
sion of this proiHMition \a

x+ (1 -x)= 1,

whence, by h^-pothesis, x f (I - x), the measture of the proba-
bility of tlie above pn>{M»sition, becomes the measure of certainty.
But tlie value of that expression is 1, whatever the {ttrticular
\alni* of X nmy l»e. l^iity, or 1, is therefore, on the hypothesis
in que!*tiun, the n)eat*ure of certainty.

Let tliere, in the next place, be n mutually exclusive, buV
c«|iially iMMvible events, which we will represent by ^, f;9 . . /«•

T

274 GENBBAL METHOD IN PBOBABILTTIBS. [CBAP. XJIU

The propoGdtion which affirms that some one of theee most oocar
will be expressed by the equation

*i + ^ . . + fti = 1 ;

and, as when we pass in accordance with the reasoning of the

last section to numerical probabilities, the same equation remains

true in form, and as the probabilities ti, tf.tn are equal, we

have

nil a 1,

whence ^i => -, and dmilarly ^t "> -9 ^« "■ -• Suppose it then re-

quired to determine the probability that some one event of the
partial series t^j ^s • • ^m will occur, we have for the expression
required

/i + ^2 • • + ^f» = - + - • • to wi terms

n n

m
n

Hence, therefore, if there are m cases favourable to the occur-
rence of a particular alternation of events out of n possible and
equally probable cases, the probability of the occurrence of that

alternation will be expressed by the fraction — .

Now the occurrence of any event which may happen in diffe-
rent equally possible ways is really equivalent to the occurrence
of an alternation, i. e., of some one out of a set of alternatives.
Hence the probability of the occurrence of any event may be
expressed by a fraction whose numerator represents the number
of cases favourable to its occurrence, and denominator the total
number of equally possible cases. But this is the rigorous nume-
rical definition of the measure of probability. That definition is
therefore involved in the more peculiarly logical definition, the
consequences of which we have endeavoured to trace.

20. From the above investigations it clearly appears, 1st,
that whether we set out from the ordinary numerical definition
of the measure of probability, or from the definition which assigns
to the numerical measure of probability such a law of value as
shall establish a formal identity between the logical expressions

CHAP* Z?II.] OBVIRAL MITHOD IN PROBABIUTIBS. S76

of events and the algebraic expressions of their values, we shall
be led to the same system of practical results. 2ndl7, that
either of these definitions pursued to its consequences, and con-
sidered in connexion with the relations which it inseparably in-
volves, conducts us, by inference or suggestion, to the other
definition. To a scientific view of the thecny of probabilities
it is essential that both principles should be viewed together, in
their mutual bearing and dependence.

1 2

276 BLBMBNTART ILLUSTRATIONS. [CHAP. X¥Uk

CHAPTER XVIII.

BLEMENTART ILLU8TRATIOK8 OF THE GENERAL METHOD IN PROBA-
BILITIES.

1* TT is designed here to illustrate, by elementary examples,
-^ the general method demonstrated in the last chapter.
The examples chosen will be chiefly such as, from their sim-
plicity, permit a ready verification of the solutions obt^uned.
But some intimations will appear of a higher class of problems,
hereafter to be more fully considered, the analysis of which
would be incomplete ydthout the aid of a distinct method deter-
mining the necessary conditions among their data, in order that
they may represent a possible experience, and assigning the cor-
responding limits of the final solutions. The fuller consideration
of that method, and of its applications, is reserved for the next
chapter.

2. Ex. 1. — The probability that it thimders upon a ^ven
day is /?, the probability that it both thunders and hails is y, but
of the connexion of the two phenomena of thimder and hiul, no-
thing further is supposed to be known. Required the probability
that it hails on the proposed day.

Let X represent the event — It thunders.
Let y represent the event — It hails.

Then x?/ will represent the event — It thunders and hails ; and
the data of the problem are

Prob. X = /?, Prob. xy = q.

There being here but one compound event xy involved, assume,

according to the rule,

xy = u. (1)

Our data then become

Prob. X = p^ Prob. « = y ; (2)

and it is required to find Prob. y. Now (1) gives

CHAP. ZTIII*] BLKMBNTART ILLUSTRATIONS. 277

y.|-i« + i|i(l-x) + 0(l-ti)x + ?(l.ti)(l.x).

Ucnoe (XVII. 17) wc find

r-ia + (l -ti)a: + (l-ti)(l -x),

and the equations of the General Rule, viz.,

p y

•, A ^ cC

Prob.y« — p—

become, on substitution, and observing that ^-tcx, C"(1-m)
(1 - x), and that F' reduces to x + (1 - m) (1 - x),

f.^.x + (l-.i)(l-x), (3)

•^_- ttx + r(l-ti) (1 -x) ...

Prob.y« -. - .>; ^9 (4)

^ X4 (I - n) (1 -x) ^ ^

firom which we readily deduce, by elimination of x and «,

Prob. y - y + ^ (1 - p). (5)

In this result r represents the unknown {irobability that if the
event ( 1 - «) ( 1 - x) happen, the event y will happen. Now
(1 -m) (1 -x)«(l -xy)(l -x)« 1 -X, on actual multiplication.
Hence r is the unknown probability that if it do not thunder, it
will liail.

The general solution (5) may therefore be interpreted as ful-
k>ws : — The probability that it hails is equal to the probability
that it thunders and hails, y, together with the probalulity that it
docs not thunder, 1 -/», multiplied by the probability c, that if it
does not thunder it will hail. And common reasoning verifies
thi:» result.

If r cannot be numericaUy determined, we find, on asi«igning
to it the limiting values and 1, the following limits of Prob. y»
viz.:

Inferior limit • q.

Superior limit »q -*■ I - p.

278 BLBMBNTABT ILLUSTBATION8. [CHAP. XHIL

3. Ex. 2. — ^The probability that one or both of two events
happen is p, that one or both of them fiul is q. What is the
probability that only one of these happens ?

Let X and y represent the respective events, then the data

Prob.ay + a: (1 -y) +(1 - a:)y -ft
Prob. a: (1 - y) + (1 - a:)y + (1 - «) (1 - y) = y ;

and we are to find

Prob.a;(l -y) + y(l -«)•

Here all the events concerned being compound, assume

ay + a? (1 - y) + (1 - a?) y = *,
a? (1 - y) + (1 - x)y + (1 - x) (1 -y) - ^
x(l-y) + (l''x)y = w.

Then eliminating x and y, and determining «? as a developed
function ofs and t^ we find

Hence A--sty C-0, r«*/ + s(l-.*) + (l-*)^ = * + (l-«)<,
Ft'^Sf Vi^'t; and the equations of the General Bule (XVII. II)
become

1 = ^-, + (!-,)<. (1)

Prob. w

^ + (1 ''S)t'

whence we find, on eliminating s and t,

Prob.M? = J) + y - 1.

Hence p + q -l la the measure of the probability sought. This
result may be verified as follows : — Since p is the probability that
one or both of the given events occur, I - p will be the probar
bility that they both fail ; and since q is the probalnlity that one
or both fail, 1 - g' is the probability that they both happen.
Hence 1 - /? + 1 - y, or 2 -/> - y, is the probability that they
either both happen or both f^. But the only remaining alter-
native which is possible is that one alone of the events happens.
Hence the probability of this occurrence isl-(2-|>-j^)^or
/j + g' - 1, as above.

CHAP. Znil.] BLBMIIVTART ILLUtTRATlONl. S79

4. Ex. 3. — The probability that a witness A speaks the truth
is Pj the probability that another witness B speaks the truth is g^
and the probability that they disagree in a statement is r. What
is the probability that if they agree, their statement is true ?

Let X represent the hypothesis that A speaks truth; y that
B speaks truth ; then the hypothesis that A and B disagree in
their statement will be represented by ;r (1 - y) + y (1 - ') ; the
hypothesis that they agree in statement by 2y + (1 - ;r) (1 - y),
and the hypothesis that they agree in the truth by jy. Hence
we have the following data :

Prob.x«|>, Prob.y-^, Prob.«(l -y) +y(l - x) - r,

from which we are to determine

Prob.gEy

rrob.ary + (l-«)(l-yy

But as Prob. «(l - y) + y (1 - «) « r, it is evident that Prob.
xy + (I - x) (1 - y) will be 1 - r ; we have therefore to seek

Prob.xy

Now the compound events concerned being in ezpresnon,
'(1 - y) + y (I - x) and xy, let us assume

+ |f(l-X)-* 1

xy -» J

Our data then are Ftoh.xmp, P)rob.y > q, Prob.« > r, and we
are to find I*rob. tr.

The system (1) gives, on reduction,

|x(l-y) + y(l-x)J(l-*) + *|^+(l-*)(l-»)l

+ ay (I - it) + w (1 - jy) - ;
whence

» . «0 -y)(i -*) + y(l -*) -*) + «y4<(l -X) (I -y)-fxy

- jay* + ay (I -«)+Ox(l -y)« + j*(l -»)(l-»)

+ 0(l-x)j»+i(l-.)(l-y)*+l(l-«) yd-,) O

+ 0(l-x)(l-y)(l-*).

280 BLBBCENTAUT ILLUSTRATIONS. [CHAP. Xnil*

In the expression of this development, the coefficient - has heen
made to replace every equivalent form (X. 6). Here we have
r=ay(I-^) + ir(l-y)* + (l-rr)y* + (l -a?)(l -Jf)(l-0'
whence, passing from Logic to Algebra,

ay (l- s) + x(l -y)s ay (1 -^)-f (I -x)ys

p ^ q

x{\ -y)s + (l''x )ys

r

« xy{\ -*) + «(1 - y) ^ + (1 - x)y8 + (1 - «) (1 - y) (1 - s).

^™°- ^(l-*) + ^(l-y)* + (l-^)y* + (l-x)(l-y)(i.*;
from which we readily deduce

Prob. w

P + q - r

2

whence we have

Prob. xy p+ q - r

(3)

1 _ r 2 (1 - r)

for the value sought.

K in the same way we seek the probability that if A and B

agree in their statement, that statement will be false, we must

zeplace the second equation of the system (1) by the following,

viz.:

(l-x){l-y)^to;

the final logical equation will then be

w ^ -xys + Oxy {I - s) + Ox {I - y) ^ + - a; (1-y) (1-*)

+ (1 - re) y^ + - (1 -ir)y (1 - 5) + - (1 - x) (1 - y)s

+ (l-:r)(l-y)(l..); (4)
wlience, proceeding as before, we finally deduce

Prob. w = ^-P-9-r (5)

Wherefore we have

CHAP. XVlll.] BLBMBNTART ILLUSTRATIONS. S8l

Prob.(l-y ) (l-y) 2-p-q-r

1-r " 2(1 -r) ^^^

for the value here sought.

These results are mutually consistent. For since it is certain
that the joint statement of A and B must be cither true or false,
the second members of (3) and {S) ought by addition to make 1.
Now we have identicaUy,

2(1 -r) 2(1 -r)

It is probable, from the simplicity of the results (5) and (6),
that they might easily be deduced by the application of known
principles ; but it is to be remarked that they do not fidl directly
within the scope of known methods. The number of the data
exceeds that of the simple events which they involve. M. Cour-
not, in his very able work, *' Exposition de la Theorie des
Chances," hs^ proposed, in such cases as the above, to select
from the original premises different sets of data, each set equal in
number to tlie simple events which they involve, to assume that
thom^ simple events are independent, determine separately from
the re{(|>cctive sets of the data their probabilities, and comparing
the dificrcnt values thus found for the same elements, judge how
fiu- tlie assumption of independence is justified. Thb method
can only approach to correctness when the siud simple evenU
pnive, according to the above criterion, to be nearly or quite in-
dependent ; and in the que4«tions of testimony and of judgment,
in which such nn hy|)othe:*it* is adopted, it seems doubtful whether
it ij» ju>tified by actual ex[)ericnce of the ways of men.

5. Kx. 4. — From obser\'ations made during a period of geno*
ral t*icknet(8, there was a proliobility p that any house taken at
random in a {tarticular district was visited by fever, a probability
q that it was visited by cholera, and a probability r that it es-
caped lioth diKcases, and was not in a defective sanitary condition
OK rvganled cleanliness and ventilation. What \a the pnibability
that any house taken at random was in a defective sanitary
condition?

With reference to any house, let us appropriate the symbols
jr, y, z^ as follows, viz. :

282 SLKMBNTABT ILLUSTRATIONS. [CHAP.XTUI.

The symbol x to the visitation of fever.
y ff diolera.

z defective sanitary condition.

The events whose probabilities are given are then denoted by
a?, y, and (1 - a?) (1 - y) (1 - z)^ the event whose probability is
sought is z. Assume then,

then our data are,

Prob. x^p^ Prob. y ^q^^^ Prob. w = r,

and we are to find Prob. z. Now jM^ves

(l~ar)(l-y)~fo
(l-x)(l-y)

+ (l-x)(l-.y)(l-«,). (1)

The value of Fdeduced firom the above is

r=a;y(l - w?) + a;(l -y)(l - it) + (l-a?)y (I -tr)
+ (l-a;)(l-y)M; + (l-a;)(l,-y)(l-w?)= l-w? + w7(l-a;)(l -y);

and similarly reducing F^, F^, F^, we get

F, = a; (1 - w), Fy = y (1 - ir), F«, - ii? (1 - x) (1 - y) ;

furnishing the algebraic equations

a?(l-i^) y(\-w) zf?(l-a))(l-y) _ ,, .,^ . ,^.

^ % — ^ — T — ^=i-^ + ^(i-^)(i-y)- (2)

As respects those terms of the development characterized by

the coefficients -, I shall, instead of collecting them into a angle

term, present them, for the sake of variety (XVII. 18), in the
form

-x(\-w)+l{\-x)y{\-u:)', (3)

the value of Prob. z will then be

CHAP. XTIII.] SLBMIMTABT ILLUSTRATIONS. 283

l-tr + ti7(l-a:)(l-y) *^ ^

From (2) and (4) we deduce

I -r 1 - r

as the expression of the probability required. If in this result
we makecaO, and c'-> 0, we find for an inferior limit of itsyalue

L_lZ — JA — -2 1; and if we make c - 1, c<« 1, we obtain

for its superior limit 1 - r.

6. It appears from inspection of this solution, that the pre-
mises diosen were exceedingly defective. The constants c and
i! indicate this, and the corresponding terms (3) of the final
logical equation show how the deficiency is to be supplied.
Thus, once

a?(l - w) « « { 1 - (1 - a?) (1 - y) (1 - z) ) - «,

(l.a:)y(l.ic.).(l.a:)y{l-(l.x)(l.y)(l-^))-(l-a:)y,

we learn that c is the probability that if any house was visited by
fever its sanitary condition is defective, and that d is the proba-
bility that if any house was visited by diolera without^fever, its
sanitary condition was defective.

If the terms of the logical development afiected by the coeffi-
cient -T had been collected together as in the direct statement of

the general rule, the final solution would have assumed the fol-
lowing form :

pn>b.z= o-^-;)_(;-g--> .c(pH.,-^)

c here representing the probability that if a house was visited by
either or both of the diseases mentioned, its sanitary condition
was defective. This result is perfectiy consbtent with the former
one, and indeed the necessary equivalence of the different forms
of solution presented in such cases may be formally established.
The above solution may be verified in particular cases. Thus,
taking the second form, if ca I we find Prob.2r » 1 - r, acorrect
result. For if Ihe presence of either fever or chdeca certoudii

284 BLBMBNTARY ILLUSTRATIONS. £cHAP. ZTIII.

indicated a defective sanitary condition, the probability that any

house would be in a defective sanitary state would be simply

equal to the probability that it was not found in that eatery

denoted by Zj the probability of which would, by the data, be 1 - r.

Perhaps the general verification of the above solution would be

difficult.

The constants />, 9, and r in the above solution are subject to

the conditions

p + r5 1, y + r< !•

7. Ex. 5. — Given the probabilities of the premises of a hypo-
thetical syllogism to find the probability of the conclusion.
Let the syllogism in its naked form be as follows :

Major premiss : If the proposition Y is true X is true.
Minor premiss : If the proposition Z is true Y is true.
Conclusion : If the proposition Z is true X is true.

Suppose the probability of the major premiss to be Pf that of the
minor premiss q.

The data then are as follows, representing the proposition X
by rr, &c., and assuming c and c as arbitrary constants :

Prob. y = c, Prob. xy = cp;
Prob. z = (fj Prob. yz = cq ;

from which we are to determine,

Prob. xz Prob. xz

T> 1 — or ; — .

Prob. z c

Let us assume,

ay - Uf yz = Vy xz = w;

then, proceeding according to the usual method to determine w
as a developed function of y, z, m, and v, the symbols corres^
ponding to propositions whose probabilities are given, we find

w = tizvy + Om (1 - 2r) (1 - v) y + (1 - w) zvy

+ ^(l-«)z(l-t;)(l.y) + 0(l-i*)(l-z)(l-r)y
+ (1 - tt) (1 - z) (1 - v) (1 - y) + terms whose coeffi-
^ cients are - ;

CBAF. XVIIK] JILBMINTART ILLUSTRATIONS. 280

Rod pRssmg from Logic to Algebra,

uzvy-^{l-u)zvy

c

y
wherein

r-=ii5ry + ti(l-z)(l-r)y + (l -n) zcy + (l -n) z(l -r) (I -jf)
4(l-ti)(l-z)(l-r)y4(l-ti)(l.r)(l-r)(l.y),

the solution of this system of equRtions gives

Prob. tr « cpq + or' (1 - ^),
R'hence

Prob. xy

c

py + a(l-7),

the value required. In this expression the arbitrary constant a
is the probability that if the proposition Z is true Rnd }' fidse, X
is true. In other words, it is the probability, thRt if the minor
preniL-is i^ fRli«e, the concluf*ion is true.

This investigation might have been greatly simplified by as-
suming the proposition Zto be true, and then seeking the proba-
bility of A". The data would have been simply

Prob. y " 7, Prob. xy m pq;

whence we should have found Prob. x " pq -^ a(\ - q). It is
evident tlmt under the circumstances this mode of procedure
would have been allowable, but I have preferred to deduce the
solution by the direct and unconditioned application of the
method. The result is one which ordinary reasoning verifies,
and whi<*h it does not indeed require a calculus to obtain. Ge-
neral methods arc apt to appear most cumbrous when applied to
cases in which their aid is the least required.

I^t it be observed, tliat the above method is equdly Rppli-
CRble to the categorical syllogism, and not to the syllogism only.

286 BLBMBNTAR7 ILLUSTRATIONS. [CBAP.Xfni.

but to every form of deductive ratiocination. Given the proba-
bilities separately attaching to the premises of any train of ar-
gimient ; it is always possible by the above method to determine
the consequent probability of the truth of a conclusion legitimately
drawn from such premises. It is not needful to remind the
reader, that the truth and the correctness of a conclusion are dif-
ferent things.

8. One remarkable circmnstance which presents itself in such
applications deserves to be specially noticed. It is, that propo-
sitions which, when true, are equivalent, are not necessarily
equivalent when regarded only as probable. This principle wiD
be illustrated in the following example.

Ex. 6. — Given the probability p of the disjunctive proportion
<^ Either the proposition Yis true, or both the propositions X and
Fare fidse," required the probability of tiie conditional propo-
cation, << If the proposition X is true, Y is true/'

Let X and y be appropriated to the propositions X and Y
respectively. Then we have

Prob.(y + (l-a;)(l-y])-/>,

from which it is required to find the value of -zp — r^-^ .

Assume y + (1 - ^) (1 - y) « ^« (0

Eliminating y we get

(i-x)(i-0 = o.

and proceeding in the usual way,

Prob. X -1-p + qp. (2)

Where c is the probability that if either Y is true, or X and Y
false, X is true.

Next to find Prob. rcy. Assume

xy = w. (3)

Eliminating y from (1) and (3) we get^

CHAP. Z?III.] BLBmMTART ILLU8TBAT10N1. 187

whence, proceeding as above,

Prob. z « cp,

r haying the mune interpretation as before. Hence

Prob.xy cp

Prob.x l-/>+c/i'

for the probability of the truth of the conditional proportion
given.

Now in the science of pure Logic, which, as such, is conver-
sant only with truth and with falsehood, the above disjunctive
and conditional propositions are equivalent. They are true and
they are false together. It is seen, however, firom the above in-
vestigation, that when the disjunctive proposition has a probi^
bility p, the conditional proposition has a different and partiy in-

definite proUbaity ^-^^. NcverthelesB the«, expre«ion.

are such, that when eiiher of them becomes \ or 0^ the other as-'
sumes the same value. The results are, therefore, perfecUy con-
sijitcnt, and the logical transformation 8er\'es to verify the formula
deduced from the theory of probabilities.

The reader will easily prove by a similar analysis, that if the
probability of the conditional proposition were given as p, that
of the disjunctive proposition would be 1 - c-f cp, where c is the
arbitrary probability of the truth of the proposition X.

9. Ex. 7. — Required to determine the probability of an event
X, having given either the first, or the first and second, or the
first, second, and third of the following data, viz. :

l9t. The probability that the event a; occurs, or that it alone
of the three events x, y, z, fiuls, is p.

2nd. The probability that the event y occurs, or that it alone
of the three events x, y, r, fails, b q.

3rd. The probability that the event z occurs, or that it alone
of the three events x, y, x, fuls, is r.

SOLUTION OP THB FIRST CASB.

Here we suppose that only the first oT the above data is
given.

288 BLBMBNTART ILLUSTRATIONS. [cHAP. XTIIL

We have then,

Prob. (or + (1 - x) yz) =p,
to find Prob. x.

Let re + (1 - a;) yjzr « *,

then eliminating yz as a single symbol, we get,

a;(l-*) = 0.
Hence

whence, proceeding according to the rule, we have

Prob. jr = g?, (1)

where c is the probability that if x occurs, or alone fiuls, the
former of the two alternatives is the one that will happen. The
limits of the solution are evidently and p.

This solution appears to give us no information beyond what
unassisted good sense would have conveyed. It is, however, all
that, the single datum here assumed really warrants us in infer-
ring. We shall in the next solution see how an addition to our
data restricts within narrower limits the final solution.

SOLUTION OF THE SECOND CASE.

Here we assume as our data the equations

Prob. [x + {l'-x)i/z] =/;,

Prob. [y + (1 -y) xz] = q.
Let us write

X + (I - x) yz = Sy

y + {l^y)xz = t;

from the first of which we have, by (VIII. 7),

[x-\- (1 -x)yz] {I -s) + s [I -x- (I '-x)yz] = 0,

or (x + xyz) s + sx(l - yz) = ;

provided that for simplicity we write ^ for I - re, y for I -y, and

80 on. Now, writing for I - yz its value in constituents, we

have

(x 4 xyz) s -\- sx (yz ■\- yz -v yz) = 0,

an equation consisting solely of positive terms.

CHAP. XTIU.] BLBMBNTART ILLUtTEATIOlff. S89

In like maimer we havefirom the second equation,

(jf -k fxz)l -i- if (xz •¥ xz •¥ xz) - 0;

and from the sum of these two equationa we are to elinunate y
and z.

If in that tom we make y « It i^ «■ 1, we get the result 7+7.
If in the same sum we make y- 1, z>> 0, we get the result

If in the same sum we make y « 0, z« 1, we get

ar J + « + ai + tx.

And if, lastly, in the same sum we make y - 0, z « 0, we find

X? + *J + to + G, or x7 + «x •»- L

These four expressions are to be multiplied together. Now
the first and third may be multiplied in the following manner :

(? + 7) (xl-k-ix-^ai-^ix)

- art + ai + (7+ <) (*i + ^x) by (IX. Prop, ii.)

- x7 + arif + 7x^ + txl. (2)

Again, the second and fourth gire by (IX. Prop, i.)

(x7+ li + i) (x7+ *x + i)

« x7 + ti. (3)

Lastly, (2) and (3) multiplied together gire

(x7 + »x) (x7 + sxi + X? + iJs)

» xl -^ $x (sxi + arf + ixS)

- x7 + sxii

Whence the final equation is

(1 -*)x + #(l -<)(l-x)-0,

whicli, solved with reference to x, gives

-Jrf ♦ .(l-l) + 0(l-«)< + 0(l-«)(l-<),

V

290 ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS. [CHAP. XTIIt.

and, proccedUng with this according to the rule, we have, finally,

Prob. a?=]»(l-y) + giy. (4)

where c is the probability that if the event st happen, « will
happen. Now if we form the developed expression o{st by mul-
tiplying the expressions for s and t together, we find —

c = Prob. that if x and y happen together, or a and z happen
together, and y fail, or y and z happen together, and x fidl, the
event a will happen.

The limits of Prob. x are evidently p(l -q) and p.
This solution is more definite than the former one, inasmuch
as it contains a term unaffected by an arbitrary constant.

SOLUTION OF THE THIRD CASE.

Here the data are —

Prob. {j? + (1 - a)yz] =p,
Prob. {y + (l-.y)a») =9,
Prob. (z + (1 - z) ay] = r.

Let us, as before, write i for 1 - ^, &c., and assume

X + jcyz = jf,
y-\-i/xz = t,
z + zxy = u.

On reduction by (VIII. 8) we obtain the equation

{x + xyz)! + sx (yz -\- yz + yz)

+ (y + yxz) i-\- ty (zx + a* J + xz)

•f (-2 + zxy) u+ uz (xy ^ xy + xy) = 0. (5)

Now instead of directly eliminating y and z from the above
equation, let us, in accordance with (IX. Prop, iii.), assume the
result of that elimination to be

then E will be found by making in the given equation ;r = 1,
and eliminating y and z from the resulting equation, and E' will
be found l)y making in the given equation ,v = 0, and eliminating
y and z from the result. First, then, making .r = 1, we have

CHAP. ZTUI.] BLBMBITTAET ILLUtTEATlOBI. 191

and maldng in the first member of this equation snccessiTely
jf • 1, r « 1, y « 1, z « 0, &C, and multiplying together the
results, we have the ezprcsuon

(J+F+i) (r+i + fi)(J+F+iO(?+^ + «)f
which is equivalent to

(7+ ?+*)(?+ ^ + a).

This is the expresnon for JET. We shall retun it in its present
form. It has already been shown by example (VIII. 3), that
the actual reduction of such expressions by multiplication, though
convenient, is not necessary.

Again in (5), making x - 0, we have

yzl + i (yl + yz + y J) -fyl + iJ^-ft-zii + tu-O;

from which, by the same process of elimination, we find for E the
expression

(J-r Fj+ a) (# + 7 + a) (# + ^ + ii) (# + < + a)

The final result of the elimination of y and x from (6) is there-
fore

(J+?4ii)(J+f+a)x+(#+i4a)(*+f+a)(*+/+iO(*+^+«)(l-*)-0.

Whence we have

(J+?+a) («+F4a)(«4<4£)(#+t4a)
(J^/ + ii)(j + /4a)(# + < + a)(# + ^ + a)-(J-f/+ii)(#4/4a) '

or, developing the second member,

(6)

4 ffa 4 Otiu 4 Oia 4 Olii.

lIcBoe, passing from Logic to Algebra,

*hi 4 iiu Miu 4 i/ai Wa 4 ifa

^.2

292 BLEMBNTART ILLUSTRATIONS. [cHAP. XTIIl.

8tU + C8tU

Prob.aj

stu-¥ stu + siu •¥8tU'¥ 7iu

(8)

To simplify this system of equations, change r- into «, =- into /»

&C.9 and after the change let X stand for stu + s-k-t-^l. We then
have

Prob. a? = — r — , (9)

with the relations

stu ■\' s stu-¥ t stu + u

«^ + « + ^ + ti+l«A. (10)

From these equations we get

stu + s = Ap, (11)

stu + * = A-^-tt-l,

ti + f = A(l -/?)-!.
Similarly, w + « = A (1 - y) - 1,

and * + ^ = A(l-r)-l.

From which equations we find

_ A(l+p-g-r)-l _^ X(l + g-r-/>)-l
" 2 ' ^ 2 '

^ A(l-fr-;>-g)-l (12)

2

Now, by (10),

stu = Ap - «.

Substitute in this equation the values of Sy t, and u above deter-
mined, and we have

|(l+^-j_r)A-l)((l + j-p-r)A-l)((l + r-;>-y)A-ll

= 4((p + 5? + r-l)A + l), (13)

an equation which determines A. The values of «, ty and «, are
then given by (12), and their substitution in (9) completes the
solution of the problem.

CHAP. XTIII.] BLBMIKTART ILLU8TEATIOII8. 293

10. Now a difficultyt the bringing of which pronunently be-
fore the reader has been one object of this inyestigation, here
arises. How shall it be determined, which root of the above
equation ought W taken for the value of X. To this difficulty
some reference was made in the opening of the present chapter,
and it was intimated that its fuller consideration was reserved for
the next one ; from which the following results are taken.

In order that the data of the problem may be derived from
a possible experience, the quantities p, q^ and r must be subject
to the following conditions :

1 +j>-y-r;o,

l+y-p-rJO. (14)

1 + r -p -y > 0.

Moreover, the value of X to be employed in the general solution
must satisfy the following conditions :

X>'; , X>, , X>z • (15)

l+/>-y-r 1 + y-p-r' • 1 + r-p-y ^

Now these two sets of conditions suffice for the limitation of
the gcnend solution. It may be shown, that the central equation
(13) furnishes but one value of A, which does satisfy these con-
ditions, and that value of X is the one required.

Let l+p-j-rbethe least of the three coefficients of X

given above, then will be the greatest of those va-
lues, above which we are to show that there exists but one value
of X. Let us write (13) in the form

t(l+/»-y-r)X-l||(l + y-/»-r)X-lJ|(l + r-p-y)X-l|

-4((p4y + r-l)X + l|-0; (16)

and rcprei»cnt the first member by V,

•Assume X - r , then V becomes

Wp-y-r

U negative.

294 ELEMENTARY ILLUSTRATIONS. [cHAP.XVni.

Let X » 00, then V is positive and infinite.
Again,

^= (1 +/> - y - r) (1 + y -i> - r) {(1 + r -p - y) X - 1}

+ similar podtive terms,

which expression is positive between the limits X =

and X = 00.

If then we construct a curve whose abscissa shall be measured
by X, and whose ordinates by V, that curve will, between the
limits specified, pass from below to above the abscissa X, its con-
vexity always being downwards. Hence it will but once intersect
the abscissaX within those limits ; and the equation (16) will, there-
fore, have but one root thereto corresponding.

The solution is, therefore, expressed by (9), X being that
root of (13) which satisfies the conditions (16), and ^, /, andu
being given by (12). The interpretation of c inay be deduced
in the usual way.

It appears from the above, that the problem is, in all cases,
more or less indeterminate.

CHAP. XIX.] OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 20S

CHAPTER XIX.

OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS.

1. T3 Y* the term statistical conditions, I mean those conditions
-L^ which must connect the numerical data of a problem in
order that those data may be consistent with each other, and
therefore such as statistical observations might actually have
fumbhcd. The determination of such conditions constitutes an
important problem, the solution of which, to an extent sufficient
at leaitt for the requirements of this work, I purpose to undertake
in the prci^cnt chapter, regarding it partly as an independent ob-
ject of Hpeculation, but partly also as a necessary supplement to
the theory of pro!)abilitics already in some degree exemplified.
The nature of the connexion between the two subjects may be
stated as follows :

2. There arc innumerable instances, and one of the kind
prcttcntcd itself in the last chapter, Ex. 7, in which the solution
of a (|uestion in the theory of probabilities is finally de|)eudent
uptm the solution of an algebraic equation of an elevated degree*
In i*uch cases the imlcction of the proper root must be determined
by certain conditions, partly relating to the numerical values as-
signed in the data, partly to the due limitation of the element
re<|uired. The dij*covery of such conditions may sometimes be
efltM'tcfl by unaided reasoning. For in.«tance, if there U a prolia-
bility /> of the occurrence of an event -1, and a probability // of
the concurrence of the said event A^ and another event /y, it is
evident that we must have

But ior the general determination of Huch relations, a distinct
methfMl is re<|uired, and this we proceed to establish.

As derived fn>m actual ex|K»rienco, the pnilialrtlity of any
event i.^ the result of a process of approximation. It U the limit
of the ratio of the number of cases in which the event is obscrvetl
to occur, to the whole numlicr of equally {KMsible cases which

296 OF STATISTICAL CONDITIOMS. [cHAP. SIX.

observation records, — a limit to which we approach the more
nearly as the number of observations is increased. Now let the
symbol n, prefixed to the expression of any class, represent the
number of individuals contained in that class* Thus, x represent-
ing men, and y white beings, let us assume

fix e: number of men.

nosy « number of white men.

no; (1 - y) s number of men who are not white; and so on.

In accordance with this notation n(l) will represent the number

of individuals contained in the universe of discourse, and —77^

will represent the probability that any individual being, selected
out of that universe of being denoted by n ( 1 ), is a man. K ob-
servation has not made us acquainted with the total values of
n{x) and n(l), then the probability in question is the limit to

winch — 7~ approaches as the number of individual observatians
n(l) ^^

is increased.

In like manner if, as will generally be supposed in this chap-
ter, X represent an event of a particular kind observed, n(x) will
represent the number of occurrences of that event, n (1) the
number of observed events (equally probable) of all kinds, and

-y— , or its limit, the probability of the occurrence of the

event x.

Hence it is clear that any conclusions which may be deduced
respecting the ratios of the quantities n (a?), n (y), w (1), &c. may
be converted into conclusions respecting the probabilities of the
events represented by Xy y, &c. Thus, if we should find such a
relation as the following, viz.,

n{x) + n(y) <n(l),

expressing that the number of times in which the event x occurs
and the number of times in which the event y occurs, are toge-
ther less than the number of possible occurrences n (1), we might
thence deduce the relation,

n(lj^n(l)''''
or Prob. x + Prob. y < 1.

CHAP. XOL] of STATimCAL COKDITIOm. 197

And gemeraJhf any snch statistical relations as the above will be
eomoerted into relations connecting the probabilities of the events
concerned^ bg changing n (1) into 1, and any other symbol n (x)
into Prob. x*

3. First, then, we Bhall inveadgate a method of determimng
the numerical relations of classes or events, and more particularly
the major and minor limits of numerical value. Secondly, we
shall apply the method to the limitation of the solutions ofques->
tions in the theory of probabilities.

It is evident that the symbol n is distributive in its operation.
Thus we have

n (J3^+ (1 .*) (1 -y)) . iwjf + nO .x)(l -y)

iKr(l-jf)-iix-iuy,

and so on. The number of thmgs oontamed in any dass re-
solvable into distinct groups or pordons is equal to the sum of
the numbers of things found in those separate portions. It is
evident, further, that any expression formed of the logical sym-
bols X, y, &c. may be developed or expanded in any way consis-
tent with the laws of the sjrmbols, and the sjrmbol n applied to
each term of the result, provided that any constant mulUplier
which may appear, be placed outside the symbol n; without affect-
ing the value of the result. The expression ii (1), should it ap-
pear, will of course represent the number of individuals contained
in the universe. Thus,

II (1 - x) (1 - y) - ii(l - X - y + xy)
ii(l)-ii(x)-ii(y) + ii(xy).

Again, « (xy + (1-*)(1 -y)) -»(1 -^-y + Jjy)

« II (1) - SIX - fly -f 2iixy).

In the last member the term Snaty indicates twice the number of
individuals contained in the class xy.

4. We proceed now to investigate the numerical limits of
clashes whose logical expression is given. In this inquiry the
following principles are of fundamental importance:

1st. If all the members of a given class possess a certain pro-
perty x, the total number of individuals contained in the dass x

298 OF 8TATISTICAX. CONDITIONS. [CHAP. XIX.

will be a superior limit of the number of individuals contained in
the given class.

2nd. A minor limit of the number of individuals in any class y
will be found by subtracting a major numerical limit of the con-
trary class, I -j/i from the number of individuals contained in the
universe.

To exemplify these principles, let us apply them to the fol-
lowing problem :

Problem. — Given, «(1), w(^), and »(y), required the su-
perior and inferior limits of tixy.

Here our data are the number of individuals contsdned in the
universe of discourse, the number contained in the class ^, uid
the number in the class y, and it is required to determine the
limits of the number contained in the class composed of the indi-
viduals that are found at once in the class x and in the class y.*

By Principle i. this number cannot exceed the number con-
tained in the class a;, nor can it exceed the number contained in
the class y. Its major limit will then be the least of the two va-
lues n (») and (j/). *

By Principle ii. a minor limit of the class ay will be given by
the expression

7^(l) -major limit of {x{l -y) + y{l - x) -\- (I - a) (1 -y)),(l)

since x (1 - ?/) + y (1 - rr) + (1 - x) (1 - y) is the complement of
the class xy, i. e. what it wants to make up the universe.

Now x(] - y) + (I - x) (1 - y) = 1 - y. We have there-
fore for (1),

w(l) - major limit of (1 -y + y(l - x)]

= 71 (1) - w (1 - y) - major limit of y (1 - a). (2)

The major limit of y (1 - x) is the least of the two values n(j/)
and w(l - x). Let n (y) be the least, tlicn (2) becomes

n{\)-n{\-y)-7i(y)
= 71 (1) - w (1) + 71 (y) - 71 (y) = 0.

Secondly, let w (1 - x) be less than 7i (y), then

major limit of wy ( 1 - a?) = w ( 1 - ;r) ;

therefore (2) becomes

CHAP. XIX.] OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 899

n(l)-n(l-y)-n(l-j?)
-n(l)-n(l) + n(y)-ii(l) + n(*)
■ nx 4 fly - n(l).

The minor limit otnxy is therefore either or ii («) + n (y) - ii(l),
sccording as ii (y) is less or greater than n (1 - «), or, which is an
equivalent condition, according as « («) is greater or less than

li(l-y).

Now as is necessarily a minor limit of the numerical value

of any class, it is sufficient to take account of the second of the

above expressions for the minor limit of n {sty). We have, there^

fore.

Major limit of n (xy) - least of values n (x) and n (y).
Minor limit o{n{sy) « n(x) + n(jf) - »(!)••

Proposition I.

6. To escpress the major and minor limit $ of a class represented
by any constitutni of the symbols x, y, z, ^*c.^ having given the va-
lues ofn (x), n (y), n (r), jr., and n (I).

Consider first the constituent xyz.

It is evident tliat the major numerical limit will be the least
of the values n(x)^ n(y), n{zy

The minor numerical limit may be deduced as in the previous
problem, but it may also be deduced from the solution of that
problem. Thus :

Minor limit of n (xyz) « n {xy) + n (z) - n (1). (1)

Now thi8 means that n (xyz) is at least as great as the expres-
sion n{xy) ^ n{2) - n{\). But n{xy) is at least as great as
» (x) -f n (y) - II (1). Therefore n {ryz) is at least as great as

n{x)^n{y)-n{\)^n{z)-n{\),
or « (x) + n (y) + n(x) - 2ii (1).

* Thf aboTc eipreMion for Um minor limit of my b applied by ProfetMNr
D« Morgao. hj whom it mppeart to Imto boen ftrtt gitim, to tbo Ajllogistic form :

Mo«t men in n «*rtAin company hate roata.
Most nM*n in tbe lanw company Iuitc waistcoats.
Thrrvforc aomo in the company have coaU aad wiUitfiMU.

300 OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. [cHAP. XIX.

Hence we have

Minor limit of n{xyz) ^ n (x) ■¥ n (y) -h n(z) - 2n (1).

By extending this mode of reasoning we shall arrive at the
following conclusions :

1st. The major numerical limit of the class represented by
any constituent will be found by prefixing n separately to each
factor of the constituent, and taking the least of the resulting
values.*

2nd. The minor limit will be found by adding all the values
above mentioned together, and subtracting from the result as
many, less one, times the value of »(!)•

Thus we should have

Major limit of nxy (1 - z) « least of the values no?, ny, and n{l -z).

Minor limit of way (1 - z) = » (^) + « (y) + n (1 - 2:) - 2»(1)

= nx + « (y) - » (z) - n(l).

In the use of general symbols it is perhaps better to regard all
the values n (ar), n (y), » (1 - z), as major limits of n {xy (1 - z)),
since, in fact, it cannot exceed any of them. I shall in the fol-
lowipg investigations adopt this mode of expression.

Proposition II.

6. To determine the major numerical limit of a class expressed
by a series of constituents of the symbols a?, y, z, §*c., the values of
n(;c), w(y), w(z), §-c., andn{l)j being given.

Evidently one mode of determining such a limit woidd be to
form the least possible sum of the major limits of the several con-
stituents. Thus a major limit of the expression

n[xy^(\'-x)(\-y)]

would be found by adding the least of the two values nxy ny, fvp-
nished by the first constituent, to the least of the two values
n(l-ar), n(l- y), furnished by the second constituent. If we
do not know which is in each case the least value, we must form
the four possible sums, and reject any of these which are equal to
or exceed w (1). Thus in the above example we should have

CHAP. XIX.] OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 301

nx + ll(l -f) «ll(l).

n(4r) + «(1 -y) - «(1) + n(x) - n(y).
«(y) + n(l -lO - 11(1) + n(y) - n(j?).

*(y) + »(i-y)-ii(i).

Rejecting the first and last of the aboTe valueS) we have

«(l) + n(«)-n(y), and n(l) + ii(y) -»(«),

for the expressions required, one of which will (unless nx « ny)
be less than ii(l)t and the other greater. The least must of
course be taken.

When two or more of the constituents possess a common fiuy
tor, ari x, that factor can only, as is obvious from Principle i.,
fumitih a single term n (x) in the final expression of the major
limit. Thus if n (x) appear as a major limit in two or more con-
stituents, we must, in adding those limits together, replace
ftr + iix by fix, and so on. Take, for example, the expression
tt|xy-fx(l-y)zj. The major limits of this expression, imme-
diately furnished by addition, would be —

1. nx. 4. njf + nx.

2. nx + ii(l -y). 5. ny + ii(l -y).

3. nx + II (z). 6. ny + nx.

Of these the first and sixth only need be retained; the second,
third, and fourth being greater than the first ; and the fifth bdng
equal to n (1). The limits are therefore

n (x) and nQf) + n (z),

and of these two values the last, supjKMing it to be less than n ( 1 ),
must be taken.

These considerations lead us to the following Rule :

Rule. — Take one Jbcior from each constituent^ and prefix to
ii the symbol n, add the several terms trtr results thus firmed toge*
ther^ rejecting all repetitions of the same term ; the sum thus olh
tained will be a major limit of the expression^ and the least of all
such sums will be the major limit to be employed.

Thus the major limits of the expression

xyz + x(l -y) (I - z) + (1 -» (I -y) (I - z)
would be

302 OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. [CHAP. XIX.

n(a) ■¥ n(l- y), and » (a?) + n (1 - z),
or » (a?) + « (1) - « (y), and n(x) + n (1) - n (z).

J£ we began with n (y), selected from the first term, and took
n (a) from the second, we should have to take n (1 - y) from the
third term, and this would give

n(j/) + n(a) ■¥ n{l - y), or »(!) + » (x).

But as this result exceeds n (1), which is an obvious major Umit
to every class, it need not be taken into account.

Proposition III.

7. To find the minor numerical limit of any class expressed hy
constituents of the symbols x^ y, z^ hatjing given n(x)j n(y), n(z),.
nil).

Thig object may be effected by the application of the pre-
ceding Proposition, combined with Principle ii., but it is better
effected by the following method :

Let any two constituents, which differ from one another only
by a single factor, be added, so as to form a single class term
OS X (I - y) + xy form Xy and this species of aggregation having
been carried on as far as possible, i. e., there having been selected
out of the given series of constituents as many sums of this kind
as can be formed, each such sum comprising as many constituents
as can be collected into a single term, without regarding whether
any of the said constituents enter into the composition of other
terms, let these ultimate aggregates, together with those con-
stituents which do not admit of being thus added together, be
written down as distinct terms. Then the several minor limits
of those terms, deduced by Prop. I., will be the minor limits of
the expression given, and one only of those minor limits will at
the same time be positive.

Thus from the expression xy + {\ -x)y -{■ (I - x) {I -y) we
can form the aggregates y and 1 - a?, by respectively adding the
first and second terms together, and the second and third.
Hence n{y) and w(l - x) will be the minor limits of the expres-
sion given. Again, if the expression given were

CHAP. SIX.] OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 303

«3f«+a?(l-y)« + (l-a?)yir + (l-a:) (l-y)r

+ acy(l-r) + (l-«)(l-y)(l-7),

wc should obtain by addition of the first four terms the single
tcmi r, by addition of the first and fifth term the single term xy,
and by addition of the fourth and sixth terms the single term
{I - x) {I - ff); and there is no other way in which constituents
can be collecteil into single terms, nor are there are any consti-
tuents left which have not been thus taken account of. The
three resulting terms give, as the minor limits of the given ex-
pression, the values

n(z\ n(x) + n(y)-n(l),

and n(l -a:) + ii(l -y) - ii(l), or n(l) - n(x) - n(y).

8. The proof of the above rule consists in the proper appli-
cation of the folloMring principles : — 1st. The minor limit of any
collection of constituents which admit of being added into a sin-
gle term, will obviously be the minor limit of that single term.
This explains the first part of the rule. 2nd. The minor limit
of the sum of any two terms which either are distinct constituents,
or con:«ist of distinct constituents, but do not admit of being
added together, will be the sum of their re9|iective minor limits,
if those minor limits are both positive; but if one be positive, and
the other negative, it will be equal to the positive minor limit
alone. For if the negative one were added, the value of the limit
would be diminished, i. e. it would be less for the sum of two
terms than for a single term. Now whenever two constituents
diflTer in more tlian one factor, so as not to admit of lieing addc<l
together, the minor limits of the two cannot be t)Oth |Misitive.
Thus let the terms l>e xyz and ( I - ar) ( 1 - y) z, which difTiT in
two factoni, the minor limit of the first is n (z + y + r - 2), that
of the second n ( 1 - x + 1 - y + r - 2), or,

iKt. » |x + y- I - (1 -z)\. 2nd. » |1 -x- y- (1 -r)l.

If ii(x 4 y - 1) is iM>!iiitive, ii(l - x - y) is negative, and the se-
cond must Ik? negative. If ii(x + y - 1) is negative, the first is
negative; and similarly for canes in which a larger numt>er of
factors are involved. It mav in this manner Xte shown tlmt, ac-
cording to the mofle in which the aggregate terms are formed in

304 OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. [cHAP. XIX.

the application of the rule, no two minor limits of distinct tenns
can be added together, for either those terms will involve some
common constituent, in which case it is clear that we cannot add
their minor limits together, — or the minor limits of the two will
not be both positive, in which case the addition would be useless.

Proposition IV.

9. Given the respective numbers of individuals comprised in
any classes^ Sj tj SfC, logically defined^ to deduce a system ofmoM-
rical limits of any other class tr, also logically defined.

As this is the most general problem which it is meant to dis-
cuss in the present chapter, the previous inquiries being merely
introductory to it, and the succeeding ones occupied with its ap-
plication, it is desirable to state clearly its nature and design.

When the classes s^t ,.w are said to be logically defined, it
is meant that they are classes so defined as to enable us to write
down their symbolical expressions, whether the classes in ques-
tion be simple or compound. By the general method of tUs
treatise, the symbol w can then be determined directly as a deve-
loped function of the symbols «, tj &c. in the form

1
M? = ^ + 05 + -C+-A (I)

wherein A^B^Cj and D are formed of the constituents ofs, t, 4c.
How from such an expression the numerical limits of w may in
the most general manner be determined, will be considered here-
after. At present we merely purpose to show how far this object
can be accomplished on the principles developed in the previous
propositions; such an inquiry being sufficient for the purposes of
this work. For simplicity, I shall found my argument upon the
particular development,

w =^ St + Os {\ -t) + ^ (I - s)t + ^{l - s) (\ - t), (2)

in which all the varieties of coefficients present themselves.

Of the constituent (I -5) (1 - /), which has for its coeffi-
cient -, it is implied that some, none, or all of the class denoted

CBAP. SIX.] OF STATISTICAL COMDITIOirt. 305

by that constitQent are fomid in to. It is erident that ii(ir) will
have its highest numerical value when all the members of the
class denoted by (1 -«) (1-0 '^^ found in to. Moreover^ as
none of the individuals contained in the classes denotiHl by
s(\ -i) and (1 ~ «) / are found in lo, the superior numerical limits
of w will be identical with those of the class «/ + (1 -«)(!- t).
They are, therefore,

fu + n (1 - /) and a/ + n (1 - «)•

In like matmer a system of sMperwr numerical limits of the

development i4 + 0J3 + -C + -A ^«y ft^ Jinmd from those qf
A^ Cby Prop. 2.

Again, any minor numerical limit of lo will, by Principle ii.,
be given by the expression

ii(l) - major limit of ii(l - to),

but the development of lo being given by (1), that of 1 - in will
obviously be

This may be directly proved by the method of Prop. 2, Clmp. x.
Hence

&Iinor limit of a (to) - a(l) - major limit (/i -•- C)

m minor limit of (i4 -•- Z/),

by Principle ii^ since the classes A ^ I) and /) f C arc nufifJe-
mcntary. Thus the minor limit of the scorjod roraiUT of (U)
would be a (/), and, gcneraliring this mode of rcasf>niog, we have
the following result :

A system ofwdmar Itmiis of the devtUrpmemt

yl 4 0/? . J C 4 \t}

rV// be given by the mimrr limits of A '*' Ih

This result may alio be directly ttdemd. Vm^nimm w^
merical limiu we wt^. \^0mA to amIk tk« gr«aiMt* N'/w »« mAp-
tain in general a higher nwaor Xmix by eftuibsMui^ tL«r r.laM //

X

306 OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. [CHAP. XIX.

with A in the expression of w, a combination which, as shown in
various examples of the Logic we are permitted to make, than
we otherwise should obtain.

Finally, as the concluding term of the development of tr in-
dicates the equation 2) » 0, it is evident that n (/>) » 0* Henoe

we have

Minor limit of n (i>) < 0,

and this equation, treated by Prop. 3, gives the requisite condi-
tions among the numerical elements n(«), n(^), &c., in order that
the problem may be real, and may embody in its data the re-
sults of a possible experience.

Thus from the term - (1 - 8)t in the second member of (2)

we should deduce

«(1 -^) + n(0-«(l)<0,

.•. n(t) < n(*).

These conclusions may be embodied in the following rule :

10. BuLE. — Determine the expression of the class to as a deve-
loped logical function of the symbols s^ t^ Sfc, in the form

Then will

Maj. lim. w = Maj. lim. A + C.

IVIin. lim. w = Min. lim. A + D.

The necessary numerical conditions among the data being given b)

the inequality

Min. lim. D <n(l).

To apply the above method to the limitation of the solutions
of questions in probabilities, it is only necessary to replace in
each of the formulse n {x) by Prob. a;, n (y) by Prob. y, (fee., and,
finally, w (1) by 1. The application being, however, of great im-
portance, it may be desirable to exhibit in the form of a rule
the chief results of transformation.

1 1 . Given the probabilities of any events *, ^, &c., whereof
another event m? is a developed logical function, in the form

2(7 = ^ +05+^C + ^Z>,

CHAP. XIX.] OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 307

required the systems of superior and inferior limits of Prob. ta,
and the conditions among the data.

Solution. — The superior limits of Prob. {A + C), and the
inferior limits of Prob. {A + D) will form two such systems as are
sought. The conditions among the constants in the data will be
given by the inequality,

Inf. lim. Prob. Z) < 0.

In Ae application of these principles we have always
Inf lim. Prob. Xj x, .. x« « Prob.a?i + Prob. x, .. + Prob.x. - (n - 1).

Moreover, the inferior limits can only be determined from sinffle
terms, either given or formed by aggregation. Superior limits
are included in the form 2 Prob. x, I^b. x applying only to
f(ymlx)ls which are different, and are taken from different terms in
the exprcs<*ion whose superior limit is sought. Thus the supe-
rior limits of Prob. ryz + x (1 - y) (1 - z) are

Prob. X, Prob. y + Prob. (1 - r), and Prob. z + Prob. ( 1 - y).

Let it be observed, that if in the last case we had taken Prob. z
from the firHt term, and I^b. {I - z) from the second, — a con-
nexion not forbidden, — we should have had as their sum 1, which
as a result would be useless because d priori necessar)*. It is
obvious that we may reject any limits which do not fall between
Oand I.

Let us apply this method to Ex. 7, Case in. of the last
chafiter.

T)ie final logical solution is

1 - 1 .

X ^ -siu -¥ -shi ■¥ -itu f stit

+ j-Hut Oslu + Oltu + OJ/w,

the data being

Prob. * = Pj Prob. i - y, Prob. « = r.

We sliall seek both the numerical limits of x;i and the condi-
tions connecting />, 7, and r.

•X 2

308 OP STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. [CHAP. XIX.

The superior Umlts of a; are, according to the rule, ^ven by
those of 8tu + sis. They are, therefore,

p, J + 1 - r, r + 1 - J.

The mferior limit of x are given by those of

stu + stii + stu + Itu*

We may collect the first and third of these constituents in the

single term st, and the second and third in the single term su.
The inferior limits of x must then be deduced separately from
the terms *(l - t), « (1 - «), (1 - «) tu, which give

p+ I - q - Ij p+l-r-1, l-p + q+r-2j
or p - qj P - ^9 and q + r - p - 1.

Finally, the conditions among the constants p, q^ and r, are
given by the terms

stUf stUf stu,

from which, by the rule, we deduce

/>+ 1 -y+r-2; 0, ^ + 5^+ 1 -r-2;0, 1 -p+ jr + r -2<0.
or 1 + y-/>-r50, l+r-p-gjO, l+p-y-rJO.

These are the limiting conditions employed in the analysis of
the final solution. The conditions by which in that solution X is
limited, were determined, however, simply from the conditions
that the quantities s, t, and u should be positive. Narrower
limits of that quantity might, in all probability, have been de-
duced from the above investigation.

12. The following application is taken from an important pro-
blem, the solution of which wiU be given in the next chapter.
There are given,

Prob. x^c^j Prob. y = Cj, Prob. « = Ci pi, Prob. t = Cjp,,

together with the lo^cal equation

z = stxy + slxy + Itxy + 07^

1 r stxy + stxy + stxy + stxy + stxy
^ L + silcy + Itxy + Itxy + Itxy ;

CHAP. ZIZ.] OP STATUnCAL COHOITION8. 309

and it is required to determine the conditions among the constants
^19 Cjt pxy pt9 and the major and minor limits ofz.

first let us seek the conditions among the constants. Con-
fining our attention to the terms whose coefficients are -, we

readily form, by the aggregatbn of constituents, the following
terms, viz.:

'0-*), ^(1-y), ^(1-Ot to(l.#);

nor can we form any other terms which are not included under
these. Hence the conditions among the constants are,

n(#) + n(l-a?)-n(l)^0,
n(0+n(l-y)-n(l)<0,
«(#) + n(y) + «(l-0-2ii(l)<0,
n (/) + II (x) + n (1 - #) - 2n (1) < 0.

Now replace n (x) by c, , n (y) by c„ n (#) by r,/>, , n (i) by
c,pi, and ii(l) by 1, and wo have, after slight reductions,

CiPi < c,, c,p, < c,,
CiPi i 1 - r, (1 -p,)» c,p, < 1 - c, (I -p,).

Such are, then, the requisite conditions among the constants.

Again, the major limits of r arc identical with those of the
expression

stry ^ s{\ ' t) X {\ - y) ^ (\ ' s) i {\ ' x) v;

which, if wc bear in mind the conditions

above dctcnnincd, will be found to be

n (#) + « {t)y or, Cift + r,p„
n (#) + n (1 - x), or, I - Ci (1 - p,)
« (0 + w (1 - y), or, 1 - r, (1 -p.).

Lastly, to ascertain the minor limits of 2, wo readily form

from tlie constituents, whose coefficients are 1 or g, the vingle

terms s and /, nor can any other terms not included under these be

310 OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. [CHAP. XIX.

formed by selection or aggregation. Hence, for the minor limits
of 2: we have the values Cipi and CtPf

13. It is to be observed, that the method developed above
does not always assign the narrowest limits which it is possible
to determine. But it in all cases, I believe, sufficiently limits the
solutions of questions in the theory of probabilities.

The problem of the determination of the narrowest limits of
numerical extension of a class is, however, always reducible to a
purely algebraical form.* Thus, resuming the equations

let the highest inferior numerical limit of w be represented by
the formula an (s) + foi (^) • . + rf» (1), wherein a, 6, c, • . </ are
numerical constants to be determined, and «, t, &c., the logical
symbols of which A, J5, C, D are constituents. Then

an (s) + bn(t) . . + dn(\) = minor limit of -A subject

to the condition Z) = 0.
Hence if we develop the function

as •{- bt . . + d,

reject from the result all constituents which are found in Z), the
coefficients of those constituents which remain, and arc found
also in A, ought not individually to exceed unity in value, and
the coefficients of those constituents wliich remain, and which
are not found in A^ should individually not exceed in value.
Hence we shall have a series of inequalities of the form y< 1,
and another scries of the form // < 0, yand g being linear func-
tions of a J A, c, &c. Then those values of «, b . , dy which, while
satisfying the above conditions, give to the function

an (s) + bn(t) . . + c?w ( 1 ),

its highest value must be determined, and the highest value in

• The author regrets the loss of a manuscript, written about four years ago,
in which this method, he believes, was developed at considerable length. Ilis
recollection of the contents is almost entirely confined to the impression that the
principle of the method was the same as above described, and that its suffici-
ency was proved. The prior methods of this chapter arc, it is almost needless
to say, easier, though certainly less general.

CHAP. XIX.] OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 31 1

quctftion will be the highest minor limit of ir. To the above we
may add the relations similarly formed for the determination of
the relations among the given constants n(«), n{t) . . n (1).

14. The following somewhat complicated example will show
how the limitation of a solution is effected, when the problem
involves an arbitrary element, constituting it the representative
of a system of problems agredng in their data, but unlimited in
their ([utcdita.

Problem. — Of n events ZiXf a^, the following particulars
are known :

Ist. The probability that either the event Xi will occur, or
all the events f^, is pi •

2nd. The probability that either the event x, will occur, or
all the cvcntf* foil, is /;, . And so on for the others.

It is rc<|uircd t^) find the probability of any single event, or
combination of events, represented by the general functional form
^(.r, . .T,), or 0.

Adopting a previous notation, the data of the problem are

Prob. (Xi ^ X, . . J,) =» Pi . . Prob. (x, ^ x, . . J.) = p«.

And Prol). ^ (x, . . j*«) is required.
A?*r«ume gencmlly

Xr I Xj . . X« ^ *ri (1)

^ «= IT. (2)

Wc hence obtain the collective logical equation of the problem

^\{Tr 4 X, . . X«) Hr + Sr (^r - Xi • • X,)) + ^2r + IT^ » 0. (3)

From thi:« e<{ nation we must eliminate the symbols Xi, . . x., and

doti'nninc rr urji a develoiMHl logical function of «i . . «».

Let us rt'pro^Mit the result of the aforesaid elimination in the

fi»nn

/•;ir + i5'(l-ir)-0;

then will K Ix; the result of the elimination of the same symbols

fniin tlic equation

V {(x, + J» . . J,) Jr-^Sr (Xr - X, . .1,)} + I - # - 0. (4)

Now /; will l>e the product of the coefficients of all the con-
stituents (comiidcred with reference to the symbols Xi, Xj . . x«)

312 OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. [CHAP.

which are found in the development of the first member of the
above equation. Moreover, ^^ and therefore 1 - 0, will conost
of a series of such constituents, having unity for their respective
coefficients. In determining the forms of the coefficients in the
development of the first member of (4), it will be convenient to
arrange them in the following maimer:

1st. The coefficients of constituents found in 1 - ^.

2nd. The coefficient of Ii, ^2 • • ?«> if found in ^.

3rd. The coefficients of constituents found in 0, excluding the
constituent Xi, X2 • . Jn*

The above is manifestiy an exhaustive clasufication.

First then ; the coefficient of any constituent found in 1 - ^
wiU, in the development of the first member of (4), be of the form

1 + positive terms derived fix>m 2.

Hence, every such coefficient may be replaced by unity. Prop. i.
Chap. IX.

Secondly ; the coefficient of xi • . i^, if found in ^, in the
development of the first member of (4) wiU be

Sir, or 7i + ^2 • • + ^»

Tliirdly ; the coefficient of any other constituent, Xi . . iCj,
^»+i • • ^n5 found in ^, in the development of the first member
of (4) will be 7i . . + 7i + ^i^i . . + 5„.

Now it is seen, that E is the product of all the coefficients
above determined ; but as the coefficients of those constituents
which are not found in <p reduce to unity, E may be regarded as
the product of the coefficients of those constituents which are found
in 0. From the mode in which those coefficients arc formed, we
derive the following rule for the determination of -E, viz., in
each constituent found in 0, except the constituent xi Xg . . x„,
for Xi write ^i , for Xi write ^i , and so on, and add the results ;
but for the constituent xi , X2 . . Xn , if it occur in 0, write 7i + Jo . . + 5« ;
the product of all these sums is E.

To find E' wc must in (3) make w = 0, and eliminate Xi , Xa . . x»
from the reduced equation. That equation will be

S((x.r + Xi .. + X„) 5r+ Sr{Xr-Xi . . X„)} +0 = 0. (5)

CHAP. XIX.] OP STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 313

Hence E will be formed from the constituents in 1 - f, i. e.
from the constituents not found in ^ in the same way as £ is
formed from the constituents found in ^.

Consider next the equation

£io + £'(l-«o)-0.
This gives ^

Now E and ^are functions of the symbols $x%$x* •$%• The

expansion of the value of to will, therefore, consist of all the con-
stituents which can be formed out of those symbols, with Uieir
proper coefficients annexed to them, as determined by the rule
of development.

Moreover, E and E are each formed by the multiplication of
factors, and neither of them can vanish unless some one of the
factors of which it is composed vanishes. Again, any factor, as
#1 . . + 7a can only vanish when all the terms by the addition of
which it is formed vanish together, since in development we at-
tribute to these tenns the values and 1, only. It is further evi-
dent, that no two factors differing from each other con vanish
together. Thus the factors 7i 4 7, . . + 7a, and «t + 7t • . + 7a, can-
not siuiultancouslv vanish, for the former cannot vanish unless
#1 B 0, orii «= 1 ; but the latter cannot vanish unless «i « 0.

First, let us determine the coefficient of the constituent
7i7| . .7, in the development of the value of ir.

Tlie simultaneous asf«umption 7i « 1, 7, • 1 . . 7n ■ 1» would
cause the factor #i + i, . . -i- #a to vanish if this should occur in
E or E\ and no other factor under the same assumption would
vaiiii^h ; but ii + i, . . + Ja does not occur as a factor of either
K or E\ neither of these quantities, therefore, can vanish; and,

E . .

therefore, the expression v^ — j,, is neither 1, 0, nor -.

Whtrefore the cotfficient oflx 7j . . 7a in the expanded valme
of tr, may be represented by - .

Sci'ondly, let us determine the coefficient of the constituent

$1 Sj , . I^a*

314 OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. [CHAP. XIX.

The assumptions «i = 1, «2 = 1, . • «• = 1, would cause thefictor
7i + ?2 . • + in to yanish. Now this factor is foimd in E and not
in E^ whenever ^ contains both the constituents Xi x% . . x^ and

xi ia . .in. Heflre then -= — = becomes -p or 1. The &ctor

?! + 7] . • + in is found in J? and not in jE^, if ^ contains neither
of the constituents rci 0:3 . . a^ and ii is . . x.. Here then

becomes — ^ or 0. Lastiy, the factor Ji + Ja • • + ^ is

£'_ E -E

contained in both E and E'y if one of the constituents XxXt..Q^

and ilia . • in is found in ^, and one is not. Here then •= — ^

becomes -.

The coefficient of the coristituent 81S2 . . ««, wM therefore be

1,0, or - , according as ^ contains both the constituents XiXt..x^

and ii ia . . in, or neither ofthem^ or one of them and not the
other.

Lastly, to determine the coefficaent of any other constituent

The assumptions 5i = 1, . . ^i = 1, si^i = 0, «„ = 0, would
cause the factor Vi . . + ij + ^i+i . . + *„ to vanish. Now this foe-
tor is found in Ey if the constituent Xi , . XiXi^i . . i„ is found in
and in£", if the said constituent is not found in 0. In the

E' E
former case we have ^^ = -^^ = 1 ; in the latter case we have

E' __
E-E" 0-E ^

Hence the coefficient of any other constituent s^ . . ^,, "^-^^ . . 7„
is \ or {) according as the similar constituent x, . . ar^ ^,-^i . . J,
is or is not found in <p.

We may, therefore, practically detennine the value of w in
the following manner. Rejecting from the given expression of
(p the constituents Xi rcj . . Xn and and 5;i io . • in 5 should both or
cither of them be contained in it, let the symbols .t^, x^, . . a*,,
in the result be changed into «i, ^2) • • «n respectively. Let the co-
efficients of the constituents S182. . 5„ and siSz.. Sn be determined

CHAP. XIX.] OP STATISTICAL CONDITIOV8. 316

according to the special rules for those cases given above, and let
every other constituent have for its coefficient 0. The result
will lie the value of ti? as a function of ^m «>, • • 'n*

As a particular case, let ^ - X|. It is required from the
given iLita to determine the probability of the event Xi .

The Hymbol x^ eximnded in terms of the entire series of sym-
Ik>1h x,« X2, . . X||, will generate all the constituents of those
syinlxilri which have or, us a factor. Among those constituents
will be found the conntituent Xi x, . . x^, but not the constituent

Hence in the expanded value of Xi as a function of the sym-
lK>lri Jfit S2J ..Snj the constituent «i «> . . #• will have the coefficient

, and the constituent 7i 7, • • j» the coefficient -•

If fn)m Xi wc reject the constituent Xi X) . . Xa^ the result
will be X| - XiX, . . Xa, and changing therein X\ into #1, &c., we
have «i - Xi jf, . . #a for the corresponding jxirtion of the expres-
sion of xi Bs VL function of Xi, jr,, . . #..

Hence the final expression for X| is

1.- ^

■r constituents whose coefficients are 0.

The sum of all the constituents in the above exfiansion whose

c<>cfficientj* are either 1, 0, or - , will be 1 - 7|7, . . 7,.

Wr ?*lwll, thcn»funs have the following algtbraic system for
the dctcrijiination of Proh. Xi, viz. :

>. Xj«

with the rebtiona

Vob. X, —^ . , , (8)

f • "/'»""/'• (9)

« 1 *- 7i «, . . la n X.

It will l»e seen, that the rclationii for the determination of
*x s^ . . $n are quite iudefiendent of the form of the function f,
and the valuci* of these quantitios, dcieniiiaod oocc, will tfcr^e

316 or STATISTICAL CONDITIOMS. [gBAP. ZUL

for all possible jnroblems in wliich the data are the same^ liow-
ever the quadta of those problems may vary. Hie nature of
that event, or combination of events, whose piobalnlity is sougiit,
will a£fect only the form of the function in which thedetennined
values of «i #t • • t» are to be substituted.
We have fixnn (9)

Si«PiX, 't"PiX, • • Jfi-j^X.

Whence

1-0 -P.X) (1 -ihX) . . (1 - jibX)-X.

l-X-(l-piX)(l-M)..(l-iiwX); (10)

from which equation the value of X is to be determined.

Suppoong this value determined, the value of Prob. «i wiD be

Px\ - (I - c) pxPi. . p^\^
l-(l-piA)(l-ftA)..(l-;^.X/

or, on reduction by (10),

Prob. 4?i - pi - (1 - c) /hjH . .l»«X»-». (11)

Let us next seek the conditions which must be fulfilled
among the constants Pu p2i • • Pm and the limits of the value of
Prob. Xi,

As there is but one term with the coefficient - , there is bat

one condition among the constants, viz..

Minor limit, (1 - «i) (1 - #2) . . (1 - «,) < 0.

Or, n(l - Si) + n (1 - «,) . . +«(1 - Sn) - (n- 1) n(l); 0.

Or, «(1) - n(«,) - n(«a) •.-«(««) < 0.

Whence pi +jp, . . +/>» > 1,

the condition required.

The major limit of Prob. Xi is the major limit of the sum of

those constituents whose coefficients are 1 or - • But that sum is «i-

Hence,

Major limit, Prob. Xi » major limit «i » pi •

CHAP. XIX.] OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 317

The minor limit of Prob. Xi will be identical with the nunor
limit of the expression

Si -#!«,..#» + (1 - «i) (1 - «a) . . (1 - s,).

A little attention will show that the different aggregates,
terms which can be formed out of the above, each including the
greatest |)os8ible number of constituents, will be the following,
viz. :

«i(l-«.), #i(l-«i), .. #i(l-s.), (l-S,)(l-Jb)..(l-#,).

From these we deduce the following expressions for the minor
limit, \iz. :

Pi" Pt9 P\ - P% * ' P\ - Pm I " pt - Pi • • - Pm*

The value of Prob. X| will, therefore, not fidl short of any of
these values, nor exceed the value of pt •

Instead, however, of employing these conditions, we may
directly avail ourselves of the principle stated in the demon-
stration of the general method in probabilities. The condition
that «i, «i, . .«!• must each be less than unity, requires that A

should be less than each of the quantities — , — , . • — . And

Pi p. P«

the condition that «i, «t, . . «■, must each be greater than 0, re-
quires that X should also be greater than 0. Now pi p% . .pn
being proper fractions satisfying the condition

p, + p, . . + p. > 1,

it may be shown that but one positive value of A can be deduced
firom the central equation (10) which shall be less than each of

the quantities — , — , .. — . That value of A is, therefore, the

^ . Pi Pt Pn

one required.

To prove this, let us consider the equation

(1 -piA)(l -p,A) . . (1 -M) - 1 -^ A - 0.

When A « the first member vanishes, and the equation is
satisfied. Let us examine the variations of the first member

between the limits A - and A - — , suppodngpi the greatest of

Pi
the values pipg ••Pm-

318 OF STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. [CHAP. XIX.

Bepresenting the first member of the equation by F, tre ha?e
dV

— « -pi (I'PtX) . . (1 -PnX) . . -Pn (1 - Pi A) . . (1 -/?i.-iA) + l,

which, when X « 0, assumes the form - pi - /is • . - /i« + 1, and
is negative in value.
Again, we have

^^ PiP«(l-/?sX)(l-;?,X) + &c,,

consisting of a series of terms which, imder the given restrictions
with reference to the value of X, are positive.

Lastly, when X = — , we have

F--1 + — ,

which is positive.

From all this it appears, that if we construct a curve, the or-
dinates of which shall represent the value of V corresponding to
the abscissa X, that curve will pass through the origin, and will
for small values of X lie beneath the abscissa. Its convexity will,

between the limits X = and X = — be downwards, and at the

Pi

extreme limit — the curve will be above the abscissa, its ordinate

Pi

being positive. It follows from this description, that it will in-
tersect the abscissa once, and only once, within the limits speci-
fied, viz., between the values X = 0, and X = — .

Pi

The solution of the problem is, therefore, expressed by (11),
the value of X being that root of the equation (10), which lies

within the limits and — , — , . . — .

Pi P2 Pn

The constant c is obviously the probability, that if the events
xi, oTj, . . rcn, all happen, or all fail, they will all happen.

This determination of the value of X suffices for all problems
in which the data are the same as in the one just considered. It
is, as from previous discussions we arc prepared to expect, a de-
termination independent of the fonn of the function ^.

CHAP. XIX.] or STATISTICAL CONDITIONS. 319

Let US, as another example, suppose

^ = or IT - xi (I - i?,) . . (1 - X,) . . + X, (1 - Xi) . . (1 - X,.,).

This is equivalent to requiring the probability, that of the events
Xi, X,, . . x« one, and only one, wiU hi^pen. The valueof ap wiU
obviously be

M? - «i (1 -«i)-. (1 -«•)•. + ««(l-«i). (I-' ««.i) + 5 (l-«i). •(!-«•)>

from which we should have

Prob. (xi (1-x,) .. (l-x,)..+ x,(l-Xi) ..(l-x,.i))

A

l-piX l-/>iX " 1-/>«X

This solution 8er\'ed well to illustrate the remarks made in the
introductory chapter (1. 16) The essential difficulties of the
problem arc founded in the nature of its data and not in tliut of
its qua»itxL The central equation by which X is determined, and
the i)eculixur discussions connected therewith, are equally {icrti-
nent to every form which that problem can be made to asi^ume,
by varying the interpretation of the arbitrary elements in its
original statement.

320 PROBLEMS ON CAUSBS. [CHAT. XX.

CHAPTER XX.

PROBLEMS RELATING TO THE CONNEXION OF CAUSBS AND

EFFECTS.

1« OO to apprehend in all particular instances the relation of
^ cause and effect, as to connect the two extremes in thought
according to the order in which they are connected in nature
(for the modus operandi is, and must ever be, unknown to us),
is the final object of science. This treatise has shown, that there
is special reference to such an object in the constitution of the
intellectual faculties. There is a sphere of thought which com-
prehends things only as coexistent parts of a universe; but
there is also a sphere of thought (Chap, xi.) in which thej are
apprehended as links of an unbroken, and, to human appear
ance, an endless chsdn — as having their place in an order oon-
necting them both with that which has gone before, and with
that which shall follow after. In the contemplation of such
a series, it is impossible not to feel the pre-e minen cg which is due,
above all other relations, to the relation of caiiflft anc^ fiffft^-^-

Here I propose to consider, in their abstract form, some pro-
blems in which the above relation is involved. There exists
among such problems, as might be anticipated from the nature
of the relation with which they are concerned, a wide diversity.
From the probabilities of causes assigned d priori^ or given by
experience, and their respective probabilities of association with
an effect contemplated, it may be required to determine the pro-
bability of that effect ; and this cither, 1 st, absolutely, or 2ndly,
under given conditions. To such an object some of the earlier
of the following problems relate. On the other hand, it may be
required to determine the probability of a particular cause, or of
some particular connexion among a system of causes, from ob-
served effects, and the known tendencies of the said causes, singly
or in connexion, to the production of such effects. This class of
questions will be considered in a subsequent portion of the

CHAP. XX.] PROBLBM8 ON CAU8B8. S91

chapter, and other forms of the general inquiry will also be
noticed. I would remark, that although these examples are de-
signed chicflj as illustrations of a method, no r^ard has been
[mid to the question of ease or convenience in the application of
that method. On the contrary, they have been devised, with
whatever success, as types of the class of problems which might
be expected to arise from the study of the relation of cause and
effect in the more complex of its actual and visible manifestations.

2. Problem I. — The probabilities of two causes Ai and Af
are Ci and r, respectively. The probability that if the cause Ai
present itself, an event E wiU accompany it (whether as a conse-
quence of the cause Ai or not) is pi, and the probability that if
the cause At present itself, that event E will accompany it,
whether as a consequence of it or not, is/),. Moreover, the
event E cannot appear in the absence of both the causes Ax and
At.^ Required the probability of the event E.

The solution of what this problem becomes in the case in

which the causes ^-li, ^, arc mutually exclusive, is well known

to be

Prob. E m Cipi ■¥ Ctpt ;

and it expresses a particular case of a fundamental and very im-
portant principle in the received theory of probabilities. Here
it is proposed to solve the problem free from the restriction above
sUted.

• The mode in whieh tach daU at tlie aboTe miglit lie fornUlMd by eipe-
riciicc if easily cooceivable. Opposite tbe window of tbe room in wbieb I writ*
is a field, liable to be overflowud from two oaaset, distinct, bat capable of being
combined, vis., floods from tbe upper sonretfe of tbe River Lee, and tidee from
tbe ocean. Suppose tbat observations made on N separate occasioos bave
yielded tbe following results : On A occasions tbe river was swollen by fresbeti,
and on P of those occasions it was inundated, wbether from this canse or not.
On B uccaAitms tbe river was swollen by tbe tide, and on Qof tboee oeeasioosii
was inundated, whether from this cause or not. Supposing , tben, tbat tbe Md
cannot be inundated in tbe absence of hoik tbe causes above mentioned, let it be
required to determine the total probability of its Inundation.

Here tbe elements a, 6, p, q of tbe general problem re pr esent tbe rmtiot

A P B Q
■y A' /if B'

er rather tbe values to which those rmtiot approaeb, aa tbe valae of JV is iadrft-
■Italy increased.

T

322 PROBLEMS ON CAUSBS^ [CBAP. XX.

Let lis represent

The cause -4i by x.

The cause A^ by y •

The effect E by z.

Then we have the following numerical data :

Prob. a: = Ci, Prob. y = Cj,

Prob. xz = Cipu Prob. yz = c^pi.'

Again, it is provided that if the causes A^ A^ are both ab-
sent, the effect E does not occur ; wheace we have the lo^cal

equation

(l-a;)(l-y) = r(l-z).

Or, eliminating v,

z (1 - aj) (1 - y) « 0. (2)

Now assume,

xz = «, yz » L (3)

Then, reducing these equations (VIII. 7), and connecting the
result with (2),

xz{l-s)+s{l^xz)+yz(l-'t)+t{l-yz)'¥z(l-a)(l''y)^0, (4)

From this equation, z must be determined as a developed
logical function of x, y, s, and t^ and its probability thence de-
duced by means of the data,

Prob. x = Ciy Prob. y = Cj , Prob. s = Cipi, Prob. # = Cj />2 . (5)

NoAV developing(4) with respect to 2, and putting x for 1 - x,
y for 1 = y, and so on, we have

(xs + sx ■¥ yi-\^ ty + xy) 2: + (« + ^) z = 0,

s-vt

.'. z + ^ — -_ :::: —

s + t-xs-sx-yt ~ ty - xy

1.1- 1 —
= stxy + - stxy + - stxy + - stxy

\ - - 1 -- 1 -_.

+ jr stxy -¥ stxy -v j'itxy-{- — stxy

1_ 1 _, . _,_ 1_,..

+ - stxy + - stxy + stxy + -zstxy

+ Oltxy + Ostxy + O^^fy + O^lfxy. (6)

CHAP. XX«] PROBLEMS ON CAC8B8. 3S3

From this result we find (XVII. 1 7),

r- stxg + sixy 4 IGy + Itxy^ltxy
+ 5??y + stxy
- «£iy + «tiy + Jtiy -»• if.

Whence, passing fix>m Lo^c to Algebra, we have the following
system of equations, u standing for the probability sought :

stxy 4 stxy + Itx sixy + stxy 4 "sty

_ stxy ■¥ stxy stxyViCcy /yx

stxy •¥ stxy ^ sixy stxy + stxy ■¥ stxy •¥ si „

from which we must eliminate «, t, x , y, and f^.
Xow if we have any scries of equal fractions, as

a b e .

a' " 6 " ? " ^*

we know that

la -¥ mb -¥ nc

la-^ mif -¥ nd
And thus from the above system of equations we may deduce

whence we have, on equating the product of the three first mem-
bers to Uie cube of the last.

Again, from the system (7) we have

Jtx sty stxy

1 - II - r» + rj/i| 1 - n - c, + r,p, r »p, + r,/>, - u
rhencc proceeding as before

-K,

*?*i.xxyy_^ . r. (9)

(I - r, + r,p, - «) (1 - c, + f,p, - u) (c,p, + c,|», - «)

»2

324 PROBLEMS ON CAU8BS. [CHAP. XX.

Equating the values of F* in (8) and (9), we have

(ti - c,pi) (u - Cap,) ( 1 - tt)
= ( 1 " Ci (1 -pi) - tl) ( 1 - Cj (1 -pt)-u} (cipi + c,p2- ti),

which may be more conveniently written in the form

(tl-Cipi)(u-C3Pa) ^ (l-Ci(l-pO-ti)(l-Ca(l-p2)"tf) /j^x
CiPi + Capa -U l-U * V /

From this equation the value of u may be found. It remaina
only to determine which of the roots must be taken for this pur-
pose.

3. It has been shown (XIX. 12) that the quantity ti, in
order that it may represent the probability required in the above
case, must exceed each of the quantities Cipi^ Ca/ia^ and M
short of each of the quantities 1 - Ci (1 - />i), 1 - Ca (1 - />a)j and
Cipi + CaPa; the condition among the constants, moreover, being
that the three last quantities must individually exceed each of
the two former ones. Now I shall show that these conditions
being satisfied, the final equation (10) has but one root which
falls within the limits assigned. That root will therefore be the
required value of m.

Let us represent the lower limits Cip;, C2P2, by a, b respec-
tively, and the upper limits 1 -c^{l -pi), 1-^2(1 -pa), and
Cipi + C2P2, by a, b\ d respectively. Then the general equation
may be expressed in the form

{u - a) (m - h) (1 - ?/) - (a'- u) {p - u) (c - u) = 0, (11)

Representing the first member of the above equation by F", we
have

£^=20 -a'-*'). (12)

Now let us suppose a the highest of the lower limits of m, a the
lowest of its higher limits, and trace the progress of the values
of V between the limits m = a and w = d.

When M = a, we see from the form of the first member of (1 1)
that V is negative, and when m = a' we see that V is positive.

CHAP. XX.] PROBLEMS ON CAUSES. 325

Between those limits V varies continuously without becoming

d}V .
infinite, and -r-^ is always of the same sign.

Hence if u represent the abscissa V the ordinate of a plane
curve, it is evident that the curve will pass from a point below
the axis of t« corresponding to u - a, to a point above the axis of
u corresiK>nding to t« « a', the curve renuuning continuous, and
having its concavity or convexity always turned in the same di*
rection. A little attention will show that, under these circum-
stances, it must cut the axis of u once, and only once.

Hence between the limits ti » a, u^d^ there exists one value
ofu, and only one, which satisfies the equation (11). It will
further appear, if in thought the curve be traced, that the other
value of H will be less than a when the quantity 1 - a' - 6' is po-
sitive and greater than any one of the quantities a , V^ d when
I - a -V\a negative. It hence follows that in the solution of
(11) the positive sign of the radical must be taken. We thus
find

"" " 2(1 -«^- ft) ' ^*^>

where Q- (a*-ay+(l -a -6y)«-4(! -a'-6')(aA-a'6'r').

4. The results of this investigation may to some extent be
verified. Thus, it is evident that the probability of the event E
must in general exceed the probability of the concurrence of the
event E and the cause Ax or ^a« Hence we must have, as the
solution indicates.

Again, it is clear that the probability of the effect E must in
general be less than it would be if the causes Ji, At were mu-
tually exclusive. Hence

I.4W(tIy, pince the probability of the failure of the effect £con-
currin*; with the presence of the cause Ai must, in general, be
less tlian the absolute probability of the failure of £, we have

.Ml < I -r,(l -/>,).

326 PROBLEMS ON CAU8B8. [CHAP. XX.

Similarly,

U< 1 -Ca(l "Pi).

And thus the conditions by which the general solution was
limited are confirmed.

Agfun, let pi = 1, p, = !• This is to suppose that when either
of the causes A^ -4, is present, the event E will occur. We have
then a = Ci, A = c,, a = 1, 6' = 1, c<= Ci + Cj, and substituting in
(13) we get

CiCa -Ci-Ct"l -^ ^/ {(CiCg " Ci - c, - 1)' + 4 (c, c, - Ct - Ct)\

-2
s Ci + Ct - CiCt on reduction
= 1 - (1 - cO (1 - c,).

Now this is the known expression for tiie probability that one
cause at least will be present, which, under tiie circumstances, is
evidently the probability of the event JS.

Finally, let it be supposed that Ci and C2 are very small, so
that their product may be neglected ; then the expression for u
reduces to Cipi + Cspa- Now the smaller the probability of each
cause, the smaller, in a much higher degree, is the probability of
a conjunction of causes. Ultimately, therefore, such reduction
continuing, the probability of the event E becomes the same aa
if the causes were mutually exclusive.

I have dwelt at greater length upon this solution, because it
serves in some respect as a model for those which follow, some of
which, being of a more complex character, might, without such
preparation, appear diflScult.

5. Problem II. — In place of the supposition adopted in the
previous problem, that the event E cannot happen when both the
causes ^1, A2 are absent, let it be assumed that the causes Ai, At
cannot both be absent, and let the other circumstances remain as
before. Required, then, the probability of the event E.

Here, in place of the equation (2) of the previous solution, we
have the equation

(l-/r)(l-y) = 0.

The developed logical expression of z is found to be

CHAP* XX.] PROBLBM8 ON CAU8II. 327

I - - . I „ I --.

+ OJTxy + Ollxy + OJfiy + 5^^^*

mnd the final solution is

Prob.£-ai;

the quantity u bemg determined by the solution of the equation

wherein a - Cip^ b = c^p%j a- I - C| (1 - pi), ft* ■ I - Cj (1 - p^.

The conditions of limitation are the following : — That value
of If must be chosen which exceeds each of the three quantities

a, Ay and a -¥ b' - 1,

and which at the same time falls short of each of the three quan-
tities

d^ b\ and a •¥ b.

Exactly as in the solution of the previous problem, it may bo
shown that the quadratic equation (1) will have one root, and
only one root, satisfying these conditions. The conditions them-
selves were deduced by the same rule as before, exccpUng that
the minor limit a' ■¥ V - 1 was found by seeking the major limit
of 1 - r.

It may be added that the constants in the data, beside satis-
fymg the conditions implied above, vix^ that the quantities a, ^,
and a -f &, must individually exceed a, 6, and a' -f 6' - 1, must
also satisfy the condition Ti 4 r, > 1. This also appears from the
application of the rule.

6. Problbm III.— The probabilities of two events A and B
arc a and h rcsi>cctively, the probability that if the event A take
place an event J? will aocompany it ia f, and the probability that

328 PROBLBMS ON CAUSB8. [cHAP. XX

if the event B take place, the same event E will accompany it
is q. Required the probability that if the event A take place the
event B will take place, or vice versd^ the probability that if jB
take place, A will take place.

Let us represent the event A by x, the event B by y, and the
event E by z. Then the data are —

Prob. a = a, Prob. y = 6.
Prob. xz = op, Prob. yz « bq.

Whence it is required to find

Prob. xy Prob. xy
Prob. a; Prob.y'

Let xy ^ 8j yz ^ t^ xy ^w.

Eliminating z, we have, on reduction,

sx -^ ty -¥ syT-k- xts + xyw + (1 - xy) to = 0,

sx + ty + *y7+ xts + xy

.•. w

2xy-l
1 - . 1 - . 1 —

= xyst 4 - xyst + - xyst + - xyst

1 _ ^ . ^ 1 1

+ - xyst + Oxyst + - xyst-^- - xyst

+ - xy'st + - xylt + Oxylt + - iyj^

+ xyll + OxysT-^- 0xy77+ OxylJ. (1)

Hence, passing &om Logic to Algebra,

T^ , xyst + xyll

Prob. ay = -^ — \r^'

X, y, 5, and ^ being determined by the system of equations

xyst + xysl -^ xylT+ xyll xyst + xylt + xyll-i- xysl

a b

xyst + xysT xyst + xylt
op bq

= xyst + xysl-^ xylt + xylt-\- xylt + xyll ■¥ xylt =■ V,

CHAP. XX.] PROBLIM8 ON CACSBS. 329

To reduce the above system to a more coDvenient form, let everj
member be divided by x^ 77, and in the result let

xs yt . X y ,

x$ yl X y

We then find

mm -¥ m-^-Wfi -^ n mm -^ m' -¥ tm' ■¥ n
a ■ b

mm •¥ m mm + m

ap bq

- mm' + m + m' + fm' -I- fi -f n 4 I.
Also,

•*^, mm + fM

rrob* xy

mm' + m + m' + iw' + 11 + n'+ 1*

fl

These equations may be reduced to the form

mm' + m mm' + m' m + n nn ^ n

op " *7 " « (1 'p) " *(i-y)

-(m+l)(m'+ l) + (ji+l)(ji'+l)- I.

-j^ - mm 4 IM

"""•'^ " (m + I) (m' + I) + (n + I) (*'+ I) - r

Now assume

(m + I) (m'+ 1) - ;;7^. (« + ») (» + 1) - ^/^^i ' (V

™_ . , m(m'+ IHm+l) m^

1 lien smce mm + m ■ , « 7 rr— ; r\t

m+ 1 (m + I) (v + fl - 1)

and 8o on for the other numerators of the system, we find, on

fubtttituting and multiplying each member of the system by

V 4 fl - 1, the following results :

mfi m'pt Av nV .

{m^\)ap {m^\)bq (« + 1) « (1 - p) {«'+ l)*(l -7)

Prob.xjf - {mm + im') (y + fi - 1). (3)

From the above system we have

^, whence m «

ap

HI 4 1 fl f^" ^P

330 PROBLBM8 ON CAUSBS. [CHAP. XX.

^milarly

ju-Ay' v-a(l-/?)' v-6(l-jy

Hence , u , i^ p

m + 1 = — i- — , n + 1 « t; r, &c.

H-ap v-a(l-p)

Substitute these values in (2) reduced to the form

V + /i- 1 =

(m+l)(m'+l) (n+ 1) (y' + 1)*
and we have

Substitute also for m, m', &c« their values in (3)| and we have

Prob. xy

r flftw . gft(i-p)(i-g) H , . ^ ^ ,.

Now the first equation of the system (4) gives

v + U'-\=fi-ap-bq + -^=-^, (oj

.'. —^-^ = V - I ■\^ ap + bq.

Similarly,

ab(l -p) (I- q) , ,, X 1./, \

— ^^ --^-^ ^ = jLC - 1 + a (1 -/?) + 6 (1 - flr).

Adding these equations together, and observing that the first
member of the result becomes identical with the expression juat
found for Prob. xy^ we have

Prob. a:^ev + /Li + a + 6-2.
Let us represent Prob. ay by «, and let a + 6 - 2 = m, then

fi ■¥ V = u - m. (6)

Again, from (5) we have

/Lcv = abpq - {ap + 6y - 1) /x. (7)

CHAP. XX.] PROBLBM8 ON CAU8XS. 831

Similarly finom the fint and third members of (4) equated we
have

Mv - 0*0 -p) (1 - y) - {a(l - p) + 6(1 - 9) - I) V.

Let us represent ap + A; - 1 by A, and a(l -p)+6(l- j)- 1 by
A'. We find on equating the above values of fiVf

m ab{p ■¥ q " 1).

Let ab(p -¥ q " 1) " /, then

kfi - h'v - /. (8)

Now fix>m (6) and (8) we get

A'(ii-m)4/ A(ii-m)-/

m m

Substitute these values in (7) reduced to the form

^ (y + A) - abpq,

and we have

(All -/){*'(««-«) + /)- abpqm\ (9)

a quadratic equation, the solution of which determines v, the va-
lue of Prob. ry sought.

The solution may readily be put in the form

. Ih' + A(A'm -l)± ^/ [|/A' - A (Am - /)|» + ihh'ahpqm^]
h 2AA '

But if wc further observe that

tt- A (Am - /) = /(A + A') - AA'm - (/- AA')m,
since A « up + 67 - 1, A'- a(l -p) + 6(1 -r/) - 1,
whence A + A'-a + 6-2«m,

Wc find

Pr.K ^. /A' + A(pm-0tm^l(/-AA')«f4AA'«%|
lrob.xy= 2AA' ' ^ "^

It remainH to determine which rign must be given to the radi-
cal. We might ascertain this by the general method exemplified
in the kst problem, but it is fiu* eaner, and it fuUy suffices in the
prescut instance, to determine the sign by a oomparisoo of the

332 PROBLEMS ON CAUSES. [CHAP. XI.

above formula with the result proper to some known case. For

instance, if it were certain that the event A is always^ and the

event B never ^ associated with the event E^ then it is certain that

the events A and B are never conjoined. Hence if p = 1, 9 - 0,

we ought to have t< = 0. Now the assumptions p ~ 1, 9 <= 0,

pve

A = a-1, A' = ft-1, ZeO, m = a + 6-2.

Substituting in (10) we have

and this expression vanishes when the lower sign is taken.
Hence the final solution of the general problem will be expressed
in the form

Prob. xy IK + A (A^m - /) - my/ [{ I - hhy + ^hh'abpq]
Prob.x ' 2ahK

wherein A = ap + 6y-l, A' = a(l-p) + 6(l-y)-l,

/ = aA(p + y-l), m«a + 6-2.
As the terms in the final logical solution affected by the co-
efficient - are the same as in the first problem of this chapter,

the conditions among the constants will be the same, viz.,

flp ; 1 - 6 (1 - y), Ay 5 1 - a (1 - ;?).

7. It is a confirmation of the correctness of the above solution
that the expression obtained is symmetrical with respect to the
two sets of quantities/?, q^ and 1 - p, 1 - g', i. e. that on changing
p into 1 - /?, and q into 1 - g', the expression is unaltered Thia
is apparent from the equation

Prob. xy = abm^ (^ - P) (^ - ^) \

employed in deducing the final result. Now if there exist pro-
babilities /?, q of the event JE', as consequent upon a knowledge
of the occurrences of ^ and By there exist probabilities 1 -/?, 1 - }
of the contrary event, that is, of the non-occurrence of E under
the same circumstances. As then the data are unchanged in

CHAP. Xl«] PROBLEMS ON CACSBS. S33

form, whether we take account in them of the occurrence or of
the non-occurrence of J?, it is evident that the solution ought to
bCy as it is, a symmetrical funcUon of p, q and 1 - />» 1 - 7.

Let us examine the particular case in which p « 1, q » \.
We find

k m a -¥ b~\^ A'--l, /-oA, fii«a4A-29

and substituting

Prob.ay -- q A4fg4ft-l)(2-a -b-ab) -(a 4&~2)(gA>fl-&-i-l)
Prob. X " - 2a (a + ft^l)

-2fl&(g4ft-l)

".2a(a + A- 1)"

It would appear, then, that in this case the events A and B arc
virtually independent of each other. The supposition of their
invariable association with some other event Ey of the frequency
of whose occurrence, except as it may be inferred from this par-
ticular connexion, absolutely nothing is known, does not establish
any dci)endcnce between the events A and B themselves. I ap-
prehend tliat this conclusion is agreeable to reason, though par-
ticular examples may appear at first sight to indicate a different
result. For int<tance, if the probabilities of the casting up, 1st,
of a particular npecies of weed, 2ndly, of a certain description of
zoophytes upon the sea-shore, had been separately determined,
and if it had al:K> t)een ascertidned that neither of these events
could happen except during the agitation of the waves caused by
a tempest, it would, I thinks justly be concluded that the events
in question were not independent* The picking up of a piece of
seaweed of the kind supiKMcd would, it is presumed, render more
probable the dL«covery of the zoophytes than it would otherwise
have been. Rut I a|>prchend that this fiu^t is due to our know-
le<lgc of another circumstance not implied in the actual conditions
of the problem, viz., that the occurrence of a tempest is but an
occasional phenomenon. Let the range of observation be con-
fined to a sea always vexed with storm. It would then, I sup-
pose, be seen that the casting up of the weeds and of the
zoophytes ought to lie regarded as independent events* Now,
to speak more generally, there are oonditions common to all plus-

334 PROBLEMS ON CAUSB8. [CRAP. XX.

nomena, — conditions which, it is felt, do not affect their mutoal
independence. I apprehend therefore that the solution indicates,
that when a particular condition has prevailed through the whde
of our recorded experience^ it assumes the above character with
reference to the class of phenomena over which that experience
has extended.

8. Problem IV. — To illustrate in some degree the above
observations, let there be given, in addition to the data of the
last problem, the absolute probability of the event E^ the com-
pleted system of data being

Prob. re =? a, Prob. y « 6, Prob. z = c,
Prob. xz » op, Prob- yz ■ 6y,

and let it be required to find Prob. xy.

Assuming, as before, xz^s^ yz^^i^ xy^Wy the final logical
equation is

w m xystz + xysTz + (aysTz + xyStz + ocyzsT + xyzsJ

+ xyzlT-k- xyzsT).

+ terms whose coefficients are -. (1)

The algebraic system having been formed, the subsequent elimi-
nations may be simplified by the transformations adopted in the
previous problem. The final result is

Prob.a:y = «^{^+(^-f_(^-g>}. (2)

The conditions among the constants are

c > op, c>bq^ c < I - a (1 - />), c < 1 - J (I - 5).

Now if p = 1, J = 1, we find

Prob. ay = — ,

c not admitting of any value less than a or h. It follows hence
that if the event E is known to be an occasional one, its inva-
riable attendjmce on the events x and y increases the probability
of their conjunction in the inverse ratio of its own frequency.

CHAF. XZ.] PROBLBM8 OM CAC8B8. 335

The farmulm (2) may be verified in a large number of canes.
Ab a particular instance, let 9 « r, we find

Prob. xymab. (3)

Now the assumption g^c involves, by Definition (Chap. XVI.)
the independence of the events B and E. If then B and E are
independent, no relation which may exist between A and E can
establii»h a relation between A and B ; wherefore A and B are
also independent, as the above equation (3) implies.

It may readily be shown from (2) that the value of Prob. r,
which renders Prob. Xjf a minimum, is

If p = J, this gives

Prob. z mp;

a result, the correctness of which may be shown by the same con-
siderations which have been applied to (3).

Problem V. — Given the probabilities of any throe events,
and the probability of their conjunction ; required the probar
bility of the conjunction of any two of them.

Suppose the data to be

Prob. X o p, Prob. y ■ j', Prob. * - r, Prob. xyr « m,

and the quaesitum to be Prob. xy.

Assuming xyz » «, xy » i^ we find as the final logical equa-
tion,

f ='xyrj4xyzi+0(xy;-»^x7) -f-(sum of all other constituents) ;
whence, finally,

wherein p - 1 -f>, &e. H» p y + (p + y)^-

This adiniu of verification when p - 1, when 9 - I, when r - 0,
and therefore m • 0, &c.

Had the condition, Prob. x - r, been omitted, the solution
would stiU have been definite. We should have had

336 PROBLEMS ON CAUSES. [CHAP. XX.

1 — HI

and it may be added, as a final confirmation of their correctness,
that the above results become identical when m =pqr.

9. The following problem is a generalization of Problem I.,
and its solution, though necessarily more complex, is obtained by
a similar analysis.

Problem VI. — If an event can only happen as a conse-
quence of one or more of certain causes Ai^ At^ .. A^f and if
generally ci represent the probability of the cause Ai, and />» the
probability that if the cause Ai exist, the event E will occur,
then the series of values of Ci and pi being given, required the
probability of the event JE*

Let the causes Aiy A^^ . . ^« be represented by a?,, o^, ..o^,
and the event E by z.

Then we have generally,

Prob. Xi = Cj, Prob. XiZ = «»/>£.

Further, the condition that J? can only happen in connexion with
some one or more of the causes Ax^ A^^^^A^ establishes the logi-
cal condition,

r(l-r,)(l-a:,)..(l-x„) = 0. (1)

• It may be proper to remark, that the above problem was proposed to the
notice of mathematicians by the author in the Cambridge and Dublin Mathemi-
tical Journal, Nov. 1851, accompanied by the subjoined observations :

" The motives which have led me, after much consideration, to adopt, with
reference to this question, a course unusual in the present day, and not upon
slight grounds to be revived, are the following : — First, I propose the question
as a test of the sufficiency of received methods. Secondly, I anticipate that its
discussion will in some measure add to our knowledge of an important branch
of pure analysis. However, it is upon the former of these grounds alone that I
desire to rest my apology.

*' While hoping that some may be found who, without departing from the line
of their previous studies, may deem this question worthy of their attention, I
wholly disclaim the notion of its being offered as a trial of personal skill or
knowledge, but desire that it may be viewed solely with reference to those pub-
lic and scientific ends for the sake of which alone it is proposed."

The author thinks it right to add, that the publication of the above problem
led to some interesting private correspondence, but did not elicit a solution.

CHAF. XXJ] PROBLBM8 OM CAU8B8. 337

. Now let 110 aflsume generally
which is reducible to the form

forming the type of a sygtem of n equations which, together with
(1), express the logical conditions of the problem. AdcUng all
these equations together, as after the previous reduction we are
permitted to do, we have

2{xiz(l-/0 + ^Kl-«<^)) + ^(l-«i)(l-*.)--(l-'.)-0, (2)

(the summation implied by 2 extending from t «* 1 to t « n), and
this single and sufficient logical equation, together with the 2n
data, represented by the general equations

Prob. Xi • Cif Prob. ti • Cipif (3)

constitute the elements from which we are to determine Prob. z.
Let (2) be developed with respect to z. We have

[2|x,(l - ti) + iii\-Xi)\ + (I - or,) (1 - x,)..(l -Xn)]z

+ 2/,(l-z)-0,
whence

,^ ^i (i^

2^-S|Xi(l-^) + ^(l-aPi))-(l-ap,)(l-*0--(l'*-)

Now any constituent in the expansion of the second member of
the above equation will consist of 2n factors, of which n are taken
oat of the set 2*1, 2*i, . . x«, 1 - jti, 1 - x„ • . 1 - jr., and n out of
the set /(, ^, . . /«, I - ^1, 1 - /„ . . 1 - tnf no such combination as
jr, (1 - 7,), ^1(1 - /,), being admissible. Let us consider first
those constituents of which (1 - /i), (1 - ^t) • • (1 - /•) forms the
l-fiu^tor, that is the factor derived from the set /i, . • 1 - /|.

The coefficient of any such constituent will be found by
changing /„ ^„ . . /« respectively into in the second member of
(4), and then assigning to x„ i:», • • z, their values as dependent
upon the nature of the x-factor of tlie constituent. Now simply
sulistituting for ^^ ^» • * '• the value 0, the second member be-
comes

-2ar*-(l-xi)(l-x,)..(l-x,/

z

838 PROBLEMS ON CAUSKtt. [_CHAP. XX.

and this vanishes whatever values, 0, 1, we suhsequently assign
to Xiy Xii • . Xn. For if those values are not all equal to 0, the
term Sa^j does not vanish, and if they are all equal to 0, the term
- ( 1 - Xi) . . (1 - Xn) becomes - 1, so that in either case the denomi-
nator does not vanish, and therefore the fraction does. Hence
the coefficients of all constituents of which (1 - ^i) . . (1 - ^) isa
factor will be 0, and as the sum of all possible oHSonstituents is
unity, there will be an aggregate term (1 - ^i) . . (1 - ^,) in the
development of z.

Consider, in the next place, any constituent of which the
^factor is ^j ^2 • • ^r (1 - ^r+i) . . (1 - tn)f T bciug equal to or greater
than unity. Making in the second member of (4), /i « 1, • . ^= 1|
tr^x = 0, . . ^„ = 0, we get the expression

r
ari . . + Xr - OTr+i . . - a:„ - (1 - a?i) (1 - 05,) . . (1 - ar„y

Now the only admissible values of the symbols being and 1,
it is evident that the above expression will be equal to 1 when
Xi = 1 . . oJr = 1» Xr^x = 0, . . a?„ = 0, and that for all other combi-
nations of value that expression will assiune a value greater than
unity. Hence the coefficient 1 will be applied to all constituents
of the final development which are of the form

the x-factor being similar to the ^-factor, while other consti-
tuents included under the present case will have the virtual co-
efficient -. Also, it is manifest that tliis reasoning is independent

of the particular arrangement and succession of the individual
symbols.

Hence the complete expansion of z will be of the form

z = 2 (XT) + (1 - t,) (1 - ^0 • • (1 - ^n)

+ constituents whose coefficients are -, (5)

where T represents any ^constituent except (1 - fi) . . (1 - /»)>
and X the corresponding or similar constituent of a^i . . x„.

CHAP. ZZ.] PR0BLBM8 OM CAUSBS. SS9

For instance, if n « 2, we shall have

Ji, xjv &c. standing for 1 - Xi , 1 - xi, &c. ; whcfioe

+ 0(X|«k7i?i + X|Xt7i7i + i|Xi7|7i+ iiXt7|7i) ffA

+ constituents whose coefficienta are -•

This result agrees, difference of notation being allowed Ibr, with
the developed form of x in Problem I. of this chi4>ter, as it evi-
dently ought to do.

10. To avoid complexity, I purpose to deduce from the above
equation (6) the necessary conditions for the determination of
Prob. X for the particular case in which n » 2, in such a form as
may enable us, by pursuing in thought the same line of investi-
gation, to assign the corresponding conditions for the more gene-
ral cai«e in which n possesses any integral value whatever.

Supposing then » ■ 2, we have

r- X, X, /, t, + X, X, tjt + X, x,7i U + X| X, 7|7, + X, x,7, 7,

+ xix,7|7, + x,x,7,7,.

p^^ ^ X|X, ii it -*- X, x,f, 7, -t- X, x,7,f,

the conditions for the determination of x,, /,, &c., being

XxXt /, /, + '• Jfi'Ji + 5 1 'i ^i 7i 4x , X, 7, 7,

*i JPj'i/i + 5,x,7,^ ♦ x,x,7,7, + x,x,7,7.

Divide the mcmberf of this system of i^iuaticiDii tiy X| >, 7, 7,,
and the numerator and dcnominatr/r of Pnifi, z by the nuim* f|uan-
tity, and in the results a^ume

;, .=~V "^» JS-^Wif .-■■»# I<)

Xi t\ Jh ft 'l 'I

z2

340 PROBLEMS ON CAUSBS. [CHAP. XX.

we find

Tfc f JWl»ll + nil + ****

Prob. z

minii + mi + ma + tiifii + iii + n, + 1'

_ fitiTna + fill + fiifu + 111 fninu + m* + niii« + n.
and «= -?

Ci Ct

«= = • = jWiiiia + iiii + m2+»iii» + ni + iit+ 1, (8)

Cifi C2P2

whence, if we assume,

(jwi+ l)(m,+ 1)-J[f, (ni+ l)(n,+ l> = 2\r, (9)

we have, afler a slight reduction,

Prob. z =

M + N-V

Wi(«2+1) «3(wi+l) iwi(m2+l) jw,(wii + l) ^^ X7 1.

— 71 \ ~ — 7i \ " ■ = = ill + XV - 1 »

^1 (1 - Pi) ^a (1 - PV ^iPl ^iPi

or,

wiiJkf iWjM ni-A^

(nil + 1) Cipi (nii + 1) Ca/?, (»i + 1) Ci (1 - />i)

(Ui + 1) 02(1 -P2)

= M+ 2^-1.

Now let a similar series of transformations and reductions be
performed in thought upon the final logical equation (5). We
shall obtain for the determination of Prob. z the following ex-
pression :

wherein

M = (wi + 1) (wia + 1) . . (m„ + 1),

N = (wi + 1) (w2 + 1) . . (w« + 1),

^i, . . win, Wi, . . 7i„, being given by the system of equations,

rriiM niiM rrinM

(wi + 1) Cip, " {rrii + 1) C2P2 ' ' " {7nn + 1) CnPn

(ni+l)ci(l-/>i) («„+ l)c„(l-jo„)

Still further to simplify the results, assume

CHAP. XX.] PROBLSIIS OK CADSU. 341

M+N-\ I M + N- I 1,

M ' n* N 'Z'

whence

M !:—rr, Nm

ft + V — i It + V - 1

We find

(iii,+ \)cipi " (mT+iy^ ' * " («» + l)c,/^i " Ji'

III Ht Mn I

(ii.+ i)r,(i-/i,)"(m + i)c(i-p,)'*"(m+i)c,(i-p.)" v*

whence

_ CiPt ^mPu

and finally,

1 M I M

/I - Cxpx II - r,p,

«

Hi + 1 « t; r, . . »« -f I «

Substitute these values with those of 3f and ^in (9), and
we have

i;^ M

0* - ^iPi) (/« - ^«/>0 • • 0* - ^-P-) " M + »» - 1 '

li'-r, (1 -/>,)) li'-r, (l-p,))..(i.-c,(l-p,)l ^-^•'-l'
which may be reduced to the symmetrical form

(m - c\px) • •ill- c^Pm)

fi + y - 1

/*""*

li' -g.(l-p ,)l .(v-c.Q- p.)| (12)

- ;^x

Finally,

Let us then assume 1 ~ y • ir, we have then

(m - fiTi) . . ( m " g« P«)
M "" •* ■ n

!l"fi(l-pi)-'<l-{l-f.(^-P»)-»)

MS ndBLuts oir ckvnB. {cHAf .xx.

If we make fi)lr oaiipliqjity

the above equatioiia may be written as fbUows:
wherein

This value of /i subfltitated in' (14) will give an equation in-
volving only «, the solution of which irill detenmne Prob. Xf
since by (13) Prob. c«tf. It remains to assign the limits of a.

11. Now the very same analysis by which the limits were deter-
mined in the particular ease in which ii « 2, (XIX. 12) can-
ducts us in the present case to the following result. The quan-
tify «, in order tiiat it may xepreaent the value of IVolkJS^ most
must have for its inferior limits tiie quantities ai» Ot, • . iia» and
for its supisrior limits the quantities fti» £b> • •iw» Ai -i- Ot • • -f «»•
We may hence infer, d priori^ that tiiere will always exist oos
root, and only one root, of the equation (14) satisfying these
conditions^ I deem it sufficient, for practical verification, to show
that there will exist one, and only one, root of tiie equation (H),
between the limits Ai, Oj, . . a^, and Ai, i^, • • ft,..

First, let us consider the nature of the changes to which fi \b
subject in (15), as u varies from ai, which we will suppose the
greatest of its minor limits, to fti, which we will suppose the least
of its major limits. When ti » ai, it is evident that fi is positire
and greater than ai. When u - ii, we have fi » &i , which is also
positive. Between the limits ti == ai, fi » 6i, it may be shown
that fi increases with u. Thus we have

^ _ - _ (6a -U). .{bn- U) (bi - «) (ft, > k) . . (ft, - U)
du" (1-M)»-^ ■■ (l-tl)»-^ .

.. (ftx-«)(i,-u)..(6,-u) (16)

^^""^^^ (T:^-

Now let

bi-u b^-u

CHAP. XX.] PROBLEMS ON CAU8S8. 343

Evidently x,, x,, . . x., will be proper firactioiis, and we have

-^ « 1 - X^Ti . . Xa - X| X| . • Xk . . - X| Xs . • X.-i +(« - 1) X| X| . . X«

« I - (1 - X,) Xa X, . . X, - Xi (1 - X,) X, . . X, . .
- Xi X, . . X«., (1 - X.) - X, Xa . . X,.

Now the negative tcrniB in the second member are (if we may
borrow the language of the logical developments) con$tituenU
formed from the fractional quantities Xi, x„ . . x». Their sum

cannot therefore exceed unity ; whence -j- b positive, and ii in*

creases with u between the limits specified.
Now let (14) be written in the form

{fjL - fli) . . (m - a.)

^-»

-0'-tt)-O, (17)

and assume « » ai . The first member becomes

(^ . a.) ( (jiZ^lLJfLl^ . 1 ^ (18)

and this expression is negative in value. For, making the same
a^ituroption in (15), we find

(A, -«)..(&.- u) . . .

^ - a, = - — ~ « a positive quantity.

At the same time we have

f»" * MM*

and since the factors of the second member arc positive fractions,
that member ia less tlian unity, whence (18) is negative. AMiere-
fore the assumption u = Oi makes the Jirst member of {\1) ne^
gative.

Secondly, let « <= Ai , then by ( 15) ^ • u •* Ai , and the Jirst mem»
her of{\1) becomes positive.

Lai«tly, between the limits « • ai and k «6|, the first member
of (17) continuously increases. For the first term of that ex-
pression written under the form

(m - fli) • •

344 PROBLEMS ON CAUSES. [CHAP. IX.

increases, since fi increases, and, with it, every fiictor contained.
Agun, the negative term ^ - tt diminislies with the increase of
«, as appears from its value deduced from (15), viz.,

(6i ~ «) . . (i« - u)

(I - uy-'

Hence then, between the limits tt « ai, ti = fti, the first member
of (17) continuously increases, chan^ng in so doing from a n^a-
tive to a positive value. Wherefore, between the limits assigned,
there exists one value of tf, and only one, by which the said
equation is satisfied.

12. Collecting these results together, we arrive at the follow-
ing solution of the general problem.

The probability of the event*^ will be that value of u de-
duced from the equation

wherein

-., . (l--gi(l-Pi)-'«) ..{l-gfi(l-p»)-tt)

^"''^ (1 - uy-^ '

which (value) lies between the two sets of quantities,

Cifi, C2P29 ..Cnp„andl-Ci(l-pi), 1-02(1-^2) •• 1-Cn(l -/?«),

the former set being its inferior, the latter its superior, limits.

And it may further be inferred in the general case, as it has
been proved in the particular case of w = 2, that the value of ti,
determined as above, will not exceed the quantity

Cipi + C2P2 . . + CnPn'

13. Particular verifications are subjoined.

1st. Let />i = I5 /?2 = 1> • . />n = 1. This is to suppose it cer-
tain, that if any one of the events -4,, Aq . . Any happen, the
event E will happen. In this case, then, the probability of the
occurrence of E will simply be the probability that the events or
causes Ai^ A 2* , An do not all fail of occurring, and its expression
will therefore be 1 - (1 - c,) (1 - Ca) . . (1 - c„).

Now the general solution (19) gives

CilAF. XZ.] PROBLBMS OH CAU8B8. 34ff

wlierein

Hence,

.- M^ 0* - gp — (m - <^» )

l-ii.(l-irO..(l-€^i),

.-. w - 1 - (1 - <ri) . . (1 - €^i),

equivalent to the d priori determination above.
2nd. Let pt - 0, p. « 0, p. - 0, then (19) giveo

/I - I* - /I,

as it evidently ought to be.

3rd. Let c^ c, . . r. be small quantities, so that thdr squares
and products may be neglected. Then developing the second
members of the equation (19),

^.«. ^^^

- /I - (CiPi 4 CtPt . . + CnPm}f
.'. M - CiPi + C,|l, . . + CnPm-

Now this is what the solution would be were the causes
Ai^ A^ . . An mutually exclusive. But the smaller the pn>ba-
bilitics of those causes, the more do they approach the condition
of toeing mutually exclusive, since the smaller is the probability of
any concurrence among them. Hence the result above obtained
will imdoubtedly be the limiting form of the expression for the
probability of E.

4th. In the particular case of » - 2, we may readily elimi-
nate ^ from the general solution. The result is

(m - c,/>i) (m - f,/0 ^ (1 - ri(l -p,) - u\ 1 1 "g»(l -Pi)"«|
Cipi + c.p, - « 1 - n *

which agrees with the particular solution before obtained for this
case. Problem i.

Though by the system (19), the solution is in general made
to depend ufton the solution of an equati<m of a high order, its

346 PROBLEMS ON CAUSBS. [cHAP. XX.

practical difficulty will not be great. For the conditions relatiDg
to the limits enable us to select at once a near value of », and
the forms of the system (19) are suitable for the processes of sue*
cessive approximation.

14. Problem 7. — The data being the same as in the last pro-
blem, required the probability, that if any definite and given
combination of the causes Au Ai^ . .A^, present itself, the event
E vnll be realized.

The cases Ai^ A29 • • A^ being represented as before by
^1, a?2, . .an respectively, let the definite combination of them,
referred to in the statement of the problem, be represented by
the (xi , 0^2 . . Xn) so that the actual occurrence of that combi-
nation will be expressed by the lo^cal e(}uation,

<p (a?i, Xiy . . arn) = 1.
The data are

Prob a?i = Ci, . . Prob.^n = c„,
Prob. aiZ = Cipi, Prob. XnZ = CnPn ;
and the object of investigation is

Prob. (^1, X2 . . x„) z

(I)

(2)

Prob. (xx^X2 . . a^n )

We shall first seek the value of the numerator.
Let us assume,

X^Z ^ t^ ' * XnZ ^ tn^ (3)

(xi , a?3 . . ^„) z -w, (4)

Or, if for simplicity, we represent (oti, ara . . x^ by 0, the last

equation will be

0z = Wy (5)

to which must be added the equation

Xi ^2 • • ^n -? = 0. (6)

Now any equation XtZ = tr of the system (3) may be reduced
to the form _

XrZlr + ^r (1 - ^rZ) = 0.

Similarly reducing (5), and adding the different results together,
we obtain the logical equation

CRAP. XX.] PROBLSBfS ON CAU8BB. 847

2 {XrS7r-¥ tr (I -XrZ)] + i, . . i.Z + fZio-f 1o(l *^)- 0, (7)

from which z being eliminated, u> mtiBt be determined as a de-
veloped logical function of «i, . . ir«, /i> . . ^« •

Now making successively r « 1» ;s « in the above equation,
and multiplying the results together, we have

Developing this equation with reference to to, and replacing

in the result 2^r + 1 by 1, in accordance with Prop. i. Chap, ix.,

we have

Ztr + £r (1 - it) - ;
wherein

Em "2 {XrTr + trXr) + ii . . X, + ^,
Em 2/^(2 (XrFr + trXr) + X, . . X, + ^).

And hence

The second member of this equation we must now develop
with respect to the double series of symbolsxi, or,, . .x., ti^ /„ . ./«.
In effecting this object, it will be most convenient to arrange
the constituents of the resulting development in three distinct
classes, and to determine the coefficients proper to those classes
separately.

First, let us consider those constituents of which 7i . . F. b a
factor. Making /i » . . /« « 0, we find

Em 0, E m 2xr + X, . . X, + ^.

It is evident, that whatever values (0, 1) are given to the 4^-«ym-
bolt*, Edocfi not vanLth. Hence the coefficients of all constituents
involving 7i . . 7. are 0.

Conjiider secondly, those constituents which do not involve the
factor 7i . . 7«, and which are symmetrical with reference to the two
set«« of symbols Xi . . x. and /| . . /« . By symmetrical constituents
is here meant those which would remain unchanged if X| were
converted into /|, x, into /,, &c., and raire vend. The constitu-
ents Xi . . Xa /, . . /«, xi . . Xa 7, . . 7a, &c., aTO ID tUs scnsc sym*
metrical.

348 PROBLEMS ON CAUSES. [CHAP. XX.

For all sjrmmetrical constituents it is evident that

vanishes. For those which do not involve 7i . . Tn, it is further
evident that xi . • Xn also vanishes, whence

S<r(»)

For those constituents of which the ^-factor is found in tbe
second member of the above equation becomes 1 ; for those of
which the a;-factor is found in ^ it becomes 0. Hence the coeffir
cierUs of symmetrical constituents not involving 7i • . ?«, ofwhidi
the x-f actor is found in ^ will be \; of those of which the x-factor
is not found in ^ it will be 0.

Consider lastly, those constituents which are unsjrmmetrical
with reference to the two sets of symbols, and which at the same
time do not involve Ti . . T„ .

Here it is evident, that neither E nor E can vanish, whence
the numerator of the fractional value of m? in (8) must exceed
the denominator. That value cannot therefore be represented

by 1, 0, or -. It must then, in the logical development, be re-
presented by - . Such then wiU be the coeflScient of this class

of constituents.

15. Hence the final logical equation by which w is expressed
as a developed lo^cal function of Xi, . . j:„, ^i, . . ^„, will be of
the form

2r= 2i {XT) + (SsCXr) + ?, . . 7„) +- (sum of other con-

" stituents), ^)

wherein 2i (XT) represents the sum of all symmetrical consti-
tuents of which the factor X is found in 0, and Si (XT'), the
sum of all symmetrical constituents of wliich the factor X is not
found in 0, — the constituent xy . .Ic^^x . . 7„, should it appear,
being in cither case rejected.

Passing from Logic to Algebra, it may be observed, that

CHAP. XX.] PBOBLIMS ON CAUSES. 349

here and in all similar instances, the function F, by the aid of
which the algebnuc system of equations for the determination of
the values of X|, . . Xnj i^ . • /« is formed, is independent of the
nature of any function ^ involved, not in the exjiression of the
data^ but in that of the qutBsUum of the problem proposed. Thus
we have in the present example,

Prob. w « — ^ — -y

wherein V = 2, {XT) + S,(Xr) + f, . . 7,

= 2(Xr) + 7, ..7,. (10)

Here ^{XT) represents the 8um of all symmetrical constituents
of the X and t symbols, except the constituent X| . . i., 7| . . 7«.
This value of r is the same as that virtually employed in tlic so-
lution of the preceding problem, and hence we may avail our-
selves of the results there obtained.

If then, as in the solution referred to, we assume

X, 7| X, r. xi

we shall obtdn a result which may be thus written :

M

3/i being formed by rejecting from the function f the constituent
X| . .Ja, if it is there found, diWding the result by the same con-

X X

stitucnt Ji . • jr., and then changing ~ into nii, =^ into ma, and

X\ JTj

BO on. The values of M and H are the same as in the preceding
problem. Reverting to these and to the corresponding ^'alues of
m„ iit„ &C., we find

Prob.» - Midi + v - I),
the general values of mr, Hr bemg

nir " , Mr ■ /T vt

M - ^rPr M - O (1 - |V)

and fi and v being given by the solution of the sjrstem of equa-
tions,

350 PBOBLBMS ON CAUSBS. [CHAP. XX.

.^ (M'giPi)"(M-g».Pn) (v-Ci(l-fh)l>>{i/-c»(l-/>,))

The above value of Prob. to will be the numerator of the firaction
(2). It now remains to determine its denominator.
For this purpose assumfe

or ^ = V ;

whence ^v + vlp >= 0.

Substituting the first member of this equation in (7) in place of
the corresponding form ^zw + tr (1 - ^2;) we obtain as the primaiy
logical equation,

whence eliminating z, and reducing by Prop. ii. Chap. IX.,
Hence

''" 2^rn *

and developing as before,

r = 2i (XT) + 7i . .7«2i (Z) + 0(2, (XT) + J, . .7,2,(Z)}

+ - (sum of other constituents). (12)

Here 2i {X) indicates the sum of all constituents found in ^,
S2 {X) the sum of all constituents not found in 0. The expres-
sions arc indeed used in place of and 1 - to preserve sym-
metry.

It follows hence that 2i (X) + 22 (X) - 1, and that, as be-
fore, 2i (Zr) + 22(Z7') = 2 (XT). Hence V will have the
same value as before, and we shall have

Or transforming, as in the previous case,

CHAP. ZX«] PBOBLBMS OH CAU8B8« 891

wheran ^i U fonned by dividing ^ by it • . x.i and ohanging in

X X

the result =^ into Hi, =? into fh* &c.

Now the final solution of the problem proposed will be given
by assigning their determined values to the terms of the fraction

Prob.^(xi, ..Xu)z Prob.ii7
Prob. f(xif.. x.y Prob. v '

Hence, therefore, by (1 1) and (13) we have

Prob. sought - ts — ^7.

A very slight attention to the mode of formation of the func-
tions Ml and ^1 will show that the process may be greatly sim-
plified. We may, indeed, exhibit the solution of the general
problem in the form of a rule, as follows :

Reject from the function ^ (jti, x, • • x.) the comtituenixi . • x. |/*
t/ 11 therein contained^ suppress in all the remaining constituents
the factors Ji, J,, ^r., and change generally in the result Xr into

^^^—. Call this result M,.

Again, replace in the function ^(xi,x,..x«) the constituent
xi . . J» if it is therein found, bg unity ; suppress m all the remaining
constituents the factors r,, Xi, ^t., and change generally in the re-

suit Xr into — '^^. ^ .

Then the solution required will be expressed by the formula

/I and V being determined by the solution of the system qf equations

l»'-^l(I-pl)l..ll'-c.(l-p.)l

m"'*

I- 1

.(15)

It may be added, that the limits of ^ and ¥ are the same as in
the previous problem. This might be inferred from the general
principle of continuity; but conditions of limitation, which are

352 PROBLEMS ON CAUdlS. [cHAP. XZ.

probably sufficient, may also be established by other ocHiside-
rations.

Thus from the demonstration of the general method in pro-
babilities. Chap. XVII. Prop, iv., it appears that the quantities
Xif • . Xnt ^19 . . ^119 in the primary system of algebraic equatioDB,
must he positive proper Jiractians, Now

1 -Xr '' V -Cr(l -Pr)'

Hence generally rir must be a positive quantity, and therefore
we must have

V>Cr(l -pr).

In like manner since we have

Xf tr CrPr

(1 -arr)(l-.^) '' fl-CrPr^

we must have generally

16. It is probable that the two classes of conditions thus re-
presented are together sufficient to determine generally which of
the roots of the equations determining /li and v are to be taken.
Let us take in particular the case in which « = 2. Here we have

.-. V = 1 - C.P.-C.P. ^ c^lP^S^^ 1 _ _ {^-c.p.)c.p.

Whence, since (x> Cipi we have generally

V < 1 - Cipi.
In like manner we have

Now it has already been shown that there will exist but one
value of IX satisfying the whole of the above conditions relative
to that quantity, viz.

whence the solution for this case, at least, is determinate. And I

CHAP. ZX.] PROBLI1I8 ON CAVBMB. SBS

aj^nrehend that the aame method is generally i^lkable and tuf-
fident. But this is a question upon which a further degree of
light is denrable.

To verify the above results, suppose f (xi, • • ««) » 1, which is
virtually the case considered in the previous problem. Now the
development of 1 gives all possible constituents of the symbols
Xi, . . x«. Proceeding then according to the Bule, we find

M^

7 r-i X - 1 - — ^ - 1 by (W)-

(ji"Cipi)..{fA- C^pm) /I + V - 1 ' ^ ^

Substituting in (14) we find

Prob. x « I - V,

which agrees with the previous solution.

Agam, let f (xi, ..'■)« ^i* which, after development and sup-
pression of the fiictors xt, . • x., gives X| (x, -i- 1) • • (x« + 1), whence
we find

M,.^ 'J£^ ^ . _£i£L-^ by (15).

^ C,(l-|h)l^' _ ^|0-P.)

* |v-Ci(l-p»)| .. {¥-Cn{\-pn)\ M+P"*

Substituting, we have

Probability that if the event A , occur, E will occur - pi.

And this result is verified by the data. Similar verifications
might easily be added.

Let us examine the case in which

f (Xi, . . X.) - Xi X, • . Xm -f ap, Xi X| . • Xa • • -I- XnXi • . X|Hi.

Here we find

XT '•■(t-|>») ■ C,(l-Jh) .

^'■v-c.(i-p.)" *-c.(\-p.y

wbenoe we h«Te the foUowtng tenilt—

Sa

SM PBOBunn ow catom. [cbaf.

Frftbdbility that if fome one ^ ^jb^

present itself the event E [ , <vpr ^ M^*"l^)
will follow. J fft-^|V y-iv(l-p^)

Let it be observed that this case Is quite diflRsrent fiom tlie
well-known one in wbibh the mutually exchuiTe oharacter of
the causes A19 • • J.* is one of the elements of the data, ezpresriog
a condition under which the very obseryations by which tha^o-
babilities of J.^ A^t ftc are supposed to have been determined,
were made.

Consider, lastly, the case in which ^(^, ••ab)"9ifl^«*<b«
Here

Hence the following result —

Probability that if all the ^

causes Ai, . . An con- pi**p«v*"*

spire, the event E will | "pi . .piiV*"^ + (l -pi) . . (1 -p«)/t«*"'*
follow. J

This expression assumes, as it ought to do, the value 1 when any
one of the quantities |9i, . . jSn is equal to 1.

17. Problbm YIII. — Certain causes A^ A^-.A^ h&ng so
restricted that they cannot all fidl, but still can only occur in cer-
tun definite combinations denoted by the equation

^ \Aly A% . . An) « 1,

and there being given the separate probabilities Ci, • • c^ of the
said causes, and the corresponding probabilities pi, . . p» that an
event E will follow if those respective causes are realized, re-
quired the probability of the event E.

This problem differs firom the one last considered in several
particulars, but chiefly in this, that the restriction denoted by the
equation ^ (^1, . . An) - 1, forms one of the data, and is siq>posed

CHAP. XX.] PROBLIMS OW CAU818. 805

to be furnished by or to be accordant with the very eiqMnrienoe
from which the knowledge of the numerical elements of the
problem is derived.

Representing the events ili, . . ^« by X|, . . x. respectively,
and the event E by z, we have —

Prob.Xr"<^r» Prob. OVZvCrPr- (1)

Let us assume, generally,

then combining the system of equations thus indicated with the
equations

xi..i,-0, f(xi,.. «.)-!; orf-1,

furnished in the data, we ultimately find, as the devekped ex-
pression of z,

z-2(Zr) + 0T|^..li.2(X), (2)

where X represents in succession each constituent found in ^
and T a similar series of constituents of the symbols ^i, . . f, ;
^{XT) including only symmetrical constituents with reference
to the two sets of symbols.

The method of reduction to be employed in the present case
is so similar to the one already exemplified in fbnner proUems,
that I shall merely exhibit the results to which it leads. We
find

Prob.z . j^ (3)

with the relations

^^ -^« ^1 ^^ Af X V (A\

Cipi C4U O(l-Pl) Cn{\'Pm) ^^

Wherein M is formed by suppresung in f (x„ • . x.) all the fiio-
tors xi , . . jr., and changmg in the result xi into »i, x. into m^
while N is formed by substitutii^ in M, si for »i, Ac ; nM>re-
over Ml consists of that portion of Jf of which »i is a fiiGtor»
^1 of that portion of A"^ of which fit isa fitftor; and so on.

Let us take, in illustration, the particular case in which the
causes Ai . . ^4. arc mutually exclusive. Hera we have

^ (X|, . . X«) ■ X| X| . . Xa • • • -f I|b X| • • X».|.

2a2

356 PROBLEMS ON CAU8BB. [cHAP. XX.

Whence

M = mi + Ilia . . + Jlln,

N = «i + n, • . + n«,
Ml = iwi, Ni = «i, &c.

Substituting, we have

Hence we find

ilf+ JV.

m

or ilf

^M-¥N,

Cifi. . + Cnpn

M+N.

'«>

Hence, by (3),

Prob. z = Cipi . . + Cnff

a known result.

There are other particular cases in which the system (4) ad-
mits of ready solution. It is, however, obvious that in most
instances it would lead to results of great complexity. Nor does
it seem probable that the existence of a functional relation among
causes, such as is assiuned in the data of the general problem, will
often be presented in actual experience ; if we except only the
particular cases above discussed.

Had the general problem been modified by the restriction
that the event E cannot occur, all the causes Ai. .An being ab-
sent, instead of the restriction that the said causes cannot all fail,
the remaining condition denoted by the equation 0(-4i, . . ^,) = 1
being retained, we should have found for the final logical equation

^{X) being, as before, equal to (jJi, . . a:„), but Si {XT) formed
by rejecting from the particular constituent xi, .x^ if therein
contained, and then multiplying each ar-constituent of the result
by the corresponding ^-constituent. It is obvious that in the par-
ticular case in which the causes are mutually exclusive the value
of Prob. z hence deduced will be the same as before.

18. Problem IX. — Assuming the data of any of the pre-

CHAP. XX.] PROBLBM8 ON CAU8B8. 357

viouB problems, let it be required to determine the probability
that if the event E present itself, it will be associated with the
particular cause Ar; in other words, to determine the d posteriori
probability of the cause Ar when the event E has been observed
to occur.

In this case we must seek the value of the fraction

As in the previous problems, the value of Prob. z has been as-
signed upon different hypotheses relative to the connexion or
want of connexion of the causes, it is evident that in all those
cai>es the prei«ent problem is susceptible of a determinate solution
by tiimply substituting in (1) the value of that clement thus de-
teniiined.

If the a priori prolmbilitics of the causes are equal, we have
Tj = Cj . . = Cr. Ilcnce for the different causes the value (1) will
vary directly as the quantity pr* ^Vherefore whatever the nature
of the connexion among the causes^ the d posteriori probability of
each csLXisc will be proportional to the probability of the observed
event E when tlmt caudc is known to exist. The particular case
of this theorem, which presents itself when the causes are mu-
tually exclusive, is well known. We have then

Prob. Xr Z Cr Pr

Prub. Z Ji€rPr />! + /^« • • -»" p«*

the values of ri , . . r, being ecjual.

Although, for the demonstration of these and sunilar theo-
rems in the {mrticular case in which the causes are mutually ex-
clusive, it is not necessary to introduce the functional symbol ^
whicli is, indeed, to claim for ourselves the choice of all possible
and conceivable hypotheses of the connexion of the causes, yet,
under every form, the solution by the method of this work of
probleniri, in which the number of the data is indefinitely great,
inuj*t always {lartake of a somewhat complex character. Whe-
ther the systematic evolution which it presents, first, of the logi-
cal, i>o(*ondly, of the numerical relations of a problem, furnishes
any compensation for the length and ofcaaional tediousness of its

PBOBUUn OH CAirSMI. [CRAF. ZX»

proo60MBy I do iiot pratome to inquif^ ItB chief TihieiiiidoiibU
adlj oonristB in ite power,---in the masteiy whUi it givos vb Of«
qufiBtioiis wUeh would mppanoAj biffle tibe nuawiiitad stnogth
of hmuin fOASon. For tUa coose it lias not beeii doemad ■opop-
fluouB to exhibit in this chapter its application to problems^ some
of which may possiUy be regarded as lepabdve^ fiom thttr diffi-
eully, without being recommended by any proepeot of iounediate
ntilily. Of the nlterior yalne of soch specolations it isy I con-
oeive, impossible for ns, at present^ to form any decided jnd^
ment.

19. The following problem is of a mnoh eader desof^plion
than the previous ones.

Pboblbm X« — Tke probabiUty of the oecunmoe qfa wrtak
natural fh^Bntmenon wnder gioen cb^^ Obteroaium

has also rscorded a probability a iff the existence of a penumai
081196 ofthatphcawmmon^^ue. qfa cause whkk would aboayspnh
dnce the eoeni under the circumstances stgoposed. What is th
probability that jfthephmnomenon is observed to occur n times »
succession under the given circumstances^ it will occur then-i- 1*
time 9 What also is the probability^ after such observation^ qfthe
existence of the permanent cause rrferred to f

First Case. — ^Let t represent the existence of a permanent
cause, and x^ Xt • .Xn^i the successive occurrences of the natunJ
phaenomenon.

If the permanent cause exist, the events x^ Xf x^i are ne-
cessary consequences. Hence

t'^^VXiy t^VXty &c.,

and eliminating the indefinite symbols,

*(l-«,)-0, e(l-a^)-0, «(l-a^x)-0.

Now we are to seek the probability that if the combination
XiXf Xn happen, the event 4?m^x' will happen, L e. we are to seek
the value of the fraction

Prob. Xi Xt • • Xn^i
Prob. XiOn^rnXn

We will first seek the value of Prob. d^i o^ • . jp. •

CHAP. XX.] PROBLIMS ON CAU8B8. SS9

Represent the combination Mi x% . .9% by ir, then we have the
following logical equations :

^1 - Xj) - 0, <(!-«,)- .. f (I - #,) - 0,

X\ x% • • 4^11 * tr.

Reducing the last to the fonn

{Zi OP, . . X.) (1 - 10) + 10(1 - OPi ^Ti . . Xn) - 0,

and adding it to the former ones, we have

2/(1 - Xi) + Xi X^..Xn (I - tr) + w(\ - Xi Xt..Xm) • 0, (1)

wherein 2 extends to all values of t from 1 to 11, for the one logi-
cal equation of the data. With this we must connect the niune-
rical conditions,

Prob. Xi e Prob. :Ei • . *= Prob. ar« « p, Prob. i^ a;

and our object is to find Prob. w.
From (1) we have

W m >- ^ =

2ap, x,..ar.- 1 2ar|«,..«.- I ^ ^* ^^

on developmg with respect to t. This result must further be
developed with respect to X|, «i, • • x«.

Now if we make Xi « 1, Xt« 1, .. x. « 1, the coefficients both
oft and of 1 - / become 1. If we give to the same symbols any
other set of values formed by the interchange of and 1, it is
evident that the coefficient of t will become negative, while that
of 1 - / will become 0. Hence the full development (2) will be

•r ■ X, X, . . x.f + Xi X, . . jr, (I - /) + (1 - X| X, . . X.) (1 - /)

+ constituent. wh<^ oo«fficieDf we J. or eqaiT^ent to i.
Here we have

r-XiX,..x.l^XiX,..x«(l-0-i'(l--'>^**'«) (* -0

» Xi X| • • ««/ -I- 1 " i;

whence, pasnng from Logic to Algebra,

360 PBOBLBMS ON CAUSES. [cHAP. JX,

SB • • •

P P

^a;,a;...a;.<4x.(l-f)^g.x,..».<^^^^ ^^^^l_^
P «

XTOD. tC = = T.

XiXt . . X^t + I — f

From the forms of the above equations it is evident that we
have ^1 e ^s • • = ^n' Replace then each of these quantities by Xj
and the system becomes

P «

Prob.tr

a:*

-rt\»-»

from which we readily deduce

Prob. to = Prob. Xi a:, . . a?, = a + (p - a) ( y^— J

If in this result we change n into n + 1, we get

Prob. a?! a?2 . . x^^ = a + (/? - a) f j J •

Hence we find —

Prob. X1X2 ,. x^,i vP ^fyi^aj

Prob. a;i X3 . . x. ^ / » - aY'^ ' ^

as the expression of the probability that if the phsenomenon be n
times repeated, it will also present itself the n+ l^ time. By the
method of Chapter XIX. it is found that a cannot exceed p in
value.

The following verifications are obvious : —

Ist. If a =0, the expression reduces to p, as it ought to do.
For when it is certain that no permanent cause exists, the suc-
cessive occurrences of the phaenomenon are independent.

2nd. If/} = 1, the expression becomes 1, as it ought to do.

3rd. Kp = a, the expression becomes I, unless a = 0. Kthe
probability of a phasnomenon is equal to the probability that there

CHAP.ZX.] PBOBLBMS ON CAU8B8. 361

exists a cause which under given circumstancefl would always
produce it, then the &ct that that phenomenon has ever been no-
ticed under those circumstances, renders certain its re-appearance
under the same.*

4th. As II increases, the expression approaches in value to
unity. This indicates that the probability of the recurrence of
the event increases with the frequency of its successive appear-
ances, — a result agreeable to the natural laws of expectation.

Sbcond Casb. — We arc now to seek the probability d pog^
teriori of the existence of a permanent cause of the phssnomenon.
This requires that we ascertain the value of the finution

Prob.teix/. .ap,
Prob. Xi X, . . Xu

the denominator of which has already been determined.
To determine the numerator assume

tTi X, . . a:, = IT,

then proceeding as before, we obtain for the logical develop-
ment.

Whence, passing from Logic to Algebra, we have at once

Prob. IT • a,

a rctsidt which might have been anticipated. Substituting then
for the numcratur and denominator of the above fraction their
values, wc have for the a posteriori probability of a permanent
cause, the expression

* As w« can neither re-enter nor recall the state of infancj, we are unable to
saj how far soch results as the above serve to explain the confidence with which
jonnf^ children conn<*ct events whose association thej havo once percetved.
Bai we ma J coigecture, g^neralljr, that the strength of their expectations Is
doe to the necessity of inferring (as a part of their rational nature), and the
narrow bat impressive experience upon which the faculty !• exercised. Hence
the reference of every kind of sequence to that of canse and effect. A little
friend of the aathor's, on being put to bed* was heard to ask his brother the
pertinent question, _•• Why does going to sleep at night make it light in the
■oraing?" The brother, who was a jew older, was able to replj, that It
wesld be light in the ■Mnifa^r mmi ifUttto boyi did not go to tleepat nigjkt«

362 PROBLEMS ON CAUSBS. [CBAP. XX.

-#i\«-i

-<^-)(B)'

It is obvious that the value of this expression increases with the
value of n.

I am indebted to a learned correspondent,* whose original
contributions to the theory of probabilities have already been re-
ferred to, for the following verification of the first of the above
results (3).

*^ The whole d priori probability of the event (under the d^

cumstances) being p, and the probability of some cause C which

would necessarily produce it, a, let x be the probability that it

will happen if no such cause as C exist. Then we have the

equation

p = a + (1 - a) «,

whence » - a

X = = .

1-a

Now the phsenomenon observed is the occurrence of the event n
times. The d priori probability of this would be —

1 supposing C to exist,

of supposing C not to exist ;

whence the d posteriori probability that C exists is

a
a + (1 - a)a;»'

that C does not exist is

a + (I -a)ar*''
Consequently the probability of another occiurence is

a - (\ - a) 3^

Ti ;: — X 1 + — ^^^ — - — X a,

a + (1 - a) a** a + {1 ^ a) af

or a + (1 - a) of*'

a + (1 - a) a;" '

* Professor Donkin.

CHAP. XX.] PROBLIMS OM CAU8B8. 368

which, on repladngXhy its valae j — , will be found to agree

with (3);'

SimiUr yerifications might, it 10 probable, alao be found for
the following results, obtained by the direct application of the
general method.

The probability, under the same circumstances, that if, out of
II occasions, the event happen r times, and fiul ii*r times, it will
happen on the ii + 1^ time is

a-¥ m

<^-'A^)'

(^-'■)('r^J

wnerem hi ■■ . — 5 ana 1 ■■ -.

1 .2..r II

The probability of a permanent cause (r bdng less than n)
U 0. This is easily yerificd.

Ifp be the probability of an event, and c the probability that
if it occur it will be due to a permanent cause ; the probability
after n successive observed occurrences that it will recur on the
M + 1<* similar occasion is

c-f (1 -c)ag"

1" cp

20. It is remarkable that the solutions of the previous pro-
blems are void of any arbitrary element. We should scarcely,
from the appearance of the data, have anticipated such a circum-
stance. It is, however, to be observed, that in all those problems
the probabilities of the causes involved arc supposed to be known
a priori. In the absence of this assumed element of knowledge,
it seems probable that arbitrary constants would nectisarUy ap-
pear in the final solution. Some confirmation of this remark is
afforded by a class of problems to which considerable attention
has been directed, and which, in conclusbn, I shall briefly
consider.

364 PROBLEMS ON CAUSBS* [CBAP. XX«

It has been observed that there exists in the heavens a large
number of double stars of extreme closeness. Either these ap-
parent instances of connexion have some physical ground or they
have not. If they have not, we may regard the phsenomenon of a
double star as the accidental result of a ^* random distribution" of
stars over the celestial vault, i. e. of a distribution which would
render it just as probable that either member of the binary sys-
tem should appear in one spot as in another. If this hypothesis be
assumed, and if the number of stars of a requisite brightness be
known, we can determine what is the probability that two of
them should be found within such limits of mutual distance as
to constitute the observed phenomenon. Thus Mitchell,* esti-
mating that there are 230 stars in the heavens equal in brightness
to /3 Capricomi, determines that it is 80 to 1 against such a
combination being presented were those stars distributed at ran-
dom. The probability, when such a combination has been ob-
served, that there exists between its members a physical ground
of connexion, is then required.

Again, the sum of the inclinations of the orbits of the ten
kno^vn planets to the plane of the ecliptic in the year 1801 was
91° 4187, according to the French measures. Were all inclina-
tions equally probable, Laplacet determines, that there would be
only the excessively small probability .00000011235 that the
mean of the inclinations should fall within the limit thus as-
signed. And he hence concludes, that there is a very high
probability in favour of a disposing cause, by which the inclina-
tions of the planetary orbits have been confined within such narrow
bounds. Professor De Morgan, J taking the sum of the inclina-
tions at 92°, gives to the above probability the value .00000012,
and infers that " it is 1 : .00000012, that there was a necessary
cause in the formation of the solar system for the inclinations
being what they are." An equally determinate conclusion has
been drawn from observed coincidences between the direction of

• Phil. Transactions, An. 1767.

t Theoric Analytique des Probabilit^s, p. 276.

J Encyclopicdia Metropolitana. Art. Probabilities.

CHAP. XX.] PROBLKMS OM CAU8B8. 366

drcular polarueadoii in rock-crjttal, and that of certain oblique
fkces in iu cryatallinc structure.*

These problems are all ofa similar character. A certain hypo-
thesis is framed, of the various possible consequences of which
we are able to assign the probabilities with perfect rigour. Now
some actual result of observation being found among those con-
sequences, and its hypothetical probability being therefore known,
it is required thence to determine the probability of the hypo-
thesis assumed, or its contrary. In Mitchell's problem, the hy-
pothesis is that of a ** random distribution of the stars,*' — the
possible and observed consequence, the appearance of a close
double star. The very small probability of such a result is held
to imply that the probability of the hypothesis is equally small,
or, at least, of the same order of smallness. And hence the high
and, and as some think, determinate probability of a disposing
cause in the stellar arrangements is inferred. Similar remarks
apply to the other examples adduced.

2 1 . The general problem, in whatsoever form it may be pre-
sented, admits only of an indefinite solution. Lict x represent the
proposed hypothesis, y a phienomenon which might occur as one
of its possible consequences, and whose calculated probability, on
the assumption of the truth of the hypothesis, is p, and let it be re-
quired to determine the probability that if the phsnomenon y is
observed, the hypothesis x is true. The very data of this pro-
blem cannot be expressed without the introduction of an arl»-
timry element. We can only write

Prob. X =» a, Prob. xy f^ ap; (1 )

a being perfectly arbitrary, except that it must fidl within the
limits and 1 inclusive. If then P represent the conditional pro-
bability sought, we have

Prob. xy ap

l^b. y Prob. y '
It remains then to determine Prob. y.

(2)

• Edinborgh R«?iew, Ka 185. p. 9S. TliU irticU. ihtm^ boI MiUrtlj hf
fr«NB error, it well wortlij of sttootkHi.

366 PROBLBMS ON CAU8B8. [CHAP. ZX.

Let xjf "i t, then

y-i-te + J<(l-x) + 0(l-0«+§(l-0O-«)- (3)

Hence obserring that 'Ptoh.x^a, Prob. t^cg», and paadngfrom
Logic to Algebra,' we have

with the relatioiis

a ap

Hence we readily find

Prob. y - op + c (1 - a). (4)

Now recurring to (3), we find that c is the probalnlily, that if
the event (I - t) (I ^ x) occur, the event y will oocur. Bat

(1 - (1 - ^) = (1 - «y) (1 - «) " 1 - «•

Hence c is the probability that if the event x do not oecuTi
the event y will occur.

Substituting the value of Prob. y in (2), we have the follow-
ing theorem :

The calculated •probability of any phcBnomenon y, upon an oi-
sumed physical hypothesis a;, being p^ the d posteriori probability P
of the physical hypothesis, when the phcmomenon has beeti observed^
is expressed by the equation

ap

(5)

op-f c(l -a)*

where a and c are arbitrary constants y the former representing the
d priori probability of the hypothesis^ the latter the probability that
if the hypothesis werefalse^ the event y would present itself

The principal conclusion deducible from the above theorem
is that, other things being the same, the value of P increases and
diminishes simultaneously with that of />. Hence the greater or
less the probability of the phaenomenon when the hypothesis is
assumed, the greater or less is the probability of the hypothesis
when the phenomenon has been observed. When/? is very small,
then generally P also is small, unless either a is large or c small.

CHAF. ZX.] PBOBLBM8 ON CAU8B8. 367

Hence, secondly, if the probability of the phenomenon is very
small when the hypothesis is assumed, the probability of the hy-
pothesis is very small when the phienomenon is observed, unless
either the d priori probability a of the hypothesis is large, or the
probability of the phamomenon upon any other hypothesis small.
The formula (5) admits of exact verification in various cases,
as when cr ■> 0, or a » 1, or a • 0. But it is evident that it does
not, unless there be means for determimng the values of a and c,
yield a d^mie value of P. Any solutions which profess to ac-
complish this object, either are erroneous in prindple, or involve
a tacit assumption respecting the above arbitrary elements. Mr.
De Morgan's solution of Laplace's problem concerning the ex-
istence of a determining cause of the narrow limits within which
the inclinations of the planetary orbits to the plane of the ecliptic
are confined, appears to me to be of the latter description. Having
found a probability /i • .00000012, that the sum of the incli-
nations would be less than 92® were all d^rees of inclination
equally probable in each orbit, this able writer remarks: ^If
there be a reason for the inclinations being as described, the
probability of the event is 1. Consequently, it is 1 : .00000012
(i. e. 1 : p), that there was a necessary cause in the formation of
the solar system for the inclinations being what they are.** Now
this result is what the equation (5) would really give, if, asngning

to p the above value, we should assume c • 1, a - -• For we

should thus find,

1

^ 1 1 1+p
2^*2

.-. 1-P:P::1:|>. (6)

But P representing the probability, d poMtmori^ that all
inclinations are equally probable, 1 - P is the probability, d pas^
igriarij that such is not the case, or, adopting Mr. De Morgan's
alternative, that a determining cause exists. The equation (6),
therefore, agrees with Mr. De Morgan's result

22. Are we, however, justified in sssigning to a and e parti-
cular values? I am strongly disposed to thuk that we ara not.

368 PROBLEMS ON CAUSBS. [CHAP. XX.

The question b of less importance in the special instance than
in its ulterior bearings. In the received applications of the theory
of probabilities, arbitrary constants do not explicitly appear;
but in the above, and in many other instances sanctioned by the
highest authorities, some virtual determination of them has been
attempted. And this circumstance has given to the results of
the theory, especially in reference to questions of causation, a
character of definite precision, which, while on the one hand it
has seemed to exalt the dominion and extend the province of
numbers, even beyond the measiu'e of their ancient claim to rule
the world ;* on the other hand has called forth vigorous protests
against their intrusion into realms in which conjecture is the only
basis of inference. The very fact of the appearance of arbitrary
constants in the solutions of problems like the above, treated
by the method of this work, seems to imply, that definite solution
is impossible, and to mark the point where inquiry ought to stop.
We possess indeed the means of interpreting those constants, but
the experience which is thus indicated is as much beyond our
reach as the experience which would preclude the necessity of
any attempt at solution whatever.

Another difficulty attendant upon these questions, and inhe-
rent, perhaps, in the very constitution of our faculties, is that of
precisely defining what is meant by Order. The manifestations
of that principle, except in very complex instances, we have no
difficulty in detecting, nor do we hesitate to impute to it an al-
most necessary foundation in causes operating under Law. But
to assign to it a standard of numerical value would be a vain,
not to say a presumptuous, endeavour. Yet must the attempt be
made, before we can aspire to weigh with accuracy the probabi-
bilities of different constitutions of the universe, so as to deter-
mine the elements upon which alone a definite solution of the
problems in question can be established.

23. The most usual mode of endeavouring to evade the ne-
cessary arbitrariness of the solution of problems in the theory of

* Mundum regunt numcri.

f ^ee an interesting paper by Prof. Forbes in the Philosophical Magazine,
Dec. 1850; also Mill's Logic, chap, xviii.

CHAP. XX.] PVOBLIM8 ON CAU8B8. 369

probabilities which rest upon insufficient data, is to asmgn to some
element whose real probability is imknown all posdble degrees
of probability ; to suppose that these degrees of probability are
themselves equally probable; and, regarding them as so many dis-
tinct causes of the phasnomenon observed, to apply the theorems
which represent the case of an effect due to some one of a number
of equally probable but mutually exclusive causes (Problem 9)«
For instamce, the rising of the sun after a certain interval of
darkness having been observed m times in succession, the proba-
bility of its again rising under the same circumstances is deter-
mined, on received principles, in the following manner. I/et p
be any unknown probability between and 1 , and c (infinitesimal
and constant) the probability, that the probability of the sim's
rising after an interval of darkness lies between the limits p and
p + dp. Then the probability that the sun will rise m times in
succession is

ip^dp;

^0

and the probability that he will do this, and will rise agun, or,
which b the same thing, that he will rise m -f 1 times in succes-
sion, is

\

Hence the probability that if he rise m times in succession, he will
rise the m -t \^ time, is

c\pr**^dp

\jrdp

the known and <renerally received solution.

The al)ovc solution is usually founded upon a supposed analogy
of t lie problem with that of the drawing of balls from an urn con-
taining a mixture of black and white balls, between which all
po((<}il»le numerical ratios are assumed to be equally probable.
And it u^ reinarkablCf tlmt there are two or three distinct hypo-
theses which lead to the same final result. For ■«ft^'M**», if the
balls are finite in number, and thoae which ara drawn are not

370 PROBLEMS ON CAUBU. [CHAP. ZX.

replaced, or if they are infinite in number, whether those drawn
are replaced or not, then, supposing that m successiYe drawings
have yielded only white balls, the probability of the issue of a
white ball at the m + l'^ drawing is

wi + 2*

It has been said, that the principle involved in the aboTS
and in similar applications is that of the equal distribution of
our knowledge, or rather of our ignorance^ the assigning to
different states of things of which we know nothing, and upon
the very ground that we know nothing, equal degrees of proba-
bility. I apprehend, however, that this is an arbitrary method of
procedure. Instances may occur, and one such has been adduced,
in which different hypotheses lead to the same final conclusion.
But those instances are exceptional. With reference to the par-
ticular problem in question, it is shown in the memoir cited, that
there is one hypothesis, viz., when the balls are finite in number
and not replaced, which leads to a different conclusion, and it is
easy to see that there are other hypotheses, as strictly involving
the principle of the " equal distribution of knowledge or igno-
rance," which would also conduct to conflicting results.

24. For instance, let the case of sunrise be represented by
the drawing of a white ball from a bag containing an infinite
number of balls, which are all either black or white, and let the
assumed principle be, that all possible constitutions of the system
of halls are equally probable. By a constitution of the system, I
mean an arrangement which assigns to every ball in the system
a determinate colour, either black or white. Let us thence seek
the ]>robability, that if m white balls are drawn in m dravrings,
a white ball will be drawn in the m + l''^ drawinor.

First, suppose the number of the balls to be /i, and let the
symbols jJi , a?2 , . . x^ be appropriated to them in the following
manner. Let Xi denote that event which consists in the i^ ball
of the syetem being white, the proposition declaratory of such a
state of things being a;, = 1. In like manner the compound

• See a memoir by Bishop Terrot, Edinburgh Phil. Trans, vol. xx. Part ir.

CHAP.ZS«] PROBLEMS OW CAU8B8. >•• - gf |

•jmbol l" Xi will represent the drcuntftanoe of the t*^ ball being
black. It is evident that the several constituents formed of the
entire set of symbols Xi, X|, • . x^ will represent in like manner
the several {lossible constitutions of the system of balls with
respect to blackness and whiteness, and the number of such con-
stitutions bdng 2^9 the probability of each will, in aoeordance

with the hypothesisi be ^ . This is the value which we should

find if we substituted in the expression of any constituent for

each of the symbols x^ x,, . . x^, the value ^. Hence, then, the

probability of any event which can be expressed as a series of
constituents of the above description, will be found by substi-
tuting in such expression the value - for each of the above

symbols.

Now the larger /i is, the less probable it is that any ball
which has been drawn and replaced will be drawn again. As fi
approaches to infinity, this probability approaches to 0. And
this being the case, the state of the balls actually drawn can be
expressed as a logical function of m of the symbols Xi, . • 2» • • x^,
and therefore, by development, as a series of constituents of the
said m symbols. Hence, therefore, its probability will be fonnd
by substituting for each of the symbols, whether in the imde-

veloped or the developed form, the value -. But this is the very

substitution which it would be necessary, and which it would
suffice, to make, ii* the probability of a white ball at each drawing

were known, a priori^ to be - .

m

It follows, therefore, that if the number of balls be infinite,
and all constitutions of the system equally probable, the probi^

bility of drawing m white balls in succession will be ^, and the

probability of drawing m ^ \ white balls in succession ^^\

whence the probability that after m white balls have been drawn,

the next drawing will furnish a white ooe, will be r. la other

2bS

372 PROBLEMS ON CAU8B8. [cHAP. XX.

words, past experience does not in this case affect fiitare ex-
pectation.

25. It may be satisfactory to verify this result by ordinsiy
methods. To accomplish this, we shall seek —

First : The probability of drawing r white balls, and p^r
black balls, inp trials, out of a bag containing /i balls, every ball
being replaced after drawing, and all constitutions of the systems
being equally probable, d priori.

Secondly : The value which this probability assumes when
fi becomes infinite.

Thirdly : The probability hence derived, that if m white
balls are drawn in succession, the m+ l^ ball drawn will be
white also.

The probability that r white balls and p- r black ones will be
drawn in p trials out of an urn containing /i balls, each baU
being replaced after trial, and all constitutions of the system as
above defined being equally probable, is equal to the sum of the
probabilities of the same result upon the separate hypotheses of
there being no white balls, 1 white ball, — ^lastly fi white balls in
the \u*n. Therefore, it is the sum of the probabilities of this re-
sult on the hypothesis of there being n white balls, n varying
from to JUL.

Now supposing that there are n white balls, the probability

of drawing a white ball in a single drawing is - , and the probar

billty of drawing r white balls and p - r black ones in a parti-
cular order in p drawings, is

But there being as many such orders as there are combinations
of r things in p things, the total probability of drawing r white
balls in p drawings out of the system of jul balls of which n are
white is

Again, the number of constitutions of the system of /n balls, which
admit of exactly n balls being white, is

CHAP. XX.] PR0BLBM8 ON CAU8B8. 373

1.2..A *

mud the number of poeuble oonstitataons of the Bystein is 2^.
Hence the probability that exactly n balls are white is

1 .2 ..n2^

Multiplying (1) by this expresrion, and taking the sum of the
products from n ■ to n • /i, wc have

1.2..r •.© I.2..n2^ W \ J*/ '

for the expression of the total probability, that out of a system
of ;i balls of which all constitutions are equally probable, r white
balls will issue in p drawings. Now

.eM M(M-l)-(M-n4l) /nYA n\f''
-«o l.2..n.2>' \ii)\ li)

D standing for the symbol -j^, so that f {D) n*- f (») k^ . But
by a known theorem,

.-. D-(l + »«)--|l + A0»/) + =-5- Z)(/)-l) + 4c)(l+i»y.
In the second member let «' • x, then

smce

x>(z>-i)..(D-i+i)-«'(~y.

374 PROBLEMS OV CAUSES. [CHAP. XX.

In the second member of the above equation, performmg the dif-
ferentiations and making x-1 (^ce = 0), we get

/)« (1 + €«> » ^ (AO") 2m-» + ^^^^^ (A*0») 2>'-» + &c
The last term of the second member of this equation will be

^^'"•i'^:r'"'"''" '--'-<'-')-o--"^'>^-'

since A'^O"* - 1 . 2 . • m. When /i is a large quantity this tenn
exceeds all the others in value, and as /i approaches to infinity
tends to become infinitely great in comparison with them. And
as moreover it assumes the form /u** 2*^' % we have, on pasdng to
the limit,

Z)" (1 + € V = |i» 2m-» « (I j 2^«

Hence if (D) represent any function of the symbol Z>, which
is capable of being expanded in a series of ascending powers of 27,
we have

i>(D)(l + ,oy^4,(^^y, (4)

if = and fi = oo. Strictly speaking, this implies that the ratio of
the two members of the above equation approaches a state of
equality, as fi increases towards infinity, being equal to 0.

By means of this theorem, the last member of (3) reduces to
the form

Hence (2) gives

p(p -l).,(p-.r^l / 1 Y
1.2..r \2) '

as the expression for the probability that from an urn containing
an infinite number of black and white balls, all constitutions of
the system being equally probable, r white balls will issue in p
drawings.

Hence, making/) = m^r = m^ the probability that in m drawings

all the balls will be white is ( - j , and the probability that this

CHAP. XX.] FR0BLXM8 ON CA08I8. 876

Will be the case, and that moreoyer the m + l*^ drawing mil

yield a white ball is I » < > whence the probability, that if the

first m drawings yield white baUs only, the m 4- 1*^ drawing will
also yield a white ball, is

{r<^'-i-

and genendly, any proposed result will have the same probability
as if it were an even chance whether each particular drawing
yielded a white or a black ball. This agrees with the conclusion
before obtained.

26. These results only illustrate the fiict, that when the defect
of data is supplied by hypothesis, the solutions will, in general,
vary with the nature of the hypotheses assumed ; so that the
question still remains, only more definite in form, whether the
principles of the theory of probabilities serve to guide us in the
election of such hypotheses. I have already expressed my oonvic*
tion that they do not — a conviction strengthened by other reasons
than those above stated. Thus, a definite solution of a problem
having been found by the method of this work, an equally do*
finite solution is sometimes attainable by the same method when
one of the data, suppose Prob. x -pi is omitted. But I have not
been able to discover any mode of deducing the second solution
firom the first by integration^ with respect to p supposed variable
within limits determined by Chap. xix. This deduction would,
however, I conceive, be possible, were the principle adverted to
in Art. 23 valid. Still it is with difiidencc that I express my
dissent on these points firom mathematidans generally, and more
especially fronx one who, of English writers, has most fully en-
tered into the spirit and the methods of Laplace ; and I venture
to hope, that a question, second to none other in the Theory of
Probabilities in importance, will receive the careful attention
which it deserves.

376 PROBABILITY OF JUDGMENTS. [CHAP.XXl.

CHAPTER XXL

PARTICULAR APPLICATION OF THE PREVIOUS GENERAL METHOD
TO THE QUESTION OF THE PROBABILITY OF JUDGMENTS.

1 • /^N the presumption that the general method of this treatise

^^ for the solution of questions in the theory of probabilities,
has been sufficiently elucidated in the previous chapters, it is pro-
posed here to enter upon one of its practical applications selected
out of the wide field of social statistics, viz., the estimation of the
probability of judgments. Perhaps this application, if wdghed
by its immediate results, is not the best that could have been
chosen. One of the first conclusions to which it leads is that of
the necessary insufficiency of any data that experience alone can
furnish, for the accomplishment of the most important object of
the inquiry. But in setting clearly before us the necessity of
hypotheses as supplementary to the data of experience, and in
enabling us to deduce with rigour the consequences of any hy-
pothesis which may be assumed, the method accomplishes all
that properly lies within its scope. And it may be remarked,
that in questions which relate to the conduct of our o^vn species,
hypotheses are more justifiable than in questions such as those re-
ferred to in the concluding sections of the previous chapter. Our
general experience of human nature comes in aid of the scantiness
and imperfection of statistical records.

2. The elements involved in problems relating to criminal
assize are the following : —

Ist. The probability that a particular member of the jury
■vvill form a correct opinion upon the case.

2nd. The probability that the accused party is guilty.

3rd. The probability that he vAM be condemned, or that he
will be acquitted.

4th. The probability that his condemnation or acquittal will
be just.

5th. The constitution of the jury.

CHAP. XXI.] PROBABILITY OF JUDGMENTS. 377

6tb. The data furnished by experience, such as the relative
numbers of cases in which unanimous decisions have been arrived
at, or particular majorities obtained ; the number of cases in
which dedsions have been reversed by superior courts, &c.

Again, the class of questions under consideration may be
regarded as either direct or inverse. The direct questions of pro-
bability are those in which the probability of correct decision
for each member of the tribunal, or of guilt for the accused
party, are supposed to be known d priori^ and in which the proba-
bility of a decision of a particular kind, or with a definite majority,
is sought. Inverse problems are those in which, from the data fur-
nished by experience, it is required to determine some element
which, though it stand to those data in the relation of cause to
effect, cannot directly be made the subject of observation ; as
when from the records of the decisions of courts it is required to
determine the probability that a member of a court will judge '
correctly. To this species of problems, the most difficult and
the most important of the whole series, attention will chiefly be
directed here.

3. There is no difficulty in solving the direct problems re-
ferred to in the above enumeration. Suppose there is but one
juryman. Let k be the probability that the accused person is
guilty; X the probability that the juryman will form a correct
opinion ; X the probability that the accused person will be con-
demned: then —

hx = probability that the accused party is guilty, and that the
juryman judges him to be guilty.

(l-A)(l-a;)=» probability that the accused person is inno-
cent, and that the juryman pronounces him guilty.

Now these being the only cases in which a verdict of con-
demnation can be given, and being moreover mutually exclusive,

we have

X - Ax + (1 - A) (1 - x). (1)

In like manner, if there be n jurymen whose separate proba-
bilities of correct judgment are Xi, X3 • . x«, the probability of an
unanimous verdict of condemnation will be

X « Axi Xi • • x. + (1 - A) (1 - Xi) (1 - JT,) . . (1 - X,).

378 PEOBABILITT OF JUDOMXNTS. [CRAP. IXI.

Whence, if the several probabilities x^ Xt •• dr. are equal, and are
each represented by x, we have

X=Jb« + (l-*)(l-.a:)». (2)

The probabiUty in the ktter case, that ilie accused person is gtulty,
will be

kx^ + il-k) (1-x)"*

All these results assume, that the events whose probabiHtleB
are denoted by A, Xi, rr,, &c., are independent, an assumption
which, however, so fiir as we are concerned, is involved in the
fict that those events are the only ones of which the probabilities
are given.

The probability of condemnation by a given number of vmoes
may be found on the same principles. If a jury is composed of
three persons, whose several probabilities of correct decision are
Xy x\ aTy the probability X^ that the accused person will be de-
clared guilty by two of them will be

Xa = A [xafil-x"^ + «a:''(l - jO + «'«^(1 - «))
+ (l-A){(l-a;)(l-O^" + (l-a:)(l-a0«'+(l-a0(l-ar)x),

which i{x = x' = of' reduces to

Skx^ (1 - a;) + 3 (1 - A) a; (1 - x)\

And by the same mode of reasoning, it will appear that if
Xi represent the probability that the accused person will be de-
clared guilty by i voices out of a jury consisting of n persons,
whose separate probabilities of correct judgment are equal, and
represented by x, then

Kthe probability of condemnation by a determinate majority a
is required, we have simply

t - a = n - t,
whence

n + a

CHAP. Xn.] PBOBABILITT 01 jUDGllBirTS. 879

which must be robetituted in the above formuk. Of coune a
edmits only of duch values as make t an integer. If x is even^
those values are 0, 2, 4, Ac. ; if odd, 1, 3, 5, Ac, as is otherwise
obvious.

The probability of a condemnation by a majority of at least m
given nimiber of voices m, will be found by adding together the
following several probabilities determined as above, viz. :

1st The probability of a condemnation by an exact nu^
jority m ;

2nd. The probability of condemnation by the next greater
majority m + 2 ;

and so on ; the last element of the series being the probability of
unanimous condemnation. Thus the probability of condemnation
by a nuyority of 4 at least out of 12 jurors, would be

the values of the above terms being given by (3) after malring
therein n - 12.

4. When, instead of a jury, we are considering the case of a
simple delibcrotive assembly consisting of fi persons, whose sepi^
rate probabilities of correct judgment are denoted by or, the above
formuhe are replaced by others, made somewhat more simple by
the omission of the quantity A.

The probability of unanimous decision is

X - ac" + (1 - x)\

The probal)ility of an agreement of i voices out of the whole
number is

Of this class of investigations it is unnecessary to give any
further account. They have been pursued to a considerable ex-
tent by Condorcet, Laplace, Poisson, and other writers, who
have investigated in [Nulicular the modes of calculation and re-
duction wiiich arc necessary to be employed when fi and i are
large numbers. It is apparent thai the whole inquiry is of a very
speculative character. The valiiee of x and k cannot be deter-

380 PROBABILITY OF JUDGMENTS. [CHAP. XZI

mined by direct observation. We can only presume that they

must both in general exceed the value -; that the former, x, must

increase with the progress of public intelligence ; while the latter,
Ay must depend much upon those preliminary steps in the ad-
ministration of the law by which persons suspected of crime are
brought before the tribunal of their country. It has been re-
marked by Poisson, that in periods of revolution, as during the
Beign of Terror in France, the value of k may fall, if account be

taken of political offences, far below the limit -. The history of

Europe in days nearer to our own would probably confirm this
observation, and would show that it is not fix)m the wild license
of democracy alone, that the accusation of innocence is to be
apprehended.

Laplace makes the assumption, that all values oix firom

x=-, to x= 1,

are equally probable. He thus excludes the supposition that a
juryman is more likely to be deceived than not, but assumes that
within the limits to which the probabilities of individual cor-
rectness of judgment are confined, we have no reason to give
preference to one value of x over another. This hypothesis is
entirely arbitrary, and it would be unavailing here to examine
into its consequences.

Poisson seems first to have endeavoured to deduce the values
of X and i', inferentially, from experience. In the six years fix)m
1825 to 1830 inclusively, the number of individuals accused of
crimes against the person before the tribunals of France was
11016, and the number of persons condemned was 5286. The
juries consisted each of 12 persons, and the decision wns pro-
nounced by a simple majority. Assuming the above numbers
to be sufficiently large for the estimation of probabilities, there

5286
would therefore be a probability measured by the fraction --,

or .4782 that an accused person would be condemned by a simple
majority. We should have the equation

X, + Xs . . + X„ - .4782, (5)

CHAP. XXI.] rBOBABIUTT OF JOOOMXHTi. S81

the genend expreauon for Xi being given bj (3) titer malring
therein 11-12. In the year 1831 the law, having received alto*
ration, required a majority of at least four persons for condemna-
tion, and the nimiber of persons tried for crimes against the
person during that year being 2046, and the number condemned
743, the probability of the condenmation of an individual by the

743
above majority was ^^^ or .3631. Hence we should have

X. + X, . . . + J:„ - ^631. (6)

Assuming that the values of k and x were the same for the

year 1831 as for the previous six years, the two equations (5) and

(6) enable us to determine approximately their values. Poisson

thus found,

k « ^354, X - .6786.

For crimes against property during the same periods, he
found by a simiUr analysis,

i-.6744, X-.7771.

The solution of the system (5) (6) conducts in each case to
two values of it, and to two values of x, the one value in each

pair being greater, and the other less, than - . It was assumed,

that in each case the larger value should be preferred, it being
conceived more probable that a party accused ;ihould be guilty
than innocent, and more probable that a juryman should form
a correct than an erroneous opinion upon the evidence*

5. The data employed by Poisson, especially those which were ^
furnished by the year 1831, are evidently too imperfect to permit
uji to attach much confidence to the above determinations of x and
it ; and it is chiefly for the sake of the method that they are here
introduced. It would have been possible to record during the
six years, 1825-30, or during any similar period, the number of
coDf lemnations pronounced with each possible majority of voices.
The values of the several elements A't» Xf, . • A'n, were there
no n*aiMin]» of policy to forind, might have been accurately ascer-
tained. Here then the conceptioQ of the general problem, of
which Poisson's is a particular case, arisea. How shall we, from

382 PROBABILITT OF JUD6BIBKT8. [CHAP. XXI.

this apparently Bupemumerary system of data, detennme the
values of a; and k? If the hypothesis, adopted by Poisson and
all other writers on the subject, of the absolute independence of
the events whose probabilities are denoted by x and k be retained,
we should be led to form a system of five equations of the type (3),
and either select from these that particular pair of equations which
might appear to be most advantageous, or combine together the
equations of the system by the method of least squares. There
might exist a doubt as to whether the latter method would be
strictly applicable in such cases, especially if the values of « andi
afforded by different selected pairs of the given equations were very
different from each other. M . Coumot has considered a somewhat
similar problem, in which, from the records of individual votes in
a court consisting of foiu: judges, it is proposed to investigate the
separate probabilities of a correct verdict from each judge. For
the determination of the elements :r, x\ af\ x"'^ he obtains eight
equations, which he divides into two sets of four equaticms, and
he remarks, that should any considerable discrepancy exist be-
tween the values of a;, a/, a?", a?'", determined from those sets, it
might be regarded as an indication that the hypothesis of the in-
dependence of the opinions of the judges was, in the particular
case, untenable. The principle of this mode of investigation has
been adverted to in (XVIII. 4).

6. I proceed to apply to the class of problems above indicated,
the method of this treatise, and shall inquire, first, whether the
records of courts and deliberative assemblies, alone, can furnish
any information respecting the probabilities of correct judgment
for their individual members, and, it appearing that they cannot,
secondly, what kind and amount of necessary hypothesis will best
comport with the actual data.

Proposition I.

From the mere records of the decisions of a court or deliberative
assembly, it is not possible to deduce any definite conclusion re^
specting the correctness of the individual judgments of its members.

Though this Proposition may appear to express but the con-
viction of unassisted good sense, it will not be without interest to
show that it admits of rigorous demonstration.

CHAP. ZXI.] PEOBABILITT Of JUDOllBMTt. 888

Let 110 suppose the case of a deUberative tssembly consisting
of II membeny no hypothens whatever being made respecting
the dependence or independence of their judgments. Let the
logical symbols X|, «t, • • x« be employed according to the fol-
lowing definitiout viz. : Let the generic symbol Xi denote that
event which consists in the uttering of a correct opinion by the
f^ member, Ai of the court. We shall connder the values of
Prob. Xi, Prob. Xt> • • Prob. x., as the qmesita of a problem, the
expression of whose possible data we must in the next place
investigate.

Now those data are the probabilities of events c^iable of
being expressed by definite logical functions of the symbok Xi,
xa, • .X,. Let Xi, X,, . • X^ represent the functions in question,
and let the actual system of data be

Prob. Xi « a,, Prob. JTt « a, Prob. X^ = 0..

Then from the very nature of the case it may be shown that
Xi9 A%, . . Xai9 arc functions which remain unchanged if
Xi, X}, . . Xm arc therein changed into 1 - X| , 1 - x,, • . 1 - x«
resi)cctiveiy« Thus, if it were recorded that in a certain pro-
portion of instances the votes given were unanimous, the event
who9e probability, supporing the instances suffidentiy numerous,
is thence determined, is expressed by the logical function

Xi X, . . X, + (1 - Xi) (I - X,) .. (1 - X,),

a function which satisfies the above condition. Again, let it be
recorded, that in a certain proportion of instances, the vote of an
individual, suppose >li, differs from that of all the other mem-
bers of the court. The event, whose probability is thus given,
will be expressed by the function

X, (1 - X,) . . (1 - x.) ♦ (1 - X|) X, . . X,;

also satisfying the above conditions. Thus, as agreement in
opinion may l)e an agreement in either truth or error ; and as,
when opiniontf arc divided, cither party may be right or wnmg ;
it is iiuuiilcst that tiie expression of any particular state, whether
of agreement or difl*erence of sentiment in the assembly, will
depend upon a logical function of the symbols X|, Xt, • . x«t

884 AoBABiLRT or JUDdmMt. [cOtf.BL

wliioh nmiUurly involveB ihe pnvstiTe symbtib I - fl^t 1 - Xn

. . 1 - 2^. Bat in the records of asiembliias it is not pswained

to dedare wliioh set of opinions is right m wnng. Hence the

functions Xu X,, . . Xm mnst be solely of the kind abofe d^

scribed.

7. Now in proceeding, according to the genend method, ts

detemune the yalne of Frob. jti, we should first equate the fimo*

tions Xi, • • Xm to a new set of symbols tu • • 4b- SVom tin

equations

Xi ■■ iij Jk% "■ ^9 • • Xfi^ ■■ 4i,

thus fbnned, we should eliminate the symbok ^t ^t • • «^t and
then determine a^i as a developed lo^cal function of the synibob
iu tu • • ^9 expressiye of events whose probalnlities are gmL
Let the result of the above elimination be

JSB, + £'(l-ai)-0; (1)

£ and JET bong function off 1,^, ..4i. Then

Now the functions X,, X,, . . Xa» are symmetrical with re-
ference to the symbols Xi, . . Xn and 1 - opi, • • 1 -x^. It is evi-
dent, therefore, that in the equation JSr must be identical with £•

Hence (2) gives

E

and it is evident, that the only coefBcients which can appear in tlie
development of the second member of the above equation are

-r and -r. The former will present itself whenever the valuee

assigned to fi, . . fm in determining the coefficient of a constituent,
are such as to make £ = 0, the latter, or an equivalent result, in
every other case. Hence we may represent the development
under the form

"'5^^5^' (3)

C and D being constituents, or aggregates of constituents, of the
symbols ^i, ^s, . . fn*

CHAP. XXI.] PROBABILITT Of JUDGMENTS. 380

Pasang then from Logic to Algebra, we have

Prob.x,-^-c,

the function F of the general Rule (XVII. 17) reducing in the
present case to C. The value of Prob. Zi is therefore wholly ar-
bitrary, if we except the condition that it must not transcend
the limits and 1. The individual values of Prob. Xs, . . Prob.Xn,
are in like manner arbitrary. It does not hence follow, that
these arbitrary values are not connected with each other by ne-
cessary conditions dependent upon the data. The investigation
of such conditions would, however, properly fall under tlie me-
thods of Chap. XIX.

If, reverting to the final lo^cal equation, we seek the inter-
pretation of c, we obtain but a restatement of the original pro-
blem. For Bince C and IJ together include all possible consti-
tuents of /i, f,, . . ^H, we have

C + i> - 1 ;

and i^iuce D is affected by the coefficient - , it is evident that on

substituting therein for ^, t^^ . . <«, their expressions in terms of
Xi , or, , . . or. , we should have /) - 0. Hence the same substitution
would give C » 1 . Now by the rule, c is the probability that if
the event denoted by C take place, the event Xi will take place.
Hence C being equal to 1, and, therefore, embracing all poHtiible
contingencies, c must be interpreted as the absolute probability of
the occurrence of the event Xi .

It may be interesting to determine in a particular case the
actual form of the final logical equation. Suppose, then, that the
elements from which the data are derived are the records of
events distinct and mutually exclusive. For instance, let the
numerical diita ^i|, a,, . . a., be the respective probabilities of
distinct and definite majorities. Then the logical functions
A^i, X,, . . Xm being mutually exclusive, must satisfy the con-
ditions

A', X, - 0, . . A^ A'« - 0, X, Xm - 0, Ac.

Whence we have,

/; /j » 0, #1 tm " 0, Ac.
2 c

386 PROBABILITY OF JUDGMENTS. [CHAP. XXI.

Under these circumstances it may easily be shown, that the
developed logical value of ari will be

+ constitutents whose coeflSicients are - .

In the above equation ri stands for 1 - ^i, &c.

These investigations are equally applicable to the case in
which the probabilities of the verdicts of a jury, so far as agree-
ment and disagreement of opinion are concerned, form the data
of a problem. Let the logical symbol to denote that event or
state of things which consists in the guilt of the accused persoD.
Then the functions Xi, X2 . . X^^ of the present problem are
such, that no change would therein ensue from simultaneously
converting t£?, a?i, oTj . . a?„ into 'cy Xi, z^j . . J« respectively.
Hence the final logical value of ti?, as well as those of Xi, x^yX^
will be exhibited under the same form (3), and a like general
conclusion thence deduced.

It is therefore established, that from mere statistical docu-
ments nothing can be inferred respecting either the indi\'idiial
correctness of opinion of a judge or counsellor, the guilt of an
individual, or the merits of a disputed question. If the deter-
mination of such elements as the above can be reduced within
the province of science at all, it must be by virtue either of
some assumed criterion of truth furnishing us with new data, or
of some hypothesis relative to the connexion or the independence
of individual judgments, which may warrant a new form of the
invcstiijation. In the examination of the results of different
hypotheses, the following general Proposition will be of im-
portance.

Proposition II.

8. Given the probabilities of the n simple events x^^ ^29 • J"*)
viz. : —

Pro!), a?! = Ci, Prob. 0^2 = c^, . . Prob. ^n = ^n ; (1)

also the probabilities of the m- 1 compound events Xi ^ A'2, • . A'«-m
viz, : —

Prob. A'l = r/,, Prob. X^ = ^25 • • Prob. Xm.\ = «w.i; (2)

CHAP. XXI.] PROBABILITY OF JDOOMB1IT8. 387

the latter events Xi . • Xn.i beinff distinct and nmluaUy exclusive ;
required the probabilitjf of any other compound event X.

In thifl propoeition it is supposed, that X,, JT,, . . A'«.,, as
well as X, are functions of the symbok :ri, x,, . . x. alone.
Moreover, the events A'l, Xt^ . . X^.i^ being mutually exclusive,
we have

Xi Xt - 0, . • Xi X^., - 0, Xt X, - 0, Ac. ; (3)

the product of any two members of the system vanishing. Now
assume

A^-^, AVi-^i.i, X^t (4)

Then t must be determined as a logical function of Xi, . . x«,

Now by (3),

^1 U - 0, t, t^., = 0, t^ t, - 0, &c. ; (5)

all binary products of ^i, . . ^m.i, vanishing. The developed ex-
pression for / can, therefore, only involve in the list of coikjtitu-

ents which have 1, 0, or ~ for their cocflkients, such as contain

some one of the following &ctors, viz. : —

7i standing for 1 - ^i , &c. It remains to assign that portion of
each constituent which involves the symbols jfi • • «« ; together
with the corresponding coefficients.

Since A', « ti (t being any int<^r between 1 and m - 1 inclu-
sive), it is evident that

Ai7, .. 7«.,-0,

from tlic very constitution of the functions. Any constituent
included in the first member of the above equation would, there-
fore, Iiave - for its coefficient.

N«>w let

A", «»1 - Ai • . - Xm- 1 ; (7)

ami it i.<« evitlent that such constituents as involve Fi . . Ta^.!, as
a fiiotor, and yet have 0iK*fficicnts of the form I, 0, or j:,mu8t be

2c2

388 FBOBABILITT Off JDDOiainni. [CB4P*XSL

uxdnded in the expnoAaa

Now Xm may be resolved into two portaons, vis., XXm vii
(I - X) Xm9 the fbrmer being the earn of those oonstitiiaitB of
Xm which are firand in X, the latter of those whieh are not found
in X. It is evident that in the developed expression of 1^ wUdi
is equivalent to X, the coefficients of the oonstitoents in the
former portion XXm will be l, while those of the latter partial
(1 - X) Xn will be 0. Hence the elements we have now con-
sidered will contribute to the development of t the terms

XX. ?i .. ?«.i + 0(1 - X) Xm7i . . Vi .

Again, since Xi • ^i, while Xtti^itti" 0, &c^ it is evident
that the only constituents involving li% • .^i.! as a fiotor wliioii

have coefficients of the form 1, 0, or -, will be included in the ex-
pression

and reasoning as before, we see that this will contribute to the de-
velopment of t the terms

XXitiTi . .7.., + 0(l-X)X,^i72 .. 7«.i.

Proceeding thus with the remaining terms of (6), we deduce
for the final expression of f,

t = XJj^Bi ti m • Im-i + XXi^i 7a • • 7bi.| . . + a2Lm-i ti • • 7,1.2 t^.i
+ 0(l-X)X.7i..7,».i + 0(l-X)Xi^i78..7«.x + &C. (8)

+ terms whose coefficients are -•

In this expression it is to be noted that XXm denotes the sum
of those constituents which are common to X and X«, that sum
being actually given by multiplying X and Xm together, according
to the rules of the calculus of Logic.

In passing from Logic to Algebn^ we shall represent by
(XXm) wliat the above product becomes, when, after effectiDg
the multiplication, or selecting the common constituents, we
give to th^ symbols o^i, . . o^m, a quantitative meaning.

CHAP. XXI.] PROBABILITY OF JUD6MBNT8. 389

With this understanding we shall have, by the general Rule
(XVII. 17),

Prob.^

(XX„)T|..T«,.i+(XX|)^i7s..Tbi.i..+(XXbi.i)Ti..?b.s^i
■ Y ' > (9)

K-X»7,..^., + Xi^ir,..T«.,.. + X«.,T|..7«.,f„.i (10)

whence the relations determining Xi, • . x., ^i, . • f.. i will be of
the following type (i varying fix>m 1 to fi),

(xj XJ7, .. F,.| 4 {xj Xij^7, .. 7,., ..^(Sj X,.,)r, . . 7,,,^,>.,

X| /| ft . . tgi.l _ Xt. I 7| . » 7|a.t tm-l _ y (\\\

From the above system we shall next eliminate the symbols

We have

^1 f J • . 7bi- I ■ — =T- J 'i • • »»-«ft»-i ■ "t; • (t2)

Substituting these values in (10), we find

r - Xp» 7, . . 7p».i + Ci K . . 1^ ii«., r.

Hence,

(1 - ai . . - a..,) V

Now let

a„- 1 -ai .. -a«.i, (13)

then we have

tx ..^-1-^. (14)

Now reducing, by means of (12) and (14), the equation (9),
and the equation formed by equating tha first line of (U) to the
symbol V\ writing also Prob. X for Prob. U we have

Prob. X. ?li$^> . '-^^> . . . ".^iH=) . (15)

fl, (X,X,) ^ <I,(X<X,) . Om UiXu) ^ , , ,,^.

-iT + V "* V "^tf (lo)

wherein X. and #1. are given by (7) and (13).

S90 PBOBABiLTTT or juDoiuvn. [chap, hl

These equaftioiis inTolve the direct Bohtiicni of the problem
under consideiation. In (16) we have the type of s eqmliQni
(formed by giving to t the yaluee 1, 2, • • ii racoesmvelj), fimii
which the valaes of «i, 4^, . . Wuf will be fonad, and tfaoee vdnei
mibetitated in (15) ^ye the value of Fh>b. X as a fimctioa of
the constants a^ Cu Ac

One conduaon deserving of notice, which ia dedncible from
the above solution, is, that if the probabilitiea of the e omp ow J
events X^ . . X..!, are the same as they would be wen As
events Xi, ..x^ entirely independent, and with g^ven probsUh
lities Ci, . . cw> then the probability of the event X will be the
same as if calculated upon the same hypothjSsiB of the absolute
independence of the events Xi, . • «»• For upon the hypothssa
supposed, the assumption d^i - Ci, «• ■> cw, in the quantitatifB
system would pve Xi - at, Xm • Ont whence (Ifi) and (16)
would give

Prob. X - (ZZi) + (X-Xk) . • + {XXn)f (IT)

(xiXi) 4 («|X,) . • + (»«X,) -C|. (18)

But since Xi + X, . . + Xm - 1, it is evident that the second
member of (1 7) will be formed by taking all the constituents that
arc contidQed in X, and giving them an algebndc significance.
And a similar remark applies to (18). Whence those equatioDB
respectively give

Prob. X (logical) = X (algebraic).

Wherefore, if X = (;Pi, ^2> • . ^ii)> we have

Prob. X = (ci, c,, . . Cfi),

which is the result in question.

Hence too it would follow, that if the quantities Ci, . • c«
were indeterminate, and no hypothecs were made as to the
possession of a mean common value, the system (15) (16) would
be satisfied by giving to those quantities any such values,
jTi, jr,, . . o^ns as would satisfy the equations

Xi B Ai • . Am. I = fliii-i > A = a,

supposing the value of the element a, like the values of ai,. . Hh.m
to be ^ven by experience.

CHAP. XXI.] PROBABILITY OF JUDGMENTS. 391

9* Before applying the general solution (15) (16)» to the
question of the probability of judgments, it will be oonveuient to
luake the following transformation. Let the data be

namely,

Prob. Xi - ai .... Prob. Xm.% " Ow-t ;

and let it be required to determine Prob. Xm^n the unknown
value of which we will represent by an. i . Then in ( 15) and ( 1 6)
we must change

X into Xm.i 9 Prob. X into an.i,

Xm.i into -Y«.,, Om.i into a«-,.

Xgt into Xm.i -^ Xm3 dm iuto a..! -I- a^;

with these transformations, and observing that {X^^i Xr) » 0,
except when r * m - 1, and that it is then equal to Xn.i, the
equations ( 15) (16) give

(a,., + a,)X«., .

/i,(4r, X,) fl,.a(Xi X,.,) (a«-i -I- fli») (i-j Xn,i -¥ Xj X»)
Now from (19) we find

Xm.\ Xb, Ag,.i + Xm

by virtue of which the last tenu of (20) may be reduced to the
fi»nn

o^i (j-, A". . ») fU Ui Xm)
V Y '

With these reductions the system (17) and (18) may be replaced
by the following synunctrical oniN viz. :

Y V

-. (21)

g|(XiX>) ii,(xiX>) «.(_J^.X.)

ith (7) and (13>« cnal>le us to

398 , PEOBABiurr or jVDOMBim. [cbap.zh

detennise iIm.i uafoDOtkmofci..Cii»ai..aM.Bf the a mnericJ
dftte sappoeed to be fiinushed by ezpeiieooe. We now pioeeed
to thw mppUcation. .

Pboposition nL

10. Givm any sjfsiem qfprobabiBHeg drmm from reufJUt
nutancei ofwiummityy cr of (utigned numerical mmjarUjf m Ikt
decuiam qfa deHeraiive aaemNf ; regmred^tqKmaeeriamddaf^
nmate hjfpothesis^ the mean probMS^ iff correct jm^tnemtjir a
member of the osiemNg*

In wbat WB J the probabilities of luuuumoiis deciaon end of
speGific numerical majoritieB may be determined from ezperienoe^
has been intimated in a farmer part of this dmptet. Adopting
the notation of Fhip. i. we shall represent the events whose pro-
babililies are ^ven by the fhnctions X^ X^f • • ^».i* It has
appeared from the yeiy nature of the case that these events ars
mutually ezdunYe, and that the fimotions by ^rhidh they an le*
presented are symmetrical with reference to the symbols at|, 4E^ • .ji^i.
Those symbols we continue to use in the same sense as in Prop. Li
viz., by Xi we understand that event which consists in the for-
mation of a correct opinion by the t ^ member of the assembly.

Now the immediate data of experience are —

Prob. Xi ■= fli, Prob. Xt « o^, • • Prob. X^., « a«-f, (I)

Prob. X«.i = a^.x. (2)

Xi • • Xm.i being functions of the logical symbols x^ • • «« to the
probabilities of the events denoted by which, we shall assign the
indeterminate value c. Thus we shall have

Prob. Xi = Prob. a?a . . = Prob. af„ = c. (3)

Now it has been seen, Prop, i., that the immediate data(l)
(2), unassisted by any hypothesis, merely conduct us to a re-
statement of the problem. On the other hand, it is manifest that
if, adopting the methods of Laplace and Poisson, we employ the
system (3) alone as the data for the application of the method of
this work, finally comparing the results obtained with the expe-
rimental system (1) (2), we are relying wholly upon a doubtfid
hypothesis^ — the independence of individual judgments. But

CHAP. XXI.] PROBABILITY OF JUDGMBNT8. 393

though we ought not wholly to rely upon this hypothesis, we
ctnnot wholly dispense with it, or with some equivalent substi^
tute. Let us then examine the consequences of a limited inde-
pendence of the individual judgments ; the conditions of limitation
being furnished by the i4)parently superfluous data. From the
system (1) (3) let us, by the method of this work, determine
Prob. Xm-u and, comparing the result with (2), determine e.
Even here an arbitrary power of selection is claimed. But it is
manifest from Prop. i. that something of this kind is unavoidable,
if we would obtain a definite solution at all. As to the prindple
of selection, I apprehend that the equation (2) reserved for final
com|)arison should be that which, from the magnitude of its nu-
merical element a^.i, \b esteemed the most important of the pri-
mary series furnished by experience.

Now, firom the mutually exclusive character of the events
denoted by the functions X|, Xt, . . Xm.\f the concluding equa-
tions of the previous proposition become applicable. On aoooont
of the symmetry of the same functions, and the reduction of the
system of values denoted by ci to a single value c, the equations
refvesented by (22) become identical, the values of Zi, x,, . . or.
become equal, and may be replaced by a single value x, and we
have simply,

ai jxX,) a,(xX,) . g«(xX«)

The following is the nature of the solution thus indicated :

The functions X,, . . X..i, and the values Oi. . a..i, being
given in the data, we have first,

a^ ■■ 1 — Hi . . — Oai-I*

From each of the functions X|, A%, . . A", thus given or de-
termined, we must select those constituents which contain a par-
ticular symbol, as X|, for a factor. This will determme the func-
tions (xA^), (X A,), &c., and then b all the functions we must
change X|, x^» . . x« indtvidiiaUj to a CW «a wmf regard any

884 AoBABXtmr Of JVDOMnni. [cttAF.u.

trhich rimOarly inTolTOB the priyttthre STmbdli 1 - d^» 1 * ^t
• • 1 • sw. But in the reoords ofnrwciinbli^j it is not prasamed
to declare which set of opinions is right or wrong. Hence the
functions Xu Xt, • • X« must be solely of the kind nbore d»-
Bcribed.

7. Now in proceeding, according to the general method, to
determine the value of Fh)b. xi, we should first equate the fimo*
tions Xi, . • X« to a new set of symbols tu • • <■• From tb
equations

thus fenned, we should eliminate the symbols ^, ^, • • «w, sad
then determine a?i as a developed lo|^cal function of the sjudxib
<if Uf • • 4»f expressive of events whose probabilities are gmL
Let the result of the above elimination be

^i + J^(l-jei)-0; (1)

£and J^ bong function of ^1, ^, .. 1^1. Then

Now the functions Xi, Xs, . . X^ are symmetrical with re-
ference to the sjonbols xi, • . x« and 1 - o^i, • • 1 -x«. It is evi-
dent, therefore, that in the equation £'mu8t be identical with £.

Hence (2) ^ves

JE

and it is evident, that the only coefficients which can appear in the
development of the second member of the above equation ve

- and -. The former will present itself whenever the values

assigned to ^i, . . ^m in determining the coefficient of a constituent,
are such as to mske E=Oy the latter, or an equivalent result, in
every other case. Hence we may represent the development
under the form

"-5^^5^' (3)

C and D being constituents, or aggregates of constituents, of the
symbols ^i, ^,, • • tm^

CHAP. XXI.] PBOBABILITT OP JUDOMBMT8. 380

PtMing then from Logic to Algebra, we have

Prob. jr, - -jy - c,

the function K of the general Rule (XVII. 17) reducing in the
present co^e to C The value of Prob. Xi is therefore wholly ar-
bitrary, if we except the condition that it must not transcend
the limits and 1. The individual values of Prob. «tf • • Prob.x.,
are in like manner arbitrary. It does not hence follow, that
these arbitrary values are not connected with each other by ne-
cessary conditions dependent upon the data. The investigation
of such conditions would, however, properly fiiU under the me-
thods of Chap. XIX.

If, reverting to the final logical equation, we seek the inters
pretation of r, we obtain but a restatement of the original pro-
blem. For since C and U together include all possible consti-
tuent8 of/,, f„ . . /a, we have

6% 2> - 1 ;

and since D is affected by the coeflSdent -, it is evident that on

substituting therein for /|, /«, . . t^^ their expressions in terms of
Xi , X,, • . or. , we should have /> « 0. Hence the same substitution
would give C » 1. Now by the rule, c is the probability that if
the event denoted by C take place, the event x, will take place.
Hence C being equal to 1, and, therefore, embracing all possible
contingencies, c must be interpreted as the absolute probability of
the occurrence of the event x, .

It may be interesting to determine in a particular case the
actual form of the final logical equation. Suppose, then, that the
elements from which the data arc derived are the records of
eventa distinct and mutually exclusive. For instance, let the
numerical data ai, a,, • . a., be the respective probabilities of
distinct and definite majorities. Then the logical functions
X,, X,, . . Xm being mutually exclusive, must satisfy the con-
ditions

Xi -Y, - 0, . . X, X. - 0, Xt Xm - 0, Ac.

Whence we have,

/i t, - 0. ti im « 0, &c.

«i ^

386 BBOBABIUTT OF Jim01ISMTt» £CHAF. XXL

Under theee oircnmiitanceft it mij tuSlj be ahowB, Att tlie
developed logical value of :i^ will be

** " ^^^ • • ^ + 'A • • 'ii • • + ^i*7i • • t».i) j

In the above equation ?i stands for 1 - #i, Ac

These investigations are eqndly applioable to the case in
which the probaUlitieB of the ver^usts of a joiy, so fiur as agree-
ment and disagreement of opinion are oone e med, form the dsta
of a problem. Let the logical symbol w denote that event or
state of tlungs which oonsists in the guilt of the accused perMm.
Then the functions Jlj, X^ • . X^ of the present problem are
such, that no change would therdn ensue from nmuHaneoiisly
converting w^ Xi^ x% • • a^n into "o^ Xi, x%^ • . x« respectivdj*
Hence the final logical value of lO) as well as those of :B|, a^, • .%
will be exhibited under the same form (3)» and a like general
conclusion thence deduced.

It is therefore established, that fiom mere statistical docu-
ments nothing can be inferred respecting mther the individual
correctness of opinion of a judge or counsellor, the guilt of an
individual, or the merits of a disputed question. If the deter-
mination of such elements as the above can be reduced within
the province of science at all, it must be by virtue either of
some assumed criterion of truth furnishing us with new data, or
of some hypothesb relative to the connexion or the independence
of individual judgments, which may warrant a new form of the
investigation. In the examination of the results of different
hyi)othe8es, the following general Proposition will be of im-
portance.

Proposition II.

8. Given the probabilities of the n simple events Xi^ jr,, . . j»,
viz. : —

Prob. Xi = Ci, Prob. oj, = Cg, . . Prob. x« = c« ; (1)

also the probabilities of the m - 1 compound events Xi , A^, . . A'h.m
viz, : —

Prob. Xi = tti, Prob. X, = a,* • • Prob. X«-i « a«,i ; (2)

CSAP. XXI.] PROBABILITY Of JVDQUMim. 387

the latter events Xx . . X«.i beinff distinct and muttiaUy excbmve;
required the probability of any other compound event X.

In this proposition it is supposed, that Xi, X^t . . X^.i, as
well as X, are functions of Uie symbob «i, x,, . . x» alone.
Moreover, the events Xu Xs, . . Xm-u b^ngmutuidly exclusive,
we have

Xi Xt - 0, . . Xi Xm.i - 0, X, X, - 0, &c. ; (3)

the product of any two members of the system vanishing. Now

assume

X|-/», X..I -<..!, X-l. (4)

Then t must be determined as a lo^cal function of Zi, . . x«,

Now by (3),

/i ^ - 0, /i ^..1 « 0, /, t, - 0, Ac. ; (6)

all binary products of /i, . . /..i, vanishing. The developed ex-
pression for t can, therefore, only involve in the list of constitu-
ents which have 1, 0, or - for their coefficients, such as contain
some one of the following factors, viz. : —

I, standmg for 1 - ^i, &c. It remains to assign that portion of
each constituent which involves the symbols #!..«,; together
with the corresponding coefficients.

Since Xi - ti (t being any integ&r between 1 and m - 1 inclu-
nve), it is evident that

Xi ii »• 7«.i - 0,

from the very constitution of the functions. Any constituent
included m the first member of the above equation would, there-
fore, have 7 for its coefficient.

Now let

"-•..AV.7 (7)

if * « as involve T| . • r.^.,, as

■nn If 0, or -, must be

398 PROBABILITT OF J0D6MBMTS. [CHAP. XXI.

rect judgment in an individual member of the body, or the merit
of the questions submitted to its consideration.

2nd. That such conclusions may be drawn upon various dis-
tinct hypotheses, as — Ist, Upon the usual hypothesis of the abso-
lute independence of individual judgments; 2ndly, upon certain
definite modifications of that hypothesis warranted by the actual
data ; 3rdly, upon a distinct principle of solution suggested by
the appearance of a common form in the solutions obtained by
the modifications above adverted to.

Lastly. That whatever of doubt may attach to the final re-
sults, rests not upon the imperfection of the method, which
adapts itself equally to all hypotheses, but upon the uncertainty
of the hypotheses themselves.

It seems, however, probable that with even the widest limits
of hypothesis, consistent with the taking into account of a/7 the
data of experience, the deviation of the results obtained would be
but slight, and that their mean values might be determined with
great confidence by the methods of Prop. iii. Of those methods
I should be disposed to give the preference to the first. Such a
principle of mean solution having been agreed upon, other consi-
derations seem to indicate that the values of c and k for tribunak
and assemblies possessing a definite constitution, and governed
in their deliberations by fixed rules, would remain nearly con-
stant, subject, however, to a small secular variation, dependent
upon the progress of knowledge and of justice among mankind.
There exist at present few, if any, data proper for their determi-
nation.

CHAP. XXII.] CONSTITUTION OP THB INTXLLBCT. 399

CHAPTER XXII.

ON THB NATURB OP 8C1BNCB, AND THB CONSTITUTION OP TUB

INTBLLBCT.

1* IHLT'HAT I mean by the constitution of a system is the
i^ggi^gA^c of those causes and tendencies which pro-
duce its observed character, when operating, without interference,
under those conditions to which the system is conceived to be
adapted. Our judgment of such adaptation must be founded
u[Mm a study of the circumstances in which the system attains its
freest action, produces its most harmonious results, or fulfils in
some other way the apparent design of its construction. There
arc cases in jrhich we know distinctly the causes uiK)n which the
operation of a ttystem depends, as well as its conditions and its
end. This is the mont perfect kind of knowledge relatively to
the subject under consideration. There are also cafes in wliich
we know only im|>erfectly or partially the causes which are at
work, but are able, nevertheless, to determine to some extent
the laws of their action, and, beyond tliis, to discover general
tendencies, and to infer ulterior purpose. It has thus, I think
rightly, been concluded that there is a moral fiiculty in our ni^
turc, not because we can understand the si>ecial instruments by
which it works, as we connect the organ with the faculty of sight,
nor u (Mm the ground that men agree m the adoption of universal
rules of conduct ; but because while, in some form or other, the
sentiment of moral approbation or disapprobation manifests itself
in all, it tends, wherever human progress is observable, wherever
society is not either stationary or hastening to decay, to attach
itK'Ifto certain cLisses of actions, consentaneously, and after a
manner indicative lM>th of |)crmanency and of law. Always and
everv'wiiert; the manifestation ofOrder affords a prcsuuipti«>u, not
measurable indeetl, but real (XX. 22), of the fulfilment oiun end
or pur|K>se, and the exi.'«tonee of a ground of orderly causae

400 CONSTITUTION OF THB INTBLLBCT. [pHAP. XXII.

2. The particular question of the constitution of the Intellect
has, it is almost needless to say, attracted the efforts of speculative
ingenuity in every age. For it not only addressee itself to that
desire of knowledge which the greatest masters of ancient thought
believed to be innate in our spedes, but it adds to the ordinary
strength of this motive the inducement of a human and personal
interest. A genuine devotion to truth is, indeed, seldom partial
in its dms, but while it prompts to expatiate over the fair fields of
outward observation, forbids to neglect the study of our own fih
culties. £ven in ages the most devoted to material interests,
some portion of the current of thought has been reflected in-
wards, and the desire to comprehend that by which all else is
comprehended has only been baffled in order to be renewed.

It is probable that this pertinacity of effort would not have
been maintained among sincere inquirers after truth, had the
conviction been general that such speculations are hopelessly
barren. We may conceive that it has been felt that if something
of error and uncertainty, always incidental to a state of partial
information, must ever be attached to the results of such in-
quiries, a residue of positive knowledge may yet remain ; that
the contradictions which are met with are more often verbal than
real ; above all, that e\en probable conclusions derive here an in-
terest and a value from their subject, which render them not
unworthy to claim regard beside the more definite and more
splendid results of physical science. Such considerations seem
to be perfectly legitimate. Insoluble as many of the problems
connected with the inquiry into the nature and constitution of
the mind must be presumed to be, there are not wanting others
upon which a limited but not doubtful knowledge, others upon
which the conclusions of a highly probable analogy, are attain-
able. As the realms of day and night are not strictly contermi-
nous, but are separated by a crepuscular zone, through which the
light of the one fades gradually off into the darkness of the other,
so it may be said that every region of positive knowledge lies sur-
rounded by a debateable and speculative territory, over which it
in some degree extends its influence and its light. Thus there
may be questions relating to the constitution of the intellect
which, though they do not admit, in the present state of know-

CHAP. XXII.] CONSTITUTION OF THB INTELLECT. 401

ledge, of an absolute deciz«ion, may receive bo much of reflected
information as to render their prolmble solution not difficult ; and
there may also be (juestion^ relating to the nature of science, and
even to particular truths and doctrines of science, upon which
they who accept the general principles of this work cannot but be
led to entertain positive opinions, differing, it may be, from those
which are usually received in the present day.* In what fol-
lows I shall recapitulate some of the more definite conclusions
established in the former parts of this treatise, and shall then
indicate one or two trains of thought, connected with the gene-
ral objects above adverted to, which they seem to me calculated
to suggest.

3. Among those conclusions, relating to the intellectual con-
stitution, which may be considered as belonging to the realm of
positive knowledge, we may reckon the scientific laws of thought
and reasoning, which have fbnned the basis of the general me-
thods of this treati.*«e, together with the principles. Chap, v., by
which their application has been determined. The resolution of
the domain of thought into two spheres, distinct but coexistent
(IV. XL); the subjection of the intellectual operations within
those spheres to a common system of laws (XL); the general
mathematical character of those laws, and their actual expression
(11. III.) ; the extent of their affinity with the laws of thought in
the domain of numl>er, and the point of their divergence there-
from ; the dominant cliuRicter of the two limiting conceptions of
universe and eternity among all the subjects of thought with
which I^iOgic is conceniod ; the relation of those conceptions to
the fundamental concoptitm of unity in the science of number, —
these, with many similar results, are not to be ranked as merely

* Tb« following illaitration maj suffice : —

It U in«intain«d bj somv of the highest modem Aothoritiei in grammar thai
wfijanctions connect propositions onlj. Now, withont ioqairing directly wIm^
iber thin opinion i« wound or not. it i« obvious that it cannot eonsistentlj beheld .
»j anv who admit the Acientific principl«>s of this treatiM ; for to laeb M wooM
teem to involve a dfnial, either. I*t, of the powibilitj 9ipmfitmm§^ OT liAji af
,be poftiihilitT of erpreuiw/^ a mental operation, tbo lawa af «i
MKb these reUtionn, have bt>en inre^tifated and ippB
Latham oa the Rnglidi Language; Sir JdM i

r. licO

402 CONSTITUTION OF TUB INTELLECT. [CHAP. XXn.

probable or imalogleal conclusions, but are entitled to be re-
garded as truths of science. Whether they be termed meta-
physical or not, is a matter of indifference. The nature of the
evidence upon which they rest, though in kind distinct, is not
inferior in value to any which can be adduced in support of the
general truths of physical science.

Again, it is agreed that there is a certain order observ-
able in the progress of all the exactor forms of knowledge.
The study of every department of physical science be^ns with
observation, it advances by the collation of facts to a presump-
tive acquaintance with their connecting law, the validity of
such presumption it tests by new experiments so devised as^
augment, if the presumption be well founded,/ its probability in-
definitely ; and finally, the law of the phenomenon having been
with sufficient confidence determined, the investigation of causes,
conducted by the due mixture of hypothesis and deduction,
crowns the inquiry. In this advancing order of knowledge, the
particular faculties and laws whose nature has been considered
in this work bear their part. It is evident, therefore, that if we
would impartially investigate either the nature of science, or
the intellectual constitution in its relation to science, no part of
the two series above presented ought to be regarded as isolated.
More especially ought those truths which stand in any kind of
supplemental relation to each other to be considered in their mu-
tual bearing and connexion.

4. Thus the necessity of an experimental basis for all positive
knowledge, viewed in connexion with the existence and the
peculiar character of that system of mental laws, and principles,
and operations, to which attention has been directed, tends to
throw light upon some important questions by which the world
of speculative thought is still in a great measure divided. How,
from the particular facts which experience presents, do we arrive
at the general propositions of science ? What is the nature of
these i)roposItIons? Are they solely the collections of experi-
ence, or does the mind supply some connecting principle of its
own? In a word, what Is the nature of scientific truth, and
what are the grounds of that confidence with which it clidms to
be received?

CHAP. XXII.] CONSTITUTION OF THB INTBLLBCT. 403

That to such questions as the above, no single and general
answer can be ^ven, must be evident. There are cases in which
they do not even need discussion. Instances are familiar, in
which general propositions merely express per enumerationem
simplieem^ a fact established by actual observation in all the
cases to which the proposition applies. The astronomer as-
serts upon this ground, that all the known planets move from
west to east round the sun. But there are also cases in which
general propositions are assumed from observation of their truth
in particular instances, and extension of that truth to instances
unobserved. No prindple of merely deductive reasoning can
warrant such a procedure. When from a large number of ob-
servations on the planet Mars, Kepler inferred that it revolved
in an ellipse, the conclusion was larger than his premises, or in-
deed than any premises which mere observation could give.
What other element, then, is necessary to give even a prospective
validity to such generalizations as this ? It is the ability in-
herent in our nature to appreciate Order, and the concurrent pre-
sumption, however founded, that the phaenomena of Nature are
connected by a principle of Order. Without these, the general ^
truths of physical science could never have been ascertained.
Grant that the procedure thus established can only conduct us
to probable or to approximate results ; it only follows, that the
larger number of the generalizations of physical sdence possess
but a probable or approximate truth. The security of the tenure
of knowledge consists in this, that wheresoever such conclusions
do truly represent the constitution of Nature, our confidence in
their truth receives indefinite confirmation, and soon becomes
undistinguishable from certunty. The existence of that prin-
ciple sboYB represented as the basis of inductive reasoning
enables us to solve the much disputed question as to the neces-
sity of general propositions in reasoning. The logician affirms,
that it is impossible to deduce any conclusion fix>m particular
premises. Modem writers of high repute have contended, that
all reasoning is from particular to particular truths. They in-
stance, that in concluding from the poesession of a property by
certain members of a class, its possession by some other member,
it is not necessary to establish the intermediate general condu-

2d2

404 CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT. [CHAP. XXII.

sion which affirms its possession by all the members of the class
in common. Now whether it is so or not, that principle of
order or analogy upon which the reasoning is conducted must
either be stated or apprehended as a general truth, to give vali-
dity to the final conclusion. In this form, at least, the necessity
of general propositions as the basis of inference is confirmed,— a
necessity which, however, I conceive to be involved in the veiy
existence, and still more in the peculiar naturcy of those faculdeB
whose laws have been investigated in this work. For if the pro-
cess of reasoning be carefully analyzed, it will appear that ab-
straction is made of all peculiarities of the individual to which
the conclusion refers, and the attention confined to those pro-
^perties by which its membership of the class is defined.

5. But besides the general propositions which are derived by
induction from the collated facts of experience, there exist others
belonging to the domain of what is termed necessary truth. Suck
are the general propositions of Arithmetic, as well as the propo-
sitions expressing the laws of thought upon which the general
methods of this treatise are founded ; and these propositions
are not only capable of being rigorously verified in particular
instimces, but are made manifest in all their genemlity from the
study of particular instances. Again, there exist general pro-
positions expressive of necessary truths, but incapable, from the
imperfection of the senses, of being exactly verified. Some, if
not all, of the propositions of Geometry are of this nature; but
it is not in the region of Geometry alone that such propositions
are found. The question concerning their nature and origin
is a very ancient one, and as it is more intimately connected
with the iiKiuiry into the constitution of the intellect than any
other to which allusion has been made, it will not be irrelevant
to consider it here. Among the opinions which have most
widely prevailed upon the subject are the following. It has
been maintained, that propositions of the class referred to exist
in the mind independently of experience, and that those concej>-
tions wliich are the subjects of them are the imprints of eternal
archetypes. With such archetypes, conceived, however, to pos-
sess a reality of which all the objects of sense are but a faint
shadow or dim suggestion, Plato furnished his ideal world. It

CHAP. XXII.] CONSTITUTION OF THB INTBLLtCT. i05

^ has, on the other hand, been variously contended, that the
subjects of such propositions arc copies of individual ol>jccts of
experience; that they arc mere names; that they are individual
objects of experience themselves; and that the proi>Otfitions which
relate to them are, on account of the imperfection of those objects,

^ bnt partially true; lastly, that they arc intellectual products
ibrmed by abstraction from the sensible perceptions of individual
things, but so formed as to become, what the individual tilings
never can be, subjects of science, i. e. subjects concerning which
exact and general propositions may be affinned. And there ex-
ist, perhaps, yet other views, in some of which the sensible, in
others the intellectual or ideal, element predominates.

Now if the last of the views above adverted to be taken (for
it is not proposed to consider either the purely ideal or the
purely nominalist view) and if it be inquired wliat, in the
sense above stated, are the proper objects of science, objects in
relation to which its propositioos arc true without auy mixture
of error, it is conceived tliat but one answer can be given. It
is, that neither do individual objects of ex|)eriencc, nor with all
probability do the mental images which they suggest, |K>!>8ess
auv strict claim to this title. It seems to be certain, that neither
in nature nor in art do we meet with anything absolutely agreeing
with the geometrical definition of a straight line, or of a triangle,
or of a circle, though the deviation therefrom may be inappre-
ciable by sense ; and it may be conceived as at least doubtful,
whether we can form a perfect mental image, or conception, with
which the agreement sliall lie more exact. But it is not doubtful
that .«uch conceptions, however imperfect, do point to something
beyond themselves, in the gradual approach towards which all
imperfection tends to disapiiear. Although the i>eriect triangle,
or square, or circle, exists not in nature, eludes all our powers of
representative conception, and is presented to us in thought
only, as the limit of an indefinite {mtoccss of abstraction, yet, by
a wonderful fiicultv of the understanding;, it mav be made the
•abject of pro|K)sitions which arc absoltiidy true. The domain of
ia thus revealed to us as krgcr than that of imagination.
^ad9 think that we are able to picture to ourwl ves,
*Jie scientific elements of form, direction, mag-

406 CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT. [CHAP. XXU.

nitude, &c., these things, as actually conceiTed, will, in the view
of such persons, be the proper objects of science. But if, as
seems to me the more just opinion, an incurable imperfection
attaches to all our attempts to realize with precision these ele-
ments, then we can only affirm, that the more external objects
do approach in reality, or the conceptions of fancy by abstractioD,
to certain limiting states, never, it may be, actually attained, the
more do the general propositions of science concerning those
things or conceptions approach to absolute truth, the actual devi-
ation therefrom tending to disappear. To some extent, the same
observations are applicable also to the physical sciences. What
have been termed the ^^ ^damental ideas'* of those sciences as
force, polarity, crystallization, &c.,* are neither, as I concdve,
intellectual products independent of experience, nor mere copies
of external things ; but while, on the one hand, they have a ne-
cessary antecedent in experience, on the other hand they require
for their formation the exercise of the power of abstraction, in
obedience to some general faculty or disposition of our nature,
which ever prompts us to the research, and qualifies us for the
appreciation, of order. f Thus we study approximately the effects
of gravitation on the motions of the heavenly bodies, by a re-
ference to the limiting supposition, that the planets are perfect

• WhewcU's Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, pp. 71, 77, 213.

f Of the idea of order it has been profoundly said, that it carries within itself
its own justification or its own control, the very trustworthiness of our faculties
being judged by the conformity of their results to an order which satisfies the
reason. ** L'id^e de I'ordre a cela de singulier et d'eminent, qu*elle porte en elle
m^me sa justification ou son contrdle. Pour trouver si nos autres facult^s nous
trompent ou nous ne trompent pas, nous examinons si les notions qu'elles nous
donncnt s'enchainent on ne s'enchatncnt pas suivant un ordre qui satisfasse la
raison.'' — Cournot^ Essai sur les fondfments de noM Connaissances, Admitting this
principle as the guide of those powers of abstraction which we undoubtedly pos-
sess, it seems unphilosophical to assume that the fundamental ideas of the
sciences are not derivable from experience. Doubtless the capacities which
have been given to us for the comprehension of the actual world would avail us
in a differently constituted scene, if in some form or other the dominion of
order was still maintained. It is conceivable that in such a new theatre of spe-
culation, the laws of the intellectual procedure remaining the same, the funda-
mental ideas of the sciences might be wholly different from those with which w«
are at present acquainted.

CHAP. XZn.] CONSTITUTION OF THE INTILLICT. 407

■ ph c re g or spheroids. We determine approximately the path
of a raj of light through the atmosphere, by a process in which
mbstractioD is made of all disturbing influences of temperature.
And such is the order of procedure in all the higher walks of
human knowledge. Now what is remarkab le in connexion with
these processes of the intellect b the disposition, and the cor-
responding ability, to ascend from the imperfect representations
of sense and the diversities of individual experience, to the per-
cepticm of general, and it may be of immutable truths. Where-
ever this disposition and this ability unite, each series of con-
nected facts in nature may furnish the intimations of an order
more exact than that which it directly manifests. For it may
serve as ground and occasion for the exercise of those powers,
whose office it is to apprehend the general truths which are in-
deed exemplified, but never with perfect fidelity, in a world of
changeful pluenomena.

6. The truth that the ultimate laws of thought are mathe-
matical in their form, viewed in connexion with the fact of the
possibility of error, establishes a ground for some remarkable con-
clusions. If we directed our attention to the scientific truth
alone, we might be led to infer an almost exact parallelism be-
tween the intellectual operations and the movements of external \
nature. Suppose any one conversant with physical science, but
unaccustomed to reflect upon the nature of his own faculties, to
have been informed, that it had been proved, that the laws of
those fiiculties were mathematical ; it is probable that after the
first ieelings of incredulity had subsided, the impression would
arise, that the order of thought must, therejore^ be as nccea-i.
■ary as that of the material universe. We know tliat in the
realm of natural science, the absolute connexion between the
initial and final elements of a problem, exhibited in the inathc-
matical form, fitly symbolizes that physical nccc8i(ity which binds
together eflfect and cause. The necessary sequence of states and
conditions in the inorganic world, and the necessary connexion
of premises and conclusion in the processes of exact demonstra-
tioo thereto applied, seem to be co-ordinate. It may possibly be
a question, to which of the two series the luimaiy applieatioo of
the term ** necessary'* b due; whether to the obsored nnnstanqyo^

408 CONSTITUTION OF THE INTELLECT. [CHAP.XXII.

Nature, or to the indissoluble connexion of propositions in all valid
reasoning upon her works. Historically we should perhaps give
the preference to the former, philosophically to the latter view.
But the fact of the connexion is indisputable, and the analogy to
which it points is obvious.

Were, then, the laws of valid reasoning uniformly obeyed, a
I very close parallelism would exist between the operations of the
[^intellect and those of external Nature. Subjection to laws ma-
thematical in their form and expression, even the subjection of
an absolute obedience, would stamp upon the two series one
common character. The reign of necessity over the intellectaal
and the physical world would be alike complete and universal.

But while the observation of external Nature testifies with
ever-strengthening evidence to the fact, that uniformity of
operation and unvarying obedience to appointed laws prevail
throughout her entire domain, the slightest attention to the pro-
cesses of the intellectual world reveals to us another state of
things. The mathematical laws of reasoning are, properly apedc-
ing, the laws o( right reasonin g only, and their actual transgres-
sion is a perpetually recurring phaenomenon. Error, which has
no place in the material system, occupies a large one here. We
must accept this as one of those ultimate facts, the origin of which
it lies beyond the province of science to determine. We must
admit that there exist laws which even the rigour of their ma-
thematical forms does not preserve from v iolaJaoQ . We must
ascribe to them an authority the essence of wliich does not con-
sist in power, a supremacy which the analogy of the inviolable
order of the natural world in no way assists us to comprehend.

As the distinction thus pointed out is realy it remains un-
affected by any peculiarity in our views respecting other portions
of the mental constitution. If we regard the intellect as free,
and this is apparently the view most in accordance ^vith the gene-
ral spirit of these speculations, its freedom must be viewed as
opposed to the dominion of necessity, not to the existence of a
certain just supremacy of truth. Tlie laws of correct inference
may be violated, but they do not the less truly exist on this ac-
count. Equally do they remain unaffected in character and au-
thority if the hypothesis of necessity in its exti'eme form be

CHAP. XXII.] CONSTITUTION OF THB INTBLLBCT. 409

adopted. Let it be granted that the hiw8 of valid reasoning,
such as they are determined to be in this work, or, to speak more
generally, such as they would finally appear in the conclusions of
an exhau!4tive analysis, fonu but a part of the system of laws by
which the actual processes of reasoning, whether right or wrong,
are governed. Let it be granted that if that system were known
to us in its completeness, we should perceive that the whole in-
tellectual procedure was necessary^ even as the movements of the
inorganic world are necessary. And let it finally, as a conse-
quence of this hypothesis, be granted that the phaenomena of in-
correct reasoning or error, wheresoever presented, are due to the
interference of other laws with those laws of which riyltt reason-
ing is the product. Still it would remain that there exist among
the intellectual laws a number marked out from the rest by this
special character, viz., that ever}' movement of the intellectual
system which is accomplished solely under their direction is
r^htj that every interference therewith by other laws is not in-
terference only, but violation. It cannot but be felt that this
circumstunce would give to the laws in question a character of
distinction and of predominance They would but the more
evidently seem to indicate a final purpose which is not always
fulfilled, to possess an authority inherent and just, but not
always commanding obedience.

Now a little consideration will show that there is nothing
analogous to this in the government of the world by natural law.
The n-alm of inorganic Nature admits neither of preference nor
of di2»tinctions. We cannot scfiarate any portion of her laws
from the rtM«t, and pronounce them alone worthy of obedience, —
done charged with the fulfilment of her highest puqKMC. On
the contrary, all her laws 8eem to stand co-ordinate, and the
larger our ac«|uaintance with them, the more necessary does their
united action seem to the harmony and, so far as we can com-
prehend it, to the general design of the system. How often the
DKMt signal departures from apparent order in the inorganic
world* such as the perturbatioDt of tlia planetary system, the in-
tcmiptioo of tlia prooen of ma*^ bf the intnition of a

faicign tontf wmi ^A f^e mto the

of * loM toa

410 CONSTITUTION OF THB INTBLLBCT. [CHAP. XXII.

more attentive and instructed gaze th^ abnormal aspect, it ib
needless to remark. One explanation only of these fiusts can be
^^ven, viz., that the distinction between true snd false^ between
correct and incorrect, exists in the processes of the intellect, but
not in the region of a physical necessity. As we advance from
the lower stages of organic being to the higher grade of consdous
intelligence, this contrast gradually dawns upon us. Wherever
the phenomena of life are manifested, the dominion of rigid law
in some degree yields to that mysterious principle of activity.
Thus, although the structure of the animal tribes is conformable
to certain general types, yet are those types sometimes, perliqM,
in relation to the highest standards of beauty and proportion,
always, imperfectly realized. The two alternatives, between
which Art in the present day fluctuates, are the exact imitation
of individual forms, and the endeavour, by abstraction firom all
such, to arrive at the conception of an ideal grace and expression,
never, it may be, perfectly manifested in forms of earthly mould.
Again, those teleological adaptations by which, without the or-
ganic type being sacrificed, species become fitted to new con-
ditions or abodes, are but slowly accomplished, — accomplished,
however, not, apparently, by the fateful power of external cir-
cumstances, but by the calling forth of an energy firom within.
Life In all its forms may thus be contrasted with the passive fixity
of inorganic nature. But inasmuch as the perfection of the types
in which it is corporeally manifested is in some measure of an
ideal character, inasmuch as we cannot precisely define the
highest su/jgested excellency of form and of adaptation, the con-
trast is less marked here than that which exists between the in-
tellectual processes and those of the purely material world. For
the definite and technical character of the mathematical laws by
which both are governed, places in stronger light the fundamental
difference between the kind of authority which, in their capacity
of government, they respectively exercise.

7. There is yet another instance connected with the general
objects of this chapter, in which the collation of truths or fi^ts,
drawn from different sources, suggests an instructive train of re-
flection. It consists in the comparison of the laws of thov^f^rta JB
their scientific expression, with the actual forms whiob

CHAP. XXII.] CONSTITUTION OF THB INTBLLBCT. 411

•peculation in early ages, and metaphysical speculation in all
ages, have tended to assume. There are two illustrations of this
remark, to which, in particular, I wish to direct attention here.

1st. J It has been shown (III. 13) that there is a scientific
connexion between the conceptions of u nity in Number , and the
universe in Logic They occupy in their reqieotive systems the
same relative place, and are subject to the same fiMrmal laws.
Now to the Greek mind, in that early stage of activity, — a stage
not less marked, perhaps not less neoe fjory, in the progression of
the human intellect, than the era of Bacon or of Newton,— when
the great im>blem8 of Nature b^;an to unfold themselves, while
the means of observation were as yet wanting, and its necessity
not understood, the terms *^ Universe" and *^ The One" seem to
have been regarded as almost identical. To assign the nature of
that unity of which all existence was thought to be a manifcsta^
tion, was the first aim of philosophy.* Thales sought for this
fundamental unity in water. Anaximenes and Diogenes con-
ceived it to be air. Hippasus of Mctapontum, and Ueraclitus
the Ephesian, pronounced that it was fire. Less definite or
less confident in his views, Parmenidcs simply declared that all
existing things were One ; Melissus that the Universe was infi-
nite, unsusceptible of change or motion. One, like to itself, and
that motion was not, but seemed to be.t In a spirit which, to the
reflective mind of Aristotle, appeared sober when contrasted
with the rashness of previous speculation, Anaxagoras of Clazo-
mena^ following, perhaps, the steps of his fellow-citizen, Hermo-
timuB, sought in Intelligence the cause of the world and of its
order. $ The pantheistic tendency which pervaded many of thct«c
•peculations is manifest in the language of Xenophanes, the
founder of the Elcatic school, who, ** surveying the expanse of

* 8e« ▼ariooi pattaget in Ariitotle't MeUphytict, Book L

t *EJi(fff« a a^rif ri vay dwttpotf ilrai, cm ilvaXXeiMrov, MJacJyfroi^t cai

li», l^ioioy iattrif tat wXtiptf. cii^f 9iV rt /iif f 7ra« Sottit^ H ilyai. — Dioy. Laert. iz«

cap. 4.

whimp 9" fxM vp^por *Bp|i^ip«c h KX«{[«piri«c tiwiXv, — AriMt. Met. i. 3.

412 CONSTITUTION OF THB INTELLECT. [cHAP. IIII.

heaven, declared that the One was Grod.*** Perhaps there are few,
if any, of the forms in which unity can be conceived, in the ab-
stract as numerical or rational, in the concrete as a passive sub-
stance, or a central and living principle, of which we do not
meet with applications in these ancient doctrines. The writings
of Aristotle, to which I have chiefly referred, abound with allu-
sions of this nature, though of the larger number of those who
once addicted themselves to such speculations, it is probable that
the very names have perished. Strange, but suggestive truth,
that while Nature in all but the aspect of the heavens must have
appeared as little else than a scene of unexpldned disorder, while
the popular belief was distracted amid the multiplicity of its gods,
— the conception of a primal unity, if only in a rude, material form,
should have struck deepest root ; surviving in many a thought-
ful breast the chills of a lifelong disappointment, and an endless
search If

2ndly. In equally intimate alliance with that law of thought
which is expressed by an equation of the second degree, and
which has been termed in this treatise the law of duality, stands
the tendency of ancient thought to those forms of philosophical
speculation which are known under the name of duaUsm^ The
theory of Empedocles,t which explained the apparent contradic-
tions of nature by referring them to the two opposing principles

• SevoipdvTjQ dk . . . els rbv hXov ovpavbv a7ro/3X«i//ac, rb iv tivat ftjot row
ei6v 76.

t The following lines, preserved by Sextus Empiricus, and ascribed to Timon
the Sinograph, are not devoid of pathos : —

u)Q KOI iyuiv o0fXov irvKivov voov avrt^oXijaai
dfA<poTip6ft\e7rTOQ (^doXiy d' o^//> tKeTrariiOrjVy
irpid^vyivriQ It ^u*v) icai dvafi^ifpKrroc dTrdtrrjg
(TKnrT0Ovvt]Q' OTTwr} yap ipibv voov tlpveraifiit
iiQ 'iv r' avTO ri irdv dviXviro,

I quote them from Ritter, and venture to give the following rernoot—

Be mine, to partial views no more confin'd
Or sceptic doubts, the truth-illumin'd mind I
For, long deceiv'd, yet still on Truth intent.
Life's waning years in wand'rings wild are spc^
Still restless thought the same high ***
And still the One, the All, eladei
X Arist. Met i. 4. 6.

CRAP. XXII.] COKSTITUTION OF THB IKTXLLBCT. 413

of ''strifo** and *' friendship ;" and the theory of Leucippun,*
which resolved all existence into the two elements of a plenum
and a vacuum, are of this nature. The famous comparison of the
universe to a lyre or a bow,t its ** recurrent harmony" being the
product of opposite states of tension, betrays the same origin.
In the system of Pythagoras, which seems to have been a combi-
nation of dualism with other elements derived from the study of
numbers, and of their relations, ten fundamental antitheses are
recognised: finite and infinite, even and odd, unity and multitude,
riglit and left, male and female, rest and motion, straight and
cun'cd, light and darkness, good and evil, the square and the
oblong. In that of Alcmason the same fundamental dualism is
accepted, but without the definite and numerical limitation with
which it is connected in the Pythagorean system. The grand
dcveIo|)ment of this idea b, however, met with in that ancient
Manichaean doctrine, which not only formed the basis of the re-
ligious system of Persia, but spread widely through other regions
of the East, and became memorable in the history of the Christian
Church. The origin of dualism as a speculative opinion, not
yet connected with the personification of the Evil Principle, but
naturally succee<ling those doctrines which had assumed the
primal unity of Nature, is thus stated by Aristotle : — ^^ Since
there manifestly existe<l in Nature things opposite to the good,
and not only onler and beauty, but also disorder and deformity ;
and since the evil things did manifestly preponderate in number
over the good, and the deformed over the beautiful, some one
eUe at length introduced strife and friendship as the respective
causes of these diverse ph»nomena.**t And in Greece, indeed,
it seems to have been chiefly as a philosophical opinion, or as an
adjunct to philosophical s[)eculation, that the dualistic theory ob-
tained ground.§ The moral application of the doctrine most in

• ArUt Met. I 4. 9.

t waXiyrpoWo^ apfiot^iti ocm^ ^*P roCov m Xi'miiic. — HeraciitMB, qaot^ in
OrigtmU Pkthiophmmena, ix 9. Al«o Plmtareh, De hide et Ouridt,

X *lLwu a gai raparria toIq ayaBotf ipo^ra ifaiytnt I'r rf fvtfii, ccii ov
pm¥9¥ ralic ca' th ttakhv aX><k cai <iraC<a mat t6 aiexpir, cai vXiim rJii taxtk
rwp ^ya9mp sai ri favXa rAw coXMr. o6r«c iXXof Uf ftXimp i<«f Mym nii mi-

I WHmw AffbMM- ^<i«ini dUri? aUoa of tlw

414 CONSTITDTION OF THE INTBLLBCT. [cHAP. XXU.

accordance with the Greek mind is preserved in the great Php
tonic antithesis of ^^ being and non-being," — the connexion of the
former with whatsoever is good and true, with the eternal ideas,
and the archetypal world : of the latter with evil, with error,
with the perishable phenomena of the present scene. The two
forms of speculation which we have considered were here blended
together ; nor was it during the youth and maturity of Gbreek
philosophy alone that the tendencies of thought above described
were manifested. Ages of imitation caught up and adopted as
their own the sam€ spirit. Especially wherever the genius of
Plato exercised sway was this influence felt. The unity of all
real being, its identity with truth and goodness considered
as to their essence ; the illusion, the profound unreality, of all
merely phasnomenal existence ; such were the views, — such the
dispositions of thought, which it chiefly tended to foster. Hence
that strong tendency to mysticism which, when the days of re-
nown, whether on the field of intellectual or on that of social en-
terpiise, had ended in Greece, became prevalent in her schools
of philosophy, and reached their culminating point among the
Alexandrian Platonists. The supposititious treatises of Dionysius
the Areopagite served to convey the same influence, much modi-
fied by its contact with Aristotelian doctrines, to the scholastic
disputants of the middle ages. It can furnish no just ground of
controversy to say, that the tone of thought thus encouraged was
as little consistent with genuine devotion as with a sober phi-
losophy. That kindly influence of human affections, that homely
intercourse with the common things of life, which form so large
a part of the true, because intended, discipline of our nature,
would be ill replaced by the contemplation even of the highest
object of thought, viewed by an excessive abstraction as some-
thing concerning which not a single intelligible proposition could
either be affirmed or denied.* I would but slightly allude to
those connected speculations on the Divine Nature which ascribed

ties *' warm," and " dry," and their contraries. It is characteristic that Plato
connects their generation with mathematical principles. — TinuBuSy cap. xi.

• AvToQ Kai vTTip Qk(7iv lari Kai dtpaipiatv. — Dion. Areop, De jyivinit Ab-
minibus, cap. ii.

CHAP. XXII.] CONSTITUTION OF THE INTBLLBCT. 415

to it the perfect union of opposite qualities,* or to the remarkable
treatises of Anselm, designed to establish a theory of the universe
upon the analogies of thought and being.f The primal unity is
there represented as having its abode in the one eternal Truth.
The conformity of Nature to her laws, the obedience of moral
agents to the dictates of rectitude, are the same Truth seen in
action; the world itself being but an expression of the self-reflect-
ing thought of its Author.) StUl more marked was the revival
of the older forms of speculation during the sixteenth and seven-
teenth centuries. The friends and associates of Lorenzo the
Magnificent, the recluses known in England as the Cambridge
Platonists, together with many meditative spirits scattered
through Europe, devoted themselves anew, either to the task of
solving the ancient problem, De Uno, Yero, Bono, or to that of
proving that all such inquiries are futile and viun.§ The logical
elements which imderlie all these speculations, and from which
they appear to borrow at least their form, it would be easy to
trace in the outlines of more modem systems, — more especially
in that association of the doctrine of the absolute unity with the
distinction of the ego and the nonrego as the type of Nature,
which forms the basis of the philosophy of Hegel. The attempts
of speculative minds to ascend to some high pinnacle of truth,
from which they might survey the entire framework and con-

• See etpeoially the lofty strain of HUdebert beginniDg ** Alpha et O magne
Dens." (Trench's Sacred Latin Poetry.) The principle upon which all these
speculations rest is thus stated in the treatise referred to in the last note.
Ov^iv o^v aroirov, iC AfivSp^v Iticovwv txi rb wdyri^p airiov ^vaj3dyraCi virip-
meefti6ic 6f9aXfioic Btupti^tu irdvra iv rf wavrAv dtri^^ tal tA dWiiXot^ lvav»
rla /iOvoiiiAe xal ^vw/iivMC* — ^' Dinnit NomimiinUt cap. ▼. And the kind of
knowledge which it is thus sought to attain is described as a ** darkness beyond
light," vwcpf Mfoc yv6foQ. (De My»tica Theologian cap. l) Milton has a simi-
lar thovght —

•« Dark with ezcessire bright Thy skirts appear.**

Par. Loet^ Book m.
Contrast with these the nobler simplicity of 1 John, L 5.

t Monologium, Prosologium, and De Veritate.

X ** Idcirco cum ipse summos spiritos dictt seipsom dioit omnia qiue facta
•unt.** — Monolog, cap. zziii.

I See dissertations in Spinosa, Picus of Mirandula, H. More, &e. Modem
discussions of this nature are chiefly in connexion with esthetics, the ground of
IIm application being contained in the formula of Augustine : ** Omnis porro
polehritodinis forma, unitas est."

416 CONSTITUTION OF THB INTELLECT. [CHAP. XXIL

nexion of things in the order qfdedticiive thoughty have differed
less in the forms of theory which they have produced, than
through the nature of the interpretations which have been as-
signed to those forms.* And herein lies the real question as to
the influence of philosophical systems upon the disposition and
the life. For though it is of slight moment that men should
agree in tracing back all the forms and conditions of being to a
primal unity, it is otherwise as concerns their conceptions of
what that imity is, and what are the kinds of relation, beade
that of mere causality, which it sustains to themselves. Herem
too may be felt the powerlessness of mere Logic, the insufficiency
of the profoundest knowledge of the laws of the understandbg,
to resolve those problems which lie nearer to our hearts, as pro-
gressive years strip away from our life the illusions of its golden
dawn.

8. If the extremely arbitrary character of human opinion be
considered, it will not be expected, nor is it here maintained, that
the above are the only forms in which speculative men have
shaped their conjectural solutions of the problem of existence.
Under particular influences other forms of doctrine have arisen,
not unfrequently, however, masking those portrayed above.f

• For instance, the learned mysticism of Gioberti, widely as it differs in its
spirit and its conclusions from the pantheism of Hegel (both being, perhaps,
equally remote from truth), resembles it in applying both to thought and
to being the principles of unity and duality. It is asked : — ** Or non h egli
chiaro che ogni discorso si riduce in fine in fine alle idee di Dio, del mondo, e
della creazione, I'ultima delle quali h il legame delle duo prime?'* And this ques-
tion being affirmatively answered in the formula, " TEnte crea le esistenze," it
is said of that formula, — *♦ Essa abbraccia la realta universale nella dualita del
necessario e del contingente, esprime il vincolo di questi due ordini, e collocan-
dolo nella croazion sostanziale, riduce la dualita reale a un principio unico, all
uniti primordiale dell' Ente non astratto, complessivo, e generic©, ma concrete,
individuato, assoluto, e creatore." — Del Bello e del BuonOy pp. 30, 31.

t Evidence in support of this statement will be found in the remarkable
treatise recently published under the title (the correctness of which seems doubt-
ful) of Origenis PhUosophumena. The early corruptions of Christianity of which
it contains the record, though many of them, as is evident from their Ophite
character, derived from the very dregs of paganism, manifest certain persistent
forms of philosophical speculation. For the most part they either belong to the
dualistic scheme, or recognise three principles, primary or derived, between two
of which the dualistic relation may be traced — Orig. Phil,, pp. 135, 139; 150,
(5, 253, 2C4.

CHAP. XXII.] CONSTITUTION OF THB INTELLECT. 417

But the wide prevalence of the particular theories which we have
considered, together with their manifest analo^r with the ex-
pressed laws of thoug hts may justly be conceived to indicate a
connexion between the two systems. As all other mental acts
and procedures are beset by their peculiar fallacies, so the opera-
tion of that law of thought termed in this work(the law of duality \
may have its own peculiar tendency to error, exalting mere want
of agreement into cgntruriety, and thus form a world which we
necessarily view as formed of parts supplemental to each other,
framing the conception of a world fundamentally divided by op-
posing powers. Such, with some large but hasty inductions from
phaenomena, may have been the origin of dualism,— indepen-
dently of the question whether dualism is in any form a true
theory or not. Here, however, it is of more importance to con-
sider in detail the bearing of these ancient forms of speculation,
as revived in the present day, upon the progress of real know-
ledge ; and upon this point I desire, in pursuance of what has
been said in the previous section, to add the following remarks :

1st. All sound philosophy gives its verdict agunst such spe-
culations, if regarded as a means of determining the actual con-
stitution of things. It may be that the progress of natural
knowledge tends towards the recognition of some central Unity
in Nature. Of such unity as consists in the mutual relation of
the parts of a system there can be little doubt, and able men
have speculated, not without grounds, on a more intimate corre-
lation of physical forces than the mere idea of a system would
lead us to conjecture. Further, it may bei^hat in the bosom of
that supposed unity are involved some general principles of di-
vision and re-union, the sources, under the Supreme Will, of much
of the rdated variety of Nature. The instances of sex and po-
larity have been adduced in support of such a view. As a sup-
position, I will venture to add, that it is not very improbable
that, in some such way as this, the constitution of things without
may correspond to that of the mind within. But such corres- / ^^^^
pondence, if it shall ever be proved to exist, will appear as the/
last induction from human knowledge, not as the first principle \
of scientific inquiry. The natural order of discovery is from the
particular to the universal, and it may confidently be affirmed

2b

418 CONSTITUTION OF THB IMTXLLBCT. [cHAP. ZXII.

\. that we have not yet advanced sufficiently fiu* on tlus track to
\ enable us to determine what are the ultimate forms into which all
I the special differences of Nature shall merge, and from whidi
Lthey shall receive their explanation.

2ndly. Were this correspondence between the forms of thought
and the actual constitution of Nature proved to exist, whatso-
eyer connexion or relation it might be supposed to establish be-
tween the two systems, it would in no degree affect the question
of their mutual independence. It would in no sense lead to the
consequence that the one system is the mere product of the other.
A tck) great addiction to metaphysical speculations seems, in
some instances, to have produced a tendency toward this species
of illusion. Thus, among the many attempts which have been
made to explain the existence of evil, it has been sought toasngn
— ^to the fact a merely relative character, — ^to found it upon a species
of logical opposition, to the equaUy relative element of good. It
suffices to say, that the assumption is purely gratuitous. What
evil may be in the eyes of Infinite wisdom and purity, we ean at
the best but dimly conjecture ; but to us, in all its forms, whe-
ther of pain or defect, or moral transgression, or retributory wo,
it can wear but one aspect, — that of a sad and stem reality,
against which, upon somewhat more than the highest order of
prudential considerations, the whole preventive force of our
nature may be exerted. Now what has been said upon the
particular question just considered, is equally applicable to many
other of the debated points of philosophy ; such, for instance,
as the external realfcy of space and time. We have no war-
- rant for resolving these into mere forms of the understanding,
though they unquestionably determine the present sphere of
our knowledge. And, to speak more generally, there is no war-
rant for the extremely sulyjective tendency of much modem spe-
culation. Whenever, in the view of the intellect, different
hypotheses are equally consistent with an observed fact, the
instinctive testimony of consciousness as to their relative value
must be allowed to possess authority,

3rdly. If the study of the laws of thought avails us neither
to determine the actual constitution of things, nor to explain the
facts involved in that constitution which have perplexed the wise

CHAP. XXII.] CONSTITUTION OT THB INTBLLBCT. 419

and saddened the thonghtful inall ages, — still less does it enable
us to rise above the present conditions of our being, or lend its
sanction to the doctrine which affirms the possibility of an tn-
tuitwe knowledge of the infinite, and the unconditioned, — whe-
ther such knowledge be sought for in the realm of Nature, or
above that realm. We can never be said to comprehend that
which is represented to thought as the limit of an* indefinite
process of abstraction. A progression ad infinitum is impos-
sible to finite powers. But though we cannot comprehend the
infinite, there may be even scientific grounds for believing that
human nature is constituted in some relation to the infinite. We
cannot perfectly express the laws of thought, or establish in the
most general sense the methods of which they form the basis, with-
out at least the implication of elements which ordinary language
expresses by the terms " Universe" and " Eternity." As in the
pure abstractions of Geometry, so in the domain of Lo^c it is
seen, that the empire of Truth is, in a certain sense, larger than
that of Imagination. And as there are many special departments
of knowledge which can only be completely surveyed from an ex-
ternal point, so the theory of the intellectual processes, as applied
only to finite objects, seems to involve the recognition of a
sphere of thought from which all limits are withdrawn. If then,
on the one hand, we cannot discover in the laws of thought and
their analogies a sufficient basis of proof for the conclusions of
a too daring mysticism ; on the other hand we should err in re-
garding them as wholly unsuggestive. As parts of our intellec-
tual nature, it seems not improbable that they should manifest
their presence otherwise than by merely prescribing the condi-
tions of formal inference. Whatever grounds we have for con-
necting them with the peculiar tendencies of physical speculation
among the Ionian and Italic philosophers, the same grounds
exist for associating them with a disposition of thought at once
more common and more legitimate. To no casual influences, at
least, ought we to attribute that meditative spirit which then
most delights to commune with the external magnificence of
Nature, when most impressed with the consciousness of sempi-
ternal verities, — which reads in the nocturnal heavens a bright
manifestation of order; or feels in some wild scene among the

420 CONSTITUTION OF THB INTBLLBCT. [CHAP. XXII.

hills, the intimations of more than that abstract eternity which
had rolled away ere yet their dark foundations were laid.*

9. Refraining from the further prosecution of a train of thought
which to some may appear to be of too speculatiye a character,
let us briefly review the positive results to which we have been led.
It has appeared that there exist in our nature faculties which
enable us fo ascend from the particular &ct8 of experience to the
general propositions which form the basis of Science ; afi well as
faculties whose office it is to deduce from general propositions
accepted as true the particular conclusions which they involve.
It has been seen, that those &culties are subject in their opera-
tions to laws capable of precise scientific expres^on, but invested
with an authority which, as contrasted with the authority of the
laws of nature, is distinct, ^z ^^nem, and underived. Further,
there has appeared to be a manifest fitness between the intel-
lectual procedure thus made known to us, and the conditions of
that system of things by which we are surrounded, — suet condi-
tions, I mean, as the existence of species connected by general
resemblances, of facts associated under general laws; together
vrith that union of permanency with order, which while it pve8
stability to acquired knowledge, lays a foundation for the hope
of indefinite progression. Human nature, quite independently
of its observed or manifested tendencies, is seen to be cofistituted
in a certain relation to Truth ; and this relation, considered as a
subject of speculative knowledge, is as capable of being studied
in its details, is;, moreover, as worthy of being so studied, as are
the several departments of physical science, considered in the same
aspect. I would especially direct attention to that view of the
constitution of the intellect which represents it as subject to laws
determinate in their character, but not operating by the power of
necessity; which exhibits it as redeemed from the dommibn of
fiite, without being abandoned to the lawlessness of chancer We
cannot embrace this view without accepting at least as probable
the intimations which, upon the principle of analogy, it seems to
furnish respecting another and a higher aspect of our nature, — its
subjection in the sphere of duty as well as in that of knowledge to

» Psalm xc. 2.

CHAF. ZZn.] COaSTITOTION OP THS nffTBLLBCT. 411

fixed laws whose mutliority does not consist in power, — its con-
stitution with reference to an ideal standard and a final purpose.
It has been thought, indeed, that scientific pursuits foster a dis-
position dther to overlook the specific difi*erences between the
moral and the material woAd, or to regard the former as in no pro-
per sense a subject for exact knowledge. Doubtless all exdusiye
pursuits tend to produce partial views, and it may be, that a mind
long and deeply immersed in the contemplation of scenes over
which the dominion of a physical necessity is unquestioned and su-
preme, may admit with difficulty the possibility of another order of
things. But it is because of the exdusiveness of this devotion to a
particular sphere of knowledge, that the prejudice in question
takes possession, if at all, of the mind. The application of
sripntifw m^thfrilif to the study of ^^ \ ^f^ ^^ ^t ^\fA v^^^^^^J ifij
conducted in an impartial spirit of inquiry, and without over-
looking those elements of error and disturbance which must be
accepted as faciSy though they cannot be regarded as laws^ in
the constitution of our nature, seems to furnish the materials of
a juster analogy.

10. If it be asked to what procftea/ end such inquiries as the
above point, it may be replied, that there exist various objects,
in relation to which the courses of men's actions arc mainly de-
termined by their speculative views of human nature. Educa-
tion, considered in its largest sense, is one of those objects. The
ultimate ground of all inquiry into its nature and its methods
must be laid ii^ some previous theory of what man is, what are
the ends for which his several fiiculties were designed, what
are the motives which have power to influence them to sustained
action, and to elicit their most perfect and most stable results.
It may be doubted, whether these questions have ever been
Gonifidercd fully, and at the same time unpartially, in the rela-
tions here suggested. The highest cultivation of taste by the
study of the pure models of antiquity, the largest ac<iuaintance
with the facts and theories of modem physical science, viewed
from this larger aspect of our nature, can only appear as [larts of
a |ierfect intellectual discipline. Looking from the same point
of view upon the means to be employed, we mi^ I
quire, whadH dniive tppeal wU

t

f

4!i9 CM>«RITUT10H OV TBI WIULBR!. [CBtf.XlII.

the preaent dmj to tlie sprit ofemwlathm or eajUBitj^ dooi moi
tend to weaken the influence of those move endaring molmi
which seem to have been implanted in oar natore tor the innne-
diate end in view. Upon these* and upon many other questioMb
the just limits of authorify* the rdtowaliation of fipeedom cf
thought with diBcipline of feelingSy halnts» mannera, and. nfm
the whole moral aspect of the question, — ^what nnfizedneiB of
opinion, what diversity of practice, do we meet with I Yet, is
the sober view of reason, there is no olgect within the riiain—
of human endeayoursVbioh is of more weight and moment.tlaB
thiBt considered, as I have said, in its largest meaning. Nov,,
whatsoever tends to make more exact and definite our'.idewcC
hnman nature, in any of its real ai^iects, tends, in the saaM pr^
portion,, to reduce these questions into nanower ifflimiftisif ski
restrict the limits of thdr possible solution. Thus ^ay em
speculative inquiries prove frintfiil ^f Aa mnfifc ^j^^ia-jAL
dples of action. ^

11. Perhaps the most obviously legitimate bearing of sodh
speculations would be upon the question of the place of Matk^
matics in the system of human knowledge, and the nature
and office of mathematical studies, as a means of intellecttild
discipline. No one who has attended to the course of recent
discussions can think this question an unimportant one. Those
who have mwitained that the position of Mathematics is in
both respects a fundamental one, have drawn one of their strongest
arguments from the actual constitution of things. The mate-
rial frame is subject in all its parts to the relations of number.
All dynamical, chemical, electrical, thermal, actions, seem not
only to be measurable in themselves, but to be connected with
each other, even to the extent of mutual convertibility, by nu-
merical relations of a perfectly definite kind. But the opinion
in question seems to me to rest upon a deeper basis than this.
The laws of thought, in all its processes of conception and of
reasoning, in all those operations of which language is the ex-
pression or the instrument, are of tiie same kind as are the laws
of the acknowledged processes of Mathematics. It is not con-
tended that it is necessary for us to acquaint ourselves with those
laws in order to think coherentiy, or, in the ordinary mum €f

CHAP IXII.] COMSnrUTIOH OP THB IMTBLLBCT. 4S3

the temiB, to reason well. Men draw inferences withont any
consciooaneM of those elements upon which the entire procedure
depends. Still less is it desired to exalt the reasoning faculty
over the faculties of observation, of reflection, and of judgment.
But upon the very ground that human thought, traced to its
ultimate elements, reveals itself in mathematical forms, we have
a presumption that the mathematical sdenoes occupy, by the
constitution of our nature, a fundamental place in human know-
ledge, and that no system of mental culture can be complete or
fundamental, which altogether neglects them.
, But the veiy same class of considerations shows with^equal
force the error of those who regard the study of Mathematics,
and of their applications, as a suffident basis either of knowledge
or of discipline. If the constitution of the material frame is ma-
thematical, it is not merely so. If the mind, in its capacity of
fonnal reasoning, obeys, whether consciously or unconsciously,
mathemaUcal laws, it claims through its other capacities of sen-
timent and action, through its perceptions of beauty and of
moral fitness, through its deep springs of emotion and affection,
to hold relation to a diflfcrent order of things. There is, more-
over, a breadth of intellectual vision, a power of sympathy with
truth in all its forms and manifestations, which is not measured
by the force and subtlety of the dialectic faculty. Even the
revelation of the material universe in its boundless magnitude,
and pervading order, and constancy of law, is not necessarily the
most fully apprehended by him who has traced with minutest
occumcy the steps of the great demonstration. And if we em-
brace in our survey the interests and duties of life, how little do
any processes of mere ratiocination enable us to comprehend the
weightier questions which they present I As truly, therefore, as
the cultivation of the mathematical or deductive fkculty is a part
of intellectual discipline, so truly is it only a part. The pre-
judice which would either banish or make supreme any one
department of knowledge or faculty of mind, betrays not only
error of judgment, but a defect of that intellectual niiHli^tv
which is inseparable from a {rare ^ ^ truth. It assumes

tbeoffioeoforiticisbgaooiiili ioh no human

appointoMBt hM ittaUialia^' n aside the

424 CONSTITUTION OF THB INTBLLBCT. [CHAP. XXII.

ancient and just conception of truth as one though manifold.
Much of this error, as actually existent among us, seems due
to the special and isolated character of scientific teaching —
which character it, in its turn, tends to foster. The study of
philosophy, notwithstanding a few marked instances of exception,
has failed to keep pace with the advance of the several depart-
ments of knowledge, whose mutual relations it is its province to
det'Crmine. It is impossible, however, not to contemplate the
particular evil in question as part of a larger system, and connect
it with the too prevalent view of knowledge as a merely secular
thing, and with the undue predominance, already advert^ to, of,
those motives, legitimate within their proper limits, which are
founded upon a regard to its secular advantages. In the extreme
case it is not difficult to see that the continued operation of
such motives, uncontrolled by any higher principles of action,
uncorrected by the personal influence of superior minds, must
tend to lower the standard of thought in reference to the objects
of knowledge, and to render void and ineffectual whatsoever ele-
ments of a noble fidth may still survive. And ever in proportion
as these conditions are realized must the same effects follow.
Hence, perhaps, it is that we sometimes find juster conceptions
of the unity, the vital connexion, and the subordination to a
moral purpose, of the different parts of Truth, among those who
acknowledge nothing higher than the changing aspect of col-
lective humanity, than among those who profess an intellectual
allegiance to the Father of Lights. But these are questions
which cannot further be pursued here. To some they will ap-
pear foreign to the professed design of this work. But the
consideration of them has arisen naturally, either out of the
speculations which that design involved, or in the course of
reading and reflection which seemed necessary to its accomplish-
ment.

THE END.

NOTE.

In Prop. 11., p. *2B1, by the *' abiolnte probabilitiet** or the ervats r, y, z . . i<i
meant ■implj what the probabilitiei of thote erenti ought to be, in order that,
regarding them at independent* and their probabilities at our onlj data, the cal-
enlated probabilities of the same erents under the condition K should be />, 9, r . .
The statement of the appended problem of the nm mnst be modified in a similar
way. The tme solution of that pr(^lem, as actually stated, is p > cp, q ^ cq,
in which e is the arbitrary probability of the condition that the ball drawn shall
be either white, or of marble, or both at once. — See p. 270, Cas a II.

Accordingly, since by the logical reduction the Nolution of all questions in
the theory of probabilities is brought to a form in which, from the probabilities
of simple events, «, I, kc. under a given condition, F, it is required to determine
the probability of some combination, ^4, of those events under the same condi-
tion, the principle of the demonstration in Prop. IV. is really the following:

** The probability of such combination A under the condition r must bi* calcu-
lated as if the events s, I. &c. were independent, and possessed of such probabi-
litie^ as would cause the derived probabilities of the said events under the sam<*
condition f^ to be such as are assigned to them in the data.** This principle 1
regard as axiomatic. At the same time it admits of indefinite verification, ■•«
well directly as through the results of the method of which it forms the basiti.
I think it right to add, that it was in the above form that the principle first pre-
sented itself to my mind, and that it is thus that 1 have always understood it,
the error in the particular problem re fer red to having arisen from inadvertence
in the choice of a material illustration.

KKRATiL

PtLgt 57t line U from bottom, /or jf read t.

— ttS, — 5, /or it read be.

_ 1 19, — 0, the letter w imperfect, like r.

-- „ — \Q, for wx read wz,

— 130, — 1, last term, far z read f.

— 12t), — 4 from bottom, /^r w read x,

— — 6 from bottom, for xw-¥x read xw -»> iw.

— „ — 8 from bottom, the letter w imperfect, lik« v.

— 129, -- % for xjfz read xjz.

— - Ml, — \^fifr ey read «y.

— 231, — 10 from bottom, /br vz read wz,

— 261, — 2 from bottom. /t>rp, 9, r, read p, q\ r.

— 262, ~ 22, for p and q read P ^nd q.

— 270, — 6 from bottom, for Ay read X Y,

— 274, — 1 1, foria I, read U h.
282, - 10. rff/^(l)giTe«.

— 291, - I, /br y 4 yi read j^ *- y*.

— 297, — 10 f'rom bottom, pi^x =
-_ 308, — 4, for limit read limiU.

_ 309, — 7.>brf9(l "Oreadifil - /)•

— 313, — 13 from bottom, ybr f 1 « read li « 0.

— 314, — 9 from bottom, oaiil the comma.

_ 315, — 4 from bottom, /br i 1 «i . . f« read iih^im

322, bottom line, read the aecond term at elxj.

— 330, line 6, for v read m\

.. 331, — 5 from bottom, /or j»'« r«ai/ Am.

— 334, — 16, tnpplv the letter «.

.- 351, — 10 from bottom, /or ri rr«^ xt.

— 384. — 21,yi)r 91 4187 r«M< 91-4187.

— 378, — 7*fi>rp^r read P - r,

. ^ .. 3, 5, and 6 from bottom, /br 1 rrfl^ 0".

- 385, - 6, /br Mm read x^

~ 388, >- 13, V imperfect, like v.

— 388, — \6,/brtm.i remdUx.

-~ 380, ~ 7 from bottom,>br l| . . U.\ read f, . . i».,.

_ 301, ^ 5, omii nanelj.
