First on the Antarctic Continent
Carsten E. Borchgrevink, 1901
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Borchgrevink's 1901 account — the first winter on the Antarctic continent (Cape Adare, 1899): the expedition that opened the Heroic Age. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/FirstonAntarcti00Borc). This 1901 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

wy.


m


t

z^ Б Z
2ч 2
ECC


EST ON THE
СОИС Е CONTINENT


Riko! ON THE
Peek CTIC CONTINENT


BEING


AN ACCOUNT OF. THE


РЕ Н ANTARCTIC EXPEDITION
1306 1900


E
y TENE
BY :
@ Б POBROHGREVINK, ER.G.S.


WITH PORTRAITS, MAPS, AND 186 ILLUSTRATIONS


LONDON
GEORGE NEWNES, LIMITED
SOUTHAMPTON STREET, STRAND


1901


LONDON:
PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED,


STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.


о
S
Б)
0
5
а


BY PERMISSION


TO


ERE ШЕЕ DOKE O YORK, KG; KI, KR CCV;


REAR-ADMIRAL


PREFACE


mo 5r Georse Newnes, Bart, to my staff, the
officers and crew of the Southern Cross, my thanks
сте frst of all due.

Next, I wish to express my gratitude to those
who stood by me while my plans were still young,
also to those whose friendly rivalry stimulated me
її my feht for the. Antarctic cause. I would
specially mention :—


England: Sir Clements Markham, K.C.B., Kt.
EM OM ERS ESA President of the Royal
Geographical Society, London ; Admiral Sir Erasmus
Ommaney, K.C.B.; Dr. Scott Keltie, LL.D. ; Admiral
Sir Leopold McClintock, KEB Bed. ERS:
De. Hugh Mil VOC Dr. Bowdler Sharp.


Е 2. Sa John Murray, K.C.B, DSC.
Edinburgh ; Paul Rottenburg, Esq., Glasgow.


Кала: A. Archer, Esq ; His Excellency
Sir John Madden; Professor David, Sydney Uni-
versity ; H. J. Crummer, Esq.

Norway: Professor Dr. Yngvar Nielsen; Pro-
fessor Collett; Professor Mohn; Dr. Hjorth: all of


Vill Preface.


Christiania University; Colonel Haffner, Director of
the Government Survey.


Germany: Professor Dr. Neumayer, Hamburg.


Two closely-related | sea-faring nations harmo-
niously carried this expedition to a successful
termination.

May the work accomplished serve to help those
who are destined to follow in our wake—lessening
their difficulties and risks.


С Е BorcHGREVINK,


Nap тага


CONTENTS


(ОНЧЕН КЕНЕ

РАСЕ

ШО н
(ПЕРЛИ THEE

EON HOBART TOM SOUTH VICTORIA LAND. . 52
CHARTER JIUL

N IN SOULE VICTORIA LAND... lh . 85
CTI Ту:

OOM EROM ALL THE WORLD .... тоо
CLANS V.

ШОО UNGER: у со WAND lull F65
(CIBLAJP IMIR WWI,

SDC MM OURNEY IN WINTER: с... . e c. il 156
ОНО ЛЕН К VIN

COD DOES < o s s тоё


CHAPTER VIE


ШОШО ОЕ HE SOUTHERN CROSS. . <. . 5 e e ARO


X Contents


CHAPTER IDS.


PAGE


PARADES SOUTH 0 0 о з о з ОБА
(Свое 56

TOWARDS CIVILIZATION 202587

APPENDIX L 0 080500050050 209

APPENDIX Il. 316


MARS AT END OF THE VOLUME


ROBERTSON Bay, VICTORIA LAND.
TRACK OF THE SOUTHERN CROSS OVER * WILKES LAND.’


Coast OF VICTORIA LAND.


The illustrations on pages 25, 30, 33 and 34 are from negatives by
Mr. W. Plank, and that on page 296 by Mr. Nicolls, of New Zealand.
The remainder are the work of Mr. L. Bernacchi and other members of
the staff.


mest Or ILLUSTRATIONS


PAGE
Шола О СОЕ Borcherevink . . . . . . . Frontispiece
охе the Union Jack Ви
Sw QGeoqge Мете a  2 2 uc
КОО О шол оті
М, С. 18, 180 ИРЕ
Captain Jensen е 3
Ai WA Collec o c c LTA
Ме, Вета o . 655
мт. Anton е E 16
cd. Buga Bans ИСТ
Wı Herlo!l Klõystad . . . . иие
ИЭО 30907
In the engine-room О Hp oe a 2I
Southern. Cross in St. Rhine 5 Dock tee oZ
A last all wasready?” . . uu DO
“ The last box with provisions Вай о оц оп Я ат
Ере and a sale KED . o. oe 32
"fiue yards were шашке IOI US. . . 33
Мос са fom the yards as we passed” . . . . CP Б!
* But in every new glorious sunset we saw it all once more’ SOL
МОЗ onc ШО make himself Useful . . . . 7. 37
Tn ie NIB, les s "s о ео
Ow weather o 27 2 52 099 9099]  . ...,..... 39
КО overboard” . . . ; 40
“All eighty, regardless of аы, joined in one penetrating
Arctic volapuk о о a” 41
C Bie followed tin ou. Gack... ооо 43
Gesta NL 2005-09 75 99 299 90 009 100 Жї
Ош palmy shores . . c у; » AWS
Rebecca at the well at St. es И 46
In summer seas © 7 А
* We passed close to the A 7. on 055 11 e TO o AS
Comey Of KEES ОЎ Ао
СӨН
Making a 5606... оо
Hanson with the large ов из она) ЕСЦ
oo oygi Vao . . . . . . - - 3535


BEEN 3 -J-. . . .. . . . . 56


xil List of Illustrations


PAGE

Anxious hours in the crow's.nest . 57
Slack ice in the pack 58
From the crow’s nest 59
View from the crow’s nest : 60
* She was eleven feet of solid oak at the Bow E
74


* The ice slackened somewhat ”
Mr. Nikolai Hanson taking sea temperatures . . . . . 65


Seal shooting from the bowsprit 66
Theodolite work in the pack 67
Seal shooting : 69
Seal hunting 7°
Mr. Colbeck, Mr. г and Mr, "Evaiis skinning a а 1 Ja
Беат im the paek 5 6 5 9 5 9 c E E
Penguins in he pack gp E ES
Two captive emperors: О Т
Hast in tne paek 5 5 c = TL EU v
Filing our tanks with fresh water in the ne Qo dr o5 75
Takina exercise in the pack ие
Savio travelling with Indian gear . : В
“The pack commenced to screw vios e mud uu c О
SU tasi wm (üme pack a s o ме 8о
Weddellii and the white seal (obodon агалай). E =
A faithful companion . 3 83
“The Southern Cross was about to | us at our pioneer
settlement” Qo ид ee = 87
Camp Ridley in springe 5 о о 9 99.9 99
die thermometer screen p Ge OD
The meridian pole at Cape nne E uu оа
Pack in Robertson Bay |. . ШО Г a
Borchgrevink and Mr. Hanson on che i» ais Che Adare uo od
Our approach to the top of Cape Adare . . nec OB
Survey sketch of Admiralty Range by C. E. Borci ik 2 n 07
Weddelli and Rossi . . Ои тоя
“ Не repeatedly asked it to look Ыл Motu cV us NOR
Deed uv s. s. cog I c no в тое
сааса ов Cane Adare 0 9. i
Мө on the cost o o d i
Eagoon at Camp Вт еу уу ee TTA
ТБ from Robentson Bay. о D ee a 3
Jew SS. sd ciu M mI E LI I4
On He manch: o 2. Wo ccm c тб


Coast-line in Robertson Bay ст


List of IHustrations xiii


М РАСЕ
Refugecamp . . 118
* We had to cut footsteps i in ш icy ene to on AG ndo |
5,000 feet above us”... ато |
* [t was one moving wall of grinding es m o |
Mone dogs were great companions" у... . . I2I |
Entrance to the hut In winter. . . . . ee 1822 |
heir tongues stuck tothe metal” . . ..... ^ EO |
“Tt was a rough pavement on which to travel" . . . . . 126
iustam у — o. 9 И
The frozen sea near Cape Adare. . . с с ол 15%
“ The anemometer snapped in two on the a 3 О |
КО о лз the coastline. . ... ... . 9 133 |
Caye im the took at Cae Adare 5 5 у. . 6 8 .т5
К crystal palace c . 137
“The mountains first Sioned Быга es in den full Шол
as we arrived at their foot” . . ОТИ
“They did not know the bloodthirstiness EC DD eS БИЛ
SS o a codjb”? =. = . eae a) у TAA
* Seldom were there more than two E КЫ оосо т
* Тһе seals leave a snake like track in the snow” . . . . 148
A geal окос. ТАО
* Dr. Klóvstad from time to time ud our бо with a
oneer” 5 ШЕШ
The cave in which an oak Т тш а ооп ite E ОЕ
was pkasde О ect т57
Midwinter Camp . . ee ee AT
Borchgrevink in his dee. Ше m у cp мы sc е то
o won Glacier СУМ
Stem Victora Land . . . : gets
Looking towards Cape Adare ion Duke t Nor {дш 66
Camp pitched near Duke of York Island. . . . 167
Mr, Colbeck and the Finn Must leaving Midwinter Саар at t the
вое О 0 oe s. 168
Crescent Bay, Duke of то Пата =o- оооу у, төй
The imeno Of Duke of York island... . . . a .туо
lin е сее Git оп сое УО. у... E ps
NX ЛДЫ ШШ OUI road ОНЧ
EE Manay Glacier т... oor ee 178
КОО at Gake шла у... . is es ITA
EE ШУ Glacier © .— . «e 5e 0 152
Afternoon tea . - боо cA WI


* Roped together we Т dde | 20 a уо;


xiv List of Illustrations


On the moraine of Dugdale Glacier

On the coast of Duke of York Island
Moraine study о
Duke of York Island ;
Before the sun rose above the horizon


Termination of the medial moraine at Dugdale age :


View in Victoria Land .

Near Sir John Murray Glacier

From twenty fathoms

Beautiful caves .

Ice-formation :

The penguins invading the DUET in the spring
At Hanson's grave .

Ice-formation

Cape Adare in spring

“Wedded” (Eudyptes UA E
Eudyptes Adeliae in the act of turning their eggs.
Eudyptes Adeliae on their nests Б
“Their nests were found as far as 1,000 feet up”
Collecting eggs in the spring

Eudyptes Adeliae on the ice

Springtide

Bird’s-eye view of (лр Оо

Eudyptes Adeliae with their young ones

London Antarctica px

Family troubles

Aptenodytes Forsterti

Royal London Yacht Club's ensign at (uus iss
Promise of spring

A lagoon at Camp idu

Skua-gull (Zeszrzs) on the watch

Found in shallow water

From shallow water

Pagodroma Nivea on its nest

Pagodroma caught on its nest .

Fish from Robertson Bay . à

Jelly-fish weighing ninety pounds . T :
Mr. Fougner with Jelly-fish weighing ninety UN
Leopard basking in the sun е,
Duke of York Island :

Geological formation of Duke of ork а
*Ice barrier near Duke of York Island .


185


. 194


PAGE
178
179
180
181
184


186
187
188
189
190
191
192
193


199


. 200
‚ Ail
. 202
2 296
d 04
2E
42:9
. 209
< 217
Be o
< 213
-215
210
217]
210
. 220
22
. 222
20€
‚ 28
22:27
= 220)
. 220
229m
= 256,
: 234


Vibe yc Ai


List of Illustrations


In Victoria Land near Sir John Murray Glacier .
Mother and child ( Weddell)

The Finn Savio in spring, 1900

Borchgrevink in kayak .

A busy day in Camp Ridley А
Borchgrevink and Savio leaving for а "e uk рош 6


The largest vegetation from South Victoria Land: Render


moss (Lichen) :
The return of the Southern Bis :
Possession Island
On the beach of Possession ME :
On Possession Island, at the pole left there in o:
In the interior of Possession Island
Possession Island with Peak Archer
Peak Archer
Mr. Colbeck taking адан ath ie SM EUM
Southern Cross in Lady Newnes Bay .
Magnetic work in Lady Newnes Bay .
Coulman Island ЗЕ
Cape Washington
Mount Melbourne .
Mount Melbourne . ;
Land near Mount I en .
Newnes Island . ;
Sir George Newnes Land in ои C ross Bou
Cape Bernacchi on Franklin Island
Franklin Island
The peninsula at Franklin Isl TM
Mr. Colbeck taking Dip uu on fonda Ыш


At the foot of Mount Terror, where Borchgrevink and ео


nearly lost their lives .
Cape Crozier
Fast again ‚
Ice weighed her dim ne :
Seals were dotted about on the w kits ioe з
The Southern Cross Farthest South


On the top of the great barrier on the journey Varthost Sorti


A hurried meal :
Farthest South ever reached fiy man .
Mr. Borchgrevink on board the Ruruhau
Heavy screw in the pack ice

Slips from the thermograph and Bn


|

March 2nd, 1899.—“ HEREBY I HAVE THE HONOUR OF HOISTING THE FIRST |

FLAG ON THE GREAT ANTARCTIC CONTINENT. IT IS THE UNION `
JACK OF GREAT BRITAIN.”


ЕКІН
ГОИ еШ EXPEDITION


toga 1900.


EH AXAPIER I,
INTRODUCTORY,


WniLE man’s knowledge of this Globe has continued
to increase by the sacrifice of energy terminating
many lives, the difficulties of obtaining further know-
ledge of the unknown territories have increased with
the decrease of the unknown space.

But centuries have rolled onwards.

Strengthened by difficulties, man’s philosophy
has forced the Arctic and Antarctic ice, and reached
the glittering gates of the Poles where eternity rules
in stern silence, awaiting the hour when time is ripe
through the sacrifice of mortals, for man to be
allowed to follow his philosophy and to enter the
Polar crystal palaces, and to satisfy his thirst for
certainty.

у Expeditions of discovery have set out, and one
by one they have returned, or one by one they have
R


2 British Antarctic Expedition.


disappeared; but all were destined to succeed by
adding to knowledge. Felix guem faciunt aliena
pericula cautum. :

Perchance it was through the sacrifice of the
one that the other achieved success!

Each sacrifice on the altar of science has driven
man onwards in the wake of his philosophy, until
science has conquered the pioneer work of the last
terra incognita on the Globe.

Although it seems remarkable that this work
has been delayed until the beginning of the twentieth
century, the experiences gained in the North were,
however, necessary, before even a beginning could be
made to solve those mysteries of natural phenomena
which are kept within the ancient walls of the
extreme South.

And not until man has followed where his mind
travelled before him towards the South as far as he
has done it in the North, will it be possible to
secure those facts which make knowledge out of
theories.


HisroRv or ANTARCTIC EXPLORATION.


The honour of being the first man to discover the
Antarctic Continent probably belongs to Captain
James Cook, who, in the year 1772, reached e
71? 1O S., in long. 106° 54’ W where he sigitea Ese
great ice barrier which forms the seaward boundary of
Antarctica. Speaking of this discovery, Sir James
Clark Ross says:—''I confidently believe that the
enormous mass of ice which bounded his view when
at his extreme south latitude was a range of


Introductory. 3


mountainous land covered with snow.” In 1819
William Smith, in the brig WiUiam, discovered the
archipelago of the South Shetlands, south of Cape
Horn Та 1820-23 Weddell visited the South
Shetlands, including the active volcano Bridgman.
Powell, the discoverer of the South Orkneys, visited
the volcanic island of Bridgman in 1822, and found it
to be at that time 200 ft. high. Weddell, who visited
it in the following year, estimates its height at доо ft.
Weddell penetrated to 74° S. in 1823, thus attaining a
higher latitude than Captain Cook, but he saw no land
anywhere in that neighbourhood. In 1831 Biscoe, in
Pie brig 77/2, discovered Enderby Land. In 1839
Balleny discovered Balleny Islands, a volcano
Eco tt high In 1839 the important French
IEE5edion under Dumont D’Urville explored the
South Shetlands. In 1840 Commander Wilkes, in
the U.S.A. corvette Vincennes, discovered Wilkes
Land.

I I ir James Clark Ross made his
memorable discovery of South Victoria Land. With
the object of trying to find the South Magnetic Pole,
as he had already found the North Magnetic Pole, he
forced his well-fortified ships through the pack-ice
geen he encountered in lat about 67? S. and
fone, 1744 E. He forced his way through it, and
entered comparatively open water beyond, a great
ocean pool about 600 miles in diameter. Bounding
this on the west was the magnificent chain of snow-
clad volcanoes of Victoria Land. Ross traced the
coast for 500 miles southwards, where he encountered
the great ice barrier, terminating seawards in a
sheer wall of ice from 180 ft. to 200 ft. high.

B 2


4 British Antarctic Expedition.


In 1874 H.M.S. Challenger visited the neighbour-
hood of the supposed Termination Land of Wilkes.
In 1893-4 the whaler аѕол, with Capt. C. Н. Larsen,
visited the north-western portion of Antarctica.

In 1894 the whaler Antarctic crossed the Ant-
arctic Circle and effected a landing on South Victoria
Land, and at Possession Island, and reached 74° IO S.
I was on board the Antarctic at the time, and dis-
covered, for the first time, a land flora on the Antarctic
Continent in the form of a small lichen, and saw in
the water near Cape Adare a live jelly-fish.

The following extract from my speech before
the Sixth International Geographical Congress in
the Imperial Institute gives a short summary of
what I observed at my first landing on the penin-
sula at Cape Adare in 1894, and which also may
have its interest, as it became an important factor
among those which weighed when I decided to
choose the place for my pioneer camp. As the
visit that time only lasted some few hours, my report
of the place was then naturally very short.

“ Тһе peninsula on which we landed at Саре
Adare must be some seventy acres in extent; on
the top of the guano were lying the primitive nests
of the penguins, composed of pebbles. Some
hundreds of yards up these landslips I came upon
two dead seals, which, from their appearance, must
have lain there several years. I made a thorough
investipation of the landing-place, because I believed
it to be a place where a future scientific expedition
might safely stop, even during the winter months.
Several accessible spurs lead up from the place
where we were to the top of the cape, and from


Introductory. 5


there a gentle slope leads on to the great plateau
of South Victoria Land. The presence of the
penguin colony, their undisturbed old nests, the
appearance of the dead seals, the vegetation on the
rocks, and lastly, the flat table of the cape above,
all indicated that here the unbound forces of the
Antarctic Circle do not display the whole severity
of their powers. Neither ice nor volcanoes seemed to
have prevailed at the peninsula at Cape Adare, and
I strongly recommend a future scientific expedition to
choose this spot as a centre for operations. At this
place there is a safe situation for houses, tents and
provisions. I myself am willing to be the leader
of a party, to be landed either on the pack or on
the mainland near Coulman Island, with ski, Canadian
snow-shoes, sledges and dogs.” *

M. Gerlache in the Belgica sailed southwards
in 1897, and returned in the autumn of 1898 without
having effected a landing on the Antarctic Continent,
and without reaching further than 71° 24’ S. (?).
But he added valuable data to the meteorology
within the Antarctic Circle, as the observations on
board the Zeue extended over a whole year,
and that expedition was the first to over-winter
within the Antarctic Circle. However, the first to
invade the Antarctic Continent were the members of
the Southern Cross under my command, who, with
me, successfully landed on the peninsula of Cape
Adare in 1899, with a complete outfit for exploration
on land and at sea.

What I claim as the principal work accom-


* From the report of the Sixth International Geographical Con-
gress, London, 1896.


6 British Antarctic Expedition.


plished by the expedition under my command is
hie The pioneer work in Victoria Land extending
over a period of one year, (1) for the first time
proving the possibility for an expedition to live
on South Victoria Land in winter; (2) recording
the meteorological and magnetic conditions of
Victoria Land during one year; (3) the present
approximate position of the South Magnetic Pole
ascertained to be approx. in lat. 73° 20' S., and
long. 146? E., about 22? W. by N. from Wood Bay;
(4) discovering new species in Antarctic biology,
viz; insects, and shallow-water fauna, proving bi-
polarity, and adding new features to our knowledge
of the geology of South Victoria Land, and the
discovery of vegetation, some of which has proved
the existence of bi-polarity in the flora. There
was also (5) a careful investigation and mapping
of the coastline round Robertson Bay, where a new
island was discovered in lat. 71? 35' S., and long.
170? 23' E., which I named after H.R.H. the Duke
of York: (©) Ше eoastline from. Cape Adare to
Mt. Terror surveyed and mapped, whereby new
geographical discoveries were made, amongst these
being two new islands, one of which I named
after His Majesty King Oscar, and the other after
Sir Clements Markham, as well as alterations in the
map of Sir James Clark Ross, whose excellent work
could, of course, not possibly be exact owing to the
fact. that. the vos; and the vx» Jacking the
aid of steam, could not be navigated so close- to
the shores of Victoria Land as could the Southern
Cross. (7) For the first time a landing was effected
on Coulman Island, Franklin Island, Wood Bay, and


Introductory. 7


Mt. Terror, whereby a most important geographical
discovery was made in the discovery of Southern
Cross Fjord, as well as the excellent camping place
discovered on Newnes Land at the foot of Mt.
DEelbourne. (8) A careful study of the great ice
barrier was made while the Southern Cross was
Hewigated as far south as 78° 34 37", thus further
than any vessel had been brought before, and having
crossed the Antarctic Circle four times—once to and
from 71? 18' (Cape Adare) and once to and from
mer furthest south; (9) and lastly, I proved the
possibility of scaling the great ice barrier on which
I, with two companions, and by the help of dogs
Bud Са зев, reached the latitude of 78° 50, the
furthest south ever reached by man.

It is thus that Antarctic exploration in the year
1900 has opened up a new era in Geographical Science
with a scope the greater because of its responsibility
towards the past work done within the Arctic Circle,
as well as towards the maiden field of the great white
world around the Southern Pole.

I believe further that in the history of culture of
nations of the Southern Hemisphere the awakened
interest in Antarctic research in the year 1900 must
needs, in time to come, be recognised as a conspicuous
and bright intellectual land-mark.

Im iE years 1994-5, I visited for the first
time the great Antarctic Continent. On Thursday,

August 1st, 1895, І had the honour of laying the
results of my scientific observations within the
Antarctic Circle before the Sixth International
Geographical Congress assembled in London at
the Imperial Institute.


8 British Antarctic Expedition.


Immediately after my lecture the following
resolution was moved :—

“The Sixth International Geographical Congress,
assembled in London in the year 1895, with reference
to the exploration of the Antarctic Regions, expresses
the opinion that this is the greatest piece of
geographical exploration still to be undertaken, and
in view of the addition to knowledge in almost every
branch of science which would result from such a
scientific exploration, the Congress recommends that
the various scientific societies throughout the world
should urge, in whatever way seems to them most
effective, that this work should be undertaken before
the close of the century."

Upon being put to the meeting the resolution was
carried unanimously.

Ten years previously that resolution had been
carried in my mind, but not so clearly did I then
realize those difficulties which, from unexpected
quarters, arose out of the mist-like ice-pack to delay
the pioneer-work which I, however, was destined to
accomplish.

It was up a steep hill I had to roll my Antarctic
boulder !

For a number of years my Antarctic work had
been limited to that of «private correspondence—a
correspondence which, however, grew so rapidly,
that in 1892 I was enabled to give that thought
to the cause which gave birth to my independent
Antarctic expedition plans.

First, in 1894, I visited Victoria Land and com-
pared my theories with reality, and in 1895 I
delivered my first lecture in the Town Hall of


Introductory. 9


Melbourne before the Royal Geographical Society
of Australasia. Shortly afterwards I spoke in
Sydney before the New South Wales branch of the
same society. My hope was that my observations


SIR GEORGE NEWNES.


and experiences within the Antarctic Circle might
stimulate the Australian interest in Antarctic work.

My hope was not disappointed. In less than one
month I found myself surrounded by the greatest
thinkers of Australasia, But great and noble thinkers


10 British Antarctic Expedition.


in the Australian colonies rarely can afford to
accompany their thoughts on far journeys, nor
despatch others, less worthy, perhaps, in pursuit
of their philosophy.

While thus the importance of the cause which
I advocated was recognised everywhere, and tons of
moral support was lavishly presented to me from all
sides, the funds for my enterprise did not come
before my work acquainted me with one of those
rare men whose brains, heart, and funds were only
equalled by his spirit of enterprise.

In 1896 I first met Sir George Newnes, and
laid my plans before him.

In 1898 he placed the necessary funds at my
disposal for the realization of my Antarctic. expedi-
tion plans. ;

My plans were then but slightly altered from
those which I laid before the Sixth International
Geographical Congress in London in 1895. (See
page 174 of the report of the Sixth International
Geographical Congress, 1895), and I may here give
a statement of the tonnage and dimensions of the


Southern Cross.


Gross Tonnage : : o... a. Bent TO ПОТЕ,
Net Tonnage . : ; : PIOS ae
Length . А : : 3 о 146°5 feet.
Breadth . : : à : Oye v
Depth of Hold : E 2 : Лб у,
Draught. : : ; . ; ТӨ ЗО л»;


Two decks ; stern round ; barque rigged ; built in
Arendal (Norway); designed by Colin Archer, who
also designed the Fram,


Introductory. и


The engine as well as the boilers were made
to order by I. and A. Jensen, of Dahl, Fredrikstad,
Norway.

This work was to have been done in England,
but a big strike of mechanics at the time made it
impossible to get the work finished up to the time in
Britain.


Pin d


DIL


PART OF OUR SPLENDID ENGINES.


The engine is a direct working vertical triple-
expansion engine of the following dimensions :—


High Pressure Cylinder, Diameter . Ins
Intermediate Pressure Cylinder, Diameter . 194 ,,
Low Pressure Cylinder, Diameter  . ООН
Length of Stroke (for all Cylinders) . dr


The high-pressure cylinder has a round slide,
while the intermediate and low-pressure cylinders
have the ordinary flat slides.


12 British Antarctic Expedition.


The low-pressure cylinder has a piston rod going
straight through. The engine has а _ surface
condenser, and is in other details furnished with all
modern appli-
ances ol a
marine engine,
with 100 revolu-
tions a minute,
and a pressure
of 170 lbs. per
square inelt,
(H р 59.
The propeller
has two blades,
ame: has 8 10 ft.
diameter, with
9.ft. 3 ine (grad-
ual rise) (Nor-
wegian Stign-
ing). To this
engine 15 at
tached combin-
ed furnace and
boiler tubes of
steel, to withstand a pressure of 170 lbs. to the square
inch. The boiler is чі ft 3m m daner and
9 ft. ro in. long. The two furnace waving plates
are 3 ft. 3 in. in diameter. Each of the 158 pieces of
horizontal tubes are 34 in. in diameter outside. The
heating surface is 1,100 Sq. dt The orate arca
43 Sq. ft. The engine as well as the boiler and the
tubes were executed according to the rules of the
Norwegian Veritas,


C. E. BORCHGREVINK.


Introductory. 12


In selecting my staff and crew of the vessel, I
purposely selected men who were able to collect
reliable data, judging this more important than having
a staff of specialists. In my opinion it is neither
desirable nor possible to work out the raw material
collected by a pioneer expedition under such conditions
in which we lived and worked; and I think it
is one of the difficulties of selecting men for an
Antarctic expedition, to get professional, capable,
and practical scientific men, who, however, will not
also attempt minute analyses of their observations
and collections. It is altogether undesirable that
well- collected
material should
be meddled with
bDcTtore it is
delivered into
the hands of
thoroughly ex-
perienced speci-
mists, With
tais in view
I selected the
following off


pers for my

БОШ and for

my vessel :—
Captain

Bernhard Jensen CAPTAIN JENSEN.

with master-

mariners certificate, born 1853, Norwegian by

birth ; has had twenty years’ experience in ice

navigation; has once before passed the Antarctic


14 British Antarctic Expedition.


Circle with me. I selected him for his responsible
position as Captain of the Southern Cross because of
his experience, courage, carefulness and tact; which
never deserted
him during the
expedition.

Mr. William
Colbeck, R. N. R.
Born August
Sth; 1873. "Edu
cated аг Ваи
Graium dm
School, went
through a six-
months' course
of navigation
before going to
sea, enn er
apprenticeship
(1886-1890)
served in the
Loch Torridon
of Glasgow in

MR. W. COLBECK. the East India

trade, under

Captain Pattman. Obtained second-mate's certificate
in Calcutta, November, 1890, and joined the Avon
of London, employed in the Government Emigrant
Service. He spent three years in this service and
obtained his first-mate’s certificate in July, 1892; and
master’s certificate March, 1894. He then joined the
firm of Thos. Wilson, Sons & Со., Lid, of Hull. “At
the time of appointment he was serving on that Com-


p


Introductory. 15


pany’s boat, the R.M.S. Montebello, as second mate
under the able and courteous Capt. Pepper. In
addition he passed for extra master in November 1897,
and was gazetted sub-lieutenant R.N.R. in June, 1898.
Subsequently he studied on behalf of the expedition
at the Kew Observatory, making a special feature of
magnetism, and it was as Magnetic Observer that
he accompanied the expedition under my command.
His father, Mr. Christopher Colbeck, is of the firm of
Messrs. Colbeck
and Walker, of
Hull.

Louis Вет-
nacchi. Born in
ШЕЛ Бапа on
November 8th,
1876, his father,
be x G, D.
Bernacchi, being
a well-known
и с таптап
colonist. Edu-
cated at the
Hutchins School
of Hobart, and
privately, he
entered the
Melbourne Ob-
servatory in MR. BERNACCHI.

1805, where

he spent: about three years studying magnetism
and meteorology. In 1897 he was appointed to
the Belgian Antarctic expedition. He was to have


16 British Antarctic Expedition.


joined the ship in Melbourne, but on account of its
being caught in the ice-pack off Cape Horn, and there-
fore not being able to call at Melbourne, he could not
join. lm May,
1898, Mr. Ber-
macchi came
from Melbourne
to “London am
the off-chance
of being able to
join the expe-
dition under my
command.
Anton Foug-
ner, ‘‘handy-
man”; educated
at^ College,
Christianias
mate’s certifi-
Cate. expert
enced sailor ;
good snow-shoe


FUMING о born
MR. ANTON FOUGNER. i
ANTON FOUGNEI 1870; at time


of appointment clerk in an office in Christiania.
Hugh Blackwall Evans. Born November ıgth,
1974. His fader is the Rey, Edward Evans, of
Bishopston Vicarage, Bristol. He was educated at
King’s School, Gloucester, after which he went to
Canada for four years, spending the first year at the
Agricultural College in the North-West Territories,
and the remaining three on a cattle ranch, where
he had a deal of hunting and shooting. On return-


Introductory. 17


ing to England he proceeded to Melbourne, where
he joined a sealing expedition to Kerguelen Island.
On again returning home he joined my expedition
to the Antarctic as assistant zoologist.

Dr Herlof Klovstad, MA MD Christiania Uni
versity. At the time of appointment resident doctor in
a lunatic asylum, near Bergen, Norway. Born 1868.

Nikolai Hanson, zoological taxidermist, experi-
enced hunter and collector, born at Christiansund,
Norway, 1870.
At the time of
appointment
employed > in
collecting for
the British
Museum and
for the Zoolo-
gical Museum


iu Christiania.
(ol bein
Ellefsen, cook ;
Civil Service
examination;
experienced
Bador; at the


cime of ap-
ON n tm e MC
me an office
i. Tonsberg,
Norway.
Jorgen, Petersen, first mate; experienced ісе
navigator. Died Dord Of Sepiember, 1000, OM the


MR. HUGH EVANS.


voyage from Australia.


18 British Antarctic Expedition.


Hans Hansen, second mate; experienced ice
navigator and hunter; born 1877.

Hans Ulis, professional carpenter.

Lars Ander-
sen, steward;
born 1850.

]. Cristram
Olsen, бс
engineer ; first-
class certificate.
Experienced
engineer and
boilermaker.
At the fme
of appointment


professional
engmicer- ai
jensen, ama
Dahls ship
building yard,
Friedrikstad,
Norway.
Julius Johan-
esen, second


DR. HERLOF KLOVSTAD.


engineer, professional engineer. At the time of
appointment at the same yard as the first engineer.

In addition to the above there were fourteen
hardy and strong. Norwegian sailors.


The Crew of the “ Southern Cross.”
Klemet Klemetsen, boatswain; Johannes Jahnsen,
cook; Franz Johan Magnüssen, A.B.; Oscar M.
Bjarko, A.B.; Hans Nielsen, A.B. ; Ingvard Samuel-


/


Introductory. 19


sen, A.B. ; Hans J. Johnson, A.B. ; Johan A. Ander-
EU B. Olof Larsen, A.B.; Lars A. Larsen, A.B. ;
Adolf M. Karlsen, O.S. ; Carl H. J. Been, fireman ;
Axel Johansen, O.S.; Karl Brynildsen, fireman.

The Norwegian Lapp Savio, born 1877; well
known for his faithful character, hardihood, and
intelligence,

The Norwegian Lapp Must, born 1877; like
Savio, an experienced snow-shoe runner.

The second
шасе Was а
real descendant
from the old
-Vikings. About
ORM 3 in. in
height, he was
proportionately
broad, with
long muscular
arms, while
his walk, by
Fonstantly
moving on a
ship’s deck, had
become similar
to that of the
penguins. Не
Bad seen a _
c SI NEU E ID MN
hard life in^ Bu E
the Arctic, which was marked in his weather-
beaten face. He would tell numerous and inter-
esting tales of the Arctic regions. Не was on

D 2


MN


20 British Antarctic Expedition.


the Jason when Nansen was landed on the pack
at Greenland. He had taken a part in the fight
against the ice in the North, as he had. to fight
with me against the Antarctic ice-pack; but besides
this he had had fights of a warmer kind when he, in
former days, returned from the North with his Viking
comrades, and landed in some town on the coast of
Norway, having in their pockets a small fraction of
the value of that blubber which they, through risking
their lives, had brought on board, and of the skins of
seals which had cost them many a frozen finger.
Having had a hard time for months at such work, it
was not to be wondered at that he and his fellows had
a gay time the first evening on shore, and woe
to those who crossed the path of these Vikings
from the icy regions when they, in delight at
their return, went their way through the small
town, where probably one feeble policeman was
supposed to keep everyone in order, including
these sailors, whose extravagant frivolities richly
deserved all that sympathy and forbearance which
they generally received.

Once, he told me, they had returned from a
very successful sealing expedition, where they had
worked hard in dragging the seal skins into large
heaps on the ice, while the captain came along with
the vessel in the open channels and picked up the
great heaps dotted about on the ice-fields. They
had all this fresh in mind, and so had their gallant
captain, who, also in celebration of their success, had
sought some well-earned comfort from Bacchus in
his quarter of the town. Singing and laughing these
descendants of the Vikings proceeded through the


Introductory. 21


small Norwegian village, with its wooden houses on
both sides of the road, when suddenly an unusually
corpulent policeman appeared on the scene. Assisted
by the strict citizen contingent of the village he
endeavoured to subdue the happy band. Thereupon
a general quarrel began, which culminated in a free


JOHANSEN, OLSEN.


IN THE ENGINE-ROOM.


fight, until the happy young captain appeared on
the scene. Seeing his sealers in full work, he called
out, “ That's right, lads, kill, skin, and drag-in-heap ;
Ill come round with the vessel!" This just had
the desired effect, both parties indulging in a peaceful
laugh.

Such is the character of a typical Norwegian
Arctic sealer, rough but true, and brave as a lion; he


22 British Antarctic Expedition.


does not know the meaning. of the word “fear.”
I had twenty-one of such men who helped me to
success.

The chief engineer was a man of great ability,
and also of a great family, the former quality very
desirable for the latter blessing. A better engineer
it would be difficult to find, and with special interest
and care for the welfare of the boilers, he worked
away with a will, which generally left. him at a
temperature similar to these (his Arotégés), when the
steam in them was at full pressure. He was a
Norwegian, and he must needs be acknowledged to
have contributed greatly to the success of the ex-
pedition.

Although I had theoretically organised the enter-
prise years before, and had one year to fit out my
expedition, I found that there was a tremendous
labour before me ere the Southern Cross, with
officers, crew, provisions, instruments, sledge-dogs and
travelling gear, all lay ready for the arduous task, in
St. Katharines Dock in London.

When at last all was ready H.R.H. The Duke of
York presented the expedition with a Union Jack.


DEPARTURE FROM CHRISTIANIA.
From Afterposten, July 30th, 1898.


"On board the South Polar vessel Southern
Cross, a solemn and appropriate function ‘took place
to-day. The British Union Jack was hoisted. At
2 р.м. Mr. Borchgrevink gave a lunch on board.
All the members of the Government were invited.
The British Consul-General, the Professors at the


MEME ng


Moe


Introductory. po


University, the Mayor of the town, and Mr. Borch-
grevink's family, as well as representatives of the
Press and a great many interested in Polar research,
were on board. A steam launch brought the guests
out to the Southern Cross. Lunch was served on
the quarter-deck. First of all Mr. Borchgrevink
welcomed the guests, after which he proposed the
toast of ‘Queen Victoria, which was responded to
with three cheers. The Consul-General, the Hon.
S. Dundas, returned thanks for the toast, and said
that, although the flag was English, the commander
of the expedition was a Norwegian. The vessel
was built in Norway, and was at the present time
in Norwegian waters; he therefore found it appro-
priate, in returning the toast of ‘Mr. Borchgrevink,’ to
ask everybody to drink to the health of ‘ King Oscar,
tre Science King.’

"Arner ths the Union Jack, the sift of H.R.H.
the Duke of York, was hoisted under salute and
cheers. Then His Excellency Minister Lovenskiold
spoke for Mr. Borchgrevink and his wife, and said
how much the Norwegians would have liked to
see the expedition go under their own flag. He
felt, however, that some of the honour also belonged
to Norway. It was two sea-faring nations who co-
operated in this expedition—two nations who were
accustomed to success at sea. Then he addressed
some few words to the commander, and said that,
while he wished luck and success to the enterprise,
he would not forget her who was to sit and wait
alone at home, and hoped that the Almighty might
protect him and his wife. The speech was received
with cheers. The Mayor of the town spoke for


24 British Antarctic Expedition.


the Southern Cross, and prophesied that as the
constellation Southern Cross was shining brightly
in the South, so would the name of the vessel
in time to come shine like a star in the Northern
Hemisphere."


After a voyage of five days the Southern Cross
entered St. Katharine's Dock, in London, where most
of the provisions and outfit was taken on board, and
here the English members of the expedition joined
me Delore we-left Sir George Newnes gave a
farewell luncheon on board, of which the Zvimes gave
the following report on August 2oth, 1898 :—


SIR GEORGE NEWNESS LUNCHEON on BOARD THE
% SOUTHERN CROSS


From the Zimes, August 20th, 1898.


“Within the next three days the Southern Cross
will start on her voyage to Hobart Town, and
yesterday a numerous company accepted the invitation
of Sir G. Newnes to luncheon on board, and to
give a hearty 'send off' to Mr. Borchgrevink and
his companions.

“The preparations are nearly complete. The
deck of the barque was crowded with sledges,
kayaks, snow-shoes, ice-axes, and stores and imple-
ments of all kinds, a large space being occupied by
nearly one hundred Samoyed dogs for sledging
purposes.

" Among the guests were Admiral Sir E. Omman-
ney, Mr. W. Ridley Richardson, Mr. Borchgrevink,
Mrs. Borchgrevink, Sir Guyer Hunter, Captain Tom-


Introductory. 25


kins, Captain Brooke Greville, Mr. Fieldhouse, Mr.
E. Hudson, Dr. Mill, Dr. Bowdler Sharpe, and Mr.
F. Newnes.

"After the toasts of “The Queen and ‘King
Oscar, from whose subjects a large proportion of
the crew are engaged,

*Dr. Mill proposed success to the expedition,


“SOUTHERN CROSS” IN ST. KATHARINE'S DOCK.


which was about to undertake a work of international
importance. It was a reproach to human enterprise
that there were parts of this ridiculously small earth
that civilised man had never reached, and never
attempted to reach, and this reproach, in so far as
it referred to the Antarctic regions, the munificence
of Sir George Newnes, combined with the courage
of Mr. Borchgrevink, would, he hoped, remove.


26 British Antarctic Expedition.


Mr. Borchgrevink had already shown that he could
do good work as an explorer, and that was recognised
three years ago when the International Geographical
Congress passed a resolution to the effect that it
would be a misfortune if the nineteenth century
should close without an effort to explore the Ant-
arctic regions. Alone and unaided Sir George
Newnes had fitted out the present expedition, from
which great results might be expected, possibly
not results of sensational interest, but of enduring
value for geographical science. In the name of
British geographers he wished the expedition God
speed, useful work, and a safe and quick return.
(Cheers.)

* Admiral Sir E. Ommanney expressed his interest
in the object and admiration of the equipment of the
expedition.

“Mr. Borchgrevink said he was grateful to the
man who had helped him in this endeavour to accom-
plish the object of his ambition. He hoped to be
worthy of that confidence, and sailing under a British
flap presented by the Duke of York, he would be
mindful of the British naval motto :—' England
expects еуегу man to do his duty. (Cheers.)

* Sir George Newnes said it was difficult on the
crowded deck, and amid all the dock noise, to prolong
the proceedings, and the heat almost induced a wish
for Antarctic regions. (Laughter) Не had or
intended any public function on the starting of the
expedition, remembering that putting on the armour
was not the time for boasting, and he would rather
have waited until the vessel returned and those on
board could say they had done the world some service.


Introductory. 27


He would avoid saying much. No doubt the possi-
bilities of the expedition were enormous, and he
reminded them of the paper read this year before the
Кети босегу by Dr. Murray on ‘The scientific
advantages . of an Antarctic expedition, Many
eminent men declared their opinion that the thing
ought to be done, and if the Royal Geographical
Society undertook the task, Mr. Borchgrevink would
be glad if they. followed his excellent example. Не
took the opportunity to say that Mr. Borchgrevink
and himself had received every courtesy at the hands
of the Royal Geographical Society. The reasons of
the expedition he would not go into. The scientific
reasons were so obvious, and had been so much
ОШООО that all who Баа studied the subject
would admit the possibilities were enormous, and
there might be a commercial side to them. (Hear,
hear) At the meeting of the Royal Society the
opinion was expressed that a big whaler should
be selected and fitted out with the best modern
appliances, and that was exactly what had been
done, with the best crew experience could select.
How long the Southern Cross would be away
could not, of course, be foreseen, but he hoped that
tidings would reach England in six months, and that
in the year 1900 he would welcome Mr. Borchgrevink
on his return. It was generally known that a Belgian
expedition under Captain Gerlache had gone out in
another direction, and was last heard of at the
Falkland Islands. It had been thought possible that
the expedition was in trouble and Sir Clements
Markham had suggested that the Southern Cross
should go to the Falkland Islands in search of them.


28 British Antarctic Expedition.


After giving the fullest consideration to this, he
thought that to go to the Falkland Islands would
be a mistake. Captain Gerlache had knowledge of
the route of the Southern Cross, and would try to
meet Mr. Borchgrevink, who, of course, acknow-
ledged the first duty to humanity, and would put
everything else aside to assist Captain Gerlache.
He hoped. he expressed the feeling of al езеш
as he felt sure he did of thousands throughout
the country, that kind thoughts would follow
Mr. Borchgrevink and his gallant companions, in
the hope and belief that they would triumphantly
return, having done something the world would
call heroic. (Cheers)

“Dr. Bowdler Sharpe said the keenest ши
and sympathy was felt at the British Museum in the
expedition, and he bore testimony to the high
qualifications of Mr. Nikolai Hanson, one of the
zoologists on the staff.

"Sir Guyer Hunter in proposing the health of
Mrs. Borchgrevink, said she might comfort herself
with the assurance that all that human foresight
and experience could suggest had been done to
secure the success and safe return of the Southern
Cross.

“The proceedings closed with the singing of the
* National Anthem.' "

Farewell telegrams with good wishes were re-
ceived from all parts of the world—from scientific
societies as well as from private individuals inter-
ested in Antarctic research.


Introductory. 29


DEPARTURE SCENES.
From the Westminster Gazette, August 23rd, 1898.


“It was just half-past four o'clock yesterday
afternoon when the Southern Cross glided out of
ihe gates of St. Katharines Dock. Опсе in the
main stream she swept as gracefully as a swan in
and out among the busy craft that filled the Thames.
In appearance the ship was as gay as a ladybird—her
black hull shone like a mirror; from deck to mast
floated a stream of bunting, whilst from the mainmast
flew the Union Jack, the gift of H.R.H. the Duke of
York ; the foremast bore the Norwegian flag, and the
mizzen-boom that of the pilot.

* As she passed down the river she was greeted
by an orchestra of whistles, some with notes as full
of music as those of the nightingale, others with only
the croak of a rook, but from the siren of the
biggest liner down to that of the oiliest, tiniest,
barge tug, all joined in ‘Hip, hip, hurrah!’

“And all the time that the down-river voyage
lasted the whistles kept up the inciting melody. At
Greenwich the waterside was crowded; there were
cheers and counter cheers, and as the Southern
Cross passed the boys’ training ships every yard
was manned; bands played, and the bugle cry
sounded its greeting from the topmast stay, and, to
make the harmony quite complete, a good number of
the ninety picked Siberian dogs on board took up the
chorus. To tempt fair weather always to surround
the ship three of the crew had fixed their chests of
clothes up in the cross-trees ; and for yesterday after-
noon at least the charm worked, for the sun shone


30 British Antarctic Expedition.


all down the route, till one of the most remarkable
sunsets happened that has been seen on the Thames
for many a day. The west was a sheet of crimson
gold, and the river a sheet of fire. The moon rose
pale and silvery, then the stars came out in a crowd ;
up went tite
lights, the bright
white on the
foremast and
the red light
on the larboard,
and the green
light on ihe
starboard. The
craft он тс
river lost form ;
their lights only
were visible—a
great mysterious
crowd of  will-
o'-the-wisps.
Gravesend was
approached at
8.15, and it was
decided to coal
“AT LAST ALL WAS-READY.? at fme. imul.

So the Southern

Cross took up her station, and black diamonds
began to rattle aboard. Three or four boatmen
now came alongside, and the few friends who
had to. go on shore crept down the side of the
ship into the boats, and with them some four of the
younger men of the expedition, for there is to be a


Introductory. 21


last breaking of bread (at least for some time) in the
Mother Country.

“The Clarence, close by the pilot's landing pier,
is the rendezvous selected ; and here we sit down to
a supper of cold roast beef and foaming ale. There
are toasts, and everybody wishes that the young men
may live to grow grey beards and often to shake


“THE LAST BOX WITH PROVISIONS HAD BEEN BROUGHT
ON BOARD.”


hands across the table-cloth again and again in good
fellowship. The leave on shore is for one hour only.

“At 9.50 we rise from the table, and leave those
who have mothers and fathers and little sisters to bid
au revoirs in quiet corners where even the stars do
not reach. It is only three minutes to the pier. At
the gateway the young explorers tread on English
soil for the last time for many months to come. We


32 British Antarctic Expedition.


go down to the pier with its pilots lolling there on the
seats on the look-out for ships to come and ships to
go. One member of the expedition hangs behind—
the mother has to say good-bye to her only boy in
England—and we wait and wait on the landing, and
we talk of home, of our hopes, and of home-coming.
Everyone is as full of spirits as a cricket.


* GOD-SPEED AND A SAFE RETURN."


“The Southern Cross sounds her whistle again
and again to tell the ‘boys’ to come aboard; at last
there is a footfall on the pier. We are all present.
The waterman says ' Now, gentlemen, please, and
down the steps of the landing-stage in file they go.
‘Shove her off the mud—keep her away, are the
words. 'Good luck! Au revoir! Bon voyage!'
we cry There is a dip of omis, thronom he
reflections of the green, red and white lights of the


Introductory. 33


next landing stage she passes, and then disappears
mito the nicht. Ihe lights of the ships reflect in
the Thames like a myriad of floating stars, and
away in the distance above, and more brilliant than
them all, glows the white light on the foremast of
the Southern Cross.

* Before the morning is here the good ship will
have gone down the river, and possibly by to-morrow
night will have for the time being had her last


* THE YARDS WERE MANNED FOR US."


glimpse of the white cliffs of Albion. Most cordial
wishes go with all on board. May they all reach
that goodly age of fourscore years and ten when men
would sleep in Abraham's bosom!”

When the shores of Old England had disap-
peared, and the Southern Cross rose and fell in the
Atlantic swell, we lived it all over again ; those last
moments of departure from London stood more
clearly before us then than reality had a week before.

D


34 British Antarctic Expedition.


Again the cheers for the Queen, for the Union
Jack and for Sir George Newnes, seemed to rise
like a mighty wave from thousands of enthusiastic
Britons; again the Southern Cross wound her way
from the dock into the Thames, into that road
towards victory and prosperity.

Again we saw the black mass of spectators on


“GREETED FROM THE YARDS AS WE PASSED.”


the enormous gallery on Tower Bridge, as their
voices gradually grew fainter as we glided into new
greetings of farewell at every turn of the river.

* God-speed! A happy return” rang again in our
ears.

The bugles of the Warspite, Cornwall, and
Arethusa sounded again, and yet again we saw
the bluejackets as they manned the yards for us.

Then all melted away in the glorious sunset of


Introductory. 35


August 22nd, 1898. Towers, buildings, chimneys,
masts, London went with the sun; but in every new
glorious sunset we saw it all once more.

During the first few days we were in the Channel
most of us were busily storing away provisions in
the ship’s hold, while others like sad spendthrifts
had to throw provisions overboard—their offerings
to Neptune!

It was fortu-
nate for us that
' the fine weather
prevailed, for
our decks were
covered with
Pees, ropes,
casks, odds and
ends, etc, апа
where there was
nothing else * BUT IN EVERY NEW GLORIOUS SUNSET WE

there would be. SAW IT ALL ONCE MORE."

a sledge dog

from Greenland growling in his Esquimo bark at his
brethren from Siberia, until all eighty, regardless of
nationality, joined in one penetrating Arctic volapuk
as harmonious as a concert of the Powers.

The cabins were full of instruments and books.
All the staff were busy and working with a will in
storing away; but, nevertheless, first one member
and then another would stop his work while his
thoughts flew back homewards, home! Never,
maybe, was that word mentioned more tenderly than
just when the “ boys” of the Sovéhern Cross saw the
last of England’s cliffs sink into the rolling ocean.

D2


36 British Antarctic Expedition.


As soon as the vessel had left London, my
scientific staff, like the crew, had to take their part
of hard work when necessary ; they helped in getting
up and setting the sails, painting the vessel, arranging
boxes, tarring the netting on sledges, giving a hand
with the dogs, and at all times making themselves
useful and growing into the life and custom on board,
Thus I had an opportunity to study the physique
and character of everyone on board at an early stage
of the Expedition. Any work, if ever so hard, was
done without a murmur by my staff, and I found
that, the (aet that all bad to take their part
materially helped to make things smooth and pleasant
in the life on board. As soon as we left Hobart
every one of my staff had to take a watch with the
other officers on board, thereby doing excellent
service in the look-out for icebergs, and also
gradually hardening themselves for the life which
lay before them. It was promising to see the
members of my scientific staff at one time with
hands and faces black with tar, and presently
clean, and working with the most delicate instru-
ments, or carefully working out observations just
taken. It is clear that in a vessel with thirty-one
men, the ordinary routine of ship discipline must
be kept up, but still, on special oecon they
were permitted to mix freely all) over tle vessel
From time to time concerts were given, when the
staff as well as the crew took part in the entertain-
ments. Amongst the crew a very good quartette
was formed, and our concerts were by no means on
the level which might be expected from an ordinary
ships crew. Of course, very many of those who


Introductory. ey


nominally acted as ordinary seamen were men of
considerable mental training. There were no less
than five navigators in the forecastle alone, who held
their mate’s certificates; and cons dering that there
were also six navigating officers aft—two of whom
had captain's certificates — I think it will be seen
that possible accidents со one or more of the


“EVERY ONE HAD TO MAKE HIMSELF USEFUL.”


navigators were provided for. At the entertainments
given aft in the cabin, recitations were also given,
both in English and Norwegian; and the Finns,
with their characteristic earnestness, sang long
Lappish songs, either of a stern religious strain, or
of the hottest love-songs of Finnmarken. Those
evenings were pleasant, and on such occasions
everyone indulged in reveries, and thoughts went


38 British Antarctic Expedition.


back to the homes in the North. I gave personally
some lectures, both on board and from time to time
on shore.


IN THE N.E. TRADES.


The day before we reached Madeira, and before
we sighted land, a small African pigeon settled first
in the rigging and, later on, on the bulwark, some
forty feet away from the bridge where Mr. Hanson
and myself were standing. We had just been
practising shooting at a target under difficulties, with
the vessel moving in a high swell. Both because we
desired to secure the pigeon as a specimen, and
because of the sport, Mr. Hanson and I quickly
decided that we should have every second shot as the
chances came when the pigeon settled, with a smal
pea-rifle at hand. When the pigeon settled on the
bulwark I had my first chance ; quickly I took aim


Introductory. 39


and fired, and I need not say that it was through
considerable luck the pigeon dropped dead on the
spot without a movement, which fact alone prevented
it from falling overboard at once. I succeeded in
getting it before the strong movement of the vessel
had caused it to roll overboard, and found, after
careful investigation, that the bullet had just merely
touched the upper part of its skull, so slightly that
some few feathers only had been disordered, while
the bullet had just made impression enough on the
bone of the skull to kill the bird instantaneously. I
was glad that
another pigeon
Ud not arrive
for me to prove
that there was
no luck in my
first shot!

Arriving at
Miadecira the
commander of
H.I.M. man-of-
war 4D Nixie
called on me
En board the
Southern Cross
23 visit which
I was pleased
fy return the
next day, as well
as paying my official visit to Her Britannic Majesty’s
Consul-General in Funchal.

My staff were delighted to get on shore. They


CALM WEATHER.


40 British Antarctic Expedition.


rushed down the mountain side in the well-known
carros, and on one occasion they went for a ride on
horses of different heights, and looked very comical


“DOG OVERBOARD !”


as they galloped off for a day’s enjoyment. One of
the members, who had a very small horse, had to
keep his knees uncomfortably near his ears to avoid
touching the ground, and I believe, had it not been
for the dignity of the thing, he would have walked.

The dogs gave much trouble, but much entertain-
ment, on the outward voyage. It is no joke to have
ninety savage beasts from Siberia and Greenland on
the deck of a vessel of only 276 tons, when, besides
the dogs, thirty-one men have to move about. By
the noise they made, whether in a quarrel or while
singing sentimentally in chorus to the big moon in


Introductory. 41


the tropics, these faithful companions of ours often
tried the tempers of the members of the Expedition
beyond control. However, it was remarkable to see
how already early in the voyage certain dogs took
to certain men, and in their leisure hours you could
see some of the members selecting a quiet corner
underneath the boat, on the top of a barrel, or on
the anchor in the forecastle, quietly petting their
favourite dog. Zema, the finest dog of the pack,
was only six months old when we started from
London, and was a dog of extraordinary intelligence.
Hardy, and with the characteristic courage of his
race, he was, besides, a more than ordinarily well-


“ ALL EIGHTY, REGARDLESS OF NATIONALITY, JOINED IN ONE
PENETRATING ARCTIC VOLAPUK."


proportioned and beautiful dog. Of colour like a
wolf, yellowish-grey with the fur black at the end,
black points, and magnificent dark brown eyes, he


i м.


е


42 British Antarctic Expedition.


soon became the favourite of everyone on board,
and was one of those few dogs which were allowed
on the quarter-deck. This he very soon realised,
and whenever one of the other dogs, not privileged,
happened to intrude on the quarter-deck, he was
beside himself with indignation. In spite of the
notice which throughout was taken of this dog,
he was never spoilt, and turned out one of our
best sledge dogs. To me he became devoted,
and innumerable are those stories which I could
tell of his unselfish way of showing his faithfulness.
All ninety were named, and it was remarkable to
notice how they came to know their own names.

Subjoined is a list of some of the names of the
dogs, together with the weights of a few :—


Ibs. Ibs.

Zembla. з. 28 Olo мш. А7
Burman (Norwegian Ehe Shake. 5 s. 3
dk dos): o > 52 The Wolk . 2
Fog So dine Howler: -28
зорро 2 Пе Cook c A
Diggal 39 51 Hunter... т
Old Boy . бл Jacks Ат
Bunny Кас 265 МЕК л
Squibss- we 28 Minders ^. бА
docto TT mM Pho o o 3 49
Black Bellow. So Bear с AN
Biat Beat у. Baumo = o
MUS 20-0 и pars оос —
Gea ле Sakko и
(Сара 4. 2. 32 Век
ае Воб 52 Ноне. a=
Chap 0 Вена 9 o
Dark  Greenlanc 06 GG —
bitch ao e Db мее =
Grey Greenland Samsohb о =


Бей у 58 ги


Introductory. 43


Ibs. lbs.
The Watchman . — N ==
ВЕ С ra 150 ME АЕН
ео ad oe — nne . ==


Nansock . . . —


Most of these names seemed to settle upon the
dogs without any special christening ceremony, and,
as a rule, the Finns, who looked after the dogs, hit


(BIRDS FOLLOWED IN OUR TRACK.”


upon names familiar to them at home. On the out-
ward voyage in the heat we had considerable trouble
in keeping most of them alive. They suffered greatly
through the heat, and several of them died; and
the smell and discomfort which those ninety dogs
caused on board will not easily be realised by any
one but those who followed the expedition. We
had to stretch awnings over them in the daytime,


44 British Antarctic Expedition.


and keep the awnings continually wet to make it
somewhat cooler for them. In heavy weather they
were constantly wet, and the salt water caused them


SANTA CRUZ,


a skin disease, so the doctor had his: hands full
on the outward journey to get them over the line
alive.

The cook, like the rest, had his favourite dog. I
do not know whether the cook selected the dog, or
the dog the cook ; anyhow the dog showed consider-
able judgment in his preference of a master. He
seemed to know on which side his bread was buttered,
and the cook buttered it for him. They grew very
devoted to each other, to the great amusement of the
sailors, who delighted in playing practical jokes on
the two: hiding the dog in the most unexpected
places, and telling the cook that the dog had fallen


Introductory. A5


overboard, while they delighted in the cooks ill-
concealed grief.

At Madeira a grey parrot joined us which was
supposed, alas, to talk Portuguese ; so in the beginning
we did not know whether he was speaking that
language, or the natural language from his happy
home in the jungle in Africa. However, the talented
bird very quickly picked up some of the roughest
jokes which he could find in the forecastle.

The meals were, of course, great events. Then
all the members came together, and as a rule the time
went pleasantly. In spite of having a Norwegian


ON PALMY SHORES,


cook, the English members kept well. His cooking
was good with the exception of his puddings, which
were both food and ballast all in one. One of the


46 British Antarctic Expedition.


members spitefully remarked when the pudding
appeared once on the day of a heavy gale, and when
the vessel was heeling over heavily, ‘Cook, place
the pudding to
windwa кеи.
The cook obedi-
ently followed
the advice, but
a week later he
had discovered
the point and
was offended.

We called at
Santa Cruz ane
St Vincent, sat
which latter
place we took in
coal. My staff
went on shore
and several
photos were
taken. Just be-
fore the Southern Cross departed several of the
British residents paid a visit on board and looked
at our sledges, dogs and outfit with great interest,
and wished us a hearty farewell. ;

Like ordinary vessels crossing the Equator, the
Southern Cross was visited by Neptune. Tall, and
with a long grey beard, he came up over the bows,
dripping wet and with a spear in his hand. A
crown he had on his head, and he was followed
by his courtiers and the necessary officials for the
christening of those who had not before crossed the


REBECCA AT THE WELL AT ST. VINCENT.


Introductory. 47


Equator. A mermaid, who was introduced as his
wife, also put in an appearance: it was Mr. Evans,
who, in light draperies, charmed everybody as Mrs.
Neptune, and leant tenderly on her husband, who,
6ft. зіп. in his socks (or rather out of his socks) beat
his better half by an inch. After them came the men
with the shaving pot, the barber with his razor,
which measured three feet, and the necessary
attendants for holding those who were to be
christened by Neptune during the soaping in with
lamp-soot and oil. One man in a fantastic costume


IN SUMMER SEAS.


resembling a porpoise, worked a hand-organ with
great energy. On the quarter-deck a big tank filled
with water had been placed in such a way that it


48 British Antarctic Expedition.


could only be seen by those who had crossed the “line”
before. A movable seat was placed on the edge of
this tank, where the Doctor, the first to be honoured


by Neptune
was placed.
Neptune


then produced
a large and im-
portant-looking
document which
he; bv ihe ligat
of a torch, read
with a deep and
CUM ptesot VE
vote IG tan as
follows :—

* Unworthy land-lubbers who want to go too far,
do you not know that the Zze must be drawn
somewhere? and I have drawn it here! Without my
permission you may not cross it, but as I know you
are going to the furthermost part of my dominion,
in fact to the Antarctic Regions, from where I have
not for more than half a century had any news, I
will let you pass when you have submitted to the
necessary formalities. І hope that at some future
time you may be here again, when you, with a cargo
of knowledge, again turn homewards towards the
North. Then I expect to come on board pump the
vessel, and take with me some of your treasures.”

This. over, the Doctors. face жиз quickly
smothered with lamp-soot and oil with a large
brush. The ‘‘barber” caught him by the nose, and
the large wooden razor was drawn down his cheeks,


* WE PASSED CLOSE TO THE ‘COUNTY OF
KINROSS/ AND SPOKE HER."


Introductory. 49


then, caught by the legs by the proper official, he
went head first backwards into the tank. When he
after some trouble was fished out, the next one, who
in the meantime had not seen these proceedings,
was placed on a seat and put through, and so on
until all had passed muster before Neptune. As it
was beautifully clear we spent a gay and memorable
, evening. Songs were sung, toasts drunk, and both
` Neptune and his wife departed as happy as those
who had been for the first time soaped, shaved,
and washed at the Equator.

Fair weather prevailed nearly throughout this
voyage фо
Hobart, where
we arrived
ninety-eight
days after our
departure from
London.

We dropped
anchor at Ad-
venture “Bay
shortly after
dank cleared
up the vessel,
fixed our steam
launch, and all
made ourselves
ready to appear
ас our best
when going up to Hobart. Half way up the
Hobart Fjord we were met by small steamers
and boats with a display of bunting. A swift little

E


* COUNTY OF KINROSS.”


|
{
і
i
]


50 British Antarctic Expedition.


white Government launch with the Harbour Master
and Mr. Alexander Morton, F.R.S.Tas., Curator of
the Hobart Museum, on board, was the first to come
alongside. The reception we received in Hobart was
kindness itself. Everyone, from the Governor, Lord
Gormanston, and the Government officials downwards,
all tried to make our stay as interesting and enjoyable


ALWAYS SOUTHWARDS.


as possible. His Excellency presided at a conver-
sazione which was arranged in honor of our arrival,
and welcomed us officially in the warmest of terms.

During our stay in Hobart, the Finns Per Savio
and Ole Must, in their original and comical kilts and
remarkable Finn boots with the straw sticking out at
the tops, had rather a good time. They were rather
handsome fellows, and great favourites with the fair


Introductory. E


sex; in fact, during the time they were staying in
London before our departure for the South, I lived
in constant anxiety for the welfare of these children
of nature. I expected any day to see them involved
in some breach of promise case, or other complication.
In Hobart, however, things seemed to run smoothly,
and the Finns enjoyed themselves thoroughly.

The day before we left I placed a large wreath
at the foot of the statue of Sir John Franklin in
Franklin Square. The wreath was composed of
laurels, ivy leaves and white lily blooms ; with the
wreath was placed a card bearing the following
inscription—* A tribute to the memory of Sir John
Enn КЕ KN KCH., Lieut.-Governor of
Tasmania, 1837-43, from the Commander and
members of the British Antarctic Expedition, 1898.


* Not here: the white North has thy bones; and thou,
Heroic sailor soul,
Art passing on thine happier voyage now
Toward no earthly pole."


CHAPTER M.
From HOBART TO SOUTH Vicroria LAND.


AFTER a fortnight's stay in Hobart we left for
Adventure Bay, cheered by thousands of people on
the main pier of Hobart. Our live stock on board
was now augmented by some sheep, a pig, and a
big bullock, the latter being a present from Mr. Gray,
living at Adventure Bay.

As we left Adventure Bay on the roth December,
1898, we saw a shoal of porpoises; there must have
been over one hundred of them; it was the biggest
shoal of them I ever saw. Then we let loose the
two first carrier pigeons (of which we had taken a
supply on board), with Christmas greetings for Hobart.
At eight o'clock in the evening the coast of Tasmania
was just sinking in the mist at the horizon, and we
steamed towards the south, towards our work, and
towards our fate. Bright, calm weather prevailed
during the first days southward. Not before the
24th December were we able to proceed by sails
only. The days went pleasantly, each member busy
in his own department laying his plans for his modus
operandi. The Zoologist, Mr. Hanson, whenever
opportunity occurred, secured specimens of the fauna.

Some few birds followed our track. There were
two kinds, the short-tailed albatross and the mutton-


From Hobart to South Victoria Land. 53


bird. On the 20th the short-tailed albatross was no
more to be seen; but the Dromeda Exulans and the
mutton-birds were plentiful. Besides these were
the little white-bellied petrel and the Prion Vittatus.


TAKING A SIGHT.


On the 21st we saw, besides the birds above
mentioned, some  zomeda Melanophrys. On the
22nd there were no birds at all to see. On the 23rd
some Diomeda Fxulans and also some Prion Vittatus
were seen. On the 24th no petrels were seen. We
now saw some Dromeda Luliginosa and Melanophrys,


54 British Antarctic Expedition.


as also а lestris. On the 26th we saw some Diomeda
Chlororhyncha, and a few penguins. Mr. Evans
reported that he had seen some whales early in his
morning watch. On the 28th, besides the ordinary
birds, a giant bird and a small white-bellied petrel
followed us; a mutton-bird also appeared again ;
there were also a few sooty albatrosses. The birds
followed us now all the night. On the 29th some
few mutton-
birds were
seen, some
Diomeda Me-
lanophrys, as
also Prion
WEEE BEDS
Phe latter
were in far
greater quan-
tities than I
had ever seen
HANSON WITH THE LARGE ALBATROSS them before.
(Diomeda exulans). On the 30th
we saw eight
different kinds of birds, but of seven of these we only
saw one specimen of each; they were: Diomeda Ful-
ginosa, Diomeda Melanophrys, Daption Capensis, Astre-
lata Lessont, Prion Vittatus, Cymodroma Grallaria,
and Oceanites Oceamzcus.

The Daption Capensis was in the midst of
moulting and was flying with some difficulty. The
specimen of the Oceanites Oceanicus was flying round
the vessel several times, and sometimes straight into
the rigging. We passed some drift-ice, and in the


cidit qii ES TS


From Hobart to South Victoria Land. 55


evening we entered the pack. Here two new birds
appeared, one quite grey, and the other white under-
neath, greyish brown above, and a white border on
the extremities of the wings. Both were about the
size of the Daption Capensis.

On the 30th December, 1898, when the Southern
Cross first struck the scouts of Antarctic ice-pack,
n Ol GO >, and lone. 153° 55' E., it was some-
what sooner
pham IL ex-
pected. There
was,of course,
reason to be-
lieve that we
sicud en-
Counter ice
early on the
southward
voyage by
going so far
west, and par-
ticularlyat the
point chosen,
where my experiences from 1894-5 justified such
anticipation ; but still the appearance of the first pack
took me by surprise at the latitude where we met it,
and in the beginning I took it as a promising sign
of early Antarctic spring. [Interested as I naturally
have been in the controversy between my predecessor,
Sir James Clark Ross, and Captain Wilkes, in regard
to the land reported by the latter, and anxious to be
enabled to judge for myself the cause of Captain
Wilkes' mistake, I purposely took that course, although


AN OCEAN VISITOR.


56 British Antarctic Expedition.


I knew there would probably be much and heavy
ice about Balleny which might cause a delay in the
progress of the Southern Cross. To me it seems clear
that it was Balleny which Captain Wilkes saw, and
while underrating his distance from this group, he
judged it to be a new land discovered.

After we had entered the ice I let some four


“TT GREW COLDER.”


pigeons fly, with messages and a number on a ring,
placed on their legs. Two of these came back after
three days’ absence; the fourth, the strongest of the
lot I let go, remained away for a week, then it came
back in a very low condition, and I had to kill it.

It was an anxious but interesting moment in the
crow's nest as I watched the vessel as she rose on the
swelling ocean and dashed in among the grinding
ice-blocks. Trembling and shaking she trod her way


From Hobart to South Victoria Land. 57


onwards, while the swell grew rapidly less as we
successfully fought our way forwards into the inner
ice-pack. Captain Jensen and myself took entire
charge of this
ісе naviga-
tiom Great
was the en-
thusiasm
amongstthose
on board who
saw Antarctic
pack for the
first time.

To crawl
up in. the
crow’s nest at
the top of the
main-mast when you are dressed in Arctic fur and
mittens on your hands is not so easily done as writing
the description down. Whether the vessel at the
time moves in a heavy swell, or is shaking under
the pressure of the ice-screw, considerable caution
must be used. All ropes and stays are covered with
ice, your mittens stick to the ropes, and if care is not
used you might lese your hold while the mittens are
left sticking to the ropes. When you then try to
avoid the danger by climbing without the mittens on,
your hands get stiff and hard in a minute, and the
chance of your dropping to the deck is greater than
nob last approach to the crows nest is by
a ladder running from the head of the under-
mast outwards, and you literally hang on to the
rungs of the ladder, suspended, as it were, in mid-


ANXIOUS HOURS IN THE CROW’S NEST.


58 British Antarctic Expedition.


air. You arrive at the bottom of the cask, which
moves on hinges, which you have to lift up. This
bottom acts both as a floor and as a trap-door. You
lift it up with your head, catch hold of a frozen
icy rope with a knot in the end made fast to the
upper end of the crow’s nest ; by dint of pulling and
shoving you squeeze yourself and your fur through
the narrow passage, shut the door under you, which
then forms the floor, and like a minor god you look
down upon the miserable little world below. How-
ever, it is from the crow’s nest that you get a proper
view of Antarctic scenery. You see the ice as it
closes and opens far out towards the horizon, where
the sky and ice seem to meet, while here and there
icebergs are floating about in halos of the most
dazzling pink and crimson. You have the delight-
ful feeling of all depending upon your correct
judgment for the
safety of the
vessel, and . for
progress among
the grinding ice-
bergs. At places
the channels be-
tween the ice-
floes are blocked
by broad or nar-
row isthmuses of


SLACK ICE IN THE PACK.


: sel is not able
to work her way ; then you back her with the engines
into the open space behind where you have already
cleared your road, then by telegraph from the


ісе, and the ves- ·


[ЕИ ОШ tebart to South Victoria Land. 59


cask to the engine-room in the depths below you
give the signal, “ Full speed ahead,” and swiftly the
Southern Cross would wind her way through
the icy water towards the ice-block. With a crash
her steel-covered bows ram into the barrier. Great
green blocks of ice rear on end, overturn and plunge


FROM THE CROW’S NEST.


against her fortified sides, while the entire crew |
watch the magnificent spectacle from the forecastle.
The ship shivers, and the shock is felt tremendously
in the crow’s nest. But often this ramming has to be
repeated several times before the vessel again runs
into an open channel by which she can proceed on
her way. The shape of the Southern Cross, her
weight, her magnificent engines, all helped her


60 British Antarctic Expedition.


through, and were, indeed, necessary if she should
not have been caught or crushed. When ramming
in hard ice she was often momentarily stuck when
the ice “barrier. proved too hard, but she never
stopped abruptly, and her bows, which sloped off in
an appropriate gradient, rose out of the ocean, and
thus gradually equalised the tremendous strain which


VIEW FROM THE CROW’S NEST.


the impact brought upon her. The roar and noise
in the forecastle as the ice-pack rubbed up against
the vessel’s sides was deafening, and well I remember
from my first experiences within the Antarctic Circle
the difficulties of a sleep, even if tired out by hard
work.

Such moments were anxious ones for those who
had not been in Antarctic ice before, and ten cold
successive hours in the crow’s nest, and with such
responsible work on my shoulders, even made me


Piom hoban to South Victoria Land. 61


feel the strain when Captain Jensen came to relieve
me, and the reaction of those long but delightful
hours of important work is felt now while I write it
down. From your lofty perch in the crow's nest
you seem lifted above all the pettiness and difficulties
of the small world below you. Wide is your horizon,
and while you sweep the ice-field with a long
telescope which threatens to lift you in see-saw
fashion out of your nest, your mind is concentrated
on one thing only
— to bring the
vessel onwards
(uo SUCCESS, Wine
hurt through
those obstacles
only visible
from your lofty
position.

As I observed
during my pre-
yous penance SHE WAS ELEVEN FEET OF SOLID OAK AT
within the Ant- THE BOWS.
ате е pack, I
again found the characteristic ice-blink in the air
where large ice-fields were, and dark vapour clouds
always indicating open water. It is, of course, of the
utmost importance to watch the constant change in
the air when looking for a likely direction in which
to proceed. This is just as important as to watch
the ice-field itself, and also the direction of the swell,
—] mean the direction from which the swell comes.
To determine this is, of course, under certain con-
mc a matter of “to be, or not to be," as in a


62 British Antarctic Expedition.


heavy screw caused by swell, the life of the vessel
may entirely depend upon whether the vessel is worked
away from the direction from which the swell comes,
and into the quiet pack or not. Those who have not
experienced the dangers of swell in the ice, and have
not had to determine the direction whence it comes,
would not realise the difficulty, and it takes an ex-


“THE ICE SLACKENED SOMEWHAT.”


perienced man to ascertain it under certain conditions.
The best way is to lie down upon the ice and listen to
the roar of the crushing ice. The roar of the grinding
ice masses travels in the air in waves like the swell
itself. Only by lying down upon the ice can you
ascertain whence this noise comes, and determine
the direction in which you have to work the vessel
into safety.


From Hobart to South Victoria Land. 63


January 14th we came in sight of land, supposed
to be Balleny Island. Sights were taken with 10-in.


sextant, by Cary.


Index error carefully determined


by the sun's diameter and horizon line, and found


to be ı4 m. off the. arc.


Times with Chron. Watch.


Н M 5.
5 20 25

3 205 97
S 28 шо;
E 27 25 00
«= 8 TOO
5 99 35:76
— 4 50°20

GM К, 7 25 555

Index

Dip

Semi-dia. .

Refraction

Parallex .


True Altitude .
Zenith distance.


Error of watch on Marine Chron.


Error of Marine Chron.


+I ttt


Declination of Sun on 13th .
Correction


Declination


Altitudes.
26 sz ug
30° 26 ng
20° mo 26"
392 йй БО
па ou
Be до! o"
NON TT т
то, до! 4m
3 Gu
Bom a ud
50 24 ду
Bi 9s со” ©.
— т о S
2 24 opu


СОСЕ at noon = O5 42 o' S. Run 2 m. since noon =


n


65° 44 o".


64 British Antarctic Expedition.


Latitude 65° 44 о sec. 0' 390,687
8 21? 20' 33" sec 3 030,853
-8 24 2; 2/7
L.D. 500 24 ду
5 sum - 51 54 C sm 9°895,949
1 diff. "^. qe. ag sm 0 116.322


Lysin Sq. 19°433,911


H. M. S.

А па 0092
Equation . 200. 11252505
Mean Time 5 „= Де 20 Q5
Gi, IML, WS o Т7 25 5995
Long. Time "Oo 54 936


Longitude 163° 38' 15” East.


On January 3rd I formally impressed upon the
scientific staff how important it would be for every
one to work independently of former observers in
those latitudes; especially did I try to impress the
importance of this upon the minds of the magnetic
observers.

Since we entered the ice we were met by quite a
different bird life to that we had seen in the open
sea. Prion Vittatus followed us some distance into
the pack, but it left us long before we came to the
dense pack. A brown-backed bird with a white
border at the wings, white underneath, and in body
and back much like a Puffinus, met us at once
when we came into the pack, and was usually seen
as long as the ice was slack, but after the pack got
denser, seldom appeared. We saw from time to time
specimens of Ossz/raga Gigantea, Oceanites Oceantcus,
as well as Daption Capensis ; some penguins (Eudyptes
Adaliea) have also been seen. Pagodroma Nuwea,


rom Bsbast to South Victoria: Land. 65


and also Zagalassowca Glacialoides, were best repre-
sented. They were always seen swimming about in
the open spaces in the ice, seeking food which mainly
consisted of crustacea. Only in a few instances a
very small fish, like a herring in shape, has been
found in them. |

Among the seals we saw about this time there


MR. NIKOLAI HANSON TAKING SEA;TEMPERATURES.


were two young sea-leopards, as well as some white
seals. Of the latter we secured ten up to this date.
The first nine of these were of the same kind, but
the last one must be of quite another kind, judging
from the skull, while in skin and size it was exactly
like the rest. In the large sea-leopard the remains
of an octopus was found. The stomachs of the white
seals were all absolutely empty. As I observed during
F


66 British Antarctic Expedition.


my Antarctic voyage in 1895, I also found now that
the seals we met were perfectly tame, or ignorant
of the bloodthirstiness of civilization. We could go
straight up to them before they started to move.

On Janu-
ary 8th- we
saw the first
specimen of
phe 477
nodytes For-
sterit, but we
did not suc-
ceed in ѕе-
curing it. In
the after-
noon WE
found three
white seals
ош а dioe.
There were
two females
and one
male. Only
one of them
had started
moulting,
and EMNE
new hair seemed much darker than the old.

On January 12th the bird life was very rich.
Especially were Pagodroma Nivea and Tagalassotca
Glactaloides plentiful, and many of these latter, as well
as the Daption Capen is, were swimming about in
the open water catching crustacea. In the evening


SEAL SHOOTING FROM THE BOWSPRIT.


"SNOVd AHL NI WHOM WILIIOGOWHL


Pun Б to South Victoria Land. бо


Mr. Hanson did some valuable work with the
plankton bag, and brought in, amongst other things, a
great many shrimps. While he was occupied with this
a fish some six inches long was seen repeatedly swim-
ming about, but we were unable to catch it.

On the rath January, 1899, when approximately
im lat Gs 42 S. and long. 163° E, 1 entered the
crow's nest at midnight and discovered high snow-


SEAL SHOOTING.


covered land to the south. The land stood out
sharply in a haze of crimson and gold which grew
more briliant as the sun rose, until the contours
of peaks and crevasses suddenly caught the beauty
of the young day, and reflected it all over the
immense ice-pack, where the dark water - pools
between the floes changed suddenly from deepest
azure to blood-red, while the young snow on the ice
blushed in delicate crimson, and the snow crystals


70 British Antarctic Expedition.


glittered like diamonds on the white bosom of the
Antarctic Ocean. This was Balleny Island which
we sighted.

On the 16th January those seals which were shot
during the last
days seemed to
have got far ad-
vanced in the
moulting, and
they looked a
good deal darker
in their new
coat. ThE
moulting starts
on the back in
d кї Иве


SEAL HAUNTING. from nose to tail.

A. seal which. T

myself shot on the 13th had a stripe about five inches

broad along the back where the old yellow-grey hair

had gone, and the new steel-grey coat was visible.

The moulting had progressed regularly on both sides

of the spinal column and narrowed off towards head

and tail. It is remarkable that in the stomachs of

the white seals there has been no food of any kind
found, nor in the intestines.

The bird life was about the same.

Some few whales were seen, mostly of the blue
kind.

We were still lying fast in heavy pack. It had
been blowing very hard from the S.W. We were
mien in lat, 65° 43. S and dong, 162° 6’ Е. The
compass error 26°5 Е.


From Hobart to South Victoria Land. 71


On January 18th we saw two large penguins
(A. Forsterit). lt was а pair. The female was just
moulting. The male had just finished moulting, but
its feathers were not quite developed. The female was
sitting to the leeward at the back of a block of ice,
and looked as if it had occupied that place for some
time, as a road was trod all round the block of ice, and
it was full up with old quills and dirt. It looked rather
miserable and seemed to suffer from the cold. While
we were steering down so as to be able to catch her
we discovered its mate in the wake of the vessel.
It however dived until it suddenly jumped up on the
ice-floe where the female was sitting. These penguins
must have a wonderful power of location, as the male
bird must have been about three hundred yards from
the vessel when
we last Saw
ШИШ, until M
appeared on
the floe where
ic "mate was
camping. The
space between
where it dived
and the block
DL Ace was
covered with


: MR. COLBECK, MR. BERNACCHI, AND
ice-floes. The MR. EVANS SKINNING A SEAL.


contents of the

stomach of the female bird consisted mainly of
half-digested alge, also some pebbles; and in
the case of the male, of a great amount of small
shrimps and small fish ; the latter were, however,


72 British Antarctic Expedition.


in a state of decomposition, so it was difficult to
classify them. Some pebbles were also found in
the stomach of the male, the largest of which was
of about the size
of an ordinary
nut.

In the pack
one day one of
the members,
who evidently
had not. been
accustomed to a
gun, was going
to shoot a white
petrel on the
wing. The bird
was swift, and
the member with the gun tried to be likewise ;
and in the excitement of following the bird with
the gun he fired just as it was in the direction of
the vessel. I was standing on the quarter-deck at
the time, and some few of the shots struck the deck
beside me. Poor Mr. Hanson, who was taking sea
temperatures, received a shower of the shot on his
back, and was not much pleased. The shooting
restrictions, which from the beginning had been strict,
I from that moment made still more so.

That same member was generally unlucky with a
gun. Once he borrowed my little pea-rifle, which
had been specially given to me before my departure
from Norway, to shoot a penguin on the ice. It
was the first penguin he had seen, and he got very
excited. We all saw him chase the bird, which he


SEAL HUNTING IN THE PACK.


From Hobart to South Victoria Land. 73


mt tea to catch alive.- The bird, however, got
frightened, and instead of waddling about in an
upright position, when it moves rather awkwardly
forward, it suddenly laid.down upon its stomach and
propelled itself forward, as they generally do when
they want to move quickly. The excited hunter
caught the rifle by the barrel and struck out after
the unhappy penguin, who, however, just escaped,
as he struck a block of ice instead, and the gun
broke at the stock. When the pieces were brought
со me, | found that a serious accident had been
avoided more through luck than management. A


PENGUINS IN THE PACK.


bullet cartridge was in the rifle, and the hammer was
at full cock.
On the 21st January we secured a big penguin


74 British Antarctic Expedition.


some five hundred yards from the vessel Mr.
Hanson thought that day to have discovered a
new seal, which, however, proved to be AO


TWO CAPTIVE EMPERORS (Aptenodytes Forsterit).


The body of this seal was not unlike that of the
ordinary seal, but the neck was of more than ordinary
thickness, and under the chin it extended to a great
round muscular purse The head was short and
broad, large protruding eyes, and a short mouth.
The eyes were somewhat slanting, after the fashion
of those of the Mongolian human race. It had six
front teeth in the upper jaw, two in the under jaw,
but no back teeth.

In connection with the killing of the Emperor
penguin some five hundred yards from the ship, we
had rather a good joke. When killed by Mr. Hanson


the bird was skinned on the spot, and as he came


[тоют IODA to South Victoria Land. 75


back on board Mr. Hanson met Mr. Evans and Mr.
Bernacchi, who, tired after a long walk on ski, had also
just returned to the vessel from another direction.
Mr. Hanson was one generally up to a practical
joke, and upon whom also practical jokes had been
played, especially by Mr. Evans and Mr. Bernacchi ;
2nd he former was one to the bad at this time,
and so was determined to get even with them.
All the rest of us were standing on the quarter-
deck when Mr. Hanson suddenly called out to
Mr. bou aud Mir, Bermacchi that an Emperor
penguin was lying on the ice some five hundred
yards away from the vessel. These two, who had
never seen an Emperor penguin, were very anxious
to secure it before all our eyes. Being, however,


FAST IN THE PACK.


somewhat suspicious, they made a bet with Mr.
Hanson, who had a good telescope, that if it
should prove not to be a penguin he should be


76 © British Antarctic Expedition.


liable to a heavy fine in their favour, for Mr. Evans
and Mr. Bernacchi were not over-anxious to set off
again, being tired already. Hanson maintained that
it was a penguin. The bet was closed, and off the


FILLING OUR TANKS WITH FRESH WATER IN THE PACK.


two went, waddling away on Norwegian ski which
they had had on that day for the first time. Mean-
while Hanson had explained to all on board that
he had the skin of the penguin which was lying on
the ice in his possession, and we all enjoyed what
happened intensely. On went the two hunters,
further from the ship, and nearer to the dark spot
on the ice. It was evident that the nearer they
got the more excited they became. They stopped,.
discussed the modus operandi, and took off their
ski. Like two Indians they noiselessly crept over


ny ii i ii а E TE TATEN E ANA EEEN


From Hobart to South Victoria Land. 77


the soft snow, nearer to their prey, and all the while
loudly cheered by Mr. Hanson, who from time to
time recommended carefulness in their enterprise.
At last came the final dash; then they stopped
short, hesitated, and then slowly wended their way
back to the vessel under the roars of laughter from
all on board. Very little things seemed now to amuse.

On January 22nd and 23rd the pack-ice com-
menced to screw violently, causing us much anxiety.
The Southern Cross sighed and groaned under the
heavy pressure brought to bear upon her. We made
preparations to get out upon the ice in case we should
lose the vessel, but the good ship proved equal to her


TAKING EXERCISE IN THE PACK.


task. On the night of the 23rd January she lifted 4 ft.
bodily out of the water. Days and nights the screwing
continued, crew and staff working energetically.

On January 31st, 1899. Meridian altitude of sun


78 British Antarctic Expedition.


carefully observed with artificial horizon, with 6j
inch sextant, using reversing telescope. Approximate
lat. 66^ 45' S. long. 165^ 26.8, Boome 26.752


SAVIO TRAVELLING WITH INDIAN GEAR.


inch. Att. ther. 50°°3. Temperature of am OMS
Fahr. Sun's upper limb observed. Index error of


sextant (on and off arc) — 5' 1o".
Double altitude. . ~ 82° 8 10° С. М.Т. by Chron. 13 — 13— 37.
Indessonnon = БОТО

82 3 ©


AT T30 Apparent alt. of upper limb.
= 16 15'4 Semi-diameter of.


6
6 Mean refraction.
Jo. Con. ton temp. о аше
7 Corr. for height of barometer.
3


+ 6:60 Paralax


до 44 17:9 ‘True alt. of sun’s centre.


From Hobart to


49 15
п7 me


Lat.of shipatnoon 66 46


Declination on 30th at noon
Variation in rr hours


True S


South Victoria Тапа.


48°7 — Zenith distance.
22* 1 S.Declination of sun.
COMINO:

2o О 3577 9.
po 1930

= 17 S99 адот


Central peak of land bearing S. 20? W. true.
Distance of land thirty miles approximately.


19


On February 7th we were lying fast to an iceberg
during the night, a beautiful berg formed into three


high peaks.


“THE PACK COMMENCED TO SCREW VIOLENTLY.”


Uer CECE


The dogs have been let on to the ice to


We are im la. 66° 57 S, and long.


164? 49' E. We have lost “Grandfather,” the finest
and strongest of the whole pack, He was supposed


80 British Antarctic Expedition.


to have made a journey through Greenland with
Lieutenant Peary. Probably he walked into the open
water and was unable to get on to the ice again. We


STILL FAST IN THE PACK.


had often noticed him in great difficulties in the water
on account of his long hair, which, when wet, weighed
him down.

For weeks we remained buried in the snow and
ice, and as the summer advanced I began to see a
possibility of not being able to get through with the
vessel southwards. Then I resolved to land on the
ice with instruments, provisions, sledges and dogs,
choosing Mr. Fougner as my comrade, he being an
experienced ski-runner. Just when we had begun
to make our preparations for a lonely journey to
Victoria Land the ice-pack slackened somewhat;
but instead of using the doubtful chance of getting


"IVES ялна '(VEVJOUIIAVI иородот) IYYTSGGSAA


Erom © to South Victoria Land. 83


southwards at the vicinity of Balleny, the advanced
season determined me, after consultations, to use the
opportunity and work towards open water, with the
intention of making a fresh attack on the ice-pack
further east. This plan was followed, and after a
hard fight in the pack for forty-eight days the
Southern Cross ran into open water, lat. 70° S.,
end long, 174° E.

On the 11th February we were making eastwards


A FAITHFUL COMPANION.


by steam and sail. On the 12th we had rather a big
swell from the N.W.; it was foggy and the baro-
meter was 28:7:1. No ice was within sight. At
ІІ P.M. the vessel was shaking as if by an earthquake,
the phenomenon being noticed simultaneously by
several of the members of the Expedition in different
parts of the ship. The phenomenon, if so it might
be called, lasted for two seconds, then stopped for
about three seconds and then again repeated itself.
It was independently reported to me by those who
G 2


84 British Antarctic Expedition.


noticed it. I myself was in my cabin at the time,
and also noticed the shaking.

On the rsth and 16th February the Southern
Cross was compelled to lay to in a storm of blind-
ing sleet, decks and rigging being completely covered
with snow and ice. On the evening of the r6th we
sighted land, and entered into Robertson Bay on the
17th February, 1899. The rocks of Cape Adare
stood out dark and conspicuous as we steamed into
the Bay. We could not sight the low-lying pen-
insula at Cape Adare until we were very close to
the shore. Only a yellow border at the foot of the
rocks of the Cape was visible, and indicated the place
where I intended to pitch the pioneer camp. [t
seemed, at a distance, so small and inhospitable that
some of my staff felt constrained to remark at first
sight of the place, that if it was there I proposed to
live for a year, they had better send letters of farewell
back with the vessel It was a moment which, I
believe, will always remain in the memory of my staff
and self as we slowly moved towards the low beach
whereon man had never ventured to live before, and
where we were to live or perish, under conditions
which were as an unopened book to ourselves and to
the world.


CHAPTER III,
LirE IN SourH VICTORIA WAND.


E» on the 17th February, 1899, for the
first time in the world’s history an anchor fell at the
last ferra incognita on the globe. The Southern
Cross dropped anchor at South Victoria Land in ten
fathoms of water, and before even the spray from
femelle anchor had settled on the icy surf, an
echo from her salute of four guns, mingled with
energetic cheers from thirty-one enthusiastic men,
pierced the frosty air, and gradually died away as
it travelled far in between those lofty snow-clad
Beals owe Us. At once І landed from а boat,
taking with me Mr. Bernacchi and the Finn Savio.
On landing Mr. Bernacchi took occasion to heartily
congratulate me. Already, while far out to sea, it
had struck me that the Cape and its surroundings
seemed much more free from ice and snow than
was the case on the occasion of my first visit in
E then the Cape had several feet of ice
and snow on the top, now it was absolutely bare.
The beach where we landed was almost exactly in
the same condition as when I first trod upon it;
only here and there some ice-blocks were left; the
rest was dark and bare, and on the peninsula itself


86 British Antarctic Expedition.


were the guano deposits, while, as it was late in
the season, only a few penguins were left. My
visit on shore was brief, and we returned to the
vessel; all was quickly arranged for a speedy com-
mencement of landing our stores, instruments, dogs
and outfit, Much to my surprise Robertson Bay
was free from ice at the time, but I knew that it
might fill up again at any moment. Already on the
18th we were hard at work landing stores We
lowered the boxes into small whale boats and pulled
them near the shore, where some of us had to wade
into the breakers and carry the things ashore. Up
to the armpits in water at 23° abr, m was a cold
job.

When the huts had been built, some four yards
apart, I decided to use the north-western as the
dwelling, and the other for provisions and outfit.
The middle space between them I covered over with
wood, seal-skin and canvas, and continued ,this cover
towards the eastern side in the run with the slope of
the roofs of both houses down to the ground, forming
a continued sloping roof from the entire ridge of both
houses, including that of the middle space and down
to the ground. А strong framework of wood formed
the rest for the canvas and seal-skin. By this means
a great space was gained at the eastward side of the
huts as well as a protected approach between the huts.
In the space to the east a great quantity of provisions
and the coal necessary for the winter were placed. In
the middle space, sledges, ski, tools and gear of all
kinds were kept. At the end of this passage towards
the west a wall was also built of wood with an extra
door. Thus precautions were taken against heavy


кайса ELI?


«


IS WHHNOId UNO LV SN AAVAT OL LNOAV SVM ,SSOWO NWHH.LOOS, AHL,,


Lie im South Victoria Land. 89


snow-drift which might have prevented us from
reaching from one hut to another. The dwelling hut
had three separate doors to its centre, one to a kind
of hall four feet wide, and two towards the inner
dwelling; the doors moving inwards so as to enable


us to dig ourselves out in case great snow-drift should
block the way. At both sides of this four-feet hall I


CAMP RIDLEY IN SPRING.


caused a small room to be made. On the right-hand
of the entrance an instrument room and developing
room for photographs; on the left-hand side a small
room which I originally intended for my own use, but
which I later gave to Mr. Evans as a taxidermist
room. These two small rooms were lined with wool
and fur, and were approached through small vertically
sliding trap-doors, some two feet from the floor. The


90 British Antarctic Expedition.


floor in the dwelling hut was doubled with papier-
máché between the layers of planks. The walls were
lined with wood, also with papier-máché between the
outer timber and the inner pannelling. A double and
horizontal
rool was
about seven
feet high; in
the middle
ot this a
trap-door
led info a
loft formed
by the slo-
ping FOOL
Here a
good deal
of- clothing
and provi
sioms HOL
immediate
use were
kept. а
physic and
spirits, and
any material
which could
not stand much cold. In the dwelling room below,
size 15 feet by 15 feet, ten bunks were fixed to the
northern and eastern side walls; the window being
towards the west, and consisting of a small double
framework carrying double glass (the outer panes
some three inches from the inner) and with a big,


THE THERMOMETER SCREEN.


Pie im South Victoria Land. 91


heavy snow-shutter outside. On the south-eastern
side of this room, and to the left of the entrance,
was a large square camp stove on four wheels, with
a funnel worked through the roof, where thick asbestos
packing was laid. A rough wooden table was fixed
before the window with a wing running out at right-
angles to the table at the window. On the ceiling
were hanging guns, fishing tackle, knives, mittens,
chains, and odds and ends. The bunks were closed
after the plan followed by sailors on board whaling
vessels, with a small opening, leaving yourself in an
enclosure which can hold its own with our modern
coffin ; and, like this, it is private ; for some minds it
is absolutely necessary to be alone, out of sipht and
entirely undisturbed by others. It was by special
recommendation from the doctor that I made this
arrangement and found that it answered well. In
these small enclosures we had some books, our diaries,
and several of us our writing materials. I myself did
a good deal of my writing in my bunk during
sleepless nights in the dark time, and so did the rest
oi ie members. lo work at the table with nine
hungry minds, starved by the monotony of the
Antarctic night, glaring at you through nine pairs of
eyes at once indescribably vacant and intense, was
impossible.

On the 23rd February we were suddenly inter-
rupted in our work by a strong gale from the S.E.
Wie sale increased and came on in a blizzard, and
at 12 midnight, after consultation with Captain
jensen, 1 ordered’ the шошо to be cut Several
of the bravest and best of the crew attempted to
ascend, but owing to the strength of the wind, and


92 British Antarctic Expedition.


the hail of pebbles, it proved impossible. One by
one they came to the bridge where Captain Jensen
and myself were standing, declaring that they found it
impossible to stick to the ropes, which were smooth as
glassin their
ice-covers;
indeed, it
was difficult
enough
to walk
on deck.
Everything
now depen-
ded upon
the engines.
Well I re-
member
that night
when I went
down £e
the engine-
. room, where
the: two
splendid
это Кете
worked with
feverish
haste, shovelling in coal to raise the pressure in
the boilers to its limit; while even down there the
howling of the tempest could be heard. The stern
face of Mr. Olsen, our first engineer, as he asked me
the question, “ Drifting still?" and the stokers
simultaneously stopping their shovelling for a second


THE MERIDIAN POLE AT CAPE ADARE.


Life in South Victoria Land. 93


to hear my answer, stands clear in my memory
to-day; and how calmly and resolutely those four
in the engine-room worked after hearing that we,
having lost an anchor, were driven by the furious
gale among rocks and icebergs, and that everything
now depended upon what could be done by the
engines! As the pressure of steam was brought to


PACK IN ROBERTSON BAY.


a point when the boilers could stand no more, the
regular pulsation of the engines quickened, the
vessel seemed to have become a living being,
while the heart-beats from the engine-room had
become so strong that they were felt all over the
vessel. All the night through we were in great
anxiety, although the vessel, by the help of the
engines. at full speed, assisted by two new big
anchors, just managed to keep its position in the


94 British Antarctic Expedition.


bay. Towards dawn the gale lowered somewhat,
and we steamed up to a big rock situated about a
mile to the south-west of the peninsula, and about
two chains from the perpendicular rock of Cape
Adare. Through great risk, four sailors in a whale-
boat succeeded in fastening two wire hawsers and
an ordinary cable to this rescuing pillar.

The two Finns were destined to be the first to
sleep on shore,
as the gale
prevented them
from reaching
the vessel al-
though on the
folowing day
some Of my
staff, at a great
risk, managed to
reach the land.
Itis curious that
these two Lapps
should happen
to have been
the first to inhabit that large southern continent,
curious because they are natives of the corresponding
latitudes on the Northern Hemisphere, and because
they, as children of nature from the north, in a way
replaced the want of natives in the south.

The next few days and nights were anxious ones
for all of us, as well for those on board as for those
on shore. The vessel lost two anchors, and was
in imminent danger of being wrecked on the rocks,
as all three hawsers fixed to the big rock snapped


MR. BORCHGREVINK AND MR. HANSON
ON THE TOP OF CAPE ADARE.


Life in South Victoria Land. 95


like so much thread. In addition to this, from the
mountain towering above us showers of stones rained
down upon our decks. Despite the piercing cold,
however, all hands worked with a will, day and
night, until the gale ceased.

On February 26th a gale was again blowing
with great violence. While the two Finns were
ashore in their
tents, the vessel
had to ride out
the gale off the


OUR APPROACH TO THE TOP OF CAPE ADARE.


rocks of Cape Adare. Captain Jensen and myself
were continualy on the bridge, and we had to
exercise great caution in order to keep our position.
Nb ele was from the S.E. To the leeward of
the cape itself, and close to the perpendicular walls
of the rocks, comparatively smooth water was found
in a triangular area with its apex some two miles
out at sea. However, from time to time heavy
squalls struck the vessel from the east, and forced


96 British Antarctic Expedition.


her towards the western extremity of this com-
paratively smooth area. I therefore had to steam
towards the eastern side, stop the engines, drift
down again towards the west, and so on the whole
day long. By this means we were enabled to keep
our position with the least possible consumption
of coal In the evening the gale had abated ee
much that we ran up into Robertson Bay, while
the sea was still too heavy near the peninsula to
make it possible for us to land more stores. To
utilise the valuable time as much as possible, I
decided to steam up to the end of Robertson Bay,
where a big, broad, magnificent glacier descends
into a cove ‘terminating the bay. This оо
descended at a slope of about 50° from a height of
2,000 feet, and is crossed by numberless crevasses.
I named this glacier Sir George Newnes Glacier,
and the glacier between Cape Adare and this place,
which we passed running up towards this cove,
and which forms a kind of saddle in the ridge
stretching from Admiralty Range down to Cape
Adare, I named Warning Glacier, because I noticed
that ‘before every gale Шош ine Se иша
of snow swept over it into Robertson Bay,
giving a timely warning of the approaching gale.
Immediately to the westward of Sir George Newnes
Glacier a bold cape terminates a land some 3,500 feet
high, which I named Cape Klóvstad, after the medical
officer on my staff, and to the westward of this land a
broad glacier descends, which I named Sir John Murray
Glacier, after my good friend the eminent scientist
of the Challenger Expedition.

At the end of Robertson Bay, Mr. Hanson,


OEINIAXSOHOIOd


'NVdV LNOOW


Sal


D


Ad AONVA ALTVWINGV ЯО HOJXWHMNS AWASÍS


"HNISVS LNAON


H


Like inm South Victoria Land. 99


Mr. Fougner, Lieut. Colbeck, and a good mountaineer
from amongst the crew named Yngvar, made an
ascent of the mountain ridge, and reached the height
of 3,000 feet, finding vegetation on their way to
Me c5 top, Prom the vessel in the cove we
watched with interest their toilsome progress as they
struggled over glaciers and up steep rocks. For a
time I was anxious about them, but it soon became
evident that the sailor Yngvar was an excellent
mountaineering guide, and about midnight they
returned, bringing with them a rich collection of
rocks and mosses.

On March 2nd we hoisted the Union Jack
presented by H.R.H. the Duke of York, at Cape
Adare at 2 р.м, and greeted it with loud cheers from
those on shore, and with a salute and with dipping
of the flag from on board. Addressing the staff and
crew, I said :— |

“Hereby I have the honour of hoisting the first
E on the great Antarctic Continent. It is the
Union Jack of Great Britain.”


Int 2


CHARTER IV
CuT OFF FROM ALL THE WORLD.


Ix the evening the Southern Cross left us at our
pioneer settlement on Cape Adare, which I had
christened Camp Ridley,* with instructions to proceed
to New Zealand, and to return to us as soon a5
possible in the New Year. Amongst other
instructions, I laid great stress upon one, namely
that Captain Jensen should not, even on his return
voyage to us, shape a course to the west of longitude
170°, and I was pleased to find that by this means
he was able to proceed with but very little hindrance
from ice.

We were cut off from all the world, 2,500 miles
south of Australia, and all ten of us realised our
isolation as the vessel steamed away with wishes
and greetings to those we had left behind us.
What would happen to the Southern Cross and to
ourselves in the coming year? Would it be possible
for human beings to exist there? The conditions
we should live under, and the natural forces we
were destined to fight, would they be too strong for
human energy and endurance? Should the Southern
Cross be crushed, how long then, in all probability,
would we remain in Victoria Land? АП this


* Commanders mother’s maiden name,


СО of trom all the World. ТОТ


passed through my mind, апа no doubt through the
minds of all ten of us, as we silently returned to the
hut when the vessel had been swallowed up in the
darkness. However, were we destined to fall in our
fight, we would not have given our lives in vain,
for our. sacinee would, perchance, lead future
expeditions on to success without further sacrifice.

On landing I had carefully selected and taken on
shore with me the following members of my expedi-
tion— Lieutenant W. Colbeck, R.N.R., magnetic ob-
server; Mr. Nikolai Hanson, zoological taxidermist ;
Mr. Louis Bernacchi, magnetic observer, astronomer,
Сор езарне s Dr. H. Klovstad, MA M.D. ;
Mr. Hugh Evans, assistant zoologist; Mr. Anton
Fougner, generally useful; Mr. Colbein , Ellefsen,
cook; the Finns Per Savio and Ole Must.

The following departments I divided among
these, besides their special professional duties— Dr.
Klóvstad and Lieutenant Colbeck, charge of pro-
visions; Mr. Bernacchi, charge of instruments and
explosives; Mr. Fougner, charge of travelling gear ;
Mr, Evans and МЕ Hanson, charge of fuel, light,
ammunition, and guns.

cannot but at once add that in their special
departments every one of these showed himself
exceptionally zealous and capable, and during the
year we fought shoulder to shoulder in those regions,
there always existed an honourable rivalry in making
each of their several departments as perfect as
possible.

The two Finns attended to the dogs and harness,
and, in addition, proved themselves excellent hunters.
I never saw them idle. The Finn Savio made with


102 British Antarctic Expedition.


his own hand some half а hundred Finn Door,
without which our feet would undoubtedly have
been severely frost-bitten. These two were also,
with their characteristic sincerity and simplicity,
delightful comrades on our sledge journeys. More
faithful and devoted companions than them I do
not think any commander could wish for.

On one occasion, a busy day, the Timp OC
Must was asked to hold tor а moment a olm
thermometer the bulb of which, through much
trouble, had been successfully blackened with lamp-
soot by Mr. Bernacchi. Anxious to be SEIU ME
Finn at once rubbed the soot off with his sleeve,
much pleased to have cleaned the thermometer: it
goes without saying that Mr. Bernacchi was not so
pleased.

On the days following the departure of the
Southern Cross, we had the arduous task of bringing
the landed stores, provisions, coal, clothing, and
timber up to the camping place, some three hundred
yards up from the beach where it had been landed.

There were but few penguins left on the peninsula
when we arrived, but very many seals were on the
beach and swarming about in the water. They
were the usual Antarctic seal, the Weddelli. They
provided us at once with useful skins for our camp,
and at the same time with fresh food for ourselves
and the dogs.

I was glad I had sent the vessel away so soon
after she had landed the stores, as the day after
she had left Robertson Bay was already full of
pack-ice, and the tidal currents raged.

On March 12th Mr. Bernacchi and Г sealed


WEDDELLII.


WEDDELLII.


ROSSII.


Cue oH from all the World. 105


Cape Adare to the height of 3,670 ft., as indicated
Py tiie aneroid. Ihe ascent was very steep for the
first 800 ft., principally over worn rocks on the
nouum side. On the top there were large
mounds of pebbles and large boulders stretching
from east towards west, on undulating ground.
Here I found vegetation of the very same kind
as that found on the lower rocks at Cape Adare
554. he penguins had been up as far as
1,000 ft. I discovered no vegetation above 1,000 ft.
in this locality. At the height of 3,000 ft. above
the sea level there was a good deal of snow. We
traversed some two miles south-westwards, and then
again upwards in an easterly direction, and reached
as far as the eastern side OI the: cape, where the
perpendicular cliffs rose up from Ross’s ice-free bay.
Very little drift-ice was to be seen towards the
south-west of the bay and in the immediate vicinity
of the actual cape. А strong tidal wave passed near
the cape north-westwards towards the western side
of Robertson Bay, continued from there its run into
the inner portion of that bay, and came back along
the eastern coast. The whole of its course could be
distinctly observed from the top, by the movement
of the drift-ice.

On the 13th March most of the provisions were
brought up to the house.

It was Sir George Newnes’s birthday, and we
celebrated it by hoisting the flag.

The temperature, which during the last few days
had kept about 22, now began to fall. rapidly.
Already on the 14th all the penguins had left us.
The skuagulls (/eszrzs), which were about in great


106 British Antarctic Expedition.


numbers at our arrival, also began to get scarce.
Mr. Bernacchi and Mr. Colbeck completed on this
date their magnetic observatory in the large Finn
tent,. which was secured by stays of варе Tbe
meteorological observatory, some 3oo yards away
from the huts, was also completed by this date.
On the 15th March we saw the first Aurora
Australis; it had the form of curtains waving from
south towards east. On the 17th we brought up
the last bags of coal. On the 18th we prepared a
preliminary expedition to the top of Cape Adare,
whence I hoped to be able to reach the inner part
of Robertson Bay. Already the first night came on
with a hurricane. Mr. Fougner, Mr. Colbeck, and
myself had cold and anxious hours, fighting hard
not to be blown over the cliffs with all our outfit.
The hurricane blew in fierce squalls with snow-drift,
and as the weather continued bad I decided to
return to the camp. On Monday we reached Camp
Ridley, where I found that we had lost one of our
boats. It had been lifted bodily up from the beach
and smashed against the rocks. At Camp Ridley the
wind had a velocity of eighty-seven miles per hour.

The Finns were busily engaged in making fur
suits out of seal-skin, as I found that skin and fur is
the only clothing which keeps the cold out on windy
days; and on calm days the Jaeger suits were the
most suitable. Robertson Bay now began to freeze.
The days were spent in daily meteorological obser-
vations, which were taken every second hour, and
whenever clear weather permitted astronomical obser-
vations were made. The magnetic work went on
whenever the magnetic conditions were favourable ;


Cut off from all the World. 107


although some local attraction was experienced, it was
less tian expected.

The following is a table of the heights (in centi-
metres) and chest measurements (in centimetres) of
the members of the Expedition, who were landed :—


Observations by Dr. Klovstad.


Chest
Height. Measurement.
(С. 18. ОБО отеулиК . о .. : 175.2 OB о 7
Lows Bernacchi ee бот 93.0
William Colbeck Е 17027 95.5
ПЕ Ваа c i c I TOT. A ШОО &
Colbein Ellefsen от RIED
Anton ОЛ Ше o <5 5 o i 165.2... 04.2
Nikolain kanson оо 5 6 6 . 178.8 93.0
BENOR ISSUE s 2^ o. у s 160.7] 94.0
Ole Mrs E oo c LIÓLSD е
Per Savio XN S iB. o s. 9.0
Date = . 28/3/90


Our few leisure hours were spent in shooting at
targets, a sport which we, however, very soon had to
give up as the barrel of the rifle became hot with
the first few shots; the air surrounding it naturally
stood in a quiver and produced a minor mirage,
which had the effect of misplacing the sight of the
гїйе.

On March 22nd Mr. Bernacchi was going to take
a photo of a magnificent seal which had managed to
Gray) iar up on the peninsula near Camp Ridley.
Enthusiastic as he always was, and eager to secure a
striking photo of this seal, which was lying lazily and
sleepily on the pebbles, looking almost as if it were
lifeless, he repeatedly asked it to “look pleasant,”
Smee up, "smile" and anything else he could


108 British Antarctic Expedition.


think of, all the time moving closer towards it with
the velvet cover over his head, and with the camera
in front of his face, for the purpose of taking the
photo from
the most ad-
vantageous
side and in
order to
FOCUS IÈ
Ee seal
continued
to sleep.
Vexed at its
indolence,
Mr. Ber
nacchi asked
Mr. Colbeck to give the brute a gentle kick, which
he did, with the result that the seal, with a tremendous
roar, rose on to its flippers and dashed towards the
lens of the camera through which Mr. Bernacchi
glared at it some three or four feet away. The scene
was changed. It was now the seal taking a mental
photo of Bernacchi lying on the ground with his
legs in the air, but faithfully sticking to the camera,
while the velvet cloth mercifully covered his face
from the savage look of the seal, and the amused
spectators.

On April 1st we were again shooting with a rifle
at a target in the morning. It was All Fools’ Day,
and we used the opportunity for all sorts of surprises
by playing practical jokes on one another. Mr.
Hanson, who was in the hut at the time, was told that
Mount Sabine was in eruption. He rushed out and


“HE REPEATEDLY ASKED IT TO LOOK PLEASANT.”


Cm on tom all the World. 109


looked with his naked eye for a considerable time,
but could see neither fire nor smoke. On Fougner's
advice he asked the doctor for a pair of field glasses ;
whereupon the doctor, in his ordinary calm and sedate
manner, handed him a gun-case and informed him
that “Mount Sabine was in activity every rst of
April" In the evening the doctor had the best of
us all by telling us that it was his birthday, at which
we all made a lot of him and found it a welcome
excuse for extra rations,

On the 2nd April a gale was blowing at the rate
of eighty-two miles an hour, with heavy snow-drift.
On the 5th April a good deal of snow fell and the
peninsula was for the time being completely covered.
On the 7th
Ajri, about 2
in the morning,
a gale started
again from the
SJE, All the
snow was swept
from the penin-
sula. The snow
squalls which
plunged down
from the cape
wrapped Camp
Ridley in a
dense whirl of
snow-drift ; the
dogs were completely buried. The ice in the bay was
ground up, and waves of snow, ice, and water dashed
up against our beach, and sent the spray flying over


A WEDDELLII SEAL.


110 British Antarctic Expedition.


the roof of the huts. On the 8th April, when the
gale had abated, on going along the beach Mr.
Hanson and myself were startled to find, washed on


THE RIDGE OF CAPE ADARE.


shore, numberless specimens of medusz, hydroids,
star-fish and ales. “ Should then, aker all, an
extensive shallow-water fauna exist within the Ant-
arctic Circle ?

The roof of our huts we gradually covered over
with seal-skins, and, in expectation of further gales
from the S.E., the eastern sides were fortified by a
sloping roof of strong canvas and seal-skins, weighted
down by numberless bags of coal and boulders.
Hanson discovered on this day (April 8th) a fish,
and shot a seal which had fragments of partially
digested fish in its stomach. On the oth April I
again visited the plateau of Cape Adare, and brought


СИГ on from all the World. IET


back very interesting geological specimens. The
doctor was from time to time tapping us for blood,
and making microscopic investigations thereof. The
health up to that date had been excellent. It was
iem@erkaple to see the quick rise апа. fall in the
temperatures, and considering the near approach of
the winter, they kept comparatively high. We now
caught many fish in the bay, some of which were
over twelve inches long and about seven inches in
girth. I had photographs taken of all the specimens,
also of the various peaks on the coast within
sight, and cinematograph photos taken when-
ever opportunity offered and incidents of interest
occurred.

On the rith April Mr. Hanson was using the
handy small collapsible canvas boats for net-work,
but the strong current near our peninsula did not
facilitate. MIS
endeavours.

On the 12th
April snow
dov @т@@ the
ground. Нап-
son's eyes were
bad; they were
swollen, and
looked às if
they had a sty
pn Шош He
was always
obliged to use “goggles” when out of the camp.

OM ine 13th Hanson caught six fish of two
different kinds, from six to eight inches long, in a


VIE Ws ON THE COAST:


LIO British Antarctic Expedition.


depth of from five to eight fathoms. The fish were
caught in the bay about two cables'length from the
shore by a strong line with an ordinary Norwegian


LAGOON AT CAMP RIDLEY.


* pilk " attached. Most of the fish were caught by
this appliance, and without any bait.

On the 16th Fougner and Hanson were fishing
on the floes. The former returned with fourteen
fish, three of them being over twelve inches
long, and with a girth of seven inches at the
widest part.

On the 19th April we discovered a very fine cave
some eight feet high and stretching into the rocks of
Cape Adare for some hundred yards. Beautiful ice-
crystals made the walls of this cave look as if formed
by stalactites.

Mr. Evans, who in former days had been in
Canada, had unlimited stories of all heights in store
for stormy days. Once upon a time, he told us, he
was driving cattle in Canada. It was on a big plain ;
and he and a bosom friend had charge of some 500
cattle; they were riding leisurely along behind the


Cut off from all the World. TiS


tails of the oxen, enjoying an evening pipe under
their broad-brimmed hats. It was just getting dusk
when up rides a highwayman, pointing his revolver
at them and demanding their money, watches, and,
if I do not remember wrongly, their pipes also. “It
was hard luck,” Mr. Evans said, but they had to give
up all as they had no weapons themselves, and re-
sistance would have been useless. However, when
the robber was about to depart, Mr. Evans conceived


FISH FROM ROBERTSON „BAY.


a bright idea. He drew out a pack of cards and

invited the departing robber to make a third in a

game, which he consented to do. Mr. Evans and
I


114 British Antarctic Expedition.


his mate showed themselves as great experts in
handling cards as their savage visitor in the handling
of his revolver; they stuck to cards until, by the
help of them, they had regained not only their
watches and money, but also their pipes, and, in
addition, became the possessors of the watch, money
and revolver, horse and saddle, of the unfortunate


THE TWO SISTERS.


thier. “Poor. fellow, - Mr. Evans remarked’ with
intense compassion, “he was fairly done, and when
he told me he had not enough money to get back
to the nearest town, I lent him a dollar out of his
own purse!" For some minutes profound silence
reigned round the table, then Mr. Bernacchi, who
had heard similar stories in the Australian bush, had
to remark, “Come, come, Mr, Evans, you do not
mean to say that you were mean enough to pay him


Cit of from all the World. IIS


Ош OL Mi Own ушер “Мей, you see" Mr.
Evans replied, ‘‘it was a fair game.”

We observed great movement in the ice-pack
in Robertson Bay during the middle of April. On
the 22nd I resolved to attempt my first penetration
into Robertson Bay on the ice, which then, though
young, was already about two-and-a-half feet thick.
I took with me Mr. Fougner, Mr: Bernacchi, and
the Finn Savio, provision for twenty days, twenty
sledge-dogs, and one small collapsible boat. We
left Camp Ridley at 11 А.м., and proceeded in the
pub until darkmess began to set in. The pack
along the cliffs was rather small, and the ice which
bound the floes together rather thin, so we had to
proceed wiin reat caution, and when I at last
decided to camp on a small beach at the foot of the
perpendicular wall of Victoria Land, we had great
difficulty in reaching that little place. The beach or
slope where we pitched our camp was not thirty
yards at the widest part; it was some four feet above
water, and had a crescent formed with the concave
Side some 15 chains in length. From the perpen-
dicular wall of Victoria Land a kind of gravel rush
had taken place, and formed a deep slope from the
walls of the rocks down to the beach, with a slope
of from sixty to seventy degrees, rising to a height
bou thirty feet. Above us the perpendicular
wall rose to about five hundred feet at places over-
hanging the little beach, which seemed completely
Perea iom everywhere, except by way of the
bay. Shortly after landing a southerly wind rose,
which continued to increase in force until it became
a violent gale. We had pitched the silk tent, and

Ie


116 British Antarctic Expedition.


my companions took their sleep whilst I kept
watch. At 7 p.m. I had to wake them, as the ice
began to break up. It was not a moment too


ON THE MARCH.


early; it just gave us time enough to save our
provisions by carrying them on to the top of the
gravel slope, where drift snow and ice had formed
a sort of gallery, about six feet broad, immediately
on to the mountain wall. The drift snow had also
formed a kind of fence at the outside of this gallery
to the height of about four feet. In the six-foot
groove between this fence and the perpendicular
wall of Victoria Land we pitched our tent, but
before doing so we had an arduous task. We
hauled away, suffering intensely from the cold, our
fingers dying as we hung to the ropes while pulling
provisions and travelling gear up to our limited
accommodation. The huge breakers washed over
the beach and sent spray about us; it froze


Cut off from all the World. D


immediately, and soon land and men were covered
with a sheet of ice. Although everyone realised
the awkward position, all worked calmly. On
Monday night, the 23rd, the bay was completely
free from ice and was perfectly calm. I then sent
Mr. Fougner and the Finn Savio towards Camp
Ridley in the small blue collapsible boat, and with
emergency rations sufficient for a few days. How-
ever, shortly after leaving us, and having gone out
of our sight, they met with heavy ice drifting
rapidly into the bay, which, as mentioned, it had
left during the gale. ‘Mr. Bernacchi and myself,
who soon afterwards noticed the floating ice masses,
were naturally very anxious about them, ignorant


COAST-LINE IN ROBERTSON BAY.


as we were of their fate in the little canvas boat.
We ourselves were without any craft whatever to
take us away from our temporary place of refuge.


118 British Antarctic Expedition.


For two days we remained in ignorance of Mr.
Fougner's and the Finn’s fate; but in the evening of
the 25th both of them appeared on a very steep ice


REFUGE CAMP.


swell, which descended from the perpendicular wall
of. Victoria Land. Ву help of a: small” axe aad
an alpenstock they cut footholds in the ice and
then slowly approached us. I soon discovered that
they were in a pretty weak condition, and while
Mr. Bernacchi started to cook some food for them, I
began to cut steps in the steep ice-slope to meet them.
At night we were again all safe on our little camping-
place. However, Mr. Fougner and the Finn had
spent two days and nights under the shelter of the
canvas boat, and thought they had discovered a
possible place, or the only possible place, for an


Cut off from all the World. 119


ascent to the ridge of Victoria Land:some 5,000 feet
above us. But the first 500 feet would necessarily
meke Cuca risk in the ascent. On the 27th I
decided to attempt the ascent. We started in
the following order: the Finn Savio, Mr. Fougner,
Mr. Bernacchi, and then myself, roped together. We
had to cut footholds in the ice. By following in the
steps by which Mr. Fougner and the Finn had reached
us, we were enabled to attain the place where these
two had camped under the small boat, and saw the
spot likely to offer the only chance of escape. It
was a kind of rough groove in the perpendicular
cliff, partly covered with ice and snow. After
having had a good feed of seal-beef we began
the scent Some
of our poor sledge-
dogs, which had
ventured along with
us on the


slope
howled
melan-
ово ту
MOLES) A$
they saw
us ascend.
Three of
them had «WE HAD TO CUT FOOTSTEPS IN THE ICY SLOPE
alread y. TO REACH THE RIDGE 5,000 FEET ABOVE 09-7
perished

by losing their foothold coming round the icy slope,
and one was precipitated into the abyss below when
we were some 200 feet up in the groove. Cautiously


120 British Antarctic Expedition.


and slowly we climbed upwards, while the lesser slope
some 400 feet above us seemed always to grow further
away as we slowly ascended towards it. All the night


“IT WAS ONE MOVING WALL OF GRINDING ICE-BLOCKS,”


through we continued to climb, while the cold increased
as we got up in the heights. By way of the ridge
we were cnabled to proceed towards Camp Ridley,
where great anxiety had prevailed already on the
day when the ice broke up, as they knew of no place
where we could possibly have camped at the time.

There were many seals on the ice-floes, the flesh
of which some of us ate raw. The Aurora Australis
was seen nearly every clear night at this time.

On May 5th seventy-one fish were caught. I saw
that day one of the brown-backed petrels. In the
evening while we were having a slight supper we
heard roaring and crushing to the N.W. of our
peninsula, and when we came near the beach we


oon from all the World. 121


witnessed a scene of singular grandeur. The ice-fields
were screwing, and at the beach the pressure must
have been tremendous. Already a broad wall some
30 feet high rose the whole length of the N.W. beach,
and coming nearer we saw that the whole of this
barrier was a moving mass of ice-blocks, each several
tons in weight. The whole thing moved in undula-
tions, and every minute this live barrier grew in height
and precipitated large blocks on to the peninsula
where we watched the interesting phenomena from a
distance of a few yards. The roar of the screwing
was appalling, The force and direction of the
pressure seemed to alter from time to time, and the


“THE DOGS WERE GREAT COMPANIONS.”


change was visible in the movement of these ice-
masses. Like Antarctic gales, this roaring and
gnashing might cease near the shore for some minutes,


122 Dritish Antarctic Expedition.


though we still heard it out at the horizon. During
these minutes of silence the barrier seemed as firm
as the rock of Cape Adare until the pressure again


ENTRANCE TO THE HUT IN WINTER.


struck the peninsula, when the whole barrier seemed
alive again and in motion. When the pressure ended,
the barrier must have been between 4o and 50 feet
high at its greatest. Towards midnight the screwing
suddenly ceased. During the progress of this ice-
pressure we began to wonder whether the whole
peninsula would be covered by ice-blocks during the
winter; and it was with a kind of relief that we
witnessed the last of the interesting display.

During the coldest period, and often during gales,
the dogs killed each other and ate their dead
comrades. Being in nature like wolves, they hungered
for fresh meat and blood. On board the vessel they


Cut off from all the World. 122


had quarrelled occasionally, but being so closely under
our eyes they had no opportunity to kill one another.
It was otherwise on shore. On the very day that
they were landed they seemed to have a general
“ day of reckoning.” They fought furiously, and two
or three good dogs were killed. It was not always
the weakest dogs who succumbed in these fights,
generally the reverse. They seemed with one accord
to boycott a single dog for days and weeks, and that
particular dog evidently knew the danger, as he
generally sought refuge with us, and was so panic-
stricken, once he had been hunted by the others, that
for days he would go without food. Then, driven by


“THEIR TONGUE STUCK TO THE METAL, AND THEIR HOWLS
BROUGHT THE PHOTOGRAPHER.”


hunger, or forgetting for the moment that he was
marked to be killed, he might show himself, even on the
peninsula or far out on the ice. Off went the other


124 British Antarctic Expedition.


dogs like wolves in pursuit, nothing could stop them.
Whips were useless, the ‘ boycotted опе” was doomed.
They set upon him, and before anyone could help he
was torn into pieces by forty or fifty of his comrades.
Even if we had a chance, it was by no means an easy
matter to extricate a dog thus brought to bay. Some
of our best dogs were killed in the way described.

On May 6th we had already so many specimens of
fish preserved in formalin and spirit that I decided to
use at least some specimens as additions to our stock
of provisions. The question naturally arose “ Were
these fish eatable? " and we drew lots as to who was
going to risk the first fried fish, with the result that
when the first dozen fish, hot and fried, appeared on
the table, we all started at once, and none of us will
forget how refreshing a change this meal of fresh,
excellent-tasting fish became to us, who for months
had been living on tinned food.

On May 8th a very heavy gale was blowing with
snow-drift. Ten feet of snow was outside the door.
The elegant white petrel (Pagodroma Nivea) was
seen from time to time soaring about the peninsula.
The daylight was now very short. We were con-
tinually returning to camp with ears, noses, cheeks,
hands and feet frozen.

On May oth we caught fifty-eight fish with only
a few hours’ fishing. We had to cut holes through
the ice to let the line down, and whilst sitting and
watching the line we might be startled by a seal
who saw a chance for a sniff of air suddenly shoot-
ing his nose up through the hole at the side of our
line, glaring at us, and then quickly disappearing.

I saw four white petrels in the evening.


CHAPTER V
Tue WINTER IN VICTORIA LAND.
Ох May roth we had an entertainment. I gave a


lecture with an account of our work up to date.
The following was the programme of this


(XO cer 8——

Mik; BORCGHGREVINK .  . lecture:

Тнв DocroR . . o . Showing magic lantern (very magic).
The views were illustrated adver-
tisements shown on the wall by the
light of a bull’s eye lantern.

MR. FOUGNER . . .. - Broke down in his song (“ Paddling
down the Strcam.")

(!{ рх ох o e o o Song Of a) fisherman.

CoLBEIN ELLEFSEN . . Norwegian song.

Mr. Evans О Tao OE o a conical character,

Mer. BERNACCHI . . . Songs and reading.

MR, Comme o o o 5 Stormers апо теайшо.


PER Savio AND OLE Musr.  Lappish duet.


After the entertainment we generally had some
nuts, a glass of grog, and a pleasant smoke.

In the forenoon I had discovered a small white
clear jelly-fish with a distinct blue cross in wt f
named it the "Southern Cross" jelly-fish. Оаа
moments in Camp Ridley were now occupied by
mending the sledges ; we used spare ski as runners,


126 British Antarctic Expedition.


and laced them to the framework of the sledges by
means of strips of seal-hide. In addition we mended
and improved tents and clothing.


“IT WAS A-ROUGH PAVEMENT ON WHICH TO TRAVEL.”


On May 15th we had the last greeting from the
departing sun. The refraction of it appeared as a
large red elliptical glowing body to the north-west,
changing gradually into a cornered square, while the
departing day seemed to revel in a triumph of colours,
growing more in splendour as the sun sank, when the
colours grew more dainty, and surpassed themselves
in beauty. It imprinted itself upon the minds of us
ten so strongly that it made life possible for us through
those dark days and nights to come. The promising
effect of that evening of the 15th May, 1:899, lasted
and cheered us until the returning sun again made the
peaks and crevasses shine on the 27th July.


The Winter in Victoria Land. 127


Both during the time the sun was low in its
descent and when it rose again, a strong mirage
effect was observed towards the west, showing
images of icebergs far below our horizon, and
Antarctic scenery only visible to us through this
phenomenon. This strong mirage remained after the
sun's return late in the summer, and the opening
of the ice was prophesied to us in the mirage long
before the ice-fields near Victoria Land broke.

It was very interesting to see the picture of
far-away broken ice-fields, with their dark channels
and towering icebergs, in the north-western sky ; and


ANTARCTIC MONARCHS.


on several occasions towards the time when the
vessel was expected back, members of my staff
returned to the camp in enthusiasm, thinking to


128 British Antarctic Expedition.


have discovered the masts of the Southern Cross
in the mirage, so strongly did their hopes confirm
the impression made by the wonderful creations in
the air.

The temperature was —25° Fahr. on the 16th
May.

On the 17th May we all celebrated the National-
Day of Norway with a flag procession, and ski-
jumping competition.

On the 18th a tremendous wale trom ihe E.
was blowing. . Sledges, boxes, stones. ete, weve
flying about in the air. Heavy showers of pebbles
descended upon our camp during the night. Our
huts were now only approachable through a tunnel
in the snow, and we had great trouble in keeping
this only place of entrance open, as one might er
snow-drift would fill it completely. Great screwing
was going on in the bay. The one whose duty
it was to read the meteorological observations ap-
proached the thermometer box with a rope round
his waist, although the place was only 200 yards
away. To give an instance of the strength of the
wind, it may be mentioned that on the night of the
18th May the anemometer broke on s shai
literally blown off. The lowest barometric reading
during this gale was 28.4.4. The days began to
get very short and dark. It was a depressing
feeling, like looking at oneself getting old. ^ Chess,
cards, and draughts were the most popular changes
from work.

We were getting sick of one another's company ;
we knew each line in each other's faces. Each one
knew what the other one had to say. Our whole


The Winter in Victoria Land. 129


repertoire was exhausted, but knowing the fact, all
kept cheerful.

Already early in the Expedition the English
members learnt to use the ski; although of course
they never mastered them as thoroughly as the
Norwegians did. We had a good deal of jumping
just before the dark time set in, on a good snow-
covered hill near Camp Ridley. We had most of us


THE FROZEN SEA NEAR CAPE ADARE.


our triumphs, and also our downfalls, but we fell
only to rise again. It was curious to see those who,
for the first time in their lives in double quick speed,
reach the boss of snow in the middle of the hill, where
they left Zerra firma only to land in a cloud of snow
some yards away. I believe that had some of the
members known of the birth of that one-time new
expression, they might have replaced some harmless
swearing with “What ho! she bumps!" I do not
K


130 British Antarctic Expedition.


think that anyone, better than a novice on ski,
realises the ups and downs of this life!

The dogs suffered a good deal from frozen feet.
In spite of the great cold, however, six puppies
born seemed to do well under the snow.

On the 24th May (H.M. the Queen’s birthday),
the Duke of York’s flag waved on high, and three
ringing cheers were given at the flagstaff.

On the 25th a heavy gale was again blowing
from the S.E. It blew in terrific gusts, carrying
stones with it. The huts were shaking violently,
and the snow-drift was blinding. Mr. Evans, whose
duty it was to read off, was lost in crossing from
the thermometer screen to the house, having for a
minute let go his hold of the guiding rope which,
as before mentioned, I had caused to be stretched
between the camp and the screen. During that
night we searched for him for three hours, in blinding
snow-drift and great cold, before Mr. Fougner and
the Finn Must succeeded in finding him. He was
brought to the camp in an exhausted condition,
vomiting severely. Under the tender treatment of
the doctor, however, he soon recovered. During the
search for Mr. Evans a comical incident occurred.
In the tremendous snow-drift and dark, while the
gale was at its strongest, it was very difficult to
move about. All of us being out to look for
Mr. Evans, I fought my way onwards, passing near
to where a dog-kennel had been fastened to the
ground. Hearing a remarkable noise in the kennel,
and seeing two black legs moving hither and thither
at the entrance, I thought it possible that Mr. Evans,
in spite of his size, might have sought shelter there


The Winter im Victoria Land. TAT


in an exhausted condition. However, on investiga-
tion, I found it was the Finn Savio, who, only half
the weight and size of Mr. Evans, thought it most
unfair that he should have to help to find the latter,
whose weight was over thirteen stone, and as I was
somewhat angry at finding him in the kennel and
not assisting in the search, he most indignantly
explained that if
the wind blew
Mr, ЗЕ таи
About, he was
sure he would
not himself re-
main very long
on ferra firma,
as he had only
IB of is
werni aud it
would поё be
any advantage
to lose him as
well as Mr


“THE ANEMOMETER SNAPPED IN TWO ON
THE ROOF,”


Evans.

On June isi
the dogs had no less than sixteen fine strong
puppies.

On June 3rd the thermometer showed — ar.
Some of my staff had their extremities badly frozen.
As it was RH the Duke of. York's birthday,
the Union Jack was hoisted, and although a
beautiful Aurora waved in mighty curtains over
Camp Ridley, moving and fading, only to appear
again in brilliant streamers of dazzling light we

K 2


а ааа а ае


132 British Antarctic Expedition.


could not help igniting an empty paraffin barrel in
honour of the occasion.

On June 4th I had the thermograph placed
2000 ft. up оп Cape: Adare 107 the purpose “or
getting an opportunity to compare the curves at
different heights.

At 6 o'clock in the morning of the 14th june
in complete darkness, I had to climb to the top of
Cape Adare, and brought the thermograph down.
It was very cold, and I had bad attacks of vomiting.
The darkness made it very difficult for me to pick
my way, and as the barometer was low I was
anxious to reach camp as early as possible, for
if I had been overtaken by a gale in those heights,
without the aid of daylight, it would probably have
been fatal.

The very next day, the 15th, a tremendous gale
started in the morning, and prevented all but one
morning reading. It started while Hanson was half-
way between the thermometer screen and the camp,
and he had great difficulty in reaching the hut. Mr.
Evans and Mr. Bernacchi attempted to reach the
screen in vain. They had to crawl back on all fours,
and arrived in camp exhausted, Mr. Bernacchi with
his hand badly frost-bitten. Later on I myself made
a further attempt to reach the screen in company with
one of the Finns by crawling along on all fours, but
found it impossible to keep the safety lantern alight,
as it blew out immediately we took it from the cover of
our fur coats, and without its light we could not have
read the observations, even had we been able to reach
the screen. By evening the wind was blowing with the
force of eighty-five miles an hour, roaring and tearing


The Wimter inm Victoria land 155


in the house, while the air was filled with pebbles.
During the night the gale increased, if possible; the
hut shook and shivered, and we expected every minute
to see our camp lifted bodily into the air like a
balloon. The metal stays by which we had anchored
the huts to the ground sang lustily during the fierce
squalls of the hurricane, in consequence of the strain


ICE FORMATIONS NEAR THE COAST-LINE,


brought to bear upon them; had they snapped we
would probably have been shaken up like so many
dice in a box. From time to time we consulted
the barometer; it continually sounded “still falling,”
"still falling,” and we earnestly began to con-
sider our chances, while now and again a jocular
suggestion was passed from bunk to bunk as to
how we should best be able to steer our hut in


134 British Antarctic Expedition.


case it suddenly became an air-ship; would the
metal stays be useful as guide ropes? and would
the rapidly-revolving anemometer on the roof be
useful as a propeller on an aerial journey? Down
went the barometer, falling! falling! falling! until
nearing 27.

During these gales a most remarkable thing
used to happen: while the gale was at its highest
it would suddenly cease for quite two or three
minutes, instantaneously the roar and rush overhead
would stop, and the absolute stillness of the Antarctic
night would prevail, and the breathing of the wondering
members could be distinctly heard keeping time with
the regular tick, tick, tick of the barograph registering
the interesting curves of the atmospheric pressure.
Then, as suddenly. as it had ceased, the gale
would howl and rage again, if possible worse than
before.

The wind continued until the 17th June. As
will be seen from our meteorological observations,
a great and sudden rise in the temperature indicated
the approach of a gale, and supported the correct-
ness of the anti-cyclone theory. The days were now -
very dark indeed. The horizon towards the N.W.
was, however, slightly crimson.

On several occasions I saw the great affection
which arose between members of the staff and the
dogs I gave to them. Mr. Fougner was particu-
larly. devoted to a puppy he had, whose name was
* НаПоа.” We used to tease him with this; and
well I remember when the dog died, how real was the
grief depicted in Fougners face. We found out
later that, through great trouble and real hard work,


Mie Winter in Victoria Land. ТОБ


he had picked and dug in the frozen rocky ground
until he had found a suitable last resting-place for his
puppy. He covered it over nicely, and put a pole
in as a mark. He evidently thought that this
characteristic mark of affection had been unnoticed
by us, and when I later on alluded to the incident,
he blushingly remarked that he had done it out ot


CAVE IN THE ROCK AT CAPE ADARE.


consideration for the other dogs. “They might
have eaten my puppy,” he said, “and become ill
themselves.” But we who knew his soft heart and
liking for his young dog, ascribed this touching act
to even more noble motives.

. The darkness and the silence weighed heavily on
one’s mind. The silence roared in our ears ; it was
centuries of heaped-up solitude. .

On June 30th one of our sledge dogs returned


136 British Antarctic Expedition.


after having been away for two months. The
remarkable fact is that he was fat on his return.
Probably he had drifted out to sea by the pack when
the ice broke during a gale, and at the edge of the
pack-ice further north had lived in luxury on penguin’s
flesh, until he was able to return over the frozen
surf, |

June 23rd, 1899.—Total eclipse of the тооп com-
menced at 10.58. It was fine and clear. We were
all watching it through the big telescope, and Mr.
Bernacchi made a careful observation.

Remarks :—It was impossible to distinguish the
entrance of the moon into the penumbra on account of
the mist. So misty was it that at the beginning of
the eclipse, only Jupiter and its stars, and Centauri,
were visible through it. The disc of the moon, how-
ever, was fairly sharp when seen through the telescope.
The crater and rays of Tycho, and craters Copernicus
and Kepler, were visible on its surface. As the moon
entered into the shadow the east limit was totally
obscured, not being visible through the telescope. As
the eclipse advanced the small stars of the constella-
tions Saggita and Crux shone forth through the mist.
Total occultation lasted nearly 13 hours. During this
time there was absolutely no geographical detail
observable on the lunar surface, and at no time was
the whole of the disc visible. It was not possible to
observe occultation of stars, as it was too misty.
During the first half period of totality the western
limit was of dull red colour, and the eastern quite
invisible. During the latter half it was the reverse,
the east limb being illuminated and the west
hidden, |


"HOV'IVd IVLSAMO V


й D :

\ i

+ ў * +
i 7

(les Su М t

3 Y + :
H 1 7

* n * vut №
m x Е
m {
Eu. i : , Ie


mie Winter in Victoria Land.


June 23rd, 1899. Lunar TOTAL ECLIPSE.


By chronometer No. 2262 by Brockbank, Atkins & Moore.


rst contact with shadow
Beginning of total phase
Ending of total phase
‘Temperature at 11 P.M.
Temperature at I A.M.


H aM S. By MM. S:
?

1$ 93. n EME 26 I 32 48

ns 2 5S CML 233 3 9

—10.6

—10.8


139


CAPE ADARE.


June 24th. OBSERVATION FOR MEAN TIME,


ПЕ У Temp 18 E. Barometer 29.048 in. Alt. Ther. 29°.
Canopus


Н MES
Time с >... S ал 000.059.
Al отті 45' 30 |
9 | , , | ; : * 2 E ‘>l by chronometer.
Mme cc pe 24 0-8
КООШ r 27 30 J
Canopus
Time i, Боса 157
PN. IIO 15 20
Time co T S 59 28.2\
ENS  — — |. :o9 i co by chronometer.
dc m o -. G- i 9. j
Eum." . . IOg9 43 4o


On the 3rd July the temperature arose suddenly
to zero. During July several smaller sledge journeys
were accomplished on the coast of Victoria Land, the
members of the expeditions suffering severely from
the cold. Mr. Hanson was in a rather low condition ;
he lost feeling in his legs, and the flesh on them took
lasting impressions from pressure. During the last
sledge expeditions depóts were made at various places
along the coast in. Robertson Day, and on the penin-
sula, on more elevated places than the camp, in case


140 British Antarctic Expedition.


high water should at times rise over the level where
our camp was pitched.

On the r4th July we travelled towards Possession
Island. At places: the ice was ey smooth, but
mostly very heavy screwing was observed. We
went out to sea and scaled an iceberg, and although
the berg was 100 ft. high, we failed to see Possession
Island because of the mist towards the south. Near
land, about five miles from the two rocks at Cape
Adare, which I named The Sisters, we observed a
great many large loose basaltic rocks on the ice,
some as far as halfa-mile out from the walls of
Victoria Land. They were on quite smooth, undis-
turbed sea ice, therefore they evidently had not been
conveyed from the shore by drift-ice, but most likely
had been thrown out by a minor volcanic eruption.
It seems almost improbable that they should have
rolled out so far by the speed attained in falling from
the edge of the cliff some 600 ft. up; although, of
course, a couple of miles rolling from the summit of
Cape Adare, some 5,000 ft. might have started
them off with great velocity. I took it as a fresh
warning against trusting oneself near the steep
rocks.

On the 18th July the house was completely
buried in snow towards the west. Mr. Evans and
Mr. Bernacchi were busily developing photographs
during the evening. It was no easy task to develop
photographs during those cold days and nights, when
water had to be got by melting snow. The mercury
froze in the thermometers, and chemicals and water
were apt to freeze instantly if left alone. Still
Mr. Bernacchi stuck to his guns, and never gave


The Winter in Victoria Land. 141


in before a satisfactory result had been achieved.
Seal liver and meat had now become a frequent
КОО and T urged on the use: of it as much
as possible, as the want of fresh food began to tell
upon us all.

On the 2156 anxious for further information,
I left Camp Ridley at 12 mid-day. I had with
me Mr. Fougner and both the Finns. Thirty dogs
pulled our sledges. It is difficult to keep one's


“THE MOUNTAINS FIRST SHOWED THEMSELVES IN THEIR FULL
DEFIANCE AS WE ARRIVED AT THEIR FOOT."


temper while driving a team of dogs, especially
when the ice is rough, the load heavy, and the
temperature low. There are occasions when the most
calm and placid natures would get fits of violent im-
patience, and strong measures are needed if you want
to get on at all. Sometimes, when two teams of a
dozen dogs each are pulling along at the side of
each other, a savage dog of one team will discover
an enemy of his in the other team; and while you
had hitherto found it difficult to make the dogs move


=


142 British Antarctic Expedition.


the sledges onward at all, you would suddenly find
they ignored the weight of them, and the two teams
would rush together as quickly as lightning, and,
before you were able to interfere, they would be one
entangled mass of straps, dogs, provisions, ropes, and
snow. When you at last, by using the whips and
shouting, managed to calm the dogs somewhat, you
might, after a most mixed work of pulling, lifting,
cutting and mending, succeed in extricating the different
particles of this complicated travelling gear; then off
they are again, rolled in one bundle, biting and barking
worse than ever. After a long day's march, when
temperature and weather already had tried one's good
nature near its limits, such incidents were apt to upset
the equilibriums of the best-balanced tempers of ШС
members.

We fought our way towards the cape amidst
heavy and hummocky screwing. We had to pick
our way carefully, thereby travelling double the
distance we had to go. In the deep new drifts of
snow the men and dogs had to work hard. We
traversed some miles in a S.S.E. direction, and then
I sent Fougner and the Finn Savio back to camp
for some material which I deemed desirable for our
journey, and which had been left behind. In the
meanwhile Ole Must and І struggled onwards,
covering some miles more on comparatively smooth
ice. We reached a field of heavily screwed ice where
the pointed blue rocks had reared on end with deep
cracks in between; they were sharp like the edges
of so many knives, ready to cut the slides of our
sledges. Here we stopped to await the arrival of
Mr. Fougner and the Finn Savio. We laid down


Enc VVinter in Victoria Land. 143


in our furs and slept for an hour, while the moon
hung like a large lamp above us, glaring at us each
time the cold conquered the sleep of fatigue. Large
bergs were floating about in the pack, most of them
discharged from glaciers, generally square colossi,
but occasionally pointed into towers. They were
generally floating about in the pack either in an


т??


“THEY DID NOT KNOW THE BLOODTHIRSTINESS OF CIVILISATION.


open sheet of water or in a soft bed of ground-up
ice. These brilliant blue monarchs seem entirely
independent of their surroundings; here is their
home where they glory; they move about against
wind and tide; they plough their way through these
tremendous ice-fields, while ice-blocks, several tons
in weight, rise up and roll aside like foam before
their glittering bows. But, independent as they


144 British Antarctic Expedition.


seem, it is the undercurrent, an irresistible force, a
natural law—fate, if we prefer it so—which forces
these nature’s giants forward towards their destiny,
against the reason of many, to the terror and
destruction of those mortals who cross their path.
These strong masterpieces of nature are driven
into warmer climes, where obstacles disappear, the


ЖТТ WAS A COLD


JOB.”


glorious fight of the forces has ceased, and,
these mighty scouts from the Antarctic Regions,
they melt away—die in the warm embrace of a
summer sea.

The Finn and I slept in the snow when
Fougner and Savio returned. The temperature
was — 17 when we awoke; the sky was clear, and
streamers of strong Aurora rose and fell towards


Nu ter in Victoria Land. 145


the east. The track grew heavier and the pointed
ice-blocks sharper the further we proceeded south-
wards. The slides of the sledges suffered greatly
over the rough surface, and large fringes of torn
wood began to protrude from underneath. At
Pit, we camped. Savio, whose turn it was to
prepare a meal, laid different utensils and tinned
food on the top of a sleeping-bag, without noticing
fiat Ole Must was within. It was bitterly cold,
and so tired was Ole that he did not notice when
I suddenly sat down upon his head, remaining there
whilst I had my meal, thinking all the while I was
sitting on a Dutch cheese, of which we had some
with us, but which froze so hard that undoubtedly they
would have been useful projectiles for a cannon.

No tent was
pitched, but we
slept on the top
of the sledpes
in our fur, while
two kept watch
im ease the ice
should break
Пр or heavy
screwing com-
mence We
kept about two
miles from the
perpendicular
walls of Victoria Land, where they rose to a
height of about 5,000 feet.

At the foot of the rocks were large worn caves,
while here and there I discovered small beaches

Е


SELDOM WERE THERE МОКЕ THAN TWO
TOGETHER.”


146 British Antarctic Expedition.


with steep slopes, formed by gravel rush from the
porous volcanic rocks. They would be the only
places of refuge in case a heavy screw should
commence; but, unlike our situation at the gravel
rush in Robertson Bay, here one would be entirely
shut off from any chance of ascending the plateau,
as the rock is either absolutely perpendicular or
overhanging. Of course there were icebergs which
might have offered us temporary shelter against heavy
screw, but only a few of them were approachable, and
in a sudden and general screw of the pack it would
have been difficult to convey instruments and pro-
visions to the top of these bergs. In the grey morning
we made a light breakfast, harnessed our dogs, and
started again, while a biting wind from the south
descended the sides of the mountain. All metals stuck
persistently to our fingers, and it was cold work before
we had our travelling gear in working order again
after camping. The track grew worse and worse ;
we pulled, lifted, pushed and shouted to the willing
dogs, and slowly our four sledges rubbed over the
rough surface towards the south. Mr. Fougner soon
reported that the slides of his sledge were entirely
worn through, as the rough screwing of the ice in-
creased, and a general investigation of all the slides
proved that most of them were worn through, con-
sequently we had to return to Camp Ridley, and
probably we should not have reached far, as open
water was sighted to the south. We left the dog-
sledges where they stood, and started eastwards towards
an iceberg which proved to be accessible, and from
where a general view of the ice conditions was to
be had. The loftiest pure white peaks of Victoria


The Winter in Victoria Land. 147


Land already blushed in the reflection of the return-
ing sun, in promise of brighter days for our work.
It was hard not to have reached further, as I
had hoped to have gained Possession Island by
risking this journey through the Antarctic winter ;
but little would have been gained by having worn
out ourselves and our sledges for a purpose which
could be better and more safely accomplished on
the return of the Southern Cross, when our travel-
ling gear would be required for more important
work.

We returned to our sledges and struggled north-
westwards again towards a flat ice-field. Here we
arrived during the evening, and pitched one of our
silk tents in a snow-drift, as usual in a square formed
by the tour sledses. The temperature was then
found to be — 13.2. The reading on the aneroid
barometer was 30.15, the highest barometric pressure
we had had since our arrival at Victoria Land. A
barometric pressure above 3o continued all through
forty-six hours. During the night the temperature
descended to — 15.

An open vapour cloud had kept soaring above
the open sheet of water to the southward, and
rather a remarkable phenomenon took place, as a
kind of water-spout formed between the open water
and a dark, deep-hanging cloud. It was evident
that the cloud continually renewed its store of
vapour from this open sheet of water. We could
distinctly observe how from time to time the cloud
diminished and increased in size and colour, as the
trunks between cloud and water alternately were
broken and renewed to keep the cloud satisfied with

15


148 British Antarctic Expedition.


vapour. I considered the phenomenon as an evidence
of little open water in the vicinity of Victoria
Land just then, a supposition which was also


“


THE SEALS LEAVE А SNAKE-LIKE TRACK IN THE SNOW.”


strengthened by the many seals using the one and
the same air-hole in the ice. I observed the greatest
number of seals near the beds of the icebergs.
Shortly after camping in the evening, the Finn
Savio went off in search of a seal. Like most
children of nature, he and Must seemed to have
an instinct telling them when and where game was
to be found; as usual he disappeared without
Saying а word to шу He had just ascertained
that I was comfortably settled in my sleeping-bag
when he went off. Shortly afterwards we heard a
faint “ Halloa,” which was immediately responded to


The Winter in Victoria Land. 149


by Ole, and soon afterwards Ole followed in the
track of the “ Halloa,” and joined Savio on an
iceberg at some distance from our camp. Mr.
Fougner and I, who just smoked away comfortably
in our bags, soon heard them approaching, and
driving a seal before them, just as peasants. at
home drive their cattle to market. We were
delighted. The dogs had a good feed, and we
had enough blubber for a large fire. There we four
were lying, thousands of miles to the southward of
the great struggling world, vast, stern Victoria
Land lying dark towards the west, while the peaks


A SEAL BLOW-HOLE.


and icebergs caught the pale halo of light from
the moon. We kept a watch, two at a time, as
usual, sleeping six hours in turn. "Towards 2 o'clock


150 British Antarctic Expedition.


in the morning heavy screwing roared towards the
north.

At 6 in the morning we boiled some coffee, ate
some biscuits and large slices of fat, and started
again on our journey northwards. A strong wind
descended from the mountains, wrapping us in a
thick drift of snow. It was bitingly cold, and the
sledges sank deep in the drifts as we struggled
onwards. We had to keep two sledges close to
each other to enable them to benefit by the track
| of the preceding one The Finn Savio hadi Hie
cheek severely frost-bitten : it was white and abso-
lutely hard. When we arrived at the camp, I was
glad to find that Mr. Hanson had greatly improved
under the able treatment Of the doctor, and 1
venture: to believe that the arrival of a skull of
Lobodon Carcinopaga (the white seal) helped to
set new life in his partly paralysed legs. With
characteristic energy he greeted the valuable
addition to his zoological collection. The result
of this short trip I consider by no means small,
both with regard to the meteorological observa-
tions and the geological studies of Victoria Land
itself, besides the hard experience in sledging in
Antarctic pack.

One night in Camp Ridley we had a fire in the
camp. I awoke through a suffocating smoke, and
found that one of the members had his bunk on fire.
He had kept a candle burning while reading, and had
fallen asleep in his bunk, leaving it alight. It gave us
rather a start, and I took extra precautions against
fire. One arrangement was that after that time ten
knapsacks full of provisions were hanging ready (one


The Winter in Victoria Land. 151


for each of us) in case we should have to leave the
hut suddenly, and of course the nearest deó; at the
foot of Cape Adare would have given us shelter.
There in a cavity we had, besides tents, a full outfit of
provisions and fur to last for a few months, so with
the additional provisions which we should have


* DR. KLÓVSTAD FROM TIME TO TIME TESTED OUR PULSE WITH
A PULSOMETER."


brought from the hut in the knapsacks, we should not
have starved.

The health all through kept remarkably well up to
this, ——due greatly, I believe, to the great care with
which I had selected the tinned food, and by the
incessant toil of the doctor in the food department.
Tins were always scrutinised by him, and carefully
he made up the menus for the week.


152 British Antarctic Expedition.


With slight variations the following were the menus
at Camp Ridley :—


Breakfast.
Bread and butter
Tea and coffee
Cheese
Sardines
Herrings


Porridge

Bread and butter
Bacon

Tea and coffee


Porridge

Ham

Bread and butter
Tea and coffee


Porridge

Bacon

Bread and butter
'Теа апа coffee


Porridge

Ham

Bread and butter
Tea and coffee


SUNDAY.
Lunch.
Cocoa
Biscuits
‘Tongue
Cheese
Jam
Marmalade


MONDAY.
Cocoa
Ham
Cabin biscuits
jam
Marmalade


TUESDAY.
Cocoa
Cabin biscuits
Herrings
Sardines
Cheese
Jam
Marmalade


WEDNESDAY.


Cocoa

Cabin biscuits
Ham

Cheese

Jam
Marmalade


THURSDAY.
Cocoa
Cabin biscuits
Herrings
Sardines
Cheese
Jam
Marmalade


Dinner.
Assorted soups
Pressed meat
Curry and rice
Dry potatoes
Porridge


Milk soup
Dry fish
Tinned potatoes


Sweet soup

Tinned tripe

Dry potatoes

Dry vegetables
Tinned plum pudding


Milk soup
Tinned salmon
Pressed potatoes


Peas
Salt meat


. Dry potatoes


Dry vegetables


Suc Winter in Victoria Land. ТБ?


FRIDAY.

Breakfast. Lunch. Dinner.
Porridge Cocoa Milk soup
Ham Cabin biscuits Dry fish
Bread and butter Ham Pressed potatoes
Tea and coffee Cheese

Jam
Marmalade
SATURDAY.
Porridge Cocoa Sweet soup
. Ham Cabin biscuits Army rations
Bread and butter Herrings
Sardines
Cheese
Jam
Marmalade


Seal beef and roasted penguin flesh became later
a frequent repast, as we grew frightfully tired of
tinned food.

ge meals at Camp Ridley lasted, on great
occasions, ten minutes; often less than five minutes
on ordinary occasions. Pipes were lit after meals,
and the doctor and I generally indulged in a game
of chess if both of us happened to be in camp at
fie time.

Br Winns played at «Sakkos (a kind of
chess), a Finn game full of remarkable formalities
to be observed. These two shouted and jumped
during their game, and it was a wonder they did
not upset the little board on which they played.

The most trying time within the Antarctic Circle
was the dark period. The strongest man must
needs feel the effect of it more or less. The same-
ness of those cold, dark nights attacks the minds
of men like a sneaking evil spirit. We found that


154 British Antarctic Expedition.


reading, playing chess, and cards, were very valuable
pastimes during this period, when work did not
require the full concentration of our minds; and
occasionally we started, purposely, minor quarrels,
when we found that a change was necessary, and
I. found the truth of the French proverb, “Les
extrémes se touchent”; it was easier to bring a
weighed-down mind to a beneficial laugh after such
little quarrel than before.

1 remember well how welcome a discussion was
started when we no longer could write Eighteen
Hundred, and the question arose as to when the new
century began, whether at the beginning of r9oo or
1901. With the utmost care I invented fresh argu-
ments in favour of the losing side, only for the
purpose of keeping a desirable dispute going.

From the Southern Cross we brought a musical
box on shore with us, but we soon came to know
its répertoire so well that we preferred for the time
to have it silent; and when we again set it going
it had become rusty, and played hymns when a
valse was required, and vice versé. In the limited
space we had at our disposal it must be clearly
understood that only exceptional precautions could
prevent serious difficulties. Those who suffered
least from the darkness were undoubtedly the
Finns, who, from their homes in the north, were
accustomed to it, but even these two changed con-
siderably during the dark time. All of us were
somewhat affected by the slow action of the heart.
In the great cold, and depending upon the tinned
food, the circulation. became very slow, and repeat-
edly I had the same feeling as when I had lain


d ‚ d


ee Winter in Victoria Land. 155


long on one limb and all the feeling had gone out
of it. It would remain like that for hours, and had
a depressing effect upon the mind. These symptoms
Шин сес in Mr. Hanson during his illness. The
monotony of the life seemed to create amongst the
members a most sensitive professional jealousy, if
it may so be called. It was, however, an evident
sign of the deep interest which they took in their
different departments, and also formed a most in-
teresting study. It is evident that in regions like
those in which we lived—where the surroundings
offered no great changes and no entertainment
except that which each found in his special work,
the material of which he had, with great difficulty,
wrested from the earth's most inhospitable corner—
such work, for which we risked all, necessarily became
the nucleus of our life, guarded passionately against
intrusion. Nothing seemed to cheer melancholy
members more than being consulted, and being asked
to give information.


CHARTER VE


SLEDGE JOURNEY IN WINTER.


On the 26th of July, 1899, eager for active service
again, I started a fresh sledge journey with the in-
tention of attempting to reach the coast land to the
west of Robertson Bay. At 12 mid-day I started
with Mr. Evans and both of the Lapps. I took
provisions for thirty days, and twenty-nine dogs. We
travelled among very heavy screwed ice. Large
blocks heaped upon each other at times rendered our
route almost impassable, and for some miles we had
very rough travelling. A strong gale from the S.S.E. —
started, and at 4 P.M. we pitched our tent in the worn -
cave of an iceberg, and spent a very cold night there.
In the early morning I scaled the berg and viewed the
ice conditions to the southward. As these conditions
appeared promising, I decided to send Mr. Evans
back to Camp Ridley for the purpose of making Mr.
Colbeck, Mr. Fougner, and Mr. Evans follow me up
with more sledges and provisions. Mr. Evans took
four dogs and a sledge and left for Camp Ridley. I
started at once further south, accompanied by the two
Lapps. We travelled all that night without pitching
camp; the temperature was — 30. We passed over
very rough ice and struggled hard between the ice-


THE CAVE IN WHICH AN OAK CASK WITH A REPORT OF THE
EXPEDITION WAS PLACED,


Sledge Journey in Winter. 159


blocks in the dark. At midnight we came across a
seal (Weddellz), which was killed to feed the dogs. We
lighted the skin and blubber, which shone like a light-
house far away into the dark as we slowly drew
further from it. In the morning the weather was
misty. There was no appearance of land, and as I
could get no observations I pitched the tent between


dme he


MIDWINTER CAMP.


two ice mounds in the pack. On the 28th July it
was still misty, and had started to blow with a low
barometer. Towards evening a violent gale com-
menced, with heavy drift from S.E. We all had to
remain inside the silk tent in our sleeping-bags during
the next three days. It was bitterly cold, — 40, and
we suffered greatly from frost-bites. Our reindeer
sleeping-bags were unmanageable comforts after they


160 British Antarctic Expedition.


had been in use two or three times on a sledge
journey. We got hot in them the first night, and
the steam from our bodies made them damp; we
packed them on the sledges in the morning, flat, with
the provisions on the top of them. Then they froze
hard, and when suddenly a gale surprised us, we had
to thaw ourselves gradually into the bag, feet first,
and their temperature did not always much differ
from that of the frozen bag. Later we used to
get the dogs to thaw them for us—they always
liked to roll upon anything that was not snow or
ice, even if it were but a thrown-away match—and
when we had laid our frozen reindeer bags on the
snow they generally clustered together on them
at once, and half-an-hour later we could get into
them.

The silk tent was rapidly filled with dense fog
as we three camped in it, both on account of our
breath, and because of the heat given off by the
lantern. A thick layer of frost covered the inner
walls of the tent in a short time, and beautiful snow-
crystals shone down on us through the ventilation hole
in the bag. The snow-drift soon buried the tent, and
the snow pressure just left us space enough for our
sleeping-bags.

That dark little spot which we formed on those
vast white fields was blotted out. Men, dogs,
sledges, all, disappeared, and the Antarctic gale found
nothing new as it raged over us, only cold, white
solitude.

For three nights and for three days we had to
take turn in standing on all fours to prevent being
smothered by the pressure of the snow.


Sledge Journey in Winter. 161


We roasted the heart of a seal, and the heart of
another we ate raw.

The dogs were completely snowed down and
froze fast to the ice. Some of them had eaten the
straps of their harness to free themselves, but were
still unable to move on account of being frozen to the


BORCHGREVINK IN HIS SLEEPING BAG.


ice. No land could be sighted anywhere. Up to
the 31st July I had seen nothing of the party which
was to have followed us up. It was a cold job that
morning to dig ourselves and our tent out of the drift.
The temperature was — 32, and we suffered from
frost-bites. We again proceeded onwards on com-
paratively good ice. In the evening I discovered an
island to the south, and reached the western side of it
an hour after dark. We were then very hungry and
M


162 British Antarctic Expedition.


worn: — 40 when we pitched camp. Early in the
morning of the rst August we killed two seals. Still
nothing was seen of the party which was to assist
us, and I anticipated rightly that they had been
compelled to return to Camp Ridley by the violent
gale which had nearly made an end of my two faithful
companions and myself. I called the new camp Mid-
winter Camp, and the island I named, after H.R.H.
the Duke of York, Duke of York Island. The island
is situated in lat. 71° 35' Si, long. 170-24 BE On he
2nd August I resolved to investipate some of the
coast line of this island; I took with me the Finn
Must, leaving Savio in camp to construct a kind of
Finn tent out of provision bags, seal-skins, and bags
which he proposed stretching over our sledges, pitched
on end; as we would then be enabled to utilize some
of the seal blubber as fuel The Finn Must and
myself proceeded along the northern shore of Duke
of York Island, and reached a bay which I named
Crescent Bay. During the succeeding days I managed
to make as thorough an investigation of the immediate
surroundings of our camp as the cold weather per-
mitted. As I began to get anxious about the party
which was to have followed us, I took in stores of
seal-beef and blubber. We suffered a good deal
from frost-bites, although we managed to keep up a
blubber fire in the conical tent, if it so may be called,
constructed by Savio in the manner described above.
It was not a question of being warm in the sleeping-
bags then, but of being less cold.

I found that the Lapps' method of never using
socks in their Finn boots answered well Socks are
never used in Finnarken in winter time, but “senne


"HHIOVIO AIVGONNG


Sledge Journey in Winter. 165


grass,” which they, of course, through practice and
tradition, had a special method of arranging in the
Eicomager (Finn boots). The “serine grass," of
which we brought several bags, is dry, although fresb.
It is a kind of wiry grass growing near the beach in
the north of Norway, and which has obtained there a
certain commercial importance because of its use
instead of socks amongst the Lapps. If you get wet


STERN VICTORIA LAND.


feet while wearing the grass in the “ Котасег” you
will be warmer than ever, as the fresh grass will, by
the moisture and the heat of your feet, in a way start
to burn, or produce its own heat by spontaneous
combustion. The great thing seems to be to arrange
the grass properly in the boots, and although we all
tried to imitate the Finns in their skill at this work,
none of us felt as warm on our feet as when they had


helped us.


166 British Antarctic Expedition.


Must suffered a good deal from the cold, and І
had at times to use medical stimulants to keep him
from passing away. I kept him alive principally
by giving
hum NAO,
а мегу fne
essence: Of
beef, which
gradually
became a
heeees ara:
part of our
sledge pro-
Vist otis.
However,
both of my
brave com-
rades kept up
their courage
and were
always cheer-
ful, Avery
valuable geo-
logical col-
lection was
secured and
brought to Midwinter Camp. In the middle of
August we started back to Camp Ridley. The
temperature continued then to fall, the nights were
very dark, and the track heavy. On es journey we
experienced the lowest temperature we recorded; it
was — 52, or 84? of frost! At night we dug ourselves
down in the snow, finding this warmer than being in


LOOKING TOWARDS CAPE ADARE FROM DUKE OF
YORK ISLAND.


Sledge Journey in Winter. 167


the tent. We had to use our reserve hickory ski to
make slides for our sledges.

On my return to Camp Ridley I decided to con-
tinue the explorations already begun in Robertson
Bay, partly because I found that the locality in itself
contained valuable scientific properties—not least in
the geological department—and partly because I also
hoped to find here a place whereby to reach further
inland. Expeditions were despatched during the
femamder Of August and September under the
alternate chàrge of members of my staff.

We had constructed a rough stone hut at
Midwinter Camp some Іо ft. in diameter. The roof


CAMP PITCHED NEAR DUKE OF YORK ISLAND.


we covered with seal-skin, canvas and rocks, and used
spare ski to support it. The hut was placed in a
corner where the rocks of Duke of York Island


^


168 British Antarctic Expedition.


formed a comparatively sheltered place. It was a
cold job building this hut. To get the material we
had to carry rocks from far off, and break loose pieces


COLBECK. BORCHGREVINK. SAVIO.


MUST.


MR. COLBECK AND THE FINN MUST LEAVING MIDWINTER
CAMP, AT THE STONE НОТ.


from the mountain side, where successive frost and
thaw through ages had made our task possible.
When we had finished the hut we covered it over
completely with snow, only leaving a small space open
to let the smoke out. The first gale with snow-drift
buried it all. Our provisions were placed in a large
cave which the Finns carved out of an immense drift.
This cave was approachable through a winding tunnel
some 30 ft. long, and would have formed a com-
paratively warm and safe place in case we should


Sledge Journey in Winter. 169


have been unable to keep the passage to the stone hut
clear.

In the vicinity of Robertson Bay the nature of the
land, with its great elevations reaching far above
12,000 ft. in height, sometimes at an angle of about
50°, and crossed by innumerable crevasses, made our
expeditions on the coast-line both arduous and risky.
Savio and myself worked hard in the neighbourhood
of Mount Sabine for more than seven weeks. Our
main camp was at the time the stone hut. By
burning blubber we managed to keep the temperature
near freezing point, but at night it varied generally
inside the hut between — 35 and — 45. During the


-


CRESCENT BAY, DUKE OF YORK ISLAND.


time we were settled here communication with Camp
Ridley was continually kept up, and stores brought
from there to form a depót at Duke of York Island.


170 British Antarctic Expedition.


The dogs were invaluable to us on these journeys ;
we fed them principally on blubber and ,seal-meat,
and at the coast we secured cM fish both for
specimens and food.


THE INTERIOR OF DUKE OF YORK ISLAND.


On September rith I killed a female seal near
the edge of Dugdale Glacier. It was a leopard
(Stenorhynchus Leptonyx). When I had skinned it,
I cut it open, and, to my surprise, found a nearly
full.grown male young one alive in her. After I
had freed him he seemed quite happy as he rolled
about on the ice in his soft, smooth coat. I put
him on my sledge, and drove him to the stone
hut, where we kept him alive on condensed milk
until we were later on able to send him by sledge
to Camp Ridley, where Dr. Klóvstad fed him from
the bottle !


Sledge Journey in Winter. DE


Mr. Bernacchi and Mr. Ellefsen were the last to
bring food supplies to the depót. They had a hard
experience on their way. When overtaken by a
furious gale in the ice pack, they had to take refuge
in an iceberg. The thermometer was very low, and
the gale so strong that they were unable to creep
against the wind on all fours, and although it was
still winter,
with the ice
about four
бт hve feet
jek, they
Epected
every minute
{© SEE it
Preak up,
and in the
midst of the
gale climbed
Ше berg
and camped
in а cavity
until light
allowed them
to descend.

On one of
our journeys


on the glac- IN THE CENTRE OF AN ICEBERG.

iers of Vic-

toria Land, in the vicinity of Duke of York Island,
Savio very nearly lost his life. Carelessly, he had
walked on alone, out of sight, onwards on the glacier
without a guiding rope. New snow had fallen, and I


172 British Antarctic Expedition.


had already for a long time been using the utmost care
in crossing the glaciers at this locality. The Finn,
who had walked boldly along, suddenly felt the


CREVASSES BLOCKED OUR ROAD.


snow give way beneath his feet, and fell headlong
into a crevasse, turning three somersaults in the air
before he was jammed, sixty feet below, head down-
wards. A dog which had followed him stood howling
at the edge of the treacherous crevasse. Although
he had managed to turn himself head upwards, Savio
remained for hours in despair in his difficult position ;
the ice curved over his head, and shut off the edge
from which he had fallen. The crevasse, which
narrowed off at the place where the Finn was
jammed, opened up a little to the right in an
abyss, dark, wide, and of unknown depth. Наа he


Sledge Journey in Winter. 173


fallen two feet further to the right, Savio would
have been lost. What saved him was his coolness,
presence of mind, and his never-failing store of
resource. He found in his pocket a strong penknife,
with which he slowly and carefully began to carve
small supports for his feet; then, pushing his back
up against the opposite wall of the crevasse, he
gradually worked his way upwards, much in the
way a chimney-sweep in the days gone by ascended
a London chimney. The different widths, and the
slippery, smooth ice wall presented great difficulties.
However, Savio at length arrived at the top, but
in an exhausted condition, and on meeting us
was unable to speak on account of weakness. I


SIR JOHN MURRAY GLACIER,


made a thorough investigation of the crevasse by
means of safety ropes, and ascertained the depth
to which the Finn had fallen; also I saw the


174 British Antarctic Expedition.


marks of the ingenious way in which he had saved
his life.

Towards the west of Duke of York Island a
gentle slope led up to a height of about о


MORAINE AT GEIKIE LAND.


where we found ourselves on the top of a glacier,
or rather, a junction of glaciers. "Towards the south,
in the Admiralty Range, a dark, high land rose,
which stood out conspicuously against the white
walls of Mount Sabine. It proved excellent travelling
on the top of this glacier for some few miles until
near the high land, which, towards the east, rose
from Sir John Murray Glacier, and towards the
west from an enormous glacier which I named
Dugdale Glacier. It was on the junction of these
two that we travelled towards this new land, which


I named Geikie Land, after Sir Archibald Geikie.


Sledge Journey in Winter. 175


When we were about a mile from it we struck the
medial moraine, consisting of large broken rocks, and
following it in a somewhat easterly direction we
crossed the moraine at about the middle of the base
line of this new land. This was no easy task, as it
was cut through everywhere by deep crevasses,
covered over with snow, gravel, and rocks in a most
treacherous way. In addition to these crevasses came
the difficulty of conveying the loaded sledges onward
safely on this cover. The rocks tore the slides of the
sledges, and we had to carry most of our provisions
over on to the solid rocks of Geikie Land roped
together, and slowly feeling our way with alpen-
stocks.

A young dog, which had followed our sledges
loose, fell into a crevasse. We heard it howl and
went in search.
Most of us had
given him up
for lost when
we, through our
Sl GSES dis
covered one of
the Finns out in
ihe middle of
the gecer; he
was lying flat
on the ice, and
evidently look-
ing down a crevasse. Through our glasses we did
not see more than one of them, so began to think
that the other might have come to grief; however,
we soon saw them both approach with the lost dog


SIR JOHN MURRAY GLACIER.


"E


176 British Antarctic Expedition.


between them. The brave, faithful fellows had risked
much in saving that dog. Unwisely, they had not been
roped together, neither had they any rope with them,


AFTERNOON TEA.


but when they discovered the dog in the crevasse,
landed on a ledge some 15 ft. below, they unbuckled
their belts, fastened them together, and Savio, lying
on his stomach, lowered the Finn Must into the
crevasse, from which he was luckily pulled up,
together with the dog, by Savio. The crevasse was
broad and seemed to be very deep, and had the dog
not landed on the ledge he would have gone down
some 80 or 100 ft. at least.

On 12th September the doctor, Lieut. Colbeck,
Mr. Bernacchi, both Finns and myself, started at
7 o'cdock in the morning from the stone hut. We
scaled the glacier and traversed the distance to


Sledge Journey in Winter. 177


Geikie Land ; and by following the moraine on the
eastern side of Dugdale Glacier we succeeded in
bringing our sledges with the outfit a considerable
distance upwards. But the gradient got steeper and
the crevasses more numerous, until progress by sledge
was impossible; then we packed ourselves, roped
together the doctor, Colbeck, myself and the Finn
Savio, and cut our way upwards in the hard blue
glacier. Step by step we rose until we were a few
thousand feet up as indicated by the aneroid. At
last the ascent became so steep that further progress
was impossible, we all of us were then roped
together at a place where our only foothold was
that cut by the pick of the alpenstock, about the


“ROPED TOGETHER


WE STRUGGLED
UPWARDS.”


7,


_ _ n


Size оѓ our hand. Towards the left an almost

perpendicular wall rose; and to the right the glacier

precipitated itself into a crevasse at a degree of about
N


178 British Antarctic Expedition.


seventy. A slip of the foot of one of us would then
probably have sent us all into eternity, and as the
small lumps of snow and ice, with accelerating speed


ON THE MORAINE OF DUGDALE GLACIER.


loosened by our feet, rushed downwards towards the
crevasse below us, we could not but consider our
chances in case we should go the same way. The
worst of it would have been that we should have had
such a long time before we arrived at our destination,
and still had the certainty of destruction in view all
the time while sliding speedily down.

Not only is Duke of York Island in itself of the
greatest interest scientifically, and also of direct
practical importance, but its position, similar to that
of Doubtful Island—discovered by Sir James Clark
Ross—illustrates that there is a remarkable land
formation which, in close vicinity of great glaciers,


Sledge Journey in Winter. 179


makes it very difficult to decide whether the land
really is an island or joined to the mainland as a
peninsula.

The discovery of Duke of York Island throws a
new light on the theory which, because of its un-
certainty in my opinion, caused Sir James Clark
Ross to name his discovered island Doubtful Island.
Duke of York Island is cut through from east to
west by broad deep quartz reefs. May it here
suffice to say that minerals of value occur in this
vicinity, and that undoubtedly, in time to come,
science to a great extent will receive that support


ON THE COAST OF DUKE OF YORK ISLAND.


from commerce which the progress of civilization
justifies, and that future Antarctic exploration never


will be in want of financial support.
N 2


180 British Antarctic Expedition.


The glacier formed by the union of the Murray
Glacier and the Dugdale Glacier is covered by a
very thick medial moraine at the N.W. side of
Geikie Land, in breadth about one English mile, or
perhaps somewhat less. The smooth and unbroken
ice-sheet formed at this junction owes undoubtedly
both properties to that great pressure which must


MORAINE STUDY.


needs prevail by the presence of Duke of York
Island just projecting at the edge of this large
inland ice-sheet. This land parts the descending
ice-sheet into two separate broken glaciers which
descend in a steep gradient into the sea.

Officially I took possession of Duke of York
Island for Sir George Newnes, under protection of
the Union Jack.


"GNV'ISI ЯЧОА AO AJAA


Sledge Journey in \Vinter. 183


We continued to have a plentiful supply of fish.
We caught very many of an unknown species just
where the glacier to the west of Duke of York
Island descends into the Bay. We generally caught
them in cracks in the ice, near ice walls formed by
the descending glacier.

I had at that time a narrow escape from falling
into a crevasse in a glacier, but managed to save
myself by throwing my alpenstock quickly across the
mouth of the crevasse.

We experienced some very heavy gales on our
sledge journey into Robertson Bay, the gusts of
wind starting fields of snow in motion, which
descended and completely buried our little stone
hut.

The last report from Camp Ridley told that
Mr. Hanson was in a rather low condition, he
having lost feeling in his legs, and only able to
walk with difficulty. He was under the treatment
of the doctor, who applied the electric battery to
his legs.

By one of the Lapp on ski I received the
following letter from the doctor :—


Camp RIDLEY,
20, 9, .99.
fee € E BoRCHGREVINK,
Commander of British Antarctic Expedition.


On my arrival in Camp Ridiey on the 13th
inst. I found Mr. Hanson in pretty good spirits,
but not as well as I had hoped. The gas poisoning,
about which Mr. Bernacchi gave you a report, had
put his general health back somewhat. His appetite


184 British Antarctic Expedition.


is small, and his digestion is not quite satisfactory.
His pulse is quick, and the swelling in his legs
larger than it was. He seems to walk with more
difficulty than before. After having treated him for
a week I find him, however, now better.


According to your instructions,


(Signed) Dr. Н. Кіоғѕтар.


BEFORE THE SUN ROSE ABOVE THE HORIZON.


On 4th October I started back to Camp Ridley
with Mr. Fougner.  Elléfsen and Must wc Je
behind for collecting purposes - lhey were to
remain in the stone hut until some message was
received from the main camp. With them I left ten
dogs, three sledges, and a good supply of provisions.

On the young seal which we brought from
Robertson Bay to Camp Ridley Т discovered
numerous ticks; they seemed to worry the seal
considerably ; I secured several of them in spirit.


Sledge Journey in Winter. 185


On arrival at Camp Ridley I found Mr. Hanson’s
condition very critical He grew daily worse and
worse, and took very little nourishment; he was
also rather low-spirited.

I had then been away from Camp Ridley seven
weeks, and already on the 7th October, not trusting
the ice conditions for sledge journeys much longer,
and wishing to get Ellefsen and Must back to the


TERMINATION OF

THE MEDIAL MOR-

AINE AT DUGDALE
GLACIER. ^ d


main camp, they being still at the stone hut, I
decided to set out again alone with a team of dogs
and some provisions, to assist them. Оп arriving
at the stone hut in Midwinter Camp, I found them
away. After a brief meal I wrote Pacem the
necessary instructions, left the dogs and sledges at
the hut, packed some provisions in my knapsack,
and started back on ski to the main camp, where


186 British Antarctic Expedition.


I arrived at 11 Р.м., having that day covered more
than forty-six miles.
On my arrival home I found Hanson very bad.


VIEW IN VICTORIA LAND.


On the 8th October the doctor thought Hanson so
ill that he was obliged to sit up with him night and
day. Mr. Hanson vomited continually. On the
roth October Hanson was still very bad, and the
doctor and I divided the night into two watches at
his side. In spite of the doctor’s care and attention,
Hanson’s condition kept getting daily worse.

On this day, roth October, Mr. Fougner brought
to camp a new species of fish of extraordinary structure.
In Robertson Bay there was an abundance of fish,
and in all we discovered about five different kinds.
One particular species was often over twelve inches
long. The most remarkable one in the fish collection,
however, is a fish about nine to ten inches long, with
a body like that of the jack, and a very long under-
jaw reaching beyond that of the upper, and armed


СЕ БЕ Journey in Winter. 187


with two very sharp, comparatively long, backwards-
inclined teeth. The head occupied nearly one-third
of the entire length of the fish. It is greenish-grey
colour above, while lighter underneath.

Another remarkable fish is one absolutely white,
not of the usual white colour you see in the light
spots of ordinary fish caught in the Northern Hemi-
sphere, but a spotless, dull, milky white. It had much
the shape of a herring.

Of lower organisms, caught principally by the
dredge, Meduse were well represented. One large
jelly-fish was caught near the peninsula, with arms, or
extremities, about twelve yards long; its weight was


NEAR SIR JOHN MURRAY GLACIER.


9o lbs. Smaller jelly-fish, several kinds of star-fish,
shells, sponges, and a variety of shrimps and crustacea
were also secured. At the coast of Franklin Island,


ы.


188 British Antarctic Expedition.


besides the above-mentioned species, a very fine coral
was found.

The magnetic work was going on. Mr. Evans
attended now
to the zoologi-
cal taxidermist
department
while Fougner
took over the
marime fauna
collecting.

On. October
ир Mr. Han:
son seemed to
have become
worse. ie
doctor took a few hours of highly-needed rest,
while Fougner watched at the sick bed.

Early in the morning of the 12th the doctor per-
formed a slight operation on Mr. Hanson, who seemed
to draw his breath with difficulty. I ordered all the
members of my staff out of the hut with the exception
of the doctor and his attendant, Mr. Fougner.

At midnight on the 13th October I crawled into
my sleeping bag outside, but at 2 o'clock in the
morning of the r4th the doctor called me and officially
informed me that Mr. Hanson had not long to live,
and that he had told Mr. Hanson of his condition,
at which he had expressed a wish to say good-bye to
us all. I went in and found him quiet and without
pain. Calmly he bade me his last farewell, and con-
fided to me his last wishes. He himself chose the
place where he wished to be buried—at the foot of a


FROM TWENTY FATHOMS.


4^


Sledge Journey in Winter. 189


big boulder 1,000 feet up on Cape Adare. The whole
staff came in one by one, said good-bye, blessed him,
and left the room. He thanked me for the kindness
he had received at Camp Ridley, and told me that
after all he was not sure whether it was not an
advantage dying away from home: here he did not
see the tears of relatives near and dear to him. Не
had, he said, a tickling sensation in his left arm, and
drew his breath with difficulty, but of actual pain he
assured me he had none. Не also remarked to me
that he had felt more moved when he had been saying
good-bye at home in Norway when leaving with me


BEAUTIFUL CAVES.


for the South, than now when he was about to leave
this world for ever. He had, he said, a feeling
as if he were going to take a long journey. Mr.


190 British Antarctic Expedition.


Hanson asked me that I might make his biography,
if I was going to write such, as short and modest as
possible. On the same day, about 3 o'clock in


ICE-FORMATION.


the afternoon, Mr. Hanson died without pain, and
remained conscious to the very last.

Half-an-hour before he died the first penguin came
back. Enthusiastic as he had always been in his
calling, he asked to see the bird, and on its being
brought to him, he was delighted to examine it.

The doctor's official report says that Hanson
died from occlusion of the intestines.

On the moth October a great many penguins
had arrived ; some stood at their old nests, which
they occasionally left to pick up pebbles, arranging
them about their nests.

On the 2oth October we buried Mr. Hanson..


Ее Journey in Winter. 191


Just before we closed the coffn, Mr. Fougner and
I placed some pressed flowers, which Hanson's wife
had sent in letters to Hobart before we left for
the south, on Hanson's breast; and while we were
thus occupied, the two Finns, according to their
wish, held a Lappish service at the head of the
cofün. It was touching to see these two simple-
minded children of nature, in their native costumes,
standing with bared heads in the cold, singing and
talking alternately to Mr. Hanson's dead body.

We breakfasted early, and after the preliminary
иссе had been made, I read the Lord's
Prayer over the coffin outside the hut. The coffin


3 de outre Ж: xm


THE PENGUINS INVADING THE PENINSULA IN THE SPRING.


was then placed on a large sledge, and covered with
the Union Jack. A light snow which had fallen
during the night made our heavy task somewhat


192 British Antarctic Expedition.


easier. We had to pull the sledge across the
peninsula with ropes to the place where we used to
ascend to the top of the cape. It was a sad and
hard task to bring our dead comrade to his last


AT HANSON’S GRAVE.


resting-place. On arriving at the grave side I read
a short funeral service ; then we lowered him down,
covered him over, and departed.

Penguins continued to arrive on the peninsula
in great numbers, and we looked forward eagerly
to the time when we might expect to get eggs. I
continued during the remainder of October to send
out expeditions in the vicinity of Robertson Bay,
with satisfactory results.

On the 27th a gale started which lasted for five days.
The ice-pack seemed to begin to slacken at this date.

On October 28th Dr. Klovstad tested our sights


Sledge Journey in Winter. 193


by the range-finder. Roasted penguin now formed
a repast at all meals, and sometimes on Sundays
we ate their hearts only, which, when properly
roasted—for us, at least—seemed a delicacy. On
the 31st I shot five skuagulls, all male birds.

I placed oak water-tight casks, with short reports
of our proceedings, both in the hollows of icebergs
and on the floes. The following is a copy of the
communication placed in these casks :—


* CAPE ADARE, VICTORIA Lanp, November ist,
1899.— This is placed in the cave of an iceberg,
situated two English miles west of Cape Adare,


ICE-FORMATION.


the British Expedition under my command being

successful in its object, but has lost one of its

members, the zoologist Hanson, who died on the
©


194 British Antarctic Expedition.


14th October from occlusion of the intestines. Any-
body who should find this is kindly requested to
forward it as soon as possible to the Royal Geo-


CAPE ADARE IN SPRING,


graphical Society of London, stating longitude and
latitude where it was found, also conditions under
which it was found, whether any icebergs were in
sight, what wind and current prevailed at the time,
and finally, the finder’s name and address.


“(> E. BorchGRevink.


I enclosed also the photo of the iceberg.

The Greenland bitches had half-a-dozen puppies
each, and all did very well. It was curious to watch
the marked difference in the habits and manners of the
Greenland dogs to that of their brethren from Siberia.
The former were.much more wild, and seldom or never


Sledece Jouriey in Winter.


195


mixed with the other dogs, nor did they attach them-
selves as much to man as the Siberian dogs did.
Lieutenant Colbeck and Mr. Evans arrived in good
health on the morning of the 2nd November from an
expedition in Robertson Bay, with a very good col-
lection, and with the following meteorological notes


by Mr. Colbeck :—


Day | Houn | Camp: [иш Ther. | Wind.
Oct ober.
26 | ga.m.|C. Ridley, 28:66| 5:0 West
її бый Sox males 28170) шасе SSB.
S.W. of | | |
| Warning. |
Glacier. | |
|
| | | |
27 102.m. Do 2879 130 SSE.
loam Do | ew оге)
|
|
28 | кыту 00 28'92—3 [5.5.Е.
|


| slight


| aE Short


Remarks.


Light breeze, overcast,
misty over mountains.

Strong gale with much
drift snow. We had a
southerly wind
during the afternoon
which freshened into a
galle ai 7 PIN РЫШЫ)
camp at оо юв
During the afternoon the
upper clouds were work-
ing up rapidly from N.W.

Strong gale, cloudy,
quantities of snow drift,
squalls of hurricane force
intervals. In
the evening barometer
was oscillating between
28'7 and 28:85.

Strong gale with drift
snow, sky partially
clouded, struck camp at
II a.m., made for Protec-
ton Cove, following the
edge of the barrier and
coase line «thence о
Crescent Bay. Examined
the depót and renewed
our provisions, and then
proceeded to Midwinter
Camp. Gale moderating
a little, sky clouded, drift
snow on glacier.


Q 2


—


British Antarctic Expedition.


Day. | Hour.
October.
28 | 9 a.m.
29 | 9 a.m.
29 | 9 p.m.
3° | 9 a.m.
30 | noon
3o | 9p.m
Sm уаш

|
|
|
|
|

November.

I 9 a.m


Camp. |


| Mid |
winter |
Camp. |
Do.
Do.


Do.


Do.
Do.
Do.


Barmtr.


28°90)


28:83
28°70)


28°65


| 28:58
| 28°35
| 28°70


Ther. | Wind.
= |
4 SSE
=i BSE)
I-z (SSE |
B |
|
2
| |
| |
ay |
| у SE
| |
| |
| |
| |
26 | Calm |
(Ther. being in|
the | sun.


Remarks.


Strong breeze E.S.E.


| in the forenoon, which
freshened into a strong


gale and hauled to the
S.S.E. later оп ш the
day. Heavy drift snow,


| sky cloudy, terrific squalls


gp.m. Strong gale, sky
cloudy, much drift snow.
and


Similar wind


| weather.


Do.
Do.
Mod. gale and clear,


| less drift snow. 4 p.m.


gale abated, and after a
short spell of calm, fresh-
ened from the N,N.W.,
crossed the glacier to
Geikie Land in the even-
ing. 9 to r1 p.m. Mod.
gale N.N.W. sky clear.


Calm and cloudy, light
snowfall, struck camp at


| 4 p.m., and proceeded to


C. Ridley. Mod. N.N.W.
wind sprang up àt 5 p.m.


| snowing, coast-line ob-


steering Юг
and


scured,
Warning Glacier,


| travelled close into shore.
| Arrived in camp 2 p.m.


Passed several flocks of


| penguins en route for the


western shore, and saw
about 50 seals on the trip
back to camp.


Sledge Journey in Winter.


197


The following are the meteorological observations
taken at Camp Ridley during the same time :—


October, 1899.


Day.| Hour. | Barmtr.

26 |g a.m. 28:882

9 p.m. 28:772

27 |9 a.m. 28:664

9 p.m. |28 706,

28 |9 a.m. |28: 862,

9 p.m. 28:802

29 |9 a.m. 28:794

9 p.m. |28* 702

зо |9 a.m. |28: 582

9 p.m. 28:478.

31 |9 a.m. |28:638|
November.

I |Ir a.m. 20 072|


E m ru Wind. Force, Мах. Min. | Remarks.
о | oo
37°4| 672| @°® SW | т | 6:8|—0'5|Snowing
Duo оо peal Calm) o | | .. |Snowing
| | (drift)
1/7135 1470 14:10 [Biss Bi: 7 ISO 5*0
I9*o|12'0 OESE] 9 20 уу
| | | | |; wind
15'010'0 того Sele 6 |15 '8 6:2, 75 m.
ил 2 eene LSID) 2
пя?) AOS! 29180580) 4 шди 2'2
1 O IO IOESE 6 |
Eno Sl тол mero) ES IT) 7 |72 O
[2 220) ЛЕ БЕ 2 | ‚ | Squalls
| | | | | | force
| 8-5 п22) лод Ы 4 5:2 —2°8 5
| |
| | | |
E J004 5. | ©°Б | 6:8 — 2'5 Snowing


CHARTER УШ
AMONG THE PENGUINS.


On the 3rd November we gathered our first
penguin eggs, which we devoured with eagerness.
I at once ordered my staff to commence collecting
eggs, which we put down in salt, in case the vessel
should not return, and we should be left for a longer
time than we expected.

When Dr. Klovstad heard that the first eggs
were laid, he implored me in his calm way not
to let the members eat mesh eses uct them
because he liked to study the progress of our
health at the time; and seeing that we all very
much required fresh albuminoids, although suffering
severely himself from the want, he knew that the
supply of eggs would detract from the valuable
studies he was making of us at the time. This
was an enthusiasm which I fully appreciated, as
much, in fact, as the doctor appreciated a good
feed of eggs himself the next morning! During
the winter, both away from and in the main camp,
we had lived chiefly on seal-beef; now penguin
flesh and eggs formed a great repast. Mr. Fougner
was now doing very valuable work in the marine
fauna department. Не returned from the ice with


Among the Penguins. 199


a very good catch in his net, including some new
kinds of star-fish of spider-like appearance, and
also some shrimps of unknown species On the
6th November Mr. Fougner was busy placing his
specimens in bottles with formalin and spirit, while
Mr. Evans was busily occupied egg collecting.

The peninsula was now literally covered with
penguins (Eudyptes Adehae), and still a constant


“WEDDED, (Eudyptes: Adeliae.)


stream of new arrivals could be seen far out on the
ice, like a long, endless black snake winding in
between the ice-floes. As no open water was to be
seen anywhere, these welcome travellers must have
had a long walk. In half an hour the two Finns
collected 435 penguin eggs for reserve stores. I
got daily reports now from the top of Cape Adare,
to find out whether the ice conditions had changed,
and for the purpose of securing reliable data in
regard to the ice conditions in the bay.


200 British Antarctic Expedition.


On the oth November, being the birthday of
H.R.H. the Prince of Wales, the Union Jack was
hoisted on the flagstaff.

On this day I took with me the Finn Must,


EUDYPTES ADELIAE IN THE ACT OF TURNING THEIR EGGS,


three sledges, and thirty dogs, and travelled to
the eastward of Cape Adare amongst very heavy
screw ice. Many Pagodroma Nivea were nesting
among the rocks; they kept up a continual noise
during the night. A large amount of gravel and
stones continued to fall from the top of the cape.
The collapsible canvas boats proved very useful on
this journey. By sleeping in the unfolded boat
much was gained in safety, as we were thus ready
for any casualty which might happen when travelling
in late spring on the ice. We let it stand on its
keel, placed our sleeping-bags side by side on the


Among the Penguins. 201


flat bottom inside, covered the boat over with the
sail, which fitted both the boat and the sledge, and
besides being secure against any accident, we laid
absolutely dry.

On November roth we had a fairly good run
for some miles on very smooth ісе, and proceeded
about twenty miles down the coast. Towards the
north the continual roar of the breakers was kept
up. At places we had only a mile of ice to travel
on between the perpendicular walls of Victoria Land
and the open, raging Antarctic Ocean. Large cracks
blocked our road at places, and the boat had to be.


EUDYPTES ADELIAE ON THEIR NESTS.


taken from the sledge, expanded, and placed in the
crack for the purpose of conveying dogs, sledges,
and provisions to the other side. The average
thickness of the ice was from two to three feet,


202 British Antarctic Expedition.,


strongly worn underneath by the current. A large
finned whale rose out of a broad crack near our
sledge, and its spouting sounded like escaping steam


“THEIR NESTS WERE FOUND AS FAR AS 1,000 FEET UP.”


from the boilers of a big liner. About 9 А.м. the
loose ice masses in the ocean about a mile from us
started to run south-eastwards with a speed of from
five to six knots. Even minor icebergs were moving
perceptibly in the same direction. The wind, which
was of little force, blew from the S.E.

There was roar of screwing in the pack towards
the E. Through the rise and fall in the tempera-
ture, pebbles and rocks from the perpendicular walls
of Victoria Land were continually loosened, and
gfeat gravel rushes descended om > to ihe ies
making it dangerous to travel near the mountain wall.
We passed two white seals fighting fiercely with


Among the Penguins. 203


each other, the fore parts of their bodies covered
with blood.

On the 11th November, while travelling in the
evening, my sledge broke through the ice, and it was
with great difficulty that Must and myself managed to
save the team and gear. The sledge went straight
through, but one runner hung on to the edge O the
ice. We took the twelve dogs from the other sledge
as quickly as possible, hooked them on to the half-
submerged sledge, and by dint of hard pulling we
brought it on to the ice again ; but it was evident that
ice travelling by this time had become very risky.
The pack seemed to be clearing away towards the east.


COLLECTING EGGS IN THE SPRING.


Projecting ice blocks were seen moving with the
current towards the horizon. With short interruptions
we had continually experienced heavy gales, some of


204 British Antarctic Expedition.


which exceeded over ninety miles an hour. The
gales naturally checked to a considerable degree the
progress of sledge expeditions in Victoria Land in
the vicinity of Cape Adare, where such meteorological
conditions ruled. Nearly all the provisions had to be
brought on sledges, as little bird life is seen beyond
the coast-line, and the frequent gales will always
necessitate a great percentage of idle camping days,
when much of the provisions for the inland journey


EUDYPTES ADELIAE ON THE ICE.


will be eaten without a corresponding distance having
been travelled. According to our meteorological
observations, no one ought, in my opinion, to start a
sledge journey in those latitudes without taking into
consideration the likelihood of getting at least 20
per cent. of checking gales. We had not here those
aids which are found in the north, not the Arctic
fauna, such as bears, foxes, musk-oxen and reindeer ;
here within the Antarctic Circle life depends entirely
upon a careful selection of the necessary provisions,


“ACI LONTAdS


Among the Penguins. 207


and without hampering oneself with too heavy loads,
nearly double the quantity of provisions necessary
for a certain distance to be travelled must be taken,
just because of those heavy gales mentioned, which
not only make it difficult to travel, but difficult to
Gee lhc facts, besides the great heights of
Ке а Land with its difficult glaciers, give the
travelling within the Antarctic Circle quite another
aspect CO ihat бї the Arctic: Also at sea in the
pack-ice, it seems to me that the difficulties presented
by the screwing must needs be greater than in the
КОП In the vicinity of Cape Adare, a position
which corresponds to that of Northern Norway in
the Northern Hemisphere, the ice and meteoro-
logical conditions afford much greater danger to
the traveller than do those higher latitudes in the
North which are ruled by average temperatures
сша to those at Cape Adare.

It-seems as if an early break-up of the ice in
the bay, eastwards of the land stretching from Cape
Adare down to the active volcanos Erebus and
Terror, takes place every year; and occasionally, I
presume, the ice even breaks up for weeks at a
time in late autumn and early spring; thus travel-
iis at sea in the pack, as well as in Robertson
Bay and the big Ross’ Bay to the east, always
will be a perilous undertaking. In my opinion,
successful exploration within the Antarctic Circle
must needs. be local; I mean, confined to опе
locality. If too big a field for operations be
attempted, the natural conditions and the varying
Antarctic season would cause a failure. There
ought also to be a close co-operation between


208 British Antarctic Expedition.


expeditions on land and at sea, between vessel
and sledges. These facts soon became evident to
me as the season drew onwards.

Up to the middle of November very little change


CAMP RIDLEY.


BIRD’S-EYE VIEW OF CAMP RIDLEY.


was to be seen in the general ice-pack, although
some open canals were met with on a sledge journey
which the Finn Must and myself carried on to the
east of Cape Adare, principally for the purpose of
studying the ice conditions. The canals closed
again, however, and not until the end of November
did noticeable changes take place in the general
ice-pack.

Although the penguin colony seemed to fill the
very ground of the peninsula, new arrivals continued
even after the penguins which arrived first had been
sitting on their eggs for a fortnight. The penguin
rookery at the peninsula of Camp Ridley at Cape
Adare was the same as when I visited it in 1894.
The penguins literally covered the ground; their


Among the Penguins. 209


nests lying on the top of the guano deposits, and
consisting of small pebbles. І remember I often
wondered, after my first visit, how the penguins
managed to get the material for their nests, and
I presumed that they brought it from the sea-shore.
NE Шоу сус they seldom did. The pebble
supply generally came down to the peninsula from
the top of the cape, driven by the furious gales,
aude could not but recollect the old proverb
which runs: “It’s an ill wind that blows nobody
good ;” and the penguins usually had a very busy
time after one of those very strong gales which we,
however, did not appreciate. Those penguins


EUDYPTES ADELIAE WITH THEIR YOUNG ONES.


(Eudyptes Adeliae) which we met on the outward

voyage have nearly all of them black throats, and

so have the myriads on the peninsula at Cape

Adare in the early spring. However, I was enabled
p


210 British Antarctic Expedition.


to solve the question whether the black-throated
penguin is of the same species as the white-throated
one or not, later in the season, when the young
ones were nearly full-grown. The full-grown young
ones had more or less white throats, and no
doubt at my first visit to Camp Ridley in 1894,
when I found the penguin colony consisted almost
entirely of white-throated birds, they were evidently
well-advanced young ones. The absence of the
black-throated penguin at that time is easily
explained by the fact that the old ones, uncharitable
as it may seem, leave their young ones and
go to sea towards the time their offspring should
be able to look after themselves. Hence I believe
that it had been a somewhat more favourable
season for the penguin colony at the time of
my first. visit to Cape Adare, as the date of that
visit was much earlier in the season than when the
old penguins left their young ones m 1000 l
noticed that the young birds generally found their
mothers whenever they wanted food, and soon
began. to pay visits to their . neighbours - and
mix amongst them; but a mutual understanding
seemed to have been arrived at by the old penguins
not to quarrel as much as at the time of love-making.
They seemed to realise the necessity of falling into
each other's peculiarities as much as possible.

When the old penguins left, the young ones,
being able, like the rest of their kind, to live for a
long while without food, remained on shore until
starvation forced them to work for their own living,
then they too went to sea and left their birthplaces
until the next short summer.


Among the Penguins. 211


We all watched the life of the penguins with
the utmost interest, and I believe and hope that
some of us learnt something from their habits and
characteristics. It was most curious to see these
birds as they invaded the peninsula in the spring,
long bewe the ice broke. From the r4th
October one continual stream of penguins waddled
over the ice towards their summer residence ; like so
many people, they walked
after one another. Some
ol them had evidently


LONDON ANTARCTICA.


come to grief in the screw-ice, having crushed feet and
flippers. They at once started nest-making on their
arrival, picking their old places and bringing new
pebbles to the nest. During the time of love-
making—when they were studied most attentively by
my bachelor staff—it goes without saying that they
had many hard fights. On sunny days the male
bird stood erect in the old nest, his head stretched
upwards, his beak towards the zenith, and while he
P2


212 British Antarctic Expedition.


moved his flippers backwards and forwards he
produced a hoarse, suffocating sound. The female
listened attentively to this Antarctic love-song.


FAMILY TROUBLES.


It was curious to see how some lazy penguins
picked those pebbles which, through the care and
work of years, had been successfully accumulated by
one when this one happened to turn his back ; and
the evident unconcern and innocent behaviour of
these thieves when caught in the act was a source
of great amusement. The rightful proprietor of the
pebbles would pursue the culprit most energetically,
running after it and hitting it with its flippers until
both were quite exhausted and covered with blood.
During this fight they generally seemed to remember
the cause of the quarrel, but I noticed that, as a
rule, the one who first gave in walked off with the


Among the Penguins. 213


pebble, while the victorious one, blinded by success,
was left with the honour.

At all times the penguin life in the spring was
most entertaining, showing that the inhabitants of
the far South, while teaching much, have also much
to learn. Considering the multitude, it must be
said that, as a whole, they formed a most well-
regulated and peaceful community.

Generally they lay two eggs; very seldom are
three found in one nest. Both male and female
divide their time on the eggs for a month. In the
summer of 1899 they sat from the beginning of


APTENODYTES FORSTERII.


November to the beginning of December. The
young ones were covered in a large grey coat of soft
down. They are well fed by the old ones until they
are about half-grown ; so well, indeed, are they fed


214 British Antarctic Expedition.


that they were at times seen unable to move, and
much resembled a small bag standing on the ground ;
and the food acted both as nourishment and as a
necessary ballast during the heavy gales, when,
however, very many of the young ones perished.
The young penguins were most of them now large,
grey and downy ; though some were still in the egg.
When the mother penguin feeds the young one, the
latter puts the whole of its head into the beak of its
parent and stuffs its beak right into the mother's
throat, which, by a shaking movement, brings the
food up. It was curious to see when a gale suddenly
surprised the colony. Ordinarily the penguins sat
upright, or lay on their nests with their heads in
different directions, but immediately a gale began
to blow they all laid down with their beaks towards
S.E., from which direction we had the strongest
gales. They looked like soldiers bivouacking on a
battle-field. How well they must be able to main-
tain the necessary heat for the eggs. This change
їй thei. ways was a relie £o our eyes, as the
sameness, the want of vegetation, the lack of
distractions told heavily upon all minds, and the very
least change from the ordinary routine of that limited
life “which surrounded us at once acted as an
entertainment. When the young penguins were
about half grown they were strange to see, half
covered by their down and half by their new quill
plumage. Of course, the whole of the young penguin
had a suit of new quills under its downy ulster when
it was a little more than half grown, but the falling-off
of the down in some places and not in others left the
young bird in a most comical dress. I noticed that


Among the Penguins. 215


very few of the old penguins managed to keep both
of their young ones alive, one generally succumbing
to the benefit of the stronger. It was also curious to
see how all the young ones flocked together in big


patches as
‘soon as the
old ones
began to go
iR» sed. and
equally
strange was
it to see how
these parents
of the young
penguins, who
in paternal
affection still
visited their
young ones
a few times
before they
nally leit
them, found
their own off-
spring among
so many
thousands.
The worst


ROYAL LONDON YACHT CLUB’S ENSIGN
AT CAPE ADARE


enemy of the penguin is the skuagull (Lestris),
which constantly soared over their nests, watching
for an opportunity when they might steal an egg or


catch a young one.


As I already observed in 1895,


I now also often saw two of these birds attack a


216 British Antarctic Expedition.


penguin family ; whilst one kept the old ones away
the other took the young one. The penguins were
considerably more afraid of the skua gulls than they


PROMISE OF SPRING,


were of us, although we gradually utilised the flesh of
many of them for food. The flesh of the penguin
was rather good, especially as we prepared it in the
main camp, where we first boiled it, whereby it lost a
good deal of the blubbery taste, and afterwards
roasted it. When served on our wooden table under
the name of “ptarmigan” it was considerably
improved as an edible.

Of the King Penguin (Aptenodytes Pennanti) we
did not see any.

I think it would be very wise as well as interesting
if the next Expedition took out an incubator. We
took the temperatures of the penguins while they
were sitting, and I do not doubt that with care some


Among the Penguins. 217


very fine specimens of young birds, of all kinds, could
be obtained in this way, besides giving an interesting
occupation.

It seems to me evident that both the seals and the
penguins obtain their great speed in water less by the
propelling movement of their legs than by a snake-like
movement through the water, vertically applied; it
naturally changes the centre of gravity, and by this
rapid falling from a higher to a lower level, aided by
the propelling movement, they attain such speed that
the quick rise to the same level again is easily accom-
plished. The seals use their fore flippers mainly to
keep their balance and for steering purposes, while the
penguins apply their wings to the same use. By
constantly observing this movement of the seals and


A LAGOON AT CAMP RIDLEY.


penguins I was compelled to compare it with the
flight of birds. Already on the outward voyage I
had keenly watched the albatross, which evidently


218 British Antarctic Expedition.


also moves forward principally by a subtle change of
its centre of gravity. The speed obtained in water by
penguins is remarkable, and they repeatedly shot up
through small cracks in the ice, sometimes a couple of
yards in the air, and a good few yards on to the
snow-covered ice-floes ; and from the kayaks I often
watched them in the crystal clear water as they
rushed under me like so many torpedoes.

The skuagulls arrived somewhat later than the
penguins, and their nesting also took place later.
They had their nests in the heights, for instance,
1,000 feet up on Cape Adare, amongst the rocks;
while a small skua rookery was also to be found. some
50 feet above the peninsula on a small rocky gallery
close to the perpendicular wall of the cape Them
eggs were a greyish brown, with dark brown stains,
generally two eggs were found in each nest. The
young ones were exceedingly pretty in their fluffy
coats of light grey down. The old skuas were very
bold at ordinary times, and attacked us frequently with
wings and beak when we climbed the rocks; but
when they had young ones their indomitable courage
and audacity surpassed that of any other bird of prey
I have seen.

The Oceanites Oceanicus also hatched on Victoria
Land. I found their nests in the cracks of the
rocks, under stones and boulders. Although we
secured eggs from them, we got no live young ones,
but from the multitude of dead young ones in their
old nests, I should say that very many perish every
year. Like the rest of the petrels, they always spat
out the yellow, evil-smelling oil from their beaks when
in danger. I caught several of them on their nests,


Among the Penguins. 219


and found that they behaved very much like the
Pagodroma Nivea, the elegant white petrel, the life
of which interested me even more than that of the


penguins.
From the time we first entered the icy regions
they had soared around the vessel. They were


SKUA-GULL (Zeszris) ON THE WATCH.


difficult to distinguish against the pure white snow.
Spotless and white, this bird, with its large black
eyes, black beak, and black webbed-feet, is perhaps
the most striking bird of the Antarctic Regions. It
seemed almost transparent as it sailed swiftly along
in the rays of the midnight sun. The couple are
greatly attached to one another, and the courage
of the male bird to help his mate when in danger
marked. It builds its nest in cavities of the


220 British Antarctic Expedition.


rocks, or cracks in the mountain side, and lays but
one egg.

The brown-backed petrel, with white borders on
the wings, was
also evidently
nesting on Vic-
toria Pandi
However, we
never found it
in its. nest
When we first
approached Cape
Adare, dense
flocks of them

FOUND IN SHALLOW WATER. sailed about in

the gaes Dur-

ing the summer we saw few of them, but in the

autumn they again sailed about in the air at

great heights, while during the gales they swept

low over the peninsula like a cloud. Although 1

never found them on Geikie Land, I believe that
they have their nests in that vicinity.

The Gigantic Petrels also visited Camp Ridley.
They were very scarce during the summer, but we
saw several of them during the autumn. We did
not find one of their nests, and their visits to the
peninsula were always short and interrupted ; and,
to a great extent, I ascribe their visits to Robertson
Bay and our peninsula to strong gales at sea, which
drove them in towards shore for shelter. In fact,
during the strongest gale we had in the autumn,
they arrived at Camp Ridley the day before the
gale commenced, and left immediately after it was


Among the Penguins. 2021


over. So I, at least, сате to look upon their arrival
as the sign of an approaching gale. These large
birds, which in their flight much resemble the alba-
tross, vary somewhat in colour—perhaps as much
as the lestris—from dark brown to light-faded brown,
and albinos are occasionally seen. I secured one of
these latter, and Captain Jensen secured another.
We had both of us great difficulty in obtaining a
specimen ; a noble, rare bird as he is, he seemed to
soar about higher and more lonely than the rest,
and remarkable was it that an albino—although of
exactly the same species as the dark one—was seldom
or never seen in its company. Whether this is
because the others combine against him and hunt


FROM SHALLOW WATER.


him because of his whiteness, or because he, in
modest ignorance of his value, seeks his own sphere
I do not know, but certain is it that he, willingly or


222 British Antarctic Expedition.


compulsorily, soared about in higher regions than
the rest.

On the 15th November we had 4,000 penguin
eggs secured in salt for reserve provisions.


PAGODROMA NIVEA ON ITS NEST.


How different it was to travel on those bright
nights, instead of having to work in the darkness
as we did in the winter time.

Many of the Pagodroma Nivea were about, and
the air sounded with their original and remarkable
half-whistling, half-shrieking voices. They did not
seem to have immediate intentions of settling down |
to the quiet family life of the season; they were still
seen to flirt about in pairs in the air, though some
of them began to repair their old nesting-places in
cavities of the rocks. Their nests were still in many


Among the Penguins. 223


instances filled with snow, and the bird is gradually
thawing a hollow downwards towards the rock by
sitting at the place from time to time. They were,
however, very restless, and I expected that. sill a
fortnight would go by before they would begin to lay
their eggs.

On the 20th November I discovered a fine
pagodroma on its nest some 300 feet above my tent.
I at once set to work and managed to mine a hole
through the roof of the cave in which it was resting,
so that the light could come in for photographic
purposes. We were unable to get a photo of the nest
as it was, on account of the depth and darkness of the
cave. But Mr. Bernacchi managed to get some very
fine photos, showing the characteristic stratifications
of the rocks.

We daily:
saw fresh proofs
of the audacity
of the skua-
culls Om
several occa-
sions they at-
tacked the dogs,
and nearly all
of us were on
more than one
occasion also
attacked by
them; they shot down from a great height in the
air straight on to our heads, hit us with their wings,
only to rise again and renew the attack. We killed
several of them with short sticks.


PAGODROMA CAUGHT ON ITS NEST.


224 British Antarctic Expedition.


We saw comparatively few of the Emperor
Penguins (A. Forsteri), and were not able to find
their nesting-places. We came across odd ones in
the pack at intervals, and not before the Antarctic
autumn of 1900 did we see several together. At
the end of November we saw more than twenty (?)
at a time. They were then walking slowly into
Robertson Bay. I secured ten of these, and kept
them for some time alive at Camp Ridley. .They
came in shoals, swimming just like the small
penguins, with whom they, however, did not mix.
Undoubtedly they were on their way to their old
nesting-places, and some of them had pretty large
eggs inside them. Their stomachs generally con-
tained crustacea, very small fish, and a quantity of
pebbles.

After the middle of November dark vapour clouds
were continually to be seen towards the eastern horizon.
On November 22nd the temperature was + 18.
I went with the doctor towards the cape and found
a large sheet of open water. There was a strong
current running with a speed of from five to six knots.
Shoals of penguins were jumping about in the open
water. The ice evidently wore rapidly at this time
The current increased in strength perceptibly from
day to day. It did not seem probable that those
abnormally violent gales would blow again before
the autumn, the summer being so far advanced. As
the bulk of the immense ice-pack still remained, with
very small interruptions of open water as far as the
eye could reach, we began seriously to think of the
possibility of there being exceptionally unfavourable
ice conditions, and that the .SowzZerz Cross, if all was


Among the Penguins, 225
well with her still, might be unable to reach us ; and
strict precautions were taken against using more than
the necessary food, while we were continually adding
to our store of provisions by seal beef, penguins,
and eges. Clear, calm, and comparatively warm


days now became frequent, On: the roof of the


FISH FROM ROBERTSON BAV.


hut we felt quite warm, and from time to time the
members could be seen basking оп the sloping
canvas cover.

On November 23rd Fougner and I were watching
the rapidly changing ice conditions near Cape Adare.
Near the open water we saw several penguins,
streams of which were continually kept up to and
from the peninsula at Camp Ridley. Those penguins
coming from the shore were all soiled and dirty
from the guano beds, while those jumping up like


()


x


226 British Antarctic Expedition.


indiarubber balls from the sea were shining like silver
in their white waistcoats.

It was difficult to determine much about the tide on _
account of the local disturbances and the unfavourable
ice conditions. The current at midnight seemed to
be settling westwards with great speed. The effect
of the light of the midnight sun amongst some of
the vapour clouds at the end of Robertson Bay was
magnificent. Towards north and west open water
was to be seen everywhere, while here and there
icebergs were floating about in haloes of the most
delicate pink and crimson imaginable. At the horizon
there was a very strange mirage, telling of open
navigable seas far beyond our limited horizon.

On. November 25th а Ny Gale PUE
from the SE with a great deal of Snow d
This drift and the dust from the guano-beds made it
suffocating to get about outside the camp. Large
flocks of Pagodroma Nivea and  brown- backed
petrels pierced the air.

On November 27th Mr. Evans brought in his
first skuagull egg ; the colour was light green, brown,
or grey, with dark brown spots.

The average barometer reading showed a con-
siderable rise since the winter. Mr. Bernacchi and
Lieutenant Colbeck were making the final arrange-
ments for observations of the total eclipse, which
was to take place on December 3rd.

On December ist the flag was run up in honour
of the Princess of Wales, whose birthday it was;
and as it was also my birthday, each member
received double the allowance of biscuits.

Our expectations with regard to the eclipse were


Among the Penguins. 227


doomed to disappointment, the 3rd December turning
out overcast. We had the telescopes and other
instruments in position, and Mr. Bernacchi and
Lieut. Colbeck were in attendance; however, some
interesting temperature records and time observations
were recorded in connection with the eclipse.

The ice now began to break up in earnest. It


JELLY-FISH WEIGHING 90 LBS.


was clear that all the pack-ice must needs take a
westerly course according to the prevailing wind,
Bund cb HnosheHy according to the current. It is
therefore likely that my instructions to Captain
Jensen not to go further west than long. 170°, and
thus take an easterly course, would cause the
Southern Cross to reach open water at a com-
paratively early part of the Antarctic summer.
On the 6th December a broad strip was stretching
a2


228 British Antarctic Expedition.


from the point outwards towards the west. The
wind had worn the ice and snow a good deal.
The high ice barrier which rose through the screwing
of the ice on the north-western side of our peninsula
had diminished considerably.

In the open sheet of water the penguins who
had a holiday from parental duties seemed to amuse
themselves by water sports. They jumped about,
dived and turned near the surface, and seemed
also to be playing at hide-and-seek amongst the
hummocky ice-floes; they did not seem to be in the
water for feeding purposes at all; in fact, those
penguins which were off eggs were seen to wash
themselves in the cavities on the surface of the ice
where the green polar ice formed both the bottom
of this their natural tub, and a looking-glass for
them toilet. Phe penguins seem very vain birds,
and if one had a soiled spot on its white waistcoat,
were it ever so small, it was at once noticed by
the others and made the most of in their small
way. It was very funny to see them seemingly
criticising each other.

It was strange to see those penguins who had
just arrived from the shore at the water's edge.
They always came in shoals, and the first arrivals
awaited until the complete number of their mates
from the colony had arrived. Each shoal seemed
to number from fifty to sixty. Arrived at the
waters edge, the birds behaved just like some
people before going into cold water; they hesitated,
shivered, and generally seemed to pull themselves
together before deciding to plunge into the cold
crystal-clear water underneath. The remarkable


Among the Penguins. 229


thing was that they always insisted upon taking
their own time at the edge of the bath before
plunging in, and we could not even drive them
De would rather run back on the ice, or
on to the shore, but if left alone they congregated
in à thick cluster near the brink, discussed matters
animatedly between themselves, whereupon one


MR. FOUGNER WITH JELLY-FISH WEIGHING 90 LBS.


pioneer penguin, with a short “ Quack-quack," dived
in, which served as a signal for the rest to follow
suit; and one by one they dived in at exactly the
same spot in one continual stream, as if poured out
of a bottle. |

The penguins which build their nests in the
steep rocks of Cape Adare, up to 1,000 f, must
indeed work hard to keep their families in such
elevated positions, where they had to carry food up


230 British Antarctic Expedition.


from the sea. Risky must it also be during heavy
gales, and when stones loosen and rush down in the
springtime. Still, the young penguins seemed to


LEOPARD BASKING IN THE SUN.


thrive better in the nests on the mountain side
than on the flat below, and the  nesting-place
for each pair did not cover more than a foot
in diameter, with the precipitous rock on one
side, and the perpendicular smooth rock on the
other. They were also much more hunted by
the skuas, who seemed to have even more pluck
up in the heights, where the penguins were scarcer,
than among the screeching myriads down on the
peninsula.

On the roth December I started on my last
sledge journey into Robertson Bay, principally for
the purpose of securing eggs of the different birds.


Among the Penguins. 231


We secured Pagodroma eggs, and from the Oceanttes
Oceanicus we also obtained some very valuable photos
of these birds on their nests. The egg hunt was
arduous, and at times involved difficult climbing.
On this sledge journey a remarkable discovery
was made by Dr. Klovstad. I had sent him on
a short expedition into Admiralty Range for the
purpose of collecting some specimens of the vegeta-
tion on Geikie Land. When he returned he was
proud to. show me several insects. This discovery
is naturally far-reaching in its information. The
insects were found in the mosses, and their existence


DUKE OF YORK ISLAND.


throws a satisfactory light on our meteorological work,
as it is improbable that the temperatures about Geikie
Land will go much below what we experienced,


232 British Antarctic Expedition.


otherwise the life of insects would not have been
possible. Perchance we had experienced a eom
paratively cold winter? The insects were of three
distinct types, and on return to Camp Ridley the
doctor made some excellent microscopic preparations
of them.

The Finn Savio, evidently put on his mettle by
the doctor's discovery, shortly afterwards triumphantly
entered Camp Ridley with an ordinary blow-fly ; and,
to say the truth, it did startle us at fest until we
found that it was a dead stowaway in a jam-box
from London !

It is important and curious that in both the
marine fauna collection, and in the AZeae collection,
specimens were found proving the existence of
bi-polarity; while in the land fauna, as far as we
know, such do not exist. The existence of organisms
does not develop from the presence of the possibility
of existence for these, but because the element
necessary for the development of these organisms
was brought into conditions which favoured its
development into a complete organism. It seems
thus that the fount whence the element of these
organisms rises exists both within the Arctic and Ant-
arctic Circles, apparently without any communication
through the intermediary zones. Quite different
appear the land fauna, where bi-polarity does not
exist. There are places on the Northern and Southern
Hemispheres which seem to be ruled by the same
climatic conditions and by the same meteorological
conditions, and where any one might expect the
same species to exist; but there «musi. be lacking
some conditions in the one place which are necessary


Among the Penguins. 233


for the existence of certain life in the other, and
vice Versá. Organisms, again, which can be trans-
ferred from one hemisphere to the other, as well of
animals as of plants, adopt quite another appearance
and character by the transfer. It seems, however,
that within the Arctic Circle and the Antarctic Circle
there prevail not only for certain organisms the very


GEOLOGICAL FORMATION OF DUKE OF YORK ISLAND.


identical conditions favourable for the development
of their elements, but the identical elements are also
present, as, for instance, the presence of the lichen
(reindeer moss) proves. It exists in both hemispheres,
and its discovery within the Antarctic Regions by
mcus for the first time, proved the existence of
bi-polarity also in the flora. It seems to me that
the existence, or non-existence, of certain organisms
must needs, in many cases, depend upon the presence


234 British Antarctic Expedition.


or the absence of some, for the development of one
particular element, vital conditions, which, in many
cases have as yet not been identified by us, but which,
perhaps, would give us a valuable link in regard
to the mystery of distribution of organisms.
During
the sledge
journey оп
which the
insects were
discovered,
we pitched
our tent in
Crescent


Bay оп
Duke o
ICE BARRIER NEAR DUKE OF YORK ISLAND. York Island


From there we made a sledge journey into the bay
to the S.E., an arm of Robertson Bay, at the end of
which we found a very low approachable land. It
was a kind of beach rising from the bay to a height
of about 3o ft. This land was partly formed by the
glacier, and partly through stone avalanches from the
mountain side to the N.E. As a marking line between
this work of the glacier and that of the mountain .
ravines, there was a small creek rippling down among
the boulders and rocks from two small lakes which
were formed through the melting of the great Murray
Glacier.

I found a dead white seal on this beach, and
300 yards further up the beach was another seal of
the white kind. Before we returned to Camp Ridley
we thoroughly explored the vicinity to the height


Among the Penguins. 235


of 1,700 feet, at which height we found vegetation.
When travelling back a good deal of water had
accumulated near the coastline, which made the
landing with sledges and gear difficult. During
the time we were camped at the Murray Glacier
a stone rush might have been fatal to us. Early
in the morning Savio and I were awakened simul-
taneously by a strange noise on the mountain above
us. It did not take us long to grasp the situation,
and we quickly crawled towards the openings of our
tents, dragging with us our sleeping-bags, from which
we had had no time to extricate ourselves, and which


IN VICTORIA LAND NEAR SIR J. MURRAY GLACIER.


stuck to us like cocoons. І then saw and heard
what was coming. Savio lost no time then, and
quickly divested himself of his bag, jumping to the
right and left, just after the fashion you may see
over-polite people in the street who cannot make up


236 British Antarctic Expedition.


their minds which side to pass a fellow-being. A
large piece of rock about three feet thick, and like
a wheel in shape, and as big as our tent, was making
a bee-line for our camp with fearful velocity down
the steep mountain side. It had got on to its edge,
and was rolling like a hoop. No wonder Savio found
a difficulty in making up his mind whether to
jump to the right or го the lett Close iby 8
camp the travelling monster took a westerly course,
and settled in a bed of snow some twenty feet
away from us.

As I remarked in 1895, after my first Antarctic
journey, it must strike anyone with an eye for
geological science how the nature of Victoria Land
speaks of evolution. One need only look at the
moraines, the empty glacier beds, and the worn
rocks of Victoria Land, to see how greatly these
lands must have changed during comparatively recent
periods.

On our way home we saw very many seals of the
Weddelli kind.

The seals we encountered іп the pack on the
southward voyage were, as they have always been
found in the Antarctic Regions, very few, all of them
being hair seals. Besides the sea leopard) tie
Weddelli was the best represented species. Then we
found the characteristic white seal of the Antarctic in
greater numbers than I found them in 1894-5, and
Mr. Hanson made, at my special request, as good a
study of this interesting species as time, specimens
and opportunity allowed. As we proceeded south-
wards the number of seals basking together increased
considerably, and in the vicinity of Coulman Island


Among the Penguins. 237


and Cape Constance we saw as many as 300 together.
These were Weddelli. The Rossii was very poorly
represented ; we only secured four specimens of them
altogether. These were three males and one female.
In the vicinity of Cape Adare seals were to be found
nearly all the winter, either on the ice near the blow
holes or in the water at these holes, which they
managed to keep open. The seals were in great
numbers on the beach at Camp Ridley when we


MOTHER AND CHILD (Weddelli).


landed in 1899, and many dead dry seals were lying
partly covered in the guano deposits. These were
undoubtedly of the white kind, some of them having
been quite young seals. I had hoped to have found
that the white seal would breed in Robertson Day,
but was disappointed at finding this was not the
case.

The JVeddeli and sea leopard both bred in
Robertson Bay, and we frequently found the young
ode сібе journeys. They all seemed


238 British Antarctic Expedition.


to live in luxury on fish in Robertson Bay. The
seals, like the penguins, provided us with fresh food,
and from time to time we killed them, and while the
flesh was still warm and smoking, drank the blood as
it spouted out from the wound made by the seal
knife. It tasted blubbery, but I myself regarded it
not alone as food, but as a great remedy against
scurvy. Not unusually they attacked us in the
kayaks, and it was with difficulty we prevented the
kayaks from being torn. Generally we killed them
by help of the seal knife, which, well handled,
despatched them without pain. If the stroke was
clean and bold at the heart, the seal would succumb
almost immediately ; but if hit in a less vital spot
it would struggle considerably, and it was difficult
to kill it with a knife if you had not succeeded at
the first blow. Then they rose on their flippers
and with blood-shot eyes they rushed for you, while
their blood spouted out and stained the pure white
snow. It is hard to: kill a Seal TL mean the tee IS
hard to man, especially within the Antarctic Circle
where the track of man is not yet marked by the
blood of seals, and where men’s bloodthirstiness is
not yet known. Most of the seals allow you to get
quite up to them without moving. Those who attack
you are exceptions, but all of them look at you
with two large, magnificent, moist dark eyes, in
which the majesty of the creature defies you ; then
down plunges the steel of civilisation and the
picture is spoilt.

I had ample opportunities of studying the
Pagodroma Nivea (elegant white petrels) in their
homes during the last sledge journey. Like its


Among the Penguins. 239


appearance, its habits are graceful and strikingly
noble.

We had a very heavy journey to Camp Ridley ;
the snow on the pack was wet and in places the
ice was treacherous. The dogs as usual pulled with
a will, but we had continually to lift the sledges
out of cracks and crevasses in the ice, and it was


D


THE FINN SAVIO IN SPRING, 1900.


in an exhausted condition that we finally arrived
at Camp Ridley. It was a surprise to us that
we had been able to keep all our eggs in the col-
lection from breaking as the sledges had been
frequently upset.

As the time went on the daily reports from
the top of Cape Adare told of improved ice
conditions.


240 British Antarctic Expedition.


On December 21st the Finn Savio conceived rather
a good idea of amusing himself; he caught a penguin,
made a string fast to its legs, took it on board


BORCHGREVINK IN KAYAK.


his “kayak, and used it as «motor power 1
penguin dived and pulled Per and the kayak about
at a great pace, and had he also invented a way
of guiding the penguin, penguins for draught purposes
would probably have fetched a high price on the
Antarctic market. However, for me, his invention
became of some importance, as it unquestionably
supported my theory about the motion of the
penguin in the water; its legs being arrested it
evidently applied its weight for the motion, as the
flippers (or rudimentary wings) are only used for
balance, and would in any case not have sufficed
to obtain such a great speed on the kayak.

Fougner to-day brought a very rich catch in his
shallow-water net, amongst which was a medusa, very
much the shape and colour of a lemon.

Christmas Eve was celebrated by speeches,


Among the Penguins. 241


toddy, extra rations of biscuits, and a longing for
home.

On Christmas Day we had tinned plum-pudding,
and Mr. Evans, in honour of the occasion, baked
cakes; and Mr. Ellefsen even surpassed himself in
the excellence of his cooking.

All the water we drank and used for our cooking
we had, of course, to make from the snow, and the
longing for real water became at last intense.

The Finns, contrary to expectations, proved of very
clean habits. In midwinter Per Savio dug himself an


FOUGNER. EVANS. COLBECK.


A BUSY DAY IN CAMP RIDLEY.


apartment under the snow, some ro feet square and

6 feet high. Here he placed a small iron stove,

and put an iron funnel through the snow. He
R


242 British Antarctic Expedition.


covered the entrance, made a big fire in the stove,
and soon the place was covered with hot, moist
steam. Here he completely undressed and remained
thus for about an hour, just as people take steam
baths in the luxuriously furnished baths in a European
city. Still it was a remarkable feature that it was
about 60° of frost above this icy steam bath. They
(the Finns) seemed to thrive well, and accustomed
to the dark time from the north, their minds did not
seem to suffer much.

On December 27th the report from the top
was to the effect that no ice was to be seen
towards the north, not even through the telescope.
Towards the north-west and also towards the west,
much ice was however in view. Along the beaches
of our peninsula it was getting un afe for travelling.
Several young penguins were out of their shells,
and Mr. Evans, who had taken over Mr. Hanson’s
department, collected specimens of the young ones
from day to day in order to сес sie Senes im
their growth. Mr. Fougner secured a magnificent
specimen of a jellyfish. When I went to the top
of the cape I caught some very fine specimens of
young skuagulls.

New Years Day broke bright and clear with
the Union Jack flying merrily at the flag-staff.
We turned our shirts in the morning. We looked
back with sentiments of pardonable pride on the
work accomplished by us during the year just sped,
feeling that as the young century was rising above
the horizon like the sun after the long Arctic night,
so was the light of knowledge illuminating the
hidden mysteries of the last Zerra incognita on the


"NOLLIQWdX


Gl


AVAVA V AOA


x)


NIA


THT OIAVS ANV


SENIASHSIOHOIOH


Among the Penguins. 245


face of the globe. A young Antarctic day was
born, and we saw a vision of many bold bands of
explorers in our wake, struggling on towards the
goal of scientific certainty.

In the afternoon we had rifle shooting at the
target at 150 yards range with the following
result :—


Me ОЕК О ОК o =- - 7 105410 7 55,5 - >: 05
IMEICunacchi  . - T31 0,0,0, 9,3, I, т E03
Meu ес 7) 75 0.0, 0; 8, 7,0,3,0 . . 49
ШЕЕ АПЫ ek 0.2, 0, 0,0, 9, 7, 6, 3, O E
A Fongers . co 2 a ty Sy Sy iy Oh 0,0. TE
IPod ООО Бо A) 3XT 10/0, 45 45 5.1 .. 47
(оет вебе 4 2, 4, 4,.0,.0,1,2,0,0,0 = . тз
Ole Must s e 7570x512, 5, 1,0,0,0 - - - 33
eC О отаде о, 9.7.5.50 mw. 46


* On January sth, there was open water as far
as the eye could reach towards north and east.
We swept the horizon with the telescope, but no
signs of the returning vessel were to be seen. I
Md hoped to have seen her back ere this, and
although we had stores of resources in case we
should be left for several more years, it was naturally
an anxious time. The fate of the Southern Cross
since she left us the previous year, was a sealed
book to us, as also were the movements in the
great civilised world. It was now very warm in
fe sun. On January roth open water was to
be seen everywhere. The 11th January was the
anniversary of the first sighting of Cape Adare by
Sir James Clark Ross. What a profound admiration
I have for that great British navigator who, without
the valuable assistance of steam, accomplished so


246 British Antarctic Expedition.


much. But how favourable must the ice conditions
of that time have been to have enabled him to
penetrate so far south at such an early date as this.
Great spirit in man who was the successful pioneer
in these regions, how little did I know that I was
destined to be the first in this land ;which you
first told the world existed! In boyhood I read
your difficulties with enthusiasm, and when I now
read them, more than half a century has crowned
your achievements, and I feel that reverence defines
my appreciation. The difficulties were great at that
time; they are now. Inventions have made the
work lighter apparently, in one way; but to utilise
those new inventions creates new difficulties, new
risks, and fresh claims upon the human brain.

On January 18th a violent gale started with
snowdrift from S.E. On the roth it was still
blowing; the wind increased in strength, with the
barometer at 28:830; the dry bulb thermometer
showed 26:5, the wet 26, and the solar 27. d has
gale continued until the 26th and was the longest
we had. The appearance of the air seemed
threatening, and had the Southern Cross been near
land at the time there would have been anxious
hours for those on board. However, had I then
known, as I now do, how local most of these gales
are, I would, perhaps, have been more easy in my
mind about her. Our abode at Cape Adare was,
in fact, lying within a close elliptic isobar of the
lowest barometric pressure within the Antarctic Circle.
The ice had now broken up in Robertson Bay.
During the gales we had experienced the greatest
dryness, or rather the least humidity of the air that


Among the Penguins. 247


had been recorded. Although open water everywhere,
a large number of monstrous icebergs were now seen
drifting northwards past the cape. Some few seemed
to be ruled by a strong undercurrent to visit Robertson
Bay, where the larger ones ran aground. It was an
interesting observation to witness those bergs sail into
the bay straight against a heavy gale, and against the
upper current. The Finn Savio and myself made
several expeditions in kayaks, and secured valuable
specimens of seals and birds.

On January 21st we celebrated King  Oscar's
birthday and drank his health, while the flag was
hoisted.

On January 23rd, the anniversary of my first
landing on the Antarctic continent in 1894, I found
that the season in regard to climate and ice conditions
was not as favourable as in that year. The young
penguins were not so far advanced now as then. On
the 24th most of the penguins had gone to sea again,
and the oldest of the young ones ventured short trips
of swimming exercise. It was insufferable inside now,
as the smell of the guano deposits was very strong.
The wet loose snow which settled in drifts during the
recent long gale melted rapidly, and the vapour there-
from made the air muggy inside the huts. Besides,
our humour always fell with the barometer, and did not
always rise as quickly, especially now that, while waiting
for the vessel, the time hung heavily on our hands,
although there were so many matters to be considered
and talked over. On the 27th I took with me Savio
and two kayaks, and provisions for about.a week. I
wanted to investigate a canine track which I had
found in the snow on the slope on the eastern side of


248 British Antarctic Expedition.


the range of Cape Adare. It had soon got clear to
us all that this track, although undoubtedly left by a
dog, was not that of a dog belonging to our pack.
So keenly are one’s senses sharpened in a community
so small and so far removed from the outer world
when you daily have to fight natural forces that you
observe everything. We followed the track a few
miles down into the bay and found that it did not
return but led on to a great glacier. I rightly con-
jectured that the dog who left this track must have
belonged to the Southern Cross or some other vessel
in the neighbourhood of Victoria Land, as after the
return of the Southern Cross later on 1 ascertained
that the vessel had been in close proximity to Cape
Adare just at the time, and having lost two dogs on
the ice pack it was probably the track of one of these
which we followed. When we could distinguish the
track no longer, seeing no chance of following it up
the steep glacier slopes, where the dog evidently had
experienced great difficulty in proceeding, we camped
on the very small beach where once Mr. Bernacchi,
Mr. Fougner, Savio and myself had nearly lost our
lives. On this occasion also the Lapp and I were
destined to run a great risk. We had just finished a
meal, and I had crawled into my kayak to have a
sleep. Atthe time I had the kayak pulled up on a
slope under the cliff, when suddenly an avalanche of
stone and snow rushed down. The snow nearly
buried my kayak, while some of the stones, of great
size, settled only a few feet from the kayak in which
I was lying. Although Savio had called out the
moment he heard the avalanche, I was not able to
extricate myself from the kayak before it was too


Among the Penguins. 249


late. The happy impulse which at once occurred to
the Finn to secure my safety was to push my kayak
down the slope into the sea. However, the avalanche
was then already so far on the road that he only just
managed to clear himself, while the kayak with
myself in it had a most marvellous escape. Early
on the morning of the 28th January Savio and
I paddled back to Camp Ridley.


THE LARGEST VEGETATION FROM SOUTH VICTORIA LAND:
REINDEER MOSS (LICHEN).


CHAPTER VIH.
RETURN OF THE “SOUTHERN CROSS.


We were all asleep in the hut at Camp Ridley
except Colbein Ellefsen. The Finn Savio and
myself slept heavily after twenty-four hours hard
pulling in the kayaks. Ellefsen had just gone out
of the hut to pull in a bag of coal when he saw a
strange man walking on the peninsula towards him.
The effect upon him, as he afterwards related it to
me, was that he wondered whether he was asleep or
awake ; suddenly to see a new being, a man not one
of us nine—was it a large penguin, a larger species
than the Emperor? However, he soon realised that
it was Captain Jensen, who came along with the mail-
bag on his back. Hurriedly, and in few words, he
ascertained the conditions at the camp, whereupon he
quietly opened the door, banged the bag down upon
the table, and said “ Post!” When we looked out of
our pigeon-holes we saw who it was. He had got old
while he had been away. His responsible position had
told upon him. It was a great moment as we again
shook hands. Quickly the mail-bag was opened
and emptied, and the members looked out for quiet
corners where they, undisturbed, could satisfy their
hunger for news from relatives at home, and from
the great world which had been shut off from us for


Return of the Southern Cross. 251


more than a year. Gradually we heard all the
news—both private and public. Never did we
realise more than then what a big part the daily
newspaper plays in our life. We heard for the
first time about the war in the Transvaal; about
wonderful discoveries in telegraphy, and found
how many alterations of conditions one year might
cause. Interesting was it to hear about those
active steps which had been taken to follow in


THE RETURN OF THE “SOUTHERN CROSS.”


our wake in Antarctic research. We commenced at
once to take those stores from Camp Ridley which
were wanted for our southward journey. The dogs
were taken on board, the sledges, instruments and
fur, and after having visited Hanson's grave, we all
went on board, leaving at Camp Ridley, however,
the huts, a quantity of coal which would have kept
us Wor auetlier yedr,. a considerable amount of
provisions, and a small note from myself to the
commander of the next expedition.


252 British Antarctic Expedition.


The following is a detailed list of the provisions,
etc., left at Cape Adare in February, 1900 :—


Commodity. Barrels. | Cases. Tins.
Flour (crew and cabin) 4 — | £56 about
P (Hungarian оао) == 4 —
Rice (Batna) л o a — 4 um
Barley Е = 2 =
Oatmeal: е — I 8
Biscuits (cabin) uw TS — I Е
Butter o -= 250 л — 4 =
Ead no — 4 ты
Cheese. о © س‎ 2 s
Milk (cocoa, E E сой) : -— 6 s
Tean у у АЯ — 3 70 about
Meatcocoa ку ae n > == | I ==
Boiled bel. о у ||. —
Tipe 55 524 2 0 ere — | I ee
Army rahons = у m a o 50 about
Salted тес ra fe =
Oxine extract... . о ЕЕ, ==
Beef suet 5. 2 0. Ss — I =
Bacon (in tins)". . о m | =
Ваа —= | т | Several
Sardines ы. о 0 Do.
Herrings ЕА | Do.
Potatoes (dried, in a. pon om =
s (Geh а) ооо bod a a Some
Hers (е =, £44 o Several
Vegetables (dried, in Ши ee 3 —

Е (теи иш s — — Some
CD. ee mc Em |
Franie food (ии == |

5 (extract) э. S| 2 — |

5 (аре ү qu —
Jams —. .. - я —
Prones i.o оа — I =
Marmalade. ye — — 50 about
Nelly, crystals м = M — 35 —


Return of the Southern Cross. 253


|
Commodity. | Barrels. | Cases. Tins,
2 a £ саши

Pale оо | 3 — 100 bottles
Chutney | — a P TOO у
гла узе р
Curry PG, O еъ | Several
EE — — — |. | Do.
Mustard к cui c + | B cu cm Do.
Coal (in bags) about ro tons . . | — — | —


In the evening of the 2nd February we steamed
away from Camp Ridley, and I had again the
collected Expedition of thirty souls under my
command.


CHAPTER IX.
FARTHEST SourH.


WHEN once again on board the Southern Cross,
Per Savio had been allowed to take up his abode
in the small cupboard, if it may so be called, in
the forecastle where he made himself remarkably
comfortable. He was lying resting after an arduous
day's work, while his thoughts were far away up
North where reindeer were running over the big
flats, and where he hoped the girl he had left
behind him was waiting for him. In these reveries
he was suddenly interrupted and brought at once
from poesie to prose by a large fat Australian rat
which fell on to his face; and being as upset as
Per was, the creature saw the refuge it needed in
Pers sleeping bag. It goes without saying that
Per was not slow in emerging from his cupboard.

While we continually took the bearings of Victoria
Land for mapping purposes, we steamed southwards
and sighted Possession Island at four in the morning
of the 3rd February. As we drew near to the island
everyone on board became greatly interested, especi-
ally when I, through my telescope, discovered that
the pole with its iron box on the top of it, which
had been left there in 1895, was still standing in
its solid foundation of rock.


AS a Edu


‘dNVISI NOISSHSSOd


Farthest South. 257


My entire staff accompanied me on shore, also
four sailors. A rather big swell was running, so
we had to use great care when we approached the
stony beach. As we rapidly followed a big wave,
we succeeded in reaching far up the beach. A
couple of seals plunged into the water at our landing
place, just where our boat struck. We jumped out


ON THE BEACH OF POSSESSION ISLAND.


and hauled the boat up, and succeeded in landing
instruments, cameras, and guns. The island was
covered with snow, and presented quite a different
appearance to that which it bore during my landing
in 1894. Very few penguins were left, but some
skuagulls were still soaring about. We approached
the solitary pole which had faced the Antarctic gales
for five years. Since I last closed the iron box, no
S


258 British Antarctic Expedition.


human beings had been near it. It was an interesting
moment as staff and crew surrounded this historical
place, while I opened the box and read the letter


ON POSSESSION ISLAND AT THE POLE LEFT THERE IN 1895.


aloud. At the call of Captain Jensen, three cheers
were given for me, and I responded in three cheers
for the Southern Cross. Then all the members
signed a fresh letter which I left in the box. Some
of the members walked towards the eastern side
of the island, while Captain Jensen, Fougner, and
myself made southward towards the high ridge which
rises boldly into Archer Peak. 1 again 10009
vegetation, and secured very satisfactory specimens
of it, as well as of the rocks. But these new rock
specimens did not differ from those which I had
collected in 1894.


Parthest South: 259


On the 4th February we had a fine day—clear
and magnificent, each undulation and white peak of
Victoria Land standing defined against the sky.
Following the land as closely as possible, we
mapped the coastline down to Coulman Island. Here
also I effected a landing, although some difficulty
was experienced owing to the heavy swell Lieut.
Colbeck and Mr. Bernacchi, with two sailors, accom-
panicdome ius was the first time that man ever
landed on Coulman Island. After having collected
specimens of rocks and vegetation we returned to
the vessel, and principally because of the magnetic
observations, which would be invaluable in this
locality, the course of the Southern Cross was
laid westwards. Since leaving Cape Adare the
temperature in the water had risen from 28 to 30.
The land, some forty miles inland, appeared con-
siderably lower than the ranges near Cape Adare,
buits, rn. my
Opimion, even
here there would
be no oppor-
Ебу for a
sledge party to
proceed success-
fully far inland.
However,
l'aving pene
maced as far
as possible to-
wards the land to the west of Coulman Island, and
to the south of a conspicuous cape, which I named
Cape Constance (after my wife), we found a bay in
S.


IN THE INTERIOR OF POSSESSION ISLAND.


260 British Antarctic Expedition.


an ice barrier, or rather in the seaward edge of the
ice-sheet descending from Victoria Land. This was
a place admirably suited for magnetic observations,
and I named it Lady Newnes Bay.


POSSESSION ISLAND WITH PEAK ARCHER.


Here, on the ice, Mr. Bernacchi and Lieut.
Colbeck took some of the most important observa-
tions, without which we would have been unable,
even with our later observations, to have located the
present position of the South Magnetic Pole. The
dip taken here was 87:18. With sledges we drove
up to the end of a barrier-bound, wedge-shaped bay.
At the end of this we found very many seals of the
Weddell, On leaving this locality on the 4th
February we had considerable difficulty through
approaching driff-ice. On the 5th we steamed
southwards, and saw a good deal of pack-ice towards
the west, so the coastline here for some distance could
not be distinctly mapped. On the 6th we were in


Farthest South. 261


lat. 74° 32. We sighted land all towards the west,
and as little pack-ice was seen, and as much dark
land was within sight towards the north-west of Cape
Washington, | decided to risk an investigation of
the fjord to the north of the range which terminated
in Cape Washington, as here also I hoped to be
able to afford my magnetic observers the necessary
opportunity for their work. Proceeding westwards for
about twenty miles from the Cape, we discovered a
promontory almost free of ice and snow. ‘The place is
a fine camping ground—a peninsula beach about 1co
acres in extent. It extends towards north-west, while
it leaves a cove, apparently a splendid winter harbour,
to the southward, where Mount Melbourne rises to


PEAK ARCHER,


a height of about 12,000 ft.; its volcanic top was
distinctly reflected into the clear cove, and reminded


262 British Antarctic Expedition.


me of Mount Etna, while the midnight sun surpassed
itself in splendour.

As we gradually drew near to this dark рго-
montory, we were enabled more distinctly to ascertain
the nature and appearance of it. Towards the west
a low peninsula descended from some picturesque
and wild-looking basaltic rocks, which stood sharply
out against the white cover of Mount Melbourne.
They towered up into the most fantastic shapes some
700 ft. high. At places the pinnacles seemed in the
very act of falling, and evidently did not want a very
great force brought to bear upon them for them to do
so. Through the appearance of these rocks I gathered
that. they had been there for some time, and it is
likely that the gales in this vicinity were considerably
more moderate than those prevalent at Cape Adare.
Towards the north-western side, and parted from
the low peninsula on the western side through a
small ridge with numerous passes, a small penguin
colony was thriving, and as the young ones were
not so far advanced as those few which were
still left at Cape Adare when we departed, they
did not seem to have any immediate. intentions
of leaving their breeding-place. At all events, they
were evidently well protected by the cone of Mount
Melbourne from the south. Although we had to use
considerable care in approaching near this promontory
with the Southern Cross, because of the drifting pack,
we effected a landing in one of our whale boats
without much difficulty. It was remarkable how the
pebbly peninsula on which we landed resembled that
at Camp Ridley. On this beach, however, there were
no penguins, but a great many skuas with. nearly


larthest South. 263


full.grown young ones. It is evident that this
low ground from time to time gets swamped by
waves started in the small cove to the south,
between it and the base of Mount Melbourne,
where evidently large blocks of icebergs break off
from tne ice shest and plunge into the cove.
Vegetation was found at the place where this
peninsula rose towards the east ; here the ground con-
sisted of large and small brim-


stones, and basalt thrown. in
the wildest disorder. Wonder-


MR. COLBECK TAKING OBSERVATIONS WITH THE ARTIFICIAL
HORIZON,


ful caves, passages and arches were found, and this
dark land discovered in the middle of everlasting
ice and snow, and surrounded by mighty peaks


and crevasses, conveyed to our minds an idea of


what one of Vulcan’s gigantic workshops ought to
be like.

I named this promontory and the land to the west-
ward of it, Newnes Land, after the generous Mæcenas
of the expedition, Sir George Newnes, Bart.


|


Se


264 British Antarctic Expedition.


While the magnetic observers were busily
employed in taking their set of observations, the
rest of us ascended towards the high ridges of this


“SOUTHERN CROSS” IN LADY NEWNES BAY.


remarkable land. When we reached the crest some
700 ft. up, we were startled by looking straight over a
precipice into a huge cauldron, the bottom of which
was even below the sea level, but guarded against
the waters of the cove to the west by a narrow ridge
of brimstone. The south-east part of this cauldron
was formed by the straight broken base of Mount
Melbourne, and revealed the most interesting geological
structures, while at its top the ice sheet descending
from the cone of Mount Melbourne was cleft,
displaying the structure and depth of the ice sheet—
some 50 ft. Shortly after we had landed, the ice pack


Farthest South. 265


had become distinctly denser, and every minute large,
heavy and hummocky ice-floes sailed into the bay,
which I named Southern Cross Fjord. According
to instructions left on board before my landing, the
vessel moved out to the middle of the bay some
five or six miles from where we were landed, and
not a minute too early had this movement of the
vessel been effected, as the ice-pack closed up to a
dense field. After the necessary work had been
done on shore, and the collections had been
brought into the whale-boat, we launched it, but
very soon had to pull it on to the hummocky 1ce,


MAGNETIC WORK IN LADY NEWNES BAY,


where we dragged it along as best we could until
a small space of open water again allowed us to
use the oars; but several times the boat was nearly


|
|
|


266 British Antarctic. Expedition.


nipped amongst the rushing ice-floes, and even far
out in the bay the pack scemed to close up rapidly
as the Southern Cross, evidently through warning


COULMAN ISLAND,


from the crow's nest, moved slowly out of the bay
towards the sea. After many struggles and cold
baths, we succeeded in reaching the vessel, and
no time was lost in forcing south-eastward through
the treacherous pack, which in a few hours had
accumulated.

Gradually we drew near Cape Washington, where
I. was anxious to. secure a photograph O UN
important Antarctic landmark, not the least because
the well-known geographer and Arctic author, Mr.
Shillinglaw, F.R.S., just before my departure from
Hobart for the South had besought me to bring back
a photo of this cape, which had been named by


Idest South. 267
біг James Clark Ross after his (Mr. Shillinglaw's)
well-known step-father, Admiral Washington.

The coast line towards the S.W. was gradually
growing lower.

After passing Cape Washington and proceeding
southwards, we discovered, towards the west, and
close to comparatively low coast land, two islands,
Eu dua about 74 50 and 74° 55) lat. S., and
163° 30' long. E., the northern one of which I had
the honour of naming after His Majesty King Oscar
of Norway and Sweden, and the southern after
Осен Markham, President of the Royal
Geographical Society, London.

Here and there dark conspicuous rocks protruded
from the enormous glaciers. At midnight on the 7th
Lieutenant Colbeck and Mr. Bernacchi were again
able to take dip observations. On the oth February
we passed through large tracts of ice. Mount


CAPE WASHINGTON.


Melbourne could still be distinguished through the
misty air towards the north-west, while ahead
Franklin Island was rapidly growing more distinct


268 British Antarctic Expedition.


as we approached it. At 5 p.m. I effected a landing on
the western side of Franklin Island. The landing-
place was a pebbly beach very much like the peninsula
at Cape Adare. On reaching shore we gave three
cheers for Sir James Clark Ross. Those who followed
me were Captain Jensen, Lieutenant Colbeck, Mr.
Bernacchi, Mr. Evans, and two sailors. Неге
also Lieutenant Colbeck and Mr. Bernacchi took
valuable magnetic observations. Vegetation was
found on the rocks, and very interesting specimens
of the rocks were collected, presenting new features
to the geologist. There were very many penguins
on the peninsula, many more than were left at Cape
Adare when we said farewell to Camp Ridley. I
named the south-eastern point of this island Cape
Bernacchi, and some dangerous rocks which stretched
some three or four miles out from this cape, Norway
Rocks. The most interesting discovery was made,
however, in the marine fauna department. Mr.
Fougner secured a rich collection of the shallow-
water fauna of that locality. Several photos were
taken, and although only some few hours were spent
on shore, rich results rewarded our efforts. On the
roth at noon the Southern Cross was in lat. 77° 17’
and long. 168° E. We had, immediately towards the
south, Mounts Erebus and Terror. The weather was
but half clear, and some misty clouds were hanging
round the tops of those mountains. The coast-line
is ice-bound by a barrier about 7 ft. thick, and only
here and there broken by a projecting rocky pro-
montory. Cape Crozier was comparatively free from
ice and snow. The Union Jack was under the gaff, and
soundings were taken. We secured valuable photos


"HNSIQOS'TIN INNOW


Farthest South. 271


of Mounts Erebus and Terror, the former being in
activity.

I effected a landing at the foot of Mount Terror,
bringing with me Lieutenant Colbeck, Captain
Jensen, and two sailors. It was a very low and
narrow beach, formed by gravel rush from an over-
hanging rock about 500 feet above. The beach was
about ro ft. broad, and the highest place about 4 it.


MOUNT MELBOURNE,


above the sea-level. We immediately collected
some specimens of the rocks and vegetation, and
here also we gave three cheers for our Union Jack
and for Sir George Newnes. Shortly after landing
Lieutenant Colbeck, at my request, went back with
the two sailors in the boat to fetch a camera; mean-
while Captain Jensen and | were occupied collecting.
Suddenly a roar started overhead — tremendous,
overwhelming, terrible. In la second the thought
passed through my mind that the overhanging rock


ата British Antarctic Expedition.


was coming down upon us. In the next I realised
the dangerous fact, and communicated it to Captain
Jensen, who simultaneously recognised that the
glacier immediately to the west of our little beach
was giving birth to an iceberg. Quick as our
thoughts the event followed. With a deafening roar
a huge body of ice plunged into the sea, and a white
cloud of water and snow hid everything before
our eyes; the next seconds were trying for us two.


LAND NEAR MOUNT MELBOURNE,


For the first time in my life I felt that I was brought
to bay by circumstances. Here were absolutely no
resources, and we both foresaw what immediately
afterwards followed. A tidal wave, if I may so term
it, because of its similarity to such—a raging, rushing
wave—rose like a wall from the plunge of this million
of tons of ice mass. It seemed rapidly to grow as it
hurried towards our ledge. We saw and heard all
this magnificent but awful phenomenon, while we
instinctively rushed to the highest part of our beach


‘ANVI SANMAN


Farthest South. 275


and stood close to the perpendicular wall of the
mountain, The time seemed long before the
wave reached us, and when it came it must
Mave been from 15 to 20 ft. in height. I called
to Jensen to struggle for life as he stood beside
Bu he wave struck ime first, lumps of
ice dashed against my back, and I stuck to the
rock until I felt that the blood rushed from
beneath my finger-nails. I had just time to call
out to Capt. Jensen to stick to the rock also when
the icy water closed over my head. When it passed
Jensen was still at my side. The next few waves
were several feet smaller, and only washed us up
‘to our armpits, but the drag of the water when it
returned from the cliff tried us almost beyond our
strength. Had it not been for the help of a projecting
ice slope, which seemed to break the force of the
wave in its advance, we would undoubtedly have been
smashed against the rock; as where the wave,
unchecked, hit the rock wall some ten yards beyond
us, it tore stones loose, and left. à mark of moisture
some twenty feet above our heads, while the marks
mH spray were to be seen still further up. Far
out at sea the boat was returning with Lieut. Colbeck
and the two sailors; they saw all that had happened
to a greater advantage, and Lieut. Colbeck's de-
scription of the whole phenomenon, as observed from
the boat, brings clear to my mind how anxious he
Er Mave Dec for our safety. Не, of course,
puede ful extent of the danger we ran,
having himself with the greatest difficulty saved
his boat from being swamped. We saw how rapidly
their oars were moving as they approached the
T 2


276 British Antarctic Expedition.


shore, where they were surprised to find us. From
the Southern Cross also, some three or four miles
from the coast, they had witnessed the incident with


SIR GEORGE NEWNES LAND IN SOUTHERN CROSS FJORD.


great anxiety. As it was, both Capt. Jensen and
myself escaped, only a good deal knocked about
by the rocks, and of course wet to the skin, and
not too warm, from the icy bath; but a splendid
collection of rocks and vegetation soon made us
forget the incident which might have ended so
disastrously for us. I now decided to steam south-
wards. Towards the south-east Mount Terror ran
into the ocean in rather a gentle slope, which,
curiously enough, was free from ice and snow. Неге
a large penguin colony seemed to flourish. The
cone of Mount Terror was covered in a mail of
ice. No evidence of activity was noticed from this


Farthest South. 277


volcano. The eastern quarter of the coastline of
Mount Terror is not ice-bound by a barrier, but
from the south-east cape a high continuous barrier
stretches towards E.S.E., apparently about sixty feet
high. A very biting breeze from the south was blowing.
From the crater of Mount Erebus a dark smoke cloud
from time to time shot up out into the frosty air. It
was cold—several degrees below zero—the deck and
sides of the vessel were covered in ice. Long icicles
hung down from the rigging. The hours on the
bridge and in the crow's nest were trying We
were slowly gaining some southing as we proceeded
along the barrier. On the 12th February we were in
78° 4'; the barrier was still unbroken, but it seemed


CAPE BERNACCHI ON FRANKLIN ISLAND.


now inclined to take a somewhat southerly bend. In
the evening we must have been about 78? 10. H.R.H.
the Duke of York's Union Jack flew from the gaff.


278 British Antarctic Expedition.


On the 13th a strong gale started with very heavy
seas and thick snow-drift.

The Southern Cross had now several feet of ice on
her decks,
bulwarks,
and sides,
and wec
suffered
severely
from. ane
cold. Inthe
intervals
between the
thick snow-
squalls tre-
mendous ice-
bergs hove
in sight. On the r4th the gale abated somewhat.
On the 16th we were still proceeding southwards
with plenty of “pancake” ice around u
that date I discovered a break in the barrier, with
low ice towards the east. The break appeared in
1 two conspicuous heads. They were about one
| mile apart, opening up into a large oval basin,
13 some four or five miles in diameter owes
the west the barrier was about the same height
as we had found it all the way from Mount Terror
eastwards, but towards the south it started to fall,
and round.to the east it was quite low, only some
two or three feet above the sea-level, rising gently
towards south-east until it gained the normal height
| of the ice-sheet in the vicinity.—some seventy feet.
ү! We entered, and reached lat. 78° 34! 5, amd long,


FRANKLIN ISLAND.


farthest South. 279


195° 50’ E. Captain Jensen and I had inspected the
appearance of this natural harbour thoroughly before
we decided to enter from the crow’s nest, fully recog-
nising the possible risk of being shut in in case the
heads, through changes in the ice sheet, might
close together. During the time we spent in this
interesting harbour constant watch was kept in regard
to movements and sounds in the ice. At a low place
we moored the Southern Cross to the ice sheets Бу
ropes and an ice-anchor. Неге I effected a landing
with sledges, dogs, instruments and provisions, and
while I left the sledge in charge of Captain Jensen


THE PENINSULA AT FRANKLIN ISLAND.


with the rest of the Expedition, I myself, accompanied
by Lieut. Colbeck and Savio, proceeded southwards,
reaching 78° 50’, the farthest south ever reached by
man,


280 British Antarctic Expedition.


The aspects of the Antarctic icebergs are
distinctly two kinds, although they, in my opinion,
have their similar origin. They are either discharged


a MR. COLBECK TAKING SLIP OBSERVATIONS ON FRANKLIN ISLAND.


from what ordinarily is understood as glacier, or
broken from the big barrier in the extreme south.
However, to my mind, the big barrier to the south is
nothing more than the northern extremity of a great
ice sheet sloping northwards from land near the South
| Pole. Although it must needs, on account of its
| appearance, be recognised as an ice sheet, it is nothing
more or less than an immense glacier. The bergs
discharged from. а glacier, will, under = eae
| elevation and squeezed between immense peaks,
naturally have a more rugged appearance than the
bergs discharged from the gentle sloping ice sheet in
the south. The former are cut through by crevasses,
rubbed against rocks, and often overturned when
borne into the sea. The latter gently break oi


Farthest South. 281


through the great but steady pressure of the ice sheet,
and the iceberg will, even after the “calving”. has
taken place, maintain the character of the barrier or
ice sheet from which it sprang. The uppermost parts
of the bergs broken from the barrier will generally
carry a from 30 to 4o ft. thick horizontal layer of ice
formed by snow-fall, which, through pressure of the
wind, has quickly taken the nature of ice, but remains
easily distinguishable, because of its whiteness of colour
and soft structure, from that of the underpart, the crystal,
clear green and blue, stratified, broken glacier ice.
Ruled by the prevail-
ing under-current, these
monarchs moved north-east-


q oe 2:
P


AT THE FOOT OF MOUNT TERROR, WHERE BORCHGREVINK AND
JENSEN NEARLY LOST THEIR LIVES.


wards, but although only, in my opinion, one in their
origin, these bergs with their different appearances
are really brethren. The pack, however, showed


282 British Antarctic Expedition.


distinctly two kinds of two different origins. It
consisted of the ice which is formed by the freezing
sea, and the smaller ice broken from glaciers, or
from the extremity of the ice-sheet in the south.
The difference between the two is not always so
marked that it can be distinguished without careful
observation, as the pressure and screw in the sea
ice near the coast of the Antarctic Continent is so
great that the blocks reared on end would appear,
to a casual observer, like glacier ice, but a nearer
investigation would quickly result in the discovery of
the two distinctly different structures of ice. It is the
land, or glacier ice, in the pack which is the most
dangerous for ice navigation. Harder, and generally
pointed and cornered, it is more difficult to ascertain
its nature as the vessel forces its way. The flat sea
ice, at least far from shore, is much alike, and although
often of great thickness, it seldom protrudes in such
treacherous rams under water as do occasionally
blocks fallen from glaciers. The movement of the
Antarctic ice-pack is, to my mind, north-easterly ; this
movement favoured both by wind and current. The
open bay to the east of Victoria Land is undoubtedly
due both to the heavy south-easterly gales and also
to currents. to the east of Victoria’ Land and
to the comparatively warm water in the locality.
Undoubtedly active volcanoes, above and under the
sea, take a not unprominent part in altering ice
conditions. In travelling southwards towards my
furthest south on the big barrier, or on the southern
ice-sheet I noticed that here and there the ice-sheet
rose in small cones, which at places were broken in
rough walls of about thirty feet. At other places


Farthest South. 283


the ice-sheet suddenly took terrace shape, but it was
always, so to speak, local; and the nature of the
ice-sheet on the top was one immense unbroken flat,
with a scarcely noticeable rising towards the south.
With a sufficient number of reindeer, sledges and
dogs, and a very small party of scientific men, I
believe that a great southern latitude may be reached
on this ice-sheet in the proper longitude.

Undoubtedly a vessel bound for Victoria Land
and having no geographical work similar to that I had


CAPE CROZIER.


to do about the vicinity of Balleny or westward of it,
ought, in my opinion, not to proceed southwards
westward of 170? long. E. November and December
I think the time when an expedition vessel ought to
approach the Antarctic ice-pack. Near Victoria Land
a general break-up of the ice does not take place
before the end of January; and I do not think that,
under normal conditions as a rule, a vessel would
succeed in reaching Victoria Land much before the
beginning of February.

I regard the success of Sir James Clark Ross,


284 British Antarctic Expedition.


without the help of steam, unquestionably as a sign
of exceptionally favourable ice conditions. in the
year when the Ærebus and Terror penetrated into
Antarctic ice-pack. In ice-pack, similar to that the
Southern Cross encountered, sailing vessels would be


FAST AGAIN.


left hopelessly to its mercy. The progress of a
vessel in the Antarctic depends, according to my
experience, very much upon the locality in which the
pack is attacked and also upon the meteorological
conditions. Having no land to the northward, a
day or two might alter the ice conditions entirely.


Farthest South. 285


The vessel may lay fast for weeks, while suddenly a
favourable circumstance might allow the pack to open
in slack ice, and the ship might reach a very high
latitude. These are favourable conditions, but the
absence of land to the north allows the big swell of
the south-westerly trades to reach the Antarctic pack,
which thus affords great danger to a vessel, whether
it be near the edge of the pack where the grinding
ice-blocks would chew her timber, or whether she
be so far in the pack that the swell does not reach
her directly ; but owing to the pressure caused by the
gales, and the swell from the north, met by heavy
pressure from similar causes from the south, very


ICE WEIGHED HER DOWN.


heavy screw takes place and threatens to crush the
staunchest of vessels. In winter time tremendous
screwings take place in the Antarctic ice-pack, near


286 British Antarctic Expedition.


land as well as out at sea, and the screwings which we
encountered in our sledge journeys were so tremendous
that at times they made it impossible to proceed. It
happens also that even after the ice is 2 or 3 feet
thick a gale of 100 miles an hour starts, and the ice,
which might have been absolutely safe for travelling
one hour, has disappeared and been ground up into
furious rolling waves the next hour. Under such
conditions, and with such risks, sledge journeys
within the Antarctic Circle must be carried on. In
Robertson Bay the ice did not get more than 5 ft.
thick, and at places it was only 2 ft. thick all the
winter through. ` І believe this to be greatly due
to the strong currents which prevailed in and near
the Bay.

On the sledge journey towards our farthest south
we repeatedly heard noises in the ice-sheet; and
seeing the irregular and abrupt rise and fall in it at
places, I got the impression that great pressure prevails
in that locality. As we entered this harbour in the
barrier, an Emperor Penguin walked philosophically
up and down upon the ice towards the E., and two of
the ordinary penguins (Zudyptes Adeliac) discussed
our boldness with the utmost interest. Towards the
south some seals were basking on the ice. I sent a
boat to the end of the bay after them, and found that
they were Weddelli. A party of ski-runners which
I despatched to the west came upon a large number
of seals in a lake, or large, deep basin, formed in
the plateau of the barrier. Although the plateau at
that place fell with a gentle slope, it evidently
reached the level of the sea, as the seals shot up
through blow-holes in the ice at the water's edge.


CHAPTER X.
TOWARDS CIVILISATION.


Ow February roth, after having taken careful
observation, the voyage towards civilisation com-
тепсей. My decision to return then I took because
of the uncertainty of the weather in the late season,
and the rapid fall of the temperature. Indeed, it
was high time that we should sail for the north if we
wanted to leave at all, and as it was, our engines
had to force the Southern Cross through ice three
inches thick as we steamed slowly out towards the
head of this harbour.

My first intention was to make for Mount
Terror, and if possible to get in the vicinity of
Beaufort Island, but prevailing south-westerly and
westerly gales prevented us from following this plan,
and I decided to steer for Franklin Island, where we
hoped to be able to obtain opportunities for a second
set of magnetic observations. Ice was covering the
deck and rigging, while a biting autumn gale was
howling between the ropes. On the 22nd the gale
calmed down somewhat, but on the next day
it was again on to us with very heavy sea. On
the 24th the weather allowed us to steam up to
Franklin Island, and at то o'clock in the morning


288 British Antarctic Expedition.


we hove to at the very place where we were lying last.
A boat was lowered with both the magnetic observers,
Mr. Evans, and two sailors. I warned them before
they went on shore to keep a sharp look-out for the
vessel in case I should find it expedient to call them
back by signal. The weather was threatening, and
the barometer fell rapidly. Shortly after they landed
we had to call them back, and scarcely were they on
board before a fresh gale was over us. The constant
wash on deck made the ice-sheet grow on us.


SEALS WERE DOTTED ABOUT ON THE WHITE CARPET.


The Southern Cross dived into the heavy surf,
rose again and shook the raging waves aside, while
the spray froze on men and spars, and hung down in
long icicles from the sprit. A good deal of pack-ice
was encountered drifting rapidly into the bay, and at
places we found it difficult to proceed. On the 26th
February we were in lat. 71? 33' S., and long.


174 13 E. Some brown-backed petrels were .


about, also some molyhawks. It was then calm,
but a large swell was running from the north,


‘HLNOS LSHHLUVA (SSOWO NYAHINOS,, AHL


Towards Civilisation. 291


indicating that it was not likely that we should
encounter much pack-ice to the north, if any at all.
I think all of us realised the important moment when
we passed the latitude of Cape Adare, bound for
civilisation, and the talk in the cabin and in the fore-
castle generally dwelt upon home and home-coming.
The members visited each other in their cabins and
discussed the fact of returning, as every one now
seemed to realise
that another
month might see
us within the
limits of the
civilised world.
A strong long-
ing for sunny
shores came over
everyone; along-
ing to see some-
thing else but
bare rocks and
snow, to see
other colours,
real green grass, and, above all, ¢vees—treal trees with
stems, branches, and green leaves on which our eyes
and minds could rest. Our thoughts turned involun-
tarily to country life on sunny shores, and the topics
of the day were the life in fields and woods of Old
England, or of the deep forests of Norway, where
dainty birds of all kinds were whistling and singing in
liquid tunes. What a change it would be from the
hoarse scream of the penguin, or the cruel screech of
the skuagull, or the wild howl of the Antarctic gales.
U 2


ON THE TOP OF THE GREAT BARRIER ON
THE JOURNEY FARTHEST SOUTH.


292 British Antarctic Expedition.


On February 28th we passed the Antarctic Circle.
The temperature rose quickly as we advanced north-
wards. One by one the layers of our thick clothing
were dropped, and washing and shaving became
almost an everyday event. On March 4th I ordered
our last live penguin (4. Forsterit) to be thrown
overboard, as he looked miserable, would not eat,
and his spirits sank with the rise of the temperature.

On March 6th we had a strong gale from
W.N.W. There was a heavy, choppy sea. One
of the dogs was washed overboard, and the rough
sea prevented us from rescuing it. Poor faithful
fellow, he was doing his best; sometimes jumping
almost clear out of the water when on the top of
a breaker, and all the while keeping his intelligent
eyes on the stern of the Southern Cross as she trod
her way northwards. Soon he was lost in the
raging surf.

On the 13th we all assembled in the cabin and
drank to the health of Sir George Newnes, whose
birthday it was.

On the 21st we dropped anchor in Port Ross
on Auckland Island at 9 a.m. The island, which is
covered with thick brushwood, is almost impenetrable
except along the stony beaches, or on the banks of the
creeks. Here and there we found the tracks of wild
pigs, but were unable to secure any. We longed for
fresh meat and would have welcomed one. However,
during the time we were lying at anchor we
secured a number of wild ducks and two goats. After
having taken in fresh water and cleared the pipes of
the boilers, we departed on March 28th.

At midnight on March 3oth, we arrived outside


Towards Civilisation. 293


Paterson’s inlet on Stewart Island. As the entrance
to this splendid harbour is rather difficult, I decided
to wait until morning, when we steamed slowly into
Paterson Bay. Although a grey, rainy morning, it
seemed beautiful to us all. Real, tall trees were before
us, and as we came nearer a neatly-built house came in


sight. One of my staff, through his field glasses, then


A HURRIED MEAL.


made a startling biological discovery—a woman! and
soon my entire staff had seized their magnifying
glasses. I at once went on shore, and after some
` hours’ tramping about in the muddy jungle, I was able
to secure a few fresh sheep and fresh vegetables.
How startling was it to see a strange face again, and
to hear a fresh voice. The first man I met shook me


294 British Antarctic Expedition.


heartily by the hand when he heard that I came from
the Southern Cross.

“Is Mr. Borchgrevink on board ?”

“ No,"—his face got long апа worried— “talking
to you!"

The man was delighted, and did his utmost to
help me in my search for fresh food.

Later on we steamed round to Half-moon Bay, -
where a little settlement of houses is situated called
Oban. During our stay there I made arrangements
for landing the sledge-dogs on Native Island, a small
island adjacent to Stewart Island, provided that I
should obtain the necessary permission from the New
Zealand Government.

On Sunday morning, April rst, I went on board
a small fore-and-aft schooner called the Ruruhau (a
Maori word the meaning of which is “getting to
windward"), under salute and cheers from the
Southern Cross. We drifted over by the tide, and
arrived at the Bluff at 11.30 р.м. The small town
being wrapped in darkness, I proceeded at once to
the telegraph office, where I succeeded in rousing the
operator, and sent the following cable to Sir George
Newnes :—


"Object of Expedition carried out. South
Magnetic Pole located. Farthest south with sledge
record 78° 50. Zoologist Hanson dead. All well on
board.— BORCHGREVINK.”


The clicking of his instrument went on while the
operator made the necessary enquiries whether my
cables could get through to Europe at once.


Towards Civilisation, 205


Suddenly the clerk turned to inform me that some
very distant official desired to congratulate me on my
safe return, and wished very much to know whether I
had found any people “down there."

The next morning, while enjoying my first civilised
bath, somebody knocked furiously at the bath-room
door and handed
me a newspaper,
in which it was
announced that my
wife had arrived
that very night
at Adelaide from
Europe. The cable
announcing my
arrival at the Bluff
had crossed the
one announcing her
arrival in Adelaide!

On April 3rd the
Hon. Mr. Ward,
M.L.A., of New
Zealand, who met
me with the greatest
courtesy and did
all in his power to assist me, informed me that he
had communicated with His Excellency Mr. Seddon,
the Premier of New Zealand, and that he had
obtained for me permission from the Government
to land the sledge dogs on Native Island.

. On April 4th, after instructing Captain Jensen to
proceed to Hobart at once after landing the dogs, 1
left in the Mokora for Hobart.


FARTHEST SOUTH EVER REACHED
BY МАМ,


296 British Antarctic Expedition.


On the 6th I arrived in Hobart, where I met my
wife, and the enthusiastic citizens welcomed me by
cheers, and almost carried me to the carriage which
awaited me. Ten days later the Southern Cross
arrived safely, and a solemn thanksgiving service was
held in the Hobart Cathedral, where all the members


ON BOARD THE *RURUHAU."


of my staff and the crew were present. The service
was conducted by the Bishop of Tasmania, the Dean
and other clergy assisting him.

On April 7th I called upon His Excellency Lord
Gormanston and Lady Gormanston, who both
received me with that characteristic kindness which
they had shown us before our departure. -


HEAVY SCREW IN THE PACK-ICE NEAR BALLENY ISLAND,
23RD OF JANUARY, 1899.


APPENDIX I.


By THE COMMANDER, C. E. BORCHGREVINK.


THE APPEARANCE OF VICTORIA LAND.


The impression of Victoria Land upon my mind is to-day almost
the same as after my return from the Antarctic Regions to civilisation
in 1895. Large, elevated mountainous country, with peaks rising
to the height of between 10,000 ft. and 12,000 ft. above the sea-
level, precipitating into the Antarctic Ocean and crossed by innumer-
able broad glaciers, cut through with deep yawning crevasses. ‘The
multitude of these crevasses naturally caused by the steep gradient
under which they descend to the sea, affords, perhaps, the most
unsurmountable barrier for the progress of the traveller. Like
immense rivers these monstrous glaciers drain the fathomless ice-
fields of South Victoria Land. At a great distance they seem to the
traveller on the frozen sea as smooth highways between mighty
domes, but when the traveller, hungry and exhausted, reaches
the place where they descend from the heights, they appear in all
their stern defiance. Step by step you can cut your way onwards
and upwards in the smooth green ice-cover; but for a traveller on
foot in those regions these elevations, with their obstacles, will
devour his time and thus his food, as no life fit to support is to
be found beyond the coastline. Remarkable 15 it to see how free
of ice and snow Victoria Land is at places near the coast, and
the question why and wherefore forces itself upon the traveller.
Cape Adare, Duke of York Island, Geikie Land, Doubtful Island,
Possession Island, parts of Coulman Island, Cape Constance, Newnes


Land, Cape Crozier, and innumerable places between these con-
i spicuous Antarctic landmarks, are all free from ice and snow. Most
of them in summer time carry vegetation. At Newnes Land a
minor eruption at the side of Mount Melbourne may account, to
some extent, . ог the hospitable appearance of this locality; but


CUFF 900 Ft.
Steep
Track up
Mountan PROVISION
> „DEPOT


/ EM + Steep slope —>


P4 Sheri
z ODE
12
HUT & 4
MAGNETIC _ Xstog£House
Tent ©
resh water
ане wy 7%
(E D

Sin-


Scale of Yards. Е \\
2 Ge 570
Mt Minto


MAP BY WILLIAM COLBECK, R.N.R. Mt Adam
by direction of


THE COMMANDER,
C.E.BORCHGREVINK,F.R.G.S.


London; Stanford's Geog? stab?


the presence of the penguin colony in their old nests, and the
vegetation, indicate that the place for some time past has been
undisturbed by the forces within Mount Melbourne. Gales, of
course, sweep the snow away from many places, but still few of those
bare places can ascribe their lack of snow and ice merely to wind ;
in fact, some of them are rather sheltered, especially the camping


300 Appendix. я


Appendix. 301


ground at Newnes Land. ‘The coast-line seemed to get somewhat
lower south of this place, but through the telescope immense peaks
were discovered in a chain far inland, and pack-ice prevented us
from penetrating near into the land between Cape Washington and
Mount Erebus. However, I regard Newnes Land and the vicinity
of Cape Neumayer and Cape Gouss as of vast geographical
importance, apart from the desirability of these places as magnetic
stations. At Newnes Land a party ought to winter.

We observed many fjords which stretched into Victoria Land
from the coast: in the vicinity of Newnes Land especially, where
the inner part of Southern Cross Fjord still remains to be explored.
Drift-ice was blocking Wood Bay and the former fjord when we
were there. Southern Cross Fjord is, in my opinion, another place
where an ice-vessel might over-winter with a scientific party.


METEOROLOGY AND MAGNETISM.


Bv Louis Bernacchi, F.R.G.S.


The following is an outline of the meteorological and magnetic
observations taken by the Expedition in southern latitudes. The
bulk of the observations being still unreduced, it is impossible to
discuss them fully at present, and for this reason no readings of
the barometer can be given to this report. These meteorological
observations, taken at Cape Adare in lat. 71° 18’ S. during the entire
year, from February, 1899, to February, 1900, cannot fail to be a
valuable addition to our knowledge of the meteorology of the
Antarctic regions. They were conducted on nearly the same lines
as at a station of the first order, and as accurately and regularly
as possible. During nine months of the year readings were taken
two-hourly, from 9 А.м. to 9 P.M., and during the three winter
months, June, July, and. August, two-hourly observations were made
day and night. Besides these bi-hourly readings, self-registering
instruments furnished. barograph and thermograph curves for the
whole period; records of the amount of sunshine with the
Campbell-Stokes | sunshine recorder; maximum and minimum


302 Appendix. '


temperatures, and observations of solar radiation. The tables
given below must be regarded as only first approximations ;
however, they are sufficiently exact to indicate the general nature
of the climate, Observations taken at Cape Adare are possibly
affected to a certain degree by local accidents, such as the contour
of the country and proximity to the sea; but they have the
advantage of being taken at one spot, and not on board a ship,
which is continually altering her geographical position.

Meteorological observations were taken on board ship every two
hours, night and day, during the month (January, 1899) she was
beset in the ice-pack. The geographical area over which the
observations were taken was between the parallels 63° 38' S., and
66° 46'S. of latitude, and meridians 160° 6' E. and 166° 56 E. of
longitude.

The mean temperature of air for January was 29'94° F., and of
the sea 29°64° F., the mean temperature for the second week being
the highest in both cases, as is shown in the following table :—


TABLE ]—MEAN TEMPERATURE FOR JANUARY, 1899.


Mean Temperature Mean Temperature
of air. of sea.
Se week < e o o . So nS Ip, 29:789 EF;
2nd week . . . . . 31°86°F. SOE rea Tp
OWENS « а в в э uo ORBE 29:48? F.
AGM WEE s s ec a . 2S3 m Ao)? uj? ЩИ


The lowest temperature for the month occurred on the 29th
at 3 A.M., when the thermometer indicated 16:8? Е. (—8:8? C.)
in lat. 66° 45’, and long. 165° 25' E., off one of the Balleny Islands.

The highest temperature for the month was 36°4°, at 5 P.M. on
the rath, lat. 65° 3, and long. 161° 42’ E.

The mean diurnal oscillation of temperature for the month was
5:20? Е. The greatest range between the maximum and the
minimum of one day was 16° F., the least 1° F.

Light variable winds prevailed most of the month, the force was
rarely greater than 4, Beaufort’s scale. Gales blew on the following
days—gth, 16th, 22nd, and 23rd respectively, when the velocity
of the wind exceeded thirty miles an hour. The weather may be
summarised as:—five days’ clear bright sunshine, thirteen days’
snow and sleet, two days’ rain, when the temperature rose above
32°, four days’ mists and fogs, and the rest overcast.


Appendix. 303
As will be seen from the table given below, the mean temperature


at Cape Adare is above zero for six months in the year, and for
six months below zero.


TABLE II.—MoNTHLY MEAN TEMPERATURES.”


pf  —Á — D — Í— — o!


Mean | Date T Date | Ta
Month. | Tempera- | of Maxi-| Maxi- | of Mini. Mini- Range,
| — tures. | mum. | шш mum, | Bum. |
1899. em | OR, oF, | OF,
February . BORA | o9 ә so] ex 2
March . . 17772 | 5th | зт 25th —2°5 33:6
Allo s. е 10'27 | 2nd | 3o'o Igth | —Io'0 40'0
May. . o —4'60 , 4th 232 I3th —31'I | 543
Jame o c s —11°82 | rth 14.1 за | —36°0 50.1
july 5 o o -8'65 | 18th 23:8 oth | —39°9 637
August . . — 13:36 I5th 18:9 4th —43'1, 62°0
September . —11°91 7th 11°$ 3oth | —36'1 47:6
(cele o с —1'85 15th 19:6 2nd —35'5 55'I
November . 17:80 28th | 457 Ist —4'O 497
December . 31°76 25th 42°2 11th 204 | 21:8
1900. | | |
January. . 32°96 | 23rd | 48'9 10th 22:5 | 2674
| |


Mean temperature for the year = 7 '05° F.

August was the coldest month, the mean temperature being
0 BE (—2572 C)

The extreme minimum temperature occurred on August 4th, at
9 P.M., during perfectly calm and clear weather.


Table III. shows the fall of temperature during the afternoon of
that day with the accompanying barometric pressure :—


TABLE III.
Y | | Barometer (corrected to
Time. | Temp. Fahr. | Temp. Cent. | a Я
| | Freezing-point only).

I P.M — 36:0? —378 | 29'292 inches.

9 x | 0-4o00 | = 4o"0® | 299982 5,

5 5 | -AUS | —40'8 | 29'324 »

7» =42 O | ا‎ | 29° 344 »

о» | -4& | -47 | 29.355 >»

| |


| |
П


* Obtained by taking the means of maximum and minimum daily temperatures,
+ Based on twelve days’ observations, 16th to 28th.


Lue 2.27


304 Appendix.


At these temperatures the mercury froze in the ordinary
thermometers, and spirit ones had to be used. The above tempera-
tures are means derived from three thermometers. At these low
temperatures there was a slight diversity in the indications of the
respective thermometers, even after applying the corrections as given
upon the Kew certificates. The maximum temperature observed
at Cape Adare was 48:9? F., which occurred during a very heavy
storm from the E.S.E. on January 23rd, r9oo. This is quite
exceptional. The-mean monthly temperature is above freezing-point
during one month of the year, viz, January. The temperature
commenced to fall rapidly during the second week of May, and rise
again even more rapidly in the second week of October.

The relatively high mean temperature for July is due to the
number of gales from the E.S.E. and S.E. during that month, the
temperature invariably rising with these winds. The extreme range
of temperature was 92? F., and the mean temperature for the year
7°05° F. (—13:9? C.), which, compared to the mean annual tem-
perature for the same northern latitude, is extremely low. The
mean temperature for Lapland, which is in the same latitude north as
Cape Adare is south, is about 32? F., and the mean temperature for the
north of Spitzbergen, which extends as far north as 82°, is about ro? F.

Regarding June, July, and August as the winter months, and
December, January, and February as summer, we may take it that
the mean winter temperature is — 11:3? F., and the mean summer
temperature 30°4° Е. The sun remained constantly above the
horizon from November 16th to January 26th, and below the
horizon from May 15th to July 29th. It was not, however,
absolutely dark all this time; for when the sky was not overcast
the twilight produced a couple of hours daylight in the middle of
the day, even at the winter solstice. The Antarctic winter is longer
than the Arctic. In his annual round the sun tarries a week
(7% days) longer on the north than he does on the south side of the
equator, and consequently, in the former case, the winter night is
longer than in the latter. This is due to the earth being, during the
Antarctic winter, at its greatest distance from the sun (aphalion),
when it moves more slowly in its orbit.

November was the finest month. During that month storms
were a minimum, and the amount of bright sunshine a maximum.

The temperature of the sea during the greater part of the year,
that is, while the surface of the sea was frozen over, remained
constant at 27:8? F. In the summer months, December, January,
and February, it rarely rose above 32? F,


Appendix. 305


During the winter months, or at least during the seventy-one days
that the sun remained constantly below the horizon, the diurnal
variations of the thermometer and barometer were scarcely perceptible,
being almost, if not quite, concealed by the oscillations due to the
passage of storms.

The intensity of solar radiation was measured with the black
bulb thermometer zz vacuo. This instrument was freely exposed to
the sun by fixing it horizontally above the ground at the same height
as the thermometer screen, viz., 4 ft. 6 in. A temperature above
80° F. was frequently recorded by this thermometer, whilst the
temperature in the shade remained below freezing-point. These
high readings were probably due to the hygrometric conditions of
the atmosphere, the air, on account of the intense cold, being
extremely dry.

Table IV. gives some of the highest readings with the solar
radiation thermometer, and the temperature of air in the shade
observed at the same time.


TABLE IV.
Solar Temperature
Date. Thermometer. in fem
Marca gral o . 3 o o o o BO I 24:0? Е.
o ОШ . s ə ə s s. o ODOT, 22:4? Е,
» Tü o o o o o o а Ges". 20:9? Е.
x ПОШ e o o o «e o °2 M, 24°5° Е.
o Z a a o o s s. o nonem Soo” IF,


Relative humidity between 40° and 50°.


The most remarkable feature in the meteorological conditions of
the Antarctic is the wind.

The prevailing E.S.E. and S.E. winds at Cape Adare, which is
within the area of abnormally low pressure, tend to prove the existence
of a great anti-cyclone stretching over the polar area, which in its
turn necessarily implies the existence of upper currents from the
northward, blowing towards and in upon the polar regions to make
good the drain caused by the surface outblowing S.E. winds.

The frequency and force of these gales, and the persistency with
which they blew—always from the same direction, E.S.E.— the
invariably high rise in the temperature, and the sudden fall and rise
of the barometer, the dryness of the winds—the relative humidity
generally between 40° and 5o^—-and the motion of the upper clcuds
from the N.W., point to the fact that the South Pole is covered by
what may be regarded practically as a great permanent anti-cyclone,
more extensive in the winter months than in the summer.

X


306 | Appendix.


Nothing more appalling than these frightful winds, accompanied
by tons of drift snow from the mountains above, can be imagined.
On ninety-two days, or twenty-six per cent. of the time spent at Cape
Adare, the wind blew from the E.S.E. and S.E. with a velocity above
forty miles an hour, and on one or two occasions above ninety
miles an hour, at which stage our Robinson anemometers were
demolished.

A proper table of wind directions, velocities, and thermal
windroses is not yet available, but the following tables will suffice to
convey some idea of the conditions.

Table V. shows the number of days in each month when the
velocity of the wind was above forty miles an hour :—


1 TABLE V.

Month. : Number Month. Number

1899. of days. 1899. of days.
Bepruary mr M M September ca зс
March Дк Жу e October 7
April eue fees 18 November . 5
аузу bea м UT December . 9
june ducc D 7 1900.
July gee E ele January 9
Auguste oo) OT


TABLE VI.—NUMBER OF OBSERVATION HOURS IN EACH MONTH
WHEN WIND BLEW AS FOLLOWS :—


Anti-Cyclonic Storms.


ee eee ML idus ee rin ==
: ; | à 5 | E
El ا‎ a) a) eee aa
Month. e д | d E En Ew | Z EZ E
Bee ЕЕ ТАЛАЦА ЕЕ Е ЕЕС ЕС
1899. | | 1 |
March отсо со 3: uh © 10 3) Sl оо
April 9 |o O 1) 4 | 30 тб ор Ol xe sol упо 79
May аат ооа шошо 2 о gi su
June -| 3/0] 2] 0] 0 148 |30 1618) уо 2| 2/0] 3] о 153
Jay по BO ® 6\9) | 991120! ©) ©) соте
August бо зоо 0126 520! O0 3) ClO] 2 o2 д| -Ф©
September | 3/1 | 2] 0] 1 25|27|14]23| 3 4| 2] 1| I | 3| 11284
October .| 1/0] olol 0/43/11] 5|14|r0 4| 1| 8| r | 6| 2| 98
November | 1|0| O O © 22 10 uS. тоох slo) | o| won
December 31 оо 05 6 12|17| OMS тз) 68
1900 |
January ol OKO ToB se | Olio CE 4 a8 | шо a) an
Totals Е 62 27 |400 215 151/207 36/65 |21|51| 13 | 63| 26 1033
ee


Appendix. 307


Table VI. shows the number of hours in each month when the
direction of the wind was actually noted at the fixed observation
times. It will be seen that the number of calms head the list, whilst
the predominance of the E.S.E. winds is very evident.


TABLE VII.—MEAN VELOCITY OF WIND IN MILES PER HOUR


(APPROXIMATE).
|
k E.S.E. S.S.W. | W.N.W. to
сен N twi | og toW. | N.N.W.

March 13 34 | 10 IO
April ol 12 37 | 9 II
May | 8 30 | 8 8
June 9 30°5 7 | 7^8
July . MIE 26 8 IO
August 7 22 IO | 14'5
September s oS 8 52, 9°5 9
October 5) 4 . . | 6 325 | 8:5 II
November 9 27 | 10'5 8
December 5 . . o 4 12'5 32 | 7 9
Jamey o so 8 6 5 14 34 | 5 11

|

1


The average for winds from the E.S.E. only, is above forty miles
an hour for nearly every month.


TABLE VIII.—CONDITIONS DURING A STORM ON APRIL 2ND, 1899.


Barometer
: Corr. Temp. of Direction of Flee т
Time. |, ficering x wind. Velocity of wind.
point). |
Ist April. | Inches. |
9 P.M. 29° Fog) | nass | W. 5:7 miles per hour.
2nd April. |
9 A.M. 29° 109 |. п) | Whirlwinds
II A.M. egeta | e | 18,90, 2200 ;
T yt 28:919 | 24°0° | ^ BIO y »
3 PM. 28:916 | 26:9? | E 102-0 (?) ,, »
5 P.M. 28:880 | 24°3° | Ў, S "9 y >
7 P.M. 28°880 | 25:3? | E доо ,, »
o mao | 28017 | MAO | » 82:5 و‎ »
3rd April. |
9 A.M. | 29:208 | 19:5? | S. Eoo MN ^
|
rr EE EE SS SES


Maximum temperature during the gale was 31°5° F. During a
gale on March 19th a Robinson anemometer was demolished
when velocity of wind excelled ninety miles an hour ; and another

X 2


308 |». Appendix.


was destroyed on the night of the 18th May, when it was impossible
to estimate the velocity of the wind. The anemometers used were
tested at the Kew Observatory prior to the departure of the Expedi-
tion from England, and were found to give results within 97% of the
Kew instruments. It is evident, however, that the action of wear
and tear on the instrument by these: gales must have a very material
influence on its indications. It would be advisable on future
Antarctic expeditions to take pressure anemometers of the type
Cator and Lind besides the Robinson pattern. :

The mean barometric pressure for the winter months is much
lower than the mean for the summer, but the means have not yet
been determined, as there are some 4,000 observations to be dealt
with. The highest barometric pressure occurred on July 22nd, 1899,
when the barometer registered 30°182 inches, and the lowest—
27'860 inches—on September oth, 1899. Both of these readings
are reduced to freezing-point only, and are not corrected for gravity.

Another important feature in the meteorological conditions is the
very small amount of snowfall at the sea-level. A snow gauge was
erected at some distance from the hut, and during the whole year it
collected no more than 3 inches rain equivalent. The heaviest
snowfall at one time occurred on April 5th, 1899, when the gauge
collected o*19 inches; the depth of the snow on a level being
8 inches and exceedingly light. :


TABLE IX.—THE NUMBER OF HOURS OF BRIGHT SUNSHINE RECORDED
BY THE CAMPBELL-STOKES INSTRUMENT.


Month. No. of Hours. Remarks.

Marc = UIT

Apal 202 f MEDIE

NEDA PM 8 Sun left rsth, too weak to burn on few days prior


to departure.


du. 6 Mos 2 Sun below horizon.

August . . . 27 Sun too weak to burn for some days after its
return.

September s 5 57

October. . . 185 From 6 A.M. to 9 P.M. Not recorded when sun

November . . 216 bd h |

DU Gee was below the pole.

January 5 5 5 3


Total 703


For high latitudes the Campbell-Stokes sunshine recorder should
be constructed so as to burn when the sun is below the pole without
any difficult readjustment of the instrument.


ET ST RISE TETE ERE з


VALANOUVA AHL JO TIVA AHL HLIM ЯЯПТУЯЯ4ЙЯТГ JHL
NI ASIA AAILVIAN AHL ONIMOHS HdV3DONVH ANV HdVNDONHXH.L AHL WOW 54115


piim


ШП
ШШЕ


if
f

ў
i


E = eae К z 3 = = Py ake EE
P = E = ERR Е
с=с = a dE E = cu E
ET z S =


310 Appendix.


On the journey from Cape Adare southwards some most remark-
ably low temperatures were observed for the time of the year. Thus,
off Mount Erebus on February rith, 1900, the temperature sank to
—6° F., with a wind from the south straight off the Great Ice.
Barrier. Again, on February rgth, the minimum temperature was
—12° F. (—24°4° C.), with a clear sky and a light wind from the
south. So itis possible to form an idea from these temperatures what
one would be likely to encounter in the way of cold on a sledge
journey southwards from the edge of the Great Ice Barrier in the
middle of the Antarctic summer.


MAGNETISM.


Magnetic observations taken in the vicinity of the south magnetic
poles will always present great difficulties unless taken on board
ship at some distance from the coast-line, and with instruments of
the nature of the Fox Circle. The highly magnetic character
of the rocks off the shores of Victoria Land not only renders the
taking of magnetic observations extremely difficult, but the
observations are themselves unreliable. Even far inland, where the
ice-cap is some thousands of feet thick, the influence of the rocks if
magnetic, as is most probable, would certainly be felt. Under such
circumstances the Unifilar Magnetometer is the worst instrument that
could possibly be taken to the Antarctic regions for the determination
of intensity. Besides being a most delicate instrument, and therefore
difficult for transport across ice, it is heavy, inconvenient to manage
in a cold climate, and most sensitive to any form of disturbance.
The ordinary Dip Circle, fitted with Lloyd needles for observations
of total intensity, would possibly be the best instrument to use for
isolated observations on shore; whilst differential instruments,
fitted up in a small house built expressly for the purpose, and
erected in Wood Bay, would doubtless be of considerable
value, although the erection of the instruments would involve
much trouble. А detailed magnetic survey of Victoria Land would,
of course, be of immense value-—of infinitely greater value than the
determination of the spot where the needle stands vertical. In order
to make such a survey, it would be necessary to take a number of
observations surrounding the magnetic pole. The work would have
to be done during the summer months by careful and determined
observers, who must be fully prepared to meet with innumerable
difficulties, and be physically capable of wrestling with them. The


Appendix. 311


magnetic observations taken at Cape Adare during 1899-1900
involved the three elements Declination, Inclination and Intensity,
and were conducted in an open Lapp tent with great personal
inconvenience, sometimes even at a temperature of — 25? C.
This tent was situated at a distance of about 2,000 yards from the
base of a volcanic and highly magnetic range of mountains, which
undoubtedly had considerable influence upon the magnets. ‘The
disturbances due to the occurrence of the aurora were also very great,
so that very few of the observations taken with the Unifilar Magne-
tometer are entirely free from its influence. On account of the weak
horizontal intensity in the deflexion observations for the moment of
the vibrating magnet, distances 39 cms. and 52 cms. had to be used
instead of 3o cms. and 4o cms., and as we had no correction to our
deflexion bar for these distances, it was not possible to reduce the
observations on the spot. In the vibration observations, every third
transit was observed instead of every fifth, and in many cases it was
impossible to observe torsion of the suspension thread on account
of the agitation of the magnet. The horizontal force derived from
a single observation taken on May ттїһ, 1899, assuming errors at
39 cms. and 52 cms. to be same as at до cms., gives *o4086 C.G.S.,
dip at same time being — 86° 35' 20", and declination 55° 46 55" E.
at 5.30 P.M.

The mean of some forty dip observations taken at Cape Adare
gives — 86? 34' 13", while the mean of some fifty declinations
gives 56° 2' o" E. The diurnal variations of magnetic conditions at
Cape Adare appear to be very great, but the sudden and relatively
large disturbances make the determination of the normal daily
variations a difficult matter. The presence of large masses of basalt
and other magnetic rocks, which magnetised by the induction of the
earth's magnetic field, must deflect the magnet, and consequently
the true magnetic declination may be assumed to be in error.
Although it is not possible to eliminate errors due to this source, one
may presume them to be constant. On April roth, r899, the
declination was observed every twenty minutes right through the
twenty-four hours, The maximum declination occurred at 4. 5 A.M.,
and the minimum at a little after noon, the difference between
maximum and minimum being 3? 2' 5". Again, on January 2nd,
1900, declination was observed every fifteen minutes. The maximum
occurred at 6 P.M., and the minimum a little after noon, the
difference between maximum and minimum being 1° 38' то. The
change in declination takes place in long oscillations or system of
pulls from 15 to 20 scale divisions to right and left of the centre, the


312 Appendix.


interval of time being rather irregular. In order to give an idea
of a disturbance, the following is an extract from the Magnetic
Journal :—


November 29th, 1899 :—“ Impossible to take set of magnetic
observations, on account of the extraordinary disturbed state of the
magnets. Vibration magnet drawn as much as 20 and 30 on each
side of the central division, and the whole scale would disappear
from the field of view. At, 4.10 Р.м. the circle reading for
declination was 157° 44’ 50". At 4.17 it was 156° 32’ 30”, the
magnet being in the same position (erect), for both readings. ‘Thus
there is a difference of 1° 12’ 20", in the declination for an interval
of seven minutes. The utter impossibility of taking observations
under such conditions is obvious.”


Table X. gives magnetic dips at eight geographical positions :—


Date | Latitude. | Longitude. Dip. Remarks.
Jan. 2nd, 1899 | 63° 41’ S.| 160° 16’ E. = 83° 18-53’ b in the ice
pack.
Jan. зга, 1899 | 63° до’ 169 eo. ое cum Ditto.
March, 1899, to | 71? 18' 170° 9' |—86° 34°13’ | Mean of до (Cape
Feb., 1900. Adare).
Jel, Alm, по) | 735 m^ 168? 31! |—87° 18:28' | 14 miles due W. of


Coulman Is.
Feb. 6th, 1900 | 74? 23/ 164° 3 .[-88? 1°31 | Taken at foot of 9
Mt. Melbourne.


IMEI, eth, noo 75° n 163° 32- | — 37247 | еам оа. ice
| barrier.
Кер; Sth ШОО | 75 2l 163° 29° |— 87° 34°51’ Ditto.
Feb. oth, 1900 | 76° 12’ 168° 20 |—86° 52°13’ | On Franklin Is.,
W. side.


a M саллы же Жыл шо n

Sir James Clark Ross, in 1841, observed a dip of —88° 24' some
twelve miles to the north of Franklin Island, so that the decrease
in fifty-nine years amounts to 1° 32', or an annual decrease of 1°66’,
There is very little doubt that the magnetic pole is much further
N. and W. than in 1841 ; but, of course, it is impossible to accurately
locate its position from such seanty data.


THE AURORA AUSTRALIS, OR POLARIS.


The Aurora, as is well known, is a phenomenon at the same time
cosmic and terrestrial, which on the one hand is confined within the
atmosphere of our globe and stands in close connection with


Appendix. 313


terrestrial magnetism, and on the other hand is dependent on certain
changes in the envelope of the sun, the nature of which is as yet
little known. At Cape Adare, which is probably within the circle
of the greatest Aurora intensity in the Southern Hemisphere,
particularly favourable opportunities are afforded for its study.
During the cold months the atmospheric conditions are most favour-
able, the amount of cloud being small. During the winter the
phenomenon was observed nearly every night, so it was possible to
establish the diurnal period, for it usually manifested itself between
6 P.M. and 3 A.M., its maximum intensity being generally reached
between 8 and 9 р.м. Of course there were exceptional cases.
The intensity also appears to be greater at the time of the equinoxes
than during the mid-winter months; the displays being more
brillant and more rapid in motion at the former time. ‘They were,
however, most frequently seen during July and August. At Cape
Adare (lat. 71? 18' o" S.) the Aurora was always observed in the


north, and it always manifested itself in exactly the same manner.


Diffused Aurora light would first appeai in the north about 3° above
the horizon; soon afterwards a gigantic luminous arc would form
above the diffused Aurora, the extremities resting on the horizon,
while the apex was situated a little to the west of the magnetic
meridian. |

The luminous arc generally formed the starting-point for the


. radiant draperies of rays, of variegated colours and with indescribably


beautiful and graceful folds, which moved laterally and most rapidly
from E. to W., and bodily across the zenith. Long shafts of light
would shoot down towards the earth with incredible rapidity, the
colour being of a much deeper red at the lower part of these
shafts than at the upper. The intensity of the colour appears to
have some connection with the altitude of the phenomenon, varying
greatly with the density of the atmosphere. In other words, the
colour of the Aurora beams is an indication of its height above
the surface of the earth, being deep red at a low altitude, and of a
pale nebulous whiteness at great altitudes. But what was of greatest


interest in the observation of the Aurora was the connection which


appeared to exist between it and an approaching atmospheric
disturbance ; a strong gale from the S.E. being almost invariably
preceded by a most brilliant and rapid Aurora display. This was
not a mere coincidence, but a fact repeatedly observed. It was
also possible to predict an approaching storm many hours beforehand
by the extreme agitation of the magnetic needle, both possibly being


manifestations of the same cause.


314 Appendix.


TABLE XI.—AURORAE OBSERVE


1899.
Month.
March .
April
May
June
July
August
September
October


Total


As mentioned before, the immense influence of the Aurora upon
the magnetic needle made the taking of magnetic observations


extremely difficult.


In order to form an idea of the extent of these disturbances
the following table is given showing the relative position of the
magnet with the position of the Aurora in the sky observed
simultaneously during an Aurora display of very weak intensity, May


D


АТ CAPE ADARE.


Number.


73


31St, I900 :—
Astro- Bee
nomicai| Temp. | Scale | Value | Remarks.
Time Cent. Diy ein ance
h. m
6 45 | —8:3? | 400 | 80’ | Magnet in meridian and steady.
6.50 P.M. diffused Aurora in N.
7 © | =7°S? las! ey Aurora becoming brighter, magnet
oscillating between 47 and 48.
у ES 52:0 | 104 | Beam of Aurora shot up towards zenith,
| and magnet moved to 52.
7 10 53:8 | 107°6° Aurora becoming much brighter in
| magnetic north.
y n2 ne 56-0 | 112’ Beam shot up from arc towards zenith.
7| ug = Боа | im Aurora arc from N. by E. to W.
(magnetic). :
y 1| S meo. nn Aurora stronger, curtain of Aurora with
slow motion.
7 22 8" | воо | пол Arc and curtain in N. and N.W.,
becoming faint.
7 25 | —8' 7? | 55:0 | то’ | Aurora arc becoming stronger in N.W.
9g 2 |a sexe. ns Aurora faded away in west.
7 39 | eu mei gr | Becoming diffused.
8 0| —8°8° | дгго 84' | No sign of any Aurora.


ا ا


During the appearance of the Aurora the disturbance of the
At no time was it brilliant or


magnet lasted more than one hour.


Appendix. 315


rapid in its movement. It was of quite an ordinary type as seen
nearly every night. When it moved towards the west the disturb-
ance appeared to be greatest. At times when the Aurora was
fairly strong, but concentrated near the magnetic north, the needle
was but little disturbed, nor did it appear to be much disturbed when
the Aurora became diffused.


May 6th, 1899. Short Extract from Meteorological Journal :—


“Very fine Aurora Australis, first visible at 6 р.м. in the form
of an arc of light in the north. The centre of the arc was about
3° above the horizon, and bore about N. by E. The arc was of
large radius, the inner side or base being of much greater intensity
than the outer; much yellow and red in the base part. Curtains
of vertical beams of light, always parallel to the original arc, com-
menced to move slowly and bodily towards the south. The lateral
movement was very rapid, and always E. and W., and the bottom
part of the beams denser and redder than the top. The curtains of
light advanced no farther than about 15° north of the zenith, the
limit in the east being the planet Jupiter, and in the west the star
Sirius. As the curtain of light moved south, the original arc became
diffused but stationary and had little movement. The display
_ reached its greatest intensity about 6.30 P.M., and ended at 7 р.м.

A kind of diffused afterglow remained in the north for many hours.
Temperature of air, 12° F. ; barometer, 29:262 inches."


August 4th, 1899. Short Extract from Meteorological Journal :—


“An Aurora was observed at a little before 6 р.м. in the form cf
a double luminous arc in the north. Тһе arcs were separated from
one another by about 2^, the inner one being 8^ above the
horizon. ‘The west extremity of the arc bore about N.N.W. The
east extremity was invisible, being hidden behind the cape. The
arcs lay in the same plane and had a common centre. Winding
curtains of Aurora afterwards manifested themselves in the usual
way, moving towards the zenith and forming coronas there.


Temperature of air, — 41:5? F. ; barometer, 29'200 inches."


APPENDIX II.


Copies OF NOTES WRITTEN BY LIEUTENANT ALEXANDER J.
SMITH, R.N., ON BOARD H.M.S. ÉREBUS, ОМ AN OLD CHART


NOW IN THE POSSESSION OF MR. C. E. BoRCHGREVINK.


“А bottle thrown from H.M.S. Zrebws in lat. 53° 59 5., and
long. 60° 47' №. at 8 EM. 4th April, 1842. The same was
picked up on Cape Liptrap, Port Phillip coast, about the middle of
September, 1845."


“Thermometer left at Deception Island by Capt. Forster in
1829 was found by William H. Smiley, master of a sealer, in
February, 1842, and carefully noted its minimum temperature, which
was 5° below zero; from Wilkes viz. . . . ."


.. “H.M. Ships Ærcebus and Terror attained the highest latitude ever

reached, the 28th January, 1841, viz., 78? 12' S.; all progress to
the south stopped by a perpendicular barrier of ice 180 ft. high,
along which the ships ran 3oo miles east by north. High mountains
to the south and south-west."


“U.S. ship Leacock saw the first iceberg in lat. 611° S.
and long. 161° 5' E., 13th January, 1840; her last was in 55°,
25th January.”


* Vincennes first berg, lat. 61° 8' S., and long. 162° 32’ E.; last
one 27th February, 51° S."


“roth January, 1840. Vincennes and Porpoise in company saw
first berg in lat. 61? 8' and long. 162? 32' E. On the rst March the
Porpoise saw the last berg, lat. 55^, and long. 140? E. The American
squadron under Wilkes reached their furthest lat. 65^, the end of
January, 1840.”


Appendix, Q17


LAND PARTY.


OBSERVATIONS BY DR. KLOVSTAD.


Names. Weights in English Ibs.
C. E. Borchgrevink . . 163, 162, 165, 167, 172, 170, 172, 173, 179, 171
Louis Bernacchi . . . 150, 149, 150, 152, 153, 155, 146, 144, 144, I45
William Colbeck. . . 153, 155, 150, 154, 153, 164, 156, 152, I5I, 152
Hugh Evans. . . . 185, 173, 179, 182, 180, 183, 176, 175, 181, 172
Colbein Ellefsen . . . 160, 162, 162, 166, 165, 172, 164, 165, 166, 168
Anton Fougner . . . 148, 144, 145, 146, 145, 150, 146, 145, 148, 147
. Nicholai Hanson . . 180, 172, 183, 185, 190, 200
Herlof Klovstad . . . 155, 145, 148, 153, 156, 162, 153, 151, I51, 146
Ole Must. . . . . 130, 120, 123, 140, 142, 137, 145, 136, I141, 140
Par Savio. 6 . 6, 146, 150, 152, 150, 143, 144, 140


» ۰ 144, 150, 144, 150, 15
Dates, 1899—28/3/, 16/5, 21/6, 3-10/8, 28/8, 4/10, 1/11, 1/12.
1900—2/1, 2/2.


Names. Lung capacities in cubic centimetrcs.

C. E. Borchgrevink . . 5100, 5000, 4600, 50:0, 5coo, 45co, 4400, 4700
Louis Bernacchi . . . 5000, 5000, 5100, 5500, 5000, 4800, 4900, 4700
William Colbeck . . . 4250, 4500, 4600, 4500, 4200, 4300, 4300, 4700
Hugh Evans . . . . 6100, 6300, 6200, 6100, 6500, 6000, 6500, 6100
Colbein Ellefsen . . . 5700, 5400, 5900, 6000, 5700, 5500, 5600, 5700
Anton Fougner . . . 4000, 4000, 4000, 4500, 3600, 3700, 3600, 3700
Nicholai Hanson. . . 4400, 4500, 4400, 4400

Herlof Klovstad . . . 4900, 4900, 4500, 4900, 4600, 4600, 4500, 4409
Ole Must . . . . . 4700, 4600, 5100, 5100, 5000, 5000, 5000, 5000
Per Savio. . . . . 5000, 5000, 5000, 5200, 4700, 5900, 5100, 5500
Dates, 1899—28/3, 19/5,* 22/6,t 10/8,$ 3/108 1/11, 2/12.

1900—2/1.


* Sun going. t+ Midwinter. Sun returning. After a sledge journey.
going g g y


APPROXIMATE POSITION OF SOUTH MAGNETIC POLE:
About 220 W. by N. from Wood Вау.


Latitude o . s ə o o 73° 20' S.
Longitude . . . . . . . . 1460 O Е.


CAMP RIDLEY :


ledge a s s. o o o a gn? ng".
Longnude o s o 5 a «o o 170° dg" m.
Variation . . . . . . . 56° o' o" Е.
Inclination. . . . . . . 86 34 o"
DUKE OF YORK ISLAND (Midwinter Сатр):
lee . o o s o а 710 3a” d"
owl. o o o o o o Was? A ag" 18.
BEARINGS FROM CAMP RIDLEY:

Mount Adam . . . . . S. 46° W. True.
Mount Minto. as o o o 5. 43° №. p
Mount Sabine. . s o 9 UB” Wo y


Duke of York Island . . o ® go М. y


318 Appendix.


OBSERVATIONS TAKEN FOR LATITUDE AND LONGITUDE AT
VESSELS FURTHEST SOUTH.


Observed height of sun was . . 23° 13 о”
Corrections amountto. . . . 18° 16
Winch ves itil c 2 s . gp il’ aJ" S.
LOGS ааа WAS o a о OS A ug" I8.
Variation observed was . . . 103° 39' ES


MAGNETIC DIPs.


Lat. Long. Dip.

ЛОТО eium йет ршн —
AT CAPE ADARE.

— MEE О SOL Су” с}
OSU c о Ое" ӨЛ? ng af"
HO ed. lc о. ПОЛ ww. з. 882 a gu"

IN WOOD BAY.
74° 23 T ® 163° 32 Ne 87° 47’ m
099 AU о s. c HOS 9 . e. 87° ssl
FRANKLIN ISLAND.
— ы кылоо О SOS IG


Franklin Island Dip observed on the 9th February :-—86° 52' 13".
In 1841, Ross observed 88° 24' twelve miles to the north of the
island, so that the decrease in fifty-nine years amounts to 1° 32’, or an
annual decrease of 1°66’.

Lowest barometric pressure on September 9th : 28:86 inches.

Highest barometric pressure on July 22nd: 30:134 inches.


NEW NAMES AFFIXED TO GEOGRAPHICAL POSITIONS
BY THE COMMANDER OF THE SOUTHERN CROSS
EXPEDITION.


In ROBERTSON Bav.


Camp Ridley, 71° 18' S. lat., and 170? 9 E. long. Named after
the Commander's mother's maiden name.

Large glacier at the end of Robertson Bay named after Sir
George Newnes, Bart.

Island situated in lat. 71° 35 S., and long. 170° 23’ E., named
after H.R.H. The Duke of York.

Sir John Murray Glacier, to the W. Sir George Newnes Glacier,
named after Sir John Murray, of the Challenger.


Appendix. 319


Land to the W. of Sir John Murray Glacier, called Geikie Land
after Sir Archibald Geikie, the Scotch geologist.

To the W. of Geikie Land, Dugdale Glacier, named after Frank
Dugdale, Esq., of Snitterfield, Stratford-on-Avon.

Westye Egeberg Glacier, named after the late Consul Westye
Egeberg, of Christiania, Norway.

Scott Keltie Glacier, named after Dr. Scott Кеше, F.R.G.S.,
F.R.S.E., D.Sc., Hon. Secretary of the Royal Geographical Society
of London.

Yngvar Nielson Glacier, named after Prof. Dr. Yngvar Nielsen,
of Christiania University.

Ommanney Glacier, after Admiral Sir Erasmus Ommanney, K.C.B.

Dr. Reush Glacier, after Dr. Reush, President of the Royal
Geographical Society, Christiania.

Haffner Glacier, after Colonel Haffner, Director of the Govern-
ment Survey of Norway.

Frank Newnes Glacier, after Frank Newnes, Esq., the only son
of Sir George Newnes, Bart.

A bay at the mouth of Sir John Murray Glacier, named Colbeck
Bay, after Lieut. Colbeck, R.N.R., Magnetic Observer of the
Expedition.

The end of Robertson Bay— Protection Grove.

Glacier S. E. of Camp Ridley— Warning Glacier.


On THE East COAST or VICTORIA LAND.


Conspicuous cape to the N.W. of Coulman Island, named Cape
Constance, after Constance Borchgrevink, the Commander’s wife.
Lat. 73^ 17' S., long. 168° 31’ E. |

Bay to the W. of Coulman Island, called Lady Newnes Bay.

The inner part of Wood Bay—lat. 74° 23 S., long. 164° 3' E.—
named Southern Cross Firth, after the Expedition vessel, the Southern
Cross.

Land to the S. and W. of Southern Cross Firth, ramed Newnes
Land, after Sir George Newnes, Bart.

Island discovered to the S.W. of Mount Melbourne, named Oscar
Island, after His Majesty King Oscar of Norway and Sweden,

An island still further south, called Markham Island, after Sir
Clements Markham, K.C.B., President of the Royal Geographical
Society, London.

A cape in about lat. 76^ S., called Cape Neumayer, after Prof.
Dr. Neumayer, Director of the Seewarte, Hamburg.


320 Appendix.


Cape S.W. of Franklin Island, called after Mr. Louis Bernacchi,
magnetic observer to the Expedition.

Cape at the foot of Mount Terror, called Cape Tennyson, after
the late Poet Laureate.


From ZOOLOGICAL NOTES sy Mr. NICHOLAI HANSON.


October 5th, 1898.
Temp. water, 68°; air, 67°; lat, 27° 27’ 5. ; long.,-23° 33 Wa
The first Albatross (D. exulans) was seen to-day ; otherwise the bird
life has been remarkably poor. In the last few days only some
small petrels (Oceanites oceanicus). Yesterday some few nearly
white birds were seen, much like gulls in appearance. ‘They were
busily occupied in fishing ; they were very much like Sterna hirundo
in behaviour.
October 6th, 1898.
Waien 63 a ави оно p. ONO 21 жй Wc Al day
long no birds have been seen, until just before sunset, when a very
small, grey-backed petrel came close to the vessel.


October 7th, 1898.

Waren Gu s am FO 8 100. ex) GG) ud" бър Iker, nl" 20), eu" WW.
The small petrels which we saw on the sth followed us to-day in
great numbers. А kind of Albatross, very much like a big Z. fuscus,
but a little bit larger, was seen to-day for the first time. Probably it
was Diomedea melanophrys.


October Sth, 1898.
Water, 65 am, 56 3 Ја, 20- 54 43”; lonp., 15 54 48" W,
A great many birds were seen round the vessel to-day—very many
of the small petrels, two specimens of Diomedea culminata, as also
some few Daption capensis.


October gth, 1898.

Water, 62°3 am mel a Iki, 30° 28’ (9.8 Шот, ie? O 3o" WE A
great many of the same birds we saw yesterday, especially Daption
capensis, the latter watching keenly to catch eatable matter which
might be thrown overboard.


Appendix. 321


October 12th, 1898.

Water, 62°; air, 56°; lat., 31° 54 S. ; long., то? 9’ W. No new
birds were seen. The chief was out, and shot three albatrosses of
the same kind as we saw on the 7th and 8th, as well as two
grey-backed petrels.


October 13th, 1898.

Water, 59^; air, 56°; lat, 30° 37’ S.; long., 9° 45’ W. The
birds are about the same in number to-day, but a new kind of petrel,
Cymodroma melanogastra, has put in an appearance. We caught
two specimens of Diomedea melanophrys ; they had in their stomachs
partly digested octopus. A great many porpoises were seen, also
two whales, but the latter were too far away for us to be able to
determine what kind they were.


October 15th, 1898.


Water, 56°; air, 54^; lat, 37°, 31' S.; long, 8? gi! W. Two
Cape Pigeons were caught to-day and prepared. ‘The contents of
their stomachs were mainly an oily fluid, mixed with a substance


like the roe of a fish.
October 16th, 1898.


Water, 53°; air, 48°; lat, 38° 29’ S.; long., 5° 51’ W. Two
new kinds of birds were seen to-day. A petrel with a white head
(4strelata) as also a Lestris.


October 18th, 1898.


Water, 50°; air, 53°; lat, 40? 27’ S.; long. o? 21’ E. We
caught one Diomedea melanophrys, also seven Cape Pigeons. Most
of the birds caught up to date have recently started moulting.


October 19th, 1898.


Water, 51°; air, 48°; lat., 39^ 55' S. ; long., 3° 16 E. Again,
a new bird has been seen to-day (Puffinus). We have caught two
of this species, and seven Cape Pigeons.


October 20th, 1898.
Water 51°; air, 54°; lat., 40° 27' S. ; long., 5° 22 E. Puffinus


is about in hundreds to-day.
Y


322 ` Appendix.


October 21st, 1898.
Water, 51°; air, 50°; two petrels, Prion desolatus and Prion
vittatus, have been seen for the first time to-day. All the old kinds
ate following us. Шар 41° 14’ S. ; long., 8° 44 E.


October 22nd, 1898.


Water, 48°; air, 45°; we saw some specimens of Diomedea
Juliginosa, the first of this kind we have seen on the voyage. Lat.,
4r 20 5; long. TO ТЕ


October 237d, 1898.
Water, 47^; air, 48^; lat 42? 1' S., and long; 20° 32 E, Опе
Cape Pigeon caught to-day. It had not started moulting.


October 24th, 1898.

Water, 56°; air, 50°; lat, 42°, 23' S. ; long., 20° 32' E. Several
albatrosses and petrels were caught to-day. Among the birds shot
to-day was a Cape hen (Majagucus equinoctialis) as also a small grey
petrel. The specimens I got this day were Diomedea exulans,
Diomedea fuliginosa, Diomedea culminata, and the two  petrels
mentioned above. The little grey-backed petrel, and the white-
bellied petrel, as also Prion vittatus were caught. The stomachs of
the albatrosses had all more or less digested octopuses, and all the
petrels had the already-mentioned oily substance. Prion vittatus,
as well as the small white-bellied petrel, had not started moulting.
All the others had started, and some of the albatrosses were already
far advanced in their moulting. We saw a small Penguin colony
to-day at some distance from the vessel.


October 26th, 1898.

Water, 52^; air, 52°; lat 43.23 5.;long., 27 25° BE Wea
two light, nearly white birds to-day. As far as could be seen they
had very narrow wings and a rounded tail, and were very much like
Fulmarus glacialis.

October 29th, 1898.

Water, 42°; air, 39°; lat, 44, 20 е long GT Е A lanes
Albatross (D. exulans) was caught to-day. It had evidently eaten a
great deal of octopus, which it left on the deck as soon as it was
hauled on board. All in all I found the beaks of seventeen
octopuses in them. The Diomedea exulans has not been seen in
: great numbers, no more than eight have been seen at one time.


Appendix. 22а


October 30th, 1898.

Water, 40°; air, 40°; lat, 45° 13' 5.; long., 40° 47 E. Saw a
white bird to-day about the size of the sooty albatross; it had some
few dark spots on it under the wings and on the belly ; it had a short
light-coloured beak and a short high head, long and narrow wings
and a square tail.


November 1st, 1898.

Water, 39°; air, 40°; lat., 45° 21'S.; long., 49° 3 E. Some few
penguins have been seen to-day, but of what kind could not be
settled.

November and, 1898.

Water, 38°; air, 40°; lat, 44° 59’ S.; long, 52° 34’ E. Some
birds were caught to-day. Amongst them were Cape Pigeons, and
in a female were found eggs one-and-a-third centimeter in diameter.
A giant petrel was seen, also a small whale.


November 3rd, 1898.
Water, 43°; air, 46°; lat., 44° 39’ S.; long., 56° 50’ E. No Cape
‘Pigeons were seen, and the Prion desolatus has also left us, and also
the small grey-backed petrel.


November 7th, 1898.
Water, 52°; air, 40°; lat., 44° 24' S.;long., 72° 5' 30" Е. Amongst
birds caught to-day were four Cape hens; they are about in great
numbers. Puffinus are about, but they are few in number.


November oth, 1898.

Water, 40 cam 43 ; lat, 45 9 S., long, 77° то E. А good
many birds were caught and prepared yesterday, and amongst them
were two specimens of Diomedea culminata which were quite
different to any of the others I caught of this kind, they had quite
black beaks, and had not such clean collars as those I previously
caught. The grey collars of the heads of these two were sprinkled
with white, especially on the sides; probably they were young birds
from last year.


November toth, 1898.
Water, 44°; air, 42°; lat.,.45° 7' 5.; long., 79° 37 E. Some few
albatrosses of a different kind were caught to-day ; amongst others I
got a sooty albatross, which was a good deal darker than any I had


Wwe


324 Appendix.


caught before, it had also a white border on each side of the under-
part of the beak; those caught before had all blue borders, This
dark albatross had not yet started moulting.


November 18th, 1898.
Water, 49°; air, 47°; lat., 45° 45' S. ; long., 111° 3' E. Puffinus
has left us, also the white-headed petrel. A flock of Diomedea
melanophrys were lying on the sea.


November 25th, 1898.

Water, 53°; air, 49°; lat, 44° 32’ S.; long., 139. 6 Hc Dhe
white-headed petrel has turned up again, and a new kind of black
petrel has been seen, much resembling the black swallow in flight,
but about twice the size of that bird.


November 26th, 1898.

Water, 522°; air, 52°; lat, 44° 3 S. ; long., 142° 55 E. A great
many albatrosses have been seen. Diomedea exulans have been about
in great numbers.

November 27th, 1898.


Water, 56°; air, 56°. We sighted land at 5 A.M. ‘The old birds,
except the Diomedea exulans, have now left us, but some new species
have put in an appearance, amongst them a large albatross with a
white head, dark back and short tail. Then we have a Sula, very
much like Suda bassana, but with a black tail. The southern black-
backed Larus dominicanus, as also its small relation Xema jamesonit,
has been seen all along the coast, and the “mutton” birds, so well
known in Australia, were seen in hundreds.


PRELIMINARY REPORT ON THE ROCK SPECIMENS
COLLECTED BY THE SOUTALRN CROSS
ANTARCTIC EXPEDITION. .


The collection consists mainly of specimens of basalt, and of
a pale-green slate and quartz-grit, together with boulders of granite
rocks.

Of the basalts, most of the specimens are very vesicular and
scoriaceous, but some are of compact basalt, showing in some cases


Appendix. 325


the vesicular and glassy surface of the lava-flow. Only a few
specimens show porphyritic crystals, which consist of small augites
and olivines, with very little felspar. A large mass of basalt from
Franklin Island is remarkable for the number and large size of
the olivine-nodules, such as occur, eg, in many of the tertiary
basalts of Rhenish Prussia.

Some of the basalts contain hornblende, and are similar to the

 glassy hornblende basalt from Possession Island, in the Ross
Collection.

Of fragmental basaltic rocks, there are specimens of palagonite
tuff, and of an agglomerate, consisting of large angular fragments
of basalt bound together by a red calcareous cement.

Of volcanic rocks besides basalts, the collection contains one
or two rounded fragments of dark phonolitic rocks, which present
characters strikingly similar to phonolitic rocks from the Canary
Islands and from the Rift Valley in the neighbourhood of McKenya,
East Africa.

The pale-green slate from Duke of York Island, of which a
large number of specimens was collected, contains much iron-
pyrites and is traversed by quartz veins. Probably connected
with the slate are specimens of a pale-green fine grained quartz-grit.

Of the granitic boulders, one specimen is remarkable for the
large size of the porphyritic felspar crystals, which measure as
much as 2 ins. long by 3 іп. broad. А large specimen from
Possession Island, showing pegmatitic structure, and containing
muscovite and pink garnets, is similar to a specimen in the Ross
Collection. It is probably a dyke rock, belonging to the Aplite-
pegmatite group.

Possibly in connection with these granites are specimens of
pale hornstone-like felsites, some of which contain small phenocrysts
of felspar and muscovite, while others are hálleflinta-like, without
porphyritic constituents.


е 1% IPIRMOIR.
Min. Dep., Nov. 30th, 1900.


326 Appendix.


APPENDIX sy Mr. W. COLBECK, RNR
MAGNETIC OBSERVER.


January 27th, Cape Adare.
INCLINATION.


Setting of Azimuth Circle, 44° 3’.


Needle No. 1A.


A dipping times { D PD B dipping times { Het s
„йр uec. wr OP IM uM I о лы о ы ы с а
Inwards. | Outwards. Outwards. Inwards.

B W. wW. E. d ANS WS E.


86° 39 86°29 | 86° 22 (86° 46 186° 35 86939 86921 (86°
55


34 35 27 4I 30 44| 26 49
38 30 24 45 34 38 2I 53
32 35 28 gos Ж 43 27 345 dy


86? 35 "75 86° 32°25] 689 2525 86° 43 | 86? 32: 25/86? 41 86° 23°75 86°51


| |


KP sal’ BOG", Q9? os" mue. 8637 ©»


Needle No. 3A.


A dipping times | ae B dipping times { n pm
Inwards. Outwards. | Outwards. | | Inwards.
E- W. W. E. E. W. W. E-


86° 32 86° 38 86° 28 [86°47 86°37 |86°36 |86°39  |86?37


29 42 32 42 34 40 Зз
33 40 29 46 34 35 28 38
30 44 33 42 30 38 32 35


86? 31 |86° 41 86° 30° 5 86° 44°25) 86° 33°75) 86° 37 '25 86° 30°75/86° 36


S0. 99 957 597". 86° 34’ 26'4".
Mean of both needles = 86° 35’ 30°9”.


Appendix. 327


INCLINATION.


Lat, 73° 17 9, Setting of circle, 86° 54’,


Bebruary 4th. { Long. 168° 31’ E.


Obs. taken near the ice barrier, W.N.W. of Coulman Island, 14 miles,


Fine clear weather, light S.Wly. airs, temp. + 3° 5’ C.


а 3.15 Р.М. o 4.4 P.M.
Times { 3.33 Times { 4.22
B dipping . Needle No. 3A. A dipping.
Inwards. | Outwards. Outwards. | Inwards.
cB E | | | | = Am E
E |w.| w./ E | BE] №. W. E.
87°28 87° то 87°17 87°22 87°27 87°15 87°19 87°20
23 15 22 | 18 | 24! 12 I4 | 16
26 i 2 I9 | 25} I5 16 2I
22 n5 vA | З | — 20] II 12 17
87?24' 75187? 13 87220: 75 87° 18:587? 24, 87° 13°25 87° 15°25) 87° TIE
| | | | |
87° 19' 15". m = 7° 1 OMe 87 п” ды”
: 3.35 P.M. : 4.26 Р.М.
Times { 3.52 Times { 4.43
Needle No. IA.
Inwards. Outwards. ` Outwards. | Inwards.
| mI | oe
pes VW W. E E үү №. Е.


12 26 5 32 25 IO | 14 20

i" 20 I 38 30 — 6 | 12 27

12 25 6 оз 25 Іо | 15 | 21
87°14°25 87° 23°25 87° 3 87° 35 87^ 2725 87° 8:25 87° 13 187° 235

i | | | :


Gy? wt), Bopp un, = 87° ng we", 87? 18' o".
Mean of both needles gives 87? 18' 28".


a s or^.


328 Appendix.


INCLINATION.
Eat VM 29S


ery 6th, 1900. Wood Bay { Long. 164° 3 E.


Setting of Circle 63° 23’.


10.0 P.M.


Times { 10.15 A dipping. Times { TO ELE MB dipping.


10.55
No. 3A.


А


Inwards. Outwards. Outwards. Inwards.


E. Wo W. E. E. W. W. E.


87°57 [88°19 |87959 |88°1 |88°8 | 87° 51 87°59 (87959


54 13 . (Ba 87° 58 3 53 |88°r 57
56 17 у 1064 9 59| 3 59
52 IO 59 88? о 5 88? 1 6 56


87^ 54°75|88°14°75|87° 59° 25| 88° 0775, 88° 6-25 87° 56 |88°2°25|87°57°75


|, = 89° mos. iim, Lim, == GS? По, шл, = 99° © FG,


Times { "0.10 un dipping. Times { шеша dipping.


10.32 it.
No. 1A.
Inwards, Outwards. Outwards. Inwards.


Gum mess |р IS 88° то |87°49  88?2 88? 11


7 880 54 IO I5 54 6 7
9 (87°55 54 13 18 49 2 7
ы o. c 56 9 14 55 x 5


88^7:7587^57:2587?537588^ 11775 88° 16°587°51`7588°3°75 88^7'5


ш == 899 mv m. of m. = 88° 1°56’ am, == 899 ©? ey)


Mean dip, 88° 1’ 31"


Appendix. 329


INCLINATION.


Lat. 75° 18’ S.; long. 163° 32’ E. (between Cape Washington and
Cape Gauss).


February 8th, 1900. Taken on the ice barrier. Strong breeze from
S.W., temp. x 18? F.


Needle No. 3A, Time 3.6 A.M. to 3.40 A.M.


B dipping. A dipping.
Inwards. Outwards. Outwards. Inwards.
E. W. W. | E. E. W. W. E.


87°34 8753 (87°45 87°54 87°40 87°52 [87°54 8744


40 51 43 56 | 45 49 51 49
34 | 532 | 44 51 45 2 50 43
39 | FO | M 53 49 50 48 46


| | |
87°36°75 87° 515 87° 43°25 87^53'5 877447587 50°75 87°50°75 87^45'5


А


m. 87° 46°25’. m. of m. = 87° 47°15’. m. = 87? 47°94".


February Sth, 1900. Taken оп ice barrier between Cape Washington
and Cape Gauss.


Lat. 75° 42’ S.; long. 163° 29’ E. Strong breeze S.W., sleet.


Times 11.35 A.M. to 12.15 A.M.


B dipping. No. 1A. A dipping.
Inwards. Outwards. | Outwards. | Inwards.
| _| fce — = ы
Bo w w. E. E | W. | W. | E
87°37 87°18 |87 41 87° 42 87°42 8738 87°15  (87^39
4I 16 38 45 45 43 12 42
49 | 42 47 41 ا41‎ | 35 16 38
590 | 8 42 40| 47 | 41 14 44


poem еланы»


87°43°25 87° 135 87° 42 187° 42 87°43 75 87° 39°25 87° 1472587? 40°74


|


pm


in, = 87° sm. m. of m. = 87° 34’ 51”. m. = 87? 34°50’.


330 Appendix.
INCLINATION,
February oth, 1900. Taken on Franklin Island.


Setting of Azimuth circle, 12° 32’.


Times { oe EN A dipping. Times { Ы A B dipping.
No. 3A.
Inwards. | Outwards. Outwards. Inwards.
E. W. W. E. E. W. W. E;
86°49 86°55 86°59 86°46 86° o3 9л) FT 86°42
52 50| 54 51 55 46 86°57 45
5I 54 59 47 25 48 59 42
55 = MM 58 1I .- 45| 56 46
86°51°75 86°52 86°56°75 86°48°75) 86° 54°25 86°47 86°58 25| 86°43°57
86 597 ngos їй, = GO 5 33207. 86? 5o' 48:6".
: 6.55 P.M. EXE . 7.26 P.M. о
Times { 7.9 A dipping. Times { 7.40 B dipping.
No. 1A.
Inwards. Outwards. Outwards. Inwards.
E W. W. E. Е; | W. W. 19р
| |
8652 BOS |872 © 86:35 |86° 35 |87°12 86°47 | 86° 55
57 50 4 40| 49 8 43 |87 o
52 56 7 38 34 13 47 | 86° 57 .
56 51 4 43 40 $ | O2
36° 54'25 86° 53 | 87° 5°75) 86° 39 | 86° 37°25) 87° 10"2586°45 | 87° 58*5
99 58 O m = 60 Bay ОШ 86° 52 Abas


Mean of both needles gives 86° 52’ 13”.


74


INDEX


Adare, 84

Adventure Bay, 49

Albatross, 54

Anemometer broken, 128
Antarctic, History of, 2
Appendix, 299

Ascent of Cape Adare, 105
Aurora Australis, see Appendix
Auckland Island, 292
Avalanche, 248


Balleny Island, 63
Barrier, Great, 279

“ Belgica,” 5

Bernacchi, 15

Bi-polarity, 232

Blizzard, 91

Blow-fly, discovery of, 232
Bluff, 294

Bunks, description of, 91


Cable home, first, 294
Cape Crozier, 268

Cape Washington, 266
Carros, driving in, 39
Cave, snow, 168

Christmas Day, 241
Christiania, departure from, 22
Colbeck, 14

Congress, Geographical, 4
Coulman Island, 259
Crevasse, Fall in a, 171
Crew of Southern Cross, 18


| Crow's nest, 57
| Cruz, Sta., 46
| Cut off from all the world, 18


Daption Capensis, 64
| Dark time, 153
| Departure, 29


Dogs, 41

Dogs, fight of, 123

Drifting, Southern Cross, 92

Duke of York Island, Discovery of,


| Emperor


| 162


Duke of York Island, taking pos-
session of, 180
Depression, 155


Eclipse, Lunar, 136

Eclipse, Solar, 227

Eggs, collecting of, 203

Ellefsen, 17 0

penguin , (Aptenodytes

Forsterit), 71, 213 .

Engines of Southern Cross, 11

Engineer, chief, 22

Equator, Crossing of, 46

Eudyptes Adelzae, 208

Evans, 16


Fauna, shallow water, 110
Fish, Discovery of, 112, 120, 186
Flag, Hoisting of, 99


| Fougner, 16
| Franklin Island, 268
| Franklin, Sir John, 51


332


Gales, 132

Geikie Land, 175
Gerlache, 5

Glacier, 180

Glacier, ascent of, 177


Hanson, 17

Hanson’s death and funeral, 190,
192

Hobart, 49

Huts, description of, 86


Icebergs, 143, 282
Iceberg, Plunge of, 272
Ice-blink, 61
Ice-navigation, 57
Ice-wall, rise of, 121
Insects, 231


Jelly-fish, Large, 242
Jensen, Capt., 13


Katharine’s Docks, St., 24
Kayak, 240, 247

King Oscar Island, 267
Klóvstad, Dr., 17
Komager, 165


Landing, 85
Lichen, Discovery of,
Luncheon, farewell, 24


Madeira, 39

Magnetic dips, 260, 264, 267, 268

Medusze, 187

Menu, 152

Meteorological
195

Midwinter Camp, 162


notes, Colbeck’s,


Index.


Mirage, 127
Moraine, 175
Must, 19


Neptune, arrival of, 46
Newnes Land, 263
New Year’s Day, 242


Ossifraga Gigantea, 64


Pagodroma Nivea, 222
Parrot, the grey, 45


| Pease, 72


Penguins, Among the, 198
Penguins, flesh of, 216
Penguin's nests, material of, 209
Penguins, quarrel of, 212
Penguins, shoal of, 228
Petrel, gigantic, 220
Photographing seal,
107
Porpoises, shoal of, 52
Possession Island, 257
Practical joke, 75
Puddings, 46


Bernacchi,


Refuge Camp, 116
Report left in cask, 193
Return of Penguins, 191
Robertson Bay, 84
Ridley, Camp, 89
Rossii, seal, 74


Savio, 19

Seal, killing of, 236

Seal, moulting of, 70

Shells, 187

Shooting restrictions, 72

Ski, 129 ;

Skua-gull, egg of, 226

Skua-gull (Zeszrzs), 219

Sledge-breaking through the ice,
203

South, Farthest, 279


Southern Cross Fjord, 261
Southern Cross’ return, 250
Southern Cross’ dimensions, 10
Sponges, 187

Star-fish, 187

Stewart Island, 293

Sun, departure of, 126


Target, Shooting at, 245
"Terror, Mt., 271
Temperature, lowest, 166
Thanksgiving service, 296
Ticks on seal, 185


Index.


СЭЭ


Vapour clouds, 224

Vegetation, 105

Victoria Land, evolution of, 236
Vincent, St., 46

Violent screwing in the pack, 77


Washington, Cape,
Warning glacier, 96
Weddellii, seal, 102
White seal, 236
Wilkes, Capt., 55


LONDON: PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED,
STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING CROSS.


:9100#
г ge (fod V9 шел)
4800 о
SCA Y


/


DS


ROBERTSON BAY


SOUTH VICTORIA LAND dis
William Colbeck,R.N.R.


berg


By direction of the Commander
С.Е, Borchgrevink.


Stanford’s Geog! Estabt London


165°
SRN
DE. |
PC |
= |
299.3407. |
et ars. _ BALLENY ISLAND
3 aS ay gh a (N.W. ISLAND)
^ \ к
vA x
/ / \
"3 = \
А 4 p7%
/ = /
r^ n
de p js th ў н у dvd
th + * >
^c ош: J í pe
РЕС; — M А $ AO
ERES z ace / ML
plu = SS 7. JA > = \
zc ec 7 >z guy Prag ETE \
IE / Es ot 1р e í 20569 \
vix Mox. = Re BS `~ 76 pub = z АА"
E = SA с ee \ Ф >
z ae =>, VN сс : 4 yok
th, Se A No IE \ :
5996 о c \ >
- & of 5 Ур? x ` Ww (V эб
l t
l AD
nom
SA \
ed \
T. і p
= o o e. \ =
x П \ 75 x
78% / \
© L \
: \
Дд] І x
WM HEY TAA. — 8% А
е 4 m" ee 2:
ead 1
€ | йм A с i
1, GAT Ace
HE A \.
\
2 oe == px \
с =A то
> B. \
5
се hy
74% AN
6 b
| \
| ie ке
| \ 8 IS Ja
1 і 2
| in \
te | 6% \
TRACK OF SY “SOUTHERN CROSS" тулт 1
З \
OVER WILKES’ LAND :
By W.Colbeck, Sub-Lieut. RNR. х
under the dircetions of E
C.E. BORCHGREVINK |
\
\
H.M.S. Erebus and Terror ——— ———— eS Y
“Vincennes” Lieut. Wilkes, U.S.N.
SY ‘Southern Cross! =
170°


165


Bia Л лт о ху RT SR
o


o 770:


со


z


ERE


Stantord’s Geog! Estab?
NNN


ki 62
155°


London.
ТИП


63


66°


200° 198° 196° 194° 192° 190° 188° 186° 184^ 182° 180'Long:East from. Greenwich 176° 174° 172° 170° 168° 166 164° 162°
cnr


Ji гз "Рта AOA I va: I = SORTS RNC NUR exce IE p ERES Furman I— Sa л I iram Aw
„д 1900
| Barchgrevinks gy ^
| Farthest South |
| |
| ‘a
| У Ship's Farthest
|
зо Цао’
| 150 fto
|
| Very Heavy Pack
| i
|
|
|
ol 12h Feby 4
78; H78
|
|
|
E } 30
|
||
E!
В. Ме Murdo
|z?H
|
||
| |
| ~
| .
| 0
| | Fel 227%
78H
|
30' |


78H E of
| . fz y
дот II 6% Feby,
A
ty
©
i
З
3
30H ^
$
©
©
©
13 H
\
30H Y
Heo
Cape Har |
Mowbray, К XE
72H pax; S. |
Possession ls. Я | 2
e. i|
| |
ao H Febx 26% |
\ 30°
W. COLBECK, R.N.R. j
By Direction of the Commander |
a С.Е. BORCHGREVINK. Ца"
у
А fs
— = —L— І I um T Qu акр
186 184 182 180 178° 176° 124° TT jai 162 °°


Rp


7-12 SOUTHAMPTON STREET,
STRAND, W.C.


Publications of


George Newnes Limited


~ ~


By HANS CHRISTIAN ANDERSEN.
Fairy Tales.


With upwards of 400 Illustrations. By HELEN STRATTON.
4to, cloth extra, gilt, 12s.


——


The Arabian Nights Entertainments.
Demy 4to, with upwards of 500 original Illustrations.
Printed on Superfine Art Paper. Price 15s.


By the Rev. WILLIAM ADAMS.


The Shadow of the Cross and the Old Man’s


Home.
Two Allegories. With Frontispiece to each Allegory.
Cloth gilt, 16mo, 8d.


The King’s Messengers and the Distant
Hills.


Two Allegories, With Frontispieces. 16mo, cloth gilt, 8d,
2


George Newnes Limited


By GRANT ALLEN.


What’s Bred in the Bone.


Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d. Also a Cheap Edition, 6d.


The Story of the Plants.
With 49 Illustrations. Cloth, 15.


** A brightly written, clear and accurate summary of the functions
and habits of plants." —Daz/y Chronicle.


Flashlights on Nature.
With 150 Illustrations by FREDERICK Enock. Crown 8vo,


cloth extra, 6s.
“ Charming and romantic scientific facts.” —Review of Reviews,


In Nature’s Workshop.
With Illustrations by FREDERICK ENock. Crown 8vo, cloth
extra, 3s. 6d.


By R. E. ANDERSON, M.A.


The Story of Extinct Civilizations of the


East.
With Maps. Cloth, ts.


“ An admirable compendium of a department of knowledge which
has been greatly advanced by the research of recent years. "—A berdeen


Free Press.
سڪ‎


By DOUGLAS ARCHIBALD, M.A.


The Story of the Earth’s Atmosphere.
With 44 Illustrations. Cloth, rs.


“One of the best of the Story series that we have read . . . the
author is frequently able from his wide travels to illustrate his remarks
from his own personal experience in climates where meteorological
manifestations can be witnessed on a grander scale than in our own
country. "— Nature.


2
2


Publications of.


The Art Bible.

Comprising the Text of the Old and New Testaments,

printed in entirely new type, specially selected for its clear-

ness and sharpness of outline, and with 850 Illustrations,

Maps, &c.

In one volume, 1360 pp. super royal 8vo, handsomely bound in cloth,
gilt leaves, 12s.; French morocco, bevelled boards, tooled in gold and
blind, gilt leaves, 16s. ; plain Persian morocco, gilt leaves, 18s. ; Persian
morocco, antique scroll in gold, gilt leaves, 215. ; limp morocco, Yapp
style, flexible back, solid gold leaves, 30s.; Turkey morocco, hand tooied
in gold, solid gold leaves, 38s.

OLD TESTAMENT, with 660 Illustrations, handsomely bound in
cloth, gilt leaves, gs.

NEW TESTAMENT, with rgo Illustrations, handsomely bound in


cloth gilt leaves, 55.
> ———.


By Professor J. М. BALDWIN.


The Story of the Mind.
Cloth, 15.


“ We have seldom read a more thoughtful and suggestive little
production. It can be strongly recommended to students of psy-
chology, to the general reader, and to all who take an interest in the
study and mental upbringing of the young.” —Zancet.

—


Edited by J. G. BARTHOLOMEW, F.R.G.S.
The Citizen’s Atlas.


Comprising 100 Maps and Gazetteer. Crown folio, cloth


extra, 16s. net; half-morocco, 18s. 6d. net.
“Ап admirable atlas." —Ziverpool Courier.


The Royal Atlas of England and Wales.


140 Pages of Plates, with Topographical Index and Statistics.
Crown folio, cloth, 16s. net ; half-morocco, 18s. 6d. net.


“The most successful atlas of this country on a popular scale
that has yet been issued." — Pall Mall Gazette.


The Hub Cycling Map of England and
Wales.


Printed in colours and folded in pocket case, 6d.; mounted


on linen, 15.
4


м
ny


George Newnes Limited


By CONSTANCE BEERBOHM.
A Little Book of Plays, for Professional and


Amateur Actors.
With 22 Illustrations of Scenes. Paper covers, Is.
“ An excellent collection of short dramatic sketches, suited to the
requirements of amateurs.” —B/ack and White.


——


By C. F. BINNS.
The Story of the Potter.


An Account of the Rise and Progress of the Principal
Manufactures of Pottery and Porcelain. With 57 Illustra-
tions, (Cloth, 1s.


** We can recommend the whole volume to all who care to know
something of one of the oldest and most universal of human arts." —
Guardian.


By Mrs. BISHOP.


Unbeaten Tracks ín Japan.
With Map and 56 Illustrations. New and Revised Edition.
Cloth extra, gilt leaves, 6s. 6d.


—


Photographs by GAMBIER BOLTON, F.Z.S.,
and others.


All About Anímals.


260 Illustrations of Animal Life. With explanatory text.
Oblong 4to, cloth extra, gilt leaves, 10s. 6d.


“ Not a dry and scientific work, but brightly written and well
illustrated. Well illustrated it certainly is. Mr. Gambier Bolton's
photographs of lions, tigers, leopards, and other feline creatures have
never been surpassed, and hundreds of such pictures are to follow.
It is really a wonderful production. "— Army and Navy Gazette.


5


Publications of


By FRANCIS BOND, M.A., F.G.S., Hon. A.R.I.B.A.


English Cathedrals Illustrated.
With 180 Illustrations from Photographs. Second Edition.


Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.


** A practical, sensible, and well-informed book, beautifully illus-
trated. Its method is clear, rational, and helpful.” — Bookman.


By GEO. BORROW.
Lavengro: The Scholar—The Gypsy—The


Priest.
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 2s. 6d.
“A marvel of cheap excellence.”— Weekly Sun.


—


By W. A. BREND, B.A.


The Story of Ice.
In the Present and Past. With 37 Illustrations. Cloth, rs.


“ As thus dealt with, the subject in its abstrusest aspects may be
easily comprehended, even by those who have not hitherto devoted
attention to the study of the Ice Age. It is prettily and profusely


illustrated.” — Scotsman.
——


By CHARLOTTE BRONTE.
Shirley.


Crown 8vo, cloth, 15. 6d.


Jane Eyre.
Crown 8vo, cloth, 1s. 6d.
By FRANCES BURNEY.
Evelina; or, The History of a Young Lady’s


Entrance ínto the World.
With 16 Full-page Illustrations by ARTHUR RACKHAM.
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 2s. 6d.


6


І George Newnes Limited


The Captain.


A Magazine for Boys and * Old Boys." Vols. 1, 2, and 3.
Profusely Illustrated. Cloth extra, gilt, 6s. cach.


~~


The Century Book of Gardening.


A Comprehensive Work for every lover of the Garden.
Edited by E. T. Соок. With about 720 Illustrations.
Specially designed Cover. Gilt leaves, large Bvo, 215. net.


-~


Celebrities of the Stage.
A Series of Coloured Portraits of celebrated Actors and
Actresses. With accompanying letterpress by Boyt Law-
RENCE. Crown 4to, cloth extra, ros. 6d. net.


By PAUL DU CHAILLU.


The Land of the Midnight Sun.
With all the original Illustrations, and some additions.
Super royal 8vo. Handsomely bound in cloth, with gilt
edges. Price ros. 6d.


~


By G. F. CHAMBERS, F.R.A.S., Author of
** Handbook of Descriptive and Practical
Astronomy," &c.


The Story of the Stars.
With 24 Illustrations. Cloth, rs.


astronomy w ho wish to acquaint themselves merely
J 1 7


“ Beginners in 2
volume of real


with the outlines of a noble science will find this
service. — Speaker.


^ Told in a pleasing and attractive manner.” Athenaeum.


/


Publications of


By G. F. CHAMBERS, F.R.A.S.
The Story of the Solar System.
With 28 Illustrations. Cloth, 15.


“His descriptions possess the double quality of simplicity and
attractiveness.” —Nature.


The Story of Eclipses.


With special reference to the solar eclipse of 1900.


With 19
Illustrations. Cloth, 1s.


“ Writ.en in a very interesting style and crammed with informa-
tion." — University Correspondent.


The Story of the Weather.
With 50 Illustrations. Cloth, rs.


“An interesting volume about weather, and especially English
weather, and presents facts, ideas, and suggestions which ordinary
people will be glad to know.’’---S¢. James's Budget.


—


By EDWARD CLODD, Author of ‘‘ The Story of
Creation," &c.


The Story of Primitive Man.
With 88 Illustrations. Cloth, rs.
* Well printed, well bound, profusely illustrated, and in every


respect capital material, on one of the most progressive of sciences.”
—Daily Chronicle,


The Story of the Alphabet.


With go Illustrations. Cloth, rs.


“The book shows how the alphabet was built up from picture
writing, and is full of interest. —5S7. James's Gazette.


* Confound that Boy."


Manual of Book-keeping and Office Routine. Crown 8vo,
cloth, 15.


8


George Newnes Limited


By H. W. CONN.


The Story of Germ Life: Bacteria.
With 34 Illustrations. Cloth, 1s.


* Though a popular work, the Story of Germ Life, as told by Prof.
H. W. Conn, is so admirable for its lucidity, terseness, and the
author's grasp of the subject, that it may be recommended to any one
who is desirous of becoming acquainted with the general features of
bacterial life and the baneful and beneficial results of microbic growth
and development.” —/ournal of Royal Microscopical Society.


The Story of Life’s Mechanism.


With 50 Illustrations. Cloth, rs.


"Very clearly written, and will give those who desire it an
exce.lent conception of some of the problems which ате engaging the
attention of biologists at the present time." —ZLazcet.


—


By FENIMORE COOPER.


The Last of the Mohicans.


Crown 8vo, cloth, 1s. 6d.


سڪ


By E. H. COUMBE, B.A. (Lond.)


What Shall I Be?


A Guide to Occupations for Men and Women. Crown 8vo,
cloth, 3s. 6d. net.
Country Life Illustrated.

The Journal for all interested in Country Life and Country
Pursuits. Profusely Illustrated. Vols. 5, 6, and 7, folio
cloth, gilt leaves, 21s. each ; half-morocco, 25s. each.

[Vols. 1, 2, 3, and 4 are out of print.

By ROBERT CROMIE, Author of ** The Crack of
Doom," &c.


The King’s Oak, and Other Stories.


Sewed, rs. ; cloth, 2s.
“A capital collection of short stories."— Black and White.


9 I


Publications of


By ROBERT CROMIE.
The Lost Liner.


Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.
By the Hon. ROBERT CURZON, Jun. (Baron de
la Zouche).


Visits to Monasteries of the Levant.


With Sketch Maps and Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth
extra, 2s. 6d.


** One of those fascinating books of travel which have taken a place
in permanent literature." — Times.


>


By WORDSWORTH DONISTHORPE.


Down the Stream of Civilization.
With 104 Illustrations from Photographs. Crown 8vo,
cloth extra, 6s.


'* A book to be reconimended to the lonely diner, or anybody else
in want of pleasant company. It might be described as the journal .
of a party of travellers in Egypt, Palestine, Greece, Italy, &c. . . .
Let it be understood that our ' с. ' includes a great deal, not only
of other lands, but of amusing comment on things in general from
the view of a good-humoured philosopher.’’—Guardian.


~~


By A. CONAN DOYLE.
Adventures of Sherlock Holmes.


With 25 Illustrations by SIDNEY PAGET. Crown 8vo, cloth,
3s. 6d. Also a Cheap Edition, 6d.
Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes.


With Illustrations by SIDNEY PAGET. Crown 8vo, cloth,
3s. 6d. Also a Cheap Edition, 6d.


The Sign of Four.


An Earlier Adventure of Sherlock Holmes. Crown 8vo,
cloth, 3s. 6d. Also a Cheap Edition, 6d.


“ For those to whom the good, honest, breathless detective story is
dear, Dr. Doyle’s books will prove a veritable godsend.” — 4 theneum.


10


George Newnes Limited


The Exploits of Brigadier Gerard.
With 24 Illustrations by W. B. WoLLEN. Crown 8vo,
cloth, 3s. 6d. Also a Cheap Edition, 6d.


“Та these days of pessimistic problem novels, when the element of
romance seems to be fading out of fiction, it is delightful to come
upon these tales and glories of a soldier's life. They are buoyant,
vital, steeped in the stir and freshness of the open air, abounding in
tragedy and gaiety. . . . It is a fascinating book, and one to be
read." — Daily News.


By Mrs. EGERTON EASTWICK (Pleydell North).


The Rubies of Rajmar; or, Mr. Charlecote's


Daughters.
A Romance. Cloth, 3s. 6d.


“ Throughout the plot is well conceived, its treatment is terse and
vigorous, and the series of exciting incidents by which the dénouement
is reached form a narrative well worth reading. — W. LE QUEUX,
The Literary World.


—


By the Rev. W. Н. FITCHETT (“ Vedette ”).
Deeds that Won the Empire.


Historic Battle Scenes. 6d.


Fights for the Flag. 6d.


Edited by C. B. FRY.


The Book of Cricket.
A Gallery of Famous Players. 256 pages, crown folio,
cloth gilt, 12s. 6d. net.


——


By W. C. GANNETT.
A Year of Miracle.


A Poem in Four Sermons. With 4 Illustrations. 16mo,


cloth, 8d.
11


Publications of


The Garden.


Vol AG, TOS. rel шек


By Mrs. GASKELL.


North and South.
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 2s. 6d.


“Capital edition of a charming story.”— Manchester Courter.


By Mrs. ALFRED GATTY.


Parables from Nature.
Illustrated. 16mo, cloth, 8d.


By W. E. GLADSTONE.


The Impregnable Rock of Holy Scripture.
A Series of Old Testament Studies. 6d.


By E. J. GOODMAN.


New Ground in Norway.
Ringerike — Telemarken — Sætersdalen. With numerous
Illustrations. Demy 8vo, cloth extra, 10s. 6d.


“Full of information as to the less frequented parts of Southern
Norway... Well printed and capitally illustrated.’ —Pall Matt
Gazette,


By MAXWELL GRAY.


The Silence of Dean Maitland.


A Novel. 4d.
I2


George Newnes Limited


By MAXWELL GRAY.


The Reproach of Annesley.
A Novel. 6d.


By Mrs. GOODWIN GREEN.


Raiders and Rebels in South Africa.


With 14 Full-page Illustrations by the Author. Crown 8vo,


cloth extra, 5s.


‘“ Unpretentious, but interesting. Mrs. Green acted as a nurse in
the Krugersdorp hospital at the time of the Jameson raid ; after-
wards she went on to Charterland in the same capacity, and was in
touch with the chief incidents of the Matabele rebellion. A plain
but stirring story is the result." — Literature.


By H. RIDER HAGGARD.


Jess: A Story of the Transvaal War of


1880-1.
6d.


She: A History of Adventure.
6d.


By BEATRICE HARRADEN.


Ships that Pass in the Night.
6d.


By HENRY HERMANN.
Hearts of Gold and Hearts of Steel.


Cloth, 3s. 6d.
ES


Publications of


By SYDNEY J. HICKSON, D.Sc., F.R.S., Professor
of Zoology in the Owens College, Manchester.


The Story of Life in the Seas.


42 Illustrations. Cloth, 1s.


*Such books as this lay the reader under a deep obligation to
writers of Dr. Hickson's eminence in the scientific world." —Spectator.


——


By G. LACY HILLIER.
Wrinkles for Cyclists.


Small crown 8vo, Is.
—_


Edited by EDWIN HODDER.
The Life of a Century, 1800-1900.


With numerous Illustrations.
[To appear in 12 monthly parts.


——


The Home Magazine.
Vols. 2, 3, and 4, cloth, 5s. each. [ Vol. 1 is out of print


By Mrs. HORSFALL.


Pretty Homes.
With бо Illustrations. 8уо, cloth, 3s. 6d.


——


By N. L. JACKSON.


Association Football.
With 20 Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth, 6s.


““ No such work in connection with the game has been published
before; and, apart from the mere novelty of the thing, Mr. Jack-
son's effort will add lustre to the lib: ary of pastimes. The work, as
a whole, is a credit to Association Football.” —4thletic News,


14


George Newnes Limited


By JOSEPH JACOBS.


The Story of Geographical Discovery.
With 24 Maps, &c. Cloth, 1s.


** A very readable little book. . . . The author has collected his
material with discrimination, and has evidently devoted much timc
and care to the preparation of this inspiring little volume. 'The
recent marked development of imperial instincts should insure the
book the popularity it merits.” —atwre,


By HARRY A. JAMES.


Oddland, and other Fairy Tales.
Illustrated. [In preparation.


—


By Mrs. JAMESON.


Shakspeare’s Heroines: Characteristics of
Women—Moral, Poetical, and Historical.


Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 2s. 6d.


“The most charming of all the works of a charming writer. ””—
Blackwood's Magasine.


By JOHN KEBLE.


The Christian Year.


Thoughts in Verse for the Sundays and Holy Days through-
out the Year. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 2s. 6d.


———


Khaki ín South Africa.


An Album of Photographs illustrating the Chief Events of
the War under Lord Roberts. Oblong 4to, cloth extra, 6s.


15


Publications of


The King.


Vol. I. Cloth, gilt edges, 18s.


——


By A. W. KINGLAKE.
Eothen.
With до Illustrations by H. К. MıLtar. Crown 8vo, cloth
extra, 2s. 6d.


-—


By RUDYARD KIPLING.


Departmental Ditties, and Other Verses.
Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.; also a Cheap Edition, 6d.


mm“


The Siege of Ladysmith.


A Collection of 120 Pictures from Photographic Negatives
taken by H. Кіѕсн, a Resident Photographer during the
Siege, with Explanatory Text by H. St. J. Tucman, an eye-
witness. Handsomely bound in marone leather, gilt leaves,
with appropriate design embossed in gold on the side.
Oblong 4to, price 21s. net.


By JOHN LEYLAND.
The Shakespeare Country Illustrated.


Illustrated by over 130 Photographs showing every feature
of interest in connection with the Shakespeare Country and
the surrounding Districts, so noted for their wonderful
beauty of scenery. тоз. 6d. net.


16


George Newnes Limited


By JOHN K. LEYS.


At the Sign of the Golden Horn.
Crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.


By FRANCES H. LOW.


Queen Victoria’s Dolls.
With 4o Full-page Coloured Illustrations and numerous
Sketches and Initial Letters by Aran WRIGHT. Cheap


Edition, crown 4to, 5s.


* No one who has not perused this entertaining record can in reality
appreciate the diligent, alert child-life of Britain's truest gentle-
woman. ‘The full-page coloured illustrations, showing the dolls in
their gorgeous costumes and wooden attitudes, are almost as naive

-as they are excellent." — The Gentlewoman.


—


By CHARLES J. MANSFORD.


Shafts from an Eastern Quiver.
With 25 Illustrations by ALFRED Pearse. Cloth, 3s. 6d.


“Mr. Mansford has the gift of a story-teller, and he uniformly
writes like a scholar. . . . The illustrations, though small, are
admirably executed, and enhance the piquancy—though that was
hardly needed—of the letterpress.” — Spectator.


By THOMAS H. MAWSON.


The Art and Craft of Garden-Making.


Profusely Illustrated by Plans, Perspective Views, and
Photographs. Specially Designed Cover. 215. net.


—


By Captain MARRYAT.


Mr. Midshipman Easy.


Crown 8vo, cloth, 1s. 6d.
17


Publications of


By E. A. MARTIN.
The Story of a Piece of Coal.


With 38 Illustrations, Cloth, rs.


* Explains in simple and delightful fashion what coal is, whence it
comes, and whither it goes, and in the concluding chapter shows
how intimately it is connected with the interests of the botanist, the
geologist, the physicist, the chemist, and the merchant. "—Zradford
Observer.


—=


By L. T. MEADE.


Daddy's Girl.


With Illustrations by Gorpon Browne. Crown 8vo, cloth
extra, 3s. 6d. [Just ready.


——


By L. T. MEADE and CLIFFORD HALIFAX, M.D.


Stories from the Diary of a Doctor.


With 24 Illustrations by A. Pearse. Cloth extra, 6s. Also
a Cheap Edition, 6d.


“ Cleverly-planned and brightly-told stories.”—Bradford ( bserver.
“ They are well told and salient in every feature." —ZLeeds Mercury.


—_


Edited by HUGH ROBERT MILL, D.Sc., F.R.S.E.


The International Geography.


By Seventy Authors. With 488 Illustrations. Demy 8vo,
cloth, 15s.


“Interest is maintained throughout the text-book before us, and
the work may be taken as the only adequate exposition in English
of the principles of the new Geography and their application to the
facts which are embraced in the subject. Until a better enters the
field this ‘ International Geography’ must remain the standard text-
book of the subject in our language. "— Times, е


18


George Newnes Limited


By MIRANDA.
Aids to Health and Beauty.
A Complete Toilet Guide. Second Edition. Long 8vo, rs.


—


By the Rev. EDWARD MONRO.


The Combatants.
An Allegory. With Frontispiece. 16mo, cloth, 8d.


—


By H. S. MORRISON
A Yankee Boy's Success.
Being an Account of how an American Lad worked his
way through Europe. With 7 Illustrations, and an Intro-
duction by CHauncry M. Depew. 6d.


By J. E. MUDDOCK.


For God and the Czar.


A Story of Jewish Persecutions in Russia. Cloth, 3s. 6d.


Only a Woman's Heart.
The Story of a Woman's Love: A Woman's Sorrow.
Cloth, 3s. 6d.


* Has an air of heartiness about it, and its plot is well worked
out.” —Academy.


——


By M. M. PATTISON MUIR, M.A.


The Story of the Chemical Elements.
Cloth, 15.


* One of the most perfect popular introductions to science extant."
— British Medical Journal.


19


Publications of


By M. M. PATTISON MUIR, M.A.


The Story of the Wanderings of Atoms.
Organic Chemistry. Cloth, 1s.


“ Really a popular and interesting account of the chief compounds
of carbon." — Pharmaceutical Journal.


©“


By Miss MULOCK.


John Halifax, Gentleman.
Crown 8vo, cloth, 1s. 6d.


By J. MUNRO.


The Story of Electricity.
With roo Illustrations. Cloth, rs.


“Just the“ kind of book to give the general reader more correct
views of the subject than many a pretentious tome."— The Electricat
Engineer.


The Story of the British Race.


With 4 Maps. Cloth, rs.

“The first attempt to bring the important results and views of
anthropologists before the general public in familiar language, and
to a certain extent it is a correction of the traditions. . . . If the
author seems to put the claims of anthropology too high, he has
written a book that ought to stimulate inquiry and will guide the
uninitiated to the lines on which anthropological research is being
pursued.” —A berdeen Free Press.


By Dr. NANSEN and Lieut. JOHANSEN.


Farthest North.


Being the Record of a Voyage of Exploration of the ship
Fram, 1893-96, and of a Fifteen Months’ Sledge Journey.
Popular Edition. In 2 vols., royal 8vo. With about 120
full-page and go text Illustrations. Coloured Plate and
Map, cloth extra, 17s.

“The narrative of one of the most remarkable and adventurous

voyages of discovery that have been made.” —Sco/sman.
'" А masterpiece of story-telling. "— Times.


20


George Newnes Limited


The Navy and Army Illustrated.
Vols. 2, 3. and 5, bound in cloth extra, gilt leaves, 12s. each.
Vols. 7, 8, 9, and 10, 18s. each.
[Vols. 1, 4, and 6 are out of print.


By Mrs. PRAGA.
Easy French Dishes for English Cooks.


Small crown 8vo, cloth extra, 2s. 6d. [Just ready.


By EDWIN A. PRATT.


Pioneer Women ín Victoria’s Reign.
Being Short Histories of Great Movements. Crown 8vo,
cloth, 5s.; paper covers, Is.


“His chapters on Women's Work in Emigration and in Medicine
are admirable.” —Pull Mall Gazette.


A Woman’s Work for Women.
Being an Account of the Philanthropic Work of Miss
L. M. Hubbard. Small crown 8vo, cloth, 2s. 6d.


——


By E. D. PRICE, F.G.S.
The British Empire Dictionary of the Eng-
lish Language.


To which are added selected lists of proper names, with
phonetic pronunciation, and abbreviations in common use,
with their meanings. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.


“The aim is to include the words that are usually required in
everyday life by business men and others, who do not want a
dictionary full of technical words and etymology. The clear type
and convenient size are to be commended.” —Morning Post.


The Story of Religions.
Cloth, ts.
“The author's brief summaries of the different creeds are excellent.
We have tried to find any sect not mentioned in the book, and have
failed. This is the highest tribute we can pay to its completeness, "—
Trish Church Times,


21


Publications of


By W. P. PYCRAFT.


The Story of Bird Life.
With Illustrations. Cloth, TS:


“ Natural History has seldom been made more interesting."—
Scotsman.


—


By WILLIAM LE QUEUX.


England's Peril.
A Novel. 6d.


By G. B. RAWLINGS.
The Story of British Coinage.


With 108 Illustrations from Coins in the British Museum.
Cloth, rs


“An excellent little handbook of a subject which should have an
attraction for many Englishmen, even though they are not very
ardent students in numismatics in general." — Times.


——


By JAMES RODWAY, F.L.S.


The Story of Forest and Stream.
With 27 Illustrations. Cloth, rs.


“Contains a short description of a tropical forest, together with
some elementary lessons which can be learned by studying the in-
cessant struggle for existence of its varied flora.” —Academy.


——


By LOUIS DE ROUGEMONT.


Adventures of Louis de Rougemont, as told
by Hímself.


With 46 Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.


“That the story is interesting—even, one might say, exciting—is
beyond doubt. What more need be asked ?”— Spectator.


22


George Newnes Limited


Round the Coast.


An Album of 284 Pictures from Recent Photographs of the
Watering Places and Resorts in the United Kingdom, with
descriptive text. Oblong 4to, cloth extra, gilt leaves, ros. 6d.
“Ме know nothing at anything like the price that can be com-
pared with these for giving to the sedentary traveller veracious


glimpses of what the world or his own seashores contains that is
interesting and picturesque. "— Times.


Round London.


An Album of 284 Pictures from Photographs of the Chief
Places of Interest in and around London, with descriptive
text. Oblong 4to, cloth extra, gilt, ros. 6d.

“The illustrations are taken from photographs of the most
notable and characteristic of the metropolitan sights. Few quarters
of London or aspects of London life are neglected ; its business and
its pleasures, its architecture and its street traffic receive illustration
in all their phases. The photographs have been admirably repro-
duced. "—-Scotsmaz.


Round the World, from London Bridge to
Charing Cross, via Yokohama and
Chicago.


An Album of 284 Pictures from Photographs of the Chief
Places of Interest in all Parts of the World, with descrip-
tive text. Oblong 4to, cloth extra, gilt leaves, ros. 6d.


'* We are taken through all the principal cities and picturesque and
historic places from Calais to Brindisi, we mentally travel up the Nile,
we go through all the great commercial and historic scenes in India,
Malaysia, China, and Japan before crossing to the American Conti-
nent; we are given views of the forests, rivers, and mountains of
the New World, the cities that are dotted over its bosom, and all the
sights from the Falls of Niagara down to the silver mountain of
Potosi and the streets of Buenos Ayres."— 7e Stock Exchange,


22


Publications of


By F. RYLAND.


The Story of Thought and Feeling.


Cloth, ts. [Just ready.


By J. HOLT SCHOOLING.
A Peep into Punch.


With about 480 Pictures from “ Punch.” | Crown 8vo, cloth
extra, 5s. net.


“Тһе book should be kept in a handy position for frequent
consultation, ”—Sketch.


By H. G. SEELEY, F.R.S.
The Story of the Earth in Past Ages.


With 4o Illustrations. Cloth, rs.
'* А simple and popular summing up of the results that have been
reached by geological science.” — Scotsman.
‘Told plainly and pleasantly fora popular audience.” —Bookman.


By GEORGE R. SIMS.


Memoirs of a Mother-in-Law.
Cloth, 2s. 6d.


“This is a pleasant sample of 'Dagonets' semi-humorous
writings. Не has a peculiar talent of finding amusement in experi-
ences relating to dwellings, servants, shopkeepers, tradespeople, and
other folk connected with the domestic household, and the ‘ Mother-
in-Law’ in his new book deals in a very masterful way with all the
foregoing subjects, and many more besides.” —/veeman's Journal.


24


George Newnes Limited


The Stratford-on-Avon Shakespeare.


The Works of William Shakespeare.


With Glossarial Side-notes. Complete in 12 vols., cloth
extra, with cut edges, 12s., or limp lambskin, 18s. net, or
bound in roan and in roan case, 25s. net.

“We can unhesitatingly say that the Newnes edition is quite the
most handy and readable edition which we have as yet seen—and
the number of editions with which we are acquainted is legion. A
wise discretion has been exercised as to the size of the volume, which
is not too small—as is the case with many existing ‘ pocket’ editicns
—whilst the semi-antique ‘laid’ paper, and the absolutely perfect
typography, reflect great credit both on the firm which initiated the
work and on the printers who produced it. It is not encumbered
with notes, but all needful glossarial explanations are ingen ously
embedded in small type in the text.” —Broad Arrow,


By JOHN SKEAPING.


Light, Shade, and Shadow.
With Model Drawing. With 155 Illustrations. Cloth, 3s. 6d.


It is the object of this book to give students an immediate
acquaintance with the principles of Light, Shade, and Shadow, by
explanation, analysis, and illustration. By this process of analysis
and demonstration the knowledge gained is confirmed and enlarged,
and permanently established, so that thestudent may, in any branch
of the art, apply the principles with equal success, from the least
even to the greatest.


By Sir H. M. STANLEY.


Through the Dark Contínent.
With a New Introduction by the Author, and all the
Original Illustrations and a Map. In 2 vols., super royal
8vo, cloth, gilt edges, 15s.
25


Publications of


By HERBERT GREENHOUGH SMITH.


The Romance of History.


292 pp., crown 8vo, cloth, 3s. 6d.
““ Pre-eminently interesting, bright, clear and attractive. "—a7/y
Chronicle.


——


By A. T. STORY.


Golden Deeds of the War.


With 160 Portraits, crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.
‘* Abounds with stirring descriptions of the most exciting incidents
ofthe campaign. It will make a rare gift book for British boys." —
Daily Express.


The Story of Photography.
With Illustrations. Cloth, rs.


“ Mr. Story does not profess to give instructions in the art: but
his history cf its progress, his description of the various forms of
apparatus and the various processes, and his statements of the rela-
tion between photography and the finer aris cannot but impart an
intelligent interest in this versatile handmaiden of scence.” —Scots-
man,


——


The Strand Magazine.


An Illustrated Magazine. Vols. 14 to 19, cloth extra, gilt
leaves, 6s. 6d. each. [ Vols. 1 to 13 ave out of print.


By CARLTON STRANGE.


The Beechcourt Mystery.
Cloth, 3s. 6d.


“A novel and well-constructed plot.”—Liverpool Courier.


26


George Newnes Limited


Edited by A. G. TEMPLE, F.S.A.


England’s History, as Pictured by Famous
Painters.
An Album of 256 Historical Pictures, with descriptive text.
Oblong 4to, cloth extra, gilt leaves, ros. 6d.


“ Notable scenes in our history as realised by artists of good
standing.” —Lirmingham Daily Post.


سڪ


By W. M. THACKERAY.


Christmas Books.
Mrs. Perkins’s Ball, Our Street, Dr. Birch and his Young
Friends, Rebecca and Rowena, The Kickleburys on the
Rhine, The Rose and the Ring. In 1 vol. Crown 8vo,
cloth extra, 2s. 6d.
“ Another welcome reprint.”"—Morning Post.


——


The Transvaal War Album.
The British Forces in South Africa (Naval, Military, and
Colonial). 272 pages, crown folio, 12s. 6d. net.


By Mrs. HUMPHRY WARD.
Robert Elsmere. 6d.
The History of David Grieve. | 6d.
Marcella. 6d.


Wide World Magazine.
Vols. 2 to 5, cloth extra, gilt leaves, 6s. 6d. each.
[Vol. 1 is out of print.
27


Publications of


By MARY SPENCER-WARREN.
The Princess of Wales: A Biographical
Sketch.


With Portraits of the Princess at various periods, and
Illustrations from Photographs taken in Denmark and at
Sandringham, Marlborough House, &c. With 53 Portraits
and Illustrations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 5s.

“‹ An excellent biography . . . narrated with admirable simplicity


and lucidity.” —- Westminster Review.


——


By H. W. WEGUELIN, F.R.H.S.
Carnations and Picotees for Garden and


Exhibition.


With a Chapter concerning Pinks; and 12 full-page Illus-
trations. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 3s. 6d.


“A very charmingly produced little book. . . . The chapter on
carnations in town gardens will be useful to London amateurs, "—
Academy.


Wide World Adventure.
True Narratives of Extraordinary Human Endurance.
256 pp., cloth, crown 8vo, 2s. 6d.


By F. WILKINSON, F.G.S.


The Story of the Cotton Plant.


With 38 Illustrations. Cloth, 1s,

“ All that is known of the origin of the cotton plant, of its cultiva-
tion and plantation life, of the pests that infest it, and the countries
where it is reared. . . . The survey is wide and complete, and the
story evolved therefrom is throughout most interesting. "— North
British Advertiser.

28


George Newnes Limited


Now in course of Publication.


OUR NEIGHBOURS.
Edited by W. H. DAWSON.


A series of handy books descriptive of the Home and Social
Life of Continental Peoples. They will not be statistical,
political, or controversial, but will aim at describing in a
friendly spirit such phases of life as are peculiar to each
country.

Generally speaking, they may be said to deal with the
Intellectual Life of the various peoples, their social divisions
and distinctions, their manners and customs, wealth and
poverty, their armies and systems of national defence, their
Industrial Life, Rural Life, Religious Life, Home Life, Amuse-
ments, and Local Governments.

The following volumes will be ready at an early date, and
others are already in preparation :—


French Life in Town and Country,
By Miss HANNAH LvywcH. Author of ** Denys D'Auvrillac,"
* Dr. Vermont's Fantasy," &c. | Read y.


Dutch Life in Town and Country.
By a Resident at The Hague.


German Life ín Town and Country.
By W. Н. Dawson, Author of “Germany and the
Germans," &c. [In March.


Russian Life in Town and Country.
By Francis Н. E. Parmer. Sometime Secretary to H.H.
Prince Droutskop-Loubetsky (Equerry to H.M. the Emperor
of Russia). [In May.
ag


Publications of


THE LIBRARY OF USEFUL STORIES.
PRICE ONE SHILLING EACH.


The Story of Thought and Feeling, By F. RYLAND. {

The Story of Bird Life, Ву W. P. Pvcnarr. With Illustrations.

The Story of the Alphabet, Ву Epwarp CLopp. With go Illus.

The Story of Life’s Mechanism, By H. W. Conn. With 50 Illus.

Story ei the Wanderings of Atoms, By M. M. PATTISON
UIR, M.A.

The Story of Ice in the Present and Past. By W. A. BREND.


With 37 Illustrations. $ 5
The Story of Eclipses. Ву С. Е. CHAMBERS, F.R.A.S. With 19


Illustrations. Е
The Story of the British Race. Ву Jonn Munro. With 4 Maps.
The Story of the Mind. By Prof. J. M. BALDWIN.

The Story of Geographical Discovery: How the World Became

Known. By JosEPH Jacoss. With 24 Maps, &c. р,
The Story of the Cotton Plant. By F. WILKINSON, F.G.S.

With 38 Illustrations.

The Story of Religions. Ву the Rev. E. D. Price, Е.С.5. _
The Story of Photography. By A. T. Story. With 38 Illustrations.
The Story of Life in the Seas. By SIDNEY J. Hickson, F.R.S.

With 42 Illustrations.
The Story of the British Coinage. Ву С. B. Rawiines. With

108 Illustrations. | н
The Story of the Potter. Ву C. F. Binns. With 57 Illustrations

of Ancient and Modern Pottery. А
The Story of Germ Life: Bacteria. Ву H. W. Conn. With 34

Illustrations.

The Story of the Earth's Atmosphere. By DOUGLAS ARCHIBALD.

With 44 Illustrations.

The Story of the Weather. By G. F. CHAMBERS, F.R.A.S.

With 5o Illustrations.

The Story of Forest and Stream. By James Ropway, F.L.S.

With 27 Illustrations.

E Story of the Chemical Elements. By M. M. PATTISON
UIR, M.A.

The Story of Extinct Civilizations of the East. By R. E.
ANDERSON, M.A. With Maps. j
The Story of Electricity. By J. Munro. With roo Illustrations.
The Story of a Piece of Coal. By E. A. Martin, F.G.S. With

38 Illustrations.

The Story of the Solar System. Ву G. F. CHAMBERS, Е.К.А.5.

With 28 Illustrations. 1
The Story of the Earth in Past Ages. By Н. G. SEELEY, F.R.S.

i With 40 Illustrations.
The Story of the Plants. By Grant ALLEN. With 49 Illustrations.
The Story of Primitive Man. Ву Epwarp Сгорр. With 88

Illustrations.

The Story of the Stars. By G. F. CHAMBERS, Е.К.А.5. With 24


Illustrations.
*„* Other Volumes in the Press.


30


George Newnes Limited


THE SIXPENNY SERIES OF
COPYRIGHT BOOKS.


By WILLIAM LE QUEUX.


England’s Peril. |
By MAXWELL GRAY.
The Reproach of Annesley.
The Silence of Dean Maitland.
Ву the Rev. W. Н. FITCHETT (‘‘ Vedette”).
Deeds that Won the Empire.
Fíghts for the Flag.
By GRANT ALLEN.
What's Bred ín the Bone.
By L. T. MEADE and CLIFFORD HALIFAX, M.D.

Stories from the Diary of a Doctor.

By RUDYARD KIPLING.
Departmental Ditties, and other Verses.

By H. RIDER HAGGARD.
She. A History of Adventure.
Jess, A Story of the Transvaal.

By Mrs. HUMPHRY WARD.

Robert Elsmere.
The History of David Grieve.


Marcella.
By A. CONAN DOYLE.
Adventures of Sherlock Holmes.
Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes.
The Sign of Four.
The Exploits of Brigadier Gerard.
By BEATRICE HARRADEN.
Ships that Pass in the Night.
With an Introduction by CHAUNCEY M. DEPEW.


A Yankee Boy’s Success. Being an Account of how an
American Lad worked his way through Europe. By H. S. MORRI-
SON. With 7 Illustrations.

By the Late W. E. GLADSTONE.

The Impregnable Rock of Holy Scripture. A Series
of Old Testament Studies.

31


Publications of George Newnes Ltd.


ADOPTED BY THE SCHOOL
BOARD FOR LONDON.


Tit-Bits Copy Books, In, Fifteen Books, containing 24
pages. Price 2d. each.

A New Series of Copy Books designed to produce a clear, bold, and
rapid writing. "There are no flourishes or fanciful peculiarities. The
style is simple, uniform, and entirely without exaggerations. Theslope
is 15 degrees from the vertical. There are at least two headlines on
every page, so that the risk of the scholar copying his own writings is
reduced to a minimum.

Great care bas been taken in the preparation and arrangement of the.
headlines. In the earlier books the elements and combinations of
letters have been carefully graded. In the higher bcoks the headlines
are ‘‘ Tit-Bits" from the Code Subjects : Interesting Facts ; Memorable
Dates; Useful Information. The interest in what is being copied will
thus be kept alive, and the style of writing will consequently be
improved.


The Golden Rule Readers: Manners and Morals.


Illustrating and enforcing by means of Proverbs, Maxims, Stories,
Examples and Poems, the necessity for habits of punctuality, of good
manners and Janguage, the importance of cheerful obedience to duty, of
consideration and respect for others, and of honour and truthfulness in
word and act, the relation of conduct, thrift, temperance, &c., to success
in life.

In Two Books for Standards JII. to VI. Book I., 15. gd. Book II.,
Is. 6d.


Flashlights on Nature. By GRANT ALLEN. With 150


Illustrations by FREDERICK ENOCK. Crown 8vo, cloth extra, 6s.


England's History, as Pictured by Famous Painters.
Edited by A. G. TEMPLE, F.S.A. Oblong 4to, cloth extra, gilt leaves,
tos, 6d.


Round the World, from London Bridge to Charing


Cross, via Yokohama and Chicago. Oblong 4to, cloth extra,
gilt leaves, tos. 6d.


Round the Coast. Oblong 4to, cloth extra, gilt leaves,


Tos. 6d.


Round London. Oblong 4to, cloth extra, gilt leaves,


IOS; 6d.


All About Animals, 260 Illustrations from Photographs
by GAMBIER BOLTON, F.Z.S., and others, with explanatory letter-
press. Cloth extra, gilt leaves, ros. 61.0? :


32


‚ S OS. 913
BIZA


