Antiquities, Historical and Monumental, of the County of Cornwall (Second Edition)
William Borlase
Antiquities, Historical and Monumental, of the County of Cornwall. Second edition, revised. London: W. Bowyer and J. Nichols, 1769.
Public domain. Transcribed from the Internet Archive copy (https://archive.org/details/bim_eighteenth-century_antiquities-historical-_borlase-william_1769).
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

tir 5
| HISTORICAL and MONUMENTAL,


„


COUNTY of CORNWALL.


CONSISTING OP


SEVERAL ESSAYS


* ON : *


The FIRST INHABITANTS, DRUID-SUPERSTI TION, CUSTOMS,
And REMAINS of the moſt Remote ANTIQUITY


In BRITAIN, and the BRITISH ISLES,


Exemplified and proved by MONUMENTS now extant in CORNWALL
and the SCILLY ISLANDS,


With a VOCABULARY of the Coxnvu-BriTisn LANGUAGE.


, WR *
—


—


By WILLIAM BO RL AS E, LL. D. F. R. 8. Rector of LuDGvaAN,
Conxxwarr.


2 00 1


* CET
——


« Miratur, facileſque oculos fert omnia circum N
&« /Eneas, capiturque locis, et ſingula lætus
« Exquiritque auditque virim Monumenta priorum.“ Vis. -


The SECOND EDiT10N, reviſed, with ſeveral Additions, by the Author; to which is added a Map
of CoRnwaALL, and Two new Plates.


— — N ed —


4 n


Printad by W. Bowyer and 7. Nichols :

For S. BAKER and G. Le1GHn, in York Street; T. Payne, at the Mews Gate, St. Martin's;

and BENJAMIN WHITE, at Horace's Head, in Fleet Street.
MDCCLXIX.


f


% N . . Cl
2
n — 2 ot -
a Specs»
Da * *. U 22


L ]


—


|
|
|


„


2


0


SIR JOHN ST. AUBYN, BAR”.


MEMBER OF PARLIAMENT


F O R


THE COUNTY OF CORNWALL.


1X.


5 years ſince, I ſeldom added any thing to


the number without communicating it to Vour late

excellent Father; who, curious as, he was in moſt

parts of knowledge, and particularly fond of this

his native County, received double pleaſure from

every thing remarkable in Art, Nature, and Anti-
quity, which it was found to contain.


I was then in hopes of writing ſomewhat con-
cerning this County, which might in time make its
appearance under the unexceptionable Patronage of
one, who had repreſented it in Parliament for many
years with ſuch an univerſal Reputation, as could
proceed quly from the moſt diſtinguiſhed Abilities,


and


HILST I was collecting the following
| Monuments, at my leiſure hours ſeveral


6 * ]
and the moſt eminent Integrity in the uſe and appli-


| cation of them.


But his death put an end to thoſe hopes; and
whilſt, for want of ſuch a Patron (after I had thrown .
theſe Papers into the following order), I was heſi-
tating whether I ſhould publiſh them or not; You
| | were pleaſed, Sir, to fix me in the deſign, by en-
couraging the Publication in the moſt friendly and


generous mann er.


In dedicating therefore this Work to You, at its
firſt appearance, I did but comply with the rules of
Gratitude; and as the Favours I have received from
You fince, in a courſe of fifteen years Friendſhip,
would make it ſtill more unpardonable to place any
other name, where Yours ſo juſtly ftood before, I
readily embrace this opportunity of renewing my ac-


knowledgements to You, and ſubſcribing myſelf,


IR.


Your moſt obliged, and
Obedient Humble Servant,


William Borlaſe.


6-8-3


1 0


THE R E A D E R.


HERE is no ſtudy more inſtructive and entertaining than
that of Ancient and Modern Hiſtory; and, though the
latter may be more intereſting, eaſy, and pleaſant, yet the former
is alſo a moſt neceſſary =o of Knowledge, as it enlarges our
proſpe&s, furniſhes us with a great variety of examples both of
Virtue and Vice, produces frequent inſtances of Science and Errour,


diſcovers the manner in which great actions have been conducted,
and great attempts have miſcarried.


Now, the ſtudy of Antiquity is the ſtudy of Ancient Hiſtory ;
and the proper buſineſs of an Antiquary is, to collect what is
diſperſed, more fully to unfold what is already diſcovered, to
examine controverted points, to ſettle what is doubttul, and, by
the authority of Monuments and Hiſtories, to throw light upon
the Manners, Arts, Languages, Policy, and Religion, of paſt
Ages,

1 |

ANTIQuiTIEs may be either conſidered as Foreign or Domeſtic ;


ſuch, I mean, as relate to other people and countries, or are pe-
culiar to our own.


Ir is the uſual obſervation of Foreigners, that the Engliſh
Travellers are too little acquaini.d with their own Country; and
ſo far this may be true, that Engliſhmen (otherwiſe well qualified
to appear in the world) go abroad in queſt of the rarities of other
countries, before they know ſufficiently what their own contains
it muſt be likewiſe acknowledged that, when theſe foreign tours
have been compleated, and Gentlemen return captivated with the
Medals, Statues, Pictures, and Architecture, of Greece and Italy,
they have ſeldom any reliſh for the ruder products of Ancient
Britain, Thus what is foreign gets the ſtart of what is at home,
and maintains its prepoſſeſſion. My ſituation in life (whatever
my inclinations might be) confined me to a different track; I ſaw
myſelf placed in the midſt of Monuments, the Works of the Ancient
Britans, where there were few Grecian or Roman Remains to be


b | met


vi


Book I.


Book II.
and III.


PR E F A C E.
met with; my curioſity, therefore, could only be gratified by what


was in its reach, and was confined to the ſtudy of our own


Antiquities; and theſe papers are the fruits of that ſtudy.
WuzTHER theſe fruits (if I may carry on the alluſion) may ſuit


the taſte of all, I much queſtion ; but, however fond we may be


of the ſuperiour flavour and beauty of what comes from abroad,
it would be very unwiſe in us to exclude every thing from our
entertainments which our own Country produces.


To fix me in the choice of this ſubject, not ods my ſituation
in life, but the manner in which it has been treated of by others,
has greatly contributed. For, firft, as to Cornwall, I found its
Hiſtory and Monuments but faintly touched in the Survey of
Mr. Carew, a gentleman of great learning and ingenuity, and
extremely capable of deſcribing his Country, if the infancy of theſe
ſtudies, at that time a, had afforded him ſufficient light, and proper


materials, \


Tux better part of Morden c Survey, which comes next, is a
meer tranſcript of Mr. Carew; and from the other parts of this
Work very little of moment is to be learnt.


Tarsz Authours have written profeſſedly of Cornwall; and where
this County is treated of collectively with many others, making
only a part of the whole, as in the general writers of England, Leland,
Camden, Speed, &c. ſuch Memoirs of it muſt be ſtill more
incompleat.


As to the Hiſtory of the Druids, I found that branch in a
worſe condition; molt Authours having contented themſelves with
enlarging upon ſeveral paſſages in Julius Cęſar't account of this
ancient Prieſthood, and what Pliny has left us on the fame ſubject,


ſo regularly, that their attempts in the Druid Hiſtory may juſtly


be looked upon as no other than Paraphraſes upon what had been
{aid before, without eſtabliſhing any diſputed fact, or diſcovering


any thing new, by having recourſe to the Monuments which the
Druids left behind them b.


Tuar valuable collection of Antiquities by Monzfaucon, for


which the Learned are ſo much obliged to him, contains but few


About the year 1600. of French and German Writers, in Frickius de
b See Elias Schedius de Diis Germanis. — Druidis. — Sheringham. — Sammes, &Cc.
vol s Syntagma de Druidis, — A Collection


ancient


Re.


ancient Druid Monuments, and thoſe the meaneſt Deſigns, and worſt
Engravings, of that voluminous Work.


Tux Authour of the Religion of the ancient Gauls © labours
under the ſame deficiency, and is rather too redundant in his own
Diſſertations, whilſt the too timorous Authour mentioned before him
will ſcarce hazard a fingle conjecture; an exceſs of caution, which,


in one of ſuch modeſty and knowledge, is much to be lamented,


Ma. Toland d has written on this ſubject; but I doubt whether
ever he copied or meaſured one Monument; and the authorities
upon which he aſſerts many extraordinary particulars have never


yet been produced.


Tarr Reverend Mr. Rowland © took a better method to advance
this kind of Learning; he examined a great variety of Druid
could (though his Drawings are extremely ſhort of the reſt of his
performance), and gives the world many pertinent obſervations
upon them. He underſtood the Britiſh and learned Languages, and
has made a proper application of both, in order to give light to
his ſubject. |


Mx. Martin, in his Deſcription of the Weſtern Iſles, ſpeaks of


many remains of the Druid Superſtition in thoſe Iſlands; but, as


I remember, there is but one Drawing engraved f, and that a ve
faulty one, by no means correſponding with the verbal deſcription.
In ſhort, ſo little uſe has been made of the Druid Monuments
(undoubtedly the beſt ſupports of their Hiſtory), that the more I
read of thoſe Authours, the more fully I was convinced of the
neceſſity of copying the original Monuments, which lay round me,
and offering ſomething to the Publick, which their undeniable
properties ſuggeſted, and, I hope, will ſtill maintain.


I uus not forget to acknowledge, that this branch of Antiquity
(as well as moſt others) is greatly obliged to the labours of the
learned and ingenious Dr. Szukeley, particularly in his Stonebenge
and Abury; and that Keyſer, in his Antiquities, ſupports his
Judicious Remarks with very entertaining inſtances from the
Cuſtoms and Hiſtory of the Northern as well as other Nations.


e In Two Volumes, Quarto, by Monſ. Mona Illuftrata, Quarto.
Martin. | f The Temple at Claſſerniſs.
* Hiſtory of the Druids, Octavo.


Tas


Vil


viii


Book IV.


Quotations.


Nee.


Tan fourth book is intended to confirm a point of Hiſtory.
hitherto diſputed, by ſhewing, that the Romans were not only in
Cornwall, but conquered it early; and, by their Coins, Sepulchres,
and other Remains, appear to have ſubdued every part of it.


| Nexr follow ſome Obſervations on the Military and Religious |
affairs of Cornwall, preceding the Norman Conqueſt, with ſome:
gleanings of Hiſtory relating to the Civil Government of this


County, its Princes, and Wars, in as much order as my Reading
would afford. |


Tas remaining ſheets I have dedicated to the Recovery and


Preſervation of the Corniſh Language, of which more will be pre-
miſed to that part of the Work 8.


Tas is the ſhell; what it contains, muſt here beſpeak the


candour of the learned Reader,


Gzear perfection cannot be expected, where the Subject is ſo
obſcure, the Age ſo remote, and the Materials fo diſperſed, few,
and rude; where we muſt range into ſuch diſtant Countries for
Hiſtory and Examples, and into ſo many Languages for


Soue of the miſtakes and errours, I muſt take wholly upon


myſelf. The literal errours of the Preſs, the Printer and I muſt
take betwixt us.


Sous Miſquotations of Page and Book, as my ſituation did not
always afford me Originals, nor indeed often the moſt correct


Editions, may juſtly be charged upon the Authours upon whoſe
credit I was obliged to depend, |


I aLLow that I have frequently ventured to differ in opinion
from ſome of the firſt rank of Literature, becauſe I think every
Authour, in juſtice to the Publick, is obliged to give his own ſenti-
ments, rather than implicitly follow thoſe of other people ; but,


whenever I differ, I hope it is with decency, I am ſure it is not
without ſome reluQance.


I Have neither neglected the learned nor unlearned; but have
gathered what plain truths I found in each, and endeavoured to


s See, in p. 413, the Preface to the Corniſh Vocabulary.
8 illuſtrate


PNA


illuſtrate my Subject with both; but never copied either, that I


can recollect, without taking care that every Reader ſhould
know it. bh |


ix


I Have been always ready to ſubmit my papers to reviſal and
correction; and many Gentlemen, allowed to be well verſed in
ſtudies of this kind, can teſtify, that I have oftener entreated
their aſſiſtance in this reſpect, than I have been able to ob-
tain it.


In treating of the Superſtition and Rock- Monuments of the
Druids, I may ſeem too conjectural to thoſe who will make no
allowances for the deficiencies of Hiſtory, nor be ſatisfied with
any thing but evident Truths ; but, where there is no Certainty to
be obtained, Probabilities muſt ſuffice; and Conje&ures are no
faults, but when they are either advanced as real Truths, or too
copiouſly purſued, or peremptorily inſiſted upon as deciſive.—
In Subjects of ſuch diſtant Ages, where Hiſtory will ſo often
withdraw her taper, Conjecture may ſometimes ſtrike a new light,
and the truths of Antiquity be more effectually purſued than
where people will not venture to gueſs at all. One Conjecture
may move the veil, another partly remove it, and a third,


happier ſtill, borrowing light and ſtrength from what went before,


may wholly diſcloſe what we want to know.


IT is a very deſirable character which Dr. Ploth gives of the
writings of the famous Dr. Willis, that “ in them there is
« nothing trivial, moſt new, and all moſt ingenious.” I am
afraid, that in the following Treatiſe more things will appear
trivial than new, and more new than ingenious, eſpecially to thoſe


who will not admit the neceſſity of minute and circumſtantial
Deſcriptions and Meaſurements.


Bur notwithſtanding this —ſome Monuments ſcarce ſo full
explained in others, ſome new, that is, firſt diſcovered, others |
illuſtrated by citations from the moſt learned Ancients, not
hitherto ſo applied, and ſome difficulties in Hiſtory cleared up,
will, I hope, be found in the following Work; and I flatter
myſelf, upon the whole, that future Writers upon the Britifh


Antiquities may find their taſk ſomewhat the eaſier for theſe
Ob/ervations.


bh Oxfordſhire, p. 309.
0 | CONTENTS.


*
*
o
v
*
*
*
=
[
|
|
.
—
*
*
*


L*]


f ß 8 NF


VV


CHAP. L G Obſervations on the Hiſtory of Britain; the Name of Britain, various Opinions of


pag. 2. Camden, Bochart, &c. Brit, likely from the Hebrew; and tania, an uſual, additional
Termination, pag. 5. |


IN. p. 6. Of the ancient Inhabitants ; their Relation to the Eaſtern Nations, p. 6. The general Diſpoſiti-
ons of Mankind in the firſt . 5 after the Flood, wandering and unſettled, p. 8. therefore Mankind


ſpread quickly, peopled the Weſt and North of Europe ſoon, and the Iſlands adjacent, and then
perhaps America, p. 9.


III, p. 10. Firſt Inhabitants from Gaul, p. 10. Tacitus's Opinion of the Origin of the ſeveral Inhabitants,
from Spain and Germany, as well as Gaul, examined, p. 11. England not joined to the Conti-
tinent ſince the Flood, p. 13. Cornwall not planted with Inhabitants from Phenicia, ibid.


IV. p. 14+ Of the Gauls, p. 14. ſame as Celts and Cimbrians, ibid. Britain peopled before any Irruptions
or Remigrations of the Celts, p. 17.


V. p. 18. What the antient Inhabitants of Britain thought of their own Original, p. 18. That they
were ſprung from Dis, the Earth, or God of the Earth, ibid, The Grin and Romans had
the ſame Notions, p. 19, 20.


VI. p. 21. Reſemblance which the ancient Cimbri or Celts bore to the Eaſtern Nations; how far the
Monuments of Aſia and the Eaſtern Parts of Europe may conrribute to illuſtrate the Antiquities
of the Weſtern Nations, p. 21. that Reſemblance from Mankind's continuing ſome Centuries in
one Nation and Society after the Flood, p. 23. whence Likeneſs in Tongue, Cuſtoms, and
Religion, p. 24, 25+


VII. p. 25. Of the Story of Brute; if any Truth in it; very little and inconſiderable muſt have been his
Power, p. 26. Of the Arrival of the Phenicians, p. 27. came into Cornwall early; but whence
uncertain, p. 27 and 28. their Trade, p. 29. to the Caſſiterides, among which they reckoned
the Weſtern Parts of Cornwall, p. 30. Few Monuments left behind them, and why, p. 31, 32.


VIII. p. 32. Of the Grecians, their Navigation, p. 3 3. what Time they might have come to the Caſſiterides
for Tin, ibid. Cornwall and the Scilly Iſles the Places of their Traffic, p. 34. they left ſew
Monuments, and why, p. 35.


IX. p. 35. Of the Romans; that they poſſeſſed themſelves of Cornwall, p. 35, 36, and 35.


X. p. 38. Of the Saxons. their coming into Britain owing to the Invitation of Vortigern, Earl of
Cornwall, choſen King of Britain, p. 38. Britans fly before the Saxons into Wales, Cornwall,
and Armorica, which laſt received it's Britiſh Inhabitants from Cornwall, p. 39. Wars of the
Corniſh with the Saxons, p. 41. till finally conquered by Athelſtan, p. 48.


XI. p. 44. Of the Danes, p. 44. Invited to land by the Corniſh, p. 41. Intrenched and fortified their
Landing-places, though in Alliance with the Corniſh, p. 45. had many Caſtles in the Welt of
Cornwall, ibid. wintered there, p. 47. turn Enemies to the Corniſh after Athelſtan's Conqueſt,

and deſtroy Cornwall, p. 48.


XII. p. 49. Of the Normans. A ſhort View of the unſettled Situation of the Britiſh Crown, immediately
preceding the Conqueſt; the Normans coming in eaſily, and by one Victory give a new Turn
to the Monuments of Britain. A new Way of building Churches, Monaſteries, and Palaces,
and enjoined, p. 49, &c.


XIII. p. 51. Moſt Monuments in Cornwall, and elſewhere in Britain, owe their Riſe to the antient Britiſh
X Religion, which was Druid, p. 51, 52.


BOOE


Xii VVV


| VV


CHAP. I. HENCE the Britiſh Religion had its Riſe, p. 53- from the antient Idolatry of the Eaſt,
Page 53» ibid. What that ancient Idolatry was; its firſt Riſe, p. 54. its Motives and Princi-
ples, p. 55. Gods, and the Order in which they became ſo, p. 56. Image-Worſhip ſubſequent

to Ghoſt-worſhip, p. 57. but ſoon became more univerſal, p. 58. Magic next, ibid. then
Fire-Worſhip, p. 59. Elements deified, ibid. Stones, and Beaſts, Birds, and Reptiles, p. 60.

Worſhip of thoſe numerous Gods how introduced, p. 61. how degenerate and polluted, ibid.

why the ſame or like Idolatry in all Nations, p. 62. Human Victims not the Cuſtom of the Druids

only, but of all Nations, p. 64. therefore Druidiſm, or the Britiſh Religion, is but a Branch of


the firſt general Idolatry, p. 66.


U. p. 66. Name and Claſſes of the Druid Prieſthood ; Meaning and Derivation of the Word Druid, p. 66,
67, 68. Claſſes three, Druids, Bards, and Eubates, p. 68. .


HI. p. 69. Countries inhabited by the Druids, No Druids anciently in e 69. but the German Re-
ligion eſſentially the ſame with that of the Gauls and Britans, 71. as being originally Celtic, but
much improved by the Druids, p. 72. Druids, a Prieſthood peculiar to the Gauls and Britans, and


common to every Part of Britain, ibid.


IV. p. 73. Antiquity of the Druids; much more antient than Pythagoras, p. 74. but ſubſequent to the
Diviſion of the ancient Celts into Germans, Teutones, Spaniards, &c. p. 75.


V. p. 76. Original of the Druids ; not from the Jews, p. 76. nor Greeks, ibid. nor any foreign Nation,
but inſtituted either in Britain or Gaul, p. 78.


VI. p. 78. Pruidiſm had its firſt Riſe in Britain, and not in Gaul, p. 78.


VII. p. 80. Dignity and Power of the Druids ; they were the firſt Order of the Britiſh Nobility, p. 80.
educated Youth, decided all Conteſts, excluded from Sacrifices, explained Omens, fared & mptu-
ouſly ; were exempted from the Burthens of War, but of great Influence both in War and eace,
p. 80, 81. the Government of their Order; their general Aſſembly the laſt Reſort of Judgment, p. 82.


VII. p. 83. Druid Diſcipline, Quality and Admiſſion of their Diſciples ; Privacy, Time, Manner, and
Place of Inſtruction, p. 83. taught by Verſes, memoriter, not by Writing, p. 84. Pythagoras and
Socrates did the ſame, ibid. all their Religion and Morality in Hymns, and in what Metre,
p. 85 ; exceedingly ſtrict in their Diſcipline, and ſevere in puniſhing the Breaches of it; Lovers of
Silence, p. 86. 5


IX. p. 86. Of the Druideſſes, none proved by Keyſler to have been among the Germans, p. 86, 87, 88, 8 . |


X. p. 89. Druid Learning; their Letters, p. 90. whether, and how far, they underſtood the Greek Tongue,
p. 90, 91. Iriſh Druid Letters, p. 91. Lovers of Verſe and Rhetoric, p. 92.


XI. p. 92. Their Phyſical Knowlege; underſtood the Nature of Eclipſes, Geography, Ethics; thought the
World had a Beginning, and was to have an End, by Fire; computed Times by Nights, as the
other Antients did, not by Days, and their Reaſons for it, p. 92, 93. the Beginning of their
Year, July ; Moon, fix Days old; a Generation with them, thirty Years, p. 92.

XII. p. 92. Their Botany, Fondneſs of the Vervaine, p. 9%. ſolemn gathering of the Miſletoe, p. 94.
gathering the Selago, p. 95. and Samolus, p. 96. Their Anatomy, ibid.


XII. p. 96. Moral and Religious Doctrines, Juſtice, Confidence in a future Life.


XIV. p. 97. The Immortality and Tranſmigration of the Soul, how far adopted by the Druids ; Immortality
undoubtedly held by all, and a diſtinct Principle from the other, p. 101. the Tranſmigration held
* by ſome, and that in two Senſes, ibid.


XV. p. 103. Druid DoQtines not only taught by Verſes, memoriter, but by Allegory and M hology, p-.103.
| as appears by Lucian's Hercules Ogmius, ibid. Portal of Montmorillon, - | Plate V. p. 53.]
explained, p. 104, 105. Cernunnos, [Plate VI. p. 107.] explained, p. 106.


XVI. p. 107. Druid Deities, Idols, ahd Symbols, Mercury, Apollo, &c. p. 107. Symbols, the Cube and
Oak, ibid. that they worſhiped the Serpent, and the Bull, not unlikely, p. 110. certainly
Stones, Rocks, Fountains, and Fairies, ibid.


Druid


E » 0” m 1 Xiii


XVII. p. 110. Druid Places of Worſhip, Groves, p. 110. why, ibid. that they had Temples, p. 111, 112,
113. Keyſler's and Mr. Martin's Objections examined, ibid. Dr. Stukeley's three Claſſes of the
Druid Temples, p. 114, 115. Temples, not accurately placed, p. 115. on the Tops of Hills,
referred to, and explained, p. 117, 118, 119, 120. Druids had no incloſed Temples, and why,
p. 120. Contents of their Groves, Rude Stone-Idols, ibid. Altars for Burnt-offerings, Libati-
ons, and ſmall devoted Gifts, p. 121. Ordinary Places of Idolatry; Rocks, Fountains, Trees,
and Croſs-Roads, p. 121, 122. many Places of Devotion, as Circles and Altars, near one another,
and why, p. 122, 123.


XVIII. p.123. The Druid Worſhip; Time of Worſhip ; Women admitted, and why, p. 123. Vulgar to


keep their Diſtance, 124. in what Order their Rites proceeded, ibid. Druid Habit, ibid. of


Men and Women, p- nuf. the Magic Rod, ibid. Several K inds of Victims, Animal and Hu-
man; Reaſons which tended to confirm them in this dreadful Cuſtom, p. 125, 126. Cloſe of their
Sacrifices, generally Intemperance, p. 127. ä


XIX. p. 127. Superſtitious Turnings of the Body during the Time of Worſhip, of the Druids, Greeks, and
Romans, p. 127, 128, 129. Remains of this Cuſtom in the Scottiſh Iſles, p. 129, 130. of two
Kinds, ibid. the Cuſtom of the three Turns very ancient, p. 131. (from Virgil and Ovid,
p. 132.) e the Druids turned Sun-ways, and why retrograde, conjectured, ibid. and ſup-
ported from Tacitus, Keyſler, &c. p. 133. To what theſe unedifying Cuſtoms were owing;
likely to the perverting or miſunderſtanding certain Portions of Scripture, p. 134.


XX. p. 134 The Holy Fires of the Druids ; the Occaſional Feſtival Fires, made in ſeveral Parts of England,
Remains of this Druid Rite, p. 135. when kindled, and how attended, in Cornwall, p. 135, 136.


Plate IV. Fig. I. explained, ibid. Sharpy-tor, p. 137. Fire-worſhip common among the Canaanites,
ibid.


XXI. p. 138. Divination, Charms, Incantations, and Predictions, p. 138. Divining, from the Enttails of
the Victim, ibid. by Augury, by the Number of Criminal Cauſes, ibid. by Lots, p. 139. by
white Horſes, p. 140. from the Waves, Eddies of Sea, River, and Well-water, ibid. from
the Convulſions of the dying Victim, ibid, by the Running of a Hare, p. 141. by ſingle Duel,
ibid. Charms of the Anguinum, ibid. Remains of this Rite in Cornwall, p. 142. Incantations


of Stones, p. 143. Logan Sones, ibid. Holed Stones, ibid. Divinations from the Brain, and
other Parts of Animals, p. 143. and Note p.


XXII. p. 144+ Reſemblance betwixt the Druid and Perſian Superſtition, in Temples, Prieſts, Worſhip, and
Doctrines; whence this Reſemblance, p. 149. Dion. Halicarn. examined, ibid. The Source
gueſſed at, by diſtinguiſhing the ſeveral Parts of Gentiliſm in which they agree, p. 150, &c,


XXIII. p.152. The Druids Declenſion and Extirpation ; Altar of Tiberius repreſenting the ſame [Plate VIII.


p. 157.] explained, p. 153. laſt Place we read of them, Ireland, where they were ſilenced by
St. Patrick, p. 155. The many Monuments they muſt have left behind them, 155, 156, 157.


ff


C HA 4 I. F Rude Stone-Monuments in general, p. 158, 159,
Pag · I 5 .


II. p. 160, Single Stones- erect, or rude Pillars, Religious Monuments, p. 160. Idolatrous, p. 161. Ex-
ample of Do. in Cornwall, at Men-perhen, Sharpy-tor, and Wringcheeſe, p. 162. Memorials of
Civil Contracts, p. 163. Marks of Places of Worſhip, p. 164. Of Places of Election and
Council, ibid. Sepulchral, p. 165. Military Memorials, p. 166. Boundaries, 167. Scope-
liſmus, p. 168.


III. p. 163. Rock-Idols common among the Orientals, p. 169. One remarkable Speaking-Stone in Wales,
. 170. Another in Norway, with the ſuppoſed Prophecy, p. 171. Why Rocks firſt became
mblems of Divine Powers, p. 172. Rock-Idols in Cornwall, many probably dedicated to Sa-

turn, Mercury, or Mars, 173. Men-Stone in Conſtantine, [Plate XI. Fig. I explained ; another
intended to ſignify, ibid, Toll-Men, two in Scilly, p. 174. [Plate XII. Fig. II. and III.] de-
conſidered, p. 175. Whereto the Paſſage underneath it * ſerve, ibid. Men-an-tol of Mad-
tious Purpoſes; for Libation, ibid. Initiation, Dedicating, Sanctification, and Reſtoration of Health,


ibid. Likely alſo Oracular, p. 178. The holed Stone at Roſmodreuy Circle, [Plate XIV. Fig. III.]


explained, ibid,


d The


ä — —— cons


xiv „ % (((


IV. p. 179. The _ or Rocking Stones; ſome among the Ancients ; two Sorts, natural and artificial,
. 180. reryn and Boſworlas, natural, ibid. Karn Lehau, artificial, ibid. St. Agnes Logan
Miſtakes concerning the laſt noted, p. 182. Druid Monuments, and their Uſe, ibid.


V. p. 183. The ſuppoſed Virtue of Stones and Gemms; the Opinion borrowed from the Urim and Thum-
mim of the Jews, p. 183. Adopted by Zoroaſter, Zachalias, ibid. The Perſians, the Druids,
and the Germans, p. 184. Remains of it; the great Eſteem of the Hematites, and the Fatal
Stone, with its Oracle, p. 185. |


VI. p. 155. . Monuments of T'wo, Three, and ſeveral Stones; Trewren, a Two-Stone Monument Sepulchral,
Sepulchral, or Idolatrous ; ſome Memorials and Religious, ibid, Deſign of Worniius's Monu-
ment at the End of Chap. VII. gueſſed at, p. 180. Number and Shape of the Stones, why differ-
ent, p. 189. Strait-line Monuments, their Intent, ibid, Nine Maids, [Plate XVII. Fig. 1.]
ibid. Stones erected as Portals; their Deſign, 190. Karn-Boſcawen Monument, [Plate XIV.


VII. p. 191. Of Circular Monuments, Sect. I. Number and Diſtance of Stones, p. 191, 192. How named
in Cornwall, Sect. II. p. 193, 194. Their Intent and Uſe, Sect. III. p. 194. Some Religious,
as the Altars at Mount Sinai and Gilgal, p. 195. Why round, and the Limits marked with
Stones erect, p. 196. Thoſe of Grandeur and Magnificence Religious, p. 197. Stone-henge, a
Druid Temple, and prior to the Romans and Saxons, ibid. Why of different Sizes, ibid. Par-
ticular Sorts of Religious Circular Monuments, Boſkednan Circle, [Plate XV. Fig. II.] p. 198.
Fig. II.] deter bed. The Hurlers, [Plate XII. Fig. VI.] p. 199. Botallek Circles, [Plate XVI.]
explained, ibid. Circles with Altars, p. 200 Treſcaw in Scilly, [Plate XII. Fig. IV. ] explained,
ibid. Karn Menelez, [Plate XII. Fig. V. ] ibid. Claſſernis Temple, [Plate XVII. Fig. V.]
p. 201. Wormius's and Speed's Miſtakes, in calling them Trophies, p. 202. Places of Council

and Judgment, Sect IV. ibid. Altars in the Fora, p. 203. Stones to ſtand by (Boſcawen un,
Plate XV. Fig. III.) p. 204. to ſtand upon, Ui 205. to fit upon, as Tredinek Circle, [Plate

s | XV. Fig. I.] ibid. Bodinar Crellas, [Plate XVII. F N .} explained, p. 206. Senor Cirque,

| (Plate XV. Fig. IV.] its Intent probably, ibid. Some Theatres and Amphitheatres, and why,

| p. 207. St. Juſt Amphitheatre, [Plate VIII. Fig. J. II.] explained; its Uſe, to hear Plays,

1 and for Britiſh Exerciſes, p. 207. and for Duels, p. 208. Some Sepulchral, by Aſhes, Urns,

| &c. found in them, p. 209. Little Circles at Bartine, at Botallek, at Altarnun ; likely, origin»

ally Sepulchral, p. 210.


VIII. p. 211. Of Barrows, a Monument found in moſt Countries, p. 211. Name, p. 212. Conſtruction,
p. 213. From the adjacent Grounds ; ſeveral Sorts, p. 216. Place, p. 217. Size, ibid, Scilly
p-. 220. Secondary Uſes of Barrows, p. 221.


IX. p. 223, Of the Cromleh ; its Place, p. 223. Conſtruction and Name, 224. Found in many Nations,
ibid. Kits Cotty Houſe, [Plate XXII.] ibid. Not Altars originally, p. 225. Proved from Chin
Quoit, [Plate XXIV. Fig. SLE Crum Cruach, p. 226, 227. A Sepulchral Monument, p.
XXI. Fig. I.] p. 231. Senor Cromleh, [Plage XXI. Fig. III. and IV. ] p. 232. Chin Cromleh,
[Plate XXIV. Fig. X.] ibid. Human Bones found in one in Ireland, p. 233.


X. p. 233. Of Urn-Burial; Urns how and where placed, p. 234. Chikarn Urns, ibid. Gwythian
Urn, p. 236. And what to be thence inferred, ibid. Bones how diſpoſed, p. 237. Men Urn,
ibid. Various Contents of Urns, p. 238. Some Bones more burnt than others, and why,
p. 239. Accounted very unhappy not to have the Dead much burnt, from Homer, p. 240.


XT. p. 240. Of the Rock -Baſons, found in ſeveral Parts, p. 240. Two Sorts, ſome with Lips, others
with none; where placed, p. 241. Their Shape and Size, p. 242. For what Uſe not fit, p. 243.
The Antiquity and Frequency of Water-Purifications, p. 245. Varieties of Holy-Water, p.
248. Spring and Sea Water, ibid. Dew, p. 249. Rain and Snow Water, p. 249, 250. That
the Druids had the Rites of external Purifications, p. 252. Of the General Uſe of the Rock-
Baſons, p. 254. The Uſe of thoſe which bave Lips, p. 255. Uſe of thoſe which have no Lips,
p. 256. Some ſhaped as if to receive the Human Body, ibid. | |


XI. p. 258. Of the Gold Coins found at Karn-bre, p. 258. Their Deſcription, p. 259. Not Phenician,
p. 263. nor Greek, nor Roman, p. 265. A Paſſage in Ceſar examined, ibid. Camden's and
Speed's Coins examined, p. 267. Which are Britiſh, p. 26g. Of the Reſemblance which the
| Karn-bre Coins bear to the Gauliſh, and the Reaſon of it, p. . Of the Age of theſe
U | Gold Coins, p. 273. Of the ſeveral Charges or Symbols of theſe Gold Coins, p. 275, &c. 8


VVT xv


why all of or 28 to the Chariot, p. 279. Of the Head, Diadem, Claſp, curled Hair, Habit,
Trees, Spices, Balls, Pearls, and Laminz, p. 280, 281.


XIII. p. 281» Of the Braſs Celts found at Karn-bre, p. 281. How far to be aſſigned to to the Romans, 282.
Where found, and with what, p. 28, Various Opinions of their Vie, p. 284. [Plate XXIV.
p. 286, 287. A Stone Celt, p. 2879. Why commonly made of Braſs, p. 289.


XIV. p. 292. Of the Caves of the ancient Corniſh-Britans, p. 292. Bolleit and Bodinar Caves, ibid,


Time of War, p. 294, &c.


CK.


CHAP. I. F Roman Coins found near Mines in Cornwall, p. 298. Roman Coins found near Har-


pag. 298, bours, p, 300. Mopas Coins, p. 302. Trewardreth Coins, ibid, Of ſcattered Coins,
p. J03.


II. p. 306. Of Roman Sepulchres and other Remains, p. 306. Sancred Urn, p. 307. Kerris Urn, ibid,


Golvadnek Barrow, ibid. Roman Remains found at Karn-bre, p. 309. Roman Paterz, ibid.
Some Fragments, p. 311.


III, p. 311. Roman Camps and Fortifications in Cornwall, p. 311. Little Dinas, p. 312, Binnoway and
Wallſburrow, ibid. Lanceſton, p. 315. Wolvedon, ibid. St Agnes Kledh, ibid, Shape of


Roman Fortifications, p. 315. Boſſens Fort, p. 316. Latin Inſcription in Greek Letters found
on a Tin Patera, p. 317. |


IV. p. 321. Of the Roman Geography of Cornwall, and the ancient and preſent Limits, p. 321. Of
the Voliba, Uxela, Tamare, and Iſca of Ptolemy, p. 322. That Exeter is the Iſca Dunmo-
niorum of the Itinerary, p. 323. Ancient and preſent Name of the County, whence, p. 324.

How far Cornwall extended, p. 325. Of Stratton, whether a Roman Town, p, 326,

| *


V. p. 327- Roman Ways, their Uncertainty, p. 327. Structure, p. 328. Roman Ways, Weſt of Exeter,
p. 330. Antoninus's Itin. Peutinger's Table, Ptolemy, and the Anonymous Ravennas, examined,
p. 330, 331. Richard of Weſtminſter, p. 332. Part of a Roman Road, likely, betwixt Loſtwy-


thyel and Liſkerd, p. 333. and betwixt Bodman and Loſtwythyel, p. 334. A Northern Roman Road,
through Stratton, p. 336.


VI. p. 330. When Cornwall was in all Probability firſt conquered by the Romans, p. 338. Antique Intaglio
of a Griffin, p. 342.


VII. p. 343. Ancient Caſtles in Cornwall: Cliff Caſtles, as Treryn Caſtle, &c. p. 344. their Uſe, p. 345.


Hill Caſtles, as Bartine, Caerbran, Caſtle-andinas, and Caſtle Chiin, p. 346, 347. by whom built,
and for what End, p. 348. |


VIII. p. 350. Of Walled Caſtles, for Defence and Reſidence, p. 350. Caſtle Karn-bre, ibid. Tindagel,
P+ 352.


IX. p. 354+ Caſtles which have Keeps, as Trematon, p. 354. Reſtormel, 986. Boſcaſtle, and


Lanceſton Caſtle, p. 358. The Name, p. 362. Antiquity and Uſe of ſuch Caſtles,
p. 363.


X. p. 366. State of Chriſtianity in Cornwall, before the Norman Conqueſt, 5 366. Saints who
preached or ſuffered in Cornwall, p. 369. Of the Monaſteries of the fifth Century, p. 372.


"Britiſh Churches in Cornwall, under the Saxons, p. 374. A Biſhoprick erected in Corn-
wall, p. 377- | | |


XI. p. 380. Of Religious Houſes founded in Cornwall before the Norman Conqueſt : Of Padſtow Church
; and Monaſtery, p. 380. Of Bodman Priory and Cathedral, ibid. St, German's Priory,

p. 381. Of the Deanry of St. Berian, p. 384. Bonury, p. 385. Of St. Stephen's near Lanceſton,

ibid. Priory of St. Michael's Mount, ibid. Carantoc Deanry, p. 387. St. Neot's, ibid. St,

Piran, p. 388. St. Kiaran, alias St. Keveryn, ibid, Priory at Scilly, p. 389, St, Probus, ibid,


Conſtantine, p. 390.


* In (cr ibed


Res..."


5 —


4201 ä | 3 C O N T E N T 8.

e ren Monuments before the Norman Conqueſt, p. 391, Iſnioc, ibid. Ciruſt
p- 399 . Se % . did. rt, 8. An,
399. Ruani, 401. Leuiut, ibid. | » 396. Alroron,


XIII. p. 402. The Civil Government of Cornwall, f IM
Kings of Britain, with the Pri rnwall, from the Time of Brute, p. 402, A Catalogue of the
© the erat Conqueſt, p. _ and Affairs of Qornwall, according to the Order of Time,


XIV. p 413. Corniſh Vocabulary, p. 415. |


1
a
;”


„


HISTORICAL


_— 290044) % , the, *
8 9.
4 .
1


F 5


"=p our
* #7 50 FRA op pens m ” * 0


e.
—


e
r


N
— —
— —
* —
OI


a


APY OED a 4


Potgtean


Tre, n-


4 e
e
east Enrn


* . 2 Atom byir AY N


THY c
* — Tregunho denen, ments. Sryrus?


\. — L


Ee


NOUSHOLE


Pen
HEL STON
4 Gn


#UNWALLO |
4 ee
, Bochum


2 Gn Zaner


erate o © Hiteo.
4
1
;
1
3 . ¹— r


— — — HS 2
— — — —— — Fe " p A
7" — © >. 4
uin lan *Goos nay . |
N 7 2 Monvtxstrowe e 0
2 M.A 1 n naten. — [CA 3!
l 2 Milton
\ ZRIN.KHAnTON |
11 Sor *
the County of 72 e. yh
. P *
nur 0 Hefrajord
Won = — |
* & STRATTON
J. 22
RNWA | | . | LANCK11,8 'F 55
. h »» Aaron $
— * £ # "A * MARHAMCHURC1
F on Hue
Wor pou — |


„ wy S TOK Langford a7! 4% bear


lambrueat 1 IP, Vas e 1 oF 7) ere n
FY g - 224 Muir sont ;
4 ee, ft , Ig


n
WEEKK%S Many Hov, — ( O fad 77 50


NT 01 CHANNEL * ae. eee eee ere. ol


1 | Whithigh don
pr” S gui tox run len utloigh es


FIW 3 Funda. |
— — aht * /
N N "Wh An :
TINDAGEL{ * Ne ene enger D G 4 6 $
reli — „ * eee
0 Trenow de of "Wrap
or 2 hope - - |
on gheS Haliworths _ Warbobhe þ N | 9
orvhyvad, * I 4 IAV >
| =" * . eee. cod LY 28 > TREMAY | = S. 45
Nou Z Jl CS A = 9 1 * arme @ "Trighaston runs Eun Wr nHERWIN
; ; 2 AMPLyORD νν 15 *
B Sc f Fegear 9
AvvExT _. 288 3 \


: Urnnant
S M . STA Mi en ron


DS [LANEAST
eee, de, 2


Au © 58 5


45
*”


: a IG 4
* 9er! + ty +50 7.7 . ” ON
"17 Gant Dry mp RY 22 |
4 te | SOUTAPEDA u N SLAWnITON 40


7
* Pre/uno Har
Arlland
7 * axed 3


WYTHYEL |


22


Vi;
STCoOLUMB S WENN Unger "ut £4 51


Lappe a > a re — A


— B | 7 Wrungoeese radon nir
"Faſo / arich jo. Trenartha e J - =
# SS — * 372 — Aa OY Ve, W
os 224 i —_ & at 8” CLaks 2 \ i. ? b bee
e hs \ x,” * Ho * + uh. CALLINTON
Bohrook G on VU Pur” 2 8 Ive An i Buga
ar, gee” _
2 / be! Trebi 2 ladrton Cartlerrich Harrowbere un
JIROD OE F- 2 Newjbridge S Downie ;
XVI. 18 Nui * \ Part op —
reg, Na peo Neef gr,


Penalty 15 (Ve G
Cav


Mol .
Ua 2 WPLEMMING SP,
FA, 4" % A Mt
br: n mar
** Pb 2 2 :
eee a 78 WY . „ SALTA8H agh of
0 N 2 LOOK Q Ke nne 4
ERC CLANS ALOS wr sv Log 5 su N 66A; 1.
.. is Canna y Roa $7
3 * Heu * * ee e -
;VAGISSY * | >= \  Porwronte 1


AV THONY


—


Ty Georges 7 IO


NNEL


CHA


|

| St 2
8

f 4

|

'


Hdqvstone A a boni.
f
— — .
— — — — - 1 — — — E — - 1 —


4
eas _ "
1 Y ;
4 . n Jn
£3 hb 8 © .


I „
— Py” —
een


A" *
F x 2 >
5 \ = I *
n


2 #7
* -» 4. I


> .
, * K
* 2 +
A - EF. ©
=; # o 3 bs Ay E
— — 2
1


HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


RELATING TO


ESTI TATN.


EQ OXF-L
General Obſervations on the Hiſlory of Britain.


N order to illuſtrate the ancient monuments which are to be
found in Cornwall, it will be neceſſary to take a ſhort view of
the moſt important circumſtances in the hiſtory of this iſland of

Britain. The original of a- people muſt be conſidered and carefully

traced, becauſe whatever monuments are diſcovered to have been

among the anceſtors (1 mean the firſt planters of countries) will in
all probability be found among the poſterity. To diſcover the ori-
ginal of a nation, the name, the national language, the neighbour-
ing people, the reſemblance of its manners, laws, monuments and
religion to thoſe of the moſt early ages (though in diſtant countries)
may all contribute ; but, above all, authentic records (if they can be
found) will moſt effectually ſatisfy our enquiries. |
Beſides the original people from whence any nation is derived,
we have a farthcr enquiry to make, which is, into what changes and
alterations the pcople ſo derived, have either by war and conqueſt
been forced, or by mutual converſe, trade, and alliance have inſen-
ſibly and gradually paſſed ; becauſe every ſuch alteration will diſ-
pole a people to cre& different kinds of monuments, according to
* | the


HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


the different cuſtoms which they have contracted by inclination and
commerce, or which have been impoſed upon them by their con-
uerors.

Theſe things being neceſſary to give ſome light into the ſubject
of the following papers, it will be worth our while to conſider what
may really be diſcovered, what may fairly be implied, what proba-
bly be ſuppoſed; but to enter particularly into the Britiſh hiſtory,
or endeavour at a regular ſeries of perſons, times and facts, would
be as vain in a writer, as it would be unpardonable with regard to
the reader. The iſland of Britain is mentioned very ſeldom, and in
a few words by the Greek authors now extant a, ſo that authentic
records, relating to our iſland, we have none beyond the times of
ru Ceſar ; ſome few remarks of Tacitus we haye next; ſome

aſty, and general obſervations in the Roman writers of the ſubſe-
quent ages, but none after Tacitus expreſsly, except Gildas, till Bede;
and afterwards too many fictions of name, time, and fact (it is to be
feared) in the monkiſh times, publiſhed to the world for hiſtory ;
ſo that there is ſcarce any hiſtory more disfigured by fable, and
more uncertain as to facts, and time, than the Britiſh hiſtory, and
every one muſt now deſpair of entering into the particulars of it with
any ſanguine hopes of certainty, However, Cornwall being one of
the two places to which the natives of this iſland who furvived the
Roman and other conqueſts chiefly retired, in order to preſerve the
little remains of Britiſh blood, and liberty, and having retained the
language of the ancient Britans down to the preſent times, we
may ſafely conclude, that the hiſtory of Cornwall is naturally in-
cluded in, and muſt principally be drawn from, that of Britain
in general, however imperfect.


*


CHAS.--L
Of the Name of Britain.


23 HE original of names is neither the moſt entertaining, nor
the moſt inſtructive part of knowledge; but as in the ſeveral
opinions of learned men on this head, ſome traces of the ancient hi-
ſtory of our iſland, may now and then be diſcovered, it may not
be amiſs to ſay ſomewhat on that head, though, by reaſon of the
great uncertainty of ſuch matters, very little may ſuffice. -In the
derivation of names no great agreement among the learned is to be
expected. I here induſtriouſly omit ſeveral derivations collected
with great care by Camden, and his editor, Mr. Speed, and others,
where the curious reader may take his Choice of thoſe words which


« Ariſtotle, Polybius, Athenzus, &c.
3 will


ö 8 0 24 : $- 2. .
1 Ry \ Mi en. * 94 4. > þ Me T = 2 d
6 " 5 . 8 LA x . 1 .
I "Ra. 5 r N Ab eee 3 2 8 VE — 2


1
=.


RELATING TO BRITAIN.


will give him moſt ſatisfaction; and ſhall only make a few obſerva-

tions on the ſuppoſitions of Camden and Bochart. Firſt then, it brit

or brith ſignifies painted, as Mr. Camden (page xxxv, &c.) athrms,

it is not unlikely that our iſland was called by the later Greeks (for

Albion was its firſt name as Pliny ſays) Britania, becauſe the inhabi-

tants painted their bodies, this being a cuſtom ſo ſingular, as might

well ſerve to diſtinguiſh them from other nations, which is the ſole

end of ſuch names: add to this, that thoſe who retired before the

Romans, and were pent up in the northern parts of Scotland, were

called by the Romans Picts, to denote, as well their cuſtom of
painting their bodies, as to diſtinguiſh them from the other branches

of the Britans, who were more ſupple, and willing to leave their

own national cuſtoms, and conform to thoſe of the Romans. This,

therefore, is a very natural ſuppoſition of Mr. Camden, if the cuſtom

of painting were general among the Britans, as well as peculiar to

their nation, and the word brit, or brith ſignified painted. But it
is by no means agreed, that either of theſe words ſignifies painted,

in the Britiſh tongue Þ: and farther, what the ancient native Britans

called themſelves, and their country, we no where find ; but if
they had the cuſtom of painting themſelves from the Celts, or Gauls,

or from the Scythians, as Bede and Dr. Stillingfleet imagine, it can
ſcarce be conceived why they ſhould call themſelves painted, or their
country that of painted men, when their next neighbours the Gauls,

the Geloni, Agathyrſi, and Scythæ, had the ſame faſhion, and that
ſameneſs would prevent all diſtinction: and, indeed, though ſome
rich and fanciful perſons among them might paint themſelves, yet
it can ſcarce be ſuppoſed that this was a national, univerſal cuſtom e.
It is more eaſily to be imagined, therefore, that brit or brith ſignifies
ſomewhat of the natural ſituation of the iſland, than any thing ſo
variable as the cuſtom of the inhabitants. It is further to be ob-
ſerved, that the Greeks and Romans in forming the names of places
built upon the foundation, which they found ready laid to their
hands, either by ſome adjun& making the ancient word more ex-
preſſive, or contenting themſelves to improve the ſound only by a
more muſical termination; ſo that brit is very likely to be found (if
not in the Britiſh) in ſome other language, akin or parental to it, as
we will endeavour to ſhew by and by.

Bochart has recourſe to the Greek name of this iſland, BeeJavirn,
in order to derive it, with the greater probability, from Baratanac,
in the Phenician tongue ſignifying a land of tin: but it may with
reaſon be objected to this great man's ſuppoſition, that the termina-


Þ WS 4 2 1 a : | 4 N 5 * Y- rn” Bags «<=
EF. > CRE 7 1 i 2 we * ; 41


=


* * b

V * ST.” a :

> 3 : , 75 f WE 7
— # 4


» No Britiſh word begins with a B as a radi- Archzol. p. 20. col, 3. W. Brith, painted;
cal letter: Humph. Lhwyd, Breviar. Sammes, 46. brith, ſpeckled. pag. 33. col. 3. Ib. and brithilh,
Yet it muſt be owned that Dr. Davis in his Dic- Angl. “ Spot fiſh, ſcil. a trout,” pag. 34 ib.
tionary, and from him Mr. Ed. Lhwyd ſays, c Sammes, pag. 70 to 74.


tion


HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


tion of Bes a is very common among the Greek derivatives d, and
the x, here, implies not the ſame conſonant neceflary in the theme,
or root from whence the word is taken, and to the root it is that
we muſt reſort for the truth of a derivation ; beſides this, it is not
very clear in Hiſtory that the whole iſland of Britain was ever ſa-
mous in all its ſeveral parts, or, indeed, in many of them, for the
production of tin ; and it can ſcarce be ſuppoſed that what, ſuch
a {mall corner of it as Cornwall, and the Scilly Iſles, was remark-
able for, ſhould have credit enough to give name to an iſland
ſo many times larger than themſelves. Where a whole, or the
greateſt part of a country, was anciently very remarkable ſorplenty
of ſome peculiar commodities, as corn, wine, honey, and the like,
there, that a name ſpecifying that commodity, ſhould fix upon it,
is not improbable ; it is therefore not unlikely that the little Scilly
Iſlands ſhould receive the name of Caſſiterides from their tin; but
that the vaſt iſland of Britain ſhould receive its name from a metal
found only in the moſt remote, and ſcattered extremities, does not
ſcem to be probable.

Theſe are the moſt conſiderable derivations of the word Britain;
and although it is more eaſy to ſhew the difficulties, and inſufficiency
of other etymologies, than to eſtabliſh one unexceptionable in their
room: yet, as we are now engaged with names, it may not be amiſs
to refer it to the learned as a thing to be conſidered, whether the
former part of the word Britain may not be found in the Hebrew
language, which, as we are well aſſured, is the ground of the Phe-
nician, and ancient Celtic. In the Britiſh tongue there are many,
(See Rowl. Mon. III. p. 278.) ſome ſay 300 Hebrew Roots to be
found, which will make it not unlikely, to find the root of Brit
in that ſacred. language. There x52 in Pihal, ſignifies to cut off,
or divide, and with the H added, (an uſual termination of nouns
derived from verbs, as n fœdus, &c.) will fignify a diviſion, or
ſeparation 3 and doubtleſs this is the firſt idea that ſtrikes us, when
we compare the ſituation of Britain with that of its neighbouring
countries on the continent, from which it is ſo entirely divided :


Et penitus toto, diviſos orbe Britannos.


The latter part of this word is—tania ; a termination, not un-
uſual among the Greeks, ſignifying probably, no more than a re-
gion, or extent of land, as Camden rightly obſerves. Thus Mauri-
tania is the land of the Moors; Aquitania the land of waters; Lu-
ſitania from luſus, (ſays Pliny, lib. iii.); Baſtitania, and Turditania,
two provinces of Spain, from the Turdi and Baſti. (Speed, pag. g.


d As Axle, Afanint®,, Alon , &c.
Rowland


. IP

SS al . · L q p q > - a Po
B Sb 3 N 1 * * I x HY <a - * wy —_ * Z
5 5 : F — - vi. 4 e 1 : LW SER” * "ol : = - 2 2 7 1
2 nf 2+. 9X oo "3 ITS 06 429 oe TY I 65 * n 8 * * 2
* - > 1 a Sn ä 1 9 * A #4 4 by * . fa *. LAS Z "$0 22 * 2 55 7 88 T 5 [ 4
* 1 * 2 1 or 1 hs wo ö _ l -
« AS 1 o 2 1


/


9

C 4

«4
3
*
2
4s
# >

*

*

Li


e


*
*


ELA TING TO BRITAIN.


Rowland Mon. illuſt.) Now, if it ſhall not ſatisſy the reader to derive
this tania from the Greek verb 7:3, we are inform'd by Pezron that
ſtan or tan ſignifies, in Celtic, a region; and ſome others alto
think, that tyn, or tain, or tania, does allo fignily the fame
thing, from Tany ſpreading ; it fo, I would only obſerve that as
the Celtic is ſuppos'd to have contributed largely towards forming
the Greek, Latin, and moſt Europcan tongues, the Greeks might
have form'd their reh as well as their 7a» from tany or tan in
the Celtic, and apply'd it to countrics, to which the figure of
thoſe countries made it juſtly applicable. Tis therefore fub-
mitted, whether Bre-tania (as the Greeks write it) may not ſig-
nify a country divided from the continent, and extended in length,
both which appellations may certainly with as much propriety be ay-
ply'd to Britain, as to any country in the world; for as the Sea ſepa-
rates it from Gaul, and the continent, ſo 'tis to be obſery'd that the
land does not lye round, ſquare, or in any compact figure, but very
much extended, and ftretch'd out in length, as every map will in-
form us. But whatever the name of Britain may be deriv'd from,
the long continuance of it, even from its firſt appearance in hiſtory,


down to the preſent time, whereas all, or moſt other countries have


loſt their original appellation, is thought by ſome to be for the
honour of the nation, and therefore much admir'd and cnvy'd by
foreigners g.

Thus much for the variety of opinions concerning the name of
Britain, from which, if we learn nothing elſe, we may certainly
learn this uſcful leſſon, that as the original of names appears to be
very obſcure and uncertain, and the moſt lucky conjecture is not
likely to make us much wiſer or better, it is by no means worth the


while too tenactoully to perſiſt in one's own ſenſe, or to labour in-
duſtriouſly to obtrude it upon others.


G HNA F. II.


Of the ancient Inhabitants of Britain.


4


V E are not likely to find greater certainty and ſatisfation in

our enquiries about the firſt inhabitants, than about the name
of this country; but, indeed, Britain is not ſingular in this point,
nor our hiſtory more defective than that of our neighbours ; the firſt
planting of countries lying at too vaſt a diſtance in the ſpace of time
to admit of a diſtinct view. In this proſpect, as in others upon land


s Scawen's MS, &c. penes C. Lyttelton, LL. D. Epiſcopum Carliolen.


C Or


3 HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


or water, what we ſee with our utmoſt ken, we know not whether
they be the real hills or mountains of the land we are bound to, or
whether they may prove any thing more than ſome deceitful clouds
that may diſappoint our expectations. I ſhall not therefore detain a:
the reader long in theſe obſcure paths, but only endeavour to trace 1
the inhabitants of this iſland ſo far back, as to ſhew their relation 5
and reſemblance to thoſe eaſtern nations of whom we have ſome
profane as well as facred hiſtory remaining ; like cuſtoms, and like
monuments appearing upon the records of ſome countries, and
exiſting in reality in others (though at a great diſtance) affording
us the ſureſt light, and the moſt reaſonable deductions towards il-
luſtrating the antiquities of all countries which bear ſuch an


affinity.

It is in vain to enquire at what time this iſland of Britain firſt re- 1
ceiv'd it's inhabitants; but in all probability it was not a long time ö a
uninhabited, after its neighbouring nations, Gaul, Germany, and 2


Spain were once peopled ; and, conſidering the temperate climates
of theſe nations, the fertility of their ſoils, and the quick increaſe
of mankind, but more eſpecially the will of God, which plainly
appears to have been, that, what he had ordain'd for the uſe of man
ſhould be us'd and enjoy'd h, this cannot be ſuppos'd to be very
Theweſtern long after the diſperſion of mankind at Babel. The diſperſion hap-
1 pen d, according to the Hebrew chronology, about the 10 1ſt year
hou fe after the univerſal deluge '; but this being much too early for a
on. ſufficient number of perſons, even to have form'd one large king-
dom, much leſs ſo unwieldy and tumultuous a number, as required
a miraculous diſperſion from heaven, and was ſufficient to form
many colonies and kingdoms in the different climates of the world,
the Samaritan computation is reckoned more worthy to take place,
and this ſets the birth of Peleg (at whoſe birth this diſperſion hap-
pened) about the four hundredth year after the flood : this will at-
ford time for mankind to increaſe, and, forgetting the ſmart of God's
judgements, to form ambitious deſigns againſt the decrees of hea-
ven; time to combine together, and think their numbers would
protect them from any future defolations*; in ſhort, about 400
years after the flood, mankind may well be ſuppos'd proud of their
numbers, and God thought ſuch numbers fit to be divided (as be-
ing ſufficient to plant the moſt conſiderable parts of the world),
and that the world itſelf, as well as the Inhabitants thereof, might


be equally benefited by ſuch a ſeparation, After this diſperſion at


h And Cod bleſſed them, and God ſaid ““ unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and
« unto them, Be fruitful and multiply, and e- ** repleniſh the earth.” Gen. ix. 1.
e pleniſh the Earth”, fill it, ſays the Hebrew. i Bochart is of the ſame opinion, Geog:
Cen. i. 28. So again immediately after the De- Sac. Lib. II. Ch. xiv.
luge © God bleſſed Noah and his Sons; and ſaid * See Univerſal Hift, Lib. I. Ch. ii.


Babel,


RELATING TO BRITAIN:


Babel, it could not be many years before ſuch a country as Europe
was poſſeſs'd in all, at leaſt its moſt temperate parts“. Some
people, indeed, are for allowing ſeveral ages for this. They fay
that before mankind ſpread into different climates, and would fore-
go their habitual ſettlements, friends, and relations, they mult be
much preſs'd by numbers ; conſequently, time mult be allowed for
their increaſe, (without ſuppoſing the interpoſition of an unneceſſary
miracle, which is abſurd) nay tor ſuch an increaſe, as muſt have
made it uneaſy for them to ſtay together, which, after the firſt
plantation of the earth by the poſterity of Noah, and indeed after
the diſperſion too, mult have been ſome hundreds of years at a mo-
derate computation. But in this opinion, the diſpoſitions of man-
kind in thoſe early ages, and the determin'd will of God to have
all (at leaſt the moſt conſiderable) parts of this world poſſeſs'd, cul-
tivated, and, like houſes made wholſome by habitation, do not
ſeem to have weight enough allow'd them. For, firſt, in thoſe
early ages, after the flood, a vaſt and quick increaſe of numbers
may be juſtly allow'd to mankind ; owing, as may be ſuppos'd,
to their longevity, and their bodies continuing ſtrong and nervous,
ſome ages longer than they do at preſent : beſides, ſoon after the
diſperſion, we can't but imagine that it became the general diſpo-
ſition of mankind to migrate from one country to another; cu-
rioſity either inſpiring them with a deſire of exploring different re-
gions, hoping ſtill to find what was better, that they might at
laſt chuſe which was beſt of all, and ſettle there, and in continual
apprehenſion as they were in thoſe unſettled times, leaſt other
names, and nations ſhould prevent, and take the title of firſt
poſſeſſion from them: at the fame time, as they journey d, 'tis na-
tural to ſuppoſe, that one portion of land might ſuit one, or more
families, one country another tribe, and a third might have ſome-
thing particularly agreeable to another ſet of men. Mankind (at
leaſt as various then as now) as they paſs'd from one country to
another, left none without ſome inhabitants, there being hardly any
ſituation or climate which would not engage ſome particular tempers
to ſettle in it; not to mention, that the aged and weary, with thoſe
whom they could influence, would willingly put an end to their
journeyings, wherever their fatigues were imagin'd to be, or really
were, inſupportable. All this while, for the ſame reaſon that God


I Japhet (under the name Tapetus, famous in Traly, Gaul, and Spain. Geogr. Sacr. Lib. III.


urope, according to many learned men (Boſſuet's
Univerſal Hiſt. p. 10.), having himſelf peopled the
greateſt part of the weſt.—Bochart is alſo of opi-
nion, that of the ſeven ſons of Japhet, two, viz.


Thiras and Javan, came into Europe. Thiras


took poſſeſſion of Thracia and Myſia, and the
north of Europe. Javan the ſouthern parts, Greece,


3


Cap. i. — “ Mankind journey'd, (ſays Theoph.
Antioch. quoted in Camden laſt edit. page 12.)
& till they came even to Britain. Ex omnium
« Hiſtoricorum fide certum eſt Gomerum, ſeu
e Aſchenazen, cum aliis Noemi nepotibus Gal-
e liam primos inhabitaſle.”

Bulzus in Frick, p. 154


diipers'd


2


HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


diſpers'd them firſt from Babel, God's pre- diſpoſing power attended
them; made them curious ates loreign countries, and willing and
ne to make new ſettlements, even before the firſt ſettlements of
the immediate deſcendants of Noah can be ſuppos d to be regularly
eſtabliſh'd, or form'd into well-govern'd focietics : it was indeed in


ſome ae den neceſſary for the preſervation both of man and beaſt,


that this wandering temper of mind ſhould prevail, and this is the
reaſon that we find the patriarchs Abraham and Jacob ſo unſettled,
changing their countries ſo eaſily, whenever the want of provender
or victuals pinch'd themſelves or cattle. This is the reaſon that
Eſau or Edom went from his father's habitation, and lettied ſar to
the ſouth, and the Scythians, of the ſame ſtock with thoſe who
peopled the weſt of Europe, liv'd in their waggons, in a ſtate of
continual motion, down to the times of Auguſtus ; and this
cuſtom of the Scythians I muſt obſerve could be no new thing, no
improvement of what was before, but very likely the manner in
which the firſt difpers'd from Babel convey'd their wives, children,
and aged, and continued ever after ſo to do. Thus then, the in-
creaſe of numbers, man's natural curiolity, the 1nability of the earth
to maintain any great numbers in one ſpot, till the invention of
tillage, and above all, the gracious deſign of the deity to have all his
earth inhabited, co- operating to one and the ſame end, it became the
faſhion of the age, after the diſperſion, to migrate; and we may
reaſonably conclude, that they no ſooner had reſted themſelves a little,
after their long travels, but thinking every thing better which was
to come, and at a diſtance, than what they then enjoy d, a great
part of their numbers ſtill mov'd on, not only through plains, and
over mountains, but we have reaſon to believe, that in theſe early
times they boldly attempted the rivers and lakes, making uſe of
floats, and ſuch ſhips, as they had either by tradition "Jearn'sl
Noah's ark to have been, or ſuch, as their moſt ingenious mecha-
nicks could then contrive: here alſo, we may imagine that there
was no mountain ſo high, nor any lake ſo wide, nor any river fo
rapid, but that the bolder and more intrepid fort would pique
themſeves upon getting over the dithcultics they met with. This
{et the ingenious to invent proper machines, and veſſels, to put
ſuch adventurous deſigns in execution; and that this muſt ſoo
have happen'd, after the diſperſion, nay at the very difperizo!

itſelf, will appear to every one, who will gire himſelf the trouble
to ſurvey the country of Meſopotamia ; Fro: n vhence, without
boats or ſome contrivance of the ſame kind, no people could con-
vey themſelves into any country beyond the great and na wigat ble
rivers of Tygris and Euphrates. Sailing, tis true, was the inven


On


m Hor. Car. Lib. III. Ode 24. See Herodotus.


of


_


EELATINGT:Q-3KT-1A1N:


of after ages, and is aſcrib'd to Dedalns, the generation before the

Trojan war; but boats, or ſmall ſhips, with oars, were much more

ancient, and things which Noah and his fons, having experienc'd the

ſecurity of the ark (built by God's own appointment and direction),

could by no. means be ignorant of, nor their deſcendants be carclets

enough to want the ſervice of, in their peregrinations m: but to

return, — ſo reſtleſs and inquiſitive after new countries mult the firſt

ages after the diſperſion have been, that they no ſooner ſaw an iſland

but we muſt imagine ſome of them were fir'd with a deſire of

ſurveying and poſſeſſing it. As ſoon, therefore, as the poſterity of j =

Japhet had ſpread themſelves over the weſtern parts of Europe, eee

had poſſeſs d the ſca ſhores of Gaul, they ſaw no doubt the oppofite probably

coaſts of Britain, and were ſoon inclin'd to adventure over, and (zu.

ſee what ſort of country it was, and how well it deſerv'd to be in-

habited : this appears to have been the prevailing paſſion of the

age. To have waited 'till their firſt ſettlements were compleated,

to fear the injuries of different climates, to be captivated with the

eaſe and plenty which they might almoſt every where in the ſouth

of Europe have enjoy'd, to be terrify'd by the Alps, Apennine, or

Pyrenean hills, by the width of rivers, and arms of the ſea; to fit

down contented till their prodigious increaſe of numbers ſhould

make them divide again, and brought them under a neceſſity of

moving on farther ; all theſe ſeem to be diſpoſitions ſuiting well |

enough an age of luxury and eaſe, but foreign and unnatural to

the firſt ages after the flood, and entirely oppoſite to the principal

intention of God at the diſperſion, which was, to have the ſeveral

parts of his terreſtrial globe poſleſs'd, cultivated, and improv'd.
And here, perhaps (ſince the peopling America is a circumſtance

in hiſtory ſo difficult to account for), it may well deſerve the thoughts

of the learned, whether, whilſt this travelling humour prevailed,

the great continent of America might not have reccived its firſt

inhabitants from ſome hardy adventurers, who, coaſting from the

northern parts of Aſia and Europe, into the American continent,

and ſoon after divided by the polar ſnows from the reſt of man-

kind, at a time when letters were ſcarce known, no records kept,

and no religion ſettled, kept journeying ſtill towards the ſouth,

in a ſhort time loſt all traces of the parents they ſprung from; and

were indeed Joſt to them 'till the great diſcoveries of Columbus.

But however that be, tis reaſonable to imagine, that the iſlands

near the continent, and to be ſeen from thence, were ſoon peopled

after the continent was inhabited, and that Britain, among the reſt

had her inhabitants as ſoon as, or but very little after, Gaul.


\O


n A ſhip was the ſymbol of Saturn, who was man Queſtions, ſays, that the ancient coins had
on one ſide the image of Janus with his two faces;


on the other, the hinder part of the ſhip. Ib. ut
Janus was alſo Noah and Plutarch in his Ro- ſupra, Stillingfl,


D CHAP.


Noah. Bochartus, Stillingfl. Orig, Sacr. 592.


10


HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


CHAP. III.
Firſt Inhabitants from Gaul, and Gaul only.


S we received our firſt inhabitants much about the ſame time

with Gaul, becauſe from thence our ſhores are to be diſco-
ver'd, ſo it is alſo moſt likely, that we had our firſt inhabitants from
Gaul, and for the ſame reaſon n: for as ſoon as the cliffs of Kent
were obſerv'd from the oppoſite ſhores, the ſame reſtleſſneſs (for it


can't be call'd n-ceſſity) which may be ſaid rather to have ſcatter'd
inhabitants over the face of the earth, than to have planted it re-


gularly, and repleniſh'd it, brought them over into Britain. Theſe
were likely the firſt inhabitants which this iſland receiv'd after the
flood ; for ſhould we allow with Tacitus, that the northern inhabi-
tants came from Germany, the eaſtern only from Gaul, and thoſe
of the ſouth from Spain (an opinion not eaſily maintain'd), yet the
Gauls muſt have come in firſt ; it being more probable that thoſe
parts which lye within fight of the continent ſhould firſt prompt
the adventurous to croſs the ſtraits, than that the other parts ſhould
be planted firſt by perſons, who had nothing before their eyes to
make them attempt ſo dangerous a paſlage.

Thus much then is moſt agreeable to truth, that our firſt inha-
bitants came from Gaul * ;
the ſhores, and Britain plainly thence to be diſcerned by the
naked eye, and what Tacitus P gives, as reaſons that the inha-
bitants ſhould come from three different places, becauſe of the re-
{cmblance the inhabitants of the north bore to the Germans, thoſe
of the eaſt to Gaul, and of South Wales to Spain, will prove no
more, than that theſe parts of our iſland, being oppos'd to the dif-
ferent countries of Germany, Gaul, and Spain (tho indeed the
Silures can ſcarce be ſaid to be oppoſed to Spain but in one certain
ſenſe, which will be taken notice of preſently), had by their mu-
tual correſpondence, trade, alliances, or conqueſts, contracted a
reſemblance of manners, or, as he himſelf ſuppoſes 4, from a
like climate, had a likeneſs of complexion, ſtature, and conſti-
tution. Others have thought, that the Phenicians, others that
the Grecians planted ſome part of the ſea coaſts, leaving colonies
bchind them, but the great 'uniformity (even in the moſt important


n Britannos Gallice eſſe originis conjectat
Jornandes. Hiſt. Goth, Cap. ix. ſays Bochart,
page 165.

o Bochart, page 1187. Camd. Pr. p. xv.


? Vita Agricol. Cap. iv.


cæli corporis habitum dedit.


articles)


it being but a ſhort paſſage betwixt


q Seu procurrentibus in diverſa terris poſitio


E
EY
>»

*


.


75 8 * * — 2 * * - *
r %* 4 1 4, 7 FL” FBS. *
"= 4 a . 48 A off 4
Gag „ LSD — N * *
4 E , Lp 2


0 UAV IS[ TLDS 1521 ebe, TTVANMOD


2 : * i VS %
— — — — 244 . .


-
1 7 * N r * — "A 4
— 7 by *£ wal 9 0 4 ; 2 3 "Sar FL . r 7 4 2 = 2H 4; 5 8 * 2
EF R K ͤ OR be By 1 n $$ ESE: Wee: * N 2 * n
J ooo oo. LL Do CS DAY 3 ” BE nat hos 2
8 7 IK” - : — "2 7 5
Ee 0 I oa * . N 5
4 I 2 ** 2; * 2 3 4 * * 1 * — PY
| ee
— — 2 3 . - 2


Dara ber


wo”
"2,


SS.
—
hs
-
Dan
—
Da
—
hs
—


A197 PAT


gt tt £4 oh gf gf hf


Sf Sf BE Sf SE EEE ES ES 2.3


09 8 gf i 1 of gt


Z


3
TT Td


.


GC˙II! ; ©


-
n- i CTOEn rd 7
2 —. <7. LOO at 5 i — — tae *
3 p of 2H. P "TY es _ ——_ * —— 1 —
2 ak et LY 2 il n e. „ . 3 IT Ss * 77. 2 K .
„„ . . ĩ 2 8 * DTS


* —— IF .v — HEAD
* — Ft CE BIA C4 —
= hw FP —
Tg? "We 8 - — 7 = 2x R 7 4 y
# F * * F k Lig” P , ny a, 2 v7 » "0 2 * .F AST WE 97% eg
* "= . 28 * . [OE > 0 * 5 * 4 er 1 1 *
. £ ern 1 *


r ͤ A RX SF 7 —
44K —— Lean ord ' | 25
— "Re >= 4 643M + a4 * ”


KELATING TO BRITAIN.


articles) to be obſervd among the ancient Britans, proves them of
one original; therefore that the inland inhabitants were AvjoyJoves,
and Aborigines, and the maritime parts peopled from different
countries, is a groundleſs ſuppoſition; for indeed there are no
footſteps of any more than one language, one pricſthood, one ſort
of monuments every where among them; and wherever the ancient
Britans were neceſſitated to retire, as into the north of Scotland,
Wales, Cornwall, Cumberland, and Bretagne in Normandy, there the
remains of one and the ſame language common to all are ſtill to be
found; there the ſame monuments, civil, military, and religious,
remain; and therefore the ſame cuſtoms, and religion, are to be
inferr'd, and all contribute to ſhew that they had one original.

As we came from Gaul, ſo we had the fame language which the
ancient Gauls us'dr. Thus the leaders of the Gauls who ſack'd
Rome, had names which were of Britiſh derivation ; and this made
Mr. H. Lluyd imagine them to be Britiſh kings, whereas at that
time, Gaul and Britain, and partly Germany too (for they were the
Galli Senones, a people of North Germany, as Tacitus affures us,
who ſack'd Rome t) had the ſame language, as ſprung from one
common ſtock, and this language continued equally the tongue of
both nations till Ceſar's time. Tacitus u, ſpeaking of our re-
ſemblance to the Germans and Spaniards produces (as 1s carefully to
be obſerv'd) only ſome conſtitutional likeneſſes, as that the nor-
thern Britans have large limbs, long yellow hair, like the Germans;
the ſouthern people of Wales (viz. the Silures) were ſwarthy, with
curl'd hair like the Spaniards ; and even theſe were but imaginary
reſemblances, and on which Tacitus lays very little ſtreſs : but
when he treats of the coming in of the Gauls, there he infiſts on
the probability of the fact, intimating, that there was not much
to be ſaid for the other opinions v; in which it is to be obſerved,
that we have no German or Spaniſh language ſo much as intimated
to have remain'd in thoſe parts of Britain, which, if the people
had been intruders from Germany and Spain into Britain, they muſt,
in ſome meaſure, have preſerv'd, all nations being willing to retain
their native language ; but when he comes to the parts oppoſite to
Gaul, there he mentions an agreement in language, cuſtoms, and
every thing elſe almoſt, betwixt the two nations. And when the
Saxons had driven the ancient Britans into Wales and Cornwall,
they were call'd Galli; Wales, Gallia; Cornwall, Cornugallia ;
all expreſſing the ancient Britans to have been one and the ſame
people, as to origin, with the Gauls upon the continent. Some


v Vit. Agric. ut ſupra.
es In univerſum tamen mzſtimanti Gallos


« viciaum ſolum occupaſſe credibile eſt,”


Boch. Vol. I. page 1200.
s Humph. Lluyd, Brey.

* See Elias Sched, page 7.
May


11


2 HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


may think that it derogates from the dignity of our country to allow
of a Gauliſh original, but, be the conſequences what they will,
whenever we are in ſearch after TRUrH, although we diſcover her in
ruins and rubbiſh, we muſt acknowledge, and revere her.
The Gauls Tf it ſhould ſeem ſurprizing, that in Ceſar's time the Gauls knew
in Gels fo little of Britain, that he could get from them no preciſe informa
little of Bri- tions, what ſort of men, places, ports, or harbours, this ifland con-
TO tain'd; it may be anſwer'd, that the Gauls (as Ceſar himſelf aſſures
us) were perpetually engag'd either in publick national wars, or in
inteſtine and private quarrels; that people of ſuch a caſt have neither
leiſure, nor curioſity to inſpect their neighbours affairs, eſpecially thoſe
which have no intimate connexion with their own; that they know
little of countries but thoſe thro' which their incurſions are gene-
rally made; that the Britans being happily divided from ſuch people
by the ſea, their aid was not uſually ſought ; never perhaps, unleſs
againſt ſo formidable an enemy as the Romans, at which time, the
Britans afforded the Gauls all the aſſiſtance they could, as, doubt-
leſs, foreſceing that if the Gauls were once conquer'd, they them-
felves could not long be free: it may be anſwer'd alſo, that ſuch
inhabitants as paſs'd from Gaul to Britain, at the firſt plantation,
came many centuries before, and had worn out that relation of blood
and friendſhip, which, in the beginning, mult have ſubſiſted betwixt
perſons of the ſame nation,

That the Gauls uſed to trade hither, Ceſar informs us x, and con-
ven'd all the merchants, hoping for ſome ſatisfaction in his enquiries
about Britain, but in vain; they knew, or at leaſt pretended to
know, nothing more than the maritime coaſt oppoſite to Gaul, their
buſineſs being to exchange merchandizes, and return, not to make
any curious remarks on the extent of the iſland, the diverſity of in-
habitants, their diſcipline of war, and the commodiouſneſs of their
harbours. It none, therefore, but theſe traders were accuſtomed
to come into Britain, tis no wonder that in proceſs of time the Gauls
became ſo much eſtranged to this iſland, altho' firſt peopled by them:
Britain affording room enough to its inhabitants to ſpread and em-
ploy themſelves, and producing every thing neceſſary for their uſe,
was a little world to itſelf; and the Gauls having more intercourſe
with thoſe neighbours who were leſs divided from them, neglected a
correſpondence, which could not be carried on without the danger
of the ſea, I he Britans, fituated as they were, could not be often their
enemies, and their aid, and aſſiſtance in time of need, muſt have
been precarious, therefore they were not much to be depended upon
as friends: fo that with regard to the Gauls, the fituation of the
Britans did not permit them often either to be friends or enemies;


z Lib, IV, de Bell. Gall.


4 4 and


RELATING TO BRITAIN. _


and it is therefore the leſs to be wondered at, that two nations, ſo
divided, ſhould become fo little known to each other as they were
in Ceſar's time.

However, it may be reaſonably ſuſpected, that the Gauls were ain
not very ready to give Celar all the informations in their power; for * 2
ſome intercourſe was always maintain'd, and Britain aſſiſted the ee
Gauls againſt the Romans, which was Cefar's chief pretence {or in- 8
vading the iſland, tho ambition was his true and real motive. Ihe
Gauls had their prieſthood of the Druids from Britain, as Ceſar tells
us; and whenever any difficulty aroſe relating to the Druid ſect or di-
ſcipline, they ſent tome perſons into Britain to be more exactly in-
form'd of the truth. This maintain'd a fort of religious corre-
ſpondence betwixt the two nations, which, together with their
trade, conſeſſedly carried on by the Gauls, will ſhew, that betwixt
Gaul and Britain there was a more open communication, than
betwixt Britain and any other nation.

To bring theſe firit inhabitants out of Gaul into Britain with
greater eaſe, ſome will have this iſland join d to the continent by an
iſthmus or neck of land which reach'd from Dover to Calais; but as
this has no foundation in hiſtory, nor any neceſſity to juſtiſy it, or
reconcile us to the ſuppoſition that ever any ſuch union ſubſiſted
fince the deluge, I ſhall not take up the reader's time with refuting,
what the learned Verſtegan is fo fond of, and might as juſtly demand
our notice as moſt authors, if he had been as good a naturaliſt
as antiquarian. The reſemblance and uniformity in the ſtrata of
the cliffs in Britain, and the oppoſite ones of Gaul, is allow'd, but
will not prove or infer any union ſince the deluge, which it ought
to do, if it be admitted as an argument in favour of transferring
more eaſily the inhabitants of Gaul into Britain. Indeed, there is
no more occaſion to ſuppoſe Britain join'd to the continent, than
to ſuppole the Grecian iſlands neceſſarily join'd to the continents
of Ionia and European Greece, in order for them to receive their
firſt inhabitants with the greater facility.

That the weſtern parts of this iſland (viz. Devon and Cornwall)
were firſt diſcover d by the Phenicians z, and by them inhabited,
has no other foundation than that the names of places in theſe
parts may be deriv'd from Phenician words, which is too deceitfu]
a ground to build on, eſpecially conſidering they may all be
found in the Britiſh tongue, which, as ſpoke in the ſeveral extre-
mities of the iſland (where the Phenicians never traded), has great
affinity with the Hebrew ; and therefore we muſt take care how
ve attribute to the Phenician traders, names which may be found
in our own Britiſh, a language deriv'd in a great meaſure from


y Ceſar, Lib. VI, 2 Samm. page 59.


E. the


\y


14


HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


the Hebrew, to which primarily the Phenicians alſo owed their
whole language *.


CHAP. IV;
Of the Gauls.


12 being moſt probable that Britain had her firſt inhabitants from
Gaul, we will next enquire into the original of the Gauls, and
endeavour to trace them as far as we can; becauſe the more we can
diſcover of them, the more we ſhall know of ourſelves, there being
but one fountain to both theſe ſtreams.

The ſame people which the Romans call'd Gauls, were in their
own tongue call'd Celts, even in Ceſar's time b: and the name
of Celts was anciently of great extent, comprehending all thoſe
nations who were ſometimes diſtinguiſh'd by the name of Scythians,
Celto-Scythians, Getz, Galatians, Gallogrecians, Celtiberians,
Teutones, Germans, and Gauls ©: but this great portion of
mankind was ftill more anciently, and when more united, call'd
Cimbri; and this laſt name reaches up to the DispERSsIoN, being


deriv'd, as moſt authors agree, from Gomer, the leader of thoſe


who came from Babylon, into the weſtern parts now call'd Europe:
ſo that the Celts are deſcended from the Cimbri; and tho', ſoon
aſter, the name of Celts prevail'd, and was adopted by the greateſt
part of this people and their deſcendants, yet ſome part of theſe
weſtern nations retain'd the name of Cimbri, and were a moſt
powerful nation as late down as the time of C. Marius ; and traces
of this firſt name are ſtill found in the appellations of ſome
countries and people; and thoſe who choſe the name of Celts
were ſometimes called Cimbrians, and the Cimbrians Celts, as being
but one people originally, diſftinguiſh'd afterwards by two names.
This is ſufficiently prov'd d, for in the Cimbrian war (as it is
call'd by moſt hiſtorians) Cicero ſays, that Marius vanquiſh'd the
Gauls, inftead of calling them Cimbrians. The ruffian hir d to
kill Marius, Lucan calls a Cimbrian ; Livy and Plutarch call
him a Gaul. Thoſe who plunder'd Delphi, under Brennus, are
generally call'd Gauls, but Appian in his Illyricks calls them Cimbri.
Now the Gauls and the Celts are two words from the ſame theme.
Let this ſuffice as to the name. As to the countries, they were
{pread ſrom the ſea ſhores of Britain, and Gaul, as far eaſt as the


See Mon. Illuſt. Bochart, Vol. I. p. 329. Oroſius, Lib. V. Salluſt. Jugurth,. Eli Sched.
b Cef. de Bell. Gall. Lib. I.


pag: 8 and 10. Shering. 54. ;

© Plin. Lib. IV. Cap. XII. Eli Sched. (ex See Camd, Brit, page 7. and Speed's
Diod, Sic. Lib. V.) page 6. Luc, Flor, Lib, I, Chr. page 12.
Palus


RELATING TO BRITAIN.


Palus Meotis, at the extremity of the Euxine ſea; where, from
one branch of them, the Cimmerian Boſphorus takes its name:
under the name of Cimmerii, they inhabited the northern coaſts,
even to the ſea which lyes off Archangel in Ruſſia : Celtiberia,
a great part of Spain, was ſo call'd from a branch of the Celts,
which ſettled on the river Iberus : Gallia Narbonenſis was another
ſouthern ſettlement of the ſame people e: there were alſo the
Celtz Ciſalpini, and Tranſalpini; fo that if we except the
ſouthern parts of Italy, Greece, and the iſles of the Ægean ſea (which
had perhaps their inhabitants from the Syrian continent), all Europe
may juſtly be ſaid to have been peopled by the ancient Cimbri,
or (as they were ſoon after call'd) Celtz. — The Gauls, then, were
the ſame as the Celts, and the Celts the ſame people originally as
the Cimbri. 3 |

The beginning of this conſiderable nation is not to be deter-
min'd with any exactneſs as to time, or their common parent; but
Joſephus t, from the traditions of the Hebrews, ſays that Japhet,
ſon of Noah, had ſeven ſons, who planted themſelves partly in
Aſia, from the mountains Taurus and Amanus, to the river Tanais,
and partly in Europe as far as Cadiz, at the Straits Mouth. By
this ancient teſtimony 1t will be probable, that the firſt inhabitants
of Europe were one of theſe portions of mankind, which were
diſpers'd from Babel, and coaſting round the Euxine ſea, directed
their general courſe towards the north, as other portions did to
the other parts of the world. Having got round the extreme parts
of the Euxine ſea, which firſt oppos'd itſelf to their northern


paſſage, part ſtay d in Scythia, whilſt others ſteering weſterly (and


in every country ſome chuſing, as we may imagine, to leave the
main body, and ftay behind) great numbers continued their courſe,
till they came to the weſtern coaſts of Gaul: thus, this vaſt
country of Europe was at firſt thinly beſprinkled with people, God


Almighty dividing them into ſmall parties g, in order to erect


little kingdoms, and ſtates more proportioned to the arts and
knowledge of governours, and more convenient to promote in
duſtry and obedience in the general maſs of mankind, than when
leſs divided, or throng'd together in one vaſt unwieldy empire :
accordingly, theſe ſeveral diviſions ſoon finding themſelves much
ſcattered from their late fellow travellers, form'd ſo many little
ſocieties, and diſtinct governments, which kept no records or
publick regiſters relating to their original, being wholly taken
up with tilling lands, and feeding cattle, wildly intent upon
preſent qualifications, and regardleſs of what was paſt. Such a
ſituation admitted not the leaſt attention to letters, and the


Eli. Sched. page 16, de diis German. [ See Sheringh. page 403. s Gen, xi. 8, 9+
| liberal


13


— — —


HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


liberal arts (which neither ſhoot nor flouriſh but under the
ſhelter of peace and government); theſe things, I ſay, inevi-
tably produc'd an utter oblivion of their being 'deriv* d from one
common ſtock. At the ſame time the diforeat: climates in which
they ſettled ſoon begot different conſtitutions of body, and different
temperatures of mind; hence the difference of their cuſtoms and
manners: different manners made different prohibitions and differ-
ent penalties neceflary ; hence difterent laws. From the little in-
tercourſe maintain'd betwixt the ſeveral branches that firſt peopled
Europe, their language, at firſt one and the ſame (I mean the Cel-
tick), became differently pronounc'd, differently modell'd by their
leading and moſt ſtudious men; ſe words were forgot, and in
thoſe firſt ages (having no books, without which a language cannot
continue long the ſame) new words muſt be fram'd, as often as ne-
ceſſity oblig d, and every ſtate muſt have a particular name, to di-
ſtinguiſh it from others: hence they became fo many different na-
tions, and each nation, jealous of it's own honour, contended with
its neighbours for dominion, antiquity, and country. Frequent en-
mities effac'd all remembrance ot blood, and made them too often
induſtriouſly alter their language, nd and religion, leſt they
might ſeem too like, and therefore to have borrow'd from their
neighbours : thus the Celtæ or Cimbri (as well as the reſt of man-
kind) became ſo many diſtinct nations, their laws, manners, names,
language, and religion all difterent, though the people were ſprung
from one ſtock, and but ſo many 5 branches from the ſame
root.

By what degrees theſe changes happen d to that part of Noah's
poſterity which peopled Europe, or in what length of time they
had overſpread the country, is hard to determine; but though
they can't be ſuppoſed to have extended themſelves through ſo large
a tract of land ſuddenly, and in a few years; yet, it being Gods
manifeſt deſign (as is before obſerv'd) that each part of the earth
ſhould have it's ſhare of inhabitants without any longer delay b,
it can hardly be imagin'd, that they were more than a century, or
two at moſt, making their way from Babel to the uttermoſt coaſt
of Gaul: this ſeems the more probable, becauſe of the many
Hebrew roots found in the old Celtick (the mother tongue whence
all the languages of Germany and Gaul are derivdi): now, it
is not likely, that theſe Hebrew roots would have been retain'd in


„ As to this, Moſes is ſo expreſs that he re- © the city, Therefore is the name of it call d
peats God's ſcattering them from Babel, upon * Babel, becauſe the Lord did there confound
the face of all the earth, in two immediately ſuc- “ the language of all the earth: and from thence
ceeding verſes. Gen. xi. 8, 9. * So the Lord * did the Lord ſcatter them abroad upon the
« ſcattered them abroad from thence upon the *“ face of all the earth.“ FX
* face of all the earth: and they left off to build i Bochart, Sac, Geog. Lib, I. Cap. xliii.

4 ſuch


pd v7


”
be.
9
,
4 —
N.
A. 1
R
i 's
: 0
LE,
—
3”
I.
3 *
T Ti
bk f
Y .
*
SR.»
Ms 13
1
2
* 5 *
A — ”
5 —
| 0
* 1
WY
*
4
*
; N
. "
: Wh.
1 —
=
3
- 5
Ws - - 1s
*
KK 8
e.
b *
vl A
b $
= g%
"CS 4
7, _”
"2 7 by
* 2
* .
*
-.
. E [4
2
4 »
1 2
= + \
_—_—
-Y 8
<a *
= f
: J
=. *
14
45 5
0 *
* if
-» 2
2
* 1
—
+ ©
Wh
. 4
4
% 44 * —
_
*
1
== mu
ä s
__
=_
i=
_
—__
=—_—
WE” T9
Wo.
Lf
__ SY
"*
=_—
"ER
x
_——
E, 3
A ,
3 *
1
4
. N
2
4 * 7
<<
=
=
_ .
*
.
1 *
by
1
*
- A
4
a L *
2 *
4
” »
_
1
2 *
XY
=_— .
mJ
» .*
=
of L
.
„
4
%
ES:
*
* =
FP.
=_
,
1
* 5
wy
=o
b
 —
.
0
*
2
x
*
.
=.
$ I
*
*
Y
Y 'Y
4
,
—
1313
=
1
_


— — 1 » = oh.” . E
N L 1 8 * a. ot FSR EE ny 2 3 -SS.4 ey 4 we Tz "2+, 3 "JD i * 32 4 k 2 +. iv Wa.” > y bk LS
0 b Op ea by F n _y Op r 2 p * i I» - * ä— TOI N PS.” KP \
5 5 5 2 . r r IR ate hide © £4 Le p 1 * 2 > ems - $6
2 N a” bat 3 a. ls ade Af * 1 : , SY 8 an, 2 * 0 . m . * * 4 k \ „ _ . 1 Sq. Wu A. 2 + # as. r N 8 ws Py e ——
5 . * 2 " *.s r 8 WIr =. y __ * p N 5 * 1 1 7 1 1 W * 3 4 15 4, bun \ a K * n * A * * 2 9” 5 e * ** * ms _— 44 * © FE 5 + s * 1 3 3 7 8 - r SA \
— 2 294 3 - 8 1 \ nn BEET 1 pr < Y - \ ky OE 3 a AIDS 2 £4 f F Cats" , 5 15 ee N 7 a 2 "nyc +» F; ; $4 3 l er wy T4, wan YL A | * 4 -
: bf ; af ade ; n 3 ks 1 7 $I Fw.” Nenn err NE IS. . er 4 * 0 N N N - :
4 + ELSE / & as OW,” > BESS — IE R 2 ! | | |
_ E * _


RELAIING.TO'BRITATIN:


ſuch abundance, if they had been many centuries upon thcir
journey, languages altering, we know, in proportion to their age,
eſpecially where no books of genius appear to fix the language,
and to which recourle may be had, as to a juſt ſtandard of purity,
and elegance.

That this people (the Celts or Gauls) increas'd prodigiouſly is the
opinion of all hiſtory k, their northern climates more conducing
thereto, perhaps, than hotter countries; and to this quick inereaſe
were principally owing the ſeveral irruptions which they made
into the caſt and ſouth. But here I would beg leave to obſerve,
that 'tis not likely that this, or any other populous nation would
make invaſions upon inhabited countrics, as long as they had be-
fore their eyes any countries or iſſands unpeopled, in which they
might beſtow their ſuperfluous numbers, and make ſo much more
commodious and ſecure ſettlements; long before theſe caſtern
eruptions, therefore, they had probably ſpread their offspring into
the iſles of Britain, and Ireland, and when they had at laſt no
farther country at hand, into which they could tranſplant their
numbers, they recoil'd, as having no farther weſt to go, and be-
gan their eruptions ; ſome threw themſelves into the eaſtern
countries, and fat down at the Cimmerian Boſphorus; another
part pierc'd as far as Galatia; ſome, at one time plunder'd
Greece, and were call'd Gallo-Grecians ; ſome made a ſettlement
in Spain, and gave riſe to the people thence call'd Celtiberians :
and at another time a branch of the ſame people took and plun-
der'd Rome, and ſettled in the north of Italy. The ſame people,


in later times, and for the ſame reaſons, under the name of Hunns,


Goths, and Vandals, overwhelm'd the tottering empire of Rome,


which doubtleſs they would never have attempted at ſuch hazard,
had they any country or iſland before them, in which they could
diſtribute, with ſafety, ſome of their multitudes. We may therefore,
by parity of reaſon, conclude, that the Cimbri or Celts, as they
were afterwards call'd, peopled Britain, and afterwards Ireland,
before eyer they made any irruption, either into Aſia, or the
ſouthern parts of Europe: and this concluſion, if true, will
ſerve to ſhew us that before the Cimmerian Boſphorus had its
Cimmerii, Spain its Celtæ, and Galatia its Gauls, Britain was
inhabited. The reaſons on which this concluſion ſtands are obvious,
no people being willing to face all the dangers and hardſhips of
war to procure themſelves habitations, whilſt at the ſame time
there lyes an uninhabited, plentiful, and well fituated country near


at hand, which they may take poſſeſſion of without oppoſition.


k Poſidonius, Eli, Sched. page 10. 7
F Such


|
j
y
+
,
|
|


18


- Bochart imagines) which is not fo likely.


HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


Such is the train and ſeries of this people which we have from
hiſtory ; from the Cimbri came the Celts, from the Celts the Gauls.
The Celts are confeſſedly very ancient; and yet, as Appian Alex-
andrinus ſays l, they were deſcended from the Cimbri; which was
therefore the moſt ancient name of the firſt planters of Europe,
and deriv'd probably from the name of their chief leader Gomer,
eldeſt ſon of Japhet, to whoſe lot Europe fell, as moſt authors
agree. From the Celts came the Gauls, and from the many
reſemblances betwixt the Gauls and Britans, the Saxons and others
call'd the Britans Gauls. The Britans however have ſtill higher
eſtimation of their own antiquity, and know no other name for
their people but Cumbri m; by this appellation aſſerting their de-


ſcent from the Cimbri, and not acknowledging an original even


{o modern as a Gauliſh, or even Celtic.


CHAP. V.


What the ancient Inhabitants of Britain knew, or thought of their
own Original,


I Ceſar's days the Gauls had quite loſt ſight of their original,
all of them giving out n, that they were ſprung from Dis; that
is, from the Earth o, according to their meaning, but Ceſar ſeems
to mean Pluto, or the God of darkneſs?P. The inland inhabitants
alſo of Britain, call'd themſelves e Terra nati, although the ma-
ritime parts, with greater judgment, acknowledged themſelves
ſprung from the Gauls. Now both thoſe who aſſerted that they
were deſcended from Dis, and thoſe who called themſelves e Terra
nati, meant the ſame thing, acknowledging equally that they could
not tell how, or when they came thither : * Ayoy8oag appellat
e (viz. Ceſar, ſays Leland of the Britans) tanquam in terra ipsa
ce genitos, quod antiquioris originis eſſent quam ut generis ſui pri-
© mordia cognoſcerent 4,” *© Achelous Terre fuiſſe filius dicitur,


c ut ſolet de his dici, quorum per antiquitatem latent parentes:“


ſays Servius ad Virgil. Georg. I. ver. .


Some indeed will have Dis to be the ſame as Tuiſco, or Tuiſto :


if ſo, Tuiſco being the generally allowed father of all the German


nations”, the Druids, who inform'd the Gaulss, that they were ſprung.


Speed, page 13. ® Ibid. page 12. q Shering. page 396.

n Ce. Bell: Gall Lib. VI. : x N 98 liv'd before Abraham. See

o See Tully, de Nat. Deor. Lib. II. Pantheon, Cluver page 6. and Sheringham, ibid. ut ſupra.
page 251. Ce, Eli. Sched. Cluverii conjectura. Teuth idem eſt qui Græcis

VUnleſs Dis- pater be the ſame among the Gauls, @c; Tors, Dorice Aus: Latinis Deus ſeu Dius & Dis.
as Dies-piter (viz. Jupiter) among the Greeks (as 5+ Cef. Lib. VI.


from


. 0 .
s 4 p 4 _” Ry l 8 L » ok 7 :
. . \ * 1 * * 12 * CY 4 * 1 9 4; e 5 1 7
4 1 0 k = : p i - 4 « 1 C 3 3 : . . 12 * F 7» pals Ba, a V. n 8 $4... + I 4 2 1 q ; 2 wn" -
- 4 - . 5 . 4. - _ 1 : 0 * 1 "3 # * 3 7 0 1 18 1 N = "y P 5 IS 4 2 — . Kl 8 8 - * 7 * 1 2 +, Tz uy * = = dF
— * * - v p 0 I pp} . — 2 — , 2 ot; . * . * 4 af 0 ** x) n cn. \ & 6. © 3 5 2 — L 5 « by * — . : 4.2%, b * 8
r * — od WAIST. 1 * "ru 3 * ; y IE 5 7 « 5 1 a + 1 , > * eee *, "XL pdt A "a yi IST 1 1 3 8 , 2 l Toy E + 5 "Ai Wed FS Car 1 "6 12 3 GS; bi * 2 8 1 3 * N. 8 1 "I 2 7 3 4 > Wo at 0 * U «
7; on im I © "oe? 3 — 7 * 4 * 1 2 x DT REY 8 re S T5 vt 1 4, 5 1 FR "> WMS. { n = 57? Rh FS * of 323 Ne 2 8 1 Al £5 2 8 a " * 7 2 0 | tn AS FF. * - Gs „ a ,
—— E * h - PRIEST © 8 E 5 1 I N WE. 4 4474 293 8 2 * > 4 > 5.0. ** 4 9 8 £ : 2 oh L = : 2 on * + PE 0 p robbed Sad 2 . os * # 12 x 82 - - 1 3 2 — -
** * r — * N > ATT d mz == I = de, e 3 4 Wake . . . 0 TORE? "I 7 3 * & wy „ 4 * 22 3 + 4* 4 - 2 n jo n > —_—
N — 2 * 3 7 5 b 2 * ** Fen 3 * * 1 * a 40 O = _ vs A *. 8 * —
F - U - * a os , * * "nd ach 8 . * Ai p th : N ad 4d "4+ *£, 5-4, 056 =: 8 N , * * . þ © x . & N * N 6 W * 4 Tn +
: k . : p l rr 5 p , . 2 , b 2 E * Ws A ; —_ n LR 4 : 1 23 Cn r
a ” * 4 ? 4 1 3 192 * dr 5 1 I " AJ yo 1 _ þ #5. "I 4 1 ( ray * Mg. 44 a +7 . 8 1 hy
. or 9 * . 1 ? £ * 2 — 4 F 7 . 7 od : y =
| — 1 *» Ay N * 1 A Tbs A. Te; * £ - „ 1 » 8 — =
N *
* = 4 = - _ k


,
*s 5 5 1 1
z s : b 4 _ 8 * 7 4 7 rn NOD 0 —
5 FW 4 ” "P pu: a 5 1 14 8 . EW. > ' - J , 3 62 5 = 4 . 4 - a 1 0 . 4 \ a 7 hs g © * 9 * *..4 L 4 - : ts 8 2 2 r gh vv x - S: 1: Wh 2 * 3 F
3 * E BY 8 N : YE, < . 4 4 FY b Wy . 1 ll ; 1 5 pv - ; R . 2 | . | f ut * 3 r . of ö : F
\ WT IRE EE, r 4 \ ' : | F 0 n l 1 * 2 . 17 r Prey Cd = a 2 4 * ww r * 8 * 1 2 = ORE F F 2 5 . FI, WW” "a + 3s * 8 5 1 . «£2 - > N + — * $2” a3 > ths * * 5
1 be + 7 — 4 f 4 47" y F 44 4% "i 5 1 4 4 7 * * 7 5 , = s . a * 1 47 * ka: * 5 ww 3 I * 85 - *
5 047 - * = = * o wv " 5 D Fe _ 4 4 1 4.4 r * R _— >] { 4 "A \ 2 * * 4 AS Cs G 22 ; „ l > p A 1 Fai" yg * 3.2 "Y A: |
n «EL TOI YE DOR I, TH SR _— D C DAY | r S on i iN eros F P 1 1
4 : - 7 . = TC. , ow rs 8 8 - N * > y ”— I. : D 4 P . 7 (T9 = - "vs
l qe" & P - my 2 15 A * 5 I”. 07 N Nee 3 * 4 1 1 +. x 3 1 r r 5 C 4 Po 4 4 F * nd —_ 0 ns * \ | 2 1
4 . * N f WW S * * 7 ty þ N 0 2 es . 8 — X a
A * 9 a” $, FE ry £0 a U * * 7 * 2 « * * "4 3 of * . * 2. or
\ 4 # A — 4 N a 0 . L ba 7% P ä . - 45 \ " * — 2 ;
f - * N AO "—_ —


RELATING TO BRITAIN.


from Dis, preſerv'd it, doubtleſs, among their traditions, that the
Germans, Gauls, and Britans, were all deſcended from that nation,
which under the conduct of 'Tuiſco peopled all the weſtern parts of
Europe; and this will be (till a more expreſs teſtimony to all our
former reaſonings about the Gauls and Britans being but different
colonies of one people. Some writers, however, treat the whole
ſtory of Tuiſco as fable, and the forgery of Annius of Viterbo, and
Aventinus, who, by inventing names and facts, and applying them
to traditions, which had perhaps truth at the bottom, have (as
ſome of our Britiſh Hiſtorians are ſaid to have done) brought the
tradition itſelf into ſuſpicion and contempt: but Tacitus is a very
good evidence, that it was in his time the opinion cf the
whole German nation, that they were ſprung from Tuiſco, or
Tuiſto t. “ Celebrant Carminibus antiquis (quod unum apud illos
« memoria et annalium genus eſt) Tuiſtonem Deum, "Terra edi-
ce tum, et filium Mannum originem gentis, conditoreſque.“ If
any one can doubt whether Tuiſco, and Tuiſto, are the ſame, he
ſeems to me more ſcrupulous about a ſingle letter, than in mat-
ters of ſuch antiquity, and among nations ſo little exact in writing,
there 1s occaſion to be. Thus far, then, it may be excuſable to
lay ſome ſtreſs upon Tuiſco, namely as a general tradition amon
the Germans, that from him they had their original, and that he
was either Dis, or his ſon, being ſaid by Tacitus to be Terra
editus u. But whether Tuiſco be the ſame as Dis, or not, or Thoth,
the Egyptian Mercury (as Bochart, page 463. imagines); which
Mercury, I muſt obſerve, was a great traveller, and the God of
travellers, and reckon'd ſo perhaps, as being one of the leaders of
the migration from Babel; it comes to the ſame point, that
the Germans, Gauls, and Britans had equally loſt all notice whence
their firſt inhabitants came; the Gauls and Britans ſaying that they
were from Dis, or e Terra nati, the Germans that they were from
Tuiſco, and he, e Terra edituss What theſe weſtern nations
meant by Terra nati, was probably the ſame opinion which many
of the ancients held, that the firſt inhabitants of countries were not
deſcended from parents in the uſual manner, but coeval with the
world, and ſprung out of the ground like trees and flowers; a cor-
ruption, this, of that great truth, that the body of man was form'd
in the beginning of the world by his Creator, and the materials
taken from the earth w.

The Grecians had the ſame falſe philoſophy among them, and
their poets adorn'd it with fable, and that fruitful invention ſo na-
tural to their country. Their Titans were ſons of the earth, Jaſon


t De Mor, German. he will find it treated of at large, Pellout, Vol. II.
If any one delires to enter further into this Chap. VI.


ſubject of Dis and Tuiſto, Teut, Teutates, &c. Gen. II. 7.
4 ſow'd


19


HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS
ſow'd the teeth of the Dragon in Colchis, as Cadmus had done be-


fore in Thebes, thence fprung a race of armed men; fables all, and
built upon one and the fame tradition, with that which gave riſe
to this opinion of the Gauls and Britans, and ſhew that mankind
in different and diſtant countries did believe that their forefathers,
for whole original they could not account, were Terrigenæ, or born
of that earth, which in truth affords only nouriſhment to compoſe
the meaner and more ignoble part of us at preſent z as it did at
firſt, materials for the forming hand of God.

It mult be obſerv d alſo that Terra x was among the Germans one


of their Majores Dii, or ſuperiour deities, which they reſpected and


% * OW r


ador'd as the giver of all things; and when they enter'd the ſacred


groves to worſhip, if by chance they fell down on the ground (as
might be no unuſual thing for thoſe, who could not approach the


conſecrated ſhades, without ſome ſort of chain or ſhackle, to ſhew RR


their ſubjection to the deity of the place) it was not lawful for
them to ariſe, or to be lift up from the ground during the con-
tinuance of the holy rites: Per humum evolvuntur , eoque omnis


« {uperſtitio reſpicit, tanquam inde initium gentis, ibi regnator on-


e nium Deus, cætera ſubjecta atque parentia.” Thus the Germans
(and the Gauls very likely were infected with the ſame ſuperſtition)
look'd upon Terra as their God, and their meaning by "Terra nati
might (when they regarded the firſt cauſe) probably be, that thoſe
firſt founders of their nations were the natural offspring of the Gods;
an opinion too common, among the heathens, to need any proof,
and another corruption of that great truth, that mankind, in its
firſt origin, was the handy-work of God.

The Britans, then, had the ſame falſe opinions concerning their
origin which the Gauls had, the Gauls ſaid they were deriv'd from
Dis, the Earth, or God of the earth ; the moſt ancient inhabitants
of the midland parts of Britain thought their original was from the
Earth. The Germans thought themſelves ſprung from Tuiſco, and he
from the Earth. The Greeks call'd their firſt anceſtors, for the ſame
reaſon, AuJoylovs; the Romans theirs, Aborigines; all plain intima-
tions that they knew not whence they were. And thus much for
the meaning of what (as Cefar ſays) the Britans thought of their
firſt origin, which may be better trac'd perhaps, by conſidering in
the next chapter the ſeveral points in which they, or their anceſtors
reſemble, and agree with the eaſtern nations, than by taking their
own opinion for their original. .


* Ceſar. Tacitus de morib. German.


4
*
|
*
7
x
4
8
*
s


8
I
"FS *
N |
id
* *


RELATING TO BRITAIN:


CHAP. VI.
Of the reſemblance which the ancient Cimbri, or Celts, bore 70 the
Eaſtern ations; and how far the Monuments of Afia and the


Eaſtern parts of Europe may contribute to illuſtrate the Anti-
quities of the Weſtern Wations.


I it does ſufficiently appear that the reſemblance betwixt the Celts
and Eaſtern nations, in language, manners, monuments, and
opinions, is no forc'd, diſtant, and imaginary, but ſuch a real and
cloſe reſemblance as uſually proceeds either from deſcent, or inti-
macy, and converſe, then it will be manifeſtly within the rules of
reaſon to conclude, either that both theſe people had been, in for-
mer ages, parts of one community ; or all along maintain'd ſuch
an open. commerce with each other as is neceſſary to produce a ſtrict
uniformity in thoſe general, national points : but, as no ſuch open
commerce appears to have been between the Celts and the Eaſtern
countries, notorious enough to influence ſuch multitudes of people
to a reſemblance of language, manners, monuments, and opinions,
that reſemblance cannot be accounted for, but by concluding them
to have been once one and the fame people: and when this people
ſeparated into many nations, and became diſpers'd into many coun-
tries, each portion carried that religion, thoſe cuſtoms, opinions, and
language with them, which they had, when, being united in a
much larger maſs, they dwelt in one country.

As the ſettlement of this point will be of no little conſequence,
let us farſt take a ſhort view of mankind united in one common
ſociety, and then conſider what general reſemblances they are likely
to have retain'd, after their diſunion and ſeparation from each other.

Mankind continued together for ſome centuries after the deluge,
and compos'd only one nation, ſeated in that country which was
watered by the rivers Euphrates and Tigris, ſometimes call'd in ge-
neral Syria, but more particularly diſtinguiſh'd by the ſeveral names
of Armenia, Aſſyria, and Chaldza 2. Being the Children of one fami-
ly (that is of Noah and his ſons) notwithſtanding the early difference
which appear'd betwixt Cham and his other two brothers, their lan-
guage was the ſame a, and doubtleſs their religion, their cuſtoms and
manners could not be very different, as long as they continued toge-
ther: and together they continued, till vainly preſuming to build a
city, and a tower whoſe top was to reach up even to heaven, and
dcteat the decrees of the Almighty, God thought proper to con-


See P. Mela and De L'iſle's maps. Gen. xi. 1.
G found


Dre >


f HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


found all ſuch airy ſchemes, and by miraculouſly introducing dif-
ferent languages (or at leaſt different dialects of the former univerſal
language) made it neceflary for thoſe who ſpoke one and the ſame
tongue, to conſort together, and ſeparate from thoſe, the ſpeech of


whom they could no longer underſtand. Thus was mankind


reduc'd to a neceſſity of forming as many different parties, or
little nations, as they found languages among them ; and being
united thereby, as by ſo many links or chains, found themſelves
under an equal neceſſity of moving off into different countries, to

revent confuſion, enmity and bloodſhed. This introduction of
different languages (I would here obſerve) was of itfelf ſufficient
to anſwer the end propoſed, which was to diſtribute mankind
more equally over the face of the earth; and therefore other
changes in a ſudden miraculous manner have no room to be ſup-
pos'd, as we ſhall ſee by and by.

Again, tho', at the diſperſion, their language was altered ſo as
that one party or family could not underſtand the ſpeech of any other,
yet it is by no means neceſſary, to produce the effect deſigned,
that all the different manners of ſpeaking ſhould be radically new,
and in their grounds eſſentially different from that ſacred language
which mankind firſt received from God himſelf, and in which they
convers'd ſo often with the deity. Some learned men, I know, have
thought that they were entirely all new languages which at the
diſperſion were impos'd, and the old one deſtroy'd ; but on the
other hand, many have with great juſtice obſerv'd, that the Hebrew
language was. the mother of all languages b; and thoſe who con-
tend for the Syriac®, ſcem to contend againſt redſon, the Syriac,
Armenian, and Arabian tongues appearing to be but any
different dialects of the Hebrew; and it is evident by the nrany
Hebrew roots, which ſhew themſelves in the northern languages,
as well as thoſe of the eaſt, that however our languages may be
now innovated, mix'd, and alter'd, yet they have the Hebrew lan-
guage at the bottom, as the general ground-work. of all ©,

Further, it is now generally allow'd, that the ancient Celtic e, Getic
or Gothic language, is that which, variouſly modify'd, gives riſe to
the Dutch, Swediſh, French, and Britiſh tongues, and in the laſt
of theſe, 300 roots of the Hebrew tongue have been inſiſted upon
by ſome perſons f, and doubtleſs by the diligence of others, more may


b Nofle poſſimus linguam Hebraicam omnium junctiſſimas linguas, ſed et Gothicam linguam,
linguarum eſſe matricem. Hieron. Cap. iii. So- ac hujus rei multa extare apud Procopium, Aga-
phoniæ. See Eli. Sched. p. 174 and 175. thiam, et Jornandem documenta.“ Franciſc.

© As Theodaret, &c, Vide Selden de Diis Junius, Præfat. Grammat.
Syris, Prol. Cap. xi. Eli. Sched. page 167, &c. e Pezron. Rowl. 317.

4 © Nec modo Indicam, Perſicam, Babyloni- f Rowl, Mona. page 278.
cam, Armenicam, Syram, Arabicam, Hebrææ


;


8


44


WI wo i 8 © 2 A y
* 1 F%e Caf "wp: 2 © + + © ett So * *& wa Sh x * 1
a "x * WN + % FE. 3 * - 1 >: . 5
* 9 — 4 3 8 45 2 & Px% x 4 - . 5 1
* 0 * n 3 1 1
* <> = <4. "%
* 4 * * . ** p
- 6B * 7 ]
© . 22 "2 *D
1
- ” =
. OS _-
VP - 5
& * , 2 + . F
2 7 . hf * * - 7 2 1 #2 >= = J ad TY
8 44% we * *p 15 5 — n * 1
9 4 — C 8 ” _ "WIS.
4 2 — $540. 4 bt "ROS
- % * n * 1· 4
* 3 * 2 a 1


RELATING TO BRITAIN.


till be diſcover'd ; which great conformity in languages, nothing
could have occalion'd in fuch diſtant countries, from India even to
Britain, but their being deriv'd primarily from one nation and one
COUntTY.

At the diſperſion from Babel, mankind was ſplit into many di-
ſtinct nations, by the different languages impos'd, but it can't be
{uppos'd that every thing elſe became different in the ſame ſudden
and miraculous manner : fo thorough a change would have multi-
ply'd the miracle without reaſon; and indeed there are no grounds
trom ſacred writ to ſuppoſe it; therefore, as to their cuſtoms, the
eſtentials of their religion, and their manners, mankind continued
the ſame as b<tore the confuſion of tongues ; and wherever they were
diſpers'd, there they carry'd, and for a long while retain'd, the man-
ners and cuſtoms which were common to them all, when they
made but one nation in the plains of Shinar.

In moſt particulars, then, mankind continued the fame, or very
like, till new climates, different governours, the accidents of war,
and the cultivation or neglect of arts introduced alterations, and more
or leſs effac'd that univerſal reſemblance.

if we meet, therefore, with many cuſtoms, religious, military,
and civil, generally practis'd by the inhabitants of Syria and the
eaſtern world, and equally follow'd by the weſtern inhabitants of
Gaul, Germany, and Spain; if we find monuments of the ſame
kind in Africa and Sweden, or {till more diſtant regions, we are not
to be ſurpriz d; but to conſider that mankind travel'd from Babel
equally inſtructed in all the notions and cuſtoms common to them
there, and that 'tis no wonder it ſome of the deepeſt-rooted prin-
ciples, and the moſt prevailing cuſtoms reach'd even as far as mankind
extended themſelves ; that is, to the utmoſt extremities of the earth.

This ſeems to be the reaſon that ſome great points of religion and
practice have univerſally obtain'd throughout the whole race of man-
kind ; ſuch as the immortality of the foul ; propitiating the Deity
by ſacrifices ; conſecrating particular places to worſhip, performing
obſequies, and erecting monuments to the dead; they were uſages
and opinions common to mankind united, were with them diſpers d,
and took root wherever they ſettled.

Thus then the great reſemblance obſerv'd above, in the grounds
and roots of languages, in diſtant countries (which do not appear
by hiſtory to have had any communication or correſpondence) the


reſemblance of cuſtoms, opinions, and monuments too (as will ap-


pear hereafter by their compariſon) nay the names of their principal
Gods and Heroes being found the ſame, almoſt in all countriess, all


a With the Greeks, Jaw [and ales]; with the grammaton Nn Jehovah of the Hebrews. Eli.


Mauritanians, Juba ; with the Latins, Jovis [and


Deus]; all manifeſtly from the moſt holy Tetra- Sched. 892.
theſe


24


*


HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


theſe critcrions are ſo many evidences not only of mankind's be.
ing once united in one community, but after their diſperſion, *
of preſerving thro all their journeyings, even to their moſt diſtant ©:


ſettlements, a general reſemblance in manners, opinions, language
and religion;


Hence fome very uſeful obſervations may be drawn.


Firſt, That, in proportion to the ſtrength of this reſemblance,
and the clearneſs of thoſe evidences, mankind may be ſuppos'd to
have arriv'd ſooner, or later, to their preſent ſettlements.

For, wherever traces of thoſe Eaſtern and univerſal cuſtoms
are well preſerv'd, and the preſent remains (be they what they will)
bear a near reſemblance to what we read of the ancient inhabi-


tants of Syria, there we may ſafely judge, that the inhabitants were


nota long while upon their migration, but advanced with expedition,
and ſettled, whilſt the common cuſtoms of mankind were as yet
lively, and in full ſtrength among them — but where the veſtiges
of the old Syrian manners and language are ſcarce at all to be per-
ceiv'd, there we may imagine they came ſlowly (not till after many
ages, ſeveral ſtops, and difficulties) to their preſent countries, and
were nat ſettled till they had loſt the cuſtoms, and worn out thoſe
impreſſions, which they muſt have brought with them from the
general maſs of mankind,

2dly, That thoſe monuments are moſt ancient, which bear the
greateſt reſemblance to the monuments of the Eaſt, as being neareſt
of kin to that fimplicity, with which monuments were erected in
the firſt ages of mankind, as authentick hiſtory, and the remains
themſelves of ſuch monuments do teſtify, Another obſervation
muſt here occur, which is,

zdly, That mankind, having been once united, and living toge-


ther as one ſociety, their cuſtoms, manners, laws, language, and reli-


gion the ſame, it may not be an improper manner of explaining mo-
numents and antiquities in the Welt (in countries eſpecially where we
have little or na other hiſtory to guide us) by having recourſe to the
ſacred, and other hiſtories of the Eaſtern nations; where, if we find
the figure, materials, ſituation, or dimenſion of monuments, very
much of the ſame kind with thoſe which it is our intention to explain,
we need not doubt but they proceeded from one deſign, and that they
are (tho in the moſt diſtant countries) the remains of one and the ſame

cuſtom, anciently common to mankind in their more united ſtate.
4thly, That the reſemblance which the ancient Cimbrians, Celts,
and Gauls, preſerv d to the Eaſtern nations, is very evident, as well
from the Celtic language, being ſo much indebted to the Hebrew
(as is mention d above), as from what we are elſewhere afſur'd of wy
4 the


2
I 4 ”
9
*
R
_
_—
5 &
I
41 L
*
91
2
b *
*
.
-
4 ”
*

50 LS |
© 4
x
mw
IP

1 5
Ve»
F
11
2
*
9
0
*
45
2
ol
A
S
F%
_ o
42
*
2
Nn
3
7
6 1
1
ML
3 *
A
oy
by


pe wage
7 * w * . *
1
7 4 8 wy. a CN "67 a 4 9


*
ho £29}


| r r YC rH ans .
PF
* n a. yy To ot N 2 1
© F »»— * *


N N =
Gu Xo OO 1 x 2
Derr 2 Wt
G ; LL al f „„ 4
* * * 9 2 3 * %
7 3 - * 4
* 6
* A - -
8 I 18 . "Fe 2 N > Pha 4 \ - *
a” 1 ' 5 we *. 9 5 12 2
* þ „ Io \s "+ 1 8
oo tr > WC i 5 1
R > v4 N 1 f *
. — 1 en 2 9 E


*


pol
ma


RELATING TO BRITAIN.


the curious. © Narrat Lazius (ſays Sheringham, page 112.) Cimme-
eis et Phrygibus unam eandemque fuiſſe linguam; which ſame-


neſs of language, in people divided by ſo many different nations
and countries from each other, could proceed from no cauſe ſo


obvious and probable, as that they had been once united. In religion,


the reſemblance of the Gauls to the Eaſtern nations is altogether


as great; for tho the Se& of the Druids had rais'd ſuch a ſuper-
ſtructure as diſtinguiſh'd their Prieſthood, Diſcipline, and Worſhip,
from all others, yet the foundation was old, and before deſcrib'd.
'The immortality of the ſoul, and a future world, was one of the
principal doctrines of the Druids h, as we ſhall ſee at large hereafter.
As to ſacrifices, they not only endeavour'd to propitiate the deity by
them, but like the people of Canaan and Moab, dyed their altars
with human gore. Groves they choſe to worſhip in, as the Ca-
naanites did; and this the Druids (ſtricteſt perhaps of all ſes),
carry'd alſo into exceſs, performing their ſacred rites not as others
did in encloſed and cover'd temples, but only under the conſe-
crated oak, Obſequies they had in ſuch regard, that whatever was
moſt precious, and moſt eſteem'd by them, during life, ſuch as
horſe, armour, domeſtic utenſils, nay their moſt beloved ſlaves, were
forc'd to attend their dead maſter into the funcral pile i: but I only
touch theſe things now, this reſemblance between the Eaſtern and
Weſtern Religions, will ſtill ſhew itſelf more ſtrongly, when we
come to the religion of the Britans.


CHAP. VII.


Of the Story of Brute, and the Phenician Trade to this Iſland.


1* is the more difficult to diſtinguiſh intruders from the original
inhabitants, and to determine what invaders in ancient times
have paſs'd from their own, into another country, becauſe the higher
up in time our enquiries reach, the more we find mankind alike, as
being but ſo many ſeveral portions, juſt divided from the ſame maſs,
nor as yet diſtinguiſh'd from each other by the different impreſſions
which after-times introduced; their rites, manners, languages, lit-
tle diftering in the primitive ages; and nations born in different, and
diſtant countries, uniting ſoon, and becoming one people, without
making any conſiderable alterations; people ſettling then, like con-
genial liquors, without any violent ſtruggles; on the other hand,
as our enquiries deſcend thro' the more modern periods of time,


h Ceſ. de Druid, i Ibid, Lib, VT.


H nations


23


HISTORICAL OBYERVATIONS


nations mix with more difficulty, and produce more ſenſible altera-
tions on one another, by conqueſt, alliance, and commerce.

However, the hoſtile invaſion of ſome ſtrangers, and the frequent
arrival of others, on account of commerce, muſt have introduced
alterations among the original inhabitants, in proportion to the age
they liv'd in, and monuments agreeable to the cuſtoms of that
country from whence the ſtrangers came.

If Brute ſhould be allowed to have landed, and made a ſettlement
in this Iſland, as ſome learned men have thought k, yet with the ſmall
number of followers which ſuch a fugitive could perſuade to follow
his fortunes, he can ſcarce be imagin'd to have ſeiz'd by violence, or
retain'd by conqueſt, any conſiderable part of ſo large an iſland; he
may with more likelyhood be ſuppos'd to have ſettled here by the
friendly entertainment, and conſent of the firſt inhabitants, in the
ſame manner as the Phenician and Grecian colonies did tranſplant
themſelves into Thrace, Libya, Sicily, and Spain. The iſland being
in thoſe early days thinly peopled, a colony of men more civiliz'd, and
{kill'd in the arts of peace and war, than thoſe of the Weſtern world,

was not unlikely to take footing in the moſt convenient place they
found, and upon very good terms alſo, with the original inhabitants.
This is the firſt entrance of ſtrangers into Britain, which either
hiſtory or tradition affords us; and ſuppoſing this ſtory true (as
being thus far attended with no improbability) it muſt be granted
that the curioſity, and reciprocal wants of the ſtrangers and inha-
bitants, would beget ſuch an intercourſe as mutually to affect the
language, manners, and cuſtoms of both. It could not be won-
der'd at, therefore, if ſome Britiſh cuſtoms were like thoſe recorded
of the ancient Trojans. |
Or the Phe- That the Phenicians came here very early, is much better founded:
OY Face the Tyrians, born for commerce, and like their Venus ſprung out of
_ 175 the ſca, were indefatigable intheir expeditions: let us trace them back
as far as we can, in order to throw ſome light upon their naviga-
tions into this weſtern part of the world. The Phenician Hercules


Of the Tro-
jans.


rope.


is ſuppos'd | to have vanquiſh'd Antzus, king of the Weſtern parts


of Africa, more than 300 years before the expedition of the Argo-
nauts, which we know was a whole generation before the Trojan
war, by which Bochart ſuſpects that the Phenicians muſt have been
very converſant in the weſt of Africa before Joſhua's time: and
that they came as far weſt as Tingis (now Tangier) at the Straits
leading into the Mediterranean ſea, about the time of Joſhua,
appears likely at leaſt m, if there were really two pillars with this


Edward the Firſt's letter to the Pope, Le- | Bochart, Vol. I. p. 326.
land, Sir John Price, Sheringham, &c. m See Bochart, p. 325. Geogr. p. 166.


4 Phenician


REIL.ATINO TO BRTITIAIN.


Phenician Inſcription, © We are thoſe who fled from the ſace of |

« Jothua, the fon of Nave. EKEuſebius, it mult be own'd, writes

to the ſame purpoſe n; that ſome Canaanites fled from the children

of Iſrael, and inhabited Tripoli in Africa. However that be, moſt

likely it is, by the temple erected at Tarteſſus, on the European

{ide of thoſe Straits, to the Tyrian Hercules, and by the genera!

tradition in all countries of his pillars being ſet up near the fame |

place, that the Phenicians came ſo far Welt, in the moſt curly |

ages of the world. Of this alſo the names of places thereabouts, all

of Phenician derivation, may be farther proofs, to ſuch as delight

in arguments of that kind. Having penetrated thus far to early, |

we are well aſſured by the many colonies they planted ſoon alter

each other, at New and Old Carthage (which was built fifty years

before the taking of 'Troy, as Appian ſays) at Tangier, at Malacha, ,

Gades, and other places o, that it was not the cuſtom of this nation

to ſtand ſtill; they were always for making new ſettlements, new

= plantations P, but the certain date of their diſcovering the Britiſh

Iſles is not to be found : however, having brought them to the

weſternmoſt parts of the Mediterranean fea, let us now proceed to

d trace the Phenicians into the Atlantic. |

-A Strabo ſays q, that the Phenicians ventur'd outſide the Straits when they
Mouth ſoon after the Trojan war; but when they firit began to wy Pe hüte

trade here in the Britiſh iſlands is uncertain, ſome think not till firſt diſco-

the year before Chriſt 450", but very likely ſooner. N
About 600 years before Chriſt, Pharaoh Nechao, king of

Egypt (the ſame who ſlew Johah king of Judah) order'd ſome

Phenicians to ſet out from the Red Sea, to go round Africa, to paſs

by the Straits of Hercules, to penetrate into the Northern Scas, and

to bring him an exact account of their voyage: about this time

therefore, if not before, tis not unlikely that the Phenicians find-

ing, by this voyage of their countrymen, the Weſtern or great At-

lantick Ocean not fo turbulent and unnavigable as their forcfathers

had taught them to believe, were either then, or ſoon after, tempted

to undertake a northern voyage, and coaſting along the banks of

Spain, and France, might firſt diſcover the Britiſh Iſles, and, upon

diſcovery begin to trade, which was the principal end of all their

voyages, There is another remarkable voyage of the Phenicians

mentioned in ancient hiſtory, but continued down to us with great

uncertainties of circumſtance, and time : Himilco was ſent forth

from Carthage to make a voyage to the North, at the ſame time


" Grzc. Chron. p. 11.


=
1 »
+
* =
p *
N *
9
|
A
1
.
aq
-=£
*
Fu
. 2
bel 4 3
*
*
yg *
* 1
, 1
0 -
4 * *
3
, A "* 5
"ov 7
"= 3
f +
4 þ
4 1
wr
1 - e
1
*
1
1 on
. *
E o 4
„
» *F;
fo *
N 0
l F
"© 4
„ .
1 Y
þ *
WI 1
1 0
a. N
My”,
* =
4 4; 5
* 2
ce >
3 4
2 .
1
N
. 4
« «> be * .
7 £ *
[os 4
7 *
"> |
18
*
be.”
; "Ja
7 .
1 ? .
/ | 5
L %


ah


4 * OY . h 25% Roe * FER.
8 - 4 >. Ty Y "ES © —
E oF 21 g
*
Of 5


— : r
* hoy . 2 r

n ; |
4 . $$ ** «


e
ie 8 88

I" 5G 4 L , * 2
£ 8 — . 2 — . * +58


e

3
1 1 1 wi

4 4 OO * 4 +


omnes partes terrarum orbis vela facerent, et co-
„ Bochart, p. 326. * | lonias deducerent. Ibid, præfat. 327.

.Þ toc pene unicum gentis ſtudium ab ipſa ſta- 4 Bochart, p. 638,

tm origine innatum fucrat ut quoquo verſum in r Carte, p. 46.


that


28 HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


that Hanno, a Carthaginian General, was diſpatch'd, the contrary
way, to explore the Southern coaſts ; but at what time theſe two
lcaders liv'd, whether a little before the ſecond Punic war (as in-
deed the names ſeem to intimate) or much more anciently in the
time of Darius Nothus, is very undetermin'd, as Camden thinks,
as alſo whether the Periplus of the latter, written in Punick, ſhall
be of any authority, tho' by Feſtus Avienus affirm'd to have been
perus'd by him. However, it the Phenicians had been near the
Straits Mouth, above 800 years before the reign of Pharaoh Nechao
(viz. in the time of Joſhua )), it is not likely that ſuch enterprizing
failors ſhould make that their Ne plus ultra, for ſo many ages :
they had a colony at Gades, without theſe Straits, in their delicious
Bztica lying on the Atlantick Ocean, as anciently almoſt, if not
altogether, as the before-mentioned age of the Tyrian Hercules's
arrival at Tingis; therefore they may be fairly ſuppos'd to have
diſcover'd Britain, more than 600 years before Chriſt: and, if we
place their diſcovery no higher up than this, the Phenicians muſt
be allowed to have traded with us ſolely, and without the leaſt
participation of other nations, for more than 300 years, as will
appear when we come to conſider the time when the Grecians ſuc-
ceeded them in this traffick.
What parts If the Phenicians, in their northern voyages, coaſted along the
22 ſhores of Spain and Gaul (as was doubtleſs the moſt ancient way of
verd by the navigating), then the ſhores of Britain oppoſite to Gaul muſt have
and traded been firſt known to them; but at whatever part of our iſland the
3 'or firſt arriv'd, the Weſtern parts had certainly the greateſt ſhare of their
commerce, if not the whole. The Phenician buſineſs into theſe
parts was not conqueſt and glory, but trade; and from Gades they
traded to Britain, bringing Salt, Crockery, and Brazen ware 5;
what they came for was Tin, Lead, and Skins, but eſpecially the
former, which was ſoon found to be ſo uſeful a Metal, that it grew
famous over all the then known world, and encouraged the Phe-
nicians to continue, and engroſs the trade to this Iſland.
Tho lead was a metal found anciently in ſome parts of Gaul and
Spain, yet it was with great difficulty come at. © Laborioſius in
<« Hiſpania erutum totaſque per Gallas (ſays Pliny, Lib. XXXV.
Cap. xvii.) ſed in Britannia ſummo terrz corio, adeò large, ut lex
c ultro dicatur, ne plus certo modo fiat.” The parts of Britain an-
ciently famous for Lead were the country of the Coritani, men of
Lincolnſhire, Derbyſhire, and that neighbourhood ; the Ordovices,
North-Welſh; and the Brigantes, or Northumbrians t.


* Strabo, Lib. III. © Bochart, p. 649. * Pag. preced.


But


, \
3 A
1
"= a.

>

* o
"4 *

+l 4
+, 4

2 +

tg
why *

a. "

.
"= 0

=4 n
aft —
+ ax
ty y *
K
1

_— ;
A 2

3 -
* * 1
—_——
2 * S
1
= |

Bu -
”

8
570

__ *
* .
1
>

* 4
re 2
7 a
*.”
= 5
* 4
2x 7
<2 *
„ —

« we
we .

8.

1
E
1 .

RB l o
. I
+ ö
*
wh 4
Y
+; ==
28
3h
 . .
of — -
_
—_—

- =

-
"=

=

<

—_

. .
. ”
* *
%Y -
== :
CK ,

4 4
24 *
"4 ';
:
* *
_

.% «£
wy £
*

— 4 a

** "a

9 *

7 1

=
= 4
_

1 8
=
2 q

ot
A *
1 *

Bm Ro
bh,
„ 4

c * D
„ 7 1

1
* * 2 C'S

**

- „

1 1

Mo

2 Y
_—
„
4 !

Þ
2 *
=

=
1


Ms


=»
WCW
. 3 * 8 r 7


45438. 3 Er, Rs : OO WO OT, Yr ? S ami
- ' OTST) thay, 81 8 . 2 * 2 a IS * 7 1 > . 1 5 8 3 82 . 1 "WIE
Ga Prat” 2 e * 5; TOLEDO. * 2 > 3 1 N 8 ,
8 70 9 * of © ">. gh \ r &v 1
*


RELATING TO BRITTAIN.


But the principal inducement for the Phenicians to frequent our
coaſts was Tin, a Metal far tranſcending both the beauty and
the uſe of Lead: this Metal was anciently alſo found in Luſitaniau,
and Gallecia, but in too ſmall quantities to ſatisfy the expectations
of ſo many cities, and countries, as were defirous to have it. The
Phenicians therefore, having diſcover d abundance of Tin in ſome
{mall Britiſh iſlands, among which they probably reckon'd the Weſt
of Cornwall, as we ſhall fee in the ſequel of this work, carry'd
on ſo conſiderable a trade here, that from theſe little iſlands only,
they were enabled to ſupply the greateſt part of the world with this
uſeful Metal: all the cities and nations of the Mediterranean had their
Tin chiefly from the Phenicians, and they from the iſlands of Britain


I ſay chiefly, for tho Spain yielded ſome little ſhare of this commodi- +


ty, yet it muſt have been a very ſmall quantity, or the Phenicians from
Gades would doubtleſs have ſupply'd themſelves at home, and never
have croſs d the Atlantick Ocean at ſuch hazard and expence, in the
infancy of navigation. This Metal was not only ſent up the Medi-
terranean, but exported even as far as India itſelf, for India has
naturally none of it, but purchas'd it by her Diamonds, and precious
ſtones". Such an extenſive trade required proportionable ſupplies; and
as we read of no Tin-mines worth notice, Eaſt of the Dunmonii x,
all the Phenician trade for this Metal muſt have been confined to
that country now call'd by the two names of Devonſhire and Corn-
wall, and the ſmall iſlands adjacent to Cornwall, now Scilly (or Sylleh)
Iſlands. Among theſe, the iſlands were moſt productive, and there-
fore moſt famous in hiſtory ; and from the Tin they yielded, call'd
Caſſiterides. They were either nam'd ſo by the Grecians?, from the
Greek word Keooiegoy (Tin), or (it being confeſs'd that both the
Chaldeans and Arabians, call Tin by a name of like ſound*) ſo nam'd
by the Phenicians themſelves, which I muſt obſerve is ſo much the
more probable, becauſe we find theſe iſlands call'd Caſſiterides long
before the Grecians either traded thither, or knew where the iſlands


lay; for Herodotus, who liv'd about 440 years before our Saviour,


ſays, that he knew nothing of the iſlands Caſſiterides, from whence
their Tin came a. Now, with great deference to Bochart's judgment,
let it be obſerv'd, that 'tis highly improbable the Greeks ſhould give
name to iſlands they knew not where to find, and conſequently had
no communication withal, but thro' means of the Phenicians. So-
linus calls them Inſulæ Silurum, or Inſula Silura, of which the pre-
lent name Scilly may ſeem to retain enough to juſtify him: but tis


Portugal. Pliny, Lib. XXXV. Cap. XVI. Ne p N Dο pp
5 e e . ym. XVII. hendi Olle none oda Kaooileplac won; te TW
Devon and Cornwall. nwat comprenending z xagorego; N pollx, In Herod.


7 Bochart, p. 650.
I much


29


30


Few Phe-
nician re-
mains.


HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


much to be ſuſpected, whether the ancient Geographers knew the
real ſituation of the Silures, and whether the Scilly Iſlands were not
miſtaken for iſlands adjacent, and belonging to the true country of
the Silures, or South Wales. However, if there be any truth in what
Tacitus relates, viz. that the Silures were oppoſite to Spain, it can
only be true of the Silures of the Scilly Iſlands ; and if ſome of
their inhabitants were like the Spaniards, it is nat near ſo ſurprizing
as that the inhabitants of South Wales ſhould be ſo. The Phent-
cian colony at Gades might probably ſend over ſome of their in-
habitants to iſlands which afforded them ſo great a profit, in order
the better to ſuperintend, and engroſs ſo profitable a commerce:
their deſcendants might retain, even to the time of Tacitus, the
ſwarthy complexion, and curl'd hair of the people they were ſprung
from ; here we find a reſemblance which has hiſtory to ſupport it,


and no ſoleciſm in Geography to weaken or reject it.


From theſe iſlands the Phenicians had their treaſures of Tinb,


and were exceeding jealous of their trade, and therefore ſo private,
and induſtrious to conceal it from others, that a Phenician veſſel
thinking itſelf purſued by a Roman ©, choſe to run upon a ſhoal,
and ſuffer ſhipwreck, rather than diſcover the leaſt track, or path,
by which another nation might come in for their ſhare of fo bene-
ficial a commerce.

In the next place, I would here obſerve, that we are not only
to reckon the Scilly Iſlands, but the adjacent Weſtern parts of
Cornwall among the Caſſiterides; for the ancient workings for Tin,
in the Scilly Iſlands, are neither deep, nor many, nor large d; and
therefore it cannot be conceiv'd that the Tin for ſo many ages,
could have been raiſed there, in quantity ſufficient to ſupply the
demand: it may be conjectur d thereſore, and the conjecture ſup-


ported by many arguments, that the Continent © being in view from


theſe iſlands, and appearing to them not very extended, but narrow,
and like an iſland (as indeed the juttings out of Cornwall, thither-
ward, plainly do, to every eye), the active Phenicians ſoon reſorted
thither, and finding the fea on either hand of them, and taking it
for granted that this land was every where encompaſs'd by the
the ſea, counted it no more than one of the cluſter of iſlands, and
rang'd it among the Caſſiterides, finding it rich in the fame trea-
ſures; and therefore deſerving the ſame name. Ortelius, therc-
fore, not without reaſon, makes the Caſliterides, to include not only
the Scilly Ifles, but alſo Devonſhire and Cornwall.

The Phenicians having made theſe iſlands their principal ſcat of
traffick, for ſo many ages, if any veſtiges of the Phenician religion,


b Strabo, Lib. III. de Caſſiter. Scilly Iſlands, p. 73, &c.
< Strabo, ibid.


© d0 the people ot Scilly call the Weſtern part


4 Sce the ancient and preſent ſtate of the of England.


1 cuſtoms,


n 13 = *


RELATING TO BRITAIN. 31.


; cuſtoms, buildings, or language be any where to be diſcover'd in the
ZE Britiſh Iſlands, they muſt needs, one would think, be found in thoſe
ies, or in the adjoining continent neareſt to them, where doubtleſs
the ſame trade allo reach'd ; but there is one reaſon which will hin-
der us from expecting to find any great matters of this kind at Scilly,
tho ſome things of this ſort there are; and that is, that ſmall
iſlands are liable to many alterations, which a greater ſcope of ground
is exempted from. In thort, improvements of tillage, and planting,
and fortifying, and incroachments of the ſea, and ſand, muſt have
chang'd the face of things extremely in ſuch narrow ſpots, ſince the
Phenician times; but theſe iſles, as well as the adjoining continent,
have preſerv'd ſome monuments which may not improbably be at-
tributed to the Phenicians, as will be ſeen in the ſequel of this
work. A continual commerce, for ſome hundreds of years, mult
have occaſioned ſome of the Phenician nation to ſettle here, and
this ſettlemennt muſt have produc'd ſome mixture of the two lan-
geuages, as thoſe that ſettled muſt alſo probably have erected ſome
of their own national Deities, the human mind being not able to
7 reſt in any climate, without ſome religion: accordingly, many words
in the preſent Britiſh, are evidently of Tyrian derivation, and many
rude Obeliſks, are ſtill, notwithſtanding the pillaging of modern build-


WE ers, to be ſeen in Cornwall, and ſome in the iſlands, which in all


— ja * 8 Wo 7 «AER IS by — 2 2 r F LE By
Dow T Rt £55 BEET x 98 we A
bet, \ 3 * >. ior, F * 2 & * 8 =


probability were the Symbols of the Phenician Deities, as will appear
when we come to treat of Erected ſtones, and ſuch as they uſually
XX worſhipd; it being the notorious infatuation of the Canaanitiſh
nations, to pay divine honours to ſuch rude ftones. Again, if ſome
4 = places, where the Phenicians were moſt converſant, retain names of
2 Phenician original, we are to attribute this either to the Hebrew,
2X that general ſource of all languages, or to the commerce of the
+,


Phenicians with the firſt and native inhabitants, and are by no
means (with ſome authors) to ſuppoſe the Phenicians the firſt
planters of our iſle; their buſineſs being to improve upon the
natural products already known by the natives, import trifles, as
we know they did into Britain, and carry back the moſt precarious
commodities to their own markets, not to plant deſolate iſlands with
ſuch uſeful merchants and ſailors as their citizens conſiſted of.

© | Laſtly, as the records of Phenician hiftory are very few, and ſcarce
any thing more than a few fragments preſerv'd in the Greek and Ro-


0 : O . . bt 7
man writers f, and as the ages in which they flouriſh'd here, are


very remote, it is not to be expected that a great many monuments
of their erecting ſhould be now extant. If they built any cities,
dhe common cuſtom of Tyrians, as the ſhores of Spain and Africa
= tlluly, or ſettled Colonies, or erected Temples, as is not unlikely, yet


f Bochart, p. 327.


the


32


HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS
the deſolations of age and war as well as ſea (near which they al.


to ruin than the things themſelves, may chance to have eſcap'd :
Tantum evi longinqua valet mutare vetuſtas.


But ſome few monuments, as I ſaid before, there are, which from
their great ſimplicity may be well judged, as ancient as the Pheni. RR
cian times, and from the Phenicians being us'd to have ſuch in their


own country (as will appear from ancient authors) may be very


rationally ſuppos'd of Phenician original.


C HAP. VIII.
Of the Grecians.


HE Phenicians were not more happy in their voyages, than
they were induſtrious to conceal the ſucceſs of them from the
reſt of the world; hence it was that the Greeks appear to be ſo much
in the dark as to Navigation, and Geography, for many years
after the Phenician trade was at its height: that Herodotus treats as
a fable what the Phenicians ſaid, that in encompaſſing the South of
Africa, they had the ſun on their right hand; which was however


ways built), may well be ſuppos'd to have obliterated every thing : SN
of this kind, unleſs the names of thoſe things, ſometimes leſs ſubje& RF


moſt certainly true: that Strabo denies it abſolutely, and Polybius


doubts whether or no the South of Africa be encompaſſed with Sea. 3 Z


Nor were they better acquainted with the Northern Ocean; for He-


rodotus acknowledges, that the Greeks knew nothing of the extreme I 4
parts of Europe, nor of the places whence the Amber and Tin was
brought; that is, the Northern coaſts of Germany on the Baltic,


and the Britiſh Ifles : and Ariſtotle, who livd when Greece made | .


the greateſt figure in every other part of Literature, and was him-
ſelf a moſt diligent enquirer into every thing curious and uſeful,


knew ſo little of what ſea or country might be beyond the Pillars of 4 2


Hercules, that he thought the places in that neighbourhood were


contiguous to the Eaſtern parts of India s; ſo ignorant was he f


to be prov'd, though at what time 1t began is very uncertain.


About goo years after the Phenician Hercules, 600 after the 1 4
Trojan war, and 550 before Chriſt, the people of Samos ſending 4M
a colony into Egypt, they were driven by the winds down the Medi- 8
terranean, and quite through the Straits of Gibraltar, which was the


E Bochart, p. 326, and 648.


the real circuit and extent of the earth. However, the Grecian 8
trade to this iſland for ſome time before Julius Ceſar is undoubtedly


q *
a 1
* N ”

*

N +
2 *
= *
1 2

*

Fu

- 8

” \

3 *


2


doe


— _ *
r . e
FFF
e Ps Ow 44 2 4
2 E 1 * o
* . y --
« Co. - Tru .
XL. 4 * 1 4 bs of "bas #.


;
FN
* MP * & > > ” 4x


%


RELATING -O-BRITALTN.


firſt paſſage the Grecks made into the Weſtern Atlantick Ocean,
but about theſe Straits they ſtuck and ſettled for ſome ages, without
making further progreſs, as may be fairly induc'd from Herodotus
and Ariſtotle abovementioned. About the time of Alexander the
Great, Pytheas, a famous Aſtronomer of Marſeilles, undertook a Nor-
chern voyage, and fail'd ſo far North, that he ſaw the Sun diſappear,
only for a moment of time, and immediately to riſe again, which
muſt be as far as 68 degrees North Latitude, where, in the
ſummer, there is no night, when the Sun is near, or in the tropic
of Cancer, the Sun then performing his whole courſe above the
Horizon. This probably was the firſt time that the Greeks ventur'd
into the Northern ſeas ; but afterwards, incited by the ſucceſs, or
conducted by the curious obſervations, of ſo great a man as Pytheas,
the Greeks were bold enough to attempt frequent voyages of this
kind; and, being naturally ingenious, were ſoon ſkilful enough to
perform them with as much facility and exactneſs, as might be ex-
pected from the infancy of their aſtronomical ſtudies. It is very
ſtrange therefore, 1f true, that the Greeks, who made a voyage


thro the Straits as anciently as Alexander's time, ſhould not fail to


Britain before the time of Ptolemy Lathyrus, king of Egypt, who
liv'd about 117 years before our Saviour: yet, ſo ſays Bochart b, and,
if he is right i, it will ſhew how ſecret the Phenician navigators kept
this trade. Mr. Camden places the coming of the Greeks ſome-
what higher than Bochart, and thinks that they arriv'd here about
160 years before Ceſar. Sammes k thinks Mr. Camden miſtaken,
and that they came here as early as Pythagoras, who flouriſh'd about
600 years before our Saviour; but brings no authority, and indeed
this is by much too early for their timorous navigation. It may
however be here obſerv'd, that the Greeks muſt have been well
acquainted with Britain, at leaſt as anciently as Mr. Camden
mentions. Pliny ſays, that Britain was famous in Greek Monuments
long before the times of the Romans; and Polybius, who flouriſh'd
about 200 years before our Saviour, a Greek by nation, though a
conſtant companion of Scipio Africanus, promis'd to write of the
Britiſh Iſles, and vnc x οοννα xe]aozen; (the methods of preparing
Tin) and made good his promiſe, as Strabo ſays; a taſk which ſo
cautious a writer as Polybius would never have undertaken, had
there not been ſufficient materials, at that time to be procur'd, for
the ground-work of ſuch an hiſtory. :


How long ſoever the Greeks traded hither, it does not appear Few Greci-


an Remains.


that they lett many monuments behind them, if any at all, unleſs
the number of Greek words interſpers'd in the Britiſh language may


h See Diod, Sic. Lib. V. i P. 650. * P. 101.
K | be


— =
—— EARL. yo wr rt — —ê


HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


be adjudg'd to be ſuch, and to have proceeded from this com-
merce l. Let us enquire into the original of this mixture (ſuppos'd
to be the moſt evident remains of the Greeks in theſe iſlands) and
ſee whether there may not be other cauſes, as well as commerce, to
which this inſertion of Greek words into the Britiſh language may
be imputed : their trade for Tin cannot be allowed to have ex-
tended beyond the confines of Devonſhire, no Tin having been
diſcover'd, or work'd, that we know of in any other par: of our
land; at leaſt not in ſuch quantities as to draw the attention of
the Greeks; and how little an intercourſe with fo ſinall a diſtrict,
could affect the whole Britiſh language is very apparent.

Certain it is, the Greeks were not a little proud of their language,
and thought it a glory to their country to diſperſe, and introduce it
wherever they came; and indeed, the copiouſneſs, elegance, and
ſonorous cadence of their tongue, at once facilitated their endeavours,
and made other nations ſo fond of it, that the publick records, and
inſcriptions in many places were Greek, altho' their national tongue
ſerv'd their other inferior purpoſes, of converſation, and buſineſs.
The Gauls us'd the Greek letters in Ceſar's time, who found
their rolls of ſoldiers, with the number of their women and children
written in Greek characters; and for a few centuries before Chriſt,
as the conqueſts of Alexander and his captains had fpread this ex-
cellent language thro' Egypt and all the Eaſt, ſo the colonies of the
Peloponneſians (with thoſe of the other Greeks) and their Acade-
mies, to which the polite world reſorted, had made it equally ac-
ceptable in the Weſt, ſo that, for two or three centuries before our
Saviour, it was the univerſal faſhion of the world to write in Greek,
We may therefore ſafely ſay, that the Britiſh had not all their Greek


words from the trading Greeks ; the truth indeed ſeems to be, that


the uſe we made of Greek in theſe iſlands, was owing to ſeveral
diltin& cauſes ; partly to commerce, and in fome meaſure to the
Druid intercourſe with the Gauls, whoſe records were in that cha-
rater. Beſides this, the Greeks might have borrow'd ſome words
from the Gallo-Grecians, a Celtic nation, which may well account
for many like words in the Greek and Britiſh, to ſay nothing here
of the great reſemblance of many Greek words to the Phenician,
from which laſt nation we know the Grecians had their very letters.
As for other remainders of the Greeks, we find few or none; for as
Tin was what they ſought and dealt in, Cornwall and the Scilly iſles
were doubtleſs the places of traffick ; but here we find no foot-ſteps
of any Grecian Monuments, neither Inſcriptions, Coins, nor any other
remains, which can ſhew that the Greeks ever made any ſettlement


here. And, indecd, when trade is the only buſineſs, where there arc


i dee Sheringham's Lift, p. 101, &, Sammes, p. 86, $7. Rowland's Mona.


CY
6


4 1
— A y had A 4 *
n 2 «d/.4
— :
r -


1 * p <7 N 8 \ 4 b— A 1 3 - 8 5 T a” 8 "9
e 3 e n r. r ;
#3 ; + + 1 5 = 6, — * F W * \ r 172 > + 5
3 e 1 417 ai n * "2 a * * 5 FL. i WY. 2 1 " * 0 * 5 cT TO
7 „ tak Bobs . * 7 r : 5 * 9 & "v0.4 - " <a
Tz


. .
Ms 3 N
3 * þ „ My


%
I
K
« wo
4
*
0


2 8


n FR

9
£5 IF 14 N

. 88


n
"4 . PETS 5 2 8


5


RELATING TO--BRITARTN.;


no colonies planted, no encampments, no battles fought, no temples
& built, or ſettled worſhip introduc'd (all which things are quite foreign
to the education and intentions of the man of trade) it is unnatural
to expect that people, let them be Phenicians, Greeks, or Romans,
E {ſhould employ themſelves in erecting many monuments.


CHF. 1A,
Of the Romans,


HE Romans came into this iſland with intentions very dit-
ferent from thoſe of the Greeks, and Phenicians, and, under
the conduct of Julius Ceſar (ever fond of new conqueſts), invaded it


{ about the year before Chriſt 55m; and after ſome {truggles, re-
© duc'd the greateſt part of it, in the time of Claudius, into the form


of a province. But ſince it has been all along doubted, whether


the Romans extended themſelves ſo far Weſt as into that county


whoſe monuments are to be the principal ſubject of our preſent


inquiry, it cannot be foreign to our purpoſe to examine this point


of hiſtory, and to ſhew firſt, the improbability of the Romans leaving
Cornwall unſubdued; and next, the ſeveral proots which may be
produc'd to ſhew that Cornwall was indeed well known to, and poſ-


ſes'd by them. Iam ſenſible that the learned are of opinion, that


the Romans never came Weſt of the river Tamar, at »reſent the
Eaſtern limit of this county: but with great ſubmiſſion, we muſt
attribute this opinion to the diſtant ſituation of this country from the
ſeats of learning, and the frequent difficulty of procuring proper
informations concerning it. At what time the Romans firſt poſ-
ſeſled themſelves of Cornwall, muſt indeed be difficult to fix, ſince


; their being here at all, has been ſo long doubted of; but as all


hiſtorians agree, that the ſouthern part of Britain was conquer'd by


Claudius Ceſar, tis not unlikely that Cornwall, the ſouthernmoſt


part of all this iſland, may be included in this computation,
When Agricola's fleet made their tour round Britain in the reign
of Domitian, they could not paſs by unobſerved, ſome of the no-
bleſt harbours in the world, ſuch as Falmouth, Hammoze, and ſuch
ſecure ſtations, as Fowey, Helford, and ſome others of that kind;
nor would a General ſo curious, ſo diligent to improve incidents,
and turn every diſcovery to the benefit of his country, and the glory
of his government, neglect to diſpatch proper guards to ſcize upon,
and make uſe of, ſuch havens as theſe. It further appears that
Agricola's fleet ſail'd thro' the Britiſh and St. George's Chanels, at-
tending Agricola's march'. Now if the march of his troops, and


K Fifty. nine, ſays the Chron. Table Scr. poſt un Camd. XXXIX.


Ledam. Sixty ſays Bede: ſo alſo the Saxon Chron. „ Horſley's Brit. Rom. p. 432 h
* 4 . 5 „ JO


a
2


U


HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


the navigation of his fleet was well concerted, and had proper con.
nexion, then his army muſt have been on all the coaſts of Cornwall,
as we ſhall find when we come to examine the Roman conqueſt of
Cornwall more particularly P. N


Again, if we may conclude any thing from the words of Ta.
citus 4, © Fert Britannia aurum, & argentum, & alia metalla pre.


cc tium victoriæ, we muſt think that the Romans made ſure of
the moſt conſiderable mines, as well as harbours, in Agricola'
time, if not before. |

Again, Galgacus, in his celebrated ſpeech”, has theſe words,
«« Neque ſunt nobis arva, aut Metalla, aut Portus, quibus exercen-
&« dis reſervemur :” intimating that the Paſture, the Metals, and the
Ports, in other parts of the iſland, had prov'd but ſo many tempta-
tions to the avaricious Romans; but that there was no ſuch thing


in the country where they were, they had only a. General, and an
army, but that they were free as yet; whereas thoſe who were rich
and abounded in mines, were already brought into ſlavery : “ Hic


« dux & exercitus, ibi tributa & metalla, & cæteræ ſervientium


c pen.“


what place ſo celebrated for Tin as Cornwall and its little iſles, the
Caſliterides ?

In the Origines Britannicz, Dr. Stillingfleet thinks that Veſpaſian
conquer'd both the Belgæ and Danmonu (from Suetonius in Veſpal.)
which Dr. Muſgrave 5 endeavours to refute, and reckons for nothing
the teſtimony of Geoffry of Monmouth *, and Ponticus Virunnius";
but the learned Dr. Muſgrave had forgot that he had ſaid (Vol. I.
p. 211.) “Romani in omnem fere angulum hujuſce inſulæ fe in-
e finuarunt, and here lays his ſtreſs upon the want of Roman An-
tiquities diſcovered in the time of Mr. Carew, and Mr. Camden, in
whoſe time the reſearches after Antiquities were in their infancy,
and there was, I think, but one Coin of the Roman Emperours found
in all Cornwall; it is certain, therefore, that Dr. Muſgrave deter-
mines a point, without giving fair play to what might afterwards
be diſcovered.

It muſt be allow'd that no Baſs-reliefs, or Altars of Roman
ſtructure, have yet been diſcoverd in Cornwall, which may with
ſome be an argument that the Romans never came ſo far Weſt;
but this argument will prove too much; for by the ſame rule


WWW
4 2
. =


Now what Metal was this iſland (tho' not perhaps with- | 3 :
ſome ſome Gold and Silver, as at preſent, in ſome few places) famous
enough for, to engage the arms of the Romans, but Tin? And 1 |


TY 7 SY 5 "Fs PD ; 7” A 72 L * l
F; wie 5 2 „ 85 « v .
W 2 77 4. £2 $4 ng. r e of 95 3 8 * 2 #5
* 2 . 5 0 5 123 e þ 4 a Vat 7
TI) 2 „„ YA CPE OIL IN RG
4 * Br " 4 4 3 » Ao F e > * ec
- 2 > P Vs *
7 4 *


of judging, the Romans never were at Exeter“, and man)


P Book IV. u Brit. Hiſt. Lib. IV.

q Tacit. Vit. Agric. w Leland, in his Itinerary, mentions a Ro-

r ]bid, man Inſcription on a ſtone fix'd in the en $
s Vol III. p. 123. wall, behind Bedford-Houſe in Exeter, but dis

© Lib, IV. Cap. XVI. now gone.


other


IE 9 * N
r * &
* LA <6 8 14 .
* : g .
9


RELATING TO BRITAIN.


other places*, where none of the above indications are to be met
with, and yet, from Antoninus's Itinerary, and other evidences not
to be gainſay'd, wg know the Romans had their Caſtra Stativa at
Exeter: but the multitude of Roman Coins found lately in the ſeveral
parts of Cornwall, and the date of them correſponding with hiftory,
and pointing out the very occaſion which drew the Romans here at
that time, one Roman inſcription on a Patera , fome Sepulchres
alſo, with all the uſual indications, as Pavements, Urns, Caves, and
Utenſils found in them, ſome Forts, and Encampments, ſome Ways,
which carry a great probability of their being Roman, will hereafter
appear in their proper place *, and be ſuch plain evidence of the
Romans being in Cornwall as cannot be contradicted.

It is a very groundlels ſuſpicion, to imagine that the eſtabliſhing
this truth can do any diſhonour to our country ; for when the latt
ſtruggles for liberty were at an end, and the conqueſt fix'd, the Ro-
mans were generally gentle and gracious maiters ; the worſt of them
would take care that no people or nation ſhould invade their pro-
vinces with impunity, and that their ſubjects ſhould be ſuch to none
but to themſelves; and the better fort of Governours employed
themſelves to introduce arts, to familiarize their own cuſtoms to
the natives, and gradually to extirpate ignorance and barbarity ;
ſo that, in ſhort, tis not very difficult to aſcertain, whether the
Britans, by loſing their liberties to ſuch maſters, were not in reality
gainers: but, if they had loſt their liberties and laws, without any
recompence, as they afterwards did to the Saxons, Danes, and
Normans, Truth and Fact muſt be acknowledg'd, and teſtimonies
from Antiquity muſt have their proper weight allowed them.
The Romans continued here ſo long, and their government was
ſo well lik'd, that after a 464 years (from the entrance of Julius
Ceſar, 54 years before Chriſt, to the year 410) the Britans, though
formally diſcharg'd from all allegiance to the Roman Empire, were
extremely loth to part with ſuch maſters ; and the Romans, out of
compaſſion to the miſeries they ſuffered from their neighbouring
enemies, ſent them, at ſeveral times, ſome troops to aſſiſt them,


but, in about twenty years after, took their laſt leave, and return'd
no more,


* Worceſter was undoubtedly a Roman town; about three miles North Eaſt of St. Michael's
and yet there are no veſtiges of any kind re- Mount, of which ſee, Lib. IV. Cap. III.
maining of that people, except a few Coins dug 2 Lib, IV. Cap. I. VI.
up of the latter empire. « Mr, Camden, p. cviii. ſays 476.

Found at Boſſens, in the pariſh of St. Erth


HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


CHAP. X.

Of the Saxons. 1 "OE
HE Romans had no ſooner retird from Britain, than te
Scots and Picts, in hopes of bettering their condition, made
frequent inroads from Scotland, The Britans had now, for ſome RR
ages, been accuſtomed to recruit the Roman armies abroad, with te «
choiceſt of their youths ; and being ſeldom inur'd to bear arms at
home, where they had no encouragement to ſtudy the profeſſion of
a ſoldier (their maſters, the Romans, for political reaſons, ſecluding
them as much as poſſible from the art of war) they found it a very
difficult matter, after a diſuſe of ſo many ages, to bring themſelves
to any tolerable reliſh for the duties of the field; ſo much more does ↄ
war depend upon uſe, and experience, than upon natural genius. alt
the ſame time, their troubleſome neighbours in the North had pre
ſery'd their warlike diſpoſition in its proper force, by their conti-
nual ſtruggles with the Romans, as well as their frequent invaſionçgçsgs
of Britain, for the ſake of plunder. The Britans, ſeeing themſelves 6
under theſe diſadvantages, and deſpairing of ever being a match for
their enemies, whoſe barbarity they were every day experiencing
without any hopes of ever ſatisfying their thirſt of ſpoil, determin'd
to call in foreign aid; and the Saxons having been for ſome ages re-
markable at ſea, had alſo by this time got the name of the moſt va-
liant nation on the continent. 'The Saxons, therefore, then ſeated on
the German ſhores oppoſite to the North-eaſtern parts of the
iſland Þ, being a populous nation, ſoldiers of fortune, and us'd to
ſea-expeditions, ſeem'd moſt likely to afford that ſpeedy and effectual
aſſiſtance, which the Britans ſo much wanted.

After the Romans were withdrawn, the Britans had choſen Vor-
tigern Earl of Cornwall for their king, who, betwixt the years
430 and 452 (Chronologiſts differing in the preciſe year ©) thought
it neceſſary to call in the Saxons to aid him againſt his enemies
the Scots and Pits. The Saxons willingly embrac'd the opportunity,
and having done great ſervice to Vortigern, expected to be rewarded
in proportion to their own eſtimate of that ſervice ; but, as con-
quering ſoldiers are not ſoon ſatisfied, their pretenſions were eaſily
rais'd high enough to diſguſt the Britans, who had employed them.
As ſoon, therefore, as the Saxons had humbled the Picts and Scots,
it was no dithcult matter for a people bred to war, as they were
(and conſequently not long pleas'd with peace) and, beſides, en-
an.vur'd with the ſpacious, and plentiful country of Britain, to find


b They then dwelt in Sleſwick, Jutland, included in the Dutchy of Holſtein, Uſh. Prim.
and to the North of the preſent city of Ham- Cap. XII. p. 392.
burgh, viz. the Cimbrick Cherſoneſe, now moſtly < Uſher's Prim. Cap. XII.


D ee
1 "ag" 4 A


ſufficient


yp i"
24 10
N * :
- 9
+:
—


employ their arms to conquer thoſe, whom they were but juſt before
call'd in, to defend: to this war the Saxons had this further encou-
© ragement, that from the native country on the continent, then full
of people, as many as were either willing to aſſiſt their countrymen,
& who firſt came hither, or deſirous to improve their own circumſtances,
could find an eaſy paſſage into Britain, by means of their ſhipping,


E which their continual piracies had made it neceſſary, as the plunder
had made it ſweet, for them to maintain in full force.


+2
t 4


8 * #- y .


- . 1


8


* $4 TY FT
"ry 8 Wb
= wt ;
*


1
OP) 5


4 4 A * 1 n E r 8


RELATING TO BRITAIN.


ſufficient pretences to quarrel with the unactive Britans, under fo in-


diſcreet a Prince as Vortigern; accordingly, they made no ſcruple to


By ſuch freſh ſupplies the Saxons found it no hard matter to keep


1 their footing, and about the year 460, treacherouſly murder'd, as it
is ſaid, 300 of the principal Britiſh Nobility, on the plains near
© Saliſbury ; the Britans therefore (who had hitherto liv d promiſcuouſly


and quietly, with the Romans) found it neceſſary to retire before the


& Saxons. Some fled into Scotland, others into Holland, and ſome into


Armorica in Gaul, afterwards from them call'd Britain, now Bretagne :
on which part of our hiſtory I muſt beg leave to makea remark or two
before I proceed, becauſe the date of the fact requires it in this place.
Here then, that is, at ornearthis flight of the Britans from the Saxons,
we are to place (as I think) the firſt conſiderable ſettlement of Britans
in Armorica, they being never mention'd in hiſtory as inhabitants in
any part of Gaul before this time. Some, indeed, are of a different
opinion ©, and think that Pliny mentions (though obſcurely) the Britans
in Gaul. Conſtantine the great, it muſt be allowed, and after him
Maximus carry d out of this iſland many parties of ſoldiers, and when
they had ferv'd them faithfully, and were diſchargd, thoſe Empe-
rours might, as ſome think f, ſettle them in Armorica; but it is by no
means likely, that the remnants of theſe recruits could be in num-
ber ſufficient, to people, or ſubdue, or give name to all the country
of Armorica®; it is much more probable, and indeed agreeable to
hiſtory, that when the Saxons had conquer'd the greateſt part of the
iſland, the Britans thronging into the ſea coaſts of Hampſhire and
the Weſtern counties, particularly Cornwall (whereto they retired, as
loth to leave their native ground, as long as they could keep it),
went over in ſuch numbers, as ſoon made them the moſt conſi-


d a Antiq. Cap. XII. Camden 12mo,
p. 38.

© La Ramee, and others.

t Hiſt. de Bretagne, par D'Argentre, p. 2.

It muſt be allow'd that the learned and judi-

cious Lhuyd, in his comparative | Aces apa
P. 32. col. 3. thinks that the Britans, who left
this iſland, and poſſeſs'd themſelves of Armorica,
Paſs'd thither before the Saxons came in: but as
far as appears to me, he had not ſufficiently con-
ſider'd that the Migrants paſs'd into the province
called now Bretagne, through and from Corn-
wall principally, a circumſtance evident (among


other proofs) from the near reſemblance of the
Corniſh and Armorican dialects, the names of
places frequently the ſame, the conſtant alliance
and friendly intercourſe of both countries (which
cannot be accounted for, if the inhabitants of
Armorica proceeded indifferently and equally
from all parts of Britain) and that nothing could
make the Britans leave their native and ſo plen-
tiful a country, in ſuch numbers as were nece:-
ſary to obliterate the ancient name of their coun-
try, and give it that of ſtrangers, but war and
compulſion, -Let the Reader judge.


derable


39


— —


. — — * * * — — Ss
— ww w_—e) — — —


— —
—_—


2
=
wh 4 3 —
* Os „„


40


HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


derable part of the inhabitants in that diſtrict ,andfromthistimeor ſo Boe,
aſterthat part of Gaul oppoſite to Cornwall, and beforecall'd Armoric, RX
began to be call'd Bretagne ; and has ill that name; and the ſan, Þ
language common to both people, and the friendly, and frequem
intercourſes of trade, and alliance, even to the laſt generation with the
Corniſh, ſhew the Armoricans, and Corniſh Britans to have ben
formerly one people. © Cornwall (ays Mr. Scawen, MS. p. 40
** hath received princes from thence (viz. Armorica), as they from us;
© mutual aſſiſtances given and taken in former times, mutual inter.
changes of private families, now extinguifh'd.” The Armoric
« Britans (ſays M. Lhuyd, Pref. to Etymologicon, p. 267.) do nt
e pretend to be Gauls, but call the neighbouring provinces ſuch, and
„their language Galek; whereas they term their own Brezonck 1 |
« [that is Britiſh |, as Het it is, being yet almoſt as intelligible to
© our Corniſh, as the illiterate countrymen of the Weſt of England,
«© to thoſe of the North.” The Britans of Armorica, therefore,
fled before the Saxons into Cornwall, and thence into Armorica, in
ſuch numbers as were ſufficient to poſſeſs, and give name to that
country, and the ſtory (fo much inſiſted upon by the Britiſh Hiſto—-
rians h) of Maximus's coming into Britain, and then carrying over
Conon Meradoc and Britiſh ſoldiers enough to people and fubdue
Armorica, is a meer fable, improbable in all its circumſtances, and
unſupported by any hiſtory of credit i. But to return, i
The greateſt part of the diſconſolate ancient inhabitants retird
into Wales, and Cornwall; and from this time they are to be under-
ſtood, as inhabiting and ruling only there, and having only one King,
Nike SAGE choſen out of Wales, and ſometimes out of Cornwall; and
to this King, common to both countries, whatever little parties of
Britans were diſpers d elſewhere k, acknowledged, and paid a kind
of allegiance, though not properly inhabitants either of Wales or
Cornwall. To enter into a detail of all the Battles fought with the
Saxons, and affecting the intereſt of the Corniſh Britans, would be
foreign to our preſent deſign ; but a ſummary account of this
matter may ſerve to collect and recover ſome parts of our hiſto
After Vortigern had ended his unfortunate reign, his ſon Ventimer
and ſome other valiant men! did their utmoſt to recover their coun-
try, and protect their religion, ſtruggling perpetually, tho' in vain,
againſt the Saxon incroachments; but after this deſtructive war had
continued near two hundred and forty years, Cadwallader of Wales,
laſt ſole Monarch of the Britans, died about 689, and the Britans


b Pontic. Virum. p. 37 to 39. &c, ce tans, and had Princes of its own till near the MM 1 5
1 In all the proceedings o Maximus, I ſee Norman Conqueſt.” 1
* no ground for ſettlihg coloni:s of Britans in | Aurelius Ambroſ. Uter. Pendragon, and
« Armorica,” Stillinzf, Ant. Krit. p. 184. Arthur firſt King of Cornwall, then of all the


E Cumberland was thca pefleis'd by Bri- Britans, &c.
4 never


RELATING-TO BRITAIN.


never aſterwards attempting to ſet up one national king, ſhews how
low their affairs were reduc'd by the Saxon wars. From this time
Wales became divided into two, and ſoon afterwards into more
principalities (each of their petty Governours however having the
name of King), and Cornwall, having no longer any King in com-
mon with the Welſh-Britans, became a diſtinct principality, gene-
rally under one prince, and ſometimes under more. Here ceas'd,
in a great meaſure, that connexion which had ſubſiſted for ſo many
vears betwixt the Welth and Corniſh ; and acting, after this, under
different rulers, they were no longer able to act with that force againſt
the Saxons which they had formerly done, when more united.
About this time, however, aid came to the Corniſh from another
quarter. The Armorican Britans came over into Cornwall under
Ivor their King, and his kinſman Ynor ; and though Leland en de-
nies any ſuch remigration of the Armoricans, it is not at all im-
probable that this people, at the ſolicitation of the Corniſh, ſhould
attemyt to reſcue from the Saxon tyranny a country to which the
greateſt part of the Armoricans ow d their original about 250 years
before. With this aſſiſtance the Corniſh recovered their country,
and the Eaſt of Devonſhire from the enemy. But their ſucceſs was
of ſhort continuance, for they found a ſevere ſcourge in Ina King
of the Weſt Saxons, who defeated them entirely in 710, and got


| RE much renown by his wars with the Corniſh o. In the year 7 20,


Adelred, King of Weſt Sex, invaded the Corniſh, but was re-
pulſed by Roderic Molwynoc, “King (or General) of the Britans


F in the Weſt part of England, and Prince of North-Wales, who


was afterwards, however, driven by the Saxons to forſake the
« Weſt-country,” and retire into his own inheritance in North-
Wales“. Cuthred King of Weſt Sex obtained a conſiderable vic-
tory over the Corniſh in the year 743. The ſame Cuthred is ſaid


do have conquer'd part of Cornwall, and united it to his kingdom


of Weſt Saxony, in the year 753; and from this time the Saxons


look d upon ſome cf the Eaſtern parts of Cornwall (which were be-


yond the river Ex *) as their own, and upon every invaſion of the


VDanes and Corniſh, diſpatch'd forces into Devonſhire to oppoſe them.
About the year 766, Kinewulf King of Welt Sex had ſome trouble--
ſome dealings with the Corniſh; for in this year he gave ſeveral
RE parcels of land to the church of Wells, by a charter which runs thus,
RX © *1 Kinewulph, King of the Weſt-Saxons, for the love of God, and


- |
* 4
* 4
* kv „
E N
4
«


(which ſhall not be here particularly mentioned) ſome vexations of


dur Corniſh Enemies, do, by the conſent of my Biſhops and noble-
men, make over by gift, a certain parcel of ground to the Apoſtle
and ſervant of God, St. Andrew, &c.“


« North and South Wales. p Carad, Llang. Edit. Powel, p. 25.
: dheringham, p. 393. q The part Eaſt of Exeter.
Rapin, vol. I. octav. p. 209. r Camden, p. 84.


M Not


41


i
|
.
l
:
:
| *
l
TY
*
4
*
5
:
. *
1
1
of
1
14
on
:
4 :
1
;
">
.
4
0
47d
' '


11


9 |
v1
\-
.
*
19
4
1
1
4
x
|
[1


—


HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


Not long after, the Corniſh, the better to oppoſe the Saxons en-
couraged the Daniſh pirates to land, and bring over every now and
then freſh forces from their country, into Britain; a ſufficient inſtance
how little the fatal miſcarriages of former times do influence a pre-
cipitate, and il]-govern'd people. The Corniſh ſmarted fo much
under the Saxons, that one would think they could not have forgot
how dangerous an impatience it was in their anceſtors to ſeek that
redreſs in war from foreign ſoldiers, which might have proceeded,
though more ſlowly, yet with more ſecurity, from exerting their own
innate virtue and fortitude. The Danes firſt arrived at the ſhores of
Welt Saxony (under which name the Saxons began now to compre-
hend all the ancient kingdom of Dumnonia) in three ſhips, when
Beorthricus (or Brithric) was king, in the year 787, and had not
long been us'd to the coaſts, before the Corniſh made a league with
them 5; for in the year 806, a fleet arriv'd in Weſt Wales (fo the
Britiſh Writers frequently call Cornwall) which encourag'd the
Corniſh to an inſurrection againſt Egbert, firſt king of England, as
uniter of the Saxon Heptarchy. This formidable union drew all the

ower and ſkill of Egbert that way; and theſe, at laſt, after the war
bad continued ſome years, proving too ſtrong for the Corniſh valour!,
Egbert over-run all Cornwall about the year 813 u. After this,
either the reſtleſs nature of Egbert, or the ſituation of his affairs
calling him elſewhere for ſome time, the war ſeems to have been rather
interrupted than ended. In the 24th year of Egbert there was a
conſiderable battle fought betwixt the Britans and Weſt Saxons of
Devonſhire, in which many thouſands fell on each fide, and the
victory remain'd uncertain: this battle was fought at Gavulford  (o
Camelford*) in Cornwall. Notwithſtanding all this, the Saxons hav-
ing gotten footing in Devonſhire, the Corniſh Britans, aſſiſted by
the Danes, who at this time came at the particular inſtance of the
Corniſh”, march'd Eaſtward in the year 835 to diſpoſſeſs them, and
at firſt overcame the Saxons, but ſoon after at Hengſtone-Hill, a few
miles to the weſtward of Tamar, were totally overthrown and to re-
ſtrain them for the future, Egbert enacted this ſevere law, that no
Britan ſhould paſs the limits of his country, and ſet foot on the
Engliſh ground upon pain of death ; about fixteen years after this,
the old inveteracy of the Corniſh Britans againſt the Saxons con-
tinuing, they ſeem to be again involv'd, for we read that Cheor|,
call'd by Huntingdon * the Conſul, by Hoveden® the Earl of Devon-
ſhire, fought againſt the Danes, and obtain'd a ſignal victory. There
was a national enmity betwixt the Britans and the Saxons; to cheriſh


Sax. Chron. p. 64. about the year 806, ſays Sax. Chron, at the year 824 or 5. :
Mr. Camden, Eng. 206. x Camd. 12mo. p. 82. Camelford alicul
t Fortiſſimos fortiter effugavit, ſays Hoveden, © Gaftelford,”
p. 237. of Egbert and the Corniſh, y Rapin, vol. I. octavo, p. 299, Philoſop"


Sax. Chron. p. 69. A. D. 809, ſays Rapin, Tranſ. Numb. 458. Hen. Hunting. p. 198.
P. 214. 2 P. 200. P. 258.


4


hi © 3 ;

7 ! | dy .

V\ C 4 : P20
"FS -


*
4 N — — 7 E 5
— LF - 0 1 2 en oY
— % > 31s ——_ 5 8 . - * K


e R II — 1 2 —
1 oy Ap Ol x 9% 0 Teh <= os 4 E 0d 2 4 8 _ Cs NONE 5 £044 5 h 70 A >
> a * 4 E * 7 N 2 4 8 F — 8 17 9 2 RMS = 3, * . N . v- * "; F 1
4 2 & \ „ 2 8 8 1 4 ny a> : F * 2 4 5 ”
2 a8 . ” 8 1 4- * 1 0 4
N _ E 4 r = 3 V — A N 5 4 * 1 -
* * 5 S A U o "4 1 1 —
. l * 48,4.


Sf -»., TW.


IS EY
8 3
1 19
* * ®

J 4


.


8 e x” oaks ae og Els ' innen CAT REY 4 4 n _ e
4. * ; n 8 8 A "+: J)) oY ERR ee FF po! 83 1 r i 5
- 4 Fa » 4 „ 1 6 , 1 2 3» 2 0 "> 8 3 « * > ” ** it X 4 * * 8 1 my Er Y o "4 * 2 r >: "- _
—_ . 2 * » * 2 "th le? SF. 1 1 . 8 "Xe n 7 0 f * i, £4 wed » N26 PR .
. «8 we # \ pn p * - 4 . 5 2
\ , . u CY 7 — <L- _ mew


RELATING TO BRI IATN.


= hich it was the intereſt of the Danes, as much as it was the natu-
ral inclination of the Britans : theſe two nations therefore, united by


inclination and intereſt, omitted no opportunity of attacking the Saxon
territories whenever they either found them unguarded or diſtreſs'd,
and themſelves in a hopetul condition to invade and conquer.

In the turbulent former part of king Alfred's reign, when the
Danes were ſo buſy, and triumphant over the Engliſh, it cannot be
ſuppos'd that the Corniſh and Welſh Britans were idle ſpectators.
We find the Danes after a truce, wintering at Exeter, in the 4th of
King Alfred, A. D. 875. and without doubt by the encouragement
of the Corniſh party there. Hither their ſhips alſo immediately
tended with freſh ſupplies, though fruſtrated of their deſign by a
tempeſt, in which 120 ſhips were wreck'd ; nor did their land army
marching towards Exeter Þ, fare much better, being encounter'd by
Alfred, and oblig'd to give hoſtages to depar with all ſpeed. This
ſeems to have given the Saxons the chief power in Exeter, for in
the 21ſt of Alfred, the Danes laid ſiege to Exeter, but fled at the
approach of Alfred, who was by this time become a powerful king.

The Welſh as well as the Corniſh had been from time to time aſſiſt-
ed, and encouraged by the Danes in their common cauſe, againſt
the Saxons, and therefore were never left quiet by the Saxons as ſoon
as they had vanquiſh'd, or by league, or otherwiſe got rid of the
Danes e. The Britans of Cumberland had alfo put themſelves under
the protection of the Danes, and ſubmitted not to the Saxons till the
time of Edward the elder, ſon to Alfred the Great d. At length, a
formidable confederacy was form'd againſt King Athelſtan, in the
year 9386, in favour of Anlaff, in which the Iriſh, Scots, Welth,
Danes, and Corniſh united, but in vain: Athelſtan firſt overthrew
the forces of the north, where the allied nations loſt Conſtantine
King of Scotland, fix Iriſh or Welſh Kings, and twelve Earls, and
General Officers: he then marched againſt the Corniſh Britans, who
had aſſiſted the confederates, took Exeter (which before they had
inhabited upon equal terms with the Saxonsf) from them entirely.
About this time alſo he bounded the Welſh by the river Wye, taking
all, betwixt that and the Severn, from them; for the ſame reaſons, and
to puniſh thoſe alike, who ſeem'd alike guilty, he excluded the
Corniſh for ever from any right to Exeter, which had been their ca-
pital for ſo many centuries; he took alſo all that goodly country be-
tixt the rivers Ex and Tamar from them, and made the Tamar their


future boundary, which has ever ſince been fo accounted. This was


ſo conſiderable an alteration in the circumſtances of Cornwall, that


3 N. B. The firſt detachment of the Danes,
alter a truce with Alfred, came from the Eaſt,
and lodg'd itſelf at Exeter; aud 'tis likely their
troops :rom Wales and Cornwall march'd to join
What had been admitted into Exeter.


© Rapin, vol. I. p. 361. 4 Ibid. p. 362.


_ + Fa
ws,
LS


e Some ſay 940, ſome 933.

f Malmeſbury, p. 28. Speed, Chron. p. 34.
« At this time alſo Adelitan did remove the
„ Brytaines that dwelt in Exceſter and therc-
„ aboutes to Cornewale, Carad, Langar.“ Edit.
Powel, p. 51.


nothing


43


— 4
— : 8
.


44 HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS
nothing leſs than an entire conqueſt could have produc'd it; from


this time therefore we are to conſider Cornwall under the Saxon


yoke®, Athelſtan, having made a thorough conqueſt of Cornwall,


took ſhipping for the iſles of Scilly, that he might not leave any Þ
ſpot unſubdued that belong'd to it. This happen'd, aſter the Cor.
niſh Britans had maintain'd a perpetual ſtruggle againſt the Saxon,
for the full ſpace of 500 years, from their firſt coming into Britain.
An enmity this, of that inveteracy and continuance, as is ſcarce to


be equall'd in hiſtory ; it reach'd down to the year 938, and the
Saxon Monarchy ſoon after giving way to the Daniſh, it cannot be
expected that many Saxon Monuments ſhould be erected in a
country ſo averſe from the beginning to the Saxon Government,
and ſo little a while under its dominion : and indeed we have no
Saxon monuments among us, that have come to my knowledge (ex-
cepting a few fragments of buildings which favour of the Saxon
ſtyle of architecture) unleſs the foundation of colleges and mo-
naſteries, and donations to churches, may be call'd ſuch,


CHA. A
Of the Danes.


1 e H the Danes landed in Weſt Sex in the year 78 7},
niſh inva- yet they winter'd not here in Britain (which is however to be
— underſtood of the Eaſtern Coaſts, near the heart of the iſland, and not
works ie oc: of the Weſt as we ſhall ſee in the ſequel) till the year 8 54, as is par-
cuſtom to return every year to their own country, either to carry
oft their ſpoil, to viſit their wives and children, to recruit their
forces, or to repair their ſhips, which could not be ſo well done, or
ſo ſecurely attended to, in a foreign and enemy's country. This
frequent ſailing to and fro brought them acquainted with all the ſe-
cure landing places on the coaſt, where, if the winds would not
permit them to land in one place, they ſoon knew where, in ſome
other adjacent creek, they might ſhelter their ſhips, and diſbark their
men with more ſafety and conveniency ; if they could not ſecurely
put on ſhore a great number in one place, 'tis natural to imagine that
they would divide into parties, and land as near one to the other as
poſſible: this, the many landing places ſo very little diſtant from
In Corn- each other round the extremity of Cornwall (call'd the Land's End)
r do abundantly teſtify: as the Danes were ſo frequently obliged to
land, and embark again, another thing occurs to every one who will
8 Cornwalli, in hoc tantum reprehenſibiles, * luerunt, nec Regio ſatis a natura munita eos

6 licet vires omnes ad patriæ ſalutem tuendam “ tutare poterat.” Camden.


* animose contulerant, in Saxonum poteſtatem h Sax. Chron. p. 64.
„ concefſcrunt, utpote qui numero non va- i Hen, Hunt. p. 200. Heveden, p 237.


conſider


ticularly taken notice of by the hiſtorians i. It ſeems, it was their


— — 5


— FRI a... lt © OY ww —


4 2 1 TR 2 8 3. =, abt 2 * 4 2 *
Bay 12382 f
2 " 4 of


A ht
SF 3


nn
P
XI : > :


e *
v OS: 3 8


4 ” a a ? * 0. a a A .
MEET rr fo Oo I TR
2 7 = 2 Fa * "TS? 4, to; — It . th Sw — + he =
2 3 „ : * 2 7 e 2 . 0 ; l >» N
a 2 A 47 * F . * Yo - - n - : 8 5
19 8 J * 1 .


RELATING TO BRITAIN.


I conſider their works (for works are records and oftentimes the only
remaining proofs and grounds of hiſtory), and tis this, that not
Z caring eaſily to quit any land where they had once got footing, and


yet knowing well enough to provide for a ſecure retreat to their


© {hips on all events, they not only intrench'd themſelves on the hills,
© but ſoon learn'd (fo inſtructive is neceſſity) to intrench and fortify
their landing places, many evidences of which are ſtill viſible, and
ſome of their works entire, on the weſtern ſhores of Cornwall; and
& where the cliffs are of clay or looſe moldering ſtone, the ſea, as
appears by the remaining veſtiges, has waſh'd away a great part
of ſeveral of them. If any one wonders what occaſion the Danes
had to fortify thus, while they were allies to the Corniſh, let him
recollect, that being much addicted to plunder and cruelty, even
where they were invited as allies, ſomething of this kind was ne-
ceͤſſary to protect themſelves from that juſt retribution which the


injur'd natives might otherwiſe have oblig'd them to. It was alfo


7 neceſſary for them to fortify, in order to awe the natives, and


make it difficult for them to renounce their alliance. Theſe mili-


. tary works are by the preſent inhabitants all call'd caſtles, are


numerous in the Weſt of Cornwall, and as they are more modern


than the Phenicians, Greeks, and Romans, and could ſerve no
== purpoſe of the native Britans, muſt have been erected by the Danes;
for it does not appear, that the Saxons did make an conſiderable
& debarkation of troops in Cornwall, they plunder'd and ravag'd the


ſhores, and ſea-port towns, about the times of the Conſtantine
family, but retreated to their ſhips ſoon : whereas the Danes came
in numbers, and join'd the natives, and being better inſtructed in
the arts of Invaſion erected caſtles (even during their alliance with
the Corniſh), it being the cuſtom of the Danes to encamp and
fortify the hills wherever they came, though without any inten-
tion to ſtay there any long while k.

The Danes, by their frequent embarkations, had not only ob-
tain'd a thorough knowledge of the coaſts of our iſland, but here
in Cornwall they had this further advantage, that by their land-
ing in the Weſt, and marching ſo often Eaſtward to fight the
Saxons, they were become perfectly acquainted with all the paſſages
and ſtrong holds of ſo narrow a country as Cornwall; and theſe
two advantages (which the unfortunate ſiding of the natives with
the Danes, for ſo many years, could not but give them) were too
conſiderable and evident, to be neglected by a nation ſo addicted
to pillage abroad, and ſo meanly accommodated at home ; and it
is too plain, from their caſtles and entrenchments on every hill
almoſt in the hundred of Penwith [Cornwall], as well as by their


k Sax, Chron. Ann. 878. p. 84. f
N landing


— — — *


HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


landing places abovementioned, that they were gueſts not eaſily to
be got rid of; and although the Corniſh were not at all times in-
clin'd, or able to face the Saxons, and had not therefore at all time;
occaſion for the Daniſh powers to help them; it is however pro.
bable, that the Dancs choſe not to quit the country entirely, but
ſoon learn'd to leave confiderable parties of their countrymen in their
encampments here, under pretence of being a guard to the inha-
bitants, but really in order to ſecure a ſafe return to thoſe who re-
embarked for Denmark, whenever they ſhould chuſe to come
again into Britain, As cruel as the Danes were in thoſe days, it
does not appear from hiftory, that they dealt as ſeverely at fark
with the Corniſh, as they did with the Eaſtern parts of the iſland;
for, as ſoon as ever they landed in Norfolk, Suffolk, or farther to
the North on that coaſt, we hear of their deſtroying every thing ſa-
cred and civil, with an unparallel'd barbarity ; but when they landed
in Cornwall, they ſeem'd to have always march'd into Devonſhire to
fight the Saxons, and however faithleſs they were in other treatics,
it does not appear that they ever broke with the Corniſh, till after
the total conqueſt of it by Athelſtan, which was more than one
hundred years after their firſt alliance againſt Egbert. Indeed, in
the year | 876, the Danes are ſaid to have attempted Exeter and
taken it, but this will not infer, that they were then at enmity with
the Corniſh ; for that city was at that time divided betwixt the
Saxons and the Corniſh m (much, without doubt, to the diſſatis faction
of the latter), and the Danes retir'd to Exeter, as to a place of ſafety
and alliance, and entered the caſtle there without any reſiſtance ";
and, that they then took only that part of it which belong'd to the
Saxons, is evident; becauſe Alfred King of Weſt Sex, immediately
purſued them thither, compounded the difference for that time,
and took Hoſtages of them. In the year 8787, the brother of
Inwzrus, and Healfdenus a Daniſh commander of 23 ſhips, was ſlain
in Devonſhire, with 840 men: again, in the year 894, we find that
the Danes attack'd a certain fortification in the North of Devon-
ſhire with 40 ſhips, and with 100 other ſhips laid ſiege to Exeter;
which ſhews only that Exeter was at that time principally under the


juriſdiction of the Saxons, and for their fakes King Alfred imme-


diately march'd thither, and made the Danes raiſe the fiege?; and,
indeed, the Danes being ſo often recorded to be in Devonſhire,
looks as if they had made this their frontier, in order to cover
their friends in Cornwall, and preſerve it as a ſecure retreat, in caſe
they thould be defeated, as oftentimes they were, though to little


purpoſe, as long as they continued maſters of the ſea,


Sax. Chron. o Sax. Chron.
m Malmſbury. p Ibid.
n Sax. Chron, ad ann, 877.


Though


. 71
1 2
4 : 1
9 : 3 l k p · 231.
*
©.


SRIATING TO-BRITATLTN:


Though it was the general cuſtom of the Danes * who infeſted the
ſhores of the Welt Sex, to return every winter to Denmark for more
than 60 years after their firſt landing, yet we may imagine that
thoſe who landed in Cornwall at the deſire of the Britans, in order
to aſſiſt them againſt the Saxons, might not have ſuch cogent rea-
ſons, annually to deſert this iſland, as the others had; we may rea-
ſonably ſuppoſe, that the inhabitants would not refuſe to ſupply with
proviſions, and the other neceſſaries of life, in winter, thoſe who
were always ready to fight their battles in ſummer : nay, it is not
unlikely that the Britans thought themſelves more ſecure from any
attempt of the Saxons, when they had a body of Danes among
them, than when they were left to themſelves ; beſides, the Dancs
could recruit their forces among their allies, at leaſt refreſh them
with eaſe from their fatigues, or employ them uſually in errecting
proper fences on the hills againſt winter, and the enemy ; they might
here too repair their ſhatter d ſhips with ſome ſecurity, the Corniſh


havnig many good harbours on the coaſt: tor theſe reaſons, therefore, _


well as what is mentioned before, viz. the Danes being an acquaint-
ance not eaſily to be ſhook off, we cannot ſcruple to attribute a longer
and more familiar converſe to the Danes and Corniſh, than to the
Danes and any other part of Britain ; ſo carly an alliance here ſoon
after they lirſt landed, gives ſtrong reaſons to ſupport this con-


jecture, as the multitude of circular fortifications, ſome of which


are wall'd round with very good maſonry”, and look more like a ſet-
tled habitation, than a haſty Vallum thrown up for a temporary
encampment. Nor were theſe fortify'd hills without their uſe,
though in an allied country; for, in theſe ſeveral ſtrong holds, con-
fiderable parties of Danes might well chuſe to winter, rather than
in towns, as places where military diſcipline might be better main-
tain'd, as well as fewer injuries done to the natives. By means of


RE theſe caſtles the Danes had indeed the command over the Britans in


Cornwall, yet ſtill look'd upon them as allies, as long as they conti-
nued 1na condition o aſh ſtthem gainſt the Saxons; but after Corn-
wall became entirely under the Saxon yoke, however obſequious the
inhabitants might be diſpoſed to act, the Danes look'd upon all the
tyes of amity as diffolved, the Britans as ſervants to other maſters,
and Cornwall as a province of Weſt Sex; and accordingly from this
time landed here, as elſewhere, to plunder and deſtroy. In the
& year 981, they committed great ravages, burnt Bodman, then a Bi-
ſhop's See. In the 19th year of Ethelred, A. D. 997, the Daniſh


fleet failed round Cornwall, and came into the mouth of the Severn,


qi; Huntingdon, p. 2003 and Hoveden, r Chin Caſtle, and Caſtelandinas, &c.


4 robbing,


— — —


48 HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


robbing, as they went along, Cornwall, Devonſhire, and South
Wales 5, all three formerly their allies upon all occaſions. And
from the time of the Saxon conqueſt, the fortified hills ſerv'd them,
not only to retain their ſoldiers in duty and order, and to awe the
natives, but as places of refuge to ſecure themſelves againft their
enemies, and preſerve their booty, and pillage ; and now 'tis likely
that their landing places were more effectually ſecur'd.

For more than a hundred years the Danes continued their uſual
abode in Cornwall as friends; and after Athelſtan's time, till the
Saxon and Daniſh Monarchy became blended in one, as enemies ;
from this continual intercourſe, and the fix d reſidence of their gar-
riſons, tis no wonder that there ſhould be erected here many and
various kinds of Monuments by the Daniſh nation. And, indeed,
as hiſtory teaches us, that the Danes were more converſant and
longer reſident in Cornwall than elſewhere; ſo the variety of Daniſh

Monuments, ſtill extant here, abundantly confirms the truth of
that hiſtory. Here likely they buried their valiant leaders, ſome. |
times under Barrows, now and then in Kiſt-vaens, or ftone-cheſts, 2
ſome under erected ſtones, ſeveral of which are to be placed to their
account, and many of each ſort ſtill remain, as will be particularly
exhibited among the Sepulchral Monuments. Here they held their
aſſemblies for chuſing and inaugurating their chief commanders
and, doubtleſs, either made or uſed the circles of erected ſtones for
that purpoſe; and hence it is that we have ſome diftinguiſh'd by
an Obeliſk in the middle, or the Kongſtolent, as in Denmark.

Here they fortified, with a Ditch and Vallum, their ſeveral land-
ing places, and as they advanc'd, they fortify'd the hills with ſuch
propriety and judgment, that no leſs than eight caſtles as they are
call'd (though they are rather ftrong entrenchments), are to be ſeen

within five miles round the town of Penzance, all of a circular form,
and ſo plac'd on the hills, that they are in fight of each other, about
two miles aſunder, ſo as to be able to communicate proper ſignals;
the moſt diſtant not more than eight miles from each other ; ſome
enclos'd with a very thick wall or walls of maſonry, wide ditches, and
ſuch other works round them as plainly beſpeak leiſure, ſecurity, and "3
the peaccable permiſſion of the natives; all theſe things ſufficiently A
ſhew how powerful they were, in theſe Weſtern parts of Britain, c
and at the ſame time how willing and defirous they were to con-
tinue their power, and perpetuate their poſſeſſion. Plunder and 7.
power were the ſole, and darling objects of the Danes; and by degrees
they came to uſe the Corniſh as bad as the reſt of the kingdom; and a
to eſtabliſh the one, that they might glut themſelves with the other,
they practis d every kind of ſeverity (which the hotteſt rage of wa:


» 4
„ „ BT _ bp ke pA" EM} 3 e .
LS FP OT EN EN. OCT I, n 8


FD ** 1 4”. 6 8 n 9 . —
n * 2 2 %. 4.9 WY * Fn l g $a n N
1 7 3 TA St 8 + * 1 + n 1 e Fs _ . ; fl
" Þ * ED p dr. PL i vis" i” I 5 Li j * - le 1 "> n 8 88 - - 2 4 *
A" my * i By 1G. =” «1 485 1 þ „, - Fa . . 3
4 Nl EY" - = L N — » 4x * 8 4 * "Mp 1 3 GY nr. oy \ ? x
1 b — F 1 ES 4 4 2 r I,
, b 8 7 — 8 4 2
'S 1
1 _
- © 4 1 o .


SY,


i 5 $:eed, p. 359- t Wormius, Mon. Dan. 9
hs, only


RELATING TO BRITAIN.


only can excuſe) unprovok'd, and, upon common occaſions, fire,
E {0rd, and deſolation, attending them wherever they march'd; ſo that
Cornwall is ſuppos'd to have been at laſt utterly ruin'd by them, and
to have continued as a foreſt uncultivated, and thinly peopled, for
© ſeveral ages. After the Danes arrived at the ſovereignty, being then
become Chriſtians as well as kings, they look'd on the natives as their
*X ſubjects, and conſequently muſt think, that to harm and plunder
them, would be proportionably to injure, and gradually to deſtroy
© themſelves ; thenceforward their depredations ceas'd, their Monu-
ments took another turn, became Chriſtian, and inſcrib'd ; and the
= Daniſh Line expiring ſoon after, as well as the Saxon, yielded an

caſier admittance to the Normans, of whom now, though too mo-
dern to ſay much of, we muſt take ſome notice, foraſmuch as they
alſo introduc'd ſome Monuments.


49


II.
Of the Mormans.


HE laſt great alteration which our country underwent, was
occaſioned by the coming in of the Normans, which being
& owing to the failure of the Daniſh, as well as the interruption, and
@ weakneſs of the Saxon line, it may be neceſſary to give a ſhort
Ws vicw of the ſeveral ſucceſſions immediately preceding the Conqueſt.
W After the weak reign of Ethelred, in which the Danes carried all
before them, his fon Edmund, ſurnam'd Ironſide (from ſupporting
his fecble and diſhearten d party with ſo much patience and fortitude)
ſucceeded, and dying in the year 1017, after a ſtrenuous but ſhort
reign, of leſs than twelve months, left the Engliſh party fo forlorn,
that Canute, ſon of Swane King of Denmark (at that time chief
RE ot the Daniſh forces in England, and already admitted into a part-
nerſhip of the kingdom) was immediately acknowledged ſole monarch
tor England, although Edmund had left two ſons, and a brother,
who afterwards was rais'd to the throne. Canute held the crown

ill 1036, and was ſucceeded by Harold (from his ſwiftneſs in
0 running, ſurnam'd Harefoot) as ſome think uu, ſon of Canute by a
d bormer marriage, which others doubt of w. He reign'd about four
RE years and four months, and left the crown to Hardacnute, ſon of
= Canute, by ÆElgiva, or Emma, widow of King Ethelred, who

eſter reigning near two years died, and with him expired the Daniſh
id Royal Line, and the crown return'd to the Saxon. Edward the
Coafeſſor, fo nam'd for his piety, ſon of King Ethelred, by Emma,
nnd half brother to Hardacnute, being choſen King, in the year


" RE 1041, and dying without iſſue in 1066, deviſed the crown x, as 'tis
Al 8 8 +
8 8 Hen. Hunt. p. 200. regnum ei ſucceſſit Haroldus. Hoveden, p. 259,
_— — ' Fax. Chron. See Sax. Chron.
uy 7 "x Et juxta quod ipſe ante mortem ſtatuerat in g


O ſaid,


50 HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS
ſaid, to Harold, eldeſt ſond of Godwin Earl of Kent y; but whe.
ther Harold received the crown by grant from King Edward,
ſeiz'd it, preſuming the greatneſs of his reputation in arms might
reconcile people, in a little while, to the weakeſt title, if he could RR
plead poſſeſſion, he held the crown only forty weeks and one day,
being ſlain in battle againſt William Duke of Normandy z, who with
this ſingle victory got the crown; with ſuch eaſy tranſitions, in thoſe
times, did the imperial crown of England paſs, not only from one
hand to another, but from one family and nation to another; inſo-
much that within 50 years the crown was poſſeſs d by a Saxon, a
Dane, a Saxon, and (as Harold had no pretence to the Saxon or Da-
niſh Blood-Royal) by the private family of Godwin, and laſtly by the
Norman line: ſo that the crown, in one generation, was poſleſs'd by
five families, each diſtin from it's preceding one, and each king
(if you except Harold) of a different nation from his predeceſſor.

William the firſt, of the Norman race, being acknowledg'd King,
made it the principal buſineſs of his reign to ſettle in Britain (as the 2
moſt likely way to ſecure the crown to his own family) his country- -
men who had attended, and further'd his expedition, and to intro- "=
duce his country's cuſtoms, laws, and language: and as the Norman;
were at this time Chriſtians, and much more civiliz d than either the
Saxons or Danes at the time of their invaſion, it can't be thought
that our country ſuffer'd ſo much from them, as from the others, o:
that the alterations introduc'd were of ſo wild, barbarous, and de-
ſtructive a nature as what the former dreadful convulſions had been
attended withal. As the ſciences were in this age more cultivated
among the Normans, than here in England, they improv'd our man-
ner in works of art and taſte a, they introduc'd a nobler and mor:


elegant kind of building and deſigningb, than we had been us'd t»


5 Cab Os . wg N APO
r 9 . ;
Mr þ . a GE ERAS IS ARIES A

4+ «a » & 1 4 M \ * ©, 1 F


Godwin Earl of Kent, of great power in his
time, married to his firſt wife the ſiſter of King
Canute, but had only one fon by her, who was

_ drown'd in the Thames: by his ſecond wife he
had Harold (who ſucceeded Edward the Con-
feflor), and many other ſons.

* To whom, William of Malmſbury ſays
(p. 53.), that Edward the Confeſſor, after the
ſudden death of Edward, ſon of Edmund Ironſide
(whom he deſign'd his ſucceſſor, and for that
reaſon had ſent for him from abroad) granted the
ſucceſſion to the crown of England ; and queſti-
ons whether Harold had any grant at all from
N though the Engliſh gave out as much.

bid.

* © Videas ubique in villis eccleſias, in vicis
*© & urbibus Monaſteria novo ædificandi genere
*« conſurgere.— Normanni veſtibus ad invidiam
« culti.—Domi ingentia zdificia.” William
of Malmſbury, p. 58.

b « Hiis diebus Anglici parvis, baſis & abjectis
« domibus utebantur cum victualium *
* dantia, Veftibus etiam ſolebant uti protenſis
* ad medium genu brachiis oneratis armillis
«© aureis, E contrario Franci & Normanni


9d


„ amplis & ſuperbis zdificiis modicas agebant 3
„ expenſas, ſed in cibariis delicati,” J. Rou, i
* Warwick. p. 106. |


cc


«© That the new way
« duced by the Normans related only to tit
© Roofs of Churches, and not to the Walls;


c that is, the Saxons did not underſtand de


e way of turning ſuch great arches with ſton, |
« as were in the new Church of St. Pauls


iſhop Stillingfleet, in his diſcourſe c ,
e the true Antiquity of London [Fol. Ed.
« Vol. III. pag. 934.] declares his opinion, ne
of Building inte-


built by Mauritius; but they knew how '" $;


6 build Churches with ſtone, and with arche,
.


There is not the leaſt doubt of“
% ſame Style of Architecture continuing 2
e the Norman Conqueſt as prevailed in d
«© Saxon age, only the latter was upon a •.¾
<« enlarged Plan. The middle of Henry '*
&« Firſt's reign, | fear, is too early for the ' ns
{© troduction of the Gothick Architecture, " my

ce contra- diſtinction to the Saxon or Norman” mt
© Saxon, which was a very debaſed and c ps
“ rupted Roman Architecture. — The Whit <_
„tower, in the Tower of London, was © py


W t By e e . "OD Ar mY , l 0 indy 25 6 1
i ß De n a 5 N *
5 1 l * * hs & * 2 Poe Vo «8. * r N * 5 . W r « v P «
S * 0 E r 6 8 : ns «OM IE TRIES . 4 WS E 2 2 N
> ts alin SSI Rant hs F 2 * OS - Ma * AS "HE __—_ 8 414 8 5 . * *Þ. ö >, TECH n 2
” . ng 1 * 4 Mn ES * boy” Ry x * e y 4


RELATING TO BRITAIN.


before; from. this time therefore, our Monuments have no more
the rudeneſs and diſproportion of the natural ſtone; they no longer
remain uninſ{crib'd, filent as well as monſtrous ; they want dates
indeed, but are generally inſcrib'd; ſurnames are added, but what
ſhall particularly diſtinguiſh all inſcrib'd Monuments erected by
the Normans, is the old French, which, in all the law courts, and
elſewhere, on all occaſions, this king labour'd moſt aſſiduouſly to


introduce, in place of the Saxon or Engliſh language. Thoſe inſcrib'd


in French are likely to be near the Conqueſt, if the characters will
ſuit that age, for notwithſtanding all the ſtruggles of the Norman
line, the Saxon tongue gain'd ground again, and in a little time no-
thing but the law remain d in French; a certain ſign how difficult it
is to make thorough alterations in language, and that chains are
eaſter impos d on the hands, than on the tongues ; the other works
of the Normans, ſuch as Monaſteries, Palaces, Courts of Juſtice,
Churches, Croſſes, and the like, are too little different from the


works of the late, or preſent age, to require any particular notice
here,


HAP. XIII.
Of the Britiſh Religion.


A many ſorts of Monuments which we have now exiſting, are
owing to the different nations which have ſucceſſively ſettled
in Britain (Phenicians, Greeks, Romans, Saxons, Danes, and Nor-
mans), ſo, many of them muſt have ariſen from the Religion
which obtain'd among the ancient people of this iſland.

From the ſway that religion has, and always has had, in the ac-
tions of mankind, it will not be wonder'd, if ancient Monu-
ments, in a great meaſure, owe their riſe to, and are diverſify d, by
the ſeveral rites, ceremonies, and particular inſtitutions of the na-
tional worſhip, whatſoever that is. For all religions (though
founded on one univerſal principle) have ſomething peculiar to them-
ſelves (as every thing muſt have which is liable to be warp'd and
tinctur'd by the humours of powerful and preſumptive men); and
whatever is ſubſervient to the offices of religion, whether 'Temple,
< tainly of the firſt Norman age, and that agrees kind of architecture which was in uſe before the


** with the Saxon mode; ſo does all that part of Conqueſt continued, with ſome little variation


40 Lincoln Cathedral, which was erected by only, till the middle of Henry the Firſt's reign.
Remigius, and ſeveral others which might be


inſtanced. In King Stephen's time I find
*© ſome intermixture of Gothick with the Nor-
** manno-Saxon, and earlier I can't trace it.“
Right Reverend Dr. Lyttelton, Biſhop of Car-
liſle to the Author, October, 1765.

Some think, therefore, that the wordsbefore of
Malmſbury are too general; and that the ſame


And it is not unlikely, that ſome time was ne-
ceſſary to change the general cuſtom in this
point, as well as in all others. However, where
the Normans did build, they followed their own
country ſtyle, no doubt; but in what particu-
lars it differed from the Saxon manner, is not
now fo eaſy to determine,


Altar,


51


32


HISTORICAL OBSERVATIONS


Altar, Prieſt, ſacred Utenſil, or Rite, will have ſomething in it
diſtin, and peculiar to that religion from whence it proceeded,
It will now be neceſſary, therefore, to enquire, what the moſt
ancient religion of this iſland was.

The ancient Britiſh Religion was of the Gentile kind, near
kin to the idolatry of the Eaſt, and every thing of a religious
nature was directed and managed by a Prieſthood of great antiquity
and fame amongſt the ancients ; they were call'd Druids, of whom
a particular account follows in the next book.


END oF THE FIRST Book,


An Ancient head in


j ' *
, WN.
2 ＋ „ 5 #F 775 * '
2 WIG Y 1 uy.


75
Fd 7 Hl, F
LAY


e I Rt EW rb OE FR Rr FR Il TE HI
. N


5

\ =_

1


A >
- 7
* £ 22 ** 2
=Y —


+ 2
aaa
- * —
WS 44. \


—


_
11 ei 3-4
— 3 I


5 7 2 7


Het on the Fortal of te Temple of Alontnordlon im Fance Mon Happen © om 1221 DONA. OCT MIN! Y, PW)


6


BRITISH REULTCGTON.
8 90-0:K I.


CHAP. I.
Of Idolatry in general,


F we take only a tranſient view of the Druid ſuperſtition, with-

out at the ſame time examining the hiſtory of other countries,
and comparing Druidiſm with the 1dolatrous rites of the Eaſt,
we ſhall be apt to think the Druids ſtand alone in all the inſtances
of barbarity, magick, and grove-worſhip, ſo juſtly laid to their
charge; the frequency of their human ſacrifices ſhocks us, their
magick exceeds belief; their oak-worſhip looks fingular and ab-
ſurd; and their diſcipline, cuſtoms and tenets have the air of pe-
culiarities to be found no where but in their ſect.

In order, therefore, to make a proper eſtimate, and form a right
judgment of this Idolatry of Britain, it will be neceſſary to give a
ſhort ſurvey of the riſe of Idolatry in general; the falſe Deities that
were at different times ſubſtituted in the room of the true one; the
manner in which the Gentiles worſhip'd theſe falſe Deities, and the
remarkable reſemblance that there was betwixt all the ſeveral ſorts of
Idolatry, From theſe particulars it will evidently appear (which is
of great concern to the preſent ſubje&) that Druidiſm acknowledg'd

P


the


54


SECT. J.


Firſt riſe
ef idolatry,


OF THE BRITISH RELIGION.


the ſame Deities, us'd the ſame worſhip, and therefore muſt hays
had the ſame original, as the cuſtoms, tenets, rites, and ſuper.
{tition of other gentile nations.

The Eaftern authors affirm that Idolatry was praQis'd before the
flood, and that the children of Seth were ſeduc'd to it by the
Cainites; and indeed, it is very likely * that the ſons of God were
call'd fo, as having retain'd the true religion, in contradiſtinction
to thoſe who had degenerated from it. Cain's infolent behaviour
to his Maker b makes it alſo probable, that he was not like to
keep himſelf or his poſterity long in the true religion. Tis allo ſaid,
that every imagination of the thoughts of man's heart was conti-
nually evil©; that all fleſh had corrupted his way upon the earth;
and of all abominations, there is none ſo productive of exceſſive
wickedneſs as Idolatry, which promotes, and even conſecrates the
greateſt vices, ſuch as lewdneſs, murder, and debauchery ; and it is
not caſy to conceive how mankind could be ſo totally immers'd in
wickedneſs, as they were before the flood, and retain at the ſame
time the True Religion 3

But however that be, whether Idolatry began before the flood,
or not, we have undoubted reaſon to think, that people began
ſoon after the flood to depart from the fear, and true worſhip of
God; for ſcarce was Noah laid in his Grave ©, but the children
of men * (that is, thoſe of the falſe religion), inſtigated by ſome
motives which were diſpleaſing to God, enter'd into a combination
to build a city, and tower, whoſe top was to reach up to heaven.
What their principal intention was does not, plainly appear; whe-
ther for a refuge in caſe of a ſecond deluge 8; or to make for
themſelves a memorial h, or to erect a monument to the honour of
the Sun, as the chief cauſe of drying up the deluge (which ſome
learned men i have ſuppos'd, becauſe the pyramidal form of this
tower reſembled fire); or laſtly, whether they deſigned this tower
as a temple for ſome Idol: whatever were the motives, the fact
was contrary to the will of God k, and their deſign ſuch, as
tended to revive and promote that general corruption of faith
and manners, which had been fo lately and juſtly puniſh'd by
the univerſal deluge. |


8 Gen, Vi. 2. have been undutiful, and very wicked, Gen. ix.
bid. iv. . 2 5 26. .

c Ibid. vi. - . * Joſeph. Antiq. Lib. I. Cap. V. Univerl.

4 Ibid. v. 11, 12. Hiſt. p. 143.


© Some think that the foundation of Babel kh As the vulgar tranſlation, Gen. xi. 4. ſeems
was laid not more than ten years after Noah's to intimate, ; |
death; moſt people agree, not more than twenty- i Teniſon of Idolatry. |
eight. | k « This they begin to do, and now nothing

f Ham and his poſterity, viz. Canaan, who * will be reftrain'd from them, which they have
by the curſe of his grandfather Noah appears to © imagin'd to do.” Gen. xi. 6.


The


OF THE BRITISH RELIGION.


The Babylonians deſcended from Cuſh, the eldeſt fon of Ham,
claim the firft and higheſt antiquity z and it mult be allowed, hat
from them all the Eaſt and the North received their firſt Idolatries.
Egypt will allow no ſuperiour in antiquity, as to religious rites
and government; and if Ham, the youngeſt ſon of Noah, was King
of Egypt l, none can go far beyond it. The Egyptians ſpread their
abominations after many ages into Greece, and Greece communi-
cated the infection to the Weſt. The Phenicians lay claim alſo to
the precedence in this matter, and fay, that the firſt temple was
erected in Phenicia : they are deſcended from Canaan the youngeſt
ſon of Ham, and were not only remarkable for their dangerous
corruptions at home, as early as the time of Jacob and Moſes,
but by the improvements they firſt made in navigation, were
enabled to communicate the poiſon of their ſuperſtition, as far as
the extremities of the then diſcover'd world.

The general and chief motives for revolting from the worſhip of
the true God, were the tranſcendent purity of God, and the ſtrict-


55


Ser. .
Chictmo-
tives to Ido-


neſs of life and manners requir'd in his adorers ; people, therefore, lauy.


who delighted in violence and wandering luſts, were ſoon glad to
drop ſuch a ſyſtem of reſtraint, as the true religion, and by general
conſent frame to themſelves a more free, various, and extenſive
manner of worſhip, ſuch as might permit their paſſions to range
and expatiate at pleaſure : this could not be done, they found,
whilſt they continued to ſerve the true God, as he had directed;
the buſineſs, therefore, of the inventive and powerful, was to
ſet up a new ſort of Deities, who were to be pleas'd upon eaſier
terms; at leaſt, who would not reſent the frequent tranſgreſſions
of man in ſo ſevere a manner as God ſeem'd to have done, in the
fall of Adam, in the curſe of Cain, and in the univerſal deluge.
This being all that is neceſſary to obſerve concerning the riſe
and firſt motives of Idolatry, or that falſe religion which afterwards
took poſſeſſion of all the world, excepting only the little nation of


the Hebrews, let us now conſider what that falſe religion was, and


wherein its oppoſition to the true conſiſted.


We muſt not imagine that the falſe religion differ'd (as ſoon as sEcT. 11.
it began) in every point from the true, nor that all the truths of the Principles
firſt, and pure religion, were at once entirely rejected; but rather, t. Decceded


that, admitting the great and fundamental truths, the children of
men rais d ſuperſtitious fancies of their own thereupon ; invented
and inſiſted upon fables, admitted great impurities in manners


udon. 4


and worſhip, and in the end become wholly immers'd in every kind


1 Prid. Part I. Book VII.
5 of


— — — — — — — -
*


SECT. IV.


Their Gods,


and the order


in which
they were


deify'd,


OF THE BRITISH RELIGION.


of corruption, every extravagance of fin, and every abſurdity of
errour. Thus, for inſtance, —— They deny'd not the Being of a
God, but made to themſelves many Gods.

That there was a mediator neceflary, was a tradition from the
very firſt ages; and this tradition aroſe (likely) from the promiſe of
God (Gen. iii. 15.), and was confirmed by man's general con-
ſciouſneſs of his own infirmities and fin, and his want therefore of
ſome perſon to interpoſe, and reconcile ſo frail a creature to a God
of infinite purity m. This tradition, the firſt Idolaters did not
deny, but choſe mediators of their own fancy, the Sun, the Planets,
and departed Ghoſts: framing to themſelves a multiplicity of
tutelary, guardian Demi-gods.

Sacrifical rites were as old as the world; they aboliſhed not
ſacrifices, but polluted them by debaucheries, and murder, and
transferr'd them from their proper object, God the Creator, to the
creature. |

They acknowledged a Providence, and themſelves ir: perpetual
want of it, as to health, the neceſſaries and conveniences of life;
they had therefore Gods for every purpoſe, of every ſhape, as well
Coloſſuſes n as of a portable ſize o; and in all places, that they might
be at hand to help them upon any emergency.

That the ſoul was immortal, and that there was a future life,
was a truth too evidently taught from the firſt beginning to be de-
nied; but to make it ſubſervient to the ends of falſe religion, they
preſently imagined, and made it part- of their Divinity, that the
ghoſts of good, great, or ingenious men (whether good or wicked)
being ſuppos'd in a ſtate of happineſs after death, were capable of
aſſiſting, protecting, and enriching men in this life, whence the
worthip of the Manes, Heroes, and Demi- gods.

They deny'd not the neceſſity of worthip and ſupplication, but
introduc'd all manner of impurity, violence, and impoſture, and
proſtituted the ſacred office of prayer, due only to God, upon
Planets, Devils, Brutes, and ſenſeleſs Images. This was the firſt
ſtate of Idolatry, by which it appears how much eafzer it was to
pervert truth, to obſcure and mix it with the moſt egregious er-
rour, than to aboliſh it. FE

The firſt capital errour in religion was departing from the unity of
the Godhead, that is, worſhiping more than one Deity; and the firſt
thing that obtain'd to be put on an equal footing with it's Creator


u The neceſſity of a Mediator hetween God » See Nebuchadnezzar's image in the plains of
and Man, was a general notion which obtain'd Dura. Dan. iii. 1.

among all mankind from the beginning.” Prid. o Laban's Teraphim. Gen, xxxi. 30.
Connex. Part I, Lib. III. p. 177. Iſt edit. 8vo. 5 12


Was


„%%% ( f FF MN.


amg


8 aw a. && 4d ©


OF THE BRITISH RELIGION. 5


was the Sun b, a body by its ſuperiour ſplendour and heat, by its Ae bs.
apparent, and orderly motion (circumſtances of great glory to its
Maker, but of none to its ſelf) moſt apt to miflead weak minds
from ſurprize and admiration into reverence and worſhip. Io
the Sun, the Moon, and other Plancts were ſoon added, and all
ſuppos'd to be actuated by ſouls, or intelligent ſpirits of a middle
nature betwixt God and Man d; they were, therefore, concluded
more proper to receive the addrefles of weak and finful man,
whoſe petitions were too imperfe& to reach the throne of the ſu-
preme God, without ſuch a mediatorial introduction. To the
making of theſe celeſtial bodies Deities, no doubt their beneficial
influences upon fruits, plants, and animals, muſt be ſuppos'd to
have contributed; it being the moſt obvious and eaſy errour, to
worſhip what they ſaw, and felt the benefit of, as Ceſar obſerves

of the Gauls. Deorum numero eos ſolos ducunt, quos cernunt,

« & quorum opibus aperte juvantur, Solem & Vulcanum & Lu-
nam.“ Com. Lib. VI.

Some think that Image- worſhip ſucceeded next i, for that find-
ing theſe new Deities as much abſent from them as preſent (the
Sun and Planets paſſing as much time below the horizon, as above)
they invented Images to be always preſent with them, that ſo,
upon any emergency, they might have a Deity at hand, to con-
ſult and implore: to theſe Images they gave names and qualities,
which they ſtill bear; whence it happens, that Jupiter, Mars,
Mercury, &c. are Gods to be found among all nations. The
Images of the Sun are reckoned moſt ancient, by thoſe who think
Image-worſhip prior to the worſhip of the Manes ; and the Iſraelites
being much addicted to worſhip them, they are generally forbid
at the ſame time, and in the ſame place with the groves, as
if they were a part of the Grove-worſhip. Ifai. xvii. 8. and
xxvii. 9 5,

But, as the images of the Sun and Planets *, as well as of the The perſons
other ſorts, though diſtinguiſh'd by the proper Symbols, were ar
generally at farſt of the human form, others think that worſhiping
out of flattery or affection the perſons of abſent as well as preſent
Kings or victorious Generals, and the Ghoſts of them after they were


P 'Ov Tor Sale Jews. & ſhew, that all the Gods of Antiquity center
Otey pepper A, Soph, Oed. Tyran. Act I. © in the Sun,” Lett, of Mythol. p. 89.
Sc. 3. q Prid. Connex. Lib. III. Part I. p. 177.
The Chorus here ſwears by the Sun, as that aſt edit.
God who ſtood forth in front of the Heathen = Ibid. p. 187. .
Gods. Dacier ſays, Le plus grand des dieux,” They are call'd ie Subdiales ſtatuæ,
but it is more agreeable to the original to call * quaſi ſolares vel ſoli expoſitæ.“ Buxt. Lex.
him the firſt, or foremoſt of the Gods. Simulachra ſolaria: i. e. in bonorem ſolis facta
* wy learned and ingenious man (Gifb, Jun. Trem.
* Cuperi arpocrates) has lately attempted to * Wiſdom, xiv. 15, 16.


*


dead,


58 OF THE BRITISH RELIGION.


dead, preceded, and gave rife t to Image-worſhip, and it ſhould
ſeem reaſonable to ſuppoſe, that they muſt firſt have worſhiped
Perſons, before they pay'd adoration to their Statues. As ſoon
as the Hero was dead, the ſame people, which had a veneration fo:
him when alive, were ſoon perſuaded by their. ardent leaders, to


pay him divine honours after his death, eſpecially whilſt the re- :


membrance of his perſon, and the glory of his actions were recent
in every one's mind; and (leaſt the peoples reſpect and affection,


Images
firſt wor-


Memorials, ſtrength, ſize, and ſpirit of the departed ; now it is not likely, !


afterwards


as Deities of Would ſay, that the prieſts or great men ſhould make uſe of this


Intelligence


device of Image-worſhip, till they found it neceſſary, to continue,
and Power. Þ ahh £ ;
and ftrengthen their ſuperſtition. Thus from the Manes or Ghotts, 8
their wandering worſhip was ſoon laviſh'd upon Images; and
having Images to repreſent their human Gods, the faſhion ſoon 8


Now all theſe Images were made in human ſhape, becauſe the i
imagination of man was not able to conceive a more excellent
form, nor to give more exaited ideas of their abſent Deitie,


than by repreſenting them in the likeneſs of man.


This I conjecture to be the moſt natural and likely method for BY
Idolaters to have proceeded in the firft ages u, but I muſt here RG
obſerve, that ſoon after the Images of their Gods were introduc d,
they were conſecrated with great pomp, various ceremonies,
feſtivals, and ſolemn ſupplications, and every one of the numerous
aſſembly was to pay his adorations before the new Deity. Thee
adorations might, in the beginning, be directed primarily to the %
Perſon or Planet whoſe image was ſet up, and only a ſecondary
worſhip paid to the Image itſelf; but the repreſentative ſoon became
equal to the principal, and the copy took place of the original;
for in a little while it became the general opinion, that by means . i
incantation, and magical charms, the power and influence of th:
Sun, Moon, or Demi-god, was brought to reſide in thoſe Images, al


after they had been ritually deify'd.


Image-worſhip ſoon ſpread itſelf over all the Eaſt, thence into
Egypt, and from Egypt into Greece, and became the univerſal re- 1
ligion of the Gentile world, till. the Magi of Perſia form'd a conl- 8 3
derable oppoſition to it, teaching, that no Image ought to be 9


t The original of Idolatry came from the v Firſt they worſhiped Planets, then the D 8
conſecration of ſome eminent perſons aſter death, Manes of Heroes, then Images both of Hes


according to Sanchoniathon, See Stillingfleet, and Planets,
Orig. Sacr. 4to edit. p. 32.


. 4 =


which were the grounds of their worſhip, might cool and languiſh 8
in time) Images were invented to keep freſh and lively the idea of
ſhiped as what was dead; they were intended to perpetuate the beauty,


* 2 >
Py J 8 7
» 1 * =


=
TIF N 1 ** n fee ie 2
8 * 2 * n ' tht" 1 8 In 4 — N — * -FA * . . ” ws W .
$4 ' 2 t ,
Wk 7” > 4 K n d : hs — » *,
ERS $5.3) n 5 As. oy 5 Shad: 4 bs 46


2 8 e 8 8 22 ** n
8 WY i & « 22 D 2 — * N RT © Jas LF 0 .
1 ws "FLY" £ 7 1 lh 4 3 . 2 N by x b. 8 84 5 5 4 : "= ht 1 4
Ca al , \ 1" wa n 3 n R „ _, G ; N
2 5 1 0 1 * nr a*% Fr OO Wal > Rt ** F = 7
: | - — A — | k N
9 7 |


N 4 MC WY rg:
o * + 2

T4 : 1

A mm * 4: 1 .
4 « "KI ” 4
1 4 7
af 1 . © x

* . 4 4


OFTHE BRITISH RELIGION.


rd, but that both the good and bad Principle (or God, for
=. held boch to be Gods, calling the firſt Oromazes, the ſecond
Arimagius), were to be worſhiped only by fire. Thenceforward


-


_ worſhipers of Images were diſtinguiſh'd by the name of
edbians, and the worſhipers by fire ſtil'd Magians, and in India
and ſome parts of Perſia fome remains of cach Sect ſtill con-
tinue.

Magick *, Witchcraft, or the ſcience of correſponding with aaa.
W Evil-ſpirits, ſome think is as ancient as the antediluvian world;
and indeed, amidſt the numerous corruptions of thoſe carly ages


it is not improbable, that the rapacious, gloomy, anxious, and


vindictive, ſhould embrace this horrid commerce with Demons,


an intercourſe which (whether imaginary or real) deluded them with


1 the proſpect of ſuperiour knowledge, of poſſeſſing what they luſted


after, of curſing their enemies, and exccuting all their envy, malice,
and revenge, by incantations not to be reſiſted by human talents ;
this was a total deſertion from the ſervice of God, and lifting into


W that of the Devil, and proves that when mankind had thrown


aſide the unity of the Godhead, they could not only condeſcend
to worſhip the meaneſt productions of nature, but the molt de-


| teſtable and bandon'd of all beings.


It muſt next be obſerv'd, that the Gentiles, from the remotell rice.


antiquity, worſhip'd Fire or Light; at firſt, perhaps, only in the
Sun, as the fountain of light and heat ; afterwards they never wor-
ſhip'd without fire on the altar, as the medium to tranſpire
their addreſſes unto the deity ; ſoon after (for crrour is infinite,
and one miſtake in ſuch ſolemn caſcs begets another) the Fire
itſelt was worſhip'd. |

Hyde, indeed *, denies that the Perſians worſhip'd fire, call-
ing it not the Cultus Divinus, but the Cultus Civilis: but this
nice diſtinction can ſignify no more with regard to the generality,
than that in their religion there were different degrees of reſpect
and adoration, more and ſtricter rites and ceremonies attending the
worſhip of ſome Deities, than what were allowed to that of others.
For as they allowed their holy fires to be the Schechinah or habi-
tation of God, it was very difficult, if not impoſſible, to keep
the mind of the vulgar, and leſs contemplative, from paying a kind
of adoration to them; and therefore the Perſians were indeed
worſhipers of Fire y.


Magick had ſeveral parts, as Aſtrology x De Vet. Perſ. Rel.
Witchcraft, Palmiſtry, Hydromancy, Augury,
Ke. The chief part of the Druid Magick y Prid. Connex. and Montfauc, Tom, II.
conſiſted in foretelling, from the entrails of hu- p. 394-
man victims,


Nimrod,


59


1 259 nd — = -


60


Air, &c.


Plants.


Erected


Stones.


.
Worſhip.


OF THE BRITISH RELIGION.


Nimrod, grandſon of Ham, is ſaid by St. Auguſtine to have been
the firſt who compell'd his ſubjects to worſhip Fire in Chaldea.

The other elements, Air, Earth, and Water were alſo deify'd, it
becoming a cuſtom very ſoon, to make Gods of every thing which
appeared either capable of doing harm, or neceſſary and beneficial
to human life : the ſame reaſon made them proceed to deify plants
and herbs *, led thereto by their experienced medicinal virtue, b
the beauty of flowers, or (in hot countries) by the friendly ſhade


of trees.


They deſcended ſtill lower, and making rude and ſhapelefs ſtones


the repreſentations of their fancied Deities, ſoon learn'd to forget
and think no more of the abſent repreſented Deity, and paid


their adoration to the Symbol, the huge lifeleſs lump of Stone;
this kind of Idolatry was very ancient among the Egyptians and
Phenicians a. It would be uſeleſs in this ſurvey of Gentiliſm, to
purſue the Egyptians through all the variety of creatures, Beaſts,


Birds, and Reptiles which they worſhip'd; and it is now time


to ſee in what manner they worſhip'd this confus'd multitude of 3


Gods.

Having chang'd the object of their devotion, and adopted the
Creature for their Deity, inſtead of the Creator, they preſerv d
however, ſome general Reſemblance to the true manner of Wor-


ſhip. They worſhip'd by Sacrifices, by Meat and Drink Offer-


ings, by Proſtration, by Supplication, by Feſtivals, and in publick


aſſemblies.

The great buſineſs of the Devil was not to obliterate what went
before, but to turn, change, and pervert in the moſt ſecret, caly,
and 1mperceptible manner, every rite, doctrine, and inſtitution, ſo
as it might beſt promote Immorality, Deluſion, and Impiety. And
indeed, this was no hard matter to do, when once mankind had
departed from that one great truth, the unity of the Godhead. This
principle would have kept them ſteady, excluded every fanciful im-
poſture, and permitted nothing in worſhip which was not agreeable
to that God, who had ſo ſufhe'-ntly revealed his will from the be-
ginning of the world, that no one could be at a loſs to know
what was acceptable to him, and what was diſpleaſing; but having
accumulated to themſelves an infinite number of Gods, 'tis hardly
credible to what an exceſs of errour and pollution in worſhip, they
were ſoon expos d. Every new Deity had his peculiar attributes, his
prevailing paſſions aſſigned, and was to be worſhip'd after ſome new
and diſtin method, ſo that it ſoon became a myſtery and ſcience
(and no doubt was continued as ſuch by the lucrative in all-places)


Some ſay before the flood, Sanchon. Euſeb. prep. Evan. 2 See Erected Stones, Lib, III.
to


-_


SES” 4 *
8 7 o
ED TS + bn” x 5
8 2 al a
by Ga 4 75.44 1. hy
Fd 8 2 2


hd os — A Wy = ©


OF TREDBRITTISH KELICION,


to underſtand by what rites each particular God was to be ap-
proached b. Every new rite multiply'd error, for every method
of worſhip muſt be wrong, that is, either abſurd or wicked,
which has an improper object; for there is no worſhiping a falſe
God with true Religion; no ſerving Idols with pure devotion.
Inſtead, therefore, of the true fear of God, a gloomy kind of


awe, and religious dread, conſiſting of Grove and Night-worſhip, |


was introduced.

Inſtead of the Sabbath, which was intended to recall people
from their wordly buſineſs to a ſerious recollection of, and
thankſgiving for the Creation, Feſtivals to their Demi-gods were


inſtituted.


Inſtead of the few Altars which were erected by the ſervants of
the living God in a few places (ſuch as were ſanctify'd by the
appearance of God, or his Angels), the Heathens ereced Altars
on every high hill, and under every green tree; and this multi—
plicity of Altars tended evidently and neceſſarily to vary the ſer-
vice performed at them, each officiating prieſt ſtriving to make
his Altar finer, and by the novelty of ſome rite and ceremony,
to render it more engaging, and better frequented, than that of
his neighbours. |

Inſtead of the true purity of heart, a falſe ſuperficial purity
was ſubſtituted, conſiſting of ablution, white garments, outward
ſprinklings, and luſtrations.

Inſtead of ſacrifices (moſt acceptable to God by the holineſs of
mind, and innocency of the hands that offer them) the ſacrifices of
the heathens were ordain'd to conſiſt, not of ſheep, or oxen, as at
firſt, but of thoſe things which were moſt precious to the heart of
man, as human victims, and even their own children e.

The worſhip of the Sun, performed when he was in the meri-
dian height of his power, ſoon taught men in thoſe hot countries
of the Eaſt to raiſe their Altars, and perform their devotions in
Groves; and, after Sacrifice, Luxury and Debauch enſued.

The worſhip of the Moon was performed in the night; this


introduced every kind of pollution, which the day in ſome meaſure
would have ſhamed,


b The Egyptian prieſts were particularly ſe- great originals us'd by the people of God) to
cret, and almoſt impenetrably reſerv'd with re- think that nothing was too precious for a ſacred
gard to their rites, offering, and that to ſacrifice what was deareſt

© dacrifices were to conſiſt, at firſt, and likely to man would be moſt acceptable unto God :
by God's appointment, of beaſts without ſpot or hence offering up the moſt beautiful captives, the
blemiſh, and offerings of the beſt of fruits; firſt-begotten ſon, the moſt noble youths, and
hence came the cuſtom among the Gentiles the deareſt friends,

(whoſe rites were but the diſtorted copies of the


R When


61


22 — — -
ww _Abes 2 * --


c


—— +


SECT. VI. s
Why the and Idols there ſhould be preferv'd fo near a reſemblance in the


OF THE BRITISH RELIGION.


When Demons began to be worſhiped, Divination, Oracle,
Incantations, and all the groundleſs fancies of Augury d, naturally
followed.

When Fire became a Deity, the children of the Idolater were
offered and burnt, that the Deity might have them, and be pro-
pitiated. |


But nothing contributed more to produce and eſtabliſh thoſe :


abominations than the deifying men, and, to complete the aflembly,
women. For their Heroes (though fortunate leaders, or inventers of


uſeful arts) being ſome of the race of the firſt Idolaters, muſt haye a
been exceedingly corrupted in Morals and Religion, and were no
ſooner made Gods after their deceaſe, than their vices were adopted, |


imitated, conſecrated: hence it naturally became the faſhion to juſtify,
to practiſe, to form a rite of worſhip of thoſe very Immoralities
which their new-made God was remember'd to have addicted him-


ſelf unto. If he was cruel and bloody, he was to be facrificed
unto by human victims; if he was luſtful or drunken, proftitu- "8
tion was to attend his feſtival, and his propitiation was to be a -
ſcene of intemperance and debauch; if he had been avaritious
the innocent and weak were to be plundered to make aich of.
fering to his altar. In ſhort, if we conſider the great indulgencies ©


which ſuch a religion as this of Gentiliſm granted to every paſſion;
that there was no vice, but what could plead in its mitigation,
that it had been the favourite of ſome of their Deities, it is no
wonder that Idolatry began ſo ſoon, that it ſpread fo univerſally,


and ſo totally corrupted both the practice and the worſhip of its A _


followers. h
It would be more ſurpriſing, that in ſuch a variety of Deities


ſame, or like


Idolatry in Method of adoration ©, betwixt the moſt diſtant nations. This, ! 4
all Nations. ſay, would indeed be very ſurpriſing, if we did not at the fame
time recollect, that all Idolatry began as early as the family oi


+ F
by 2 ww
4 j Be -
\ 1

* *


Ham; proceeded upon the fame general motives of licentiouſneſs;
that the Sun and Planets, open to every eye, were the firſt Gods,
and eaſily continued the firſt deluſion, as attracting in every region
the notice and adminiſtration of the ignorant and wicked; that
one and the ſame principle, Polytheiſm, will produce a multitude
of corruptions in all places; that Grove-worſhip, being the conſe-
quence of worſhiping the Sun, produc'd every where debauch;
worſhiping the Moon, proſtitution ; worſhiping Demons, magick

4 Augury was founded at firſt (as ſome ſup- with a very innocent intention to prove the de-
poſe) an the tradition, of Noah's ſending forth, creaſe of the waters.


firſt the crow, and then the doves from the ark, e $acrifices, Fruit, and Meat-offerings, Grove-
worſhip, unclean Myſteries,


and


. * | ms of — ww


FF


* -
77 S *. 2 FCC ETE JO ' .
3 . 8 „ WW TE TIITIR „
1 . * 4 SEO l buy 3 End 8 * 3 2 * 2
A ” 5 — * -
* -
* =
4 A
. * 1 e
, k 4 * E 7 *

* * * *


OF THE BRITISH RELIGION:


and divination ; deifying wicked men, immoral rites ; that ſa—
crifices (having been the univerſal cuſtom of every falſe and mi-
mick religion, as well as the true) degenerated eaſily into the bar-
barity of ſacrificing human victims, as being ſuperiour in their na-
ture to thoſe of the brute kind; that, afterwards, their drink-
offerings were the blood of their victims, and that every kind of
cruelty muſt become familiar to thoſe, who could make Religion
conſiſt in murder, and look'd upon the moſt unnatural butchering
their own children, as the higheſt proof of devotion to their
Gods.

We may obſerve in the next place, that all this ſyſtem of abſur-
dity, impurity, and inhumanity, was not only propagated every
where upon the ſame principles, but all conducted by one hand; 1
mean the authour of errour, the father of lyes, as he is called; when
we conſider all this, we ſhall no more wonder to find the ſame
ſuperſtitions and abominable worſhip in the farthermoſt parts of
India, and in the weſternmoſt parts of Europe: the ſame in
Babylon, Egypt, and Phenicia; the ſame in Greece, Germany,
and Britain: what the Brachmans were in India, the Druids were in
Gaul; what the Magi did in Perſia, the fame, or even more,
ſays Pliny, did the Britiſh Druids : in ſhort Grove-worſhip, with
all its train of horrors, divination, the myſterious rites of ma
gie, human ſacrifices and proſtitutions, are to be found, more or
leſs, in the religion of all countries, and for the ſame reaſons ;
the authour was the ſame, and alike the principles : the root was
corrupted, and from thence the infection was ſpread into all the
moſt diſtant branches of mankind.


It has been long diſputed, whence the Druid diſcipline and ſuper- The Dm—


ids like other
Idolaters.


ſtition had its riſe; but if we compare it with the ancient Gentile
Religion, every Tenet and Rite which the Druids taught and
and practiſed, every Deity which they are ſaid to have worſhiped,
we ſhall find to have been common to them, and the moſt an-
cient Idolaters of the Eaſt. The moſt diſtinguiſhing parts of


their (the Druids) ſuperſtition, are the Grove-worſhip, and their 1 Gre


human Victims; the firſt of theſe was ſo common among the worlbip.


Canaanites in the time of Joſhua, and attended with ſo much im-
piety and lewdneſs, that it made their utter extirpation inſiſted
upon by the only true God, infinitely merciful and benevolent.
One reaſon why the Druids were ſo fond of Groves (of Oak eſpe-
clally) was becauſe of the Miſletoe which grew on the Oak Trees,
to which they paid a ſort of worſhip, but even in this they are
not alone: the Perſian and Maſſagetes thought the Miſletoc ſome-
thing divine, as well as the Druids : the Grecians had their vocal
Oaks at Dodona, that gave forth oracles; and the Arcactans

4 thought


OS)


Buman
victimo.


OF THE BRITISH RELIGION.


thought that ſtirring the waters of a fountain with an Oak-bough,
would produce rain. Evander was ſacrificing in his Groves,
without the city, when Zneas came to him f. The ancient
Tyrrhenians had the fame cuſtom ; the firſt temple in Egypt,
that of Jupiter Hammon (or Ham the firſt King) was in a facred
Grove.

As for the cruel cuſtom of ſacrificing human victims, tis true
that it cannot be enough condemned and deteſted, and that the
Druids continued this horrid practice longer than any nation or
ſect we know, and perhaps practiſed it more frequently; but tis
as true, that we hardly read of any conſiderable nation, but what
has had the ſame cuſtom (at leaſt upon extraordinary occaſions)
recorded of its, The Egyptians had this abominable cuſtom b,
as alſo the Phenicians i, whoſe King, Chronus k (or Saturn), ſa-
crificed his own ſon during a publick calamity !: and when Saturn
became a God, is it any wonder that he ſhould be ſuppos'd to
delight in ſuch facrifices? From the Phenicians the Iſraelites n
learn'd to devote, and offer by fire, their own children to Moloch n,
another name for Saturn, From them the Carthaginians tranſ-
planted alſo with their colony the ſame bloody rites, and in the firſt
ages of their commonwealth, uſed to ſacrifice to their God Saturn
the ſons of their moſt eminent citizens; in after- times they ſecretly
bought and bred up children for that purpoſe. In the year before
Chriſt 308, thinking to reform more effectually what was amiſs by
a publick ſacrifice, the Carthaginians offered two hundred ſons of
the nobility, and no fewer than three hundred more offered up
themſelves voluntarily. Diod. Sicul. Lib. XX. Cap. I.

The ſame author gives us a particular account of the manner
in which this barbarous offering was made; the children were
put into the hands of a brazen ſtatue of Saturn, and the hands
being ſo contriv'd as to bend downwards to the earth, the unhappy
victims dropt cafily through, and fell into a furnace prepared for


them below o.


fn. VIII. ver. 102. Ibid 597, & En. deareſt friends and relations to Saturn. See


XI. ver. 739.

E Vide Smith's Syntagma de Druid. p. 77,
&c.
h © FEgyptii vivos homines Typhoni ſuo
„ comburere ſolebant.“ Bulæus in Frik. 162.

i See Lev. xviii. 21. Deuter, xviii. 10, 11.
2 Kings. XxXiil. 10.

K Chandler (and others) think him Ham. An-
ſwer to Moral Philoſ. p. 184.

! It was cuſtomary (ſays Phil. Bibl. from
Sanchoniath.) among the Phenicians in great
perils of the ſtate, to ſacrifice ſome one of their


Pool, ad Deuter. xviii. 10.

m See the Scripture Hiſt, paſſim. 2 Kings
xvii. 31. Pſ. 106. 37. Jer. vii. 31.

n Non dubitandum quin fl Saturnus.“
Pol. Ibid.

o Ibid. Lib. XX. Cap. J.
« Mos fuit in populis quos condidit advena Dido,
Poſcere cæde Deos veniam, ac flagrantibus aris,
Infandum dictu, parvos imponere natos !”


Sil. Ital. Lib. IV.


The


OF THE BRNITI SH RELIGION.
The Perſians had the ſame horrid cuſtom P ; the Scythotauri


7d ſtrangers to Diana, the Laodiccans a virgin to Pallas d;
tue Thracians, and thoſe who liv'd on the river Boryſthenes hac!


ta ſame ſacrifices r.


The Grecians alſo admitted the fame dreac-
ful rites.

& lphigenia was to have been ſacrific'd to Diana by her father
Agamemnon, to obtain a favourable winds; the Arcadians 1i-
crific'd a boy to Jupiter Lycæus t; the Indians and the Cretans
killed men overcharg'd with banqueting, and young boys, to


XX $aturn on his feſtivals: in Chios and Salamis they cut the throats


of men; and then tore them to pieces as an offering to their
W Gods.

= A temple dedicated to the ſame Divinity there was in Arcadia,
in which girls were whip d to death, as boys were in Sparta, at tlie
W altacs of Mercury and Orthia Diana; and Ariſtomenes of Nleſſene
is reported to have {lain three hundred men at one ſacrifice to Ju-


= | piter Ithometes ; the Lacedemonians alſo were mad enough to ſa-


neu Inga or Emperour.


crifice human victims to Mars. In the anniverſary feaſt of Bacchus,
the Greeks ſacrific d living men. The Cimbrians did the ſame ;
and if we may believe Spaniſh writers, the American Indians of
Peru were taught the ſame leſſons of inhumanity, and ſeldom ſa-
crific'd leſs than two hundred children upon the acceſſion of a
To mention no more, the Romans were
as guilty in this particular as other nations. Tit. Liv. relates, that
human victims were offered up after the deſeat of Cannæ. And
Dionyſ. of Halicarnaſſus (in his firſt book of Roman Antiq.) in-
forms us, that Jupiter and Apollo ſent dreadtul calamities into all
the coaſts of Italy for this reaſon, namely, becauſe the tenth part
of the natives was not offered up in ſacrifice. And this cuſtom
continued at Rome many ages, for the Romans were not forbid
human ſacrifices till the Conſulſhip of Cn. Corn. Lepidus, and Pub.
Lic. Craſſus in the 657th year of their city, 97 years before Our
Saviour, whence Pliny (Lib. XXX. Cap. I.) infers that the Romans
uſed human ſacrifices *till that time u.


Al. ab Al. vol. II. pag. 750.

4 Pompon, Mel. lib. II. cap. i.

r Pliny, lib. VIII. ch. xxii.

d ra neun di hala, ſays Sophocles, Electra
Act II. pag. 225


God for ſuch a ſhocking ſacrifice; but there &
not the leaſt argument recorded in ſcripture to
enforce, what an injunction entirely new and ſo
unnatural might well require, to make it prevail
over ſo righteous a man. The cuſtom therefore


-


On n'offroit pas alors d'autres victimes a
cette Deefle.” Dac. tranſlat. None but virgins
were at that time acceptable victims to Diana.

See Pliny, lib. VIII. pag. 22.

Some think the Gentiles borrow'd this dread-
ful rite from the hiſtory of Abraham and Iſaac;
but if this had not been a rite uſual among the
Heathens before, Abraham would not have been
commanded to it, nor probably obey'd, without
ſome more particular and cogent reaſons given by


ſeems more ancient, and God ſeems to have com-
manded this action not only for the tryal and juſti-
fication of the patriarch, but that he might thereby
have an opportunity of convincing him how much
he abhorr'd ſuch ſacrifices of the heathen, by in-
terpoling in a miraculous manner, to prevent the
innocent ſon from dying an immature and violent
death, and the obedient father from imbruing his
hands in the blood of his only ſon.


8 | As


66 OF THE BRITISH RELIGION.


Magick, c. As the Druids were by no means ſingular in their facrifices, 6
neither in their magick, their purifications, diſcipline, and places i
worſhip; of all which traces are to be diſcovered in the ancie WY
hiſtory of the moſt conſiderable nations; and, therefore, whilſt ve
have been following the ſteps of Gentiliſm, and Idolatry in general,
and attending it from its firſt beginning till it had ſpread its poiſon 2
into all countries, I can't but think that we have been at the ſame
time laying before the reader the original, and nature of the Drud
ſuperſtition. The ſeeds of Idolatry are the ſame in kind, and nature;
and though they thrive more luxuriantly in ſome foils than in
others, and contract ſome mixtures and peculiarities from the
Climate they grow in, enough to diſtinguiſh the Idolaters into dif. Þ
ferent ſeas, yet the plants are of the ſame tribe; and indeed,
Druidiſm has all the ſtrongeſt features to ſhew in evidence of its
birth, that it is but a branch of the firſt general and moſt ancient
Idolatry : tis but a ſect (though eminently diftinguith'd by e
learning and ſtrianeſs of the prieſts) that differs in ſome ceremonial; FR
and ordinary particulars from the ſects of other nations, who either:
ſettled in the Eaſt, where mankind firſt inhabited, or paſs'd from
theſe firſt ſettlements into the moſt diſtant countries, carrying the
ſame religious eſſentials throughout the whole Gentile world. 2M
For all this the reaſons have been given before, namely, becauſe
theſe eflentials were found to ſuit beſt with the licentious temper af
mankind, and were ſecretly promoted in every nation by one and
the ſame power of darkneſs, Satan well knowing that his iniquitous RY
ſyſtem would moſt eaſily conduce, in this life to the utter cor-
ruption, and in the next to the certain perdition, of its unhappy Þ
followers. |
Of Druidiſm we now come to treat more particularly, and
circumſtantially. Y


CHA F.-
Of the Name and Claſſes of the Druid Prieſthood.


HE name Druid is by many ſuppos'd to be deriv'd from
f the Greek word Apu;, an oak; an opinion which has been BY
adopted by ſome learned men x: becauſe the veneration of this ſect for
Oak, the tree, leaves, and excreſcencies of the Miſletoe exceeds
every thing of that kind which we read of other nations. But
Strabo is of opinion, that in the names of foreign nations (all
which the Greeks call'd barbarous) we are not to ſeek for Greek


* Pliny, lib. xvi. Sheringham, &c. |
etymolo-


“ AE fs co ER. oo


ee


OrF-THE:DRUILTIDS.


etymologies y: and, indeed, this derivation, though ſo obvious, is
thought much too modern *, the Druids having been famous from
the moſt remote antiquity; long before Greece could boaſt of her
wiſe men, or philoſophers, who were really bcholden to the Druids,
and copied them in many particulars a: and therefore it is not likely
that they ſhould borrow their name from a nation which they ſo
much ſurpaſs'd in antiquity.

As the Druids were Prieſts of Gaul and Britain, it is more proba-
ble that their name was taken from the Celtick language, upon which
the language of the Gauls and Britans (originally the ſame) was
grounded: in this language Derw ſignifies an Oak®; and Deru as
the Armoricans write ite, Derven and Derwen as the Corniſh and
Welſh, has the ſame ſignification ſtill, and therefore fome have fup-
pos'd them to have call'd their prieſts Derwidden, in Latin Querque-
tulani d. Some derive Druid from the Britiſh Tru, and Wis, (viz.
call'd in Britiſh Deruidhon, 1. e. perſapientes', The Turkiſh devo-
tees call'd Derviſes are ſuppos'd to derive their name from the ſame
fountain. Sacerdotum genus apud Turcas ab antiquiſſimis tempo-
« ribus conſervatum Dervis, & nomine, & re Druides.” Keyſler,
p. 152. In Scotland they were call'd Durcergliis. In Spain, Turduli,
or Turditanih: where we muſt obſerve, that what is Der or Dre
with the Celts, is with the German Celto-Scythes, Deur, vel Door,
ſo that with them the Druids were call'd Deurwitteni: the firſt
{yllable of all which partakes of. the root from whence the other
names of this prieſthood are ſo evidently deriv'd k.

There are other opinions about this name. The primitive word
Drud (in the plural Drudion) is thought to have ſeveral ſignifica-
tions. Firſt, it ſignifies a Revenger ; 2dly, Cruel; gdly, Valiant,
or Hardy; 4thly, Dear, or precious! Some“ derive it from the
Celtic word Trewe, that is, Faith; or from Drut, a Friend;
others from the Hebrew Deruſſim, Druſſim, or Driſſim, that is,
people of contemplation”; and the learned Keyſler (pag. 37.), ſays
that Draoi, (Deuteron. xviii. 11, Bibli, Hibern.) in the plural num-
ber Draioithe, ſignifies a Magician or Inchanter, from which, Ceſar
and others, made the word Druides,


Y © Placet Strabonis conſilium, qui negat in J. Gorop. Becanus not. on Cæſ. Comm. edit.
** appellationibus gentium barbararum quærendas Delph. lib. 6.


© eſte etymologias Grzcas.” Hoffman in Druid. f Gloſlar. pag. 107.
Paz. 111. Frickius, pag. 27. - £ Hect. Bocth. lib. ii. Eli. Sched. 256.
Elias Sched. De diis Germanis, pag. 258. b Sched. lib. ii. chap. ii.
Antiquiſſimi enim hi (viz. Druidæ) apud i Baxter, ibid. 107.
© Celtas, doctores, & ipſis Græciæ ſapientibus k Druwydd, Drudau, Drudion, Drudon, and
** excellentiores, qui poſtea longo temporjs decur- Derwyddon were equally names of the Druids,
u ſecuti ſunt Druidarum ſectam.“ Sched. ibid, Rowland, pag. 247.
> Frickius, pag. 24. Jones to Tate in Toland of the Druids, pag.
© Sammes, pag. 104. 187, 188. * Bucherus in Frick.
Sheringham, pag. 105. m Hoffman, ibid. ac ſupra.


_- However,


68


OF THE DERUFDS


However, it is moſt likely that the Druides were call'd ſo from
their ſuperſtitious regard for the Oak- tree, and that they had not


their name from the Greek word Aęre, but from the Celtic Deru,


in the firſt ſyllable of which the E muſt be pronounced very ſhort,
if at all, like the Hebrew Shevah.

Druid, then, (whenceſoever deriv'd) was the general name of the
Britiſh Prieſthood, and there were three degrees of Druids", The
ſuperiour claſs was call'd The Druids, by way of eminence o. They


had under, and next to them, the Bards ; who, though inferiour in


rank, are ſaid to be prior in antiquityP. They were remarkable for
an extraordinary talent of memory 4; and therefore, in all probabi-
lity, particularly employ'd to teach their young diſciples, who were
chiefly to learn to Remember, as the principal qualification in
ſocieties where no written rules were allowed. Theſe were alſo the
poets of the Britans and Gauls r. |

The Eubates, or Vates, were of the third and loweſt claſs, their
name, as ſome 5 think, deriv'd from Thada which amongſt the Iriſh
commonly ſignifies Magick, and their Buſineſs was to foretell future
events; and to be ready on all common occaſions to ſatisfy the en-

uiries of the anxious and credulous*.

Theſe are the ancient diviſions of the Druid Prieſthood, and
theſe, all the names which we meet with in ancient hiſtory ; but
when any family had been long prieſts to a particular Deity, as
Apollo, Mercury, and the like, that family look'd upon itſelf as pe-
culiarly conſecrated to the ſervice of that God, and the Druids took
names to themſelves, and children, deriv'd from the name of the God


they ſerv'd". But that this was a modern cuſtom, introduc'd after


that the Druids, mixing much with the Greeks and Romans, had
departed from their ancient ſimplicity, is certain, and we are not
now enquiring after the modern, but the ancient Druids,


n Teiæ Pac T TyYwwpueruy, Strabo, lib. iv. on „ imitator or teacher of what was invented by
which Leland (De Script. Britann. p. b.) makes * the Privardd : 3dly, the Arwyddvardd, that
this remark, ** Strabo videtur tria illuftrium in © is, an Enſign Bard, or Herald at Arms.” Jones
< literis virorum genera recenſere.“ Frickius, in Toland, ibid. 192. But this, I believe, is 3
p. 33. & Martin de la Relig. des Gaules, tom. I. diviſion unknown to the ancient Druids.


pag. 173, &c. s Keyſler, Antiq. Septentrion. p. 36.
9 Ingeniis celſiores. t Some reckon the Eubates the ſecond rank ;
P Sammes, « The Bards were Singers, the Eubates Prieſts
q Rowland, p. 61. & and Phyſiologers, and the Druids to their Phy-


Cum dulcis lyræ modulis cantitarunt, lau- „ fiology added Ethicks.” Rowl. p. 65. But 48


dationibus rebuſque poeticis ſtudent.” Ammian. their office was inferiour to that of the Bards, |


Marcell. The Welſh ſubdivided thisclaſs into three have, with ſeveral others, plac'd them in an inte.
parts: „ Firſt, the Privardd, Prince of learned riour claſs.
men, or firſt inventor; 2dly, the Poſvardd, v Rel, des Gaul, p. $88,


CHAP.


pw — | 8


OF RED.


r .


= 0/ he Countries inhabited by the Druids, probably only Gai!


and Britain.


HAT the Druids inhabited and in ſacred matters preſided
over Britain, and the Britiſh Ifles, as well as all Gaul, is not


to be doubted. Tis alſo aſſerted by ſome moderns, that there


were Druids in Spain”; but this remains to be prov'd, and if
there were really any, they paſs'd from Gaul to Spain, by means of
the vicinity of ſituation, and muſt have been modern and inconſi-
derable, by their being taken ſo little notice of in hiſtory, and not
near ſo ancient, noble, powerful, and well diſciplin'd, as in Gaul


and Britain.


It is much debated, whether there were any Druids in Germanv*; No Druids


7


Ceſar is very expreſs that the Germans had no Druids, but in this
he is thought to be miſtaken?, and to be flatly contradicted by Ta-
citus, who in his account of the Germans ſhews a great deal of ac-
curacy, and appears to have been rather better inform'd, as to his
ſubject, than Ceſar æ. Tacitus is certainly very faithful and particular,
but he does not appear to contradict Ceſar, nor Ceſar to have ſaid any
thing but what was truth: theſe two great authors may be reconcil'd,
as it ſeems to me, with little trouble. Ceſar's words are theſe, Ger-
* manos neque Druidas habere qui rebus divinis præſint, neque
« ſacrificiis ſtudere; that is, the Germans have no Druids, no
ſuperiour, noble order of prieſts, famous for diſcipline and learning,
inveſted with an abſolute authority in all ſacred affairs: “ neque
« facrificiis ſtudere, they did not mind their ſacrifices much; they
were not curious and learned in explaining the circumſtances that
occurr'd during their ſacrifices; they were not ſolicitous about, nor
well vers'd in, the art of prediQting future events from the entrails of


the victims, as the Druids, and other Gentile nations were: this is


all Cefar ſays; he does not deny that they had prieſts, but he ſays
they had no Druids ; he does net deny that they had ſacrifices, but
he ſays they were unſkilful and unlearned; they did not apply them-


» © Hiſpani quippe a Celtis traxerunt originem Frickius, p. 44. and Keyſler, p. 378. hold the
& una religionem eorum hauſerunt.” El. affirmative, but are far from proving it.
Sched. lib. ii. ch. ii.“ Celtiberi dicti a com- y Contra cæterorum fidem tradit,” viz, Cæ-


S miſtione Celtarum & Iberorum.“ Ibid. ex far. Sched. 254.


Diod. Sic. lib. v. 2 « Plura igitur ac certiora de religione Ger-
x Leibnitius, Wachteris, Calvoerius, and “ manorum Tacito nota quam Czfari.” Lip-
other learned men among the Germans deny it. fius in not. ad Tacit, de M. G. cap. viii.
Chr. Aug. Fabrettus, Dithmarus, Eli. Schedius,
T ſelves


in Germany.


— ow * * Px
= P ˙ CO EEE”


. by lots among the Germans in all private domeſtick affairs e, and the AY


OF THE DRUIDS. |
ſelves to ſtudy their ſacrifices, nor endeavour to reap that informati,, la
concerning futurity, which their ſacrifices might have afford., wi
them; and this is very true, the German nation continuing, ev


« 4 1


l ; : ain
to the times of Tacitus, a plain, ſimple, uncultivated, and an un.


learned nation, as appears all along in his account of them a; nor; N
what Ceſar ſays here, contradicted or refuted by what Tacitus al.

vances. For Tacitus does not ſay that that the Germans had au, 5
Druids, any diftinguiſh'd order of prieſts, form'd into ſocieties b; %

ſtrict as to their rites, and their ordinary aſſemblies; ſo exact in ob. 5 5
ſerving every thing relating to the Oak; fo ſtudious, learned, au! *
contemplative, concerning the works of nature; fo intent upon the . 6;
education of children, all regularly ſubordinate to one Arch- Druid, ar
and of ſuch authority in times of peace and war, that in Britain they . D
were the firſt order of the ſtate. Neither does Tacitus mention tie te
other inferiour orders of Druids, viz. the Bards, and the Vates, that!
can recolle& : whereas Strabo, Diod. Siculus, Lucan, Ammian. n
Marcell. &c. all mention them as belonging to the ſect of the Druids, 1.

But the ſame Tacitus, defcribing the Battle of Angleſea in Britain, Ne
ſtrait mentions the Druids, Druidæ, inquit, circum,” &c. and if tt
the Germans had Druids he would not have omitted them. Tacitus 8 «c


ſays indeed, that the Germans had prieſts, and ſo had all nations; t
but this will no more prove that the Germans had Druids, than that K
the Egyptians, Greeks, or all the world had this order among them, 1
becauſe they had alſo prieſts. The maſter of a family might divine 8 ;
'
|


prieſts were only conſulted in publick exigencies, but no ſuch thing
was permitted among the Druids ; and among the three ſeveral ways
of divining mentioned by Tacitus, there is nothing mentioned of
foretelling future events from any part of their ſacrifices ; which .
filence of Tacitus does really confirm what Ceſar obſerv'd, that they
were not ſtudious nor intent upon explaining their facrifices. x
Conradus Celtis (Deſcr. of Nuremberg) advances it as an imdif-
putable truth 4, that the Germans had no Druids, but from the ll
time of Tiberius, when that ſect paſs'd over thither from Gaul, in
order to celebrate their myſteries (forbidden by that Emperor), with
the greater ſecurity. To this opinion there is one objection, which
is certainly of great weight; it is this, that Germany's receiving ſo
conſiderable a change in its civil and facred polity, as muſt have
come in with Druidiſm, could never eſcape ſo corre and penetrat-
ing an hiſtorian as Tacitus; if ſuch an innovation had happen'd lv
Les hommes & les femmes (dit Tacite) ſont b Sodalitiis aſtricti, conſortiiſque. Ammian. 3 I


egalement ignorans, des ſecrets des lettres. Marc. lib. xv.
Caſtlen. Coutumes. de Gaulois, p. 57. Ente c Tacit. de M. G.


Sylve aſſure que du temps d' Adrian la civilite & 41 Rel. des Gaules, p. 212.
les lettres vinrent en Germanie. Ibid.


©
4 * x
* *
gb - *
ag 7 C
* 4 1
* 4
*

- 4, N
* — 1
* 1
and E


OFTHE DRUI DSS. 71


ſew years before him as the reign of Tiberius, Tacitus could not
have paſs'd it over in ſilence; but he never mentions any Druid
among the Germans, from which we are to conclude, that there
were either no ſuch perſons there, or too few to deſerve the notice
Pot his hiſtory. 5 |
WW But the truth of it is, although the Germans had no Druids, al- The Rehe.
though that order of prieſts was not eſtabliſh'd among them, and 2 0 ,
W conſequently their religion wanted many ſuperſtitious ceremonies, to funda-
and much of that erudition in idolatry, which the authority, learn- g ,
ing, and invention of that prieſthood had introduc'd in Britain and of 1
Gaul, yet the religion of the Germans was, in the fundamentals, one?
and the ſame with that of the Gauls and Britans. Their principal
Deity was Mercury, they facrific'd human victims e, they had open
E templesf, and no Idols of human ſhape : they conſecrated Groves,
worſhip'd Oaks h, were fond of the auſpicial rites i, computed by
nights, not by days k. :
No one that obſerves this great conformity in ſuch eſſential points
can doubt but that the religion of the Germans was at the bottom
the ſame! as that of Britain and Gaul, although all the tenets and
| X& cuſtoms which were introduc'd by the Druids, and diſtinguiſh'd
them from any other prieſthood, had not taken footing in the ancient
Germany. If we find therefore the ſame kind of Monuments in
Denmark, Sweden, Norway, and in Germany properly ſo call'd em,
as we find in Britain, and Gaul, we may attribute them all to a
religion eſſentially the ſame, although it cannot be prov'd that the
Druids were eſtabliſh'd, nor the prieſthood equally dignified, and
learned in all. The ſame religion (that of the ancient Celts) is to
be trac'd as far as the Northern parts of Lithuania n, and the Ruſſians
retaining for many ages after Chriſtianity the like idolatrous venera-
tion for their groves, refus'd toadmit the Chriſtians intothem, though
ſocial enough in other particulars, thinking that their ſacred places,
and their divinities would be violated by the preſence of thoſe who
were of ſo different a religion o. In a word, there was no nation in


E 3 the Northern and Weſtern parts of Europe which had not (as the


LAM IO —_— ww * ak
: 1 1 F b FY "#0 — RES
— : _ ” 8 5 « LO Tod © Bak 1 4 i an 1 1 „„ ˖ A OR | —— NN po 2 7 # \ — 2
* 22 A. 8 Kan * . r „ * bk A * 75 g p e e bo 9 * ”,
* 75 * 1 A * * ws * 2 4%; TE 3 A 2a 4-4 eb LTD . A Ny r P 40S. ho, x 7 1 a . 2 1
* 2 1 3 $3 wth _—_ = = 4 \ $1 *.% _ W * » - 8 PX £5 5 * 5 x» ” ue — T , : s 1
- 9 * 7 N 4 X * L 4 # =
Fo ad - _
— » «ax _
- a
a . * 2 > _
G * pe 4 * ' 5
* — » 8 «© - N
2 * 7 3 * * *
- + * 3 1 a.
1 2 d
» * — 5 . >


IF


w
LIES IS" IR 1 2
4.4 by + * 2h


6—̃ —


oY” a


1 "I 8
ns 7-06 a7 8 ; 3


© «© Deorum maxime Mercurium colunt.” *The Sclavonians (a people of Germany}.
Tacit. ibid. cap. ix. (in the ſame words Ceſar worſhip'd Oaks, inclos'd them with a court,
of the Britans and Gauls, lib. vi.) cui certis die- and fenc'd them in, to keep off all unhallow'd
** bus humanis quoque hoſtiis litare fas habent.” acceſs. Not. on Tacit. Variorum, ch. ix.

i © Nec cohibere parietibus Deos, neque in k See Tacit. ibid.


— — — — * Lucoſque vetuſta


** Relligione truces & Robora numinis inſtar
** Barbarici”


ſeptentrionaux.” Rel. de Gaul. vol. II. p. 94.
m Anciently much larger. See Cluver, and
Claudian de Sylva Hercynia, Wells, Compar. Geog, &c.
Lipſ. not. on Tacitus, ibid. n Cromer, lib. xv. in Sched. p. 346.


50 i cc Auſpicia ſorteſque ut qui maxime obſer- o Helmoldus de Ruſſis, in not. var. ad Tacit.
vant.“ Tacit. ibid. de M. G. ch. ix.


t- d ullam humani oris ſpeciem aſſimilare ex mag- 1 Le meme fond de religion qui etoit en
c 7 * nitudine Cœleſtium arbitrentur”. Ibid. uſage dans les Gaules, Vetoit auſſi dans toute la
0 3 : Lucos & nemora conſecrant. Tacit. ibid, Germanie meme chez preſque tous les peuples


ground-


— 5 9


_- Pm 2.
-. > . * 2 *
n ——
7 —
— "x7 9357 bg = . 5 5 N _ 2 * 2
— um Ronny ———  —— — —


- —


”—_—


4 2


72


OFF Der


ground-work of their religion) the ſame kind of idolatry as the Druid
profeſs'd in Gaul, and Britain P; although the order, ſect, and dif.


cipline of the Regular Druids never extended itſelf beyond the bound 7


of Gaul and Britain, as the German authors contend.


Ceſar, Strabo, Pliny, and Pomponius Mela mention them only in ;


Gaul and Britain ; and the Germans have no reaſon to think thy
they are injur'd by Ceſar, and depriv'd of their ancient and famay;


order of Prieſts unjuſtly, till they can produce poſitive proof in
favour of themſelves from the ancients, which, as far as I can learn,


will be no eaſy matter.


It may be of ſervice therefore here to make one general obſerzz.


tion, viz, That whatever religious ceremonies and tenets we find
recorded to have been among the Germans and northern nations, they


are parts of the old Celtick religion, common to all the Weſt of © 4


Europe, and conſequently to the Druids, and therefore the ſuper-


ſtition of Germany and the Northern countries may give great
light into that of the Druids, and may juſtly be referr'd to,
as they frequently are, in this work. But this argument will
not bear being inverted ; the inverſe is not true, for what we find


recorded of the Druids can by no means be aſſerted of the Germans,
and Northern nations.

The Druids built much upon, and improv'd the Celtick plan,
added ſcience and contemplation, ſeparated themſelves into a diſtin
and noble order, held annual councils about ſacred things, refin d
the plain homely rites of their forefathers, and carried the erudition
of their myſteries to a height unknown to nations invariably re-
tentive (as the Germans were) of their firſt fimplicity ; content to
make war, and hunting, the principal aim of their lives ; affording
religion, arts, and ſpeculation, but a ſmall, if any portion of their
time and thoughts.

In ſhort, what is ſaid of the ancient Germans, &c. as to things
divine, may be ſaid alſo, for the moſt part, or reaſonably inferr'd (as
of Celtic original) to be true of the Druids ; but all that is faid of the
Druids can by no means be probably inferr'd of the Germans, It
the reader keeps this diſtinction always in fight, it will prevent
miſtakes, |

The little iſle of Angleſea is thought to be the chief reſidence of
the Britiſh Druids q, and indeed Tacitus mentions them only here,
they were a Holy Order common to all the nation of the Britans,


v Their Cromleches, Cirques, and Erected XXXV. and XXXVI. are Squares, Circles,


ſtones are to be ſeen in Norway, Sweden, Den- Triangles, and Ellipſes of Stones-Erect.
mark. — See Wormius's Mon. Danica. Olaus à Humph. Lluyd's letter to Abr. Ortelius,
Magnus, paſſim: and in Rudbeckius's Tables Tac. vol. I. p. 592. Rowl. Mona.


and


OF THE DRU IDS.


and diffuſed every where, as appears not only from Hiſtory, but from
Monuments extant in every corner of the iſland, and particularly


in Cornwall.


G 11 AP. IV.


Of the Antiquity of the Druids,


N all our general enquiries after the Druids, we muſt carefully
diſtinguiſh between the Prieſthood, and the Religion which that
Prieſthood proſeſſed. That the Religion was a branch of the firſt
Faſtern Idolatry, which obtained ſoon after the flood, is plain”, and
by its overſpreadſng ing all the countrics, which that ancient and popu-
lous Nation (the Celta) inhabited appears to have been brought with
them from the Faſt, at their firſt migration 5, and when the Celtæ
had parcelled themſelves out into Germans * and Gauls, and were
afterwards ſubdivided into Swedes, Danes, and Britans ; the ſame
Religion paſſed with theſe off- ſets which the Celts planted, and this
is the reaſon that the ancient Religion of theſe nations was really in
eflentials one and the ſame ; but it will not thence follow that the
Prieſthood was alſo the ſame in all theſe countries, nor that Druidiſm
is as ancient as their Idolatry. When we are therefore enquiring into
the antiquity of Druidiſm, it is into the antiquity of that religious
Sect, that order of Prieſts and Philoſophers, and not into the anti-
quity of their Religion, which in the principal parts is certainly as
old as the firſt Idolatry.

The want of this diſtinction has led the Germans into a miſtake,
arguing very inconcluſively from the Religion's being the ſame with
that of Gaul and Britain (as doubtleſs it was) that therefore the Ger-
mans had Druids, which (as has been before obſerved) does no more
follow than that if all Europe were of the Chriſtian Religion, there-
fore all Europe muſt have the Benedictine or Jeſuit order 4 In every
nation, nor is it warranted by any ancient author that I have ſcen.

That there were Druids remarkable for their learning, and even
antiquity, before the time of Pythagoras, who lived near 600 years
before our Saviour, 1 IS extreamly probable u. u. A certain man called


r See cap. i. lib. ii. „ publicavit Druidarum argumenta pro anime


 Schedius thinks the Druwyds derived from
Tuiſco, who was the leader of the Celts from the
Eaſt, becauſe the Religion came together with
him, and that nation; confounding the Prieſthood
and Relic gion, as uſual, p. 257.

t The Germans were called Kade and K
down to Plutarch's time.

« © Pherecydes Pythagoræ præceptor primus


<« jimmortalitate.” Hotfman's Dict. in verb. p. 111.

Cæterum cu:libet vel modicè perſpicaci pate-
bit Druidas philoſophatos plus mille annis an-
„ tequam Eruditio Pythagore innotuiſſet in
& Jtalia.” Steph. Forcatulus de Gall. Imp. &
Philoſ. p. 41. Plus octingentis ante annis Phi-
© loſyuphati ſunt quam Gracie lementa literarum
„ Calmo fucrint aflecuti,” Jo. Picardi Celto-


U Alexander


— —— — * * — —
_ _ .


— — — ®


—S * Faw.


OFT Dis


Alexander Polyhiſtor in Clemens Alexandrinus w, ſays that Pytha-
goras heard both the Druids and the Brachmans x, Now, we can
{carce imagine that ſo curious a traveler as Pythagoras could he
induced to traverſe almoſt all the then known olobe, i in order to
converſe with them, and examine the principles upon which they
proceeded in the fearch of wiſdom, by any thing leſs than becauſe
both the Brachmans and Druids made at that time a conſiderable
figure in the diſcourſes and writings of the learned. I would only :
obſerve upon this paſſage, that what is ſaid here is very agreeable ty
the general character of that indefatigable Philoſopher v. He firſt
traveled into Egypt to converſe with their Prieſts, thence into the


1 —
. aa STE 2 * 4 .
2 DCC RAT
- SAD RS . ENIESs -
- oe, * * 2 * E ©. „


Eaſt to hear the Brachmans, the Prieſts of India; and it is not at aal! -
improbable that his inſatiable curioſity would not let him reſt tillle C
had ſeen alſo the other extremity of the world to eenverſe with the F
Druids, gathering every where what he thought divine, good, and
wiſe, and communicating the doctrines he treaſured up, where he
found the people docile and willing to be wiſer. 8B :
« Abaris formerly traveled thence (viz. from an iſland oppoſite ;
* to Gaul, and moſt likely Britain) into Greece, and renewed the [
«© ancient league of friendſhip with the Delians 2. Now this Abaris t
was a man famous in his time, of Northern extraction, Prieſt of |
Apollo, (therefore by ſome conjectured to have been a Druid *), and


is reported to have been very intimate with Pythagoras, who made
no ſcruple to communicate to him freely (what he concealed from
others, in Fables and Enigma's) the real ſentiments of his heart, and
the deepeſt myſteries. But whether Abaris was a Druid or not, or
what parts, if any, of the Druid ſyſtem might be owing to his
private communications with Pythagoras, there are ſome tenets of
the Druids which will make it very
really converſe with this Prieſthood; and as he might have been in-
debted for ſome points of knowledge to them, ſo he communicated
to them ſome of thoſe doctrines which he had learned elſewhere. RX
The Metempfychoſis, or tranſmigration of the foul (as will hereafter
more particularly appear, when we come to treat of the Druid

learning) it is very * the Druids owed to ee, For that


pædia lib. ii. in Frickio, 199. Gallorum Phi-
„ Joſophos etiam Philoſophis Græcis priores
« exiſtimant nonnulli Græci Scriptores, ut Ari-
e ſtoteles apud Diog. Laertium, qui non a Græcis
« ad Gallos Philoſophiam deveniſſe, ſed a Gallia
« ad Græcos prodiifle ſcriptum reliquit.” Not.
Cæſ. Comm. lib. vi. Edit. Delph. 8vo. p. 119.
Coutumes des Anciens Gaulois La Ramee par
Caſtlenau, 52. Ariſtote avoit ecrit en ſon
* Magicien (ſelon que Laert le reconte) que la
6 Philoſophic a pris ſon | Origine de Semnotheis
« des Gaulois anciens,”


probable, that Pythagoras did


* Strom. lib. i. p. 357.
x Cæſ. Comm. Edit. Delph. 8vo. p. 123.
Tamaluy xas Bpaxpary anova Brahamei ſeu Bra-
mæi Arabici dicuntur, quaſi ab Abrahamo Patri-
archa nomen & originem ſuam derivarent.
Smith's Syntagma de Druid. Mor. p. 49.
Pythagoram peregre profectum omnibus
© myſteriis Græcis & Barbaricis fuiſſe initiatum.
Diog. Laert. ibid. in Cæſ. Comm.
z Diod. Sic. Lib, ii. chap. iii. wn
z Toland of the Druids from Porph: r. p. 161 ö


Pythagoras


20
A
99
2
*
N.
N
4s
|
oy
8
\
a 7'S
3 - 4
1 bes.
* 185
. y
Of N
FE"
1. A
-” I
4 *
n * =
4
.
15 I *
.
t F
3 4
2 T
772 \ .
_
1 7 £1
*
bs
a*


OF T HRE DAUFDS.


4 Pythagoras borrowed this tenet from the Druids is not near ſo
Ne probable, though advanced by ſome learned men b, who are perhaps
too fond of every occaſion to exalt the Druids. The extream fond-
nals of the Druids, for white colours in their garments, and victims,
ET (:vours alſo of the doctrines of Pythagoras. Some other rites, as we
2 proceed, will appear perhaps to have been borrowed of Pythagoras,


but that their whole ſyſtem was of his framing, or indeed of Grecian


| original (i. e. derived from the Greeks®), is by no means likely, for


if they had not been at that time a ſamous ſect, Pythagoras had
never gone into their country to converſe with them; and before
the time of this philoſoper, they could not have borrowed much
from the Greeks, for the Greeks before Pythagoras were in no


| Capacity of communicating much learning or religion, having very


little of either at that time in their own nation.

The great reſemblance betwixt the Druids, Perſians, Gymnoſo-
phiſts, Brachmans, and Egyptians, is a ſtrong argument in favour of
their antiquity ; for if it be true that the Druids had not their tenets
in oeneral (but only ſome particular ones) from Pythagoras, the
principles of theſe diſtant nations muſt have been diſperſed with
them from Babel, or how could there be ſuch a contormity between
Iflanders in the Weſt, and the moſt remote nations of the Eaſt, who
do not appear to have had the leaſt communication afterwards?

The Germans ſuppoſe the Druids as old as the migration of the
Celts from the Eaſt, miſtaking continually the inſtitution of the
Prieſthood, for the Religion of theſe Prieſts : however, certain it is,
they were very ancient in Gaul and Britain. Ariftotle writes of
them in his book of magick d. All the Gauls faid * that they
« were ſprung from Dis (ſays Cel. lib. vi.) which they had by tra-
edition from the Druids;” now this referring to the ancient Druids
in the time of Cefar implies their great antiquity, it being ſufficient,
they thought, to ſay, that the Druids for a long ſeries of ages had
fill delivered it as their opinion, that Dis, or Pluto (as Cefar is
thought to mean®©), was their father.

To fix the Æra of their antiquity would be a vain attempt, and
therefore I ſhall only make this obſervation, that if the Druids were


b © AnDruidz Dogma, viz. Metempſychoſin a d « Ariſtoteles in libro de Magia de ciſdem (viz.


** Pythagoraacceperint, an a Druidibus Pythago-
** ras in dubio mihi eſt.” Not. in Cæſ. Comm. ut
ſupr. p. 123. Falſiſſimè omnium perhiberi Drui-
** das Philoſophiam ſuam debere Pythagoræ.“
Prick. p. 38. Pythagoras hanc ipſam Doctrinam
„ (viz. Metempſychoſin) a majoribus noftris
** hauſiſſe videri poteſt, ſi Clem. Alex. Strom.
* lib, vi. & huſeb. Prep. Evang. lib. x. ch. it.
** ſequamur,” Keyſler, p. 116.

© As ſome think, viz. Diod. Sicul. Ammian.


Marc, Valerius Maxi. & e recentioribus Seldenus
Ille etiam, & alii,


« Druids) ſcribit.” Lel. de Sacr. Brit. p. 4. Celſus
oppoſes to the Antiquity of the Chriſtian Reli-
gion, the more famous Antiquity of the Ga-
lactophagi, Getes, and Druids. Tz; ps Ounge Ta-
Na us A Tu; T Apvidzs xas Te; Telas, ooPÞwlail
Ne eva a apyarce. Cell, ap. Orig. lib. i. p. 14.
which though no argument againſt the antiquity
of the Chriſtian Religon, is a good argument that
the antiquity of the Druids was allowed to be very
great in the days of Celſus, as Frickius rightly
judges, p. 37.


e Ch. v. p. 18. book i.
really


|
© |
'"
|
'


|


- 20 8 - 1 -” - To — —
1 ˙—— ²˙¹¹ ne. ee 4


Not from
the Jews.


Not from
the Greeks.


OF THE DRUIDS.


really Celtic Prieſts, they would have ſpread with the ſeveral diviſion;
of that mighty nation, and their traces would conſequently appear
equally ftrong and lively in every country where the Celts ſettle,
but as we have no warrant from hiſtory (at leaſt as I think) to
ſuppoſe this Prieſthood ſettled anciently any where but in Gaul ang
Britain, they cannot be ſo ancient as they are ſuppoſed by the
Germans f; they muſt rather be ſuppoſed to have had their begin-
ning after the Celts divided into Germans, Gauls, Cimbrians,
Teutones, &c. and their ſubdiviſions, each fragment of that vaſt
ſtructure making a powerful and numerous nation; but the Druid
Prieſthood taking place only among the Gauls and Britans.


CHAP V;
The Original of the Druid Doctrine, and Prieſthood.


I N what country this Order had its firſt riſe and inſtitution, whence
their Rites and Doctrines, we will now enquire. |

Some think they derived their rites from the Jews, founding their
conjectures upon the reſemblance of the Jewiſh, and Druid ceremo-
nies; but the little commerce which the Jews had, and were obliged
to have, with other nations; nay the contempt and hatred which
they met with from the Gentiles for their ſingularity of worſhip,


and the ſtrictneſs of their recluſive law, muſt convince us that we are


to look for the riſe of Druidiſm elſewhere.

Several learned men h have with more reaſon thought it derived
from the Greeks, induced thereto not only from the name of the
order, which they looked upon (too haſtily) as of Greek derivation,
but from the conformity of their opinions to thoſe of the moſt cele-
brated Greek philoſophers, and their worſhiping the ſame Gods. In
order to give what light we can to this affair, let us go on with the
diſtinction before- mentioned i, which will prevent much confuſion,
and allow that many of the Druid rites, opinions, and their Deities
alſo, are the ſame with thoſe of the Greeks; but indeed it mult
be here remembered that the ſame Deities, Mercury, Sol, Jupiter,
&c. were among the firſt falſe Gods k, and being diſperſed as ſuch
into all nations with the firſt Idolaters, retained their uſurped
dignity all over Europe, moſt part of Aſia, and the moſt known
parts of Africa; ſo that no concluſive argument can be drawn from


f « Arbitror inſtitutos fuiſſe (viz. Druidas) a * (nam primi omnium Philoſophi fuerunt x
«© Tuſcone.” Sched. p. 257. Antiquiſſimi * Agyptus Judzos Prophetas habuit) accepere.
enim hi apud Celtas Doctores.“ ib. Sched. lib. ii. ch. ii. a Johanne Metello.

s „Quæcunque vel ex Perſis Magi, ex Baby- h Sheringham, p. 104, 107. Sammes, &c.
loniis vel Allyriis Chaldæi, vel ex Indis Gym- i See Ch. iii. and Ch. iv. p. 73.

«*« noſophiſtæ, & e Gallis Druidz, & qui Samo- k See Ch. i. lib. ii.
thei dicuntur, invenerunt, ea ipſi a Judzis


thence.


r 4 Os


\ 4 4 wh Ly * 4
. In; x" FEST SS
2


OF THE DRU IDS.


* mence. Again, if the Druids are to be plac'd higher in antiquity,


A: p , COT En 1 _ — a 4
x3 * 1 WH Hs e i hk Brat
* "WE." 13 2 - N. . 5
: b : * % 2
*


e e ITY, e dee n 3


and were eſtabliſh'd here, long before the Greeks made any figure
iu the learned world (as is very probable), and before they ſent

WE {oth colonies, or were civiliz'd enough to cultivate their own

Religion; it is not at all probable that the Druids ſhould have

owed much of their regulations, doctrines, or eſtabliſhment to the

Greeks : it may be true that they borrow'd ſome tenets from Py-

thagoras, as Pythagoras himſelf did before from the Egyptians

and Eaſtern ſages. It is alſo likely that they improv'd and ex-

tended their ſyſtem, and adopted ſome foreign rites by means of
the trade carry'd on between the Phenicians, as well as the Greeks,

and Britans ; but to adopt or imbibe a few opinions is one thing,

and to be indebted for the very being, formation, and fabrick of
their whole order, is entirely different. Beſides, the Greek authors

who mention the Druids, would not have conceal'd from us a
circumſtance, which would have contributed fo much to the repu-
tation of their influence and learning; it the Druids had been

of Greek original, the Greeks would have been fond of recording
it, ever ready, as they prove themſelves, to exalt their own anti-
quity, and pre-eminence over other nations.

'Tis very probable (as it is ſaid before !) that the Greeks and
Druids, and indeed all other nations, had their ſuperſtition from
one and the ſame polluted fountain (all partaking, more or leſs,
of the general taints of that falſe religion which obtain'd ſoon after
the flood) and for this reaſon muſt have many things alike, as in-
deed all religions had; but it is no more juſt to infer from thence,
that the Druids owed their religion to the Greeks, than that the
Greeks owed their religion to the Jews, for their two religions
had many the ſame tenets, and ſeveral like ceremonies ®, If the
Druids owed but very little with reſpe& to their tenets and reli-
gion to the Greeks, much leſs with regard to the eſtabliſhment of
their order, and regular Prieſthood. The Greeks had no ſuch
Prieſts among them any where; and it would be very abſurd to
imagine, that they ſhould ſet up an order in diſtant countries,
which they had made no experiment of in their own ®.

Now if the pretenſions of the Greeks are ſo weakly founded, we
may fafely conclude, that no other foreign nation has any right to


claim the honour of erecting and eſtabliſhing this ancient order
among the Gauls and Britans 9.


See chap. I. lib. ii. | Some will have them to be derived from the
* As ſacrifices, luſtrations, feſtivals, one ſu- Egyptians, becauſe they are ſaid by Dionyſius the
preme God, and immortality of the ſoul. African to have celebrated the Orgyes of Bacchus.


„Non a Gracis igitur (viz. Druidz) ſed Warb. Div. Leg. vol. I. pag. 136.
© Britannis.” Hoffman. in Dru. pag. 111. F hes


X | The


any foreign


254 _-
< — - DS S 2 - - —
CC . Sk an 2


— —


||

|

3

4

1

\

1
1
" :


Gaul or
Britain.


OF THE DRU IDS.


The Druids therefore were a regular order of Prieſts, not fetch'q
from abroad, but inſtituted and form'd at firſt either in the
countrys of Britain or of Gaul, and peculiar to thoſe two nations;
an order gradually faſhion'd and ſhap'd, partly by their own in.
vention, aſſiſted by the general cuſtoms of all the Gentile world,
and partly from the adopted precepts of ſome philoſophers they
convers d with, increaſing in learning and authority, age after age,
till by its luxuriancy in both it attracted the eyes and admiration
of all the curious and the learned; and the next enquiry muſt be,


which of theſe two nations 1s intitled to the honour of giving
birth to this Order.


CHAP. VI.
That Druidiſm had its firſt riſe in Britain.


A® it appears from reaſon and hiſtory, that there are no con-
cluſive arguments to prove that Druidiſm was a foreign in-
ſtitution, nor a rule and diſcipline tranſplanted from the more
liſh'd nations of the Eaſt, tis the leſs to be wonder'd at, that it
ſhould be firſt invented and eſtabliſh'd in Britain, and thence
tranſlated into Gaul: for if it had been introduced by any foreign
philoſopher, it would moſt probably have been firſt taught in
Gaul, and next in Britain: if it had been primarily fetched from
Greece, it would have paſſed from Greece to the Grecian Colony
of Marſeilles, thence ſpread -into Gaul, and from Gaul to Britain;
but as it was not a borrowed Order, as is apparent from the
foregoing chapter, it is at leaſt as likely in the nature of things,
that it ſhould have had its riſe in Britain, as in Gaul ; and where
things are in their own nature equally poſſible and probable, the
fuperiour weight of teſtimonies, on which hand ſoever it lies,
ſhall eſtabliſh the one and reject the other. Now Ceſar is a
very expreſs evidence in this matter. Diſciplina, in Britannia
c reperta, atque in Galliam tranſlata eſſe exiſtimatur.“


The French, indeed, are unwilling to own their forefathers
| indebted ſo much to this ifland, but have no arguments on their


fide, ſufficient to ſet aſide fo great an authority as that of Ceſar,
who was too curious to want the beſt information that was to be
had in ſo material a point, and of too noble a mind to record any
thing upon light and trivial grounds. *Tis true, we had our in-
habitants from Gaul , as the neareſt part of the continent to


See Book I. Ch. III.


— e e
4 *


* 1 1 2 2 "YI E *
Wi a _


Se ne nk DE TY COR OPT es A 4 A N C ”_ -
: n , 1 : - " 1 7 4 8 e % 3 3 — © j
. « * 1 44 * 2 » ; - J j _— — —
a f \ Fg | 7 a a ;
T ' —
4
wy
. b g * * * *


PO LT a "NP N KS. D
* « —- 1 WE — * 4 _ * AS *
1 Nen a e #7 II's - Gar
v * 5 —
* 4


— * LA. LAM _
GEE * Fw CLIO ge” . = «cs , N w
Th L JS + 1 ore 1 n r RES ES >, v
* . _ 5 . - * oh — &- > n oF Ep. 4
0 3898 ROS © FE „ >
, . 5 © l - 4 2% ”
. * 4 +.«<aX


"ap.


LD:


PF
1 2 * 9 LT


„


OF IHE-DRUILTIDS,


W p:itain, and with the inhabitants came the Celtic language, but
the Druids had no being when this iſland was peopled, their difci-


pline being inventedafterwards 4; and therefore Britain's having had


its inhabitants from Gaul, will by no means prove that they had alſo
che Druids from that country. I muſt here obſerve, that none


of the ancient authors deny what Ceſar advances, Strabo, and
Pomponius Mela, in their obſervations on the Druids, copying him


as their beſt Guide”, Tacitus in no point contradicting him; and
co ſilence all wonders, how Britans ſhould give an Order of prieſt-
hood to their neareſt neighbours the Gauls, I muſt take notice that


Pliny * (who is more circumſtantial in the rites of Druidiſm than


any other) ſays that the Britans were ſo exceſſively devoted to all |
the myſteries of magic, that they might ſeem to have taught even
the Perſians themſelves that art*, There is another circumſtance
W worthy our notice in what Ceſar ſays, which is, that the inſtitu-


tion of the Druids was maintain'd with greater ſtrictneſs and purity,
in Britain than in Gaul; and that when the Gauls were ar a loſs
in any point relating to this diſcipline, their cuſtom was to go over
to Britain for their better information . Does not this in a great
meaſure intimate and confirm that the Gauls were taught this
diſcipline by the Britans, and that when any dithculty occurred,
they had recourſe to the firſt fountain of inſtruction ? "Theſe teſti-
monies are too many and particular, to give way to modern jea-
louſies, and national envy ; and therefore we have reaſon to con-
clude, that Druidiſm had its firſt riſe in Britain, till the contrary
is better ſupported u. And here, before we take our leave of theſe
conteſted points, it can't but be obſerv'd how one truth ſupports
another, and how both reaſon and hiſtory (notwithſtanding the
little cavils againſt him) ute to confirm and eftabliſh every
thing that this illuſtrious author gives us on theſe heads. Ceſar
ſays, the Germans had no Druids; the Germans * are loath to
own this, but cannot prove they had ; and though their religion
was really at the bottom the ſame with that of the Gauls and Bri-
tans, yet, with theſe laſt, the Prieſthood might be more regular, of
greater dignity, of higher ſpeculation, more intent on the myſteries
of their ſuperſtition, claſſed into ſocieties, and theſe ſocieties
dignified with the particular name of Druid; and this is all Ceſar


4 As is plain from the Germans, Danes, * © Et nunc qui diligentius eam rem cognoſcere
Swedes, Ruſſians, who were branches of the Celts, “ volunt, illo (viz. Britanniam) diſcendi cauſa


and yet have no Druids, See ch. iii. lib. ii. & proficiſcuntur,”
r dee Leland de Sacr, Brit. pag. 3. uv The author of La Rel. de Gaulois (ſuppoſed
Lib. xxx. c. i. Mr. Martin) ingenuouſly confeſſes that the Gauls
© © Britannia hodie eam (viz. Magiam) atto- had their Religion from Britain, pag. 13. vol. I.

** nite celebrat tantis ceremoniis, ut eam Perſis w Ceſar.

* dediſle videri poſlit.” Plin. lib. xxx. cap, I. x See Lipſius in Tacit. de M. G. & Schedius,


_ © Druidz, ita ſuos appellant Magos.” Ibid. chap. iii. lib. ii.
lib. xvi. c, 44. ad — ee n


EN
ſays


* ü


- — * 8 "4 = 8 A. -_
— — — 2 —


—

84 — .

— — - * — = -” .
E22 — U ——%ð —


= - — — - — -
. - - - - —
2


.

17
1
1
:


OF THE DRUIDS.


ſays and intends, in which he is ſo far from being contradicted mm
Tacitus, that from the general character which is given in th; WY
author of the Germans, and their prieſts, he is indeed ſupported and
confirmed. | 1

Again, Ceſar ſays, that the inſtitution of theſe Druids was firſt iu.


vented in Britain. France would not willingly be indebted to hz
neighbours in a point of ſuch conſequenee and antiquity ; but th


humour of hers will not deprive fo great an author as Ceſar of tlie


weight, which he muſt always have with unprejudiced readers, til ©


ſhe can produce teſtimonies of equal, or ſuperiour authority to refute F
him,


CHAP. VI.
The Dignity and Power of the Druids.


I F we have ſo much reaſon to follow Ceſar in the account he gives Þ
us of the conteſted points abovementioned, we can with no fon Þ
of juſtice deſert him in things which are leſs controverted.

Dignity and There were two ſorts of nobles in Britain, the one ſacred, te
Privileges. ec other civil, or rather military; for moſt of their civil diſputes were

&« decided by the Druids. The firſt order of the Britiſh nobility ws
ce that of the Druids, the ſecond of the Equites. The preſence of
e the Druids was neceſſary in all acts of devotion ;** they were to
take care of all publick and private ſacrifices, and to explain dect
fively every thing relating to religion. |
Power in The government of youth was under their dirèction, and none but
pat thoſe who were educated by them were adjudged capable of publick
employments. By them, all publick as well as private controverſies
were decided and if any ax crimes were committed, as mur-


iſpute concerning lands, or inheritance, by


ther, or the like; any di
l them 1t was determined ; they conferred proper rewards upon the


worthy, and appointed puniſhments for the guilty, and their judg-
ment was deciſive, for if any one was refractory, he was excluded
from their ſacrifices, which of all other was accounted the moſt grie-
vous puniſhment, thoſe who were ſo excluded, being from that time
looked uponas impious and deteſtable, every one ſhunning their com-
pany as contagious; nor could ſuch claim any benefit of the
law, or ſucceed to dignities, which might otherwiſe fall to ther
ſhare. Beſides this, as the Druids had the ſole privilege of explain-
ing the appearances of the victim's entrails, and managed all the ſe-
crets of augury and divination, they may be reckoned the principal
engines, and governours of the ſtate; and indeed it was not wie

ct


. 5 A. . A0 :


OFTHE DRUTDS


for the King himſelf to reſolve, or enter upon any important


KF 44ion, without the concurrence of the Druids v. The ſame au-


thor informs us, that the Druids fat on golden thrones, lived in large
palaces, and fared ſumptuoully ; and if we credit a modern author *,


e ruins of the Druid palace in the country of the Carnutes (where
the annual aſſembly for the Gauliſh Druids was held) are ſtill plainly


to be ſeen, and conſiderable in themſelves.


4 As theſe privileges could not but give them great power in times n . 4
ol peace, they had alſo proportionable weight in times of war; they Wa.


were indeed by law excuſed from attending upon the army, and from
all the difficulties and fatigues of war, nor were they burthened with
any expence on that account; yet did they frequently attend the
military expeditions, as at the battle of Angleſea, praying with great
fervency to their Gods with hands lifted up to Heaven; where
Tacitus calls the Britans Fanaticum agmen, led on as they were by
their Druids. But their preſence was neither improper nor ineffectual
in the field; for in the day of battle, their office was to animate their
troops by inculcating the immortality of the ſoul, and aſſuring them
either of victory, or a paſſage into a ſtate of happineſs ; nay, ſome-
times they prevented bloodſhed, and made peace ; for Diod. Sic. in-
forms us b, that theſe Philoſophers, ſtepping in between two armies
ready to engage, have pacified them as effectually, as if ſome wild
beaſts had been tamed by inchantments. When they had reſolved
upon a battle, they vowed the booty to Mars ©, the ſuperfluous living
creatures which they took, they ſacrificed, the reſt they conveyed
intoone publick repoſitory, which was a place of worſhip, and, when
once there, no one dared be ſo impious, as to take any thing away.


As to treaties they held it unlawful to enter into any thing of that


kind with foreigners d.


The Druids had not only theſe general privileges and authority Of the Rule


and Govern -


over their countrymen, but they had alſo a ſort of government among


and with him the chief authority (in all matters relating to the Order)
was lodged : when he died, if any one was more noble and famous
than the reſt, he ſucceeded ; but if ſeveral had an equal claim, he
was choſen by the ſuffrages of the Druids, and ſometimes the election
has been known to be decided by the force of arms e. This is ſaid


by Cefar of the government of the Druids among the Gauls; and as


there was this Arch-druid in Gaul to preſide in all caſes of difficulty,


3 KeiATor d &; oven Aęvidac, v TETE5; eg Manly ©* præclara Palatii Druidum,” Bul. in Frick. 1 45
as val T1 aa Topas, wy avv, Toig Baownevoiy gd t,. Rovillard. Hiſtor. Carnotenſ.


Srarlen, ud xs da, we To u aknbeg terne aN, a Tacit. Ann. lib. xiv. ch. xxx.
7g Os Baonez; aUTWY drin xa. Aae vito ha. 71g b Lib. v.
uuns, ty Speroig xabryuimn;, xas cit; Are oaylas c Ceſar. ibid

b -


40 woos wow. Dion. Chry ſoſtom. de Recuſ.
Magiſtrat. in Senat. pag. 538. Edit. Paris.
+ * In agro Carnotenſi extare adhuc veſtigia


d Gollut's Axioms of the Druids, Ax. 25,
© Ceſar, ibid. |


Y importance,


81


ment of their


themſelves. There was one Druid who preſided over all the reſt, Order.


Cy
1
}
?
f
4
*
9

Ly


82 OF THE:DRUTDS. Z
importance, and ſolemnity; ſo doubtleſs in Britain (whence the Gay],
had their plan), for the ſame reaſons, there was lodged the lame, .
like authority in one, or more ſuperior Druids, it being altogeth ©
improbable that peace, diſcipline, and a regular adminiftration g
Juſtice could be preſerved in any Order or ſociety of men, whey, ©
there was no ſuch proper ſubordination. ;

Of weit an- According to ſome accounts f, the chief authority among the ©

nual Aſlem- Britiſh Druids was lodged in twenty-five Flamens or ſuperig; ®

_ Prieſts, over which preſided three Arch-flamens, all which Flamens
continued in England till the time of King Lucius, A. D. 179, when S
Chriſtianity came in 8. The truth of this is much to be queſtiones, |
but there was another kind of authority among the Druids, wel
ſupported in hiſtory, which conſiſted in their annual aſſembly; and
this ſeems to have been the ſupreme court, or laſt reſort for juſtice, *
For the common conveniency of all the nation, the Gauls held this
aſſembly in the country of the Carnutes, as Ceſar obſerves, the middle |
ſpot of Gaul, lying between the rivers Loire and Seine, where they
approach neareſt one to the other: here there was a place conſe-
crated for that purpoſe, and at the appointed time, all thoſe who had
any controverſies which could not be adjufled elſewhere, came and
paid entire obedience to the decrees of this aflembly : It is not to
be imagined that the Britiſh Druids were obliged to attend this
aſſembly, in a place choſen for the more commodious reſort of the
Gauls (but without any regard to the conveniency of Britain),
although it is not ſaid that the Britiſh Druids had any court of Judi-
cature of this kind; but, as the diſcipline of this Order was ſtrider
in Britain than in Gaul, it is not to be ſuppoſed that they were with-
out a convention, ſo neceſſary to preſerve peace, and finally ſettle
all diſputes of a higher nature, or of more difficult interpretation, and
therefore we may reaſonably conclude, that for the ſame purpoſes
which induced the Gauliſh Druids to inſtitute an aſſembly of this
kind, the Britiſh Druids alſo had a court of ſovereign appeal, or
general annual meeting of the ſtates, in a proper place, in their own
nation,


l
: — a —


#4. au F ho ——


f Ptolemzus Lucenſis. See Lel. de Ser. Brit. s See Stillingf. Or. Sac. Antiquities of the
p. 7. 5 Britiſh Churches, from pag. 36 to 52.


5 1 8s 24 ä 1
LITE I» 7 MES. „ „„ "326327 905 A 5 * q
* dy io ou COoCOO''*<CCC_o: XNA
« > * 8 2 1 ba.
* M - XK


"+


-., * r ** * * 1 5 . r 13 Les nn: St ot I LY
CY
4 . » 2
& 4 . 3
M7 2 1 J hd & 5 %%# ; * ;
x 5: Bag 4 2M c R 633-154. of — ot 5 >
- 4, od 1 S &
4 e « „ 4 *
”
: * -


OF THE DRUILIDS.


C HA P. VIII.


Of the Druid Diſcipline, the Quality and Admiſſion of their Diſciples,
the Privacy, Time, Privileges, and Manner of their Inſiruction,
their Correction.


* great privileges and authority of this Order made people


fond of being admitted into it, and parents and guardians
thought they could not do better for children of the higheſt birth |
than ſend them to the Druids to be inſtructed. Some think that the
Druids not only kept ſchools for the education of youth (which was
their peculiar province), but lived in ſocieties in a conventual man-
ner i; and indeed it is not eaſy to imagine, how they could preſerve
their Arcana, read lectures in every kind of Philoſophy, and keep up
their diſtinction from the vulgar, without ſome kind of collegiate
aſſemblies. Their inſtructions were inſtilled into youth in the moſt
private manner; ſome Cave, or retired and ſacred Wood k, or ſome
rocky Karn*, being the appointed place of I uition; in which re-
tirement the ſcholars were gradually introduced into the ſeveral parts
of learning, and ſlowly, the education not being compleated in leſs
than twenty years , for one who was to be initiated. No one was
capable of publick employments who had not been educated under a
Druid!, They did not permit parents to intermeddle in the edu-
cation of their children, it being one of their fixed rules that children
were to be brought up at a diſtance from, or out of the preſence of,
their parents till they attained to fourteen yearsm. They had this
rule alſo among them, that young people (who I ſuppoſe were not
to be initiated) were to be diſmiſſed from ſchool when they had the


h «© Nobilifſimos gentis,“ Pompon. Mela, © mana, pronuntiarunt Animas immortales.”


Lib. III. cap. ii, See Galtruch P. H. Lib. III. Ammian. Marc. Lib. XV. Rowl. 234.


c. iv, Divitiacus, an intimate client of Pompon.
Att. and Cicero, and friend to Jul. Cæſar, Prince
of the /Edui, was a Druid, and had a principality
in Britain as well as in Gaul. See Leland de
Scr. Brit. pag. 3. Cicero to Attic,

i * Academia ampliſſima exiſtimatur fuiſſe in
„ ſylva Carnotenſi, eo loco ubi nunc Urbs a
* Druidibus nuncupata Gallice Dreux, et in
„ Pagis Sylve Vicinis (ut Rovillardus) Druid-
*arum Domus dicuntur; & non procul ab
* Auzuſtoduſio (ubi Imagines Druidarum de
„ Montfaucon erutæ ſunt), altera Acad. in
monte Gallice Montedru.” Frick. 147. in
Bulzo, „Druides ingeniis celfiores (ut Autho-
* ritas Pythagoræ decrevit) ſodalitiis aſtricti
conſortiiſque, Quæſtionibus occultarum rerum
©* altarumque erecti ſunt, &, deſgectantes hu-


* ] faut etre enſeigne dedans les Bocages
& Sacrecz,” Gollut's Memoirs Ax. 1. „ Clam,
ce in ſpecu, aut abditis ſaltibus.“ Pompon. Mela.
Lib. III. c. ii.

* In ruinoſis locis, aut ſylveſtribus,” viz. in
rocky Karns, where the Stones were ſcattered,
as in heaps of ruined buildings.

+ «+ Diu, vicenis annis,” ibid. “ Nonnulli
© annos vicenos in Diſciplina permanent.“ Cz/.


Lib. VI. “Non in Urbibus & magnis Civitati-


bus, ſed in lucis & nemoribus veluti Anachore-.


c tas, a ſtrepitu & turba populari remotas ſedes
„ habuiſſe.“ Bul. in Frick. Lucan. Lib. I.

1 Gatruch, Hiſt. Poet. ibid. :

m The Parents never ſuffered their ſons to
come near them in any publick place, till they
could bear arms, Ceſar, Gollut, M. Axi. 28.


courage


had real life, but if you aſk t


OF THE DR UI DS.
courage and reſolution to fight for the publick liberty n. Under the


direction of the Druids the moſt ſingular part of inſtruction was that
of learning a great number of verſes by heart, for they did not think
it lawful to commit what related to their particular diſcipline to
writing o. They ſeem to have purſued the method of teaching their
myſteries memoriter for ſeveral reaſons ; becauſe they would no
have their myſteries become too familiar to the vulgar, in this, as iu
many other particulars reſembling the Egyptians? ; nor be divulged
and expoſed to the caprice of foreign countries; nor their ſcholar,
truſt too much to the written letter, and neglect to cultivate their
memory d, and, it may be obſerved, that we find ſeveral inſtance; © 3
in hiſtory of the ſame cuſtom among the wiſeſt Heathens. Lycur. Þ
« ous and the Lawgivers of other cities thought it better to imprint
ce their laws in the minds of their citizens, than to engrave them in
e Tablets, where they might lye neglected and unregarded ; and
«* Plutarch informs us, that Numa's ſacred books and writings were
«© buried with him by his orders” (perhaps in compliance with the
opinion of his friend Pythagoras), imitating herein the legiſlators of z 3
Greece, who inculcated the contents of their laws ſo long into
ce the hearts and minds of their Prieſts, that their underſtanding be-
e came, as it were, living libraries of thoſe ſacred volumes, it being ³ä
« efteemed a profanation of ſuch myſteries to commit their ſecrets
c unto dead letters r. Such was alſo the opinion of Pythagoras and
Socrates, neither of whom left anything bchind them committed to
writing 5. =
When therefore the Diſciples of Pythagoras periſhed in the flames np
during the Metapontine tumults, the diſcipline, and ſcience of that ll
Philoſopher expired for the moſt part with themt; for their memories i
were the only repoſitories in which they had preſerved thoſe treaſures
of knowledge which their great founder had left them. All
theſe therefore were irrecoverably loft, excepting only what ll
ſome novitiate ſcholars, who were never admitted into the myfteries, i
could remember and very badly explain. Socrates diſputing
with Phedrus in favour of teaching by word of mouth, rather than
by written doctrines, ſays, that written books reſemble the works
of a Painter where the portrayed animals appear, indeed, as if they
9 any queſtion, they can give you


25


$a .. Es OTIS —


#4


TT 03. - pe


„ Wael yds +» = 8 ao Mw» Hs — Mike —


n Gollut. Ax. 21.

o Ceſ. ibid. This, Sheringham, p. 108, thinks
to ſavour of the cuſtoms of the Hebrews, they ha-
ving been as fond as any nation, of oral tradition.

p * ZEpgyptii ſacra ſua pollui, fi vulgarentur,
<« credentes.” Mont. Kempiana xL11,

q Ceſar, Lib. VI.

r Pott. Antiq. Græ. Vol. I. p. 142.

Diog. Laert. indeed, in the Life of Plato, ſays


that Pythagoras compoſed three Books, and Pliny
(Lib. XIV. c. xvii.) quotes a book of Pytha-
guy but all ſuppoſed ſpurious, vid. Syntagm. de
ruid. p. 160.
t Tus & ovpPopces Slg nalacyxeon; Te ara (ſays
Porphyr ius) cure uνανε xa 7) ETIT1MN Wag ty Toig FI
brow t Puaxtuon axp Td poruy Tur duoovriluy Cafe


Tos tg Nap rap artuopiruy Syntag. de Dr. 1 59


no


= OF THE DRUIDS.
WE .nfvcr. © You may think, adds he, that written diſcourſes
W might ſpeak to you, as if they heard, and underſtood what is ſaid;
but if, deſiring to know the bottom and grounds of things, you
W cnquire into, and endeavour to examine what they fay, they
W (ignify but one and the ſame thing over and over again; and,
believe me, as ſoon as ever a diſcourſe is written down, it remains


always the ſame ; to the learned it is intelligible, perhaps; to the
vulgar it is not, and never ſhall be fo, and it is difficult to fay
what degree of underſtanding it will ſuit, and what it will not
ſuit. When it is wrongfully and injurioufly blamed and ill
treated, it ſtands immediately in need of its father's aſſiſtance, for
W it can neither revenge itſelf for the injuries it receives, nor clear
W itſelf of any miſrepreſentations. How much more excellent and
efficacious is the other way of inſtruction ? the knowledge, I
mean, which is written and engraved in the mind of him that
teacheth ; who knows what, and before whom, he is to ſpeak,
how, and what he is to inculcate, and what he is to conceal.
Ws He ſows not his corn in a hot bed, where it ſhall ſoon ſprout,
= flouriſh for a few days, then languiſh and decay; but like a ſkilful
huſbandman, ſows his field, and waits patiently for a few months
in juſt expectation of a plentiful harveſtu. In ſhort, Socrates
oss only of writing, in order to enrich and aſſiſt the memory of
ee teacher, but by no means proper to inſtruct the ſcholar.


— * * N
_ a D D + %4 | * n
8 E F Pd 3 $1 ne * 28 10 *
„ Wnt Py 4 1 3 o \
ae” — 1
* x * « «
, * *
. ws 4 4 n
1 27 He «
„ ae : l & at
{ b&. fg REY  - . OF. \ *
* * 2 4 EEE A * e * 7 * *


gion, and morality in hymns, the number of which, as Mr. Mar-

e ſays, was fo great, that the verſes which compoſed them
mounted to 20000. In juſtification of this part of their diſcipline,

muſt be obſerved, that the ſubject matter of verſes is eaſier learnt

| RS) means of the metre, and more eaſily retained, than what is
=: preſicd in proſe.

Of the particular ſorts of verſes which the Bards uſed, there is an
ccount in the ingenious Dr. John David Rhys's Rudiments, &c. of
he Britiſh language * ; and Mr. E. Lhuyd is there of opinion, that
the oldeſt kind of Britiſh verſe is that called by Rhys's Grammar
= Englyn Millur,” and © that it was in this ſort of metre the Druids
WS. taught their Diſciples, of which there are ſome traditional remains


vg Ty DP OF RS WW


—_ - See Caſtlenau's Tranſlat. of La Ramee, Cou- couplets, in the Welſh tongue, and ſet them to
mes de Gaulois. their Harps. In all this company of muſical
Ia Relig. de Gaul. iii. p. 59. Poets, ſcarce fix of them can read or write, and
See Archzol. Brit. p. 250. yet ſome of them have ſuch'a poetick genius
At Bala in Merionethſhire an annual meet- that their compoſitions have both ſpirit and in-
and feſtival of the Bards is celebrated. There vention.” Letter from the Rev. Dr. Charles
eemble together 60 or 70 Harpers, the greateſt Lyttelton, Dean of Exeter, and F. R. S. to the
ert of whom compoſe extempore verſes, or Author.


Z


teſtimony


A to this day in Wales y, Cornwall, and Scotland, and a farther


After the example of the ancients (the Chaldeans, E ptians, Their Verſe
nd Aflyrians), the Druids comprized all the particulars of their re- and Mette.


86 OF THE DRUIDS.


teſtimony the verſes themſelves bear to this truth, in that they gene.
rally contain ſome divine or moral doctrine ?.

As the Bards (an inferiour claſs of Druids) were remarkable for
an extraordinary talent of memory a; this teaching memoriter, and
by verſe, was likely their office, whilſt the ſuperiours of the Order
were employed in higher ſpeculations, or the more ſecret and folemy
parts of duty.

Mythology, The Druids uſed alſo allegory and fable (as the Orientals did
to convey their doctrines into previouſly adapted, and well prepared
minds, without being at all underſtood by, or ſubjected to the
refuſal, and profanation of the ludicrous and perverſe,

Severity. The Druids were exceedingly ftri& in their diſcipline, nice and
punctual to the laſt degree in every thing that related to worſhip,
their ordinances b, and civil duties; and it was one of their maximse
that all fathers of families were to be eſteemed as Kings in their own
houſes, and have power of life and death over wives, children, and
ſervants; and in order to give weight and attention to their general
public afſemblies, and oblige others to the greater punctuality of
appearance there, they practiſed, as it is ſaid, that cruel cuſtom
(which Pliny reports of the Cigonii) of cutting in pieces him who
came laſt,

Silence, The Druids were great lovers of filence, inſomuch that if any one
during their aſſemblies or ſacrifices, was found pratling, they cut off,
after the third admonition, a large piece of his robe ; and if, after
that, he offended a fourth time, they puniſhed him moſt rigorouſly.


CHAP, IX.
Of the Druideſſes, and whether the Germans had an 1y Female Druids.


H HE female Druids were ſome times regulars, conſecrated to
1 particular Gods and Temples, bound to obſerve particular ce-
remonies, and peculiar forms of diſcipline as well as the men. They
had three ſorts of Druideſſes (ſays Mr. Martin Rel. des Gaul. vol. i.

p. 206.), of the firſt claſs were Virgins during life; the ſecond, though
married, ſaw their huſbands but once in the year for to have chil-
dren, and were obliged to attend the Temples continually ; the
third ſort never ſeparated from their huſbands, but governed their
families, brought up children, and laboured as much as became their
ſex and circumſtances.


z Lhuyd. Ibid. 2 b Gollut's Axioms of the Druids, Ax. 38, & 39
2 Galtruchius's Hiſt, Poetique, Lib. III. © Rowland, p. 61.
chap. iv. | 4 Guenebald. p. 29.


The


2 2 ng 2 .


— —


—


* mitn, 1 a—_— — 1 — — La


OF DRULDS
The third ſort of theſe had little different from the common


uties of other women, but the firſt and ſecond fort of female Druids


may both be diſcovered in the accounts we have from Strabo and
Pomponius Mela of the Iſland Sena, and by attending to this diſtinc-
tion, theſe two Geographers may well be reconciled. This ſmall
Iſland was either on the Britiſh or Gaulith coaſt, and conſequently
the inhabitants were of the Druid perſuaſion. Strabo ſays © that
men f never landed here, but that the women paſſing over in ſhips,
and having converſed with their huſbands, returned again to the
iſland, and to their charge, which was to worſhip Bacchus (the God
to whom they were conſecrated), with rites and ſacrifices : that every
year it was their cuſtom to unroof their Temple, and to renew the
covering, the ſame day, before ſun-ſet, by the united labours of all
the women; of whom, if any one dropt or loſt the burthen ſhe was
carrying to compleat this ſacred work, the was torn in pieces by the
reſt (a thing not uncommon during the Orgies g), and the ſeveral
limbs of this unhappy companion they carried round their 'Temple,
with rejoicings proper to the ſolemnities of Bacchus ®, untill


their fury abated. Of this cruel rite, Strabo ſays, there always hap-


pened ſome inſtance whenever the annual ſolemnity of uncovering
their Temple was celebrated. This iſland is generally ſuppoſed to
be the ſame as the Sena, of which Pompon. Mela gives the follow-
ing account. ** Sena, ſituated in the Britiſh fea over-againſt the
land of the Oſiſmii (in Gaul), is famous for the oracle of a Gauliſh
« Deity, whoſe Prieſteſſes, devoted to perpetual virginity, are ſaid to
be nine in number. They are called Gallicenæ k, ſuppoſed to be
« of great genius, and rare endowments ; capable of raiſing ſtorms
« by their incantations, of transforming themſelves into what animals
« they pleaſe ; of curing ailments, reckoned by others beyond the
4 reach of medicine; quick at diſcerning, and able to foretell what
« is to come, but eaſy of addreſs only to ſailors, and thoſe who come
& to this iſland on purpoſe, to conſult them.” Here are two ſorts
of the Druideſſes, both conſecrated, one claſs conſorting only with
their huſbands once in the year, the other conſiſting of perpetual
Virgins, and poſſibly theſe two Orders might ſubſiſt together on the
ſame iſle; ſo far therefore theſe ancient authors do not contradict
each other; but, as to the ſituation of this famous iſland, neither
the ancients nor moderns are eaſy to be reconciled ; and I ſhall not


carry the reader aſide into ſuch great, and not material uncer-
tainties.


e Lib. IV. p- 303. h Mil Evaope.
f Arderg, VIZ. Has nds. i Lib. III. cap. viii.
8 See the rn] fo Pentheus, Orpheus and the k « Al. Galligenz quaſi a Gallis ortz, ut


madneſs of the Bacchanals, in Montf, tom, i. Grajugenz a Graiis genitæ.“
part ii. |


The


88


OF THE DRUI DS.


The learned Keyſler, p. 378, labours to prove that the German; 5


had theſe female Druids as well as the Gauls and Britans.


they had the rites of divining at leaſt as plentifully as the Germans.
The Fatidicæ of the Gauls were of Druid parentage, or at leaſt ad-


mitted into the Order, and therefore properly called Druids; but the |


Fatidicæ of the Germans, never had that title. Keyſler goes on,
after producing many inſtances of inſcriptions to the Dex-Matres in
to the ancient Germans, for they might as likely, if not more fo, have
been erected by the Romans difpers'd over the ſeveral cities of Ger-
many), and tells us p. 446, * Ipſas has mulieres Druides adhuc
“ ante annos 3oo, et. quod excurrit, apud Bituricenſes fuiſſe indicat
« Guil, Pariſienſis; but the Bituricenſes were indeed a people of
ancient Gaul, and that the Gauls had their Druid women no one
ever denied. *©* Quas matres Deas appellant inſcriptiones, eas
c mulieres Druides, hoc eft, Sacerdotes & Divinas nominant
« Scriptores.”* ibid. It is true, antient authors do call the Fatidice
of the Gauls, Druids, but no other, and the inſtances there produced
from p. 447, by the learned author, prove no more; for Diocleſian
was among the Tungri in Gaul l, when he was informed by a female
Druid that he ſhould become Emperour. The female Druid who


foretold the fatal end of Alexander Severus's expedition, ſpoke to |


him in the Gauliſh tongue, whenee it is to be inferred that ſhe was
of Gauliſh birth ®. When Aurelian was ſolicitous to know whether
the purple ſhould continue in his family, he is ſaid, * Gallicanas
« conſuluifle Dryades.”” The following inſcription, * s1LVANO sack.
« ET NYMPHIS LOCI, ARETE DRUIS, ANTISTITA SOMNO MONITA D.“
(Gruter, P. LVIII. II. g.) was found at Metz on the Moſelle in
Gaul. The Cimbri a branch of the Northern Germans living in,


or Aliorumnæ, Hellirunæ, Alrunz, Alirunz, i. e. Holy Prieſteſſes;
(as Keyſler 4.61. explains thoſe terms o). Now it cannot be imagined,
that there would have been ſuch particular names (all from onc


original) for the German Fatidicz, and ſuch an univerſal ſilence as


I Vopiſc. in Numeriano, cap. xiv.


n Vopiſc. in Aurel. cap. xliv.
m Al. Lampridius vit. Al. Sev, cap. lx.


* Hali ſignifies Sanctus; & Runa Vates.
to


.


Imuſt
the reader's patience whilſt I examine what he advances, becauſe


I think it contradicts what ancient hiſtory aſſures us of, I mean, that
the Germans had no Druids. It cannot be denied but that the Ger-
mans had their Sacre Fatidicz, as moſt nations had; but that the
ancient Germans ever called theſe Druids, is by no means plain; nei-
ther does it at all follow from the Germans having their fortune.
tellers, that they had the diſcipline, and order of the Druids among i
them, any more than that the Egyptians had their Druids, becauſe


and near the Cimbrica Cherſoneſe, called their Fatidicæ Alyrunæ,


» ed Qu Tp rRARrRACT:ORLeo.TCw


OFTHE: DRUIDS,


to the name of Druid, unleſs the Druids Fatidica of the Britans and
Gauls had ſome peculiarities, and ſuch diſtinguiſhing marks as could
can we therefore conclude, but that the Germans were ſenſible that
although their Fatidicz were of the ſame profeſſion as thoſe of their
neighbours, yet that they could not with any propriety call them
Druids, becauſe the Druids had not only the Giſt of divination and
prophecy (as was imagined in thoſe days), but were a particular
Sea, Fraternity, Prieſthood, and noble Order of the States in which
they lived ; looked upon by other nations as a ſpiritual tyranny, and
which they were as unwilling to admit into their countries, as the
Druids were tenacious of their influence and dignity in their own ?
Among the other Fatidicz, the name Thrudur furniſhes a third
argument that the Germans had Druideſſes. 'Thrudur etiam in
« Dearum numerum relata perhibetur ab Edda, ſacerdos fave Druis,
« ut ex nomine colligo antea Duri, five Thori p.“ But what little
ſtreſs is to be laid on the fabulous Edda, all the world knows; and


| deriving Druis from Thrudur, or Thrudur from Druis 4 ; Druden's


fonifying a Witch in Franconia and Helvetia, and Drutner a
Magician among the modern Germans, theſe are foundations too
flight and airy to ground hiſtory upon. Words will be tranſplanted,
and from ſhort, accidental intercourſe, paſs from one country to


| another, and there take root; but we diſpute not about a word or


two, but about things; the queſtion is, whether the Diſcipline,
Order, or Se& of the Druids was eſtabliſhed among the Germans,
and whether their Priefts have been generally, or could properly be
called Druids.

There is but one argument more upon which Keyſler lays any
{treſs, and this alſo ſhall be mentioned. Velleda is by him reckoned
among the Druids, p. 473 3 but Tacitus ſays ſhe was born in the
country of the Bructeri (now Weſtphalia), a part of Germany be-


twixt the rivers Luppia and Amiſia, and ſhe is no where ſaid to be
a Druideſs r.


SNK. X.
Of the Druid Learning, Letters, Language, Dofrines, and Tenets.


BY the account we have of the Druids in ancient authors, they
muſt have been very ſtudious and learned for the ages they
flouriſhed in, and the countries they inhabited, at ſuch a diſtance


? Keyſler, p. 490. a lawyer (Nomophylax) of Iſland in the year
1 Edda Iſlandica, Eddam frivolis & ridiculis 1215. Ibid,


7. \gmentis ſcatere fatetur,” Keyſlerus, p. 20. r Vid. Tacit. Hiſt. Lib. IV. c. Ixi. & lxv. &
"ICKius, p. 70. It was compiled by Snorro Sturla, de M. G. c. viii. & Hiſt. Lib. V. c. xx.


A a from


”
- IF&Y.. a >.
-oqgr...


_—__
—— — —— — — *


* — * *
— —
. 1 -
2 A


—
—_ 1


—
—
— — — —
— ——


=>


90


Letters and
Language.


OF THE DRUID LEARNING.


from all the aſſiſtances of the Egyptian and Grecian Literature.
That they loved and encouraged Learning, appears from their in-
culcating it as a moſt certain truth, that whoever was ſkilled in
divine things (as they termed every part of their Superſtition and


Philoſophy) was moſt agreeable to their Gods, and moſt proper to


attend their ſacrifices 8.


Although the Druids held it unlawful to commit the Myſteries
of their Order and Diſcipline to writing, yet in all other affairs, either
of publick or private concern, they uſed writings, and the Greck
letters t. It ſeems however very reaſonable to believe, that though
they uſed the Greek letter, or character, for ordinary buſineſs, yet
that they uſed not the Greek language, but the Celtic or Britiſh;
juſt as we uſe the Roman letter, and yet write in the Engliſh, French,
For this, there are ſeveral arguments; Ceſar,
we find, converſed with the Gauls, and Divitiacus (one of the moſt
learned of the Druid Order), by an interpreter u; which, had Divi-
tiacus underſtood the Greek language, Ceſar, who knew Greek as
well as his mother-tongue, needed not to have done v. Ceſar writ in
the Greek tongue to Qu. Cicero, then beſieged among the Nervii,
leſt the letters being intercepted, his deſigns might be known and
In ſhort, if the Druids had uſed a foreign language to
deliver their myſterious laws in, they might as well have wrote
them, for they would have been as much ſecrets to the vulgar, if
written in Greek, as if intruſted only to the memory of their


or Spaniſh tongue.


defeated.


Novitiates x.


The learned Selden thinks that the knowledge of the Greek
tongue can ſcarce be allotted to the Druids ; and, at a diſtance from
probable that this piece of learning was
Joſ. Scaliger thinks the word, Græcis ?, an inter-
polation, and indeed the ſenſe will very well bear this word's being
thrown out, notwithſtanding what ſome authors 2 alledge to the
contrary. Leland a ſeems therefore to be miſtaken when he ſays,
© Druides, quibus & Græca lingua tantùm non familiaris.” Lucian
(in Hercule Gallico) fays, indeed, that a certain Philoſopher of the
Gauls (undoubtedly a Druid) explained certain pictures to him in
the Greek tongue; and not unlikely, it being not poſſible for the


Marſeilles, it is indeed very


rarely to be found:


s Gollut. ibid. Axiom. 33.

Non deſunt tamen qui priſcos Druidarum
<« characteras, & elegantes, & Græcis ſimiles
fuiſſe credant. Xenophonte ſiquidem & Archi-


locho teſtibus, literarum figuræ, quas in Græ-


© ciam e Pheœnicia Cadmus intulit, Galaticis
© quam Punicis five Phæœniciis fimiliores
6 extitcre.” Bucher. Fro. p. 183.

© Altatici hi Galatæ Gallorum Europzorum,
quibus ori erant, characteras æque ac linguam
© retinere potuerint, quam pene T reuerorum


ce fuiſle teſtatur Hieronymus.“ Praf. in Ep. ad


Galat. ibid.


v © Quotidianis interpretibus remotis per C.
ce Valerium Procillum, cum eo (viz. Divitiaco)


<« colloquitur.” Cæſ. Lib. I. Janſon's Edit. p. 12.


v Czf. Lib. I.

* Ibid. Lib. V.

y Czf, Lib. VI. de Bell. Gall.
z Syntagm. de Druid. p. 66.

2 Sheringham, p. 390.


Druid


a *
I EC ee Ho er f --- J ̃ TO SEE EE 0 ⁊ d kõy


:
'
1


OF THE DRUID LEARNING.


Druid to explain them to a Grecian in the Britiſh tongue. This
therefore proves only that ſome of the Druids underſtood Greek, not
that it was their common tongue. What Greek the Druids had,
came to them, likely from the Greek colony of Marſeilles, which was
a ſort of academy to the Gauls b, as well as a Mart to the Eritans.
Upon the whole, if we conſider what Juſtin ſays, Hiſt. Lib. XLIII.
of the univerſal influence which the learned colony of Greeks at
Marſeilles had upon all Gaul, Non Gracia in Galliam emigraſſe,
« ſed Gallia in Greciam tranſlata eſſe videretur; and that as Stra-
bo (Geog, Lib. III. p. 125.) ſays, Marſeilles was a ſchool to the
Gauls, and made them fond of every thing that was Grecian ; that
Ceſar ſays, writings in Greek letters were found in the camp of the
Helvetii, that in all other affairs than what rclated to their own
Order, they uſed Greek characters: from theſe teſtimonies it cannot
be doubted but that the Druids in ſome parts underſtood the Greck
tongue, and the moſt learned of them id occaſionally uſe it; but
that it was their common, uſual language, either in things profane or
ſacred, is altogether improbable; for, that the Gauls and Britans had a
national language, is true beyond queſtion : that the Druids had great
concerns with the other Orders, noble and plebeian, is as certain;
council, judicial deciſions, predictions, devotional exerciſes of ſacri-
fice, ſupplication, and the like, all came from, and through the
Druids, and to whom were they directed? Whom did they con-
cern, but their countrymen of Gaul and Britain ? Could they there-
fore be in a language, which, whatever the few learned might do,
moſt certainly the general body of the people was totally unac-
quainted with ? * |


The Iriſh Druids (if we may credit ſome accounts) had a form


of Letters very ſingular, the alphabet whereof they called Beth,


Luis, Nion (from the three firſt letters of it, B, L, N,) in which
every letter, to the number of twenty-ſix, was called by the name of
ſome tree in the wood ©.
They had a great fondneſs for verſes, as appears by that part of V

their diſcipline, which conſiſted in making their tyroes to learn by
heart vaſt numbers for many years together, In verſe they cele-
brated the praiſes of their departed heroes, and ſeem to have appro-
priated one third of their whole Order d (the Bards) more particu-


b Strabo, Lib. III. a very learned and ingenious work.

© Rowland, p. 108. The truth of this is much d « Studia liberalium doctrinarum inchoata
doubted of, if not unanſwerably confuted in * per Bardos Euyates & Druidas,” Amm. Marc.
Innes's account of the Caledonians and Pigs, Lib. XV.


larly


91


erſes and
hetorick.


92


Aſtronomy.


Geography.


OF THE DRUID LEARNING.


larly to this ſtudy © They had a kind of rhetorick among them,
of which the Druids themſelves were the teachers, and were there.
fore called Magiſtri Sapientiæ f.


CHA P. XI.
Of their Phyſical K. nowledge.


"THAT the Druidsapplied themſelves to Aftronomy, Geography,

and Phyſicks, Ceſar and Mela aſſure us g. They reaſon much
(ſay they) and inſtruct their youth in many particulars relating to
the Planets and their motion. Caius Sulpicius, Tribune of ſoldiers in
the Macedonian war, a Gaul by nation, foretold an eclipſe of the
moon, to the Roman army, upon which Livy adds, that thenceforth
6 Gallos Romanis militibus ſapientia prope divina viſos h.“

The extent and limits of the univerſe was another ſubject of their
contemplation ; they endeavoured to underſtand the form, and dif-
poſition of the ſeveral regions of the earth, and the nature of ma-
terial ſubſtances.

The Euvates (the third Order of the Druids) ſeem to have had
the ſtudy of Nature committed to them i, as the Bards had Poetry,
or the ſtudying and teaching Verſes for their ſhare : but theſe ap-
pointments, however, ſeem to be of ſuch fort, as that the Druids,
or ſupreme part of the Order, were not excluded from theſe noble
ſtudies, but were at liberty to employ themſelves in every art and
ſcience, and alſo to extend their ſearches into the moſt ſublime ſpe-
culations; accordingly, to Phyſiology, or the ſtudies of Nature, the
Druids added Ethicks, a future ftate, the immortality of the ſoul,
and the will and power of the Gods; and from theſe profound myſ-
teries, the inferior claſſes of the Order ſeem to have been prohibited,


e Fuere ex hoc hominum genere celebres
« aliquot in ipſa etiam Britannici imperii decli-
< natione, videlicet Telieſſinus, Mevinus, Mer-
„ linus.” Leland, de Scr. Brit. p. 5.

f « Habent tamen & facundiam ſuam, ma-
< oiſtroſque Sapientiz Druidas.” Pomp. Mela,
Lib. III. ch. ii.

s Cxfar, Lib. VI.“ Multa de ſideribus, &c.
et Pomp. Mela, Lib. III. ch. ii.

h Liv. Lib. XLIV. cap. xxxvii. |

i « The Euvates were Prieſts and Phyſi-
© glogers.” Rowl. 65.

e Vates autem ſacrificiorum naturaliumque
cc cauſarum cure dediti.” Lel, de Scr. Brit.
ex Strabone, Lib. IV.) p. 6.

« Batties vero ſcrutantes ſecreta & ſublimia na-
„ turz pandere conabantur.” Ibid, ex Amm.


Marc.


Diod. Sic. Lib. III. ſpeaking (from Hecateus)
of a Northern Iſland, about the extent of Sicily,
ſituated over againſt the Celtz, inhabited by the


 Hyperboreans, ſays, it is fruitful, pleaſant, and


dedicated to Apollo, who, for the ſpace of
5 nineteen years, uſed to come and converſe
* with them, and, which is more remarkable, they
© could, as if they had the uſe of Teleſcopes,
„ ſhew the Moon very near them, and diſcover
© therein Mountains, &c. They had a large
„Grove and Temple of a Round form, to
* which the Prieſts frequently reſorted, with
their Harps, to chaunt the praiſes of
Apollo.“ Nat. and Civ. Hiſt. of Cork, Vol. I.
p. 266. This is a proof of the Druid Aſtronomy,
for this Iſland could be no other than one of the
Britiſh Iflands, and the Prieſts no other than
Druids, as Rowland, p. 76. thinks in his Mona.


They


y »


OF THE DRUID LEARNING. 93


They taught alſo that the world had a beginning, and that it Rectonin; |
ould one time have an end, and that by fire. Their computation © W
e dime was by nights, not days!; the reaſon of which, as Ceſar
inks, was becauſe it had been the conſtant tradition of the Druids,

hat they were ſprung from Dis, God of the Infernal Shades, or
Night. But this does not ſeem to be the reaſon, for it was a tradition
enerally received among the ancients, that night was before day,

r light, and Orpheus calls night the mother of all things. The
Maebrews reckoned by the natural day of twenty-four hours, and the
Wight, in this reckoning, was placed before the day; as it was alſo

WE mong the Ethiopians”. Heſiod allo makes the day and ether to
Proceed from night; ſo that their being ſprung from Dis was not,
erhaps, the true reaſon of their computing time by nights n, but
as rather a remainder of the ancient tradition, that night or dark-
Wreck was before the world was created, and therefore to be placed,

Jia order and reckoning, before the day 9.

8 The beginning of their year P was July, the moon fix days old;
Wand an age or generation with them was reckoned to amount to


thirty years.


S HAF. XII.
Of their Botany, and Anatomy.


HE Druids ſeem to have been very ſtudious of the virtue of

Plants and Herbs, and either from ſome real or imaginary
diſcoveries in this branch of knowledge, were led on to that extrava-

gance as to attribute divine power and efficacy to ſeveral vegetables.

4 They were exceſſively fond of the Vervaine; they uſed it in caſting The Ver-
lots, and foretelling events. Anointing with this, they thought the le.
readieſt way to obtain all that the heart could defire, to keep off


r Conditum mundum eredebant & aliquando
< 1gni periturum.“
„ Adﬀapleg Mryvon Tas Cas, xa Toy 00jory erinpa=
let Te wilt op xa. vdo. Strabo, Lib. IV. Pla-
to and Cicero held the ſame opinion.

Nec dierum numerum ut nos, ſed noctium
* computant.” Tac. de M. G. Cæſ. Lib. VI.

m + ZEthiopes diem ordiuntur ab ineunte
<* note.” Joſ. Scaliger, Lib. VII. de Emend.
Temp, p. 677. Syntagm. p. 164.

Alia proinde & longe prægnantior hujus
2 conſuetudinis cauſa fuit quam ilJa Cæſaris in-
** genio prodita, quz a fabuloſa Ditis, ſcil. Plu-
4 fonis, noctis ac tenebrarum Domini progenie
. Tepetitur (qua in re nobiſcum conſentit doctiſ.
2 H. U. a Lingen. Frickius, 78.) viz. antiquum

tempora numerandi morem a noctibus reti-


© nuere, illum cujus ipſe Deus auctor erat.”
Gen. i. 5. Ut pluribus oſtendunt Cluverius,
„ Schedius, &c.“ Ibid.

o In our common reckonings of time, this cuſ-
tom ſtill obtains in England; for, the ſpace of
ſeven days, we ſtill call a ſe'nnight, the ſpace of
fourteen days we call a fortnight, or fourteen-
night; and ſo did the Britans, and the Welſh
even to this time. Hunc morem Cambro-Bri-
„ tanni hodie retinent, qui pro ſeptimana dicunt
% With-nos, i. e. octo noctes; pro duabus Pym-
{© thec- nos, i. e. quindecim noctes, utroque ter-
mino incluſo.“ Syntagm, de Druid. p. 163.

? Pliny, Lib. XVI. Cap, XLIV. Gollut's
Mem. Axi. 4, 5, 6.

4 Inſaniunt, ſays Pliny.


B b | fevers,


N

|

|

|

'
1


94


Miſletoe.


OF THE DRUID LEARNING.


fevers, to procure friendſhips, to heal all diſtempers. That it waz
to be gathered at the riſe of the Dog-ſtar, without being looked upon
either by ſun or moon; in order to which the earth was to be pro-
pitiated by a libation of honey, and the honey-comb. The iron
(viz. the plant) and then dig it up; in doing which the left hang
was to be uſed, and to wave it aloft after it was ſeparated from the
ground. The leaves, ſtalk, aud roots, were to be ſeparately dried in
the ſhade ; and if their couches were ſprinkled with an infuſion gf
it in water, the feaſts were thought in a fair way of being much the
merrier for ſuch a ſprinkling. Againſt the bite of ſerpents they
uſed it infuſed in wine", ;

They deified the Miſletoe, and were not to approach either that,
or the Selago, or the Samolus, but in the moſt devout and reve.
rential manner. When the end of the year approached, they
marched with great ſolemnity to gather the Miſletoe of the
oak, in order to preſent it to Jupiter, inviting all the world to aſſiſt
at this ceremony with theſe words, © The new-year is at hands,
gather the Miſletoe.”

«© The Druids indeed account nothing more ſacred than the
* Oak-Miſletoe, which is however rarely to be found, but when
found isapproached with great reverence; and principally when the
* moon is fix days old t, at which time they begin their months and
« years, and ages, every zoth year. Then, calling it univerſal re-
© medy in their native language, they prepare the ſacrifices and reli-
& gious feaſts after their own cuſtom, under the tree, and lead forth
two white bulls, never yet yoked, nor their horns till then bound
with ropes; the Prieſt cloathed in white aſcends the tree, and with
n golden hook cuts off the Miſletoe, which is received in a white
* garment, {pread for that purpoſe.”

This Miſletoe was of a golden colour, an adventitious plant of the
Climbing kind, and therefore the golden bough is compared to it by
Virgil, En. vi. ver. 205.


*© Quale ſolet ſylvis brumali frigore Viſcum
Fronde virere nova, quod non ſua ſeminat Arbos,
Et croceo fœtu teretes circundare truncos :


<« Talis erat ſpecies auri frondentis opaca
66 Ilice u.“


r Plin. Nat. Hiſt, Lib. XXV. Cap. IX. footſteps of this cuſtom ſtill remain in ſome
* © In Aquitania quotannis Prid. Kal. Jan. parts of France. |
<< pueri atque adoleſcentes vicos villaſque obeunt, t Pliny, Lib. XVI. Cap. XLIV.
* carmine ſtipem petentes, ſibique, atque aliis N. B. The Verſe attributed to Ovid, 60 Ad
pro voto, in exordio novi anni acclamantes, Viſcum Druides Druidæ clamare ſolebant,


„ Allguy, L'an neuf.“ Keyſler 30s. ſo that the ſpurious, and not in Ovid. Keyſler, p. 30%


This


OF THE DRUID LEARNING.


This ſtory of the golden bough ſhews that the Druids were not
ſingular in attributing great magical powers to ſuch ſcarce and beau-
tiful plants, ritually gathered, and offered to the Gods.


« Hoc ſibi pulchra ſuum ferri Proſerpina munus
ce Inftituit ; ——

Ergo alte veſtiga oculis & rite repertum
Carpe manu.“ Ib. ver. 142.


I muſt here alſo obſerve, that the Druids in ſeveral religious par-
ticulars had a delicacy ſuperiour to molt of the ancients; for in ga-
thering this Miſletoe they uſed only a golden hook, when among
other nations a hook of braſs was thought nice enough for like pur-
poſes, © Falcibus et meſſæ ad Lunam quæruntur ahenis , and Medea
hook, Xaayeory nua deeravor; Toung, and afterwards putting their
juice into brazen pots x. The Sabine Prieſts alſo ſhaved themſelves
with, © ex zre cultris.“ |

Having gathered the Miſletoe they next offer the victims, praying
that their deity would proſper thoſe to whom he had given fo preci- |
ous a boon, Of the Miſletoe thus gathered they made a potion, |
which (as they thought) prevented ſterility, and was an antidote to
all poiſon.

With great care alſo and ſuperſtition did the Druids gather the Schago.
Selago . Nothing of iron (as too baſe a metal) was to touch or cut
it, nor was the bare hand thought worthy of that honour, but a pecu- |
liar veſture, or ſagus applied by means of the right hand; the |
veſture muſt have been holy, and taken off from ſome ſacred perſon
privately, and with the left hand only. The gatherer was to be
cloathed in white 2, his feet naked, and waſhed in pure water a. He
was firſt to offer a ſacrifice of bread and wine, before he proceeded
to gather the Selago, which was carried from the place of its nativity,
in a clean, new napkin. This was preſerved as a charm by the
Druids againſt all misfortunes, and the fumigation of it was thought
exceedingly good againſt all defects of the eyes.

the Samolus, and gathered it in a ritual, religious manner b: he that
was to perform the office of gathering it, was to do it faſting, with
the left hand; and whilſt he was engaged in this duty, was obliged
not to look behind him on any account, nor lay down the herbs


IS. Om ("—_


-— -—ub


CONS


-H— SS I Ih. . — —
— r


=
— . Ad EE ere
- pe <& © T2 - _
— A 2 2 bm. —_
9 A — — by - r


— —


Seil. Herbæ, n. IV. ver. 513. 2 © Pureque lotis nudis pedibus.” Plin. ibid.
* Macrob, Saturn, Lib. V. Cap. XIX. Lib. XXIV. Cap. XI. in Marg. Not. ib. pura
El A Kind of hedge hyſſop, reſembling the Sa- ſubaud. aqua, the pureſt of water. |
vin, Pliny, Lib. XXIV. Cap. IX. The Firr- b Samolus or Marſhwort, Pliny, Lib. XXIV.
Club-moſs, Hudſon, Flora Anglica, p. 395. Cap. XI. The Round-leaved water Pimperneil,
Viz, a Druid whoſe garment was white. Hudſon, p. 79. |


any


\


Anatomy.


ther; but the firſt and chief was, to worſhip the Gods h. The better


OF THE DRUID LEARNING.


any where, but in the ciſterns, and chanels, where the ſwine and
bullocks uſually drink, and there they were to be bruiſed for them,
and mixed with the water to keep off diſeaſes from them. When
Medea gathered her magical herbs, ſhe turned her head back from
them, leaſt the peſtilential ſmell might be fatal to her ©; but here the
Druids were obliged not to turn their face from the herbs, to ſhew,
perhaps, the harmleſs nature and ſanative virtue of the plant they
gathered. |

As the Druids were great admirers of the virtue of vegetables, and
therefore ſtudious of Botany in order to guard and reſtore health,
they were ſagacious enough to diſcover that phyſical remedies, of
which they were not ignorant d (Pliny calling them phyſicians,
<« Suſtulit Druidas © Gallorum, et hoc genus Vatum, Medicorum-
que, ), could not effectually be applied without a thorough in-
ſpection into the ſeveral parts of the human body. Accordingly,
they encouraged the ſcience of Anatomy to ſuch an exceſs, and ſo
much beyond all reaſon and humanity, that one of their doQors
called Herophilus, is ſaid to have read lectures on the bodies of more
than 700 living men, to ſhew therein the ſecrets and wonders of the
human fabrick f.


R


nnn. POOR


_ * RE


C HAP. XIII.
Moral and Religious Doctrines.


HE Druids were remarkable for juſtice &, moral and religious

doctrines, and ſkill in the laws of their country; for which reaſon all
diſputes were referred to their arbitration; and their deciſion, whether
relating to private and domeſtick, or publick and civil affairs, was
final; and the moſt heavy puniſhments inflicted on thoſe who ſhould
be ſo obſtinate as not to abide by their determination: to do no evil,
was one of their general maxims, as to be valiant in battle was ano-


to inſpire their countrymen with a noble ardour to fight their ene-
mies, and to contemn death, they attended the battles; ſome in-
culcated the immortality of the ſoul, others its paſſage from one
body into another, others the certainty of a future life, as doctrines


Macrob. Sat. V. Cap. XIX.

4 Pliny, Lib. XXX. Cap. I.

* Viz. Tiberius Cæſ.

f Galtruch. Poet. Hiſt. Lib. III. Cap. IV.

5 Aixaidlalos d oH, xas ice Tele erryevorias Ta;
Ti A „ehe, K TH; Kovac, Ta; Te Ponx g Fas
pE&Nfa T&lo (viz. Dr uidis) io Nina Ge, Strabo,
Lib. IV. p. 146. Sotion in libro Succeſſionum


ce confirmat Druidas Divini Humanique Juris
e peritiſſimos fuiſſe.” Lel. de Scr. Brit. p. 5.
the Druids thoſe excellent Laws, by which the
Ile of Man has always been govern'd. Se
Carte's Hiſt. of England, p. 46.
n E:Bur Orv, xa Andi xaxer par, xa af ares

Diog. Laert. de Druid,
the


c


1
I l
k

.


2
SG. ai
— 6 :
* :
4 | wie PI
"
—


OF THE DRUID LEARNING.


the moſt comfortable and enlivening upon all ſuch dangerous occa-
lions. Nor was it only in war that theſe doctrines operated upon
their diſciples, but at all times; and fo confident and aſſured of a
future life were the Druids, that they often put off ſettling


their accounts till they met in the other world; ſome willingly


threw themſelves into the funeral e of their friends, in order to live
with them after death i, and others threw letters into the funeral pile,
to be read by the deceaſed in the other world. That they thereſore
held the immortality of the ſoul and a future life, I take to be paſt all
doubt; but from whom they derived, or in what particular ſenſe they
underſtood and taught, theſe doctrines, I do by no means preſume
to affirm; becauſe we want more circumſtantial and particular lights
from hiſtory as to theſe points; but we may now enquire whether
they held the tranſmigration, for this is poſitively affirmed by the
to them, and is therefore called in queſtion by ſome of the
moderns. | |


>
/


„ .


Of the Immortality and Tranſimi gration of the Soul, and how far
| | adopted by the Druids.


EAR plainly tells us that the Druids not only held the im-
mortality of the ſoul, but its migration after death from one
human body into another k. Diod. Sic. Lib. V. tells us, that the
opinion of Pythagoras prevailed among them; which was, that the
ſouls of men, after a determinate number of years, lived again, the
ſoul entering into another body l. According to Valerius Maximus
(Lib. II. c. vi.) it was the ancient cuſtom of the Gauls to lend money
upon condition that it ſhould be repaid them m in the next life,
thoroughly perſuaded, as they were, that the ſouls of men were im-
mortal; in this, fimple enough (ſays our author, ibid.), and yet they
thought the ſame as the celebrated Pythagoras n. Ammian. Marc.
Lib. XV. informs us that the Druids, men of exalted genius, ranged
in regular ſocieties, by the advice of Pythagoras raiſed their minds to
the moſt ſublime enquiries, and, © deſpiſing human and worldly
affairs, ſtrongly preſſed upon their diſciples the immortality of the


1 Czfar, Pomp. Mela. ut ſupra. Diod. Sic. Yu ros aripurur ena, oviCrone A N re gg
Lib. V. Cap. II. a Buy, ex i reo TW TG uns £47 Vo parmnge |
Non interire animas, ſed ab aliis poſt mor- m Apud inferos.
«tem tranſire ad alios.” Lib. VI. n Dicerem ſtultos, niſi idem Bracati ſenſiſ-
Enoxue yag Saß ola; 8 Nudayops Nes, ors Tas © ſent, quod palliatus Pythagoras credidit.“


C c « ſoul.”


97


OF THE DRUID LEARNING.
e ſoul?” Lucan fays, © that according to the Druid opinion, the
ec ghoſts of the dead deſcended not to Erebus, or the empire of


Pluto, (there to remain in a ſtate of ſeparation from all body, as 55
the Greeks and Romans thought) but that the ſame ſoul actuated th
N another body in another world P. Pomp. Mela, Lib. III. c. ii. may *
| © ſeem to differ from Lucan ; but, indeed, is only relating the ſenti- os
| ments of a portion of the Druid philoſophers; he declares that the pa
ö Druids maintained the fouls to be eternal (1. e. without beginning SE hr
| and without end) that there was another life after this, wherein the be
ſoul exiſted amongſt other departed ghoſts, and that they did for :
this reaſon burn and interr with the dead, what ſuited their rank and he
inclinations when they were alive q. 1
Objeftion So far the ancients; from whoſe writings it appears, that the cc
torr rt © Druids all held the immortality, and ſome, the tranſmigration alſo: pe
gration. but many of ther moderns will not allow the latter opinion to be bi
juſtly imputed to the Druids. Their reaſons are theſe; firſt, the (.
tranſmigration is a tenet erroneous in itſelf, and groundleſs; not aſ- b.
ſerted by Ammianus, or Mela, of the Druids; and inconſiſtent with 0
their other avowed opinions; and therefore what Ceſar and the reſt ot
after him ſay, is to be looked upon as the effect of envy, and as a m
Anſwered. moſt injurious aſperſion. Now, that the tranſmigration never had ci
. any exiſtence, but in the fancy of its whimſical patrons, is readi] th
allowed; but this can be no reaſon why the Druids ſhould not adopt p
itz; for in thoſe dark ages many abſurdities, as great as this, were il
admitted into their ſyſtem, evidences of which will occur to the cc
reader from what goes before, ſuthcient to excuſe my not re- entering cl
into particulars in this place. It is true, neither P. Mela, nor Amm.
Marcel. do record the tranſmigration, as held by the Druids; but as f
they do not contradict Ceſar and the reſt, who poſitively aſſert it, a
nothing can be concluded in favour of the moderns, from the mere V
filence of thoſe authors: neither can it be ſuppoſed but that Cefar's n
ſituation in life and knowledge placed him far above envying the h
Druids ; for though they were poſſeſſed of all the eſteem which an- 0
tiquity could give, inſtructed in many laudable doctrines, and brought t
up to the nobleſt contemplations, yet, in the opinion of the Greeks
and Romans, they were far from rivaling them, or moving the leaſt t
degree of envy. Monſ. Martin 5 has laboured this point with great 0


zeal for the reputation of his countrymen, in ſeveral pages, and cannot
allow the tranſmigration to have been held by the Druids, becauſe it


o „ Deſpectantes humana pronuntiarunt ani- « Aternas eſſe animas vitamque alteram ad 4
; © mas immortales. | © manes, itaque cum mortuis cremant ac defo-
b ? KRegit idem ſpiritus artus. - Orbe alio.— “ diunt apta viventibus olim.“ «


q ls tiennent (dit il, viz. Strabon.) que les r Cluver. Germ. Ant. p. 219. Frickius, p. 77
| Ames ne ſont point ſujettes a corruption.“ &c. Rel. de Gaul. Vol. II. p. 223.
; Caſtelnau, p. 65. | Rel. de Gaul, Vol, II. p. 223, &c.


js


OF THE DRUID LEARNING.


i inconſiſtent with their other tenets: his arguments may be collect-
«4 into this narrow ſpace ; he thinks they could not be ſo abſurd, as
to throw letters, accounts, and money-bills into the funeral fires, if
the dead, after death, became different perſons, and even different
creatures from what they were before; neither would {laves or clients
voluntarily die to ſerve their maſters in another life t, or the wiſe
participate the fate of her huſband, if the ſouls of thoſe matters or
huſbands were ſuppoſed to pats into the bodies of other men or
beaſts. | |

But in anſwer to this, it muſt be obſerved, that the Druids never
held the migration of Souls into Brutes. 'The union of the Soul
after death to another body in another world was never ſuppoſed to
conſtitute a different perſon, the man remained the ſame identical
perſon as he was before; in like manner as a man that has changed
his cloaths, or lodgings, continues ſtill the ſame man; and there-
fore they imagined that in this new body (apud inferos) the man
had all the ſame wants, and the ſame paſſion for horſes, armour,
food, cloaths; the ſame rights and claim to money, ſlaves, and every
other property, which he had in the preſent life. It was in confor-
mity to theſe ſentiments (which were no more than what the moſt
cultivated parts of the Gentile world held) that the greateſt part of
the Druids conveyed ſuch things into the grave, urn, or funeral
pile, as the perſon deceaſed had, or delighted in when alive, that
they might be of the ſame uſe, and preſerve the ſame relation and
connex10n with the dead in another life, which they had been ac-
cuſtomed to in this". 1

But though this was the general way of thinking, it does not
follow that it was univerſal. Another part of the ſame Sect might,
and probably did, diflent from the foregoing opinion, and imagine
with Pythagoras, that the ſouls of men when they died, lived conti-
nually here upon earth, by paſſing into new habitations of the
human form; and it muſt be allowed that people of this perſuaſion
could not with any propriety or conſiſtency a& as the others are ſaid
to have done ; neither indeed need it be ſu ppoſed w.


This diſpute may be ſoon ended, if we rightly diſtinguiſh between


99


The Im-


mortalit


theſe two principles, the Immortality, and Tranſmigration ; and and Tranf-


conſider that one is eſſential, and inſeparably connected with the ngen,


„Animalia, ſervi, clientes, juſtis funeribus © etiam ad pecudes tranſire vellet, & rurſum e
f confectis, una cremabantur.“ Ceſar, Lib. VI. © pecudibus ad homines revocari, Druides vero
"OP os. 8 5 N <* tantum ad alios homines tranſmigrare.” To
Kh Omnia quæ vivis cordi fuiſſe arbitrantur the ſame purpoſe Keyſler, p. 117. In eo tamen

en inferunt.“ Ceſ. Lib. VI. %a Pythagorica abibat (ſcil. Druidum Metemp-
* . aliis (ſays Ceſar) poſt mortem tranſire © ſycholis) quod non in pecorum aliorumque
* alios (ſeilicet homines).” (Joan Brantius and * animantium corpora, ſed in ſola humana iterum
n 8 Frick, p. 70.) „ Hoc diſcriminis eſſe „ concedere autumabant.

wut, quod Pythagoras hominum animas


f | belief


Principles.


|
|
|


*
— 0
— *
- —— re
1 - —
— — — .! ̃ ²wu ĩ˙ͤẃ .


—— — ——]—ñ—ũ— —n”
— —


. —
8 n *


oo OF THE DRUID LEARNING.
belief of a future ſtate, the other indifferent; and therefore
though all might and did hold the former, that is, the immortality,
yet that one ſect and party might embrace, and another reject, the
tranſmigration, as a point in no ſenſe fundamental. ©

The Im. The immortality of the foul is the ancient principle; traces of jt

. be diſcovered in all ages and nations; this was the chief doc-

Principle, trine of Pythagoras *, and not only the opinion of Pythagoras, but,
as Plato informs us, of all the great men and poets who had any
thing divine in them, as he expreſſes it. But upon this great truth,
on which the ſpirit of all religion depends, learned men grafted their

but variouſly OWN fancies, disfiguring truth with fables. Some declared the

pet ood departed ſouls to leave all matter behind them at death, and never
tiles, afterwards to have any communication with it; ſome attributed to
them a thin etherial body; ſome held that they mixed immediately
with the Gods, from whom they were deſcended, and of whom
they were but detached particles ; and others paſſed them over the
river Styx, and either into the Elyzium Fields if good and virtuous,
or into a region of grief and torment, if they had been the ſouls of
wicked men. This laſt was the opinion of the Greeks, borrowed

Pythagoras. from, or at leaſt built upon, an Egyptian plan., But Pythagorsy
brought with him from the Eaſt (where it ſtill continues among the
ſucceſſors of the ancient Brachmans v) a different do&rine, and
added it to his favourite principle, the immortality of the ſoul; it
was this, that after death, the ſoul having left one earthly habitation,
entered into another; from one body decayed and turned to clay,
betook itſelf to another freſh and lively, and fit to perform all the
offices of animal life. According to him, the ſouls of the good
paſſed into wiſe, valiant, and virtuous men, and the ſouls of thol:
who were otherwiſe, paſſed into the baſeſt of the ſpecies, or wereeven
compelled to animate brutes. This was his literal doctrine, but
whether literally to be underſtood, and ſuch changes really believed
to happen, or whether (as is altogether as probable) it was only
an allegorical refinement, intending nothing more than that -the
ſouls of good men went into a ſtate of happineſs, and thoſe of the
impious into miſery, is what cannot now be determined with any
certainty, the Pythagorean diſciples being bound to ſecrecy, as thei
firſt and perpetual rule and duty; for which reaſon it remains ver
uncertain, as Porphyrius confeſſes, what Pythagoras did commu-
nicate to his ſcholars 2. But in what ſenſe ſoever this tranſmigra-
tion of Pythagoras is to be underſtood, evident it is, that the in-


* Manirz per Tob Yee Warpe War tyirelo Tpuloy tagma Druid. P · 148.
prev ws, aα⁴M was Pros Tw ]. Porphyr. Vit. y The Banians, and Chineſe.
Pythag. p 188. . Wuxns Mαν,ẽꝭ˖m2u xas aidolng ev 2 A A Ur NY Tee CUIRO1 9; sig x Praca 2
eig ANTE TwY Iudayopruy dH, YYWpipoy 558 Wa- Caiws, xa yap Sor 1 TUXgT% vn wap le 0wTh, p.


o xa Naorlor Porphyr. apud Stobæum. Syn- Vit. Pythag. Syntagm. Druid. p. 148.
mortalit


[* Te * 5 7 . . 0 tho
ada n * PTY 9 OE 2 p "TG 9 — h
"a A 3 \ ; > 7 - T6 8 2 we | Wa.
Cr oo oe oo U OS
l Ne s TF *© p 0 — * . 4 P — * - i *
a * . , a


—


N * . 13 ah "1s
PIT OTR
1 2.4% * F


OF THE DRUID LEARNING. 101


mortality of the ſoul is entirely independent of, and diſtinct from

it; and therefore Ariſtotle held the immortality, but rejected the Aritorte.
weak and airy ſuperſtructure of the tranſmigration a: and indeed

the immortality was generally held, but philoſophers wanting the

light of revelation, and not being able to prove the truth, either

to themſelves or others, by meer reaſon, frequently heſitated, feared,

doubted, and at laſt remained undetermined ; but the tranſmigra-

tion was now and then admitted, and as often rejected, being a

matter of indifference and ſpeculation only ; nay, thoſe who ad-

mitted, did not admit it in the fame ſenſe : in the ſame ſet it was The Tram
held by ſome, and diſallowed by others; and this is the reafon, as hei by ſome
I apprehend, that the Stoicks are ſaid by ſome b to have held this my ſe
doctrine, and by others © to have rejected it. And probably it was the came
the ſame thing among the Druids. Some adopted this fancy of the $*tamons
Metempſychoſis from Pythagoras; others received it not (at leaſt in and, le,
his ſenſe) but rambled into other fables and inventions, more re- Druid.
ſembling the Grecian ſuperſtition. No people were more ardent in
aſſerting the immortality, than the Druids ; in this they all agreed,

but in the fabulous tranſitions they were divided, as the Grecks alſo

were. Their firmneſs in the great point does them honour, for in The Druids
this tenet they were more ſteady, than the beſt of the Greeks and te nn
Romans, whoſe fluctuating betwixt hope and deſpair is too notorious tality ;

to be denied d; whereas the intrepidity of the Druid ſyſtem is at all

times, and in every particular, the ſame, and all owing to this great
principle: this was the univerſal ſpring of action, it animated the

ſoldier to expoſe his life in war, the ſlave to die with his maſter, the

wife to follow her dead huſband, the old and decrepid to precipitate
themſelves from rocks, or walk freely and without concern up to

their own funeral piles; it reconciled the devoted victim to become

a ſacrifice, the creditor to poſtpone his debt till the next life, and

the man of buſineſs became thereby contented to throw letters for

his correſpondents into the funeral fires to be thence remitted into

the next world : all theſe particulars were the natural reſult of ſuch

a principle as the immortality. The immortality was therefore a

ſpring e, an engine neceſſary to actuate ſo warlike, and ſo ſuperſtiti-

ous a people; but the tranſmigration had no ſuch tendency, it was but not una-
meer theory, a ſpeculative point, and might either be admitted, or .
not, without injuring the publick, or infeebling the manners of the Tranſmi-
people: all therefore, in general, held the immortality, and thoſe“““ .


who were content with the plain truth, reſted there, whilſt thoſe


Lib. I. de Anima, cap. iii, Syntagm. d Hieron. Epiſt. ad Heliodorum,
p. 155, 6 — Inde ruendi


Gregorius, p. 69. Epiphanius, Epiſt. In ferrum mens prona viris, animæque capaces
Mortis, & ignavum eſt redituræ parcere vitæ.“
Lucan.


D d who


yntagm, P- 155.
Sactitius, ibid,


n gy ůůůů ů ů˙²è—;ĩ· — 1822 —
= ; . 2 7 Ma - wo


102


Thoſe who
held the


Tranſmi-


gration, did
not agree in


one ſenſe of this world, as Pythagoras did, and others adopting the tranſmigration,


of the Doc-
trine.


OF THE DRUID LEARNING,
who had a mind to pry further into the ſtate of ſouls departed, a
to reaſon out of their depth (which is no little pleaſure to ſpeculatiy.
men), either fell into the opinion of Pythagoras, or into other fable.
full as abſurd : that ſome held the tranſmigration is plain from th.
united voice of the ancients beforementioned, and that more moder;
ages had not entirely freed themſelves from the ſame groundle;
fancies, we have an inſtance from the Edda Iſlandica f. Howeye;
this does not appear to have been any general, fundamental principle
among the Druids ; for indeed by the traces of the ancient doc.
trines which ſtill remain (faint as they are, yet perceptible) amone
the northern nations, it is evident that inſtead of the tranſmigration
of the ſoul into another body to live again upon earth; ſomes held
two ſtates of the departed ſouls entirely inconſiſtent with that opi.
nion; one ſtate was before the general conflagration of the worl!
(which they called the Crepuſculum Deorum) ; the other ſtate wy;
in a new and more pleaſant world, lately emerged from the ſea, and
riſen out of the flames of the firſt; in this ſecond ſtate the good
were to enjoy all felicity, the bad to ſuffer continual puniſhment,
In ſhort, the immortality was the univerſal doctrine of all the Druid
ſe, and ſhines every where, notwithſtanding the fabulous veil now
and then thrown upon it; but ſome were bold enough to purſue the
ſoul into its future ſtate, whither they had but a dim light to guide
them ; and therefore it is no wonder they ſhould fall into miſtakes
concerning the manner of its exiſting, acting, deſiring and loathing;
ſome adopting the tranſmigration, and ſuppoſing the new life in


and ſuppoſing the new life in another world; and of thoſe Lucan
ſpeaks, Regit idem Spiritus artus— Orbe alio— ſome thinking that
the ſouls remained meer ſhades or ghoſts, whilſt others imagined
that the dead wanted cloaths, armour, horſes, ſervants, and the
like appurtenances of the preſent life; and theſe are they
of whom Pomp. Mela writes. Now that ſome ſhould be more
fanciful than others, and that the Theoriſts ſhould differ one from
the other, and even hold inconſiſtencies in ſuch ſpeculative points, i
not at all ſurprizing; in all ſuch matters people will think freely, and
conſequently differently, ſometimes contradictorily; and yet this
will not at all affect the reputation any people may have delſervedly
obtained by means of their eſtabliſhed and fundamental do&rines;
ſo, that what was ſaid of the ancient Thracians i, is the worſt thing
that can be ſaid of the Druids on this head, and 1s no more than
this, that they held ſome tenets concerning the ſtate of departed


f Keyſler, p. 117. i Mela, Lib. II. cap. ii. Alii redituras puta"
$ Ibid. p. 118. 6 animas obeuntium, alii, etſi non redeant, non
b Ibid, p. 122. « extingui tamen ſed ad beatiora tranſire.


ſouls,


OF THE DRUID DOC TRINEsS. 103


ſouls, not very conſiſtent and uniform, We may conclude then,
that all held the immortality, and a future ſtate, and that ſome held
the tranſmigration 3 of whom there were alſo two diviſions, ſome
thought with Pythagoras, and others ſomewhat differcntly. Of the
firſt of theſe ſpeaks Ceſar, Diod. Sic. & Val. Max. Of the latter,
Lucan and Mela,


T
Of the Druid Do@rines.


N teaching their Doctrines, the Druids uſed the ancient Oriental of their
manner of Allegory and Mythology, and moſt aſſuredly for this h.
reaſon : leſt their great and ſublime truths, by deſcending into the
familiar reach of every 1nattentive and unprepared novice, might
fall ſhort of the veneration they deſerved, and become cheap and
contemptible k; but left any one ſhould think that ſuch a manner
of inculcating truth was too refined for the Druids, or doubts whe-
ther it was their cuſtom to deal in ſuch emblematick repreſentations,
I ſhall here produce ſome inftances, both from hiſtory and monu-
ments, to prove it. Lucian found an odd picture of Hercules
Ogmius in Gaul, and has tranſmitted to us the deſcription of it in
the following manner. * Hercules was there exhibited, and known
by his uſual ornaments ; but inftead of the gigantick body, and
fierce countenance, given him by others, the Druids painted him,
to Lucian's great ſurprize, aged, bald, decrepid : but to his tongue
were faſtened chains of gold and amber, which drew along a mul-
titude of perſons, whoſe ears appeared to be fixed to the other end of
thoſe chains. I find, Lucian, ſays one of the Druid Philoſophers
to him (as he ſtood admiring the ſtrangeneſs of the ſight), you are
full of wonder, at what you ſee ; we Gauls do not agree with the
* Greeks in making Mercury the God of eloquence ; according to
our ſyſtem this honour is due only to Hercules, becauſe he ſo far
ſurpaſſes Mercury in power; we paint him advanced in age,
* becauſe that eloquence exerts not all her moſt animated powers
but in the mouths of the aged: the link, and conſtant attach-
ment there is betwixt the tongue of the eloquent, and the ears of
the audience, juſtifies the reſt of the repreſentation : by under-
* ſtanding the hiſtory of Hercules in this ſenſe, we neither
* diſhonour him, nor depart from truth; for we hold it indiſ-


: © Kay C271 Te; werTvuvoroPirgy xa Agvidzs Auſpudl e bant Druidz.” Frick. de Druid. P- 52.
«5 F0070P10%, Diog. Laert. I. c. ſegm. 6. Anti- * In Hercule Gallico, Tom. X. p. 517. Edit.
t . * *

quum Gentium vetuſtifimarum morem in Salmur,


* tradenda Philoſophia atque Theologia ſerva-


6 putably


—_—
—"


—
3


* — rm. 3 —ů ů — — Arc 2 ꝶꝶ69iwu ] y KVK— — ſ— —
- cc» » _


104


OF THE DRUID DOCTRINES.


* putably true, that he ſucceeded in all his noble enterprizes, cap.
ce tivated every heart, and ſubdued every brutal paſſion, not by the
te ſtrength of his arms (for that was impoſſible) but by the powers
ce of wiſdom, and the ſweetneſs of his perſuaſion.“ Theſe were the
ſentiments of the Druid, in which there is ſo much true ſcience, that
it might do honour to any ſchool of Athens, or Rome. The author
of the Rel. des Gaules, has indeed laboured to prove, in ſeven long
pages, that it is not Hercules but Mercury in this Picture, and that


Lucian miſtook one for the other; but his arguments are too weak


to ſet aſide the plain teſtimony of fo diſcerning an author as Lucian,
and of all thoſe other authors (as he confeſſes himſelf, p. 307.) who
have writ of Ogmius ſince Lucian. The tenour of the whole fable,
and the ſpirit of the picture, confirms every thing that Lucian fays
the truth contained in the repreſentation is more new, pointed, and
ſtriking, than if it had been applied to Mercury: the turn given to
the ſtrength of Hercules is the leading beauty of the whole, and
what could not but make fo forcible an impreſſion upon the elegant
wit of Lucian, that it was impoſſible he ſhould forget, or
miſtake it.

There is another noble evidence (as it appears to me) of their
fymbolical learning in a baſs relieve, not many years ſince diſcovered
over the door of the temple of Montmorillon in Poictou!; the

late of it is in Montfaucon's ſupplement, tom. ii. p. 221. and in
the Religion des Gaules m, but in neither of them ſatisfactorily
explained; I think therefore it will explain itſelf, and being ſet in
the following light will approve itſelf a moſt inſtructive monument
of antiquity, as well as a plain inftance of the delicacy of the Druid
learning.

The whole is a lively repreſentation of the ſeveral ſtages of life at


which the Druid Diſciples were gradually admitted into the myſte-


ries and truths of the Druid ſyſtem. The figures are eight in num-
ber; ſix men, and two of the other ſex: ſome have taken them all
for deities; the two women do indeed ſeem to be images of TruTu,
but the men reſemble, in no particular, any ſort of divinities hitherto
diſcovered, and by the ſtripes of their garment, and ſome other cir-
cumſtances which will occur in the explanation, they muſt be
Druids : they all ſtand in rings, or circles round their feet, of which
figure the Druids were extremely fond; in the fix men a great
diſparity of age is perceivable ; they are divided into two claſſes,
each conſiſting of three perſonages, three on the right are all aged
and bearded, the other groupe of men are all young and beardleſs;


i See Plate IV. p. 53. o See Lib, III. cap. vii.
m Vol. I. p. 144. in Frickius, p. 49.


there


OF THE DRUID DOC TRINES.


there is a manifeſt gradation of age in both groups 3 "that man
next the right-hand woman is very aged and venerable ; the next,
in front to the eye, is not ſo old, and the third of this party is ſome-
what younger ſtill, but barbate, and ſeemingly of a middle age. In
the juvenile triumvirate, there are three ſtages of youth, each of
which has its proper garb. The firſt (No. 1.), and neareſt to the
aged group, has a plain Prieſt's veſtment, bound by a ſurcingle,
and diſtinguiſhed only by the colour, and ſhape (being without any
ornaments), from that of the laity. The next (No. 2.) fronts the eve,
and has a ſaſh reaching from the right ſhoulder croſs the body to the
bottom of the garment. The third figure (No. 3.) looking towards
the left-hand woman, has a broad ſtream or facing (like a ſcart
croſſed with horizontal ftripes), reaching round his neck, and to the
bottom of his cloathing, and the garment ſo edged, is looſe, and
without a ſurcingle : it is obſervable that this laſt figure, which ſeems
the oldeſt, moſt manly, and of moſt diſtinction among the vouths,
looks towards the left-hand woman (No. 7); and that the oldeſt in
the ſenile cluſter looks towards the woman on the right-hand
(No. 8.). Such are the figures, habits, and ſtations, and by them, I
think, are plainly pointed out to us, the ſix different claſſes through
which the Druids were to paſs, before they arrived at the ſummit
of their dignity among their brethren, and of their authority in all
ſacred things. That woman [No. 7.) to whom the youths turn, is
cloathed from head to foot . Her hair is plaited in two ringlets
which grace each fide of her neck; ſhe has ſhoes on her feet, and
gloves on her hands, to ſhew that knowledge and truth are veiled
from youthful eyes, that myſterics are cloathed, and wrapt up in
allegory, ſymbol, and fignificant rites.: at firſt the young diſciples
are not permitted to look towards the real truth, but as they grow
elder are proportionably brought nearer and nearer unto, and taught
the divine ſecrets, though {till enſhrined in figure and mythology ;
but when age has ripened the judgment, and diſciplined the paſſions,
the Philoſopher is advanggd into the aſſembly of the Seniles. This
(N'. 4.) is the firſt of the aged cluſter of Druids, who, though fo
far advanced, preſerves his proper diſtance, has no enſiga of dignity,
no diſtinction, but that of place, and with a reverential awe keeps
his face averted from the Goddeſs (No. 8.). In the next ſtage of life
the Druid (No. 5.) fronts us; he has a large ſaſh depending from his
right ſhoulder croſs the body, and the hinder part meets the fore part
at the waiſte. He is one degree more than the laſt-mentioned
turned towards the female ſtatue on the right-hand : the laſt figure


(No. 6.) is very aged; he turns his face towards the Goddeſs, (Nv. 8.)


* © J/Enigmatibus faciem velarent veritati, acſi vetuiſſet Pudor nudam oſtendere populo.“ Fr.


de Druid. 5 lo
E e which


105


32
1 *


2 — IE US” —— at” — — .
Dd. * 5 — > - 4
| * — .


— Str. x exe. Kt Iv th
2 * r 9 . 9 "_
—— 2 - — 1 — —
— - I - — 4


106 OF THE DRUID DOC TRINEsS.


which is naked, to ſhew, that truth unveils all her myſteries to thoſe
who by paſſing through the ſeveral ſtages of their diſcipline, were
enlightened, and prepared to receive truth in her moſt undiſguiſeg,
ſimple and natural appearances. Truth, therefore, is here uncovered,
her hair waves naturally down her ſhoulders, nothing ſavours of
conſtraint or art; two ſerpents (creatures among all nations the
emblems of wiſdom) twined round her legs and body, are embraced
by both her hands, to ſhew the harmony, connexion, and inſeparable
union betwixt Wiſdom and Truth : the heads of both theſe ſerpent;
are applied to the breaſt of the Goddeſs, to ſhew that Wiſdom draws
all her ſupport from Truth; they are claſped faſt, and directed to
the ſeat of nouriſhment, to ſhew that Truth readily yields her
choiceſt treaſures, her moſt amiable beauties, to the ſearches of the
wiſe and ſtudious. The Druids are divided into two groups, as
was obſerved before, and each group ſtands on a ſemicircular plan,
two being in profile, and one in front : Truth 1s at each end of the
baſs-relieve, ſignifying, that ſhe is to be equally the aim and purſuit
of young and old ; one group therefore is moving round towards
the one ſymbol, and the other towards the other ſymbol; the young
men turn towards the object of their ſtudies, bending their courſe
from right to left; on the other hand the old men proceed from left
to right, ſtill approaching to a more dire& and intimate view of


Truth and Nature.


Cernunnos. Cernunnos, a deity of the Gauls, lately diſcovered at Paris p, is
another evidence, how much the Druids were addicted to ſymbolical
ing ſingular manner. The face human; old; bearded; of a
downcaſt thoughtful eye; ears erect, large, and liſtening ; a ſtag's
horn, branched, proceeding from each temple ; on each horn hangs
a ring, or {mall circular fillett, and on the upper margin of the ſtone


is written CERNVNNOSE.,
the moſt conſpicuous parts of


Perhaps the Druids, by uniting


different animals in one image,


might intend to exhibit the ſeveral attributes of the Supreme Deity,
naturally enough to be deduced from theſe emblems ; but what
ſtrikes me more, their deſign, I apprehend, was to repreſent the
ſubordinate divinity, Juſtice z not a blind female, as others fancied;
but manly, ſeeing, hearing, and thinking; not unaptly ſignifying,
that the ſeat of Power and Princely Rule (of which the horn is an
uſual ſymbol +) ſhould always have its ears open to ſound counſels,
and to both parties, equitably exerting its judicial authority under


the checks of ſedate age, and


P (Viz. A. D 1711.) See Montfaucon, Tom.
II. p. 426. whence the Buſt in page 107.

A name derived from the Horns Hebr. |,
Kern. a horn; Wallicè, Cornub. & Armor. Corn,
& Kern.

+ In that ſublime deſcription of the true Deity


deep reflexion. But although


given us by Habakkuk, ch. iii. iv. God is ſaid to
have „ had horns coming out of his head, and
„there was the hiding of his power.” Vit
under this ſymbol lay couched, and only myſticaly
preſſed, the emnipotence of God,


the


OF THE DRUID DOC TRINEsS.


the learned may not agree in the meaning of a compoſition ſeem-
ingly ſo odd and unnatural ; yet it mult be allowed by all, that the
figure is truely hieroglyphical, and was made fo in order to commu-
nicate ſome 1mportant piece of knowledge, though what, may be
doubtful. Thus much may ſuffice to prove that the Druids conveyed
their tenets by ſymbols; painting, and engraving their doctrines ;
and this doubtleſs they were the more inclined to do, foraſmuch as
they were prohibited, by a fundamental law, from communicating


their erudition in any kind of writing.
IVI


gin Hongaua 75
CHAP. I.


Of the Druid Deities and Idols.
RIGEN onEzek. iv. ſays that the Druids taught the Britans


to believe that there was but one God; but the meaning of


this place in Origen is much diſputed ; however, ſome” will have it
that they acknowledged but one God ; yet Abp. Uſher 5 thinks
otherwiſe 3 and indeed Ceſar is ſo expreſs, as well as Pliny, as to their
ſuperiour and inferiour Gods, that their Polytheiſm and Idolatry
cannot well be diſputed. Mercury was their chief deity, as Ceſar
informs us, and many images of him they had among them : the
eſteemed him the inventor of arts, the tutelary God of all travellers
and highways, and the ſovereign Lord in all matters of gain and
merchandize. So far they agreed with the Greeks, who called him
Eyo9;og, or Vialis, and Keedw@-, for the ſame reaſons,

After Mercury they worſhiped Apollot, whom they called Bale-
nus, and ſometimes Belis ; by him they meant the Sun, as other na-
tions did. Then Mars, whom they called Heſus u, and Teutates; then

Jupiter, called alſo Taranys, i. e. the thunderer ; and next, Minerva.
Their opinion of theſe Gods was much the ſame as that of other
nations; that is, that Apollo cured diſeaſes, that Minerva taught all
works of ingenuity and handycraft ; that Jupiter reigned in heaven,
and that Mars preſided in matters of war. That the Druids, under
the names of the ſun, the moon, and fire, worſhiped the Holy


1 See Camden's Britannia, Lxxx1v. General 1 Ceſar, ibid.
Deſcr. Gibſon's J d. u Als, vel Æſus, hoc eſt Deus ie dictus“


Obad. Walk. Camb. cxyn, Frickius, p. 60. Keyſler, p. 139.
* Prim, Lib. I, cap. i.


Trinity,
*


107


nen


—


wry —


—


. cb


— .


108


OF THE DRUID DOC TRINEsS.


Trinity, was a groundleſs fancy of Cluver, and ſome other
Germans , more zealous for the honour of the Druids, than for the
intereſt of truth; but to the great commendation of this ſect, it myſt
be allowed that they acknowledged a Providence x.

Beſides their celeſtial Gods, they had their idols, and ſymbolical
repreſentations of their divinities, A cube was the ſymbol of
Mercury, who, as the meſſenger of the Gods was eſteemed the index
or emblem of Truth always like to itſelf, however you turn it;
as it is with a cube. The Oak, talleſt and faireſt of the wood, was
the ſymbol of Jupiter?.

The manner in which the principal tree in the grove was conſe-
crated, and ordained to be the ſymbol of Jupiter, was as follow z.
The Druids, with the general conſent of the whole Order, and all
the neighbourhood, pitched upon the moſt beautiful tree, cut off
all its fide branches, and then joined two of them to the higheſt part
of the trunk, ſo that they extended themſelves on either ſide like
the arms of a man, making in the whole the ſhape of a croſs;
« Simulacraque mœſta Deorum— Arte carent, cæſiſque extant im-
& mania Truncis?*.” Above the inſertions of theſe branches, and
on the left Belenus, and on the middle of the trunk Tharamis ©.

Under this tree they performed their moſt ſacred rites ; without
the very leaves of the Oak. firſt ſtrewed on the altar, no ſacrifices
could be regularly oftered ; and to this more than uſual veneration
for the Oak, was doubtleſs in a great meaſure owing that ſubordinate
degree of adoration, which they paid to the Oak- miſl-toe, thinking
it ſent from Jupiter, as a kind of inferiour deity d. The Druids are
alſo ſaid to have erected in one of their moſt retired places of worſhip,
a ſtatue of Iſise. Of what form this ſtatue was, is not ſaid; but,
if this cuſtom really exiſted among the ancient Druids, it could not
be of the human ſhape, for it was contrary to the principles of the
Celtic Religion to repreſent any of their Gods by the human figure,


w Frick. p. 60.

* Aeſuos 0 (viz. Celtz) K tives Org, na pov
nue, X&k ? ue οννn. Tacitus and P liny
alſo ſay the ſame thing. Frick. p. 63.

KN 056208 pry Act, aſahpa ft: AO» Killer U
Ape, Maxim. Tyr. Serm. 38. Camd. xix. The
Jews were ſtrongly infected with the ſame idola-
trous veneration for the Oak in the time of Iſaiah.
(chap. i. ver. 29.) They ſhall be aſhamed of the
„Oaks which ye have deſired, and ye ſhall be
* confounded for the gardens that ye have choſen.”

z Cromer. Lib. xv. Sched. p. 346.

a Lucan, Lib. III.

d Gr. ©, Gal. Dieu. Cornub. Deu. Ir, Dia.


Wallice Duw.

© Forſitan pro Taranys. To this ancient way of
inſcribing names on ſacred ſymbols, St. John may
ſeem to allude, Rev. iii. 12. ** Him that over-
ce cometh I will make a Pillar in the Temple of
© my God, and I will write upon him the Name
of my God, and I will write upon him my
new Name ;” and, ibid. xiii. 1. I ſaw a Beal:
o rife up out of the ſea, having ſeven Heads, and
« upon his Heads the Names of Blaſphemy, and
«© upon her Forehead was a Name written —
« Myſtery — Babylon the Great.“ Ib, xvii. 3.

d Alex. ab Alex. Vol. II. p. 744.

e Eli Sched. p. 237. ſed unde non conſtat.


juſtly


OF THE DRUID DOC TRINEsS.


juſtly conceiving, according to ancient tradition, that the Divine
power was to be worſhiped, but not ſeen f.

Whether the Druids admitted the ſerpent into the number of
their deities, is rather uncertain, than improbable. The Babylonians,
Egyptians, Romans, Jews, and the Perſians alſo, to whoſe cuſtoms
the Druid Ritual is near a-kin, moſt certainly paid their adorations
to this creature; and if it ſhould be allowed that the Druids (as the
Guenebald- inſcription ſuggeſts) had groves conſecrated to Mithras, a
God whoſe common ſymbol was a ſerpent ; or ſecondly, that they
made their temples in a ſerpentine form, as the learned Dr. Stukeley
in his Abury ſuppoſed ; it will then be paſt all doubt, that the
Druids worſhiped ſerpents; but there are great difficulties attending
both theſe ſuppoſitions 8 : as to the firſt, the inſcription given us by
Guenebald, is ſtrongly ſuſpected to be forged ; as is alſo another
inſcription, in which Mithras is mentioned, viz. Deo-Invicto —
MITH R Secundinus — Dat®; and, as to the ſecond, notwith-
ſtanding what is advanced in favour of Dracontia, or ſerpentine
Temples, it is not altogether clear that the Druids conſtructed their
Temples on a ſerpentine plain. However, from the great value
which the Druids placed upon the Anguinum*®, to which they attri-
buted ſuch wonderful efficacy; it may be conjeQured, that thoſe
muſt have had ſome veneration for the Serpent, who had confeſſedly
ſuch a regard for, and attributed ſuch miracles to, its ſuppoſititious
production. It may alſo be obſerved, in favour of the learned
Doctor above-mentioned, that there is a mound thrown up on one
fide of Karnbre hill i (a place remarkable for Druid monuments of
every kind), ina ſerpentine form, and in the center of its voluta there
are two tall ſtones ere& ſtanding by each other; by which work
one would imagine, that if, the Druids intended it not as a ſymbol
of ſomething divine (which is not unlikely), yet that a work of fo
uncommon an appearance muſt have been ſome way or other ſub-
ſervient to their ſuperſtition : this, I ſay, one may conjecture ; but
indeed, whether they worſhiped Serpents, or Mithras, or had ſer-
pentine Temples, are points much too doubtful, and monuments
too few, imperfect, and indeciſive, alledged in order to ſupport them,
for us to affirm or conclude any thing poſitive concerning them.
Among the Gods of the ancient Gauls, and therefore of the
Druids, ſome reckon the Bull: by this God made of brafs, the


Cimbri, Teutones, and Ambrones, ſwore to obſerve the articles of


capitulation granted to the Romans, who defended the Adige againſt
them: after their defeat, Catulus ordered this Bull to be carried to


f 95 Secretum illud quod ſola reverentia g See Sepul of Chyndonax Reveille, Guenebald.
« vident.” Tacit. de M. G. „ Non vulgatis h Rel. de Gaul. Vol. I. p. 418. |
* dacrata figuris — Numina fic metuunt.” [* See Chap. XXI.]

Lucan, Lib. iii. | i See Map of Karnbr, Plate VII.


F f his


109


—


— ̃ vVòÄ é ꝗ6—K2 rr. ]5———! RE ... — — —˖—ð oo oo r —— wr” —— — _


—


=


——ů ̃ — oe — -< — — ——


————
— -
—


nr FA...


nas: tee
9
I TS» eos 25


\


110


Groves.


OF THE DRUID DOC TRINEsS.


his own houſe, there to remain as the moſt glorious monument of
his victory k: this God is ranked with Jupiter, Eſus, and Vulcan“,
being called 'Tarvos Trigaranus, trom three Cranes perching, one on
his head, one on the middle of his back, and the third on his
hinder parts m. |

Gildas ſays that the Druids worſhiped mountains, and rivers. Nor
unlikely; but that they worſhiped rocks, ſtones, and fountains, and
imagined them inhabited and actuated by divine intelligences of a
lower rank, is ſtill more evident, and may be plainly interred, not
only from their ſtone monuments (as we ſhall ſee more particular]
in the following ſheets), but from the prohibitions of ſeveral Gallick
councils n. Theſe inferiour deities the Corniſh call Spriggian, or
Spirits; they anſwer to the Genn, and Fairies of the ancients; and
of theſe the vulgar in Cornwall ſtill diſcourſe as of real beings,
attribute to them large powers to rule the weather, and to diſcover
hidden treaſures, and pay them a kind of veneration.


CH AFP. XVII.
Of the Druid Places of Worſhip


T was eſſential to the Druid worſhip, that it ſhould be performed

in a grove®; there the Druids lived P, eſpecially during their
miniſtration in ſacred things. —Vemora alta remotis — Incolitis
Lucis— Lucan. Lib. I. de Druid. That we find their places of
worſhip where no groves are at preſent, is owing to the alterations
of time, and no contradiction to the indiſpenſable neceſſity of groves
to the Druid worſhip. Even Stonhenge itſelf, where there are no
traces to ſhew that ever a tree grew, ſtood formerly in a grove
according to tradition J. Nor would any grove ſerve the turn, but
it was to be a grove of Oaks, of the talleſt ſize, and moſt venerable
antiquity, if to be procured. This cuſtom was owing to the ſame
motive that all ancient idolatrous nations had for chuſing ſuch
gloomy places to perform their religious rites in ; namely, that the
ſhades and ſolitude might give an air of myſtery and devotion to


K Plutar. in Mario, Rel. de Gaul. Vol. I. p. 72. * El. Sched. in Dedicat. & p. 345.

In the ſquare Stone, No. 2. found in Paris ? Ceſar Lib. VI. Conſidunt in Luco conſe-
Cathedral in the Year 1711, where it has the © crato” ſays Caſaubon; not in Loco as in the
fourth front of that Stone allotted it. vulgar Edition. Hoffman de Druid. |

m See Montfaucon, Tom. II. p. 424. q „Si fides accolis habenda, qui tractum ſyl-

n Cultores Idolorum, Veneratores Lapidum, * veſtrem in tota illa planitie uſque ad Ambreſ-
« accenſores facularum, & excolentes ſacra Fon- “ buriam fuiſſe perhibent.” Keyſler, p. 57:
* tium vel Arborum, admonemus ut agnoſcant Nec enim ſacra fuit ædes fine Luco, ut aucior
* quod ipſi ſe ſpontaneæ morti ſubjiciunt qui * eſt Callimachus, teſte Guenebaldo.“ Frick.
Diabolo ſacrificare videntur.” Concil. Turon. p. 134, ex Petr, Leſcalop.

A. D. 567. Baluz. Tom. VI. 1234. |


their


OF THE DRUID PLACES OF WORSHIP.


their religious ſervice, incline the worſhipers to believe the deity was
really there, and raiſe a ſullen ſuperſtitious dread of their imaginary
divinities.

Stat vetus, & multos incidua ſylva per anos,


Credibile ęſt illi Mumen adeſſe loco. Ovid Am. Lib. III. EL i.


« If you find, ſays Seneca (Ep. LXI.), a grove thick ſet with
« antient Oaks, that have ſhot away up to a vaſt height, the tallneſs
« of the wood, the retirement of the place, and the pleaſantneſs of
« the ſhade, immediately makes you think it the habitation of ſome
« God.” And, indeed, without this folemn ſcene of ſhade and
ſilence, the mind could not be diſpoſed to embrace fo readily all the
fabulous relations of their falſe Gods, much leſs to comply with all
the abſurd and deteſtable rites of their idolatrous worſhip. * "They
« ſacrifice upon the tops of the mountains, and burn incenſe upon
« the hills, under oaks, and poplars, and elms ; becauſe the ſhadow
« thereof is good.” Hoſea IV. 13. Horace, full of that tranſport,
which dignifies, and becomes the poet (but is inſufferable madneſs
in the Prieſt), having invoked Calliope, and intreated her to deſcend
from heaven, fancies her alighted in ſome ſacred grove.


Auditis & an me ludit amabilis
Inſania? Audire, & wideor pios
Errare per lucos, amene


uo & ague ſubeunt & auræœ. Lib. III. Od. iv.
7


Groves being reckoned fo eſſential to the Druid worſhip, have
made ſome think that the woods were their only Temples, and that
they had no particular places conſecrated to the more ſolemn rites of
Religion, which, as it appears to me to be a great miſtake, I ſhall


here examine, and conſider the arguments by which they would
ſupport it.


111


Keyſler r thinks the Druids had no temples, founding his opi- Temples.


nion upon theſe words of Tacitus (Ann. XIV. Cap. xxx.), where
he gives an account of the conqueſt of Angleſea : © Prafidium


poſthac impoſitum victis, exciſique Luci ſævis ſuperſtitionibus


* ſacri. © Now if there were any Temples, ſays Keyſler, why were
the groves only to be felled, when it was the intention of Sueto-
* nius Paulinus, entirely to eradicate all places of that barbarous
„Religion 5?” If this learned author means that the Druids had
no walled or covered Temples, he is right in the general ſuppo-
tion ; but if he denies their having Temples of any fort, he is
very deficient in his proof; for, though the groves here mentioned
were ſacred, there might be one part more ſacred than another,


7 Antiqu, Septent, p. 63. * Keyſler, ibid.


and


EC —ẽẽ— —


112 OF THE DRUID PLACES OF WORSHIP.


1


and there might be one or more Temples incloſed in this grove (as
we ſhall fee hereafter that there really were in the grove at Karn.


bre in Cornwall), for any thing that Tacitus ſays to the contrary,


neither does Tacitus ſay that Suetonius Paulinus cut down the
groves, in order to deſtroy all remembrance of the barbarous re-
ligion of the Druids ; it is more likely that he thought the groves
ſo many impediments of victory, and deſtroyed them becauſe they
might no longer harbour the rebellious Britans, and their auxi-
| liaries, * Monam Infulam, ut vires rebellibus miniſtrantem, ag.
e opreflus'”* (viz. Suet, Paul. in Tacit.) “ Monam Inſulam incolis
Ibid,
Ann. Lib. XIV.) but ſuppoſing that Suetonius Paulinus 1
their groves out of a juſt abhorrence of the barbarities there com-
mitted; yet he might not think it worth his while to throw down
their Temples, which conſiſting only of Stones erected in a cir-


e yalidam, & receptaculum perfugarum aggredi parat;


cular manner, were much below the indignation of a victorious
Roman. This obſervation of Keyſler therefore is very inconcluſive.


On the other hand there are very ſtrong teſtimonies, as well from


hiſtory as monuments, that the Druids had temples, as well as


groves.


On occaſion of the maſſacre of the Romans by Boadicea,
there were great rejoicings in the Britiſh Temples, but chiefly in the


wood conſecrated to Andate—Dion. in Nerone, Rel. des Gaules,


Vol II. p. 14. Therefbre it is plain that Temples and Woods were
two diſtin@ things. Suetonius ſays of Ceſar, © In Gallia, Fana Tem-


ce plaque Deùm donis referta expilavit ;* and Keyſler owns, that
Tacitus attributes Temples to the Germans (ibid. p. 80.) “ Her-
* tham Deam, ſecreta Religione ablutam, 'Templo fuiſſe redditam.“


Lib. de M. G. Tacit. & Annal. Lib. I.
© memorat (ſcil. Tacitus) a Romanis ſolo æquatum.“


« Tanfanz Temp
To fay that


lum


e the firſt Temple means nothing more than a grove, as appears
&« from all that is ſaid of Hertha by Tacitus,” is too much to be
granted him; for in the ſecond inſtance the Temple of Tanfana is


particularly named; here therefore recourſe muſt be had


to 4


different reaſon, and it is alledged that © the Germans borrowed the
© manner of erecting this Temple from the neighbouring Romans.”


The truth is, that all nations profeſſing ſome, though the


Religion, had ſacrifices, and alſo idols of ſome kind or other.


falſe
For


ſacrifices they muſt have had altars, as well as places for their idols;
and where theſe altars were, there generally were the idols, and that
place was accounted more holy than the reft, and was ſeparated


and diſtinguiſhed, either ſimply, and moſt anciently by mounds, or


ſtones, or more neatly and magnificently by walls and roofs, ac-
cording to the principles and cuſtoms of the nation they belonged
to; and in both caſes thoſe places ſo ſeparated, and diſtinguiſhed,


may


8 N 8 PR — th
* * c . 92
% * T5 ey 1 > l 4 be ; . l
2 ** + of on "ba, * y 4 n * * - oh ö 8 3 —Y 4 a 4 *
. . 2 * * * Io" — 15 WE - nn * * 15 9 * „ XN * _— 5 > 25 9 2


c


= _ * 8 * * ä 0 Y l
* _ ” . ” ted 2 ac. he n "OW" A 9 9 * R 1 r \ 0 ,
9 * * N — » 9 I * c tak 4 * R —— N AER. N
jw , add 4 J * K 1 * a * A * — KK 2 JS * o 1 * S K wa, . S Foy
FI ² oe ee EEE ICS he: &
Rs of Ss 0 — . It + y _ 2 £ * * .


OF THE DRUID PLACES OF WORSHIP.

may with equal juſtice be called Temples; and from Snorro
Sturleſont, it plainly appears that the antient northern nations (who
were a branch of the Celts, and much leſs cultivated than where the
Druids were eſtabliſhed) had Temples or fanes. Ignis fieri in me-
« dia Templi area debebat. Vetus tum obtinuerat conſuctudo circa
« Viclimarum mattationes ut ad Fanum ipſum Incolæ convenirent


« nne, ibid. p. 33% © Stabant autem (viz. Majores ſui, ut
p. 349.) cum Comporationes facre peragerentur circa ignem in medio
« Templi accenſum.” ibid. p. 355.

So far were the ancients from having no Temples, that they held
one Temple more ſacred than another. Spo/ia Corporis, caputque
« Ducis præciſum Boii ovantes Templo quod San&iſſimum eſt apud cos
« jntulere— poculumgque idem Sacerdoti eſſet, ac Templi Antiſtibus u.
% Fridlevus Olai filii fortunam exploraturus nuncupatis ſolenniter
« i Deorum ædles precabundus accedit, ubi introſpecto Sacello,
« zernas ſedes, totidem Mympbis occupari cognoſcit v. This proves
Temples among the northern nations ſufficiently, and that caves
might be their Temples (as they were, in the Mithraic myſteries),
will only prove the manner in which they conſtructed their
Temples, and can never prove that they had none.

Mr. Martin x endeavours to prove that at Thoulouſe the Gauls had
no other Temple than a ſacred lake; but Strabo (as quoted there)
ſays only * that the Gauls conſecrated their gold in lakes (by dipp-
ing it, perhaps, in lakes before dedicated to ſome particular deity,
and iffclofing, or being incloſed in, ſome parts of their ſacred woods)
and immediately ſubjoins, * that there was a Temple at Thoulouſe
« very famous, and immenſely rich in treaſures.” Now it is poſſible
that this Temple might be ſurrounded by a lake which made it very
difficult to get at the treaſure; and if this lake was conſecrated,
made it ſtill more heinous to pillage it than otherwiſe it would have
been; for they reckoned thele lakes the ſafeſt aſylum, and repoſitory
for their treaſure ; but that theſe lakes were their Temples, is
quite new, and not tenable; and that they caſt their treaſures into
ſuch Jakes, there to remain for ever as a dedication, is altogether
Improbable ; nor does Juſtin (whom he quotes) give the leaſt counte-


nance to ſuch a ſuppoſition, but only ſays, that * the Gauls, return-


* ing to Thoulouſe, were adviſed by the Prieſts of their own country,
© that they ſhould never be freed from the peſtilential diſtemper
© then raging amongſt them, till they ſhould throw the gold and
* ſilver, got by war Wd ſacrilege, into the lake of Thoulouſe. It


t Neyller, p. 327. | (
Ii. Lib, XXIII. cap. xxiv. N. B. The
8 were a People of Gallia Celtica.


v4, Grammat, Lib. III., Keyſler, p. 396.


x Rel. des Gaules, Vol. I. p. 114.
Y Mabig & auld &. Aburat Ti Aguiiay Tae,


Strab. ibid.


TT 3 does


113


114


OF THE DRUID PLACES OF WORSHIP.


does not appear but any other lake would have done as well; for
it is not ſaid conſecrarent, that they ſhould dedicate this gold as to a
deity, but mergerent, that they ſhould drown it, that is, rid them.
ſelves for ever of ſuch an accurſed booty *, in order to propitiate
the offended deities: that there was no other Temple at Thodlouſe
but this lake, is not credible : it is true, the Gauls are ſaid to have
killed, burnt in wicker images, and ſhot to death with arrows their
human victims, all in their temples; and it muſt be owned that
theſe cruelties could not be properly or ſafely exerciſed in ſuch
covered Temples as the Greeks and Romans had; but does it
therefore follow that they (the Gauls) had no Temples at all 2 ? far
from it. Again; many perſons reſorted to a lake (at the foot of
the Gevaudan mountain) conſecrated to the moon, under the name
of Helanus, and thither caſt in, ſome, the human habits, linen,
cloth, and entire fleeces ; others caſt in cheeſe, wax, bread, and
other things, every one according to his ability ; then facrificed
animals, and feaſted for three days, p. ibid. 128. I am perſuaded
that there is no one, who will not eaſily perceive that theſe offerings
were made to the Manes of departed friends, fuppoſed after death
to ſtand in need both of food and raiment *, which was the reaſon
that their countrymen ſent them yearly a frefth ſupply, and in a
ſolemn manner attended by ſacrifice and feaſtings. "This inſtance,
therefore, may prove lakes confecrated, and holy, but cannot prove
them either to have been divinities, or Temples, as this author con-
tends. It is plain therefore from all the ancients, that the Gauls, and
even the Celts, had Temples, as appears by what has been obſerved
above from Dion Caſſius, Livy, Tacitus, and ſome modern authors
alſo; to which may be added, what Strabo ſays of Sena, that the
Prieſteſſes there had a covered Temple, the old covering of which
was annually and ſolemnly taken away, and a new covering im-
mediately laid on it b.

The learned Dr. Stukeley diſtinguiſhes the Druid Temples into
three claſſes +: firſt, the Rounds or Circles ſimply called
Temples. Secondly, thoſe circles which have the form of a ſnake
annexed (as that of -Abury) which he calls ſerpentine Temples, or
Dracontia. Thirdly, thoſe circles which have the form of wings
annexed, by him ſtiled Alate, or winged Temples ; theſe are all the
different kinds which he knows . Thoſe of the firſt ſort are
very numerous in this iſland, and its dependencies, and will be par-
ticularly enquired into in book III.; of the other ſorts I have not
met with any; I have indeed ſeen the famous monument which
this author mentions, p. ib. 97. as one of the Alate Temples. It i


z Juſtin, Lib. XX XII. cap. iii. | b See p. 87.
Rel de G. Vol. I. p. 115, 121. + Abury, p. 9.
See before, Chap. XIV. + Ibid. p. 8.


vulgarls


OF THE DRUID PLACES OF WORSHIP.


vulgarly called the Hurlers, in Cornwall, but it conſiſts only of three
circles of ſtones-erect, whoſe centers are in a ſtrait line, and conſe-
quently muſt belong to the firſt claſs.
In placing their 'Temples Dr. Stukely in his Abury, conjectures
« that the Druids uſed a compaſs or Magnetick needle, and finds the
« works at Stonehenge placed at the variation of between ſix and
« ſeven degrees to the Eaſt of the North: he finds alto the variation
« at Abury to be about ten degrees the ſame way; and, from theſc
different variations, proceeds to determine the different ages in which
theſe two celebrated works were erected; a method of calculation
very ingenious, and deſerving the highett praiſe, provided that this
variation of the needle made a conſtant uniform progreſs, increaſing
by equal ſpaces in equal portions of time. But, left we ſhould
attribute more knowledge to the Druids than is their due, this may
be well doubted of : it muſt be allowed that the ancients knew the
attractive power of the Magnet; but whether they uſed, or knew
the Polar virtue may be very well queſtioned, ſince no traces
appear of any ſuch knowledge among them, or indeed among
the moderns till about 500 years ſinces. The variation of
the Magnetick needle from the pole is ſtill a later diſcovery, not 300
years old; and although the ancients, by obſerving the courſe of the
heavenly bodies, might project with great exactneſs a meridian line,
(which when croſſed at right angles would conſequently direct them
to the four cardinal points of the heavens) and might regard thoſe
principal points in placing their buildings; yet, when we find thoſe
buildings not placed exactly with reſpect to theſe points, I apprehend
that we ſhould attribute this toa miſtake, and want of accuracy in
aſtronomical projections, which, like many Artiſts of the moderns
(in placing their churches), they did not always carefully attend to,
though they had all poſſible means of ſuch exactneſs within their
reach; this I ſhould think a plain and obvious reaſon for their build-
ings deviating from the cardinal points, rather than having recourſe
toa variation which they were utterly unacquainted withal ; in the
laſt place, out of regard to truth, I muſt obſerve, that there is no
fixing of dates from ſuch an inconſtant and fluctuating index, as
the declination of the Needle, which is not only different in
different places, but varies alſo at different times in one and the
lame place.
Let us haſten to more ſatisfactory enquiries, and to conſider thoſe
circumſtances relating to their places of worthip which are not


liable to ſuch dif, putes.


© The Chineſe boaſt of this knowledge 1100 Invention, and the remoteſt Antiquity upon every
years before Chriſt ; but the Learned juſtly reject occaſion.
the vain Pretences of this people, claiming every


It


115


116


General
Deſcription
of their
Places of
Worſhip.


OF THE DRUID PLACES OF WORSHIP.


It was a general cuſtom to chuſe for their places of worſhip
Woods which {ſtood on the tops of hills, and mountains, as more
becoming the dignity and ſublime offices of their devotions, and of
nearer neighbourhood (as they imagined) to the habitation of their


Gods, Thus the devotions and facrifices of Balaam among the


Moabites, and the idolatrous rites of the Canaanites, and the ancient
Gentiles in general, were performed in their high places,

The wood was incloſed, ſometimes with a fence of palliſades q,
and ſometimes the hill was ſurrounded at bottom by a mound or
vallum to keep off the profane, and prevent all abrupt, and rude in-
truſion upon their myſteries. This mound was alſo of civil, as well
as ſacred uſe, for in theſe groves were the common publick repoſito-
ries or treaſuries of ſpoils taken in war. In many of their cities,
e (fays Ceſar, Lib. VI.) one may ſee great heaps of ſuch booty laid
c up in their, places of worſhip; and it ſeldom happens that any
« one is ſo impious as to conceal the booty he has made, or to take
“eit away when it has been once brought into the treaſury, that
« crime being puniſhed with the utmoſt ſeverity.” The trees of this
grove were all conſecrated by ſprinkling them with the blood of
human victims. Omnis & humanis luſtrata cruoribus Arbos .
Beſides the holy Oaks of this grove (which were eſteemed by
the Druids as much as thoſe oracular ones of Dodona by the Greeks)
within the ſame bounds were incloſed every thing required for per-
forming the ſeveral offices of their Religion; circles marked out,
and allotted for particular perſons, or claſſes, to officiate in; ſymbols
or memorials of their deities e; wells were ſometimes incloſed within
the ſacred limits. Caves for inſtruction of youth ; altars for great
and ſmall facrifices; ſeats or tribunals of Juſtice z Cairnes (or Karns)
for their holy fires ; and on a large hill (which has all theſe ſacred
monuments) I find a great number of hollow baſons or troughs
ſunk in the ſurface of large rocks, which muſt therefore be looked


upon, as having been ſome way or other ſubſervient to the purpoſes


of the ſame ſuperſtition, |


To give the better idea of a place of Druid Worſhip, it may not
be amiſs to particularize the ſeveral devotional monuments (in the
order they offered themſelves) upon Karnbre-hillf, which has all
the evidences that can be defired of having been appropriated to the
uſe of the Britiſh Religion.


d ce Prohibetur acceſſus Lucorum & Fontium © ſacris eas regiones ſeligerent quæ Puteum aut
& quos autumant pollui Chriſtianorum acceſſu. © fontem vivum exhiberent abluendis victimis &
idem ſcribit Sclavos Quercus coluifſc quas am- „ auſpiciis inde capiendis. Puteus ille ſeptentri-
« biverit Atrium & ſepes accuratior ex lignis * onalibus populis Blotkelda vel Blotabrum dictus


« conſtructa.“ Not. in Tacit. de M. G. tc erat a voce Blot ſacrificium cruentum notante.
* Lucan, ibid. Keyſler, p. 47. on -
e « Neque illud etiam prætereundum, majores 1 [llogan Pariſh, Cornwall.


„ noſtros ſemper in uſu habuiſſe, ut Aris & Locis —


This


ws
F
*

1 *
.
+

*


Z, VII. pa. 177


1 ——
2 = —


Hig. A


Iii West View of the lagtle
fee pa 350-


*k
v.10


k


4 +

11a off = ) rh —
3 75 uh —
* TT * „0 1 7 —
The


699 2


4: I" 1
== == a EIS
" a . $74 4 | 7 =...
— „8. - & 7 —_ + & S : J Coz f
o , FEES 8 * ,
o ITY & 4g 4 xD - — . % - 28 4
vo 2 %% „0 - 2
5 1.85
% Nees.


5 *

— ON _
*
*' 2
r


Fre eden
SD. 4 Ko ne 8%.


7 SSN = =


- y . »«o?h © . p o
1 a 1 > IS.
—— - GY — _ KI = * Nr *
—y— 1. AV” --- FT 8 - — 8 . OV. dr
L. n 1 SIE —_R IA . ne
C Av 8 8 * 2 . 3
"_ © a> >=. _ * n 8


5 28. 2
aac o00500 8 Wo — wt


— * +
— — — — — —


8 o * *$+*% — 4 . % 1 . __
— — — — —— ¶— —C 3 =
N 1 % A " 0 X
* i
AN WOES < D
A CN *
« \ \ JA ID XA. \Y \
% %Y
\


*


*


Y


\ \ \ Nes \
N DJ JD


|

| \ x e _ % N \ Q ” NJ %

RO IONS \ DLO OE

DD T D D N De

S N DN N S JIG W
DN N DDD D IDJ


N
8 W N J V WY W \ JJ


—
NN
* % D


NV g
N


Y


J


N
N
NN
N
————


* „ -
"7;
nf 5 *
nr N
# „


TT:


\ DW JC JW .
Q ' JV A wo AAS. l
NN RIO YO THY Se
* * * > * Sh - Ks
3 G2 II X DJ rel „„ ere . ies
5 0oes ke,, . e WY


16 „
TIX


„„ Au.


„ „ „„ & * „
P TEES ,
 ##., 5 . 6


LES ES,


77110


8 75772575 ng.
„ 22 e, eee Ws .;
7 ee * W/ 1 a | 1
Il! WILL 2 . 5


7


4 79
75
1 ＋


3 -
5 & ©. „ m * *
9628 26
u7 &o + 2G 2 1 a — Fs „ en ran — — ”, 4 hos
. N — 990 * TT 1989 . %
2 # # „„ "5 147 * » — 2114 3-7 * .
- £42 Ex * © IF 2:
DL 1 11 - $664 .
" - 4 3 4 - 4 7 * * - -- «
— * 225 4 1 — — —— — POS — py * * .
pi 23. g 721131 2
4


4% »* 4 . *
pr ep] 7 „„
e 1 Hat VE A ,
|


* U


SCALE OF CHAINS FOR THE MAP.
v4 - * 2 3 7 4 ,


We Tr,


| SCALE OF FEET FOR THE BUILDINGS.


— 2
Go 40 40 30 20 70


| Fug. AD


-y
171 5.
14 5
*
1


Nr


'


8
4
'
l :
: 1 I.


——
"I '
7 4


1—


WH ns
od
AY
: ' *
04
-
*
*


-
i
1

'


/
uit,


(] W SM]


«4


JIG


%\* *
K N *
N *


North Gat end of the late. 2
eee *


E


Plan of the Caorle.
ak "FEM


To Tohn Prdeaur Bajoet of Nel in Coral, Cog)
N : C , * l f
Thi 7 late Ng rad at his Pence 2 mou g1utefully dodleated by "orlaze


OP


£g. my 30.
0 Woman FN
Warum


Nen
Aten


995
1564


| LE
4% ghd
Wal | N. ii


Xx. — 2 3 * 3


— — — — — — — —— — 22 CL — — = ee ie ro — —— — — e —— — 2p renge—y N
=_ * — 1 - PI "Um. AD. 04 * WY * ane mint an .
\\ I { — 1 A 10


*


-


\
W \
\ \


/
WA


———


Wk


| |
If


e 1
\ 111 \


|


10
i


|


|


\
0


7


N
l


|
| /
n * k
: 4 :
* A} . N
. . * *

„ - - — = -
-


1


\


| -
*
A iy '
sin » F
” Sx
*


e


WINE


\ 8
dQ W. N * 2
2 9

—

—


*
—


WAN
a s JO


\


0
al


ö
"r
;


T
0
Wl
n
2
*% 6 B61
2 T
1
?
8
—.
>.<


/ L-
— — | TOA


-

PASTS

AMV þ 3 8

5

K. _ FIR - -

— £ P 25 1 — 2;
- he 4&3:

- 4
, * „ "
þ - 2 „* * * "i
Shed —— 114 ©


_ Y
\ Ub * I
#1 i, AN WA \
1 Y
eh De * | -
1 PI ie, .


\
M. * Agrel 8


; W. 1 . \\\ MARIA | 8 \ *
2 AIAN... * * * 4
{\ \


% ö
ee 3


d - * 8 # 9 28 hed 8 os, 7 * tu wy

4 .2 — 88 0 , gn. * 3 0 * \ _ : . % I —
„ - * 3 7 Fa 22 © \ \ » * * 8 > WW wo
kt _” — 0 1 CE 5 . \ i — dere I 3
Led prey Pee. Pp of „„ „% n ' 5 N + Ny % C IE
0 5 53% — _— -- 1 8 # * \ % * >> *

N A — „ wy s 14 Ye Ox!  ICDSIDIQSRYRV

of - . a — 5 5 - ns N . \ . . *
, * 4 25 — ' c 5 _— \
. — od £47 _—_ \ \ WL


AF Jee Pa. 255+ JUL


SSSR D
— * a r Wa n
We — * »
* ** Id wn EIB
COR CEE


— — — — — — —_————— e—_ _—— — — —  ———— — — — —


. 28 Se. Ze Nel Ja gon Aut on es Ledge An ancoent S epulehre. AD ruid Seat of. Judgment.


TheMap and Buildings of Hombre tn Cornwall.


: \ ; \ ; , WW V. 2 XI EM 1 n I , N \ , \ * I . \ TY 3 * N 6 Wes 11 " if | Il \ 1 * 11 „ N 1 \ ot ©% {fy
* * RY V + N N A \ A = Th \ * N „ . 1 *N \ W * r * W \ c\ R \ * ith j £ wy VP 3 ö | a | + 7 | 'Y of b . \
1 o % J : * 1 L* 4% * * 8 0 & \ k > . WM, | \ N \ 0 1 IIS * \ , n 18 N il 1 YE 'F 110. 187 iS 14 14 a 2
1 h XY 8 NN. N N e Wa * INE N N Vie An \\ \\ ial \\ U ws [411% þ . , Pitt re 1 Je,
Es N N TORT CY * \ X a Wen \ * N f | Mas We 0 N 7 0% ks 70 1 (tl &, 61 2
«2750 % K \ \ \ "Ht, N * \ \ 5 0 \ \ N 1 \ \ ( a \ | ( I! ao 4 1
do N eee N NI Wee WINGS 7100 MG UB es PLS,
— * \\ \ \ N \ \ \\ N ING W W \ V \ SUYUABALL \ \ \\\ 1 i 4 | 14 | | { * { 5 N \ þ { 4// 14
A N OY OO OOO dnnn \ \ ee, „%% %u,
* * \ IE WOOL \\\ hay N \ W WW 1 XII \ \ M | j [ \ 18 5 , Wh 1 e MN k
enn e 1 Me
W N e + ( |
V


7 4.


- *
*


.
* We.
X SY


\ „ # = -
"> 2 > -
rn 2 xx ft > 1% 519 ”
4 Io. SY 7 * > *


— —— — —— = —_


2 mel


ther
burl


OF THE DRUID PLACES OF WORSHIP. 117


This Hill is high, and its area on the top is thick ſet with karns, Karnbte
or groupes of rocks; the ſpaces between and below were, in the *
memory of the laſt generation, filled with a grove of Oaks; now Were
tere are no trees, but the places where thoſe trees were charked (or“


burnt into charcoal), are ſtill to be ſcen.


— & Confecrated hills
Once girt with ſpreading Oaks, myfterious rows
« Of rude enormous Obeliſks that rife
« Orb within Orb, ſtupenduous monuments
« Of artleſs Architecture, fuch as now
« Oftimes amaze the wand'ring traveller
By the pale Moon diſcern'd on Sarum's plain!s”


On a Karn® at the weſtern end (A) there are artificial baſons cut Rock-
in the uppermoſt rocks. On the ſecond groupe ( B) there are five of 2 88 85
the ſame kind, two of which have plain and diſtinct lips or mouths,
to diſcharge whatever was intended to be contained in theſe
veſſels ; their figure circular, ſometimes oblong, and ſeemingly with-
out any aim at a regular figure: they were all of different dimen-
ſions, from three to one foot diameter; from one foot to ſix inches
deep.

Alter ſeeing ſeveral other baſons on the tops of the rocks, as we
advanced towards the Eaſt, we found a moſt curious orbicular flat
ſtone (ſuch as in Cornwall are called Quoits from their figure which
has pretty much of the Diſcus form) which was wantonly thrown
down from the top of a monſtrous rock (F), at the foot of which it
now lies. On the ſurface of this Quoit was an exact circular baſon,
three foot diameter, one foot deep, and round the edges many little
and ſhallow baſons communicating with the great one. Of theſe
baſons a particular account will be given in the following book; I
will only remark here, that the great difficulty of aſcent to the vaſt
rock from whence this Quoit was thrown down, will prevent us
[rom reckoning the rock among the Druid Altars; I rather imagine
that it might ſerve for one of the Gorſeddau, or places of elevation, Gorſeddau,
from whence they uſed to pronounce their decrees. In ſome places
indeed, theſe Gorſeddau were made of earth, but it was plainly un-
neceſſary to raiſe hillocks of earth, where ſo many ſtately rocks might
contribute full as well, to give proper dignity to the ſeat of judgment;
and where rocks were ſo plenty, it is not to be doubted but decrees
and oracles were pronounced from the tops of them k.


g Mr. Weſt's Inſtit. of the Garter. i See the Map of Karnbre, Plate VII.
5 2 is Corniſh for a Ledge or heap of „ The Delphian Oracle gave forth its anſwers
ICKs, from a Rock; thus in Sophocles f Oedipus Tyran-


H h Having


G Re” ar tr LES End
w- .
: =
< * * -
* 4 * 5 8 — x; .
Fs 4 . * 2 4 j a g= P l A es 1


118 OF THE DRUID PLACES OF WORSHIP


The holy


3 4 Having attained the ſummit of the hill, we croſſed ſome ſtone-


aps at AL. Theſe heaps are the ruins of a ſtone wall which
encloſed an area of about an acre of ground. The encloſure (A)
is called the old Caſtle, and appears to have been a fortification, as
taken out of the holy ground, as by the map annexed will ſoon be
diſcerned from the ſhape of the whole plan; and by reaſon alſo that
there is a mound on the ſouth (AK) without any ditch on the outiide,


and ſinking far below the ridge of the hill, which are two proper- lo
ties that no man who fortifies will give to his work. The fence here le
was not therefore originally deſigned for a military work; and the W
many remaining evidences of this hill's being dedicated to the ſervice hi
of Religion, makes it plain, that the deſign of this low defencelc{ is
mound was to ſeparate the ſacred groves from common uſe, to pro- fo
hibit not only cattle, but all perſons profane, and before examination, h;
and on all other but holy days, and on holy purpoſes, from enterins B
upon this conſecrated ground. There 1s a mound of this kind W
round the ſtone circles at Abury l. The ſame caution was obſerved ſe
(though for much better reaſons) at Mount Sinai. Thou ſhalt ſet .
« bounds unto the people round about, ſaying, Take heed unto {
« yourſelves that ye go not up into the Mount, or touch the border 1
« of it; whoſoever toucheth the Mount ſhall ſurely be put to death. ti
« Set bounds unto the Mount, and ſanctify it.” Exod. xix. 12. 1
The fame cuſtom the Druids certainly uſed ; as Lucan ſays, ſpe:k- Pp
ing of their place of worſhip, Lib. III. ver. 400. Mon illum cu tu f
populi propiore frequentant — Sed ceſſere Diis. a
There are many baſons on the rocks here at (G), but the moſt |
remarkable I have yet met with any where is at (L), on a large Quoit, c
which, with the ledge on which it lies, and its baſons, may be ſeen \
Holy Cir- At (J) is the firſt circle we meet with, and the others are traced at


cles. (NOPQRS),. and figures 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8; from 7 to 12 |
paces (generally) in diameter, the dimenſions to be meaſured by the |
ſcale of chains annexed to the map ; they are edged, ſome with a
mound of earth, others with ſtones, forming a kind of walled en-
trance from the Eaſt ; but the long ſtones which formerly dignified
theſe circles ſeem to have been taken away to build the walls of the |
old Caſtle, or rather by the Danes to add to them, for I obſerve that
the Quoits are ſquared, and therefore the fortification ſeems originally

Stones: crect Britiſh, ſee Book IV. ch. viii. Paſling from theſe rounds to the South-


Of theſe ſeats of Judgement the Reader will find 1 «« The Druids by throwing outwards the
two of different conſtruction, one as we advance Earth dug out of the huge circular Ditch, en-
in this Map of Karnbre (Z), the Elevation of it “ vironing the Town (viz. of Abury), demon-
AH (of which ſort I have met with ſeveral, eſpe- „ ſtrated to all comers at firſt fight, that 8
cially in the Scilly Iſlands), and the otherat Karn © was a Flace of Religion, not a Camp ot Caſtle
Boſcawen in Burien, both which will be particu- of Defence.“ Dr. Stukeley, Abury, p- 28.


Ealt,


OF THE DRUID PLACES OF WORSHIP. 119


eaſt, we found ten tall ſtones together ſet on end (9), none more
than four foot diſtant from each other, ſome contiguous. South-
eaſt from this groupe of ten ſtones, there runs a ridge (marked 11.)
of carth, in a ſerpentine figure, which in the Voluta of its ſcroll
(N'. 7.), has two very high and large ſtones ſet on end; the diſtance
between them twelve feet. Farther on tothe right, we perceived many
more ſtones ſet up on end on the top of the mound (AK), and

leading the eye to a paſſage or entrance, betwixt two ſtones taller by
ſeveral feet than the others /marked No. 10.). Turning to the left
we found a ſepulchre, whoſe ſides were raiſed with ſtones roughly
hewn, and covered with a large flat ſtone; the drawing of which
is marked (AG) in the elevations. Hence keeping due Eaſt, we 4 Judec-
found at (Z) a natural Karn, which has a flat canopy fone, over
hanging, as A in the icon AH. It has alſo a ſtone like a bench at
B; at C there is an area of graſs, which has its outer edge fence
with a row of pillars, fronting what, I think, we may ſafely call this
ſeat of Judgement. I have ſeen ſeveral of theſe ſeats, or benches of
juſtice, particularly in the iſles of Scilly, but none ſo diſtin, and
ſo manifeſtly pointing out the uſe they were intended for as this.
The Caſtle (AC) on this hill is much the moſt modern thing
I muſt obſerve, that what they call the parlour here (marked in the
plan of the Caſtle (AD No. 2.) is floored with one rock, and in the
ſurface of that rock a very regular elliptical baſon, of the ſame kind
as thoſe mentioned before, ten inches by fourteen, which could
hardly be ſo exactly delineated, without ſtationing the two focus's
of the ellipſis mathematically ; a ſtrong evidence that this baſon
was made by the Druids, who underſtood Geometry m, and may be
ſaid to be the only capable men among the ancient Britans of
dealing in ſuch regular figures.

In the weſtern ſide of this hill there is a cave, the bottom of which
is now full of water, and there are large ſtones lying croſs its
entrance; there are alſo on this {ide ſeveral long ſtones, which are
now proſtrate, but ſeem to have been formerly placed on end : here
allo the flat ſtone of one Cromlèh, with one of its ſupporters, is ſtill Cronh.
to be ſeen, and it is probable there were many Cromleh's here; but
great devaſtations have been lately made in the monuments of this
remarkable hill by ſtone- cutters; and Cromlèh's conſiſting of broad
thin ſtones eaſily cloven for maſonry, were ſome of the firſt that
tempted the ignorant to deſtroy them; this, by the way, is
one reaſon why in England we have fo few Cromleh's remaining,
and none at all near great towns, they having been all cut up for


building.


_—
— — _— = a 7 2 * .


* Book IV. ch. viii. m Sce Dr. Stukeley's Stonchenge.


In


OF THE DRUID PLACES OF WORSHIP.


I20

Druid mo-. In this hill of Karnbre, then, we find rock-baſons, circles, flog...
Kambre erect, remains of Cromléh's, Karns, a grove of Oaks, a cave, and a0
228 encloſure, not of military, but religious ſtructure: and theſe are ei.
It to nave


been a place dences ſufficient of its having been a place of Druid worſhip ; gf
of Worltip. which it may be ſome confirmation, that the town about half a mil
Croſs the brook, which runs at the bottom of this hill, was ancient;
called Red-drew n, or more rightly Ryd-drew, i. e. the Druids for,

or croſſing of the brook : and what I have obſerved on theſe Points,
may give ſome notion of the manner in which ſuch places wer:
marked out, and incloſed, and with what works they were furniſheq
within. It was indeed contrary to the principles of the Celtic Re.
ligion, as we have obſerved before, to have any incloſed Temples;
but inſtead of ſuch, they had the moſt ſacred parts of their proye,
marked out into circles, either by low mounds, or by rude ſtones of
the obeliſk form, pitched on end; and of theſe we find a ſy;
prizing number near or contiguous to each other, in this hill of
Karnbre ; but ſtill more remarkably ſo in the lands of Botallek in

St. Juſt Penwith, as will appear when we come to treat particularly

of theſe holy circles. I will only obſerve, that to have circles, ſo
many of one fort, and ſome monuments of every ſacred, oracular,
and judicial kind, in one place, is agreeable to the cuſtom of the
Druids, as we find by their remains in other parts of Britain®. Az
the Druids had no incloſed Temples, thinking them inconfiſtent with
the majeſty of their Gods, fo neither had they any carved images to
repreſent them, and for the ſame reaſon ; but, inſtead thereof, rude
ſtones were erected in their places of worſhip, at ſome myſtick, figni-
ficant diſtance, and in ſome emblematick number, ſituation, and


plan, ſometimes in right lines, ſometimes in ſquares, ſometimes in


triangles, ſometimes in both: now ſingle, and 50 paces diſtant or
more from the circles; or, eminently taller than the reſt, in the
circular line, and making a part of it, like portals, not only to ſhape
the entrance, but alſo to hallow thoſe that entered, it appearing by
many monuments, as we ſhall find in the ſequel, that the Druids
attributed great virtue to theſe paſſages betwixt rocks. Sometimes
theſe ſtones- erect were placed in the center of the circles, the intent
of which will be hereafter inquired into. Theſe are the reaſons that
we find ſo many ftones-ere& in Karnbre-hill.


As I find by a Grant of the Fairs there to
the Baſſets of Tchidy, in the time of Hen. VII.

„ „ The Druids called their Groves Lwyn;
* and in theſe Groves were their Mounts and
* Hillocks, which they called Groſeddau, from
their fitting aloft upon them when they pro-
© nounced their Decrees. Here were allo their
e erected Pillars and Idols, or their Heaps and


& Carnedde, or their Altars or Cromleche, or in
ce ſome large and more eminent Grove, many of
« theſe all together within one Grove, and En-
ce cloſement, and in one Place there are the Ke-
© mainders of all theſe, except the Cromleches,
<« in the Verge of one great Grove, as is probe
« ble, though the Wood incloſing them have been
gone theſe many Ages.” Rowl. Mon. p. 09


In


WT.


N ü * * N — — 5 - * * 2 ry * p
* N * * — yo . * * [3 3 ä uin ; — 3 N ä R 3 r 1 8 9 * x 3» — "8  k + N RE We Dn * p

E „ * 1 FP * ws r B * 1 , * , * * N = e A e * n 1 - 2 +2" 2s * — :
8 Yao? tia bh R * e 8 9 * * r * WS. 4 © N 112 - 4 of S 2 os Ly 2 5 * * 1 - P a .


*


N . e
RIO TVET 9
— LENS" " *


*** 3 as — 2 — We 9 — 1 $4 a
= * * * r i. a, PREP? ” 22
Wand ET as * nn e


*
8 - 4 A 2 * ; * „ 1 * * * „ " * II
— . K * 4 4 12 4 * — ä — a 8 * 5 * n — n — — 5 * 3 * _ * * * *
A - * ** _ n * WI " * 2 _ 4 i. 3 2 EY * 4 "I D 8 Y * * * L 2 9399 * — * 5
. eta Ate Co It. 6 . , ” 4 - . hx hes pal. ale 8 8 1 - OT, „r 3 r 9 . A». \ - Rs G 5 "Win * +» 2 N N N
FP — —  —— ⅛ ⁰ͤnqNÃ⁰˙miwuvw ⅜Ü̃ͤ..——ʃ̃I ] |
r 9 5 % To a #4} n 9 R hs el Soc W. * s A 8 AA 2 [15 2 „ N p A E 2 r je ba a Ee 5 r N 2 3 — — * . Y
: ; * * gs ka n 2 23 * F $ STEM þ ** C 5 5 N 4 . 2 * "re? e K n


OF THE DRUID PLACES OF WORSHIP. 121


In their ſacred groves were alſo their Altars, of which, doubtleſs, Druidaltars.
they had ſeveral ſorts, ſuitable to the nature and kind of offering.
That Altar which was for offering human victims muſt have been
very different from what they uſed on leſs ſolemn occaſions: there
are many flat large rocks on Karnbrc-hill (eſpecially at G, and AN),
which probably might have been appropriated to this horrid rite.
Schedius (p. 356.) ſays, that theſe Altars were made of turf, and very
likely, eſpecially where no rocks were ; for, at ſuch times, it was ne-
ceſſary that the officiating Druid ſhould ſtand upon a plain, roomly
area, as theſe victims were oftentimes many in number, and beats
as well as men were offered up as a burnt offering on a large pile of
wood, Of ſuch holocauſt Altars, we have ſome, I think, remaining
ill in the higher parts of the pariſt. of Gullval (Cornwall), built
ſome-what like a Barrow, but plain and even on the ſurface, raiſed
about three feet and half from the ground, and about 20 feet
diameter, | \

The Altars for their libations, and other ſmaller offerings, ſuch as
their Viſcus p, devoted ſpoils, pecuniary oblations, and the like,
needed not to be ſo large. For theſe laſt purpoſes the Cromleh
might well ſerve, eſpecially for all oftc.ings made at the tombs of
the dead ; for that the Cromleh was, in its original deftination, a
ſepulchral monument will appear beyond doubt.

In their ſacred groves the Germans kept alſo the images of wild Imazes of
beaſts, which in time of war were carried before the. troops, think- 5
ing perhaps that by having been ſet up in ſuch ſacred places they
might contract ſome divine power and influence, available to victory.

The Gauls had the ſame cuſtom, and their ſacred Bull which they
brought with their army againſt the Romans, was taken from
them”,

After Chriſtianity came in, the dregs of Druidiſm had been ſettling Places of
for ſo many ages, that the veſſel was not ſoon to be cleaned, and =
made wholeſome. The ſuperſtition ſurvived the loſs of her autho- more mo-
ity, affluence, and dignity, and the idolatrous places to which the e
Druids of thoſe times more particularly reſorted to perform their
ordinary ſuperſtitions, were rocks, ſtone - erect (of which ſome were
called after the name of one particular God, and ſome of another,
ritually deified, and worſhiped 5), fountains, trees, and croſs- roads.
Theſe are called the <© Deſignata Loca Gentilium*,” the ancient
accuſtomed places, where the remains of Druidiſm were practiſed
for many ages by the ignorant and ſuperſtitious, after Chriſtianity


Non ſemper homines offerebant ſed etiam r See of Tarvos Trigaranus, p. 106.


: Sine res dedicabant, præſertim Viſcum.” See Lib. III. of the Tolmen, cap. iii.
p * 410. © Baluz. tom. I. p. 518. Concil. Turon.
1 Inſigne Superſtitionis, Formas aprorum A. D. 567.
geſtant,” Tacit. de M. G. Hiſtor. iv. 22.
I 1 Was


122 OF THE DRUID PLACES OF WORSHIP


was become the national Religion of Gaul: they continued to per.
form their worſhip either in © Ruinoſis Locis aut Sylveſtribus, that
is, either in rocky places or groves". Here they made their voy.
paid their devoted offerings, prayed for their own ſafety and ſucces,
imprecating deſtruction to their enemies . Here they brought their
incenſe, their tapers, candles, firſt-fruits and morſels of fleſh x, Here
they uſed their Sortes and incantations Y ; all this they did with
oreat reverence, lighting their candle or torch with great eſtimation
of that light which they took thence , as if ſome deity a had hee,
really there. Theſe rites were performed oftentimes where two waz;
croſs (ad Bivia), and indeed it was a very ancient cuſtom among th;
Gentiles to perform their Religious Rites, at the meeting of Roads,
Thus Ezek. xvi. 25. It is objected to the people of Jeruſalem,
e Thou haſt built thy high place at every head of the way.” Item
ibid. v. 31. Ezek. xxi. 21 © The King of Babylon ſtood at the par.
« ing of the way, at the head of the two ways to uſe Divination,
« He made his arrows bright, he conſulted with Images, he looked
« in the Liver: at his right hand was the Divination for
« Jeruſalem.” I muſt obſerve, that part of this ſuperſtition is till re.
maining ; for the common people in Cornwall will not be perſuaded
even at this day, but that there is ſomething more than ordinary at
ſuch places; and their ftories of apparitions gain greater credit, if
the Spirit, Demon, or Hobgoblin, is ſaid to have appeared where
four Lanes meet; there they think apparitions are moſt frequent,
and at ſuch places it is common for theſe people travelling in the
dark to be moſt afraid. Here the Druids had ſtones- erect, or rude
idols, which by the Council of NantzÞ were to be pulled down and
thrown into ſome place, where they might never be found by thoſe
who were ſuch fools as to worthip them.
Why many Before we take our leave of their places of worſhip, it may not be
places. ® amiſs to obſerve, that it will perhaps ſeem ſurprizing to ſome readers


worſh1
contiguous, that many places of devotion, and Altars of the ſame kind, ſhould


ond another. be found ſo near one the other; Karns, for inſtance, on adjoining
hills, and ſometimes rocks in different parts of the ſame Karns, or
ledges of rocks, marked with the ſame traces of the uſe they were
deſigned for: but it muſt be remembered, that the ancients were of
opinion, that all places were not at all times equally auſpicious, and

that the Gods might permit, encourage, or grant in one place, 0!

circle, or on one rock, or altar, what they denied in another: an


opinion, firſt ſuggeſted for the furtherance and promoting of erro!,


v Concil, Nantenenſ. Labbe, tom. ix. p. 474. * tione Loci, incendiſti.” Burchard Coll. Ca-


w Ibidem, Lambard's Laws of Canute. non. Keyſler 17. :
x Labbe, tom. I. p. 956. a « Velut ibi quoddam Numen ſit, quod bonum
7 Lambard, ibid. « aut malum poſſit inferre,” Baluz, Lib. l.


« «© Veniſti ad aliquem locum, id eſt, ad Fon- p. 210.
© tes, vel ad Lapides, vel ad Arbores, vel ad Bivia, d Apud Labbeum ut ſupra.
„ & ibi aut Candelam, aut Faculam pro yenera- 1
a!


OF THE DRUID PLACES OF WORSHIP.


and continued for the private gain of theſe ſuperſtitious jugglers ;
fr if the appearances of the victim were not favourable in one

lace, if their divinations, and inchantments were miſtaken, and
their predictions failed, the fault was not laid to the want of art in
the Prieſt, or of truth 1n the ſcience, or of power in the idol, but to
the innocent place; and the places were changed, till appearances
became more ſupple and applicable to the purpoſes intended. So
Balaam viewed the Iſraelites from every ſituation, from the top of
rocks, from the hills<, from the high places of Baal, from the top of
Piſgah, and when theſe places did not ſatisfy, * Come I pray thee,
« fays Balaak, I will bring thee unto another place, peradventure


« jt will pleaſe God that thou mayſt curſe me them from thence,”


C HA P. XVIII.
Of the Druid Worſhip.


AVING taken notice of every thing remarkable in their places
of Worſhip we come now to the Worſhip itſelf,


or mid-night. — Medio cum Phebus in axe eft, — Aut celum nox
atra tenet (Luc. Lib. III). But their more than ordinary aſſem-


only men, but women were admitted, and it is ſaid that the Britans
brought their wives and daughters-in-law into their Temples naked,
and painted with the juice of herbs, there to ſupplicate, and appeaſe
the Gods with human vicims*®. Tacitus gives us another reaſon;
* the women, ſays hef, were admitted into their aſſemblies and
* councils concerning peace and war, as well as perſonal diſputes,
* becauſe it was the opinion of the Celts, that there was in that ſex
* ſomething more than ordinarily holy, and clear-fighted in diſ-
* covering what was to comes.” There may be another reaſon
alligned for the Druids inſiſting upon the preſence of women at their
ſacrifices, which was, to harden their minds by ſuch frequent in-
ſtances of barbarity as their moſt ſacred rites conſiſted of, and fo


: Numb. xxiii. 9, dicature upon their Wives, before their firſt Expe-
A Coeunt certis diebus aut cum inchoatur dition into Italy ; that the Women enjoyed this
x Luna, aut impletur, nam agendis rebus hoc Honour when Annibal paſſed the Alps (Plut. de
g aul picatiſſimum initium credunt.” Tac. de clar. Mulieribus; Polyæn. Stratag. Lib. VII.) and

. G. to. that the Druids by degrees ſupplanted them, and


Alex. ab. Alex. p. 753. got the Power into their own Hands; Rel. de


The principal times of ordinary devotion were either at mid-day, Time of
Worthip.


blies ſeem to have been held at their new, and full Moons d. Not Wome
admitted.


-
Ne I a ————— ns nh en
2 - ua ” -


f De M. G. 8.
5 It is (aid (Rel. de Gaul. Vol. I. chap. xxiv.


2 . . 3
P- 199.) that the Gauls carried their complaiſance
ta a great extream, and conferred the ſupreme Ju-


Gaul. p. 198. but it is by no Means probable
that ſuch unlimited Power would be granted to
Wives, as ſhould ſet them above their Princes
and their Prieſts,


famillarize


<


we” Y
2 — of


——
-
— —
1 — —
—
— _—


124 OF THE DRUID WORSHIP.


familiarize them, even to thoſe of the ſofter ſex, that every one gf
the other ſex, boys as well as men, might be aſhamed to heſitate
and refuſe their attendance, when ſuch rites were in hand: but
whatever was the reaſon, this cuſtom was very ancient b. The
All with vulgar were to keep at a proper diſtance i. Whoever among the
humilityand Germans entered the place of Worſhip, wore (out of reverence to
read. P
the ſacred grove) a kind of fetter or ſhackle about the leg, to teſtify
ſays Tacitus, their own ſubordination, and the Deity's power ; by
whether the Druids had this cuſtom, does not appear ; however
the Prieſts themſelves did not approach upon ſuch ſolemn occaſions.
without a conſcious trembling at the bloody rites which wor


then to be performed.


Pavet ipſe Sacerdos
Acceſſus, dominumque timet deperdere Luci. Luc. Lib. III.


The Rites, Before the ſacred rites began, it was a general cuſtom among the
ancients to uſe ablutions, ſprinklings, or luſtrations, in order to purify,
as they imagined, and prepare the Prieſts, the aſſembly, the victim,
and the ſacrifical inſtruments for what was to enſue.

In the Iriſh MSS. according to Mr. Toland K (for he produces no
proof), © The rites and formalities of the Druids, their Divinity and
e Philoſophy are very ſpecially, though ſometimes very figuratively
e expreſſed.” But none of theſe are particularly named. «I find,
* that the Prieſts firſt prayed ; then the victim was offered, being
e firſt ritually devoted; the mola ſalſa, wine, and frankincenſe at-
« tending ; then followed the libation !; and the victim being
dead, prayers ſucceeded, the blood of the victim was poured out,
and what was to be burnt was placed on the Fire- altar m. Sacrifice

Druid habit. was never to be performed without a Druidn. The Druid was
cloathed in white, of which colour they, with many of the ancients,
had a great opinion . On their head they had a Diadem or Tiara,
which (if the ſeal found in Angleſea lately, be as ancient as the
Druids), may be ſeen, Pl. IV. Fig. II. and III. They wore a
badge of honour on their garments, next in dignity to that of
ſovereign Princes; © for the Druids had the priviledge of wearing


h Alex. ab Alex. ibid. goras adviſed, that Sacrificers ſhould addreſs the
i Lucan, Lib. III. ver. 402. Gods, not in rich and gaudy Habits, but only in
k Of the Druids, p. 46. white and clean Robes. Fragm. of Diod. Sicul.
1 Alex. ab Alex. cap. xvii. 4. The Egyptian Prieſts were always cloathed in
m Pliny, Lib. XVI. cap. xliv. white * So were the Perſian Magi and


n Cæſar.— Strabo. Lib. IV. Sched. 335. Kings. Hyde, p. 20. The Jews had their white

They gathered the Miſletoe, and other ſacred Ephod, and the Gauls uſed to carry in Procethon
herbs on a white Garment. On the ſame coloured round their Lands, their Idols covered with white
Garment they ſpread their Lots for Divining. Linen. Rel. des Gaul, p. 104. Sulp. Sever.
Their Horſes for Divining were white. Pytha- cap. ix. vit. Sti. Mu.


te {ix


OF 2 R474
l 0 8 SS ln + 5 . 22 :
- > I old, SID ond SAR aa i EG . „ 4
"y „ 1 72 „ 1 * : 32
_— 3 * 2 FE PR "A as * * N * 4 2 2
Ik y ac * vw" N 8 4 a 4 * ** 3

2 bas, 1 4 4 + 4 ö N * 4 en F

- o 7 vo 2 *, «5 +; 2 . bo 25 2 "I, 2. 5 2 _ ®

* *


r oo ' a


OF THE DRUID WORS HIP. 125


« ix colours in their Breacans (or Robes), the King and Queen
« ſeven, the Nobles five P. Their ſhoes were of a ſingular ſhape,
made of wood, of a pentagonal form. The Inſigne, or general
diſtinction of their Order, was the figure of the Anguinum, or
ſerpent's egg. They wore alſo on their garments a Creſcent, be-
cauſe it was at the Neomenia that they gathered their darling Miſletoe. | Ui
Selden (and from him Sammes, Rowland, and others5), gives us

the Icon of a ſtatue found in Wichtelbergue in Germany, by ſome,
thought to be a Druid ; but Selden himſelf does not think it to be

ſo *, and indeed, his having a book in his left hand, confirms him

not to be a Druid; for the Druids taught all without book. Other
images there are t, ſaid to be Druid; but thoſe which bid faireit for

being fo, are thoſe placed in the beginning of this Book, p. 53. of
which a particular account is given before u.

The younger Druids are all without beards, the old had very long
ones, and ſometimes a wreath of oaken leaves round their temples,
heir garments reached down to their heels, and generally their eyes


(who calls them Fatidicz) to have had white hair, white gowns,

linen cloaks joined together by claſps ; to have been girt with a girdle
of braſs work, and their feet naked W.
In their hand they carried the magic rod x, and the Conjurer's
wand is {till called in the Iriſh tongue, Slatnan Druidheacht v. The
Magician's rod was reckoned Oracular?, and they could not regularl
proceed to predict future events without it ; and in the Altar (which
[ ſhall take particular notice of hereafter) found at Paris A. D. 17 11
I think the Magick-Wand is to be found in the hands of the
Druids.

Their victims were of ſeveral kinds. Sometimes beaſts ; as at the Viaims
gathering of the Miſletoe, two white bulls a; but eſpecially beaſts“ al.
taken from their enemies in war; however, their more ſolemn ſacri-
fices conſiſted of human victims, and it cannot be diſſembled, that the Human.
Druids were extreamly laviſh of human blood. Not only criminals,
captives, and ftrangers, were ſlain at their ſacrifices, but their very
Diſciples were to be put to death without mercy, if they were will-
fully tardy in coming to their aſſemblies. No people, however,
could, I think, have wrought themſelves up to ſuch a total con-


"7
|
|
1
|


—_ +
A 4


_— _—
— —


— —


Tol. Hitt. p. 22. Rowl. Mon. p. 107. * Sammes, p. 101.
In the Portal of Montmorillon (Pl. V. p. 53. t Frick. Tab. I.


Fig. 3.) the Stripes of the Purple in their white v See of the Druid Learning, ch. xv. p. 104. 1
|


Robes may be diſtinguiſhed. See Rel. de Gaul, w Strab. Keyſler, p. 375.


Vol. I. p. 142. * Frick. in Bulæo, p. 143. |
i Aventin. Ann. Boi. Lib. I. but ſometimes y Toland, ibid. p. 20. |
their Feet are naked, z Hoſca iv. 12. 4
© dee of Divination, cap. xxi. Lib. II. 2 Plin. xvi, 44. F |
* See Nat, Diſplayed, Engl. Vol. I. p. 211. 1


K K tempt


126 OFTHE DRUID WORSHIP;


tempt of human life, and the body of man, who had not at the m
time the moſt elevated notions of the ſoul, and the moſt certain per.
ſuaſion of futurity; but this, inſtead of being their excuſe, yi MM
only ſhew us how the greateſt Truths may be made the occaſion s Bu
the moſt horrid Sins, where proper notions of the Deity do 14
obtain, and where Truth, and Reaſon, and Philoſophy are permitted Þ
Dodtinal to be built upon by the Father of error. The Druids held fevers BY
Palliatives opinions which contributed to confirm them in this dreadful cuſtom, KE


for this in-


humanity, For the redemption of the life of Man, they held, that nothing but F
the life of Man could be accepted by the Gods®; and the conſe. 1


quence of this was, that thoſe who implored fafety from the dangers


of war, or the moſt deſperate diftempers, either immediately lacri- |
ficed ſome human creature, or made a vow to do ſo, ſoon ate,
Their human facrifices generally conſiſted of ſuch criminals as ws


convicted of theft, or any capital crime; and ſome of theſe hay:
been ſacrificed after an impriſonment of five years e; but when ſuch
malefactors were not at hand, the innocent ſupplied their place.
They held, that Man was the moſt precious, and therefore the moſt
grateful victim which they could offer to their Gods; and the more
dear and beloved was the perſon, the more acceptable they thought
the offering of him would be accounted. Hence, not only beauti-
ful captives and ſtrangers d; but Princes and the firſt born of their
own children, were, upon great and intereſting occaſions, offered


upon their Altars. Nature it ſeems was ſilent, and did not fay with f
the prophet Micah (vi. 7.) “ ſhall I give my firſt-born for my tran.


e greſſion, the fruit of my body for the fin of my foul ?” In order
to ſatisfy the ſcrupulous of the innocence of ſuch barbarous ſacri-
fices, and reconcile the devoted victim to his fate, the Druids
held, that the ſouls of thoſe who ſerved as victims to their Gods in
this life, were deified, or at leaſt tranſlated into heaven to be happy
there ; and the remains of thoſe who died in ſacrifice, were ac-
counted moſt holy, and honoured before any other dead bodies*,
How the Variety of deaths they had for thoſe miſerable victims, as if they
victios q, had been afraid that they ſhould fall into a loathing, and diſlike of
ſuch ſacrifices, if they confined themſelves to one particular manner
of diſpatching them. Some they ſhot to death with arrows ; others
they crucified in their Temples; ſome were impaled in honour to
their Gods, and then with many others, who had ſuffered in a dif-
ferent manner, were offered up as a burnt- ſacrifice. Others were
bled to death, and their blood being received in baſons ſerved to
ſprinkle their Altars f. Some were ſtabbed to the heart, that by the


b Cæſ. Lib. VI. | e Rel. de Gaules, Vol. ii. p. 226.
© Diod. Sic. f Strabo, Lib. IV. Diod. Sic. Tacit. A
« Horace, Lib. III. Ode iv. | nal. xiv.


direction


On


OF THE DRUID-WORSHIP.


direction in which (after the fatal ſtroke) the body fell, either to
the right or left, forward, or backward, by the convulſion of the
limbs, and by the flow of blood, the Druids (ſuch erudition there
is in butchery!) might toretell what was to come g. One Druid
ſacrifice was ſtill more monſtrous. They made a huge image of
{traw, the limbs of it were joined together, and ſhaped by wicker-
work: this ſheath, or caſe, they filled with human victims; and
&rabo adds, with wood for fuel and ſeveral kinds of wild beaſts,”
imagining perhaps, that by a variety of expiring groans and howlings,
they might terrify their Gods into a compliance with their ſolicita-
tions; to this image they ſet fire, conſuming that, and the incloſed, at
one holocauſt. In what ſhape this image of ſtraw was made, Ceſar
does not ſay, but probably it was in that of a bull; for they uſed to
facrifice bulls h, and carried to war with them the image of a bull,
and the bull is one of the largeit, and moſt capacious of the brute
kind, and therefore the fitteſt for ſuch a dreadful office. Whilſt
they were performing theſe horrid rites, the drums and trumpets
ſounded without intermiſſion, that the cries of the miſerable victims
might not be heard, or diſtinguiſhed by their friends, it being ac-
counted very ominous, if the lamentations of cither children or
parents were diſtinctly to be heard whilſt the victim was burningi.
The victim being offered, they prayed molt ſolemnly to the Gods
with uplifted hands, and great zeal; and when the entrails had
been properly examined by the Diviners, Pliny thinks that the
Druids eat part of the human victimk; what remained was con-
ſumed by the laſt fire upon the Altar; intemperance in drinking
generally cloſed the ſacrificing; and the Altar was always conſe-


crated a-freſh, by ſtrewing Oak-leaves on it, before any ſacrifice
could be offered upon it again!.


CHAP. MX.


Of the ſuperſtitious Rounds and Turnings of the Body, which the


Druids and other Gentiles performed during the Time of Worſhip,
and of Luſtration.


| | MANY nations had the cuſtom of going a certain round whilſt


they were worſhiping their Gods, and they thought it of
great importance to fix the manner in which the perſon ſhould per-


8 * Sic. Bibl. Lib. V. Ceſar, Lib. VI. * Plin. Lib. XXX. cap. « 4


"= ba : | It is faid to have been a part of their worſhip
We in. xvi. 44. | to carry in Proceſſion the images of their Deities,
zl, Rhodig. Sched. 401. Plutar, A- or Demons, from one part of the Country to


leg. another, veiled over in a white garment (Sulpit.


form


— 2 ” . * 0

* - =

A -
. - * - . ——
— a £ «ts *
—˙ 2 —— ̃ — — — * 5 =
= _ * * 4 4
2
"— — J 5 - — _


ry
—
1


— -


—


— — —
— — —


— — —


_
»  —_ 2


—  —
PSAS... — — — —


_—


TEE. —ꝛ — —
— — x, 5 — —


—— Ul


tn oo OE oe re re
— 5
SS — 2


U


128 OF THE DRUID WOURSHTP:


form this round ; ſome contending ſtrenuouſly, that they ought to
proceed from left to right, others inſiſting that this ſacred turn was
moſt prevalent with the Gods when it proceeded from right to left
This cuſtom, as abſurd as it may ſeem, is extremely ancient in
{his Super- foreign countries, as well as this iſland. It was the cuſtom of the
practiſes Romans, during the time that they were performing their more
exong ie publick devotions, to turn the body quite round from leſt to right m
Romans, deſcribing, now a ſmall, and at other times a larger circle; a cuſtom
founded on a precept of Numa", In the rites of purifying amon
the Greeks, going round the perſons who were to be hallowed, was
expreſſly neceſſary ; and therefore, as Abp. Potter obſerves o, moſt
of the terms which relate to any ſort of purification, begin with the
Prepoſition Tg: (ſignifying around), as Nepigauer, Tieciuareo3u,
Ilses, IIe, © to ſprinkle about, to wipe all round, to per-
* 3 or expiate with ſulphur, to luſtrate, or ritually purify, all
** around;” the veſſel alſo containing the holy water, was called
Tzeieay]newy ; to which let me add, that Sorcerers and Exorciſts, are
ſtiled in ſcripture Ilearegxopeyer (Acts xix. 13.), and the magical Art;
are called Ilecieęſa (Acts xix. 19.), all from their walking round, to
perform the rites of Enchantment and Purification; for which pur-
poſe the Greeks were abſurd enough now and then to draw a ſea
onion, and ſometimes a dog's whelp round the perſon to be
purified p. The Trojans, at the burial of Miſenus, were purified by


Coryneus's going three times round them with the holy water:


Idem ter ſocios purd circumtulit undd
SPAr gens rore levi. En. vi. ver. 229.


And Servius on that place obſerves, that the word Luſtratio came
to ſignify purifying, becauſe the perſon who performed the rite, was
to carry round the perſon or company a torch, a victim, or (as was
the cuſtom in ſome places) a certain quantity of ſulphur, by which
means he could not avoid ſeeing and being ſeen by the whole com-
pany. In the Temple of Diana, the perlon who facrificed, was to
go nine times round the Altar, ſprinkling the blood of a hind, or
doe, and wine q. When Medea was performing her incantations, in
order to renew the life of Æſon, Ovid gives us this picture of her:


Sever. vit. Martini Frick. p. 125.); but their “ velato, circumvertensque ſe, deinde procumbens.
having portable images, was not the pure and Sueton. in Vit. cap. ii. p. 696. Edit. Var.


ancient, but the mixed Druidiſm of the more n « Circumagas te, dum Deos adoras; ſedeas,

modern ages. © cum adoraveris.” Plutar. in Numa. 8
m Ph. „Quo me vortam neſcio,” Pa. “ Si „ Atque aliquis modo tunc viſa jam ur

„Deos ſalutas dextrovorſum cenſeo.“ Plaut. Ov. Faſt, Lib. III.

Act. i. Sc. i. Luc. Vitellius primus C. Cæſa- o Vol. I. p. 221. Greek Antiqu-

rem adorari ut Deum inſtituit, cùm reverſus ex. p Ibid. Potter, p. 223.

Syria non aliter adire auſus eſſet quam capite 4 Pont. Vir. p. 2.


—


OF THE DRUID WORSHIP. 129


— Paſſis Medea capillis

Bacchantum ritu flagrantes circuit aras,

Multifidaſque faces in foſſa ſanguinis atrd

Tingit, & inſectas geminis accendit in aris ;

Terque ſenem flammd, ter aqud, ter ſulphure luſtrat.
Ov. Met. Lib. VII. ch. ii. ver. 2 5 8, &c.


The Romans turned, as is before obſerved, from the left to the
right, Sun- ways; but Pliny ſays", that the Gauls thought it more
conformable to the Religion of the ancients, to turn round the body
in adorando, from the right to the left; ſo that it may be juſtly How by the
inferred, that it was the cuſtom of the Druids to turn round the P'%'%s:
body during their prayers, and walk round their aſſemblies, their
holy Karns, and their religious fires ; and whether they turned to
the right or left, or both theſe different ways, at different times, and
upon different occaſions, as is moſt likely, we will now examine.

The practice of going this myſterious round in worſhip, was very
ancient among the Britans, as the multitude of the round monu-
ments, {till extant, teſtify ; and, according to Toland, © was uſed

« 3000 years ago, and God knows how long before; but the
circumambulation, which at preſent remains in ſome places, and 1s
certainly a relick of the Druid cuſtom, proceeds in a contrary
direction to what Pliny records of the Gauliſh Druids. Whether

the cuſtom has been inverted by the coming in of Chriſtianity

(as many cuſtoms of theſe Gentiles have thereby been altered in
ſome particulars, and retained in others), or whether the Britiſh
Druids in this point held a different opinion from their brethren of
Gaul; certain it is, that the turning round, at preſent in uſe in thoſe
places (I mean the iſles of Scotland), where the Druid cuſtoms are

not yet wholly extinguiſhed, is Sun- ways, that is, from Eaſt, by South

to the Weſt. © In the Scottiſh iſles the vulgar never come to the tn the
ancient ſacrificing, and fire-hallowing Karns, but they walk =?


46 . : Iſlands, i. e.
three times round them, from Eaſt to Weſt, according to the Hebrides.


* courſe of the Sun. This ſanctified tour, or Round by the South,
* 1s called Deiſeal, from Deas, or Deſst, the right hand; and Soil,
* or Sul, the Sun; the right hand being ever next the Heap, or Cairn.
The contrary turn from right to left by the North, when the
* body faces the Eaſt, was (alſo uſed by the Druids, and) called
“ 'Tuaphol, i.e. Siniſtrorſum; the Proteſtants, as well as the Papiſts,


An adorando dextram ad oſculum referimus, XXVIII. cap. ii.


* totumque corpus circumagimus, quod in lævum 5 Hiſtory of the Druids, p. 108.
feciſſe Galli religioſius credunt,” Plin. Lib. © Deſſil, in Martin of the Iſles, p. 117, 140.


11 & are


$
*
N
? + by
*
1 3-23
we *
4
14
W 7
- . 1
| 0
fy j
: 41
|
*
4
1.
*
.
* H
4 U
; 4
F,
30
I : |
1
4
5 i
| U
+. 2 .
11
[


———
— =_
— —
- —


130


OF THE DRUID WORSHIP.


care addicted to the Deiſolu. Of the Tuaphol there are little ;..
mains, and we ſhall by and by ſee the reaſon ; but the Deiſol 10
frequently practiſed. When the inhabitants of the Lewis (one
« of the largeſt of the weſtern Scottiſh iſles) go a fowling to tl.
« Flannan Iſlands, to prevent the tranſgreſſion of the leaſt nice,


every novice is always joined with another, who can inftruq hin


« in all the punctilios obſerved here: when they are got up into
&« the Iſland, all of them uncover their heads, and make a turn Sun.
tc ways round, thanking God for their ſafety. All the crew pray
« three times, in three different places, before they begin towling,
* the reaſon of their going to theſe uninhabited Iſlets, being to


| © procure a quantity of fowls, eggs, down, feathers, and quills; their


With Fire,


« firſt prayer is made as they approach towards the Chapel of 8.
« Flannan; the ſecond is going round it; the third at or in the
„ ruined Chapel. This is their morning ſervice, and the Veſper,
e are performed with the ſame number of prayers *.” The fame
author (p. 20. ib.) tells us, that one of the natives of Rona”, willing
to expreſs the high eſteem he had for the perſon of Mr. Moriſon, to
whom that Iſland then belonged, would needs make a turn round
about him Sun-ways, and at the fame time bleſs him, and wiſh him
all happineſs; and when Mr. Moriſon refuſed that ceremony, the
other inhabitants ſaid, it was a thing due to his character, as their
Chief and Patron, and they could not, nor would fail to perform
it. In theſe Iflands three times they perform theſe rounds Sun-
ways, about their benefactors, then bleſs them, and wiſh them good
ſucceſs (ib. p. 118.). In the Iſle of Ila the author had this com-
pliment of three turns made round him by an old woman, to whom
he had given alms, after which ſhe recommended him to the pro-
tection of God, and Mac-Charmig, the tutelary Saint of this Iſland.
This cuſtom makes part alſo of the feſtival ſolemnities; for, in the
Iſland of Sena the Druideſſes celebrating (as Strabo ſays, Lib. IV.
p. 303.) the rites of Bacchus, went round their Temple with re-
joicings ſuitable to the ſolemnities of that God, till their fury
abated +. In the Iſland of Barray, the inhabitants till obſerve the
anniverſary of St. Barr on the 27th of September, by a proceſſion
on horſeback, which is concluded by three turns round St. Barr s
Church there*; and indeed this cuſtom was ſo generally mixed
with all their rites, that there was ſcarce any thing, ſacred, civil, or
domeſtick, undertaken without the performance of the Deſſil.
They alſo performed Luſtrations by fire, carrying lighted torches,
candles, and fire, in a ſuperſtitious manner, at certain times, in order
v Tol. p. 108. + See before, ch. ix. Lib. II. p. 84.
* Mart. ibid. 17. * Mart. ibid. p. 99. |


„ A ſmall weſtern Iſland.


to


OF THE DRUID WORSHIP. 131


% drive away evil ſpirits v. In the betore-mentioned Iſland of Lewis,
t was an ancient cuſtom to make a tiery circle about the houles,
corn, and cattle, belonging to each particular jamily; a man carried
ire in his right hand, and went round. The fame Luflration, by
carrying of fire, is performed round about women after child-
bearing“, and round about children before they are Chriſtened; as
an effectual means to preſerve both the mother and infant from the
power of evil ſpirits. . 5 |

The like cuſtom obtains in water as well as fire, lor in the Iſle of With

Skie, after drinking the water of a. famous well there (called Loch- 8
ſiant well, ibid. 140.), they make three Sun- turns round the well, as
if ſome Deity reſided in it, to whom they were to pay proper reſpect
before they left it. Weak and ſimple as theſe turns may ſeem, they Three times
have been uſed by the molt ancient, and the moſt polite nations, and“ sten
in the ſame number, as now practiſed by theſe uncultivatcd Iſlanders.
The Iſlanders turn three times round their Karns; round the per-
ſons they intended to bleſs three times; three turns they make round
St, Barr's Church, and three turns round the well, ſo that the
number Three was a neceſſary part of the ceremony.

It has been before obſerved, that Corineus went three times round Among the
the aſſembly at Miſenus's ſuneral, to purify them; three times was ne
the effigies of the coy lover to be drawn rumd the Altar to inſpire *
him with love a — Tergrue hec altaria circum — £Effigiem duco. — In
the feſtival called the Ambarvalia, the victim was to be led round
the fields three times — Tergue novas circum felix eat hoſtiæ frugesb.

In the ſacrifices of Bacchus the Prieſteſſes were to go round the Altar

with diſhevelled hair; three times did Medea, in imitation of the Among the
Bacchæ, go round the aged Æſon with fire, three times with water, .
and three times with ſulphur — Paſſis Medea, &c*. And when ſhe

was about to invoke all the powers of the Night, her Goddeſs

Hecate, the Moon, the Stars, and all the inferiour Deities reſident

in the elements of nature, three times ſhe turned herſelf about. The
deſcription of her, the ſtillneſs of the night, the propriety of the
addreſſes, and parts of her prayer, are all extremely poetical:


Ter ſe convertit, ter ſumptis flumine crinem
Trroravit aguis, ternis ululatibus ora

Solvit, & in durd ſulimiſſo poplite terrd,
{Vox, ait, &c ©!


8. See Mart, p. 117. And the Laws of the © Necte tribus nodis ternos, Amarylli, colores;
Councils againſt their lighted Tapers, Chap. xx, * Necte, Amarylli, modo, & Veneris dic vincula


# Ibid. p. 117. e necto.“ Virg. Ecl. viii. ver. 77.
5 4 Virg. Eclog. viii. ver. 74. b Geor. I. ver. 345. ibid,
4 Terna tibi hxc primum triplici diverſa colore * dee before, p. 129.
Licia Circumdo. ver. 73: ibid, c Ovid Met. Lib. VII. from ver. 182 to 190.


But


8 — —


„ — 2


- „ 2 . 8 k E ,
CT CN —— —— — — EE”
— —c — — — T Ju OO a 8 — 4 - Ss —
4 — — — 4 — i G_ =» — — - — > 4


* 4 3 * _—_ —


132 OF THE DRUID WORSHIP.
Different But to return. By theſe odd cuſtoms ſtill extant in many part,
turns on the of Britain (evident remainders as they are of the Druid ſuperſtitigy
occaſions All turning Sun-ways), it looks as if the Druids turned the body Sun.
Bien ways in their Worſhip, and not from right to left as Pliny intimate,
But indeed, the turning from right to left, contrary to the courſe gf

the Sun (called Tuaphol), might have been a very ancient cuſtom

among the Gauls, and reckoned rather more ominous, although ng

uſed, as Pliny ſeems to think, in adoring their Gods d; and it i;

very probable that the Druids of Britain uſed the Tuaphol as wel

as the Deiſol, though upon very different occaſions, I am apt to thin

that they turned Sun-ways, in order to bleſs one another and worſhip

the Gods *, as the Iſlanders do in the North; and that they turned the
contrary way when they intended to curſe or deflroy their enemies.

The Druids had a rite of curſing (as well as of bleſſing) as other

ancient Idolaters had ©; and as every thing among them was to be

done in a ſolemn ritual manner, they turned this religious myſtick

round towards the left, in order to pour out their imprecations the

more efhcaciouſly. ©* Druidegque, circum, preces diras fublatis al

cc celum manibus, fundentes novitate aſpectus perculere milites,”

ſays Tacitus f, of the battle of Angleſea, Here we have the Druid;

curling their enemies not intercurſantes, as the women Druids, but

circum, viz. euntes, ſe vertentes. The way they turned, indeed,
whether to the right or to the left, is not here expreſſed; but as the

cuſtom of bleſſing was apparently Sun-ways, and ſtill remains ſo, the

rite of curſing muſt in all probability have been contrary to it, and

may be decided to have been ſo, I think, by a paſſge in the ftory of
Gretteruss: © The Inchantreſs, taking a knife, eut the Runick
characters called the Fatales Runæ, on a ſtick or piece of wood,

© and ſmeared it with ſome of her own blood®; then ſinging ker


ce Incantations, retrograde i, ſhe went round the inchanted wand,


e contrary to the courſe of the Sun, and uttered all her curſings;


e ſhe then threw the ſtick with obſervation, ritually into the ſea, and
«© prayed — That it might be wafted to the Iſland Drangoa, and
« carry every kind of evil to Gretterus k. This was the way there-
fore, they turned, when they curſed; but when/they bleſſed, and
praiſed their Gods, imploring their aſſiſtance for themſelves, or
friends; then they turned a different way, even as the Sun proceeds,


4 Mr. Toland thinks that the preſent uſage f Annal. Lib. xiv. cap. xxix.
among the Iſlanders does not at all contradict 8 Barthol. Lib. III. cap. ii. p. 661.
what Pliny ſays; but this is certaing his miſtake, h « In foſſa ſanguinis atra— Tingit, *
for the uſage is one way, and what Pliny aſſerts is * infectas, &c. ſee before, p. 129. oy
the quite contrary turn. Sha” | i « Contra curſum Solis lignum circuivit,
* See Note | p. ſequ. c multaſque Diras protulit.“
© Numb. xxii. ver. 6. * Keyſler, p. 467.


as


TT o


a „


& hcavenly bodies o; and perhaps one of their reaſons mi


OF THE DRUID WORSHIP. 133


as the Iſlanders do at preſent; and as Athenzus obſerves! (the
W Druids) anciently did, Tag Jz25 T7700 xuv808 e dE ge οονEj .
 $ythcicnt has been ſaid concerning the manner of theſe religious
Turns, and ſtrange it may ſcem to readers unacquainted with the
W ;itcs of the Ancients (in which every thing was to be myſterious and
| typical) to what ſuch a groundleſs unedifying cuſtom as this, could
ET gc its riſe, That there was ſomething ſymbolical in this turning
ol the body, is very likely; for it is reckoned among the ſymbols uſed
by the Pythagoreans, me2oxye Teaperoper©-, © Turn round whilit
you worthip®”, But what the Ancients intended by this circular
turn, is very uncertain. Some think it was in conformity to the
round figure of the Earth” ; others to the circular motion of the


ght be (for I
take it for granted that they had ſeveral myſtical meanings, in one and
the ſame rite) that in whatever region of the heavens their Deity was
then ſeated, they might, by turning the body quite round, make
proper obeiſance to him, and their prayers be favourably heard: it
may be conjectured alſo, that they intended to teach their Diſciples,
by this ceremony, that their Deity was not confined to any one ſpot
of the heavens, and therefore that they needed not to confine them-
ſelves to one poſture or place, but that, wherever their face was turned,
there they were ſure to meet the aſpect of their Deity. If they
rcckoned all the compaſs of Heaven to be their Jupiter, or chief
God, as is not unlikely b. then certainly theſe turns were in honour
partly to that extenſive Divinity.

Whence this Rite was derived to the Druids is equally uncertain; Likely de-
as the Pythagoreans had it, it might be among thoſe which the Gen- 9 1
tiles of the Eaſt had borrowed from, or rather grounded upon, ſome Hiſtory.
extraordinary incidents of the Jewiſh hiſtory, communicated to
Pythagoras in his travels, and by him imparted to the Druids.
Nothing indeed is more apparent, than that the falſe Religion
mimicked the true. Heatheniſm was as ſuſceptible of innovation,
and as willing to mix with the true Religion (as far as the impurity
and error of its principles would allow) as the Jews were to run into
the idolatrous Rites of the Heathens. When the Gentiles heard of
any manner, in which ſome extraordinary event had been produced,
they attributed it tothe method in which ſuch things had been per-
tormed, and to the external, material inſtruments; not, as they


ſhould have done, to the miraculous interpoſition of God. Thus


| Lib. IV. cap. xiv. p. 151. Not. in Plin. p. 568.
m Pithæue, cap. vii. 1. | P Sce Chapter xxii. of the Perſian and Druid
u Elias Sched, p. 370. Conformity.


Fo Cæleſtis vertiginis quadam imagine.“


M m thev


—
. ——ä—ñw— — —


——E—— — 8 ms
— 4 —


_


—


— — — — — — — — — — —„—— 1 ——— —— ay
PwC - —ů ——— * _


—
7 —— — My
So DAS ame Re —— —
— - — = —


134


OF THE DRUITID WORSHIP.
they copied from the ſacred Hiſtory, pouring Libations q, facrifc,,
upon the tops of Rocks t, inveſtigating Truth by lots 5, and gemi
bowing before fire u, and worſhiping it, uſing the magick wang ;,
imitation of Moſes's rod W: hearing that God and his Angels 4.
peared in the human form to Adam, Abraham, Manoah, &c. ther
made human Images of the Deity, and worſhiped them; findiß,
that Abraham proſpered greatly after offering to ſacrifice his *
Iſaac, they proceeded to ſacrifice their own children, or were at lea
confirmed in the practice, by thinking they might follow the exampl
of ſo good a Man; fo here in this caſe, which we are now treaty,
of, finding that Moſes conſecrated, bleſſed, and purified the Altar k,
Burnt-offtering, by going round it, as we have it (Levit. viii. 153.
finding that he ſprinkled the blood of the Ram (ver. 19.) upon th:
Altar round about; that he did the ſame with the blood of the Ram
of conſecration (ver. 24.) ; hence they learnt probably the ceremo-
nious part of theſe Rites : neglecting the true God, the Spirit, and
the thing typified, they transferred a fimilar worſhip to their Idols
they ſprinkled the aſſembly, they poured the blood of the vin
round the bottom of their Altar, they went round the Altar, and
conſecrated it with ſome part of the blood, as Moles did, in order to
perform the emblematical enjoined Purifications of the Levitical lay;
all theſe Rites are indeed contained (as if copied from the Scripture
in the paſſage before cited, p. 129*. Again, it is no improbable
ſuppoſition that the Heathens, finding the ſacred rounds performed
about the city of Jericho, attended with ſucceſs, attributed that ſuccek
to the religious march (not to the Almighty God, who commanded!
it), imitated it, and introduced it as a moſt effectual Rite of worthip-
ing, confidently depending upon ſucceſs from the forms and ſhadows
of things, the Spiritual meaning, the real intent and divine author
of the injunction, being wholly neglected.


CHAP. AX.
Of the Holy Fires of the Druids.


E muſt not diſmiſs their Rites of Worſhip without taking
ſome notice of the Fires, which made a part of the Druid


1 Judges vi. 20. See the Drink Offerings of an awful diftance, pronouncing the Ground


the Jews, Exod. xxx. g9.—lIbid. xxix. 12. to be holy,
r Judges vi. 20. —Ibid. xiii, 19. w Exod. iv. 3.
» Joſhua vii. 16, &c.— 1 Sam. xiv. 42.—Eſ- x «© And Moſes took the Blood (of the Bullock
ther iii. 7. | ce and put it upon the Horns of the Altar out
t From the the Urim and Thummim of the “ about with his Finger, and purified the _
Jews. e and poured the Blood at the bottom of the
» As Moſes did before the burning Buſh, Ex. iii. Altar, and ſanctified it.”
out of which God ſpake to him, and bid him keep * —*<< Flagrantes circuit aras, &c.“


Worllup


al


lat


= 7


a A 695 a e Of


*


OF THE DRUID WORSHIP.


Worſhip. Moſt nations of the world had the cuſtom of burning
perfumes and ſpices during the times of worſhip, and the Jewith
Incenſe was enjoined by God y; but the Gentiles carried this Rite to
an excels as unreaſonable and inhuman as it was impious and ido-
latrous. ** Two Fires were kindled near one another on May-eve in
« every village of the Nation; through Gaul, Britain, Ireland, and
« the Iſles . One fire was on the Karn,” (that is, a Stone- barrow)
« the other on the ground adjoining; the men and beaſts to be
« ſacrificed, were to pals through theſe two Fires;“ acquiring
thereby, I ſuppoſe, a greater degree of Holineſs and Purification.
Keyſler adds (p. 356.), that after ſacrifice and banquetting, the
Goblets full of wine were to be paſſed through the Fire, as for Puri-
fication, The Perſians had their moſt holy Fires perpetually
burning in their Temples; but they had alſo occaſional feilival
Fires, on the gth day of their gth month®* (November with the
Moderns ; March, with the Ancients) and at the winter Solſtice”,
becauſe then the days began to lengthen; and the ſame author there
obſerves, that, for the ſame reaſon (at the feaſt of Epiphany) Feſtival
Fires are kindled in England (particularly in Shropſhire) upon the
hills, for joy that Winter is paſſing away, and the Spring approach-
ing. The Druids had alſo their ſolemn Fires on the Eve of Novem-
ber, to which the people were obliged to reſort, and re-kindle the
private fires in their houſes from theſe conſecrated Fires of the
Druids, the domeſtick Fire in every houſe having been, for that
purpoſe, firſt carefully extinguiſhed© : the Ghavri (of the ancient
Perſian Religion) have the ſame cuſtom to this day, as will parti—
cularly appear in the ſequel d. It is very probable that the Tin-
egin or forced Fire, not long ſince uſed in the Iſles, as an antidote
againſt the Plague, or Murrain in Cattle, is the remainder of a Druid
cuſtom. ** All the fires in the pariſh were extinguiſhed, and then
* two great planks of wood, were rubbed one againſt the other, till
fire was produced; then a pot full of water is ſet on, and the water
* ſprinkled upon the people, or cattle infected with the Plague, and
this they ſay they find ſucceſsful by experience e.“

Of the Fires we kindle in many parts of England, at ſome ſtated
times of the year, we know not certainly the riſe, reaſon, or occaſion;
but they may probably be reckoned among the relicks of the fore-
mentioned Druid ſuperſtition. In Cornwall, the Feſtival Fires,
called Bonfires, are kindled on the Eves of St, John Baptift *, and


: Exodus XXXl. 1. | * Martin of the Iſles, p. 113.
5 Toland, ibid. ut ſupra, *The like cuſtom prevails all over Cum-
b Hyde de Vet. Perf. Rel. p. 249. & berland, but the Inhabitants are ignorant of
0 . p+ 2 „the Original of it.” Right Rev. Dr. Lyttelton,
0 Toland, ibid. ut ſupr. p. 71. Biſhop of Carliſle, to the Author, 1765.
Chapter xxii, |
St.
2


*


135


——— —


uy |
+o
14 b
1
T
113
* N :
| 7
*
4
- D
Sil
= F
-
1
* *
1
x '|
e
1
14
«


— —
—


r —_— = —


——— — OR


— —— way -- — — —
- 3 8


2 <


13


5


OF THE DRUID WORSHIP.


St. Peter's day; and Midſummer is thence, in the Corniſh tongue
called Goluan, which ſignifies both Light, and Rejoicing. At th;
Fires the Corniſh attend with lighted torches, tarred and pitcheg ,
the end, and make their perambulations round their Fires, going fim
village to village and carrying their torches before them ; thi .
certainly the remains of Druid ſuperſtition; for, Faces preferr,
to carry lighted torches, was reckoned a kind of Gentiliſm, and a
ſuch particularly prohibited by the Gallick Councils: they wer
in the eye of the law, Accenſores facularum, and thought to aer.
fice to the devil f, and to deſerve capital puniſhment.

In Cornwall we have Karn-Gollewas, that is, the Karn of Light,
and Karn Leſkyzh (the Karn of burnings), both called ſo probably
from the Druid Fires kindled on thoſe Karns. Karn Leſkyz hy
ſome things which deſerve a particular deſcription. It is a lars:
ridge of rocks, deſcending from a very high hill in the tenement
Lechau (St. Ju) to the ſea, and conſiſting of ſeveral.groups, in the
higheſt of which there is one ſmall baſon, about 18 inches in da.
meter, its ſides about fix inches deep (Plate IV. p. 52. fig. 1, D;
about five paces to the left of which, on the ſame Karn, whoſe
ſurface is planed or flat, is an oblong cavity five feet long (B), and
in the ſhelving ſides of the rocks adjoining .on both fades, are ſever!
little grooves or chanels about two inches wide, and as many deep,
cut into the ſurface, and running by the fide of one another i; 1
vermicular direction (C); they are certainly artificial, but what uf:
to aſſign them I know not, unleſs we ſuppoſe them the divinator
chanels, into which, as the blood of the unhappy victim flowed,
either to the Weſt or Eaſt, North or South, freely or languidl,
into few or many of theſe ducts, ſo the fate of the nation, the arm),
or the ſacrificing enquirer, was accordingly predicted to be happy or
unhappy i. There are alſo on the Eaſt fide of the oblong cavity
before-mentioned, and on the ſame Karn, two ſmall, exactly round
holes ſunk into the top of the rock ; ſome others of like kind may
be ſeen intermixed with the little duQs ; they are about ſour inche
diameter, and three deep (AAA). I have obſerved cut into the
rocks at Scilly, in more places than one, ſome cavities of the ſame
ſhape, and very little larger than theſe, on rocks, which, in other
parts of them, have either furrows, ducts, or baſons worked into
them; but what theſe little cup-like cavities were deſigned for, it
hard to determine; whether for an holy oil, to hallow the Fire, and
the ſacred inſtruments ; for wine to ſprinkle the ſacrifice ; for Oi
leaves dipped in their holy water to purify their Altars afreſh, atte!


f Baluz, tom. vi. p. 1234. i There are ſeveral of theſe chaneled Stones v
t In Sennor pariſh, ; be ſeen in the Scilly Iſlands, particularly # ©
In St. Juſt, pariſh, Giant's Caſtle on St, Mary's,


eren


OF THE DRUID WORSHIP.


every act of ſacrificing; or whether they were deſigned, like the
Acorra and Thuribulum of the Ancients, for holding the frankin-
cenſe, perfume, or what anſwered to the -:o/a /o//a; whether for any
of theſe uſes, and for which, is uncertain; but as they are found
near, or on theſe ſacred rocks, we may lately conclude, that they
were in ſome ſhape or other ſubſervient to the Druid ſuperſtition.
Beſides the ſingle baſon above-mentioned, I could not perceive one
in all theſe rocks; but in a Karn below, overlooking, and its ſides
almoſt perpendicular to the fea, I ſaw many furrows and clefts
croſſing the ſurface of the upper rocks; this lowermoſt Karn is called
in the Corniſh tongue Karn a-wethen, that is, the Tree-Katn, and an
Oak-tree (which is ſingular) growing among the clifts of the rocks is
there ſtill to be ſeen. This whole ridge 1s called Karn-Leſkyz, or,
the Rock of burnings, from all which it is natural to conjecture,
that theſe Rocks were appropriated to the Holy Fires of the Druids,
that the tops of theſe rocks were the places where they killed their
victims, then burnt them; and that even theſe Fire-rites, Divination,
ſacrifice, and worſhip, could not proceed without ſome holy water,
oil, frankincenſe, and oak-leaves, nor the rocks be properly pre-
ared for theſe uſes, without ſeveral little ducts, and receptacles,

ſuch as the baſon, the cup-like cavity, and the vermicular chanels,

Sharpy Tor (not far from the church of St, Cleer, Cornwall), is
called ſo from its conick figure, which ſhoots up a great height from
the moors below. This vaſt Cragg could not but attra& and employ
the ſuperſtition of the Druids: before we came to the higheſt part
of it, on a group of rocks to the right, as we paſled, the top rock
has three rock-baſons in a line communicating with each other, and
in the middle of a rock contiguous, but lower, one curious baſon ;
all probably deſigned for holy water“. But, on the top of all, I
found not one rock-baſon, which convinces me that the ſummit of
this mountain was dedicated to another Element than what thoſe
baſons were deſigned for, I mean that of Fire. 8

I ſhall only farther obſerve, that theſe Heathen Rites df worſhip-
ing by Fire, were common among the Canaanites, and the per-
verted Jews. Every one knows how they paſſed their children
through the fire to Moloch, and the Prophet Iſaiah thus rebukes
them for this part of their idolatry : © Behold, all ye that kindle a
* fire, that compaſs yourſelves about with ſparks. Walk in the light
* of your fire, and in the ſparks that ye have kindled k.“


* See Book III. Chap. xi. k Chap. l. ver. 11.


N n CHAP.


137


138


OF THE DRUID DIVINAT ION,


CHAP. XXI.
Of their Divination, Charms, and I ncantations.


HE Druids were the Magi! of the Britans, and had a preat


number of Rites in common with the Perſians: now, one of


the chief functions of the Magi of the Eaſt was to Divine, that Is, to


explain the Will of the Gods, and foretell future events; the term
Magus, ſignifying among the Ancients, not a Magician in the modem
ſenſe, but a ſuperintendant of Sacred and Natural knowlegen,
Pomponius Mela tells us, that the Druids profeſſed the fame art
and were ſo remarkable for this pretended piece of knowledge, that
ſome derive their name from N to conſult, as if it had been their
principal ſtudy to conſult, and declare the will and pleafure of the
higher Powers. The Order or Claſs of the Eubates (otherwiſe called
Vates) ſeem to have been thoſe, to whom this ſtudy of future event;
was chiefly allottedo. But not only the men-Druids, but the


women alſo were very famous for their predictions, and often a


plied to by the Roman Emperours. Gauna (or Ganna) a Celtic
Virgin, was accounted by the Germans next in honour to Veleda,
who was worſhiped as a Goddeſs Pp. When Alexander Severus, the
Roman Emperour, was ſetting out on his laſt expedition, a female
Druid cried out to him as he went along, Go thy way, neither
« expect victory, nor truſt thy ſoldiers q. Aurelian is faid to have
conſulted the Druids, whether the imperial crown ſhould continue
in his family; to which the anſwer was, that no name ſhould be
more famous in the Republick, than that of the poſterity of
Claudius . The ſame author aſſures us, that the Roman Empire


Divining by WAS promiſed to Diocleſian, by a woman-Druids, Their molt
theEntrails. ſolemn Rite of Divining was, by examining accurately the entrailsof


their victims; an univerſal practice among the Gentiles, but 2
ſcience peculiar to the Prieſts of each nation, who were the ſole
judges, whether the appearances (which they thought were ordained
purpoſely by the Gods to communicate their Will to the proper
obſervers) were favourable or otherwiſe. Beſides the ominous ap-


1 Pliny, Lib. XXIX. cap. i. 6 Sacrificiorum, naturaliumque caufarym cur? |
m Syntagma de Druid. p. 35. « dediti.” Lel. de Scr. Brit. p. 5.—Strabo.
» « Quid Dii velint, ſcire ſe (viz. Druidas) 2 Tacit. de M. G. cap. viii. Dio in Fragm.
6“ profiteri.” Lib. III. cap. i. Not. Lipſ. Var. Edit.
* Batties vero ſcrutantes, ſecreta & Sublimia 4 Tacit de M. G. Var. Edit. c. viii. p. 59%
« Naturz pandere conabantur.“ Amm, Marc.“ in Not. from Lamprid, in Alex.
Vates, qui per auſpicia, & immolationes Futura r Vopiſc. in Aureliano, ibid.
* prenunciant,” Diod. Sic. Vates autem * Vopiſc. in Numeriano, ibid.


pearances


J ˙ d


CHARMS, AND IN CANTATIONS. 139
earances of the entrails, they had ſeveral ways of Divining *. They 84 vugury.


divined alſo by Augury, that is, from the obſervations they made on
the voices, flying, eating, mirth, or ſadneſs, health, or ſickneſs, of
birds u. Thus the Gauls and Britans concerned in the expedition
of Brennus, after they had taken and burnt the city of Rome, divided
into two parties, one ſettled in Italy, the other forced its way into
the ſea-coaſts of Illyricum, led thither by ſome ominous flights of
birds.

Strabo mentions a ſingular kind of Divination practiſed by the By the
Druids ; by the number of criminal cauſes they formed a judgment C
of the fertility or ſcarceneſs of the year, which was to come. They Cause,
had alſo another way of foretelling plenty, and want; if the ſacred
number of the Druids was found to increaſe, a plentiful year was to and of
be expected; if to decreaſe, want was to follow w. From any re- —
markable incident, any publick affliction, or misfortune (which the From re-
ſuperſtitious of all ages have been too apt to call a judgment from fades,
heaven), they would infer the anger of the Gods; and then conſider-
ing the ſignificancy of names, the relation of perſons and places, and
comparing them with the nature of the accident, the Druids would
divine what was to enſue*. Thus the Roman Capitol being burnt
down, in the civil wars between Otho and Vitellius, the Druids
preſumed to foretell that the ruin of the Roman Empire was at hand;
that the city of Rome had been taken formerly by the Gauls, but
the Capitol, the Temple of * remained inviolate; but that
this remarkable evidence of the indignation of the Gods could
portend no leſs than the utter ſubverſion of the Roman State, and
tranſlation of the imperial Power, to the Tranſalpine Gauls.


The Germans are recorded to have divined by Lots, and the Druids By Lots and


fond of Magick, and abandoned to this fooliſh ſtudy of Divination, ier
as well as originally of the ſame Celtick Religion with the Germans,

may with great probability be inferred to have had the fame cuſtom.
Tacitus's deſcription of this method of Divining is this v. They cut

* a rod, or twig (taken from a fruit- bearing tree), into little ſhort

« ſticks, or tallies, and having diſtinguiſhed them one from the other

* by certain marks, lay them without any Order, as they chance to

« fall, on a white garment®. Then comes the Prieſt of the State, if


IN The brain of Animals, according to its = 4 Partim auguriis, partim conjectura.“ Cicero
v different appearances, was ſuppoſed to prog- de Divin. Lib. 1. cap. xli.
* noſticate future Events.“ Henry's Hiſt. Ecclef. 1 Tacit. de M. G. cap. x.
3 p. 274. z The Druids were very fond of white Gar-
2 a Augurandi ſtudio Galli præter cœæteros va- ments (as ſee before on the Miſletoe, Selago, and
lent,” Juſtin, Lib. XXIV, Arni & (viz, Celtæ) their Habit during the time they officiated) : this
_ 2 X26 cg Nin, dad Wgornuairiy 7% H. is the more likely to have been a Druid manner of
ende Oelen, xas d Tungeher, xas ha Trag- Divining; and it may be the more probable, be-


De, xa bY NN Tivwy pallnualur . N Al. . je #
Var. Hiſt, Lib. II, cap. xxxi. ; h _ * Cornilh, Fren figniſtes a Stick, and


v Strab. Lib. IV.
ce the


+ i £8


-
=
„


Number of


CT.” nd — — —
=


—


——


W
— —


FI ah - Ss
**
—


—
— -


ww
—p


„ꝙà—ä—
=
on


— — — ,


„33„„„„„ oo


= 2 — —


140


White
Horſes.


By Hydro-
mancy.


he thought moſt for his purpoſe.


Convulſions


of the
Victim.


Trvpala Twr lepwy yuramayy as cela Grag goo CTU a


OF THE DRUID DIVINATION,


« the conſultation be at the requeſt of the publick (but if it he
* matter of private curioſity, the maſter of the family may *
well enough), and having prayed to the Gods, looking up ,,
ce heaven, he takes up each billet, or ſtick, three times, and dray;
« his interpretation from the marks before imprinted on them: ;
e theſe marks intimate a prohibition to proceed, there is no fare,
e enquiry made that day, concerning that particular affair; hy;
ce they have full authority to go on, they then proceed to tj.
4 Auſpicia, or Divining from Birds.“

There is another cuſtom of the Germans, which may with equal
juſtice be inferred, to have been practiſed by the Druids. Certan
white horſes were carefully fed in their ſacred Groves, and never h
be profaned by common labour; theſe were harneſſed to a conf.
crated chariot, and their Prieſt attending by their fide, together with
the King, or chief Magiſtrate of the State, accompanied thei
proceſſion, and obſerved their neighing, every ſound they uttered, ad
which foot they put foremoſt, with other equally important circum.
ſtances. Not only the common people, but the Nobles and the
Prieſts, placed great dependance on this way of Divining.

From the ſeveral waves and eddies, which the ſea, river, or other
water exhibited, when put into agitation, after a ritual manner, th
pretended to foretell with great certainty the event of battles; a way
of Divining, recorded by Plutarch, in his life of Ceſar a, and fil
uſual among the vulgar in Cornwall, who go to ſome noted Well, on
particular times of the year, and there obſerve the bubbles that riſe, and
the aptneſs of the water to be troubled, or to remain pure, on their
throwing in Pins or Pebbles, and thence conjecture what ſhall, or
ſhall not befall them. The Druids alſo (as we have great reaſon to
think) pretended to predict future events, not only from holy wells,
and running ſtreams, but from the rain, and ſnow-water, which
when ſettled, and afterwards ſtirred, either by Oak-leaf or branch,
or magic wand, might exhibit appearances of great information to
the quick-{ighted Druid, or ſeem ſo to do to the credulous Enquirer,
when the Prieſt was at full liberty to repreſent the appearances as
The rock-baſons of which we
ſhall diſcourſe in the next book, will make it evident that the Druids
uſed this fort of Hydromancy. ©

The Druids Divined alſo, from the fall and convulſion of the
limbs, and from the flow of the blood, immediately after the mile-
rable victim had received the fatal ſtroke b.


Fl. di laber ados (viz. Temaeg) nufBave ra H- Hoffman in verb. p. 111 3
b See Chap. XVIII. and XX, Diod. die.


xa Fei eiſpuors xa Pepelg TIxuaip pies weodhiom ter, Lib. V. Strabo, Lib. IV.
A te-


CHARMS, AND INCANTATIONS. 141


l \ remarkable way of Divining 1s related of Boadicea Queen of By the Run- 0
e Jie Þritans (in the reign of Nero), and therefore, doubtleſs, uſed by ag.“ * 0
: the Druids, who then preſided in all ſuch matters. When the had - |
i WE hacangued her ſoldiers, in order to ſpirit them up againft the 4
' WS 1p omans, ſhe opened her boſom, and let go a hare which the had il
ere concealed, that the Augurs might thence proceed to Divine, 1
SE concerning the iſſue of the intended enterprize. The frighted l,
| animal made ſuch turnings and windings in her courſe, as, according "

io the rules of judging eſtabliſhed in thoſe times, prognotticated if


happy ſucceſs: the joyful multitude made loud huzza's, Boadicca P
ſeized the opportunity, approved their ardour, and led them ſtraight 1
to their enemies ©. | :
Another method of Divining uſed by the Germans, was ſingle Ducts,
Duel, which may with great probability alſo be attributed to the
ET Druids, as not only having been very ancient in this Hand, but as
it continued in Britain many ages after Druidiſm was extinct, and
Chriſtianity planted in the room of it. Curious to know the 1i{iue
of any important war, a ſingle Combat was appointed, and pro-
claimed, betwixt one of their Captives, and a choſen Champion of
their own people, each accoutered in his own country arms, and as
the victory here fell out, ſo they judged of the approaching iſſue of
= the war d. |
* Befidesthe ſecret virtues attributed by the Druids to their Miſletoe, py te
= Selago, and Samolus, which were looked upon, when ritually gathered Anguinum-
and preſerved, as ſo many powerful charms, to keep off ſickneſs and
misfortunes ; their opinion concerning the Anguinum was altogether 5
extravagant. The Anguinum, or Serpent's Egg, was a congerics of
ſmall Snakes rolled together, and incruſted with a ſhell, formed by -
the faliva, and viſcous gum, froth, or ſweat of the Mother Serpent.
The Druids ſay, that this Egg is toſſed into the air by the hiſſings of
its Dam, and that before it falls again to the earth it ſhould be re-
ceived in the Saguse, left it be defiled. The perſon who was to
* carry off the Egg muſt make the beſt of his way on horſe-back,
for the Serpent purſues this Raviſher of its young ones, even to
* the brink of the next river: they alſo pretend, that this Egg is to
** be taken off from its dam, only at one particular time of the
Moon. The trial whether this Egg was good in its kind, and of
* ſufficient efficacy, was made, by ſeeing whether it would ſwim
= © againſt the ſtream, even though it were ſet in gold f.“ Such ab-
ſiurdities did they propagate, in order to ſet a price and value upon


2 „%“ lnb


2


— —


—


> — — —
. 2 —_— —
—


*


— — — — —
— A 2
— — 2


- * 444 — = "io „„ — — —-—V— 3255555 — — ä —ä—
— — - 3 :
* = A, - _
— - -


: D ion in Nerone, Rel. de Gaul. vol. ii. p. 13. and ritually received from the Prieſt that ga-
Facitus, ibid. thered it.


17 \ facred white Veſtment, in which the * Pliny, Lib. XXIX. cap. iii,
\::\ktoe, Selago, and Samolus, were ſolemnly


O o trifles,


— p — = * — — ”
— *
_—— —— ——— —— — * n — —


PTY \
— « 5


2 ü. — — - — __
=— = —— — —


142


e when they have found one aſleep, and ſtuck a hazel wand in the Ss


„ ſmall glaſs Amulets, commonly about half as wide as our finger-


OF THE DRUID DIVINA TION,


trifles, and no doubt to make the credulous multitude purchaſe then
from their own Order only, as by them only regularly and ritual.
procured, and of full virtue at no other time, or from the hand, of
any other perſon than thoſe of a Druid. ** I have ſeen,
« Plinys, that Egg; it is about the bigneſs of a moderate Apple
« jts ſhell a cartilaginous incruftation, full of little cavities, ſuch ,.
< are on the legs of the Polypus; it is the Igſgne, or badge g
« diſtinction, which all the Druids wear. For getting the bene
ce of their adverſaries in any kind of diſpute, and introducing they
eto the friendſhip of great men, they think nothing equal to th
% Anguinum; and of my own knowledge, I can ſay, that Claudia
e Cefar ordered a Roman Knight, of the Vecontian Family, to b
« put to death, for no other reaſon, but that, when he had a trial a
<« law before a Judge, he brought into the court in his boſom th: n
« Anguinum,” This Anguinum, is in Britiſh, called Glain-neig; S |

t

I


ſays


i, e. the Serpent of Glaſs; and ſome remains of that ſuperſtitiou
reverence, formerly paid it by the Britans, is ſtill to be diſcovered in
Cornwall. Mr. Edward Lhwyd h fays, © that he had no oppo.


ce tunity of obſerving any remains of Druidiſm among the Armai. WT 1
can Britans; but the Corniſh retain variety of Charms and hae |
ce ſtill towards the Land's-end, the Amulets of Maen Magal and S |
« Glain-neider, which latter they call a Melprev” (or Milprev, i.e. -

a thouſand worms), and have a charm for the Snake to make it s |


<« center of her Spire.


« In moſt parts of Wales, and throughout all Scotland, and in
ce Cornwall, we find it a common opinion of the vulgar, that about
« Midſummer-Eve (though in the time they do not all agree) it
ce uſual for Snakes to meet in companies; and th Joining head;
<« together, and hiſſing, a kind of bubble is formed, which the rel}
by continual hiſſing, blow on till it paſſes quite through the body,
and then it immediately hardens, and reſembles a glaſs- ring, which
* whoever finds (as ſome old women and children are perſuaded)
<« ſhall proſper in all his undertakings. The Rings thus generated,
&« are called Gleineu Madroeth; in Engliſh, Snake-ftones*. They ar


Rings, but much thicker, of a green colour uſually, though ſome-
times blue, and waved with red and white.” Camden, p. 815.
The opinion of the Corniſh is ſomewhat differently given us by
Mr. Carew, „The Country people (in Cornwall) have a perſuaion,*
that the Snakes here breathing upon a hazel wand, produce a


E Lib, XXIX. cap. iii. muſt have been very rare), artificial Rings ofStor?,
b In his Letter, March 10, 1701, to Rowland, Glaſs, and ſometimes baked Clay, were fubſt-


tuted in its room, as of equal validity.


cc ſtone-


„
* Inſtead of the Natural one (which ſurely


CHARMS, AND INCANTATIONS. 143


« ſlone- ring of blue colour, in which there appcars the yellow figure
« of a Snake, and that beaſts bit and envenomed, being given ſome
« water to drink, wherein this ſtone has been infuſed, will perfectly
« recover of the poiſon i.

The Druids were alſo wont to conſecrate ſome particular rocks and By Fatal
tones, and then perſuade their Devotees, that great virtues were to N
be attributed to them. Of this kind was the Taal-ëtone, called fo,
as ſuppoſed to contain the fate of the Iriſh Royal Family. On this
the ſupreme Kings of Ireland uſed to be inaugurated on the hill of
Tarah; and the ancient Iriſh had a perſuaſion, that in what country
ſoever this Stone remained, there one of their blood was to reign $.


' |

The Rocking- ſtones, called in Cornwall, Logan-Stones, are alto By Logan 7

| . > . and other i 1

thought by ſome! to be engines of the ſame fraud, and the Druids c,\@crared 9
might probably have recourſe to them, and pretend that nothing, tones. 0


but the holy hands of a Druid, could move them, when they wanted
to confirm their authority, and judicial deciſions by any ſuch ſpecious
miracle.

Waſhing the Blue-Stones in order to precure a favourable
wind, applying it to the part affected to cure {titches and pains, and
ſwearing ſolemnly upon itm, as alſo the virtues of Molingus's
ſtone-globe n, ſeem remainders of theſe Druid ſuperſtitions.

Another Relick of ſuch Druid fancies and incantations, is doubt-
leſs the cuſtom of ſleeping on ſtones, on a particular night, in order
to be cured of lameneſs; drawing children through a round hole
made in flat rocks, to cure the Rickets, with ſome other obſolete
= uſages of the ſame ſtamp, which will occur in the explication of
particular monuments.

By the prohibitions of Councils®, we find the weſtern Heathens, And the
not only divined by Augury, but deſcended to ſtill more trifling, eee
and abſurd examinations PD. In ſhort, nothing is ſo groundleſs or
extravagant, but that ſuperſtition lays hold of it, and grafts it into
the body of its airy ſcience; as if what the ſupreme Power had
concealed induftriouſly from the ſubtil Spirit of Man, he had
wantonly diſperſed the criterions of, in the whole conduct of Birds,
in Stones and Gems, Lots and Waters, and in all the ſeveral
parts of the Victim, the Horſe, the Ox, and what not?


Carew, p. 22, who had one given him of this „ Weſtminſter. The Iriſh pretend to have


kind ; and the Giver avowed to have ſeen a part
of the Stick ſticking in it; but, penes Authorem
fit fides, ſays he.
£ EP This Stone was ſent into Scotland, whcre
a it continued as the Coronation Seat of the
5 Scotiſh Kings till, in the Year 1300, Edward
: the F rſt of England brought it from Scone,
© placing it under the Coronation Chair at


Memoirs concerning it for above 2000 Years.”
Tol. p. 103.

| Toland, ibid.

m Martin, p. 167.

" Thid. p. 225.

o Concil. Liptinenſ. &c.

Pp © Du fiente et Veternuement des chevaux,


“ ou des boeufs.“
CHAP,


144 OE THE RESEMBLANCE BETWIXT


CHAP XxX.


Of the great Reſemblance betwixt the Druid and Perſian Superſii;i,, | | [
and the Cauſe of it enquired into. 7


MONG all the Eaſtern Nations no ſuperſtition waz 0


extenſive, and famous, as that of the Perſians; and it is ye tl
well worth our notice, that there was a remarkable conformity RS /
betwixt them and the Druids, as to Temples, Prieſts, Worſhip, any *
Doctrines. W 7:
By all the Monuments which we have left of the Druids, we cannot :
find that they ever admitted of covered Temples for worſhiping their ET
Gods *; and we find that the ancient Perſians held the ſame opi- te
nion q, and performed all the offices of their Religion in the open n
air r; and Cicero tells us, that “ in the expedition of Xerxes int» i ®
« Greece, all the Grecian Temples were burnt at the inſtigation of {ME
e the Magi, becauſe the Grecians were ſo impious as to incloſe thoſe ER 8
“Gods within walls, who ought to have all things round them open, Ss”
and free, their Temple being the univerſal worlds.“ This was per- $f!
haps one and the principal reaſon of theſe Temples being demoliſh- 1
ed; but the Perſians had another objection to the Grecian Temple, 1 P
equally conformable to the Druid principles (viz. their containing (MM *
many ſtatues) which will be taken further notice of in the tuo 1
following pages. *
A great conformity there was betwixt the Druids and the Perſian : 4
Priefts, called the Magi, which is the reaſon that Pliny calls the i
Druids, the Magi of the Gauls and Britans. As the Druids wer: WA :
divided into three claſſes, viz. Druids, Bards, and Euvates, ſo were ü P
the Perſians into Prieſts, Preſuls, and Superintendants, that is, Arch- Ss
preſuls, or High Prieſts t. The Druids alſo had their Arch-druic, We .
or ſovereign of their Order, as the Perſians had their Archimagus. 25 0
The Druid Prieſt was cloathed in white, the holy veſture (called Þ
the Sagus) was white ; the bull for ſacrificing, white, their oracular p
horſes white; and the Perſians were altogether as fond of the whit: N 1
colour; the Perſian Magus was cloathed in white u; the horſes af
* The Temple in the [land of Sena, mentioned *© ſacred Fire from being extinguiſhed, and that 0
p. $7, may ſeem to be an exception to this gene- * the ſacred Offices might proceed with letz tl


ral rule; but was probably a ſlight and and ſmall
Covering only of a corner of the Temple, for an
Idol, for Fire, or the Prieſteſs to ſnelter herſelf in;
for this Covering was to be taken off annually,
and renewed the ſame day before Sun-ſet,

q Prideaux, Conn, part i. book i. Hyde de V.
R. P. chap. viii. 29. :

„ Zoroaltivs was the firſt who introduced
* into the Peritan Religion covered Temples, in
* the Time of Darius Hyttaſpis, Father of
„ Xerxes, in order the better to preſerve the


« Interruption from the Weather; but in thei
e covered Temples introduced by Zoroafires
they had no Deities or Images; and before hun
they had no covered Temples at all.“ dee Pu.
vol. i. p. 210.

+ Cic, de Leg. Lib. II. cap. ii.

t Sacerdotes, Præſules, Archipræſules. Hye,
chap. xxviii. and xxx. p. 380. 5

u « Veſte alba induti ſuper albis equis eq
« tantes,” Hyde, p. 253.


the


cc
cc


THE DRUIDS AND PERSIANS. 145


the Magi were white ; the King's robes, and his horſe-trappings [n Habit, j
of the lame colour. The Druids wore Sandals, the Perſians did the |
ame *. Zoroaſtres, chief Magus of the Perſians, lived and taught

in x Cave; in the ſame place did the Druids chule principally to ö
inttruct their Diſciples”. ö


— —


Both the Druids and Perſian Magi were of the nobleſt Order in In Dignity.
E the State, and the Kings were ranked both with the Druids and the
Magi: Divitiacus, a King of the Gauls, and alſo of part of Britain,
was of the Druid Order; and the Kings of Perſia were always
T ranked in the Sacerdotal Tribe“.

No Sacrifice of the Gauls or Britans was to be performed without
1 Druid a; and among the Perſians it was reckoned a high crime
to approach the Altar, or touch the Victim, before the Magus had
made the uſual prayers, and gone through the preparatory
atonements b. |
EF The Druids excluded from their Sacrifices (as one of the moſt
grievous puniſhments they could infli&t) all thoſe who were contu -
macious ; the Perſians had the ſame cuſtom, and excommunicated
the impenitent and abandoned in like manner e.

& Not leſs ſurprizing is the conformity betwixt the Druid and the In wortiip.
& Perſian Worſhip. Some think the Perſians worſhiped the Serpent;
this creature being the ſymbol of their God Mithras, or the Sun;
and we have as much reaſon to believe the ſame of the Druids ; for
it muſt be confeſſed, that the veneration which they had for the
Anguinum, or Snake-Egg ; the portrait of the two Serpents found
in the Baſs-relieve at the Temple of Montmorillon (not to inſiſt upon
the ſuppoſition, that ſome of their Temples are founded on a ſer-
| pentine plan), give us great reaſon to think, that the Druids paid a
veneration to the Serpent, very little ſhort of divine Worſhip.

The Perſians held that their chief God Mithras was born from a
Rock, that he was married to a Rock, and of that Rock begot a
Son, called Diorphus d; and the Druids imagined that ſome divine
intelligences dwelt in Rocks; hence their oracular, or ſpeaking-
Kocks; their Logan-Stones, their Rock-Idols, Baſons, and Rock-
84 Worſhip. |
| Whatever innovations the more modern Druids adopted from the
Greeks and Romans ; we muſt conclude, that the ancient ſyſtem of
this Order admitted of no Statue- Worſhip, it being one of the fun-


——— —— f 2


— —
2 |
— "3


- — —
—
— — —


*
—
— -


2
= —


Ds * Rex albis veſtibus indutus ſuper albo a Diod. Sic. v.—Czſar, Lib. VI.
ſtragulo ledebat.” Ibid. p. 254. b « Erat piaculum Aras adire, vel hoſtiam
* Hyde, p. 20, 356. © Pedibus gerunt San- „ contrectare, antequam Magus conceptis preca-


cc : . , : . . p . x -
dalos, nam nudis pedibus terram contingere © tionibus litamenta diffunderet pracurſoria.”


cc nefas.“ H de, ? 70.
' Car Lib. VI 37 Hyde, p. 356.


x | c Hyde, p. 406.
2 Prid. vol. i, p. 222. d See Montfauc, tom. 1. p. 368.
P p | damental


_ — — —
* wr —— = *
E K *


—


— —
3 % > <--#


_— —- %» 8 — — « -
— _ — — —— — ——-.r


146


OF THE RESEMBLANCE BETWIXT


damental principles of the Celtick Religion® (and all theſe Prin;
ples the Druids certainly held), that the Gods were not to be repre.
ſented by any human figure f; and we know, that though the fed
of the Sabians would have introduced Image-worſhip into Perſi:
yet, that the Magians (before, and after Zoroaſtres), never admitted
any Statues into their Temples (which was indeed the moſt ancicy
and juſtifiable principle), and the Grecian "Temples being ſo full o
Statues, was one reaſon, likely, that the Magi infiſted upon thei;
utter deſtruction, when they attended Xerxes in his weten
expedition.

The Druids worſhiped the whole expanſe of heaven, and there.
fore had open Temples, and turned round the body during the pe-
formance of their Religious Offices 8, and took the circle for one dt
the Enſigns of their Order®, as well as for the plan of their Ten.
ples i; and Dr. Hyde informs us, that the Perſians held, that tl:
whole circuit of Heaven was their Jupiter k.


It is plain from Chapter XVIII. that the Druids performed the


ſeveral acts of their Religion on the tops of hills; the Perſians all


In Ritual
Purifica-
tions.


In Sorcery.


did the ſame, worſhiping their God on the higheſt parts of mountain
according to the manner of the Ancients |.

The Perſians uſed Ritual Waſhings and Purifications m, and with
the pureſt water, being obliged to uſe all the Elements in thei
utmoſt purity n; they waſhed their heads and their body, and then
held themſelves pure, and fit to approach the Altar, and the ſacted
Fire in their Temples®; they had alſo a particular prayer in thei
Formulary to be ſaid in the morning, at the waſhing of their hands),
In like manner, the Druids had alſo their pure Holy-water, and, by
the multitude of Rock-baſons d, muſt have had many Rites o
Waſhings and Purifications.

The Perſians were remarkable for Magick and Witchcraft", and
the Britiſh Druids went ſuch lengths in that diabolical art (as ha
been already obſerved), that Pliny ſays, they ſeemed to him to hav


exceeded the very Perſians themſelves, and the latter to have bee
only ſcholars of the former.


e Lucan, Lib, III.— “ Simulachraque mœſta © more, Deum colebant.“ Hyde, p. 17.


« Deorum— Arte carent, cæſiſque extant im- m © Aqua munda vos lavate, et Deo grati
mania truncis.“ — <« agite.” Hyde, p. 236.
i See Chap. XVI. Lib. ii. n «© Elementa enim omnia tenentur ſerv
* Chap. XIX. book ii. pura.“ Ibid, 406.


Altar in Tiberius's time, at the end of this o Ibid. p. 357.


Book. P Ibid. p. 371. |
i See of the Circles, Lib. III. cap. vii. 1 See Chapter of the Rock-baſons, cap. .
k « Totum cæli gyrum, Jovem exiſtimantes.” Lib. III. | o_
Hyde, cap. vi. p. 137. Tov xuxMov wala Te egars r « Sine dubio illic orta (viz. Ars Magie


Ae x2orle;g, Herod. in Clio. ce jn Perſide a Zoroaftre, ut inter autores cone
In ſummis montium jugis, antiquifimo «© nit.” Plin. Lib. XXX, cap. i.


The


- *
% 28 be
. . 2 De : PR. 5 |
* k N ve s « a £5 * r * p 2 OY T5 7 .
e 3 . { 1 1 Is = ; „4 : 3 v
4 G w—_ 5 44 Wa bk. Pant -* Z p — *
rr M545 > I he 5 2
* r - * „ q L |


_ > Sl. -


THE DRUIDS AND PERSIANS.


147


Ihe Druids ſacrificed human Victims, and ſo did the Perſians“. In Holy
e Perſians had their Holy Fires, before which they always wor- Fires.


ſhiped 3 the Druids alſo had their Holy Firecs*, to which the people


ere obliged to come and carry off ſome portion {for which they


loubtleſs payed according to their abilities) to kindle the fire in their


buen houſes; and, at preſent, the Perſians have the ſame cuſtom, for


the day after their feaſt, which is kept on the 24th of April, they


f extinguiſh all their domeſtick fires, and, to rekindle them, go to the
prieſt's houſe, and there light a candle, paying the Prieſt his tee of


Colt Fray &


fix ſhillings and three pence, Engliſh money u.


The Perſians thought that this Holy Fire was the cauſe of domeſtic
plenty, and placed the ſick before it, thinking it of great and healing


virtue w; and the Druids had probably the ſame opinion of it, for
they uſed a Holy Fire, as an antidote againſt the Plague, or the


Murrain in Cattle X.
The Druids had their Feſtival Fires, of which we have inſtances


ſtill remaining in Cornwall; ſo had the Perſians at the Winter Sol-
ſtice v, and on the gth of March ?.


The ſcrupulous, awful regard which the Druids payed to a few lu venerat-
plants (as the Miſletoe, Samolus, and Selago) which they accounted > —
facred, and the extravagant opinion they had of their virtues, may


be reckoned among the greateſt abſurdities of their ſyſtem; yet in


this they have the Perſians to keep them in countenance, for the


| Perſians and Maſſagetes thought the Miſletoe ſomething Divine as


7 handle, was firſt carefully


well as the Druids.
The Druids thought it unlawful to cut the Miſletoe, with any


other than a golden hook; and the Perſians were altogether as ſuper-


ititious: they were to cut the ſacred twigs of Ghez or Haulm, called
Ber/am, with one peculiar ſort of knife only, which had an iron
to be waſhed, then blefled by a few


words muttered over it, in praiſe of God and Fireb. The Druids


thought their Miſletoe a general antidote againſt all poiſons what-


loever ; their Selago was preſerved as a charm againſt all misfortunes;
and the preſent Perſians on the 24th of December, or (according


to their more ancient way of reckoning) April, eat fleſh, boiled with


Garlick, and ſome other herbs, as a ſure preſervative againſt all the


ill influences of Demons; they have alſo a notion, that whoever on


this ſame day eats Annice, or (as ſome think it ſhould be read)
Apples, and ſmells to a Narciſſus- flower, ſhall for the whole enſuing
year be eaſy in his mind, and healthy as to his body. Another


* Alex. ab Al. vol. II. p. 7c.
See Chap. xx. p. 74. Fe
* Hyde, ibid. p. 351

* Hyde, p. 546.

* Martin of the Ifles, p. 113.


y See Chap. xx. p. 135.


2 Hyde, p. 255, 249.
Alex. ab Al. Vol. II. p. 744.


b Hyde, p. 345.


ſancy


_ 8 =
md —— — — —— — —


—


— — — — ́E——


—


” * it nas


— —
n * —
— ” Ww ⁰•ů[k 3 A — — — ——
— — * ES — 2 2 —


148 OF THE RESEMBLANCE BETWIXT


fancy the Perſians ſtill have of like kind, which is, that by ſokj,, JR **

R or burning the Iris or its root, they are to be preſerved from hung; 12

and poverty all the year after . | n
Tranſmi- In the xviith Chapter, Book II, the Druids are ſhewn to h!

f gration. | ae 4

, held the Trnſmigration of the Soul; and the Perſians held the fun-! ©

? doctrine, as the myſteries of Mithras ſufficiently intimate d. KM
Divination. The Druids were very much given to Divinatione, and no people i 8 |


more notoriouſly addicted that way than the Perſians f. The Druid
divined from incidents, perſonal diſappointments, and remarkay.
afflitions ; and the Perſians had the ſame way of Divining, for whe
Haman was diſappointed in his deſigns againſt Mordecai, and inftey
of hanging him on the gallows which he had prepared, was cg.
ſtrained, contrary to all expectation, to attend upon him in pro-
ceſſion, as an inferiour, after cloathing and crowning him as Rin-
of Perſia; his Magi preſently concluded that this extraordinar
| incident, ſo much the reverſe of Haman's ſcheme, portended no1:; 7
| than that Haman, inſtead of prevailing againſt Mordecai, was bf!
| haſtening on his own fall g. | 13
þ It is intimated, that the Druids had their white oracular hoſes, hy
obſerving the neighing of which, and ſome other circumſtance i
; their going, feeding,-and the like, they prognoſticated what was t
| 25 come. Cyrus, King of Perſia, had alſo his white and ſacred horſes);
and not long after him the neighing of horſes was pitched upon ſot
determining, who ſhould have the vacant imperial throne, and it v
accordingly given to Darius Hyſtaſpis, becauſe his horſe neighed
q firſt.
f One of the virtues of the fatal Stone was to diſtinguiſh the right
1 ful owner of the throne from an Uſurper; and the Perſians too had
3 their fatal Stone; the Artizoe with them was to point out the mol
deſerving candidate for the crown of Perſia k. |
Whence In theſe, as well as other particulars, common to theſe two nations
aggro with the other Gentiles (which I here induftriouſly omit), did tix
cceded, Druids reſemble the ancient Perſians ; but whence this.ſurprizing
conformity in Temples, Prieſts, Worſhip, Doctrines, and Divination,
betwixt two ſuch diſtant nations did proceed, it is very difficult to
ſay : there never appears to have been the leaſt migration, any acc:
dental or meditated intercourſe betwixt them, after the one people
was ſettled in Perſia, and the other in Gaul and Britain; and whe
ther the Celts (much leſs the Gauls and Britans) can ever be pro:


LES eo iS os. a Me —_ —_ gs, 6% — ws — —


—


© Hyde, ibid. p. 254. f Pliny, Lib. XXX. cap. i.
due Decretum enim apud primos habetur de s Eſther, vi. 13.
„ Animarum in diverſa corpora Tranſmigratione, hd Xenophon Cyropæd.
© id quod etiam in Mithræ myſteriis videtur i See Chap. v. book III.
„ ſignificari.“ Ibid, * I bid.


e dee foregoing Chapter of Divination,


Fw
t1 5
a p The”


THE DRUI DS AND PERSIANS. 149


to have been one and the ſame people with the Perſians, ſince the
general diſperſion (which is a time too early to produce ſuch a
minute conformity) 1s much to be queſtioned.

This ſtrict agreement betwixt the Perſians and the weſtern nations Celts and
of Europe was too obvious to eſcape the notice of the judicious and dg wry
learned Pellouticr in his hiſtory of the Celts ; therefore he takes it 3

. | iperhon.
for granted, that the Celts and Perſians were one and the ſame “
people, and ſcems to ground his opinion upon the little difference
there is betwixt the Language, Cuſtoms, and Religion of the two
nations m: but this Union, I am afraid, muſt have been ſo early
(for we have no tracks of it in hiſtory) that it can only account for
an agreement in the eſſentials of Religion, which in the firſt ages of
the world were few, {imple and unadorned, and ſpread into all parts,
and there continued in great meaſure the ſame as at firſt, Such
were the eſſentials of both the true and falſe Religion in the begin-
ning of the world after the Flood, and the principles of the true
Religion continued ſtill to be few, and always the fame ; but falſe
Religion grows, contracts a multiplicity of Doctrines, adopts new |
Deities and Rites, according as the invention of its own country, or
the contagious commerce which it carries on with foreign countries


prevails.


I am ſenſible that Dion. Halicarn. VII. 474. denies, that either 14olatry and


Superſtition,


the Egyptians, Africans, Celts, Indians, or indeed any other of the ite
Barbarians, in the courſe of fo many ages down to his time, ever de and ſpread-
ferted their country Rites of Worſhip, or changed any thing even ©
ſo much as in the ceremonies of their Religion, unleſs compelled
thereto by their Conquerours ; but, whoever conſiders the variable
tempers of mankind, their thirſt of novelty, tne luxuriancy of human
invention, and the infectious nature of Superſtition equally calculated
to proſelyte the Jew and Gentile, cannot but differ from this learned
Hiſtorian in this point: we may indeed allow, that the leſs intercourſe
theſe nations had with the other parts of the world, the more tena-
cious they were of their old ways of worthip ; the leſs learning and
commerce, the more ſimple their Rites, and more the ſame (as be-
fore) they continued ; but that ſuch large portions of mankind, who
had ſuch a multitude of Gods and ceremonies, could have them all
trom the very beginning of their nation, and retain them all without
adding to, or retrenching any thing from what they had at firſt, is
inconceivable, contrary to the temper of mankind, and repugnant to
the very nature and deſign of their Religion.
Idolatry and Gentiliſm offering us, every now and then, new Gods,

tempt us at the ſame time with. new cninaring Rites of worſhiping

A legard de Perſes, Je ne doute point du “ tumes ni leur Religion ne diferoient pas


66 N ; | : 8
tout qu ils ne fuſſent le meme peuple que les “ anciennement de celle des C-ltes,” Ib. p. 19.
Celtes. Ni la langue des Perſes, ni leurs cou- m Vol. I. p. 18.


Q q them,


— —
—
— — _


— g_ — 2 .
E., Sa Tar 2 — — —— —


— 2
—


— — — Abe —Bᷣ—


—


_ 5
, — —hAB — . noon x˖ —v—— — — — — —ͤ——: —Uä—äͤ— * *
- .


{hi


h


7 7


WWhence


the Princi-
ples, Doc-
trines, Rites,


OF THE RESEMBLANCE BETWIXT


them, and run us deeper ſtill into the abyſs of vice and errgy,
Whence had the Gentiles the Rite of Circumciſion, did they 10
borrow it from the true believers ? did not the Egyptians borrow thi,
Rite from the Jews", as the Jews contracted from their intercourſ.
with them a propenlity to make to themſelves a golden Calf? Can
it be denied, that Zoroaſtres copied a great deal from the Moſaic;
Inſtitutions? Dr. Prideaux, in his Connexion (part I. book IV.)
hath placed this beyond all doubt 9. Let theſe two inſtances (to
which many more ſpread through theſe papers might here be added)
ſuffice to ſhew, how bold, and untenable the aſſertion of Dion.
Halicarn. is, and that the Religion of the Heathens has always been
in a fluctuating condition, ſometimes loſing in one part, but gene.
rally increaſing, and altering in more b.

The great queſtion is, whether the Perſians and Celts could be
one nation, late enough in time to have had ſuch a variety of Cuſtoms,
Rites, and Doctrines of the fame caſt and turn among them, when
one People; ſo as that when they ſeparated and ſettled, ſome in
Perſia, and the others in Europe, they carried theſe Rites, Cuſtoms,
and Doctrines with them into their ſeveral departments, whence a
conſtant viſible conformity enſued, This is a difficulty not eaſily
ſolved. I ſhall therefore examine this matter a little more narroh,
and, by diſtinguiſhing between the ſeveral parts of Gentiliſm, endea-
vour to ſhew whence they did ſeverally proceed.

Some Principles and Rites they had in common with the true
believers, Principles which began with mankind, and ſtill continued
with them, though obſcured, and almoſt defaced by fable. Others
ſprung from the {ecds of the firſt Idolatry, and were the fame in all
the Gentile world; but a third fort of Religious Cuſtoms and Opi-
nions, were the peculiar growth of particular climates, inventions of
later ages, or the product of imitation. Their having open Temples,
for inſtance, worſhiping in high places, not worſhiping Statues, hold-
ing the immortality of the Soul, and the neceſſity of Sacrifices ;
theſe are what they may well be ſuppoſed to have had in common
with the reſt of mankind, when united in one nation, and as yet in-
corrupted ; other Rites and Superſtitions they had in common with
all other Heathens, derived from the fundamental errours of Idola-
try 1, which proceeding from one author, and one general deſign, was


» Herodotus thinks the Jews had this Rite from mations of Magianiſm, and ſet afide the Sabians;
the Egyptians ; but the Scripture Original of this and laſtly, Mahometaniſm joſtled them out both.


Kite will prevail with all impartial Readers, The Phenicians anciently worſhiped only the
© See Prid. Connex. p. 216, and 219, firſt Sun and Moon, under the Names of Baal, or
Edit, Belus, and Aſtarte, „ prorepente autem Ido-


?P The Perſian Religion was firſt Magian en- © lolatria Hercules Pheenix, aliique Deorum
tirely; then came in Sabianiſm with all the Addi- „ numerum auxerunt,” - Wiſe, Bodlei. Med.
tions of Image-worſhip, and at one time, had p. 218.
got a greater multitude of followers than the q See Lib. II, cap. i.

Magians ; then came Zoroaſtres, and his Refor-


originally


on
"®
v.73
8
£
x
.
1”
z
£ q
1
% $
».J
2 *
7 *
.
MC
=
4
*
#


THE DRUIDS AND PERSIANS. 151


originally tainted ſo ſtrongly, as to ſome particulars, that it never loft
the venom. Of this kind was Polytheiſm, human Sacrifices, Witch-
craft, Necromancy, Proſtitution, and Debauch after Sacrifice, theſe,
being corruptions at the fountain head, ſpread wherever the waters
flowed, and as they are common to all Idolaters, necd no migration,
nor union of nations, to account for their being alike in all countries.
Put the remaining part of this likenefs remains ſtill to be accounted]
for. The Tranſmigration of the Soul was a fancy added to the old
Doctrine of the immortality, of Eaſtern growth, where it ſtill conti-
nues, the Bannians and Chineſe making it at this time a fundamental
principle of their perſuaſion, received, as they ſay, from the ancient
Brachmans. Magick, with all its horrid erudition, aſtrology, com-
merce with Demons, examining the entrails of human victims, and
ſuch a multitude of ceremonies wherewith the Britans, to the
aſtoniſhment of all beholders, exerciſed the arts of Divination, could
never have exiſted early enough to have been uſed by the Celts and
Perſians, when one people; the ſame may be ſaid of worſhiping the
Serpent, and always before Fire, which were both borrowed by the
Perhans from the Jewiſh Hiſtory, after the migration of the Jews
from Egypt. The Druids were a Se& which had its riſe among the
Britans, after the Celts were broke into Germans, Gauls, and
Britans, &c. ſince which time it is impoſſible that the Perſians and
Celts ſhould have been one people without our knowing it; and the
great reſemblance betwixt the Druids and the Magi, as to their
eminent Power and Dignity in their own nations, their ſkill in
Magick, the colour of their habit, the ſame degrees in the Prieſt-
hood, their like ways of Divining ; all theſe, as much too modern
for the time when the two nations of Celts and Perſians were united
in one community, muſt be fetched from another chanel.

It has been hinted before, that the Druids were probably obliged Partly frons
to Pythagoras for the Doctrine of the Tranſmigration, and ſome other */ 29s:
particulars; and as that great Philoſopher had been a Diſciple, cither
of Zoroaſtres, or ſome of that Perſian's immediate ſucceſſors, there
can be no doubt but he was learned in all the Magian Religion, which
Zoroaſtres preſided over, regulated and eſtabliſſied in Perſia: it was with
this Magian Religion that the Druids maintained ſo great an uni-
formity; and as Pythagoras is juſtly thought to have converſed with
the Druids, after he had returned full fraught with, and eager to
impart. his oriental Learning, it is not improbable, but the Druids
might have drawn by his hands out of the Perſian fountains.

It may be obſerved in the next place, that the Phenicians were Partly from
very converſant with the Perſians for the ſake of the Eaſtern Trade, eee
of which Tyre and Sidon were the principal Marts for many years, Greeks.
and nothing is more likely than that the Phenicians, and after them


the


—_ —
=


— —
— r o
— _ —— ů— — ——
— -


Gone i a GO So aan


—


-


6 — — —— — oO, Lu _ — — —


152


OF- THE DRUIDS DECLENSION AND EXPIRATIOx.


the Grecks, finding the Druids devoted beyond all others to ſuperſti-
tion i, ſhould make their court to that powerful Order, by bring;,,.,
them continual notices of the oriental Superſtitions, in order to hg
mote and engroſs the lucrative trade, which they carried on in Britain
for ſo many ages. What makes this the more likely, is, the general
character of the Druids, who were glad to catch at every thing they
could lay hold of to enrich their ſuperſtition. It may not be amij;
here to obſerve, that the ſame chanel which imported the Perſian,


might alſo introduce ſome of the Jewiſh and Egyptian Rites ; the


Phenicians traded much with Egypt, and had Judea at their own
doors, and from the Phenicians the Druids might learn ſome ſew
Egyptian and Jewiſh Rites, and interweave them among their own;
this is much more probable, than that the Druids ſhould have had
their whole Religion from Egypt, as ſome think, or from the Jews,
as others with as little reaſon contend.


CH AP, XXIII.
The Declenſion and Expiration of Druidiſm.


Great deal may be ſaid in favour of the ſtrictneſs of the Druid

Diſcipline, and the extenſiveneſs of their learning; and the
veneration paid to their Morality and Juſtice in civil matters muſt be
acknowledged their due; but it muſt be ſurprizing to all the world,
that a ſyſtem of ſo much barbarity in the chief part of worſhip (I
mean their Sacrifices) ſuch fanciful Rites in ſome particulars, and ſuch
groundleſs ſpeculations relating to others, a ſe& which contributed
ſo little to the exigencies of the community, and yet appropriated to
its ſelf the moſt invidious ſuperiority over its fellow ſubjects, ſhould
maintain its elevation from the moſt remote antiquity down through
ſo many ages. The great reaſon was, the Judicial and abſolutely
deciſive power in all cauſes, civil, military, and religious, which they
had the artifice to procure for, and appropriate to their own Order:
this preſerved the Druids as long as the Gauls and Britans preſerved
their independency ; but as ſoon as theſe nations were forced to
ſtoop to foreign Maſters, and became no more than ſo many Provinces


of the Roman Empire, all the authority of the Druids was ſubject


to the controll of a higher juriſdiction, and the Romans were ſo far
from ſhewing them the reſpe& and veneration which they had held
among their own people for ſo many generations, that they utterly


Druidiſm in deteſted their moſt ſolemn Rites as ſhocking to human nature. This


Gaul con-


demned and


was the firſt blow to Druidiſm, and particular laws were ſoon after


prohibited made againſt their human Sacrifices. Auguſtus forbad the Roman
by the fir
Roman
Emperours, *


r « Natioeſt omnis Gallorum admodùm dedita Religionibus.“ Cæſ. Lib. VI. p. 16. ;
Citizens


| \


OF THE DRUIDS DECLENSION AND EXPIRATION.


citizens from praiſing any part of the Religion of the Druids 5;
but Tiberius Cefar carried this matter farther, and ſtrictly forbad
the celebration of the Druid Rites in the city of Rome, and the
adjoining Provinces, if he did not utterly aboliſh the whole Druid
Order in the Gaulith Nation, as Pliny ſcems to intimate“.

There was an Altar found in the Cathedral of Paris, in the year
1-11, which was dedicated to Jupiter, in the time of Tiberius, and
very probably on account of that Emperor's proceeding to aboliſh
Druidiſm. The Inſcription takes up one front of the Altar (A)
pl. VIII. p. 157. the other three fronts have ſtill remaining in them
plain ſigns of the Druids giving way to the imperial Edict. Whether
in that part of front the ſecond (B), which is defaced (for the two
armed youths (a, b,) here take up but half the baſs relief) there might
not have been ſome ſymbol of the Emperor's Proſcription (as a whip,
or laſh), is what cannat now be determined, but from the contents
of the other baſs relieves, is very likely. The figures are haſtening
forwards ; if they are Soldiers putting in execution Tiberius's law,
what the ſecond (b) holds in his hand may be a drawn ſword, a pike,
or /lagellum. In the third front (C) there are two perſons bearded
and old, and one in the middle not bearded. The right hand old
man (a) has the Virga divinatoria, perhaps, in his hand, the ſecond
and middle figure (b) ſeems to be young and beardleſs, perhaps ſhe is
a Druideſs, and the torch in her right hand, a ſymbol of their holy
fires. The third (c) 1s old, bearded, and in his right hand carries the
Magick circle (d) of which figure the Druids were extreamly fond:
they have all three in their left hand an octangular kind of plate u (e),
but by no means like the ſhields of the front before this, as Mr.


Martin thinks ; neither are theſe figures helmeted, but have looſe


caps, or turbants on their heads. By their tunick, cap, and circle,
take it for granted, that they are Druids ; what they carry in their
left hand therefore, cannnot be ſhields, the Druids being privileged
againſt carrying arms; beſides that the left hand ſeems not to be on
the inſide as in carrying ſhields it ought always to be; theſe things
3 are not born as arms of defence, but may rather be ſome
muſical inſtrument of the Bards, or perhaps ſome tablet on which they
were uſed to caſt their Sortes, or lots of Divination: the figures are
all upon the march, and ſeem to repreſent the Exit of the Druid
Rites, Holy Fires, and Magical Incantations. The fourth front
of this Altar (D) as Martin juſtly obſerves (p. 64.) ſhews us the
departing Druids, and, I doubt not, had different Symbols to expreſs
the other Druid Superſtitions; but this front of the ſtone is un-
happily defaced, and one head only has the appearance of a Diadem.


$ Suetonius in Claudio. |
5 980 Tiberii Cæſaris principatus ſuſtulit Druidas calling them Hexagonal, See the Icon.
__ corum. viz, Gallorum. Lib. XXX. cap. i, w Rel. de Gaul. vol. II. p. 60.


Rr Montfaucon


v Montfaucon, tom. II. p. 423. is miſtaken in


15


3
J


——— AA tt <A


— —


—— > — —


— — ů - a


— —


—
—


—


—


— u —x —


— eEz._—=
—ͤ—ũ—— ͥ — c 8 —


—


14


Druidiſm in
Britain

yields to
Chriſtianity


OF THE DRUIDS DECLENSION AND EXPIRATIOy,


Montfaucon* thinks, © that theſe Baſs-relieves do repreſent the
« conſecration of this Altar, that it is hard to gueſs for what reaſgn
cc the Circle is here inſerted ; but concludes, that it muſt have bon
< its ſhare in the ceremony of this Proceſſion. In what ceremg,
then more likely, than in one relating to the Gauliſh Superſtition 3
Notwithſtanding what Tiberius did, it was thought neceſlary to
proceed againſt the Druids with more ſeverity in the reign of Claygiy,
Ceſar, and therefore Suetonius attributes the honour of ſuppreſſy
the Gauliſh Druids to Claudius, and his zeal againft them is ,
parent enough from his putting to death a Roman of the Equeſtiim
Order, for carrying the Anguinum (that Druid charm) in his boſom:
But notwithſtanding theſe imperial Edicts it is not to be imagine
that the whole Druid Order and Diſcipline in Gaul immediately and
abſolutely ceaſed; their cruel Sacrifices of human Victims wer
doubtleſs exprefily forbidden, as well as the more fraudulent part
of their Magick and Incantations, under the moſt ſevere penalties;
however, it is by no means to be queſtioned, but that they retained
and publickly exerciſed, their other more innocent Rites of worſhip;
nay, in private, it is very much to be ſuſpected, that they continued
alſo their ancient bloody cuſtoms® even till Chriſtianity itſelf ap-
peared, and corrected the heart, their hands only having been
reſtrained by the laws of the Empire. And yet indeed, after
Chriſtianity (which is moſt to be wondered at), their fondneſ
for human Victims continued, though perhaps in few places; for
Procopius, who lived about the middle of the ſixth century, fays},
Francos etfi Chriſtum jam colerent, humanis tamen ad ſuum evun
e Hoſtiis uſos.” Some other of their Rites ſeem alſo to have reached
down far below the date of their converſion to Chriſtianity.

Though Druidiſm in Gaul was ſtrictly prohibited as early as Tibe-
rius and Claudius; yet in Britain it was practiſed a long while after
with impunity, and all its moſt dreadful Rites, ſo religiouſly, and
with that diligence, pomp, and exactneſs perſiſted in, as made Pliny
ſay, that the Britans out did the very Perſians.

The Druids continued authorized in Britain, as Arch-biſhop
Uſher®, and Leland think, with all their Rites in as full force, as the
Roman powers here would permit, till the reign of King Lucius
(A. D. 177.) when Chriſtianity being embraced by the King® and
Princes of the Iſland, Biſhops were ordained, and ſupported by the
Civil Power, in preaching to, and converting the people. This chang?


* Tom. II. p. 423. | b Lib. II. de Bello Gothico. Lipfii not. in
y « Druidarum Religionem apud Gallos diræ Tac. de M. G. cap. ix.

cc immanitatis & tantum civibus ſub Auguſto in- c Prim. pages 57, 58, 59.

t terdictam penitus abolevit, viz. Claudius,” d De Scr. Brit. p. 4.

Sucton. in Claud. chap. xxv. e See of Lucius, in the Catalogue of the
See Chapter xxi. p. 142. Kings of Britain, at the end of this work.


= Gronovius in Tac. Ann. Var. p. 592.


took


oF - op. pup fy ©. pw A BB» ty © fa -


og — — — — wy ©, aA£”ty, os


— —


9 . — e . ry Yo e onS


—


ls.


9 7 9 mv


—


or TEE DRUIDS DECLENSION AND EXPIRATION.


took away from the Druids the eſtabliſhment, and countenance of the
Civil Government ; but notwithſtanding this (as Superſtition takes
deep root, and in more places than can preſently be attended, admi-
niſtered unto, and effectually cured by the moſt diligent Paſtors) it
doubtleſs required time to introduce a thorough change in the people:
however, from the time of the Goſpel's taking place, Druidiſm cer-
tainly began to dwindle, as having loſt that Power which was the
principal ſupport of their whole ſyſtem! ; Druidiſm continued in
Mona, till Crathlintus, King of Scotland 8, expelled the Druids, and


ſettled a Biſhop there®.


1335


But the laſt place we read of them in the Britiſh dominions, is Ire- In Ian!


land, where they continued in full poſſeſſion of all their ancient power
till the year 432 after Chriſt, when St. Patrick undertook the con-
verſion of that Iſland. The Druids, or Iriſh Magi, are ſaid to have
forctold the coming of St. Patrick, and that it was to happen in the
year abovementioned ; they are alſo ſaid to have diſputed with him in
preſence of Leogarius, King of Ireland, this ſame year*; and from
the great progreſs which St. Patrick and his Diſciples made in con-
verting the Druids, and the people of that Iſland to Chriſtianity, he
has ever ſince been accounted the Apoſtle and Tutelary Saint of the
iriſh Nation k. After the Druids were entirely aboliſhed, and no Prieſt
of that Order ſuffered to officiate, many of the Druid ſuperſtitious
Cuſtoms, of the leſs enormous kind, remained, and may be manifeſtly
traced, even to this day, in Ireland, in the Scotiſh 1iles, and in Cornwall.


exiſted till
the yearg 32.


A Prieſthood of ſuch antiquity and eminence, could not but leave Some Re-


many Monuments behind them.


Druids muſt have had in all their places of worſhip, Idols, 'Vemples,


mains ſtill to
l 4 . RAGE be traced
As Prieſts, dedicated to the ſacred offices of their Religion, the of the Mo-
numents
they left be.


Groves, Altars, Lavacra (or holy Baths): as Men they muſt have bind them.


had houſes, and doubtleſs, habitations of the better ſort; as they were
abſolute Judges in every caſe of importance, they had their Forums,
or appropriated courts of judicature; as the firſt claſs of the Nobility,
they were certainly buried (eſpecially the chief Flamens) with ſome
diſtinction, and conſequently muſt have had ſepulchres, the mot re-
markable which the times they lived in afforded : now, as all theſe
things were intended for the uſe of poſterity, as well as of the age
that erected them, it is no wonder that many of them ſhould ſurvive
the fate of their Superſtition, But as the country became more cul-


It is recorded of Elvanus, immediate Succeſ- which I cannot but add, that Ceſar calls the Iſle


ſor to Theanus (the firſt Arch- biſhop of London, of Man, Mona, and ſays it was in the Middle of
2ppointed by King Lucius), that he converted the Sea, betwixt Britain and Ireland. The Britiſh
many Druics to the Chriſtian Faith, Uſher, Prim. Hiſtorians, however, endeavour to appropriate
p. 67. this Name to the Iſle of Angleſea.
4 Ibid. i « Apud Probum, & Jocelinum,” c. Iii.
5 This Mona was at that Time under the Uſher, ibid. p. 852. Ind, Chron, ibid. p. 430.
Opinion of the King of Scotland, and therefore, * Flaherty and Matt. Kennedy, p. 19 Row-
25 Uſher obſerves (ibid. ut ſupra), more likely to land, p. 197. ;


*


be the Ille of Man, than that of Angleſea: to tivated
3


156


Grores.


Caves.


Gorſedaus.


Stonc-heaps


Sepulchres.


OF THE DRUIDS DECLENSION AND EXPIRATION


tivated, people and trade increaſed, towns built, and cities, Churche,
monaſteries, and palaces erected, many of theſe ancient m ument,
were, doubtleſs, applied to the uſes of building, for which reifon vc
few or none of them are to be found near great cities and towns
However, in more retired ſituations, particularly on rocky hills, and
mountains of difficult acceſs, as well as on deſert plains, there ae
ſome of every ſort abovementioned, ſtill remaining.

Of their Groves it cannot be expected that many ſhould remain
tillage and cultivation having made more than bare amends for their
ſhade and beauty; but Tradition unqueſtionably aſſures us, that there
were formerly many woods and groves,” where now there is not a tree
to be ſeen; and though we find the Druid monuments at this ting
naked and uncovered, yet there is great reaſon to believe, that anc.
ently they all ſtood under their proper coverture of ſacred trees,

Their Caves were all as rude as nature formed them, or ſo lite
altered from nature, that nothing of art might appear, the Druid;
imagining (as it appears from moſt of their monuments) that it wa
beneath the antiquity of their Order, as well as the majeſty of the
Gods, to make uſe of the modern delicacies of art, or carving. Their
Houſes alfo (or at leaſt thoſe what Tradition call ſo) many of which
are {till to be ſeen in the Scotch Iſles (called Zig be- nan-Druidb
have little art, being capable only of holding one perſon (as fitter for
contemplation), without lime or mortar, and of as few and un-
wrought Stones as poſſible. But it muſt be obſerved, that theſe little
houſes were their Sacella (ſacred Cells), to which the people were to
have recourſe for Divining, or deciding controverſies, or for prayers;


but not their family- ſeats, or uſual habitations, which were neceſſi-


rily to be of a different ſize and ſhape, and were ſurely as con-
venient and noble as were cuſtomary in that age.

There is no room to doubt, but as judicial Arbitrators of all di-
putes, Civil and Religious, the Druids had their Forums, or proper
places allotted them, ſuch as might beſt anſwer the exigencies of
their function, and of theſe ſome muſt remain. .


Gorſedaus, we have many in Cornwall; whether they were ſome


conſecrated Rocks, elevated above the the reſt, or whether they were
ſtone- heaps, ſerving to pronounce their judicial decrees from, as being
the encloſures of their anceſtors aſhes, which they would not by any
means violate by unjuſt deciſions. Of which ſoever kind the Gorſedaus
were, there are a great number in the weſtern parts of Cornwall.
Stone-heaps,with a rough Pillar erected in the middle of them, ate,
doubtleſs, Druid monuments, traces of ſuch being found in the hiſtory
of the moſt ancient Eaftern nations, applied to like Superſtition.
What kind of Sepulchres the Druids made uſe of may be perhaps


diſputed, but as they unqueſtionably burnt their dead, it 1s * el
| Onable


PE


*
>
*
—
*
4 *
N
Ne I
ie oÞ
po
Fes =
*# \:
*
8
4
*%
* a
NE
*
0
"yy
.
i
*
PF
#, +
*
©
»&
TX
#
8
N
#4
4 *
Wy
E
5
5
*
9;
CY
*
5
1 * *
5
1
©
.
"LY
*


* -


48
*
II.


OF THE DRUIDS DECLENSION AND EXPIRATION.


ſonable to ſuppoſe, that their principal Prieſts, and great Men, had
their aſhes collected into an Urn, and ſometimes had the Urn placed
in a grave, ſtone-vault (or &z//-vaen'), near ſome place of worſhip,
where they officiated; or near their dwelling; without any other
note, or mark of dignity, inſcriptions being a tranſgreſſion againſt
the general prohibition of committing any thing to writing. At other
times, when leiſure permitted, and the defires or dignity of the de-
parted Druid were properly conſidered; they erected Barrows over
the Urn, there being no country of any c{pecial note in hiſtory, in
which this general kind of Sepulchre (I mean the Barrow) is not to
be found; and there is the more reaſon to think the Barrow-burial
uſed by the Druids, becauſe ſometimes, upon theſe Barrows, and
ſometimes at the bottom, and near them, the Druids burnt ſome of
their holy and feſtival Fires m; all nations paying great honours to
the tombs of their anceſtors, and annually ſacrificing, feaſting, and
appointing games at thoſe very places, as doing honour to the dead,
and giving pleaſure, and entertainment at the ſame time to the living.

We have great plenty of theſe Barrows every where; and indeed, by
their plain and ſimple figure, they are to laſt as long as they continue
free from the hands of violence.

All the remains of the Druids, beſides what has been hinted at
above, are few and inconſiderable. In ſome places they left their
names to towns and houſes, hills and brooks, which {till continue ;
and all names that have Drudau, Dru, Druwydd, Drudion, Derwyd-
don, Derw, and Dar, may be reckoned of Druid original".

i. e. Stone Cheſt. rivation. Boddrugy in Philak. — Rhied-Druith
„ Chap. xx. (vulg. Red-Druth), i. e. Nobilium Druidarum
" Bod-Drudau, viz. Druids Houſe in Angle- vadum. vel Statio. Goon-Derw (vulg. Conde-
ſea, Rowland, p. 245. — Boddryddau in Diſert row) the Druids Downs. Tin-Derw (vulg.


Pariſh, Flintſhire, Druids Houſe. — Bod-druden Tinderow), in St. Anthony Meneague, Druids
(vulgo Bod-drugan in Cornwall) of the ſame De- Hill.


END oF THE SECOND Book.


A / —ͤ .„—„— — p.
® MBCAESARE 1}


\


AVGLOVIOPTV wh

MAXSVMO "Mp
. NAVTAEPARISIACI | |
BLICEPOSIERVS:


/
112


” 55 J 55
A C , > e 0
— tre — :
2 — — 1 5
.. IAU - 2 x þ


S 1 RUDE


D. 157.


"IF


Hoe 434.153.


PL IX.


5 — 4
ae ee 116 8
WI ati ach ! F


0 Ted face
Q ;


| i
"NN
0 yy b
', ORC
ö 1 3
ig \ e
N *
KW
WHIT
\ 1.
* ! N
|
[ 1 y \


RUDE STONE-MONUMENTS,


BOO K III.


CH AP. I.
Of Rude Stone- Monuments in general.


OME things are remarkable and curious for their elegance,
richneſs, ſhape, and magnificence, and ſome others for their
ſimplicity, and remote Antiquity. If the Reader is of that

turn, as to be delighted only with the former kind of Monument;
can promiſe him but little pleaſure in the enſuing Treatiſe; butit
he has a juſt regard for the firſt ages and cuſtoms of mankind, andis
willing to enquire into the original of thoſe Monuments, which are
diſperſed, not only in thoſe Iſlands of Britain, but in moſt other m-
tions, and certainly preceded all the improvements of art, imagery,
and fancy, he may not loſe his labour wholly, nor miſs of entertain-
ment. He may here ſee the ſame Monuments in Aſia, and at home
at his own doors; the ſame in Egypt, and the Weſternmoſt parts
of Britain; and may perhaps diſcover the intent and deſign of
them, ſet forth in other hiſtories, better than we can expect from
the hiſtory of our own country.

The precariouſneſs of human life, and the uncertainty of world
affairs, taught people very ſoon after the Creation to endeavour by
ſome memorials to perpetuate the remembrance of thoſe perſons and
events, which had been of importance in their time.


Religion


BA www PaqQDp


wy


OF RUDE STONE MONUMENTS.


Religion did alſo prompt them very early to mark out particular
places for worſhip; aad there 1s no room to doubt, but that theſe
Monuments were at firſt of the moſt ſimple kind, rude, without Art,
or Inſcription, the Authors. of them regarding more the thing to be
remembered, than the materials or faſhion of the Memorial, and con-
ſulting their preſent exigencies, without any view of apr ner the
curioſity of after- ages, by affixing dates and names upon their w Ks:
they therefore choſe ſuch kind of Monuments as offered molt readily,
and required only the good- will, labour, and aſliſtance of that multi-
tude, from whom they could expect no elegance, invention, or
beauty: of this moſt ancient ſort of Monuments muſt thoſe be
reckoned, which conſiſt of rude unhewn Stones, as offering themſelves
in moſt, or all countries, on the higheſt hills (ſuch as the Ancients
generally choſe, for their eminency, to erect their memorials upon),
and promiſing a longer duration, than Monuments of a more com-

ounded nature.


Theſe ſtones were erected in different number, and figure, and


upon different occaſions.

In Cornwall, they are ſometimes found ſingle, as Obeliſks, ſome-
times two, three, or more, compoſing one Monument, ſometimes
diſpoſed in a lineal, ſtraight direction, jiometimes in a circle; often
in heaps, or Barrows, and now and then, three or four large flags,
or thin ſtones, capped with a much larger one, which go by the
Britiſh name of Cromléhs. |

It appears from hiſtory, that ſome of theſe Monuments were of a
truly Religious Inſtitution, erected by particular perſons, either as
Monuments of their gratitude for ſome extraordinary bleſſing, or to
be a ſymbol to poſterity of a Religious Covenant, either with God,
or with one another: others were ſepulchral, and both theſe forts of
Monuments became afterwards, with the true believers, places of
publick national Worſhip; but with the Heathens they became Idols,
Altars, or Temples, ſublervient to the purpoſes of Idolatry ; and with
both true Believers and Gentiles, the places where theſe Rude Stones
were erected, became the ſeats of Judicature, of Inauguration, and
national Councils. Some of theſe Rude Stones were memorials of
civil contracts, or military exploits. Others were boundaries of
lands and countries, and ſometimes goals of fadia, the termination
of courſes; others, according to the voice of Superſtition, were of
miraculous, healing, and ſacred virtue. Let us paſs on to treat of
each fort particularly, following the Order in which they may be
ſuppoſed to have had their beginning ; and from theſe Monuments


lee what lights we can ſtrike out in ancient hiſtory; for as the


Author of the Religion of the ancicat Gauls ſays, „Monuments
are


139


160


SECT. I.


Single
Stones Reli-
ligious.


OF SINGLE SONES-ERECT OR RUDE PILLAks.


« are oftentimes more ſure guides to truth,


than Hiftor:
themſelves o. "I


S HR .
Of fingle Stones-Eref, or rude Pillars,


TI moſt ancient Monument of this kind, which hiſtory af.
fords us (if Joſephus is to be credited), is that which Seth
erected: this Patriarch, fearing (as the Jewiſh Hiſtorian ſays) the
deſtruction of mankind, becauſe of their abominable wickedneſs, but
not foreſeeing whether this deſolation was to be executed by Fire o
Water, ſet up two Pillars, the one of Stone, the other of Brick; that
by their different conſtructions, one of them might be proof again}
that Element (which ſoever it was) which ſhould accompliſh the
divine judgement P. There is alſo a Stone mentioned (1 Sam. vi. 18,
which bore the name of Abel, but whether a ſepulchral Monument
or any memorial of Seth's elder brother, hiſtory is filent 4, But Jt
us paſs on to what is more authentick,

Jacob erected ſeveral of theſe Monuments, and upon different oc-
caſions: the firſt we read of, is that which he erected at Luz, after
wards by him named Bethel. It was a Religious Monument which
Jacob (at once full of holy dread, at the viſion of God and his An-
gels, and inſpired with the moſt grateful ſenſe of the Divine Goodnek,
ſo plainly declared to him in this gracious Viſion) thought he could
not do leſs than mark the place withall, where he had been ſo favoured
by Heaven. And Jacob roſe up early in the morning, and took
the Stone which he had put for his pillow, and ſet it up for :
« Pillar (Matzebah) and poured oil upon the top of its, and called
te the name of that place Beth-el,” vowed to worſhip the true God


only, and that the place where he had ſet up this Stone ſhould be the


? « Les Monuments ſont ſouvent des guides
ce plus ſiirs que les Hiſtoriens. De quelque ex-
c actitude qu'ils ſe ſoient piquez, non ſeulement
„il leur a echappè une infinite des choſes impor-
tc tantes, mais meme ils ſont tombez dans erreurs
<« groſſiers, qui paſleroient pour des veritez con-
ce ſtantes ſans le ſecours de Monuments.” Monſ.
Martin, Rel. de Gaules, vol. ii. p. 332.

? Joſephus (Jewiſh Antiq.) ſays, that one, or
both of theſe Pillars, were to be ſeen in his time.
viz. in the Reign of Veſpaſian ; but it is indeed
very unlikely, that any ſuch Pillars ſhould have
been erected. See Stillingfl. Orig. Sacr, Lib. I.
Cap. ii.

q It is very likely, that what is in our Hebrew
Text here, Abel, is a falſe Reading, and ought
to be Aben, a Stone, as it is in our marginal
Reference in the Engliſh Bible,

r Gen, xxviii. 18.


From this ancient Rite of pouring Oil en
Stones (not begun by Jacob, but received from
his Predeceſſors) came among the Heathens the
Cuſtoms, of conſecrating Stones into Idols in this
ſame Manner, and making frequent Libations of
Oil upon the top of them; which Stones when-
ever they ſaw marked with theſe Inſtances of De-
votion, they worſhiped as the Caſe, and Shrine:
ſome Divinity: Clem. Alex. Strom. vii. I. Apa
leius — Arnob. Lib. I. “ Si quando conſpexerin
© lubricatum lapidem, et ex Olivi unguine orc!-
e natum, tanquam ineſſet Vis præſens, adulaba:.
At Delphi there was a Stone on which they da,
poured a certain Quantity of Oil. Pauſan. Phoc'.
de Delphis. Many have a cavity on the top ©
pable of a Pint, with a Groove, about an inch
deep reaching to the Ground. Camd.— Le-
land, p. 101. |


houte


Or SINGLE STONES-ERECT, OR RUDE PILLARS.


bouſe of God. As Jacob was at this time young in years, and had
euer vet lived from his parents, it may be reaſonably inferred, that
I this ceremony of marking out, confecrating, and new-naning
chis place, he inſtituted nothing new (as being alone, and intent
ubon other things, Viz. the length, danger, and iſſue of his journey)
nit followed the cuſtoms of his Ancettors, ſo that Antiquities of the
ind we are now diſcourſing, may be juſtly concluded older than
the times of this Patriarch. |

As Jacob creed this Religious Memorial at Beth-el, Joſhua ſet
up another of the ſame kind, and upon a Religious occation. He
had called all the tribes to Shechem, and after reciting the meſſage
to them, which he had in charge from Cod, he exhorted them to
ſerve God only, and they covenanted ſo to do. © And Joſhua took
« a great Stone, and ſet it up there under an Oak, that was by the
« ſanctuary of the Lord; and Joſhua ſaid unto all the people,
« Bchold this Stone ſhall be a witneſs unto us, for it hath heard all
« the words of the Lord which he ſpake unto us, it ſhall be there-
fore a witneſs unto you left ye deny your God d.“


Theſe are the firſt ſimple Memorials erected by true Believers, on SECT. 11.


161


a Religious Account. As for the Gentiles, they tet up Pillars of the Single


fame kind in every country, but with very different ends from thoſe
of Jacob and Joſhua ; for, as, afterwards, when Arts were invented,
and became applied to the purpoſes of Superſtition, in making
images, adorning Altars, and conſtructing Temples, they worſhiped
Statues, and Images; ſo before Arts they worſhiped thoſe Rude
Stones w. Some think that God's appearing in a pillar of fire by
night, and of a cloud by day, ſuggeſted to the Gentiles the contri-
vance of ſetting up Stone Pillars, and worſhiping them, as the re-
ſemblance of that form in which the Deity had choſen to appear x.
But it is evident, that the Heathens had this cuſtom of worſhiping
Stone Pillars, before the migration of Iſrael out of Egypt; for the
children of Iſrael, before they came into Canaan, are expreſsly pro-
hibited from worſhiping theſe Idols, common at that time in Canaan,
and therefore not borrowed from any appearances in the Peregri-
nation. That the Canaanites worſhiped them as Gods, we learn
from the expreſs prohibitions given to the Ifraclites. “ Ye ſhall
* make you no Idols, nor graven Image, neither rear you up a
* ſtanding Image (7230 a Pillar), neither ſhall ye ſet up any Image


t It is ſuppoſed by ſome, that from this impor- „ habitus, Veteres, columnas, erigentes, eas cole-
tant Incident in the Hiſtory of Jacob, communi- „ bant tanquam Statuas.” Clem. Alex. Strom.
cated by Tradition to the Gentile World, the Lib. I. Rowland, p.224. Nec pietas ulla eſt, ve-
Gentiles called their Stone-Deities Badona., Seld. „ latum ſæpe videri— Vertier ad Lapidem.” —


ce Diis Syris. Phil. Bybli. Lucret. Lib. V.
* Joſhua xxiv. 14, 26, 27. * Rowland, p. 229.
Antequam accurate tenerentur Imaginum Y Gen, xxviii. 18.


'F:£ | « of


Stones
ldolatrous,


— —ͤ—ũ—— ͥ ł ̃t-ᷣ— — — —— —


2 *
— — — ——ñ———— 2 * —
-


162


OF SINGLE STONE S-ERECT, OR RUDE PILLAgSZ.
« of Stone in your land to bow down unto it?.“ And what y
read in ſacred Writ we find confirmed alſo by other hiſtories, :

Semiramis is ſaid to have erected an Obeliſk 125 feet high, and
five foot wide a. All the world knows, and ſtill admires, the work.
manſhip of the Egyptian Obeliſks; they were generally dedicated ty
the Sun, and worſhiped d. The Paphians worſhiped their Venus
under the form, nearly, of a white Pyramide; and the Brachman,
worſhiped the great God, under the figure of a little column of
Stone d. The Symbol of Jupiter Ammon, was a conick Stonee ;
his Egyptian Temple; and in Africa Apollo's Image was a kind of
Erect- ſtone, like a Pyramid f. A ſquare Stone was the Image
Mercury, as a pillar was that of Bacchus g. The Jews alſo wen
carried away by this ſtrong current of Idolatry, and they {: u
pillars in every high hill, and under every green tree® ; ſo that thi;
Idolatry of worſhiping Rude Stones-Erect may be reckoned to hays
infected much the greateſt part of the world, eſpecially thoſe Part
which had any communication with Syria, Egypt, or Greece, and
may with equal reaſon be ſuppoſed to have occaſioned the erecting
many of thoſe large Stones which are to be found in Britain, when
the ancient Phenicians and Grecians had frequent reſorts.

In Cornwall there is a great number of high Stones (probably ſome
of the ancient Idols) ſtill ſtanding i in many places. Many have been
carried off for building, as has been mentioned in the deſcription of
Karn-bre, and many ſtill remain where they fell from their ered

ſition. In a village called Men-Perhen in Conſtantine Parih,
there ſtood about five years fince a large Pyramidal Stone, twenty
foot above the ground, and four foot in the ground; it made abo
twenty Stone Poſts for gates, when it was clove up by the Farmer,
who gave me this account. In the ſides of Sharpy-tor (mentionel
chap. xx. Lib. II.) and Wringcheeſe in the pariſh of St. Cleer,!
obſerved many .large Stones of a rude Columnar ſhape, now lying


proſtrate; but formerly, without doubt, Erect, conſecrated to Super-


ſtition, and by their tallneſs ſerving, to make theſe Craggs (fo rough
by nature) ſtill more forked and briſtly.


After Chriſtianity took place, many continued to worſhip theſe
Stones, to pay their vows, and devote their offerings, at the place:
where theſe Stones were erected, coming thither with lighted torches
and praying for ſafety and ſucceſs; and this cuſtom we can trace


2a Lev. xxvi. 1. | © Max, Tyr. Serm. 38.


a Diod. Sic. Lib. II. cap. i. 4 Plott's Oxford (from De la Valle) p. 352.
b Onthe Pedeſtal of the famous Obeliſk, erected © Qu. Curtius Var. p. 185.


by Theodoſius the Emperor, in the Hippodrome f Pauſan. Lib. I.
at Conſtantinople, the People are juſtly repre- s Toland 101.
ſented in Baſs-relieve proſtrate, and adoring theſe * 2 Kings xvii. 10.


Obeliſks, Spon. vol. i. p. 139. i See Plate X. Figures I. II. |
through


OF SINGLE STONES-ERECT, OR RUDE PILLARS. 163


through the fifth and ſixth centuries, even into the ſeventh, as will
appear from the prohibitions of ſeveral Councils,

In Ireland ſome of thele Stones-ere&t have croſſes cut on them,
which are ſuppoſed to have been done by Chriſtians, out of compli-
ance with the Druid prejudices; that when Druidiſm fell before the \
Goſpel, the common people, who were not cafily to be got off from
their ſuperſtitious Reverence for theſe Stones, might pay a kind of |
juſtiſiable adoration to them when thus appropriated to the uſes of |
Chriſtian Memorials, by the ſign of the Croſs. There are {till ſome
remains of Adoration paid to ſuch Stones in the Scottith Weſtern Iles
even by the Chriſtians. They call them Bowing-ſtones from the
reverence ſhewn them, as it ſeems to me; for the Even Maſchith,
which the Jews were forbad to worſhip k, ſigniſies really a Bowing-
ſtonel, and was doubtleſs ſo called, becauſe worſhiped by the |
Canaanitesm. In the Iſle of Barray there is one Stone, about ſeven "i
foot high, and when the inhabitants come near it, they take a reli- i

tous turn round, according to the ancient Druid cuſtom ®. ji

The abovementioned Patriarch, Jacob,ſfeems to have been deſirous SECT. 117,
above any of his Anceſtors, of leaving ſome traces of his adventures 7 on |
to poſterity, by ſomething more than bare 'Tradition ; accordingly, Contracts. 6
when Laban had overtaken him in his return to his native country,
and deſired to enter into a ſolemn contract of amity with him, Jacob
took a Stone, and ſet it up for a Pillar o; and his kinſmen who at-
tended upon Laban took Stones, and made an heap, to intimate, that
they did thereby become parties in, or guardians of the treaty, as well ö
as witneſſes to the execution of it by the principal perſons concerned,
Laban, and Jacob. There is one other circumſtance here obſervable,
which is, that when any thing, or place, was by conſent appropriated
to a particular uſe, it was the cuſtom to give it a new, and expreſſive
name; thus Luz was called Beth-el, or the houſe of God, and this
ſecond monument was called Galeed, or heap of witneſs. It was alſo
called Mizpah, or Mitzpah, i. e. a high place of Obſervation. Where,
therefore, we find a ſmall heap of Stones, and a Pillar ereted among
them, there are ſome grounds to think, that it is a monument of the
lame deſign as that of Jacob at Galeed, for as much as it is of the
ſame ſtructure, The Stone (Plate X. fig. III.) and little Barrow
at the bottom was either a Monument of ſuch a civil contract as


Galeed, or a Sepulchre; for that the Ancients buried thus we ſhall
lee ſoon.


a = : * *
awd — wt” AAA” oy *
2 — —


Lev. chap. xxvi. 1. Church, at which place, therefore, they firſt bowed
dee State of Downe, p. 209. themſelves; but this Cuſtom is much more
* Mr. Martin of the Ifles, p. 88, and 229. ancient than Chriſtianity.

thinks them called Bowing- ſtones, becauſe the n Martin, ibid.

Chriſtians had there the firſt View of their © Gen. Xxxi, 45.


The


— ß—iÜið“m K


164 OF SINGLE S'TONES-ERECT, OR RUDE PILLAR.


SECT, 1V. The Monument of Galeed was firſt erected upon account of a gy
Marks of L of friendſhi fi d bv fol Oath
compadR, or treaty of friendſhip, confirmed by ſolemn Oaths and Im.


Flaces of


Worſtip, precations, and to be tranſmitted to Poſterity by the proper Memo.
rials of a Pillar, and a heap. This fame Monument in alter-age;
drew the attention of the People to it fo much, as to make the place
become the great place of worthip for the twelve tribes q; fo that thi
ſort of Stone-monuments, originally only intended as Memorial; of
private family-leagues (though theſe leagues were attended by ſome
religious Oaths and Rites), becoming famous on account of the
Authors of them, and places of 2 were ſoon afterwarg


appointed to be places of worfhip for


e whole nation; and hence


proceeded the cuſtom (which afterwards obtained much among the
Ancients) of marking out places of worſhip, by theſe Stone.


erect,


Firſt then, where theſe Stones were erected, places of worſhip were
eſtabliſhed out of reſpect to the moral and religious Character of thei;
Author. Bethel* became a place of worthip, becauſe of Jacob;
Pillar; Gilgal alfos, for like reaſon, becauſe of the Pillars erected by


Joſhua, at the paſſing of Jordan; Gilead, Galeed, or Mizpah


)


became alſo in after-ages a place of worſhipt, and of idolatry", 2


the reſt.


SECT.V. Theſe places having been conſecrated to the purpoſes of Religion
Places of were ſoon after juſtly thought worthy of being the ſcenes of all the


Election and


Council. moſt important affairs of the nation, ſo that no ties, or covenants,
were thought ſo obligatory, as thoſe which were contracted in theſe
ſacred places. Samuel made Bethel and Gilgal the annual feats of
Judgment. At Gilgal, Saul was confirmed King, and the allegiance
of his people renewed, with Sacrifices, and great Feſtival Joy x. At
Mizpah, Jephtha was ſolemnly invefted with the Government of
Gilead, and the general council againſt eBnjamin ſeems to have been
held here 2. At the Stone of Shechem, ere&ed by Joſhua a, Abimelech
was made King b. Adonijah by the Stone of Zoheleth ©. Jehoaſh was
« crowned King ftanding by a Pillar, as the manner was d;“ and

ofiah © ſtood by a Pillar” when he was making a ſolemn covenant
with Gode. There was ſomething emblematical in their chuſing


q Judges xxi. 1. 1 Sam. vii. 5, 6, &c.


r Amos vii. 13. — Gen. xxxv. 1.— 1 Sam. x. 3.


1 Kings xii. 33.


Hoſ. ix. 15. xii. 11. — Amos iv. 4. — 1 Sam.


Xie. 13.

5 3 xi. 11.

u Hoſea v. 1.
w 1 Sam, vil. 16.
x 1 Sam. xi. 14.
Judges xi. 11.


.


© Judges xx. 1, 3.

2 Joſh. xxiv. 26. |

b In the. Engliſh Tranſlation it is ſaid, that
Abimelech was made King, by the Plain of
ce the Pillar that was in Shechem;ꝰ but it ſhould
be by the Oak of the Pillar,” for under an Ol
this Pillar was erected. Joſh. xxiv. 26.

1 Kings i. .

4 2 Kings xi. 14.
© 2 Kings xxiii. 3.


* 5.8


A ui *
Moron.” at Frenren


SIS


Keuehral AMenument at Frewren in Aladtern


— — —
— _


—


> 8 . — — = 2 — 1
= . — — = _— "WW U.
Wr 71 — | WY
- a _ ES + " 1 — g 235


: noNKMonesrerect a * Hollett ink 4
He, gan, avout iu anmacr
explamd yp” 1/68.


Long None m HBormens Hutu
Jee . s.
„ ee


a


F 1


38. |


TTUTT—C— ” Op.


2 1 "Rn 8 . " ii 2 ” by
"yy : „ IO 8 rr %
| PPP ff ee 3

8 =O : * 4 T Aer 8 "Xx Eve. $M > ig * 0H # IK. SS. as? 38 Sr

. 4 . * * r 4 yr 1 „ I 8

2 1 * — * 4 k

- a 4 — HE WG 41 * & N 7 + 27,0 gp ORG 4 5 F
4 N "VE 4 8 * | ö * F A
. 9 x 2 0 - *
. 4
0 « » *
= OI
® *
.
*
=
-
*
5
*
-
.
*
.
0
4
V
*
-
”
6 k
* ”
\
—
5
*
„ =» - 8 g 3 — — . buy — . ” — —— —̃ — — " * —
1 ˙ — „ „ 28 8 hey G 3
— D— . ¶ ů «ͥãũ ER — * - 2 1 | | ? | _


OF SINGLE STONES-ERECT, OR RUDE PILLARS. 105


thus to ſtand by erected Stones or Pillars, when they were employed
in affairs of ſuch ſolemnity; and doubtleſs, it was their intent to
intimate, that their engagements entered into in ſuch places ought to
be as firm and laſting, and their deciſions as impartial and uprigat,
as the ſymbolical Pillar that ſtood before their eyes.

But of theſe rude Stone Monuments, ſome were originally Sepul- SFC. vt
chral, and did neither owe their beginning to the true, or falſe Sepulcbi®.
Religion, however afterwards applied.

We are obliged to Jacob for the firſt recorded Monument of this
kind; for when his beloved Rachel died, he did not bury her under
an Oak, as Deborah the nurſe of Rebeccah was buried f, left her
grave might not be enough diſtinguiſhed, but “ ſet a Pillar upon
« her Graves.” Bohan the ſon of Reuben ſeems to have been
buried alſo in the ſame manner, his Stone Monument becoming
afterwards one of the boundaries of the Realm of Judah h, and in-
deed this was reckoned a very honourable way of burying among
the ancients.


To make the grave and pillar more conſpicuous, moſt
countries ſoon adopted the manner of placing the latter on a heap |
of ſtones or earth. Ilus the ſon of Dardanus King of Troy, was
buried in this manner in the plain before that city i. When Sarpedon
was killed in battle, Jupiter deſired Apollo, to ſend his
wounded body, waſhed, anointed with ambroſia, and cloathed with
never-fading veſtures, to his native country, there with due honours
do be depoſited by his friends and relations * TyuSy re TIM ve, To ya?
* vyeexg eg Javoy)wy; an evident ſign that this was the moſt honourable
way of burying, as being what Jupiter himſelf ordered for his
favourite ſon. Abradates king of Suſa and his wife Panthea had alſo
a pillar erected on their grave by Cyrus), and their State Officers or
Eunuchs had a pillar for each on their graves.

It is likely that in Greece they launched out into ſome extrava- i
gancy in the erected- Stones of Sepulchral inſtitution; for Plato is faid |
to have forbidden any larger Stone to be fixed on the grave, than what |


would contain the Eulogy of the interred: . Plato vetabat” (Cic. ii. 2 |
de Leg.) © ne fit ſepulchrum altius quam quod quinque homines : 'l
* ciebus quinque abſolverent, nec e Lapide excitari plus, nec imponi, |

\ . CY . .
* quam quod capiat laudem mortui inciſam, nec plus quatuor herois N
e verſibus quos Longos appellat Ennius.” Demetrius Phalereus alſo 1
> ordered at Athens, that no perſon for the future ſhould have a {|
Stone on their Tymulus higher than three Cubits, 1
4 f Gen. xxxv. 8. | Dryden xtπνοοππj e- af or antw £776 run fl
8 t Ibid. xxxv. 20. ; IA Aapoxviouo TA) Srpoytees'O, þ |
> Joſh. xv. 6. * II. xvi. 667. 4
Paris taking the advantage of this Pillar, 1 Xenoph. Lib, VII. if
wounded Diomed. II. xi. 317. m See Of Barrows, chap. viii. 10


U u There 4


166 OF SINGLE S'TONES-ERECT, OR RUDE PILLARs.


There are many of theſe rude Obeliſks in Denmark and Sweden
which are generally ſuppoſed by the natives of theſe countries to he
ſepulchraln; and Olaus Magnus tells us“, that it was one of Wade,
laws to erect high Stones on the graves of famous men. In Scot.
land there are many, and King Reutha is ſaid by Boethius to hate

invented this way of honouring the memory of valiant men b. In
Ireland there are many of the fame Kind ſtill to be ſcen, near which
aſhes and boues being found, make it juſtly believed that they ar
Sepulchral Monuments 1.

The Pillar ſaid to be erected to the memory of Pompey, the
Trajan and Antonine Columns (all Sepulchral Memorials), are but
imitations of this ancient cuſtom, the magnificence of after a
getting the better of ancient ſimplicity, and altering the conſtrudion
of theſe Monuments, without rejecting or totally obſcuring the
cuſtom of their predeceſſors.

Theſe Sepulchral Monuments became afterwards famous for the
Annual Sacrifices, Feaſts and Games celebrated in honour of the de-
parted Heroes, there interred.

4007 Some of theſe rude ſingle Stones were alſo of Military Extraction,
Memorats, and were erected as Memorials of ſingle Combats, Battles, and con-
ſiderable Victories. The moſt ancient Trophy we read of is that
erected by the Prophet Samuel, betwixt Mizpeh and Shen, in com-
memoration of a ſignal and miraculous overthrow of the Philiſtines:
it was called Ebenezer, or the Stone of Help, that holy leader
aſcribing all (without allowing any ſhare to his own conduct, or to
the valour of the Iſraelites) to the divine aſſiſtance r. The Swedes
and Danes have many of theſe ſingle Stones, as has been before
obſerved, and, among other uſes aſſigned them, tradition has there
preſerved the names of the heroes, and the warlike occaſion upon the
account of which they were erected t; and in Scotland, in the ſhire
of Murray, there is a ſingle Stone ſet up as a Monument of the fight

betwixt King Malcolm ſon of Keneth ® and Sueno the Dane.
Trophies. In other parts of Scotland more Monuments of the ſame kind,
are attributed to the ſame uſe v. In proceſs of time, as mankind
became more fond of ornament, the Spoils and Armour of the con-
quer'd were employ'd to dreſs up the naked Stone; afterwards the
Stock of a Tree was found to be better adapted to exhibit the ſig-
nals of Victory in a proper figure, than the rude Stone : Art and In-
genuity afterwards carved all the properemblems out of the Marble,


» Wormius, p. 64, 65. Ol. Mag. Lib. I. r 1 Sam. vii. 12.


p- 8. Ola. Mag. Lib. I. p. 8.
o Lib. I. cap. vii. t See Wormius, Mon. Danica, p. 62. and
Camden, p. 1480. ibid. p. 118. |


q4 Toland, p. 84. Other inſtances may be v Camden, p. 1268.
ſeen in Camden, p. 1256; Martin of the Iſles, ” Wallace, of the Orkn. p. 54.
p. 59, and 388.


the


OF SINGLE STONESG-ERECT, OR RUDE PILLARS.


the Porphyry, or the Granite, erected them with grandeur, and |
diſpoſed the arms with more elegance and unity in ſculpture, than |
the realities would admit of, | :

Some of theſe Stones were alſo erected by the Ancients as Boun- sror. vn.
daries either national, or patrimonial. Laban and Jacob's Monu- "ie
ment beforementioned, was partly of the patrimonial kind. This |
« Reap be witneſs, and this Pillar be witneſs, that I will not pals
« gyer this Heap to thee, and that thou ſhalt not pats over this
« Heap and this Pillar unto me for harm *.” So was the Stone
which Minerva wounded Mars withalY. As to national Boundaries,
the Iſraelites, where no city, fea, lake, or hill, offered itſelf, made a
Stone their boundary, as in the limits of the kingdom of Judah“.

But theſe Monuments were not always the works of War, or Scopelifaus
Compact, or of Law, Religion, or Sepulture, but ſometimes of
Execration, and Witchcraft. |

The Arabians are ſaid to have had a cuſtom of ꝓlacing Stones
upon the field, or farm, of the man they hated, as a denunciation of |
utter deſtruction to any one who ſhould afterwards attempt to oc-
cupy or cultivate the ground on which they were erected,
and ſuch terrour attended this malevolent interdiction, called |
Scopeliſmus?, that no one ventured to come near ſuch ground. "|

In the rage of War and Victory, when the Fnemy and every thing
he had was devoted to utter deſtruction, it was uſual to mar and
deſolate his beſt lands of corn and paſture by ſtrewing them with
ſtones, thereby rendering them ſterile and uſeleſs to the unhappy
vanquiſhed. 2 Kings iii. 19. 25. Some have thought this act to
have been a kind of Scopeliſmus, but the Arabian cuſtom was differ-
ently grounded, and with more extenſive malice and cruelty. The
former was the violence of open war, which laid no penalty on thoſe
who came afterwards and endeavoured to cultivate the ſpoiled lands;
the latter was an interdiction of every kind of cultivation,
in times of peace as well as war, an interdiction ratified
probably, and made irreverſible, by ritual Magical execrations, ſub-
jecting the lawful poſſeſſor to the moſt treacherous murder, only for
undertaking to improve his barren and rocky grounds.

The account given of this Arabian cuſtom by Ulpian is as
follows b, © Sunt quædam quæ more Provinciarum coercitionem


107


Gen. xxxi. 52, | among the Arabians of erecting Stones upon the
4 Alben e eig Taxi, land of the perſon with whom they were angry. '1
Ketuueroy ey idle, KEAQYE, TN TE ueyasl, Wood's Civil Law, P. 322. D. 47, 11, 9, and ＋
Ter g' ardpeg Teclepos be tpjneras ego ae ˙νενν. 39, 2, 11.


II. xxi. ver. 403. b Ulpian, de officio Proconſulis, p. 1673. Lug-
5 Joſhua xv. 6. xviii. 17. The Northern Na- duni, 158 5, 4to. 4 vol. For the firſt notice of
tions had alſo the ſame way of marking out the this paſſage in Ulpian, I was indebted to the Right |
Boundaries of Diſtricts. Gl. Mag. p. 11. Rev. Dr. Lyttelton, Biſhop of Carliſle, in the 4
„ Scopeliſmus, à ovrnutw, to threaten or en- year 1762. il
*cavcur the death of any one; from a cuſtom 5 |


6 ſolent


168


Phenicians.


Syrians.


OF ROCK EFED-U'L: 3


i ſolent admittere : ut puta in Provincia Arabiæ Ezoneaopoy, Lapi-
« dum poſitionem, crimen appellant; cujus rei admiſſum tale eg
40 Plerique inimicorum ſolent prædium inimici ozoneadgey, i. e. Lapi-


«© des ponere, indicio futuros, quod ſi quis eum agrum coluiſſet malo


« letho periturus eſſet inſidiis eorum qui ſcopulos poſuiſſent: quz
ce res tantum timorem habet, ut nemo ad eum agrum accedere audez;
c crudelitatem timens eorum qui Scopeliſmon fecerunt. Hane em
e Præſides exequi ſolent graviter uſque ad pœnam capitis, quia et
e ipſa res mortem comminatur. @Zieritzius © (in his comment on
this paſſage) obſerves, that as the province of Arabia and the neigh.
bouring countries have been from all Antiquity remarkable for in-
cantatorial herbs and animals, and alſo for Superſtition and Witch.
craft (as appears from the Holy Scriptures, Joſephus, Pliny, Mela,
and others), it is moſt likely that the Arabs either placed ſome magj.
cal inſtruments of their diabolical commerce under theſe Stones, ot
perpetrated at or near them ſome infernal rites of Execration and
Darkneſs d. |

To this may be added, that theſe Stones muſt have been of ſuch x
ſize, and placed in ſuch a particular order, as might exhibit in
ſome degree the intention of thoſe that placed them“, (for if
there was no indication, there could be no tranſgreſſion) yet
left in ſuch a myſtical arrangement as might ſubject the innocent to
miſtake, and incite the raſh and cruel to renew hoſtilities, and to
ſhed blood on the ſlighteſt pretences. The Roman Governourz
therefore, juſtly made it a capital crime to devote Lands in ſuch
a deteſtable manner to deſolation, preventing at once the
deſirable cultivation of lands in ſo deſart and rocky a Province
as Arabia, and equally expoſing the lives of the Romans, and their
induſtrious provincial ſubjects, to the revenge of the inſidious and


aſſaſſin.


CHA P. III.
Of Rock-ITdols, their ſeveral Shapes, and the high Opinion which the


Ancients entertained of .


ESIDES tall Stones-ere&, the Ancients had Stone-Deitics of

various ſhapes. The Phenicians made the Image of the Sun of
one black Stone, round at the bottom, its top ending, either in the
ſhape of a cone, or a wedgee. Their neighbours the Syrians had the


Nunc, nunc adeſte, nunc in hoſtiles doms3


© Tn the Bodleian Library, Oxford. Iram atque Numen vertite. ;
Nox, & Diana quæ Silentium regis, Hor. Canidia, Epod- \+
Arcana cum fiant Sacra, * « Indicio futuros,“ Up. ibid. 3
* Herodian, Lib. V.— Alex. ab Alex. Lid. .

P · 1026. |


| fame


nr Tr” Hey Fa ” wn WE 7.


ant fold © © PR wa * bes a _


OF NOR IDOS.


| ROO i 1 cc
ſame cuſtom, and worſhiped a Rude Image of the Sun. The


« Arabians, ſays Maximus Tyrius®, worſhip ſuch a God as J have not Ariane.


| « before met with; the form of the Idol is a Quadrangular Stone,
15 likely dedicated to Mercury. Arnobius" calls the Arabian Deity

I { Informem Lapide) a ſhapeleſs Stone'. Among the ſeveral Demi-
| gods that went by the name of Hercules, I find one called Hercules


Saxanus, who was worthiped, more eſpecially in Rocks, or in rocky Grecians.
Places. The Statue of the Theſpian Cupid, was a rough Stone un-


touched by a Tool!; and the Greciaus in general, in their more
ancient times, worſhiped Rude Stones inſtead of Images". The


E Canaanites, whoſe chief God was Saturn", had this cuſtom of wor- C,nuiccs.


ſhiping Rocks very anciently ; for Moſes (in his Song, Deut. xxx1i.)
cautioning the Jews againſt Apoſtacy, alludes ſeveral times to the
corruptions of Rock-Worſhip, to which he foreſaw they would be
drawn aſide by their neighbours. © How ſhould one chaſe a thou-
« ſand, and two put ten thouſand to flight, except their Rock
(meaning their true God) “ had fold them, and the Lord had ſhut
« them up: for their Rock (meaning their falſe God of Stone) is not
eas our Rock, even our enemies themſelves being Judges“ (ver. 3o.)
And again, ver. 37, © Where are theſe Gods, their Rock, in whom
« they truſted, which did eat the fat of their Sacrifices, and drink
« the wine of their Drink-ofterings? Let them riſe up, and help


« you, and be your protection.“ The Italians had anciently this t:atians.


cuſtom, and their Rocks and high hills were generally dedicated to,
and called after, the name of SaturnP, By this it appears, that ſuch
conſecrated Rocks were called anciently by the name of ſome God,
that is, named, ritually dedicated, and advanced into Divinities.
After theſe Rocks had been conſecrated, the Ancients paid them all
manner of reverence, imagined, that thenceforth ſome ſpiritual in-
telligences reſided within them, and that whatever touched them
was facred, and derived great virtue and power from them. Hence
arole a Cuſtom, which continues to this day, of lying down, and
ſlceping upon Rocks, in order to be cured of lameneſs; and the
very rain that fell from their ſides, or was contained in their hollows,


was accounted holy, of great uſe to purification, to cure diftem-


pers, and foretell future events q. Nay, they went ſo far in the
madneſs of this kind of Idolatry, as to imagine, that they heard


f Arigyaroy Hugs 62012, Herod. in Heliogab, — I Pauſan. in Ach.
Sched. 342, E m Pauſan. ibid. p. 579.
* dermo 38. See p. 64. Note |. =
4 Contra Gent. o Sce llaiah lvii. 5, 6.
Ihe oldeſt Idol of the Arabs was called p ©* Multa etiam Loca (viz. in Italia) hujus
* Manah, a Goddeſs like Venus, and Fate, wor- © Dei (viz. Saturni) nomen habent, et præcipue
* ſhiped under the form of n great unhewn Stone.” «+ Scopuli et colles e: celſi.“ Dion. Halic. Lib. I,
Letters of Mythology, p. 374. See Sale's Alcoran, Cap. iv. p. 27.
Keyſler, p. 195. 4 Sce Chapter xi. Book, III.


XX | ſignificant


P


—
—
—
*


ö Egyptians.
|
a


| Welch,


Iriſh.


OF RUCE I DOU ES.


ſignificant noiſes, and even diſtin oracular Predictions,
of theſe Rocks. The Statue of Memnon, in U
likely the Deity of that country; it conſiſted


Proceed oy
+ 3 Eg Pt was


of one immenl.


ſtone, and at Sun riſing was imagined to utter Sounds, and 85
Pliloſtratus ſays, to ſpeak; and the probable Remains of this Statue


are ſtill full of Inſcriptions, placed there by Greck and Latin tra.
vellers, credulous enough to leave their names and teſtimonies (uch
as they are) of their having heard the miraculous effuſions of this
Vocal Statue”. There is a remarkable Story in Giraldus Cam.
brenſis, which ſhews, that the common people in his days attribu.
ted the power both of ſpeaking and protecting to theſe facreg
Rocks. There was a large flat Stone, ten feet long, fix wide, and one
foot thick, which in his time ſerved as a bridge over the river Alyn
at St. David's, in Pembrokeſhire. It was called in Britiſh Lis,
Lavar, that is, the Speaking-ſtone, and the vulgar Tradition was
that when a dead body was, on a time, carrying over, this Stone
ſpoke, and with the ſtruggle of the voice cracked in the middle, and
the chink, from which the voice iſſued, was then to be ſeen. In this
ſimple ſtory the remains of that part of the Druid ſuperſtition, of
which we are treating, are clearly to be perceived. There is no
doubt but this Lech Lavar was the top Stone of a Cromlech (the
Dimenſions ſhew it), which being at firſt no more than a Tomb-


ſtone for the dead, became afterwards an Altar, and by degrees had


a kind of worſhip paid to it, and was reckoned to give forth oracular
ſounds, whence it had the name of Lech Lavar, and being of ſo
holy a nature, it was thought to be profaned and incenſed by the
touch of a dead body t; and therefore, even to the middle of the
12th century, the people could never be perſuaded to carry dead
bodies over it; and that they attributed more than ordinary power
and virtue to this Stone is plain from what the ſame Author faysin
the ſame place, that a woman having made ſome complaints to
Henry II. (then juſt arrived at St. David's from Ireland) and not
immediately receiving a favourable anſwer, cried out with a loud
voice to Lech Lavar tor redreſs : being checked by the ſtanders-
for her unſeemly behaviour, ſhe cried out ſo much the more violently,
* 0 Leh Lavar, revenge our Injuries!” The Iriſh had the fame
Superſtition ; © in an adjacent brook to the Weſt of Bally-caroge, the
te country people ſhew a large Rock, as big as an ordinary houl:,
ce which they call C/oughlowriſh, i. e. the Speaking Stone, and relate
« a Fabulous account of its ſpeaking at a certain time in contradic-
tion to a perſon who ſwore by it in a lye. The Stone is remakabh


r See Pocock's Travels, Vol. I. p. 103.
* Itinerar. Cambr, Lib. II. cap, i.
See 2 Kings xxiii. 14. |


6 ſplit


OrF--ROCK IDOLS


e ſplit from top to bottom, which they tell vou was done at the


« time of taking the above-mentioned Oathu.“ We have a Karn


ia the pariſh of St. Juſt, Cornwall, named Karn-idzek, or the Hooting-


Karn, called fo probably trom the prophetick ſounds, which con-
{crated Rocks were ſuppoſed occaſionally to ſend forth.


The learned Keyſler (p. 22.) ſetting before us the ſuperſtition Note
and credulity of people in this point gives us an inſtance of what Nt»


the Northern Nations thought on this head. They believed that
a kind of Fairies or Demons reſided within their Stone-Deities.


« For which reaſon it was not very difficult or unnatural for them
« to proceed to that degree of infatuation as to perſuade themſelves
« that they really heard diſtinct and prophetick voices proceeding out
« of ſuch Stones,” of which he then produces the following inſtance
from the Holmveria ſaga of Norway. Indridus, going out of his houſe,
lay in wait for his enemy Thorſtenus, who was wont to go to the
Temple of his God at ſuch a particular time. Thorſtenus came,
and entering the Temple, before Sun- riſe, proſtrated hipiſelf before
his Stone-Deity, and offered his Devotions. Indridus ſtanding with-
out, heard (or fancied) the Stone to ſpeak, and pronounce Thor-
ſtenus's doom in the following words:


+


« Ty buc, Heedleſs of thy approaching fate
« []tima vice, 4 Thou tread'ſt this holy ground:
„ Morti vicinis pedibus Laſt ſtep of life] thy guilty breaſt,


« Terram calcaſti: Ere Phcebus gilds the ruddy Eaſt,
Certè enim antequam Muſt expiate

« Sol ſplendeat, Thy murderous hate,

«* Animoſus Indridus Deep pierc'd with crimſon wound,


« Odium tibi rependet.


This is a ſufficient proof, as Keyſler well obſerves, that the ancients
believed not only that Rocks and Stones contained ſomething divine
within them, but had a power alſo of diſcloſing the ſecrets of futurity.

The Druids held theſe conſecrated Rocks in ſuch eſtimation, that,
if we may credit the account we hav / from Ireland x, they covered


"the famous Stone of Clogher (which was a kind of Pedeſtal to Ker-


mand Kelſtack, the Mercurius Celticus) all over with gold y.


We have in Cornwall Rocks of that grandeur, remarkable ſhape, coi.


and ſurprizing poſition, as can leave us in no doubt but that the


muſt have been the Deities of people addicted ſo much to the ſu-
perſtition of worſhiping Rocks.


* Hiſt. of Waterford, p. 93.


X
” Keyller, p. bo. Toland, p. 100.


See Crum Cruach, chap. ix.


Rocks


172


Why Rocks


SF NO e BE


Rocks were firſt choſen, as it ſeems to me, to repreſent the God;


worlbiped from the firmneſs of their ſubſtance, continuing {till the ſame, neit,.,


diſappearing ſoon, as Fire; nor ruffled, and by drought diſſipate
like Water; nor waſting away like Earth; and therefore prope
emblems of Strength, Shelter, Shade, and Defence*. After Rock,
became Symbols, they were occaſionally varied and ſhaped for ſeven
ſuperſtitious reaſons; to avoid which, God ordered that the Stone;


uſed in his Worſhip ſhould continue as nature left them. Bu


Gentiles, in this, as well as all other inſtances of Simplicity, could
not but depart from the true Religion. Accordingly our Rocks in


Of different Cornwall have in ſome inſtances been cleared of their wildeſt excr..


ſhape.


ſcences, by art, in others evidently ſhaped and fitted by tools, and
this could not be done without ſome aim or deſign ; and no deſign
ſo likely, as that ſome, by ſhewing themſelves to greater advantage
(being ſeparated from the adjoining rocks), might by their vaſtne
more eaſily procure the adoration of the beholder; that others, by
being ſhaped in a particular manner might be more fignificant ſym-
bolSof that Deity, or Attribute, which they were deſigned to repre-
ſent; and that a third fort might be ſo carved as to become moveahls
to a certain point, or furniſhed with Rock-Baſons (both which arc
often met with in one Monument) to promote the deluſion of the
people, and gain of the Priefts, Theſe Rocks have loſt the names


And Moſtly of the Deities to which they were dedicated ; and therefore I ſhall


dedicated to


Saturn.


content myſelf with calling them by their common names, though
have, however, ſome reaſon to think them dedicated to Saturn, Mars,
or Mercury; for we have many places in Cornwall called Treſi-
darn*, that is, the town or houſe of Saturn; and we have Nankh-
darn, or the Valley of Saturn: and as Saturn was the God that
chiefly delighted in Human Sacrifices®, as the Druid age conſiſted
of thirty years, and was probably taken from one Revolution of the
Planet Saturn; as Saturn was worſhiped in Italy, in Rocks and in
ſuch rocky Places where we find theſe Stones ſet up, the Druids may
well be ſuppoſed to have worſhiped Saturn principally in and among
theſe Rocks. The Fable of Saturn adds confirmation to the fore-
mentioned opinions. His delight in Human Sacrifices, and even
offering his own ſons, is well expreſſed in his cuſtom of devouring
his own children; his lying hid in Latium [derived a Later)
expreſſes his fondneſs for deſart rocky places; and his receiving a
Stone to devour, inſtead of Jupiter, repreſents his having Stones
offered and dedicated to him. We have alſo places called aſter the


„„The Lord is my Stony Rock,” Pſalm In the pariſhes of St. Columb, Ruan-Maqcr,
xvili. 1. alibique paſſim. As the Shadow of a Red-druth Guenap, &c.
„ great Rock,” Iſaiah xxxii. 2. d See p. 64.


name


—
*
A
*
0
*
*
8
Pi Ly 4
. * * Y
*
EP
£
wh,
tr - 5
oy 7
A
1 — A.

1
*
*

"Wu q
Lat
E
. -
2
JE
"Up la
wy
*
2
*

SY

1

» -

>

*

os
4 —
*
7
4 *
4.
.
">
<5
*
%-


8
*
5 =
„ 4
45 *
=,
"IM
bY >,
9
e
24
34
.
5
*
4
Wo
"I
*
1


=
3


77


* yo 8 - 15
1 ts ul mi


SURYA wth [ 1 al
os W uM 10 9 % 724 uy
= 70
£ NDS


14h 1/0
VA Ws 4 ö |
3 9 IV


n => * , — q «> <
ans SY — "2 . , — "4 = l | = * e. 7. en Ded
>. . N ' l 8


— * — —
= ä % SS —


\ LY VE HIVE


tA Nall i


—


—
ä "IT.


X . 4. _— 99 „ mn
8 IJ VILE T | & ty fl ry i wh, 1 N.
| DV : 4 {tap
N . , 8


— of e mn = i \ b b SID


—


323


en "Ul OE ee "uy


„e ili | MV


—


N


e
a —
D == = |


* 7
FP 7%;
ST


14


4 R. 1% ü ' OO
89 I 2 1
II =
TONS "| SIN


<6
Wag


r of c,) PV ;
e en ugunt gray, 1;


\ R N DIE wY þ4 ——
\ EI EDD Ds
©, — — . 7 K


Em Wi ll 5 77 — — = l | f "IM : - |
9 23 2 — : Rod = | wy: d þ '


Wh; i!
0 155 ”" (to „„ 1 1 [ 1 7 *


AS ; 17 7
”


CE ) LS


weld £4


— WL


4 j Wt rh


i NL. {6
Wa | 1 hal


*


ſh: "nl


104


"0; N M In A; * WI
vos wy
252


RING
N


Ys Aer. —
WY 0 Hg, eue, = a 3
. 2 tt. be


—


*
— A -
l


48-4 O05
1 \ aa, be. ac 22 4


9 ＋ Tx” 1 1


1


. . PZ — DIA AL B24


5 * . bee, N 22, 2 2 me a


*
#41 Rho AS


& 7


*.
%
*


N *


LN UC
ln


HEADS


8


*


2 2 FU FUL? . e.


, a ee, Br . ECO 2


— ́ꝗ 2


1


—


= , aq "ay . - N
i IDS Fas. oa To -
- —— ht — ———
— . — — —— £ - —- — |
p_ 7 - YT» -, > — —
7 7 "©, 2 Z
* — _
— .


2 n, 7
"Ales 1
. A Ad .
. 0 N "nn tn


'
wy


„ 3 1 in


Wes Gy


4 2 l, 2 Kune e.


ITY, Th


| Ons a.


ATR 3


"THE


gt


\
. 0 LIT)


cu N 14


6
|


OF KUGUE FDULS


name of Mars, as Tr emer, the town of Mars I and after the name
of Mercury, as Gun Marr, and Rell: Mar'r 3 7.0. the Downs, and
Grove of Mercury : and to theſe Gods too, it is moſt likely that
the Druids ſometimes dedicated in a formal manner theſe Rock-
Idols; and, that Rock-worlhip was univerſally ſpread throughout
the Druids, in whatever parts of the iſland they reſided, will appear
plainly, becauſe in ſuch rocky places moſt of the Druid Monuments
of every Kind were erected, and are at preſent to be found

In the parith of Conſtantine, Cornwall, in a village called Men,
I obſerved a Stone (Plate XI. Fig. I.) in a very uncommon ſhape ;


it is like the Greek letter Omega, ſomewhat reſembling a Cap. In


the Impoſt upon the Plint (A. A.) it is thirty feet in girt, cleven ſect
high from B to C. The ground about it is uneven, as if there had
been walls or houſes near it; and ſome other rocks adjoining had
plain figns of workmanſhip near the baſe, as if they had been begun
to be formed after the model of the other. In the iſland of St. Mary,
Scilly, on the edge of a moſt remarkable circular Temple, there is
a vaſt ſtone (Fig. II. Plate XI.) which is cut much in the ſame form
with Fig. I. but whereas Fig. I. has no Rock- baſon, this at Scilly
has thirteen perfect Baſons cut on the ſurface. As theſe Stones are
evidently ſhaped by art, and for no conceivable purpoſe, either civil,
military or domeſtick, I conclude them Stone-Deities ; their Plint
(DD, Fig. I.) deſigned perhaps to expreſs the ſtability of their God;
and the roundneſs of the upper part his Eternity.

The Rock now called Wringcheeſe®, is a groupe of Rocks that
attracts the admiration of all Travellers. It is beſt apprehended by
its Icon (Plate XII. Fig. I.); on the Top- ſtone B were two regular
Baſons; part of one of them has been broken off, as may be ſeen at
(A). The upper ſtone B was, as I have been informed, a Logan,
or Rocking-ſtone, and might when it was entire be eaſily moved
with a pole, but now great part of that weight which kept it on a
poiſe is taken away. The whole heap of Stone is 32 feet high; the
great weight of the upper part from A to B, and the ſlenderneſs of
the under part from B to C, makes every one wonder how ſuch an
ill- grounded Pile could reſiſt for fo many ages the ſtorms of ſuch an
expoſed ſituation. It may ſeem to ſome that this is an artificial
building of flat Stones layed carefully on one another, and raiſed to
this height by human ſkill and labour; but as there are ſeveral
heaps of Stones on the ſame hill, and alſo on a hill about a mile
diſtant, called Kell-mar'r, of like fabrick too, though not near ſo
high as this, I ſhould think it a natural Cragg, and that what Stones


< See Chap. vii. Lib. III. SeR. iii.
* In the Pariſh of St, Clare, near Liſkerd, Cornwall.


Y 7 ſurrounded


174


men.


»"


OFEDCKT1 DUE:


ſurrounded it, and hid its grandeur, were removed by the Druid
From its having Rock-baſons, from the uppermoſt Stone's being ,
Rocking-ſtone, from the well-poiſcd ſtructure and the preat d.
vation of this groupe, I think we may truely reckon it among the
Rock- Deities, and that its tallneſs and juſt balance might probably
be intended to expreſs the ſtatelineſs and juſtice of the Supreme
Being. Secondly, as the Rock- baſons ſhe that it was uſual to et
upon the top of this Karn, it might probably ſerve for the Druid to
harangue The Audience, pronounce deciſions, and foretell future
Events.


Of the Tol- There is another kind of Stone-Deity, which has never been talen


notice of by any Author that I have heard of. Its common name
in Cornwall and Scilly, is 'Tolmen ; that is, the Hole of Stone. It
conſiſts of a large Orbicular Stone, ſupported by two Stones, betwixt
which there is a paſſage. There are two of theſe in the Scilly Iſlands,
one on St. Mary's Iſland, at the bottom of Salakee Downs; the to

Stone 45 foot in girt, horizontally meaſured (Plate XII. Fig. II.); the-
other in the little Iſland of Northwethel (Plate XII. Fig. III.) 3
feet in girt horizontal, by 24 perpendicular meaſurement. They are
both in the decline of hills, beneath a large Karn of Rocks, ſtanding
on two natural ſupporters; the firſt has one exactly round Baſon on
it; the ſecond has none, neither are there any Baſons on the Rocks
below or near it; but elſewhere on the Iſland there are ſeveral.
Both theſe are probably erected by Art; and the Top- ſtones, large as
they are, brought from the Karns above, and placed by human
ſtrength where we ſee them. But the moſt aſtoniſhing Monument
of this kind, is in the Tenement of Men, in the Parith of Conſtan-


tine, Cornwall (Plate XIII.). It is one vaſt egg-like ſtone, placed


on the points of two natural Rocks, ſo that a man may creep under


8 2


the great one, and between its ſupporters, through a paſſage about
three feet wide, and as much high. The longeſt diameter of this
Stone is 33 foot from C to D, pointing due North and South; from
A to B, is 14 feet 6 deep; and the breadth in the middle of the
ſurface, where wideſt, was 18 feet 6 wide from Eaſt to Weſt, I
meaſured one half of the circumference, and found it, according to


my computation, 48 feet and half, ſo that this Stone is 97 feet in


circumference, about 60 feet croſs the middle, and, by the beſt in-
formations I can get, contains at leaſt 7 50 ton of Stones, Getting up
by a ladder to view the top of it, we found the whole ſurface worked,
like an imperfet, or mutilated Honey-comb, into Baſons“; one,
much larger than the reſt (bb), was at the South-end, about ſeven
foot long; another at the North (cc), about five; the reſt ſmaller,
* Seethe Plan of it, Plate XX. Fig. IX, '
2 ſeldom


.
—


> + I'S, —
L with; *
— —


* 2 o 2 I 4
© N — a * o 2 * 9
| lis ä * 1 7 PTS
8 5 of 22 8 U 732 N N *». danced oo a
Sos i a e - ä Hs +» * a » . *
ba n 4 "Py * 1 n © * v m N * * =


. 1 [1 LE 85 * 2 9 * * "
, 4 y _ * FTIR » A 1 4 ”
* 5 ; a N F a . 2 ANN * F — " oe we ** * J N
* ö ; B 1 ad", — —— - 3 R "OSS h 08. SO SIRENS e
N 7 p . 0 i * 4 9 * * Rs 5 * ts A % G
7 ; 4 — * -
= . , 4 pa
* — —
n _ ee — —— —
_ —S——— — * 4 — PI — Tad. N E
_—_ — 2 4


4 26.4
- + » wean LIONS «a> wa


=
-#


7 2 —


=_—


_— — Sy = — == — _
—
* = — -
— _ — — — * 1 — — — 4 — — 2
— —— — —
E ; _ * — —_—_—— a = A = — 2 — =


uod b eee .


200940 u, renn
uud ur F107 auge) % % PTY


— — — e! 4 ve ? E _— . —
F332 g yon . a : — - DPS - * — A — — > CN
—— — — 12 * — 28 * — = \ l -
7 - - - 1 4 =—_ JF KY » . * . * \ :
ap s CETEFFPFAT FLEET RY © ** 004+ A * > - M— * ©
V} -E 75 > „
. — TO

© 7
. > A *
* * * LE
A x

% FLIES


<{


2 J0pPrd four; TT dee!


- — DIETS >. ©e*d
4 =  —_ _ % .
— — — * *


179
/


\— Anfppebanom 17
hp 19204) „ % 9L,


*


„„ - IS > JOGGER "DJ
. „ . *. x. N — n x
. - - w_ . | i 0 -v Ry i 8 \


FRY OK. be
= ny , & *0+s
4 = CY \ l

THR


_ SS


DICE
S230 d 5
. » 2 IJ b * » 4 5 5 7—— N y I. (41, HERS


LETS I
Y


3 —
\ == Ja 2 EIT
| | 55 A DEVEL
% . = AI - = . - * o l C5 d — 5 2 W 9
G | |


w N "7

Q Nds
ene

8 I...


4.2477 72 . Q — 5 ” 8 Z = L — .
** 4 * N . — — N 8 . 0 - . =»
SIO 10 1699 — - F n f A

\ 25


1 N \ AA :
N 4

a 9 ONS ey N. 11

1 ” See. — 222

2 +4 I _ * i Ty- — . I .

1 * 22 Q ©... - «S204 =

þ - 8 8 g - \ 2

i . - . - - -. — : is

— 0 ny *


— .
= % > - ww
WI? ws = — 2
© — *
= JETS WJ.
- — 7


7 5 3

— > A 24

CK. a> %
SY


»
_ * *


. * —
A YO .


83 *


"NV ww
d


„% 05
| \
«a * 9 .


i
It, "
% =


In


. þ 42e: g = | 14277778
— 7 : « > l , | ; - , wm —


I”
%
%


vo - 09 »

«+ (04480
0 2 *
2


5238


> + bh —— O00 o
; TIS ene 92 " 2s
ond Mode


'
Ne


= _ TY Va


_» TTY TT x
| | l
7 iin 8 - —— II = —— X-
„ n. n "TIT" 5 — . 1 - 4 0 3
28 5 M4 n dw Ne . (2000 e. y 0 . — 0 7 | 1 A
27557 wit BN N , AO A100 IV — K . i SE I — =
. 44” \ : = | $ 7 ; , 4 4 *


. *85*.31; i ,
2 ee
#1 nigh
C \


tra) 7 50
15 11 1


Ni


; Nn — — : | ——— — --
i\ {1 \ of . — = — = — ” - 3 >: - 2 - - a * : - _ |
* 4 i \ \. SY P - 2 . - — 2 - - 1 — - nt — —
nt Te! by _
4 g


0 - : . : * 2 ; g re. = * - —
\ - - - 5 — — — 4 — - pris 19 —
7 1 - — 3 — 2 - — A re —
' , ö 0 Y \ ; ; . — — —— >= — —— * — — —
. { — : . i T3 1 N U 2 : — 2 AZ ; s : a —
, f
N


W JW %


|
| [


4


N
{
|
\


|


LOW
"JO Oy


N
W
WW
U
un
W
\\
If
1


*
K
*
U
|
|


|
5 *
1
\


\
\
lj

\x\\
a

\ 0
10%
W

| 1
11]
| |

[|

|

14

47

ut!
0


; — _ —_— t
722 — — 451 Se * — —
= —— - : ——
- —— — - -
— Gf — — Fa he a
5 ' — jp = —
if R l 3 . A ——— is -_m—_ —
ee Nee IOW | PEE EE —
* i N 2 - — — 2
SR ce F | | = EEC CPE; ̃ Ez .
8 T% 4 4 4 10 10 — —. tne . -
f til £ ' * WW 1 Ore . — — . i SA IS . =
. P . 1 1 1 4 4 \ . £ * ? (% . 41+ — — — PX 4 — — — — —— l "4 , - =
' ' ; a 771 i% ity 4 { 11 1 f <> FEELS a ne — — 2
* | : , Tt Or ' YN: ' Li! will. /1} ( v1 EO _E_ =, —
- a RT \ : $3: 11.111 FB * j 880 Wen SAL Deu 10 1 J 1 —_— — r ——
N 5 | coo _ LIC \ 12 N Ne 4 i (* ' Ji I * Y [ — — —— — *
— 05 ' WA: TY Wk! 111 SAND ee, eee 5 2. nn, no
- | | a n : NA ee eee . En EZ
jw _ e * r ; „ Y | , 3 | N i! 1 , JN ] ; —_—
a 4 pe + + + * . i . 1 » 1 5 — ; 2
Fo” (
— —
— -
% 7 *
"of
2 I -
= A 2
_- E ä — —— ä — =>
# - Any 48. *
— . — by 3 TA * eee
N : * - wy r 1 — IS re
— - — * wy — — 8 1 7 r K ** 4 EO. = * 8 . 6 WG p "ae 0 * N . 8 Vs
2 25 * 1 | 7 4 ;
A, *


——


2 Fe
n . y
AE ev a"


OF ROCK IDOLS


ſeldom more than one foot, oftentimes not ſo much, the tides ard
(have irregular. Moſt of theſe Baſons diſcharge into the two prin—
(ibal ones (which lie in the middle of the ſurface), thoſe only excepted
which arc near the brim of the Stone, and they have little lips or
chanels (marked in Plate XIII. I, 2, 3, 4, 5 Which diſcharge the
Water they collect over the ſides of the Tolmen, and the flat Rocks
which lic underneath receive the droppings in Baſons cut into their
ſuclaces. This Stone is no leſs wonderful for its poſition, than for
its liz e; for although the underpart is nearly ſemi-circular, yet it
reſts on the two large Rocks E, F; and fo light, and detached, docs
it ſtand, that it touches the two under ſtones but as it were on their
points, and all the Sky appears at Gf. The two 'Folme&ns at
Scilly are Monuments evidently of the ſame kind with this, and
of the ſame name, and theſe, with all of like ſtructure, may


with great probability, I think, though of fuch ſtupendous


weight, be aſſerted to be the works of Art, the under ſtones
in ſome inſtances appearing to have been fitted to receive and
ſupport che upper one. It is alſo plain, from their works at Stone-
henge, and fome of their other Monumentss, that the Druids had
{kill enough in the mechanical Powers to lift vaſt weights; and the
Ancients, we know, in theſe rude works, ſpared no labour to ac-
compliſh their deſign ; Haraldus, at one time (as Wormius informs
usb) employing his whole Army, and a great number of Cattle, to


bring one ſingle Stone to the place intended. Notwithſtanding all


this, I have ſome doubts whether ever this Stone (fo vaſt it is) was


ever moved, ſince it was firſt formed, and whether it might not have
been only cleared from the reſt of the Karn, and ſhaped ſomewhat
to keep it in proper poiſe, ſo as it might ſhew itſelf to that advan-
tage which it now does moſt ſurprizingly at ſome miles diſtance,
But yet I am far from thinking it impoſſible that this Rock might be
brought where we ſee it by Human force. The Ancients had
powers of moving vaſt Weights, of which we have now no idea;
and in ſome of their works we find bodies even heavier and larger
than this 'Tolmen. In the Ruins of Balbeck (the ancient Helio-
polis of Syria), there are three ſtones lying end to end, in the fame
row extending ſixty one yards, and one of them is fixty three feet
long, the other two ſixty each. Their depth is twelve feet, and
their breadth the ſame, and, what adds to the wonder, they are
raiſed up into the Wall above twenty feet from the ground',
In Ireland there are Monuments of the ſame * they tell you, ſwam miraculouſly from Rome


kind. One mentioned in the Hiſtory of the © conveying upon it St. Declan's Bell And
county of Waterford, p. 70, is called St. © Veſtments.”


3 »dtone: © It lies ſhelving upon the point E See the following Chapter, of the Logan-
us 4 Rock, and on the Patron-day of this Stones.
1 e Ercat numbers creep under this Stone h Mont. Dan. p. 39.
„ ue times, in order, as they pretend, to cure + Maundrell's Travels.
cha prevent pains in tie back. This Stone,


And,


1


Nr

And near the city of Alexandria ſtands what is wy.
called Pompey's Pillar (but erected by one of the Ptolemics) f.
4 y . . . % The
ſhaft of which conſiſts of one ſolid granate ftone, go feet high an
38 in compaſs. Le Bruyn's Voyage, p. 171. both theſe Wy,
* . . 0 Steed

are greatly ſtiperiour to that of this Tolmen.
In the Area below this Stone there are many great Rocks, which


have certainly been divided and ſplit, but whether thrown down fig


LES


the ſides of the Tolmen, for the purpoſes abovementioned, I will not.


pretend to determine. One thing is remarkable, which is, chat ther.
Tolmens reſt on ſupporters, and do not touch the Earth, grecabl.
to an eſtabliſhed principle of the Druids, who thought every thing
that was ſacred, would be profaned by touching the groundi; and
therefore, as I imagine, ordered it ſo, as that theſe Deities ſhoud
reſt upon the pure Rock, and not be defiled by touching the com.
mon Earth. Another thing is worthy our notice in this kind of
Monuments, which is, that, underneath theſe vaſt ſtones, there is ;
hole, or paſſage, between the Rocksk. What uſe the Ancicnt,
made of theſe paſſages, we can only gueſs; but we have reaſon t
think, that when Stones were once ritually conſecrated, they atii.
buted great and miraculous Virtues to every part of them, and ima-
gined, that whatever touched, lay down upon, was ſurrounded by,


or paſſed through, or under theſe Stones, acquired thereby a kind of.


Holineſs, and became more acceptable to the Gods. This paſſage
might alſo be a ſanctuary for the offender to fly to, and ſhelter himſelf
from the purſuer; but I imagine it chiefly to have been intended,
and uſed for introducing Proſelytes, or Novices, people under Vows,
or about to ſacrifice, into their more ſublime Myſteries: for the ſame
reaſon, I am apt to think, the vaſt Architraves, or Croſs- ſtones,
reſting upon the uprights at Stonehenge, were erected; namely,
with an intent to coniecrate and prepare the worſhipers, by paſſing
through thoſe holy Rocks, for the better entering upon the offices
which were to be performed in their Peuetralia, the molt ſacred part
of the Temple. The Druid Throne at Boſcawen Ros! might allo
ſerve at particular times for the like preparatory Rites, and might
be thought to inſtill a greater degree of ſanctity into the prefiding


Judge, the ſeat being ſurrounded ſo on every fide by Rocks. Nor


ad Rocks only the privilege of conferring this imaginary exaltation |


and purity ; whatever had the ſtamp of ſacred and divine imprinted
on it, was thought to be endowed with the ſame power upon the


i This was the reaſon that they gathered the * From this Hole they have the Name ©
Miſletoe, Selago, and Samolus, and took ſuch Tolmen. 1
care to catch the Anguinum, before it touched 1 See Plate XIV. fig. III. and ebap. vi. ſect. l.
the Ground. See Cap. xii. Lib. II. and Cap. xxi.

Ibid.


people's


7
of
7 .


* - ” 4 P
. * " N > N Fn * 6 X a
— * * * *
—__ Ps 5 L >
x ) bY ? -
"= 5 - ;
E . 47 L ;
EL. — . * „ wy *
1 se P ; . * 4 . 2 J » 7 1
K&D, * * M 2 N XS «> LR LT, - * e 1 Wer *


T—T—VPPPPPPPGGGGGPPGGPGGGPGGGGGGGGGG ye LE ER}, WEAR


- gf * —


ee CE CORES


the "FCA — 78 . 4 1 7 „ 2 *
PET OG e e,, een, 2 bee 421042}


*
1/7 Re ins tes 449 e N. r. * — * — N % 2 "T4 ©
: \


_ = —


= 24
— 8 e be
1 2 5 4 2 4 — 8 S * IDE 1 i
* + "04 4 3 *** * — —
24 0 2 * 8 * WHT. 75 * „582 OY
(= 4 . 4 f WD 1 % 4 1
2 4 - #
52 . Nn n WW L n: TE”
E HA : Ane 3 — ere W bY No 08 SETTLE n
2 | 2 7 WY 7 — N . WELLES TE a MN TIF *
— . * | | * . Wh \ . [SY
— e. —— * . 3, da - w - > *. 9 ?
ANN Eons c | "IE
N Wi, NI _ os £ =; ,


FOR > k


eee


ö L114
gnueg iu 147 ROS

293 9 40 3 og Un "H Le
1%;


— _ —


*
4


a 2.


2E 2 PF ICO ae, e,, 1


. F<, ,
ee EP 2 — . Jo CAL Cd hl: og 1917 Tf *


w_——_


: % M 93 Se DIES r * 9 4


4,


— *
ag . :
.


40 nee. , 22


I " 1 We!


ll


Wil


1


0


4)


Nr


Wont!


o . Aa ' Wa! 7


9
, „


1 9


a 1
bg ©». IS
2295898
2 >.
. —

=


'f „


wh" * bh 8 \ * 1
98 y = \ My J - WW


- "a * % * * a . Q
API 1 So e040 h p .
© - o >
Y uv — "I * 8
- - * . *
- Ss _* a2


SY __
— Sar » *


W ae
N 2 15 ö Re


WO
KOI IN
WJ I

WITH


I


—
I;

JP
AN


£114 4 *


„„ ST ans


„% 0 . 1


6


e


. FIESF FFEE FIfEfE FEEa cf


r


„„ „


3

"2

*
s
Y
=.
x
7 3
A
Z
*
*
:


- *
n


JR | *
*

E
© T

dos

-

*

1


.
7
*
*
1
XI


GF RUE EF D-O0:L


cople's complying with the ſame rites. The ancient Idolaters
wade their Children pals through their conſecrated Fires, a Luſtra-
tion, which ever afterwards made the Gentiles think, that thoſe who
had gone through, had acquired thereby a greater degree of Purity
than any others; and as Maimonides informs us m, the Canaanites
believed that ſuch Children ſhould not die before their time.

One of the abominations objected to the Jews (Jeremiah xxxiv. 18,
10.) is this, that“ they cut the Calf (after being ritually killed as a
victim)“ in twain, and paſſed between the parts thereof,” by ſuch
a paſſage devoting themſelves more religiouſly, as they thought, to
the worſhip of their Idols, and acquiring a greater degree of Purifi-
cation. This cuſtom (like many other of the Gentile Rites) may
be traced in the writings of Moſes, particularly in the ſacrifice
made by Abraham (Gen. xv. 10.) in obedience to the command of
God; which command is alſo thought to be in compliance with the
then cuſtom of ſacrificing, in order to confirm Covenants, and yet
it was hallowed by a miraculous Lamp of fire, paſſing between and
conſuming the pieces, (ibid. ver. 17.) The ſame Cuſtom is very


viſible among the ancient Gentiles. © Peleus having killed the Wife


« of Acaſtus, divided the Limbs and paſſed the army through them.”
Apollodorus. Livy tells us, Lib. XXIX. that a Bitch being factificed,
and the head divided into two equal parts, the Army paſſed between
them. Why they did fo, we learn from Plutarch in his Roman
Queſtions, viz. That it was the common method of Purification
among the Beotians to paſs between the parts of a Dog when they
were divided into two parcels. The Sacred Oak, when it was cleft,
and the Earth (by many nations counted divine) were thought to be
endowed with equal and ſtrong powers of Luftration®. Surely the
ſame Superſtition which made people defirous of purifying themſelves
by paſſing between the parts of the Victim, the Oak, the Earth,
the Fire, might alſo prompt them to ſeek for the like deluſive Puri-
heation, by paſling through the conſecrated parts of their Rock-idols,
Temples, and Altar;

Since we are now conſidering theſe Stone-monuments, tliere is a
very ſingular Monument in the Pariſh of Madern (Cornwall) which
in this place, will naturally offer itſelf to our enquiry. In the Tene-
ment of Lanyon ſtand three Stones-erect on a triangular Plan. The
ſhape, ſize, diſtance, and bearing, will beſt be diſcerned from the plan
and elevation of them (Plate XIV. Fig. I. and II.) The middle
Stone (A) is thin and flat, fixed in the ground, on its edge, and in
the middle has a large hole one foot two inches alter whence it


Fol. Synopſ. Deut. xyiji. F.


n ( 5 x .
Qu on ne faſſe point paſſer le Betail par un » See Note * p. 178. |
atbre creux, ou par un trou de la terre.“ In- „


Sx | 15


|
4
|
|
|
|


OP ROCK IDOLS.
is called the Men an Tol (in Corniſh the holed Stone); on each ſide


is a rude Pillar, about four foot high; and one of theſe Pillars 5


has a long Stone lying without it (C), like a cuſhion, or pillow, 3
if to kneel upon. This Monument as is plain from its ſtruduse“
could be of no uſe, but to ſuperſtition. But to what particular ſuper.
{titious Rite it was appropriated is uncertain P, though not unworthy
of a ſhort enquiry. —

The inhabitants of Shetland, and the Iſles (as Mr. Martin inform;
us, p. 391.) uſed, very lately, to pour Libations of milk or beer
through a holed Stone, in honour to the Spirit Brownyt, which K
therefore called Browny's Stone. Now whether the Corniſh Druid;
applied this Stone to the uſe of ſuch Offerings, I cannot ſay; but the
Corniſh to this day invoke the Spirit Browny, when their Bee;
ſwarm, and think that their crying Browny, Browny, will prevent
their returning into their former hive, and make them pitch, ſo as to
form a new colony. It is not improbable, but this holed Stone
(conſecrated, as by its ſtructure and preſent uſes it ſeems to have
been) might have ſerved ſeveral deluſive purpoſes. I apprehend that
it ſerved for Libations, ſerved to initiate, and dedicate Children to
the Offices of Rock-Worſhip, by drawing them through this hole,
and alſo to purify the Victim before it was facrificeds; and conſi-
dering the many lucrative juggles of the Druids (which are confirmed
by their Monuments) it is not wholly improbable, that ſome
miraculous Reſtoration of health, might be promiſed to the people
for themſelves and children, upon proper pecuniary gratifications,
provided that, at a certain ſeaſon of the Moon, and whiltt a Prieſt
officiated at one of the Stones adjoining, with prayers adapted to the
occaſion, they would draw their infirm children through this hole.
It is not improbable, but this Stone might be alſo of the oracular
Find; all which may, in ſome meaſure, be confirmed by the preſent,


though very ſimple, uſes, to which it is applied by the common


people. When I was laſt at this Monument, in the year 1749, a
very intelligent farmer of the neighbourhood aſſured me, that he had
known many perſons who had crept through this holed Stone for
pains in their back and limbs ; and that fanciful parents, at certain
times of the year, do cuſtomarily draw their young Children through,
in order to cure them of the Rickets. He ſhewed me alſo two braſs pins,


% Maen Tol, or the Stone with a hole, on „ Hoſtiis litare ſolitos, ea per Framina mactan-
© Agnidal downs in Madern, famous for curing ““ dos homines tranſire cocgifle. — Conftitutolque
5 pains in the back by going through the hole, “ ad aras immolafle. — Eum Ritum ad Bonatacit
de three, five, or nine times.” T. T. MS. H. « Epiſcopi Ultrajectini tempora duraſſe.“ Ol.

4 To pour Libations of Beer to Othinus, or Worm, ex Ubb. Emm. p. 9. The fame Cuſtom
Woden chief God of the Northern Nations, was the Jews ſeem to have had in the time of Ifatad,
a common Cuſtom. Keyſler, p. 155. when © they inflamed themſelves with Idols

r he Spirit Browny was a kind of Hob-gob- © among the Oaks, and flew the Children in the
lin, ſuppoſed to haunt the moſt ſubſtantial Fami- * Valleys, under the Clifts of the Rocks.
lies of the Iſlands. Martin, ibid. If, Ivii. 5.

Fabula fert Paganos quondam Humanis


carefully


” 8 * V 1 * * wy . .
= . - f .

Lo Ec: i . k
LE Ke ** *


r


F


4 * 26M
4 W's 2 " K _ N I
PROT ** r 3 27
wt * F < * We 1 2. * ad 2 * * x 4 N
o * F ad 5 net; , 3 Las : ke? * * ' + p
a * * . I * aq 2 * I * $ 1 4 SS.
* . 74 N 7 2 * TEEN 7 WP 2 N * * p 4 * 4 2 : *


9 2


- A *
* od N * 6 F a
F = * . * N A 1
r * 5 138 3 . 5
„ . f


or THE LOGAN, OR ROCKING STONES.


carefully layed a-croſs each other, on the top-edge of the holed Stone.
This is the way of the Over-curious, even at this time; anc. by recur-
ing to theſe Pins, and obſerving their direction to be the ſame, or
Jiforcnt from what they left them in, or by their being loſt or gone,
they are informed of ſome material incident of Love or Fortune,
which they could not know ſoon enough in a natural way, and im-
mediately take ſuch reſolutions as their informations from theſe
prophetical Stones ſuggeſt. f

Of the ſame kind, and appropriated to the ſame uſes as that I
have here explained, I look upon all thin Stones which have a large
hole in the middle* ; but, before I cloſe this Chapter of the holed
Stones, I muſt juſt mention ſome of another ſhape, many of which I
have ſcen; but the figure of one will ſufficiently explain the whole,
and may be ſeen Plate XIV. Fig. III. About 65 paces exactly
North of Roſmodreuy Circle in Burien, Cornwall, is a flat Stone, fix
inches thick at a medium, two foot fix wide, and five foot high;
15 inches below the top, it has a hole ſix inches diameter, quite
through. In the adjoining hedge I perceived another, holed in the
ſame manner; and in one wall of the village, near by, a third of like
make. By ſome large Stones ſtanding in theſe fields, I judge there
have been ſeveral Circles of Stones-erect, beſides that which is now
here to be ſeen entire; and that theſe belonged to thoſe Circles, and
were the detached Stones, to which the Ancients were wont to tye
their Victims, whilſt the Prieſts were going through their prepara-
tory Ceremonies, and making Supplications to the Gods to accept
the enſuing Sacrifice,


C11 AE. IV;


a


Of the Logan, Lagan or Rocking Stones.


MONG the curious Rude Stone Monuments, conſiſting of

ſingle Stones, we may take ſome notice of the Gygonian,
Rocking, or Logan Stones, and conſider what uſes they might pro-
bably have been applied to by the Druids.


Of theſe Stones the Ancients give us ſome account. Pliny tells


us, that there was to be ſcen at Harpaſa, a town of Aſia, a Rock


ok a wonderful nature: Lay one finger to it, and it will ſtir, but
thruſt at it with your whole body and it will not moveu.“


2 As that at Conſtantine, above a mile Weſt u « Cautes horrenda uno digito mobilis,
© the Church, and others in Cornwall, and the © eadem fi toto corpore impellatur reſiſtens.“
two Stones in one of the Orkneys, mentioned by Plin, J. ib. II. cap. Ixix.


Toland, Hiſt. of the Druids, p. 91, and 92.
Ptolemy


179


R
i180


called the Logan Stone, and at ſuch a great height from the


OF THE LOGAN, OR ROCKING STON RS.


Ptolemy Hepheſtion c mentions the Gygonian Stone, near "
occan, which may be moved with the ſtalk of an Aſphodel
cannot be removed by any force. It ſcems this word Pod
« js purely Celtick, for Gwingog ſignifics Motitans, the Rockin,
« ſtone x.“ In Wales they call it Y Maen ſigl, that is, the Shakin?
Stone. In Cornwall we call it the Logan Stone, the meaning ke
which I do not underſtand, Logan, in the Guidhelian Britiſh
ſignifies a Pit, or hollow of the Hand“, and Leagan a high Rock
and thence I ſhould think it moſt reaſonable to derive it, althous)
the Welſh word Kloguin, a great Stone or Rock (ſce Lhuyd 1
Saxum) comes very near it; but whether the word Logan be thence
derived, or may poſſibly be a corruption of the Britiſh Llygadtijn
in Welſh ſignifying 2 (foraſmuch as the ſingular propenz
of this Stone may ſeem the effect of Witchcraft“, I ſhall not tale
upon me to decide,

Some Authors a take theſe Stones to be placed in their preſent po-
ſition by human Art; but there are two forts of them, ſome natun
ſome artificial. In the Pariſh of St. Levin, Cornwall, there is a pro.
montory, called Caſtle Treryn b. This Cape conſiſts of three diſtind
groupes of Rocks. On the Weſtern {ide of the middle groupe near
the top lies a very large Stone (marked A), ſo evenly poiſed, that any
hand may move it to and fro; but the extremities of its baſe are dt
ſuch a diſtance from each other, and ſo well ſecured by their nei
neſs to the Stone, which it ſtretches itſelf upon, that it is morally
impoſſible that any lever, or indeed any force (however applied ina
mechanical way), can remove it from its preſent ſituation. lt is


ground,


that no one who ſees it can conceive that it has been lifted into the

lace we ſee it in. It is alſo much of the ſame ſhape as the Rock
which lie under it, and makes a natural part of the Cragg on which
it ſtands at preſent, and to which it ſeems always to have belonged.
There is alſo a natural Logan Stone in the large heap of Rocks,
called Boſworlas Lehau® Although theſe Stones ſhew, by their
ſituation, that they were never placed there by Art, yet ſome Stones
are ſo ſhaped, and placed, as that there is great reaſon to believe they
were erected by human force. Of this kind I take the great Quatt
on Karn-lehau in the Pariſh of Tywidnek to be, It may be {ee
Plate XI. Fig. III. it meaſures in girt 39 feet, is four feet thick at


w Lib. III. chap. iii. piration of the Druid Syſtem, obtain the names
* Stukeley's Stonehenge, p. 50. of the Lying-Stones. See Junius in voce Lic,
In Belgic, Saxon, and German, Leagan ſig- or Le, laſt Edit.

nifies mentiri, Logen, mendacium; and from the 2 Lhuyd's Arch. Ir. Engl. Vocab.


impoſtures and falſities, propagated by the 2 Toland, p. 103. Hiſt, Druid.
Druids from the top of ſuch rocks of prodigy, it is b See Plate XXVI. ad fin. Lib. III.
not impoſſible but the Stones might, after the ex= * Pariſh of St. Juſt, Penwith.


a medi-


or THE LOGAN, OR ROCKING STONES.


dium; it lies on one fingle Stone as well poiſed as if placed
ri by the moſt ſkilful Artiſt.
_ 2 is a very remarkable Stone of this kind on the Iſland of St.
: R in Scilly. The under Rock, A (Plate XI. Fig. IV.) is ten
Ag 5 hich, and 47 feet in circumference round the middle, and
3 15 che ground with no more than half its baſe. The upper
e reſts on one point only, fo nice, that two or three men,
ar? . Pole. can move it; it is eight feet fix high, and 47 in girt.
On the top is a large Baſon, D, three feet eleven in diameter (at a
medium), at the brim wider, and three foot deep : by the globular
ſhape of this upper Stone, I gueſs that it has been rounded by art at
leatt, if it was not placed on the hollow ſurface of the Rock it reſts
uno by human force, which to me appears not unlikely d. In the
Ph of Sithney, ſtood the famous Logan Stone, commonly called
Men- amber (Plate XI. Fig. V.) It is eleven foot long irom Eaſt to
Welt, four ſoot deep from E to F, wide {1x foot from C to D. There
ic no Baſon on the ſurface of A; but on the Stone B, there is one plain
one. This Top-ſtone, A, was ſo nicely poiſed on the Stone, B, that
« 4 little Child (as Mr. Scawen in his MS. ſays) could inſtantly move
« it, and all Travellers that came this way deſired to behold it; but
« jn the time of Cromwell, when all monumental things became
« deſpicable, one Shrubſall then Governour of Pendennis, by much
« ado, cauſcd it to be undermined, and thrown down, to the great
« oricf of the country. There are ſome marks of the tool upon this
Stone, the ſurface CD, being wrought into a wavy plane, as in the
Icon; and by its quadrangular ſhape, I ſhould judge it to have been
dedicated to Mercury, as, by a Baſon cut in the under Stone, B
(which I conclude from other works of this kind muſt have been
done when this Stone B was without any covering, and entirely ex-
poſed to the Heavens (ſee Chap. IX. of this Book), I judge the
Stone A, to be placed on the top of this Karn by human Art.
However that be, certain it is, that the vulgar uſed to reſort to this
place at particular times of the year, and payed to this Stone more
reſpe& than was thought becoming good Chriſtians, which was the
reaſon, that, by cleaving off part of the Stone, B, the 'Top-ſtone,
A, was layed along in its preſent reclining poſture, and its wonder-
ful property of moving eaſily to a certain point, deſtroyed. It was
the Top-ſtone therefore of this Cragg which drew the common
people together, and raiſed their admiration ; and I find that in the
Corniſh Language Men-an-bar ſignifies the T op- ſtone; and I do
not at all doubt, but that Men- amber is a corruption of MCn-an-bar,


did not ſee this Monument, but its Draw- ſent to me; and I have no Reaſon to think but
ing and Meaſurement was taken by a Friend, and that it is cxuct,


A aa and


181


OF THE LOGAN, OR ROC KING STONRs


and ſignifies nothing, either relating to Ambroſius Aurelius Kin of
Britain, or to the Petra Ambroſiæ of the Ancients, as ſome learned
Men have thought. This Stone Mr. Carew, placing it among th.
wonders of Cornwall, thus addreſſes, p. 152. 5


4 Be thou thy mother Nature's work,
Or proof of Giants might,
Worthleſs and ragged though thou ſhew,
Yet art thou worth the ſight.
This hugy Rock one finger's force
Apparently will move, +
But to remove it many ſtrengths


Shall all like feeble prove.”


There are ſome of theſe Logan Stones in Ireland ©, and in Wales.
and in Derbyſhire, I have been informed of three; one near Byrch-
over four yards high, and twelve round; and two at Rowtor, the
largeſt of which is computed to weigh, at leaſt, twenty ton, ona
Karn, twenty feet high.


That theſe are Monuments of the Druids cannot, be doubted; but


what particular uſe they applied them to, is not fo certain. Mr,


Toland f thinks, „that the Druids made the people believe that
« they only could move them, and that by a Miracle; by which
* pretended Miracle, they condemned, or acquitted the accuſed,
ce and often brought Criminals to confeſs what could in no other
“ way be extorted from them: and I muſt own that it is not at all
improbable, that the Druids, ſo well verſed in all the Arts of Magick
(the ſole buſineſs of which is to deceive), obſerving this uncommon
property in the natural Logan Stones, ſoon learned to make uſe of


it, as an occaſional miracle; and, where they had no natural ones,


made artificial ones, and conſecrated them. They then imagined
Spirits to inhabit them; and this motion, likely, they inſiſted upon
as a proof of thoſe Spirits reſiding within them, and ſo they became
Idols. As to the pits or baſons which we find ſunk into the tops oſ
theſe Logan ſtones, Plate XI. Fig. III. and IV. I will only obſerve
here, that it can ſcarce be doubted but they had their part to act in
theſe juggles, and by the ruffling or reſt of the water, which alter
every ſhower of rain they muſt have contained, were to declare the
wrath or pleaſure of the God conſulted, and ſome way or other to
confirm the deciſion of the Druid, as we ſhall ſee when we come tv
treat of them more circumſtantially,


Camden, p. 762. f Hiſt. of the Druids, p. 103.
- CHAP,


GREAT VIRTUE SUPPOSED IN GEMS.


CHAP, :v.


Of the great Virtucs attributed by the Ancients in Forcigu Parts,
FT ; 3
: and the Druids here, to particular Stones, aid Gems,


MONG the ſeveral ſuperſtitions of the Ancicnts, which claim

a place here, we mult not pals by the great virtue attributed
to certain Stones and Gems. It has been before obferveds, that
when the Gentiles were informed of any extraordinary incident's
being foretold. or any miraculous event produced by the Divine
Power among the Jews, they attributed all this to the viſible means,
the order, ceremony, or ſymbol, ſubſtituted, and enjoined by God
(and therefore, uſed by the Jews), and not to the Divine Power
operating through its own appointed nedium, without which all the
reſt was but dumb, inactive matter, impotence and ſhew.

Among the reſt of the obſervations they made upon the hiſtory of
the Jews, they found that the Divine Will was to be diſcovered b
means of certain appearances in Gems. The Magi of the Eaſt,
either really thinking, or at leaſt making the vulgar believe, that
thefe diſcoveries made by the Urim and Thummim of the Jews b,
were owing to ſome innate Virtue in the Stone, made it a part of their
magical ſyſtem : immediately after, it became the profeſſion of
perſons properly appointed to explain, and interpret, the various
ſhades and coruſcations, the different colours, ders, clouds, and
images, which theſe Gems differently expoſed to the Sun, Moon,
Stars, Fire, or Air, at particular times inſpected by proper perſons,
did exhibit : after theſe Stones were ritually blefied and conſecrated,
they aſſumed in the next place a medicinal influence, and their
power was pretended to be very great, as a Charm, or Amulet,
againſt misfortunes.

Zoroaſter i is faid to have celebrated the wonderful efficacy of the
Aſiroite in all the Arts of Magick, as he did alſo of the Daphnzas k.
Democritus thought the Erotylos of great virtue in Divination].
Zachalias the Babylonian, in his books dedicated to King Mithri-
dates, thinks the deſtiny of Man may be foreknown, accelerated, or


r Page 133. |
* The Urim and Thummim (viz. Lights and


Perfections) were precious Stones in the Breaſt-


abroad to the neighbouring Oriental Nations,
and it is not wholly improbable, that the Zoro-


aſtrian, and other like Gems were made in Imi-
Plate of the High Prieſt, by the particular Ap- * tation of this, and took their Riſe from it.“


pointment of God, Oracular, and under ſome Woodw, Method. Foſſ. Part II. p. 36.
Reſtrictions, Declarative of the Divine Will. i Pliny Lib. XXXVII. cap. ix.

Ex XXVII. 30. Numb. xxvii. 22. The fame * Ibid, cap. x.
** of a thing ſo ſurprizing could not but pals | Ibid,


*


reverſed,


183


184


GREAT VIRTUE AT TRIBUTE PD


reverſed by Gems m; and not content to attribute medicinal Virtues
to the Hematites, or Blood-ſtone, recommends it as neceſſary t.
make applications to great men ſucceſsful, of great power in Law.
ſuits n, and very effectual in the day of battle towards procurin
Victory. S
The Agate was good to allay Tempeſts, as the Perſians thought
and the Artizoe o to inſpire them with proper diſcernment to chyf.
a King. The Cinediz, as they were clear or troubled, were ſuppoſed
to foretell fair or foul weather at ſea ; the Chelonitides to appeaſe
ſtorms ; the Heliotropium to render people invifibleP ; the C
Ammonis is ſaid to prepare the mind to foreſee things to come in
Dreams; the Siderites to create or continue Diſſention. The Zo.
niſcos is ſtyled the Magicians Gem, by, way of eminence ; becauſe,
perhaps, it was a chief favourite of that Order, and generally carried
about them. Doubtleſs, the Magicians found their account in pro-


pagating ſuch extravagancies; and as there was a remarkable confor-


mity between the Magick of the Eaſtern Impoſtors, and that of the
Druids, it is not to be imagined, that the latter would neglect an
Art, which might be ſo much the more eaſily converted to their
private gain, as it was entirely groundleſs, and exhibited wonders,
Spectra, & Predifions, which none but themſelves could ſee, and
none but themſelves were to explain q. There are ſeveral remainders
of this ſuperſtitious foolery {till ſubſiſting, eſpecially in thoſe parts
where Druidiſm impreſſed her laſt footſteps when ſhe took her
leave. In a little Iſle", near the Skie, in a chapel dedicated to
« St, Columbus, on an Altar, is a blue Stone, of a round form,
cc always moiſt : Fiſhermen, detained by contrary winds, waſh this
Stone with water, expecting thereby to procure a favourable wind,
& which, the credulous ſay, never fails: it is likewiſe applied to the
« {fide of people, troubled with ſtitches; and ſo great is the regard
ce they have for this Stone that they ſwear deciſive Oaths upon it.
« Baul Muly* is a green Stone, like a Globe in figure, big as a
ce gooſe- egg, the virtue of it is to remove ſtitches, and to ſwear upon;
ce the credulous firmly believe, that if this Stone is caſt among the


« front of an Enemy, they will all run away. Joachim Camera-


m © Humana gemmis attribuit Fata.“ Plin. ib. © they were uſed in Magick by the Druids.”
» The ſame Power was attributed by the And in his Miſcellanies, 8vo. Lond. p. 128. he
Druids to the Anguinum. : takes notice of © a Cryſtal Sphere, or Mineral


o See Pliny, laſt Edit. Pearl, uſed by Magicians, and to be inſpected |


p Magorum impudentiz vel manifeſtum in © by a Boy.”
choc quoque exemplum eſt.“ Plin. ibid. r Martin of the Weſt-Iſles, p. 167.
4 That the Druids profeſſed this Part of * That is Molingus's Globe. This Molin-
Magick is plain, from the great Powers they at- „ pus was Chaplain to Macdonald, King of the
tributed to the Anguinum. Dr. Woodward, <« les. The Stone is carefully kept by the
Method. Foſſilium, Part II. p. 30. ſpeaking of © Mackintoſhes of the Iſle of Arran in Scotland,
Gems, ſays, ©* Mr. Aubrey, who much ſtudied „ who have that Priviledge.“ Mart. p. 225.
6 the Antiquities of this Iſland, contends, that of
rid


TO PARTICULAR STONES AND GEMMS.


« vis © mentions a round Cryltallin Gem, into which a chaſt boy
„ looking, diſcerned an Apparition, that ſhewed him any thing that
« he required. Paraceltus avers®, that in theſe Speerta, are [cen
« things paſt, preſent, and to come, Of this ſort were the Cry -
« lallin Stones made ute of by Dr. Dec, and Mr. Kelly in their
« m1 Herious Vitions and Operations. One, round, pretty big, and
« of Crv{tal, they call the Shew- ſtone, and holy Stone x. The Iriſh
„ had the fame ſuperſtition. A ſolid Globe of Glaſs or Crvital has
« beet time out of mind in the family of Tyrone, and is ſaid to cure
the Murrain in cattle by putting it into a veſſel of Water, or even
« 4 Rivulct, and giving that Water to the cattle to drink.

Fycrv one is ſenfible, that though the Hematites has been diveſted
of ſome of its wonder-working properties“, yet, that it is {till


ckoned of great uſe, to prevent unuſual and too frequent


leedings.
The political property, attributed to the Fatal Stone, has been
already mentioned, p. 143. It was encloſed in a wooden chair,
and thought to emit a ſound under the rightful King, but to be
mute under one of a bad Title,

The Druid Oracle concerning it is in verſe, and in theſe words,


« Cioniodh ſcuit ſaor an fine « The Lowland Scots have rim'd
it thus,

« Except old Saws do feign,

« Mar a bb ſuigbid an Lia fail ** And Wizardy wits be blind,


8 : „ © "The Scots in place muſt reign
* gd feitDear as raue, v, Where they his Stone hall finds”.


« Man ha breag an Fais dine


By this mcans the Druids (who were always Interpreters of Prodi-
cies, and Oracular Emiſſions) had it in their power of chuſing a
King, whom they thought moſt likely to favour their Order; and
could perſuade the credulous people, that the Stone aſſented, or was
lilent, as ſuited beſt their purpolc.


Martin, ibid. N. B. This is the ſame Metre as the Britiſh
* Explicat. Aſtron. Verſe, called by J. Dav. Rhys's Grammar, the
* The Gems, which are to be inſpectcd, were Englyn Milur, and in which Mr. Edward Lhwyd
called Specla, and the Appearances in them thinks the Druids delivered their Doctrines. See


Meelra. Archzo]. Br. p. 250, 251; and therefore theſe
Woodward, Meth. Foſſ. Part II. p. 30. lines are not improbably of Druid original. Ser
ift. of Watertord (Ireland), p. 10). p. 85.

Page 183. b Toland, Hiſt, Druids, p. 103.
B b b CHAP.
- Male eric Yr of (-+ A #-/ / [a4 1 a; C at: Souls f
7 7 wth / 5 F F : . DE --
17 * /of ty Cr cx ror Lb 42 P n _ {Hae to S4) *
YC. wh ; | .
( 4. 4 9 — 2 1 N 3 * "a a *


1


1 4
. — «7 * en 4 Mn za [ie He 1 Ae. *


x {


155


— ä — ——


2 —


186


SECT. I.


Of Two-
ſtone Mo-


numents.


OF MONUMENTS, OF TWo,


CH AT: VEL


Of Monuments, conſiſting of Two, Three, or ſeveral Stones, thew
a * = = . * . * Cn
De/cription, and Original Deſign enquired into.


> convey the memory of any material Incident to Poſter;

in a more laſting manner than Tradition ſeemed to be capable
of the Ancients made uſe at firſt of rude and ſingle Stones; after.
ages added more in number, and aſſembled them together in ſerer;]
figures the better to preſerve a diſtinction as well as remembrance
which through the fewneſs of ſuch Monuments among the mg:


Ancient was not altogether ſo neceſſary.


To the firſt manner of erecting one fingle Stone Pillar, another
was added, either out of equal reſpect to two Divinities, as Apollo


and Diana (Sun and Moon) Jupiter and Juno, or the like; or u


make the Monument more conſpicuous, and diſtinguiſh it fron
other Monuments of one Stone only, It is not at all ſtrange, thy
two allied Divinities ſhould ſeem worthy of equal honours ; and a
the erecting one Stone only by the ancient Patriarchs might be
intended to expreſs and imply the Unity of the Godhead, fo, after
Polytheiſm, Theogony, and Idolatry took place, the firſt {imple
Unity of the Memorials was alſo laid aſide, and the Stones and Pillar,
multiplied together with their falſe Gods and Idols.

The firſt we read of, I think, are the Pillars of Hercules, ercacd
at the ancient Gades, as Terminations of his Weſtern Travels. The
memory of theſe two Pillars ſeems to be ſtill preſerved in Medals:
for in the Coins of old Tyre, are erected two Stones with a Tyrian
Hercules, ſacrificing by them; they were called AuSzooia m2,
becauſe, as ſome think, they were dedicated to Divine purpoſes by
pouring on them Oil of Roſes d.

Homer intimates to us two different ends, for which the Ancients
erected Monuments of this kind. The Goal, or Termination ot
Horſe and Chariot Courſes was often anciently marked out, by two
erected Stones e; and for this purpoſe, probably, that the Meta migit
be more diſtinctly ſeen and obſerved by the Racers, than if there had
been but one Stone. But the moſt obvious end of this kind ©
Monument was to diſtinguiſh the Graves of conſiderable perſons
by placing an erected Stone at each end of the body interred f. There


Some Authors, however, treat this Story of


Hercules as a Poctical Fable. See ver, 1. Juvenal
Sat. x. Not. Var.


* dtukeley's Stonchenge, p. 50.


© H Toys Nacca THe ii ardleps a. geren Il A.
ver. 3 32. :

H Tw TNA Beolor Tana xalalrwld. Ibic,
ver. 331. |


0 - F 3 * * 7
1 * 1 5 p
- + =
D WS > >»
+ 5 ö 5 n


4
*


10 8 $ *
Account in Gyraldus Cambrenſis, of Arthur's


THREE, OR SEVERAL STONES.


s ſuch a Monument in the Tenement of Drytt in Sancred, Corn-
wall; one of the Stones ſtands nine foot high out of the Earth, the
other fomewhat more than ſeven ; they are eighteen feet diſtant,
Me line in which they ſtand pointing North-weſt. Another of the
ſame ſort in the Tenement of Trewren Madern, the diſtance ten fect,
the line of their plan lying E. N. E. Upon ſearching the ground
between theſe two Stones (October 21, 17 52). the diggers preſently
found a pit fix feet fix long, two feet nine wide, and four feet fix
deep; near the bottom it was full of black greazy Earth, but no
bone to be ſeen. This grave came cloſe to the Weſtermoſt and
largeſt Stone, next to which, I imagine, the head of the interred lay.
The dimenſions and plan of this Monument, are exhibited (Plate X.
fig. IV. V. and VI.) The Chriſtians in ſome parts buried in this
manner, but in compliance, as it is to be imagined, with a more
ancient Pagan cuſtoms. The victorious King Arthur was buried
in the Church-yard of Glaſtonbury, betwixt two Pyramids, as the
Welſh Bard ſung to King Henry II; and as their reſearches in that
place afterwards are ſuppoſed by ſome to have put beyond doubt",


In ſome ancient Monuments we find three Stones fo placed as to SECT. 11.


187


conſtitute one Monument; this was ſometimes to record the number Of Three-


of perſons interred. Xenophon takes notice that where the three n


Eunuchs of Abradates were buried, there were three Pillars i erected.

The Number Three had alſo reſpect unto the three Primary Idols k.
One of the Idols, or creed Symbols of the God Mercury conſiſted
of three Stones; two large Stones were pitched on end, over which
another Stone was laid, which covered the reſt, bearing with its
middle upon the Stones underneath. At theſe three Stones, ſo diſ-
poſed, it was a piece of Religion among the Heathens to throw
certain other ſmall Stones, as a kind of Offering to the Idol!.

Stone- Heaps or Parcels, conſiſting of three circular Stones piled one
on the other, the largeſt underneath, and twelve feet diameter ;
the other two ſmaller in proportion, but the ſmalleſt excceding fix
teet diameter. He calls them Hermea, thinking them neareſt in


* * The Monk, O Gorgon, is buried near to © ton in his Hiſtory abſolutely rejects it.” Lord
** this Chapel, and there is a Stonefive Foot high Biſhop of Carliſle to the Author,
pF at each End of this Grave.” Martin, of St. This ſeems to be the molt obvious and natu-
Columbus's Chapel in an Iflet near the Skie, ral reaſon for erecting Stones in this Number ;
P. 167, | and of this kind probably may be the three huge
" dpeed, Chron. p. 272. &. „The late upright Stones called the Devil's Quoits, in a
q learned Dr. Ward of Greſham College, and ploughed field near Kennett in Oxfordſhire,
2 tne late ingenious Smart Lethieullier, Eſqz which Dr. Plott thinks Britiſh Deities. Hitt.
F.R.S. were both of opinion that the whole Oxf. ch. x.
3 | k Worm. p. 8.
5 depulchte being diſcovered at Glaſtonbury, | Buxt, Lexic. Talm. in voce MarcoLis.
e an Nipolition upon him, and Lord Lyitel-


reſemblance


ſtone Mo-
uments.


188 OF MONUMENTS, OF TW oO,


reſemblance to the Heaps near the Highways crected to the honour gx
Mercury m.

Strabo (Lib. III. p. 2c 2.) takes notice of three or four Stone,
placed together (but he mentions no Ichnography) in a ſacred Piece
of ground near Hercules's Temple n. |
SEC T. II. When the Ancients erected Stones in order to compoſe ami
Of Several- Memorial, there was ſomething expreſſive either in the number cf
numents, the Stones of which the Monument did confiſt, or in the ſhape of
an *Y ® the Stones themſelves, or in the Order and figure in which the,
Numbers. were diſpoſed. |

Of the firſt kind were the Monuments of Mount Sinai®, and th
at Gilgal, erected by Joſhua upon the banks of Jordan; they con-
ſiſted of twelve Stones each, becauſe the people of Ifrael (for whoſ:
ſake the Altar was built, and the ſtreams of Jordan dividing them.
ſelves, opened a miraculous paſſage for the whole nation) were prin.
cipally claſſed into twelve tribesP. The ſame number of Stones, and
for the ſame reaſon, were ſet up in the midſt of Jordan, where the
Ark had reſted 9. |

The Altar alſo which Elijah built”, was compoſed of twelxe
Stones only, according to the number of the twelve Tribes of Iſrael;
intimating thereby, that this Altar was dedicated to the God of
Iſtael, who had choſen thoſe twelve Tribes for his peculiar people,
and, by a long ſeries of miracles and revelations, had proved him-lf
to them not to be a dead Idol, but a living God.

There is a very ſingular Monument recorded by Wormiuss; and
as the Stones are neither ſhaped by Art, nor placed in any regular
emblematick figure, it may be ſuppoſed that the number wa;
expreſſive of what Tradition is now filent. Six large tall Stones are
the principal parts of this Monument ©; four of them have two
ſmall circles, or ringlets, of Stones round the baſe of each; the other
two have a few ſmall Stones heaped round their bottom. Between
the principal Stones, are {1x little piles of Stones interſperſed : the
neighbours relate, that it is a monument of a battle fought there.

Perhaps it was the Memorial of an appointed Duel betwixt fix
perſons of each fide (as that of the Horatii and Curiatii was of three).
The little heaps (which are generally conſtrued to be ſepuchral) be-
ing intended as Memorials of the conquered and lain, the ere
Stones emblems of the victorious, whereof four ſurvived the Combat,


m Strabo, Lib. XVII. p. 1173. Univerſ. Hiſt. * quod ferunt eum noQurno tempore a D


Engliſh, Vol. I. folio, p. 217. 6 teneri.”
" Of which Keyſler, p. 189, thus, Apud * Exod. xxiv. 4.
© S$trabonem, quidam, de fano Herculis ad occi- ? Joſh. iv. 8.
* dentem ſito mentionem faciens, neque aram q4 Ibid. ver. 9.
ibi efle ait, neque ullius Deorum {|ſcilicet r 1 Kings Xviil. 31.
* templum] {ed Lapides multis in locis Ternos Mon. Dan. p. 63. Nr ty”
aut Quaternos compoſitos. Fas ibi non eile See the Monument at the End of Cha.


ſacrificare, neque nocte eum locum adire, copied from Wormius.


and


THREE, OR SENYNERAT STUN


and were inveſted with Garlands, or Ringlets of Stones, as tokens of
Victory; the other two ell in the action, and have therefore little
heaps round their baſe 3 but, being entitled to a ſhare of the Con-
querour 5 Glory, they have therefore the honour of a E7yay, or
column, creed to their Memory.

Some of the Ancients were wont to place as many Obeliſks, or
Stones: rect, at the Grave, as the departed Warriour had {lain of the
Enemy. In the number of Stones of which they compoſed their
circular Temples, they ſometimes had regard to the diviſions of time
into Days, Weeks, and Months. There is alſo reaſon to believe,
that when any new Circle of Stones was formed for the more
ſolemnly electing a King, or Chief, as many Stones went to compoſe
the Circles, as there were Electors who had a right to vote at the
Election, one Stone for each, and no more.

Sometimes, by the particular ſimilar ſhape of many Stones ercced,
they expreſſed their reverence for their principal Deity, by conform-
ing all che Symbols to that figure in which he was uſually repre-
ſented. Thus the Phareans “ round their Mercurius Agoræus, which
held the middle and moſt honourable place of their Forum, erected
zo Cubes of Stone, out of reſpe& to their chief God, Mercury
(whoſe Symbol was a Cube), each of which they worſhiped under
the name of ſome particular Deity. |


189


W hy of
different
Shapes and


Some Authors think that erected Stones, placed in a ſtraight line, RcAilinear.


are Memorials of Battles, or Combats *. In Weſtmoreland, is a row,
or range, of ſtones erect, ſome nine foot high, pyramidal, placed
almoſt in a direct line, and at equal diſtances for a mile together.
They ſeem erected, ſays the learned Annotator, in memory of ſome
great action). With as much reaſon, at leaſt, it may, from the
extent of theſe Monuments, be preſumed, that they were boundaries
of patrimonial Lands, or thoſe little Territories, into which moſt
countries anciently were divided; for © in Angleſea there are many
lines of ſingle Stones-ere&t, which are ſtill called Terfyne, or
« Terfyneau, that is, terminations of Lands.“ :

On the Downs leading from Wadebridge to St. Columb, and
about two miles diſtant from it, is ſuch a line of Stones (Pl. XVII.


fig. I.) bearing N. E. and S. W. This Monument is generally called
the Nine Maids.


Olaus Magnus a tells us, that Stones diſperſed in a triangular figure, Triangular.


denote a Victory obtaincd by a body of horſe ; that by a ſquare


v © Theri pro hoſtium interfectorum numero, Lib. I. cap. xxxix.—Plott's Staffordſhire, p. 398,
tot Obeliſcos apponunt, hoc inſigne teſtimo- of the four Pyramidal Stones near Burrow-Bridge,
** nium_ virtutis, & expertiſſimum decus arbi- Yorkſhire.

* trati,” Al. ab Al. vol. I. p. 558. Lib. III. y Camden, p. 996. Britan, Ed. Gibſon.

Pauſan. Acha. Lib. VII. cap. xxii. * Rowland, chap. xxvi. p. 5. |

* Wormius, Mon. Dan. p. 62. —Olaus Mag. 3 Lib. I. cap. xxix.


Ccc figure,


o 8
„ td. gow


190


Penſile.


OF MONUMENTS, OF Two


figure, the place where mies (or rather, champions for ſingle Duels
met and engaged, is ſignified; by a round, family-burial-placeg f

Sometimes we find Stones erected, and others lying horizontal
on the tops of them, making, as at Stonehenge, &c. ſo many Portals:
and in this faſhion we find the Ancients ſometimes erccted thei;
Trophies to perpetuate the Memory of ſome important Victory,

The Victory gained by Regnerus over the Kings of the Biarm;
and the Finni, was tranſmitted to poſterity by a T rophy of this
kinds.

Some Stones placed in this latter manner were (as I conjecture)
ſeats of ſudgement; of Inſtruction, of Ritual Admiſſion of Dilciples,
and giving Audience to perſons of ſuperiour note d.

There is a Monument of this penſile kind in Karn Boſcawene; it
conſiſts of one large flat Stone (A), one end of which reſts upon the
natural Karn (B); the other end on three large Stones (CDE; placed
on one another, in order to raiſe a proper ſupport for the weight
above (Plate XIV. fig. IV. p. 177.) Between this Canopy-ftone,
and its ſupporters, there is an opening, wide at the top ſeven feet,
but the Chaſm cloſes into a ſharp point at the bottom (F). This
Canopy 1s too nicely ſupported to be the work of nature, and one
mult check one's imagination very much not to conjecture, that the
opening, underneath it, was deſigned for the ſcat: of ſome conſidet-
able perſon; from which he might give out his Edicts, and Deciſions,
his Predictions, and Admiſſions to Noviciates. 'The mind can hardly
frame to itſelf a ſcene more ſtriking and awful than this mult be to
all perſons, who came hither for judgement, or inſtruction ; nothing
can be more ſuitable to the ſuperſtition of the Druids, nor more
likely to promote the deluſion of all that were to be initiated into
the myſteries, or introduced into the preſence of *the Chief Prieſt :
we may fancy, with ſome probability, that, when any perſon of
more than ordinary figure was to be admitted, he was to be con-
duced firſt round the holy Circle (of which the remains are ſtill to
be ſeen on the brow of the hill above); that, as he deſcended, he
was to be ſprinkled and purified at proper pauſes, and tations, by
the heavenly waters which the Rock-baſons (very numerous here)
contained: as he deſcended farther, paſſing along between the ſacred
Obeliſks (of which ſome are {till to be ſeen) he loſes fight of every
thing, but of vait Rocks on either fide, above, and below, and the
immenſe ocean before him, till being got about half way down this


b Wormius, however, a more cautious Writer, „ ac Danicis literis unum inſcribi refert.
p. 67. doubts, whether theſe Characteriſticks are Worm. p. 67.
always infallible. „J. Speed, in Deſcriptione c Worm. p. 96.
„Devon. ad Exmore, Saxa in triangulum, alia 4 See pages 176, 178.
& in orbem erecta. Trophæa certe victoriarum e In the Pariſh of St. Burien, Cornwall.
„ quas Romani, Saxones, vel Dani obtinuerunt,


ſteep


THREE OR SEVERAL STONES. 191


{tcep and craggy Cliff, doubtful whither he was to be led, he is
ſurprized with this Throne, which has fomething ſo truely grand
and {imple in its ſupporters and Canopy, that it almoſt leaves us
uncertain, whether it be the work of Nature, or of | Art. Between
the ſũpporters fits the venerable Chief Druid, his Tiara on his head,
his holy veſtments on, his Scepter in his hand, all theſe decorated
with the Iii, of his Order, and every where round him the moſt
ſtupendous Rocks. A few paces below this Throne is an Arca of
about twelve fect diameter, cleared of the Rocks, from whence the
perſon introduced, with his attendants, might well hear the Precepts
of the Druid without violating his Dignity by too familiar an
approach.


2 —
— — —— — — ne
— —
— — — — — — -
* = - 2 2


- — — e Ws -- N — = — 4 — — — A ——
= Fug - * = — — *


CHAP. VII.


Of Circular Monuments, the UV ſe and Defron of | then among the
Ancients in foreign Countries, and the Druills in this.


MONG the moſt ancient Britiſh Monuments, the Circles of

Stones- erect may juſtly claim a place; we come therefore to
diſcourſe of them particularly, for as much as, by their ſimplicity,
they appear to be next in date to the Monuments yhich go before.

We lind the number of Stones erected on a circular plan various; SECT. .
ſome Circles conſiſting of twelve, others of more, the moſt which have Number of
reached my notice, ſeventy- ſeven. This difference in number was Sate.
not owing to chance, but either to ſome eſtabliſhed Rules obſerved
in the conſtruction of theſe Monuments, or referring to, and ex-
preſſive of, the Erudition of thoſe ages. In ſome places we find them
oftner of the number Twelve than of any other number, either in
honour to the twelve ſuperiour Deities, or to fome national Cuſtom
of twelve Perſons of Authority meeting there in Council upon im-
portant affairse; or alluding to the twelve months of the year.

There are four Circles | in the hundred of Penwith, Cornwall (the
moſt diſtant two of which are not eight miles aſunder), which have
[mom Stones each, a ſurprizing uniformity, expreſſing, perhaps,
the two principal diviſions of the year, the twelve months, and the
even days of the week. This conjecture will not ſeem ſtrange and
groundleſs, when we reflect that the Prieſts were the only Chrono-


By The Monument of Sinai, p. 188. and of © olim ſolenni creabantur pompa, quz cinta
Gilzal, ibid. (which were both probably of the ** adhuc grandibus taxis (ut plurimum duodecim )
circular kind) had twelve Stones each, becauſe ** conſpiciuntur.“ Worm. M. D. p. 87.
ſuch was the Number of the Tribes. Reperi- f Boſcawen'uun, Roſmodereuy, Tregaſeal,
* untur 1n his oris loca quædam in quibus Reges Boſkednan,


logers


192


OF CIRCULAR MONUMENTS.


logers and Regiſters of Time; and it is no wonder that they (,,.
hidden as they were either to teach by Letters, or commit ther


| Myſteries to writing) ſhould endeavour to perpetuate the mem


of their Learning, and Aſtronomical Computations, in ſuch C,,.


racers as were moſt likely to deſcend through all ages of their


Poſterity, without tranſgreſſing the laws of their Order. But
whatever was the reaſon, the number of theſe Stones in other places
is different, and where the deſign of the Circle was for electing:
Governours, or holding Councils, muſt needs have been ſo, becauf:
the number of Nobles there aſſembled could not but be frequently
different, and each Noble, ſo convened, had a right to his Pillar, at
which he was to take his ſtand ; again, when the Authors of ſuch
Monuments were eminent for family, fortune, or learning, they
might probably chuſe to record ſome diſcovery in Science, the
number of their famous Anceſtors, or of the Principalities they in-
herited, in theſe their works.


Diſtance of The diſtance of the Stones from each other is alſo different in dif.
theſeStones. ferent Circles, but was likely the ſame, or nearly fo, at firſt, in one


Plans.


and the ſame Circle, ſo that, by thediftance of what remain ſtanding,
or otherwiſe, may in a great meaſure be aſcertained the number of
Stones of which the Circle formerly conſiſted. Whether they were
very exact in ſuiting theſe diſtances according to the ſize of the Stones,
and obſerved a regular gradation from the ſmaller to the great, and
again a gradual declenſion from the greater to the ſmall, is what!
cannot aſſert; but is imagined fo to be by ſome of the learned, as well
as that they meaſured thoſe diſtances by Cubits in whole numbers,
not by the foot or yards.

It was not in any indifferent or common place that theſe Circles
were erected; but the Rites of Augury, and the opinion of the Magi
(or Philoſophers of the Country) were firſt conſulted, eſpecially if
Religion, or the Election of Princes, was upon the carpet h; but if
Victory, the place where it was won was to be honoured with the
Trophy. |
The figure of theſe Monuments is either ſimple, or compounded.
Of the firſt kind are exact Circles, elliptical or ſemicircular. The
conſtruction of theſe is not always the ſame, ſome having their cir-
cumference marked with large ſeparate Stones only ; others having
ridges of ſmall Stones intermixed, and ſometimes Walls and Seats,
ſerving to render the incloſure more-compleat. Other circular Mo-
numents have their figure more complex and varied, conſiſting, not


£ Dr. Stukeley's Abury, p. 21. Lib. I. p. 14. ver. 19. ** No Place was called

h «<< Augures vero eadem ferme Teſqua quæ & * a Temple, but what had been marked out, that
« Templa, vocabant ; Loca Auguriis deſignata, “ is, conſecrated, by the Augurs.“ Scal. de Lin,
« quorum termini, cum fere rupibus, ſylviſque ac Lat. Lib. V. p. 54. Moyle, P. Works, vol. I.
„ montibus finirentur,” Not, Var. Hor. Epiſt. p. 390. | |


only


Li
bt 4 2 2 U *
- 0 * * * wy WT. I us
e —


OF CIRCULAR MONUMENTS. 193


only of a Circle, but of ſome other diſtinguiſhing Properties i. In, or
near the center of fome, ſtands a Stone taller than the reſt -; in the
niddle of others a Kiſt-vaen, that is, a Stone-ſepulchral-cheſt, or
Cavity, A Cromleh (or Aitar-tomb of rough Stone) ditlinguithes
che center of ſome circles!; and one remarkable Rock that of
others; fome have only one line of Stones itz their circumference,
* .nd ſome have two; ſome Circles are adjacent, ſome contiguous,
* and ſome include, and fome interſect each other. Sometimes Urns
are ſound in or near them; and theſe Circles are of very different
dimenſions, as will be ſeen in the Icons. Some are curiouſly erected
on geometrical Plans, the chief entrances facing the cardinal points
of the Heavens; ſome have avenues leading to them, placed exactly
North and South, with detached Stones, ſometimes in ſtreight lines
to the Eaſt and Weſt, ſometimes triangular; all evidences of more
than common exactneſs and deſign: of all theſe we ſhall produce
inſtances in their proper place.

Theſe Monuments are found in many foreign Countries m, as well
as in all the Iſles dependant upon Britain”, and in moſt parts of
Britain itſelf“. «
. They go by ſeveral names in different places. In the Highlands SECT. 17.

pol Scotland they call them Temples; and from two or three of them Hownamed.
in the Pariſh of Strathawen, there is a place adjoining called 'Temple-

Town; and, where two Circles are called the Temple Stones, in
Auchincochtie, there, as Tradition ſays, Pagan Prieſts had formerl

their Habitation. In Scotland ſometimes they are alſo called Chapels;

and from one of them in Bamfſhire, a Place is called Leachell

Beandic, or Bleſſed Chapel b.

In the Weſtern Iſles (where there are many) they are called by the
common people Druin Cruiny 9, that is, Druid Circles. In Den-
bighſhire, there 1s one Circle called Kerig y Drudion, or the Druid
Stones". Another name (though foreign) may be here taken notice
of, which is, that Stone-Circles in Denmark, and in the Iſles of
Iſland, Shetland, and Man, are called Ting, that is, a Seat of Juſtice,
a Forum; and the hill on which the King of the Iſle of Man was


0 ng r
- 4 * 9
4 , 9 8 - 2 1 1 5
1 * * FTA. 15 ** > 1 *
e } 4 4
. e . * l


One Circle at Abury has a work in the Cen-
ter, which the old Britans called a Cove (as Dr.
dtukeley ſays, ibid.), conſiſting of three Stones
making an obtuſe Angle toward cach other ; this
was the Kibla, or point, to which they turned


and the Iſle of Man.
o Scotland, Cumberland, Wales, Oxfordſhire,


Wiltſhire, and in Cornwall many, and very
entire. |


b Camden.


their Faces Curing the time of Worſhip.

See the Circle of Boſcawen- un (Plate XV.
Fiz. III. p. 198.) this is alſo called the Kibla by
Dr, Stukeley. See his Abury, p. 24.
© See Narn Lechart in Glamorganſhire, Cam-
den, p. 739.

_ ® Hand, Sweden, Denmark, in the Marqui-
ate of Brandenburg, the Dutchy of Brunſwick
Linenburgh, and other Parts of Germany,


The Orkneys, Weſtern Ifles, Jerſey, lreland,


q4 Rowl. Mona, p. 112.

r Lhuyd's Letter to Mr. Paynter, in Moyle,
p. 239. And his Letter to the Biſhop of Carliſle.
Baxt. Gloſl. p. 272.

Worm. Mon. Dan. p. 68. —<« Ding, Judi-
* cium, Dingſtuhl, Sedes Scabinalis (or Sheriffs
„Seat), Dingdach, Dies Juridicus, — Huſtin-
„ gum & Hultingian, Anglo Saxones pro Curia
* ulurpabant.” Keyller, p. 78.


Ddd


formerly


\#


194 OF CIRCULAR MONUMENTS.


formerly inaugurated, ſtanding in the Center of a Circle (his Noble
round him, and the Commons without the Circle) is called ge
Tinwald-hill.

In Cornwall there is a great number of theſe Circles (and of mod
ſorts that have been mentioned) and the name they go by moſt com.
monly is, that of Dawns-men, that is, the Stone-Dance, “ ſo called
& of the common people on no other account, than that they are
placed in a circular Order, and ſo make an Area for Dancing: ”

This is the true reaſon of that name, and not a corruption of Dani
men (as ſome have imagined), as if theſe Monuments had been of
Daniſh erection; the traditions of the common people ſeldom fixin
upon, and being conſtant to, points of hiſtory, but rather taking the;
riſe from ſome obvious property that ſtrikes the ſenſes, and reſemble;
the Cuſtoms of their Country. To confirm Mr. Lhuyd's opinion, |
muſt obſerve, that theſe Circles are found where the Danes never
were; that, Dawnſe in Corniſh, ſignifies a Dance, and that in the
circular Figure (of which we are now treating) there is a very anci.
ent Dance, or play u, ſtill practiſed among the Corniſh. For the
ſame reaſon, as I ſuppoſe (namely, becauſe theſe circular Stones ere
ſeem to have thrown themſelves into a King towards a Merry.
making) about eight miles Weſt of Bath, a Monument of this kind
is called the Wedding ; and I cannot but obſerve, that the Greeks
had ſuch a Dance at their hymeneal ſolemnities, as appears by the
Nuptials engraved on the ſhield of Achilles, where the young men
are ſaid to run round, or dance in a Ring.


—=Ioavg 0' THeα Y ogweet The Hymeneals far reſound,
Kegor d wexnonees e0wveoy,-— And Youths in myſtic Mazes whirl,—
Hom, II. Lib. XVIII. ver. 493.


SECT. I. The ſeveral names by which theſe Monuments are diftinguiſhedin
Of the in- different parts of the world, conſidered jointly with the other betore-
tent and uſe . . - ,
of theſe mentioned properties of Size, Figure, Number, and ſome Peculi-
Circles. arities belonging to particular Circles, will contribute to diſcover in
a great meaſure by whom they were erected, and for what uſes they
were intended; and our conjectures formed upon theſe, we mult be
contented to fortify as well as we can by Tradition, and ſuch tifto-
rical Records as offer in other Countries as well as in our own.
Some Reli- Firſt, it is highly probable that ſome of theſe Monuments were o
bt Religious Inflitution, and deſigned originally and principally for the


Rites of Worſhip. And Moſes roſe up early in the Morning, ans


t Lhuyd : Moyle's Poſthum. Works, vol. I. » « Adoleſcentes autem Saltatores in orbem


3 « agebant ſe.” Cler. Hom. ibid, #9 4, vir.
It is called Trematheeves, ut fieri ſolebat.


« builded


*
TY
0

1
7


OF CIRCULAR MONUMENTS.


« huilded an Altar under the hill, and twelve Pillars according to
« the twelve Tribes of Uraels.” Certainly this was a Religious
Monument; the Altar for Sacrifice, and the twelve Pillars for a
prince of each Tribe to ſtand by, to partake of the Sacrifice, to
covenant in the name of his Tribe, and to ſeal that covenant which
he made with God, by receiving the. Blood with which Moſes be-
ſprinkled theſe Delegates of the people; as they ſtood round about
the Altar v. If it be ſaid, that the Scripture leaves us in the dark as to


the plan and form of this Monument; yet it mull be obſerved, that the 5
ceremonial circumſtances make it clear, that it was of the circular


Figure. I would only aſk, in what form theſe Pillars would be
crected by any perſon who was to perform the like ceremonies; I
fancy it would be anſwered, without any heſitation, in the circular
form, as liable to leſs exceptions, with regard to the Princes, and
molt convenient for the officiating Prophet.

In obedience to the Divine Command, there was a Monument ſet


up by Joſhua at Gilgal, which conſiſted of twelve Stones fixed in the


Earth. The deſign of it was to make the Iſraclites conſtantly adherc
to the worſhip of the true God, by remembering their miraculous
paſſage (dry thod) over the river Jordan, from the chanel of which
theſe twelve Stones were taken? . In what figure theſe Stones were
diſpoſed, the Scriptures do not ſay; but from the reſemblance which
Monuments did uſually bear to ſome of the principal incidents they
were deſigned to commemorate, as well as alſo from the name of
Gilgal*; it is moſt probable that this Monument was round. It muſt
here alſo be noted, that there was not only twelve Stones erected
upon the banks of Jordan, but the ſame number alſo in the chanel
of the River, exactly © in the place where the fect of the Prieſts,
« which bare the Ark of the Covenant, flood b.“ Now as the Prieſts
ſtood round about the Ark, to prevent the approach of every thing
that was unholy ; it is more likely that the Stones in the Water were
erected with a conformity to the Order in which the Prieſts ſtood,
whiltt the people were paſſing over, than in any other manner.
This Gilgal was firſt a place of worſhip ©, then of national Councild,
and Inauguration ©, and when the Iſraelites had degenerated into


Paganiſm, it became a place of Idolatrous Worſhip f ; as ſuiting the


5


principles of the Eaſtern Superſtition: ſor, as it was their Cuſtom


1 Exod, XXiv. 4. Agreement between the Name and the Figure of
7 Ibid. 7, 8. | the Monument; and therefore. Dr. Stukeley in
„ Joſhua iv. 21, 22, and 24. his Abury thinks Gilgal a Circular Monument.
* Which ſignifies Rolling, ſurrounding, b Joſh. iv. . D
Roundneſs, a wheel, and the like. See Buxtorf's © Ibid. v. 10.
Lex. Heb, Leigh's Crit. Sacr, p. 40. and Paul. 4 1 Sam. vii. 16.
Fag. ibid. ſo that, beſides rolling away the Re- © Ibid. xi. 15.
proach of Egypt (mentioned Joſh. v. g.), there ft Hoſea iv. 15, and xii, 11. \
tems to be in Gilgal a mutual Relation and >


to


195


196


OF CIRCULAR MONUMENTS.


to conſecrate places to Religion, ſo it was equally their Principle tg
take care, that thoſe places ſhould be open, and nothing like con-
finement in their Temples, left it ſhould look like Limiting, |
cloſing, or Impriſoning, an infinite, ubiquitarious being. The lm2ge,
of the Sun were to be open to the Heavens, and were therefore called
PN} that is, Subdiales, or Statues in the open air; and the Ph...


nician Hercules (or the Sun) was wont to be adored in an open


Temple h; and their Sacrifices, and publick Devotions were alwars
ficb dio, on the tops of Rocks and Mountains, or in the midſt ct
Groves, but never under covert. Now theſe two principles of dedi.
cating particular places to worſhip, and at the ſame time keeping
them open and unconfined, were thoroughly reconciled in Monuments
of this circular kind. The places were marked out {ufficiently t

reſerve them from rude, profane abuſe, and yet by Stones placed
at ſome diſtance from each other on their ends, there was no abſolute,
compleat incloſure. That the Druids held, the firſt of the aboye-
mentioned Principles, and had places appropriated to ſacred ue,
has been ſhewn before i; and that they alſo maintained the ſecond
principle, namely, that the Gods were not to be confined within
walls, is not to be doubted, it being one of the fundamentals of the
Celtic Religion k, from which we have no reaſon to think that the
Druids ever departed, if we judge from their Monuments, which are
the beſt vouchers for their opinions. Beſides, the multitude and
nature of their Sacrifices required ſuch Fires as could not admit of
Roof or Coverture. Again, the Druids were extreamly addicted to
Magick, in which Art the Circle was eſteemed eſſentially neceſſary,
to carry on all the nefarious Rites of Witchcraft, and Necromancy ;
and the vulgar opinion that Conjurers have no power to call forth the
Demon to foretell future events, or diſcover what is concealed from
others, unleſs he draws a Circle round him, ſeems to be a remaining
part of this Druid Superſtition. It has been already obſerved}, that
the Druids had a ſurprizing reſemblance to the Perſians, who took
in all the whole compaſs of Heaven into their Idea of Jupiter®; and
it muſt be owned, that the Druids had the ſame Deity, and-that they
could not ere& their Temples more analogous to, and expreſſive of,
that God, nor better adapted to perform their adorations to every
Region of the Heavens, than in the Circular Figuren. Again, we
find in the middle of ſuch Circles, ſometimes a tall Pillar, ſuch 2:
formerly were worſhiped as Idols; at other times a Rock, ot


* Iſaiah xxvii. 9. Buxtort. in voc. x In the Symbols of their Deities there w::
> Maundrel's Travels, p. 21. ſomething in the Figure which expreſſed tie
i Cap. xvii. Lib. II. principal Attribute of their God (ſee p. 108. f
k Tacitus, de M. G. Sched. p. 340. alſo in their Temples; the Temple of Veſta we


1 Cap. xxii. Lib. II. round, becauſe Veſta was the Earth.
Herodot. in Clio. Hyde, Cap. VI. p. 137. ;
Cromlch,


|
|


OF CIRCULAR MONUMENTS.


* Cromlch, which have all the appearances of having ferved on
* me occaſions for Altars; and therefore nothing can be ſo
probable, as that the ring of Stones ſerved to mark out the limits
of the Tewple, where ſacred Othces were perfortned to ſuch
Idols, and upon ſuch Altars. The Circular Figure (as every
one muſt allow) was molt convenient of any for the audience to
fee, and hear, and enter into their parts of the ſacrifical
Rites; and therefore could not but ſuggeſt itſelf, from the moſt
remote Antiquity, to all Idolaters that placed their whole ſtreſs upon
the outhde of Religion. Let me obſerve farther, that ſome of theſe
Monuments are of aſtoniſhing Grandeur and Magnificence®, much
exceeding every other end, and occaſion, than that of Religion. I
am aware that ſome attribute the Circle of Stonehenge to the
Romans, and not to the Druids ; but there is ſuch a wildnels in this
orand Structure, that to imagine it of Roman erection after Julius
Ceſar's time, is too groundleſs a ſuppoſition to be worth confuting.
However, to add a word or two to this diſpute, let it be only con-
ſidered, that the Roman ways croſs and mangle theſe Circles (as fee
Tab. IV. of Dr. Stukeley's Stonehenge); and it can never be true,
that the Romans would erect and dishgure the ſame, and their own
works. It is alſo evident, that ſuch Monuments were prior to the
Roman ways, for the Druids would never be ſuffered to impede the
Highways of their Lords and Maſters ; theretore, theſe mult have
been built before the Roman ways were made, which will naturally
lead us to another concluſion equally evident, which is, that as they
could not be Roman works, becauſe prior to the le ways; ſo
neither, for the laſt mentioned reaſon, could they be of the Saxon or
none but the Druids.

That theſe Temples are of different ſizes, and ſome excceding
ſmall, no more than twelve feet diameter, muſt be confeſſed; and yet
this will not hinder but that all might be places of worſhip: that
ſome are of larger dimenſions than others, may probably be owing
either to the different quality of the Founders and Prieſts, or the
different end for which they were deſigned; the larger for more
noble and general aſſemblies, the ſmaller for more private, and,
perhaps, family uſes: the large for Sacrifices and feſtival Solem-
nities, the ſmall for particular Interceſſions, Predictions, and per-

haps Sepulchres of Prieſts and Worthies. — In ſhort, theſe Circles
were of different ſize, either becauſe thereby they were better pro-
portioned to the different kind of Superſtition therein to be per-
formed, or to the different ranks and claſſes of the Druids; if the
riches or power of the perſons who erected them was great, ſo was


o See Dr. Stukeley's Stonehenge and Abury.
E e e their


197


J


198


Particular
{ rts of Cir-
cles.


Bolk dnan.
Ferris


Roundago.


Salakee in
Scilly,


OF-CIRCVULAR MONUMENTS


their work; if their ability was ſmall, the Circles they erected
in proportion. |

Of theſe Monuments that kind was molt ancient which was moſſ
ſimple, and conſiſted only of a Circle of Stones-erect. Of this fort
we have a great number in Cornwall, which differ not materia
from one another: Boſkednan Circle therefore (Plate XV, Fig, |
may repreſent the whole. —In the tenement of KerrisP there is 41
oval Incloſure, which may be ſeen Plate XVII. Fig. II. It is about
52 paces from North to South, and 34 wide, from Eaſt to Weg.
At the Southern Termination A, ſtand four rude Pillars about eivh;
fect high, at the foot of which lie ſome large long ſtones, which
I am apt to think did formerly reſt upon theſe Pillars. The Plan
on which theſe Pillars ſtand 1s eighteen feet from North to South
and eleven feet wide. I am inclined to think that this was a place
of Worſhip, that theſe Stones-ere& were deſigned to diſtinguiſh and
dignify the Entrance, and were the Kibla of the Place (as the learned
Dr. Stukeley calls the Cove of one of his Abury Circles), and that
they were erected like ſome of the Stones at Stone-henge in the ſha
of two rude Portals, to inſpire thoſe that entered this encloſure
with double Sanctity r. It is at preſent called the Roundago, which
name (though Engliſh) it may have acquired poſſibly from the
ſuperſtitious Rounds uſed in the Druid Worſhip.

On a Karn adjoining to the Grant's Caſtle in St. Mary's Scilly,
we found the back of the Rock cleared, as it ſeemed, of all uneven-
neſs, and making one plane of Rock. This Area is of a circular
{igure, 172 feet from North to South, and 138 feet from Eaſt to
Weſt ; on the edges of it are nine vaſt ſtones {till remaining, planted
in a circular line; ſeveral others perfected the round, but from time
to time have been removed, and ſome of them within theſe few years,
There is no uniformity in the ſhape of the Stones that remain,
neither do they ſeem to have ever been placed at any calculated,
equal diſtances. The Stone (Plate XI. fig. II.) placed among the
Rock- idols makes one of the ring; the front of it, towards the
center, is 20 foot long; a rude Pillar fallen down lies before it,
about five paces diſtant, inwards. This Rock ftands Eaſt of the
Central Point; and in a line from it ſomewhat to the North of the
Weſt, are three large flat Stones, which have Baſons on the top 0!
them, but pieces of them are broke and carried off. This was 2
great work of its kind, the flcor of one Rock, and the Stones round
the edges of an extraordinary ſize. |

Some Circles are near one the other, and their Centers in a line,
to ſignify, perhaps, that they were intended for, and directed to, one


tre


? Pariſh of Paul, Cornwall. r Chap. iii. p. 176.
4 See the Entrance, or Portal, Pl. XVII. fig. III. * Ibid. p. 173. 0
U


.


PI. W


hk
8 FO l 1 V 8
| Fes a NN |
* : . d. *
—_ % ou
=


*
Vr cdi Gre pigot'


4 & : #
| X
. F n a
* J .
Fn PN.


5 1
f 1 Dorhednan nite in gulhal con


Pugh
*
2 |
4 4A... j 1 *
4 IR - * ;


: | /
od. vn |
* * 89 -


i
. — 0 * * . Fra *
ll, Barcawen-un (ride un- Beryan Se p. d. 1.
34 3
1


3 * 3
Ft ES 3 R a


A . \& Woe
| Seele. in Cornwall O19 of


: ä &/ fa :
regbect 111114 tf by Ton Barlage.


war rIephe r Hawking of ©


Sh) Plate 70 2 great


| F 8 = . . 0 5
Of ATi: ere nucah Moll UND)


L. XVI. pa. 0%): ; 7 7 ,
FIL. XVI pa. <Polalloh C e, u, t.
. 1 =
« * \
( : &
= fe
[£5
E E a
* 1 Cc
0
4
=
N .
8? 4
—
+ £
„„
3 E
2 0
4
4
0 E
y
*
2 2 : ©
r 4 8 v *
*
5 5 20 2 .
d ans S0,
3
5 3 $, 1 7
— 260


4 —
f £ 4
* 5 >
© {> 5
2 A Wn * 8 ®
T : — 2 ha a
0
<<
2 nv
(+
6
O
&
W
*


0 4 FRY
0 £


a 20 30 pares
= 1


f


2%


XK 7 Precentor of the Cl aue 7 Earle“
h e, 1 work : great EX) re ect IC rib by Jhn. Jon laue .


1
4
* 4
Kd
wo
$
*
*
9
*


7
5
z
&
> A
*
+]
Mo
6
$
„
4 **
*
F
0


OF-CIRCULAR MONUMENTS. 199


uſe. Of this Kind is the Monument called the Hurlers, in the Pariſh Thettur-
St. Clare, Cornwall; the Stones of which, by the vulgar, are ſuppoſed '**
o have been once Men, and thus transformed, as a puniſhment for
their hurling* upon the Lord's Day. This Monument" conſiſted of
thrice Circles from which many Stones are now carried off; what
remain, and their diſtances, , may be ſcen (Plate XVII. p. 215.
ſig. VI.) Again, ſome of theſe Circles include, and interſect one
the other, as in the curious cluſter of Circles at Botallek (Plate Bares
XVI.), in the ſceming confuſion of which, I cannot but think that <>
there was ſome mythical meaning, or, at leaſt, diftin& allotment to
particular uſes. Some of theſe might be employed for the Sacrifice,
and to prepare, kill, examine, and burn the Victim, others allotted

to Prayer, others to the Feaſting of the Prieſts, others for the flation

of thoſe who devoted the Victims: whilſt one Druid was preparing
the Vidim in one Place, another was adoring in another, and de-
ſeribing the limits of his Temple: a third was going his round at
the extremity of another Circle of Stones; and, likely, many Druids
were to follow one the other in theſe myſterious Rounds : others
were buſy in the Rights of Augury, that fo all the Rites, cach

in its proper place, might procced at one and the ſame time, and
under the inſpection of the Bigh-Prieſts ; who, by comparing and
obſerving the indications of the whoie, might judge of the Will of
the Gods with the greater certainty : laſtly, that theſe Circles inter-
ſected each other in ſo remarkable a manner as we find them in this
Monument, might be, to intimate that each of theſe” Holy Rites,
though exerciſed in different Circles, and their own proper com-
partments, were but ſo many Rings, or Links, of one and the ſame
chain; and that there was a conſtant dependance and connexion
petwixt Sacrifice, Prayer, Holy-Feaſting, and all the ſeveral parts of
their Worſhip, It is farther to be noted, that near molt of theſe Cir-
cular Monuments we find detached Stones, as particularly on the
South-Weſt {ide of theſe circles at (A) and (B), which are placed fo
orderly, that there can be no doubt of their having had ſome ſhare
allotted them of the ſuperſtitious Rites. — At theſe Stones, proba-
bly, the High Prieft had his Officers to keep ſilence, and the offici-


ating Prieſts their Aſſiflants to prompt them, leſt any material


words might be left out, or what. were diſorderly inferted ; for the
Ancients were ſcrupulouſly nice in every thing ſaid, or done, upon
luch folemn occaſions, and were not only allowed their Prompter*,
but a ſecond perſon alſo at hand to mark that no Ccremony or Cir-


' Hurling, is playing with a Ball, and endea- v The Circles DEF (Plate XVI.) are alſo


vouring to get at the Goal with it before one's in a Line.
Antagoniſt; an ancient trial of Strength and „See Lib. II. Cap. xix.


dwiftneſs among the Corniſh, See the Nat. * Plin, Lib. XXVII. Cap. ii.
Hit. of Cornwall, firſt Edit. p. 300.


cumſtance


200


OF CIRCULAR MONUMENTS,


cumſtance ſhould be omitted; let me farther obſerve, that, w,.,
theſe detached Stones are found at too great a diſtance for the before.
mentioned purpoſes, inferiour Prieſts might be ſtationed to Drevens
or regulate any diſorderly behaviour on the out-ſkirts of the congre.
gation, and might attentively obſerve the flying of Birds, or any
other ominous appearances, during the time of theſe folemnities. |
have only farther to remark, that the Circles, F, H, I, in this fingula;
Monument of Botallek, appear to have been edged with two rows gf
Stones. It need not be here added, that in whatſoever Circles we
find Aſhes and Altars, they want no arguments to prove that they
were places of ſacrifice and worſhip”.


Circles with Of that kind of Circle, which has altars within it, I ſhall take


Al t N ,

Treſcaw, notice of three only. The firſt of them is on the Iſland of Treſcau
wW d x . g . * 0
r Scilly. It is one rude Stone, nineteen feet long, ſhelving on the


of Arran. top, round the bottom of which there is a hollow circular trench


36 feet in diameter, the brim of which trench is edged with a line
of rude and unequal Stones (PI. XII. fig. IV. p. 173.) The other
(Pl. XII. fig. V. ibid.) is in the Wilds of Wendron Pariſh, Cornwall,
on a high hill called Karn-Menelez ; it conſiſts of four flat thin
Stones, by nature placed on each other ; the upper Stone is circular,
and meaſures juſt nineteen feet long, as the Rock abovementioned;
but, what is more remarkable, the circular 'Trench at the bottom of
it is in ſhape and cavity like to that of the former, and meaſures 35
feet and half diameter, which is within half a foot as long as the
former; and that ſmall difterence may be owing to the inaccuracy of
my meaſurement, rather than to any real difference betwixt the
things themſelves. I leave the Reader to make his remarks on this
conformity; but I cannot help mentioning, © that in the Iſle of
& Arran (Scotland) there is a Circle of big Stones, the Area of which
&« js about twelve paces. In the middle of this Circle, there is a
broad thin Stone ſupported by three leſſer Stones; the ancient
&« Inhabitants are reported to have burnt their Sacrifices on the
ce broad Stone in the time of the Heathens 2. See there, the ſame
dimenſions of the Circle as thoſe of the two before mentioned, the
Stone in the middle alſo; and I ſee no reaſon to queſtion the truth
of the Tradition, as to the uſe of the latter, which may thereior
point out to us the uſe and intent of the two former.


y © In medio Fani Focum inſtruebant coquen= © Monuments, which is yet ſtanding near the
© dis hoſtiis deſtinatum,” Worm. p. 28. „church of Keig in the Shire of Aberdeen,” Dr.
« Some perſons who are yet alive declare, that James Garden's letter, dated June 15, 1692, '9
„% many years fince they did ſee aſhes of ſome John Aubrey, F. R. S. of Exſton Pierce !n
* burnt matter digged out of the bottom of a Wiltſhire, Eſq; communicated by the Right
© little circle ſet about with Stones, ſtanding Rev. Dr. Lyttelton, Biſhop of Carliſle,

* cloſe together in the center of one of thoſe Martin, ibid, ut ſupra, p. 220.


We


CERCULAR MONUNMEN:TS.


We ſee how caly it is to reconcile all the difterent appearances of
theſe Circles to the Rites of Worthip ; p and 1 mult oblerve in the laſt
place, that Tradition, and the opinion of the learned, confirm the
arguments above, which arc drawn'from the Structure of the Monu-
ments, and the Cuſtoms of ancient ages. Bocthius, in his life of
Mainus, King of Scots, intimates that ſome of thele Circles were
erected by him, and appropriated to the \W orthup of the Gods b. In
the Weſtern parts of Ifland, in the province of Thorneſthing, there
was a Cirque, in which Men were ſacrificed, after they had been
Lilled, at a vaſt Stone placed therein b. In the Mainland (one of
the Orkneys) they worſhiped the Sun in a Circle, as they did the
loon in a Semi-circle®. Ahe Grave of Gealcofla, a Druidels, is
in Inifoen in the County of Donegall (Ireland), and hard by is her
« Temple, being a ſort of a minute Stonchenge, which many ol
« the old Iriſh dare not even at this day any way profane d.

The Temple at Claſſerniſs is the moſt regular example of this kind Temp!e at
chat J have met with; and therefore I have inſerted the plan of it 3
(Plate XVII. fig. V. p. 206.) It is in the Iſland of Lewis near
Cluſternits, and called a Heathen Temple. It conſiſts of an avenue,
which has nineteen Stones on each fide, from F to E, and one at F;
this leads you to a Circle of twelve "tones, with one in the center,

A; from the circumference of which Circle, and in a line with the
center, run a line of four Stones to B, four to D, and four to C.
« I enquired 'fays Mr. Martin f) of the inhabitants what "Tradition
« they had concerning theſe Stones; and they told me, it was a place
« appointed for worſhip in the time of Heatheniſm ; and that the
chief Druid ſtood near the big Stone in the center, from whence he
g addrefied himſelf to the people that ſurrounded him.” One ob-
ſervation occurs to me relating to this curious Monument, which is,
that the number of Stones in the Avenue is 30, and the Circle 13, in
all 52, and the detached Stones to the South, Eaſt, and Weſt, twelve;
whether theſe numbers happened to be ſo compleat by accident, or
whether (as I rather imagine) they were intended to expreſs the
number of weeks and months in one whole year, I ſübmit to the


O IF


,
-
1
*
—


* Camd, Wallace of the Orcades, p. 54.


” Arng:um, ex Eyrbyggia, Worm. Mon. Dan.
P27 |


* Mart in, p. 365.


Toland, ibid. ut ſupra, p. 23. — “ Temples
'© of the Druids Circles of Obeliſks.” Ib. p. 87.
I conjscture, ſays the late learned Mr. Lhuyd,
that they (viz. thoſe Circles) were Places of
' *acrifice, and other Rel! igious Rites, in the
| nes of Paganiſm,” Lett. concerning the
Lens mon, Moyle's Works, vol. I. p. 239.
| The Reaſon why we uſe Lhan for a Church,
* Vary as J conjecture, that before Chriſtianity


© the Druids ſacritced, and buried their dead, in
* a Circle of Stones.” Ibid. Baxt. Gloff. p 272.
Wallace, ibid, ut ſupr. p. 53. is of like Opinion.

© In copying this Monument, I have followed
the deſcription of it given us in Mr. Martin's


own Words (p. .), as being likely taken on the


Spot, and therefore true, and not the Copper Plate


(ibid.) which does not at all agrez (in Number of


Stones, or largeneſs of the Circle) with the verbal
Deſcription ; being 7 committed, as I ſuppoſe, to
the Hands of ſome inaccurate Engraver.


Of the Iſles, p. .


Ff


learned


202


Of Reli-
gious Uſe


originally.


4.


OF CIRCULAR MONUMENTS,


learneds, The Rev. Dr. Stukeley has given us ſome extraordiy,,,
inſtances of exactneſs in works of this kind in his plans of Abury
and Stonehenge, which, being in every one's hands, I thall not detain
the Reader withall.

To have done with this firſt Claſs of Circular Monument
When it is remembered that Stones- erect were the Idols of thoſe apes
(p. 161) what is more likely than that they were ſet round about
their altars to put thoſe who were engaged in the religious rites in
mind, that what they ſaid and did at ſuch times was in preſence gf
their Deities? © Among their Idols, round about their altars, upon
« every high hill, in all the tops of the mountains, and under eie
t preen tree, and under every thick Oak, the place where they did
te offer ſweet ſavour to all their Idols.” Ezek. vi. 13. I take eren
thing indeed of this figure, that 1s either magnificent, greatly
expenſive, regular, or laborious, to have been erected for Religious
uſe : in this number, therefore, I reckon, all the great works ve
have of this plan, the Circles of Main-land, Abury, Stonehenge, the
Circles of vaſt Stones on Salakee Downs in St. Mary's, Scilly,
Rollrich Þ, in Oxfordſhire, and in other places wherever they appear.
The intent of them, Wormius i attributes to a different reaſon ; but
what he ſays is too vague to be convincing. I take them (fays het)
for Altars, or for Courts of Judicature; and then ſpeaking parti-
eularly of Rollrich, Stiperſtons, and Stonehenge (undoubtedly the
nobleſt Monument of its kind), *All theſe are no more than
« Monuments, and 'I'rophies of Daniſh Victories.” Here we have
Stonehenge declared to be an Altar, a Forum, a Trophy. The
ſame perplexed account of theſe things we have from Speed!:
Trophies moſt certainly (ſays he) of Victories here obtained, either
by the Romans, Saxons, or Danes. Now, can any one ſuppoſe
that the Romans, at the time they lived in Britain, erected Trophies
in the ſame taſte as the Saxons and Danes did afterwards? or will
any one believe that the ſtupendous Fabrick of Stonehenge was
erected by an army intent on action and conqueſt ? The grandeur
of the deſign, the diſtance of the materials, the tediouſneſs with
which all ſuch maſſy works are neceſſarily attended, all ſhew that
ſuch deſigns were the fruits of Peace and Religion; that they mult


have been chimerical and impoſſible, during the buſy ſcenes of war,


Since my writing the Obſervation above, I h Al Roll-dricht, or Roll-druicht, i. e, th
find Mr. Carte (Engliſh Hiſt. vol. I. p. 55.) Druid-round, as the ingenious Sander ſon Miller
thinks there is ſomething emblematical in the Eſq; of Radway, Warwickſhire, has late)
number of Stones (xix.) on each ſide the Ave- informed me.
nue, which he refers to the great Year or Circle i Mon. Dan. p. 67.
of xix years; and the xii Pillars, compoſing the * Ibid,

Body of the Temple, he thinks an Emblem of 1 Wormius, ibid,
the Zodiac.


Trophies


OF CIRCULAR MONUMENTS.


Trophies are ſuggeſted by the ſudden tran{port of victory; but when
the mind cools, and national or perſonal animoſities ſubtide, they
are the evidences of a vain-glorious preſumption, and rather infults
upon the vanquiſhed and unhappy, than Monuments of any real
honour to the victor m.

To imagine that Stonchenge is only a Sepulchral Monument”, is
equally incongruous both to the ſhape and vaſtneſs of the building;
that it might, after it was built and conſecrated, be applied to ſuch
purpoſes, tor the greateſt Princes or Prieſts, is very likely; for though
thele Circles were originally of Religious Inſtitution, yet that they
became afterwards applied to other uſes, we ſhall ſee in the next
Section.

Next to Religion, Government muſt be ſuppoſed to have claimed
the attention, and employed the labour and arts, of mankind; and
in order to give weight to the moſt ſolemn Acts of the Society, V here
could Aſſemblies be held more properly than in places conſecrated
to Religion, already reverenced equally by the Nobles and the
Commonalty, and therefore likely to influence thoſe who were to
make Laws and govern, as well as awe thoſe who were to follow
them, and obey? Accordingly when any place had firſt been
dittinguiſhed by the Rites of Worſhip, and was looked upon with a
kind of facred dread, as the habitation of the Deity (where he was


55
O
GI


SECT. IV.


Pl..ces of
Council and
Judgment,


molt eſpecially and always preſent); this place naturally ſuggeſted


itſelf to all ranks, as moſt likely to inſpire the Rulers with juſtice
and knowledge, and the peopie with ſubmiſſion : the Laws made
here were reckoned to partake of the ſacredneſs of the place; the
Oaths ſworn here were of higheſt obligation, and double impiety it
was accounted to violate any compad®, or diſturb any friendſhip, here
contracted : beſides, as the Ancients took care that all civil Treatics,
Laws, and Elections ſhould be attended by Sacrifices, no place could
ſerve ſo commodiouſly for ratifying thoſe Acts of the Community,
as where they could ſo eaſily have all the means of the moſt ſacred
atteſtations, ſuch as Prieſts, Altars, and Victims, to confirm them.
The Monument of Gilgal was firſt dignified by Religious Rites
there performed : here the whole nation, by God's particular ap-
pointment, was circumciſed ; here they kept a ſolemn paſſover
(which, fince their departure from Mount Sinai they had entirely
omitted®), conſequently, the Ark and Tabernacle remained here for
lome time, and where they were, there were their ſtated conſtant


» Wormius himſelf, ibid. p. 90, thinks ſuch came out of Egypt, Exod. xii. 2. The ſecond
Circles more likely to be Places of Election, than the Year after, upon their receiving the Law, and
ſetting up the 1 abernacle in Sinai, Numb. ix. 2.
The third was this at Gilgal.


Trophies,
" As Keyſler, p. 109.
* The fiſt Paſſover was held on the Day they


Sacrifices,


204


SECT, V.


Stones to
ſtand by.


OF CIRCULAR MONUMENTS.


Sacrificcs, and devotional Oblations, publick prayers and interceſſion;
This Monument became aſtervards the Seat of Juſtice and National
Councils; but we do not read of its being uſed as ſuch, till the
time of Samuel, which was ſome centuries after its firit erection
by Joſhua ; and then, out of regard to the holineſs of the place,
and from a perſuaſion that God was preſent there in an eminent
and peculiar manner, by his power and goodnets : for whatever
was done there, was ſaid to be tranſacted © before 7he Lord,” that IS,
in the moſt folemn manner, in the molt holy place, and with the
additional corroboration of Sacrifice and Devotion b.

There is no doubt but the ancient Monuments of Stones ercg,
and particularly theſe Circles, underwent the ſame alterations in
other countries; and for the ſame reaſon became, in ſucceedins
ages, the common places of aſſembling upon any emergent and
more than ordinarily intereſting occaſion. In the fame place wi;
the Forum (viz. Court of Judicature), and the Altars of the Gods, ſo
as that the Fora might at once ſerve tor Worthip, Law, and Juſtice:


ſo Homer, II. xi. ver. 805,


— — — — — ba o Ayoen Te, Ocpig TE
Hey, Ty dn x Qt Oxy e|£|evyalo BH..


So alfo Virgil, deſcribing the Grove and ancient palace of Picus q,
ſays, that it ſerved for the inauguration of the Latin Kings, and
for Religion too:


Hinc ſceptra accipere, & primos attollere faſces
Regibus omen erat; hoc illis curia, Templum,


He ſacris ſedes epulis; — — — — —


Inſtead therefore of detaining the reader with a diſpute whether
they were places of Worthip, or Council, it may with great proba-
bility be aſſerted that they were uſed to both purpoſes; and having
for the moſt part been firſt dedicated to Religion, naturally
became afterwards the Curiæ and Fora of the ſame Community.

When theſe Circles paſſed into Courts of Council, Judicature,


and Election, they probably underwent ſuch alteration as the na-


tional cuſtoms upon thoſe occaſions did require; for, when the


aſſembly was convened, it was the cuſtom either to ſtand by, or
to ſtand upon, or thirdly to fit upon theſe ſtones; and each of
theſe different poſitions of the body required a peculiar arrange


P 1 Sam. ii. 14. xv. 31. — xv. 33. q En. vii. ver. 174.
ment


N or CIRCULAR MONUMEN Ts. 205
went of the ſtones t. In the firſt caſe, whilſt any election or de-
Foes was depending, or any ſolemn compact to be confirmed; the
incipal perſons concerned ſtood each by his pillar; and where a
i l J . he bv, 5 | 0
viddte Stone Was erected in the Circle, there ftood the Prince,
4 General elect. This feems to be a very ancient cuſtom, and
token of as ſuch, before tlie Baby loniſh Captivity LOT © Mo-
nument ot this kind I take the circle ol Boſcawen-un to be (Plate 3 e
XV. Pag. 198. Fig. III.), as having a Middle Pillar erected NCAr
the centre of the Circle, probably at the Election of ſome conſi-
derable Prince, or at the eff abliſhment of ſome new Decree 3 each
1:1ccor, or Legitlator, {landing by his Pillar in the circumference,
as the Prince did by that in the muddle,

It was alſo the cuſtom to ſtand upon Stones, placed in a circular SECT. v1.
manner, and ſhaped for that purpoſe, as ſo many pedeſtals to .
elevate the Nobles above the level of the reſt; conſequently, ſuch © *
Stones (however rude) were of different ſhape, and are therefore
carefully to be diſtinguiſhed from the abovemeationed Columnar
Stones erect, by the fide of which the Kings ſtood, and n
which it cannot be ſuppoſed that any one ever intended to ſtand.

Where we find Stones of this Kind and Order, we may pronounce
them merely elective, conſultory, and judicial, as never intended
for the Rites of Worſhip*. This cuſtom of chuſing Princes, by
Nobles ſtanding in a Circle upon Rocks, is ſaid to have remained
among the Northern Nations, 'till the Reign of Charles IV. and
the Golden Bull, A. D. 1356 %. Some of theſe Circles have a
large Stone in the middle, as the Monument near Upſal in Sweden,
called Moraſten, of which Olaus Magnus gives us both the dc-
ſeription and uſe v. On this Moraſten, Ericus was made King of
Sweden, no longer ſince than the year 1396 *. In Denmark alſo
there are Monuments of this kind Y ; and Macdonald was crowned :
King of the iſles, in the iſle of Vſla, ſtanding upon a Stone with


a deep impreſſion on the top of it, made on purpoſe to receive his
lect /.


* Wormius, p. 87. ſeems to make no diſtine- © cum circa duodecim minores adjacentes ha-
tion betwixt theſe Monuments; whereas, whoever © bens, cuncatis petris paululum e terra eleya-
«onhiders the ſhape of the Stones which compoſe „“ tus, non procul a Metropoli Upſalenſi Mo-
zum, muſt immediately perccive that the tall “ raſten dictus, ſuper quem novus Rex eligen-
Coiumnar stones erect could neither be for fitting ““ dus, infinita populi multitudine præſente ſuſ-
or landing upon, as the Moraſten and Kong- „ cipitur.” Lib. I. p. 11.


Folen kind evidently were. x Worm. p. 90.
See p. 164. y Ibid. P · 87.
© + Lecturi Regem, veteres, affixis humo ſaxis Martin of the Iſles, p. 241. Of this kind
* infifterc, ſuffragiaque promere conſueverunt I have not yet met with any in Cornwall, unleſs * wo
© lubjectorum lapidum firmitate fa&ti conſtan- it ſhould pleaſe the Reader to reckon the great
Th ** tizm ominaturi. Quo ritu Humblus, dece= Stone on the Iſland of Treſcaw, Scilly (Plate XI.
b dente parre, nuvo Patriz beneficio Rex cre- Fig. IV.), in that number, which by the hol-
atus.“ Sax. Gr. in Worm. p. 88. lownels of the Ground round it, I have judged
Worm. ibid.


rather to he an Altar, p. 200.
7+ Eſt etiam Lapis ingens & rotundus, cir-


Ggg It


I 4


206 OF CIRCULAR MONUMENTS


SET 30 00: * NE ORS- 000-8 cuſtom to fit on Stones, placed in the ſame Circy.
3 to lar manner, during the time of Council, Law, or Election; and
the ſcat where the King ſat, is ſtill in Denmark, called Ronoftole,
or King's ſeat, as that whereon the Queen was crowned, is called
Droning-ſtolen. In the Holm, as they call it, in Shetland Lo
the Law-Ting), “there are four great Stones, upon which {at the
Judge, Clerk, and other Officers of the Court à.“
Torn Of this kind of Circular Monuments for the principal of the
Circle. Aſſembly to ſtand, or to fit on, I take our Circle of Tredinck in
Gullval Cornwall), to be: the drawing of which will beſt ſup-
port the conjecture (Plate XV. Fig. I.).
Bodinr Of the fame kind, I take the following ſingular Monument,


metas called the Crellas b, to be. Its plan is very regular (Plate XVII.


Fig. IV.). It conſiſts of two low walls, the outermoſt forms to


Circles, one of which, B, 1s but 18 feet diameter, the other, (,
is 55 feet diameter by 50; and incloſes within it another circular
wall, which makes an Area within, 41 feet from North to South,
and 36 from Eaſt to Weſt; between each wall of the great in-
cloſure, is a ditch four feet wide, 'The larger Circle has two
entrances from the adjoining grounds at E and F, and one into
the ſmaller Circle at G; theſe entrances have tall Stones on each
ſide: I conjecture, that the little Circle might be for the Prince,
with thoſe of higher rank, to fit, or ſtand upon, and the other two
Circles, for the inferiour part of the Council.
Senor Cir. In the Pariſh of Senor, I met with a remarkable Cirque (Plate
cle, XV. Fig. IV.), formed by ſmall Stones thrown looſely together in
a circular Ridge. At the entrance A, there is one tall pillar,
The dimenſions of it may be found by the ſcale annexed. 1
judge this to have been an elective Circle; but why this Round
ſhould conſiſt of ſuch a number of ſmall Stones heaped together,
and the reſt of a few, and fo much larger, I cannot guels; unlcls
that in the latter, ſuch as Boſcawen-un, &c. where the Stones are
few, great, and ere, the Election was made by a few Leaders, or
Nobles ; and here, where the Stones are ſmall and numerous, the
Election was was more popular, and determined by the Voices of
the common people. 5 |
This Cuſtom of fitting on Stones in Council, was very ancient
among the more Eaſtern Nations; for, in the ſeveral ſculpturs,
which the fruitful imagination of Homer beftows ſo liberally on
the ſhield of Achilles, one of them is of the Elders of the com-
munity, met together to decide a matter in difference, ſitting
on Stones properly adapted to receive them, and in a facred
Circle : ;
Martin of the Iles. „In the Tenement of Bodinar, Sancred, Cornwall.


— 0


he Pha lors .


A


Ai


% 1
— 2 :


$4 "NN . £6 8 0 % I G * .
*


1
= *


—— — — hs — — — — -
Ez EI ORE a


PDA, 1 41 g. P1438 we OF "7.4 : Jo 202.40 i # PF 2 228 CY; —
PU 27 2 ep. D, 722 UUAO 3 (: uu NAHLITMANHL / 1007 114M e 22
ee {0 eue, u ee of 5 _—_—
OLE 95 p Rf p< *
a ? 9 44 da m - '4 af KS 2 X/ 9
22 of gre eee uus e.
gon of gr by: 1
1 * E *
9
” ©
ns vs 80
2 »
© @ w
p01. 'A @'©:,
oni navy 1705: 84
9 0
© @
© ©
© ®
oe »
wv „
2 *
ov @
* ©
e ©
- & ©
1
*s,.. * # * 8 -
5 4 2 „% „% „ 2 92 2 „ „
"ES. 2
93
by '- on 5 7
— * 7 g
— . — Ro 2 _ TS o £
5 T ; 23 12 it lee: 149 g 722
6: a8 +.
3 — Nd x
on IF „ 1 *
67 6% X n l 6 - | f |
2 3 91 Ke. 2 wennn 1 n L: Ku oe a nl ne dE Phone Dee tc wo Mo St th DN ele, ee eee


&


OF CIRCULAR MONUMENT >.


— —— — — — Ot 0, 77e |
Fix sri Zs50wr Alhoig IE PO ENI KTK AQ. i


On rough-hewn Stones, within the ſacred Cirque,


Convok'd, the Hoary Sages fat, — — — — —


; 717 3 „ LE K
7 B i" x86 ,
s EW > 5 *
2


1 23


We muſt not think, however, that all the Monuments of the s
Circular kind had no other uſe, but thoſe before mentioned, of tes, and
Religion, Law, and Election. The names which ſome of them 407i
are ſtill called by, and the ſingular conſtruction of others, as wel!
as particular Cuſtoms, recorded in hiſtory of the Ancients, will
ſuggeſt ſome other very different uſes, to which Monuments cf
this Figure were applied.

Where theſe Stone incloſures are ſemi-circular, and diſtinguiſhed For Plays,
by ſcats and benches of like materials; there is no doubt but they
were conſtrued in that form, out of regard to and for the con-
venicnce of the ſpectators d, at plays, games, and feſtivals. 'T here
is a Theatre of this kind in Angleſea, reſembling a horſc-ſhoc,
including an Area of 22 paces diameter, called Bryngwyn (or
ſupreme Court ©), with its opening to the Weſt : 1t lics in a place
called Tre'r Drew (or Druids town), from whence it may be reaſonably
conjectured, that this kind of ſtructure was uſed by the Druids.

There is alſo one in Main-land (Orkney), from its theatrical or
creſcent-like form, ſuppoſed to have been dedicated to the worſhi
of the Moon; but perhaps nothing more than one of theſe ancient
Theatres.

But though the theatrical form is beſt adapted for the inſtruction
and information of the Audience, yet (as men cannot be ſuppoſed in
thoſe illiterate times to have conſulted the delight and inſtruction
of the Far, as much as the pleaſure and entertainment of the
Eye) it is not ſo commonly met with among the Ancients, as the
Amphitheatrical, which, being more capacious, had generally the
preference to the former. In theſe continued Rounds, or Am-
phitheatres of ſtone (not broken as the Cirque of Stones ered),
the Britans did uſually aſſemble, to hear plays acted, to ſee the
Sports and Games, which upon particular occaſions were intended
to amuſe the people, to quiet and delight them; an inſtitution
(among other Engines of State) very neceſſary in all Civil Socie—
ties: theſe are called with us in Cornwall (where we have great
numbers of them) Plan an guare; viz. the level place, or lain
of ſport and paſtime. The benches round were generally of Turf,
as Ovid, talking of thoſe ancient places of ſport, obſerves f:


: il, XVIll, ver. 504. the Curve better diſtributes the Hearers than any
U hg Reaſon why Theatres are built in, or Figure.


ory in, a ſemicircular Figure, is this. The © Rowland's Mon. III. 84.
bt Line is for the Actors and Speakers, and De Arte Amat. Lib, 1.


In


208


St. Juſt
Plan an
Guare,


Duels.


College, Oxford.


OF CIRCULAR MONUMENTS


In oradibus ſedit populus de ceſpite ſais,
Qualibet hirſuta fronde tegente comas.

We have one whoſe benches are of Stone, and the moſt p.
markable Monument of this kind which J have yet ſeen; . I
near the church of St. Juſt, Penwith, now ſomewhat disfigured
by the injudicious repairs of late years; but by the remains |
ſeems to have been a work of more than ufual labour and co.
rectneſs (See Plate XVIII. Fig. I. and II.). It was an exact Cir.
of 126 feet diameter; the perpendicular height of the bank, from
the area within, now ſeven feet; but the height from the bos.
tom of the ditch without, ten feet at preſent, formerly my.
The ſeats conſiſt of fix fteps, fourteen inches wide, and one fot
high, with one on the top of all, where the Rampart is abou
ſeven feet wide. The Plays they acted in theſe Armphithea-


tres were in the Corniſh language; the Subjects taken from


Scripture Hiſtory, and © called Guirimir, which Mr. LIhurd
ce ſuppoſes a corruption of Guari-mirkl, and in the Corniſh diales,
© to ſignify a miraculous Play, or Interlude. They were com
6 poſed, for begetting in the common people a right notion ct
* the Scriptures, and were acted in the memory of ſome not long
ce ſince deceaſed 8.”

In theſe ſame Cirques alſo were performed all their Athletar;
Exerciſes, for which the Corniſh Britans are ftill fo remarkable;
and when any ſingle combat was to be fought on foot, to decide
any rivalry of Strength or Valour, any diſputed Property, or any
Accuſation exhibited by Martial Challenge; no place was thought
ſo proper as theſe incloſed Cirques h. When a ſudden Challeng:
and Rencounter happened, and the Champions were to fight it


out on the ſpot, the area was marked out immediately with fuch


ſtones as were at hand i; and indeed it muſt be obſerved, in favou:
of theſe rude cuſtoms, that the marking out the place of batte
muſt have prevented much cruelty, and ſaved many innocent
lives; for if either combatant was, by any accident, forced out o
pay three marks of pure filver as a redemption of his life k. Frothd
the great, King of Denmark (cotemporary with our Saviour) 18


reported | to have firſt ordered, m that all controverſies ſhould be


decided by the ſword ; for which law he had doubtleſs this reaſon
of ate, viz. That all his ſubjects might ſtudy and practiſe the


i « Nec mora (ſays Sax. Gr. Worm. p. bs.)
© circuatur campus, milite circus {tipatur c


currunt pugiles.“ TIS
k Worm. p. 68, 69. | Sax. Gr. Lid. V.


a „ -
m ee Ut de qualibet controverſia ferro decert*
„ retur.” Worm. p. 68.


} Biſhop Nicholſon's Letter to Dr. Charlett,
Nov. 14, 1700. pen. Mr. Ballard, of Magdalen


h « Quzdam (viz. Saxa) Circos claudebant in
« quibus Gigantes & pugiles duello ſtrenue de-


cc ccrtabant.” Worm. P · 62. 0
ule


}
UL 70
vl
%


*, 4 „


—


:
P ; 4
al On


uh


N I.


bj
i


17757
WU

_
= fa,


dl 1 l i"


,

. 4 1

j P 1
T ' 5 1

15 0 A,
' 2 79 9ꝗ
71 off, *

„ „„


U
* i


6,440 Mk


ts 7 %


Io.


PI97


(91


17


2232


VO LV WS LY So 2
.,


ww —Äv—


/
11


*
.


—


Hmm


Jo


*
*


8 S a
Q N
k * >
4

3 H |


———


Ae Urn foro! (7


6


— COA


4


FY


Hat un lr £,


14


30


ae
100 U
7 . FM,
„% 5


1
U


Naa


nac


a " < 1 | * *
—y» 1 *
f / 14 / IS?
. . J
E 06 70 : WI / / Y


7


W I 7 Tr | f
De


giti udtun


a.


*


.
-


„
127%
121 30
596.


*


1


-


. 7 *
55 $
$+>+.32 +34 4 f
74 2
* 23 4 * _
Lf II*r22+- F334 | 4 :
. . 3 N
— 8 3 1 223 : S.
. . *3 -Tr2 . : : iS, ITS
2 118 1 2 214181 2
: : — IT? . T2 Is 1 :
- — 8 7 4 1


I. P
„ "BY


*


* . ĩͤ h J . J / rd Sr ON ra
EV OT. 009 en" 1 8
——_— -f 4,
fa. a3 46 Y $3 + : .
*
*
5 Fg
-
f
*
s
*

*
f
ö
|
,


OF CIRCULARMONUM LN s. 209


: ue of Arms; for upon any diſpute whatſoever, if a man could
het vindicate his own right, he mult give up the Caute, and bear
* 1. Inſult, as if he had been actually overcome in a Duel n. This
* ..tize, but unjuſt manner of trial obtained in Denmark, till the
vear 987, when it was aboliſhed for a ſtill more whimſical de-
ion (Ordeal) to take its place. It was not prohibited in
England till the Reign of Edward III“; who better underſtood
the true nature of Military Glory, than to ſuffer Duelling any
longer . |
he Cirques, whether open or encloſed, were alſo often Sepul- SECT. IX.
chral. For in, or adjoining to the edge of theſe Circular Monu- e e
ments, we {ind Kiſt-vaen's (or Stone Cheſts) ſometimes Cromlchs 4, ©
and at other times Sepulchral Urns, or Barrows", all evident ſigns
of burial; and, doubtleſs, of the burial of perſons, the moſt il
Iaftrious in their country for Knowledge, Virtue, or Power. It
mult therefore be obſerved, that theſe Cirques were never the or-
dinary, common places of burial, it being very ſeldom that more than
one Kiſtvaen, Barrow, or Cromlch, is found in or near them, ſcarce
ever more than two, and very ſew Urns. And, indeed, it is no wonder
that their friends ſhould defire, and the general voice conſent, that
thoſe (and thoſe only) who were at the head of the Religion
and Laws of their Country, might be interred, when dead, in thoſe
ſacred places, where they had preſided with ſo much eminence whilſt
they were alive. Thales the Mileſian (being preſſed probably by his
friends to declare in what Forum, or what part of the Forum he
would be buried) commanded them to bury him in an obſcure and
contemptible part of Miletus, ſaying, © That place would in after-
times become the Forum of the Mileſianss,“ as if the Forum was not
ſo able to do honour to his remains, as his remains to erect a new
Forum. |
A late diſcovery in Ireland has placed it beyond all doubt, that per-
ſons were ſometimes buried in thoſe Circles ; for the account of it I
am obl ged to Mr. Wright in his Louthiania (Plate IT. book III.).
** The center of two Circles he procured to be opened, and in both
* of them were found ſeveral decayed human bones. In one the broken
parts of two or three different Urns were taken up, one of which was
* tilled with burnt bones, and pieces of charcoal, but the reſt were
ul moſt quite decayed, and turned to a black grey ſubſtance. Two
uch Circles of Stones, not long ſince, were, by accident, laid open


0 5 orm. p. 69. » Camd. vol. I. p. 349. Skirts of Boſcawen- un Circle (PI. XV. Fig. III.)
: Notwithſtanding this Prohibition, and of ſo marked there B. On the outſide edge of the
peat a Ning, ſome remainders of the inveterate Roundago at Kerris, there is alſo a Kiſtvaen, or
10 Catom remained 'till “ the beginning of Sepulchral Stone Cavity. At Killimille, near
0 Ela eth, when a Duel was appointed, and all Dungannon, Ireland, within a Circle of Stones
£ tne \ppratus ſettled, but when the Champions on the top of aHill, have been found Urns.
had entered the Liſts, the Qucen interpoled Philoſ. Tranf. 1713, p. 254.
and made up the difference.“ r Camd, Annot. 1390.
There is part of a Crumlch to be ſeen on the S Plut. in Solone,


H hh | upon


+


OF CIRCULAR MONUMENTS,


* upon Mr. Kaux's Eſtate near Dungannont, and three ſuch Urns wer
&* diſcovered, but the Urns were broke u. But either all Circles ha-
not been uſed for this purpoſe of burial, or all people have not be
alike ſucceſsful in their reſearches, for Ralph Sheldon, Eſq; * diggins
« in the middle of Rollrich Circle x, (Oxfordſhire) found nothing.

We muſt not diſmiſs this ſubject, before we have obſerved, thy
rag Cir- there are many little Cirques, ſometimes of a low bank of Eanh:
nally fopal- ſometimes of Stones erect a, ſometimes of looſe ſmall Stones throws
chral. together in a circular form, incloſing an Area about three yardgb

without any larger Circles round them,

Now as the firſt are found in the Area of a Fortification, and theſs.
cond intermixed with the Circles of Worſhip, Iſhould be apt to thin,
them, in both, places of Burial; in the firſt inſtance, Monuments of the
leaders of the Garriſon of Bartine, who fell during the Garriſons lody.
ing there, and were brought oft from the Enemy (it being accounted


moſt diſhonourable of all things to the engaged party, to leave behind


them their ſlain commander e); and in the ſecond inſtance the Sequl-


chres of ſome principal Druids buried there. "Thirdly, the little Circles
on the Moors of Altarnun are about three yards diameter, more orlef;
ſomewhat; about four or five in the Botallek Monument; and the
three in Bartinè Caſtle are {1x and half, 7, and ꝙ yards diameter;
all much too ſmall for fortification, or duel, attended with no veſtiges
which can make us ſuppoſe them habitations, and much below the
general ſize of the other Circles (mentioned in ſect. III.) and there-
tore intended I ſhould think originally for Sepulchres.


t In the County of Tyrone in Ireland, tinue to this Day in Scotland, applied to the ſame
u Nat. Hiſt, of Ireland by Molyneux, p. 184. Ute, fee ibid. 1270.


Wright's Louth. p. 8, 9. z As at Bartine Caſtle (Pl. XXIX. Fig. I. a,
v Stukeley's Abury, p. 12. b, c.).


* Rollrich is ſuppoſed Sepulchral by Sir Tho. 2 Among Botalleck Circles (Pl. XVI. 4, % c,
Brown, Hydriot. p. 28, but a Temple by Dr. b In the wilds of Altarnun Pariſh near Lin-
Stukeley in his Abury; both likely right. ceſton. i

That the Druids uſed ſuch Places for Burial, © See Homer's Iliad, The long Diſpute
{ce Camd. p. 739. and that theſe Circles con- about the Body of Patroclus.


been


SECT. X.


PI.XIX. a. 2-0.


"» ZE 2 2 pe
| 5 ö J . 4 5
A. Angular lau from Hormuw p63. Cg. g. gte


„% KM AF WE 3%


HA. VIS
Of Barrows.


NJ Cornwall there are diſperſed on every plain (almoſt) as well as
tops of hills, great numbers of thoſe artificial heaps of earth o1
gone, which are at preſent called Barrows®. A kind of Monument
this, found, in molt countries, of the remoteſt Antiquity, oftentimes
of the higheſt Dignity, of various name and conſtruction, but for one
ſe only, foraſmuch as all of them ſeem primarily intended for the
more ſecurely protecting the remains of the dead, though afterwards
transferred to other uſes.


211


The moſt ancient Barrow we read of, is that of Ninus founder of SEC T. 1.
the Aſſyrian Empire: Semiramis, as it is related, wife of Ninus, Found in


buried her huſband in the Royal Palace, and raiſed over him a
Mount of Earth. |

In Perſia the ſame manner of burying obtained ; though, generally
ſpeaking, none but princes were ſo buried.

Achans, aſter his body had been burnt (he, and his children, and
cattle being firſt ſtoned), was buried under a Stone Barrow, during
the time of Joſhua's command; and the King of Ai was buried in
the ſame manner. In the 2 Sam. xviii. 17. it is ſaid that © they took
« Abfalom and caſt him into a great pit in the Wood, where they
laid a very great heap of Stones upon him.” But it may be well
queſtioned whether this was properly Barrow-burial; and not
rather burying a King's fon (whoſe life had been taken away fo ex-
proſſly contrary to the royal command) in as expeditious a manneras

pclhible; and in a Stone quarry, perhaps, where rubbiſh for covering
the body was at hand. However, by the above inſtances, it ſeems that
this way of burying was not always intended to do honour to the
dead, but ſometimes to create an abhorrence of their crimes. In
general they were Sepulchres of Dignity ; Alyattes the Father o
Creſus, and King of Lydia®, was buried under a Barrow.

Ihe fame method obtained among the Grecians. The Monument
of Laius father of Oedipus is yet extant in the middle of the wa
117/271) where he and his ſervants were buried, © collected Stones”


1 14 1 — . .
: cal them Barrows, becauſe that Name is Barrows not certainly were.
MON, Vu!


d; but in Cornwall, we call them, e 1Nod.. Sic. Lib. II. cap. i.

IOTC rope 4 , . 122 1 * , 114 2
bande Near. Burrows; for Barrow ſigni— f Xenophon, Lib. VII. — Hyde, cap. xxxiv.
. 7 yy HJCIence (Dugdale's Warwick Hlzire P. 410.

..), but Burrow is from Byrig. to hide or E Joſh. vii. 26. viii. 29.


ULY 5 l *
h Herodetus.


muen


and ſignines a Sepulchre. as Wat wo 44
15 uamnes A Sepuichre, as what we call


bein


moſt Coun


2.12


SECT. n. Theſe Monuments are differently named, according to their obi


Name.


h


being thrown over them i. Tydeus, the father of Diomed, ſſan;
the Theban War, was buried in that country under an bw
Barrow *; and it ſeems to have been the univerſal cuſtom of "hoy
and Trojans, to bury both the Soldiers and Generals in the =
manner during the ſiege of Troyl. The Monument of 5
&« near Sicyone, was an Earthen Barrow, and the Sicyonians penerall :
c buried in that manner m.“ Alexander intombed his frien 1 ;

;

9


Hepheſtion in a Barrow n.

As we come farther Weſt, in Sicily we find vaſt numbers of ther
Monuments. The Romans had the ſame cuſtom, ſome think asan.
ciently as Remus and Numa; and Virgil® makes it ſtill more an.
cient. From Livy?P, it appears, that Claudius Nero buried his oy,


Soldiers after this manner, in the ſecond Carthaginian War; and 5
Ceſar Germanicus brought the firſt Turf himſelf, to raiſe the Barroy F
over the Remains of Varius's unfortunate army 4, 3

In Germany there was the ſame way of interring” ; and in the F
moſt Northern Kingdoms there are ftill many Barrows of grea A
Note and Extent. A

In Britain, and the Britiſh Iſles, they are without number, for N
the Druids burnt and then buried their Dead. .

Mr. Martin (Rel. de Gauls, Vol. II. p. 345.) denies the Druid ,
to have had either Barrows or Urns; but as the Gauls burnt their iſ :
Bodies, and uſed Urns, at leaſt for their Victims, as this Author .
confeſſes (ibid.), can it be imagined that they uſed not the fame £
way of interring their Prieſts, Generals, and Princes ? Who could x
be the Authors of the numerous Barrows in Britain, but the Britan; ;
themſelves? How could it ſurprize this Author that Aſhes ſhould {WF
be mixed in theſe Barrows, when the Heap was formed from the |
neighbouring Ground, upon which the Funeral Pile had been burnt? 43


That the Gauls honoured the Remains of their human Vidims 13
true; but that they could not but reſpe& the Remains of the mol
conſiderable men among them, muſt alſo be as true.


ous and moſt diſtinguiſhed. properties. From the Stone Material
of which ſome are built, they are, in Scotland, in the Iſle of Man,
Ireland, and in Cornwall, as well as in other parts of England,
called Kairnes or Karns ; but when among the Grecians they con.
ſited of Earth (n y, they were then called pnaogo, or cẽ,t


75 * . 4
** 5 2 4 . 6 I;
2 | \ "IB 3 *
5 — a „ * * AE ”, of ws * 1
* ö 2 . wa Fr ä
RR * el S


- 2 TT


i Pauſanias in Phocicis, cap. v. p. &08., m Pauſan. p. 126.
A royal, © A little below the City (viz. of a « Tumulumque ei x11 mill. Talentorum fee
e Orchomenos) are ſome heaps of Stones ſome- *© cit.” Juſtin, Lib. XII. cap. xii.
„ what diſtant ſrom eachother, erected to the ho- o En. xi. ver. 207, &c.
nour of Men that had fallen in Battle,” Ib. p Lib. XXVII. cap. xlii.
Arcad. p. 626. | q Worm. p. 34. 3
k Iliad. xiv. ver. 119. r « Sepulchrum ceſpes erigit.“ Tacit. de RI. G.
LI). vii. ver. 336. II. xxiii. ver. 247. Il. xxiv. 5 ll. x. ver. 799. and ver. 801.
ver. 795. N


Ol


OF BARROW S$ 213


or Timili of Earth's; ſometimes Touziz, from being near the
Highways, where the Symbols of Mercury uſed Irequently to ſtand.
From the circular plan on which they were erected, in Cornwall they
are often called Crigs, or Crugs (in Britiſh, round Heaps), and by
the Vulgar oftentimes Crig an Bargus, or the Kite's round Hill; it
being no uncommon thing for a bird of that kind to perch upon
ſuch Habitations of the Dead,

From their being intended for Sepulchres, they arc calied Lows in

Staffordſhire u, &c. and Lawes in Ireland; in Wales they are called
Tommens, or Hillocks; in Oxtordthire and Northamptonſhire,
Cops; in Teutonick Broghs, in Saxon Byrighs (whence comes our
Engliſh word); and Burrows they are ſtill called in Cornwall.
Becaſe they conſiſt of Earth or Stones gathered into a Heap,
Qui::11{{a1 calls the manner of burying Sepultura Collatitia: in Den-
the Northern Kingdoms, they have their names from the
hs and Generals interred under them.

When the Funeral Pile was exceeding large, or the number of skCT. III.
the Perſons burnt great, the fire was not ſuppoſed to be extin- Conttructi-
guiſhed till the third day, when they proceeded to collect the Bones h
and make the Barrows.


e : =
- : IR ee
p J 1 1
n 4 r jy . 9. 9 * - LATE VB. ms Sn 10 3 1 4 **
33 EI "a 2 . FE TS > Bon — 1 83 = l
. ee n . * "OED a |


—_ 3 * Fn 5 * It".
IF. OTIS.


bn = S
Fee


r


r


— 4 4 * 9 x — 2
N bn HE B- K


Tertia lux gelidam c&lo dimoverat umbram,
Mrerentes altum cinerem, & confuſa ruebaut
Offa focis, tepidoque onerabant aggere terre &:


n
g *
. —_


br


Ab


The materials, of which the Barrows conſiſt, are either a multitude
of ſmall or great Stones, or ſecondly Earth; or Stones and Earth
mixed together, collected (as they ſeem to me) by many hands, from
= theneighbouring neareſt ground, and heaped together ull they make
= alittle Hill, or Tamulus. It is ſuggeſted Y that “ ſome Barrows are
A * compoſed of foreign, adventitious Earth, of a yellow colour,
© known to be the natural ſoil of a hill a mile diſtant from them ;”
but whether the Sun, Rain, and Air, together with the admixtures
of Clay, Turf, Earth, and Sands (moſt of them entering jointly in-
to the compoſition of ſuch Monuments) may not have contributed


| ; to alter the original colour of the compoſt ; and why the Ancients
= A{houldgo a mile for Earth, when ſo much eafier to be procured in
= the adjacent Plains, are queſtions not ſo caſy to be anſwered. If it


be ſaid with this Author, that the more trouble the Ancients took in
crecting theſe Monuments, the more reſpectful (as they thought) they
thewed themſelves to the memory of the deceaſed; it ſhould alſo


* Pauſan, p. 126. in Corint. calls the Tu- Morton, Northamptonſh. p. 530.
mulus ot Lycus, xz rs, a Heap of Earth. x n. xi. ver. 210. |
3 tot. Staff. p. 402. Low ſignifies a Sepul- y Dr. Williams's Diſſertation on the St. Auſtle
3" care, as Row-low, regale Sepulchrum, Barrows, Philoſ. I'ranſact. 1740.


111 follow,


214


OF. N


follow, that in erecting Stone Barrows, they fetched the Stones from
far, and neglected the Stones near at hand, and equally for their
purpoſe ; but this does not appear to be the caſe : it is true, the
Ancients thought, that the larger they made theſe Monuments, and
the vaſter the Stones with which they ſometimes adorned them, the
greater honour they did to their departed friends; but to chuſe one
Earth before another, purely becauſe at a greater diſtance, contributed
nothing to the grandeur of the work; the colour, richneſs, or
diſtance of the Mould, were things too minute to have any place
in deſigns of ſuch ſimplicity, and haſty erection.

In a field at Trelowarren *, there was opened in July 1751, an
Earthen Barrow, very wide in circumference, but not five feet high,
As the Workmen came to the middle of the Barrow, they found x
parcel of Stones ſet in ſome order, which being removed, diſcovered
a Cavity about two feet diameter, and of equal height. It was fur.
rounded and covered with Stones, and incloſed Bones of all lorts,
Legs, Arms, Ribs, &c. and intermixed with them ſome Wood-aſhes ;
there was no Urn here ; but at the diſtance of a few feet from the
central cavity, there were found two Urns, one on each fide, with
their mouths turned downwards, and ſmall bones and aſhes incloſed.
All the black vegetable mould which covered the place where the
Urns were found, was induſtriouſly cleared off, and the Urns, in-
verted, placed on the clean yellow clay (which in this field lies under
the ſoil); then the black vegetable mould was placed round about
the Urns; and throughout the whole compoſition of the Barrow, I
obſerved afterwards the ſame materials, clay, mould, wood-aſhes,
and rubble-ſtone, mixed very diſorderly, ſo that there can be no
doubt, but that the people who formed this Barrow took indifterently
of the mould and clay that lay neareft at hand. Three thin bits of
braſs found near the middle, juſt before Icame there, were given meby
the Workmen ; they were covered with ærugo, neither incloſed in the
cavity nor inthe Urns, by which I conjecture, that they were pieces of
a ſword, or ſome other inftrument of war, which, after having been
inſerted in the funeral pile, and broke, were thrown into the Barrow
among the Earth and other materials that were heaped together.

All the materials, therefore, were in this inftance (as I believe
they were in moſt others) fetched from the adjacent and moſt con-
venient grounds, gathered from the ſurface neareſt to the funeral
pile, not dug very deep for, but the ſurface ſkimmed and ftrippedot
its glebes*, which lying more diſperſed, and open to numbers of
Workmen, were eaſier raiſed, and lighter to carry, than if the more


ſolid parts which lie under the Glebe were firſt dug and broke, and


* The Seat of Sir R. Vyvyan, Bart. in 2 Dugdale, on the Lowes in Warwickſhire, is


then


Cornwall. of the ſame Opinion.


*
90
7
*
"I *
”
0 9
5
%
*


he


then carried ; the chief point was for many to work at a time, and
ſor cach party to bring their iharc of Earth, Stone, and Turf, in ſuch
regularity and ſucceſſion as might create no contution, or any way
rad the work in hand, about which ſuch a number oi workmen
were to be conſtantly employed: that they ſcimmed the ſurface in
this manner, needs no other proof than that no hollows (generally
peak ing), trenches, or pits, appear in the neighourhood of theſe
Monuments from which the Earth might poſtibly have been dug.
The Earth was brought, and poured out of the Helmets“. The
Stones, were brought from as far as conveniently might be, on the
ſhoulders of the Soldiers, and ſo the Monument was ſoon compleated
eſpecially if plain, and not immoderately great, neither adorned with
Circles, or Pillars of Stone, nor crowned with large flat Stones; which
Stones in ſome Monuments are indeed of aſtoniſhing magnitude, muſt
have been far fetched, and brought with confiderable labour, to bear
a part in theſe works. In places where Stones were more plentiful,
and eaker to be collected than the Earth, theſe Barrows were com-

oſed of Stones, ſeldom larger than what might be carried eaſily by
one Soldier, but oftentimes leſs. In places where Stones were not
to be had, the Barrows were formed of the Earth, or ſuch a mixture
of Earth, Sand, or Stone, as the foil preſented ©; and this the Ancients
ſeem to have done, not out of any preference which they gave to
either of theſe materials (unleſs the Stones were large, and thereby
became more {ſuitable to the magnificence of the deſign), but purely
directed by the nature of the place, and their own conveniency; in-
different, whether the remains of the dead were to be covered by heaps


of Stone or Earth, they contented themſelves with anſwering the


principal intention of the monument, which was, that perſons of
diſtinguiſhed merit ſhould have the honour of being interred by the
united labours of ſo many of their own countrymen, of which the
Barrow was to be a perpetual (Zypa, or) Memorandum. Some think
that Earthen Barrows denote an inferiour quality of the perſon in-
terred d; but we find them erected (as well as the others) for perſons
of the higheſt quality. King Dercennus's in Italy was of Earth
(Virg. An.) ſo was that of Abradates in Lydia; ſo was Patroclus's;
the King of Ai's Monument of Stones ; ſo was Achan's; ſo was
that of Laius; Hector's was of Stone and Earth; fo was that of


, Pita d. er Nh. II. xxiv. ver. 795. the quickneſs and activity with which the Soldi-
4 here 1s a paſſage in Homer wbich very hap- ers poured out their Helmets full of Earth one
pl'y (though no where, as I remember, taken upon the other, in order to compleat the Barrow
notice of by Commentators) expreſſes the dili- as ſoon as poſſible.
gence and expedition with which they worked That ſome of the Stone Barrows are carthen
on ſuch Sepulchres : ones petrified (as Dr. Plot imagines, Staffordſhire,
. bag d Ni tm. Yalav xx p. 414) is very unlikely, to ſay no more on't.
5 Nix aſſic q To onue Taku n' II. XXi1. ver. 2 56,7. 4 As Pet. Lindeberg. & Joh. Cypræus, in
here xv, exevar, & Hue come ſo thick on Worm. p- 33, 34, 38.
he back of one the other, on purpoſe to expreſs


Alyattes


ts


T1


216


SECT. IV.


0 FF BARERR-O WS


Alyattes King of Lydia. To theſe materials of Earth (as is thought
ſome added a covering of green ſod, as more pleaſant for the ches
of thoſe that paſſed bye; but as likely, perhaps, to keep the Barro
in ſhape, and give it an air of neatneſs.

This was the conſtruction of plain Barrows, or Timuli; nothin,
more was requiſite than heaping together the materials till the,
made a hillock, over the dead body, of a Conic ſhape : that ſon;
of them are now become of a more depreſſed and hemiſpheric,
figure, is owing to the rage of winds and rain, the firſt original
deſign being to heap up the Earth, or Stones, as high 1
the Baſe would bear. This was a ſhape (I mean the Conceich
of the greateſt ſimplicity, and therefore moſt ancient; les
ſubject than any other form to the injuries of Time, nor likel
to be violated by the fury of Enemies, and therefore the mot
laſting ; indeed, the Egyptian Pyramids themſelves are but im-
Yrovements of this firſt Plan, they are but ſo many Conic Tum);
of Maſonry (if I may call them fo), hollowed into Galleries
and Chambers, to preſerve the ſucceſſive Remains of Egyptian
Princes. Barrows therefore, and Pyramids (ſolids the moſt ſimple,
next to Barrows) bid fair to laſt as long as the world : for ſmall
ones eſcape the attention and envy of the deſtroyer, and little la-
bour will not deface the large ones; no one but a Cambyſes f can
be found in hiſtory barbarous or mad enough to uſe much labour


in order to deface ſuch venerable inſtances of the magnificence of


former ages. By the Laws of Solon, there was a Penalty laid
upon the violation of all ſuch Monuments 8.
Beſides theſe plain Barrows, there are others which ſhew greater


Barrows leſs art and exactneſs. Some are ſurrounded with a ſingle row of Stones


ſimple, how
orna-
mented.


which form the Baſe; others with a ring or foſſe of Earth. Some
have a large flat Stone on the top, and ſome a Pillar, now and
then with, but oftner without, Inſcription ®. Some have a circle
round the bottom, and round the top alſo; and where this cuſtom
revailed, and no Stones offered for the purpoſe ; there Trees were
planted i, Oak or Beech, to ſupply the want of high Stones:


* Wormius, p. 41. h «© The Barrows with Pilars are pretty ſte-

f Son of Cyrus the Great, who, when he con- „ quent in Ireland; in the county of Waterford
quered Egypt, employed his army to deſtroy one * the Heap of Stones has in the middle a long
of the greateſt Pyramids; but the Officer who © Stone about ſix feet high, ſtuck in the ground:
had the direction, after much time and labour © Theſe we ſuppoſe to be Monuments of per-
expended in making a Breach or two (ſtill to ““ ſons of great diſtinction. Under the Stones ot
be ſeen), gave over the deſign, as equally im- „ ſuch Karns they have found a fort cf a coffn
practicable and ridiculous. & made with rough ſtones,” See p. 163, and

s % Fœna eſt fi quis, Bu/tum (nam id puto ap- 165,
© pellari Tymbon) aut Monumentum, aut Colum- Wormius, p. 38.
nam, violarit, dejecerit, fregerit.“ Cie. de Leg.
lib. II.

— Hit


: £5 FIG


J ĩ¼˖öi $8: 0 VV. Bs 217


I


3
1 — cn. FO Uep ii geus FRONTE /ub alty
Reots Dercennt een ON AVTEFC Buſtum
O 6 ” 525 nh ,
Antigui Laurentis, opacagie tice tectusu. En. XI.


When theſe Barrows were not very large; that is, when they ae DRE
were intended for private perſons, they were either placed near
public + roads to put travellers in mind of their common deſtiny,
or, like Joſhua's Sepulchre, in the borders of their patrumony 3
molt people deſiring to reſt in peace where they had uſually lived
with content and reputation *, Plato enjoined, that no arable or
cultivated, but only coarſe and barren land ſhould be allotted for
Sepulchres, leſt that ſhould be taken up to no purpoſe by the
dead, which ought to feed the living !, If they were the Sepulchres
of common Soldiers, they were thrown up generally on the Field
of Battle, where the Soldiers fell, and are ſtill to be known in
ſome places, by being found in ſtraight lines ſtretched along the
plains, which have been the Scenes of great AQtions, as regulaily
as the Front of an Army. On Saint Auſtle Downs in Cornwall,
the Barrows “ he ſometimes two, three, even ſeven in a ſtrait
« line m.“ It was indeed reckoned fo honourable to be interred
on the Field of Battle, that not only the Athenian and Platzan
Soldiers, who fell in the Plains of Marathon were there interred en,
but Miltiades alſo (who commanded in and ſurvived that great
Action) choſe to be buried in the ſame place, leaving there his
mortal Remains, where he had gained immortal Glory. This
General's Sepulchre was apart, at a diſtance from thoſe of the
common Soldiers“. Sometimes Barrows are found in Valleys, but
generally, and much oftner, on the tops of Hills and Plains,
where Engagements for the molt part, as well as Encampments,
happen, and where ſuch works may have the advantage of being
more conſpicuous than if they were lower placed.

The Size of theſe Sepulchral Monuments is various, but ge-sECT. vr.
ncrally large in proportion to the Quality of the deceaſed, or the Of the Size
Vanity, Affection, and Power of the Survivors. That of Ninus, see
according to Cteſias, was of a wonderful bigneſs, nine furlongs in
height?, and ten in breadth 4 ; ſo that the City ſtanding in a Plain
near the river Tigris, the Tumulus looked like a ſtately Citadel at
2 diſtance; and it is ſaid that it continues to this day, though


:
.
1
13
%
:

: I
A 4
os 7
i
1 *
*
1
|


_———


— — =


2X
— —


* Toſhua xxiv. 30. ae o I bid.


$ Philof. Tranſ. 1740. Þ This Height muſt be reckoned by the ſlant
Under Tumuli with Stones on the top, in- line, not the perpendicular,


ond with the names and tribcs of the Slain. 3 Diod Sic. Lib. II. cap. 1.


alan, in Attic is, p. 79.
E Nineveh


218


5 FB ARROW 8


Niniveh (where it was erected) was deſtroyed by the Medes y
they conquered the Aſſyrian Empire. 5

The Barrow erected by Achilles, over his friend Patroclus, was
reckoned but a very moderate one", though it exceeded 100 fla
in diameters. But this was owing to the particular order of
Achilles, who commanded that it ſhould be made no larger unt
he himſelf came to lie down with his friend in the ſame Sepulchre:
for then it was to be made higher and wider'. The Barrow ct
Alyattes King of Lydia was more than a quarter of a league in
circuit, and 1560 Italian feet wide. It is indeed certain that
where time and power permitted, perſons of rank were not in.
terred in ſmall Barrows.

When Abradates (of Princely Dignity) was killed fighting under
Cyrus, againſt Creſus King of Lydia; his Eunuchs and Servant,
dug a private grave for him in a riſing ground. Cyrus thinkin
this too mean a ſetting for ſuch a Jewel, went to viſit his widoy,
Panthea, and to aſſure her of a more honourable Sepulchre for her
huſband. He found her fitting on the ground, Abradates her
dead huſband lying by her with his head on her knees : Cyrus in
a friendly manner taking the dead by his hand, and the hand
(cut off in Battle) following on the touch, Panthea adjuſted it
again to its place; it ſeems ſhe had been before employed in the
mournful office of collecting and diſpoſing his other difperſed and
mangled limbs. Cyrus, moved with compaſſion, endeavours to
comfort her (though in vain) with a promiſe that a great number
of Soldiers ſhould come and raiſe a Monument (ywazo: To fn,
i. e. heap up a Barrow) worthy of his dignity. Panthea killing
herſelf that ſhe might be buried in the fame grave with her huſhand,
Cyrus took care that their burial ſhould be performed with prope
honours ; a very large Barrow was erected, and on the top of thc
Barrow a high ſtone, was placed with the names of the Princes,

The Tumulus erected by Alexander the Great over his friend
Hepheſtion, was ſo large that it coſt 1200 Talents  : the Greeks,
ſeem about the time of Alexander, to be launching out into great
extravagance in this particular; and, therefore, Plato propoſcs a
regulation, which no one ought to exceed in erecting ſuch Monu-
ments, viz. that no one Sepulchre ſhould be larger than what fue
men could compleat in five days; nor a Pillar larger than what


hen


r Iliad xxiil. 246. Ov pare To\or—AAN ETIHISE


TCbov. v Xenophon, Lib. VII. Cyroped.
* it was erected round the Funeral Pile, which » Juſtin, Lib. XII. cap. xii, Curt. X. i.
was 100 Feet each way. Ib. ver. 164. 25.


t Evevy, T d Te Ti urrats Th. ver. 247+


would


uns


— 4 4 " FE NY th *
* 4 5
"-
7 ** L ” 2 —
r a Ws 4


NN N |
| , £ 5 Lo; 7 Lf WFF 4 ONE Ate »4


* na. 2 r or


Lara.” MONTY od


4 4


Fol
. alin REP
L207 + As


* 210,


"oO 2 CO OC 7 F
4 dhe mand eu. Zinnen...


Cd a Rab


„ anon nth a Hiftvacn rea Ape | MR.
Py d "oe Aron af bee
in . dun


tf Sai I 'TH. HG V1 7


1 2
amoi, barons h Roch ll
# Auth OO
8 3 240. . 1
*


my
*,


# Bn” 7 © :


5 ＋ . the Fork bavoru


= Ml 2 — AL — 0 =, K —

r : am

X. by % x y
Ra > 4%
A — « * 8 > : ©, "Þ
Py — *

* = 4
* — =

7 —


Shak


„


2
7
1 5 J
a 8 N 9 2


Ly
**
.


8
$ p h

* * of) wy y

= 88


lll PheSicch Cue
i alſas ntre P1254.


*


Auer ff the 8
” _ +. OO . | i : 8 N 0 Wh "


<


PPT


- ©]
o *
e


il Wh 115 4 '
* * : —_
k * | - &. © = W.
D >
4 :


—


£


|: . Lande Part amen! —


ebe, ele, eee
A. fc arne 2 Len, Borlage.


RT 'f Mate 1. () nith .


ä
* PS. " W 6 1
PEER g * * *
8 — CAD ES a . „ *
Wo 4
” F * *
c


r KK AF WW ©


would contain four Heroic Verſes x. In the Northern Kingdoms,
the cuſtom was to deny the honour of being buried under Barrows
to T'vrants, Parricides, and other Criminals ; but to grudge no
labour or expence in erecting Barrows to their truly great and
worthy Princes. The carcale of Fengo was to have neither Urn
nor Tis, but only to be burnt by the common Soldiers, and
the aſhes ſcattered into the air v. On the other hand, the Bar-
rows of good Princes, and brave Generals, were exccedingly large
in themſelves, or adorned with immenſe Stones; ſometimes one
Tus took up three years in the making*; the Monument of
Haco was Cellis ſpeclatæ magnitudinis*;, Haraldus employed his
whole Army, and a great number of Oxen, in drawing one vaſt
Stone to adorn the Timmulus of his MotherÞ; and it is to be ob—
ſerved, that where Stones of ſufficient Magnitude to do honour to
the dead were not to be procured, there the Earth-barrows were
made ſo much the larger, and were heaped up into little Moun—
tains, that by their aſtoniſhing ſize they might excite the wonder
and cur;ofity of the living, and thereby perpetuate the dignity and
merit of the dead.
Silbury Hill in Wiltſhire is an evidence of the labour and time
which the ancient Britans did ſometimes beſtow on ſuch Works.
The diameter on the top is 105 feet, at the bottom ſomewhat morc
than 500 feet; its perpendicular height 170 feet. On the top of
it the workmen planting trees dug up a Human ody. In Ireland
« their Barrows are allo ſo very large, that, during their Civil Wars,
they erected Caſtles and Fortifications on their tops d.“ In Corn-
wall, we have them from 30 feet high and under, down to four feet,
and from 15 to 130 feet wide; where Stones are plenty, of Stones;
in champain countries and Plains, moſtly of Earth : ſome have
Crypta, or hollows, in the top; ſome a pillar.

There is a very ſingular kind of Barrow which obtains throughout


the outward Ring (as Fig. I. and Fig. III. Pl. XX.); in the middle
they have a Cavity walled on each fide, and covercd with large flat
Stones, and over all is a Tumulus of ſmall Stones and Earth, in ſome
more of Earth than Stones, in others vice ver/a, Upon opening it
(Fig. III.), in the middle of the Barrow we found a large Cavity, as
repreſented in the Plan, full of Earth; there was a paſſage into it at
the Eaſtern end, one foot eight inches wide, between two Stones ſet


x Several laws were made at Athens to reſtrain a Ibid. p. 32.
this Vanity, Cic. de LL. Lib. II. b Sec before, p. 175. —— Sax. Gram. Lib. X.
Non Urna, non Tumulus, nefandas oſſium Worm. p. 39.
* reliquias claudat, nullum Parricidii veſtigium < dtukelcy's Abury, p. 42.
* mancat” (ſays Amletus to the Soldiers in Sax. As ſee the Louthiana, paſſim.
Gramm.) * tis exequiis proſequendus tyran- e As at Boſwens, in the pariſh of Sancicd,
* nu.” Wormius, p. 39, &c. Cornwall,


Worm. Mon, D. p. 39.


— —
. ˙¹m.A . . nm —


ON.


219


STCT.VIT.
all the Scilly Iſlands; they are edged with large Stones, which form Rematkab'e


Barrows at


Scilly.


220


SECT. VIII.


To what

Nation the
Barrows in
Britain are


to be


aſſigned.


e ß


on end. In the middle it was four feet eight inches wide, the lenmy
of it 22 feet. It was walled on each {ide with Maſonry and Ra
the ſides four feet ten inches high; at the Weſtern end, it had ;
large fla: Stone, which terminated the Cavity; its length bore F. at
by N. and it was covered from end to end with large flat Stones
ſeveral of which we removed in order to get the exact dimenſions o-
the Cavity, and others had been carried oft for building. Portr.
two feet diſtant, to the N. E. we opened another Barrow of the fame
kind. The Cave was leſs in all reſpects, but of the fame ſhape, 1,
length bore N. E. by E. 14 feet, the walled ſides two feet high:
where the Cavity was narroweſt, it was but one foot cight inches, 1
the middle four foot, and at the 8. W. end two feet wide in th.
bottom. On one ſide, in the floor, was a ſmall round Cavity, dus
deeper than the reſt. It was covered with flat Rocks as the forme:
In both theſe we found neither Bone nor Urn, but ſome ſtrono
unctuous Earth, which ſmelt cadaverous, and was of a different
colour from the natural. The reaſon why theſe Cavities were made
ſo much beyond the dimenſions of the human body, was probably
that they might contain the Remains not of one perſon only, but of
whole families, it being uſual among the ancients for particula:
families to have ſeparate Burying-places. The vulgar, however, ate
not eaſily perſuaded, but that theſe Graves were made according to
the Size of the Body there interred, and they are till called in
theſe Iſlands, Giants Graves f.

In moſt of thoſe Barrows which have been examined by the
Curious, they have found Urns, of which we ſhall difcourſe ar
large, as ſoon as we have gone through the Monuments chat in-
cloſe them.

In ſome Barrows there are no Urns; but in or near the centre
there are either round or ſquare Pits g, which, by their containing
black greaſy Earth, ſhew that they were deſigned to ſerve the office
of Urns ; but the moiſture of the ſurrounding Earth, in this kind
of burying, ſoon conſumes the Bones. In ſome Barrows again,
there are neither Urns, nor little Repoſitories inftead of them, but
Human Skeletons without any Sign of their having paſſed through
the Fire. Whoſe Sepulchres theſe were, we ſhall preſently
conſider.

It muſt be obſerved, that this way of burying under Tumuli was
ſo univerſal, that it is no caſy matter to decide by hat Nation any
Barrows were erected, unleſs ſome criterion, found within, aſſiſt us te


K 4 n . . . 7 78 01
In hiſce vulgus Gigantes ſepultos credit,” © Heath, mentioned by Plot in his Nat. Hit. .


Waormius. | c Staffordſhire, there was found, at the depth 75
s Dr. Williams, ibid. ut ſupra, N'. 2, 3, 4. © ten feet, a quantity of black greaſy earth, and
Plot's Staffordſhire, p. 405 &« ſome half. burnt ſticks and aſhes,” Letter, 174

„On opening one of the Barrows on Clent
forn


U
f


\ I 3
a p r CR LT — - > = . N
: | . * 4.44426. hn WAS A —
- . 4 * #=" 1 Wd W 7 I * 8
E gt Poets ; n : q
ST Aa HFA 2 I RENEE. DN EET: Sa


- =
=
k \
* * — id
a * r 1 ky > CE
„ n 18 4H TR i. „ <
= N 5 £46 * N r 8
S . 5 TRA ny TS by 2 L Y -
— oF > 2 * N 3 * 5 A


the year 878, in Devonſhire. Hearne's Note on


FFF us 19 YA © 2h. Ge


ſorm our judgment. Thus, by the Materials and Workmanſhip of
the Urn, the Cell that contains it, Coins perhaps, and Inſtruments
r War, or Domeſtick lite, which may accompany the Bones, we
may diſcover to what Nation we are to aſſign ſuch Sepulchres ;
but where theſe Indicaticns are wanting, we muſt reit comented
in our uncertainty. If indeed it be true“ that the Saxons and
« the Danes, though they continued to bury their dead under
« Farthen Hillocks, had left off burning them, at or before their
« arrival and ſettlement in this Hland 3” as Morton " conjectures
om Wormius (Mon. Danica, Lib. I. cap. vi. and vii.), then all
our Barrows in Cornwall with Urns or Aſhes muſt be either Britith
or Roman (few, if any, being to be attributed to the 'I'raders of
Phenicia and Greece, as being too diſtant from the Sea Shore): but
doubt whether ſo much can be clearly concluded from Wormius.
That the Danes and Swedes ſometimes burnt their dead bodies
(eſpecially thoſe of their principal men) and fometimes interred
without burning, is to be gathered from Sax. Gram. i (p. 50. ibid.
Wormius, p. 51.) but no more. Thus far, then, we may proceed
upon ſure grounds in aſſigning theſe Monuments to their proper
Authors, that where there are no Coins or Pavements underneath,
or elegance in the Workmanſhip of the Urns, or choice in the
Materials of which the Urns are made, or Roman Camp or Wa

near or in a line with theſe Barrows, we may ſafely conclude, that
ſuch Barrows are not Roman, and vice verſa. But we cannot
determine all the reſt to be Britiſh, nor indeed diſtinguiſh the Saxon,
Daniſh, and Britiſh, one from another ; arts being at much the
35 height with them all, and their cuſtoms very like, eſpecially
in the ancient ſimple manner of beſtowing their dead; the Saxons,
and Danes, likely, when they had leiſure, were as willing to honour
their Generals with funeral Piles, as the Britans were their Princes
and Prieſts: but it muſt be allowed, that where Barbows have
neither Urns, nor little repoſitories inſtead of them, but human
Skeletons, without any ſign of their having paſſed through the fire;
theſe are more likely to have been the Sepulchres of ſuch unſettled
ſtrangers as the Saxons were (whilſt they infeſted Cornwall
before the time of Vortigern), and the Danes after them, who were


perpetually engaged in 1n-roads, and all the hurry of wandering
parties, than of the fixed natives.


" Northamptonſh. p. 531.


| North of Devon, and to this day the place is
' Tne Danes buried the body of Hubba, in


commonly known by the name of Whibble Stow.
If. Mem. of Ex. p. 8. but ſometimes they alſo


burnt their Dead. See Worm. and Nich. Hiſtor.
Lib. p. 52.


the Life of Alfred, p. 60. The Stones are (wept
away by the Sea's encreaſing, yet the name ſtill
mains on the Strand near Appledore in the


L1I By


13
d
—


222


SEC T. IX.


The Se-
condary
Uſes of
Barrows.


„ Wy 45 ob


By the contents of all Barrows which have been examined gt.
where as well as in this Iſland, it appcars that the principal _
of their erection was to encloſe either the Aſhes, or the Bodi.
(unburnt), of the dead: however, the Sepulchres of the Ancient;
being always looked upon with a kind of veneration, they hecgy,..
afterwards applied to the ſolemnization of their higheſt Rites ,;
Religion and Feſtivity. No ſooner was Alexander arrived upon
the Plains before Troy, but he performed Sacrifices and other uſual
Rites at the Tumwulus of Achilles; and this is recorded of him net
as any thing new, or inſtituted by him; we are therefore only 1
conſider him here, as comply ing with the already eſtabliſhed cullom
of his country. Again, as the Druids burnt, and afterward buried
their dead, there is no doubt but they had Barrows for th;
Sepulchres as well as other nations, and this was the original uſe df
them, but they were afterwards otherwiſe applied; for, on the
Stone Barrows, the Druids kindled their annual fires, eſpec; !
where there is a large flat Stone on the top!. Where the En.
Barrows are incloſed, or ſhaped by a Circle of Stones erect, they m;y
ſafely be preſumed to have ſerved as Altars for Sacrifice, Ti;
Heaps were alſo, probably, at times, places of Inauguration, d
Chieftain ele& ſtanding on the top expoſed to view, and the Druid
officiating cloſe to the edge below m. On the {ame Hillocks (like!
judgment was frequently pronounced, and the moſt importair
deciſions made, as from a ſacred eminence ; and where thele wee
not at hand, ſomething of like kind ® was erected, for the Judge to
ſtand or fit upon, and give forth his Decrees with proper advantage.

In the Scotch Iſles they reſt their Corpſes (as they are carried to
burial) at ſome little Barrows, oblige themſelves to make a religiou;
tour, ſun-ways, round ſome heaps of Stones ; and, that they might
retain this very ancient, but Druid Cuſtom (though Chriſtians,
maintain a Tradition among them, that one Barrow was conlecrated
to St. Martin, and another to the Virgin Mary.

The firſt Miſſionaries in Ireland (in order to prevail in greater
points) were forced to connive at ſome of the Druid Supcrttitions,
and, inftead of aboliſhing them quite, thought it beſt to give them
only another, and a Chriſtian turn. Not being able to withdraw
the people from paying a kind of Adoration to Erected ſtones, thei


cut Croſſes on them, and then permitted that Superſtition. So here,


te cauſed a round Mount to be caft up, 29% v7"!
1 See Book II. chap. xx. p. 135. ce the ſame was the Judgment-ſeat placed. ha
m Martin of the Iſles, p. 365. „his Back towards the Sun or the Ii cats,
n «© When an aſſembly met together for the “ Some of theſe Mounts were made {quare, iv


* Pomp. Mela, Lib. III. cap. ii.


<« title of lands, the King, or his Deputy, came „ round, and both forts bore the name 0!


2 . % ; 0 Hunt [
« upon the land, and with the contending © Gorſeddevy dadie, that is, the Mount 7
c parties and their friends, and a champion for * Pleading.” Jones's Anſwers in Toland 0
© cach, viewed the controverted lands; then the Druids, p. 94.


.
thetx


' AS FA. s Fas bk
. * * * x
„ 2s N N 2 e
9 . q : 4 £


* —


4 — ane ie
| | J "


Uhm ne
[| WA ' 1 uy
I } h Ly 750.


{
96 59—9ꝗ t Ir
* 7 } 555


ay a %


6
i Vt
7 1 05
WH


LL ANT
W109 4
757 uh 451 !


A
— ®,
E

*


— —


22
17
*


0
i (


WONG

Wed

iss Ie.
1 N \ wy


\
1600 i
0 Wo [OO 1. 5 Get eh,
(are, K. "0, N : j ="


ee Pa put W 4
—— _ TORS a nes
ST at * 4 MS. Sg > p -
_— — — a 5 —
— — — :
> > LS IS > ho —
r =_—= RR A iowa
at OO S ID —
N 2 WOO > vac? . <<
bets - 2 TO 4 Wes 6 5 hs — Th _— — 2 ® ho FF. =
e 9 ISS — 9
—_— 1141 2 DI IS VIEISS = _—O 2 N Kea
, m. > t 1 wA
. : 1 *
Ane Gomtbh Fg . 231 . ;
*
9599
WT
„„
5
I
=
/ —
2 þ


o .* * +
ES EE EEE EMERY


a Vogre*”
MINN
| DUATEFTINNGs 8:
ES. —— %* dn COP — 9 x
! 1 BO —— n —
"ND DANCED XoY WI D
«<< — * KW
— DS — N JS Mo — x — — —
l D 5
*
— = * |
N —


—
—
eee
—— —
*% %

N — %


1
({(f ( | payee:
= Vw OY YA %.
RS
Mi DJ Yat — — IJRY 0
_ * * —
" a I. — = ho
H *


i2


— : %
* %
* 7 N Q * . F 9 » 4 - I
* * mY > ö 9 N = 5 4 — * T%\ e |
vol — ; $ * I 1 Ne * * : * \W 2 * — * s FF
OE R WW .- — . +7 4 ö
* 5 = — WAY *


— . of | ll N


Ag Ania, 8
Senar Gm, N
P-232. For s a N

| N

Q


8


*


WN


.
® 3»
.
290 00600


—
—


. N
Co J. 22 Oliver * | © Bath ND RS.
"4 # . .
Hs Fl, engravel nth; C 52 WIL, 2 2 areal r angertd di 2 Win Borda |


OFT HE CNOM UE H.


their Miſſionaries, ſent to convert theſe ignorant Iflanders, fecing
the profound veneration they had for Barrows, dedicated them to
Chriſtian Saints, and then allowed of the religious turn, reſting the
Corps, and the like fanciful abſurdities.


CHAP. IX.
Of the Cromlth,


by ſeveral parts of Cornwall we find a large flat Stone in a hori-
zontal poſition (or near it) ſupported by other flat Stones fixed
on their edges, and faſtned in the ground, on purpoſe to bear the
weight of that Stone, which reſts upon, over-ſhadows them, and,
by reaſon of its extended ſurface, and its elevation of fix or eight
{cet or more from the ground, makes the principal figure in this


423
12
—


kind of Monument. The ſituation, which is generally choſen for SECT. 1.


this Monument, is the very ſummit of the hill; and nothing can be Place of the


Cromlch.


more exact than the placing ſome of them, which ſhews, that thoſe
who erected them were very ſolicitous to place them as conſpicuouſly
as poſſible. Sometimes this flat Stone, and its ſupporters, ſtand upon
the plain natural ſoil, and common level of the ground; but at
other times it is mounted on a Barrow made either of Stone or
Earth; it is ſometimes placed in the middle of a Circle of Stones-
erecto, and, when it has a place of that dignity, muſt be ſuppoſed
to be erected on ſome extraordinary occaſion ; but when a Circle
has a tall Stone in the middle, it ſeems to have been unlawful to
remove that middle Stone, and therefore we find this Monument of
which we are ſpeaking, ſometimes placed on the edge of ſuch a
CircleP. But we find ſome Cromlehs erected on ſuch rocky
ſituations, and fo diſtant from houſes (where no Stones-cre& do ſtand,
or appear to have ftood), that we may conclude, they were often
erected 1n places where there were no ſuch Circles. Some of theſe
Monuments are quite incloſed, and buried, as it it were, in the
Barrow ; as that of Senor in Cornwall (Plate XXI. Fig. III.) and
that at Chiin (Plate XXIV, Fig. X.) and that mentioned by
Wormius, p. 4. Mon. Dan.


As at Carig a fouky in the County of Cork, tin: fiom which we may draw this conſequence;
Ireland, Hiſt. of Cork, vol. i. p. 190. where that the Cromleh was poſteriour in date to the
the Caſtle adjoining ſeems to have taken its name Circle, and the former erected there for the ſake
from the vulgar notion of this Monument being of the latter.
erected by the Fairies; Carig a fouky ſignifying q One only which I have yet heard of, has its
in Iriſh the Fairy rock. Supporters, or Side-ſtones, fixed on a ſolid Rock.

See Pl. XV. Fig, III. a, and b, in Boſcawen- State of Downe, p. 199.

I find


—


: _—_ —— _ — . —
— ä 1 n * 4
* - — - - 3 . -
a = 2 at .
— : — Þ
—— 4 Z
— - N — 5
Y


—
8 %
—


. 2


— —


444 gs <a Ct —
.


224 OF THE Non Ln


SECT. II. I find the number of ſupporters, in all the Monuments of this kind
Conftruc- which I have ſeen, to be no more than three, the reaſon of which
TI I take to be this; they found it much caſier to place and fix ſecurely
any incumbent weight on three ſupporters than on four, or more;
becauſe, in the latter caſe, all the ſupporters muſt be exactly level on
the top, and the under ſurface alſo of the covering Stone be planed
and true, in order to bring the weight to bear equally on every
ſupporter; whereas, three ſupporters have no occaſion for ſuch
nicety; the incumbent weight eaſily inclining itſelf, and reſting on
any three props (though not of one level on the top); and accord-
ingly, we tind the Covering Stones, not horizontal, but always more
or leſs ſhelving, the weight naturally ſubſiding where the loweſt
ſupporter is found, and ſupporters of unequal height being eafir

found than thoſe of one and the ſame".
The Supporters mark out, and incloſe an area, generally, fix fect
long, or ſomewhat more, and about four feet wide, in the form of a
ſtone Cheſt or Cells; on theſe Supporters reſts a very large flat, or
gibbous ſtone t. In what manner they proceeded to ere theſe
Monuments, whether by heaping occaſional Mounds, or Hillocks
of Earth, round the Supporters, in order to get the Covering Stone
the eaſier into its place, or by what Engines, it is in vain for us to
enquire ; but what is moſt ſurprizing is, that this rude Monument
of four or five Stones is ſo artfully made, and the huge incumbent
Stone ſo geometrically placed, that though theſe Monuments greatly
exceed the Chriſtian æra (in all probability), yet it is very rare to
find them give way to Time, Storm, or Weight; nay, we find the
covering Stone often gone, that is, taken down for building, and yet
the Supporters {till keeping their proper ſtation.
Name, From the oblate and ſpreading form of the upper Stone (reſembling
a Diſcus) this Monument is in Cornwall called by the name of Quoit.
In Merionidſhire (Wales) alſo there 1s one called Koeten-Arthur, or
Quoit of Arthur; and another in Carnarvonſhire, called Bryn)
Goeten, or the Quoit Hillock. The Cromleh in Kent (Pl. XXII.) is
called Kitt's Cotty-houſe (or rather, with Camden Keith, Coty-houſe),
a corruption likely of the Britiſh Kocten, or Gocten, a Quoit.
In the Iſle of Jerſey (where there are many) they are called Pou-
queleys u. There is a Cromlth near Cloyne in Ireland, named Carig


x In Denmark alſo, Wormius ſays, the Sup- ſeveral Angles, which, if not the effect of ſome
porters are but three. modern Fancy, and love of Alteration, is very

„ Sub hac Mole, Cavitas viſitur in quibuſ- rare in Monuments of this kind. Thoſe fue
&« dam vaſta fatis, in aliis terra ac lapidibus repleta, which I have exhibited here from Cornwall in
* que ſanguini victimarum recipiendo deputata Pl. XXI. and XXIV. and others which I hate
„ creditur,” Worm. p. 7. How right he is in ſeen, are more more artleſs.
the uſe aſſigned for this Cavity, will be ſeen v This ſeems to be a Britiſh Compound word;
hereafter. for in Cornwall we ſtill call a Heap a Pook (3

One in Wales at Bodofwyr (Camd. p. $10.) a Pook of Turves, a Pook of Hay, i. e. a hep
is ſaid to be neatly wrought and pointed into of Turves, a Haycock); and Ley is nothing but


Croith


OO ee eee ED


EY " » PAM . 224.
% | : I C\ %
„abe, 2222 4 , (ll) ( oflly 1 e.
„


E hun.


06 moe 4 OTH FT


9195


ö * | t! [ | | Mee "Ms
N N iche 10

Me V1 Be e LA

\\ |. i | e \ fl J bo


,
k
|
.-
.-


ALL
8 22
. SS 3 >
. O07 anon.” — -
Sov, > _— LR

wg*. 7 - —

2 2 "


2=g
25
— — . * -
o - — - „ .
9 PRESS
-


my
- —
- Ln
-


—


7 | ny
fl 1
UL hs l W Il
_— Vn
— — . TRE n
— * — ” 17 d [
* LAS
(ce WS  - YT
= KDE |
72 — 275809 | Y
— *
: - 1 ; - *
— I i * . 2 3
' 1 i — I : 8 EN
© , l n a Kae N —
2 : 8 —— i
- - *_> norte
TT 8
Up DAL N —
494 WA


A
1 *
\


|
o


IND
\
4


1


-
Fes = _
— —
- — EY =
2 =
— >, bu
- — * SR
— = _ gt


i


|
if
nl


05 |


— — .
-
c- = — >
— _ —
ET —
— — on
— —
— —
— —
———
— —
— — — —
— — — —_— -
— Ly — — — - _
— —
—— — — .
— o——_ f =
— — —— * Lo l
— — — . . *
—— ——— — IE .
Long — - A _— .
- < N pl £ = -
— 2 -— * Ss
==, N 2 5 12 e
—— — {At rr yy
— , 7 * * .
: 4 .
i”,


p 22 (alta e Arolla on lhe brow ofa Hall about 1 Mito & + from Alntesjord
K. White lo ths rouht of the great Hioad from Doh ar: {0 « Huibtone A a comprorid 14 4
" Vat Hones call Vontwh An UL he Aumontons of the Hones hat on the . ate to
"Af "high by J * broad & 2 Fee. auge lou Hu. That on the V. & e o 4 2 p
" lhrck noght G ton 10 hund® lhe end Shone &. 0. hgh 46 6 broad 1 2 Lf mch
"neught 2on & 3. (he Nianwverte or „uche. Ml A rg 2 G broad 8 2 tack w "40 lon
bine. (lawullliq to Camden & others il, created ove: the banal /rtace of 7 alget 7¹
"Volher of Vorttmer Meng of i the SOretans aun un a Anttle near Cube belnart
"the Mie, & Sacons . — NF). Dhe nearer Laing 1 He Hiebe, dertant

For this Monument {the Author having ner een it quite prevent Edition is indebted to the B Mag May, 1103 pa. 240.
12 Veonot br the ame Sale arthe Grazth Gomehs, butts ung / of the yame conovuction


#4


OF NHEBUUT NOM. E H.


Coith w, 1. e. the Sun's rock, as if it were dedicated to the Sun,
which the Irith certainly worſhiped : but the general name by
which they are known among the learned is that of CromIch" (or
crooked Stone), the upper ſtone being generally of a convex or
felling ſurface, and reſting in an inclined or crooked poſition,

What Nation, Sect, or Religion, this Kind of Monument may be
ſaid properly to belong to, or had its rile from, 1s a point not caſily
to be adjuſted], ſceing we find them in Denmark, France, Germany,
and in the Iſles of the Mediterrancan Seca, adjacent to the Coaſts of
Spain and France, in Jerſey, Ircland, Britain, and the Britiſh Iles ;
and perhaps in many other countries they will occur, eſpecially the
Northern Kingdoms, by which they ſhould ſcem to have been
Celtick Monuments, and with that numerous pcople carried into all
their Settlements.

That the Druids erected Monuments of this kind, I think is more
than probable, for there are remains of ſeveral in the Iſle of Angle-
ſea, and in places denominated from the ancient Druids. There
are alſo many Cromlchs ſtil] entire in the Weſt of Cornwall, where,
by the number till remaining of their Monuments, the Druids
muſt have been long fixed. For which reaſons I conclude (as well
as for that the Chriſtians never erected ſuch Monuments), that the
Druids were accuſtomed to erect Monuments of this kind. To
whom elſe can we attribute them? If it be ſaid, to the Danes;
caſe, among ſuch a number as we meet with in Cornwall ; for
beſides, we find them in places where the Danes never were, and
therefore they cannot all be Daniſh ; neither do they appear to be
ſuch as Sojourners, and generally in an Enemy's Country, would
have leiſure and ſecurity enough to erect. But as they are not likely
to be Daniſh, ſo neither can they be ſaid to be peculiar to the Druids ;
for we find them alſo in many foreign parts, where the Druid Prieſt-
hood never took footing.

Doubtleſs they are very ancient, as appears by their ſimplicity,
the grandeur and fewneſs of the Materials. The Iriſh Hiſtorians


Leh, in Armorick and Corniſh ſignifying a flat
Stone; ſo that Pookleh (Gallice Pouqueley)
means a heap of Stone.

Nat. and Civil Hiſt. of Cork, p. 148.

* In Welſh, Cromlech; but the Corniſh (in-
ſtead of pronouncing the Greek X as ch), only
accent the Vowel before the H, and drop the C;
thus, inſtead of Lech a flat Stone, they ſay Leh,
pur. Lehou. Crom, or Crum (Armorice
Crewm), is crooked, and a Word ſtill in uſe
among the Corniſh, in that ſenſe. From Crom
or Cri, comes Crymmy, bending, bowing z


M m m


whence ſome (viz. Toland, and the State of
Down, &c.) conjecture that theſe Stones were
called Cromlech, from the Reverence and Ado-
ration, which Perſons bowing paid to them. It
the Reader chuſes to derive Cromlech ſrom the
Hebrew with Rowland, p. 47, 214. MP? C
will ſignify a devoted, conſecrated Stone,

y As Tre'r baird, and Bodofwyr; and Monu-
ments of the ſame nature, viz. Kiſtvaens (or
Stone-cheſts) covered, are called in Denbighſhire,
Kerig y Drudion, that is, Druid Stones,


ſay


225


Ser. ut.
What Nut


On to Ic


alcribed


10.


226


SECT. IV.


The intent
and uſe of
theſe Mo-
numents.


Not Altars


originally.


OF THE e en.


ſay that Tigernmas King of Ireland, firſt Author of Idolatry there.
died anno mundi 30 34, in the Plains of Magh Sleachd (1. e. the
field of worſhip) with a great number of his ſubjects, whilſt they
were ſacrificing there to Crom Cruach *. The largeſt Cromlch in
Angleſea, is ſaid to be the Sepulchral Monument of Bronwen,
Daughter of King Leirus, who' by the Welſh Traditions began
his Reign, A. M. 3205* The Supporters, indeed, are found
marked with Croſſes in a Monument of this kind called Ty Iltud in
Wales; but the Crofles and the Saint's name muſt have been given
it after Chriſtianity came in, if this be a true Cromlth, for it i;
difficult to prove that the Chriſtians ever erected Structures of this
kind e.

Some have been fanciful enough to imagine that the Cromlth
was intended for a federal teſtimony d; ſome, from the Sacrifice and
other ſacred Ceremonies performed near it, ſeem to have miſtaken
the Cromleh, for the Idol to which divine honours were paid, a
at Crom Cruach abovementioned ; others have been ſo weak as to
think them Priſons, becauſe one of them goes by the name of
Kenricus's Priſon in Wales, and might poſlibly be converted to
that uſe; but the molt prevailing opinion is, that they were Druid
Altars e; which, becauſe eſpouſed by ſeveral learned men, we will
now proceed to examine, by conſidering their ſtructure, and fitneſs,
or unfitneſs, for ſuch an uſe.

It is very unlikely, if not impoſſible, that ever the Cromlth
{hould have been an Altar for Sacrifice, for the top of it is not caſily
to be got upon, much leſs a fire to be kindled on it, ſufficient to
conſume the Victim, without ſcorching the Prieſt that officiated;
not to mention the horrid Rites with which the Druid Sacrifice
was attended, and which there 1s not proper room, or footing, to


= This Crom-Cruach (i. e. a heap of crooked,
unwrought Stones) was the moſt famous Idol of
all Ireland; it ſtands in the middle of a Circle of
twelve Obeliſks on a hill in Brefin, in the County
of Cavan; and by the Iriſh Writers (State of
Down, p. 20. Tol. Hiſt. Druids, p. 100) is ſaid
to have been covered with Gold and Silver: I
ſuppoſe they mean when it was at the moſt cele-
brated point of Glory ; for Idols rife and fall in
value, and have greater, or leſs reſort, according
as the fits of Superſtition are more or lets
inflamed.

a Camd. p. 810,

b j, e. Houſe of St. Iltut.

© Keith Coty-houſe near Aylesford in Kent
(which is plainly a Cromleh, as ſee Plate XXII.
p. 224.) is thought by ſome (Camden, laſt Edit.


p. 230.) the Sepulchre of Catigern, brother of


Vortimer King of the Britans, who invited the
Saxons into Britain, If this Tradition is true,
Catigern (it may be ſaid) was likely a Chriſtian,
and the people who erected his Monument


Chriſtians (Britain having before this received
the Chriſtian Religion); but it muſt be con-
ſidered, that the Chriſtianity then among the
Britans, particularly thoſe of Cornwall (from
whence Vortimer came, and ſucceeded his father
Vortigern, who was advanced from that Earldom
to be the general King of Britain) was ſo deeply
tainted with Druidiſm, and exerciſed the great
abilities of the Iriſh Saints ſo long after as well
as before this period, that it is difficult to deter-
mine whether we are to look upon Keith Coty-
houſe as a Druid or as a Chriſtian Monument:
even though allowed to be of the date Camden
gives it.

d See the Louthiana, Book III. p. 12. ä

e « Ego ejuſmodi (viz. Tumulos) integris
etiam familiis deſtinatos puto, unde et (in his
« Arz, viz. Cromlehs) quæ communia ſacrifcia
pro totius gentis incolumitate immolata ex-
„ cipiant.” Worm. p. 35. See Rowland, p. 47:
215. |


perform


OF THE CROMELE@YDh:


\crform in ſo perilous a flation*®, Molfra and Senar Quoits are ſo
ory thin, that the intenſeneſs of the Sacrifical Fire muſt have
cracked and ſoon broke the Quoits, which are all of Moor-Stone!,
and can, therefore, reſiſt the fire but very indifferently, the ſtrongeſt
and moſt compact ſtone caſily ſplitting on being roaſted. But
what is almoſt deciſive in this diſpute is, that the Table Stone of
the Cromleh at Ch'un, in Morvah, Cornwall (Plate XXIV. Fig.
X.), is ſo very gibbous, that no Prieſt could ſtand on it, cither to
tend the Fire, or overſee the conſumption of the Victim. There
is alſo one in Pembrokeſhire, of which the middle, or covering
Stone, is eighteen ſect high, and nine feet broad towards the Baſes;
now what kind of Altar could this be? 1 know that it is confidently
iffirmed that all Cromlths were Places of Worſhip"; but this is a
hallv, vague expreſſion, and it was not at all confidered by the
Author how 1mproper the dimenſions and parts of a Cromlch were
for a Place of Worſhip. That part of it which lies directly under
che Quoit, and may be termed the Kiſt-vacn' of this Monument,
in fome fo cloſe (as particularly at Senar and Ch'tn) that 'tis
with great difficulty any man can get into it; and where the Kilt-
vaen is not ſo regularly marked out, and encloſed on every fide (as
at Lanyon and Molfra it is not), there is great reaſon to believe that
ſome of the conſtituent parts have been removed: beſides, many
are erected on Stone Barrows, viz. Heaps of looſe ſmall Stones;
a very uneaſy ſtation for people to perform their Devutions upon.
The Top- ſtone is alſo too high for the Prieſt to pour out his Li-
bations upon; ſo that it could in no ſenſe ſerve the purpoſe of
any Altar, but only (which is not improbable) of ſuch an Altar as
was to receive the Oblations and Preſents of the Aſſembly, in ho-
nour of the deceaſed.

That the ancients might ſacrifice near the Cromlch, is not un-
likely; whence it comes to paſs that great quantities of Aſhes may
be found near theſe Monuments, as in Jerſey ; but that the
Cromleh itſelf was an Altar for Fire, will by no means follow : it
Is incongruous both to the Structure and the Materials, the nature
of which laſt, as well as the ſhape and dimenſions of the former,
are more 1nvariable rules to judge by, than any other now to be
diſcovered or expected.


As the whole frame of the Cromlch ſhews itſelf unfit for an put Sept.
Altar of Burnt offerings, ſo I think it points out evidently to us chin.


* Of this opinion I have the pleaſure to find “ quibus ſacerdos ſacra peratturus aſcendere &
the judicious Keyſler (p. 46.) ſpeaking of the „ in ſumma eniti potuerit.“
Cromlch Monuments, * Quod enim alia hujuſ- f A Stone of a large grain or gritt, a kind of
. modi monumenta in Drenthia & Septentrione Granite eaſily clove, and ſometimes free enough
g attinet, conſtat ſuperiores eorum lapides planè to yield to a chizzel.
: rudes, gibboſos atque ad ſacrificia fuiſſe ineptos: 8 Toland, p. 98.

Accedit quod nulli in ullis appareant gradus, \ "Ibid. p. 97. See note k, p. ſequ.


ſeveral


1
1
ly ;
4
*

| |
1
ö


— — — ——


1 —
wy » _ *
5 y.


— — — —
—— — — —
i — 2 1 ————
2 ra


—
——


— = - —
— —
p ——-— ͤ —ä—
—
— —


GF THE CRO MTL E H.


ſeveral reaſons to conclude that it is a Sepulchral Monument.
The area incloſed underneath the Quoit is about fix feet and 3
half long, and four wide, ſo very near is this ſpace to the di-
menſions of the human body, and every kind of Sarcophagus of
the ancients.

In Cornwall, and elſewhere, we find Kiſt-vaens* (of an area equal
to the fize of the human body), conſiſting of Side Stones pitched
on end, without any Covering Stone; theſe certainly once incloſed
the Bones of the Dead, though now generally dug up to ſearch for
money; and what elſe is our Cromleh but a Kiſt-yaen conſiſting
of larger Side Stones, covered with a ſtill larger and flat one on the
top ?

Erne Supporters, therefore, as well as Covering Stone, are no
more than the ſuggeſtion of the common univerſal ſenſe of man-
kind; which was, firſt, on every ſide to fence and ſurround the
dead body from the Violences of weather, and from the rage of
enemies, and in the next place, by the grandeur of its conſtruction,
to do honour to the memory of the Dead. Our Altar-tombs at
this day are but a more diminutive and regular Cromleh, and called
Altar- tombs (as I apprehend) not from any divine ſervice or ſacri-
fice ever intended to be performed upon them, but rather becauſe
they are raiſed from the Earth as Altars are, near the height, and
near their figure: I leave it to be conſidered, whether the Cromlth
might not obtain the name of the Altar from the ſame reſemblance],
It ithe objected, that the Covering-ſtone of this Monument is uſually
ſo large, that it is very unlikely people ſhould combine to call it
an Altar, unleſs tradition had conſtantly and juſtly aſſerted that
it was really ſo: I anſwer, that the generality and vulgar part of
mankind have always thought with the Fabulous, that our Fore-
fathers much exceeded in proportion the preſent race of mankind,
and therefore had ſeats or chairs (as we find the Giant's chair almoſt
in every country), Altars, Tombs, and Weapons, proportionably
larger, than what the dwindled preſent generation have any occa-
ſion for. Next, let it be obſerved, that the Cromlehs are ſometimes
found on, and often ſurrounded with Barrows. Now the Barrow
was one of the molt ancient and moſt general way of interring the
dead ; and, therefore, its lying ſometimes under, and at other times
round this Monument is no weak reaſon for the Cromleh to have
been a place of Sepulture. Again, it is juſtly obſerved m, that a
ſmall brook near this kind of Monument, is called Rhyd y Bedheu,


or the ford of the Graves. In the ſame page it is ſaid, that hu-


* 1, e. Cheſts made of Stone. Wormio, p.9.) ut aras referre videantur.”
' © Ea diſpoſitio eft” (ſays Emmius in m Annot. on Camden, p. 810,


man


OFT.


man bones and aſhes have been found near them. The names aito
of ſome perſons interred in them are recorded, as that of Haraldus,
(in Wormius, p. 22. u) and that of Bronwen in Wales. Mormius
mentions a Crypta and a CromlCh together on one Barrow (p. 44.)
but, for want of an accurate drawing of both, his deſcription is not
ſufficiently diſtin ; out of the firſt were taken a great many
human bones, from which he concludes it to have been the bury -
ing place of ſome remarkable family.

It is very probable, therefore, that the uſe and intent of the
Cromlch was primarily to diſtinguiſh, and do honour to the dead,
and alſo to incloſe the dead body, by placing the ſupporters, and
Covering- ſtone, ſo as they ſhould ſecure it on all ſides.

When this Monument is found in the middle of a ſacred Circus,
it was probably the Sepulchre of one of the Chief Prieſts or Druids,
who preſided in that diſtrict, or of ſome Prince, a favourite of that
Order. When the middle of the Circus was alrcady taken up by
a ſingle Obeliſk, which was always regarded as a Symbol of ſome-
thing divine, and generally worlhiped®, then was the Croml!ch
placed on the edge of that Circle, and perhaps reſpecting a parti-
cular region of the Heavens. Princes and great Commanders were
not only interred in a Barrow, but had their Sepulchres farther
dignified by a CromIch erected over them. Laſtly, it was the
deſire of many in former times, as it ſtill is, to be buried ncar the
remains of an illuſtrious Anceſtor, or Predeceſſor in Office; and
hence it is, that ſome Vaults are diſcovered near theſe Cromlchs ;
hence, in the large Crypta, above-mentioned from Wormius, ſome
bones, aſhes, and the Enſigns of military command, as ſpears,
helmets, and the like; the principal body remaining (as I ſuſpect)
undiſturbed by the after-interments in the Kiſtvacn of the Cromlch;


but either through age and moiſture decayed, or diſhpated by


the fooliſh, in hopes of finding treaſure.

That theſe places of burial became afterwards the ſcenes of the
Parentalia, or where divine honours were payed, and ſacrifices
performed to the Manes of the dead, is very reaſonable to believe ;
but theſe Rites muſt have been tranſacted at ſome diſtance from
the Cromleh, which (as I think has been ſhewn) could never ſerve
for ſacrifice. © Uncia ubi viſtur (viz. Ara, i. e. the Cromlch)
"* maximd ex parte Sepulchro impoſita eſſe ſolet, eo fine, ut ibidem
in memoriam defuncti quotannis ſacra peragantur P. By which


* Snorro (in his Hiſtory of King Harald, © Petra, aggeſtis etiam ad latera lapidibus mino-
necds have been of the Cromleth kind. „In o See before on ſingle Stones erect, Book III.
* medio Tumuli (viz. Barrow) ſepultus eſt Rex chap. ii. p, 160. |
0 Haraldus, diſpcfito utrinque Lapide juxta p Worm. p. 8.

caput, pedeſque, ac ſuperimpoſita Sepulchrali


Nnn words,


13
2


— — * — — . - — _ — C —
4 n—_— 4 0 —— — 8
1 — 3 rs — 4 — — 2 — —
- ——— = _ - —
1 = * —


=


8
f
1
f


bang


BY
_—


— a
2 5 . -
ty. )


230 OF THE CROML E H.


| words, if he means, that there, in that place, near by, that i;
| round about the Barrow and Cromleh, ſacrifices were performed.
his opinion 1s juſt, and the Cromleh might be, as it were, the
ſacred Kibla, to mark the place of aſſembling, and to which they
were to direct their devotions. .

I muſt not diſmiſs this Article without proper Examples and
Figures given of ſome of thoſe Monuments in Cornwall.

SECT. v. Five Elevations I have choſen to exhibit here, and four plans,

Examples. which, as there are ſome peculiarities in each, may, perhaps, afford
ſome light and confirmation to what goes before, or, paſſing into
more ſkilful hands, may prove the means of explaining the uſe and
intent of this Monument in a ſtill more ſatisfactory manner,

Molfra In the Pariſh of Madern (Cornwall), there are two Cromlehs ;

Gromie4, one at Molfra (Plate XXIV. Fig. XI.) the other at Lanyon (Plate
XXI. Fig. I.) The former is placed exactly on the ſummit of a
round bald hill, as the word fignifies in the Cornu-britiſh. The
Cover-ſtone is nine feet eight by fourteen feet three inches,
reckoning a piece evidently clove, or broke off from it, and lying
near it. The ſupporters are three, five feet high, incloſing an Area
fix feet eight from Eaſt to Weſt, and four feet wide, fo that the
length bears due Eaſt and Weſt, has a fide Stone to the North, but
is open to the South, that Stone being probably removed, or broken
into pieces. This Quoit was evidently brought from a Karn or
Ledge of Rocks below, about a furlong to the North Weſt, in
which Karn may be ſeen ſeveral very large flat Stones lying on one
another horizontally; and ſome thin ones, near the top, ſeem by
their parallel edges to have been raiſed or clove off from the Rock
underneath by art, as if on purpoſe to form more Cromlths; thoſe
that did not rife well ſerving for Supporters, and the more entire for
Quoits, or Covering Stones. 'The Stone-Barrow with which this
Cromlch is ſurrounded is about two feet high from the general
ſurface, and 37 feet three inches in diameter.

As this Quoit is off from its ancient ſituation with one edge
reſting on the ground, I thought it might permit us ſafely to ſearch
the incloſed area, In digging, one foot was very black, the natural
upper ſoil; we then came to a whitiſh, cinereous-coloured ſtiff clay,
two inches in depth, then a thin ſtratum of yellow clay mixed with
gravel, four inches deep; then a flat, black, greaſy loam, mixed in
and throughout, more or leſs, with the yellow natural clay ten
inches in depth, under which appeared the hard, natural, tony,
ſtratum which lies on the Karn, not moved ſince the deluge. The

it was 20 inches deep under the natural hill. Although here is
not all the diſcovery that might be wiſhed, yet the following truths
may be deduced from this digging: by the black greaſy loam being


got


OF THE Eo ul .


got down under the two layers of yellow and cinereous clay, it
appears that a pit was dug in the area of the Kiſt-vaen; that


ſomething which either was originally, or has ſince turned black,
was placed in the bottom of the pit.


uoit is ſeven feet; but it does not ſtand Eaſt and Weſt, as at Cremch.


Molfra, but North and South, as that Monument of Haraldus
mentioned by Wormius, p. 22. There is no Kiſt-vaen, that is, no
area marked out by Side Stones, under this Quoit, which is more
than 47 feet in girt, nineteen feet long; its thickneſs in the middle,
on the Eaſtern edge, is ſixteen inches, at each end not ſo much,
but at the Weſtern edge this Quoit is two feet thick. The two
chief ſupporters (A and B4) do not ftand at right angles with the
front line, as in other Cromlehs, but obliquely, being forced from
their original poſition, as I imagine, by the weight of this Quoit,
which is alſo ſo,high that a man can fit on horſeback under it.
Under this Quoit I cauſed to be ſunk a pit of four feet and half
deep, and found it all black earth that had been moved, and ſhould
have ſunk ſtill deeper, but that the Gentleman in whoſe ground it
is, told me, that a few years: before, the whole cavity had been
opened (on account of ſome dream) to the full depth of fix feet,
and then the faſt" appeared, and they dug no deeper; that the
cavity was in the ſhape of a grave, and had been rifled more than
once, but that nothing was found more than ordinary. This
Cromleh ſtands on a low bank of earth, not two feet higher than
the adjacent ſoil, about 20 feet wide, and 70 long, running North
and South : at the South end has many rough Stones, ſome pitched


on end, in no order; yet not the natural furniture of the ſurface, |


but deſignedly put there; though, by the remains, it is difficult to
lay what their original poſition was. Weſt N. W. there is a high
ſtone about 80 yards diſtance. By the black earth thrown up in
digging here, nothing is to be abſolutely concluded, there having
happened ſo many diſturbances. By the pit being in the ſhape of
a grave, and fix feet deep, it is not improbable that a human body
was interred here, and by the length of the bank, and the many
diſorderly ſtones at the South end, this ſhould ſeem to have been a
burial place for more than one perſon.


On the top of a high hill about half a mile to the Eaſt of Senar $cnar |
Church-town ftands a very large handſome Cromleh; the area Cole.


incloſed by the ſupporters is exactly of the ſame dimenſions as that
at Molfra, viz. fax feet eight inches by four feet, and points the fame
way, running Eaſt and Weſt (Plate XXI. Fig. III. and IV.) The


q See Pl. XXI. Fig. I. and II.
r The Ground which has not been moved is called in Cornwall the Faſt,


Kiſt-


232 OF THE CROM L E H.


Kiſt-vaen (Fig. IV. No. 5.) is neatly formed, and fenced every way,
and the ſupporter marked N'. 2. in the Plan, is eight feet ten
inches high, from the ſurface of the earth in the Kiſt- vaen, to the
under face of the Quoit. The ſide Stones of the Kiſt-vaen runnin
on beyond the end Stone (N'. 2.) form a little Cell (No. 3.) to the
Eaſt, by means of two ſtones terminating them at right angles.
The great depth of this Kiſt-vaen, which 1s about eight feet, at x
medium under the plane of the Quoit, is remarkable; there is no
ſtone in it, and the Stone-barrow fourteea yards diameter was
heaped round about it, and almoſt reached the edge of the Quoit,
but care taken that no ſtone ſhould get into the Repoſitory. This
Quoit was brought from a Karn about a furlong off, which ſtands
a little higher than the ſpot on which this CromICh is erected ; and
near this Karn is another Cromleh, not ſo large as that here
8 About 500 yards to the South Welt of Ch'ùn Caſtle, in the
enen, pariſh of Morvah (Cornwall) ſtands a Cromlth, the Covering-ftone
of which, being twelve feet and a half long, and eleven wide, is
ſupported by three ſtones pitched on edge, which with a fourth
form a pretty regular Kiſt-vaen. .
The top of the Quoit is very convex; it has a low Barrow, or
Heap of Stones, round it as at Moltra, Plate XXIV. Fig. X.
Carwynen In a tenement called Carwynen, in the pariſh of Cambom
Cromleh. (Cornwall), ſtands a very entire, and plain Cromleh ; it is called the
Giant's Quoit: the three ſupporters incloſe an area five feet three
inches wide, and ſeven feet long: the Covering- ſtone is twelve feet
three inches long, by eleven feet ſix wide, and no more than one
foot thick at a medium, Plate XXIV. Fig. IX.

Though, in ſearching theſe Monuments, I was not fortunate
enough to find any Bones, or Urns, yet thoſe who have lately been
employed in the fame enquiries have had better ſucceſs, and, as
their diſcoveries plainly confirmed the uſe aſſigned to theſe Monu-
or two from Mr. Wright's Louthiana,

*I chanced one day to meet with a fallen one (viz. Cromlch)
« upon Lord Limerick's ground about two miles from this, by the
* fide of a River, exactly between the two Druids groves before

Hof the incumbent load, the other ſtanding. This (viz. the cavity
e between the Stones) his Lordſhip immediately ordered to be
carefully dug into, and in the middle, about two feet deep,
ce covered, and incloſed within broad flat Stones, great part of the
« Skeleton of a human figure was found, all crowded together


« within a bed of black greaſy earth, as if originally incloſed within
| « an


O FU RN BU RIAL.


« an Urn. Mixed with the bones, were found ſome pieces of clay
about the thickneſs of my little finger quite ſolid, and round, as if
« part of a Rod broke to pieces, which, if really ſo, probably may
« have been the nia of the high office of the perſon here
« jnterred. Since my return from Ireland, I received this farther
« account from a friend upon the place.“ Yeſterday I went with
« Lord and Lady Limerick to the great Cromleche at Bullrichan
« (near Dundalk, Louth) where you found the human bones :
« the country people had ſunk above a yard deeper in queſt, I
« believe, of treaſure, and we found them {till at work; they had
« got under, and were trying to pull up the large ſquare Stone
« which ſtood on one edge; they came to another flat Stone, under
« which they found many large Bones, but we do not yet know
de whether they be human*: they raiſed alſo many regular Stones
« of a conſiderable length, and the whole place ſeems to have been
« built up regularly, as well to ſtrengthen the three great props, as
« to contain a proper Repoſitory for Bones, or whatever was to be


t 555


« laid theret.


a .


Of Urn- Burial; and ſome remarkable Urns found in Cornwall.


HAT the Britans burnt their dead, and then interred the
Remains in Urns, cannot but appear from the number of
Barrows and Urns found every where, and Aſhes mixed with the
Earth of the Barrows; that the Gauls did the ſame, we are well
aſſured"; let us therefore proceed to take notice of the moſt
remarkable circumſtances relating to Urn-Burial in general, and
Urns found in Cornwall in particular.

The Urns deſigned to contain Human Bones were ſometimes of
Gold, Silver, Braſs, Marble, or Glaſs, but are generally of Pottery
Ware; among the barbarous nations, of rude faſhion, coarſe clay,
and rather ſmoked than burnt; but thoſe of the Romans eaſily
diſtinguiſhed by their elegant ſhape, materials, and ornaments.
Among the politer Ancients, when the Urns were carried to be
intombed in the Barrrows prepared for them, they were ſometimes
decked with flowers, ribbons, or other gay attire ; but the ſtern


* If they were not human, why buried with » Sce Montfaucon, tom. V. p. 194.
that care and labour, and the ſame ſort of cover- w Patroclus's was of Gold, II. xxili. ver. 253.
ing over them as where human bones were found Corineus's of Braſs, Mn. vi. ver. 226. A Glass
by Mr, Wright ? one, ſee Kenn. Par. Ant. p. 12.

' Wright's Louthiana, Book III. p. 12.


OOO Lycurgus


—


234


SECT. I.


Places
where
found,


OF:-URN.-BU-R-1.A-E.


Lycurgus confined the Spartan Urns to the more ſober dreſs of Olive
and Myrtle*. It the Barrow could not be immediately erected, the
Urn, with the Bones in it, was ſecurely laid by, covered with
tranſparent linen or ſilk, till the Sepulchre was ready.

The place where we generally find them is the middle of the
Barrow, but there are ſome which are found near the outward
edge; the reaſon of which different poſition ſeems to be this:
the Urn, which the Barrow was purpoſely erected to incloſe, lies
in the middle of it; but, if any perſon had a deſire afterwards to be
intombed in the ſame Barrow, a ſkirt of it only was opened near
the extremity of the circumference, or a little trench dug that
reached not to the middle, and there the ſecond Urn was made
partaker of the ſame Monument, but in ſuch a manner that no
violence might be offered to the Remains firſt interred.

It was common among the Ancients, where there had been great
intimacy and friendſhip, for the Survivers to deſire to be interred


near the perſon that died firſt.


— — — — — Ka yy To
Tov Joov Jevouon pn ToAaTETIHu TD.


— —— — — And now my laſt requeſt,
Grant me, ye Gods! with thee intomb'd to reſt.


Says Electra, lamenting over the ſuppoſed Urn of her brother Oreſtes?,


Sometimes not only one, but two (or more) Urns were depoſited
round the central Sepulchre, and ſometimes a whole family choſe
to be buried in the fame Barrow, and then we find many Urns placed
cloſe one to another ; the moſt remarkable Monument of which
kind that I have yet heard of in Cornwall, was that opened by
Ralph Williams, yeoman, in the tenement of Chikarn (St. Juſt,
Penwith) where (A. D. 173 3.) in removing a Barrow was diſcovered
a great number of Urns; and as they approached nearer the center,
a ſtone ſquare cheſt, or cell, paved underfoota, in which was alſo
found an Urn, finely carved, and full of human Bones. As well as
could be remembered (at the time when TI had this relation from him,
which was four years after the diſcovery), there were about 50 Urns
which ſurrounded the central and principal one, which alone,
becauſe it appeared to be neatly carved, he carried home to his


* Brown, p. 37. Hydriotaphia. a As I have been informed (ſince the Death
y Dr. Williams, Philoſ. Tranſ. 1740. of the of R. W.) by his Daughter, who ſaw the Urn,

St. Auſtle Barrows, Cornwall. which her Father brought from the Field into
z Sophocles, Electra, Act. iv. Scene i. his Houſe,


Houle,


OF URN BUR TA L.


Houſe, the reſt (all which had ſome remains of Bones and Earth in
them) were thrown away and broke, as of no conſequence.

Farther particulars have been diſcovered, by ſearching three
Barrows lying in a line nearly 8 E, and NM, in the tenement
of Boſavern Ros, in the fame pariſh, about a mile diſtant from the
foregoing. In the eaſternmoſt Barrow, about the year 1748, there
was found the carcaſe of a man laid at full length; a long ſtone on
each fide, and one at each end on their edge, the cavity like a grave,
the bones large ſized, no ſtone covering the body; the middle
Barrow was opened afterwards, and bones in it, but not regularly
placed; the Barrow ſeemed to have been ſearched before. On the
20th of May 1754, I got the weſternmoſt Barrow to be opened;
there was a kind of cave or door-vault which led into this Barrow
with a tall ſtone on each fide and a covering ſtone acroſs, but fallen
inſide; the floor was ridded clear to the rabman®, on which there
was about three inches depth of ſea-ſhore grave], the biggeſt of the
gravel about three quarters of an inch diameter, then ſome bones
ſcattered on the gravel, then an Urn of the contents of three quarts
(beer meaſure) full of bones, and a little partition beyond it fixed
on the gravel; about a foot farther, ſome walling, which being
removed, a little Urn of about a pint full of bones appeared in a
cell of ſtone work (the cell about two feet eight inches long, and
one foot {1x inches wide, with a covering flat ſtone), placed upon
the rabman (no beach, or gravel under the Urn); when this little
Urn was taken out, at about a foot diſtance appeared the fide of a
tall great Urn one foot three inches high, the bottom eight inches
wide, of the contents of three gallons and half, full of bones to
within three inches of the top ; ſome bones cight inches long, and
with the bones ſeveral pieces of burnt ſticks. About four inches
diſtant from the great Urn ſtood two other Urns of about two quarts
each, which, with the little one abovementioned, ſtood triangularly
round the great one which ſtood in the middle. Matted graſs
had forced its roots in among the bones. The Northern and
Eaſtern parts of this Barrow conſiſted of natural rock and ground,
not moved ſince the flood; the reſt was artificial, with a ring of rocks
forming the outer edge: that part which incloſed the Urns was
factitious, had a wall doubled (i. e. faced within and without) of large
ſtones for the ſpace of fifteen yards, about five feet high ; the whole
Barrow about fifteen feet high, thirty-ſix feet diameter. Several
ſhreds of Urns were found before they came to the bottom; Urns,
by which it may be juſtly conjectured that there were more ſtages
of Urns than one, ſome likely placed above the lowermoſt, when
the undermoſt area was filled.


dAC


wig ur word, ſignifying a ſtratum of ſtone not quite ſolid, but next in conſiſtence to the
d coc 7 :


: That


235


it
|

1
;
|


{


N
il
(|


|


= =


h
|


— —_—


236


How guard-
cd and
placed,


SECT. II.


Bones how
diſpoſed,


Sr URN BU-REAL:


That theſe Urns might be guarded from the weight above
and round them, they are generally found in ſuch little Cells ot
Stone- work; but ſometimes they are incloſed with greater neatne,
and ſecurity, eſpecially when depoſited by the more cultivated
nations b. |

Urns are generally found ſtanding erect on their bottom, and
covered with a flat Stone, or Tile; but ſometimes they are
themſelves a covering to what they contain, being found placed
with their mouths downwards, as were the Urns at Trelowarren
(Chap. viii. p. 214.) and a remarkable one (PI. XVIII. Fig. v.
p. 208.) found in Gwythian Pariſh, Cornwall, where, in May 1541,
about half a mile to the South Weſt of the Church-town, the ſea
having waſhed away a piece of the Cliff, diſcovered about three
feet under the common ſurface of the Land a ſmall cavity about
20 inches wide, and as much high, faced and covered with Stone;
the bottom was of one flat Stone, and upon it was placed an Urn
with its mouth downwards, full of human bones, of which the
vertebre were very diſtinct. Round about the Urn was found a
quantity of ſmall Duſt or Earth, which had all the appearances of
human Aſhes, and filled the lower part of the cavity about four
inches high from the bottom. This Monument will ſhew, that
the Ancients took different ways to ſecure the remains of their
friends. Here, the bones being placed in the Urn, and ſecured
therein with clay, earth, or fate; the Urn was inverted, and placed
in its cell with its mouth downwards, a method of proceeding which
they thought might prevent the moiſture of the ground above from
ſuddenly rotting the bones, and, in caſe of any accidental failing of
the coverture, might reſiſt the weight with greater ſtrength, than if
the Urn was placed on its bottom; but there was here another
caution obſerved, which is, that when the Urn was thus placed on
its mouth, the aſhes of the human body ſeem to have been collected
and placed round the Urn, filling the cavity to ſuch an height,
that the mouth of the Urn ſtood about four inches deep in theſe
aſhes. This body was well burnt, which is a mark of dignity in
the deceaſed, as we ſhall ſee by and by ; and, as the bones of ſome
bodies which have not undergone ſo much fire are found round the
Urn in ſome Sepulchres, ſo here the aſhes were laid round the
Urn which incloſes the bones, for the ſame reaſon, namely, becauſe
both the bones and aſhes belonged to the ſame perſon.

In theſe Urns the friends or relations of the deceaſed thought it
their duty to lay up the colleted bones as free from filth and


b Such a one was the Urn found at Kerris, hereafter, Lib. IV. cap. ii.
and the Urn found in Golbadnek Barrow, of both © See Hom, lliad, paſſim.


which there will be a particular account given ;
pollution


© & 0 0 Gy 0 Os ol


ollution as the nature of mortality will permit. The larger bones
of the body were burnt again and again, till they were reduced to
the ſmalleſt ſhreds, and till all the bones, both great and ſmall,
could eaſily be crowded into ſo narrow a compaſs as that of an Urn:
this was the general way of proceeding, for human bones are ſeldom
ſound ſcattered, in the Barrows : when the bones were thus reduced,
they Were laid in the Urn, and the aſhes which the Urn would not
contain were ſpread about it, and covered by the Barrow. But we
find that the fires were not always ſo well attended, nor continued
long enough to conſume the greater bones, for in a Cell in the
middle of the Barrow at Trelowarren (mentioned, p. 214. before),
we find bones of all kinds and ſizes, which ſeems to have been the
reaſon that they were placed in a Cell, as being too large for an
Urn; but adjoining to this Cell we find two Urns (one on either
fide) full of bones, which being certainly laid there after the Cell
was made, in the middle, ſhew that the bones of them were better
burnt, and reduced ſmall enough to be incloſed in Urns.

Sometimes they incloſed what was well burnt in an Urn, and what
was not fo, in a Cell round the Urn; for in the year 1716, a farmer
of the village of Men, near the Land's End, Cornwall, having
removed (in order to cleave it for building) a flat Stone ſeven feet
long, and fix wide, diſcovered a cavity underneath it, at each end of
which was a Stone two feet long, and on each fide a Stone four feet
long. In the middle of this ſquare cavity, was an Urn full of black
Earth, and round the Urn very large human bones, not placed in
their natual Order, but irregularly mixed. In theſe inſtances it
appears that the ancient Corniſh-Britans either wanted time, or were
not always ſo religiouſly punctual in conſuming the larger bones of
the body as others of the Ancients thought themſelves obliged to be.,

Whilſt we are treating of the diſpoſal of the bones, it may not be
amiſs to obſerve, that in ſome Sepulchres are found bones much
larger than thoſe of the human body, which are therefore by the
vulgar thought to be the Remains of Giants; but they are more
likely the bones of horſes, which, as well as arms, were thrown
into the funeral pile, and thought as abſolutely neceſſary (for thoſe

who were Soldiers) in the next life, as they had been in this ; and
ſo honourable was it accounted to have the horſe interred with
them, that (as Keyſler obſerves, p. 169.) none but the Eguites had
aright to this honour, the Foot-Soldiers were not allowed it.

The bones being laid in the Urn were covered ſometimes with
earth preſſed in cloſe, whence it comes to paſs, that in ſome Urns
ve find the roots of graſs; in other Urns, the bones ſeem to have
been cemented by ſtrong mortar, to prevent any impure mixture,
and keep out the air and moiſture; but the moſt ancient and


P pP effectual


237


— — ——— — — — a « — —


— — — —


— _ — — — — — _
— Vt _— = — W - —


— — —


2


A3


238


OFF URN DUN.


effectual way was to cover the bones with the fat of beaſts, the oil


of which, the bones, hot from the embers ſtrongly imbibed, and
became thereby much better guarded againſt ſucceſſive drought and
moiſture, than by any other method then known. Achille;
therefore, out of his tenderneſs for the remains of his friend, orders hi
attendants to cover the bones of Patroclus with a double coat of fatd,

Beſides human bones, it was uſual among the politer nations to


SECT. III. incloſe in the ſame, Urn, lamps, lacrymatories ſuch (ſmall vials as


Various
Contents of


Urns.


were filled with purchaſed tears) and other utenſils of mourning,
which had attended the funeral. Sometimes the furniture of the
toilet accompanied the Matron to her grave; combs, inlaid boxes,
nippers, ſome favourite jewel or bracelete, were thrown into the Urn,
as of no farther uſe when the lady was to dreſs no more; others
choſe to throw in a little deity, in Agate, Amber f, or Cryſtal, In
ſome Urns are found Coins, kindly inſerted for the ſatisfaction of
poſterity, being of the age nearly in which the body was interred,
In others are found veſſels of oil, aromatick liquors, or vinous
ſpirits g. The Helmet, Sword, or Spear, were uſually thrown into
the funeral pile of the Soldier. It was a very ancient cuſtom for a
Soldier to be thus accompanied, whether the body was interred
without burning, or burnt, and the aſhes placed in an Urn. If the
body was not burnt, the ſword is found entire, and was uſually
placed under the head, a cuſtom recorded by the Prophet Ezekiel,
chap. xxiii. 27. They ſhall not lye with the mighty that are
fallen of the uncircumciſed, who are gone down to hell with
„their weapons of war, and have laid their ſwords under their
„heads.“ But if the body was burnt, we cannot expect to find
the Sword, Helmet, or Javelin, entire; they were either melted, or

ruſhed, and broke in the fallings of the funeral fabrick, undermined
1 the fire, or purpoſely broke before thrown into the func!
pile; the reaſon of the latter was either that ſome piece, after
it had gone through the ſame fire with its maſter, might be
inſerted in the Urn, or that the pieces might be ſtrewed round
about it in the Barrow, to give notice to all who ſhould dig,
that the remains of a ſoldier lay there, and were not to be
violated; theſe ſeem to me to be the reaſons that we find only
ſmall pieces of theſe weapons in Sepulchres where the bodies had
been burnt. Several bits of braſs were found among the bones in


the Men Sepulchre®, and the perſon who found the Urn, ſhewed


d II. XXIII. ver. 243. Letter from the Rev. Dr. Mills, to the Riz":

© A beautiful bracelet of gold, about three Rev. Dr. Lyttelton, Biſhop of Carliſle. -
inches broad, but exceſſively thin, was lately f Brown, of the Farneſe Urn. Hydriot, p. 55
found in a brown earthen Urn under a Stone Brown, ibid. 33. Kenn. Paroch, Antigui.
Barrow in Ireland. By the ſize it ſhould be a p. 23.
lady's bracelet, for it will hardly come on a n Page prcced,
man's hand: the gold was of the fineſt ſort.


me


1 * — 1 —— RX _ * --


. 2


me the point of a {word of braſs found at the fame time and place:
ſome thin bits of braſs I had alſo out $f the Trelowarren Barrow,
which I take to have been parts of a ſword,

In ſome Urns have been diſcovered thin plates of braſs, remain-
ders, either of ſwords, or ſome neat implements belonging to a
leceaſed Artiſt, and theſe, which is very remarkable, are half—
melted; which laſt circumſtance ſeeming to be an evidence, that
ach Urns contained the remains of ſome perſon of qualityi; we will
examine a little into, eſpecially as we had reaſon, in the foregoing
page, 238, to take notice of the different degrees of burning which
our Corniſh remains of mortality have undergone.

There is no doubt, but that the funcral piles of perſons of rank SECT. 1V.
and character were better contrived, the materials greater in Se Bones
quantity, and of the moſt combuſtible kind, the fires better tended, Te,
and conſequently more vigorous, than when perſons of lower *4 why.
circumſtances, or impious lives, were to be burnt. It is no wonder,
then, that the bones of the vulgar, of deteſted Tyrants, ſuch as
Tiberius (whoſe body was to be but half burnt*\, or of thoſe who
died by peſtilence, whole piles were erected in haſte, and but little
care taken whether their burnings were properly compleated or not ;
it is no wonder, I fay, that their Relicks ſhould be but half burnt,
and expoſed to putrefaction, the moſt dreaded of all cataſtrophes ;
a fate, of which Nero was more afraid than of death itſelf l. But it
was otherwiſe, where the quality of the deceaſed, and the love of
their ſurviving friends, called jointly for all the ritual Obſequics to
be moſt minutely performed ; here all imaginable care was taken
by the friends, that the Fire ſhould be kept in full force, till the
fleſh was quite conſumed, and the bones blanched fair®, and few,
fit to take their place in the appointed Urn. The fierceneſs of ſuch
ſtrong Fires melted the Sword Blades, Spear-Heads, Spurs, and
other Enſigns of War or Art; and therefore, where theſe evidences
of ſuch intenſe Fires are found, it may be fairly concluded, that
the intombed remains were thoſe of ſome conſiderable perſon.
On the other hand, if a great quantity of Bones remained
unconſumed, it may be inferred, either that the perſon interred was
of common ordinary circumſtance, or, what may have been more
probably the caſe, that the funeral was performed in haſte, during
the alarms of war, when they had not ſufficient time to ſuperintend
the burning ; for by the bits of Braſs, and piece of a Sword, found
at Trelowarren, and alſo at Men, there muſt have been Soldiers
buried in both Sepulchres, though ſo many Bones remained entire,


As Sir T. Brown very judiciouſly ſuppoſes, Sueton. in Tiber. not. Caſaubon,
ibid. p. 37. To whom aflents Keyſler, p. 517. | Sueton. Brown, p. 38.
Et in amphitheatro ſemiuſtulandum.“ mn Ama ori. Hom,


However,


240


SECT. I.


In ſeveral
Parts of
Cornwall,


& c.


OF THE ROC K-BASONsS.


However, in all countries, where burning of the dead obtained, it
was accounted very unhapf#F for the deceaſed, not to have eve
part of his body (except a few Boncs, which, becauſe they were {,
much burnt, were generally called aſhes) conveyed into the etherial
Regions by the flame; and it is this , Pager, of
the Ancients, to wit, that the body ſhould be thoroughly conſumed
by the funeral Fires, which is conveyed to us by Homer in the
following beautiful Epiſode.

The body of Patroclus being placed on the funeral pile, and the
fires lighted", Achilles, intent upon the laſt offices of friendſhip,
perceived, with concern, the Fire to burn faint and languid;
immediately he ſuſpends his addreſſes to the Manes of his departed
friend, retired a little from the pile ; from an exulting Hero became
a ſubmiſſive ſupplicant; offered up his Prayers, and poured his
libations to Boreas and Zephyr; having then vowed proper
Sacrifices, he beſeeches them to come without delay, to rouſe and
fan the Fire, that it might conſume the dead body of his dear
Patroclus: in fine, leſt the prayers of a mortal ſhould proye
ineffectual in an affair ſo eſſential to the honour and happineſs of
the deceaſed, Iris, from the Gods, ſeeing the diftreſs of Achilles,
haſtes away to ſolicit the Winds; they come, and blow the fire,
and the body is burnt.


G. HA.


Of the Rock- Baſons.


* Cornwall there are Monuments of a very ſingular kind, which
have hitherto eſcaped the notice of Travellers; and, though
elſewhere in Britain, doubtleſs, as well as here, in like ſituations,
have never been remarked upon (as far as I can learn) by any Writer;
they are Hollows, or artificial Baſons, ſunk into the ſurface of the
Rocks.

The firſt which I met with of this kind were thoſe cut into a Kam,
or large groupe of Rocks, in the tenement of Boſworlas, in the Pariſh
of St. Juſt, Penwith, in the year 1737. Three of them may be
ſeen, Plate XX. Fig. VII. d, e, / p. 219.

There are many more Hollows of the ſame kind on this Karn;
and in the tops of ſeveral ſeparate large Rocks, which are ſcattered
in the Valley beneath, there are more, and ſome have one ſingle
Baſon on their higheſt part.


o Iliad XXIII. ver. 192, &c.


OF THE ROC RK-BA SONS.


In the higher part of a Tenement called Karn-Lthov, in the
parith of Tiwidnek, are many large flat Rocks. Many Baſons
there are cut into the tops of theſe Rocks, which have no commu—
nication with one another (as before at Boſworlas) nor any chanel
to diſcharge whatever it was that they were deſigned to contain:
theſe are of ſeveral ſizes, but of no particular Figure.

On the top of a large Quoit here (PI. XI. Fig. III. p. 173.) ti;
one Baſon, which has ſeveral little ones round it, communicating
what . moiſture they collect to this principal Reſervoir, which 1s
triangular, about three feet ſeven long, is ſunk on the extremity of
the Rock, having only a brim leſt round the edge to confine the
contents, and oblige it to diſcharge them through one lip, lying to
the South.

Round Arthur's Bed, on a rocky Tor in the pariſh of North-hill,
there are many, which the country people call Arthur's 'Troughs,
in which he uſed to feed his Dogs. Near by alſo, is Arthur's
Hall ; and whatever 1s great, and the uſe and Author unknown, is
in Cornwall, for the moſt part, attributed to king Arthur; the
dimenſions, ſhape, and diftance of theſe Rock-baſons, may be ſeen
Plate XX. Fig. VI. a, ö, c, p. 219.

I have an account of ſome of the ſame kind found in Wales,
where I doubt not but, upon proper enquiry, more will appear ;
and I think we muſt underſtand a paſlage of Leland's Itin. (Vol. V.
p. 59.) to relate to works of the ſame kind o. Thaveobſerved ſo many
of theſe Baſons in other Karns here in Cornwall, that I may venture
to ſay, there was hardly any conſiderable groupe of Rocks in theſe
Weſtern parts which had not more or leſs of them; but no
where perhaps are they to be found in greater number, or variety of
ſhape, ſize, and ſituation, than on the top of Karn-bre-hill in the
Pariſh of Illogan.

Since no author has mentioned, and attempted to explain, theſe
Monuments; let us ſee what light and aſſiſtance their ſhape and
ſtructure, expoſition, number, and place, conſidered together with
the cuſtoms and known Rites of Antiquity may afford us in this
untroden path.


Of theſe Baſons there are two ſorts; ſome have lips or chanels SEC r. 17.
to them, others have none: and therefore as thoſe lips are manifeſtly Properties
the works of deſign, not of accident, thoſe that have ſo material a Walle.


difference muſt needs have been intended for a different uſe; and


o c On the farther ripe of Elwy, a three or “ ſum bigger, cutte oute of the mayne Rok by
four miles above St. Aſaphes, is a ſtony rock „ manne's hand, and there children and young
* caullid Kereg the tylluaine, i. e. the Rok with * men cumming to ſeek their catelle uſe to ſitte
* hole Stones, &c. There is in the Paroch © and play. Sum call it the rounde table, Kiddes
of Llanſannan in the fide of a ſtony hille a © uſe ther communely to play and ſkip from ſete
4 place wher ther be 24 hole ſtones or places in * to ſete.”

a roundel for men to ſitte in, but ſum leſſe and


/ Q q q yet


242


OF THE RO CK-BASO NS.


Two Sorts, yet both theſe ſorts ſeem to be the works of the fame people, for


ſome have
Lips, ſome
none,


Where
found,


Their
Shape.


there is a multitude of theſe Baſons which have no lips or outlets,
as well as thoſe which have, to be ſcen in Karn-bre-hill, and
elſewhere, on contiguous rocks.

Theſe Baſons are generally found on the higheſt hills, ſpread on
the tops of the moſt conſpicuous Karns, very numerous in ſome
places; and where we find few of them, and perhaps none at all,
it is owing, in all likelihood, to the many rocks which have been
clove and carried off for building.

On ſome ſingle rocks, as we deſcend the hill at Boſworlas, we
find a few fingle Baſons, but they are ſmall,

They are never on the ſides of Rocks (unleſs diſplaced hy
violence) but always on the top, their openings horizontally facin::
the Heavens. a

They are often found on the tops of Logan, or Rocking Stones;
wherefore they, as well as thoſe, ſhould ſeem to have ſome affinity
to, and to be in their ſeveral Kinds ſubſervient (on different occaſions)
to the ſame ſuperſtition.

Some are found funk into thin flat ſtones, but they are oftner
worked into more ſubſtantial and maſſive Rocks.

The ſhape of theſe Baſons is not uniform; ſome are quite
irregular, ſome oval, and ſome are exactly circular: one I meaſured
at Karn-bre is a very regular Ellipſis, and is already taken notice of,

. I19.
b Their openings, do not converge in the top as a jar or hogſhead,
but rather ſpread and widen, as if to expoſe the hollow as much as
poſſible to the ſkies. |

Some have little falls into a larger Baſon, which receives their

tribute, and detains it, having no Outlet.
Other large ones intermixed with little ones have paſſages from
one to another, and by ſucceſſive falls uniting, tranſmit what they
receive into one common Baſon, which has a drain to it, that ſerves
itſelf and all the Baſons above it.

The floor of theſe Baſons (if I may fo call it) is generally ſunk to
a horizontal level, or at leaſt ſhelving, fo as that whatever falls into
it, may run off into the next Baſon, then into a third, and fo on;
this I have obſerved, more eſpecially in the works of this kind
which have moſt art, and are moſt finiſhed; but in others which
ſayour leſs of workmanſhip, the bottom 1s not ſo exactly leveled,

The Lips do not all point in the ſame direction, ſome tending to
the South, ſome to the Weſt, others to the North, and others again
to the intermediate points of the Compaſs, by which it ſeems as if


As is apparently the caſe at St. Michael's in proportion to the ſtill remaining Karns, are
Mount, where, and at Boſcawen R6s, and elſe- found.
where, ſome fragments of them, but not many


the


OF THE ROC R-BASO Ns.


che Makers had been determined in this particular, not by any


myſtical veneration for one region of the Heavens more than
another, but by the ſhape and inclination of the Rock, and for the
moſt eaſy, and convenient Outlet.

The ſize of them is as different as their ſhape, they are formed
from fix feet to a few inches diameter: in Boſworlas the vulgar call
the largeſt, which is circular, and fix feet diameter, the Giant's
Chair (Plate XX. Fig. VII. / p. 219.); and in the great Rock at
Boſſavarn juſt by, there is another of the ſame kind, which gocs by
the ſame name; the common people here attributing all thoſe works
which have ſomething vaſt in them, as they do in other countries, either
to Giants in general, or to their own national heroes in particular,


Size.


243


Many uſes may ſuggeſt themſelves to the imaginations of the syer. 117.
curious from the deſcription of theſe new, and hitherto ſcarce For what
mentioned Monuments; in order therefore to obviate ſome V*®


prepoſeſſions, and prevent the mind from reſting ſo far on

roundleſs ſuppoſitions as may make it more difficult to embrace
the truth, I ſhall firſt conſider (by comparing and recurring to the
foregoing properties of theſe Baſons)


What, in all probability, cannot have been the deſign of them, ey we
and then ſubmit to the reader a conjecture or two relating to the .


intended uſe of them, drawn from their ſhape, ſtructure, number,
and ſituation, and conformable to ſome univerſal principles and
tenets of the ancients.

Some may perhaps imagine that they were deſigned to prepare
and dry falt in for human uſe? (becauſe, on the ſea ſhore in
Cornwall, we find little hollows in the rocks ſpread with the whiteſt
ſea falt) ; but theſe Baſons are found in great plenty many miles
diſtant from the ſea'1,

Diodorus Sic. (Lib. III. cap. i.) informs us, that the men employed
about the gold mines in Ethiopia take a piece of the Rock (viz. of
the Ore broke out of the Mine with its pabu/um) of ſuch a certain
quantity, and pound it in a ſtone mortar till it be as ſmall as vetch :
and the ancient Tinners had certainly the ſame cuſtom of pounding
in Stone-troughs their Tin-ore, before ſtamping-mills were found
out: it may therefore be imagined, that theſe Baſons were
intended for ſo many troughs to pound their Tin-ore in, eſpecially
if no ſuch Monument occurs in other parts of this iſland ; but there
are many objections to this uſe of theſe Baſons. Firſt, theſe Baſons


Rev. Francis Wiſe, late B. D. Radclif ſhould be miſtaken in the uſe and application
Librarian, Oxford. which he has made of theſe ſeveral properties,

minute and circumſtantial in the deſcription of one time or other lead ſome one (more happy in
theſe, ſeemingly ſo trifling, peculiarities ; but he his conjectures) to diſcover the true and rcal ute
15 deſired to conſider, that, in caſe the Author of theſe Monuments.


are


- bo - 4 Am
— 7


8
— a — — 2a — 1 *


—


— —


22 —


244


them there, when they had ſo weighty a ſubſtance to manufacture


See Pl. XX.
Fig. VIII.


OF THE ROCK-BA SONS.


are on the tops of hills, whereas the ancient workings for Tin were
altogether in valleys by way of ſtream- work, or waſhing (by the
help of adjacent rivers) the Tin brought down from the hills by
the deluge, and violent rains. Theſe baſons ae generally far from
water, which every one knows is of abſolute neceſſity to promote
the pulverizing any ſtubborn, obdurate ſtones, as our 'Tin-orex
generally are. In the next place, it may be obicrved, that if theſe
Baſons had been much uſed in pounding Tin, they would be all
concave at the bottom; but what is more convincing ſtill, is, that
many of the Baſons are found on ſuch high, and almoſt inacceſſible
Rocks, that people muſt have been very ſimple indeed to have made


by their means, and muſt have lifted up and let down both the Tin
and themſelves with ſuch inconveniency. |

It may with more reaſon be thought that theſe Monuments were
intended ſome way or other for the purpoſes of Religion, rather
than of Mechanicks; and according to our propoſed method we
will firſt ſhew what religious Uſe they ſeem not to have been
intended for. Firſt, they are evidently too ſhallow and irregular,
and too cloſe together, to have received Obeliſks, or Stone Deities
erected in them.

Neither do they ſeem to have been deſigned for Altars, either of
Sacrifice, of Libation, or Holy Fires.

The Ancients indeed ſacrificed on Rocks”; but the Rocks of
which we are diſcourſing, have their ſurfaces ſcooped out in ſuch a
manner as no Altar extant, or on record, ever ſhewed the like:
Altars of 20 feet high, and more (for ſo high are ſome of our Rock-
Baſons) without any eaſter acceſs than climbing from Rock to
Rock, are no where to be found. If they were deſigned for a
whole Burnt-Sacrifice, how ſhould the Victim, or the neceſſary fuel,
without great labour be drawn up to the top of the Altar? How
ſhould the Fire be properly attended, nouriſhed, and continued in
ſo high a ſituation as that of the Mountainous Rock at Karn-bres?
To what purpoſe the ſmall Baſons round that capacious Urn, which
ſtood on the top of this Rock, of three feet diameter, and one foot
deep, beforementioned, p. 117. |

If they were for Altars, why ſuch communications, as if to drain
away through one common paſſage, ſomething not commonly found
in the Element of Fire? Why ſuch thin and artful partitions, as
we ſee in ſome of them, betwixt the ſeveral Baſons ? If theſe were
all for Altars, and offerings made by Fire, why ſhould they not be
all of one ſtructure? Why have ſome Lips, and others never deſigned


r As Balaam, Numb. xxiii. 9, — Gideon, Judg. vi. 20, — Manoah, ibid. xiii. 19.
» Map, Pl. VII. Fig. F. p. 117.


OF THE ROC K-BASONsS.


to have any? Or, indeed, for the uſes of Fire, what needed the
ſurface of Rocks to be any more than meerly planed and leveled ?
Why ſuch hollows at the bottom of the Fire- place, as muſt have
been retentive of water, and therefore in a great meaſure weaken, if
not wholly defeat, all Ignition ? This would evidently be the caſe
with thoſe Baſons which had no Lips; and thoſe which had, would
paſs away the holy aſhes upon every ſhower. In the laſt place, ir
may be obſerved, that ſome of theſe Baſons are ſunk into thin flat
Stones, ſome not ten inches thick t; which Stones could not long
reſiſt the fretting power of Fire, but muſt crack and fly to pieces
with intenſe heat. If it be ſurmiſed, that theſe hollows may be
the natural conſequences, and were all fretted into the Stones by
the power of the Fire, let it be conſidered, that they would then
be without all regular form, none would be Circles, nor Ellipſes,
there would be no perpendicular ſides, nor thin partitions, nor
plainly deſigned communications, nor ſmall and artfully-placed
mouths, all which, it muſt be confeſſed, are the properties of theſe
Monuments. Theſe are the dithculties, which, till they are anſwered
and removed, muſt prevent our thinking, that the Rock- Baſons
were deſigned for Altars of Sacrifice, or Holy Fires.

Theſe Veſſels before us muſt have been of more general uſe than
either, for Libations of Blood, or, I may add, of Wine, Honey, or
Oil; becauſe, for ſuch uſes, they are too many, and too large.

Having now ſhewn what uſes the ſeveral properties of theſe Baſons
{ill more difficult to aſſign the real uſe, intent, and deſign of them;
the candid Reader will therefore, pardon the following conjectures,
although he may not approve of them.


Among all the Pagan Superſtitions there was hardly any one stcr. Iv.


more anciently and more univerſally adopted, than that of Purit- :

Cations

: a 5 © ara] F

the Soul itſelf was defiled by the impurity of the body, and frequent
d very

ent.


Luftration and Purifications by water. The Ancients thought that


therefore much care was taken of this outward purity : by frequent ,uci


ſprinklings and waſhings, they had perſuaded themſelves that all
ors were to be canceled, but without them no pardon was to be
obtained; and beſides the Rites neceſſary for every private individual
tailty, they never approached the Sacrifice, nor entered their place
of Worſhip, nor lay down to their feſtival entertainments, nor with-
drew from battle, nor initiated their Moviciates, nor inaugurated
their Princes, or Prieſt, nor proceeded to their magick enquiries,
nor, in ſhort, engaged in any part of their endleſs Superſtition,


| : = : .
without either total or partial Waſhings.


As Tobſcrved in a flat Stone at St. Michael's v Porphyr. de Abſlin. Lib, II. = Spencer, de
Mount. L. Hebr. p. 1177.


R rr There


——


-
—


_ —
— _


* „ ED


— —
—— * ” . -
—— ñ — — — — — — ꝓͥ wu
—


Pw


< -
*
Lb,


248


246


Jewiſh
Rites,


Not bor-
rowed from
the Gen -
tiles,


OF THE ROCK-BASONS.


There is no queſtion but theſe Rites of waſhing are as ancient as
the inſtitution of the Moſaical Law; but many of the learned carry
their original much higher, and, conſidering how every Gentil.
nation, though divided into the extremities of the globe, had the
ſame cuſtoms of purifying, think them as ancient as the Flood of
Noah, and diſperſed with mankind from Babel“. This Rite,
indeed, by its great ſimplicity, ſhews its early date; and though the
purifications of Waſhing were, in many caſes, enjoined the Je,
by God; yet does it not follow, but that they might be much
ancienter than the Law, and might probably be inſerted in the
Levitical Ordinances, that the Jews (impatient always of
reſtraint) might not think themſelves arbitrarily debarred of any
innocent Rites, which the reſt of the world ſo univerſally embraced,
and derived from ſo high a fountain as the reſtoration of mankind,
after the Deluge.

The Jews uſed not only Ablutions, but Libations alſo in the
moſt early ages, after their Migration from Egypt. It is ſuppoſed
Libations, and yet uſed them, they muſt have borrowed them
from the Heathens, but the conſequence is not clear: and
though Water-libation is no where ordained in the Levitical Lay,
yet this I take to be one proof of its Antiquity, and not of its
being derived from the Gentiles ; for the Jews might practiſe it as
one of thoſe Rites, which, being founded on the general ſenſe of
mankind, needed not to be republiſhed, and it is recorded as a piece of
worſhip performed under the eye, and therefore, it may be preſumed,
not without the approbation, of that ftri&t Governour, Samuel; The
Children of Iſrael gathered together unto Mizpeh?, and drew
« water, and poured it out before the Lord; which, if not cuſtomary,
it is not likely that Samuel would have ſuffered ; at a time too, when
the people were to humble themſelves for too criminal a commerce
already carried on with the Gentile Worſhip ; neither is it probable,
that David (who was a man after God's own heart, more eſpecially
on account of his avoiding every part of Idolatry and Superſtition,
would have performed this ſame Rite of Water-libation 2, if it were
no better authorized to him than from the practice of the Heathens.
The Jews practiſing, therefore, this Rite without the Ordainment
of God, is a ſtrong proof of its Antiquity, and its being derived


(not from the Gentiles to the Jews, but) from the univerſal ſenſe of
mankind.


It was the general opinion of the Ancients, © fuiſſe inter Inſtituta vetera orta poſt magnum
that the Larth was purified by the Waters of the “ Diluvium in memoria aqua purgati Mundi.
i'lood (Spenc. ib. 713.) “ Primum inter Sacra Grot. ad Matt. iii. 6.


locum Tezo770%%; tribuit Porphyrius de Abſt.“ x Spencer, ibid. 1098.
Lib. II. Sect. xx. Spencer (ib. 1099.) thinks Y 1 Sam. vii. 6.
theſe Rites as old as the Age immediately follow- Z 2 Sam. Xili. 16.


ing the Flog), —** Hance Ablutionem arbitror | It


6¾⅛ꝛwü Ä a - ⏑ . cuc mw au. . W- os . pac © Werren eee ow


a6


—
*
— -


—
adn
on »
—ͤä— — — ——— —ñ—ñäũ6—ͤ4ꝶũ Ägꝛ —ʒw——̃ ——
_


*


— — „ —— —
Rn


AL AM —-— IS


OF THE ROCK-BASONS. 247


It muſt however be acknowledged, that the Heathens are no The Ge.
where found without Ablutions and Libations; the Egyptians, e Kü
Ethiopians, Syrians, Perſians, Arabians, and the more Eaſtern
dolaters, the Greeks and Romans in the Weſt, Chriſtians as well
as Heathens, nations, however diſtant, and in Genius, Climate,
Religion and Manners, however different, all conſpircd to uſe theſe
fame Rites z which is ſuthcient Teſtimony, that they muſt have
been the Cuſtoms of Mankind before the diſperſion, and paſſed Nu ber-
into all Countries with the firſt Planters of Nations; not borrowed e
from the ſmall and little- noted people of the Jews, no more than £
from the Gentiles derived to the Jews ; but having deſcended to all
from their firſt common fathers, who practiſed it when mankind
was united in one common maſs, it could not but ſpread itſelf with
every ſettlement, into every religious ſect, though in ſome more But as «14
ſtrictly and ſcrupulouſly performed, in others with leſs delicacy, i
devotion, and frequency. ;

Theſe Rites of Luſtration, though at firſt in all probability nigwcnty
uniformly practiſed, yet after the diſperſion ſoon varied as to bractiſca.
manner, ſubſtance, time, and uſe (as the cuſtoms, dialects, laws, and
religion took a different turn) ſome preferring one time of the day,
or month, ſome another; ſome enjoining frequent and ſeveral ſtated
daily Ablutions, others contenting themſelves with fewer; ſome
taught that the hands, others the kead, others that the fect only
needed to be waſhed, and they ſhould be clean; whilft not a few
inſiſted that nothing leſs than a total and frequent immerſion of the
whole body was abſolutely neceſſary. The juſt, and every where
prevailing notion, that ſacred things required ſome preparatory, and
more than ordinary purity, continued this Rite among all nations;
but with ſome it continued in its native ſimplicity, whilſt it grew by
degrees, among the civilized and more cultivated nations, into a
kind of Science. The water was conſecrated with various
ceremonies, nay in ſome places worſhiped as a deity. The very
temples were ritually beſprinkled, not only when firſt conſecrated,
but as often as the gates were opened, with this holy water; and
the people, whenever they came to worſhip. The prieſts were to
waſh in one only kind of the pureſt water, their veſtments dewed,
their victims, altar, and ſacrifical inſtruments waſhed ; they had
their magical water to divine by, to foretell events, to try doubtful
and criminal caſes; the pureſt was poured out in libations to the
Gods; their oviciates were initiated with no other than one
particular ſort of water; at ſtated times; in certain appointed
places; before particular perſons in proper habits ; ſo that it
became one of the myſteries of the Pagan Religion, an emblematical
ſcience, of which the moſt minute circumſtance was not to be


omitted ;


= *
RY —


— —


—


——


— — — — — — — 3 —

Anja —
—— — — 5 FL.

— 2" IEIE < —— ATE LE


— - T_T 2 — 5
: q — 7 1 2 *
£ 1 -— |
_ » * 4 a La
— - — * —. — A
: E K * 1— *


1


—
2 5 _
— —


1
4
q
by


EEE r——— —


_ N


or —2 2 nh — — —
* + = OR —
3
— —— — —


OF THE ROC K-BA SONS.


omitted; a ſcience which no one but their Prieſts underſtood
which, without the moſt powerful ſolicitations, and timely
probation, no one was admitted unto, nor ſo much as to be
preſent when another was admitted.
SECT.V. To obtain this external purity, various were the opinions
133 of concerning the Water, which ſort was moſt effectual and conducixe.
ter, All nations agreed, that the pureſt Water was to be uſed at theſe
Solemnities ; but which was the pureſt Water, they did not agree.
Some preferred the fountain, and river Water, and were particularly
attached to ſome noted ſprings and rivers of their own Country,
The Romans thought it not lawful to uſe any other Water in their
Sacrifices to Veſta, than what was taken from the fountain of
Juturna where riſes the River Numicus: with this they ſprinkled
Fountain their Victims, and carried it in the Futile (a Veſſel broad at the
and River mouth, and ſo narrow at the bottom, that it would not ſtand on
1 round), that it might not touch the common Earth, leſt it
ſhould be defiled: this Water was alſo brought to Rome for all
Sacrifices a.

The Athenians, for Sacrifices and Bridal Contracts, thought it
unlawful to uſe any other than that of the Fountain Callirhoe®,
The Syrians were fond of their own Rivers. © Are not Abana
cc and Pharpar, Rivers of Damaſcus, better than all the Waters of
« Tſrael<?” The Egyptian Prieſts purified themſelves with no
other Water than that which the Ibis had approved the purity of,
by drinking of it.

At Heliopolis in Syria, not far from Lebanon, they never purified
their Temple but with Water fetched from the ſea, though at a
great diſtance l. In Sea-water the Greeks waſhed their hands
before prayer ©. |

The Jews had the ſame cuſtom f; but as lake and river Water
is very 1mpure, becauſe of the mud and filth which comes from
Plants, Fiſh, the Wind, and Animals; ſo neither is the Sea without
the like impurities, and, when not agitated by the winds or tides,
has its unwholſome ſmells, is foul, and corrupts the air with
noxious ſteams.

The pureſt of all water is that which comes from the Heavens,
in Snow, Rain, or Dew; and of this the Ancients were not
ignorant s, and therefore no Water ſeems to bid more juſtly for the


248


Sea-Water.


2 Servius Kn. 12.


b Sce Alex. ab Alexandro, Vol. I. p. 1096. fMoris eſt apud omnes Judæos manus aqua
The nicety of the Greeks, Perſians, Arabs, marina lavare quoties Deum precibus Venc-
Egyptians, and Babylonians, in this particular. rantur.“ Spencer, 789. ibid. :

5 Tay dN x r r oe xa. YAUKUTE , 95050


2 Kings, v. 12.
Spencer, ibid. ut ſupra 775, 6, 790. AzumpoTaiz, xai Aefloraia, Hippocrat. Lib.
S.. — Iipax® &, Acre & aquis,
Xevguy rLau®- Tong an, Yer Ahnen.
Strom. Lib. IV. Clem. Alex. p. 628.


de


preference


OF FHE ROCK-BASONS,


preference in thoſe ſacred Rites than this. For what is likely to
be ſo precious in the opinion of the Superſtitious, ſo fit to be offered
unto the Gods, or to purify Man, as that Water which comes from
the Heavens ?

The people who performed Sacrifice to the infernal Deities were
ſprinkled with Dew ®: © With pure Dew beſprinkled, go ye to the
Temple, ſays Euripides; and from the frequent mention made
of Dew, before they proceeded to the ſolemn Rites of Worſhip,
we may infer it to have been the opinion of the ancients, that as the
Dews of Heaven did waſh and purify the trees, herbs, and flowers,
upon which they fell, ſo did the ſprinkling of any Sacred Water
clean and purify the perſon who was to attend the Altar of tlie
Gods; and indeed this /prink/ing (of whatever kind the water
might be) was borrowed (as it ſeems to me) firſt from Nature ; for
the effect of Dews, and Rain, upon Plants, Leaves and Stones, was
no ſooner obſerved in the days of primitive ſimplicity, than theſe
Celeſtial Liquors (as if deſigned originally to cleanſe all things they
fell upon) became the ſymbols of Purity, and probably the firſt
inſtruments (becauſe the moſt obvious) of ritual Purification.
Among all the Ancients therefore, without exception, the cuſtom
of ſprinkling ſtill continued; although, with ſome, Waters
from Fountain, Well, Sea, or River, took place of the natural
Dew, and Shower, from whence the phraſe, and the practice, were
both at firſt derived.

In the hot Eaſtern Countries, it was no uncommon Rite to offer
Libati8ns, with thanks to the Gods for the former and the latter
Rain: the Jews offered Water only k, at the Feaſt of Tabernacles;
by this Rite, teſtifying, that having gathered in their Fruits, they
owed the Rain and plenty to God!, Some, ſays Pliny, prefer the
Rain-water preſerved in Ciſterns; and there is little queſtion to be
made, but that they uſed in Religious Rites that Water which they
thought moſt ſweet, pure, and wholeſome. Hoſpinianus and
Pontanus think that the Ancients uſed only that Water which was
perfectly pure, without any mixture, to make their Luſtraln. The
Jews too had their Cifterns for preſerving Rain-water, and every
tamily ſeems to have been thus provided. In theſe Ciſterns they
let the Rain depoſit the Faces which it could not but contract


collected as it was generally from the tops of houſes, or into pits),
and then purified themſelves therewith P. F


: a Aqua abluebantur Sacrificantes Diis ſuperis, n Danet, R. & G. Ant.


- Kore aſpergebantur Sacrificantes Inferis.“ o It is one argument of Rabſhakeh to the be-
SerVILS, En. ii. ver. 720. ſieged Jews, That, if they would ſurrender to
Ear ipides in lo. &« his Maſter, every Man ſhould drink the Wa-
Opencer, ibid. 1101. 1 « ters of his Ciſtern.“ 2 Kings xvill. 31.
luviam & frugifera tempora Deo.” ibid, p John ii, 6.


Lib. XXXI. cap. ili.
8 The


249


Dew.


Rain.


250


Snow
Water.


OF THE RO CE-BA SONS.


The Greeks too had their ſacred Rain; for Creon a, coming upon
the Stage, and ſecing Oedipus (after he had deprived himſelf of his
ſight, upon his appearing to be the murderer of his Father, and the
defiler of his Mother), begs the people preſent, if they had any
reverence for the Sun, to whole beams they owed all the plenty of
the Earth, to take away Oedipus, whom neither the Earth could
ſupport without horrour, nor the facred Rain purify, nor the light
of the Sun endure”.

The Egyptians, probably, were the firſt who improved the
ſimple uſe of purifying by Rain, Dew, and Snow, into an eſtabliſhed
ſyſtem of ſecret and ftrict ordinances, and indiſpenſable prohibitions;
tor there being very little Fountain or Well-water in Egypt, and the
Waters of the Nile generally foul, and of a muddy colour, and Rain
falling alſo but ſeldom (and therefore the more precious) ; this laſt
became reſerved for, and dedicated to, ſacred uſes, as moſt ſuitable
to the ſervice of the Gods, and to all thoſe myſtical Purifications in
which the Prieſts of this Country were ſo learned, and nice among
themſelves, and ſo unwilling to admit all others unto.

Pliny * tells us, that as Rain was preferred to running ſtreams, ſo
was Snow to Rain, and Ice (as reduced by the Chemiſtry of nature
to the utmoſt lightneſs and purity) to Snow. The Egyptians,
though idolizing at times the water of their Nile, were alſo,

robably, the Authors (among their various Rites of Libation and
Ablution) of dedicating Snow-water to ſacred uſes; for in all ſuch
ſuperficial Purities they much exceeded others, were more ſtrict
and pompous, and being bound (from the moſt ancient timeY by a
greater variety of Laws, they were to other nations, as it were, the
Standard and Oracles of Purity, infomuch that the Romans went
even as far as Egypt ſometimes for Water, in order more ritually
to beſprinkle the Temple of Iſis at Rome.


— — — — Si candida juſſerit Io,
Ibit ad Ag ypti finem, calidaque petitas
A Meroe portabit aquas, ut ſpargat in ædem
1j;dis. Juven. Sat. vi. ver. 525.


Polyphemus, in his addreſſes to Galatea, reckons Snow-water as
one of the moſt inviting and precious treaſures of his Cave u.


4 Sophocl. Oed. Tyr. Act v. Scen. iii. © /Feyptiz cunabulis uſitatas.“ Spencer, 1174.
© Ou/2g- lige, well tranſlated by Dacier, © La See Spencer, of the extraordinary nicety of the
** Pluye Celeſte, dont nous ſommes arroſez aux Egyptian Prieſts, ib. p. 786.


„ pieds des Autels.“ t lbid. ut ſupra,
_* Herod. Lib. II. cap. xxxvii. Ada dig Tx v Els N beg, To Hel & wohl gr · Alla
" nee; gens, uxess xa dig Eu -/; et ritum Atuxag ty Nινν e-, wolo 23000, Toon.
« illum recenſet inter alias puritatis extern 1 heocr, Idyll. Xls ver 47


& ceremonias a primis uſque Superſtitionis


.


OF THE ROC EK-B AS O NS.


That the Egyptians uſed Snow- water to purify themſelves before
eating, is evident from Petronius 8, Now the cuſtom of ſuch a
nation as Egypt, ſo celebrated in Theology, Magick, Science, and
the decpeſt Myſteries, could not but influence the cuſtoms of the
neighbouring nations; and in the ancient Poem of Job (who is
generally ſuppoſed to have lived at no great diſtance from Egypt)
che ſuperiour purity of rain and ſnow- water is plainly taught.

In the gth chap. ver. 30. Job acknowledges that all his
endeavours after purity would prove ineffectual, and incapable of
making him pure in the fight of God. © If I waſh myſelf with
« Snow-Water, and make myſelf never ſo clean, and if I purify
amy hands in a Ciſtern” (viz, of Rain-water), © yet ſhalt thou
« plunge me in the Ditch, and mine own Cloaths ſhall abhor me.”
Meaning, evidently, that the Waters of the Heavens (whether from
Snow or Rain) did principally conduce to purification, but that,
notwithſtanding all his ablutions, in the pureſt liquid that could be
procured, he muſt till appear, in the fight of God, full of
Uncleanneſs and Iniquity.

| muſt here obſerve that, in the latter part of this goth verſe,
our tranſlation leaves out a whole cuſtom of the Ancients, b
deſerting the original words, and (which is a manifeſt deſect)
retaining only the general ſcope of the author; but Spencer*
tranſlates theſe words as the Hebrew requires y: © $7 /avero me
« in aquis nivis, & mundavero in ciſterna volas meas.” ; and thence
infers the probability of Job's exerciſing himſelf in ſuch Purifications.
But more explicit ſtill is Cary/l. ad loc. p. 376. © Others
« conceive it (ſays he), an alluſion to that peculiar Rite in thoſe
* times when they took Snow-water to waſh with, rather than
« Spring, or River-water, becauſe that came from the Heavens, not
from the Earth here below, and was therefore, in their opinion,
© more excellent in its nature, becauſe it had a more excellent
* original.” Thirdly, “ Job (continues this Author), is thought
to ſpecify Snow-water, becauſe, in thoſe Countries, the Fountain
* or River-water was not pure; and therefore they preferred Snow,
and took that Water to waſh and cleanſe with, as the cuſtom ſtill
is in thoſe places where good Water is a rare commodity.”


251


Now, it being manifeſt that all nations who were in any degree $ECT. v1.


intent upon cultivating proper diſtinctions betwixt the ſacred and That the |
profane, expiating their faults, and reſtoring themſelves to a purity 4... ric:
becoming the ſacred myſteries, had ſome or all of theſe Rites of of external


: : Purihcati-
Water-luſtration, ablution, and libation, n


Ons.


ic 3 . . . . * * .
: e aquam in manus Nivatam infundenti- „ See Buxtorf, in voce Yi and Pagninus, ib.
Lap. xxxi.


Be Tandem ergo diſcubuimus, pueris Alex- * Tbid. ut ſup. p. 779.


It


— -


— — — — — —


252


*


OF THE ROCK-BASONS,


It may with great probability be advanced, that fo ftri& a ſeq 22
that of the Druids could not be ignorant of ſo univerſal a cuſtom
nor knowingly forbear to adopt ſo ancient and ſpecious a Rite
a part of their ſyſtem: my opinion, therefore, is, that the Druids, as
well as other Priefthoods, had the Rites of external purification
waſhings and ſprinklings; for this, they had their Holy Water; that
this Holy Water was Rain or Snow, or probably both; and that
theſe Rock-Baſons were veſſels moſt ingenioully contrived t,
procure that Holy Water.

The great reſemblance which the Druids bore to the Egyptiang
and Perſians in other parts of their ſuperſtition will not let us believe
that they could be ſo — as to reject one of the principal and
the moſt extended brahches of their religion.

There is no reaſon to think but the Druids were as nice in this
particular, and as ſtri&, and valued themſelves upon their ſuperiour
purity, and were as cautious of theſe imaginary defilements, as any
ſect in the world; and it appears, by their gathering the Selago, that
they had their Holy Water, and that, before the Prieſts could proceed
to cut this facred Herb, he was to be cloathed in white, his feet
were to be naked, and waſhed in pure Water a.

Here a Ritual Ablution of the Feet, in order to gather the Selago
with greater deyotion, is expreſſly mentioned of the Druids, and
may with equal juſtice be inferred, to have preceded the forms of
gathering the much more ſcarce and reverenced Miſletoe : a Sed
Ceremonial, named the hand, reftrained the eyes (for they were not
colour of the robe, ordained a preparation of faſting, and then
commanded the gatherer, with naked and waſhed feet, to procced
to gather herbs, could ſcarce avoid being equally myſtical and
ſuperſtitious in their other Rites b. |

The Druids had their Waters of Jealouſy as well as the Jews,
and near the banks of the Rhine uſed the waters of that river to
purge the ſuſpected e.

In the admonitions of St. Eloi, in the 8th century, we find him
charging the Chriſtians not to follow the ſeveral ſuperſtitions of the
then Pagans and Gauls (who were doubtleſs of the Druid
perſuaſion), ©* Qu'on ne faſſe point de Luſtrations d; whence it is


z © Les Druides etoient fecondes en Myſteres, Victim (which Rites muſt conſequently haye
& rafinoient ſur tout ;” ſays Rel. de Gaul. been Pagan), and then proceeded to baptiſe.
p. 138. vol. I. very judiciouſly, © « Le Rhin tenoit lieu aux Gaulois des eaux
a Plin, Lib. XXIV. cap. xi. « de Jalouſie. Ce fleuve, dit Julien I'Apoſſat,
b The Celts uſed Luſtrations, and even Baptiſ- * vangeoit par ſon diſcernement Iinjure qu on
mal Rites ; and by Pope Gregory's Epiſtle, 122, * faiſoit à la puretẽ du lit conjugal.“ La Rel. de
to Boniface, it appears, that ſome Prieſts at that Gaul. Vol. I. p. 56. 71.
time ſacrificed to Jupiter, and cat part of the 4 Rel. de Gaul. ibid. p. 71.


plain,


OF RE RUCEBASON:'S


plain, that the Druids had the Rite of Luſtration; for that this is
meant of the Druids 1s evident by what immediately follows,
« Qu'on ne jette aucun charme ſur les herbes,” that they ſay no
ncantations over herbs, i. e. over the Miſletoe, Samolus, and Selago


as the Druids uſed to do.


Having reaſon therefore to conclude that the Druids had theſe That thei


- 1 1 1 - Baſous arc
Rites of waſhing and purification, let us next conſider whether jm ©


to


theſe Rock-Baſons were Druid works. ark.


Although theſe Baſons could not be of any conceivable
mechanick uſee, or ſerve the religious purpoſes of Druidiſm as to
Libations, or ſerve as Altars, or as ſtages for their Holy Fires, yet
there are great reaſons to believe that they are indeed Druid
Monuments. |

Theſe Monuments are generally on the tops of Hills, on the Crags,
or Karns, in places which have the veſtiges of every kind of Druid
Superſtition 3 which muſt not only ſuggeſt to us that they were
Druid, but alſo Religious Monuments; and ſome way or other
ſubſervient to the purpoſes of Paganiſm, as taught by the Druids.
It may be objected, that the hiſtory of the Druids mentions very
little of theſe external Purifications by Water; but it muſt be
conſidered that whenever we find any cuſtom general among the
moſt ſuperſtitious of the ancients, and diſcover Monuments in
places frequented by the Druids, by their fitneſs correſponding
with, and by their properties adapted to, and framed as it were for
that general ſuperſtitious cuſtom, we have all the reaſon in the
world to impute that cuſtom to the Druids, though it be not
mentioned in the few ſcattered hiſtorical imperfe& remains relating
to that ſe,

We have no traces of ſuch works among the Roman or Chriſtian
Antiquities; and they are too frequent and numerous to have been the
works of ſuch ſojourners as the Danes, always engaged in wars, and
either paſſing to, or repaſſing from, their own country; much leſs
could they be the works of the Saxons, who were Chriſtians long be-
tore they conquered Cornwall: to whom then are thoſe Monuments
to be referred but to the ancient Britiſh, and among them to whom
lo properly as to the Druids, who engroſſed all the Science, and


whoſe Se& gave birth to all the Monuments (military excepted) of
thoſe darkſome ages ?


There being then great reaſon to conclude, that theſe Baſons are str. vn.


Druid works; let us take a review of the moſt remarkable of their
Uſe in gene-


properties of theſe Baſons, and from them (conſidered together with


e Sce before, p. 244.


Tt t the


24


8 —
— — v—_ — —


254


from the others either on the ground, or (which 1s moſt likely) into


Examples,


what the Baſons, next the edge, did contain ; and underneath a


ſo much ſkill as to fall from one level to another, from the higheſt


OF THE ROCE-BASONS.


the forementioned general Rites of Water-luftration) proceed to
determine their ule,

There are two ſorts of theſe Baſons; one ſort has Lips, or Paſſages
through which, what they received run off. The other ſort has
none, but retain the Liquors which they receive. They are
both on the higheſt hills, in great numbers, on every Karn which
has not been defaced. Both ſorts are alſo found on the tops of
Logan, or Rocking- Stones; and both have their openings, or upper
brim, widening towards the Sky.

What is more particularly obſervable in thoſe Which have Lips,
is, that their floors, or bottoms, are horizontal, their Lips generally
level with the bottom, ſo as that the upper Baſon runs off what it
contains into another below it, that into a third, and ſo on, till the
lowermoſt Baſon has a mouth or lip to diſcharge what it has received


a veſſel or rock prepared underneath.

I ſhall only produce two Monuments to illuſtrate what J have to
ſay, as to the uſe of theſe Veſſels. The Tolmen at Conftantine has
taken notice of here, as the moſt aſtoniſhing piece of this kind of
Fret-work, which perhaps the world affords. The whole ſurface A,
is beſpread entirely with Baſons (as may be ſeen in the little Plan,
Pl. XX. Fig. IX. p. 219.) moſt of which ſupply and run into
two very large ones, in compariſon of the reſt, one at the South
end (bb), another at the North (cc; but where the convexity of
this vaſt body of Stone ſhelved off from the middle of its top
towards the fides, there many little rills, or chanels (1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
Pl. XIII. p. 174.) are cut in the brim of the Tolmen, to diſcharge


great number of Baſons are cut into the natural Karns (ibidem,
C, B, F) as if to preſerve from waſte the precious Liquor as it fell.

large flat Stone on Karn-bre (PI. XX. Fig. VII. p. 219.) with the
Baſons wrought into its ſurface. |

The ſurface here is cut out into as many Baſons as the natural
declivities of the Stone would permit. The parſimonious Artiſt
has made the moſt of his ſubject: ſeven Baſons are contrived with


I ra of the Rock at g, down to (pointing Weſterly), which
on the very brim of the Stone has a chanel cut, o, by which all that
was collected in thoſe ſeven troughs (for they are large, three of
them near ſix fect long, and two feet deep) uniting, runs off, and 15


f Lib, III. cap. iii. P+ I 7 4»


diſcharged


OF THE-ROCK-BASON:-S;


diſcharged eaſily into any veſſel placed under: to the left land of
theſe Baſons, the ſurface of the Rock falls quick, dipping away to
the North, ſo that here was room for Bafons, yet would not the
level ſuffer any communication with the Baſon :. Two Baſons
therefore, p and , were contrived, in order to make the moſt of
this remaining ſpace; they are together an area of ten feet (i. e.
four feet long by two feet and half wide at a medium) ; and becauſe
the mouth at o was too high to ſerve their purpoſe, they have a
chanel of their own at 7, through which they yield what they were
intended to receive. |
Now if Fitneſs can decide the uſe (and where Hiſtory is deficient, src. vin.
it is all reaſon that it ſhould), we ſhall not be long at a loſs: for, Uſe of thoic
why all this art and labour? why is all the area of theſe Stones yyicy, hate
employed, and no part left idle? why are all the openings ſpread Lies
toward the Heavens, but to receive in greater plenty ſomething
which the Heavens were to beſtow? and why ſhould com-
munications paſs from one to the other (from the higher to the
lower), if it were not to convey ſome Liquid ? why ſhould, what
centered in the upper, run off from the place where it firſt lodged,
and the ſeveral Rills that proceeded from the ſeveral Baſons unite all
at laſt in the lower, if what was colleacd by them all, was not
thought precious, and to be preſerved with care ? why is the ſhelving
fide of this laſt Stone cut into two Baſons, þ and g, although the
level would not permit them to unite with the Baſon ; but with
an evident deſign to procure a greater quantity of the ſame Liquid,
than the other ſeven Baſons without them would afford ?
The Lips do not all point one way; for what reaſon? why they
are directed to that part of the Stone whence the Liquor collected
might be moſt conveniently diſcharged into, and be treaſured up in
ſome veſſel placed below. |

They are moſtly placed above the reach of Cattle, frequently
above the inſpection of Man; nay, the Stones which have thele
Baſons on them, do not touch the common ground, but ſtand on
other Stones. Wherefore? But that the Water might neither be
really defiled by the former, nor incur the imaginary impurity,
which touching the ground (according to the Druid opinion) gave
to every thing that was Holy. Why they are placed above the
inſpection of Man will ſoon appear.

Theſe Baſons are found on the tops of hills; they could not
more properly, according to the trueſt Philoſophy (as well as the
laws of their Religion) be any where placed, for it is a known truth
among Naturaliſts, that the pureſt Water is that of Rain, and Snow,
collected in open Veſſels upon the tops of Mountains g; and it is no


t


t Muflenbroek, p. 865. — Bocrhaave's Chem. Engl. p. 312.
wonder


] 7d 5; OF THE ROCK-BASONS.


wonder that the Druids ſhould be acquainted with this ſuperiour
Purity of Rain and Snow-water, if we conſider their celebrated
inſight into the works of nature h.
q For catching the Rain and Snow, the little Walls, or Partitions
} betwixt the Baſons, are as neceſſary as the Mountains on the ſurface
| of the Earth, and left purpoſely, one would think, in order to catch
and diſtill the Rain and Snow; for theſe (I mean the Rains and
Snow) fall not perpendicularly, but are driven in an inclined
direction, and are therefore very artfully intercepted by theſe ſcreens,
which at once ſtop the rain as it drives, and ſhelter it from being
blown out of the Baſons when the Wind is tempeſtuous.
Farther it muſt be obſerved, that ſome of theſe Baſons have one
0 part of their hollow made more circular than the reſt, forming a round
receſs, as if it were to receive the head, and the other part the body,
of ſome human creature. What I mean is plainly viſible in the
| Boſworlas Baſons, King Arthur's bed (Pl. XX. Fig. VII. p. 219.
D, and Fig. VI. 5) as well as in ſeveral others which I could here
produce i. In the ſmaller kind, I conjecture, they uſed to lay
| Children, in the larger, Men, for particular diſorders, that, by the
| healing virtue attributed to the God who inhabjted the Rock,
they might be cured of their ailment ; or, by being proſtrated on
ſo holy a place, might be fitted for, and conſecrated to, the ſervice
of the Rock-deity, for which they were intended.
The number of theſe Baſons is very great in the Weſt of
Cornwall; therefore the Druids muſt have been very numerous here,
and the uſes they applied this their Holy Water unto muſt have
been many, and frequent : we need only recolle& the various uſes
to which the Ancients applied their Holy-Water (as recited Sect. g.);
and then we ſhall the leſs wonder that the Druids ſhould be ſo
{tudious to preſerve, by ſuch a number of Stone-veſſels, ſo great a
quantity of Rain and Snow-water.
SECT. IX. But there are ſome Bafons which have no lip or chanel; and
Uſe of thoſe therefore, as they could not contribute any of their water to the
rang 8 common ſtore, they muſt have been appropriated to another ule:
many large troughs of this kind have little Baſons round them,
which ſupply the great one with what they gather; the maker
; evidently proceeding upon this maxim, that the larger the concave
| area was which was expoſed to the Heavens, the greater would be
| the collection of water. |


— OOO — — —— — —
*
© p o " 4 p _ — 1 - —


d See cap. xi. Lib. II. p. 92. and the large Baſons on the of the Tolmen
| 9 ge top

As the large Baſon at Hanterdavaz, in the in Conſtantine, mentioned ip the preceding pages
pariſh of Mabe, four feet two inches and a half * See p. 169.
| wide, and ſeven feet nine inches and a half long,


Now


OF THE ROCE-BASON-S.

Now theſe being found in the ſame places with the others above-
mentioned, which have outlets or mouths to them, mult have been
ſome way or other (as has been obſerved before) ſubſervient to the
ame ſyſtem of ſuperſtition, though in a different method.

Theſe Baſons are ſometimes found near 20 feet high from the
common ſurface; and therefore, being ſo far withdrawn from vulgar |
eyes, ſo elevated from the ground (which was ſuppoſed, as I ſaid 'Y
before, to defile all) they had likely a proportionably greater degree
of reverence, and their waters accounted more holy, and more
efficacious.

From theſe Bafons perhaps, on ſolemn occaſions, the officiating
Druid, ftanding on an eminence, ſanctified the congregation with a
more than ordinarily precious luſtration, before he expounded to [
them, or prayed for them, or gave forth his deciſions. This water 1
he drank, or purified his hands in, before it touched any other |
reſlel, and was conſequently accounted more ſacred than the other
Holy-water. To theſe more private Baſons, during the time of
Libation, the Prieſt might have recourſe, and be at liberty to judge
by the quantity, colour, motion, and other appearances in the
water, of future events, of dubious cafes, without danger of contra- 3
dition from the people below!, This Water might ſerve to mix AF
their Miſletoe withall, as a general antidote ; for doubtleſs thoſe who l
would not let it touch the ground, would not mix this their
Divinity (the Miſletoe), with common water. Oak leaves (without
which the Druid Rites did ſcarce ever proceed) ritually gathered,
and infuſed, might make ſome very medicinal or incantatorial 1
potion. Laſtly, Libations of water were never to be made to their I
Gods, but when they conſiſted of this pureſt of all water, as what
was immediately come from the Heavens, and partly therefore
thither to be returned, before it touched any other water, or any
other veſſels whatſoever, placed on the ground.

As Logan Stones were ſome of the piæ fraudes of the Druids,
the Baſons found on them might be uſed to promote the juggle :
by the motion of the Stone the Water might be fo agitated, as to
delude the enquirer by a pretended Miracle; might make the
criminal confeſs 3 fatisfy the credulous; bring forth the gold of
the Rich; and make the injured rich, as well as poor, acquieſce in
what the Druid thought proper.


72
*
— |


The vulgar Corniſh have a great deal of this from ſeveral trials they make upon the well-
folly il! remaining; and there is ſcarce a pariſh- water, they go away fully fatisfied for a
well, which is not frequented at ſome particular while ; thoſe who are too curious being always 100
times for information, whether they ſhall be too credulous. .
fortunate or unfortunate; whether, and how,they m See before, Book III. chap. iv. p. 179, &c. |
fall recover loſt goods, and the like; and

U uu 'There


* — - 1 n - _
— — —— — — —— _ -


258


OF THE GOLD COL1NS


There are ſome little ſingle Baſons cut into a few Stones in
Boſworlas bottom, not higher from the ground than what the Cattle
might reach to.

Were theſe the Stone-cifterns in which the Druids depoſited their
Samolus, for in ſome ſuch Ciſterns, Pliny n ſays, they uſed to bruiſe
this herb, and make ſuch an infuſion as would keep off diſcaſes
from their cattle ? or, were theſe ſmall Baſons to receive Libations
of particular families, and, by the Sun foon exhaled, might be
therefore thought to have been accepted, and well received by the
Deity ?

This then is the ſum of what I have ſaid, relating to theſe
Rock-Baſons :

That the Druids had the Rite of Water-Luſtrations, is not without
ſome traces in hiſtory, and very agreeable to the general tenour and
caſt of their ſuperſtition. |

That they made theſe Baſons, in conſequence of ſuch Rite, for
the purpoſe of collecting Rain and Snow-Water (as an uſe moſt
correſpondent to the ſhape, direction, fituation, and number of
theſe Monuments), I have endeavoured to ſupport in ſuch a manner
as I hope ſhall not injure truth, if it does not diſcover it; and it is
ſo pleaſant, to purſue truth, when we think we have firſt got it in
ſight, that, if I have been too diffuſive and long in the purſuit, I
hope the reader will excuſe it: the conſequences before drawn 1
take to be clear, that the Druids uſed Water-Purifications, becauſe
theſe Baſons could ſerve no other uſe: but what parts, whether
few or many, or all, of the Heathen ancient Libations, Ablutions,
and Expiations the Druids adopted, or what diſtinction they made
betwixt the two ſorts of Baſons above-mentioned, I do not vet
find, fo as poſitively to aſſert.


CHAP. XII.


Of the Gold Coins found at Karn-Bre in Cornwall, and what Mation


N the month of June 1749, in the middle of the ridge of Karn-
bre-hill?, were found ſuch a number of Coins of pure Gold, as,
being ſold for weight, brought the finder about 16 pounds, ſterling.
Near the ſame quantity was found by another perſon, near the ſame
ſpot, a few days after; all which were ſoon ſold and diſperſed:


n Lib. XXIV. cap. xi.
v Marked D. Sce Plate VII. Map of Karn-brs, p. 117.
| ſome


—


—— 5 5 e
Jo . LI ajoet 7


Hs Plate engravd at 7 aqhonce -Y


5


able Pi %Y Hmbot ven ih


ge comms are chargd. fp 176


i ll 6Z
2|| 7 0
#
3 | ( ,
41 282
0 QC <
9 * Tr


reat reit mvord id by Wm Hol.
1


F OUND AT K ARN-B RE, CORNWALL.


ſome were much worn and ſmoothed, not by age, or lying in the
Earth, but by uſe, they having no allay to harden, and ſecure them
from wearing.

Seventeen J here exhibit, in Plate XXIII, of different Impreſſions, SECT. 1.
ze, or weights; ſeveral others, found at the ſame time and place, Coins de.
have ſeen, but being of the ſame ſort as theſe Examples, I think ©
t needleſs to lay them before the publick. I range the rudeſt, and
thoſe which have figures moſt unknown, firſt (as others engaged in
treating of Medals have done), being, in all probability, the moſt
ancient; the others follow according as their criterions ſeem to
become more and more perfect, and modern. I mention their
weight alſo, as a material circumſtance (though omitted by other
Authors) for claſſing them, and diſcovering what are, and what are
not, the fame ſort of Coin. The ſize in the Plate is the real one by
meaſurement of the Coins. The firſt has ſome figures upon it
which I do not underſtand ; its weight is 22 grains.

No II. has ſome figures on one ſide, which I do not ſo much as

veſs at; on the other fide, it has the Limb, or trunk of a Tree,
with little branches ſpringing from it in one part; and what I take
alſo for the body of a Tree, with two round holes, or marks, where
the limbs have been lopt off, and roots at the bottom on the other

art : it weighs only 23 grains.

No III. has a figure, which, in the Coin attributed to Caſſibelan
(by Speed, p. 30.), is more plain, and reſembles two Dolphins
turning their crooked backs to each other; on the other fide it has
a plain large ftump of a Tree, with two branches breaking out on
each fide; it riſes out of the ground, and ſtands between two
ſmaller trees: it weighs 23 grains. |

No IV. is quite defaced on one fide, unleſs it be the outline of
a human head ; but on the other, it has ſome parts of a horſe, and
ſome little round ſtuds, or button- like emboſſments, both which
marks will be particularly diſcourſed of when we come to explain
the ſeveral uncommon figures which theſe Coins afford us : it weighs
26 grains.

No V. has one fide effaced; the Reverſe is a horſe, betwixt the
legs of which, there is a wheel, and from its back riſes the ſtem of
a ſpear, or Javelin : weight 26 grains, g

No VI. has the ſtem of a tree, with its collateral branches ve
diſtinct; in the middle, it is croſſed ſlopewiſe by a bar like the
ſcaſt of a ſpear ; the Reverſe has the horſe, the wheel, and ſpear,
but ſomewhat differently placed on the gold. The weight is
twenty five grains and a half, by which I conclude, that the ſide
which js defaced in No V. was the fame as in this Coin, for the ” x
Reverles are the ſame, and their weight correſponds to half a grain,


which


239


260 OFF THE GQOLD een


which may be allowed for the greater uſe that has been made of
this than of the former.

N* VII. has on one fide ſome appearances of a human heaq
(which fide of the Coins we ſhall henceforth call the Head, a3
Medalliſts generally do, to avoid a multiplicity of words); on the
Reverſe the remains are ſo mutilated, that it can be only ſaid, that
this Reverſe was much ornamented, but what the ornaments were,
is not to be diſcovered ; it weighs 23 grains.

No VIII. has the lines of a garland, or diadem on the Head.
The Reverſe has the Exergue at bottom, ſupported by jagged lines
interſperſed with dots, above which are fome barbarous figures,
which are to be explained, and their orderly diſpoſition here and
in ſome of the other Coins accounted for in their proper place;
it weighs four penny-weights, three grains.

No IX. has a head much defaced, but viſible, as is alſo the
outline of the neck, and the ear; behind the forehead, and noſe,
it has three ſemicircular protuberances; the Reverſe has the ſame
figure as the Reverſe of No VIII. but has more little round ſtubs
on it (the Die, which gave the impreſſion, being placed farther back
in this than in the former), and diſcovers therefore a circular figure,

See the Ta. N' VII. with three pointed javelins, N' VI. underneath it, which

Sel; the other impreſſion has not; but, by the run of the Die, the former

Pl. XXIII. has one of the figures which is not in this. It weighs four penny-
weights three grains, which weight, and the Reverſe charged with
like figures (though differently placed) ſhews that theſe two Coins
were ſtruck at one time, by the ſame Die, and are of the fame
value.

N' X. has a laureated diadem, croſs which, at right angles, is a
fillet, or rather claſp, and a faint appearance of a hook at the end
of it, the reſt defaced. The reverſe has a very diſtin& Exergue at
bottom; the ſame figures partly as N' VIII, IX. but the Die was
placed ſtill farther back on the gold, therefore not altogether the
ſame, the javelins, or ſpears (or whatever thoſe pointed ſtakes
ſignify), being in this Coin cut off by a deſcending line, intimating

that but part only of thoſe inſtruments were to be exhibited. It

weighs four penny-weights two grains, by which it is probable, that

it is the ſame fort of Coin with the two foregoing, allowing one
rain out of fifty for the wear.

Ne XI. has the laureated diadem and claſp, above which the
hair turns off in bold curls; the Reverſe has the fame charge as the
three foregoing, but better placed, and it ſhould be a Coin of the
ſame ſort, but that it weighs four penny-weights and ſeven grains, fo
that it muſt have been much leſs uſed than the others, if of the


{ame time and value.
Ne XII.


. reaches the


FOUND AT K ARN-BRE, CORNWALL.


N XII. has on the Head ſeveral parallel lines faſhioned into
ſquares, looking like the plan of a town of which the ſtreets croſs
nearly at right angles, and the whole cut by one ftraight and
wider ſtreet than the reſt. On the Reverſe are the remains of a
horſe with a collar or garland round his neck, and behind, ſome-
thing like a charioteer driving forward ; underneath the horſe is a
wheel, and a few ſtuds ſcattered near the extremities of the Coin;
one penny-weight, three grains,

Ne XIII. juſt ſhews the faint profile of a human face; the
Reverſe a horſe, a ſpear hanging forwards towards the horſe's neck,
ſome appearance of a charioteer above the horſe : it weighs only
2 ns. —

NY XIV. has a laureated diadem round the temples, above which
the hair turns back in large curls: the diadem has the claſp, or
ribbon, which has a hook at the bottom of it, and on the ſhoulder
isa fibula or button which tucked up the looſe garment, The
Reverſe has a horſe with a wheel below it, and many ſmall and
large ſtuds above it ; it weighed 25 grains.

N* XV. exhibits a diſtin human face in profile; the head is
laureated, claſped, and cirrated as the others, which plainly ſhews,
that where there is only a fimple laureated diadem now to be ſeen,
as in N' X. XI. XIV. there the human face alſo was, though now
worn out. The Reverſe has a horſe, with a wheel below it, and
creſcents, ſtuds, and balls above it; weight 26 grains.

Ne XVI. is the beſt preſerved Coin, as well as largeſt and moſt
diſtin, which I have ſeen of the gold Coins found in Cornwall.
The Profile 1s well proportioned, and neither deſtitute of ſpirit nor
expreſſion : and it is ſomewhat ſurprizing that an artiſt, who could
deſign the human face ſo well, ſhould draw the horſe ſo very
indifferently on the other fide. This head has two rows of curls


above the laureated diadem, and the folds of the garment rife u


round the neck cloſe to the ear. The reverſe, a horſe, a wheel,


balls and creſcents, as in the reſt; it weighs four penny-weights,
fourteen grains.


XVII. is the ſame weight as N' XIII. and the horſe is. nearly
the ſame turn, but here it has a creſt of beads or pearl for a mane,


Ne XIV. It has alſo ſome appearance of reins (as of a bridle)


under the jaw; the horſe is better turned than in any of them.
Behind the wheel, it has ſomething depending like a pole, which

e ground; whether a reclining ſpear, or what their
leythes might be faftened to, or any other part of the chariot, is
uncertain 3 but the charioteer is plain. Bey”
I perceive no letters on any of them ; ſome are plain, or flat;
lome a little concave on one fide and convex on the other, but not
remarkably ſo, | X XxX Eight


5


261


262


OF THE GOLD COINS
Eight Coins are here ſubjoined, from the cabinets of the curious,
not yet publiſhed, which may tend to illuſtrate the foregoing; the
five following are copied from the collection of the Rev. Mr.
Gifford, of Queen-ſquare, Ormond- ſtreet, London, and were in
Karn-bre, but in what part of Britain they were found is uncertain.
Ne XVIII. on one ſide a head emboſſed; the Reverſe a very
uncouth ancient horſe with its head to the right hand ; the other
ornaments as in the reſt : the uſe we ſhall make of this, ſhall he
to explain the marks of thoſe which go before; where, though the
ſame, they are not ſo diſtinct, nor treated of by any author I have
yet ſeen; it weighs four penny-weights, one grain; a little concave
on the Reverſe. | |
Ne XIX. Bars, ſtakes, or fragments of ſpears, or javelins croſſing
irregularly; Reverſe a horſe, with a ſpear leaning forth over its neck,
the ſpear held (as it were) by an arm reaching forward ; {plinters
or pieces of ſpears in other parts of the Coin; a garland round the
horſe's neck, the mane made of a line of ſtuds; a little convex on
the Reverſe; weight 29 grains.
Ne XX. a noble Coin; the head is ornamented in the fame
manner as N' XVI. but has the claſp over the diadem much
plainer; the hook at the bottom of the claſp alſo very plain, and
ſhews the ſhape of this member, in N' X. XI. XIV. XV. where
they are defective. It has more curls below the diadem, and the
hair of the hinder part of the head ſeems traced in ribbons ſtudded
with pearl: it ſhews alſo more of the habit than N' XVI. but it
has either loſt, or never had, the profile, in which particular it falls
greatly ſhort of the other. The Reverſe is a horſe in the ſame ſtyle,
and ſurrounded with the ſame ornaments, as N' XVI. the weight is
four penny- weight, nineteen grains, which is five grains more than
the above Coin; and if that difference may be imputed to the
different uſe made of theſe Coins, they are of one age, were
originally of one weight and value, and very likely of one and the
ſame prince. |
Ne XXI. the Head defaced. The Reverſe a horſe well ſhaped,
and of neat deſign : underneath, 'is a ſtar of five rays, formed very
artificially by the interſection of three equal triangles 4. Both the
horſe and this geometrical figure ſhew this Coin to be much more
modern than any of our Karn-brè Coins; it is a little concave on
the Reverſe, and weighs twenty grains and a half,
N' XXII. a well-preſerved face, and of elegant workmanſhip.
In the Reverſe the horſe is well proportioned, has a chariotecr


p There are four grains difference betwixt q I find the ſame figure in one of the Britiſh
No IX, and XI. which however are certainly Coins publiſhed in Dr. Battely's Antiq. Rhutu-
Coins of the ſame ſort, e p. 93. ;

| behind


„„


ac


FOUND AT KARN-BRE, CORNWALL.


behind it, pointing forward the ſpear, a wheel of dots under it
ſupported by an Exergue, and. the chariot wheel alſo cloſe at the
horſe's heels: the mane of the horſe is a line of beads or pearls.
This Coin is ſtill more modern than the reſt, and is of the ſame
ſort in all appearance, as that publiſhed in the laſf edition of
Camden, Vol. I. Tab. II. N' xxx; though, for want of the weight
being 13 it cannot certainly be athrmed ; it weighs 29 grains
and à half. | |

Ne XXIII. is a Coin from the cabinet of Smart Letheullier, Eſq;
of Alderſbrook in Eſſex. In the Head, it has the laureated diadem
with ſome curled hair above it, over which comes the claſp. Under
the diadem ſeems the collar-ornament of N* XX. but out of its
place; underneath are two large creſcents, fo that this fide of the
Coin ſeems to be a collection of the ornaments of the Head inſerted
together, and the face never intended. I find this Coin very near
the ſame as Dr. Plot's Coin (p. 335. N' XXI. Oxfordſhire) who
takes it to contain two faces of Praſutagus and Boadicea, but I ſee
nothing tending that way r. In the Reverſe is a horſe of the ſame
ſtyle as N'. XVII. but the wheel is larger, and the ears and tail of
the horſe more apparent, though of very clumſy deſign; the whole
favouring of great antiquity, and ſhewing the low pitch of the art
of coining, at this time, in the nation to which this Coin belongs.
But the greateſt curioſity of this Coin, and the reaſon indeed for
which it is here introduced, is, that it is neither gold, nor wholly
electrum, or any imitation of gold, but ſeems to be copper
plated over with a mixed metal of the colour of gold.

Ne. XXIV. and XXV. are ſilver Coins of the ſame kind, from
the cabinet of the Rev. Mr. Wiſe, B. D. late Radcliff Librarian,
Oxford, and inſerted here for confirming the deſcriptions that go
before, as will be more particularly explained hereafter ; they were
found in the pariſh of Swacliffe near Madmarſton Caſtle, Oxford-
ſhire, A. D. 1746.

others which may in ſome meaſure explain them, let us conſider to


be, and got into the hands of the curious, it was by many imagined
that they were foreign Coins, and ſome thought that they were
Phenician, To this opinion the Reverſe, having generally a horſe


r The learned Mr. Walker (from whom Dr. „ more faces, I rather imagine it to be ſome
lot had this Coin, which is alfo publiſhed in “ fortification;” which latter ſuppoſition, I
Camden, Tab. I. 29.) I find (fince my cannot but obſerve, is as far wide of the truth as
writing the above) of the ſame opinion, viz. that Dr. Plot's; as, by comparing this Coin with the
, does not contain two faces; I ſee no reſem- others here produced, will readily appear.
blance (ſays he, Camden, p. 716.) of one or


upon


Not Pheni-


clan Ccous,


264


OF THE GOLD COINS


upon them, gave at firſt ſome countenance, ſome of the Phenici,,
Colonies having choſen that creature for their ſymbol; the place
where they were found ſeemed to confirm this ſuſpicion, Cornwall
having been (from the firſt appearance of Britain in hiſtory)
celebrated for its Tin, which the Phenicians for many apes
engroſſed to themſelves by their ſuperiour {kill in Navigation, The
only thing, then, that remains to be done, in order to determine
them to be Phenician or not, is to confront the Coins found in
Cornwall with thoſe confeſſedly of Phenician original, and conſider
whether Coins of the ſame ſtyle have not been found in other parts
of this our Iſle where the Phenicians never traded. No the
Phenician Legends will always be known by their letters, when
they exceed the Roman Conqueſt of Syria (for after that Conqueſt
they uſed either Greek or Roman Characters on their Coins); but
there is not one Character to be found in theſe our Corniſh Coins.
The ancient Symbol of the Syrophenicians was the Palm-tree,
ſometimes the Murex; and of their Weſtern Colony, Hercules's
Pillars; but there is no ſuch thing on our Coins. The Libypheni-
cians about Cyrene took, indeed, the horſe for their Symbol ; but
this horſe had either the whole Palm-tree, or its ſtalk ſtanding by it,
alluding at once to their deſcent from the Syrians, and to the horſe
for which their own country, Africa, was always ſo famous, and for
the taming of which they were indebted to their principal God,
Neptune. |

But although this part of the Phenician people choſe the horſe
for their Coins, yet could not our Coins come from thence, no
trade having been carried on with this branch of the Phenicians
ſettled ſo near Egypt; our Phenician trade was with thoſe of
Cadiz, Carthagena or Carthage, herſelf. Now the Carthaginians


had the head and neck of a horſe for their Symbol, alluding to the


fable of their being commanded by Juno to build their city where
a horſe's head was dug up*. Cadiz had her Hercules, his Temple,
and his Pillars; but all theſe were modern and well executed, and
of them nothing is to be ſeen in the Coins now before us, which are


neither well executed, nor have any reference, or relation, to the


Palm-tree, Murex, Buſt of the Horſe, Hercules, or his Pillars, But,
one argument, which will ſtill weigh more than the above, is this,
that coining Money came ſo ſurprizingly late into uſe among the


Phenicians, that ſuch ſkillful Artiſts as they, and their Colonies were,


could not coin ſuch artleſs Money as ours is. Of the Phenician
Coins (certainly known to be ſuch) there are none extant more
ancient than the time of Alexander the Great*; fo modern are


» /En, I. ver. 445. t Wiſe, p. 217.


they,


. AT. 8


oY e Oo . ©@ ww FfY.


4 CD |_FHonww.


FOUND AT KARN-BRE, CORN WALL.


they, that the Phenicians were many ages celebrated for theit in-

enuity and ſkill in other arts, before they ever coined money;
and, beſides, having borrowed likely this art from the Grecians u,
they cannot, with any probability be ſuppoſed to coin money of
{ rude and mean deſign, as thoſe of Karn-bre; arts among the
Greeks being arrived, as we all know, to their ſummit in the time
of Alexander the Great: hiſtory forbids us therefore to attribute
ſuch Coins, as what are now under conſideration, to ſo polite and
cultivated a nation as the Phenicians. Laſtly, that they were not
brought hither by the trading Phenicians, ſeems to be plain, be-
cauſe they are found, not only in Cornwall, but in Wales, and
moſt parts W of Britain, where the Phenicians never came, their
trade being confined to Cornwall x, and their buſineſs, Tin.


to the Greeks nor Romans. That they are not of Roman work- Nor Greek
nor Roman.


manſhip, the firſt fight of them plainly ſhews ; much leſs can we
attribute them to the Greeks, whoſe Medals are ſtill ſuperiour to
the Roman in force and delicacy v. They mult be either Gauliſh,
therefore, or Britiſh ; for people muſt be very fanciful indeed
(and extremely unwilling, or rather determined not to let their own
country Rights be impartially weighed) who will look out for a
foreign father of theſe Coins among the Spaniards, or Germans.
That they do in a few particulars reſemble the Gauliſh Coins,
muſt be allowed; and for this very good reaſons can be given,
without admitting them to be Gauliſh, as we ſhall ſoon fee ; in
the mean time, I mult obſerve, that Ceſar's ſeeming to aſſert, that
the Britans had no money in his time, having made ſeveral learned
men think that we had no coined money in Britain before the
Roman Invaſion a, and others being of a different opinion b, I
will take all the care I can that the veneration which I have for
the latter may neither lead me blindly into their opinion, nor
the reſpect which I have for ſome of the others make me ſuppreſs
what 1 think to be right. The reaſons muſt be weighed ; the
palſage of Ceſar ſet in it's proper light; and the reader muſt de-


termine,


v Ibid. p. 218. N. Salmon, Nova Angliæ Luſtratio, Lond.


„ deveral gold Coins of the ſame kind, and 1728, p. 387, who thinks them coins belong-
* uſo a rough Ruby were found not long ago ing to the ancient Saxons,
m the He of Shepey.” Letter from Smart a See Moreton's Northamptonſhire, p. 500.
Letheullicr, Eſq; Walker in Camden, p. cxiv.—See Mr. Wiſe's

By Cornwall here, as oftentimes elſewhere, learned account of the Bodleian cabinet.
I mean all that anciently went by that name, b Camden. Plot's Oxfordſhire, Chap. X.
. the South and Veſtern parts of Devon- The learned Editor of Camden. Notes, ibid.
ſhire, as well as what is Weſt of the Tamar. p. 774. The late Mr, Ed, Lhuyd, ibid.

Ir. Jobert, p. 3. tranſlated by Gale.


Yyy & Utuntur


265


264


OF THE GOLD COINS


upon them, gave at firſt ſome countenance, fome of the Phenician
Colonies having choſen that creature for their ſymbol; the place
where they were found ſeemed to confirm this ſuſpicion, Cornwall
having been (from the firſt appearance of Britain in hiſtory)
celebrated for its Tin, which the Phenicians for many apes
engroſſed to themſelves by their ſuperiour ſkill in Navigation, The
only thing, then, that remains to be done, in order to determine
them to be Phenician or not, is to confront the Coins found in
Cornwall with thoſe confeſſedly of Phenician original, and conſider
whether Coins of the ſame ſtyle have not been found in other parts
of this our Iſle where the Phenicians never traded. Now the
Phenician Legends will always be known by their letters, when
they exceed the Roman Conqueſt of Syria (for after that Conqueſt
they uſed either Greek or Roman Characters on their Coins); but
there is not one Character to be found in theſe our Corniſh Coins,
The ancient Symbol of the Syrophenicians was the Palm-tree,
ſometimes the Murex; and of their Weſtern Colony, Hercules's
Pillars; but there is no ſuch thing on our Coins. The Libypheni.
cians about Cyrene took, indeed, the horſe for their Symbol ; but
this horſe had either the whole Palm-tree, or its ſtalk ſtanding by it,
alluding at once to their deſcent from the Syrians, and to the horſe
for which their own country, Africa, was always ſo famous, and for


the taming of which they were indebted to their principal God,


Neptune. |

But although this part of the Phenician people choſe the horſe
for their Coins, yet could not our Coins come from thence, no
trade having been carried on with this branch of the Phenicians
ſettled ſo near Egypt; our Phenician trade was *with thoſe of
Cadiz, Carthagena or Carthage, herſelf. Now the Carthaginians
had the head and neck of a horſe for their Symbol, alluding to the
fable of their being commanded by Juno to build their city where
a horſe's head was dug ups. Cadiz had her Hercules, his Temple,
and his Pillars; but all theſe were modern and well executed, and
of them nothing is to be ſeen in the Coins now before us, which are
neither well executed, nor have any reference, or relation, to the
Palm-tree, Murex, Buſt of the Horſe, Hercules, or his Pillars. But,
one argument, which will ſtill weigh more than the above, is this,
that coining Money came fo ſurprizingly late into uſe among the
Phenicians, that ſuch ſkillful Artiſts as they, and their Colonies were,
could not coin ſuch artleſs Money as ours is. Of the Phenician


Coins (certainly known to be ſuch) there are none extant more


ancient than the time of Alexander the Great*; ſo modern are


En. I. ver. 445. t Wiſe, p. 217.


they,


J f . . go——_—


FOUND AT KARN-BRE, CORNWALL. 265


they, that the Phenicians were many ages celebrated for their in-

auity and ſkill in other arts, before they ever coined money;
and, beſides, having borrowed likely this art from the Grecians u,
they cannot, with any probability be ſuppoſed to coin money of
ſo rude and mean deſign, as thoſe of Karn-bre; arts among the
Greeks being arrived, as we all know, to their ſummit in the time
of Alexander the Great : hiſtory forbids us therefore to attribute
ſuch Coins, as what are now under conſideration, to ſo polite and
cultivated a nation as the Phenicians. Laſtly, that they were not
brought hither by the trading Phenicians, ſeems to be plain, be-
cauſe they are found, not only in Cornwall, but in Wales, and
moſt parts of Britain, where the Phenicians never came, their
trade being confined to Cornwall *, and their buſineſs, Tin.

to the Greeks nor Romans. That they are not of Roman work- Nor Greek
manſhip, the firſt fight of them plainly ſhews ; much leſs can weer Roma.
attribute them to the Greeks, whoſe Medals are ſtill ſuperiour to
the Roman in force and delicacy v. They muſt be either Gauliſh,
therefore, or Britiſh ; for people muſt be very fanciful indeed
(and extremely unwilling, or rather determined not to let their own
country Rights be impartially weighed) who will- look out for a
forcign father of theſe Coins among the Spaniards, or Germans.

That they do in a few particulars reſemble the Gauliſh Coins,
muſt be allowed ; and for this very good reaſons can be given,
without admitting them to be Gauliſh, as we ſhall ſoon ſce; in
the mean time, I muſt obſerve, that Ceſar's ſeeming to aflert, that
the Britans had no money in his time, having made ſeveral learned
men think that we had no coined money in Britain before the
Roman Invaſion a, and others being of a different opinion b, I
will take all the care I can that the veneration which I have for
the latter may neither lead me blindly into their opinion, nor
the reſpect which I have for ſome of the others make me ſuppreſs
what 1 think to be right. The reaſons muſt be weighed ; the
paſſage of Ceſar ſet in it's proper light; and the reader muſt de-


termine,


—


v Ibid. p. 218. = N. Salmon, Nova Angliæ Luſtratio, Lond.
»* deveral gold Coins of the ſame kind, and 1728, p. 387, who thinks them coins belong-
* uſo a rough Ruby were found not long ago ing to the ancient Saxons,
* 1n the Ie of Shepey.” Letter from Smart a See Moreton's Northamptonſhire, p. 500.
Letheullier, Eſq; Walker in Camden, p. cxiv.—See Mr. Wiſe's
* By Cornwall here, as oftentimes elſewhere, learned account of the Bodleian cabinet.
| mean all that anciently went by that name, b Camden. Plot's Oxfordſhire, Chap. X.
v7, the South and Veſtern parts of Devon- The learned Editor of Camden. Notes, ibid.
lire, as well as what is Weſt of the Tamar, p. 774. The late Mr. Ed, Lhuyd. ibid.
Ar. Jobert, p. 3. tranſlated by Gale.


1 & Utuntur


— — — —


— .


— —


266


Ceſar ex-
amined.


SF TRS GOLD ois


% Utuntur aut æreo, aut taleis ferreis ad certum pondus exam;.
e natis pro Nummo ©,” The Britans, ſays he, uſe either Brac
Money, or iron tallies inſtead of Money. This is the plain gram-
matical ſenſe of Ceſar's words, and in Plantin's Edit. p. 87. the
words run thus, © Utuntur autem num æreo, aut annulis ferreis
„Ec. pro nummo; by which it is plain that, according to
Ceſar, the Britans had the knowledge of money, and that, in the
place he is there ſpeaking of, they had Braſs Money ; from whence
it may be inferred, that the reaſon why they had not Gold and
Silver Money there, as well as Braſs, was not becauſe they were
ignorant of the ule of it (for the uſe of Gold and Silver Money
is much more obvious and convenient, for exchange or
purchaſe, than that of Braſs, but becauſe doubtleſs they had
none of theſe Metals, and therefore could not coin Money of
them, but were obliged to be contented with coining the little Bras
they had, and an endeavour to remedy the ſcarceneſs of Bra%
Coin, by Iron Tallies, or Rings, of a certain weight. Cefar is evi-


dently here ſpeaking of the maritime parts d, in which they might


well uſe iron inftead of money; for iron was found, fays he
(p. 92.), in maritimis,” on the ſea coaſts: in the fame place
they had braſs money, but their braſs was imported, ©& ere utuntur
ce jimportatoe; which argues, that the maritime coaſts had no
braſs out of their own lands. Neither had they gold or ſilver in
theſe parts, which is, doubtleſs, the reaſon that they did not coin
any; for of the four Kings, whom Ceſar mentions in Kent, viz.
Cingetorix, Carnilius, Taximagulus, and Segonax, we find not one
Coin which has any part of their name upon it ; but this will by
no means infer, but that the other petty kingdoms of the iſland,
where theſe metals were, might have had gold and filver Coins
among them, although the other States, who had no ſuch native
treaſures, might be without them; and that the other parts of this
kingdom really had gold and ſilver Coins, we ſhall ſoon find ſome
very ſtrong arguments to believe, It is plain, therefore, that
what Ceſar ſays, related only to that little part of Britain, in which
he paſſed the ſhort time he ſtayed in this Iſland ; all his whole
account ſhews, that he pretended not to give any deſcriptien of
thoſe inland parts. which were at a diſtance from the ſeat of
action; let us add to this, that if the Kentiſh men had any gold
Coin or Treaſure, they certainly took all the care imaginable to


© Cef. Comm. Lib. V. Janſ. Edit. p. 92. the account of the maritime parts, till he _
' 4 As appears by the whole paſſage : ** Britan- down to 7:7: ; then he palles on to the r.
% niæ pars interior ab iis incolitur quos natos in parts: „ Naſcitur ibi plumbum album in me *


„ Inſula ipſa memoria proditum dicunt; Mariti- ** terraneis regionibus, &c.“
*© ma pars ab iis, &c.” And then he goes on with © Cel. Ibid,


conceal


* _— _——— — w+ „r Fay


12


TW 5D _ SF 5D - a 0”


of G2” has "©


FOUND AT KARNBRE, CORNWALL. 267


-onceal it from Ceſar. But ſuppoſing that Cefar had poſitively
{id that the Britans had no gold Coins, or Money, among them;

if, by evidences unknown to him, and fince his time diſcovered,

it ſhould appear extremely probable at leaſt (if not as certain as

things at this diſtance can be made\, that they really had ſuch
Coins; his authority muſt give way, he muſt be acknowledged

to have been mil-informeg ; and the greater degree of probability

muſt determine our judgment,

There are ſeveral Coins preſerved and publiſhed in Camden, and $ECT. Iv.
Speed, which have been thought to bear the names of Britiſh Camden,
Princes ; and I may add, that they have other evidences of their 1
belonging to this Iſland. Let us examine them. amined.

The firſt Coin produced by Speed (p. 29), is that of cou. the
bability, to be the Coin of Comius, King of the Atrebatii in
Pritain,, companion to Julius Ceſar in his invaſion. I will onl
make one remark upon the Reverſe, which is, that the horſe here
is of much too great a deſign to be among the firſt Eſſays of the
Britiſh Coining, conſequently the Britans muſt have had Coins
before this, or they could never have made this horſe and rider ſo


bold and ſhapely. |


The next Coin in Speed, is that of Caſſibelan, which he read
cas; but Moreton in his Northamptonſhire (p. 500) reads it
cov; the occaſion of which difference is this: Moreton began
with the S, goes on to the C, miſtakes the Wheel (one of the
Britiſh Symbols) over the horſe's head for an O, and takes the A
without its croſs-ſtroke (as it was anciently written) for a V; ſo
that Moreton's objection to Speed's reading proceeds from his own
miſtakes, and he concludes too haſtily, * That the Britans had not
the art of coining till they learned it of the Romans, and that
they did not mark their Coins with the names of Princes till the
time of Cunobelin.” Speed's reading then remaining unim-
peached, we have here a Coin of Caſlibelan, who was General of
the whole war againſt Julius Ceſar, and cannot be ſuppoſed to
have learnt any art from the Romans, having been engaged conti-
nually in all the alarms of war from the time they landed to their
better turned than in our Karnbre Coins, and therefore later; for
Arts and Sciences muſt have time to ripen in ſuch retired and un-
cultivated places as Britain ; their beginnings will be rude, and the
progreſs of every art towards perfection will be flow and gradual,
eſpecially where no Siſter Arts have been practiſed, and therefore


g t muſt be remembered, that one fide of a Medal is called the Head, whether it has a face
dit, or not; and the other fide is called the Reverſe.


cannot


268


OF THE GOL D- COINS


cannot lend their helping hand to forward and cheriſh that which
is newly introduced. The Reverſe of this Coin confirms the fore-
going obſervation, the ornaments of it being a kind of ſcroll-work,
intermixed with balls more uniformly diſpoſed, and the whole
better digeſted, than our Coins, and therefore later.

Cunobelin's Coin is later ſtill than that of Caſſibelan, and mor
elegant; the Horſe has ſhape and ſpirit; and there is ſomethicte
Roman in the turn of the head g; but there is great difference in
the countenance of this King's coins; ſome are rude and of coarſe
deſign, as N' IV. V. VI. VII. XI. which may therefore be ſafely

ronounced to be coined in his firſt years, either before his intimacy
with the Romans, or before he could get the Artiſts into the ready
and maſterly way of deſigning; ſo that it may be inferred, from the
coins of Cunobelin, that he did not learn, or firſt bring, the art of
coining from the Romans, but that, having acquired ſome
knowledge that way, he greatly improved this art. Even this
King's Coins have been diſputed, and by ſome inſinuated not to
belong to the Britiſh King of this name, though his name be at
full length upon four coins in Camd. Tab. I. and upon three of
the ſame in Speed, ſo that theſe ſcruples are apparently without
foundation. |

The gold coin attributed to Caractacus by Camden and Speed,
has the Spice well placed on the Reverſe; and in the Head the horſe
in full ſpeed is as well deſigned as poſſible, and therefore ſeems a
cloſe imitation of the Roman manner. |

That of Venutius has nothing Britiſh in it, but that the curls of
the hair are formed of many contiguous circular rings ſtudded with
balls, which is indeed in the Britiſh ſtyle b. ;

Though the coins of Cunobelin were at laſt fo greatly improved
by approaching to the Roman manner; yet theſe improvements
ſeem to have been confined to his own dominions, for the coin of
Boadicea, Queen of Verolamium (if it be of her), has nothing
Roman in it, but the letters zxopva in the Head; the Reverſe
is of the ſame ſtyle as thoſe found at Karn-bre'.

formed by eight detached ſtuds! ; but the Horſe is too good to be
ancient.

The next coin attributed by Speed to Galgacus®, but by Mr.
Walker n to Cartiſmandua, has nothing of our coins, but the Wheel
formed like a large Ring under the Horſe o.


s dee No 8, 9, 10. in Speed; and 12, 13. p. 32. I As in N* XX, and XXII.

h See the mane of the Horſe in N XVIII. m Page 35. N* 18.
XVI. XIX. XXI. Venutius in Camden, xiv. a Camden, p. exv. ; :
Tab. I. in Speed, xv. p. *. Other Britiſh Coins may be ſeen in Camden


i Camd. Tab. I. N* g. Speed Ne 16. p. 34. and Speed, but theſe may be ſuffcicnt for out
As


* Speed No 17. —Camd. ib. Ne 25. purpoſe.


1


nA


GP Ys


0 Gold, and zool. in Silver, - beſides other
2 2 2 denied


FOUND AT KARN-BRE, CORNWALL.


As to the word Tasc1a found on many of the coins above-
mentioned, whether it ſignifies the Taxation, or Tribute-Monev as
Mr. Camden believed, or whether ſuch coins of Tribute were ever
vſed (coins being the enſigns of liberty and power, not of ſlavery},


as other learned men doubt, I do not here enquire, there being no


ſuch word on our Corniſh coins*, Let it ſuffice that here are ſeveral
forts of coins produced; we muſt next ſee whether we have not


ſufficient grounds to think them Britiſh, yet ſeveral of them not the


oldeſt of our Britiſh coins, and ſo trace up the art of coining
among the Britans to its firſt ſimplicity, where we may poſſibly
and reaſons to place many of the coins of Karn-bre.


All theſe Coins from Camden and Speed are ſound in ser. v.
Britain in ſeveral places, many in number, and the very ſame in no That theſe


other country P. Their Inſcriptions, and ſeveral others which might Hag“


here be mentioned, have either the firſt or more ſyllables of the
names of Britiſh princes, cities, or people, nay Cunobelin the whole
name; why then ſhould they not be Britiſh4? If there be honey
enough in our own hive, what need have we to fly abroad, and range
into the names of neighbouring countries and kings, to find out
reſemblances in ſound, which are not near ſo exact as what we find
at home ? Before we deprive our own country of the honour of
coining the money found here, one would think it but reaſonable
that there ſhould be produced from foreign countries, ſamples of the
rery Coins we find in Britain; and in greater number, as being
doubtleſs more in plenty where they were ſtruck, than any where
elſe; but there is not one inſtance of any number of Coins found
abroad, which are of the ſame kind as what we find here; although
with regard to Roman Coins (which were not coined by little
particular States, as the Britiſh muſt have been) there is nothing
more common. It is very wonderful that all the Gauliſh Coins
(for inſtance), correſpondent to ours in metal and workmanſhip,
ſhould be deſtroyed, and not one appear, or be dug up in Gaul;
whereas in Britain they are numerous, which makes the learned
Mr. Wiſe, though dubious at other times, conclude very juſtly, that
no country has a better title to the coining them than Britain”,
But, I do not know how it comes to paſs, it is the unhappy faſhion
of our age to derive every thing curious and valuable, whether the
works of art or nature, from foreign countries; as if Providence had


© Of the word Tasc1a, ſee the learned Mr. things. © And in Domeſday, particularly, we
Pepge's Coins of Cunobelin, p. 21. publiſhed in * find Gold in Ingotts, contradiſtinguiſhed from
1700. | « Gold Coin, viz. Libras auri ad penfum.—

? Sec Camden, p. 110. 4 Libras ad numerum.—Muſt we ſuppoſe that

4 It is held by ſome that there were no © all this Coin was of Bizants, or other forcigu
Gold Coins coined in England till Edward III. „Coin?“ Letter to the Author, 1753, from the
but this is probably a miſtake, for “ in the Saxon Rev. Dr. Lyttelton, now Biſhop of Carliile.
and brit Norman times, vaſt ſums were paid r Maximo ſane numero in hac Inſula eruvn -
in Geld.“ The annual tribute to be paid by © tur, aded ut nulla regio poſſeſſionis jure magis
the W<lh and Cornith to Athelſtan, was 201. © eos (viz. nummos) {bi vindicet.“ p. 220,


fa


270


WA
bs


OF THE GOLD COINS


denied us both the genius and materials of art, and ſent us every thin


that was precious, comfortable, and convenient, at ſecond hand only,
and, as it were, by accident, from the charity of our neighbour, ©

That the Britans had both Gold and Silver in their own country
is plain from Strabo and Tacitus ; and it is obſervedt, fo lately
Camden's time, that Cornwall produced both theſe precious
metals u; and this is confirmed by the reſervation of both thoſe
metals to the Duke of Cornwall, in his grants to the Tinners. Gold
diſcovered here I have ſeen? found among Tin grains in the
Pariſh of Creed, near Granpont, in the year 1753; and both that,
and native Silver, the produce of a Corniſh Mine in the Pariſh of
St. Juſt, I have now in my keeping; and it muſt be allowed, that
people, who have materials ready at hand, will take the firſt hint of
anſwering their neceſſities therewith. That the inhabitants of Kent,
and the adjoining countries, had braſs money, Ceſar plainly alerts,
as we have ſeen before; and when one part of the Ifland had
experienced the uſe of braſs money, and knew the art of coining
it, the neighbouring States muſt have had very little communi-
cation one with the other, or been very void of underſtanding, if
they did not perceive the equal and ſuperiour convenience of Gold
and Silver money, and for their own ſakes procure it to be coined
wherever they enjoyed the happineſs of proper materials. Farther,
that the Britans had and uſed money coined at their own mint is
really plain, becauſe the Roman Emperors publiſhed a ſevere edi
to ſuppreſs all ſuch Coins, and ſo forbid the uſe of any money in
Britain, but what was ſtamped with the image of a Ceſar V.

If it be infinuated that the Gauls brought over this money to
traffick withal; this is a circumſtance which wants to be proved,
nay wants probability, for it could not have eſcaped Ceſar, and the
Gold Coins muſt have been in greater plenty on the maritime coaſts
where he was, than in the inland parts, the merchants from Gaul
coming to the ſea- ports and coaſt of Britain, and having nothing to


do with the other parts of the ifland x; but Ceſar ſays, they uſed”


Aurum et argentum fert Britannia.” Strabo,
Lib. IV.“ Fert Britannia aurum et argen-
tum et alia metalla, pretium Victoriæ.“ Tacit.
vit. Agric, cap. 12.

t The Gold Mine of Cunobeline (being
« loſt) in Eſſex was diſcovered again, temp.
Hen. IV. as appears by the King's letters of
«© Mandamus, bearing date the 13th of May,
* An. 2. Rot. 34. directed to Walter Fitz Walter
concerning it, and ſince that loſt again.” Plot's
Oxf. from Sir John Pettus's Tradit.. Regal,
cap. ix, and xiii, Gold and Silver Mines alſo in
Devon; ſee the Calendars of the Rolls in the
Tower, verbo MINERA et MINERATORRS, —
And that the Romans did woak in our Mines, ſee
Brit, Baconica, p. 10. Pl. ibid, See more of


Gold found in Cornwall, Nat. Hiſt. of Corn.
Chap. xix. p. 213.

u Nec ſtannum vero his ſolùm reperitur, ſed
bc una etiam aurum & argentum.“ Camden, in
Cornwallia. :

r See Nat, Hiſt, of Cornwall, chap. xi.
p- 213.

E Cautum fuit Edicto Romanorum Impe-
© ratorum ſevero ne quis in Britannia nummis
e uteretur niſi ſignatis imaginibus Czfarum.”
Leland, quoted by Sheringham, p. 391. ©

x << Neque enim temere præter mercatores il
& adit quiſquam, neque iis, ipſis quidquam
„ præter oram maritimam atque eas regione-
<« quæ ſunt contra Galliam notum eſt,” C.
Lib. IV. p. 76.

are


_— > a 23 qa


ww DDAh Lain. at. W tc as MLS


— — —, 988. — 2 2


— „ ww


FOUND AT KARN-BRE, CORNWALL.


ereo nummo, and takes no notice of any, gold coin in theſe parts,
which I think may make us reaſonably inter, that the Gauls did not
bring over any Gold Coins for merchandize; much leſs ſtill can it
be imagined that, if the Gauls did bring over ſuch Coins, we ſhould
princes and cities. If any of the ſame Impreſſion and Legend with
ours, found in many parts of Gaul, can be produced (which at

reſent is far from the caſe), then let it be diſputed whether the
Gauls had theſe Coins from us, or we from them, both fides
ſtanding upon even ground; but till then, it is a piece of great
partiality to foreigners, to deny the origin of theſe Coins to our own
country; and I am ſurprized to find my countrymen ſo fluctuating,
and indifferent, not to ſay careleſs, which way the beam may fall,
in a point which concerns ſo much the Hiſtory of Medals in general,
and affects the honour of their own country in particular.


But it will be ſaid, that there is a near reſemblance between the sher. vi.


27


ancient Gallick Coins and thoſe found in Britain: it is true, there Retem-


is a reſemblance in a few particulars betwixt ſome of the Gauliſh


Coins and ſome of the Britiſh ; and this is all that can be alledged, Gaul


coins ex-


for it is not ſo in all, nor in the greateſt part. The reader will be amined and
convinced of this truth, by cafting his eye over the Gauliſh Coins of cee
Plate LIT. Tom. III. p. 88. of Montfaucon's Antiq. where he


will find the reſemblance they bear to ours of Karn-bre to be as
follows :

There are in that table forty-ſeven different coins; upon the
Reverſe of eighteen may be difcovered the horſe, a ſymbol not
peculiar to Gaul and Britain, but adopted by many other countrics,
as the moſt ſpirited and uſeful of all the brute creation. In the
deſigning part, there are theſe reſemblances; ſome of the horſes
have wheels below, or above, or in both places; and beads, pearls,
or balls, and rings, or rather pierced Dz/cus's, above and round
them; but the horſes are all of another and better ſhape than ours,
and there are but two, which are N' 4. and N' 16. which are near
the ſtyle of the Corniſh Coins, and theſe have the manes of the
horſes made of a ſtring of beads, as in N* 16. and 19. before
produced. This is the reſemblance of the Reverſe; but when


we come to the other fide, that is, to the Head. part (lately called


by ſome the Obverſe), they are entirely different, ſome helmeted,


collar ornament ; therefore, that there is ſome reſemblance in the


charge of the Reverſe is true, but when the coins are brought to the
teſt, and the particulars in which they agree ſeparately examined,
there are ſo few that have any reſemblance in the Reverſe, and even
theſe few have their Head fo entirely different, that there is not the

| leaſt


I


blance they
bear to


272


th OF THE GOLD COINS

leaſt grounds to ſuſpect from this ſmall reſemblance that our Coins
were coined in Gaul. If the Gauls indeed had one peculiar manner or
ſtyle in their Coins, which they invariably ſtuck to, as was the way
of the Greeks and Romans, then the criterions would be deciſive
and indiſputable, and we ſhould know Coins to be Gauliſh, whether
this cannot be pretended ; nothing is more vague than their ſtyle,
if it deſerves that name; their Coins are as different from one
another, as they are from thoſe of other nations, and here I cannot
but obſerve, that many of the Coins found in Gaul may with much
more reaſon be imputed to foreign nations : than ours found in
Britain; for the Gauls being on the Continent, and continually
almoſt at war with the Barbarians round them, and war not to he
carried on without money, where the uſe of money was known
it is not at all unlikely that the Coins of the many German and
Spaniſh nations lying round Gaul ſhould be more frequently
brought in, dropt, and diſperſed there, than in an iſland, not ſubject
to ſuch invaſions,

But ſuppoſing that there was a greater reſemblance betwixt the
Coins found in Britain, and thoſe found in Gaul ; it was not to be
wondered at, nor would it prove the Coins found here to be Gauliſh,
The Gauls and Britains were both uncultivated nations, and being


of one Origin, one Language, one Religion, and Climate, divided
only by a narrow branch of the ſea; there were frequent inter-


courſes (eſpecially betwixt the inhabitants of the oppoſite ſea-coaſts);
inſomuch, that their mapners?, cuſtoms, and buildings, were alike,
Why then ſhould not their Coins have ſome reſemblance? but this
reſemblance will not prove the Coins to belong to either nation
ſeparately and excluſive of the other; for * the Coins of the
« Anglo-ſaxons are not unlike thoſe of the firſt race of the Kings
& of the Franks, who ſettled in Gaul near the time that the Saxons
&« invaded Britain*.” The Saxons continued their ancient ſtyle;
the Franks, doubtleſs, did the like, and the reſemblance continues.
Are the Coins therefore the ſame? did not the Saxons as well as the
Franks coin for themſelves ? I”

” Farther, it is not improbable, but the art of coining might be
tranſmitted to the Britans through the hands of the Gauls, which
might partly contribute to the reſemblance abovementioned ; and
we may go one ſtep farther yet, and with great probability con-
jecture, that, though the Gauls were nearer to the ſeats of arts, and
therefore had this art of coining before the Britans ; yet, that they


Neque multum a Gallica differunt conſue- * conſimilia.” Ibid. p. 92.
«© tudine” (viz. Cantii incolæ) Cæſ. Lib. V. * Walker in Camd. p. cxiv.
p- 93. ** creberrimaque ædificia fere Gallicis
could


ll — — dds tc" Mio ds Wd a6 «@ i 1


H % ft K yt r @n_ r ft ' oc FS e oa wan eas ea EL


—


0
t
ü


FOUND AT KARN- BRE, CORNWALL,


could not have had coining among them long, before the mutual
reſort of the Gauls into Britain, and the Britans into Gaul, on
account of traffick, aid, alliance, and religion, muſt have com-
municated it to this Iſland, where there being Gold, Silver, and
Braſs, ready prepared, there was nothing wanting, but the hints to
improve and make uſe of what nature had ſent. It is alſo to be
remembered, that ſome Princes, as Divitiacus and Comius (and
others, probably, whoſe names are not recorded) were Kings of part
of Britain, and part of Gaul, at the ſame time.

All theſe circumſtances conſidered, can it be wondered at, that
the Britiſh and Gauliſh Coins ſhould be ſomewhat alike, and
equally rude and barbarous in the beginning ; but about the time of
Julius Ceſar more improved, and the repreſentations of men,
animals, fruits, and the ſymbols of War and Religion, more
naturally, or rather more artfully, performed ?

The Coins of Countries then may reſemble one another (as we
know the Greek and Roman do, and thoſe of other neighbouring,
emulous nations) and yet be coined in different countries; and as
there can be very good reaſons given why our Coins ſhould reſemble
thoſe of Gaul, there is no reaſon ſrom this reſemblance to conclude,
that our Coins (I mean thoſe found here) were coined in Gaul, any
more than that the Roman were coined in Greece, or the Grecian
at Rome. In ſhort, let it not ſurprize the Reader to find, that the
ancient Britans are here aſſerted to have had the art of coining ; for
by N* XXII. it appears, that they had the art of counterfeiting
Coins too; and the very Coin which is here counterfeited by being
plated over, is found in Oxfordſhire in Gold, and publiſhed by
Dr. Plot a, which is another diſcovery that may ſerve to ſtrengthen
what the learned Camden juſtly ſuppoſes, viz. that the ancient


Britans had more arts among them than we ſeem willing to allow
them.


To ſettle the age of our Karn-bre Coins is perhaps impoſſible, gory.
but that the Britans had, and uſed Coins of their own making, and of the Age


before, p. 270. for which prohibition there could be no reaſon, if
the Britans did not coin in a different manner from the Romans ;
therefore, this different manner of ſtamping their money, it is not
ſo likely they ſhould learn of the Romans, as that they had it before
the Romans came; for after the Conqueſt, the Romans, we find,
inſiſted upon the head of Ceſar's being upon all their Coins;
therefore, that theſe Karn-bre Coins are prior to the Roman


2 Plate XV. p. 335. Perhaps the Britans that ſuch baſe Coins came into uſe among the
uſed this Coin when there was a ſcarcity of Romans, during the tempeſtuous Triumvirate of
Gold, or the State was diſtreſſed, Certain it is, Auguſtus, &c. Fobert's Medals, p. 14.


4A invaſion


1


that the Romans forbad the uſe of Britiſh money, has been obſerved 1


274


invaſion is extreamly probable. Further, both the Gauls and Bri.


.


tans being invaded nearly at the ſame time, and by the ſame Ge-
neral, the firſt conquered, the other frightened, both of them
would either have had ſome ſymbol of their ſubjection in their
Coins, if they had been ſtruck under the direction of their Con-
querors, or would have borrowed at leaſt ſomewhat more of the
Roman elegance than what we find in the Corniſh Coins, The


Age, confirm this conjecture, there being ſomething of the Ro-


man air and regularity in all of them, but in ours nothing at all


of that kind.


Coins before-mentioned, and may contribute to ſettle ſome parti-


culars relating to the age of theſe Corniſh Coins; which is, that


more of the beginning and infancy of the art.


The ſeries, in which money was firſt introduced, and arrived
by degrees to the Grecian and Roman perfection, ſeems to be
this: firſt they weighed pieces of metal, then found out the way
of impreſſing them differently, according to their weights, and
the quantity and ſort of cattle they would be taken for in exchange


fo as to fave them the trouble of weighing Þ; then they impreſſed


Symbols of the Religion, War, Arts, and Philoſophy, peculiar to
their country; then came in the heads of Demi-gods, and Princes;
and then Inſcriptions, more certainly to determine the Age, Works,
and Perſons, ſignified by the Coins. |

As ſoon as the Gauls, or any other barbarous nations, ſaw the


great uſe of money, as it was managed among the more poliſhed


parts of mankind; it 1s natural to imagine, that people of au-


thority would endeavour to introduce the ſame convenient way of


exchange among their own people; but, being haſty and impe-


tuous to have the thing done, were not over-nice in their choice |


of Artiſts for the doing it. What firſt and principally firuck


them, was the uſe of money; to have the money coined with


beauty and expreſſion, was what had no place in their firſt con-
ceptions, nor entered at all into their deſign ; hence came the firſt
Coins ſo rude and inexpreſſive; becauſe the art, though at full
maturity among the Greeks and Romans, was forced to paſs through |
a ſecond infancy among the Gauls, and like the Gold that was calt }


b The firſt Money uſed in Rome was of plain ſtamped with an Image of an Ox, a Sheer.
Copper, without any impreſſion, till the time of a Hog, whence it began to be called pecusa n


Servius Tullius, who cauſed them firſt to be pecude. Pliny,—Jobert's Medals, Engl. p. 35.


into


#
FOUND AT KARNBRE, CORNWALFE. 255
into the fire, could not come out a better molten calf than the

bends, which were employed, were able to mold and faſhion it.

The money, therefore, coined at firſt among the Gauls and Bri-

ans, could not but partake of the barbarity and ignorance of the

times in which it firft came into uſe; and the figures muſt have


Coins. Of this firſt kind of money are probably Laminæ ferreæ of

which Ceſar ſpeaks, Comment. of the Gall. War, Lib. V. and of

which Mr. Ed. Lhwyd, in his Travels through Cornwall, writes

in the following manner, ſending at the ſame time the out lines of

of the pieces he found to Tho. Tonkin, Eſq; by letter dated at
Falmouth, Nov. 29, 1700. © The fifth and fixth figures” (Pl.

XXIV. Fig. I. and 2. p. 287.) © are two iron plates of that form

« and fize, whereof ſeveral horſe-loads were found about fix years

« ſince. Qu. Whether theſe may not be the Britiſh money men-

« ttoned by Ceſar in theſe words, Mummo utuntur pardo et areo,

« aut ferreis laminise pro nummo. On which Mr. Tonkin, MS. B.

p. 193. remarks: I am apt to believe that Mr. Lhwyd rightly

« concludes, that this was the Britiſh money mentioned by Ceſar.“
And then adds,“ This preſent year 1730, as they were pulling
« down the great Tower and ſome very old buildings at Boconnock,
the ſeat of the late Lord Mohun, in Cornwall, about a peck
« of the ſame ſort, but of a larger Hze” (Pl. XXIV. Fig. 3. and
4. p. 287.) © were found in part of an old wall there.” Thoſe
or Legends, being a part of elegance and accuracy, which at firſt
were not at all attended to; but which after-ages conſtantly
practiſed, conſulting at once the conveniency of their commerce,
and the glory of their country.

If this inference is right, our Coins at Karn-bre, and the like
fort in Plot, and Camden's Engliſh Edition, are elder than the in-
elder than the Roman Invaſion.

There are many parts of our Britiſh Coins, which, though scr. vn.
faithfully enough copied by Engravers, are yet wrongly placed in Cf or
the Plates; becauſe, indeed, they did not know what they had ber: and
copied. This is the reaſon that we find the Diadem ſometimes bol.
horizontal d, at other times perpendicular ©; whereas we all know,


In other editions called, “ Taleis ferreis ad © the text, upon the authority of theſe manu-
* certum pondus examinatis, and the late * ſcripts, and the Greek 'Tranſlation. I believe
(earned Mr. Moyle obſerved that Dr. Davis, „ it to be the true Reading.” Moyle's Works,
in his notes (viz. on the Commentaries), Vol. I. p. 171. . Fg

r with Lipfius, judges Annulis ferreis to d Plot, Oxf. Ne 21. p. 335.
de the true Reading; and Dr. Clarke, © Wiſe, Ne 1. .

An his Edition of Ceſar, has admitted it into


that


276 OF THE GOLD CQINS


that this ſhould riſe ſloping from the ear to the forehead. In Mont.
faucon's Plate, N* 16. the horſe is laid on his back with his legs
uppermoſt; and in N' 36. (ibid.) the horſe's body is perpendicu.
lar, and fo is the line of the Exergue; which ſame fault is com.
mitted in placing the Reverſe of Plot's N' 21. p. 335. plain eri.
dences, that the Engraver did not underſtand the figure, though
he drew the ſize and ſhape, not knowing what animal it was, or
whether an animal or not: and whoever copied the fine Gold
Coin in Camden's laſt Edit. p. 833. N' 21. (of the ſame Yge with
ſome of thoſe at Karnbre), moſt certainly did not know what figure
he had before him; and, therefore, it is no wonder that the learned
Editor, depending on his Engraver, ſhould place the Horſe upon
his back. |
There is one thing more neceſſary to be obſerved, in order to
place theſe Coins with propriety, which is, that ſeveral of our
Karn-bre Coins have not the horſe on the Reverſe (as N' VIII. IX,
X. XI.), but inſtead thereof, have certain members and ſymbols
adjuſted together, in ſuch a manner, as to imitate the ſhape of a
horſe, and become, when joined together, the emblem, rather
than the figure of that creature, which the firſt Engraver knew
no better how to deſign. Theſe ſeveral Symbols are not to be
explained but by comparing the Coins, in which we find the fame
parts inſerted in the compoſition of an intire figure, and others in
which the ſame parts are detached and unconnected. |
The Legs of The latter muſt derive their light from the former. For exam-
he Hort ple. In No VIII. you find three of the figures marked in the
Table of Symbols f N' x. In N' IX. there are four of the ſame
Symbols; in N' X. two; N' XI. four. What ſhould be the intent
of placing ſuch figures, in ſuch numbers on theſe Reverſes ?
Why, in N* XVIII. and XIX. we find the legs of the horſe made
in this unnatural faſhion; and it is obſervable, that where the
horſe is not, there theſe legs (the moſt uſeful parts of this
creature) are placed. They are four in number in N' IX. and XI.
and would have been alſo in the ſame number and place in N' VIII.
and X. (for, by the Weight and Symbols, theſe four muſt have been
Coins of the ſame ſort, time and value), but the mold in ſtriking
theſe latter was miſplaced 8. 1
They are placed two and two, with a ball or wheel between
them, as in the Coins which have horſes intire. Between them
the Half moon (of which by and by) dips his convex part, ſome-
thing in the manner of the horſe's barrel, above which another


— — — —— — —
— 3 ͤ — — > — —


f Plate XXIII. XXII. where the Horſe is intire; theſe laſt

* Theſe parts of the Horſe (viz. III.) are mentioned Coins therefore are next in antiquity
but very little better placed in Coins XVII. and to Ne XI.

h | _  Creſcent-


FOUND AT KARN-BRE, CORNWALL: 277


Creſcent-like bunch forms the back; a round ball turns to ſhape
the buttock, and on the fore part, a thick handle of a Javelin ſlopes
upwards from the breaſt, to form the neck and creſt of the horſe.
In Coin XI. we find theſe Symbols in full number (1. e. four) very
diſtin, and as juſtly placed as the Engraver's ſkill directed.
When theſe are placed double, as in Coin XVII, they ſeem intended
to denote there being two horſes a-breaſt, as was the ancient cuſtom
of drawing the fighting chariots. Two little figures of this ſhape
are alſo placed in the later Coins, viz. N* XXIII. and XVIII. to
form the upper and under jaw of the horſe's head. When therefore
ſuch figures occur in Britiſh Coins, we need but refer to theſe of
Karn-brè; and we find immediately, that they were intended for
ſome parts of a horſe.
Round the horſe's neck of N' XII. there is a Garland; or The Car.
Bracelet, which in N* XIX. is alfo plainly to be diſcovered. .
There is uſually a circular figure under the belly of the horſe; ThewWheel,
which in ſome is a diſtinct Wheel, as in Coins V. VI. XII. XIX. Far br
XX. XXII. XXIII. and therefore in the reſt, where this figure is Ny. 9.
leſs diſtinct, it muſt be deemed an aim at, or rude imitation of, the
ſame thing.
'The Wheel is to denote the Chariot to which the Horſe belonged. :
The learned Walker ſays, © that the Wheel under the horſe,
« amongſt the Romans, intimated the making of an high way for
« carts, ſo many of which, being in the Roman times made in this
country, well deſerved ſuch a memorial i.“
What the Wheel ſignified among the Romans I ſhall not diſpute;
but it could not be inſerted in the Britiſh Coins (as he ſeems to
imply) for that purpoſe ; for there were no Roman ways made in
Britain till after Claudius's conqueſt, and we find the Wheel
common in Cunobelin's Coins k, and in Caſſibelan's N“ II. ibid.
in N' XVI. XVII. XVIII. and in Plot's XXI; and alſo in the
Corniſh Coins, which from all their characters appear to be older
than the reſt.
The Wheel is uſually placed under the belly of the Horſe, but
is ſometimes found in two places on the fame Coin (as in N“. q.
and 32. of Tab. II. in Camden) one above and one below the
horſe, to denote (as I imagine) the two Wheels of the Eſſeda. One
of theſe Wheels (viz. the upper one in N' g. ibid.) Walker takes to
be the Sun. |
There are many balls, or globules, diſperſed in all the Corniſh Ot ts


mp es FD mu — FF — *#-


AS. a Air. , uh, , %


We *Y 10 n 1 *


O'S WW - - WW... yer


Coins, which are of two ſizes; thoſe of the leaſt kind are, or ſeem, von
1 | | Tab. of
g In the Table of Symbols, No 5. ſame kind. Symbols,
ö Camd. p. cx. and in cxv. ibid. On k See Speed, No VIII. and XIII. Ns.


No 2. and 3. he has an obſervation of the
4 B meerly


278


Rings, or
Plates.
Tab. of
Symbols,
N' 10,


Creſcents.


OF THE GOLD COINS
meerly ornamental, being ſtrung in rows like Beads or Pearls, and
ſerve now and then in a regular figure to form the mane of a horſe
(as in N' XV. XVI. XVII. XX. XXII); the circumference or out-
line of the Wheel (N* XXII. and Mr. Wiſe's Bodleian N“ 2.), or a
kind of Bracelet, or Garland (two of which may be ſeen in one Re-
verſe of the Bodleian N'. 11.) round the neck, or body of the Horſe,

There is another round figure in theſe Coins, which is of the
middle ſize, and is a Ring, or Diſcus, either pierced or emboſſed,
They are larger in N' IX. X. XI. than the Wheel itſelf, a diſpro-
portion owing to the rudeneſs of the art when firſt practiſed. When
theſe are emboſſed, as I find them in a well-preſerved Coin in the
Bodleian Cabinet, I imagine they are to repreſent either the ſhield,
or rather the Lamine, and may ſhew that they had iron plates, as
well as rings, that ſerved inſtead of Money.

In N' XX. ſome of the Balls are plainly pierced ; in N' 12. of
the Bodleian they are plain, and placed where the roundneſs of the
Horſe's body, ſhoulder, and buttock, made them fall in with the
ſhape of the creature; there are others in the Bodleian collection,
and in the Reverſe of Speed's Caſſibelan, but no where more plain
than in Dr. Plot's N' 21. (p. 335. Oxfordſhire) where there are
five near the edge of the Coin, and more, though of a ſmaller ſize,
diſperſed in the Field of the Coin, not only of the Reverſe, but of
the Head. |

Tam perſuaded that the little annular figures will make the learned
Reader eaſily recolle& the annuli ferrei of Ceſark, and as eaſily aſſent
to their being inſerted on purpoſe to repreſent the ancient money
which the Britans had before they coined after the Roman and
Grecian manner; and, perhaps, afterwards too, for a while, when
the Gold, Silver, and Braſs currency fell ſhort of anſwering the
exigences of the State, Theſe Rings are taken notice of by Ceſar,
as made of Iron, adjuſted to a certain weight and ſtandard, and
uſed inſtead of money; and the figures of them on theſe Coins,
where this Symbol is pierced, may confirm the reading of that
paſſage, to be as in Plantin's Edit. (Lib. V. p. 87.) © annulis


ferreis;”” as the emboſſed ones may in ſome meaſure aſſure us, that


they uſed alſo Taleis, or Laminis, as we read it in others. Where
there are many of theſe Symbols, they ſhould ſignify the plenty of
money in the little kingdoms where they were ſtruck.

In many of theſe Karn-bre Coins, viz. VIII. IX. X. XI. XVI.
and in N* XXII. we find a Creſcent, or ſome ſuch figure (N' 3.);


and in the Head of Dr. Plot's (N' 21.) there are three; what


intended to ſignify, is uncertain. We know the Creſcent was


among the moſt honourable badges of the Druid Order ; and from


* Sce before in this Chapter.


the


FOUND AT KARN-BRE, CORNWALL.


the Moon at ſix days old, they regulated the beginning of their
months, years, and ages, every thirtieth year; ſo that the Moon
was of conſtant and eſpecial note among the ancient Britans : but
whether it be really a Creſcent, or not, I do not pretend to decide.
t might poſſibly be intended to repreſent the golden hook with
which their Prieſts with ſo much ſolemnity cut their divine
Miſletoe, or to record the hooks or ſcythes faſtened to the axis of
their chariots of war, for ſuch they had!, and on theſe Coins we
find ſeveral alluſions to this manner of fighting. Which of theſe
ſuppoſitions is moſt likely, let the reader determine as he thinks
beſt, ,


279


There is a remarkable rectilineal figure, which leans obliquely in The $pear.


a line nearly parallel to the creft of the horſe, with which, or its
emblem, it is always combined: it is ſeen in N* V.VI. more uncouth
fill in N' VIII. IX. XI. but very diſtinct in XIII. This I take to
repreſent the ſpear, with which the Britans were ſo dextrous in
fighting from their chariots. In N' VI. it is placed croſs the tree,
out of which the ſhaft was made, and in gratitude perhaps to the
tree, for affording the beſt ſhafts for theſe uſeful arms.


In theſe coins then the principal figure is the horſe ; the wheel why au


emblem of the chariot) conſtantly attends the horſe; the ſpear is


theſe Sym-


bols of, or


viſible in ten of theſe Coins produced, and in N' XXII. the human belonging
figure is plain, pointing forward the ſpear, or javelin, as if advancing = bog


to attack the enemy. In N'. XIII. there are ſome traces of the
ſame kind, and more rude attempts to delineate the ſame in
Ne VIII. IX. X. XI. for the ſpear has the ſame direction in all.

In N' XVII. the charioteer is very apparent—in ſome winged
like a victory—the bridte—and ſomething like a trapping —a
pendant or trailed ſpear, or ſcythe. To what other purpoſe then
are theſe warlike things collected and inſerted in their Coins, but to
ſignify, that the chief glory of the Britans was their ſkill in fighting


from their chariots ?


The Britans (ſays Ceſar, Lib. IV.) have the following manner of


fighting from their chariots ; © firſt they advance through all parts of
their army, and throw their javelins, and having wound themſelves
© in among the troops of horſe, they alight and fight on foot; the
© charioteers retiring a little with their chariots, but poſting them-
* ſelves in ſuch a manner, that if they ſee their maſters preſſed, they
may be able to bring them off: by this means the Britans have
© the agility of Horſe, and the firmneſs of Foot, and by daily exerciſe
* have attained to ſuch ſkill and management, that in a deelivity


; ' * Dimicant (ſcil. Britanni) non equitatu “ falcatis axibus utuntur,” Pompon. Mela,
f modo aut pedite, verum et Bigis et Curribus Lib. III. cap. viii.
Gallice armati. Covinos vocant, quorum


cc they


280


Of the
Head.


Diadem.
Tab. of
Symbols,
N“. 11.


Claſp.

Tab. of
Symbols
Fig. *


P | |
. tbid, Lib. V. p. 93. © Equites Hoſtium File- © pugnæ pertertitis Noſtris.“ ibid.


OF THE GOLD COINS
e they can govern the horſes, though at full ſpeed, check and turn
them ſhort about, run forward upon the pole, ſtand firm upon the
« yoke, and then withdraw themſelves nimbly into their chariots,”
The Britans being trained to, and excelling all others in this peculiar
manner of fighting (Ceſar himſelf more than once acknowledging
the diſorder into which theſe Efedarii had thrown the Roman
ſoldiers) had nothing more glorious to record in their Coins than
ſuch an artful and efficacious manner of combat ; and no Coins, with
ſuch ſymbols, ſo likely to be of any nation as of Britain. Thence
come the horſe, the wheel, the ſpear or javelin, and the charioteer,
and perhaps the hook with which their chariot was armed. The


Britans were ſo ſenſible of their Glory acquired by Chariot- hghting,


that great Soldiers had an addition made to their names, for being
remarkable in this way of fighting, as the moſt famous Romans had
from the ſeveral places they conquered, the Gauls from their habit,


and the Macedonians from their ſpears. Hence we have thoſe


Britiſh names ending in Rh (which fignifies a fighting Chariot)
as Anau-rhd6d, Cadrh6d, and Med-rhod, as Mr. Rowland juftly


thinks.


In the firſt ſix Karn-bre Coins here exhibited, there is no
appearance of the human Head. In N' VII. and VIII. there are
ſome faint traits of a diadem. In N' IX. the profile of the face, car
and claſp, and outline of the neck is plain, but the diadem, which
was certainly there (as muſt be inferred from N' X. and XI.) i;
effaced, and the Coin has loſt four grains more than N* XI. which
ſhews that it has been ſo much more uſed. In N' X. XI. XIV.
XV. XVI. the diadem is plain and ſtrong. It is formed of leaves,
which have this peculiarity, that they point downwards; whereas,
in the ancient Roman and Grecian Coins, the leaves point upwards.
There is another difference between the diadem in the Karn-bre
Coins, and in the Greek and Roman; for, whereas, in the laſt
mentioned, the fillet or ribband on which the diadem is grounded
or by which it is bound together) makes a very elegant knot
behind the Head, the Britiſh Coins have no ſuch thing, but have i
ſtraight bandage, or rather claſp which croſſes the diadem at right
angles, and was doubtleſs deſigned (like the fillet of the ancients)
to keep the diadem firm in its place, and cloſe to the Head. This
is the meaning of that ſtraight figure croſſing the diadem in N- X.
XI. and XIV. and XVI. of the Karn-bre Coins; but is molt plainly


\ viſible in N* XX. XXIV. and XXV. with a hook or ſcroll at the
end of it, and, but for theſe well-preſerved Coins, would have ſtil


remained uncertain, and unknows.


m e Ordines plerumque perturbant.” Lib. IV. “ dariique acriter prælio cum Equitatu noſtro
83. Perturbatis noſtris novitate pugnæ.“ © in itinere conflixerunt.” — © Novo genci


Abors


FOUND AT KARN-BRE, CORNWALL. 281


Above the diadem, the hair turns off in bold curls, ſometimes in Curledttiir.
one tire or row, as in N X. XI. XIV. XV. but in the larger Coins
in two rows, as N- XVI. and XX".

rg orig neck, in N- XIV, the habit of the prince juſt appears; abi.
in N' XVI. a kind of ſcolloped lace or ornament of embroidery ;
more of which is {till to be ſeen in N* XX. |
In Ne I. II. III. VI. trees are placed in the Head part (as was why diffe-
before obſerved in the deſcription) but there are few if any rings or e
balls: the reaſon ſeems to be this; the riches of the country where e
theſe were coined conſiſted in woods (not in money); and therefore
they took the tree for their ſymbol, as the countrics abounding
in corn took the /þica, and thoſe which had plenty of pearls took
the globules reſembling pearl, and thoſe which had plenty of gold
and money, took the ringlets, or Laming, into their Coins“.
The figure in the Head of N' XII. has been before obſerved to
reſemble the ichnography of a city, and was probably inſerted in
the Coin by the founder, to record the erection of ſome city: for
that the Britans had ſuch cities, 1s very plain from the noble ruins
(containing in circuit about three or four miles), near Wrotteſly, in
the county of Stafford, where (as Dr. Plot thinks, Staffordſh. p. 394.)
the parallel partitions, within the outwall, whoſe foundations are
« ſtill viſible, and repreſent ſtreets running different ways, put it
* out of doubt that it muft have been a city, and that of the
Britans.“ f


CT


WO


© = —


CG HAF. All.


hdd
—


Of the Braſs Celts found at Karn-bre, and elſewhere.


[N the year 1744, in the fide of Karn-bre hill, were dug up
ſeveral hollow inſtruments of braſs, of different ſizes, called Celts,
whoſe ſhape is moſt eaſily apprehended from the drawings of two
of them, exhibited Plate XXIV. Fig. I. and II. with others from
ulterent parts of the kingdom, placed together for the better
Illuſtration of one another. |

With theſe inſtruments were found ſeveral Roman Coins, fix of
which came into my hands; one of anToninvs avs. N' 2.
uncertain. N' 3. Divo CONSTANTIO PIO; Reverſe MEMORIA FELIX.
N* 4. defaced. Ne 5. $EveERVvs ALEXANDER. N“ 6. defaced.


N The Gauls were called Comati, from their o Camden thinks that tribute for woods was
ng lair. "The Britans had probably the ſame paid in ſuch coin, and that tribute-monies had
C.itom, for all uncultivated nations wore long their impreſſion from that deſtination. T he
«1,*5cept the Alani, (Lucian, Toxaris) it was reader will chuſe which opinion he thinks moſt
W dune of their wildneſs. probable.


4 C At


282 |
SECT. I. At preſent let the Celts be the ſubje& of our enquiry, what
and how far them. As they are found here in Cornwall in company with


they are to


be afſiened Roman Coins, one would be apt to imagine that they were gf


to the Ro-
mans.


'Trajan*, or Antonine Pillar, which, if they had been Roman inſtru-


Se THE BRASS CELTS


Roman original. Upon much leſs grounds are they aſſerted to be
Roman by the learned Dr. Plot b, who, finding one of like king
engraved in the Muſeum Moſcardi, immediately concludes all th.
Celts found at the ſeveral places there mentioned fo be Roman
(though no Coins of that nation were found with them), and deter.
mines alſo the Barrows where they were found to have been erected
by that people. | |
Mr. Hearne follows Dr. Plot, in attributing . them to the
Romans: others take them to be Britiſh.
Firſt, then, I do not take them to be purely Roman, foreign, or
of Italian invention and work manſhip.
They are made of Braſs, which the Romans of Italy would not
have done after Julius Ceſar's time, when the ſuperiour hardneſs of
iron was ſo well underſtood by that cultivated people, and ſo eafily
to be had from any of their conquered provinces.
They do not appear in the complete collection of arms on the


ments, they certainly would have done.
There are but very few in the cabinets of the curious in Rome,
Naples, and the other cities of Italy, as I am informed by a gentle-
mans who has examined them with equal penetration and diligence
(and has been ſo kind as to favour me with ſeveral informations
relating to that ſubject), and ** where they occur, they are looked
ce upon, by all the Italian Virtuoſi, as Tranſalpine Antiquities, and
& not to have belonged to their predeceſſors.
In the great diſcoveries which have of late years been made
among the ruins of Herculaneum, where weapons, tools, and utenſils |
for every occurrence in life, have been found, none of theſe
inſtruments have been met with, as far as yet appears.
Spon in his Miſcellanea mentions none of them. They occur |

ce not in the Muſeum Romanum, publiſhed by Monſ. de la Chauſſe,
ce nor in the Muſeum Kercherianum publiſhed by Bonani. In the
ce yoluminous collection of Montfaucon, there are none engraved or
e mentioned.” So far this learned Gentleman.
| Now if theſe inſtruments had been of foreign original, and by |
the Romans introduced into Britain, they would have been frequently
found in Italy, and very numerous in the collections of the curious, }


P Staffordſhire, p. 403. with P. S. Bartoli's notes. ;
q Leland, Vol. I. p. 127. Smart Lethicullicr, Eſq; in his letter on the
r As publiſhed with Ciaconius's, or the Edit, Celts,


and |


FOUND AT KARN BRE, CORNWALL.


and could never have eſcaped the authors above-mentioned, I am
to the Romans, nor uſed by the Roman legions in Italy and the Eaſt;
but that they were probably made and uſed by the provincial Ro-
mans of Britain, and by the Britans themſelves when they had im-
tored the arts under their Roman maſters.

They are found here at Karn-bre, and have been found at Ald-
borough (the ancient Iſurium) in Yorkſhire, in company with many
Roman Coins; the reaſon of which ſeems to be this, when the
Romans had thought fit to admit the natives of their conquered
rovinces into their armies (the very legions themſelves being, at
aſt, occaſionally recruited out of ſuch provinces), it is not to be
doubted but the Britans were allowed to carry the weapons of war,
which they had been trained up to, and were become eaſy and habitual
tothem. And as we do not find theſe weapons of general uſe among
the Eaſtern Romans, we may conclude, that the Romans ſuffered
the Britiſh diſcipline, as to this particular, to prevail here in this
province ; and finding the Britans expert in the uſe of theſe arms,
and the arms really of ſervice againft the Picts, Scots, and rebel-
lious Britans, not only indulged and encouraged the Britans in the
uſe of them, but fell into the uſe of them themſelves. In ſhort,
moſt of them ſeem to me too correct and ſhapely for the Britans be-
fore the Julian conqueſt; and yet the Romans do not appear to
have uſed them beyond the Alps ; I imagine, therefore, that they
were originally of Britiſh, Gauliſh, or Northern, invention and fa-
brick, and afterwards uſed by the provincial Romans, as well as
Britans, Let us conſider, in the next place, that they are frequently
found in all parts of Britain.


Leland (Vol. III. p. 7.) tells us, that a few years before his being


in Cornwall, there were found ſpear-heads, battle-axes, and ſwords Place.where


made of copper, near the Mount *, in the pariſh of St. Hillary,
where, by the ſpear-heads, he certainly meant thoſe which we
from Begerus, &c.) now call Celts u. Camden V ſays, they were
found not long before in Wales, and in Germany. Mr. Thoreſby
gives an account of ſome found in Yorkſhire near Bramham- Moor,
in 1709 *. Several of them have been found in a ſtone quarry in
the ſame county, many of which had Caſes exactly fitted to
them y. In May, 1735, were found above 100 on Eaſterley-
* Moor, twelve Miles N. W. of York, together with ſeveral lumps


A.


According to Camden (Lat. edit. p. 79.) „ any profitable uſe.”


at the foot of the Mount, as they were digging a A Czlo, to engrave; unde Cz1tis, vel Celtis,
or Tia; which gave occaſion to Mr. Carew to guaſi, An engraving tool.
think that they were uſually found in Tin-works I did.
4 8.), where he ſay}, © they were termed, x Leland, Itinerary, Vol. I. p. 17.
by tome, thunder-axes, making ſmall ſhew of ? Mr. Lethieullicr's Letter.


60 of


283


SEC T. II.


found, and


with what.


— — . — —


.
—
*


OF THE BRASS CEL Ts


* of metal, and a quantity of cinders, ſo that no doubt remained
of there having been a forge at that place for making them,”
Mr. Rowland, p. 85. has publiſhed ſome (but all of one figure
neareſt to Fig. I. Plate XXIV.) found near the place where the
Romans made their attack upon the Britans, in the Iſle of Angleſea
under Suetonius. 4

At Danbury in Eſſex, about twenty-two years ſince, ſome of the
ſame kind were found, and at Fifield in the ſame county, in the
year 1749, with a large quantity of metal. for caſting theſe in-
ſtruments, ſeveral of which, with fifty pounds of the meta], were
ſent, by the late Earl Tilney, to the learned gentleman before-
mentioned; part of the Celts, and Metal, he was fo kind as to
favour me with, at the ſame time informing me, that he had ſome


of the ſame inſtruments from Scotland, Wales, New-Foreſt in


Hampſhire, and other places in Britain.

From all which circumſtances it appears that they are ſpread
every where in this iſland, that they were manufactured here, and
of general uſe among the natives. But though thoſe found here
were Britiſh, that is, made and uſed here, yet it muſt not be ima-
vined that they were peculiar to the Britans. Doubtleſs the Gauls
dad the ſame inftruments, their manner of living, fighting, wor-
ſhiping, their arts and learning, being the ſame with thoſe of the
Britans. Neither is it any wonder that they ſhould be found among
Germans, any more than that the Germans ſhould have ſwords,
ſpcars, the tools of arts, and inftruments of common life, as well


as the Britans; the ſame neceſſity of defending themſelves, offend-


SECT, III.


Various


Opinions of


their Uſe.


ing their enemies, and preparing utenſils for their conveniency,
prompting them all to work up ſuch metals as they could get, in
tuch manner as was proportioned to their ſkill, and might beft
anſwer their neceſſities. ;

Various have been the opinions of the learned concerning the
uſe and deſign of theſe inſtruments ; and, if they had not been ad-
vanced by men of learning, it would be ſcarce excuſable to men-
tion ſome of them, much leſs to refute them. 234

Some have taken them for the Heads of walking-ſtaffs, ſome
for Chizels to cut Stone withal, concluding, that ſuch kind of in-
fruments ? muſt have been abſolutely neceſſary in making the great
Roman ways in Britain; ſome fancy them intended to engrave
Letters and Inſcriptions; others as happily have imagined them to
be the Falx with which the Druids cut the ſacred Miſletoe. But
all theſe ſuppoſitions ſeem to me repugnant, either to their ſhape,


z See Leland, Vol. I. p. 132.


or


FOUND AT KARNBRE, CORNWALL.
or to the metal they are made of, to their ſize or ſtructure, or


to all theſe equally.

They are found in too many places a, and too many in number,
to have been walking- ſtaffs b; for, if we can ſuppoſe, that perſons
of diſtinction had ſuch, the generality cannot be imagined to have
run into ſuch an expence.

The ſocket is not large enough ©, nor in a proper direction, for
that of an Ax, nor the inſtrument weighty enough, or properly
ſhaped, to do any execution on the victim d.

The Socket 1s, it muſt be owned, more like that of a Chizel ©;
but there are unſurmountable difficulties attending this hypotheſis,
which ariſe from the other properties. For firſt and principally, it
muſt be objected, that the metal of which theſe inſtruments gre
formed is very improper for an edge-tool (for cutting Stones eſpe-
cially, much too ſoft and brittle), being a compoſition of Copper
and Tin, or Lead. If they had been uſed in cutting Stone, they
muſt have been ſcratched, and furrowed on cvery fide, by the hard
and rough Stone ; but the many I have ſeen have no marks of the
kaft application to ſuch an uſe; the edges of them are in ſome parts
jagged, in ſome blunted, in others broke; but the fades, from the
edge upwards, are ſtill as ſmooth as at firſt from the mold, where
the ruſt has not corroded them. Round the brim of the Socket is
ſome imboſs d work, more or leſs, which is much too delicate J
imagine for Maſons Chizels. To moſt of theſe inſtruments there is
a Loop, or Ring, which is to be found in no Chizels in the world.
Some are fo thin in the blade, that they would bear no force, nor
make any expedition in works of Stone; and they are all ſo un-
equal to the laborious works of Maſonry, that, to ſay no more of
it, we may ſafely conclude, that the Roman ways, from one end
of Britain to the other, might well be executed without the aſ-
ſtance of any ſuch impotent tools as theſe.

To think they were intended to cut Letters f, an art requiring the
keeneſt and moſt laſting point, is ſtill more abſurd.

Dr. Plot 8 takes one (the ſame fort which I publiſh here N' VIII.
PI. XXIV. from my own) to have been a Roman Reſt, uſed to ſup-
port the Lituus; but by its ſhape, and having the ſame marks of
damage at the edge as others have, I ſhould rather think it de-
ſigned for the fame uſe.

[ ſhall only obſerve, that the hook for cutting the Miſletoe was
of Gold among the Druids, not of Braſs, as the Celts are ; and that


See Sea. II. d Richardſon, ibid. Leland, Vol. I. p. 142.
; Thoreſby. e Mr. Hearne, ib. p. 135. &c.
c Being, in my largeſt, but one inch and f Begerus, ut ſupra,


quarter; and in the leaſt but five cighths of an E Staffordſhire, p. 404.
inch diameter,


+ D:--- the


286 OFT HE BRABSS:CEL TS


che make of the Celts bears not any ſimilitude to that of a hook, a,
the Druid inſtrument is always formed; let me add in this place,
that if we conſider how curious and elegant the Ancients were, and
the Moderns ſtill are, about their arms; if it ſhall appear that we
have reaſon to reckon theſe Celts among the weapons of war, it
cannot be wondered at that they ſhould be ornamented with mold-
ings, and imboſſed orderly-figured ridges.

SECT. IV. The true uſe of them is beſt ſuggeſted by the things themſelves,

Uſe beſt that is, by the ſhape, ſize, and the metal they conſiſt of. In the

work "ado ſhape we find three things remarkable ; the Socket A, the Ring or
Loop B, and the flat point or edge C. Round the Socket they
have ſome little moldings and lifts, DE; but as theſe are merely
ornamental, and not conducive to, or ,expreſſive of, the uſe of
them, I paſs them by. Some have a Socket, but no Ring, as
Fig. VIII. Some have a Ring, but no Socket, but, inſtead there.
of, a Groove on each fide, as Fig. VI. (of which Fig. VII. is the
Section) and Fig. IV. and ſome have neither Socket nor Ring,
but the Grooves only, as Fig. III; and V has neither Socket,
Groove, nor Ring, being quite flat, and its edge more circular;
aſſigned to the ſame country and uſe, though of another model. |
They are different in ſize, but of the ſame metal. The uſe, which
will beſt agree with theſe properties, ſeems to me to be the Head,
or arming of the Spear, the Javelin, or the Arrow.

Their Size. They are of different ſizes, and it is obſervable, that the Ancients
had their auiſſile weapons of all ſizes; for one Engine, ſome were
heavy, for another light; to throw at a great diflance, and to fight
with near by; ſome to aſſail the heavy armed, and others for the
Haſtati, Velites, and the light- armed; the larger and heavier ſeem
to have been the Heads of Spears, the middle ſort for Javelins,
and the lighter and ſmaller for the Heads, or arming of Arrows.

Socket. The Socket of Fig. I. II. and VIII. ſeems manifeſtly deſigned
to receive a wooden haft. In Fig. VI. the Socket is divided in the

See Section middle by a partition A, to which a chink in the haft might

4 l. eafily be adjuſted, and the wood embracing this partition ſecure

: the Head, better perhaps than where the Socket conſiſts only ot
one hole. Fig. III. and IV. ſeem alſo to have had their hafts, the
timber of which was prepared properly to fill up the Grooves 0
each fide, and the tranſverſe welts (45) to prevent the arming Head
from ſinking too deep into the haft, by the reſiſtance it met with
rom the bodies it was thrown againſt. Thoſe which have nv
Sockets were faſtened on to the haft in a different manner from thc
others; and, perhaps, by the driving a Ring round the handle,
which did compreſs the timber, and keep it cloſe to the Head.


Fig. V. was more difficult to fix on to its haſt, it having ae
Socket


— — 4 — —


DAT


P 232. ;
Three Gomitthy Soo 14-230
40 * AC 50


40 0


*
=. — * 4 *


W
—


$40 „„ nt


Ct; Joo £2207.


þ z44v
1 Bos


1 bb *


nds Ad


bf tt — 44
*


— ones
—


22222
112


71 %


20.


” A


Ii


In
WIEN I


Wil ETTTO


[


Jin H,


Pwo A Jound at une, lornmals N. ov aul, HC.


Vee. 207.


© / n.


|


t
t


5 — 1 << wy


FOUND AT K ARN-BRE, CORNWALL.


docket, Loop, nor Groove; and therefore it might be doubtful,


whether it ſhould have a place among the offenſive weapons before-
mentioned, but that we find the edge of the Spear-head made in
this Creſcent like form, in two Spears on the Trajan columnh; fo
that, however, they faſtened this Celt to its haft, or the other
Stone-axes (as they are called') which are found in many parts of
Britain, and much more difhcult to fix than this, we may probably
rank them among the weapons of war,


It muſt be owned, that Spears and Javelins are for the moſt part Edge.


pointed for piercing; but it may be acknowledged as well, that they
were ſometimes edged flat for cutting, as appears from the two on
Trajan's Pillar abovementioned, and from that publiſhed by Dr.
Plotk (of which fort he numbers four) which in the collection of
Moſcardus, from which he publiſhed it, is faid to be the arming of
a weapon of war |,

Of this latter kind is the Stone Celt exhibited in its natural ſize,
Plate XX VIII. Figures IX, X. p. 316. the only one I have yet
heard of found in Cornwall. The fone of which it conſiſts is
white flint; it is ground to an edge, A, very ſmooth and ſharp ;
the face ccc is alſo ſmooth and poliſhed ; it was alſo grinded thin at
the fides BB, after which the ſides were farther thinned by ſplinter-
ing off part of the fide edge, and hollowing it into ſemicircular
ſhallow cavities dd d d, for the better faſtening it, as I imagine,
unto the handle or ſhaft of the Spear”, To return nog to the braſs
Celts of Plate XXIV.


The greateſt difficulty is, what this Ring, or Eye (Fig. I. II. IV. Ring or
and VI.) ſhould be deſigned for. That it ſhould be intended to 8 85


faſten on the arming to the haft, is an end that it would by no
means anſwer, as is evident it being placed below the edge of the
Socket in N' I. and II. whereas, in order to faſten it to the handle,
it ſhould be placed above, and then (without another to anſwer it
on the other ſide), according to all the rules of Mechanicks, its
Power could ſecure but half the inſtrument® : beſides, if we obſerve
the Ring in N“ II. it is too flight and weak to fix a bandage, or
wire, for a Head of ſuch weight and ſize. Upon diligent con-
hderation, therefore, the Ring could never be deſigned for this ulc.
Let us ſee in the next place, whether even this part may not be
reconciled to the arts of War.


 Montfaucon, Tom. IV. p. 65. his uſual readineſs to oblige, was pleaſed to

| Dugdale's Warwickſh. — Plot's Staff. p.404. communicate it, and to conſent that, for the
Tab. 33. No 3. 6. ſatisfaction of the curious, it ſhould be depoſited

* Staffordſhire, p. 404. Ne V. with ſome other Corniſh remains in the Muſeum

| Moſcard, Lib. III. cap. 174- at Oxford,

This Inſtrument of war was found indigging, n Dr. Richardſon's conjecture therefore (Le-


Oct. 17, 1766, about three feet under the ſurface, land, Vol. I. p. 142.) though ingenious, and his
in the new farm-yard (lately a field) at Clowance, bandage neatly deſigned, cannot be true.
the ſcat of Sir John St. Aubyn, Bart. who, with


It


288


Its Uſe con-
jectured.


OF THE BRASS CELTS


It is not unlikely that this Ring, though it might poſlibly be of
uſe to fix the Labarum, the Garlands of Victory, or the bunch of
Ribbons (for all theſe we find placed at the Spear's Head", and
therefore the Roman Spear muſt have been properly prepared to
receive them) yet ſerved, more eſpecially among the leſs cultivated
nations, to fix a line to, by means of which, the Soldier carried this

avelin more commodiouſly on his march by ſlinging it on his
ſhoulder, and might throw it with more force in time of action, or
by means of the faſtened line recover it to him again, after he had
aſſailed his adverſary. For all theſe purpoſes this Ring is equally
convenient. |

Mr. Rowland ſeems to come the neareſt to the truth of any author
J have read; where he ſays, p. 86, © that they might be uſed with
« a ftring to draw them back, and ſomething like a feather to guide
te them in flying towards the enemy, and calls them Sling-hatchets;”
but for ſuch weighty Heads there was certainly no occaſion for
feathers; it was uſe and practice that brought the Soldiers to poiſe
and throw their Javelins ſo dextrouſly; and as for ſlinging of
hatchets.againft an enemy, I do not remember ever to have met with
any inſtance, ancient or modern; and ſome of them are evidently
too light to do any execution thrown from the hand.

The Greeks had darts projected by a ſtring, which they called
Ayzudn ; that is, the Anſa, or handle, by which they took hold of,
directed, and threw the dart: theſe Javelins were ſometimes called


Aclides :


— — — Teretes ſunt Aclides illis
Tela, fed hec lento mos eſt aptare flagello®.
Vir. En. VII. ver.7 50.


The ſtring was generally by the Romans called amentum, becauſe
the ſoldiers brought it level to their chin, before they diſcharged the


Javelin.


Theſe weapons were not confined to the Greeks and ancient }


Italians, but were alſo uſed by the Gauls, and by them ſometimes
called Cateie : |


Teutonico ritu ſoliti torguere Cateias. En. VII. ver. 741.


on which Servius (ibid.) obſerves that the Gauls, having thrown theſe


„ See deſcription of Antonine's Pillar, ibid. © acuminibus, quæ ita in hoſtem jaciuntur

ut ſupr. Plate I. Fig. III. ce religatæ Loro vel Lino, ut peractis vulneribus

* On which Servius — © Aclides ſunt tela ** poflint redire. Putatur tamen eſſe Teli genus

e quædam antiqua: Legitur, quod ſint Clave * quod per flagellum in immenſum jaci poteſt.
© cubitoſemis factæ, eminentibus hinc & hinc

Darts


r


K


6


mm


bis ww * bs .


FOUND AT KARN-BRE, CORNWALL.


Parts at their enemies, recovered them again by lines faſtened to

8 |
; The Gauliſh weapons of this kind Ceſar calls Mazare ; and, as
Strabo ſays, they were like the Pilum of the Romans which the
Gauls darted, and uſed generally in hunting and killing of birds ;
and this weapon was ſo common, and univerſally uſed by the Gauls,
that it became a criterion of their nation, as the Sariſſa (a very long
ſear) was of the Macedonians”.

The Kerns, or Foot-ſoldiers, of the ancient Iriſh Militia bore
Swords and Darts; to the laſt were fitted cords, by which they
could recover them after they had been launched out p.


289


But, if theſe inſtruments were deſigned for war, it may ſeem SECT. v.
ſtrange to ſome that they ſhould be made of braſs, when. they would Cel, why


de of


he ſo much more proper for all warlike uſes if they had been made =


of iron. In anſwer to which I may obſerve, that in ancient times
they had neither ſuch plenty nor choice of metals as we have at
preſent. The moſt ancient weapons were neither armed with Braſs
nor Iron. ;

The Sarmatians1, the Germans*, and the Hunss, for want of
Metals, pointed the dart with bone. The Gauls had heads of ivory,
and ſome of ſtone for their arrows; they had alſo what are called
ſtone hatchets, as appears by what have been found in their
Sepulchres*; and the Britans, as is obſerved before, had flint
heads for their ſpears and arrows, if they had not hatchets
alſo of the ſame ſubſlance ®, This was the moſt ancient
way of making and arming their weapons, in the Weſtern
parts; but copper being found in many places, and very early
among the Orientals, the way of tempering, hardening, and
colouring it with Tin, Lead, or Lapis Calaminaris, ſoon followed,
and was probably as ancient as the invention of Swords, which by
learned men is ſuppoſed coeval with War; with this Metal it was
ſoon found much eaſier to head their Spears and Arrows, than to
grind a ſtone into the neceſſary offenſive form; wherever, therefore,
they had a ſufficient quantity of braſs, they threw aſide the more
operoſe preparation of ſtone-heads for theſe warlike weapons, and
armed them with braſs. But Iron was not found out till 188
years before the War of Troy, if we may believe the Arundelian
Marbles; and this may be the reaſon that braſs weapons are ſo


9 Montfaue, Tom. IV. p. 37. * Amm. Marc. Lib, XXXI.
? dee Camden and Chambers, in voce KERN, t Montf. Tom. V. p. 195.
q Pauſanias, Atticis, Lib. I. p. 37. v Plot, Staffordſh. p. 396. Sibbald, ibid.
r Tacitus de M. G. Dugdale's Warwickſhire, p. 1081.
4 E often


290


often mentioned in Homer, the ancients working in braſs much


e


OF THE BRASS CELTS


more early than in iron, according to Heſiod w:
Xen 0 eονναοννο, perag d ux ec cid.
And Lucretius, Lib. V.
Sed prius Eris erat quam Ferri cagnitus uſis.


And when Iron became known, and its ſuperiour hardneſy
acknowledged, it was ſcarce. The Sarmatians (a very extenſive
nation) had no Iron in all their country x. The Germans had none
in Tacitus's time; and in Britain, Iron was very ſcarce, as Cefar
ſays y, and found only near the ſea coaſt, and that in ſo ſmall a

uantity, and fo precious, that their money was ſometimes made of
that Metal. Thus it appears, that the uſe of Iron came late into
the Weſtern parts of Europe; ſo that it is no wonder that
anciently their weapons were made of Braſs. Even among the


Romans, their arms were of Braſs :


— — eratum quatiens Tarpeia ſecurem. En. XI. ver. 656.
ZErateque micant peltæ, micat æreus enfis. En. VII. ver. 743.


Their arrows alſo were tipped with Braſs, as appears by ſo great a
number of them found at one time, as loaded ſeveral boats ?.


The Spears of the Luſitanians, ſays Strabo, were pointed with


Braſs; and to come nearer home, the Cimbrians and Gauls had


Braſs for their weapons*; the Danes made their ſhort ſwords,
arrow-points, ſpurs, and knives, of Braſs? ; and laſtly, the Britans
had the ſame metal, and for the ſame uſe, as appears by part of a
ſword found in Men in Sennan, by the Braſs found in Trelowarren
Barrow, by thoſe publiſhed by Dr. Plot, Staff. p. 396; and by the
Spear-heads, Axes for war, and Swords of copper, wrapt up in linen
before mentioned, found at St. Michael's Mount 1n this, County, as
well as by the ſeveral places in Britain beforementioned (p. 284.) |
which have yielded a fruitful harveſt of ſuch like weapons. 1

Beſides the ſcarceneſs of iron, there is another reaſon which the
Ancients had for making their weapons of Braſs, which is, that
iron is not ſo eafily worked up, caſt, repaired (I mean recaſt) and


Ey nas HAtę, ver. 142.
* Pauſan. ibid. ut ſupra. See Montf. Tom. IV. r Montfaucon, Tom. IV. p. 58.
a Camden.


p. 58.
In maritimis ferrum, et ejus exigua eſt b Worm. Mon, Dan. P · 48, 49+


* copia,” p. 92, a
i, poliſhed;


r d a A. Eo


FOUND AT KARNBRE, COR NWAEL.


poliſhed nor indeed, after all, of ſo rich or laſting a colour as
Braſs. Montfaucon therefore rightly obſerves (though he atligns
not the reaſon) that after the uſe of Iron was found out, the
Ancients continued the uſe of Braſs in making their weapons,
and other things, for which at preſent we uſe only Iron. In ſhort,
all the fragments of Braſs were ſerviceable, and eaſily to be re-melted,
and caſt a-new. And that the Britans put in practice this piece of
good huſbandry, is plain, from what was diſcovered at Fifield e; a
great quantity of theſe inſtruments, ſome entire, ſome broke,
with fragments of the ſame metal, but to what particular
utenſils they belonged, uncertain. Theſe, with the quantity
of unwrought metal found with them, are undoubted evidences of
a furnace being here for caſting ſuch implements of war, and that
here lived and worked an Artiſt, whoſe profeſſion was that of a
Founder or Caſter of Braſs; and I cannot but obſerve that ſpear-
heads being found amongſt the reſt of theſe materials muſt Babe us
conclude that the workman who made the Heads of Spears pointed,
made the edged ones too called Celts, Javelins of all kinds, and
Arrows, their uſe, intent, and ſubſtance being ſo much alike, that
he who made the one, could not be ignorant of, or unpractiſed in
making the other. 'This is therefore an equal proof of the Britans
uſing Braſs weapons, and of the inſtruments found there being
weapoas of war. There 1s another circumſtance worth notice, in
what has been mentioned before (p. 283.) which is, that ſome
Celts, found in a ſtone-quary in Yorkſhire, had Caſes exactly
fitted to them. Why incloſed in Caſes ? Why, doubtleſs, for the


ſame reaſon as thoſe found at St. Michael's Mount were wrapt up


in linen, to preſerve the keenneſs of the edge; and I muſt own it


ſcems to me, that chizels for working Stone needed not to have
been ſo cautiouſly ſheathed ; but rather, that the intention of the
owner was, that by this means the edges of fo tender a metal
might be better kept for execution againſt the day of battle.


© As mentioned before, p. 284.


CHAP.


291


Deſcription
of Bolleit
Fogou,


Bodinar


Holt. -


Cave, called
the Gyant's


OF THE CAVES OF THE


CH AP. XIV,


Of the Caves of the Ancient Corniſh Britans.


inſtruction, or pleaſure, reſulting from a multiplicity of
meaſurements, where things are not materially diſtinc.

In the Tenement of Bolleit in the pariſh of St. Berian, in the
Weſtern part of Cornwall, at the end of a little inclofure, is
a Cave called the Fogou; its entrance is about four fect
high, and wide. The Cave goes ftraight forward, nearly of
the ſame width as the entrance, ſeven feet high, and 36 from
end to end. About five feet from the entrance, there is on
the left hand a hole two feet wide, and one foot fx inches high,
within which there is a Cave four feet wide, and four feet fix
inches high; it goes nearly Eaſt about 13 feet, then to the South


five feet more; the ſides and end faced with Stone, and the roof


covered with large flat ſtones, At the end fronting the entrance,
there is another ſquare hole, within which there was alſo a further
vault now ſtopt up with ſtones, through which you fee the light;
and therefore I doubt not but here was a paſſage for light and air,
if not a back way of conveying things into and out of theſe
Cells ; a property, which other Caves have as well as this. This
Cave 1s not 1n the village of Bolleit, but about a furlong diftant,
and indeed, but for the entrance (the ground is ſo level above, and
on each fide of it), no one would ſuſpe& that there was a Cave
below. There is a Cave of the fame name in the pariſh of St.
Eval near Padſtow. N

In the tenement of Bodinar, in the pariſh of Sancred, ſomewhat
higher thon the preſent village, is a ſpot of ground amounting to
no more than half an acre of land (formerly much larger), full of
irregular heaps of ſtones overgrown with heath and brambles. It
is of no regular ſhape, neither has it any veſtiges of Fortification.
In the Southern part of this plot, you may with ſome difficulty
enter into” a hole, faced on each fide with a ſtone- wall, and
covered with flat ſtones. Great part of the walls as well as
covering are fallen into the Cave, which does not run in a ſtraight
line, but turns to the left hand at a ſmall diſtance from the place
where I entered, and ſeems to have branched itſelf out much farther
than


iO -


o


59 'd


IEE


. Oy


TY 1 40/0 op) ge,


——


A <4 Atta „ 9


— See See ee 47 eee, e Up


*


EC


Th.


*


—
5
1 4


oh de, bp, e,


o 27g Swpuny


o18'd N 63/0 1999 IAC


O18 A an, fun e,


ag ufd fu of b, i anf inne EA, ite,


— —
2


*
2 2


28


n
9


10


1 0 3 *
1 k i '
7 7 1 4 1 Y ” W *
.
* % ; : * 7 \
ii un * l TT tt 177
F wail 171 bs #37 * 11 . 1 90 1 \ 0 |
49000 The 44. 171 0 SLIT. P0344) 4 1 ö :
* * „ 1 6 2


7
..


7 *
4


or d, mes g uoounty 761;


Any $2446 111144 (7 Fn thr? C1 £47 Pave b Le
: - Cl,


e, ISFDJAO ͤ Lt >
. e, en, .


ANCIENT CORNISH BRITA NHS. 293


than I could then trace it, which did not exceed twenty feet.
t is about five feet high, and as much in width, called the Giant's
Holt, and has no other uſe at preſent than to frighten and appeaſe
foward children. As the hedges round are very thick, and near


py 1 4
Sp A
> es a fl”
hy of Las 0
1 * ;


fot IA
Gd 2 4 du A .


does the other, and the incloſures within them extremely ſmall,
5 W 1! imagine theſe ruins were formerly of much greater extent, and
© Wl have been removed into the hedges; the ſtones of which, appearing
d MM j:cable, and as if they had been uſed in Maſonry, ſeem to confirm


the conjecture. Poſſibly here might be a large Britiſh town (as
[ have been informed the late Mr. 'Tonkin thought), and this Cave
might be a private way to get into or ſally out of it; but the walls
ae every where cruſhed and fallen, and nothing regular to be ſeen ;
[will only add, that this Cave, or under-ground paſſage, was ſo well
concealed, that though I had been in it in the year 1738, yet, when
came again to examine it in the year 1752, I was a long while
b-fore I could find it. =

Of all the artificial Caves I have ſeen in Cornwall, that called Carc in
Pendeen Vaud (by the Welſh pronounced Fau) is the moſt entire, 8
and curious. It conſiſts of three Caves or galleries; the entrance
is four feet fix inches wide, and as many high; walled on each
fide with large Stones, with a rude arch on the top*. From the * Plate
entrance you deſcend fix ſteps, and advance to the N. N. E. the floor p.*
dipping all the way as in the ſectione. The ſides built of Stone
draw nearer together, as they riſe, the better to receive the flat
Stones DD, which form the covering, and are full fx feet high
from the ground; this firſt cave is 28 feet long from E to F.
Before you come to Ff, at right angles, turns off to the left hand
the ſecond Cave B, its ſides the ſame diſtance, and roof formed in
the fame manner as thoſe of the firſt Cave, but the roof only five
feet 1x inches high. In the middle of this ſecond Cave, obſerving
a low place, I cauſed the floor to be dug, and found there a round
pit, G, three ſect diameter, and two feet deep, but nothing in it
remarkable; in other parts, I afterwards tried the floor, and found
the natural ground, as left when the work was finiſhed: at the
end K +, it has a hole in the roof through which a man may climb 1 ibid.
up into the field. This is all I found worth noteing iu the ſecond ©
Cave. At H, fronting the entrance, there is a ſquare hole, two
ieet wide, and two feet fix inches high, through which you creep |
into a third Cave C, fix feet wide, and fix feet high, neither ſides
nor roof faced with ſtone, but the whole dug out of the natural
ground; the ſides formed regularly and ftraight, and the arch of


hs IS
13332


and FCS 11ntrarlb <4


iv 1N ©


V2


C


id al his C41 CHANCE 43 HW il A Ati 2.


fa ts, engrav


—
JS


Or Vou, Wallice Tau. Dav. Dit, Plate XXV. Fig. II. Plan ibid. Fig. III.
4 F the


. Fwy -
—
8 ts, 4 2
S 7 * * 3 TY
6 - *


294 OF THE CAVES OF THE


the roof a ſemi- circle. The plan alſo ends in a ſemi-circle of the
ſame dimenſions at I, at the diſtance of twenty-ſix feet fix inches.
I cauſed the floor of this Cave to be dug i in two places, but found | |


neither Cell nor Grave, but the natural ground only, without an chap
appearances of its having been moved. You ſee nothing of this | Fo

Cave, either in the field or garden, 'till you come to the mouth fl e

it, as much privacy as poſſible being conſulted. * br
Norden, in his Survey of Cornwall, p. 40. tells us, “that the be;

te tide flows into this Cave, at high water, very far under the earth,” mi

but the ſea is in truth more than a quarter of a mile from any : Jin

part of it. Int

The common people alſo thereabout tell many idle ſtories of like A

( kind, not worth the reader's notice, neglecting the ſtructure, which Ml |"
is really commodious, and well executed. br

There are many other Caves ſtill to be ſeen in theſe parts, and N.

ſome have been rifled and deſtroyed by converting the Stones to dat

other uſes, but none have yet come to my notice, different enough Ml "*

from the foregoing to merit a particular deſcription. I ſhall Wl **

now proceed therefore to enquire into the uſe and deſign of thoſe Ml

Caves. >

SECT. 1. In moſt countries the ancients thought themſelves under a ne- Ml 72
Their Uſe. ceſſity of providing themſelves with ſuch private receptacles ; and MN
where their country did not afford them natural ones, they made il

to themſelves, as here in Cornwall, artificial ones. They had Ml

more reaſons than one, for betakiog themſelves to theſe retired 3 .

thi


places. In cold countries they retired into their Caves to avoid the
ſeverity of Winter, ſays Tacitus of the Germans 8; and Xenophon,
concerning the cold country of the Armenians, tells us that their ;
houſes were under ground, the mouth or entrance of them like
that of a well, but underneath wide and ſpreading ; there are ways
for the cattle to enter, but the men go down by ſtairs h. This
they did, doubtleſs, becauſe, when the ground was Gant or |
covered with ſnow, for any long time, their cattle as well as them- |
ſelves, might go into the Caves where the ground was not affected
not for — by either, and the air leſs piercing. But the Winters are not ſo
rears, fo ſevere in Cornwall, as that they can be reaſonably ſuppoſed to
have given occaſion for the making thoſe Caves. :
nor In- The Druids taught in Caves, and in Caves people were ini
*trudtion, tiated into the myſteries of Mithras; but for both theſe purpoſes


the Ancients made uſe generally of natural not artificial Caves.


„ Solent et ſubterraneos ſpecus aperire, „ gium hyemi, et receptaculum frugibus.” De


* coſque multo inſuper fimo onerant, ſuffu- M. G. cap. xvi.
| | > De Exped. Cyri, Lib. IV. It


41 2 4%,
| os 1


ANCIENT CORNISH BRITANS.


295


t was a very ancient way of Sepulture (if not the firſt man- vor Bury-


that obtained) to bury in Caves: thus Abraham buried Sarah


ig wife in the field of Mackpelah (Gen. xxi. 19.), in which
hapter the ſacred hiſtorian gives us at length the treaty for pur-
aling this Cave, ſhewing how ſollicitous the Patriarch was to
ve the property of it ſecured to him for a family burial-place :
iis whole paſlage intimates, that it was then the cuſtom of
the greateſt princes to have ſepulchres (ſee ver. 6.) peculiar to their
amilies, either more ornamented, or more ſpacious, than the bu-
ging places of the vulgar, and that theſe ſepulchres were Caves :
wut notwithſtanding the Cell which J found in Cave the ſecond (B)
iPendeen Vau, I do not take that work to have been ſepulchral.
may be ſuggeſted that there was an urn buried in this place
for in ſuch Cells we often find them), and might be taken away
y perſons who had ſearched here before. This is poſſible ; but
hat a work of ſo much labour, and of three apartments, ſhould be
nade for burying, and only one Pit, and one ſuppoſed urn, is not


all probable. If this Cave had been deſigned for the dead,


many Cells would offer with their Urns, or many Graves, For Retreat in


Time of


here is yet another reaſon why the ancients made theſe under- War.


round ſtructures, a reaſon which prevails in all countries; and
that is, to hide and ſecure what they poſſeſſed and valued in
imes of war and danger. Plutarch ſays i, that the Characitanians
n any danger of war deſcended into their Caves, carrying in their
booty with them, free from all apprehenſions when they were
thus concealed : and of the Germans, Tacitus relates the fame
cuſtom K. In ſuch places as theſe Caves, ſays he, they endea-
"your to ſoften the rigour of the ſeaſon, and if at any time an
"enemy approaches, he will lay waſte and carry off all that he
can readily lay his hand on; but theſe ſecret ſubterraneous re-
treats are either not known, or not thought of in the hurry, or
"eſcape notice for this reaſon, becauſe they muſt take up time
"in ſearching for.” In ſeveral parts of Britain, Caves of this
nature muſt occur. © In the Ifland of Skie there are ſeveral
little ſtone houſes built under ground, called Earth-houſes, which


* ſerve to hide a few people, and their goods in the time of


war l.“ The ſame author tells us, © that in the iſle of Ila there
"18a large Cave called Vah-Vearnag, or Man's Cave, which will
* hold 200 men.” There is a remarkable one publiſhed and planned
in the Louthiana, (Lib. III. PL X. p. 16.) imagined by the author,
vith good reaſon, to have been © intended originally for a ſort of


4 In vita Sertorii. * Ibid. ut ſupra. 1 Martin of the Iſles, p. 154.


40 granary


OF THE CAVES OF TH E


« granary to conceal corn, and, perhaps, other effects of value
“ from mountain-robbers. All this part of Ireland, continues le.
© abounds with ſuch Caves, not only under Mounts, Forts, ad
« Caftles 3 but under plain fields, ſome winding into little hill:
« and riſings, like a volute, or ram's horn; others runnin


have judged more rightly if they had attributed theſe hiding: places
to the natives than to foreigners, the latter having but little reaſon
to flatter themſelves with any hopes of concealment from the
former; but the former, born and bred upon the ſnot, a great
deal of reaſon to conclude, that many private places might be
retired to, which ſtrangers and temporary invaders might never
diſcover.

The true intent then of theſe Caves in Cornwall was, as J ap-
prehend, to ſecure their proviſions, and moveable goods, in tinics
of danger n; and the reafon that they are many in number, is be-
cauſe Cornwall has been the ſeat of much war; and, therefore,
few countries have had more occaſion for ſuch private ſtore-houſes
than the Corniſh. That Cornwall has been the Theatre of much
war, appears by the multitude of entrenchments on the ſhores,
particularly in the Weſtern parts, where every promontory has its
fortification, every neck of land its ditch and vallum reaching
from ſea to ſea, and not a hill of any eminence without what we
call a caſtle. Some ruined towns are alſo {till to be ſeen, teſtify ing
the deſolations of war. It was during theſe troubleſome times
that I imagine the ſeveral Caves I have now mentioned, and others
of like kind, were made by the natives, to ſecure their effects,
and, perhaps, the perſons of thoſe of their family who were not
able to eſcape, or keep the field, from the piratical invaſions of
the Saxons and Danes. Expoſed to the ſea on every fide, as
Cornwall is, what is now looked upon as their greateſt ſecurity
by the inhabitants, proved at that time the perpetual inſtrument
of their miſery. As ſoon as the Saxons came to underſtand their


trade of piracy, they found it more for their advantage to attack


the Britiſh nation in its extream parts, than at the heart and centre


m Ireland. « numerous and ſpatious, as to contain all the
u Since the writing theſe papers, an inge- „ inhabitants of the country in time of danget,
nious modern author has given us an account “ and were uſed long after the erection of
of the ſame means uſed in time of diftreſs in * houſes, as places of ſecurity for women,
the Iſland of Minorca. Their Caves, which * children, and moſt valuable moveables upcn
they call Covas, have with incredible labour “ any ſudden alarm.” Armſtrong's Hiſtory of
© been ſcooped out in the rock; they are ſo Minorca, c
C


—


2


bs IT . 23
» a . R 2 4 q ,


g Zig- BN
% zag, like a ſerpent; others, again right forward, comme, 4
« Cell with Cell: the common Iriſh think they are ſkulking-holes
« of the Danes, after they had loſt their ſuperiority in that


« iſland,” Upon which I cannot but obſerve, that they would J


*


ANCIENT CORNISH BRITANS. 297


x the ifland 3 conſequently Cornwall had its ſhare of their viſits,
n proportion to its remoteneſs from the ſeat of protection and

wer, and the opportunities which its numerous creeks gave theſe
ons of plunder to land and pillage. The Danes were ſtill more
roubleſome and cruel, as they were more conſtant viſitors, and
continued many ages to waſte, burn, and deſtroy, whatever fell in
their way; ſo that the poor Corniſh Britans becauſe of theſe ra-
1cious enemies, as © the children of Iſrael becauſe of the
« Midianites, made them the Dens which are in the Monntains,
« and Caves, and ſtrong Holds o. |


ka


2
' Y
+l
8 0 4
>
=
1
i
4H
-

.


P Judges vi. 2.


END OF THE THIRD Book.


ny £ -


— ”
Ee In. FIDEO =.


"0001,,


ROMAN REMAINS


I N


CNW 4k


B O O K IV.


CGH A PP; I.
Of Roman Coins.


W E have already examined the reaſons upon which authors
have hitherto doubted whether the Romans were ever in
Cornwall; and have ſhewn in general p, that Cornwall could not but
SECT. l. be known to, and poſſeſſed by, that people: I have there alſo
OfRoman Intimated, that great numbers of Roman Coins, and ſome Sepul-
Coins foun® chral Remains, have been found here, which confirm that
ſuppoſition, and that upon enquiry it will be found probable, that
there were Roman Forts, Camps, Towns, and Ways, in this


County. I muſt now treat of theſe particulars ſeparately, and firſt
of the Roman Coins.


P Book I. Chap, IX.


About


— : " 2 iv - iS 8 2 2 J
WS ES 2 Cong — 4 of


a rt —2


% = os n 5 — - =
; _ 4.4... * . — — « amr CEC 2 W
2
4


1 * *
—— wn : 4
. — w? * n n
. 1} 516 8 7 4 y 26. 1 7
> i
660 —— RY ////////// EY — — — — — — r — — —— (
, 7
— %
® .
. 6 . y * *
0 9


.
Ll
9


ö — — . 2 . Fa 8 .
Le lands Pi JSCILL r- Lying about latte Leagues | j 55
\


"—


Q J 9
4 —_—
: nearly Mat 0) He Lands End, could not be placd 17
. without making the W/ of loo
IS | greal a 1g th, Hey ar" mefore placed here to Shes |
l, Form 6 /Foportion Hey bear with the ref of the lounty.


White Juul


.


22


Made 1 4 Tho- Martyn. — r


—— i
| : — — —
— == 7 — — 1 . i. — — 1 — * Sd — ——— — —
— — — nY — — 1 : 4
| * . ; — I N — —— 1 — 1
%. -_ J —— ———— — — —— — — — —
_ = ) F \ 7 |;
- Z - \ A — : * — TR j -
A \ ' ; _ Her N
50 Q N > ; a) = * - * :
* —
N d. — * 1
N 7 —
# —  — — —_ — —
2 :
* 2
W . 8 D K ?
J
- —
A N
f ; 3
. %.
- 3


. ?
, ; /
| | 4
«eNorvland
: a.


| | « | F +»
Gull and_ I urn "hs. |


3 N * 9 4 1 , 8
. 21 Hin- 4 ThevorHea of SapporFbond nn >.< 7 4 Yo by 2 ede,
ON — 7914 4 4 . A MM
as. 2 „„ ee

il + ob 4 | a the | Sri 4
WY b Y 44 4 Een Ae, — —

Fee Poor my, " | a — e. 45 4 2
2 0 . ed hy *, i IE, 2


8 n aue, ( Sade. E.
N 4 * 6A _—_. z. RR ets 28 7. e * Af (en
I | 1 'd S'Michae on |


. — Drewanc 4
enn, 4 4 Caren XG
1 . EZ.. eee. „ 2 Dol ur ole Ago e
4 4 4 y 4 re > * — e 2 Md, YH
” 2 Tag "dnt Y way VF WO / Za
4 vrithev 2 wy Gz MF as
| : 1 0 — 92 Yee I * =".
* {9 - c OMp 8 25 7 7 & Kam; ,
Þ 4 7 1 10 Lithe >th £ K 4 | ate a bs,
| '% , e, ee 5 orb Wo
M. 4 0 5 Her ah


de PAC. 4 — ä
fon rd * aj 2 — —
0


4 7 2
* 2
ar Jaun e P
1 19 , 2
0 * * |
*'N . J
ay Ph
Gutiland
1) A
7. 4 c 4. You, %
"=, * by End | Wn to
* 0 8 ; ” 4 -- ew 72 2 nv * - 4A : wy, STITCH n # vb
P f 5 p | 7 0 1 . * e — *s
mud.
P n.
ee *
5 Any
54 4
1 * ©
bony 2 3 2
4 7 ©
4 8
0 QC oz
lu
arr 2
Aa


Cao -


}
|
|


|


ö Al | |


ITT 1 will


M


EC ORN WA WAI


— 2 22 | —
wtyn. 4


—— — — —ð — —8 — —


—
38 —
—
—


A 4 Vorr land
a


a Mouls
Gull and_ PZ nt Ftint; |


, + .
" 222 .
1 * — | on


”
7


3 y Port Isa

TrevoveHead ge rH 1 72 Fong

* . | a
1% One 2 pf a. 1 ” 24 2 fart a, Pe


ae - e
- — e 1
*. 2 mY


| 2 oo 2 Enden fi
Ax SMinyer 4 N *

e oe re = Com 7 , in.

: - S'Michaels 'r oZheay


o Tu.
, Fonarved eee.
e = par Foot L.


5
4
/L,.x
1 4 a
# £ 7


* An


Torwvan Head
The Coe 4


e


JAS


od 4 ee 0) cha


a
Fen ©
„ ur . enters oþ


"If


Calle 2


Blu
2 a * 2 244.8
n
"lis n $2.55 P OY
un Dru.
N,


9 e
; —


4


. ARE
oO 2 7 all.
CHEN 0 Dongas oY


nr. hh 0 *


on e
gt 5


——
n —


2
ang * e


”»


wp) —
2 0 hs b


Fm
1 A 94
ya


d * 5 2 — l :
— — Ss „ „% «. , , — * „ C a *
| . 6 N +» W


"EEE,


. 11 7 8 1 1 97,9 — — 7
feng Goo. $1. 19: 4% i? e.
1 2 | 1 e
. p home OB ( _ M11 7 77
nc rr . F,
+ Morbwin . Nin % W. Foul Mad nf * n
N r M ee, /of 4 . H Zarge. A e *
1. 4
- N. WH A. FL
Og 4 man? . Ju.
O Hun, i 1. * a : Grind


a Clay 9 8 vor Vee


"0 24 3 N SEND


CAO hives
25 _ * bn 2
\ 7 Ar. e " Ii .
. Nabe ton 2 ;


: 1 p Primal 2. f aadohill n = *
, * * A Mook P Per ftnage 4 0 4 1 72 "th D
ö 0 5
Fo Y OZ, / Jos „ Au


W a : \ Gn * 7
. Kan — Pf 8 Neue . r


4 6 7 *


\


N
I
n Fan


W L f. 1 | . | Tough 2 E. o Po, — NSD
/ VA " 9 An Actual, , 77 1 \ Wars,” „ , Js" ths 07 11 F 0 4t4
3 þ Pte | mg , —
— 2 — 15 6 oP” | #bifngford 6 Cre t 8
3 7 3 - K 3 8 f 22 «MW þ — Bos * „. en 5
\ 4 fo * . N. vH tt *


v


N | , "Blake's of C
| | | ie, b#* Tae . Porch Vun
\ \ k 4 Villon © CP mer SYome —
: N N 7 Ml hs Church, Wall acegt Qus of * 172
0 _ — — \ N \ . . ATIIIN” * Wl "»" Pullber Pancralweek 2
DD —_— — * } 2 R Heer 2
= —— — 0 7 k D

Tx Po WE rue, Wins N | * * >" Amor 4 Bridgerule 0 F

F114, . , 70. . Bride Ny . wg /
* Zh bed
is PTE ue 0 ON * :
- . Pe
Wi 4 Pr 2 4 71 Rar wo Oy Hill :


ATTO?) | © Pakworthy 40


Nn. e \
1 4 72 a] n = c Jimerton


Iſtock
22 ed ago 15 fun, 29.)
14 * 9
I "I'M 0 {£71 :


1 5 «
fa Coal St enn x- Zruο 0 Zhang


A
10


7 elm . *
Fong ani Th 92 Ahits tame c 12 "HO 7 =
© Hard Pots ty, 2 v Marv er. 8 **, i Lol ol J - 39
lon o BE er 8 1 * 1 Mer 7 bevy 46 Pant O's Sy Ware T4 * * 0 NH :
* 7 MY mY ano ; , mn » «ti .
Lu #1 45 8577 {oct ye. | 2 b ON ft 208 Bl. a —_ K* Hel "A "© 35 1} Land ©
2 Ku 0 28 75 u- * 075 7 1 1 ne ton
mae,  Farraby mg Oral Vn A nd *
ö 9 1 4 * 5%
ant r e * Mon yr ey 1 7, „ ine.
” * * * *
Ae ue —— * « Wit: * N , "Tetcott —
OX: AP." .


ö Sh 4


0 7 Muanorths 9 WO e


71 „ $3 5


Tintageltk (
FRY 1


* X. *


Fa 7.5 . vol
"$5 1 "IN Ws n A 77 * N s in" Ad * ab
Lee — 2 Jo 2 a” 175 Mihn withy ;
f * WM. ES NE V T') Tell & Warlxt 9 25 The. "1H o » MY . 7 IE #7. MH ( *
| I RY TURE u ny * n art of” 2 / 9
85 2 7 ? e
= e. oOntnd. | * N. 37 * Armen. « :
n- * * ＋ Wi low Shire FE Sou 9 1 0 worth will ;
0 w The: , 1 «ts ws 1 % % HM { ” Fomdt 2
j 1nd,” — . .
; 22 Ws 0 f —_ ' of. 7 — . "71" 8 © Pun wn :
F a ee 5 & DDeburtt: North Petherwin 8 \ Tina Tomnn * y
97 ue 0 * ; 4 N ee AQ ooo! f SU, = JW A of TN
i Mel, af - \\ = res meere Hr begh "2 e Mi; « ngye LOUN
Death 2 * ＋ 17 7 Fo {4 Coll, we. , ©

r 7 — \ dal © _— —— — , hd -
mu 24 Ponctunm Aba 2 . 2 f roudl, me * 7e. 2 8 Fre i * MI Oo Dru len b
is LOGS ,” 8 1 a rl 07M 7 Hivh Sy Buddha 2 — 1 ;
2 2 wy Hors * * 7. WOT 9 .\s Werindton J

* ( 1 10 r Eu
Nn. 1H « 1 & HM: 41111 2 "1 .


{Imus 7
Caffee, Burgund :
&


C1 1 0
N Drudithen
& nnd» "1


» k FE
= nr * 2477 n, © .
25 8 c Trogity 10 4 IT 8
77 7 ,
— — nam, © ©
7 Carr). „ Allan


MN Mer Bends:


1, .
Dirk on * N Y


Vite, Hir


l.


2 %
—
—


© e


1


0 —
νπ = CT) a #44114


Wen


0
** 7). 71 Hu 9
e N 25 IS 0 K a SY; 74 wh, .
On. 1th e . 1. Lande e WW Dun 4 an Hl u
8 Tel ue 75 . 20 South , "4 ee
2 eli, foe Ae, * N — 0 F Rune, ui. 97 7
Po e 7 *
7; * "IN RH 4b q —


Lo uA
— 1. SAC 3 1 6


5 25 9 o,. 2


, 9, 45 r.


„4 gl g
22 e


rn en 2 F


a7 , * thy
2


. |
e 3, ac „ 5 - + Bradstone
2 ory Saline ul, 1 * r
2 7 rot tor po, EY LoSant *
rn ue
n 4 e nl Eon Breet), £ 5 7 & Dunterton


WAP | ( 2 "> „ide Vu Len; Le Gunner ho .
1 330 nf e n 7 Mug 1 7557 * 17 | . el, 2
Wine Slwnes , I WY Ry 0 1h rf 75 0 P |
A ws * |, Zum, A O u, N
D 1 mor muß 7. 4. 3 Ld 1. Nitro & "87


: 2
- Iv A lamp 7 5 o Hg ty Yu ol t% Saum.


AL)


[=]
© *
GM” TT
73
— 5


Y 2
Ard O Dank 49 i", . Han ">; PTY, gill 2 WY "HU LH
j e FS 4 Sf Auel "A = * e, * V 2 E
1 and 0 Tos « * * Stoke ated me 4 .
5 os SH ore ridge
N K ** — 70 „ Omen 9
4 Wc Ant Carrrndet Hin if cke e, * 4 * —

y 77 e Fo) f\/ Aheket ; 1 = tue! 7
n 1 Batind ed OR 79 5 2 © 12
oy J * not s , who A, my Uh, I 4 6 _

Nets a; ai fun f Keri @& J7 „ - AE 9 — a7


varipn© / «; oTreworrach S *
tee * icer A © " 4 75 7
” N w
©


UW


74 3 the © molt (py
4 * 22 L YM


„. Q y ＋
& SH, — A ighuu, 7 N II 1 © 22 #5 3 0
0% lm Nou f Is Huydr 0 of 5h Wa
G, 7 * 2 Fu n, 4 * while


OM Tt,
SITES — &


LS
ty


e


4 tu , Worigt
Ht * Figuli 1


f FP OM


« ”; * 3
pul lbs f 7. r Fre CLCAR *% 7 th, a . : 8
A * St ve 9 ** ay Cd 7 I
er CY 2 Wood all , 0 — A 5 hon cps "alh K ama, o te - 3
2 9 2 = PIP / l 7 Jun. A K \ 792 = 7 . n. url L 8
wa 5 7 pk mm | Tu Comma 7% ; Me, - £
E: 1 - omint 0 ;
Purk Kal. 8 7 « 2 A
2 Nt lon \ - Sams 9 * * — 77.7 Ps
Ws > H ore, 7 ne,
= WI. 11.4 =


Pollen dE
172 Sen. eltion 5 ug .


OT 2
e LACY
2 4 TE/ |


0 rs 22


He. >


N
d
%


HA —


7 Pla


g \

© e ©

"Fra MP e, dt © 9 2 1
by”, RY fr t 2 ode \

Du ork. H % ay IO; 2 . * 5 Brirw £5 G98 2 *


e, e 41 e 4 ; £7, 7 N 7 2 +
argollin on FR . vp” A Aides,


Morvall 0 Croft Bak, T2 \
ad eu.
P > d


u 2 * 7 2 L


— lan
Hrn a + There mar, Wor


20


* 4 AP ew
- | edbrr
(OURS


a Mine


4 cad, g Ms f


(
loi Dark ellyc
99 FowEY| 8 " 1 1 man, 0 5 4 ies
8580 | & 7 bun; 5 r Lode
7 *
raton ; 2 Hurd 2 * i mſn
4 : | *" W377 Plrege © 81 10 N N | 1 . 2
{ a 9 Rn ELD Fore A 7 onndr nod |
» b EY _ © A - a.” . 1 4 | * 42 — RP 2 — | 2
| | 1 5 | | : ) Ame


4
By - ni ul
* Doc


Fi T3 teu.


n ALES


nn,.


%
=
ary


Ramme


—
-
—


—


.  % * PPT 11.401 5


777777


UD


— —


r=


1


5 N
Mmmmmmme


.*


p, 7" "\ "71" \


Irre
*
*


1 ee
#!


—.


Nin


DU


＋. * uy
*


che Cornmatlt


2 N
on


, Sund Ha v || d
4 e, Tra 2


NN


u Jun Anh
7/9" -- SE


(014541011111


2


c


re tres nu


fs


ho -


N t
N


Runnel Stone


If uM; m.


— nne ung
_— *


Neo 1 1


Oo
In ind Tredger-


- '

> 5 » 6
. i,
' "1 2
AF


* recon


Crum


0 ee.


1 >


- e


i =.


:


anne,
2


—


ums meu
—


_—_—


«free Hr and
Celawethan *
©.


2 , 1 1


1

OY 2 — Ja

- >. = San ot Foote _—_
4 Oer 72974 / verton ?


0 l Fan: wo —


_ — W . 8 8 |
> = Zi | — |
Pons are Hhewn A 1 , their Hh FEA Ta
[.7; pA” E,
V. ave n B. a, lo ee
Nora arjh { hun un- 7 . ONS hun
e Vol lorncm and G 77% H. e Ile * a
Wi Tha, {Mllrge © . 4 . 2
N ene 1 0 d * e n QN


Anne


The Stones
*.
. *
(urrachs . Go 1 *
4 Fo £ 50 Jaand


225


2 2 —


4 0 5 — S4Towednack . W } % rar frac
* ENor:; . 2 — 2 Ve 4 i Null, 5 n
| eue * gs A * WW; *
n.,. — « 1 . 1 * *
5 — 2 „ \ * oy — PE NWT T Fr uz 0rink Lelant = —— -w_4e, aac. 1 e
«4 > 3 Zan Y
e es hu men; e re ge er *
* Barb 169 7
Mg iO I a endr FOE
Herts Jragirras .
wee ä 5 Sarnen,
See EEG: 2 -4


122
ne


1 RA "mer ls Wee
_ Mounts Bay ©


N
+


Jure


vel:


and the Doro 7


EY
CO eh
a » Cty 42/44


M71 OUS


. % %
%
%
F WR %
IS
\*, Gy %
* *
. J
7


\.v : * % * 8
NN Wd W I. % My
W AV x WH J NS J 6 * k * = * *


7 Gull Feock ( 0 8 75
| 4 11 Pr. 3
1 Wed L 1 P * ES


dM IL, 12


16414


{


| ooo mm
p41 Il WM | bt | HIM * Manne wh | ttt at Aua. 00 (| . itt |! i | | wh | {ul i li " T I. Ne i! Ml : / 5

184 nne rana Ig Ani | i! i! | Ii}! WNT ili I | ot Wh fi | "ll, | he

| The Lizard ont [.-

— „
HU :
WML 7 Ä . oh 5 LALLHHLHGLHL 6A L Deen Mm
5 *
9 07 63 0 HS / 5 6


3 5


8 % 3 3


rene


3 7 R Auen


5” Dens 7 „ F * e — e ef
2 eme Al, flint « Hill Ws 25 Hu


2 J. PP” — Pu * af e, a


Tuwan A. wad


p TOM „ *
4 ©. .
The Goout * * F 7 . 1 « + Taue by AO N F. . 8 IF yell as *
5 : 9 0 Nn r PT A 755 7 e. *
1 8 2 A a4 - xt —
/ MW. <> ' — — R , ls, 3 ee . *
f | 2 — SY Columb M4 | 2 if ee oF Es Tretwe >.
Clark nw A 8 ' \ 7 A e, — 7 e 2 475 Fe n 6 wt "2 — 4 wer”:
g 4 * * os, ook ö _ Su, Any 7 " un Ce T 22
) , 18 by
N, Rana | Deng ations CSF
„ 0 * = 1 "<> ; A :
e 2 * ber Dor. 5 5 |
: £ N , 4 PP ed; OMe
o > oy aan /f 6
Perranza - . a 2 Bros — N
» , 3 ö Oo... 4
3 El 3 * OY i


258 —— Rot 6. 22
LB. len os 3 ge, 5 tn
j bY 2 Col be, 1th A. Anna, y .
= Al b, u "Kar e, FO WDR R M1,


Tyr abt, olrgan ae
”
9 4 3 "uy 2 — <


ch 5 . ht


j my 4 3 F 22 .
„ 4 . * 5 ae? 1
2 > * A . 5


Dem


tens 4 are 4
v »
MW. 6; £4 Eu 75


Gooktre | 6 c. 2 e


7
o A. 7298 Hiorrom®? P
2 : Grboes AA:


00 9 ==; 9 [rmmmithidk
foes Au, MA. Nightor ©


The


ta


—
-


2
-Y
Fortowamn |
4


D 9 RE F#.
Wa. Wee 2 oO * —
4 oa — 2 ok Sed „„ . „ * 7 . RN
2 2 x But O97 Rome I HR % FY | * 5 * a 2 * 9M
[7.44 — dag = W Carvinart o Nu. © Dr1g av 8 2


8 — e 1
Ad. yy we . We . vert es, — a Non el,
- 547


ee Agel * my
C&, A "Drhonrurh 0


N 1.4 AO 22 - — .
| AT Neu 42 L Dr
* 29 7 1 2
rs . 2 OT; «Opie 11 e.
1 P Vregenny 2
& -- £m . Þ LON UN i/ 8 IS
& £” Boar *: J 78 4. Vita 2 > *
D ö 74 : «MH 4
_ ee og 2 5 ads F 112.4 "1 3; * 4 , v
— 75 ms bo + * e, geg 0 the 4 A . N 75 8 1 4 Y 73 BY. vl,
Hrn, xv} e 74 uu, {op 4 Ce Blu
Pal Lanny Tcvince Hoop the: © Sy DN 7 , N
on Gere S 1 lar nor A
o iGyimp OWN / 1 8 s hich »
8 3 rer — % : | 4% Aln hgh Prof ou 2 H Nan lar © ,
7 + "ATED / | a $A W - 4a Vr eee 53 2 4 6 Pei mis F/4 Is WEIAGCTLEY
65 N 0 ne ee — * Hege 75 * Gultgnrnes | N
0 - 22 A vo Ps 225 9 4 "NO Hs
2 4 n= PrnFalla t | rr Ao „e PR \ 2 75 — 772 uid P WY * Du you
4 <0. 75 AH Peace Thr wo , * mW” 1777 8
8 Griv/th © ue, Hor Snitz De td —L by, Carol ood Lv Rong i /: e. n, w M. gil, Link
 ofremain \#” len 2, a a ares pe Wy b p = args We? OE | { 2 Dr 5
G 92 7 A L. - 7; de, Gre, ho * "w 1 of 4 Gorrnhaven
1 Tre gate . * a 22 eu wi "Yu * C , :
KI RRIER Agfa 17 8. Datteln, A lern. 4 ali a LOU HO
MN in, ff Wa . \ *
4 V * 7 | C111Noav
wy nim, oP) * | Tons”
/ ali 4


679 |
A * vp" 2.


| CD), thn Hint
46 C 1 f s


Ho 22 . 2
enge Suh '<


[


1
en 2
* 4


* e 4


I ©


— an


A 7 10


Tre "i eee,


1 ar!

As 5 — — 2. 2
. Profle SEAS ,

Lye ndher »


F


por 7177
„ For


or:


be, to nas


a 2
\ n a Frevotheg ©


5 54 eg, 7 a $4


2 Tie,


- _—


4 IR,
Ruan nn ig hr ”


0 Ciige A
nance me, S


1
2 5 net


a


BY 4 N


a A 4 —
nt.
— Wn


*+


*.


ll uit
— — — m — VIII.... — i,, / =! 44 ⁴⁰＋
1% 666%, 177C/ / HI i


% 22 . 2/ "27, Br, x7 5 8 os
EZEZ;


7 * 4


0 — — 9 ud 2 uw : . 1 7 i * TY Ft „ tt A, | 52 J 52 -
| 75 , Hose f e 5 515 wy 7 2 1 * * ee; 2 Junkor W a — 7
, ” 7 WW » , 7 4 a 4 by 7 MA: 72 1h, oO —
3 et * The 4 WA ut O i "ination * 0 In- , 2 o


—


L/ 7 Heardage 1 7 A 17 8 « wala THANE 1 bl. 78 te
# S Eval g. dt n. IS R 8 8 87 tk . tft thick New Gn a oc

Frame . 4 4 Bayt 6 7, m 0 4 „he, Hes 7 7 Mt . Rolls. * 1 82 ann, o Me
He no Prot Theg en In bau * TAE" 2 4 lite, EY a rae 4 bee

W Drum 7 8 | T. R wth avi 4
Ao P a 5 8 pe * r: 7 R "2. ane Lv 72 wn (i Crabaoly 22 — raind 4 1
” i wo, Halina — * 7 4 K ah nug, {.l, =, I I. — © oy
\ . * 7 vill : 8 C nts ON . "Burk * K Hum & a—_ 2 f
Tre rama Ra FF Peu ll „ — — — . 80 o eee. py Tar edge, ”"R

of , , 2 _

if 1 Zane NN oB My, mr, "Fe — We” Eos | —.— au, neg. Sb V e
Zinne Het 1 N an" eee be enn a ® Calling - nm.
2 Y Fo linen. d o 2 wa . 7 5
2 Oddo eu- , lee. wa Dunmoar _ Lomar *
2 7 . 97 : A il n Fog. OA,
The Hole e 8 Zern, © 2
F a 'a _ 4


YO
_ th * * * =
d | und d f De — = l Ne
tr Rock * _ Fh Toon * "Bedard
3% Yadre — 2 lou on 2
'4 -# Crant ock —_ a re Ting


—


Cartfmas 33 N |
Hllongi=e\? * Zino ran F # A>o=, um /uf11 =
1 1 23 ber ü 4 | p - 1 gue 2 -0 ddl ue. * ck ,

; % Hu . A De Pere, as * 711 Buna, /


7 0 yy aue, * — ; :
on 7 85 2

— 22

„ Neu


. *


: 2 aSD SDenns A
. L — 47


% LA
e ee bee, ee a
bali n "nu {4 POWDER- Hoi ; tplive CA (4;
CZ 82 o 1 EYE; : 05 : Jo B
228 F o A. 720 Prom? u WOW
N | | oh mY 2 7 * ez Knee 2. Fass e Ther X ?
I 1 == , QT rr T1 0 » fi Ana "mr,
- al un = | Lendra\ a 9 ——— A 1 e e »y
vIrenen * / . We ( 1 "age © / [ 72 2 eu,, N. 7 Nightor * 8 1 ore, 9 *
4 |} [ tl 7 |
. Py . Fi 4 a 0 n | 25 —_ fd 2 +4 47 2 bh ”
| - f * OO
0 ; r 1 n
48 8 75 Zune —_—
5 o Hu —2 Apdren tint q
Drvoryan u * Nip Auk ® Ny — 0 1 e ri Polmeer \1 9/4
un 7 routhow Anu,“ : befor s Fuer P wurde” 3 22 ,
m * . we! e | 6 Lag=" =
Polk. 2 2222 N 2 * 4 irik « 1
. NM | —
5 e 4 49 0M an 1 22 = 55
2 — — K eren — umme 8 * o s . 4
of i Ray: Than 4 "IF ad Lou N 9 | : by my 2 P 22 Oo
Fas Nn St. _ 7 5 e. * 4 „Hutten - 4 Lis 4 TL x"
|; —


60


rie-. Carry ** 1726 47 5 \


Cadorn © N . e FCornelly


A


zuuu cue, I 2 : |
125 3 ment 3 ocean 755
Wt aar, & |
JL * 2
8 "mae J © Pr . f 75 : pag F
boy 2 here 7 — TY Galt, | AGILE Y
it | |
Hg N Ea e di- OV. Tipr UShis Ne 28 + — * — eflin
e ee 27 POTTY


% * te gal * a 2
* 4 L -
e e e
dl 1 {
Pavers 2


e
0 True


Ihe n- 2
| - of 4 4 Tus 2 c prog it haven


4 IF: *


＋ ar vien”
Cu tneas


1), 4 lun He TL 7


FL 1M , 4


(37 &,


et


N i.
nan
pthony R


72 MMM


He oo


ff R717 7C4E LM Ml GW To)\Jonathan
_ N [lombrr of P11 (ame


. K Ca 0 & =; a
4 The jn. 7 | ) I n the E
(— 2 . AP: F


q SY
y | Fin: ras of {io os 2007 4


(4/441111.111 GR |/////1///1//// ET m 1 2


3 : /


Tee MA


#
Ul


Foam


Hantey


75 2 JF ul He


2


N , e


ou ord Fig OD * rt. n A 2
[7 7 „AN. Cars whe Tir. bam Comme fe thorn 15 1
10 on. — & , , l 75 1 Biadstone 0
a — — 25 en.
a Zen, o Kaen Brdicht Bier o 1 - Pg . An . 2 N Heer tan „ thu * net *
ov 4 „ Herde 0 F ; ,
* nr) ; North! H | Q _— 2 7 Punterton 2
ruin, A CONN cn 8 le Good t ; 1 "Ws — g= ume, yr
—_ >. Coat. Oo ,s,
1 2 Wine St 7 ill, 75
A u. | * blub. Zu-, I ro} — 2
225 MH (lod l 1 ——_ MM Tela 0 Linmr 1 + WY —_ 4 „ A. I. A” pe "MI \ : ”-
| — 2 , . its ual "2 , dll < Z
1 70 . * . 2 © ale „ E
ALL 13 _— K 18 y 7 a 7 W 3 Panda for, I | ue n . »nhouk =
Fame _ pps 4 ö — F . T2 WO... > . hn = . aHolwll ' nl 26
be Hundred r N
* * Je nnar | dad 9 0 5 * 6 Stoke Jimfland 22 e 2 Ha” IE /
Tr wb 45 W E 8 T N 1 N 4 _” . (uu o s * e, met erg
. woy ib. Aurel 45 WT 9 in hikes Ws 4 = #7 - Hf. mp WH. nmin't =
A o oy & Then whe ir Barra) fe P : / E
ar. Tu grcl r But e 1 Southorm — 2
175 n 7 5 ©O tremad tot 'Y {i N FORT . "HH f „ AT i > o 4 =
l / "gy ate o a 8.Neots * D k Nt. ay” 41 7 6. 7 4 2 pe "7 Fol N 5 : 4, * C © H. lnbush 5 2 J/ * .
nMHMernth . fro a Lui Hare Fog th 0 Tron much © a Sole Am, Ward's. 74 aud: |
2 G/ Lait fen grit _ } — Seer, A D vnn, Auen 22 1 ed 2 © - :
- * Lay ; a N wethr © Tr ng roll * or 6 oth OM: bon A {47 wid Flt ty Q An. „ ,$ Newbrilg:
—— Dee Dy L, ern . 2 0% 2 7 ae, 44 doh _ * Hay pute 5 Len 0 E A 8 * Io © a :
4 77 N. . "I \ » + = n
en 0 Sil. hs eo args © / * © ; WCC * | . 1 MH 50 mk” 4 7510 1 974 5
2 mage, 2 how LI A. * 4. Al LD 27 * Hefe, „, whey — . „ 18 7 7.0 © of 2000 11 Ann © * 17 , T7 AP/ =
Fam bf 2 — A e e B N be e u . 2 5 aMule. E
. : 7 _ 118 , * n of 2 2 47 = * Wb: ll 2 - 24 — ** "dh 2
py " B We, 47 — — 0 15. * 1 lun 955 3 4 . bye”: 8 Pomanr , 1 /
Plggbe & Purvonage » * 2 4 l, , 83 25 2 e Hue Al 6 4 Fe Rl ad 2 OF Ab o
W KE 6 2 Mon 1 * 77
Bocon noc Non * Tl. Cod : 4 A. ghuuuli. 771
n eie Leg itt \ rgurͤ "2 7 2 > 0 i ” 7 7 7 2 77. He 8
ZS u Fa F 4 ry 14 4 N - tis % © 4 "te 5
\ IO / Za HH” Au. 1 1 a {1 l S'Neltion Pd "tha * . b
Boltleor Ln lu, Bon HY U. has 7 _ n * 25 * —— BH 0 MI eee 8
K * 8 Kune I Labin mm 2 * OR: Av 2 RE” N , JAP 4 8 =
* 2 4 we y 1 70 * AY ,Y - as AF«
— 0 w_ l. 5 e ** e 1 . * Ge 4 E T4 H. A 2 e nm 2 2 CO
/4 Fat fee. N 422 abt e. N . ge 5
e, fee. . 3 ne, me 2% 4. muck
FELL bl * 1 8 / *
22 — Y? . 0 797 * 5 N Is * 8 2 L,
6 127 * A , 5
Lib. 2 45 1 —_ re (4 2 * 1 N Leen Bon — * E ig
"a 7 4 "Y -
LAY; ny on FLIP wy " 1 2 8 Lande > "4; 2 5 2 naue
N P AN 4 Fe 7. ES C " a E
— Bakg pO AN W ev Cirkeeth "© — : I
3 1 * 25 1 7 J Hr / 2 Hint
. AR Themuls 2
* n B. SGFERMAI 8 Ste ov 5


.


Dakellye
©
Rytha |

27 4 1 bee


0. 2 ff Him
Hbwr ©


1 257A i — Ki
* \ vB *


T3 onan .
0 Ahn Jo ine o
Ae ©


raton


Nr


WY


IC


V


N.


al


mm ©


wo Ix re he Ox


thi han N aſß bleigh 77 Menabilly Fg.
/ entry . C: 9 1 Og 19) 0 7 22 2,


the (County. ol Connwarr, .


A AP MoH, Hack 2 e 47" nib il),
y His _ humble, and Obedient Servant, —


/ We Ct e Sho NAN


4


= WE
1


JON 2 *
Lene Deere


fo of 4h 48


UI
_—


ULLI


1466


5


| * Mon Buradow, Vil
Bur:


F 2G ove
THO ax


; Wilh,.
£0 Teh
0 wy
era.
©


bo.
regia


7 *


13


13 r — n „„


*
an”
+


7 A heal
Smudeaux


24.


& und. en


— —


be oa]
wy


BS.


2 bun
2 u
„ud hank


Nr


= *
-


(ume


*


H,


pn


SN icholany
J. tee.


'
*


lock ©.
oO le
48


* Nane 1


Y


hs ”


CUte


WU


,


Mu


%
%


WW


LILA


GB


ern


© Hlblakid accontng to Ml of Yarhament
1 FR 10%] 74 5


öl...


Me


OF ROMAN REMAINS IN CORN WALL.


About a century and a half ſince, Mr. Carew mentions only one
Roman Coin, found in this country; I ſhall ſpeak here of thoſe
few which I cither have in my poſſeſſion, or have ſeen, or have
been beyond all queſtion informed of; and doubtleſs there arc
many more in the cabinets of the curious, which have not yet
reached my knowledge, but may make their appearance
hereafter.

There were two principal tempte ons which led the Romans into

theſe Weſtern parts ; the plenty of Metals, and the excellency of
our Harbours. 'That the Romans worked our ancient Mincs, is
extremely probable; for, having found out the way to the
Caſſiterides above 200 years before Julius Celar, it is not to be
ſuppoſed that they ever quitted that profitable trade, which was
worth purſuing even from Italy, and muſt needs therefore have
induced the Romans to ſeize upon the Mines, the ſources of theſe
riches, when they came here, and were ſo near the fountain's
brink.
Some of the moſt ancient Mines I have yet ſeen in Cornwall are
as follows. There are ſome in the higher parts of Wendron parith,
which being a wild of barren hills, that never appears to have been
cultivated, it is not eaſy to imagine what could draw the Romans
here to live, and bury their dead, but the plenty of Tin. Yet here
they were, for above theſe old heaps of workings there ſtands a
Stone-Barrow, called Golvadnek-Burrow, in which ſome Roman
Coins, and other things of the ſame nation, were found in the ycar

There were alſo ancient Mines near Karnbre in the pariſh of
Illogan. On the South fide towards the foreſt lies a Bald of
ancient works called Karn-Kei. On the North-Weſt, in the pariſhes
of Illogan and Camborn, many there are of like kind, and ſome in
the ſides of Karn-bre Hill; and here many Roman Coins, at ſeveral
times, in ſeveral parts, have been found. Some near the village, on
the Eaſtern end of this hill, I had given me by the Rev. Mr. Collins,
Rector of Redruth, viz. an AN roNINVs, large ſize, of the ancient
lead (Coins of which Metal are very rare): Reverſe, a Triumphal
Arch. Another much defaced, I think a ravsriNa. 3. Divo
| CONSTANTIO PIO. 4. Unknown. 5. SEVERVS ALEXANDER. ©. Un-
known. At the foot of the ſame hill, in a circle marked in the
Map of Karn-bre W, one Mr. Bevan of Redruth diſcovered, in
July 1749, three feet under the ſurface, the quantity of one pint
of copper Roman Coins, two only of which came to me; to wit,
the ſenior Tetricus, and the Roma, in Plate VII. Fig. IV. and V.


3 A Bal is a cluſter of Mines,


p. 117.


2909


300


an wc) 1
Roman
Coins found
near Har-
bours.


OF ROMAN REMAINS IN CORNWALI.


p. 117. A few years before, one Mr. Stephens of the ſame town
found about a quart of old Coins of the fame nation, in the fame


lace.


That there were very ancient Mines in the pariſh of St. Juſt, in
Penwith, cannot be doubted, conſidering that this coaſt is within


ſight of the Caſſiterides, and reſorted to as one of thoſe iſlands:


the ancient traders for Tins.


by


There are alſo very ancient Mines in St. Agnes Bal, adjoining to
which a Gold Valentinian was found that has reached wy
knowledge; and this 1s not the only evidence of this Bal being
known to the Romans, as we ſhall ſee hereafter.

Harriſon, in his Deſcription of Britain, p. 65, ſpeaking of the


place where Arthur is ſuppoſed to have fought his laſt battle, on the


banks of the River Camel, ſays, © Not long fince, and in the
© remembrance of man, a braſs pot full of Romane coine was found


te there, as I have often heard.”


Mr. Carew tells us (p. 8, 1ſt edit.) that he had a Braſs Coin of
Domitian found in one of the Corniſh Tin-works.

Theſe Coins found near, and among, and even in our ancient
Mines, far from Towns, Harbours, and Forts, muſt have been depo-
ſited either by the Roman Miners, or by officers appointed by that


nation to ſuperintend and


guard the Mines which poſſibly the


Romans might have worked more by the Natives than by


themſelves.


Several parcels of Roman Coins have alſo been found upon the


hills, and banks, of our harbours.


At Tredine alias Treryn), the South-Weſt point of Cornwall,
there was found (ſays Leland, Itin, Vol. III. p. 4.) in hominum
© 77e-M0r1ia, digging for the fox, a braſs pot full of Roman Money.“
I have two filver Coins fouhd near Penroſe, which ſtands on a Lake
called the Loe Pool, in the Eaſtern part of Mount's-Bay. One is
of Trajan; Reverſe, a female figure fitting : Exergue, po The
ſecond is a face helmeted, the metal much eaten. Reverſe, two
horſes, fide by fide as if drawing a chariot, full ſpeed, no letters


viſible: both of the ſmall faze.


r J have not ſeen any Roman Coins found
here; but J have been informed, by Mr. Borlaſe
of Pendeen, that as ſome workmen were remoy-
ing a bank in a Field belonging to the adjacent
Tenement of Boſcadzhil, they found near a hun-
dred Copper Coins, which were all brought to
him, and the greateſt part of them by him difpoſed
of as a preſent to William Harris of Hayne in
Devonſhire, Eſq; the few which he retained in
his own keeping are now loſt, but anToniNvs
Piv3 was very plainly to be read on ſome of them,
as he well remembered, December 17, 1737-
+ & In 1702, in the pariſh of Tawednack, be-


*


ce tween St. Ies and the Land's- end, were ſound,
« under a prodigious rock of Moor- ſtone, called
« the Giant's Rock, a large flat ſtone, ſupported
&« by four pillars of the ſame, an Urn full of aſhes
« with a round ball of earth by the fide of it,
« and in the aid ball fourſcore ſilver Coins, of
ci the latter Emperours, very fair and well pre-
«© ſerved, 1 could not have the ſight of more
« than five of them, of which I got three, of
« Valentinian I, Gratian, and Arcadius; the
« reſt were ſeized for the Lord of the Soil.

Mr. Tonkin's letter to Biſhop Gibſon, Aug. 4


1733. MS. B, p. 224. On


.


OF ROMAN REMAINS IN CORNWALL,


On an arm of the Sca called Helford Haven, in the tenement of


Condorah, in the ſpring of the year 1735, were found 24 gallons
of the Roman Braſs Money, ſeveral of which I have now by me,
and many more I have ſeen, all which were of the age of Conſtan-
tine and his family, and had either the Heads of thole Emperours,
or were of the cities of Rome, or Conſtantinople.

As theſe Coins were found in ſuch a quantity, and ſo remarkably
ſree from the Coins of preceding Emperours, there is no doubt
but they were brought hither, and depolited, in the age Immediately
ſucceeding Conſtantine the Great. All I have ſeen were of the
{mall ſize (viz. ſomewhat ſmaller than our common farthings) for
which reaſon they muſt have been very incommodious for carrying
on trade, or ſerving any other purpoſe than paying the common
ſoldiers, whoſe daily portions were to be diſtributed in ſuch ſmall
{ums, as made the carriage of little money abſolutely neceflary, to
every ſeparate corps of troops: the place where they were found,
by its ancient fortifications (to be treated of in their proper turn),
will confirm the ſuppoſition that they belonged to ſoldiers.

On the other ſide of this Haven, upon one of the Creeks which
run up into the pariſh of Conſtantine, were found forty Roman
Coins. Four of the largeſt ſize, by the favour of the Rev. Mr.
Collins of St. Erth, I have by me. The firſt of copper, Ir. cakEs.
DOMIT. AVG. GERM. cos. XIII. CENS. r. r. A bold impreſſion, Head
laureated 3 graceful, Reverſe, roxTvNat AvGVSTI. 8. C. Plenty,
with her Cornucopia. — The ſecond of Trajan: bright braſs, Iur.
CAES. NERVAE TRAIANO AVG. GER. DA, Reverſe, figura galcara
fedens, s. c. the third defaced. — The fourth, ravsrina viva, the
younger Fauſtina. Reverſe, fgura ve/tita dextra ſerpentem, ſiniſtra
haſtata.

Fw other Coins which I have ſeen found here are of the lower
Empire, and need not be particularized : the loweſt was one of the
Emperour Valens. DN. VAL. N. P. avG. Reverſe, SEcv. REI VBLICAE
Dar. which brings this parcel about thirty years later than that which
was found on the other ſide the Harbour. Theſe Coins found on
the banks of Helford Haven, belonging to the Soldiery, and depoſited
ſo near one time, will lead us to enquire whether there is any
remarkable incident in hiſtory which may ſupport the conjecture
of the Roman ſoldiers being planted hereabouts in the age aſſigned
to theſe Coins. I think there is.

The Saxon depredations were come to ſuch a height in the time
of Conſtantine the Great, that he thought it neceſſary to ere& an
office unheard of before, the ſole buſineſs of which ſhould be to


4 H protect


301


302


Mopas


Coins.


Trewar-
dreth Coins.


OF ROMAN REMAINS IN CORNWALL;
protect the ſhores of Britain from thoſe pirates; it may, therefore,
be a probable conjeQure, that the ſoldiers were placed at Condoral
(where no Coins but thoſe of him and his fons appear) in the time
of Conſtantius and his brothers for this very purpoſe, as the other;
were depoſited in the following reigns of Valens and Valentinian,
by ſoldiers on the ſame errand ; and what ſeems to confirm this
conjecture, is, that at the mouth of this Helford river there is a
creek ſtil} called Porth Sauſſen, or Saxon's Port, thereby ſhewing
itſelf to have been formerly frequented by the Saxons.

But we are not to imagine that the Romans were not planted
round our harbours till the time of Conſtantine, or that no other
occaſion drew them there, but to guard againſt the Saxon Piracies,
Whenever they ſettled near the fea coaſts, it was neceſlary for them
to be maſters of the adjacent harbour, and muſt have been one of
the chief points that came under their conſideration when they were
upon determining their fettlements, the conveniency of a harbour
to a body of troops being of the laſt importance. To proceed
therefore with Coins found on our harbours. In the month of
October 1747, about two miles below the ſea-port town of Truro,
on a branch of Falmouth Harbour, in a ditch near Mopas Paſſage,
in the pariſh of St. Michael Penkevil, were found twenty pounds
weight of Roman Braſs Coin. The Rev. Mr. Ley, Rector of
Lamoran, who bought them all of the finder, writ me that he never
met with more than one of Severus Alexander, and one of Valerian,
I have examined about 3000 of this parcel, and find them all from
Gallienus, who began his reign, A. D. 259, to Carinus, who with
Carus and Numerian reigned about two years vis. from 282
to 284t.)

Theſe Coins having but one or two of the Emperours preceding
Gallienus, and none below Carinus, appear therefore to have been
depoſited in the time of the laſt mentioned Emperour, and conſe-
quently before the Count of the Saxon ſhore was appointed, upon
what particular occaſion I do not preſume to gueſs ; but that the
Romans were very converfant about Truro, we ſhall have great
reaſon to believe in the ſequel of this chapter.

The next harbour, to the Eaft, is that of Fawy®, near which, in
the neighbouring pariſh of Trewardreth, were many Roman Coins


3 The title of this officer was, Count of the
Saxon ſhore; he had the honourable appellation
of Spectabilis (Camd. Vol. I. p. 96.); he was one
of the three commanders in the Weſt under the


| Maſter of Foot (then chief over all the military


affairs of Britain) by Ammian. Marc. ſtyled Comes
7 rattus Haritimi; had under him ſeven companies
of foot, two troops of horſe, the & cond legion
and a cohort,


© The ſeveral ſorts which came into my
poſſeſſion were as follows: of Gallienus twenty-
ſix, Salonina his wife two; of Poſtumus nine ;
of Victorinus ten; Tetricus fourteen ; Tetricus
jun. eight; Marius two; Claudius twenty-two;
Quintillus four; Aurelian one; Tacitus one;
Probus two; Carinus one. |

u In Linc, Taxation Faxe,


found,


OF ROMAN REMAINS IN CORNWALL.

found, and carefully preſerved by the late worthy Philip Raſhleigh
of Menabilly, Eſq; and now in the poſſeſſion of his ſiſter, Mrs.
Hawkins of Pencoit V.


[ have only to obſerve, that Fawy


lying about ſour miles below


the Uxela (OveZeaz) of Ptolemy, now called Loſtwythyel, and at the
mouth of the ſame navigable and (at Fawy) ſpacious river, this
country and the coaſt was well known to the Romans, for they
could not get at Loſtwythyel by water without paſſing by Fawy


and indeed it 1s very


likely that they


had a ſtation for their ſhips


here, for on the other ſide of the river, about a mile below Faws.
there is an ancient village with a fair cove before it, ſtill called Pol-
rouan, ſignifying the Roman Pool, or, as I find it written ſometimes,
Port-rouan,. that is, the Roman Port or Cove.
No Roman Coins found on the banks of the noble Harbour of
Hammoze have yet come to my knowledge; but it being evident
that the Romans were ſpread upon all the harbours to the Weſt,
we may ſafely conclude that their Coins have been, or will be found
there; the excellency of this harbour being ſuch, as could no more
eſcape their poſſeſſion, than their notice x.
Let theſe parcels of Coins ſuffice to ſhew the Roman Settlements
on our Harbours. Many ſcattered Coins found in different places I
have received information of, and the late Mr. Tonkin died poſſeſſed
of great numbers of his own collecting, and collected with a deſign
to give light to the hiſtory of our county; but as his notes relating
to them have not reached me, and as taking notice of all the Coins
of this kind that have been found in particular places will more
properly make a part of the Topography than of the preſent work ,


[ ſhall detain the reader, on this head, no longer than to obviate


a few doubts, by making ſome general obſervations on the Roman
Coins found here.


Theſe Coins are ſometimes found ſingle and diſperſed, here and SECT. 111.
there one, or a few only together.


In ſuch caſe we may conclude


them accidentally dropt, and loſt ; but whether by Britans, Traders,
or Romans, will be uncertain, unleſs found near a Roman Way,
Fort, or Habitation.


Sometimes they are found in heaps, as at Condorah twenty-four Why found
gallons, at Mopas twenty pounds weight; in which caſe, I apprehend


What have reached my notice of this parcel
ar2 the following ſorts. Of Valerian one; Galli-
ncus three; Victorinus twenty; Tetricus fifteen ;
Claudius nine; Aurelian one; Maximinus one;
Conſtantin. Max. one; Conſtantin, jun. one;


Urbs Roma one.


Some other Roman Coins,


found on the Eaſtern bank of Fawy harbour
near Ethy, have lately come to the Author's
knowledge, and will be taken notice of in their


Proper place.


* By the late Lady Carew of Eaſt-Anthony


(ſeated on this harbour), I was favoured with
the ſight of ſeveral fair Roman Coins ; but
where they were found (though probably in tha:
neighbourhood), I could not learn.

The places where Roman Coins (as far as !
have been yet informed) have been found, at-
marked in the Map of Cornwall, Plate I. with an
Afﬀteriſk, by which it will appear that they have
been diſperſed in al! the extremities of this
county.


they


S]
fs


Single ones
moſtly un-


certain,


in larze


9 Parcels.


2. — 2


8


—


— +.


'
- [1
— v» 1
1
: J
43
11
5
,
5 F
17 1
*
14
e 1
14 ;
:
|
:
. 1
4 .


2
” 30

19
i IE.
' 1


304


OF ROMAN REMAINS IN CORNWALL,


they muſt be conſidered, as part of the Roman Military Cheſt, it
being equally abſurd to imagine that either Merchants or Miter:
would lay up ſuch a heap of copper farthings (if I may call they,
ſo) or carry them from place to place to trathck withal, or that an;
but the Romans could have ſuch a quantity in their poſſeſſion fg;
payment of ſoldiers. This money found in quantities, was
purpoſely hidden in the earth, being always found covered (though
ſome deeper buried than others); but for what reaſon it was *
encloſed, learned men have been of different opinions.

Some have thought that the Romans buried their money in order
to perpetuate their glory, and the memory of their conqueſts,
That they incloſed Coins in the foundation of their Edifices, and
in their Sepulchres, is true, and ſhews the zeal they had to continue
the remembrance of their nation, and the age they lived in: but
the glory of their nation required other proof than the precarious


teſtimony which a few Coins buried in the earth might, and might,


never, give. We ſee the degeneracy as well as the perfection of
their Arts in the Medals, and allow the uſe of them in adjuſting
facts and dates; but the glory of their nation muſt be eſtimated
by the ſpirit and the juſtice of their laws, their virtue, arts, and
military exploits, and the ſcience as well as magnificence of their
publick ſtructures. | |
Some think the great number of Roman Coins found in this
Iſland were buried by the Romans when they were drawn off b
Conſtantine and other Emperours, to fight their battles on the
Continent, when the prize of victory was the Imperial Purple;
but neither of theſe can have been the occaſion of hiding either of
the two parcels found at Condorah or at Mopas, for the latter had
no Coins but what what were 20 years before Conſtantine, and the
former had thoſe of his ſons, and therefore could not be buried here
at his time of leaving Britain, which was the beginning of his reign.
Neither could they be hid here in the time of Maximus, for neither
of them has any Coins of the three Emperours immediately
preceding that Uſurper, which undoubtedly they muſt have had it
depoſited in Maximus's reign.
Mr. Speed y ſeems to think that when the Romans took their laſt
farewell they buried their money, and that this is the reaſon why
we find ſo much coin of that nation. This may poſſibly be true ot
the money coined in the time of the laſt Emperours immediately
preceding the Roman deſertion of Britain, but cannot be true of
ſuch parcels which have none of the laſt Emperours intermixed ;
for as ſoon as ever Emperours aſiumed the Purple, one of their firſt


y See Chron, p. 187.
Acts


k AM
*


—


C
t
J
de
f
1

J


hid it in their tents, from which many a ſoldier goes upon an


OF ROMAN REMAINS IN CORNWALL.


Acts of Empire was to coin Money in their own name, and to have W|
their Effigies impreſſed; and therefore no parcels can be later, as to |
their interment, than the laſt Emperour's time whoſe Coin is therein
found. But I cannot ſee any reaſon why the Romans ſhould bury
their Money when they left this Iſland , for their deſertion was not
forced, but voluntary; they did not leave us in a hurry, but upon
mature conſideration, that the ſafety of their own country required
their aſſiſtance, preferably to that of any other. That the Romans,
therefore, called off to fight their own battles, ſhould bury their
Money, without which it is in vain for any people, however potent
and glorious, to go to war, ſeems to me irreconcileable to common
prudence, I ſhould rather think that every foldier, marching
againſt an Enemy, or reſiding in Garriſon, either carricd it about
with him, by which means ſome ſcattered Coins, and even purſes
of Money were loſt, by the death or careleſneſs of the owner ; or


22
Ps |


expedition, or to an engagement, and never returns again : when
ſtrictly beſieged, or driven from their Caſtles and Towns, by enemy,
or fire, upon ſudden aſſaults, it is likely they hid ſmall ſums
as well as they could, or forgot, and neglected them; but
when we find ſeveral gallons together of this ſmall Coin, as at
Mopas and Condorah, we cannot ſuppoſe them the property of
ſingle perſons (every particular perſon being willing, for his own
conveniency, to reduce Braſs into Silver, or Gold), but may juſtly
conclude them part of the ſtores of the Qe/for, or Paymatter of the
Army, kept by him for the conveniency of the ſoldiers, and buricd
there where we find them, upon ſome unexpected alarm, when they
could not be carried off. In ſhort, we owe the greateſt part of this
kind of treaſure, to the confuſion and fatal events of War, the
plundering Camps, burning Temples, Streets, and Cities.

Some may wonder, that we have ſo many Braſs Coins, and but Why more
few of Silver and Gold; but when we conſider how much fewer and Ser or
more portable theſe precious metals are than braſs, we may caſily Cen.
conceive that both Officers and Soldiers, on any ſurprize, were well
able to carry oft a ſum of great value in Silver and Gold, when
without great incumbrance they could not diſpoſe of Braſs.

Laſtly, It may be obſerved of our Corniſh Roman Coins, that why mot |
more of the lower Empire are found than of the higher. But we bas“ 164
are not ſingular in this reſpect, for the ſame thing may be ſaid of We
the mott Eaitern, and indeed all parts of this kingdom. “ Nor is
it ſtrange (ſays Sir Thomas Brown Hydriotaph. 8vo. p. 17.) to


' As Kennett's Paroch. Autiqu. p. 11. „ buried their money in hopes of an opportunity
66 1b: 1 = 5
Wen at laſt they deſerted the Iſland they © toreturn, and raile it up.”


4 I „ {nd


306


OF ROMAN REMAINS IN CORNWALL. '


te find Roman Coins of Copper and Silver among us (viz. in Nor-
&« folk) of Veſpaſian, Trajan, Adrian, Antoninus, Commodus, Seve.
& rus, &c. but the greater number of Diocletian, Conſtantine, Con-
&« ſtans, Valens, with many of Victorinus, Poſthumus, Tetricus,
<« and the thirty Tyrants in the reign of Gallienus.” Whence we
ſee that not only in Cornwall, but in Norfolk, a country well and
early frequented by the Romans, the Coins from the thirty Tyrants
downwards are moſt common; one reaſon of which is, the morc
frequent reſort of the Roman Emperours and Soldiers to this Iſland
during the time of the lower Empire, than in the reign of the more
early Ceſars; to which a ſecond may be added, that in the latter times
of the Roman Power, the Soldiers were more diſtreſſed and hurried,
and more Britans in every part of the Iſland taken into the Roman
Soldiery, conſequently the Roman money was more diſperſed, and
common, in the latter, than in the former ages, and the greater
the plenty, the more there is to loſe.


H.


Of Roman Sepulchres, and other Remains found in Cornwall.


HETHER the Urns found at Chikarn® (to the number of

fifty, many of them carefully placed, fide by fide, round the
principal Urn, which was carved, and lay in the center of the
Barrow) were Roman, and that Barrow a Family-ſepulchre, I will
not take upon me to ſay, all the Urns being broke, or not to be
found; but certain it is, the Romans had ſuch family burial-places*,
and the ſame manner, if I do not miſtake, of diſpoſing their Urns.
Mr. Hals, in his Obſervations on Cornwall, mentions a Roman
Coin, found (as he ſays) in an Urn taken out of a Tumulus in this
county. The Coin muſt be as follows, by the letters he gives us,


IMP. CAES. M. ANT, GORDIANVS AVG. d the Reverſe, PROVIDENTIA
AVG.


Mr. Walker gives us another reaſon (Dedi-
cation of Coins and Medals, p. 7.) „Though
very many Roman Coins be found here, yet
© not many of great rarity, they being generally
* of thoſe who, ſetting up for themſelves againſt
* the lawfully eſteemed Emperors, were called
© Tyrants, eſpecially ſuch as reigned here, and
* in France; ſuch were Carauſius, AleQus,
ae”


d See Book III. chap. x. p. 234.


© See Moreton's Northamptonſhire, p. 528,
and 530. |

4 Mr. Hals ſays, it muſt be read, CESAR MAN TIs
GORD. and the Reverſe, PROVIDENTIA AVGYRIS;
not ſufficiently informed that Gordianus aſſumed
the title of Marc. Antoninus, as many other
Emperours did, and that PROVIDENTIA AVGVSTI
is a common legend for the Keverles of molt
Emperours.


Mr.


OF ROMAN SEPULCHRES


Mr. Carte tells us (Vol. I. p. 103. Hiſt. of England), that “ a
« little while before he came into Cornwall” (which was in the vear
1714.) © a fine Roman Urn was diſcovered, with a cover to it, very
large, on a hill oppoſite to Karnbrè; it had aſhes in it, and one
« Coin of the bignels of a Crown-piece, with an inſcription on it
« yery legible, ſhewing it to be a Medal of Auguſtus Ceſar.”

« Within leſs than ten years before I was there, a quantity of
« Roman Coins (ſome of which, by the brightneſs of their colour
« ſeemed to reſemble gold) were dug up in one of the Barrows in
« the Pariſh of Illogan. I have ſeen a great number of the Coins
« found here in ſearching Barrows, but none later than Lucilla
« and Fauſtina found in thoſe Urns and Barrows, but in other
« places down along to Valentinian the third e.“


3<F


By the neatneſs of the Lace-work round this Urn (Pl. XVIII. Sacred


Fig. VI. p. 208.), I ſhould judge it to be Roman.


Near the Manſion-houſe at Kerris, in the Pariſh of Paul, ſome Kertis Urn.


workmen removing an old hedge in the year 1723, diſcovered a
vault about eight feet long, and ſix high, the floor paved with ſtonc,
and the roof arched over with the ſame materials; within it was a
plain fair Urn, of the fineſt red clay, full of earth (Pl. XVIII.
Fig. III.). By the largeneſs and ſtrength of this vault, the ſmall-
nels of the Urn, and the earth without any bones; this Urn muſt
have contained the aſhes of ſome conſiderable perſon f. But far-
ther ; by the delicate ſhape of this Urn, and the fine clay it is
made of 8, compared with thoſe we commonly find in Cornwall
(as Pl. XVIII. Fig. IV. V. VII. IX. ib.), and ſome Coins found with
it (but not preſerved, becauſe of Braſs); this may be juſtly ranked
among the Roman Urns. For that the Romans had Sepulchres
of this vaulted kind, and Urns within them, in the Weſtern parts
of Cornwall; the following relation, as I received it from the late
Thomas Tonkin, Eſquire, a Gentleman well learned in' the An-
tiquities of this county, in a letter dated March 1, 1727, will
place beyond all ſuſpicion, or doubt.


In the year 1700 ſome Tinners opening a Barro of Stones, Golvadnck


called Goldvadnek Barrow, in the pariſh of Wendron, came at
* laſt to ſome large ones diſpoſed in the nature of a vault, in which
* they found an Ura full of aſhes, and a fine chequered brick pave-
* ment, which, together with the Urn, they ignorantly broke to
pieces; they found allo, in the ſame place, ſeveral Roman Brats
Coins of the ſecond ſize, and a ſmall inſtrument of Braſs ſet in


* Ibid. p. 104. Coins. ruined walls, ridge-tiles, and bricks,
Ste Chapter of Urn-burial, Book III. are evidences that the Romans made their Urns
Chap. X. of ſuch clay. See Morcton's Northamptonſfhite,
* Earthen Veſſels and Fragments of this bright p. 519.
rd colour, being found at Caſter, with Roman


C1vOIrY,


Barrow.


308


OF ROMAN SEPULCHRES


Ivory, which I ſuppoſe the Roman Ladies made uſe of about their
hair. The Coins were much defaced ; two of them, with the
e inſtrument, were brought to me; on the firſt was very legible,
«© IVA FAVSTINA, the Head of the elder Fauſtina, the Reverſe had
© only remaining s. c.; the other, as well as I could gueſs (for the
e Inſcription was quite defaced, and the Head much ſpoilt), was
* of LVCILLAa, wife of the Emperour Verus, and daughter to Marc,
Antoninus the Philoſopher. Since that, I had another given
me, found, as well as I remember, at the fame time and place,
ce of the Emperour MARC. ANTONINVS PIVs, huſband of the elder
„ Fauſtina, in which Ax ro is plain; Reverſe, a woman ſtand-
* ing with the Haſta in her left-hand, the reſt defaced, all but
6:4, &--

In a letter, dated Auguſt 4, 1733, of the ſame Gentleman
(Mr. Tonkin) to the late Right Rev. Dr. Gibſon then Biſhop of
London, the laſt paragraph runs thus: © Since that, I had three
© more (viz. Roman Coins) brought to me, which I believe came
“from the ſame place: One of theſe was of Trajan, Eris magni,
c one of Nerva, and one of Marcus Aurelius Antoninus, both
* medi Æris, but all much defaced.” T. T. MS. B. p. 224.


Karn mene-= About a furlong from Goldvadnek, on the hill called Karn-


lezBarrows.


menelez, ſtand two Barrows of the ſame kind; theſe have alſo been
ſearched, to what purpoſe I cannot poſitively ſay ; but the guide
who carried me to them informed me, that in one of them had
been found ſome Coins of Julius Ceſar; which relation, though !
do not credit (as to the name of the Emperour, Julius Ceſar's
money being very ſcarce in Britain), may, nevertheleſs, have taken
its riſe from Coins found here belonging to ſome of the Ceſars;
theſe Barrows being ſo near to Golvadnek (which was undoubtedly
Roman) make it the more probable, that theſe two were alſo of
the ſame people; and it is very remarkable that one of theſe is alſo
walled at the edge (five foot high when I faw it), which makes me
fancy that it muſt have been erected in a Pyramidal or Conic
Figure; an improvement upon the rude ſhape of a Stone-barrow,
which is more likely to proceed from the Romans than from any
other people. In this claſs, I think, may be reckoned the curious
Urn found about the year 1600, of which Mr. Carew (p. 157
1ſt Edit.), gives the following account: Certain hedgers di-
* viding a cloſe on the ſea- ſide hereabouts h, chanced in their
« digging upon a great cheſt of Stone, artificially joined, whole
* cover they (over-greedy for booty) rudely broke, and therewithal
« a great earthen pot encloſed, which was gilded and graved with
letters, defaced by this miſadventure, and full of black cartd ;


b viz, Trewardreth- bay, where Mr. Raſhleigh's Roman Coins were found.


(s the


FOUND IN CORN W AI. I.


« the aſhes, doubtleſs, as that the Urn, of ſome famous perſon-
« age i. |

1 the foot of Karn-bre-hill, in a circle marked W in the Map, Roman Re-
three feet under the ſurface, were found, together with one pint uebi.
of Roman Coins (mentioned before p. 300. ), the head of an Ani-

mal in Braſs Pl. VII. p. 117. Fig. I.) the hinge of ſome cover (F ig.

III.), and a concave thin plate full of holes of the ſame metal

(Fig. II.). They are repreſented in their real ſize. The head is

hollow, and I take it for the head of a ram, and to have been the

pummel of the handle of an ancient ſword or dagger : one not ver

unlike this may be ſeen in Montf. (Tom. IV. Pl. XXIV. N* 6.).

The hinge needs no explanation, Whether the other was the co-

yer of the mouth of the Simpulum, or a veſſel called the Periran-

terium, uſed to beſprinkle the Sacrificers with Holy Water, or part

of a muſical inſtrument, or whether it might have been part of

the lid of the Incenſe Pot, called Thuribulum (the perfume or in-

cenſe to aſcend through the holes), is uncertain, there being ſcarce

remains enough to decide what it really was; but there being ſo

many Roman Coins found with theſe things, and a few years be-

fore ſeveral other Coins of the Roman nation in the very ſame

place, makes me 1magine that this braſs head, as well as the other

things found with it, may have been of Roman original, though

of the times in which arts began to decline in that Empire, foraſ-

much as the workmanſhip is not at all elegant in cither, and the

ou found among the Coins is evidently of the lower Empire,

as ſee Fig. V. ibid.


Fig. IV. Pl. XXV. p. 293. is the plan of a Bowl or Pater a, and Roman pa-
Fig. V. ibid, is the ſection of the ſame : it is ten inches in diameter, 77 94"


at Ludgvan.
including the brim, which is half an inch thick, with a ſmall drill or 2
ſulcus in the middle. The hollow is nine inches diameter nearly, Ses te
and the breadth from D to E is three inches, that is, one third of Section.
the diameter. The brim thickens as it deſcends from A to B,
and the line G H on the outſide is not parallel to the line AE F
within, but contracts itſelf at H to give relieve to the lip B, and con-
tracts itſelf again as judiciouſly at G, to give the ſame relieve to
the baſe C, which baſe is five inches diameter, 7. e. one half of
the whole circumference. The depth of the brim from A to B is
hve eighths of an inch, and the thickneſs of the ſhell at the bot-
tom from E to I is exactly the ſame; the projections allo at C
and B were without doubt the ſame, but the edge at C 1s much worn
by being applied to uſes for which it was never at firſt deſigned.
The curious will eafily diſcover that this harmony in the meaſure-


? The Urn attributed by Guenebald to Chyn- all the marks of a groſs impoſition. See Guene-


was incloſed in ſuch a Stone cheſt, and bald, Reveil de Chyndonax.
P19.49ly Roman, the Greck Inſcription having


309


4 K ments


= ——— d—— —— — — fä— —ä — — — — — ¶ ̃ — _ 5 —


— — — — — — -


Co. Ir EE... 3 — ooo


310 OF ROMAN SEPULCHRES, &.


ments is what produces the proportion and beauty of this Vaſe:
and that this agreement is ſo far from being accidental, that it cn
be no other than a reſult of the matureſt judgment, and, what is
moſt likely, of Roman elegance. I take it to be a facrifical Pa.
tera, to receive the blood of the Victim, and convey it as an
offering to the Altar. The Vaſe is of fine Granite, turneq
and poliſhed, and was found in an old hedge belonging to the Glebe
of Ludgvan. A fragment only remains, as repreſented Fig. IV,


ibid.


Roman Pa- Fig. VI. (ibid.) is a Patera alſo of Stone, turned and ornamented,
terz found within which are ſeveral hollow liſts or drills: F ig. VII. is its


in St. Juſt,


ſection, and ſhews, by the thickneſs of its fides, that it was a worl:


leſs elegant than the former. It is entire, and was that kind of
Patera from which they poured out the Libation of Wine, either
upon the Altar, or between the horns of the Victim; and the
center holes by which it was fixed in the turning-preſs, are ſtill vi.
ſible at K and L, Fig. VII. It is made of a particular talky Moor-
ſtone, or Granite, called commonly Ludgvan-ſtone, from the pariſh
which it is moſt plentifully found in.

Fig. VIII. is another Stone Patera, of the ſame kind of Stone as
Fig. VI. It wants an eighth of two inches high, or thereabouts;
the bottom cavity wants about an eighth of three inches diameter;
the depth of that cavity wants a little of a quarter of an inch; the
outer drill wants about an eighth of three inches and a quarter
diameter; the baſe at bottom wants a little of three quarters of an
inch ; by which meaſurement of this, and the foregoing, it appears
that theſe Vaſes were deſigned by a ſcale of inches, which inches
were not ſo much as the Engliſh inch, which is a further con-
firmation of their being Roman ; the Roman inch being but © of
the Engliſh, of which it falls ſhort therefore one thirtieth part.
Theſe Pateræ were both found in the Tenement of Leſwyn in $t.
Juſt, and 100 yards diſtance from them a large Urn; the Paterz
were given me in 1753, but the Urn was broke and loſt.


Varro (de Ling. Lat. Lib. IV. cap. xxvi.) ſays, that the Patera |


was a ſort of Cup to drink out of, and even to his age in Feſtival
times they carried drink in the Pateræ, and uſed them alſo in fa-
crifices to 12 out Wine and Blood in honour of the God ſacri-


faced unto k.


* „The flat Plates, or Diſcus's, with figures
© emboſſed, are not Pateræ; but according to Be-
e over are the Apophoreta of Iſidorus, in which
they carried fruits and other viands to the ta-
ble; but, ſays Montfaucon's Supplement, Vol.
„II. p. 67. they have figures in Relief, are ad-
© mult always of copper, and many ſo ſmall, that


they do not appear to have been at all proper
« for Plates, I ſhould rather think that they
< fixed them as ornaments upon their Preſſes,
or Cup- boards; this laſt fort is never found
<« either in Sacrifices, or on tables of repaſt among
« the Ancients,” Ibid.


*


FOUND IN CORN WALL. 311
« In a Barrow on Lamburn Downs, in the pariſh of Piran Sanz, Other Re—
« was found an Earthen Pot, containing about two gallons, wherein Wan.
« was lodged much aſhes, ſome bones in ſmall pieces, and


|
charcoal; and by the fide of the ſaid pot were alſo found two ;
p


« ſmall drinking cups of like clay, with ſeveral handles made of br
« the ſame matter. Hals's MS. What theſe handles were, 1 Vi


cannot ſay; but certainly, theſe drinking cups were Roman Pater,
placed (as before in Leſwyn) in the Funeral Monument of the

rſon interred; which I the rather believe, becauſe, in ſome of the b
Barrows of the ſame Downs, which have been examined, have been 1
ſound pieces of iron, and braſs money, as the ſame Author informs
us. Poſſibly the handles here mentioned, might be the Auſæ of
the Simpulum, or of Lacrymatories, &c. and theſe Monuments,
in which ſuch facred utenſils are found, were probably the
Sepulchres of Prieſts.

In the year 1757, in a ſtream-work in the pariſh of St. Ewe,
Cornwall, in Par-moor, was found the blade of a Dagger; it was
of braſs, eight inches and quarter long, and one inch wide; its
handle was loft, otherwiſe it might have been determined with
more certainty, to what nation it belonged ; but probably it was
Roman, for the workmanſhip is neatly executed. Sce Fig. X.
PL. XXV. p. 293\


% bh. Ad _—


C HAP. III.
Of Roman Camps and Portifications in Cornwall.


I A we have already tracked the Romans by their Coins and
1 Sepulchres, there can be no doubt of their having Camps and
WH fortifications, neceſſary for the ſecurity of their forces in the field,
aud in garriſon z it being one of the firſt maxims among them, as
early as Agricola (as Tacitus ſays) to fortify themſelves wherever

they advanced; whereas, before Agricola's time, the Romans
retiring to their Winter quarters (where only they had regular
ſtations fortified) loft their ground in Winter, which they had

won in Summer. But ſo many ages have paſſed ſince the Roman

times, and ſuch great alterations by improvements and devaſtations

equal enemies to antiquity) have enſued, that entirely perfect Camps

and Forts can ſcarce be hoped for. Let us therefore be content |

with what remains, and ſome rational conjectures relating to Roman ul


I Depoſited in the Oxford Muſcum, in the year 1764.


Fortifi-


312


Little Di-


Nas;


Pendinas.


Binnomay.


Wall-
borow.


OF ROMAN CAMPS AND


Fortifications, rather than always abſolutely pronounce them «,
to be.
Tue firſt place which I think a Roman Fortification is that at
Condurrah, in the pariſh of St. Anthony (Meneäg) where the
arcel of Coins of Conſtantine and his Sons (p. 301.) were found.
This hill is waſhed on each fide by the ſea; and about a quarter of
a mile from the ditch in which the Coins were lodged, there runs
out a little tongue of land, called Dinas, and (to diftinguiſh it from a
much larger fortification, on the other {ide the bay, called Pendlnas
this is called the little Dinas, in Corniſh, Dinas veati. This little
Dinas has ſeveral modern fortifications on its Eaſtern point (ereaef
in the great Rebellion) but nearer to Condurrah it has an old Vallum
ſtretching from ſea to ſea, which is the remainder of a very ancient
fortification, and in all likelihood Roman ; for it is rightly obſerved
by Mr. Horſley m, © the Romans were careful to have their ſtations”
(by which he means I ſuppoſe their Camps and Forts) * placed
e near a river; and there is no ſituation which they ſeem to be ſo
6e fond of, as a Lingula (little tongue of land) near the confluence
* of a larger, and ſmaller river.” Here I cannot but obſerve, that
this ſtation at Condurrah has every one of theſe properties ; on the
right hand, as you front the Eaſt, comes down the river Dutrah,
and with the ſea makes a pretty pool, or cove, before St. Anthony's
Church, in which ſmall veſſels may lye with great ſafety ; on the
left hand comes down Hel river, at this place near a mile wide, and
what would be a very good harbour, but that it is within four miles
of Falmouth, reckoned among the beſt harbours in England. From
the front of the hill runs out the Lingula of Little Dinas, about
500 yards long, and 200 wide at a medium.

As this place, therefore, has all the marks which its natural
ſhape, old Yallum, and Coins found, can give of its being a Roman
Fort; ſo, from the ſituation of Pendinas, lying oppoſite to it, of the
ſame name, and rather more advantageouſly ſhaped for defence, and
guard of a noble Harbour (called by Ptolemy, Cænionis Oſtium); |
ſhould guels it could never eſcape the notice and uſe of the Romans: (
but as the hill is fortified in the modern manner, though not

|


without ſome veſtiges of antiquity nct far from the preſent works,
and as no Coins, to my knowledge, have been found here, I leare
this to be determined by future diſcoveries.

There are two ſquare forts near Stratton, one at Binnomay®,
where ſome old Braſs Coins were lately found; the other at
Wallſborow. This latter is vulgarly, and, as I think, erroneoully,


j. e. The principal fortification, or, Fort m Brit. Rom. p. 393. 5
on the Head- land. a In Camden's Map, laſt Edit, Binaway.


called


"= Yo .


8


—


Haw — — — 4 e —


— TM, TY - amy


„ nnn — 17 IP — —


FORTIFICATIONS IN CORNWALL.


called Whaleſborow ; but more properly, Wallſborow ®; for on the
higheſt part of the Tenement, I perceived a very large Barrow, and
as this place lies not far from the way called the Cauſeway, leading
from Stratton to Camelford, raiſed above the common level high
like a wall” (as is plain from the remains of it Weſt of Stratton);
I ſuſpe& that this place was either called the Barrow on, or near
the wall (1. e. Wall's Borow) or from the walled Fort there, now
viable above the houſe ; Gual ſignifying a FortP, and for one of
theſe reaſons, called by the Saxons Walls-borow. Both theſe
ſquare Forts lying ſo near Stratton (and in all probability near a
Roman way which paſſed theſe parts) may not improbably have
been little Roman Forts, ſuch as they had by the ſides of their
ways in other parts of the kingdom q.


313


Lanceſton Caſtle is a very ancient fortification, and in the plan of Lanceſton.


it there is a ſquareneſs, and one round tower remaining on the
angle (now called the Witches tower) which ſavour much of the
Roman ſhape. Some Roman Coins have been likewiſe found here,
which will be taken notice of hereafter.


There is an angular Fort on the Barton of Wolvedon, alias Wolvedon.


Golden, in the pariſh of Probus, which has a wide deep ditch, the
outer edge (or counterſcarp) of which was faced upwards with
Maſonry of thin ſtones in cement, which had round Turrets, or
Buttreſſes (ſuch as neither Saxons, Danes, or Britans, had as far as
[ can ever find) of the ſame Maſonry, interſperſed with the ſtraight
lines of the ditch. This is very ſingular in our country, where
moſt of our ancient fortifications are of a circular plan, without
any projections, angular or circular, from the Maſter-Line. I can
judge this, therefore, neither to be Britiſh, Saxon, or Daniſh, as
being like no other works of theſe people; and from the artful


fence of this ditch, as well as from the Polygon, which the whole


forms, I gueſs it to be a Roman Work. There 1s a large avenue,
ora way from the North, riſing from an adjoining valley.


There is a vaſt intrenchment in the pariſh of St. Agnes, which St. Agnes


(from Porthchapel-Coom, to Breanik-Coom), extends near two
miles in length. In the Weſt, where the ſides of Porthchapel-Coom
are ſteep and eaſily defenſible, the ditch is ſhallow, and the Ya/lum
low; but as the Coom wears out into a plain, it grows propor-
tionably larger, and about 200 yards above a cott called Gun-vre,
appears of its full ſize, where the ditch I found to be 17 feet fax


inches wide, and from the bottom of the ditch the perpendicular of


the Vallum is at leaſt 20 feet; from this place I traced, and


; In Domeſday, W ALESBRAU, , q At the Roman Wall in the North of Eng-
| Gual ſignifying any Ridge, or Vallum. See land; theſe ſquare Forts are from i00 t 730
Plot's Oxfordſhire, p. 323. paces for ſide of the ſquare, Horſley, p. 113.


? As Gual-hen, the old F ort. Camden, p. 164.


4+ L dialled


Kledh.


314


OF ROMAN CAMPS AND


dialled it more than a mile. The Work, throughout I judge to
have been executed uniformly, according to the meaſurement above
expreſſed, but in ſome parts it is now much altered; the ditch
has been widened in ſome places, and levelled in others, to make
gardens, and the Vallum has been carried off (where it was of clay)
to make bricks, and levelled to make room for houſes in. other
places; it is alſo much defaced by Tin works, but is ſtill a great
work. From the Weſtermoſt point it runs in a ſtraight line due
Eaſt, then makes another line ſomewhat to the North of the Faſt
to a village called Bolſter, for a quarter of a mile; about 500 yards
beyond which, it comes into Pol-brean Common, running Eaſt by
North, down to the Vicarage; about 100 yards below which it
appears again, keeping very judiciouſly the brow of the hill, and
bearing N. E. by N. till it reaches the Coom, or bottom, below the
Church-town called Breanik-Coom, which deſcends to the fea,
A work, ſurely, of equal ſkill and labour, intended for the defence
of St. Agnes Beacon, and its rich Bal, incloſing ſome thouſands of
acres by making a line of entrenchment from Portchapel-Coom,
which lies to the Weſt, and Breanick-Coom, which runs down to
the ſea on the Eaſt of this Promontory. Within thisentrenchment
the late Mr. Tonkin (whoſe paternal feat makes a part of the land
incloſed) ſays (in a letter to the late Learned Brown Willis, Eſqʒ), that
his father's ſervant, in the year 1684, plowing, turned up a gold
Coin of Valentinian”, and thinks verily that this was a Roman work;
but this ſingle Coin is the only reaſon which he gives, as far as I am
at preſent informed ; however, there are much better reaſons to be
drawn from the work itfelf ; the grandeur of the undertaking, the
judgement and conduct of the deſign, the ſtraightneſs of the lines,
the uniformity of the work in all its parts, the Fallum, where not
injured, being of one height, the ditch of one breadth, the judicious
diminution of the labour, in proportion as the Cooms grow deep,


and able of themſelves to form ſome defence; all theſe are circum:


ſtances intimating too much art, and military ſcience, for either
Britans, Saxons, or Danes; add to this, that to the weſt of the
Beacon, on the top of the incloſed hill, is Kill to be ſeen, the
remains of a ſmall ſquare fortification z adjacent to which are
« three Sepulchral-Barrows; which, if one may judge by the
labour of erecting them on ſuch an eminence, muſt have been the
monuments of ſome great perſons. It is called the Kledh, which
in Cornith ſignifies the Trench, or Foſs, and by the vulgar “ faid
to be the work of a giant called Bolſters.” |


r The Coin had this legened, DN. vaLEnTI- © ſhillings value in Gold.” Letter to Biſhop
SIANVS., P. p. AVG. Reverſe, RESTITV TOR REI Gibſon, a
PYBLICAE ANT. A. © It weighed ſeventeen T. T's letter to Brown Willis, Elq;


But


bj, © 2208080


FORTIFICATIONS IN CORNWALL. 31 5

But the Romans did not always fortify in the ſquare or rectilincal shape of
manner, but ſometimes in the circular; for in encamping, the firſt eee
point is to chuſe proper ground, that is, proportionable to, and 1
convenient for, the quantity of forces, and eaſieſt to be made
defenſible; and the ſecond great maxim, to ſuit the Lines to the
natural ſite of the ground.

When they were to ſit down on a plain and level ground, there
is no doubt but they choſe the ſquare figure, as containing their
troops in better order, eaſier to be inſpected, and more ready for
action, than any other figure; but when they were obliged to take
up with a triangular or hexagonal hill, or riſing, as it would be
ridiculous to imagine them labouring contrary to the nature of the

und to throw the fences of their camp or garriſon into a ſquare,
ſo I conclude, that whenever they met with the round top of a hill
conveniently ſituated with regard to the enemy, and to their own
forces, they fortified this round hill with circular Lines. Nay, the
Romans made round hills probably, and fortified them with
a Keep on the top; for the famous Mount of Marlborough, in the
gardens of the late Duke of Somerſet, was ſhaped out of the Keep of
the caſtle, a Roman work, and in digging, braſs Roman Coins were
there found*; and an eminent Tumulus, on which the Keep, or
Watch-tower of the Caſtle of Brinklo, in Warwickſhire, did ſtand,
is made no improbable argument for that to be a Roman ſtructure u. 1
The great fortification in Somerſetſhire, called Camalet alias 1
Arthur's Caſtle) muſt be a work of the Romans, as appears by the
Roman Coins found there, and as is agreed by Camden, p. 77.
and Dr. Gale's Comm. in Antonin. p. 93. and yet the work is
round, four trenches and three earthen walls encompaſſing it.
Maiden Caſtle near Dorcheſter is round, with a triple vallum, yet
allowed Roman, being near ſo many other works of the ſame
people, viz. their amphitheatre, ways, &c. So that, although the
general ſhape of Roman intrenchments muſt be allowed to be
ſquare, yet this muſt not be underſtood (as Moreton well obſerves,
Northamptonſh. p. 5 22. &c.) without its exceptions ; for the
poition of the enemy, and the ſhape of the ground, are two points
which in the art of war will always carry a ſuperiour weight,
and controul the other ſubordinate rules, according as the
lafety of the whole body and the advancement of the ſervice


—
— — —
al _ ——
2 a ——
By . mn
3 == * -
9 - 9
— 2 —
— « —


— — — Ss

| — —
-- K 2 —
— —


—— —
CD -


hall requi "
all require. 7
© Camd. Annot. p. 129. ' ſometimes quadrangular, and ſometimes trian- 4
» Ibid. p. 612. gular, ſometimes half round. 1


Vegetius allows of Camps of different figure,


From


316


OF ROMAN CAMPS AND


From theſe general obſervations on the Roman Camps, give me
leave to obſerve, that ſome of our round intrenchments on the tops
of round hills in Cornwall may be Roman works, if either way;

ſs near or through them, or Coins be found in them.

But to paſs from conje&ures to the ſtrongeſt evidence. In the
year 1756, a Farmer at Boſſens, in the Pariſh of St. Erth, driving
his oxen from the field; perceived the foot of one of them to fink
a little deeper than ordinary into the Earth at A, Pl. XXVIII.


Fig. VIII. Curioſity, and hopes of treaſure, led him to ſearch


the place, where was ſoon diſcovered a perpendicular pit, cir-
cular, of two feet and half diameter. Digging to the depth of
18 feet, there was found a Roman Patera (Fig. I. and II. ibid);
about 6 feet deeper the Jug, Fig. III. ; near by among the rubbiſh the
Stone, Fig. IV.; then a ſmall mill-ftone about 18 inches diameter,
Digging further ſtill they found another Patera with two handles,
in other particulars much of the ſhape and ſize as Fig. II. Inter-
mixed were found fragments of horns, bones of ſeveral ſizes, half-
burnt ſticks, and many pieces of leather, ſhreds of worn-out ſhoes,
Having ſunk to the depth of 36 feet, they found the bottom of
the pit concave, like that of a diſh or bowl: there was a ſenſible
moiſture and wet clay in all parts of the pit, in each fide there
were holes at due diſtances capable of admitting a human foot, ſo
that perſons might deſcend and aſcend : there 1s no doubt but this
work muſt have been intended for a well, but ſo deep a pit of
ſuch narrow dimenſions could not have been ſunk through a ftony
ground without great difficulty, and with tools very different from
thoſe now 1n uſe.

On the 22d of May, 1758, I went to view this place, toge-
ther with Henry Davies, Eſquire (Proprietor of the Land, who firſt
favoured me with notice of this diſcovery); and on the higher
parts of the Tenement, in a field called the Rounds, I perceived
the remains of a Fort; the length from N. to S. is nearly (for it
was covered with buſhes and briers) 152 feet; the breadth from
E. to W. 136 feet. The foſs on the outſide is ſtill diſcoverable;
the walls diſmantled, in ſuch a manner, that at firſt fight it appears
to be oval, but, on farther inſpection, enough remains to ſhew
tha it was rectilinear with the angles rounded off, a manner of
fortifying very common among the Romans, as may be ſeen by
their ſtations, ad lineam valli. Horleley, p. 113.3; and many
other places. |

At the north corner B, there was an additional building, which
projected outwards beyond the Rampart; it was about 30 feet
long, not quite ſo wide. At the ſouth angle alſo at D there was 4
building of the like kind; the Ancients called thoſe buildings

Proceſttla.


eie


Fug Lp 316.


Wy


I IVA

Ari

eee
mY


\


100 |


1


Mill
WA


'


1
|
0 |
\l
ll
|
|
| *
FIG! | It! it NV i ; 18
Ne i ( ji 1
e s


mf Inches


.,
— =


: *
Err * -


—
r


© DAWN na eee mn Wine —
— 900 _ WWW mewn ee, 2%
UE eee c +

752. F.. —


ag. Hl. p. dis.


A Fort at Bojrens in
STErth Paruh, Cornmadll.


136 F..


. .


nxt £ — — — 2


Nn.
mtu


WLAN WA ARRACALL OHA


MT td NM fer r  eete eu A 3 :


—ů


pF


leu een


LAY


. ern" nmnne
nn to enen


2
OR mm, R


a


Oil re ar mmm ni rr


Front of Stone (olt, real Size A Vo
* 1 10 lj * "> W
N 0 in Ks | Mum i

Mi i Ne 1 hn
| 10 |\ Wii | 01 lr lt


6 5 "nt
16% |


| ' ,
wt lj 0 Uy
nl NN 0 5 ſh 1


75
Wt


py
U


1 p20}.
e 20 _ Ef n
"VS \ N ION N Wt \


Mom eee


mmm


IL TIE


114414


tart of a large
Rees or Prajerica lum
aconting mur


PI. XVIII.. 3:6.


9 mmutdne. -


i Fs a + p


FOR TIFICATIONS IN CORNWALL.


proceſtria x. Examining the rubbiſh, beſides what is mentioned
dove, I found the ſtone Fig. V. and part of a large Vaſe of a cu-
nous ſort of grey granite (Fig. VI. ibid.) formed by turning, well

liſhed, but ſomewhat diſcoloured. I found alſo ſome fragments

In Pl. XXVIIL. p. 316. Fig. I. and II. are two views of the
Patera, made of tin, of the 2oth of an inch thick, four inches
and half wide at the brim, but at the bottom, which was flat,
wo inches and half. The bottom of the infide is repreſented,
fig, I. ib. of its real ſize. Fig. II. is the fide of the ſame Pater a,
by the ſcale annexed. The Roman Patera was not always of the
ime dimenſions ; when it was of the larger ſize, its uſe is well
known to have been for receiving the blood of the victim, or to
be carried before the prieſts, containing other offerings ; but when
of ſmaller dimenſions (as this is) either to offer Libations of water,
ol, or wine (whence on medals the hand is ſo often ſtretched out
holding the Patera over the Altar), or to participate the rites of
Gcrifice by drinking. This Patera has no handle, but that which
has been mentioned above, as found near it (and has fince been
unfortunately loft) had, and thoſe found in England generally have.
Mr. Addiſon, in his Travels Y, obſerves that it is not ſo common
to find Pateræ with handles to them in foreign countries; but that
a Patera without a handle would be as ſingular here in England,
23 one with it at Rome; and Mr. Horſley, p. 191. ſays, that all
Patere, which he had ſeen upon any altars in Britain had handles,
though of different ſizes and ſhapes ; although the Pateræ found
in Cornwall, which I have ſeen, never had any. It is more rare ſtill
cular Deity ; but moſt uncommon to ſee them diſtinguiſhed by
names of the Donor, and his Father, as well as the name of the
Deity, to which it is dedicated. This Patera found at Boſſens is
a ſingular inſtance of all theſe particularities, having the inſcription
engraved on its bottom, as Fig. I.; which, till better information,
| read thus, LIVIVS MODESTVS DRIVLI (OT D8IVLI) FILIVS DEO MARTI.
The two firſt words are exceedingly plain, tho' a mixture of Greek
and Roman characters. Livius is too well known to be Roman, to
need any comment; it is as well known, that the Virtues often-
times gave name to perſons, and among the reſt Modeſty. Some-
times the perſon who had his cognomen from this virtue was called
Verecundus, as Dils MANIBVS VERECVNDI in a Roman Monument


_- n
er 1 0 9 >. ee | 4 a . 3 4
n . Fa Co en” . r 3 1 -

Wor” ; 2 . 2 . —— SESs
Pr” PROT oa) ,
o 4 * Fes 8 CE .
_ * "—_ . 1 * y _ * 2 8 . le * .
© :


a” Ouest wappCn;, Proceſtria dicitur. “ Proceſtria zdificia dixit eſſe extra portam.“ ib.
lex, p. 101, from an old Gloſſary, ** Elius Y Addiſon's Works, p. 115.


4 M at


ne AT a AA. won ©


— — —


— = .
a 1 N - " — — —
— n —— — — —— — 3 — —
— — —


|
|


|
|
|
|
|
|
|
|


318


OF ROMAN CAMPS AND
at Skirway in Scotland 2; here it is Modeſtus, of which we
alſo ſeveral inſtances 4. | |

Before I proceed farther, I would obſerve that the letters in
of this Inſcription are badly ſhaped, but in the third word
cularly the letters are more perplexed than in the reſt. The $9


letter is the Grecian ſmall Delta; the ſecond I take to be the wo |
Ro reverſed, i. e. with the long ſtroke on the right hand inſtead of


its being, as uſual, on the left; the other letters are more truly
delineated, though ſomewhat entangled, ſo that I take this word


to be Driuli, a name which I do not recollect to have ſeen before;


but if the ſecond letter, inſtead of being a Ro, ſhall appear to the


learned to be more likely intended for the Greek dipthong a, or
o, this word will then be Douiuli or Duilii, a name very honou-
rable in the Roman genealogies. F ſtands for Filius, and the two
laſt words are beyond doubt Deo Marti. Though the language
here is Latin, yet the characters are for the moſt part proper to the }


Grecian alphabet, as the 2, d, A, anden (which in both places
where it occurs is uſed for the Latin e) and the 1 ; the R in Marti
is ſingular, approaching to the Latin P (which with the Greeks is
the capital Ro); but inſtead of the ſemi- circular part joined to the
upright, it has, through the incorrectneſs of the engraver, a demi-


hexagon like a canopy ſpread over the upright line. The o is oval |
and angular, not round as with the Latins, and the A has no
tranſverſe ſtroke; the other letters are common to the Romans


cauſe the reſt are purely Grecian property.


That this Latin inſcription here in Britain ſhould have fo many


Greek characters in it is remarkable, and the reaſon not eafily
aſſigned. It is well known that the Druids uſed the Greek letters,


though they writ not in the Greek language b. It is alſo certain, that
among the Roman Legions there were many of the Greek nation.


But whether the perſon, who conſecrated this Patera to Mars
might have intruſted the engraving to one of the Druid Sed, or
whether the Engraver was one of the auxiliary cohorts originally
of Greece (as the Thracian and Dalmatian horſe were), it is in
vain to enquire; but neither of theſe conjectures is improbable.
'There are, I think, but two inſcriptions in the Greek language as
yet found in Great Britain ©; but in the Latin language this is che


Horſley's Brit. Rom. p. 199. and the ſame in his Travels, has a medal, No LXXXII. ſtruck


name is to be traced in another Monument, ib. at Trallis (anciently a conſiderable city on the


Pl. 64 Ne X. River Alcander in Aſia) under the Conſulſhip of


a Publius /Elius Modeſtus Præfectus, Pl. 16. Modeſtus, p. 279. |
ibid. Ne XLI. Caius Murrius Modeſtus Miles, b See before, Book II. Chap. X. p. 99»
ibid. Pl. 71. Noll, And Sir George Wheler, < See Horlley's Collect. in Brit. Rom.


only


: „5
=
« Wn
x
| 3
W
=
_
=
Af


general
parti-


FOR TIFICATIONS IN CORNWALL.


onle one yet diſcovered in this iſland with ſo many Greek cha-
alters in it; and I believe there are but few inſtances of it in other
countries d. I will only add, that as this inſcription has neither
ligature, NOT point, nor the A any tranſverſe ſtroke, which are
o many evidences of its genuine antiquity, ſo its brevity and
{mplicity (including nothing but th2 names of the Donor, his
Father, and the God to whom the Patera was dedicated) ſhew it
to be truly Roman.

Fig. III. is a Jug or Jar (of Tin alſo) containing 4 quarts, 1 pint,
and 2 of a quartern, wine meaſure, its weight 7 pounds, 9 ounces
and . It is the Præfericulum of Antiquaries, z. e. a veſſel uſed
to carry the holy water, or other ſacred liquor, to the Altar; it
ſems to have had that name from its being carried in proceſſion
before the Prieſts, ſtanding in a kind of ſhallow baſon, much after
the fame manner as the baſon and ewer were uſed among our
Engliſh Anceſtors e.

Fig. IV. and V. are of ftone, the firſt and largeſt weighs 14

unds Io ounces averdupoiſe, and 11 penny weights. The {e-
cond and ſmaller ſtone, Fig. V. weighs 4 pounds 1 ounce, and
penny weights. By the holes theſe ſtones have near the top,
they were probably deſigned as weights whereby proviſions were
bought for, and afterwards ſhared out among, the Garriſon. Whe-
ther theſe weights were originally of the Roman Standard (for they
are not ſo now), and varied by time, or ſucceſſive droughtand moiſture,
or whether they might be the weights commonly uſed, in buying
and ſelling, by the Natives of theſe parts, I ſhall not determine; but
proceed to obſerve, that the Ancients in all countries oftentimes
made their weights of ſtone, and of different ſhapes ; ſome round,


One inſtance was mentioned to me, as fol-
lows, in a letter from the late learned and wor-
thy Robert Hoblyn, Eſquire, of Nanſwhydn in
Cornwall, dated June 29, 1751. I have ſome
« recollection of an Inſcription in memory of
* one Gordianus a Gaul, and his whole family,
in the Roma Subterranea, in which, though
© the Language is Latin, the Letters are a mix-
ture of Greek and Runic; I believe Mabillon


takes ſome notice of it in his Iter Italicum. .


* Biſhop Fleetwood ſays, in the Preface to
* his Sylloge, ſpeaking of the Orthograhy of
* Inſcriptions, — * Utebantur enim N. Grzco
* ſicut & aliis Græcorum literis promiſcuè cum
* Latinis, ut videre eſt, p. 328.”
„The Inſcription is as follows:
oO K
ATE C Alert [Is
ATEAIAC er TIAAIO
TereC. KOM ITAPAOY
1! POVAT CIBI ET COTYEIC


& T ſuſpect this Inſcription (which is at Rome)
« is not fairly copied, it is very probable all the
Letters are Capitals, nor is the meaning of
«© ſome of the words to be decyphered. It is
© quoted from Gruter (1 believe), where poſſibly
© others of the ſame kind are to be found.“
Dr. Jer. Milles, now Dean of Exeter, July 27,
1758, to the Author. "Theſe inſtances are from
foreign countries, and more may occur, but in
Britain none, as I believe, have yet appeared.
See Gruter and Reineſius,

e Feſtus calls the Baſon, or Charger, Præferi-
culum, and without any impropriety (as it ſeems
to me); for as much as the broad Patera, or
Baſon, which was carried before the Prieſts in
both hands of the attendant, might as often con-
tain cakes, mola ſalſa, the Simpulum & Pateræ,
as the Jar of wine, oil, and water; but in this
point Feſtus is ſuppoſed by ſome to have
been miſtaken, Montf. de Pateris. Horſley,
p. 191. 281.


258


319


CT —— — ˙. —̃æ F


" —— — = —


320


OF ROMAN CAMPS AND


as that mentioned in Kemp's Collection f; ſome rectangular, 3 5 op!
Fig. V.; and ſome conical, as Fig. IV.; ſometimes they wor fl .
marble, as thoſe exhibited by Gruter, p. 221, 2228; and the ert
Pondus antiquum marmoreum of Kemp, ibid. Theſe here de. 2
ſomewhat by fire, or acrimonious moiſture. But the ancients ſeem | W fo
not to have made their weights of ſtone by choice, but for want ch
of more proper materials; they could not be ignorant that lead. Ml i
braſs, or iron, was more compact, ponderous, and durable, and | Ca
that ſtone was liable to become heavier, by aſſuming into its ſub. «n
ſtance the moiſture and weight of adjacent bodies, as alſo to be! ac
corroded, and become more porous, by any penetrating acid, or by | 2
heat, or drought, and thereby loſe ſomewhat of its weight. Theſe (
inconveniences of ſtone weights, the Ancients, I ſay, could not Ml
but foreſee; they are alterations, which the materials could hardly ch
eſcape; and, there fore, ſuch materials they would never have made ol
uſe of, but for want of better, 0
Fig. VI. I take to be part of that Vaſe called by Feſtus the WM t
Præfericulum; it was ſometimes made of braſs, or more precious WM q
metal, but is here of Stone®, and by its gradually increaſing thick- 1
neſs towards the bottom appears to have been of like deſign with (


that exhibited before, Pl. XXV. Fig. V. p. 293. i ©
The ſmall Mill-ftone, by the ſmoothneſs of one fide, ſhewed that t
it had been much uſed, and was ſuch as without any material |
difference is ſtill uſed in the Iflands of Scilly, and elſewhere, for
hand-mills to grind corn in times of fiege and ſcarcity, and muſt be
abſolutely neceſſary in all garriſons.
The bones and horns belonged to animals either ſacrificed or
killed for the Fort; the aſhes and half-burnt ſticks are the remains
of ſacrifical or culinary fires : the fragments of leather are patched
and coarſely ſewn together for the moſt part; but ſome have no


ſuch evidences of inferiour uſe, and one piece which I found more


entire may contribute perhaps to ſhew us the ſhape of the Roman
Calceus of thoſe times, and may be ſeen Fig. VII. by the ſame ſcale
as the other figures. Some bits of leather were alſo pierced with
circular holes; but whether parts of the cothurnus, calceus, or any
border for the habit, armour, or vehicle of the officers, enough does


not remain to decide.


This ſubje& cannot be diſmiſſed without obſerving, that every
ſeparate article here produced, is a freſh proof, eſtabliſhing the


EY Mon. Kempiana, p. 152. * fine anſa appellatum, patens ſummum ut


* — 1 Re ba a . . *
s Kemp, ibid. e pelvis quo ad facrificia utebantur in Sacrario,


„ Præſericulum, inquit Feſtus, vas xycum Montf. Tom. II. p. 142.


opinion


FORTIFICATIONS IN CORNWALL.

pinion all along eſpouſed in theſe Antiquities, I mean that
he Romans came into Cornwall, conquered it even to the very
xtreme parts, and had all the appendages of victory, as Ways,
rorts, Garriſons, and reſided here as Governours, in the fame
manner as they did in the other parts of Britain. For firſt, this
rort is of that rectilinear figure, with the angles rounded off,
which the Romans generally preferred to any others k. It is ſmall
n extent, as they generally made thoſe forts, which they called
Caftra Æſtiva, which were of no certain determinate ſize; but ſuch
only as might anſwer the neceſſity of the ſervice. It is ſituated in
a direct linel, leading from Truro to Mount's bay, and the Land's
end, It is alſo in the ſtraighteſt line from Falmouth Harbour (the
Cenionis Oſtium of Ptolemy), and there is at preſent a great
fraight road, which paſſes within a bow-ſhot South of this Fort, as
the Roman ways generally did from their Caſtra Æſtivam. But to
obviate all contradiction here is found a Latin Inſcription in un-
doubted Roman ſtyle, The letters are Greek, and the Inſcription is
e the firſt and only one diſcovered yet in Cornwall of ſuch high anti-
is quity, and will fatisfy the Learned, that the Romans had penetrated
= 4 into the Weſternmoſt parts of Cornwall, before the Empire became |
b Chriſtian; the Sacrifical veſſels, the Pateræ, and Præfericulum, are will

W of Tin, the natural product of Cornwall; the Vaſe, the Weights, 10
the Mill-ſtone are alſo of Corniſh Granite; and by the Walls, the I
Religious Utenſils, Weights, quantity of Shoes, Bones, Horns, ll
Vaſes, and aſhes; this Fort appears to have been that of a fixed 1
Garriſon, not a temporary occaſional Fortification ®,


321


TY FyY — —


CHAP; W.


——
— —
— = —
—ͤ—)— — — — — — — - Y
— 2 — S ˙


Of the Roman Geography of Cornwall, and the ancient and *
preſent Name and Limits. | 1


1 Roman Geography of this County is ſo imperfect, that MI
little information can be drawn from thence, which can be |
depended upon. 1

Ptolemy mentions four towns; and all the light he ſeems capable |
of affording us, muſt be drawn from their names, and the order
in which he places them. His words are as follows: 11


: : See Horſley's plan of the Roman forts “ad p. 123. 15I. 154. &c, 140
eam valli paſſim.“ n That the curious may the more eafily 119
dee the Map belonging to the Nat. Hiſt. of ſatisfy their doubts, the Patera, one of the N
Cormwa'l, Weights, and the Pæfericulum, with the V aic, 1.

duch Forts were generally not contiguous are depofited in the Muſeum Aſhmoleanum, at ll


but within call of, their great roads. Horley, Oxford.


bl
4 N © Me!


OF THE ANCIENT AND PRESENT


tc Mel ig Avpdleryas, dvopurula]or Azpvoyor, ey oig wonur,
ce Oukena, Tapagpn, Io, viz. © After the Dourotriges (the People


« of Dorſetſhire), come the moſt Weſtern inhabitants of Britain |


« called Dunmonii*, among whom we find theſe towns, Voliba
« Uxela, Tamare, Iſka.” Voliba muſt be a town in the moſt
Weſtern parts; for as Ptolemy ends with Iſca (undoubtedly Exete
as will be proved by and by) in the Eaſtern parts of the Dunmonj;
he muſt in all reaſon be allowed to have begun in the Wet, By
the name, Voliba ſhould ſtand ſomewhere on the river Fal or Val;
and as the ancients for the greater ſecurity from pirates and invaſions.
choſe to build their cities (which they always placed, if poſſible,
on navigable rivers) at a diſtance from, rather than near the mout|,
of the harbours, I think Granpont is moſt likely to be the Voliba
of the ancients. Ovteax (or Vexela) comes next; farther to the
Eaſt, certainly than the former, and by Camden thought to be
Leſtwithel, but by Baxter peremptorily aſſerted to be Saltaſh.
ene quidem juraverim hanc (viz. Uxelam) fuiſſe Salteſſe, eve uti
&« hodie dicitur Saltaſh?.” I am, however, of opinion, that Uxela
is Loſtwithel (Saltaſh being much too near to Tamerton), though l
do not think with Camden, that ever this town ſtood on the top of
a hill, or that the preſent name reſembles much the ancient
one . | -

The third city is Tamare, in which the name of the river Tamar
is too ſtrong to be queſtioned; and Tamerton, on the eaſtern
bank of this river, lies almoſt oppoſite to Saltaſh, and muſt have
been the place.

The fourth is Ja Dunmoniorum, or Exeter, the winter and
weſternmoſt ſtation of the Romans, according to Antoninus's
Itinerary, capital of the Dunmonii, the common appellation of the
Devonſhire and Corniſh men.

Here, therefore, I muſt beg leave to differ from the learned Mr.
Horſley, who (in his Britannia Romana, p. 4.62.) denies Exeter to
be the 1/ca Dunmoniorum, making Ilcheſter the weſternmoſt ſtation.
If Mr. Rorſley © could never yet hear” (p. 462.) of any military
way leading to it, or from it, nor the leaſt evidence of any ſuch way
farther weſt than what Dr. Stukely gives an account of in his Itin.
Curioſum, p. 153. (which is the only foundation of all his
arguments) I doubt not but he would be glad to be better informed;


> © Tt muſt be written Dunmonii, from Dun a but its being conveniently ſituated near a river
Hill, and Mwyn Metal ; ſays Gale, Itin. p.183. (formerly of greater depth of water than now)
ſo therefore we ſhall write it for the future, and at a middle diſtance from Tamerton at the
however differently written by other authors. Eaſt, and Truro to the Weſt, I ſhould think the

p Gloſlar. p. 257. Romans might have had their head quartets

Whatever gave name to Withyel at a few here, and a ſtation for ſome ſhips farther down
miles diſtance, gave alſo name to this, with the at Polruan, at the mouth of the river.


addition of Loſt (or Leſt rather), put before it; {
OT


Ovozuba, :


; ev "he e dls LY 5 pr —_ 7 , - G Det a ++ Z n
« 7 d So NT
* * * 8 of
* - * 1 4 - ig * R 4 , 3 C 1 o 2 * * Sv


LIMITS OF CORNWALL.


«by thoſe who have examined the ground, I am well aflured that
lere are two different Roman Ways, that plainly croſs one another
ar Honiton, about twelve miles to the Eaſt of Exeter", and
-efragable evidences of Roman Ways to the Weſt of that city, as
©: ſhall ſoon ſee. But Ways are not the only teſtimonies of this
ut; and fince this point has not yet been cleared up, I ſhall beg
le reader's patience whilſt, from the name and ſituation of it,
«cording to hiſtory, and alſo by its anſwering clearly to the
"ances given by Antoninus, I prove Exeter to be the T/ca
Nunmonior um.

That the river Ex, on which Exeter ſtands, is the Iſca of Anto-
nus, the very ſound of the word ſeems ſtrongly to imply, whereas
[.chefter has the radical letter L in all its names*; and ſurely,
«cauſe it ftands on the river Ive], it was named by the Saxons Ivel,
© [|-cheſter. Again, Iſca is placed by Ptolemy on the Southern
bore next above Tamar, whereas the Iſkalis runs into the northern
i and by the ſame author is rightly placed next to the Severn u.
The Iſca is called 1/ca Dunmoniorum, and therefore to be looked
t in Devon; whereas Ilchefter is almoſt in the middle of
omerſetſhire.

Now, if, beſides theſe congruities of name and place, and ap-
nearance of Roman Ways, it ſhall be found that the diſtance alſo in
the Itinerary of Antoninus does well agree to Exeter, I ſhould
dick that this matter can be no more diſputed ; let us therefore
camine the 12th Iter of Antoninus, and go no farther back than
{rbiodunum (Old Sarum), and ſee whether the diſtance from Old
drum to Exeter is ſuch as is there laid down from Sorbiodunum
o Iſca Dunmoniorum :


From Sorbiodunum to Vindocladia, near Cranburn, x111.
From Vindocladia to Durnovaria, now Dorcheſter, xxxv1.
from Durnovaria to Muridunum, likely Seaton

(as by the name in Britiſh) on the river Ax, } —
from Muridunum to Iſca Dunmoniorum*, = = xv.


Feb. 21, 1754, as I came from Honiton
oxards Exeter, about four miles Weſt of
loniton, I ſaw two plain fragments of what I
de to have been the ancient Roman Road to
be Iſca Dunmonii ; one of theſe was the nobleſt
* of Road that I remember to have ever
* Nothing, indeed, is more natural to imagine,
an that the Saxons, inſtead of Iſk-ceſter
ya there are three Conſonants after the 1)
WR calier pronunciation turned the / of the
11. vii into an x, writing it Exceſter; as
der Axon, ſays Baxter, p. 140. for


8 10-2015
en.


+
I”,


t Givelcheſter in Florence of Worceſter; in
the anonymous Ravennas (inverſedly, as Baxter
ſays p. 141.) Velox; in Ptolemy, Iſchalis.

u See Horſley, p. 357.

The VIII. as in ſome Copies, is a manifeſt


errour; for this would make it but fifteen miles


Engliſh, from Old Sarum to Dorcheſter, Of
this erroneous Number, ſee Horſley of the 12th
Iter. and ibid. p, 461. and Dr. Gale, Itin. Ed.
1709. p. 137- and the Map, ibid,

x Erroneouſly written in Anton, Scadum-
nunniorum; by the Anon. Rav. Scadum-
namorum, & Scadomorum, & in M.S. Regis
Call. Scadoniorum.

Here


324


Of the pre-
ſent Name of


Kernou.


OF THE ANCIENT AND PRESENT


Here we have one hundred miles, according to the Rom |
meaſure ; but the Roman miles are much ſhorter than the
of which difference Mr. Horſley makes this, and I beliey


miles from Sorbiodunum to Iſca Dunmeoniorum make only 75 Englif


mules, according to the mean proportion, and eighty, according 4


the Ratio of four to five, which comes ſo very near the I


* i 0
et


diſtance , that there can be no reaſonable diſpute but that Exct
not only anſwers to the name and place, but alſo to the diſtancg
given us in the Itinerary, and therefore muſt be the Iſca Dunmrid
07171, the ſtation on the Roman Military Way mentioned in the
12th, and again in the 15th Ter of Antoninus.


boundary was between the Belgæ and Durotriges on the Eaſt, and


the Dunmonii on the Weſt, is uncertain, but not improbable ; and,
if true, will ſhew that ancient Cornwall included all the preſent
Devonthire, as well as what is Weſt of the River Tamar. When the
Weſtern part of Dunmomium was firſt diſtinguiſhed by the name of

Cornubia, I am not certain, no more than what were the bounds of
the Dunmonii, What ſeems moſt probable (if it be not true, as 1
ſuppoſe it is) is, that though the Romans called this Weſtern part of
Britain Danmonia, Dunmonium, or the Country of the Dunmonii;
the native Britans (remarkable always for affixing ſuch names as
the natural properties of places ſuggeſted) called it Kernou*, as


The meaſurement (according to the poſt- obſerved, that Tlcheſter is above thirty miles


road) is 89 miles from the preſent Saliſbury to nearer to Saliſbury than the computed diſtance
Exeter; but meaſuring by the Wheel much of Exeter,


What we now call Cornwall, is but a Portion of what in the

theCountry. Roman times was called Dunmonium. What the exact bounds of
Dunmonium, were it is difficult to ſay. Mr. Horſley (p. 463, 464.
thinks that the South parts of Someſetſhire, where the inhabitants
were not much unlike the Dummonii, belonged formerly to Das
monium; but, in truth, Borderers may contract a likeneſs in manners,
language, cuſtoms, and religion, from a neighbouring country io
which they do not belong, and therefore there is no ſettling the
limits of a country without ſomething more deciſive than ſuch a
reſemblance. Whether Alfred divided England into counties, and
then fixed the limits of Devonſhire, where the ancient Eaſtem


exceeds the real diſtance (as meaſuring all the
uncavenneſs of the ſurface), reaſonable allow-
ances therefore on this account being made, this
diitance will appear as exact, as moſt of thoſe
laid down in the Itinerary. The Roman
Roads were alſo directed in much ſtraighter
lines than the Engliſh, and therefore their
meaturement coniilted of fewer miles than ours,
in pioportion to their length. It mult be alio


z Pou Kernou, the country Kernou (ſays Mr.
I. buy d, Archzol. p. 222.) i. e. the county of


Cornwal. This word is oftentimes writ Cornou


(and the adjective derived Cornouak) and


Cornow (alias Curnow) by the family of that |
ſurname, of which there are many remaining Mt ©


Cornwall, but Kernor, as Mr. Lhuyd willes s,
ſeems to be the true reading, Armoricè Qernoys
— 5 - % #'Y . . 13 by
\\ allice er. ALT) 1. ©, L113.


they


A rw ca.


— , — . . — . - —— — —


LIMITS OF CORNWALL.


ber Rill call the Adjective Kernoueck (i. e. Corniſh), and probably
zam the many ſharp projections or promontories ſhooting on each

into the ſea. After frequent communications with the Latin
luguage, firſt by means of the Roman governours, and afterwards

an ntercourſe with the Church of Rome, this Kernou (or Kornou,

tr ſo it is alſo written) became Latiniſed into Cornubia à; thus it Cornubi...
antinued till the Saxons impoſed the name of Wealas on the Britans

Lizen by them Weſt of the Rivers Severn and Dee (called by the

Romans Ordovices, and Silures), calling their country in the Latin

ogue Wallia. After which, finding the Britans had retreated not

ally into Wales, but into the more weſtern extremities of the Iſland,

chich were called by the Natives Kernou, and in Latin Cornubia;

he Latinifts changed Cornubia into Cornuwallia; a name not only Cornu-
preſſing the many natural promontories of the country; but alſo, _—
dat the inhabitants were Britans, of the ſame nation and deſcent as
hoſe of Wales bd, and from this Cornuwallia is derived the preſent
name Cor nwall 15 : | Cornwall,
This CORNWALL, as has been hinted before, reached anciently far Limits.
rond its preſent limits, if it did not include all the ancient Dun-

mum; for the Britans gave way by degrees, and diſputed the ground

vith the Saxons for ſeveral centuries : but the fortune of the Saxons
rerailed; and the Corniſh Britans being ſoon forced to leave the

altern parts of Dunmonium in their poſſeſſion, became bounded by

the river Ex d. When England was divided into Counties, or Shires,

i made no alteration in the habitancy of particular perſons, nor

ay diſtinction betwixt Britan and Saxon. It is likely that Alfred,

rho probably made this diviſion, ſeparated Dunmonium into two
rortions, dividing them by the river Tamar, as a very natural and
commodious diviſion for the well governing of the two counties

but, notwithſtanding this diviſion, the Corniſh Britans, lived at

Exctzr together with, and in equal authority to the Saxons e, till

e entire Conqueſt of their country by Athelſtan in 936, when


G2
ty
UN


i * Regnum, Latinizantibus Monachis Cor-
nudiam appellatum.” Baxter, Gloſſ. p. 89.
Camden ſeems to think that Wales and
Comwall, Wallia and Cornwallia were names
it mentioned in the laws of King Ina.
de Engl. Camden, p. 3. Vol. I. |
** Cornubia videlicet que Cornuwallia a
*quibuſdam dicitur. Demecia quæ Auſtralis-
z uallia appellatur, Venedocia quæ North-
"alia nuncupatur,” ſays Mat. Par. reckoning
dee places to which the Britans were driven by
ae daxons, Edit, Tran. of p. 104.
1 f this time we are to underſtand what
ward I, ſays (Sheringham, p. 129.) that
ten, Wales, and Cornwall, were the Portion
© Lelinus, elder ſon of Dunwallo, and that that
et the Iſland, afterwards called England,


40


was divided into three ſhares, viz. Britain, which
reached from the Tweed, Weſtward, as far as
the river Ex; Wales incloſed by the rivers
Severn, and Dee; and Cornwall from the
river Ex to the Land's-End.

e « Fanc urbem (ſcil Exceſtre) primus Rex
c Ethelſtanus in poteſtatem Anglorum (effugatis
© Britonibus) redactam, turribus inſignivit.”
Wm. Malmſb. p. 146. Ab Exceſtra, quam
« ad id temporis æquo cum Anglis jure inha-
<« bitarant cedere compulit, terminum Provinciæ
©« {uz citra Tambram fluvium ſtatuens, ſieut
ce Aquilonaribus Brit. amnem Wajam limitem
c poſuerat.” ib. p. 28, And the fee farm of
the city of Exeter is ſtill the Duke of Corn-
wall's; amounting to 211. 155,


they


326 OF THE ANCIENT AND PRESENT


they were confined within the Tamar. But even after this th Al
Corniſh are ſaid to have held as far Eaſt as Totneſs upon the ws g W 0!


Dart; and this town was long after, even till the rei Ro
Henry HI. reckoned the Eaſtern part of Cornwall f. By theſe feye; pla
removes were the Corniſh Britans reduced to their preſent narrg Str


limits, and as they retired Weſtward, the Eaſtern parts regained theit Str.


ancient name of Dunmonium, or Danmonium; and, when the alt
diviſion of Shires took place, was called Davonſhire (quaſi Danvan. in

or Danmonſhire) ; and the name of Cornwall became appropriated the

to the Country Weſt of the Tamar g. 4 W

SECT. Ill. Where the Roman ſtations were to the Weſt of Exeter, ig vi
Whether uncertain. Liſkerd, alias Leſcard, is certainly a very ancient town - MM
re ogra, and Tradition ſays, that a Roman Legion was ſtationed there, of ch
Cornwall. which the preſent name of the Town is thought to bear ſome i
remains. But of the ancient Caſtle that was there, the remains are Sh

too ſmall to draw any conſequences from, eſpecially, as I could ſee .
nothing in or round the Town to countenance any ſuch great Ml ©
antiquity. . R

Some Authors® think that the word Caer, in the name of 3 1

Town, or Fort, is a proof of its being Roman, as Caer-leon, &c. *

and this may be a good argument, where hiſtory mentions the b
Roman exploits, and monuments frequently found, prove their MW *
reſidence. We have many places in Cornwall which begin with e

c


Caer!, but as the Roman Hiſtory of our country is but in its
infancy, and more monuments will every day, I flatter myſelf, be
making new diſcoveries, I ſhall lay no ſtreſs upon Etymology,
where there are not the concurrent ſupports of Coins, Sepulchres,
Forts, or Ways. I
Stratton, One town, however, we have great reaſon to think of Roman
original; for it has not only the name of many towns in England
which are all Roman; but as far as I can learn, every other il
teſtimony ; it is Stratton, at preſent not a conſiderable town, either
for extent, trade, fortification, or beauty, yet formerly of ſuch high
account as to give name to the hundred in which it ſtands, which
is more than any town in Cornwall was of figure enough to do,
when the county was divided into hundreds, confeſſed to be done in


See Note © p. 330. following. diſpute, on the iſſue of which very little depends,
£ In the moſt ancient Engliſh Writers, and I let the name ſtand as I find it in the Records,
al! the Records (I have ſeen) this name is and the more ancient Engliſh Writers, many of
written Cornwall, as it is alſo in Camden, and them eminent for their knowledge in Languages
his Editor Biſhop Gibſon, in Carew, Norden, and ancient hiſtory. ;
Speed, Selden, Baker, Ogilby, Biſhop Kennett, h Sce Moreton's Northamtonſhire, p. 572.
Dr. Brown Willis, Ainſworth, &c. Others, and Camden, paſlim. 9 5 0
however (as Lord Clarendon, in his Rebellion, i Catr in St. Germans — Caër-Dinbam —
Mr. Ed. Lhuyd, and Mr. Ray), of late have Caer-gol — Caer-lean in Mawgon Nerrier —
written this name Cornwal, with a ſingle I, and Catr-hays, and many others.
perhaps with more propriety; but as this is a


Alfred's


LIMITS OF CORNWALL. 327


Alfred's time, about gook. That the Romans placed their towns
on their great roads, needs no proof; the Saxons called the Roman
Roads Streets, as Watling-ſtreet, Icknild- ſtreet, and the like: the
laces where theſe ways paſſed rivers they called Street, or
vretfords, and the towns placed on thoſe Streets they called


Gtreet-towns, or Strettons, and the name properly muſt be ſo writ,


although corruption in ſpeech has joſtled out E, and put the A
in its place in this inſtance as well as many others]. Many Strettons
there are in Warwickſhire, all which take their name, ſays Sir
William Dugdale (ibid. p. 49.), from ſome great road, near unto
which they are ſituate, as Stretton Baſkerville does from
Watling-ftreet (p. 50. ibid.). Stratton in Somerſetſhire, near
the river Froom, lies on the Fofſe-way®, Near Cirenceſter there
is a Stratton, on the Roman Way through Glouceſterſhire. In
Shropſhire, Staffordſhire, and Oxfordſhire, the liken; and there is
hardly any county where theſe great roads paſs, but that there is a
town called Stretton near them; and their being placed ſo on the
Roman roads is ſufficient authority to eſteem them of Roman
original. This conſtant uſe of the Saxons in naming other places,
muſt weigh with the impartial, and convince them that our Stratton
had its name for like reaſon with the reſt, and conſequently is of
Roman original as well as the others. Nor does this ſuppoſition
entirely depend on found, as will be ſhewn in the following
chapter.


CH A-P.-V.
Of the Roman Maps.


Cornwall there are none, which can be ſpoken of with Uncertainty
certainty 3; and no wonder, conſidering that it has been hitherto ge


man Roads,


doubted whether the Romans were ever here or no. This latter not *
ornwall,


point, however, can be no more diſputed; for that the Romans were but elfe.
here, and Maſters of our whole country, may, and, I think, has Where.
been proved beyond all doubt; and yet to pronounce abſolutely of

their Ways may ſeem too preſuming. Even in counties, where


ö k Has ſaye, that Leſnewth and Stratton | Thus we ſay Aſton for Eaſton, Aſtley for
wundreds are not mentioned in any record till Eaſtly (ſays Dugdale Warwickſh. p. 106.) ; and
'2 Edward III. both paſſing under the name ſo we ſay Stratton for Stretton, and Stratford for
5 Trigmajorſhire : but this is a great miſtake, Stretford.

in the Exeter Domeſday which was compiled m Camden, p. 87.

the year 1086, Stratton is reckoned one of the ® Ibid. p. 658. Plot's Oxfordſh. p. 402.


Fin, |
„andted


|
J
*9


the


328


SECT. II.


The ſtruc-
ture of the
Roman
Ways,


OF THE ROMAN WAys,


the Romans have been known to reſide, ever ſince the time of
Tacitus, we find the learned world not agreed, as to the riſe and
courſe of the four great conſular ways. We find the Lier itſelt
erroneous, or at leaſt not underſtood, and its laſt learned Editor
not always ſuppoſed to have hit upon the truth. In his Oxfordſhire
Dr. Plot, p. 321. hopes only to give a probable account, and
(p. 323.) thinks he has reaſon to depart from Hollenſhed, both 48
to the riſe and courſe of the Icknild- ſtreet; and (p. 326.) differ;
from Camden, and others, in their account of the Akeman: ſtreet
which paſſed (as he thinks) quite a different way from what they
imagined ; and the ſame author tells us (in his Staffordſhire, P-402,)
that he could find no footſteps of the tenth Iter of Antoninus, a;


way from London to Yeroconium of the Cornavii go one way, the


Trier of Antoninus another way, In Antonine's ninth 7zer, Dr.
Gale ſuppoſes the firſt ſtation to have been , at Taeſborough in


7%


7 4


4
x


14
KL
by
3
4
:


*


8
*
Te


Norfolk; but Baxter very much alters the courſe of this Iter, and
ſuppoſes the firſt ſtation to have been at Cambridge p. In ſhort, |


we are not ſure of the Roman roads, for any long way together;


they ſlip us every now and then, and we are as uncertain where
they end, as where they begin, ſo that every one advances ſuch a
judgment of them as is moſt reconcilable to his own obſervations.


To ſupport, and I am afraid, perpetuate this great uncertainty, |


the towns on the Ways are often miſpelt by copyiſts, ſo that learned
men are not agreed, which, and where were the towns. The


breaches made in the road for many miles together by cultivation
and buildings, and oftentimes at ſome turning, are another obſtacle;


ſo that although it appears again afterwards, it ſhall be dubious,


whether it be the remains of the way we have left, or part of


another. But what contributes moſt of all to theſe uncertaintics 1s
the different ſtructure of the ways themſelves, and the intended


diſcontinuance of them oftentimes by the Romans, in places where


they thought them unneceſſary.


Oftentimes the Roman ways are raiſed into a Ridge, conſiſting


of regular rata of Stone, Clay, and Gravel, ditched on cach fide,
running in a ſtraight line, and the moſt finiſhed ones paved on the


top, and the Stones oftentimes layed cloſe in an arch correſponding |


to the general turn of the Ridge; where ſuch a way occurs, it

cannot be deemed any other than Roman. -
But they are not all ſo well conſtructed. Icknild is not a raiſed

way q, nor Foſs r. Sometimes the Ways are raiſed, and ſometimes level\,


© See Baxter's Gloſſ. in Durxocosrivi, q Plot's Oxfordſhire, p. 323-
Pe 114 | r Horſley, p. 389.
? Baxter's Gloſſ. ad TAvuu, p. 7. —Hoifley * Plot's Oxfordſhire, p. |
on the ninth Iter. x and
ved


23
pw
to
*


PPP
”
-


—
*
8
7
2
y
*
_


7"
75
2
i
4
g


A
0


„


OF THE ROMAN WAYS.


1nd the raiſed ones ſometimes only of Earth, ſometimes pitched, or
ned; ſome have two Ridges, and a ditch in the middle, as that
E Dorcheſtert, that at Grimſdykeu, and at Ellsfield w. Some-
mes the Ridge turns to a ditch as Grimſdyke , and the Dyke turns
in to a Ridge, a little farther on, very high and loftyy. Two
ways are ſometimes found, one near and by the ſide of the other,
«Aves-ditch, and Portway , and in the Icknild- ſtreet near Stoken-
durch-Hills. In Staffordſhire the ways are only made of gravel,
aug all along by the ſides of each Roman way, as appears by the
ts near Occamſley on the Watling- ſtreet, and more plainly upon
he Icknild near Little Aſton a: the ſame is obſerved by Dr.
gukeley, concerning Ickling-dyke near Woodyates, where the
boles whence that road was raiſed are {till viſibleb, which I men-
ton the more particularly, becauſe ſomewhat of this kind appears
chere there is great reaſon, as we ſhall ſee by and by, to ſuppoſe a
Roman road-in Cornwall. Add to this, that where new roads were
plainly unneceſſary, either becauſe the March was to be over large,
iy, champain grounds (where the country-hills, or Sepulchral-
Barrows, might be a ſufficient direction), or for that the ſoldiers
ind the people were not diſorderly enough to need ſuch conſtant
employment; the Romans diſcontinued their ways as often as they
found them neither neceſſary for the eaſe nor the diſcipline of
their people, and begun them again, when proper reaſons or
lficult grounds made it requiſite. Again, as ſome of theſe ways
were Vicinal, and ſmall in compariſon of the great roads, I muſt
obſerve, that the leſs theſe ways were (that is, the narrower and
bwer) the ſooner they were deſtroyed and loſt; and the more a
country has been cultivated ſince the Roman Times, the more the
ways which they made have been ruined, which will {till increaſe
the difficulties, with regard to this county of Cornwall; for our
ways not being of the conſular rank (if they had been, they muſt
have had a place in the Iter of Antoninus) but Vicinal (that is,
om Town to Town) they were the ſooner defaced; and the
cultivation of our barren grounds in Cornwall, being introduced
nuch later than in the more central parts of Britain, has deſtroyed
the ways here much more than in other counties, which were cul-
trated during the refidence of the Romans, when all improvements
In huſbandry were obliged to conform themſelves to the military
ways of their Maſters, and leave them untouched. |


t Ibid. p. 329. Y Ibid.
* Ibid. p. 324. z Ibid.
* Ibid. p. 325. | | z Plot's Staffordſhire, p. 399.
E Ibid, p. 328. of the Akeman- ſtreet. b Itin, Cur. p. 180. — Holley, p. 460


: 4 Amidſt


339


SECT. Ill, As the Romans have been before proved to have had ſoldiers ;


OF THE ROMAN WaAys


Amidſt theſe difficulties, fome common to the whole nation, ang


ſome peculiar to this county, I would not be underſto


Cornwall, but only lay before the reader what Trad
thors ſay, and what has occurred to me in a few reſearches relatin
to this ſubject, in which I do not deſpair of evincing the probahi-


lity of ſuch ways, or of giving a few hints, at leaſt, where they |


may be moſt ſucceſsfully ſought for.


Romanways here in Cornwall, and in the very Weſtern parts to have poſſeſſed


Weſt of


Exeter.


our mines and ſea-coaſt, it is not at all likely, that a nation ſo


well ſkilled in making, and no leſs intent upon ſecuring their con-
queſts, ſhould depart from one of their firſt principles of military


policy, and leave themſelves deſtitute of publick roads. By all + 3
their hiſtory it appears, that they were very intent upon com-
pleating the conqueſt of this Ifland ; and this could not well be
done with ſuch few Legions as they had here, unleſs they conſi-
dered above all things the convenience of theſe troops, and for their
eaſe and connexion extended their roads as they enlarged their con-
queſts. By the direction of the great roads now viſible in the
more inland parts of Britain, we are ſure that the Romans laid out
their ways with great ſkill, according to the length and breadth of
the iſland, Of their four great ways, that called Icknild-ſtreet
ſeems deſigned to have ſtretched away the whole length of the


Province which we now call England (which is from Wintertonneſs


in Norfolk, to the Land's End in Cornwall), in a line near W. S. W.


for, as it has its name from the Iceni of Norfolk, and conſequently ;


its riſe there, it is traced in many places bearing as ſtrait as may


be towards the Weſtern parts of the iſland; which made Dr. Plot
imagine ©, that it goes © into Devonſhire and Cornwall to the
« Land's End.” Others think that it was not this Icknild-ſtreet
(for there are ſuppoſed to be two of that name) which came into
Cornwall, but another Roman way which has not been yet de-


{cribed d.


In the Itinerary of Antoninus, it is true, there is no ſtation Welt


of Exeter; but it is confeſſed, by all who have made this part of


Geography their ſtudy, that there are Roman Ways in England,


© Plot's Oxfordſhire, p. 324. ce the great Conſular-way, fo named, be not

4 « ] was always of opinion, that the Foſs „ that which paſſes through Gloceſter, Wor-
& way, and not the Icknyld-ſtreet, was the great * ceſter, Warwick, Stafford, and Derbyſhire,
© Roman way which paſles through Devon and *© and ſo quite to Tinmouth in the North, ra-
% Cornwall: The Foſs, or Vorſe, as the So- . ther than that from Norfolk. In the Pariſh
© merſetſhire men call it, certainly enters De- * of Alvechurch, in Worceſterſhire, it wis
vonſhire, about the fair mile near Sir George * called Iekle- Street.“ Right Rev. Dr. Lyt el-
& Yonge's, and gives name to dtreet-way-head, ton Biſhop of Carliſle,
« a village juſt by. As to the Icknyld, Q. It 5

4


od to ſpeak
poſitively of the Roman ways, which I think may be EY


ition and au-


OF THE ROMAN WAYS:


.


3 a which no Iter has proceeded, nay, which have never been


jn Peutinger's Table there is a Roman Way far Weſt of Exeter,


E. al (if any thing could be gathered with certainty from this T able)


quſt be quite to the Land's End, where his Riduno is placed; and
ear this extremity of our County, we do indeed find Rin, and
ſreryn (not much unlike Ridunum), where the Braſs pot of Roman
noney, mentioned by Leland, was found e; but as this Table is
fortunately deficient, as well as confuſed, in the Weſtern parts,
is no ſafe guide; and I am apt to think, from the numeral
foure XV. near Riduno, that it is a miſtake, as well as miſplacing
for Mor iduno.

Ptolemy's Geography is ſo rude a ſketch, and ſo full of errours f,
hat there is no following it. The anonymous Ravennas is till
yore, and the names of places ſo diſ-figured, that there is no
knowing them. Places in Cornwall, or Devonſhire, we have none
nentioned in the Notitia, We muſt, therefore, depend upon the
ſervation of the moderns; and, by what already appears, there
zcaſon to believe, that there are two Roman Ways leading into
Cornwall, and therein to be traced ; one, by Exeter through
Totneſs, paſſing near Plymouth towards Liſkard ; the other
liher up, coming through Somerſetſhire, the North of Devon-
fire, by Torington, to Stratton, Camelford, and Bodman, in the
ame County.

That there paſſed a road Weſt of Exeter to Totneſs, Robert of
Gloſter (Temp. H. III.), tells us, ſpeaking of the four great Roman
Wayss, But we have better authority than that of this antiquated
Poet for a Roman road to Totneſs. Whether it paſſed to the Ferry
below) Exeter, as ſome think (who take it for a branch of the
Northern road through Worceſterſhire, Gloſter, Somerſet, and De-
ſonſhire), or through that city, and was only a continuation of the
wy through Dorcheſter, Seaton, and Exeter, I ſhall not now ſtay
o enquire; my buſineſs is to trace it Welt of the City, in which I


ſhall uſe the words of a late curious Gentleman. The Roman road


is viſible at Kenford (about three miles below Exeter); there are
not bolder remains in the Kingdom of ſuch ways than from the
* paſſage over the Ex, through Kenford and Newton Buſhel, to
* Totnefs. It appears with a high Creſt, and entire, moſt part


dee before, p. 300. &« Fram Dover into Cheſtre goth Watlyng ſtrete
Horſley, p. 356, 261. 6 The ferth of theſe is moſt of alle, that tilleth
t* Fram the South into the North takith from Totoneys
__ * Erminge-ftrete „ Fram the one end of Cornwaile anone to
* Fram = Eaſt into the Weſt goeth Ikeneld «© Cateneys.“
* ſtrete
tem the South Eaſt to North Weſt that is Dugd. Warw. p. 8.


„ {um del grete


60 of


— DO EP ee = =
— — —


OF THE ROMAN Ways.
.


* of the way, which is at leaſt twenty miles: I travelled tie
« along it: at Totneſs I loſt it; but about Brent, a ſmall Marken |
« Town fix miles farther, I imagine I ſtruck into it again, whe "=
« it continues in as ſtrait a line as that uneven rocky 50 ; * 1
&« mits of, to Ridgeway, a ſmall village near Plympton. E the!
ce neighbourhood of which place, in the grounds of Mr. Parker of |
« Burrington, I obſerved a remarkable Camp, though of no creat
*© magnitude. Near this intrenchment, the ſaid road, having paſſed
ce the ſmall river Plym, mounts a pretty ſteep aſcent, croſſes the
tt main coach-road from Plymouth to Exeter, at a place called
4 Nacker's-hole, and proceeds in a direct though narrow line to!
« St. Buddox, where the ferry over the river Thamar brings us to
& Saltaſh, and thence into Cornwall. Near this Nacker's-hole is F
& a ſmall entrenchment (now a Bowling-green) which though o
« a circular form, I yet deem it Roman, and the Caſſrum efifound :
« of the Tamaris of Ravennas, at this day called Tamerton b ©
« about a mile below it on the fide of the river Thamar.“ S0 far
the late learned Mr. Moulding, of Wichenford, Worceſterſhire, n
the Roman Ways i in the Weſt, from his own obſervation ; to


which he adds, “This way from Saltaſh, I have been told, pro-
<« ceeds to an intrenchment near Loſtwithel, where there is a cauſe-


« way leading directly to it. I am equally poſitive, there is another
« Roman direction into Cornwall.” The cauſeway this Gentleman
mentions will be taken notice of in its proper place; I will only


obſerve, that this road being continued from Exeter to Totneſs, and ,


thence to the ſides of Tamar, manifeſts that the defign was to carry


it into the Southern coaft of Cornwall; and that this deſign was
executed, there is more reaſon to believe, becauſe in the ancient
MS. written by Richard of Weſtminſter K (lately recovered from |
obſcurity), I find an Iter! laid down in the manner of Antoninus,
which, though imperfect, muſt needs lead us as far Weſt as the
river Fal. The paſſage here follows: A Londinio Ceniam uſque
Sic. Venta Belgarum XC. Brige XI. Sorbioduno VIII. Venta
Geladia m XII. Durnovaria IX. Moridumo XX XII. I/ca Dumninio- ©


rum XV. — Durio amne—Tamara—Foluba—Cenia.


2
F


N


Here we may obſerve, that the diſtances below Exeter are not


*


* q


expreſſed, but Durio Amme, feems to ſignify the river Dart (poſſibly


Ei


in the original Dario). The name of the town, which flood upon


it, is loſt ; then comes Tamarton ; the intermediate town on the
river of Fawy (likely Vxela) loſt ; next the Voluba of Ptolemy, *


The Tamare of Ptolemy, now Tamerton naſterienſis, publiſhed by Charles Bertram in 5

Foliot. . the year 1757. | ERR
i In a Letter to the Rev, Dr. Lyttelton, now | Iter XVI. p. 39. 2s publiſhed by Bertretn, ;

Bp. of Carliſle, dated Aug. 22, 1743. m Pro Yindociadia Ant. 4
» Richardus Corinenſis Monachus Weſtmo—


mot


£
. 7
£ £
2 0
|S .
*
I ,
2 :
*
"©
44
xF q
*
**
*
3 |
*
3
—
as
| 7
NF
3
©
.
"$1
2 * *
* *
TY
1


„ a. — FEY A ww 22 —


pined it again, plain, high-creſted, ſlanting up the hill, ditched


Tfaw nothing more of it. That this is part of a Roman Way, I


OF THE ROMAN WAYS.


qoſt likely the preſent Granpont ®, whence the Fal deſcends to ij

ſregeney» the Cenia probably of this author; the Cenio of Pto- 1

emp and the Giano of the anonymous Ravennas*. ö
The reader will perceive that, according to this author, there was

Roman Way upon this Southern coaſt; and where I think

ne the remains of it, how it kept its courſe, and where it branched

of, the following obſervations may in ſome meaſure inform us.

In the ſummer of the year 1752, J ſet out for Saltaſh, on pur- Remains of |
ſe to ſearch after this road; and in my way from Loſtwythyel to h .
liſcerd, about a furlong to the Eaſtward of Loſtwythyel Bridge, int Ha.
fur an old Ridgeway on the right hand, but ſoon loſt it by keep- TA.
ng too much to the left, as I imagine; but, a quarter of a mile
tefore I came to the ſecond Tap-houſe, ſaw on the left a high
nage, leading on near Eaſterly, large pits on the higher fide of it,
ome ſquare, ſome ſhapeleſs, out of which the Ridge was raiſed.
This way was ditched on both ſides, ten feet and half wide, in
ome places wider. It went ſtraight over the Downs (which was
here level) from Loſtwythyel towards Liſkerd ; on the fide of it
were many Barrows: hence it runs through ſome meadows


which lie round the Tap-houſe), beyond which I immediately


on both ſides, but wider than before; thence it is very plain as
fr as the third Tap-houſe, beyond which, in a ſtraight line, it con-
inues for half a mile, then paſſes from the highway into a field,
where it runs within the hedges for a quarter of a mile farther in a


ſtraight line ſtill. I then loft it; and thence to Liſkerd, and at-
terwards to Saltaſh, being through deep hollow ways and incloſures,


am inclined to think, from its keeping in a ſtraight line, from the
places dug along its ſides to fill it P, from its aſcending the hill in
an eaſy ſlope, and from its being ditched on one fide as much
25 on the other; whereas, if it had been a Camp, it would have
turnings round the hills, and rounds or faliant angles on its turn-
ings, and would have been ditched but on one ſide q.

There is alſo a Ridgeway Welt of Loſtwythyel, which runs down other Frag-
nearly parallel to the river towards Fawy; it runs by Caſtle-Doar vents ot

. Ancient
| | | Ways on

This Voluba cannot be Falmouth, for it is Genna, or Cenio, as may be reaſonably ſup- the South
lere placed to the Eaſtward of Cenia, whereas poſed. Coaſt,
Falmouth lies to the Welt of it. | See Occamſly pits, p. 329.
; Cenia, lying fomewhere on the Cenio river q Other inſtances of Roman ways in Corn-
r harbour of Ptolemy), mult be either Tregeny wall, particularly the Giant's-hedge (as it is
vr I ruroe ; but Tregeny bears faireſt to be this vulgarly called), running in a ſtraight line from
Cenia; for in the pariſh of Lamorran on this Loo to Leryn-creek on the Fawy River, ſeven
Creek, we find twa Manſions called Tregennah; miles long, and in ſome places ſeven feet high,
aud in the adjoining pariſh of Verian, we finda and twenty feet wide, Sce in the Natural
tenemend of like name, all taking their name Hiſtory of Cornwall, p. 325.


lem 4 River, or Creek, called anciently the
40 an


334


OF THE ROMAN WAS.
(an ancient encampment now almoſt demoliſhed),
and Loſtwythyel, I ſaw many remains of a Riſba
feet wide, ditched on each fide ; betwikt Caſtle-Doar alſo 2.x
Fawy, ſaw a high ridge-way ditched on each fide, in a 3
line. What makes it probable that the Romans had a way ber!


running down from their great Weſtern road, the better to ſecurel


the mouth of Fawy harbour, is, that many Coins have been found?
hereabouts r; and a little below Fawy, croſs the River
cient village, called ſometimes Polrouan 5, and ſometimes Portrouan.
which by its name ſeems to have belonged to the Romans. I am |
informed that there 1s part of a Stone cauſeway leading from Bod- f
man to Loſtwythyel : this Way Tradition attributes to the Romans:
the remains of it are about midway betwixt theſe two Towns; ther |
conſiſt of two fragments, the longeſt of them is about a hundred


yards, and the other not ſo much; they incline a little with the
road, are about ten feet wide, and are raiſed above the common


level about a foot. It is not at all firange that here ſhould be à
Way, for the river Alan coming up from Padſtow-Haven, on the


North Sea, and the river Fawy coming up from the South Sea, and
Fawy to Loſtwythyel, do almoſt cut our narrow county in two, being


within the reach of four miles one of the othert, ſo that a way from
river to river would in a manner connect the two Seas; and there


could not be a more judicious piece of ground choſen either ſor a


Way, or a Garriſon, than this, from whence the Troops could reach
ſo eaſily from North to South Sea.


fortification overlookin
conſiderable a Fort, leading direcly
towards Loſtwythyel, called Caſtle-Kynek. By means of theſe two


Garriſons, and one at or near Loſtwythyel, the paſſage between the
two rivers was eaſily ſecured, and ſmall parties might traverſe with


ſecurity.


Having tracked this way thus much about Loſtwythyel, I hare +.
ſeen no more of it; but there is reaſon to believe, that it kept
on, through, or near St. Auſtle, to Granpont, the Yoluba of the


Ancients, and thence in a ſtraight line to Truro, fix miles farther ;
but the grounds (altogether incloſed) will make it dithcult to trace
it here. However, about a mile Weſt of Granpont, there 1s a
Tenement called Caerfds, alias Carvozau, that is, the Caſtle, or
Encampment, on the Dyke, or Foſs (by which name the ancient
Ways are frequently called), adjoining to the High road to Truro ;


r See, p. 303.
* Ibid.
t See Map - Plate I.


v I find by Mr. Tonkin's MS. that he allo
looked upon this Carvoza as a Roman Encawp*
ment. M.S, A. Creed patiih.


and


betwixt which |


: p


To this let me add one obſer-
vation more, that at Pencarrow there is a very conſiderable |


the Alan, and on a hill near Bodman as
from that of Pencarrow


„ A Ss WW We


OF THE ROMAN WAYS:


ad indeed the name of this laſt mentioned town (to ſay nothing of
ke Coins found near it taken notice of before) makes me think
hat more than one way paſſed here*; ſo that Camden may be
jery little out in his derivation, when he fays, that it is called in
Corniſh Truru, a tribus plateis, from the three Streets. Probably
he great Eaſtern road paſſed from Truro, near Penryn, there being
; ſtraight lined fortification about midway between theſe two
Towns (in the pariſh of Feock, as I remember), and ſo on towards
Conſtantine, and Helford Haven, where ſo many Coins were
ſound.

[ have nothing farther to remark of this great Weſtern road, than
that there is room to conjecture, from the Iter, juſt now produced
om Richard of Weſtminſter, that a little beyond Granpont it ſent
of a branch to the left hand down to Tregeny, on the river Val,
which was formerly navigable far above this laſt mentioned Town;
ind what ſeems to confirm this conjecture, is, that midway betwixt
Ganpont, and Tregeny, is the encampment of Wulvedon,
nentioned before, with an avenue pointing towards the Granpont


road Z.


335


Befides this Southern road, the Romans muſt have had another Fragments


ublick road into Cornwall, as Mr. Moulding, mentioned before,


of Ancicnt
Roads on


juſtly obſerves, for this one road could never ſend off ſuch con- the North ;


renient branches as to command the whole Country. For this pur-
pole they muſt have had another Way coaſting along the North Sea,
with Forts, or Towns, at proper intervals (as well as Croſs-roads
ſtretching from the two principal ones) for to maintain a proper
correſpondence between the forces on both. Of this Northern
wad I think there are plain remains ſtill to be ſeen at Stratton.


As this Town lies among hills, I was obliged to get up into the  $tratton.


Church-tower to have the better view of the country round :
from the battlements there, I ſoon ſaw a ſtraight road paſling E.
ad W. and bearing directly for the Town, which in the main


has the ſame direction, though ſome little by-ftreets branch off


on the ſides. The next morning, in my purſuit of this ſubject
o the Eaſt, I eaſily found the ridgeway, which I had ſeen
rom the Tower the evening before, overgrown with briars,
about ten feet wide, bearing in a ſtraight line up the hill;


P. 302. At Mopas, which might be Caſtrum
lam of the Garriſon of Truro, the Caftra
da being ſometimes a mile or two at a
chance from their Ways and Towns.
find this Britiſh Name wrtiten Tre- uro;
n Domeſday it is written Treurgeu; in Henry
e decond's time Treveru; Trivere in the 13th
% Liward JI. but in the goth, Treveru, by
eh it appears that the firſt ſyllable of this
ene is Tre, a Town, and vor, or dur, is a

i Making in the Plural number, worou ;
at Trevuron, corruptly written in Domeſ-


bo tl


day Treurgeu, will make Treurou (by dropping
the V conſonant, which the Corniſh Language
often does); conſequently this name will ſignify
the Town of, or on, the Ways,

y See of Coins, p. 300, 301.

z « The Sea in former times brought boats
© of reaſonable burthen far above T regny to a
& place called Hale-boat-rock, in which rock
te are yet many ſtrong iron rings which ſerved 10
« tye boats unto.” Norden's Survey of Cora-
wall, p. 6.


I rode


n


— — —
—


336


OF THE ROMAN WAS.


I rode by it till I came to Weſt-leigh on the top of a hill, nes.
two miles Eaft of Stratton, in the way to Torrington 3 oh,
twenty miles Eaſtward of this Town. There is a Way Arr R
nearly to this, which runs midway betwixt the Lane 2 din 6 :


other, for ſuch are found near the great roads, particularly in
Oxfordſhire®, and are ſuppoſed to be made either becauſe nearer ®
or better Ways, or in order to keep ſeditious people and ſoldiers ©


from worſe employments ; but I do not take it to be the Principal 1
or moſt ancient road, becauſe, I apprehend, there muſt be a broad
ridge-way near by, or that this could never with any propriety 1


have been called the Small ridge.


Having collected theſe hints to the Eaſt, let us now paſs through q


the town of Stratton to the Weſt, where, at the Town's-end, we


find a raiſed Way pitched with Stones called the Cauſeway, ſlanting | |


up the hill, and then running a mile and half as ſtraight as the
hilly ſurface will permit. About half a mile from the Town, and


one furlong to the right of this Cauſeway, there is a ſquare ®


entrenchment, containing about an acre of ground, where the
houſe of the Blackminſters (once a great family in theſe parts)


formerly ſtood. It was moated round; but whether a little fort
belonging to this Way (for the Romans were fond of the {quare 14


figure), or layed out ſo by the owners I do not pretend to ſay; but
in this place ſeveral Braſs Medals and ſome Silver Coins have been


lately found, as I was aſſured by (Mr. Marſhall) the preſent tenant


of theſe lands, who found the former, and gave the four or five *
braſs old Farthings (as he called them) to his Children to play withall,
as good for nothing. Before I go farther from this Town, I muſt not |


forget to mention, that about two thirds of the Way from hence
to Lanceſton, there is a Barton called Broad- ridge, in which, as I am *


informed by Samuel Percival, Eſq; Lord of the Soil, there is a large :


ridgeway ſtraight for a mile together, in a line pointing North and


South, that is, from one of theſe Towns to the other, which makes


me imagine, that there was a Croſs road which ſtruck off at right q
angles from Stratton to Lanceſton, a place certainly of great


antiquity, and a paſs of no leſs importance. to thoſe who would ;
maſter Cornwall, as we ſhall find when we come to give an account
of the Caſtle there. I return now to the Cauſeway, which runs a
mile and half Weſt of Stratton, paſſing away at the head of Bude

Haven towards Camelford. I ſhall not trouble the reader with my
conjectures about the farther tendency of this Way at preſent.


Dr. Plot's Map.


Lancell's Church and the forementioned Way, and this mike) 5 |


called Small-ridge Lane. This may be a Collateral Way to the |


This


S


is


OF THE ROMAN WAYS.

This is ſufficient to ſhew that the Romans had a way in the North
i Cornwall, though to be diſcovered now only in fragments; but
e people hereabouts have done by this Way, as the vulgar and
morant have dealt with the four great Ways in the other parts of
de kingdom, they have attributed it to the moſt famous man
hat tradition records to have lived in theſe parts; they ſay the
(Cauſeway was firſt made by one of the name de Allo Monaſfterin,
1 Engliſh Blankminſter, a knight Templar (whoſe effigies lies in
heir Church) who lived in the time of Edward the Firſt, and gave
Lnds to this Pariſh, as appears by a deed of confirmation granted
y Queen Elizabeth. This Story may have fo much truth in it as
that it was repaired by ſome great man of this family, as it has been,
t no {mall expence, within theſe thirty years; but the Romans, of
| the Ancients, are eminently diſtinguiſhed by their attention to
ablick roads; however, as we attribute all great works of the
uder kind to Giants, ſo the people of no knowledge in this part of
litor ribe the great Ways to the greateſt men they can think
of, aus Robert of Glouceſter, from the fabulous Britiſh hiſtory,
«tributes the four great military Roads of Britain to King Belinus ;
d in like manner the Road through Weſtmoreland and Cumber-
and (though confeſſedly Roman) is called Michael Scot's Cauſe-
day b, as is alſo that in the County of Durham about Bincheſter;
rhoever conſiders this cuſtom, and at the ſame time the Road
k:ding from the Eaſt, through the town of Stratton, muſt needs
think that this Cauſeway to the Weſt (though kept in better
pair, becauſe paſſing through more miry grounds) is only a
continuation of the great Road which comes from the Eaſt.

Whether this great Road through Stratton comes from Exeter,
(as Jam more apt to imagine) comes into the North of Devon-
lire from Somerſetſhire, croſſing the river Ex above Bampton,
hende to Romans-Leigh, and near Burrington, or Chimleigh
(forl, Cheminleigh) paſſes on to Torrington, I leave to other
Gentlemen, and future enquiry, as not concerning the deſign of
theſe papers; but, I think, that the navigable Rivers, on which
iz two conſiderable trading Towns Barnſtaple and Biddeford now
land, will abundantly juſtify the Romans for bringing their
publick Road ſo far North, directly from Somerſetſhire, a way
tre in the North being altogether requiſite for ſubduing this part
« the Iſland, as well as opening a communication with Ireland;
5 this I muſt add, that Bude-Haven (as it is ſtill called, though
wy only a ſandy Creek for ſmall veſſels) appears to have been
umerly much more commodious for ſhipping than it is now; for


d Horſley's Brit. p. 388.
4 R the


IE)


CORNWALL CONQUERED


the ground running up the valley from the Creek's-mouth (till it


+


comes within half a mile, or thereabouts, of Stratton) is all a flat


marſh, and moſt certainly made fo by the Earth and Gravel waſhed
down from the hills adjoining ; the River here, being a plentiful BY
ſtream, always comes down charged with ſlime, when it .
encreaſed by the Land-floods, and has not the liberty to run it off
into the ſea, by reaſon of the ſands blown in by the Northern
Winds; the ſands increaſing every age, as the preſent generation
well remembers, muſt have choaked this Haven long fince the


Roman times. Nor is this a ſingular caſe ; deterrations have had
elſewhere the ſame effect on ſome of the ancient Harbours e, of


which no one can doubt, who has read the judici9us obſervations of


Dr. Battely's Antiquitates Rhutupiane.
Before this Marſh was formed, therefore, the Harbour of Bude


muſt have been a very pretty, and ſecure one, being + mile and half


long, and in many places more than half a mile over, the ſea at


Spring-tides even now reaching up more than a mile m the
preſent mouth of the Haven, covering all this Marſh as it comes
along. If Stratton then is an inconſiderable place at preſent, and,


ſeemingly, not worthy of a Roman Way, it is becauſe its Harbou
is choaked up, and it wants that reſort which Trade naturally
produces ; but there 1s reaſon to ſuppoſe, that it was former]
reckoned a Poſt of ſuch conſequence, upon the account of its Haven,


and oppoſition to the Iriſh Coaſt, that it was conquered as early as


the time of Agricola; into which point of hiſtory, as not at all


foreign to the Antiquities of our County, ſince this place favours *


us with ſo fair an opportunity, we will now enquire.


CHAP. VI.


in the Reign of Domitian.


R. Edward Lhuyd, whoſe authority in Britiſh Hiftory will


>.


Cornwall conquered by the Romans as early as the time of Agricola,


have great weight with the judicious, tells us (Archæol.


p. 32. col. 3.) that ©* the Dunmonian and other Southern Britans,
being on account of their fituations earlier conquered, were


« conſequently more converſant with the Romans than the people


« of Wales.” Now the Welſh were conquered partly before
Agricola's coming, and in his firſt Summer ; therefore, according


* Sandwich, Richborough, the Iſle of Thanet, &c.
| to


EX THE ROMANS


ir, Lhuyd, the Dunmonians muſt have been conquered before
cola. I will not, however, place it ſo early; but proceed to


e into particulars, and ſee what may be collected from the


cients on this point.
4 2 5 . o .
iu the firſt Summer of Agricola's command here in Britain, he


. aquiſhed the Ordovices (i. e. the Britans of North Wales), and


duced Angleſea dl. In his ſecond campaign, he made a great


; es, conquering from Angleſea to Edinburghe, or, according to


Yorlley, Cumberland and Northumberland, in which, however,
muſt be implied, that the intermediate nations were before
-dued, if not then, for Agricola would not leave an enemy at


, back. In the third Summer, he advanced as far in Scotland as


i river Tay, building ſeveral Forts. The fourth Summer,
Tacitus ſays, was ſpent in erecting Forts upon the Iſtmus,
hetwixt the Clyde, and the Frith of Edinburgh *f;”” and, doubt-
t to pen up the Scots in the Northern part of Scotland, that he
night be at liberty to turn his arms another way; for, in the
ith year, Agricola took ſhipping, and conquered nations before
non to the Roman Eagles, and garriſoned that part of the
aun which lies over againſt Irelands,

ſhe words of Tacitus run thus : © Quinto Expeditionum anno
nave prima tranſgreſſus (ſcil. Agricola) ignotas ad id tempus
gentes crebris fimul ac proſperis preliis domuit; eamque partem
hrſtanniæ gue Hiberniam aſpicit copits inſtruxit, in ſpem magis
warn ob formidinem. Tacit. vit. Agr. cap. xxiv. And, accord-
ng to their Geography, nothing could be better ſituated for carrying
n their purpoſes againſt Ireland than Dunmonia: * Siguidem
' Hibernia, medio inter Britanniam atque Hiſpaniam fita, &
Callico quoque Mari opportuna, valentiſſimam Imperii partem
nagnis invicem uſibus miſcuerit.” Ibid. The Romans thought
and to have lain midway betwixt Spain and Britain, and to have
atended itſelf a great deal farther to the South than it really does;
promote the Conqueſt therefore of an Iſland, ſuppoſed to be
Jaced fo aptly for the connexion of Spain, Gaul, and Britain,
thing, he thought, could be more proper than conquering firſt
lunmonia, the moſt Southern and Weſtern part of Britain.

The queſtion is, who were theſe unknown nations ſubdued by
\nicola in his ſhips this fifth year? The Brigantes, who
atnded as far North as the river Tine, were ſubdued by Petilius
ralish, The Welſh were already ſubdued (South Wales by


be Tacitus, —Horſley, p. 42. the firſt of Domitian. Domitian and Flavius


emen Itin. Sept. p. 15. ibid. Sabinus being Conſuls A. D. 83. according to
EY, p. 43. the Savilian Faſti. i
eis Expedition was in the gth year of h Stillingfleet's Or. Brit. p. 243. — T acit,
Propretorſnip in Britain, which was Agric. cap. xvii. xviii, :
Julius


.

»* *
4 1%. 4 8
9 4 1
8 » © + —


339


—


— _ - —
— — — 2
— —— — — — —
- —


— —— v9 ee


-
—


r


CORNWALL CONQUERED {|


Julius Frontinus, and the men of North Wales by Agricola in i
firſt year); ſo that they could not be the Welſh ; nor indeed ther
neighbours the Cangi, or thoſe nations ſtretching from Cheſterhy
Briſtol (as the late learned Dr. Muſgrave imagines), for they e
in the way to South and North Wales, could not be unten ;
the Roman Generals, whoſe forces had made ſevera] campai
(before the coming of Agricola) on thoſe borders in Shropſhif
Staffordſhire, Hereford, and Monmouthſhire, as they warred tra
the hardy Britans of Wales. Let it be conſidered, in the next pla
that there was no reaſon for Agricola to go into his ſhips to conqut
thoſe inland Countries. f
Mr. Horſley ſeems to me no happier in his conjecture than Ne
Muſgrave, for he ſuppoſes theſe unknown nations were the peo
of Galloway, or the maritime parts of Cantyre and Argyleſhirel
but is it likely that theſe nations ſhould be unknown to Aoricoll
when they lay fo near him in his marches the ſecond, third, I


fourth Summers? Is it likely that Agricola, fo knowing in mattgy


of war, would make his ſhips to fail fo long and dangerousg
voyage, on purpoſe to conquer, or attend the conque!? of, wh
was ſo near at hand, and as it were contiguous to the Rod
Garrifons, which he had placed on the 1fhmus in his third i
fourth Summers? It is certain, ſays Horley (ibid.), that the Rome
{ſhips were in Clyde this (1. e. the 5th) Summer. I would aſk ho#
they ſhould get there? They could not fail round Cathneſs withodt


diſcovering the Orkneys, and the Orkneys were not diſcoverd ©


till the ſeventh year of Agricola k; fo that plain it is, the Roman
Fleet, which had its Winter Station at Portus Rhutupienſis neat


Dover, muſt have gone round the Land's-End, and up the Iriſh |


Ocean to the Frith of Clydel. Is it probable, then, that the Flee
of one ſo curious, and equally intent upon Conqueſt and new


Diſcoveries, ſhould paſs idly by the many promontories and


harbours of the Weſtern Coaſt, in a Climate much more tempting
than the North, with the General and ſoldiers on board, without
the leaſt attempt on ſo great a ſcope of ſhores, till they arrived at
the Frith of Clyde? No, ſurely. —In the Weſt, therefore, were the
ignotæ gentes. The Romans had poſſeſſed the middle and principal
parts of England in the time of Claudius; his Lieutenants, and
thoſe of the ſubſequent Emperours, carried on the Conqueſts (as
we find by their hiftory) againſt all the Nations, from the Belge


i Stillingfleet, p. 43. cipal point; © nave prima tranſgreſſus ;” and

k Horſley, p. 44- therefore takes the ignotz gentes to lie beyond

! Bp. Stillingfleet treating of this Summer's the Bodotrian Frith. |
Expedition (ibid, ut ſupr. 244.) omits the prin-


and.


BY-THE ROMANS


ad the Britans in Wales, as far North as the river Tay in
tland.

vill the ſeveral nations of England, and the South of Scotland,
gere ſo intermixed, that, upon any new inſurrection, or freſh
aterprize to employ the Soldiery, they muſt at one time or other
ve fallen under the notice and power of the Romans. The
gage were probably ſubdued by Veſpaſian, of whom Suetonius
ith (in Veſpaſ. cap. iv.), „ That he fought thirty battles,
« conquered here two powerful nations, above twenty towns, and
« the Ile of Wight. By which we find his employment was
« Weſtward, and the Belgæ and Dunmonii were the two powerful
Nations that way m.“ But, with ſubmiſſion, the Dunmonii are
"ot mentioned as conquered by Veſpaſian; and as the Wars of
hat General reached from Wales, Southward, to the Iſle of Wight,
he two powerful nations ſeem to have been the Be/ge and the
Durotriges, which both lay contiguous to his other Conqueſts,
Mt the Dunmonii farther to the Weſt. All this while we find no
nention of the Dunmonii, they alone lying hid hitherto in a narrow
mole of Britain, which was neither a thorugh-fare to other nations,
or had of itſelf provoked the Roman Power.

If we conſider the Theatre of the Roman Wars to this time with
little attention, and how many battles were fought by Veſpaſian,
nd how the Roman Armies were reſident at different times in all the
ther parts of the Kingdom; we muſt conclude, that the Dunmonii
ere the only Nations that could be unknown to the Roman people.
This part of Tacitus's hiſtory is, therefore, not intelligible, much
ks reconcilable to the conſummate prudence of Agricola, unleſs
xe underſtand him in the following manner, viz. That Agricola,
having in his fourth year ere&ed Forts on the Bodotrian Iſthmus, to
keure thoſe Northern Limits, and being now at Liberty to make
wy diſcoveries, and puſh his Conqueſts another way, went into


lis ſhips at Portus Rhutupienſis, and failing, down the Engliſh


Chanel, conquered the Weſtern parts of the Ifland, till then
unknown to the Roman Nation; thence paſſing round the Land's-
Ind, he placed Garriſons on the Shores oppoſite to Ireland, not only
at he might thereby better ſecure the Conqueſts he had made;
but intending (like a man of extenſive views) one time or other to


conquer that Iſland alſo; to which great deſign, the different


Harbours and Garriſons on the North of Cornwall and Devonſhire
ic thought might much contribute.

Before I cloſe the account of the Romans reſiding in Cornwall,
nd the Remains they left here, one article (though it might have


= Stillinzfleet's Orig. Brit. p. 31.
48S been


341


342


CORNWALL CONQUERED


There was an Intaglio found in this County fome time ſince
which I think has undoubted marks of being a true Antique, |
moſt likely therefore to be Roman. It is the propert


and


y of Philip


been more regularly inſerted in Chapter II. of this book if it haal


been more early communicated to the printer) requires ſome notice


*


Vyvyan, Eſq; of Tremeal, was found in the pariſh of Altarnun near
Lanceſton, and was then fixed, as a head to a gold bodkin, but 1


now ſet in a ring as a ſeal (See Plate XXVIII. p. 316.)
The ſtone in which the impreſſion is cut, is green Jaſper,


ſlips of white, incloſing one that is brown in parallel lines, like what


the Heralds would call a Bend Cotized: the texture of the ſtone
did not admit that high poliſh, which the Drawing and erudition


of the Deſign deſerved. |


"6 2p”


markably ſtreaked at the back, and zoned tranſverſedly with . i


=
4
x


A
»


25


®
I

4
*
«


In the Area of the Seal, the chief figure is a Griffin, with 10


wings diſplayed ; three of the feet are fixed, the other is lifted up, 5


as if to graſp ſome ſmall. round things which lie before it, like
pieces of money; the left wing is next to the eye, and very bold;


the other is partly hid by the head and neck of the Griffin, but
appears beyond the top of the head like a Creſt of plumage: under-


neath is an extended ſerpent, which makes no improper baſe line


for ſupporting the principal figure.


In Aldrovandus's > Ornithologia, Tab. VIII. Fig. V. there is a
Griffin, which will in ſome meaſure explain the ſubje& before us:
it has the Serpent ſtretched under its feet, and in one of his fore-
paws uplifted he holds a dagger, fierce and attentive, guardian (as ;


this bird was anciently ſuppoſed to be) of his collected treaſures,


The Griffin, indeed, is an imaginary animal, as the Sphynx,
Satyr, Gorgon, Syrens, Harpies, and Centaurs were of old, all
creatures of the fancy, yet not unmeaning, nor to be looked upon
as meer whims and monſters in any other ſenſe than as they do
not exiſt in Nature; they are mythological beings, conſiſting of
ſeveral parts of different animals, adjuſted and blended together, in
order to convey ſome moral, or heighten ſome prevailing paſſion
above and beyond nature: this was one way among the Ancients | *
of imprinting Caution and Wiſdom ; by a pardonable mixture of 1
forms, they ridiculed and deformed Vice, ſupplied Youth with


inſtructive and virtuous memorials, and contracted a leſſon of im-


portant and extenſive benefit within the portable compaſs of a_


ſhilling. |


The Griffin (with which we are only at preſent concerned) has


the Head, Breaſt, and Wings of an Eagle, added to the body, and


* Aldr, Lib. X. cap. i. de fabuloſis Avibus.


talons


, 7
q
4


TA NN


gons of a Lion; the former to expreſs ſwiftneſs, quickneſs of
ht, and voracity, the latter to repreſent fierceneſs and ſtrength.
this compound figure was the Emblem of a Miſer, intent only


ce, old (the fixed characteriflick of the Griffin), who by turns
nd wen S : C4
1. OM ccacioully broods over his neſt of treaſure, or, with the ſwiftneſs of
py | Eagle, and the rapacity of a Lion, preys upon, ftrips, and devours
carl mn orphan, the neceſſitous, and improvident. In this Seal, the
Cain ſeems to be employed in pawing and ſcraping together
s pieces of money; and a Serpent, his uſual companion, lies
1 nderneath, either to denote the ſubtilty of getting, or the watch-
the ill artifice of defending what is unjuttly gotten, or (which appears
uat equal utility), to warn the greedy Miſer, that though unjuſt gain
ne my give pleaſure in the hoarding, yet at the laſt it biteth like a
on
ent, and ſtingeth like an adder”.
its
p- 1 8 | |
= CHAP, VII |
— Of Ancient Caſtles in Cornuall; and firſt of Hill-Caſſles.
1 1
: E have ſeveral ſorts of ancient Fortifications in Cornwall; SECT. I. |
a and becauſe it is difficult to aſſign them to their proper TheSorts of 1
: authours, but more difficult ſtill to diſcover the reſpective age in We- |}
e- ich they were built, we will range them, by the reader's leave, 1
as xcording to the ſimplicity of the works, beginning with thoſe [
JJ vhich have leaſt of Art, and proceeding gradually to thoſe which |
x, me more labour, and a greater variety of works in their |
ll compoſition. | 1
n Our Caſtles (for the Corniſh call them all ſo, though, perhaps, [
o inproperly) may be divided into three Claſſes. Firſt, Walled Forts, |
of or Lines, for Defence and Garriſon. 4
In Secondly, Walled Caſtles for Reſidence, as well as Defence. \f
In | Thirdly, Artificial Hills, covered with a Building, ſometimes
ts called a Keep, ſometimes a Dungeon; and a garretted Wall
of eacloſing an Area below, called a Bafle-court. Of each fort I ſhall
1- aſign them to that Nation which appears moſt probably to have
a rected them, with ſome obſervations on the occaſion of their being
built, and the choice of the ground they ftand upon.
a8
d | ® The Drawing is truly bold and good ; the Architects in their capital works have enriched


le- part is magnified ſo as to correſpond fitly their Frizes with it, and Emperours in their
© tie ize of the Lion, and the whole is an Coins have ſometimes preferred it to the Horſe
eedant and expreſſive compoſition: indeed, the for drawing their trumphal Carrs.

ian in general is ſo ſha, eiy a figure, that


s 4 Of


344


SEkcr.n. Of the firſt Claſs we have two ſorts, ſome which incloſe 1


Cliff
Caſtles.


Tolpedn-
penwith,
and other
Entrench-
ments,


the North ſea, and at its Northern point, turning about to the Weſt, *

formed a Pool where veſſels might have had ſome ſhelter whilſt this

cape remained entire, and Soldiers, under the fortifications above, |

might have had tolerable good landing: but the violence of the
Northern ſea has eaten away all the neck of Land which joined this


OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL.


promontory, by a Yallum ftretching croſs a neck of land fro
edge of one cliff to that of another, which for diſtinction w
call Cliff-Caftles ; and ſome conſiſting of one V. allum,


m the
e may
or more,


of Earth, or a rampart of Stone on the tops of hills. Of the firſt


ſort is Caſtle Treryn in the pariſh of St. Levin (Plate XX V1,


e


P- 297).


This Cape ſhoots forth into the Sea, bearing directly South; its


farthermoſt Ridge conſiſts of three lofty groupes of Rock, to the


North of which is a low and narrow neck of Land, croſs which |
there runs from the Eaſt to the Weſtern Cliff, a Stone Wall


marked A; the ground then riſes pretty quick, and on the brow © ©
of the hill there is a Vallum of Earth B, and a ditch without ir ©?
towards the land, but none within next the ſea. This Yallum ©


runs alſo nearly Eaſt and Weſt, reaching from ſea to ſea; and without
it towards the land there is another Yallum of Earth C, of like ©


direction, but lower in point of ſituation, incloſing in like manner
a greater portion of this promontory. To the Eaft of this 8 |


promontory there is a very commodious Creek called Penberth;
and to the Weſt there are many landing places, which will give ;


us fome light hereafter into the occaſion of this and ſuch like 4


Caſtles. |


About a mile and half to the Weſtward of Caſtle Treryn, the 5 |
cape called Tolpedn-penwith is divided from the main land by a ©


Stone-wall, which coaſting along the brow of the hill extends from
ſea to ſea. The Caſtles Karnijek and Boſcajelln, in the pariſh *
of St. Juſt, are of the ſame kind, and many others on the ſea- coaſt.
The remains of one are very remarkable, about half a mile N. W.
of Tehidy, the Seat of Francis Baſſet, Eſq. They ſtand now on
the very brim of the Cliff, and much more than what is now
ſtanding is fallen with the Cliff into the ſea. This entrench-
ment conſiſted of two Ditches, and conſequently two Y a!lums” :
the inner and principal Ditch next the Cliff 1s now but ninety
paces long, and twelve feet wide at the bottom, which, being
very even, and full of graſs, is generally called the Bowling-
green; it runs near E. and W. at each extremity ending in an
inacceſlible Cliff, encloſing formerly a cape of land which ran into


matey AH 9 rn ey


YT” PT I, gt,
Se ae org — N


cape to the main, ſo that the Land and Sea alſo, which this forti-


a In Corniſh Karnnidzbek, and Boſcadzhel. order to diſtinguiſh betwixt that and a Rampart, |


7 By a Vallum, I mean what is thrown up though Vallum in Latin really ſignifies both tht
out of the Trench into a Mound, or Rid.e, in Ridge, and a Rampart alſo.


oa. 4 n


#911 at;


Gcation


oo = Won =P


z 7 og” Sat av a @ 8 ans


OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL:


ion was intended to ſecure, are both ſo altered ſince they were
bnified, that, were it not for the remains of the fortification above,
the place would eſcape all notice; and, on the other hand, unleſs we
-uld trace this cape, and its alterations in the ſoft ſhelfy Cliffs,
nd the remaining Rocks below, it would be impoſlible to gueſs
© what reaſon ſuch a fortification ſhould be here erected ; but the
ſent appearance, well conſidered, illuſtrates the uſe and intent
this fortification to be the ſame as of thoſe which have been


Caſtles of this ſort, including Promontories and Rocks, with Uk 28
ign of Cli


345


heir trenches towards the Land, were made, as I imagine, by Cle.


waders, to ſecure a place for landing men, when they made any
geſcent, and re-imbarking them upon their retreat. For this I
ive the following reaſons 3 the trench is always next the Land,
plying, that the enemy expected was to come from the land, not
the ſea; the inner Yallum next the ſea at Tehidy, and at Treryn
it C, is higher than that without it, and, doubtleſs, for this reaſon,
that they might make a double execution upon the enemy, by
ſhooting their arrows, darts, and ſtones, both from above and
below, at the fame time. It may be imagined, that theſe were
jetiring places for the Natives, when they were preſſed by the
enemy who were in poſſeſſion of their country, but this could not
te; the Natives would quickly have been ſtarved into a ſurrender,
amidſt theſe Rocks and naked Capes; there was no ſhelter for
their wives, children, or cattle, all which, therefore, they muſt have
abandoned to the mercy of their enemy, and upon every ſuch in-
judicious retreat find themſelves under an immediate neceſſity of
ſubmitting, ſtarving, or drowning; beſides, the Saxons and Danes,
having fleets, were maſters of the ſea, and, there being landing
places near all ſuch Caſtles, the flight of the Natives hither would
not by any means ſecure them, for thoſe who had ſhips might
ally land, and ſcale theſe Cliffs, without the leaft impediment
irom the fortifications towards the land; ſo that theſe Faſtneſſes
could be of no ſervice to the Natives; but they were extremely
proper for invaders ; for the line being ſhort irom Cliff to Cliff,
and therefore eaſily and quickly manned, and the invaders having
aly acceſs to their ſhips below for proviſion, and every thing they
wanted, could neither be forced nor ſtarved; as ſoon as they had
ized a rocky Cape fit for their purpoſe, they entrenched to
prevent ſurprize, and, under the covert of theſe intrenchments,
ome repelled the Natives, whilſt others were buſy in diſ-embarking
their troops and neceſfaries; as ſoon as they were ready, they
marched forwards into the land, leaving their ſhips, and, doubtleſs,
i Garriſon in theſe works, to ſecure a retreat to their ſhips. I


41 attribute


SECT. ui.
Hill Caſtles. Fallum, or more, of Earth on the top of a hill. On the top off


OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL,


I
attribute theſe works, therefore, to the Saxon or Daniſh invaders 10 .
for they ſuit very well the purpoſes of foreigners and Pirates ; but g
could by no means be of ſervice to the Britans. |


The ſecond fort of our military works is that which has aa


:
,


Bartine-hill, in the pariſh of St. Juſt, may be ſeen a circular moung
of Earth, with little or no ditch, never of any preat ſtrength; |
perhaps only traced out, begun, and never finiſhed, Within this | ;
incloſure was ſunk a Well, now filled with Stones; and the only
thing remarkable is, that near the centre of this Caſtle lie thr.
ſmall circles, edged with Stones pitched on end, and contiguous to
each other, the Northernmoſt nine yards diameter, the others
ſeven. It is uncertain whether theſe Circles were of military or :
religious erection; if of the firſt, they were, as I imagine, the
apartments or ſepulchres of the Commanders; if of the ſecond.
places of worſhip, prior to the fortifying this hill. A view of thi;
may be ſeen Plate XXIX. Fig. I. :
That we may advance gradually, let the next Fortification be
Caerbran P in the pariſh of Sancred, a circular fortification on the
top of a high hill; conſiſting firſt of a deep ditch fifteen feet wide 5
edged with Stone, through which you paſs to the outer V allum, .
which is of Earth, fifteen feet high, and was well perfected to the
North Eaſt; but not fo towards the Weſt. Within this Vallum,
paſſing a large ditch, about fifteen yards wide, you come to a 5
Stone- wall, which quite rounded the top of the hill, and ſeems to
have been of conſiderable ſtrength; but lies now like a ridge of |
diſorderly Stones: the diameter of the whole is ninety paces, and
in the center of all a little circle. There are many others of this
kind ſtill to be ſeen q, and ſome have been quite deſtroyedt; and
there are ſome of theſe Hill-caſtles which are more regularly built,


C:ftlcandi- and walled round, ſuch as Caſtleandinas in the pariſh of Ludgran,


which conſiſted of two-ſtone-walls built one within the other in a
circular form, ſurrounding the area of the hill. The ruins are no-
fallen on each fide the Walls, and ſhew the work to have been of
great height and thickneſs; there was alſo a third and outmoſt


4 *
: * 7 > * 5


Wall built more than halfways round, but was left unfiniſhed. ©?


Within the Walls are many little incloſures of a circular form
about ſeven yards diameter with little Walls round them, of two
and three feet high; they appeared to me to have been ſo many
huts, erected for the ſhelter of the garriſon ; the diameter of the
whole Fort from Eaſt to Weſt is 400 feet, and the principal Graff


p “ Dinas Bian, that is to ſay, Brennus's q As Caſtle-Hornek, and Caſtle Leſgidzbek,
© Court, or Palace.” Hum. Lh. Brev. Engl. &c.
p. 53. N r As Roſcadzhel and others.


Or 7


Py


tz N * 0
* > 5 fy N
4 *


Aartine Cuth in. Shut


BET, 4 4.4 4 4A


uma 116 N


m lad nad W WIY Wn 98»
ds G45 A ls,
Py — 1 *


u ee we"
meme, eee


— —


aer bran larth ui Sancred


=
}


CET WAS (AWW * D fag.
ern W W e * q 7 2 | TW Ber 9g 1
a\% * ' 2 0 5 - .


2
* —_ . g £7


* \ * , K Wan 8 8
U WN W \ \ |


WERE


f I | | ny. Ne RY

1 p * f Nd J ;

—— x \ W. NV. Na Q So 3) "

\ WO \ vl SID > 8
ce N N JS =

, 9 WWW: N —_—_——. *

5 Fi 1 I \\ 4 e WV e 8 2 LIC

AIAN ALES ——


.
£ > & 6: > a —


e
Oo mo 420 150 *


>»
, 2


4 7
25 . 2
| i |
wh, Ip
| 8 7
ee, lee,
5 5 | . |
„uu un. Lemon 7


. Plate 12 A great


|


_ —


['Z
'B
:
|
14
/
(
/


= 4 » s . 4 * „ a i .
3 2 ö : - 5 5 . N . 8 _ 3s . 3s * 2 9 n 5 JL. 9 : -
l * * K ; , OTE FADE II ee . n Fk e A 4


25 e = 25 wy. b


O0F ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL.
0 Ditch is ſixty feet wide: towards the South the ſides of this


1 gountain are marked by two large green paths about ten feet


wide, which were viſibly cleanſed by art of their natural roughneſs,
i; the more convenient approach to this garriſon : near the middle


| Ihe Area is a Well almoſt choaked with its own ruins, and at a


| diſtance, a narrow pit, its ſides walled round, probably dug


I vr water alſo, but now filled with rubbiſh: this is on the


yohelt hill in the hundred of Penwith; as to conſtruction not


bdaterially differing from Caer-bran caſtle; but the moſt regular and


arious of this kind is Caſtle-Chiin in the little pariſh of Morvah,


plan of which I have therefore here exhibited (Pl. XXIX. Fig. III.)


The entrance faces W. 8. W. where having paſſed the ditch A, Caftte
ou enter the outmoſt Wall G, five feet thick at M, which is called .


he Iron Gateway, and leave on the left hand the wall twelve feet
kick for ſtrengthening the entrance; on the right, there is a wall,
x, which traverſes the principal ditch, BB, thirty feet wide, till it
raches within three feet of the principal wall C eight feet thick at
e preſent top, but in the foundation thicker ; then turns away
rallel to it, to L, leaving a narrow paſſage of three feet wide, as a
communication betwixt the entrance, Q, and the ditch K B H.
The entrance Q, flanked on the right by the wall K, and on the
kf by an oppoſite wall I, admits you by the paſſage O, through
the great wall C, into ſeveral lodgments which are formed by a
acular line of ſtone-work E EE, about three feet high, parallel to
the wall C, and ſeveral partitions NNN, ſpring as it were from the
center of the whole work, and reaching from the line E to the
principal wall C: theſe divifions are all thirty feet wide, but of
unequal bigneſs. The area within theſe works is 125 feet from
Faſt to Weſt, and 110 from North to South. The principal foſs
h has four traverſes; two, K, and I, which ſecure the entrance;
nd two more HH, which divide the remaining part of the foſs
early into three equal parts. At F, there is a Well, which has
leps to go down to the water, By the ruins of theſe walls, I judge
lat the outermoſt could not be leſs than ten feet high, and the
nnermoſt about fifteen, but rather more, and both well perfected ;
tie apartments within were probably ſhelters from the weather.
dome rude ones of like uſe we have taken notice of in other
tamples ; but theſe are much more regularly diſpoſed, and indeed
the whole of this work, the neatneſs and regularity of the walls,
roriding ſuch ſecurity for their entrance, flanking and dividing
their Fols, ſhews a military knowledge ſuperiour to that of any
"her works of this kind, which I have ſeen in Cornwall. Many
ther walled Caſtles we have upon our hills, as Torcrobm in
Lanant ;


<]


the moſt valuable and ſpacious parts of it; and where there could


own forts; but now all theſe circumſtances argue, on the other


348 OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL,
Lanant; Caergonin in Breague, and the like, but none material] -
difterent. | =:
8 The age and authours of this ſort of Fortification may beſt b N
waat End. determined by the form, number, and ſituation of the works. -
| All of this kind, which I have ſeen, are either round or nearly ſo . is


from which ſome will pronounce them to be Daniſh; but this Þ
too haſty a concluſion; for though the Danes fortified in this
manner, as appears by entrenchments in ſeveral parts of England.
inconteſtably of Daniſh ſtructure; yet by p. 315, it is plain that oe
the Romans alſo erected their Forts ſometimes in the circular form; d.
and ſo doubtleſs did the Saxons and the Britans ; however, thegs WW in
Hill-Caſtles in Cornwall, I take to be Daniſh, for the following,

and, as I think, more concluſive reaſons. In the narroweſt and Ml r
Weſternmoſt part of Cornwall (viz. from St. Michael's Mount to the Ml 1
Land's-End), there are no leſs than ſeven of theſe Caſtles Rill th
remaining*; ſome are not one mile, none more than three miles MY &:
diſtant from one another; ſo that from the firſt you can fee the Ml
ſecond, from the ſecond the third, and ſo on; from ſeveral of them b
you can ſee both the North and South Chanell; but from all of Ml :
them you can ſee either one or other. This narrow ſpot, in which n
the Caſtles ſtand fo thick, is no where above ſix miles from the ly
North to the South ſea, in ſome places not four; and from the 1
Weſternmoſt Caſtle of this kind, to the Eaſternmoſt, is not more
than eight miles. In other parts of this county, we have Fortifi-
cations of the ſame kind, but they are thinly planted. Now, why:
{hould the natives crowd them together in a heap, and in ſuch a
corner of the county, where they could be of no ſervice to defend


not be room enough for the numerous inhabitants of a county ſo?
well peopled as Cornwall was (before it was depopulated and in a
manner ruined by the Danes) to retreat into?
Theſe Caſtles have no houſes within them (as moſt certainly they
would have had, if erected by and for the natives), but only ſome
low huts for ſoldiers. 3
Moſt of them have ſome part of either ditch or vallun
unfiniſhed, which would not be left in that manner, if the natives
had intended them for their ſecurity ; for the natives had intervals
of quiet enough to have compleated theſe works. Again, all theſe
Caſtles are diſmantled, which the Danes could have no motive to
do; neither can we imagine that the Britans would deftroy their


*
£
=
*
x:
&


3 4
\


* All markcd with a double circle in the ſmal! Map,


bad.


OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL.


und, as much for their being Daniſh, as they do againſt their
being Britiſh. 9 ; i

The Danes choſe this Weſtern part of Cornwall for diſembark-
no their troops, and planting their garriſons, becauſe ſmall parties
s doubtleſs they were at firſt) were not ſo eaſily ſurrounded,
trced, and cut off here, as they would have been in a more
tended country *,

They placed their Forts on hills in fight of one another, that
he alarm might reach from one Caſtle to the other; that ſignals of
itreſs, or aflembling, and making ready, might be communicated
n a minute.

They placed them near the Sea, to give notice to their fleet,
receive notice from it, and diſcover the ſhips of the enemy; and
al theſe are ſo many expreſs teſtimonies that the Danes underſtood
their buſineſs well. The Caſtles indeed had only temporary
ſhelters, becauſe the Danes, accuſtomed to a much colder climate,
ganted no more. The outer parts of them were left unfiniſhed,
decauſe the General, either ſatiated with plunder, or becauſe of the
advanced ſeaſon, called off the garriſon, Laſtly, they are all laid in
mins, probably by the Britans, who, as ſoon as the Danes were
gone, had reaſon ſufficient to wreak their ſpite, and demoliſh them,
remembering how bitterly they had ſmarted by the garriſons they
contained, ,

It may be aſked, why ſhould theſe Caſtles have Britiſh names, if
of Daniſh erection? Britiſh names they have, it is true; but the
ſingle circumſtance of a name cannot over-balance the reaſons
which go before. What the Danes called them we cannot tel],


names for the different hills; but the Daniſh names expired with
the poſſeſſion, and of the Daniſh language we find no traces which
rere owing to the intercourſe of the Corniſh and Danes of thoſe


from the name of the lands or manor on which it ſtood, as the
caſtle of Chünx; or from the remarkable height of the hill, as


ey. times, When the Danes left Cornwall, the natives named the
me Fl Caltle from ſome famous exploit, as the caſtle of the Bloody
5 Field"; from its ſtrong ſituation and works, as the Iron Caſtle *;


als Caſtle-andinas v; but it cau be no more concluded that the Britans
eſe rected theſe caſtles, becauſe they have Britiſh names, than that
to the Saxons built Exeter or Saliſbury becauſe theſe cities have Saxon
eir names. And here I cannot but take notice of a common miſtake,
ger |


See map of the Hundred of Penwith, Plate I. x Caſtle Chun.
v Caſtle Leſgudzhek. y Caſtle-andinas,
- * Caſtle Hornek. |


4 U in


though, for diſtinction ſake, the garriſons had doubtleſs different


349


—
.
— — 4 — — 2


Caſtle


Karnbre,


kind we are now treating of) near St. Columb, and that 1 8 i
pariſh of Ludgvan, Caſtle-an-Danis, as if it were called ſo, becauſe 0 0
was a Daniſh caſtle. This cannot be the true name, as it would 100
be no diſtinction (which is the reaſon of all names), for the inhabi. Bu
tants to call them Danis (i. e. Daniſh), caſtles, where there are ſo ou
many of one ſtructure, and ſo near one another, and all ax much yl
built by the Danes, one as another. It muſt be written therefore © ho
Dinas (not Danis) for ſo the Corniſh call the fortified hills al a
Pendinas near Falmouth ; Dinas, in Padſtow ; Little Dinas in “
St. Anthony. The reaſons for the other Britiſh names we have
ſeen before; but this name they gave, by way of eminence, ol th
the moſt conſpicuous and ſtrongeſt fort of any particular q
; th

of

C HAP. VIII. | 1

= ©

Of the Walled Caſtles deſigned for Reſidence as well as Defence, ; T


HESE are likewiſe of two ſorts, either with or without a MW :
Keep?. Thoſe without a Keep were generally built Turtet- n
wiſe, of which ſort, we have but one now remaining, that I can 6


ſpeak of, in Cornwall a, and that is Caftle Karnbre, and even this »
has been ſomewhat altered, to make it a Lodge for the old Park in MC
which it ſtands?. However, there is ſomething fingular in the Wt
fituation, plan, and elevation of this caſtle, for which reaſon I have .
_ Karnbre Caſtle ſtands on a rocky knoll at the Eaſtern end of YM "
Karnbre-hill. The foundation of the building (Plate VII. Fig. ac. WW !
p. 117.) is laid on a very irregular ledge of vaſt rocks, whoſe ©
ſurfaces are very uneven, ſome high, ſome low, and conſequently * i ®


the floors of the rooms on the ground-floor muſt be ſo too. The
rocks were not contiguous, for which reaſon the architect has
contrived ſo many arches from rock to rock, as would carry the
wall above. The ledge of rocks was narrow, and the rooms
purchaſed with ſo much labour, neither capacious nor handſome, '
as may be ſeen by the Plan, a p. The walls, as will beſt appear
in the elevation, have in one of the turrets, a, three ſtories of


? A Keep is a building elevated above the reſt deſtroyed likely in the Daniſh wars. a
by a Hillock (or Tumulus) for the moſt part b Belonging to the family of Baſſet, _
artificially raiſed, See Trematon, Plate XXXI. anceſtral ſeat, called Tehidy, is within two mile?
and Lancefton, Plate XXXIII. of it. |

* The reſt, as they were Britiſh, being c Plate VII. p. 117.


windows, |


OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL.


cindows, in & but one, and are pierced every where by ſmall holes
o deſery the enemy, and diſcharge their arrows, and ſome perhaps
ded in the more modern times for muſkets. There were ſome
wildings (now all down) at the North Weſt end which were the
aut-Work's to this caſtle ; but its greateſt ſecurity was the difficult
proach to it, the hill being ſtrewed with great rocks on every
dle. This was certainly a Britiſh building, and erected in thoſe
cultivated ages, when ſuch rocky, hideous ſituations were the
choice of warlike, rough, and ſtern minds.

The pore on which this Caſtle ſtands is not the higheſt part of
the hill d; that is taken up by a circular fortification a u, about
zoo yards to the Weſt of the former® Here we find the ruins of
i tone wall n, which ruins are twenty feet wide, and ſhew the
Fall to have been of conſiderable height and thickneſs ; it is called
he Old Caſtle: its Weſternmoſt fide was built on the foundation
if a ſacred mound, which incloſed the greateſt part of this hill, for
cigion f; but its Eaſtern part deſerted that mound at 6 L n, and
yas determined by the height of the ground, as it ought to be.
That it was built by the ancient Britans, and as anciently as when
Druidiſm was the eſtabliſhed religion in Cornwall, I have great
raſon to think, becauſe I find the large flat ftones which have
noſt remarkable Rock- baſons (inſtruments probably of Druid
uperſtition) at G6 and 1, leſt entire, as if preſerved out of devotion ;
Fhereas, if this wall had been built by Saxons, Danes, or even
Chriſtians, they would certainly have been clove up, as being of
he quoit or dz/czs ſhape, and therefore commodious for the uſe of
wilding ; in the next place I obſerve, that their wall does not cut
r mangle any of their ſacred circles, which are numerous here;


whereas there is not that care taken of theſe places of devotion in


the Daniſh Fortifications. The Rock-baſons of that vaſt crag
alles Karnidſak were probably carried off to build Caſtle Chin ;
nd at Caſtle Treryn (Plate XXVI.) I obſerve one of the Daniſh
rams B, cutting one of the Druid holy circles, and paſſing quite
rough it; and where the Danes have ſtone walls in their cliff
altles, we find few or none of the Rock-baſons : all ſtrong
ridences, that the Danes had no reverence for thefe works, and
lierefore where we find them ſpared, we have reaſon to conclude
lat they were ſpared by the Britans out of reſpect to their own
fligion, There ſeems to have been part of a ſtone wall built on
he North fide of this hill, running from the old Caſtle, nearly Eaſt,
Wards the new; it was built on the foundation of the religious


e the elevation of this hill at the end of © See the Map; Plate VII. p. 117.
. Xt, Plate XX XV 11. of this Book. k See Book II. Chap, xvii. P. 118.


mound


5 L


— — — -


352


Tindagel
alias Tindo-
gel Caſtle,


OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL,


mound before mentioned ; but it does not reach within ſixty yards
of the new Caſtle, and was never finiſhed. TY 4

By the Military Remains on this hill, the Britiſh Coins of Gold.
the Roman Coins, Weapons of War, and other things (probably 1
Roman) found here (not to inſiſt upon the ſeveral Religious Mood 2
ments mentioned Book II. Chap. XVII.) this hill mult have been af
place of ancient and great reſort in times of war, as well as peace; 4
well known to the Romans, and frequented by the moſt conſiderable I
among the Britans g. I

Tindagel Caſtleh (Plate XXX.) was built on a cape of land, the
extremity of which was a Penin/ula, a very lofty hill, =. Where!
this Peninſaula joined the main land, there are the fortifications, Ml
partly on the Peninſula, and partly on the Main. Concerning this 4
Caſtle, a Poet has the following verſes, thus tranſlated in the Ml
reign of Elizabeth, by the ingenious Mr. Carew, p. 121. 3


*
*


E. locus Abrini finuoſo littore © There is a place within the wind-


ponti ing Shore of Severne Sea,
Rupe fitus media; refluus On mids of rock, about whoſe foote
quem circuit eftus: The tides turn-keeping play; W
Fulminat hic late turrito A Tow'ry topped Caſtle here
vertice Caſtrum „Wide blazeth over all, 4
Momine Tindagium weteres © Which Corineus ancient broods
dixere Corini. « Tindagel Caſtle call.” 3


The Remains here are not at preſent conſiderable. The Ruins on
the Penin/ula conſiſt of a circular garreted wall D, incloſing ſome M
buildings, among which there was a *© pretty chapel of St. Uliane',
© with a tomb on the left fide (ſtanding in Leland's time, temp.
4H. VIII.) and men then alive remembered a poſtern door of iron.”
Leland (vol. II. p. 81.) calls this, improperly, the Dungeon (for it
is indeed only the walling of the Baſecourt), and thinks the WM
ſituation muſt have rendered it impregnable ; the cliffs, it muſt be
owned, are hideous, and not to be climbed without the utmoſt MF
danger; but, with all deference to ſo great a judge of antiquity,
the ground here was badly choſen, the hill dipping fo very quick,
that every thing within the wall was expoſed to a hill over again 4
and ſcarce an arrow-flight from it; whereas the judgment was to
have placed the Fortreſs higher, ſo as it ſhould have reached the top
of the hill x. This would indeed have expoſed the inhabitants


more to the weather, but leſs to the enemy, which laſt, in ſuch 1


264


Its elevation (as a hill that has afforded d Rectius f. Pintughel; viz. the high fortified Þ 4

a great treaſure of antiquities) may be hill. NR Let 3
ſeen at the end of Chap. xiii. of this book, i St, Juliane's Chapel in Tindagel Caſtle. Lel. iz
Plate XXXVII. | vol. III. fol. 95. ..
| works
1

4


ad
=
. ==
. *
7
do
ox *
=


--
--* LE


8 "


—


— — — —1—
- 2 _ = „„
«


- =


dr
ES
8 I
>*% >


,
—
==
>=
=
. Rn v 8
. Ae
: 8 8 Vds
A. *
IG > EY
* 8
. * 5
| THC WD WW =<Y JD
1
* = oy n bl 0 1 *
2 | ſn 2 ood |
* NN d © V X W f
— * 8 . 2A] JH


Sn


" kd)
ER


* * : l —

4 Mas wi 7 n By r af 42 yo. a
9 @0T ON SF - BW —
— 1 9 » _ „ 8 —_— —


nn hub col e.
n


> n Mia ' ur! i A et OR e Ms; "WW un

PRs N Aer V $ bp 20 7285 2 is 5 ;
255 ps , wle ban | 00

9 OG CI * <>


Fa If


Irs 8225
1
bal, AYE With!


4
fy 40015 ji


7 99 Pe T , ; hs . *
- * E. x 9 13 N


* FA” n 112


e 2 W TIO nb At WS ISPS 404 5100 > — BBA 0


— — — — —— 2 —— —— ———— —  —_ 64 — — x. = —— ——_— noe o —


OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL.


corks is moſt to be conſidered. The walls on the Main incloſe
0 narrow courts, and cover better than the other, and at the end
the higheſt part of this fortreſs, there are ſeveral Stone ſteps to
end unto the Parapet for making diſcoveries. The Walls were

eted, and are pierced with many ſquare little holes as at
Lunbre. This part of the fortification was anciently joined to
hat of the Peninſula by a Draw- bridge; but it was decayed before
[land came there, and the want of it ſupplied by long Elm- trees
red as a bridge'; but the gap o (purpoſely cut through the
[/mus at firſt for the ſecurity of the works p) is now much
widened, and the communication intercepted, The whole was a
unge work, and placed here for the ſake of ſhutting out the enem
yy means of the narrow 1/hmus, which errour in the firſt deſign
nevitably planted it ſo low, that little of what happened in the
country adjacent could be deſcried from it. This Caſtle, fo
noted for the birth of the famous King Arthur, about the end of
he 5th century, needs no proofs (though not without ſome
nodern alterations) of its being originally a Britiſh Structure.
| was the feat of the Dukes of Cornwall at that time, how long
fore we cannot ſay, but probably a product of the rudeſt times,
deore the Corniſh Britans had learnt from the Romans any thing
of the art of war; for it cannot be conceived that any people who
ud ſeen the Romans chuſe their ground, fortify, or attack, would
ger have placed a Fortreſs ſo injudiciouſſy. It continued to be
me of the Caſtles of the Earls of Cornwall to the time of Richard,
king of the Romans, who entertained here, his nephew David,
Prince of Wales. After the death of Richard, and his ſon Edmund,
Farls of Cornwall, all the ancient Caſtles went to ruin; from
Palaces became Priſons and Gaols, and this among the reſt.
There was, however, a yearly ſtipend allowed for keeping this
Ciftle, till the Lord Treaſurer Burleigh, in Queen Elizabeth's
ron, aboliſhed it, as a ſuperfluous charge to the crown.

There is another Caſtle of this kind called Caerguidn (or White
Cale} in the pariſh of Sancred, which, becauſe it lies in the Side of
i hill, and has not in its ſituation the advantage of the ground, I
annot think Daniſh, but Britiſh, and very ancient.


i Vol. VII. p. 106.


4 X CHAP.


C3


I'S;


—ů—— — } — — — —
— — — —— — —


334


Trematon
Caſtle, :


Baſs- Court.


Keep.


OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL,


C H A P. IX.


Of Walled Caſtles for Refidence and Defence, which have Keeps 4
and firſt of Trematon,


HE moſt entire Caſtle of this ſort, but the leaſt which wi .
have in Cornwall, is that called generally Trematon k, b 7
Leland Tremertoun, in the pariſh of St. Stephen near Saltaſh.“
The Wall of the Baſs-court, a (Plate XXXI. Fig. I.) is ſtill ſtand
ing, ditched without, and pierced in ſeveral places with cena
loop-holes, ſome ſquare (as thoſe before in Karn-bre and TindagelJ*
fome narrow, and high, as c, and ſome croſs-wiſe, as p. There is
no tower projecting from this Wall, but the gateway, which ſeemg *
(together with the Walls near it) more modern than the reſt of the
building. :
The Bafs-court was about three quarters of an acre, and oncg
charged with ſeveral buildings which are now all gone. At one?
end of this Court is an artificial hill 6, which, by the dipping off
the valley at E, is there of a very conſiderable height, and has 4
large ditch round the bottom; but next the Baſs-court is only
about thirty feet perpendicular. On the top of this taper hill ig
erected the Keep x, of an oval figure!, the outer Wall of which ig
ſtill ſtanding, ten feet thick, two feet of which is taken up with
the garreted Parapet, the other eight make the breadth of the
rampart. The entrance is towards the Weſt, where the arch ovet
the gateway is round, not pointed, and therefore the more ancient
The top of the Parapet is about thirty feet high from the are
within, which is now converted into a garden of pot-herbs; but
the man who ſhewed the Caſtle, and made the garden for his own
uſe, remembers a chimney, and ſome part of walls ſtanding, of
which there are now no traces. The holes for the beams are plain,
and in two rows, but both ſo near the top of the rampart, that, I
imagine, there could be but one flight of rooms, and that the
double beaming was contrived for the better ſupporting the roof,
upon which in time of action the Soldiers did duty. There is no
window in all this Keep, for which reaſon I conclude, they mult haves
had a little Court (or Well, as the the. builders term it), in the center
of the Keep, to give light and air, in ſome ſuch manner, as We?
ſhall find by and by in another Caſtle, and as is ſhewn in this?
by dotted lines in the plan annexed, at n. This little Court, its |


| See the plan Pl. XXXI. Fig. Il.


* in Domeſ'ay, TrREMATONA. ;


— 9 Wok
Hl, NG
rial:


0/08 ji 5
7 , wy * N' „.
7 Ty als


, LM A wa
7 4 1 W * 1 *
* 7 5 1

0 A


%
, y ; 99 1
„ 4


9 « \
, : 4. " g
* , a) K.
F- | 2 * 0 ff 2 N
4 " 1 2 1 7 N bu . R
5 / 1 it . Pp + 1] 4 CY.) 1 '# N
þ 7 * , Ti A 1 v, \Y
6 9" WK ; 4 „ „ e
N 1 N 4 woe \ W
pl f ( — 4 f 77 lk
+ 1 % i " 4 . „„ .


OTH wall
114 2 Hon Borne


hon Nen
„ mu. great ieee. 6e


9 475 —
„ * OR
* v l oy :
N fo ay
] a 75 p


An


Yann” * 1,
k, +» vs v J VE. 4
9639 19% % 214010 4:,.:1/ \
0 * — C 1 P
mY *s ** ws 8 8 5 4
p . 222 — 1 no - P
* n -
, PR 4 0 ”, Kd
. N
0 7
, . SS. |
. - * ( q „ '8,
* . . "Xx — > l
- = 5 0
pe a " '\ 1 > > - V A.” \ > V [ 2 * 0
th K 1 . 9 o
: \ = Nn
r SDJ) * 2 4 +7
* e i
— 4 > N . ” : - &
=:
1
a :


—_— +


„ 4.
o


VET. —
1 REIN LE * 4-4 at
l /


TTL


CE


7


7


* 2
4 ' ' >
* Fo
— 7 x 0 . 1
5 N 5
| BD
» % =
L , „ * 3% : * Ji,
* - 8 J.
= „ OY „ — *  -W 2 „
0 — * 0 : - 1
1 _ * * U ö o
= N „. 39 ** . 7 * 4 {5 |
7 E 6 s Re
1 N 8
j J p WP l - Z (
— 1 e q * 4 ll 1,0
= i "RITES 8 . 70 2
q f * 2 4 - p
bi! | 1 x iQ . . * A a 4 5 2 f
* 2 py 1 4 Gris
* 17 _ af 5 0
7 * -4 . 1 of dh
h p TW
: ma 5 C
A * '
* 1 , * * ld
\ 20
WJ »h, r WY . . "y \
. I/ —»l * N 4 * 6
17 0 WAL. ' *
4" AS, *IB UV - 4
MYA Ll - Cant #8, *
x h * 7 9
* N. gf PET Go of 6 „*
g 10 0 #1 >=, 7 # ,
, \ of * J 28 Fe - BY. * %
a %
2 .
\ — „ * %\ * ,
- * Y
: - 1 %
\ , ;


rm \
W/ 4 | / , D
TI, = 0
4
11%


Thi


n


<=
: BD _


7
1;
/


"Uh... *
a),
/ „777
7 it 77
LT p
F of p <4


*
F /
—


7


e
? My y Mun 3 X
CN RAIN


— — —


OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL.


nue, would yield but little light, but it was to ſtrengthen their
mpart, that they denied themſelves the plcaſure of windows
ind hence it was that theſe Keeps are often called the Dungeons
if the Caſtles to which they belong.

Trematon Caſtle was the head of a Barony of the ancient Dukes
of Cornwall. It appears by Domeſday ®, that William Earl of
Moretonn and Cornwall had here his caſtle and market, and reſided
here; but we are not to ſuppoſe that this William or his father
Robert (half brother to the Conqueror) were the builders of all the
caſtles which they had. For when the Conquerour came in, the
lat Earl of Cornwall of Britiſh blood (by ſome called Candorus; by
Camden, Cadocus) deſcended from a long train of Anceſtors,
ſometime called Kings, ſometime Dukes, and Earls of Cornwall, was
lifplaced, and his Lands as well as Honours given to Robert Earl
of Moreton; and it is natural to think that, where the Reſidence
of thoſe ancient Earls of Cornwall was, there he occaſionally fixed
his Court, as at Lanceſton, Tindagel, and Trematon. Mr. Carew, in
his Survey (p. I12.) gives us this account of an ancient Monument
found in the pariſh Church of St. Stephen, to which this Caſtle
belongs. I have received information (ſays he) from one averring
« eye witneſs, that about fourſcore years ſince, there was digged
« up in the pariſh chancel, a leaden coffin, which, being opened,
« ſhewed the proportion of -a' very big man. The partie farder
© told me, how a writing, graved in the lead, expreſſed the ſame
« to be the burial of a Duke, whoſe heir was married to the Prince,
but who it ſhould be, I cannot deviſe ; albeit, my beſt pleaſing
« conjecture lighteth upon Orgerius, becauſe his daughter was
© married to Edgar.” Now this Orgerius was Duke of Cornwall,
A. D. 959. and might probably have lived at Trematon Caſtle in
this pariſh 3 but he was buried in the monaſtery of Taviſtock (as
W. of Malmſbury fays, p. 146.), ſo that probably the Duke of
Cornwall buried here was Cadoc, hereafter mentioned. Farther
of this Caſtle, before the Conqueſt, I have not yet ſeen, Under
Robert Earl of Moreton and Cornwall, it appears by the Exeter
Domeſday, that Reginald de Valletorta held the Caftle® ; but the
inheritance came to William Earl of Cornwall, from whom it
palted by attainder to the crown, with his other lands and
dignities; then, as ſome think, Cadoc, ſon of the Condorus above-
mentioned, was reſtored to the Earldom of Cornwall, lived and died
at the Caſtle of Trematon, leaving one only daughter and heir
Agnes, married to Reginald Fitz-Henry, natural fon to Henry I.


ra Camden, p. 21. &« Caſtrum et Raginaldus (ſpoken of before as
; Alas Mortagne, alias Moriton. the Holder of the chief parts of the Manor)
In ea Manſione habe: Comes unum * tenet iſtud de Comite.” ſol, 67.


1 con-


G3


try


UV


356


Reſtormel
Caſtle.


Baſs-Court.


Keep.


OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL,


I conjecture, therefore, that this Cadoc muſt be that Duke (or rather
Earl) of Cornwall, whoſe ſepulchre was diſcovered as above "TR
daughter being married to a Prince of the Royal Blood. From
Reginald Fitz-Henry, with one of his daughters and heirs this
Lordſhip of Trematon came to Walter Dunſtavil, Baron of Caſtle.
combe in Cornwall, whoſe iflue (male) failing, it went with +a
daughter and heir to Reginald de Valletorta (temp. Ric. I.) who
had fifty-nine Knights fees belonging to the honour of Trematon »
His ſon John de Valletorta had ifſue Roger (by others calleq
Reginald), who, having only two daughters, Eglina married to
Pomeroy of Bury Pomeroy in Devon, and of Tregeny in Corn—
wall; and Jone married to Sir Alexander Oakeſton, Knight, ſettled
this Lordſhip of Trematon on Sir Henry Pomeroy, Knight, his
grandſon by his eldeſt daughter, Eglina; and this Sir Henry (or
a ſon of the ſame name and title, as is more likely) did by his
deed bearing date the 1 1th of Edward the third, releaſe to Edward
the Black Prince (then created Duke of Cornwall) all his right and
claim to the honour, caſtle, and manor of Trematon d. It then
became again, as it was moſt anciently, a part of the Dutchy of
Cornwall, and ſo it ſtil] continues.

One of the principal houſes of the Earls of Cornwall was
Reſtormel Caſtle, about a mile North of the town of Loſtwythyel.
This Caſtle ſtands not on a factitious hill, for the architect finding
a rocky Knoll, on the edge of a hill overlooking a deep valley, had
no more to do than to plane the Rock into a level, and ſhape it
round by a ditch, and the Keep would have elevation enough,
without the trouble of raiſing an artificial hill (like that at
Trematon) for it to ſtand on. The Baſs-court was ſore defaced,
as Leland ſays, in his time. Some few ruins were to be ſeen in the
lower part (in Mr. Carew's time), where the ditch is very wide and
deep ſtill, and was formerly filled with water brought by pipes from
an adjoining hill; on the higher fide alſo leading to the principal
gate there are traces of buildings to be found. The Keep is a very
magnificent one”; the outer Wall, or Rampart, is an exact circie,
a hundred and ten feet diameter within, and ten feet wide at the top,
including the thickneſs of the Parapet, which is two feet fix. From
the preſent floor of the ground-rooms to the top of the Rampart is
twenty-ſeven feet fix, and the top of the Parapet is ſeven feet


higher, garreted quite round. There are three ſtair-caſes leading


to the top of the Rampart, one on each fide of the gateway


y Fvidences from the Red Book in the Ex- Prince writ his Worthies of Devon, and in the


chequer. © Car. p. 45. poſſeſſion of Roger Pomeroy of Sandridge in
q lu conſideration (as Mr. Hals ſays) of an Devon, Eſq;
annuity of gol. per annum out of the Ex- r Sce the plan, Plate XXXII.


chequer, which deed was extant when Mr. :
aſcending


un no , eee


+4 fe


„„ h ie ASAT


„neee


FA


—
.
is 48254


4 -
FW
*
5 75 r
p 5 #3 *
/ 55
7 1H) 55 F LTH, FF 5 „
* 77 i! "FF WHT STAMP 7 If WT
/ WM 76 Wil 7 Ut FE LH 7 g „ 7 , 517+
7 75 7 T1111 4 / T7777 Ne 1 7 75
/ „ 5 / / ALLY f


,, , Mn1n
/ 5 Wl 6 e, e e 2

, 111:
j / 7 „„ d — 4 4 1 / f f 7 1
F / 7 / 4 47 , , ſs, 7


9 ll


2
7 .
.
* - * * * —
- - * * * - bd
. 5 . 0 . os — N
27 4 *#- -
* 4
—
8.
. N
4 2. 5 - 5,
< » ons. 1 . .
. * 2 . *
—_—
P CELDT bs PM / £ -
2 - 2 on - 5
4 o * - « 40
” 4 -- o ” * — g =
7 ar \
* >; 4 5 .
o 4 „ 4 "pt 4 M
N n _ r |
of a7 . — . 2 * 1 4 of 0 7
o % „ = . g
4 N : . „
; j %s . 2 = j 5„ 111-4
. - * „ : / g
* * d A . 11
4 * , 1 7 #
o 2 , F
- bl "4
* 2525 "
* — 2 1 # & : . * 1 7
; 4
- = Zi
* — — * *I> 4 4 , ﬀ
0 - * 1 - 1 „ logd /
* 5 , g
33 «
: #7 q '
* Wi *
— 0 >


76%


11H


A} 22


"i


. gab Re 5 | 77
A, | ; N — N14 Al
mA Wh


jp —


Fo
$57.5
s *

—
A
bg


WW WHT, PEGS A
| e, .


2
© wh


Wo |


Cl
Cm


* n
RY
N o
: k i


* "”


s
4;
. o
1
. 952. *
4
- „ i . -
77 RY p .
. pe * 755
2 0 ; -
"IO a 2
o *% 2
— oy N
*-
#> \
P x. ®
e 20 *
44 PA 4
* , *. o
0
- ,
. .-
o
.


—
++ ,f
1;


*


Rane
/ WAWYEAIS 171


mh


— >
=D
BR
-


4


/
7
0 lj I, |
IN "I.
/ / f 200 he een WO, y; 4 :


Q


/


N a 5
/ / * T7777 TT], f
W111 7 7 77% 7 N mud, 7 , 7
1 WH 7 ll, 77 Mi; HI! i/ 1 77 7 is
/ / 7 / 7 HIT!) 5, 4 7 HH , 4 7 p
6% ,


f


7 ll F 7

,

" 111117 / 7 '/ /
WH,


5 WITH /
4% . 7 VI,
44 FIT ul, |


4 4 I.


Woh mots. xo 3 ox 3 n
9 T . Ard; Ark R. 3 * ba
e .


P
— © —_ —


2 —


n ⅛ðöüüͥů E ͥ RT ̃ M RIGS I 0 m mům £y - ew WH co olh ED K ,,,, 2M 2 & M..2m::8
2 5 5 2 A 5 oo 8 . .
5 <4 — wn * ESL, EOS Hg SE ws * e 5 —
*


OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL.


.cending from the Court within, and one betwixt the inner and
dutermoſt gate. The rooms are nineteen feet wide, the windows
moſtly in the innermoſt Waller; but there are ſome very large
openings (in the outmoſt Wall, or Rampart) now walled up,
ſhaped like Gothick Church-windows, ſharp-arched, which were
formerly very handſome and pleaſant windows, and made to enjoy
the proſpect, their receſſes reaching to the planching of the rooms:
theſe large openings are all on the chamber-floor (where the rooms
of State ſeem to have been) and from the floor of theſe chambers
ou paſs on a level to the chapel p. This chapel is but twenty-
tre feet fix, by ſeventeen feet fix; but, that it might be the more
commodious, there ſeems to have been an anti-chapel o. This
chapel, as Leland well obſerves", is a newer work than the Caſtle
itſelf; and I may add, that the gateway, and the large windows
in the Rampart wall, are alſo more modern than the Keep, for
they were not made for war and ſafety, but for pleaſure and
gandeur; and yet, as modern as theſe things compared with
the reft may appear, they muſt be at leaſt as ancient as Edmund
ſon of Richard King of the Romans (temp. Edw. I.), for, fince his
death, I cannot find that any Earl of Cornwall reſided here.
Richard King of the Romans kept his Court here, and in all pro-
bability made theſe additions (temp. Hen. III.). The Offices
belonging to this Caſtle, lay below it in the Baſs-court, where ſigns
of many ruins to the North and Eaſt are ſtill apparent, and, with
the ruins on either hand as you come towards the great gate from
the Weſt, ſkew that this Caſtle was of great extent; there was an
Oven (as Mr. Carew ſays) of fourteen feet largeneſs among the ruins
in the Baſs-court, and may ſerve to give us ſome idea of the hoſpi-
tality of thoſe times. This noble Keep {till holds up the ſhell of
ts turreted head, but within equals the ruinous ſtate of the
Dals-court below, over both which the following is Mr. Carew's
Lamentation, in his ſomewhat antiquated but nervous ſtyle:
* Certes (ſays he, p. 138.) it may move compaſſion, that a palace
* ſo healthful for air, ſo delightful for proſpect, ſo neceſſary for
* commodities, ſo fair in regard of thoſe days for building, and ſo
* ſtrong for defence, ſhould, in time of ſecure peace, and under the
protection of its natural Princes, be wronged with thoſe ſpoilings,
than which it could endure no greater at the hands of any foreign
and deadly enemy; for the park is diſparked, the timber rooted
eb, the conduit pipes taken away, the roof made fale of, the
y planchings rotten, the Walls fallen down, and the hewed ſtones
"of the windows, dournes, and clavels, plucked out to ſerve


r Vol. III. p. 24.
41 *« private


358


Boſcaſtle.


Lanceſton
Caſtle.


Baſs-Court.


OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL


&« private buildings; only there remaineth an utter defa
ce complain upon this unregarded diſtreſs,”

The Caſtle and Honour has never been alienated, as far 1 has.
learned, from the inheritance of the Dukes and Earls of why
There was a park round it, well wooded, and ſuitable to the ualit
of the ancient owners; but with ſeveral other parks in this ens
(there having been formerly belonging to this Earldom nine Park 5
and one chace, or foreſt!) diſparked by Hen. VIII. at the inſtan L
of Sir Richard Pollard u. wy

Boſcaſtle, called ſo from being the Caſtle of the Lord Botreaux
(a family anciently of great poſſeſſions in this county), was a
Caſtle of the fame kind as we are now treating of, and the round
artificial hill is ſtill to be ſeen (called the Court); the hill was
ſmall, and there are no other remains.


Cornwall,


Lanceſton Caſtle, Plate XXXIII. is the laſt I ſhall mention, and


was by far the ſtrongeſt of all our Corniſh Caſtles. Leland, who
was a judicious traveller, and had ſeen the moſt reſpectable places
of England, ſays, * the hill on which the Keep ſtands, is large
« and of a terrible height, and the Arx (viz. Keep) of it having
ce three ſeveral wards is the ſtrongeſt, but not the biggeſt, that ever
« ſaw in any ancient work in England w.“

The principal entrance is on the North Eaſt, a, the gateway
a hundred and twenty feet long, whence turning to the right you
mount a terrace running parallel to the Rampart, till you come to


the angle, on which there is a round tower, now called the Witches


Keep.


* See the
Plan, Plate
XXXI. Fig


III p. 354.


tower 3. From hence the terrace turns away to the leſt at right
angles, and continues on a level, parallel to the Rampart, which is
nearly of the thickneſs of twelve feet till you come to c. Here
was a ſemicircular tower, and, as I ſuppoſe, a guard-room, and
gate: from this place the ground riſes very quick, and through a
paſſage of ſeven feet wide you aſcend the covered-way p, betwixt
two walls which are pierced with narrow windows for obſervation,
and yet cover the communication betwixt the Baſs-court, and the
Keep, or Dungeon, on the top of all, beginning at g. The whole Keep


is ninety-three feet diameter*. It conſiſted of three wards. The


Wall of the firſt Ward x was not quite three feet thick, and there-
fore, I think, could only be a parapet for ſoldiers to fight from,
and defend the brow of the hill. Six feet within f ſtands the


ſecond Wall r, which is twelve feet thick, and has a ſtair-caſe three


] think this Cafile muſt have been built ſince molean Library among the Dugdale MSS.


the Norman Conqueſt; for in the Exeter Domeſ- t Dodridee, p. 118.
day it is not named, nor in a Lift of the Earl of v Car. p. 23.
Moreton's Lands and Caſtles, communicated by Vol. II. p. 79.


Francis Gregor, Eſq; from a M5. in the Aſh-


feet


4 n te © wy,
AH „% et gt


—


— - Abe - gs 232 —ͤ„- K


haut "S014 B17 .
puny prog hoy 3 YG SL


eiue wg, fog pen p,


DT; FS.


58 5 / „ 114 +! B yy [4 1 5 ** ' '
Ah / 7 / 7 7210 » 71 Wl . you £ , 7
—— * = nary  », : 6 „1. , N. _—_ 5 2
NT . * » 4 * —X 22 — OS. * * „ 1 - 7 7 Ll Files | N x 4 7 !
e, eee eee GI IO LSD „ wel "Ya 8 —
4 0 7 pf 7 by 9 * 4a 1 4 k — -. — - D - 1 . . *
. 5 e * 0 IS . \ SQ PHD N N * == ——— GEE SL * = j | =
% : of * * 2 — 4+ *\ 1 % 1 — " «YR - ts — * 8 | |
WE > — — g i} GE * VU — 8 on — P | |


ſ 4 * 5 I

, Hd 4 is

Z „ pen 4 \
wa, 760

100


ah 8 _


o


U


— «
——


1


| -
a


—


* > _ . 5 8 nd * .
6 —— 1


—


- : 3 ee F* * = RY. a wp


a -
an


*
— 1 —


* w _—_ jp 4, 4
4 Vi . 100
. WT g e, 5—
1 ny "#8 Fl - F


J d + £x> In 3 * 25 5 is re
CEP n o N 0 * \
F. RV w—_ 5 |
MACS - 8
* \ 1 O00 1
N Fader
„1% Y Wd.
r 5
4 4 *


*


=
= *
| 2 <
* _-
. -


_ —


+ Ee pas K » h oo -


LOO DES St 8 JECT” a Sq" 3» — 7


U Ir


#4 a WAS. = "I %
4 7 A * Fs 7 * y 1 r . 55
e 5


FSC CL Work: ns


* Wr heat 4 22 n 1 en 43 FRF 40
„ » we þ 0 1


*
5.
*.
*
#1
>
#

5
th
*


A A "4 n 1 8 — 5 *
DE


OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL.


ret wide, at the left hand of the entrance at o, running up to the
n of the Rampart 3 the entrance of this ſtair-caſe has a round
chof ſtone over it. From 6, paſling to u, you find the entrance 1,
to the innermoſt ward; and on the left of that entrance, a
zinding ſtair- caſe conducts you to the top of this innermoſt
Rampart, the Wall of which is ten feet thick, and thirty-two feet
boh fom the floor K. The room x is eighteen feet ſix diameter;
vas divided by a planching into two rooms. The upper- room
1:4 to the Eaſt and Weſt two large openings, which were both
windows, and (as I am inclined to think) doors alſo in time of
ion, to paſs from this Dungeon out upon the principal rampart
; from which the chief defence was to be made; for it muſt be
ſ:rved, that the ſecond Ward n was covered with a flat roof at
he height of the rampart r, which made the area there very roomly,
nd convenient for numbers; theſe openings, therefore, upon
xcafion, ſerved as paſſages for the ſoldiers to go from one Rampart
o the other. In the upper-room of x, there was alſo a chimney
tothe North; underneath, there was a dungeon which had no
aht. The lofty taper hill, on which this ſtrong Keep is built, is
partly natural, and partly artificial; it ſpread farther into the town
aciently than it does now, and by the Radius of it was three
kundred and twenty feet diameter, and very high*. Norden gives
us Wall at the bottom of this hill; and, though there is no ſtreſs
to be layed on his drawings, yet it is not unlikely that it had
wall, or parapet, round the bottom of it, towards the town, for
the principal Rampart of the Baſs-court breaks off very abruptly
fronting the town, and ſeems patched, and maimed at u, and to
ure loft ſome works at this place. The Baſs-court (half of which,
or more, as I judge, is now covered with the houſes of the town)
had formerly in it, the Aſſize-hall, a very ſpacious building, a
chapel, and other buildings, now all gone, but the county gaol x:
a the Weſtern end there 1s another gateway, o, into the town, but
more modern than the reſt.
The buildings which remain of this Caſtle are of difterent ſtyles, and
hew that the ſeveral parts of it were built at different times. For at
lie firſt entrance through the great gateway, you have a flat but
pointed arch over the firſt gate; but within, at the ſecond gate, you
e a much rounder arch. There is a round tower 3; on the angle of
de Rampart, which (if not built by the Romans) is undoubtedly of
e Roman ſtyle. There is a ſquareneſs alſo in the Area of the Baſs-


' I took the height of it by a Quadrant, and depend on the obſervation ; though, I believe,


"-*3t trom the Baſs court to the parapet of it is pretty near the truth.
"2 Drngeon L, a hundred and four fect per- 7 Sce the Elevation, Plate XXXIII.
cue, but, as it rained violently, I cannot


court,


OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL


court, which agrees with the manner of the Romans much m A &


any thing we have in our other Caſtles; but whether theſe parts an.
as old as the Roman times, I cannot ſay; however, that the Romanf


ſhould fortify here, is not at all improbable, conſidering that th


ſituation of this Caſtle, near the ford of the river Tamar, makes it 4
paſs of great conſequence. The river Tamar, running away to th }
South, is either dangerous or impaſſable below this place; and all
learned men allow, that the Romans were not fond of the tedious


work of building bridges, and it was therefore the more cuſtomar#


with them to take poſſeſſion of the Fords. Now all below this
place is ſecured by the Tamar, but near this Caſtle the river ig
fordable in ſeveral places. Here, therefore, it was proper to have
a garriſon, and, by placing another at Stratton on the North Seq


(between which and Lanceſton there are the remains of an ancient


way ), they formed a chain from the North at Stratton, to the


South Sea at Plymouth. This was therefore a ſtation of great
importance, and not at all unworthy of the Roman attention, and
that the Romans were here early, has been intimated before, and
appears ſtill more likely from ſome Coins which have already
reached my notice (viz. one of Veſpaſian, one of Domitian, found
in the Walls of an old houſe, and a third found in digging a vault in


the Church, with the letters 1vII plainly to be ſeen upon it); and


will, it is to be hoped, be more confirmed, either by what are
known to other perſons at preſent, or may hereafter be diſcovered
in greater number. |


I know it is generally held, that William Earl of Moreton and:
Cornwall built this Cattle ; but this is a vague expreſſion, and
muſt not be underſtood, ſo as to ſuppoſe him the original, firſt
builder, and founder of this Caſtle. That he built ſomething here,


is not unlikely; but, that he built all, can never be agreed to, when


we conſider of what different parts it conſiſts, and recollect that it


was a Caſtle long before the Normans came over.


The town was firſt built b by Eadulphus, brother to Alpſius,
Duke of Devon and Cornwall, about the year 9oo; but the Caſtle
mult be much more ancient, for the town was evidently built for the
ſake of the Caſtle, to be near the reſidence of the Prince, not the
Caſtle to guard the town. Of this there are ſeveral proofs ; the


high hill on which the Keep ſtands is a certain evidence that it was
ſhaped in the manner we ſee it, before the town could be formed,


for where there are houſes ſo thick, it would be madneſs to think


of erecting a work of this kind. The hill for the Keep mult be


certainly the firſt thing conſidered in all ſuch works, for to make


See of the Roman Ways near Stratton, Book IV. chap. vi.
before, p. 339. b Hooker in Carew.


ſuch


OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL.


nh a hill after other fortifications, and after a town was built,
could be tearing every thing to pieces. The garreted Walls, which
c2nt round the town, are manifeſtly nothing more than a conti-
uation of the Walls of the Caſtle. In the Church of the town
here is not the leaſt mark of Antiquity, the Church being no
der than Henry VII. as by the date 1511 on the Church-

ch appears b. The only thing favouring of Antiquity in all
he town is a door- caſe e, carved according to the manner of the
sons; and this was likely removed from the buildings of the
Caſtle, or from the collegiate Church of St. Stephen's, for where
+ fands at preſent, it has no building near it to which it has any
correſpondence, or can bear the leaſt relation; ſo that the town 3s
modern in compariſon of the Caſtle, and was built for it to enjoy
the benefit of the Prince's Court, and to accommodate the perſons
relorting to it. This Court was kept in the Caſtle, which has large
and Royal Juriſdiction ſtill, entirely ſeparate and diſtin& from tne
corporation of the town, having its own hereditary conſtable,
who had a houſe in the Baſs-court (temp. Eliz. d), and lived
there. That there was a Caſtle here before the Conqueſt, is
beyond all doubt, for Othomarus de Knivet © (ſaid to be of Daniſh
extraction) was hereditary conſtable of the Caſtle of Lanceſton, and
was diſplaced at the Norman Invaſion for being in arms againſt
the Conquerour 3 and Condorus Earl of Cornwall, at that time,
being alſo diveſted of his Earldom, the town and Caſtle of Lan-
ceſton were given by the Conquerour, to Robert Earl of Moreton,
with the Earldom of Cornwall, who with this honour had two
hundred and eighty-eight Manors f in the county of Cornwall,
belides five hundred and fifty-eight Manors in other counties g.
William Earl of Moreton and Cornwall, ſon and heir of Robert,
kept his Court here, and likely made ſome alterations and additions
to the buildings. From him it fell to the Crown, with his other
lands, and paſſing with the Earldom of Cornwall, either into the
Crown, or by grant from it, was at laſt unalienably faxed to the
Dukedom of Cornwall in the 11th of Edward III. and ſtill con-
tinues part of the inheritance of the Dutchy.

It is called by Norden (p.21.) “ the Duke's moſt ancient Caſtle
ein which dwelt divers Earls and Dukes of Cornwall before
* Wiltam Earl of Moreton,” (p. 92.). In the latter part of which


" © Tt was (viz, the Town-Church) from a from the Town called Dunheved ; as the Dun-
* Chantry Chapel re-edified and enlarged in the hevets of Norfolk had (as Leland thinks, Vol,
time of Hentry IV. and made ſufficient to IX. xxxii.) though called afterwards Nevets ;
© contain the Inhabitants of the town.” Not. dropping the De or Du, as molt families now


Patl. b. 20, by Br. Willis, Eſq; have done.
Now at the White-hart Inn. ft Two hundred and forty-eight, ſays Br.
| Carew, p. 117. Willis, Eſq. P- 16.


, Perhaps Dunhevet, having had this name 8 Rapin, 8vo, Not. Vol. II. P · 253. ; i
4 2 allertion


301


— —  _ —


— T— —- ——


£5 +2 —·˙ - W__ — — —
— - — S n =


|
|
|
|
|
|
| t Leland, Vol. VII. p. 114. ſtephan. |
|
|


362 OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL


aſſertion he is right; but whether this Caſtle, though of 1


juriſdiction, higher honours, and ſtronger fortifications,
more ancient than that of Tindagel, it is impoſſible to dete

Several Gentlemen in Cornwall hold their eſtates of this
by Caſtle- guard, being bound to repairs and defend this Caſtle

« About ſixty years ſince, ſays Mr. Carew, p. 117. were found
te certain leather Coins in the Caſtle wall, whoſe fair ſtamp and
ie ſtrong ſubſtance till then reſiſted the aſſault of time.“ It is great
pity but the Impreſſion had been copied; however, a like diſco.


Imine,


very, made at Carnarvon Caſtle in Wales, may poſſibly point out io
us, if not the age, yet at leaſt the occaſion, of ſtriking theſe leather
Coins. King Edward I. his leathern money bearing his name.
“ ſtamp, and picture, which he uſed in the building thereof, '
« ſpare better bullion, were, ſince I can remember, preſerved and
& kept in one of the towers of Carnarvon Caſtle, and his Statue i;
te {till upon the great gate of the town.” Kennet's Paroch. Antiq.


p. 697 l.
OftheName Before I diſmiſs this ſubject, give me leave to obſerve, what ſeems


of jms. to me a miſtake, relating to the name of this Caſtle and Town.


Lanceſton. The common opinion is, that Lanceſton is derived from Lanſtu-
phadoni; Launſtaveton, as in Domeſday ; Loſtephank, as in
Leland, that is, the Church of Stephen; whereas they ſeem to
me the names of two different places. The Church of St. Stephen
is near a mile from the town of Lanceſton, and had a College of
Canons belonging to it before the Conqueſt, with many dwelling


houſes round it, which, as in other places of like kind, people
always found it their intereſt to build near the Monaſtery, and


might probably enough be called Lanſtuphadon, i. e. the Town of |
St. Stephen's Church. Earl Harold poſſeſſed (as Lord of the


Manor) this Lanſtavedon, in the time of Edward the Confeſſor, and
here was held a market at that time; but the Earl of Moreton and
Cornwall transferred it to his own Caſtle, that is, to Lanceſton,
Unum mercatum quod ibi jacebat ea die qua m R. E. F. V. & M.
abſtulit inde Comes de Moritonio & poſuit in CasTRo $U0",
Now, if Lanſtuphadon had been the fame as Lanceſton,
with what propriety could it be ſaid that the Earl of Corn-
wall took away the market from Lanſtaveton, and fixed it in his
own Caſtle, that is, in the town, within the precincts and rights of


his own proper Caſtle? and therefore Lanſtaveton and this


h Hiſt. of Alcheſter written in 1622. ! lbid. ut ſupra.
| Carew, p. 116. m Rex Edvardus fuit vivus & mortuus,


* And in Wales, Kennett in his Parochial Exeter Nomeſday.
Antiq. p. 630, mentions the Lordſhip of Land-


Lanceſton


m ay be |


H Onou A 5


„ ee
7 .


7 .
_
4 N
_
2
b.
*
4
,
*
«
* 5 k
*
14
©
_
* *
N
72
=
bs
_
1
6
gp.
—
*
%
*
1
-
a
*
bs.
of
*
p


OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL.
lanceſton (where the Earl of Cornwall's Caſtle is) muſt be two


363


different places; and it could never be called Lanſtaveton Caſtle,


wut by miſtake, and the delufive affinity of names. I am therefore
of opinion, that Lanceſton is the proper name of this Town, for
the abovementioned reaſons, as well as that neither our Towns
nor our Caſtles (in this county) take their moſt ancient names from
wints; but from ſome notable property of fituation, ſhape, the
vſe they were deſigned for, or river on which they are planted.
Now Lanceſton ſignifies (in mixed Britiſh) the Church of the
Caſtle, and in the Inquifition 20 Edward I. (A.D. 1293-4), I
and it was rated by the name of Capella de Caſtro in Decanatu de
Eaſtwellſbire. Lanceſton may alſo be a contraction of Lan-
eftreton ; for in the Biſhoprick of Durham we have Lancheſter,
the Longovicus of the Romans, and Lancaſtre (in Lancaſhire)
ould have the ſame derivation ; Langborough, that is, Longum
jurgum, a Long-town; and it is not improbable, that the moſt
ancient name of this Caftle ſhould have been Lanceſtre, and the
own thence called Lanceſtreton, but by contraction Lanceſton, in
the fame manner as Cheſhire, which is but a contraction of
Cheſtreſhire (its ancient name), and Cheſton for Cheſterton or
Celtreton, as in Kennett (Par. Antiq. p. 224.), for the eaſier pro-


nounciation®. This place has alſo another ancient name, Dunheved, Dunhered.


which is generally ſuppoſed Saxon, and to fignify the head of the
hill*; but the learned Baxter, in his Gloſſary, thinks that Dunevet
s the ſame as the Nemetotacium (or, as it ſhould be written
Nemetomagum of the anon. Ravennas); and to his opinion I ſub-
ſetlbe, becauſe that Nemet is by the Corniſh pronounced and
written Nevet, and Dun is Magus for Pagus (a Town or Village)
and Dun-huedh ſignifies, in the Corniſh language, the Swelling-
hill, but Dun-hedh the Long-hill. I will only obſerve farther,
that if Baxter's Etymology is well grounded, it will prove this
place as ancient as the Romans, and taken notice of in their
Geography.

This manner of fortifying with a Baſs-court, an artificial-hill,


The Anti-
33 . quity and
and a Dungeon on the top of it, is very ancient; was uſed, perhaps, Uic of his


by the Romans, but certainly by the Saxons. That the Romans ner t


fortified ſometimes in this manner, the old Cunetium, now Marl-


borough in Wiltſhire, gives us reaſon to believe. * The Caſtle


chere ſeems to have been a Roman work, by the Braſs Roman
* Coins that were found in ſhaping the Mount in the time of the
late Duke of Somerſet, which was contrived out of the Keep of


* As Glouceſtre, not Gloucheſter, Burceſter, hefod, i. e. Caput de decem; fron heved comes
Com. Ox. &c. Exceſtre, &c. the Engliſh head.
* Kenn, Par. Ant. p. 633. Tien heved, or ? Camden's Annot. p. 129.


cc the


tortitying.


OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALI.


304
0 the Caſtle.” In Nottingham Caſtle there are the remains of the


Keep d, and Dr. Gale places there the Gauſennæ of Antoninus
The Burgh at Leyden, which is a building of the fame kind 1
thought to be Roman”. It muſt however be owned, that in the
Military Architecture of the Romans in other parts, ſuch buildin rg
do ſeldom appear. However that be, that the Saxons built in aha
manner, long before the Normans came in, one inftance or tw,
will be ſufficient to ſhew. Elfleda, daughter of Alfred the Great
and wife of Ethelred Earl of Mercia, in the end of Autumn, 975
built ſome fortifications againſt the Danes (which are ſtill called th.
Dungeon) upon an artificial hill at Warwick 5. The ſame noble
Lady built a work of the ſame kind at Tamworth, on the borders of
the counties of Warwick and Stafford. She is ſaid to have built
eight Caſtles", all called Burrows, alias Burroughs, and very
properly, becauſe they were fortifications raiſed on hills in the ſhape
of Burrows, or Tumuli u. It is not likely that Elfleda was the
inventor of this manner of Fortifying; her father Alfred ſoon


diſcovered the neceſlity of ſtrong holds, preſſed as he was on every ©
fide by the Danes; and yet, as Aſſer obſerves, the Saxons were ſo
indolent and ſtupid, that they could not be prevailed upon by the
moſt preſſing inſtances of the King to erect any Caſtles and
Fortreſſes, till they were drove to it by the depredations of the Danes,
and then Alfred cauſed ſeveral to be built. Here, therefore, we
find fortification in its infancy among the Saxons, even when the
country was over-run by the Danes; and whether they had then
the leiſure to ſhape the natural hills, and where there were no
natural hills to raiſe even mountains for the Keeps, or (as ſeems to
me more likely) only built on theſe hills already raiſed, and ſhaped *
to their hand, we muſt leave undecided. One thing I would


obſerve, that where the Saxons found any Roman fortification,


they called it Ceaſter, or Cheſter; but what they erected themſelves *


in this manner they called Burghs, from the hills they ſtood on;
and I am inclined to think, that the Saxons generally chole to
fortify in this manner (whether the hills were of their own railing |
or not) as ſuiting their purpoſe effectually againſt ſuch a roving |


cnemy as the Danes were ; whereas the Romans placed their forts ©


any where, according as the circumſtances of the time and ground
would permit, but generally in the manner of the encampment,


ſquare, for the ſake of the health and order of their forces, and


therefore called by the Saxons Ceaſters, 1. e. Caſtles, or Encamp-


1 Gale's Itin. p. 95. v Whence, when theſe Caſtles became nume-


r Breval, vol. I. p. 23. Travels. rous, and almoſt in every Town, fuch Towns


J. Roflin Hiſt, Reg. Angli, p. 97. Dugd. had the name of Burghs, or Burroughs, and


Warwickfhire, p. 373.


Burrough came afterwards to ſignify a 1 own.
Named by Huntingt. p. 204. a


ments.


l _— ca OY Co LY -— — 1 on — —


ren IOC 7, ro ng te rap rw gphy
4 #


1 — - ** nn Fehn Du


OF ANCIENT CASTLES IN CORNWALL. 365


ments. Whether the artificial hill, mentioned at Warwick, was at

chat time rais d, or had onlythe Keep then built upon it, is notclcarly
expreſs'd ; but the ſeaſon of the year ſeems to intimate only the lat-
der, autumn being a very improper time of the year, one would think,
ET toengage in a work of ſo much labour as the raiſing an artificial hill,
and a work allo that required time to ſettle, before it was capable
of being built upon. In ſhort, it is not at all unlikely, that where
the Saxons found theſe artificial hills erected by the Romans, they
built new Keeps upon them, and added what works were neceſſa—
y to keep oft the Danes. Theſe artificial hills were works of time
and labour, but as it was neceſſary to build Caſtles ſometimes low,
and among hills, to ſecure a narrow paſs, or to command a creck,
or a valley which had a navigable river ; it was almoſt as neceſſa- |
ry to raiſe theſe artificial hills, and place Keeps upon them to over- !\Ji
look the country, diſcover the enemy in ſeaſon, and in times of ex-
x tremity for the garriſon to retire to as their laſt effort *. 1
1 So far we have gone with the ancient Forts ard Caſtles of this Tbe |
| county, which, 1f compar'd with the Fortifications of the preſent, 1 1
and modern times, muſt, doubtleſs, appear weak and trifling, con- cations.


eng ene


= ſidering the improvements which Mathematicks, and the diſcove-
" ries of Gunnery and Engineering, have added to the latter; but
-J thoſe who compare only the modern fortification with the ancient,
> | take not a proper way to form a true judgement of either. De-


1 fence and ſecurity is the proper end of fortifying, and the ancient
manner might have anſwered that end as well as the modern, and


23 therefore be of equal ſervice in it's time. The truth is, as forti-
5 tying has improved, ſo has the Art of beſieging and attacking. The
Arts of offence and defence have always grown together, provi-
i dence nurſing them up, as it were, with equal care, to be a ba-
„ lance for, and a mutual check upon, one another; and the mo-
Þ dern fortreſſes, which look ſo much better upon paper, more in-
FF tricate, artful, and ſubſtantial, than the ancient, are no more im-
» pregnable than the others were ; they may have all the advanta-
"| ges which the nature of the ground, improved by the greateſt Art-
. its, can give them, but they muſt yield to the ſuperiour force of
ä ſhot, and bomb, and the equally improv'd method of approach,
battery, and ftorm. To ſay no more of this, theſe ancient Forts,
| were, no doubt, equal and proportioned to the then method of at-
. | ” The Burgh at Leyden is plac'd ſo as to originally ſepulchral Tumuli, is not improbable,
| command the Kiver there, —Breval, ut ſupra, — eſpecially in Ireland. (See Wright's Louthiana. )
Trematon, on a Creek — Reſtormel, to com- where theſe Tumyl ate large andmany, and Tur-
. mand the river and valley of Loſtwythel — Lan- rets, or little Caſtles, built upon them; bur,
: | celton, at thehead of the fords of Tamar — Oak- that they were all fo, is a miſtake, thoſe round


ampton Caſtle, in the narrow valley there. hills in Cornwall being natural, as to the great-
hat ſome of theſe artificial hills might be eſt part of them, and only ſhaped by Art.


5 A tack,


366 OF THE STATE OF


tack, and art of war; conſequently, their uſe and ſecurity mug
be meaſured by the manner of beſieging then in uſe. 5


There were but few of theſe Caſtles in England before the 5 F


mans came in v, which much facilitated their Conqueſt, and Wil
liam the Firſt was ſo ſenſible of this errour in the Britans "dts |
and Danes, and ſaw the uſe of theſe Caſtles fo clearly, that he 3 :
mediately promoted the building of them with all poſſible .
dour; and his Nobles put in execution his commands with 10
much diligence, that in Henry II's time, there were reckoned n
leſs than 1115 Caſtles in England.
When this Earldom of Cornwall was erected into a Dutchy (11
Edward III.) and fix'd either in the Crown, or the eldeſt ſon of th.


ſovereign, all the Caſtles in Cornwall which had been the ſeats of


their Earls or Princes from the Roman Times, if not before, were
utterly deſerted, and their dependant 'Towns, for want of that
Princely reſort, upon which they chiefly ſubſiſted, went to ruin
alſo; of which the Crown taking notice, an act paſſed in the 32d
of Hen. VIII. for repairing thoſe Towns, but this act came to no-
thing, and left that for trade and induſtry to do, which Law could
not.


CHAP.- £2.
Of the State of Chriſtianity in Cornwall before the Norman Conqueſt.


II AVING in the ſecond Book given an account of DRxumisu
(the ancient Religion of the Britans in general), exemplificd,
and chiefly deduced from the Monuments remaining in Cornwall, I
proceed now to conſider the ſtate of the Chriſtian Religion, and at
what time, and by what degrees, it ſucceeded the other, by what
means it flouriſh'd at ſome times, and to what degree it was at other
times depreſſed, together with the Chriſtian Monuments which have
reached my notice in Cornwall, before the Norman Conqueſt.


SECT. I. The Britans received the Faith of Chriſt very early, even, accord-
1 nA ing to ſome authors, in the Apoſtolic Times *, but there was no


ſtianity a= Britiſh King preſumed to have been of the Chriſtian Religion till
wrt in Bei. Lucius, and the preciſe time when he was converted is not agreed
: 8 Fe . MW 6
upon, but is generally held to have been in the time of M. Aurcli-

us, and Lucius Verus, and the beginning of Eleutherius's Popedom *,

who began his Rule, according to the Savi/ Faſt, A. D. 171, ten


years before Commodus. It cannot however be imagined, that Pa-


5 Dugdale's Warwickſhire, pag. 426. heſides ſome other doubts relating to this King
* Says Stillingfl. Ant. Brit. cap. i. Lucius, ** his letter to Pope Elcutherius 1s a8
2 [bid. pag. v0. It muſt here be obſerved that, ** evident forgery.” L.


1
rann


nh Gy — . - wy


\
7
2
*
*
*
U
8
*
F.
"Ir";
*
5
4
*
*
1
5
a #:
*
*
1
*
75
4
1
*
#


CHRISTIANITY IN-CORNWALLTL.


niſm was every where aboliſhed as ſoon as Chriſtianity appearcd ;
there were at that time, and from the very firſt account we have in
liltory of the Britiſh nation there had been, many petty principali-
les in Britain b, for the moſt part independent of one another, yet
n times of diſtreſs ſubordinate, and obliged in matters of Council
nd War, to obey that Prince whom they elected to be the head of
l. If it be allowed then, that Chriſtianity was embraced by the
King of Britain, as early as King Lucius, and that he was ſupreme
King of all the Britans ©, yet muſt he have been under the direction
the Romans, and King only by their leave, and could have had
o authority in Religious Matters over the other Princes of Bri-
ain; many of the little Kings therefore may be ſuppoſed to re-
gain unconverted for a long time after.

I know that the learned Sir Henry Savil, in his Tai, ſays (in a
bote there, ad ann. 173.) that “ about this time Lucius King of
„tze Britans (as he is call'd by Bede), at the inſtance of Eleuthe-
ius the Pope, together with the whole nation of the Britans, re-
« ceived the Chriſtian Faith ;** but this is altogether improbable,
xcither ſuiting the limited authority of Lucius, nor allowing
cough for the different tempers and circumſtances of the other
Princes.

Doubtleſs, the moſt ſtubborn, vicious, and bigotted, were leſs
ſuſceptible of the divine precepts of the Goſpel, and continued ma-
w years after in their contented darkneſs; and when the Princes
became at laſt converted, and baptized, the common people (eve-
ry where fonder of ſuperſtition than truth) continucd their attach-
ment to the errours in which they were brought up.

From Commodus, to the time that the Roman Empire became
Chriſtian, Chriſtianity, tho' adopted by the Britiſh Kings, wanted
rally the ſupport and countenance of the State, for the Romans
len Heathens) being lords of all, tho' the Britans had ſome
Churches, Biſhops, and a few Monaſteries, the generality of the
people (we may take it for granted) continued without controul
n tue Druid Superſtition 4. Again; the true Religion in it's in-
lacy ſuffered much under the perſecution of Diocleſian's reign,
which Jaſted ten years, at which time it loſt ground rather than


aranced, tho', when thoſe clouds were paſſed, it ſhone the brighter.


* Diod, Sic. lib. iv.—Strabo, lib. iv.-Mela, „ and the generality of the people, being ſet a-
9. TH, cap vi. Tacitus, vita Agric. o gainſt the Chriſtians,” Stillingfl. Orig. Brit. 74.
© Though ſome think he was but a petty And this ſeems to be what Gildas means when
"ce, Stillingfl. ibid. pag. 63. he aſſerts, „the continuation of a church here
And of this opinion | find Dr. Stillingflzet: “ from the firſt plantation of the Goſpel (though
; During all this time, the Church, ſays he, muſt * not maintain'd, ſays he, with equal Zeal) to
| dave labour'd under great difficulties ; the Go- © the perſecution of Biocleſian.“ Stillingfl. An-
ernours, and Provinces, before Conſtantius, tiq. Brit. pag. 55.


In


——ů — — — — — —


386


SECT. II.


Author f, one perpetual perſecution.


OF THE STATE OF


In this perſecution, they not only deſtroyed the
they prejudiced Church Hiſtory beyond recovery, for as Velf... #
obſerves e, they burnt all the Monuments which tice OM
ſtian Church. Tis true, the perſecution in Britain did not 1agk
ſo long as it did in the Eaſt, that is, did not rage with that viole... ©
but the whole reign of this Emperor, is reckon'd by the


Churches, buf


above!


A
8 —


When Conſtantine and the Empire became Chriſtian, the Bi.
tiſh Biſhops were ſummon'd to the Council of Arles (314), andf
probably to that of Nice 8 (A. D. 325.), and of Ariminum in 350,
at the laſt of which, as well as at the firſt i, three Biſhops of Britain
were preſent. Theſe Biſhops are ſtyled by Hilarius (in his Epiſtle?


to the Biſhops H) of the Provinces of Britain; and the reaſon why


only three were preſent, ſeems to be becauſe Britain was at that
time divided into three Archbiſhopricks. Under the Archbiſhop?


of London was Loegria, and Cornubia (that is, from the river Hun-


ber to the Land's End); under the Archbiſhop of York, all Doral
and Albania, that is, all North of Humber to Cathneſs in Scotland;
and under the Archbiſhop of Caerleon, all Wales, called then Cambria.


One great obſtacle to Chriſtianity's prevailing ſoon in Cornwall


Diſadvanta- arofe from the retired ſituation of the country, which, being at a


ges of Chri-


ſtianity in


particular.


great diſtance from the heart of the kingdom, had fewer opportu-


Cornwall in nities of being inſtructed, than countries which lay nearer to the


Imperial Court, which had already received the Goſpel. ;

Cornwall and Devon (then called Dunmonium) were at this
time under the Archbiſhop of London; they muſt have ſuffered
greatly therefore in point of Religion, by means of their diſtance ?


from the Metropolitan See. The Goſpel might have been ſup-
ported in it's full purity under the Biſhop's. eye; but, as the Bi-


ſhops kept moſt of their Clergy about their perſons in thoſe early)
days, and diſpatched them occaſionally only from their Cathedrals, |


to inſtru& the more diſtant parts, the Goſpel ſhone more faintly *


in the remote corners of the Iſland. Druidiſm had taken deep
root, and it would not give way to weak efforts; hence it is, that
after the Roman Empire, and much the greateſt part of Britain had


been Chriſtian, we find many martyrs ſuffering death in Cornwall


for the Chriſtian faith; and hence it is, that in the latter end of
the fourth, during all the fifth, and moſt part of the ſixth centu-


ries, we find ſo many holy men employed to convert the Cornith
to the Chriſtian Religion.


e M. Velſer. Rerum Vindel. Lib. VI.—Still. Council. Spelman's Conc. Vol. I. pag. 141, from
Ch. Ant. p. 42. Bede. Lib. II. cap. xix.—See Prid. Connexion,
f Stillingfleet, pag. 70. 8vo, Vol. II. pag. 238, &c. |
* As Stillingfl. ib. pag. 9. and Selden (ibid) in > Stillingfl. Or. Brit. pag. 176.
Eutych. pag. 115, 123. though by others this is i See Stillingfl. pag. 74-
doubted of, becauſe the Britans did not keep Ea- k Speed's Chron. pag. 79-
ſer conformably to the directions of the Nicene


« The


lence, .


E


CHRISTIANITY IN CORNWALL. 3069


« The ſtate of Chriſtianity among the Britans in Cornwall (at SECT. ul.
« this time) is accounted very uncertain |,” Let us endeavour * ag
diſcover what we can of it, by tracing the facts we have in hiſtory preached E
tain thereto de

About the middle of the fourth century, Solomon Duke of x<;uc.

Cornwall ſeems to have been a Chriſtian ; for his ſon Kebius was
rained a Biſhop by Hilarius Biſhop of Poitiers in France, and af-
erwards returned into his own country to exerciſe that high func-
ton m. St. Corantine (now called Cury) was the firſt Corniſh Apoſtle Corantine.
note that we meet with; born in Brittany, he preached firſt in his
wn country, and Ireland, till, being driven away by violence, he
again betook himſelf to the life of a Hermit, which he had quitted
or the fake of travelling, to inſtruct the ignorant and the infidel :
e ſettled at the foot of a mountain called Menehont n, in the Dio-
of Cornwall. Here the fame of his ſanctity increaſing, at the
ntreaty of Grallonus King of the Armoricans, he was conſecrated
flop of Cornwall by St. Martin, Biſhop of Tours in France, and,
being ſaid to have converted all Cornwall, died in the year 401.

St, Piranus, born in Ireland in the year 352, mult have come Piranus.
into Cornwall about this time, for he is ſaid to have been buried
here. But, notwithſtanding the endeavours of theſe holy men,
about the year 411, St. Melor (although ſon of Melianus Duke of
Cornwall) ſuffered Martyrdom '. Capgrave, (p. 451.) ſays that
this happened ſoon after the Britans had received the Chriſtian
Fath; by which Britans he muſt mean thoſe of Cornwall, for the
others had been converted above 200 years before. By perſiſting
n their Druidiſm, the Britans of Cornwall drew the attention of
. Patrick that way, who about the year 432, with 20 compani- Patrick.
ons, halted a little in his way to Ireland on the ſhores of Cornwall,
where he is ſaid to have built a monaſtery. Whether St German
ws in Cornwall at this time I cannot ſay; but, according to Uther,
he was either in Cornwall or Wales; for St. Patrick is faid, * ad
Fræceptorem ſuum beatum Germanum divertiſſe, & apud Britan-

"95 in partibus Cornubiæ & Cambriæ aligquandin ſubſtitiſſe P.“

This was not the only viſit of St. Patrick; for that holy Apoſtle
ing had great ſucceſs afterwards in Ireland, in confuting the
Druid Priefts, and converting that nation to Chriſtianity, under-
wk the ſame charitable taſk in Cornwall q, and had an altar and
church there dedicated to him, and much reverenced for the fake


1 inet's Orig. Ang. from Bede, Lib. V. cap. Menhynnett in Cornwall.

is. Vol. I. pag. 123. + Capgrave, pag. 451.—Uſh. Prim. p. 451.
ch. pag. 1087. A. D. 369. p Uſh. Prim. pag. 1100, and 842.

Ty | nd it written thus, © Uberrimam Rec- q The legend ſays, he was wafted over from

am de Manihont in Devonia.” Parker's Ireland into Cornwall upon this Altar, which was

des. Antig. Drake, pag. 384. but ſome think it greatly frequented and reyerenced for that reaſon,


5B of


—


— ä —V— ² —— —ů—


|
|
|
|
[
ö
|


370


Fingarus.


Breaca.


| Germochus.


OF THE STATE OF


of this excellent Paſtor. From the time of St. Patrick, Ireland be-
gan to be the ſeat of every kind of learning, which the chriſtian ®


world was then acquainted with ; and perſons of the higheſt rank | -


not only deſerted Gentiliſm, but their crowns too, and became
Preachers of the word of God; they neither ſhut themſelves up
in Monaſteries, nor confined themſelves within the limits
own Iſland, but travelled into Italy and France,
the Iſles on the North of England and Scotland, an


to Cornwall, directing their courſe where they ſaw moſt need of


their inſtruction. x


9


ae.


<0


St. Patrick who lived to a great age, ſome think till he was 120


5


8


years old (not dying till about the year 490), by his example
equally and his inſtructions, animated his Diſciples to purſue his ho- 5


ly plan. Of his ſcholars, Fingarus, from Armorica (whither the


like Druid ſuperſtition which had overſpread all the Weſt had pro-


bably called him), paſſing into Ireland, his native country, and find- b
ing it, by the labours of St. Patrick and his Prieſts, thoroughly con-


verted to chriſtianity, gave up his right to a crown, by that time


fallen to him (upon the deceaſe of his father Clito), and, with his
ſiſter Piala, eleven Biſhops, and a numerous attendance, all bap-


tized by St. Patrick, came into Cornwall, and landing at the mouth
of the river Hayle, was there put to death, with all his company,
in the year 460, by Theodorick King of Cornwall, for fear leſt
they ſhould turn his ſubjects from their ancient Religion r. About
the ſame time came over from Ireland St. Breaca (now called


Breag) attended with many Saints, among whom were Sinninus* :
the Abbot, who had been at Rome with St. Patrick, Germochus an
Iriſh King (as Tradition ſays), and ſeveral others. She landed at
Revyer on the Eaſtern bank of the river Hayle in the hundred of
Penwith, where Theodorick (or Tudor) had his caſtle of reſidence, *


and flew great part of this holy aſſembly alſo.


In the middle of this fifth century the Saxons, being called in
as friends, in a few years proved the moſt inveterate enemies to the
Britiſh nation whicli the iſland to that time had ever felt; and the
general diſorders which attend a weak government, and a potent
enemy in the heart of the kingdom, engaged all hands in war, the
Britans to defend their country, and the Saxons to ſeize it, Re-


ligion, in the general tempeſt, had her ſhare of the diſtreſs; an


univerſal ignorance enſued, no one ftudied Religion, becauſe eve-


ry one was obliged to be in arms. Vortigern, hereditary King 0
Cornwall, and then advanc'd to the throne of Britain (from which


r Uſher. cap. xvii. pag. 869.


Dr. Cave, & ſociorum, pag. 542.


in his Hiſtor. Literar. among St. Anſelm's works, s Alias Scnanus.
reckons Paſſio St. Guigneri five Fingari, Pialz,


of their | 4
frequently into
d oftentimes in- 7


CHRISTIANITY IN CORN WALL. 371


be unhappily had invited the Saxons, as auxiliaries), neglected every
: thing ſacred and civil, and was depoſed in the year 454. His fon
1 © I yvortimer, being deſervedly placed in the Throne, rebuilt the church-
8 « ruin'd by the Saxons, and did his beſt to reſtore the Chriftian
| Religion, then (as Speed ſays, pag. 266.) ſorely decayed ; but his
ir! eign being no longer than four years (as others ſay, ſeven), and
I oft part of that ſpent in war, much could not be done, before,
F Vortimer dying, his father Vortigern was reſtored to his throne,
; and the Saxons, by his indolence and luxury, to a capacity of re-
. heating with impunity their wonted deſolations. About the year
o o there was a Provincial Synod held in Britain, for reforming |:
|
:


th


le Religion, and repairing Churches. This Council, if held fo ſoon,
* muſt have been in the laſt year of Vortimer ; but, if ten years later, |
Ce under the direction of Aurelius Ambroſius, who, having vanquiſhed ö
5 Vortigern, and ſucceeded him, and with great ſucceſs repelled the [|
1 guons, took that opportunity of convening the Princes and Bi- I
1. ſhops, in order to reſtore the true worſhip of God. Ambroſius died, |
e > King of Britain, in the latter end of the fifth century, or beginning Ii
is ofthe fixth u, and was ſucceeded by his brother Uther Pendagron, 1
- ho by Igerna, wife of Gorlois Duke of Cornwall, had iflue Ar- {!
h * thur, who firſt ſucceeded Gorlos, in Cornwall, and, in the year 516, !
'y Pendagron, in the Imperial Crown of Britain. Arthur was a great |
ſt beer of Chriſtianity, as appears in all his hiſtory w; he came to the q
It Crown, as ſome think, very young *, and finding himſelf perpe- 1
d I tally haraſſed with battles, by Cerdic the Saxon, is ſaid, in his ſe- |
2 cond year, to have allowed Cerdic, Hamſhire, Surrey, Wiltſhire F
n and Somerſetſhire (to which were afterwards added Dorſetſhire, and 1
it part of Devonſhire and Cornwall); but, in this Treaty, King Ar- i
f © thur took care to provide for the Religion of his native country, |
„ and it was ſtipulated that Cerdic ſhould allow the Corniſh the free | |
: exerciſe of the Chriſtian Religion, upon paying an annual tribute Y. It
n Here, it ſeems, there were ſome remains of Chriſtianity, and ſome 1
e ſtruggles of a few Britans, aſſiſted by the Iriſh Saints, to preſerve j
e and cheriſh it; whereas in Somerſetſhire, Hamſhire, Wiltſhire, 7
lt and places over-run by the Saxons, the Saxon Paganiſm had abſo- i
e lutely obtained. 11
. But though Arthur made ſuch proviſion for tolerating Chriſti- | |
: ſanity in Cornwall, the old ſuperſtition remained ſtrong enough i|
f ; Speed, pag. 80. tho' the cuſtom of bearing Coats-armour was l
h Biograph. A. D. 508. — Speed, pag. 268. indeed never known in England till near five i
498. hundred years after his death. 14
This may ſeem to be confirmed by the of- x About fifteen or ſixteen; but ſome under» 1
feious adulation of after-ages, which, in order ſtand this of his coming to the Crown of Dun- il
to compleat the Hero, among other fables, aſ= monium. | .
den him for a Coat of Arms, a croſs with the * Rudburn's Chron. Lib, II. cap. i. —Uſber. | :
N Virgin-mother carrying Chriſt in her arms, al- cap. xili. pag. 468. bu


372 OF LHE STATE OF
to call forth the labours of the moſt learned and active of the Iriſh


Divines.
Petroc.


St. Petroc therefore came into Cornwall, to preach the Goſpel:


he was a native of Cumberland, and of royal blood; but forſakino
his country, and right of ſucceſſion, went into Ireland (the great


Weſtern Academy), in the year 4982, and havin
years there in the ſtudies of theology, under the


g ſpent twenty
moſt eminent


maſters, came into Cornwall, A. D. 518. He ſettled in a mona.
tery called, before his time, Loderic, and Laffenek a, but from his
name (as ſome think) Petrocſtow, now Padſtow. Here he had
ſeveral Diſciples, illuſtrious for their learning and piety b; and
after paying a viſit to Rome e, he returned into Cornwall, where.
at that time, Tendurus, a man of a ſavage and cruel diſpoſition,
and probably a Heathen, was King; and having reſided and taught
there for thirty years, died about the year 564, was buried firſt
at Padſtow, and afterwards tranſlated to Bodman Priory, dedicated


to him.


SECT. IV. Having mentioned the monaſtery ereced by St. Patrick, and


Of the Mo-


naſteries of


that which St. Petroc afterwards lived and taught in, it may not be


the fifth amiſs, before we go any farther, to look a little into the nature and


Century,


conſtitution of the Monaſteries of thoſe times, by which we ſhall


be able to form a better judgment of the men that came from
them, to whom the Corniſh were ſo much indebted for their in-


ſtruction.


« The Monaſteries of the Weſtern Nations, before the time of


* St. Benedict, ſuch as that of Bangor in England, and St. Martin
«© and St. Germans in Gaul, were chiefly intended as Nurſeries to
the Church d,“ to educate perſons in ſuch a manner as to make
them able Miniſters of the word of God,

In the fifth century we read, of no diftin& orders of Monks;
they were not as yet called after any particular patron, as the Be-
nedictines, Dominicans, Auguſtines, &c. in the following ages
were; their deſign being to learn of ſome, in order to teach others,

they were quite flrangers to the ambition, luxury, and idlenels,
which afterwards attended the monaſtick life: their zeal for Re-
ligion made them indefatigable in preparing themſelves for, and
afterwards exerciſing their holy function. In the Monaſtery of
Bangor (by ſome e accounted the firſt Chriſtian Monaſtery in the


z Uſh. Ind. Chron. in Pri. pag. 1112.

2 Probably the ſame that St. Patrick had
founded in the year 432; from which there is
an eaſy paſſage to Wales, whither he afterwards
went, before he paſled into Ireland.

d Credanus, Medanus, Dachanus.

© In that age * the chief Univerſity of the
« Empire,” Stillingfleet, ibid. p. 210. which is
the reaſon that pcople of the greateſt fame for


learning and ſanctity generally went to Rome
to ſtudy ſome time, though born in the moit di-
{tant parts of the Roman Empire; as dt. Ger-
man, St. Patrick, &c. 5

4 Dupin's Eccl. Hiſt. Vol. II. pag. 291.—8til-
lingfleet, Orig. Brit. pag. 206. |

© Bede, Lib. II. cap. ii, —Stillingficet, Orig.
Brit. p. 205.


world)


15 n Fa * N "T # * 7 ö LIES


ESR UTI, e eee


renne


*
=
.
4
2
"©
0 *
A


— —-
—


n


rer


a


CHRISTIANITY IN CORNWALL.


world) great numbers of Monks were bred up in a Collegiate
manner, and daily, bodily labour was to fill up the intervals of their
tudy and devotion. By their learning, they fitted themſelves for
caching Religion; by their labour, they contributed in their turns
o the ſupport of the Religious numerous community of which
they were members f. Many of theſe Monks were Biſhops, of
which ſeven at one time, with many other learned men from the
ame place, attended the Synod, called by St. Auſtin of Canterbu-
v, about the year 600. St. German, St. Martin, and St. Patrick,
il exerciſed the Epiſcopal Function, ordained, and appointed Bi-
ſhops to their particular provinces. St. German Biſhop of Auxi-
ere, in France (but called over to aſſiſt the Britiſh Church), is
thought to have eſtabliſhed ſeveral Schools, or Seminaries, for
young Divines here in England; and St. Patrick, who ſpent many
years under the diſcipline of St. German, carried the ſame Colle-
giate or Monaſtick Education into Ireland &, and, doubtleſs,
broucht the ſame into Cornwall when he came here. St. Patrick
had alſo ſtudied under his uncle St. Martin, Biſhop of Tours, and
from him received the habit of a monk, and with the habit, doubt -
leſs, the Inſtitutes he was to obſerve ; ſo that St. Patrick's Mona-
ſteries (for he founded many, as ſo many ſchools for learning) were
of the ſame kind as thoſe in France, in which he had his educa-
tion h; and, by the hiſtory of thoſe great Doctors, we ſee that their
principal office was to preach the Goſpel, to undertake the con-
verſion of Infidels, now in one nation, and now in another, and to


bring up other Monks under them, who might engage in the ſame


holy taſk.

By this it appears that the Monaſtick Life, in thoſe early ages
of Chriſtianity, was not what it generally is at preſent, viz. a life
of inactivity and confinement, but a life of travel and preaching ;
and it was from ſuch Monaſteries, and ſuch Monks, that we had
our Iriſh Saints and Teachers i, who, coming into Cornwall to
preach the Goſpel, were, after their death, generally reckoned
among the Saints; and we have indeed great reaſon to think thoſe
holy men endued with as much picty and learning as any of the
age they lived in, or any after them for many centuries.


Hum. Lhuyd (in his Breviary) thinks ſome fleet. ib.); and in this School Gildas is thought
of theſe Monks were appropriated to labour, in to have been a Profeſſor,


orcer to maintain thoſe whoſe genius carried
them more eminently to ſtudy and learning;
others think that labour was enjoined to all, at
Proper times, by their Inſtitution.


8 As Probus and Jocelin, the writers of his


life, agree.

" 5
At Armagh, it is ſaid, he founded Summum
badi um Literale, which, in the language of that


ume, is the ſame with an Univerſity (Stilling-


5 C


cc
cc


i « As the deſign of theſe Monaſteries was
very different from that of the Monaſteries in
after-ages, ſo was the faith of the ancient
church of Ireland, to which the Corniſh had
ſo many obligations, very different from that of
modern Rome, as may be ſeen at large in
Archbiſhop Uſher's Religion of the ancient
Iriſh.” Letter from the Rev. Mr. Collins to


the Author,


10


3


3


374 OF THE STATE Or


To name all theſe holy men and women, and particularly 6 172
cify their coming into Cornwall, and departure elſewhere. . 4
ſuit a Regiſter, or Catalogue, but would be foreign to the 3 Is
on of this Treatiſe, as well as tireſome to the reader. The deſign ; ,
of them all was one and the fame ; they came to preach the Gol.
pel, and by the ſtrictneſs and ſeverity of their lives to enforce l b
their doctrine; and the conſequence was ſuitable to their ende.


vours; by their means Chriſtianity increaſed, Churches were built. {
and when, by a diviſion of the Kingdom into pariſhes, each pa- ö 0
riſh had it's Church, there was ſcarce a Saint from Ireland, or ele. © h
where, who had preached in Cornwall, but had his memory pre- _
ſerved by the grateful inhabitants, by having a Church, near the © f
place he ſettled in, dedicated to and called after his name, Ire. © 8
land continued to be a nurſery full of holy and learned men even © A ;
to the year 674 (as Marianus notes, Uſher, Prim. pag. 1165.); and ;
therefore we may reaſonably ſuppoſe, that, till that time, ſhe con- t
tinued to fend forth her Saints into the adjoining countries. %
SECT.III: To reſume the thread of our narration. The Saxons prevailing 7 |


*


Of the Bri- after the death of Arthur (which happened in 542), did every


in Cornwall thing in their power to extirpate Chriſtianity, and Chriſtianity „
vncer the (with the Britans) retreated before the Conquerours into the extre- ©
mities of the Iſland; fo that in the year 597 K Theonus, Archbi- © 7

ſhop of London, and Thadiocus, Archbiſhop of York, ſeeing al!

their Churches deſtroyed, their Clergy fled into Wales | and Ar-

morica, and the Chriſtians every where expelled from the country
conquered by the Saxons, © retired with other Biſhops into Corn-

e wall and Wales, and by their labours ſo plentifully propagated ?

c the Goſpel there, that they made thoſe parts, eſpecially above

&« all other, glorious by the multitudes of their holy Saints and

« learned Teachers m.“ In other parts the Saxons were in full
poſſeſſion, having, from their firſt coming, not only raged againſt
religion, but againſt Learning too (as the Romans in Diocleſian's

time, mentioned before pag. 334), and deſtroyed, wherever they

came, all the books and monuments they could find, which 1s
another great reaſon that our Eccleſiaſtical Hiſtory of thoſe times

is, and muſt always remain, very much maimed and imperfect.

About the ſame time that the Biſhops abovementioned retired ©

into Wales and Cornwall, the Saxons, fatigued as it were with |


perſecuting the Goſpel, embraced (like a generous enemy) what


* j

2
N
E

3


#


7%
bs


«
i #8
5
15


*


Sor


r


l ho gate!
=


3
©.
**


r e eee eee ee


6 ,

ES OV

"i >; 5 4
g


Speed, pag. Bo. from Bede. tempted by the Saxons, and the Pelagian He-


1 By Wales here we are to underftand Wales reticks. And Religion remaining in theſe = .
properly ſo called, and Weſt Wales too, as countries authorized and unſullied, was 3
Cornwall was oſtentimes called. reaſon that the Britiſh people, among all Fan. 2

„In Wales and Cornwall they had preſerved were renowned for their conſtancy in their _ .
their Liberty and their Religion, tho both at- Hiſtoriola Winton. Eccleſ. Uſh. Prim. BED


© OS 4 GA Is Mc AN es + nary ones te ren 7 en
4 * 0 „ 1 * v 1 * % of
. -


. Rare OY


CHRISTIANITY IN CORNWALL.


they could not deſtroy. The kingdom of Kent firſt became Chri-
tian, and the other Kingdoms of the Saxons quickly followed ſo

an example. But the condition of the Britiſh Church did
20 ſoon feel the benefit of this change; for Auſtin and his fellow
Miſſionaries not contented to convert the Saxons (in which it muſt
te allowed they had great ſucceſs) thought it incumbent upon them
to correct the errours of the Britans, who, being at a great diftance
{om Rome, and perpetually at war, had not admitted the innovations
of that Church, but ſtuck to the brit, plain Chriſtianity, which they
had received (as ſome think) four hundred years before. A Synod was
appointed about bor, and ſeven Britiſh Biſhops, with many others
{om the Monaſtery of Bangor, appeared ; but matters between the
gaxons and Britans had been fo imbittered by continual wars, that
no agreement enſued : the Britans were as tenacious of their own
accuſtomed time of holding Eaſter (the great ſubject of debate in
thoſe days), and as reſolute to maintain their independency on any
foreign hierarchy, as Auſtin was eager to eſtabliſh his ſuperiority,
and impoſe the Romith obſervation of that Feſtival,

There ſeems to have been a third diſpute betwixt Auſtin and the
Britiſh Chriſtians 3 for the Saxons being now multiplied into ſeveral
and populous nations, all Heathens, and Auſtin and his Monks few
in compariſon of the work they had to do ; he ſeems to have pro-
poſed to the Britiſh Clergy, that they ſhould accept of a commiſſion
from him, and, under his authority, preach to the Pagan Saxons,
and hold communion with thoſe that were by him converted. This
propoſal being refuſed, St. Auſtin told them, that ſince they
refuſed peace as brethren, they muſt accept of war as enemies; and
a3 they would not preach the way of life to the Engliſh, by the
Engliſh they muſt expect to ſuffer death in return for ſuch bar-
barity. Theſe words were probably menaces, deſigned only to terrify


the Britans into a compliance; but afterwards, when the Saxon


King Edelbright had maſſacred the Monks of Bangor, they were
looked upon as prophetical, and the effect of inſpiration, by thoſe
who were determined to admire and excuſe cvery thing that this


axon Apoſtle did, or ſaid. |
The Corniſh Britans had either their own repreſentatives at this


dynod, or were repreſented by their brethren of Wales; and


Broch-well King of Powis, then General of the Britans, being ſoon
after defeated by the Saxons, and the Monks of Bangor (attending
the Britiſh Army to pray for them) ſlain without mercy, to the
number of twelve hundred, Bellthruſfius *, then Duke of Cornwall,
{ent aid to his fellow Britans of Wales, and by his aſſiſtance in a


Bede, Lib. II. cap. ii. „ Huntingt. p. 287.


gre at


— —
OS — — —


DF-THE STATR e


great meaſure it was, that the Welſh had the victory, and {oy of
the Saxons one thouſand and fixty-fix men. The difference about
the time of Eaſter laſted about a hundred years after this ; and
whereas the mutual right of Britans and Saxons to celebrate that
high Feſtival ſhould have made them love one another as Chriſtian
brethren, a few days difference P in the time of obſerving (which
was a thing in itſelf of little importance) made them reproach and
deteſt one another, in a moſt Unchriſtian manner inſomuch, that
Huntington (p. 187.) calls the Britans a perfidious nation, a de-
teſtable army: Malmſbury (p. 28.) calls the Corniſh contamino;,
gens, a moſt defiled people; and Bede himſelf does not {cruple to
call the Britans a wicked and curſed nation, upon this very
account, | ;

The Saxon nation however (as it were to make amends for their
former outrages) willingly, and more ſpeedily than could be
expected, ſubmitted to the Chriſtian Faith, and, as Chriſtianity
increaſed, appointed Biſhops over particular provinces. Juſtus had
been made Biſhop of Rocheſter, and Melitus of London, in 604 ;
and in 635, Birinus was made biſhop of Dorcheſter near Oxford, in
the 24th year of Kingils, firſt Chriſtian King of Weſt Saxony; and
Cornwall (to which the Weſt Saxon Kings, from the time of Arthur
laid conſtant claim, though never in poſſeſſion) was included in
this biſhoprick. This was the firſt Biſhop that ever the Weſt
Saxons had, and it was their only one, for it included all Welt
Saxony: in the year 660, Wincheſter was made an Epiſcopal Sce,
and then all Weſt Saxony was under the Biſhop of Winton. As
Chriſtianity ſpread to the Weſt, a Biſhop was appointed at Sherburn
in the year 705, and as Winchefter contained Hampſhire and
Surry ; Sherburn had Wiltſhire, Dorſetſhire, Berkſhire, Somerſet-
ſhire, Devonſhire, and Cornwall. Aldhelm was the firſt Biſhop of
Sherburn, and his Epiſcopacy laſted but five years; from him
Geruntius King of the Corniſh Britans received a reprimand, becauſe
the Britiſh Monks of his country made uſe of a different Ton/ure
from that of the Roman Church. It ſeems the Corniſh ſhaved
only from ear to ear1; whereas the Romans ſhaved all but the
hinder part of the head. Aldhelm writ an epiſtle to the King, and
Prieſts of Cornwall, on this ſubject. But though the Saxon Biſhops


The Aſiatick Churches kept their Eaſter Lord's day next following the Jewiſh Paffover; |


upon the fame Day the Jews obſerved their and it was ordained by the Occumenical Counci!
Paſſover, viz. the 14th day of their month, of Nice, that Eaſter ſhould be xept upon one and
chiefly anſwering our March; and this they did the ſame day throughout the world, not MT
upon what day of the week ſoever it fell. The ing to the Cuſtom of the Jews, but upon tue
Britiſh Church did the ſame, and (as well as the Lord's day following their Pattover. _ 3
A ſiaticks) plcaded the practice of the Apoſtles q « Rotundã quidem tonſura, 1.0 1
for doing ſo. The Church of Rome, and moſt * orbe ab autre ad autem chcumddsze; Kc.
of the Weſtern Churches, kept Eaſter upon the Uſh. p. 923. | 1.4
Pretonuc


188 a Py eee 7 af og 2 8 eee wm 1 | Thar 22 . F 9 N n LS 8 e N


eee eee e ß OP.
.
* FR — as - 8


VVV En wh Pm end #30 YI SE IRR


9 Ponds A. - "IM .


CHRISIIANITY IN CORNWALL;


*ctended a right to direct and rule the Corniſh in matters of Reli-
ion, yet in reality the Corniſh were as averſe to receive orders from
the Saxon Biſhops, as from the Saxon Princes, with whom being
umoſt in conſtant war, they neither gave up their Civil nor
Religious Rights; continuing Chriſtians, but on the firſt plan;
independent, though perſecuted” ; and, eſteeming the Religion of
the Engliſh as nothing, the Corniſh would no more communicate
with them than with Paganss, accounting that of the Welſh and
themſelves the only true Chriſtianityt. At the ſame time they
held conſtant communion with their fellow Chriſtians of Wales,
and ſome holy men paſſing from hence into Angleſea and other
parts of Wales, gave names to the churches there"; and doubtleſs
the Welſh did the ſame in Cornwall. All this while there had
been no fixed Epiſcopal See in Cornwall that I can learn, and never
was, till Edward the elder, in 905. But Cornwall was not ſingular
in this particular, for the Kingdom of Eaſt Anglia had never a
Biſhop for above an hundred years, during the Daniſh Wars w.
The ancient way in the Weſtern Church was this; the Biſhops
uſually lived in Monaſteries, as appears from the ſeven Biſhops at


one time coming from Bangor to meet Auſtin. In London, York,


and Caerleon, the Biſhops had fixed reſidence from the beginning,
but ſcarce any where elſe. To Cornwall, and moſt other places,
biſhops came either from France, Ireland, or Wales; and having
taught, ordained, and ſtayed as long as they judged convenient,
went to other places, with the ſame pious deſign, and returned, or
not, as they were diſpoſed. |


|
Sherburn continued the Epiſcopal See of the Weſtern parts of SECT. Iv. |
Britain, without any material accident or alteration, as far as I have 4 Biſhop- .


rick crected


in Corn- |


read, till the year 897, when, Alfred being old, and the confuſions


of the Daniſh wars increaſing * in theſe parts, there was no Biſhop wal. |


in all Weſt Saxony, from that time till the year 905, which the
Pope of Rome? being informed of, excommunicated Edward (then


in the throne of his deceaſed father Alfred) and all his ſubjects.


Edward, upon this, convenes a Synod (Pleimund Archbiſhop of


r Winton, Hiſt. Monaſt. Anglican. Propy-
lzum, from Bede, Lib. II. cap. xx.

* The Scots Chriſtians uſed the Roman
Biſhops in the ſame harſh manner ; and Lauren-
tius, ſucceſſor to Auſtin in the See of Canter-
bury, complains that Daganus Biſhop of the
Scots (Diſciple of the Corniſh St. Petrock)
would never eat bread with the Roman Miſſi-
onaries, nor in the ſame houſe with them.
Malmſb. p. 187. His finibus (viz. Cornubiæ,
© Demeciz, and Venedociæ) quamvis eis invitis
contenti a fide tamen Chriſti nunquam re-
ceſſerunt ſed in hoc tantum reprehenſibiles
judicantur, quod ſemper gentem Anglorum


5 D


© etiam uſque in hodiernum diem, quaſi per
* eos propriis ſinibus proſcripti odio mortali
<« perſtringunt nec illis libentius quam canibus
*« communicare volunt,” Mat. Paris, Edit.
Francofurti, p. 104.
© Uſher, p. 1152. 576.— Geoff. Mon. Rog.
Wendover, — Mat. Flor.
u Rowland's Mon. p. 154-
„ Rapin, Vol. I. Lib. IV. fol.
* „Vi hoſtilitatis cogente,” ſays Malmſb.
141. |
4 y Malmſfb. ibid. ſays it was Formoſus, but he
died in 896 (Dupin, Vol. IV. p. 335.) fo that it
muſt have been John IX.


Canter-


Y a
5 — r


2 * "24
ns
= —


378


OF THE STATE 8


Canterbury being Preſident), in which it was determined to add
three Biſhops to the two, which were before at Wincheſter 3 4
Sherburn. The Pope approved of the propoſal, and Pk
ordained five Biſhops in one day*; Friedeſtan for Winton
Adelftan for Cornwall, Werſtan for Sherburn, Athelhelm for Wells,
and Eidulph for Crediton in Devon. x
Priory of Canterbury confirms this piece of hiſtory, with this
addition, that the council made a particular proviſion for the Cornif},
men, to recover them from their errours*,
this paſſage has, I believe, a good deal of truth in it, © That. hy
te the errours of the Corniſh, we are to underſtand their refulir?
ce to acknowledge the papal authority b. The Corniſh See *
fixed at Bodman, and the Cathedral Church was that of St. Petrock
at that time the chief Monaſtery among the Corniſh Britans.
To this appointment, the Corniſh ſubmitted, when it had reſiſted
the Roman Hierarchy a great while after all the reſt of Britain had
ſubmitted to it. © The Britans in Cornwall (ſays Mr. Rowland)
e refifted the Romiſh Uſurpations much longer than the reſt of the
&« Britans, till about the year 905, when Edward the elder, with
e the Pope's conſent, ſettled a Biſhop's See among them, which,
by the Pope's power, then greatly prevailing, in a ſhort time
cc reduced them, much againſt their will, to ſubmit their ancient
e faith to the conduct of papal diſcipline, as moſt of the Britans
<« were before forced to do d.“
This new ſettlement of the Church of Cornwall was followed by
what ſome hiſtorians have ſtyled the age of ignorance, ſo that few
materials of any conſequence are to be met with for Eccleſiaſtical
Hiſtory ; the Monks and ſecular Clergy diſputed and contended
with one another, but were both preyed upon without diſtinction
by the furious Dane.
The Biſhop's See continued at Bodman ® till the year 981, when,
that town and monaſtery being burnt down by the Danes, the
Biſhop removed his See to St. German's, where it continued till
the year 1049, and in both places there fat twelve Biſhops in re-
gular ſucceſſion? ; — Athelſtan, — Conan, —Ruydocke, — Aldred,


An ancient regiſter in the


Rapin's remark upon


* Thid. p. 26. Some ſay ſeven, adding
Kenulph Biſhop of Worceſter and Beornock of
Selſey in Suſſex. Rap. Engl. Fol. p. 113.
Vol. I.

2 Spelman's Councils, Vol. I. p. 387.

b Tranſlat. Vol. I. p. 112.

© Rowl. p. 150.

This Biſhoprick was founded principally
for the reduction of the rebellious Corniſh to
* the Roman Rites, who, as they uſed the lan-
guage, ſo they imitated the lives and doctrine,
© of the ancient Britans, neither hitherto, nor
long aſter, ſubmitting themſelves to the See


C apoſtolic.” Fuller, Ch. Hiſt. Cent. X. B. II.
: LY Rowland ſays, the See was fixed at St.
German's, and Edulph the firſt Biſhop ; but this
is a miſtake, and probably owing to this cauſe,
that Edulph or Wolf might be the firſt Biſhop
that ſat at St. German's, but he was the ſeventh
Biſhop from the firſt erection of that Epiſcopacy.

f See Heylin's Help to Engliſh hiſtory, where
the year of inſtallment of each Biſhop is men-
tioned, — See Creſſy, p. 832. where we find
the names. |


"BE 4 * — wb: . 72 Fa N $ 44 IS #, 2 4 * : 4 A


—— - * — — A7 — — ——ñ0
— — n —— — — - _ — — —_ *
— _ - — — ſhe — — — — _—_— —
— — — — 9
—— — — — — — > — —


4  Þ 2 e 1 . \ : * 7 18
1 1 * £4 e 2 * 4 - * 23 q 2 = - 0 * — 2 * a 2 * . * 8 J : : 8 Ss * * # ; S > af ; * af e * x = SF wt bs; 5 * 2 3 4 1
: F. DR 3 YE Þ n ISS” OR „ r Fax. bt Lo” r e 9 * 8 8 n N „ a 3 N * * R FD" ow * e * * *. :
. . * * * "IS * *


» ä W


, lee, ee. RO 1


wo


2” 5%


os


0 e 0
100 1 1 0 7 1%
| 0 4,908
5 5 6


j
* 0 { 00
N 0 00 1 90 WI. 0 0 00 be 4
i K 75 o
| Wilt tity, # 1000 0 mY
A. + 0 0 0 00 .
eee Da
100 006% . 0 165 4
1340 |


lh
wk of 1065 8
1 | !


e 6.


n


* A. A- .


1
—


ede 4
angres i) at hes


r a&©&


MANS


Y 100 Va 1 00


—— 1 r —— — ꝗ—XiL½y)nj — ꝑſ — — — — —


V
WY


ee s AT n


.


N


5
a


Lol.


oo
4


£


7


l


CHRISTIANITY IN CORNWALL;


_Britwin, — Athelſtan II. — Wolf, — Woron, — Wolocke, —
gudio, — Aldred II. 2 and Burwoldg. Afﬀter the death of
parwold, his nephew Livingus, Abbot of Tavillock, and Biſhop
{ Crediton, by his great intereſt with King Canute, prevailed fo
fu as to unite the Bithoprick of St. German's to that of Crediton,
J. D. 1049 3 and Leofricus ſucceſſor to Livingus (becauſe of the
mages committed by pirates in the open towns of St. German's and
(editon) carried them both to Exeter in the reign of Edward the
(onſeſſor, as to a place of greater ſecurity, where the Epiſcopal Scc
or both counties of Devon and Cornwall {till continues,


G3
1
—


„


0f Religious Houſes founded in Cornwall before the Norman
Conqueſl.


b is not here intended to trace the Religious Houſes from the
foundation, and, reckoning up their Benefactors and Donations,
to run through all the changes they underwent. In one age they
were plundered and ruined, in the next reſtored ; ſometimes they
rere filled with Regulars, ſometimes with Seculars, and then
Regulars again; ſometimes the Monks were of one Habit and
Order, ſometimes of another; ſometimes the Houſes were indepen-
dent, and at other times Cells to other and greater Houſes, "Theſe
particulars are too numerous for our preſent bounds. 1 ſhall only
gre a ſummary view of the moſt ancient, and of ſome particulars
relating to them, leaſt known, and moſt remarkable.
The firſt Religious Houſe which we read of, founded in Corn- SECT. 1.


wall, was that erected by St. Patrick h, in the year 432. The place Of Padttow


Church and


where this houſe was ſituate was called anciently Loderick, the Nonaſtety.
houſe itſelf Laffenac; either from the Church's being built with
lone i, whereas in thoſe early times they were ſeldom built of ſuch
coſtly materials K; or Laffenac, quaſi Lan-manach, the Church of
the Monks; as Bodvenah (now Bodman) from Bod-manach, the Houſe
of the Monks; it ſtood on the North Sea, at the mouth of a river, the
place called then Heilemuth!; by Malmſbury, Lib. I. Hegelmith :
the river was what we now call Alan, formerly called by the name


* Called alſo Birthwald, and Brithwald. clay or wood,
Ag Ubi (in Cornubia ſcil.) & Meneviæ Alfred the Great, almoſt five hundred years
Cœrobium conſtruxiſſe ferunt,” — Uſher, after this, introduced building with ſtone. Rap.


Pr 110, Vol. I. p. 96. — Spelman's Councils of Britain,
LESS -

Quali Lan-menck, the M (according to the p. 15.

14 * * - T .

vn idiom) paſſing into an U. Rog. Wendover, Uſher, p. 1014. Heiel muth,


x ty : 18 " : 1 * " .
Their walls being ulually wattled, and of i.e. the Mouth of the Riser.


of


380


SECT.
OfBodman.


former uſe, by a nobleman called Algar, with the licence of the


OF RELIGIOUS HOUSES


of Hayle, or Heyle, a common name for any River.
church Laffenack, there was an Altar dedicated to St
much reverenced in thoſe times, as ſuppoſed to be ah p F-
on which (according to his Legend) that Saint ſwam "IPs 4
Ireland into Cornwall, to avoid the pomp and 1 :
with which the Iriſh continued to teize himm, This hd 5
was called afterwards by the name of St. Patrick - * ;
ſhould think that the town was afterwards, in commemoration of -þ
this Saint, called by the Saxons Padſtow, or Patrick-ſtow *: other;
think it called Padſtow from St. Petrock, a Diſciple of St. Patrick.
who ſettled in the ſame Houſe, and built here; and, after thirty © J
years labour in the word of God, died and was buried wk £
A. D. 564. 1 ;


EE,
1
.
*
4
45


The Monaſtery of Padſtow being near the ſea ſhore, and expoſed
to the piracies of the SaxonsP, and after them of the Danes, the
Monks removed to Bodman, and, bringing the body of Petrock ©
with them, the church there was dedicated to that faint (who paſſed ;
ſome part of his retirement formerly in this place 4) ; and the town
was called by the Saxons Petrocſtow, but by the Britans Bodmanna,
that is, the habitation of the Monks. As this was the moſt ancient
ſociety, and moſt flouriſhing in Cornwall, and placed conveniently |
for that purpoſe; Edward the elder ſettled here the epiſcopal Sec,
A. D. 905. Athelſtan, ſucceeding his father Edward, abſolutely 23
conquered the Corniſh Britans about the year 936; and, being a F
Prince as generous in his donations to the Clergy, as he was valiant ©
and fortunate in war, among the reſt of his liberalities, gave the ?
Religious here ſuch privileges and lands, that he was ever after
regarded as their Founder. He found the Monks following the
<« rule of Benedict, fays Biſhop Tanner (p. 66.); and it is not
improbable but they might have admitted this rule of the Romiſh f
Church when they had their new Biſhop. Here the Biſhops of
Cornwall reſided till the year 981, when the town, church, and
monaſtery, being burnt down by the Danes, the Biſhops removed
their ſeat farther Eaſt, to St. German's on the river Lyner. The
Monaftery ſeems to have continued in ruins for ſome time, and
went into the poſſeſſion of the Earl of Moreton and Cornwall, at
the Conqueſt; but was ſoon after * re-edified, and reſtored to its


In this :
Patrick, |


7 3 il


feng,


10 we rs T


n *


King, and aſſiſtance of William Warlewaſt, Biſhop of Excter.


m Utſher, p. 877. p Whence it ſeems to have had the name of p
n « [ſhidem ttatuitur Eccleſia, St. Patricii Loderick, that is, the Creck of Robbers.

ce nomine.“ From the Glaſtonb. Records, — q Leland, Itin. Vol. II. p. 84.

Uſher, p. 879. r Viz. in 1110, or 1120, according to Ic
* The lrith calling him Padraick. Uſher, ib. Tanner.

p. 895.


Leland


to


ad


FOUNDED IN CORNWALL.


cad fays (Vol. II. p. 84.) there were in this houſe, firſt Monks,
ben Nuns, then ſecular Prieſts, then Monks again, then Canons ;
I. it was Algar that placed the black Canons regular here, be-
nen the years 1110 and 1120. About fixty years after this,
here happened a remarkable conteſt about the body of their Saint
J id Patron, Petrock, for“ Martin, Canon Regular of this


« houſe, ſtole the body of St. Petrock from the Church of Bod-


. nan, and carried it into Britany in France, and lodged it in
the Abby of St. Mein there. The theft being diſcovered, Ro-
. ger, then Prior of the Church of Bodman, with the honeſter part
J « of this Chapter, went to Henry the Second, then King of England,


« yith their complaint, who, without delay, ordered the French


J « Abbot and his Convent to reſtore the body to the Prior of
J « Bodman 3 and, in caſe of refuſal, Rolland de Dinant, chief Ju-


« ftice of Britany, had orders to take it away by force, and reſtore
„it. The Abbot, fearing the King's diſpleaſure, reſtored the bo-
« dy, at the ſame time ſwearing upon the Evangeliſts, and the
« Relicks of the Saints, that it was in no wile altered or diminiſh-
« ed ſince it came into his cuſtody 5,” Such a treaſure the Monks
of that age eſteemed the bones of their patron. And here I
annot help mentioning, how precious every part of this Saint was
rxckoned in ancient times. King Athelftan was remarkable for
very act of piety which was in faſhion in his time; he was par-
ticularly curious in collecting Relicks ; they were preſented to
lim as the moſt acceptable gift*, and he beſtowed them with
eat devotion, as he ſaw moſt proper; among other preſents,
ke is ſaid to have given part of the bones, the hair, and the
rrments of St. Petrock to the Monaſtery of St. Peter's at Exe-
ter, The ſhrine of St. Petrock, and his tomb, were both
fanding, in the Eaftern part of the great Church, in Leland's
ime, The black Canons, placed here by Algar, continued
ill the diſſolution, when Thomas Wandſworth (laft Prior) with
is Monks delivered it up into the King's Hands, in 1539. It
ras ſtiled © the Priory of St. Mary, and St. Petrock, and valu-
"ed at 2701. 11d. by Dugdale, 2891. 11s. 11d. by Speed x.


King Athelſtan is reckoned to have founded this priory, and to SECT. 111.


tare dedicated it to the honour of St. German, Biſhop of Auxi-
re, in France, but a ſtrenuous preacher here in Britain, being de-
kgated by the French Biſhops (A. D. 429 Y), together with Lu-
pus Biſhop of Troy, to come hither, and oppoſe the Pelagian He-


' Hoveden's Ann, pag. 324. — Uſher, pag. Temp. Hen. VIII. Itin. Vol. II. pag. 84.
Ni. x Tanner, pag. 66.

dee Malmſb. pag. 28. Y Ibid. pag. 77.

* Mcnaſt, Angl. pag. 226.


5 E rely.


St. Cer-


man's Prio-
ry.


— — — } . —


382


OF RELIGIOUS HOUSES


reſy. Here were ſecular Canons at firſt, and King Athelſt |
ſaid to have appointed one Conan Biſhop here (A. D. 536). a I


Edred, brother to Athelſtan, who began his reign in 946
955%, is alſo ſaid to have ordained St. German's to be a Binos
See; but as all hiſtories agree, that the Biſhop of Commwall 4 .
not remove from Bodman till the year 981, it is very unlike1d


and died


that there ſhould be a Biſhop here before that time (as Biſho ©
that thers


Tanner rightly obſerves) ; neither does it ſeem neceſſaty,
ſhould be two Biſhops in ſo narrow a flip of land as Cornwall.
and but one at Crediton, for all Devon, a country of {© mu
larger extent. The following particulars may ſerve, in ſome mea
ſure, to diſcover the truth: I find Edred a benefactor to the 808
of Bodman; for Henry the third confirmed to the Monks there


the Manor of Newton in the ſame manner as King Edred had


granted it. Very likely this was given in order to augment the


revenues of the Biſhoprick there; and, for the ſame reaſon, he


might have appointed the Biſhop of Bodman to be Biſhop of St.
German's too. Again, Conan is ſaid to be the name of the fi


Biſhop, placed here by King Athelſtan. I find alſo that Conan


was ſecond Biſhop, in the See of Bodman, in the time cf King
Athelſtan; it is poſſible therefore that Athelſtan might annex his


new Priory of St. German to the See of Bodman, for the better


maintenance of the Epiſcopal Dignity, and ordered alſo that St.


German's ſhould partake of the Epiſcopal Title, by which diſpo-


fition, I imagine, that Conan, at that time Biſhop of Bodman,
became Biſhop of Bodman and St. German's too, in the ſame man-


ner as we have now the Biſhop of Bath and Wells, and the Biſhop


of Litchfield and Coventry; and this might give occaſion to the


miſtake of St. German's being one Biſhoprick, and Bodman ano-
ther; but theſe things I offer only as conjectures: one thing, I


think, we may reſt aſſured of, that there were not two Biſhops in
Cornwall at one time. In 981, the Corniſh Biſhop ſettled here,


and, by the date, it muſt be one of the middle Biſhops in the liſt;
for, in all, they were but twelve; and to the year 981, the Bi-


ſhoprick had laſted, at Bodman, ſeventy fix years, and from the
year 981, to the tranſlation of the See to Crediton (in 1049), 18
ſixty eight years, fo that the perſon who removed muſt, likely, be
the ſeventh: Biſhop from the foundation; and the name of the
ſeventh viſhop was Wolf, who firſt placed the See at St. German's;
and this gave riſe to another miſtake, which is, that the Biſto-
prick was firſt placed at St. German's, and that Edulph, or
Wolf, was the firſt Biſhop ; whereas, indeed, he was (at leaſt as it
ſcems to me) only the firſt Biſhop that fart and lived at St. German.


2 Speed, Chron. pag. 346.


Leoiri-


FOUNDED IN CORNWALL.


Leofricus, ſucceſſor to Livingus in the See of Crediton (then
the only See for the counties of Cornwall and Devon), is thought
o have changed the ſecular into regular Canons, and was therc-
ore looked upon as their Founder, and it was called a Priory of
che foundation and patronage of the Biſhop of Exeter a. Whe-
her the regular Canons of Leofric, firſt Biſhop of Exeter, were
lifplaced, and the ſeculars reſtored, I cannot ſay; but it is faid
b Leland, that Bartholomew, Biſhop of Exeter (temp. Hen. II.)
:troduced Regulars here. Robert Swimmer, the laſt Prior here,
with eight black Canons, yielded it up into the King's hand
March 2), in the zoth of Henry VIII. The Monaſtick Church
b as ancient a building as any at this time extant in Cornwall,
and was formerly incloſed by the Priory. “ Beſide the high Altar
« on the right hand is a tomb in the Wall with an image of a
« Biſhop, and over the tomb eleven Biſhops painted, with their
„names, and verſes, as token of ſo many Biſhops buried there,
« or that there had been ſo many Biſhops of Cornwall that had
« their ſeat there b.. On this paſſage, let me obſerve, that there
were twelve Biſhops in all, from the firſt eſtabliſhment, by Ed-
ward the Elder, to the laſt Biſhop ; the firſt, called Athelſtan, fat
it Bodman before the Conqueſt of Cornwall; Conan was the ſe-
cond, and, from him included, to the laſt Biſhop, there were ele-
ren in number, as- painted here in this Church, which may ſerve
to confirm the above conjecture, that Conan was made Biſhop of
dt. German's, as well as of Bodman, by Athelſtan, and confirmed
by Edred, and that, though there were twelve Biſhops in all in
Cornwall, St. German's could only reckon eleven, and therefore
has only that number painted ca the wall. Their Names, with
the order of ſucceſſion, are mentioned before, pag. 378.


King Athelſtan, having ſet his heart upon the Conqueſt of SECT. 1V.


383


Cornwall, thought it could not be compleat, unleſs he reduced the Of St. Be-


Scilly Iſlands, which he had a view of from the Weſtern Promon-


tries, He vows, therefore, a Religious houſe, in caſe he returned
with victory, and being returned according to his wiſh, he acted


cording to his Vow; he built a Collegiate Church in fight of


thoſe Iſlands, and dedicated it to St. Berian a holy Woman of Ire-
and (who had at that time an Oratory, and was buried here), pla-
ang a Dean and three Prebends in the College.

This King had now done with conquering, and his Princely
mind had nothing farther to exert itſelf in, but making free and
amplifying thoſe immunities, which, by his conqueſt, he had ta-


2 Prideaux's E xcerpta — Tanner, pag. 67. d Leland's Itin, Vol. VII. pag. 113.


ken


— — — — —


384


OF RELIGIOUS HOUSES *
ken away; the firſt he did for his glory, the ſecond was the uſual 5 ̃


dictate of his generous nature. 5
This Religious Houſe was exempted from all Epiſcopal, ad i


every other authority, but that of the Pope of Rome c. He alf
made it a ſanctuary d, and, perhaps, extended his bounty to this
Church in the ſame manner, if not in the ſame words, which he
made uſe of in endowing the Church of Beverley,


“Alls free make I thee— As Heart may think, or Eye may ſee +,”


1 wk _


To build Religious Houſes was, in thoſe days, the way which the


moſt. religious Princes took to ſhew their gratitude to Providence


for delivering them from the accidents of War; and the donations


were generally in proportion to their danger, or victory. At the


Norman Conqueſt, there were ſecular Canons here; and in the 2oth


of Edward the Firſt, a Dean and three Prebends. The Dean-


„ry (conſiſting of three Churches, and as many Pariſhes, viz, |


St. Berian, St. Levin, and Sinnin, alias Senan) ** was ſeized into


ce the King's hands, in the reign of Edward III. (becauſe John


« de Maunte, then Dean, was a Frenchman); and, as Alien, was
« given in the 24th of Hen. VI. to King's College, Cambridge,
« and in the 7th of Edward IV. to Windſor College; yet neither


* of theſe Societies long enjoyed it, or had any benefit from it,


<« for it was all along, and ſtill continues, an independent Deanry,


« either in the gift of the Crown, or the Duke of Cornwall f.“ It


was valued in the 26th of Henry VIII. at 481. 12 8. 1 d. per ann.


The remains of the College were wantonly demoliſhed by one


Shrubſall, Governor of Pendinas Caſtle, during the uſurpation of
Cromwell.


The following Deans, before the ſuppreſſion, occurred to the
learned Biſhop Tanner 8 — Walter de Gray, 1213.— William de


Hamilton was ſucceeded, in the year 1296, by Ralph de Manton.
— Matthew de Baylew elected 1303. — John de Maunte (alias de
Meunte), elected 1.318. — Tho. de Croſs elected 1338. — John de
Hale, Robert de Stratton, and Richard de Wolviſton, all three
elected 1350. — John Saucey was ſucceeded by David Maignard,
1354. —Alan de Stokes elected 1386; but he was Dean of Be-
rian A. D. 1372, as appears by the copy of an inſtrument he was
witneſs to that year, ſigned Alan de Stokes Doien de Sanct Bert-
en h. — John Boor elected 1394. Nicholas Slake elected 1305.—
William Lochard 1410; he was Dean of Berian, and by his Mo-


: re Vol. III. pag. 113. RR

id. p. 6. : n. Notitiæ. 1
e Holland. Inſert. pag. 4. b M. S. Survey of the Dutchy of men
Tanner, pag. 67. temp. Edward III. nuper penes R. Elliot Arm. get.


nument


e See his Principals of Religious Houſes, 2d


— i .


„


Cy
Ee *.
£ of"
a
*
*
*
is”
4
4
"=
2
N
1 *
* *
F
.
*
vs
1
Ii
4 .
FF
I
4
#
5
7
1
*
F


FOUNDED IN CORNWALTL.


zument in Hereford Church®, died Oct. 24, 1438, Adam Moleyns
439. — Peter Stukler occurs 1444. — Robert Knollys elected
1460, occurs 1486; to which we may add, John Reſe „of late


> ny:


time i, Dean of St. Berian's.


King Athelſtan is alſo ſaid to have founded a priory of Black Bonury.


Canons to the honour of St. Petrorſi, at Bonury in this county; but
where that Religious Houſe was, I cannot fay, probably it was ſoon
iter annexed, and the Monks tranſlated to ſome larger houſe, by
which means it loſt all notice k.


The Church of St. Stephen near Lanceſton was Collegiate, and sgcr. v.
n the College ſecular Canons before the Conqueſt. It was given Of $t. Ste-
to the Biſhop and Church of Exeter by Hen. I. and ſuppreſſed 1


Lanceſton.


about 1126, by William Warlewaſt Biſhop of Exeter, who removed
the Canons from the hill into a more retired ſituation under the
Caſtle, about half a mile nearer to the Town, where he founded a
Priory for Canons of the order of St. Auſtin, and dedicated it
to St. Stephen as the College had been before l. This Priory was
the richeſt in Cornwall, and in the 26th of Henry VIII. was
ralued at 3541. os. 11d. ſays Dugdale; 3921. 118. 2d. ſays
A. D. 1534. It had the privilege of a Sanctuary, as appears by
32 Hen. VIII. cap. xi. ſect. 3.


When the Monks firſt ſettled here, is uncertain : Edward the stcT. vi.
Confeſſor found Monks here ſerving God, and gave them by charter St. Mi-


the property of the Mount and other lands; firſt obliging them to
conform to the Rule of St. Benedict. But, long before this, this
place ſeems renowned for its ſanctity, and therefore muſt (accord-
ing to the cuſtom of the firſt ages of Chriſtianity) have been dedi-
ated to Religion; for St. Kayne, or Keyna, a holy Virgin of the
blood royal, daughter of Braganus, Prince of Brecknockſhire, is
laid to have gone a Pilgrimage to St. Michael's Mount in Cornwall m.
Now this Saint lived in the end of the fifth Century, and as ſhe
probably dwelt in the Eaſtern part of this county (where her
Church and Well are ſtill to be ſeen, and her feſtival is celebrated


on the zoth of September n), it is not at all improbable that ſhe


ſhould come this pilgrimage to St. Michael's Mount; a fact farther
confirmed by the Legend of St. Cadoc (though disfigured by Fable),


Willis, Cathed. p. 539. Cornwall, was a great benefactor to it, and


| Leland, Vol. III. p. 46. | endeavoured to bring back the Biſhoprick of
Biſhop Tanner, Not. f, p. 66. thinks it the Cornwall to it, but in vain.
kme with Zodman. m Carew, p. 130.-— Capgrave, p. 204. —


| + It was founded and endowed (ſays Hals) Willis, Not. p. 102.
© by the Earls of Cornwall, and Biſhops of u By the Romiſh Calendar, her feaſt was
? Bodman, long before William the Con- * held October 8.” Letter from Dr.Milles, now
' queror,” Reginald Fitz Henry, Earl of Dean of Exeter, Dec. 11. 1755,


5 F who,


|
{
g
9


OF RELIGIOUS HOUSES


who, according to Capgrave (fol. liv. and ccv.), made a pilgrima

to St. Michael's Mount, there faw, and converſed with St. Ka 105
and on his return, parched with thirſt, miraculouſly 3 a
moſt plentiful and healing fountain in a dry place, and had a
church dedicated to him in Cornwall, where this miracle was
performed; from which it appears that this place was dedicated


ä
by
*
y
7
15”
7
„
*
L
5
7
5
A
F:
**
*
*
FEY
FE
*
4
oy
*
*
4
©
*
*
E
*
4


to Religion, at leaſt as anciently as the latter end of the fhith ©


of it by Edward the Confeſſor.


century, above five hundred years before the grant and ſettlement ©


When the Normans came in, this Monaſtery (with many other


lands and honours) came into the power of Robert Earl of Morcton


and Cornwall, who built here, and, out of regard to his Mother-
country, annexed it as a Cell to the Abby of St. Michael 4;
Periculo Maris m Normandy ; the Monks were of the reformed
Order of the Benedictines called Ciſtercians, and of the Gilbertine
kind, a rule introduced into the Ciſtercian Order by Gilbert of
Sempringham in Lincolnſhire, A. D. 1148. By this rule, Monks
and Nuns were placed in one houſe; and the Nunnery was lately
ſtanding on the Eaſtern end of this Monaſtery, with a Chapel


dedicated to the Virgin Mary, as in all Ciſtercian Monaſteries


theſe Chapels were. The Nunnery was detached a little from the
Cells of the Monks, and a great deal of carved work both in ſtone
and timber (to be ſeen a few years ſince) ſhewed that it was the
moſt elegantly finiſhed of any part of this Houſe. In Richard the
firſt's time, one Pomeroy, a gentleman of great poſſeſſions in
Devonſhire and Cornwall, having committed murder, took refuge
here, having a Siſter in this Nunnery, and being (as Leland ſays,
Itin. Vol. VI. p. 54.) © at that tyme Lord of the Caitelle of the
Mount of St. Michael,” where, finding the hill on which the
Monaſtery ſtands ſteep and rocky, he fortified it, though to little
purpoſe; however, from this time, it was looked upon as a place fit
tor defence, and made uſe of as ſuch upon ſeveral occaſions, and
the Commander of the Garriſon had a lodging in the Monaſtery.

This Priory continued a Cell to St. Michaels's in Normandy till
that connexion was deſtroyed, with all thoſe of like kind throughout
the kingdom, in the time of Edward the third.

When Henry VI. endowed his New College in Cambridge, he
gave this Religious Houle to it (Pat. 20 Hen. VI. p. 4. m. 3.
but Edward IV. annexed it as a Cell to Sion Abby in Middleſex,
and ſo it continued till the general difiolution. At the firſt ſcizule
of it by Edward III. the farm of it was rated but at ten pounds


” * J.

" In Patent 5, of Hen. IV. p. 1. m. 21, for * war, to all the country round. Rym. For

repairing this Priory, it is called Fortalitium, Vol. VIII. p. 102, 340, 341.
i. c. *© a place of defence and ſecurity in time of


Per


.


—


FFF T


k LD.
by.
7 E
*
2
þ 5
2
7
2
*
-
"x
«
*
0
ä
*
I.
I
*
„ .
7
1
*
*
F
#
4


FOUNDED IN CORNWALL,


Annum; but in the time of Hen. VIII. the lands belonging to
this Houle (as parcel of Sion) were valued at one hundred and ten
pounds, twelve ſhillings, and one halfpcnny o.

Of this Mount and Priory, as the moſt entire Religious Houſe
now ſtanding in Cornwall, I prefix the proſpect to this chapter b.


At Crantock there were Secular Canons in the time of Edward SECT.V1T.
the Confeſſor, and a Collegiate Church dedicated to St. Carantocus Carano.


(ſaid to be a diſciple of Patrick), in the patronage of the Biſhop of
Fxeter. * In the Lincoln taxation q, there were reckoned here
eight Prebendaries without a Dean, but Le Neve's MS. reckons
f Dean and ten Prebendaries.” Tanner, a Dean, nine Pre-
dendaries, and four Vicars choral". The founder of this Religious
Houſe is not yet known. The Secular Canons continued here
till the general ſuppreſſion, when their Revenues were valued at


89]. 158. 8d.


Here was a Monaſtery in the time of Edward the Confeſſor, src. vin.


CI


founded in honour of St. Neot, brother, “or (as others think) a S.. Neor's.


« near relation” to King Alfred the Great. St. Neor is ſtyled by
Fox, Abbot in Cornwall; he died, A. D. 890, and was buried here,
and from him the place was called Neotſtow, having had the name
of St. Guerir till that time. His body was afterwards removed
into Huntingtonſhire?; where alſo he gave name to the town,
before called Arnulphſbury (alias Aimſbury), but, ever ſince, St.
Neot's, from this Saint, In 1213 the poor body ſuffered another
removal; for Henry, Abbot of Croyland, thinking his Abby a
fitter ſhrine for ſo great a Saint, took up his bones from St. Neot's
in Huntingtonſhire, and beſtowed them in Croyland Minſter".
From this Church of St. Neot's in Cornwall, the Earl (as Excter
Domeſday calls him), that is, William Earl of Morcton and
Cornwall, took away all the lands, excepting one acre, which he
leſt to the Prieſts; and the ſame Earl ſeems to have annexed it to
Montacute Priory in Somerſetſhire, of which he was the founder,
tor to this Houſe it did belong", The founder of this Monaſtery
is not known, but likely it was Alfred, or ſome of his family; for
Aſſer, in his Life of Alfred, tells us, that King Alfred, being ill,
proſtrated himſelf in the Church of St. Guerir, and there per-
forming his devotions with great zeal was ſurprizingly recovered;


and St. Neot dy ing here, with great reputation for his ſanctity,


and being here interred, it is not unlikely that Alfred (by whom


o Perhaps, inſtead of Lands, it ſhould be r Spelman's MS. of the Lincoln Taxation, in
Revenues, which might be advanced by means the Bodleian Library, names ten Frebends.
of the Fiſhery; formerly of little value, but of To the palace of Earl Alric (alias Alfric) in
late ages much increaſed ; at preſent, the moſt Huntingdonſhire. Spelman's Life of Alfred,
conuverable part of the Revenue of this Site and (p. 139.), then converted into a Monaſtery,
Manor, and ſtill likely to increaſe, t dpelm. Life of Alfred, p. 139.

Plate XRX XIV. p. 379. v Tanner, p. 69.

2 Tanner, p. 68,


he


. — ——— — —


SEC T. IX.


alias Piran-


St. Kiaran,
alias St. Ke-
veryn, f. St.


OF RELIGIOUS HOUS RES


he was highly honoured after his death), or his fon Edward
might found a Religious Houſe of Clerks (as Spelman calls them)
in this place, in grateful remembrance of the abovementioned
recovery, as well as to do honour to the name of fo near and
worthy a relation.

In the days of Edward the Confeſſor, here was a Dean x and
“Canons endowed with lands, and the priviledge of a ſandtuarv
* The Church was given by King Henry I. to the Biſhop 2
ce Church of Exeter. Afterwards, here was a Cell of Ciſtercian
Monks ſubordinate to Beaulieu Abby in Hampſhire y.“

John of Tinmuth, in his Life of Kiaranus, ſays, that in Com-
wall, where he was buried, he was called Piranus ; the ſame author
adds, * that his father was called Domuel, and his mother
„ Wingella,” and this might be true of St. Piran, but other parents
had then in his poſſeſſion, for his (viz. Kiaranus's) father was faid
to be Lugneus, de nobilioribus gentis Oſraigi, and his mother,
called Liadain, “de gente gue dicitur Corculaigde, and that he
was born and brought up © in Clera Inſula in regione Corculaigde,”
whereas Piranus was ex Offorienſ [Tiberniz provincia, ſon of
Domuel and Wingella. However, from John of Tinmuth, as I
ſuppoſe, Leland a calls the pariſh church “ of St. Keveryn, alias of
& Piranus; but whatever name St. Piran had before he came into
Cornwall, St. Keveryn, and St. Piran were certainly different
perſons; for Domeſday b ſays, the Canons of St. Pieran held
Lan Piran;“ that is, ſome lands which (from their belonging to
a Church of that Saint) had the name of Lan Piran; and at
Piran-Sanz © the Biſhops of Bodman had a Manor called Lan
Piran, now almoſt entirely overun by the ſands; and fo great
eſteem had the Corniſh for the name of this Saint, that we have at
preſent three parochial Churches dedicated to him, and two of them
are at preſent in the patronage of the Church of Exeter.

But St. Keveryn does not appear to have had any connexion
with the Biſhop of Exeter, any otherwiſe than as its Dioceſan. The
patronage is in Lay hands d; and here ſeems to me. to have been a
diſtin& Religious Houſe, with lands called Lanachebran, which we
find mentioned as one of our Religious Houſes in Cornwall, but
have not known hitherto where to fix it. © There was a Society
© of Secular Canons in a place of this name, at or about the
« Conqueſt e, dedicated to St. Achebran; and it appears from the


w Spelm. ibid. p. 139. 2 Ttin. Vol. VII. p. 110.

* Domeſday, Exon. p. 435. d Tanner, p. 69, Not. <.

y Tanner, p. 69. s Piran-Sanz, ile. St. Piran.

* Prim. p. 784, and 1091. - Bulteel, Eſq; of Devon.


e Tanner, p. 69.


Domeſday


— A.


FOUNDED IN CORNWALL.


Domeſday in Exeter Cathedral library, that theſe Canons held
Lanachebran in the time of Edward the Conteſſor. Now this St.
Achebran is not to be found in Cornwall ; but St. Chebran there is
commonly called Kevran, the ſame doubtleſs as Kiaranus e, now called
gt. Keveryn, in the hundred of Kerrier f. Several conſiderable
Ruins are ſtill to be ſeen, about a quarter of a mile from the Church
of St. Kevern, at a place called Tregonin, where there is a Tradition
among the neighbours, that formerly there ſtood a Priory; and a
part of theſe Ruins is ſtill called the Chapel. This likely was the
Houſe, and St. Kevern the Collegiate Church, of theſe Canons Secular.


There was a little Priory on the iſland of Treſcaw (alias Iniſcaw) SECT. x.
in Scilly, at leaſt as early as the reign of Canute, though by whom Sulley, alias


this lift of Religious Houſes we have all along obſerved) was very
intent upon converting, and furthering in the ways of Religion,
thoſe whom he had ſubdued in war. It was dedicated to St.
Nicholas (from whom the whole iſland is ſometimes called St.
Nicholas's Iſle), and belonged to Taviſtock Abby before the
Conqueſts. Whether that be true or not, Henry I. by his charterh,
grants all the Churches of Sylley (or Sully), with their appur-
« tenances, and the land, as the Monks or Hermits held it in the
« time of Edward the Confeſſor, and Burgald (alias Burwald, or
« Birthwald) Biſhop of Cornwall, to Oſbert Abbot of Taviſtock,
«A. D. 1120.' By which charter (as it grants rather than
confirms), though its connection with Taviſtock earlier than this
date may be rendered doubtful, yet the Monaſtery's being as old as
Canute at leaſt (in whoſe reign Burgald died at St. German's)
becomes unqueſtionable. The remains of the Priory Church are
till to be ſeen, called the Abby; but the Monaſtery is wholly
deſtroyed. The Monks were of the Benedictine Order,


Scylley, et


laced there is uncertain; but probably by Athelſtan, who (as ins


There was a Collegiate Church of Secular Canons here, dedicated SECT. x..
to St. Probus, before the Conqueſt, The Manor, which the Probus.


Canons had here, is called Lanbrabois in Domeſday !, erroneouſly,
tor Lan Probus, and was held by Edward the Confeſſor himſelf, fo
that it muſt have been granted to the Canons by Edward the
Confeſſor, or after him. The Church was given to the Biſhop
* and Church of Exeter, by King Henry I.“ (ſays Tanner); but
find, by Henry I's Charter m, that he only reſtored it to St. Mary,
and St. Peter's Church in Exeter, © for the abſolution of his fins,


page 433 3 Tanner, p. 69.

* In the Lincoln Taxation (20 Ed. I.) called n Monaſt. Ang. p. 516 and 1002.
Eccleſia Sti Kiorani, by Mr. Carew writ Keyran. i Tanner, p. 69.

The letter A before Chebran (whereby they * Domeſday, in Not. (b) ibid, = Tanner,
make a Saint Achebran) is no more than a pre- p. 69.
poſition in the Corniſh language, ſignifying of, ! Exon. p. 434. .
pretixed to the name of the Saint Chebran, or n Pen. T. Hawkins, Arm. Dom. de Manerio
Nevran, de Probus. :


5 G and


390


Conſtan- |


tine.


OF RELIGIOUS HOUSES


« and the good of his ſoul, together with the other Churches of
6e St, Petrock, St. Stephen, Peran, and Tohou, as free in 8
« reſpect, and quiet, as the famous Kings, his predeceſſors, app 1
« by their charters to have granted them.“ There were yoo
Prebends heren. Henry de Boliſh was made Dean by the Biſho
of Exeter, in 12580; and I find by an extra (ex Regiſt, Exon.)
that Henricus de Bollegha (doubtleſs the ſame man), by his infiru-
ment of Donation P, bearing date the 14th of Feb. 1268, grants
the perpetual Patronage of the Prebends of Probus to the Biſhop of
Exeter, and his ſucceſſors for ever. After this Henry, I have found
no mention of a Dean; but © William, Biſhop of Exeter a, ſoon
ce after gives the Church of Probus, with all its rights of preſenting
e and nominating the Prebends, and Vicar, the impropriation of the
« Tithes (a particular portion being reſerved to the Prebends), and
« every appurtenance (ſaving the rights and dues of the Vicar), to
<« the Treaſurer for the time being of the Church of Exeter, moved
e thereto, by the great expence which the faid Treaſurer was put
« to in maintaining perpetual Lamps in the Church of Exeter.”
For the better ſupport of which, eſpecially on the Feaſt of the
Dedication of the ſaid Church, the Feaſt of the Nativity, Feaſts of
St. Paul, and our Saviour's Circumciſion, this was granted by the
Biſhop, with the conſent of the Chapter. A few years after this,
viz. in 1312, Walter Stapledon, Biſhop of Exeter, eftabliſhed a
Partition of the Tithe Corn, between the Treaſurer of his Church,
and the Prebends here. In which inſtrument (called Djvifo
Garbarum) the five Prebends are named. There were alſo five
Prebends at the general ſurrender; their names were Matthew
Hull; Thomas Parker ; George Chudleigh ; Perot ; Richard
White; they had a Salary each", which in the whole amounted but
to 161. 9s. 4d. © The endowment of the Treaſurerſhip in the
« 26th of Henry VIII. was valued at 221. 10s. per ann.” And to
the Treaſurer of the Church of Exeter the Patronage of this Church
ſtill belongs.

There ſeems to have been a Religious Houſe at Conſtantine ; for
in Domeſday, Sanctus Conſtantinus habet dim. hide terre,


c gue tempore Regis Edwardi( ſcil. Confeſſoris) fuit immunts ab omni


« Servitio, poſtguam Comes (viz. de Moreton) accepit terram, ſemper


« -odardit Gildum.”


In the Linc. Taxat. but four Prebends, ſays * Regiſt. of Bronſc. Biſhop of Exeter.
Tanner, ibid. but I find five in Sir Henry r Pen. Thomas Hawkins, Armig.
Spelman's excellent copy of that Taxation in #4 Suppoſed Biſhop Brewer.
the Bodleian Library; five in 1312, twenty years r Tanner ſays but four had penſions, but this
atter the Linc, Taxat. and five alſo at the ſeems to be a miſtake.
ſuppreſlion. * Exon. p. 435.


Theie


8 * — lth hf a a


.


-


I oe re ve; 99s Sy


722


"a


* — gf


—— 5


POE AG A®


1 8


—


—— —


-


5 2 — —


a


*


— 2 *
1


3 „44
* 9
| il iy, Fall Wy U


2 1 C,,


FA


%
A
Hd 1 Are e * . * . | Fu
1 \ N* Vi i, , ' l
1


1 $4
* 1 U
1


1
1 A)
N "Wig " 3. |


yy |
wy av) ) ben "i


Lo 1 Inet 1 | 7 | of | Wop:
LINE. AM. „ Vf

e
N cle eee!


$ 42 5 IL eee


WY
wi Ti 4 }}


Nr RAR ATI ng OY. ne
9 \ mW | 1

\ \ 0 TIO * þ \ N " * 41 \
' \ 14 \ 5 i) i 85 g

” | „ qv ji * j i i Th h , U nr
4 i \ _— 5 . |

ns % MORAL: th


1105 iN k l


'


—


— 22 N hy 4 &, # - 8
n . b r eee
' ty; k l 0 0 1


, ny K N.
a qj Lets |
Wy 105 94


- -
U1h
*


0. A SIA, N 50 8


Evd ANNNTA


FC


—


2
1


Ferran nnr


nh rem 41%


,

*

52

*
off
ED
8
af


FOUNDED IN CORNWALL. 391


Theſe are all the Religious Houſes which were founded in Corn-
all before the Norman Conqueſt, that I have met with; the reſt
of more modern date, may be ſeen in the Monaſt. Angl. and Biſhop
Tanner 5, and may one time or other (as well as theſe which have
gone before) come to be more particularly conſidered, if God


FINN Ser 5 £2 ue = FINS: r wb F 2
#. i. 1 : 4 * C EO FLEE we 4 a N 6.


permit.
CHAP VI.
HIS Stone ſerves, at preſent, to hang a gate to, on the Vi- SECT. I.
b carage ground of St. Clement's near Truro. By the purity Phew


of the character, I judge it to be one of the moſt ancient Chriſtian © Ft.
ſepulchral Monuments in this county. It's inſcription is in one Ie.
line, and, if at full length, the words would be theſe following:
Imiocus Vitalis filius Torrici; there is not the leaſt deviation from
the Roman Capitals, but only that the under dexter ſtroke of the
Rin Torrici is too ſhort, and too horizontal.
"Y There is another very good argument for the great antiquity of
*F this Inſcriprion, which is, that here are two names of the perſon
FJ interred, a thing ſo common among the Romans, and ſo ſeldom
met with, during their Empire, in the Monuments of other nati-
ons, that where the character concurs, it may be looked upon as a 0
deciſive criterion of a Roman Inſcription, or at leaſt nearly bor- iv
dering upon their reign here in Britain; but this is ſtill more
confirmed by a remark, which will readily occur to the curious,
| which is, that Vitalis is actually a Roman Name; ſo that T/110c
che Prænomen is Britiſh, and the Cognomen Vitalis is Roman *, it
This Stone has at preſent a large Croſs on it in baſs relieve, which |
ancient as this, have no Croſſes, I queſtion whether the Croſs i
may not be of later date than the inſcription, and cut on the ſtone 1
in thoſe times, when it was none of the meaneſt parts of Religion
to erect Croſſes in every Church- yard, and at the meeting of high-


8 * * Pr „


ways u; but of this I am doubtful, it being a very early cuſtom ö
among the Chriſtians to bleſs and dignify their memorials with 1
the ſign of the croſs w. | ,
Pag. 70. | wick of Truro; and, after I had drawn it on the [1
See Dr. Muſgrave, of Julius Vitalis. ſpot, I muſt do them the juſtice to ſay, their co- | g


The Copy of this Inſcription was firſt ſent py was very faithful.
me by Francis Gregor, Eſq; taken at his in- Moyle, in Poſthum. Works, Vol. I. p. 187. 01
{tance by the Rev. Mr. Walker, and Mr. War- thinks, ““ that there arc ſeveral inſtances to be
:
?
|
{


98 A mile


392
SECT: U.
Plate
XXXV.
Fig. .
CiRuslus.


« A mile off (viz. from Caſtledor) is a broken Croſs,“ ſays Le
But Mr. Lhuyd, who was better acquainted with the old che, |
reads the inſcription (as publiſhed in Camden, from his pa 0
pag. 18.) Ciruſius hic jacet — Cunowori filius. The ſame e
perſon juſtly thinks the W to be an M reverſed, the W being but
lately Y introduced into the Britiſh Alphabet. This Stone IS it
corrrectly publiſhed in Camden, and alſo in Mr. Moyle's Pot.
humous Works a. In the top of it, a, there is a little trough or
pit ſunk, marked with dotted lines, fax inches long, three dee
Croſs emboſſed, of the ſhape and ſize as Plate XXXV. Fig. VII

. This Monument is called the Long-ſt *
391 e Long-ſtone. It was re-
moved, about twelve years ſince, from the four Croſs- ways, a mile
and half North of Fawy, and lies now in a ditch, about two bow
ſhots farther to the North, in the way from Fawy to Caſtledér.

Mr. Edward Lhuyd abovementioned, in a letter to Thomas
Tonkin Eſq; dated at Falmouth, Nov. 29, 1700, ſays, that this
inſcription is probably of the fifth or ſixth century. Mr. Moyle
in his letter on this inſcription, ſays b, © The letters reſemble the
«© common inſcriptions of the fourth and fifth century.“

Who this Ciruſius was, I do not pretend to ſay; perhaps, the
ſame who gave name to a little Creek, not far from this place,
called Polkerys ©, as Mr. Lhuyd conjectures; but we have the
name of Cerys in other parts of Cornwall alſo, by which it may
be concluded, that Ciruſius was a name of note among the Corniſh
Britans.

As to the name of Cunomorus, I find in Rowland d, that Kin-
warwy, ſon to Awy, a Lord of Cornwall, gave name to a Church
in Angleſea, which was built A. D. 630 e. This ſeems to be the
ſame name as Cunomorus (which, as Mr. Lhuyd rightly obſerves,
in Welſh, and ſo in Corniſh, was writ Kynvor f), and the termi-


nation Wy was aſſumed, as denoting the father Awy, from whom


he was deſcended g. If the Kynvor, mentioned by Rowland,
was the ſame as here interred, this Monument muſt be of the mid-
dle of the ſeventh century, unleſs the reputation of his ſanctity


© found in Aringhi's Roma Subterranea of #*% Mon. IIluſtr. p. 154.


« Chriſtian Monuments, with crofles engraven © Ibid. p. 189.

on them in the ſame (viz. the fourth) centu- Mr. Moyle thinks it only a flip of Mr.

« ry, and earlier.“ ; Lhuyd's pen, when he ſays it ſhould be written
* Itin. Vol. III. p. 26. in Welſh ap Kynuor, and that it ſhould be
About the year 1200, uſed firſt by the Bri-ü Kynmor; but this is a miſtake, the m, in Welth

tans, Sce Lhuyd, Archæol. Brit. p. 2:9. and Corniſh compoſition, changing uſually into
= Camd, ut ſupra, p. 18. a V. Conmor was a Royal name among the
Vol. | p. 189. ancient Scots; he was King of Inis huna-
d Lhuyd, Archæol. Brit. p. 229. « Ceaſe, Love of Conmor, ceaſe.” Fingal.
The Corniſh common people pronounnce s According to the cuſtom of the-Britans, as

it Pol-kerus, Moyle, ibid. p. 182. Ap Rice, ap Howel, now Price, and Powel.


may


WA


BEFORE THE NORMAN CONQUEST.


ax be ſuppoſed to have occaſioned the nomination of that Church,
ter his deceaſe, which might poſſibly be the caſe,
In a croft about half a mile to the North Weſt of Lanyon, in str. 111.
the pariſh of Madern, lies a Stone, called by the Cornith, Men Ju...
en inches long, one foot eight wide, and one foot ſeven deep, or t
thick.

This Stone ſtood upright, and the inſcription begins at the top
(1s moſt of our ancient Corniſh Inſcriptions do), and is to be read
downwards, quite contrary to the method of the Runick Inſcrip-
tions, which generally begin at bottom, and are to be read up-
wards Þ, The Inſcription is,


C3
2
Wa


Rialobran — Cunoval — Fil,


At length, the words would be, Nialobramus Cuncool! filins,


It is a ſepulchral Monument ſignifying that Nialobran, the ſon
of Cunoval, was buried here.

The firſt name is likely compounded of Rialo (a name taken
from Rblal, a Britiſh word, ſignifying noble), and Bran, or Bren,
in the ſame language, ſignifying a Prince, as Brennus, Brendanus, |
and the like; both names are found in the Britiſh Hiſtory i. Af- _. 0
ter the Saxon invaſion, the Britans, hard beſet, diſperſed into Corn- N
wall and Wales; others, under the conduct of Rioval, took poſſeſ- |
fon of of Armorica, in the year 454 K.

Harold, fon of Earl Godwin, had alſo a brother called Rivallo
(alias Rywalhon), whom, with his brother Blegent, he appointed
to ſucceed Griffin King of Wales, whom he had conquered |.

As to the other name; Cun, or Kyn, is a Head, metaph. a |
Prince; and Mawl (which, in compoſition, the Corniſh turn into
Vawl) ſignifies to praiſe or glorify m. q

As to it's age, nothing certain can be ſaid; but probably it is 8
one of the oldeſt Monuments we have in Cornwall. The lines '
are well kept in the writing, and the mark for contractions at the
end of cach word proper. It was written before the alphabet
was corrupted, that 1s, before the letters were joined together by
unnatural links, and the down-ſtrokes of one made to ſerve for ik
two; which corruptions crept into the Roman alphabet (uſed by 4


|
Worm. Mon. Danica. doc. Carad, Tang. by Powell, p. 2. Ry- i
: Brennin (Wallice), a King. Bren (Cor- walhon, King or Prince of Wales, tune of Ed-
nubice), ſupreme, ward the Confeſlor. %
Uther, Prim. p. 1110. m Malglocun ſcems ta have the ſame original, 1
Malmſbury, p. 83. Rualhonus the ſix- the radixcs being inverted,
icenth prince of Armorica, from Conan Meri-


sH the


394


Ser..
Plate
XXXV.
Fig. IV.
QUENA=-


TAU,


the Corniſh Britans) gradually, after the Romans went «
increaſed more and more, until the Saxon letters came i.
about Athelſtan's conqueſt. The moſt obfervable deviation from
the Roman orthography in this Monument is this, that the croſ |
ſtroke of the Roman N is not diagonal as it ſhould be, nor "Hi
quite horizontal (as it is obſerved by the learned to be under tlie
ſixth century n); wherefore I ſhould think it highly probable chat
this inſcription was made before the middle of the ſixth century
The learned E. Lhuyd, in his letter to Mr. Tonkin b, ſays, the
« reading in Britiſh [i. e. Welſh] is Rhwalhvran map Kynw
% names not uncommon in our old Welth pedigrees ; I take it
« be a thouſand years ſtanding.”

Mr. Moyle 4 thinks it moſt likely that Rialobran was a Heathen,
though for what reaſon it is not ſaid. I rather imagine it a Chri-
ſtian Monument; for, to make uſe of that gentleman's own ar—
gument , if D. M. (i. e. Dus Manibus) being wanting in Dr. Muſ—
grave's Inſcription of Julius Vitalis ſhews it plainly to be the Mo—
nument of a Chriſtian, why muſt not the omiſſion of it in Ria-
lobran be admitted as equal evidence for his religion ? If he was
a Heathen, he muſt have been of the Druid perſuaſion ; and we
know how averſe the ancient Druids were, to commit any thing
to writing. It is true, there is no croſs at the beginning of this
but there being no ſymbol of the Heathen Religion here, and the
Inſcription written in the ſame conciſe ſtyle and the ſame cha.
racer with others, which (as the following pages will ſhew! have
croſſes on them, will ſufficiently prove that this is a Chriſtian
Monument, and erected, poſſibly, before it became uſual to place
the croſs before the name.

In Barlowena bottom, as you paſs from the Church of Gulyal
to that of Maderne, in the hundred of Penwith, there is a ſtone, one
foot cight inches wide, thick one foot, long ſeven feet nine inches,


ff, and


Ho ute,


al,
ty


Quenatau S * In words at length, it would run,
dinui filius. Quenatavus Icdinui filius.


This Inſcription cannot be ſo old as either of the former, for
here are two ſorts of the letter N, the firſt true Roman, the other
as uſed in the fixth century; that is, as the Roman H. There


a See Bernard's Alphabet of the Latin lan- p Ms. penes Rev, Ed. Collins, p. 38.
guage, and Moyle, p. 198. 4 Poſthum. V/orks, p. 199. |
* See Fig. IV. TheN in Icdinui, and In- : Moyle's Works, Vol. J. p. 173.

{ci:ptions in Camden.


are


7
TE


OLE


BEFORE THE NORMAN CONQUEST. 7


ie three daſhes at the end of the name, =, inſtead of one; the fe-
cond I in filius is linked to the L, and the S is inverted. Ahe
-roſs ſtroke in the A is not ſtraight, but indented. Theſe are ar-
guments, that the Alphabet then in ule was farther departing
from the Roman exactneſs, and conſequently more diſtant from the
Roman times. Mr. Lhuyd, abovementioned, in his letter to
Mr. Painter of Boſkenna 5, thinks the perſon here interred would
have been called in Wales Kynadhav ap Ichdinow, and places the
age of this Monument near the end of the fixth century.
"In the highway leading to Helſton, near the parith church of «ror. v.
Mawgon, ſtands, what is generally called, Mawgon Croſs. "Phe v1.
Inſcription is, e


Cnegumi fil-Enans. CxEGUMI,


e


\e |


7 Oe og go neuen
8 220 A wp * 4 4 :


It is very erroneouſly publiſhed both in Camden's laſt Edit. p. 16.
and in Mr. Moyle's Poſthumous Works, The icon annexed is
the exact ſize and ſhape of the ſtone, and letters as they are
Mr. Moyle, in a letter to the Jate Sir Richard Vyvyan (May 1 2,
1715), fays, that © by the characters this muſt be above 1200
« years ſtanding;“ but by the firſt E being joined to the firſt N,
and by the ſhape of the G in Gumi, I ſhould take it to be two,
if not three centuries later; the G being the ſame as we have in
Monument t evidently of the ninth century.

Enans is ſaid by Mr. Lhuyd to be © ſtill a common name in
Wales, where this Inſcription would run thus, Knegwm ap En— *
*nian;” to which we may add, that Ennian is a Royal Name, the
ſon of Malgo, fourth King of Britany, being ſo called u.

three inches wide, was formerly a foot bridge near the late Lord Plate


Falmouth's ſeat of Worthyvale, about a mile and halt from Ca- f VI. f
melford. It was called Slaughter Bridge, and, as Tradition ſays, Carus. N
from a bloody battle fought on this ground, fatal to the great | |
King Arthur. A few years ſince, the late Lady Dowager Fal- if


mouth, ſhaping a rough kind of hill, about 100 yards off, into |
ſpiral walk removed this Stone from the place where it 3 as ||
a bridge, and, building a low piece of Maſonry for it's ſupport, |
placed it ar the foot of her improvements, where it ſtill lies in one
of the natural grots of the hill.


' Moyle's Works, Vol. I. p. 173. Knights, 4 in the conqueſt of Glamorgan, temp.
t Doniert, Wm. II. A. D. 1094. Evan probably is no 1
* Geff, M. p. 97. — lt is alſo written Emman, other than Enan, the N being liquidated as yet N
nian, and Eneon; ſee the liſt of Kings of Bri- by the Corniſh (as fee Lhuyd, Corniſh Gram- 1
lain, chapter following. Eneon, ſon of Cadi- mar) into an U, or a V, as Tyner, Tyuver, ten—
1 Lord of Dyuvet, was a Welſh nobleman, der, and Bevan (a Surname well known). Qu, an

ant to Fitz-hamon, Granville, and other non ap Evan, as Price from Ap Rice,

This


396


This Stone is taken notice of by Mr. Carew , in the followin
words: For teſtimony of the laſt battle in which Arthur —_
« killed, the old folkes thereabouts (viz. round Camelford) ſherw
« you a Stone bearing Arthur's name, though now depraved to
cc Atry.“

This Inſcription has been lately publiſhed *; but fo incotrecly


that it may be ſtill reckoned among the non-deſcripts. It is {a;4


there, that this Stone lay at the very place where King Arthur
cc received his mortal wound.“

All this about King Arthur takes it's riſe from the five laſt
letters of this Inſcription, which are by ſome thought to be Mag-
uri (quaſi magni Arthuri), and from thence others will have It,


that a ſon of Arthur was buried here ; but though hiſtory, as well


SECT. VIL


Plate
XXXVI.
Fig. I. & II.
Dori Rr.


as tradition, affirms that Arthur fought his laſt battle, in which
he was mortally wounded, near this place, yet that this Inſcripti-
on retains any thing of his name, is all a miſtake, The letters are
Roman Y, and as follows :


Catin hic jacit — filius magari


By the I in Hic being joined to the H; by the H wanting it's croſs
link, the bad line of the writing, the diſtorted leaning of the let-
ters; I conclude, that this Monument cannot be ſo ancient as the
time of Arthur, nor indeed as the foregoing *.

In the pariſh of St. Clare, about 200 paces to the Eaſtward of
Redgate, are two Monumental Stones, which ſeem to me parts of
two different Croſſes, for they have no ſuch relation to each other
as to make one conclude that they ever contributed to form one
Monument of that kind.

Fig. I. is like the Spill of a Croſs, ſeven feet fix inches high
above ground, two feet fix inches wide in the under part D, but
in the above A, two feet, and one foot thick. The fide of the
ſhaft B is adorned with ſome diaper work, conſiſting of little aſte-
riſks of two inches diameter, diſpoſed in the guincunx manner ; the
lower or pedeſtal part D is ſomewhat thicker, but has no ornament,
In the top of this Stone at C, there is part of a mortice, which,
doubtleſs, had ſome tenon fitted to, and fixed in it, in ſuch ſhape
as to form a croſs; but the making this mortice ſeems to have
ſhattered the Stone, for part of the ſhafr, which reſted on D, is clo-
ven off, and not to be found, from which defect, this is called,


"Phan 123. great M.

x Gent. Mag. June, 1715. z See the Figure in the Plate.

Y "The M in the Gent. Magazine is ſaid to a St. Machar is mentioned in Spotſw. p. 102,
be Saxon ; but this is a miſtake, it is a Roman We have a Church in Cornwall dedicated to 2


little m, placed, as frequently we find it, fora Saint of this Name.


the


vc £1" 2% Eos EE top 1 1 4 er
* S —ͤĩ Os + _
k * o ** 2 *
F
— . N *


*


e e ee


—


r


£5
d |


on '
14 j . \

1 en . 8 wy JESS 1
Wore? "WOE gt, I len
eise: 1
LO TY ATIECACt 5-008,
. . * nent TINT. Fit
i \ Mane 9 0 "F SJ.
Ye * ** Au. 1 < Ul * N. -N 4 THY | +8


NEE
D N
. }


h | y


| | Tr f MN ; Ow.
FI 19 Mee ni

Aa! l N
Wee


Gornmall _—


-


1.


» SJRECC ingcrib A by H mn. 1 gage ä


Hendl. Gallons L =


,
4


OS
P
*


C


E


0


52
Fi
REF -


EI


2


/ .
He 17


2


C


7


2


He Plate . with great —


*
1 #


75


0
«dt


1
|
n 14
1
ee


„ - þ
r


the
tut
the


IV
thi
tac
thi
In
IS
th
ei


BEFORE THE NORMAN CONQUEST.


the ber- halſfeſtone: the ground about this Stone has been much
tumbled and ſearched by digging; and in one of the hollows is
hc Stone H, Fig. II. On the top of it was a ſquare ſocket E, vo-
regularly funk, the ſides and top well ſmoothed, above which
the brim riſes into a thin edge F, that ranged round the whole ſur-
{:c, One fide G 1s diapered, as in the former Stone, and in ano-
cher ſide (furrounded with a rectangular /z/cus) is the following
Iafcription, Domert rogavit pro anima. lie Maſonry of Pig. Il.
js greatly ſuperior to that of the other; and I apprehend it might be
the Pedeſtal or Plint of a Croſs, and that the other Fig. I. was
either placed at the other end of the Grave, or was erected for ſome
ather perſon about the ſame age.

That by Doniert is meant Dungerth King of Cornwall, about
the beginning à (or rather middle) of the ninth century, drowned
in the year 872 b, or 873 ©, cannot be diſputed (the G, before an E,
being ſometimes pronounced in Britiſh as an ] conſonant, as Geo,
a giant), and alſo becauſe the letters are exactly the ſame with
thoſe on a Monument in Denbighſhire put up by Konken, King
of Powis, in the very ſame age d.

The name is a name of Dignity®; and this Donjert was not on-


y a Prince, but a man of great piety, as this ſolicitude for his ſoul


teſtifies,
Of the perſon here named there can be no reaſonable diſpute, but


the meaning of the Inſcription is doubtful. Some think, it may


ſignify that Doniert gave thoſe lands to ſome Religious Purpoſe f.
Creſſy g had the fame information, and calls this a Monument
very ancient,” with this imperfect Inſcription, © Doniert gave
« for the benefit of his ſoul, namely, certain lands :” “ this folici-
« tude,” ſays the ſame author, © he had in the time of his health,
lor at his death he could not ſhew it being unfortunately
„ drowned h; but Creſſy was mifinformed, for he ſays this Monu-
ment is at Neotſtow, or St. Neot's, whereas it is three miles and a
half diſtant, in the pariſh of St. Clare. Secondly, the regiſtering
ſuch gifts upon Stone is unuſual, and, I believe, in that age among
the Britans without precedent: beſides; the make of this Stone
evidently ſhews, that it was part of a Croſs, and why ſhould the

Others have thought that this was a place of devotion, and that
Doniert uſually prayed here for the good of his ſoul, and erected


: Lhuyd's letter to Mr. Painter, Nov. 30, e One Dungardus died King of Scotland


1700. A. D. 457. H. Boethius, Uſher, p. 67:1.
* Carew, p. 78. Camden, laſt Edit. p. 29.
* Crelly, p. 746. s Crelly, ut ſupra.
4 Lhuyd, ibid. h Ibid. ut ſupra,


5 I this


=)


— "FR 2 1
— - - > — — . —


398


this Croſs himſelf, being willing that his name and piety ſhould de-


ſcend together, in order, by ſuch an illuſtrious example, to rai.
the emulation of poſterity. But it was very uncommon, not 3
ſay vain, and unbecoming a ſincerely Religious Man, to record 1
own acts of piety in ſuch a manner; beſides, the word Rogo cann 8:
properly ſignify to pray to God.

I rather think that Doniert deſired in his life time, that a Croſs


” =
* *
5
*
L. 4 *
f ö
8
[4


might be ereQed in the place where he ſhould be interred, in order


to put people in mind to pray for his foul. So that this is, in m
opinion, a ſepulchral monument; and, if we take it in this ſenſe
the word rogavit is proper, and the whole Inſcription intelligible,
and according to the uſage of ancient times. ;

| Chriſtians generally placed a Croſs (about this time) at the be-
ginning of Inſcriptions; and, I think, part of one (the corner of
the Stone being here broken oft) may be ſeen in this, before the
D. When praying for the dead came into uſe, it was a general
cuſtom (as in the Catholick countries it 1s at preſent), to intreat all
comers to pray for the foul of perſons buried there; and that they
might after death have (as they thought) the benefit of frequent
prayers, ſometimes a Church or Oratory was erected i, at other
times it was only an Altar; ſometimes it was a Tomb-ſtone, that
deſired the prayers of the reader; and ſometimes a real Croſs of
Stone; and all theſe memorials were ſaid to be erected pro animd,
for the good of their ſouls, becauſe their intent was to excite the
devotion of perſons that paſſed by, in fwour of the dead.

When theſe Memorials were erected by perſons in their life-time,
commonly they were erected either by the command, or at the
deſire, of the perſon departed. When by the command or order
of the deceaſed, the word Juſſit was made uſe of; when at the de-
fire, Rogavit. |

That the Ancients erected Croſſes in the middle ages of Chri-
ſtianity, we have an inſtance in the Inſcription near Neath in Gla-
morganſhire, in the Church- yard of Lan Iltud vawr, where there
Stone was part of a Croſs, very likely the Pedeſtal ł, and on one
of its ſides has this Inſcription, Samſom poſuit hanc crucem pro anims


i As there was at this place, if what Mr. Hals * men's bones and aſhes were uſually put by the
ſays, in his account of Cornwall, be true. At © Britans and Romans.” Tonkin's Extracts
< the Pedeſtal of the Stone Monument of Do- from Will. Hals's Dictionary. ;
„niert, called the Half-ſtone, is yet extant a „ Once the Shaft or Pedeſtal of a Croſs.
„ vaulted and arched Chapel under ground, Camd. p. 736. Very different things; but the
* or Coftins, within which pots, or urns, dead well placed,


EUs.


BEFORE THE NORMAN CONQUEST. 399


ejus: Now the meaning of this Inſcription is (as is obſerved in
Camden, ibid.) that one Samſon erected this Croſs for his foul, that
is, that Prayers might be ſaid at this Croſs for the good of his
foul.

Of Monuments ſet up by the command of perſons for their ſouls,
we ſhall give an inſtance preſently, .

That people deſired the erection of ſuch Monuments for their
ſouls, and that Rogavit was the word uſed upon ſuch occaſions ;
we find an inſtance in Godwyn's Catalogue of the Biſhops of Lan-
daffl, where, ſpeaking of Theodoric King of Glamorganſhire's
lat battle againſt the Saxons, in which he was mortally wounded,
he has theſe words, © Having received a wound in the head which
he knew to be mortal, he haſtened back into his own country,
« that he might expire among his friends and relations, firſt de-
firing his fon {Rogato privs filio) to build a Church on that ſpot
« where he ſhould breathe his laſt (in cafe he ſhould die on the
« road), and bury him alſo there.” Here we ſee the dying 'The-
odoric only deſired the Monumental Church, and therefore it was
not Juſſo, but Rogato filio; and, in the caſe before us, I conjecture,
that Doniert requeſted, and did not command, that this Croſs
ſhould be erected, and prayers ſaid there for the good of his ſoul,
and therefore it is Rogavit, and not Juſſit. Whether the Long-ſtone
the pillar of the Croſs at the other end, or whether there was an
Oratory here (as there was erected for Theodoric abovementioned m),
and the Long-ſtone ere&ed for ſome other perſon who deſired to
be interred near Doniert, is all uncertain.

That © hanc crucem” ſhould be omitted in this Monument,
will not ſeem at all ſtrange to thoſe who are acquainted with an-
cient Monuments, which (contrary to the modern ones), were to
have as ſew words as poſſible on them. I have only further to ob-
ſerve, that this Doniert was probably reckoned among the Saints,
and was the ſame under the name of Donanwerdh mentioned by
Leland, whoſe reliques were held in great eſteem at Beckley ®,
formerly the Capital Seat of the Honor of St. Walery, Oxfordſhire,
and place of Reſidence of Richard King of the Romans and Earl
of Cornwall, and his ſon Edmund ſucceſſor to him in the Earldom |
of Cornwall. 1.

In the pariſh of St. Blaſey ſtands a high and ſlender ſtone, the scr. vil. .


— WM -
E 33 e RS > 2
: e e 4 LS. bd - *
- l adi
2


p

Rs , 1 j

form beſt known by it's icon, ſeven feet fix inches high, one foot XXxVI. |
Fig. Iil. & IV. 2

| Uſher's Prim. p. 562. St. Donanwerdh (I ſuppoſe) a Britiſh Saint, zs obo. bf
2 Ibid. p. 564 I find entered among the collections of Leland, 10


This Town of Beckley (Kenn. Par. Ant. St. Donanwerd apud Becklciam.” Collectan. F
?- 295.) had a reputation for the Reliques of MS. Tom. II. p. 369. 1


ſix :


fix inches wide, eight inches thick (Plate XXXVI. Fig. III. , d
IV.); it is publiſhed in Camden very erroneouſly, in Moyle' Work
better, but incorrectly, and in both without ſcale, and rather W
gueſs than meaſurement. 2


ſcription not to be read from the top downwards, but horizontall+
as Doniert, and therefore lefs ancient than thoſe that go before.
'There is ſuch a mixture of the Saxon writing in the letters, A R
8, but eſpecially the firſt, that I think it muff be more modern th.”
the year 900. It is the only one of theſe ancient Monuments that
has the Saxon A, ſo that it can ſcarce be leſs than 50 years below Do-
niert.

It has been judged by ſome to be the ſtone ſet up by the Sax-
ons, to ſhew how far Weſt they penetrated. What has given riſe
to this opinion 1s, that the Inſcription was never underſtood. The
late learned Mr. Ed. Lhuyd in a letter to Thomas Tonkin, Eſq;
dated November 29, 1700 n, writes, that he did not at all under-
ſtand this Inſcription”, © By a Gentleman, F. R. S. the firſt
« Inſcription (Fig. III.) was interpreted to John Hicks, Eſq; of
6 Trevithick, cit, or CIVL $0SON P, Hucuſque Saxones, ſo far came
the Saxons; but he could make nothing of that on the other
&« fide.” Now on the other fide (viz. Fig. IV.) the laſt Word is
plainly ius, which will decide this Monument to be no Trophy,
nor to have any relation to the Saxon Invaſion of Cornwall; but
before in the XXXVth Plate, repreſenting, firſt the name of the
perſon interred, and then that of his father,

The Monument is ſepulchral. The Inſcription on the South
{ide in the compartment (N“. 1.) contains the name of the perſon
interred, AlRORON q, in three lines, with a croſs before the firſt letter.
Above the Inſcription there. is a little compartment of net-work,
conſiſting of diagonal tranſverſe ſulcus's (2), and over that, a plain
rectangle (3), ſhaped out by a ſulcus (parallel to the edges of the
ſtone) which deſcends ſo far as to become footed on the aſtragal
D, projecting from the body of the ſtone about one inch, and
going round the whole. On the North fide (Fig. IV.) upon a level,
and of the ſame fize with the compartment (1), is the net-work;
above which there is a compartment anſwerable to (2) on the other
fide, which has the name of the father of Alroron in one line,
which is either VILIcI, or ULLIoI (for the ſecond letter is ſomewhat


T. T. MS. B. p. 103. q Or it may poſſibly be Alſoſon, or Cilſoſon;
© Do, in a letter to Fran. Paynter, Eſq; da- but I chuſe the former reading, becauſe the ſhape
ted November 30. 170c, recited in Moyle's of the letter, which I read R, 1s very different
Poſthum. Worke, Vol. I. p. 237. from the Saxon 8, in “ filius.“

T. T. MS; G. p. 74.


defaced).


A
'#
5
J
*
*
«4,
95
4 |
15
Fs.
15
4
U
wy


BEFORE THE NORMAN CONQUEST.


1faced), I judge it to be the former. The next line has a Croſs,
and. molt certainly, flius. The characters are much worn, and
muſt have been at firſt very barbarouſly written. Above this In-
ſcription, the rectangle, which is plain in the South front, is here
anamented with the tranſverſe chanels; fo that the ornaments of
his ſtone were purpoſely counterchanged.

[ find Euroron among the names of the Welch nobility r. But
there is reaſon to conjecture that Alroron was the ſame name as
Aldroen (or Auldran 5), of which name I find a King of Armorica,
of Britiſh deſcent, the fourth from Conan-Merodac ; and poſlibly
this Monument might be erected to the memory of ſome one called
Aldroen, but in a rough and ignorant age pronounced Alrorn, and
5 ignorantly written Alroron.

In a little meadow adjoining to the place where this ſtone now
ſtands, many human bones have been found; and I ſuſpect that this
Croſs may have been removed from thence.


In this Stone (which I accidentally met with about four miles sxcr. 1x.


Eaſt of Michel) the letters are much worn, eſpecially the ſecond ; Plate
XXXVI.
Fig. V.


but the R is the fame as in the foregoing Monument, and the line


401


worſe kept. I judge it of the ſame age as that above, and read it, Ru.


Ruani hic jacit. |

In Cornwall we have three pariſhes called Ruan, doubtleſs from
a faint of this name. This name alſo occurs among the Princes.
One Prince of this name was fon of Maglocunus, who reigned 1n
the latter end of the ſixth century. I find three Princes more of the
name of Run from the year 808, to 1020 ©; and Rouan, and Rou-
anes, is, among the Britans, a name of Dignity, and ſignifies Royal,
not improbably derived from the name by which the Britans di-
ſtinguiſhed the Roman people.


This is a flat ſtone three feet five inches long, by two feet nine SECT. X.


A on . . - Plate
inches wide. It lies at preſent a little without the church yard .


Fig. VI.


of Camborn, but I do not at all doubt that it was either in the


Church, or ſome Oratory or Chauntry near it, and ſerved as a co- Lv.


rering to an Altar there, at which it had prayers ſaid for the good
of the foul of the man whoſe name it bears. The Inſcription, ſur-


rounded with a fillet of wreath work, is as follows :
Leuiut juſit hec Altare pro anima ſua.


By the character ſo mixed with the Saxon, I judge it to be near
the ſame age with Alroron, the writing being equally bad, the letter


R exactly the ſame, and the Latin very barbarous.


Leuiut is a Corniſh name, and ſignifies pilot, or ſailor ; as may


be ſeen in the Vocabulary.


Car. Langarv. p. 183. t See Caradoc of Langarvon, Edit. Powel.
5 Ibid, Edit, Powel, p. 2.


5 R CHAP.


402


CIVIL GOVERNMENT OF CORN WALL


CH AF. AHL


Of the Princes and civil Government of Cornwall, from the earlieft Þ


Account of it to the Norman Conqueſt,


1* would be in vain to attempt a regular ſucceſſion of the Prin-

ces of this County ſince it has been taken notice of in hiſtory
All before the times of Ceſar is very uncertain. We have howe-
ver ſeveral Princes ſaid to be Kings, and at other times Dukes and
Earls of Cornwall, before Julius Ceſar invaded Britain u; but there
are great chaſms in the liſt ; by which we may ſuppoſe that Corn-
wall was ſometimes governed by it's own diſtin Princes, and at
other times governed as a Province, or part of the whole, by the
ſame Prince that ruled over the other parts of Britain; that ſome
of the Princes did nothing worthy of note, and that what was
recorded of the moſt worthy in the ſongs of the Bards has been
in a great meaſure loſt. Theſe ſeveral cauſes having concurred
to make our hiſtory defective, ſcattered memorandums are all we
can now expect; and even the truth of theſe, far from being un-
queſtionable, reſts in a great meaſure upon the fidelity of Geoffry
of Monmouth, who is ſaid by ſome to have forged them, though
by many learned and candid men to have only copied them from
Annals, and tranſlated the Records which he had the good fortune
to meet with, but (like other Records of ſuch diſtant times) labour-
ing under the misfortune of fable, and a diſturbed chronology.
Another unhappy cauſe of the defeQs of Britiſh hiſtory was the
Druid tenet of writing as little as poſſible, for whatever may be ſaid
in favour of teaching things emoriter, and tranſmitting them to


_ poſterity by oral tradition, it cannot be denied that it was very un-


fortunate for the hiſtory of thoſe times and places in which this unſo-
ciable maxim prevailed: I call it unſociable, becauſe Hiſtory unites us
to the company of our anceſtours; it is the ſcale, or Ladder, by which
we aſcend into the regions of Antiquity, and by which the actors
of the ages paſt deſcend to us; and, in proportion as Hiſtory is de-
fective, all communications are interrupted, and what has paſſed
before 1s, to poſterity, as if it had never happened.

After the Saxon invaſion, the Britans ſometimes choſe their
King from among the Princes of Wales, ſometimes from thoſe of


| f . 1
v Certum eſt (vel hae quam habemus hiſto- „ the Britans, long before the Romans ſabdued


5 . . . . = 5 8 ei
ria teſtante) Loegriam, Albaniam, Cornubi- * it, nay ſome hundreds of years before C3 itt,
* am, &c. ſuos ferè ſemper habuiile Regulos.” „ if we may k believe the Britiſh 185.“ Row.
Dr. Porwel's Epiſt, to Fleetwood.“ Cornwall, p. 171.


* a Ciltinct province of great antiquity among


Dunmo—


e 194-1 , q .
7 re 5 - . A Sari wrt IS Ya a *
2 5 n yn N 1 4 9 Wo" : FL * 9 P


BEFORE THE NORMAN CONQUEST.


Dunmonium (or Cornwall), and in after-times from thoſe of
Armorica, as being originally all of one nation, and of the blood
oval of the Britans. The prince fo elected was thenceforth called
King of the Britans, and King of Britain, though he had little
more power than commanding their armies in time of action;
and the Saxons, ſoon after they came in here, became entire maſters
of the greateſt part of Britain, the ancient Britans having only
Wales and Cornwall, to which ſometimes, upon preſſing exigen-
cies, Armorica united . The King reſided ſometimes in Wales
and ſometimes in Cornwall, according as the neceſſity of the pub-
lick weal required. But, if we may believe the Britiſh Hiſtorians,
Cornwall afforded many Kings and Princes to all Britain, long be-
fre the Saxon and even Roman conqueſt ; ſo that indeed it cannot
well be apprehended at what time we had diftin& Princes here in
Cornwall, and when we had none, without inſerting the ſucceſſion
of the Britiſh Kings. I ſhall therefore in this chapter lay before
the reader the ſeries of Kings, according to the Britiſh Hiſtorians x,
with the age of the world. Where the Britiſh Kings ceaſe (as
they did with Cadwalader about 690), I take in the Kings of
Weft Saxony, and after them the Kings of England, until the Nor-
man Conqueſt, marking down 1n each reign, what has occurred to
me relating to the Princes and affairs of Cornwall. |

For the amuſement of the curious, I begin with the reign of
Brute; not entering into the diſpute whether the account we have
of him be hiſtory or fable, but laying hold of it as the only account
we have of thoſe ancient times, and in which, it is likely, we have
ſome truth, though all be not ſoY ; neither ſhall I pretend to re-
concile the differences between our Britiſh Chronicle-writers. It
muſt ſuthce, that by comparing, and bringing things into the ſame
view, and diſpoſing them (as well as I can) in their proper periods
of time, ſome light may be gained; but dim, I own, it muſt needs
be, and unſatisfactory to the critical eye.


There were alſo ſome of the ancient Britans Powell in his edit. of Gir. Cambrenſis.


in Cumberland, who contributed to the com- Vid. Dr. Powel's Epiſt. to Serjcant Flect-


men Cauſe, what their diſtant ſituation would woode ad fin. Gir. Cambr, p. 282.— Ses alſo


permit, | Book I. Chap. VII. p. 25.
According to Harding's Chronicle, and Dc,


A CATALOGUE


[ 404 ]


A CATALOGUE of the KINGS of BRITAIN -


With the PRINCES of CORNWALL,


And the moſt important INCIDENTS relating to that Couxty |


Interſperſed according to their Order of Time.


Abbreviations in this Catalogue. G. M. Geoffry of Monmouth, —Gir. Camb. Giraldus Cambrenſis,—


H. Harding.—P. Powel.—A. M. Anno Mundi.—Not. Notes. —A. D. Anno Domini. —r. reigned, l


A.M.
2859 TIRUTUS began to reign, and reigned accord-
ing to Harding 60, to Powel 15 years.
CORINEUS came into Britain with Brute,
and choſe Cornwall for his ſhare of the kingdom.
Unde Corineia, & populus Corineienſis, ut vult
M. ix. b. & Gir. Camb. p. 241.)

2874 LOCRINUS reigned according to Harding
10, to Powel 20.

2894 GUENDOLEN reigned according to Hard-
ing and Powel 15 years. She was the daughter
of Corineus, married to Locrinus, by whom be-
ing divorced after the death of Corineus, ſhe re-
tired into Cornwall, (temp. Sam. Prophetz, Pont.
Vir. p. 6.) rais'd an army, routed and killed Lo-
crinus, got the kingdom, and when her ſon Ma-
dan was fit to rule, reſigned, andretired into Corn-
wall, which, as her paternal inheritance, ſhe had
reſerved for herſelf. P. Vir. ibi.

2909 MADAN reigned according to Harding and
Powel 40 years.

2949 MEMPRICIUS (omitted by Harding) reigned
according to Powel 20 years, when Saul was The
in Judea. G. M. f. xii.

2969 EBRAUC reigned according to Harding 60,
to Powel 40 years.

3009 BRUTUS II. (alias Greneſhylde) reigned 12

ears,

3012 . LEYLE (alias Leir) reigned 25 years. He
built Carliſle, alias Caer Leil.

3046 RUDHEDEBRAS (alias Hudibras) reigned
according to Harding 39, to Powel 29.

3085 BLADUD, who built the City of Bath,
reigned 20 years.

EIR II. (omitted by Harding) reigned ac-
cording to Powel 40 years, partly by himſelf, and
partly with Maglan and Heninus.

Heninus Duke of Cornwall, married Raguna
daughter of King Leir the ſecond, with whom
he had only one half of the Iſland, but was af-
terwards diſpoſſeſſed, and what was given with
Raguna, taken from him by King Leir, and given
to his other daughter, Cordeilla,

3141 CORDELL (alias Cordeilla) reigned five years.

3170 CUNEDAGIUS (alias Condage) reigned
with his kinſman Morgan, and alone, 33 years.

Cunedagius ſucceeded his father Heninus in the
Dutchy of Cornwall and Cambre. He took Cor-
deilla priſoner, and ſhe killing herſelf in priſon,
he and his couſin-german Morgan divided Britain
betwixt them. Morgan had all north of the Hum-
ber, Cunedagius the reſt; but a quarrel enſuing,
and Morgan being ſlain, Cunedagius became ſole
Monarch of Britain, This happened at the time
of the building of Rome. G. M. xvi.

3203 RIVEALL (alias Rivallus) reigned according
to Harding 22, to Powel 46 years.


r0 37.

F Gus the ſecond reigned according 650
to Harding 24, to Powel 7 years, in Wavie
time the Picts landing in Britain took pe.
ſeſtion of that part of the iſland now called the


„ eee tend,
Marches of England aud Scotland. Not KyMaR


S8URGUSTIUs (pacificus, ebrietati addictus 4
not. in Pow.) reigned according to Hardi 2 |


ng r
to Powel 7 years. *


SCICILIUS (alias Siſillius) reigned ; ;
014606 14, * Powel = „ 520

alias Jacobus) reigned a "
Harding * to — 28. a l ts 33

KYMAR (alias Kynmarcus, alias Kinimacus) 326.
1. — to Harding 28, to Powel 54 years, 350

GORBONIAN (alias Gorbodug) reigned ac-
cording to Harding 11, to Powel 63 years,

CLOTANE (alias Cloteius) then Duke of
Cornwall was next heir.

At this time the Kingdom was divided into
five parts, betwixt Rudac King of Wales—Clo.
tenus King of Cornwall—Pinnor King of Loe-
gria—Staterus King of Albany—Y wen or Owen


| King of Bernicia but Clotane dying after a


reign (reckoned by Harding) of ten years, Mul-
mutius his fon overcame the reſt, and became
ſole King of Britain. Not. in Powel.


DUNWALLO MODUNCIUS (alias Mul- 3529


mutius, alias Molmutius, fil. Cloteii) reigned 40
years.


wallo Molmutius, reigned according to Harding
41, to Powel 26 years.

To theſe two princes it was propoſed, that Pe-
linus, the eldeſt, ſhould have Loegria, Cambria,
and Cornwall, and Brennus, the ſecond ſon, all
from the river Humber to Cathneſs in Scotland.
The brothers agreed, afterwards fell out, and
Brennus is forced out of all. Belinus, at peace,
makes a great Way, the whole length of the
iſland, and eſtabliſhes laws, which Gildas the hi-
ſtorian and poet turned into Latin, King Alfred
into Engliſh, Pont. Vir. pag. 10.—Harding,
pag. 26. G. M. 18.

Theſe were the two brothers, who after their
quarrel (agreeing at the intreaty of their mother
Cornuenna) went afterwards, ſubdued great part
of Gaul, and ſacked Rome. P. Vir. p. 11. Now
betwixt this Britiſh chronology, as to the ſacking
of Rome, and that of the Roman Faſti, theie 1s


only about twenty years difference. : |
GURGWIN fon of Belinus (alias Gurgwin- 3596


tus Barbtrucus) reigned according to Harding


30, according to Powel 19 years.
GUYTELIN BATRUS reigned according 3014


to Harding 10, to Powel 27 years; (fu. an n


P. V. Ponticus Vir 4 4


341


BELINUS and BRENNUS, ſons of Dun- 3574


3701


10 [ 405 ]


7 KYMAR the ſecond reigned according to
| ps! Harding 21, to Powel three years.
N. DANIUS (alias Elanius) reigned according
5 pl to Harding 10, to Powel eight years.
MORVYLE (alias Morindus) reigned ac-
cording to Harding 17, to Powel eight years,
in GORBONIAN, his eldeſt ſon, reigned 10


rs.
66 g THEGAl. his ſecond brother (alias Ar-
; gallo) reigned one year, and was depoſed, Hard-


ing, pag- 31.

65 a5 FUR the third brother, (alias Elidu-
rus, alias Heliodorus Pius) reigned according to
Harding five, to Powel three years.

ARTHEGAL the ſecond time being ad-

*” vanced to the throne, reigned 10 years.

„ ELEDOUR (alias Elidurus Pius) coming
| again to the throne, reigned according to Hard-
ing 13 years, to Powel one. : :
goo JUGEN (alias Vigenius, alias Ingenius, alias
Oenus) and Peredour (alias Peredurus) reigned
jointly, according to Harding ſeven, to Powel

eight years.

Then PEREDOUR reigned alone four years,
according to Harding.

Then ELEDOUR abovementioned came a
third time to the Crown, and reigned according
to Harding 10, to Powel four years.

From this place Dr. Powel reckons only the
names of the Kings, but not the years they reign-
ed; imagining, as I gueſs, that the computation of
the following chromicle was more ſuſpicious, and
more irreconcilable than the former; but ſays,
that they were 33 Kings, and reigned, all toge-
= ther, 185 years. Belinus Magnus was the 35th

| King; and in the following Catalogue Hardin
352 S g
, makes the years 186, the Kings 33, as Powel;


| but in the number from Porrex to Capoirus there
3514 are 24 Kings; 15 of them only reigned but one
year each ; and the whole 24 reigned 57 years.
| — This is ſomewhat unlikely.
 GORBONIAN 3» (alias Reſus Gorboniani
hl.) reigned ten. |
MORGAN (fil. Archigallonis) fourteen.
EMMAN (alias Emerianus, alias Anianus
alias Eneon) Morgani frater, ſeven.
IVAL, alias Idvallo, alias Edoallus, fil. Oeni,
20.
RIMO, alias Runo, fil. Pereduri, 16.
GERENNES, alias Geruntius, Eliduri fl.
20. CATELLUS, fil Geruntii, 10.
COYLE, alias Coyllus, alias Coelus, 20.—
PORREX, 58.
CHERYN, alias Cherimus, one. —FUL-
GEN, fil. Cherini, one. |
ELDRED, alias Eldadus, fil. Cherini, one.—
ANDRAGIUS 3» fil. Cherini, one.
| URYAN, fil. Androgei, 3. — ELIUDE,
alias Elvidius, 5.
3596 DEDANICUS, alias Dedacus, alias Cledau-
on dus, reigned 5.


DE'TENUS, alias Clotenus, 2.


3614 GURGUNTIUS, alias Gurgineus, 2.
zs, alize Meiriaunus, 2. BLE-
oy
650 CAPPE, alias Caphus, 2.—OWEN, 2.—


SCISILLIUS ze, 2.


BLEDUD 2%, alias Blegabridus, alias Ble-
Joredus, 10. |


|


ARCHYVAL, alias Archemaillus, 2. EL-
DOL, alias Aido, 2.

REDON, alias Redion, 2.—-REDRIKE,
alias Rothericus, 2.

SAMUEL, alias Peniſel.—PIRRE, alias Pir,
and Pyrrhus, 2.

PENEYSEIT., 2.—-CAPRE, alias Capoirus, 2.

ELYNGUELLUS, alias Gligueilus, alias
Gilguellus, fil. Gapoiri, 7.

HELY, alias Bely, reigned according to Hard-
ing 60, to Geoffry of Monmouth 4o years.
The Britans call him Beli Mawr, that is, Beli,
or Belinus the Great; and the Welſh Bards, in
tracing all Genealogies, have nothing more to
do, than to riſe as high as this Belinus the Great,
becauſe thence (as Dr. Powel ſays, Not. on
Girald. Camb. pag. 246.) quite up toEncas, the
pedigree of the Britans is ſufficiently known
and allowed, Henry VII. ſent into Wales pur-
poſely -to enquire into the pedigree of Owen
Tudor his Grandfather, and it was traced up to
this Belin the Great, and no higher; a copy of
which pedigree Powel was then poſſeſſed of. (ibid.)

LUDUS, ſon of Belin the Great, reigned ac-
cording to Harding 40, to Powel 11 years.

CASSIBELAN (alias Caſſivellaunus, Ludi
frater) reigned according to Harding 33, to Pow-
el 15 years. 5

In this reign Jul. Ceſar, invading Britain, made
it tributary to the Roman Empire, Here let us
pauſe a little, and weigh the imperfections of this
Britiſh Chronology, and, perhaps, we may find
it come nearer to the Computations of the modern
Chronologers (who, learned as they are, all dif-
fer from each other) than is generally imagined,

The deſtruction of Troy, according to Mar-


A. M.


3895


3908


ſhall's tables, was before Chriſt, 1184; out of


which take 69 years, at which time Brutus, great
Grandſon to Encas, came into Britain, 1115
years before Chriſt ; Eli had been judge of Iſracl
then 18 years; for Eli was born A. M. (accord-
ing to Archbiſhop Uſher's Annals, pag. 45.)
2790, and judged Iſrael 40 years, dying at the
age of 98; conſequently he was 58 years old
when his Magiſtracy began, and the 18th year
thereof muſt have been the 76th year of his age,
which added to 2790 (the year of his birth)
makes 2866. Now according to Abp. Uſher
(Annals, p. 1.) the vulgar Chriſtian Era is A.
M. 4004, cut of which deduct 2866, and Brute
will have come into Britain 1138 years before the
birth of Chriſt.

Let us ſee now how the Chronicles of theſe
Britiſh Kings agree with this computation. From
Brutus's firſt year of reigning in Britain to the
33d year of Caſſibelan, Harding's Chronicle
makes in all 1003. 1003

To this add 20 years for the reign of
Mempricius omitted by Harding, but by
G. M. ſaid to be torn in pieces by Wolves
in the 20th year of his reign. — oo20

To this add what Leir the 2d, Maglan,
Heninus and Arthegal reigned, not men-
tioned by Harding, but by Dr. Powel reck-
oned 37 years.

Julius Ceſar came into Britain 50 years
before the birth of Chriſt, - Suppoſe this to
be in the latter end of the reign of Caſſibe-
lan, for he had made his two ſons one King

3 : of


0037


-


A.M.


of Cornwall, the other King of Kent, be-
fore Ceſar's coming, and muſt therefore
have been advanced in years; place this
therefore in the 25th year of Caſſibelan, for
about ſeven years after he died, ſays Pont.
Vir. (pag. 26.) from which time there be-
ing 50 years to the birth of our Saviour,
and eight of them reckoned above in the 33
years, there remains according to Harding


42 years. — —


0042

According to H. Chron. from Brute's com- 6
ing into Britain to the birth of Chriſt, ; cos

According to the vulgar computation from

the 18th year of Eli's Rule, in which | 1138

Brute came in, to the birth of Chriſt.

Difference 36 years according to Harding.

Difference 38 —— according to Powel.

« Caſſibelan had two ſons ; to the firſt, called
© Androgeus, he gave Kent, and the Province of
ce the Trinobantes; to the ſecond, called Theo-
& mantius, he gave the Dukedom of Cornwall,
te reſerving the imperial Diadem to himſelf.”

TENANTIUS, alias Theomantius, ſon of
Lud, reigned according to Harding 17; to Powel
22 years.

HEOMANTIUS was Duke of Cornwall
when Ceſar came, (Pont. Vir. 17.) © but Dr.
« Powel ſays, (ibid.) that he was ſon of Lud;”
and Ceſar ſays, one Imanuentius King of the Tri-
nobantes was killed by Caſſibelan; and his ſon
Mandubratius came over to Ceſar's party, and
was by him made King of the Trinobantes in
oppoſition to Caſſibelan. De Bell. Gall. lib. v.
3944 CYMBELINE, alias Cunobelin, reigned ac-

cording to Harding and Geoffry of Mounmouth
to, to Powel 29 years.
In the 22d year of this King, Jeſus Chriſt
was born in Judea. (Powel, ibid.)
His name ſignifies King Belin, which adds
ſome proof to Belinus being King of Britain be-
AD fore, A. M. 3574; and again 3890. He is ſaid

to be ſon of I heomantius. Pont. Vir. 26.

7 GUIDERIUS, eldeſt ſon of Cunobelin, made
great reſiſtance againſt the invaſion of Claudius
Ceſar, but was treacherouſly lain by Hammo,
Pont. V. p. 26. He reigned according to Hard-
ing 24, to Powel 28.

AGRESTES (the Arviragus of Geoffry of
Monmouth, and Powel, ſuppoſed the Praſuta-
gus of Tacitus, alias CaraQtacus, the Cateracus,
alias Caradocus, of Hum. Lhuyd) reigned ac-
cording to H. 64, to P. 28 years,

4 This Arviragus, ſecond ſon of Cunobelin,
cc after much bloodſhed, makes peace with Clau-
ce dius, who by his aſſiſtance ſubdues the Orca-
d des, and the Iſlands adjoining to the Roman
ce province in Britain.“ [ ſcil. Loegria] Pont.
Vir. pag. 28.

But in fact the Orcades were never diſcovered
by the Romans till the 6th year of Agricola's
command, many years after this. See of the
Rom. Conqueſt, before, p. 340 ; and Stillingfleet
rg no ſuch King as Arviragus till Domitian.
ibid. 34.

In this reign, viz. A. D. 17. Joſeph of Arima-
thea is ſaid to have come into Britain, and to have
had Glaſtonbury, then called Mewtryn, given to
him and his 14 companions, Hard. f. 40, Nen-
nius 42, and Mewynus 44; a forgery of the


3921


[ 406 ]


Monks of Glaſtonbury, A.


Antiq. Brit. chap. i. s Stillingfleer in his

In his time, according to Po
man Legati in the following e e | 1 rg
tius.— P. Oſtorius Scapula.— A. Didi 8 1 D
—Paulinus Suetonius.—Petronius T Kat ang 1
—Trebellius Maxi 2 ˖ urpilianus, x

us Maximus;—VeQtius Vol ,
Julius Frontinus. ——
I. muſt _— be noted that t
ings of Britain, Kings o
were, indeed, ſubjects to hs 3 —
1 ſuffered to enjoy the title of Kin n
; e Maurius, alias Mars Ma 8
nius ayricus, reigned a Res
63, to Pound 52. l allt to Hay

In this reign, Julius Agricola was Roman Le
= N — 4 and his 5th year ſailing row
the Land's End probably c wed Coro
See Book IV. = Hr FE Oey ond,

This King Marius is faid by Harding, pa-

"yp ing, pag.
2 — — 2 been ſomewhat informed of the Faith.

COYLUS (Coillus, alias Cotlus) the
the foregoing King, ſucceeded and reigned ac-
cording to Hard. 13, to Powel 40 years,

He was inſtructed ſomewhat in the Chriſtian
F —— fully, fays Hard. pag. 43.

» fon of Cotlus, reigned accordine
to Hard. 54, to Powel, 43. 1 5

He, firſt of all the Kings of Britain, embraced
the Chriſtian Relgion, according to Powel, A. D.

177; but, according to the Savillan Faſti, betwixt 330
the years 173 and 176.

He was baptized A. D. 190, 1* Eleuth. Papz;
founded Archbiſhopricks and Biſhopricks, in the
room of three Archiflamens, and 28 Flamens,

H. 43, Pont. Vir. 31.

The Archbiſhop of York in his Province had
all North of Humber. Archbiſhop of London
had Loegria and Cornubia ; Archbiſhop of Ca-
erleon, Wales. Ibid. i

This ſtory is much diſputed, and juſtly as to 3
the Flamens. Lucius died without Children. |
Pont. Vir. 32. ſays, he died in 158, and was bu-
ried at Gloceſter. That there was ſuch a perſon,
with Royal authority in ſome parts of Britain, a
Chriſtian, and promoter of Chriſtianity, . q
proved from the concurrence of authors, and
from two Coins mentioned by Archbiſhop Ulher,
one ſilver, and the other gold, the image of a
King on them, and Croſs, the Letters Lvc. a,
far as they could be diſcerned. Stillingfl. ibid.
pag. 39- conjectures him to be King only in Surry
and Suſſex; but theſe bounds are rather too nat-
row: though to think that he had ſo much influ-
ence as to change the whole ſtate of religion
throughout the Iſland, is on the other hand al-
lowing him more power than hiſtory will warrant.

In his time, the Roman Legates were Cn. T re-
bellius,—Julius Capitolinus.—Pertinax, —Clod.
Albinus. |

SEVERUS, Roman Emperor, (deſcended 207
from Androgeus, eldeſt ſon of Lud, ſays Hard.

p. 44.) was in Britain four years, and died in the
5th, viz. A. D. 212.

BASSIANUS CARACALLA, called allo 211
Antoninus, reigned according to H. 7, to P. 6
years.


CARENCE, alias Carauſius, reigned accord- 219
ing to H. 4, to P. 7 years.
ing to H. 4, to F. 7 year ALEC-


heſe Princes, cal- x


d.


ſon of 125 5


—


5


„n TIT Oy gee
8 28 „0 2 * NN 0
* 1 ood : wo}


ALECTOR, alias Alectus, reigned accord-


225 ing to Hard. 3, to Powel 7 years.


2


339


350


300


383


—


About this time one Lyr was a great Lord, or
Duke in Cornwall; and the Britans, enraged at
the death of Carauſius, flain by Alectus, made
Aſclepiodotus Duke of Cornwall, (perhaps the
{on of Lyr) their King; (Pont. Vir. pag. 34.)
and he reigned according to H. 10, to P. 30
years, and was killed by Coelus Duke of Col-
cheſter, who ſucceeded him in the throne A. D.
262, and x. according to H. 11, to P. 27 years.

N. B. Carauſius was not killed by Alectus till
the year 293-4. (ſee Speed, 151, &c.) and Aſ-
clepiodotus ſerved under Conſtantius Chlorus,
who came into Britain on that occaſion, ſo that
Aſclepiodotus could not begin his reign over the
Britans till 293, and he is therefore placed much
too early by the Britiſh Hiſtorians,

CONSTANTIUS CHLORUS CESAR, r.
according to Harding 15, to Powel 17 years
he was ſent into Britain to reduce the rebels
there; upon Coelus's ſubmiſſion, takes hoſtages,
names the tributes to be paid by the Britans, and
married Helena daughter of Coelus, by whom
he had Conſtantine the Great ; who being but
16 years old when his father died in Britain, ſuc-
ceeded him, and reigned here, till, being ſoli-
cited to ſet up for Roman Emperour, he aſſumed
the Purple, conquered the Tyrant Maxentius,
and fixed himſelf in the imperial throne.

When Conſtantine left Britain, Octavius King
of North Wales (called Duke of Cornwall in
Heylin's Help to Hiſtory, pag. 15, and by Row-
land reckoned ſo, A. D. 330.) rebelled againſt
the Roman Proconſuls appointed by Conſtantine,
and, having lain them, made himſelf King of
Britain; is diſpoſſeſſed by Trahern brother of
Coelus abovementioned, ſent for that purpoſe
into Britain; but Trahern being treacherouſly
murdered, Octavius regained the throne,

SOLOMON * (perhaps the ſon of Aſclepio-
dotus abovementioned) was Duke of Cornwall
about the year 350. He was father of St, K-bius,
who died in Angleſea, A. D. 369. Uſher's Prim.
pag. 786. and ibid. 1086, 1087.

About this time Caradocus, ſon of Lewellyn,
who was Uncle to Helena the mother of the
Emperor Conſtantine, and by him advanced in
the rank of a Roman Senator, was King of
Cornwall; and Octavius King of Britain, hav-
ing only one daughter, Helen, Caradocus adviſed
the Nation to ſend to Rome, and invite one of
the moſt noble Romans to come and marry her,
and ſucceed her father, Conan Meriadoc, then
King of South Wales, nephew of Octavius,
thinking to ſucceed his Uncle, oppoſes this mo-
tion ; but Caradoc ſending his ſon Mauritius to
Rome to propoſe it to Maximus, alias Maximian,
lon of Trahern, (Hard. pag. 51.) he accepts
the terms, Pont. Vir. 36, and Powel's Note, ibid.

MAXIMIAN, alias Maximus Tyrannus, r.
according to H. 34, to Powel 5 years.

Maximus, being reconciled to Conan Meria-
coc, conquers great part of Gaul, plants 30000
Britiſh Soldiers in Armorica and makes Conan
King of them; from whom Armorica (as Pont.

1r, chimerically, pag. 39.) received the name
of Little Britain. This Maximus is ſaid to have


* 4 Coriniz Regulus,” ——Lel. de Scr. Britan. p. 65.


[ 407 ] A.D.


depopulated Britain, and left it expoſed to the
incurſions of the Picts (ibid. 41.) All ground-
leſs ! The Britans had not Armorica till a long
while after this. See before, pag. 39. and Stillingſl.
Antiq. Brit. pag. 291. f

DIO NOT Us ſucceeded his brother Caradoc,
and was Duke of Cornwall, A. D. 383. (Matt.
Weſtm.—Carew, p. 97.) He is ſaid tabulouſly
to have ſent 11000 Noble Virgins (at the in-
ſtance of Conan Meriadoc) and bo of inferi-
our rank, to people Maximus's new Colony ot
Britans in Armorica, but all diſperſed, drowned,
or taken priſoners by the Barbarians. Pont. Wir.
40, 41. Hard. 153.

GRACIAN, ſurnamed Funarius, alias Grati-
anus Municeps, was General in Britain, accord-
ing to Powel, four years. He was father to Va-
lentinian the Emperor, Camd. p. xcvit. There
happened then an Iuterregnum, during which 1
find Melianus Duke of Cornwall, father to St.
Melor, who ſuffered Martyrdom, A. D. 411.
Jan. 3.— Uſh. Prim. p. 451. Capgrave places
this Martyrdom on the Kalends of October, thar

ear.

CONSTANTINE, ſon of Solomon, King 433
of Armorica, according to Rowland, and bro—
ther of Aldroen, afterwards King of the ſame
country, reigned 10 years,

CONSTANS, eldeſt fon of Conſtantine, r. 443
according to Hard, one, to Powel three years.

VORTIGERN, of Royal Parentage, was Earl 446
of Cornwall. [Speed, p. 264, &c.] and thence
elected King of Britain, betwixt the years 430
and 452. He called in the Saxons, reigned ac-
cording to H. 18, to P. 8 years, and was then
depoſed.

VORTIMER, fon of Vortigern, ſucceeding, 464
reigned according to Powel 7 years, and, as ſome
ſay, was depoſed, as others, killed.

THEODORIC, King of Cornwall, about
the year 460, put to death St, Guigner, and his
company from Ireland. Uſher's Prim. 869, p.
1113. He wasa Heathen, and by his being ap-
pointed King (after Vortigern was elected to the
throne of Britain) it appears that whoever ap-
pointed him (whether Vortigern or the Nobles of
Cornwall) could not have the intereſt of Chriſti-
anity much at heart. His ſubjects alſo were
Heathens ; for he put to death the Iriſh Saints,
leſt they might turn away his ſubjects from their
old religion. Uſh. ib.

VORTIMER being dead, Vortigern again 471
aſcends the throne, and f. according to P. g years.

AURELIUS AMBROSIUS, ſecond ſon of 481
Conſtantine abovementioned, [as Hard. 58.] r.
according to Harding, 13, to Powel 19 years.

He is fabled to have erected Stonehenge (cal-
led the Stone Hengles, by Harding) at the ad-
viceof Merlyn, as a ſepulchral monument for the
Britiſh Lords, there treacherouſly ſlain by Hengiſt,
and to have been buried there himſelf. Hard. 59,

About this time Gorlois was Duke of Coru-
wall, and lived at Tindagel Caſtle,

UTER PENDRAGON, third fon of Con-
ſtantine, reigned according to Hard. 13, to P. 16

ears, He was famous for his ſtrength and va-
lour, died A. D. 516. and was buried (as Hard-
ing ſays, p. 79.) at Stonehenge.

ARTHUR reigned 26 years. This Prince 516
having ſucceded his nominal father, Gorlois, in

the


©Y,\
599


599


—— — f — —


— —
= _—_ 2


— —


—


A. D.


542


Cornwall as Uſher thinks, id. p. 537. He is |


[ 498 ]


the Kingdom of Dunmonium (by the Britiſh
Hiſtorians always, though prematurely, called
Cornwall), as Duke of Cornwall, is faid to have
affiſted greatly Aur. Ambroſius againſt the Sax -
ons. [Rapin, pag. 34-] He ſucceeded Uter Pen-
dragon (as ſome think his real father) in the
year 516, He is ſaid to have been born at Tin-
dagel Caſtle in Cornwall ; and in the Country
near that place, every thing that is grand, un-
common, or inexplicable, is attributed to this
Arthur. Here we have his Hall, his Bed, his
Way to Church, and the like; which things may
ſtrengthen the Tradition, and ſerve to aſſure us,
that there was ſuch a perſon ; and the Tomb-
ſtone found in Glaſtonbury Church, even though
ſuppoſititious, will confirm the tradition that there
was ſuch a famous Prince, or the monks would


never have attempted ſuch a forgery in favour of |


the Dignity and Antiquity of their Monaſtery.
The Inſcription may appear to ſome to be more
modern than the Interrment of King Arthur; be
it ſo, it may not however impeach the matter of
fact of Arthur's being buried here; for, from
the conſtant Traditions, and perhaps Regiſters
of the houſe, it appearing that K. Arthur was
buried in ſuch a place, it is not unlikely but, in
ſome after-time, when diſputes ran high about
Relicks, and the fame of Arthur was more and
more celebrated, it was thought no part of de-
ceit, to aſcertain the Tradition, and appropriate
the honour of ſuch Remains to the Abby of
Glaſtonbury, by recording that diſtinguiſhed name
in the ſtone found there. The Inſcription may
be ſeen in Camden's laſt Edit. Vol. I. pag. 80.
See Stillingfleet's Antiq. Eccleſ. Brit. cap. 1.
In ſhort, there was certainly ſuch a perſon ; but
the year when born, whether the ſon of Gorlois
or of Uter, or the ſame perſon as Uter, is not
agreed. Another thing of him may be aſſerted
without doubt, that he was a valiant Warriour,
and true Chriſtian; but his real actions, great as
they were, cannot now be ſeparated from his
falſe and ſuppoſititious ones, ſo intimately are they
mixed with fable. Merlin, in his Propheſies, calls


him the Corniſh Boar (aper Cornubie) becauſe


born in maritim caſtro Tintagel.
p. 518.

Arthur being advanced to the Crown of Bri-
tain, his half brother [as Harding ſays, p. 77,
79.] Capor, who muſt therefore have been fon
of Gorlois by Igerna before Arthur (as Hard.
thinks p. 63.) was made Duke, and (after many
great actions in war, under the command of Ar-
thur) ſtiled King of Cornwall; he is by ſome
thought the ſon of Aur. Ambrofius. The Bri-
tiſh Hiſtory in Rowland fays, that Uter Pendra-
gon made Cador Duke of Cornwall; if ſo,
Arthur, as Duke of Cornwall, could not have
been ſo early upon the ſtage as Rapin ſays above.

About this time Indualis, ſurnamed the White
{Candidus], was Domnonenſis Patriæ magna ex
parte dux nobiliſſimus. Uſher, Prim. pag. 558.
In Arthur's time, Gereint ap Erbyn, Admiral of
the Britiſh Fleet, Nobleman of Cornwall, was
killed at Longborth.

CONSTANTINE, fon of Cador, reigned 4
years; he was made King of Cornwall by King
Arthur, and by Geoffry of Monmouth is reck-
oned King of Britain, but was only King of


Ulſh, Prim.
*


ſaid by Creſſy, p. 288, to har
Ta en, turned Monk, A. Gy. 0 0
his converſion in the Ulton. Annals? 3 1. x
in the year 588. Uſh. ibid. pag, 1148 ; Large
is ſaid to have died in 890. Uſher, ibid Perh 8
he might be elected King of the Britans in 1
at the death of Arthur; and in thoſe *:
ous times depoſed after four years, and then 8
tired into his hereditary country of Cornwall.
where Gildas's Epiſtle ſound him in
583, and made ſuch an impreſſion on
he turned Monk, This will reconcil
accounts of this Prince,

He is ſuppoſed to have ſuffered Martyrdom,
and is therefore reckoned a Saint, We have 3
Church dedicated to him, in the gift of the
Church of Exeter; and the Pariſh- feaſt is on the
neareſt Sunday to the 11th of March, accordir
to the Martyrology cited by Uſher. Prim. 541.
„He was called by the Britans Cyſtennin Go-
* ronawg” [i. e. the Corniſh Conſtantine, as
Rowland ſays, becauſe he was the laſt Kino of
Britain of the Corniſh Family]; “ and his ue
{© is ſaid to have continued Dukes of Cornwall
% long time.” Rowland, pag. 170. He is ſaid
to have been buried at Stonehenge. Hard, 79,
Uſh. ibid. 541.

AURELIUS CONANUS (nepos Conſtan-
tini) reigned according to Hard. 3, to Powel 2
years, He is ſuppoſed to have been King of
Powis, or ſome other Province in Wales (Uſh.
ib. 537.) ; by ſome King of Cornwall after Con-
ſtantine's being killed by him,

VORTEPER [& Vortiporius King of De-
metia, Uſh. 537.] reigned according to Hard,
7, to Powel 4 years.

TENDURUS was King of Cornwall when
St. Petrock came laſt to viſit the Corniſh Britans,
about the middle of the 6th century, A. D. 557.
Uſh. ib. 1141.

MALGO, alias Maglocunus, King of Vene-
dotia. Uſh. ib. 537. reigned according to Hard,
22, to Powel 5 years.

GERENNIUS was King of Cornwall about
the year, according to Powel, 585, to Uſher,
[pag. 1150.] 589, who [pag. 559. ] thinks him
ſucceſſor to Conſtantine, to whom he was grand-
ſon ; he lived at Dingerein [i. e. the fort of
Gerennius], which, moſt likely, was ſomewhere
near the Church called from this Prince (as tis
ſuppoſed) Gerrans, and gave name to the har-
bour, thence called Dingerein port. Uſh. 560.
When the yellow plague raged, even to the de-
populating South Wales, and among the reſt had
carried off King Maglocun, Theliaus, then Bi-
ſhop of Landaff, with ſome ſuffragan biſhops,
and ſeveral attendants, came into Cornwall, and
was there kindly entertained by Gerennius. From
thence St. Theliaus went into Armorica, and af-
ter ſtaying there ſeven years and ſeven months,
being upon his return to his own country, viſit-
ed Gerennius again, found him dying, and gave
him the Sacrament; and then proceeded to Lan-
daff. {Uſh. 560.] This Gerennius is thought
to be the perſon mentioned before, and celebrated
in a particular Ode called Cowydd Gereint ap
Erbyn, by Lowarch Hen, a Britifh Prince and
Poet, who flouriſhed about that time, [Rowland
Mon. 187. ] Mr. Lhuyd, in his Arch. Brit. pag-
260. gives us the following account of this jog


the year
him that
e the two


5b$ f.
540 P.


548 b.


F


580 P,


0 K


A0.


Wl
4 ;$


Sd
| 5 1D, ; [ 409 ] A, D.
; ee In Epicædio Geruntii docet [ſcil. Lhywarx | within the bounds of his own inheritance, [ Bp.
« Hen. ] cujus filius fuerit, et ut ſupra,” (viz. | Stillingfleet, however, queſtions whether there
pag. 240, col. 1.) „ innuimus, locum ubi oc- | was ever ſuch an Abbot as Worgrez *; but 1
« ciderit deſignat, pugna fortaſſis navali, nam in | cannot underſtand for what reaſon.
« portu Lhongborth dicto peremptum refert. CADVAN reigned according to Hard. 13, to 603 H.
einde Arthuro tam egregium militem Long- Pow. 22 years. He reigned over the Britans, and $61 3 F.
« port# ſublatum dolet. But it muſt be noted | the Weit part of all Wales and Cornwall.
that this Gerennius King of Cornwall fell not | Hard, 85. He was great Grandſon to Malgo,
1 in battle, but died in his bed, as above; and | alias Maglocunus; for Malgo begat Ennian, who
CY ſecondly, that time will not permit them to be | begat Belin, who begat Jago, who begat Cad-
| one and the ſame perſon; for the Gerennius | van. [G. M. xcv1.
who is the Hero of this Poem was killed at CADWAL, alias Cadyallonus, ſon of Cad- c 616 H.
Longborth, in the time of King Arthur; the | van, reigned according to Harding 61, to ** P.
Poet laments that King Arthur had loſt fo ex- Powel 48.


S G44 gore? *


1 m7
4 ;$


cellent a ſoldier as Gerennius the ſon of Erbyn,
who muſt therefore have been elder than Geren-
nius King of Cornwall by many years.

CARICIS, alias Careticus, reigned according
to H. 3, to P. 2 years, over all Britain, and in
Wales and Cornwall 25 more.

At this time the Britans were, by the Saxons,
and Gormund, a King of Ireland (who came
into Britain, A. D. 590, according to Uſh. ib.
p. 1151+), driven into Wales and Cornwall, with
their King Careticus (Not. in Powel's Cata-
logue), who in Wales and Cornwall, after this


By the fate of War, Cadwallo was forced to
take ſhelter in Armorica. Brian, his Nephew,
convoked an aſſembly of his Britiſh Subjects;
they met at Exeter, and ordered all the Nobles
(univerſis Britonum proceribus) to put their towns
in a proper poſture of defence, and prepare for
the reception of their King, Cadwallo, who
would foon return with aid from Britany [G.
M. pag. xcvin.], which he accordingly did,
and became afterwards Maſter of all Britain
(excepting what the Saxons held), ibid. xc1x.
He died according to Harding, pag. 113. A.


retreat in his ſecond, year, ſeems to have reigned D. 676.
540 P. 25 years; for, according to Powel, he was not CADWALADER, fon of Cadwallo, reigned 5 676 H.
| ſucceeded till 613. according to Hard. 12, to Powel 3 years, 168 3 P.
To Gerennius ſucceeded a King of Cornwall, CADWALADER, laſt King of the Britans,
who gave the land of Glaſtonbury to the Monks | died and was buried at Rome A. D. 690. Hard.
i there, at the inſtance of Worgrez, then Abbot, | p. 96.
571K. A. D. 601. The name of this King, Uſher ſays, Here fell that moſt ancient Kingdom of the
548 Þ, they could not find out, becauſe the paper and | Britans, which, continuing from the time of Heli
| writing was decayed. Uſh. p. 1054. But Ge- | the High- Prieſt to this time, during the ſpace of
rennius dying ſeven years and a half after Malgo, | 1825 years, may be juſtly reckoned to have ex-
| who died, according to Powel, in 586, muſt | ceeded in duration all other Kingdoms of the
| fix the death of Gerennius to 593, or | as Uſher | World, Vid. Rob. Canal. Lib. ii. and Not. in |
| has placed it in p. 1150.] in 596, or a little | Powel's Catalogue. |
578 K. after, according to H. At this time J find Bel- From the Death of Belthruſius, A. D. 617, |
580 he thruſius, Bletius, or Bledericus, called Duke, | the Dukedom of Cornwall ſeems annexcd to the


Prince, and King of Cornwall. [G. M. xc111.
—Caradoc of Lhancarvan, by Wynne, p. 17,
21, 23.] He was ſent to for aid againſt the
Saxons, who had maſſacred the Monks of Ban-
gor. Now this maſſacre happened, according to
Uſher [from the Ultonian Annals, p. 1157.],
A. D. 613. He was Generaliſſimo in a conſi-
derable battle on the River Dee, in the year 617,
againſt Ethelbrith King of Northumberland,
where he won the battle, but loſt his life. G. M.
ibid.] This Prince is alſo mentioned on account
of the above battle by Nic. Trivet. [Wilk.
Conc. p. 28. and in Spelm. Con. vol. i. p. 28.]
By his living ſo near the date of the grant of
Glaſtonbury to the Monks, and no one named
betwixt Gerennius and him, I conclude him
the perſon who granted thoſe lands. Nor is it
unlikely, that the Kings of Cornwall ſhould
have power to grant theſe Lands, for as much
as it appears to have been part of their heredi-
tary dominions, which was the reaſon, that
though Arthur was wounded mortally in a battle
in Cornwall, yet was he nevertheleſs carried
E a nobili matronã quãdam ejuſdem cognata et
7 Morgani vocatà (corpus ſeil. Arthuri) eſt de-
latum, quod poſtea defunctum, in dicto Cœ-
meterio ſacro eadem procurante ſepultum.“
Uſb. Prim. 523.] to the Abby of Glaſtonbury


to be buried, as a place of the greateſt ſanctity, |


crown of Britain, for Cadvan reigned over
Cornewayle | Hard. 85.], and ſo did Cadwallo
his ſucceſſor [G. M. xcv111.], as appears by
the Aſſambly of Britans held at Exeter by his
Nephew, during his exile in Britany, and ſo pro-
bably did Cadwalader ; but, upon Cadwalader's
death, though the Britans afterwards had never
one King in common to Wales and Cornwall,
yet the firſt had ſeveral petty Princes, or Reguli,
and the latter its own Ruler, ſometimes called
King, and ſometimes Duke, as will appear in
the following remarks.


GERUNTIUS was King of Cornwall in 690


the year 690. Archbiſhop Uſher, Prim. pag.
1167. places the Epiſtle he received from Al-
delm (mentioned before, pag. 343-) in this
ear.

The addreſs of this famous Epiſtle, relating
to the Sacerdotal Tonſure, and keeping of Eat-
ter, is ſomewhat remarkable. It runs thus,
Creſly, pag. 481.

« To my glorious Lord Geruntius, King of
„the Weſtern Kingdom, whom l, as God
ee the ſearcher of hearts is my witneſs, do
« embrace with brotherly Charity, and like-
e wiſe to all God's Pricſts inhabiting Damno-
„ nia,” See.


Antiq. Brit. pag. 27.


5 M GERUN-


A. D.


GERUNTIUS, King of the Britans in Corn-
wall, was vanquiſhed by King Ina | Hunt. 193.
Creſſy, p. 522.— Sax. Chron, ad ann. 710. |; and
Ina got great glory by his wars with the Cor-
niſh. [Rapin, 8vo. Engl. p. 209. ]


730 RODERICK MOLWYNOC, Grandſon to


143


Cadwalader, perceiving that Ethelhard, King
of the Weſt Saxons, had deſtroyed Devonſhire
with fire and ſword, drew the Corniſh toge-
ther, and, upon that King's entrance into Corn-
wall, gave him battle, defeated him, and forced
him to retire with all ſpeed to his own do-
minions : this victory the Britans call Gwaeth
Heilyn from the place where this battle was
fought. [Caradoc of Lhangarvon, pag. 15, 16.]
Roderick was afterwards forced to forſake
theſe Weſtern parts, and died in North Wales,
A. D. 755. [ibid. Wynne's Hiſt, of Wales,


pag. 18.
BLEDERIC is ſaid to have been Prince of
Cornwall at this time, and to have joined Ro-
deric. [Car. lib. ii. pag. 97.—Carad. Langarv.
Edit. Powel, pag. 16. |
This year Cuthred obtained a conſiderable


753 victory over the Corniſh. [ Hunt. 196.] In


this year he obtained another victory here.
Hunt. ibid.]


755 At this time the Britans in Devonſhire and


780


Cornwall were forced out of every thing worth
notice [Wynne, p. 18. ]; but Ivor ſucceeding
his father Alan the ſecond in the Kingdom of
Britany, in this year came over into Corn-
wall to aſſiſt the Fries, by which aſſiſtance
the Corniſh recovered their country from the
Saxons, Leland [ It. Vol. VIII. ] mentions three
battles, one at Heyl in Cornwall, the ſecond
at Gardmailanc, the third at Pentun; in all
which the Britans, under the command of Ivor,
overcame the Saxons, — Lhuyd's Pref. to his
Corniſh Grammar, and Third Letter in Rowl.
Mona,

This Ivor is called the ſon of Cadwalader,
by Lel. It. Vol. VIII. Theparticulars of this
Hiſtory of Ivor will admit of ſome doubt. [See
Powel's Edit. of the Hiſtory of the Princes of
Wales, ]

About the year 766, Kynewulf had wars with
the Corniſh, for his ſucceſs in which he gave
certain lands to the Church of Wells. [Cam.
pag. 84.]

In the time of Conan, ſon of Ivor (who
both ſeem to have had the chief power in Corn-
wall), the Britans were again diſpoſleſled.[ Wynne,
ibid.} Kynewulf is ſaid to have been very vic-
torious in his wars with the Britans. [Hoveden,


pag. 235+]


787
806


824


In the third year of Brithricus, the Danes
came into Cornwall. [See before, pag. 42.]

In this year the Danes came into Cornwall,
and brought a fleet there at the invitation of the
Cornith. They joined forces, and, continuing
the war ſome time, were met at laſt by Egbert
in the year 813 | as the Sax. Chron. or 809, as
Rapin, pag. 214. ], vanquiſhed, and all Cornwall
over-run.

In the 24th of Egbert, the Corniſh and Danes
engage the Devonſhire men at Gavulford, | Sax.
Chron. ann. 284.] but were worſted ; which
being the firft battle recorded betwixt the De-


[ 410 ]


vonians and Corniſh, incline .
that the Devonian Britans Sow fab EY
part driven out of that county, and that =
remained there had at this time ſided with. he
Saxons, and that by the Devonians here .
to underſtand principally the Saxons who 5
ſettled in Devonſhire, Hunt. pag. 198. ſays 2
many thouſands fell on both ſides. © $6 lays Ho-
veden.

The Corniſh, with their auxili 2
marched Eaſtward to fight the ds tors "33
the firſt battle put Egbert to the worlt (Wa.
of Malm. pag. 20.], and the coming on of the
night was the only thing that prevented the
diſgrace of a total defeat; but in the next battle
at Hengeſdune, the Corniſh and Danes were en-
tirely overthrown.

In this year Caradocus, ſecond of that name 8

n 851
ſeems to have been King of Cornwall [G. M.
lib. v. cap. xv.]; and at this time the Corniſh
were overcome in battle at Wenbury Wicgam-
beorg by Cheorl Earl of Devonſhire. Hoveden
pag. 258. Cheorl is a Saxon name, and con-
ſequently the Saxons ruled at that time in De-
vonſhire.

ETHELBALD, King of England.

ETHELBERT, King of England.

ETHELRED, King of England. £6

ALFRED was in Cornwall in this year. $-x
[Creſſy, p. 742.] ;

DUNGARTH, or Doniert, King of Corn- 872
wall (likely the ſon of Caradocus), was drowned *
in this year, and a Croſs at his defire (or an Ora-
tory) erected where he was buried. | See in Plate
XXXVI. Fig. I. and II.]

ALFRED was in Cornwall again in this year. 892
[Sax. Chron. ]

EDRED, Duke of Damnonia, [Davene in
Hunt. | intime e companion of Alfred in his wars,
died A. D. 901. one month only before Alfred.

[ Hunt. p. 202.]

In Alfred's time, the Saxons appointing an
Earl of Devon, ſeem to have given him alſo the
title of Earl of Cornwall, though Cornwall was
not as yet ſubdued.

ALPSIUS Duke of Devon and Cornwall. 901
[I find, by a note of Mr. Hals, that this Duke
gave the manor of Cargol to the Biſhop of
Bodman.}]

The Corniſh were heaten by Edward
[Malm. pag. 25.]; and a Biſhoprick was erected
at Bodman.

ETHELSTAN conquered the Corniſh en- 936
tirely ; and, as they before claimed a right to
Devonſhire as far as — ordered, that thence-
forth the river Tamar ſhould be the Eaſtern
boundary of their country.

EADMUND, King of England. 949

EADRED, King of England. 946

ORGERIUS (alias Ordargus, Comes Dom- 959
nonienſis, Pater Elfridæ Regis Eadgari ux.)
Duke of Devon and Cornwall, was a great be-
nefactor to the abby of Taviſtock, where he 15
regarded as a founder, and lies buried. [Malmſb.
pag. 146. ] :

EADULPHUS, ſon of Ordgarus, famous for 959
his great ſtature and ſtrength of body. [Malm!. |
pag. 146.] buried at Taviſtock.


When


A.D, 4


4


4D


51


J2


0]
b


975
900


H. AMI.


When Eadgar was taking his pleaſure on the
river Dee in the year 973, and, fitting in the
tern of his boat, was rowed along by eight
Kings who were ſubjects to him, Creſſy | pag.
878. ſays (upon what authority he does not men-
tion) that Duffnal, one of thoſe Kings, was
King of Weſt Wales. — Very likely this might
de Eadulphus. 8

EDWARD the Martyr, King of England.

AYLMAR, alias Athelmar, was Earl of
Cornwall. [Monaſt. Angl. Tom. I. pag. 258. |
—See Creſly [| pag. 783. | who places him as early
as the reign of Eadgar ; but Eadulphus was living
in Edward's time [as Malmſb. ſays, pag. 146.],
and therefore outlived Eadgar. This Aylmar (by
his name ſhould be Saxon) and therefore the Royal
Blood of the Britans was either by this time
diſplaced, or had adopted Saxon names, [See
Creſſy, pag. 896. ] ; |
Q The Danes, now enemies to the Corniſh,

burnt and deſtroyed Bodman, and forced the Bi-

ſhop to St. German's.


G97 The Daniſh Fleet, ſailing round Weſt Saxony,


entered the mouth of the Severn, and ſome-
times landed and plundered North Britain | Sud-
wales, ſays Hunt. ] now and then Cornwall,
and ſometimes Devonſhire, at Weced port
(now Bydeford); and, having burnt many vil-
Jages, and killed a great number of people,
failed back again round the Land's-End, landed


— — — —— —


22 7


-
K a


*
. 4+ * 2 — 5 p wh 7
U ; 2 2
—_— -- i 3233
23 * 2 7 > 3 - 4£< a
” * '2 — 4 RT CE, on.
- GET . = FA on "FEE GR * 5
* _ — 4 .* 1 RY 25S — Pa
8 . —_ _— 2 — - * 3 e:


Horte? 32 View of


L 411


at the mouth of the river Tamar, and waſting
both ſides of the river (Cornwall, as well as
Devon) without oppoſition, till they reached
Lideford, burnt that 'I'own, and then proceeded
to Taviſtock, where the Abby, being firſt plun-
dered, underwent the ſame fate, {Hoveden,
pag. 246.
EDMUND Ironſide, King of England,
CNUTE, the Dane, King of England,
HAROULD, King of England,
HARDECNUT, King of England,
ALGAR Earl of Cornwall, A. D. 1046.
[Mon. Ang. ibid. pag. 1022.] founded the
Abby of Bruton in Somerſetſhire. | Leland,
It. Vol. V. pag. 49, & 79.] + Odda conſti-
** tutus fuit Comes ſuper Defenaſhire, Sumer-
* ſet, Dorſet, and Oter Wealas.“ [ Sax. Chr.
ad pag. 1048. ]


1016
1017
1036
1040
1040


CONDORUS, alias Cadocus, laſt Earl of 1066


Cornwall of the royal Britiſh blood (ſays Cam-
den, pag. 123.) was diſplaced by William the
Norman, to make room for his half brother
Robert Earl of Moriton. He had iſſue another
Condor, whoſe daughter and heir Agnes was
married to Reginald, baſe ſon to Henry the Firſt.
[ Carew, pag. 79.]

thers ſay, this Reginald married the daugh-
ter of William Fitz-Richard, a potent man in
Cornwall, Tonkin's notes on Carew, MS. B,


Pag. 1 50.


* Os :


—- IH» — 5 — ©.


tot,
udy


' >.44 x
— 130 %
x ” .
Ad =>»
er Ll VD.. a. — a
1 * 1 i 1 — 27
4 - 4 » 6.4 - 225
en * 2 N
. . — 1 2 aa
- » 742k. 5
*
2 > » — TY: -
F.3 "=. "4 CES — 5
„ "3 - <
>»<28 7. © ade 2
* | hae Pg * = ie; x od — . — *
_— r K. . 4
— 9 . "© * *
— - FP ,} * . *
2K — aver
— 2 —& 8


NATALL


—— ———— . . — — —


-
1 1 1
Gy
4
X
4
—
,
N
+
£.
„
\ 4
1
S
7
.
«
p
©
\
.
1 s
*
”
0
*
*
*
*
#
f
*
1
o
«
-
0
*


% tx $542 wt Y »
; * * » 7 1 *
os
-


E


W . 8
8.


R. Lhuyd obſerves, in his Preface to his Corniſh Grammar, ©« That to preſerve any old
M Language in Print is, without all Doubt, a moſt pleaſant and obliging Thing to Scho-
« Jars and Gentlemen, and altogether neceſſary in the Studies of Antiquity.”

It was in Hopes of throwing ſome Lights upon the Hiſtory of my native Country, that I under-
took the Taſk of inſpecting the few Things that remain in the Corniſh Language, and forming out
of them, as far as my Time and Reading could reach, the little Vocabulary that follows.

I am ſenſible that it is not ſo compleat as I could wiſh, the Reaſon of which may be partly owing to
the Authour, and partly to the Subject, and partly to the Materials. If the Authour had no other
Points of Antiquity to divide and ſhare his Attention, he would be more inexcuſable that it is not
more correct. Had not the Subject been diſuſed among People of Literature for fo many Apes, it
would have been eaſier compaſſed; and if the Materials had been in greater Plenty, there would have
been more Choice, and the Work might have been better executed. But the Materials were not
only few, but they were much diſperſed ; and ſo many as fell into my Hands might not probably
have come to the Share of another, and the Helps for ſuch a Work were ſtill growing fewer by Time
and Accident ; it being with Languages as with Buildings, when they are in a State of Decay, the
Ruins become every Day leſs diſtin&t, and the ſooner the Remains are traced and copied out, the
more viſible both the Plan and the Superſtructure will appear.

The ſooner therefore ſuch a Work was undertaken, the greater Likelihood there was that more of
the Language might be preſerved, than if the Attempt was deferred ; and as ſome who had a Regard
for their Country lamented, that it ſhould utterly loſe its ancient” Language, and thoſe who were
curious had a mind to underſtand ſomething of it, I found the Work was much deſired; and I was
willing to do ſomething towards reſtoring the Corniſh Language, though I might not be able to do
all that fewer Avocations would have permitted,

As incompleat as the following Vocabulary is, I am perſuaded, that it will be of ſome Uſe. In
the preſent Language of my Countrymen, there are many Words which are neither Engliſh, nor
derived from the learned Languages, and therefore thought Improprieties by Strangers, aud ridiculed
as if they had no Meaning ; but they are indeed the Remnants of their antient Language, eſteemed
equal in Purity and Age to any Language in Europe. | :

The technical Names belonging to the Arts of Mining, Huſbandry, Fiſhing, and Building, are
all in Corniſh, and much oftener uſed than the Engliſh Terms for the ſame Things. The Names of
Houſes and Manors, Promontories, Lakes, Rivers, Mountains, Towns, and Caſtles in Cornwall
(eſpecially in the Weſtern Parts), are all in ancient Corniſh, Many Families retain till their Cor-
niſh Names. To thoſe, therefore, who are earneſt to know the Meaning of what they hear and
ſee every Day, I cannot but think that the preſent Vocabulary, imperfect as it is (and as all Vo-
cabularies, perhaps, are at firſt), will be of ſome Satisfaction,

The Helps I have received, I muſt acknowledge chiefly owing to the Archzologia of the late Mr.
Edward Lhuyd, above mentioned, Keeper of the Muſeum at Oxtord, who has publiſhed a Grammar of
the Corniſh Tongue, and therein preſerved the Elements of this Language, which had otherwiſe
wholiy periſhed with him, and his Friend Mr. John Keigwyn, whowas, indeed, Mr. Lhuyd's Tutour in
this Point of Learning, and died a few Years after him. In the Comparative Vocabulary, and in other
Parts of the Archæologia, there is a great Number of Corniſh Words; moſt of which, if not all, I be-
lieve, the Reader will find in the following Vocabulary. Ihave alſo called in the Aſſiſtance of the Armo-
rick Vocabulary (publiſhed in the ſame Work); and where I met with no Radix of like Sound in the
Corniſh, I have there inſerted the Armorick Word, putting after it Ar. to note that it has ouly oc-
curred to me as yet in the Armorick, tho it may in the reading of others either be found in the
Corniſh MSS, or be of Service to explain Words which are omitted by me at preſent. Some Radix's
alſo are taken from the Welſh and Iriſh, as what may at one time or other explain Parts of the Siſ-
ter-Diale&, the Corniſh. Beſides what Mr. Lhuyd has printed, he left ſeveral MSS. behind him. and
among the reſt a Corniſh-Engliſh Vocabulary, which [in his Arch. pag. 253.] he tells us, he had
then by him, „ written about fix Years before,” that is, in the Year he was in Cornwall, viz. 1700
and that he had lately improved it with what Additions he could.” I had the favour of peruſing
all the MSS, relating to Etymology, which could be found in the Library of Sir Thomas Seabright,
Bart. where the Literary Remains of Mr. Lhuyd were thought to have been depoſited, Among them
I met with an imperfect Engliſh-Corniſh Vocabulary; and in the other ſcattered Memorandums, I
found ſeveral Corniſh Words I had not ſeen before, which in the following Work are inſerted ; but


* Arch, pag. 225, &c.
5N tho


— —


— KM —
32 oy a - — —


414 PREFACE TO THE CORN ISH YOUCABULARY:
the Corniſh-Engliſn Vocabulary was not among thoſe Papers, and therefore is ſuppoſed to be 104
and always to be regretted by the Curious, pint
| Refides Mr. Lhuyd's Works, I have been favoured > v7ith the Peruſal of a curious MS. yritten b
the late Mr. Scawen of Molinek in Cornwall; in which, firſt, there was Part of a Coruiſh Mo
called Mount Calyary, with a verbal Engliſh Tranſtation (no ſmall Help to a Beginner); and in =p
latter End, the Excellency of the Corniſh Language, and the ſeveral Reaſons of its Decay, are well ſet
forth, together with ſome Proverbs; Sentences, and other Aſſiſtances, for the better underſtandins»
and for the encotraging ſome one th endeavour to reſtore it. Mr. Scawen's MS called the Cornubric,..
nick Antiquities was alſo communicated®, I had alſo the Favour d of the My. of the late Tho, Tonkin
Eſq; in which there is a Tranſcript of the MSS. now in the Bodleian Library, in Corniſh and Engliſh,
which were copied under the Direction of the late Mr, Lhuyd, at the inſtance of Mr, Tonkin, ;


\ t f ; Who
intended to print them, with ſome Dialogues, and other Corniſh Compoſitions, contained in the


ſaid Manuſcript.

I had the Favour® of peruſing what the late William Gwavas, Eſq; (after Mr. Keigwyn, and, Mr
Lhuyd, the moſt knowing of his Age in the Corniſh Tongue) left behind him; and a few MSS f of
the late Mr. Boſon, Part of Mr. Hals's Corniſh Vocabulary, and ſome Tranſlations of ſeveral Parts
of the Holy Scripture. Laſtly, I have inſerted the Corniſh V ocabulary®, which is in the Cotton Library
London; a MS. as Mr. Lhuyd thought®, about ſeven hundred Years old; fo that, I hope, though what
follows is not compleat, it may lay a Foundation, and provoke ſome one of more Leiſure to add to it
an Engliſh-Corniſh Vocabulary, and a more exact Lift of the Words which are to be found in the
two laſt Corniſh Manuſcripts of the Bodleian Library, which, with the Grammatical and Philolovical
Collections | have made in order thereto (and ſhall readily communicate to any Perſon of Learning
who will undertake the Taſk), will recover, and may continue, as much of this dead Language as may
be uſeful to my Countrymen, and ſatisfactory to all who will not be too Scrupulous and Critical,

I ſhould here have inſerted a Contraction of Mr. Edward Lhuyd's Corniſh Grammar, as | at firſt
intended; but as the Number of Sheets, which this Work was to conſiſt of, will be more than com-
pleat without it, and as the whole Grammar is already printed by Mr. Lhuyd, to print it here would
needleſsly ſwell the preſent Work; and it is hoped that the Addition of ſeveral Chapters, and ſeveral
Copper Plates, more than were at firſt engaged for, will ſufficiently compenfate for this Omiſiion,


d By the Rev. Dr. Lyttelton, then Dean of Exeter, countenanced as that it ſhall he ſoon re-publiſhed :
now Biſhop of Carliſle, whoſe kind Aſſiſtance, in every It might not, perhaps, be unacceptable to the Studi-


thicg relating to this Work, I can never forget. ous in Britiſh Hiſtory to have that Corniſh Grammar
© By Francis Gregor, of Trewarthenik, Eq; re-printed from pag. 222, to pay. 232. viz. down to
4 From the Rev. Mr. Collins, Vicar of St. Erth. (aberh an tſhei omma), at the bottom of the firſt Co-
© From William Veale of Trevailor, Eſq; lumn. From thence there is in Mr. Lhuyd a long
From the Rev. Mr. Uſtick of St. Juſt. Digreſſion not immediately relating to the Corniſh


For an entire Tranſcript of which I am obliged to Tongue till you come to pag. 240. Col. 2. where the
the Rev. Dr. Jer. Milles, then Precentor, now Dean, of third Chapter begins—from hence to the End, pag.
the Church of Exeter. | 251. may be publiſhed together with the St. Levan

h Letter to Th. Tonkin, Eſq; in 1702-3, pen. W. B. man of Tſhei an Hor, in modern Corniſh, with the

i As Mr. Edward Lhuyd's Corniſh Grammar, Engliſh Tranſlation of it from Mr. Tonkin's Ms.
publiſhed in his Archzologia, Tit. VI. pag. 222. is pag. 177.
icarce, and little Hopes of ſeeing Etymology ſo much |


ABBREVIATIONS in the following VocaBULARY.


A. Adjective. G. Gallice. Pr. Pronoun.

Ad. Adverb. Gr. Greek. Pre. Prepoſition.
Ar. Armorick. Gw. Gwavas MS. Pri. Primitive,

B. Bochart. Heb. Hebrew. Qu. Quzre.

Baxt. Baxter's Gloſſary. id, idem. R. Rowland's Welſh.
Boſ. Boſon MS. Ir. Iriſh. S. Subſtantive.

C. Corniſh, J. T. Tregere MS. Sc. Scawen MS.
Car, Carew's Survey. L. Latin. Sing. Singulariter.
Comp. Compound. Lh. Lhuyd, Arch. [T. T. Tonkin Ms.
Cott. Cotton Vocab. LMS. Lhuyd's MS. V. Verb, |
Dav. Davies's Dict. Pa. Participle. Uſ. Uſtick MS.

f. forſitan. Pl. Plural. W. Lhuyd's Welſh.


* Y en
\ A'CORN1SH


-
"4
by
*
5
f
"I
5


e LO 8 Fs


xo aa part re e Sr ISNT 5
. s a * " 2 „


"
”
ox
3
8
y
5
*
5 8
N
. 1
f *
5


. * . FR


nr


e


1
1 A,


{ee . 7 1 , 4 2 Oe * n * at 1 , —_ 1 1
F Far FETs EX SLAIN.
\ , *
%" :


Abem, a Kiſs. Gw.


A CORNISH-ENGLISIH VOCABULARY. 415


A


Of; Leer ; and; a Prep.

A, or Conjunction, it is ei-
ther, ſebarate, or annexed,

A, prefixed to the infinitive mood
of Verbs, ſupplies the want of
the Participle of the Preſent
Tenſe; as, a debbry, eating ;
a cuſga, ſleeping.

A, as; A mia moz, as I was
eing.

A, is the ſign of the Preter and
Future Tenſes; it is alſo uſed
ſometimes, in the Preſent
Tenſe, thus, A leverſys, thou

; A nethas, thou ſpinneſ/l.

1 101g; as, My / I will
go; Ty a, thou ſhait go; Moz,
being underſtood. See more
of the uſe of this Particle be-
fore the Verb, Lhuyd's Cor-
niſh Gram. Arch. pag. 25,
20.

A, my; as, a Veſter, a Veſtrez,
my Maſter, my Miſtreſs.

A, is united tothe pronoun per-
ſonal when ſign of the Preter,
or future Tenſe, as, Am, hath
me; Ath, have thee, &c.

A, the Article, anſwers to the
Engliſh a, or an.

A, is ſometimes put before the
Subſtantive, when mi is uſed ;
as, dho a bredyr vi, to my Bro-
ther.

A, out ; a kez glaz, out af green
Cheeſe.

A, by, or with; as, a Eleth ſplan,
with Angels bright.

A, Oh; an Interjection; A Das,
0 Father! A Venen, Ah Mo-
man.

A, which, or that; a Pron. Re-
lative, as Avo, that is, or
which is.

A, if; A'm cothvaz, if thou
kneweſl me; A mennas, if thou
wilt,

A, his, or her's; as, a dhillaz, His,
or her cloaths


AB
Abaff, dizzineſs ; raſhneſs. Ar.


Aban, above; foraſmuch as; when,
ſince that; it is written Aba,
before an N.

Abardtat, an Uncle; a Father's
Brother.

Abarhmam, an Uncle; a Mother's
Brother.

Abarſtick, inſatiable.

Abat, an Abbot, Cott. Abod. W.
id.

Abec, a Cauſe. Ar.

Abell (apell, id.), far F.


Aber, a Ford; a fall of Water;


AB


of two Rivers, V. id.
Aberveth, Aberth, and Oberth,
upon ; within.

Abeſtely (abozdol, id.), Ap:/iles.
Able, whence.

Ab ſdol, an Apoſtle.

Abrans, the Eyelid. Cott. W.
Amrant.

Abys, to beſeech ; ny a bys, we
do beſeech ; wy a bys, you ſhall
beſeech.


AC


Accoyes, to aſſwage ; abate,
Ach, Iſe; Offspring ; root of a
Tree.

Acheſon (Acheſow), Guilt ; ab
Achela, to impeach ; accuſe,
Achleſs, Defence; Protection.
Acr, wile; baſe. Ar.

Achta (it. Ehtas, id.) a Pefſeſi-


on; Tnheritances.
AD


Ad (ath, id.) of; on; concerning;
thy, Cott.

Ad, aliquando otioſa particula ;
as Ny ad wra, we will make.
Cott.

Ada, to ſeed ; (C. haza.) Ar,
Adail, a Building.

Addel, lozſe Rubbiſh; Filth. W.
addail. id.

Addeuli, to worſhip. Ar.
Aden, the Leaf of a Bock. Cott.
Adhurt (adheuorth, adhiuort,
id.) from. \

Adhellar, after; behind.
Adletha, a Soldier. Cott.
Adoth, Haſte; Readineſs; Vow.
Adre, homewards.

Adro, about ; on ; upon.
Adwra, thou ſhalt endure.
Adzhan, to know ; perce:ve.


Adzhyi, within; agy, id. LMS,
AE


Ael, a broto; Aeltavon, the brow
of a River. Moreton.

Aer, a Snake; Air.

Aeran, Plumbs.

Aerva, a Defeat. See Lh. 155.


A F


Aff, I; me; war aff, on me; tis
ſuffixed to Verbs, as, allaf, /
can; dampnyaff, I condemn,—
*Tis ſuffixed alſo to Prep. as,
ragaff, for ; by me.

Aff, a Kiſs. Ar.

Aflavar, an Infant ; one that can-
not ſpeak. Ar.

Affo, ſwift ; quick, Arg


AG


Agan, eurs.

Agan honan, eur ſelves.

Agan bys, let us pray.

gan, f. the flomach of an ni -
mal; ſo the Cornith call the
ſtomach of a Pig.

Agans, with ; (a preſix).
Agary, contrary, Enemy to.
Agathyas, /eizedupon ; (a præſix.)
Agaz, your; agaz Pedn, your
Head.

Agerou (et Agheri), te open;
flretch,

Agis, you; your.

Agolan, a I hetſtone,

Agoz, agyz & guz, your, This
Pronoun poſſeſſive loſes often
the three firſt Letters, and has
the laſt annexed to the end of
another Word, as, Evos kowl,
ſup up your Broth; for evough
agoz kowl.

Agos, near; Ogaz, id.
Agowſys, ſaid; (a præfix) a
Kouz, 10 ſay.

Agris (or agreis), as, Me agreis,
I do believe; prel. t. of Crely,
hear, or believe,


Agroaſen, a Shrubb. Ar.
AH
Aha! So ha!


Ahanav, from me.

Ahanaz, from ; out of thee.
Ahanen, from us.

Ahuel, a Key.

Aho, Offipring ; Pedigree. Lh.


Al


Ai (pro A), have; as, mi ai did-
hinuys, / have promiſed. Lh.
Aidlen, a Fir Tree. Cott.
Aidhlen, id.

Ail, an Angel. Cott. Archail

Arch-angel.

Ailga, Slaughter.

Ailla, moft beautiful; pl. aluin.

LMS,

Ailne, Beauty.

Aincamheach, blemiſbed. Ir. ib,

Ainiſle, mean; low, ib.

Annaiſle, id. ib.

Ainmhidh (pl. ainmhidhe), a
Beaſt ; vulg. Corniſh, Beſtaz.
ib. |

Airos, the tern of a Ship.

Aiſe, gentle.

Aithbhear, % blame.

Aiuma, to kiſs, ib,

Aizia, to eaſe ; to leſſen; to diſ-


burthen.


AL


Alan, Breath.


a mouth of a River; a meeting


Aga, them; theirs.


Albalaſtr, a Cr9s- Bow.
Alene,


&
4
e
'
:
|
|


—


— — —


— .


416
AL


Alau, white Water Lillies.

Alemma(alebma, id.), frombence.

Alene, fron thence.

Ales, abroad; (unles, id.) ſpread,
broad. |

All, another.

Allaff, I can, ny allaff, I can't.

Allas, could; ny allas, thou
could'fl not.

Allec, Herring: Pilchards.

Alli, Advice, Counſel, Ar.

Allos, ought ; Dallos, id.

Alloys, Graef ; ing.

Ales, a 77. er vant.

Als, a Cliff; aſcent, or deſcent ;
a Shore. Cott. Alz, id. Lh.

Alſeſt, mightefl ; ti'a alſeſt, thou
mighte/l.

Alt, a Grove. Ar.

Alta, wild; Beathuige alta, wild
Beaſts.

Altrou, a Father-in-law.

Altruan, a Step- Mother.

Aluedh, a Key. Lh.

Alwed, an Incleſure.

Alyek, a Key.


AM


Cott.


Am, my; me.

Am, round about.

Am, hath me ; neb am gurek,
who hath made me.

Amal, Plenty, or Store,

Amane, a KXiß.

Amann, above; aban, id. var, id.

Amar, a Knot, or Tye. Ar,

Amas, did kiſs.

Ambodlaun, unwilling ; anbod-
laun, id.

Ambreth, ſhaking. Hals.

Amenen, Butter. Cott. Eme-
nin, id.

Amman, id. Ar.

Ameſek, a Neighbour. Ar.

Amnuid, a Beck, or Ned. LMS.

Amneidio, to becken ; gogwyddo
pen, id. viz. to bow the Head.

Amontye, to reckon.

Amplek, pleaſetb; Mar thym
amplek, it much pleaſeth me.
LMS.

Amſer, Time; Anſer, Cott. id.

Amwyn, to defend; aſſift. |


AN |


An, him, or it; Mi an guelaz,
1 ſaw him, or it; Ev an ge-
vyth, he ſhall find it.

A'n, of the; from the; the; This
Atticle is not only placed be-
tore Nouns, as, an Den, the
an, but before Pronouns ;
as, an rena, thoſe; and alſo
inſerted between a Noun and
P: onoun, as, pa an dra, what


AN


ticula, or redundant, as, pa
an cheyſon, what Accuſation ?
An, a Particle privative, as, an-
lavar, mute; without Speech ;
an coth, not known.
Anadlu, to breath; anadl, breath.
Lms. anal, id.


Anallod, before ; before that ; of
ld


old.

Anat, plain; manifefl. Ar.

Anau, an Evet, Cott.

Anav, a ſpot, or blemiſh. Cott.

Anavel, a form; ab an, & avel,
a calm,

Anbodlaun, unwilling.

Ancar, a Hermit ; it. an Anchor.
Cott. ancar, id. Lh.

Anchel, an Arm.

Ancouth, a firanger; one not
known.

Androw, Andrew.

Anedhi, of her.

Anered vur mor, à Pirate. Cott.
alias, angredar, id. |
Anethe, of them; annedhe, an-
nydha, from or concerning

them.


Aneval, a beaſt; any quadruped.
A


I,

Anfur, imprudent. Cott, without
wiſdom.

Anghel pur, unlike ; unequal.

Anghygred, hardneſs of belief.

Anglod, to blemiſh ; ſpot ; ſpoil.

Angor, an anchor.

Angov, fogetfulneſs.

Angredar mer, à Pirate.

Angus, anguiſh ; pain.

Aniak, weak ; infirm.

Anken, Greef. oy

Ankevys, 7 page See Kovys.

Ankow, Death; ancou, & an-
couyns, id.

Anlavar, mute; avlavyr, id. Lh.

Anludd, buckſome.

Annerh, Honour.

Annez, Cold.

Annodho, thereof.

Anow, a Name; pro hanou, id.
alſo a Mouth; pro ganow.

Anſer, Time.

Anſueth, @ Curſe; kymmys an-
ſueth, ſuch a Curſe ! |

Antarlick, a Play; a Comedy.

Antel, Danger. |

Antromet, Sexus. Cott.

Anvab, barren; anvabat, bar-
renneſs, Cott. |

Anuan, an Anvil.

Anvein, weak, Cott.

Anwyd, cold. Cott,

Anz (ut, & onz, & oinz),
they; a Pronoun perſonal ſuf-
fixed to denote the third
Perſon plural, as, Guelanz,


they ſee.
Anzaoue, Proſperity ; Opportu-


thing 9 where it is otioſa par- ö


nity.


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


A Oo
Ao, ripe. Ar.
Aor, Earth; Oar, id,
AP


lo, k. filius Solis ; ſcil. Apol-
pert, publickly ; openly, G.
Aperth, a Viel. 8
Apparn, an Apron.


AR
Ar, a flill Lale. Hals. Qu.


Ar, the; an artic!e before Nouns,

Ar, Land; qua, pro aor, Slaugh.
ter ; har, id. Lh. Aras, lr. id.
Arwerthel—Arwinic. Qu.
Ar-devora—Arvs6s., Harlyn.

Ar (for war), on, or upon; ar-
dour, upon the Il ater.

Ara, to cauſe; make; do; id. ac


Pang — awra, we Hall cauſe.


Araderuur, a Plauman. Cott.

Arall, another ; pl. erel, others,

Arat, a Plow; it. arad, id. Dho

Ade ow mary
rbednek, wſed; cu 0

Ardar, a 7585 ; a= a Plow-
man.

Arghans, or argan, Silver. Lh.
arhans, id. Lh,

Argila, to recoil,


{ Argraphyz, printed ; Levar ar-


graphyz.

Arha, to command.

Arhadou, Commands.

Arho, a Goad, Lh. ſtimulus, L.

Arleth, à Lord; a Chief, or
Maſfter.

Arludes, a Lady. Cott.

Arluit, @ Lord. Cott. Arluth,
id. pl. arlydhi. W. Arglwy-
dhi,


| Armas, cried out ; a arme, they


cried out.
Armor, a Wave; a Surge ; Lh.
Armoriou, Arms in Heraldry. Ar.
Aroaz, Tanſie. Ar.
Aroc, before. Ar.
Arouez, a /ign, or token. Ar.
Arrez, a way; path; courſe;
pace.
Arria (vulg. for ria), O ftrange !
Arſe, commanded ; from arrha,
Arte (& arta), again.
Arth, a Bear; orth, id. Gr. axis.
Arv, a weapon ; arm thay; pl.
Arvou.
Arvez, vipe.
Arvis, early in the Morning.
Aruit, Air. Cott.
Arvor, the Sca Hare; Ar. quaſi
war mor. |
Arvordir, W. place by the Seaſide,


Arweddiad, behaviour , TRAKNCT <+


IM 5


Arwydd,


A
*


E 1 Et N N i 2 ö


.


. 0 *


2 & 7p "1 ain I. Be"
* * * * — bs


* 388 0 o 1
e eee
A v *


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 417


AR |
Arwydd, a brand, or mark; ib.


Arwyl, a burial, or funeral; ib.
Arwyddocan, to betoken, or fore-
ſhew:


AS


As, them; (us, id.) they.

As, a Termination of the im- |
perf. Tenſe, as, y ſoras, they
did grieve ;, y reſoras, they did
much grieve.

Aſcable, cavilled, or ſquabbled.

Aſcient, one out of his Senſes ; a
poſſeſſed ; (guan, id.)

Aſcle, the Boſom ; aſcra, id. Lh.

Aſderbynas, compelled. V.

Aſen, an Aſs; it. a Rib; pl.
aſon.

Aſenza, an Aſs-cvlt.

Aſenguil, a wild Aſs. Cott.

Aſew, it be; (V. a præf.)

Aſgarn (aſgorn, id.), a Bone.

Aſgornek, bony.

Aſgura, will make them; (as pref.)

Aſkal, a Il ing; pl. aſkelli.

Aſkal, a ſhell Fiſh; a Naker ; it.
the fin of a Fiſh. Lh.

Aſkellen, a Thi/tle. Cott. Aſkal-
lan, id.

Aſſaz, thou art.

Aſſon, we are.

Aſtell, a Board, or Plank. LMS.

Aſtyllen, id. a Shelf; a Shingle.
Lh.

Aſten, to enlarge.

Aſtor, Offspring ; dry aſtor, to
bring forth Iſſue.

Aſwonas (aſwothas, id.), do


know.
AT


Ate, ſpite; mar ate, ſo much ſpite.

Ath, hath thee ; have thee ; will
thee; meathkelma, [1 will bind
thee.

Ath, thy ; mez ath, cut of thy.
Ather, a Paunch; a Belly; lean
eu athor, fill my Belly. Gw.
Atis, a perſuaſion ; Advice. Ar.
Attal, a Bolt, or Bar.

Attamye, to redeem.
Attret, ſtweepings. Ar.


AU AV
Au, the Liver. Ar.


Avain, an Image. Cott.

Aval (Avell, id.), an Apple; all
orts of frutt.,

ad 1 Trees. Cott.

Auan, à River, Lh.

Avan (aban, id.), above ; ita &
man, pro aman, id,

Avani, to imagine.

Auartha, above.


AU AV |


gata Ab ahis, vel ahvis aqua,

flumen, Keyſler.

Aveas, by; through ; aus, cut of.

Avez, without ; foras.

Auel, Aura; weather, Cott. Ar.

IVind.

Auel teag, fair I/7ather ; auel

vas, a calm; hagar auel, bad

IWeather.

Auelek, windy.

Avell, like to; (haval, id.) /ike-

neſs.

Aueth, alſo ; equally (aweth &

auedh, id.); ſcribitur aweyth,

awyth, awyethe, id.

Aueil, the Goſpel, Ar. Aviel,

Avin, will; wilt; ni au'n moz,

we twill go, Lh.

Aules, a Cliff; aules ewhal, a

high Cliff; whel aules, work

m the Cliff.

Aultra, à Godfather.

Aultruan, a Godmother.

Avon (auan, id.), a River,

Avor, towards ; avor thys, to-

wards thee.

Avorou, to-morrow. Cott.

Auoz, /o that, notwithſtanding ;

above; avoz travyth, above any

thing; for the ſake of; as, auos

den vyth, for the ſake of any

— 1 LMs. SY

Aure, he that; (ſuel, id.); q. ſec

gwre.

Auſa, to adorn; prepare. Ar.

Auſillen, an Ozier. Ib.

Aut, the Sea-ſhore ; bank of a
River.

Autrou, a Maſter, or Lord. Ar.

Avi, the Liver, or Breaſl. Cott.
Spite ; Envy ; Diſcord ; avey,
& avy, id.


A W


Awatta, to behold. LMS.
Awen, the Jaws, or Chops. Ar.
Awothe (awothy, id.) he felt,
or knew.
Awre, he made.


Awy, the old Word for Rzver.
R.
Awyr, Air.
AY


Ay, that; his; ay oys, that
Age.
Aydn, one; peb aydn, every one.
Ayuh, ever; above; ayuhav, a-
bove me; ayih y pen, over his


Head.
AZ


Azan, a Rib; it. a Pipe-/tave ;
(aſen, id.) pl. aſou.


Aue, pl. auen, Vallis fontibus ri-


/


AZ


gen algran, every Fit it:
Il ings. Boſ.

Aznat, evident; plain. Ar.
Azrek, Sorrow. Ib.
Azrouant, a Devil. Ib.
Azroue, a Sign; Token, Ar. See
aroucz,


B.
Hum. Lhuyd affirmeth bold-


ly, that there is not any Bri-
„ tifſh Word whoſe firſt Radical
Letter is B.“ Speed. Chron,
p. 7. But H. L. p. 8. adds,
what Speed docs not, “ abideth
any change into P, or Ph.“

Many Words beginning pri—
marily with a B, begin allo in
the tame Authours, ſometimes
properly (viz, by Grammatical
Permutation), ſometimes impro-
perly (contrary to Rule) with a
V, or F. B is changed into F,
and M. as, Bara, Bread; o far:,
out of” Bread; ſy mara, my Bread.


A, 1000.

Baal (bal), a Shzvel.

Baar, a Bolt, or Bar.

Bach (bagl, id.), a Stick.

Badeza, to laftize. Ar.

Badna, a Drop ; banne, id.

Badus, a Lunatic.

Baedh, a Bear; bahed id, bo-

ra, id.

Bagat, a Troop, or Crew; an

Aſſembly, or Council,

Bagaz, a Buſh ; bagaz eithin,
a 2 Furſe ; bhaid, alaut.

Bahau, Hows, Hinges ; bahau
an darras, Hinge of the Der.

Baiou, Jes; a baye, to kiſs.

Bai, blame; difai, blamelc/s.

Baicwl, a blamer ; a fault. finder.

Bail, a Bery.

Baiol, Enula, the Herb Elicams


an.

Bairſighe, brawling

Bakken, Bacon. Gw.

Bal, a Plague; a Place; a Place
of digging.

Balas, zo dig; Palas, id.

Balaven, a Butterfly. Ar.

Bali, a high grown Mood.

Balliar, a Barrel; it. a Tub.

Ban, up ; high. W. a Place.
[Lugban, alias ludvan, @ high
Tower.]

Ban a ſevy, up he flood.

Banal, Broom; bauathel, id.
Cott. Ai balan. Lh.

Baneu, a Sow.

Baniel, a Banner.

Bankan, a Dam, or Bank.

Banna could; V. (vynna, id.) as,
n'y wely banna, he ſaw nt a


| Azgran, a Wing; kaniſer hethen
5 0


glinitſe, i. e. could t ſee.
Banneth,


—


418
B A


Banneth, a Bleſſing.

Bar, the top, or ſummit.

Bara, Bread; bara heb gwel, un-
leavened Bread.

Barbur, a Barber; W. Cneifiwor,
id.

Bardh, a Mimic ; Scoffer ; barz,
Ar. writ alſo, barth.

Barev, a Beard; id. Lh.

Barf, & Baref, a Beard.

Barfuſy, Codfiſhes ; pl. from Bar-
vas, a Cod.

Barges, & bargos, a Kite.

Bargidnyas, did bargain; dho
bargidnias, ta . £9nſent ; agree.


Barh, & bara, with; barh an
dzhei, with them.

Baris, readily ; paris, id.

Barliz, Barley; n 1d. Lh.

Barlen, the Lap, & Boſom.

Barn, to judge.

Barner, a Fuage.

Bart, a Side; a Scoffer ; war-
barth, altogether.

Barri, to divide; debarra, to ſe-

arate.

Barth-hirgron, a Trumpeter.

Baſdhour, a Ford, or Paſs over
the Water.

Baſghed, W. & C. 4 Baſket ;
Baſket-dorn, C. a Hand-
ket. Lh.

Baſtord, à Baſtard ; pl. beſterd.
Sic W. & A. & Ir.

Bat, Money.

Bath, Coin; Money. Lh.

Bather, a Coiner ; a Banter; gwas
bathor, diligent, a monied man.

Bathon, & bathyn, à Baſon.

Battiz, Staves.

Baye, to kiſs.

Baz, a Pole, or Staff.


BE


Be, he hath been. '

Bealtine, Fires lighted to Belus. Ir.
N. B. The Corniſh for Fire

is Tan ; but to tine, or light a

a Fire, is ſtill uſed in Cornwall,

unde Bartine, the fiery top, i. e.

the hill of Fires.

Beazen, beaze, beazenz, we, ye,
they had been. V.

Beazez, thou had/? been; beaze,
be had been.


| Beb, every one; pub, id.


Bech, a Voyage. Ar.

Bechye, to thruſt. V.

Bederow, Prayers.

Bedh, & Bez, be thou.

Bedh, a Grave ; pl. bedhiow,
bethow, id.

Bedhav, I will be ; bedhi, byd,
theu, be will be.

Bedhez, boez, biz, let it be.

Bedhon, bedhoh, bedhanz, wwe,


B E


ye, they will be; let us be, or
be ye.

Bedhon, bezen, we ſhould be.

Bedhe, beze, he ſhould be.

Bedhiz, beiz, thou ſhould'/? be.

Bedhynz, bezenz, benz, they
ſhould be.

Bedewen, the Poplar Tree.

Bedhigla, to bellow like an Ox.

Bedho, & bedewen, 4 Birch
Tree; pl. behu.

Bedidio, to baptize.

Bednath, & benath, a Bleſſing.

Bednuaaz, Madam; pro benen-
vaz.

Bedzhinidia, a Chriſtening ; bap-
t1]m.

* «cr HH a Font, i. e. a flone
for baptixing.

Befer, a Beaver ; Animal.

Beghan, bean, bian, little; vig-
han, id.

Beghas, a Sin; peghas, id.

Begel, the Navel ; it. a Boſs.

Begol, a Shepherd; bizel, 1d,

Bein, I ſhould be.

Beiſder, a. Window.

Bel, long ; far; vel, & velha,
id. o bel, afar off.

Belee, a Prieſt; pl. belein. Ar.

Belender, a Miller. |

Beler, Creſſes, i. e. the Herb Ca-
riſta.

Belgar, the calf of the Leg.

Belyny (velyny, id.), railing ;
malice.

Belin, a Mill; velin, id.

Ben, bended; a Head, for pen.

Bena, to cut. Ar.

Benary, hourly ; continually.

Benans, Penance. |

Beneas, banned; viz. in the
Church; quaſi benidnias, con-
ſented; agreed.

Benegys, bleſſed.

Benen, a Woman; pl. benenas,
& ez.

Benen-vat, a Matron.

Benen-rid, Female.

Benen- nowydh, a Bride.

—_— an Awl ; . beneuez, id.

h.

Benidnia, 20 conſent.

Benk, a Bench; ſkin, Ar. id.

Bennak, ſcever, piua bennak,
whoſoever ; pandra bennak,
whatſoever.

Benthygio, to borrow.

Beol, a Trough, or Manger. Ar.

Ber, a Spit.

Ber, & berr, ſhort; beranal, a
Shortneſs of Breath.

Bera (en beta), within.

Bera, to drop; ſlide; flow. Ar.

Berges, a Citizen.

Bern, a Heap; a Rick, viz. of
Hay, or Corn.

Berna, to buy; perna, id.


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


| B E
Bernigan, a Limpet;


breunik, id.
Berri, Fatneſs.
Berthog, rich,
— Defence. Ar.

erthuan, a 3 @a Magpye.

Bes, but ; af” g me

Bes, f. for boſs, as res for ros.

Beſadow, Prayers.

Beſga (for biſgueth), never; ever.

Beſgan, a Thimble.

Beſl, Muſcles; it. Gall, bitter-
neſs. Lh.

Beſt, Moſs; ne vedn nevra kunt!
belt, will never gather Moſs.

Beſte, thou had/t been.

Beſtyll, Call; Bitterneſs.

Beſy, to intreat; V. (piſy, id.)
needful,

Betan urma, hitherto,

ns, & betygons, neverthe-

OfSs
Bethens, be; let him be.

Beu, alive; (biu, & bewe, id.)
beua, to live; na illy beu, could
not live.

Beunans (veunas, bounaz, id.)
Life.

Beva te, & bethys, be thou.

Beven, the hem of a Garment, Ar.

Beuk, Cow; beugh, or biuh, pl,

Beuzet, drowned. Ar. See bid-

hyz.

Beuzi, Ar. to dip, or drown.

Beyn, Pain ; plr beynis.

Bez, a Finger, or Toe; it. but.
yet. pl. byzias.

Bezau, a Ring.

Bezo, a little Hosp, Circle, or
IA heel.

Beze, beuch, bedhec, bezech,
ye ſhould be.

Bezl, the Gall. Lh. it. a Muſcle

Shell. Lh. alias, meſklen.


BI


Bideven, a Hawk; Bydhin, id.
Lh. Kryſſal, faucan, id.

Bidhen, a Meadow. Lh.

Bidhyz, drowned.

Bidn, againſt ; towards.

Bidnepein, a Hawk ; a Crane.

Bidzheon, a Dungbill.

| Rigel, the Navel ; begel, id.

Bylien, a Pebble.

Bilwg, a hedging Bill; W. gwa-


di, id.


Lh. pl.


Bindorn, a Hall, or Refectaryv.


Bis, a Finger; bez, id. pl.
beſs.

Biß gueh, perpetual; cenſlant.

Biſou, a Ring; pro bezau.

Biſtel, the Gall.

Biſtruit, a Toe; i. e. Finger of
the Foot. :

Bithen, a Meadow; bedhein,


id.
Biu


8 e '£ SE Land © 2 ny * — >, when ' * * ROS I
- 1


A CORNISH ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


BI
Biu en lagat, the Pupil of the


Eye.

Biz, there will be; biz reiz dhod-
ho, he will be obliged; viz.
there will be a neceſſity for him.

Bix, the Box Plant. Mod. C.


BL
Blaidh, a Wolf. W.


Blaguro, to branch out.

Blaz, Tafte. Ar.

Bledhan, the Year; pl. bletha-
niou, blidhen, id.

Bledhian, à Flower; pl. blegy-
ow (bledzhan, id.)

Blegadou, things agreeing.

Bleit, a Wolf; bleiddie, blaidh, id.

Blek, pleaſant. Ar. blific, id.

Blem, pale; wan. Ar.

Bleu, Hair; bleuak, hairy, gols,
id.

Bleu, a Pariſh; mui vel ol an
bleu, more than all the Pariſb,
bleu, id.

Bleuak, rough ; prickly ; unplea-
ant, Lh.

Blevenlagat, the Eyelid, viz. Hair
on the Eye.

Bleuynpen, the Hair of the Head.

Bleut, Meal. Ar.

Blez, Meal; blez fin, fine flour;
it. Powder ; Sawduſt. Lh.

Blipen, or bliwen, the Year.

Blith, Milk; W. that hath Milk.

Bloaz, the Year.

Blodeno, to bloſſom ;, bloden, a
Flawer.

Bloeddio, to bal, or cry.

Bloeſy, a Stammerer.

Blonek, Fatneſs; Greaſe ; tallow ;
Ar. Bloanek.

Blonet, id. it. Fat; Tallnw.

Blot, Meal; ſoft ; tender. Ar.

Blou, blew ; Glaſ. id.

Blythen, Blows; bluthen, 10 bear.

Blyzen, id. yn blyzen, with
blows.


B O


Bo, thee ; a pr. is, V. he may be.

Boayok, a Paraſite; bohauok,
id. bowhoc, & bauhoc, id.
Cott.

Boas, Cuſtom; Faſhion. Ar.

Bod, a Den, or Dwelling.

Bodn, the Teat, or Nipple; bron
id. tidi, id.

Bodo (G. bodun, profundum),

deep.

Body-guerni, a Buzzard.

Bogan, the corner of a Sack, or


ag.

Boghan, little. See bychan, &
vian.

Poh (bock, bok), a Cheek. pl.
Byhou; boch, W. & Ar. id.


B O |


Bohatna, the ſmaller ; from bo-
han, compar. benna, & bo-
hatna, & bohadna.

Bohoſak, poor, pl. bohoſogyon.

Bolder, Qu. tis boldering wea-
ther, i. e. lowring, inclina-
ble to Thunder.

Bolenegeth, the Will.

Bolee, a Calve's Houſe; qua. bod-
leau.

Bolla, a drinking Cup; Intrench-
ment. T. T. A Berl; Skala,
id. Lh. ;

Bonas, that there was ; may be. V.

Boncytf, a Block; a Stem f a

Fees

Bondhat, a Circle; Spira.

Bom, @ Bank, or Cauſeway. Ar.

Bonez (Poz, id.), to be.

Bora, a Bear; baedh, id.

Bor, fat.

Bord, a Border.

Bore (y bore), beitimes ; y fore,
id,

Boregeth, en a Morning.

Boren frwyd, a Breakfaſt.

Bareles, the Herb Cumfry.

Boreys, that it was ; a comp.

Borſach, to boaſt; Froſtis, W
id.

Bos (boz, id.), but; he; ha bos,
and that he; is, f.

Boſeias-triez, Toes of the Foot;
bozias, Fingers,

Boſs, a Houſe.


Boſſe, t lan ; boſſe y ben, to


lean his Head.

Bothan, a bump ; or bunch.

Bothell, a Blifter.

Bothak, a Bream Fiſh.

Bothas, bore; V. borthas, id.

Bothur, deaf; it. bothack, id.

W.

Bottaler, a Tankard-bearer. Lh.

Bottas, a Boat.

Bounder, common Paſture ; as,
park an vounder, the Field of
Paſture ; bounder tre, a /il-
lage, or Town, Lh.

Bouch, a he Goat ; byk, id.

Boucq, /t; Ir. a Bog.

Boudzhi, a Cow-houſe ; (a comp.)
a Fold; Lh. boudzhe de vas,
a Sheep-fold. Lh.

Boueſua, Rt; ny a bouez, he
will refl. V.

Bouet, Meat; Ar. Ir. biath, id.

Bouin, Beef.

Bounaz, Life. Lh.

Bouperic, the Hoop Bird.

Boweſas, re/t:d; my re boweſas,
J reſted.

Bows (Pows, id.), a Coat,

Boynedh, daily.

Boys, Meat; buz, buyd, & bos, 1d.

Bozzorrez, to ſing after others.

Bez, to be; boz talvez, e be


419
B R


| Brac, W. Czlliculus; bre, or
breh, id. pl. breon. Ius ;
Collis.

Brag, Halt.


Brakat (bregaud, id.), Altlig-


in,
Bram, Jentris crepitus. Ar.
Brabm.


Brin, a Crew; bran vraz, or mar-
vrän, a Raven.

Brandre, a Reek; (a comp.) viz.
a Town-crow ; Frau, id.

Brandzha, a Neck; y vedn trehe
gyv brandzha, he'll break your *

eck. *

Brandzhian, he ullet, or Threat;
brangain, id.

Braozder, Greatneſs ; mourder,
id, 8

Bris, & ben groſs; great ;
braz, ider rel; outrageons ;
braſa, rea: it; braoz-oberyz,
magnificent; noble.

Broza, greater.

Brath, a Maftiff; brath kei, a
Maſtiff Dog.

Brawd, a Brother.

Brawdoliath, Brotherhood ;;
brawder, Broth.

Brawan, Braun; bahed kyg, id.
viz. Boar Fleſb.

Brechol, a Sleeve ; brohal, id.

Bredar, while ; broad; a Brother ;
pl. brederi.

Brederys, bethought himſelf ; pre-
derys, id.

Bredion, à boiling ; coctio.

Bref, a Serpent; hagar bref, 4
oul Serpent; prev, id.

Breferud (brefu, id.), to bleat lite
a Sheep.

Brefuſv, Prophets.

Breg, a Breach , Seizure.

Bregaud, Hydromel; Mead.

Bregeth, preached. V.

Bregowthys (cum a præf.), th5:
preacheſl.

Bre, a Hill; pl. breon. Dav.

Breh, an Arm; pl. breas, or
brehs.

Brein, brenn, brennyn. ſupreme,
Royal. R. Ar. Futidns.

Breinaft, 1 rt, flink. Ar.

Breily, a Roſe ; breilu, id. and
Primreſe.

Erelyr, a Baron. Qu. breyr, id.
Lh. ac pot. Qua. bre wyr, 4
Man that lives high,

Breman, now; already; at length.

Brennik, a Limpet.

Brennyat, a Fortreſs ; a Pilot.

Brenmat, a Boatſwain.

Brenol, Lh. brittle; Qu. an non,
id, ac brettol.

Brerthil, a Mullet.

Bres, Judgment.

Breſel, Var. Ar.


a


able. Lhe.


Breton, a Priſau.


Breſc,


420
B R


Breſq, brittle. Ar,

Breſſel, Argument; Diſpute.

Breſt, Braſs. Lh.

Breſys, queſtioned,

Breſych, a Cabbage.

Brethal, a Mackerel; a bryth,
ftreaked; brethil, id. Lh.

Brettol, br:ttle.

Breva, to waſte.

Breuha, Food.

Beur, Brother ; Ir. brathair. W.
Braud.

Breuyonen, a Crumb of any thing;
Ar. brienen, id.

Breyr, a Baron. See brelyr.

Brez, the Mind. Lh.

Brezelcr, warlike,

Brezonnek, Armorique, viz. Bre-
tonique.

Brianſen, the Thats.

Bridzhan, to boil, ſeeth; brud-
iar, id.

Bri-nen, a Crumb. Ar.

Brihi, MHalt-liguor; gara brihi,
to brew. |

Bris, a Berry. Ar.


Vo. At


|


Brith, & bruit, various; i. e. of


different Colours ; Cott. bryth,
id. pl. brithion.

Pritty, vel abritty, a Mackerel ;
trom brit, ſpeckled, or ſpotted.
Lh


Broch, a Badger ; Ar. a Veſſel
of Clay, or Il; Bank of a
River; Gale. it. a Yew-tree.
Mod.

Broche, a Buckle, Claſp, or
Bracelet.

Brochi, cruel; unruly.

Broden, the Lungs.

Brodit, Preſident of a Country;
Lord lieutenant. Lh.

Broen, a Ruſh ; broenek, ruſhby.
Ar.

Brohal, a Sleeve; brechol, id.

Brohalek, having Sleeves.

Bron (brun & brodn, id.), Breaſt,
or Pap; a Mill. tone.

Bronkis, brought; led; homb-
ronkyas, they led.

Bronter (praunter, id), a Prieſl.

Bros, a Sting, or Prickle ; inde
f bruls, Furſe-duft.

Brou, a Caaſt; an Edge ; brou
an mor, the Sea Coaſt ; it. a
Alill. Ar. bro, a Country.

Brouion (brouſian, id.), pl. bre-
yonen, Crumbs.

Brouda, to /ting ; nettle,

Brouſta, to bud.

Broza, greater ; broz for braz.

Brudnyan, Gerts. Gw.

Brudzhiaz, boiled; ſod. Lh.

Bruha, Vi:tuals ; Prodiſian. Lh.

Brunnen, a Bull. ruſb. Lh.

Bruts, Furſe-duft.

Brychan, 4 Lull-ruſb.


Brydnan (brydn, id.), a Rb,


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY,


B R


Bry, Clay; Earth.

Brych, a Blot, or Blur.

Bryn, a Hilloct; brine, id. W.
a Hill, or Cliff, brynkyn, W.
id,

Brys, Account; den a brys, a
Man of Account, of Council,

Bryth, /potted ; ſpeckled. Lh,


BU


Bu ( Ar. Byuh, Ir. bo), an Ox, | B


or Cow.

Buanegez, Madneſs; Ir. bane-
gas, Anger.

Bubbuen, @ Botch, or Boil. Ar.

Bucellat, t /»w; bellow. Ar.

Buddiol yw, it behoveth.

Budgeth andour, the face of the
deep.

Budh, Conqueſt.

Budicaul (bydhygol, id), vicbo-
rious.

Buel, he that.

Bugale, à little Boy, Ar.

Bugel, 4 Shepherd.

Buhan, guick; fwift ; byhan,
non.

Bal, an Axe.

Bulch (W.), a Paſſage; as, bulch
Guortigern, Vortigern's Paſ-


ſage.

Bulhorn, a Shell-ſnail.

Bulligan, an Angle-touch, or An-
gle-worm.

Bunta, to puſb, or jolt againſt. Ar.

Burman, 7%, or Barm. W.
Swyf.

Burzut, a Wender. Ar.

Buttein, à Bawd; ind. putten-
dy, a Bawdy-houſe.

Buth, a Cottage.

Bayd, Food; buit, id. biz, id.

Buyth, @ Houſe; a Cottage;
veth, id.

Buz, eating; à Bait for Fiſh or
Birds ; but ; bes, id.

Buzuguen, a Ground-worm ; a


Grub ; pl. buzug.
B *


Byan (ni vian, id.), we have been.

Byck, a Buch Goat, W. Ewyg,
id. boch, 1d.

Byddin, a Band, viz. a Com-


pany.
Bydh, he bill be.
Byhan, con.
Bydredhy, W. to defile ; pollute,
or corrupt.
Byghel nos, Ar. a Heobgoblin, a
Bugbear. Lh.
Bym, I have been.


Byn an lugat, the Ball of the Eye. |


Bynk, a Strete; a Blow; a Blat,
or Pf. Lh. Bank, id.
Zynkiar, @ Cooper.


B Y


Bynollan, a Beeſom ; Breen.
Byoh (huei a vych, id.), ye have
been. :
Byonz, they have been.
Bypur, hourly ; continually;
peb ur.
Byr, brief; ſhort ; cuttu, id.
Byr-luan, the Morning Star.
Byrdruethwd (W. f.), a Erro.
ary; a Maſs-back,
Byrla, to embrace.
ys, even ; bis, id.
Bys pan, then; until.
Byſma (Bys, id), this World ;
beis, & beaz, id.
Bys (abys, id.), to beſeech ; ny
abys, we do beſecch, ;
Byte (vyte, id.), Pity.
Byth queth, never; ever; na
byth, or vyth, never; nothing,
Bythak, deaf; id. ac bothak.
Bytheirio, to belch.
Byuh, a Cow, or Ox.
Byu an lagat, the Ball, or Apple
of the Eye.
Byz, but. Lh.
Byzias, the Fingers.


C.


qua.


Note, that many Words pla-
ced under C, by ſome Authors
are begun by K, or G, by others,
& vice verſa; “ for K we ule
C.“ Hum. Lhuyd Brev. C, for
good ſound, is turned into G,


Ch, and into NG H. Hum, Lh,
p. 3.


"Gs A BAN, a liuleHouſe, Ir. Ar.
Cabell, a Heod. Ar.
Cabin Lygeazhab, Squirt eyed.
Lh


Cabin thavas, a Rainbnw.

Cablas (Cublas, id.), cavilled;
quarrelled ; ſcable, id.

Cabledd, Blaſphemy; Serthed, id.

Caboun, a Capon. Ar. f

Cabydul, a Chapter.

Cad, an Army. R. a Battle.

Cad, any Liquor.

Cadair, a Chair. Ar. Cador, id.

Cadarnle, a Builwark; Cader-
nid.

Cadr, firong.

Caduit. Cott. Qu. f. Cadwyr,
a Soldier.

Cadzhel, vulgo Cagel, a Ca/lle,
as Roſcadzhel, Boſcadzhel —
Kaſtelh. id.

Caer, a City; a walled Town. Ar.
Ceer, & C. Geer.

Caethiwed, Bondage; Slavery;
Caeth, hid. Gurkaeth, 4

Bond- ſiave, Lh.
Cafor, Hrucus. Cott. Qu.
Catos, found; Cafors, we find;


ate, I find.
er a. Cafudhd,


CA
Cafudhd, a Stile; a Stone Stile.


W. |

Cagal, Rubbiſh ; Rubble ; Dirt;
Sheep- Dung.

Cahout, Wealth; Riches, Ar.

Caid, a Servant; Caid-pinid, a
Slave.

Caihir, Ir. Caer, Ar. Fair;
Pretty.

Caillar, Dirt ; Mire. Ar,

Caines, a Nun.

Caithes, a Maid Servant.

Ciith, a Servant; a Slave.

Cal, cunning ; lean.

Cala, Strato; Stubble, Ar, Colo,
id, Calav. id.

Cale. Ar. A Wed, Ir. Coill;
C. Kelli, id.

Caleh, Chalk.

Callo (Calle, id.), might; could.

Callys (Calys, Calliſh & Cals,
id.), hard ; ſmart.

Cals, many; much. Ar.

Calter, a Kettle; Kalhtor, id.

Cam, crooked ; evil; Pl. camou.
Iriſh, Caum.

Camen, ſos

Camgyhuddo, to belye one.

Camhinſic, injurious ; croſt; un-


uſt,

Cimbilik, id, Cott,

Camniuet, a Bow.

Cams, a Surplice.

Canaſow, Meſſengers ; Apoſles.
Ar. Cannat, a Meſſenger.

Cane, to crow ; or ſing ; Can. Ar.
a Song,

Canego, Bogs.

Canel, a Pipe of Mood to draw
off Liquor ; Tap an canel, the
Pipe and it's Peg; qual, a ca-
nalis, a Chanel or Conduit, ut
& Gannel,

Caniad, a Ballad.

Cann, the full Moon.

Cannu, to whiten, or blanch.

Canores, a ſinging Moman.

Cans, a Hundred,

Canſgur, a HFife; any Female,

Canſrueg (Canslreg, id.), a Huſ-
band,

Cantrev, a hundred; becauſe it
contained formerly 100 villa-
ges.

Cantulbren, @ Candliſticł.

Cantuil, à Candle. F. Cyntulu.

Caouen, an Owl. Ar.

Caougant, abundant ; very much.

Car, a Friend,

Car, a Charict; R. ind. Cara-
doc.

Capt, of Charicts ; a Charioteer;
Kyncar, id. |

Cara, 4 cut; it. 26 Love.

Caradow, belt ved.

Carayos, a Kinſinan.


Carcpur (Carchurdy, id.), 6


Eridewell.


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY. -


CA


Carchar. Ar. a Priſon.

Carder, beautiful; comely.

Cardotta, to beg; Cardottin, a
Beggar.

Cariad, Benevolence.

Carn, a Heap of Rocks; a high
Rock. Pi. Carnow,

Carnſow, Clif.

Carogos, a Kinſman,

Carou (Lh. Karo), a Deer;
Caruu, id. Cott,

Carru, a Plow. Car.

Carreg, a Rok; Pl. Cerigi; as,
Cerigi Drudion; Calummulæ
Druidum.

Carthu, to clear; purge.

Cath, a Cat.


Caſaus, odions. Ar.


Caſadou, Countenance; ill. ſu-
voured ; withered.

Caſat, any Veſſel.

Caſmai, an Ornament.

Cau, to hut; or incloſe. R.

Cauen, an Owl.

Caul, Gruel; Peottage ; Cole,

Caur-march, a Camel.

Caus, Cheeſe.

Cawg, a Baſon.

Cawr (Gaur, id.), a Gyant.

Cazau (Caſſec, id.), a Mare.


CE


Ceany, to ſup.

Ceard, or Keard, an Artificer,

Ceg, a Muth; or Throat.

Cerbal, a Barge.

Cel, or Cil. lr. a Church, or
Cell.

Oeirſio, to wind, turn, or twiſt.

_cndel, fine Linen.

Cerig, Stones, or Circles; Crig,
Crug, id.

Ccriſs, /oweſt ; Pul-keriſs, low:
% Stream. R.

Cern, a Turn; Circle. Ar.

Ceulan, Bank of a River; ind.
Glan. f. .

Cevn, a Ridze, or Bank.

Centowen (Contuen, id.), «
Gnat.


CH


Chabenrit, a Torrent.

Chaden, a Chain,

Chain, a Carrion, Ar.

Charnel, a Place where dead Ba-
dies are laid, Ar.

Ohaſty, to Cbaſliſe.

Chaſy, to chaſe ; Chaeyes, cha-
cel,

Cheber, Vulva.

Checnys, taken.

Chee thou ; ge (erron. for chee),
id.


Chefals, a Limb; arts,


| Chelindoc, emnipitent, Cott.


5 *


— — — ͤ——r—᷑—ͤ—uũ q — —


421
CH


Chein, the back; Kein, id.
Chelioc guit (or Ghod), à Gan-
er.

Chelioc, a Cock.

Chemel, to tarry. Ar.

Chen, a Cauſe,

Cheniat, à Singer.

Chereor, a C:bler ; a Shoemaker.

Cherhit, a Heron; Keridh, id.

Cherite, Dearneſs ; Charity. Get.
id,

Cherniat, a Player en the Hors.

Cheſpar, Conjux.

Chetua, @ Meeting; Convention.

Chever, 1 3 unto ; chever tylier,
unto the Place.

Chic (Kyg, id.), Fleſh.

Chil, the Neck.

Choantek, A. greedy z covetcus ;
Lh. W. Chuannog, id.

Choar, Ser.

Choareil (Ir. Corgas), Lent. Ar.

Choarion, ſports; ab Huare,

Choch-dibi, a Cymba!.

Chom, to inhabit. Ar.

Chuervan, a Whirling. Lh. 172.

y Chugfyons, they bethought.

Chuillioc, an Augur. *

Chuillioges, a Witeb, or She- di-
viner.

Chuivian, to fly atay; Lh. 215.

Churiſigen, a Bladder ; a Bliſler;
Guzigan, id.

Chuyth, ind; Lh. 122.

Chyffar, a Bargain; yn chaffar,
in the Bargain.


C1
Cib, a Shell; a Cabinet.


Cin. Ar. a Swan.
Cinkla, to coft. Ar.
Ciſt, a Cheſt.


CI,


Claatgueli, Bolſters; fulcra. L.

Clabi:ter, a Bittern.

Claff, fick; Clevys; Clevas;
Clef, Claf, id. Pl. Clevion.
Klav. id.

Clafnorer, a Leper.

Clafn, the Blade of a Sword.

Claiar, warm.

Clamderys, fainted. V. Mas in
Want.

Clao, an Inflrument, or Iron
Tool.

Clapier, to ſpeat; clapier Ker-
nuak, to ſpeak Corniſh.

Claſq, to gather; look for ; beg.
A


r.
Clathoree, fallen; lapſus.
Clauſt (Cloiſt, id.), 4 Bar; In-
cloſure.
lawd (Kled, id.), a Pyke; a
E; Clawd Offa, Ofa's Dit.
lecha, @ Lell place; Lucar. 10.


Clechis,


42% A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


C Lo


Clechic, a little Bell; a Clock,
ot & Bell.

Cleddif, a Belt.

Cledr, a Rafter.

Clehe, Ice.

Cleis, A Chalk. Lh.

Clemmow, Clement ;
Name.

Clenniaw, a Hip, or Thigh.

Cleſkher, the Skin of the Leg.

Clethe, a Sword, a Knife, a Dag-
ger. Kledheid.

Cleuth, a Ditch,

Clenzen, à Tree; Ar.

Clewet, a Diſtemper, or Sickneſs.

Clewo (Glewo, id.), to hear;
Clewys, heard.

Clicket, Clapper of a Bell;
Latch of a Door.

Clithio, to batt, or entice.

Clo (Cleg, Clog, Cluid, id.), a
fort of hard Stone, between a
Moor tone and a Marble.

Clocen, a Shell; Clocen ui, an
Egg Shell. Ar.

Cloch, a Bell; Kloh, id.

Cloch-muer (or Maur), a great
Bell.

Clode, Praiſe ; Fame (Klos. Ir.
Cloth); Klod, id. Klodvaur.
W. a famous Man.

Clof, Lame ; maimed.

lo-gris, the grey Clo; Clo-du,

the black Glo. Hals.

Choireg, a Clergyman.

Clone (Cluain./1d.), @ Cave, or
Den. Ir. (ind. f. 'Treglone, in
Cornwall; the Town of Caves ;
or near the Cave), it. a Park.
Lh. |


Clor, neatneſs ; yn clor, neatly.


a Man's


Clorian, a Pair of Scales ; Man-


tol, id.
Clot-boffan, a Trype. Gw.
Clouar, warm. Ar,
Cluddias, a Bar, or Hinderance.
Cluddu, fe bury,


Clugea, to perch ; or ſit. Ar. inde


to cluck as a Hen going to ſit,
Cluit, Brea/ft. |
Clymmu, to buckle.
Clynk, to fallow. Qu.


CN


Canil (Cnill Clil, id.), a paſſing


Bell.
Caithio, to ftrike,
Cnoi, to bite, or gnaw.


CO
Coant. Ar. fair ; handſome,


Coar, wax. Ir. Ceir.


Cob, dho Cob, to break, or bruiſe.


Cobber, a Bruiſer of Tin,
Coch,
(Ar. Merda.);


Codgroen, a Budget.
Codnabreh, the Arm-wrift.


{ Colwiden, a Hazel Tree.


Purple; Coccus, Red


CO


Codnatale, the Forehead.
Coed, W. a Mod; Cos & Ki,


id,
Coegdale, purblind.
Cof, cov. See kov, kovys.
Coff, a Belly. Ar.
Cofgurhehel, Uten/ils.
Coggas, a Prieſt.
Coifinel, Running Betony; wild
me.
Coillinhat, the herb Angelica.
Coir, Wax.
Coit. See Koit (& Küz, id.);
a Mood.
Col (Colin, Conyn, id.) Sting of
ee


a Bee.
Colewuys, heard; glavis, T. T.
id


id.

Colbran, fierce ; Lightning.
Colhen, a Hazel.

Colhlwyn, a Grove of Hazel.
Coll, Loſs; Coll reſtoua, Loſs
beſet him.

Collet, a farlorn; a loft Perſon;
perditus; a Kellye, to loſe;
it. Loſs. |
Collon (Colan, id.), a Heart.
Colmas, bound.
Colmen (Pl.
Knot.
Colmur, a Binder. Pl. Colmuri-
an.

Colmye, to bind.

Coloin, a M belp.

Coltel, a Penknife ; an engraving
Tool.

Colter, the Plou-Aniſe.


Colmenou). 4


Colyd, a Beard of Corn,

Colyek, a Cock; Keilliog, id.

Comer, Pride ; Lh. 215.

Comiſka, Stirring ; Gw.

Commaer, a Godmether,

Commol, 4 Cloud; Darkneſs.
Ar.

Compez, right; even; tha geil
compez, to do right; N'un
compez, the plain, even Downs.

Compoſter, Form, heb compol-
ter, without Form.

Conerioc, mad; raving ; fooliſh.

Conna, the Neck ; codna, vulg.
id, |

Connar, Rage; Fury. Ar. it. C.

Contreva, to dwell ; commoror.

Contrevac, a Neighbour ; one of
the ſame Town.

Contowen, a Gnatt.

Conze, Matrix, Gw.

Coom (cwmm, id.), a Valley.

Coone, Sugar. Gw. |

Coot (kooth, id.), a Beating ;
to give one his Ceot; i. e. his
Beating.

Coppa, the Top, or Summit.


| Cor (cor, id.), Ale; Aanner ; |


CO


war nep cor, in any Man ner.


Cor, a Dwarf;
& corrig, id,
Corden, a Pipe.
Corf, a Body; a dead Body; pl
corfou. 285
Cork, a little Body.
Corgwenyn, Bees-wwax,
Corn, 4 Horn.


Cornbrican, a Pipe; Fiflula ;


Ar. cornandon,


tolcorn, id.


id,


Cornwyd, a Bile, or Scre; gwelli,


Corol, Ar. a Dance; corolli, 75


dance.
Cors, a Place full of ſmall I vod;
a Den; a 1 * " ;


Corſen, a Reed; a Pipe. Ar.
Corsfruynen, a Bull-ruſh,
Coruf, Beer ; coref, id,
* a Mood.

oſke, Sleep; ſleeping.
Coſte, the i % Zedeary,
Coth, old; den coth, an old Man,
Cothas, to find.
Cothas (pro wothas), knoweſt ;


fuffereft ; feeleft ; finde/t.


r,


Ar.


id.


Cothewell, he felt.

Cothys, fallen ; gothys, id.
Couat, a Shower ; a Cloud,
Coueno, Swelling ; Inflammation,


Covi, extreme Heat of the Sun,


Coulm, a Pidgeon.

| Couls, Time. Ar.

Coin, Memory. Ar,
Couniel, a Rabbit.

Couz, ſpeak thou.

Coweidliuer, Glove.
Cowethas, to lie down.
Cowethe, a Companion.
Cowethys, acquainted.
Cowlas, a Bay of Building.
Cowlez, ſour; leath cowlez,
four milk.

Coyntis, wrought. V.

Coz, old; cozni, old Age; id.
ac Coth,


CR


Craf, covetous ; kraff, id.
Crakye (crakya, id), to break.
Craouen, Nuts.

Crapat, to anchor. Ar.
Craſa, to dry. Ar.

Creader, a Creator. Ar. Crouer,


Crech, high ; crechen, a lite
Hill. Ar.

Cred, Belief ; credzhi, id. Lh.
Cref, /trong ; abundant ; crit, id.
Cott. i

Creft, Art; creftor, Artifex, Ib.
Creſt, & creſtor, id. Qu.
Creg, Stammerer.


Cregaud, Fhdreiel. Qu.


Cregys,


e SIS Saeed
4 FI 0 ” : 3 = - 3 mg +, 3 2 * : 3 *
J -


:
1


aa. an. = wad - "'Y
.


CR


Cregys, hanged; gregy, to hang.

Cregyans, Faith.

Crehyllys, cruſhed.

Creiz, Mud; Dirt. Ar.

Cren (kern, id.), round; Ir.
cruin, id.

Crene, trembling; crenna, to
tremble.

Cres, @ Garment; Ar. pl. creſiou.

Creven, a Cruſt.

Creulon, barbarous.

Crez, the middle; Ar. creis, id.

Crib, a Comb ; criban, id. (Ir.
Cir.)

Criedzy, to believe.

Crin, dry.

Criz, cruel; crizder, Cruelty. Ar.

Crob, Qu. tre, an crob, Qu.


Crobman, a Hook; crobman
ithen, @ Furze-hook, Gw.
Crocadur, Creatures, created

things.


Crochen, a Skin; Ar. C. Croin.

Crochan, a Pot, or Kettle; cro-
chadn, 1d.

Crockan, « Springle. Gw.

Croider, a Sieve; Ar, crouezer,
id.

Croin, the Hide, or Skin, Cott.

Croinoc, a Land Toad that fre-

. quents the Buſhes; Cott. Ru-
beta; cronek, id.

Crois, a Croſs. Cott.

Cronnys (curnys, curunys, id.),
crowned.

Cronou, Thongs.

Croueg, a Gibbet.

Croum, crooked ;
crobm, id.

Crouſel, the Top of a Hill.

Crou, a Fold; crou an devet, a
Sheep Fold; Crou an gueffer,
a Goat Fold.

Crow, utmoſt; yn crow, to the ut-
moſt ; it. Gore ; Blood.

Crowethe, in Bed.

Crows, a Croſs.

Cruguel, a Hillock. Ar.

Crunckia, to beat.

Crunnys (crummys, id.), /tag-
nated ; curdled.

Cruſſu, to broil,

Crwſt, an Eating between Meals.

Cryk. Sce Kryk.


CU
Cudiri, Hair.


Cudon, a Dove.

Cuen, a Wedge. Ar.

Cueny, Ae; Mouldineſs ; Hoari-
neſs, Germ. vinnigh.

Cueth, I/earineſs. See Gweth.
it. Hort; as, cuedth anadl,
hart Breath,

Cugol, a Hood.

Cugdd, @ Butcher.


krum, 1d,


Cuhupudioc, an Accuſer-; cuhu-


|


þ


CU


thudioc, id.

Cuic, bleer-eyed ; one-eyed,

Cuit, a IL vod.

Cul, Lean.

Culm, Chap; Straw; uſion, id.

Cumah, now.

Cummyas, Leave ; ty ary cum-
myas, thou ſhalt give Leave ;
kibmiaz, id.

Ciin, feet ; affable. Ar.

Cunhinſik, a juft man.

Cuntellet, an Aſſembly.

Cuntullys, gathered; cintle, id.

Cur, a Cure; grwa cir, do a
Cure,

Curo, to beat; puniſh ; bounce,
or knock.

Curun ray, a Diadem.

Cuſcadur, a Lethargy.

Cuſki, a Dormitory. |

Cuſſin (guſſin, id.), a Kiſs.

Cuſual, /%%/t; kuzal, id. kyzo-
leth, Peace.

Cuſyll, Advice; Counſel; cuſul, id.

Cuſulioder, a Counſellor.

Cuthens (cuthys, id.), covered;
Par,

Cwkw, a Boat; bhaid, vel baid,
id,

Cuyttyn, Wort; little, W.

Cuz, to liter.

Cuziat, a hiding Hole.

Cwas, a Shower, or Skud of Rain.


CY


Cyff, a Bloch; a Stem of a Tree;
boncyff.

Cyffin, a Boundary.

Cyfoeth, Honours ; I caltb.

Cyhoeddwr, a Crier of a Court.

Cymmun, a Legacy.

Cymmuno, to leave by Will.

Cynddeiriog, 4 Bedlam.

Cyulym, ſwift ; rapid.

Cyweithas, find; courteous.


Cywelu, a Bedfellow,
+


D is changed into Dh, and
N, as, Duw, God, (W.) O
Dhuw, out of God ; Fynuw,
my God. Hum. Lhuyd, pag. 4.

Note, that D is not ſo often
radical as T.


1D A (dha, & dah, id.), gesd.
Da, thy; tha, id.

Da, a Doe. Cott.

Daal, a Sth, or Family, Ir.

Daffar, Conveniencies; Furniture.


Dagel, Qu. unde Tindagel; an


a dagh, vel dah, god; & hel,


a Moor.
Dagrou, Tears; Jaxez, Gr.
Daiarou, to bury ; to interr.


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


— —


Dain, ſent; mi 11g dain dythi, |


D A


I have ſent unto hin.

Dal, worth; travyth ne dal, u
thing is worth ; it. dark. Lh.
E dal, it ſhould or ought ; Lh.
oportet ; Lh. rez, id.

Daladur, a Plane. Ar.

Dall, blind; (tiwal, id.) dallu,
to make blind.

Dallath, to begin; it. a Begin-
ning. Lh.

Dalpen, 7% of a Hill, Ar.

Dalvith, to reguite.

Dalv, Palm of the Hand.

Dama (damma, id.), a Mother.

Dama- widen, a Grandmother.

Damenys (Danvonys, & teve-
nes, id.), ſent.

Dampnys, to condemn; thamnys,


id,

Dan, & dadn, id. below, inferi-
our ; (unde ut B.) Danmonii,
the Corn. & Dev-men.

Dan, a Tooth (danz, pl. denz,
id. deins, id.), pl. dannet.

Dans, an Elephant ; Ivory.

Daneuel, to tell, Ar.

Danin, to ſend.

Danta, to bite.

Daol, a Cauſe; Suit, or Proceſs ,
Ar. kein van, id. haul, id.

Daoz, to come, or go. Lh.

Daphar, % prepare, or provide;
it. Furniture.

Dar, an Oak; glaſtan, & glaſta-
nen, id.

Daradur, a Doorkeeper.

Daralla, a Tale; Narration.

Darat, a Door; daras, id.

Dareden, Lightning, Ar.

Darken, inflizted; warkerd, id.

Darllawydd, a brewer.

Darlow, to brew.

Darn, Pieces; mil darn, a thu-
ſand Pieces.

Darniegeal, 1 wag, or waver.
Ar,

Darrar delkar, the back Door, or
Poſlern Gate. Lh.

Darras, @ Door (darat, id.), PI,
Daraſou ; darras rag, the fore
Doors, Lh.

Daryvas, Diſcovery; Meaning;
Daſtor, to yield; yielding ; das,
a Father ; a das, O Father.

Datguddio, to bewray a Secret.

Datheluur, 4 Speaker ; an Ora-
tor.

Ditho, to him.

Dau, he will come.

Davaz, a Sheep; pl. devez; (da-
vat, & devet, id.)

Davydh, David.

Dawns, a Dance ; guare dauns,
a Ball where many dance. Lh.

Day! (dalt, & dolle, id.), ought-
&t ; ny dayll, thou oughteſt not.

Daz, anſwers to the Latin re,

as, dazveua, fa rue

Daze,


424


D A


A CORNISH- ENGLISH VOCABULARY,


5 D E


Daze, a glittering Stone from the | Demytho, 1% marry.


ine.
Dazprena, to redeem.


DE


De, Day; Yeterday ; this Day; it.
; as, de hanno, thy Name.

De jeu, Thurſday.

De ſwore ; 272 deas, he ſwore.

Deag, Tythe ; Deaug. Ar. id.

Deau, two.

Deauon, Gods ; Deuiou, id.

Debar, down. See dybour.

Debarn, @ Scab; an Itch. Ar.
debron.

Debarris, divided ; ſeparated:

Debm, to me; dho debbry, to

eat; Lh. deori, id.

Deder, Goodneſs.

Dedh-goil, AHoly-days ; deg}, &
degol, id.

Dedwh, a Law.

Dedwyddweh, Bliſs ; __—_—

Deez, come than; a dyvoz,
to come.

Deck, a Neck-jewel ; Monile;
deck, Lh. id.

Defendis, put out ; forbidden.

Deffry, ſoon.

Deg, Ten; deg, uar nigans,

hirty. Lh.

Deghenzete, the Day before Te
terday.

Deglitul, Epiphany ; Twelfth-day.

De-guenar, Friday.

Degylmy, to untie.

Degys, taten; carried; dregy, id.

Dehen, Cream. Gw.

Deheubarth, the Right Hand Side ;
j. e. the Southern Part, ſays
Camden. — Name of South
Wales. Hum. Lh.

Dehilians, Forgiveneſs.

Dehou, South; i. e. on the right ;
as Gleth, the left Hand, figni-

fies North.

Dehoules, Cott. Southern II bod.

De Jeu; Thurſday.

Deiſkin, 19 deſcend. Lh.

Dele, the Yard of a Ship.

Delen, a Leaf. Pl. dell.

Delin, Monday.

Delk, a Leaf. Lh.

Dell, ſo; as; by.

Della, like; an della, [ewiſe ;
thus; Lh. an dellana, id.

Dellit, Merit ; deſert. Ar.

Delly, 1% hole; telly, id. und.
toll, a Hole.

Delt, mort, Ar.

Delw, an Image. R.

Delyou, Leaf; Leaves. Ar, &c,
Delk.

Demarhar, Wedneſday.

Demer, Tueſday.

Demigou (yn demigou, id.) par-
ticularly.


|


Den, a Man; Pl. dynion; dyn,
o dean, id. Cott. Pl. Tiz-Lh.
Den an cloc, the Bellman ; Sex-


* ; dean deu, à pious Man.

h.

Denater, annatural.

Dencoſkor, à Client.

Dendle, to get; dendle peth, to
get Riches.

Dendzall, to bite; danheddu, &
deintio, id.

Denethys, born; begotten.


2 Yearling. |

 Denhuel, a Servant; a Werk-
man.

Denjack, a Hake Fiſh.

Dennas, Drew. V. dene, id.

Den nowydh, a Bridegroom.

Denſdhellor, Faw: teeth,

Denſhoc dour, a Pike, or Fack-

Cott.
Denſrag, the Foreteeth.


. | Denſys, hunger ; hungry.


Denunchut, a Stranger.
Denys, ſucked ; tenys, id.
Denythyans, @ Generation.
Denz klav, the Tooth-ach, Lh.
Deoriad, a Brood of Chickens.
Deow, Two.
Depbro, eat it; dibbry, & tib-
bry, to eat.
Dera, or tera, was; did; dera
vi labiria, I do labour.
Deragla, to chide; ſcold,
Dereat, handſome; decent. Ar.
Derevas, lifted up ; deraffas, id.
Dereval, to build ; to hoard up ; to
= up; as, dho dercual aman,
1d,
Deriaeth, a Nourifher, or Bring-
er-up of any one. Cott.
Derrez, by; or through your.
Derry, to break.
Derven, an Oak ; Ar. dair. Pl.
Der u, Ar. id.
Deſethys, flirred up.
Deſgibl, a Scholar; Diſciple.
Deſimpit, a Lethargic.
Deſkans, Skill; Knowledge. Lh.
Deſkians, an Ignoramus; a Fool.


Deſky, to learn; dho deſge, id.
Lh


Deſlam, an Excuſe.

Deſo, ts thee.

Deſpyth, Vexation; Spite.
Deſtrias, over ; Deſtrias enefou,
over Souls.

Deſty, to taſte.

Det (deth, id.), a Day; Pl. de-
thiou; dydh, id. Pl. dydniou.
Dethewys, cheſen.

Deu, Ged; a Die; W. Dyu,
id.

Deuas, & dewes, Lh. Drink.
Deve, cug ht.


Denevoit, a Bulloct; denevoid,


| DE


ms, a choak Sheep, \
> ER ner


8 VN dropped. V. thiveras,
id. |
Deüergy (Quaſ. dour kei), an


Otter.

Deueſys, cheſen.

Devethes, we c:me ; came; de-
| 7 hez dre, brought back again,


Devez, Sheep. Pl.

Deugh, come. V.

Devidhyz, guenched ; crak
tegez, Lh. id.

Devra, a Baſom; (aſera, id.)
a Lap; it. a Haden. Lh. 151.
Tir devrak, a Len, or arg.

Devys, grew up. 5

Dew (Deo, id.), Ged ; Pl. Peu-
ion. See Dit, & Dewou,

Dewerryan, Drop.

Dewcth, an End; yn deweth,

| at ln; diuedh. Lh. id.

Deuiggans (dowgans, id), Forty.

Dewie, Hands ; thewle, id.

Dewolgow, Darkneſs.

Dewr, valiant. R.

Dewſcol (Dowſcol, id.), all a.
road.

Dewy, David; Landewi, Da-
vid's Church.

Deyow, Thurſday ; Duyow, id,

Deyſif, a Petition. Inc;

Dez, to thee ; thys, id.

Dezadarn, Saturday.

Dezan (tezan, id.), 4 Cake,

Dezil, Sunday.

Deakryſſa, to diſtruſt.


D H


| Dt'an, to the ; as far as; to thee.

Dhanleiah, at /ea/t.

Dhanna; with; an golou dhan-
na, with the Light.

Dhedhe (dhedhynz, id.), to them.

Dheffa, ts come; neb a dheffo,
he that ſhall come.

Dhellar, back ; doz uar dhellar,
to came back ; var delhar, be-
hind.

Dhelledzhaz, delayed; protract-

ed.

Dhem, and dhebm, dhym, dhym-

mo, to me.

Dheth, came; V. it. urte thy

as, dheth corf, unte thy Heng.

Dhiguydha, 16 fall; kuedna, Ar.
id


id.
Dhiu (dhyuch, dhuich, id.), 0
peu. |
Dhive, thou cemeft.
Dhiz, to thee ; dheyz, & dhehi,
id.
Dho, 4; Sign of the Infinitive
Mood before Verbs; as, £19


dibbry, ts cat. |
Dhedke:.s.,


4 — 1 - * oy; =; S 2 Ws y 6 . 705 D HO 2 Ss. A =
— * ky 1 — . » 7 2 * 5 2 8 LE 2 ns \ ** q * oy.” — * * oC * + ns 1 3 2 we Aa 2
- . N V a - — 7

W


2


A r M T A
> 7 * ME


r 8 0
oo b ; nen 4 «
& 4 V 3 A


EET LIE Fea FL,


A CORNISH ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 425


DH


Dhodha, unto thy.

Dho-douria, to moiſſen, ſoak, or
water. Lh.

Dhodhans, of them ; to them.

Dhodhe (dhydhe, id.), , or
unto him.

Dhofergi. See Dourgi.

Dhora, bring; mi a dhora, Iwill
bring.

Dhoroaz, brought; (dhroz, &
dhroys, id.)

Dhort, from ; dhortam, from
me.

Dhov, to come; mi dhove, I will
come.


Dhy, thy ; (the, tha, da, thy,
id


id.
pon hither.
Dhyg, did; mi a dhyg ton, /
carried.
Dhygav don, I did carry; me a
dhygav don, I will carry.
Dhyn (dhynni, id.), 2 us ; to the;
as dhyn voz, to the Maid.
Dhyſo, for thee ; to thee,
Dhyz, to your.


DI


Di (deiz, id.), a Day ; thou.

Di, without; id. ac a priv. Gr.

as dibitti, mercileſs, i. e. with-
out Mercy.

Diagon, à Deacen.

Dialthyet, a Key ; f. without a


Key.

Dianaff, ſpotleſs ; chaſte; inde
Diana, R.

* a Fury, Fiend, or Hag.

h.

Dibbry, te eat.

Dibeh, guzltleſs ; without Sin.

n to behead, kill, or butcher.

h.

Dibre, a Saddle; W. kyvruy, id.

Diberh, divided. V.

Dich, potent; powerful.

Dichon, to be powerful.

Dicreft, a Sluggard; Blocthead.

Dicreſt, a Rogue.

Didhiuys, promiſed. Pa.

Didirio, to baniſh.

Didra, poor, i. e. without any
thing.

Diegus, idle. Ar.

Dien, Cream. Ar.

Dieſgiz, unſhod.

Dieu, beth; an dieu, one and the
other.


Diffenner, an Excuſer ; Defend-


er.

Diffig, Want; Defect. R.

Diffry, Duty.

Difroedd, Baniſhment,

Difroi, to vaniſh.

Difyddio, to deprive.

Dignas, oppoſing; o dygnas, were
oppoſing.


| Dinar, a Held; a fenced Place;


DI


Digthtyas, refored; nſed; led
forth ; did provide. V.
Digwyddo, zo befall, or happen.
Dikref, filly ; weak ; i. e. with-
out Strength.
ir 7" to depart; to go away.
h


Diliis, manifeft ; d Gr.

Dilla (dolla, id.), to cheat ; de-
cerve ; delhas, id.

Dilladzhi, to cloath; Dilladzhas,
cloathing.

Dillat-gueli, Bedcloaths,

Dillun, Monday.

Dimedha, Marriage; it. to mar-
ry. Lh.

Din, worthy. Ar. it. C.

Din (tin, id.), à fortified Hill,
© ſometimes uſed as the pro-
© per Name of round ſteep
« Hills.” Lh.

Dinevour, a Fort on the Sea; (a
din & mor), inde Moridu-
num. Lat.

Dinam, clean.


R. dinas, id. a Penny; Lh.
dinair, id. Lh.

Dinas Beli, Belinus's Palace, or
Court. Hum. Lh.

Dinaz, a Fortreſs, or Bulwark.
Lh.

Dinerz, weak ; a nerz, Strength.

Dinſul dezil, id. (devſull, id.),
Sunday; it. a ſunny Hill, or
Hill dedicated to the Sun.

Diogel, ſecure ; certainly; endi-
ogel, doubtleſs.

Diog, /ow ; lazy.

Diolacht (dileuchta, id.), Father-
leſs.

Diot, Drink; diautvrac, Malt-
drink; it. a Sot. Ar.

Dioul, the Devil.

Diowenes, Loſs; Damage.

Diwog, the Great-Grandfather.
Proavus. Cott.

Dippa, a Pit. (Tinners Term.)

Dir, Steel, Ar.

Direttha, latter; paſteriour.

Direvall (dereval, id.), to build.

Diriair, Money.

Dirra, to 14ſt, or hold out long.

Diſcar, to break down; ta ruin.
Ar.

Diſcebel, a Diſciple.

Diſcorvanait, Madneſs.

Diſe, a Rich, or Mow; parc an
diſe, the Rick-Field.

Diſkient, ſimple, ignorant; diſ-
kians, Madneſs; Folly.

Diſkuedha, to diſcover ; ſhew ;
accuſe, Lh.

Diſkys, taught ; learned.

Diſlarg, behind; diſlör, id.

Difliu, deformed; diſcolaured.

Diſlonka, to fevallow.


DI


Diſmigo, to ſuſpe.

Diſtrippas, /tripped; ſpoiled.
Diu, black (Ir. div, id.); diuat,
and duat, Blackneſs.

Diua (diuath, id.), a Bound.
Terminus, L.

Diua (teua, id.), at la.
Diuadha, o fini/h; diuadh, End;
war an diuadh, finally. Lh.
Divetha, the worſt.

Diuethaz, late; ſerus. L.
Diuglun, the Reins.

Diuorte, from him.

Diures, an Exile.

Dizhanih, a Breakfaſt ; dizan-
hih, id,

Dizil, t unde; dizurythyl, id.


DL


Dle, a Debt. Ar.
Dluzen, à Trout. Pl. Dluz.


DO


Do, tame; maggo do, as tame as,

Doal. See Dol.

Doan (don, id.), to bear; carry,

Dobby, Robert.

Dochye, to touch.

Dodnan, Earth ; Soil.

Dof, a Son-in-law; Gener, L.

Dogan, Ar. a Cuckow.

Dohadzheth, Afternoon; dy-
hodzhydh, id.

Dok, gave; (thuek, & thoke, id.)

Dol, a Sbare. Ir. daal, id. doal,
id.

Dol, a Valley; (Ir. Dal, id.)
W. a Meadow.

Dole, a Plain; Plainneſs. B.

Dolla, do. V. na ylly dolla, could
not do; it. to deceive.

Dony, damp.

Dor, Earth; doar, doer, & day-
er, id,

Dor, from (dorte, id.); dor y
vam, from his Mother.

Doreganas, to charge. V.

Dorre, broke; torhas, id. to break.

Dorgis, an Earthquake.

Dormont, to torment.

Dorn, a Hand; a Handle ; Lh.
pl. dula.

Dorne, back; it. Hands.

Dorngliken, on the the left Hand ;
the Corniſh call a left-handed
Man Glik, or Klik-handed.

Doroſſen, a Mole-hill. Ar.

Dos, ceme ; doſe, he comes; da-
0z, id.

Dotha, en him; dothans, to them;
for dho.

Dothye, he came; dothyans, they
came.

Dova, to tame, ſubdue.

Dovi, a Houſe. R.


Diſlough, immediately.
5Q


Doul, a Purpoſe ; a Deſign:
oun,


426,


D O


Doun, deep; town, id.
Dounder, Deep; viz. Sea; Def th;
a Gulf.
Doun, we will come; douh, donz,
ye, they will come.
Dour, Vater; Gr. ddp. Durra,
or deura, id.
Dourgi, an Otter, devergi, id.
Dous, they.
Douthek, Twelve ; taken off.
Dowlyn, the Knees ; Dewlyn, id.
Dowyll, ady; R. und. f. thule,
a dark Place; it. a Tool.
Doy, Yeſterday.
Doyn, to thee ; to bring. V.
Doys, ſwore.
Lh.


LDoz, to come.
DR
Dra (tra, id), a Thing; it. ts. V.


Draff, Grains; i. e. Remains of
the Malt after Brewing. Qu.

Dragun, a Dragon. Ar. id.

Dre, by (der, id.); a Town,
for Ire.
ye, Home; moaz dre, to go
Home; for Tre.

Dreath, ſandy Shore, or Beach ;
it, gravel; dreath lenky, a
Duickſand, Lh.

Dreau, lufly ; lively. Ar.

Dred ha, through thy.

Dred hev, hy me.

Drefen, although ; becauſe.

Dregas (tregid), tarried ; drag-
ged ; forced along.

Drehevy, raiſed; drehevell, to
riſe; it. bred; bore ; brought


up.

Dre (dho drei), to afford ; pre-
les; Lh. dho rei, id. Lh.
Dreizan, a Bramble; a Thorn;
pl. dreis ; drachen, and drize,

id,

Dremas, J.

Dren, a Bramble; parc-andren,
the Bramble Field ; drein, and
drain, id. Cott.

Dres, Being ; S. Nature; Pro-
feſſion ; ladron dres, Thieves by
Prefeſſion ; it. above; as mo-
az dres, to be above; for dris. f.

Dret, a Share. Ar.

Drethe, through.

Drethough, between.

Dreval, to lift up; to take away.

Drevas, Tillage; cultivated Land.

Drevethys, proceeded; came forth.

Drew (Deew, id.), is; being.
Pr.

Drey, a Ci; ut dre pro tre.

Dreyſon, Treaſm.

Dreyn, Prickles ; f. pl. of dren.

Drez, oder; beyond. Lh.

Drilgy, Noi; Hurry. f.

Drindaz (drendzer, and drind-
218, id.), the Trinitz.


D R
Driſkyn, drowned. Pa.


Dris, according to; above ; dris
pubtra, above every Thing.

Dro, about ; on every Side; pou
adro, the Country reund about ;
it. thereabout. Lh.

Drö, bring thou. V.

Droaga, to hurt.

Drocger, Infamy ; Scandal.

Drocgerut, an infamous Man ;
drog-ober, a wicked Mors;
drokgeryt, 1d.

Drogbrez, Spite; Grudge ; il.
Will.

Drohas, cut. V.

Drok, Hurt; Wrong; Grief;
drwg, it. Heart; wicked ; ma-
licious. Lh.

Drok-davazck, ill-tonguecd.

Droſſen, brought; dhroz, id.

Droys, bought ; it. Feet.

Drueſy, mournful. Lh.

Druic, à Dragon.

Druilla, to pare ; flice. Ar.

Druſher, a Threſber. Lh.

Druw, a Druid, as tre'r druw,
tbe Druid/tawn ; maen ydruw,
Druid Stones.

Druz, a Foot; Lh. Greazy, Ar.

Dry, what.

Dry, to bring.

Drychinog, boifterous ; flormy.

Drydhi, through her.

Dryff, Purpoſe ; adryff, on Pur-
Poſe.

9 to blemiſh ; anglod, id.

Dryk, zo tarry ; ef a dryk, he ſhall
tarry.

Dryllio, to break ſmall; i. e. in-
to Pieces.

Drylyas, wrapped.

Dryppan, 4 Drop.

Dryſt, an Oat; Grove. Hu; Gr.

Drythyll, buckſome, gameſome, an
ludd, id.

Dryz, come thou.


DU


Du, Ced (Ir. Dia, Ar. Dove,
id.); pl. Duou, Duy, and Du-
vo, Cott, id. Deu. Lh.

Du, duw (Cott. id.), black ; du
ha glas, black and blne.

Du (pro De) Paſch, Eaſlerday.

Du (pro De), -yow, Thurſday.

Duat, Blacineſs.

Dues, a Goddeſs ; Diuies, W. id.

Dig, a General.

Duganz, Forty.

Dule, Comfort.

Dulw, a Baſe, or Pedeſicl of a

Pillar.


Din, a Hl; din, id.
Dunuves, a Steer, or Bullack ;
f. pl. a Denevait.
Durdalatha, I thank. V.


| Dur:a & deura, f. Lahr; as


|


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY,


D U


ardeuta, congurra, &c. 4
the Water; and the "Fra a
(Gillan Creek, comin» hag
from Manachan, is called che
Durra; and Conduria aud
Tindura lie upon it.

Durt, from, pro dort.

Durva, water y.

Dus, tos, a Vun.

Duſtuny, a Jitnſs ; vl, duftun-
nou.

Du-taith (teutates), the Trauel.
ler's Deity.

Duyfron, the Breaſt, Lb.

Duyfronneg, a Bg. Plate.


D *


Dy, of thee ; there; Ad. it. Pri-
vat. as dygomfortis, with.ut
Comfort; dy, W. Ink.

Dyal, Revenge.

Dyantell, hazardous,

Dybarth, a Separation.

Dytour, lowly.

Dyenar, Pence.

Dyerbine, to revive.

Dyfen, a Prohibition,

Dyftn, Depth. R.

Dyfout, Fault.
Crime.

Dyg, to bring; ef aidyg hym, he
brought it unto me.

Dygnahas, to deny.

Dygow, right; barth dygow,
Right-ſide.

Dyhodzheth, in the Afternoon.
See dih, &c.

Dyhou, right. Lh. See dehou.

Dyhuanz, guickly.

Dyliez, revenged. V. Mevedn
boz dyliez, I wall be revenged.

Dyllas, Cloaths. See dill.

Dylla gudzh, Phlebotomy; draw-
ing Blood.


See Diffout,


Dyller (tyller and tellar, id), @


Place.
Dylly, ceaſing ; Heb-dylly, with-
out ceaſing.
Dylofni, a Bunch, or Bundle,
Dylyr (& dilvar, id.), to deliver.
Dymme, Value, S. na ro dymme,
value it net; deem it as nothing.
Dymmo, valued. Pa.
Dymmyn, Pieces; ol the dym-
myn, all ta Pieces.
Dyn, harp, it. a Man; tyn, id.
Dynerchy (dynerhi, id.), to Ja-
lute ; to greet.
Dyns, Teeth.
Dyrag, before ; coram, Lat.
Dyrgwys, raiſed.
Dyſkas, a Guide.
Dyſkyans, Learning.
Dyſcyna, to deſcend. |
Dyſkyblion, Diſciples. Sce Diſx.
Dyſon, a Blſſing.
Dyſpreſias, def; ifed. V.
Dyſſantye,


P EET, er ns,


*
I
4®
7Y


8


3


= ANCE gt wrt eb A. CLE Ay; at


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


DY


Dyſſantye, to deceive.
"rages the Top of the Head.
yſwe, tell. V.

Dyſwithy, to ſhew, inſorm; dyſ-
quethas, & thyſwethas, id.
Deſwrys, undone ; deſtroyed. Pa.

Dyth, @ Day; Pl. dydiou.

Dythygtys, was framed; pre-
pared.

Dyvere, to drop; guraf dyvere,
[ ſhould drop.

Dyueth, /cornful.

Dyuetha, 4%; utmeſt. Lh.

Dyvethaz lak, long a coming. Lh.

Dyun, let us come.

Dyvot (dyvoz, id.), to come.

Dyweddio, to betroth.

Dywolou, the Devils ; a Dioul.

Dywort, from.

Dyz (dez, id.), equivalent to
the Engliſh Dis, or un, as

Dyzkydha, to diſcover.


D Z


Dzarn, an Orchard; a Garden.

Dzeziou, Jeſus, the Saviour.

Dzhei, they ; them.

Dzherken, a Perkin.

Dzhiaul, the Devil. Lh.

Dzhiunia to join together; to cou-
ple; kydio, W. id.

Dzhyi, a Houſe ; they.

Dzhyrna, a Day.


.
He; him; it; of him; Mit;
I his.
E, V. ts; this E, before Verbs
of the Preſent Tenſe, is joined
to the Verb, as Dew ewyr
(for dew e wyr), God knows.
Eage, Spar-thatched.
Eal, an Angel; pro El.
Eanes, Lambs ; Parc an Eanes,
the Lamb's Field.
Eaſt, Auguſt.
Eauſtic, a Nightingale, Ar.
Eaſt, ju/? (f. pro yſt), Ju/tus, (a
proper Name}, as Pronter Eft,


the Prieſt of St. Fuft,
E B


Ebal, à Colt.

Ebat, a Play. Ar.

Ebilhocra, a Nail, or Spike.
Ebilio, 0 bore a Hole; tyllou, id.
Ebral, April. |
Ebron, the Sky.

Ebſcob, High-Prieft ; Biſhrp.


E C
Echuydh, the Evening.


Echrys, à Blaſting, or Strateing elez.


with a Plant,


ED


Ed, into; in; as, ed eſkaz vi,
into (or in) my Shoe.

Eddrak (edrek, id.), Sorrow ;
Repentance.

Edhen, a Bird.

Edhenor, a Fowler.

Edn, narrow ; ſlender,

Ednak, only ; te wit ; enednak,
1d.

Edris, learned; caer edris, a learn-
ed City.

Eduyn (Ir. eadhan, id.), ſcilicet ;
to wit.


Edyack, a Simpleton,
E F


Ef, he; (E, id.)
Efin, June; Ephan, & Ephou, id.
Efyddu, to braze; pieſſu, id.


E G


Egery, to open; Egoru, id.

Egliz, a Church; W. egluys;
Ar. ilys, id. eglos, id.

Egr, a Daiſy; egr deu, id. neo-
nin, 1d.

Egruath, to roll; voluto.


E H


Ehal, & eal, Lh. a /abouring
Leaſt ; an Angel; Lh. el, id.
PLE


Ehan (eghen, id.), a Kind; a Sort;
as, neb ehan, every Kind; Ar.


Ehaz, Health ; Safety ; Greeting.
Lh


Ehog, a Salmon; choc, & chauc,
id.

Ehual, high; as, bal-ehual, the
high Bal.


EI


Ei, wit; ti ei moz, thou wit go.

Eiddo, proper ; one's own. Gr.
10+,

Eigion, the Bottom, or Ground of
any thing.

Eiloh, can; hui eiloh, ye can.

Eineach, a Face.

Eiriaſdan, a Bonefire; tanllwyth,
id.

Eirinen, a Plumb; Ar. a Sl.

Eifin, Bran; yſgarthion, id.

Eithick, huge, very; eithick da,
hugely (or very) god.

Eithin, Furze.

Eithav, inward. Lh.


E L


El (chal, & eal, Ail. Cott. Ir.
aiglile, id.), an Angel; Pl.


E L.
7 8


Elau, an E'm Tree.

Elec, Alexander.

Elerch, a Swan; Elcrhe. Cott.

& Elerchy, id.

Eleſker, the Shin; Shank,

t.leſtr, Matt; Tapeſtry; Carpet.

Eleſt 5 Sedge; Ii ater flag; Sheer-

raſs.

Elgeht, the Chin.

Elhylbon, y mor, W. Nereides,

the Fairies of the Sea, Lh.

Elin, a Cubit ; an Angle, or Cor-

ner. Gr. WAN. id,

Ella, the Night-mare ; unde f.
Elves, or Fairies; W. elkylh

nos, Lh.

Ellaz, Alas.

El.il, an Idol, or Hobgebiin. R.

Elo, may, or can; neb na ello,
who cannot.

Els, a Son-in-law ; a Stepſon.
Elſes, a Son- in law by a former
Mie, or Huſband. Cott,

Elvenuaf, to ſparkle. Ar.

Elven, an Element; a Spark of
i

Elydr (elydn), Braſs.


E M
Emdhal, to rive; ombdhal, id.


Emeas, without.

Emenin, Butter.

Fm!odb, Fighting; a Fight.
Emmet, an Ant; Qu.
Emperr, an Empreſs.
Emperur, an Emperour.
Emſkemmunys, accurſed.


E N


En, an Intenſive Particle, as,
enkledhyz, buried; for kled-
hyz, it. the; for an.

En (for enys, in Compoſ.), an
Hand, as, enmaiir, the great
Iſland.

Ena, & enaff, the Soul; it. there;
then.

Enap, a Face; it. againſt; bidn,
id.

Enbcra, into.

Enbit, the World; (Quaſ. an
bys.)

Enc, narrow; encat, to mak
narrow.

Enchinethel, a Gyant ; enquele-
zar, id. Ar.

Ene (ena, id.), there; then.

Eneb (enep, id.), the Page of a
Book.

Enedeten, the Powell.

Enef (enaff, & ena, id.), the Scul;
Pl. enevou.

En-val, @ Beaſt; enevales, 3
She- beaſt.

Enez, Shrode tide; it. an Iſiand,


Elar (elor, W. id.), 4 Bier.


(pro Enys), Pl. Enezou.
| Enezek,


7


— —
—  —
— —


———-


= - — —
—— — — —_— — — ͤ——q—pTä—
& — - — — — — —
— —


428
E N |


Enezek, an I/lander.
Enfys bwagwlaw, W. à Rain-
bow.

Engil, Fire. R.

Englennaf, to flick, or adhere to.
r.

Engurbor, a Diſh.

1 an Iſland; W. ynys; Ar.
nezen, enyzyz, id.

Enkledhyas, buried.

Encois, Frankincenſe ; Incenſe.

Enlidan, the Herb Plantain.

Ennill, Gain. R.

Enniou, Foints ; Scams.

Enogoz, near.

Enradn, partly.

Ens, are. V.

Entredes, Warmth.

Enuedh, alſo.

Envenough, ten; liaztorn, li-

aſtre, id.

Enuoch, again/t ; a Face.

Enwedhan, an Aßb- tree.

Enwyth, id.

Enys, an Iſland. Lh.


EP


Epat, laſling; during. Ar.
Ephan, Summer ; miz ephan,
Summer Month ; viz. June.
Eppilio (qu. an euillio), 1 breed,

or be with young.


E R


Er, an Hour (urna, id.), it.
upon.

Er, an Intenſive Particle, like
16 Gr. valde; it. new; freſh;
it. Snow ; Lh. as, eri.

Er, au Eagle.

Er (pro erw), a Field; as, erteg,
a Foir-field.

Era, which; how ; as, pelea era,
hoo far.

Era (pro dera), do; as, mi dera

lavirias, I do labour.

Erberou, Gardens.

Erchyll, dreadful; Hercules;

Erchys, commanded.

Eren, to tye; ere, a Band, or


ye. ;
* (yrgh, id.), to call earnęſti-


ly.

Ergiz (for egiz), a Shoe.

Ergyd twrwf, a Thunderbolt.
Erhmit, a Hermit.

Erieu, the Temples; viz. of the


*


cad.
Erigea, to ariſe.
Ernoyth, undreſſed; unclad;
naked.


Ero (erov, erven, id.), a Ridge,
or high Furraow. Ar.

Err, Snow; ma kil err, it ſnows;

it. new; freſh.


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY,


E R


Erres, a flat, even Plat; Flor of
a Houſe, Ar.

Erthebyn (ortheby, erybyn, er-
byn, erdhabyn, id.), againſt.
Ervinen, a Turnip.

Ervyes, he is circumſpect; ab
Ervyr, to perceive.

Ervyz, armed; ab arv, arm thou.
Erw, à Field; ager. L


E S


Es, is; eſen, id. eſa, were; ens,
& ez, are.

Es, that; which; es guaya,
which moveth.

Eſcob, a Biſhop; eſcoben, & eſ-
cobon, PI.

Eſcuit, nimble; ſwift. Ar.

Eſe (eve, & ve, id.), was. V.

Eſgara, to leave, or forſake. Lh.

Eſgiz, a Shoe; eſkaz, id.

Eſkidieu, Slippers.

Eſkynna, to aſcend. T. T.

Eſel, a Limb, or Member.

Eſou (eſoz, id.), already.

Eſquet, a Felon,

Eſt, Yiſt, Iſt, Fu/? [a proper
Name]; Re Th, 55. J
W. Jeſtin for Juſtin.

Eſtren, an Oyſter; Pl. eſtreu.


ET


Et (pro etaf), it; in; as, et a
phokkat, in my Pocket,

Et, Corn. Ar.

Eta, ztſelf; it.

Etau, . Ar.

Eth, he went ; ethons, they went.

Ethas, the eighth. Lh.

Ethiaz, is; there is.

Edhnou brodzan, Starlings.

Etho, am; Ethove, I am; tho, id.

Ethon, bear Children.

Ethowon, Zews; Edzhewon, Pl.

Ethym, did; mea ethem moaz,
T did go.

Etre, between; emeſk, id, Lh.

Ettanz, in them; therein.

Etto, yet; till; Gr. eti.


E U


Eu, he; (ef, Ev, id.)


Eva, to drink.

Evef, Eve.

Even, patient ; pur even, very
patient.

Evez, out ; without.

Eugh, go; get out; eugh yn mes,
get you out,

Euhal, high; ehual, eukella, id.
W. uchel, id. haughty. Lh.

Euhelder, Height.

Euhelet, Altivola; a Lark, or
Bird that flies high. Lh.


Erra, was; had been.


Evi, of nie.
}


E U


ng a Lark,

uig (euhig, id.), @ Hint:

fattened er A.) & =.

euig, a Fawn; euhi

fallow Dar. .

1 a Hoc.
uit, an Uncle; a F.

Mother's Brother, *

Euithr, id.

Euleiok, at leaft.

Eun (even, id.), freight

Euna, to reftify.

Eunhilik, 4 ju/t Man; camhilik,
an unjuſl. |

Evodh, Leave; dregyz evodh,

by your Leave.

Evos (for evough aguz), drink
your.

Evough, Drink ye ; from eva.

Eure, a Goldſmith.

Eur, Happineſs ; eurmat, id. Ar.

Eus, Horror; Abomination. Ib.

Eus, a Nightingale.

Euth, alſo; ruth, id. |

Euin, a Nail ; Ind. Euincarn,
the Hoof of a Horſe. Lh.


EY


Eye, they; Y, id.

Eyll, the one ; yld, id,

Eyn, Cold; gatm eyn, cold Cry.

N (kining eyinok), Car-
1


4 ff * *
D e
—


; right,


>,

Eyriſder, Happineſs.
Eyſye, to extol, praiſes
Eyſyll, Hyſep.


E Z


8 1 _— N 4 1 * , * —_ >
* ; . — 0 4 DENT it eo Hh. 2 5 y . r l % *
r 21 en * 8 LR 41 r N . v W X-4 = * a 44 7 J * 2 SW * 3 * IE 7 o
8 IE 6d e x "is +. 3 PSs. N = ME, OO 3 3 8 F a , q
3 8 4 . * _ fl P 1 1 P : « ed 3 3 n
6 | . n — ar r EN" thats ne hi Sri 1 FY — ah
l 4 4 * 1 1 * * CV _ N 4 * b bs


Ez, is; V. it. your, as, der ea
kibmiaz, by your Leave.

Ezall, low. Gw.

Ezen, I was; it. a Bird, for ed-
hen.

Ezhov (ydzhov, id.), I come.

Ezom, Poverty. Ar.

Ezzez, thou wert.


F.
N. B. The Letter F, Primary


Initial, never alters in the Welſh,
Corniſh, or Armoric. Lh.
| « We uſe F always for V,
&« when it is a Conſonant, as,
« Lhan fair, is in reading called
« Lhan vair.” Hum. Lh. So
Fou, or Fau, à Cave in Welſh,
is Vou, or Vau, in Corniſh.
Inſtead of the Latin F, the
Welſh always uſe Ph, or Ff.


WG
„ 4 wand ach _—_ a 8 L


. - 8 4
5 FI * 5


PAdic, (profugus), 4 Run-
away.
Faellu, to err; make to err. pads.


r. :
Faidus (fardus, Cott ), *.
415


6


nee —_ . 4 ' a
ö 2 e 2 8 18 2 n een 9 "” ac - | * 1
P tos. i 4 W Pye a b EY ' q "_ KY Wy * * "> N N 1 : " 1 —
4 1 wy aged * 8 n \ EE td 1 a 0 1 . N x ,
I _ | * ; — „ 8 nad A by —_ Wa WY ” RY 4 1 Oh: GIG.
, ? p l w 1 * " INTRO n 2 6


a 2 2
K 3 *


Fellores, a Player on the Pipe, or


F A


Fal, 4 Shovel, hez ou al, Length
of my Shovel.

Fall, Doub! ; heb fall, without
Doubt.

Falladou, Fraud; Failing.

Fallia, to cleave ; ſplit.

Falſney, —

Falſury, falſely.

Fan, BAA 3 Deus; Celtic.
Keyſ.

Faneq (Ar.), Mud; Mire.

Farvel, a Buffoon; Ar. a Je,
ter.

Fas, & yn fas, clearly; Strength;
Face to Face.

Faſtſens, Faſtneſs ; it. preſently ;
it. Fat; an Ad.

Fatel, how ; fatla, & fat], id.

Favan, a Bean; Pl, fav ; ponar,
id.

Faucun, a Hawk.

Fauns, a Fall; a Caft; a Throw
a wreſtling Term.

Faut (fout, id.), Lan; Lack;
a Crime; ma faut, I want.
Ffau, ffay, Lh. Fovea; a Den;

Day ; C. vau, & vou.


F E


Fe, was ; ſhould be; ve, id,
Fehas, Sin; (pro peghas, id.)
Fein, neat, handſome ; feg, id.
witty.
Fekyl, hewed (ſecle, id.); made;
feigned. |
Feldzha, to cleave ; id. ac fallia.
Felen, Wormwozrd ; fuelein, id.
Fell, & feld. See Gueal.
Fella, further; na fella, no fur-
ther; fel, id. as, vorfel, the
further Way.


Violin; a Woman Piper. Cott.
Felpen, a Piece, Ar.
Fen, End; yn fen, in ſhort; final-
*


ly. |

Fenochel, the Herb Fennel.

Fentan, a Spring; a Source; fyn-
tan, id.

Ffenwith, End ; heb ffenwith,
without End.

Fer, the Leg (Crus). Cott.

Ferclin, Meat ; Dainties.

Ferhiat, a Thief; lader, id.

Fernoyth, bare; naked ; poorly
clad.

Ferue, to die; merwe, id.

Feryl, Danger.

Flelont, a Pheaſant.

Feſt, quickly; Meaſure; feſt cref,
abundant Meaſure,

Feſtinna, zo made Haſte. Lh.

Feth, Face; i. Hall be; fyt.
id, 7

Fethys, taken; fedh, id.

Fettow, faid be.


F E


F = r, a Fair; Market; fer,
id,
Feyn, Smart; Pain; beyn, peyn,


id,


FI


Fia, had, or did; via, id.

Fial, a Buckle.

Fiala, a She-piper,

Fickya, copulari.

Figbren, a Fig-tree. |

Figges, Figs ; tigges ledan, broad

Figs; figgez an houl, Raiſins

of the Sun. Gw.

Filgeth, Scot.

Filh, a Hook-bill, a Hook; a

Sickle.

Fin, againſt; fyn, id. it. ſubtil;
wary; provident; it. white,
pro gwyn.

Finval, to fir; remove; part
from. Ar.

Fiol, a Cup.

Fir, wiſe ; cautious; fir, id. Lh.

Fiſlak, qu. (go you little fiſlak),

fiſſelek, f. a Knave; Lat. lepi-
dum Capitulum ; Puerulus.

Fiſlel, YVentris Crepitulus ; Pedi-


tum.


F L


Flair, a Smell,

Flacraf mad, to ſmell well, or

flrong. Cott.

Flam, a Flame. Lh. Ar. & W.
id.

Flaw, a Cut; @>aw, Gr.

Fledgiow, Children.

Fleheſſig, a little Child; fleheſou,
Pl. & flechet, id.

Flem, à Sting. Ar.

Floh, a Child; Pl. flehys.

Flo, very ſmall,

Flookan, qu. (an a Flaw), a Cut;
it being a Parcel of Ground
which cutteth off one Part of
a Load from another? a Tin-
ner's Term: fleukan, a /
Vein. T. T.

Flown an, a proud Maid. Gw.

Fflur, Brightneſs.

Flurr (flurrag, id.), Prow of a
Ship.

Flyran, a Lack of a Door.


F O


Ffo, Flight.

Foath, the Townof Fawy (Carew),
quaſi Fau-weath; in Leland,
Fawathe, Corniſh for Fawy;
Faw-uedh, i. & the Bed, or
Graveof the Fau, fromit's Depth
near the Town ; f. Fau-warth,


on (i. e the Banks of) the Faw,


Feuat, would; y feunt, be winld.


Fol (fed, id.), a Place, R.
5 R


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 429


F O
Fodic, happy.


oen, Hay.

Foge, a Blov*ng-houſe for melting

of Tin,

Fogou, a Cave; quaſ. foghou,
id. ac fou, vel fod-gou, a
fod & govea, to lie hid; viz.
a hiding Place; ogo, quaſi
vogo, id.

Fol, a Feel; par (or pur) tol,
a very Fool.

Ffollach, a Buſkin.

Follat, a Handkerchief.

Folneth, Folly ; Foloreth, id.

Foltguſke, frantick ; foltreguſke,
id


Foltre, frantick. Li.

Fon, let it be. V.

Fonn, Ar, Plenty; fonna, to
abound.

Fons, may be; fens, we were.

Font, the Bottem. Ar.

Ford, a IWay ; (forth, & vor, id.)
P. furru.

Forh, a Pitchfork; a Prong.

Formyys, formed.

Forn, an Oven; Ar. a Prong.

Forrior, a Thief ; pag. Sam.

Forth, a Hay; it. why ?

Fos, a Wall; marhas an fos, the
Market on Wall; tos. Lh. id.

Folaneu, a Shoe, or Slipper.

Fou (vou, id.), a Den, or Cave;
Pendin vou, Pendin Cave;
PI. fouiz, Dens.

Foulz, falſe; perfidious ; treache-
Fou. 4


Foys, a Table,
F R


Fra, why; rag fra, wherefore ?

Fraga, why ; praga, id. rag pra-
ga, 1d.

Frank, A. free.

Franki, Francis, Gw.

Frao, the little horned Owl.

Fſras, born ; inffras, to be born.

Frat, Qu. for all your Frat ; Noiſe;
Objection.

Frau, a Rok, or Town Crow ;
Lh.

Freg, a Wife; gureg, id.

Frehez, vexed. Gw.

Frenna, to buy; perna, id.

Frez, diſtincily; eaſily. Ar.

Fria, to fry ; Lh. W. frio, id.

Fries, a Huſband.

Frigau, a Neſe; trein, id. Ar. fri.

Fron, the Neſe.

Fros, the Tide of the Sea.

Frot, anarrav Sea. Cott. Aluens.

Froth, a Crumb ; a ſmall Piece.

Frou, id. ac fros,

Frouden, Fancy; Humour; Fra-
lick. Ar.


Frouyn, to part, or ſeparate. Lh.
Frac,


430
F R


Früc, the Noſe; Cott. Ar. fri.

Fruyn, a Bridle.

Firwyth, Effects; Fruit; Ar.
frouez, id.

Frya, to Fry.

Fryns, Prince.

Fryth, a Hawthorn ; kellifryth,
a Grove of Hawthorns,


FU
Fual, a Buckle; fial, id.


Fuelein, Wormwood.

Fulen (fulien, id.) a Spark of
Fire. Ar.

Funil, Fennel.

Funten. See Fenten.

Fur, wiſe; W. fwyr, anfur, im-
prudent.

Furaat, to be wiſe.

Furf, a Form, or Shape.

Furgan, Qu. to give a Bey his
Furgan, i. e. to correct, or
chaſliſe him.

Furnez, Wiſdom.


| i 4


Fyal. See Fual.

Fyas, fled:

Fye, to exile ;, drive away ; fys,
ſcattered.

Fykyl, Hing; fykyl lavarou,
ing Words.


Fyllel, fail; heb fyllel, without
71


ail.

Ftylly, ought; dous fylly, they
ought. |

Fyn, an End; à Boundary; tyr-
fyneau, Lands.

Fynnas, would; vynnas, id. V.

Fynny, to proſper.

Fyr, wiſe ; cautious. See Fur,

Fyſadou, Prayers.

Fyſel. Qu. See Fiſlel.

L yſta, to threſh.

yſteene, Hale.

Fyth, Kaas

Fyvar, an Edge.


G.


« (G, in the firſt Place vaniſh-
* eth away.” H. L. Brev. E. 3.
So in Gun, Downs, the G
ſhall vaniſh, as in Boſcawen in,
Lan y un.

N. B. Where the ſame or
like Word begins with a K or
C, and alſo with a G; that with
a K, or C, is to be reckoned
the Theme, and the K, or C,
changed into a G, Euphoniæ
gratia.


8 ſeixed; gathyas, &
agathyas, id.


A CORNISH- ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


"A


Gael (for gavel), to find.
Gafe (cafe, & cafos, id.), to find;
to contrive.

Gahen, the Herb Symphoniaca.
Gajah, a Daiſy; Gajah broaz,
the Great, or Horſs- Dai i7
Gaiav (guav, id.), the Winter,
Gain (cain, & gainor, id.), Fair.

Gainz (pro guenz), Wind.


Pangs, or Mailings.
Galarouedges, ſuffered. +


French.
Galla, to may, or can.


Gallydhog, mighty ; galluidoc,
Cott. id.


kelly, to loſe.
Galli (hali, id.) Hoh.
Galliard, a Jigg; a Dance.
Gallons, obtained ; perſuaded.
Gallous, to go. V.
Galloys, Eagerneſs.
Gailuſter (galluzack, id.), migh-
ty; galludek, A. able.


=
Galu (galua, id.), 10 call,


down; a kam, or kabm, bowed.

Gan, in (id. ac gen), by; with.

Gan (for gwen, or can), white;
as, godolgan. . . . dourgan,
white Water ; it ſignifies al-
ſo, 4 Hollow; an Opening,
or Mouth of a River, or Val-
ley; as, Treworgan, Habi-
tation on the Opening of the
Valley ; from ganau, genee,
C. Ar. genee, id. W. genee,
Lh. 110.

Ganau, a Mouth; gene, id. Lh.

Gangys, changed. Pa.

Gannel, Chanel, or Arm of the

Sea ; f. gan-hel, white River,

or River's Mouth.

Ganou, a Mouth (genau, id);

genuous, their Faces.

Gans, with.

Gans-henna (or hema), here-

upon.

Ganſa, with you.

Ganzo (gonzha, id.), with him.

Gan-zingy, to draw in any thing.

Gara, beloved; gare, Love; loved;

pro cara.

Garan, a Crane; ige

Garera, to leave; gara, id.

Gargabm, bandy, or crooked legg'd.

Gargat, a Garter; gargettou. Pl.

Garlont, a Garland; an arlant,

the Garland.

Garm (lr. gairm, id.), happy.


Garme, bewailing ; yn un garme,


Gad, Ar. a Hare; gat, id. ib,


1d.


Galarou, to lament; it. bitter | Garz, a Hedge; Ar, Pl.


Galdrum, Inchantments; a De-
lirium, or Abſence of Reaſon ;
vulg. Gualdrums ; Galek,


Galles, did/ft loſe; art lot; a


Gamma (omgamme, id.), bewed


GA
Garou, rough; cruel : ,
hagar, id, een
Garr, the Leg; Pl.
Feet, or Knee.


ceed. paſs Saha


Garres, left ; I1
ter left. Nu nn,


Garthou, @ Goad; guän, id.


garrou, Leg 15


ler. 8


Gaſa (gaſe, id.), to j
2 e wn"

— went ; came.
athya, to ſeize upon.

Gay, ö *

Gavael, a Tenure; Lands-boung..
ed. R

Gaval, to get.

Gavar, a Goat [ Ar, gaor, id.);
Pl. Goiir ; gever, a She-Goat ;
Cott. bock, a He-Goat. 1b.

Gavar mor, a long Oyſter; from
its Horns called a Sea-Geat ty
the Corniſh. Lh.

Gaunak, Ar. barren.

Gawr, valiant ; mighty ; ind,
cawr, a Giant.


Galſe (galſo, & Gulſe, id.), gone; | Gaws, to get; gotten; got,


GE


Ge, their; as, dho ge Deauon
gow, to their falſe Gods. See

Ghee, and Ghee.

Geauel, the Goſpel ; Geawel, id.
Cott.

Gedn, a Wedge; ind. gad, an
Iron Wedge.

Geey, to bring forth; to fole;
the Mare was ready to geey,
i. e. to caſt her Fole; f. for kiy.

Geffi [ti a geffi, or gevyth, thou
ſhalt have]; to haſle; hold.

Geffo, found ; have; had.

Gefys, t; [geſys, id.]

Geien, a Sinew ; Nerve.

Geien, a Back,

Geir, by. Lh.

Gel, a Horſe-leech; Gelauch, f.

id, Lh.

Gelchi, te waſh thoroughly.

Gele, to ſwear; V. another;

gelle, id.

Gelen, an Elbow, or Cubit.

Gelli, Hazels; Tregelli, Tow:

of Hazels. Hum. Lh.

Gellon, a Cubit; gelin; Pl.

gelinou, 1d. ONT

Gelvyn, a Bill, or Beak; gilbin,

id,

Gen, with; it. on; for ; near io.

Genas, with theez genes, & ge-

nez, 1d,

Genau, the Mouth.

Genaued, a Morſel; A. & C.

Gene, a Chin. 80

| Genedigycth, Birth ; Nativity.

Gennen;


LY
4
TY
.
1
1
*
1 %
7
bw.
4 *
.
'
Wl
4
=
I
72 4
"LY *
4 'B
p _
—-
|
3
"ii
—_—
=
=
3
A 18
2
bs H
-
py
2 0 \


*

>

>
1
x -
14

#

;


-


R
+ * * 1


OY
y 4


Ly

»

a.

*

1

1
4
%
* ©

-4

LE.
oF .
"IX
5 '
C ZI
"A
wy *
— þ
4 ;
q


8


GE |


Gennen, with us; gennam, by us.

Genouh, with you.

Genre, with them. N

8. are; gennas, id.

—1 An or with him.

Genvar, January.

Genys, born; begotten.

Genzynz, with them.

Ger, a Werd; gervas, a good
Mord; ger da, id.

Gerches, to fetch.

Gerdin, the Bloody-ux.

Gerenſe (grenſye, id.), Sate;
Love; pro Carenſa.

Gerhas, did go; gerys, gone.

Gero, let; gero ni guil, let us
make.

Gerut-da, a famous Man.

Ges, jeering 3 yn ges, in Sport;
is; V. nyn ges, is not.

Gift, a Bitch; Pl. geſti, Dogs,
or Bitches.

Gethe, a Day; Pr. deth.

Geve, had; took ; ought ; gevo,
he had; na geve, there was not.

Geuelhorn, a Hand-wiper, or
Towel.

Gever, Duty ; et i gever, in her
Duty; it. Pl. of gavar.

Gevern, a Hundred; a Diſlrid.

Gevyn, W. Fetters; Gives;
Shackles.

Gevyons, forgiven; Geve, to
pardon. ;

Gew, a Spear; gyW, id.

Gewar, Rage.

Geyleiſio, to tickle; yſynugu, Gr.
id.

Geyll, Scoffe


GH
Ghe, them; ne el e ge debre, he


can't eat them.
Ghenev (forgen y vi), with me.
Ghel, a Horſe-leech; gel, id.
Gheluyz (& ghiluyz, id.), called.
Ghenouch (ghenok, id.) with
on.
Chas with your.
Gheon, a Giant; treva gheon,
Gyants Town.
Ghera, do; ghera vi, 7 ds,


G1
Gi (ge, id.), they; them; ha go-


raſgi, and he put them.
iar, a Hen; mab giar, a young
Hen,

Gigal, a Diftaff; Kogol, W. id.
il, to make; guil, id. gero ni
gil, let us make, It is often re-
dundant.

Gilbin, a Beat, or Bill.

Gilliz, gone; loft.

Ginnow, a Pair of Bellows.


Gir (for ger), Pl. giriou.


A CORNISH- ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


681


Girak, the Gar-fiſh; the Needle-
fiſh; a Needle. Lh.

Gur, a Loſeneſs ; an girr, the
Looſeneſs.

Dho githa, te hide. Lh.

Givians, Pardon. See Geve.


GH


Glaine (Ir. gloine, id.), Glaſs ;
W. Gleini nadroeth, the Glaſs
Adders, viz. the Anguinum of
the Druids; in Scotland call-
ed Adder-ſtones.

Glan, the Bank of a River.

Glane, clean; glannith, Lh. id.

Glannuthder, Cleanlineſs.

Glaouen, a Coal; Ir. gualan, id.

Glas, Green; Grey; Afh-coloured;
it. the Stomach; Cott, glayis,
& lays, id. glaz, id.

Glaſenye, Green water. Norden,


P- 49-

Glaſennith, Viridis Nidus. Le-
land.

Glaſgarn, a Kingdom.

Glaſtan (& glaſtanen, id.), an
Oak.

Glaſuidd, Hueiſb. R.

Glau, a Shower ; Stud of Rain;
gleau, id.

Glavethas, a Midwife ; a clav,
f. bennen glyvedh, id. & ve-
thys, viz. looking to fick Wo-
men.

Gleab, & gleb, moi (pro glib),
it. Vet; W. gulyb, id.

Gledh, Left; as, Leſt-hand; it.
North; it. Chickweed ; Gog-
leth, the North.

Gleny, to flick ; cleave to; take
hold of ; glenys, Pa.

Gleſin, the Herb Sandyx.

Glevyon, the ſick ; Pl. of clef.

Glewas, to hear ; clowas, id.
gleu, heard. Pa.

Glez, a Swarm of Bees.

Gliber, Moiſture (ind. glib), fip-
pery; moiſt ; ſmooth ; gly bor, id.

Glihi, Tre; 1a, id.

Glikin, 4%; dom glikin, Left-
hand. Lh.

Glin, a Knee ; Ir. glun.

Glit, Water-ſnow ; Hoar-froft ;
Froſt.

Glos, Grey; Ar. glaz, id.

Glow, a Coal; glou, id. Lh.

Gloyndiu, a Butterfly.

Gloys, Pulſe ; gloys cref, flrong
Pulſe.

Gloz, & glauz, Cotu-dung.

Gluan, Wool; gulan, id. Ar.
gloan.

Glud, Birdlime.

Glut, Glew ; Paſte; Solder. Lb.

Gluth. a Bed, or Bed-chanber ;
it. Dew; Ar. geiz.

Gluys, pleaſant ; bite.


G L
Glyd, a Lord; it. vehement; Lh.


® .
Glyn, a Falley; Ir. glin, glean,


glan, id.
G O


Go, was; nyn go, was n:t.
Goac, /oft ; tender. Ar.


8 (goagten, id.), & ute.
b.


Goall, evil; wicked, Ib.

Goap, Mcchery.

Goar, a Huſband. See Gut.

Goas (Ar. pro guaz), a Man.

Goath (Ar. pio goth), old.

Goaz, a Gooſe,

Goazen, an Arm of the Sea. Ar,

Gobennudd, a Bel/ter.

Goch, à proud Il man. Hugh
goch, i. e. Hugh the Red.
head; W. from Godhz, Blood.

Gochus, a proud Man.

ra gh fooliſh Feople ; II.

oky.

God, a Mole; godh, id. gudh-
doar, 1d, |

Goden-truit, Sole of the Foot.

2 88 Lees of Drink; godho,


id,

Dho Godhaz, to know. Lh.

Godho, Gecſe, Pl. à goaz.

Godoryn, a Breil; Tumult.

Godrabben (gudrabm, id.), a
Pain, or Swelling in the Hand;
a Cramp.

Gofail, a IVorkman; à gov. f.

Gote (goſfe, poyft, & gov), a
Smith.

Gofys, blocdy.

Gog, a Cuckow (Goky, a Fel);
ind. f. Gogwell, the Cuckow's
Town, or Work.

Gogleth, the North,

Gogwyddo, to bend, or ſhake ;


ind. gogwyddo pen, to beckon.
Goil, 4 Sail.


Goitkenin, Dog's Bane.
Goky, a Focl; aſſos poky, you
are a Foal ; a gog, a Churl.
Gol, Holy; it. 4 Veil; ind. Ca-
ergol, Holy Town, or Fortreſs;
goil, id. Lh.

Y Gol, the Fly; a Corniſh
Oath.
Golas, /nver (pro wolas).
Golaz, a Bottom ; ler, id. go-
laz truz, Sole of the Fort.
Golch, a Bath; golchſa, a ht
Bath.

Goleou, Marks, Pl. golcou pals,
freſh Marks. See Golu.

Goleuder, Splendar.

Golhen, a A; holhan, id.
kolhel, id.

Goleur, alias golor, Plenty;
Abundarice of any Thing.

Golhya, to wajh,

Golhys, waſhed.


1%,


432
G O


Goll, to loſe; gollas, 4%; it.

hidden ; gyld, id.

Golli, to deſtroy.

Gollon (collon & hollon, id.),
a Heart ; it. a Hart, or Deer.

Gollow, a Light ; goleuad, W.
id. golouas, Lightning.

Golmas, bound; fettered.

Golo, a Coverture; golo ar guele,
a Coverlid.

Goloff, to cover. Ar.

Golom, a Pidgemm ; Columba.

Golovas, Childbed; Travail; ben-

nen yn golovas, a Woman in
Childbed.

Golou-leſtre, a Lamp; a Candle-
flick ; incoiſe leſt, an Incenſe
Pot.

Gols, the Hair.

Golſowas, to kearken.

Golu, a Mark:

Goluan, rejoicing ; Midſummer;
i. e. the Time of Lights, or
Baone-fires.

Golvan, a Sparrow ; gylvan, id.

Golvinak, a Curliew.

Golwiden, a Hazle-tree. Lh.

Golwyth, Burnt-offerings.

Golyough, watch ye; goolyas,
to watch ; golzyas, id.

Gomfortye, to comfort. V.

Gon, ours.

Gonalen, a Shoulder.

Gonidog, a Servant; Attendant.

Gonnyon, white ; carrig gonny-
on, White Stones.

Gonon, none.

Gons (Mod. Corniſh), Vulva.

Gonyaz, a Moth-worm.

Gonys, with them.

Goon, a Down a Plain; goon
glaz, the Sea, or green Plain ;
gin, & ann, id.

Goober (gober, id. guber, id.),
a Reward; Wages; gubar, Lh.
id.

Googoo, a Cave, or Den; W.
ogoh.

Gophen, to aſe.

Gor, put; cauſe; do; 2 gorra.

Gor, an Intenſive Particle, ſome-
times only an Expletive.

Dho go a, to put, or ſet in Or-
der ; to frame, or make, Lh.

Gorchymmia, to bid, or com-

mand,


Gorephan, July; Miz Gore-


phan, the Month of July; Miz
gorphennav, W. id. 1. e. the
Muth in the Height of Sum-
mer.

Gor#enne, to make an End; gura
fen, id.

Gorguith, be careful.

Gorgwethens, they covered; a gu-
eth, a Cloth.

Gorha, Hay.


Gorhmenna, ta command, Lh.


— <p


1


A CORNISH- ENGLISH VOCABULARY,


G O


Gorhemmenau, Commands.

Gorlan, a Church-yard; it. a
Sheep Cote.

Gormenna, to command.

Gormola, Praiſe.

Dho gorou, to open.

Gorra, or ora, Lh. to put ; lay
down. See Gurys, or gorris.

Gorre, that which is above. Ar.

Gorſedd, a Seat of Judgement;
gorſeddaddleu, a Bar in a
Court of Juſtice.

Gorthewyth, Bed-fichneſs.

Gorthyans, V orſbiping.

Gorthyn, muſt, or ought.

Gortha, 10 tarry; gor tos, to flop.

Gortys, e/teemed.

Goruedh, ts lie-dotun.

Goruer, a Cloud.

Gorweythy, ought. V.

Gorweddar, 1% brood, or ſit on

Brood.

Gorwfel, a Snake,

Goſkaz, to ſleep; me ry goſkaz,
I have ſlept.

— 4 Heuſpold; a Fa-
mily.

Golteggion, Bannsof Matrimony.

Goſteyth, obedient.

Goſtotter, Shelter,

Golys, bloody.

Goth (for koth), old; formerly;
it. Pride,

Goth, ſee; V. back ; ought; be-
comes.

8 they fell; pro cothas, to
a .

ha (pro wothaff), 7 now ;
ind. gothewys, Anon.

Gothihuar, the Evening.

Gothoan, Fools.

Gothvetnough, now ye.

Gov, a Smith; gov-diu, a Black-


ſmith.

Goval, W. Care; Induſtry;
Diligence.

Govail, a Smith's Shop; a Work-
man.

Govaytis, Covetouſneſs.

Gouas, to have; to hold; gevas,
id. dho gouas (dho gaval), to
hald, poſſeſs, or obtain.
oucen, a Nerve.

Gouea, to lie hid; A. kudha,
kudhet, id.

Gouegneth, Fraud; Falſbood.

Gouelaft, to weep ; I weep.

Govenek, Remembrance.

Gouer (gouea, id.), @ Brook, or
Beg; Ar. W. gover, gouern,
id.


Gover, a Rivulet; as, polgover,
a Rivulet Pool, or Head of the
Rivulet.

Govidzion, Sorrows. |
Gouiles, ' the Herb Avadznia.
Cott, Qu.


Goular, Coral, Ar.


G O


8 a Lier.
roullenwel, to fill; ful
Goulo, void. Ya En
Gouris, a Girdle.
Gouwan, à Meth; Lh. gouy-
an.
Govy, ſad.
Govynnas, aſted; govyn, id.
Gow, a Lie.
Gowak, a Lier; Pl. goulgnion
güak, id. 4
Gowethas, Company,
Gows (pro cowz), Speech,
Gowſyn, I ſpake.
Goyf, inter; guaf, id.
Goyne, Supper; kone, id.
282 4 —_
oyntys, Courteſy ; Covetonſucſi.
ts Blood ; N & 5
id.


Goz, your; for agoz, id.

Gozer, ftrived; Gw.

Gozan, a hard Vein, or Lodecrofe
ing another. T. T.

Gorowas, hearken. Gw.


G R


Grachel, à Heap; Tumulus; L.
berk, id.

Grachya, to break ; crack.

Grambla, to climb. Lh.

Gran, Command ; an deag gran
Deu, the ten Commandments of
God. f. Contraction from gor-
men, or gormenna.

Gras ('ras, & grage, id.), Pl. ara-
ſou (grath, id.), Grace;
Thanks.

Graſſys, thankful.

Grat, a Step; L. Gradus.

Gravar, a Barrow ; gravar dow-
la, or dula, a Hand-barrow ;
gravar roe, a Wheel-barrow ;
a Vehicle, Lh.

Gravior, a Sculptor ; gravia, to
engrave, Lh.

Grawn, a Berry.

Grayth, Trouble.

Gregar, to cackle as a Hen,

Gregy, to hang.

Grehan, Leather ; ſkelligrehan,
Leather wings, viz. a Bat.

Greiah rag, to require z t9 enquire


for.

Grelin, a Lake; W. id. &lhuch,
Ar. laguen; Ir. loch.
Gren, as, Polgren, Tregren,

i. e. the Green Pool; the Green
Town, or Dwelling on the
Green. Scribitur & Gryn, as,
Grynſey in Scilly, quaſi Green
Sea.
Gres, 4%; dell rethe gres, /o they
ſhauld do. ;
Greſt, Chrift; Griſt, id.


Greunen, a Grain; Ar. C. gro-


nen.
Greut,


i 4 —_ l ä p * * - n 1
W . n * $4 F | 8 : Rf 9 0
. ̃ oben Zito > EDS 277 „% EG oe NR ER
4 bond « 5 , N : 2 * 7 bs _—_ _— 1 27 pO
* , - TIER, Ie", 2 2
, — L ; n


+. 1 4. =


* Har


D on En ng The / va ee PLC 2g 4 dra.
> 8 Y N 2 . 1 2 1 * 4 FE ©. 1 - us, * *H '4 3 i Jn
, p N of 1 x ** 2 N 7 2 gg 1


4 "39 "=" 3
r enn.


2


8


FR


"Pe." few e
8


5” PN
A E
*


1 hes FE»

8 2

8 + 1
* .


rr Nannen ah + Red Ae * 3
r F, n n 1 - Sag dg 3 £
hd * NE" FOE. P 4 a 4 4 0 ö :
* * "YR 8 — „ 1
- * 0 -


„ OR


1
N <7" "RIP = oy -


1
1
A

x
4
1
BE. -


n on EO” 3 wr eo
11 3 ah


. W — - Sa " Wer of Fe, n
mmm enmn TITEL


GR
Greut, Earth; Powder; duſiy


Grains; Grit.
Grevye, painful; heavy; grevys,
grieved.
Gew, cauſed ; a gura, to make,
Grez, Faith; gris, id.
Grigear, a Partridge; qual, gry-
giar; grugyer, id. a Heath-poult,
Giigiz, a Girdle; a Band, Lh.
Grill, a Crab.
Gris (agtis, id.), I believe, grys,


id.

Griſill, thin ; ſmall,

Grifla, to grin z man kei y griſ-
la, the Dog grins.

Gro, Ballaſt ; pro grou, f.

Groes, Heat. Ar.

Gromercy (or gwra mercy),
Thanks to thee.

Gronen, the Skin ; a Grain.

Gronkye, to beat.

Grontys, a Grant ; granted.

Grou, Gravel; Sand, &c.

Grouan, id. 22 id.

Grouanen, a Pebble.

Groudel, a Fidler,

Growedh, to lie down ; ke grow-
eth, go, lie down.

Grownzebas, let him do. N

Groyne, a Seal ; Vitulus Mari-
nus, Leland.

Gruah, an old Woman.

Grüan, A. Gravel.

Grud, a Check, or Faw; grydh,
id,

Grueirten, a Root.

Grug, W. a Mount ; pro Cryg,
id


*


id.

Gruſhens, the Dregs, or Lee.

Gruſſons, they took ; gruſſons
cuſyl, they too Counſel.

Gry, Noiſe.

Grydh, a Cheek ; Faw or Chin.

Gryg, Heath. W.

Gryglans, Sticky Heath,

Grygys, a Belt, or Girdle; gou-
ris, id, grug. Cott. id.

Grym, bony ; ſtrong. R.

Grys, to believe; me a grys, /
believe,


—


GU


Guadhel, Houſhold Stuff.

Guadan, a Foundation ; the Baſe
of a Pillar,

Guadn, weak; pro guan.

Guadngyrti, to Hrangle.

Guaeldgu, a Sorry Felluo; boud-
hyn, id, Gw. Lh. 65.

Guaf, chaſte.

Guag, Hunger; Penury; en gu-
ag, in vain; empty.

Guahalgeh, an Officer of State;
a Preſident, or Governor of a
Country,

Guailen rayvanadh, a Scepter ;
guailen, a Scepter. Cott,


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


GU


Guain (nain, id.), a Meadoto;
it. @ Sheath,

Guainten, the Spring Seaſon,

Guaith, a Works; guithorion,
Il ordnen.

Guil, a Null; a Fort; guad!
hen, an old Fort; as, Wal-
lenford, Camd. & gwal, Mu-
rus, Dav. ut Gwal Sever,
Severus's IWall.

Guallofwr, a Butler.

Guan aſcient, Cott. one beſides
himſelf.

Guan, @ Sting; ind. Guana, ts
Pierce.

Guan, weak ; ſichly,

Guana, to pierce, bear, or enter.
Guanan, à Bee; Pl. guenen;
kaual guanan, a Bee-hive,
Guanath, J/heat ; bara guanath,
I heaten Bread, i. e. IWhite
Bread ; quaſ. a Guen, white,

Gwander, /Yeatneſs ; guandre,
Wandering, Lh.

Guar, the Neck; Collum, L.

Guarac, a Charter, or Patent,

Guardy, Theatre. Lh.

Guare (huare, id.), to play, or
ſport.

Guarhaz, the Top, or Summit ;
guarhaz ganou, the Roof of the
mouth, Lh.

Guarimou, Theatres.

Guarnys, warned.


Guarth, a Garriſon; a Place of


Safety, Gale, a high Place,
Guarra, to ſell; guertha, id,


| Guarrak, a Bow; Arcus. L. An


Arch, or Vault, Lh.

Guarrhog, all Manner of Cattle
eal, id. Lh.

Guarthav, the Top, or Summit.

Guaſga, to preſs ; guaſge dorn,
to lay Hands on; to raviſh, or
deflower, Lh.

Guaſhevyn, a Magiftrate; Pri-
mas. Lh.

Guaſkettek, ſhady; guaſtad, W.
fleddy ; conflant,

Guaſtia, to deſtroy; dho toula
dyveas, id.

Guav, Winter. Ar. a Spear.

Guaya, to move ; es guaya, that
moveth ; that creepeth along;
ind, guayans, moving.

Guaglen, a Rod, or T wig.

Guayn, Advantage.

Guaynia, to gain, win, or pro-
ft. Lh.

Guaz, a Man; Fellow; Ser-
vant ; Pl. gueſſion; guaz he-
gin, a Skullion,

Gubar, pay, reward ; aguz,
gubar, your Pay,

Gubman, Sea Weed; the Alga.

Gudh, à Gooſe.

Gudhän, A. to harden.

Gudh, a Mole; gudhor, id, &


59


GU
guihthaur, id. Lb. gudh


dhaor,
Gudra, to milk, or milch.
Gudrak, or guedrak, the fr?
Milt before the Cow has Calf.
Gudreva, the third Day hence.
Gudzh, guydh, id. (govs id.),


Toi 3 Pareniage; Deſcent,


Gudzhigan, a Black Pudding,

Gueadar, a I/taver,

Gueal, 4 Field; Farm; Manor.

Gueder, C; gwydr.

Guedeu, 4 H/idow; guldeu,
Cott.

Guedh, W. Cuftem; Faſhion.


1 a Tree; guydhen, id.
h


Guedhan knyfan, a Hazle Tre.
ws 7 Why W. a Weather Sheep.
h


Guedho, deprived, Pa.

Guedhra, to be dry ; to dry up ;
dho ſcha, id.

Guedn hogian, a I/art.

Guedran, a Glaſs; guedran avin,
a Glaſs of l ine.

Guedrek, glaſſy; green.

Guedrys, weak ; flagging. Lh.

Gueid, Vorl.

Gueid uur-argans, a Silverſmith*

Gueiadar, a raver. Lh.

Gueiduur-cober, à Braxzier ; a
Tinker,

Guein, a Sheath; it. for gun,
Campus; pou izal, id. Ln.
Gueith, Trees; Pl. a guedhan.
Guelan, a Yard; guelan gol, or

goil, the Sail Yard.

Guelaz, zo ſee; it. Sight; Ln,
guellys, ſeen; welions, they
ce; miraz, id. Lh.

Gueldzha, a Pair of Sheers.

Guele, @ Bed; penguele, a Bul-


er.
Guelen, a Rod; Welen, id. Pl.
uecl.

Guella, to yield ; amend; correct;
it. be/t ; dho ouna, id,

Guelz, Graſs ; Strato; all kind
of Herbs. Lh.

Guelu, a Lip; guelv, id.

Guelvan, #9 weep ; ind, vuly. to
belve, or weep aloud,

Guelyſt, thou haſt ſeen.

Guelz, Moody; wild; as, Idhin

uelz, wild Fowl,

Guelzen, I had ſeen.

Guen, Campus; a Plain, Cott,
pro Gun.

Guenan, a Pimple; a Bliſter ;
a Sheckle. |

Guenar, Love ; Beauty ; ind. f.
Venus; W. Didh Guener,
Friday ; inde Guenwar.

Guenez, Hung; guenez, gen na-
dar, /tung with an Adder. Gw.

Guennol,


432
8 O


Goll, to leſe; gollas, 1%; it.

hidden ; gyld, id.

Golli, to deftroy.

Gollon (collon & hollon, id.),
a Heart ; it. a Hart, or Deer.

Gollow, a Light ; goleuad, W.

id. golouas, Lightning.

Golmas, bound; fettered.

Golo, a Coverture; golo ar guele,
a Coverlid.

Goloff, to cover. Ar.

Golom, a Pidgeon ; Columba.

Golovas, Childbed; Travail; ben-
nen yn golovas, a Woman in
Childbed.

Golou-leſtre, a Lamp; a Candle-
ict; incoiſe leſt, an Incenſe
Pot.

Gols, the Hair.

Golſowas, to kearken.

Golu, a Mark:

Goluan, rejoicing ; Midſummer ;
i. e. the Time of Lights, or
Baone-fires.

Golvan, a Sparrow ; gylvan, id.

Golvinak, a Curliew.

Golwiden, a Hazle-tree. Lh.

Golwyth, Burnt-offerings.

Golyough, watch ye; goolyas,
to watch ; golzyas, 1d.

Gomfortye, to comfort. V.

Gon, ours.

Gonalen, a Shoulder.

Gonidog, a Servant ; Attendant.

Gonnyon, white ; carrig gonny-
on, White Stones.

Gonon, none.

Gons (Mod. Corniſh), Vulva.

Gonyaz, a Moth-worm.

Gonys, with them.

Goon, a Downg a Plain; goon
glaz, the Sea, or green Plain
giin, & unn, id. 4

Goober (gober, id. guber, id.),
a Reward; Wages; gubar, Lh.
id.

Googoo, a Cave, or Den; W.
ogoh.

Gophen, to aſe.

Cor, put; cauſe; de; a gorra.

Gor, an Intenſive Particle, ſome-
times only an Expletive.

Dho go a, to put, or ſet in Or-
der; to frame, or make, Lh.
Gorchymmia, to bid, or com-

mand,

Gorephan, July; Miz Gore-
phan, the Month of Fuly ; Miz
gorphennav, W. id. i. e. the
Mnib in the Height of Sum-
mer.

Gortenne, to make an End; gura
fen, id.

Gorguith, be careful.

Gorgwethens, they covered, a gu-
eth, a Cloth.

Gorha, Hay.


Gorhmenna, te command, Lh.


G O


Gorhemmenau, Commands.

Gorlan, a Churchgard; it. a
Sheep Cote.

Gormenna, to command.

Gormola, Praiſe.

Dho gorou, to open.

Gorra, or dere, Lh. to put; lay
down. See Gurys, or gorris.

Gorre, that which is above. Ar.

Gorſedd, a Seat of Judgement;
gorſeddaddleu, a Bar in a
Court of Tuſtice.

Gorthewyth, Bed-fichneſs.

Gorthyans, Worſhiping.

Gorthyn, muſt, or ought.

Gortha, 10 tarry; gortos, to flop.

Gortys, eſteemed.

Goruedh, ts lie-down,

Goruer, a Cloud.


4 Gorweythy, ought. V.


Gorweddar, 1% brood, or it on
Brood,

2 a Snake,
oſkaz, to ſleep; me oſkaz
I have * 4 be

— a Heuſbold; a Fa-
mily.

Goſteggion, Bannsof Matrimony.

Goſteyth, bedient.

Goſtotter, Shelter,

Goſys, bloody.

Goth (for koth), old; formerly;
it. Pride.

Goth, ſee; V. back ; ought; be-
comes,

Gothas, they fell; pro cothas, to


alts
Gothaff (pro wothaſf), I know ;
ind. gothewys, &nown.
Gothihuar, the Evening.
Gothoan, Fools.


Goval, W. Care; Induſtry;
Diligence.

Govail, a Smith's Shop; a Work-
man. |

Govaytis, Covetouſneſs.

Gouas, te have; to hold; gevas,
id. dho gouas (dho gaval), to
bald, poſſeſs, or obtain.

Goucen, a Nerve,

Gouea, to lie hid; A. kudha,

kudhet, id.

Gouegneth, Fraud; Falſbood.

Gouelaff, to weep z I weep.

Govenek, Remembrance.

Gouer (gouea, id.), @ Brook, or


Gover, a Rivulet ; as, polgover,
a Rivulet Pool, or Head of the
Rivulet.

Govidzion, Sorrows.


Gouiles, the Herb Avadznia,
Cott, Qu.


Goular, Coral, Ar.


Beg; Ar. W. gover, gouern,
id,


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY,


G O


— a Lier.
roullenwel, to fill; ful
Goulo, void. 47 .
Gouris, a Girdle.
Gouwan, a Meth; Lh. gouy-
an.
Govy, ſad.
Govynnas, aſked; govyn, id.
Gow, a Lie.
Gowak, a Lier; Pl. gouignion,
güak, id.
Gowethas, Company.
Gows (pro cowz), Speech,
Gowlyn, I ſpake.
Goyf, „linter; guaf, id.
Goyne, Supper; kone, id.
82 a Sheath,
oyntys, Courteſy ; Covetryſurli,
ws Blood; Hy & mw
id.


Goz, your; for agoz, id.

Gozer, flrived; Gw.

Gozan, 'a hard Vein, or Lode croſ-
ing another. T. T.

Gorowas, hearken. Gw.


G R


Grachel, a Heap; Tumulus; L.
berk, id.

Grachya, to break ; crack.

Grambla, to climb, Lh.

Gran, Command ; an deag gran
Deu, the ten Commandments of
God. f. Contraction from gor-
men, or gormenna.

Gras (*ras, & grage, id.), Pl. ara-
ſou j(grath, id.), Grace;
Thanks.

Graſlys, thankful.

Grat, a Step; L. Gradus.

Gravar, a Barrow ; gravar dow-
la, or dula, « Hand-barrow ;
gravar roe, a Wheel-barrow ;
a Vehicle. Lh.

Gravior, a Sculptor ; gravia, to
engrave, Lh.

Grawn, a Berry.

Grayth, Treuble.

Gregar, to cackle as a Hen.

Gregy, to hang. |

Grehan, Leather ; ſkelligrehan,
Leather wings, viz. a Bat.

Greiah rag, to require z is enguire


for. |
Grelin, a Late; W. id. & lhuch,
Ar. laguen; Ir. loch.
Gren, as, Polgren, Tregren,
i. e. the Green Pool; the Green
Town, or Dwelling on the
Green. Scribitur & Gryn, as,
Grynſey in Scilly, quaſi Green
Sea.
Gres, di; dell rethe gres, ſo they
ſhauld do. : ;
Greſt, Chrift; Griſt, id.


Greunen, a Grain; Ar. C. gro-


nen.
Greut,


a 4 », n 8 85 1 at ; th 3 iy 1 $5 a . i I *& 2 wy $2.44 * . A Lg Wow 0 - EE TS es Rs. 7 <4 <a #2 - 7 LES *
1 mas} 7 0 4 * SE 5 4 - r 1 _ . 1 x As , a» 4 2 of 4 * e * "* * SY LoL 7 + ö = [4
n 1 0 I 1 r 1 N 8 WE 2 FE l 9 F , 75 > + 268
PR * 1 i . 4 ** * . 5 FR 4 . FR" * " * 1 et 4 . j * > _ * . F * 1 Fu 6 y * * —
1 - 0 K V. _ * 8 * FLEW 0 "FE 1 3 2 & — 8 * 4 , \ r a E


. , *


4
2 |
4

qv
A
ei *
9
A
7


28
1


n 4 Pl


2


c IO 0100 09, WF ARIEe
** kl <2 no inch as * eng 5 p 5 * a \ \ — * oO 8 pe 4


= PIER Se
"1 = 1 2
9 4 2 ds


2 . P 1 . N 8 K 1 _
i N he * * 4 1 5 * 45 ** 8 * N 1 -4 *. M Py , . — ho . * nl ie . 5 F .
1 2 * r 4 4's M * * 4 2 4
; an Mts; . ; 4 A. OE ̃⅛ N $ E rn,
1 cc _e l
1 Lead hs. FE 1 : 1 N 8 2 6 * th , _ ata in ,


gk — -


D 1 P £5


2 4 0 N 1 *


3


"Ss * 1 TA


1
4


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


GR


Greut, Earth ; Powder ; dufly
Grains ; Grit.

Grevye, painful; heavy; grevys,
grieved,

Giew, cauſed ; a gura, fo make.

Grez, Faith; gris, id,

Grigear, a Partridge; qual, gry-
giar; grugyers id. a Heath-poult,

Giigiz, a Girdle; a Band, Lh.

Grill, a Crab.

Gris (agris, id.), I believe, grys,


id,

Grifill, thin ; ſmall,

Griſla, to grin z man kei y griſ-
la, the Dog grins.

Gro, Ballaſt ; pro grou, A

Groes, Heat. Ar.

Gromercy (or gwra mercy),
Thanks to thee.

Gronen, the Skin ; a Grain.

Gronkye, t beat.

Grontys, a Grant; granted.

Grou, Gravel; Sand, &c.

Grouan, id. grouder, id.

Grouanen, a Pebble.

Groudel, a Fidler.

Growedh, to lie down ; ke grow-
eth, go, lie down.

Grownzebas, let him do. ;

Groyne, a Seal ; Vitulus Mari-
nus. Leland.

Gruah, an old Woman.

Grüan, A. Gravel.

Grud, a Check, or Faw; grydh,
id,

Grueirten, a Root.

Grug, W. a Mount ; pro Cryg,
id,

Gruſhens, the Dregs, or Lee.

Gruflons, they took; gruſſons
cuſyl, they took Counſel.

Gry, Noiſe. |

Grydh, a Cheek ; Jato; or Chin.

Gryg, Heath. W.

Gryglans, Sticky Heath,

Grygys, a Belt, or Girdle; gou-
ris, id, grug. Cott. id,

Grym, bony ; flrong. R.

Grys, to believe; me a grys, 1
believe,


GU


Guadhel, Houſhold Stuff. ;

Guadan, a Foundation ; the Baſe
of a Pillar,

Guadn, weak; pro guan.

Guadngyrti, to ftrangle.

Guaeldgu, a Sorry Fellzw ; boud-
hyn, id, Gw. Lh. 65.

Guaf, chaſte,

Guag, Hunger ; Penury; en gu-
ag, in vain ; empty.

Guahalgeh, an Officer of State;
a Preſident, or Governor of a
Country,

Guailen rayvanadh, 4 Scepter ;
guailen, a Scepter, Cott,


GU


Guain (nain, id.), a Meadow z
it. @ Sheath,


Guainten, the Spring Seaſon,

Guaith, a Mes; guithorion,
IForkmen,

Guil, @ Mull; a Port; guad!
hen, an old Fort; as, Wal-
lenford, Camd. & gwal, Mu-
rus, Dav. ut Gwal Sever,
Severus's IWall.

Guallofwr, a Butler.

Guan aſcient, Cott. one beſides
himſelf.

Guan, @ Sting; ind. Guana, to
Pierce.

Guan, weak ; ſichly,

Guana, 7» pierce, boar, or enter.
Guanan, à Bee; Pl. guenen;
kaual guanan, a Bee-hive,
Guanath, heat; bara guanath,
IVheaten Bread, i. e. IWhite
Bread; quaſ. a Guen, white,

Gwander, /YVeakneſs ; guandre,
IWWandering. Ln.

Guar, the Neck; Collum. L.

Guarac, @ Charter, or Patent.

Guardy, Theatre. Lh.

Guare (huare, id.), to play, or
ſport.

Guarhaz, the Top, or Summit ;
guarhaz ganou, the Roof of the
mouth, Lh.

Guarimou, Theatres.

Guarnys, warned.

Guarth, a Garriſon ; a Place of
Safety, Gale, a high Place,
Guarra, to ſell ; guertha, id.
Guarrak, a Bow; Arcus. L. An

Arch, or Vault, Lh.

Guarrhog, all Manner of Cattle;
eal, id. Lh.

Guarthav,. the Top, or Summit.

Guaſga, to preſs; guaſge dorn,
to lay Hands on; to raviſh, or
deflower, Lh.

Guaſhevyn, a Magiftrate; Pri-
mas, Lh.

Guaſkettek, ſhady; guaſtad, W.
fleddy ; conſtant,

Guaſtia, to deſtroy ; dho toula
dyveas, id.

Guav, Winter. Ar. a Spear.

Guaya, to move ; es guaya, that
moveth ; that creepeth along ;
ind, guayans, moving.

Guaglen, a Rod, or Twig.

Guayn, Advantage.

Guaynia, to gain, win, or pro-
fit. Lh.

Guaz, a Man; Fellow; Ser-
vant ; Pl. gueſſion; guaz he-
gin, a Skullion,

Gubar, pay, reward; aguz,
gubar, your Pay,

Gubman, Sea Weed; the Alga.

Güdh, a Gooſe,

Gudhan, A. to harden.

Gudh, a Mole; gudhor, id, &


5 8


GU
gudhthaur, id. Lh. gudh


dhaor,
Gudra, to milk, or milch.
Gudrak, or guedrak, the fr
Milk before the Cow has Calf.
CGuudreva, the third Day hence.
Gudzh, guydh, id. (govs id.),
1 3 Parentage; Deſcent.
Gudzhigan, a Black Pudding,
Gueadar, a Weaver.
Gueal, 4 Field; Farm; Manor.
Gueder, Glaſs; gwydr.
Guedeu, a Hidow; guldeu,
Cott,
* W. Cuſtom; Fuſbion.
h


* 7 a Tree; guydhen, id.
h


Guedhan knyfan, a Hazle Tree.
W 3 W. a Weather Sheep.
h


Guedho, deprived. Pa.

Guedhra, to be dry ; to dry ub;
dho ſcha, id.

Guedn hogian, a I/art.

Guedran, a Glaſs; guedran avin,
a Glaſs of IM ine.

Guedrek, glaſſy; green.

Guedrys, weak ; flagging. Lk.

Gueid, //ork.

Gueid uur-argans, a Silverſmith*

Gueiadar, a //eaver, Lh.

Gueiduur-cober, a Brazier ; a
Tinker,

Guein, a Sheath; it. for gin,
Campus; pou izal, id. Lh.
Gueith, Trees; Pl. a guedhan.
Guelan, a Yard; guelan gol, or

goil, the Sail Yard.

Guelaz, to ſee; it. Sight; Lh.
guellys, ſeen 3 welſons, they
ſee ; miraz, id. Lh. |

Gueldzha, a Pair of Sheers.

Guele, a Bed; penguele, a Bul-


er.
Guelen, a Rod; Welen, id. Pl.
ueel,

Guella, to yield; amend; correct;
it. 5% ; dho ouna, id,

Guelz, Gra; Strato; all kind
of Herbs. Lh.

Guelu, a Lip; guelv, id.

Guelvan, t weep 3 ind, vulg. to
belve, or weep aloud,

Guelyſt, thou haſt ſeen.

Guelz, Woody; wild; as, Idhin
guelz, wild Fowl.

Guelzen, I had ſeen.

Guen, Campus; a Plain, Cott,
pro Gun.

Guenan, a Pimple; a Bliſter ;
a Speckle.


Guenar, Love ; Beauty ; ind. f.


Venus; W. Didh Guener,

Friday ; inde Guenwar,
Guenez, /tung; guenez gen na-
dar, /tung with an Adder. Gw.
Guennol,


434
GU


Guennol, à Swallow,

Guenoiurciat, a Witch s Cott.
guenoiureat, & gunethiatdren,
id,

Guent, Monmouthſhire. |

Gienuit, ſagacious; ſubtil ; cun-
ning, R.

Guenuyn, Poiſon ; Witchgraft.

Guenyz, pierced ; guinys, id.
ua. a guan.

Guenz, ind; Breath; Spirit;
guinz, id.

Gueol, a Mouth. Ar.

Guer, a Village; Ar. a Word.

Guer, Green ; guirdh, X. Vi-
ridis. 6

Gueras (weras, id.), Help.

Gueret, the Ground; moiſi Earth.

Guereugh, ſhew ye.

 Guerha, to brag.

Gueriff, to lay Eggs.

Guern, the Maſt of a Ship.

Guernen, an Alder Tree.

Guerſyn, à Spindle.

Guerthe (werthe, id.), 15 ſell.

Guerthyd, W. an Axle tree.

Gueruelz, Feeding Ground; Paſ-
ture ; Green Field ; bounder,
id. Lh.

Gues, wild. Lh. 59.

Gueſga, to wear Cloaths ; to rub ;

Gueſkys, clad ; cloathed.

Gueſkeuyn, a Primate; a Ma-
giſtrate. Eh,

Gueſk, a Huſk.

Gueſkall, to contend,

Gueſpeden vriz, A. a Hornet.

. Gueſt, a Garment; ind. a Veſi,
Engl.

Gueth, Glothing ; a Cloth; gue+
thens, Ar. to cover. |

Guetho, deprived.

Guethy, weaved.

Gueuan, a Heel.

Gueus, the Lips. Cott.

Guew, a plain Field.

Guezga, to rub, threſh, or crum.


Gugl, a Veil.

Gugy, 15.

Guher, a River; id. f. ac gover,
a Broth,

Guhidh, a Daughter-in-law ; gu-
hit, id.

Guhien, 4 Vaſp; & guhyen, id.

Guhuthas, to accuſe.

Guia, to weave; init, or com-
poſe. Lh.

Guiat, a Webb.

. Guiban, a Fh.

Guibedn, little inging Flies.

Guicgur, a Merchant.

Guid, a Vein.

Guiden, a Tree; Guetha, id.

Guidhi, thou ſhalt know,

Guidhili, 1riſhmen.

GuidthiaJ, a Keeper; a Guardian.

Guihar, a Periwrinkle Shell ; a,


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY,


GU


Wrinkle.
Guik, Ar. a Village; Guer, Ar.
id,
Guikyr, a Merchant; a Farmer.
Guil, the Sail of a Ship.
Guilan, a King's- Fiſher.
Guili, à Bed; Pl. gueliau.
Guilleia, a Beggar.
Guillua, a Watch; watching.
Guilſkin (guilkin, id.), a Frog.
Guilter, a Maſtiff.
Guin, Vine; win, id.
Guin-bren, the Vine-tree.
Guindod, Excellency. R.
Guinenddhy, brown.
Guins, the Wind. Lh.
Guins a dro, a Storm,
Guinzal, a Fan.
Guirion, a Man of Veracity.
Guirioneth, Truth, Lh.
Guirleveriat, id.
Guirt, & gwird, green; viridis.


Lh.


Guis, an old Sow,

Guiſc, a Claathing; a Garment ;
guiſk, id.

Gueſt, id.

Guiſetti, a Baſket.

Guiſgdy, a Wardrobe,

Guiſtel, a Heſlage.

Guit (& gwydd, id.), a Gooſe.
Guith, Noiſe, Lh. 52. it. Anger,
73. it. a Vein, ib. 170.

Guitha, to preſerve.

Guith, to keep 3 guitha dhort, to
withhold, or keep back, Lh.

Guitſil, a wild Beaſt,

Guithorion, Horkmen.

Gul (guil, id.), to do; gull peg-
bg. do Sin. EY

Gulad, a Country ; wlas, W, id.
gulot, Cott. id.

Gulan, 7/01.

Gulbredengu, the Pin-bones,

Guledh, a Feaſt,

Guledh-iz, the Corn.

Guledhiz, the Corn-feaſt,

Guleit, Roa/t-meat.

Gulen, to require.

Gilhel, Heouſhold Goods.

Gulhys, waſhed ; waſhing,

Gulli, a Wound; Pl. Gollyou.

Gullan, a Gull ; Pl. gullez.

Gullas (for wollas), iwer; as,
gueal gullas, the lower Field,

Gulloar, Abundance ; Plenty. Qu.

Gumfellet, Vinegar. |

Gumpas, a Plain; n'an gumpas,
the plain Downs.

Gun, our; our
ehaz.

Giin, a Scabbard; a Heath; a
Down; it. a Gown; Pl. gun-
niau. Lh.

Gunbre, a Hill on a Down.
Guneual, to dine; dho guneual
gondzha, to dine with him.
Guner, a River, or Brook, Lb.


Health ; gun


GU


Gunio, to ſow; as
to ſow "ark ;

Gunithiat ereu, 4 Huſbandman

Gunthas (guathas, rectiùs id ),
kept. 3

Guon, I know ; mi
know,

Guorhemmyn, a Command.

Guorhyans, Glory ; Renown,

Guothto ev, he may know ; mai
guoth ev, that he may knw

Guoze (guodzhi), after, :

Guozemma, hereaſter; udzhem-
ma, id.

Guozena (udzhena, id.),
wards,

Doi, a Man.
ur-a-vau, an Herma %:
Vulvatus Homo. e

Guta, 1 cauſe (wra, id.), gu-
rys, done.

Guradn, a Wren.

Guiah, an old Meman; bennen
goath, id,

Gural, Ar. Amber,

Guraminadou, Commandments, 3
guorhemmyn z gurhewyna-
dow, id,

Guriz, he has done.

Gurbor, a broad Diſh,

Gurbulloc, mad.

JOE, a Root.
ureg (grueg, & ſreg, id.
ene ; « Witt he

Gureg uedhu, a Widow. Lh.

Dho gurei, t make; to create;
gil, id,

Gureithon, we have done,

Gurek, I/rect.

Gureoneth, Truth,

Gures, Heat; gres, id. n'un
grez, the Hot Down,

Gureſlauk, hot.

Gurgettan, Garters.

Gurhal, a Ship; goroll, id. Pl.
Garhaliou,

Gurhemin, a Command; an Or-
dinance ; Lh. a Charge ; Com-

miſſion; gurhmenniz, id.

Gurhog, a Great-Great-Grand-
father. * |

Gurhthit, a Spindle,

Guridnias, preſſed; ſqueezed ;
cruſhed.

Guriz, a Girdle,

Guria, Ar, to ſurround; encom-
paſs. N |

Gurjovene, a young Man.

Gurkaeth, a Priſoner ; a Man
taken in Battle.

Gurpriot, a Bridegroom.

Gurra, ta impoſe ; deceive ; be-
guile, Lb.

Gurria, to worſhip. |

Gurruid, a Male; a Man; the
Male of any Creature.

Gurythys, rooted.


gunnes haz,


a uon, /


after.


Gurthvi',


*


r r ee ra : * | SF, |
L Ss e 7. Y 1 2 * : l : BT's p s 1 1 2
* 0 We * o - 4 2 AJ "T5 © 8 3 ff » 24k * r 1 a 7 7 3 7 Fs * 2 2
a * * 1 . 8 « 8 8 5 an. 4 fs 418 * "Te , , 4 =" * » 4 8 ea 1 oth 4 1 1
* 3 p4 . 1 a * "_—


GU


Gurthvil, @ Beaſt; a wild or

other Beaſt. Lh.

Gurthuper, in the Evening.

Gurthyd, 4 Spindle; kerdhit, &
guerzit, id.

Gurvedhu, to lie; ha gurvedhu
en guilt kala na, and lie in that
Straw Bed.

Gurychin, a Briftle.

Gurys, put; carried; uras the
mernans, to put to Death,

Guryſſen, done; mi a vryſſen,
had done.

Guryſlys, thou haſt done.

Gus (for aguz ), yours 3 you.

Guſel, did; guſell dre envi, did
it out of Envy.

Guſendzhi, to lay ; mi vedn gu-
ſendzhi, 1 will lay.

Guſke, frantick. Lh.

Guthemin-ruif, a Royal Law.

Guthot, Meal. See Guloth, &
Gloth, id.

Guthyl, All-heal. So the Anci-
ents called the Miſletoe,
Keyſl. .

Guthyl, 471 canſt ; to make,

Guver, a Brook ; giiner. Lh.

Guy, Water; uy, id. Baxt.

Guyader, See Gweadr. Ir. Fia-

 doir,

Guyd, a Fault; or Errour ; kill
bai, id.

Guydh, conſpicuous ; high. See

wydh.

Guydh-grug, a High Mount.

Guydnach, a Whiting ; a Fiſh.

Guydhbedyn, W. 4 Knat, or
little Fly.

Guydhvaen, a high Stone; ind.
f. Penwyth, or Penguydh, the
High Promontory; the Weſtern
Hundred of England, Qu.

Guydhelek, Iriſh.


Guydhuydh, the Moodbind, or


Honeyſuckle. Lh.

Guyles, the Herb Libeſlica.

Guylfym, 7 hall ſee ; mar guyl-
fym, if I ſhall ſee.

Guyr (& fyr gwyr), Truth, it.
a Man; guyr an chy, Man of
the "ag

Guyraf, Hay.

Guyrthiadereu, a Huſbandman.

Guys, an old Sow. |

Guyſketh, ſtricten; gweſka, &
gwaſka, id,

Guyſtel, a Haſlage, or Pledge in
War. Lh.

Guyth, Times; Seaſon; komero
wyth, take Care; Opportu-
nity,

Gwyth, Name of the Iſle of
Wight. |

Guythyad, a Guardian.

Guzen, a Rope; with,


Guzigan, @ Bladder.


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


GW


Gwaeddi, to hto; cry ont.
Gwaedling, bleeding at the Noſe,
Gwaedu, to bleed,

Gwaeth, a Field; Gwacth Hei-
lyn, the Field of Heihu; Ficld
of Battle; a Battle,

Gwailbeth, a Bawble.


1 empty; R. gwael, vile.


Gwal, Murus; L. Dav. a Wall.

Gwarha, Lover, Gw.

Gwarthav, the Top, or Summit
of any thing; gwarthe, id.

Gwarth, Shame,

Gwawdio, 79 befool one.

Gwef (gwelh, id.), ſad.

Gwel, Leaven; Barm ; bara
gwel, Leavened Bread.

Gwell, better; guella, 4%; gu-
ella guaz, beſt Man.

(wells, wild. See Guelz.

Gwelltfa, a Bean Stalk,

Gwelyfod, a Bedchamber.

Gwen, white; gwin, & wyn,
id.

Gwep, to bill as a Pidgon.

Gwer, green.

Gwerches, a Virgin.

Gwern, a Place of Alder Trees,

Gwethy, to weave ; weaved,

Gweyth, the contrary; gweth,
worſe z it, pro vyth, as, terg-
weyth, three Times.

Gwe, Fierceneſi; Anger. Ar.

Gwiſe-pren, Bark of a Tree.

Gwlas, the Kingdom; wlas, &

gulaſker, id.

Gwothemys, ſee 3 know 3 wo-
thaff, gothaff, I know.

Gwregus, a Belt; cleddiff, id.

Gwrelle, to make.

Gwydd, @ Gooſe.

Gwydh, perſpicuous ; eaſy to be
ſeen; as, gwydbgruc, a conſpi-
cuous Heap; gwydhfa, a con-
ſpicuous Place; the higheſt

ountain in Britain, in Caer-
narvonſhire, H. Lhuyd's Brev.
fol. 17.

Gwydr, Glaſs. R.

Gwylvyth, have ſeen.

Gwyn, glorious; a Court ; as,
brein-gwyn, a ſupreme Court.


Gwyn, alias gwydn, white.

Gwyne, Wine.

Gwyns, Wind; guenz, id.

Gwyrthiadereu, a Huſbund-
man.

Gwyrif, a Batchelur; an unmar-
ried Man.

Gwyro, to bend.

Gwythe, to preſerve 3 hinder ;


Gwythres, Quarter; Part; yn
pub gwythres, in every Quar-
| ter.


8


Gy (dzhei, id), they ; them.

Gybeddern, a little Hammer.

Gydhaz, Judgment; it. Opinion;

advice, Lh.

Gydhivaz, to brim as a Soto, i. e.
marem appetere.

Gydhihuar, the Evening, Lh.

Gydiuhar, the Evening Star
Even-tide, Lh.

Gytf (gyff, id. a cafos quas),
wy a gyff, ye ſhall find,

92 to acciſe; kyhydha,
id.


Gyk (pro kych, or kyg, id.
.


Gylchynu, to beſct,

Gyliange, a Hedge Sparrow.

Gyllin, can; ni a yllin, we can.

Gylvan, a Sparrow ; golvan, id.

Go ge, 4 Hedge Sparrow.
h.


Gylwyr, Maker.

Gylwys, called.

Gylyua, to ſhine. ,

Gymyn (gemyn, id. cummyn,
id.), to commend; reſign ; give
Leave to.

Ghyn (gh-n, id.), our,

Gyndan, à Debt.

Gynez, to ſow.

Gynnodar, à Sower, Lh.

Ghynſi, with her,

Gynſy, Uſe; the wull gynſy,
for it had Uſe.

Gyrgcrik, a Partridge, Lh.

Gyrhefhas, offered; profſered, or
given, Lh.

Gyrr, the Gripes ; Flux; Dyſen-
te.

Gyryn, @ Crown ; tan ghyryn,
to the Crown.

Ghyſenzhi, to lay.

Gytheffys, offered.

Gyu (gew, id.), able; is; but;
only; due; ought ; nyn gyw,
"tis but ; tis not.

Gyw, a Spear.

Ghynzhanz (genzynz, id.), with
them.

Gyz (goz, id.), your; gyz honan,
our OWN,

Gyzigan, a Bladder, Lh.

Gyzyuaz, liſtiened or did liſten;

to hearken; gwel yw guzuwaz,
it is better to hearken,


H.


A, and; oh! hag, before
Vowel.
Habadin, Bondage, Slavery.
Haddal, @ Ladle,
Hafaid, ſummerly ; eſtivus ; Haf,


hold; gwethe, & wythe, id. Summer.


Hagar, foul; ugly; cruel; wicl-
ed; hagra, & hacera, more
| ugly,


Hagar-


436
HA
Hagar-auel, bad II rather, Time,
. or Seaſon.


Hagen, but ; yet.

Hagenzol, alſo; likewiſe. Lb.

Haheyz, wholly ; altogether.

Hai, and her; ſhe; her; of her;
hay, id. hodda, id.

Hain, and our. :

Haiarn, Strength; R. 'trehairn,
gwethairne, ib.

Hail, liberal; huge; very great;
ind. Hailmen Tor, the great
StoneTor. See Heyle.

Hal, a Hill, or Hillock ; Pl.
halou ; halou-nei, our Hills;
it, a Moor; ker th'an hal, to
go to Moor, i. e. to work for
Tin; halgaver, the Goat's

. Moor;

Halan, Calends, firſt Day of the
Month,

Hale theez, Pull to thee. Gw.

Halein, & ha!oin, Salt; halen,
id,

Hali (Teuton), Holy:

Halle, he might.

Hallough (yllougb, id.), ye, or
you may, Or can be.

Hallus, Sweat ;z re hallus, «*vith
the Sweat.

Hallyah, pulling,

Halogu, to bribe, or corrupt.

Haloiner, a Salter,

H'am, and my; and I am; ab ha
& om.

Hamblys, prepared; Preparation ;
hablys, id.

Hambrokkya, to waſh. Lh.

H'an, and the ; for ha-an,

Hanadzhans, a Sigh.

Hanaf, Hanapus. Cott. Qu.

Hanath, a Cup, or Bowl; hanaf,
id, bolla, id, fiol, id.

Hanchi, a Linx; a ſpotted Beaſt.

Hanes, thoſe, |

Haneth, he ; this ; this Night.

Haneu, a Swine; a Sow.

Hanou, a Name.

Hanter, betwixt ; middle ; han-
ternos, Midnight,

Hao, Ar. ripe.

| Har, Slaughter; Murther ; Ar,
quod pro aor, Land Earth;
plowed Land, W.

Harau, a Harrow; W. oged.
Ar, oget.

Hard, earne/tly; hard, W. ſeem-
ly ; comely,

Harfel, a She-piper; a Viol; a
Harp; it. a Drink-pot ; Lh.
in Phiale,

Harfellor,
Pipe.

Harlot, à vile Fellow.

Harow, bitter; yn harrow, bit-
terly,

Harthy (hartha, or harrah), 15
bark as a Dog, |


a Player on the


— cc.


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY,


H A


Haru, rough ; beggarly.

Harz, a Bound; Limit; Hin-
derance; Ar. as, mEn-hars, a
bound Stone.

Hat, a Hat; het. W. id.

H'ath, and thy.

Hav, Summer ; Cott. haf, id.

Haval, Likeneſs. See Aval, Avel,
id,

Havas, found ;- cafos, id.
Haun, a Haven; as, Porthkarn-
haun, in Endellyan, Par,

Hauns, thee.

Haunſel, a Breakfaft; diſhuniſh,
id. Lh.

Havodty, a Cottage. Lh. 167.

Havrek, Ar. a fallow Ground.

Hauz, a Duck; haz, id. Pl.
heidzhe, hoet, id.

Hawlſons, they cried out; ab
helwys.

Haz, Seed; Nature; it. a Duck ;
kuliagaz, a Drake; a Mol-
lard ; Plur. heidzhe.


HE


He, the Skin.

Hean, a Haven; goran hean, put
into the Haven.

Heb, without.

Hebford, impaſſable.

Hebrenciat phui (oferiat, id.), a
Prieſt of the Pariſh ; it. he-
bryngkiad, an Elder; a Preſ-
byter.

Hebrenciat, luir, a General.

Hecka, Richard. Gw.

Hedda (hed, id.), that.

Heddre, whil/t.

Hedh, eaſy ; feaſible.

Hedha, to ftretch out ; to reach at.
Lh


Hedra, October.

Heene, drowſy. Gw.

Heeneth, Generation, Gw.

Hegar, a Captive.

Hegar, lovely ; ab hedh, & gare,
' eaſy to be loved.

Hegarat, A. Mild; gentle.

Hegaratyz, Health. Lh. Pref.

Hehen, one; pub hehen, every
one.

Heid, Barley.

Heidzhe, Ducks.

Hel, a Hall; Cott. hell, id. it.
a River, or Mcor.

Helak (helik, heligen, or hela-
gan, id.), a Willow Tree.
Helek, Moory; Marſby ; full of
Brooks ; ab hel, a River; a

Monr.

Helha, to hunt.

Helhwar, a Hunter; a Huntſ-
man.


Heltheys, hunted.


Helu, Brine ; gulyber, id.
Helviat, one that purſues, or bunts


HE


helyad, & helydr, id.
Helwys, to cry out.
Hemdrez, Dream,
Hemlodh, 2 fight ; hemladh, id.
Hen, that.

Henath, Generation ; Age.
Henbiuhiat, ſparing ; frugal,
Hendat, a Grandfather,
Hengog, the Great Grandfather's


Father ; a Great Grandfather,
Cott.


Henn, old; Ir. ſean, id.

Henna, this; be; then,

Hent, Ar. a May.

Henuir vi, I hall le called.

Henvill, Vigil. See Heuyl,

Henwys, called; fliled ; henu-
elez, id.

Henz, befere; fit; for kenz.

Heor, Ar. an Anchor,

Hepmar, doubtleſs.
epparou, incomparable; matchleſz,

Hepeu, To-day; this Day.

Hepuil, watchful ; hichh puil,
very watchful,

Herdya, thruft forth; prominent;
ind. f. lyzherd, a chief Place
thruſt forth, or Head-land jut-
ting forth.

Hernan, a Pilchard; hearne,

Hernan guidn, à Herring, i. e.
a white Pilchard.

Herniah, to ſhoe; herniah an
verh, to ſhoe the Horſe.

Heruedh, in Reſpect of ; heruedh
nep, without Reſpect of whom.

Herwith, Attendance.

Heſchen, a Reed, or Sedge; a
File; Pl. heſk. pendiuen; id.

Heſkyz, dry; beuh heſkyz, a
dry Cow.

Heſp, a Lock.

Hethe, to reach; flretch; hethys,


| pa.
Hethen, a Bird; Cott. adglaer,


id. f. an Eagle.

Hethow, this Day.

Heved (Sax. a Head), Qu.

Heuel, vi/ible; eaſy to be ſeen ; ab
hedh, or he, and guel.

Hevelep, lite; ab havel.

Hevez, a Shirt, or Shift ; heuis,
Cott. id.

Heeuhal, dy; mar heuhal, /
high.

Heuul, the Sun. Cott.

Heuyl, watchfull, e
Heyle, a River; hel, id, hail,
id. heil, id.
Heys, the Length of any thing by

Meaſure.
Hez, a Swarm.
Hezuek, Eaſe. scx. Gr.


HI


Hi, he; of her. a
ibblyth, pant; ſfuppie.
an. en ths


* ” 2 4 ws ad” 2h Ex CH 80 Po ?
PW 0 PS 1 + Fc - ads MEE at $a nc 2
* K * 4 *% 4 \ 1 * 4 2 0 N 1 ny
_ & ok * al 8 1 F ky by


e
ad ar 1


1 . 2 6 , , a = 2 2
6 7 Tg 2 po l
A F 1 * 1 * r 2 82 Ws 4 . * 4 & * 1 - : , ba x6 . *%
1 f gm :
— a, 4s * 3 1 "
: 3 4 2 "-


TTW


HI
Hidhu, To-day.


Hieauven, Jvy.

Hig, a Creok; a Hook.

Higa, to play with,

Higolen, 4 l beiſlone.

Hihſommet, a Bat.

Hillah, the Night Mare.

Hilliv, I may, or can; as, mai
hilliv, that I may, or be able.

Hingerlin, a Ba/tard's Buſtard.

Hinon, Ar. the clear Firmament.

Hir, long; Tremenhir, the Town
of Leng-ſlines; Her, id.

Hirath, a longing after ; a covet-
ing.

Hirgherniad, a Trumpeter.

Hirgorn, a Trumpet; a long Tube,
or Horn.

Hirrahat, to procraſtinate, Ar.

Hiſommet, a Bat. Lh.

Hitadver, Harveſt.

Hiubren, a Cloud.

Hiuhelder, Height.

Hiuhvoeliet, a Helbetian; a
Highlander.

Hiuin, the Yew-tree ; hivin, id.


HO


Ho (He, id.), eafily ; when pre-
fixed to an Adjective; as, ho-
gil feaſible ;, as bilis affixed in

at,


Hoalea, to weep.

Hoar, a Siſter; hor, huyr, id.

Hoarn, Iron; hoarnek, of or
belonging to Iron.

Hoary, Ar. a Sport ; C. huare,
& guare, id.

Hoch, a Sow ; Pig; hoh, id.

Hochuayu, a Hunting Pole. Lh.

Hochuaiu, id.

Hodda, /he; that; there; hon-
na, id.

Hodna, a Neck; ter (for der),
y hodna, about her Neck ; god-
na, id.

Hoedel, Life; Age.

Hoet, a Duck; hos, id. Cott.

Hogan, a Hawthorn Berry. Ar.

Hogen, vile.

Hogil, eaſy.

wm an Ironmonger. 205
oizias, Hoarſeneſs; hoz, hoarſe.

Hokye, Die y

Holan, the Heart; for golan, id.

Holan, a Knife.

Holan (& holoine), Salt; Lh.
pro halen.

Hollyas, followed ; holliou, fol-
low ye. |

Holm, the Holy Tree.

Holi, J/atch; ketwell holy, keep-
ing Watch. |

Hombronkyas, led; V.it. to twaſb.

Hon, this Female ; homma, this
ILman here.


Honon, himſelf; one's ſelf.


|
N


H O


Honou, Honour.

Dho honua, t name, or call;
dho kriha.

Hor, a Ram; Pl. Hyrroz, it.
a Siſter,

Hora, a II here; a Miſs. Lh.

Hordh, a Ram.

Horfe, Body, for corfe.

Hos, a Boot; a Harneſs for the
Leg. Lh.

Hoſtleri, a Tavern; Alehouſe.

Hot, Caputium. L.

m_ the Fun; ſul, id. heul, id.


Houl-dreval, the Eaft, or Sun-
riſing.

Houl-zethza, the Mist, or Sun-
ſetting; houlzedhas, id. Lh.
Hounſal, Breakfaſt; Gw. See

Haunſel, & Halſel.
Hoz, Hoarſe. Lh.


HU q


Huanen (huadnan, id.), a Hy;
a Flea; for guanan.

Hual, on high; above; upon;
uhal, id. ehual, id.

Huarfo (as, pan huarfo, when 7
ſhall do); a gwra, to db, or
cauſe.

Huath, yet; it. anew ; afreſh;
W. eto, id.

Huchot, above.


Hudol, a Magician.


Hudur, Ar. feul ; naſty.
Huedh, S. a Swelling. Lh.


Huedhi, to ſwell; huedhyz, ſwoln. |


Huedzha, to vomit.

Hueffas, the ſixth.

Hueg, ſweet ; dear; delicious;
wek, id.

Hueger, a Mother-in-lato.

Huehag, ſixteen.

Huei, ye; you ; of you.

Huekter, Sweetneſs.

Huel, a Vert; a Mine; huel
ſtean, a Tin Mine; Pl. huelio.

Huelder, Bounty.

Huelen, 4 Hill. Ar.

Huellam, I may ſee ; Huellaz,
ſeen. ,

Hueret, the Ground. Cott,

Huerhen, Laughter.

Huerthyn, to laugh, or play;
hwerwin, 1d,

Huero, rough ; Ar. bitter.

Huerval, February; corruptly
for Huevral, id. Lh.

Huethia, to blow.

Huethvians an dour, à Bubble of
Water.

Huetlo, a Tale- teller; W. chu-
edlz ; Lh. xuedel, W. a Ru-
moure

Huettag, ſixteen.

Huez, Sweat ; hueza, to ſiveat.


N


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 437


HU
Hui (dheu, huyhui, id.), unte


ou,

Huibanat, 10 whi/le.

Huido-wenyu, a Swarm of Bees;
ſaith-beach, id.

Hujeth, huge; hujeth tra, a huge
thing.

Huigan, Meal, or Flour ; Me-
aulla Panis.

Huigeren, a Father-in-law.

Huih, fix (hue, id.), hueffas, the
faxth,

Hu:l, to do; make. V.

Huila, zo ſeek (huillaz, id.), to
aſk, ſeek, or demand. Lh.

Huilan, a Peetle ; a Spider.

Huirnerez, a Hornet; a IVaſp.

Huis, an Age, & huys, id. Lh.

Huiſt, S§lence.

Huitel, @ Story ; Pl. huitelou.

Hule, an Owl.

Humthan, conceived; breeding
ma hy a humthan, ſhe here is
breeding.

Hun, Ar. Shep.

Hunnyn, of us.

1 * humble ; hyvel, W. id.

h.

Huveldot, Humility.

Huwelwur (& huweluair), a
Nobleman; a Viſccunt ; a She-
riff ; qual. Uchel wyr.

Huweltat, a Parriarch.

Huyl-bren, a beacon.

Huyn-dhe-ſympit, the Lethargy.


HY


Hy, he, or ſbe.

Hycheul, very watchful.

Hychol, above. Lh.

Hydheyl, Saat. Ar.

Hydhr, bold. Ib.

Hydol, an Impoſtor; Sorcerer.

Hydruk, brittle.

Hyeis, an Age; huis, & buys,
0 ;


id,

Hyfder, Boldneſs.

Hygoeled, Credulity; Superſli-
ton.

Hyll, fierce; it, the hinder Part
of the Neck.

Hyller, to follow.

Hylly, might; hyllyf, I may, or
can.

Hylwys, to cry out.
Dho hynadzha, to groan, or „ih.
Lh.
Hynadzhan, 4 Sigh, Groan, or
Howling.

Hyrch, e command; apxn. Gr.

Hyrliau, Hurling; a Corniſh Cul-
tom of playing with a Ball:
Hyrliau, yu ghen guare nyi,
Hurling is our Sport.

Hyſty, haſte ; haſte.


Hyuelar, noble,


Huhuthas, fo accuſe ; gunuthas, id.
1


Hyveldot, Obedience, Lh.


Hyuclvair,


—
- * 4 — — — — —
— — LY
- — 2 —
—— —— — — — — —
— - = — —
— 9 ä _ — - *
Py


— DOE
—— CN — —
— - >


— —
22


438 A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY,


*
Hyuelvair, a Sheriff; a Viſcount.
Lh |


Hyvla, to obey. Lh.


I,
I They (for y), his ; her ; war


9 i progath, upon his Sermon.
Ja, but ; rather; it. Ice.
Jach, found; ſafe ; healthy ; it.
low


Jakeh, John.

Jammeh, James.

Jar (rectiùs yar), a Hen.
Jar, a Stalk,


I C
Icot, below ; Deorſum. Cott.
ID


Idhen, à Bird; ethen, id.

Idhio, the Toy Tree; eideu, id. W.
id.

Idnak, the eleventh. -

Idne, narrow ; it. a Fowler, Cott.

Idzhek, hooting; ſounding ; Qu.
as, Karn-idzhek, the hooting
Karn, fo called probably from
the ſignificant, prophetic noiſes
which conſecrated Rocks were
ſuppoſed by the Ancients ſome-
times to emit,

Idzhin, we; ni idzhin aguelaz,
we ſee. |

N. B. Two Pronouns perſonal
for one. Lh. 245, Col. 1.


IE
Jedhewon, Jews; Edzhewon,


id.

Jef, Ice.

Tein, cold; chill; frigid.

Jen, Cold; it. a Yoke.

Teu, the Ridge of a Hill,
Jevam, a young Man; Prince;


Jupiter. R.
I'F
Ifarn, Hell; Als-yfarn, the Hel-


liſh Cliff ; viz. as deep as
Hell.


I G
Ig, a Hook.
Iganz, twenty.

I K


Ik (yk, ick, id.), a common
Termination of Creeks in
Cornwall, as, Pordinik, Prad-
nik, Portyſſik, f. A'uik, or
Guik,


| I L

Il, can, or may; ti ail, thou can.
ni illi, /e cannot. |

Ilin, an Elbow.


I'M


_—


Impinion, the Brain,
Im, into my.
Impoc, a Kiſs; impog, id. pok-


kail, id.
IN


In, they.

Inguinor, a Workman ; Inventor;
Contriver, Lh.

Inhans, down; inhans in hal,
down in the Mor. Qu.

Inniadou, Repulſes ; Denials,

Inkois, Frankincenſe.

Inkois-leſtr, a Cenſer.

Innanz, now.


10


Jor, Lord; bad-ior, the Gover-
nor's Houſe. R.

Jorkhes, a Roe; a She-goat.

Jot, Hafly-pudding ; Pulſe. Cott.

Joul, the Devil; Dzhiaul, id.
Joulou, Devils.

Jowan, John ; Dzhuan, id.

Jorwerth, W. Edward.


IR


Ira, to anoint.
Irat, feet Ointment.


1 Snow ; Cott. 8. irk. Lh.
1d.


18


Iſav, the Bottom.


Dwelling. |
Ifel (iſall, id.), humble ; Jow,
Iſelhat, Ar. Humility,
Iſeldor, lowe/t, or deepeſt Part;
even with the Ground,
Iſge, Water; Ar. viſge, id.
Iſion, Cha; Palea; L. kulin,
id. Lh. |
Iſkel, Breth ; iſgal. Lh. id.
Iſkinat, to provoke; to challenge.


ward.
3


Ithen, Furze; eithen, id.
Ithik, immenſe; cruel; fat; va-
liant; ithik tra, very much;


moſt of all.


my) Bed.


—— — — — ——


Is, any thing low; inferiour.
Gale 5


Iſcaun, fight ; treviſcaun, a ſlight


Iſod (iſot, id.), below ; down-


Itta, in; itta 'o guili, in the (or


I U


Ives, Ar. 4%.

Jugye, to judge.

Juh, upon, ſuper. L.

Juin, a Nail; Pl. juinaz, Ln
guts. L.

Juntis, Joints; viz. of the Limbs,

Ivre, Darnel.

Jurna, a Day; dzhurna, id.

1


Iyn, young.
lynyh (Iynkar, id.), a Youth,


1
Iz, Corn; iz ſaval, id. Lh.


[z-diu, 4 Hurtle-berry.
[zal, See Iſel.


K.
Mem. No K, in the Britiſh


| Language, ſays Moyle, Lett,


Vol. I. pag. 182. Poſthum.
Works, till the Year 1200, when
the W was alſo introduced,

N. B. The K is very rare in
the Cott, MS. But Mr. Lhuyd
often uſes it ; and by other Mo-
derns the C, K, and Ch, are
indifterently uſed,


* garick, bandy-legged.
Kabin lugadſhok, /quint-
eyed. Lh. ;

Kabin ſghudak, crook-backed. Lh.

Kac, a Field.

Kad, W. War; Battle.

Kadar, Honour ; Reverence.

Kadven, W. a Chain.


Kaeth ; d; gurkaeth, a Bond-


ſlave. Lh.

Kael, te find ; gael, & gavel,
ML. * '

Kaff (kaou, id.), aCavern. Gale.

Kaffel, to have; Verbs that want
the Preſent Tenſe Indicative,
have it ſupplied by ma d'hym-
mo, I have, i. e. there is 15
me; kavaz, id.

Kah, caco; kaha en guili, ca-
cavit in Leto; Gw. it. th?
Crop, or firſt Stomach of a Few!.

Kahen-ryd, a Torrent.

Kaik, Lime.

Kairder, an outward Form; Shape;
Pretence, or Pidture.

Kaithes, a Maid Servant; kaith,
a Man Servant. Lh.

Kakan (Pl. kakez), a Cate.


| Kal, a Phallus ; Membrum I iri-


. L.
Kala, a Straw. Lh.
Kalagueli, a Bed of Straw.
Kalan (halan, id.), the Calends,
or fir/l Day ef the Month. Li.


| Kalanedh, AZurther. _
Kalatza,


*


1
=
"x

Tf
8
8
C
1
:
*
5
1%
=
G *
4 ,
*
=
2
4%
C
*
»
*
3 |
— 2J
* 5
* "=


K A
Kalatza, hardeſt.


Kalch, Lime.

Kaletter, Hardneſs.

Kaliſh, hard; kaliſho, difficult.

Kall, crafty.

Kallaminghi, Tranquility; Calm.

Kalonnek, valiant.

Kaltor, a Kettle; per, id.

Kamdhavas, @ Rainbow.

Kamhinſek, partial. Lh.

Kams, a Surplice. Lh.

Kin, white ; bara-kan, white
Bread ; \t. a Song ; a Poem.

Kana, to ſing; kans, ſinging.

Kankar, a Crab-fiſh, Rut; Bla/t
of Corn; PI. kenkraz.

Kanna, a Flagon.

Kan-pur (f. kanwur), Athleta ;
a Wrestler.

Kans, kana, à Seng, or Tune.

Kanſtel, a Baſket.

Kant!, kantuil, PI. kyntulti, 4
Candle.

Kanvas, to flout, rattle, make a
Noiſe.

Kanz, a hundred.

Kaol, Cabbage. Lh.

Kar, a Friend; Lh. a Kinſman,

Kara, to love; LH. it. as V; as
it were, Ib.

Karak, a Rock ; kraig, id.

Kardouion, Friends.

Karedig, W. I/ind.

Karenza, Love.

Kareſk, Exeter City,

Karetys, a Parſnip, or a Carrot.

Karhar, a Jail, or Priſon.

Karlath, a Ray-fi/h, or Thornback.

Karn, a Heap of Stones.

Karnedh, a Heap of Stones; W.
& Ir. karnan, id. it. a rocky
Heap of Witneſs.

Karnkolhan, the Handle of a

Meadon.

Karo (karu, 14.). a Stag, or Deer.

Karogos, a Kinſman ; Lh. qua.
kar- agos.

Karol, a Choir; a Conſort of Mu-
ſick ; a Song. Cott.

Karr, Ar. a Cart, or Maggon.

Karrak, a Rock; W. Kraig. Lh.

Karrog, W. a Brook, or River. Lh.

Karrog, @ River. [Qu.]

Karwedha, zo lie; ma'n ladar y
karwedha, the Thief lies; i. e.
down,

Karven, W. a Cart, or Waggon.

Kaſtelh, alias kaſtal, Lh. a Caſſle.

Kath, a Cat.

Kavaethiaz, Covetouſneſs.

Kaval, a Hive; a Baſket, W.
a Hamper.

Kaval guanan, a Bee-hive.

Kavankis, o eſcape.

Kavarn, a Gret, or Den. Lh.

Karat, any Kind of Veſſel.

Kavatſh, a Cabbage; kaol, id.

Kauaz, to have; it, to find, Lh.


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


K A |


Kaudarn, @ Caldren ; per, kal-
tor, id.

Rauh, Dung.

Raul, Herbs; Pottage. Lh.

Kaurvarch, a Camel.

Kauz, to talk,

Kaz, Reaſon ; Cauſe.

Kazal, the Arm pit.

Nazek koit, or koat, a I d.
pecker. A. & C. Lh.


Kazer, a Sieve.
K E
Ke (kei, id. W. kae, id.), Pl.


keaw, a Hedge.
Ke, fall thou; g9 thou,
Reann, Ir. a Head.


Dho keaz, to ſhut up; to ſhut fs.


Keber, the Rafter of a Houſe ;
a Beam of Timber ; it. pro
cheber.

Kebiſter, a Halter.

Kedha, a Full.

Kedva, an Aſſembly ; a Synad.

Keer, Love; Afectian; carer,
kerd, ker, id.

Keffrys, hetibeen.

Keg, a Cook; kog, id. Cott.

Kegaz, Hemlock.

Keghin, a She-cook; a Kitchen.
W. id.

Kehedzhe, a reaching, or flretch-
ing of the Body.

Kei, a Dog (ki, id.), Pl. ken,
gi, id. in Compol,

Rein, the Back.

Keinak, a Shad-fiſh.

Keirch, Oats; bara keirch, Oaten
Bread. Cott.

Kekyffrys, alike ; likewiſe,

Kelednak, hind. G.

Kelegel, a Cup; Calix, L. Cott.

Kelin, the Meed of flanding Pools.

Kelinen, the Holly Tree.

Kelinnek, a Place where Holly
Trees grow.

Kelionen, a Fly; kilionen, id.

Keliok reden, the Ferncock ; Graſ-
hopper.

Kelli, a Grove, Cott. Lh.

Kellys, fallen; It; killys, id.
a kelly, to loſe.

Kelma, to bind. See Colmye.

Kelmy, to bind; to thruſt in; tak-
kia, id.

Keluedhek, A. 4 Grove, or Tops
of Hazel Trees; kelhi. W. id.

Kembra, a Britan; Chi an Kem-
bra, the Houſe of a Britan. Pl.
Kembrion.

Kemer, to take.

Dho kemera kerr, to take away
(kymeras, zo take, ; Lh.

Kemerys (hemerys, kemerag, &
gemerag, id.), taken. Pa.


| Kemiſkys, mixed; a Mixture.


— — — — — —


139
K F.


Ken, although ; before ; otherwiſe ;

as if; before that.

Ken, Pity; hebken, wwith1ut Pi-

ly.

Kendereu, A. a Cofu- germ

Reneual, to dine.

Kenin eynoc, Cie.

Reniat, a Singer,

Kenkraz, Crabs.

Rennkia, ta contend; quarrel ;

gueſkal; id. .

ens, rather; before that; kyns,
id. & before-band.

Kenſa, fir/t; Chief; kenza, id.

Kenſemmyn, &er nz.

Kenſenna, cer that.

Kent, before. Lh.

Kentro, Nails (Claves, L.), Suns;
kentar, a Nail; pidn, id.
Kenyver, cvery; (kanifer, id.),

anve

Renzhoha, the AZcrning ; en
kewzboha, in the Morning.

Kepar, as, even as; ſurely.

Ker, a Dwarf; kerr, far away ;
procul; L. it. dear; coftly ;
beloved; hueg, huegol, id.

Kerd, Affection.

Kerden, the Mountain Ah.

Kerdinen, @ Branch, or Bough.

Kerdy, Gords; kereor, a Shze-
maker, Lh.

Kerh, Oats; ker-iz, Out Corn.

Kerheis, a IIeran. Lh.

Kerhez, to fetch; kerhys, re-
moved ; gone.

Kerhidh, a Heron: Lh.

Kerghys, made ready.

Kern, a Hern; kernias, kerniat,
a Piper; it. round.

Kerna, to tremble; trembled; ev
rigkerna, he did tremble; kren-
na, id.

Kernat, a Pipe; a Blower of a
Clarion.

Kernou, Cornwall ; ſo Cymru,
W. Wales. R.

Kernuak, Corniſb; of or belong-
ing to Cornwall,

Keroin, a Cup.

Kerrys, loved.

Kerydhy, W. to condemn. Th.

Keſer, Hail ; kezzar, id.

Keſkar, Poverty.

Keſker, to wander.

Keſkewetha, familiar.

Keſkyans, Conſcience.

Ket, Adv. implying an Equality;
as, kettoth, as ſoon as.

Ketchys, taken.

Ketella, /o; in ſuch Manner.

Ketelma, this Manner.

Ketep, every. |

Keth, People; the ſame ; ſuch ;
Acquaintance. ©

Kethel, a little Knife; a Knife.


Kerthes, to walk; gerthes, 14.


Ketorva, the Grein; Inguen. L..
Krttoth,


440 A coRNISH- ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


K E.


Kcttoth, as.

Ketwell, to keep.

Keu, hollow. Lh.

Keuar, a Storm; a Tempeſt; ha-
garauel, id,

Keuar-diu-mis, December.

Kevelep, alike.

Kevnen, a Hill, or Hillock.

Keweras, help.

Kewſel, to ſpeak ; kewſens, they
ſpake.

Keyſon, Charge, Accuſation.

Kez, a Cheeſe; kezn, id.

Kezan, a Cld, or Turf; Pl.
kezau. |


Kezzar, Hail. Lh.
KI


Ki, go thou.

Kibbal, a Bucket; a little Tub;
Ar. quibell, id.

Kibmiaz, leave; kummyaz, id.
Dho kidha (dho dereval, id.),
To hoard; hide; it. to build.
Kidniadh, Autumn; kidniaz,

Harveſt ; kyniau, id.

Kidnio, a Dinner.

Kig, __ F

Kigel, a Di/taff.

Kine: a "> Ar. id,

Kigliu, Fleſh-colour.

Kigty, the Shambles. W. id.

Kiguer, a Fork; Furca; L.
vorh, id.

Kil, a Neck; chil, id. polkil,
top of the Neck ; it. a Retire-
ment.

Killin, to lie along ; killynia, to

lie ſbelving.

Kilymmiar, a Pigeon Houſe ;
klymmiar, id.

Kimer (for keimawr), a great


og.
Kinak, a Vorm; Pl. kinakas.
Kinbyk, a Wether-goat.
Kinethel, a Generation; en ki-
nedhel, a Giant.
Kinidern, Ar. a ſhe Couſin- german.
Kinin, a Leet; a Slip of Land.
Kinguer (ſee Kiguer), Cott.
u.
Kinnis, Fewel; hot ; kynnes, id.
Kio, a Snipe.
Kiſtan, a ſmall Chefl. Lh.
Kitha, to hide; keeth, id. kee-
ther, hidden; leath kither,


ſealded (viz. hidden, or covered)


Milk. |
Kiulat, 4 Coverlet. Lh.


a


Klabitter, a Bittour, or Bittern.

Elav, ſick. Lh.

Klechic, a little Bill. Lh.

Kledh, a Trench (Pl. kledhiou),
a Dyte; kleudh, id. Scots


K L


Cluith, as, Alcluith. W.
Clawd, as, Clawd Offa, Offa's
Dyke.

Kledha. See Clethe,

Kledha bian, a Dagger.

Kledhe, a Sword; Knife ; it. the
Left. band; kledhek, Left-
handed. Lh.

Klevas, @ Diſeaſe.

Klevas y min tedh, the Stone in
the Kidneys; klevaz an my tern,
the King's Evil.

Klevet, the Hearing.

Klihi, ce. |

Klittro, to ſhine; o es klittra,
that is ſhining.

Klo. See Clo.

Klodai, W. Credit; Honour.
Lh.

Klodzha, to harrow. Lh.

Klodzhaz, a Harrow; to harrow ;
ma e a klodzhaz, he harrows.

Kloh, a Bell; kloch, id.

Kloppek, lame; a Cripple. See
Clof, & Klof, id,

Klouaz, to hear ; dho glouaz,
id.

Klunk, to ſwallow. f. Qu.

Klut, a Rag ; a Clout.

Klut-leſtre, a Diſb-clout.

Kluyd, a Hurdle of Rods; W.
id. Ar, kluet, id. the Breaſt;
duyvron, id. Lh. |

Klymiar, & klomiar, à Pigeon-
houſe.


K N


Kneff, ſorry.

Kneu-glan, a Fleece M col.
Kniſkan, a Flagon.

Knyfan, a Hazzle; guedan kny-


fan, a Hazzle Tree.
K O
Ko, Remembrance ; ema ko dho


vi, I remember; kof, & cof,
id,
Koat (for coit), a Wd kiz,


id,

Kober, Copper ; Braſs. |

Kodha (dho kodha), to fall. Lh.

Kodna, a Neck; kodna breh, the
Arm IWrift ; kona, id.

Kodna-guidn, a white Neck;
i. e. a Meaxel.

Kodna-huilen, a Lap-wing.

Koeten, Quoit; as, koeten Ar-
thur, Arthur's Quoit.

Kof, & cof, Remembrance.

Koir, Wax. |;

Koiſen, the Calamus, or fweet
Cane.

Koit, a J/ood; as, penkoit, W.
coed,

Koith-gath, a wild Cat, i. e. 4


oed Cat. |


Kota, a Peticoat, Coat, or Fer-


K O


Kok, a Boat; ſkath, id,

Kolan, a Cole; it. the Heart. Lh

Kolannak, courageous ; a Colon,

Kein (kolhed |
olh {kolhed, id.), W. .
Damage. Lh, 4 Tm

Soliaz, ſailing.

Koll, Ir. a Head.

Kollel, a Knife ; kolhel gravio,
a Graving Inflrument. Sce
Coltel.

Kollet, Leſs; Damage.

Koloin, a /help.

Komolek, dark.

Kompas, Ir. a Circle; it. C. as,
n'un gompas, in St. Juſt, the
Down by or of the Circle.

Kona, a Neck.

Kone, Supper ; Pl. konnes,

Koneriok, mad.

Kong, à Look,

Kontlez, gathered.

Kopher, or Kophor, a Box; ko-
pher-braz, a Cheſt.

Kor, Beer; Ale; Wax; a Mal
Dwarf ; koruv, id. i. e. Ale ;
korguella, 5% Beer.

Kor, W. a Sheep; lr. kaor, id.

2 4 _—
orhlan, a Burying-þplace ; a
Sheepfald. Ww. 2 8

Korn (C. W. Ar), a Horn;
kern, id.

Kornat, an Angle. Lh.

Kornat, a Corner; Angulus, L.

Korolli, to dance.

Koron, 4 Crown ; a Coronet.

Korph maro, @ Corpſe; a dead
Body.

Korres, a Female Dwarf.

Korſen, à Reed, Stalk ; a Luill.

Kortez, to /tay.

Koruedha, to lie down ; to lie.

Koſgar, Lads; Boys; it. à Guard;
Sate.litium, Lh.

Koſgaza, ſbade, or defend thou;
koſgezyz, ſhaded.

Koſkor, depending; Den koſkor,
a Tenant.


Koſkough, ſleep ye; a Kuſge, to


cep.
Koſoua, to lift up.
Koſtan, a Huckler, or Target;
a Defence.


Koſtrel, a Pot, Bottle, or Flagon.
W


tin. Lh.
Koth, old; of old Time. Lh.
Kov (kyv, id.), anſwers to the
Latin en in confirmo, &c.
as, kovlenuel, & collenuel,
to fulfill.
Kouaith-liver, a Manual.
Kouat, a Storm of Rain. Lh.
Kouaz, to get; to enjoy; potior. L
Kovlenuel, t2 fulfill ; koullen-
weugh, fuufil ye.


Koulrty,


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 441


K O
Koultyr, the Coulter of a Plough.


Kovys, mindful ; remembring.

Kouz (koums, id.), Diſcourſe;
Talk ; dho kouz, to chat ; to
tell. Lh. |

Kowl, Broth ; evos kowl, ſup
up your Broth.


Kozal, ſow; ſoft. See Kuzal.
K R


Kraf, covetous. Lh.

Krig, Proviſion ; Meat.

Kra-ma, i not.

Kramia, to creep.

Krampez, a Pie; as, gil krampez
Vavalou, to make an Apple- pie.

Krampothan, a Fritter ; a Pan-
cake ; Pl. krampedh.

Krana, a Crane. Lh.

K ranag, a Frog; kranag diu, 4
Toad.

Kredzhans, Faith; Honefly ; Lh.

Kreft, Art; Science; Skill, Lh.

Kreis, a Smock ; a Shirt; hevez,


1d,

Kreiz, called; invited, Lh.

Kren, a Spring; a Source; pedn
an kren, the Head of the Spring.
Gr. Xp.

Kren, & kern, round. Lh.

Krena, t9 ſhake. Lh.

Kreſhaz, increaſed; an devaz yn
kreſhaz, the Sheep are increaſed.

Kreſſia, to increaſe.

Kreſtudnian, Chriſtians; Kriſto-
nion, id.

Krev, ftout ; flrong ; cref, id.

Krevan, a Cruſt. -

Krevdar, the chief Point of Buſi-
neſs ; Firmamen. L.

Krez, the Middle; ber-krez, the
Midadlle-finger. Lh.

Krib, a Ridge; krib an chi,
Ridge of the Houſe.

Eriba-mel, a Honey-comb.

Kriba, or kribaz, Lh. to card;


to comb; dho kriba an pedn, %


comb the head; ſy bbona, id. Lh.

Kriban, a Comb; the Creſt of a
Lapwing, or other Bird; a Tuft ;
a Plume.

Kridzhi, to think; conjecture.

Kriha, to call; name; to cry.

Krio, to weep.

Kriv, crude; raw; bold.

Krobman, a Hook.

Krodar, a Sieve, or Sierce.

Krogan, or krogen, a Shell; Pl.
kregin.

Kroglath, W. a Snare, or Trap.

Krohan, the Skin; Hide; kroin,
id, Lh. :

Krois, 4 Croſs ; krouz, id.

Kronek, a Toad; kronek melyn,
a Frog.

Krongkia, to beat, laſh, over-
come, or ride; terhi, id.


K O


Krou, a Hut; krou moh, a
Hog's-/lie.
Kroude, a Fiddle.


* Th crooked ; cromb, id, cam,
i


Krun, W. round.

Krüſt, an Afternoon's Luncheon.

Kryhiaz, to neigh as a Horſe.

Kryk, a Hilleck; for kryg, id.
r. kruach, id.

Krylliaz, curled; bleu krylliaz,
curled Hair.

Kann a Shirt, or Smock; hevez,
id,

Kryſlat, a Hawk.

Kryvedhe, a Bed.


K U


Kuarre, a Quarry ; Fodina. L.
Kuartan, the fourth Part of any
Thing.


ys a Shower of Rain ; kuas,
id.
Kubma, to fall, periſh, or le


ſlain,

Kudnik, crafty, cunning.

— vin A. .

Kuer, Hemp; it. pro keuar, a
Storm.

Khuero, cruel; fierce. See Hu-
ero, rough, id.

Kueth (or gweth), Cloathing.

Kuethiou, Cloaths; Kkuethiou
kod- penna, Neck-cloths.

Kuf, Wife.

Kugol, a Mont's Cowl ; a Hood.


Kuhuthe, to betray ; kyhydha,
=


Kuik, a Blintard; One- eyed.


Kuilioc, an Augur; kuilioges,
a Mitch.

Kuilken, a Frog ; kranag melyn,
id. Lh.

Kuilkiores, a Vaſp; a Hornet.

Kuillan, a Pull, or Reed.

Nuit, a H/od (koit, kuz, id);
penkuit, Head of the Weed.

Kuitha, to keep, preſerve, or
guard. Lh.

Kuithizi, Keepers ; Guardians.

Kul, lean; macer. L.

Kulhu, @ Beard of Corn.

Kulin, Chap.

Kulliag, a Coch; Kelioc, id.

Kulliag-gini, @ Turky-cock ; &
jar-gini, a Turky-ben.

Kulliaghaz, a Drake, or Cock-
duck,

Kulſte, could t; mar kulſte, if
thou could ſi.

Kuluwi, to lighten ; idzhi kulu-
wi ha tredna, it lightens and
thunders,

Kundura, a Pot, or Stake.

Kunivias, Sheers ; V. ef a kunt-
vias e dhevaz, he fheers bis


Sheep.
7 30


—


K U


Kür, the Coaft, or Border of the
Country,

Kurel, W. Coral; A. Gular, id,

Kurkath, a Ram-cat.

der w ligering. See Kortes.
ulga, to fleep; to be flow, or
a.” 8

3 (Ir. a Head), a Cod, or


10 F.

Kuthu, Chaff; kuthn pez, Peaſe
Cods.

Kuthyl, Harm.

Kiz, à IId (W. koed); Pl.
kozou; kuit, id. Lh.

Kuzal, clear ; ſerene; ſeft ; plea-
ſant.


3


Ky, a Dog ; kei, id. ky-hir, a
Greyhound,

Kydas, fallen ; cothas, id.

Kydhman, a Companion; a Friend.

Kydhon; à Ring- dove; a Pigeon;
a Dove.

Kydiad, W. Coitus, Copulatis;
it. a Joint, or Cloſure.

Kydiorch (kytiorch, Cott. id.),
a Male Kid; a Roe-buck ; .an
quaſ, koed jurk? Lh.

Kydnik, Crafty.

Kydynnou, Hair of the Head.

Kyſtes, W. Confeſſion ; Acknow-
ledgement ; Kotes, A. id.

Kyffris, in Reſpect of.

Kyffys, & ketys, found.

Kyg, Flyh.

Kyl, kan. Lh.

Kylednak, ſincere; kind.

Kylhan, a Knife ; kolhen, id.

Kylighi, Cockle ſhells.

Kyll, can; mar a kyll, if he can.

Kylmys (keimys), bound ; thru/t
in.

Kylobman, à Pigeon.

Kylyrion, the Bowels ; Entrails.

Dho kymeras, to tate; dho ſezia,
id.

Kymmis, ſ much; every; always 3
kynnis, & kemmys, id.

Kymmiſk-bleid (or ki, à Lynx),
a ſpotted Beaſt; hanchi, id.

Kympez, a ways; as much as;
id. f. as kymmis.

Kyn, Head; Prince; as, Kyn-
velyn, ſc. Cunobelin, 1. e.
yellow Head. R.

Kynak, a Louſe; Tinea Capilis. L.

Kynava, à Rogue.

Kyndan, a Debt; dha bos en
kyndan, to owe; to be obliged.

Kynihias, neighing. L.

Kynin, a Kabbit.

Kynivias, to clip, or ſbeer, or
reap. Lh.

Kynnen, Strife; ind. f. Trekyn-


nen, 4 Town of Strife,


Kynil, to gather; coll-&,


Kynyphan,


— —


442


K Y


Kynyphan, a Nut; kynyphan
Franc, a Watlnut. Lh.

Kyr, dearly beloved; choſen. Lh.

Kyran, W. a Buſtin; folhach,
id


Kyriak, a Pimple.
Kyrtaz, to ſlay behind ; remaneo,


L.

Kyſga, to ſleep (kufga, id.)

Kyffel, Counſel ; Pl. kyſſylgou.
W. id.

Kyſtris, between.

Kyvadhas, profitable ; fit; agree-
able; it. a Companion.

Kyuedh, a Fellow; a Collegue.
(& kyuedhiad), a Copart-
ner.

Kyvedhach, W. a Banquet ; gu-
ledh, id.

Kyveether, Omnipotent. Cott.

Kyvelak, a Woodcock.

Kyueras, Help; Succour.

Kyvetha, drunk.

Kyvethidog, able ; potent.

Kyulat, @ Coverlit; Tapeſtry ;
Hangings. Lh.

Kyw, a Chick. W.

Kywely, a Bedfellow. W.

Kyzalath, Peace; kuſual, id.

Kyzalatha, to reconcile z; make
Friends ; make Peace.


Kyzauleth (Cott. id.), Peace.
L.


L is ſometimes premiſed for
ſound ſake, as, guedhan lavalu,
(for avalu), an Apple-tree.


Aboucc, a Bird. Ar.
Labſcon, coarſe Diet; poor
Meat.

Lader, & ladar, a Thief; purra
lader, the verye/t Thief (ladron,
id.); Pl. ladrou. W. Iheidir,
id


Dho ladh, 70 Lill.

Ladn, a Bank. In Carew, pa.
144, tis written Ladu, but
that is printed wrong ; Mr.
Carew meant 2 for he
is giving the mol of
Las in 1 *

Laduit, Nothing.

Lat, high.

Laferrya, to work; lavyrrys,
wrought ; laboured.

Lagadzhek, quick-/ighted.

Lagam, a Pool, or Late; lagu-
en. Ar,

Lagas, the Eye; lagat, id. le-
gadzho, id. lagas-auel, the
Meatber's Eye ; the Weather
Dog.

Lagat, id. Pl. legeit, Cott.

Laha, a Law; Pl. lays,

Laian, /y2l; good; leal, id. diſ-
laian, unfaithful ; ſeditious,


L A
Laig, & leig, a Layman.


Laines, a Nun. See Leanes.

Lait (lath, leath, id.), Milt. W.
blith, Ar. leth, id.

Laka, worſe ; lacka, id.

Lakka, a Well; a Pit.

Lam, .

Lam 3 beaten ſoundly.

Lan, a Church; a Reft ; an In-
cloſure ; yn lan, in Reft.

Lan, Ar. Furze, or Gorft.

Lanek, F or belonging to the
Church ; as, Inſula Lenach (a
little Iſland near the ſhores of
Angleſea), i. e. ſnſula Eccle-
ſiaſtica propter Santtos ibi ſe-
pultos.

Lanherch, a Foreft; an incloſed
Mood; it. a Leap, or Skip. Lh.

Laol, to ſpeak. See Laul.

Laouer, a Trough.

Lappior, @ Dancer. Cott,

Lappiores, a She- dancer.

Laſche, Aronely.

Laſk, LY leſk, id.

Latha, to Kill (ladh, id.); han-
ter e ladha, to half kill bim.

Lau, a Hand; lof, id. layff, &
leyff, id. la, Ar. id. it. Furz.
Lh


Lavalou, Apples; for Avalou.
Lavar, a Saying; Proverb; Book ;
Pl. Leffrou ; Ar. lenfr, id.
Lauenez, Jey; lauenik, glad.

Lh


Laverſough, ye have ſpoken.

Lavethas, a Midwife ; Germo
Mahtern, Breag Lavethas,
i, e. Germowasa King; Breag
a Midwife.

Laul, to ſay; ema radn a laul,
there are ſome who ſay.

Launter, a Lantern.

Lavrak, Breeches ; lavarrak, &
laudr. id. =

Lavrok-pan, an Apron.

Lauſq, ack ; looſe.

Lavur, ſweet.

Lawennek, merry.

Lays, green (for glaz, id.); glays,
id.

Laz, las, Land; von laz, the
furtheſt Land; i. the Land's
End.


L E


Le, a Place; it. le; it. a Con-
dition. Lh.

Leadan, huge.

Leal, Faithful; loyal ; innocent.
Lh


Lean, Slate ; lehan, id.
Llean, a Pilchard.


Leana, to fill, fulfill ; lenal, fill


ye.
Leanes, Ar. a ſacred Virgin. |
Lear, Ir. the Sea.


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


|


L E


Leas, many.

8 t Half; Ir. & W.
as, teith hal,
or Barbariſm. .

Leau-ewig, a Fawn; Cott. loch
ew hic, id.

Leauh, a Calf; loch, id. Ar.
leve, id. it. the Ague ; Pl. lee ;
parcan lee, the Calves Fiel.

Leb, which; lebba, whom ; who,

Lebben, now; merough lebbcn,

fee now ; laat now.

Lebma, e whet, or Harpen; ind.
lemmys, fharpened.

Lebmal, to Hip, or dance. Lh.

Lech, a flat Rock ; W. id. Ar.
id. Ir. leac, leh, id. ind. crum-
leh, a crooked flat Stone.

Ledan, large; broad; Ar. lead-
an, id,

Ledan-en (ledan-les), Plan-
tain.

Ledhaz, Fain ; Filled. Lh.

Lediaith, a Barbarifm.

Ledior, a Reader; lediores, a
Female Reader. Cott.

Lednow, Whittles ; Swaddling-
cloaths, '

Ledradeth, Secrecy ; privately.

Ledres, /tolen. |

Ledryn, ignoble.

Ledzhek, a Heifer.

Leefhann, a Sur-name; i. e. Name
from a Place.

Leeſmam, a Step- mother. Ar.

[Lats a Voice; it. a Hand.

Legaſt, a Lobfter ; legeſti, it. a
Polypus Fiſh.

Legriaz, a Change; legryz,
changed.

Leh, a flat Stone; W. llech, id.
Pl. lehau ; lehan, id. Lh. it.
a Tyle. 5

Leiah, e; dhan leiadh, at
leaſt ; en leiah, id. Lh.

Leid, an Offipring ; lwyth, id.

Lein, a Dinner ; a Feaſt.

Leith, @ Tribe, or Ward. See
Leid.

Lemal, to leap; lebmal, & lem-
mell, id.

Lemmyn, now ;
id. Lh.


Lemmys, ſharp; ſparpened ; leym,
id


Lempia, lame.

Len, full; leun ; luen ; Iwn, id,
it. honeſt.

Len, Ar. a Pond of flanding Mu-
ter; it. a Kind of Blanket ; Sa-
gum. L. à Short Cloak.

Lenez, @ Ling Fiſh ; Pl. lene-


ZOU,


but; luman,


of the Sea.
Ler, a Floor; a Bottom; the Foun-
dation; the Earth; it. warler,


after ; wariler, after him.
Es,


2 . *
dhe


r


3 * S > 4 * 1 =; .
rn 3 : [% wp


Lenol, the Tide; lenol mor, Tide


*
=
.
*
1
of
x
»
_——
4
WF
5
*
© 4
=
„
=
*
”
3 J
= 4
*
1 *
2X
* o
A
«
-
5 *
8
2
f =


" * ot
oy; OI


4
*
»
0
7
1
*
=
2
4
4
„
1
.
E
. ==
.
:
.
I
* 1X
_—
7
1 4
5
4
*
4
%
=
£ 4
9
1
9
>
"=
=
1
2 3
* —
# „
"=
I \
=.
*
*
f -
*
4
=
;
=_—
” *
of
-
*
*
5
= 4
-Y
&
4 2
_
—
_—
__
3.
8
A
_
« *
# 4
- 1
*
2
*
1
1
> *
1
=


n ISS 4
r


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 443


LE


Les, Breadth ; Ar. a Court-Hall ;
lez, W. lhys, id.

Les, Profit ; it. any Herb.

Les-derth, Feverfew ; leſderthen.

Les-duſhoc, Betony.

Les-engoc, the Sun-flawer; the
Marygold. .

Leſk, a Cradle. Lh.

Leſkyz, burning ; karn leſkyz,
the Rocks of burning; leſkez,


id.

Leſkyad, a burning Coal; W.
lloſgiad, id.

Les-lait, Mugwort ; white IVhore-
hound.

Les-ſerchoc, the Burr ; Burr-
doct.

Leſter, a Sbip; Pl. liſtri.


Leſtezius, /owzy.


Leſtre, a Diſh; any thing that] L


holds or receives another thing ;
as, cantuil-leſtre, a Candleſtick,

Leth, Side. Sc.

Letſhar, a Frying-pan.

Lethys, Killed. See Latha.

Leu-guthal, the Rudder of a Ship;
ind. leuiut, a Pilot.

Llevain, to lament. R.

Levar, the Bark of a Tree; a
Book.

Leven, bald; ſmooth ; por-leven,
the ſmonth Port.

Leuenik (louan, & louenak, id),
pleaſant.

Leuend-lac, ſweet Milt; Cott,
leuerith, 1d,

Leverell, ſpeak ; leverys, ſaid.

Leuiar, a Dyer.

Leuilloit, the Milt ; Spleen.

Leuirgo, the Seale-fiſh.

Leuiũt, a Pilot; Maſter of a
Ship; leuyidh, id. Lh.

Leur, a Piece of flat, even Ground.
Ar.

Lew, a Lion; lhe, id. Lh.

Lewte, indeed.

Lezow, Bretagne ; Armorica.

Lezr, a Skin; Ar. Leather.

Lezron, the Thighs. Ar.


LI
Li, a Breakfaſt.


Liam, a Knot, or Tie.

Lian, Linen ; lien. Ar.

Liana, to bury. Ib.

Lian-buz, a Table- cloth

Lian duylou, a Hand-cloth; a
Napkin.


Lian-gueli, a Bed-ſheet ; it. Co-
ex. L


Liakder, Plenty ; Wealth ; peth,
id,
Liaz, thick; cloſe; — ;


much ; a Band, or Company.


Liaz-tre, often; lias termen, of-


tentimes.


Lic, Ar, wanton.


30


L I


Liden, qu. This is your Liden,
1. e. this is your Muy of talk-


ing.

Lidden, a By- word. Car.

Lidzhiu, Abbes.

Ligan, qu, penny-ligan, i. e.
25 Stake ; laſt Penny ; Penny-
eſs.

Lili, a Lilly. Lh. |

Lligruer, a Barbariſm in Speech ;
llediaith, id.

Lill, /aſcivious; Trelill, a Town
of IWantonneſs.

Lin, a Lake; it. Flax; Ar. a
Pond.

Linaz (linhaden, id.), a Nettle.

Linva, to flow ; linvat, an Inun-
dation. Ar.

Linyn, Thread ; Yarn.

is, . + Ir. @ Fort; unde Liſ-

carol & Lisfinuy, ibid. & Liſ-

kerd, in Cornwall.

Lit, a Feaſt; a Merriment ; lit
an 1lis, the Wakes of a Pariſh.

Litherau, an Epiſtle ; Learning;
Scholarſhip.

Litheren, Letters ; Cott. it. a
Letter in a Book ; Pl. litherou.
Lh.

Litiauc, angry.

Lituen, a Pipe. Cott.

Liu, Colour; ind. Iiuiar, a Dyer;
liuor, a Painter; ynliu, of one
Colour, Lh.

Livan, the Leaf of a Book.

Liver, a Bark of a Tree; a Book ;
Pl. livrou. Lh.

Livern, the Ancle-lone; lifern,
id.

Liumelet (minium, L.), Red-
lead; Paint.

Livris, freſh; lez livris, freſh
Milk. Ar.

Liy, an Egg.

Liz, à Gulf of Water between two
Lands. Hals.

Lizer, an Epiſtle, Ar.

Lizherd (the Southermoſt Pro-
montory of England, qual,
liazherd, much thruſt out), a
projetting Headland. See Her-
dya, to thruſt out.


L O


Lo, a Spoon; loc. Cott. id. Pl.
leu; lo, Water ; Lh. in A-


qua.

Loak, qu. do loak, i. e. ds /
pray.

Loar, enough; laur, lar, id. it.
the Moon.

Lobmaz, a kind of Bream Fiſh.

Loch, a Calf. Cott.

Lodes, the Herb Artemiſia.

Lodn, a Bullock ; Pl. lodnou
Lodn-guarack, id. viz. a Bul-


lock. Gw.


| L O


Lodn, à Sluggard; lodn an par-
nu, ſuch a Sluggard !

Lodn-davas, a / «ther Sheep.

Lodr (PI. lydrau), Stociings ;
Breeches ; lydrou, id.

Lodzhon (ſee Lodn), any Bul-
lock.

Loe, qu. Cott. Regula.

Lof, a Hand.

Logan, f. ling; qu. a Logan
Stone, Viz. a rocking, movings
Stone; qu. an a leägan, Ir.
a Rack, or great flone. Lh.

Logel, a Pocket ; Cott, loghel, id,

Loggas, Mice; Treloggas, Mice-
town.


r Seeg a Mouſe ; lygodzhen,
1


Logoden fer, Calf of the Leg.

Lodoſa (hlodoſa, id.), wild Saf
fron ; Dog's-bane. |

Lollas, America; the NM Indies;
Dour tubm Lllas, Rum; i. e.
Ile India Spirit; Dour tubm


Franc, French Spirit, or Bran-


Lommen, a Meſs ; lommen coul,
a Meſs of Pottage. Gw.

Lonath, a Kidury; the Reins ;
diuglun, id. Lh.

Lor, a Staff (lorch, id. Cott.),


it. a Floor; the Earth; the


Moon.

Lor-vraoz, a Club.

Loſgi, to burn. Lh.

Loſk, Corn Smut: Uſlilago. L.

Loſq, a Burning. Ar. id.

_ a Tail; a Rump; Pl. lo-
io.

Loſteg, a Fox (loſtek, id.), qua.
large Tail.

Loſtlydan, a Beaver,

Lov, a Hand.

Lovan, a Rope; loch-lovan, a
Rope of the watry Place.

Louan, pretty ; cheerful ; louen,
Cott. Merriment.

Louas, Lightning ; goleuas, id.


Loven, a Bed.

Lovennan, a Mazel.

Lougurchel, Utenſil; any thing
for Uſe.

Loui, te wax mouldy; louedy, Ar.
id.

Loum, a Drop of Water.

Lour, down; downward; ind. f.
a lowring Look,

Louſaouen, Graſs; Herbage. L.

Louzall, to unloofe ; laxo. L.

Llow, Chief; VV, lloworch, 4
Chief; a Governor,

Lowarth, a Garden ; luar, 1d.

Lowene, Jey; lowan, gladly.

Lower, many; lower le, many
Places.

Lowyz, Gray; W. lhuyd, id.
ludzh. id,


Loyen,


_——— — DA


444
L O
Loyen, a Louſe.


L6ys (aloys, id.), flowing.
Lozou, Aber. l


LU


La, the Vulgar; the Mob.
Lli, an Army ; Cott. ly, id.
Luan, a Houſe ; Pl. Lou.
Luar, See Lowarth.
Luarn (luern, id.) @ Fox; loſ-
teig, id. Lh. :
Lucar, à Bell-place ; clecha, id.
Lhuch, W. a Lake; Ir. loch.
Luder, a Peer of the Realm; a
Ruler.
Ludin, a Meadow.
Ludnou, Cattle; reban ludnu, by
the Cattle.
Ludzh, Gray-haired. W. Lhuyd,
A. Gwen, id.
Luck, enough. Qu.
Luedik, ftinking.
Luerid, ſweet Milt. Ar.
Llueſu, to be calm.
Lug, a Tower ; Ar. a Crow.
Lugu, Pl. Crows ; Ravens.
Lugarn, @ Candle; a Lamp. :
Luh, @ Lake; W. lhuch, id.
inde luh, River ; luh, Pool;
Ir. lough, Scot. loch.
Luhas, Lightning.
Luid, Battle-array.
Luid, à Precinct. See Leid.
Luir, the Moon; lr, id.
Llun, à Late; Gale, See Lin.
Lur, enough ; it. the Moon.
Lurgy, qu. feaver lurgy, i. e.
the Fever of Laxzineſs ; a pre-
tended Fever ; i. e. no Fever
at all. Qu.
Luſhan, a Herb; lyzuan, id.
Luu-liftri, a Fleet; à Ship-army.
Luwet, Lightning.
Luworch-guit, à Shrub ; lyu-
orch guydh, id. So Kuz, a
Mood; W. Koed, 5
Liz, gro; W. llwyd, id.
Llwyn, a Grove; Fl. Ihwynau,
R. See Lhyn.


LY


Ly, & lhy, an Army. Th.

Lyle-ſtri, A. a Fleet. W. id.

Lyble, the Inſcription; Character.

Llydaw, W. of or belonging to
Shore.

Lyder, a Preſident of a Country ;
an Officer of State, See Luder,
Cott.

Lydrou, Stockings. Lh.

Lyfr, a Bozk ; Pl. lyffrou.

Lyz-vraoz, a Rat. Lh.

Lygarn, a Candle. Lh.

Lygodzhan, a Monſe; Pl. lo-


gaz.
Llygud, the Eye. See Lagad ö


| Lyw, a Countenance; Complexion,


Lyazdan (it. lyſuan), a Herb, or


| Maen, à Stone; a Rock.


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


LY


ydn lygadzhak, One-eyed Lh.

Lyhuetha, to lact; lyhuetha dar-
ras, to lock the Door.

Lyk [& laur], enough; it. luck,
& laver, id.

Llymman, W. an Enſign; Flag.

Lyn, Humour; Mater; it. al-
though.

Lhyn, à Grove ; as, pellyn, or
pellhyn, the Head of the Grove,
W. id.

Lynneth, Ofipring ; Lineage.

Lyrgh, after; war ylyrgh, after
that.

Llys, a Manor Houſe ; lees, Ar.
a Raya! Houſe, or Court; lis,
Ir. a Fort.

Lytherau, Letters.

Lyv, a Deluge: a great Flood. Lh.

Lyuorch-guydh, Sucker; of Trees;
young Sprouts.


|


Lywar, Liquor.
ut.
M.


A, this; den ma, this Man ;
FA it. pro ymma, is; a V.
it. my.

_ faut dho, I want, or lack.

h.

Mab, & map, à Son; Pl. meib,
Ar. map; Ir. mak; W. miab.
Lh.

Mab an lavar, an Infant.

Mabmeithrin, a Fofter Child.

Mach, a Fail; Pl. meichian.

Machenno, to be Bail for any one.

Machno, defenſible Places.

Madam (for me vadam), I will.

Madere, the Herb Sinitia. Cott,
Qu.

Madhekneth, Phyſic (Ir. f.)

Madra, to ſtudy.

Mael, Steel (metaph.), Hard-
neſs; Armour; tegvael, fairly
armed.


Mael-gyn, Vulcan. R.


Maen-flent, a Flint-/tone.

Maengluadh, Ar. a Quarry; in
Corniſh, à Trench of Stone;
maengledh, id,

Maer (mair, Cotr. id.), a Lord ;
meſter, id. Celtis, Præ po-
ſitus, a quo Major Angl.
„ non a Latino Fonte.“
Keyſl.

Maerbuit, @ Stewad; i. e. a
Diſpenſer, or Orderer of Food.
Cott.

Maes, a Field; R. Gale. Ar.

Maeth, Nouriſbment. Ar,

Maethu, to ba/t, or beat one.

Mag, to breed ; megyz, & mig-


hyz, bred,


M A


Maga, to feed; nouriſh; it, Corn,
284, as; maga tek, as fair;

Fob. mar, id. Lh.
agata, alſo,

Magdulans, the Pat-herh : Cile-
Wort.

Magl, a Blur, or Bl.

Maglen, a Halter; a Snare, f.
a magal, W. enſnaring,

Magon, a Field; 'a Houſe ; ma-

 gwyr, a Habitatien; a tal
Dwelling. W. R. und. C.
machno. Pl.

Mahtheid, a Virgin. Lh.

Maidh curd, W. kaus maidh,
Cheeſe ; Runnet.

Maidor, an Innkeeper ; Caupo.
Cott. a Viftualer ; a Futiler.
Maillart, a Drake ; Ar, Engl,

a Mallard.
Mair, an Overſeer. Lh.
Maiſter-meibion, a School-maſter,
Cott.
Maithez, a Maid Servant. Gw.
Mako dho vi, I remember (per-
koh. See ko, kovys), there is
Remembrance to me.
Ma, a Joint; Pl. malou, Ar.
a kind of Sack; it. that.
Malagma, Ointment ; Soap. Lh,
Malan, Ar. 4 Sheaf of Corn.
Malc, a Path-way.
Mall, deſerved.
Malou, the Herb Mallows. Cott.
Mam, good; nyn yw mam, it
was not good; it. a Mother.
Mam guenyn, a Stock of Bees.
Gw.

Mamard (mammath, id.), 2
Nurſe, Cott.

Mamen, a Spring; Source, or
Head.


Mamteilu, Miftreſs of a Fami-
/


7 a Monk; Cott. ind.
Bodman, @ Houſe of Monks ;
Pl. menech. Lh. A. id.

Manaes, a Nun.

Manak, a Glove (manek, id.), Pl.


menik, it. manegou.


Manal, 4 Handful; a Sheaf of


Corn.

Manan, wuleſs.

Maner, Manner; maner o, it
was the Manner; Ar. a Gen-
tleman's Houſe.

Manno, many Times; liaz ter-
myn, id Lh.

Mans, maimed.

Mantel, a Mantle; a Tewel, or
Napkin. Lh. 7
Manyn, Butter; amenen, id.
Mao, Ar. merry. Dho maoz, ts

walk. Lh.

Mar, if (maro, id.), very; 41;
ſe; as, marwhek, / „beet.

Mar- bel, ½ long ; fo far.

Matburan, « Grow, Cott.

| Mare,


MA


Mare, Time; Ar. da bap mare,

at all Times.

Marg, Ruſt; Ir. meirg, id.

Marh, @ Horſe; Pl. merh; Ar.
& W. March.

Marhar, a Horſeman (W. Mar-
chwr, id.); it. Mercury.

Marhaz, a Market; ind, mar-
hazion, or marhaz-dzuhon,
Market of the Fews, or mar-
haz-zian, 4 Market on the Sea
Shore; tſhymarhazno, a Mar-
ket-houſe, or Place.

Marhtheid, @ Virgin; mattheid,
or mahtheid, id.

Marnans, Death.

Marow, or maro, dead ; maruo,
to die,

Marth, Wonder (marthan beas,
the Wonder of the Morid), Pl.
merthas.

Marra, to break Earth, or dig;
marradek, dug up. Ar.
Marreg, a Soldier; marhag, a

Man of Arms, i. e. a Horſe-

man.

Martezen, ſee tvell; f. marth ezen,
It ts a Wonder.

Maru, Marrow.

Marudgyon, Wonders.

Maruo, to die; maru, id.

Marya, Mary.

Mas, but.

Mas (for mat), ju/.

_ good; vat, id. Ir. maith,
id.

Matern, a King; megtern, id.

Mat-oberar, an honeſt A, or
Actor.

Math armeſſur, a Buſbel, or
Strike,

Maur, great; bras, & braoz,
id.

Maurugo, the Thighs.

Maw, or mau, a Lad; an maw-
na, that Lad; maw teg, a
cmely Youth,

Mawl, to praiſe, or glorify.

Mawr-wyſk, powerful; R. und.
Maurice.

Maxy, Mundic ; a Corruption of
Marchaſite,

May, that; there.

Mayn, Means ; mayn ave guris,
Means were found out.

Maythys, qu. maithez, id. See
maethu, a Maid Servant.

Maz, good ; da, id.


ME


Me, J; mi, id.

Me, May- month.

Mean, à Stone; men, id. Pl.
ue & mein; mean bian,
a Pebble,

Meare, much; mer, id. mear-lc,
nuch leſs ; rag mer a dounder,


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


M E


over much of the Deep.
Meas, out of, from; ſince; for;
according to; Lh. e meas, id.
Meath, a Plain.
Meaul, with a Miſchief. Ad.


Mechain, a defenſible Place ; Pl,
f. machno.


Mechiek, /iinking.

Medal, ſoft ; gentle; medaldher,
Ps meddal, Lh. id. aiſe,
i


Medd, Metheglin; medu, id. &
medhu,

Meddonz, they will.

Meddou, a Meadow. Lh.

Medge, to reap.

Medh, ſaid; Methens, they ſaid.

Medhas, Drunkenneſs. Lh.

Medhec, a Phyſician ; a Surgeon.

Medhecniad, Phyſic; a Medhec,
a Phyſician, Cott,

Medho, to drink ; drunk ; drunk-
enneſs ; ind. vedho, a drunken
Woman ; meſuiff, Ar. drunk.

Medi, to moto; mediur, a Mow-
er.

Mediner, a Hinge.

Mediud, Mowing.

Medra, to behold; mira, id.


| Meen, an Edge; min, id.


Meervell, to die.

Megganu, the Mob; the Vulgar.

Meginou, a Pair of Bellows,

Megis, /lifled ; qual. a megy.

Megouzian, Reapers,

Mehin, Lard; Fat of Bacon.
Cott.

Mehil, a Barbel; a Mullet ; me-
hal, id. meill, id. Ar, Pl. me-
illi.

Meidhio, W. to dare; to preſume;
Lh. |

Mein, a Face, or Countenance.
Lh.

Meini-gwyr, Men-pillars ; R.
Stone men; erected Stones like
Men,

Meinek, any; meinig, ſony;
made of Stone; Ar. C. menek,
or meneg; und. meneague,
vulg.

Meith, Whey.

Mel, Honey; ind. melys, feet.
W. id.

Melhuez (melhuek, id.), a Lar#;
Celtic, & Corn. Lh.

Melhyonen, a Violet.

Meliaz, to grind; dho melias yz,
to grind Corn.

Melin, a Mill (velin, id.)

Mellyn, a bright Yellow ; Cott.
milin, id.

Melwiogel, a Houſe-ſnail. Ib.

Melyen, a Snail ; a Dew-jnatl,
or Slug.

Melyn-0i, the Yolk, or Yellow of
an Egg.


| Menas, * belyny, id.),


M E


meer Reproach,

Mener (menar, id.), 4 Hill, or
Mountain; as, drez menar
Brownuello, over Brownwill:-
Hill,

Meneth, a Mount; monedh, id.
menydh, id, Pl. menedhiou,
Cott. menit, id,

Men-glas a Slatt; Ar. men-
gleudhier, A, a Stone-cutter
men-gluedh, a Quarry of
Stones.

Menjam, I will; me amenja, id.

Meniſtror, a Butler; a Servant.
Cott.

Menn, a Place; mann, id,

Mennaz, he would ; mennen, 1
would,

Mennen, wwe; mennen, ye; men-
nenz, they would,

Mennyz, thou would/t,

Menouc, often.

Menough, many; frequent ; it.
ye will,

Men-pall, a Quit. Ar.

Men-pobaz, a Baking-/tone.

Ment, Size; Greatneſs. Ar.

Menta, thou wilt.

Mente, the Herb Mint; it. men-
tula. Lh.

Menwionen, an Ant.

Menwynnen—in Ludgvan, &
Illugan, the Mindy Place.

Menz, wherein; in which ; that
which,

Menzhon, I would; I had been
willing; menzhez, thou; men-
zhe, he would, &c.

Meppig, a little Boy.

Mer (mar, mor, id.), Vater;
either Lake or Sea Mater. Bax.

Meraſtadu, it mack, thank God.

Meraſtawhy, I thank you.

Mere, a Lake. Celtic,

Merel, Rut; Ar. merela, to grow
rufly. Ib.

Meren, Ar. à rere Supper; me-
renna, to take a Repaſt after
Supper.

Merh, a Daughter ; it. March-
Monib.

Merle, much leſs.

Meroin, @ Girl.

Mernans, Death (marnens, 1d.),
Let him die. V.

Merrow, ſee; ameras, V. to ſce.

Merth, Deſire.

Merthyn, a flanding Pool. Lh.

Merthuſy, wondrous.

Merwy, to die.

Mes, but; out; mer ames, abun-
dantl;.

Meſclen, a Muſcle-fiſp. Cott.

Meſen, an Acorn; A. id.

Meſk, among. |

Mcſkat, mad; furious; fierce ;
meſkatter, Madneſs; diſklans,
id.

Mcſkymera,


” — — — . — WO —
8 * me W —


446
ME


Meſkymera, to miſtake ; meſky-
meraz, gyz vurdh, miſtaken

your May.

Meſlan, a Maſtiff; guilter, id.

Meſternges, a Kingdom.

Meſtre, Maſter:

Meftry, Power ; Vidtory.

Meth, Shame ; Sorrow.

Methia, to nurſe ; nurſing.

Metin, the Morning. Lh.

Metol, Steel ; f. any Metal.

Metui, in the Morning. Cott.
Qu. an non pro mettyn, vel
mettin, Ar. the Morning!

Mevionen, an Ant.

Mevys, moved.

Meyny, within.

Mez, a Field; without ; its Mo-
deſty.


M I


Mi, J. |

Midil, a Mower. Cott.

Midzhar, à Reaper; a Mower.

Midzhi, to reap.

Mien, a Face.

Mighterne, a King ; materne,
id. ind. mighteruas, a K:ngdom.

Miginau, a Pair of Bellows. Lh.

Mihal, Michael.

Mikan, a Morſel; a ſmall Piece.

Mil, an /nimal (it. a thouſand) ;
ourthvil, id. Lh.

Milin, yellow. Cott.

Mill, a Poppy.

Milprev, a thouſand Worms; it.
the anguinum (Ovum Drui-
dum), called ſo from the
Spawn of the Adder incloſed
in the Lump; it was called
alſo Gleinneidr, or Glaſs Ser-
pent, which was the artificial
Imitation of the natural An-
guinum, made of Glaſs, ſup-
poted a powerful Amulet. See
Gleininadroeth.

Mil- wr, a Knight; R. qual.
Captain FA 1000 Men,

Min, the Brink, or Borders of a
Country, an Edge; miniog, id.
Lh.

Min, a Kid; Lh. parc an min,
the Kid's Field, See Myn-
nan.

Minarvau, Temperer of Tools,

Mintel (miltel, f.), the Herb
Millefalium.

Minne ( Pecula Diis ſacrata. Key-
fler. Patere), Cups Sucri-
ce.

Minne, 7[ alſo.

Minnis, little; tacklouminnis,
ſmall Things,

Mins, a Table.

Mintin, in the Morning.

Mira, lost you ; mirough, ſee ye.


Mir.z, the Lock; Mien; AJ.


| Molythia, to curſe ; molletha, id.


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


M I


pect.

Mis, a Month (Ar. Expence) ;
Pl. miſou, miz, 1d.

Mis Genuer, January.

Miſcheurer, February.

Mis Meurz (alias Mech), March.

Miſeprell, April. Ar. id.

Mis Me, May.

Mis Meſuen (f. Miſuen), June.

Mis Gouare, Jh; i. e. Play-
Month.

Miſ-Eaſt (or Eauſti), Auguſſ.

Mis Guengolo, September.

Mis-Hezre, October; miz hedra,
id. Lb.

Mis-Diu, November; i. e. Black-
month.

Miſguerdiu, December;
Month of black Storms.

Miſcoggan, Fools.

Miſke, among.

Miſkymeraz, to err; miſtake;
myſkymerrians, Error,

Mius, a Table, or Board; Lh.
bord, id.


M O


Moal, W. moall. Ar. See
Moel, |

Moaren, a Blackberry ; moras,
id.

8 to mock ; felge. Gr.

A

Moch, a Pig.

Modereb, Cott. an Aunt; mo-
dryb, id. abarhmam, id. mo-
drap, id. Lh.

Modereuy, a Bracelet; a Ring,
or Rings.

Moel, a Bald- top, or Tops of Hills.
Pl. moelion; ind. W. moel-
cen, Baldneſs.

Moelh, a Black-bird; mola-diu,

id.

Mocg, Smoke ; W. mäg, id.

Mogyon, the Vulgar.

Möh, a Hog; krou mob, a Hog-


ie.
d. a Woman.
Moign, maimed. Lh.


Mol-huydzhon, a Snail ; i. e.
a naked, or Dew Snail.
Mola-dhiu, a Black- bird. Lh.
Mola-laz, a Fieldſare. Lh.
Molaud, W. (A. meulendi),
Praiſe ; Renown,

Moli, to praiſe.

Molletha, to curſe. Lh.
Mollethians, a Curſe.
Mollough, that they may be; for
may yllough.

Molth, a Curſe (molath, id.);
molothek, curſed.


L ©


Mon. See Min.
Monadh, a Mountain. Lb.


| XO


2 Money; o's, id. Lu

or, 7 ; mor Ta .

wilt; fo mar, e

Mor, * 9 Ir. mair, mor,
mur, id. mordrai, W.
2 of the See. th *

Mor-nader, the Lamprey; mor-
nerdyr, id.

1 a Lamprey. Lh.
oran, a Berry; m
9 3 moran diu, 4

Moran-kala, & ſivi, a Strato
berry,

Morboit, the Hip, or Thigh.

Mor-difeid, the Sea; the Ocean;
Cott. mor diveid, id.

Moreth, Sorrow ; morethek, Me-
lancholly.

Morhoch, & morhuch, & mo-
ruch, a Porpoiſe; i. e. a Sa-
Swine,

* a Girl,
orraz, a Hip; a Thigh; klyn,
A

— a Hammer; morzol,
I *

Mortot, the Ocean. Cott. Lh.
An mor bras, id.


— a Place by the Sea; W.
id.
Mor-vil, a Male.


Moruerches, a Mermaid.

Mos (moz, id. & mouas), to go,
or come.

Moth, Shame.

Mouar, a Mulberry,

Mourder (from maũr), Greatneſs,

Moureriak, high. flown,

Mourobrur, magnificent.

Mowlz (molz, id.), a Wether
Sheep.

Mowys, Mouths.

Mouzak, flinking. Cott,

Moy, more; muy, id.

Moygha, moſt.

Moyrbren, a Mulberry-tree.

Moz, a Maid (moaz, & mauz,
id.), Pl. muzi, & mozi, it.
to go, or come.


MU


Much, à Daughter; Cott. merh,
id.
Muin, ſmall; thin. Ar. moan,
Muis, a Table. Qu.
Mul, ba/hful.
Mulder, Baſhfulneſs.

un (mooun, or moowyn id.
W.), any fufible Metal; ind.
dunmwyn, 4 Hill of Metals;
unde Dunmonii, the Corniſh
Britans; ſecund. Gale.
Mungys, W. fluttering ; flam-
mering. :
Munugl, W. the Neck; Ir. muin.
Mar, much ; ſo; many; it. 4


Monez, t ge; V. mynez, id.


Wall, R, 8
Murrian,


n 1 1 5 — 2 einm WOW 1 ' ” N . 1 \ 4 : : 5 4 :
Ae BIG ee EE Rp , TIX CC CC CC LILIES "ep
4 f ot 8 i FA . "60S + 'y SY, 1 1 4 I E Gy of. hh. * 5 < "a \ 6 * * e wore CI FEY A F * 4 " 8 * 8 * * 2 5
_ F <P ls. 4 2 4 . * l 3 0 5 , K > PAT . N * * N — 5 4 \ _-— Q=
n C q oh he - 1 ” N 4 "hy l r " 7 - , 1 A


W


9


2
ww >


wb 8 Dr
_ ö


ES


qe a we de ire gt Te of CE


a aa


RS


| Mynan, a Kid; myn, & min,


M U

Murrian, an Ant, or Piſmire;

murianean, id. meujonen, id.

Lh.

Muy, more; moy, id.

Muydion, Marrow. Lh.

Muyglen, à Bawd ; ind. f. to
muggle.

1047. Metal.

Muys, @ Baſket ; baſcaeid, id.

Muzel, Ar. a Lip; unde f. to


muz le.
MY


My, me; I; whence,

Mydzhovan, the Ridge of a Hill;
L. Jugum.

Myfyrion, a Place of Study.

Mygfaen, Brim/lone.

Mygilder, Warmth.

Myhtern, a King.

Myll, Thouſands,

Mylyge, cus ſed.

Myngar, a Cord; a Collar for
Horſes.


id. Ar. menn, id.
Mynneu, the Alps. See Lh.
Myns, as many; how much;
warth an myns, upon the whole,
Mynyd (W.), 4 Hill.
Mynyth (menyth, vynnyth, id.),
wilt thou; would'fl thou,
Myrough (myrugh, id.), ſee ye.
Myſtite, a Miftake.
Myyn (for mean, or mein), 4
Stone.


N.


A, not; no; neither; nag,
before a Vowel, id.

Na neite, neither of the two.

Na, that; often annexed; as, an
mawna, that Lad; an marh-|
na, that Horſe.

Naddyr, a Snake; an Adder (na-
dar, id.), ind. glein-naddyr,
a Snake of Glaſs, ſcil. Angui-
num.

Nadclik, the Nativity; viz. Chriſi-
mas.

Nadzhedh, a Needle.

Nag, not. See Na.

Nagas (naughas, id.), denied.

Nago, it was not; nagoff, I am
not.

Nagonnon, nagonen, Lh. none
at all; none were.

Nam, that; as, nam vyo, that
it might be.

Nam- na, almoſt.

Nan, n2w ; as, nanſyw, now is;
it. us; as, warnan, on us; it.
nit; as, nan Ethewon, not the
eus.

Nans, a Valley; it. now; as, yn
nans, even now,


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY:


N A


Nant, a Fountain; cornant; id.

Naou, nine; nau, id.

Nauhuas, the ninth,

Naun, Hunger (naoun, Ar, id.);
naounek, hungry,

Nauy, more than ordinary,

Nawanyo, not yet ; it was not.


N E.


Ne, not; prefixed, as, nel e, he
cannot; for ne el e. Neg, be-
fore a Vowel, id.

Neag, Moſs; moſſy; mean neag,


a moſſy Stone; keneggy, i. e.


Hedge ly the Water. |
Neb, whom; why; he who (neb-
mer, much ado); nef, id.

Nebaz, a little ; ſomewhat,

Nebyn, any ; ſome one.

Nedelek. See Nadelik.

Nedhan, a Nit ( Lens. L.), Pl.
Nèdh.

Nedhez, ttiſted; wreathed.

Neff, Heaven; above; joyful ;
R. neb, & nev, id.

Neffre, never; neither; for ever;
ever.

Negis, Errand; Buſmeſs.

Nehuer, /a/? Night.

Neith, a Neft ; Pl. neithio. Nid,
id. Lh.

Nel, Power ; Dre ou nel, by my
Power, or Strength.

Nenbren, the Roof of a Houſe.

Nenna, from thence ;, then; more-
over; nena. Lh.

Nenpynion, the Brain; quaſ. an
enpynion.

Nentydd, a narrow Paſſage for
Waters. R.

Neonin, a Dat/y.

Nep, any; prehxed, as, yn nep-
pow, in any Country.

Neppeth, ſomething ; ſometimes ;
Nepyth, & nebas, id.

Nerg (nerh, & nerth, id.),
Strength ; it. @ Nerve.

Nes, nigh; neſſa, nearer ; the
ſecond, or next.

Neſheuin, a Neighbour.

Nethyn, Birds; quaſ. an edhen,
und. n ethen.


out Number.
Neün, Ar. to ſwim.
Neung, it was not.


Newidio, to barter, or exchange.
Newothou, News ; neuydho, id.
Neyl, one; anneyl, on one Side.


NI


Ni neb tra, Nothing ; ni tra-
veth, id. laduit, id.


Nied, @ Ny. Cott.


f. ke-neag-gwy, the moſſy


Never, Number; heb never, with- |


Newawdd, a Hall; Habitation.R. |


| NI


Niedga (ga pron. as, ja) to fy;
ſwim.

Nigans, twenty,

Nintell, Yarrow ; Mill:folium. L.

Nivera, to reckon, or number,

Niull, a Cloud, or Mit; L. Ne-
bula.

Nith, a Nrece. Cott.


NO


Noaudho, News. See Newothou.
id,

Noath, bald; bare; leven, id.
Lh.

Noaz, naked. Ar.

Nod, a Mark; nos, id.
Noden, a Thread; Yarn.
Noffddyfn, over the Deep; R.
ind. Neptune.

Noi, a Cranchild; it. a Prodi-
gal; Lh. L. Nepos.

Noith, a Niece; noit, id.
Nonce, Qu. Purpoſe ; provided
for the nonce, i. e. Purpoſe.
Nor, Earth; Gw. quaſ, an oar,
id,

Nos, Night.

Notho, him,

Notuydh, 4 Needle.

Notye, to remark ; obſerve, or
note.

Nough, ye ; warnough, on je;
genough, with ye; and ſuf-
fixed to Verbs, as, vynnough,
will ye.

Noundzhak, nineteen.

Now, Noſe ; qua. an ow.
Nowydh (noweth, id), new; Pl.
newothow.


Noydh, naked ; noath, Lh. id,
NU


Nuddic, the hinder Part of the
Head.

Nudol, a Magician. Cott. See
Hudol.

Nuel, only ; alone.

Nueſs (Iſlandic.), a Neſe, or a
projecting Piece of Land; und.
f. neſs, id.

Nugan, nogen, vel hogan, 4
Loaf of Bread; Pie cruſt;
velin nogen, vel hogen the
Loaf Mill in Gulval Pariſh ;
i. e. the Mill where Loaves, or
Pies are ſold,


NY


Ny, nt; we; us; Or, wi, nie,
id, nyn, before a Vowel,


| Nyddu, to ſpin. Gr. ms.


Nyethy, Nuts.
Nyidzha, to ſwim ; Ay, or leap.


Nym, not to me.


O, was;


447


— 7 4
_— —e— — *


448 A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


O.


was ; V. he wat.
5 Oales, a Hearth.
Oan, we are (on, id.), it. Ar.
a Lamb.
Oanic, a little Lamb.
Oar, Earth; aor, id.
Oare, can; for Or.


Oat, Ar. Age.
OB


Obel, far off, eminus. L.

Ober, Work; Wages; rag an
ober, for the Work.

Oberur, a Workman ; any Ar-


tft,
O C


Och, OH Wies me.
Ochre, an Edge. Camden.


OD


Odgha nena, afterward.

Odjans, a Court z a Town-hall.

Odhiuorto, from him.

Odzhi, ye ; as, hui odzhi a gu-
elez, ye ſee.

Odzhon, an Ox, or Cow; ohan,
id,


OE
Oerni (oerfel, oerder, id.), bleak;


cold.
Oezenz, they were.
Oezy, ye were.
Oezyn, we were.


OF


Of (av, id.), I am. V.


Ofergugol, a Hood. Cott.
Offeren (L. Miſa, id.), Maſs.
Offeiriad, a Priet. Lh.


| OG
Ogall, a Pulpit.


Ogas, near; ogas o, it was near.
Oguet, Ar. a Harrow.


OH


Oh, ye are.
Ohan, Oxen.


OI


Oi, an Egg.

Oich, Cold. Cott. |

Oilet, f. a Frying-pan, or Grid-
iron.

Oin (oan, id.), a Lamb.

Oinz, they ; ſuffixed to Verbs,
to ſheiy the third Perſon Plu-
ral,


Ol


Oiz, thou; ti oiz aguelez, thou


ſeft.
OL


Ol, all; Pl. ollow.

Olaz, a Hearth; ollaz, id.
Ole, weep ; olough, weep ye.
Olegaddow, Agreement.
Olen, Salt; Ir. Ar.
Olifans, an Elephant. Cott,
Oleu, an Olive.

Oleubren, an Olive Tree.
Ollna, Lamentation ; olva, id.


OM


Om, him; himſelf; prefixed to
Verbs and Subſtantives,

Oma, I am,

Ombdenas, out ; fled.

Omdhal, to contend; croſs ; thwart ;
chide ; rebuke.

Omgamme, wryed, or turned him
awry; from cam, crooked ;
gamma, to crook; and, with
om prefixed, omgamma, to

2 ; turn 2 &c.
mgregy, to hang himſelf.

8 lame. s

Omma, here ; this; ymma, &
uppa, id,

ma, is contracted and placed
after Subſtantives, as, anbyz-
ma, this World, and velen-
ma, this Woman; ſo that ma,
at the Termination of Nouns,
ſeems but an Abbreviation of

3 —
mſettyas, ſet himſelf.

— 71 555 him.

Omwethe, preſerve, keep him.

Omwrello, ſeeks him.


ON


Oneſt, honeft, Lh.

Ongel, 4 Cabbage.

Oni, we are.

Onn, or ynn, à Spear, Celtic.

Onnen (on, id.), an Ab- tree.
Cott.

Onowr, Honour.


OR


Or, a Bound; Terminus, L. Ir.
Ore, id.

Or, can, or know; mior, I can,
or #now ; oare, id. ni or den
veth, no Man knows.

Orch (oruch, id.), eminent ; ſu-
preme; W. as, llow-orch, chief
Government, R.

Orchinat, a Shoe, or Sock.

Ord, of; on; upon; orth, id.


OR


Ordnys, ordaine1.

Ors, a He-Bear. Cott,
Orta. See Ordan,
Orte, thereupon.
Orthin, 1 us ; for,
Orthiv, to me.
Orthyz, unto thee,
Orz, a Hammer.


OS


and unto us,


Os, thou art.


vw art thou ; it. behold; oteſe,
i


Offay, I am; oſſam, id.


Oſt, a Hoft, or Landlird.
Oftia, Lodging.


If


Ota (& ote, id.), behsld.


Otham, Neceſſity ; yn otham, ne-
ceſſary.

Otho, him; warnotho, on him.

Otte, he ts. |


OV


Ov, are; as, ov ry, are giving;
it. Tam.

Ouch, ye are.

Overgugol, a Cottage; Cabin;

ent.

Ouna, to amend, rectißy; to fear ;

Fear; S. oun, Lh. ounek,

fearful.

Ounter, Uncle.

Our, an Hour ; ouer, id. Lh.

Ourlen, Silk.

Oure (anowre, id.), faretvel.


O w


Ow, of me; mine.

Ow (now, id.), Noiſe ; heb ow,
without Noiſe.

Owel, a Cliff (voel, id.), aul,
or aules, id.

Owleou, Marks ; goleou, id.

Own, Fear.

Ownek, a Coward.

Owr, Gold; Aurum. L.


oY


Oyech, an Outcry ; oyez.

Oyha hemma, #now this; oyha
hedda, know that. Gw.

Oyrech, fiery ; red-hot.

Oys, Ae; ay oys, that Age;
oze, id.


Oyv, 1; as, oyv a guelez, I ſee.
OZ


Oz, thou art. a
Ozhoz, id. as, Ozhoz toz, thou


| by him


Ordan, by ; Juxta. L. orta eff,


cameſt, or art coming.
Every


,
*
7
4
4
-
=
G
=
I
1
28
>
=
5 .
="
-
*
1 1
4
5
1
9
1
Þ 4
o
4 a
1.4
A
*
bh”
44
uu


1


n 8 22 1 *


S


y y - * * | * * 0
: y . \ ö R b "of . ny 2 6 7
J Y * 2 88 * 0 FT * 2 2 2
> * * WO > Bo —_ d 8 Ho ; « 1 ** * *
8 r OI 7 % REF Py ar A 47 *7 4 "
as Py 2 0 7 PS 6. $a © %e ag 45 "2 : CITE


CAPE RT NS


8 * LA 1 RN ACS «how my . Gd
n 7


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


P.


Every Britiſh Word whoſe firſt
Radical is P, T, or C, hath in
writing three Variations; ſo that
Radical P js ſometimes turned in-
to B, into Ph, and into Mh.

H. Lhuyd, p. 3.


A, which; when; ſee-
ing that; o pa an ruiva-

nedh, of what Country is he?
Lh.

Paal, a Spade, or Shovel.

Pad, a Cloth; padn, id.

Padal, a Pan.

Padar, (the Lord's Prayer) ; a
Father.

Padarn, W. of or belonging to a
Father.

Padelh, a Frying-pan.

Padelhoern Cott. id), an Iron
Frying-pan.

Padn, Cloth; L. Pannum.

Padzhar, Four ; padzhar iganz
ha deg, ninety, or four-ſcore
and ten. Lh.

Paizhuera, the fourth.

Pairchemin, S$4:n; parſhmennen,
id. Parchment, Lh.

Pais, Lh. a Coat; peis. Cott. id.

Pal, a Shovel; W. A. id. unde,
by inſerting d, to padle, i. e.
to tir, and ſhake the Mater to
and fro.

Paladr, W. Strato; Stem; Reed;
kala, id.

Palf, the Palm of the Hand.
Cott.

Palfat, a Companion; Ar. palfat
mat, a good Companion, ib.

Palmes, Branches.

Palmoryon, Pilgrims.

Palores, @ Corniſh Chough, or
Dato.


Pals, freſh; recent; goleou pals,


freſh Marks, or Stripes.
Paltowat, Fertility. Cott.
Pan, when; that ; what; until.


Pandra, which Thing.


Panan (Pl. panez), a Parſnip.
Lh.


Panvotter, Sorrow.

Panyn, whether of them ; which
of them.

th Paper; Lh. W. pappyr.
id.


Parad, a Separation. R.

Paravii, Pleaſure; Preparation;
qu. Paravij gwaynten, Pleaſure
of the Spring.

Parc, a Field; Ir. pairc.

Parch, to e/teem, or bleſs. R.

Pardec, mildly ; Quaſ. pur dek,
very good.. |

Paret (coctus, L.), baked, or
Boiled.

Parkemmin, Parchment.

Parkmennik, like Parchment.

Parkenniat, hurtful.


Ta |


Paris, parez, Lh. ready; pre-

pared ; readily.

Parleth, a Parlour, parledh, id.

Parou, Ar. the Country,

Parthy, to honour ; party ma-

teyrn, honour the King, Sce

parch. W.

Paſch, the Paſſover ; Eaſter.

Patſez, paſt. Lh.

Patſhan, @ Butt«ck ; a Haunth ;

peuklyn, id.

Pattek, a Simpleton ; a Fool.

Pattel, how ; tattel, & patla, id.

Paugen (Cott. Pedula), a Il rap-
per for the Feet.

Paun, a Peacock. Cott.

Paut, enough ; Abundance. Ar.

Pautr, a Boy. A

Pautres, a Girl. 5

Payltye, beat; to beat; ind. f.
pelted.

Paz, a Cough.

Pazuardhak, fourteen,


PE


Pe, what; although ; where ; or.

Pea, to pay; to rue; Pemet, Pay-
ment.

Peal, a Spire; und. karn an peal,
tbe Spire Rock. Hals.

Peb, every.

Peba, to bake; pebas, baked; pe-
bar, a Baker.

Pebouch, tune ye.

Pechadyr, à Sinner.

Pechadyres, a Woman Sinner.

Pedar, 2 peſwar, id.

Pedhigla, to bellow; (rugio, L.),
to roar like a Lion.

Pedn-diu, a Blackhead ; a Frog-

atun.

Pedniz, the Earl of Cornwall.
Ln.

Pednglin, a Knee.

Pednpral, a Skull ; W. penglog.

Pedrain, a Buttoct, or Haunch.

Pedreſiv (pedrevor, id.), a Li-
zard. Cott.

Pedrevan, id. pedrevan au dour,
a Water Evet, or Lizard.

Pedyr, Peter.

Pefyr, bark as a Dog.

Peg, Pitch.

Pega, Ar. to bite, or fling,

Peghe, Sin; beghas, id. pek,
id,


Pehadorion, Sinners.

Pehadur, a Man Sinner; pcha—
duras, a Woman Sinner.

Peidgy, to pray.

Peidwurty (Peidwura, id.), an
Architect. Cott. |

Peis, a Coat.

Pekar, as; kepar, id.

Pel, a Ball; pelen, id. it. a Bowl,


or any round Thing ; a Shire.
Pelgyp, à Battledore.
4


5


44
PE


Peliha, which; which HF the tivs,
Pell, far F; long Time; pella,
further,
Pellen, a Bewl; a Globe; a hard
Pudding ; a Bottem of Yarn ;
Pl. peliou.

Pelliſt-ker (pelliſtgur, id.), a Fur

Coat; a Leather Pilch. Lh.

Pema, where.

Pemdhak, fifteen.

Pemp, five ; pempas, fi/th.

Pen, Head; a Promontory; pedn,

id. Pl. pennou.

Pen braoz, a Folt-head ; pen-

maur, id.

Penakyl, a Pinnacle.

Pencanguer, à Centurion,

Pencion, a Gift ; a Penſion.

Penclis, Head of a College, R.

Penclun, the Buttock; Cott. pen-

klyn, id.

ic bus a Prince; a Princeſs ;
Pl. pendzhivigion.

Pendiuen, a Reed; Arundo. L.

Pendruppia, to nod, ſhake, or
drop the Head ; to beckon.

Pendzhivig, a Gentleman; Pl.
Pendzhivigion.

Pengaled, W. ſublorn; per-
verſe,

Pengarn, @ Gurnet ; qu. hard,
or Rock-head; Pengurn, a
Gurnard, id.

Penſgruet, Bed-cloaths.

Pengughrek, a Fur-ceat ; pelliſt
ker, id. pengughgret, Cott. 4
Quilt, or Rug.

Penhalurick, quaſ. pen-halou-
rick, Head of the rich Moors.

Penkaſt, I hitſuntide; Pencas,
id. Lh.

Penklyn. See Penclun.

Pennaeth, chief ; uppermoſt,

Pennou-ties, the head Men of the
Houſe.

Pens, Pound; dek pens, ten
Pounds.

Penteileu, Maſter of the Family,
Cott, penteyly, id. |

Penuar, W. a Halter, or Col-
lar. Lh.

Penwith, the Left-hand Promon-
tory ; ſays Camden. — But [
find the South called by the
Ancients the Right, and the
North the Left. — Now Pen-
with is one of the two Sou-
thernmoſt Hundreds of all
Britain. —Penguith, or guydh,
the moft conſpicuous high Land,
or pen-nict, the Head of the
Ifland. See Baxt. in Mictis;
and Humph. Lhuyd's Brev.
on the Iſle of Wight, pag. 17.

Penyle, which of the two; penyle
an dũs, which of the two Men?


nas, id,
Penzivik,


Penys, Pains; Puniſhment ; pe-


” — —


450 A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


PE


Penzivik, noble. See Penzhivig.

Pepynnag ol, whatſoever.

Per, a Pear; Peran, id. perbren,
a Heartree; it. a Cauldron ; it.
ſweet ; as, aval per, a ſweet
Apple. Ar.

Perag, before; coram, L. where-


ore.
Pergho (for perko), remember.
See Ko.
Pergrin, a Foreigner; pirgirin.
ott. id.


Perhen, Owner, or Poſſeſſor of


any Thing.
Perna, to buy; redeem ; pernas,
bought.
Perpoz, the Plaice Fiſh ; Pl. per-
pezou.
Pers, partial.
Perſeit, a ſmall Caſk; Amphora.
L. Cott. |
Pertal, the Porch. |
Pertha, to honour, See Parthy.
Perthyans, Patience.
Peruez, Ar. learned; expert.
Pes, payed. See Pea,
Peſa, to pray.
Peſk, Fiſh, puſgar, id.
2 Salt. fiſh. Y
eſough, pray ye to. V.
N Witch. |
Peſy, pray, praying; pidzhi, id.
beſy, i


„ 10. 1

Path, Plenty; Pex, id. Goods ;
Riches ; it. a Lump, or Maſs;
a Part, or Portion; as, peyth.

Peth-tſhyi, Houſbold Stuff, Fur-
niture, &c. Lh.

Peualtra, how many. Qn.

Peuare, a Farthing,

Peul, a Stake.

Peulia, to round with Stakes. Ar.

Peuri, to graze; Ar. und. peur-
van, Paſlure Ground; Ar.
Commons, |

Pew, whom. See Piu.

Pewi, to own; as, me a pew, 1
do own.

Pewo, was; pew, is; V. ve,
id,

Peyny, to puniſb.

Peynye, 4à Toten; a Sign.

Peyth, Part; Share; as, nep
peyth, ſome Share.

Pez, Peaſe; Ar. a Piece; it. a
Finger, or Toe ; as,

Pez-braz, the Thumb, or great
Toe.

Pezcalla, how many ; ſo many as.


TI
Piban, a Pipe (pib, id.), Fiſtu-


la, L. of any Kind.


Pibidh, à Maker of Pipes; a Pi-


per.
Pibououl. See Piban.
Picol, Ar. great.


1
Pidde, a Coat; f. pro peid, id.


ac peis.

Pidn, a Pin; a Nail; a litth
Stake.

Pidnian, the Brain.

Pidzhi, to pray ; piedgy, pidgy,
& pidzha, id. |

Pig, Cuſpis. L.

Pig, a Pig; pig binau, a little
Pig. Lh.

Piga, to prick (pungo, L.), pi-
gaz, pricked; ev rig pigaz, he
pricked.

Pigol, a Mattock, or Pick.

Pilecur, a Paraſite.

Pilez, bald; pen-pilez, @ bald


Head. |
Pilgudhar, a Molebill; a Hillacł.
h.
Pill, Cafirum, L. a Bulkwark.
Pillen, the Skirt, or Hem of a
Garment.
Pilliz, pilled Corn; a Kind of
Oats called by Ray Avena
nuda.


| Pilm, Duſt ; Chaff; Stroil.
| Pil-tyil, a Dunghill.


Pimuſchoch, Bleer-eyed ; Qu. an
wimuſchoc. |

Pinbren, the Pine-tree.

Pindy, muſty ; the Flour is pin-
dy, i. e. muſty.

Pinuidic, Ar. rich.

Pip, a Song; Muſa. L. Cott.
Piphit, à Songſter ; a Player on
the Pipe; & pibit, id. ibid.
Pirgirin, a Stranger; Peregri-

nus. L,

Piſch, a Fiſh ; Cott.

Piſclin, a Fiſh-pond ; i. e. piſc-

_ thn.

Piſky, qu. f. @ Fairy.

Pitſhar-piza, an Urinal.

Piu, who? which? pu, piua, id.
Den o piua, of what Country
is the Man? Lh.

Piuns, Ar. a Spring, or Well;
Ir. fans, id. |

Piz, a Part; a Piece; Ar. Spar-
ing ; Niggard.

Pizaz, Urine,


PL


Plankan, a Table; a Plank; PI.
plenkos, & plynkennou.

Plas, a Palace.

Plans, Sole of the Foot; it. a
Plant.

Ple, where ; prefixed generally,
as, plemonz, where they are ;
peleh, pelech, and plech, id.

Plegvyz, pleaſing; por blegvyz,
very pleaſing ; cbliging.

Plegya, t wrap, or fold in; im-
plico, L. it. ta bow down to.

Plema, where.


I Plen, united. Ar. |


:


P L


Plena, to wnite, ib.

Plenkos, Boards; Pl. plynken-
nou.

Plenys, that; quid, L.

Pleu, a Pariſh.

Pleyntye, accuſing.

Plezia, to pleaſe.

Pliſkin, an Egg-fhell,

Ton, Lead; plobm rydh, Red.

a


Plos, Duſt; it. a Sow.

Plouſen, a Straw ; ChafF. Ar.

Pludn, a be na reaw möz
war an pludn na

= 1 » do not go on

Plumbren, a Plumb-tree. Cott,

Pluuen, @ Pen; plyven, id, Pl.
pliv.

Plymon, a Plumb ; pluman, id,

Plynche, to bow. V.

Plyſg, Shell of a Nut.

Flyvogs a Cuſhion ; plufoc, Cott,
Ids, .


P O


Po, er; either; when ; where is;
po marh leddres, when a Horſe
is Holen.

Poan, Grief; Pain.

Pobaz, to grind, bake ; men (min,
Lh.), pobaz, à baking Stone;
ba, id.


8 tiogou, the Yulgar ; pobyl,


id.

Pob-faen, a Brick; pob- vaen, a
baked Stone.

Pob- ti, a Bake-houſe.

£25 v a Kiſs ; Baſium, L. Cott.


r.

Pocq, id. pokkail, pokkuil, f. id.

Podar, rotten; corrupt; it. mun-
dic; ugly.

Podrak, a Hitch ; pydrak braz,
a great Witch.

Podzher, à little Diſh.

Poenis, See Peynye.

Pots, Weight; Ar. id. poeſa,
to weigh.

Poeſygys, very hot; torrid.

Pokar, as if; ſuch; lite; eguul-
ly ; as; kar, id.

Poken, but if ; elſe ; otherwiſe.

Pokkail, a little Mouth ; a Kiſs.

Pokkia, to thruſt, or puſh.


1 Pokkys-frenc, Lues Gallica. L.


Pokkys miniz, the Small Pox, or
Meaſles.

Pol, a Pool; Cott. Puteus, L.
pull, Ar. id. (T. T. a Top, or
Summit; Qu.), a Pit; it.
Dirt; poldoun, a deep Pit;
Pol is often put before the
Pits dug for Tin, as, Polbre-
on, Polgooth, Poldys, becauſe
their ancient Workings were
attended with much Water


before they found out the
Way


AY
3
we
—_—
--=
—_


* 22 4 £& it Do n Wy Res #7 hes 5.5 ne ths
* 8 T5 : 4 N | \ 1


Sis xa 2 2 1 A A
* 1 1 Ty ” F ©
4 N |


8 # 4A 2 228 rene F 7 8 Wy” 5.5
l % 4 % *


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY. 451


P O |
Way of making Adits, and
draining with Engines; it.
Dirt 3 Mir 4 3 Lh.

Pollan, id.

Poldoun, a deep Pit.

Poldys, i. e. St. Dye's Pit, or
Work.

Polgover, the Pool of the Brook.

Polgooth, the old Pool.

Pol-Hendra, Hendra- Pool.

Poli, a Province.

Pol kil (Occipitium), the hinder

Part 7 the Head. Lh.

Polkil, Top of the Neck; T. T.
f. Pit in a Slip, or Neck of
Land. |

Pollan-troillia, a Furrow; a
Mate.

Pol-pry, Mud, viz. Pool-clay.

Polot, Ar. a Ball; choari polot,
to play at Balls.

Pol-roz, the Pit under a Mill-
wheel.

Pols, while ; un pols, a while. |

Polſten, a Tin-pool, or Pit.

Poltrigas, Buſtins, Spatter daſhes.

Polvellan, the Mill-pool.

Polhüel, the Pool-work.

Ponar, a Bean.

Poni, unleſs; pyni, & ponag,
id.

Pons, a Bridge; ponz, id. pont,
id.

Ponteodi, a Draw-bridge.


Ponyas, ran; ef ponyas, he ran.
'Pooc, or puuk, a Heap; as, a


Pooc of Turves, Pooc of Hay,
i. e. a Heup of Turves; a Hay-
eoch.
Poran, Freight; poran war,
Areigbi over.


Porchel, a little Pig; L. Porcel-


lus ; Pl. pocelli, Porhal, id.

Porh, a Haven, or Creek ; por,
id. porth, 1d.

Porogga, to gather; to fleal; ind.
f. progging.

Porris, it muſt be; needs; fain


would ; of Neceſſity.


Portal, à Porch, a Threſhold ; an


Entry.

Porth, a Gate; Pl. Porthou; a
Door; folding Doors.

Portheres, a Woman Porter.

Porthwys, 4 Ferryman.

Poruit, the Wall of a Houſe. Cott.
a Wall,

Pos, or poz, a Poſt of Mood, or
Stone; a Prop; a Pillar. Cott.
poſt, id. Lh.

Poſigr, empty.

Potguidn, a Bag-pudding.

Pottro, rets ; pottro ol dha gig,
all thy Fleſh rots.

Pour, Rule; Dominion; gwrens
govas pour, let Dominion be
given.

Pouruei, to prepare. Ar,


P O


Pouis, a Burthen ; W. Ar. poes,
C. pois, & poiys, id.

Pow, @ Country; a Province;
pow izal, a plain Country;
pou an zouzn, England, or the
Country of the Saxons.

Powes, a Coat.

Poweſough, ret ye. V.

Poys, heavy; grievous, See Puz.


PR


Prag, why ; praga, id.

Praidh, W. a Prey; Flack; Herd;
C. praed, f.

Prania, crows; V. in kuliak a
prania, the Cock crows.

e 88 a Prigi; prounder,
id.

Prontir, Pl. prauntirion, id.

Predery, to conſider; predirio, id.
to meditate ; to /ludy ; prediri
— TONY

Pregoth, breathing.


| Pregeth, @ Preaching ; as, pre-


geth awre, made a Preaching ;
ind. progath, a Sermon; pro-
gathar, a Preacher,

Pren, or predn, a Stick; a Tree;
a Lot (f. becauſe by Sticks the
Druids divined) ; PI. pre-
nyer,

Preneſt, a Window; L. Feneſ-
tra.

Prenoyth, ſeize ; take.

Prenol, a Box. Arca. L.

Preſon, a Priſon ; preſonys, a
Priſoner.

Preſt; but ; ſoon; readily.

Prev, a Worm; a Viper; mil prev,
1000 Worms ; Prev-nor, an
Earth-worm.

Preva, to prove; mal dho prev,
that he might prove, or try;
prevys, proved.

Prevan, a Moth-worm ; a Cheeſe-
worm, or other Worm. Lh.

Prev'nor, an Earth-worm.

Prev pren, Eruca, L. a Cater-
pillar.

\ Prez, Time; Opportunity. Lh.

Prez-buz, a Feaſt; a Banquet ;
ſcil. a Time of eating.

Pri, Clay; peulpri, a Clay Pit.
Prideras, careful; cautious ; ſad ;
Studious ; pryderys, Lh. id.
Pridit, a Poet, Cott. prydydh,

W. id,

Pries, a Huſband ; ou fries, my

Huſband.


Prinnis, Princes.


Bride-IVoman.

Prit, an Hour.

Privia, to bleat; dhavas a privia,
the Sheep bleats.

Priz, Price; Lh.


| Profuit, a Prophet. Cott.


Priot, a Bride; bennen priot, a


PR


Progath, an Oratin, or Speech;
progathar, a Preacher. Lh.

Pront, ſwift, Ar.

Provycha, to incenſe ; provoke,

Prunnys, pardoned.

Prumpl, aBoſs, or Stud of a Bridle,

Pryderys, penſrve ; forrewful.

Prydydh, a Poet. Lh.

Prydzhan, boiling.

Pryi, Clay; it pry, id.

Piys, Time; pres, & prez, id.

Pryvia, to procure.


33


Pu, who.

Pub, every; pub-er, whatſoever 3

pypenag, 1d,

Puberoll, every where.

Puill, Ar. abundant,

Puir, a Siſter. Cott.

Pul, a Stream.

Pulcolan, the Brea/! (f. the Heart
beating, or Palpitation ). Cott.

Puludoc, rich ; ib. wealthy.

Punder, a Prieſt; ib. Qu. if not
Prunder,

Pundeſimpit, a Lethargy. ib.
Punnio, to run away; eſcape, or
flee; Lh. redek, W. A. id.

Punt, eight; L. ponds. Ar.

Pupprys, akvays ; pupir, conti-
nually ; every Hour.

Pur, being; pa, pur ylwys, be-
ing called.

Pur, ſuivel; it. very (par, per,
id.), pura, verye/t.

Purcheniat, a Sorcerer ; Cott.

wicked ; miſchievous. Lh. it.

Purvan, @ Ruſh; a Pith of a

Ruſh.

Put, Ar. ſour; as, avalou put,

ſour Apples.

Puttendy, a Bawdy-houſe.

Puz (powz, id.), heavy.

Puza, to preſs; lean; maw, na-
puza, Boy, do not lean.


a 4


Py, whether ? Lh.

Pydzhadou, a Prayer. Lh.

Pyg, the Beak of a Bird; gyllin,
id.


Pygimmis, how much; qual.
pythkemys.

Pykar, like; as it were. Sce Po-
kar. |

Pylta, much; pylta guel, much
better.

Pyltye, 79 beat; pylt, f. a Stroke,
or Blaw.

Pymthek, fifteen; a pemp-dek,

Pyni, except; unleſs.

Pyni, alias poni, wnleſs. Lb.

Pynyon, the Brain; pidnian, id.


| Pynz, a Pound; pymthag pynz,


teen Paunds.
H Pyrdzha,


— — *
-


— ̃ — — —


—— —


*


452 A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


*


Pyrdzba, to purge.

Pyrkat, a Pulpit ; Chair ; Roſ-
trum. L.

Pys, to pray. V.

Pyſder, Heavineſs ; à puz.

Pyſga, a Fiſh (peſk [pyſgaz, Pl.
Fiſhes], & pyzgh, id.)

Pyſgadar, a Fiſherman.

Pyſgadyr, yn mytern, the Hal-
cyon, or King's-fiſher ; Lh. pilk
lin, a Fihh-pond. Lh:

Pyſgetta, a Fiſhing; Lh. it. to fiſh.

Pyſtege, I/ounds ; T. T. pyt-
tege, id. Sc, Qu.

Pyſtryor, a Sorcerer ; peſtriores,
a Witch.

Pyteth, Pry; pyte, id.

Pyth, what ; it. all be; as, mar
pyth, F he ſhall be.

Pyuha, who.

Pyuha, bennak, whoſoever.


Q:


This Letter is rarely uſed by
the Corniſh, often by the Armo-
ricans; and as in ſome Corniſh
MSS. Words may occur writ-
ten after the Armorican Manner,
the following Armoric Words
are inſerted from Lhuyd, marked
Ar.


UAE, Ar. a Hedge; ind.
f. a Quay, or Hedge, Mole,
or Pier built into the Sea.
Queiquel, a Dita; Ir. cuigeal,
id. C. kigel.
Quelen, Ar. Holly ; its to teach,
ib


Quelguen, Ar. a Fly.

Quellida, Ar. to bud; ſpring
forth.

Quelvezen, a Hazel. Ar.

Quemeſq, to mix. Ar.

Quenet, Ar. Beauty.

Quenver, Ar. an Acre.

Querchen, Ar. the Lap, or Bo-
ſom.

Quetren, Ar. a Particle,

Queuneut, Fewel; queuneuden,
a Log, or Bullet.

Quevvret, Ar. the Eaſt; Auel
quevvret, the Eaſt Il ind.

Quignen, Ar. Garlick,

Quill, the Nape of the Neck. Ar.

Quilquin, a Frog.

Quoit, a broad thin Stone, or

Rack; koeten, id,


R.


Abman, Rubble; that Mix-
ture of Clay and Stone
which has not been moved
fince the Flood, and generally
lies over the Karn.


Racca, Qu. Cott, Camedia.


R A


Raden, a Fern; reden; & Ir.
rathin, id.

Radna, te divide (radn for ran,
a Share), dho barri, id. Lh.

Raf, 1 hall do; wra af, id.

8 th a Miracle, or Wander.

h.

Rag, for; from; before; ſuffix-
60 Jo Lat rad? Lal, id. Lh.

Ragdazu, Forefathers ; or rhag-
dazu,

Ragos, for thee.

Ragou, before you; rago huei,

or you.

Ragta (ragthe, id.), for him, or
t.

Ragteken, a little while,

Rahaya, to ſneeze.

Rakkan, a Rake; a Harrow;
Lh. W. kribyn, Ar. Raſtel.

Rambrea, Ar. to doat.

Rampa, Ar. to ſlip, or ſlide.

Ran, hall do; duhyi a'ran, they

ſhall do.

Ran, a Part; a Share (rans, id.),
pedar rans, four Shares ; rhan-
niad, id.

Randigal, Qu. what a Randigal
(viz. Rout, Noiſe, or Tumult )
is here ?

Rane, broke; rent; ſhared; di-
vided.

Raneie, Sc. (rauny, T. T. id.),
vexing.

Raoula, to grow hoarſe. Ar.

*Ras, Grace; Virtue; der'ras, by
Virtue of ; good Will; for gras.

Rath, Ir. a circular Fortificati-
on; a radt, f. in Celtic, a
Wheel.

Raz, Ar. Lime; a Rat. ib.


R E


Re, that; who; ſome; whilſt ;


it. Sign of the Future Tenſe ; |


as me a re gelfes, / will heal.

Re, too much; alſo; quickly ;, a
Particle encreaſing the Force
of Verbs and Nouns and Ad-
verbs ; as rebehas, have too
much ſinned; reſorras, is very
angry; redegua, a Courſe; f.
violent one.

Re, often uſed for rig; as, me
re guſges, I have ſlept.

Rea ria, rea way id.), O
firange !

Reiu, Fre/t; reu, id. rhewi, &
reui, Ar. to be very cold.

Reb, of; by; nigh ; near.

Rebe, were; rebee, was; revye,
it was before.

Rebea, to begin; a nombris rebea,
began to number ; to begin.

Rebet, Ar. a Fiddle; rebetter,
a Fidler.


| Rebeuten, Ar. @ very pere.


RE


See Puttenty.
Pra a Fern,
edanan, a Brake of Pers.
Redegua, a Courſe! Cott. Cur.
ſus ; L. retaden, Ar. id.


Rhedec, Swifineſs ; W. & Ar,


I, pew.

Redha, well; very well,

Redic, a Radiſp; rhedhic, id.

Redy, ſurely ; yredy, readily,

Redyn, to read; Engl. und. re-

4 dior, 1
cep, did; ya reeg gore,

did put; for _ FSI
Regeth, is ſettled, V.
Reighten, aCoal, or Ember. Cott,

Pruina.

Rego, again/t ; as, aga rego, a-
gainſt them,

Reguezen, Ar, a burning Coal.

Dho rei, 1 give; to grant, or
offer.

Reig, Ice; po an reig dho der-
hi, or the Ice to break.

Relewte, indeed; relawta, & ru-
lewte, id.

Rello, to make ; be. V.

Remenat, the Remnant; Pl. re-
menadow.

Ren, the Mane of a Horſe,

Ren, to bring; lead; pa. reet.
Ar.

Ren, him; the ſame ; the ren,
to him; reth, Pl. rena, id.
Reneag, to deny, or refuſe ; Re-
negado, Span. quaſi a Lat, re-

nego-are,

Renki, or renkia, Lh. to ſnore ;
Gr. peſyur. id,

Rhengkias, ſnoring.

Renniat, a Sharer ; a Carver.
Cott, Diſcifer ; a Waiter at
Table.

Rera, Father. Sc.

Res (for ros), a Valley; as, Re-
ſtormel, reſcadzhill, &c. Places
in Vallies; as, bes for bos.

Reſas, guſbed; flowed ; Gr. pr.
uo. See Rezek.

Reſſa, done; ev a reſſa, he had
done. |

Reſteffo, that he might be.

Reſtoua, qu. f. to beſet; to ret
upon.

Reth, they; them; it. V. be
cauſed.

Retheruid, a Fiſherman.

Rev, an Oar; a Shovel ; as, rev-
tan, a Fire-ſhovel.

Reu, Celum, L. Cott. See
Nef.

Revadar, @ Rower. ,

Revaria, by our Lady, ſcil. by the
Virgin Mary ; a common Ex-
preſſion of Altoniſhment and
Surprize. a

Revewſe, to abide ; reveſe, id.


Reugh,


5
5
* 4
2
4
_
þ =
*
=
8
=
—_
*
=
9 *
- 4
-—**
17
q
= 4 —
2
-þ
=
=
=
av"
*1
*
_
=
_—_—
.-
,
"Y
= 1
%
-
K 4
*
K
=
4
wy
p 4
*%
by
=
=
*Y
by
Oy
=
Wh
"2
=— -
_—
1
4
7
"2
—
. \
if
"A
72
=
Po
4 *
-.&
4 =
b.
"i
4
1
.,%Y
- ”

4
.
4

4
_
] 5
=
= -

=
be

Z
3
Y
4
-Y
-<
14


A CORNISH- ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


R E
Reugh, ge; eugh, id. it. de;


as, na reugh, do ye not.

Reun, the Hair of Beaſts. Ar. W.
rhaum, id,

Reux, Ar. Misfortune.

Rew, Haſte; yn rew, in Haſte;
it. Froſt; as, reau.

Rewrenſys, thou haft done.

Rey, to give; re, id.

Reys (rez, & rys, id.), needs ;
as, reys yw, needs be; L. opor-
tet.

Rezck, running.


RH


This aſpirate is always in W.
ſometimes in Ar.
Rhaith, Ar. a Law.
Rhei an guella, to permit, or con-
ſent.
Rhied, Nobilium Statio. L. R.
Rhies, a Princeſs ; a Lady. R.
Rhiſglaff, Ar. to ſlide.
Rhittia, to rub, chaſe, or fret.
Lh


Rude, Heath. R.
Rhyvedhod, Ar. rare.


RI


Rib, of; by ; through,

Ribla, to rake; ſwagger. Ar.

Ridar, a Kind of Sieve, or Rid-
ale.

Ridar, a Kaſher; a Sierce; kro-
dar, id.

Rig, did, or have; Sign of the
Preter Tenſe; ever joined to
the Verb.

Rigol, Rigour; Ar. it. a Slip,
Gap, cr Cleft. Lh.

Rilan, flowing into.

Rimadel, Ar. a Romance; a Fable,

Rine, a Quail.

Riou, Cold; Froft; riua, to be
cold. Ar. See Reau,

Riſk, the Rind of aTree; e riſk,
it's Bart; a Shell, or Pill.

Riſt, /ad ; triſt, id.

Ruan, the Mind: pipe.


RO


Ro, a Gift; Pl. robou; a roſe,
gave; tero, you give; un ro,
one Gift.

Roath, Form.

8 to ſpoil; rob; plunder.

h


Roch, Ar. a Rock; G. id.

Rochet, a Shirt; Ar. rochueden,
a little Shirt.

Rocca, a Roach-fiſh ; talhoc, id.

Rhod, 3 fighting Chariot; R.
whence Britiſh Names; as,


Anau-Rh6od, Cadrhod, Med-
rho,


R O


Rodella, to turn, or wind about.


Ar,
Rhodl, a Branch,


'Rodothye, gave Gifts ts thee.


Rogeth, /ettled.

Rolle, to give; rolla, might, or
did give. |

Ronkye, ſnoring ; renky, id.

Rooge, to rocge to and fs, i. e.
to remove ; to transfer from one
Place to another bymeer Strength;
Lat. egrt portare.

Roulers, Rulers ; Governors.

Roſen, a Roſe; ros, Ar. Ir. Ro-
ſa, L. id,

Rhos, habitable Land; rhoſydh,
Heathy Ground. R.

Ros, a Mountain; AJeadiw, or
M:fs; Heath; a Ti heel. Lh.

2 3 a Valley, or Dale; nans,


id.

Roſtia, to roa/t.

Rouan, Roman; as, Pol-rouan,
the Roman Pool.

Rouden, Ar. a Foot-/tep.

Roue, Ar. a King ; rouanes (ſee
ruyfanes), a Queen; & rou-
entelez, a Kingdem; G. roy,
&c, C. ruy, Cott. rhy, riog,
id. Ar.

Rouenner, a Mite ; a Ieevel.
Ar.

Roueſt, Confuſion ; roueſtla, to
confound. Ar.

Rouez, thin; flender, Ar.

Rouffen, J/rinkles ; Plaits; Folds.
Ar, |

Rougn, a Scab; rougnus, ſcabby.

Rouhen, à Span. Ar.

Roulia, to guide, or rule.

Rounzan, rouzan, & roſin, id.
an Aſs.

Row, Qu. as, the Row-tin, i. e.
the large grained, rough Tin ;
rowtor, i. e. the rough Hill;
quaſ, ab huero, rough.

Rowas, obtained. V.

Roz, a IWWheel; gravar-roz, a
Il heel-barrow (Ar. rot, id.).

Rozellen, a I hirl for a Spindle ;
1. e. little Wheel,


RU


Rual, Ar. to ruſh; batter; throw.

Rud, red-coloured. See Rydh.

Rüeik, a Prince; prins, id. Lh.

Rug, made ; ryg, arug, id. as,
arug cry, made a Cry.

Rugſi, /he bore. N

Rulbht, Brimſtone; mygfaen, id.

Ruilla, to roll.

Ruif, Cott. an Oar ; ruifadur,
a Rower ; a Waterman ; ruiv,
ruivadar, id.

Rum, hath ; haſl me; ty rum
gruk, thou haſt made me. Ar.
ſemebody.


5 Z


453
RU.


Runa, Myſterium; Jute; Cel-
tic, as, Runa Goths, Dei Con-
filium. Keyll.

Runen, a Hilleck. kryg, id.

Ruſk, the Bark cf a Tree, Cott.

Rut, a Path; A. Lh. it. ib.

Rute, the Herb Rue; ryte, id.

Ruthveyn, 4 Multitude.

Rhuttia, te rub; as, rhytti marh-
na, rub that Horſe.

Ruy, a Prince; Cott. a King;
brenin, W. id.

Ruyd, a Net; Ar. red, id.

Rhuydh, W. %.

Rhuyfanes, à Juen. Cott.

Rhuygo, te tear, or rend. W. R.

Ruyvanaid, a Aingdem. Cott,

Ruz, a Net,


KY


Ry, to give; give; reyth, give;
rys, gave.

Ry, to cauſe; rys, Cauſe; ryſy w,
there is Cauſe; did.

Ryb, of ; by.

Rybbon (rebbon, id.), by, or near


us,

Ryd, 4 Ford; ryd-helik, the
Willew Ford.

Rydh, red; rydhik, reddiſh ;
ryudh, Ar. ridh velin, a deep
yellow. |


| Pedn-rydh, red haired. Lh.


Ryel, reyal.

Rygthe, to charge; command,

Rymys, divided.

Rhyn (W. a Promontory) ; C. 4
Chanel. Gr. fv.

Ryn, a Bill; a Neſe; W. rinn,
id


Rynen, a Hillact. Cott.

Rys, was.

Ryſeve, received.

Ryſy, to extoll, T. T.

Ryte, Rue. Lh.

Rhyth, Appearance. R.

Rhyttia, to rub. :

Rhyven, W. Rome; C. Ruan,

Rywier, Ar. a River; und. f.
Ryvier in Phillak, on Hayle
River,


.
AUT, Meat; Dainties; Cott.


Sach-diauol, a Demeniac;
a poſſeſſed. ib. ;
Saëſnek, Engliſh ; Saxon.
Safar, Ar. Noiſe ; ſafari, to make
a Noiſe.
Sagen, a ſlanding Pool.
Saim, Fat; Oyl.
Sairpren, a Carpenter. Cott.
Saithor, a Shag ; Bird; Cott.
Mergus. L.
Sal, vile. R.
Salver, a Saviour. Ar. id. Lh.
Sam,


454 A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY,


S A


Sam, a Burthen ;, a Charge.

San, Ar. a Conduit.

Sanaill, a Mw-hay. Ar.

Sanqua, to prick ; pierce.

Sans, holy; Speris Sans, the Ho-
ly Spirit ; Sanz, a Saint. Lh.

Sant, Lh. Food; Meat.

Sarn, a Cauſey, or Pavement. W.

Sarra, Sir; ſarra wheag, ſweet
Sir.

Satheluur, an Orator; a Speaker.
Cott.

Satnas, Satan.

Siu, ſafe; but; except; ſave
that. ;

Sav, riſe up; fland up; a ſevys.

Savarn, Smell; Savour ; drog ſa-
varn, ill Smell.

Savas, a Chanel; penſavas, Head
of a Chanel. Gibſ. Camden,

ag. 13. Qu.

Saud], = a Heel. a

Savig, the Branch of a River.

Saunt, Noiſe ; Diſpute. What a
Saunt is here ? Qu.

Sautra, to foul ; bewray.

Sawe, a Seam; a Horſe- load; war
an ſawe, by the Seam.


Saweh. Cott. Qu:
SC


Scacel, a Prop. Ar. :

Scaff, nimbly ; marſcaff, ſo nim-
bly. ;

Scala, a Diſh; Patera, L. a
Goblet,

Scan, a little Table. Ar.

Scao, an Elder-tree ; ſcauan, id.
Ar. 1d.

Scarz, ſhort. Ar. .

Scavel, a Bench; ſkaval, id.
Lh.

Scedgwith, Privet.

Scherewneth, Pride.


Scevens, the Lungs ; Cott. Ar.
ſqueveat, Ir. ſcaven, id.

Scinin, an Ear-ring ; ib. ſkinen,
id.

Scloqua, to chirp like a young Bird,
or Hen.

Scobman, a Chip of Timber
Scobman vian, a little Chip.
Scoch, common ; ſcoch-for, the

common May.

Scod, the Shade; Umbra, L. Cott.
ſkez, id. Ar. ſqueut, id.

Scol, a School ; ſcolheic, ſchalaſ-
tic; yſkol, W. id.

Scolchye (ſcolcheth, id.), a Fu-
gitive; ind. f. eulking, or lying
hid. |

Scolys, ſpilt. Pa.

Scon, ummeuiately; mar- ſcon, as

n 4s.

Sconyth, ſhunneft ; ſconyas, re-

Filed.


S C


Scorgyas, to ſcourge, or laſh.

Scorren, a Branch, or Bough :
ſcourr, Ar, id. it. a ſmall Vein
of Tin, or other Ore.

Scos, a Change; to exchange.

Scoth, a Shzulder ; ſcooth, id.
See Scuid,

Scovern, the Ear.

Scoul, @ Kite; Cott. bargus,
id.

Screſys, or ſkrephys, written ;
Stone.

Skrepha, to write. Lh.

Skrift, a J/riting ; \krividh, id.
Lh.


Scren, a Bone,

Scriven-danven, an Epiſtle, Cott.

Scriviniat, a Writer. ib.

SIerivit, Myitings.

Scrvrya, forſaken.

Scubellen, a Bram; ſcubilen,
Cott. id.

Scudell, a Diſh; a Yueit; a
broad Diſh ; ſkydel, id. Pl.
ſcudellou; ſgudh, & ſkaydh,
id,

Scuid, Cott. Scapula, L. Shoul-
der; ſcuidlien, à Cloak to put
over the Shoulder. Cott.

Scuilia, to ſhed, or ſpill. Ar.
cuiz, weary; tired.

Scuiza, to be weary. Ar.

Sciit, @ ſmall Piece of Money.

Scyle, a Pro; ſcyle vas, good
Prof; it. plainly ; ken ſcyle,


other, or more ado.
SE


Se, them; ganſe, with them.

Seadha, to fit ; fit down ; ſethas,
ſeithva, ſittis, did fit.

Seaſys, dried; drying. See Se-
ha. ,

Seban, Soap; Gr. o»mw. Sa.

Seera, a Father,

Segernath, lazy; dull.

Segeris (ſegyr, & ſiger, id.),
empty; void.

Seha, to toipe; to be dry; to ſeour.
Lh.

Seis, Silk; ſeizen, a Ribbon. Ar.

Seitag, ſeventeen.

Seith, a Pot; Cott. it. ſeven.

Lh,

Seithas, & ſeythvez, the ſeventh.

Seithyn, a Weel. ib.

Sekerden, Security.

Sel, a Foundation; Cott, W.
IB

Selda, a Cellar.

Sell, a Look; Sight ; ſellet, ts
laot. Ar.

Selliz, ſalted.

Sely, Arms.


Sempla, Ar. ts flacken,


Senedh, an A//cmuly ; Synod, Cott. |


|


SE


enſys (from ſendzha, alias ſe
ze, to hold), held.
derra, to cloſe ; ſhut up.
>eruic, a Shrub, Cott.
Seth, an Arrow; ſeth
4 5, to ſh,
Sethek, jet din; ſethas, 44 7
ſettyas, placed. .
Setſans, preſſed; earneſtly intreated.
deuadh, 4 Taylor; ſeufad 4
Patcher; Mender, ;
Sevi (ſyvi, id.), Strawberries,
Seuades, a I/oman 1 aybr,
Sevys, flood ; letsons, they /la:d.
deuzl, the Heel. Ar. 18
Sew, ye be; lens, they be.
Sewcth, ſadly,
cewillat, to looſe ; L. ſeluere.
dewyas, follow:d.
deygh, dry; pren ſeich, 4 4+
r
Seygh, or ſeugh, f. id. i. e. as,
the Cow is gone to leugh, i. e.
is gone dry ; without Ait.


S G


*


Sgan, an Elder Tree 3 ſkauan, id,
C. & A.

Sgau, light ; ſgav, id. i. e. not
heavy ; ſgavder, Lightneſs.
Sgenip, ince/luous ; Cott, ſgue-

nip, id.

Sgein, Ir. a Flight.

Sguattia, to tear in Pieces. Lh,

Sgüch, a Shouller-blade. Ly.

Sguthlien, @ Cloat, or Hood. Lh,

Shagga (ſarthor, id.), a Corme-
rant; a Shag.

Shanol, a Chanel; a Pipe; a Gut-
ter; A. kanal, & ganhel, Lh.
id, as, Ganhel in Carantok Pa-
riſh, & Canal in St. lily; as,
Canal-Idgy, or Idzhy, i. e.
St. 1% Creek.

Shimbla, a Hearth, or Fire-
place.

Shode. Qu. ſmoothed Tin-Ore.


SI


Sibuit, a Fir-tree.

Sicer, Peaſe. Cott.

Sichen, 4 Chair; à Seat.

Sichor, Drought ; Thir/t. Cott,

Sidan, Ar. a Linnet,

Siell, a Seal. Ar.

Siger, hollow ; full of Holes; tol-
lek, id.

Siglen, à Bag. |

Silien, an Kel; Pl. ſiliou.

Sim, an Ape.

Sindzhy, fe held ; dho finizha,
to ſeize. Lh.

Sinſtat, tenaciaus. Cott.

Sioas, alas /

Sionge, honourabio

Sioul, flert.

Mira, a Father, 7

Sira,


*
I]
"A
$ *
4%
P
| [
N *
©
IS .
N. 4
"==
4 —
=
a
5
7
444
E "EY
_
«& _
»
=,
<


=. _ wo” r 8 -
a; * - $i . 5 = 4 SY 12 8 1 *
r . RE
** d - , — > . o A + a _—
20 4s Ky a PR * 5 _ %


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


SI
Sira-gwydn, 4 Grand, father.
Sirig, Silt; Gr. ofHννον:. Sa.
Sizl, a Strainer; ſizla, to flrain.


S K


Skarkeas, a Shark-Fiſh.

Skat, or ſkuat, a Buffet, or Blow
of the Fijt. Lh.

Skath (ſkaph, id.), a Boat;
ſkath ruz, a Boat with Nets;
{kath hir, a Long-boat.

Skauan, an Elder-tree ; ſcauori-
an, id. ſkaun. Lh.

Skavarnak, @ Hare.
vern.

Skeans, pretty; lepidus. L.

Skelli, Vings.

Skelligrehan, a Bat; Leathern
Il ings.

Skent, ſcanty ; ſhort.

Skentyll, learned; ſkyntyll, id.

Skenys, Sinews.

Skephans, the Lungs. Lh.

© kely, eſcape; ny wra ſkeſy, ſhall
not eſcape.

Sketh, weary.

Skez, a Shadow ; (cod, Cott. id.
und. f. ſkeſy.

Skibia, to bruſh, ſconr, or ſweep.
Lh


Skibor, a Barn.
Skidal, a little Diſh.
dkientoc, wiſe ; Cott. ſkientik.


See Sco-


Skinan, a Pin.

Skiran, a Bough; Pl. ſkirau;
ſcorren, a Branch, or Bough.
Lh. Greten, a Sprig. Ar.

Skith, weary; jaded ; ſpent.

Skival, a Porring.r ; ſcudel, id.

Skogan, a Fool,

Skreft ({krividh, id.), Scripture.

Skriga, to ſcreech ; na ſkrig, do
thou not ſcreech.

Skrivinas, to ſcratch, claw, or
rub,

Skuattia, to flrife; to break.

Skud, a Sh:ulder.

Skudel, ſkydel, a Diſh, or Plate.
Lh


*


Skuerryon, Eſſuires.

Skul, Qu. towle the Skul, zo
take in vain, ſcil. the Name of
Gd.

Skul, a Shoal; a Quantity of

Fiſh; a Skul of Pilchards.

Skyhans, I iſdom.

Skylia, ſcatter thu.

dkylur, a Schelar; PI. ſkylurion.


8 L


Slavan, dirty; loh-ſlavan, dirty
Poo. Hals. ä

Sleane, a Conger-fiſh.

dleppia, te flip, or fiumble ; rag
dout why dho ſleppio, for fear


SL


you do ſlip,


Slev, cunning; ſkillful; und. ſley-
neth, S4/l.


Slottere, i. e. dirty, ſlovenly. Qu. | S


Slumyas, to reproach,
SN


Snell, to him.


Snod, Cott. a Fillet; a Hatband ;
a Garland. Lh.


S O
Soa, Tallow; Suet. Ar.


Sobman, a (ip; ſobman vian,
a little Chip.

Soch, the Plough-ſhare. Cott.

Sofl-jar, W. a Quail. Lh.

Sog, f. a Doze; Numibneſs ;
Drouzineſs.

Sogal, Nye; bara ſogal, Rye-
bread, Gw. Lat. Secale.

Sogete, a Diſcovery.

Sol, a Shilling (Ar. a little Gird-
er), hanter ſol, a Six-pence,
Soler, a Throne; a high Seat, or
Bench; it. a Sun-dial. Lh.

Sols, Money.

Sonas, bleſſed.

Sonta (ſouta, id.), to ſolder. Ar.

Sorca, to charm ; bewitch. ib.

Sorchenni, to rave. ib.

Sordys, raiſed. Pa.

Sorras, angry; jealous ; reſorras,
very angry ; lor, id.

Sort, a Hedge-hog.

Sos, thou beeſt ; ſota, thou art;
ſoge, be thou.

Sos, a Friend, or Companion.

Softer, a Si/ter. Mod. Corn.

Soth, riſe. S.

Souba, to hop, or ip. Ar.

Soubla, to ſweeten, Ar.

Souez, Admiration ; ſouzea, to
admire. Ar.

Soul, Straw (W. fool, id.), ti
ſoul, a thatched Houſe. ib.
Soweth, curſed; yn ſoweth, ac-

curſedly ; it. Alas!
Sowmens, Salmens.


S P


Spal, a Sconce ; Amercement ; For-
feiture.

Sparf, a holy Water; a Sprinkling.
A


Fo

Sparl, a ſhort Cudgel ; ſparla, to
bolt. ib.

Sparria, to ſpare.

Spas, untill; as long as; whil/
that,

Spauen mor, A#quor. L. Cott.

Spaz, a Gelding ; ſpaza, to geld.
Ar.

Speal, an Acquaintance. T. T.


| Specyal, id. intimate; ſpecyal


455
S P


braz, very intimate.

Spedye, to ſucceed; haſten ; ta

ſpedye, to ſpeed well,

peitia, to ſpite z vex.

Spekkiar, /peckled.

Spendys (ſpengas, id.), ſpent
waſted,

Spens, a Buttery; L. Promptua-
rium.

N Spirit; ſpyr, id. ſprite,
id.

2 Thorns ; Pl.

pernabyll, /fe4/a/t ; ſpernaſyll,
4's T Wd OY :

Spervan, a Thorn; ſpernan diu,
a black Thorn, Lh.

Speur, an Iucleſure. Ar.

Spezaden, a Gooſeberry. ib.

Spillen, a Pin.

Spiziz, a Ghoſt ,

ag.

Splan, clear; bright ; excellent;
iplanna, to ſbine; ſplen, id.
ſpladn, z{luſtris. L.

Splander, Brightneſs.

dpluſen, a Pippin; Ar. ſpluſek,
a Nurſery of Pippins. ib.

Spong, a Spunge.

>pont, dread; ſpontus, dreadful.
Ar


Hzbgoblin ;


Spoue, Cork.


Spoum, ſcum ; ſpouma, to ſcum,
i


Spykes, Spikes ; large Nails.
SQ


Squardya, to tear ; ſquardias, he
tore.

Squarinek, long-legged. Ar.

Squattia, to pluck, or tear in
Pieces. Qu,

Squei, to knock; Pa ſcoet. Ar,

Squeigea, to cut ; pare, ib.

Squenip, /nce/t; Uncleanneſs. Lh.

Squeull, Ar. a Ladder.

Squilfou, Claws. Pl. Ar.

Squyth, weary.

Squytzder, Mearineſt. I. T.


8 T


Stagen, a flanding Pool.
Staquel, the String of the Tongue ;
und. f. ſtaqual, te clatter, or


gnaſh. Ar.
Stal, a Shop. ib.


Stanconni, to prop; ſtanconnou,
Stays. Ar. id.

Stanc, a Pool; a Pond of ſtanding
Water. Ar. id.

Stanquen, a Valley; a low Place.
Ar.

Staoun, the Roof of the Mouth.
ib. See Stetenic.

Starda, to quench. ib.

Start, firm; faſt,

Stèean, Tin.

Stefenic,


456
8 T


Stefenic, the Palate of the Mouth.

Stella, every Day ; always.

Stemmyn, Qu. 4% work out his
Stemmyn, i. e. to do his Share of
Work.

Stempel, a /lant Beam uſed in Tin

ines.

Sten, a Milking Pail; alſo a Ma-
ter Veſſel.

Stener, ſtenor, Lh. a Tinner ;
it. a Water-Mag- tail.

Stequi, to choak ; Ar. See Ta-

a.

. cl a Star; Cott, fterran,
& ſteyr, id, ſterran leſki, 4
Comet; ſterran guandre, a Pla-
net. Lh.

Stervys, to catch Cold. See Stevys,
id. T. .

Steva, to find; found; ni ſteva
whans, found no Deſire.

Stevel, a Chamber; a Dining-
rom; Cott. Triclinium. L.

Stevys, to be very cold.

Stich (hule, id.), an Ow!. Cott.

Stifak, a Cuttle-fiſh. |

Stigna, to reach; extend; diſplay.
Ar.

Stikedn, a State; Pl. ſtukednaw.

Stil, a Beam of a Houſe.

Stlaf, a Stammerer.

Stlapa, to caft, or fing; Ar. id.
ind,

Stlap, a Stroke, or Biow.

Stlegea, to draw, or drag.

Stoath, /t:fled.

Stoc, Cott. the Trunk of a Tree.

Stol, a looſe Garment. Cott.

Stollof, a Glove ; a Handful.

Stollowfet, a Towel, or Napkin.

Stopan, bend thou; ſtopan we-
then, bend the Tree; ind. f. a
Stope.

Storc, Cott. a Stork.

Stouet, to kneel, Ar.

Strail, Tapeſtry; Mats; ftrail-
leſtre, a Mat.

Strath (Scotiſh), a Dale, or Val-
ley, or Plain; W. à Vein, or
Soil of Land; as, Strad Alyn,
Strad Towyn, i. e. 4 Vein on
the River Alyn, or Towyn, H.
Lh.

Strecha, to tarry; ni ſtrechaff,
I will not tarry. 5

Streil, a Curry-comb; a Fleſb-
bruſh. Cott.

Streing, a Buckle. ib.

Strek, a Stream; ſtrek braz, a

.great Stream ; ind. f. Strakes,
to go to Strakes.

Stret, Spring- water. Cott.

Strevy, /trived.

Strifor, contentious. Cott.

Strihue, ſneezing; ſtrihui, to
necx.

Strik, ſwift; active; Infly ; cou-

rageous.


8 T


Strill, a Drop : ſtrillic, a little


Drop. Ar.

Stringua, to caſt, or hurl. ib.

Striz, narrow; flreight ; ſtriza,
to bind faſt.

Strokoſou, St 5.

Strollat, a Fi.. a Rank. Ar.

Strop, a Thread, or String. Ar.
id.

Strouez, Prickles ; Thorns. Ar.

Stüan, Qu. He y ave him a Stan,
i. e. a Blow

Stut, a Knat, * little Fly; Cott.
Ar. a Rudd

Stynnar, a Pei erer.


8 J


Stas, O Arange! ſioas, Ar. alas!

Suben, a Kind of Pudding ; a
Mor ſel. Lh.

Sudronen, Co t. a Drone.

Suel, he that.

Suellak, a Fie fare; a Bird.

Suidnan, a Drc ught; Hauſtus. L.

Suif, Tatlow. '_ott.

Sul, the Sun; il, id. Ar. id.

Suler, a Flor. Ar. id. |

Sumbul, @ Goad. ©

Sutal, to whifth ; Ar, ſutellez,
whiſtling,


8 *
Sybottia, to think ; ſyppoſia, f.
id


id.
Sygal, Rye; the Grain Secale. L.
Sygan, Sap; Soaking 3 Juice;

Moiflure.

Syl, although.
Syllyas, the Conger-fiſh. See Sili-
en


Sylwans, Salvation; ſylwys, ſaved.

Syns, he be; it. I hold.

Synſy, retained; held.

Synt, a Saint; re Synt Gylmyn,
by Saint Golman.

Sythyn, a Meet; 1eithyn, id.

Syueth, alas! ah! ſyweth, id.


T.


ce T is changed into D, into
&« Th, and into Nh.” Hum.
Lh. p. 3.

N. B. T and D are often
uſed indifferently.


ff Good; yn ta, after Good;

goodly ; it. thou.

Tabarlanc, a Cloth of State; a
Canopy. Ar.


Tabm, a Piece; a Morſel. Lh.


Tach, a little Nail ; a Nail; ta-
cha, Ar. to nail, or tack toge-

ther. | |

T achen, a ſpacious Plain, or Piece
of Ground; tachen glaz, 4


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


2


green Place. Ar.
N 22 Goodneſs.
advath, a Nurſer; Bri
talvat, ng] ty
Tata, to choak ; devour; tagou,


id.
Taghir, the Shuttle Bone
of the Ga,
Tahua, a Sea-calf.
Taig, a Club. Ar.
Takkia, to fir; to drive, or
thruſt in. Lh.
20% a Tax; tailla, to impoſe,
A three; fem. g. tre, m.


Tairnant, Oiutment; Cott. Soap.

Takkys, fa/lened to; ind. f. to
have the Tack; i. e. not to be
able to move.

Taklolaz, a Creature; taklolaz
gwayans, a moving Creature, B.

Taklou, Creature ; Thing ; as,
taklou minniz, ſmall Things;
ind. f. Tackle; as, good Tackle ;
1. e. good Things; fit Inflru-
ments for the Buſineſs; & è con-
ny bad Tackle ; viz. unfit,

C


Tal, high; tall; a Forehead;


W. a Region; R. & W. a
Beginning; und. talar, a Head-
land ; it. a Seal ; as, tal-gellth,
Sigillum; Cellarium. Lh,

et Bran.
aleden (talguen, id.), Ar. 4
Fillet. 3

Talhiar, a bread Plate, or Diſh;
Lanx. L.

Talien, a Brew; a Forehead-cloth ;
f. koruadh, id.

Tallaſqua, to be idle; Ar, See
Talſoch.

Talſokh, flupid; talſoch, Lh.

Tallok, a Raoach-fiſb.

Talm, a Clap of Thunder ; Ar.
tarzcurun, 1d.

Talſoch, Cott. a Dunce ; Blick-
head.

Talvat, a Nouriſber.

Talvega, te reward. I. K.


able.
Tam, piece (tabm, id.), at.
Tamal, to rebuke. Ar.
Taman, upright ; that.

Tam, or Tamny, Names of Ri-


vers, as the Greek Heraus,


und. f. Tam-mawr, or Ta-

mar, ſcil. the great River; the

largeſt in Cornwall.
Tamouez, a Sieve. A.
Tan (odditan, & tanodd, id.),

beneath ; tanou, under me.
Tan, Fire.
 Tan-llwyth, a Bon-fire; Ar. tan-
| tez, tan, id.


T antat.


Talvez, able; boz talvez, to ht


C ²˙ 1 I ET


n 3 ccc ary... gd mm -


.


T A |

Tanau, thin; ſender ; ſmall ;
lean.

Tanauder, Thinneſs.

Tantat St. Jan, Midſummer Bon-
fires, ic. St. John's Fires;
tantat, good, or holy Fires.

Tanter, a Tater ; tymarrhar,
id.

Taran, Thunder; tredna, id.

Tardar, an Augur; a Gimblet;
und.

Tardha, fo bore, prick, ſling, or
nettle ; Lh.

Tardhak, thirteen ; trethak. id.

Tarfin, a Boundary.

Tarian, a Buckler.

Tarneidzha, Lh. tarneudzha, ts
toi n over.

Tarneuhon, the Lein; Hanch,
or Flank,

Tarnutuan, a Phantaſm ; Cott,
a Whim ; a Chimera. Lh.

Tarthas, guſbed forth.

Tarw, à Bull; Lh. taro.

Tarza, to prick; ftir. Ar.

'Tarzas, to burt. V. Neut.

Tarzell, a Nook, or Corner. Ar,

Taſerghys, the Reſurrection.

Tatinus, * contentious, Ar.

Tiu, hold your Tongue; be ſilent.

Tavantec, poor; tavanteguez,
Poverty. Ar.

Tavarchen, a Turf. Ar.

Tavargn, holſteri, id. a Tavern;
an Alehouſe.

Tavaz, a Tongue; tavazek, talka-
tive; it. a Token; Pl. tava-
zou.

Taul, a Blat; taulen, a Table.
Ar.

Tavolen, a Dack; Cott. Dilla.
L


Tavot, Cott. the Tongue.


Taw (Cott. Cereus, L.), WVaxen.


Taz (tad, id.), Father ; taz
guidn, @ Grandfather,


T. E


Te, thzu.

Teak (teg, pro tek, id.), fair;
good ; und. tekter, Beauty.

Teaut, Tongue. Ar,

Tear, rude. ib.

Tebel, wicked.

Tebri, to itch; ma dorn a tebre,
my Hand itebes.

Techet, to fly. Ar.

Tedha, to melt; thaw; diſſolve.
Tedna, to lead; convey ; draw ;
train; wring, or bind. Lh.

Teed, à Tide; trig, id.

Teen, a Man; dien, id. for deen,
quaſ. pro den, id. |
Teffa, Hue; teffe, might come.

Teffen (en teffen), awake.
Tefighia, to tire; tevigia, id.
Leg, pleaſunt; Lh. honeſt ; ſuir.


|


Terebah, wntil ; as far as.


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


1


Tegauel, a Calm; fair IWeather.

Teghez, choaked.

Tehen, a Firebrand; it. to light ;

kindle, or ſet Fire to; tewyn,
id,

Tei, to thatch, or cover with
Straw; Ar. C. tey, id.

Teil, Dung; Ordure.

Teill, a Raſpberry, Ar.

Teirgueth, thrice. Lh.

Teithioc, a Bond Servant, Male

or Female,

Teken, alittle while; rag teken,

for a while.

Tekter, Beauty; Comelineſs.

Telein, a Harp.

Teleinior, a Harper.

Telhar, a Palace; Palatium; L
telhar marhaz, a Market-place.
Th.

Tellou, Land-taxcs. Ar.

Tellys, holed.

Temigou, Bits; Fragments ; Pl.
of temig, a Bit; qua. from
tam; demigou, id. Lh.

Temptys, tempted.

Tena, t ſuck. Lh.

Tene, ſucking ; denys, ſucked.

Tenewen, a Side of the Body;
tyrnenuan, id.

Tenn, rude; ruſtic. Ar,

Tenſa, to chide ; ſcold. ib.

Ter, a Field; a Manor; quaſ.
Terra; L.


Tera, was ; dera, & thera, 1d.


Termen, a Time; thermina, id.
Pl. termin; un termen ma,
hac Vice; Lh. pubtermin, all
Times ; enmen, after that. Lh.

Tern, an Oven; a Furnace.

Ternewan, the Side; terneuan
an auan, the Bank of a River.

Lernewen. See Tenewyn,

Ternos, the Day following.

Terri-andzheth, Dawn, or Break
of Day.

Terry, to break, cut, ſaw, or
rend ; torras, & dorras, broke;
trehez, cut.

Tes, Heat; Cott. R. id.

Teſcaoua, to glean. Ar,

Teſky, to teach.

Tempell, a Temple; Pl. tem-
plys.

Tethan, an Uuder ; alſo a little
T eat. |

Tetholl, Day; all Day; pubte-
tholl, every Day.

Teu, fat; thick; Ar. teo, id.
braz, id.

Teua, Home ; moz teua, to go
Home z it. at loſt ; qual. a dew-
eib.

Teva, to grow ; increaſe,

Teual, dark; brown; Pl. tul-


ou


|


457
TE


Teuder, Thickneſs ; Ar; tevauat,
id,

Teuel, to be ſilent.

Tevenes, ent; damenys, id.
Teuth, a Nation; Ir. tuath, id.
Teuzi, to melt. Ar.

Tewlas, caſt ; decreed; deſigned ;
dewlys, id. |

Tewlel (tyulel, id.), to c/f.
Teyrn, a Prince. R

Teys, Thatch, chy teyz, a thatch-
ed Houſe ; Ar. Loen, und.
toer, a Thatcher,

res (tif; . . f. 1 den),
Men.

Tezan, @ Cake.


T H
Tha, thy ; da, id. thy, the, dhy,
id


id.

| hadder, Goodneſs.

Thagan, fo ws; thagan ſawga,

to ſave us.

Thal (for tal, a Forehead) ; rum

thal, by my Forehead,

Tharnou, Pieces; ol the tharnou,

all to Pieces.

Thas (taz, tad, id.), a Father.

That, Thall, or do go; a theth,

Thavaz, a Token; cabm thavaz,

a Rainbow; i. e. a crooked

Token.

The, to; from; thethe, to them.

The (athe, id.), c:mes; V. thes,

do you come; dee, ind. f. come

thou, |

Thecſyngh, ye carried; a thegis.

Thetregh, Arms.

Thegis, to bear, or carry; thek,

id, |

Thegough, bear ye.

Thehes, at length. Ad,

Thelle, was; might, or could be;

delle, id.

Thelhar (thellurgh, id.), back ;

warthellurgh, backward.

Then, this.

Thens, they were.

Theravas. See Derevas.

Therevel, to raiſe ; repair; re-
build.

Thermaz, dearly; belaved.

Theſe, were; theſe ſethek, were
ſet down.

Theſkerny, to grin.

Theſky (diſky, tiſky, id.) See
Teſky.

Theſympys, immediately.

Theth, went ; theves, they went ;
thethons, id. came; à toz, vel
doz, ti come, Or go.

Thethoras, to ri/e; ef a thetho-
ras, he roſe.

Thethoryans, the Reſurrectien.

Theveth, 4 Cur/e.

Theugh, you; to you ; thewna,


e merciful.
6 A


they; themſelves.
T hevyth,


458


TH |
Thevyth, take Care; qua. à the-


veth, a Curſe.

Thew, a Side; Pl. thewen ; it.
is; y thew, it is.

Thew, Dew; two; dho thew, to
threaten.

Theweth, End; Death; Dew- |
eth, id.

Thewhans (tewans, id.), faft;
per thewhans, very fa/t ; i. e.
ſecure.

Thewleff, Hands; viz. two

a.

Thewlyn, Knees; dowlyn, id.

Thewſys, Pains; it. Choice,

Thillas, Claaths; dillas, id.

This, @ Servant; ou this, my
Servant; qua. tez, or tiz, it.
at all.

Thiſtiplys, Diſciples.

Thiſtrewy, 0 deſtroy.

Tho, him; it. (pro dho), to; as,
thotho, to him; war tho, on
him. |

Tho, am; V. as, tho ve, I am.

Thoke, carried; taten; a the-
gis, or thek.

Tholle, deceived ; to decerve.

Thom, I am; thom kimerez, /
am taken.

Thons, they; often ſuffixed in
the End of Verbs, to ſhewthe
third Perſon Plural; it. they come.

Thorians, the Eaft ; viz. Sun's
Riſe ; thuyran, id.

Thort, from.

Thoutyth, careſt; ny thowtyth
Du, Careſt thou not for God?

Thragta (thrayta, T. T. id.), to
betray.

Thraytor (traytoar, id.), a Trai-
tor; thraytorou,

Thrig, the Tide of the Sea.

Throppys, dropped.

Thugſyons, they thought.

Thum, my; to my; thum lava-
rou, my HY/ards.

T huthy, to her, or him.

Thy, to his; thys, to thee; to
er.

Thyaſſeth, Nedfaſt ; ſettled,

Thyatye, to diſpoſe.

Thyfar, a Bargain.

Thyghou, right ; leffe thyghou,
the Right-hand.

Thyguethys, ſhaved; tryſyvethas,
id,

Thym, to us, thymmo, to or
for me, |

Thynny, we; u.

Thytſyas, provided. Pa.

Thyvas, ſhould.

Thyveth, diſmal.


1


Ti, a Houſe ; Pl. ties, Ar. id.
Ir. teagh, id.


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


1


Tiwarnal, a Houſe upon the Moor;
ſcil. ti war an hal. N. B. Four
Words put together, to make
a Name expreffive of the Situ-
ation.

Tiah, te ſwear ; ind. toan, or
tyan, an Oath; Ar. touet,
to ſwear.

Tiak, a Farmer ; a Houſholder ;
Maſter of a Family; Ar. tick,
id, |

Tidi, a Dug; a Breaft ; a Nip-
ple; Lh. W. diden, teth.

Tigan, a large Sack; a Wallet.

Tign, Scurf. Ar.

Tikkideu, a Butterfly; gloindiu,
id


Tim, Thyme.

Timat, ſwift. Ar.

Tin (dyn, id. & tyn), arp;
terrible; ſevere, AurS., Gr.

Tinel, a Tent. Ar.

Tir (tyr, id.), Land; PI. tiriou,
& terros. |

Tir-devrak, a Moor, or Marſh.

Tiſky, teaching; Learning; diſky,
& theſky, id.

Tiſt, a Witneſs, Cott,

Tithe, thou alſo,

Tithia, to hiſs.

Tivia, to grow. See Teva.

Tiwulgou, Cott. Darkneſs.

Tiz, Men; tuz, duz, tez, id.
a People; a Tribe, or Family;
tyd, A. id.

Tizout, to reach; attain to, Ar.

Tiz-rum, Romans; Men of |


Rome.
T O


To, than; T. T. Qu. it. a Roof.
Cott.

Toan, an Oath.

Toas, Paſie; Ar. toaſez, a knead-
ing Trough; ind. f. to toas,
i. e. ſhake the wet Tin to and
fro, to cleanſe it of the Earth.
Toc, a Hat; a Cap; a Bonnet.


Todn, Lay-ground ; Land on a

Downs,

Toim, hot ; tom, id.

Tokko, he may bring; mai tok-

ko, that he may bring; f. a

degy-

Tollgarrik, the holed Rock.

Toll, a Hole; tell, id. tolven, a
hiled Stone; toll y gwint, a
Vent- hole.

Toll-karn, the holed Heaps of
Racks.

Tollek, hollow.

Tollkorn, a Trumpet; clarion,

a Crozier, Lh.

Tollur, a Man that inſpefts and

ſuperintends Tin- bounds ; ſo call-


ed f. becauſe Bounds are ter-


TO


minated by Holes cut
Earth, which muſt be Ane
and viſited once in a Year, or
becauſe he receives the Tolls
or Dues, of the Lord of the
Soil;

Tolva, a Cuſſom Houſe,

Tombder, Heat; Pl. tummaſou

1 1 y
cmals, Quantity; prea
of any Thing, Lü“ CO

Ton (tin, id.),-to bear; porto, L.
it. @ Billnw; a great IV ave.

bee a Flock, or Herd,
onen, the Rind, or Pari

1 Fruit, or Plant. Ar. * 7
onnel, a Tub; any great 7.
Cott. tonwel, wg e bh

Tons, they come,

Tor, a Tower, or high Place; as,
Helmantor, Rou- tor; Tor-
crobm; it. the Belly (Ar. tur,
id.), Pl. torr.

Torandorn, the Palm of the Hand,

Torch, a Hog ; towren, Ar. It.
tore, a Boar; f. a wild Boar ;
a tor,

Torchat, a Bundle; Ar. torcha
bleo, a Lock of Hair.

Torgocc, Ar. a Dwarf.

be a Loaf ; torth, id. torz,

2

Torkhan, a Fire; Hatred; Ex-
vy. Lh.

Torlan, Bank of a River,

Tornad, a Breach.

Torneuan, the Sea Shere; the
Bank of a River.

Tos, to come; me toz, I come;
doz, id.

Toſoanna, to provoke, or vex.

Toſt, near. Ar,

Tougec, Ar. @ Toad.

Toula, to caſt ; te pour; toula
emeas, pour out.

Toun, an Cath. Lh.

Tourni, Noiſe. Ar.

Touſe, a Noiſe; Diſturbance ;
as, What's the Touſe there ?


Qu.

Touzier, a Table-cloth. Ar,

Towan, an Otter.

Towl, ſome ; away; Qu. @
Fall.

Towne, deep; maga towne, very
deep.

Towyll (dowyll, id.), a Taal;
a working Inſlrument.

Towyn (tuyn, id.), 4 Turfy
Dawn ; ind. r bs & to-
wyns, Hillocks of Turf ; W.
in Dav. Gleba; Ceſpes; L.
Beig. Duyn eſt Tumulus are-
narius, ſive Collis ſabuloſus
objectus Oceano and o are
the Towyns in Cornwall.
see Lye's Junius in Voce
Dow zs.

Traath


0


© te ev A
8


& KE 2245 O'S 8 OA” 5 : — MS -
4 - _ - a " "4 * * pe. "=


6
bs
Y
#4


„ ˙²˙ EE TS Ru


A CORNISH- ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


TR


Traeth (Tractus, viz. Mariti-
timus), a Sea-ſhore ; trai, Ir.


id,
Trafferth, a Buſtle; a Noiſe.
Trahaue, proud.
Trahezi-mean, Stone-cutters.
Trailia, fo turn; traillia an ber,
to turn the Spit ; treyl, id.
Trangiak, a Dream; Exſtaſy;
Delirium ; a Difficulty.
Traoue, à Valley; Ar. traoun,
law, id.
Travethak, & trauedhak, lamen-
table ; ſad.
Traũſt, a Beam.
Trauythes, thin ; rare ; excellent,


h.

Tre (id. ſonat ac L. Trans),
as, tremencz, to traverſe ;
tranſgreſs.

Tre, that ; as, trevedna dama,
t'nei, that my Mother will give.

Tre, a Town; trev, id. a Walled
Toton, or City. Lb.

Treage, the Muſcle-fiſh.

Treas, Gravel; Pebble; coarſe
Sand. Lh.

Trebath, a Trivet, or Brand- iron.
Lh.

Trebe, until.

Trebez, a Trivet. Ar.

Trech, Cott. Fruit; a Trunk,
or Stem of a Tree; a Blockhead,
Lh.

Trechi, to ſurpaſs. Ar.

Tredhek, thirteen.

Tredna, Thunder; trenna, id.

Tredzha, the third.

Tref, Lands annexed to a Houſe.
R.

Treffia, to ſpit on; und. trifiaz,
ſpitting.

Trefraint, a Borough, or Corpo-
ration, qua. trefranc, a free
Borough.

Trege, to dwell ; tregis, & dre-
gas, Pa. dho trega, id.

Tregva, a Dwelling ; alias tre-
ga, as, tregavara, the Bread
Town ; tregaminion, tregane-
bris.

Trehar, a Taylor; a Cutter out.

Trehe (try, trybo, id.), as far
as ; until.

Trehi, to cut; chop; ind. tro-


her, 4 Coulter ; trehys, cut;


treſheys, to cut.

Trei, three.

Trein, the Noſe. Cott.

Treiz, Ar. a Paſſage ; a Strait
in the Sea (und. treiza, to paſs );
it, a Town of Corn.

Trekh, the Trunk of a Tree ;
treugen, id. Ar.

Trem (or threm, W.), the Sight.

Tremen, a Paſſage; tremenvan,
id. Ar.

Tremengue, a Ladder. Ar.


ö


| TR


Tremor, foreign ; beyond Sea.

Trene, fharp-taſted.

Trenk, a Sower,

Trendzha, the Day after To-
morroto.

Trens, among them; beyend them.

Trenydzha, to fly to and again ;
to fly over, or acroſs,

Tres, moreover ; yn tres, in the
midſt,

Tres, Trouble.

Treſſe, three.

Trethe, among them.

Trethon, betwixt us ; trethynz,
betwixt them.

Tretury, Treachery.

Trev, a Village; a Houſe ; Pl.
trevou; Lh. treven, W. a
Tribe; R. treu, id. as in
Domeſday, Coven treu, for
Coven tre, ind. Treuro, f.

Trevedic, a Countryman ; Cott.
a Cottager ; a Clown.

Frevedig-doer, a Sojourner,

Treus, Croſs ; treuſou, a Threſ-
hold. Ar.

Freuſt, Powder ; Duft.

Treut, lean; Ar. Qu. See Teu.

Trevith, Nothing.

Freuth, the Entry. Lh.

Treuzhen, a Blxkhead. Lh.

Trew. See Trev, Tre, id.

Trewe, ſpitted on. See Treffia,

Treefa's, & Drewys, id.

Treweſy, feeble ; forrowſully; it.

Fit; dreueſy, id.

Treys, Pl. of Troys, the Foot;

troat, id.

Trez, Ar. Sand; trezou, Linen

Cloths ; it. betwixt yours.

Tria, to tempt ; to prove; to aſ-
fault,

Tribedh, a Brand-iron, or Trivet ;
Terre, Gr. it. a Gallows,

Tridal, to fart. Ar.

Trihaz, Spittle.

Trig, a Flowing ; f. Trig, &
Trigſhire, Cornwall, it. an
Inhabitant ; Receſſus Maris.
Lh.

Trighia, to inhabit ; kontreva, id.

Trikkin, @ Tucker, or Fuller;
trykkiar, id.

Trincha, to flatter. Ar.

Triſt, ſad; Cott. triſtys, & triſ-
tans, Sorrow.

Triuadhek, meet; gentle.

Triuath, Pity. See Truez.

Tro, a Turn; Pl. troiou, trova,
id.

Troheaul, a Turn- Sol, or Sun-
turn, ſuch as the Druids made,
and the Inhabitants of the
Weſtern Iſles ſtill make, in Sa-
lutations and Worſhip.

Tro, that; as; hw;
than (try, id.)


then ;


Troaz. See Tios ; it. Urine ;


459
T R


und. troaza, to mate Water.

Trocha (troha, & trogha, &

traha, id.), towards,

Trodzhan, a Starting.

Troed, a Foot; trocdlydan, broad-

fooled; Lh. W. See Truz.

Troet, a Turtle.

Troher, the Phugh's Coulter,

Troidella, te compaſi. Ar.

Troill, à turning Reel; Ar. a

Term in Hunting,

Tron, a Hoſe. Lh. an tron,

Qu,

Tronſal, to truſs; tuck up. Ar.

Pros, A. trus, W. truſt, id,

Noiſe; a Bounce; a Din.

Troſter, a Beam. Cott.

Troftvl, a Bar, or Bolt,

Prot, miſerable ; Cott. troth, id.

Poor.

Trouviaz, found; V. G. Trous

ver,

Trui, through,

Tru, tru, ſad! ſad! ogh tru,

tru, O ſad ! ſad!

Trud, a Treat.

Fruez, Compaſſion; truath, id,

Trugarez, Mercy; quo. Pity and

Love; und. trucaraue, mer-

caful.

Truillou, Rags; truillek, rag-

ged. Ar.

Truit, the Foot. Cott.

Trulerch, a Path; a Foet-path.

Frull, a Buttery.

Truz, & druz, a Foot; truzu an

daraz, a Threſhold; it, a Louſe;

PI. treiz ; trüyd, id. Lh.

Truz-blat, Splay- footed.

Truz-ebal, the Colt's Fort; Tuſe

filago, L.

Trwydon, Swimming ; und. R.

triton,

Try, whil}t ; ſpas, id. Lh.

Tryan, Clay, or Clob; as, chy-
tryan, a Houſe of Clob, or
Clay Malls.

Trychans, three hundred.

Tryygans, fix.y; tryngens, id.
trei-igans. Lh

Trylya. See Traillia.

Tryn, to foo or look after, R.

Tryſa, the third,

Tryflor, a Bank, or Public Stock.


T 5


Tſhappal, a Chapel.
Tſhappen, à Capon.

Tſhattal, all Manner of Cattle.
Tſhauka, a Fack-daw, or Chough;
W. koguran ; palores, id.
Tihei, a Houſe ; tſhei hora, a

Brathel ; chi, id. Pl. treven.
*
Tſhikuk, a Swallow.
Tſhimbla, a Chimney.


Tihomber,


469


1 8
Tſhomber, a Bed. room; a Cham-


ber.
Tſhoun- ler, a Candleſtick.
Tſhofar, a Chafindiſb.
Tſhyrkog, a Tavern, or Victual-
ling- Houſe.
Tſkekker-eithin, à Titmouſe.


1


Tu, Side; pub tu, on every Side;
Ar. a Coaſt;

Tuban, a Bank; Lh. Dam;
Dike; ind. tubans, f. i. e.
great Clods of Earth.

Tubby, Thomas.

Tubm, warm ; lukewarm ; from
tubmy, Lh. tubma, to heat.
Tui (tyi, id.), ſworn ; e rig tyi

dho vi, he fware unto me.

Tull (toll, id.), a Hole. |

Tulgu (tuyldar, tewolgou, id.),
Darkneſs. See Teual.

Tulla, 10 bore through, or hole ;
und. f. |

Tulle, Deceit; and tullor, decrit-
ful.

Tummaſou, Heats.

Tunder, Heat. Cott:

Tuogu, common ; pobel tuogu,
the Rabble; the common Peo-
ple.

Tir, Cott. a Tower; türmas, id.
Lh. kaſtal, id. |


Turen (Cott.), a "urtle; turan, |


id. Ar. turzunell;
Turquez, @ Pair of Pincers.
Twrgwelied, @ Beacon; huy!

bren, W. id. |
Turiat, Ar. to dig the Earth, as

Moles.

Turnupan, @ Turnip ; Pl. tyr-
nyppyz.

Turumel, a Molrbill.

Tas, Men; dus, id.

Tutton, a Chair, or Seat; und.

f. Tutts, or Haſſocks.

Twyllo, to beguile, or deceive.

See Tuila,

h Tuyn, a Hills.

Tuyſog, W. à Captain.


3


Ty, Thau; te, id. it. Side; as,
anty man, on this Side. Lh.

Tybakko, Tobacco.

Tybyans, Thought; Imagination.

yd {tydhyn, W.), Land; C.
id. from tydhyn to tydhyn,
i. e. from Pariſh to Pariſh.

T'yffonz, they came; may tyffonz,
that they come.

Tyha, towards ; as, tybhan tem-
ple, towards the Church; war
tyha tre, towards leni.


1 ytes A- n Slime.


- wet


Tyller, a Place; Pl. tellyryou.

Tyllian, an Owl. Hal.

Tymarrhar, a Mooer; a Suiter.

Tymarrburian, Sweethearts.

Tymheſtlog, tempeſiuaus; boiſ-
trous. |

Tyn, a Paſſage over a River, or
Arm of the Sea; alſo a Hill.

Tyner, tender.

Tyſtio, to bear Witneſs.

Tythar, a Place; py tythar byn-
nag, what Place ſoever. See
Tyller.

Tythy, from thence,

Tyuldar, Dari#nefs.


V.
N. B. No Corniſh Word be-


gins primarily with a V, but ei-
ther with B, F, P, or M, all
which in Compoſition will change
intoa V; as, Bara, Bread; Maur,
great; in Compoſition, ſay, Vara,
Vaur, &c.


EEN, vain. Ar.
Vab. See Mab.
Vabm, the Milt ; the Spleen. Lh.
Vac, impeached. Ar. |
Vadna, will. See Vedna,
Val, a Peſt, or Plague.
Vam. See Mam.
Vanaff, I will; ny vanaff, Iwill
not.
Vanah, a Fellow ; a Paramour ;
qua. for Manah.
Uar (for uarth), in, or upon;
as, uar an diuadh, in the End.
Uarler, after (uarlyrch, id.),
ſometimes divided by a Pro-
noun, as, uar-i- ler, after him ;
uardhalyrk, after.
Uarnach (uarno, id.), on you ;
uarnaz, id.
Uarnan, upon us.
Uarnodho, of or concerning bim;
anodho, id.
Uarnydzhanz, ever or upon them ;
uarnedhe, id.
Uarrah, higheft ; ſummus. L.
Varth, Wonder. See Marth, id.
Varuo. See Maruo.
Uaruolez, below.

Vary, Licenſe ; Liberty; Play.
Vas, good; enough. See Mat, or
Maz. |

Vaſe, ſce; fas, id,
Vaulz, a Reaping Hock ; Falx,
L |


Uauſſow, Cliſ; qua. Pl. ab
aules (vel owel, vel owels), 4
Cliff; where the U ſeems to
be prefixed as it were for
Sound- ſake.

Vaw, a Be See Maw,

Vay, a Kijs, See Baye.


|


Veyll, extremely.


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


UC.
Uchel, high. Sec Ughel.
D


Udzhe, or udzha, Lh. after-
wards ; udzhe henna, or ud-
zhe hedda, id. after this, or
that,

Udzheon, a Bullock; udoi
odion, id. *


UE


Ve, I; me.

Veam, ould J. V.

on (tor bean, or bychan), I-
He.

Uedhu, a I/idow.

Vedn, will; V. na vedn ſinzhy,
will not hold; me vedn keuz,
[ had rather.

Vehegar, a Bondman.

Vel, /ike; as it were; than; far.

Velen, vilely ; mar velen,
vilely.

Velha, longer ; farther off than.

Velhuez. See Melhuez; eu
idydh (f. cu idyn), id.

Ueli, ſee; ti a ueli, thou wilt ſce.
Vid. Guelaz.

Uellyn, yellow. See Mellyn.

Ven, that were; it. ready.

Vendzha, will; would ; did ;
could ; me vendzha a henz, 1
had rather. 1 ä

Venedh, a Mountain.

Veneffre, never.

Vennyn, would ; could.

Venons, ſþilt ; came; come. V.

Venſy, te chaſliſe ; deſiroy; vin-

cate.
Venyn, Namen; Pl. à Benen.


Veor, great; as, Treveor, the


* " great Ten; qua. pro Vair.


Veras, lasted; admired ; viraz for
miraz, id.

Vernans. See Mernans.

Verth, Strength; nerth, id.

Verwy, to die; Merwye, id.

Ves, out; ves guris, put cut; mes,
id. aves, '. out of Doors.


Veſtl, Gall. Ar.


Veſlry, Maftery ; Strength ; Vic-
tory ; a meſter; ;
Vet, ſlay; me avet, I will flay.

it. from ; as, golou vet an tuyl-
dar, Light from the Darkneſs.
Veth, /hall be; as, vethaff, I fall
be; it. Sorrow; it. a Time,
or Turn; as, dyweth, twice;
biſgueth, never; it. pro bedk,
a Houſe, or Grave it. any.
Vethough, fade ye Care.
Vetye, to meet; qua. a metye.
Veughe, Lives; V. a beu.
Vewns, a Dream.


Veyn,


VE


Veyn, a Stone; Stones; for meyn.
Ver, It; waſted; outward, as,
gweal an vez, the outward
Field.


UF

Ufern, the Ancle-bone. Ar,
UG

Uge (auch, T. T.), over, from


above.

Ughel, high; Hud (ughan, &
aughan, f. Ir. id.) ſupream.

Ughelder, Height.

Ughelles, extolled ; praiſed ; hal-
lowed.


UNH


Uhal, Bard; difficult; hual, id.
it, pro ughel.


VI


Ui, an Egg; ol, id. Ar.

Vi, I; of me; to me.

Via, had; navia, had it not been.

Uibren, a Claud, or Miſt, Lh.

Vichan, litile; as, vean, bechan,
&c.

Vidn, Sorrow.

Vihith, Care; Heed; dho ky-
meras vihith, te tate Heed.
Lh.

Vilekur, a Paraſite.

Vindrau (Torpor; Digitus, L.),
a Numbneſs; Stupidity; Infen-
ſibility.

Vinny, thou wilt.

Vir, Truth; en uir, verily.

Viraz, to behold; for miraz, id.

Viſkuethek, evcrlaſting. See Biſ-
gueth.

Viſnans, Lances; ſmall lung Fiſbes
taken out of the Sands.

Vith, any ; vyth, none.

Viz, a Mouth; miz, id.


UL


Ula, an Owl; Ind. f. tre-ula ;
hule, id,

Ulair, a Mantle; a Veil.

Ulamy, to accuſe ; a blamye.

Ulano, diſklien, Cott. a Qua-
ternion.

Ulaz, a Country; ulaz ma, this
Country ; wlas, id. wlad, W.

" ids

Ullia, to howl; to make a Noiſe.

Ulos, Sight, welas, id.


UM


Umdowla, IFre/iling; ymdoula,


id,


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


UN


Un, a; as, un pols, @ while.

Uncorn, an Unicorn.

Undamſi, aClent; Clientulus. L.
dencoſcor, id. Cott.

Ungarme, a Lamentation.

Ungle, a Clewort; ind. f. tre-
ungle.

Unſa, to have; unſa moy joy, to
have more "Joy.

Unſcogyon, unwiſe; miſcogyon,
id,

Untye, to anoint ; Ointment ; an-
ointed. f

Unver, a Bargain.


VO


Voel, a bleat Hill; a Cliff; Pl.
wa Sce Moel, & Owel,
id,

Vold, courageous ; bold.

Volder, Leave; Pardon; dry
volder, by Leave.

Uole, to weep ; krio, id. Lh.

Voleythy, to cur/7,

Uolhya, to waſh ; for golhya.

Uolou (for golou), Lights.

Vols, a Vault; voſſa, to vault,
or bow, ©

Von, ſurthermeſt; hindmift ; as,
y von ynys, the furthermaſt I/
land; von laz, the Land's-
end,

Vones, Mey; vone, id.
Vons, they be; vonas, he ſhould
be, :
Uor, ur, uyr, Pa. of the irregu-
lar Verb, guodhaz, or kodhav,
to know z as, evaur (or uyr),

he knaweth.

Vor, a May; as, vorlas, the green
Way.

Voreth, Sorrow.

Vork, a Fork.

Vork, trivork, a Trident,

Vorn, an Oven. Sce Forn.

Uorh, from; by; in; to; un-
to.

Uorto, to, or unto him.

Vos (for fos), a Ditch, Wall, or
Fence; as, penvos, Head of
the Trench ; marhas an vos,
the Market on the Foſs ; Pl.
voſou, as, Caervoſou.

Vos, to be; vo, it was; was;
voſe, to be.


Voſogyon, the Poor ; boſogyon,


I Co
Voth, the WH.
Uouiz, a Hook; voulz, id.


'Vounder, a Lane; vounder vor,


the Lane-way.
Uour, a Huſband (f. pro gur),
dha uour, thy Huſband.
Vouly, were; they were.
Vownas, Was.
Voxcuſy, buffeted.
Cote, offer,


6 B


461
UP


Uppa, here ; for omma,


UR
Ur, a Man; Ar. Ir. fear, id. L.


Ir.

Ur, an Hour,

Vrac, Malt.

Vraſter, Pride.

Ureha, to ſow, or plant. Lh.

Urellon, we Hall do.

You Judgement; Sentence. bres,
id,

Ureth, ay.

Vrinkak, French Tongue; W.
Frennig, id.

Urma, now ; at this Hour; yn
urma, id, pel dhan urma, Ing
fince ; Lh. bet an urma, thus

wo ; to this Time or Place. Lh.
rna, that Time; that Hour ;
yn urna, id. Ar, urou, ſome-
times.

Urria, to honour ; worſhip.

Vry, Account; Price; Efleem.

Uryffo, I ſhall dr. ©

Urylli, thou ſhalt do; uryſſys, id.

Urylliff (urello, id.), he ſhall do.

Urellon, we ſhall do.

Urz, Borders. Ar.


US


Uſair, a Veal. Cott.
Oſion, Chaff; Straw.
Ulyc, uſed,


*


Uter, dreadful.

Utetha, 1% ſow ; ſero. L.

Uther, a Club,

Uun, a Downs; as, chiuun, a
Flouſe on a Downs ; ſor guun.


UT


Vy, I; me; une

Uy, or guy, a Fermination of
Names, uſually ſignifying Ha-
ter; as, dourduy, W.—and
C. id. as, Treth-uy, and Tre-
varguy (al. Trewergy), i. e.
the Town above, or upon the
Mater, or River.

Vya, it were ; vye, ſhould be.

Vygyans, Suſtenance.

Vyin, Stone (meyn, id.), fos a
vyen, a Stone Mall.

Vyl, fee; ti a vyl, thou wilt ſee.

Vylen, villainouſſy.

Vyllyk (yvyllyk, id.), they ſhall

lament.

Vynaff, I will.

Vynna, would ; vynnas, wall ;
ti a vin, thou wilt.


Vynſe, would; vyle, id.
Uynyn,


462
UY |
Uynyn, one; kynifer uynyn,


every one.

Vyo, might be.

Vyru, dead (ef a ven vyru, he will
dir); verou, id;—for merow.

Vyſk, a Flail.,

Vyth, none; byth, id.

Vyttyn, Morning (metin, id.),
kyns vyttyn, before Day.

Vyvyan, Little Water. Name of
a amily.


UZ
Uz, Age; a Tim; huys, id.
Uzal, Seat, Ar. uzillz id.
W.
For the Letter W, Lhuyd uſes


enerally U, with a Pick under
it, and the Cott. MS. the Sax-
on W. See Gu, UW, F, Hu,
and Ou.


was not intorduced in-
9 to the Britiſh Alphabet
till A. D. 1200.
Wan, weak; mar wan, ſo weak.
Wane, to fierce; y wane the
gollon, to pierce him to the
Heart.
War, upon.

Warbarth, altogether z on every
Side. | |
Warfe, did; put; dell warfe,

they ſo put. |
Warlyrgh, after that; warler,
id


id,

Woarol, Merchandize, Cott.

Warnough, on ye.

War-rag, forward.

Wartha, upon high; yn nef
wartha, in Heaven above.

Warthellurgh, backwards.

 Warwolcs, below.

Wary, Liberty; Play; the- wary,
out.

Warybyn, againſt; near; over-
againft him; warben; id.

Wathyll, to make; wuthell, id.

Waz, a Fellow ; waz teble, a
wicked Fellow, See Guazs


WE


Weath, below; behind; awhe-
ath, id.

Wecor, Courage; wecor gwan,
weak Courage ; faint Heart.

Weffra, for ever.

Weilgi, the Sea; Gw. See Lh.

Welen, a Rod. See Guelen.

Weles, Seats, or Dwellings. R.

Well, have; a well had; wull,;


id,
Wellas. See Guelas,


WE
Welth, a Vert; whel, id.
Wen, or gwen, white ; beauti-
fuh P
Wens, or Wenze. See Guenz,
Mind; as, boſwens, chy an
guenz.
Weres, Help; rag ym weres,


wW* his Help.
erthys, ſold ; guerthy, 4d.


Weth, is; alſo a Time; a Turn; W


often annexed to Nouns of
Number, as, deweth, twice ;
milweth, a thouſand Times,
Wethan. See Guethan.
Wethough, ye felt.
Wethyl, to do.
Wetras, flooped.


WH


Whad, ix.

Whans, Defire; Luſl ; Coveting.

Whare, anon; but; yn whare,
in Actount.

Whath, yer.

W hefes, the ſixth ; whefes dydth,
the ſixth Day.

Whegoll, dear; vam whegoll,
dear Mother.

Wheh, /ix.

Whek, ſweet; dear.

Whekter, Sweetneſs.

Whelough, /eek ye.

Wherthen, to laugh,

Wheſe, Sweat ; whes, id.

Whethe, to blow ; whethe the
gorn, to blow the Horn.

Whiggian, Pillis ; a Seed.

Whole, wept.

Whurts, Hurtleberries.

Why, you ; ye.

Whyrvyth, they Hall ſee; à me-
row, or miraz.

Whyth, to breath; blow ; whe-
the, id;

WI

Wibanor, a Slipper: Cott.

Widnak, whitiſh. |

Wigan, the ſoft Part of a Loaf
of Bread; the Crumb.

Willen, Fringe; f. pillen.

Win, Vine; guin, id. Cott.

Winaz, Nails of the Fingers.

Wingarly, Qu. f. faint, fick.

Wiſkis, cloathed. See Guiſkis,

Withell, a Lion; withellonack,
id.

Wlano-diſclien, Quaternio. L.
Cott.


WO


Woky, churliſh. See Goky.
Wolas, could.
Wole, to weep.


Wolhas, waſhed ; walthas, id.


|
|


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


0


ade — below ; wolaz, id,

olſowas, to hear; golf

o

Won, were ye; ny won, they
were not; it. to know.


Wonys, to faſhion; it. to till, or


ow.

oolac, Reſpect; wovlac da,

good Reſpect. See Guelas,

or, to; wos, id,

Woras, put ; gora, id,

Wornyas, gave Notice; warned;

Woromynys, ſent. Pa,
orrians, I can.

Worthenys, Miſeries.

Worte, them. |

Worthe, /; from; over Thilez
dywort, from.

Worthebys, anſwered.

Worthoſow, Thighs; Legs.

Worthe, 1 worſhip.

Worthyans, Glory.

Wortos, to flop ; to flay.

. your Huſband; gwyrti,


1

Wos, Cold; it. ſince; ſeeing that.

Wos, to be; a wos, that be br.

Woteveth, a: laft.

Wothaff, I knew.

Wothe, could.

Wottenſe, them; a wottenſe, to
them.

Wovente, concerning.

Wour (worc, id.) know (f. won),
can; dell wour, as J can,

Wovynnys, aſted.

Wow, grumbling; heb wow,
without grumbling ; qua. 4
now,


WR


Wre, wra, did; cauſed ; wraſys,
didſi come.

Wrath, @ Giant; ind. Wrath's
Hole in St. Agnes. 0

Wreſſens, they made; wryſſens,
id. |

Wrenſe; was. |

Wrowethe, to lie along.

Wryk, did (for rig, as), me
re wryk {krife, I did write.


WU
Wuthell, to de; mate; frame.
WY


Wyber, a Serpent. R.

Wyn, bleſſed; white ; wyan, id.
gwydyn, pro gwyn. id.

Wynnough, will ye; ye will.

Wyr, true. See Gwyr.

Wys, becomes; awys thy, it be-
comes thee.

Wys, for Guyz, a Sow. Sce
Guyz.


W yſken


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY,


W V
Wikies, ruck; gwylkys,
Wyth, a large Field.
W 2
Wz. See Uz.
Y.


* He; bis; bim; that; ſhe;
9 a; the; as, y mawna,
that Boy, |

V, to; as, y ſedha, to fit.

Yau, a Yoke; yeu, id. Ar.

Yakh, healthy; well; yechet,
Health, Ar. id.

Yar, a Hen; Pl. yer,

Yaz, Health,


2% B


Ybba, here; ubb>, obba, hub-
ba, id,


YD


Yd, Corn; iz, id.

Ydd, a Plural Termination of
Britiſh Words, as nentydd,
Fountains ; coedydd, Woods.

Yidnek, eleven.

Ydnhakvas, the eleventh.

Ydhyn, a Bird.

Ydhoz, thou art.

Ydnungk, a young Bird; ebol,


id.
Ydn, one; ydnger, one Word.
Ydzhi, he ts.
Ydzhiz, 1 am.


Y E


Yea, ſo; yes; L. ita; ino; la,
huath, id. Lh.

Yeghys, called.

Yeigen, a Ferret; yeugen,
id.

Vein, cold; Ice; yen, Ar.


dd.

Yeinder, Stiffneſs; Rigor; L.
Cold; K 7 4 Lh.

Venter tor, the Back ; Cott, ha-
len, id.
Yermis-priv, @ Rat. ib.

' Yerres, a Boar; Pig; Verres.
L.

Yerues, a Ram.

Yet, a Gate.

Yeveren, public Matters,


Y F
Yffran, Hell; yfarn, id.


YG


Ye, 4 Hoek.


| 285
Yk, alſo,


1

Vlaſt, calling; wylaſt, id.

VII (yl, id.), may, or can; yll

welas, may ſee, |

Ylla, he conld,

Ylly, might.

Vlly, Ointment; len a ylly, full
of Ointment.

Ylwis, cried.

Y ma, there is.

Y mbithionen, Paper ; L. Scheda.

| Y mdoula, to wreſtle; qua. ab
emdal, to flrive.

Y mdoulur, a Wreſtler 3 a Cham-
Pion.

Vmdwyn, to behave well, or ill.

Ymeirio, to brawl, or chide.

Y mgachu, to defile ; concaco. L.

Ymladd, W. a Battle, or Com-
bat.

Ymma (omma, id.), here; ſuf-
fixed, as, chymma, for chy
omma, this Houſe here.

Y monz, they are.


Ymyl, a Border.
YN


Yn, in; to; then; yn meath,
then ſaid; it is alſo a Sign of
an Adverb, as, yntebel, wick-
edly.

Vnbarth, within; inſide.

Yndan, under.

Ynikorn, that hath

Horn.

Ynion, Right. Lh.

Yair, Honorius; L. enir, or he-

nir, id.

Ynmes, out ; in the Middle.

Ynn, a Spear; Celtic; onn, id.

Ynne, in; within; en, id.

Ynno, him; ynna, he,

Vnnon, in us.

Ynnos, in thee.

Ynnyas, inſiſted; cried out.

[as nm "Þ behind.


Ynta, well; ynta a wothe, well
knew.


Yntebel, wickedly.

Ynten, together; upright.
Yntre, among; yntrethow, among
you,

Yntyen, entirely.

Vnven, earne/tly.

Ynweth, alſo.

Ynyough, charge ye; cry ou,
to.

Vnz, they are; monz, id.


YO
Yoch, à Pig. Cott.


Youll, Deſire; Wiſh,
Yonk, young.


| Yontye, to anoint.


but one


463
YO

Yorkh, a Roe; Cott, Caprea, L.
YR


Yr, are; ber; as, yr goar, her
Huſband.

Yrat, Ointment.

Yrchys, comman led; as, del yr-
chys ev, as be commanied ; vr-
ges, id. |

Yredy, already; readily; indeed.

Yrhian, the Brim f any Thing;
the Borders or Fi onticrs,

Yrvyz, armed; Pa. ab arv.


YS


Ys, them; to them; than; as,
s kyns, than before.

Yibrychu, to beſmear,

Yſcaun, Lh. an Elder Tree.

Y (cod, a Shade. Cott.

Vſcren, Bones,

Yſcubell, a Beſem.

Ylely, his Arms.

Ylgal, a Baſon.

Vigobeth, a Bench, or Chair. Lh.

Yigol, W. a Ladder; a Stile;
A. deredh, id.

Vſgubo, to bruſh.

Vſguydh, a Shield.

Y (gwydarf, to hrandiſb.

Vſigo, to bruiſe.

Yſkrybl, a labouring Breaſt ;
ſgrybl, W. id.

1 to aſcend ; yſkunnes,
Let him mount,

Vſkys, ſoon.

Vſſilli, Limbs ; Members.

Yſlu, to burn. R.

Yſtate] gwelu, a Bride chamber.

Vſtig, fudious ; m"_ Lh.

Yitlym, a Bat, or Dormonſe.

Yſtuucc, a Bucket ; kibal, id.

Yityn, to reach; yſtyn thym,
reach io me.

Vſwil, baſbful; mill, id.

Yſwilio, to bluſh.

Yly, he 1s.


3
Ytterevis, /tirred up.


Yth, in thy; yth lervis, in thy
Service


YU
Yvabm, the Spleen.


1] Yves, /o; as. Ar.


Vuggye, to judge. Lh.

Yuh, above; yuh an mor, above
the Sea.

Yuhal, high; tall.

Yurl, a Count; Earl, or Conſul.

Yvuru, To-morrow; W. y vory,
A. archoadh, id. Lh.


Vuzia, to be accuſtomed ; ſoleo. L.
| .


464
Y W


Vw, am; is; are.
Yweges, a Steer ; an Ox.


1 2
Vu, Cort.
Yzouch, ye are.

Z.


AB AN, a Pine; avelzaban,
a Pine- apple; plankys za-
ban, Fir-timber, Lh.


Zadarn, Saturn; ind. T reza- *


darn, Town , Saturn,

Zih, a Sack; dry; zahaz, Ti.
Lh.

Zal, Salt; peſé zal, Salt fißb.
Lh.

Zilla, ts ſalt.

Zans, a Saint.

Zanz, a Bay; ind. f. Penzanz,
alias Penians, Holy Head, or
Promontory; it. à Saint.

Zar, a Turhy.

— rt, an Urchin, or Fledge-heg.

+» Lawn, a Creck.


A CORNISH-ENGLISH VOCABULARY.


2 A


Thaff, a Cable Rape.
2 E


Zeage, Grains; lacka vel zeage,
worſe than Grains.

Zeah, dry; it. an Arraw; parc
zeah, adry Field; zch, id. zeth,
Dreawth.

Z.:ath., See Zeth,

Zehar, Drought ; zeha, id.

Zehez, Thanks,


Zheibio, to bewitch, or inchant.
Zeithan, a Nec; ſeittan, id.


. for ; to; ours; as, zen


enevou, to orr Souls.
Zetu, an Arrace ; a Pa; ſeth,
id. zethan, id. Lh. an Archer.


| Zethar, a Sea Mew, or Gull,


Zeval, to land; eval, id.


Z 1


Zan, the Seaſide; Spore; Lh.
ind f. Marhazian, the Market
| b; the Sca Side.


Y
Ziznak, Engliſh; Zouznak, id.


Z I


"Bb Rant bois
idle. © OA Ms

Zi . , .

<ingy, to hold, draw; ſynſy,

Zlu, « large Kind of Brome. ß;


Pl. zivion; ziew, id,
Z 0
Zoha, a Plw-fhare; 26h, id.
Tha to below.


Zona, to charm,

Zoul, Stubble; W. ſoxol, id,
Straw fer Thatch. Lh.

Zoulz, a Shilling.

Zous, an Engliſh Man.

Zouzn, Saxons.


Zouznak, Anglißb.
*
Zylgueth, à Sunday.


D'EO:GL.OK 1: A,


f
g
